ity
HM ODEN


i na


ae :


aT)


ihe
Bn
TH at BIH


f
TT


Ea HE inTHA aU
i hui LRT
aH a uo


yt it}


Lith
Tate ii
isd Mi Nis !


nin i p
JILL Te
GB ih


i Hin Hi 4 dia i a
i ya Det i ‘| i ait i ie Hl HR a i
aa a


tit gia rast is
Tne aa ve rast oe
{ ihe uy il


ails ies il a
oe i ae
ain tas


Ais uiknai i
Bu esera int i


¥ Te aati
iH er


Wn Mat!


Aan i;
Pay Hibs
rie Ul


Or ‘eae
ae

AR Se reas
ean ra a be i:


a
i i HTL ih
tH pH NT

Hf fii!) PHA iit}

TR a a ee
STAT ar i :
Hi a
ch i a aaa

TEST Mal Hn nal
th


Us ft A uae
bi it i a He
Ae at . ae f


a AMT
i


Te iH i it Ui -


a ty


i ad


cy


au a


i iit

aM i tHe an thot Nt Ae
Wh m1 H Fi
Lae


i i . a


a : d it tT a
al i HU a i a a
if ini H a i i i


HH is
ue | o a en
ARLE my ui ae Tat a

aN eh if nan iA i :
ia ae A a ae aah
a i


a a


Atngg
i: ais Hu Hi


ffi Hl ni ik INSTA it
; i a
a yt cane it a a une
aut Aching a lath
o a
Ht
it


ae a u
BN inh a


ing a


a Cn Ve
ee a La ie a NA a
HHUA Lie nt a ih th Heel ae a
CS
hal ae aE
a LA ata
ae er fe Tin
a wy . fli
He bu 7 ih He - HAA
He


HE
ring


sy


erie
ait man Bias fill fat
aris asta Hie


ah atl


Rt


a
i a i


Hi

if ft : ne i ry
bee

ve i

ai


a a
i ae mA niggith Ha
pile aun


esata HUT
fang ah 1: pH
i iit in
{ut Hits ii
ip ini
USS


a a i


i
By}


os
a Ip


ul
!

AHiEH jul ih
rae int


eae

ve atta
NAT
if


a


i i he IST art
ann a

I IL Tue Hi ny
is Latst


nn


pleted


ce fir al
E Brigit


ey fit


“i nua :
i A
gist


Bote


>
i}


“e-


ies


Mt


i


Digitized by the intemal Archive :
in 2024 with funding from —
Princeton Theological Seminary Lib
ae httos://archive. orgldetails/storyomylite00
ae
1p Ae ; Rs


THE STORY OF MY LIFE
By RUDOLF STEINER


<
Pe OD r : - A,
hi: 7’ ae : 4% ae Wine ied Be
es)
" a or we iy gant rat
n Tes :
ny
‘ .
; i
4 ;
F Spe 2 :
. : iw fi F »
: \
4 Pa
+ i
a
:
ty ?
~ c
}
-
‘
:
. i
if
|
i! ~
Al
‘
;
‘
“ “ ;
- /
"
- , Pi
’
:
‘
‘ = ¥ ae
-
. nt
.
i
; ‘
i
se '- : ‘
s 4
’
i
id 4 v !
.
t 9
4 ;
» & bd s 4
7 a ' é 5 4 =
7 . a “er
a * . : 7]
i 4 ial _


‘ : / : .
‘ 2 %


i, ee }


, 5 x ‘ xa ° * P
— er semen terwsen een btm Geis Wenge actin Fk ste ot aap et mate tent ener Ae me oye Meme ne diam Alenia Waiter a4 tor = 9 <cip ree ppemmecsnes uncrnasiharieiresnnelniorte: remanent erm See ree Heater FO er arti bee ear)
¥ ‘ ’ : : ;
v


nm en etme hy
+s -_ » ‘ :
i ty ;
y
i


THE 'SPORY :OF
MY LIFE


By RUDOLF STEINER, PD.


WITH AN AFTERWORD
By MARIE STEINER


WITH AUTOGRAPHS AND FOUR PORTRAITS
OF RUDOLF STEINER


1928
LONDON
ANTHROPOSOPHICAL PUBLISHING CO.


NEW YORK
ANTHROPOSOPHIC PRESS


f “ise, pe 1s 5 > a ae. s
Mila r “is ‘ hes
‘ 4 i! * "J s Lo 4
“7 ot ee a fe :
4 acy Fie)
y ' rte eee ee
a’ - ae ‘i Wo ;


0 >} a , A > be ‘it ‘
Authorised Translation
Edited by H.Cottison e


| Ete

CopyRiGuT 1928 > when
| BY ete”

ANTHROPOSOPHICAL PUBLISHING Co. _


Printed in Great Britain by "ae
UNWIN BROTHERS, LIMITED, LONDON AND WOKING |


SCHLACHTENSEE, 227d Sept., 1903.


Dear FRAULEIN M——


There was no time left yesterday for what I should
have liked to say to you: that your last letter was deeply
gratifying to me. You will not misunderstand me: it is
not because of your kind and good words to myself, but on
account of the whole way in which you relate yourself to our
cause. For a long time I have known that you love the truth;
it has been a joy and satisfaction to me that we have found
one another in this love for truth, and your recent letter
confirms and strengthens this feeling. I can only say to
you that this love for the truth has always been my guide.
I have been much misunderstood, and shall no doubt be much
misunderstood in future, too. That lies in the very nature of
my path. Every imaginable réle has been ascribed to me—
not least, that of a fanatic in one direction or in another.
Fanaticism is the one thing of all others from which I know
that I am free. For it is the greatest tempter into illusions.
And it has ever been my principle to keep out of the way of
all illusion.

You write that I make manifest the Spirit in my life. In
one respect, I assure you, I strive to do so: I never speak of
anything spiritual that I do not know by the most direct spiritual
experience. This principle is my guiding star, and it has
enabled me to overcome illusions. I can see through the
ulusions. And I can truly say that for me the spiritual is
absolutely real—not a whit less real than is the table at which I
am now writing. Whoever is ready to look into all that I have
said and done will discover harmony, where by not looking
at the whole he only finds contradictions. I can but say :
The same kind of experience which has taught me the
truth in science has also taught me the “‘ mystical fact” in


8 RUDOLF STEINER


Christianity. Moreover, those who know me well know that
I have not unduly altered in my life. Of one thing I can
assure you: I do not force myself, I put myself under no
kind of strain, when I relate the truths of the spiritual life
just as I would relate the realities of this world of the
senses. We shall speak of these things again, no doubt,


another time.
Your devoted


RUDOLF STEINER.


SCHLACHTENSEE NEAR BERLIN,
SEESTRASSE 40.


Sihorhtonjee 11. Syl. 140


Vaekvteyla Padlew je


Sle gevteen Herne Zul mefe Jaga wes Wh Thnen geome sefagf
haWte. dasa wevch Mhy Uelgbe IBvsef amit tree WWfrvedig img ov hua ted
hab. Sie mipy ee mid woh mds y fp dur mich, week La mer
Maver fo vik Gita fagow, lomdurn wegen her Ar , wit dic fof ge antes
Sah Hellen. Wh wed ya fet lam gum dem dee die Wahrheit leben jd

Jar wie wor in Avia drcbe gute Wafefd gftn dem haben , day hal mar
cae) Nf rie deg ung felch » umd ape cal toe Dred ff Lune NeKedf
Ingntuy davon. = Wh Kan fies Jago dan dife dike si Wop
fmm mere Fife ware deh Gan nil mifsvoftanden worden; ind eas
gens hf nef vid macfbvertanden warden. Das. Cceyt wi her Natty
aa Li ney We ges au Fur ally miglidhe bum vf Jum gum ein wurdiun,
Wit ym vacn helen pa eon in bane liner nad defor, o)x yonuy
Riflsng, Naess mid ven thom fu wep ify if or guade dv Fama tes gg
Jewn hur Famatismun ft der welee Vopthour gay Wrion. Und oy


babe sts Au draw) vats gehalt , alle Jbtn row Pee hun Wee sy“ fen


Si feeb Ve Sf vm mcm Kdyim din Gul davpille. Id
tine Wool den volte of fon re of den gene ows of
wae mis Sh vga ctavte Jefyg |prethen, Jar af wif te
nent HUbardr geiditen Lfafe dng Henne. Jas P mer dilfinn,
Und dur huh my vba alle Med [mew himw eg guheu few lAMenw
Me Mle firme Abr Y deme. Und sf harp wofe fagen, Tan por
rity chen Gecfiage [a am gamy fo Welgmed Yt, wee der rf oft
anf im 4 of ies Ifrerbe. Wer aller bu amu tb ealdaw en wollte, Ney
cee foi Mang ffw, wo of 04 ty Uw wh slhalfawt, ner
Wider |prdy fendi. Yh Kann dhwew min Jago so ob Avfitle &,
fafeskman ew obi maf Ade Wabehecl wm cin Wifferffofl » and deft
dic mif Ate , myHhi]h TaYade’ mm bhrvytin fila gelud ht. -Wer
im wf A on avn Kenwlh, dw wep and den rf mdf A melon
hb uch Jondnlef vardndat habe. Lema Have of Tham Jegee:
Hf prefs mcf oil, wf uguirnge mei vie vmce wen Yf ded Waffle
An gaprgmn ddr cryefia wit die Witklrfdedtin her dewmenidd.
Wow Jureden wot Se me duraly,
Garg dhe
(atic [tecney


J lutAodee ety elu ; lag Yo.


THE STORY OF MY: LIFE


I


IN public discussions of the anthroposophy for which I stand
there have been mingled for some time past statements and
judgments about the course which my life has taken. From
what has been said in this connection conclusions have been
drawn with regard to the origin of the variations so called which
some persons believe they have discovered in the course of
my spiritual evolution. In view of these facts, friends have
felt that it would be well if I myself should write something
about my own life. |

This does not accord, I must confess, with my own
inclinations. For it has always been my endeavour so to
order what I might have to say and what I might think well
to do according as the thing itself might require, and not from
personal considerations. To be sure, it has always been my
conviction that in many provinces of life the personal element
gives to human action a colouring of the utmost value ; only
it seems to me that this personal element should reveal
itself through the manner in which one speaks and acts, and
not through conscious attention to one’s own personality.
Whatever may come about as a result of such attention is
something a man has to settle with himself.

And so it has been possible for me to resolve upon the
following narration only because it is necessary to set in a
true light by means of an objective written statement many
a false judgment in reference to the consistency between my
life and the thing that I have fostered, and because those who
through friendly interest have urged this upon me seem to
me justified in view of such false judgments.

The home of my parents was in Lower Austria. My father

a


2 RUDOLF STEINER


was born at Geras, a very small place in the Lower Austrian
forest region ; my mother at Horn, a city of the same district.

My father passed his childhood and youth in the most
intimate association with the seminary of the Premonstratensian
Order at Geras. He always looked back with the greatest
affection upon this time in his life. He liked to tell how he
served in the college, and how the monks instructed him.
Later on, he was a huntsman in the service of Count Hoyos.
This family had a place at Horn. It was there that my father
became acquainted with my mother. Then he gave up the
work of huntsman and became a telegraphist on the Southern
Austrian Railway. He was sent at first to a little station in
southern Styria. Then he was transferred to Kraljevec
on the border between Hungary and Croatia. It was during
this period that he married my mother. Her maiden name
was Blie. She was descended from an old family of Horn.
I was born at Kraljevec on February 27, 1861. It thus
happened that the place of my birth was far removed from that
part of the world from which my family came.

My father, and my mother as well, were true children of
the South Austrian forest country, north of the Danube.
It is a region into which the railway was late in coming.
Even to this day it has left Geras untouched. My parents
loved the life they had lived in their native region. When
they spoke of this, one realized instinctively how in their
souls they had never parted from that birthplace in spite of
the fate that forced them to pass the greater part of their lives
far away from it. And so, when my father retired, after a
life filled with work, they returned at once there—to Horn.

My father was a man of the utmost good will, but of a temper
—especially while he was still young—which could be passion-
ately aroused. The work of a railway employee was to him
a matter of duty; he had no love for it. While I was still
a boy, he would sometimes have to remain on duty for three
days and three nights continuously. Then he would be
relieved for twenty-four hours. Under such conditions life
for him wore no bright colours; all was dull grey. Some
pleasure he found in keeping up with political developments.
In these he took the liveliest interest. My mother, since


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 3


our worldly goods were none too plentiful, was forced to
devote herself to household duties. Her days were filled
with loving care of her children and of the little home.

When I was a year and a half old, my father was transferred
to Médling, near Vienna. There my parents remained a
half-year. ‘Then my father was put in charge of the little
station on the Southern Railway at Pottschach in Lower
Austria, near the Styrian border. There I lived from my
second to my eighth year. A wonderful landscape formed
the environment of my childhood. The view stretched as
far as the mountains that separate Lower Austria from
Styria: “‘ Snow Mountain,’ Wechsel, the Rax Alps, the
Semmering. Snow Mountain caught the sun’s earliest rays
on its bare summit, and the kindling reflection of these from
the mountain down to the little village was the first greet-
ing of dawn in the beautiful summer days. The grey
back of the Wechsel put one by contrast in a sober mood.
It was as if the mountains rose up out of the all-surrounding
green of the friendly landscape. On the distant boundaries
of the circle one had the majesty of the peaks, and close around
the tenderness of nature.

But around the little station all interest was centered on the
business of the railway. At that time the trains passed in
that region only at long intervals; but, when they came,
many of the men of the village who could spare the time were
generally gathered at the station, seeking thus to bring some
change into their lives, which they found otherwise very
monotonous. ‘T’he schoolmaster, the priest, the book-keeper
of the manor, and often the burgomaster as well, would be
there.

It seems to me that passing my childhood in such an
environment had a certain significance for my life. For I
felt a very deep interest in everything about me of a mechanical
character ; and I know how this interest tended constantly
to overshadow in my childish soul the affections which went
out to that tender and yet mighty nature into which the railway
train, in spite of being in subjection to this mechanism, must
always disappear in the far distance.

In the midst of all this there was present the influence of


4 RUDOLF STEINER


a certain personality of marked originality, the priest of St.
Valentin, a place that one could reach on foot from Pottschach
in about three-quarters of an hour. This priest liked to come
to the home of my parents. Almost every day he took a walk
to our home, and he nearly always stayed for a long time.
He belonged to the liberal type of Catholic cleric, tolerant
and genial; a robust, broad-shouldered man. He was quite
witty, too; had many jokes to tell, and was pleased when he
drew a laugh from the persons about him. And they would
laugh even more loudly over what he had said long after
he was gone. He was a man of a practical way of life, and
liked to give good practical advice. Such a piece of practical
counsel produced its effects in my family for a long time.
There was a row of acacia trees (Robinien) on each side of
the railway at Pottschach. Once we were walking along
the little footpath under these trees, when he remarked:
‘Ah, what beautiful acacia blossoms these are!’’ He
seized one of the branches at once and broke off a mass of the
blossoms. Spreading out his huge red pocket-handkerchief
—he was extremely fond of snuff—he carefully wrapped the
twigs in this, and put the “ Binkerl”’ under his arm. Then


he said: ‘“‘ How lucky you are to have so many acacia
blossoms!” My father was astonished, and answered :
“Why, what can we do with them?” ‘‘ Wh-a-a-t?” said
the priest. “‘ Don’t you know that you can bake the acacia


blossoms just like elder flowers, and that they taste much
better then because they have a far more delicate aroma?”
From that time on we often had in our family, as opportunity
offered from time to time, ‘‘ baked acacia blossoms.”

In Pottschach a daughter and another son were born to my
parents. ‘There was never any further addition to the family.

As a very young child I showed a marked individuality.
From the time that I could feed myself, I had to be carefully
watched. For I had formed the conviction that a soup-bowl
or a coffee cup was meant to be used only once; and so,
every time that I was not watched, as soon as I had finished
eating something I would throw the bowl or the cup under
the table and smash it to pieces. Then, when my mother
appeared, I would call out to her: ‘‘ Mother, I’ve finished ! ”


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 5


This could not have been a mere propensity for destroying
things, since I handled my toys with the greatest care, and
kept them in good condition for a long time. Among these
toys those that had the strongest attraction for me were the
kind which even now I consider especially good. These
were picture-books with figures that could be made to move
by pulling strings attached to them at the bottom. One
associated little stories with these figures, to whom one gave
a part of their life by pulling the strings. Many a time have
I sat by the hour poring over the picture-books with my sister.
Besides, I learned from them by myself the first steps in
reading.

My father was concerned that I should learn early to read
and write. When I reached the required age, I was sent
to the village school. The schoolmaster was an old man to
whom the work of ‘teaching school” was a burdensome
business. Equally burdensome to me was the business of
being taught by him. I had no faith whatever that |
could ever learn anything from him. For he often came to
our house with his wife and his little son, and this son, according
to my notions at that time, was a scamp. So I had this idea
firmly fixed in my head: ‘“ Whoever has such a scamp for a
son, nobody can learn anything from him.” Besides,
something else happened, “ quite dreadful.” This scamp,
who also was in the school, played the prank one day of
dipping a chip into all the ink-wells of the school and making
circles around them with dabs of ink. His father noticed
these. Most of the pupils had already gone. ‘The teacher’s
son, two other boys, and I were still there. The schoolmaster
was beside himself; he talked in a frightful manner. I
felt sure that he would actually roar but for the fact that
his voice was always husky. In spite of his rage, he got an
inkling from our behaviour as to who the culprit was. But
things then took a different turn. The teacher’s home was
next-door to the school-room. The “lady head mistress ”
heard the commotion and came into the school-room with
wild eyes, waving her arms in the air. ‘To her it was perfectly
clear that her little son could not have done this thing. She
put the blame on me. I ran away. My father was furious


6 RUDOLF STEINER


when I reported this matter at home. Then, the next time
the teacher’s family came to our house, he told them with
the utmost bluntness that the friendship between us was
ended, and added baldly: ‘‘ My boy shall never set foot in
your school again,’ Now my father himself took over the
task of teaching me; and so I would sit beside him in his
little office by the hour, and had to read and write between
whiles whenever he was busy with his duties.

Neither with him could I feel any real interest in what
had to come to me by way of direct instruction. What
interested me was the things that my father himself was
writing. I would imitate what he did. In this way I learned
a great deal. As to the things I was taught by him, I could
see no reason why I should do these just for my own improve-
ment. On the other hand, I became rooted, in a child’s way,
in everything that formed a part of the practical work of life.
The routine of a railway office, everything connected with it,
—this caught my attention. It was, however, more especially
the laws of nature that had already taken me as their little
errand boy. When I wrote, it was because I had to write,
and I wrote as fast as I could so that I should soon have a
page filled. For then I could strew the sort of dust my father
used over this writing. Then I would be absorbed in watching
how quickly the dust dried up the ink, and what sort of mixture
they made together. I would try the letters over and over
with my fingers to discover which were already dry, which
not. My curiosity about this was very great, and it was in
this way chiefly that I quickly learned the alphabet. Thus
my writing lessons took on a character that did not please my
father, but he was good-natured and reproved me only by
frequently calling me an incorrigible little “ rascal.” This,
however, was not the only thing that evolved in me by means
of the writing lessons. What interested me more than the
shapes of the letters was the body of the writing quill itself.
I could take my father’s ruler and force the point of this into
the slit in the point of the quill, and in this manner carry on
researches in physics, concerning the elasticity of a feather.
Afterwards, of course, I bent the feather back into shape ; but
the beauty of my handwriting distinctly suffered in this process.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 7


This was also the time when, with my inclination toward
the understanding of natural phenomena, I occupied a position
midway between seeing through a combination of things, on
the one hand, and ‘‘ the limits of understanding” on the
other. About three minutes from the home of my parents
there was a mill. The owners of the mill were the god-parents
of my brother and sister. We were always welcome at this
mill. I often disappeared within it. ‘Then I studied with
all my heart the work of a miller. I forced a way for myself
into the ‘‘interior of nature.” Still nearer us, however,
there was a yarn factory. The raw material for this came to
the railway station ; the finished product went away from the
station. I participated thus in everything which disappeared
within the factory and everything which reappeared. We
were strictly forbidden to take one peep at the “inside” of
this factory. This we never succeeded in doing. There
were the ‘“‘ limits of understanding.” And how I wished to
step across the boundaries! For almost every day the manager
of the factory came to see my father on some matter of business.
For me as a boy this manager was a problem, casting a
miraculous veil, as it were, over the “‘ inside ”’ of those works.
He was spotted here and there with white tufts; his eyes
had taken on a certain set look from working at machinery.
He spoke hoarsely, as if with a mechanical speech. “ What
is the connection between this man and everything that 1s
surrounded by those walls ?”—this was an insoluble problem
facing my mind. But I never questioned anyone regarding
the mystery. For it was my childish conviction that it does
no good to ask questions about a problem which is concealed
from one’s eyes. Thus I lived between the friendly mill
and the unfriendly factory.

‘Once something happened at the station that was very
“ dreadful.” A freight train rumbled up. My father stood
looking at it. One of the rear cars was on fire. The crew
had not noticed this at all. All that followed as a result of
this made a deep impression on me. Fire had started in a
car by reason of some highly inflammable material. For a
long time I was absorbed in the question how such a thing
could happen. What my surroundings said to me in this


8 RUDOLF STEINER


case was, as in many other matters, not to my satisfaction.
I was filled with questions, and I had to carry these about
with me unanswered. It was thus that I reached my eighth
ear.

During my eighth year the family moved to Neudorfl,
a little Hungarian village. This village is just at the border
over against Lower Austria. ‘The boundary here was formed
by the Laytha River. The station that my father had in
charge was at one end of the village. Half an hour’s walk
further on was the boundary stream. Still another half-hour
brought one to Wiener-Neustadt.

_ The range of the Alps that I had seen close bv at Pottschach
was now visible only at a distance. Yet the mountains still
stood there in the background to awaken our memories when
we looked at lower mountains that could be reached in a
short time from our family’s new home. Massive heights
covered with beautiful forests bounded the view in one direc-
tion; in the other, the eye could range over a level region,
decked out in fields and woodland, all the way to Hungary.
Of all the mountains, I gave my unbounded love to one that
could be climbed in three-quarters of an hour. On its crest
there stood a chapel containing a painting of Saint Rosalie.
This chapel came to be the objective of a walk which I often
took at first with my parents and my sister and brother, and
later loved to take alone. Such walks were filled with a
special happiness because of the fact that at that time of year
we could bring back with us rich gifts of nature. For in these
woods there were blackberries, raspberries, and strawberries.
One could often find an inner satisfaction in an hour and a
half of berrying for the purpose of adding a delicious con-
tribution to the family supper, which otherwise consisted
merely of a piece of buttered bread or bread and cheese for
each of us.

Sull another pleasant thing came from rambling about in
these forests, which were the common property of all. There
the villagers got their supplies of wood. The poor gathered
it for themselves ; the well-to-do had servants to do this.
One could become acquainted with all of these—most friendly
persons. ‘They always had time for a chat when “ Steiner


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 9


Rudolf”? met them. ‘So thou goest again for a bit of a
walk, Steiner Rudolf ”’—thus they would begin, and then
they would talk about everything imaginable. The people
did not think of the fact that they had a mere child before
them. For at the bottom of their souls they also were only
children, even when they could number sixty years. And so
I really learned from the stories they told me almost everything
that happened in the houses of the village.

Half an hour’s walk from Neudorfl is Sauerbrunn, where
there is a spring containing iron and carbonic acid. The road
to this lies along the railway, and part of the way through
beautiful woods. During vacation time I went there every
day early in the morning, carrying with me a “ Blutzer.”
This is a water vessel made of clay. The smallest of these
hold three or four litres. One could fill this without charge
at the spring. Then at midday the family could enjoy the
delicious sparkling water.

Toward Wiener-Neustadt and farther on toward Styria,
the mountains fall away to a level country. Through this
level country the Laytha River winds its way. On the slope
of the mountains there was a cloister of the Order of the Most
Holy Redeemer. I often met the monks on my walks. I
still remember how glad I should have been if they had spoken
to me. They never did. And so I carried away from these
meetings an undefined but solemn feeling which remained
constantly with me for a long time. It was in my ninth year
that the idea became fixed in me that there must be weighty
matters in connection with the duties of these monks which
I ought to learn to understand. There again I was filled
with questions which I had to carry around unanswered.
Indeed, these questions about all possible sorts of things made
me as a boy very lonely.

On the foothills of the Alps two castles were visible: Pitten-
and Frohsdorf. In the second there lived at that time Count
Chambord, who, at the beginning of the year 1870, claimed the
throne of France as Henry V. Very deep were the impressions
that I received from that fragment of life bound up with the
castle Frohsdorf. The Count with his retinue frequently
took the train for a journey from the station at Neudorfl.


10 RUDOLF STEINER


Everything drew my attention to these men. Especially deep
was the impression made by one man in the Count’s retinue.
He had but one ear. ‘The other had been slashed off clean.
The hair lying over this he had braided. At the sight of this
I perceived for the first time what a duel is. For it was in
this manner that the man had lost one ear.

Then, too, a fragment of social life unveiled itself to me
in connection with Frohsdorf. The assistant teacher at
Neudorfl, whom I was often permitted to see at work in his
little chamber, prepared innumerable petitions to Count
Chambord for the poor of the village and the country around.
In response to every such appeal there always came back a
donation of one gulden, and from this the teacher was always
allowed to keep six kreuger for his services. ‘This income he
had need of, for the annual salary yielded him by his profession
was fifty-eight gulden. In addition, he had his morning
coffee and his lunch with the “‘ schoolmaster.’’ Then, too,
he gave special lessons to about ten children, of whom I was
one. For such lessons the charge was one gulden a month.

To this assistant teacher I owe a great deal. Not that I
was greatly benefited by his lessons at the school. In that
respect I had about the same experience as at Pottschach.
As soon as we moved to Neudorfl, I was sent to school there.
This school consisted of one room in which five classes of
both boys and girls all had their lessons. While the boys
who sat on my bench were at their task of copying out the
story of King Arpad, the very little fellows stood at a black-
board on which z and w had been written with chalk for them. ~
It was simply impossible to do anything save to let the mind
fall into a dull reverie while the hands almost mechanically
took care of the copying. Almost all the teaching had to be
done by the assistant teacher alone. The ‘“‘ schoolmaster ”
appeared in the school only very rarely. He was also the
village notary, and it was said that in this occupation he had
so much to take up his time that he could never keep school.

In spite of all this I learned earlier than usual to read well.
Because of this fact the assistant teacher was able to take
hold of something within me which has influenced the whole
course of my life. Soon after my entrance into the Neudorfl


THE STORY OF MY LIFE II


school, I found a book on geometry in his room. I was
on such good terms with the teacher that I was permitted
at once to borrow the book for my own use. I plunged
into it with enthusiasm. For weeks at a time my mind
was filled with coincidences, similarities between triangles,
squares, polygons; I racked my brains over the question :
Where do parallel lines actually meet? ‘The theorem of
Pythagoras fascinated me.

That one can live within the mind in the shaping of forms
perceived only within oneself, entirely without impression
upon the external senses—this gave me the deepest satis-
faction. I found in this a solace for the unhappiness which
my unanswered questions had caused me. ‘To be able to
lay hold upon something in the spirit alone brought to me
an inner joy. I am sure that I learned first in geometry
to experience this joy.

In my relation to geometry I must now perceive the first
budding forth of a conception which has since gradually
evolved in me. This lived within me more or less uncon-
sciously during my childhood, and about my twentieth year
took a definite and fully conscious form.

I said to myself: ‘‘ The objects and occurrences which the
senses perceive are in space. But, just as this space is outside
of man, so there exists also within man a sort of soul-space
which is the arena of spiritual realities and occurrences.’ In
my thoughts I could not see anything in the nature of mental
images such as man forms within him from actual things,
but I saw a spiritual world in this soul-arena. Geometry
seemed to me to be a knowledge which man appeared to have
produced but which had, nevertheless, a significance quite
independent of man. Naturally I did not, as a child, say all
this to myself distinctly, but I felt that one must carry the
knowledge of the spiritual world within oneself after the
fashion of geometry.

For the reality of the spiritual world was to me as certain
as that of the physical. I felt the need, however, for a sort
of justification for this assumption. I wished to be able to
say to myself that the experience of the spiritual world is just
as little an illusion as is that of the physical world. With


12 RUDOLF STEINER


regard to geometry I said to myself: “‘ Here one is permitted
to know something which the mind alone, through its own
power, experiences.” In this feeling I found the justification
for the spiritual world that I experienced, even as, so to speak,
for the physical. And in this way I talked about this. I
had two conceptions which were naturally undefined, but
which played a great rdle in my mental life even before my
eighth year. I distinguished things as those “‘ which are
seen ’’ and those “‘ which are not seen.”

I am relating these matters quite frankly, in spite of the fact
that those persons who are seeking for evidence to prove
that anthroposophy is fantastic will, perhaps, draw the con-
clusion from this that even as a child I was marked by a gift
for the fantastic : no wonder, then, that a fantastic philosophy
should also have evolved within me.

But it is just because I know how little I have followed my
own inclinations in forming conceptions of a spiritual world
—having on the contrary followed only the inner necessities
of things—that I myself can look back quite objectively upon
the childlike unaided manner in which I confirmed for myself
by means of geometry the feeling that I must speak of a
world “ which is not seen.”

Only I must also say that I loved to live in that world.
For I should have been forced to feel the physical world as
a sort of spiritual darkness around me had it not received
light from that side.

The assistant teacher of Neudorfl had provided me, in his
geometry text-book, with that which I then needed—a
justification for the spiritual world.

In other ways also I owe much to him. He brought to me
the element of art. He played the piano and the violin,
and he drew a great deal. These things attracted me
powerfully to him. Just as much as I possibly could be, I
was with him. Of drawing he was especially fond, and
even in my ninth year he interested me in drawing with
crayons. I had in this way to copy pictures under his direction.
Long did I sit, for instance, copying a portrait of Count
Szedgenyi.

Very seldom at Neudorfl, but frequently in the neighbouring


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 13


town of Sauerbrunn, could I listen to the impressive music
of the Hungarian gipsies.

All this played its part in a childhood which was passed in
the immediate neighbourhood of the church and the churchyard.
The station at Neudorfl was but a few steps from the church,
and between these lay the churchyard.

If one went along by the churchyard and then a short stretch
further, one came into the village itself. ‘This consisted of
two rows of houses. One row began with the school and
the other with the home of the priest. Between those two
rows of houses flowed a little brook, along the banks of which
grew stately nut trees. In connection with these nut trees
an order of precedence grew up among the children of the
school. When the nuts began to get ripe, the boys and girls
assailed the trees with stones, and in this way laid in a winter’s
supply of nuts. In autumn almost the only thing anyone
talked about was the size of his harvest of nuts. Whoever
had gathered most of all was the most looked up to, and then
step by step was the descent all the way down—-to me, the
last, who as an “‘ outsider in the village’ had no right to
share in this order of precedence.

Near the railway station, the row of most important houses,
in which the ‘“‘ big farmers ” lived, was met at right angles
by a row of some twenty houses owned by the “‘ middle class ”’
villagers. Then, beginning from the gardens which belonged
to the station, came a group of thatched houses belonging to
the “small cottagers.” These constituted the immediate
neighbourhood of my family. The roads leading out from
the village went past fields and vineyards that were owned
by the villagers. Every year I took part with the “ small
cottagers ” in the vintage, and once also in a village wedding.

Next to the assistant teacher, the person whom I loved most
among those who had to do with the direction of the school
was the priest. He came regularly twice a week to give
instruction in religion and often besides for inspection of the
school. The image of the man was deeply impressed upon
my mind, and he has come back into my memory again and
again throughout my life. Among the persons whom I
came to know up to my tenth or eleventh year, he was by far


14 _ RUDOLF STEINER


the most significant. He was a vigorous Hungarian patriot.
He took active part in the process of Magyarizing the
Hungarian territory which was then going forward. From
this point of view he wrote articles in the Hungarian language,
which I thus learned through the fact that the assistant teacher
had to make clear copies of these and he always discussed
their contents with me in spite of my youthfulness. But the
priest was also an energetic worker for the Church. This
once impressed itself deeply upon my mind through one of
his sermons.

At Neudorfl there was a lodge of Freemasons. To the
villagers this was shrouded in mystery, and they wove about
it the most amazing legends. The leading réle in this lodge
belonged to the manager of a match-factory which stood at
the end of the village. Next to him in prominence among
the persons immediately interested in the matter were the
manager of another factory and a clothing merchant. Other-
wise the only significance attaching to the lodge arose from
the fact that from time to time strangers from “ remote parts ”
were visitors there, and these seemed to the villagers in the
highest degree unwelcome. The clothing merchant was a
noteworthy person. He always walked with his head bowed
over as if in deep thought. People called him ‘‘ the make-
believe,” and his isolation rendered it neither possible nor
necessary that anyone should approach him. The building
in which the lodge met belonged to his home.

I could establish no sort of relationship to this lodge. For
the entire behaviour of the persons about me in regard to this
matter was such that here again I had to refrain from asking
questions ; besides, the utterly absurd way in which the manager
of the match-factory talked about the church made a shocking
impression on me.

Then one Sunday the priest delivered a sermon in his
energetic fashion in which he set forth in due order the true
principles of morality for human life and spoke of the enemies
of the truth in figures of speech framed to fit the lodge. Asa
climax, he delivered his advice: ‘‘ Beloved Christians, beware
of him who is an enemy of the truth: for example, a Mason
or a Jew.” In the eyes of the people, the factory owner and


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 15


the clothing merchant were thus authoritatively exposed. The
vigour with which this had been uttered made a specially
deep impression upon me.

I owe to the priest also, because of a certain profound
impression made upon me, a very great deal in the later
orientation of my spiritual life. One day he came into the
school, gathered round him in the teacher’s little room the
“riper ” children, among whom he included me, unfolded a
drawing he had made, and with the help of this explained
to us the Copernican system of astronomy. He spoke about
this very vividly—the revolution of the earth around the sun,
its rotation on its axis, the inclination of the axis in summer and
winter, and also the zones of the earth. In all of it I was
absorbed ; I made drawings of a similar kind for days together,
and then received from the priest further special instruction
concerning eclipses of the sun and the moon; and thence-
forward I directed all my search for knowledge toward this
subject.

I was then about ten years old, and I could not yet write
without mistakes in spelling and grammar.

Of the deepest significance for my life as a boy was the near-
ness of the church and the churchyard beside it. Everything
that happened in the village school was affected in its course
by its relationship to these. ‘This was not by reason of certain
dominant social and political relationships existing in every
community ; it was due to the fact that the priest was an
impressive personality. The assistant teacher was at the
same time organist of the church and custodian of the vest-
ments used at Mass and of the other church furnishings. He
performed all the services of an assistant to the priest in his
religious ministrations. We schoolboys had to carry out the
duties of ministrants and choristers during Mass, rites for the
dead, and funerals. The solemnity of the Latin language
and of the liturgy was a thing in which my boyish soul found
a vital happiness. Because of the fact that up to my tenth
year I took such an earnest part in the services of the church,
I was often in the company of the priest whom I so revered.

In the home of my parents I received no encouragement
in this matter of my relationship to the church. My father


16 RUDOLF STEINER


took no part in this. He was then a “ freethinker.”” He never
entered the church to which I had, become so deeply attached ;
and yet he also, as a boy and as a young man, had been equally
devoted and active. In his case this all changed once more
only when he went back, as an old man on a pension, to Horn,
his native region. ‘There he became again ‘‘a pious man.”
But by that time I had long ceased to have any association
with my parents’ home. :

From the time of my boyhood at Neudorfl, I have always
had the strongest impression of the manner in which the
contemplation of the church services in close connection
with the solemnity of liturgical music causes the riddle of
existence to rise in powerful suggestive fashion before the
mind, ‘The instruction in the Bible and the catechism imparted
by the priest had far less effect upon my mental world than
what he accomplished by means of liturgy in mediating between
the sensible and the supersensible. From the first this was
to me no mere form, but a profound experience. It was all
the more so because of the fact that in this I was a stranger
in the home of my parents. Even in the atmosphere I had
to breathe in my home, my spirit did not lose that vital experi-
ence which it had acquired from the liturgy. I passed my
life amid this home environment without sharing in it. I
perceived it; but my real thoughts, feelings, and experiences
were continually in that other world. I can assert emphatically,
however, in this connection that I was no dreamer, but quite
self-sufficient in all practical affairs.

A complete counterpart to this world of mine was my father’s
political affairs. He and another employee took turns on
duty. This man lived at another railway station, for which
he was partly responsible. He came to Neudorfl only every
two or three days. During the free hours of the evening he
and my father would talk politics. This would take place at
a table which stood near the station under two huge and
wonderful lime trees. There our whole family and the
other employee would assemble. My mother knitted or
crocheted ; my brother and sister busied themselves about
us ; I would often sit at the table and listen to the unheard-of
political arguments of the two men. My participation, how-


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 17


ever, never had anything to do with the sense of what they
were saying, but only with the form which the conversation
took. ‘They were always on opposite sides ; if one said “‘ Yes,”
the other always contradicted him with “ No.’ All this,
however, was marked, not only by a certain intensity—indeed,
violence—but also by the good humour which was a basic
element in my father’s nature.

In the little circle often gathered there, to which were
frequently added some of the “ notabilities’ of the village,
there appeared at times a doctor from Wiener-Neustadt.
He had many patients in this place, where at that time there
was no physician. He came from Wiener-Neustadt to
Neudorfl on foot, and would come to the station after visiting
his patients to wait for the train on which he went back. ‘This
man passed with my parents, and with most persons who
knew him, as an odd character. He did not like to talk about
his profession as a doctor, but all the more gladly did he talk
about German literature. It was from him that I first heard
of Lessing, Goethe, Schiller. At my home there was never
any such conversation. Nothing was known of such things.
Nor in the village school was there any mention of such matters.
There the emphasis was all on Hungarian history. Priest
and assistant teacher had no interest in the masters of German
literature. Andso it happened that with the Wiener-Neustadt
doctor a whole new world came within my range of vision.
He took an interest in me; often drew me aside after he had
rested for a while under the lime trees, walked up and down
with me by the station, and talked—not like a lecturer, but
enthusiastically—about German literature. In these talks he
set forth all sorts of ideas as to what is beautiful and what
is ugly.

This also has remained as a picture with me, giving me
many happy hours in memory throughout my life: the tall,
slender doctor, with his quick, long stride, always with his
umbrella in his right hand held invariably in such a way that
it dangled by his side, and I, a boy of ten years, on the other
side, quite absorbed in what the man was saying.

Along with all these things I was tremendously concerned
with everything pertaining to the railroad. I first learned the


3


18 RUDOLF STEINER


principles of electricity in connection with the station telegraph.
I learned also as a boy to telegraph.

As to language, I grew up in the dialect of German that is
spoken in Eastern Lower Austria. ‘This was really the same
as that then used in those parts of Hungary bordering on
Lower Austria. My relationship to reading and that to
writing were entirely different. In my boyhood I passed
rapidly over the words in reading ; my mind went immediately
to the perceptions, the concepts, the ideas, so that I got no
feeling from reading either for spelling or for writing gram-
matically.: On the other hand, in writing I had a tendency to
fix the word-forms in my mind by their sounds as I generally
heard them spoken in the dialect. For this reason it was
only after the most arduous effort that I gained facility in
writing the literary language; whereas reading was easy for
me from the first.

Under such influences I grew up to the age at which my
father had to decide whether to send me to the Gymnasium 1
or to the Realschule at Wiener-Neustadt. From that time
on I heard much talk with other persons—in between the
political discussions—as to my own future. My father was
given this and that advice; I already knew: “ He likes to
listen to what others say, but he acts according to his own
fixed and definite determination.”

«The Gymnasium and the Realschule are secondary schools, the


curriculum of the former giving more prominence to the classics and
that of the latter to science and the modern languages.


II


Tue decision as to whether I should be sent to the Gymnasium
or the Realschule was arrived at by my father, on the basis
of his intention to give me the right preparation for a
‘ position ” on the railway. This purpose of his finally took
definite form in the decision that I should be a railway civil
engineer. Hence his choice was the Realschule.

Next, however, the question remained to be settled as to
whether in passing from the village school of Neudorfl to
one of the schools in the neighbouring Wiener-Neustadt, I

should be prepared for admission to such a school. So I was
taken to the town hall for an examination.

These plans which were thus being carried through for my
own future did not excite in me any deep interest. At that
age these questions concerning my “ position,’ and whether
the choice should fall on town school, Realschule, or Gymnasium
were to me matters of indifference. ‘Through what I observed
around me and felt within me, I was conscious of undefined
but burning questions about life and the world and the soul,
and my wish was to learn something in order to be able to
answer these questions of mine. I cared very little through
what sort of school this should be brought about.

The examination at the town school I passed very creditably.
All the drawings I had made for the assistant teacher had been
brought along ; and these made such an impression upon the
teachers who examined me that on this account my very
defective knowledge was overlooked. I came out of the
examination with a “ brilliant” record. There was great
rejoicing on the part of my parents, the assistant teacher, the
priest, and many of the notabilities of Neudorfl. People were
happy over the result of my examination because to many of
them it was a proof that ‘‘ the Neudorfl school can teach a


thing or two!”
19


20 RUDOLF STEINER


For my father there came out of all this the thought that
I should not spend a preliminary year in the town school—
seeing that I was already so far along—but should enter the
Realschule at once. So a few days later I was taken to that
school for another examination. In this case matters did not
turn out so well; nevertheless, I was admitted. This was
in October 1872.

I had now to go every day from Neudorfl to Wiener-
Neustadt. In the morning I could go by train; but I had
to come back in the afternoon on foot, since there was no
train at the right time. Neudorfl was in Hungary, Wiener-
Neustadt in Lower Austria. So every day I went from
“ Transleitanien ”’ to ‘‘ Cisleitanien.”” (These were the official
designations for the Hungarian and the Austrian districts.)

During the noon recess I remained in Wiener-Neustadt.
It so happened that a certain woman had come to know me
during one of her stops at the Neudorfl station, and had learned
that I was coming to Wiener-Neustadt to school. My parents
had spoken to her of their concern as to how I was to pass
the noon recess during my attendance at the Wiener-Neustadt
school. She told them she would be glad to have me take
lunch at her home without charge, and would welcome me
there whenever I needed to come.

In summer the walk from Wiener-Neustadt to Neudorfl
was very beautiful; in winter it was often exceedingly hard.
To get from the outskirts of the town to the village one had
to walk for half an hour across fields which were not cleared
of snow. There I often had to “ wade” through the snow,
and I would arrive at home a veritable ‘‘ snow man.”

The town life I could not share inwardly as I could the
life of the country. I would fall into a brown study over
the problem of what might be happening in and between
those houses closed tight one against the other. Only before
the booksellers’ shops of Wiener-Neustadt did I often linger
for a long time.

What went on in the school also, and what I had to do there,
proceeded at first without awakening any lively interest in my
mind. In the first two classes I had great difficulty in
“ keeping up.” Only in the second half-year was the work


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 21


easier in these two classes. Only then had I become a “ good
scholar.”’

I was conscious of one overwhelming need. I craved men
whom I could take as human models to follow. The teachers
of the first two classes were not such men.

In this school life something now occurred which impressed
me deeply. The principal of the school, in one of the annual
reports which had to be issued at the close of each school
year, published a lecture entitled Die Anztehungskraft
betractet als eine Wirkung der Bewegung.t As a child of
eleven years I could at first understand almost nothing of
the content of this paper; for it began at once with
higher mathematics. Yet from some of the sentences I got
hold of a certain meaning. There formed itself in my mind
a bridge between what I had learned from the priest con-
cerning the creation of the world and these sentences in the
paper. The paper referred also to a book which the principal
had written, Die allgemeine Bewegung der Materie als Grundur-
sache aller Naturerscheinungen.z2, 1 saved my money until I
was able to buy that book. It now became my aim to learn
as quickly as possible everything that might lead me to an
understanding of the paper and the book.

The thing was like this. The principal held that the
conception of forces acting at a distance from the bodies
exerting these forces was an unproved ‘‘ mystical ”’ hypothesis.
He wished to explain the “‘ attraction’ between the heavenly
bodies as well as that between molecules and atoms without
reference to such “forces.’’ He said that between any two
bodies there are many small bodies in motion. ‘These, moving
back and forth, thrust the larger bodies. Likewise these
larger bodies are thrust from every direction on the sides
turned away from each other. The thrusts on the sides
turned away from each other are much more numerous than
those in the spaces between the two bodies. It is for this
reason that they approach each other. ‘‘ Attraction ”’ is not
any special force, but only an “ effect of motion.” I came


t Attraction Considered as an Effect of Motion.
2 The General Motion of Matter as the Fundamental Cause of All the
Phenomena of Nature.


22 RUDOLF STEINER


across two sentences stated positively in the first pages of the
volume: “‘1. There exist space and in space motion con-
tinuing for a long period of time. 2. Space and time are
continuous, homogeneous masses; but matter consists of
separate particles (atoms).’’ Out of the motions occurring
in the manner described between the small and great parts
of matter, the professor would derive all physical and chemical
occurrences in nature.

I had nothing within me which inclined me in any way
whatever to accept such a view; but I had the feeling that
it would be a very important matter for me when I could
understand what was in this manner expressed. And I did
everything I could in order to reach that point. Whenever
I could get hold of books of mathematics and physics, I seized
the opportunity. It was a slow process. I set myself to read
the paper over and over again; each time there was some
improvement.

Now something else happened. In the third class I had
a teacher who really fulfilled the “ideal” I had before my
mind. He was a man whom I could emulate. He taught
computation, geometry, and physics. His teaching was
wonderfully systematic and thorough-going. He built up
everything so clearly out of its elements that it was in the
highest degree beneficial to one’s thinking to follow him.

A lecture accompanying the second annual school report
was delivered by him. It had to do with the law of proba-
bilities and calculations in life insurance. I buried myself
in this paper also, although of this likewise I could not
understand very much. But I soon came to grasp the idea of
the law of probabilities. A more important result, however,
for me was that the exactness with which my favourite teacher
handled his materials gave me a model for my own thinking
in mathematics. This now brought about a wonderfully
beautiful relationship between this teacher and me. I was
very happy to have this man through all the classes of the
Realschule as teacher of mathematics and physics.

Through what I learned from him I drew nearer and nearer
to the riddle that had arisen for me through the paper mt the
principal.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 23


With still another teacher I came only after a long time
into a more intimate spiritual relationship. ‘This was the one
who taught constructive geometry in the lower classes and
descriptive geometry in the upper. He taught even in the
second class. But only during his course in the third class
did I come to an appreciation of the kind of man he was.
He was an enthusiastic constructor. His teaching also was
a model of clearness and order. The drawing of circles,
lines, and triangles became to me, through his influence, a
favourite occupation. Behind all that I was taking into myself
from the principal, the teacher of mathematics and physics,
and the teacher of geometrical design, there arose in me in
a boyish way of thinking the problem of what goes on in
nature. My feeling was: I must go to nature in order to
win a standing place in the spiritual world, which was there
before me, consciously perceived.

I said to myself: ‘‘ One can take the right attitude toward
the experience of the spiritual world by one’s own soul only
when one’s process of thinking has reached such a form that
it can attain to the reality of being which is in natural pheno-
mena.” With such feelings did I pass through life during the
third and fourth years of the Realschule. Everything that I
learned I so directed as to bring myself nearer to the goal
I have indicated.

Then one day I passed a bookshop. In the show window
I saw an advertisement of Kant’s Kritik der reinen Vernunft.t
I did everything that I could to acquire this book as quickly
as possible.

As Kant then entered the circle of my thinking, I knew
nothing whatever of his place in the spiritual history of man-
kind. What anyone whatever had thought about him, in
approval or in disapproval, was to me entirely unknown. My
boundless interest in the Critique of Pure Reason had
arisen entirely out of my own spiritual life. In my boyish
way I was striving to understand what human reason might
be ablé to achieve toward a real insight into the being of
things. |

The reading of Kant met with every sort of obstacle in the


t Critique of Pure Reason.


24 RUDOLF STEINER


circumstances of my external life. Because of the long
distance I had to traverse between school and home, I lost
every day at least three hours. In the evenings I did not get
home until six o’clock. Then there was an endless quantity
of school assignments to master. On Sundays I devoted
myself almost entirely to geometrical designing. It was my
ideal to attain the greatest precision in carrying out geo-
metrical constructions, and the most immaculate neatness
in hatching and the laying on of colours.

So I had scarcely any time left for reading the Critique
of Pure Reason. I found the following way out. Our history
course was handled in such a manner that the teacher appeared
to be lecturing but was in reality reading from a book. Then
from time to time we had to learn from our books what he
had given us in this fashion. I thought to myself that I must
take care of this reading of what was in my book while at
home. From the teacher’s “lecture’’ I got nothing at all.
From listening to what he read I could not retain the least
thing. I now took apart the single sections of the little Kant
volume, placed these inside the history book, which I then
kept before me during the history lesson, and read Kant
while the history was being “ taught’ down to us from the
professor’s seat. ‘This was, of course, from the point of view
of school discipline, a serious fault ; yet it disturbed nobody,
and it subtracted so little from what I should otherwise have
acquired that the grade I was given on my history lessons
at that very time was “‘ excellent.”’

During vacations the reading of Kant went forward briskly.
Many a page I read more than twenty times in succession.
I wanted to reach a decision as to the relation sustained by
human thought to the creative work of nature.

The feeling I had in regard to these strivings of thought
was influenced here from three sides. In the first place, I
wished so to build up thought within myself that every thought
should be completely subject to survey, that no vague feeling
should incline the thought in any direction whatever. In
the second place, I wished to establish within myself a harmony
between such thinking and the teachings of religion. For
this also at that time had the very strongest hold upon me.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 25


In just this field we had truly excellent text-books. From
these books I took with the utmost devotion the symbol and
dogma, the description of the church service, the history of
the church. These teachings were to me a vital matter.
But my relation to them was determined by the fact that to
me the spiritual world counted among the objects of human
perception. The very reason why these teachings penetrated
so deeply into my mind was that in them I realized how the
human spirit can find its way consciously into the super-
sensible. Iam perfectly sure that I did not lose my reverence
for the spiritual in the slightest degree through this relationship
of the spiritual to perception.

On the other side I was tremendously occupied over the
question of the scope of human capacity for thought. It
seemed to me that thinking could be developed to a faculty
which would actually lay hold upon the things and events
of the world. A ‘stuff’? which remains outside of the
thinking, which we can merely “ think toward,” seemed to
me an unendurable conception. Whatever is in things, this
must be also inside of human thought, I said to myself again
and again.

Against this conviction, however, there always opposed
itself what I read in Kant. But I scarcely observed this con-
flict. For I desired more than anything else to attain through
the Critique of Pure Reason to a firm standing ground in order
to get the mastery of my own thinking. Wherever and
whenever I took my holiday walks, I had in any case to set
before myself this question, and once more clear it up: How
does one pass from simple, clear-cut perceptions to concepts
in regard to natural phenomena? I held then quite uncritically
to Kant; but no advance did I make by means of him.

Through all this I was not drawn away from whatever
pertains to the actual doing of practical things and the develop-
ment of human skill. It so happened that one of the employees
who took turns with my father in his work understood book-
binding. I learned bookbinding from him, and was able to
bind my own school books in the holidays between the fourth
and fifth classes of the Realschule. And I learned stenography
also at this time during the vacation without a teacher.


26 RUDOLF STEINER


Nevertheless, I took the course in stenography which was
given from the fifth class on.

Occasions for practical work were plentiful. My parents
were assigned near the station a little orchard of fruit trees
and a small patch for potatoes. Gathering cherries, taking
care of the orchard, preparing the potatoes for planting,
cultivating the soil, digging the potatoes—all this work fell
to my sister and brother and me. Buying the family groceries
in the village, of this I would not let anyone deprive me at
those times when the school left me free.

When I was about fifteen years old I was permitted to come
into more intimate relationship with the doctor at Wiener-
Neustadt whom I have already mentioned. I had conceived
a great liking for him because of the way in which he talked
to me during his visits to Neudorfl. So I often slipped past
his home, which was on the ground floor of a building at the
corner of two very narrow streets in Wiener-Neustadt. One
day he was at the window. He called me into his room.
I stood before what seemed to me then a great library.
He talked again about literature; then took down Lessing’s
Minna von Barnhelm from the collection of books, and said
I must read that and afterwards come back to him. In this
way he gave me one book after another to read and invited
me from time to time to come to see him. Every time that
I had an opportunity to go back, I had to tell him my
impression of what I had read. In this way he became
really my teacher in poetic literature. For up to that time,
both at my home and also at school, all this—except for some
“‘ extracts ’’—had been quite outside of my life. In the
atmosphere of this lovable doctor, sensitive to everything
beautiful, I learned especially to know Lessing.

Another event deeply influenced my life. ‘The mathematical
books which Liibsen had prepared for home study became
known to me. I was then able to teach myself analytical
geometry, trigonometry, and even differential and integral
calculus long before I learned these in school. ‘This enabled
me to return to the reading of those books on The General
Motion of Matter as the Fundamental Cause of All the Phenomena
of Nature.’ For now I could understand them better


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 27


through my understanding of mathematics. Meanwhile, we
had come to the course in physics following that in chemistry,
and this brought me a new set of riddles concerning human
knowledge to add to the older ones. The teacher of chemistry
was a distinguished man. He taught almost entirely by means
of experiments. He spoke little. He let natural processes
speak for themselves. He was one of our favourite teachers.
There was something noteworthy in him which distinguished
him in the eyes of his pupils from the other teachers. One
felt that he stood in a closer relationship to his science than
did the others. The others we addressed with the title
‘Professor’; he, although he was just as much a professor,
was called ‘‘ Doctor.” He was the brother of the thoughtful
Tyrolese poet Hermann von Gilm. He had an eye which
held one’s attention firmly. One felt that this man was
accustomed to looking intently at the phenomena of nature
and then retaining what he had perceived.

His teaching puzzled me a little. The feeling for facts
which marked him could not always hold concentrated that
state of mind through which I was then striving toward
unification. Still he must have considered that I made good
progress in chemistry, for he marked my notes from the start
““ creditable,” and I kept this grade through all the classes.

One day I found at an antiquary’s in Wiener-Neustadt
Rotteck’s history of the world. Until then, in spite of the
fact that I received the highest grades in the school in history,
this subject had always remained to me something external.
Now it grew to be an inner thing. The warmth with which
Rotteck conceived and set forth historic events swept me
along. His one-sidedness of view I did not then perceive.
Through him I was led to two other books which, by reason
of their style and their vivid historical conceptions, made the
deepest impression on me: Johannes von Miiller and Tacitus.
Amid such impressions, it was very hard for me to take any
interest in the school lessons in history and in literature.
But I strove to give life to these lessons from all that I made
my own out of other sources. In this manner I passed my
time in the three upper classes of the seven years of the
Realschule.


28 RUDOLF STEINER


From my fifteenth year on I taught other pupils of the
same grade as myself or of a lower grade. The teachers
were very willing to assign me this tutoring, for I was rated
as a very ‘“‘ good scholar.” Through this means I was enabled
to contribute at least a very little toward what my parents
had to spend out of their meagre income for my education.

I owe much to this tutoring. In having to give to others
in turn the matter which I had been taught, I myself became,
so to speak, awake to this. For I cannot express the thing
otherwise than by saying that I received in a sort of dream-
life the knowledge imparted to me by the school. I was
awake to what I gained by my own effort, and what I received
from a spiritual benefactor, such as the doctor I have men-
tioned of Wiener-Neustadt. What I received thus in a fully
self-conscious state of mind was noticeably different from
what passed over to me like dream-pictures in the class-room
instruction. The development of what had thus been received
in a half-waking state was now brought about by the fact
that in the periods of tutoring I had to vitalize my own
knowledge.

On the other hand, this experience compelled me at an early
age to concern myself with practical pedagogy. I learned
the difficulties of the development of human minds through
my pupils.

To the pupils of my own grade whom I tutored the most
important thing I had to teach was German composition.
Since I myself had also to write every such composition, I
had to discover for each theme assigned to us various forms
of development. I often felt then that I was in a very difficult
situation. I wrote my own theme only after I had already
given away the best thoughts on that topic.

A rather strained relationship existed between the teacher
of the German language and literature in the three upper
classes and myself. The pupils considered him the “ keenest
professor,” and especially strict. My essays had always been
unusually long. The briefer forms I had dictated to my fellow-
pupils. It took the teacher a long time to read my papers.
After the final examination, during the celebration before the
close of the session, when for the first time he was “in a


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 29


good humour” among us pupils, he told me how I had
annoyed him with my long themes.

Still another thing happened. I had the feeling that some-
thing was brought into the school through this teacher which
I must master. When he discussed the nature of poetic
descriptions, it seemed to me that there was something in
the background behind what he said. After a time I found
out what this was. He adhered to the philosophy of Herbart.
He himself said nothing of this. But I discovered it. And so
I bought an Introduction to Philosophy and a Psychology,
both of which were written from the point of view of Herbart’s
philosophy.

And now began a sort of game of hide-and-seek between
the teacher and me in my compositions. I began to understand
much in him which he set forth in the colours of Herbart’s
philosophy ; and he found in my compositions all sorts of
ideas that came from the same source. Only neither he nor
I mentioned Herbart as the source of our ideas. This was
through a sort of tacit agreement. But one day I ended a
composition in a way that was imprudent in view of the
situation. I had to write about some characteristic or other
of human beings. At the end I used this sentence: ‘‘ Such
a man possesses psychological freedom.’’ Our teacher would
discuss the compositions with the class after he had corrected
them. When he came to the discussion of this particular
theme, he drew in the corners of his mouth with obvious
irony and said: “‘ You say something here about psychological
freedom. There is no such thing.” I answered: ‘ That
seems to mea mistake, Professor. There really is a psycho-
logical freedom, only there is no ‘ transcendental freedom’ in
an ordinary state of consciousness.” The lips of the teacher
became smooth again. He iooked at me with a penetrating
glance and remarked: “ I have noticed for a long while from
your compositions that you have a philosophical library. I
would advise you not to use it; you only confuse your
thinking by so doing.” I could never understand at all why
I would confuse my thinking by reading the same books
from which his own thinking was derived. And thus the
relation between us continued to be somewhat strained.


30 RUDOLF STEINER


His teaching gave me much to do. For he covered in the
fifth class the Greek and Latin poets, from whom selections
were used in German translation. Then for the first time
I began to regret once in a while that my father had put me
in the Realschule instead of the Gymnasium. For I felt how
little of the character of Greek and Roman art I should get
hold of through the translations. So I bought Greek and
Latin text-books, and carried along secretly by the side of
the Realschule course also a private Gymnasium course of
instruction. This required much time; but it also laid the
foundation by means of which I met, although in unusual
fashion yet quite according to the rules, the Gymnasium re-
quirements. I had to give many hours of tutoring, especially
when I was in the Technische Hochschule in Vienna. I
soon had a Gymnasium pupil to tutor. Circumstances of
which I shall speak later brought it about that I had to help
this pupil by means of tutoring through almost the whole
Gymnasium course. I taught him Latin and Greek, so that
in teaching him I had to go through every detail of the
Gymnasium course with him.

The teachers of history and geography who could give me
so little in the lower classes became, nevertheless, important
to me in the upper classes. ‘The very one who had driven
me to such unusual reading of Kant wrote once a lecture
for a school report on Die Fiszeit und ihre Ursachen I
grasped the meaning of this with great eagerness of mind,
and conceived from it a strong interest in the problem of the
glacial age. But this teacher was also a good pupil of the
distinguished geographer, Friedrich Simony. This fact led
him to explain in the upper classes the geological-geographical
evolution of the Alps with illustrative drawings on the black-
board. Then I did not by any means read Kant, but was
all eyes and ears. From this side I now got a great deal
from this teacher, whose lessons in history did not interest
me at all.

In the last class I had for the first time a teacher who gripped


1 The Technische Hochschule does not correspond wholly to any English
or American institution. It might be called a ‘‘ university ” with marked
scientific emphasis.

4 The Glacial Age and Its Causes.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 31


me with his instruction in history. He taught history and
geography. In this class the geography of the Alps was set
forth in the same delightful fashion as had already been the
case with the other teacher. In the history lessons the new
teacher got a strong hold upon us. He was to us a personality
in the full sense of the word. He was a partisan, enthusiastic
for the progressive ideas of the Austrian liberal movement
of the time. But in the school there was no evidence of this.
He brought nothing from his partisan views into the class-
room. Yet his teaching of history had, by reason of his own
participation in life, a strong vitality. I listened to the
temperamental historical analyses of this teacher with the
results from my reading of the Rotteck volumes still in my
memory. ‘he experience produced a satisfying harmony. I
cannot but think it was an important thing for me to have
had the opportunity to imbibe the history of modern times
in this manner.

At home I heard much talk about the Russo-Turkish
war (1877-8). The employee who then took my father’s
place every third day was an original sort of person. When
he came to relieve my father, he always brought along a
huge carpet-bag. In this he had great packets of mnauscript.
These were abstracts of the most varied assortments of scientific
books. ‘Those abstracts he gave to me, one after another, to
read. I devoured them. He would then discuss these things
with me. For he really had in his head a conception, some-
what chaotic to be sure but comprehensive, concerning all
these things that he had compiled. With my father, however,
he talked politics. He delighted to take the side of the Turks ;
my father defended with great earnestness the Russians. He
was one of those persons still grateful to Russia for the service
she rendered to Austria at the time of the Hungarian uprising
(1848). For my father was on no sort of terms with the
Hungarians. He lived in the Hungarian border town of
Neudorfl during that period when the process of Magyarizing
was going forward, and the sword of Damocles hung over his
head—the danger that he might not be allowed to remain in
charge of the station of Neudorfl unless he could speak Magyar.
This language was quite unnecessary in that originally German


32 RUDOLF STEINER


place, but the Hungarian regime was endeavouring to bring
it to pass that railway lines in Hungary should be manned
with Magyar-speaking employees, even the privately owned
lines. But my father wished to hold his place at Neudorfl
long enough for me to finish at the school at Wiener-Neustadt.
By reason of all this, he was then not friendly to the Hungarians.
So, since he could not endure the Hungarians, he liked in
his simple way to think of the Russians as those who in 1848
had ‘‘ shown the Hungarians who were their masters.” This
way of thinking manifested itself with extraordinary earnest-
ness, and yet in the wonderfully lovable manner of my father
toward his Turkophile friend in the person of the “ sub-
stitute.” The tide of discussion rose ofttimes very high. I
was greatly interested in the mutual outbursts of the two
personalities, but scarcely at all in their political opinions.
For me a much more vital need at that time was that of finding
an answer to this question: To what extent is it possible to
prove that in human thinking real spirit is the agent ¢


Ill


My father had been promised by the management of the
Southern Railway that he would be assigned to a small station
near Vienna as soon as I should have finished at the Realschule
and should need to attend the Technische Hochschule. In this
way it would be possible for me to go to Vienna and return
every day. So it happened that my family came to Inzersdorf
am Wiener Berge. ‘The station was at a distance from the
town, very lonely, and in unlovely natural surroundings.

My first visit to Vienna after we had moved to Inzersdorf
was for the purpose of buying a greater number of philoso-
phical books. What my heart was now especially devoted to
was the first sketch of Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre I had
got so far with my reading of Kant that I could form a notion,
even though immature, of the advance which Fichte wished
to make beyond Kant. But this did not greatly interest me.
What interested me then was to express the living weaving
of the human mind in a sharply outlined mental picture.
My strivings after conceptions in natural science had finally
brought me to see in the activity of the human ego the sole
starting-point for true knowledge. When the ego is active
and itself perceives this activity, man has something
spiritual in immediate presence in his consciousness—thus
I said to myself. It seemed to me that what was thus per-
ceived ought now to be expressed in clear, vivid concepts.
In order to find a way to do this, I devoted myself to Fichte’s
Theory of Science. And yet I had my own opinions. So
I took the volume and rewrote it, page by page. This made
a lengthy manuscript. I had previously striven to find con-
ceptions for the phenomena of nature from which one might
derive a conception of the ego. Now I wished to do the

t Theory of Sctence.
4 33


34. RUDOLF STEINER


opposite: from the ego to penetrate into the nature’s process
of becoming. Spirit and nature were present before my soul
in their absolute contrast. There was for me a world of
spiritual beings. That the ego, which itself is spirit, lives in
a world of spirits was for me a matter of direct perception.
But nature would not pass over into this spirit-world of my
experience.

From my study of the Theory of Science 1 conceived a
special interest in Fichte’s treatises Uber die Bestimmung des
Gelehrtent and Uber das Wesen des Gelehrten.2» In these
writings I found a sort of ideal toward which I myself would
strive. Along with these I read also the Reden an die Deutsche
Nation. This took hold of me much less at that time than
Fichte’s other works.

But I wished now to come also to a better understanding
of Kant than I had yet been able to attain. In the Critique of
Pure Reason this understanding refused to be revealed to
me. So I attacked the problem with the Prolegomena zu einer
jeden Kiinftigen Metaphysik.s ‘Through this book I thought
I recognized that a thorough penetration into all the questions
which Kant had raised among thinkers was necessary for me.
I now worked more consciously to the end that I might mould
into the forms of thought the immediate vision of the spiritual
world which I possessed. And while I was occupied with
this inner work I sought to get my bearings with reference to
the roads which had been taken by the thinkers of Kant’s
time and the succeeding epoch. I studied the dry, bald
transcendentalen Synthetismus 5 of Traugott Krug just as eagerly
as I entered into the tragedy of knowledge by which Fichte was
possessed when he wrote his Bestimmung des Menschen. ‘The
history of philosophy by Thilo of the school of Herbart
broadened my view of the evolution of philosophical thought
from the period of Kant onward. I fought my way through to
Schelling, to Hegel. The opposition between the thought of
Herbart and of Fichte passed before my mind in all its intensity.

The summer months of 1879, from the end of my Realschule


1 The Vocation of the Scholar. 2 The Nature of the Scholar.
3 Addresses to the German Nation.

4 Prolegomena to all Future Metaphysics.

5 Transcendental Synthesism. 6 Destiny of Man.


THE. STORY OF MY LIFE 35


period until my entrance into the Technische Hochschule, I
spent entirely in such philosophical studies. In the autumn
I was to decide my choice of studies with reference to my
future career. I decided to prepare to teach in a Realschule.
The study of mathematics and descriptive geometry would
have suited my inclination. But I should have to give up the
latter ; for the study of this subject required a great many
practice hours during the day in geometrical drawings, but in
order to earn some money I had to have leisure to devote to
tutoring. ‘This was possible while attending lectures whose
subject-matter, when it was necessary to be absent from
lectures, could afterwards be taken up in readings, but not
possible when one had to spend hours assigned for drawing
regularly in the school.

So I had myself enrolled for mathematics, natural history,
and chemistry. |

Of special import for me, however, were the lectures which
Karl Julius Schréer gave at that time in the Hochschule on
German literature. He lectured during my first year on
‘“‘ Literature since Goethe ” and “ Schiller’s Life and Work.”
From the very first lecture he impressed me. He developed
a survey of the life of the spirit in Germany in the second
half of the eighteenth century and placed in dramatic
contrast with this Goethe’s first appearance and its effect upon
this spiritual life. ‘The warmth of his manner of treating the
subject, the inspiring way in which he entered into the selections
read from the poets, introduced us through an inner process
into the nature of poetry.

In connection with these lectures he had the habit of
requiring “‘ practice in oral and written lectures.”” The students
had then to deliver orally or read what they themselves had
prepared. Schréer would give informal suggestions during
these student performances as to style, manner of delivery,
and the like. My first discussion dealt with Lessing’s Laokoon.
Then I undertook a longer paper. I worked up the theme:
“To what extent is man in his actions a free being?” In
connection with this paper I drew much upon Herbart’s
philosophy. Schréer did not like this at all. He had not
shared in the enthusiasm for Herbart which then prevailed in


36 RUDOLF STEINER


Austria both in philosophical circles and also in pedagogy.
He was devoted completely to Goethe’s type of mind. So
everything which was derived from Herbart seemed to him
pedantic and prosaic, although he recognized the discipline of
thought to be had from this philosopher.

I was now able to attend also certain lectures at the uni-
versity. I took great satisfaction in the Herbartian, Robert
Zimmermann. He lectured on “ Practical Philosophy.” I
attended that part of his lectures in which he developed the
ground principles of ethics. I alternated, generally attending
his lecture one day and the next that of Franz Brentano, who
at the same period lectured on the same field. I could not
keep this up very long, for I missed too much of the courses
in the Hochschule.

I was deeply impressed by learning philosophy in this way,
not merely out of books, but from the lips of the philosophers
themselves.

Robert Zimmermann was a notable personality. He had
an extraordinarily high forehead and a long philosopher’s
beard. With him everything was measured, reduced to style.
When he entered through the door and mounted to his seat,
his steps seemed to be studied, and all the more so because
one felt: ‘With this man it is obviously natural to be like
that.’ In posture and movement he was as if he had formed
himself thus through long discipline according to the zsthetic
principles of Herbart. And yet one could entirely sympathize
with all this. He then slowly sat down on the chair, cast
a long glance through his spectacles over the auditorium, then
slowly and precisely took off his glasses, looked once more
for a long time without spectacles over the circle of auditors,
and finally began to lecture, without manuscript but in care-
fully formed, artistically spoken sentences. There was some-
thing classic in his speech. Yet, owing to the long periods,
one easily lost the thread of his discourse. He expounded
Herbart’s philosophy in a somewhat modified form. ‘The
close logic of his teaching impressed me. But it did not
impress the other hearers. During the first three or four
periods the great hall in which he lectured was full.
“ Practical Philosophy” was required for the law students


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 37


in the first year. They needed the signature of the professor
on their cards. From the fifth or sixth lecture on, most of
them stayed away ; while one listened to the classical philoso-
pher, one was in a very small group of auditors on the farthest
benches.

To me these lectures afforded a powerful stimulus, and
the difference between the views of Schréer and Zimmermann
interested me deeply. The little time I did not spend in
attendance at lectures or in tutoring I utilized either in the
Hofbibliothek* or the library of the Hochschule. ‘Then for
the first time I read Goethe’s Faust. In truth, until my
nineteenth year, when I was inspired by Schroer, I had never
been drawn to this work. Then, however, it won a strong
claim upon my interest. Schréer had already begun his
lectures on the first part. It happened that after only a few
of the lectures I became better acquainted with Schréer. He
then often took me to his home, told me this or that in ampli-
fication of his lectures, gladly answered my questions, and
sent me away with a book from his library, which he lent me
to read. In addition he said many things about the second
part of Faust, an annotated edition of which he was already
preparing. ‘This part also I read at that time.

In the library I spent my time on Herbart’s metaphysics
through Zimmermann’s Aesthetik als Formwissenschaft,? which
was written from Herbart’s point of view. ‘Together with
this I made a thorough study of Haeckel’s Generelle Morpho-
logie.3 I may say that everything which I felt to be entering
into me through the lectures of Schréer and Zimmermann, as
well as the reading I have mentioned, became a matter of the
deepest mental experience. Riddles of knowledge and of
world conception shaped themselves within me from these
things.

Schréer was a spirit who cared nothing for system. He
thought and spoke out of a certain intuition. Besides, he
gave the greatest possible care to the manner in which he
clothed his views in language. For this reason he almost
never lectured without manuscript. He needed to write


t The Public Library. 2 Esthetics as the Science of Form.
3 General Morphology.


38 - RUDOLF STEINER


things down undisturbed in order himself to give the requisite
attention to the bodying forth of this thought in appropriate
words. Then he read a lecture in such a way as to bring
into prominence its true inner meaning. Yet once he spoke
extemporaneously about Anastasius Griin and Lenau. He
had forgotten his manuscript. In the next period, however,
he treated the whole topic again, reading from his manuscript.
He was not satisfied with the form he had been able to give
to the matter extempore. |

From Schréer I learned to understand many concrete
examples of beauty. Through Zimmermann there came to
me a developed theory of beauty. The two did not agree
well. Schréer, the intuitive personality with a certain scorn
for the systematic, stood before my mind side by side with
Zimmermann, the rigidly systematic theorist of beauty.

Franz Brentano, whose lectures also on “ Practical Philo-
sophy ’’ I attended, particularly interested me through his
personality. He wasa keen thinker and at the same time given
to reverie. In his manner of lecturing there was something
ceremonious. I listened to what he said, but I had also to
observe every glance, every movement of his head, every
gesture of his expressive hands. He was the perfect logician.
Each thought must be absolutely complete and linked up with
many other thoughts. The forms of these thought-series
were determined by the most scrupulous attention to the
requirements of logic. But I had the feeling that these
thoughts did not come forth from the loom of his own mind ;
never did they penetrate into reality. And such also was the
whole attitude of Brentano. He held the manuscript loosely
in his hand as if at any moment it might slip from his fingers ;
with his glance he merely skimmed along the lines. And
this was the action suited to a merely superficial touch upon
reality, not for a firm grasp of it. I could understand his
philosophy better from his “‘ philosopher’s hands ” than from
his words. |

The stimulus which came from Brentano worked strongly
upon me. I soon began to study his writings, and in the
course of the following years read most of what he had
published.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 39


I felt in duty bound at that time to seek through philosophy
for the truth. I had to study mathematics and _ natural
science. J was convinced that I should find no relationship
between these and myself unless I could place under them
a solid foundation of philosophy. But I perceived a spiritual
world, none the less, as a reality. In clear vision the spiritual
individuality of every one revealed itself to me. This found
in the physical body and in action in the physical world merely
its manifestation. It united itself with that which came down
as a physical germ from the parents. Dead men I followed
farther on their way in the spiritual world. After the death of
a schoolmate I wrote about this phase of my spiritual life to
one of my former teachers, who had been a close friend of
mine during my Realschule days. He wrote back to me
with unusual affection ; but he did not deign to say one word
about what I had written regarding the dead schoolmate.

And this is what happened to me always at that time in this
matter of my perception of the spiritual world. No one
would pay any attention to it. From all directions persons
would come with all sorts of spiritistic stuff. With this I in
turn would have nothing to do. It was distasteful to me to
approach the spiritual in such a way.

It then chanced that I became acquainted with a simple
man of the plain people. Every week he went to Vienna by
the same train that I took. He gathered medicinal plants in
the country and sold them to apothecaries in Vienna. We
became friends. With him it was possible to talk about the
spiritual world as with one who had his own experience therein.
He was a personality of inner piety. He was quite without
schooling. He had read very many mystical books, but what
he said was not at all influenced by this reading. It was the
outflowing of a spiritual life which was marked by its own
quite elementary creative wisdom. It was easy to perceive
that he read these books only because he wished to find in
others what he knew for himself. He revealed himself as if
he, as a personality, were only the mouthpiece for a spiritual
content which desired to utter itself out of hidden fountains.
When one was with him one could get a glimpse deep into
the secrets of nature. He carried on his back his bundle of


40 RUDOLF STEINER


medicinal plants ; but in his heart he bore results which he
had won from the spirituality of nature in the gathering of
these herbs. I have seen many a man smile who now and
then chanced to make a third party while I walked through
the streets of Vienna with this ‘“‘ initiate.’ No wonder ;
for his manner of expression was not to be understood at
once. One had first in a certain sense to learn his spiritual
dialect. T'o me also it was at first unintelligible. But from
our first acquaintance I was in the deepest sympathy with
him. And so I gradually came to feel as if I were in company
with a soul of the most ancient times who—quite unaffected
by the civilization, science, and general conceptions of the
present age—brought to me an_ instinctive knowledge of
earlier eras.

According to the usual conception of ‘‘ learning,” one might
say that it would be impossible to “ learn ”’ anything from this
man. But, if one possessed in oneself a perception of the
spiritual world, one might obtain glimpses very deep into this
world through another who had a firm footing there.

Moreover, anything of the nature of mere dreams was
utterly foreign to this personality. When one entered his
home, one was in the midst of the most sober and simplest
family of country folk. Above the entrance to his home
were the words: ‘‘ With the blessing of God, all things are
good.” One was entertained just as by other village people.
I always had to drink coffee there, not from a cup, but from
a porridge bowl! which held nearly a litre; with this I had
to eat a piece of bread of enormous dimensions. Nor did the
villagers by any means look upon the man as a dreamer.
There was no occasion for jesting at his behaviour in his
village. Besides, he possessed a sound, wholesome humour,
and knew how to chat, whenever he met with young or old
of the village folk, in such fashion that the people liked to hear
him talk. There was no one who smiled like those persons
that watched him and me going together through the streets
of Vienna, and these persons simply perceived in him some-
thing quite foreign to themselves.

This man always continued to be, even after life had taken

t Haferl.


THE STORY OF: MY LIFE 41


me again far away from him, very close to me in soul. He
appears in my mystery plays in the person of Felix Balde.

It was no light matter for my mental life at that time that
the philosophy which I learned from others could not in its
thought be carried all the way to the perception of the spiritual
world. Because of the difficulty that I experienced in this
respect, I began to fashion a form of “theory of knowledge ”’
within myself. The life of thought in men came gradually
to seem to me the reflection radiated into physical man from
that which I experienced in the spiritual world. ‘Thought-
experience was to me the thing itself with a reality into which
—as something actually experienced through and through—
doubt could find no entrance. The world of the senses did
not seem to me so completely a matter of experience. It 1s
there ; but one does not lay hold upon it as upon thought.
In it or behind it there might be an unknown reality concealed.
Yet man himself is set in the midst of this world. Therefore,
the question arises: Is this world, then, a reality complete in
itself ? When man from within weaves into this world of the
senses the thoughts which bring light into this world, does he
then bring into this world something foreign to it? This
does not accord at all with the experience that man has when
the world of the senses stands before him and he breaks into
it by means of his thought. Thought then appears to be
that by means of which the world of the senses expresses
its own nature. The further development of this reflection
was at that time a weighty part of my inner life.

But I wished to be prudent. To follow a course of thought
too hastily to the extent of building up a philosophical view
of one’s own appeared to me a risky thing. This drove me
to a thorough-going study of Hegel. The manner in which
this philosopher set forth the reality of thought was distressing
to me. That he made his way through only to a thought-
world, even though a living thought-world, and not to the
perception of a world of concrete spirit,—this repelled me.
The assurance with which one philosophizes when one advances
from thought to thought drew me on. I saw that many
persons felt there was a difference between experience and
thought. To me thought itself was experience, but of such


42 RUDOLF STEINER


a nature that one lived in it, not such that it entered from
without into men. And so for a long time Hegel was very
helpful to me. :

As to my required studies, which in the midst of these
philosophical interests had naturally to be cramped for time,
it was fortunate for me that I had already occupied myself
a great deal with differential and integral calculus and with
analytical geometry. Because of this I could remain away
from many lectures in mathematics without losing my con-
nection. Mathematics was very important for me as the
foundation under all my strivings after knowledge. In
mathematics there is afforded a system of percepts and
concepts which have been reached independently of any
external sense impressions. And yet, said I to myself con-
stantly at that time, one carries over these perceptions and
concepts into sense-reality and discovers its laws. Through
mathematics one learns to understand the world, and yet in
order to do this one must first evoke mathematics out of the
human mind.

A decisive experience came to me just at that time from
the side of mathematics. The conception of space gave me
the greatest inner difficulty. As the illimitable, all-encom-
passing vacuity—the form in which it lay at the basis of the
dominant theories of natural science—it could not be conceived
in any definite manner. Through the more recent (synthetic)
geometry, which I learned by means of lectures and in private
study, there came into my mind the perception that a line
which should be prolonged endlessly toward the right hand
would return again from the left to its starting-point. The
infinitely distant point on the right is the same as the point
infinitely distant on the left.

It came over me that by means of such conceptions of the
newer geometry one might form a conception of space, which
otherwise remained fixed in vacuity. The straight line
returning upon itself like a circle seemed to be a revelation.
I left the lecture at which this had first passed before my
mind as if a great load had fallen from me. A feeling of
liberation came over me. Again, as in my early boyhood,
something satisfying had come to me out of geometry.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 43


Behind the riddle of space stood at that period of my life
the riddle of time. Might a conception be possible here also
which would contain within itself in idea a return out of the
past by way of an advance into the infinitely distant future ?
My happiness over the space conception caused a profound
unrest over that of time. But there was then visible no way
out. All efforts of thought led only to the realization that I
must beware especially of applying the clear conception of space
to the problem of time. All clarification which the striving for
understanding could bring was frustrated by the riddle of time.

The stimulus which I had received from Zimmermann
toward the study of esthetics led me to read the writings of
the famous specialist in zsthetics of that time, Friedrich
Theodor Vischer. I found ina passage of his work a reference
to the fact that more recent scientific thought rendered
necessary a change in the conception of time. ‘There was
always a sense of joy aroused in me when I found in others
the recognition of any cognitional need which I had conceived.
In this case it was like a confirmation in my struggle toward
a satisfying concept of time.

The lectures for which I was enrolled in the Technische
Hochschule 1 always had to finish with a corresponding
examination. For a scholarship had been granted me, and
I could draw my allowance only when I showed each year the
results of my studies.

But my need for understanding, especially in the sphere of
natural science, was but little aided by these required studies.
It was possible then, however, in the technical institutes of
Vienna both to attend lectures as a visitor and also to carry
on practical courses. I found everywhere those who met me
half-way when I sought thus to foster my scientific life, even
so far as to the study of medicine.

I may state positively that I never allowed my insight into
the spiritual world to become a disturbing factor when I was
engaged in the endeavour to understand science as it was then
developed. I applied myself to what was taught, and only
in the background of my thought did I have the hope that
some day the blending of natural science with the knowledge
of the spirit would be granted me.


44 RUDOLF STEINER


Only from two sides was I disturbed in this hope.

The sciences of organic nature were then—wherever I
could lay hold of them—steeped in Darwinian ideas. To
me Darwinism appeared in its leading ideas as scientifically
impossible. I had little by little reached the stage of forming
for myself a conception of the inner man. This was of a
spiritual sort. And this inner man I thought of as a member
of the spiritual world. He was conceived as dipping down
out of the spiritual world into nature, uniting with the organism
of nature in order thereby to perceive and to act in the world
of the senses.

The fact that I felt a certain respect for the course of thought
characterizing the evolutionary theory of organisms did not
render it possible for me to sacrifice anything from the con-
ception. The derivation of higher out of lower organisms
seemed to me a fruitful idea, but the identification of this idea
with that which I knew as the spiritual world appeared to me
immeasurably difficult.

The studies in physics were penetrated throughout by the
mechanical theory of heat and the wave theory of the pheno-
mena of light and colour.

The study of the mechanical theory of heat had taken on
for me the charm of a personal colouring because in this field
of physics I attended lectures by a personality for whom I
felt quite extraordinary respect. This was Edmund Reitlinger,
the author of that beautiful book, Free Blicke.t

This man was of the most captivating lovableness. When
I became his student, he was already very seriously ill
with tuberculosis. For two years I attended his lectures on
the theory of heat, physics for chemists, and the history of
physics. I worked under him in the physics laboratory in
many fields, especially in that of spectrum-analysis.

Of special importance for me were Reitlinger’s lectures on
the history of physics. He spoke in such a way that one felt
that, on account of his illness, every word was a burden to
him. And yet his lectures were in the best possible sense
inspiring. He was a man of a strongly inductive method of
research. For all methods in physics he liked to cite the

t Open Vistas.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 45


book of Whewel on inductive science. Newton marked for
him the climax of research in physics. ‘The history of physics
he set forth in two parts: the first from the earliest times to
Newton; the second from Newton to recent times. He was
an universal thinker. From the historical consideration of
problems in physics he always passed over to the perspective
of the general history of culture. Indeed, quite general
philosophic ideas would appear in his discussions of physics.
In this way he treated the problems of optimism and pessimism,
and spoke most impressively about the legitimacy of setting
up scientific hypotheses. His exposition of Keppler, his
characterization of Julius Robert Mayers, were masterpieces
of scientific discussion.

I was then stimulated to read almost all the writings of
Julius Robert Mayers, and I was able to experience the truly
great pleasure of talking face to face with Reitlinger about the
content of these.

I was filled with a deep sorrow when, only a few weeks
after I had passed my final examination on the mechanical
theory of heat under Reitlinger, my beloved teacher succumbed
to his grievous illness. Just a short while before his death
he had given me as his legacy a testimonial of personal quali-
fications which would enable me to secure pupils for private
tutoring. This had most fortunate results. No small part
of what came to me in the following years as means of liveli-
hood I owed to Reitlinger after his death.

Through the mechanical theory of heat and the wave theory
of light and of electric phenomena, I was impelled to a study of
theories of cognition. At that time the external physical
world was conceived as motion-events in matter. The
sensations appeared to be only subjective experiences, as the
effects of pure motion-events upon the senses of men. Out
there in space occurred the motion-events in matter ; if these
events affected the human heat-sense, man experienced the
sensation of heat. There are outside of man wave-events in
the ether; if these affect the optic nerve, light and colour
sensations are generated within man.

These conceptions met me everywhere. They caused me
unspeakable difficulties in my thinking. They banished all


46 RUDOLF STEINER


spirit from the objective external world. Before my mind
there stood the idea that even if the observations of natural
phenomena led to such opinions, one who possessed a per-
ception of the spiritual world could not arrive at these opinions.
I saw how seductive these assumptions were for the manner
of thought of that time, educated in the natural sciences, and
yet I could not then resolve to oppose a manner of thought
of my own against that which then prevailed. But just this
caused me bitter mental struggles. Again and again must
the criticism I could easily frame against this manner of
thinking be suppressed within me to await the time in which
more comprehensive sources and ways of knowledge should
give me a greater assurance.

I was deeply stirred by the reading of Schiller’s letters
concerning the esthetic education of man. His statement
that human consciousness oscillates, as it were, back and forth
between different states, afforded me a connection with the
notion that I had formed of the inner working and weaving
of the human soul. Schiller distinguished two states of
consciousness in which man evolves his relationship to the
world. When he surrenders himself to that which affects
him through the senses, he lives under the compulsion of
nature. The sensations and impulses determine his life.
If he subjects himself to the logical laws and principles of
reason then he is living under a rational compulsion. But he
can evolve an intermediate state of consciousness. He can
develop the “‘ esthetic mood,” which is not given over either
on the one side to the compulsion of nature, or on the other to
the necessities of the reason. In this zsthetic mood the soul
lives through the senses ; but into the sense-perception and
into the action set on foot by sense-stimuli the soul brings
over something spiritual. One perceives through the senses,
but as if the spiritual had streamed over into the senses. In
action one surrenders oneself to the gratification of the present
desire ; but one has so ennobled this desire that to him the
good is pleasing and the evil displeasing. Reason has then
entered into union with the sensible. ‘The good becomes an
instinct ; instinct can safely direct itself, for it has taken on
the character of the spiritual. Schiller sees in this state of


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 47


consciousness that condition of the soul in which man can
experience and produce works of beauty. In the evolution
of this state he sees the coming to life in men of the true human
being.

These thoughts of Schiller’s were to me very attractive.
They implied that man must first have his consciousness in
a certain condition before he can attain to a relationship to
the phenomena of the world corresponding to man’s own
being. Something was here given to me which brought to
greater clarity the questions which presented themselves before
me out of my observation of nature and my spiritual experience.
Schiller spoke of the state of consciousness which must be
present in order that one may experience the beauty of the
world. Might one not also think of a state of consciousness
which would mediate to us the truth in the beings of things ?
If this is granted, then one must not, after the fashion of
Kant, observe the present state of human consciousness and
investigate whether this can enter into the true beings of
things. But one must first seek to discover the state of con-
sciousness through which man places himself in such a
relationship to the world that things and facts reveal their
being to him.

And I believed that I knew that such a state of conscious-
ness is reached up to a certain degree when man not only has
thoughts which conceive external things and events, but such
thoughts that he himself experiences them as thoughts. 'This
living in thoughts revealed itself to me as quite different from
that in which man ordinarily exists and also carries on ordinary
scientific research. If one penetrates deeper and deeper into
thought-life, one finds that spiritual reality comes to meet
this thought life. One then takes the path of the soul into
the spirit. But on this inner way of the soul one arrives at a
spiritual reality which one also finds again within nature. One
gains a deeper knowledge of nature when one then faces
nature after having in living thoughts beheld the reality of
the spirit.

It became clearer and clearer to me how, through going
forward beyond the customary abstract thoughts to these
spiritual perceptions—which, however, the calmness and


48 RUDOLF STEINER


luminousness of the thought serve to confirm—man lives
himself into a reality from which customary consciousness
bars him out. This customary state has on one side the
living quality of the sense-perception; on the other the
abstractness of thought-conceiving. The spiritual vision per-
ceives spirit as the senses perceive nature; but it does not
stand apart in thought from the spiritual perception as the
customary state of consciousness stands in zs thoughts apart
from the sense-perceptions. Spiritual vision thinks while it
experiences spirit, and experiences while it sets to thinking
the awakened spirituality of man.

A spiritual perception formed itself before my mind which
did not rest upon dark mystical feeling. It proceeded much
more in a spiritual activity which in its thoroughness might
be compared with mathematical thinking. I was approaching
the state of soul in which I felt that I might consider that
the perception of the spiritual world which I bore within me
was confirmed before the forum of natural scientific thought.

When these experiences passed through my mind I was in
my twenty-second year.


IV


For the form of the experience of spirit which I then desired
to establish upon a firm foundation within me, music came
to have a critical significance. At that time there was pro-
ceeding in the most intense fashion in the spiritual environment
in which I lived the “strife over Wagner.” During my
boyhood and youth I had seized every opportunity to improve
my knowledge of music. The attitude I held toward thinking
required this by implication. For me, thought had content
in itself. It possessed this not merely through the percept
which it expressed. This, however, obviously led over into
the experience of pure musical tone-forms as such. The
world of tone in itself was to me the revelation of an essential
side of reality. That music should “ express’? something
else besides the tone-form, as was then maintained in every
possible way by the followers of Wagner, seemed to me utterly
“ unmusical.” |

I was always of a social disposition. Because of this I
had even in my school-days at Wiener-Neustadt, and then
again in Vienna, formed many friendships. In opinions I
seldom agreed with these friends. This, however, did not
mean at all that there was not an inwardness and mutual
stimulus in these friendships. One of these was with a
young man pre-eminently idealistic. With his blond hair
and frank blue eyes he was the very type of a young German.
He was then quite absorbed in Wagnerism. Music that lived
in itself, that would weave itself in tones alone, was to him
a cast-off world of horrible Philistines. What revealed itself
in the tones as in a kind of speech—that for him gave the tone-
forms their value. We attended together many concerts
and many operas. We always held opposite views. My
limbs grew as heavy as lead when “‘ expressive music ”’ inflamed


5 49


50 RUDOLF STEINER


him to ecstasy ; and he was horribly bored by music which
did not pretend to be anything else but music.

The debates with this friend stretched out endlessly. In
long walks together, in long sessions over our cups of coffee,
he drew out his “ proofs’ expressed in animated fashion,
that only with Wagner had true music been born, and that
everything which had gone before was only a preparation for
this ‘‘ discoverer of music.”” This led me to assert my own
opinions in drastic fashion. I spoke of the barbarism of
Wagener, the graveyard of all understanding of music.

On special occasions the argument grew particularly
animated. At one time my friend very noticeably formed
the habit of directing our almost daily walk to a narrow
little street, and passing up and down it many times
discussing Wagner. I was so absorbed in our argument
that only gradually did it dawn upon me how he had got this
bent. At the window of one of the little houses on the narrow
alley there sat at the time of our walk a charming girl.
There was no relationship between him and the girl except
that he saw her sitting at the window almost every day, and
at times was aware that a glance she let fall on the street was
meant for him.

At first I only noticed that his championship of Wagner
—which in any case was fierce enough—was fanned to a
brilliant flame in this little alley. And when I became aware
of what a current flowed from that vicinity into his inspired
heart, he grew confidential in this matter also, and I came
to share in the tenderest, most beautiful, most passionate
young love. The relation between the two never went much
beyond what I have described. My friend, who came of
people not blessed with worldly goods, had soon after to take
a petty journalistic job in a provincial city. He could not
think of any nearer tie with the girl. But neither was he strong
enough to overcome the existing relationship. I kept up a
correspondence with him for a long time. A melancholy
note of resignation marked his letters. That from which he
had been forced to cut himself off was still living and strong
in his heart.

Long after life had brought to an end my correspondence


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 51


with this friend of my youth, I chanced to meet a person from
the same city in which he had found a place as a journalist.
I had always been fond of him, and I asked about him. This
person said to me: “ Yes, things turned out very badly for
him; he could scarcely earn his bread. Finally he became
a writer in my employ, and then he died of tuberculosis.”
This news stabbed me to the heart, for I knew that once the
idealistic, fair-haired youth, under the compulsion of circum-
stances, had in his own feelings severed his relation with
his young love, then it made no difference to him what life
might further bring to him. He considered it of no value to lay
the basis for a life which could not be that one which had
floated before him as an ideal during our walks in that little
street.

In intercourse with this friend my anti-Wagnerism of that
period came to realization in even more positive form. But,
apart from this, it played any way a great role in my mental
life at that time. I strove in all directions to find my way into
music which had nothing to do with Wagnerism. My love
for “‘ pure music” increased with the passage of years; my
horror at the ‘‘ barbarism ”’ of “‘ music as expression ’”’ con-
tinued to increase. And in this matter it was my lot to get
into a human environment in which there were scarcely any
other persons than admirers of Wagner. This all contributed
much toward the fact that only much later did I grudgingly
fight my way to an understanding of Wagner, the obviously
human attitude toward so significant a cultural phenomenon.
This struggle, however, belongs to a later period of my life. In
the period I am now describing, a performance of Tristan,
for example, to which I had to accompany one of my pupils,
was to me “ mortally boring.”

To this time belongs still another youthful friendship very
significant for me. This was with a young man who was in
every way the opposite of the fair-haired youth. He felt
that he was a poet. With him, too, I spent a great deal of time
in stimulating talk. He was very sensitive to everything
poetic. At an early age he undertook important productions.
When we became acquainted, he had already written a tragedy,
Hannibal, and much lyric verse.


52 RUDOLF STEINER


I was with both these friends in the “ practice in oral
and written lectures” which Schréer conducted in the
Hochschule. From this course we three, and many others,
received the greatest inspiration. We young people could
discuss what we had arrived at in our minds and Schroer
talked over everything with us and elevated our souls by his
dominant idealism and his noble capacity for imparting
inspiration.

My friend often accompanied me when | had the privilege
of visiting Schréer. There he always grew animated, whereas
elsewhere a note of burden was manifest in his life. Because
of a certain discord he was not ready to face life. No calling
was so attractive to him that he would gladly have entered
upon it. He was altogether taken up with his poetic
interest, and apart from this he found no satisfying relation
with existence. At last he had to take a position quite un-
attractive to him. With him also I continued my connection
by means of letters. ‘The fact that even in his poetry he could
not find real satisfaction preyed upon his spirit. Life for him
was not filled with anything possessing worth. I had to observe
to my sorrow, how little by little in his letters and also in his
conversation the belief grew upon him that he was suffering
from an incurable disease. Nothing sufficed to dispel this
groundless obsession. So one day I had to receive the
distressing news that the young man who was very near to me
had made an end of himself.

A real inward friendship I formed at this time also with a
young man who had come from the German Transylvania
to the Vienna Hochschule. Him also I had first met in
Schréer’s Seminar periods. There he had read a paper on
pessimism. Everything which Schopenhauer had presented
in favour of this conception of life was revived in that paper.
In addition there was the personal, pessimistic temperament
of the young man himself. I determined to oppose his views.
I refuted pessimism with veritable words of thunder, even
calling Schopenhauer narrow-minded, and wound up my
exposition with the sentence: “If the gentleman who read
the paper were correct in his position with respect to pessimism,
then I had rather be the wooden board on which my feet


‘


: THE STORY OF MY LIFE 53


now tread than be a man.” These words were for a long
time repeated jestingly about me among my acquaintances.
But they made of the young pessimist and me inwardly united
friends. We now passed much time together. He also felt
himself to be a poet, and many a time I sat for hours in his
room and listened with pleasure to the reading of his poems.
In my spiritual strivings of that time he also showed a warm
interest, although he was moved to this less by the thing itself
with which I was concerned than by his personal affection for
me. He was bound up with many a delightful friendship,
and also youthful love affairs. As a means of living he had
to carry a truly heavy burden. At Hermannstadt he had gone
through the school as a poor boy and even then had to make
his living by tutoring. He then conceived the clever idea
of continuing to instruct by correspondence from Vienna the
pupils he had gained at Hermannstadt. The sciences in
the Hochschule interested him very little. One day, however,
he wished to pass an examination in chemistry. He had
never attended a lecture or opened a single one of the required
books. On the last night before the examination he had a
friend read to him a digest of the whole subject-matter. He
finally fell asleep over this. Yet he went with this friend to
the examination. Both made “ brilliant ”’ failures.

This young man had boundless faith in me. For a long
time he treated me almost as his father-confessor. He opened
up to my view an interesting, often melancholy, life sensitive
to all that is beautiful. He gave to me so much friendship
and love that it was really hard at times not to cause him
bitter disappointment. This happened especially because he
often felt that I did not show him enough attention. And
yet this could not be otherwise when I had so many varieties
of interests for which I found in him no real understanding.
All this, however, only contributed to make the friendship
a more inward relationship. He spent his summer vacation
at Hermannstadt. There he sought for students in order to
tutor them by correspondence the following year from Vienna.
I always received long letters at these times from him. He
was grieved because I seldom or never answered these. But,
when he returned to Vienna in the autumn, he hurried to


54 RUDOLF STEINER


me like a boy, and the united life began again. I owed it
to him at that time that I was able to mingle with many men.
He liked to take me to meet all the people with whom he
associated. And I was eager for companionship. This
friend brought into my life much that gave me happiness and
warmth.

Our friendship remained the same till my friend died a few
years ago. It stood the test of many storms of life, and I shall
still have much to say of it.

In retrospective consciousness much comes to mind of
human and vital relationships which still continues to-day fully
present in my mind, united with feelings of love and gratitude.
Here I cannot relate all this in detail, but must leave quite
unmentioned much which was indeed very near to me in my
personal experience, and is near even now.

My youthful friendships in the time of which I am here
speaking had in the further course of my life a special import.
They forced me into a sort of double mental life. The
struggle with the riddle of cognition, which then filled my mind
more than all else, aroused in my friends always, to be sure,
a strong interest, but very little active participation. In the
experience of this riddle I was always rather lonely. On the
other hand, I myself shared completely in whatever arose
in the existence of my friends. Thus there flowed along in
me two parallel currents of life : one which I as a lone wanderer
followed, the other which I shared in vital companionship
with men bound to me by ties of affection. But this two-
fold life was on many occasions of profound and lasting signi-
ficance for my development.

In this connection I must mention especially a friend who
had already been a schoolmate of mine at Wiener-Neustadt.
During that time, however, we were far apart. First in
Vienna, where he visited me often and where he later lived
as an employee, he came very close to me. And yet even at
Wiener-Neustadt, without any external relationship between
us, he had already had a significance for my life. Once I
was with him in a gymnasium period. While he was exercising
and I had nothing to do, he left a book lying by me. It was
Heine’s book on the romantic school and the history of


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 55


philosophy in Germany. I glanced into it. The result of
this was that I read the whole book. I found many stimulating
things in the book, but was vitally opposed to the manner in
which Heine treated the content of life which was dear to me.
In this perception of a way of thought and order of feeling which
were utterly opposed to those shaping themselves in me, I
received a powerful stimulus toward a self-consciousness in
the orientation of the inner life which was a necessity of my
very nature. I then talked with my schoolmate in opposition
to the book. Through this the inner life of his soul came to
the fore, which later led to the establishing of a lasting friend-
ship. He was an uncommunicative man who confided very
little. Most people thought him an odd character. With
those few in whom he was willing to confide he became
quite expressive, especially in letters. He considered himself
called by his inner nature to be a poet. He was of the opinion
that he bore a great treasure in his soul. Besides, he was
inclined to imagine that he was in intimate relation with other
persons, especially women, rather than actually to form these
ties into objective fact. At times he was close to such a
relation, but he could not bring it to actual experience. In
conversation with me he would then live through his fancies
with the same inwardness and enthusiasm as if they were
actual. ‘Therefore it was inevitable that he experienced bitter
emotions when the dreams always went amiss.

This produced in him a mental life that had not the slightest
relation to his outward existence. And this life again was to
him the subject of tormenting reflections about himself, which
were mirrored for me in many letters and conversations.
Thus he once wrote me a long exposition of the way in which
the least or the greatest experience became to him a symbol
and how he lived in such symbols.

I loved this friend, and in my love for him I entered into
his dreams, although I always had the feeling when with him :
“We are moving about in the clouds and have no ground
under our feet!’ For me, who ceaselessly busied myself to
find firm support for life just there—in knowledge—this was
an unique experience. I always had to slip outside of my
own being and leap across into another skin, as it were,


56 RUDOLF STEINER


when I was in company with this friend. He liked to share
his life with me; at times he even set forth extensive
theoretical reflections concerning the “ difference between
our two natures.”’ He was quite unaware how little our
thoughts harmonized, because his friendly sentiments led
him on in all his thinking.

The case was similar in my relation with another Wiener-
Neustadt schoolmate. He belonged to the next lower class
in the Realschule, and we first came together when he entered
the Hochschule in Vienna a year after me. Then, how-
ever, we were often together. He also entered but little
into that which concerned me so inwardly, the problem of
cognition. He studied chemistry. The natural scientific
opinions in which he was then involved prevented him from
showing himself in any other light than as a sceptic concerning
the spiritual conceptions with which I was filled. Later on
in life I found in the case of this friend how close to my state
of mind he then stood in his innermost being; but at that
time he never allowed this innermost being to show itself.
Thus our lively and long arguments became for me a “ battle
against materialism.” He always opposed to my avowal of
the spiritual substance of the world all the contradictory
results which seemed to him to be given by natural science.
Then I always had to array everything I possessed by way of
insight in order to drive from the field his arguments, drawn
from the materialistic orientation of his thought, against the
knowledge of a spiritual world.

Once we were arguing the question with great zeal. Every
day after attending the lectures in Vienna my friend went back
to his home, which was still at Wiener-Neustadt. I often
accompanied him through the streets of Vienna to the station
of the Southern Railway. One day we reached a sort of
climax in the argument over materialism after we had already
arrived at the station and the train was almost due. Then
I put together what I still had to say in the following words :
“So, then, you maintain that, when you say ‘I think,’ this
is merely the necessary effect of the occurrences in your brain-
nerve system. Only these occurrences are a reality. So it
is, likewise, when you say ‘ I am this or that,’ ‘I go,’ and so


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 57


forth. But observe this. You do not say, ‘ My brain thinks,’
‘ My brain sees this or that,’ ‘ My brain goes.’ If, however,
you have really come to the opinion that what you theoretically
maintain is actually true, you must correct your form of
expression. When you continue to speak of ‘I,’ you are
really lying. But you cannot do otherwise than follow your
sound instinct against the suggestion of your theory. Ex-
perience offers you a different group of facts from that which
your theory makes up. Your consciousness calls your theory
a lie.” My friend shook his head. He had no time to
reply. As I went back alone, I could not but think that
opposing materialism in this crude fashion did not correspond
with a particularly exact philosophy. But it did not then
really concern me so much to furnish, five minutes before
the train left, a philosophically convincing proof as to give
expression to my certitude from inner experience of the
reality of the human ego. To me this ego was an inwardly
observable experience of a reality present in itself. This
reality seemed to me no less certain than any known to
materialism. But in it there is absolutely nothing material.
This thorough-going perception of the reality and the
Spirituality of the ego has in the succeeding years helped me
to overcome every temptation to materialism. I have always
known “the ego is unshakable.’’ And it has been clear to
me that no one really knows the ego who considers it as a
form of phenomenon, as a result of other events. The fact
that I possessed this perception inwardly and spiritually was
what I wished to get my friend to understand. We fought
together many times thereafter on this battlefield. But
in general conceptions of life we had so many similar senti-
ments that the earnestness of our theoretical battling never
resulted in the least disturbance of our personal relationship.
During this time I got deeper into the student life in Vienna.
I became a member of the “‘ German Reading Club ”’ in the
Hochschule. In the assembly and in smaller gatherings the
political and cultural phenomena of the time were thoroughly
discussed. These discussions brought out all possible—and
impossible—points of view, such as young people hold.
Especially when officers were to be elected, opinions clashed


58 ~ RUDOLF STEINER


against one another quite violently. Very exciting and
stimulating was much that there found expression among
the youth in connection with the events in the public life
of Austria. It was the time when national parties were
becoming more and more sharply defined. Everything which
led later more and more to the disruption of the Empire,
which appeared in its results after the World War, could then
be experienced in germ.

I was first chosen librarian of the reading-room. As such I
found out all possible authors who had written books that I
thought would be of value to the student library. ‘To such
authors I wrote “‘ begging letters.’’ I often wrote in a single
week a hundred such letters. Through this “‘ work ” of mine
the library was very soon much enlarged. But the thing
had a secondary effect for me. Through the work it was
possible for me to become acquainted in a comprehensive
fashion with the scientific, artistic, culture-historical, political
literature of the time. I was an eager reader of the books
given.

Later I was chosen president of the Reading Club. This,
however, was to me a burdensome office. For I faced a great
number of the most diverse party view-points and saw in all
of these their relative justification. Yet the adherents of the
various parties would come to me. Each would seek to
persuade me that his party alone was right. At the time when
I was elected every party had favoured me. For until then
they had only heard how in the assemblies I had taken the part
of justice. After I had been president for a half-year, all
turned against me. In that time they had found that I could
not decide as positively for any party as that party wished.

My craving for companionship found great satisfaction in
the reading-room. And an interest was awakened in a broader
field of the public life through its reflection in the occurrences
in the common life of the students. In this way I came to
be present at very interesting parliamentary debates, sitting
in the gallery of the House of Delegates or of the Senate.

Apart from the bills under discussion—which often affected
life profoundly—I was especially interested in the personalities
of the House of Delegates. There stood every year at the


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 59


end of his bench, as the chief budget expositor, the keen
philosopher, Bartolemaus Carneri. His words were a hail-
storm of accusations against the Taaffe Ministry ; they were
a defence of Germanism in Austria. There stood Ernst
von Plener, the dry speaker, the unexcelled authority in matters
of finance. One was chilled while he criticized the statement
of the Minister of Finance, Dunajewski, with the coldness of
an accountant. ‘There the Ruthenian Thomeszuck thundered
against the politics of nationalities. One had the feeling
that upon his discovery of an especially well-coined word for
that moment depended the fostering of antipathy against the
Minister. ‘There argued, in peasant-theatrical fashion, always
intelligently, the clerical Lienbacher. His head, bowed over
a little, caused what he said to seem like the outflow of clarified
perceptions. ‘There argued in his cutting style the Young
Czech Gregr. One felt in him a half-demagogue. There
stood Rieger of the Old Czechs, altogether with the deeply
characteristic sentiment of the organized Czechs as they had
been built up during a long period and had come to self-
consciousness during the second half of the nineteenth century
—a man seldom shut up to himself, a powerful mind and a
steadfast will. ‘There spoke on the right side of the Chamber
in the midst of the Polish seats Otto Hausner—often only
setting forth the results of reading spiritually rich; often
sending well-aimed shafts to all sides of the House with a
certain sense of satisfaction in himself. A thoroughly self-
satisfied but intelligent eye sparkled behind a monocle; the other
always seemed to say “ Yes’ to the sparkle. A speaker who,
however, even then often spoke prophetic words as to the
future of Austria. One ought to-day to read again what he
then said; one would be amazed at the keenness of his
vision. One then laughed, to be sure, over much which
years later became bitter earnest.


V


I couLD not at that time bring myself to reflections concerning
public life in Austria which might have taken a deeper hold
in any way whatever upon my mind. I merely continued
to observe the extraordinarily complicated relationships in-
volved. Expressions which won my deeper interest I could
find only in connection with Karl Julius Schréer. I had the
pleasure of being with him often just at this time. His own
fate was closely bound up with that of German Austria-
Hungary. He was the son of Tobias Schréer, who conducted
a German school in Presburg and wrote dramas as well as
books on historical and esthetic subjects. ‘The last appeared
under the name Christian O6cser, and they were favourite
text-books. The poetic writings of Tobias Gottfried Schréer,
although they are doubtless significant and received marked
recognition within restricted circles, did not become widely
known. ‘The sentiment that breathes through them was
opposed to the dominant political current in Hungary. They
had to be published in part without the author’s name in
German regions outside of Hungary. Had the tendencies of
the author’s mind been known in Hungary, he would have
risked, not only dismissal from his post, but also severe
punishment.

Karl Julius Schréer thus experienced the impulse toward
Germanism even as a young man in his own home. Under
this impulse he developed his intimate devotion to the German
nature and German literature as well as a great devotion to
everything belonging to Goethe or concerning him. The
history of German poetry by Gervinus had a profound influence
upon him.

He went in the fortieth year of the nineteenth century to

60


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 61


Germany to pursue his studies in the German language and
literature at the universities of Leipzig, Halle, and Berlin.
After his return he was occupied in teaching German literature
in his father’s school, and in conducting a Seminar. He
now became acquainted with the Christmas folk-plays which
were enacted every year by the German colonists in the
region of Presburg. ‘There he was face to face with Germanism
in a form profoundly congenial to him. The roving Germans
who had come from the west into Hungary hundreds of years
before had brought with them these plays of the old home,
and continued to perform them as they had done at the
Christmas festival in regions which no doubt lay in the
neighbourhood of the Rhine. The Paradise story, the birth of
Christ, the coming of the three kings were alive in popular
form in these plays. Schrder then published them, as he
heard them, or as he read them in old manuscripts that he
was able to see at peasants’ homes, using the title Deutsche
Weinachtsspiele aus Ungarn.*

The delightful experience of living in the German folk-
life took an even stronger hold upon Schréer’s mind. He made
journeys in order to study German dialects in the most widely
separated parts of Austria. Wherever the German folk was
scattered in the Slavic, Magyar, or Italian geographical regions,
he wished to learn their individuality. ‘Thus came into being
his glossary and grammar of the Zipser dialect, which was
native to the south of the Carpathians; of the Gottschze
dialect, which survived with a little fragment of German folk
in Krain; the language of the Heanzen, which was spoken
in western Hungary.

For Schréer these studies were never merely a scientifi
task. He lived with his whole soul in the revelation of the
folk-life, and wished by word and writing to bring its nature
to the consciousness of those men who have been uprooted
from it by life. He was then a professor in Budapest.
There he could not feel at home in the presence of the pre-
vailing current of thought ; so he removed to Vienna, where
at first he was entrusted with the direction of the evangelical
schools, and where he later became a professor of the German

* German Christmas Plays from Hungary,


62 RUDOLF STEINER


language and literature. When he already occupied this
position, I had the privilege of knowing him and of becoming
intimate with him. At the time when this occurred, his
whole sentiment and life were directed toward Goethe. He
was engaged in editing the second part of Faust, and writing
an introduction for this, and had already published the
first part.

When I went to call at Schréer’s little library, which was
also his work-room, I felt that I was in a spiritual atmosphere
in the highest degree beneficial to my mental life. I under-
stood at once why Schréer was maligned by those who accepted
the prevailing literary-historical methods on account of his
writings, and especially on account of his Geschicte der Deutschen
Dichtung im neunzehnten Jahrhundert: He did not write at
all like the members of the Scherer school, who treated literary
phenomena after the fashion of investigators in natural science.
He had certain sentiments and ideas concerning literary
phenomena, and he spoke these out in frank, manly fashion
without turning his eyes much at the moment of writing to
the “sources.” It had even been said that he had written
his exposition “‘ from the wrist out.”

This interested me very little. I experienced a spiritual
warmth when I was with him. I could sit by his side for hours.
Out of his inspired heart the Christmas plays lived on his
lips, the spirit of the German dialect, the course of the life of
literature. ‘The relation between dialect and cultured speech
became perceptible to me in a practical way. I experienced
a real joy when he spoke to me, as he had already done in his
lectures, of the poet of the Lower Austrian dialect, Joseph
Misson, who wrote the splendid poem, Da Naaz, a nieder-
Osterreichischer Bauernbua, geht ind Fremd2 Schréer then
constantly gave me books from his library in which I could
pursue further what was the content of this conversation.
I always had, in truth, when I sat there alone with Schréer,
the feeling that still another was present—Goethe’s spirit.
For Schroer lived so strongly in the spirit and the work of
Goethe that in every sentiment or idea which entered his


1 History of German Poetry in the Nineteenth Century.
a Ignatius, a peasant boy of Lower Austria, goes abroad.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 63


soul he feelingly asked the question, “‘ Would Goethe have
felt or thought thus ? ”

I listened in a spiritual sense with the greatest possible
sympathy to everything that came from Schrier. Yet I
could not do otherwise even in his presence than build up
independently in my own mind that toward which I was
striving in my innermost spirit. Schréer was an idealist,
and the world of ideas as such was for him that which worked
as a propulsive force in the creation of nature and of man. I
then found it indeed difficult to express in words for myself
the difference between Schréer’s way of thinking and mine.
He spoke of ideas as the propelling forces in history. He
felt life in the idea itself. For me the life of the spirit was
behind the ideas, and these were only the phenomena of that
life in the human soul. I could then find no other terms for
my way of thinking than “objective idealism.” I wished
thereby to denote that for me the reality is not in the idea;
that the idea appears in man as the subject, but that
just as colour appears on a physical object, so the idea
appears on the spiritual object, and that the human mind—
the subject—perceives it there as the eye Se colour
on a living being.

My conception, however, Schréer very fireell satisfied in
the form of expression he used when we talked about that
which reveals itself as “‘ folk-soul.”” He spoke of this as of a
real spiritual being which lives in the group of individual
men who belong to a folk. In this matter his words took on
a character which did not pertain merely to the designation
of an idea abstractly held. And thus we both observed the
texture of ancient Austria and the individualities of the several
folk-souls active in Austria. From this side it was possible
for me to conceive thoughts concerning the state of public
life which penetrated more deeply into my mind.

Thus my experience at that time was strongly bound up
with my relationship to Karl Julius Schréer. What, however,
were more remote from him, and in which I strove most of
all for an inner explanation, were the natural sciences. I
wished to know that my “‘ objective idealism ” was in harmony
with the knowledge of nature.


64 RUDOLF STEINER


It was during the period of my most earnest intercourse
with Schréer that the question of the relation between the
spiritual and natural worlds came before my mind in a new
form. This happened at first quite independently of Goethe’s
way of thought concerning the natural sciences. For even
Schréer could tell me nothing distinctive concerning this
realm of Goethe’s creative work. He was happy whenever
he found in one or another natural scientist a generous
recognition of Goethe’s observations concerning the beings
of plants and animals. As regards Goethe’s theory of colour,
however, he was met on all sides by natural scientific concep-
tions utterly opposed. So in this direction he developed no
special opinion.

My relationship to natural science was not at this time of
my life influenced from this side, in spite of the fact that in
my intercourse with Schréer I came into close touch with
Goethe’s spiritual life. It was determined much more by the
difficulties I experienced when I had to think out the facts
of optics in the sense of the physicist.

I found that light and sound were thought of in an analogy
which is invalid. The expressions ‘‘ sound in general ” and
“light in general’? were used. The analogy lay in the
following: The individual tones and sounds were viewed as
specially modified air-vibrations ; and objective sound, outside
of the human perception, was viewed as a state of vibration
of the air. Light was thought of similarly. That which occurs
outside of man when he has a perception by means of
phenomena caused by light was defined as vibration in ether.
The colours, then, are especially formed ether-vibrations.
These analogies became at that time an actual torment to my
inner life. For I believed myself perfectly clear in the
perception that the concept “sound” is merely an abstract
union of the individual occurrences in the sphere of sound ;
whereas “ light” signifies a concrete thing over against the
phenomena in the sphere of illumination. ‘‘ Sound” was
for me a composite abstract concept; “light”? a concrete
reality. I said to myself that light is really not perceived by
the senses ; ‘‘ colours” are perceived by means of light, which
manifests itself everywhere in the perception of colours but


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 65


is not itself sensibly perceived. ‘‘ White” light is not light,
but that also is a colour.

Thus for me light became a reality in the sense-world, yet
in itself not perceptible to the senses. Now there came before
my mind the conflict between nominalism and realism as this
was developed within scholasticism. The realists maintained
that concepts were realities which lived in things and were
simply reproduced out of these by human understanding.
The nominalists maintained, on the contrary, that concepts
were merely names formed by man which include together a
complex of what is in the things, but names which have no
existence themselves. It now seemed to me that the sound-
experience must be viewed in the nominalist manner and the
experiences which proceed from light in the realist manner.

I carried this orientation into the optics of the physicist.
I had to reject much in this science. ‘Then I arrived at
perceptions which gave me a way to Goethe’s colour theory.
On this side the door opened before me through which to
approach Goethe’s writings on natural science. I first took
to Schréer brief treatises I had written on the basis of my
views in the field of natural science. He could make but
little of them ; for they were not yet worked out on the basis
of Goethe’s way of thinking, but I had merely attached at the
end this remark: ‘“‘ When men come to the point of thinking
about nature as I have here set forth, then only will Goethe’s
researches in science be confirmed.’’ Schréer felt an inner
pleasure when I made such a statement, but beyond this
nothing then came of the matter. The situation in which I
then found myself comes out in the following: Schroder
related to me one day that he had spoken with a colleague
who was a physicist. But, said the man, Goethe opposed
himself to Newton, and Newton was “ such a genius ”’; to
which Schroer replied: But Goethe “also was a genius.”’
Thus again I felt that I had a riddle to solve with which I
struggled entirely alone.

In the views at which I had arrived in the physics of optics
there seemed to me to be a bridge between what is revealed
to insight into the spiritual world and that which comes out
of researches in the natural sciences. I felt then a need to

6


66 RUDOLF STEINER


prove to sense experience, by means of certain experiments
in optics in a form of my own, the thoughts which I had
formed concerning the nature of light and that of colour.
It was not easy for me to buy the things needed for such ex-
periments ; for the means of living I derived from tutoring
was little enough. Whatever was in any way possible for me
I did in order to arrive at such plans of experimentation in
the theory of light as would lead to an unprejudiced insight
into the facts of nature in this field.

With the physicist’s usual arrangements for experiments I
was familiar through my work in Reitlinger’s physics laboratory.
The mathematical treatment of optics was easy to me, for I
had already pursued thorough courses in this field. In spite
of all objections raised by the physicists against Goethe’s
theory of colour, I was driven by my own experiments farther
and farther away from the customary attitude of the physicist
toward Goethe. I became aware that all such experimenta-
tion is only the establishing of certain facts “ about light ”
—to use an expression of Goethe’s—and not experimentation
with light itself. I said to myself: “The colours are not, in
Newton’s way of thinking, produced out of light; they come
to manifestation when obstructions hinder the free unfolding
of the light.’’ It seemed to me that this was the lesson to be
learned directly from my experiments.

Through this, however, light was for me removed from the
properly physical realities. It took its place as a midway
stage between the realities perceptible to the senses and those
visible to the spirit.

I was not inclined forthwith to engage in a merely philo-
sophical course of thinking about these things. But I held
strongly to this: to read the facts of nature aright. And then
it became constantly clearer to me how light itself does not
enter the realm of the sense-perceptible, but remains on
the farther side of this, while colours appear when the sense-
perceptible is brought into the realm of light.

I now felt myself compelled anew to press inward to the
understanding of nature from the most diverse directions.
I was led again to the study of anatomy and physiology. I ob-
served the members of the human, animal, and plant organisms


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 67


in their formations. In this study I came in my own way to
Goethe’s theory of metamorphosis. I became more and
more aware how that conception of nature which is attainable
through the senses penetrates through to that which was
visible to me in spiritual fashion.

If in this spiritual way I directed my look to the soul-activity
of man, thinking, feeling, and willing, then the “‘ spiritual
man ”’ took form for me, a clearly visible image. I could not
linger in the abstractions in which men generally think when
they speak of thinking, feeling, and willing. In these living
manifestations I saw creative forces which set ‘‘ the man as
spirit’ there before me. If I then turned my glance to the
sense-manifestation of man, this became complete to my
observation by means of the spirit-form which ruled in the
sense-perceptible.

I came upon the sensible-supersensible form of which Goethe
speaks and which thrusts itself, both for the true natural vision
and for the spiritual vision, between what the senses grasp
and what the spirit perceives.

Anatomy and physiology struggled through step by step
to the sensible-supersensible form. And in this struggling
through my look fell, at first in a very imperfect way, upon the
threefold organization of the human being, concerning which
—after having pursued my studies regarding this for thirty
years in silence—I first began to speak openly in my book
Von Seelenratzeln.t It then became clear to me that in that
portion of the human organization in which the shaping is
chiefly directed to the elements of the nerves and the senses,
the sensible-supersensible form also stamps itself most strongly
in the sense-perceptible. The head organization appeared to
me as that in which the sensible-supersensible becomes most
strongly visible in the sensible form. On the other hand, I
was forced to look upon the organization consisting of the
limbs as that in which the sensible-supersensible most com-
pletely submerges itself, so that in this organization the
forces active in nature external to man pursue their work in
the shaping of the human body. Between these poles of the
human organization everything seemed to me to exist which

* Riddles of the Soul.


68 RUDOLF STEINER


expresses itself in a rhythmic manner, the processes of breathing,
circulation, and the like.

At that time I found no one to whom I could have spoken
of these perceptions. If I referred here or there to something
of this, then it was looked upon at once as the result of a
philosophic idea, whereas I was certain that I had disclosed
these things to myself by means of an understanding drawn
from unbiased anatomical and physiological experimentation.

For the mood which depressed my soul by reason of this
isolation in my perceptions I found an inner release only when
I read over and over the conversation which Goethe had with
Schiller as the two went away from a meeting of the Society
for Scientific Research in Jena. They were both agreed in
the view that nature should not be observed in such piece-
meal fashion as had been done in the paper of the botanist
Batsch which they had heard read. And Goethe with a few
strokes drew before Schiller’s eyes his ‘‘ archetypal plant.”
This through a sensible-supersensible form represents the
plant as a whole out of which leaf, blossom, etc., reproducing
the whole in detail, shape themselves. Schiller, because he
had not yet overcome his Kantian point of view, could see in
this “ whole ” only an “ idea’ which human understanding
formed through observation of the details. Goethe would not
allow this to pass. He saw spiritually the whole as he saw
with his senses the group of details, and he admitted no
difference in principle between the spiritual and the sensible
perception, but only a transition from the one to the other.
To him it was clear that both had the right to a place in the
reality of experience. Schiller, however, did not cease to maine
tain that the archetypal plant was no experience, but an idea.
Then Goethe replied, in his way of thinking, that in this case
he perceived his ideas with his eyes.

There was for me a rest after a long struggle in my mind,
in that which came to me out of the understanding of these
words of Goethe, to which I believed I had penetrated.
Goethe’s perception of nature revealed itself before my mind
as a spiritual perception.

Now, by reason of an inner necessity, I had to strive to work
in detail through all of Goethe’s scientific writings. At first


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 69


I did not think of undertaking an interpretation of these writings,
such as I soon afterward published in an introduction to them
in Kiirschner’s Deutsche National Literatur. I thought much
more of setting forth independently some field or other of
natural science in the way in which this science now hovered
before me as “‘ spiritual.”

My external life was at that time not so ordered that I could
accomplish this. I had to do tutoring in the most diverse
subjects. The “‘ pedagogical” situations through which I had
to find my way were complex enough. For example, there
appeared in Vienna a Prussian officer who for some reason or
other had been forced to leave the German military service.
He wished to prepare himself to enter the Austrian army as
an officer of engineers. Through a peculiar course of fate
I became his teacher in mathematics and physical-scientific
subjects. I found in this teaching the deepest satisfaction ;
for my “scholar”? was an extraordinarily lovable man who
formed a human relationship with me when we had put
behind us the mathematical and scientific developments he
needed for his preparation. In other cases also, as in those
of students who had completed their work and who were
preparing for doctoral examinations, I had to give the instruc-
tion, especially in mathematics and the physical sciences.

Because of this necessity of working again and again through
the physical sciences of that time, I had ample opportunity
of immersing myself in the contemporary views in these fields.
In teaching I could give out only these views ; what was most
important to me in relation to the knowledge of nature I had
still to carry locked up within myself.

My activity as a tutor, which afforded me at that time the
sole means of a livelihood, preserved me from one-sidedness.
I had to learn many things from the foundation up in order
to be able to teach them. Thus I found my way into the
“ mysteries’ of book-keeping, for I found opportunity to
give instruction even in this subject.

Moreover, in the matter of pedagogical thought, there came
to me from Schroer the most fruitful stimulus. He had
worked for years as director of the Evangelical schools in
Vienna, and he had set forth his experiences in the charming


m9 RUDOLF STEINER


little book, Unterrichtsfrage.t What I read in this could then
be discussed with him. In regard to education and instruc-
tion, he spoke often against the mere imparting of information,
and in favour of the evolution of the full and entire
human being.


t Questions on Teaching.


VI


IN the field of pedagogy Fate gave me an unusual task. I was
employed as tutor in a family where there were four boys.
To three I had to give only the preparatory instruction for
the Volkschule: and then assistance in the work of the
Mittelschulet ‘The fourth, who was almost ten years old,
was at first entrusted to me for all his education. He was
the child of sorrow to his parents, especially to his mother.
When I went to live in the home, he had scarcely learned the
most rudimentary elements of reading, writing, and arithmetic.
He was considered so subnormal in his physical and mental
development that the family had doubts as to his capacity
for being educated. His thinking was slow and dull. Even
the slightest mental exertion caused a headache, lowering of
vital functions, pallor, and alarming mental symptoms.

After I had come to know the child, I formed the opinion
that the sort of education required by such a bodily and mental
organism must be one that would awaken the sleeping faculties,
and I proposed to the parents that they should leave the child’s
training tome. ‘The mother had enough confidence to accept
this proposal, and I was thus able to set myself this unusual
educational task.

I had to find access to a soul which was, as it were, in a
sleeping state, and which must gradually be enabled to gain
the mastery over the bodily manifestations. In a certain
sense one had first to draw the soul within the body. I was
thoroughly convinced that the boy really had great mental
capacities, though they were then buried. ‘This made my task
a profoundly satisfying one. I was soon able to bring the


t The Volkschule course usually extends from the sixth to the tenth
year; the Mittelschule covers the three following years, though the term
is not always so definite.

71


72 RUDOLF STEINER


child into a loving dependence upon me. ‘This condition
caused the mere intercourse between us to awaken his sleeping
faculties of soul. For his instruction I had to feel my way
to special methods. Every fifteen minutes beyond a certain
time allotted to instruction caused injury to his health. To
many subjects of instruction the boy had great difficulty in
relating himself.

This educational task became to me the source from which
I myself learned very much. Through the method of
instruction which I had to apply there was laid open to my
view the association between the spiritual-mental and the
bodily in man. Then I went through my real course of
study in physiology and psychology. I became aware that
teaching and instructing must become an art having its
foundation in a genuine understanding of man. I had to
follow out with great care an economic principle. I frequently
had to spend two hours in preparing for half an hour of
instruction in order to get the material for instruction in
such a form that in the least time, and with the least strain
upon the mental and physical powers of the child, I might
reach his highest capacity for achievement. The order of
the subjects of instruction had to be carefully considered ;
the division of the entire day into periods had to be properly
determined. I had the satisfaction of seeing the child in
the course of two years accomplish the work of the Volkschule,
and successfully pass the examination for entrance to the
Gymnasium. Moreover, his physical condition had materially
improved. The hydrocephalic condition was markedly
diminishing. I was able to advise the parents to send the
child to a public school. It seemed to me necessary that
he should find his vital development in company with other
children. I continued to be a tutor for several years in the
family, and gave special attention to this boy, who was always
guided to make his way through the school in such a way
that his home activities should be carried through in the
spirit in which they were begun. I then had the inducement,
in the way I have already mentioned, to increase my know-


t That is, the boy completed in two years what children usually do in
the years from the sixth to the tenth year of age.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 73


ledge of Latin and Greek, for I was responsible for the tutoring
of this boy and another in this family for the Gymnasium
lessons.

I must needs feel grateful to Fate for having brought me
into such a life relationship. For through this means I
developed in vital fashion a knowledge of the being of man
which I do not believe could have been developed by me so
vitally in any other way. Moreover, I was taken into the
family in an extraordinarily affectionate way; we came to
live a beautiful life in common. The father of these boys
was a sales-agent for Indian and American cotton. I was
thus able to get a glimpse of the working of business, and
of much that is connected with this. Moreover, through this
I learned a great deal. I had an inside view of the conduct
of a branch of an unusually interesting import business, and
could observe the intercourse between business friends and
the interlinking of many commercial and industrial activities.

My young charge was successfully guided through the
Gymnasium ; I continued with him even to the Unter-Prima.t
By that time he had made such progress that he no longer
needed me. After completing the Gymnasium he entered the
school of medicine, became a physician, and in this capacity
he was later a victim of the World War. The mother, who
had become a true friend of mine because of what I had
done for her boy, and who clung to this child of sorrow with
the most devoted love, soon followed him in death. The
father had already gone from this world.

A good portion of my youthful life was bound up with
the task which had grown so close to me. For a number of
years I went during the summer with the family of the children
whom I had to tutor to the Attersee in the Salzkammergut,
and there became familiar with the noble Alpine nature of
Upper Austria. I was gradually able to eliminate the private
lessons I had continued to give to others even after beginning
this tutoring, and thus I had time left for prosecuting my own
studies.

In the life I led before coming into this family I had little
opportunity for sharing in the play of children. In this way


™ The next to the last year in the Gymnasium.


m4 RUDOLF STEINER


it came about that my “ play-time ” came after my twentieth
year. I had then to learn also how to play, for I had to
direct the play, and this I did with great enjoyment. To be
sure, I think I have not played any less in my life than other
men. Only in my case what is usually done in this direction
before the tenth year I repeated from the twenty-third to the
twenty-eighth year. |

It was during this period that I was occupied with the
philosophy of Eduard von Hartmann. As I studied his theory
of knowledge, continual opposition was aroused within me.
The opinion that the genuinely real lies as the unconscious
beyond conscious experience, and that the latter is nothing
more than an unreal pictorial reflection from the real—this
was to me utterly repugnant. In opposition to this I postu-
lated that the conscious experience can, through the
strengthening of mental life, dip down within the real. I was
clear in my own mind that the divine-spiritual reveals itself
in man if man makes this revelation possible through his own
inner life.

The pessimism of Eduard von Hartmann appeared to me
as an utterly false questioning of human life. I had to
conceive man as striving toward the goal of drawing up from
within himself that with which life fills him for his satisfaction.
I said to myself: ‘‘ If through the ordering of the world a
‘ best life’ were simply imparted to man, how could he bring
this inner spring to a flowing stream?”’ ‘The external world
order has come to a stage in evolution in which it has ignored
the good and the bad in things and in facts. ‘Then first the
human being awakes to self-consciousness and guides the
evolution farther, but in such way that this evolution takes
its direction toward freedom, not from things and facts, but
only from the fountain head of man’s being. The mere
introduction of the question of pessimism or optimism seemed
to me to be running counter to the free being of man. |
frequently said to myself: ‘‘ How could man be the free
creator of his highest happiness if a measure of happiness
were imparted to him through the ordering of the external
world?”


On the other hand, Hartmann’s work Phdnomenologie des


THE STORY OF MY LIFE a5


Stttlichen Bewusstsein* attracted me. There, I found, the
moral evolution of man was traced according to the clue of
what is empirically observable. It does not become—as in the
case of Hartmann’s theory of knowledge—speculative thought
linked to unknown being which lies beyond consciousness ;
but rather it is that which can be experienced as morality,
and grasped in its manifestations. And it was clear to me
that no philosophical speculation must think beyond the
phenomena if it desires to reach the genuinely real. The
phenomena of the world reveal of themselves this genuinely
real as soon as the conscious soul prepares itself to receive
the revelation. Whoever takes into consciousness only what
is perceptible to the senses may seek for real being in a beyond-
consciousness ; whoever grasps the spiritual in his perception
speaks of this as being on this side, not of a beyond in the
sense characteristic of a theory of cognition. Hartmann’s
consideration of the moral world seemed to me congenial
because in this his beyond standpoint withdraws wholly into
the background, and he confines himself to that which can
be observed. Through a deeper penetration into phenomena,
even to the point where these disclose their spiritual being—
it was in this way that I desired to know that knowledge of
real being is brought to pass, not through inferential reasoning
as to what is ‘‘ behind ” phenomena.

Since I was always striving to sense a human capacity on
its positive side, Eduard von Hartmann’s philosophy became
useful to me, in spite of the fact that its fundamental ten-
dency and its conception of life were repugnant ; for it cast
a penetrating light upon many phenomena. And even in
those writings of the ‘‘ philosopher of the unconscious ” from
which in principle I dissented I yet found much that was
immensely stimulating. So it was also with the popular
writings of Eduard von Hartmann, which dealt with cultural-
historical, pedagogical, and political problems. I found in
this pessimist ‘‘ sound ” conceptions of life such as I could
not discover in many optimists. It was just in connection
with him that I experienced that which I needed,—to be able
to understand even though I had to oppose.

* Phenomenology of Moral Consciousness.


“6 RUDOLF STEINER


It was thus that I sat till late many a night—when I could
leave my boys to themselves, and after I had admired the
starry heavens from the balcony of the house—in study-
ing the Phenomenology of Moral Consciousness and the
Religiéses Bewusstsein der Menscheit in der Stufenfolge seiner
Entwickelung,! and while I was reading these writings I attained
to an ever increasing assurance concerning my own standpoint
in regard to the theory of knowledge.

Upon the suggestion of Schréer, Joseph Kiirschner invited
me in 1884 to edit Goethe’s scientific writings with an
introduction and accompanying interpretive notes as a part
of the edition of Deutsche National-Literatur planned by him.
Schréer, who had taken responsibility for Goethe’s dramas
within the great collective work, was to preface the first
volume assigned to me with an introductory foreword. In
this he analysed the manner in which Goethe as poet and
as thinker was related to the contemporary spiritual life. In
the philosophy introduced by the age of natural science which
followed after Goethe, he saw a falling away from the spiritual
height upon which Goethe had been standing. The task
which had been assigned to me in the editing of Goethe’s
scientific writings was characterized in a general way in this
preface.

For me the task included an exposition in which natural
science should be on one side and Goethe’s whole philosophy
on the other. Now that I had to come before the public
with such an exposition, it was necessary for me to bring
to a certain issue all that I had thus far won for myself in the
way of a world-conception.

Until that time I had occupied myself as a writer with
nothing more than brief articles for the press. It was not
easy for me to write down what was a vital inner experience
in such manner that I could consider my work worthy of
publication. I always had the feeling that what had been
elaborated within appeared in a very paltry form when I had
to present it in a finished shape. So all literary endeavours
became to me the source of continual inner unhappiness.

The form of thought by which natural science has been


t Religious Consciousness in Man in the Stages of its Evolution.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE oe


dominated since the beginning of its great influence upon
the civilization of the nineteenth century seemed to me ill-
adapted to reach an understanding of that which Goethe
strove to attain for natural science, and actually did in large
measure attain.

I beheld in Goethe a personality who, by reason of the
unusual spiritual relationship in which he had placed man
with reference to nature, was also in a position to place the
knowledge of nature in the right form in the totality of human
achievement. The form of thought of the period in which
I had grown up appeared to me fit only for shaping ideas
regarding lifeless nature. I considered it powerless to enter
with capacity for knowledge into the realm of living nature. I
said to myself : “In order to attain to ideas which can mediate
a knowledge of the organic, it is necessary that one should
first endue with life the concepts adapted for an understanding
of inorganic nature.” For these seemed to me dead, and
therefore fit only for grasping that which is dead.

How the ideas became endued with life in Goethe’s spirit,
how they became ideal forms, this is what I sought to set
forth in order to clarify Goethe’s conception of nature.

What Goethe thought and elaborated in detail regarding
this or that field of the knowledge of nature appeared to me
of less importance than the central discovery which I was
forced to attribute to him. This I saw in the fact that he
had discovered how one must think in regard to the organic
in order to come at it understandingly.

I found that mechanics completely satisfy the need for
knowledge in that they generate conceptions in a rational
manner in the human mind which then prove to be real
when applied in the sense-perception of that which is lifeless.
Goethe was to me the founder of a law of organics, which
in like manner applies to that which has life. When I looked
back to Galileo in the history of modern spiritual life, I
was forced to remark how he, by the shaping of ideas from
the inorganic, had given to the new natural science its present
form. What he had introduced for the inorganic Goethe
had striven to attain for the organic. Goethe became for
me the Galileo of the organic.


78 RUDOLF STEINER


For the first volume of Goethe’s natural-scientific writings
I had first to elaborate his ideas on metamorphosis. It was
difficult for me to express the relation between the living
ideal forms through which the organic can be understood
and the formless ideas suited to enable one to grasp the inorganic.
But it seemed to me that my whole task depended upon making
this point in true fashion intelligible.

In understanding the inorganic, concept is added in series
to concept, in order to survey the correlation of forces which
bring about an effect in nature. In reference to the organic
it is necessary so to allow one concept to grow out of another
that in the progressive living metamorphosis of concepts there
come to light images of that which appears in nature as a
being possessing form. This Goethe strove to do in that he
sought to hold fast in his mind an ideal image of a leaf
which was not a fixed lifeless concept but such a one as
might present itself in the most varied forms. If one permits
these forms in the mind to proceed one out of another, one
thus constructs the whole plant. One re-creates in the mind
in ideal fashion the process whereby nature in actual fashion
shapes the plant.

If one seeks in this way to conceive the plant world, one
thus stands much nearer in spirit to the world of nature than
in conceiving the inorganic by means of formless concepts.
For the inorganic one conceives only a spiritual fantasm of
that which is present in nature in a manner void of spirit.
But in the coming into existence of a plant there lives some-
thing which has a remote resemblance to that which arises
in the human mind as an image of the plant. One becomes
aware of how nature, while bringing forth the organic, is
really bringing into action something spiritually similar within
her own being.

I desired to show, in the introduction to Goethe’s botanical
writings, how in his theory of metamorphosis he took the
direction of thinking about the workings of organic nature in
the manner in which one thinks of spirit.

Still more spiritual in form appeared to me Goethe’s way
of thinking in the realm of the animal and in the lower natural
stages of the human being.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 79


In relation to the animal-human, Goethe began by seeing
through an error which he noticed among his contemporaries.
These sought to ascribe a special position in nature to the
organic bases of the human being by finding individual
distinctions between man and the animal. They found such
a distinction in the intermaxillary bones which the animals
possess, in which their upper incisor teeth are bedded.
In man, they said, such a special intermediary bone in the
upper jaw is lacking; his upper jaw consists of a single
piece.

This seemed to Goethe an error. For him the human
form was a metamorphosis of the animal to a higher stage.
Everything which appears in the forming of the animal must
be present also in the human, only in a higher form so that
the human organism might become the bearer of the self-
conscious spirit.

In the elevation of the whole united form of man Goethe
saw the distinction from the animal, not in details.

Step by step does one perceive the organic creative forces
become more like spirit as one rises from consideration of
the plant-beings to the varied forms of the animals. In the
organic form of man creative forces are active which bring
to pass the highest metamorphosis of the animal shape. These
forces are present in the process of becoming of the human
organism ; and they finally live there as the human spirit
after they have formed in the natural basic parts a vessel
which can receive them in their form of existence free from
nature.

In this conception of the human organism it seemed to me
that Goethe had anticipated everything true which was later
affirmed, on the ground of Darwinism, concerning the kinship
of the human with the animal. But it also seemed to me
that all which was untrue was omitted. The materialistic
understanding of that which Darwin discovered leads to the
adoption of conceptions based upon the kinship between man
and the animals which deny the spirit where it appears in
its highest form in an earthly existence—in man. Goethe’s
conception leads to the perception of a spiritual creation in
the animal form which has simply not yet arrived at the stage


80 RUDOLF STEINER


at which the spirit as such can ive. That which lives in man
as spirit creates in the animal form at a preliminary stage ;
and it metamorphoses this form in the case of man in such
a way that it can then appear, not only as creative, but also
in its own living presence.

Viewed in this way, Goethe’s consideration of nature
becomes one which, while tracing the natural process of
becoming from the inorganic to the organic, also leads natural
science over into spiritual science. To bring out this fact
was to me of more importance than anything else in working
up the first volume of Goethe’s natural-scientific writings.
For this reason I allowed my introduction to narrow down
to an explanation of the way in which Darwinism establishes
a one-sided view, coloured by materialism, which must be
restored to wholeness by Goethe’s way of thinking.

How one must think in order to penetrate into the phenomena
of life—this is what I wished to show in discussing Goethe’s
view of the organic. I soon came to feel that this discussion
required a basis upon which to rest. The nature of cognition
was then conceived by my contemporaries in a way which
could never arrive at Goethe’s view. The theorists of cog-
nition had in mind natural science as it then existed. What
they said in regard to the nature of cognition held good only
for a conception of inorganic nature. There could be no
agreement between what I must say in regard to Goethe’s
kind of cognition and the theories of cognition ordinarily held
at that time.

Therefore, whatever I had established upon the basis of
Goethe’s theory of the organic sent me afresh to the theory
of cognition. I had before my mind theories such as that
of Otto Liebmann, which expressed in the most varied forms
the dogma that human consciousness can never get outside
itself ; that it must therefore be content to live in that which
reality sends into the human soul, and which presents itself
within in spiritual form. If one views the thing in this way,
one cannot say that one perceives a spiritual relationship
in organic nature after the manner of Goethe. One must
seek for the spirit within the human soul, and consider a
spiritual contemplation of nature inadmissible.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 81


I discovered that there was no theory of cognition fitting
Goethe’s kind of cognition. This induced me to undertake
to sketch such a theory. I wrote my Erkenntnistheorie der
Goethe’schen Weltanschauung * out of an inner need before I
proceeded to prepare the other volumes of Goethe’s natural-
scientific writings. This little book was finished in 1886.


t Theory of Cognition in Goethe’s World-Conception.


Vil


I wrote down the ideas of the Theory of Cognition in Goethe’s
World-Conception at a time when Fate had led me into a family
which made possible for me many happy hours within its circle,
and a fortunate chapter of my life. Among my friends there
had for a long time been one whom I had come to hold very
dear because of his gay and sunny disposition, his accurate
observations upon life and men, and his whole manner, so
open and loyal. He introduced me and other mutual friends
into his home. ‘There we met, in addition to this friend,
two daughters of the family, his sisters, and a man whom we
soon had to recognize as the fiancé of the elder daughter.

In the background of this family there hovered some-
thing we were never able to see. This was the father of the
brother and sisters. He was there, and yet not there. We
learned from the most various sources something about the
man who was to us unknown. According to what we were
told, he must have been somewhat unusual. At first the
brother and sisters never spoke of their father, even though
he must have been in the next room. ‘Then they began, at
first very gradually, to make one or another remark about
him. Every word showed a feeling of genuine reverence.
One felt that in this man they honoured a very important
person. But one also felt that they dreaded lest by chance
we should happen to see him.

Our conversations in the family circle were generally of a
literary character, and, in order to refer to this thing or
that, many a book would be brought by the brother or sisters
from the father’s library. And the circumstances brought it
about that I became acquainted, little by little, with much
which the man in the next room read, although I never had


an opportunity to see him.
82


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 83


At last I could no longer do otherwise than inquire about
much that concerned the unknown man. And thus, from
the talk of the brother and sisters—which held back much, and
yet revealed much—there gradually arose in my mind an
image of a noteworthy personality. I loved the man, who
to me also seemed an important person. I came finally to
reverence in him a man whom the hard experiences of
life had brought to the pass of dealing thenceforward only
with the world within himself, and of foregoing all human
intercourse.

One day we visitors were told that the man was ill, and soon
afterward the news of his death had to be conveyed to us.
The brother and sisters entrusted to me the funeral address.
I said what my heart impelled me to say regarding the per-
sonality whom I had come to know only through descriptions.
It was a funeral at which only the family, the fiancé of one
daughter, and my friends were present. The brother and
sisters said to me that I had given a true picture of their
father in my funeral address. And from the way they spoke,
and from their tears, I could not but feel that this was their
real conviction. Moreover, I knew that the man stood as near
me in the spirit as if I had had much intercourse with him.

Between the younger daughter and me there gradually came
about a beautiful friendship. She really had in her something
of the primal type of the German maiden. She bore in her
soul nothing acquired from her education, but expressed in
her life an original and charming naturalness together with
a noble reserve, and this reserve of hers caused a like reserve
in me. We loved each other, and both of us were fully aware
of this ; but neither of us could overcome the fear of saying
that we loved each other. Thus the love lived between the
words we spoke to each other, and not in the words themselves.
I felt the relationship as to our souls was of the most universal
kind ; but it found no possibility of taking a single step beyond
what is of the soul.

I was happy in this friendship ; I felt my girl friend like
something of the sun in my life. Yet this life later bore us
far apart. In place of hours of happy companionship there
then remained only a short-lived correspondence, followed by


84 RUDOLF STEINER


the melancholy memory of a beautiful period of my past
life—a memory, however, which has through all my later life
arisen again and again from the depths of my soul.

It was at that same time that I once went to Schréer. He
was altogether filled with an impression which he had just
received. He had become acquainted with the poems of
Marie Eugenie delle Grazie. Before him there lay a little
volume of her poems, an epic Herman, a drama Saul, and a
story Die Zigeunerin Schréer spoke enthusiastically of these
poetical writings. ‘‘ And all these have been written by a
young person before completing her sixteenth year !”’ he said.
Then he added that Robert Zimmermann had said that she
was the only genius he had known in his life.

Schréer’s enthusiasm now led me also to read the productions
one after another. I wrote an article about the poet. ‘This
brought me the great pleasure of being permitted to call
upon her. During this call I had the opportunity of a
conversation with the poet which has often come to mind
during my life. She had already begun to work upon an
undertaking in the grand style, her epic Robespierre. She
discussed the basic ideas of this composition. Already there
was present in her conversation an undertone of pessimism.
I felt in regard to her as if she meant to represent in such
a personality as Robespierre the tragedy in all idealism.
Ideals arise in the human heart, but they have no power over
the horrible destructive action of nature, empty of all ideals,
who utters against all ideals her pitiless cry: ‘‘ Thou art mere
illusion, a fantasm of my own, which I again and again hurl
back into nothingness.”

This was her conviction. ‘The poet then spoke to me of
a further poetic plan, a Satanid. She would represent the
antitype of God as the Primal Being which is the Power
revealing itself to man in terrible, ruinous nature, empty of
the ideal. She spoke with genuine inspiration of the Power
from the abyss of being, dominant over all being. I went
away from the poet profoundly shocked. ‘The greatness with
which she had spoken remained impressed upon me; the
content of her ideas was the opposite of everything which

t The Gipsy.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE $5


stood before my mind as a view of the world. But I was
never inclined to withhold my interest or my admiration
from that which seemed to me great, even when it repelled
me utterly by its content. Indeed, I said to myself, such
opposites in the world must somewhere find their recon-
ciliation. And this enabled me to follow what repelled me
just as if it lay in the same direction as the conception held
by my own mind.

Shortly after this I was invited again to the home of delle
Grazie. She was to read her Robespierre before a number of
persons, among whom were Schroer and his wife and also a
woman friend of his family. We listened to scenes of lofty poetic
rhythm, but with a pessimistic undertone of a richly coloured
naturalism : life painted in its most terrible aspects. Great
human beings, inwardly deceived by Fate, rose to the surface,
or sank below in the grip of tragedy. This was my impression.
Schréer became indignant. For him art ought not to plunge
beneath such abysses of the “ terrible.” The women withdrew.
They had experienced a sort of convulsion. I could not agree
with Schréer, for he seemed to me to be wholly filled with
the feeling that poetry can never be made out of what is
terrible in the experience of the human soul, even though this
terrible experience is nobly endured. Delle Grazie soon
after published a poem in which Nature is celebrated as
the highest Power, but in such a way that she mocks at all
ideals, which she calls into existence only in order to delude
man, and which she hurls back into nothingness when this
delusion has been accomplished.

In relation to this composition I wrote a paper entitled
Die Natur und unsere Ideale, which I did not publish but
had privately printed in a small number of copies. In this
I discussed the apparent correctness of delle Grazie’s view.
I said that a view which does not shut out the hostility
manifested by nature against human ideals is of a higher
order than a “ superficial optimism ”’ which blinds itself to
the abysses of existence. But I also said in regard to this
matter that the free inner being of man creates for itself that
which gives meaning and content to life, and that this being

* Nature and Our Ideals.


86 RUDOLF STEINER


could not fully unfold itself if a prodigal nature bestowed upon
it from without that which ought to arise within.

Because of this paper I had a painful experience. When
Schréer had received it, he wrote me that, if I thought in
such a way about pessimism, we had never understood one
another, and that anyone who spoke in such a way about
nature as I had done in the paper showed thereby that he
could not have taken in a sufficiently profound sense Goethe’s
words : ‘“‘ Know thyself, and live at peace with the world.”

I was cut to the heart when I received these lines from the
person to whom I felt the most devoted attachment. Schroer
could be passionately aroused when he became aware of a
sin against the harmony manifesting itself in art in the form
of beauty. He turned against delle Grazie when he was
forced to observe this sin against his conception. And he
considered the admiration which I felt for the poet as a falling
away both from him and also from Goethe. He failed to
see in my paper what I said regarding the human spirit over-
coming from within itself the obstacles of nature; he was
offended because I said that external nature could not be the
creator of true inner satisfaction for man. I wished to set
forth the meaninglessness of pessimism in spite of its correct-
ness within certain limits; Schréer saw in every concession
to pessimism something which he called “the slag from
burned-out spirits.”

In the home of Marie Eugenie delle Grazie I passed some
of the happy hours of my life. Saturday evening she always
received visitors. ‘Those who came were persons of divers
spiritual tendencies. The poet formed the centre of the
group. She read aloud from her poems; she spoke in the
spirit of her world-conception in very positive language. She
cast the light of these ideas upon human life. It was by
no means the light of the sun. Always in truth only the pale
light of the moon—threatening, overcast skies. But from
human dwellings there arose flames of fire into the dusky
air as if carrying the sorrows and illusions in which men are
consumed. All this, nevertheless, humanly gripping, always
fascinating, the bitterness enveloped in the magic power of:
a wholly spiritualized personality.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 87


At delle Grazie’s side was Laurenz Miillner, a Catholic
priest, teacher of the poet, and later her discreet and noble
friend. He was at that time professor of Christian philosophy
in the theological faculty of the University. The impression
he made, not only by his face but in his whole figure, was
that of one whose development had been mental and ascetic.
A sceptic in philosophy, thoroughly grounded in all aspects
of philosophy, in conceptions of art and literature. He wrote
for the Catholic clerical journal, Vaterland, stimulating articles
upon artistic and literary subjects. The poet’s pessimistic
view of the world and of life fell always from his lips also.

Both united in a positive antipathy to Goethe; on the
other hand, their interest was directed to Shakespeare and the
later poets, children of the sorrowful burden of life, and of
the naturalistic confusions of human nature. Dostoievsky
they loved warmly ; Leopold von Sachen-Masoch they looked
upon as a brilliant writer who shrank back from no truth in
order to represent that which is growing up in the morass
of modern life as all too human and worthy of destruction. In
Laurenz Miillner the antipathy to Goethe took on something
of the colour of Catholic theology. He praised Baumgarten’s
monograph, which characterized Goethe as the antithesis of
that which is deserving of human endeavour. In delle Grazie
there was something like a profound personal antipathy to
Goethe.

About the two were gathered professors of the theological
faculty, Catholic priests of the very finest scholarship. First
among them all was the priest of the Cistercian Order of the
Holy Cross, Wilhelm Neumann. Miillner justly esteemed
him because of his comprehensive scholarship. He said to
me once, when in the absence of Neumann I was speaking
with enthusiastic admiration of his broad and comprehensive
scholarship: “‘ Yes, indeed, Professor Neumann knows the
whole world and three villages besides.” I liked to accom-
pany the learned man when we went away from delle Grazie’s
at the same time. I had many a conversation with this
“‘ideal” of a scientific man who was at the same time a
“true son of his Church.” I would here mention only two
of these. One was in regard to the person of Christ. I


88 RUDOLF STEINER


expressed my view to the effect that Jesus of Nazareth, by
reason of supramundane influence, had received the Christ
into himself, and that Christ as a spiritual Being has lived
in human evolution since the Mystery of Golgotha. This
conversation remained deeply imprinted in my mind; ever.
and again it has arisen in memory. For it was profoundly
significant for me. ‘There were really three persons engaged
in that discussion: Professor Neumann and I, and a third,
unseen person, the personification of Catholic dogmatic
theology, visible to spiritual perception as he walked behind
the professor, always beckoning with his finger threateningly,
and always tapping Professor Neumann on the shoulder as
a reminder whenever the subtle logic of the scholar led him
too far in agreement with me. It was noteworthy how often
the first clause of the latter’s sentences would be reversed in
the second clause. There I was face to face with the Catholic
way of life in one of its best representatives. It was through
him that I learned to esteem it, but also to know it through
and through.

Another time we discussed the question of repeated earth
lives. The professor then listened to me, spoke of all sorts
of literature in which something on this subject could be
found; he often nodded his head lightly, but had no in-
clination to enter into the merits of a question which seemed
to him very fanciful. So this conversation also became of
great import to me. ‘The uncomfortableness with which
Neumann felt the answers he did not utter in response to my
statements was deeply impressed upon my memory.

Besides these, the Saturday evening callers were the historian
of the Church and other theologians, and in addition I met
now and then the philosopher Adolf Stohr, Goswine von
Berlepsch, the emotionally moving story-teller Emilie Mataja
(who bore the pen-name of Emil Marriot), the poet and
writer Fritz Lemmermayer, and the composer Stross.
Fritz Lemmermayer, with whom I was later on terms of
intimate friendship, I came to know at one of delle Grazie’s
afternoons. A highly noteworthy man. Whatever interested —
him he expressed with inwardly measured dignity. In his
outward appearance he resembled equally the musician


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 89


Rubinstein and the actor Lewinsky. With Hebbel he developed
almost a cult. He had definite views on art and life born
out of the sagacious understanding of the heart, and these
were unusually fixed. He had written the interesting and
profound romance, Der Alchimist and much besides that
was characterized by beauty and depth. He knew how to con-
sider the least things in life from the view-point of the most
vital. I recall how I once saw him in his charming little
room in a side-street in Vienna together with other friends.
He had planned his meal : two soft-boiled eggs, to be cooked
in an instantaneous boiler, together with bread. He remarked
with much emphasis while the water was heating to boil the
eggs for us: “ This will be delicious!” In a later phase
of my life I shall again have occasion to speak of him.

Alfred Stross, the composer, was a gifted man, but one
tinged with a profound pessimism. When he took his seat
at the piano in delle Grazie’s home and played his études,
one had the feeling: Anton Bruckner’s music reduced to
airy tones which would fain flee this earthly existence. Stross
was little understood ; Fritz Lemmermayer was inexpressibly
devoted to him.

Both Lemmermayer and Stross were intimate friends of
Robert Hamerling. Through them I was led later into a
brief correspondence with Hamerling, to which I shall refer
again. Stross finally died of a serious illness in spiritual
darkness.

The sculptor Hans Brandstidter I also met at delle Grazie’s.

Even though unseen, there hovered over all this group of
friends, through frequent wonderful descriptions of him
almost like hymns of praise, the historian of theology Werner.
Delle Grazie loved him more than anyone else. Never once
did he appear on a Saturday evening when I was able to be
present. But his admirer showed us the picture of the
biographer of Thomas Aquinas from ever new angles, the
picture of the good, lovable scholar who remained naive even to
extreme old age. One imagined a man so selfless, so absorbed
in the matter about which he spoke as a historian, so exact,
that one said, “ If only there were many such historians ! ”

t The Alchemist.


go RUDOLF STEINER


A veritable fascination ruled over these Saturday evening
gatherings. After it had grown dark, a lamp was lighted
under a shade of some red fabric, and we sat in a circular
space of light which made the whole company festive.
Then delle Grazie would frequently become extraordinarily
talkative—especially when those living at a distance had gone—
and one was permitted to hear many a word that sounded
like sighs from the depths in the after-pangs of grievous days
of fate. But one listened also to genuine humour over the
personalities of life, and tones of indignation over the cor-
ruption in the press and elsewhere. Between-whiles there
were the sarcastic, often caustic, remarks of Miillner on all
sorts of philosophical, artistic, and other themes.

Delle Grazie’s house was a place in which pessimism
revealed itself in direct and vital force, a place of anti-
Goetheanism. Everyone listened whenever I spoke of
Goethe; but Laurenz Miillner held the opinion that I
ascribed to Goethe things which really had little to do with
the actual minister of the Grand-duke Karl August. Never-
theless for me every visit at this house—and I knew that
I was welcomed there—was something for which I am
inexpressibly grateful; I felt that I was in a_ spiritual
atmosphere which was of genuine benefit to me. For this
purpose I did not require agreement in ideas; I required
earnest and striving humanity susceptible to the spiritual.

I was now between this house, which I frequented with
so much pleasure, and my teacher and fatherly friend Karl
Julius Schréer, who, after the first visit, never again appeared
at delle Grazie’s. My emotional life, drawn in both directions
by sincere love and esteem, was actually torn in two. |

But it was just at this time that those thoughts first came
to maturity in me which later formed the volume Dre
Philosophie der Fretheit* In the unpublished paper about
delle Grazie mentioned above, Nature and Our Ideals, there
lie the germs of the later book in the following sentences :
“Our ideals are no longer so superficial as to be satisfied
with a reality often so flat and so empty. Yet I cannot believe
that there is no means whereby to rise above the profound

t The Philosophy of Spiritual Activity


THE STORY OF MY LIFE gI


pessimism which comes from this knowledge. This elevation
comes to me when I look into our inner world, when I enter
more intimately into the nature of our ideal world. This is
a self-contained world, complete in itself, which can neither
win anything nor lose anything by reason of the transitoriness
of the external. Do not our ideals, if these are really living
individualities, possess an existence for themselves indepen-
dently of the kindness or unkindness of nature? Even though
the lovely rose may for ever be shattered by the pitiless gusts
of the wind, it has fulfilled its mission, for it has rejoiced
hundreds of human eyes; if to-morrow it should please
murderous nature to destroy the whole starry sky, yet for
thousands of years men have gazed up reverently toward it,
and this is enough. Not the existence in time, no, but the
inner being of things, constitutes their completion. The
ideals of our spirits are a world for themselves, which must
also live for themselves, and which can gain nothing from
the co-operation of a good nature. What a pitiable creature
man would be if he could not gain satisfaction within his own
ideal world, but must first to this end have the co-operation
of nature! What divine freedom remains to us if nature
guides and guards us like helpless children tied to leading-
strings? No, she must deny us everything, in order that,
when happiness comes to us, this shall all be the result of
our free selves. Let nature destroy every day what we shape
in order that we may every day experience anew the joy of
creation! We would fain owe nothing to nature ; everything
to ourselves.

“This freedom, one may say, is only a dream! While we
think that we are free, we obey the iron necessity of nature.
The loftiest thoughts that we conceive are merely the fruit
of the blind power of nature within us. But we surely should
finally admit that a being who knows himself cannot be
unfree! ... We see the web of law ruling over things, and
this it is which constitutes necessity. In our knowledge we
possess the power to separate the natural laws from things ;
and must we ourselves be nevertheless without a will, slaves
to these same laws?”

These thoughts I did not evolve out of a spirit of con-


re


92 RUDOLF STEINER


troversy ; but I was forced to set forth what my perception
of the spiritual world said to me in opposition to a view of
life which I had to consider as being at the opposite pole
from my own, but which I none the less profoundly reverenced
because it was revealed to me from the depths of true and
earnest souls.

At the very time during which I enjoyed such stimulating
experiences at the home of delle Grazie, I had the privilege
of entering also a circle of the younger Austrian poets. Every
week we had a free expression and mutual sharing together
of whatever one or the other had produced. ‘The most varied
characters met in this gathering. Every view of life and every
temperament was represented, from the optimistic, naive
painter of life to the leaden-weighted pessimist. Fritz
Lemmermayer was the soul of the group. There was present
something of the storm which the Hart brothers, Karl Henckel,
and others had loosed in the German Empire against “ the
old” in the spiritual life of the time. But all this was tinged
with Austrian “‘ amiability.”” Much was said about how the
time had come in which new tones must sound forth in all
spheres of life; but this was done with that disapproval of
radicalism which is characteristic of the Austrian.

One of the youngest of this circle was Joseph Kitir. He
devoted his effort to a form of lyric to which he had. been
inspired by Martin Greif. He did not wish to bring sub-
jective feelings to expression ; he wished to set forth an event
or situation objectively, and yet as if this had been observed,
not with the senses, but with the feelings. He did not wish
to say that he was enchanted; but rather he would paint
the enchanting event, and its enchantment should act upon
hearer or reader without the poet’s statement. Kitir did really
beautiful things in this way. His soul was naive. A little
while after this he bound himself more closely to me.

In this circle I now heard an Austro-German poet spoken
of with great enthusiasm, and I afterward became familiar
with some of his poems. These made a deep impression
upon me. I endeavoured to meet the poet. I asked Fritz
Lemmermayer, who knew him well, and also some others
whether the poet could not be invited to our gatherings.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 93


But I was told that he could not be dragged there with a
four-horse team. He was a recluse, they said, and would
not mingle with people. But I was deeply desirous of knowing
him. Then one evening the whole company went out and
roamed over to the place where the ‘“‘ knowing ones ” could
find him. It was a little wine-shop in a street parallel to
Kartnerstrasse. There he sat in one corner, his glass of red
wine—not a small one—before him. He sat as if he had sat
there for an indefinitely long time, and would continue to
sit indefinitely long. Already a rather old gentleman, but
with shining, youthful eyes, and a countenance which showed
the poet and idealist in the most delicate and most speaking
lines. At first he did not see us enter. For it was clear
that in the nobly shaped head a poem was taking form.
Fritz Lemmermayer had first to take him by the arm; then
he turned his face in our direction and looked at us. We
had disturbed him. His perplexed glance could not conceal
this; but he showed it in the most amiable fashion. We
took our places around him. There was not space enough
for so many to sit in the cramped little room. It was now
remarkable how the man who had been described as a
~ recluse ”’ showed himself in a very short while as enthusiasti-
cally talkative. We all had the feeling that with what our
minds were then exchanging in conversation we could not
remain in the dull closeness of that room. And there was
now not much difficulty in bringing the ‘ recluse” with us
to another Lokal. Except for him and one other acquaint-
ance of his who had for a long time mingled with our circle,
we were all young; yet it soon became evident that we had
never been so young as on this evening when the old gentleman
was with us, for he was really the youngest of us all.

I was completely captivated by the charm of this personality.
It was at once clear to me that this man must have produced
much that was more significant than what he had pub-
lished, and I pressed him with questions regarding this. He
answered almost timidly: “‘ Yes, I have besides at home some
cosmic things.” I succeeded in persuading him to promise
that he would bring these the next evening that we could
see him.


94. RUDOLF STEINER


It was thus that I became acquainted with Fercher von
Steinwand. A poet from the Karntnerland, pithy, full of
ideas, idealistic in his sentiments. He was the child of poor
people, and had passed his youth amid great hardships. The
distinguished Anatom Hyrtl came to know his worth, and
made possible for him the sort of existence in which he could
live wholly in his poems, thoughts, and conceptions. For
a considerable time the world knew very little of him. After
the appearance of his first poem, Grafin Seelenbrand, Robert
Hamerling brought him into full recognition. |

After that night we never needed again to go for the
“recluse.” He appeared almost regularly on our evenings.
I was extremely glad when on one of these evenings he
brought along one of his ‘‘ cosmic things.”” It was the Chor
der Urtriebet and the Chor der Urtrdéume,2 poems in
which feelings live in swinging rhythm which seem as if
they penetrated into the very creative forces of the world.
There hover ideas as if actual beings in splendid euphony,
forming themselves into pictures of the Powers which in
the beginning created the world. I consider the fact that I
came to know Fercher von Steinwand as one of the most
important events of my youth ; for his personality acted like
that of a sage who reveals his wisdom in genuine poetry.

I had struggled with the riddle of man’s repeated earth-
lives. Many a perception in this direction had come to me
when I came close to men who in the habit of their lives,
in the impress of their personalities revealed clearly the signs
of a content within their beings which one would not expect
to find in what they had inherited through birth or acquired
afterward through experience. But in the play of countenance,
in every gesture of Fercher, I saw the essence of a soul which
could only have been formed in the time from the beginning
of the Christian evolution, while Greek paganism was still
influencing this evolution. One does not arrive at such a
view when one thinks only of those expressions of a per-
sonality which press immediately upon one’s attention ; it
is aroused in one rather by the intuitively perceived marks
of the individuality which seem to accompany such direct

t The Chorus of Primal Instincts 2 The Chorus of Prima! Dreams.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 95


expressions but which in reality deepen these expressions
immeasurably. Moreover, one does not attain to this view
when one seeks for it, but only when the strong impression
remains active in retrospect, and becomes like the memory
of an experience in which that which is essential in the external
life falls away and the usually “ unessential ”’ begins to speak
a deeply significant language. Whoever observes men in
order to solve the riddle of their previous earth-lives will
certainly not reach his goal. Such observation one must feel
to be an offence which does injury to the one observed, for
one can hope for the present disclosure of the long past of a
man only through the dispensation of fate coming from the
outer spiritual world.

It was in the very time of my life which I am now describing
that I succeeded in attaining to these definite views of the
repeated earth-lives of man. Before this time I was not far
from the conceptions, but they had not yet come out of indeter-
minate lines to sharply defined impressions. Theories, how-
ever, in regard to such things as repeated earth-lives, I did
not form in my own thoughts; I took them into my under-
standing out of literature or other sources of information as
something illuminating, but I did not theorize about them.
And now, since I was conscious within myself of real per-
ception in this region, I was in a position to have the con-
versation mentioned above with Professor Neumann. A man
is not to be blamed if he becomes convinced of the truth of
repeated earth-lives and other insights which can be attained
only in supersensible ways ; for a complete conviction in this
region is possible also to the sound and unprejudiced human
understanding, even though the man has not yet attained to
actual perception. Only the way of theorizing in this region
was not my own way.

During the time when concrete perceptions were more and
more forming within me in regard to repeated earth-lives,
I became acquainted with the theosophical movement, which
had been initiated by H. P. Blavatsky. Sinnett’s Esoteric
Buddhism came into my hands through a friend to whom I
had spoken in regard to these things. This book, the first
from the theosophical movement with which I became familiar,

4


96 RUDOLF STEINER


made upon me no impression whatever. And I was glad that
I had not read this book before I had experienced perceptions
out of the life of my own soul. For the content of the book
was repellent to me, and my antipathy against this way of
representing the supersensible might well have prevented me
from going farther at once upon the road which had been
pointed out to me.


Vill


Durinc this time—about 1888—lI felt within me, on the one
hand, the impulse to intense spiritual concentration ; on the
other hand, my life brought me into intercourse with a wide
circle of acquaintances. Because of the interpretive introduc-
tion which I had to prepare for the second volume of Goethe’s
scientific writings, I felt an inner necessity to state my view of
the spiritual world in a form of thought transparently clear.
This required an inward withdrawal from all that bound me
to the outer life. It was due in large measure to a certain
circumstance that such a withdrawal was possible. I could
at that time sit in a coffee-house, with the greatest excitement
all around me, and yet be absolutely tranquil within, my
thoughts concentrated upon the task of writing down in a
rough draft that which later composed the introduction I have
mentioned. In this way I led-an inner life which had no
relation whatever to the outer world, although my interests
were still intimately bound up with that world.

It was at this time that these interests were forced to turn
to the critical phenomena then appearing in the external
situation of things. Persons with whom I was in frequent
relation were devoting their strength and their labour to the
arrangements which were then coming to completion between
the nationalities in Austria. Others were occupied with the
social question. Still others were in the midst of a struggle
for the rejuvenation of the artistic life of the nation.

When I was living inwardly in the spiritual world, I often
had the feeling that the struggles toward all these objectives
must play themselves out fruitlessly because they refused to
enter into the spiritual forces of existence. The sense of
these spiritual forces seemed to me the thing needed first of

8 97


98 RUDOLF STEINER


all. But I could find no clear consciousness of this in that
sort of spiritual life which surrounded me.

Just then Robert Hamerling’s satiric epic Homunculus was
published. In this a mirror was held before the times in
which were reflected purposely caricatured images of its
materialism, its interests centred on the outer life. A man
who can live only in mechanistic, materialistic conceptions
marries a woman whose nature lies, not in a real world, but
in a world of fantasy. Hamerling desired to represent the
two aspects in which civilization has become warped. On
one side he perceived the utterly unspiritual struggle which
conceives the world as a mechanism, and would shape human
life mechanically ; on the other side the soulless fantasy which
cares not at all whether its make-believe spiritual life comes
into any relation whatever to reality.

The grotesque pictures drawn by Hamerling repelled many
who had esteemed him for his earlier works. Even in delle
Grazie’s home, where Hamerling had enjoyed unmeasured
admiration, there was a certain reserve after the appearance
of this epic.

Upon me, however, the Homunculus made a deep impression.
It showed, so I thought, those spiritually darkening forces
which are dominant in modern civilization. I found in it a
first warning to the time. But I had difficulty in establishing
a relationship to Hamerling. And the appearance of the
Homunculus at first increased this difficulty in my own mind.
In Hamerling I saw a person who was himself a special
revelation of the times. I looked back to the period when
Goethe and those who worked with him had brought idealism
to a height worthy of humanity. I recognized the need to
pass through the gateway of this idealism into the world of
real spirit. To me this idealism seemed the noble shadow,
not cast into man’s soul by the sense-world, but falling into
his inner being from a spiritual world, and creating the
obligation to go forward from this shadow to the world which
has cast it.

I loved Hamerling who had painted these idealistic re-
flections in such mighty pictures. But it gave me deep
distress to have him remain at that stage—that his look was


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 99


directed backward to the reflections of a spirituality destroyed
by materialism rather than forward to the spiritual world now
breaking through in a new form. Yet the Homunculus
strongly attracted me. Though it did not show how man enters
into the spiritual world, still it indicated the pass to which
men come when they restrict themselves to the unspiritual.

My interest in the Homunculus happened at a time when
I was thinking over the problem of the nature of artistic
creation and of beauty. What was then passing through my
mind is recorded in the pamphlet Goethe als Vater einer
neuen Asthetik,t which reproduces a paper that I had read
at the Goethe Society in Vienna. I desired to discover the
reasons why the idealism of a bold philosophy, such as had
spoken so impressively in Fichte and Hegel, had nevertheless
failed to penetrate to the living spirit. One of the ways by
which I sought to discover these causes was my reflection
over the errors of a merely idealistic philosophy in the
sphere of zsthetics. Hegel and those who thought in his way
found the content of art in the appearance of the “idea”
in the sense-world. When the “idea” appears in the stuff
of the senses, it is manifest as the beautiful. This was
their opinion. But the succeeding period refused to recognize
any reality in the “‘idea.’’ Since the idea of the idealistic
world-conception, as this lived in the consciousness of the
idealists, did not point to a world of spirit, it could therefore
not maintain itself with the successors of these idealists as
something possessing reality. Thus arose the “ realistic ”
zesthetics, which saw in the work of art, not the appearance
of the idea in a sense-form, but only the sense-image which,
because of the needs of human nature, takes on in the work
of art an unreal form.

I desired to see as the reality in a work of art the same
thing which appears to the senses. But the way which the
true artist takes in his creative work appeared to me as a way
leading to real spirit. He begins with that which is perceptible
to the senses, but he transforms this. In this transformation
he is not guided by a merely subjective impulse, but he seeks
to give to the sensibly apparent a form which reveals it as

* Goethe as the Founder of a New Science of Atsthetics.


100 RUDOLF STEINER


if the spirit itself were there present. Not the appearance
of the idea in the sense-form is the beautiful, so I said to
myself, but the representation of the sensible in the form of
the spirit. ‘Thus I saw in the existence of art the entrance
of the world of spirit within the world of sense. The true
artist yields himself more or less consciously to the spirit.
And it is only necessary—so I then said to myself over and
over again—to metamorphose the powers of the soul, which
in the case of the artist work upon matter, to a pure spiritual
perception free of the senses in order to penetrate into a
knowledge of the spiritual world.

At that time, true knowledge, the manifestation of the
spiritual in art, and the moral will in man became in my
thought the members which unite to form a single whole.
I could not but recognize in the human personality a central
point at which these are bound in the most immediate unity
with the primal being of the world. It is from this central
point that the will takes its rise. If the clear light of the
spirit shines at this central point, then the will is free. Man
is then acting in harmony with the spiritual nature of the
world, which creates, not by reason of necessity, but in the
evolution of its own nature. At this central point in man
the motives of action arise, not out of obscure impulses, but
from intuitions which are just as transparent in character as
the most transparent thought. In this way I desired by means
of a conception of the freedom of the will to find that spirit
through which man exists as an individual in the world. By
means of an experience of true beauty I desired to find the
spirit which works in man when he so labours through the
sensible as to express his own being, not merely spiritually
as a free spirit, but in such a way that this spiritual being
of his flows forth into the world, which is indeed of the spirit
but does not directly manifest it. Through a perception of
the true I desired to experience the spirit which manifests
itself in its own being, whose spiritual reflection is moral
conduct, and toward which creative art strives in the shaping
of sensible form,

A “philosophy of freedom,” a living vision of the sense-
world thirsting for the spirit and striving toward it through


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 101


beauty, a spiritual vision of the living world of truth hovered
before my mind.

This was in the year 1888, just at the time when I was
introduced into the home of the Protestant pastor, Alfred
Formey, in Vienna. Once a week a group of artists and
writers used to gather there. Alfred Formey himself had
come out as a poet. Fritz Lemmermayer, speaking out of
a friendly heart, described him thus: ‘“ Warm-hearted,
intimate in his feeling for nature, enthusiastic, almost drunk
with faith in God and blessedness, so does Alfred Formey
write verse in mellow resounding harmonies. It is as if his
tread did not rest upon the hard earth, but as if he mused
and dreamed high in the clouds.”’ Such was Alfred Formey
also as a man. One felt quite borne away from the earth
when one entered the rectory, and found at first only the
host and hostess. ‘The pastor was of a childlike piety ; but
this piety passed over in its warm disposition in the most
obvious way into a lyric mood. One was, as it were, sur-
rounded by an atmosphere of good-heartedness as soon as
Formey had spoken a few words. The lady of the house
had exchanged the theatre for the rectory. No one would
ever have discovered the former actress in the lovable wife
of the pastor entertaining her guests with such delightful
charm. Into the mood of this rectory, so other-worldly, the
guests now brought ‘‘the world” from all directions of
the spiritual compass. There from time to time appeared the
widow of Friedrich Hebbel. Her appearance was always the
signal for a festival. In high old age she developed a sort
of art of declamation which took possession of one’s heart
with an inner fascination, and completely captivated one’s
artistic sensibilities. And when Christine Hebbel told a
story, the whole room was permeated with the warmth of
the soul. At these Formey evenings I became acquainted
also with the actress Wilborn. An interesting person with a
brilliant voice in declamation. Lenau’s Dret Zigeuner * one
could hear from her lips with constantly renewed pleasure.
It soon came’ about that the group which had assembled at
the home of Formey would from time to time gather also at

t Three Gipstes.


102 RUDOLF STEINER


that of Frau Wilborn. But how different it was there! Fond
of the world, lovers of life, thirsty for humour—such were
then the same persons who at the rectory remained serious
even when the “‘ Vienna People’s Poet,” Friederich Schlégel,
read aloud his boisterous drolleries. He had, for instance,
written a “‘skit’’ when the practice of cremation had been
introduced among a small circle of the Viennese. In this he
told how a husband who had loved his wife in a somewhat
“coarse”? manner had always shouted to her whenever any-
thing did not please him: ‘‘ Old woman, off tothe crematorium !”
At Formey’s such things would call forth remarks which
formed a sort of episode in cultural history throughout Vienna ;
at Wilborn’s people laughed till the chairs rattled. At Wilborn’s
Formey looked like a man of the world ; Wilborn at Formey’s
like an abbess. One could pursue the most penetrating
reflections upon the metamorphosis of human beings even to
the point of the facial expression.

To Formey’s came also Emilie Mataja, who, under the name
of Emil Marriot, wrote her romances marked by penetrating
observation of life: a fascinating personality, who in the
manner of her life revealed the cruelties of human existence
clearly, with genius, and often charmingly. An artist who knew
how to represent life when it mingles its riddles with everyday
affairs, where it hurls the tragedy of fate ruinously among men.

We often had the opportunity to hear also the four women
artists of the Austrian Ischamper quartette; there Fritz
Lemmermayer melodramatically recited Hebbel’s Heideknabe,
to a fiery piano accompaniment by Alfred Stross.

I loved this rectory, where one could find so much warmth.
There the noblest humanity was actively manifest.

At the same period I realized that I must busy myself in
a more serious manner with the situation of public affairs in
Austria. For during a brief period in 1888 I was entrusted with
the editorship of the Deutsche Wochenschrift. ‘This journal
had been founded by the historian, Heinrich Friedjung. My
brief editorial experience came during a time when the
interrelationships between the races in Austria had reached
a specially tense condition. It was not easy for me to write

t The German Weekly.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 103


each week an article on public affairs; for at bottom I was
at the farthest possible remove from all partisan conceptions
of life. What interested me was the evolution of culture
in the progress of humanity. And I had so to handle the
point of view resulting from this fact that the complete
justification of this view should not cause my article to seem
the product of a person alien to the world, Besides, it
happened that the ‘‘ educational reform ”’ then being intro-
duced into Austria, especially by Minister Gautsch, seemed
to me injurious to the interests of culture. In this field my
comments seemed questionable to Schréer, who always felt
a strong sympathy for partisan points of view. I praised
the very suitable plans which the Catholic clerical Minister,
Leo Thun, had brought about in the Austrian Gymnasien
as early as the ’fifties, as opposed to the measures of Gautsch.
When Schréer had read my article, he said, ‘‘ Do you wish,
then, to have again a clerical educational policy for Austria?”

This editorial activity, though brief, was for me very
important. It turned my attention to the style in which
public affairs were then discussed in Austria. To me this
style was intensely antipathetic. Even in discussing such
situations I desired to bring in something which should be
marked by its comprehensive relation to the great spiritual
and human objectives. This I missed in the style of the
daily paper in those days. How to bring this characteristic
into play was then my daily care. And it had to be a care,
for at that time I did not possess the power which a rich
life experience in this field would have given me. At bottom
I was quite unprepared for this editorial work. I thought I
could see whither we ought to steer in the most varied depart-
ments of life; but I had not the formule so systematized as
to be enlightening to newspaper readers. So the preparation
of each week’s issue was a difficult struggle for me.

Thus I felt as if I had been relieved of a great burden when
this activity came to an end through the fact that the owner
of the paper got into a controversy with the founder over the
question of the price at which the property had been sold.

Yet this work brought me into a rather close relationship
with persons whose activities had to do with the most diverse


104 RUDOLF STEINER


phases of public life. I became acquainted with Victor Adler,
who was then the undisputed leader of the Socialists in
Austria. In this slender, unassuming man, there resided an
energetic will. When he talked over a cup of coffee I always
had the feeling : “ The content of what he says is unimportant,
commonplace, but his way of speaking marks a will which
can never be bent.”’ I became acquainted with Pernerstorffer,
who was then changing over from the German National to
the Socialist camp. A strong personality possessed of com-
prehensive knowledge. A keen critic of misconduct in public
life. He was then editing a monthly, Deutsche Worte. I
found this stimulating reading. In company with these
persons I met with others who either for scientific or for
partisan reasons were advocates of Socialism. ‘Through these
I was led to take up Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, Rodbertus,
and other writers on social economics. ‘To none of these
could I gain any inner relationship. It was a personal distress
to me to hear men say that the material economic forces in
human history carried forward man’s real evolution, and that
the spiritual was only an ideal superstructure over this sub-
structure of the “truly real.’’ I knew the reality of the
spiritual. ‘The assertions of the theorizing Socialists meant
to me the closing of men’s eyes to true reality.

In this connection, however, it became clear to me that
the “ social question ”’ itself had an immeasurable importance.
But it seemed to me the tragedy of the times that this question
was treated by persons who were wholly possessed by the
materialism of contemporary civilization. It was my con-
viction that just this question was one which could be rightly
put only from the point of view of a spiritual world-conception.

Thus as a young man of twenty-seven years I was filled
with “‘ questions ” and “ riddles’ concerning the outer life
of humanity, while the nature of the soul and its relationships
to the spiritual world had taken on, in a self-contained con-
ception, a more and more definite form within me. At first
I could work only in a spiritual way from this perception.
And this work took on more and more the direction which
some years later led me to the conception of my Philosophy
of Spiritual Activity.


IX


Ir was at this time (1888) that I took my first journey into
Germany. This was made possible through the invitation
to participate in the Weimar edition of Goethe, which was
to be prepared by the Goethe Institute under a commission
from the Grand-duchess Sophie of Saxony. Some years earlier
Goethe’s grandson, Walther von Goethe, had died. He
had left as a legacy to the Grand-duchess the manuscripts of
Goethe. She had thereupon founded the Goethe Institute
and, in conjunction with a number of Goethe specialists
—chief among whom were Hermann Grimm, Gustav von
Loeper, and William Scherer—had determined to prepare
an edition of Goethe in which his already known works should
be combined with the unpublished remains.

My publications concerning Goethe were the occasion of
my being requested to prepare a part of Goethe’s writings
on natural science for this edition. I was called to Weimar
to make a general survey of the natural-scientific part of the
remains and to take the first steps required by my task.

My sojourn for some weeks in Goethe’s city was a festival
time in my life. For years I had lived in the thoughts of
Goethe ; now I was permitted to be in the places where these
thoughts had arisen. I passed these weeks in the elevated
impression arising from this feeling.

I was able from day to day to have before my eyes the papers
in which wefe contained the supplements to that which I
had already prepared for the edition of Goethe for the
Kiirschner National-Literatur.

My work in connection with this edition had given me
a mental picture of Goethe’s world-conception. Now the
question to be settled was how this picture would stand in view


105


106 RUDOLF STEINER


of the fact that hitherto unpublished material dealing with
natural science was to be found in these literary remains.
With the greatest intensity I worked at this portion of the
Goethe legacy.

I soon thought I could recognize that the previously un-
published material afforded an important contribution toward
the very task of more thoroughly understanding Goethe’s
form of cognition.

In my writings published up to that time I had conceived
this form of cognition as consisting in the fact that Goethe
perceived vitally. In the ordinary state of consciousness man
is at first a stranger to the being of the world by which he is
surrounded. Out of this remoteness arises the impulse first
to develop, before knowing the world, powers of knowledge
which are not present in ordinary consciousness.

From this point of view it was highly significant for me
when I came upon such directing thoughts as the following
among Goethe’s papers :—


‘* In order to get our bearings to some extent in these different
sorts [Goethe here refers to the different sorts of knowledge
in man and his different relationships to the outer world]
we may classify these as: practising, knowing, perceiving,
and comprehending.

‘“‘ y. Practical, benefit-seeking, acquisitive persons are the
first who, so to speak, sketch the field of science and lay hold
upon practice. Consciousness gives a sort of certitude to
these through experience, and necessity gives them a certain
breadth.

“2. Knowledge-craving persons require a serene look free
from personal ends, a restless curiosity, a clear understanding,
and these stand always in relationship with the previous type.
They likewise elaborate what they discover, only they do this
in a scientific sense.

‘3. The perceptive are in themselves productive; and
knowledge, while itself progressing, calls for perception without
intending this, and goes over into perception ; and, no matter
how much the knowers may make the sign of the cross to shield
themselves from imagination, yet they must none the less, if


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 107


they are not to deceive themselves, call in the aid of the
imagination.

“4, The comprehending, whom one may call in a proud
sense the creative, are in themselves in the highest sense
productive ; beginning as they do with the idea, they express
thereby the unity of the whole, and it is in a certain sense in
accord with the facts of nature thus to conform themselves
with this idea.”


It becomes clear from such comment that Goethe considered
man in his ordinary consciousness as standing outstde the
being of the external world. He must pass over into another
form of consciousness if he desires knowingly to unite with
this being. During my sojourn in Weimar the question arose
within me in more and more decisive form: How must a
man build further upon the foundations of knowledge laid by
Goethe in order to be guided knowingly over from Goethe’s
sort of perceptions to that sort which can take up into itself
actual experience in the spirit, as this has been given to me?

Goethe goes forward from that which is attained on the
lower stages of knowledge, by “ practical”’ persons and by
those “‘ craving knowledge.” Upon this he causes to shine
in his mind whatever can shine in the “ perceiving ” and the
“‘ comprehending ” through productive powers of the mind
upon the content of the lower stages of knowledge. When
he stands thus with the lower knowledge in the mind in the
light of the higher perception and comprehension, then he
feels that he is in union with the being of things.

To live knowingly in the spirit is, to be sure, not yet attained
in this way; but the road to this is pointed out from one side,
from that side which results from the relation of man to the
outer world. It was clear to my mind that satisfaction could
come only with a grasp upon the other side, which arises from
man’s relation to himself.

When consciousness becomes productive, and therefore
brings forth from within itself something to add to the first
pictures of reality, can it then remain within a reality, or does
it float out of this to lose itself in the unreal? What stands
over against consciousness in its own “ product ”’—it is this


108 RUDOLF STEINER


thing that we must look into. Human consciousness must
first effect an understanding of itself; then can man find
a confirmation of the experience of pure spirit. Such were
the ways taken by my thoughts, repeating in clearer fashion
their earlier forms, as I pored over Goethe’s papers in Weimar.

It was summer. Little was to be seen of the contemporary
art life of Weimar. One could yield oneself in complete
serenity to the artistic, which represented, as it were, a memorial
to Goethe’s work. One did not live in the present; one
was drawn back to the time of Goethe. At the moment it
was the age of Liszt in Weimar. But the representatives
of this age were not there.

The hours after work I passed with those who were connected
with the Institute. In addition there were others sharing
in the work who came from elsewhere for longer or shorter
visits. I was received with extraordinary kindness by Bernhard
Suphan, the director of the Goethe Institute ; and in Julius
Wahle, a permanent collaborator, I found a dear friend. All
this, however, took on a definite form when I went there two
years later for a longer period, and it must be narrated at the
point where I shall tell about that period of my life.

More than anything else at that time I craved to know
personally Eduard von Hartmann, with whom I had corre-
sponded for years in regard to philosophical matters. This
was to take place during a brief stay in Berlin which followed
that in Weimar.

I had the privilege of a long conversation with the philosopher.
He lay upon a sofa, his legs stretched out and his upper body
erect. It was in such a posture that he passed by far the
greater part of his life from the time when the suffering with
his knee began. I saw before me a forehead which was an
evident manifestation of a clear and keen understanding, and
eyes which in their look revealed that assurance felt in the
innermost being of the man as to that which he knew. A
mighty beard framed in the face. He spoke with complete
confidence, which showed how he had woven certain basic
thoughts about the whole world-concept and thus in his way
illuminated it. In these thoughts everything which came
to him from other points of view was at once overwhelmed


THE STORY OF UMY ©LIFE 109


with criticism. So I sat facing him while he sharply passed
judgment upon me, but in reality never inwardly listened to
me. For him the being of things layin the unconscious, and
must ever remain hidden there so far as concerned human
consciousness ; for me the unconscious was something which
could more and more be raised up into consciousness through
the strivings of the soul’s life. During the course of the
conversation about this, I said that one should not assume
beforehand that a concept is something severed from reality
and representing only an unreality in consciousness. Such
a view could never be the starting-point for a theory of cognition.
For by this means one shuts oneself off from access to all reality
in that one can then only believe that one is living in concepts
and that one can never approach toward a reality except
through hypothetical concepts—that is, in an unreal manner.
One should rather seek to prove beforehand whether this
view of the concept as an unreality is tenable, or whether it
rises out of a preconception. Eduard von Hartmann replied
that there could be no argument as to this ; in the very definition
of the term “‘ concept” lay the evidence that nothing real is
to be found there. When I received such an answer I was
chilled to the soul. Definitions to be the point of departure
for conceptions of life! I realized how far removed I was
from contemporary philosophy. While I sat in the train
on my return journey, buried in thoughts and recollections
of this visit, which was nevertheless so valuable to me, I felt
again that chilling of the heart. It was something which
affected me for a long time afterward.

Except for the visit to Eduard von Hartmann, the brief
sojourns I made at Berlin and Munich, while passing through
Germany after my stay at Weimar, were given over entirely
to absorption in the art which these places afforded. The
broadening of the scope of my perception in this direction
seemed to me at that time especially enriching to my mental
life. So this first long journey that I was able to take was of
very comprehensive significance in the development of my
conceptions as to art. A fulness of vital impressions remained
with me when I spent some weeks just after this visit in the
Salzkammergut with the family whose sons I had already


110 RUDOLF STEINER


been teaching for a number of years. I was further advised
to find my vocation in private tutoring, and I was inwardly
determined upon the same course because I desired to bring
forward to a certain point in his life evolution the boy whose
education had been entrusted to me some years before, and
in whom I had succeeded in awakening the soul from a state
of absolute sleep.

After this, when I had returned to Vienna, I had the
opportunity to mingle a great deal in a group of persons
bound together by a woman whose mystical, theosophical
type of mind made a profound impression upon all the
members of this group. The hours I spent in the home of
this woman, Marie Lang, were in the highest degree useful to
me. An earnest type of life-conception and life-experience was
present in vital and nobly beautiful form in Marie Lang. Her
profound inner experiences came to expression in a sonorous
and penetrating voice. A life which struggled hard with itself
and the world could find in her only in a mystical seeking a
sort of satisfaction, even though one that was incomplete.
So she almost seemed created to be the soul of a group
of seeking men. Into this circle had penetrated theosophy,
initiated by H. P. Blavatsky at the close of the preceding century.
Franz Hartmann, who by reason of his numerous theosophical
works and his relations with H. P. Blavatsky, had become
widely known, also introduced his theosophy into this circle.
Marie Lang had accepted much out of this theosophy. The
thought-content which is there to be found seemed in many
respects to harmonize with the characteristics of her mind.
Yet what she took from this source had attached itself to her
in a merely external way. But within herself she had a
mystical possession which had been lifted into the realm of
consciousness in a quite elementary fashion out of a heart
tested by life.

The architects, littérateurs, and other perons whom I met
in the home of Marie Lang would scarcely have been interested
in the theosophy offered by Franz Hartmann had not Marie
Lang to some extent participated in this. Least of all would
I myself have been interested in it; for the way of relating
oneself to the spiritual world which was evidenced in the


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 112


writings of Franz Hartmann was absolutely opposite to the
bent of my own mind. I could not concede that it was
possessed of real andinner truth. I was less concerned with
its content than with the manner in which it affected men
who, nevertheless, were truly seekers.

Through Marie Lang I became acquainted with Frau
Rosa Mayreder, who was a friend of hers. Rosa Mayreder
was one of those persons to whom in the course of my life I
have given the greatest reverence, and in whose development
I have had the greatest interest. I can well imagine that
what I have to say here will please her very little ; but this
is the way that I feel as to what came into my life by reason
of her. Of the writings of Rosa Mayreder which since that
time have justly made so great an impression upon so many
persons, and which undoubtedly gave her a very conspicuous
place in literature, nothing had at that time appeared. But
what is revealed in these writings lived in Rosa Mayreder
in a spiritual form of expression to which I had to respond
with the strongest possible inner sympathy. This woman
impressed me as if she possessed each of the gifts of the human
mind in such measure that these in their harmonious inter-
action constituted the right expression of a human being.
She united various artistic gifts with afree, penetrating power
of observation. Her paintings are just as much marked by
individual unfoldings of life as by absorption in the depths
of the objective world. The stories with which she began
her literary career are perfect harmonies made up of personal
strivings and objective observations. Her later works show
this character more and more. Most clearly of all does this
come to light in her late two-volume work, Krittk der Wetblich-
keit.t I consider it a beautiful treasure of my life to have
spent many hours during the time about which I am here
writing together with Rosa Mayreder during the years of her
seeking and mental strivings.

I must in this connection refer again to one of my human
relationships which took its rise and reached a vital intensity
above the sphere of thought-content, and, in a sense, quite in-
dependently of this. For my world-conception, and even more

t A Survey of the Woman Problem.


Die RUDOLF STEINER


my emotional tendencies, were not those of Rosa Mayreder.
The way by which I ascended from that which is in this respect
recognized as scientific into an experience of the spiritual
cannot possibly be congenial to her. She seeks to use the
scientific as the foundation for ideas which have as their goal
the complete development of human personality without
permitting the knowledge of a world of pure spirit to find
access into this personality. What is to me a necessity in this
direction to her means almost nothing. She is wholly devoted
to the furtherance of the present human individuality and pays
no attention to the action of spiritual forces within these
individualities. ‘Through this method of hers she has achieved
the most significant exposition yet produced of the nature of
womanhood and the vital needs of woman.

Neither could I ever satisfy Rosa Mayreder in respect to
the view she formed of my attitude toward art. She thought
that I denied true art, because I sought to get a grasp upon
specific examples of art by means of the view which entered
my mind by reason of my experience of the spiritual. Because
of this she maintained that I could not sufficiently penetrate
into the revelation of the sense-world and thus arrive at the
reality of art, whereas I was seeking just this thing—to penetrate
within the full truth of the sensible forms. But all this did
not detract from the inner friendly interest in this personality
which developed in me at the time, during which I owe to
her some of the most valuable hours of my life—an interest
which in truth remains undiminished even to the present day.

At the home of Rosa Mayreder I was often privileged to
share in conversations for which gifted men gathered there.
Very quiet, seemingly with his gaze inward upon himself
rather than listening to those about him, sat Hugo Wolf,
who was an intimate friend of Rosa Mayreder. One listened
inwardly to him even though he spoke so little. For whatever
entered into his life was communicated in mysterious fashion
to those who might be with him. With heartfelt affection
was I attached to the husband of Frau Rosa, Karl Mayreder,
so fine a person both as man and as artist, and also to his
brother, Julius Mayreder, so enthusiastic in regard to art.
Marie Lang and her circle and Friedrich Eckstein, who was then


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 113


wholly given over to the spiritual tendencies and world-con-
ception of theosophy, were often present.

This was the time when my Philosophy of Spiritual Activity
was taking more and more definite form in my mind. Rosa
Mayreder is the person with whom I talked most concerning
this form at the time when my book was thus coming into
existence. She relieved me of a part of the inner loneliness
in which I had lived. She was striving for a conception of the
actual human personality; I toward a revelation of the world
which might seek for this personality at the basis of the soul
by means of spiritual eyes thus opened. Between the two
there were many bridges. Often in later life has there
arisen before my grateful spirit one or another picture from
this experience, for example, memory pictures of a walk through
the noble Alpine forests, during which Rosa Mayreder and I
discussed the true meaning of human freedom.


Xx


When I look back upon my life, the first three decades appeal
to me as a chapter complete in itself. At the close of this
period I removed to Weimar, to work for almost seven years
at the Goethe and Schiller Institute. ‘The time that I spent
in Vienna between the first journey to Germany, which I
have described, and my later settling down in the city of
Goethe I look upon as the period which brought to a certain
conclusion within me that toward which the mind had been
striving. ‘This conclusion found expression in the preparation
for my book The Philosophy of Spiritual Activity.

An essential part of the general ideas in which I then
expressed my views consisted in the fact that the sense-world
did not pass with me as true reality. In my writings and
lectures at that time I always expressed myself in such a way
as to make the human mind appear as a true reality in the
creation of a thought, which it does not form out of the sense-
world but unfolds in an activity above the region of sense-
perception. ‘This sense-free thinking I conceived as that
which places the soul within the spiritual being of the world.

But I also emphasized strongly the fact that, while man lives
within this sense-free thinking, he really finds himself con-
sciously in the spiritual foundations of existence. All talk
about limits of knowledge bad for me no meaning. Knowing
meant to me the rediscovery within the perceptual world
of the spiritual content experienced in the soul. When any-
one spoke of limits of knowledge, I saw therein the admission
that he did not experience spiritually within himself the true
reality, and for this reason could not rediscover this in the
perceptual world.

The first consideration with me in advancing my own insight


was the problem of refuting the conception of the limitation
II4


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 115


of knowledge. I wished to turn away from that road to
knowledge which looked toward the sense-world, and which
would then break through from the sense-world into true
reality. I desired to make clear that true reality is to be
sought, not by such a breaking through from without, but by
sinking down into the inner life of man. Whoever seeks to
break through from without and then discovers that this is
impossible—such a person speaks of the limitation of know-
ledge. But this impossibility does not consist in a limitation
of man’s capacity for knowledge, but in the fact that one is
seeking for something of which one cannot speak in true self-
comprehension. While pressing on farther into the sense-world,
one is there seeking in a certain sense a continuation of the
sensible behind the perceptual. It is as if one living in
illusions should seek in further illusions the causes of his
illusions.

The sense of my conception at that time was as follows:
While man is evolving from birth onward he stands con-
sciously facing the world. He attains first to physical perception.
But this is at first an outpost of knowledge. In this perception
there is not at once revealed all that is in the world. The
world is real, but man does not at first attain to this reality.
It remains at first closed to him. While he has not yet set
his own being over against the world, he fashions for himself
a world-conception which is void of being. ‘This conception
of the world is really an illusion. In sense-perception man
faces a world of illusion. But when from within man sense-
free thought comes forth to meet the sense-perception, then
illusion is permeated with reality and ceases to be illusion.
Then the human spirit, living its own life within, meets the
spirit of the world which is now no longer concealed from
man behind the sense-world, but weaves and breathes within
the sense-world.

I now saw that the finding of the spirit within the sense-world
is not a question of logical inferences or of projection of sense-
perception, but something which comes to pass when man
continues his evolution from perception to the experience of
sense-free thinking.

What I wrote in 1888 in the second volume of my edition


116 RUDOLF STEINER


of Goethe’s scientific writings is permeated with such views :
‘‘ Whoever attributes to thinking his capacity for an awareness
which goes beyond sense-perception must also attribute to
thought objects which lie beyond mere sense reality. But
these objects of thought are ideas. When this thinking of the
idea grows strong enough, then it merges with the funda-
mental existence of the world ; what is at work without enters
into the spirit of man: he becomes one with objective reality
at its highest potency. Becoming aware of the idea within
reality is the true communion of man. Thinking has the same
significance in relation to the idea as the eye has for light,
the ear for sound. It is the organ of perception.

I was then less concerned to represent the world as it is
when sense-free thought advances beyond the experience of
oneself to a spiritual perception, than I was to show that the
being of nature as revealed to sense-perception is spiritual.
I wished to express the truth that nature is in reality spiritual.

It was inevitable from this that my fate should bring me
into conflict with the contemporary formulators of theories
of cognition. These conceived, to begin with, a nature void
of spirit, and therefore their task was to show how far man is
justified in conceiving in his own spirit a spiritual conception
of nature. I wished to oppose to this an entirely different
theory of cognition. I wished to show that man in thinking
does not form conceptions in regard to nature while standing
outside of her, but that knowing means experiencing, so that
man while knowing is actually inside the being of things.

Moreover, it was my fate to knit my own views to those of
Goethe. In this union there were many opportunities to
show how nature is spiritual, because Goethe had striven
toward a spiritual nature ; but one does not in the same way
have the opportunity to speak of the world of pure spirit as
such since Goethe did not carry his spiritual view of nature
all the way to direct perception of spirit.

In a secondary degree I was then concerned to find expression
for the idea of freedom. When man acts upon his instincts,
impulses, passions, etc., he is not free. Then impulses of


Cf. Einleitung zu Goethes naturwissenschaftlichen Schriften, in Kiir-
schner’s Deutsche National-Literatur, p. iv.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 117


which he becomes conscious as he does of the impressions
from the sense-world determine his action. But his true
being is then not acting. He is then acting on a plane where
his true being has not yet manifested itself. He then discloses
himself as man just as little as the sense-world discloses its
being to mere sense-observation. Now, the sense-world is
not really an illusion, but is only made such by man. But
man in his action can permit the sense-like impulses, desires,
etc., really to become illusions ; then he permits illusions to
act upon him; it is not he himself that acts. He permits
the unspiritual to act. His spiritual being acts only when he
finds the impulses for action in the moral intuitions of his
sense-free thought. Then he alone acts, nothing else. ‘Then
he is a free being acting from within.

I desired to show that whoever rejects sense-free thought
as something purely spiritual in man can never grasp the
conception of freedom; but that such a conception comes
about the moment one understands the reality of sense-free
thinking.

In this field I was at that time less intent upon representing
the world of pure spirit, in which man experiences his moral
intuitions, than to emphasize the spiritual character of these
moral intuitions. Had I been concerned with the former I
should have been obliged to begin the chapter in The Philosophy
of Spiritual Activity on ‘‘ Moral Imagination ” in the following
way: ‘‘ The free spirit acts upon his impulses; these are
intuitions which are experienced by him apart from the
existence of nature in the world of pure spirit without his
being aware of this spiritual world in the ordinary state of
consciousness.” But it was my concern then only to describe
the purely spiritual character of moral intuitions. ‘Therefore
I referred to the existence of these intuitions within the totality
of the world of human ideas, and said in regard to them:
‘The free spirit acts upon his impulses, which are intuitions
that by means of thought are selected from the totality of his
world of ideas.”—One who does not direct his gaze toward
a world of pure spirit, and who could not, therefore, write the
first statement, could also not entirely admit the second.
But allusions to the first statement are to be found in plenty


120 RUDOLF STEINER


therefore inwardly chilled by ideas. The coldness which he
feels in ideas drives him to seek through an escape from ideas
for the warmth of which the soul has need.

As for myself, the warmth of my soul’s experience increased
in proportion as I shaped into definite ideas the previously
indefinite experience of the spiritual world. I often said to
myself: ‘‘ How these mystics fail to understand the warmth,
the mental intimacy, which one experiences when one lives
in association with ideas permeated by the spiritual!’’ To me
this living association had always been like a personal inter-
course with the spiritual world.

The mystics seemed to me to strengthen the position of the
materialistically minded observer of nature instead of weakening
it. The latter objects to the observation of the spiritual world,
either because he does not admit the existence of such a world,
or else because he considers human understanding adapted
to the physically visible one. He sets up boundaries of know-
ledge at that point where lie the boundaries of the physically
perceptible. The ordinary mystic is of the same opinion as
the materialist as regards human ideal knowledge. He
maintains that ideas do not extend to the spiritual, and there-
fore that in ideal knowledge man must always remain outside
the spiritual. Since, however, he desires to attain to the spirit,
he turns to an inner experience void of ideas. He thus yields
to the materialistic observer of nature in that he restricts
ideal knowledge to the knowledge of the merely natural.

But if anyone enters into the interior of his own soul
without taking ideas with him, he thus arrives at the inner
region of mere feeling. Such a person then says that the
spiritual cannot be reached by a way which is called in ordinary
life a way of knowledge, but that one must sink down from
the sphere of knowledge into the sphere of the feelings in
order to experience the spiritual.

With such a view a materialistic observer of nature can
declare himself in perfect agreement unless he considers
all talk about the spirit as a fantastic playing with words
which signifies nothing real whatever. He then sees in his
system of ideas directed toward the things of sense the sole
justifiable basis for knowledge, and in the mystical relation-


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 121


ship of man to the spirit something purely personal, to which
one is either inclined or not inclined according to one’s tem-
perament, but of which one can never Speak 1 in the same way
as one speaks of the content of a “ positive knowledge.”
Man’s relation to the spiritual must be relegated entirely,
he thinks, to sphere of ‘‘ subjective feeling.”

While I held this before my mind the forces within my soul
which stood in opposition to the mystic grew steadily stronger.
The perception of the spiritual in inner mental experience
was to me far more certain than the perception of the things
of sense; to place boundaries of knowledge before this mental
experience was to me quite impossible. I objected with all
positiveness to mere feeling as a way into the spiritual.

And yet, when I thought of the nature of the mystic’s ex-
perience, I felt once more a remote kinship between this and
my own attitude toward the spiritual world. I sought
association with the spirit by means of spirit-illuminated ideas,
in the same way as the mystic seeks this through association
with the non-ideal. I also could say that my view rests upon
** mystical ”’ ideal experience.

To achieve for this mental conflict within myself the clarifica-
tion which at length came about was not a matter of great
difficulty ; for the real perception of the spiritual casts light
upon the range of applicability of ideas, and this assigned
proper limits to the personal. As an observer of the spiritual,
one knows that the personal ceases to function in man when
the very mind itself becomes an organ of perception of the
spiritual world.

The difficulty, however, consisted in the fact that I had
to find forms in which to express my perceptions in my
writings. One can by no means easily find a new mode of
expression for an observation which is unfamiliar to the
reader. I had to choose between putting that which I found
it needful to say either in those forms which are generally
applied in the field of nature-observation, or in forms which
are used by writers inclined toward mystical experiences.
By the latter method the resultant difficulties seemed to me
to be unavoidable.

I reached the conclusion that the form of expression in the


122 RUDOLF STEINER


sphere of the natural sciences consists in content-filled ideas,
even though the content was materialistically thought out.
I desired to form ideas which bore in the same way upon the
spiritual as the natural-scientific ideas bore upon the physical.
In this way I could preserve the ideal character for that. which
I had to say. This seemed to me impossible with the use of
mystical forms ; for these do not refer to the reality outside
of man, but describe only subjective experiences within man.
My purpose was, not to describe human experiences, but to
show how a spiritual world is revealed in man through
spiritual organs.

Out of such fundamental considerations I gave form to the
ideas from which my Philosophy of Spiritual Activity later
evolved. I did not, in the forming of these ideas, permit any
mystical rhapsodies to become dominant within me, in spite
of the fact that I perceived clearly that the ultimate experience
of that which would manifest itself in ideas must be of the
same character within the soul as the inner awareness of the
mystic. Yet there was the difference that in my presentation
of the matter man surrenders himself and the external spiritual
world comes to objective manifestation, whereas the mystic
strengthens his own inner life and in this way eflaces the true
form of the objective spiritual.


XII


THE time that I consumed in the setting forth of Goethe’s
natural-scientific ideas for the introduction to Kiirschner’s
Deutsche National-Literatur was very protracted. I began this
task in the year 1880, and I had not finished even when
I entered upon the second phase of my life with the removal
from Vienna to Weimar. The reason for this lay in the
difficulties I have described in connection with the natural-
scientific and the mystical form of expression.

While I was labouring to reduce to correct forms of thought
Goethe’s attitude to the natural sciences, I had to advance
also in the formulation of that which had taken shape before
my mind as spiritual experience in my perception of the world-
process. I was thus constantly driven from Goethe to the
representation of my own world-conception and back again
to him, in order the better to interpret his thoughts by means
of the thoughts to which I myself had attained. I felt that
the most essential thing in Goethe was his refusal to be content
with any sort of theoretically easily surveyed thought-pictures
as contrasted with the knowledge of the illimitable richness
of reality. Goethe becomes rationalistic when he wishes
to. describe the manifold forms of plants and animals. He
struggles for ideas which manifest themselves as active in the
evolution of the earth when he wishes to grasp the geologic
building of the earth or the phenomena of meteorology. But
his ideas are not abstract thoughts; they are images living in
the form of thoughts within the mind.

When I grasped what he has set forth in such pictures in
his natural-scientific works, I had before me something which
satisfied me to the bottom of my soul. I looked upon a
content of ideal images of which I could not but believe that


this content—if followed further—represented a true reflection
123


124 RUDOLF STEINER


within the human spirit of that which happens in nature. It
was clear to me that the form of thought in the natural sciences
must be raised to this of Goethe’s.

But at the same time, in this grasping of Goethe’s knowledge
of nature, there came the need for representing the content
of ideal images in relation to spiritual reality itself. The
ideal images are not justifiable unless they refer to a spiritual
reality lying at the foundation of the things of sense. But
Goethe, in his holy awe before the immeasurable richness
of reality, refrains from entering upon a presentation of the
spiritual world after having brought the sense-world to the
form of a spiritual image in his mind.

I had now to show that Goethe really experienced the life
of the soul in that he pressed forward from sense-nature to
spirit-nature, but that anyone else can comprehend Goethe’s
soul-life only by going beyond him and carrying his own
knowledge on to ideal conception of the spiritual world itself.

When Goethe spoke of nature, he was standing within
the spiritual. He feared that he would become abstract
if he proceeded further beyond this vital standing-within
to a living in thoughts concerning this standing-within. He
desired the experience of being within the spirit ; but he did
not desire to think himself within the spirit.

I often felt that I should be false to Goethe’s way of thinking
if I only gave expression to thoughts concerning his world-
conception. And in regard to every detail which I had to
interpret concerning Goethe I had again and again to master
the method of speaking about Goethe in Goethe’s own way.

My setting forth of Goethe’s ideas consisted in the struggle,
lasting for years, gradually to achieve a better understanding
of him with the help of his own ideas. When I look back
upon this endeavour I have to say to myself that I owe to this
in large measure the evolution of my spiritual experience of
knowledge. This evolution proceeded far more slowly than
would have been the case if the Goethe task had not been set
by destiny on the pathway of my life. I should then have
followed my spiritual experiences and have set these forth
as they came to light. I should have broken through into
the spiritual world more quickly ; but I should have had no


THE STORY OF’ MY’ LIFE 125


inducement to sink down by actual striving into my own
inner self.

Thus by means of my Goethe task I experienced the differ-
ence between a state of soul in which the spiritual world
manifests itself, so to speak, as an act of grace, and one in which
step by step the soul first makes its own inner self like the
spirit, in order that, when the soul experiences itself as true
spirit, it may then stand within the spiritual of the world.
But in this standing-within man first realizes that the human
spirit and the spiritual world may come into union one with
the other within the human soul.

During the time that I was working at my interpretation of
Goethe, I had Goethe always beside me as an admonisher
who called inaudibly to me: ‘“‘ Whoever too rashly moves
forward on the spiritual way may attain to a narrowly re-
stricted experience of the spirit, but he enters into a content
of reality impoverished of all the richness of life.”

In my relation to the Goethe work I could observe clearly
“how Karma works in human life.” Destiny is made of
two forms of fact-complexes which grow into unity in human
life. The one streams from the struggle of the soul outward ;
the other comes from the outer world into man. My own
mental impulses moved toward the perception of the spiritual ;
the outer spiritual life of the world brought the Goethe work
tome. [had to reduce to a harmony within my consciousness
the two currents which there met. I occupied the last year
of the first phase of my life in justifying myself alternately in
the eyes of Goethe and then in my own eyes.

The task I set myself in my doctor’s dissertation was an
inner experience: that of bringing about an “ understanding
of man’s consciousness with itself.” For I saw that man can
understand what the genuine reality in the outer world is
only when he has perceived this genuine reality within himself.

This bringing together of the genuine reality of the outer
world and the genuine reality of the inner life of the soul
must be achieved for the knowing consciousness through
tireless spiritual activity ; for the willing and the acting
consciousness it is always present when man in action experi-
ences his own freedom.


126 RUDOLF STEINER


That freedom exists as a matter of fact for the unprejudiced
consciousness and yet becomes a riddle for the understanding
is due to the fundamental fact that man does not possess his
own true being, his genuine self-consciousness, as something
given from the beginning, but must first achieve this through
an understanding of his consciousness with itself. ,

That which makes man of the highest worth—freedom—
can be won only after appropriate preparation.

My Philosophy of Spiritual Activity is based upon an ex-
perience which consists in the understanding of human
consciousness with itself. In willing, freedom is practised ;
in feeling, it is experienced ; in thinking, it is known. Only,
in order to attain this last, one must not lose the life out of
thinking.

While I was working at my Philosophy of Spiritual Activity,
it was my constant endeavour in the statement of my thoughts
to keep my inner experience fully awake within the very
thoughts. This gives to thoughts the mystical character of
inner perception, but makes the perception like the perception
of the outer physical world. If one forces oneself through
to such an inner experience, then one no longer finds any con-
tradiction between knowledge of nature and knowledge of
spirit. It becomes clear to one that the second is only a
metamorphosed continuation of the first.

Since this appeared thus to me, I could later place on the
title-page of my Philosophy of Spiritual Activity the motto:
Seelische Beobachtungsresultate nach naturwissenschaftliche
Methode*t For, when the natural-scientific methods are
truly followed in the spiritual sphere, then these lead one in
knowledge into this sphere.

There was great significance for me at that time in my
thorough-going work upon Goethe’s fairy-tale of The Green
Snake and the Beautiful Lily, which forms the conclusion of
his Entertainments of the German Wanderers. ‘These “ riddle-
tales’ have had many interpreters. I was not at all interested
in the “interpretation” of the content. I wished simply
to take that in its poetic, artistic form. I always had an


* The Results of Spiritual Observation According to the Methods of
Natural Science.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 127


antipathy to shattering the dominant fantasy with intellectual
interpretation.

I saw that these poems of Goethe’s had arisen out of
his spiritual intercourse with Schiller. When Schiller wrote
his Briefe zur Férderung der aesthetischen Erziehung des Men-
schen, his mind was passing through the philosophical phase
of its evolution. The “ understanding of human conscious-
ness with itself’? was a mental task which occupied him most
intensely. He saw the human mind on the one side wholly
absorbed in intellectual activity. He felt that the mind
dominant in the purely intellectual was not dependent upon
the bodily and sensible. And yet he found in this form
of supersensible activity something unsatisfying. The mind
is “in the spirit’? when it is given over to the “ logical
necessity ’’ of the reason, but in this activity it is neither free
nor inwardly spiritually alive. It is given over to an abstract
shadow-image of the spirit, but is not weaving and ruling in
the life and existence of the spirit. On the other side, Schiller
observed that, in an opposite sort of activity, the mind is
wholly given over to the bodily—the sense-perceptions and
the instinctive impulses. Then the influence out of the
spiritual shadow-images is lost from the mind, but it is given
over to natural law, which does not constitute its being.

Schiller came to the conclusion that man is not “ true man ”
in either of these activities. But he can produce through
himself that which is not given to him by nature or by the
rational shadows of the spiritual coming to existence without
his effort. He can take his reason into his sense-activities ;
and he can elevate the sensible into a higher realm of conscious-
ness so that it acts like the spiritual. Thus he attains to a
mood midway between the logical and the natural compulsion.
Schiller sees man in such a mood when he is living in the
artistic. ‘The zsthetic conception of the world directs its
look upon the sensible, but in such a way that it perceives
therein the spirit. It lives in shadows of the spirit, but in
its creating or its enjoying it gives to the spirit a sensible form
so that it loses the shadow existence.

Years before had this endeavour of Schiller’s to reach a

* Letters on the Advancement of the Atsthetic Education of Man.


128 RUDOLF STEINER


conception of the “ true man > attracted my attention ; now,
when Goethe’s “ riddle fairy-tale’ became itself a riddle to
me, Schiller’s endeavour occurred to me again. I saw how
Goethe had taken hold of Schiller’s conception of the
“true man.” For him no less than for his friend this was a
vital question: ‘‘ How does the shadowy spiritual find in
the mind the sensible-corporeal, and how does the natural
in physical bodies work itself upward to the spiritual ?°”

The correspondence between the two friends and all that
can be learned otherwise about their spiritual relationship
indicates that Schiller’s solution was too abstract, too one-
sidedly philosophical for Goethe. He created the charming
picture of the stream which separates two worlds ; of the
will-o’-the-wisps who seek the way from one world to ‘the
other ; of the snake which must sacrifice itself in order to
form a bridge between the two worlds ; of the beautiful lily
who can only be surmised as wandering in the spirit on the
“far side’ of the stream by those who live on “ this side,”
and of much more. Over against Schiller’s philosophical
solution he places a poetic vision in fairy-tale form. He had
the feeling that, if one attacked with philosophical conceptions
the riddle of the soul which Schiller perceived, such a person
impoverished himself while seeking for his true being. He
desired to approach the riddle in all the wealth of the soul’s
experience.

The Goethe fairy-tale images hark back to imaginations
which had often been set forth before the time of Goethe by
seekers for the spiritual experience of the soul. The three
kings of fairy-lore are found in some resemblance in the
Chymische Hochzeit, by Christian Rosenkreutz. Other forms
are revivals of those which had appeared earlier in pictures
of the way of knowledge. Only in Goethe these pictures
appear in a more beautiful, noble, artistic form of fantasy,
whereas they had until his time borne a less artistic
character.

In these fairy-tales Goethe carried this fanciful creation
near to the point at which it passes over into the inner process
of the soul which is a knowing experience of the real world

* Chemical Marriage.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 129


of spirit. I felt that one could see to the utmost depths of
Goethe’s nature when one sank down into this poetry.

Not the interpretation, but the stimulus to the experience
of the soul, was the important result that came to me from
my work upon the fairy-tales. This stimulus later in-
- fluenced my mental life even in the shaping of the mystery
dramas which I afterward wrote. As to that part of my work
which related directly to Goethe, I could gain but little from
these fairy-tales. For it seemed to me that Goethe in their
composition had grown beyond himself in his world-conception,
as if impelled by a half-conscious life of the soul. In this
way there came about for me a serious difficulty. I could set
forth my interpretation of Goethe for Kiirschner’s Deutsche
National-Literatur only in the style in which I had commenced
this ; but this in itself did not suffice me at all. For I said
to myself that, while Goethe was writing the “‘ fairy-tales,”
he had, as it were, looked across the boundary and had seen
into the spiritual world. But nevertheless what he wrote
about natural processes gave no attention to this glimpse.
Therefore he could not be interpreted on the basis of this
insight.

But even though I obtained nothing at once for my Goethe
writings from sinking down into the fairy-tale, yet I gained
much mental stimulus from it. What came to me as mental
content in connection with the fairy-tale became most important
material for meditation. I returned to this again and again.
By this activity I prepared myself beforehand for the temper
of mind into which I entered later during my Weimar work.


se)


XIII


Jusr at this time my outward life was altogether happy. I
was frequently with my old friends. Few as were the
opportunities I had to speak of the things I am here discussing,
yet the spiritual and mental ties that bound me to these friends
were none the less strong. How often must I think over
again the conversations, sometimes unending, which occurred
at that time in a well-known coffee house on Michaelerplatz
in Vienna. I had cause to think of these especially during
that period following the World War when old Austria went
to pieces. For the causes of this crumbling to pieces were
at that time already present everywhere. But no one was
willing to recognize this. Everyone had thoughts that would
be the means of a cure, always according to his own special
national or cultural leanings. And if ideals which manifest
themselves at times of the ebbing tide are stimulating, yet
they are ideals born out of the decadence itself, out of the
desire to prevent this—themselves being no less tragic. Such
tragic ideals worked in the hearts of the best Viennese and
Austrians.

I frequently caused misunderstandings with these idealists
when I expressed a conviction which had been borne in upon
me through my absorption in the period of Goethe. I said
that a culmination in Occidental cultural evolution had been
reached during that period. This had not been con-
tinued. The period of the natural sciences, with its effects
upon the lives of men and of peoples, denoted a decadence.
For any further advance there was needed an entirely
new attack from the side of the spirit. There could be no
further progress into the spiritual by those roads which had
previously been laid out, except after a previous turning back.


130


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 131


Goethe is a climax, but therefore not a point of departure ;
on the contrary, an end. He develops the results of an evolu-
tion which goes as far as himself and finds in him its most
complete embodiment, but which cannot be further advanced
without first resorting to far more primal springs of spiritual
experience than exist in this evolution. In this mood I wrote
_ the last part of my Goethe exposition.

It was in this mood that I first became acquainted with
Nietzsche’s writings. Fenseits von Gut und Bose * was the first
of his books that I read. I was fascinated by his way of
viewing things and yet at the same time repelled. I found
it hard to get a right attitude toward Nietzsche. I loved his
style ; I loved his keenness ; but I did not love at all the way in
which Nietzsche spoke of the most profound problems with-
out immersing himself in these with fully conscious thought
in spiritual experience. Only I then observed that he said
many things with which I stood in the closest intimacy in
my spiritual experience. And thus I felt myself close to his
struggle and felt that I must find an expression for this
proximity. Nietzsche seemed to me one of the most tragic
figures of that time. And this tragedy, I believed, must be
the effect of the spiritual attitude characterizing the natural-
scientific age upon human souls of more than ordinary
depth. I passed my last years in Vienna with such feelings
as these.

Before the close of the first phase of my life, I had the
opportunity of visiting also Budapest and Siebenbiirgen
(Transylvania). The friend I have previously mentioned
whose family belonged to Transylvania, who had remained
bound to me with rare loyalty through all these years, had
introduced me to a good many of the people from his district
who were in Vienna. Thus it happened that, in addition to
my other extensive social relationships, I had also this with
persons from Transylvania. Among them were Herr and
Frau Breitenstein, who became friends of mine at that time and
who have remained such in the most heartfelt fashion. Fora
long time they have taken a leading part in the Anthroposophical
Society in Vienna. This human relationship with ‘‘ Sieben-

t Beyond Good and Evil.


132 RUDOLF STEINER


biirgers ” led me to make a journey to Budapest. The capital
of Hungary, in character so entirely unlike Vienna, made a
deep impression upon me. One went there from Vienna
through a region brilliant in the beauty of its scenery, its
highly temperamental humanity, and the intensity of its
musical interest. When one looked from the windows of
the train, one had the impression that nature herself had become
poetic in a special way, and that human beings, paying little
heed to the poetic nature so familiar to them, plunged down
within themselves in an often profoundly inward music of
the heart. And, when one reached Budapest, there came to
expression a world which may be viewed with the greatest
interest from the point of view of the relationships to other
European peoples, but which can from this point of view
never be wholly understood. A dark undertone over which
gleams a light playing amid colours. This character seemed
to me as if it were forced together into visible unity when I
stood before the Franz Drak monument. In this head of
the maker of that Hungary which existed from the year 1867
to 1918 there lived a strong, proud will which laid hold with
all its might, which forced itself through without cunning but
with elemental mercilessness. I felt how true subjectively
for every Hungarian was the proverb I had often heard :
“Outside of Hungary there is no life ; and, if there is a life,
it is by no means such as this.”

As a child I had seen on the western borders of Hungary
how Germans were made to feel this strong, proud will ; now
I learned in the midst of Hungary how this will brings the
Magyar people into an isolation from humanity which clothes
them, as they rather naively think, in a certain glamour obvious
to themselves which values much the showing of itself to the
hidden eyes of nature but not to the open eyes of men.

Half a year after this visit, my Transylvanian friends arranged
for me to deliver a lecture at Hermanstadt. It was Christmas
time. I travelled over the wide plains in the midst of which
lies Arad. The melancholy poetry of Lenau sounded in my
heart as I looked out over these plains where all is one expanse
to which the eye can find no limit. I had to spend the night
in a little border village between Hungary and Transylvania.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 133


I sat in a little guest-room half the night. Besides myself
there was only a group of card-players sitting round a table.
In this group there were all the nationalities to be found at
that time in Hungary and Transylvania. The men were playing
with a vehemence which constantly broke loose at half-hour
intervals, so that it took the form of soul-clouds which rose
above the table, struggled together like demons, and wreathed
the men about completely as if in the folds of serpents. What
differences in vehement existence were there manifested by
these different national types !

I reached Hermanstadt on Christmas Day. Here I was
introduced into “‘ Siebenbiirger Saxondom.” This existed
there in the midst of a Rumanian and Magyar environment.
A noble folk which, in the midst of a decline that it could not
perceive, desired to prove its gallantry. A Germanism which,
like a memory of the transfer of its life centuries ago to the
East, wished to show its loyalty to its origins, but which in this
temper of soul showed a trait of alienation from the world
manifesting itself as an elevated universal joy in life. I passed
happy days among the German ministers of the Evangelical
Church, among the teachers of the German schools, and among
other German Siebenbiirgers. My heart warmed to these
people who, in the concern for their folk life and in their
duty to this, evolved a culture of the heart which spoke first
of all likewise to the heart.

This vital warmth filled my soul as I sat ina sleigh, wrapped
close in heavy furs, and travelled with these old and new friends
through icy-cold and crackling snow to the Carpathians (the
Transylvanian Alps). A dark, forested mountain country
when one moves toward it from the distance; a wild, pre-
cipitous, often frightful mountain landscape when one is
close at hand.

The centre in all which I then experienced was my friend
of many years. He was always thinking out something new
whereby I might learn thoroughly Siebenbiirger Saxondom.
He was still dividing his time between Vienna and Hermanstadt.
At that time he owned a weekly paper at Hermanstadt founded
for the purpose of fostering Siebenbiirger Saxondom. An
undertaking it was which arose entirely out of idealism, utterly


134 RUDOLF STEINER


devoid of practical experience, but at which almost all repre-
sentatives of Saxondom laboured together. After a few weeks
it came to grief.

Such experiences as this journey were brought me by
destiny ; and through them I was enabled to educate my per-
ception for the outer world, a thing which had not been easy
for me, whereas in the element of the spiritual I lived as in
something self-evident.

It was with sad memories that I made the journey back to
Vienna. There fell into my hands just then a book of whose
“ spiritual richness ”’ men of all sorts were speaking : Rembrandt
als Erzieher.t In conversations about this book, which were
then going on wherever one went, one could hear about the
coming of an entirely new spirit. I was forced to become aware,
by reason of this very phenomenon, of the great loneliness
in which I stood with my temper of mind amid the spiritual _
life of that period.

In regard to a book which was prized in the highest degree
by all the world my own feeling was as if someone had sat for
several months at a table in one of the better hotels and
listened to what the “‘ outstanding” personalities in the
genealogical tables said by way of “ brilliant ” remarks, and
had then written these down in the form of aphorisms. After
this continuous “ preliminary work” he could have thrown
his slips of paper with these remarks into a vessel, shaken
them thoroughly together, and then taken them out again.
After drawing out the slips, he could have made a series of
these and so produced a book. Of course, this criticism is
exaggerated. But my inner vital mood forced me into such
revulsion from that which the “ spirit of the times” then
praised as a work of the highest merit. I considered Rembrandt
as Teacher a book which dealt wholly with the surface of
thoughts that have to do with the realm of the spiritual, and
which did not harmonize in a single sentence with the real
depths of the human soul. It grieved me to know that my
contemporaries considered such a book as coming from a
profound personality, whereas I was forced to believe that
such dealers in the small change of thought moving in the


t Rembrandt as Teacher


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 135


shallows of the spirit would drive all that is deeply human out
of man’s soul.

When I was fourteen years old I had to begin tutoring ;
for fifteen years, up to the beginning of the second phase of
my life, that spent at Weimar, my destiny kept me engaged
in this work. The unfolding of the minds of many persons,
both in childhood and in youth, was in this way bound up
with my own evolution. Through this means I was able to
observe how different were the ways in which the two sexes
grow into life. For, along with the giving of instruction to
boys and young men, it fell to my lot to teach also a number
of young girls. Indeed, for a long time the mother of the
boy whose instruction I had taken over because of his patho-
logical condition was a pupil of mine in geometry; and at
another time I taught this lady and her sister zsthetics.

In the family of these children I found for a number of
years a sort of home, from which I went out to other families
as tutor or instructor. Through the intimate friendship
between the mother of the children and myself, it came about
that I shared fully in the joys and sorrows of this family.
In this woman I perceived a uniquely beautiful human soul.
She was wholly devoted to the development of her four boys
according to their destiny. In her one could study mother-
love in its larger manifestation. To co-operate with her in
problems of education formed a beautiful content of life.
For the musical part of the artistic she possessed both talent
and enthusiasm. At times she took charge of the musical
practice of her boys, as long as they were still young. She
discussed intelligently with me the most varied life problems,
sharing in everything with the deepest interest. She gave
the greatest attention to my scientific and other tasks. There
was a time when I had the greatest need to discuss with her
everything which intimately concerned me. When I spoke
of my spiritual experiences, she listened in a peculiar way.
‘To her intelligence the thing was entirely congenial, but it
maintained a certain marked reserve ; yet her mind absorbed
everything. At the same time she maintained in reference
to man’s being a certain naturalistic view. She believed the
moral temper to be entirely bound up with the health or sickness


136 RUDOLF STEINER


of the bodily constitution. I mean to say that she thought
instinctively about man in a medical fashion, whereby her
thinking tended to be somewhat naturalistic. To discuss
things in this way with her was in the highest degree stimulating.
Besides, her attitude toward all outer life was that of a woman
who attended with the strongest sense of duty to everything
which fell to her lot, but who looked upon most inner things
as not belonging to her sphere. She looked upon her fate in
many aspects as something burdensome. But still she made
no claims upon life ; she accepted this as it took form so far
as it did not concern her sons. In relation to these she felt
every experience with the deepest emotion of her soul.

All this I shared vitally—the soul-life of a woman, her
beautiful devotion to her sons, the life of the family within
a wide circle of kinsmen and acquaintances. But for this
reason things did not move without difficulty. The family
was Jewish. In their views they were quite free from any
sectarian or racial narrowness, but the head of the family,
to whom I was deeply attached, felt a certain sensitiveness to
any expression by a Gentile in regard to the Jews. The
flame of anti-Semitism which had sprung up at that time had
caused this feeling.

Now, I took an active part in the struggle which the Germans
in Austria were then carrying on in behalf of their national
existence. I was also led to occupy myself with the historical
and the social position of the Jews. Especially earnest did
this activity of mine become after the appearance of Hamerling’s
Homunculus. 'This eminent German poet was considered by
a great part of the journalists as an anti-Semite on account
of this work ; indeed, he was claimed by the German national
anti-Semites as one of their own. This disturbed me very
little; but I wrote a paper on the Homunculus in which, as
I thought, I expressed myself quite objectively in regard to
the Jews. The man in whose home I lived, and who was
my friend, took this to be a special form of anti-Semitism.
Not in the least did his friendly feeling for me suffer on that
account, but he was affected with a profound distress. When
he had read the paper, he faced me, his heart torn by innermost
sorrow, and:said to me: ‘‘ What you wrote in this in regard


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 137


to the Jews cannot be explained in a friendly sense ; but this
is not what hurts me, but the fact that you could have had
the experiences in regard to us which induced you to write
thus only through your close relationship with us and
our friends.’ He was mistaken: for I had formed my
opinions altogether from a spiritual and historic survey ;
nothing personal had entered into my judgment. He could
not see the thing in this way. His reply to my explanations
was: ‘No, the man who teaches my children is, after this
paper, no ‘ friend of the Jews.’”’ He could not be induced
to change. Not for a moment did he think that my relation-
ship to the family ought to be altered. This he looked upon
as something necessary. Still less could I make this matter
the occasion for a change; for I looked upon the teaching
of his sons as a task which destiny had brought to me. But
neither of us could do otherwise than think that a tragic thread
had been woven into this relationship.

To all this was added the fact that many of my friends had
taken on from their national struggle a tinge of anti-Semitism
in their view of the Jews. They did not view sympathetically
my holding a post in a Jewish family ; and the head of this
family saw in my friendly mingling with such persons only
a confirmation of the impression which he had received from
my paper.

To the family circle in which I so intimately shared
belonged the composer of Das Goldene Kreuz, Ignatius Brill.
A sensitive person he was, of whom I was extraordinarily fond.
Ignatius Briill was something of an alien to the world, buried
in himself. His interests were not exclusively musical ;
they were directed toward many aspects of the spiritual life.
These interests he could enter into only as a “ darling of
destiny ” against the background of a family circle which never
permitted him to be disturbed by attention to everyday
affairs but permitted his creative work to grow out of a certain
prosperity. And thus he did not grow in life but only in
music. To what degree his musical creations were or were
not meritorious is not the question just here. But it was
stimulating in the most beautiful sense to meet the man in
the street and see him awaken out of his world of tones when


138 RUDOLF STEINER


one addressed him. Generally he did not have his waistcoat
buttons in the right button-holes. His eye spoke in a mild
thoughtfulness ; his walk was not fast but very expressive.
One could talk with him about many things ; for these he had
a sensitive understanding ; but one saw how the content of
the conversation slipped, as it were, for him into the sphere
of music.

In the family in which I thus lived I became acquainted
also with the distinguished physician, Dr. Breuer, who was
associated with Dr. Freud at the birth of psycho-analysis.
Only in the beginning, however, did he share in this sort of
view, and he was not in agreement with Freud in its later
development. Dr. Breuer was to me a very attractive person-
ality. I admired the way in which he was related to his medical
profession. Besides, he was a man of many interests in other
fields. He spoke of Shakespeare in such a way as to stimulate
one very strongly. It was interesting also to hear him in his
purely medical way of thinking speak of Ibsen or even of
Tolstoi’s Kreuzer Sonata. When he spoke with the friend
I have here described, the mother of the children whom I
had to teach, I was often present and deeply interested.
Psycho-analysis was not yet born; but the problems which
looked toward this goal were already there. The phenomena
of hypnotism had given a special colouring to medical thought.
My friend had been a friend of Dr. Breuer from her youth.
There I faced a fact which gave me much food for thought.
This woman thought in a certain direction more medically
than the distinguished physician. ‘They were once discussing
a morphine addict. Dr. Breuer was treating him. The
woman once said to me: ‘“ Think what Breuer has done!
He has taken the promise of the morphine addict on his word
of honour that he will take no more morphine. He expected »
to attain something by this, and he was deluded, since the
patient did not keep his promise. He even said: ‘ How can
I treat a man who does not keep his promise?’ Would one
have believed,” she said, ‘‘ that so distinguished a physician
could be so naive ? How can one try to cure ‘ by a promise ’”
something so deeply rooted ‘in a man’s nature’?”? The
woman may not, however, have been entirely right; the


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 139


opinion of the physician regarding the therapy of suggestion
may have entered then into his attempt at a cure; but no one
can deny that my friend’s statement indicated the extraordinary
energy with which she spoke in a noteworthy fashion out
of the spirit which lived in the Viennese school of medicine
up to the time when this new school blossomed forth.

This woman was in her own way a significant person ; and
she is a significant phenomenon in my life. She has long
been dead; among the things which made it hard for me to
leave Vienna was this also, that I had to part from her.

When I reflect in retrospect upon the content of the first
phase of my life, while I seek to characterize it as if from
without, the feeling forces itself upon me that destiny so led
me that I was not fettered by any external ‘calling’ during
my first thirty years. I entered the Goethe and Schiller
Institute in Weimar also, not to take a life position, but as a
free collaborator in the edition of Goethe which would be
published by the Institute under a commission from the
Grand-duchess Sophie. In the report which the Director of
the Institute published in the twelfth volume of the Goethe
Year Book occurs this statement : “‘ The permanent workers
have associated with themselves since 1890 Rudolf Steiner
from Vienna. To him has been assigned the general field
of ‘morphology’ (with the exception of the osteological
part): five or probably six volumes of the ‘ second division,’
to which important material is added from the manuscript,
remains.”


XIV


For an indeterminate length of time I again faced a task that
was given me, not through any external circumstance, but
through the inner processes of development of my views of
life and the world. To the same cause was due the fact that
I used for my doctor’s examination at the University of
Rostock my dissertation on the endeavour after “an under-
standing of human consciousness with itself.’ External
circumstances merely prevented me from taking the examin-
ation in Vienna. I had official credit for the work of the
Realschule, not of the Gymnasium, though I had completed
privately the Gymnasium course of study, even tutoring also
in' these courses. This fact barred me from obtaining the
doctor’s degree in Austria. I had grounded myself thoroughly
in philosophy, but I was credited officially with a course of
study which excluded me from everything to which the study of
philosophy gives a man access.

Now at the close of the first phase of my life a philosophical
work had fallen into my hands which fascinated me extra-
ordinarily—the Sieben Biicher Platonismus* of Heinrich von
Stein, who was then teaching philosophy at Rostock. This
fact led me to submit my dissertation to the lovable old
philosopher, whom I valued highly because of his book,
and whom I saw for the first time in connection with the
examination.

The personality of Heinrich von Stein still lives in my
memory—almost as if I had spent much of my life with
him. For the Seven Books of Platonism is the expression of
a sharply stamped philosophical individuality. Philosophy
as thought-content is not taken in this work as something
which stands upon its own feet. Plato is viewed from all


t Seven Books of Platonism.
140


THE STORY OF MY LIFE I4I


angles as the philosopher who sought for such a self-supporting
philosophy. What he found in this direction is carefully
set forth by Heinrich von Stein. In the first chapters of
the book one enters vitally and wholly into the Platonic world-
conception. Then, however, Stein passes on to the breaking
into human evolution of the Christ revelation. This actual
breaking in of the spiritual life he sets forth as something
higher than the elaboration of thought-content through mere
philosophy.

From Plato to Christ as to the fulfilment of that for which
men have striven—such we may designate the exposition of
von Stein. Then he traces further the influence of world-
conceptions of Platonism in the Christian evolution.

Stein is of the opinion that revelation gave content from
without to human strivings after a world-conception. There
I could not agree with him. I knew from experience that
the human being, when he comes to an understanding with
himself in vital spiritual consciousness, can possess the revela-
tion, and that this revelation can then attain to an existence
in the ideal experience of man. But I felt something in the
book which drew me on. The real life of the spirit behind
the ideal life, even though in a form which was not my own,
had set in motion an impulse toward a comprehensive ex-
position of the history of philosophy. Plato, the great re-
presentative of an ideal world which was fixed through its
fulfilment by the Christ impulse—it is the setting forth of
this which forms the content of Stein’s book. In spite of
the opposition I felt toward the book, it came closer to me
than any of the philosophies which merely elaborate a content
out of concepts and sense-experiences.

I missed in Stein also the consciousness that Plato’s ideal
world had its source in a primal revelation of the spiritual
world. This (pre-Christian) revelation, which has been sym-
pathetically set forth, for example, in Otto Willmann’s
Geschichte des Idealismus,t does not appear in Stein’s view.
He sets forth Platonism, not as the residue of ideas from
the primal revelation, which then recovers in Christianity
and on a higher level its lost spiritual form; he represents

t History of Idealism.


142 RUDOLF STEINER


the Platonic ideas as a content of concepts self-woven which
then attained life through Christ. |

Yet the book is one of those written with philosophical
warmth, and its author a personality penetrated by a deep
religious feeling who sought in philosophy the expression
of the religious life. On every page of the three-volume work
one is aware of the personality in the background. After
I had read this book, and especially the parts dealing with the
relation of Platonism to Christianity, over and over again,
it was a significant experience to meet the author face to face.

A personality serene in his whole bearing, in advanced age,
with mild eyes that looked as if they were made to survey
kindly but penetratingly the process of evolution of his students ;
speech which in every sentence carried the reflection of the
philosopher in the tone of the words—just so did Stein stand
before me when I visited him before the examination. He
said to me: “‘ Your dissertation is not such as is required ;
one can perceive from it that you have not produced it under
the guidance of a professor; but what it contains makes it
possible that I can very gladly accept you.” I should now
have been extremely glad to be questioned orally on something
which was related to the Seven Books of Platonism; but no
question related to this ; all were drawn from the philosophy
of Kant.

I have always kept the image of Heinrich von Stein deeply
imprinted on my heart; and it would have given me im-
measurable pleasure to have met the man again. Destiny
never again brought us together. My doctor’s examination is
one of my pleasant memories, because the impression of Stein’s
personality shines out beyond everything else pertaining to it.

The mood in which I came to Weimar was tinged by
previous thorough-going work in Platonism. I think that
mood helped me greatly to take the right attitude toward
my task on the Goethe and Schiller archives. How did
Plato live in the ideal world, and how Goethe ? This occupied
my thoughts on my walk to and from the archives ; it occupied
me also as I went over the manuscripts of the Goethe legacy.

This question was in the background when at the beginning
of 1891 I expressed in some such words as the following my


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 143


impression of Goethe’s knowledge of nature.t ‘It is im-
possible for the majority of men to grasp the fact that something
for whose appearance subjective conditions are necessary
may still have objective significance and being. And of this
very sort is the ‘ archetypal plant.’ It is the essential of all
plants, objectively contained within them ; but if it is to attain
to phenomenal existence the human spirit must freely
construct it.”’ Or these other words: that a correct under-
standing of Goethe’s way of thinking ‘‘ admits of the possibility
of asking whether it is in keeping with the conception of Goethe
to identify the ‘archetypal plant’ or ‘ archetypal animal’
with any physically real organic form which has appeared or
will appear at any definite time. To this question the only
possible answer is a decisive ‘No.’ The ‘ archetypal’ plant
is contained in every plant; it may be won from the plant-
world by the constructive power of the spirit ; but no single
individual form can be said to be typical.”

I now entered the Goethe-Schiller Institute as a collaborator.
This was the place into which the philology of the end of
the nineteenth century had taken over Goethe’s literary
remains. At the head of the Institute was Bernhard Suphan.
With him also, I may say, I had a personal relationship from
the very first day of the Weimar phase of my life. I had
frequent opportunities to be in his home.

That Bernhard Suphan had succeeded Erich Schmidt,
the first director of the Institute, was due to his friendship
with Herman Grimm.

The last descendant of Goethe, Walther von Goethe, had left
Goethe’s literary remains as a legacy to the Grand-duchess
Sophie. She had founded the archives in order that the
legacy might be introduced in appropriate manner into the
spiritual life of the times. She naturally turned to those
personalities of whom she had to assume that they might
know what was to be done with the Goethe literary remains.

First of all, there was Herr von Loeper. He was, so to
speak, foreordained to become the intermediary between


t In the essay on “‘ The Gain to Our View of Goethe’s Natural-Scientific
Works through the Publications of the Goethe Institute,” in the twelfth
volume of the Goethe Year Book.


144 RUDOLF STEINER


Goethe scholars and the Court at Weimar to which the control
of the Goethe legacy had been entrusted. For he had attained
to high rank in the Prussian household administration, and
thus stood in close relation with the Queen of Prussia, sister of
the Grand-duchess of Saxe-Weimar; and, besides, he was a
collaborator in the most famous edition of Goethe of that time,
that of Hempel.

Loeper was an unique personality, a very congenial mixture
of the man of the world and the recluse. As an amateur,
not as a professional, had he come to be interested in “ Goethe
research.” But he had attained to high distinction in this.
In his opinions concerning Goethe, which appear in such
beautiful form in his edition of Faust, he was entirely indepen-
dent. What he advanced he had learned from Goethe himself.
Since he had now to advise how Goethe’s literary remains
could best be administered, he had to turn to those with whom
he had become familiar as Goethe scholars through his own
work with Goethe.

The first to be considered was Herman Grimm. It
was as an historian of art that Herman Grimm had become
concerned with Goethe ; as such he had delivered lectures on
Goethe at the University of Berlin, which he then published
as a book. But he might well look upon himself as a sort of
spiritual descendant of Goethe. He was rooted in those
circles of the German spiritual life which had always been
conscious of a living tradition of Goethe, and which might
in a sense consider themselves bound in a personal way with
him. ‘The wife of Herman Grimm was Gisela von Arnim,
the daughter of Bettina, author of the book, Goethe’s Corre-
spondence with a Child.

Herman Grimm’s judgments about Goethe were those of
an historian of art. Moreover, as an historian of art he had
grown into scholarship only so far as this was possible to
him under the standards of a personally coloured relationship
to art as a connoisseur.

I think that Herman Grimm could readily come to an
understanding with Loeper, with whom he was naturally on
friendly terms by reason of their common interest in Goethe.
I imagine that, when these two discussed Goethe, the human


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 145


interest in the genius came strongly to the fore and scholarly
considerations fell into the background.

This scholarly way of looking at Goethe was the vital thing
in William Scherer, professor of German literature at the
University of Berlin. In him both Loeper and Grimm had to
recognize the official Goethe scholar. Loeper did so in a
childlike, harmless fashion; Herman Grimm with a certain
inner opposition. For to him the philological point of view
which characterized Scherer was really uncongenial.

With these three persons rested the actual direction in the
administration of the Goethe legacy. But it nevertheless
really slipped entirely into the hands of Scherer. Loeper
really thought nothing about this further than to advise and
to share from without as a collaborator in the task ; he had
his fixed social relationships through his position in the
household of the Prussian King. Herman Grimm thought
just as little about it. He could only contribute points of
view and right directions for the work by reason of his position
in the spiritual life ; for the directing of details he could not
take responsibility.

Quite different was the thing for William Scherer. For
him Goethe was an important chapter in the history of German
literature. In the Goethe archives new sources had come to
light of immeasurable value for this chapter. Therefore, the
work in the Goethe archives must be systematically united
with the general work of the history of literature. The plan
arose for an edition of Goethe which should take a philologically
correct form. Scherer took over the intellectual supervision ;
the direction of the archives was left to his student Erich
Schmidt, who then occupied the chair of modern German
literature at Vienna.

Thus the work of the Goethe Institute received its stamp.
Not only so, but also everything that happened at the Institute
or by reason of this. All bore the mark of the contemporary
philological character of thought and work.

In William Scherer literary-historical philology strove for
an imitation of contemporary natural-scientific methods.
Men took the current ideas of the natural sciences and sought
to form philological and literary-historical ideas on these as

II


146 RUDOLF STEINER


models. Whence had a poet derived something ? How had
this something been modified in him? ‘These were the
questions which were placed at the foundations of a history
of the evolution of the spiritual life. ‘The poetic personalities
disappeared from view ; instead there came forward views
as to how “ material’ and “ motif” were evolved by the
personalities. The climax of this sort of view was reached
in Erich Schmidt’s extended monograph on Lessing. In
this Lessing’s personality is not the main fact but an extremely
painstaking consideration of the motifs of Minna von Barnhelm,
Nathan, and the like.

Scherer died young, shortly after the Goethe Institute was
established. His students were numerous. Erich Schmidt
was called from the Goethe Institute to Scherer’s position
in Berlin. Herman Grimm then arranged so that not one of
the numerous students of Scherer should have the direction
of the Institute, but instead Bernhard Suphan.

As to his post before this time, he had been teaching in a
Gymnasium in Berlin. At the same time he had undertaken
the editing of Herder’s works. Through this he seemed marked
as the person to take direction also of the edition of Goethe.

Erich Schmidt still exercised a certain influence ; through
this fact Scherer’s spirit still continued to rule over the Goethe
task. But the ideas of Herman Grimm came forward in
stronger fashion, if not in the manner of work yet in the personal
relationships within the Goethe Institute.

When I came to Weimar, and entered into a close relation-
ship with Bernhard Suphan, he was a man sorely tried in his
personal life. His first and second wives, who were sisters,
he had seen buried at an early age. He lived now with his
two children in Weimar, grieving over those who had left
him, and not feeling any happiness in life. His sole satis-
faction lay in the good will which the Grand-duchess Sophie,
his profoundly honoured lady, bore to him. In this respect
for her there was nothing servile: Suphan loved and admired
the Grand-duchess in an entirely personal way.

In loyal dependence was Suphan devoted to Herman
Grimm. He had previously been honoured as a member of
the household of Grimm in Berlin, and had breathed with


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 147


satisfaction the spiritual atmosphere of that home. But there
was something in him which prevented him from getting
adjusted to life. One could speak freely with him about the
highest spiritual matters, yet something bitter would easily
come into the conversation, something arising from his ex-
periences. Most of all did this melancholy dominate in his
own mind ; then he would help himself past these experiences
by means of a dry humour. So one could not feel warm
in his company. He could in a moment grasp some great
idea quite sympathetically, and then, without any transition,
fall immediately into the petty and trivial. He always showed
good will toward me. In the spiritual interests vital within
my own soul he could take no part, and at times treated
them from the view-point of his dry humour; but in the
direction of my work in the Goethe Institute and in my personal
life he felt the warmest interest. I cannot deny that I was
often painfully disturbed by what Suphan did, the way in
which he conducted himself in the management of the Institute,
and the direction of the editing of Goethe ; I never made any
secret of this fact. Yet, when I look back upon the years
which I passed with him, this is outweighed by a strong inner
interest in the fate and the personality of the sorely tried man.
He suffered in his life, and he suffered in himself. I saw how
in a certain way, with all the good aspects of his character and
all his capacities, he sank more and more into a bottomless
brooding which rose up in his soul. When the Goethe and
Schiller archives were moved to the new building erected in
Ilm, Suphan said that he looked upon himself in relation to
the opening of this building like one of those human victims
who in primitive times were walled up before the doors of
sacred buildings to sanctify the thing. He had really come
gradually to fancy himself altogether in the réle of one sacrificed
on behalf of something with which he did not feel that he
was wholly united. He felt that he was a beast of burden
working at this Goethe task with which others with higher
intellectual gifts might have been occupied. In this mood
I always found him later whenever I met him after I had
left Weimar. He ended his life by suicide in a mood of
depression.


148 RUDOLF STEINER


Besides Bernhard Suphan, there was engaged at the Goethe
and Schiller Institute at the time of my entrance Julius
Wahle. He was one of those called by Erich Schmidt. Wahle
and I were intimates from the time of my first sojourn at
Weimar ; a heartfelt friendship grew up between us. Wahle
was working at the editing of Goethe's journals. Eduard
von der Hellen worked as Keeper of the Records, and also
had the responsibility of editing Goethe's letters.

On Goethe’s works a great part of the German “ world of
Germanists ? was engaged. There was a constant coming
and going of professors and instructors in philology. One
was then much in company with them during their longer
or shorter visits. One could get vitally into the circle of
interests of these persons.

Besides these actual collaborators in the Goethe task the
archives were visited by numbers of persons who were
interested in one way or another in the rich collections of
manuscripts of other German poets. For the Institute
gradually became the place for collecting the literary remains
of many poets. And other interested persons came also
who at first were less interested in manuscripts than in simply
studying in the library contained within the rooms of the
Institute. There were, moreover, many visitors who merely
wished to see the treasures there.

Everybody who worked at the Institute was happy when
Loeper appeared. He entered with sympathetic and amiable
remarks. He requested the material he needed for his work,
sat down, and worked for hours with a concentration seldom
to be seen in anyone. No matter what was going on around
him, he did not look up. If I were seeking for a personification
of amiability, I should choose Herr von Loeper. Amiable
was his Goethe research, amiable every word he uttered to
anyone. Especially amiable was the stamp his whole inner
life had taken from the fact that he seemed to be thinking of
one thing only : how to bring the world to a true understanding
of Goethe. I once sat by him during the presentation of
Faust in the theatre. I began to discuss the manner of
presentation, the dramatic qualities. He did not hear at all
what I said. But he replied: ‘‘ Yes, this actor often uses words


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 149


and phrases that do not agree with those of Goethe.’’ Still
more lovable did Loeper appear to me in his “ absent-
mindedness.’’ When in a pause I chanced to speak of some-
thing which required a reckoning of duration of time, Loeper
said: ‘* Therefore the hours to 100 minutes; the minutes
to 100 seconds ...’’ I stared at him, and said: ‘‘ Your
Excellency, 60.” He took out his watch, tested it, laughed
heartily, counted, and said: “Yes, yes, 60 minutes,
60 seconds.”’ I often observed in him such instances of
absent-mindedness. But over such proofs of Loeper’s unique
temper of mind I myself could not laugh, for they seemed to
me a significant by-product—and also charming in their effect
—-of the personality so utterly free from pose, unsentimental,
I might say gracious, in its earnestness. He spoke in rather
sprawling sentences, almost without modulation; but one
heard through the colourless speech a firm articulation of
thought.

Spiritual purpose entered the Institute when Herman Grimm
appeared. Fromthe standpoint from which I had read—while
still in Vienna—his book on Goethe, I felt the deepest sympathy
with his type of mind. And when I was able to meet him for
the first time in the Institute, I had read almost everything
that had come from his pen. Through Suphan I was soon
afterwards brought into much more intimate acquaintance
with him. Then, while Suphan was once absent from Weimar
and he came for a visit to the Institute, he invited me to
luncheon at his hotel. I was alone with him. It was plainly
agreeable to him to see how I could enter into his way of
viewing the world and life. He became communicative.
He spoke to me of his idea of a Geschicte der Deutsche Phantasie *
which he had in mind. I then received the impression that
he would write such a book. This did not come to pass.
But he explained to me beautifully how the contemporary
stream of historic evolution has its impulse in the creative
fantasy of the folk, which in its temper takes on the character
of a living, working supersensible genius. During this
luncheon I was wholly filled with the expositions of Herman
Grimm. I believed that I knew how the supersensible


t History of the German Imagination.


150 RUDOLF STEINER


spiritual works through man. I had before me a man whose
spiritual vision reached as far as the creative spiritual, but
who would not lay hold upon the actual life of this spiritual,
but remained in the region where the spiritual expresses its
life in man in the form of fantasy.

Herman Grimm had a special gift for surveying greater or
lesser epochs of the history of the mind and of setting forth
the period surveyed in_ precise, brilliant, epigrammatic
characterization. When he described a single personality
—Michelangelo, Raphael, Goethe, Homer—his representa-
tion always appeared against the background of such a survey.
How often have I read his essays in which he characterizes
in his striking glances the Greek and Roman cultures and.
the Middle Ages. The whole man was the revelation of
unified style. When he fashioned his beautiful sentences
in oral speech I had the feeling: “This may appear just
so in one of his essays”; and, when I read an essay of his
after having become acquainted with him, I felt as if I were
listening to him. He permitted himself no laxity in oral
speech, but he had the feeling that in artistic or literary
presentation one must remain the same person who moved
about in everyday life. But Herman Grimm did not roam
around like other men even in everyday life. It was inevitable
for him to lead a life possessed of style.

When Herman Grimm appeared in Weimar, and in the
Institute, then one felt that the plan of the legacy was, so to
speak, united with Goethe by secret spiritual threads. Not
so when Erich Schmidt came. He was bound to these papers
that were preserved in the Institute, not by ideas, but by
the historic-philological methods. I could never attain to
a human relation with Erich Schmidt. And so all the
great respect shown him by all those who worked at the
Institute as Scherer philologists made practically no impression
upon me.

Those were always pleasant moments when the Grand-duke
Karl Alexander appeared in the Institute. An inwardly true
enthusiasm—though manifested in a fashionable bearing—for
everything pertaining to Goethe was a part of the nature of
this man. Because of his age, his long connection with much


THE STORY OF MY LIFE ISI


that was important in the spiritual life of Germany, and
because of his attractive lovableness he made a satisfying
impression. It was a pleasing thought to know that he was
the protector of the Goethe work in the Institute.

The Grand-duchess Sophie, owner of the Institute, one
saw there only on special festival occasions. When she had
anything to say, she caused Suphan to be summoned. The
collaborating workers were taken to her to be presented.
But her solicitude for the Institute was extraordinary. She
herself personally made all the preliminary preparations
for the erection of a public building in which the poetic
legacies might be worthily housed.

The heir of the Grand-duke also, Carl August, who died before
he became Grand-duke, came often to the Institute. His interest
in everything there going on was not profound, but he liked
to mingle with us collaborators. This interesting himself in
the requirements of the spiritual life he viewed rather as a
duty. But the interest of the heiress, Pauline, was full of
warmth. I was able many times to converse with her about
things which pertained to Goethe, poetry, and the like. As
regards its social intercourse the Institute was between the
scientific and artistic circles and the courtly circle of Weimar.
From both sides it received its own colouring. Scarcely
would the door have closed after a professor when it would
reopen to admit some princely personage who came for a visit.
Many men of all social positions shared in what went on in the
Institute. At bottom it was a stirring life, stimulating in many
relationships. |

Immediately beside the Institute was the Weimar library.
In this resided as chief librarian a man of a childlike tempera-
ment and unlimited scholarship, Reinhold Kéhle. The
collaborators at the Institute often had occasion to resort
there. For what they had in the Institute as literary aid to
their work was here greatly augmented. Reinhold Kohle
had roved around with unique comprehensiveness in the
myths, fairy-tales, and sagas; his knowledge in the field of
linguistic scholarship was of the most admirable universality.
He knew where to turn for the most out-of-the-way literary
material. His modesty was most touching, and he received


152 RUDOLF STEINER


one with great cordiality. He never permitted anyone to
bring the books he needed from their resting-places into the
work-room of the archives where we did our work. I came
in once and asked for a book that Goethe used in connection
with his studies in botany, in order to look into it. Reinhold
Kohle went to get the old book which had rested somewhere
on the topmost shelves unused for decades. He did not come
back for a long time. Someone went to see where he was.
He had fallen from the ladder on which he had to climb to
attend to the books. He had broken his thigh. The noble
and lovable person never recovered from the effect of the
accident. After a lingering illness this widely known man
died. I grieved over the painful thought that his misfortune
had happened while he was attending to a book for me.


XV


Two lectures which I had to deliver shortly after the beginning
of the Weimar phase of my life are associated for me with
important memories. One took place in Weimar, and was
entitled, “ Fancy as the Creatress of Culture”; it preceded
the conversation I have described with Herman Grimm con-
cerning his views on the history of the evolution of fantasy.

Before I delivered the lecture, I summarized in my own mind
what I could say on the basis of my spiritual experience con-
cerning the streaming of the real spiritual world into the human
fantasy. What lives in the imagination seemed to me to be
stimulated by human sense-experiences only as regards its
material form. ‘That which is truly creative in the genuine
forms of fantasy seemed to me a reflection of the spiritual
world existing outside of man. I desired to show that fantasy
is the gateway through which the Beings of the spiritual world
work creatively indirectly through man in the evolution of
civilizations.

Because I had arranged my ideas for such a lecture toward
this objective, Herman Grimm’s exposition made a deep
impression upon me. He felt no need whatever to seek for
the supersensible sources of fantasy ; what enters the human
mind as fantasy he took as matter of fact and proposed to observe
this in the course of its evolution.

I first set forth one pole of the fantasy—dream-life. I
showed how external sense-experiences are perceived, because
of the subdued life of the consciousness, not as in waking
life, but transformed into symbolic pictures; how inner
bodily processes are experienced through the same symboli-
zation ; how experiences rise in consciousness, not in sober
memories, but in a way that indicates a powerful elaboration


of the thing experienced in the depths of the soul-life.
153


154 RUDOLF STEINER


In dreams consciousness is subdued ; it sinks down into
the sensible physical reality and perceives the control within
the sensible existence of something spiritual which during
ordinary awareness remains concealed, and which even to
the half-sleeping consciousness appears only as a play of
colours from the shallows of the sensible.

In fantasy the mind rises as far above the ordinary state of
consciousness as it sinks below this in dream-life. ‘The
spiritual which is concealed within the sense-existence does
not appear, yet the spiritual influences man ; but he cannot
grasp this in its very own form but pictures it unconsciously
to himself by means of a soul-content which he borrows from
the sense-world. The consciousness does not penetrate all
the way to the perception of the spiritual ; but it experiences
this in pictures which draw their material from the sense-
world. In this way the genuine creations of fantasy are
evidences of the spiritual world even though this does not
penetrate into human consciousness.

By means of this lecture I wished to show one of the ways
in which the Beings of the spiritual world influence the
evolution of life.

It was thus that I strove to discover means by which I might
bring to expression the spiritual world I experienced and yet
in some way connect it with what is adapted to the ordinary
consciousness. I was of the opinion that it was necessary
to speak of the spirit, but that the forms in which one is
accustomed to express oneself in this scientific age must be
respected.

The other lecture I gave in Vienna at the invitation of
the Scientific Club. It dealt with the possibility of a monistic
conception of the world on the basis of a real knowledge of the
spiritual. There I set forth that man by means of his senses
grasps the physical side of reality “ from without ” and by
means of his spiritual awareness grasps its spiritual side “ from
within,” so that all which is experienced appears as an unified
world in which the sensible manifests the spirit and the spirit
reveals itself creatively in the sensible.

This occurred at the time when Haeckel had formulated
his own monistic philosophy through his lecture on


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 155


Monismus als Band Zwischen Religion und Wissenschaft.
Haeckel, who knew of my being in Weimar, sent me a copy
of his speech. I reciprocated his courtesy by sending him
the issue of the newspaper in which my lecture at Vienna was
printed. Whoever reads this lecture must see how opposed
I then was to the monism advanced by Haeckel when occasion
rose for me to express what a man has to say about this
monism for whom the spiritual world is something into which
he sees.

But there was at that time another occasion for me to give
thought to monism in the colouring given it by Haeckel. He
seemed to me a phenomenon of the scientific age. Philosophers
saw in Haeckel the philosophical dilettante, who really knew
nothing except the forms of living creatures to which he applied
the ideas of Darwin in the order in which he had rightly
arranged them, and who explained boldly that nothing further
is required for the forming of a world-conception than what
can be grasped by a Darwinian observer of nature. Students
of nature saw in Haeckel a fantastic person who drew from
natural-scientific observations conclusions which were arbitrary.

Since my work required that I should realize what was the
inner temper of thought about the world and man, about nature
and spirit, as this had been dominant a hundred years earlier
in Jena, when Goethe interjected his natural-scientific ideas
into this thought, I saw in Haeckel an illustration of what
was then thought in this direction. Goethe’s relation to the
views of nature belonging to his period I had to visualize
inwardly in all its details during my work. At the place in
Jena from which came the important stimulations to Goethe
to formulate his ideas on natural phenomena and the being
of nature, Haeckel was at work a century later with the assertion
that he could draw from a knowledge of nature the standard
for a conception of the world.

In addition it happened that, at one of the first meetings
of the Goethe Society in which I participated during my work
at Weimar, Helmholtz read a paper on Goethes Vorahnungen
kommenden naturwissenschaftlichen Ideen.» I was then in-


* Monism as a Bond between Religion and Sctence.
2 Goethe’s Previsions of Coming Scientific ideas.


156 RUDOLF STEINER


formed of much in later natural-scientific ideas which Goethe
had “ previsioned ” by reason of fortunate inspirations ; but
it was also pointed out how Goethe’s errors in this field bore
upon his theory of colour.

When I turned my attention to Haeckel, I wished always
to set before my mind Goethe’s own judgment of the evolution
of natural-scientific views in the century following that which
saw the development of his own; as I listened to Helmholtz
I had before my mind the judgment of Goethe by this
evolution.

I could not then do otherwise than say to myself that, if
one thought of the being of nature in the dominant spiritual
temper of that time, that must necessarily result which Haeckel
thought in utter philosophical naiveté ; those who opposed
him showed everywhere that they restricted themselves to
mere sense-perception and would avoid the further evolution
of this perception by means of thinking.

I had at first no occasion to become personally acquainted
with Haeckel, about whom I was impelled to think very much.
Then his sixtieth birthday came. I was invited to share in
the brilliant festival which was being arranged in Jena. The
human element in this festival attracted me. During the
banquet Haeckel’s son, whom I had come to know at Weimar,
where he was attending the school of painting, came to me
and said that his father wished to have me presented to him.
The son then did this.

Thus I became personally acquainted with Haeckel. He
was a fascinating personality. A pair of eyes which looked
naively into the world, so mild that one had the feeling that
this look must break when the sharpness of thought penetrated
through. This look could endure only sense-impressions,
not thoughts which reveal themselves in things and occurrences.
Every movement of Haeckel’s was directed to the purpose
of admitting what the senses expressed, not to permit the
ruling thoughts to reveal themselves in the senses. I under-
stood why Haeckel liked so much to paint. He surrendered
himself to physical vision. Where he ought to have begun
to think, there he ceased to unfold the activity of his mind
and preferred to fix by means of his brush what he had seen.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 157


Such was the very being of Haeckel. Had he merely unfolded
this, something human unusually stimulating would have been
thus revealed.

But in one corner of his soul something stirred which was
wilfully determined to enforce itself as a definite thought-
content—something derived from quite another attitude
toward the world than his sense for nature. The tendency
of a previous earthly life, with a fanatical turn directed toward
something quite other than nature, craved the satisfaction of
its passion. Religious politics vitally manifested itself from
the lower part of the soul and made use of ideas of nature
for its self-expression.

In such contradictory fashion lived two beings in Haeckel.
A man with mild love-filled sense for nature and in the back-
ground something like a shadowy being with incompletely
thought-out, narrowly limited ideas breathing out fanaticism.
When Haeckel spoke, it was with difficulty that he permitted
the fanaticism to pour forth into his words ; it was as if the
softness which he naturally desired blunted in speech a hidden
demonic something. A human riddle which one could but
love when one beheld it, but about which one could often
speak in wrath when it expressed opinions. Thus I saw
Haeckel before me as he was then preparing in the nineties of
the last century what led later to the furious spiritual battle
that raged over his tendency of thought at the turning-point
between the centuries.

Among the visitors to Weimar was Heinrich von Treitschke.
I had the opportunity of meeting him when Suphan included
me among the guests invited to meet Treitschke at luncheon.
I received a deep impression from this very comprehensive
personality. ‘Treitschke was quite deaf. Others conversed with
him by writing whatever they wished to say on a little tablet
which Treitschke would hand them. The effect of this was
that in any company where he chanced to be his person became
the central point. When one had written down something,
he then talked about this without the development of a real
conversation. He was present in a far more intensive way
for the others than were these for him. This had passed
over into his whole attitude of mind. He spoke without


158 RUDOLF STEINER


having to reckon upon objections such as meet another when
imparting his thoughts in a group of men. It could clearly
be seen how this fact had fixed its roots in his self-consciousness.
Since he could not hear any opposition to his thoughts, he
was strongly impressed with the worth of what he himself
thought.

The first question that Treitschke addressed to me was to
ask where I came from. I replied that I was an Austrian.
Treitschke responded: ‘‘'The Austrians are either entirely
good and gifted men, or else rascals.’ He said such things
as this, and one became aware that the loneliness in which his
mind dwelt because of the deafness drove him to paradoxes,
and found in these a satisfaction. Luncheon guests usually
remained at Suphan’s the whole afternoon. So it was this
time also when Treitschke was among them. One could see
this personality unfold itself. ‘The broad-shouldered man
had something in his spiritual personality also through which
he impressed himself upon a wide circle of his fellow-men.
One could not say that Treitschke lectured. For everything
he said bore a personal character. An earnest craving to
express himself was manifest in every word. How commanding
was his tone even when he was only narrating something !
He wished his words to lay hold upon the emotions of the
other person also. An unusual fire which sparkled from his
eyes accompanied his assertions. ‘The conversation touched
upon Moltke’s conception of the world as this had found
expression in his memoirs. Treitschke objected to the im-
personal way—suggestive of mathematical thinking—in which
Moltke conceived world-phenomena. He could not judge
things otherwise than with a ground-tone of strongly personal
sympathies and antipathies. Men like Treitschke, who stick
so fast in their own personalities, can make an impression on
other men only when the personal element is at the same
time both significant and also interwoven deeply with the
things they are setting forth. ‘This was true of ‘Treitschke.
When he spoke of something historical, he discoursed as if
everything were in the present and he were at hand with all
his pleasure and all his displeasure. One listened to the man,
one received the impression of the personal in unmitigated


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 159


strength ; but one gained no relation to the content of what
he said.

With another visitor to Weimar I came into a friendly
intimacy. This was Ludwig Laistner. A fine personality
he was, in harmony with himself, living in the spiritual in the
most beautiful way. He was at the time literary adviser to
the Cotta publishing house, and as such he had to work at
the Goethe Institute. I was able to spend with him almost
all the leisure time we had. His chief work, Das Rdtzel des
Sphinx, was then already before the world. It is a sort of
history of myths. He follows his own road in the interpreta-
tion of myths. Our conversation dealt very much with the
field which is treated in that very important book. Laistner
rejected all interpretation of fairy-lore, of the mythical, which
maintains the more or less consciously symbolizing fantasy.
He sees in dreams, and especially in nightmares, the original
source of the myth-making conception of nature formed by
the folk. The oppressive nightmare which appears to the
dreamer as a tormenting questioning spirit becomes the
incubus, the elf, the demonic tormentor; the whole troop
of the spirits arise for Ludwig Laistner out of the dreaming
man. The riddling sphinx is only another metamorphosed
form of the simple midday-woman who appears to the sleeper
in the fields at midday and puts questions to him which he
has to answer. All that the dream creates by way of strange
and fanciful and meaningful, tormenting and delightful shapes
—all this Ludwig Laistner traces out in order to point to it
again in the images of fairy-lore and myths. In every con-
versation I had the feeling: ‘‘ The man could so easily find
the way from the creative subconscious in man, which works
in the dream-world, to the super-conscious which touches
the real world of spirit.”’ He listened to my explanations of
this sort with the utmost good will; opposed nothing against
these, but gained no inner relationship to them. In this matter
he, too, was hindered by the fear belonging to that time of
losing the “ scientific”? ground from under him the moment
he should enter into the spiritual as such. But Ludwig
Laistner stood in a special relationship to art and poetry by

t The Riddle of the Sphinx.


160 RUDOLF STEINER


reason of the fact that he traced the mythical into the real
experiences of dreams and not into the abstraction-creating
imagination. Everything creative in man thus took on,
according to his view, a world-significance. In his rare inner
serenity and mental self-sufficiency he was a discriminating
poetic personality. His utterances in regard to every sort of
thing had a certain poetic quality. Conceptions which are
unpoetic he simply did not know at all. In Weimar, and later
during a visit in Stuttgart, when I had the pleasure of living
near him, I spent the most delightful hours in his company.
Beside him stood his wife, who entered completely into his
spiritual nature. For her Ludwig Laistner was really all
that bound her to the world. He lived only a short while
after his sojourn at Weimar. The wife followed her vanished
husband after an exceedingly brief interval; the world was
empty for her when Ludwig Laistner was no longer in it.
An altogether lovable woman, in the true sense of that word.
She always knew how to be absent when she feared she might
disturb ; she never failed when there was anything requiring
her care. Like a mother she stood by the side of Ludwig
Laistner, whose refined spirituality was contained in a very
delicate body.

With Ludwig Laistner I could talk as with few other persons
regarding the idealism of the German philosophers—Fichte,
Hegel, Schelling. He had a vital sense for the reality of the
ideal that lived in these philosophers. When I spoke to him
once of my solicitude regarding the one-sidedness of the
natural-scientific world-conception, he said: ‘‘ Those people
have no sense of the significance of the creative in the human
soul. They do not know that in this creative within man
there lives a cosmic content just as in the phenomena
of nature.”

In dealing with the literary and the artistic, Ludwig Laistner
did not lose touch with the directly human. Very distinctive
were his bearing and approach ; whoever possessed an under-
standing for such things felt the significant element in his
personality very quickly after forming his acquaintance. The
official researchers in mythology were opposed to his view ;
they scarcely paid any attention to it. Thus there remained


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 161


scarcely observed at all in the spiritual life of the time a man
to whom by reason of his inner worth belonged the very first
place. From his book The Riddle of the Sphinx the science of
mythology might have received entirely fresh impulses; it
remained almost wholly without influence.

Ludwig Laistner had at that time to undertake for the Cotta
Bibliothek der Welthteratur editions of the complete works
of Schopenhauer and of selections from Jean Paul. He en-
trusted both of these to me. And thus I had to unite with
my Weimar tasks the thorough working through of the
pessimistic philosopher and of the paradoxical genius, Jean
Paul. I devoted myself to both undertakings with the deepest
interest, because I loved to transplant myself into attitudes
of mind utterly opposed to my own. Ludwig Laistner had
no ulterior motive in making me the editor of Schopenhauer
and of Jean Paul; the assignment was due entirely to the
conversations we had held about the two persons. Indeed,
the thought of entrusting these tasks to me came to him during
a conversation.

There were then living in Weimar Hans Olden and Frau
Grete Olden. They gathered about them a special group of
those who desired to live in ‘‘ the present ” in contrast with
everything which considered the very central point in a spiritual
existence to consist in the furtherance, through the Goethe
Institute and the Goethe Society, of a life that was past.
Into this group I was admitted; and I look back upon all
that I experienced there with great appreciation.

However fixed one’s idea might have become in the Institute
through association with the “ philological method,” they must
again become free and fluid when one entered the home of
the Oldens, where every one was received with interest who
had the idea in his head that a new way of thinking must
find place among men, but likewise every one who in the depths
of his soul found painful many an old cultural prejudice
and was thinking about future ideals.

Hans Olden was known to the world as the author of slight
theatrical pieces such as Die Offizielle Frau*; in his Weimar
circle at that time his life expressed itself quite otherwise.

* The Official Wife.
12


162 RUDOLF STEINER |


He had a heart receptive to the highest interests which were
manifest in the spiritual life of that time. What lived in the
plays of Ibsen, what thundered in the spirit of Nietzsche—
in regard to these things there were endless discussions in his
house, but always stimulating.

Gabrielle Reuter, who was then writing the novel, Aus
guter Familie,t which soon afterward won for her by storm
her literary place, was a member of Olden’s circle, and filled
it with earnest questions of all sorts which were then stirring
men in reference to the life of woman. .

Hans Olden could be captivating when, with his rather
sceptical way of thinking, he instantly put an end to a con-
versation which was about to lose itself in sentimentality ;
but he himself could become sentimental when others fell
into easy-going ways. The desire in this circle was to evolve
the deepest ‘‘ understanding”? for everything “ human” ;
but criticism was unsparing of whatever did not suit one in
this or that human thing. Hans Olden was penetrated through
and through with the idea that it was the only sensible course
for a man to apply himself through literature or art to the
great ideals about which there was a good deal of talk in his
circle; but he was too scornful of men to realize his ideals
in his own productions. He thought that ideals could live
in a social circle of select men, but that any one would be
“ childish ” who should think that he could bring forth such
ideals before a greater public. At that very time he was
making a beginning toward the artistic realization of wider
interests by means of his Kluge Kdte2 ‘This play had only
a moderate success in Weimar. This confirmed him in the
view that one should give to the public that to which it has
now attained, and should keep one’s higher interests for the
small circle which has an understanding for these.

To a far greater degree than Hans Olden was Frau Grete
Olden filled with this idea. She was the most complete
feminine sceptic in her estimation of the world’s capacity
for receiving things spiritual. What she wrote was plainly
derived from a certain form of misanthropy. |

What Hans Olden and Grete Olden offered to their circle

t Of a Good Family 2 Clever Kate.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 163


out of such a temper of mind breathed in the atmosphere of
an zstheticizing world-feeling, which was capable of reaching
up to the most earnest matters, but which did not hesitate
to pass by many of the most serious questions with a vein
of light humour.


XVI


I must number among the happiest hours of my life those
which I passed with Gabrielle Reuter, with whom I had the
privilege of intimate friendship by reason of this circle. A
personality she was who bore within her profound questions
of humanity, and who laid hold of them with a certain
radicalism of the heart and the sensibilities. In regard to
everything which seemed to her a contradiction in the social
life she stood with her whole soul half-way between tradi-
tional prejudices and the primal claims of human nature.
She looked upon woman, who both by life and by education
is forced from without into subjection to this traditional
prejudice, and who must experience in sorrow that which
from the depths of the soul would fain come forth in life
as ‘truth’. Radicalism of the heart expressed in a manner
serene and sagacious suffused with artistic feeling and marked
by an impressive gift for form—this revealed itself as some-
thing great in Gabrielle Reuter. Extraordinarily delightful
were the conversations one could have with her while she
was working at her book Of a Good Family. As I reflect
upon the past I see myself standing with her at a street
corner, in the blazing heat of the sun, discussing for more
than an hour questions by which she was stirred. Gabrielle
Reuter could talk in the finest manner, never for a moment
losing her serene bearing, about things over which other
persons become at once visibly excited. ‘‘ Exulting to heaven,
grieved even to death ’’—this, indeed, was her feeling within,
but it remained in the soul and did not find its way into her
words. Gabrielle Reuter laid strong emphasis upon what-
ever she had to say, but she did so not by means of the voice


but only through the soul. I believe that this art of keeping
164


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 165


the articulation entirely a matter of the soul, while the audible
conversation flows evenly along, was peculiar to her, and it
seems to me that in writing she has developed this unique
art into her very charming style.

The admiration felt for Gabrielle Reuter in the Olden circle
was something inexpressibly beautiful. Hans Olden said to
me many times very solemnly: “ This woman is great.
Would that I also,” he added, ‘‘ could rise to such a height
and place before the outer world that which moves in the
depths of my soul!”

This circle shared in its own way in the Weimar Goethe
affairs. It was in a tone of irony, but never of frivolous
scofiing, and yet often esthetically angry, that the “ present ”
here passed judgment on the “ past.” A whole day long
would Olden work at his typewriter after a Goethe gathering
in order to write an account of the experience, which, accord-
ing to his feeling, would give the judgment of a man of the
world concerning the Goethe prophets.

Into this tone soon fell also the one other man of the world,
Otto Erich Hartleben. He seldom ever missed a Goethe
meeting. Yet at first I could never discover why he came.

It was in the circle of journalists, theatre people, and writers
who gathered on the evenings of the Goethe festivals at the
Hotel Chemnitius, apart from the learned celebrities, that I
became acquainted with Otto Erich Hartleben. Why he was
sitting there I could at once perceive. For he was in his
element when he could live himself out in conversations such
as were then customary. ‘There he would remain for a long
while. He could not go away. In this way I once chanced
to be with him and others. The rest of us were “ of neces-
sity’ the next morning at the Goethe meeting; Hartleben
was not there. But I had already become fond of him and
was concerned at his absence. So at the close of the meeting
I looked for him at his hotel room. He was still sleeping. I
woke him, and told him that the principal meeting of the
Goethe Society was already at an end. I did not understand
why he had wished to participate in the Goethe festival in this
fashion. But he answered in such a way that I saw it was
entirely natural to him to come to Weimar to attend a Goethe


166 RUDOLF STEINER


gathering in order to sleep during the programme—for he
slept away the chief thing for which the others had come.

I got close to Otto Erich Hartleben in a peculiar fashion.
At one of the suppers to which I have referred there was a
prolonged conversation regarding Schopenhauer. Many words
of admiration and of disapproval had been uttered concerning
the philosopher. Hartleben had for a long while been silent.
Then he entered into the tumultuous revelations of the con-
versation : “ People are aroused by him, but he means nothing
for life? Meanwhile he was looking at me with a childish
helplessness ; he wished me to say something, for he had
heard that I was then occupied with Schopenhauer. I said:
“ Schopenhauer I must consider a narrow-minded genius.”
Hartleben’s eyes sparkled ; he became restless ; he emptied his
glass and filled another. In this moment he had locked me
up in his heart ; his friendship for me was fixed. © Narrow-
minded genius! ’—that suited him. I might just as well
have used the expression about some other personality, and
it would have been the same thing to him. It interested him
deeply to think that one could hold the opinion that even a
genius could be narrow-minded.

For me the Goethe gatherings were fatiguing. For most
persons in Weimar during these meetings were either in one
circle or the other according to their interests—either in that
of the discoursing or dining philologists or in that of the
Olden and Hartleben colouring. I had to take part in both.
My interests impelled me in both directions. That went
very well since the sessions of one came at night and of the
other during the day. But I was not privileged to live after
the manner of Otto Erich. I could not sleep during the day
sessions. I loved the many-sidedness of life, and was really
just as happy at midday in the Institute circle with Suphan,
with whom Hartleben had never become acquainted—since
this did not appeal to him—as Iwas in the evenings with
Hartleben and his like-minded companions.

The philosophical tendencies of a succession of men revealed
themselves to my mind during my Weimar days. For in the
case of each one with whom it was possible to converse about
questions of the world and of life, such conversations developed


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 167


in the intimate relationships of thac time. And many persons
interested in such discussions came through Weimar.

I passed through these experiences during that period of
life in which the soul is inclined to turn strongly to the outer
life ; when it must find its firm union with that life. T’o me
the philosophies there expressing themselves were a fragment
of the outer world. And I was forced to realize that even
until that time I had really lived but very little in touch with
an external world. When I withdrew from some living inter-
course, then I always became aware at once that up to that
time the only trustworthy world for me had been the spiritual
world, which I saw in inner vision. With that world I could
readily unite myself. So my thoughts often took the direction
of saying to myself how hard had been the way for me through
the senses to the outer world during all my childhood and
youth. It was always difficult for me to fix in my memory
such external data, for example, as one must assimilate in the.
realm of science. I had to look at a natural object again and
again in order to know what it was called, in what scientific
class of objects it was listed, and the like. I might even say
that the sense-world was for me somewhat like a shadow or
a picture. It passed before my soul in pictures, whereas my
relationship to the spiritual bore always the character of
reality.

All this I experienced in the highest degree during the
nineties in Weimar. I was then giving the final touches to
my Philosophy of Spiritual Activity. I wrote down—so it
seemed to me—the thoughts which the spiritual world had
given me up to my thirtieth year. All that had come to me
from the outer world was only in the nature of a stimulus.

This I experienced especially when in vital intercourse with
men in Weimar. I discussed questions of philosophy. I
had to enter into them, into their way of thinking and emotional
inclinations ; they by no means entered into that which I had
inwardly experienced and was still experiencing. I entered
with vital intensity into that which others perceived and
thought ; but I could not cause my own inner spiritual activity
to flow over into this world of experience. In my own being
I had always to remain behind, within myself. Indeed, my


168 RUDOLF STEINER


world was separated, as if by a thin partition, from all the
outer world.

In my own soul I lived in a world that bordered on the
outer world, but it was always necessary for me to step across
a boundary if I wished to have anything to do with the outer
world. I was in the most vital intercourse with others, but
in every instance I had to pass from my world, as if through
a door, in order to engage in this intercourse. ‘This made it
seem to me as if each time that I entered into the outer world
I was making a visit. Yet this did not hinder me from giving
myself up to the most vital participation with one whom
I was thus visiting ; indeed, I felt entirely at home while on
such a visit.

Thus it was with persons, and thus also with world-concepts.
I liked to go to Suphan ; I liked to go to Hartleben. Suphan
never went to Hartleben ; Hartleben never went to Suphan.
Neither could enter into the characteristic ways of thinking
and feeling of the other. With Suphan, and equally with
Hartleben, I was as if at home. But neither Suphan nor
Hartleben really came to me. Even when they came to me,
they still remained by themselves. To my spiritual world
they could, in actual experience, make no visit.

I perceived the most varied world-concepts before my
mind—the natural-scientific, the idealistic, and many shades
of each. I felt the impulse to enter into these, to move about
in them; but into my spiritual world they cast no light. To
me they were phenomena standing before me, not realities in
which I could truly have lived.

Thus it was in my soul when life thrust me into immediate
contact with such world-concepts as those of Haeckel and
Nietzsche. I realized their relative correctness. With my
attitude of mind I could never so deal with them as to say:
“This is right ; that is wrong.” In that case I should have
felt what was vital in them to be something alien to me. But
I found one no more alien than the other ; for I felt at home
only in the spiritual world of my perception, and I could feel
as if at home in every other.

When I describe the thing thus it may seem as if every-
thing were to me fundamentally a matter of indifference.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 169


But such was by no means the case. In this matter I had an
entirely different feeling. I was conscious of a full partict-
pation in the other because I did not alienate myself from it
by reason of the fact that I bore my own along with me both
in judgment and feeling.

I had, for instance, innumerable conversations with Otto
Harnach, the gifted author of Goethe in der Epoch seiner
Vollendung,t who often came at that time to Weimar as he
was working at Goethe’s art studies. This man, who later
became involved in a terrible tragedy, I really loved. I could
be wholly Otto Harnach while I was talking with him. I
received his thoughts, entered into them as a visitor—in the
sense I have indicated—and yet as if at home. It did not even
occur to me to invite him to visit me. He could only live
alone. He was so woven into his own thought that he felt
as something alien to himself everything that was not his
own. He would have been able to listen to talk about my
world only in such a way that he would have treated it as the
Kantian “thing in itself’? which lies on the other side of
human consciousness. I felt spiritually obliged to deal with
his world as such that I did not have to relate myself to
it in Kantian fashion but must carry my consciousness over
into it.

I lived thus not without spiritual perils and difficulties.
Whoever turns away from everything that does not accord
with his way of thinking will not be imposed upon by the
relative correctness of the various world-concepts. He can
without reserve experience the fascination of that which is
thought out in a certain direction. Indeed, this fascination
of intellectualism is now in the life of very many persons.
They easily adapt themselves to thought which is quite unlike
their own. But whoever possesses a world of vision, such as
the spiritual world must be, such a person sees the correctness
of various “‘standpoints”’; and he must be constantly on
guard within his soul not to be too strongly drawn to the one
side or the other.

But one becomes conscious of the “ being of the outer
world ” if one can with love yield oneself up to it and yet

t Goethe at the Time of His Maturity.


170 RUDOLF STEINER


must always turn back to the inner world of the spirit. But
one also learns in this process really to live in the spiritual.

The various intellectual ‘‘ standpoints ’’ repudiate one
another ; spiritual vision sees in them simply “ standpoints.”
Seen from each of these the world appears differently. It is
as if one should photograph a house from various sides. ‘The
pictures are different ; the house is the same. If one walks
around the actual house one receives a comprehensive impres-
sion. If one stands really within the spiritual world one
allows for the “ correctness ” of a standpoint. One looks upon
a photographic impression from one “‘ standpoint ’’ as some-
thing “correct.” Then one asks about the correctness and
the significance of the standpoint.

It was in this way that I had to approach Nietzsche, and
likewise Haeckel. Nietzsche, I felt, photographs the world
from one standpoint to which a profound human personality
was driven in the second half of the nineteenth century if he
had to live upon the spiritual content of that age alone, if the
perception of the spiritual would not break into his conscious-
ness, and yet his will in the subconscious strove with unusual
force toward the spiritual. Such was the picture of Nietzsche
that lived in my soul ; it showed me the personality that did
not perceive the spiritual but in which the spirit battled
against the unspiritual views of the time.


i etl ele


XVII


At this time there was established in Germany a branch of
the Ethical Culture Society which had originated in America.
It seems obvious that in a materialistic age one ought only to
approve an effort in the direction of a deepening of ethical life.
But this effort arose from a fundamental conception that
aroused in me the profoundest objections.

The leader of this movement said to himself: ‘‘ One stands
to-day in the midst of the many opposing conceptions of the
world and of life as regards the life of thought and the religious
and social feelings. In the realm of these conceptions men
cannot be brought to understand one another. It is a bad
thing when the moral feelings which men ought to have for
one another are drawn into the sphere of these opposing
opinions. Where will it lead if those who feel differently in
matters religious and social, or who differ from one another in
the life of thought, shall also express their diversity in such
a way as thus to determine also their moral relationships with
respect to those who think and feel differently. Therefore
one must seek for a foundation for purely human ethics which
shall be independent of every world-concept, which each one
can recognize no matter how he may think in reference to the
various spheres of existence.”

This ethical movement made upon me a profound impres-
sion. It had to do with views of mine which I held to be
most important. For I saw before me the deep abyss which
the way of thinking characteristic of the most recent times
had created between that which occurs in nature and the
content of the moral and spiritual world.

Men have come to a conception of nature which would
represent the evolution of the world as being without moral
or spiritual content. They think hypothetically of a purely


171


172 RUDOLF STEINER


material primal state of the world. They seek for the laws
according to which from this primal state there could gradu-
ally have been formed the living, that which is endued with
soul, that which is permeated with spirit in the form charac-
teristic of this present age. If one is logical in such a way
of thinking—so I then said to myself—then the spiritual and
moral cannot be conceived as anything other than a result of
the work of nature. Then one faces facts of nature which are
from the spiritual and moral point of view quite indifferent,
which in their own process of evolution have brought forth
the moral as a by-product, and which finally with moral
indifference likewise bury it.

I could, of course, perceive clearly that the sagacious thinkers
did not draw these conclusions; that they simply accepted
what the facts of nature seemed to say to them, and thought
in regard to these matters that one ought simply to allow the
world-significance of the spiritual and moral to rest upon its
own foundation. But this view seemed to me of little force.
It made no difference to me that people said: ‘‘ In the field
of natural occurrences one must think in a way that has no
relation to morality, and what one thus thinks constitutes
hypotheses ; but in regard to the moral each man may form
his own ideas.’’ I said to myself that whoever thinks in regard
to nature even in the least detail in the manner then customary,
such a person cannot ascribe to the spiritual-moral any self-
existent, self-supporting reality. If physics, chemistry, biology
remain as they are—and to all they seem to be unassailable—
then the entities which men in these spheres consider to be
reality will absorb all reality ; and the spiritual-moral could be
nothing more than the foam arising from ¢/zs reality.

I looked into another reality—a reality which is spiritual
and moral as well as natural. It seemed to me a weakness in
the effort to attain knowledge not to be willing to press through
to that reality. I was forced to say to myself according to
my spiritual perception: “‘ Above the natural occurrences, and
also the spiritual-moral, there is a veritable reality, which
reveals itself morally but which in moral activity has at the
same time the power to embody itself as an occurrence which
attains to equal validity with an occurrence in nature.” I


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 173


thought that this seemed indifferent to the spiritual-moral only
because the latter had lost its original unity of being with this
reality, as the corpse of a man has lost its unity of being with
that in man which is endued with soul and with life.

To me this was certain; for I did not merely think it: I
perceived it as truth in the spiritual facts and beings of the
world. In the so-called ‘ ethicists”? there seemed to me to
have been born men to whom such an insight appeared to be
a matter of indifference ; they revealed more or less uncon-
sciously the opinion that one can do nothing with conflicting
philosophies ; let us save the principles of ethics, in regard
to which there is no need to inquire how they are rooted in
the world-reality. Undisguised scepticism as to all endeavour
after a world-concept seemed to me to manifest itself in this
phenomenon of the times. Unconsciously frivolous did any-
one seem to me who maintained that, if we let world-concepts
rest on their own foundations, we shall thus be able to spread
morality again among men. I took many a walk with Hans
and Grete Olden through the Weimar parks, during which
I expressed myself in radical fashion on the theme of this
frivolity. “‘ Whoever presses forward with his perception as far
as is possible for man,’ I said, “‘ will find a world-event out of
which there appears before him the reality of the moral just
as of the natural.’”” In the recently founded Zukunft I wrote
a trenchant article against what I called ethics uprooted
from all world-reality, which could not possess any force.
The article met with a distinctly unfriendly reception. How,
indeed, could it be otherwise, when these “‘ ethicists ’ them-
selves had been obliged to come forward as the saviours of
civilization ?

To me this matter was of immeasurable importance. I
wished to do battle at a critical point for the confirmation of
a world-concept which revealed ethics as firmly rooted along
with all other reality. Therefore, I was forced to battle
against this ethics which had no philosophical basis.

I went from Weimar to Berlin in order to seek for oppor-
tunities to present my view through the press.

I called on Herman Grimm, whom I held in high honour.
I was received with the greatest possible friendliness. But it


174 RUDOLF STEINER


seemed to Herman Grimm very strange that I, who was full
of zeal for my cause, should bring this zeal into his house.
He listened to me rather unresponsively, as I talked to him
of my view regarding the ethicists. I thought I could interest
him in this matter which to me seemed so vital. But I did
not in the least succeed. When, however, he heard me say
‘‘T wish to do something,” he replied, ‘‘ Well, go to these
people; I am more or less acquainted with the majority
of them; they are all quite amiable men.” I felt as if cold
water had been thrown over me. The man whom I so highly
honoured felt nothing of what I desired ; he thought I would
‘think quite sensibly” when I had convinced myself by a
call on the “‘ ethicists”? that they were all quite congenial
persons.

I found in others no greater interest than in Herman
Grimm. So it was at that time for me. In all that pertained
to my perceptions of the spiritual I had to work entirely alone.
I lived in the spiritual world ; no one in my circle of acquaint-
ances followed me there. My intercourse consisted in excur-
sions into the worlds of others. I loved these excursions.
Moreover, my reverence for Herman Grimm was not in the
least diminished. But I had a good schooling in the art of
understanding in love that which made no move toward
understanding what I carried in my own soul.

This was then the nature of my loneliness in Weimar, where
I had such an extensive social relationship. But I did not ascribe
to these persons the fact that they condemned me to such lone-
liness. Indeed, I perceived that unconsciously striving in many
people was the impulse toward a world-concept which would
penetrate to the very roots of existence. I perceived how
a manner of thinking which could move securely while it had
to do only with that which lies immediately at hand yet
weighed heavily upon their souls. ‘‘ Nature is the whole
world ’—such was that manner of thinking. In regard to
this way of thinking men believed that they must find it to
be correct, and they suppressed in their souls everything
which seemed to say one could not find this to be correct.
It was in this light that much revealed itself to me in my
spiritual surroundings at that time. It was the time in


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 175


which my Philosophy of Spiritual Activity, whose essential
content I had long borne within me, was receiving its
final form.

As soon as it was off the press, I sent a copy to Eduard
von Hartmann. He read it with close attention, for I soon
received back his copy of the book with his detailed
marginal comments from beginning to end. Besides, he
wrote me, among other things, that the book ought to
bear the title: Erkenntnistheoretischer Phdnomenalismus und
ethischer Individualismus.t He had utterly misunderstood
the sources of the ideas and my objective. He thought
of the sense-world after the Kantian fashion even though he
modified this. He considered this world to be the effect
produced by reality upon the soul through the senses. This
reality, according to his view, can never enter into the field of
perception which the soul embraces through consciousness. It
must remain beyond consciousness. Only by means of logical
inferences can man form hypothetical conceptions regarding
it. The sense-world, therefore, does not constitute in itself
an objective existence, but is merely a subjective phenomenon
existing in the soul only so long as this embraces the pheno-
menon within consciousness.

I had sought to prove in my book that no unknown lies
behind the sense-world, but that within it lies the spiritual.
And concerning the world of human ideas, I sought to show
that these have their existence in that spiritual world. There-
fore the reality of the sense-world is hidden from human
consciousness only so long as the soul perceives by means of
the senses alone. When, in addition to the sense-perceptions,
the ideas are also experienced, then the sense-world in its
objective reality is embraced within consciousness. Knowing
does not consist in a copying of a real but the soul’s living
‘entrance into that real. Within the consciousness occurs that
advance from the still unreal sense-world to the reality of this
world.

In truth is the sense-world also a spiritual world; and the
soul lives together with this known spiritual world while it
extends its consciousness over it. The goal of the process of

1 Phenomenalism in the Theory of Knowledge and Individualism in Ethics.


176 RUDOLF STEINER


consciousness is the conscious experience of the spiritual world,
in the visible presence of which everything is resolved into
spirit.

I placed the world of spiritual reality over against pheno-
menalism. Eduard von Hartmann thought that I intended to
remain within the phenomena and abandon the thought of
arriving from these at any sort of objective reality. He con-
ceived the thing as if by my way of thinking I were condemning
the human mind to permanent incapacity to reach any sort
of reality, to the necessity of moving always within a world
of appearances having existence only in the conception of the
mind (as a phenomenon).

Thus my endeavour to reach the spirit through the expansion
of consciousness was set over against the view that “ spirit ”
exists solely in the human conception and apart from this can
only be “ thought.’”’ This was fundamentally the view of the
age to which I had to introduce my Philosophy of Spiritual
Activity. The experience of the spiritual had in this view of
the matter shrivelled up to a mere experience of human con-
ceptions, and from these no way could be discovered to a real
(objective) spiritual world.

I desired to show how in that which is subjectively experi-
enced the objective spiritual shines and becomes the true
content of consciousness ; Eduard von Hartmann opposed me
with the opinion that whoever maintains this view remains
fixed in the sensibly apparent and is not dealing at all with an
objective reality.

It was inevitable, therefore, that Eduard von Hartmann must
consider my “ ethical individualism ” dubious.

For what was this based upon in my Philosophy of Spiritual
Activity ? 1 saw at the centre of the soul’s life its complete
union with the spiritual world. I sought so to express this
fact that an imaginary difficulty which disturbed many persons
might resolve itself into nothing. That is, it is supposed that,
in order to know, the soul—or the ego—must differentiate
itself from that which is known, and therefore must not merge
itself with this. But this differentiation is also possible when
the soul swings, like a pendulum, as it were, between the union
of itself with the spiritual real on the one hand and the sense


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 177


of itself on the other. The soul becomes “ unconscious ”’ in
sinking down into the objective spirit, but with the sense of
itself it brings the completely spiritual into consciousness.

If, now, it is possible that the personal individuality of men
can sink down into the spiritual reality of the world, then in
this reality it is possible to experience also the world of moral
impulses. Morality becomes a content which reveals itself
out of the spiritual world within the human individuality ; and
the consciousness expanded into the spiritual presses forward
to the perception of this revelation. What impels man to
moral behaviour is a revelation of the spiritual world in the
experiencing of the spiritual world through the soul. And
this experience takes place within the individuality of man.
If man perceives himself in moral behaviour as acting in
reciprocal relation with the spiritual world, he is then experi-
encing his freedom. For the spiritual world works within the
soul, not by way of compulsion, but in such a way that man
must develop freely the activity which enables him to receive
the spiritual.

In pointing out that the sense-world is in reality a world of
spiritual being and that man, as a soul, by means of a true know-
ledge of the sense-world is weaving and living in a world of spirit
—herein lies the first objective of my Philosophy of Spiritual
Activity. In characterizing the moral world as one whose
being shines into the world of spirit experienced by the soul
and thereby enables man to arrive at this moral world freely—
herein lies the second objective. The moral being of man is
thus sought in its completely individual unity with the ethical
impulses of the spiritual world. I had the feeling that the first
part of The Philosophy of Spiritual Activity and the second
part form a spiritual organism, a genuine unity. Eduard von
Hartmann was forced, however, to feel that they were coupled
together quite arbitrarily as phenomenalism in the theory of
knowledge and individualism in ethics.

The form taken by the ideas of the book was determined by
my own state of soul at that time. Through my experience
of the spiritual world in direct perception, nature revealed
itself to me as spirit; I desired to create a spiritual natural
science. In the self-knowledge of the human soul through


te


178 RUDOLF STEINER


direct perception, the moral world entered into the soul as its
entirely individual experience.

In the experience of spirit lay the source of the form which
I gave to my book. It is, first of all, the presentation of an
anthroposophy which receives its direction from nature and
from the place of man in nature with his own individual moral
being.

In a certain sense The Philosophy of Spiritual Activity —
released from me and introduced into the external world that
which the first period of my life had brought before me in
the form of ideas through the destiny which led me to
experience the natural-scientific riddles of existence. The
further way could now consist in nothing else than a struggle
to arrive at ideal forms for the spiritual world itself.

The forms of knowledge which man receives through
sense-perception I represented as inner anthroposophical
experience of the spirit on the part of the human soul. The
fact that I had not yet used the term anthroposophic was due
to the circumstance that my mind was always striving first
to attain perception and scarcely at all after a terminology.
My task was to form ideas which could express the human
soul’s experience of the spiritual world.

An inner wrestling after the formation of such ideas com-
prises the content of that episode of my life which I passed
through between my thirtieth and fortieth years of age. At
that time fate placed me usually in an outer life-activity which
did not so correspond with my inner life that it could have
served to bring this to expression.


XVIII


To this time belongs my entrance into that circle of spiritual]
experience in which Nietzsche lingered.

My first acquaintance with Nietzsche’s writings belongs to
the year 1889. Previous to that I had never read a line of
his. Upon the substance of my ideas as these find expression in
The Philosophy of Spiritual Activity, Nietzsche’s thought had
not the least influence. I read what he had written with the
feeling of being drawn on by the style which he had developed
out of his relation to life. I felt that his soul was a being
that was impelled by reason of inheritance and attraction
to give attention to everything which the spiritual life of his
age had brought forth, but which always felt within: “ What
has this spiritual life to do with me? ‘There must be another
world in which I can live; so much does life in this world
jar upon me.” ‘This feeling made him a spiritually incensed
critic of his time; but a critic who was by his own criticism
reduced to illness—who had to experience illness and could
only dream of health—of his own health. At first he sought
for means to make his dream of health the content of his own
life ; and thus he sought with Richard Wagner, with Schopen-
hauer, with modern positivism to dream as if he wished to
make the dream in his soul into a reality. One day he dis-
covered that he had only dreamed. ‘Then he began with every
power belonging to his spirit to seek for realities—realities
which must lie ‘‘ somewhere or other.” He found no roads
to these realities, but only yearnings. Then these yearnings
became to him realities. He dreamed again, but the mighty
power of his soul created out of these dreams realities of the
inner man which, without that heaviness which had so long
characterized the ideas of humanity, floated within him in a
mood of soul joyful but resting upon foundations contrary to


the spirit of the age, the “ Zeitgeist.”
179


180 RUDOLF STEINER


It was thus that I viewed Nietzsche. The freely floating
weightless character of his ideas attracted me. I found that
this free-floating element in him had brought to maturity many
thoughts that bore a resemblance to those which had shaped
themselves in me by ways quite unlike those of Nietzsche’s
mind.

Thus it was possible for me to write in 1895 in the preface
to my book Nietzsche—ein Kampfer gegen seiner Zett.:* “ As
early as 1886 in my little volume, The Theory of Knowledge in
Goethe’s World-Conception, the same sentiment is expressed ’””—
thatis, the same as appears in certain works of Nietzsche. But
what attracted me particularly was that one could read
Nietzsche without coming upon anything which strove to
make the reader a ‘“‘ dependant ” of Nietzsche’s. One could
gladly experience without reserve his spiritual illumination ;
in this experience one felt oneself to be wholly free; for one
had the impression that his words began to laugh if one had
attributed to them the intention of being assented to, as is the
case when one reads Haeckel or Spencer.

Thus I ventured to explain my relationship to Nietzsche
in the book mentioned above by using the words which he
himself had used in his book on Schopenhauer: “ I belong
among those readers of Nietzsche, who, after having read their
first page from him, know for a certainty that they will read
every page and listen to every word which he has ever uttered.
My confidence in him continued from that time on... . I
understood him as if he had written for me, in order to express
me intelligibly, but immodestly, foolishly.” Shortly before
I began the actual writing of that book, Nietzsche’s sister,
Elizabeth Foérster-Nietzsche, appeared one day at the Goethe
and Schiller Institute. She was taking the preliminary steps
toward the establishment of a Nietzsche Institute, and wished
to learn how the Goethe and Schiller Institute was managed.
Soon afterward there came to Weimar the editor of Nietzsche’s
works, Fritz Koegel, and I made his acquaintance.

Later I got into a serious disagreement with Frau Elizabeth
Foérster-Nietzsche. Her emotional and lovable spirit claimed
at that time my deepest sympathy. I suffered inexpressibly

t Nietzsche as the Adversary of His Age.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 181


by reason of the disagreement. A complicated situation had
brought this to pass; I was compelled to defend myself
against accusations; I know that it was all necessary, that
the happy hours I was permitted to spend among the Nietzsche
archives in Naumburg and Weimar should now lie under a
veil of bitter memories ; yet I am grateful to Frau Forster-
Nietzsche for having taken me, on the first of many visits I
made to her, into the chamber of Friedrich Nietzsche. There
he lay on a lounge enveloped in darkness, with his beautiful
forehead—artist’s and thinker’s forehead in one. It was early
afternoon. Those eyes which in their blindness yet revealed
the soul, now merely mirrored a reflection of the surroundings
which could find no longer any way to reach the soul. One
stood there and Nietzsche knew it not. And yet one could
have believed, looking upon that brow permeated by the
spirit, that this was the expression of a soul which had all
the forenoon long been shaping thoughts within, and which
now would fain rest a while. An inner shudder which seized
my soul may have signified that this also underwent a change
in sympathy with the genius whose gaze was directed toward
me and yet failed to rest upon me. The passivity of my gaze
so long fixed won in return a comprehension of his own gaze :
his longing always in vain to enable the soul-forces of the eye
to work.

And so there appeared before my soul the soul of Nietzsche,
hovering above his head, boundless in its spiritual light ;
surrendered wholly to the spiritual worlds, longing after its
environment but failing to discover it; and yet chained to
the body, which would have to do with the soul only so long
as the soul longed for this present world. Nietzsche’s soul
was still there, but only from without could it hold to the
body, that body which so long as the soul remained within it
had offered resistance to the full unfolding of its light.

I had ere this read the Nietzsche who had written; now
I perceived the Nietzsche who bore within his body ideas
drawn from widely extended spiritual regions—ideas which
still sparkled in their beauty even though they had lost on the
way their primal illuminating powers. A soul which from
previous earthly lives bore rich wealth of light, but which


182 RUDOLF STEINER


could not in this life cause all its light to shine. I had admired
what Nietzsche wrote ; but now I saw a luminous form. behind
that which I had airtel

In my thoughts I could only stammer over what I then
beheld; and this stammering is in effect my book, Nietzsche
as the Adversary of His Age. ‘That the book is no more
than a stammering conceals what is none the less true, that
the form of Nietzsche I beheld inspired the book.

Frau Foérster-Nietzsche then requested me to set Nietzsche’s
library in order. In this way I was enabled to spend several
weeks in the Nietzsche archives at Naumburg. In this way
also I formed an intimate friendship with Fritz Koegel. It
was a beautiful task which placed before my eyes the books
in which Nietzsche himself had read. His spirit lived in the
impressions which these volumes made upon me—a volume
of Emerson’s filled throughout with marginal comments
showing all the signs of an absorbing study ; Guyau’s writings
bearing the same indications; books containing violent
critical comments from his hand—a great number of marginal
comments in which one could see his ideas in germinal form.

A penetrating conception of Nietzsche’s final creative period
shone clearly before me as I read his marginal comments on
Eugen Diihring’s chief philosophical work. Diuhring there
develops the thought that one can conceive the cosmos at a
single moment as a combination of elementary parts. Thus
the history of the world would be the series of all such possible
combinations. When once these should have been formed,
then the first would have to return, and the whole series would
be repeated. If anything thus exists in reality, it must have
occurred innumerable times in the past, and must occur again
innumerable times in future. Thus we should arrive at the
conception of the eternal repetition of similar states of the
cosmos. Diihring rejects this thought as an impossibility.
Nietzsche reads this; he receives from it an impression,
which works further in the depths of his soul and finally takes
form within him as “the return of the similar,” which,
together with the idea of the “ superman,” dominates his final
creative period.

I was profoundly impressed—indeed shocked—by the


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 183


impression which I received from thus following Nietzsche
in his reading. For I saw what an opposition there was
between the character of Nietzsche’s spirit and that of his
contemporaries. Diihring, the extreme positivist, who rejects
everything which is not the result of a system of reasoning
directed with cold and mathematical regularity, considers “ the
eternal repetition of the similar” as an absurdity, and sets up
the idea only to show its impossibility ; but Nietzsche must
take this up as his solution of the world-riddle, as an intuition
arising from the depths of his own soul.

Thus Nietzsche stands in absolute opposition to much
which pressed in upon him as the content of the thought and
feeling of his age. This driving pressure he so receives that
it pains him deeply, and it is in grief, in inexpressible sorrow
of spirit, that he shapes the content of his own soul. ‘This
was the tragedy of his creative work.

This reached its climax while he was sketching the outlines
for his last work, Willen zur Macht, eine Umwertung aller
Werte. Nietzsche was impelled to bring up in purely
spiritual fashion everything which he thought or experienced
in the depth of his soul. To create a world-concept from
the spiritual events in which the soul itself participates—this
was the tendency of his thought. But the positivistic world-
conception of his age, the age of natural science, swept in
upon him. In this conception there was nothing but the
purely materialistic world, void of spirit. What remained of
the spiritual way of thought in the conception was only the
remains of ancient ways of thinking, and these no longer
found him. Nietzsche’s unlimited sense for truth would
expunge all this. In this way he came to think as an extreme
positivist. A spiritual world behind the material became to
him a lie. But he could create only out of his own soul—so
create that true creation seemed to him to have meaning only
when it holds before itself in idea the content of the spiritual
world. Yet this content he rejected. The natural-scientific
world-content had so firmly gripped his soul he would create
this as if in spiritual fashion. Lyrically, in dionysiac rush of
soul, does his mind soar aloft in Zarathustra. In wonderful

t The Will to Power, a Transvaluation of all Values.


184 RUDOLF STEINER


fashion does the spiritual hover there, but it is a wonderful
spiritual dream woven out of the stuff of material reality.
The spirit strews this about in its effort to escape because it
does not find itself but can only live in a seeming reality in
that dream reflected from the material. |

In my own mind I dwelt much during those Weimar days
in the contemplation of Nietzsche’s type of mind. In my
own spiritual experience this type of mind had also its place.
My spiritual experience could enter sympathetically into
Nietzsche’s struggles, into his tragedy. What had this to do
with the positivistic forms in which Nietzsche proclaimed the
conclusions of his thought ?

Others looked upon meas a “ Nietzschean,” merely because
I could unreservedly admire what was entirely opposed to
my own way of thinking. I was impressed by the way in which
Nietzsche’s mind revealed itself; in just this aspect I felt
myself close to him, for in the content of his thought he was
close to no one; as to the experience of the spiritual way
of thought he felt himself isolated both from men and from
his age.

For a long time I was in frequent intercourse with the
editor of Nietzsche’s works, Fritz Koegel. We discussed in
detail many things pertaining to the publication of Nietzsche’s
works. I never had any official relation to the Nietzsche
archives or the publication of his works. When Frau Forster-
Nietzsche wished to offer me such a relationship, this led to
a conflict with Fritz Koegel which at once rendered it impossible
that I should have any share in the Nietzsche archives.

My connection with the Nietzsche archives constituted a
very stimulating episode in my life at Weimar, and the final
rupture of this relationship caused me deep regret.

Out of the various activities in connection with Nietzsche,
there remained with me a view of his personality—that of
one whose fate it was to share tragically in the life of the age
of natural science covering the latter half of the nineteenth
century and finally to be shattered by his impact with that
age. He sought in that age, but nothing could he find. As
to myself, I was only confirmed by my experience with him
in the conviction that all seeking for reality in the data of


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 185


natural science would be vain except as it directed its view, not
within these data, but through them into the world of spirit.

It was thus that Nietzsche’s work brought the problem of
natural science before my mind in a new form. Goethe and
Nietzsche stood in perspective before me. Goethe’s strong
sense for reality directed him toward the essential being and
processes of nature. He desired to remain within nature.
He restricted himself to pure perceptions of the plant, animal,
and human forms. But, while he kept his mind moving
among these forms, he came everywhere upon spirit. For
within the material he found everywhere dominant the spirit.
All the way to the actual perception of the spirit living and
controlling he would not advance. A spiritual sort of natural
science was what he constructed, but he paused before arriving
at the knowledge of pure spirit lest he should lose his hold
upon reality.

Nietzsche proceeded from the vision of the spiritual after
the manner of myths. Apollo and Dionysos were spiritual
forms which he experienced in vital fashion. The history of
the human spiritual seemed to him to have been a history of
co-operation and also of conflict between Dionysos and Apollo.
But he got only as far as the mythical conception of such
spiritual forms. He did not press forward to the perception
of real spiritual being. Beginning with the spiritual in myth,
he made a path for himself to nature. In Nietzsche’s thought
Apollo had to represent the material after the manner of
natural science ; Dionysos had to be conceived as symbolizing
the forces of nature. But thus was Apollo’s beauty dimmed ;
thus was the world-emotion of Dionysos paralysed into the
_ regularity of natural law.

Goethe found the spirit in the reality of nature ; Nietzsche
lost the spirit-myth in the dream of nature in which he lived.

I stood between these two opposites. The experiences of
soul through which I had passed in writing my book Nzetzsche
as the Adversary of His Age could at first make no
advance; on the contrary, in the last period of my life in
Weimar, Goethe became once more dominant in my reflec-
tions. I wished to indicate the road by which the life of
humanity had expressed itself in philosophy up to the time of


186 RUDOLF STEINER


Goethe, in order to conceive the philosophy of Goethe as
proceeding out of this life. This endeavour I made in the
book Goethes Weltanschauung,* which was published in 1897.

In this book it was my purpose to bring to light how Goethe,
wherever he directed his eyes to the understanding of nature,
saw shining forth everywhere the spiritual; but I did not
touch upon the manner in which Goethe related himself to
spirit as such. My purpose was to characterize that part of
Goethe’s philosophy which expressed itself vitally in a spiritual
view of nature. .

Nietzsche’s ideas of the “‘ eternal repetition ”’ and of “‘ super-
men ”’ remained long in my mind. For in these was reflected that
which a personality must feel concerning the evolution and
essential being of humanity when this personality is kept back
from grasping the spiritual world by the restricted thought
in the philosophy of nature characterizing the end of the
nineteenth century. Nietzsche perceived the evolution of
humanity in such a way that whatever happened at any
moment has already happened innumerable times in precisely
the same form, and will happen again innumerable times in
future. The atomistic conception of the cosmos makes the
present moment seem a certain definite combination of the
smallest entities; this must be followed by another, and
this in turn by yet another—until, when all possible combina-
tions have been formed, the first must again appear. A
human life with all its individual details has been present
innumerable times; it will return with all its details in-
numerable times.

The ‘‘ repeated earth-lives ” of humanity shone darkly in
Nietzsche’s subconsciousness. These lead the individual
human life through human evolution to life-stages at which
overruling destiny causes men to pass, not to a repetition of
the earth-life, but by ways spiritually determined to a traversing
in many forms through the course of the world. Nietzsche was
fettered by the natural-scientific conception. What this con-
ception could make of repeated earth-lives—this exercised a
fascination upon his mind. This he vitally experienced; for
he felt his own life to be a tragedy filled with the bitterest

= Goethe’s World-Conception.


5


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 187


experiences, weighed down by grief. To live such a life
countless times !—this was what he dwelt upon instead of the
liberating experience which is to follow upon such a tragedy
in the further unfolding of future lives.

Nietzsche felt also that in the man who is living through
one earthly existence another man is revealed, a superman,
who is able to form but a fragment of his whole life in a bodily
existence on earth. The natural-scientific conception of
evolution caused him to view this superman, not as the
spirit dominant within the sense-physical, but as that which
is shaping itself through a merely natural process of evolution.
As man has evolved out of the animal, so will the ‘‘ superman ”
evolve out of man. The natural scientific view drew Nietzsche’s
eyes away from the spiritual man to the natural man, and
dazzled him with the thought of a higher “ natural man.”

What Nietzsche had experienced in this way of thought
was present in the utmost vividness in my mind during the
summer of 1896. At that time Fritz Koegel gave me his
collection of Nietzsche’s aphorisms concerning the “ eternal
repetition ” to look through. The opinions I formed at that
time of this process of Nietzsche’s thought were expressed in
an article published in 1900 in the Magazin fiir Literatur.
Certain statements occurring in that article fix definitely my
reactions at that time to Nietzsche and to natural science. I
will transcribe those thoughts of mine here, freed from the
polemics with which they were there associated.

“There is no doubt that Nietzsche wrote these single
aphorisms in a series without any order . . . I still maintain
the conviction I then expressed, that Nietzsche grasped this
idea when reading Eugen Diihring’s Kursus der Philosophie
als streng Wissenschaftlicher Weltanschauung und Lebensgestal-
tung * (Leipzig, 1875) and under the influence of this book.
On page 84 of this work the thought is quite clearly expressed ;
but it is there as energetically opposed as Nietzsche defends
it. This book is in Nietzsche’s library. It was read very
eagerly by Nietzsche, as is evident from numerous pencil
marks on the margins. . . . Diihring says: “The profound


1 The Course of Philosophy as a Strictly Scientific World-Conception and
Shaping of Life.


188 RUDOLF STEINER


logical basis of all conscious life demands in the strongest
sense of the word an inexhaustibleness of forms. Is this end-
lessness, by virtue of which ever new forms will appear, a
possibility ?. The mere number of the parts and of the force-
elements would in itself preclude the unending multiplication
of combinations but for the fact that the perpetual medium
of space and time promises a limitlessness in variations.
Moreover, of that which can be counted only a limited number
of combinations is possible. But from that which cannot
according to its nature be conceived as enumerable it must
be possible for a limitless number of states and relationships
to come to pass. This limitlessness, which we are considering
with reference to the destiny of forms in the universe, is
compatible with any sort of change and even with intervals
of approximation to fixity or precise repetitions (italics are mine),
but not with the cessation of all variation. Whoever would
cherish the conception of an existence which contradicts the
primal state of things ought to reflect that the evolution in
time has but a single true tendency, and that causality is
always in line with this tendency. It is easier to abandon the
distinction than to maintain it, and it then requires but little
effort to leap over the chasm and imagine the end as analogous
with the beginning. But we ought to guard against such
superficial haste ; for the once given existence of the universe
is not merely an unimportant episode between two states of
night, but rather the sole firm and illuminated ground from
which we may infer the past and forecast the future. .. .’
Diihring feels also that an everlasting repetition of states holds
no incentive for living. He says: ‘ Now it is self-evident
that the principle of an incentive for living is incompatible
with the eternal repetition of the same form... .’”

Nietzsche was forced by the logic of the natural-scientific
conception to a conclusion from which Diihring turned back
because of mathematical considerations and the repellent
prospect which these represented for human life.

To quote further from my article: ‘‘. . . if we set up the
postulate that with the material parts and the force-elements a
limited number of combinations is possible, then we have
the Nietzschean ideal of the ‘return of the similar.’


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 189


Nothing less than a defence of a contradictory idea taken from
Diihring’s view of the matter occurs in Aphorism 203 (Vol. XII
in Koegel’s edition, and Aphorism 22 in Horneffer’s work,
Nietzsches Lehre von der ewigen Wiederkunft): ‘The amount
of the all-force is definite, not something endless: we must
beware of such prodigality in conceptions ! Accordingly the
number of stages, modifications, combinations, and evolutiuns
of this force, though vast and practically immeasurable, is yet
always definite and not endless: that is, the force is eternally
the same and eternally active—even to this very moment
already an endlessness has passed, which means that all
possible evolutions must already have occurred. Therefore,
the momentary evolution must be a repetition, and likewise
that which brought it forth and that which arises from it,
and so on both forwards and backwards! Everything has
been innumerable times insofar as the sum total of the stages
of all forces is repeated... .’ And Nietzsche’s feeling in
regard to these thoughts is precisely the opposite of that which
Diihring experienced. To Nietzsche this thought is the
loftiest formula in which life can be affirmed. Aphorism 43
(in Horneffer; 234 in Koegel’s edition) runs: ‘ Future
history will ever more combat this thought, and never believe
it, for according to its nature it must die forever! Only he
remains who considers his existence capable of endless repe-
titions : among such, however, a state is possible to which
no Utopian has ever attained.’ It can be proven that many
of Nietzsche’s thoughts originated in a manner similar to
that of the eternal repetition. Nietzsche formed an idea
opposite to any idea then present before him. At length this
same tendency led to the production of his masterpiece,
Umwertung aller Werte.” ?

It was then clear to me that in certain of his thoughts which
strove to reach the world of spirit Nietzsche was a prisoner
of his conception of nature. For this reason I was strongly
opposed to the mystical interpretation of his thought of
repetition. I agreed with Peter Gast, who wrote in his edition
of Nietzsche’s work : ‘‘ The doctrine—to be understood in a


1 Nietysche’s Doctrine of the Eternal Repetition.
2 The Will to Power, a Transvaluation of all Values.


190 RUDOLF STEINER


purely mechanical sense—of limitedness and consequent
repetition in cosmic molecular combinations.” Nietzsche
believed that a lofty thought must be brought up from the
foundations of natural science. ‘That was the way in which
he had to sorrow because of his age.

Thus in my glimpse of Nietzsche’s soul in 1896 there
appeared before me what one who looked toward the spirit
had to suffer from the conception of nature prevailing at the
end of the nineteenth century.


XIX


Tue loneliness I then experienced in respect to that which
I bore in silence within me as my world-conception, while
my thoughts were linked to Goethe on one side and to
Nietzsche on the other—this loneliness was my experience
also in relation to many other personalities with whom I felt
myself united by bonds of friendship but who none the less
energetically opposed my spiritual life.

The friend whom I had gained in early years but whose
ideas and my own had become mutually so divergent that I
had to say to him: ‘‘ Were that true which you think con-
cerning the essential reality of life, then I had rather be the
block of wood under my feet than a man ”’—this friend still
continued bound to me in love and loyalty. His welcome
letters from Vienna always carried me back to the place which
was so dear to me, especially because of the human relation-
ships in which I was there privileged to live.

But if this friend undertook in his letters to. speak about
my spiritual life, a gulf then opened between us.

He often wrote me that I was alienating myself from what
is primal in human nature, that I was “ rationalizing the
impulses of my soul.” He had the feeling that in me the
life of feeling was changed into a life of mere thought, and
this he sensed as a certain coldness proceeding from me.
Nothing which I could bring to bear against this view of his
could do any good. I could not avoid seeing that the
warmth of his friendship gradually diminished because he
could not free himself of the belief that I must grow cold
as to what was human since I passed my soul-life in the
region of thought.

That, instead of being chilled in this life of thought, I had


mgr


192 RUDOLF STEINER


to take with me into this life my full humanity in order by
this means to lay hold upon reality in the spiritual sphere—
this he would never grasp.

He failed to see that the purely human persists, even when
it is raised to the realm of the spirit; nor could he see how
it is possible to live in the sphere of thought; it was his
opinion that one can there merely think and must lose oneself
in the cold region of abstractions.

Thus he made me out a “ rationalist.”’ In this view of his
I felt there was the grossest misunderstanding of what was
reached by my spiritual paths. All thinking which turns
away from reality and spends itself in the abstract—for this
I felt the innermost antipathy. I was in a condition of mind
in which I would develop thought drawn from the sense-
world only to that stage at which thought tends to veer off
into the abstract ; at that point, I said to myself, it ought to
lay hold upon the spirit. My friend saw that I moved in
thought out of the physical world; but he failed to realize
that in that very moment I stepped over into the spiritual.
Therefore, when I spoke of the really spiritual, this was to
him quite non-existent, and he received from my words merely
a web of abstract thoughts.

I was deeply grieved by the fact that, when I was really
uttering that which had for me the profoundest import, yet
to my friend I was talking of a “nothing.”” Such was my
relationship to many persons.

What so entered into my life I had to perceive also
in my conception of the understanding of nature. I could
recognize as right only that method of nature-research in
which one applies one’s thought to the task of looking through
the objective relationships of sense-phenomena ; but I could
not admit that one should by means of thought elaborate
concerning the region of sense-perception hypotheses which
then are to be referred to a supersensible reality but which,
in fact, constitute a mere web of abstract thoughts. At that
moment in which thought has completed its work in fixing
that which is rendered clear by the sense-phenomena them-
selves, when rightly viewed, I did not desire to begin with the
framing of hypotheses, but in perception, in the experiencing


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 193


of the spiritual which in reality lives, not behind the sense-
world, but within it.

What I then held firmly as my own view in the middle
of the ’nineties I later set down briefly as follows in an article
I published in 1900 in No. 16 of the Magazin fiir Literatur :
“A scientific analysis of our activity in cognition leads; ...%
to the conviction that the questions which we have to address
to nature are a result of the peculiar relationship in which
we stand to the world. We are limited individualities, and
for this reason we can become aware of the world only in
fragments. Each piece, of and for itself, is a riddle; or,
otherwise expressed, it is a problem for our understanding.
But the more we come to know the details, the clearer does
the world become to us. One act of becoming aware makes
clear the others. Questions which the world puts to us and
which cannot be answered with the means which the world
gives us—these do not exist. For monism, therefore, there
are on general principles no limits to knowledge. At one
time this or that may not be clarified, because we are not yet
in position, as to either space or time, to find the things which
are there concerned. But what is not found to-day may be
found to-morrow. Limits determined in this manner are only
accidental, such as will vanish with the progress of experience
and of thought. In such cases the formation of hypotheses
legitimately comes into play. Hypotheses should not be
formed in regard to anything which by its nature is inacces-
sible to our understanding. ‘The atomic hypothesis is utterly
without foundation when it is considered, not merely as an
aid to abstract thought, but as a declaration regarding real
being beyond the reach of our qualitative experience. A
hypothesis must be merely an opinion regarding a group of
facts which, for accidental reasons, is inaccessible to us but
which belongs by nature to the world given to us.”

I stated this view regarding the forming of hypotheses
because I wished to show that “ limitations of knowledge ”’
were not proven, and that the limitations of natural science
were a necessity. At that time I did this as to the under-
standing of nature only in a side reference. But this way
of forming thoughts had always laid down the road for me


14


194 RUDOLF STEINER


to advance farther by means of the knowledge of spirit beyond
that point at which one dependent upon the knowledge of
nature reached the inevitable “ limitation.”

A contentment of soul and profound inner satisfaction were
mine at Weimar by reason of the artistic element brought
into the city by the art school and the theatre, and the musical
people associated with these.

In the teachers and students of painting in the art school
there was revealed what was then struggling out of the ancient
traditions toward a new and direct perception and reflection
of nature and life. A good many among these painters might
properly have been considered “ seekers.” How that which
the painter had as colour on his palette or in his colour-pot
could be applied to the surface in such a way that what the
artist created should bear a right relationship to Nature as she
lives and becomes visible to man’s eyes in creating—this was
the question which was constantly heard in the most varied
forms, in a manner stimulating, often pleasantly fanciful, and
from the artistic experience of which there originated the
numerous paintings that were displayed by Weimar artists
in the frequent art exhibitions.

My artistic experience was not then so broad as my relation
to experiences in the realm of knowledge. Yet I sought in
the stimulating intercourse with the Weimar artists for a
spiritual conception of the artistic.

To retrospective memory, that which I then experienced in
my own mind seems very chaotic—when the modern painter
who sensed the mood of light and atmosphere and wished to
give these back took up arms against the “ ancients ”? who
knew from tradition how this or that was handled. There
was in many of them a spiritualized striving—derived from
the most primitive forces of the soul—to be “true” in the
reproduction of nature.

Not thus chaotic, however, but in most significant forms
appeared to my mind the life of a young painter whose
artistic way of revealing himself harmonized with my own
evolution in the direction of artistic fantasy. This artist, then
in the bloom of youth, was for some time in the closest
intimacy with me. Him also life has borne far away from


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 195


me; but I have often recalled in memory the hours we spent
together.

The soul-life of this young man was all light and colour.
What others expressed in ideas he uttered by means of
“colours in light.” Indeed, his understanding worked in
such a way that he combined things and events of life as one
combines colours, not as mere thoughts combine which the
ordinary man shapes from the world.

This young artist was once at a wedding festival to which
I also had been invited. The usual festival speeches were
being made. The pastor took as content of his talk the
meaning of the words bride and groom. I endeavoured to
discharge the duty of speaking—which rested upon me because
I was a frequent visitor at the friendly home from which the
bride came—by talking of the delightful experiences which
the guests were permitted to enjoy at that home. I spoke
because I was expected to speak. And I was expected to make
the sort of speech “ belonging to” a wedding feast. So I
took little pleasure in “the réle” I had to play. After me
arose the young painter, who also had long been a friend of
the family. From him no one expected anything; for
everybody knew that such ideas as are embodied in toasts
simply did not belong to him. He began somewhat as
follows: ‘‘ Over the glimmering red crest of the hill the
glance of the sun poured lovingly. Clouds breathing above
the hill and in the gleam of the sun; glowing red slopes
facing the sunlight, blending into triumphal arches of spiritual
colours giving a pathway to earth for the downward striving
light. Flower surfaces far and wide; above these the air,
gleaming yellow, slips into the flowers awakening the life in
them...” He spoke in this way for a long while. He had
suddenly forgotten all the wedding merriment about him and
begun “in the spirit ” to paint. I do not know why he ceased
thus to speak in painter fashion ; I suppose his coat-tail was
pulled by someone who was very fond of him, but who also
wished equally that the guests should come to a peaceful
enjoyment of the wedding roast meat.

The young painter’s name was Otto Frishlich. He often
sat with me in my room, and we took walks and excursions


196 RUDOLF STEINER


together. While Otto Fréhlich was with me, he was always
painting “in the spirit.” In his company one could forget
that the world has any other content than light and colour.

Such was my feeling about this young friend. I know that
whatever I had to say to him I placed before his mind clothed
in colours in order to make myself intelligible to him.

And the young painter really succeeded in so guiding his
brush and so laying on the colours that his pictures were in
a high degree a reflection of his own luxuriant, living colour-
fantasies. When he painted the trunk of a tree, there appeared
on the canvas, not the delineated shapes of a picture, but
rather that which light and colour reveal from within them-
selves when the tree-trunk gives them the opportunity to
manifest their life.

In my own way I was seeking for the spiritual substance
of colour in light. In him I was forced to see the secret of
the being of colour. In Otto Fréhlich there stood beside me
a man who individually bore instinctively within him as his
experience that which I was seeking for the taking up of the
colour-world through the human soul.

It gave me pleasure to be able through this very search of
mine to give the young friend many a stimulus. The follow-
ing was an instance. I myself experienced in a high degree
the intensive colours which Nietzsche describes in the Zara-
thustra chapter on “‘ the most hateful man.” This “ Valley
of Death,’’ described like a painting by Nietzsche, held for me
much of the secret of the life of colour.

I gave Otto Fréhlich the advice to paint poetically the
picture done by Nietzsche in word colours of Zarathustra and
the most hateful man. He did this. And now something
really remarkable came to pass. The colours concentrated
themselves, glowing and very expressive, in the figure of
Zarathustra. But this figure as such did not come out fully,
since in Frohlich the colours themselves could not yet unfold
themselves to the extent of creating Zarathustra. But so much
the more living did the colour variations boil up into the
‘“‘oreen snakes ”’ in the valley of the most hateful man. In
this part of the picture all of Frohlich lived. But now the
“most hateful man.” There it would have required the line,


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 197


the characteristic of painting. This Frohlich refused. He
did not yet know how there actually lives in colour the secret
of causing the spiritual to take on form through the very
handling of the colour itself. So “the most hateful man”
became a reproduction of the model called by the Weimar
painters “‘ Fiillsack.” I do not know whether this was really
the name of the man always used by the painters when they
wished to deal with the characteristically hateful ; but I know
that “ Fiillsack’s ” hatefulness was no longer merely conven-
tional, but had something of genius in it. But to place
him thus uuchanged as a copy in the picture where Zara-
thustra’s soul revealed itself shining in countenance and in
apparel, when the light conjures forth true colour-being out
of its intercourse with the green snakes—this ruined the
painting of Frohlich. Thus the picture failed to become what
I had hoped might come to pass through Otto Frohlich.

Although I could not but realize the sociability in my
nature, yet at Weimar I never felt in overwhelming measure
the impulse to betake myself where the artists, and all who felt
socially bound up with them, spent the evenings.

This was in a romantic “‘ Artists’ Club ” remodelled out of
an old smithy opposite the theatre. There, united together
in a dim-coloured light, sat the teachers and students of the
Academy of Painting ; there sat actors and musicians. Who-
ever sought for sociability must feel himself impelled to go
to this place in the evenings. And I did not feel so impelled
just for the reason that I did not seek companionship, but
thankfully accepted it when circumstances brought it to me.

In this way I became acquainted with individual artists in
other social groups, but did not come to know the artistic
world.

To know certain artists at Weimar in those days was of
vital value. For the tradition of the Court and the extra-
ordinarily sympathetic personality of the Grand-duke Carl
Alexander gave to the city an artistic standing which drew to
Weimar, in one relation or another, everything artistic which
was active in that period.

There, first of all, was the theatre with the good old tradi-
tions disinclined in its leading representatives to allow a


198 RUDOLF STEINER


naturalistic flavour to come into evidence. And where the
modern would fain show itself and expunge many a pedantry,
which nevertheless was always associated with good traditions,
there modernity was kept far away from that which Brahm
propagated on the stage and Paul Schlenther through the
press as the ‘‘ modern conception.’” Among these “* Weimar
moderns ” the chief of all was that wholly artistic noble fire-
spirit, Paul Wiecke. To see such men take in Weimar the
first steps of their artistic career gave one an ineradicable
impression, and was a comprehensive school of life. Paul
Wiecke used the basement of a theatre which, because of its
traditions, annoyed the elemental artist. Very stimulating
hours have I spent at the home of Paul Wiecke. He was on
terms of intimate friendship with my friend Julius Wahle,
and because of this I came very close to him. It was often
delightful to hear Wiecke grumbling over almost everything
that he must endure when he had to do the dress rehearsals
for a new performance. Then, with this in mind, to see him
play the rdle that he had so abused, and which nevertheless,
through his noble endeavour after style and through his
beautiful spiritualizing fire, afforded one a rare enjoyment.

Richard Strauss was then making his beginning in Weimar.
He was second director along with Lassen. The first com-
positions of Richard Strauss were performed in Weimar.
The musical craving of this personality revealed itself as a
piece of the very spiritual life of Weimar. Such a joyful
unreserved acceptance of something which in the act of its
acceptance became an exciting problem of art was then possible
at Weimar alone. Round about one the peace of the tradi-
tional—a highly prized and worthy mood; now enters amid
this Richard Strauss with his Zarathustra Symphony or even
his music for the buffoon. Everything wakes up in tradition,
reverence, worth; but it wakes up in such a way that the
assent is lovable, the dissent harmless-——and the artist can find
in the most beautiful way the reaction to his own creation.

How many hours long we sat at the first performance of
Richard Strauss’s music drama Guntram, in which the lovable
and humanly so distinguished Heinrich Zeller Pe the
leading réle and almost sang himself out of voice !


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 199


Indeed, this profoundly sympathetic man, Heinrich Zeller—
even he had to leave Weimar in order to become what he did
become. He had the most beautiful elemental gift of song.
He needed for his unfolding an environment which, with the
utmost patience, permitted that such a gift should in de-
veloping itself experiment over and over again. And so the
evolution of Heinrich Zeller is to be numbered among the
most human and beautiful things which one could ever
experience. Besides, Zeller was such a lovable personality
that one must count the hours one could spend with him
among the most stimulating possible.

And thus it came about that, although I did not often think
of going in the evening to the Artists’ Club, yet, if Heinrich
Zeller met me and said I must go with him, I always yielded
gladly to this demand.

The state of things at Weimar had also its dark side. That
which is traditional and peace-loving often held the artist
back as if in a sort of seclusion. Heinrich Zeller became
very little known to the world outside of Weimar. What
was at first suited to enable him to spread his wings later
crippled these wings. And so it was always with my dear
friend Otto Fréhlich. He needed, like Zeller, the artistic
soil of Weimar, but the dim spiritual atmosphere absorbed him
too much in its artistic comfort.

And one felt this “artistic comfort” in the pressure of
Ibsen’s spirit and that of other moderns. There one shared
with everything—the battle waged by the dramatist, for
example, in order to find the style for a Nora. Such a
seeking as one could there observe occurs only where, through
the propagation of the old stage traditions, one meets with
difficulties in the effort to represent what comes from poets
who have begun, not like Schiller with the stage, but like
Ibsen with life.

But one also shares in this reflection of this modernism out
of the “artistic comfort’? of the theatrical public. One
ought to find a middle way between the two circumstances :
first, that one is a dweller in “ classical Weimar,” and, on the
other hand, that what has made Weimar great has been its
constant understanding for the new.


200 RUDOLF STEINER


It is with great happiness that I remember the productions
of Wagner’s music dramas at which I was present in Weimar.
The Director von Bronsart developed a specially under-
standing devotion to this type of theatrical productions.
Heinrich Zeller’s voice then reached its most exquisite value.
A remarkable gift as a singer belonged to Frau Agnes
Stavenhagen, wife of the pianist Bernhard Stavenhagen, who
was also for a long time director at the theatre. Frequent
music festivals brought the representative artists of the time
and their works to Weimar. One saw there, for example,
Mahler as director at a music festival when he was just getting
his start. Ineradicable was the impression of the way in
which he used the baton—not aiding music in the flood of
forms, but as the experience of a supersensible hidden some-
thing visibly pointing amid the forms.

What came before my mind from these Weimar events—
seemingly quite unrelated to me—is really deeply united
with my life. For these were excitations and states which I
experienced as pertaining in the deepest manner to me.
Often afterwards, when I have encountered a person, or the
work of a person, with whom I have shared experiences at his
beginning at Weimar, I have recalled with gratitude this
Weimar period through which so much became intelligible
because so much had gathered from elsewhere there to pass
through its germinal stage. Thus I then experienced in
Weimar the artistic strivings in such a way that in regard to
most of these I had my own opinion, often very little in
harmony with those of other persons. But at the same time
I was just as intensely interested in everything which others
felt as in my own feelings. Here also there came to pass
within me a twofold mental life.

This was a genuine discipline of the mind, brought to me
by life itself in the course of destiny, in order that I might
find my way out from the “either or’ of abstract intellectual
judgment. This sort of judgment erects barriers separating
the mind from the spiritual world. In this there are not
beings and occurrences which admit of such an “either or”
judgment. In the presence of the supersensible one must
become many-sided. One must not merely learn theoreti-


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 201


cally, but must take everything to dwell in the innermost
emotions of the soul’s life, in order to view everything from
the most manifold points of view. Such standpoints as
materialism, realism, idealism, spiritualism, as these have been
elaborated in the physical world by personalities with abstract
ways of thinking into comprehensive theories in order that
they may signify something for things in themselves,—these
lose all interest for one who knows the supersensible. He
knows, for example, that materialism cannot be anything else
but the view of the world from that point from which it reveals
itself in material phenomena.

It is a practical training in this direction when one finds
oneself in the midst of an existence which brings the life
whose waves beat outside of one’s own so inward as to become
as close as one’s own judgments and feelings. But for me
this was true of much in Weimar. It seems to me that at the
close of the century this ceased to be true there. Until then
the spirit of Goethe and of Schiller still rested upon every-
thing. And the lovable old Grand-duke, who moved about
with such distinction in Weimar and its vicinity, had as a boy
seen Goethe. He truly felt very strongly his ‘‘ Your Highness,”
but he always showed that he felt himself a second time
ennobled through the work that Goethe did for Weimar.

It was the spirit of Goethe which worked so powerfully
from all directions at Weimar that to me a certain side of the
experience of what was happening there became the practical
mental discipline in the right conception of the supersensible
worlds.


XX


THE hospitable welcome I met in the family of the Keeper
of the Records at the Goethe-Schiller Institute, Eduard von
der Hellen, was of the most delightful character. This man
stood in a peculiar relationship to the other collaborators
at the archives. He had an extraordinary reputation among
the philological specialists because of his remarkably successful
initial work on Goethes Anteil an Lavaters Phystognomischen
Fragmenten.t Von der Hellen had in this work produced
something which every contemporary philologist accepted
forthwith as ‘‘ complete.” Only the author himself did not
think so. He looked upon the work as a methodical achieve-
ment whose principles “‘ could be learned ”’ by anyone, whereas
his own endeavour was to fill himself with inner spiritual
content.

When there were no visitors, we sat for long spells together
in the old collaborators’ room of the Institute while this was
still at the castle: three of us—von der Hellen, who was
working at an edition of Goethe’s letters; Julius Wahle,
occupied with the journals ; and I, with the natural-scientific
writings. But the very requirements of von der Hellen’s
mental life gave rise to conversations in the midst of the work
touching upon the most manifold aspects of public life,
spiritual or other. In this connection, however, those interests
which are bound up with Goethe always received their due.
The notes written by Goethe in his journals, and letters of
Goethe’s revealing a standpoint so elevated and such com-
prehensive vision,—these gave rise to reflections which led
into the very depths of existence and the breadth of life.

Eduard von der Hellen was friendly enough to introduce
me into his family, in order further to develop the relation-


t Goethe’s Share in Lavater’s Physiognomic Fragments,
202


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 203


ship growing out of these meetings in the Institute, often so
stimulating. A still further extension of the delightful com-
panionship came about by reason of the fact that von der
Hellen’s family likewise mingled in the circles I have already
described—such as those grouped about Olden, Gabrielle
Reuter, and others.

Especially has the profoundly congenial personality of Frau
von der Hellen always remained fixed in my memory. Hers
was a nature wholly artistic. One of those persons who, but
for other duties intervening in her life, possessed the capacity
for achieving something beautiful in art. Such was her
destiny that, so far as I am aware, the artistic side of this
woman came to expression only in the early part of her life.
But every word about art that one could exchange with her
was a satisfaction. She showed a basic quality, as it were,
of reserve ; always cautious in judgment, and yet profoundly
sympathetic in a purely human way. I seldom went away
from such a conversation without carrying with me in long
continued reflection what Frau von der Hellen had suggested
rather than spoken.

Very lovable also were the father of Frau von der Hellen
and his two daughters—the father a lieutenant-general who
had fought through the war of the ’seventies as a major. While
one was in this group of persons, one experienced vitally the
most beautiful aspect of German spiritual life: that spiritual
life which had flowed into all circles of the social life out of
those religious, zsthetic, or popular-scientific impulses that
for so long constituted the real nature of German spirituality.

Eduard von der Hellen’s interests for some time brought
me into touch with the political life of the times. Discontent
with things philological drove von der Hellen into the lively
political affairs of Weimar. There he seemed to find a broader
perspective of life. And my friendly personal interest in him
led me also—although without active participation in politics—-
to become interested in the movements of public life.

Much of that which has been found to be impracticable
in our present-day life, or else, in a terrible metamorphosis,
has given rise to absurd social forms,—much of this was to be
seen at that time in its genesis, associated with all the hopes


204 RUDOLF STEINER


of a working class taught by trained and forceful leaders to
believe that a new time must come for men in the forms of
social life. The cautious and the altogether radical elements
among the workers were enforcing their views. To observe
them was all the more impressive since what there appeared
was like a boiling up of the lower levels of the social life.
In the upper levels there was something vital which could
have expressed itself only in a worthy sort of conservatism
bound up with a hope for everything that is human—a hope
marked by capable and profound thinking and by vigorous
activity. In the atmosphere then present there sprang up
a reactionary party which considered itself as indispensable,
and in addition the so-called National-Liberty Party.

So to adjust himself to all this that he might gain effective
leadership and bring men out of this chaos—such was the
interpretation one had to place upon the feeling of Eduard
von der Hellen at that time. And one had to share in the
experience through which he passed in this respect. He
discussed among his circle of friends every detail of a brochure
he was preparing. One was forced to take as deep an interest
as Eduard von der Hellen himself in the conceptions—at that
time accompanied by feelings quite unlike those of the present
—of the materialistic interpretation of history, the class
struggle, ‘‘ surplus value.” One could not refrain from
attending the numerous gatherings at which he appeared as
lecturer. Over against the theoretically formulated Marxian
programme he proposed to set up another which should grow
out of a good will toward social progress on the part of all
friendly working men of every party. He was thinking of
a sort of revival of the middle parties by the incorporation
into their platforms of those impulses which would enable
them to solve the social problem.

The effort proved futile. Only I am confident that I could
not have participated in the public life of that period so
intensely as I did had I not shared in this struggle of von der
Hellen’s.

Yet public life had its influence upon me from another
direction also, though far less intensely. Indeed, it always
seemed that a mild repugnance arose within me—which wa


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 205


not true in relation to von der Hellen—in the very proximity
of anything political, There lived in Weimar at that time
Dr. Heinrich Frankel, a liberal politician, an adherent of
Eugen Richter and also active in politics in the same spirit.
We became acquainted. A brief acquaintance which was
later brought to an end by reason of a misunderstanding,
but to which I often look back with pleasure; for the
man was, in his way, extraordinarily lovable, had a strong
political will, and was led by his good purpose and far-sighted
views to the belief that it was necessary to create an enthusiasm
among men on behalf of a right way of progress in public
affairs. His life became a succession of disillusionments.
Unluckily, I myself had to be the occasion of one of those
for him. He was working just at the time that I knew him
at a brochure which he hoped to circulate in very great numbers,
What concerned him was the desire to oppose the establish-
ment of a combination between big industry and the agrarians,
which was already beginning to take form in Germany
and which, according to his view, would certainly bring
devastating results in the train of its later development.
His brochure bore the title, Kaiser werde hart. He thought
he could dissuade the entourage of the Kaiser from what he
believed to be harmful. The man accomplished not the
slightest result by this effort. He saw that the party to which
he belonged and for which he laboured could not bring to
birth those forces which were needed to lay down a foundation
for the policies thought out by him.

This led him to conceive the idea of exerting himself to
revive the Deutsche Wochenschrift, which I had edited for a
short time a few years before in Vienna. By means of this
he wished to set up a political current which would have
enabled him to move forward from the “ liberalism ” of that
time into a more national-liberal activity. It occurred to
him that I could do something along with him in this direction.
That was impossible; even for the mere revival of the
Deutsche Wochenschrift 1 could do nothing. The manner in
which I informed him of this led to misunderstandings which
in a short time put an end to our friendship.

t Kaiser, Be Stern !


206 RUDOLF STEINER


But another friendship grew out of this one. The man
had a very dear wife and a dear sister-in-law, and he had
introduced me into his family. This in turn brought me
in touch with another family. And then something came to
pass that seemed like a repetition of the remarkable relation-
ship which destiny had brought me once in Vienna. I was
intimately associated with a family there, but in such a way
that the head of the family remained always unseen, and yet
he came so close to me in soul and spirit that after his death
I delivered the address at his funeral as if he had been my
best friend. The whole spiritual being of this man stood
before my mind by means of his family.

And now I entered into almost the same relationship with
the head of the family into which I was brought in a round-
about way by the liberal politician. The head of this family
had died a short while before; the widow’s life was filled
with pious thoughts about her dead husband. It came about
that I left the home in Weimar in which I had lived till then,
and took up my residence with the family. There was the
library of the dead man. A man of interesting spirit in many
ways, but living just like that one in Vienna, refusing all
relationships with men; living like that one in his own
‘“‘ mental world” ; considered by the world to be a recluse,
as the other had been.

I felt this man like that one—though I had never met him
in the flesh—entering into my destiny “from behind the
veils of existence.”” In Vienna there came about a beautiful
relationship between the family of the ‘“‘ unknown” thus
known and myself ; and in Weimar there came about between
the second “‘ unknown ”’ and myself a relationship even more
significant.

When I must speak in this way of the two “ unknown
known ” I am aware that what I have to say will be called
by most men “ mad fantasy.” For this has to do with the
way in which I was able to draw near to the two men in
that sphere of the world in which they were after they had
passed through the portal of death.

Everyone has the inner right to exclude from the group
of subjects which interest him all statements in regard to


‘¢


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 207


this sphere ; but to characterize such statements as merely
fantastic is something quite different. When anyone does
this, then I must emphasize the fact that I have always sought
in such exact branches of science as mathematics and analytical
mechanics for the sources of that temper of soul which
qualifies one to make assertions concerning things spiritual.
When, therefore, I assert what here follows I cannot justly
be accused of mere careless talk unsupported by the requisite
knowledge.

The power of the spiritual vision which I then bore in my
soul made it possible for me to enter into a close union with
these two souls after their earthly death. They were unlike
other dead persons. These immediately after their earthly
death go through a life which, in essence, is in close
relationship with the earthly life, and which only gradually
comes to resemble the life one experiences in that purely
spiritual world where one’s existence continues till the next
earthly life.

The two “ unknown known ” had been rather familiar with
the thinking of this materialistic age. They had elaborated
in concepts within themselves the natural-scientific way of
thinking. The second, whom Weimar brought to me, was
indeed well acquainted with Billroth and other natural-
scientific thinkers. On the other hand, during their earthly
lives both had remained aloof from a spiritual conception
of the world. The spiritual conception which they might
have encountered at that time would have repelled them,
since they were forced to believe that “ natural-scientific
thinking,” according to the habits of thought of the time, was
demanded by the facts.

But this union with the materialism of the time remained
wholly in the world of ideas of the two persons. They did
not share in the habits of life which followed from the
materialism of this thinking, and which were predominant
in the case of all other men. They became “ recluses from
the world”; lived in more primitive ways than were then
customary and would have been natural to men of their
means. ‘Thus they did not carry over into the spiritual world
that which a union with the materialistic “ will-evaluations ”


208 RUDOLF STEINER


would have given to their individualities, but only that which
the materialistic ‘‘ thought-evaluations ” had planted in these
individualities. Naturally this worked itself out for the souls
mostly in the unconscious. And now I could see how these
materialistic thought-evaluations are not something which
alienates man after death from the world of the divine and
spiritual, but that this alienation comes about only through
materialistic will-evaluations. Both the soul which had come
close to me in Vienna and also the one which I came to
know spiritually in Weimar were, after death, noble shining
spiritual forms whose soul-content was filled with conceptions
of those spiritual beings who are at the foundation of the
world. And the only result of their acquaintance with those
ideas by means of which they mastered the material in thought
during their previous earthly life was that after death also
they were able to develop such a relationship with the world
as included a capacity for judgment. This would not have
been the case if the corresponding ideas had remained un-
known to them.

In these two souls there had crossed my predestined path
beings through whom the significance of the natural-scientific
way of thought was revealed to me directly from the spiritual
world. I could see that this way of thought in itself need
not lead away from a spiritual perception. In the case of
these two personalities this had happened during their
earthly life because they found no opportunity there to elevate
the natural-scientific way of thinking into the sphere where
spiritual experience begins. After death they accomplished
this in the most complete fashion. I saw that one can achieve
this elevation of thought if one brings inner mood and force
to the task during the earthly life. I saw also, through
my participation in that which is significant in the spiritual
world, that humanity had of necessity to evolve to the scientific
way of thinking. Earlier ways of thinking could unite
humanity with the supersensible world ; they could lead man,
especially if he entered into self-knowledge (the foundation
of all knowledge), to know himself as a copy, or even amember,
of the spiritual world; but they could not bring him to the
point where he could feel himself to be a self-sufficient, self-


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 209


enclosed spiritual being. Therefore the advance had to be
made to the grasp of an ideal world which is not kindled from
the spirit itself, but is stimulated out of matter—which is,
indeed, spiritual, but not derived from the spirit.

Such a world of ideas cannot be generated in man in that
spiritual world where he has his vital relationships after death
and before a new birth, but only in the earthly existence,
because only there does he stand face to face with material
forms.

I could realize, therefore, through these two human souls
what man wins for the totality of his life, including his spiritual
life after death, by reason of his being woven into the natural-
scientific way of thinking. But in the case of others who had
taken into themselves during their earthly lives the effects of
the crass natural-scientific way of thinking upon the will, I
could see that these estranged themselves from the spiritual
world ; that they had, so to speak, arrived at a totality of life
in which man is less man in his full humanity with the natural-
scientific way of thinking than without it.

Both these souls had been recluses from the world because
they did not wish to lose their humanity during the earthly
life ; they had accepted the natural-scientific way of thinking
in its full comprehensiveness because they wished to reach
that stage of the spiritual man which cannot be attained without
this.

It might well have been impossible for me to attain to these
perceptions in the case of these two souls if I had encountered
them within the earthly existence as physical personalities.
In order to perceive the two individualities in the spiritual
world in which they were to reveal to me their being, and
through this also many other things, I needed that sensitive-
ness of the soul’s perception in relationship to them which
is easily lost when that which has been experienced in the
physical world conceals what is to be experienced spiritually,
or at least interferes with this.

I was forced, therefore, to perceive that the manner in which
both souls entered into my earthly life was something ordained
by way of destiny along my path to knowledge.

But nothing whatever of a spiritistic sort can be associated


15


210 RUDOLF STEINER


with this way of relating oneself to souls in the spiritual world.
Nothing could ever count with me in the relationship to the
spiritual world except the genuine spiritual perception which
I later discussed publicly in my anthroposophic writings.
Moreover, the Viennese family and all its members, as well
as that of Weimar, were far too sane for a communion with
the dead by the help of mediums.

Wherever such things have been under discussion, I have
always taken an interest also in such a seeking on the part
of human souls as is manifested in spiritualism. Modern
spiritualism is a way toward the spirit for such souls as would
seek for the spirit in external—-almost experimental—ways
because they cannot any longer experience the real, the true,
the genuine in a spiritual manner. It is just the sort of
person who interests himself in an entirely objective manner
in spiritualism, without himself having the desire to investigate
something by means of it, who can see through to correct
conceptions of the purpose and the errors of spiritualism. My
own research moves always by a different path from that of
spiritualism in any of its forms. Indeed, there were opportu-
nities in Weimar for interesting intercourse with spiritualists ;
for there was an intense interest for a long time among the
artists in this way of seeking to relate oneself to the spiritual.

But there came to me from my intercourse with the two
souls—he of Weimar was named Eunicke—an access of strength
for the writing of my Philosophy of Spiritual Activity. What
I aspired to do in that book was this: First, the book is the
product of my way of philosophical thinking during the
eighties ; in the second place, it is the product also of my
general concrete perception in the spiritual world ; but in the
third place, it was reinforced through my participation in the
spiritual experiences of those two souls. In these I had before
me the ascent which man owes to this natural-scientific world-
conception. But I had in them also the fear which noble
souls feel of entering vitally into the will-element of this
world-conception. ‘These souls shrank back from the moral
effects of such a world-conception.

Now I sought in my Philosophy of Spiritual Activity for that
force which leads from the ethically neutral ideal world of


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 211


natural science into the world of moral impulse. I sought
to show how the man who knows himself as a self-enclosed
being of a spiritual sert because he lives in ideas which are
no longer streaming out from the spirit but are stimulated by
material being, can nevertheless evolve out of his own being
an intuition for the moral. In this way the moral shines in
the individuality now made free as individual impulsion
toward the moral, just as ideas arise from the perception
of nature.

The two souls had not pressed on to this moral intuition.
Hence they shrank back (unconsciously) from life because
this could have been maintained only in the sense of natural-
scientific ideas not as yet extended further.

I spoke at that time of ‘‘ moral fantasy ” as the source of
the moral in the isolated human individuality. I was far
from any intention of referring to this source as to something
not wholly real. On the contrary, I wished to point out in
fantasy the force which helps the spiritual world in all its
aspects to break through into the individual man. Of course,
if one is to attain to a real experience of the spiritual, then
it is necessary that the spiritual forces of knowledge should
enter into one—imagination, inspiration, intuition. But to
man conscious of himself as an individual the first ray of a
spiritual revelation comes by means of fantasy; and we
observe, indeed, in Goethe the way in which fantasy holds
aloof from everything fantastic, and becomes a picture of the
spiritually real.

In the family left behind by the Weimar ‘“‘ unknown known,”
I lived for much the greater part of the time that I remained
in Weimar. I had a part of the house for myself; Frau
Anna Eunicke, with whom I was soon on terms of intimate
friendship, watched over all my needs in the most devoted
fashion. She valued greatly the fact that I stood beside her
in her heavy responsibilities for the education of the children.
She had been left after Eunicke’s death a widow with four
daughters and a son.

The children I saw only when there was some occasion
for me to do so. That happened frequently, since I was
looked upon just as if I belonged to the family. My meals,


212 RUDOLF STEINER


however, except the morning coffee and supper, I took
elsewhere.t

In this place where I had formed so delightful a family
connection it was not only I who felt at home. When young
visitors from Berlin who had formed intimate ties with me,
attending the meetings of the Goethe Society, wished for once
to be quite ‘“‘ cozy ” together, they came to me at the Eunicke
home. And I have every reason to assume from the way in
which they acted that they felt very much at ease there.

Otto Erich Hartleben also was happy to be there whenever
he was in Weimar. ‘The Goethe Breviary that he published
was there put together by us two in the space of a few days.

Of my own larger works, The Philosophy of Spiritual
Activity and Nietzsche as the Adversary of His Age there
took form.

And I think that numbers of Weimar friends also spent many
a happy hour—or several hours—with me at the Eunicke home.

In this connection I think most of all about the man to
whom I was bound in intimate love and friendship—Dr.
August Fresenius. He had become a permanent collaborator
at the Museum. Before that he had been editor of the
Deutsche Literaturzeitung. His editorial work was universally
considered as the standard of excellence. I had many things
in my heart against philology, especially as the science was
then pursued by the adherents of Scherer. August Fresenius
armed me over and over again by the way in which he was
a philologist. And he never for a moment made any secret
of the fact that he wished to be a philologist, and only a true
philologist. But with him philology was really the love of
words, which filled the whole man with its vital force; and
the word was to him that human revelation in which all the
laws of the universe are mirrored. Whoever wishes to see
into the mysteries of words must possess an insight into all
the mysteries of existence. The philologist, therefore, must
do nothing less than pursue an universal knowledge. ‘True
philological methods rightly applied can move outward from

* In Germany the midday meal is the principal occasion for the whole


family to be together.
* German Literary News,


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 213


the utterly simple until they cast a powerful illumination upon
extensive and important spheres of life.

Fresenius showed this at that time in an example which
took a strong hold upon my interest. We had discussed the
matter a great deal before he published it in a brief but
weighty article in the Goethe Year Book.

Until the discovery by Fresenius, everyone who had busied
himself with the interpretation of Goethe’s Faust had mis-
understood a statement made by Goethe five days before his
death to Wilhelm von Humboldt. Goethe made this state-
ment: “Es sind iiber sechzig Jahre, dass die Konzeption
des Faust bei mir, jugendlich von vornherein klar, die weitere
Reihenfolge hingegen weniger ausfiihrlich, vorlag.”t The
commentators had understood von vornherein to mean that
from the beginning Goethe had had an idea, a plan, of the
entire /aust drama in which he had at that time more or less
elaborated the details. Even my beloved teacher and friend,
Karl Julius Schréer, was of this opinion.

Consider: If this were correct, then we should have in
Goethe’s Faust a work which Goethe had conceived in main
outline as a young man. We should have to assume that it
was possible for such a temper of soul as Goethe’s so to work
outward from a general idea that the work of elaboration
could go on for sixty years and yet the idea remain fixed.
That this is not so was proved irrefutably by Fresenius’s
discovery. He maintained that Goethe never used the
expression von vornherein in the way ascribed to him by the
commentators. He said, for example, that he had read a
book “ von vornherein, das weitere nicht mehr.” He used
the expression von vornherein only in a spatial sense. It was
thus shown that all Faust commentators were wrong, and that
Goethe had said nothing about a plan of the Faust existing
von vornherein—from the first—but only that the first parts
were clear to him as a young man, and that here and there
he had developed something in the latter parts.


* “ For more than sixty years the conception of Faust has been present
to my mind—the earlier parts clear in my youth, the latter parts less fully
developed.’’

? “ As to the earlier parts but not the latter.”


214 RUDOLF STEINER


Thus an important light was cast upon the whole psychology
of Goethe by the correct application of the philological method.

At that time I only marvelled that something which ought
to have had the most far-reaching effects upon the conception
of Goethe’s mind really produced very little impression, after
it was published in the Goethe Year Book, among those who
ought to have been chiefly interested in it.

But other things than mere philology were the topics
of conversations with August Fresenius. Everything that
stirred the men of that time, everything interesting to us
which happened in Weimar or elsewhere, became the subject
of long conversations between us ; for we spent much time
together. At times we grew excited in conversations about
many things; but they all ended in complete harmony, for
we were convinced of the earnestness with which our respective
views were held even though opposed. So much the more
distressing must it be to me to reflect upon the fact that even
my friendship with August Fresenius sustained a rupture in
connection with the misunderstandings associated with my
relationship to the Nietzsche Archives and to Frau Dr.
Férster-Nietzsche. These friends could form no conception
of that which really had happened. I could do nothing to
satisfy them. For the truth is that nothing at all had hap-
pened. Everything rested upon misconceptions and illusions
which had become fixed in the Nietzsche Archives. What
I was able to say is contained in my article published later
in the Magazin fiir Literatur. 1 felt this misunderstanding
deeply, for the friendship with August Fresenius was firmly
rooted in my heart. |

Another friendship to which I have often looked back was
that which I formed with Franz Ferdinand Heitmiiller, who
had just then—later than Wahle, von der Hellen, and I—
become a collaborator at the Institute.

Heitmiiller’s life was that of a fine soul with the sensibilities
of an artist. He made all his discriminations through his
artisticsense. Intellectualism was remote fromhim. Through
him something artistic entered into the whole tone of our
conversations in the Institute. He had already published
stories marked by a delicate refinement. He was by no means


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 215


a bad philologist, and he did no worse than others in what
he had to work at as a philologist for the Institute. But
he always maintained a sort of inner opposition to what was
worked out in the Institute—especially to the way in which
this work was conceived. Through him it came about that
for a long time we felt very deeply the fact that Weimar had
once been the place giving birth to the most inspired and
famous productions but that men now contented themselves
with going back to the things once produced, “ fixing the
readings,” and giving the best interpretations with super-
stitious care. Heitmiiller published anonymously what he
had to say about this in S. Fischer’s Neue Deutsche Rundschau
in the form of a story—Die Versunkene Vineta. How men
then tried to discover who had made of the once spiritually
flourishing Weimar a drowned city!

Heitmiiller lived in Weimar with his mother, a wonderfully
lovable woman. She became a friend of Frau Anna Eunicke,
and enjoyed coming to her home. And so I then had the
happiness of frequently seeing the Heitmiillers also in the
house in which I lived.

One friend I have to recall who came into my circle rather
early during my stay in Weimar, and with whom I was
associated in intimate friendship until I left, and, indeed, even
after that, when I went backwards and forwards on visits to
Weimar. This was the painter Joseph Rolletscheck. He was
a German Bohemian, and had been attracted to Weimar by the
art school. A personality he was who impressed one as alto-
gether lovable, and to whom one gladly laid open one’s heart.
Rolletscheck was sentimental and slightly cynical at the same
time; he was a pessimist on one side, and inclined on the
other side to value life so little that it did not seem to him
worth the trouble to lay so much stress upon those things
which give ground for pessimism. When he was present,
the talk had to deal much with the injustices of life; and he
could storm endlessly over the injustice which the world had
done to poor Schiller in contrast with Goethe, the chosen
of destiny before his birth.

Although daily contact with such persons kept up a constant

* Venice Submerged.


216 RUDOLF STEINER


and stimulating exchange of thought and feeling, yet it was
impossible for me to speak directly during this Weimar
period about my experience of the spiritual world even to
those with whom I was otherwise on terms of intimacy. I
maintained that men must come to see that the true way
into the spiritual world must lead first to the experience of
pure ideas. The thing for which I argued in every sort of
form was this: that, just as man can have in his conscious
experience colour, tone, and heat qualities, so also he can
experience pure ideas uninfluenced by any perception of the
external, but appearing with the fulness of man’s experience
of himself. And in these ideas there is real and living spirit.
All other experience of the spirit in man, so I then said, must
spring up within consciousness as the result of this experience
of ideas.

The fact that I sought for the experience of the spirit first
in the experience of ideas led to the misunderstanding of which
I have already spoken—that even intimate friends did not see
the living reality in ideas, and considered me a rationalist, or
intellectualist.

Firmest in maintaining an understanding of the living
reality of the ideal world was a young man who came
frequently to Weimar—Max Christlieb. It was rather early
after the beginning of my stay in Weimar that I saw him,
a seeker after the knowledge of the spirit. He had completed
his preparation for the evangelical ministry, was just then
taking his doctor’s examination, and was getting ready to go
to Japan to engage in some sort of missionary work, as he soon
afterward did.

This man saw—inspired, I dare say—that man is living
in the spirit when he lives in pure ideas, and that, since all
of nature must shine forth before the understanding in the
world of pure ideas, therefore in everything material we
have only appearance (illusions) ; that all physical being is
revealed by means of ideas as spirit. It was profoundly
satisfying to me to find a person who possessed an almost
complete understanding of spiritual being. It was an under-
standing of the spiritual being within the idea. There, of
course, the spirit so lives that feeling and creative spiritual


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 217


individualities do not yet separate themselves for the conscious
vision from the sea of general ideal spirit-being. Of these
spirit individualities I could not yet speak to Max Christlieb.
This would have shocked too much his beautiful idealism.
But genuine spirit-being—of this one could speak with him.
He had read with thorough understanding everything that I
had written up to that time. And I had the impression at
the beginning of the ’nineties : ‘‘ Max Christlieb has the gift
of entering into the spiritual world through the spirituality of
the ideal in the way that I must consider the most suitable.”
The fact that he did not later wholly maintain this direction
of mind, but took a somewhat different course—of this there
is Now no occasion to speak.


XXI


TuroucuH the liberal politician of whom I have spoken I
became acquainted with the owner of a book-shop. This
book business had seen better days than those it was passing
through during my stay in Weimar. This was still true when
the shop belonged to the father of the young man whom
I came to know as the owner. The important thing for me
was the fact that this book-shop published a paper which
carried sketchy articles dealing with contemporary spiritual
life and whatever was then appearing in the fields of poetry,
science, and art. This paper also was in a decline; its
circulation had fallen off. But it afforded me the opportunity
to write about much which then lay within the scope of my
thinking or had a relation to this. Although the numerous
essays and book reviews which I thus wrote were read by
very few, it was an important thing to me to have a paper
in which I could publish whatever I pleased to write. ‘There
was a stimulus in this which bore fruit later, when I edited
the Magazin fiir Literatur and was therefore compelled to
share intensely in thought and feeling in contemporary spiritual
life.

In this way Weimar became for me the place to which my
thoughts had often to turn back in later years. The narrow
limits within which my life had been restricted in Vienna
were now expanded, and I had spiritual and human experiences
the results of which appeared later on.

Most important of all, however, were the relationships with
men which were then formed.

When in later years I have recalled to memory Weimar
and my life there, my mental gaze has often been directed
to a house which had become dear to me in very special


measure.
a18


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 219


I became acquainted with the actor Neuffer while he was
still engaged at the Weimar theatre. I appreciated in him at
first his earnest and austere conception of his profession.
Into his judgment concerning the art of the stage he allowed
nothing of the dilettante to enter. This was satisfying for
the reason that people are not always aware that dramatic art
must fulfil genuinely artistic requirements in the same way
_ as does, for instance, music.

Neuffer married the sister of the pianist and composer
Bernhard Stavenhagen. I was introduced into his home. One
was in this way received at the same time in friendly fashion
in the home of the parents of Frau Neuffer and Bernhard
Stavenhagen. Frau Neuffer is a woman who radiates a
spiritual atmosphere over everything about her. Her senti-
ments, deeply rooted in the soul, shone with wonderful beauty
in the free and informal talk in which one shared while in her
home. She brought forward whatever she had to say thought-
fully and yet graciously. Every moment that I spent with
the Neuffers I had the feeling : ‘‘ Frau Neuffer strives to reach
truth in all the relationships of life in a way that is very rare.”

That I was welcomed there was evidenced in the most
varied incidents. I will choose one example.

One Christmas Eve Herr Neuffer came to my home, and—
as I was not in—left the request that I must without fail
come to his home for the ceremony of Christmas gifts. This
was not easy, for in Weimar I always had to share in several
such festivities. But I managed somehow to do this. Then
I found, beside the gifts for the children, a special Christmas
gift for me all nicely wrapped up, the value of which can be
seen only from its history.

I had been one day in the studio of a sculptor. The
sculptor wanted to show me his work. Very little that I
saw there interested me. Only a single bust which lay out
of sight in a corner attracted my attention. It was a bust
of Hegel. In the studio, which belonged to the home of an
old lady very prominent in Weimar, there was to be seen
every possible sort of sculpture. Sculptors always rented
the room for only a short time ; and each tenant would leave
there many things which he did not care to take with him.


220 RUDOLF STEINER


But there were also some things which had lain there for a
long time unobserved, such as the Hegel bust.

The interest I had conceived in this bust led from that
time on to my mentioning it here or there. So this happened
once also in the Neuffer home; there also I added a casual
remark to the effect that I should like to have the bust in my
possession.

Then on the following Christmas Eve it was given to me
as a present at Neuffer’s. At lunch on the following day, to
which I was invited, Neuffer told how he had procured the bust.

He first went to the lady to whom the studio belonged.
He told her that some one had seen the bust in her studio,
and that it would have a special value for him if he could
procure it. The lady said that such things had been in her
house for a long time past, but whether a “ Hegel” bust
was there—as to that she knew nothing. She appeared quite
willing, however, to guide Neuffer around in order that he
might look for it. Everything was ‘‘ thoroughly searched ” ;
not the most hidden corner was left uninspected ; nowhere
was the Hegel bust discovered. Neuffer was quite sad, for
there had been something very satisfying to him in the thought
of giving me pleasure by means of the Hegel bust. He was
already standing at the door with the lady. The maid-servant
came along. She heard the words of Neuffer’s: “ Yes, it is
a pity that we have not found the Hegel bust!” ‘‘ Hegel!”
interjected the maid: ‘‘Is this perhaps that head with the
tip of the nose broken off which is under my bed in the
servant’s room?” Forthwith the final act of the expedition
was carried out, and Neuffer actually succeeded in procuring
the bust ; before Christmas there was still time to supplement
the defective nose.

So it was that I came by the Hegel bust which is one of
the few things that later accompanied me to many different
places. I always liked to look again and again at this head
of Hegel (by Wassmann, the year 1826) when I was deeply
immersed in the world of Hegel’s ideas. And this, as a matter
of fact, happened very often. This countenance, whose
features are the most human expression of the purest thought,
constitutes a life-companion wielding a manifold influence.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 221


So it was with the Neuffers. They spared no pains when
they wished to give someone pleasure by means of something
that had a special relation to him. The children that came
one by one into the Neuffer home had a model mother.
Frau Neuffer brought them up less by what she did than by
what she is—--by her whole being. I had the happiness of being
godfather to one of the sons. Every visit to this house was
the occasion of an inner satisfaction. I was privileged to
make such visits also in later years after I had left Weimar
but returned to and fro to deliver lectures. Unfortunately
this has not been possible now for a long while. It thus
happens that I have not been able to see the Neuffers during
the years in which a painful fate has broken in upon them;
for this family is one of those most sorely put to the test
by the World War.

A charming personality was the father of Frau Neuffer,
the elder Stavenhagen. Before this time he had been engaged
in a practical occupation, but he had then settled down to
rest. He now lived wholly in the contents of the library he
had acquired for himself; and it was a thoroughly congenial
picture to others—the way in which he lived there. Nothing
self-satisfied or toplofty had entered into the lovable old man,
but rather something that revealed in every word the sincere

craving for knowledge.
_ The relationships in Weimar were then of such a character
that souls which felt elsewhere unsatisfied would turn up
here. So it was with those who made a permanent home
there, but so also with those who loved to come again and again
as visitors. One had this feeling about many persons : ‘‘ Visits
to Weimar are different for them from visits to other places.”

I had this feeling in a very special way about the Danish
poet, Rudolf Schmidt. He came first for the production of
his play, Der verwandelte Kénig.t During this very first visit
I made his acquaintance. Later, however, he appeared on
many occasions which brought visitors from elsewhere to
Weimar. The fine figure of a man with those wavy locks
was often among these visitors. The way in which a man
“is ” in Weimar had in it something that drew his soul. He

? The King Transformed.


222 RUDOLF STEINER


was a very sharply marked personality. In philosophy he was
an adherent of Rasmers Nielson. Through this man, who
derived his thought from Hegel, Rudolf Schmidt had the most
beautiful understanding of the German idealistic philosophy.
And if Schmidt’s opinions were thus clearly stamped on the
positive side, they were no less so on the negative. ‘Thus he
became biting, satirical, utterly adverse when he spoke of
Georg Brandes. There was something artistic in seeing a
person revealing an entire expansive field of experience poured
out before you in his antipathy. Upon me these revelations
could never make any impression except an artistic one ; for
I had read much from Georg Brandes. I had been especially
‘nterested in what he had written, in a manner rich in spiritual
wealth and out of a wide range of observations and knowledge,
about the spiritual currents of the European peoples. But
what Rudolf Schmidt brought forward was subjectively honest,
and because of the character of the poet himself it was really
captivating.

At length I came to feel the deepest and most heartfelt
love for Rudolf Schmidt; I rejoiced on the days when he
came to Weimar. It was interesting to hear him talk about
his northern homeland, and to perceive what significant
capacities had sprung up in him from the fountain-head of
his northern experiences. It was no less interesting to talk
with him about Goethe, Schiller, Byron. Then he spoke
very differently from Georg Brandes. The latter is always
in his judgments the international personality, but in Rudolf
Schmidt there spoke the Dane. For this very reason he talked
about many things and in many connections in a more inter-
esting way than Georg Brandes.

During the latter part of my stay in Weimar, I became an
‘ntimate friend of Conrad Ansorge and his brother-in-law,
yon Crompton. Conrad Ansorge later developed in a brilliant
way his great artistic powers. Here I need speak only of
what he was to me in a beautiful friendship at the close of
the ‘nineties, and how he then impressed me.

The wives of Ansorge and von Crompton were sisters,
Because of this relationship, our gatherings took place either
at von Crompton’s home or at the hotel Russischer Hof.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 223


Ansorge was an energetically artistic man. He was active
both as pianist and as composer. During the time of our
Weimar acquaintance he set to music poems of Nietzsche and
of Dehmel. It was always a delightful occasion when the
friends who were gradually drawn into the Ansorge-Crompton
circle were permitted to hear a new composition.

To this group belonged also a Weimar editor, Paul Bohler.
He edited the Deutschland, which had a more independent
existence side by side with the official journal, the Weimarische
Zeitung. Many other Weimar friends besides these appeared
in this circle : Fresenius, Hartmiiller, Fritz Koegel, too, and
others. When Otto Erich Hartleben came to Weimar, he
also always appeared in this circle, after it had been formed.

Conrad Ansorge had grown out of the Liszt circle. Indeed,
I speak nothing but the truth when I assert that he considered
himself one of the pupils of the master who understood
him in an artistic sense most truly of all. But it was
through Conrad Ansorge that what had come in living form
from Liszt was brought before one’s mind in the most
beautiful way.

For everything musical which came from Ansorge arose
out of an entirely original, individual human being. This
humanity in him might be inspired by Liszt, but what was
delightful in it was its originality. I express these things
just as I then experienced them ; how I was afterward related
to them or am now related is not here under discussion.

Through Liszt, Ansorge had once at an earlier period been
bound to Weimar; at the time of which I am here speak-
ing, his soul was freed from this state of belonging to
Weimar. Indeed, the characteristic of this Ansorge-Crompton
circle was that it was in a very different relationship to Weimar
from that of the great majority of persons of whom I have
hitherto been able to state that they came into close touch
with me.

Those persons were at Weimar in the way I have described
in the preceding chapter. The interests of this circle reached
outward from Weimar, and so it came about that at the time
when my Weimar work was ended and I had to think about
leaving the city of Goethe, I had formed the friendship of


224 RUDOLF STEINER


persons for whom the life in Weimar was not especially
characteristic. In a certain sense one “lived oneself” out
of Weimar while among these friends.

Ansorge, who felt that Weimar put fetters upon his artistic
development, moved at nearly the same time as I did to Berlin.
Paul Béhler, although editor of the most widely read paper
in Weimar, did not write in the contemporary “ spirit of
Weimar,” but expressed many a sharp criticism, drawn from
a broader range of view, against that spirit. It was he who
always raised his voice when dealing with this theme to place
in the true light what was born of opportunism and littleness
of soul. And in this way it happened that, just at the time
when he was a member of this circle, he lost his place.

Von Crompton was the most lovable personality one could
imagine. In his house the circle passed the most delightful
hours. Frau von Crompton was there the central figure, a
richly spiritual and gracious personality like sunlight to those
who were privileged to be about her.

The whole group stood, so to speak, in the sign of Nietzsche.
They looked upon Nietzsche’s view as possessing greater
interest than all others; they surrendered themselves to that
mood of soul which manifested itself in Nietzsche, considering
it as representing in a certain way the flowering of a genuine
and free humanity. In both these aspects von Crompton
especially was a representative of the Nietzsche followers in
the ’nineties. My own attitude toward Nietzsche did not
change at all within this circle. But the fact that I was the
one who was questioned when any one wished to know some-
thing about Nietzsche brought it about that the relation in
which the others stood to Nietzsche was assumed to be my
own relation also.

But I must say that this circle looked up in a more under-
standing fashion to that which Nietzsche believed that he
knew, and that they sought to express in their lives what lay
:n the Nietzsche ideals of life with greater understanding
than was present in many other cases where Superman and
Beyond Good and Evil did not always bring forth the most
satisfying blossoms

For me the circle was important because of a strong and


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 225


vital energy that bore one along with it. On the other hand,
however, I found there the most responsive understanding
for everything which I thought it possible to introduce into
this circle.

The evenings, made brilliant by Ansorge’s musical com-
positions, its hours filled with interesting talk about Nietzsche
in which all shared, when far-reaching and weighty questions
concerning the world and life formed, so to speak, a satisfying
converse,—these evenings were, indeed, something to which
I can look back with contentment as having given a beautiful
character to the last part of my stay at Weimar.

Since everything which had a living expression in this circle
was derived from a direct and serious artistic experience and
sought to permeate itself with a world-conception which held
to the true human being as its central point, one could not
cherish any sense of dissatisfaction if there was manifested
something opposed to the Weimar of that time. The tone
was different from that which I had experienced previously
in the Olden circle. There much irony found expression ;
one looked upon Weimar also as ‘“‘ human, all too human”
as one would have seen other places if one had been in these.
In the Ansorge-Crompton circle there was present rather—
I mean to say—the earnest feeling: “‘ How can the evolution
of German culture progress further if a place like Weimar
does so little to fulfil its foreordained tasks ? ”’

Against the background of this social intercourse my book
Goethe’s World-Conception came into being, with which
I ended my work at Weimar. Some time ago, when I was
preparing a new edition of this book, I sensed in the way
in which I then shaped my thoughts for the volume an echo
of the inner nature of the friendly gatherings of the circle
I have here described.

In this book there is somewhat more of the personal than
would have been the case had there not re-vibrated in my
mind while I was writing it what had over and over resounded
in this circle with strong and avowed enthusiasm about the
“nature of Personality.” It is the only one of my books
of which I would say just this. All of them I can assert to
have been personally experienced in the truest sense of the

16


226 RUDOLF STEINER


word ; not, however, in this way, when one’s own personality
so strongly enters into the experiences of the personalities
about one. |

But this concerns only the general bearing of the book.
The philosophy of Goethe, as revealed in relation to the realm
of nature, is there set forth as this had already been done in
my Goethe writings of the eighties. Only in regard to details
my views had been broadened, deepened, or confirmed by
manuscripts first discovered among the Goethe archives.

In everything which I have published in connection with
Goethe the thing that I have striven to do has been to set
Goethe’s “‘ world-conception ”’ before the world in its content
and its tendency. From this was to appear, as a result, how that
in Goethe which is comprehensive and spiritually penetrating
into the thing leads to detailed discoveries in the most varied
fields of nature. I was not concerned to point out these single
discoveries as such, but to show that they were the flowers
of the plant of a spiritual view of nature.

To characterize this view of nature as a part of what Goethe
gave to the world—such was my purpose in writing descrip-
tions of this portion of Goethe’s work as a thinker and
researcher. But I aimed at the same objective in arranging
Goethe’s papers in the two editions in which I collaborated,
that in Kiirschner’s Deutsche National-Literatur and also the
Weimar Sophie edition. I never considered it a task which
could fall to my lot because of the entire work of Goethe to
bring to light what Goethe had achieved as botanist, zoologist,
geologist, colour-theorist, in the manner in which one passes
judgment upon such an achievement before the forum of
competent scientists. Moreover, it seemed to me inappro-
priate to do anything in this direction while arranging the
papers for the two editions.

So that part also of the writings of Goethe which I edited
for the Weimar edition became nothing more than a document
for the world-conception of Goethe as revealed in his researches
in nature. Howthis world-conception cast its special light upon
things botanical, geological, etc., this must be brought to the
fore. It has been felt, for instance, that I ought to have
arranged the geological-mineralogical writings differently in


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 227


order that “‘ Goethe’s relationship to geology ” might be seen
from the contents of these. But it is only necessary to read
what I said about the arrangement of the writings of Goethe
in this field in the introductions to my publications in
Kiirschner’s Deutsche Nattonal-Literatur, and there could be
no doubt that I would never have agreed to the point of view
urged by my critics. In Weimar this could have been known
when the editing was entrusted to me. For in the Kiirschner
edition everything had already appeared which had become
fixed in my point of view before the idea had ever arisen of
entrusting to me a task in Weimar. The task was entrusted
to me with full knowledge of this circumstance. I will by
no means deny that what I have done in many single details
in working up the Weimar edition may be pointed out as
“errors’’ by specialists. This may be rightly maintained.
But the thing ought not to be so presented as if the nature of
the edition rested upon my competence or lack of competence,
and not upon my fundamental postulates. Especially should
this not be done by those who admit that they possess no organ
for perceiving what I have maintained in regard to Goethe.
When the question concerns individual errors of fact here
and there, I might point out to those who criticize me in this
respect many much worse errors in the papers I wrote as a
student in the Higher Technical Institute. I have made it very
clear in this account of the course of my life that, even in
childhood, I lived in the spiritual world as in that which was
self-evident to me, but that I had to strive earnestly for
everything which pertained to a knowledge of the outer world.
For this reason I am a man slow in development as to all
the’ aspects of the physical world. The results of this fact
appear in details of my Goethe editions.


XXII


At the end of the Weimar period of my life I had passed my
thirty-sixth year. One year previously a profound revolution
had already begun in my mind. With my departure from
Weimar this became a decisive experience. It was quite
independent of the change in the external relationships of my
life, even though this also was very great. The realization
of that which can be experienced in the spiritual world had
always been to me something self-evident ; to grasp the sense-
world in full awareness had always caused me the greatest
difficulty. It was as if I had not been able to pour the soul’s
experience deeply enough into the sense-organs to bring the
soul into union with the full content of what was experienced
by the senses.

This changed entirely from the beginning of my thirty-
sixth year. My capacities for observing things and events
in the physical world took form both in the direction of
adequacy and of depth of penetration. This was true both
in the matter of science and also of the external life. Whereas
before this time the conditions had been such that large
scientific combinations which must be grasped in a spiritual
fashion were appropriated by me without mental effort, and
that sense-perceptions, and especially the holding of such
facts in memory, required the greatest effort on my part,
everything now became quite different. An attentiveness not
previously present to that which appeals to sense-perception
now awakened in me. Details became important; I had the
feeling that the sense-world had something to reveal which
- it alone could reveal. I came to think one’s ideal should be
to learn to know this world solely through that which it has
to say, without man’s interjecting himself into this by means


of his thought, or by some other soul-content arising within him.
228


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 229


I became aware that I was experiencing a human revolution
at a far later period of life than other persons. But I saw also
that this fact carried very special consequences for the soul’s
life. I learned that, because men pass early out of the
soul’s weaving in the spiritual world to an experience of the
physical, they attain to no pure conception of either the spiritual
or the physical world. They mingle permanently in a wholly
instinctive way that which things say to their senses with
that which the mind experiences through the spirit and which
it then uses in combination in order to “‘ conceive ”’ things.

For me the enhancement and deepening of the powers of
sense-observation meant that I was given an entirely new
world. The placing of oneself objectively, quite free from
everything subjective in the mind, over against the sense-world
revealed something concerning which a spiritual perception
had nothing to say.

But this also cast its light back upon the world of spirit.
For, while the sense-world revealed its being through the
very act of sense-perception, there was thus present to know-
ledge the opposite pole also, to enable one to appreciate the
spiritual in the fulness of its own character unmingled with
the physical.

Especially was this decisive in its vital effect upon the soul
in that it bore also upon the sphere of human life. The task
for my observation took this form : to take in quite objectively
and purely by way of perception that which lives in a human
being. I took pains to refrain from applying any criticism
to what men did, not to give way to either sympathy or
antipathy in my relation to them; I desired simply to allow
““man as he is to work upon me.”

I soon learned that such an observation of the world leads
truly into the world of spirit. In observing the physical
world one goes quite outside oneself ; and just by reason of
this one comes again, with an intensified capacity for spiritual
observation, into the spiritual world.

Thus the spiritual world and the sense-world had come
before my mind in all their opposition. But I felt
opposition to be not something which must be brought into
harmony by means of some sort of philosophical thought—


230 RUDOLF STEINER


perhaps to a “ monism.” Rather I felt that to stand thus
with one’s soul wholly within this opposition meant “ to have
an understanding for life.” Where the opposition seems to
have been reduced to harmony, there the lifeless holds sway—
the dead. Where there is life, there works the unharmonized
opposition ; and life itself is the continuous overcoming, but
also the recreating, of oppositions.

From all this there penetrated into my life of feeling a most
intense absorption, not in theoretical comprehension by means
of thought, but in an experiencing of whatever the world
contains which is in the nature of a riddle.

Over and over again, in order that I might through
meditation attain to a right relationship to the world, I held
these things before my mind: “‘ There is the world full of
riddles. Knowledge would draw near to these. But for the
most part it seeks to produce a thought-content as the solution
of ariddle. But the riddles ’—so I had to say to myself—" are
not solved by means of thoughts. These bring the soul along
the path toward the solutions, but they do not contain the
solutions. In the real world arises a riddle; it is there as
a phenomenon ; its solution arises also 7m reality. Something
appears which is being or event, and this represents the
solution of the other.”

So I said also to myself: ‘‘'The whole world except man
is a riddle, the real world-riddle; and man himself 1s its
solution.”

In this way I arrived at the thought: “‘ Man is able at
every moment to say something about the world-riddle. What
he says, however, can always give only so much of content
toward the solution as he has understood of himself as man.”

Thus knowledge also becomes an event in reality. Questions
come to light in the world ; answers come to light as realities ;
knowledge in man is his participation in that which the beings
and events in the spiritual and physical world have to say.

All this, to be sure, is contained both in its general
significance and in certain passages quite distinctly in
the writings I published during the period I am here
describing. Only it became at this time the most intense
mental experience, filling the hours in which understanding


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 231


sought through meditation to look into the foundations of the
world, and—which is the fact of chief importance—this mental
experience in its strength came at that time out of my objective
absorption in pure, undisturbed sense-observation. In this
observation a new world was given to me; from what had
until this time been present to knowledge in my mind, I had
to seek for that which was the counterpart in mental experience
in order to strike a balance with the new.

The moment I did not think the whole reality of the sense-

world, but contemplated this world through the senses, there
was brought before mie a riddle as a reality ; and in man himself
lies its solution.
_In my whole mental being there was a living inspiration
for that which I later called ‘‘ knowledge by way of reality.”
And especially was it clear to me that man possessed of such
a “knowledge by way of reality’ could not stand in some
corner of the world while being and becoming should be
taking their course outside of him. Understanding became
to me something that belongs, not to man alone, but to the
being and becoming of the world. Just as the roots and
trunk of a tree are not complete if they do not send their
life into the flower, so are the being and becoming of the
world nothing truly existing if they do not live again as the
content of understanding. Having reached this insight, I said
to myself on every occasion at which this came up: ‘“‘ Man
is not a being who creates for himself the content of under-
standing, but he provides in his soul the stage on which for
the first time the world partly experiences its existence and
its becoming.” Were it not for understanding, the world
would remain incomplete.

In thus knowingly living in the reality of the world I
found more and more the possibility of creating a defence
for human knowledge against the view that in this knowledge
man is making a copy, or some such thing, of the world.
For my idea of knowledge he actually partakes in the creation
of the world instead of merely making afterwards a copy
which could be omitted from the world without thereby
leaving the world incomplete.

But this led also to an ever increasing clarity of under-


233 RUDOLF STEINER


standing with reference to the “‘ mystical.” ‘The participation
of human experience in the world-event was removed from
the sphere of indeterminate mystical feeling and transferred
to the light in which ideas reveal themselves. The sense-world,
seen purely in its own nature, is at first void of idea, as the
root and trunk of the tree are void of blossoms. But just
as the blossom is not a disappearance and eclipse of the plant’s
existence, but a transformation of that very existence, so the
ideal world in man as related to the sense-world is a trans-
formation of the sense-existence, and not a darkly mystical
interjection of something indefinite from the human soul-
world. Clear as things physical become in their way in the
light of the sun, so spiritually clear must that appear which
lives in the human soul as knowledge.

What was then present in me in this orientation was an
altogether clear experience of the soul. Yet in passing on
to find a form of expression for this experience the difficulties
were extraordinary.

It was at the close of my Weimar period that I wrote my
book Goethe’s World-Conception, and the introduction to the
last volume that I edited for Kiirschner’s Deutsche National-
Literatur. 1 am thinking especially of what I then wrote as
an introduction to my edition of Goethe’s Spriichen in Prosa,*
and compare this with the formulation of contents in the book
Goethe’s World-Conception. If the matter is considered only
superficially, this or that contradiction can be made out between
the one and the other of these expositions, which I wrote at
almost the same time. But, if one looks to what is vital
beneath the surface—-to that which, in the mere shaping and
formulating of the surface, would reveal itself as perception
of the depths of life, of the soul, of the spirit—then one will
find no contradictions, but, indeed, in my writings of that
period, a striving after means of expression. A striving to
bring into philosophical concepts just that which I have here
described as experience of knowledge, of the relation of man
to the world, of the riddle-becoming and riddle-solving within
the truly real.

When I wrote, about three and a half years later, my book

t Aphorisms in Prose.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 233


Welt und Lebensanschauungen im neunzehnten Jahrhundert, 1
had made still further progress in many things; and I could
draw upon my experience in knowledge here set forth in
describing the individual world-conceptions as they have
appeared in the course of history.-

Whoever rejects writings because the life of the mind
knowingly strives within these—that is, because, in the light
of the exposition here given, the world-life in its striving
unfolds itself still further on the stage of the human mind—
such a person cannot, according to my view, submerge himself
with knowing mind into the truly real. This is something
which at that time became confirmed within me as perception,
although it had long before been vitally present in my con-
ceptual world.

In connection with the revolution in my mental life stand
inner experiences of grave import for me. I came to know
in my mental experience the nature of meditation and its
importance for insight into the spiritual world. Even before
this time I had lived a life of meditation ; but the impulse
to this had come from a knowledge through ideas as to its
value for a spiritual world-conception. Now, however, there
arose within me something which demanded meditation as
a necessity of existence for my mental life. The striving
life of the mind needed meditation just as an organism at
a certain stage in its evolution needs to breathe by means
of lungs.

How the ordinary conceptual knowledge, which is attained
through sense-observation, is related to perception of the
spiritual, became for me, at this period of my life, not
only an experience through ideas as it had been, but one in
which the whole man participated. The experience through
ideas—which, however, takes up within itself the real spiritual
—has given birth to my book The Philosophy of Spiritual
Activity. Experience by means of the whole man attains to
the spiritual world in its very being far more than does experi-
ence through ideas. And yet this latter is a higher stage as
compared with the conceptual grasp upon the sense-world.
In the experience through ideas one grasps, not the sense-

t Conceptions of the World and of Life in the Nineteenth Century.


234 RUDOLF STEINER


world, but a spiritual world which to a certain extent rests
immediately upon this.

While all this was seeking for experience and expression
in my soul, three sorts of knowledge were inwardly present
before me. ‘The first sort is the conceptual knowledge attained
in sense-observation. This is acquired by the soul, and then
sustained within in proportion to the powers of thought there
existent. Repetitions of the acquired content have no other
significance than that this may be well sustained. The second
sort of knowledge is that which is not woven of concepts
taken from sense-observation but experienced inwardly,
independently of the senses. Then experience, by reason of
its very nature, becomes the guarantor of the fact that these
concepts are grounded in reality. ‘To this realization that
concepts contain the guarantee of spiritual reality one attains
with certitude by reason of the nature of experience, just as
one experiences in connection with knowledge through the
senses a certainty that one is not in the presence of illusions
but of reality.

In the case of this ideal-spiritual knowledge one is not
content—as in the case of the sense-knowledge—with the
acquisition of the knowledge, with the result that one then
possesses this in one’s thought. One must make this process
of acquisition a continuous process. Just as it is not sufficient
for an organism to have breathed for a certain length of time
in order then to metamorphose what has been acquired through
breathing into further life processes, so also an acquiring like
that of sense-knowledge does not suffice for the ideal-spiritual
knowledge. For this it is necessary that the mind should
remain in a continuous interchange with that world into which
one has entered through knowledge. This takes place by
means of meditation, which—as above indicated—arises out
of one’s ideal insight into the value of meditating. ‘This
interchange I had sought long before this revolution in my
thirty-fifth year.

What now came about was meditation as a necessity for
the mental life; and with this there stood before my mind
the third form of knowledge. ‘This not only led to greater
depths of the spiritual world, but also permitted an intimate


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 235


living communion with this world. By force of an inner
necessity I was compelled to set up again and again at the
very central point of my consciousness an absolutely definite
sort of conception.

It was this: If in my mind I live in conceptions which rest
upon the sense-world, then, in my direct experience, I am in
position to speak of the reality of what is experienced only so
long as I confront with sense-observation a thing or an event.
‘My sense assures me of the reality of what is observed so long
as I observe it.

Not so when I unite myself through ideal-spiritual know-
ledge with beings or events of the spiritual world. Here
there enters into the single perception the direct experience
of the status of the thing of which I am aware continuing
beyond the duration of observation. For instance, if one
experiences the human ego as the inner being most fundament-
ally one’s own, then one knows in the perceiving experience
that this ego was before the life in the physical body and will
be after this. What one experiences thus in the ego reveals
this directly, just as the rose reveals its redness in the act
of our becoming aware. |

In such meditation, practised because of inner spiritual
necessity, there was gradually evolved the consciousness of
an “inner spiritual man” who, through a more complete
release from the physical organism, can live, perceive, and
move in the spiritual. This self-sufficing spiritual man
entered into my experience under the influence of meditation.
The experience of the spiritual thereby underwent an essential
deepening. ‘That sense-observation arises by means of the
organism can be sufficiently proven by the sort of self-
observation possible in the case of this knowledge. But
neither is the ideal-spiritual knowledge yet independent of
the organism. Self-comprehension shows the following as
to this: For sense-observation the single act of knowing is
bound up with the organism. For the ideal-spiritual knowing
the single act is entirely independent of the physical organism ;
but the possibility that such knowledge may be unfolded at
all by man requires that in general the life within the organism
shall be existent. In the case of the third form of knowing


236 RUDOLF STEINER


the situation is this: it can come into being in the spiritual
man only when he can make himself as free from the physical
organism as if this were not there at all.

A consciousness of all this evolved under the influence of
the life of meditation. I was able truly to refute for myself
the opinion that in such meditation one becomes subject to
a form of auto-suggestion whose product is the resulting
spiritual experience. For the very first ideal-spiritual know-
ledge had been enough to convince me of the reality of spiritual
experience: not only the experience sustained in its life by
meditation, but indeed the very first of all, that whose life thus
merely began. As one establishes absolutely exact truth in
a discriminating consciousness, so I had already done for what
is here brought forward before there could have been any
question of auto-suggestion. ‘Therefore, in the case of what
was attained by meditation, the question could have to do
only with something whose reality I was in a position to test
prior to the experience.

All this, bound up with my mental revolution, appeared
in connection with the result of a practicable self-observation
which, like that described, came to have a momentous signi-
ficance for me.

I felt that the ideal element in the ongoing life retired in
a certain aspect, and the element of will took its place. If
this is to be possible, the will during the unfolding of know-
ledge must succeed in ridding itself of everything arbitrary
and subjective. The will increased as the ideal diminished.
And the will also took over the spiritual knowledge which
hitherto had been controlled almost wholly by the ideal. I
had, indeed, already known that the separation of the soul’s
life into thinking, feeling, and willing has only limited sig-
nificance. In truth there is a feeling and a willing contained
in thinking; only thinking predominates over the others.
In feeling there lives thinking and willing ; in willing, likewise,
thinking and feeling. Now it became to me a matter of
experience that the willing took more from thinking ; thinking
more from willing.

As meditation leads on the one side to a knowledge of the
spiritual, on another side there follows as a result of such


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 239


self-observation the inner strengthening of the spiritual man,
independent of the organism, and the establishment of his
being in the spiritual world, just as the physical man has his
establishment in the physical world. Only one becomes aware
that the establishment of the spiritual man in the spiritual
world increases immeasurably when the physical organism
does not cramp this process of establishment; whereas the
establishment of the physical organism in the physical world
yields to destruction—at death—when the spiritual man no
longer sustains this establishment from itself outward.

For such an experiential knowledge, that form of theory
of cognition is inapplicable which represents human knowledge
as limited to a certain field, and considers the “‘ beyond ”
the “ primal bases,” the “ thing in itself’ as unattainable by
human knowledge. ‘That “ unattainable”’ I felt to be such
only “for the present”’; it can continue unattainable only
until man has evolved within himself that element of
his being which is allied to the hitherto unknown, and can
henceforth grow into one with this in experiential knowledge.
This capacity of man to grow into every form of being became
for me something that must be recognized by the person who
desires to see the place of man in relation to the world in its
true light. Whoever cannot penetrate to this recognition, to
him knowledge cannot give something which really belongs
to the world, but only a copy of some part of the world-
content, something to which the world itself is indifferent.
But through such a merely reproducing knowledge man
cannot grasp a being within himself, which gives to him as
a fully conscious individuality an inner experience of the truth
that he stands fast within the cosmos.

What I wished to do was to speak of knowledge in such
a way that the spiritual should be not merely recognized, but so
recognized that man may reach it with his perception. And
it seemed to me more important to hold fast to the fact that the
“primal basis’ of existence lies within that which man is
able to reach in his totality of experience than to recognize
in thought an unknown spiritual in some sort of “‘ beyond ”
region.

For this reason my view rejected that form of thinking which


238 RUDOLF STEINER


considers the content of sense-experience (colour, heat, tone,
etc.) to be something which an unknown external world calls
up within man by means of his sense-perception while this
external world itself can be conceived only hypothetically.
The theoretical ideas which lie at the foundation of the thinking
in physics and physiology in this direction seemed to my
experiential knowledge as being in very special degree harm-
ful. This feeling increased to the utmost intensity at the
period of my life which I am here describing. All that
was designated in physics and physiology as “ lying behind
- subjective experience” caused me—if I may use such an
expression—discomfort in knowledge.

On the other hand I saw in the form of thinking of Lyell,
Darwin, Haeckel something which, although incomplete as it
issued from them, was nevertheless suitable to a sound mind
according to the order of evolution.

Lyell’s basic principle—to explain by means of ideas which
result from present observation of the earth’s nature those
phenomena which escape from sense-observation because they
belong to past ages—this seemed to me fruitful in the direction
indicated. To seek for an understanding of the physical
structure of man by tracing his form from the animal forms,
as Haeckel does in comprehensive fashion in his Anthropogente,!
appeared to me a good foundation for the further evolution
of knowledge.

I said to myself : ‘‘ If man places before himself a boundary
of knowledge beyond which is supposed to lie * the thing
in itself,’ he thus bars himself from any access to the spiritual
world ; if he relates himself to the sense-world in such a way
that one thing explains another within that world (the present
stage in the earth’s becoming thus explaining past geological
ages ; animal forms explaining that of man), he may thus
prepare himself to extend this intelligibility of beings and
events also to the spiritual.”

As to my experience in this field also I can say: “ This is
something which was just at that time confirmed in me as
perception, whereas it had long before been vitally present
in my conceptual world.”

t The Evolution of Man.


XXITI


WiTH the mental revolution thus described must I bring to
a close the second main division of my life. ‘The paths of
destiny now took a different bearing from what had preceded.
During both my Vienna and also my Weimar period, the
outward indications of destiny manifested themselves in such
directions as fell in line with the content of my inner mental
strivings. In all my writings there is vitally present the basic
character of my spiritual world-conception, even though an
inner necessity required that my reflections should be less
extended into spiritual spheres. In my work as a teacher in
Vienna the goals set up were solely those which resulted
from the insights of my own mind. At Weimar, as regards
my work in connection with Goethe, there was active only
what I considered to be the responsibility attaching to such
a piece of work. I never had to overcome difficulties in order
to bring the tendencies coming from the outer world into
harmony with my own. |

It was just from this course of my life that 1 was able to
perceive the idea of freedom in a form shining clearly within
me, and thus to set it forth. I do not think that the great
significance which this idea had for my own life has caused
me to view it in a one-sided way. ‘The idea corresponds
with an objective reality, and what one actually experiences
of such a thing cannot alter this reality through a conscientious
striving for knowledge, but can only enable one to see into it
in greater or lesser degree.

With this view of the idea of freedom there was united the
“ethical individualism’ of my philosophy, which has been
misunderstood by so many persons. ‘This also at the beginning


of the third division of my life was changed from an element
239 .


240 RUDOLF STEINER


in my conceptual world living within the mind to something
which had now laid hold upon the entire man.

Both in physics and in physiology the world-conception of
that period, to whose forms of thinking I was opposed, as
also the world-conception of biology, which, in spite of its
incompleteness, I could look upon as a bridge leading to a
spiritual conception, required of me that I should continually
improve the formulation of my own conceptions in all these
aspects of the world. I must answer for myself the question :
Can impulses for action reveal themselves to man from the
external world? What I found was this : The divine spiritual
forces, which are the inner soul of man’s will, have no way
of access from the outer world to the inner man. A right
way of thinking both in physics and physiology, as well as
biology, seemed to me to arrive at this result. A way in
nature which gives access from without to the will cannot be
discovered. Therefore no divine spiritual moral impulse can
by such a road from without penetrate to that place in the
soul where the impulse of man’s own will, acting in man,
comes into existence. External natural forces, moreover, can
stimulate only that in man which pertains to nature. In
that case, however, there is no real expression of a free will,
but the continuation of the natural event in man and through
him. Man has then not yet laid hold upon his entire being,
but remains as to the natural element of his external aspect
an unfree agent.

The problem can by no means be—so I said to myself
again and again—to answer this question: Is man’s will free
or not ?—but to answer this quite different one: How is the
way to be attained in the life of the mind which leads from
the unfree natural will to that which is free—that is, which
is truly moral? And if we are to find an answer to this
question we must observe how the divine-spiritual lives in
each individual human soul. It is from the soul that the moral
proceeds ; in its entirely individual being, therefore, must the
moral impulse have its existence.

Moral laws—as commands—which come from an external
environment within which man finds himself, even though
these laws had their primal origin in the spiritual world, do


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 241


not become moral impulses within man by reason of the fact
that he directs his will in accordance with them, but only by
reason of the fact that he himself, purely as an individual,
experiences the spiritual and essential nature of their thought-
content. Freedom has its life in human thought; and it is
not the will which is of itself free, but the thinking which
empowers the will.

So, therefore, in my Philosophy of Spiritual Activity I had
found it necessary to lay all possible emphasis upon the freedom
of thought in discussing the moral nature of the will.

This idea also was confirmed in very special degree through
the life of meditation. The moral world-order stood out
before me in ever clearer light as the one clearly marked
realization on earth of such ordered systems in action as are
to be found in the spiritual regions ranged above. It showed
itself as that which only he lays hold upon in his conceptual
world who is able to recognize the spiritual.

During just that epoch of my life which I am here describing,
all these insights were linked up for me with the lofty com-
prehensive truth that the beings and events of the world will
not in truth be explained if man employs his thinking to
“explain” them; but only if man by means of his thinking
is able to contemplate the events in that connection in which
one explains another, in which one becomes the riddle and
another its solution, and man himself becomes the word for
the external world which he perceives.

Herein, however, was experienced the truth of the con-
ception that in the world and its working that which holds
sway is the Logos, Wisdom, the Word.

I believed that I was enabled by these conceptions to see
clearly into the nature of materialism. I perceived the harm-
ful character of this way of thinking, not in the fact that the
materialist directs his attention to the manifestation of a being
in the form of matter, but in the way in which he conceives
the material. He contemplates matter without becoming
aware that in reality he is in the presence of spirit, which
is simply manifesting itself in material form. He does
not know that spirit metamorphoses itself into matter in
order to attain to ways of working which are possible only


17


242 RUDOLF STEINER


in this metamorphosis. Spirit must first take on the form
of a material brain in order to lead in this form the life of
the conceptual world, which can bestow upon man in his
earthly life a freely acting self-consciousness. To be sure,
in the brain spirit mounts upward out of matter; but only
after the material brain has arisen out of spirit.

I must reject the form of thinking of physics and physiology
only on the ground that this makes of matter that is not
vitally experienced but only conceived through thought the
external cause of man’s spiritual experience; and, moreover,
this matter is so conceived in thought that it is impossible
to trace it to the point where it is spirit. Such matter, which
this way of thinking postulates as real, is in no sense real.
The fundamental error of the materialistically-minded thinkers
about nature consists in their impossible idea of matter.
Through this they bar before themselves the way leading to
spiritual existence. A material nature which stimulates in
the soul merely that which man experiences within nature
makes the world an “illusion.” 'The intensity with which
these ideas entered into my mental life led me four years
later to elaborate them in my work Conception of the World and
of Life in the Thirteenth Century, in the chapter entitled “ Die
Welt als Illusion.”! (In later enlarged editions this work
was given the title Rdtsel der Philosophie.)

In the biological form of conceptions it is impossible in the
same manner to fall into typical ways of thought which remove
the thing so conceived wholly out of the sphere that is open
to man’s experience, and therefore to leave behind in his mind
an illusion as to this. Here one cannot actually arrive at this
explanation : ‘‘ Outside of man there is a world of which he
experiences nothing, which makes an impression on him only
through his senses; an impression, however, which may be
utterly unlike that which causes it.” If a man suppresses
within his mental life the more weighty elements of thinking,
he may believe, indeed, that he has uttered something when
he asserts that to the subjective perception of light the
objective counterpart consists of a wave-form in ether—such
was then the conception ; but one must be an absolute fanatic

x “The World as Ilusion.” * Riddles of Philosophy.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 243


¢


if one proposes to “‘ explain” in this way that also which is
perceived in the realm of the living.

In no case, so I said to myself, does such a conception of
ideas pertaining to nature penetrate to ideas concerning the
moral order of the world. Such a conception can view this
only as something which drops down into the physical world
of man from a sphere foreign to man’s knowledge.

The fact that these questions confronted my mind I cannot
consider as having a significance for the third phase of my
life; for they had confronted me for a long time. But it
was significant for me that the whole sphere of knowledge
within my mind—without changing anything essential in its
content—attained by means of these questions to a quickness
of vital activity in a greatly heightened sense as compared
with what had hitherto been the case. In the Logos lives the
human soul; how does the external world live in this Logos?
This is the basic question in my Theory of Congestion in
Goethe’s World-Conception (of the middle of the eighties) ; such
it continued for my writing Wahrheit und Wissenschaft and
The Philosophy of Spiritual Activity. ‘There were dominant
in this orientation of soul all the ideas I was able to formulate
in the effort to penetrate into the substrata of the soul from
which Goethe sought to bring light for the phenomena of
the world.

That which especially concerned me during the phase
of my life here set forth was the fact that the ideas which
I was forced to oppose so strongly had laid hold with the
utmost intensity upon the thinking of that period. People
lived so completely according to these tendencies of mind
that they were not in a position to realize at all the range
of anything which pointed in the opposite direction. I so
experienced the opposition between that which was to me
plain truth and the opinions of my age that this experience
gave the prevailing colour to my life, especially in the years
near the turn of the century.

In every manifestation of the spiritual life the impression
made upon me was drawn from this opposition. Not that


* Truth and Science, the dissertation offered for the degree of Doctor
of Philosophy.


244 RUDOLF STEINER


I regretted everything brought forward by this spiritual life ;
but I had a sense of profound distress in the presence of the
many good things that I could hold dear, for I believed that
I saw the powers of destruction ranging themselves against
these good things, the evolutional germs of the spiritual
life.

So from all directions my life was focused upon this
question : “‘ How can a way be found whereby that which is
inwardly perceived as true may be set forth in such forms
of expression as can be understood by this age ?”’

When one has such an experience, it is as if the necessity
faced one of climbing in some way or other to the scarcely
accessible peak of a mountain. One attempts it from the
most varied points of approach; one remains there still,
forced to feel that all the struggles one has put forth have
been in vain.

I spoke once during the ’nineties at Frankfort-am-Main
concerning Goethe’s conception of nature. I said in my
introduction that I would discuss only Goethe’s conceptions
of life, since his ideas regarding light and colours were such
that there was no possibility in contemporary physics of
throwing a bridge across to these ideas. As for myself,
however, I was forced to view this impossibility as a most
significant symptom of the spiritual orientation of the age.

Somewhat later I had a conversation with a physicist who
was an important person in his field, and who also worked
intensively at Goethe’s conception of nature. The con-
versation reached its climax when he said that Goethe’s
conception regarding colours is such that physics cannot
possibly lay hold of it ; and I—was speechless.

How much there was then which said that what was truth
to me was such that the thought of the age could “ not in
the least lay hold of it.”


XXIV


So this question became a part of my experience: ‘‘ Must
one remain speechless ? ”’

With this shaping of my mental life I then faced the necessity
of introducing into my outer activity an entirely new note.
No longer could the forces which determined my outward
destiny remain in such unity with those inner directive ten-
dencies which came from my experience of the spiritual world,
as had till now been true.

For a long time previously I had thought of bringing to
bear upon my age through a journal those spiritual impulses
which I believed ought to be brought before the public of
that time. I would not be “ speechless,” but would say as
much as it was possible to say.

To found a newspaper myself was something not to be
thought of at that time. The necessary funds and the con-
nections essential to the founding of such a paper were utterly
lacking to me.

So I seized the opportunity which came to me to secure
the editorship of the Magazin fiir Literatur.

This was an old weekly. It was founded in the year of
Goethe’s death (1832), at first as the Magazin fiir Literatur des
Auslandes.* It carried translations of whatever foreign pro-
ductions in all aspects of the intellectual life the editors thought
worthy of being incorporated into the intellectual life of
Germany. Later on the weekly was changed into a Magazin fiir
die Literatur des In- und Auslandes.2 Now it contained poetry,
character studies, criticism, from the whole expanse of the
intellectual life. Within certain limits it was able to do well
in this task. Its activity thus defined fell at a time when a

* Magazine for Foreign Literature.


* Magazine for German and Foreign Literature.
245


246 RUDOLF STEINER


sufficiently large number of persons in the German-speaking
regions desired each week to have whatever was “‘ forthcoming ”
in*the intellectual sphere laid before their minds in brief,
summary fashion. Then in the ’eighties and the ‘nineties,
when the new literary objectives of the younger generation
entered into this peaceful and superior way of sharing in the
intellectual, the Magazine was soon swept into this move-
ment. Its editorship was rather suddenly changed, and it
took its colour for the time being from those who in one way
or another belonged to the new movements. When I suc-
ceeded in securing it in 1897, it was in close relationship
with the strivings of the young literature without having
placed itself in strong opposition to what lay outside these
strivings. But at all events it was not in a position to main-
tain itself financially solely on the basis of its contents. For
this reason it had become, among other things, the organ of
the Freie literarische Gesellschaft.1 ‘This added a little to
the otherwise no longer extensive subscription list. But, in
spite of all this, the situation was such in connection with my
taking over of the Magazine that one had to include all the
subscribers, even the less certain ones, in order just barely
to reach the minimum needed for a livelihood. I could take
over the paper only in case I could include as part of my
work an activity which seemed likely to increase the circle
of subscribers. This was the activity of the Free Literary
Society. I had so to determine the content of the paper
that this Society should be adequately represented. In the
Free Literary Society one expected to find those who had
an interest in the productions of the younger generation.
The headquarters of the Society was at Berlin, where younger
littérateurs had founded it. But it had branches also in many
other German cities. Of course, it soon came about that
many a ‘‘ branch” led a very distinctive existence of its own.
It now became my task to deliver lectures before this Society
in order that the mediation of intellectual life which was to
be effected by the Magazine should also be given a personal
expression.

I had thus a circle of readers for the Magazine into whose

t Free Literary Society.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 247


intellectual needs I had to find my way. In the Free Literary
Society I had an organized group which expected something
quite definite because something quite definite had till now
been offered them. In any case they did not expect that
which I should have liked to give them from my innermost
being. The stamp of the Free Literary Society was deter-
mined by the fact that it wished to form a sort of opposite
to the Literarische Gesellschaft, to which such persons, for
instance, as Spielhagen gave the predominant tone.

It was now a necessity of my status within the spiritual
world that I should truly share in a wholly inward fashion
in this relationship into which I had entered. I made every
effort to root myself in my circle of readers and in the member-
ship of the Society in order to discover out of the spiritual
nature of these men the forms into which I should have to
pour what I wished in a spiritual way to give them.

I cannot say that I had yielded to illusions at the beginning
of this activity and that these were gradually destroyed. But
the very fact of working outward from the circle of readers
and hearers, as it was necessary for me to do, met with greater
and greater opposition. One could count upon no strong and
earnest spiritual motive on the part of the men who had
been drawn about the Magazine before I took it over. The
interests of these men were only in a few cases deeply rooted.
And even in the case of these few there were no strong under-
lying forces of the spirit, but rather a general desire seeking
for expression in all sorts of artistic and other intellectual forms.

So the question soon arose for me whether I was justified
inwardly and before the spiritual world in working within
this circle. For, even though many persons who were con-
cerned were very dear to me, although I felt bound to them
by ties of friendship, yet even these belonged among those
persons who caused the question to arise with respect
to that which I vitally experienced within me: Must one be
speechless ?

Then another question arose. In regard to a great many
persons who had until now come into near and friendly
relations with me, I was privileged to feel that, although they

t The Literary Society.


248 RUDOLF STEINER


did not go along with me very far in our mental life, yet they
assumed something in me which gave value in their eyes to
whatever I did in the sphere of knowledge, and in many other
sorts of life relationships. They so often shared in my way
of life, without further testing of me, after we had come into
relationship.

Those who had till now published the Magazine had no
such feeling. They said to themselves: “‘ In spite of many
traits of a practical life in Steiner, he is nevertheless an
idealist.”” And since the sale of the Magazine had been made
under such conditions that partial payments were to be made
to the former owner within the course of the year, and that
this person had the chief interest in point of fact in the
continuance of the weekly, therefore from his point of view
he could not do otherwise than to provide for himself, and
for the affair in hand, another guarantee than that consisting in
my own personality, regarding which he was unable to say what
effect it would have within the circle of persons who had till
now rallied about the Magazine and the Free Literary Society.
Therefore it was added to the terms of the purchase that
Otto Erich Hartleben should be co-editor, sharing actively in
the work.

Now in reflection upon the orientation of my editorial work
I would not have had it different. For one who stands within
the spiritual world must, as I have made clear in the preceding
pages, learn to know fully through experience the facts of
the physical world. And this had become for me, especially
by reason of my mental revolution, an obvious necessity. Not
to yield to that which I clearly recognized as the forces of
destiny would have been to me a sin against my experience
of the spirit. I saw not only “‘ facts” which then associated
me for some years with Otto Erich Hartleben, but “‘ facts
woven by destiny’ (Karma).

Yet there resulted from this relationship insurmountable
difficulties.

Otto Erich Hartleben was a person absolutely dominated
by the zsthetic. There was something appealing to me in
every manifestation of his utterly esthetic philosophy, even
in his gestures, in spite of the really questionable milieus in


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 249


which he often met me. Because of this attitude of mind
he felt the need, every now and then, of staying for months
at a time in Italy. And, when he returned, there was actually
something Italian in what came to expression out of his nature.
Besides, I felt a strong personal affection for him.

Only it was really impossible to work jointly at what was
now our common field. He did not direct his efforts in the
least toward transplanting himself into the sphere of ideas
and interests pertaining to the readers of the Magazine or
the circle of the Free Literary Society, but wished in both
cases to ““impose”’ what his esthetic feelings said to him.
This acted upon me like something alien. Besides, he often
insisted upon his right as a co-editor, but also often did this
not at all for a long while. Indeed, he was often absent in
Italy for a long time. In this way there came to be a certain
lack of consistency in the Magazine. And, with all his “ ripe
gsthetic philosophy,” Otto Erich Hartleben could never
overcome the “‘ student ” in himself. I mean the questionable
aspect of “studentship,” not, of course, that which may be
brought into later life as a beautiful force of one’s existence
out of one’s student days.

At the time when I had to bind myself to him, an added
circle of admirers had become his on account of his drama
Die Erziehung zur Ehe.t This production had not come into
existence at all from the graceful zsthetic which was so
charming in one’s association with him; it was the product
of that “ exuberance ” and “‘ unrestraint ” which caused every-
thing that came from him, both by way of intellectual pro-
ductions, and also in his decisions regarding the Magazine,
to issue, not from the depths of his nature, but from a certain
superficiality—the Hartleben known to very few of his personal
associates.

It came about, as a matter of course, that, after I removed
to Berlin, where I had to edit the Magazine, I associated with
the circle formed about Otto Erich Hartleben. For this was
the one that rendered it possible for me to supervise what
pertained to the weekly and to the Free Literary Society in
the manner necessary,

* Education for Matrimony.


250 RUDOLF STEINER


This caused me, on the one hand, much suffering ; for I
was thus hindered from seeking out those men, and getting
close to them, with whom delightful relationships had existed
in Weimar. And how I should also have enjoyed calling
frequently on Eduard von Hartmann !

Nothing of this sort happened. The other side claimed
me wholly. And so at one stroke much was taken from me
of a valuable human element which I would gladly have
retained. But I recognized this as a dispensation of destiny
(Karma). It has always been perfectly possible for me, by
reason of the substratum of the soul which I have here
described, to apply my mind with complete interest to two
such utterly different human groups as those associated with
Weimar and those existing round the Magazine. Only
neither of these groups would have found any permanent
satisfaction in a person who associated by turns with those
belonging in soul and mind to polarically opposed world-
spheres. Besides, I should have been forced in such an
intercourse to explain continually why I was devoting my
labour exclusively to that service to which I was obliged to
devote it by reason of what the Magazine was.

More and more it became clear to me that I could no longer
place myself in such a relationship to men as I have described
in connection with Vienna and Weimar. Littérateurs assembled
and learned in literary fashion to know one another as litté-
rateurs. Even with the best, even in the case of the most clearly
marked characters, this element of the writer (or painter or
sculptor) was so deeply embedded in the soul that the purely
human retired wholly into the background.

Such was the impression I received when I sat among these
persons, much as I valued them. All the deeper for this
reason was the impression which I myself received of the
human soul background. Once after I had given a lecture,
and O. J. Bierbaum a reading, in the Free Literary Society
in Leipzig, I sat amid a group in which was also Frank Wede-
kind. I could not take my eyes from this truly rare figure
of aman. I use the term “ figure ’”’ here in a purely physical
sense. Such hands !—as if from a previous earthly life in
which they had achieved things such as only those men can


ee ee eee ee eee eee


eS ee eee


=


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 251


achieve who cause their spirits to stream into the most delicate
branching of the fingers. This may have given an impression
of brutality, because energy had been used up in work, yet
the deepest interest was attracted to what streamed forth
from those hands. And that expressive head—altogether like
a gift of that which came from the unusual note of will in the
hands. He had something in his glance and the play of his
features which gave itself so arbitrarily to the world, but
which especially could withdraw itself again, like the gestures
of the arms expressing what the hands felt. A spirit alien
to the present time spoke from that head. A spirit that really
set itself apart from the human impulses of the present. Only
a spirit that could not inwardly attain to clear consciousness
as to which world of the past was that to which he belonged.
As a writer—I express now only what I perceived in him,
and not a literary judgment—Frank Wedekind was like a
chemist who utterly rejects contemporary views in chemistry
and practises alchemy, even this without sharing inwardly
in it but with cynicism. One could learn much about the
working of the spirit on the form if one received into the
vision of the soul the outer appearance of Frank Wedekind.
In this, however, one must not employ the look of that sort
of “ psychologist’ who ‘“‘ proposes to observe man,” but
the look which shows the purely human against the back-
ground of the spiritual world through an inner dispensation
of destiny, which one does not seek, but which simply comes.

A person who notices that he is being observed by a
“ psychologist ”’ may justly be indignant; but the passing
over from the purely human relationship to “‘ perceiving the
spiritual background ”’ is also purely human, somewhat like
passing from a casual to an intimate friendship.

One of the most unusual personalities of Hartleben’s Berlin
circle was Paul Scheerbarth. He had written poems which
at first appeared to the reader arbitrary combinations of words
and sentences. They are so grotesque that one for this reason
feels oneself drawn on to get beyond the first impression.
Then one finds that a fantastic sense for all sorts of generally
unobserved meanings in words strives to bring to expression
a spiritual content derived from a fantasy of soul, not only


252 RUDOLF STEINER


without foundation, but not in the least seeking for a
foundation. In Paul Scheerbarth there was a vital inner cult
of the fantastic, but one that moved in the sought-out forms
of the grotesque. It is my opinion that he had the feeling
that the man of wit should set forth whatever he does set forth
only in grotesque forms, because others tease everything into
humdrum form. But this feeling of his will not develop even
the grotesque into rounded artistic form, but in a lordly,
purposely senseless mood of soul. And what was revealed
in these grotesque forms must spring from the inner realm
of the grotesque. There was a basic quality of soul in Paul
Scheerbarth of not seeking for clarity in reference to the
spiritual. What comes out of common sense does not
go over into the region of spirit—so said this “ fantast.”
Therefore one does not need to be sensible in order to express
spirit. But Scheerbarth made not one step from the fantastic
to fantasy. And so he wrote out of a spirit that was interesting
but remained fixed in the wild fantastic, a spirit in which
whole worlds of the cosmos gleam and glisten as framework
for stories caricaturing the realm of spirit and yet containing
elevated human experiences. Such is the case in Tarub,
Bagdads beriihmte Kéchin.*

One did not see the man in this light when one came to know
him personally. A bureaucrat, somewhat lifted up into the
spiritual. The ‘‘ outer appearance,” which was so interesting
in Wedekind, was in him quite ordinary, commonplace. And
this impression was still further strengthened if one entered
into conversation with him in the early stages of one’s
acquaintance. He bore within him the most burning hatred
of the Philistines, but had the gestures of a Philistine, their
manner of speech, and behaved as if the hatred came out of
the fact that he had taken on too much from Philistine circles
in his own appearance and was conscious of this and yet
had the feeling that he could not overcome it. One read at
the bottom of his soul a sort of recognition: ‘I should like
to annihilate the Philistines because they have made me one
of themselves.”

But if one passed from this outer appearance to the inner

£ Tarub, Bagdad’s Famous Cook.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 253


nature of Paul Scheerbarth independent of this, there was
revealed an altogether fine spirit-man, only fixed in the
grotesque-fantastic, and remaining incomplete. Then one
realized in his “ luminous ”’ head, in his “‘ golden ”’ heart, the
manner in which he stood in the spiritual world. One had
to say to oneself what a strong personality, penetrating in
vision into the realm of spirit, might there have come into the
world if that incomplete had been at least in some measure
completed. One saw at the same time that the “ devotion
to the fantastic ’’ was already so strong that even a future
completion during this earthly life was no longer within the
realm of the possible.

In Frank Wedekind and Paul Scheerbarth there stood before
me personalities who, in their whole being, afforded the most
significant experience to one who knew the truth of the
repeated earthly lives of men. They were, indeed, riddles
in the present earthly life. One perceived in them what
they had brought with them into this earthly life, and an
unlimited enrichment of their whole personalities stood forth.
But one understood also their incompletenesses as the result
of earlier earthly lives which could not in the present spiritual
environment reach complete unfolding. And one saw how
that which might come out of these incompletenesses needed
future earthly lives.

Thus did many personalities of this group stand before me.
I recognized that meeting them was for me a dispensation of
destiny (Karma).

A purely human, heartfelt relationship I could never win
even with that so entirely lovable Paul Scheerbarth. It was
always the case that in our intercourse the littérateur in Paul
Scheerbarth, as in the others, invariably intervened. So my
feelings for him, affectionate to be sure, were finally restricted
to the attention and interest which I was impelled to feel for
his personality, in such high measure noteworthy.

There was, indeed, one personality in the group whose
living presence was not that of a littérateur but in the fullest
sense human—W. Harlan. But he talked little, always really
sitting as a silent observer. When he spoke, however, his
talk was always either in the best sense brilliant or else genuinely


254 RUDOLF STEINER


witty. He really wrote a great deal, but not exactly as a
littérateur ; rather as a man who must speak out what he had
in his mind, It was just at that time that the Dichterbérse «
had come from his pen, a representation of life full of excellent
humour. I was always glad when I came somewhat early
to our meetings and found Harlan, as the first arrival, sitting
there all alone. One then got close to him. I exclude him,
therefore, when I say that in this group I found only littérateurs
and no “ persons.”” And I think he understood that I had
to view the group in this light. Utterly different paths of life
soon bore us far apart.

The men associated with the Magazine and the Free Literary
Society were evidently woven into my destiny. But I was
in no manner whatever woven into theirs. They saw me
appear in Berlin, became aware that I would edit the Magazine
and work for the Free Literary Society, but did not understand
why I should do this. For the way in which, as regards
the eyes of their minds, I went about among them, offered
them no inducement to go more deeply into me. Although
there did not cling to me a single trace of theory, yet my
spiritual activity appeared to their theoretical dogmatizing as
something theoretical. This was something in which they,
as “‘ artistic natures,” thought they need take no interest.

But I learned in direct perception to know an artistic current
in its representatives. This was no longer so radical as that
appearing in Berlin at the end of the ’eighties and in the early
years of the ‘nineties. It was also no longer such that it
represented absolute naturalism as the salvation of art—as
in the theatrical transformation under Otto Brahms. They
were without any such comprehensive artistic conviction.
They relied more upon that which streamed together out of
the wills and the gifts of individual personalities, which was,
however, utterly without any unified endeavour toward style.

My place within this group became mentally unendurable
because of the feeling that I knew why I was there but the
others knew not.


t Poets’ Exchange.


XXV


ASSOCIATED with the Magazine group was a free Dramatic
Society. It did not belong so intimately with the Magazine
as did the Free Literary Society ; but the same persons were
on the board of directors here as in the other Society, and I
was elected a member of this board immediately after I came
to Berlin.

The purpose of this Society was that of producing plays
which, because of their special character, because they fell
outside the usual taste and tendencies and the like, were at
first not produced by the theatres. It was no light task that
rested upon the directors, to succeed in the midst of so many
dramatic attempts with the “ misunderstood ” plays.

The productions were carried out in such a way that in each
case a company of actors was made up of artists who played
on the most varied stages. With these actors the play was
given in the morning in a theatre rented or else lent freely by
its managers. ‘The actors proved to be very unselfish in rela-
tion to this Society, for it was not able by reason of its limited
means to offer adequate compensation. But neither actors
nor managers had any inner reason to object to the production
of works of an unusual sort. They simply said: “ Before the
ordinary public and at an evening performance, this cannot
be done, since it would cause financial injury to any theatre.
The public is simply not ripe for the idea that the theatre
should serve exclusively the cause of art.”

The activity associated with this Dramatic Society proved
to be of a character in a high degree suited to me; most of
all the part having to do with the staging of the plays. Along
with Otto Erich Hartleben I took part in the rehearsals. We


felt that we were real stage-managers. We gave the plays
255


256 RUDOLF STEINER


their stage forms. In this very art it became evident that all
theorizing and dogmatizing are of no use unless they come
from a vital artistic sense which intuitively grasps in the details
the general requirement of style. One must steadfastly resist
the resort to general rules. Everything which the circumstances
in such a sphere render possible must appear in a flash from
one’s sure sense for style in action, in arrangement of the scenes.
And what one then does, without any logical reflection but
from the sense for style, gives a feeling of satisfaction to every
artist in the cast, whereas a rule derived from the intellect
gives them the feeling that their inner freedom is being inter-
fered with.

To the experiences in this field which were then mine, I
had occasion afterwards again and again to look back with
satisfaction.

The first play that we produced in this way was Maurice
Maeterlinck’s L’intruse.« Otto Erich Hartleben had made
the translation. Maeterlinck was then considered by the
zsthetes as the dramatist who was fitted to bring upon the
stage before the eyes of the susceptible spectator the invisible
which lies amid the gross events of life. That which is
ordinarily called incident in drama, the form of development
in dialogue, Maeterlinck so employs as to produce thereby
upon the susceptible the effect of symbols. It was this
symbolizing that attracted many whose taste had been re-
pelled by the preceding naturalism. All who were seeking
for the “ spirit,” but who did not desire a form of expression
in which a world of spirit is directly revealed, found their
satisfaction in a symbolism that spoke a language not expressed
in naturalistic form and yet entered into the spiritual only
to the extent that this was revealed in the vague blurred form
of the mystic-presentimental. The less one could “tell
distinctly ’’ what lay behind the suggestive symbols, the more
were many enraptured by them.

I did not feel at ease in the presence of this spiritual glimmer-
ing. Yet it was delightful to work at the management of
such a play as The Intruder. For the representation of
just such symbols by appropriate stage means required in

t The Intruder.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 257


an unusual degree a managerial function guided in the way
described above.

Moreover, it became my task to precede the production
with a brief introductory address. This practice, common
in France, had at that time been adopted also in Ger-
many in connection with individual plays. Not, of course,
in the ordinary theatre, but in connection with such under-
takings as were adapted to the Dramatic Society. ‘This did
not occur, indeed, at every production of the Society, but
infrequently: when it seemed necessary to introduce the
public to an artistic purpose with which it was unfamiliar.
The task of giving this brief stage address was satisfying to
me for the reason that it afforded me an opportunity to make
dominant in my speech a mood radiated to me myself from
the spirit. And I was happy to do this in a human environ-
ment which had otherwise no ear for the spirit.

Being vitally within this dramatic art was, at all events,
really important for me at that period. From that time on
I myself wrote the dramatic criticisms for the Magazine.
Concerning such “‘ criticism,’ moreover, I had my own
views, which, however, were little understood. I considered
it unnecessary that an individual should pass “‘ judgment ”’
upon a play and its production. Such judgments, as these
were generally given, should really be reached by the public
for itself alone.

He who writes about a theatrical production should cause
to arise before his readers in an artistic-ideal picture what
combination of fantasy-form stands behind the play. In
artistically fashioned thoughts there should arise before the
reader an ideal poetic reproduction as the living, though un-
conscious, germ from which the author produced his play.
For to me thoughts were never merely something by means
of which reality is abstractly and intellectually expressed. I
saw that an artistic activity is possible in thought-conceptions
just as in colours, in forms, in stage devices. And such a
minor work of art should be created by one who writes
about a theatrical production. But that such a thing should
come about when a play is produced before an audience
seemed to me a necessary co-operation in the life of art.


18


258 RUDOLF STEINER


Whether a play is “ good,” “ bad,” or ‘“‘ mediocre” will
be evident in the tone and bearing of such an “ art-thought
form.” For this cannot be concealed even though one does
not say it in the form of crass judgments. Anything which
is an impossible artistic structure will be visible in the thought-
art reproduction. For one there sets forth the thoughts,
but they appear as utterly unreal if the work of art has not
come from true and living fantasy.

Such a vital working in unison with the living art I wished
to have in the Magazine. In this way something would have
come about that would have given to the journal a character
different from that of merely theoretical discussion and
judgment upon art and the spiritual life. The Magazine
would actually become a member of this spiritual life.

For everything which the art of thinking can do for dramatic
poetry is possible also for theatrical art. It is possible by
means of thought-fantasy to bring into existence that which
the art of the manager has introduced into the stage-conception ;
in this way it is possible to follow the actor, and, not through
criticism but by “‘ positive”’ presentation, cause that which
is alive in him to stand forth. ‘Then one becomes as a “ writer ”’
a formative participant in the artistic life of the time, and not
a ‘“‘judge’”’ standing in the corner, “‘ dreaded,” “ pitied,” or
even despised and hated. When this is practised for all branches
of art, a literary-artistic periodical is in the midst of actual life.

But in such things one always has the same experience.
If one seeks to bring them into effect with persons who. are
engaged in writing, they either fail completely to enter into
these things, because they are contrary to the writer’s habits
of thought, or else they laugh and say: “ Yes, that’s right,
but I have always done so.” ‘They do not observe at all the
distinction between what one proposes and what they them-
selves “‘ have always done.”

One who can go alone on his spiritual path need not be
disturbed in mind by this. But whoever has to work among
persons united in a spiritual group will be affected to the depths
of his soul by these relationships. Especially so if his inner
tendency is one so fixed, grown into him, that he cannot
withdraw from this into another vitally real.


bd


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 259


Neither my articles in the Magazine nor my lectures gave
me at that time inner satisfaction. Only, anyone who reads
them now and thinks that I intended to be a representative
of materialism is mistaken. ‘That I never wished to do.

This can clearly be seen from the essays and abstracts of
lectures that I wrote. It is only necessary to set over against
those individual passages which have a materialistic note
others in which I speak of the spirit, of the eternal. So it is
in the article Ein Wiener Dichter. Of Peter Attenberg I
say there: “‘ What most interests the person who enters
deeply into the world harmony seems foreign to him. .
From the eternal ideas no light penetrates into Attenberg’s
eyes .. .” (Magazin, July 17, 1897). And the fact that this
“eternal world harmony” cannot be meant to signify some-
thing materialistic and mechanical becomes clear in utterances
such as those in the essay on Rudolf Heidenhain (November 6,
1897): ‘‘ Our conception of nature is clearly striving toward
the goal of explaining the life of the organism according to
the same laws by which the phenomena of inanimate nature
must also be explained. General laws of mechanics, physics,
chemistry are sought for in the bodies of animals and plants.
The same sort of laws that control a machine must also be
operative in the organism—only in immeasurably more com-
plicated and scarcely comprehensible form. Nothing is to
be added to these laws in order to render possible an explanation
of the phenomenon we call life. . . . The mechanistic con-
ception of the phenomena of life steadily gains ground. But
it will never satisfy one who has the capacity to cast a deeper
glance into nature’s processes. Contemporary researchers in
nature are too cowardly in their thinking. Where the wisdom
of their mechanistic explanations fails, they say the thing
is to us inexplicable. ...A bold thinking lifts itself to a
higher manner of perception. It seeks to explain by higher
laws that which is not of a mechanical character. All our
natural-scientific thinking remains behind our natural-
scientific experience. At present the natural-scientific form
of thinking is much praised. In regard to this, it is said that
we live in a natural-scientific age. But at bottom this natural-

t ** A Viennese Poet,”


260 RUDOLF STEINER


scientific age is the poorest that history has to show. Its
characteristic is to hang fast to the mere facts and the mechan-
istic forms of explanation. Life will never be grasped by
this form of thinking because such a grasp requires a higher
manner of conceiving than that which belongs to the explanation
of a machine.”

Is it not obvious that one who speaks thus of the explanation
of “life? cannot think materialistically of the explanation of
Spite,

But I often spoke of the fact that the “spirit issues ”
from the bosom of nature. What is meant here by “ spirit ”’ ?
All that out of human thinking, feelings, and willing which
begets “culture.” ‘To speak of another “ spirit”? would
then have been quite futile. For no one would have under-
stood me if I had said: “‘ That which appears in man as spirit
and lies at the basis of nature is neither spirit nor nature,
but the complete unity of both.” This unity—the creative
Spirit which in its creating brings matter into existence and
thereby is at the same time matter, but which also shows itself
wholly as spirit—this unity is grasped by an idea which lay
as far as possible from the habits of thought of that period.
But it would have been necessary to speak of such an idea if
one was to present in a spiritual form of thinking the primal
state of the evolution of earth and man and the spiritual-
material Powers still active to-day in man himself, which on
the one hand form his body and on the other cause to issue
forth the living spiritual by means of which he creates culture.
But external nature would have needed to be so discussed
that in it the primal spiritual-material is represented as dead
in natural laws.

All this could not be given. It could be linked up only with
natural-scientific experience, not with natural-scientific think-
ing. In this experience there was something present which
could set in shining light before a man’s own mind a true,
spirit-filled thinking regarding the world and man—something
out of which might again be found the spirit now lost from the
sort of knowledge confirmed by tradition and accepted on faith.
The perception of spirit-nature I desired to draw from the
experience of nature. I wished to speak of what is to be found


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 261


on “ this side ”’ as the spiritual-natural, as the essentially divine.
For in the knowledge confirmed by tradition the divine had
come to belong to “ the beyond ”’ because the spirit of ‘‘ this
side ’’ was not recognized and was therefore sundered from the
perceptible world. It had become something which had been
submerged in man’s consciousness into an ever increasing
darkness. Not the rejection of the divine-spiritual, but its
setting within the world, its calling to “ this side,” lay in such
sentences as the following in one of the lectures before the Free
Literary Society : “ I believe that natural science can give back
to us the consciousness of freedom in a form more beautiful than
that in which men have yet possessed it. In the life of our
souls there operate laws which are just as natural as those
which send the heavenly bodies round the sun. But these
laws represent something which ts higher than all the rest of nature.
This something is present nowhere save in man alone. Whatever
flows from this, in that is man free. He lifts himself above the
fixed necessity of laws of the inorganic and organic ; he heeds and
follows only himself.” (The last sentences are italicized here !
for the first time; they were not italicized in the Magazine.
For these sentences see the Magazine of 12th February, 1898.)


t That is, in the German text.


XXVI


INDIVIDUAL assertions regarding Christianity which I wrote
or uttered in lectures at this time appear to be contrary to
the expositions I gave later. In this connection the following
must be noted. At that time, when I used the word
“‘ Christianity,” I had in mind the “ beyond ”’ teaching which
is operative in the Christian creeds. ‘The whole content of
religious experience refers to a world of spirit which is not
attainable by man in the unfolding of his spiritual powers.
What religion has to say, what it has to give as moral precepts,
is derived from revelations that come to man from without.
Against this my view of spirit opposed itself, desiring to experi-
ence the world of spirit just as much as the sense-world in what
is perceptible in man and in nature. Against this likewise
was my ethical individualism opposed, desiring to have the
moral life proceed, not from without by way of precepts obeyed,
but out of the unfolding of the human soul and spirit, wherein
lives the divine.

What then occurred in my soul in viewing Christianity
was a severe test for me. ‘The time between my departure
from the Weimar task and the production of my book Das
Christentum als mystische Tatsache* is occupied by this test.
Such tests are the opposition provided by destiny (Karma)
which one’s spiritual evolution has to overcome.

In my thoughts I perceived that there could result from the
knowledge of nature—though this did not result at that time—
the basis upon which man might attain to insight in the world
of spirit. I therefore laid much stress upon the knowledge
of the foundation of nature which must lead to the knowledge
of spirit. For one who did not stand in living reality within the
world of spirit, such a sinking of himself into a certain course

t Christianity ebb Fact.
202


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 263


of thought signified a mere activity of thought. For one who
experiences the world of spirit, it signifies something quite
different. He is brought into contact with Beings in the
world of spirit who desire to make such tendencies of thought
the sole predominant ones. ‘Their one-sidedness in thinking
does not merely lead to abstract error ; there is a spiritual and
living intercourse with a being which in the human world is
error. Later I spoke of Ahrimanic beings when I wished to
make reference to this. For these it is an absolute truth that
the world must be a machine. They live in a world which
touches directly upon the sense-world.

In my own ideas I never for one moment fell into this world,
not even in the unconscious. For I took pains that all my
knowledge should be reached in a state of discriminating
consciousness. So much the more conscious was my inner
struggle against the demonic Powers who would cause to
come about from the knowledge of nature, not perception of
spirit, but a mechanistic-materialistic form of thinking.

He who seeks for knowledge of spirit must experience these
worlds: for him a mere theoretical thinking about them does
not suffice. At that time I had to save my spiritual perception
by inner battles. These battles stood behind my outer
experience.

In this time of testing I succeeded in advancing farther only
when in spiritual perception I brought before my soul the
evolution of Christianity. This led to the knowledge which
was expressed in the book Christianity as Mystical Fact.
Before this the Christian content to which I had referred had
always been that found in existent creeds. This was true of
Nietzsche also.

In an earlier passage in this biography I have narrated a
conversation concerning Christ that I had with the learned
Cistercian who was a professor in the faculty of Catholic
theology of the University of Vienna. I was in the presence
of a sceptical mood. ‘The Christianity which I had to seek
I did not find at all in the creeds. After the time of testing
had set before me stern battles of the soul, I had to submerge
myself in Christianity and in the world in which the spiritual
speaks thereof.


264 RUDOLF STEINER


In my attitude toward Christianity it can clearly be seen
that I have by no means sought and found in spiritual
science by the path which many persons have ascribed to me.
These state the matter as if I had collected together the know-
ledge of spirit left in ancient traditions. I am supposed to
have elaborated gnostic and other teachings. What is achieved
of the knowledge of spirit in Christianity as Mystical Fact
is brought directly out of the spiritual world. Only when I
wished to show to those who heard my lectures and to the
readers of the books the harmony between the spiritual
perception and the historic traditions did I first take these
traditions and blend them in the content. But nothing existing
in these documents have I blended in the content unless I
had first had this before me in the spirit.

At the time when I made the statements concerning
Christianity so opposed in literal content to later utterances,
it was also true that the real content of Christianity was
beginning germinally to unfold within me as an inner pheno-
menon. About the turn of the century the germ unfolded
more and more. Before this turn of the century came this
testing of the soul here described. The evolution of my soul
rested upon the fact that I stood before the mystery of Golgotha
in most inward, most earnest joy of knowledge.


XXVII


Tue thought then hovered before me that the turn of the
century must bring a new spiritual light to humanity. It
seemed to me that the exclusion of human thinking and willing
from the spirit had reached a climax. A revolutionary change
in the process of human evolution seemed to me a matter of
necessity.

. Many were talking in this way. But they did not see that
man will seek to direct his eyes toward a world of real spirit
as he directs them through the senses toward nature. ‘They
only supposed that the subjective spiritual temper of the soul
would undergo a revolution. ‘That a real, new objective world
could be revealed—such a thought lay beyond the range of
vision of that time.

With the experiences that came to me from my perspective
of the future and from the impressions received from the
world about me, I was forced to turn the eyes of my mind
more and more to the development which marked the
nineteenth century.

I saw how, with the time of Goethe and Hegel, everything
disappeared which knowingly takes up conceptions of a spiritual
world into human forms of thought. ‘Thenceforth knowledge
must not be “ confused’”’ by conceptions from the spiritual
world. ‘These conceptions are assigned to the sphere of
faith and “ mystical ”’ experience.

In Hegel I perceived the greatest thinker of the new age.
But he was just that—only a thinker. To him the world
of spirit was im thinking. Even while I admired immeasurably
the way in which he gave form to all his thinking, yet I perceived
that he had no feeling for the world of spirit which I beheld
and which is revealed behind thinking only when thinking is
empowered to become an experience whose body, in a certain

265


266 RUDOLF STEINER


measure, is thought, and which takes up into itself as soul
the Spirit of the world.

Since in Hegelianism everything spiritual has become
thought, Hegel represented to me the person who brought the
ultimate twilight of the ancient spiritual light into a period
in which the spirit became hidden in darkness from human
knowledge.

All this appeared thus before me whether I looked into the
spiritual world or looked back in the physical world upon the
century drawing to an end. But now there came forth in
this century a figure which I could not trace on into the spiritual
world—Max Stirner.

Hegel was wholly the man of thought, who in his inner un-
folding strives after a thinking which goes ever deeper, and
in going deeper extends to farther horizons. This thinking,
in its deepening and broadening, becomes at last one with
the thinking of the World-Spirit which includes the whole
world-content. And Stirner was all that man unfolds from
himself, bringing this wholly from his individual personal will.
What exists in humanity lies only in the juxtaposition of single
personalities.

I dared not just at that time fall into one-sidedness. As I
stood completely within Hegelianism experiencing this in
my soul as my own inner experience, so must I also wholly
submerge myself inwardly in this opposite.

Against the one-sidedness of endowing the World-Spirit
merely with knowledge must, indeed, the opposite appear,
the assertion of man merely as a will-being.

Had the situation been such that this opposition had simply
appeared in me as an experience of my own mind in its
evolution, I would never have permitted anything of this to
enter into my writing or lecturing. I have always observed
this rule with regard to such mental experiences. But this
particular contradiction—Hegel and Stirner—belonged to
the century. Through this the century expressed itself,

And, indeed, it is true that philosophers are not to be
principally considered in relation to their influence on their
times. Certainly one can mention very strong influences pro-
ceeding from Hegel. But this is not the main thing. Philoso-


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 267


phers show in the content of their thinking the spirit of their
age as a thermometer shows the warmth of a place. In the
philosophers that becomes conscious which lives unconsciously
in the age.

And so the nineteenth century in its two extremes lived
through the impulses expressing themselves through Hegel
and Stirner: impersonal thinking which most delights to
yield itself to a contemplation of the world in which man with
his inner creative powers has no part ; and wholly personal will
with little feeling for the harmonious co-operation of men.
To be sure, all possible ‘‘ social ideals’ appear, but they have
no power to influence reality. ‘This more and more takes
on the form of what can come about when the wills of
individuals work side by side.

Hegel would have the thought of the moral take objective
form more and more in the associated life of men; Stirner
feels that the “individuals ”’ (single persons) are harmed by
everything which thus gives harmonious form to the life of men.

My own consideration of Stirner was connected at that time
with a friendship which had a decisive effect upon very much
in what we are here considering. ‘This was my friendship
with the important Stirner scholar and editor J. H. Mackay.
It was while still in Weimar that I was brought in contact
by Gabrielle Reuter with this personality, to me likewise
altogether congenial. He had occupied himself with those
chapters in my Philosophy of Spiritual Activity which deal
with ethical individualism. He found a harmony between
my discussions and his own social views.

At first it was the personal impression I received from
J. H. Mackay that filled my soul when in company with him.
He bore the “‘ world”? inhim. In his whole inner and outer
bearing there spoke world-experience. He had spent some
time in both England and America. All this was suffused
with a boundless amiability. I conceived a great affection
for him.

When, therefore, J. H. Mackay came to reside permanently
at Berlin, there developed a delightful friendship between us.
This also, unfortunately, has been destroyed by life and
especially by my public discussion of anthroposophy.


268 RUDOLF STEINER


In this instance I must only describe quite objectively how
the work of J. H. Mackay seemed to me at that time, and still
seems, and what effect it had upon me. For I am aware that
he would express himself quite differently about it.

Profoundly hateful to this man was everything in human
social life which is force, Archie. The greatest failure, he
felt, was the introduction of force into social control. In
“communistic anarchy ” he saw a social idea in the highest
degree objectionable because this proposed to bring about
a better state of humanity through the employment of
force.

Now it was a risky thing for J. H. Mackay to battle against
this idea and the agitation based upon it while choosing for
his own social thought the same name which his opponents
had, only with another adjective preceding it. ‘‘ Individualistic
anarchy ” was his name for what he himself represented, and
that, too, as the very opposite of what was then called
“anarchy.” ‘This naturally led the public to form nothing but
biased view concerning Mackay’s ideas. He was in accord
with the American, B. Tucker, who stood for the same
conception. ‘Tucker visited Mackay at Berlin, and in this way
I came to know him.

Mackay is also a poet of his conception of life. He wrote
a novel Die Anarchisten.1 I read this after I had become
acquainted with the author. This is a noble work based upon
faith in the individual man. It describes penetratingly and
with great vividness the social condition of the poorest of the


poor. But it also sets forth how out of the world’s misery


those men will find a way to improvement who, being wholly
devoted to the good forces, so bring these forces to their un-
folding that they become effective in the free association of
men rendering compulsion unnecessary. Mackay had the noble
confidence that men could of themselves create a harmonious
order of life. He considered, however, that this would be
possible only after a long time, when by spiritual ways a
requisite revolution should have been completed within men.
He therefore demanded for the present that those individuals
who were far enough advanced should propagate the idea of


t The Anarchists.


oe weet oe >


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 269


this spiritual way. A social idea, therefore, which would
employ only spiritual means.

Destiny had now given such a turn to my experience with
J. H. Mackay and Stirner that here also I had to submerge
myself in a thought-world which became to me a spiritual
testing. My ethical individualism I felt to be a pure inner
experience of man. It was by no means my intention when I
formulated this to make it the basis of a philosophy of politics.
Now at this time, about 1898, a sort of abyss had to be opened
in my mind in regard to this purely ethical individualism.
It had to be changed from something purely human and
inward to something external. ‘The esoteric must be shifted
to the exoteric.

Then, in the beginning cf the new century, when I had
succeeded in stating my experience of the spiritual in Die
Mystik im Aufgange* and Christianity as Mystical Fact, ethical
individualism again stood after the test in its rightful place.
Yet the testing took such a course that the outward expression
played no part in full consciousness. It took its course just
below this full consciousness, and because of this very proximity
it could influence the forms of expression in which, during the
last years of the past century, I spoke regarding things social.
Certain discussions of that time, however, which seem all too
radical must be compared with others in order to arrive at a
correct conception.

One who sees into the spiritual world always finds his own
being externalized when he ought to express opinions and
conceptions. He enters the spiritual world, not in abstractions,
but in living perceptions. Nature likewise, which is the
sensible copy of the spiritual, does not represent opinions
and conceptions, but places these before the world in their
forming and becoming.

A state of inner movement, which drove into billows and
waves all the forces of my soul, was at that time my inner
experience.

My external private life became one of absolute satisfaction
by reason of the fact that the Eunicke family was drawn to
Berlin and I could live with them under the best of care after

t Mysticism at the Beginning of the Modern Spiritual Life.


270 RUDOLF STEINER


having experienced for a short time the utter misery of living
in a home of my own. My friendship with Frau Eunicke
was soon thereafter transformed into a civil marriage. Only
this shall be said concerning this private affair. Of my
private life I do not wish to introduce anything into this
biography except what concerns my process of development.
Living in the Eunicke home enabled me to have an undisturbed
basis for a life of inner and outer movement. Otherwise,
private relationships do not belong to the public. It is not
concerned in these.

Indeed, my spiritual development is, in reality, utterly
independent of all private relationships. I am conscious of
the fact that this would have been quite the same had the
shaping of my private life been entirely different.

Amid all the movement in my life at that time came now the
continual anxiety concerning the possibility of an existence
for the Magazine. In spite of all the difficulties I faced, it
would have gained a circulation if there had been available
to me the material means. But a periodical which at the
utmost could afford only sufficient compensation to give me
the bare necessities of a material existence, and for which
nothing whatever could be done to make it known, could not
thrive upon the limited circulation it had when I took it over.

So long as I edited the Magazine it was a constant source
of anxiety to me.


XXVIII


AT this difficult time of my life the executive committee of
the Berlin Workers’ School came to me with the request that
I should take charge of the courses in history and practice
in “speaking” in the school. I was at first little interested
in the socialistic connections of the school. I saw the beautiful
task offered me of teaching mature men and women of the
working class, for few young people were among the “ pupils.”
I explained to the committee that, if I took over the teaching,
I must lecture entirely according to my own views of the course
of evolution in human history, not in the style in which this
is customary according to Marxism in Social-Democratic
circles. ‘They still wished to have me as a teacher.

After I had made this reservation, it could no longer disturb
me that the school was a Social-Democratic foundation of
the elder Liebknecht (the father). For me the school consisted
of men and women of the proletariat ; the fact that the great
majority were Social-Democrats did not at all concern me.

But I obviously had to do with the mental character of the
“pupils.” I had to speak in forms of expression to which I
had till then been quite unaccustomed. I had to familiarize
myself with the forms of conception and judgment of these
persons in order to be in some measure understood.

These forms of conceptions and judgments came from two
directions. First, from life. These people knew manual
labour and its results. The spiritual Powers guiding mankind
forward in history did not enter into their minds. It was for
this reason that Marxism, with its “ materialistic conception
of histcry,” had such an easy way with them. Marx main-
tained that the impelling forces in the historic process are
merely economic-material forces, those operative in manual


labour. The “ spiritual factors”? are considered merely a
Pp
271


272 RUDOLF STEINER


sort of by-product which arises from the material-economic
factors—as a mere ideology.

A craving for scientific education had long before grown
up among the workers. But this could be gratified only
by means of the popular materialistic scientific literature.
For this literature alone dealt in the forms of conceptions
and judgments known to the workers. Whatever was not
materialistic was written in such a way that the workers could
not possibly understand it. Thus came about the unspeak-
ably tragic fact that, while the developing proletariat desired
knowledge with the most intense craving, this craving of theirs
was satisfied only by means of the grossest materialism.

It must be confessed that half-truths are imbedded in the
economic materialism which the workers take from Marxism
as the ‘‘ materialistic conception of history.” And these
half-truths are just the thing they easily understand. If I
had taught idealistic history to the complete ignoring of these
half-truths, the students would have found involuntarily in
the lack of these materialistic half-truths the very thing which
would have repelled them in my lectures.

I therefore took as my starting-point a truth which could
be grasped by my hearers also. I showed that to speak of a
mastery by the economic forces up to the sixteenth century,
as Marx does, is nonsense. ‘That from the sixteenth century
on the economic first comes into a relationship which can
be conceived in a Marxian way; and that this process then
reaches its climax in the nineteenth century.

In this way it was possible to speak quite as a matter of fact
of the ideal-spiritual impulses in connection with the preceding
periods of history, and to show that in the most recent times
these had grown weak in comparison with the material-economic
impulses.

In this way the workers arrived at conceptions of capacities
for knowledge, of religious, artistic, and moral impulses in
history, and abandoned the habit of thinking these mere
‘‘ ideology.’”’ It would have been senseless to resort to polemics
against materialism ; I had to cause realism to arise out of
materialism.

In the “ practice in speaking ” little could be done in this


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 273


direction. After I had discussed at the beginning of each
course the formal principles of lecturing and speaking, the
pupils made practice speeches. Inevitably they then brought
forward what was familiar to them from their materialistic
nature.

The “ leaders ” of the labour unions did not at first trouble
themselves at all about the school, and so I had a perfectly
free hand.

It became more difficult for me when the teaching of the
natural sciences was annexed to that of history. ‘There it was
especially difficult to ascend to true conceptions from the
materialistic conceptions dominant in science, especially
among its popularizers. I did this as well as I possibly could.

Now, however, my teaching activity was extended through
the sciences among the workers themselves. I was requested
by numerous workers’ unions to lecture on natural science.
Especially was instruction desired concerning that book then
creating a sensation, Haekel’s Weltrdtsel: In the positive
biological third of this book I saw a comprehensive handbook
on the metamorphosis of living beings. My general convic-
tion that mankind can be led from this side to spirituality
I held to be true also for the workers. I connected my
reflections with this third of the book and said often enough
that the other two-thirds must be considered worthless and
really ought to be cut out of the book and thrown away.

At the celebration of the Gutenberg jubilee I was entrusted
with the festival address before 7,000 type-setters and printers
in a Berlin circus. My manner of speaking to the workers
must therefore have been found congenial.

With this activity destiny had once more transplanted me
into a piece of life into which I had to submerge myself. I
came to see how the single souls among this workers’ group
slumbered and dreamed, and how a sort of mass-soul laid hold
upon men, revolutionizing their conception, judgment, bearing.

But it must not be imagined that the single souls were dead.
In this respect I was able to look deeply into the souls of my
pupils and of the whole workers’ group. This brought me
to the task which I set myself in all this activity. ‘The attitude

t The Riddle of the Universe.
1g


274 RUDOLF STEINER


toward Marxism was not yet what it became two decades
later. Marxism was still something which they elaborated
with complete deliberation as a sort of economic gospel. Later
it became something with which the mass of the proletariat
were apparently obsessed.

The proletariat consciousness then consisted of feelings
which manifested themselves like the effect of mass suggestion.
Many of the single souls said again and again: “ A time must
come in which the world shall evolve spiritual interests ; but
for the present the proletariat must be freed by purely economic
means.”

I found that my lectures wrought much good in their souls.
Even that element was taken up which contradicted materialism
and the Marxian conception of history. Later, when the
leaders learned of my way of working, they fought against
it. Ina gathering of my pupils one of these ‘“ minor leaders ”
spoke. He made this statement: ‘‘ We do not wish freedom
in the proletarian movement ; we wish rational compulsion.”
Because of this the desire arose to drive me out of the school
against the will of my pupils. This activity gradually became
so burdensome to me that, soon after I began my anthro-
posophic work, I dropped it.

It is my impression that if the workers’ movement had been
followed with interest by a greater number of unprejudiced
persons, and if the proletariat had been dealt with under-
standingly, this movement would have developed quite differ-
ently. But we have left the people to live in their own class,
and we have lived in ours. The conceptions of each class of
men held by the others were merely theoretical. ‘There was
discussion of wages when strikes and the like forced it; and
all sorts of welfare movements were established. These
latter were exceedingly creditable.

But the submerging of these world-stirring questions into
a spiritual sphere was wholly lacking. And yet only this
could have taken from the movement its destructive forces.
It was the time in which the “ higher classes ” had lost the
community feeling, in which egoism spread abroad with it
fierce competitive struggles—the time in which the world
catastrophe of the second decade of the twentieth century


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 275


was already being prepared. Side by side with this, the
proletariat evolved the community sense in its own way as
the proletarian class-consciousness. It took up the culture
which had been developed in the “upper classes’ only so
far as this provided material for the justification of the prole-
tarian class-consciousness. Gradually there ceased to be
any bridge between the different classes.

Thus by reason of the Magazine I was under the necessity
of submerging myself in the being of the citizen, and through
my activity among the workers in that of the proletariat.
A rich field, wherein one could knowingly experience the
motive forces of the time.


XXIX


From the spiritual sphere new light on the evolution of
humanity sought to break through in the knowledge acquired
during the last third of the nineteenth century. But the
spiritual sleep in which this acquired knowledge was given
its materialistic interpretation prevented even a notion of the
new light, much less any proper attention to it.

So that time arrived which ought by its own nature to have
evolved in the direction of the spirit, but which belied its
own being—the time wherein it began to be impossible for
life to make itself real.

I wish to set down here certain sentences taken from articles
which I wrote in March 1898 for the Dramaturgische Blatter
(which had become a supplement of the Magazine at the
beginning of 1898). Referring to the art of lecturing, I said:
‘* In this field more than in any other is the learner left wholly
to himself and to chance. . . . Because of the form which our
public life has taken on, almost everybody nowadays has
frequent need to speak in public. ... The elevation of
ordinary speech to a work of artis a rarity. . . . We lack almost
wholly the feeling for the beauty of speaking, and still more
for speaking that is characteristic. . . . To no one devoid of
all knowledge of correct singing would the right be granted
to discuss a singer. ...In the case of dramatic art the
requirements imposed are far slighter. . . . Persons who
know whether or not a verse is properly spoken become
steadily scarcer. ... People nowadays often look upon
artistic speaking as ineffective idealism. . . . We could never
have come to this had we been more aware of the educative
possibilities of speech. . . .”


What then hovered before me could come to a form of
276


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 277


realization only much later, within the Anthroposophical Society.
Marie von Sievers (Marie Steiner), who was enthusiastic on
behalf of the art of speech, first dedicated herself to genuinely
artistic speaking ; and then for the first time it became possible
with her help to work for the elevation of speech to a true
art by means of courses in speaking and dramatic represen-
tations.

I venture to introduce this subject just here in order to show
how certain ideals have sought their unfolding all through
my life, though many persons have tried to find contradictions
in my evolution.

To this period belongs my friendship with the young poet,
now dead, Ludwig Jacobowski. He was a personality whose
dominant mood of soul breathed the breath of inner tragedy.
It was hard for him to bear the fate that made hima Jew. He
represented a bureau which, under the guidance of a liberal
deputy, directed the union ‘‘ Defence against Anti-Semitism ”’
and published its organ. An excessive burden in connection
with this work rested upon Ludwig Jacobowski. And a sort
of work which renewed every day a burning pain; for it
brought home to him daily the realization of the feeling
against his people which caused him so much suffering.

Along with this he developed a fruitful activity in the field
of folk-lore. He collected everything obtainable as the basis
for a work on the evolution of the peoples from primitive
times. Individual papers of his, based upon his rich fund of
knowledge in this field, are very interesting. ‘They were at
first written in the materialistic spirit of the time; but, had
Jacobowski lived longer, he would certainly have been open
toa spiritualizing of his research.

Out of this activity streamed the poetry of Ludwig
Jacobowski. Not wholly original; and yet born of deeply
human feeling and filled with an experience of the powers of
the soul. Leuchtende Tage he called his lyrical poems.
These, when the mood bestowed them upon him, were in his
life-tragedy really something that affected him like days of
spiritual sunlight. Besides, he wrote novels. In Werther der
Jude there lived all the inner tragedy of Ludwig Jacobowski.


t Luminous Days. 2 Werther the Few.


278 RUDOLF STEINER


In Loki, Roman eines Gottest he produced a work born of
German mythology. The soulful quality which speaks from
this novel is a beautiful reflection of the poet’s love of the
mythological element in a folk.

A survey of what Ludwig Jacobowski achieved leaves one
astonished at its fulness in the most divers fields. Yet he
associated with many persons and enjoyed social life. More-
over, he was then editing the monthly Die Gesellschaft 2 which
meant for him an enormous burden of work.

He had a consuming passion for life, whose essence he
craved to know in order that he might mould this into artistic
form.

He founded a society, Die Kommenden,3 consisting of
writers, artists, scientists, and persons interested in the arts.
The meetings there were weekly. Poets read their poems ;
lectures were given in the most divers fields of knowledge
and life. ‘The evening ended in an informal social gathering.
Ludwig Jacobowski was the central point of his ever growing
circle. Everybody was attached to the lovable personality,
so full of ideas, who, moreover, developed in this club a fine
and noble sense of humour.

Away from all this he was snatched by an early death,
when he had just reached thirty years. He was taken off by
an inflammation of the brain, caused by his unceasing
labours.

There remained to me only the duty of giving the funeral
address for my friend and editing his literary remains.

A beautiful memorial of him was made by his friend,
Marie Stona, in the form of a book consisting of papers
by friends of his.

Everything about Ludwig Jacobowski was lovable: his
inner tragedy, his striving outward from this to his ‘‘ luminous
days,’’ his absorption in the life of movement. I keep always
alive in my heart thoughts of our friendship, and look back
upon our brief association with an inner devotion to my
friend.

Another friend with whom I came to be associated at that


t Locki, the Romance of a God. a Society
3 ‘The Coming Ones.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 279


time was Martha Asmers, a woman philosophically thoughtful
but strongly inclined to materialism. This tendency, however,
was modified through the fact that Martha Asmers kept in-
tensely alive the memory of her brother Paul Asmers, who had
died early, and who was a decided idealist.

During the last third of the nineteenth century Paul Asmers
had lived, like a philosophical hermit, in the idealism of the
time of Hegel. He wrote a paper on the ego, anda similar
one on the Indo-Germanic religion—both characteristically
Hegelian in form, but both thoroughly independent.

This interesting personality, who had then long been dead,
was brought really close to me through the sister Martha
Asmers. It seemed to me that in him the spirit-tending
philosophy of the beginning of the century flamed forth like a
meteor toward its end.

Less intimate, but of constant significance for a long time
thereafter, were the relationships which came about between
the “ Friedrich Hagen-ers ”—Bruno Wille and Wilhelm Bélsche
—and myself. Bruno Wille is the author of a work entitled
Philosophie der Befreiung durch das reine Mittel Only the
title coincides with my Philosophie der Freitheit. ‘The content
moves in an entirely different sphere. Bruno Wille became
very widely known through his important Offenbarungen
des Wachholderbaumes,2 a philosophical book written out of
the most beautiful feeling for nature, permeated by the con-
viction that spirit speaks from every material existence.
Wilhelm Bélsche is known through numerous popular writings
on the natural sciences which are extraordinarily popular
among the widest circles of readers.

From this side came the founding of a Free Higher Institute,
into which I was drawn. I was entrusted with the teaching
of history. Bruno Wille took charge of philosophy, Bélsche
of natural sciences, and Theodor Kappstein, a liberally minded
theologian, the science of religion.

A second foundation was the Giordano Bruno Union.
In this the idea was to bring together such persons as were
sympathetic toward a spiritual-monistic philosophy. Emphasis


t Philosophy of Freedom through the Pure Means.
4 Revelations of the funiper Tree.


280 RUDOLF STEINER


was placed upon the idea that there are not two world-principles
—matter and spirit—but that spirit constitutes the sole principle
of all existence. Bruno Wille inaugurated the Union with a
very brilliant lecture based upon the saying of Goethe : ‘‘ Never
matter without spirit.” Unfortunately a slight misunder-
standing arose between Wille and me after this lecture. My
words following the lecture—that long after Goethe had
coined this beautiful expression, he had supplemented it in
impressive fashion, in that he had seen polarity and ascent
as the concrete spiritual shapings in the actual spiritual activity
in existence, and that in this way the general saying first
received its full content—this remark of mine was interpreted
as a reflection upon Wille’s lecture, which, however, I had
fully accepted in the sense he himself intended.

But I brought upon myself the direct opposition of the
leadership of the Giordano Bruno Union when I read a paper
on monism. In this I laid stress upon the fact that the crude
dualistic conception, “ matter and spirit,” is really a creation
of the most recent times, and that likewise only during the
most recent centuries were spirit and nature brought into
the opposition which the Giordano Bruno Union would oppose.
Then I indicated how this dualism is opposed by scholastic
monism. Even though scholasticism withdrew from human
knowledge a part of existence and assigned this part to “‘ faith,”
yet scholasticism set up a world-system marked by a unified
(monistic) constitution, from the Godhead and the divine all
the way to the details of nature. I thus set even scholasticism
higher than Kantianism.

This paper of mine aroused the greatest excitement. It
was supposed that I wished to open the road for Catholicism
into the Union. Of the leading personalities, only Wolfgang
Kirchbach and Martha Asmers stood by me. The rest could
form no notion as to what I really meant to do with the
“misunderstood scholasticism.” In any case, they were
convinced that I was likely to bring the greatest confusion
into the Giordano Bruno Union.

I must call attention to this paper because it belongs to a
time during which, according to the later views of many persons,
I was a materialist. But at that time this materialist passed


a  . a


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 281


with many persons as the one who would swear afresh by
medieval scholasticism.

In spite of all this I was able later to deliver before the
Giordano Bruno Union my basic anthroposophic lecture,
which became the point of departure for my anthroposophic
activity.

In imparting to the public that which anthroposophy
contains as knowledge of the spiritual world, decisions are
necessary which are not altogether easy. The character of
these decisions can best be understood if one glances at a
single historical fact.

In accordance with the quite differently constituted temper
of mind of an earlier humanity, there has always been a
knowledge of the spiritual world up to the beginning of the
modern age, approximately until the fourteenth century. This
knowledge, however, was quite different from anthroposophy,
which is adapted to the conditions of cognition characterizing
the present day.

After the period mentioned, humanity could at first bring
forth no knowledge of the spiritual world. Men could only
confirm the “ ancient knowledge,” which the mind had beheld
in the form of pictures, and which was also available later
only in symbolic-picture form.

This ‘“‘ ancient knowledge ” was practised in remote times
only within the “‘ mysteries.” It was imparted to those who
had first been made ripe for it, the “initiates.” It was not
to reach the public because there the tendency was too strong
to use it in an unworthy manner. This practice has been
maintained only by those later personalities who received
the lore of the “ ancient knowledge ” and continued to foster
it. They did this in the most restricted circles with men
whom they had previously prepared.

And thus it has continued even to the present time.

Of the persons maintaining such a position in relation to
spiritual knowledge whom I have encountered, I may select
one who was active within the Viennese circle of Frau Lang
to which I have referred but whom I met also in other circles
with which I was associated in Vienna. This was Friedrich
Eckstein, the distinguished expert in the “‘ ancient knowledge.”


282 RUDOLF STEINER


While I was associated with Friedrich Eckstein, he had not
written much. But what he did write was filled with the
spirit. No one, however, sensed from his essays the intimate
expert in the “ ancient knowledge.’ This was active in the
background of his spiritual work. Long after life had
removed me from this friend also, I read in a collection
of his writings a very significant paper on the Bohemian
Brothers.

Friedrich Eckstein represented the earnest conviction that
esoteric spiritual knowledge should not be publicly propagated
like ordinary knowledge. He was not alone in this con-
viction ; it was and is that of almost all experts in the “ ancient
wisdom.” ‘To what extent this conviction of the guardians
of the “ancient wisdom,” strongly enforced as a rule, was
broken through in the Theosophical Society founded by
H. P. Blavatsky—of this I shall have occasion to speak later.

Friedrich Eckstein wished that, as “‘ initiate in the ancient
knowledge,” one should clothe what one treats publicly in
the force which comes from this “‘ initiation,” but that one
should separate the exoteric strictly from the esoteric, which
should remain within the most restricted circles of those who
fully understood how to honour it.

If I was to develop a public activity on behalf of spiritual
knowledge, I had to determine to break with this tradition.
I found myself faced by the requirements of the contemporary
intellectual life. In the presence of these the preservation
of mysteries such as were inevitable in ancient times was an
impossibility. We live in the time which demands publicity
wherever any sort of knowledge appears. The point of view
favouring the preservation of mysteries is an anachronism.
The sole and only possibility is that persons should be taught
spiritual knowledge by stages, and that no one should be
admitted to a stage at which the higher portions of this know-
ledge are to be imparted until he knows the lower. This,
indeed, corresponds with the practice in lower and higher
schools even of an ordinary sort.

Moreover, I was under no obligation to anyone to guard
mysteries, for I received nothing from the “ ancient
wisdom”; what I possess of spiritual knowledge is entirely


EE SS ee ee ee ee


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 283


the result of my own researches. When any knowledge
has come to me, only then I set beside it whatever of the
“ancient knowledge” has already been made public from
any side, in order to point out the harmony in mood and, at
the same time, the advance which is possible to contemporary
research.

So, after a certain point of time, it was quite clear to me
that in coming before the public with spiritual knowledge I
should be doing the right thing.


XXX


THE decision to give public expression to the esoteric
from my own inner experience impelled me to write for the
Magazine for August 28, 1899, on the occasion of the one
hundred and fiftieth anniversay of Goethe’s birth, an article
on Goethe’s fairy-tale of The Green Snake and the Beautiful
Lily, under the title Goethes Geheime Offenbarung. 'This
article was, of course, only slightly esoteric. But I could not
expect more of my public than I there gave. In my own mind
the content of the fairy-tale lived as something wholly esoteric,
and it was out of an esoteric mood that the article was written.

Since the ’eighties I had been occupied with imaginations ©
which were associated in my thought with this fairy-tale.
I saw set forth in the fairy-tale Goethe’s way from the
observation of external nature into the interior of the human
mind as he placed this before himself, not in concepts, but
in pictures of the spirit. Concepts seemed to Goethe far too
poor, too dead, to be capable of representing the living and
working forces of the mind.

Now in Schiller’s letters concerning education in esthetics,
Goethe saw an endeavour to grasp this living and working
by means of concepts. Schiller sought to show how the
life of man is under subjection to natural necessity by reason
of his corporeal aspect and to mental necessity through his
reason. And he thought the soul must establish an inner
equilibrium between the two. Then in this equilibrium man
lives in freedom a life really worthy of humanity.

This is clever, but for the real life of the soul it is far too
simple. The soul causes its forces, which are rooted in the
depths, to shine into consciousness, but to disappear again


* Goethe’s Secret Revelation.
284


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 285


in the very act of shining forth after they have influenced other
forces just as fleeting. These are occurrences which even
in arising also pass away ; but abstract concepts can be linked
only to that which continues for a longer or shorter time.

All this Goethe knew through experience ; he placed his
picture-knowledge in a fairy-tale over against Schiller’s
conceptual knowledge.

In experiencing this creation of Goethe’s, one had entered
the outer court of the esoteric.

This was the time when I was invited by Count and Countess
Brockdorff to deliver a lecture at one of their weekly gatherings.
At these meetings there came together seekers from all sorts
of circles. ‘The lectures there delivered had to do with all
aspects of life and knowledge. I knew nothing of all this
until I was invited to deliver a lecture; nor did I know the
Brockdorffs, but heard of them then for the first time. The
theme proposed was an article about Nietzsche. This lecture
I gave. Then I observed that among the hearers there were
persons with a great interest in the spiritual world. There-
fore, when I was invited to give a second lecture, I proposed
the subject “ Goethe’s Secret Revelation,” and in this
lecture I became entirely esoteric in relation to the fairy-tale.
It was an important experience for me to be able to speak in
words coined from the world of spirit after having been forced
by circumstances throughout my Berlin period up to that
time only to let the spiritual shine through my presentation.

The Brockdorffs were leaders of a branch of the Theoso-
phical Society founded by Blavatsky. What I had said
in connection with Goethe’s fairy-tale led to my being in-
vited by the Brockdorffs to deliver lectures regularly before
those members of the Theosophical Society who were
associated with them. I explained, however, that I could
speak only about that which I vitally experienced within me
as spiritual knowledge.

In truth, I could speak of nothing else. For very little of
the literature issued by the Theosophical Society was known
to me. I had known theosophists while living in Vienna,
and I later became acquainted with others. These acquaintance-
ships led me to. write in the Magazine the adverse review


286 RUDOLF STEINER


dealing with the theosophists in connection with the appear-
ance of a publication of Franz Hartmann. What I knew
otherwise of the literature was for the most part entirely un-
congenial to me in method and approach ; I could not by any
possibility have linked my discussions with this literature.

So I then gave the lectures in which I established a connec-
tion with the mysticism of the Middle Ages. By means of the
ideas of the mystics from Master Eckhard to Jakob Boéhme,
I found expression for the spiritual conceptions which in
reality I had determined beforehand to set forth. I pub-
lished the series of lectures in the book Die Mystik im
Aufgange des neuzeitlichen Geisteslebens.t

At these lectures there appeared one day in the audience
Marie von Sievers, who was chosen by destiny at that time to
take into strong hands the German section of the Theoso-
phical Society, founded soon after the beginning of my
lecturing. Within this section I was then able to develop
my anthroposophic activity before a constantly increasing
audience.

No one was left in uncertainty of the fact that I would bring
forward in the Theosophical Society only the results of my
own research through perception. For I stated this on all
appropriate occasions. When, in the presence of Annie
Besant, the German section of the Theosophical Society
was founded in Berlin and I was chosen its General Secretary,
I had to leave the foundation sessions because I had to give
before a non-theosophical audience one of the lectures in
which I dealt with the spiritual evolution of humanity, and
to the title of which I expressly united the phrase “ Eine
Anthroposophie.”’? Annie Besant also knew that I was then
giving out in lectures under this title what I had to say about
the spiritual world.

When I went to London to attend a theosophical congress,
one of the leading personalities said to me that true theosophy
was to be found in my book Mysticism. . . . I had reason
to be satisfied. For I had given only the results of my spiritual
vision, and this was accepted in the Theosophical Society.


* Mysticism at the Beginning of the Modern Spiritual Life.
2 “ An anthroposophy.”


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 287


There was now no longer any reason why I should not bring
forward this spiritual knowledge in my own way before the
theosophical public, which was at first the only audience
that entered without restriction into a knowledge of the spirit.
I subscribed to no sectarian dogmatics ; I remained a man who
uttered what he believed he was able to utter entirely according
to what he himself experienced in the spiritual world.

Prior to the founding of the section belongs a series of
lectures which I gave before Die Kommenden, entitled Von
Buddha zu Christus In these discussions I sought to
show what a mighty stride the mystery of Golgotha signifies
in comparison with the Buddha event, and how the evolution
of humanity, as it strives toward the Christ event, approaches
its culmination. In this circle I spoke also of the nature of
the mysteries.

All this was accepted by my hearers. It was not felt to be
contradictory to lectures which I had given earlier. Only after
the section was founded—and I then appeared to be stamped
as a ‘‘ theosophist ’’—did any objection arise. It was really
not the thing itself ; it was the name and the association with
the Society that no one wished to have.

On the other hand, my non-theosophical hearers would
have been inclined to permit themselves merely to be “ stimu-
lated ”’ by my discussions, to accept these only in a “ literary ”’
way. What lay upon my heart was to introduce into life
the impulse from the spiritual world; for this there was
no understanding. This understanding, however, I could
gradually find among men interested theosophically.

Before the Brockdorff circle, where I had spoken on Nietzsche
and then on Goethe’s secret revelation, I gave at this time a
lecture on Goethe’s Faust, from an esoteric point of view.?

The lectures on mysticism led to an invitation during the
winter from the same theosophical circle to speak there
again on this subject. I then gave the series of lectures which
I later collected into the volume Christianity as Mystical Fact.


* From Buddha to Christ.

2 'This was the lecture which was later published, together with my dis-
cussions of Goethe’s fairy-tale, by the Philosophische-Anthroposophische
Verlag.


288 RUDOLF STEINER


From the very beginning I have let it be known that the
choice of the expression ‘as Mystical Fact’ is important.
For I did not wish to set forth merely the mystical bearing
of Christianity. My object was to set forth the evolution from
the ancient mysteries to the mystery of Golgotha in such a way
that in this evolution there should be seen to be active, not
merely earthly historic forces, but spiritual supramundane in-
fluences. And I wished to show that in the ancient mysteries
cult-pictures were given of cosmic events, which were then
fulfilled in the mystery of Golgotha as facts transferred from
the cosmos to the earth of the historic plane.

This was by no means taught in the Theosophical Society.
In this view I was in direct opposition to the theosophical
dogmatics of the time, before I was invited to work in the
Theosophical Society. For this invitation followed immedi-
ately after the cycle of lectures on Christ here described.

Between the two cycles of lectures that I gave before the
Theosophical Society, Marie von Sievers was in Italy, at
Bologna, working on behalf of the Theosophical Society in
the branch established there.

Thus the thing evolved up to the time of my first attendance
at a theosophical congress, in London, in the year 1902. At
this congress, in which Marie von Sievers also took part, it
was already a foregone conclusion that a German section of the
Society would be founded with myself—shortly before invited
to become a member—as the general secretary.

The visit to London was of great interest to me. I there
became acquainted with important leaders of the Theosophical
Society. I had the privilege of staying at the home of Mr.
Bertram Keightley, one of these leaders. We became great
friends. I became acquainted with Mr. Mead, the very
diligent secretary of the Theosophical Movement. The most
interesting conversations imaginable took place at the home
of Mr. Keightley in regard to the forms of spiritual knowledge
alive within the Theosophical Society.

Especially intimate were these conversations with Bertram
Keightley himself. H. P. Blavatsky seemed to live again in
these conversations. Her whole personality, with its wealth
of spiritual content, was described with the utmost vividness


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 289


before me and Marie von Sievers by my dear host, who had
been so long associated with her.

I became slightly acquainted with Annie Besant and also
Sinnett, author of Esoteric Buddhism. Mr. Leadbeater I did
not meet, but only heard him speak from the platform. He
made no special impression on me.

All that was interesting in what I heard stirred me deeply,
but it had no influence upon the content of my own views.

The intervals left over between sessions of the congress I
sought to employ in hurried visits to the natural-scientific
and artistic collections of London. I dare say that many an
idea concerning the evolution of nature and of man came to
me from the natural-scientific and the historical collections.

Thus I went through an event very important for me in
this visit to London. I went away with the most manifold
impressions, which stirred my mind profoundly.

In the first number of the Magazine for 1899 there appears
an article by me entitled Neujahrsbetractung eines Ketzers.
The meaning there is a scepticism, not in reference to religious
knowledge, but in reference to the orientation of culture
which the time had taken on.

Men were standing before the portals of a new century.
The closing century had brought forth great attainments in
the realm of external life and knowledge. In reference to this
the thought forced itself upon me: ‘“‘ In spite of all this and
many other attainments—for example, in the sphere of art—
no one with any depth of vision can rejoice greatly over the
cultural content of the time. Our highest spiritual needs
strive for something which the time affords only in meagre
measure.” And reflecting upon the emptiness of contemporary
culture, I glanced back to the time of scholasticism in which,
at least in concepts, men’s minds lived with the spirit. ‘‘ One
need not be surprised if, in the presence of such pheno-
mena, men with deeper intellectual needs find the proud
structure of thought of the scholastics more satisfying than
the ideal content of our own time. Otto Willmann has written
a noteworthy book, his Geschichte des Idealismus,2 in which
he appears as the eulogist of the world-conception of


* New Year Reflections of a Sceptic. * History of Idealism.
20


290 RUDOLF STEINER


past centuries. It must be admitted that the human mind
craves those proud comprehensive illuminations through
thought which human knowledge experienced in the philo-
sophical systems of the scholastics.. . . Discouragement is
a characteristic of the intellectual life at the turn of the
century. It disturbs our joy in the attainments of the youngest
of the ages now past.”

And in contrast to those persons who insisted that it was
just “‘ true knowledge” itself which showed the impossibility
of a philosophy comprising under a single conception the
totality of existence, I had to say: “‘ If matters were as they
appear to the persons who give currency to such voices, then
it would suffice one to measure, weigh, and compare things
and phenomena and investigate them by means of the available
apparatus, but never would the question be raised as to the
higher meaning of things and phenomena.”

This is the temper of my mind which must furnish an
explanation of those facts that brought about my anthroposophic
activity within the Theosophical Society. When I had
entered into the culture of the time in order to find a spiritual
background for the editing of the Magazine, I felt after this
a great need to recover my mind in such reading as Willmann’s
History of Idealism. Even though there was an abyss between
my perception of spirit and the form of Willmann’s ideas,
yet I felt that these ideas were near to the spirit.

At the end of September 1g00, I was able to leave the
Magazine in other hands.

The facts narrated above show that the purpose of imparting
the content of the spiritual world had become a necessity
growing out of my temper of mind before I gave up the
Magazine ; that it has no connection with the impossibility
of continuing further with the Magazine.

As into the very element suited to my mind, I entered upon
an activity having its impulse in spiritual knowledge.

But I still have to-day the feeling that, even apart from the
hindrance here described, my endeavour to lead through
natural-scientific knowledge to the world of spirit would
have succeeded in finding an outlet. I look back upon what
I expressed from 1897 to 1900 as upon something which at


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 291


one time or another had to be uttered in opposition to the
way of thinking of the time; and on the other hand I look
back upon this as upon something in which I passed through
my most intense spiritual test. I learned fundamentally to
know where lay the forces of the time striving away from the
spirit, disintegrating and destructive of culture. And from
this knowledge came a great access of the force that I later
needed in order to work outward from the spirit.

It was still before the time of my activity within the
Theosophical Society, and before I ceased to edit the Magazine,
that I composed my two-volume book Conceptions of the
World and of Life in the Nineteenth Century, which from the
second edition on was extended to include a survey of the
evolution of world-conceptions from the Greek period to
the nineteenth century, and then appeared under the title
Rdtzel der Philosophie.

The external occasion for the production of this book is
to be considered wholly secondary. It grew out of the fact
that Cronbach, the publisher of the Magazine, planned a
collection of writings which were to deal with the various
realms of knowledge and life in their evolution during the
nineteenth century. He wished to include in this collection
an exposition of the conceptions of the world and of life,
and this he entrusted to me.

I had for a long time held all the substance of this book in
my mind. My consideration of the world-conceptions had
a personal point of departurein that of Goethe. The opposition
which I had to set up between Goethe’s way of thinking and
that of Kant, the new philosophical beginning at the turning-
point between the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries in
Fichte, Schelling, Hegel—all this was to me the beginning of
an epoch in the evolution of world-conceptions. ‘The brilliant
books of Richard Wahle, which show the dissolution of all
endeavour after a world-conception at the end of the nineteenth
century, closed this epoch. ‘Thus the attempt of the nineteenth
century after a world-conception rounded itself into a whole
which was vitally alive in my view, and I gladly seized the
opportunity to set this forth.

t Riddles of Philosophy.


292 RUDOLF STEINER


When I look back to this book the course of my life seems
to me symptomatically expressed in it. I did not concern
myself, as many suppose, with anticipating contradictions.
If this were the case, I should gladly admit it. Only it was not
the reality in my spiritual course. I concerned myself in
anticipation to find new spheres for what was alive in my mind.
And an especially stimulating discovery in the spiritual sphere
occurred soon after the composition of the Conceptions of
the World and of Life.

Besides, I never by any means penetrated into the spiritual
sphere in a mystical, emotional way, but desired always to go
by way of crystal-clear concepts. Experiencing of concepts,
of ideas, led me out of the ideal into the spiritual-real.

The real evolution of the organic from primeval times to
the present stood out before my imagination for the first time
after the composition of Conceptions of the World and of Life.

During the writing of this book I had before my eyes only
the natural-scientific view which had been derived from the
Darwinian mode of thought. But this I considered only
as a succession of sensible facts present in nature. Within
this succession of facts there were active for me spiritual
impulses, as these hovered before Goethe in his idea of
metamorphosis.

Thus the natural-scientific evolutionary succession, as
represented by Haeckel, never constituted for me something
wherein mechanical or merely organic laws controlled, but as
something wherein the spirit led the living being from the
simple through the complex up to man. I saw in Darwinism
a mode of thinking which is on the way to that of Goethe,
but which remains behind this.

All this was still thought by me in ideal content ; ‘only later
did I work through to imaginative perception. This perception
first brought me the knowledge that in reality quite other
beings than the most simple organisms were present in
primeval times. ‘That man as a spiritual being is older than
all other living beings, and that in order to assume his present
physical form he had to cease to be a member of a world-being
which comprised him and the other organisms. ‘hese latter are
rejected elements in human evolution ; not something out of


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 293


which man has come, but something which he has left behind,
from which he severed himself, in order to take on his physical
form as the image of one that was spiritual. Man is a
microcosmic being who bore within him all the rest of the
terrestrial world and who has become a microcosm by separating
from all the rest—this for me was a knowledge to,,which I
first attained in the earliest years of the new century.

And so this knowledge could not be in any way an active
impulse in Conceptions of the World and of Life. Indeed, I
so conceived the second volume of this book that a point of
departure for a deepening knowledge of the world mystery
might be found in a spiritualized form of Darwinism and
Haeckelism viewed in the light of Goethe’s world-conception.

When I prepared later the second edition of the book,
there was already present in my mind a knowledge of the
true evolution. All through I held fast to the point of view
I had assumed in the first edition as being that which is derived
from thinking without spiritual perception, yet I found it
necessary to make slight changes in the form of expression.
These were necessary, first because the book by undertaking
a general survey of the totality of philosophy had become an
entirely different composition, and secondly because this
second edition appeared after my discussions of the true
evolution were already before the world.

In all this the form taken by my Riddles of Philosophy
had not only a subjective justification, as the point of view
firmly held from the time of a certain phase in my mental
evolution, but also a justification entirely objective. ‘This
consists in the fact that a thought, when spiritually experienced
as thought, can conceive the evolution of living beings only
as this is set forth in my book; and that the further step
must be made by means of spiritual perception.

Thus my book represents quite objectively the pre-anthro-
posophic point of view into which one must submerge oneself,
and which one must experience in this submersion, in order
to rise to the higher point of view. ‘This point of view, as a
stage in the way of knowledge, meets those learners who seek
the spiritual world, not in a mystical blurred form, but in a
form intellectually clear. In setting forth that which results


294 RUDOLF STEINER


from this point of view there is also present something which
the learner uses as a preliminary stage leading to the higher.

Then for the first time I saw in Haeckel the person who
placed himself courageously at the thinker’s point of view
in natural science, while all other researchers excluded thought
and admitted only the results of sense-observation. The
fact that Haeckel placed value upon creative thought in laying
the foundation for reality drew me again and again to him.
And so I dedicated my book to him, in spite of the fact that
its content—even in that form—was not conceived in his sense.
But Haeckel was not in the least a philosophical nature. His
relation to philosophy was wholly that of a layman. For
this very reason I considered the attack of the philosophers
that was just then raging around Haeckel as quite undeserved.
In opposition to them, I dedicated my book to Haeckel, as I
had already written in opposition to them my essay Haeckel
und seine Gegner« Haeckel, in all simplicity as regards
philosophy, had employed thought as the means for setting
forth biological reality ; a philosophical attack was directed
against him which rested upon an intellectual sphere quite
foreign to him, I believe he never knew what the philosophers
wished from him. This was my impression from a conversa-
tion I had with him in Leipsig after the appearance of his
Riddle of the Universe, on the occasion of a presentation of
Borngraber’s play Giordano Bruno. He then said: “ People
say I deny the spirit. I wish they could see how materials
shape themselves through their forces; then they would
perceive ‘spirit’ in everything that happens in a retort.
Everywhere there is spirit.” Haeckel, in fact, knew nothing
whatever of the real Spirit. ‘The very forces of nature were
for him the “ spirit,” and he could rest content with this.

One must not critically attack such blindness to the spirit
with philosophically dead concepts, but must see how far the
age is removed from the experience of the spirit, and must
seek, on the foundation which the age affords—the natural
biological explanation—to strike the spiritual sparks.

Such was then my opinion. On that basis I wrote my
Conceptions of the World and of Life in the Nineteenth Century.

1 Haeckel and His Opponents.


XXXI


ANOTHER collective work which represented the cultural
attainments of the nineteenth century was published at that
time by Hans Kraemer. It consisted of rather long treatises
on the individual branches of knowledge, technical production,
and social evolution.

I was invited to give a description of the literary aspect of
life. So the evolution of fantasy during the nineteenth century
passed through my mind. I did not describe things like a
philologist, who develops such things “ from their sources ”’ ;
I described what I had inwardly experienced of the unfolding
of the life of fantasy.

This exposition also was important for me in that I had to
speak of phenomena of the spiritual life without having recourse
to the experience of the spiritual world. ‘The real spiritual
impulses from this world that manifest themselves in the
phenomena of poetry were left unmentioned.

In this case likewise what was present to my mind was that
which the mental life has to say of a phenomenon of existence
when the mind is at the point of view of the ordinary con-
sciousness without bringing the content of the consciousness
into such activity that it rises up in experience into the world
of spirit.

Still more significant for me was this experience of standing
before the doorway of the spiritual world in the case of a
treatise which I had to write for another work. ‘This was not
a centennial work, but a collection of papers which were to
characterize the various spheres of knowledge and life in so far
as human egoism is a motor force in each sphere. Arthur
Dix published this work. It was entitled Der Hgotsmus}


t Egoism.
295


296 RUDOLF STEINER


and was throughout applicable to the time—the turning- point
between the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.

The impulses of intellectualism, which had been effective
in all spheres of life since the fifteenth century, have their
roots in the “ life of the individual soul ” when these impulses
are really genuine expressions of their own nature. When
man reveals himself intellectually on the basis of the social
life, this is not a genuine intellectual expression, but an
imitation.

One of the reasons why the demand for a social feeling has
become so intense in this age lies in the fact that this feeling
is not experienced with original inwardness in intellectualism.
Humanity in these things craves most of all that which it has not.

To my lot fell the setting forth for this book of Egoismus in
der Philosophie. My paper bears this title only because the
general title of the book required this. The title ought really
to have been Individualismus in der Philosophie.» I sought
to give in very brief form a survey of occidental philosophy
since ‘Thales, and to show how the goal of its evolution has
been to bring the human individual to experience the world
in ideal images, just as it is the purpose of my Philosophy of
Spiritual Activity to set this forth with reference to knowledge
and the moral life.

Again in this paper I stand before the “‘ gateway of the
spiritual world.” In the human individual were pointed out
the ideal images which reveal the world-content. They
appear so that they may wait for the experience whereby the
mind may step through them into the world of spirit. In
my description I held to this position. There is an inner world
in this article which shows how far mere thinking comes in
its grasp of the world.

It is evident that I described the pre-anthroposophic life
of the mind from the most varied points of view before devoting
myself to the anthroposophic setting forth of the spiritual
world. In this there can be found nothing contradictory of
my coming forward on behalf of anthroposophy; for the
world-picture which arises will not be contradicted by anthro-
posophy, but extended and continued further.

t Egoism in Philosophy. 2 Individualism in Philosophy.


THE STORY OP MY ‘LIFE 207


If one begins to represent the spiritual world as a mystic,
any one has a right to say: ‘‘ You speak from your personal
experiences. What you are describing is subjective.’ ‘To
travel such a spiritual road was not given me as my task from
the spiritual world.

This task consisted in laying a foundation for anthroposophy
just as objective as that of scientific thinking when this does
not restrict itself to sensible facts but reaches out for com-
prehensive concepts. All that I set forth in scientific-philo-
sophic manner, and in connection with Goethe’s ideas is
subject to discussion. It may be considered more or less
correct or incorrect; but it strives after the character of the
objective-scientific in the fullest sense.

And it is out of this knowledge, free of the emotional-mystical,
that I have brought the experience of the spiritual world.
It can be seen how in my Mysticism and Christianity as
Mystical Fact the conception of mysticism is carried in the
direction of this objective knowledge. And let it be noted
also how my Theosophy is constructed. At every step taken
in this book, spiritual perception stands as the background.
Nothing is said which is not derived from this spiritual percep-
tion; but, while the steps are being made, the perception
is clothed at first in the beginning of the book in scientific
ideas until, in rising to the higher worlds, it must occupy
itself more and more in freely picturing the spiritual world.
But this picturing grows out of the natural-scientific as the
blossoms of a plant from the stem and leaves. As the plant
is not seen in its entirety, if one fixes one’s eye upon it only
up to the blossom, so nature is not experienced in her entirety
if one does not rise from the sensible to the spiritual.

Therefore that for which I strove was to set forth in anthro-
posophy the objective continuation of science, not to set by
the side of science something subjective. It was inevitable
that this very effort would not at first be understood. Science
was supposed to end with that which antedates anthroposophy,
and there was no inclination so to put life into the ideas of
science as to lead to one’s laying hold upon the spiritual. Men
ran the risk of being excommunicated by the habit of thought
built up during the second half of the nineteenth century.


298 RUDOLF STEINER


They could not muster the courage to break the fetters of mere
sense-observation ; they feared that they might arrive at a
region where each would insist upon his own fantasy.

Such was my orientation of mind when, in 1902, Marie
von Sievers and I entered upon the leadership of the German
section of the Theosophical Society. It was Marie von
Sievers who, by reason of her whole being, made it possible
to keep what came about through us far removed from any-
thing sectarian, and to give to the thing such a character as won
for it a place within the general spiritual and educational life.
She was deeply interested in the art of the drama and of
declamation and recitation, and had completed courses of study
in these art forms, especially in the best institutions in Paris,
which had given to her talent a beautiful development. When
I became acquainted with her in Berlin she was still con-
tinuing her studies in order to learn the various methods of
artistic speech,

Marie von Sievers and I soon became great friends, and
on the basis of this friendship there developed an united work
in the most varied intellectual spheres and over a very wide
area. Anthroposophy, but also the arts of poetry and of
recitation—to cultivate these in common became for us the
very essence of life.

Only in this unitedly cultivated spiritual life could the
central point be found from which at first anthroposophy
would be carried into the world through the local branches of
the Theosophical Society.

During our first visit to London together, Marie von Sievers
had heard from Countess Wachtmeister, an intimate friend of
H. P. Blavatsky, much about the latter and about the tendencies
and the evolution of the Theosophical Society. She was
entrusted in the highest measure with that which was once
revealed as a spiritual content to the Society and the story
of how this content had been further fostered.

When I say that it was possible to find in the branches of
the Theosophical Society those persons who desired to have
knowledge imparted to them from the spiritual world, I do not
mean that those persons enrolled in the Theosophical Society
could be considered before all others as being of such a character.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 299


Many of these, however, proved very soon to have a high
degree of understanding in reference to my form of spiritual
knowledge.

But a large part of the members were fanatical followers of
individual heads of the Theosophical Society. They swore
by the dogmas given out by these heads, who acted in a strongly
sectarian spirit.

This action of the Theosophical Society repelled me by
the triviality and dilettantism inherent in it. Only among
the English theosophists did I find an inner content, which
also, however, rested upon Blavatsky, and which was then
fostered by Annie Besant and others in a literal fashion. I
could never have worked in the manner in which these theoso-
phists worked. But I considered what lived among them as
a spiritual centre with which one could worthily unite when
one earnestly desired the spread of spiritual knowledge.

So it was not the united membership in the Theosophical
Society upon which Marie von Sievers and I counted, but
chiefly those persons who were present with heart and mind
whenever spiritual knowledge in an earnest sense was being
cultivated.

This working within the existing branches of the Theo-
sophical Society, which was necessary as a starting-point,
comprised only a part of our activity. The chief thing was
the arrangement for public lectures in which I spoke to a
public not belonging to the Theosophical Society that came to
my lectures only because of their content.

Of persons who learned in this manner what I had to say
about the spiritual world and of those who through the
activity in one or another theosophical tendency found their
way to this mode of learning—of these persons there was com-
prised within the branches of the Theosophical Society that
which later became the Anthroposophical Society.

Among the various charges that have been directed against
me in reference to my work in the Theosophical Society—
even from the side of the Society itself—this also has been
raised: that to a certain extent I used this Society, which
already had a standing in the world, as a spring-board in order
to render easier the way for my own spiritual knowledge.


300 RUDOLF STEINER


There is not the slightest ground for such a statement.
When I accepted the invitation into the Society, this was the
sole institution worthy of serious consideration in which there
was present a real spiritual life. Had the mood, bearing, and
work of the Society remained as they then were, the withdrawal
of my friend and myself need never have occurred. The
Anthroposophical Society might only have been formed officially
within the Theosophical Society as a special section.

But even as early as 1906 things were already beginning to
be manifest and effective in the Theosophical Society which
indicated in a terrible measure its deterioration.

If earlier still, in the time of H. P. Blavatsky, such incidents
were asserted by the outer world to have occurred, yet at the
beginning of the century it was clearly true that the earnestness
of spiritual work on the part of the Society constituted a
compensation for whatever wrong thing had taken place.
Moreover, the occurrences had been left behind.

But after 1906 there began in the Society, upon whose
general direction I had not the least influence, practices remi-
niscent of the growth of spiritualism, which made it necessary
for me to warn members again and again that the part of the
Society which was under my direction should have absolutely
nothing to do with these things. The climax in these practices
was reached when it was asserted of a Hindu boy that he was
the person in whom Christ would appear in a new earthly
life. For the propagation of this absurdity there was formed
in the Theosophical Society a special society, that of “ The
Star of the East.” It was utterly impossible for my friend
and me to include the membership of this “‘ Star of the East ”
as a branch of the German section, as they desired and as
Annie Besant, president of the Theosophical Society, especially
intended. We were forced to found the Anthroposophical
Society independently.

I have in this matter departed far from the narration of
events in the course of my life; but this was necessary, for
only these later facts can throw the right light on the purposes
to which I bound myself in entering the Society at the beginning
of the century.

When I first spoke at the congress of the Theosophical Society


THE SPFORY OF (MY (LIFE 301


in London in 1902, I said that the unity into which the
individual sections would combine should consist in the fact
that each one should bring to the centre what it held within
itself ; and I gave sharp warning that I should expect this most
especially of the German section. J made it clear that this
section would never conduct itself as the representative of set
dogmas but as composed of places independent of one another in
spiritual research, which desired to reach mutual understandings
in the conferences of the whole Society in regard to the fostering
of genuine spiritual life.


XXXIT


IN reading discussions of anthroposophy such as appear
nowadays there is something painful in having to meet again
and again such thoughts, for instance, as ‘“ that the World War
has been the cause of moods in men’s souls fitted to set up all
sorts of ‘ mystical ’ and similar spiritual currents” ; and then
to have anthroposophy included among these currents.

Against this stands the fact that the anthroposophic move-
ment was founded at the beginning of the century, and that
nothing essential has been done within this movement since
its foundation that has not been derived from the inner life
of the spirit. ‘Twenty-five years ago I had a content of spiritual
impressions within me. I gave the substance of these in
lectures, treatises, and books. What I did was done from
spiritual impulses. In its essence every theme was drawn
from the spirit. During the war I discussed also topics which
were suggested by the events of the times. But in these there
was nothing basic due to any intention of taking advantage
of the mood of the time for propagation of anthroposophy.
These discussions occurred because men desired to have certain
events illuminated by the knowledge which comes from the
spiritual world.

On behalf of anthroposophy no endeavour has ever been
made for anything except that it should take that course of
development made possible by its own inner force bestowed
upon it from the spirit. It is as far as possible out of harmony
with anthroposophy to imagine that it would desire to win
something from the dark abysses of the soul during the World
War. That the number of those interested in anthroposophy
increased after the war, that the Anthroposophical Society
increased in its membership—these things are true; only one
ought to note that all these facts have never changed anything


302


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 303


in the development of the anthroposophical reality in the sense
in which this took its full form at the beginning of the
century.

The form which was to be given to anthroposophy from
inner spiritual being had at first to struggle against all sorts
of opposition from the theosophists in Germany.

There was, first of all, the justification of spiritual knowledge
before the “ scientific”? mode of thought of the time. That
this justification is necessary I have stated frequently in this
story of my life. I took that mode of thought which rightly
passes as “‘ scientific”? in natural knowledge and extended
this into spiritual knowledge. Through this means, the
mode of knowledge of nature became, to be sure, something
different for the observation of spirit from what it is for the
observation of nature, but the character which causes it to
be looked upon as “‘ scientific’? was maintained.

For this mode of scientific shaping of spiritual knowledge,
those persons who considered themselves representatives of
the theosophical movement at the beginning of the century
never had any feeling or interest.

These were the persons grouped about Dr. Hiibbe-Schleiden.
He, as a personal friend of H. P. Blavatsky, had established a
theosophical society as early as the eighties, beginning at
Elberfeld. In this foundation H. P. Blavatsky herself partici-
pated. Dr. Hiibbe-Schleiden then published a journal, Dze
Sphinx, in which the theosophical world-conception should be
upheld. The whole movement failed ; and, when the German
section of the Theosophical Society was founded, there was
nothing existing except a number of persons, who looked upon
me, however, as a sort of trespasser in their territory. ‘These
persons awaited the “scientific founding” of theosophy by
Dr. Hiibbe-Schleiden. They held the opinion that, until this
should occur, nothing was to be done in this matter within
German territory. What I began to do appeared to them as
a disturbance of their “‘ waiting,” as something utterly blame-
worthy. Yet they did not at once withdraw ; for theosophy
was their affair, and, if anything should happen in this, they
did not wish to be absent.

What did they understand of the “science” that Dr.


304. RUDOLF STEINER


Hiibbe-Schleiden was to establish, whereby theosophy would
be “ proven”? ‘To anthroposophy they conceded nothing.

They understood by this term the atomistic bases of natural-
scientific theorizing. The phenomena of nature were “ ex-
plained” when one conceived the “ primal parts” of the
world-substance as grouping into atoms and these into mole-
cules. A substance was there by reason of the fact that it
represented a certain structure of atoms in molecules.

This mode of thought was supposed to be figurative. Com-
plicated molecules were constructed which were also to be the
basis for spiritual effects. Chemical processes were supposed
to be the results of processes within the molecular structure ;
for spiritual processes something similar must be found.

For me this atomic theory, in the significance given to it
in natural science, was something quite impossible even
within that science ; to wish to carry this over into the spiritual
seemed to me a confusion of thought that one could not even
seriously discuss.

In this field there have always been difficulties for my way of
establishing anthroposophy. People have been assured from
certain sides for a long time that materialism was overcome.
To those who incline to this view, anthroposophy seems to be
attacking windmills when it discusses materialism in science.
To me, on the contrary, it was always clear that what people
call a way of overcoming materialism is just the way uncon-
sciously to maintain it.

It was never a matter of moment to me that atoms should be
conceived either in a purely mechanical or other activity in
connection with processes in matter. What was important to
me was that the thoughtful consideration of the atom—the
smallest image of the world—should go forward and seek for
an issue into the organic, into the spiritual. I saw the necessity
of proceeding from the whole. Atoms, or atomic structure,
can only be the results of spiritual action or organic action.
From the perceived primal phenomena, and not from an intel-
lectual construction, would I take the way leading out into the
spirit of Goethe’s view of nature. Profoundly impressive to me
was the meaning of Goethe’s words that the factual is in itself
theoretical, and that one should seek for nothing behind this.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 305


But this demands that one must receive in the presence of
nature that which the senses give, and must employ thought
solely in order to go past the complicated derivative phenomena
(appearances), which cannot be surveyed, and arrive at the
simple, the primal phenomena. Then it will be noted that
in nature one has to do with colour and other sense-qualities
within which spirit is actually at work ; but one does not arrive
at an atomic world behind the sense-world.

That in this direction progress has occurred in the conception
of nature the anthroposophic mode of thinking cannot admit.
What appears in such views as those of Mach, or what has
recently appeared in this sphere, is really the beginning of an
abandonment of the atomic and molecular constructions ;
yet all this shows that this construction is so deeply rooted
in the mode of thought that abandoning it means losing all
reality. Mach has spoken now of concepts only as if they were
economical generalizations of sense-perceptions, not something
which lives in a spiritual reality; and it is the same with
recent writers.

Therefore what now appears as a battle within theoretical
materialism is no less remote from the spiritual being in which
anthroposophy lives than from the materialism of the last
third of the nineteenth century. What has been brought
forward, therefore, by anthroposophy against the customary
thinking of the physical sciences holds good to-day, not in
lesser but in greater measure.

The setting forth of these things may appear to be theoretical
obtrusions in this story of my life. ‘to me they are not;
for what is contained in these analyses was for me an experience,
the strongest sort of experience, far more significant even than
what came to me from without.

Immediately upon the foundation of the German section of
the Theosophical Society, it seemed to me a matter of necessity
to have a publication of our own. So Marie von Sievers
and I established the monthly Luzifer. The name was
naturally in no way associated at that time with the spiritual
Power whom I later designated as Lucifer, the opposite of
Ahriman. ‘The content of anthroposophy had not then been
developed to such an extent that these Powers could have been

21


306 | RUDOLF STEINER


discussed. The name was intended to signify only “ The
Light-bearer.”

Although it was at first my intention to work in harmony
with the leadership of the Theosophical Society, yet from
the beginning I had the feeling that something must originate
in anthroposophy which evolves out of its own germ without
making itself in any way dependent upon what theosophy
causes to be taught. ‘This I could accomplish only by means
of such a publication. And what anthroposophy is to-day
has really grown out of what I then wrote in that monthly.

It was thus that the German section was established under
the patronage and in the presence of Mrs. Besant. At that time
Mrs. Besant delivered a lecturein Berlin on the goal and the prin-
ciples of theosophy. Somewhat later we requested her to deliver
lectures in a number of German cities. Such was the case in
Hamburg, Berlin, Weimar, Munich, Stuttgart, Cologne. In
spite of all this—and not by reason of any measures taken
by me, but because of the inner necessities of the thing—
theosophy failed, and anthroposophy went through an evolu-
tion determined by inner requirements.

Marie von Sievers made all this possible, not only because
she made material sacrifices according to her ability, but
because she devoted her entire effort to anthroposophy. At
first we had to work under conditions truly the most primitive.
I wrote the greater part of Luzifer. Marie von Sievers
carried on the correspondence. When an issue was ready,
we ourselves attended to the wrapping, addressing, stamping,
and personally carried the copies to the post office in a laundry
basket.

Very soon Luzifer had so far increased its circulation
that a Herr Rappaport, of Vienna, who published a journal
called Gnosis, made an agreement with me to combine
this with mine into a single publication. Then Luszifer
appeared under the title Luzifer-Gnosis. For a long time
also Herr Rappaport had a share in the undertaking.

Luzifer-Gnosis made the most satisfactory progress. The
publication increased its circulation in a highly satisfactory
fashion. Numbers which had been exhausted had to be
printed a second time. Nor did it “ fail.” But the spread


ee ee


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 307


of anthroposophy in a relatively short time took such a form
that I was called upon to deliver lectures in many cities, From
the single lectures there grew in many cases cycles of lectures.
At first I tried to maintain the editorship of Luzzfer-Gnosts
along with this lecturing ; but the numbers could not be
issued any longer at the right time—often coming out months
later. And so there came about the remarkable fact that a
periodical which was gaining new subscribers with every
number could no longer be published, solely because of the
overburdening of the editor.

In Lucifer-Gnosis 1 was able for the first time to publish
what became the foundation of anthroposophic work. ‘There
first appeared what I had to say about the strivings that the
human mind must make in order to attain to its own per-
ceptual grasp upon spiritual knowledge. Wie erlangt man
Erkenntnisse der héhern Welten?* came out in serial form
from number to number. In the same way was the basis
laid for anthroposophic cosmology in serial articles entitled
Aus der Akasha-Chronik.?

It was from what was thus given, and not from anything
borrowed from the Theosophical Movement, that the Anthro-
posophical Movement had its growth. If I gave any attention
to the teachings carried on in the Society when I composed my
own writings on spiritual knowledge, it was only for the purpose
of correcting by a contrasting statement one thing or another
in those teachings which I considered erroneous.

In this connection I must mention something which is
constantly brought forward by our opponents, wrapped in
a fog of misunderstandings. I need say nothing whatever
about this on any inner ground, for it has had no influence
whatever on my evolution or on my public activities. As
regards all that I have to describe here the matter has remained
a purely “ private” affair. I refer to my forming “ esoteric
schools ”’ within the Theosophical Society. |

The “esoteric schools” date back to H. P. Blavatsky.


t Knowledge of the Higher Worlds and Its Attainment. ‘The content of
this book appeared in English at first in two volumes : The Way of Inttiation,
and Initiation and Its Results. mete

2 From the Akashic Record.


308 RUDOLF STEINER


She had created for a small inner circle of the Society a place
in which she gave out what she did not wish to say to the
Society in general. She, like others who know the spiritual
world, did not consider it possible to impart to the generality
of persons certain profound teachings.

All this is bound up with the way in which H. P. Blavatsky
came to give her teachings. ‘There has always been a tradition
in regard to such teachings which goes back to the ancient
mysteries. ‘This tradition was cherished in all sorts of societies,
which took strict care to prevent any teaching from permeating
outside each society.

But, for some reason or other, it was considered proper to
impart such teaching to H. P. Blavatsky. She then united
what she had thus received with revelations which came to her
personally from within. For she was a human personality in
whom, by reason of a remarkable atavism, the spiritual worked
as it had once worked in the leaders of the mysteries, in a
state of consciousness which—in contrast with the modern
state illuminated by the consciousness-soul—was dreamlike
in character. ‘Thus, in the human being, “ Blavatsky,” was
renewed that which in primitive times was kept secret in
the mysteries.

For modern men there is an infallible method for deciding
what portion of the content of spiritual perception can be
imparted to wider circles. This can be done with everything
which the investigator can clothe in such ideas as are current
both in the consciousness-soul itself and also in appropriate
form in acknowledged science.

Such is not the case when the spiritual knowledge does not
live in the mind, but in forces lying rather in the sub-
consciousness. ‘These are not sufficiently independent of the
forces active in the body. Therefore the imparting of such
teachings drawn from the subconscious may be dangerous ;
for such teachings can in like manner be taken in only by the
subconscious. ‘Thus both teacher and learner are then
moving in a region where that which is wholesome for man
and that which is harmful must be handled with the utmost care.

All this, therefore, does not concern anthroposophy, because
this lifts all its teachings entirely above the subconscious.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 309


The inner circle of Blavatsky continued to live in the “ esoteric
schools.” I had set up my anthroposophic activity within
the Theosophical Society. I had therefore to be informed
as to all that occurred in the latter. For the sake of this
information, and also because I considered a smaller circle
necessary for those advanced in anthroposophical spiritual
knowledge, I caused myself to be admitted as a member into the
“ esoteric school.” My smaller circle was, of course, to have
a different meaning from this school. It was to represent a
higher participation, a higher class, for those who had absorbed
enough of the elementary knowledge of anthroposophy.
Now I intended everywhere to link up with what was already
in existence, with what history had already provided. Just
as I did this in regard to the Theosophical Society, I wished to
do likewise in reference to the esoteric school. For this
reason my “‘ more restricted circle ” arose at first in connection
with this school. But the connection consisted solely in the
plan and not in that which I imparted from the spiritual
world, So in the first years I selected as my more restricted
circle a section of the esoteric school of Mrs. Besant. In-
wardly it was not by any means whatever the same as this.
And in 1907, when Mrs. Besant was with us at the theosophical
congress in Munich, even the external connection came to
an end according to an agreement between Mrs. Besant
and myself.

That I could have learned anything special in the esoteric
school of Mrs. Besant is beyond the bounds of possibility,
since from the beginning I never participated in the exercises
of this school except in a few instances in which my participa-
tion was for the sole purpose of informing myself as to what
went on there.

There was at that time no other real content in the school
except that which was derived from H. P. Blavatsky and
which was already in print. In addition to these printed
exercises, Mrs. Besant gave all sorts of Indian exercises for
progress in knowledge, to which I was opposed.

Until 1907, then, my more restricted circle was connected,
as toits plan, with that which Mrs. Besant fostered as such a
circle. But to make of these facts what has been made of


310 RUDOLF STEINER


them by opponents is wholly unjustifiable. Even the absurd
idea that I was introduced to spiritual knowledge entirely
by the esoteric school of Mrs. Besant has been asserted.

In 1903 Marie von Sievers and I again took part in the
theosophical congress in London. Colonel Olcott, president
of the Theosophical Society, was also present, having come
from India. A lovable personality, as to whom, however, it
was easy to see how he could become the partner of Blavatsky
in the founding, planning, and guiding of the Theosophical
Society. For within a brief time the Society had in an external
sense become a large body possessing an impressive organiza-
tion.

Marie von Sievers and I came closer to Mrs. Besant by reason
of the fact that she lived with Mrs. Bright in London and we
also wereinvited for oursecond London visit to this lovable home.
Mrs. Bright and her daughter, Miss Esther Bright, constituted
the family ; persons who were like an embodiment of lovable-
ness. I look back with inner joy upon the time I was privileged
to spend in this home. The Brights were loyal friends of
Mrs. Besant. ‘Their endeavour was to knit a closer tie between
us and the latter. Since it was then impossible that I should
stand with Mrs. Besant in certain things—of which some
have already been mentioned here—this gave pain to the
Brights, who were bound with bands of steel—utterly un-
critical they were—to the leader of the Theosophical Society.

Mrs. Besant was an interesting person to me because of
certain of her characteristics. I observed that she had a
certain right to speak from her own inner experiences of the
spiritual world. ‘The inner entrance of soul into the spiritual
world she did possess. Only this was later stifled by certain
external objectives that she set herself. :

To me a person who could speak of the spirit from the
spirit was necessarily interesting. But, on the other hand, I
was strongly of the opinion that in our age the insight into
the spiritual world must live within the consciousness-soul.

I looked into an ancient spiritual knowledge of humanity.
It was dreamlike in character. Men saw in pictures through
which the spiritual world revealed itself. But these pictures
were not evolved by the will-to-knowledge in full clarity of


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 311


mind. They appeared in the soul, given to it like dreams from
the cosmos. This ancient spiritual knowledge came to an
end in the Middle Ages. Man came into possession of the
consciousness-soul. He no longer had dream-knowledge. He
drew ideas in full clarity of mind by his will-to-knowledge
into the soul. This capacity first became a living reality in
the sense-world. It reached its climax as sense-knowledge
in natural science.

The present task of spirit-knowledge is to carry the experi-
ence of ideas in full clarity of mind into the spiritual world by
means of the will-to-knowledge. The knower then has a
content of mind which is experienced like that of mathematics.
One thinks like a mathematician ; but one does not think in
numbers or in geometrical figures.. One thinks in pictures
of the spiritual world. In contrast to the ancient waking-
dream knowledge of the spirit, it is the fully concious standing-
within the spiritual world.

Within the Theosophical Society one could gain no true
relationship to this new knowledge of the spirit. One became
suspicious as soon as full consciousness sought to enter
the spiritual world. One knew a full consciousness solely
for the sense-world. ‘There was no true feeling for the evolving
of this to the point of experiencing the spirit. ‘The process
was only to the point of a return to the ancient dream-
consciousness with the suppression of full consciousness. And
this turning back was true of Mrs. Besant also. She has
scarcely any capacity for grasping the modern form of know+
ledge of the spirit. But what she said of the world of spirit
was, nevertheless, from that world. So she was to me an
interesting person.

Since among the other leaders of the Society also there was
present this opposition to fully conscious knowledge of the
spirit, my mind could never feel at home in the Society as
regards the spiritual. Socially I enjoyed being in these circles ;
but their temper of mind in reference to the spiritual remained
alien to me.

For this reason I was also hindered from founding my lectures
upon my own experience of the spirit. I delivered lectures
which anyone could have delivered even though he might


312 RUDOLF STEINER


have no perception of spirit. This perception found expression
in the lectures which I delivered, not at the meetings of
branches of the Society, but before those which grew out of
what Marie von Sievers and I arranged from Berlin.

Then arose the Berlin, Munich, and Stuttgart work. Other
places joined. Later the content of the Theosophical Society
gradually disappeared ; and there came into existence that
which was congenial to the inner force living in anthroposophy.

While carrying out the plans together with Marie von
Sievers, for the external activities, I elaborated the results of
my spiritual perception. On the one hand I had, of course,
a fully developed standing-within the spiritual world; but I
had in about 1902—and in the succeeding years also as regards
many things—‘‘ imaginations, inspirations, and intuitions.”
These gradually shaped themselves into what I then gave out
publicly in my writings.

Through the activity developed by Marie von Sievers
there came about from a small beginning the philosophical-
anthroposophical publication business. A small pamphlet
based upon notes of a lecture I delivered before the Berlin
Free Higher Institute to which I have referred was the first
matter thus published. The necessity of getting possession of __
my Philosophy of Spiritual Activity—which could no longer
be distributed by the former publisher—and of attending per-
sonally to its distribution gave the second task. We bought
the remaining copies and the publisher’s rights for this book.
All this was not easy for us. For we were without any
considerable means.

But the work progressed, for the very reason that it could
not rely upon anything external but solely upon inner spiritual
circumstances.


XXXITT


My first work of lecturing within the circles which grew out
of the Theosophical Movement had to be planned according
to the temper of mind of the groups. Theosophical literature
had been read there, and people were used to certain forms
of expression. I had to retain these if I wished to be under-
stood.

But with the lapse of time and the progress of the work
I was able gradually to pursue my own course, even in the forms
of expression used.

For this reason, in the reports of lectures belonging to the
first years of the anthroposophical activity, there is spread
before one a true inner and spiritual picture of the path by
which I moved in order to extend the knowledge of the spirit,
stage by stage, so that from what lay close at hand the remote
might be grasped; but one must also take this path truly
according to its inwardness.

The years, approximately, from 1g01 to 1907 or 1908
were a time in which I stood with all the forces of my soul
under the impression of the facts and Beings of the spiritual
world coming close to me. Out of the experience of the
spiritual world in general there grew the special sorts of
knowledge. One experiences very much while composing
such a book as Theosophy. At every step my endeavour
was to remain always in touch with scientific knowledge.
With the expansion and deepening of spiritual experience,
this endeavour after such a contact takes on special forms.
My Theosophy seems to fall into an entirely different tone at
the moment when I pass from the description of the human
being to a setting forth of the “‘ Soul- World ” and the “ Spirit-
Land.”


313


314 RUDOLF STEINER


While describing the human being I proceed from the
results of physical science. I seek so to deepen anthropology
that the human organism may appear in its differentiation.
Then one can see in this how, according to its several kinds
of organization, it is in different ways bound up with that
penetrating it from the beings of the spheres of soul and spirit.
One finds the vital activity in one form of organization ; then
the point of action of the etheric body becomes visible. One
finds the organs of feeling (Empfindung) and of perception
(Wahrnehmung) ; then the astral body is indicated through the
physical organization. Before my spiritual perception there
stood spiritually these members of man’s being : etheric body,
astral body, ego, etc. In setting these forth I sought to connect
them with the results of physical science. Very difficult for
one who wishes to remain scientific is the setting forth of the
repeated earthly lives and of the destinies which are thereby
determined. If one does not wish at this point to speak
merely from spiritual perception, one must resort to ideas
which result, to be sure, from a fine observation of the sense-
world, but which men fail to grasp. To such a finer manner
of observation man shows himself to be, in organization and
evolution, different from the animal kingdom. And if one
observes this difference, life itself gives rise to the idea of
repeated earthly lives; but people do not actually observe
this. So such ideas seem not to be taken from life but to be
conceived arbitrarily or simply taken out of more ancient
world-conceptions.

I faced these difficulties in full consciousness. I battled
with them. And anyone who will take the trouble to review
the successive editions of my Theosophy and see how I recast
again and again the chapter on repeated earthly lives, for the
very purpose of attaching the truths of this to those ideas
which are taken from observation of the sense-world, will
find what pains I took to adjust myself rightly to the recognized
scientific methods.

Even more difficult from this point of view were the chapters
on the “‘ Soul-World ” and the “ Spirit-Land.” To one who
has read the preceding discussions only to take cognizance
of the content, the truths set forth in these chapters will seem


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 315


to be mere assertions arbitrarily uttered. But it is different
for one whose experience of ideas has received an access of
strength from the reading of that which is linked up with the
observation of the sense-world. ‘To him the ideas have released
themselves from their bondage to sense and have taken on an
independent inner life. Now, therefore, the succeeding process
of soul can become an inner possession. He becomes aware of
the life of released ideas. These weave and work in his soul.
He experiences them as he experiences through the senses
colours, tones, and sensations of warmth. And as the world of
nature is given in colours, tones, etc., so is the world of spirit
given to him in the experienced ideas. Of course, any one who
reads the first discussions of my Theosophy without the impres-
sion of inner experience, so that he does not become aware of a
metamorphosis of his previous ideal experience whoever, in
spite of having read the preceding, goes on to the succeed-
ing discussions as if he had begun to read the book at the
chapter ‘‘ The Soul-World ”—such a person must inevitably
reject it. To him the truths appear to be assertions set up
without proof. But an anthroposophic book is designed to
be taken up in inner experience. Then by stages a form
of understanding comes about. This may be very weak.
But it may—and should—be there. The further deepening
confirmation through exercises described in Knowledge of the
Higher Worlds and Its Attainment is simply a deepening con-
firmation. For progress on the spiritual road this is necessary ;
but a rightly understood anthroposophic book should be
an awakener of the spiritual experience in the reader, not a
certain quantity of information imparted. The reading of it
should not be a mere reading; it should be an experiencing
with inner commotions, tensions, and releasings.

I am aware how far removed is that which I have given in
books from sufficing by its own forces to bring about such an
experience in the mind of the reader. But I know also that
in every page my inner endeavour has been to reach the utmost
possible in this direction. I do not, as regards style, so describe
that my subjective feelings can be detected in the sentences.
In writing, I subdue to a dry, mathematical style what has
come from warm and profound experience. But only such


316 RUDOLF STEINER


a style can be an awakener; for the reader must cause
warmth and experience to awaken in himself. He cannot
simply allow these to flow into him from the one setting
forth the truth, while the clarity of his own mind remains
obscured.


~" oe ee a


XXXIV


In the Theosophical Society artistic interests were scarcely
fostered at all. From a certain point of view this situation
was at that time quite intelligible, but it ought not to have
continued if the true sense for the spiritual was to be nurtured.
The members of such a society centre all their interests at
first upon the reality of the spiritual life. In the sense- world
man appears to them only in his transitory existence severed
from the spiritual. Art seems to them to have its activity
within this severed existence. It seems, therefore, to be
apart from the spiritual reality for which they seek.

Because this was so in the Theosophical Society, artists did
not feel at home there.

To Marie von Sievers and to me it was important to make
the artistic also alive within the Society. Spiritual knowledge
as an experience takes hold, indeed, of the whole human
existence. All the forces of the soul are stimulated. In
formative fantasy there shines the light of the experience of
spirit when this experience is present.

But here there enters something which creates hindrances.
The artist’s temperament feels a certain misgiving in regard
to this shining in of the spiritual world in fantasy. He desires
unconsciousness in regard to the dominance of the spiritual
world in the soul. He is entirely right if what we are con-
cerned with is the “‘ stimulation ” of fantasy by means of that
element of clear-consciousness which has been dominant
in the life of culture since the beginning of the age of con-
sciousness. This “ stimulating” by the intellectual in man
has a deadly effect upon art.

But just the opposite occurs when spiritual content which is
actually perceived shines through fantasy. It is here that all


the formative force in man arises which has ever led to art.
317


318 RUDOLF STEINER


Marie von Sievers had her place in the art of word-shaping ;
to dramatic representation she had the most beautiful relation-
ship. Here, then, was a sphere of art for anthroposophy in
which the fruitfulness of spiritual perception for art might be
tested.

The “ word ” is the product of two aspects of the experience
which may come from the evolution of the consciousness-
soul. It serves for mutual understanding in social life, and it
serves for imparting that which is logically and intellectually
known. On both these sides the “ word ” loses its own value.
It must fit the “sense”? which it is to express. It must
allow the fact to be forgotten that in the tone, in the sound,
in the formation of the sound, there lies a reality. Beauty,
the shining of the vowels, the characteristics of the consonants
are lost from speech. The vowels become soulless, the con-
sonants void of spirit. And so speech leaves entirely the sphere
in which it originates—the sphere of the spiritual. It becomes
the servant of intellectual knowledge and of the social life
which shuns the spiritual. Thus it is snatched wholly out of
the sphere of art.

True spiritual perception falls as if wholly from instinct
into the “ experience of the word.” It becomes experience in
the soul-representing intoning of the vowels and the spiritually
empowered colours of the consonants. It attains to an
understanding of the secret of the evolution of speech. This
secret consists in the fact that divine spiritual beings could
once speak to the human soul by means of the word, whereas
now the word serves only to make oneself understood in the
physical word.

An enthusiasm kindled by this insight is required to lead the
word again into its sphere. Marie von Sievers developed this
enthusiasm. So her personality brought to the Anthropo-
sophical Movement the possibility of fostering artistically the
word and word-shaping. The cultivation of the art of recita-

tion and declamation grew to be an activity by means of which
to impart truth from the spiritual world—an activity which
forms a part receiving more and more consideration in the
ceremonies which found a place within the Anthroposophical
Society,


ee ee a ee


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 319


The recitations of Marie von Sievers at these ceremonies
were the initial point for the entrance of the artistic into the
Anthroposophical Society ; for a direct line leads from these
recitations to the dramatic representations which then took
place in Munich along with the course of lectures on anthro-
posophy.

By reason of the fact that we were able to unfold art along
with spiritual knowledge, we grew more and more into the
truth of the modern experience of the spirit. Art has indeed
grown out of the primeval dreamlike experience of spirit.
At the time in human evolution when the experience of spirit
receded, art had to seek a way for itself; it must again find
itself united with this experience when this enters in a new
form into the evolution of culture.


XXXV


TE beginning of my anthroposophic activity belongs to a
time when there was a sense of dissatisfaction among many
persons with the tendencies in knowledge characterizing the
immediately preceding period. There was a desire to find a
way out of that realm of being in which men were shut up by
reason of the fact that only what was grasped by means of
mechanistic ideas was allowed to pass as “sure ” knowledge.
These endeavours of many contemporaries toward a form of
spiritual knowledge came very close to me. Biologists such
as Oskar Hertwig—who began as a student under Haeckel
but had then abandoned Darwinism because, according to
his opinion, the impulse which this theory recognized could
give no explanation of the organic process of becoming—were
to me personalities in whom was revealed the longing of the
age for knowledge.

But I felt that a heavy burden rested upon all this longing.
This burden was the ripe fruit of the belief that only what
can be investigated in the realm of the senses by means of
mass, number, and weight can be recognized as knowledge.
Man dared not unfold an active inner process of thought in
order thereby to live in closer contact with reality as one
experiences reality through the senses. Thus the situation
continued to be such that men said : ‘‘ With the means which
have been used hitherto in interpreting even the higher forms
of reality, such as the organic, we can advance no further.”
But when men ought to have reached something positive, when
they ought to have said what is at work in the activities of life,
they moved about in indeterminate ideas.

In those who were attempting to escape from the mechanistic
explanation of the world there was chiefly lacking the courage


to admit that whoever wished to ovecome that mechanism
320


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 321


must also overcome the habits of thought which have led to
it. Such a confession as the time needed would not come
forth. This should have been the confession :—With one’s
orientation towards the senses one penetrates into what
is mechanistic. In the second half of the century men had
accustomed themselves to this orientation. Now that the
mechanistic leaves men unsatisfied they should not desire
to penetrate into the higher realms with the same orientation.
The senses in man are self-unfolding, but the unfolding
which the senses undergo will never enable one to perceive
anything save the mechanistic. If one wishes to know more,
then out of oneself one must give to the deeper-lying
forces of knowledge a form which nature gives to the forces
of the senses. The forces of knowledge for the mechanistic
are in themselves awake ; those for the higher forms of reality
must be awakened.

This self-confession on the part of the endeavour to attain
knowledge appeared to me to be a necessity of the time.

I felt happy when I became aware of spokesmen for this.
So there lives in beautiful memory within me a visit in Jena.
I had to deliver lectures in Weimar on anthroposophical
themes. There was also arranged a lecture to a smaller group
in Jena. After this J happened to be with a very little group.
There was a desire to discuss what theosophy had to say.
In this group was Max Scheler, who was at that time a dozent *
in philosophy in Jena. In a verbal statement of what he had
felt in my lecture he soon began our discussion ; and I felt
at once the profound characteristic which dominated in his
striving after knowledge. It was with inner tolerance that
he met my view,—the very tolerance which is necessary for
one who desires really to know.

We discussed the confirmation of spiritual knowledge on
the basis of theories of cognition. We talked of the problem
as to how the penetration into spiritual reality on the one side
must be established on foundations of the theory of cognition,
just as that into the sense-world must be on the other side.

Scheler’s mode of thought made an agreeable impression
upon me. Even till the present I have followed his way of

t Scholar,
22


322 RUDOLF STEINER


knowledge with the deepest interest. Inner satisfaction was
always my feeling when I could again meet—very seldom,
unfortunately—the man who at that time became so congenial
to me.

Such experiences were important for me. Every time that
these occurred there was an inner need to test anew the certainty
of my own way of knowledge. And in these constantly re-
curring tests the forces were evolved which then embraced
wider and wider spheres of spiritual existence.

Two results had now come from my anthroposophic work :
first my books published to the whole world, and secondly
a great number of lectures which were at first to be considered
as privately printed and to be sold only to members of the
Theosophical (later the Anthroposophical) Society. These
were really reports on the lectures more or less well made
and which I, for lack of time, could not correct. It would
have pleased me best if spoken words had remained spoken
words. But the members wished the printed copies. So
this came about. If I had then had time to correct the
reports, the restriction “ for members only ” would not have
been necessary. For more than a year now, this restriction
has been allowed to lapse.

At this point in my life story it is necessary to say, first of
all, how the two things—my published books and this privately
printed matter—combine into that which I elaborated as
anthroposophy.

Whoever wishes to trace my inner struggle and labour
to set anthroposophy before the consciousness of the present
age must do this on the basis of the writings published for
general circulation. In these I explained myself in connection
with all which is present in the striving of this age for knowledge.
Here there was given what more and more took form for me
in “‘ spiritual perception,” what became the structure of anthro-
posophy—in a form incomplete, to be sure, from many points
of view.

Together with this purpose, however, of building up
anthroposophy and thereby serving only that which results
when one has information from the world of spirit to give to
the modern culture world, there now appeared the other


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 323


demand—to face fully whatever was manifested in the member-
ship as the need of their souls or their longing for the spirit.

_ Most of all was there a strong inclination to hear the Gospels
and the biblical writings generally set forth in that which had
appeared as the anthroposophic light. Persons wished to
attend courses of lectures on these revelations given to mankind.

While internal courses of lectures were held in the sense
then required, something else arose in consequence. Only
members attended these courses. These were acquainted
with the elementary information coming from anthroposophy.
It was possible to speak to them as to persons advanced in
the realm of anthroposophy. ‘The manner of these internal
lectures was such as it would not have been in writings intended
wholly for the public.

In internal groups I dared to speak about things in a manner
which I should have been obliged to shape quite differently
for a public presentation if from the first these things had been
designed for such an audience.

Thus in the two things, the public and the private writings,
there was really something derived from two different bases.
All the public writings are the result of what struggled and
laboured within me ; in the privately printed matter the Society
itself shares in the struggle and labour. I hear of the strivings
in the soul-life of the membership, and through my vital living
within what I thus hear the bearing of the course is determined.

Nothing has ever been said which was not to the utmost
degree an actual result of the developing anthroposophy.
There can be no discussion of any concession whatever to
preconceptions or to previous experiences of the members.
Whoever reads this privately printed material can take it
in the fullest sense as that which anthroposophy has to
say. Therefore it was possible without hesitation—when
accusations became too insistent in this direction—to depart
from the plan of circulating this printed matter among the
members alone. Only it will be necessary to remember there
are errors in the lectures which I did not revise.

The right to an opinion in regard to the content of such
privately printed material can naturally be admitted only in
the case of one who knows what is taken as the pre-requisite


324 RUDOLF STEINER


basis of this judgment. For most of those pamphlets such a.
pre-requisite will be at least the anthroposophic knowledge of
man and of the cosmos, in so far as its nature is set forth in
anthroposophy, and of that which is found in this information
as ‘‘ anthroposophic history ” as it is taken from the spiritual
world.


XXXVI


A CERTAIN institution which arose within the Anthroposophical
Society in such a way that there was never any thought of
the public in connection with it does not really belong to the
chapters of this exposition. Only it has to be described for
the reason that attacks made upon me have been based
upon material derived from this.

Some years after the beginning of the activity in the
Theosophical Society, Marie von Sievers and I were entrusted
by certain persons with the leadership of a society similar to
others which have been maintained in preservation of the
ancient symbolism and cultural ceremonies that embody
the “ancient wisdom.” I never thought in the remotest
degree of working in the spirit of such a society. Everything
anthroposophic should and must spring from its own sources
of knowledge and truth. There should not be the slightest
deviation from this standard. But I had always felt a respect
for what was historically given. In this lives the spirit which
evolves in the human process of becoming. And so wher-
ever possible I also favoured the linking of the newly given
to the historically existent. I therefore took the diploma of
the society referred to, which belonged to the stream repre-
sented by Yarker. It had the forms of Free Masonry of the
so-called high degrees ; but I took nothing else—absolutely
nothing—from this society except the merely formal authori-
zation, in historic succession, to direct a symbolic-cultural
activity.

Everything set forth in content in the “ ceremonies ”
which were employed in the institution were without
historic dependence upon any tradition whatever. In the
formal granting of the diploma only that was fostered which
resulted in the symbolizing of anthroposophic knowledge.

325


326 RUDOLF STEINER


And our purpose in this matter was to meet the needs of the
members. In elaborating the ideas in which the knowledge
of spirit is given in a veiled form, the effort is made to arrive
at something which speaks directly to perception, to the heart;
and such purposes I wished to serve. If the invitation from
the society in question had not come to me, I should have
undertaken the direction of a symbolic-cultural activity without
any historic connection.

But this did not create a “secret society.” Whoever
entered into this practice was told in the clearest possible
manner that he was not dealing with any “ order,” but that
as participant in ceremonial forms he would experience a sort
of visualization, demonstration of spiritual knowledge. If
anything took on the forms in which the members of traditional
orders had been inducted or promoted to higher degrees, this
did not signify that such an order was being founded but only
that the spiritual ascent in the soul’s experience was rendered
visible to the senses in pictures.

The fact that this had nothing to do with the activity of any
existing order or the mediation of things which are mediated
in such orders is proved by the fact that members of the most
various types of orders participated in the ceremonial exercises
which I conducted and found in these something quite different
from what existed in their own orders.

Once a person who had participated with us for the first time
in a ceremonial came to me immediately afterward. This
person had reached a very high degree in an order. Under
the influence of the experience now shared, the wish had arisen
to hand over to me the insignia of the order. The feeling
was that, after having once experienced real spiritual content,
one could no longer share in that which remained fixed in
mere formalism. I put the matter right; for anthroposophy
dare not draw any person out of the association in which he
stands. It ought to add something to that association and
take away nothing from it. So this person remained in the
order, yet continued to participate further with us in the
symbolic exercises.

It is only too easily understood that, when such an institution
as the one here described becomes known, misunderstandings


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 327


arise. ‘There are, indeed, many persons to whom the extern-
ality of belonging to something seems more important than
the content which is given to them. And so even many of
the participants spoke of the thing as if they belonged to
an ‘“‘order.” They did not understand how to make the
distinction that things were demonstrated among us without
the environment of an order which otherwise are given only
within the environment of an order.

Even in this sphere we broke with the ancient traditions.
Our work was carried on as work must be carried on if one
investigates in spiritual-content in an original manner according
to the requirements of full clarity in the mind’s experience.

The fact that the starting-point for all sorts of slanders was
found in certain attestations which Marie von Sievers and
I signed in linking up with the historic Yarker institution
means that, in order to concoct such slanders, people treated
the absurd with the grimace of the serious. Our signatures
were given as a “form.” ‘The customary thing was thus
preserved. And while we were giving our signatures, I said
as clearly as possible: “‘ This is all a formality, and the practice
which I shall institute will take over nothing from the Yarker
practice.”

It is obviously easy to make the observation afterwards
that it would have been far more “ discreet” not to link up
with practices which could later be used by slanderers. But
I would remark with all positiveness that, at the period of my
life here under consideration, I was still one of those who
assume uprightness, and not crooked ways, in the people
with whom they have to do. Even spiritual perception
did not alter at all this faith in men. This must not be
misused for the purpose of investigating the intentions of one’s
fellow-men when this investigation is not desired by the man
in question himself. In other cases the investigation of the
inner nature of other souls remains a thing forbidden to the
knower of the spirit ; just as the unauthorized opening of a
letter is something forbidden. And so one is related to men
with whom one has to do in the same way as is any other
person who has no knowledge of the spirit. But there is just
this alternative—-either to assume that others are straight-


328 RUDOLF STEINER


forward in their intentions until one has experienced the
opposite, or else to be filled with sorrow as one views the
entire world. A social co-operation with men is impossible
for the latter mood, for such co-operation can be based only
upon trust and not upon distrust.

This practice which gave in a cult-symbolism a content
which is spiritual was a good thing for many who participated
in the Anthroposophical Society. Since in this, as in every
sphere of anthroposophical work, everything was excluded
which lies outside the region of clear consciousness, so there
could be no thought of unconfirmed magic, or suggestive
influences, and the like. But the members obtained that
which, on the one hand, spoke to their ideal conceptions and
yet in such a way that the heart could accompany this in direct
perception. For many this was something which also guided
them again into the better shaping of their ideas. With the
beginning of the War it ceased to be possible to continue the
carrying on of such practices. In spite of the fact that there
was nothing of the nature of a secret society in this, it would
have been taken for such. And so this symbolic-cultural
section of the anthroposophical movement came to an end
in the middle of 1914.

The fact that persons who had taken part in this practice—
absolutely unobjectionable to anyone who looked upon it
with a good will and a sense for truth—became slanderous
accusers is an instance of that abnormality in human conduct
which arises when men who are not inwardly genuine share
in movements whose content is genuinely spiritual. ‘They
expect things corresponding with their trivial soul life; and,
since they naturally do not find such things, they turn against
the very practice to which they previously turned—though
with unconscious insincerity.

Such a society as the Anthroposophical could not be formed
otherwise than according to the soul-needs of its members.
It could not lay down an abstract programme which required
that in the Anthroposophical Society this and that should
be done. The programme had to be elaborated out of
reality. But this very reality is the soul-need of its members.
Anthroposophy as a content of life was formed out of its own


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 329


sources. It had appeared before the world as a spiritual
creation, and many who were drawn to it by an inner
attraction tried to work together with others. Thus it came
about that the Society was the formation of persons of whom
some sought the religious, others rather the scientific, and
others the artistic. And it was necessary that what was sought
should be found.

Because of this working out from the reality of the needs
of the members, the private printed matter must be judged
differently from that given to the public from the beginning.
The content of this printed matter was intended as oral, not
printed, information. The subjects discussed were determined
by the soul-needs of the members as these needs appeared
with the passage of time.

What is contained in the published writings is adapted to
the furtherance of anthroposophy as such; in the manner
in which the private printed matter evolved, the configuration
of soul of the whole Society has co-operated.


XXXVII


WHILE anthroposophic knowledge was brought into the Society
in the way that results in part from the privately printed
matter, Marie von Sievers and I through our united efforts
fostered the artistic element especially, which was indeed
destined by fate to become a life-giving part of the Anthro-
posophical Movement.

On one side there was the element of recitation, looking
toward dramatic art, and constituting the objective of the work
that must be done if the Anthroposophical Movement was to
receive the right content.

On the other hand, I had the opportunity, during the journeys
that had to be made on behalf of anthroposophy, to go more
deeply into the evolution of architecture, the plastic arts,
and painting.

In various passages of this life-story I have spoken of the
importance of art to a person who enters in experience into
the spiritual world.

But up to the time of my anthroposophic work I had been
able to study most of the works of human art only in copies.
Of the originals only those in Vienna, Berlin, and a few other
places in Germany had been accessible to me.

When the journeys on behalf of anthroposophy were made,
together with Marie von Sievers, I came face to face with the
treasures of the museums throughout the whole of Europe.
In this way I pursued an advanced course in the study of art
from the beginning of the century and therefore during the
fifth decade of my life, and together with this I had a percep-
tion of the spiritual evolution of humanity. Everywhere
by my side was Marie von Sievers, who, while entering with
her fine and full appreciation into all that I was privileged to


experience of perception in art and culture, also shared and
339


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 331


supplemented all this experience in a beautiful way. She
understood how these experiences flowed into all that gave
movement to the ideas of anthroposophy; for all the im-
pressions of art which became an experience of my soul
penetrated into what I had to make effective in lectures.

In the actual seeing of the masterpieces of art there came
before our minds the world out of which another configuration
of soul speaks from the ancient times to the new age. We were
able to submerge our souls in the spirituality of art which still
speaks from Cimabue. But we could also plunge through
the perception of art into the spiritual battle which Thomas
Aquinas waged against Arabianism.

Of special importance for me was the observation of the
evolution of architecture. In the silent vision of the shaping
of styles there grew in my soul that which I was able to stamp
upon the forms of the Goetheanum.

Standing before Leonardo’s Last Supper in Milan and
before the creations of Raphael and Michelangelo in Rome,
and the subsequent conversations with Marie von Sievers,
must, I think, be felt with gratitude to have been the dispensa-
tion of destiny just then when these came before my soul for
the first time at a mature age.

But I should have to write a volume of considerable size
if I should wish to describe even briefly what I experienced in
the manner indicated.

Even when the spiritual perception remains in abeyance,
one sees very far into the evolution of humanity through the
gaze which loses itself in reflection in the School of Athens or
the Disputa.

_ And if one advances from the observation of Cimabue to
Giotto and to Raphael, one is in the presence of the gradual
dimming of an ancient spiritual perception of humanity down
to the modern, more naturalistic. That which came to me
through spiritual perception as the law of human evolution
appeared in clear revelation before my mind in the process
of art.

I had always the deepest satisfaction when I could see how
the anthroposophical movement received ever renewed life
through this prolonged submergence in the artistic. In order


332 RUDOLF STEINER


to comprehend the elements of being in the spiritual world
and to shape these as ideas, one requires mobility in ideal-
activity. Filling the mind with the artistic gives this mobility,

And it was necessary constantly to guard the Society against
the entrance of all those inner untruths associated with false
sentimentality. A spiritual movement is always exposed to
these perils. If one gives life to the informative lectures by
means of those mobile ideas which one derives from living
in the artistic, then the inner untruths derived from senti-
mentality which remain fixed in the hearers will be expelled.
The artistic which is truly charged with experience and emotion,
but which strives toward luminous clarity in shaping and in
perception, can afford the most effective counterpoise against
false sentimentality.

And here I feel that it has been a peculiarly fortunate destiny
for the Anthroposophical Society that I received in Marie
von Sievers a fellow-worker assigned by destiny who under-
stood fully how to nourish from the depths of her nature this
artistic, emotionally charged, but unsentimental element.

A lasting activity was needed against this inwardly untrue
sentimental element ; for it penetrates again and again into
a spiritual movement. It can by no means be simply repulsed
or ignored. For persons who at first yield themselves to this
element are in many cases none the less seekers in the utmost
depths of their souls. But it is at first hard for them to gain
a firm relation to the information imparted from the spiritual
world. ‘They seek unconsciously in sentimentality a form of
deafness. They wish to experience quite special truths,
esoteric truths. They develop an impulse to separate them-
selves on the basis of these truths into sectarian groups.

The important thing is to make the right the sole directive
force of the Society, so that those erring on one side or the
other may always see again and again how those work who
may call themselves the central representatives of the Society
because they are its founders. Positive work for the content
of anthroposophy, not opposition against outgrowths which
appeared—this was what Marie von Sievers and I accepted
as the essential thing. Naturally there were exceptional
cases when opposition was also necessary.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 333


At first the time up to my Paris cycle of lectures was to me
something in the form of a closed evolutionary process within
the soul. I delivered these lectures in 1906 during the theo-
sophical congress. Individual participants in the congress
had expressed the wish to hear these lectures in connection
with the exercises of the congress. I had at that time in Paris
made the personal acquaintance of Edouard Schuré, together
with Marie von Sievers, who had already corresponded with
him for a long time, and who had been engaged in translating
his works. He was among my listeners. I had also the joy
of having frequently in the audience Mereschkowski and
Minsky and other Russian poets.

In this cycle of lectures I gave what I felt to be ripe within
me in regard to the leading forms of spiritual knowledge for
the human being.

This “ feeling for the ripeness’ of forms of knowledge is
an essential thing in investigating the spiritual world. In
order to have this feeling one must have experienced a per-
ception as it rises at first in the mind. At first one feels it
as something non-luminous, as lacking sharpness of contour.
One must let it sink again into the depths of the soul to “ ripen.”
Consciousness has not yet gone far enough to grasp the
spiritual content of the perception. ‘The soul in its spiritual
depths must remain together with this content, undisturbed
by consciousness.

In external natural science one does not assert knowledge
until one has completed all necessary experiments and observa-
tions, and until the requisite calculations are free from bias.
In spiritual science is needed no less methodical conscientious-
ness and disciplined knowledge. Only one goes by somewhat
different roads. One must test one’s consciousness in its
relationship to the truth that is coming to be known. One
must be able to “wait” in patience, endurance, and
conscientiousness until the consciousness has undergone this
testing. It must have grown to be strong enough in its
capacity for ideas in a certain sphere for this capacity for
concepts to take over the perception with which it has to deal.

In the Paris cycle of lectures I brought forward a perception
which had required a long process of “ ripening ” in my mind.


>


334 RUDOLF STEINER


After I had explained how the members of the human being
—physical body ; etheric body, as mediator of the phenomena
of life ; and the “‘ bearer of the ego ’’—are in general related
to one another, I imparted the fact that the etheric body of
a man is female, and the etheric body of a woman is male.
Through this a light was cast within the Anthroposophical
Society upon one of the basic questions of existence which
just at that time had been much discussed. One need only
remember the book of the unfortunate Weininger, Geschlecht
und Charakter,' and the contemporary poetry.

But the question was carried into the depths of the being of
man. In his physical body man is bound up with the cosmos
quite otherwise than in his etheric body. Through his physical
body man stands within the forces of the earth; through his
etheric body within the forces of the outer cosmos. The male
and female elements were carried into connection with the
mysteries of the cosmos.

This knowledge was something belonging to the most
profoundly moving inner experiences of my soul; for I
felt ever anew how one must approach a spiritual perception
by patient waiting and how, when one has experienced the
‘ripeness of consciousness,’’ one must lay hold by means
of ideas in order to place the perception within the sphere of
human knowledge.

t Sex and Character.


XXXVITI


In what is to follow it will be difficult to distinguish between
the story of my life and a history of the Anthroposophical
Society. And yet I should wish to introduce from the history
of the Society only so much as is needed for the narration of
the story of my life. This will be considered even in
mentioning the names of active members of the Society. I
have come too close to the present time to avoid all too easy
misunderstandings through the mention of names. In spite
of entire good will, many a one who finds some other
mentioned and not himself may experience a feeling of bitter-
ness. I shall mention in essential matters only those who,
apart from their activity in the Society, had an association
with my spiritual life, and not those who have not brought
such a connection with them into the Society.

In Berlin and Munich there were destined to develop to
a certain extent the two opposite poles of anthroposophical
activity. There came into anthroposophy, indeed, persons
who found neither in the scientific world-conception nor in
the traditional sects that spiritual content for which their
souls had to seek. In Berlin a branch of the Society and an
audience for the public lectures could be formed only of such
persons as were opposed to all those philosophies which had
come about in opposition to the traditional creeds; for the
adherents of philosophies based upon rationalism, intellectual-
ism, etc., considered what anthroposophy had to give as
something fantastic, superstitions, etc. An audience and a
membership arose which took in anthroposophy without
tending in feeling or ideas to anything else than this. What
had been given them from other sources did not satisfy them.
Consideration had to be given to this temper of mind. And,


as this was done, the number of members steadily increased
335


336 RUDOLF STEINER


as well as the number of those attending the public lectures.
There came about an anthroposophic life which was, to a
certain extent, self-enclosed and gave little attention to what
else was taking form by way of endeavours to see into the
spiritual world. ‘Their hopes rested upon the unfolding of
anthroposophic information imparted to them. They expected
to go further and further in knowledge of the spiritual world.

It was different in Munich, where at the beginning there
was effective in the anthroposophic work the artistic element.
In this a world-conception like that of anthroposophy
can be taken up quite otherwise than in rationalism and
intellectualism. ‘The artistic image is more spirit-like than
the rationalist concept. It is also alive and does not kill
the spiritual in the soul as does intellectualism. In Munich
those who gave tone to the membership and audience were
persons in whom artistic experience was effective in the way
indicated.

This condition resulted in the formation of a unified branch
of the Society in Berlin from the beginning. The interests
of those who sought anthroposophy were of the same kind.
In Munich the artistic experiences brought about certain
individual needs in different groups, and I lectured to those
groups. A sort of compromise among these groups came to
be the group formed about Countess Pauline von Kalckreuth
and Fraulein Sophie Stinde, the latter of whom died during
the war. This group also arranged for my public lectures
in Munich. The ever-deepening understanding in this group
brought about a very beautiful response to what I had to say.
So anthroposophy unfolded within this group in a manner
which can truly be designated as very satisfying. Ludwig
Deinhard, the old theosophist, the friend of Hiibbe-Schleiden,
came very early as a very congenial member into this group,
and this was worth a great deal.

The centre of another group was Frau von Schewitsch.
She was an interesting person, and for this reason it was well
that a group formed around her also which was less concerned
in going deeply into anthroposophy than in becoming
acquainted with it as one of the spiritual currents among
those of the period.


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 337


At that time also Frau von Schewitsch had given to the public
her book Wie ich mein Selbst fand« It was an unique and
strong confession of theosophy. This also made it possible
for this woman to become the interesting central figure of
the group here described.

To me and also to many who formed part of this group,
Helene von Schewitsch was a notable part of history. She
was the lady for whom Ferdinand Lassalle came to an
early end in a duel with a Rumanian. She was afterwards
an actress, and on a journey to America she became a friend
of H. P. Blavatsky and Olcott. She was a woman of the
world whose interests at the time when I made these lectures
at her home had been deeply spiritualized. The impressive
experiences through which she had passed gave to her
appearance and to everything she did an extraordinary weight.
Through her, I might say, I could see into the work of Lassalle
and his period; through her also many a characteristic of
H. P. Blavatsky. What she said bore a subjective colouring,
and a manifold and arbitrary form of fantasy; yet, after
allowing for this, one could see the truth under many veils,
and one was faced by the revelation of an unusual personality.

Other groups at Munich possessed different characteristics.
I recall a person whom I met in several of these groups—a
Catholic cleric, Miiller, who stood apart from the narrow
limits of the. Church. He was a discriminating student of
Jean Paul. He edited a really stimulating periodical,
Renaissance, through which he fostered a free Catholicism.
He took from anthroposophy as much as was interesting to
him from his point of view, but remained always sceptical.
He raised objections, but always in such an amiable and at
the same time elementary fashion that he often brought a
delightful humour into the discussions which followed the
lectures.

In pointing out these as the opposing characteristics of the
anthroposophic work in Berlin and in Munich, I have nothing
to say as to the value of the one or the other; here there
simply came to view differences among persons which had
to be taken into account, both of equal worth—or at least

. t How I Found My Self.

23


338 RUDOLF STEINER


it is futile to judge them from the point of view of their relative
values.

The form of the work at Munich brought it about that the
theosophical congress of 1907, which was to be set up by
the German Section, was held there. These congresses,
which had previously been held in London, Amsterdam, and
Paris, consisted of sessions in which theosophical problems
were dealt with in lectures and discussions. ‘They were
planned on the model of the congresses of learned societies.
The administrative problems of the Society were also dis-
cussed.

In all this very much was changed at Munich. In the
great Concert Hall where the ceremonies were to take place,
we—the committee of arrangements—provided interior decora-
tions which in form and colour should correspond artistically
with the mood that dominated the oral programme. Artistic
environment and spiritual activity were to constitute a
harmonious unity. I attached the greatest possible value
to the avoidance of abstract inartistic symbolism and to giving
free expression to artistic feeling.

Into the programme of the congress was introduced an
artistic representation. Marie von Sievers had long before
translated Schuré’s reconstruction of the Eleusinian drama.
I planned the speeches for a presentation of this. This play
was then introduced into the programme. A connection
with the nature of the ancient mysteries—even though in so
feeble a form—was thus afforded; but the important thing
was that the congress had now an artistic aspect,—an artistic
element directed toward the purpose of not leaving the spiritual
life henceforth void of art within the Society. Marie von
Sievers, who had undertaken the réle of Demeter, showed
already in her presentation the nuances which drama was to
reach in the Society. Besides, we had reached a time when
the art of declamation and recitation developed by Marie
von Sievers by working out from the inner force of the word
had arrived at the most varied points from which further
fruitful progress could be made in this field.

A great portion of the old members of the Theosophical
Society from England, France, and especially from Holland,


THE STORY OF MY LIFE 339


were inwardly displeased by the innovations offered them
at the Munich congress. What it would have been well
to understand, but what was clearly grasped at that time
by exceedingly few, was the fact that the anthroposophic
current had given something of an entirely different bearing
from that of the Theosophical Society up to that time. In
this inner bearing lay the true reason why the Anthroposophical
Society could no longer exist as a part of the Theosophical
Society. Most persons, however, place the chief emphasis
upon the absurdities which in the course of time have grown
up in the Theosophical Society and have led to endless
quarrelling.


CONCLUSION
By MARIE STEINER


Here the life-story abruptly ends. On 30th March, 1925
Rudolf Steiner passed away.

His life, consecrated wholly to the sacrificial service of
humanity, was requited with unspeakable hostility ; his way
of knowledge was transformed into a path of thorns. But he
walked the whole way, and mastered it for all humanity. He
broke through the limits of knowledge; they are no longer
there. Before us lies this road of knowledge in the crystal
clarity of thoughts of which this book itself constitutes an
example. He raised human understanding up to the spirit ;
permeated this understanding and united it with the spiritual
being of the cosmos. In this he achieved the greatest human
deed. The greatest deed of the Gods he taught us to under-
stand; the greatest human deed he achieved. How could
he escape being hated with all the demonic power of which
Hell is capable ?

But he repaid with love the misunderstanding brought
against him.


He died—a Sufferer, a Leader, an Achiever
In such a world as trod him under foot
Yet which to raise aloft his strength sufficed.
He lifted men; they cast themselves before him,
They hissed with hate and blocked his forward way.
His work they shattered even as he wrought it.
They raged with venom and with flame;
And now with joy they brand his memory :-—
“So he is dead who led you into freedom,
To light, to consciousness, to comprehension
Of what is Godlike in a human soul
To your own selves, to Christ.
Was this not criminal, this undertaking ?

340


He did what once Prometheus expiated,

What gave to Socrates the poisoned cup—

The pardoning of Barabbas was less vile—

A deed whose expiation is the cross.

He made the future live before you there.

We demons cannot suffer such a thing.

We harry, hunt, pursue who dares such deeds
With all those souls who give themselves to us,
With all those forces which obey our will.

For ours are the turning-points of time

And ours this humanity which lies,

Without their God, in weakness, vice, and error.
We never yield the booty we have won,

But tear to pieces him who dares to touch it.”


He dared—and, daring, he endured his fate—
In love, long suffering, and tolerance:

Of weak, incapable humanity,

Which ever all his work in peril set,

Which ever wrenched his word awry,

Which misinterpreted his kind forbearance,

And in their smallness did not know themselves
Because his greatness was beyond their compass.
"Twas thus he bore us—we were out of breath
In following his stride, his very flight

Which ravished us away. "I‘was our weakness
That was the hindrance ever to his flight,

The lead that weighed his footsteps down... «


Now he is free, a helper to those high ones
Who take whatever hath beén wrung from earth
As safeguard of their goal. So now they greet
The son of man who his creative power
Unfolded thus to serve the Gods’ high will ;
Who to the age of hardened understanding

And to the time of dead machinery

Stamped clear the Spirit, called the Spirit forth.


They would not suffer him.

The earth rolls into shadows.

Behold those forms which now appear in space.
The Leader waits; the heavens part and open;
In joy and reverence stand the rangéd hosts.


But earth is wrapped in gray enshrouding night.


Sennen me pon Ets press ent
Lavchtunde , Wellen Legnadende
Guistumichle ; yn Wich aly StrohlenKlecd


Suid che voulestimmf vom Getter demkey .


by tr Chusterbole we'st vin ach
Meftentrayendun, hela Welln = Willen ;
Ihe, lit ellen OeMrew well - Were

Taint day Chrstus worl tim Mendon.


$0 Wek A Christ Kinder
Jun whanewdli , dari emdew Selon ;
Thaw reflect un duvbte - Wort
Jn du Jes fume ow Whim .


Thr, dev Yuh- dkeumntwn Scholar
Wht Micha wusen Winken
Nehmt do Welk. With Lice» Wot
Iw dw Sth Kibo witldfomy wi .


Springing from Powers of the Sun,
Radiant Spirit-powers blessing all Worlds !
For Michael’s garment of rays

Ye are predestined by Thought Divine.


He, the Christ-messenger revealeth in you—
Bearing mankind aloft—the sacred Will of Worlds.
Ye, the radiant Beings of Aether-Worlds,

Bear the Christ-Word to Man.


Thus shall the Herald of Christ appear

To the thirstily waiting souls,

To whom your Word of Light shines forth
In cosmic age of Spirit-Man.


Ye, the disciples of Spirit-Knowledge,

Take Michael’s Wisdom-beckoning,

Take the Word of Love of the Will of Worlds
Into your soul’s aspiring actively!


ae
%
i
:
‘


4}


4


1
aS


Pe ile a ine any
FARR Ry


Tice


ine


ie Ny
eae a y
gD Ct Paty, as S 7 aL :
“at: hentai tg |
Ree pF " ty , nl.
aay Reet S iane Ag)
Rayan s HY ea rar te A
i ak, Ree ie why bea i
LR NL, ue mage ie
?
sth yf. #3 He
q
is lit, Thseld j
On ateen
. . ,
GA twee aayahe pat ayes! H By ere
’ , ti Pik ; OA ee vig’ B: rey
s j ae) hs
MEN, ‘Sepe a wie Wik
. ol 4 ; ‘
P ‘ i 4
by eR ew oe ae | > st :
: ’ :
Se A ye 3 fT Paty “
; ‘
an
a0
if 4
+ i
4
i \ ; 1S ., ‘
‘ Pay
i '
|
r
]
‘ ” {
'
eg 8) » *
|
\
ft
28
. ij , '
'
’
. yy
‘ Pe 4 v
i ' : ie
Py : A,
¥ ¢ | Any
t
r
4 A ¢
oy { *
‘ yaad :
oi i\4
air iv. a)
fe J Y ve ey
' cA i ‘
Poet | ‘aa’


et at


From a crayon drawing by William Scott Pyle


DATE DUE


GAYLORD PRINTEDINU.S.A.


eo


ri


Wu


ary


Theological Semin


eee
—_—_—
——
a
SS
_—_—_—
—————_—_]


.
ae
>)
N
> oe
©
»
»


Il


|
