GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

department of archaeology

CENTRAL ARCHAEOLOGICAL

LIBRARY

Gri

Gall No..

m ee

BY THE SAME AUTHOR.

♦" ,,, /•

THE HYMNS OF THE SAMAYeM; mofte Vol.,
Royal 8vn., cloth boards, gilt lettered, Rs. 4-0-0.

THE HYMNS OF THE ATHARVA-YEBA, in two
Yolumes, Royal 8vo., cloth bound, gilt lettered,

Rs. 6-0-0, each Yolume.

A METRICAL TRANSLATION OF ViLMIETS
RAMi.Y AN, complete in one Volume, Crown
8 vo., cloth bound, gilt lettered, Rs. 6-0-0.

I .

THE

HYMNS OF THE RIGYEDA

TRANSLATED WITH A POPULAR COMMENTARY

BY

. RALPH T. H. GRIFFITH, M. A., C. I. E.

FORMER PRINCIPAL OF THE BENARES COLLEGE, AND LATE DIRECTOR
PUBLIC INSTRUCTION N.-W. P. AND OUDH.

Second. Edition.

COMPLETE IN TWO VOLUMES,

BENARES:

PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY E. J. LAZARUS AND 00.

1896.

All rights reserved.

CENTRAL ARCH Allot OGiGAI
LIBRARY, NEW L>/ J HI.

Aoc. No LkM'

Cato. .

tkIJ No

CONTENTS.

Preface to the first edition.
Hymns, Translation and Commentary :
Book I.

„ II.

» ni.

„ iv.

„ v.

VI.

Appendix I. — Hymn I.
Appendix II. — Metre...
Index of Hymns
Index of Names, Etc.
Corrigenda et Addenda

126. 6, 7 ; and I. 179.

Page,

v.

1

259

315

391

465

555

649

651

657

673

705

PREFACE

TO THE FIRST EDITION.

<l What can be more tedious than the Veda, and yet what can be more
Interesting, if once we know that it is the first word spoken by the Aryan
man ? ”

“ The Veda has a two -fold interest : it belongs to the history of the
world and to the history of India.,,...... As long as man continues to take an

Interest in the history of his race, and as long as we collect in libraries and
museums the relics of former ages, the first place in that long row of books
which contains the records of the Aryan branch of mankind, will belong for
ever to the Kig-veda.” F. Max Mcli/er,

This work is an attempt to bring within easy reach of all
readers of English a translation of the Hymns of the Rigveda
which, while aiming especially at close fidelity to the letter and
the spirit of the original, shall be as readable and intelligible as
the nature of the subject and other circumstances permit.

Veda, meaning literally knowledge, is the name given to
certain ancient works which formed the foundation of the early
religious belief of the Hindus. These are the Rigveda, the Sama-
veda, the Yajurveda, and the Atharvaveda , and of these the
Rigveda — so called because its Sanlnta or collection of mantras
or hymns consists of Richas or verses intended for loud recitation
— is the oldest, the most important, and the most generally in-
teresting, some of its hymns being rather Indo-European than
Hindu, and representing the condition of the Aryans before their
final settlement in India. These four Vedas are considered to be
of divine origin and to have existed from all eternity, the Rishis
or sacred poets to whom the hymns are ascribed being merely in-
spired seers who saw or received them by sight directly from the
Supreme Creator. In accordance with this belief these sacred
books have been preserved and handed down with the most re-
verential care from generation to generation, and have accom-

, , 4k"' '

Vi

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION,

p Allied the great army of Aryan immigrants in their onward
march from the Land of the Seven Rivers to the Indian Ocean
and the Bay of Bengal. Each of these four Vedas is divided into
two distinct parts, one the Mantra containing prayer and praise,
the other the Brahmana containing detailed directions for the
performance of the ceremonies at which the Mantras were to be
used, and explanations of the legends connected with them, the
whole forming a vast body of sacred literature in verse and in
prose, devotional, ceremonial, expository and theosophic.

The Sanhita of the Rigveda is a collection of hymns and
songs brought by the remote ancestors of the present Hindus
from their ancient homes on the banks of the Indus where they
had been first used in adoration of the Father of Heaven, of the
Sun, of Dawn, of Agni or the God of fire, in prayers for health,
wealth, long life, offspring, pattle, victory in battle, and freedom
from the bonds of sin ; and celebration of the ever-renewed war-
fare between the beneficent thunder-wielding Indra, the special
champion of the Aryans, and the malevolent powers of darkness
and the demons of drought who withheld the rain of heaven.

Of these hymns there are more than a thousand, arranged in
ten Mapdalas, Circles, or Books, in accordance with an ancient
tradition of what we should call authorship, the hymns ascribed
to the same Rishi, inspired poet or seer, or to the same school or
family of Rishis being placed together. Within these divisions
the hymns are generally arranged more or less in the order of the
deities to w r hom they are addressed. Agni and Indra are the Gods
most frequently invoked. Hymns to Agni generally come first,
next come those addressed to Indra, and after them those in
honour of other deities or deified objects of adoration. The ninth
Book is devoted almost entirely to Soma, the deified juice used in
pouring libations to the Gods, and the tenth forms a sort of ap-
pendix of peculiar and miscellaneous materials. Independently
of the evidence afforded by Indian tradition, there can be no rea-
sonable doubt of the great antiquity of the Rigveda SanhitA

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION, vfi

which, with the exception of the Egyptian monumental records
and papyrus rolls, and the recently discovered Assyrian literature,
is probably the oldest literary document in existence. But it
Seems impossible to fix, with anything approaching to certainty*
any date for the composition of the hymns. Ii* the first Hymn
of Book I. ancient and recent or modern Bishis or seers are
spoken of, and there is other internal evidence that some hymns
are much older than others. Colebrooke came to the conclusion,
from astronomical calculations, that a certain Y edic calendar was
composed in the fourteenth century . before the Christian era ;
from which it would follow, that as this calendar must have been
prepared after the arrangement of the Bigveda and the inclusion
of the most modern hymn, the date of the earliest hymn might
be carried back, perhaps, some thousand years. The correctness
of Colebrooke's conclusions, however, has been questioned, and
some recent scholars consider that his calculations are of a very
vague character, and do not yield any such definite date. In the
absence of any direct evidence, the opinions of scholars vary and
must continue to vary with regard to the age of the Hymns of
the Bigveda. “The reasons, however,” (to quote Professor
Weber*) “ by which we are fully justified in regarding the liter-
ature of India as the most ancient literature of which written
records on an extensive scale have been handed down to us are
these In the more ancient parts of the Bigveda Sanhit&, we
find the Indian race settled on the north-western borders of India,
in the Panj£b, and even beyond the Panj&b, on the KubhS, or
Kw^v, in Kabul. The gradual spread of the race from these
seats towards the east, beyond the Sarasvati and over Hindustan
as far as the Ganges, can be traced in the later portions of the
Yedic writings almost step by step. The writings of the follow-
ing period, that of the epic, consist of accounts of the internal
conflicts among the conquerors of Hindustan themselves, as, for

* The History of Indian Literature, by Albrecht Weber* Trtibner's
Oriental Series, 1878. ‘

vMi PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.

instance, the Mahabharata ; or of the farther spread of Brah-
manism towards the south, as, for instance, the Ram£yapa. If
We connect with this the first fairly accurate information about
India which we have from a Greek source, viz., from Megasthenes,*
it becomes clear that at the time of this writer the Brahmanism g
of Hindustan was already completed, while at the time of the
Periplus (see Lassen, I. AK ii. 150, n; 7. St, ii. 192) the very
southern-most point of the Dekhan had already become the seat
of the worship of the wife of $iva. What a series of years, of
centuries, must necessarily have elapsed before this boundless
tract of country, inhabited by wild and vigorous tribes, could
have been brought over to Brahmanism ! ”

I must beg my European readers not to expect to find in
these hymns and songs the sublime poetry that they meet with
in Isaiah or Job, or the Psalms of David. " To me,”‘says Professor
Wilson, “the verses of the Veda, except in their rhythm, and in
a few rare passages, appear singularly prosaic for so early an era
 ,as that of their probable composition, and at any rate their chief
 value lies not in their fancy but in their facts, social and religious.”
Professor Cowell, also, says : “The poetry of the Big-Veda is sin-
gularly deficient in that simplicity and natural pathos or sublimity
.which we naturally look for in the songs of an early period of
.civilisation. The language and style of most of the hymns is sin-
gularly artificial Occasionally we meet with fine outbursts of

jjoetry, especially in the hymns addressed to the dawn, but these
-are never long sustained, and as a rule we find few grand similes
or metaphors.” The worst fault of all, in the Collection regarded
as a whole, is the intolerable monotony of a great number of the
hymns, a monotony which reaches its climax in the ninth Book
which consists almost entirely of invocations of Soma Pavamana,
or the deified Soma juice in process of straining and purification.

* Who as ambassador of Seleucus resided for some time at the court of
Chandragupta. His reports are preserved to us chiefly in the ’IvSiica of
Arrian who lived in the second century A. D,

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION,

XXL

The great interest of the Eigveda is, in fact, historical rather than
poetical. As in its original language we see the roots and shoots
of the languages of Greek and Latin, of Kelt, Teuton and Slavonian,
so the deities, the myths, and the religious beliefs and practices
of the Veda throw a flood of light upon the religions of all European
countries before the introduction of Christianity. As the science
of comparative philology could hardly have existed without the
study of Sanskrit, so the comparative history of the religions of
the world would have been impossible without the study of the
Veda.

My translation, which follows the text of Max Muller’s splendid
six-volume edition, is partly based on the work of the great
scholiast Sayana who was Prime Minister at the court of the King of
Vijayanagar — in what is now the Madras District of Bellary — in
the fourteenth century of our era. Sayana’s Commentary has
been consulted and carefully considered for the general sense of
; every verse and for the meaning of every word, and his interpreta-
; tion has been followed whenever it seemed rational, and consistent
with the context, and with other passages in which the same word
or words occur. With regard to Sayana’s qualifications as an in-
terpreter of the Veda there is, or was, a conflict of opinion among
European scholars. Professor Wilson — whose translation of the
Bigveda is rather a version of Sayana’s paraphrase — -was firmly
persuaded that he had a “ knowledge of his text far beyond the
pretensions of any European scholar, and must have been in
possession of all the interpretations which had been perpetuated
by traditional teaching from the earliest times.” Yet, as Dr. J.
Muir has pointed out, Professor Wilson in the notes to his transla-
tion admits that he “ occasionally failed to find in S&yana a per-
fectly satisfactory guide,” that <£ the scholiast is evidently puzzled,”
and that his explanations are obscure. On the other hand Pro-
fessor Roth — the author of the Vedic portion of the great St.
Petersburg Lexicon — says in his preface to that work; rc sq far
as regards one of the branches of Vedic literature, the treatises

X

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.

on theology and worship, we can desire no better guides than
these commentators, so exact in all respects, who follow their
texts word by word, who, so long as even the semblance of a mis-
conception might arise, are never weary of repeating what they
have frequently said before, and who often appear as if they had
been writing for us foreigners rather than for their own priestly
alumni who had grown up in the midst of these conceptions and
impressions. Here,.. they are in their proper ground. The
case, however, is quite different when the same men assume the

task of interpreting the ancient collections of hymns

Here were required not only quite different qualifications for in-
terpretation but also a greater freedom of judgment and a greater
breadth of view and of historical intuitions. Freedom of judgment,
however, was wanting to priestly learning, whilst in India no one
has ever had any conception of historical development. The very
qualities which have made those commentators excellent guides
to an understanding of the theological treatises, render them un-
suitable conductors on that far older and quite differently circum-
stanced domain. As the so-called classical Sanskrit was perfectly
familiar to them, they sought its ordinary idiom in the Yedic
hymns also. Since any difference in the ritual appeared to them
inconceivable and the present forms were believed to have existed
from the beginning of the world, they fancied that the patriarchs
of the Indian religion must have sacrificed in the very same man-
ner. . As the recognized mythological and classical systems of their
own age appeared to them unassailable and revealed verities, they
must necessarily (so the commentators thought) be discoverable
in that centre point of revelation, the hymns of the ancient Rishis,
who had, indeed, lived in familiar intercourse with the Gods, and
possessed far higher wisdom than the succeeding generations,..,..

It has never occurred to any one to make our understanding of the
Hebrew books of the Old Testament depend on the Talmud and
the Rabbins, while there are not wanting scholars who hold it as
the duty of a conscientious interpreter of the Veda to translate in

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION, xl

conformity with Sayana, Mahidhara, etc. Consequently, we do
not believe like H, H. Wilson, that S&yana, for instance, under-
stood the expressions of the Yeda better than any European in-
terpreter ; but we think that a conscientious European interpreter
may understand the Yeda far better and mor§ correctly than
S&yana. We do not esteem it our first task to arrive at that un-
derstanding of the Yeda which was current in India some centuries
ago, but to search out the sense which the poets themselves have
put into their hymns and utterances. Hence we are of opinion
that the writings of Sayana and the other commentators do not
form a rule for the interpreter, but are merely one of those helps
of which the latter will avail himself for the execution of his un-
doubtedly difficult task, a task which is not to be accomplished
at the first onset, or by any single individual,.,, We have, there-
fore, endeavoured to follow the path prescribed by philology, to
derive from the texts themselves the sense which they contain,
by a juxtaposition of all the passages which are cognate in diction
or contents ; — a tedious and laborious path, in which neither the
commentators nor the translators have preceded us. The double
duty of exegete and lexicographer has thus devolved upon us. A
i simple etymological procedure, practised as it must be by those
who seek to divine the sense of a word from the sole consideration
; of the passage before them without regard to the ten or twenty
I other passages in which it recurs, cannot possibly lead to a correct
; result,”*

Professor Max Muller says : “ As the authors of the Brah-

manas were blinded by theology, the authors of the still later
Niruktas were deceived by etymological fictions, and both conspir-
ed to mislead by their authority later and more sensible commen-
tators, such as Sayana. Where S&yana has no authority to mislead
him, his commentary is at all events rational ; but still his schol-
astic notions would never allow him to accept the free interpreta-
tion which comparative study of these venerable documents forces

* On the Interpretation of the Vcda } by Muir Esq.

xii

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION'.

upon the unprejudiced scholar. We must therefore discover our*
selves the real vestiges of these ancient poets.”

Professor Benfey says : “ Every one who has carefully studied
the Indian interpretations is aware that absolutely no continuous
tradition extending from the composition of the Yeda to their ex-
planation by Indian scholars, can be assumed ; that, on the con-
trary, between the genuine poetic remains of Vedic antiquity and
their interpretations a long-continued break in tradition must have
intervened, out of which at most the comprehension of some par-
ticulars may have been rescued and handed down to later times
by means of liturgical usages and words, formulae, and perhaps,
also, poems connected therewith. Besides these remains of tradi-
tion, which must be estimated as very scanty, the interpreters of
the Yeda had, in the main, scarcely any other helps than those
which, for the most part, are still at our command, the usage of
the classical speech, and the grammatical and etymological-lexico-
< .graphical investigation of words. At the utmost, they found some
 aid in materials preserved in local dialects; but this advantage is
J almost entirely outweighed by the comparison which we are able
j to institute with the Zend, and that which we can make (though
 here we must of course proceed with caution and prudence) with
j the languages cognate to the Sanskrit,— a comparison which has
j already supplied so many helps to a clearer understanding of the
 Vedas. But quite irrespectively of all particular aids, the Indian
method of interpretation becomes in its whole essence an entirely
false one, owing to the prejudice with which it chooses to conceive
the ancient circumstances and ideas which have become quite
strange to it, from its own religious stand-point, so many centuries
more recent, whilst, on the other hand, an advantage for the com-
prehension of the whole is secured to us by the acquaintance (drawn
from analogous relations) with the life, the conceptions, the wants,
of ancient peoples and popular songs, which we possess, — an
advantage which, even if the Indians owed more details than they
actually do owe, to tradition, would not be eclipsed by their inter-
pretation.” *

* On the Interpretation of the Yeda , by J, Muir Esq.

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION-.

« xiil

A very different opinion of the value of the Indian commenta-
tors was held and expressed by Professor Goldstiicker. “ Without
the vast information,” he says, “ which those commentators have
disclosed to us, — without their method of explaining the obscurest
text, — in one word, without their scholarship, we should still stand
at the outer doors of Hindu antiquity.” He ridicules the assertion
that a European scholar can understand the Veda more correctly
than Sayana, or arrive more nearly at the' meaning which the
Rishis gave to their own hymns, and yet even this stanch champion
of the Indian commentators “ cannot be altogether acquitted (as
Dr, J. Muir says and shows) of a certain heretical tendency to devi-
ate in practice from the interpretations of S&yana

The last quotation which I shall make in connexion with this
question is from Professor E. B. Cowell’s Preface to his edition of
Vol. V. of Wilson’s Translation of the Rig-Veda Sanhitd ; “This
work does not pretend to give a complete translation of the Rig-
Veda, but only a faithful image of that particular phase of its in-
terpretation which the mediaeval Hindus, as represented by Sayana,
have preserved. This view is in itself interesting and of an his-
torical value j but far wider and deeper study is needed to pierce
to the real meaning of these old hymns. Sfty ana’s commentary
will always retain a value of its own, — even its mistakes are often
interesting, — but his explanations must not for a moment bar the
progress of scholarship. We can be thankful to him for any real
help ; but let us not forget the debt which we owe to modern
scholars, especially to those of Germany. The great St. Petersburg
Dictionary is indeed a monument of triumphant erudition, and
it has inaugurated a new era in the interpretation of the Rig-
Veda.”

My translation, then, is partly based on the commentary of
S&yana, corrected and regulated by rational probability, context,
and intercomparison of similar words and passages. For constant
and most valuable assistance in my labour I am deeply indebted
to the works of many illustrious scholars, some departed, and some,

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.

happily, still flourishing. I am thankful to S&yana, my first guide
to the hymns of the Bigveda ; to my revered Master, Professor H.
H. "Wilson ; to Professors Both,, Benfey, Weber, Ludwig, Max
Muller, Grassmann, and Monier Williams, and Dr. John Muir and
Mr. Wallis. I hjive also consulted, and shall probably make more
use hereafter of, the works of M. Bergaigne and Dr. Oldenberg ;
nor can I omit to mention the Siebenzig Lieder des Bigveda by
Geldner and Kaegi, Dev Bigveda , by Kaegi, and Ilymns from the
Bigveda , , by Professor Peterson of Bombay, all of which I have
read with pleasure and profit.

But it must not be supposed that European students and in-
terpreters of the Veda claim anything like infallibility, comple-
teness, or finality for the results to which their researches have
led them. All modem scholars will allow that many hymns are
dark as the darkest oracle, that, as Professor Max Miiller says, there
are whole verses which, as yet, yield no sense whatever, and words
the meaning of which we can only guess. As in the interpretation
of the more difficult books of the Old Testament and the Homeric
poems, so in the explanation of the Veda complete success, if ever
attainable, can be attained only by the labours of generations of
scholars.

The Hymns are composed in various metres, some of which
are exceedingly simple and others comparatively complex and
elaborate, and two or more different metres are frequently found
in the same Hymn ; one Hymn, for instance, in Book I. shows
nine distinct varieties in the same number of verses. The verses
pr stanzas consist of three or more — generally three or four
--PddgSy semi-hemistichs or lines, each of which contains eight,
eleven, or twelve syllables, sometimes, but rarely, five, and still
less frequently four or more than twelve. As regards quantity
the first syllables of the line are not strictly defined, but the last
four are regular, the measure being . iambic in the eight and
twelve syllable verses and trochaic in these of eleven syllables.
Partly by way of safeguard against the besetting temptation to

PREFACE TO THE FIRST ERITIOK.

XV

paraphrase and expand, and partly in the hope of preserving,
however imperfectly, something of the form of the Hymns, I have
translated each verse by a vera^ syllabically commensurate with
the original and generally divided into corresponding hemisticha.

The verses consisting of three or four ocfcqjsyllabic lines are
tolerably well represented by the common octosyllabic or dimeter
iambic metre which I have employed. In other verses I have not
attempted to reproduce or imitate the rhythm or metre of the
original : such a task, supposing its satisfactory completion to he
possible, would require more time and labour than I could spare
for the purpose. All that I have done, or tried to do, is to show
to some extent the original external form of the Hymns by render-
ing them in syllabically commensurate hemistichs and verses, as
Benfey and the translators of the Seventy Hymns have done for a
portion of the Rigveda, and Grassmann for nearly the whole of
the Collection.

For further information regarding the Rigveda the English
reader is referred to Max Muller’s History of Ancient Sanskrit
Literature , Muir’s Original Sanskrit Texts, and Weber’s History
of Indian Literature; or if a simpler and more popular exposition
be required, to Mrs. Manning’s India , Ancient and Mediaeval , or
to Kaegi’s Her Rigveda , of which an English translation has
recently appeared. The student who reads German and French
will*' as a matter of course, consult Ludwig’s great worker Rigveda
and Bergaigne’s Etudes sur la Religion Y6dique,

To conclude, my reasons for publishing this work are chief y
these : there is at present no complete translation of the Rigveda
in English, Professor Wilson’s version — of which the last two
volumes have only lately appeared — being “ only a faithful image
of that particular phase of its interpretation which the mediaeval
Hindus, as represented by S&yana, have preserved,” and, more-
over, the price of Wilson’s six volumes — upwards of ninety rupees
puts the work beyond the reach of the great majority of
readers in India.

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.

A

XVI

T can hardly hope that my work will find acceptance with
Pandits and Indian scholars inasmuch as I venture to deviate
both widely and frequently from Sayana whom they have been
taught to regard as infallible. No arguments are likely to shake
this belief. Nothing short of a course of study similar to that to
which the leaders of the modern school of Yedic interpretation
have devoted half their lives will enable them to see with our eyes
and accept our views. I trust, however, that they will at any
rate give the leaders and the followers of this modern school
credit for deep devotion to ancient Indian literature and duo
admiration of the great Indian scholars who have expounded it ;
and will acknowledge that these modern scholars — however mis-
taken their views may appear to be — are labouring sincerely and
solely to discover and declare the spirit and the truth of the most
ancient and venerated literary records that are the heritage of
Aryan man.

R. T, H. GRIFFITH,

Kotagiri, Nilgiri :

May mill, 1889,

Note.

This second edition of my translation is in the main a re-
print in compacter and cheaper form, with some corrections and
other improvements in text and commentary, of the original four-
volume edition.

E. T. H. a

Kotagiri :

15 th October , 1896,

f

THE HYMNS OF THE RIGVEDA,

BOOK THE FIRST.

2

3

4

5

6

HYMN I.

I laud Agni, the chosen Priest, God, minister of sacrifice,
The Hotar, lavishest of wealth.

Agni.

Worthy is Agni to be praised by living as by ancient seers :

He shall bring hitherward the Gods.

Through Agni man obtainetli wealth, yea, plenty waxing day
by day,

Most rich in heroes,' glorious.

Agni, the perfect sacrifice which thou encompassest about
Verily goeth to the Gods.

May Agni, sapient-minded Priest, truthful, most gloriously great,
The God, come hither with the Gods.

Whatever blessing, Agni, thou- wilt grant unto thy worshipper,
That, Angiras, is indeed thy truth.

The first two hymns of this Book are ascribed to the Ilishi or seer Madhu-
chchhandas Vaisvainitra, a son or descendant of the famous Visv&mitra. The
deity to whom this hymn is addressed is Agni, the God of* fire, the most
prominent, next to Indra, of the deities of the Rigveda. Agni is the mes-
senger and mediator between earth and heaven, announcing to the Gods the
hymns, and conveying to them the oblations, of their worshippers, inviting
them with the sound of his crackling flames and bringing them down to the
place of sacrifice. As concentrating in himself the various sacrificial duties of
different classes of human priests, Agni is called the Pnrokita or chosen priest,
the prmpositm or presses. He is a, Ritvij, a priest or minister who sacrifices at
the proper seasons, and a Hotar, an invoking priest, a herald who calk the
Gods to enjoy the offering. All riches are at his disposal, and he is the most
bountiful rewarder, both directly and indirectly, of the pious whose oblations
he carries to the Gods.

2 Ancient seers : said by S&yana to be Bhrigu, Angiras, and others. The
expression indicates the existence of earlier hymns.

3 Most rich in heroes : the heroes here spoken of, who accompany the
acquisition and increase of wealth, are brave sons and dependents.

4 Perfect : uninterrupted by R&kshasas or fiends, who are unable to mar a
sacrifice which Agni protects on all sides.

6 Angiras : here a name of Agni. The Angirases appear to have been .
regarded as a race of higher beings between Gods and men, the typical first
saerificers, whose ritual is the pattern which later priests must follow.

2 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK L

7 To thee, dispeller of the night, 0 Agni, day by day with prayer
Bringing thee reverence, we come ;

8 Ruler of sacrifices, guard of Law eternal, radiant One,
Increasing in thine own abode.

9 Be to us easy of approach, even as a father to his son :

Agni, be with us for our weal.

HYMN II. Vdyu.

Beautiful Vayn, come, for thee these Soma drops have been
prepared :

Brink of them, hearken to our call.

2 Knowing the days, with Sonia juice poured forth, the singers

glorify

Thee, Vayu, with their hymns of praise.

3 VAyu. thy penetrating stream goes forth unto the worshipper,
J-h’r^pivading i'or ilio Soma draught.

8 Law eternal. The word used to denote the conception of the order of the
world is rita. Everything in the universe which is conceived as showing
regularity of action may be said to have the rita for its principle. In its
most general application the conception expressed by the word occupied to
some extent the place of natural and moral law, fate, or the will of a supreme
God. See Wallis, The Cosmology of the Rljvedu, p. 92.

' In thine own abode: sve chime, sud do mo, in the sacrificial hall or chamber
in which fire-worship is performed, and in which the fire (Agni) increases as
the oblations of clarified butter are poured upon it by the priest.

1 Vdyu : God of the wind.

v Soma dtops: libations of the juice of the Soma, or Moon-plant, said to he
I the Acid Asclepias or Sarcosterna Vimiualis. The plant was gathered by
j moonlight on certain mountains, stripped of its leaves, and then carried to the
} place of sacrifice ; the stalks having been there crushed by the priests were
i sprinkled with water and placed on a sieve or strainer, whence, after further
} pressure, the acid juice trickled into a vessel called Droua ; after which it
\ was mixed with flour etc,, made to ferment, and then offered in libations to
< the Gods or drunk by the BrAhmans, by both of whom its exhilarating quali-
\ ties were supposed to be highly prized. This famous plant has remained
j unidentified till recently (see Max Muller, Biographies of Words, Appendix
J III.) 4 Dr. Aitchison has lately stated that Soma must be the Ephedra pachy -
! chide, which in the Harirud valley is said to bear the name of hum, huma , and
j yahma. This supposition is confirmed by Dr. Joseph Bornmuller, a botanist
1 long resident in Kerman, who identifies the Soma plant with some kind of
\ Ephedra, probably Ephedra distachya, but who remarks that different vane-
\ ties of Ephedrarare to be found from Siberia to the Iberian peninsula, so that
 we must give up the hope of original home of the Aryas by

i means of the habitat of the So. i : ! -terly Review, No. 354, October

 1894, p, 455). ■ •

2. Knowing the days :■ knowing the proper days for sacrifices; or perhaps,
knowing or marking the time of daybreak, the exact time for the commence-
ment of sacrificial rites.

8 Hymns of praise : tiJcthas, lauds recited or spoken, in opposition to verses
that are chanted or sung.

HYMN 3.] * THE R7QYEDA, %

4 These, Indra-Vayii, have been shed ; come for onr offered

dainties’ sake :

The drops are yearning for you both.

■5 Well do ye mark libations, ye Viyu and Indr a, rick in spoil \

Bo come ye swiftly hitherward.

6 Vayu and Indra, come to what the Soma-presser hath prepared:
Boon, Heroes, thus I make my prayer.

7 Mltra, of holy strength, I call, and foe-destroying Vanina,

Who make th e oil-fed rite com plete.

5 Mitra and Varuna, through Law, lovers and eheriskers of Law,
Have ye obtained your mighty power.

$ Our Sages, Mitra- Varuna, of wide dominion, st rong by birth.
Vouchsafe us strength that worketh ivell.

HYMN TIL Asvins.

Ye Asvins, rich in treasure, Lords of splendour, having nimble
hands,

Accept the sacrificial food.

4 Indra and Vayu are here conjointly addressed in a dual compound, Didra-
vayO. Indra was the favourite national deity of the Aryan Indians in the
Vedie Age, and more hymns are dedicated to his honour than to the praise of
any other divinity. He is the God who reigns over the intermediate region or
atmosphere ; he fights against and conquers with his thunderbolt the demons
of drought and darkness, and is in general the type of noble' heroism.

7 According to Sayana, Mitra presides over the day as Varuna over the
night ; hence the closest connexion subsists between these two deities who
are more frequently invoked together than Varuna is invoked singly ; together
they uphold and rule the earth and sky, together they guard the world, to-
gether they promote religious rites, avenge sin, and are ilie lords of truth and
light.

Oil-fed} performed with ghritAm (the modern ghi), and clarified butter, or
butter which has been boiled gently and then allowed to cool. The butter
is then used for culin&ry purposes and also offered in sacrifice to the Gods.
Complete : by granting the worshipper’s prayer.

8 Through Law : i. e. in accordance with ritd, the eternal law or everlasting
order of the universe. See I. 1. 8.

1 ‘ The Asvins seem to have been a puzzle even to the oldest Indian Com-
mentators. Y&ska thus refers to them m the Nirukta, XII. 1 : — ‘Next in order 1 * * 4
are the deities whose sphere is the heaven ; of these the Asvins are the first
to arrive... Who then are these Asvins f ‘ Heaven and Earth,’ say some ; * Day
and Night,’ say others ; * The Sun and Moon,’ say others ; ‘Two Kings, per-
formers of holy acts/ say the legendary writers,’ Professor Both thus s{>eaks

of these Gods : ‘The two Alvins, though, like the ancient interpreters of the ,
Veda, we are by no means agreed as to the conception of their character, hold,

nevertheless, a perfectly distinct position in the entire body of the Yeffie ,

deities of light. They are the earliest bringers of light in the morning skff

€ the jiymjss, OF [BOOK l

2 Come thou to our libations, drink of Soma, Soma-drinker thou !
The l'ich One’s rapture giveth kine.

3 So may we be acquainted with thine innermost benevolence :
Neglect us not, come hitherward.

4 Go to the wise un conquered One, ask thou of Indra, skilled in

song, °

Him who is better than thy friends.

5 Whether the men who mock us say, Depart unto another place,
Ye who serve Indra and none else ;

6 Or whether, God of wondrous deeds, all our true people call us

blest.

Still may we dwell in Indra’s care.

7 Unto the swift One bring the swift, man-cheering, grace of

sacrifice.

That to the Friend gives wings and joy.

8 Thou, Satakratu, drankest this and wast the Vritras’ slayer ;

thou

Holpest the warrior in the fray.

9 We strengthen, Satakratu, thee, yea, thee the powerful in fight.
That, Indra, we may win us wealth.

10 To him the mighty stream of wealth, prompt friend of him who
pours the juice.

Yea, to this Indra sing your song.

2 Indra is especially the lard of Soma and its chief drinker. The exhilar-

ation produced by drinking the fermented juice offered in libations stimulates

his warlike energies and disposes him. to give out of his boundless riches

liberal rewards in the shape of cattle and other wealth to those who worship
him.

6 The general meaning of this and the two preceding verses seems to he :
Indra is the best friend and protector, and so long as we enjoy his friendship
and protection we care nothing for the revilings of the ungodly who mock at
our faithful worship.

7 The swift One : Indra. The Soma juice which exhilarates men or heroes
and accompanies or graces the sacrifice is also called swift both because it
flows quickly and because it makes Indra hasten to the solemnity. The
Friend , is Indra whom the juice exhilarates and sends quickly to the sacrifice.

8 Satakratu, a name of Indra, c is explained by S&yana, he who is connected

with a hundred (many) acts, religious rites ( bahukarnmyukta ), either as their
performer or their object : or it may be rendered f endowed with great wis-
dom;’ hratu implying either karma , act, or : *•'»' * 2 * 4 * 6 7 8 . i r r-.’ Wilson.

The Vritras, the enemies, the oppressors, or ■ ■ .. ■ .,■■■■ 1 1 ■■ hostile

powers in the atmosphere who malevolently shut up the watery treasures in
the clouds. These demons of drought, called by a variety of names, as Vvittra
Ahi, Sushna, Namuchi, Pipru, Sambara, Urana, etc., etc., armed on their side,
also, with every variety of colest-ial artillery, attempt, but in vain, to resis,
the onset of the gods.’ Muir, 0, & Texts, Y.

HYMN 6.]

THE RIO VEDA.

7

HYMN V.' Indra.

O come ye hither, sit ye down ; to Indra sing ye forth your song,
Companions, bringing hymns of praise ;

2 To him the richest of the rich, the Lord of treasures excellent,
Indra, with Soma juice outpoured,

3 May he stand by us in our need and in abundance for our

wealth :

May he come nigh us with his strength ;

4 Whose pair of tawny horses yoked in battles foemen challenge

not :

To him, to Indra sing your song.

5 Nigh to the Soma-drinker coxne, for his enjoyment, these pure

drops,

The Somas mingled with the curd.

6 Thou, grown at once to perfect strength, wast born to drink

the Soma juice,

Strong Indra, for preeminence.

7 0 Indra, lover of the song, may these quick Somas enter thee ;
May they bring bliss to thee the Sage.

8 Our chants of praise have strengthened thee, 0 Satakratu, and

our lauds :

So strengthen thee the songs we sing.

9 Indra, whose succour never fails, accept these viands thousand-

fold,

Wherein all manly powers abide. ■*

1 0 0 Indra, thou who lovest song, let no man hurt our bodies, keep
Slaughter far from us, for thou canst.

HYMN VI. Indra.

They who stand round him as he moves harness the bright,
the middy Steed :

The lights are shining in the sky.

I Companions. The call is addressed to the ministering priests.

3 * Two separate • cases appear to be meant : yoge> where the God must
recognize the necessity of his intervention, and purmdhydm } where he may
deem it superfluous.’ Ludwig.

4 At the sight of whose chariot and horses all enemies flee.

9 Wherein all manly powers abide. The oblations of worshippers, as well as
their hymns of praise, stimulate and strengthen the Gods for deeds of heroism.

1 They who stand round ; lohatrayavartin a h prdnimth, * the living beings of
the three worlds,’ is S&yana’s explanation. Probably the Maruts, Indra’s
constant companions are intended.

The bright , the ruddy Steed , (bradhndm arush&m ), is probably the Bun, with
whom Indra is frequently connected.

THE HVMXE OF [BOOK 1.

2 On both sides to the car they yoke the two bay coursers dear

to .him, #

Bold, tawny, bearers of the Chief.

3 Thou, making light where no light' was, and form, 0 men !

where form was not,

Wast born together with the Dawns.

& Thereafter they, as is their wont, threw off the state of babes
imbora,

Assuming sacrificial names.

5 Thou, Indra, with the Tempest-Gods, the breakers down o£»

what is firm,

Foundest the kine even in the cave.

6 Worshipping even as they list, singers laud him who findoth

wealth,

The far-renowned, the mighty One.

7 Mayest thou verily be seen coming by fearless Indra’, s side ;
Both joyous, equal in your sheen.

8 With Indra’s well-beloved hosts, the blameless, hastening to

heaven,

The sacrifice!' cries aloud.

2 On both sides : vipakshasd ; harnessed on different sides.

8 Thou, i. e. the Sun. 0 men / is perhaps merely an exclamation expressive
of admiration. If marydh , men, be taken to mean the Maruts, the words
thou , making , wast born, although in the singular number, may apply to these
Gods regarded as one host or company and born at one birth.

4 Threw off the state of babes unborn : according to Prof. M. Muller f as-
sumed again the form of new-born babes.’ 2 * 4 5 * The idea that the Maruts
assumed the form of a garbha, lit. of an embryo or a new-born child, is only
meant to express that the storms burst forth from the womb of the sky as
soon as Indra arises .to do battle against the demon of darkness. As assisting
Indra in this battle, the Maruts, whose name retained for a long time its
purely appellative meaning of storms, attained their rank as deities by the
side of Indra, or as the poet expresses it, they assumed their sacred name.
This seems to be the whole meaning of the later legend that the Maruts, like
the Ilibhus were not originally gods, but became deified for their works. 7 8
M. Muller. Rigveda Sanhitd, i. p. 25.

5 The Tempest-Gods : the Maruts, the friends and helpers of Indra.

The kine; are streams of water and the beams of light which follow their
effusion. The cave is the thick dark cloud which holds the imprisoned waters
and which Indra cleaves asunder with his thunderbolt or lightning.

7 Thou : the host of Maruts. According to Benfey, the Sun.

8 The sacrificer cries aloud . This is the interpretation proposed by Professor
Max Muller,.. but it is only conjectural and not altogether satisfactory, Benfey
translates : Mightily shines the sacrifice ,* and Ludwig t The warrior sings
triumphantly,

HYMN 7.] TtiM MOVED A. g

9 Come from this place, 0 Wanderer, or downward from the
light of heaven : ' _

Our songs of praise all yearn for this.

10 Indra we seek to give us help, from here, from heaven above
the earth,

Or from the spacious firmament. 9

HYMN VII. Indra,

Indra the singers with high praise, Indra reciters with their
lauds,

Indra the choirs have glorified.

2 Indra hath ever close to him his two bay steeds and word-yoked

car,

Indra the golden, thunder-armed.

3 Indra hath raised the Sun on high in heaven, that he may see

afar :

He burst the mountain for the kine.

4 Help us, 0 Indra, in the frays, yea, frays where thousand spoils

are gained,

With awful aids , 0 awful One.

5 In mighty battle we invoke Indra, Indra in lesser fight,

The Friend who bends his bolt at fiends,

6 Unclose, our manly Hero, thou for ever bounteous, yonder

cloud,

For us, thou irresistible.

7 Still higher, at each strain of mine, thunder-armed Indra’s

praises rise :

I find no laud worthy of him,

8 Even as the bull drives on the herds, he drives the people with

~Tns mighC ~~

TJi e Ruler irresisti ble :

9 From this place : from earth.

Wanderer : ( parijman ) here applied to Indra.

10 The spacious firmament : the expanse between earth and heaven.

1 The choirs : ( vd'ni ) referring perhaps to both singers and chanters.

2 The golden : i. e. richly decorated (sarvdhharanahhUshital}) according to
S&yana.

3 The moutain: is the : ■ v J V ■■ 1 v* *! mass of thick cloud, and the kine

are the waters as in I. 6, 5. ” i ■ / ■ and pdrvata mean both mountain

and cloud, those beiftg constantly seen in close juxtaposition .and being often
indistinguishable one from the other,

10 THE HYMXS OF [BOOK L

9 Indra who rules with single sway men, riches, and the fivefold

* race

Of those who dwell upon the earth.

10 For your sake from each side we call Indra away from other

men :

Ours, and nope others’, may he be.

HYMN VIII. Indra.

Indra, bring wealth that gives delight, the victor's ever-con-
quering wealth,

Most excellent, to be our aid ;

2 By means of which we may repel our foes in battle hand to

hand,

By thee assisted with the car.

3 Aided by thee, the thunder-armed, Indra, may we lift up the

bolt,

And conquer all our foes in fight.

4 With thee, 0 Indra, for ally with missile-darting heroes, may

We , conquer our embattled foes.

5 Mighty is Indra, yea supreme ; greatness be his, the Thunderer ;

Wide as the heaven extends his power ;

6 Which aideth those to win them sons, who come as heroes to

the fight,

Or singers loving holy thoughts.

7 His belly, drinking deepest draughts of Soma, like an ocean

swells,

Like wide streams from the cope of heaven.

8 So also is his excellence, great, vigorous, rich in cattle, like

A ripe branch to the worshipper.

9 For verily thy mighty powers, Indra, are saving helps at

once

Unto a worshipper like me.

9 The fivefold race : Ben fey explains this as ‘the whole inhabited world/
But the expression seems to mean the Aryan settlements or tribes only, and
not the indigenous inhabitants of the country. The five tribes or settlements
were probably the confederation of the Turvasas, Yadus, Anus, Druhyus, and
Pftrus. S fry ana’s explanation is * those who are fit for habitations/ and the
phrase is said to imply the four castes and Nisliadas or indigenous barbarians.
But there were no such distinctions of caste when the hymn was composed.

2 With the car: arvettd , literally, with a horse, is explained by Sftyana to
mean fighting on horseback. But horses seem to have been used in war as
drawers of chariots only, and dr vat d here stands for rathena, with a car or
chariot.

3 May vie lift up the holt. The thunderbolt here spoken of is sacrifice which,
when employed against enemies, is as powerful a weapon as the bolt of Indra,

10 THE HYMNS OS [BOOK L

9 Indra who rules with single sway men, riches, and the fivefold

* race

Of those who dwell upon the earth.

10 For your sake from each side we call Indra away from other

men :

Ours, and nope others 7 , may he be.

HYMN VIII. Indra.

Indra, bring wealth that gives delight, the victor's ever-con-
quering wealth,

Most excellent, to be our aid ;

2 By means of which we may repel our foes in battle hand to

hand,

By thee assisted with the car.

3 Aided by thee, the thunder-armed, Indra, may we lift up the

bolt,

And conquer all our foes in fight.

4 With thee, 0 Indra, for ally with missile-darting heroes, may

We conquer our embattled foes.

5 Mighty is Indra, yea supreme ; greatness be his, the Thunderer :

Wide as the heaven extends his power ;

6 Which aideth those to win them sons, who come as heroes to

the fight,

Or singers loving holy thoughts.

1 His belly, drinking deepest draughts of Soma, like an ocean

swells,

Like wide streams from the cope of heaven.

8 So also is his excellence, great, vigorous, rich in cattle, like

A ripe branch to the worshipper.

9 For verily thy mighty powers, Indra, are saving helps at

once

Unto a worshipper lite me.

9 The fivefohl race: Benfey explains this as ‘the whole inhabited world/
But the expression seems to mean the Aryan settlements or tribes only, and
not the indigenous inhabitants of .the country. The five tribes or settlements
were probably the confederation of the Turvasas, Yadus, Anus, Druhyus, and
Pfirus. S&yana’s explanation is £ those who are fit for habitations,’ and the
phrase is said to imply the four castes and Nishadas or indigenous barbarians.
But there were no such distinctions of caste when the hymn was composed.

2 With the car: drvatd, literally, with a horse, is explained by Sftyana to
mean fighting on horseback. But horses seem to have been used in war as
drawers of chariots only, and dvvatd here stands for rathenu , with a ear or
chariot.

3 May we lift up the holL The thunderbolt here spoken of is sacrifice which,
when employed against enemies, is as powerful a weapon as the bolt of Indra.

THE RIG VEDA.

11

HYMN 9.]

10 So are his lovely gifts ; let lauds and praises be to Indra sung,
That he may drink the Soma juice.

HYMN IX. Inclra.

Comb, Indra, and delight thee with the juice at all the Soma
feasts, ^

Frotector, mighty in thy strength.

2 To Indra pour ye forth the juice, the active gladdening juice

to him

The gladdening, omnific God.

3 0 Lord of all men, fair of cheek, rejoice thee in the gladdening

lauds,

Present at these drink-offerings.*

4 Songs have outpoured themselves to thee, Indra, the strong,

the guardian Lord,

And raised themselves unsatisfied.

5 . Send to us bounty manifold, O Indra, worthy of our wish,

For power supreme is only thine.

6 O Indra, stimulate thereto us emulously fain for wealth,

And glorious, 0 most splendid One.

7 Give, Indra, wide and lofty fame, wealthy in cattle and in

strength,

Lasting our life-time, failing not.

8 Grant us high fame, O Indra, grant riches bestowing thousands,

those *

Fair fruits of earth borne home in wains.

9 Praising with songs the praise-worthy who cometh to our aid,

we call

Indra, the Treasure-Lord of wealth.

10 To lofty Indra, dweller by each libation, the pious man
Sings forth aloud a strengthening hymn.

10 Let lands and praises be to Indra sung : more exactly, ‘be lauds, spoken
and sung, to Indra given ; ’ nlctha being properly the laud that is recited, and
Stoma the hymn of praise that is sung.

4 And raised themselves unsatisfied: djoshdh, not contented, that is, with
prayers ever new, Ludwig observes that the S&maveda has preserved the
correct reading sajdshdh, 4 with one accord.’

8 Those fair fruits of earth brought home in wains. c The original of this
hymn, as of many others, is so concise and elliptical as to be unintelligible
without the liberal amplification of the Scholiast. We have in the text simply
“ those car-having viands,” td rath in tr ishah . meaning, Sayana says, those
articles of food which are conveyed in cars, carts, or waggons, from the site of
their production ; as rice, barley, and other kinds of grain.’ Wilson,

The meaning of mthinir is not clear.

[Book t.

n tub hymxs of

HYMN X. Indra.

The chanters hymn thee, they who say the word of praise
magnify thee.

The priests have raised thee up on high, 0 Satakratu, like a
pole.

2 As up he c'lomb from ridge to ridge and looked upon the

toilsome task,

Indra observes this wish of his, aiid the Ra m hasten s with his
troop. "" -

3 Harness thy pair of strong bay steeds, loiig-maried, whose

bodies fill the girths,

And, Indra, Soma-drinker, come to listen to our songs of
praise.

4 Gome hither, answer thou the song, sing in approval, cry

aloud.

Good Indra, make our prayer succeed, and prosper this our
sacrifice.

5 To Indra must a laud be said, to strengthen him who freely

gives,

That Sakra may take pleasure in our friendship and drink-offer-
ings.

6 Him, him we seek for friendship, him for riches and heroic

might.

For Indra, he is Sakra, he shall aid us while he gives us wealth.

7 Easy to turn and drive away, Indra, is spoil bestowed by thee.

1 f The concluding phrase, twd ..ud vans'am iva ijemire, “ they have raised
tjiee, like a bamboo,” is rather obscure. The Scholiast says, they have ele-
vated Indra, as tumblers raise a bamboo — on the summit of which they
balance themselves j a feat not uncommon in India ; or, as vuhm means, also,
a family, it may be rendered, as ambitious persons raise their family to con-
sequence,' Wilson,

% Tl-~ L . - ' k *■ -*■*”*.- ■: ■■■* ‘rom height to' height,

which* ^ i ■ . - 1 * * * 5 * 7 ■ ■ * ■. ■ ■ ' . of theYajam&ua, the

person who institutes or performs a regular .sacrifice and pays the expenses of
it, who goes to the mountain to gather the Soma-plant, fuel, etc, Ludwig
thinks that Indra is meant, rising higher and higher, and yet not delaying to
come to the sacrifice,'

The Ram , {vrishnih) is Indra, and liis flock or troop are the Maruts.

Hastens : comes quickly to the sacrifice.

5 Sakra, a common name of Indra, used in the next stanza as an epithet =

{ the powerful,-' from sale, to be able.

7 Easy to turn ; The booty spoken of in the Rigveda consists chiefly of
cattle, which with Indra’s assistance are easily turned and driven away from
the enemy who possesses them.

JIYMX 11]

THE RIG VEDA.

13

Unclose thejjtable of , the .kine^and give us. wealth 0 Thunder-
' ’ armed.

8 The heaven and earth eontain thee not, together, in thy wrath-

ful mood.

Win us the waters of the sky, and send us kine abundantly.

9 Hear, thou whose ear is quick, my call ; take 1 to thee readily

my songs.

0 Indra, let this laud of mine come nearer even than thy
friend.

10 We know thee mightiest of all, in battles hearer of our cry.

Of thee most mighty we invoke the aid that giveth thousand-
fold,

11 0 Indra, Son of Kusika, drink our libation with delight.
Prolong our life anew, and cause the seer to win a thousand

gifts,

12 Lover of song, may these our songs on every side encompass

thee :

Strengthening thee of lengthened life, may they bo dear de-
lights to thee.

HYMN XL Indra.

All sacred songs have magnified Indra expansive as the sea,
The best of warriors borne on cars, the Lord, the very Lord of
strength.

2 Strong in thy friendship, Indra, Lord of power and might, we

have no fear.

We glorify with praises thee, the never-conquered conqueror.

3 The gifts of Indra from of old, his saving succours, never fail.
When to the praise-singers he gives the boon of substance

rich in kine.

XJn close the stable of the bine: Open the thick cloud that holds the water
imprisoned, and fertilize our fields with rain.

9 Thy friend ; probably the mjra or thunderbolt which is Indra’ s insepar-
able associate and ally.

11 Son of Kusika : ICusika was the father or the grandfather of Visv&initra
who was the father of the poet or seer of this hymn. This epithet Kausika,
son of Kusika, is here applied to Ipdra as being the chief or special God of the
seer's family.

12 Of lengthened life— immortal,

1 This hymn is ascribed to Jetar the son of M adhu ch ehhan d as the seer of
the preceding hy mn . i -i -

Expansive as the sea : cf. I, 8, 7. Or the expression may be, as Wilson says,
‘ a vague mode of indicating the universal diffusion of Indra as the firma-
ment,’

THE RIG VEDA.

IIYMN 9.]

11

10 So are his lovely gifts; let lauds and praises be to Indra sung,
That he may drink the Soma juice,

HYMN IX, Indra.

Come, Indra, and delight thee with the juice at all the Soma
feasts, 9

Protector, mighty in thy strength.

2 To Indra pour ye forth the juice, the active gladdening juice

to him

The gladdening, omnific God.

3 0 Lord of all men, fair of cheek, rejoice thee in the gladdening

lauds,

Present at these drink-offerings.-

4 Songs have outpoured themselves to thee, Indra, the strong,

the guardian Lord,

And raised themselves unsatisfied.

5 . Send to us bounty manifold, O Indra, worthy of our wish,

For power supreme is only thine.

6 0 Indra, stimulate thereto us emulously fain for wealth,

And glorious, 0 most splendid One.

7 Give, Indra, wide and lofty fame, wealthy in cattle and in

strength,

Lasting our life-time, failing not.

8 Grant us high fame, O Indra, grant riches bestowing thousands,

those ^

Fair fruits of earth borne home in wains.

9 Praising with songs the praise-worthy who cometh to our aid,

we call

Indra, the Treasure-Lord of wealth. *■

10 To lofty Indra, dweller by each libation, the pious man
Sings forth aloud a strengthening hymn.

10 Let lauds and praises be to Indra sung : more exactly, ‘be lauds, spoken
and sung, to Indra given ; * ulcthu being properly the laud that is recited, and
Stoma the hymn of praise that is sung.

4 And raised themselves unsatisfied: djoshah, not contented, that is, with
prayers ever new, Ludwig observes that the SHmaveda has preserved the
correct reading sajdshdh, ‘ with one accord.’

8 Those fair fruits of earth brought home in wains. ‘ The original of this
hymn, as of many others, is so concise and elliptical as to be unintelligible
without the liberal amplification of the Scholiast. We have in the text simply
« those car-having viands,” td ruthintr ishah. meaning, S&yana says, those
articles of food which are conveyed in cars, carts, or waggons, from the site of
their production ; as rice, barley, and other kinds of grain.’ Wilson.

The meaning of ruthintr is not clear,

14 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK L

4 C rusher of for ts, the young, the wise, of strength unmeasured,

wtisTIeTiorn

Sustaiuer of each sacred rite, Indra, the Thunderer, much-
extolled.

5 Lord of the thunder, thou didst burst* the cave of Vala rich

in 'cows.

The Gods came pressing to thy side, and free from terror aided
thee.

6 I, Hero, through thy bounties am come to the hood addressing

thee.

Song-lover, here the singers stand and testify to thee thereof.

7 The wily Susima, Indra 1 thou c/erthrewest with thy wondrous

powers.

The wise beheld this deed of thine : now go beyond their
eulogies.

8 Our songs of praise have glorified Indra who ruletli by his

might,

Whose precious gifts in thousands come, yea, even more
abundantly,

HYMN XIT. a gni.

Wn choose Agni the messenger, the herald, master of all wealth,

Well skilled in this our sacrifice.

2 With callings ever they invoke Agni, Agni, Lord of the House,

Oblation-bearer, much beloved.

3 Bring the Gods hither, Agni, born for him who strews the sacred

grass :

Thou art our herald, meet for praise.

4 Ormher of forts ; destroyer or breaker-down of the clouds that withhold
the rain, which are regarded as the forts or strongholds of Vritra and the
other hostile powers of the air.

5 The care of Vala ; Vala is the brother of Vritra, or Vritra himself under
another name, who stole the cows of the Gods and hid them in a cave, that is,
kept the light and waters imprisoned in dark clouds.

6 To the food ; i. e. to Indra, the river or sea of bounty.

7 The will/ Sashna ; Sushna is described as a demon slain by Indra.
The word means drier up : bhkudndm soskanahetu, cause of the drying up of
beings, the excessive heat and drought before the Kains, which Indra puts an
end to.

Now go beyond their eulogies : i. e. do deeds worthy of still higher praise.
Or it may mean, make their eulogies endure.

1 The Hymns from XII to XXIII inclusive are ascribed to Medh&tithi,
son of Kanva.

The messenger ; the mediator between men and Gods. The herald : devdndm
dhvdtdrum , the in viter of the Gods, is S&yana’s explanation,

3 Born : newly produced by attrition for the man who has prepared and
spread the sacrificial grass as a seat for the expected deities,

HYMN 13.]

THE R1GVEDA.

15

4 Wake up the willing Gods, since thou, Agni, performest

embassage :

Sit on the sacred grass with Gods.

5 0 Agni, radiant One, to whom the holy oil is poured, burn up
Our enemies whom ^fiends protect.

6 By Agni Agni is inflamed, Lord of the House, Wise, young, who

bears

The gift ; the ladle is his mouth.

7 Praise Agni in the sacrifice, the Sage whose ways are ever true,
The God who drive th grief away.

8 God, Agni, be his strong defence who, lord of sacrificial gifts,
Worshippeth thee the messenger.

9 Whoso with sacred gift would fain call Agni to the feast of

Gods,

0 Purifier, favour him.

10 Such, Agni, Purifier, bright, bring hither to our sacrifice,

To our oblation bring the Gods.

1 1 So lauded by our newest song of praise bring opulence to us,
And food, with heroes for our sons.

12 0 Agni, by effulgent flame, by all invokings of the Gods,

Show pleasure in this laud of ours.

HYMN XIII. Agni.

Agni, well-kindled, bring the Gods for him who offers holy gifts.
Worship them, Purifier, Priest.

2 Son of Thyself, present, 0 Sage, our sacrifice to the Gods to-
day,

Sweet to the taste, that they may feast.

6 By Agni Agni is inflamed : The fire into which the oblation is poured is
lighted by the application of other fire.

Young : as newly horn each time the fire is produced. The ladle: used for
pouring the sacrificial butter into the fire.

8 Lord of sacrificial gifts : the wealthy patron or institutor of the sacrifice.

9 0 Purifier: pdvaka, purifying, is in later Sanskrit a common word for fire.

 This is one of the Apr! or propitiatory hymns, consisting of invocations to a
series of deified objects, and said to be introductory to the animal sacrifice,
j All the deified objects addressed in this hymn are said by S&yana to be forms
\ of Agni.

1 For him who offers holy gifts : for the institutor of the sacrifice.

2 Son of Thyself . Tanunapat, son or descendant of oneself, is a frequently
recurring name of Agni, so called because fire is sometimes self-generated, as
in the lightning, or produced by attrition, and not necessarily derived from
'other fire. Other fanciful derivations are given.

16

THE IITMHS OF

[BOOH T.

3 Dear Narasausa, sweet of tongue, the giver of oblations, I
Invoke to this our sacrifice.

4 Agni, on thy most easy car, glorified, hither bring the Gods ;
Manu appointed thee as Priest.

5 Strew, 0 ye wise, the sacred grass that drips with oil, in order

due,

Where the Immortal is beheld.

6 Thrown open be the Doors Divine, unfailing, that assist the rite,
For sacrifice this day and now.

7 I call the lovely Night and Dawn to seat them on the holy grass
At this our solemn sacrifice.

8 The two Invokers I invite, the wisp, divine, and sweet of

tongue,

To celebrate this our sacrifice.

\/p I] a, Sarasvati, Main, t 1 ■ G ; l ■ who bring delight,

( Be seated, peaceful, of " " .

10 Tvaslitar I call, the earliest born, the wearer of all forms at

will :

May he be ours and ours alone.

11 God, Sovran of the Wood, present this our oblation to the

Gods,

And let the giver be renowned.

3 Nard§ahsa ; * Praise of Men * is one of Agni’s mystical names.

4 Mam t ; is the man par excellence , or the representative man and father of
the human race, regarded as the first institutor of sacrifices and religious cere-
monies.

5 The Immortal : according to S&yana either the clarified butter or* Agni
the God.

6 The Doors Divine : the doors of the chamber in which the oblation is
offered.

Unfailing ; the signification of asauhdtah in the text is uncertain. S&yana
explains the word variously in various places.

8 The two InvoJeers, It seems a uncertain who these two invokers or priests
(holdrd) are, whether Agni and Aditya, or Agni and Vavuna, or Varuna and
Aditya. See M, Muller’s A . S. Diterature. p. 464.

9 lid ; the Goddess of sacred speech and action.

Sarasvati : see I. 3. 1 0.

Mailt: 'the great ’ (Goddess), said' to be identical with BMratS, also a
Goddess of speech.

10 Tvaslitar, is the Hephaistos, or Vulcan, of the Indian pantheon, the ideal
artist, the divine artisan, the most skilful of workmen, versed in all wonderful
and admirable contrivances.

11 God, Sovran of the Wood : vanaspati, lord of the wood ; usually, a large
tree ; here said to be an Agni,— as if the fuel and the burning of it were iden-
ttfied. A Or the Sacrificial Post may be intended, which is enumerated among
tlie Apr! deities or deified objects.

HYMN 14.3

THE MIG VEDA.

17

12 With. Svaha pay the sacrifice to Indra in the offerer’s house :
Thither I call the Deities.

HYMN XIV. Visvedevas.

To drink the Soma, Agni, come, come to our service and our
songs r

With all these Gods ; and worship them.

2 The K any as have invoked thee; they, 0 Singer, sing thee

songs of praise :

Agni, come hither with the Gods ;

3 Indra, Yayu, Brihaspati, Mitra, Agni, Pushan, Bhaga,

Adityas, and the Marut host.

12 Svdlid is tlie sacred word or exclamation ( Hail ! Blessing ! ) used in
pouring the oblation on the fire. According to S&yana, SvftM also may be
identified with Agni.

2 Tht Kanvas : sons or descendants of Kanva, men of the same family as the
seer of the hymn.

3 Indra , Vdyu, etc. The names of these Gods are in the accusative case,
governed by ‘they (the Kanvas) have invoked,’ or ‘worship them,’ understood.

Brihaspati , ‘alternating with Brahmanaspati is the name of a deity in
whom the action of the worshipper upon the Gods is personified. He is
the suppliant, the priest who intercedes with the Gods for men, and protects
them against the wicked. Hence he appears as the prototype of the priests
and the priestly order, and is also designated as the Purohita of the divine
community. The essential difference between the original idea represented
in this God and those expressed in most of the other and older deities of the
Yeda consists in the fact that the latter are personifications of various de-
partments of nature, or of physical forces, while the former is the product of
moral ideas, and an impersonation of the power of devotion,’ Muir, O. S,
Texts , Y. 272.

jPfishan is a God who protects and multiplies cattle and human possessions
generally. In character he is a solar deity, beholds the entire universe, and is
a guide on roads and journeys.

Bhaga, the gracious Lord and protector, is regarded as the bestower of
wealth,

Adityas. ‘ There (in the highest heaven) dwell and reign those Gods who
bear in common the name of Adityas. We must, however, if we would dis-
cover their earliest character, abandon the conceptions which in a later age,
and even in that of the heroic poems, were entertained regarding these deities.
According to this conception they were twelve Sun-gods, bearing evident
reference to the twelve months. But for the most ancient period we must
hold fast the primary signification of their name. They are the inviolable,
imperishable, eternal beings. Aditi, eternity or the eternal, is the element
which sustains them and is sustained by them... The eternal and inviolable
element in which the Adityas dwell, and which forms their essence, is the
celestial light... The Adityas, the Gods of this light, do not therefore by any
means coincide with any of the forms in which light is manifested in the uni-
verse. They are neither sun, nor moon, nor stars, nor dawn, but the eternal
susiainers of this luminous life, which exists, as it were, behind all these
phenomena.’ Roth, quoted by Muir, 0 . S, Texts, Y, p. 56*.

18 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK L

4 For you these juices are poured forth that gladden and exhi-

larate,

The meath-drops resting in the cup,

5 The sons of Kanvafain for help adore thee, having strewn the

grass,

With offering's and all things prepared.

6 Let the swift steeds who carry thee, thought-yoked and drop-

ping holy oil,

Bring the Gods to the Soma draught.

7 Adored, the strengthened of Law, unite them, Agni, with their*

Dames :

Make them drink meath, 0 bright of tongue.

8 Let them, 0 Agni, who deserve worship and praise drink with

thy tongue

The meath in solemn sacrifice.

9 Away, from the Sun’s realm of light, the wise invoking Priest

shall bring

All Gods awaking with the dawn.

10 With all the Gods, with Indra, with Vayu, and Mitra’s splen-

dours, drink,

Agni, the pleasant Soma juice.

11 Ordained by Manu as our Priest, thou sittest, Agni, at each rite:
Hallow thou this our sacrifice.

12 Harness the Bed Mares to thy- car, the Bays, 0 God, the flam-

ing ones :

With those bring hitherward the Gods.

HYMN XY. Eltu.

0 Indra drink the Soma juice with Bitu ; let the cheering drops
Sink deep within, which settle there.

The Marut host : the Maruts are the Gods of the winds and storms, the
companions and friends of Indra. They are said in the Veda to be the sons of
Rudra and Prism, the latter being explained by S&yana as ‘ the many-colour-
ed earth/ hut regarded by Professor Roth as a personification of the speckled
clouds.

7 Unite them, with their Dames ; pcitnivatas Tcridhi ; make them (come) with
their consorts.

9 The wise invoicing Priest : Agni, who calls the Gods,

10 All the Gods : or Visvedevas ; see I. 8. 7.

11 Manu : see 1. 13. 4.

1 Mtu .* meaning generally a season, a sixth part of the Indian year, is here
personified and addressed as a deity.

HYMN 15.]

THE RIGVEDA.

19

2 Drink from the Purifier's cup, Maruts, with Eitu ; sanctify
The rite, for ye give precious gifts.

3 0 Neshtar, with thy Dame accept our sacrifice ; with Eitu drink,
For thou art he who giveth wealth.

4 Bring the Gods, Agni ; in the three appointed places set them

down :

Surround them, and with Eitu drink.

5 Drink Soma after the Eitus, from the Brahmana’s bounty : un-

dissolved,

O Indra, is thy friendship's bond.

6 Mitra, Varuna, ye whose ways are firm — a Power that none

deceives — ,

With Eitu ye have reached the rite.

7 The Soma-pressers, fain for wealth, praise the Wealth-giver in

the rite,

In sacrifices praise the God.

8 May the Wealth-giver grant to us riches that shall be far

renowned :

These things we gain among the Gods.

9 He with the Eitus fain would drink, Wealth-giver, from the

Neshtar's bowl.

Haste, give your offering, and depart.

10 As we this fourth time, Wealth-giver, honour thee with the
Eitus, be

A Giver bountiful to us.

2 The Purifier's cup : the sacrificial vessel of the Potar, or Purifier, who
pours into the fire the libation for the Maruts.

3 0 Neshtar : the Neshtar is one of the chief officiating priests, who leads
forward the* wife of the institutor of the sacrifice. In this place Neshtar is
said to be another name for the God Tvashtar from his having on some oc-
casion assumed the function of a Neshtar priest.

4 The three appointed places ; by the three sacrificial fires.

5 The Brdhnana's bounty. The Br&hmaua here is said to be the Br&hma-
n&chchhans!, one of the sixteen priests employed in sacrifices ; and perhaps his
office may have been to hold some ladle or vase in which the offering is pre-
sented.

7 The Soma-pressers : grcthvahastdsah, men having stones in their hands
with which to bruise the Soma plant. The Wealth giver is Agni.

In the rite , In sacrifices : 1 in the adhvara and in the yajnas , the first said
to be the primary or essential ceremony, such as the Agnishtoma ; the second,
the modified ceremonies, such as the Ukthya which is elsewhere termed an
offering with Soma juice.’ Wilson.

10 As we this fourth time; Agni, as Dravinod&s or Wealth-giver, has now
been celebrated in four stanzas instead of the usual tricha or triad; or we may
translate with Ludwig, ‘ As we in fourth place/ Agni being fourth in the in-
vocation (Indra, Maruts, Tvashtar, Agni).

20 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK /.

1 1 Drink ye the meath, 0 Asvins bright with flames, whose acts

are pure, who with
■ Bitus accept the sacrifice.

12 With Bitu, through the house-fire, thou, kind Giver, guidest

sacrifice :

Worship the Gods for the pious man.

HYMN XYI. Indra.

Let thy Bay Steeds bring thee, the Strong, hither to drink the
Soma draught —

Those, Indra, who are bright as suns.

2 Here are the grains bedewed with oil : hither let the Bay

Coursers bring
Indra upon his easiest car.

3 Indra at early morn we call, Indra in course of sacrifice,

Indra to drink the Soma juice.

4 Come hither, with thy long-maned Steeds, 0 Indra, to the

draught we pour :

We call thee when the juice is shed.

5 Come thou to this our song of praise, to the libation poured

for thee :

Drink of it like a stag athirst.

6 Here are the drops of Soma juice expressed on sacred grass :

thereof

Drink, Indra, to increase thy might.

7 Welcome to thee be this our hymn, reaching thy heart, most

excellent :

Then drink the Soma juice expressed.

8 To every draught of pressed-out juice Indra, the Vritra-slayer,

comes,

To drink the Soma for delight.

9 Fulfil, 0 Satakratu, all our wish with horses and with kine :
With holy thoughts we sing thy praise.

12 Through the house-fire . The gftrhapatya is the sacred fire perpetually
maintained by the householder \ the fire from which fires for sacrificial pur-
poses are lighted.

1 Bright as suns ; sttrctchahsasah. S&yana understands this to refer to the
priests, and Wilson renders accordingly : may (the priests), radiant as the sun ,
(make thee manifest).

2 Easiest car j suhhdtame rathe : that is, most easily moving, swiftest.

3 Indra at early morn we call . Although not more particularly named, the
specification implies the morning, mid-day, and mo’i.ing v.-; : .--liip.

5 Mice a stag athirst : like a gaum (Bos Gaums) a kind of buffalo.

• f Drink like a thirsty buffalo/ would perhaps be a more strictly accurate
rendering.

MYMN 18.]

21

THE RIO VEDA.

HYMN XYIL Indra-Yarupa.

I crave help from the Imperial Lords, from Indra-Yaruna ;

may they

Both favour one of us like me.

2 Guardians of men, ye ever come with ready succour at the call
Of every singer such as I.

3 Sate you, according to your wish, 0 Indra-Yaruna, with wealth :
Fain would we have you nearest us.

4 May we be sharers of the powers, sharers of the benevolence
Of you who give strength bounteously.

5 Indra and Yaruna, among givers of thousands, meet for praise.
Are Powers who merit highest laud.

6 Through their protection may we gain great store of wealth,

and heap it up :

Enough, and still to spare, be ours.

7 0 Indra-Yaruna, on you for wealth in many a form I call :
Still keep ye us victorious.

8 0 Indra-Yaruna, through our songs that seek to win you to

ourselves,

Give us at once your sheltering help.

9 0 Indra-Yaruna, to you may fair praise which I offer come,
Joint eulogy which ye dignify,

HYMN XVIII. Brahman&spati,

0 BRAHifAif aspati, make him who presses Soma glorious,

Even Kakshivan Ausija.

1 Indra the Hero and Yaruna the King are addressed conjointly as
a dual deity, Indr&varuna, The most prominent of the other dual deities are
Agni-Soma, Indra-Vftyu, Indra- Agni, Indra-Brihaspati, Indra-Soma, Mitra-
Varuna, Indra-Pdshan, Indra-Vishpu, Dyaus-Prithivl and Soma-Budra.

Brahmanaspati . See I. 14, 3. Professor Wilson says : * The Scholiast fur-
nishes us with no account of the station or functions of this divinity. The
etymology will hr-tify Dr. TVth’s rlofnition of him as the deity of sacred
prayer, or rat her. pevin-’H, oi' do loxi of the Veda ; but whether he is to be
considered n* a (iLiii.ei per-'or.VK'v.ioii, or as a modified form of one of those
already recognized, and * especially of Agni, is doubtful. His giving wealth,
healing disease, and promoting nourishment, are properties not poculiar to
him ; and liis being associated with Indra and Soma, while it makes him dis-
tinct from them, leaves him Agni r* , His being, in an especial

manner, connected with prayer * . ■■ in a subsequent passage.

Hymn XL. Agni is, in an especial . . ■■ . of the Brahman; and,

according to some statements, the Rigrodn 1? «'.ipp<W:d to proceed from him ;
a notion, however, which according to Mcdh-Piilii, idi.es commentator on MAnu,
was suggested by its opening with the hymn to Agni, Agnivi tie'

Kal'shtvdn, called Ausija, or son of TJsij, was a renowned ljishi or seer, of
the family of Pajra, and the author of several of the hymns of the Rigveda,

22 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK I »

2 The rich, the healer of disease, who giveth wealth, inereaseth

store,

The prompt, — may he be with us still.

3 Let not the foeman’s curse, let not a mortal's onslaught fall on

us :

Preserve us, Brahmanaspati.

4 Ne'er is the mortal hero harmed whom Indra, Brahmanaspati,
And Soma graciously inspire.

5 Do, thou, 0 Brahmanaspati, and Indra, Soma, Dakshina,
Preserve that mortal from distress.

6 To the Assembly's wondrous Lord, to Indra’s lovely Friend who

gives

Wisdom, have I drawn near in prayer.

7 He without whom no sacrifice, e'en of the wise man, prospers ;

he

Stirs up the series of thoughts.

8 He makes the oblation prosper, he promotes the course of

sacrifice :

Our voice of praise goes to the Gods.

9 I have seen Nar&sansa, him most resolute, most widely famed,
As 'twere the Household Priest of heaven.

2 The rich , the healer of disease : Brahmanaspati.

4 Soma ; the God who represents and animates the juice of the Soma

plant. He was in former times the Indian Dionysus or Bacchus. ‘ The
simple minded Aryan people/ says Professor Whitney, { whose whole religion
was a worship of the wonderful powers and phenomena of nature, had no
sooner perceived that this liquid [Soma juice] had power to elevate the
spirits, and produce a temporary frenzy, under the influence of which the
individual was prompted to, and capable of, deeds beyond his natural powers,
than they found in it something divine : it was to theif apprehension a Gpd,
endowing those into whom it entered with godlike powers ; the plant which
afforded it became to them the king of plants ; the process : — : "Z i 1-

iecame a holy sacrifice. The high antiquity of this cultus Is : ■ ■ :

references to it found occurring in the Persian Avesta/ See Muir, 0. S. Texts }
V. 258.

5 Dahshtnd : properly the present made to the priests at the conclusion of
a sacrifice, here personified as a Goddess.

6 The Assembly's tvondrous Lord : Sadasaspati, the master or protector of
the assembly of priests, is here a title of Agni.

9 Household Priest : sadmmiakhasam ; according to Sfiyana, * radiant as
heaven/ according to Ludwig, ‘ as one who fought to win heaven’s seat/

Nardaama has already occurred as a name of Agni (I, 13. 3.) The meaning
appears to be : through my invocation and praise I have reached the Gods,
and with the eye of the spirit have looked on Agni in heaven.

HYMN 19.]

23

THE RIGVEHA,

HYMN XIX. Agni. Maruts.

To this fair sacrifice to drink the milky draught thou art in-
voked :

0 Agni, with the Marats come.

2 No mortal man, no God exceeds thy mental power, 0 Mighty

One :

0 Agni, with the Maruts come :

3 All Gods devoid of guile, who know the mighty region of mid-

air :

O Agni, with those Maruts come.

4 The terrible, who sing their song, not to be overcome by

might :

0 Agni, with those Maruts come.

5 Brilliant, and awful in their form, mighty, devourers of their

foes :

0 Agni, with those Maruts come.

6 Who sit as Deities in heaven, above the sky-vault’s luminous

sphere :

O Agni, with those Maruts come.

7 Who scatter clouds about the sky, away over the billowy sea :
0 Agni, with those Maruts come.

8 Who with their bright beams spread them forth over the

ocean in their might :

O Agni, with those Maruts come.

9 For thee, to be thine early draught, I pour the Soma-mingled

meath :

0 Agni, with the Maruts come.

HYMN XX. Bibhus.

Fob the"* Celestial Face this song of praise which gives wealth
lavishly

Was made by singers with their lips.

2 They who for Indra, with their mind, formed horses harnessed
by a word,

Attained by works to sacrifice.

1 For the Celestial Race ; devclya j&nmane, the divine class or race of the
BibhuSj the three sons of Sudhanvan who is said to have been a descendant of
Angiras. They were named severally Ribhu, Yibhvan, and V&ja^ and styled
.Collectively Xtibhus from the name of the eldest, ^ 1 Through their assiduous
performance of good works they obtained divinity and became entitled to
receive praise and adoration. They are supposed to dwell in the solar sphere,
and there is an indistinct identification of them with the rays of the sun-: but,
whether typical or not, they prove the admission, at an early date of the doc-
trine that men might become divinities,’ Wilson,

24 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK I.

3 They for the two Nasatyas wrought a light ear moving every

way :

They formed a nectar-yielding cow.

4 The Ribhus with effectual prayers, honest, with constant

labour, made

Their Sire anct Mother young again.

5 Together came your gladdening drops with Indra by the

Maruts girt,

With the Adityas, with the Rings.

6 The sacrificial ladle, wrought newly by the God Tvashtar’s

hand —

Four ladles have ye made thereof.

7 Vouchsafe us wealth, to him who pours thrice seven libations,

yea, to each

Give wealth, pleased with our eulogies.

8 As ministering Priests they held, by pious acts they won

themselves,

A share in sacrifice with Gods.

HYMN XXL Indra- Agni.

Indra and Agni I invoke ; fain are we for their song of praise :
Chief Soma-drinkers are they both.

3 The two N&satyas : the Asvins. See I. 3. 3. The Ribhus may have
been the first to attempt the bodily representation of the horses of Indra and
the chariot of the Asvins.

4 Sire and Mother: Heaven and Earth, which they, as deities of the
seasons, refresh and restore to youth.

5 1 According to Asval&yana, as quoted by S&yana, the libations offered
at the third daily (or evening) sacrifice are presented* to Indra along with the
Adityas, together with Ribhu, Vibhvan, and V&ja, with Brihaspati and the
Visvadevas.’ Wilson.

6 ' Tvashtar, in the Paur&nik -*•; tie carpenter or artisan of

the Gods: so S&yana says of him, 3: 1 ' ■ \ 1 se duty, with relation to

the Gods, is carpentry Setyana al ■ 1 • 1 ■: h' ' •. the disciples of Tvash-

tar... The act ascribed to them in the text, of making one ladle four, has, pro-
bably, rather reference to some innovation in the objects of libation than to
the i ■ ■ ■ : .’!■** V :. J ■* ; rs of the wooden spoons used to pour out the Soma juice.
The.' \ W b that Agni, coming to a sacrifice which the Ribhus ce-

lebrated, became as one of them, and, therefore, they made the ladle fourfold,
that each might have his share.’ Wilson.

7 Or the * thrice seven ’ may refer to rdtndni } grant thrice seven rich trea-
sures.

1 Indra and Agni : addressed conjointly as a dual deity, Indr&gni, that is,
Indra* Agni, See, 1, 17, 1,

tee mar ed a.

25

HYMN 22.]

2 Praise ye, 0 men, and glorify Indra-Agni in the holy rites i
Sing praise to them in sacred songs.

3 Indra and Agni we invite, the Soma-drinkers, for the fame
Of Mitra, to the Sonia-draught.

4 Strong Gods, we bid them come to this libation that stands

ready here :

Indra and Agni, come to us*

5 Indra and Agni, mighty Lords of our assembly, crush the

fiends :

Childless be the devouring ones.

6 Watch ye, through this your truthfulness, there in the place

of spacious view :

Indra and Agni, send us bliss.

HYMH XXII. Asvins and Others.

Waken the Asvin Pair who yoke their car at early mom :
may they

Approach to drink this Soma juice.

2 We call the Asvins Twain, the Gods borne in a noble car, the

best

Of charioteers, who reach the heavens.

3 Dropping with honey is your whip, Asvins, and full of plea-

santness :

Sprinkle therewith the sacrifice,

4 As ye go thither in your car, not far, 0 Asvins, is the home
Of him who offers Soma juice.

5 For my protection I invoke the golden-handed Savitar :

He knoweth, as a God, the place.

8 For the fame of Mitra ; the meaning is not clear. Mitra appears to be
regarded as the guardian of the world. Sfryana takes Mitra in the sense of
friend, and refers it to the institutor of the sacrifice.

5 Crush the fiends : the R&kshasas, demons who go about at night, ensnar-
ing and even devoui'ing human beings, disturbing sacrifices and devout men,
and generally hostile to the Aryan race.

6 In the place of spacious view : S&yana explains f in the station which

tly akes known the experience of results (of actions) that is in

hvi. -'L:: . f i: ja. In the place where what is hidden will be made known.

8 Your whip ; the madhuJcasfl or Honey-whip of the Asvins is perhaps the
stimulating morning breeze. See Atharva-veda IX. 1, the whole of which
hymn is a glorification of this wondrous whip.

6 Savitar : the generator or vivifier, is a name of the Sun, in the Veda
sometimes identified with and sometimes distinguished from Sftrya,

26 THE HYMNS OF [HOOK 1 \

6 That he may send us succour, praise the Waters’ Offspring

Savitar :

Fain are we for his holy ways.

7 We call on him, distributer of wondrous bounty and of wealth,
On Savitar who looks on men.

8 Come hither^ friends, and seat yourselves; Savitar, to be

praised by us,

Giving good gifts, is beautiful.

9 0 Agni, hither bring to us the willing Spouses of the Gods,
And Tvashtar, to the Soma draught.

10 Most youthful Agni, hither bring their Spouses, Hotra, Bharati,
Varutri, Dhishana, for aid.

1 1 Spouses of Heroes, Goddesses, with whole wings may they come

to us

With great protection and with aid.

12 Indrani, Yarunani, and Agnayi hither I invite,

For weal, to drink the Soma juice.

IS May Heaven and Earth, the Mighty Pair, bedew for us our
sacrifice,

And feed us full with nourishments.

14 Their water rich with fatness, there in the Gandharva’s sted-
fast place,

The singers taste through sacred songs.

6 The Waters' Offspring Savitar : son or offspring of the Waters, apdm
napdt , is an epithet more frequently applied to Agni. Sayana explains it
otherwise as f one who does not cherish (na p&lakam) the water, but dries it
up with his heat/

10 Hotrd is called the wife of Agni, or the personified invocation ; Bhdrati
is Holy Speech or Prayer ; VardtH is explained as e she who is to be chosen,
the excellent ; 1 and Fhishand is said to be a synonym of Vak or V&gdevi,
the Goddess of Speech,

• 11 With whole wings ; literally, with unclipped wings ; that is, swift as
birds whose wings have not been cut,

12 Indrdnt, Varundnt, and Agndyi : are respectively the consorts of Indra,
Varuna, and Agni,

14 Their water rich in fatness ; the fertilizing rain sent by Heaven and
Earth. The meaning appears to be : the holy singers enjoy, as guerdon for
their hymns, the kindly rain and other good gifts which are sent down from
the regions above by the great parents Heaven and Earth.

The Gandharva's stedfast place : Though in later times the Gandharvas are
regarded as a class, in the fligveda more than one is seldom mentioned. Pie
is commonly designated as" ‘the heavenly Gandharva/ whose habitation is
the sky, and whose especial duty is to guard the heavenly Soma, which the
Gods obtain through his permission.

HYMN 22.]

the mar bi>a.

27

15 Thornless be thou, 0 Earth, spread wide before us for a dwell-

ing-place :

Vouchsafe us shelter broad and sure.

16 The Gods be gracious unto us even from the place whence

Vishnu strode

Through the seven regions of the earth !

17 Through all this world strode Vishrm; thrice his foot he

planted, and the whole
Was gathered in his footstep’s dust.

18 Vishnu, the Guardian, he whom none deceiveth, made three

steps ; thenceforth
Establishing his high decrees.

19 Look ye on Vishnu’s works, whereby the Friend of Indra,

close-allied,

Hath let his holy ways be seen.

20 The princes evermore behold that loftiest place where Vishnu is,
Laid as it were an eye in heaven.

21 This, Vishnu’s station most sublime, the singers, ever vigilant,
Lovers of holy song, light up.

v 16 Vishnu : This God, e the all- pervading or placed

in the Veda in the foremost rank of deities, and \ ■' ■'.■.!!«■ \ invoked

with Indra, Varuna, the Maruts, Budra, V&yu and : 1 ■* .V.' • . 1 uperiority

to them is never stated, and he is even described in one place as celebrating
the praise of Indra and deriving his power from that God. The point which
distinguishes him from the other Vedic deities is chiefly his striding over the
heavens, which he is said to do in three paces, explained as denoting the three-
fold manifestation of light in the form of fire, lightning and the sun, or as
designating the three daily stations of the sun, in his rising, culminating and
setting.

The meaning of the stanza is obscure : Wilson, after S&yana, translates :
f May the Gods preserve us (from that portion) of the earth whence Vishnu,
(aided) by the seven metres, stepped,’ and notes: * According to the Taitti-
riyas, as cited by the scholiast, the Gods with Vishnu at their head subdued
the invincible earth, using the seven metres of the Veda as their instruments.
S&yana conceives the text to allude to the Trivihvama Amtdra, in which
Vishnu traversed the three worlds in three steps. The phrase “ preserve us
from the earth ” implies according to the commentary, bhe hinderance of the
sin of those inhabiting the earth/

17 The whole was gathered in his footstep r s dust : This is the meaning ac-
cording to S&yana. Vishnu was so mighty that the dust raised by his foot-
step enveloped the whole world, or the earth was formed from the dust of hid
strides.

20 The princes : the Sfiris, the wealthy patrons of sacrifice,

21 Light up : glorify with their praises.

THE HYMNS OF

[ BOOK t

38

HYMN XXIII. VAyu and Others

Strong are the Sonias; come thou nigh; these juices have
been mixt with milk :

Brink, Vdyu, the presented draughts.

2 Both Deities who touch the heaven, Indra and Vayu we invoke.
To drink of this our Soma juice.

B The singers, for, their aid, invoke Indra and V&yu, swift as
mind,

The thousand-eyed, the Lords of thought.

4 Mitra and Varuna, renowned as Gods of consecrated might,

We call to drink the Soma juice.

5 Those who by Law uphold the Law, Lords of the shining light

of Law,

Mitra I call, and Varuna,

6 Let Varuna be our chief defence, let Mitra guard us with all

aids :

Both make us rich exceedingly.

7 Indra, by Maruts girt, we call to drink the Soma juice : may he
Sate him in union with his troop.

8 Gods, Marut hosts whom Indra leads, distributers of Pushan's

gifts,

Hearken ye all unto my cry.

9 With conquering Indra for ally, strike Vritra down, ye boun-

teous Gods :

Let not the wicked master us,

10 We call the Universal Gods, and Maruts to the Soma draught,
For passing strong are Prism’s Sons.

1 1 Fierce* comes the Maruts 7 thundering voice, like thatlof con-

querors, when ye go
Forward to victory, 0 Men.

12 Born of the laughing lightning, may the Maruts guard us

everywhere :

May they be gracious unto us.

This hymn is addressed to V&yu, Indra, Mitra, Varuna, the Visye Devas
Pashan, the Waters, Agni. ‘ ‘ 1 11

I Lords of thought ; dM, thought, means especially in the Veda holy
thought, devotion, prayer, a religious rite, a sacrifice,

8 Pdshan is the guardian of flocks and herds and of property in general.

10 Prisnimdtarah .* Prisni’s sons, those who have for their mother Prisni

the many-coloured earth or the speckled cloud ; the Maruts, ' ‘ :

11 0 Men ; 0 heroic Maruts,

HYMN 23.] THE RIG VEDA. 20

13 Like some lost animal, drive to us, bright Pushan, him who
bears tip heaven,*

Besting on many-coloured grass.

I 14 Pushan the Bright has found the King, coacealedj^.Bidden
1 ' in a c ave,

Who rests on grass of many hues.

15 And may he duly bring to me the six bound closely, through
• these drops,

As one who ploughs with steers brings com.

16 Along their paths tlae Mothers go, Sisters of priestly ministrants?
Mingling their sweetness with the milk.

17 May Waters gathered near the Sun, and those wherewith the

Sun is joined,-

Speed forth this sacrifice of ours.

18 I call the Waters, Goddesses, wherein our cattle quench their

thirst ;

Oblations to the Streams be given.

19 Amrit is in the Waters ; in the Waters there is healing balm :
Be swift, ye Gods, to give them praise.

20 Within the Waters — Soma thus hath told me — dwell all balms

that heal,

I And Agni, he who blesseth all. The Waters hold all medicines,

21 0 Waters, teem with medicine to keep my body safe from harm,

So that I long ,

22 Whatever sin is found in me, whatever evil I have wrought,

If I have lied or falsely sworn, Waters, remove it far from me,

23 The Waters I this day have sought, and to their moisture

have we come :

O Agni, rich in milk, come thou, and with thy splendour
cover me.

13 Him who bears up heaven : Soma, the juice which prompts the world-
sustaining deeds of the Gods.

14 The King : Soma.

. Concealed and hidden in a cave ; in a place difficult of access ; the refer*
ence is to the flight of Agni. See III. 9. 4.

15 The six : the six seasons, spring, summer, the rains, autumn, winter, the
dews. Through these drops : May this libation induce him to bring, etc.

16 The Mothers : the Waters, regarded as the close allies of the priests, as
they are mingled with the ingredients of the Soma libation.

19 Amrit ; nectar, the drink that confers immortality ; the Greek Ambrosia,

20 Soma thus hath told vie : Soma is especially lord of medicinal plants.

30 • THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1.

24 Fill me with, splendour, Agni ; give offspring and length of
days ; the Gods

Shall know me even as I am, and Agni, with the Rishis, know,

HYMN XXIV. Varuna and Others,

Who now is f he, what God among the Immortals, of whose
auspicious name we may bethink us %

Who shall to mighty Aditi restore us, that I may see my
Father and my Mother ?

2 Agni the God the first among the Immortals, — of his auspici-

ous name let us bethink us.

He shall to mighty Aditi restore us, that I may see my Father
and my Mother.

3 To thee, 0 Savitar, the Lord of precious things, who helpest us
Continually, for our share we come —

4 Wealth, highly lauded ere reproach hath fallen on it, which is

laid,

Free from all hatred, in thy hands.

. 24 Indra with the Rishis ; Perhaps the seven great Rishis are intended,—
MartcM, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, and Vasishtha.

* This hymn, addressed to Varuna, Prajapati, Agni, Savitar, and Bhaga, is.
the first of a series attributed to Sunahsepa, the soil of Ajtgarta. The legend
is told in full detail in the Aitareya Brdlmana. A king, named Harischandra,
worships Varuna in order to obtain a son, promising to sacrifice to him his
first-born. A son is born, named Rohita ; but the king delays tlie sacrifice
until Rohita grows up, when his father communieates to him his intended
fate. Rohita refuses submission, and spends several years in the forest away
from home. There, at last, he meets with Ajigarta, a Rishi in great distress,’
and persuades him to part with his second son Sunahsepa to be offered, as a
substitute, to Varuna. Sunal sepa is about to be sacrificed, when, by the ad-
vice of Visv&mitra, one of the officiating priests, he appeals to the Gods, and
is liberated. See Wilson, Rigveda , i, p. 60., Muir, 0, S. Texts, i. 355, 407,
413, and M. Muller, A. S. Literature , p. 408.

1 Mighty Aditi : Professor Muller {Trans, of the Rigveda , 1. 230)
says that ' Aditi, an ancient god or goddess, is in reality the earliest name
invented to express the Infinite ; not the Infinite as the result of a long pro-
cess of abstract reasoning, but the visible Infinite, the endless expanse beyond
the earth, beyond the clouds, beyond the sky.’

f These words [Who shall to mighty Aditi restore us ? ] may be understood
as spoken by some one in danger of death. . .who prayed to be permitted again
to behold the face of nature.. .If we should understand the father and mother
whom the suppliant is anxious to behold, as meaning heaven and earth, it
would become still more probable that Aditi is to be understood as meaning
nature.' Muir, O. S. Texts , v. 45,

S&yana explains Aditi in the text as Earth ; Roth, as freedom or security j
Benfey, as sinlessness.

HYMN 24J

THE RIGVEDA.

SI

5 Through thy protection may we come to even the height of

affluence

Which Bhaga hath dealt out to us.

6 Ne’er have those birds that fly through air attained to thy

high dominion or thy might or spirit ;

Nor these the waters that flow on for ever, nor hills, abaters
of the wind’s wild fury.

7 Varuna, King, of hallowed might, sustaineth erect the Tree’s

stem in the baseless region.

Its rays, whose root is high above, stream downward. Deep
may they sink within us, and be hidden.

8 King Varuna hath made a spacious pathway, a pathway for

the Sun wherein to travel.

Where no way was he made him set his footstep, and warned
„ afar wkate’er afflicts the spirit.

9 A hundred balms are thine, 0 King, a thousand; deep and

wide-reaching also be thy favours.

Far from us, far away drive thou Destruction. Put from us
e’en the sin we have committed.

10 Whither by day depart the constellations that shine at night,

set high in heaven above us 1

Varuna’s holy laws remain unweakened, and through the night
the Moon moves on in splendour.

11 I ask this of thee with my prayer adoring; thy worshipper

craves this with his oblation.

Varuna, stay thou here and be not angry; steal not our life
from us, O thou Wide-Ruler.

12 Nightly and daily this one thing they tell me, this too the

thought of mine own heart repeateth.

May he to whom prayed fettered Sunahsepa, may he the
Sovran Varuna release us.

5 Which Bhaga hath dealt out to us : the riches which the distributer of
wealth, Bhaga, Fate or Fortune; has allotted to us.

7 Vanasya stMpam. in the text appears to mean 1 the stem of the tree * and
S&yana’s explanation * the mass or pile of light’ seems forced and unnatural
The phrase is not clear, hut perhaps the ancient myth of the world- tree the
source of life, may be alluded to. 3

9 Nwriti is Decay or Dest'"'' ,J * J
corruption. S&yana calls her v

i

he Goddess of death and
of sin.

10 Vanina's holy laws : Varuna is the chief of the lords of natural order
Hia activity displays itself * he control o£ the moafc j '

phenomena of nature. See v. .. of the Rigvedu, p. 97 f. The

connexion appears to be i : Fear not : the laws of Varuna are inviolable, and
the constellations will duly reappear.

THE HYMNS OF

U

{BOOK I.

21 Belease us from the upper bond, untie the bond between, and
loose

The bonds below, that I may live.

HYMN XXVI. Agni.

0 worthy of ^oblation, Lord of prospering powers, assume thy
robes,

And offer this, our sacrifice.

2 Sit, ever to be chosen, as our Priest, most youthful, through

our hymns,

0 Agni, through our heavenly word.

3 For here a Father for his son, Kinsman for kinsman worshippetb.
And Friend, choice-worthy, for his friend.

4 'Here let the foe-destroyers sit, Varuna, Mitra, A ry aman,

Like men, upon our sacred grass.

5 0 ancient Herald, be thou glad in this our rite and fellowship :
Hearken thou well to these our songs.

6 Whate’er in this perpetual course we sacrifice to God and

God,

That gift is offered up in thee.

7 May he be our dear household Lord, Priest, pleasant and

choice-worthy : may
We, with bright fires, be dear to him.

8 The Gods, adored with brilliant fires, have granted precious

wealth to us :

So, with bright fires, we pray to thee.

9 -And, 0 Immortal One, so may the eulogies of mortal men
Belong to us and thee alike.

10 With all thy fires, 0 Agni, find pleasure in this our sacrifice,
And this our speech, 0 Son of Strength.

21 Belease us from the upper bond; see I. 24. 15.

1 Assume thy roles: clothe thyself in thy vesture of flames.

2 Most youthful : continually renewed for sacrifice, either from the house-
hold fire or by repeated attrition.

3 For here a Fatlw' for his son : Agni, who stands in the place of father,
kinsman, and friend to his worshipper.

4 Aryaman : the name of an Aditya commonly invoked together with

Varuna and Mitra, He is said to preside over twilight.

5 like men: or, according to S&yana, as they sate at the sacrifice of
Manus, who is the same as Manu.

10 Son of Strei ■* 7 ■ ,r " Vi W* . -f frequent occurrence, and is some-
times applied to 1 ■ - * ■ ‘ . mighty God. The r.xr'-rs-'V.’.. ap-
plied to Agni, alu ■ ■ ■ ployed in rubbing i- gtr.hcr i Lie i»o

pieces of wood to generate fire.

HYMJSf 27.]

TEE RIG VEDA.

35

HYMN XXVII. Agni.

With worship will I glorify thee, Agni, like a long-tailed steed,
Imperial Lord of sacred rites.

2 May the far-striding Son of Strength, bringer of great

felicity, . „

Who pours his gifts like rain, be ours.

3 Lord of all life, from near, from far, do thou, 0 Agni evermore
Protect us from the sinful man.

4 0 Agni, graciously announce this our oblation to the Gods,
And this our newest song of praise.

5 Give us a share of strength most high, a share of strength

that is below,

A share of strength that is between.

6 Thou dealest gifts, resplendent One ; nigh, as with waves of
x % S:r.dhu, thou

S^ffTTi-I’anK-si to the worshipper.

7 That man is lord of endless strength whom thou protectest in

the fight,

Agni, or urgest to the fray.

8 Him, whosoever he may be, no man may vanquish, mighty One:
Hay, very glorious power is his.

9 May he who dwells with all mankind bear us with war-steeds

through the fight,

And with the singers win the spoil.

10 Help, thou who knowest lauds, this work, this eulogy to

Rudra, him

Adorable in every house.

11 May this our God, great, limitless, smoke-bannered, excel-

lent ly bright,

Urge us to strength and holy thought.

1 Like a long-tailed steed : Agni, or Fire, is likened to a horse, probably,
on account of Vi? « ; and his long flames, curled and driven by

the wind, are ■. ■ i - horse’s flowing tail. Sftyana explains: scat-

tering our foes with thy flames as a horse brushes away the flies that
trouble him.

6 Sindhu ; the Indus ; or the word may stand for any river, and the
expression mean, with great abundance.

9 With the singers ; the priests who sing hymns of praise at the sacrifice.

10 Thou who knowest lauds : (jardbodha) seems to refer to the IMshi .or
poet of the hymn, not to Agni.

Rudra ; the Koarer, or Howler, is here a name of Agni, on account of
the loud crackling or roaring of his flames. Or the word may signify red,
bright, See Pischel, Vedische Studien, 1. pp. 55 sqq.

86

THE HYMNS OF [BOOR /.

12 Like some rick Lord of men may lie, Agni, the banner of

the Gods,

Refulgent, hear us through our lauds.

13 Glory to Gods, the mighty and the lesser, glory to Gods the

younger and the elder !

Let us, if wer have power, pay the Gods worship : no better
prayer than this, ye Gods, acknowledge.

HYMN XXVIII. Indra, Etc.

There where the broad-based stone is raised on high to press
the juices out,

0 Indra, drink with eager thirst the droppings which the
mortar sheds.

2 Where, like broad hips, to hold the juice, the platters of the

press are laid,

0 Indra, drink with eager thirst the droppings which the
mortar sheds.

3 There where the woman marks and learns the pestle’s constant

rise and fall,

0 Indra, drink with eager thirst the droppings which the
mortar sheds.

4 Where, as with reins to guide a horse, they bind the churning-

staff with cords,

0 Indra, drink with eager thirst the droppings which the
mortar sheds.

f) If of a truth in every house, 0 Mortar, thou art set for
work,

Here give thou forth thy clearest sound, loud as the^ drum of
joj onoueror s. ’

12 The banner of the Gocls : who like a banner brings the Gods together ; or
it may be rendered * the herald of the Gods/ he who notifies to them, as
Sayana explains it,

13 These distinctions of greater and lesser, older and younger Gods, s or as

we should say, angels, are nowhere further cx' h-i:: Sunabsepa, it is said,
by the advice of Agni, worships the Vi cvi.* Universal Gods. The

Visvedeyas, as a separate troop or class of Gods, are ten in number, especially
worshipped at funeral obsequies, and moreover, according to the laws of Manu,
entitled to daily offerings.

This hymn — a song sung during the preparation of the Soma juice — is said
to he addressed to Indra, and to the pestle and mortar and other utensils
used in the work.

2 Platters ; two shallow plates, one being used as a receiver and the other
as a cover.

They bind the churning-staff with cords ; the churning-stick is moved by
a rope passed round its handle and round a post used as a pivot.

6 0 Mortar ; according to S&yana the divinities presiding over the mortar
and pestle, and not the implements themselves, are addressed.

THIS UIGYEHA.

HYMN 2&]

37

6 0 Sovran of the Forest, as the wind blows soft in front of

thee,

Mortar, for Indra press thou forth the Soma juice that he may
drink,

7 Best strength-givers, ye stretch wide jaws, 0 Sacrificial Imple-

ments, *

Like two bay horses champing herbs.

8 Ye Sovrans of the Forest, both swift, with swift pressers press

to-day

Sweet Soma juice for Indra’s drink.

9 Take up in beakers what remains : the Soma on the filter

pour,

And on the ox-hide set the dregs.

HYMH XXIX. Indra.

0 S oka-drinker, ever true, utterly hopeless though we be,

Do thou, 0 Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses and of kine,
In thousands, 0 most wealthy One.

2 0 Lord of Strength, whose jaws are strong, great deeds are

thine, the powerful :

Do thou, O Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses and of kine,
In thousands, 0 most wealthy One.

3 Lull thou asleep, to wake no more, the pair who on each

other look :

Do thou, 0 Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses and of kine,
In thousands, O most wealthy One.

4 Hero, let hostile spirits sleep, and every gentler genius wake :
Do thou, 0 Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses and of kine.
In thousands, 0 most wealthy One.

6 0 Sovran of the Forest : ( vanaspati ) a large tree ; used in this place, by
metonymy, for the mortar, and in verse 8, in the dual number, for the mortar
and pestle.

7 Strength- : ov.-V”--*’ 1 by S&yana as especially givers of food. The

two platters ■, are probably meant. When the upper platter

is raised to receive the juice of the Soma stalks the aperture between the two
is like a horse’s mouth when he chews succulent grass.

9' This verse is addressed to the ministering priest. What remains ; after
the libation. The filter or sieve was used to purify the juice before it was
poured into the receptacle. Ox-hide ; laid under the mortar.

3 TJie pair who on each other loob : ( The text is very elliptical and obscure.
It is, literally : Put to sleep the two reciprocally looking : let them sleep, not
being awakened. The Scholiast calls them the two female messengers of
Yama [the God of the Dead],’ Wilson.

38 ‘ TBE HYMNS OF [BOOK L

5 Destroy this ass, 0 Indra, who in tones discordant brays to thee :
Do thou, 0 Indra, give us hope of beauteous ho r ses a nd . of kine,
In thousands, 0 most wealthy One.

6 Far distant on the forest fall the tempest in a circling course !
Do thou, 0 Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses and of kine,
In thousands' 0 most wealthy One.

7 Slay each reviler, and destroy him who in secret injures us :
Do thou, 0 Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses and of kine
In thousands, 0 most wealthy One.

HYMN XXX. Indra.

We seeking strength with Soma-drops fill full your Indra
like a well,

Most liberal, Lord of Hundred Powers,

2 Who lets a hundred of the pure, a thousand of the milk-blent

draughts

Flow, even as down a depth, to him ;

3 When for the strong, the rapturous joy he in this manner

hath made room
Within his belly, like the sea.

4 This is thine own. Thou drawest near, as turns a pigeon to

his mate :

Thou carest too for this our prayer.

5 0 Hero, Lord of Bounties, praised in hymns, may power and

joyfulness

Be his who sings the laud to thee.

6 Lord of a Hundred Powers, stand up to lend us succour in

this fight :

In others too let us agree.

7 In every need, in every fray we call as friends to succour us
Indra the mightiest of all.

5 This ass : our adversary, says the Scholiast. < Therefore is he called an
ass, as braying, or uttering harsh sounds intolerable to hear.’

6 Far distant on the forest : may the cyclone or tempest expend its fury on
the wood, and not come nigh us. The word kundrinffcM, which I have render-
ed in accordance with S&yana, means elsewhere a certain kind of animal, a
lizard according to S&yana. This passage may perhaps mean, * may the wind
fall on the forest with the kundrinctchi,’ whatever that may be.

1 Lord of Hundred Powers : Satakratu.

3 The strong , the rapturous joy : the exhilarating Soma juice.
i This is thine oion : this Soma libation is for thee alone.

6 In this fight ; the hymn is a prayer for aid in a coming battle.

r

TEM RIG V ME A.

39

HYMN 30.]

8 If he will hear us let him come with succour of a thousand kinds,
And all that strengthens, to our call.

9 I call him mighty to resist, the Hero of our ancient home,
Thee whom my sire invoked of old.

10 We pray to thee, 0 much-invoked, rich in all precious gifts,
O Friend,

Kind God to those who sing thy praise.

110 Soma-drinker, Thunder-armed, Friend of our lovely-featured
dames

And of our Soma-drinking friends.

12 Thus, Soma-drinker, may it be : thus, Friend, who wieldest

thunder, act

To aid each wish as we desire.

13 With Indra splendid feasts be ours, rich in all strengthening

things wherewith,

Wealthy in food, we may rejoice.

14 Like thee, thyself, the singers’ Friend, thou movest, as it were,

besought,

Bold One, the axle of the car,

1 5 That, Satakratu, thou to grace and please thy praisers, as it were,
Stirrest the axle with thy strength.

16 With champing, neighing, loudly-snorting horses Indra hath

ever won himself great treasures.

A_car of gold hath he whose deeds are wondrous received from
usT^ndT'et us too receive it.

17 Come, Asvins, with enduring strength wealthy in horses and

in kine,

And gold, 0 ye of wondrous deeds.

9 The Eero of our ancient home ; the tutelary God of our family.

11 Friend of our lovely -featured dames : the meaning of sipHnindm in the
text is very doubtful. Wilson, following Sayan a, paraphrases : (bestow upon)
us, thy friends, (abundance of cows) with projecting jaws. Benfey takes the
word to mean beautiful women. Ludwig suggests helmeted, from a possible
form siprini, agreeing with visdm, of men, understood. - Both considers the
reading to he faulty, and suggests, siprinivan , in the vocative case, agreeing
with Soma- drinker.

14 The lines in this and the following stanza referring to the axle and the
chariot or wain are somewhat obscure and have been variously interpreted.
Ludwig’s explanation. which I follow, appears to be the simplest and the best.
Tim cxpre? >!■:»!!. r. ovoi.. or stirrest, the axle, which is the firmest and strongest
part of the car, is intended to signify Indra’s great strength exerted at his
worshippers’ prayer.

1 6 The hymn really ends with the preceding stanza. The car of gold given
to Indra is the hymn, The car of gold prayed for is abundant wealth.

40 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK L

18 Your chariot yoked for both alike, immortal, ye of mighty acts,
Travels, 0 Asvins, in the sea.

1 9 High on the forehead of the Bull one chariot wheel ye ever keep,
The other round the sky revolves.

20 What mortal, 0 immortal Dawn, enjoy eth thee ? Where

lovest thou?

To whom, 0 radiant, dost thou go %

2 1 For we have had thee in our thoughts whether anear or far away,
Bed-hued and like a dappled mare.

22 Hither, 0 Daughter of the Sky, come thou with these thy

strengthenings,.

And send thou riches down to us.

HYMN XXXI. Agni.

Thou, Agni, wast the earliest Angiras, a Seer ; thou wast, a
God thyself, the Gods’ auspicious Friend.

After thy holy ordinance the Maruts, sage, active through
wisdom, with their *~on,rs, were born.

2 0 Agni, thou, the -■ . e ■. Angiras, fulfillest as a Sage

the holy law of Gods,

Sprung from two mothers, wise, through all existence spread,
resting in many a place for sake of living man.

3 To Matarisvan first thou, Agni, wast disclosed, and to Yivas-

van through thy noble inward power.

Heaven and Earth, Vasn ! shook at the choosing of the Priest ;
the burthen thou didst bear, didst worship mighty Gods.

18 The sea : the ocean of air.

19 The Bull ; apparently the Sun. The car of the Asvins stands at his
head or in front of him, and the Asvins precede him in his course round
heaven. But the meaning is not very clear.

20 We are reminded of the old Grecian myth of Eos and Tithonus. Uslias,
Dawn, or Morning, is the daughter of personified Heaven, Dyaus, or Dyu,

This hymn, and the four following, are ascribed to Hiranyastftpa, son
of Angiras.

1 Thou, Agni, wast the earliest Angiras : the Angirases are the most im-
port?. r - mentioned in the Veda. See I. 1. 6.

W ; spears : the spears of the Maruts or Storm-Gods are

lightning flashes.

2 The holy law of Gods : sacrifice to the Gods, which Agni performs.

Sprung from two mothers : from the two pieces of wood used to produce fire.

( 8 Mdtarisvan: the name of a divine being described in X. 60.1 as bringing the
hidden Agni to Bhrigu, and identified by Sayana with V&yu the God of wind.

Vivasvdn: { the brilliant he appears to be* the God of daylight and the
morning sun, the personification, of all manifestations of light. He is said to
be the father of Yama, and the Gods are called his offspring.

Vasa : (good) often used as a name or epithet of Agni. The Vasus as a class
r- of Gods, eight in number, were at first personifications of natural phenomena*

r

TUB MO VXD A,

BTMN 81.]

41

4 Agni thou madest heaven to thunder for mankind; thou, yet

more pious, for pious Pururavfis.

When thou art rapidly freed from thy parents, first eastward
they hear thee round, and, after, to the west.

5 Thou, Agni, art a Bull who makes our store increase, to he

invoked by him who lifts the ladle up. *

Well knowing the oblation with the hallowing word, uniting all
who live, thou lightenest first our folk.

6 Agni, thou savest in the synod when pursued e’en him, far-

seeing One ! who walks in evil ways.

Thou, when the heroes fight for spoil which men rush round,
slayest in war the many hy the hands of few.

7 For glory, Agni, day by day, thou liftest up the mortal man

to highest immortality, —

Even thou who yearning for both races givest them great
bliss, and to the prince grantest abundant food.

8 0 Agni, highly lauded, make our singer famous that he may

win us store of riches :

May we improve the rite with new performance. O Earth and
Heaven, with all the Gods, protect us.

9 O blameless Agni lying in thy Parents’ lap, a God among the

Gods, he watchful for our good.

Former of bodies, be the singer’s Providence : all good things
hast thou sown for him, auspicious One !

10 Agni, thou art our Providence, our Father thou ; we are thy
brethren and thou art our spring of life.

In thee, rich in good heroes, guard of high deci*ees, meet hund-
red, thousand treasures, 0 infallible !

4 Purdravds ; son of Budha, He is said to have instituted the three sacri-
ficial fires. Agni, to reward him, sent thunder the forerunner of rain.

Freed from thy parents : produced and separated from the fire-sticks.

Eastivard they bear thee ; the fire is first applied to light the Ahavaniya fire
and then the Garhapatya.

5 A Bull : exceedingly strong.

With the hallowing word : the exclamation Vashat (may he (Agni) bear
it (to the Gods), used at the moment of pouring the sacrificial oil or clarified
butter on the fire.

6 Agni, thou savest in the synod : the viddtha, synod or sacrificial assembly,
seems to have been regarded as an inviolable asylum.

7 Both races : Gods and men.

The prince : the Sfiri, the noble or eminent man who institutes and pays
the charges of the sacrifice.

9 Thy Parents : here said to mean Heaven and Earth,

Former of bodies ; giver of children,

& THB HYMNS OF {BOOK L

1 1 Thee, Agni, have the Gods made the first living One for living

man, Lord of the house of N&husha.
list they made the teacher of the sons of men, what time a Son
was born to the father of my race,

12 Worthy to he revered, 0 Agni, God, preserve our wealthy

patrons with thy succours, and ourselves.

Guard of our seed art thou, aiding our cows to hear, inces-
santly protecting in thy holy way.

13 Agni, thou art a guard close to the pious man ; kindled art

thou, four-eyed ! for him who is unarmed.

With fond heart thou acceptest e’en the poor man’s prayer,
when he hath brought his gift to gain security.

14 Thou, Agni gainest for the loudly-praising priest the highest

wealth, the object of a man’s desire.

Thou art called Father, caring even for the weak, and, wisest,
to the simple one thou teachest lore.

15 Agni, the man who giveth guerdon to the priests, like well-

sewn armour thou guardest on every side.

He who with grateful food shows kindness in his house, an
offerer to the living, is the type of heaven.

16 Pardon, we pray, this sin of ours, 0 Agni, — the path which

we have trodden, widely straying,

Dear Friend and Father, earing for the pious, who speedest
nigh and who inspirest mortals.

17 As erst to Manus, to Yay&ti, Angiras, so Angiras ! pure Agni !

come thou to our hall.

Bring hither the celestial host and seat them here upon the
sacred grass, and offer what they love.

IS By this our prayer be thou, 0 Agni, strengthened, prayer
made by us after our power and knowledge.

Lead thou us, therefore, to increasing riches ; endow us with
thy strength-bestowing favour.

11 Ncthuslm : one of the great progenitors of the human race.

lid; the personification of prayer, and the first teacher of the rules of
sacrifice.

What time a Son was bom : this* Son is Agni himself,

Hiranyastupa, the Rislii of the hymn, is the son or descendant of Angiras,
who, as one of the first introducers of the sacrificial fire and the rites of
worship, is regarded as the generator or father of Agni. The meaning of the
verse is that Agni was appointed priest, and lift teacher of the rules of divine
worship in the earliest time when Agni was first born on earth as sacrificial fire,

13 Four-eyed ; illuminating the four cr.rlir.nl rovrd*. or looking in all directions.

living ; probabh . •mo. v-'ii.. Mior.-. food and hospitality
to a human being, the nriyajna , worship of man, of Manu. Or it may mean,
as Ludwig suggests, one who offers a sacrifice that transports the sacrifieer
at once, living, to heaven.

16 Yaydti ; a celebrated king, one of the sons of Nahusha,

HYMN 32.] THE JUGVEDA, 43

' HYMN XXXII. Indra.

I will declare the manly deeds of Indra, the first that he
achieved, the Thunder-wielder.

He slew the Dragon, then disclosed the waters, and cleft the
channels of the mountain torrents.

2 He slew the Dragon lying on the mountain : his heavenly bolt

of thunder Tvashtar fashioned.

Like lowing kine in rapid flow descending the waters glided
downward to the ocean.

3 Impetuous as a bull, he chose the Soma, and in three sacred

beakers drank the juices.

Maghavan grasped the thunder for his weapon, and smote to
death this firstborn of the dragons.

4 When, Indra, thou hadst slain the dragons 5 firstborn, and

overcome the charms of the enchanters,

Then, giving life to Sun and Dawn and Heaven, thou foundest
not one foe to stand against thee.

6 Indra with his own great and deadly thunder smote into pieces
Vritra, worst of Vritras.

As trunks of trees, what time the axe hath felled them, low
on the earth so lies the prostrate Dragon.

6 He, like a mad weak warrior, challenged Indra, the great

impetuous many-slaying Hero.

He, brooking not the clashing of the weapons, crushed — Indra 5 s
foe — the shattered forts in fa lling.

7 Footless and handless still he challenged Indra, who smote

him with his bolt between the shoulders.

Emasculate yet claiming manly vigour, thus Vritra lay with
scattered limbs dissevered.

1 1 2 3 4 In this and subsequent Stiktas we have an ample elucidation of the ori-
ginal purport of the legend of Indra’s slaying Vritra, converted by the Paura-
nik writers, into a literal contest between Indra and an Asura, or chief of the
Asuras, from what in the Vedas is merely an allegorical narrative of the pro-
duction of rain, Vritra, sometimes also named Ahi, is nothing more than the
accumulation of vapour, condensed or figuratively shut up in, or obstructed
by, a cloud. Indra, with his thunderbolt, or atmospheric or electrical influ-
ence, divides the aggregated mass, and vent is given to the rain which then
descends upon the earth.’ Wilson.

2 The Dragon : Ahi, literally a serpent. Tvashtar is the artist of the Gods.

3 Magkavan : the wealthy and liberal ; Lord Bountiful.

4 The charms of the enchanter's : magical or supernatural powers ascribed
to Vritra and his allies.

In three sacred bealcers : trihadrukeshn ; according to S&yana, on the Trikad-
rukas, the first three days of the Abhipl^va ceremony,

44 fm unfits of {book t

8 There as he lies like a bank-bursting river, the waters taking

courage flow above him. . . .

The Dragon lies beneath the feet of torrents which Yritra
with his greatness had encompassed.

9 Then humbled was the strength of Yritra’s mother ; Indra

hath oast his deadly bolt against her;

The mother Was above, the son was under, and like a cow
beside her calf lay D&nu.

10 Rolled in the midst of never-ceasing currents flowing without

a rest for ever onward,

The waters bear off Yritra’s nameless body t the foe of Indra
sank to during darkness.

11 Guarded by Alii stood the thralls of Dasas, the waters stayed

like kine held by the robber.

But he, when he had smitten Vritra, opened the cave where-
in the floods had been imprisoned.

12 A horse’s tail wast thou when he, 0 Indra, smote on thy bolt;

thou, God without a second,

Thou hast won back the kine, hast won the Soma; thou hast
let loose to flow the Seven Rivers.

13 Nothing availed him lightning, nothing thunder, hailstorm or

mist which he had spread around him :

When Indra and the Dragon strove in battle, Maghavan gained
the victory for ever.

14 Whom sawest thou to avenge the Dragon, Indra, that fear

possessed thy heart when thou hadst slain him;

That, like a hawk affrighted through the regions, thou crossedst
nine-and-ninety flowing rivers ?

9 JDdnu : according to S&yana, the mother of Vritra.

11 Thralls of JDdms : in the power of Vritra and his allies. Dasa is a
general name applied in the Veda to certain evil beings or demons, hostile to
Indra and to men. It means, also, a savage, a barbarian, one of the non-
Aryan inhabitants of India,

The robber : pani (literally, one who barters and traffics) means a miser, a
niggard ; an impious man who gives little or nothing to the Gods. The word
is used also as the name of a class of envious demons watching over treasures,
and as an epithet of the fiends who steal cows and hide them in mountain
caverns.

12 A horse* s tail was thou : destroying thy enemies as easily as ahorse
sweeps away flies with his tail. Of. I. 27. 1.

The Seven Fivers ; according to Professor Max Muller, the Indus, the five rivers
of the Panj&b (Vitastd, Asikni, Parushni, Vipfts, Sutudri) and the Sarasvati
Lassen and Ludwig put the Kubhfi in the place of the last-named.

14 This fight of Ir s - alluded to. It is said that he fled

thinking that he had ■ ■ ■: . ; ■■■ fin in killing Vritra,

Mne-and-ninety ; ui- . , j v : a great number,

HYMN 33.]

THE UICxYEDA .

45

15 Indra is King of all that moves and moves not, of creatures
tame and horned, the Thunder-wielder.

Over all living men he rules as Sovran, containing all as
spokes within thej:elly.

*HYMN XXXIII. Indra.

Comb, fain for booty let us seek to Indra : yet more shall he
increase his care that guides us.

Will not the Indestructible endow us with perfect* knowledge
of this wealth, of cattle'?

2 I fly to him invisible Wealth-giver as files the falcon to his
cherished eyrie,

With fairest hymns of praise adoring Indra, whom those
who laud him must invoke in battle.

3

4 :

Mid all his host, he bindeth on the quiver : he driveth cattle
from what foe he pleaseth :

Gathering up great store of riches, Indra, be thou no
trafficker with us, most mighty.

Thou slewest with thy bolt the wealthy Dasyu. a lone, yet
going with thy helpers, Indra f
Far from the floor of heaven in, all directions, the ancient

5 ‘ ■ ‘ ii : ■>, the riteless turned and

fled, Indra ! with averted faces,

When thou, fierce Lord of the Bay Steeds, the Stayer,
blewest from earth and heaven and sky the godless.

6 They met in fight the army of the blameless: then the

Navagvas put forth all their power.

They, like emasculates with men contending, fled, conscious,
by steep paths from Indra, scattered.

1 Fain far booty : gamjantah, literally seeking or eager for kine, that is,
booty or wealth consisting chiefly of cattle.

3 Be thou no trafficker with us : Do not deal illiberally with ns like a
petty trader : do not give sparingly, nor demand too much in return,

4 The wealthy JDastju : according to S&yana, ‘Vritra the robber,’ the
withhold er of the fertilizing rain. The Dasyus are also a class of demons,
enemies of gods and men, and sometimes the word means a savage, a
barbarian. , ,

The ancient riteless ones : the followers of Vritra; here v’ -*' *y. x 7
with indigenous races who had not adopted, or were hostil- 1 . s - ..«■ ■: the

6 The Stayer: he who stands firm in battle. The word in the test
sthdiar appears to correspond exactly with the Latin Stator (Jupiter Stator).
See Benfey, Orient und Occident , 1. 48. . *

6 The Navagvas : the name of a mythological family often associated with
that of Angiras, and. described as d.ai u:g in Inora battles, regulating the
worship of the Gods, etc. . .

4$ THE HYMNS OF [BOOKJ.

7 Whether they weep or laugh, thou hast overthrown them,

0 Indra, on the sky’s extremest limit.

The Dasyu thou hast burned from heaven, and welcomed
the prayer of him who pours the juice and lauds thee.

8 Adorned with their *array of gold and jewels, they o’er the

earth a covering veil extended.

Although they hastened, they o’ercame not Indra ; their
^ spies, h e compassed with the Sun of morning,
y As uiou*" ehjoyest heaven and earth, 0 Indra, on every side
surrounded with thy greatness,

So thou with priests hast blown away the Dasyu, and those
who worship not with those who worship.

10 They who pervaded earth’s extremest limit subdued not

with their charms the Wealth-bestower ;

Indra, the Bull, made his ally the thunder, and with its
light milked cows from out the darkness.

11 The waters flowed according to their nature; he mid the ■

navigable streams waxed mighty.

Then Indra, with his spirit concentrated, smote him for e ver
with his strongest weapon.

12 Indra broke through Ilibisa’s strong castles, and Sushna with

his horn he cut to pieces :

Thou, Maghavan, for all his might and swiftness, slowest thy
fighting foeman with thy thunder.

13 Fierce on his enemies fell Indra’s weapon : with his sharp

bull he rent their forts in pieces.

He with his thunderbolt dealt blows on Vritra, and con-
quered, executing all his purpose.

14. Indra, thouholpest Kutsa whom thou lovedst, and guardedst
brave Dasadyu when he battled.

The dust of trampling horses rose to heaven, and Svitra’s son
stood up again for conquest.

8 With the Sun of morning : ‘We revert here to the allegory. The fol-
lowers of Vritra are here said to he the shades of night which are dispersed
by the rising of the sun ; according to the Brahman a “Verily the sun, when
he rises in the east, drives away the R&kshasas.’’ ’ Wilson.

10 Milked cows: struck the cloud with his lightning, and made the milky
streams of fertilizing rain flow forth.

12 Ilibisa’s. strong castles : Ilibisa is said by S&yana to be Vritra f who sleeps
in caverns of the earth.’ Probably one of the confederate demons is intended.

Sushna with his horn: the demon of drought, ‘furnished,’ says the
Scholiast, ‘with weapons like the horns of bulls and buffaloes.’ The meaning
of ‘ horned ’ or ‘ with his horn * is simply * mighty,’ the horn being used, as in
Hebrew poetry, as the emblem of strength.

13 With his sharp bull : the rushing thunderbolt.

14 Kutsa : said to have been a Ilishior seer, founder of a religious family
or school, and elsewhere spoken of as the particular friend of Indra.

J&TMiSr 34 .] TEE EIGVEDA. 47

15 Svitr&'s mild steer, 0 M&ghavan thou holpest in combat for
the land, mid Tugra's houses.

Long stood they there before the task was- ended : thou wast
the master of the foemeu's treasure.

HYMN XXX1Y. Asvins,

.Ye who observe this day be with us even thrice ; far-stretch-
ing’is your bounty, Asvins, and your course.

To you, as to a cloak in winter, we eleave close : ye are to be
drawn nigh imto us by the wise.

2 Three are the fellies in your honey-bearing car, that travels

after Soma's loved one, as all know.

Three are the pillars set upon it for support: thrice journey
ye by night, 0 Asvins, thrice by day,

3 Thrice in the self-same day, ye Gods who banish want, sprinkle

ye thrice to-day our sacrifice with meath ;

And thrice vouchsafe us store of food with plenteous strength,
at evening, 0 ye Asvins, and at break of day.

4 Thrice come ye to our home, thrice to the righteous folk,

thrice triply aid the man who well deserves your help.
Thrice, 0 ye Asvins, bring us what shall make us glad ;
thrice send us store of food as nevermore to fail.

‘ 5 Thrice, O ye Asvins, bring to us abundant wealth ; thirce in
the Gods' assembly, thrice assist our thoughts.

Thrice grant ye us prosperity, thrice grant us fame ; for the
Sun's daughter hath mounted your three-wheeled car.

6 Thrice, Asvins, grant to us the heavenly medicines, thrice

those of earth and thrice those that the waters hold.

Favour and health and strength bestow upon my son ; triple
protection, Lords of Splendour, grant to him.

7 Thrice are ye to he worshipped day by day by us ; thrice, O ye

Asvins, ye travel around the earth.

Car-borne from far away, 0 ye Nasatyas, come, like vital air to
bodies, come ye to the three.

Dasadyu, is also said to have been a Rishi, but nothing is known of him.
The same may be said of Svaitreya or Sviirya, the son of a woman named
SvitrA

15 The meaning of tugrydsu in the text is not clear, r-.-v* .. ib

by ‘in the waters;’ Benfey translates "among Tugra’s ■. r . ‘.e

Petersburg Lexicon takes it to mean "among the families ,■ . ; ■ Y :

Mild steer : strong but gentle son.

1 Be present with its even thrice : that is, at all the three daily sacrifices,

2 Soma : is here the Moon, His darling is Jyotsnfi or Kaumudt, Moonlight,
identified with Stiryft, the light borrowed from the Bun.

5 For the Sun's daughter : Suryfi, who is called the consort of the Asvins,
7 Ndsatyas : a common appellation of the Asvins, Bee I, 3. 3,

To the three ; to the three daily sacrifices.

43 THE HYMNS OF {BOOK l

8 Thrice, 0 ye Asvins, with the Seven Mother Streams ; three

are the jars, the triple offering is prepared.

Three are the worlds, and moving on above the sky ye guard
the firm-set vault of heaven through days and nights.

9 Where are the three wheels of your triple chariot, where are

the three seats thereto firmly fastened ?

When will ye yoke the mighty ass that draws it, to bring you
to our sacrifice, Nasatyas ?

10 Nasatyas, come : the sacred gift is offered up ; drink the sweet

juice with lips that know the sweetness well.

Savitar sends, before the dawn of day, your car, fraught with
oil,, various-coloured, to our sacrifice.

11 Come, 0 Nilsatyas, with the thrice-eleven Gods; come, 0 ye

Asvins, to the drinking of the meath.

Make long our days of life, and wipe out all our sins : ward off
our enemies ; be with us evermore.

1 2 Borne in your triple ear, 0 Asvins, bring us present prosperity

with noble offspring.

I cry to you who hear me for protection ; be ye our helpers
whore men win the booty.

HYMN XXXV. Savitar.

Agni I first invoke for our prosperity ; I call on Mitra, Varuna,
to aid us here.

I call mi Night who gives rest to all moving life ; I call on
Savitar the God to lend us help.

2 Throughout the dusky firmament advancing, laying to rest

the immortal and the mortal,

Borne in his golden chariot he cometh, Savitar, God who looks
on every creature.

3 The God moves by the upward path, the downward ; with two

bright Bays, adorable, he journeys.

Savitar comes, the God from the far distance, and chases from
us all distress and sorrow.

8 The Seven Mother Streams : see I. 32. 12.

Three are the jars: three sorts of pitchers, u#ed to contain and pour out the
Soma juice at the three daily sacrifices.

Three worlds : earth, middle air, and heaven.

9 The mighty ass : according to the Nighantn * two asses are the steeds
of the Asvins.’

10 Savitar : implying that the Asvins are to be worshipped with this hymn
at dawn. Savitar is the Sun.

11 The thric-eleven Gods ; ‘ TH~ h usthcvilv for the usual Paur&nik enumer-
ation of thirty-three deities, nvoi.wi'.y ro-rir-g on Vaidik texts. The list is,
there, made up of the eight Vagus ; eleven liudras : twelve Adityas, PrajA-
pati, and VashatkCirad Wilson.

’THE RIG VEDA.

49

HYMN 35.]

4 His chariot decked with pearl, of various colours, lofty, with

golden pole, the God hath mounted,

The many-rayed One, Savitar the holy, bound, bearing power
and might, for darksome regions.

5 Drawing the gold-yoked car his Bays, white-footed, have

manifested light to all the peoples.

Held in the lap of Savitar, divine One, all men, all beings
have their place for over.

6 Three heavens there are ; two Savitar’s, adjacent : in Yama’s

world is one, the home of heroes.

As on a linch-pin, firm, rest things immortal ; he who hath
known it, let him here declare it.

7 He, strong of wing, hath lightened up the regions, deep-quiver-

ing Asura, the gentle Leader.

Where now is Surya, where is one to tell us to what celestial
sphere his ray hath wandered ?

8 The earth’s eight points his brightness hath illumined, three

desert regions and the Seven Hi vers.

God Savitar the gold-eyed hath come hither, giving choice
treasures unto him who worships.

9 The golden-handed Savitar, far-seeing, goes on his way be-

tween the earth and heaven,

Drives away sickness, bids the Sun approach us, and spreads
the bright sky through the darksome region.

10 May he, gold-handed Asura, kind Leader, come hither to us

with Ins help and favour.

Driving off* Eakshasas and Yatudh&nas, the God is present,
praised in hymns at evening.

11 0 Savitar, thine ancient dustless pathways are well established

in the air’s mid-region :

0 God, come by those paths so fair to travel, preserve thou
us from harm this day, and bless us.

6 Two Savitar' & : heaven and earth, or the heaven of day and the heaven of
night. As on a liach- pin : the linch-pin is the emblem of stability, retaining
its position unchanged by the revolution of the wheels. So the Gods remain
unmoved, unalfeoted by death or change, unlike the mortals who depart to
the realm of Yama. See J. Lhni, Der Mythus des Yama, p. 115.

7 He, strong of wing : ( saparnuh ) an epithet or a name of the Sun. Apura :
the immortal and divine One.

9 Bids the Sim approach us : S&yana says 1 approaches the Sun/ and
observes that although Savitar and the Sun are the same as regards their
divinity, yet they are two different forms, and therefore one may be said to
go to the other.

10 Ydtudhdnas : a class of demons or evil spirits, much like R&kskasas,
but more particularly practises of sorcery.

4

> THE HYMNS OF [BOOK l

HYMN XXX VL Agni

With words sent forth in holy hymns, Agni we supplicate,
the Lord

Of many f imilies who duly serve the Gods, yea, him whom
others also praise.

% Men have won Agni, him who makes their strength abound
we, with oblations, worship thee.

Our gracious-min led Helper in our deeds of might, be them,
0 Excellent, this day.

3 Thee for our messenger we choose, thee, the Omniscient, for

our Priest.

The flames of thee the mighty are spread wide around : thy
splendour reaches to the sky.

4 The Gods enkindle thee their ancient messenger, -Yaruna,

Mitra, Aryaman.

That mortal man, O Agni, gains through thee all wealth, who
hath poured offerings unto thee.

5 Thou, Agni, art a cheering Priest, Lord of the House, men’s

messenger ;

All constant high decrees established by the Gods, gathered
together, meet in thee.

6 tn thee, the auspicious One, O Agni, youthful lest, each sacred

gift is offered up:

This day, and after, gracious, worship thou our Gods, that
we may have heroic sons.

T To him in his own splendour bright draw near in worship
the devout.

Men kindle Agni with their sacrificial gifts, victorious o’er
the enemies.

8 Yritra they smote and slew, and made the earth and heaven
and firmament a wide abode.

The glorious Bull, invoked, hath stood at Kanva’a side : loud
neighed the Steed in frays for kine.

Tins Hymn and the twelve following are ascribed to Kanva, a very celebrated
ftiahi who ia called the son of Ghora and is said to belong to the family of
Angiras.

5 The preservation of the whole world rests, according to the Vaidik view,
the sacrifices offered by men, as these give the Gods strength and enable
them to perform their duties.

8 The glorious Bull: the mighty Ag*'. 1 . hull and impetuous

as a war horse, has aided his favourite K : i hi*. :

r

MYMN 36.] TUB RtGYEDA. 51

9 Seat thee, for them art mighty; shine, best entertainer of
the Gods.

Worthy of sacred food, praised Agni ! loose the smoke, ruddy
and beautiful to see.

10 Bearer of offerings, whom, best sacrificing Priest, the Gods for

Manu’s sake ordained ;

Whom Kanva, whom Medhyatithi made the source of wealth,
and Vrishan and Upastuta.

11 Him, Agni, whom Medhyatithi, whom Kanva kindled for his

rite,

Him these our songs of praise, him, Agni, we extol : his powers
shine out preeminent.

12 Make our wealth perfect thou, 0 Agni Lord divine : for thou

hast kinship with the Gods.

Thou rulest as a King o’er widely-famous strength : be good
to us for thou art great.

IS Stand up erect to lend us aid, stand up like Savitar the God :
Erect as strength-bestower when we call aloud, with unguents
and with priests, on thee.

14 Erect, preserve us from sore trouble; with thy flame burn

thou each ravening demon dead.

Raise thou us up that we may walk and live : so thou shalt
find our worship mid the Gods.

15 Preserve us, Agni, from the fiend, preserve us from malicious

wrong.

Save us from him who fain would injure us or slay, Most
Youthful, thou with lofty light.

16 Smite down as with a club, thou who hast fire for teeth,

smite thou the wicked, right and left.

Let not the man who plots against us in the night, nor any
foe prevail o’er us.

10 Medhyatithi: Sftyana takes this word to be an epithet of Kanva, * en-
tertainer of guests who are worthy of sacrificial food.* But it appears to he
the name of a ltiahi of I£auva’s family, the seer of twenty-eight hymns of
Books YIII. and IX.

Vrkhan and Upastuta: rendered by Wilson, after S&yana, ‘ Indra and
some other worshipper,’ are also apparently the names of two other Ilishis.

13 Stand up erect : Agni, as erect, is identified by Sftyaua with the ytipa or
sacrificial post to which the victims, at an animal sacrifice, were bound.
Accordingly he takes, ahjlhhih to mean 4 with unguents' wherewith the post
was anointed. This word may however refer to the ornaments — another
signification of the word — worn by the ministering priests.

52

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK L

17 Agni hath given heroic might to Kan v a, and felicity:

Agni hath helped our friends, hath heiped Mcdhy&tithi, hath

helped Upa&tuta to win,

18 We call on Ugradeva, Yadu, Turvasa, by means of Agni,

from afar. ;

Agni, bring JNavav&sfcva and Brihadratha, Turviti, to subdue
the foe,

19 Manu hath stablished thee a light, ’ Agni, for all the race

of men :

Sprung from the Law, oil-fed, for Kanva hast thou blazed,
thou whom the people reverence.

20 The flames of Agni full of splendour and of might are fearful,

not to be approached.

Consume for ever all demons and sorcerers, consume thou
each devouring iiend.

HYMN XXXVII. Marat*.

Sing forth, 0 Kanvas, to your band of Maruts, unassailable,
Sporting, resplendent on their car :

2 They who, self-luminous, were born together, with the spotted

deer,

Spears, swords, and glittering ornaments.

3 One hears, as though ’twere close at hand, the cracking of the

whips they hold ;

They gather glory on their way.

■ 4 Now sing ye forth the God-given hymn to your exultant
Marut host,

The hercely-vigorous, the strong.

5 Praise ye the Bull among the cows ; for Tis the MarutV
sportive band :

It strengthened as it drank the rain.

17 Agni hath helped our friends : S&yana takes mitrtt in the text as mitrtfni,
friends. Benfey and Ludwig consider it to mean, the former Mitra, and the
.latter the two Mitras, i. e. Mitra and Vanina; and they translate respectively
* Agni and Mitra protected,’ and ‘Agni, as Mitra [and Varunaj hath favoured/

18 Turvasa and Yadu are frequently -mentioned together as eponymi of

tribes of those names. The poet appears to pray for the return of Mavavdstva,
whoever he may have been, to protect the home attacked by the Dasyus or
robbers, and perhaps also to strengthen his prayer by an appeal to the spirits
of departed heroes. 1

20 Demons and sorcerers : R&kshasas and evil spirits who practise sorcery.

For an exhaustive explanation of this and other Hymns to the Maruts
see M. Muller’s Vedic Hymns, Part 1. (Sacred Books of the Bast, XXXII.) ’

5 Thc Ball among the cows: the band of Storm-Gods preeminent among
the clouds as a bull is among cows, ‘ °

&YMX S3.] THE MOVED A. $3

6 Who is your mightiest, Heroes, when, 0 shakers of the earth

and heaven,

Ye shake them like a garment’s hem ?

7 At your approach man holds him down before the fury of

your wrath ; r

The rugged-jointed mountain yields.

>8 They at whose racings forth the earth, like an age-w*eakened
lord of men,

Trembles in terror on their ways.

9 Strong is their birth : vigour have they to issue from their
Mother ; strength,

Yea, even twice enough, is theirs.

10 And these, the Sons, the Singers, in their racings have enlarg*

ed the bounds.

So that the kine must walk knee-deep.

11 Before them, on the ways they go, they drop this offspring
of the cloud,

Long, broad, and inexhaustible*

12 0 Maruts, as your strength is great, so have ye cast men

down on earth,

So have ye made the mountains fall.

18 The while the Maruts pass along, they talk together on the
way ;

Doth any hear them as they speak ?

14 Come quick' with swift steeds, for ye have Worshippers among

Kanva’s sons :

May you rejoice among them well.

15 All is prepared for your delight. We are their servants

evermore,

To live as long as life may last

HYMN XXXVIII. Maruts.

What now 2 When will ye take us by both hands, as a dear
sire his son,

Gods, for whom sacred grass is clipped 2,

6 That is, where all are so mighty it would be superfluous to ask who is
mightiest. 1

Like a garment's h$m : or, according to S&yana, ‘ like a tree’s high top/

10 The Singers: the loud-voiced Maruts.

The Maruts have spread themselves over the sky and caused so much rain
to fall that the cows in the pastures are up to their knees in water. But see
Ludwig, TTeber die neuesten Arbeiten auf dem Gebiete der Rgveda-forschung/
P rag. 1S9& - • 1 - •

u MS HYMNS OP {BOOK L

2 Now whither 1 To what goal of yours go ye in heaven, and

not on earth ?

Where do your cows disport themselves?

3 Where are your newest favours shown? Where, Maruts,

your prosperity ?

Where all ycfiir high felicities ?

4 If, 0 ye Maruts, ye the Sons whom Prisni bare, were mortal,

and

Immortal he who sings your praise,

5 Then never were your praiser loathed like a wild beast in

pasture-land,

Nor should he go on Yama’s path.

6 Let not destructive plague on plague hard to he conquered,

strike us down :

Let each, with drought, depart from us.

7 Truly, they the fierce and mighty Sons of Rudra send their

windless

Eain e'en on the desert places.

8 Like a cow the lightning lows and follows, motherlike, her

youngling,

When their rain-flood hath been loosened.

9 When they inundate the earth they spread forth darkness

e’en in day-time,

With the water-laden rain-cloud.

10 0 Maruts, at your voice’s sound this earthly habitation

shakes,

And each man reels who dwells therein.

11 0 Maruts, with your strong-hoofed steeds, unhindered m

their courses, haste
Along the bright embanked streams.

12 Firm be the fellies of your wheels, steady your horses and

your cars,

And may your reins be fashioned well.

2 Where do your coirs disport themselves 1 : perhaps, as M. Miiller suggest*
* where tarry your herds V viz. the clouds. Why do you remain in the sky,
and hot come down to earth ? Or, according to Bud wig : f Where do the cows
feed that are to supply milk and butter for sacrifice to you 1 Where is the
place in which sacrifice is to be offered to you ? 1

5 Like a wild heust .* or. unwelcome like a deer in the home-pasture or
meadow reserved for the cows.

Yama's path; the path that leads to Yama the God of the Departed*

6 Destructive plague : nirritih; sin. M. Muller. Brought : greed. M. MUller*
.7 Sods of Rudra ; or £ dear to ftudra/ who is the father of the Maruts.
Windless rain : steady rain, not blown away; that sinks into the ground;

the wind generally ceasing as soon as heavy rain begins to fall,

8 The thunder follows the lightning as a cow lowing, follows her calf*

TEE RIGVEDA .

BYMN 89.]

U

13 Invite thou hither with this song, for praise, Agni the Lord

of Prayer,

Him who is fair us Mitra is,

14 Form in thy mouth the hymn of praise: expand thee like a

rainy cloud :

Sing forth the measured eulogy.

15 Sing glory to the Marat host, praiseworthy, tuneful, vigorous ;

Here let the Strong Ones dwell with us.

HYMN XXXIX, Maruts.

When thus, like flame, from far away, Maruts, ye east your
measure forth,

To whom go ye, to whom, 0 shakers of the earth, moved by
whose wisdom, whose design ?

2 Strong let your weapons be to drive away your foes, firm for
resistance let them be.

Yea, passing glorious must be your warrior might, not as a
guileful mortars strength.

$ When what is strong ye overthrow, and whirl about each
ponderous thing,

Heroes, your course is through the forest trees of earth, and
through the fissures of the rocks.

4 Consumers of your foes, no enemy of yours is found in heaven
or on the earth :

Ye Hud r as, may the strength, held in this bond, be yours, to
bid defiance even now.

6 They make the mountains rock and reel, they rend the forest-
kings apart.

Onward, ye Maruts, drive, like creatures drunk with wine, ye
Gods with all your company.

13 Agni, the Lord of Prayer : ‘Agni is frequently invoked together with
the Maruts, and is even called marut-sakhft, the friend of the Maruts, viij, 92,
14. It seems better, therefore, to refer brdhmanas pdtpn to Agni, than, with
S&yana, to the host of the Maruts. Brdhmanasp&ti and Brihaspdti are both
varieties of Agni, the priest and purohita of Gods and men, and as such he is
invoked together with the Maruts in other passages, i. 40, 1/ M. Muller'.

14 Expand thee : addressed to the poet of the hymn.

15 Tuneful : so in 1. 37. 10 ‘And these the Sons, the Singers/ The song
of the Maruts is the music or singing of the winds.

1 Maruts , ye cast your measure forth: i * * 4 Ii L V* we must take

measure, not in the abstract sense, but as a ■ .■ i/ 1 which is cast

forward to measure the distance of an object, an ■ ■■ ■ ■' . \ applicable to

the Maruts, who seem with their weapons to strike the trees and mountains
when they themselves are still far off/ M. Muller.

4 Held in this bond: together with your race. M. Muller,

m TEE 17YMES OF [BOOK L

6 Ye to your chariot have yoked the spotted deer : a red deer,

as a leader, draws.

Even the Earth herself listened as ye came near, and men
were sorely terrified.

7 0 Rudras, quickly we desire your succour for this work of

ours. c

Come to us with your aid as in the days of old, so now for
frightened Kanva’s sake.

8 Should any monstrous foe, 0 Marti ts, sent by you or sent by

mortals threaten us,

Tear ye him from us with your power and with your might,
and with the succours that are yours*

9 For ye, the worshipful and wise, have guarded Kanva

perfectly.

0 Maruts, come to us with full protecting help, as lightning
flashes seek the rain.

10 Whole strength have ye, 0 Bounteous Ones; perfect, earth
shakers, is your might.

Maruts, against the poet’s wrathful enemy send ye an enemy
like a dart.

HYMN XL. Brahmanaspati.

0 Brahman asf ati, stand up : God-serving men, we pray to
thee.

May they who give good gifts, the Maruts, come to us. Indra,
most swift, be thou with them.

2 0 Son of Strength, each mortal calls to thee for aid when

spoil of battle waits for him.

0 Maruts, may this man who loves you well obtain wealth of
good steeds and hero might.

3 May Brahmanaspati draw nigh, may Sunrita the Goddess

come,

And Gods bring to this rite which gives the fivefold gift the
Hero, lover of mankind.

9 As lightning-flashes seek the rani: ‘Lightning precedes the ram, and may
therefore be represented as looking about for the rain.’ M. Muller.

1 0 Brahmanaspati: Agni is sometimes called Brahmanaspati, or Lord of
Prayer. See 1. 38. 13.

3 .May Sdnritd the Goddess come: SunrifcA (Pleasantness) is, according to
SAyana, the Goddess of Speech (YfigdevaU) in the form of lover of truth.

The fivefold gift ; an offering of grain, gruel, curdled milk, rice-cake, and
curds,

IIYMX 41.] TUB JR/GVB'DA. 67

4 He who bestows a noble guerdon on the priest wins fame that

never shall decay.

For him we offer sacred hero-giving food, peerless and con-
quering easily.

5 Now Brahmanaspati speaks forth aloud the solemn hymn of

praise,

Wherein Indra and Yanina, Mitra, Aryaman, the Gods, have?
made their dwelling-place.

6 May we in holy synods, Gods! recite that hymn, peerless, that

brings felicity. ^

If you, 0 Heroes, graciously accept this word, may it obtain
all bliss from you.

7 Who shall approach the pious ? who the man whose sacred

grass is trimmed 1

The offerer with his folk advances more and more : he fills his
house with precious things.

8 He amplifies his lordly might, with kings he slays ; e’en mid

alarms he dwells secure.

In great or lesser fight none cheeks him, none subdues, the
wielder of the thunderbolt.

HYMN XLI. Yaruna, Mitra, Aryaman.

N e’er is he injured whom the Gods Y aruna, Mitra, Aryaman,
The excellently wise, protect.

2 He prospers ever, free from scathe, whom they, as with full

hands, enrich,

Whom they preserve from every foe.

3 The Kings drive far away from him his troubles and his

enemies,

And lead him safely o’er distress.

4 Sacred . food : tid or hid. sacrificial food, or a libation, especially aholy liba-
tion coming between the Pray&ja and the Anuy&ja the fore-sacrifice and the
after sacrifice; the preliminary and the final offering.

5 y 0 it' Brahmanaspati speaks forth : ‘Professor Itoth remarks : The thunder

v voice. The voice of thunder, again, as the voice of the

iyei\ is by a beautiful transference brought into connec-
tion with the prayer which, spoken on earth, finds, as it were, its echo in the
heights of heaven.’ Muir 0. S . Texts , V. p. 279, no^$.

8 The wielder of the thunder holt : meaning, S&yana says, Brahmanaspati,
and so far identifying him with Indra. Ludwig refers the expression to the
pious sacrificer who is said to be armed, as it were with Brahmanaspati a
thunderbolt.

3 The Kings ; Yaruna, Mitra, and Aryaman,

U THE HYMNS OP [BOOK /.

4 Thornless, Adityas, is the path, easy for him who seeks the
Law :

With him is naught to anger you.
h What sacrifice, i dityas, ye Heroes guide by the path direct,—
May that come nigh unto your thought.

$ That mortal, ever unsubdued, gains wealth and every precious
thing,

And children also of his own.

7 How, my friends, shall we prepare Aryaman’s and Mitra’s

laud,

Glorious food of Yaruna ?

8 I point not out to you a man who strikes the pious, or reviles :
Only with hymns 1 call you nigh.

9 Let him not love to speak ill words ; but fear the One who

holds all four

Within his hand, until they fall.

HYMN XLIL Pushan,

Shorten our ways, 0 Pushan, move aside obstruction in the
path :

Go close before us, cloud-bom God.

4 A tityas : the three Gods named above, with others. See X. 14. 3.

9 But fear the One who holds the four ; Wilson remarks : ‘ The test has
ihaturas chid dadainln&d Oil) hi d nidhdtoh , he may fear from one holding
four until the fall The meaning is supplied by the Scholiast with the
assistance of Ydska, chaturo bshdn dhdniyutuh ..hitardt, from a gambler hold-
ing four dice ..That is, where two. men are playing together, the man who
has not the throw of the dice is in anxious apprehension lest it should be
against him.’ Benfey thinks that ‘ the holder of the four (dice)’ is God who
holds in hi* hands and decides the destinies of man. Ludwig maintains that
there is no reference to dice, either of gambling or destiny, and that * the four'
are Yaruna, Mitra, Bhaga, and Aryaman, The pious man when ho possesses
these four as friends should fear to let them go.*- Bergaigne (La Religion
Vddique, XII. 158) is of opinion that the cords or nooses of Yaruna, with
which he catches and punishes the wicked, are intended.

1 Shorten our ways, 0 Pdshmi Pfishan is usually a synonym of the Sun;
that is, he is one of the twelve Adityas. According to the tenour of this
hymn, he is the deity presiding especially over roads and journeyings.

Cloud* bavn ; with reference, perhaps, to the close connexion between
nourishing the earth, which is one of Pushan’s especial duties, and the cloud
that gives the necessary rain. But in Eigveda VIII. 4. 15, 16, Pushan is
called vimoehana, the deliverer, (from sin, according to S&yana), and perhaps
vmucho napdt may mean the same thing. See Muir 0. S. Texts. V, 175
where the whole hymn is translated, *

&rMN 43.] TJIE RIGVEDA. 5*

2 Drive, Pushan, from our road the wolf, the wicked inauspicious

wolf,

Who lies in wait to injure us.

3 Who lurks about the path we take, the robber with a guileful

heart :

Far from the road chase him away. r

4 Tread with thy foot and trample out the firebrand of the

wicked one,

The double-tongued, whoe’er he be.

5 Wise Puslian, Wonder-Worker, we claim of thee now the aid

wherewith

Thou furtlieredst our sires of old.

6 So, Lord of all prosperity, best wielder of the golden sword,
Make riches easy to be won.

7 Past all pursuers lead us, make pleasant our path and fair

to tread ;

O Puslian, find thou power for this.

S Lead us to meadows rich in grass : send on our way no early
heat :

0 Pushan, find thou power for thi^.

9 Be gracious to us, fill us full, give, feed us, and invigorate :

0 Pushan, find thou power for this.

10 So blame have we for Pushan ; him we magnify with songs
of praise :

We seek the Mighty One for wealth.

HYMN XLTII. Bud™,

What 'shall we sing to Budra, strong, most bounteous, excel-
lently wise,

That shall be dearest to his heart?

2 That Aditi nriy grant the grace of Budra to our folk, our kine,
Our cattle and our progeny ;

3 That Mitra and that Varupa, that Budra may remember us v
Yea, all the Gods with one accord.

2 The wolf ; vrika — Swedish and Norwegian vary, which signifies not only
wolf, but also a wicked godless man.

1 Budra appears in this hymn as a gentle and beneficent deity, presiding
©specially over medicinalplants.

2 That Aditi may grant the grace: Aditi is said by Sftyana to mean here
the earth, and is accordingly so translated by Wilson. Benfey explains the
word by * Sinlessness/ and Ludwig take3it as a masculine deity meaning Budra
himself.

60 fllM HYMNS Of [EOOk L

4 To Rudra Lord of sacrifice, of hymns and balmy medicines,

We pray for joy and health and strength.

.5 He shines in splendour like the Bun, refulgent as bright gold
is he,

The good, the best among the Gods,

6 May he grant health into our steeds, wclVbemg to our rams and

ewes.

To men, to women, and to kine.

7 0 Soma) set thou upon us the glory of a hundred men)

The great renown of mighty chiefs.

8 Let not malignities, nor those who trouble Soma, binder xiS*
Indu, give us a share of strength.

9 Soma ! head, central point, love these ; Soma ! know these as

serving thee,

Children of thee Imortal, at the highest place of holy law*

HYMN XLIY. Agni

Immortal Jata vedas, thou many-hued fulgent gift of Dawn,
Agni, this day to him who pays oblations bring the Gods who
waken with the morn,

2 For thou art offering-bearer and loved messenger, the chariot-

eer of sacrifice :

Accordant with the Asvins and with Dawn grant ns heroic
strength and lofty fame.

3 As messenger we choose to-day Agni the good whom many

love,

Smoke-bannered spreader of the light, at break of day glory of
sacrificial rites.

0 May he grant health : here Rudra appears as pasuputi, Lord and guardian
of cattle.

8 Those who trouble Soma : probably the people of the hills who interfere
with the gathering of the. Soma plant which has to be sought there.

Indu : literally ‘ drop ; 1 from the same root as In dr a, the Rainer ; a name
of the Moon as rain-giver, and of Sonia which is identified with it.

9 At the highest place of holy law ; at the place where sacrifice is duly per-
formed. ‘ The whole verse is difficult, possibly a later addition,’ Max Muller.

This Hymn and the six following are ascribed to the Rishi Praskauva;
the son of K&nva who is the seer of the preceding group.

1 Immortal Jdtavcdas ; J&tavedas is a common epithet of Agni, the mean-
ing of which is explained in five ways ; 1. f knowing all created beings ; % pos-
sessing all creatures ; ’ 3. 1 known by created beings ; ’ 4. ' possessing riches ;
5. possessing wisdom.’

2 The Asvins: see I, 8. 1.

Dawn; the Goddess ITshas ; Morning personified,

HYMN 44.]

THE XIGVEDA.

61

4 Him noblest and most youthful, richly- worshipped guest, dear

to the men who offer gifts,

Him, Agni Jatavedas, I beseech at dawn that he may bring
the Gods to us.

5 Thee, Agni, will I glorify, deathless nourish er of the world,
Immortal, offering-bearer, meet for sacred foocj, preserver, best

at sacrifice.

6 Tell good things to thy praiser, 0 most youthful God, as richly-

worshipped, honey-tong ued,

And, granting to Praskauva lengthened days of life, show
honour to the Heavenly Host.

7 For the men, Agni, kindle thee as all-possessor and as Priest;
So Agni, much-invoked, bring hither with all speed the Gods,

the excellently wise,

8 At dawn of day, at night, Ushas and Savitar, the Asvins,

Bhaga, Agni’s self ;

Skilled in fair rites, with Soma poured, the Kanvas light thee,
the oblation-wafting God.

9 For, Agni, Lord of sacrifice and messenger of men art thou :
Bring thou the Gods who wake at dawn, who see the light, this

day to drink the Soma juice.

10 Thou shortest forth, 0 Agni, after former dawns, all visible, 0

rich in light.

*Thou art our help in battle-strife, the Friend of man, the great
High Priest in sacrifice.

11 Like Alarm, we will stablish thee, Agni, performer of the rite,
Invoker, ministering Priest, exceeding wise, the swift immortal

messenger. ^

12 When as the Gods’ High Priest, by many loved, thou dost

their mission as their nearest Friend,

Then, like the far-resounding billows of the flood, thy flames, 0
Agni, roar aloud,

1 3 Hear, Agni, who hast ears to hear, with all thy train of escort Gods;
Let Mitra, Aryaman, seeking betimes our rite, seat them upon

the sacred grass.

14 Let those who strengthen Law, who bountifully give, the fire-

tongued Maruts, hear our praise.

May Law-supporting Varuna, with the Asvins twain and
Ushas, drink the Soma juice,

11 Like Manu; th r ■ ' ~'n and father of the human race and

the first institutor of ■ ■ ■. . . * ' .

12 Of the food : c- 1 - ■ ! ■ r ord meaning either that river (the

Indus) in particular, or any river or gathering of waters in general,-

15 Let Mitra, Aryaman ; and Varuna, understood.

14 The jir c-tonguc i Marais ; who consume the sacrifice by means of the
longuc-like flames oC Agni. ... ......

mu if run vs op

[BOOK L

HYMN XLY. a Agni.

Wobshif the Yasus, Agni ! here, the Rudras, the Adityas, all
Who spring from M tnu, those who know fair rites, who pour
their blessings down,

2 Agni, the Gods who understand give ear unto the worshipper :
Lord of RedrSteeds, who lovest song, bring thou those Three-

and-Thirty Gods.

3 0 Jatavedas, great in aet, hearken thou to Praskanva’s call,

As Priyamedha erst was heard, Atri, Virdpa, Angiras.

i The sons of Priyamedha skilled in lofty praise have called for
help

On Agni who with fulgent flame is Ruler of all holy rites.

5 Hear thou, invoked with holy oil, bountiful giver of rewards,
These eulogies, whereby the sons of Kanva call thee to their

aid.

6 0 Agni, loved by many, thou of fame most wondrous, in their

homes

Men call on thee whose hair is flame, to be the bearer of their
gifts.

7 Thee, Agni, best to find out wealth, most widely famous, quick

to hear,

Singers have stablished in their rites Herald and ministering
Priest.

8 Singers with Soma pressed have made thee, Agni, hasten to

the feast,

Great light to mortal worshipper, what time they bring the
sacred gift.

9 Good, bounteous, Son of Strength, this day seat here on sacred

grass the Gods

Who come at early morn, the host of heaven, to drink the
Soma juice.

10 Bring with joint invocations thou, 0 Agni, the celestial host :
Here stands the Soma, bounteous Gods : drink this expressed
ere yesterday.

1 Rudras , Adityas : three classes of Gods who make up almost the
whole number of the thirty-three deities spoken of in the next stanza.

Who spr'nuj from Matiu : Manu appears here as Praj&pati, the progenitor
of Gods as well as of men.

2 Lord of Red Steeds ; Agni, whose horses are flames of fire.

The Three-and-Thirty Gods; see I, 34. 11.

3 Priyamedha, Atri, and Virupa are famous Rishis, the seers of many hymns
of the Rigvcda. Angiras has already been mentioned. See I. 1. 6,

9 Son of Strength ; made or generated by strong friction ; * kindled through
agitation to a flame.*

10 Expressed ere yesterday : prepared two days liefore in order that the juice
might ferment before it was used.

BYMiSf 46,]

THE RIG VEDA. 6*

HYMN XL VI. Asvina.

Now Morning with her eaiiist light shines forth, dear Daughter
of the Sky :

High, Asvins, I extol your praise,

2 Sons of the Sea, mighty to save, discoverers of riches, ye
Gods with deep thought who tind out wealth. *

3 Your giant coursers hasten on over the region all in flames,
When your car flies with winged steeds.

4 He, liberal, lover of the flood, Lord of the House,, the vigilant,.
Chiefs ! with oblations feed 3 you full.

§ Ye have regard unto our hymns, Nasatyas, thinking of our
words :

Drink boldly of the Soma juice.

6 Vouchsafe to us, 0 Asvin Fair, such strength as, with attend-

ant light,

May through the darkness carry us.

7 Come in the ship of these our hymns to bear you to the hither

shore :

0 Asvins, harness ye the car.

8 The heaven’s wide vessel is your own : on the flood’s shorn

your chariot waits ; *

Drops, with the hymn, have been prepared.

9 Kanvas, the drops are in the heaven; the wealth is at the

waters’ place :

Where will ye manifest your form?

1 Morning : U'shas or Dawn, personified as a Goddess.

Asvins ; see I. 3. 1.

2 Sons of the Sea : offspring of the celestial ocean, the atmosphere.

4 He, liberal , lover of the flood : evidently Agin and not the Sun. Agrri's

connexion with water is frequently alluded to, and he is often called the Lord

and Guardian of the house or family.

6 The darkness : in the shape of poverty or want, according to the Scholiast.

7 The poet appears to invite the Asvins to yoke their chariot for part of
the journey and come to meet his hymn which shall bear them as in a ship
through the sky. The middle air or atmosphere is the sea between heaven
and earth, and the earth is the hither shore,

8 Vessel : (aretram). a vehicle in the shape of a ship, says S Ay an a. You
have already the ship of our songs to bear you through the sky, and now your
chariot has reached the earth and the place where, together with this hymn,
the Soma juice has been prepared for a libation to you.

9 The drops, or Soma libation, and the wealth or treasure, and the sky and
the place of rivers appear here to be parallelisms, both pairs of expressions
signifying the same thing. The oblation is said to liave already reached the
heaven where the Asvins will receive it. Say ana’s paraphrase which Wilson has
followed, seems forced and unnatural. ‘ Kanvas* (ask this of the Asvins):
(How) do the rays (of the sun proceed) from the sky ? : (How) does the dawn
(rise) in the region of the waters 1 1 2 * * * 6 7 8 9

THE HYMNS OF [BOOK L

10 Light came to lighten up the branch: the Sun appeared as it
were gold ;

And with its tongue shone forth the dark.

1 X The path of sacrifice was made to travel to the farther goal :
The road of heaven was manifest.

12 The singer of their praise awaits whatever grace the Asvins

give,

Who save when Soma gladdens them.

13 Ye dwellers with Yivasvan come, auspicious, as to Manu erst;
Oome to the Soma and our praise.

14 0 circumambient Asvins, Dawn follows the brightness of your

way:

Approve with beams our solemn rites.

15 Drink ye of our libations, grant protection, 0 ye Asvins Twain,
With aids which none may interrupt.

HYMN XLVIL Asvins.

Asvins, for you who strengthen Law this sweetest Soma hath
been shed.

Drink this expressed ere yesterday and give riches to him who
offers it.

2 Come, 0 ye Asvins, mounted on your triple ear, three-seated,

beautiful of form.

To you at sacrifice the Kanvas send the prayer ; graciously
listen to their call.

3 0 Asvins, ye who strengthen Law, drink ye this sweetest Soma

j uiee.

Borne on your wealth-fraught car come ye this day to him
who offers, ye of wondrous deeds.

4 Omniscient Asvins, on the thrice-heaped grass bedew with the

sweet juice the sacrifice.

The sons of Kanva, striving heavenward, call on you with
draughts of Soma juice out-poured.

5 0 Asvins, with those aids w r herewith ye guarded Kanva care-

fully,

Keep us, 0 Lords of Splendour : drink the Soma juice, ye
strength eners of holy law.

10 Light come to lighten up the branch : the branch is probably the sacrificial
fire. Cf. ‘The other fires are verily thy branches’ (I. 59. 1)* The epithet
* dark 1 may refer to the darkening of the fire by the sunlight or by the smoke.

11 Sacrifice is the path which leads the Gods from heaven to earth, and the
way thVough heaven is made visible by the sacrificial fire or by the daylight,

13 Vivasvdn ; ‘the Brilliant,’ a name of the morning heaven personified
Ho is regarded as the father of Yama, Manu, and the Asvins. See X. 17. 2, note"

HYMN 48.]

THE RIG VEDA.

65

G 0 Mighty Ones, ye gave Snells abundant food, brought on
your treasure-laden car ;

So now vouchsafe to us the wealth which many crave, either
from heaven or from the sea.

7 Nasatyas, whether ye be far av r ay or close to Turvasa,

Borne on your lightly-rolling chariot come tio us, together

with the sunbeams come.

8 So let your coursers, ornaments of sacrifice, bring you to our

libations here.

Bestowing food on him who acts and gives aright, sit, Chiefs,
upon the sacred grass.

9 Come, 0 Nasatyas, on your car decked with a sunbright canopy,
Whereon ye ever bring wealth to the worshipper, to drink the

Soma’s pleasant juice.

10 With lauds and songs of praise we call them down to us, that
they, most rich, may succour us ;

For ye have ever in the Kanvas’ well-loved house, 0 Asvins,
drunk the Soma juice.

HYMN XL YIH. Dawn.

Dawn on uc with prosperity, 0 Ushas, Daughter of the Sky,
Dawn with great glory, Goddess, Lady of the Light, dawn thou
with riches, Bounteous One.

2 They, bringing steeds and kine, boon givers of all wealth, have

oft sped forth to lighten us.

0 Ushas, waken up for me the sounds of joy : send us the riches
of the great.

3 Ushas hath dawmed, and now shall dawn, the Goddess, driver

forth of cars

Which, as she cometh nigh, have fixed their thought on her,
like glory-seekers on the flood.

6 Sudds ; a king, the son of Pijivana. See VII. 18, 5 — 25.

7 Nasatyas : Asvins. See I. 3. 3,

Turvasa ; the tribe or family called after the chief of this name, frequently
mentioned in the Itigveda. See I. 36. IS.

10 With lauds : nhtkebh answering, according to S&yana, to what in the
Br&hmana is called Sastram (to be recited by the Hotar) while the Stoma
(stofcram) song, is sung by the S&ma-priests.

1 Ushas : Morning, Dawn, personified.

2 They : the Dawns of preceding days,

3 The approach of Dawn sets cars or wains in motion in the same way as it
causes ships or boats that have anchored during the night to move out to the
open water.

5

66 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR 2,

4 Here Kanva, chief of Kaiiva’s race, sings forth aloud the glo-

ries of the heroes’ names, —

The princes who, 0 Ushas, as thou cornest near, direct their
thoughts to liberal gifts.

5 Like a good matron Ushas comes carefully tending everything ;
Housing alb life she stirs all creatures that have feet, and

makes the birds of air fly up.

6 She sends the busy forth, each man to his pursuit : delay she

knows not as she springs.

0 rich in opulence, after thy dawning birds that have flown
forth no longer rest.

7 This Dawn hath yoked her steeds afar, beyond the rising of

the Sun :

Borne on a hundred chariots she, the auspicious Dawn, advan-
ces on her way to men.

8 To meet her glance all living creatures bend them down ;

Excellent One, she makes the light.

Ushas, the Daughter of the Sky, the opulent, shines foes and;
enmities away.

9 Shine on us with thy radiant light, 0 Ushas, Daughter of the

Sky,

Bringing to us great store of high felicity, and beaming on our
solemn rites.

10 For in thee is each living creature’s breath and life, when.
Excellent ! thou dawncst forth.

Borne on thy lofty car, 0 Lady of the Light, hear, thou of
wondrous wealth, our call.

110 Ushas, win thyself the strength which among men is won-
derful.

Bring thou thereby the pious unto holy rites, those who as.
priests sing praise to thee.

12 Bring from the firmament, 0 Ushas, all the Gods, that they

may drink our Soma juice,

And, being what thou art, vouchsafe us kine and steeds,
strength meet for praise and hero might.

13 May Ushas whose auspicious rays are seen resplendent round

about,

Grant us great riches, fair in form, of all good things, wealth
which light labour may attain.

14 Mighty One, whom the Rishis of old time invoked for their

protection and their help,

4 The princes are the wealthy patrons or institutors of sacrifice, who bear
all expenses and remunerate the invests.

THE RIG VEDA .

HYMN 50.]

er

0 Ushas, graciously answer our songs of praise with bounty
and with brilliant light.

. 15 Ushas, as thou with light to-day hast opened the twin doors
of heaven,

So grant thou us a dwelling wide and free from foes. 0 God-
dess, give us food with kine. -6

16 Bring us to wealth abundant, sent in every shape, to plentiful
refreshing food,

To all-subduing splendour, Ushas, Mighty One, to strength, thou
rich in spoil and wealth.

HYMN XLIX. Dawn.

E’en from above the sky’s bright realm come, Ushas, by aus-
picious ways :

Let red steeds bear thee to the house of him who pours the
Soma juice.

2 The chariot which thou mountest, fair of shape, 0 Ushas !

light to move, —

Therewith, 0 Daughter of the Sky, aid meu of noble fame to-
day.

3 Bright Ushas, when thy times return, all quadrupeds and

bipeds stir,

And round about flock winged birds from all the boundaries of
heaven.

4 Thou dawning with thy beams of light illumest all the radiant

realm.

Thee, as thou art, the Kanvas, fain for wealth, have called
with sacred songs.

HYMN L. Sf;rya.

Hrs bright rays bear him up aloft, the God who knoweth all
that lives,

S&rya, that all may look on him.

2 The constellations pass away, like thieves, together with their

beams, ’ *'

Before the all-beholding Sun.

3 His herald rays are seen afar refulgent o’er the world of men,
Like flames of fire that bum and blaze.

4 Swift and all beautiful art thou, O Surya, maker of the light,
Illuming all the radiant realm.

1 Let red steeds bear thee : the Scholiast explains arunapsuvah as the purple
cows, the vehicles of morning, that is, the dark red clouds that accompany the
dawn.

1 The God who knoweth all that live: jdtdvedasam, here an epithet of. Si. rya»
the Sun-God,

68 TEE KTMNS OF [BOOK I.

5 Thou goest to the hosts of Gods, thou comest hither to mankind,
Hither ail light to be beheld.

6 With that same eye of thine wherewith thou lookest, brilliant

Varuna,

Upon the busy race of men,

7 Traversing sky and wide mid-air, thou me test with thy beams

our days,

Sun, seeing all things that have birth.

8 Seven Bay Steeds harnessed to thy car bear thee, 0 thou far-

seeing One,

God, Surya, with the radiant hair.

9 Sftrya hath yoked the pure bright Seven, the daughters of the

car ; with these,

His own dear team, he goeth forth.

10 Looking upon the loftier light above the darkness we have come
To Surya, God among the Gods, the light that is most excellent.

11 Rising this day, 0 rich in friends, ascending to the loftier

heaven,

Surya, remove my heart’s disease, take from me this my yel-
low hue.

12 To parrots and to starlings let us give away my yellowness,

Or this my yellowness let us transfer to Marital a trees.

13 With all his conquering vigour this A ditya hath gone up on high,
Giving my foe into mine hand : let me not be my foeman’s prey.

6 Varuna : the word is, as Sayana points out, used here as an appellative
(the encornpasser) and applied to Sftrya. Sayana explains it as anisktanivdraka,
averter of evil.

9 Sdrya hath yoked the pure bright Seven : the seven steeds that draw his
ear, and which, as intimately conneeted therewith, are called the daughters of
the chariot. The number seven has reference to the seven days of the week.

11 f This verse and the two following constitute a trkha or triplet, the re-
petition of which, with due formalities, is considered to be curative of disease 5
Wilson.

12 The yellowness here spoken of is probably the colour of the skin in
jaundice. . The hdvidvard of the text is said by Sayaua to mean haritdladru -
ma h a hantftla tree ; but there seems to be no tree of that name Ilaritdla
means, usually, yellow orpimeut, and haridruva , a yellow vegetable powder
Tlie word hdndrava is explained in the Petersburg Lexicon as a certain yellow

To parrots and to starling: similarly, among the Romans, people with the
jaundice were called icterici according to Pliny (H. N, xxx IX) from the
fanciful notion that the disease was cured by looking at the icterus, one of the
many varieties of the aturnidio or starling family. The bird was said to die
instead of the patient.

HYMN 51.]

' THE RIG VEDA. 69

HYMN LI. into.

Make glad with songs that Ram whom many men invoke,
worthy of songs of praise, Indra, the sea of wealth ;

Whose gracious deeds for men spread like the heavens abroad :
sing praise to him the Sage, most liberal for our good.

2 A s aids the skilful Ribhus yearned to Indra strong to save,

who fills mid-air, encompassed round with might,

Rushing in rapture ; and o’er Satakratu came the gladening
shout that urged him on to victory.

3 Thou hast disclosed the kine’s stall for the Angirases, and

made a way for Atri by a hundred doors.

On Vimada thou hast bestowed both food and wealth, making
thy bolt dance in the sacrificer’s fight.

4 Thou hast unclosed the prisons of the waters ; thou hast in

the mountain seized the treasure rich in gifts.

When thou hadst slain with might the dragon Vritra, thou
Indra, didst raise the Sun in heaven for all to see.

This hymn and the six following are attributed to the Kishi Savya, who is
called the son of Angiras.

1 That Ram : that famous ram, Indra. See I. 1 0. 2. Here the reference
is to a fighting*ram ; or, accoi'ding to S&yana, to a legend which says that
Indra came in the form of a ram to Medhatithi’s sacrifice, and drank the Soma
juice.

2 The skilful Ribhus : see I. 2fi. I. Sayana says that the Maruts are here
intended, who encouraged Indra when all the Gods had deserted him.

Rushing in rapture ; when exhilarated by draughts of Soma.

4 Here again/ says Professor Max Miiller, 4 the difficulty of rendering Vedic
thought in English, or any other modern language, becomes apparent, for we
have no poetical word to express a high state of mental excitement produced
by drinking the intoxicating juice of the Soma or other plants, which has not
something opprobrious mixed up with it, while in ancient times that state oi
excitement was celebrated as a blessing of the gods, as not unworthy of the
gods themselves, nay, as a state in which both the warrior and the poet
would perform their highest achievements. The German Rausch is the nearest
approach to the Sanskrit mada.’

In this version mada has generally been rendered by rapture, delight,
transport, or wild joy.

Satakratu : Indra. See I. 4. 8.

3 The kinds stall ; the dark cloud that holds the waters imprisoned.

The Angirases : an ancient priestly family. See I. 1. 6. Atri : a Ilishi usually
enumerated with the Angirases among the j prajapatis or progenitors of men.
Indra freed him from captivity, showing Mm a hundred ways of escape.
Vimada was also a Itishi of ancient times.

4 The mountain : the cloud. The treasure is the fertilizing rain.

Didst raise the Sun : according to S&yana, didst free the Sun which had
been hidden by Vritra,

THE IIYMNb Oi*

[BOOK I.

i 0

5 With wondrous might thou blewest enchanter fiends away,

with powers celestial those who called on thee in jest.

Thou, hero-liearted, hast broken down Pipru’s forts, and helped
Eijisvan when the Dasyus were struck dead.

6 Thou savedst Kutsa when Sushna was smitten down ; to Ati-

thigva gayest Sambara for a prey.

E 5 6 * 8 9 10 en mighty Arbuda thou troddest under foot : thou from of
old wast born to strike the Dasyus dead.

7 All power and might is closely gathered up in thee; thy

bounteous spirit joys in di'inking Soma juice.

Known is the thunderbolt that lies within thine arms : rend
off therewith all manly prowess of our foe.

8 Discern thou well Aryas and Dasyus; punishing the lawless

give them up to him whose grass is strewn.

Be thou the sacrificer’s strong encourager : all these thy deeds
are my delight at festivals.

9* Indra gives up the lawless to the pious man, destroying by
the Strong Ones those who have no strength.

Vamra w r hen glorified destroyed the gathered piles of the still
waxing great one who would reach the heaven.

10 The might which Usan& hath formed for thee with might
rends in its greatness and with strength both worlds apart.

5 Those who called on thee in jest : literally, called on thee or offered to thee
above or over the shoulder, apparently an ancient proverbial expression ap-
plied to those who instead of sacrificing to the Gods put the intended oblation
into their own mouths.

Pipru is one of the demons of the air ; his forts are the clouds that withhold
the rain ; Rijisvdn is a pious worshipper oppressed by the Dasyus, robbers or
barbarians.

6 Sushna } { the Drier-up,’ is the personification of the excessive heat before

the rains ; a demon of drought. Sambara and Arbuda are similar demons of
the atmosphere. Atithigva is another name of the liberal prince DivodAsa.

8 The Aryas are, first, the people who speak the language of the Veda,
and the Dasyus are the original and hostile peoples of India. Later, the

• former are the true and loyal people, faithful to Indra and the Gods, and the
latter are the wicked and godless.

Whose grass is strewn : the faithful worshipper, the priest who has trimmed
and strewn tlie sacred grass for the Gods.

9 Vamra : the second half of the stanza is ■' ’V Wilson remarks :

4 The text is obscure, — Vamro vi jaghdna . , ■ destroyed the

collection. The Scholiast says that a Ilishi named Vamra took advantage of
Indra’s absence from sacrifice, to carry away the accumulated heap of offerings/

10 The Dishi Us an A, called also KAvya or Kavi’s son, appears in the Veda
as the especial friend of Indra. In I. 121, 12. he is said to have given
Indra his thunderbolt : 4 The bolt which KAvya UsanA erst gave thee/ Here,
also, * the might ’ means the conquering thunderbolt, although in other places
its fabrication is attributed to Tvashtar.

The steeds of Vdta : horses of the Wind* God, horses swift as wind.

HYMN 52.] THE RIG VEDA. 71

0 Hero-souled, the steeds of Vata, yoked by thought, have
carried thee to fame while thou art filled with power.

11 When Indra hath rejoiced with Kavya Usana, he mounts his

steeds who swerve wider and wider yet.

The Strong hath loosed his holt with the swift rush of rain,
and he hath rent in pieces Sushna’s firm-built forts.

12 Thou mountest on thy car amid strong Soma draughts : Sar-

yata brought thee those in which thou hast delight.

Indra, when thou art pleased with men whose Soma flows thou
risest to unchallenged glory in the sky.

13 .To old Kakshivan. Somsi prefer, skilled in song, O Indra, thou

didst give the yon tin el Vrii-hriyii.

Thou, very wise, wast Mena, Vrishanasva’s child : those deeds
of thine must all be told at Soma feasts.

14 The good man’s refuge in his need is Indra, firm as a door-

post, praised among the Pajras.

Indra alone is Lord of wealth, the Giver, lover of riches, cha-
riots, kine, and horses.

15 To him the Mighty One, the self-resplendent, verily strong and

great, this praise is uttered.

May we and all the heroes, with the princes, be, in this fray,
O Indra, in thy keeping.

HYMN LII. Indra.

1 glorify that Ram who finds the light of heaven, whose hun-
dred nobly-natured ones go forth with him.

With hymns may I turn hither Indra to mine aid, — the Car
which like a strong steed liasteth to the call.

1 1 When Indra hath rejoiced : drunk the exhilarating Soma.

12 Sin/dta : a R&jarshi or royal llishi of the family of Bhrigu,

Drought thee those : draughts of Soma juice.

Thou risest to unchallenged glory : when thou hast exhilarated thyself with
the Soma offered by thy worshippers thou performest thy most glorious deeds.

13 Kakshivan : a llishi, son of Usij. See I. 18. 1. Vrichayft, the damsel who
was given to him, is not mentioned elsewhere.

Mend : according to a later legend, Indra became, himself, the daughter
of King Yrisanasva.

14 Among the Pajras ; an ancient priestly family, said to be identical with
the Angirases.

1 5 In this f rag : the hymn appears to have been addressed to Indra for aid
in a coming battle,

1 That Ram : that famous warrior. See I. 51. 1,

Whose hundred nobly-natured ones : see verse 4.

72 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK L

2 Like as a mountain on firm basis, unremoved, be, thousand-

fold protector, waxed in mighty strength,

When Indra, joying in the draughts of Soma juice, forced the
clouds, slaying Yritra stayer of their flow.

3 For he stays e’en the stayers, spread o’er laden cloud, rooted

in light, strengthened in rapture by the wise.

Indra with thought, with skilled activity, I call, most liberal
giver, for he sates him with the juice.

4c Whom those that flow in heaven on sacred grass, his own as-
sistants, nobly-natured, fill full like the sea, —

Beside that Indra when he smote down Yritra stood his helpers,
straight in form, ’mighty, invincible.

5 To him, as in wild joy he fought with him who stayed the rain,

his helpers sped like swift streams down a slope,

When Indra, thunder-armed, made bold by Soma draughts,
broke Vala’s fences down, as Trita burst his way.

6 Splendour encompassed thee, forth shone thy warrior might :

the rain-obstructer lay in mid-air’s lowest deep,

What time, 0 Indra, thou didst cast thy thunder down upon
the jaws of Yritra hard to be restrained.

7 The hymns which magnify thee, Indra, reach to thee even as

water-brooks flow down and fill the lake.

Tvashtar gave yet more force to thine appropriate strength,
and forged thy thunderbolt of overpowering might.

8 When, Indra, thou whose power is linked with thy Bay Steeds

hadst smitten Yritra, causing floods to flow for man,

Thou heldst in thine arms the metal thunderbolt, and settest
in the heaven the Sun for all to see.

3 For he stays e'en the stayers ; the words of the text set hi dvard dvartsfnt

ravrtl ttdhavi, are very difficult. S Ay aria’s paraphrase, adopted by Wilson, is
loose but seems to give the general sense of thf ' ‘ ‘ * T T ho is victorious

over his enemies, who is spread through the . ■■ ■ ■ ’ 3 4 5 6 7 8 The stayer

among the stayers,’ is probably the conqueror who checks the demons who
obstruct the rain, and tidhan, the udder (of the sky) means the rain-giving
clouds, over which Indra, as God of the firmament, is extended as a covering.

4 His own assistants : the inspiring Soma draughts,

5 II is helpers : his constant allies, the Maruts.

4s Trita burst his way : Sayan a refers to a legend which says that Trita fell
into a well, and the Asuras heaped coverings over its mouth ; but he broke
through them with ease. So Indra broke down the defences of the demon
Yala, See Wilson’s note on the passage.

6 The rain-obstructer : the demon Vritra.

7 Tvashtar : the Vulcan or Hephaestus of the Indian Gods.

8 The metal thunderbolt : vajram dyasam, usually translated ‘ iron thunder*
bolt ’ ; but we do not know for certain what metal ay as (Latin aes) was*

HYMN 53.]

THE MIG VEDA.

73

9 In fear they raised the lofty self-resplendent hymn, praise- .
giving and effectual, leading up to heaven,

When Indra’ s helpers fighting for the good of men, the Maruts,
faithful to mankind, joyed in the light.

10 Then Heaven himself, the mighty, at that Dragon’s roar reeled
back in terror when, Indra, thy thunderbolt?

In the wild joy of Soma had struck off with might the head
of Vritra, tyrant of the earth and heaven.

110 Indra, were this earth extended forth tenfold, and men who
dwell therein multiplied day by day,

Still here thy conquering might, Maghavan, would be famed :
it hath waxed vast as heaven in majesty and power.

12 Thou, bold of heart, in thine own native might, for help, upon

the limit of this mid-air and of heaven,

Hast made the earth to be the pattern of thy strength : em-
bracing flood and light thou reachest to the sky.

1 3 Thou art the counterpart of earth, the Master of lofty heaven

with all its mighty Heroes :

Thou hast filled all the region with thy greatness : yea, of a
truth there is none other like thee.

14 Whose amplitude the heaven and earth have not attained,

whose bounds the waters of mid-air have never reached, — #
Not, when in joy he fights the stayer of the rain : thou, and
none else, hast made all things in order due.

1 5 The Maruts sang thy praise in this encounter, and in thee all

the Deities delighted,

What time thou, Indra, with thy spiky weapon, thy deadly
bolt, smotest the face of Vritra.

HYMN LIIL Indra.

We will present fair praise unto the Mighty One, our hymns
to Indra in Vivasvan’s dwelling-place ;

For he hath ne’er found wealth in those who seem to sleep :
those who give wealth to men accept no paltry praise.

9 In fear then raised: that is, Indra’s worshippers in fear of Vritra.

11 If the earth were ten times as large and populous as it is, thy fame
would extend over the whole of it.

14 The waters of mid-air ; the aerial ocean, the firmament.

He fights : said of Indra. We should expect 4 thou fightest ; ’ but this and
similar sudden changes of person are common in the Veda.

1 Vhasvdn's dwelling-place ; the seat of the sacrifice^ the representative
of the celestial Yivasv&n.

74 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK /.

2 Giver of horses, Indra, giver, thou, of kine, giver of barley,

thou art Lord and guard of wealth :

Man’s helper from of old, not disappointing hope, Friend of
our friends, to thee as such we sing this praise.

3 Indra, most splendid, powerful, rich in mighty deeds, this

treasure 'spread around is known to be thine own.

Gather therefrom, 0 Conqueror, and bring to us : fail not the
hope of him who loves and sings to thee.

4 Well pleased with these bright flames and with these Soma

drops, take thou away our poverty with steeds and kine.
With Indra scattering the Dasyu through these drops, freed
from their hate may we obtain abundant food.

5 Let us obtain, 0 Indra, plenteous wealth and food, with strength

exceeding glorious, shining to the sky :

May we obtain the Goddess Providence, the strength of heroes,
special source of cattle, rich in steeds.

6 These our libations, strength-inspiring, Soma draughts, glad-

dened thee in the fight with Vritra, Hero Lord,

What time thou slewest for the singer with trimmed grass ten
thousand Vritras, thou resistless in thy might.

7 Thou goest on from fight to fight intrepidly, destroying castle

after castle here with strength.

Thou, Indra, with thy friend who makes the foe bow down,
slewest from far away the guileful Namuehi.

8 Thou hast struck down in death Karan j a, Parnaya, in Atr

thigva’s very glorious going forth.

Unyielding, when Eijisvan compassed them with siege, thou
hast destroyed the hundred forts of Vangrida.

9 With all-outstripping chariot-wheel, 0 Indra, thou far-famed,

hast overthrown the twice ten Kings of men,

With sixty thousand nine-and-ninety followers, who came in
arms to fight with friendless Susravas.

10 Thou hast protected Susravas with succour, and Turvay&na
with thine aid, 0 Indra.

2 Those who seem to sleep : Indra derives no advantage from those who are
remiss in their religious duties.

6 Ten thousand Vritras : countless demons like Vritra.

7 With thy friend ; the thunderbolt. Or namyd may mean ' with Kami’ as
thy confederate.

Ac imuchi : * non-looser (of the heavenly waters),’ another demon of drought.

8 A aranjju, Parnaya , and Vangrida are Asuras or demons; Atithigva has
been mentioned before, I. 51. 6, and Bijisvan in verse 5 of the same hymn,

9 S us ravds } and Tiiruaydna in the next verse, are said to be kings, . - .

HYMN 54.]

THE R1GYEDA .

75

Thou rnadest Kutsa, Atithigva, Ayu, subject unto this King,
the young, the mighty.

11 May we protected by the Gods hereafter remain thy very pros-
perous friends, 0 Indra.

Thee we extol, enjoying through thy favour life long and joy-
ful and with store of heroes.

HYMN LIV. Indra.

Urge us not, Maghavan, to this distressful fight, for none may
comprehend the limit of thy strength.

Thou with fierce shout hast made the woods and rivers roar :
did not men run in crowds -together in their fear ?

2 Sing hymns of praise to Sakra, Lord of power and might ; laud

thou and magnify Indra who heareth thee,

Who with his daring might, a Bull exceeding strong in strength,
maketh him master of the heaven and earth.

3 Sing forth to lofty Dyaus a strength-bestowing song, the Bold,

whose resolute mind hath independent sway.

High glory hath the Asura, compact of strength, drawn on by
two Bay Steeds : a Bull, a Car is he,

4 The ridges of the lofty heaven thou rnadest shake; thou,

daring, of thyself smotest through Sambara,

When, bold with gladdening juice, thou warredst with thy bolt,
sharp and two-edged, against the banded sorcerers.

10 Kutsa has been mentioned (I. 33. 14.) as a favourite of Indra, but is
here represented, together with Atithigva and Ayu, as chastised by him.

This Kivg ; Susravas, or Turvayana ; these names perhaps denote the same
individual.

1 Urge us not, Maghavan : the verb, urge, which is not in the text, is
supplied by S&yaua. The meaning appears to be, Do not, 0 Indra, force us
into any conflict in which we may have thee for our opponent.

2 ^Sahra ; 1 the Mighty,’ a name of Indra.

3 Sing forth to lofty Dyaus : Heaven. The God who is represented in the
Veda as the consort of Earth and the progenitor of the Gods is called Dyaus
or Dyauslixfitar, names identical in origin with Zeus, or Zeus pater, and
Jupiter, or Diespiter, the appellations given to the supreme God of the Greeks
and Homans. In this place Sayana identifies Dyaus with Indra, who seems,
in later times, to have succeeded to the functions assigned to the former God.
See Muir, Original Sanslcrit Texts, v. 33.

The Asura : the divine One, Indra as the snpreme Dyaus.

4 Sanibara: a demon. See I. 51. 6.

The handed sorcerers : the fiends of the atmosphere who use enchantments
or supernatural powers in their conflicts with Indra.

76 THE HYMNS OP [ BOOK /.

5 When, with, a roar that fills the woods, thou forcest down on

the wind^ head the stores which Sushpa kept confined,

Who shall have power to stay thee firm and eager-souled from
doing still this day what thou of old hast done ?

6 Thou holpest Nary a, Turvasa, and Yadu, and Yayya’s son

Turviti, *Satakratu !

Thou holpest horse and car in final battle ; thou brakest down
the nine-and-ninety castles.

7 A hero-lord is he, King of a mighty folk, who offers free oblations

and promotes the Law,

Who with a bounteous guerdon welcomes hymns of praise : for
him flows down the abundant stream below the sky.

8 His power is matchless, matchless is his wisdom ; chief, through

their work, be some who drink the Soma,

Those, Indra, who increase the lordly power, the firm heroic
strength of thee the Giver.

9 Therefore for thee are these abundant beakers, Indra’s drink,

stone-pressed juices held in ladles.

Quaff them and satisfy therewith thy longing; then fix thy
mind upon bestowing treasure.

10 There darkness stood,- the vault that stayed the waters’ flow :

in Yritra’s hollow side the rain-cloud lay concealed.

But Indra smote the rivers which the obstructer stayed, flood
following after flood, down steep declivities.

1 1 So give us, Indra, bliss-increasing glory ; give us great sway

and strength that conquers people.

Preserve our wealthy patrons, save our princes ; vouchsafe us
wealth and food with noble offspring.

HYMN LY. l ndra .

Though e’en this heaven’s wide space and earth have spread
them out, nor heaven nor earth may be in greatness Indra ’s
match.

Awful and very mighty, causing woe to men, he whets his
thunderbolt for sharpness, as a bull.

5 Sushna : a demon of drought.

6 Thou holpest Narya ; some chief or Rishi so named : or the word may be
an adjective, manly, qualifying Turvasa.

Ttirvasa, Y udu, Turviti have been mentioned before. See I. 36. 18.

1 Asa hull ; as a bull sharpens his horns.

Causing woe to men ; as the punisher of the wicked.

HYMN 55.]

THE MOVED A.

77

2 Like as the watery ocean, so doth he receive the rivers spread

on all sides in their ample width.

He bears him like a bull to drink of Soma juice, and will, as
Warrior from of old, be praised for might,

3 Thou swayest, Indra, all kinds of great manly power, so as to

bend, as 4 5 t were, even that famed mountain down.

Foremost among the Gods is he through hero might, set in the
van, the Strong One, for each ai'duous deed.

4 He only in the wood is praised by worshippers, when he shows

forth to men his own fair Indra-power.

A friendly Bull is he, a Bull to be desired, when Maghavan
auspiciously sends forth his voice,

5 Yet verily the Warrior in his vigorous strength stirreth up

with his might great battles for-mankind ;

And men havo faith in Indra, the resplendent One, what time
he hurleth down his bolt, his dart of death,

6 Though, fain for glory, and with strength increased on earth,

he with great might destroys the dwellings made with art,
He makes the lights of heaven shine forth secure, he bids,
exceeding wise, the floods flow for his worshipper.

7 Drinker of Soma, let thy heart incline to give ; bring thy Bays

hitherward, 0 thou who hearest praise.

Those charioteers of thine, beat skilled to draw the rein, the
rapid sunbeams, Indra, lead thee not astray,

8 Thou bearcst in both hands treasure that never fails; the

famed One in his body holds unvanquished might.

0 Indra, in thy members many powers abide, like wells
surrounded by the ministering priests,

4 A friendly Bull is he: Maghavan, the mighty Indra, is here represented
in his gracious mood, strong yet gentle. But vrl&hd, the male, the hull, the
strong, may also mean the strong Soma ; maghdvd means also the rich in-
stitutor of a sacrifice, a worshipper ; and Alien d means cow as well as voice.
Accordingly Professor Max Muller translates the passage : 1 The strong Soma
is pleasing, the strong Soma is delicious, when the sacrifice!' safely brings the
cow/ in order that the Soma may be mixed with milk. See Vedic Hymns ,
Part I, p. 148.

In the- wood, in the first "line of the verse seems to be an allusion to the
forest life of Br&hmuns.

5 In this verse Indra is represented as a terrible God, and in the following
verse as sometimes sending afflictions but generally blessing men with light
and with kindly rain.

78

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK l

HYMN LVI. Indra.

Foe this man’s full libations held in ladles, he hath roused
him, eager, as a horse to meet the mare.

He stays his golden ear, yoked with Bay Horses, swift, and
drinks the Soma juice which strengthens for great deeds.

2 To him the* guidance-following songs of praise flow full, as those

who seek gain go in company to the Hood.

To him the Lord of power, the holy synod’s might, as to a hill,
with speed, ascend the loving ones.

3 Victorious, great is he ; in manly battle shines, unstained with

dust, his might, as shines a mountain peak ;

Wherewith the iron one, fierce e’en against the strong, in
rapture, fettered wily Snshna fast in bonds.

4 When Strength the Goddess, made more strong for help by

thee, waits upon Indra as the Sun attends the Dawn,

Then he who with his might unflinching kills the gloom stirs
up the dust aloft, with joy and triumphing.

5 When thou with might, upon the framework of the heaven,

didst fix, across, air’s region firmly, unremoved,

In the light- winning war, Indra, in rapturous joy, thou smotest
Vritra dead and broughtest Hoods of rain.

6 Thou with thy might didst grasp the holder-up of heaven, thou

who art mighty also in the seats of earth.

Th~". '?-]'■ I by the juice, hast set the waters free, and

■ ’’ stony fences through and through.

HYMN LVII. Indra.

To him most liberal, lofty Lord of lofty wealth, verily powerful
and strong, I bring my hymn, —

Whose checkless bounty, as of waters down a slope, is spread
abroad for all that live, to give them strength.

1 This man : the institute of the sacrifice. He : Indra.

2 The flood ; ( samudrd) any large gathering of waters not necessarily the
sea or ocean.

The holy synod : an assembly for worship of the Gods.

The loving ones : the songs of loving praise. I find the stanza unintelligible ;
and the version (based chiefly on Grassmann’s) which I offer is merely a tem-
porary makeshift.

3 The iron one : the thunderbolt, made of dyciSf iron or other metal,

4 By thee ; by Soma.

5 In the light-winning war : waged with the demons of the air for rain and
the light which follows the dispersion of the clouds.

6 The bearer-up of heaven ; perhaps the thunderbolt, with which Indra
maintains order.

HYMN 58. j THE R/GVEDA. 79 ,

2 Now all this world, for worship, shall come after thee — the

offerer’s libations like floods to the depth,

When the well-loved one seems to rest upon the hill, the
thunderbolt of Indra, shatterer wrought of gold.

3 To him the terrible, most meet for lofty praise, like bright

Dawn, now bring gifts with reverence in this*' rite,

Whose' being, for renown, yea, Indra-power and light, have
been created, like bay steeds, to move with speed.

4 Thine, Indra, praised by many, excellently rich ! are we who

trusting in thy help draw near to thee.

Lover of praise, none else but thou receives our laud : as earth
loves all her creatures, love thou this our hymn.

5 Great is thy power, 0 Indra, we are thine. Fulfil, O

Maghavan, the wish of this thy worshipper.

After thee lofty heaven hath measured out its strength : to
thee and to thy power this earth hath bowed itself.

6 Thou, who hast thunder for thy weapon, with thy bolt hast

shattered into pieces this broad massive cloud.

Thou hast sent down the obstructed floods that they may
flow : thou hast, thine own for ever, all victorious might.

HYMN LVIII. Agni.

Ne’er waxeth faint the Immortal, Son of Strength, since he,
the Herald, hath become Vivas v^n’s messenger.

On paths most excellent he measured out mid-air : he with
oblation calls to service of the Gods.

2 Never decaying, seizing bis appropriate food, rapidly, eagerly
through the dry wood he spreads.

His back, as be is sprinkled, glistens like a horse : loud hath
he roared and shouted like the heights of heaven.

* 2 When the well-loved one : when the lightning-laden cloucl is resting on the
mountain, men pray to Indra in order that he may discharge his celestial
artillery and bring down the rain.

5 After thee ; the heaven has taken thy might as a pattern for its own
might.

This Hymn and the five following are ascribed to Hodhas, the son of
Gotama.

1 Vivasvdn’s messenger : Vivasvitn is the morning heaven and the personifica-
tion of the sacrificer of the Gods.

i/e measured out mid-air : this act is ascribed to Indra in I. 56. 5.

2 As he is sprinkled ; with clarified butter.

SO THE HYMN 8 OF \ BOOR I.

3 Set high in place o’er all that Vasus, Rudras do, immortal,

Lord of riches, seated as High Priest ;

Hastening like a car to men, to those who live, the God
without delay gives boons to be ‘desired.

4 Urged by the wind he spreads through dry wood as he lists,

armed with his tongues for sickles, with a mighty roar.

Black is thy path, Agni, changeless, with glittering waves !
when like a bull thou rushest eager to the trees.

5 With teeth of flame, wind-driven, through the wood he speeds,

triumphant like a bull among the herd of cows,

With bright strength roaming to the everlasting air : things
fixed, things moving quake before him as he flies.

6 The Bhrigns stablished thee among mankind for men, like as

a treasure, beauteous, easy to invoke ;

Thee, Agni, as a herald and choice-worthy guest, as an aus-
picious Friend to the Celestial Race.

7 Agni, the seven tongues’ deftest Sacrificer, him whom the

priests elect at solemn worship,

The Herald, messenger of all the Yasus, I serve with dainty
food, I ask for riches.

B Grant, Son of Strength, thou rich in friends, a refuge without
a flaw this day to us thy praisers.

O Agni, Son of Strength, with forts of iron preserve thou
from distress the man who lands thee.

A Be thou a refuge, Bright One, to the singer, a shelter, Boun-
teous Lord, to those who worship.

Preserve the singer from distress, 0 Agni, May he, enriched
with prayer, come soon and early.

HYMN LIX. Agni.

The other flres are, verily, thy branches; the ‘Immortals all
rejoice in thee, 0 Agni.

Centre art thou, Vaisv&nara, of the people, sustaining men like
a deep-founded pillar.

3 Rudras, Yasus ; two classes of Gods. See I. 34. 11.

4 The description of Agni in this verse and the next applies, not to the
sacrificial fire, but to the fire that clears the jungle as the new settlers advance
auto the country.

6 r/ie B hr if/us : one of the most eminent priestly families of more ancient times.
Fnend to the Celestial Race : as bearing to the Gods the oblations of their

worshippers.

7 Ay tii, the seven tongues deftest Sacrificer : the seven tongues appear to be
the tongue-like flames which Agni employs to consume the oblabions.

1 Thy branches : merely offshoots of thee.

Vaisvdnara : a name of Agni ; common to, dwelling with, and benefiting all
Arva men. b

HYMN 60.]

THE JUG VEDA.

81

2 The forehead of the sky, earth’s centre, Agni became the mes-

senger of earth and heaven.

Vaisvanara, the Deities produced thee, a God, to be a light
unto the A.rya.

3 As in the Sun firm rays are set for ever, treasures are in Vais-

vanara, in Agni. n

Of all the riches in the hills, the waters, the herbs, among
mankind, thou art the Sovran.

A As the great World-halves, so are their Son’s praises; skilled,
as a man, to act, is he the Herald.

Vaisvanara, celestial, truly mighty, most manly One, hath
many a youthful consort.

5 Even the lofty heaven, 0 Jatavedas Vaisvanara, hath not

attained thy greatness.

Thou art the King of lands where men are settled, thou hast
brought comfort to the Gods in battle.

6 Now will I tell the greatness of the Hero whom Puru’s sons

follow as Vritra’s slayer :

Agni Vaisvanara struck down the Dasyu, clave Sambara
through and shattered down his fences.

7 Vaisvanara, dwelling by his might with all men, far-shining,

holy mid the Bharadviijas,

Is lauded, excellent, with hundred praises by Purunitha, son
of Satavani.

HYMN LX. Agni.

As ’twere some goodly treasure Matarisvan brought, as a gift,
the glorious Priest to Bhrigu,

Banner of sacrifice, the good Protector, child of two births, the
swiftly moving envoy.

4 Vast as heaven and earth, which constitute the world, are the praises
offered to Agni their son.

Skilled, as a man. to act : duties of the heavenly Hotar, invoking priest, or
herald, being regarded as similar to those of the earthly functionary.

Man if a youthful consort : the flames.

6 Piiru’s sons : men in general ; Pdru "being regarded as their progenitor.
Struck do ion the Dasyu : the demon who stayed the rain. The deeds usually

ascribed to Xndra are here attributed to Agni, that is, Agni is identified with
Indra.

7 The BJiaradvdjas : the descendants of the IV' 1 * * ' TV”'t V" 4 ;’"..

Par untt ha : a king of that name, says S&yana ,* . 1 ■ ■ ' - of the

sacrifice.' The name does not occur again, and nothing is known regarding him.

1 Mdtari&van: a divine or semi-divine being, who as the messenger of

Vivasv&n brings clown from heaven Agni who had hitherto been concealed.

The explanation of Matarisvan as V&yu, the God of wind, does not appear to
be justified by Iligveda texts. See Muir, 0, S. Texts , v, 204.

Q

82 . THE HYMNS OF [BOOK L

2 Both Gods and men obey this Euler’s order, Gods who are

worshipped, men who yearn and worship.

As Priest he takes his seat ere break of morning, House-Lord,
adorable with men, Ordain er.

3 May our fair praise, hearb-bom, most recent, reach him whose

tongue, $’en at his birth, is sweet as honey ;

Whom mortal priests, men, with their strong endeavour,
supplied with dainty viands, have created,

4 Good to mankind, the yearning Purifier hath among men been

placed as Priest choice-worthy.

May Agni be our Friend, Lord of the Household, protector of
the riches in the dwelling.

5 As such we Gotamas with hymns extol thee, 0 Agni, as the

guardian Lord of riches,

Becking* thee like a home, the swift prize-winner. May lie,
enriched with prayer, come soon and early.

HYMN LXL Inclra.

Even to him, swift, strong, and high-exalted, I bring my song
of praise as dainty viands.

My thought to him resistless, praise-deserving, prayers offered
most especially to Indra.

2 Praise, like oblation, I present, and utter aloud my song, my

fair hymn to the Victor.

For Indra, who is Lord of old, the singers have decked their
lauds with heart and mind and spirit.

3 To him then with my lips mine adoration, winning heaven’s

light, most excellent, I offer,

To magnify with songs of invocation and with fair hymns the
Lord, most bounteous Giver.

The glorious Priest : Agni. Bhrigu ; tbs chief of the ancient priestly family
who bear that name. Banner of sacrifice: announcer of sacrifice by his
crackling flames. Child of two births ; bom of heaven and earth and again
from the two fire-sticks, or born from the fire-sticks and again when he m
consecrated,

Swiftly moving envoy : messenger between Gods and men. See 1. 1. 1, note.

3 Sweet as honey : with tasting the sweet libations.

Have created : by rapid agitation of the fire-stick.

5 We Gotamas : descendants of Gotama, men of the family to which the
Kishi of the hymn belongs.

Decking thee : trimming thee, to make thee shine as men groom a race-horse
in the morning.

HYMN Q i.] THE RIGVEDA. . 83

4 Even for him I frame a land, as fashions the wright a chariot

for the man who needs it, —

Praises to him who gladly hears our praises, a hymn well-form-
ed, all-moving, to wise Indra.

5 So with , my tongue I deck, to please that Indra, my hymn, as

? twere a horse, through love of glory,

To reverence the Hero, bounteous Giver, famed far and wide,
destroyer of the castles.

6 Even for him hath Tvashtar forged the thunder, most deftly

wrought, celestial, for the battle,

Wherewith he reached the vital parts of Vritra, striking — the
vast, the mighty — with the striker.

7 As soon as, at libations of his mother, great Vishnu had drunk

up the draught, he plundered

The dainty cates, the cooked mess ; but One stronger trans-
‘fixed the wild boar, shooting through the mountain.

8 To him, to Indra, when he slew the Dragon, the Dames, too,

Consorts of the Gods, w$ve praises.

The mighty heaven and earth hath he encompassed : thy great-
ness heaven and earth, combined, exceed not.

9 Yea, of a truth, his "magnitude surpasseth the magnitude of

earth, mid-air, and heaven.

Indra, approved by all men, self-resplendent, waxed in his home,
loud-voiced and strong for battle.

10 Through his own strength Indra with bolt of thunder cut
piece-meal Vritra, drier up of waters.

He let the floods go free, like cows imprisoned, for glory, with
a heart inclined to bounty.

4 For the man who needs it : and orders it to be made. Tdtsindya is a diffi-
cult word. Wilson renders it, after S£yana, (that the drivei*) may, thence,
(obtain) food.

5 The castles : the strongholds of the atmospheric demons of drought, the
castles of rain-imprisoning cloud.

6 The striker ; the thunderbolt or lightning.

7 His mother : Indra’s mother Aditi who gave him Soma to drink as soon
as he was born. See III. 32. 9, 10 ; 48. 2, 3 ; VII. 98. 3. Dainty cates : the
demon’s store of rain. One stronger ; the mightier Indra. The wild boar,:
the fierce demon Vritra. Cf. VIII. 66. 30. The mountain : the massive cloud in
which Vritra was enveloped. For my corrected version of this stanza I am
indebted to Prof. A. A. MacdonelFs article on Mythological Studies in the
Jtigveda, Royal Asiatic Society Journal, January, 18 §5.

8 The Dames, the Consorts of the Gods : according to S&yana these are the
personified G&yatri and other metres of the Veda. The Celestial Waters are
probably intended.

THE HYMNS OF

84

{BOOK I,

1 1 The rivers played, through his impetuous splendour, since with
his holt he compassed them on all sides.

Using his might and favouring him who worshipped, he made
a ford, victorious, for Turviti.

,12 Vast, with thine ample power, with eager movement, against
this Vritra cast thy bolt of thunder.

Bend thou his joints, as of an ox, dissevered, with holt oblique,
that floods of rain may follow.

13 Sing with new lauds his exploits wrought aforetime, the deeds

of him, yea, him who moveth swiftly.

When, hurling forth his weapons in the battle, he with impe-
tuous wrath lays low the foemen.

14 When he, yea, he, comes forth the firm-set mountains, and the

whole heaven and earth, tremble for terror.

May Nodhas, ever praising the protection of that dear Friend,
gain quickly strength heroic.

15 Now unto him of these things hath been given what he who

rules alone o J er much, electetli.

Indra hath helped Etasa, Soma-presser, contending in the race
of steeds with Surya.

16 Thus to thee, Indra, yoker of Bay Coursers, the Gotamas have

brought their prayers to please thee.

Bestow upon them thought, decked with all beauty. May he,
enriched with prayer, come soon and early.

HYMN LXII. Indra.

Like Angiras a gladdening laud we ponder to him who loveth
song, exceeding mighty.

Let us sing glory to the far-famed Hero who must be praised
with fair hymns by the singer.

2 Unto the great bring ye great adoration, a chant with praise
to him exceeding mighty,

Through whom our sires, Angirases, singing praises and know-
ing well the places, found the cattle.

11 Turviti : S&yana says that this JJishi had been immersed in water, and
that Indra brought him to dry land.

14 Nodhas ; the Rishi or seer of the hymn.

15 Praises and sacrifice have been offered to Indra. He himself possesses
everything else. Such praises and sacrifice led Indra to help Etasa, his wor-
shipper, in his rivalry of SCirya and his horses. See II. 19. 5, note.

16 The hymn ends with the refrain that concludes also Hymns I. 58 and 60.

1 Like Angiras, : after the manner of Angiras, one of the first institutors of
religious ceremonies.

2 Found the cattle ; the rain-clouds, or the rays of light which follow the
effusion of rain.

TIIE RIG YE DA .

85

HYMN 62.]

3 When Inclra and the Angirases desired it, Sarama found pro-

vision for her offspring.

Brihaspati cleft the mountain, found the cattle : the heroes
shouted with the kine in triumph.

4 Mid shout, loud shout, and roar, with the Navagvas, seven

singers, hast thou, heavenly, rent the mountain ;

Thou with the speeders, with Dasagvas, Indra, Sakra ! hast
rent with thunder flaming Vala.

5 Praised by Angirases, thou, foe-destroyer, hast, with the Dawn,

Sun, rays, dispelled the darkness.

Thou Indra, hast spread out the earth’s high ridges, and firm-
ly fixed the region under heaven.

6 This is the deed most worthy of all honour, the fairest marvel

of the Wonder-Worker,

That, nigh where heaven bends down, he made four rivers
flow full with waves that carry down sweet water.

7 Unwearied, won with lauding hymns, he parted of old the

ancient Pair, united ever.

In highest sky, like Bhaga, he the doer of marvels set both
Dames and earth and heaven.

8 Still bom afresh, young Dames, each in her manner, unlike

in hue, the Pair in alternation

Round heaven and earth from ancient time have travelled,
Night with her dark limbs, Dawn with limbs of splendour.

3 Saramd found provision for her offspring * Saramft, the hound of Indra

and mother of the two dogs called after their mother S&rameyas who are the
watchdogs of Yama the God of the Dead, is said to have pursued and
recovered the cows stolen by the Panis ; which has been supposed to mean
that Saram& is the Dawn who recovers the rays of the Sun that have been
carried away by night. The legend says that nrr~oed to go in search of

the stolen cattle on condition that the milk of lie !i: be given to her

young ones. Ludwig is of opinion that the word e offspring’ in the text refers
not to Saram&’s young ones, but to the descendants of the Angirases.
Of. I. 72. 8.

Brihaspati cleft the mountain : Brihaspati or Brahamanaspati is the Lord
of prayer. ‘ It is, therefore,’ as Professor Roth observes, { brahma, prayer, with
which the God breaks open the hiding-place of the enemy. Prayer pierces
.through to the object of its desire, and attains it.’

4 The seven singers are probably the Angirases themselves ; the Navagvas

and Basagvas are r 1 ' ■» V" : “" ■»- or their priestly allies. They are called

speeders hastily ’■ ■ ■ . -.sk of the stolen cows. Vala is the fiend

who keeps the cows imprisoned.

6 Nigh where heaven lends down : flowing away to the distant horizon. The
four rivers are not specified by S&yana, who merely says they are the Ganges
and others.

7 The ancient Pair : Heaven and Earth. Bhaga is here the Supreme God*

Both Baines ; Night and Morning.

80 9ES HYMNS OP [BOOK L

9 Rioh in good actions# skilled in operation, the Son with might
maintains his perfect friendship.

Thou in the raw cows, black of hue or ruddy, s forest the ripe
milk glossy white in colour.

10 Their paths, of old connected, rest uninjured ; they with

great misfit preserve the immortal statutes.

For many thousand holy works the Sisters wait on the haughty
Lord like wives and matrons.

11 Thoughts ancient, seeking wealth, with adoration, with newest

lauds have sped to thee, 0 Mighty.

As yearning wives cleave to their yearning husband, so cleave
our hymns to thee, 0 Lord most potent.

12 Strong God, the riches which thy hands have holden from

days of old have perished not nor wasted.

Splendid art thou, 0 Indra, wise, unbending : strengthen us
with thy might, 0 Lord of Power.

13 0 mighty Indra, Gotama’s son Nodhas hath fashioned this

new prayer to thee Eternal,

Sure leader, yoker of the Tawny Coursers. May he, enriched
with prayer, come soon and early.

HYMN LXIII. * Indra.

Thou art the Mighty One ; when born, 0 Indra, with power
thou terrifiedst earth and heaven ;

When, in their fear of thee, all firm-set mountains and mons-
trous creatures shook like dust before thee.

2 When thy two wandering Bays thou dravest hither, thy praiser
laid within thine arms the thunder,

Wherewith, 0 Much-invoked, in will resistless, thou smitest
foemen down and many a castle.

9 The Son with might : S&yana takes sdvasd, ‘ with might, * in the sense of
the genitive sdvasah , and explains : the Son of Might, that is the exceedingly
strong one. But this seems forced. The Son is Indra.

Thou in the raio cows : the cows are called raw, as contrasted with the warm
milk matured or cooked in their udders. The colour of the milk is also con-
trasted with that of the cows, as in the German child’s ditty quoted by
Zimmer : ‘ 0 sage mir, wie geht es zu, gibb weisse Milch die rothe.Kuh/

10 Their paths : the courses of Night and Morning

The Sisters : a frequently occurring appellation of the fingers as employed
in acts of worship. The haughty Lord ; Indra.

2 Thy praiser: the praises of the worshipper strengthen Indra, and urge
him to the performance of glorious exploits,

HYMN 64.]

THE M&VEDA.

87

3 Faithful art thou, these thou deftest, Indra ; thou art the

Kibhus’ Lord, heroic, victor.

Thou, by his side, for young and glorious Kutsa, with steed
and car in battle slewest Sushna.

4 That, as a friend, thou furtheredst, 0 Indra, when, Thunderer,

strong in act, thou crushedst Yritra ; e

When, Hero, thou, great-souled, with easy conquest didst rend
the Dasyus in their distant dwelling.

5 This doest thou, and art not harmed, 0 Indra, e’en in the

anger of the strongest mortal.

Lay thou the race-course open for our horses : as with a club,
slay, Thunder-armed ! our foomen.

6 Hence men invoke thee, Indra, in the tumult of battle, in the

light-bestowing conflict.

This aid of thine, 0 Godlike One, was ever to be implored in
deeds of might in combat.

7 Warring for Pumkutsa thou, 0 Indra, Thunder-armed! brakest

down the seven castles ;

Easily, for Sudfts, like grass didst rend them, and out of need,
King, broughtest gain to Turn.

8 0 Indra, God who movest round about us, feed us with varied

food plenteous as water —

Food wherewithal, 0 Hero, thou bestowest vigour itself to
flow to us for ever.

9 Prayers have been made by Gotamas, 0 Indra, addressed to

thee, with laud for thy Bay Horses.

Bring us in noble shape abundant riches. May he, enriched
with prayer, come soon and early.

HYMN LXIV*. Maruts.

Being for the manly host, wise and majestical, 0 Nodhas, for
the Maruts bring thou a pure gift.

I deck my songs as one deft-handed, wise in mind prepares
the water that hath power in solemn rites.

3 The RlbhuA Lord; Chief over the three semhdivine beings who by their
good works raised themselves to immortality and godhead. See I. 20.-

K utsa; has been nfentioned before as protected by Indra. See 1. 33. 14; 51. 6.

4 Dasyits ; hostile demons, or perhaps savage tribes.

7 Pur it kutsa : a favourite of Indra and of the Asvins. See I. 112. 7 ;
174. 2 ; IV. 42. 8, note. Sudds (See I. 47. 6) and Pdru are kings or chiefs of
clans.

8 Who movest round about, us : pdrijman, circumambient, is an epithet
applied to the Sun also, and to the chariot of the Asvins.

9 With laud for thy Bay Horses : this is clearly the sense of the words as
they stand. S&yana explains 'with reverence to thee connected with thy
bay horses.’

1 0 Nodhas : the Rishi or seer of the hymn addresses this line to himself,

ss

Till! HYMNS OF

[BOOK L

2 They spring to birth, the lofty Ones, the Bulls of Heaven,

divine, the youths of Kuclra, free from spot and stain ;

The purifiers, shining brightly even as suns, awful of form
like giants, scattering rain-drops down.

3 Young Rudras, demon-slayers, never growing old, they have

waxed, even as mountains, irresistible.

They make all beings tremble with their mighty strength,
even the very strongest, both of earth and heaven.

4 With glittering ornaments they deck them forth for show ; for

beauty on their breasts they bind their chains of gold.

The lances on their shoulders pound to pieces ; they were
bom together, of themselves, the Men of Heaven.

5 Loud roarers, giving strength, devourers of the foe, they make

the winds, they make the lightnings with their powers.

The restless shakers drain the udders of the sky, and ever
wandering round fill the earth full with milk.

6 The bounteous Maruts with the fatness-dropping milk fill full

the waters which avail in solemn rites.

They lead, as ’twere, the Strong Horse forth, that it may rain :
they milk the thundering, the never-failing spring.

7 Mighty, with wondrous power and marvellously bright, self-

strong like mountains, ye glide swiftly on your way.

Like the wild elephants ye eat the forests up when ye assume
your strength among the bright red flames.

8 Exceeding wise they roar like lions mightily, they, all-posses-

sing, are beauteous as antelopes ;

Stirring the darkness with lances and spotted deer, combined
as priests, with serpents’ fury through their might.

9 Heroes who march in companies, befriending man, with ser-

pents’ ire through strength, ye greet the earth and heaven.
Upon the seats, 0 Maruts, of your chariots, upon the cars
stands lightning visible as light.

2 The Bulls of Heaven : or of Dyu or Dyaus.

$ Young Budras : the Maruts, or Storm- Gods, are the sons of Ruclra.

Demon-slayers ; slayers of the clouds that give no rain.

4 The lances, as well as their other bright ornaments, are the lightning-
flashes.

5 The udders of the shy j the full clouds. The milh , is the sweet fertiliz-
ing rain,

6 The Strong Horse : is the rain cloud, which in the same line is called a
spring or well.

8 ComMn ed as priests ; the music of wind and storm being regarded as the
Maruts’ song of praise. But the meaning of the words thus rendered is not
clear. S&yana, Benfey, and Max Miiller give other interpretations.

IIYMN 64.] THE RIG VEDA. S9

10 Lords of all riches, dwelling in the home of wealth, endowed

with mighty vigour, singers loud of voice,

Heroes, of powers infinite, armed with strong men’s rings, the
archers, they have laid the arrow on their arms.

1 1 They who with golden fellies make the rain increase drive for-

ward the big clouds like wanderers on the way.

Self-moving, brisk, unwearied, they o’erthrow the firm ; the
Maruts with bright lances make all things to reel.

12 The progeny of Rudra we invoke with prayer, the brisk, the

bright, the worshipful, the active Ones.

To the strong band of Maruts cleave for happiness, the chasers
of the sky, impetuous, vigorous.

13 Maruts, the man whom ye have guarded with your help, he

verily in strength surpasseth all mankind.

Spoil with his steeds he gaineth, treasure with his men ; he
winneth honourable strength and prosperetli.

14 0 Maruts, to the worshippers give glorious strength invincible

in battle, brilliant, bringing wealth,

Pi*aise worthy, known to all men. May we foster well, during
a hundred winters, son and progeny.

15 Will ye then, 0 ye Maruts, grant us riches, durable, rich in

men, defying onslaught,

A hundred, thousandfold, ever increasing'? May he, enriched
with prayer, come soon and early.

10 Armed icith strong men's rings ; the meaning of vriskakhddayah is un-
certain ; but the hhddi seems to have been a ring worn on the arm and foot.
It may also have been used as a weapon, as the sharp-edged quoits are ugecl
by the Sikhs. Vrishan as Professor Max Muller observes, ‘ conveys the mean-
ing of strong, though possibly with the implied idea of rain-producing, ferti-
lizing. 5

12 The worshipful ; the meaning of wmnam is uncertain. Wilson, after
Sftyana, translates it by ‘ water-shedding, 5 vana being said to mean water.
Ludwig suggests ‘ dwelling - in the woods, 5 instead of c fighting 5 which he gives
in his translation. ‘ Worshipful 5 is Professor Max Muller’s suggestion, and I
adopt it for the present.

15 Enriched with prayer : either, generally, invoked by many worshippers,
or rich through the hymn just recited. This last hemistich is the usual re-
frain of the hymns ascribed to Nodhas.

I have generally followed Professor Max Muller in his translation of this
hymn. See his Vedic Hymns, Part I.

90

[BOOK I.

THE HYMNS OF

HYMN LXV. Agni.

One-minded, wise, they tracked thee like a thief lurking in
dark cave with a stolen cow ;

Thee claiming worship, bearing it to Gods ; there nigh to thee
sate all ^jie Holy Ones*

2 The Gods approached the ways of holy Law ; there was a

gathering vast as heaven itself,

The waters feed with praise the growing Babe, bom nobly in
the womb, the seat of Law.

3 Like grateful food, like some wide dwelling-place, like a fruit-

bearing hill, a wholesome stream ;

Like a steed urged to run in swift career, rushing like Sindhu,
who may check his course 1

4 Kin as a brother to his sister floods, he eats the woods as a

King eats the rich.

When through the forest, urged by wind, he spreads, verily
Agni shears the hair of earth.

5 Like a swan- sitting in the floods he pants ; wisest in mind mid

men he wakes at mom.

A Sage like Soma, sprung from Law, he grew like some young
creature, mighty, shining far.

HYMN LXYI. Agni.

Like the Sun’s glance, like wealth of varied sort, like breath
which is the life, like one’s own son,

Like a swift bird, a cow who yields her milk, pure and reful-
gent to the wood he speeds.

Sjj* aricl the eight following hymns are ascribed to the Rishi ftrftsara, son
of ?*kti the son of Vasishtha, They are generally difficult, and not seldom
unintelligible.

1 They t niched thee : the Gods followed Agni who had lied away, carrying
with him the sacrifice as a thief carries off a cow. The dark cave is the depth
of the waters in which Agni hid himself.

% The seat of Eaw ; the place of sacrifice, the law ordained for ever.

8 Sindhu : the Indus, or any great river.

4 As a King eats the rick; supports his state by levying contributions from
the wealthy.

The hair of earth : grass and shrubs, which forest-fires destroy.

5 He pants : after his rapid flight to the waters in which lie hid himself.
He wakes at morn : at the time of the early morning sacrifice.

A Sarje like Soma : like the deified Soma. ‘ As Soma creates or causes use-

fromthem ’ Uleir uutritive

the mar ed a.

91

HYMN 67.]

2 He offers safety like a pleasant home, like ripened com, the

Conqueror of men.

Like a Seer lauding, famed among the folk ; like a steed
friendly he vouchsafes us power.

3 With dams insatiate, like eternal might ; caring for each one

like a dame at home ; f

Bright when he shines forth, whitish mid the folk, like a car,
gold-decked, thundering to the fight.

4 He strikes with terror like a dart shot forth, e’en like an

archer’s arrow tipped with flame ;

Master of present and of future life, the maidens’ lover and
the matrons’ Lord.

5 To him lead all your ways : may we attain the kindled God

as cows their home at eve.

He drives the flames below as floods their swell : the rays rise
up to the fair place of heaven.

HYMN LXVIL Agni.

Victorious in the wood, Friend among men, ^ver he claims
obedience as a King.

Gracious like peace, blessing like mental power, Priest was he,
offering-bearer, full of thought.

2 He, bearing in his hand all manly might, crouched in the

cavern, struck the Gods with feai\

Men filled with understanding find him there, when they have
sung prayers formed within their heart.

3 He, like the Unborn, holds the broad earth up, and with effec-

tive utterance fixed the sky.

0 Agni, guard the spots which cattle love : thou, life of all,
hast^gone from lair to lair.

2 Like a steed : like a war-horse who helps to win spoil in battle,

4 The maidens’ lover : the offering to Agni being an essential part of the
marriage-service.

The matrons’ Lord : children being especially the gift of Agni, in whose
worship the wife of the sacrificer bears an important part. I have not at*
tempted to imitate the rhythm of the original, and have contented myself
with preserving the same number of syllables in each line.

1 Victorious in the wood ; subduing the fuel and burning it to ashes,

2 Crouched in the cavern : concealed in the dark depth of the waters. See
I. 65. 1.

3 The Unborn : the Sun ; regarded as the Supreme God.

The spots which cattle love : as thou knowest by experience how pleasant it
is to find a safe place of refuge, do not burn up the places where the cattle
find refuge and food.

92 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1.

4 Whoso hath known him dwelling in his lair, and hath approach-

ed the stream of holy Law, —

They who release him, paying sacred rites, — truly to such
doth he announce great wealth.

5 He who grows mightily in herbs, within each fruitful mother

and eaelf babe she bears,

Wise, life of all men, in the waters 1 * 3 4 5 home, — for him have sages
built as ’twere a seat.

HYMN LXVIII. Agni.

Commingling, restless, he ascends the sky, unveiling nights
and all that stands or moves,

As he the sole God is preeminent in greatness among all these
other Gods.

2 All men are joyful in thy power, 0 God, that living from the

dry wood thou art born.

All truly share thy Godhead while they keep, in their accus-
tomed ways, eternal Law,

3 Strong is tjie thought of Law, the Law’s behest; all works

have they performed ; he quickens all.

Whoso will bring oblation, gifts to thee, to him, bethinking
thee, vouchsafe thou wealth.

4 Seated as Priest with Manu’s progeny, of all these treasures

he alone is Lord.

Men yearn for children to prolong their line, and are not
disappointed in their hope.

5 Eagerly they who hear his word fulfil his wish as sons obey

their sire’s behest.

He, rich in food, unbars his wealth like doors : he, the House-
Friend, hath decked heaven’s vault with stars.

4 The stream of holy Law : or as Sftyana explains, the supporter of the
truth or of sacrifice, that is, Agni.

They who release him : free him, by attrition, from the fire-sticks.

1 Commingling : Agni, devouring and fusing together with his flames

and smoke the elements of the oblations which he bears to the Gods.

3 I can make nothing of the first hemistich. Wilson, after Sfiyana,
paraphrases : ‘Praises are addressed to him who has repaired (to the solem-
nity) ; oblations are offered to him who has gone (to the sacrifice) ; in him is
all sustenance ; (and to him) have all (devout persons) performed (the
customary) rites.'’

4 MantCs progeny ; all Aryan men.

Men yearn for children : men have children at their desire, as the reward
of their faithful worship of Agni.

//e, the Home-Friend: he, Agni, who is the friend and guardian of every
house in his character of the household fire, as the Sun, the Creator, the
Supreme God, made the heaven and adorned it with stars.

IIYMN 70.] THU RIGVEDA. 93

HYMN LXIX. A gm\

Bright, splendid, like Dawn’s lover, he hath filled the two
joined worlds as with the light of heaven.

When born, with might thou hast encompassed them : Father
of Gods, and yet their Son wast thou.

2 Agni, the Sage, the humble, who discerns like tlie cow’s udder,

the sweet taste of food,

Like a bliss-giver to be drawn to men, sits gracious in the
middle of the house.

3 Born in the dwelling like a lovely son, pleased, like a strong

steed, he bears on the folk.

What time the men and I, with heroes, call, may Agni then
gain all through Godlike power.

4 None breaks these holy laws of thine when thou hast granted

audience to these chieftains here.

This is thy boast, thou smotest with thy peers, and joined with
heroes dravest off disgrace.

5 Like the Dawn’s lover, spreading light, well-known as hued

like morn, may he remember me.

They, bearing of themselves, unbar the doors : they all ascend
to the fair place of heaven.

HYMN LXX. Agni.

May we, the pious, win much food by prayer, may Agni with
fair light pervade each act, —

He the observer of the heavenly laws of Gods, and of the race
of mortal man.

1 Like Lawn's lover ; both the Sun and Agni are called the lovers of
Ushas or Dawn. Agni is so called from his making his appearance as
sacrificial fire at the earliest break of day.

The two joined worlds: earth and heaven coupled into a single dual
conception.

2 Like the cow's udder: Agni discerns and selects the sweet savours of
oblations in the same manner as the udder of a cow selects and assimilates
the sweet juices of grass and herbs for the production of milk.

3 The meaning of the second hemistich is not clear. Wilson, after S&yana,
renders it : e Whatever (divine) beings 1 may, along with other men, invoke
(to the ceremony) thou, Agni, assumest all (their) celestial natures/

5 They , beariny of themselves : either, his rays bearing up the oblation of
their own accord, or the steeds who freely draw the chariot of Dawn.

1 Pervade each act : be present and regulate all our acts of worship ; or the
meaning may be c attain each gift,’ receive every oblation that we offer.

)4 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK I,

2 He who is germ of waters, germ of woods, germ of ail things

that move not and that- move, —

To him even in the rook and in the house : Immortal One, he
cares for all mankind.

3 Agni is Lord of riches for the man who serves him readily

with sacred songs.

Protect these beings thou with careful thought, knowing the
races both of Gods and men.

4 Whom many dawns and nights, unlike, make strong, whom,

born in Law, all things that move and stand, —

He hath been won, Herald who sits in light, making effectual
all our holy works.

5 Thou settest value on our cows and woods : all shall bring

tribute to us, to the light.

Men have served thee in many and sundry spots, parting, as
’twere, an aged father’s wealth.

6 Like a brave archer, like one skilled and bold, a fierce avenger,

so he shines in fight.

HXMN LXXI. Agni.

Loving the loving One, as wives their husband, the sisters of
one home have urged him forward,

Bright-coloured, even as the cows love morning, dark, breaking
forth to view, and redly beaming.

2 Our sires with lauds burst e’en the firm-set fortress, yea, the

Angirases, with roar, the mountain.

They made for us a way to reach high heaven, they found
' us day, light, day’s sign, beams of morning

3 They stablished order, made his service fruitful ; then parting

them among the longing faithful,

Not thirsting after aught, they come, most active, while with
sweet food the race of Gods they strengthen.

2 To him even in the rock : I can make nothing out of this. Wilson, after
S&yania, paraphrases ; ‘(They offer oblations) on the mountain, or in the
mansion, to that Agni ; ’ but this cannot be the meaning. Ludwig suggests
an alteration of the text, so that the meaning would be, ‘ even within the
stone is his dwelling/

5 ‘Agni, confer excellence upon our valued cattle ; and may all men bring
us acceptable tribute.’ — Wilson. ^

1 The loving One,; Agni. The sisters of one home; the fingers that serve

him by kindling the fire, etc. The cows ; the clouds brightened by the
approach of Dawn. J

2 The priestly Angirases, the earliest institutors of religious worship, caused

by prayer and praise the mountain-like cloud, that held the rain imprisoned
to be opened. . * ,

3 His service ; the worship of Agni.

Tins RIG VISTA.

HYMN 71 .J

9 #

4 Since M&tarisvan, far-diffused, hath stirred him, and he in

every house grown bright and noble.

He, Bliyigudike, hath gone as his companion, as on commission
to a greater Sovran.

5 When man poured juice to Heaven, the mighty Father, he

knew and freed himself from close embra cement
The archer boldly shot at him his arrow, and the God threw
his splendour on his Daughter.

6 Whoso hath flames for thee within his dwelling, or brings the

worship which thou Invest daily,

Do thou of double might increase his substance r nmy he whom
thou inoitest meet with riches.

7 All sacrificial viands wait on Agni as the Seven mighty Rivers

seek the ocean.

Hot by our brethren was our food discovered : And with the
Gods care for us, thou who knowest.

8 When light hath filled the Lord of men for increase, straight

from the heaven descends the limpid moisture.

Agni hath brought to light and tilled with spirit the youthful
host blafheless and well providing. .

9 He who like thought goes swiftly on Ins journey, the Sun,

alone is ever Lord of riches.

The Kings with fair hands, Vantna and Mitra, protect the
precious nectar in our cattle.

10 0 Agni, break not our ancestral friendship, Sage as thou art,
endowed with deepest knowledge.

Old age, like gathering cloud, impairs the body ; before that
evil be come nigh protect me.

4 M&tarUvan ; the divine or ^semi-divine being who brought Agni ta
0 Bhrigu.

5 This verse is very obscure. The meaning of the first hemistich seems to
be that when oblations were offered to Byaus or Heaven Agni shone forth
freed from encompassing night. Who the archer is, whether Mtitarisvan or
Agni, is uncertain, nor is it clear at whom the arrow was shot. The God
may b q Byaus, and his Daughter may be Tishas or Bawn,

7 The Seven mighty Rivers ; see I, 32. 12.

Not by our brethren ; we do not look to our kinsmen for food, but depend
upon Agni and the other Gods.

8 The Lord of men : according to S&yana, the sacrifieer. Perhaps Indra is
meant, who comes attended by the youthful host of Maruts.

96

[BOOK L

THE HYMNS OF

HYMN LXXII. Agni.

Though holding many gifts for men, he humbleth the higher
powers of each wise ordainer.

Agni is now the treasure-lord of treasures, for ever granting
all immortal bounties.

2 The Gods infallible all searching found not him, the dear Babe

who still is round about us.

Worn weary, following his track, devoted, they reached the
lovely highest home of Agni.

3 Because with holy oil the pure Ones, Agni, served thee the

very pure three autumn seasons,

Therefore they won them holy names for worship, and nobly
born they dignified their bodies.

4 Making them known to spacious earth and heaven, the holy

Ones revealed the powers of Rudra.

The mortal band, discerning in the distance, found Agni
standing in the loftiest station.

Nigh they approached, one-minded, with their spouses, kneel-
ing to him adorable paid worship.

Friend finding in his own friend’s eye protection, they made
their own the bodies which they chastened. *

1 Wilson, after S&yana, translates : ‘ Agni appropriates the prayers ad-

dressed to the eternal creator.’ The meaning appears to be that although
Agni bestows many good gifts on men, his flames are at times terribly des-
tructive.

2 The flight of Agni and his pursuit by the Gods have been mentioned
before (I. 65, 1). The idea here is, as Ludwig observes, that the Gods did not
really find Agni — visible thou he be in his earthly form — until they attained
to the true philosophical knowledge of the Deity as he is.

3 The pure Ones: ‘The text has only suchayah , the pure: the Scholiast
supplies Maruts , for whom, it is said, seven platters are placed at the Agni-
chayana ceremony : and they are severally invoked by the appellations Idris,
Any&dris, T&dris, Pratidris, Mitak, Sanimitah, and others. In consequence of
this participation, with Agni, of sacrificial offerings, they exchanged their
perishable, for immortal, bodies, and obtained heaven. The Maruts are, there-
fore, like the Ttibhus, deified mortals.’ Wilson.

Three autumn seasons : during three years. Ludwig observes that the period
of three years in connexion with religious vows or ceremonies is mentioned
elsewhere also.

4 The powers of Rudra : Itudra here is a name of Agni.

The mortal band : the Maruts, so called as not having been originally im-
mortal

IIYMN 73.]

THE RIG VEDA,

97

6 Soon as the holy beings had discovered the thrice-seven mystic

things contained within thee,

With, -these, one-minded, they preserve the Amrit : guard thou
the life of all their plants and -cattle.

7 Thou, Agni, luiower of men’s works, hast sent us good food in

constant course for our subsistence : *

Thou deeply skilled in paths of Gods becamest an envoy never
wearied, offering-bearer.

8 Knowing the Law, the seven strong floods from heaven, full of

good thought, discerned the doors of riches.

Saram& found the cattle's firm-built prison, whereby the race of
man is still supported.

D They who approached all noble operations making a path that
leads to life immortal,

To be the Bird’s support, the spacious mother, Aditi, and her
great Sons stood in power.

10 When Gods immortal made both eyes of heaven, they gave to
him the gift of beauteous glory.

•Now they flow forth like rivers set in motion : they knew the
Bed Steeds coming down, 0 Agni.

HYMN LXXIII. Agni.

He who gives food, like patrimonial riches, and guides aright
like some wise man’s instruction,

Loved like a guest who lies in pleasant lodging, — may he, as
Priest, prosper his servant’s dwelling.

2 He who like Savitar the God, true-minded, protecteth with his
power all acts of vigour,

Truthful, like splendour, glorified by many, like breath joy-giv-
ing, — all must strive to win him.

B He who on earth dwells like a king surrounded by faithful
fripnds, like a God all-sustaining,

Like heroes who preside, who sit in safety : like as a blameless
dame dear to her husband.

6 The thrice-seven mystic things : the .secret or mysterious rites by which
heaven is to be obtained; offerings of various kinds, food, clarified butter,
Soma juice etc., arranged in three classes of seven. All these offerings require
Are, and so are contained in Agni.

They preserve the Amrit : the nectar or drink of the Gods; by the perfor-
mance of these sacrifices they secure the fall of rain in due season.

8 Saramd found the cattle' s fivni'buUt prison : see I. 62. 3.

9 To be the Bird's support : the Bird is the Sun. Aditi is infinite Nature,
and her great Sons are the Adityas.

10 Both eyes of heaven ; the Sun and Moon. The Red Steeds ; the Sun's rays,
7

98 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK I.

4 Thee, such, in settlements secure, 0 Agni, our men serve ever

kindled in each dwelling.

On him have they laid splendour in abundance : dear to all
men, bearer be he of riches.

5 May thy rich worshippers win food, 0 Agni, and princes gain

long life who bring oblation.

May we get booty from our foe injbattle, presenting to the
Gods their share for glory.

0 The cows of holy law, sent us by Heaven, have swelled with
laden udders, loudly lowing ;

Soliciting his favour, from a distance the rivers to the rock
have flowed together.

7 Agni, with thee, soliciting thy favour, the holy Ones have

gained glory in heaven.

They made the Night and Dawn of different colours, and set
the black and purple hues together.

8 May we and those who worship he the mortals whom thou,

0 Agni, leadest on to riches.

Thou hast Ailed earth and heaven and air’s mid-region, and
folio west the whole world like a shadow.

9 Aided by thee, 0 Agni, may we conquer steeds with steeds,

men with men, heroes with heroes,

Lords of the wealth transmitted by our fathers ; and may our
princes live a hundred winters.

10 May these our hymns of praise, Agni, Ordainer, be pleasant
to thee in thy heart and spirit.

May we have power to hold thy steeds of riches, laying on
thee the God-sent gift of glory.

G The cows of holy law : the cows whose milk is used in the various sacrifices
offered in accordance with the eternal ordinance.

The rivers : the water used in sacrifice which flows or is brought to the rock
or stone with which the Soma juice is expressed.

7 Through Agni’s favour the holy Ones , the immortal Gods, receive the
oblations which strengthen them for the performance of the great deeds which
bring them glory.

8 Like a shadow: averting distress, as the shade of ^ great rock or tree
wards off tire oppressive heat of the sun.

9 May our princes : may the wealthy men who institute our sacrifices live
to the greatest age usually allotted to man.

10 To hold thy steeds of riches : to retain by us thy horses which bring
wealth, that is, continue to receive and keep the riches which thou sendest.

HYMN 75.]

TEE R1GYEVA.

09

HYMN LXXIY. Agni.

As forth to sacrifice we go, a hymn to Agni let us say,

Who hears us even when afar ;

2 Who, from of old, in carnage, when the people gathered, hath

preserved r

His household for the worshipper.

3 And let men say, Agni is born, e’en he who slayeth Vritra, he
Who winneth wealth in every fight.

4 Him in whose house an envoy thou lovest to taste his offered

gifts,

And strengthenest his sacrifice,

5 Him, Angiras, thou Son of Strength, all men call happy in liis

God,

His offer mgs, and his sacred grass.

6 Hitherward shalt thou bring these Gods to our laudation and

to taste

These offered gifts, fair-shining One.

7 Vlien, Agni, on thine embassage thou goest not a sound is

heard of steed or straining of thy car,

8 Aided by thee uninjured, strong, one after other, goes he forth :
Agni, the offerer forward steps.

9 And splendid strength, heroic, high, Agni, thou grantest from

the Gods,

Thou God, to him who offers gifts.

HYMN LXXV. Agni.

Accept our loudest-sounding hymn, food most delightful to
the Gods,

Pouring our offerings in thy mouth.

2 Now, Agni, will wo say to tliee, 0 wisest and best Angiras,

Our precious, much-availing prayer.

3 Who, Agni, is thy kin, of men ? who is thy worthy worshipper?

On whom dependent ? who art thou ?

4 The kinsman, Agni, of mankind, their well-beloved Friend art

thou,

A Friend whom friends may supplicate.

5 Bring to us Mitra, Varuna, bring the Gods to mighty sacrifice.
Bring them, 0 Agni, to thine home.

This Hymn and the nineteen following are ascribed to the Rislii Gotama,
eon of Rahugana.

n Who slayeth Yritra : Agni may here be identified with Indra.

5 Angiras ; a name of Agni. See I. 1. 6. •

100

TUB HYMNS OB

[BOOK L

HYMN LXXYL A gni.

How may the mind draw nigh to please thee, Agni % "What
hymn of praise shall bring ns greatest blessing %

Or who hath gained thy power by sacrifices h or with what
mind shaM we bring thee oblations ?

2 Come hither, Agni ; sit thee down as Hotar ; be thou w T ho

never wast deceived our leader.

May Heaven and Earth, the all-pervading, love thee : worship
the Gods to win for us their favour.

3 Burn thou up all the E&kshasas, 0 Agni ; ward thou off curses

from our sacrifices.

Bring hither with his Bays the Lord of Soma : here is glad
welcome for the Bounteous Giver.

4 Thou Priest with lip and voice that bring us children hast been

invoked. Here with the Gods be seated.

Thine is the task of Cleanser and Presenter : waken us, Wealth-
bestower and Producer.

5 As with oblations of the priestly Manus thou worshippedst the

Gods, a Sage with sages,

So now, 0 truthfullest Invoker, Agni, worship this day with
joy-bestowing ladle.

HYMN LXXVIL Agni.

How shall we pay oblation' unto Agni ? What hymn, God-loved,
is said to him refulgent *1

Who, deathless, true to Law, mid men a herald, bringeth the
Gods as best of sacrificers %

2 Bring him with reverence hither, most propitious in sacrifices,
true to Law, the herald ;

For Agni, when he seeks the Gods for mortals, knows them full
well and worships them in spirit.

3 The Lnrcl of Sonia : Indra.

4 Agni, the priest or bearer of oblations, has been invoked -with a hymn
■\vliieh will bring the blessing of children.

The Cleanser (Potar) and the Presenter or Invoker (Hotar) are two of the
Sixteen officiating priests.

5 il/anas .* another form of the word Manu, Man, the great forefather of
men.

WUh joy-bestowing ladle : with the sacrificial ladle used in pouring the holy
oil or clarified butter into the fire, an offering especially pleasing to the Gods,

THE RlGVEDA.

101

HtMtf 79.3

3 For he is mental power, a man, and perfect ; he is the bringcr,

friend-like, of the wondrous.

The pious Aryan tribes at sacrifices address them first to him
who doeth marvels.

4 May Agni, foe-destroyer, manliest Hero, accept with love our

hymns and our devotion. ©

So may the liberal lords whose strength is strongest, urged
by their riches, stir our thoughts with vigour.

5 Thus Agni Jatavedas, true to Order, hath by the priestly Go-

tamas been lauded.

May he augment in them splendour and vigour : observant,
as he lists, he gathers increase.

HYMN LXXVIII. Agni.

O JAtavkdas, keen and swift, we Gotamas with sacred song
exalt thee for thy glories’ sake.

2 Thee, as thou art, desiring wealth Gotama worships with his

song :

We laud thee for thy glories’ sake.

3 As such, like Angiras we call on thee best winner of the spoil :
We laud the for thy glories’ sake.

4 Thee, best of Vritra-slayers, thee who shakest off our Dasyu

foes;

We laud thee for thy glories’ sake.

5 A pleasant song to Agni we, sons of Rahugaua, have sung :

We laud thee for thy glories’ sake.

HYMN LXXIX. Agni.

He in mid-air’s expanse hath golden tresses ; a raging serpent,
like the rushing tempest :

Purely refulgent, knowing well the morning; like honourable
dames, true, active workers.

3 The wondrous : extraordinary wealth.

4 Liberal lords : wealthy patrons whose gifts will encourage and strengthen
the devotions of the priests :

3 Like Angiras : after the manner of Angiras, one of the earliest per-
formers of sacrifice.

4 Test of Vritra-slayers : here again Agni is identified with Indra.

1 Agni is here spoken of in his three forms, the golden-haired Sun, the ser-
pentine lightning, and the household fire for religious purjwses and ordinary
use. He is said to know the morning as being re-kindled for sacrifice at day-
break, and is compared to an active matron op account of Ms employment fo
domestic purposes.

m the hymns op [book t

2 Thy well- winged flashes strengthen in their manner, when the

black Bull hath bellowed round about us.

With drops that bless and seem to smile he cometh : the wa-
ters fall, the clouds utter their thunder.

3 When he comes streaming with the milk of worship, conduct-

ing by directest paths of Order,

Aryaman, Mitra, Yaruna, Parijman fill the hide full where lies
the nether press-stone.

4 0 Agni, thou who art the Lord of wealth in kine, thou Son

of Strength,

Vouchsafe to us, 0 Jatavedas, high renown.

5 He, Agui, kindled, good and wise, must be exalted in our song :
Shine, thou of many forms, shine radiantly on us.

6 0 Agni, shining of thyself by night and when the morning

breaks,

Burn, thou whose teeth are sharp, against the Rakshasas.

7 Adorable in all our rites, favour us, Agni, with thine aid,
When the groat hymn is chanted forth.

8 Bring to us ever-conquering wealth, wealth, Agni, worthy of

our choice,

In all our frays invincible.

9 Give us, 0 Agni, through thy grace wealth that supporteth all

our life,

Thy favour so that we may live.

10 0 Gotama, desiring bliss present thy songs composed with

care

To Agni of the pointed dames.

1 1 May the man fall, 0 Agni, who near or afar assaileth us :

Do thou increase and prosper us.

12 Keen and swift Agni, thousand-eyed, chaseth the Itakshasas

afar :

He singeth, herald meet for lauds.

2 The black Ball hath bellowed; the dark rain- clouds have thundered.

3 When he comes to the Gods with the milk of worship, the rich sacrificial
offering, the Gods send copious rain. Parijman , the "Wanderer, the circum-
ambient, is in this place the stormy Wind, The nether press-stone (which rests
upon an ox-hide) is here the earth, the heaven being the upper stone. Wilson,
following S&yana, translates ‘pierce through the (investing) membrane into
the womb of the cloud,’

ETMN 80.] TEE RIGVEDA. 103

HYMN LXXX. Indra.

Thus in the Soma, in wild joy the Brahman hath exalted
thee :

Thou, mightiest, thunder-armed, hast driven by force the
Dragon from the earth, lauding thine own imperial sway.

2 The mighty flowing Soma-draught, brought by the Hawk, hath

gladdened thee,

That -in thy strength, 0 Thunderer, thou hast struck down
Vritra from the floods, lauding thine own imperial sway.

3 Go forward, meet the foe, be bold ; thy bolt of thunder is not

checked.

Manliness, Indra, is thy might : slay Vritra, make the waters
thine, lauding thine own imperial sway.

4 Thou smotest Vritra from the earth, smotest him, Indra, from

the sky.

Let these life-fostering waters flow attended by the Marut host,
lauding thine own imperial sway.

5 The wrathful Indra with his bolt of thunder rushing on the

foe,

Smote fierce on trembling Vritra’s back, and loosed the waters
free to run, lauding his own imperial sway.

6 With hundred-jointed thunderbolt Indra hath struck him on

the back,

And, while rejoicing in the juice, seeketh prosperity for friends,
lauding his own imperial sway.

7 Indra, unconquered might is thine, Thunderer, Caster of the

Stone ;

For thou with thy surpassing power smotest to death the guile-
ful beast, lauding thine own imperial sway.

8 Far over ninety spacious floods thy thunderbolts were cast

abroad :

Great, Indra, is thy hero might, and strength is seated in
thine arms, lauding thine own imperial sway.

Laud him a thousand all at once, shout twenty forth the
hymn of praise.

Hundreds have sung aloud to him, to Indra hath the prayer
been raised, lauding his own imperial sway.

1 The Dragon : the great serpent Aki, one of the demons of drought.

2 Brought hij the Hawk : the Soma is said to have been brought from heaven,
by a hawk or falcon. Cf. I. 93 6.

7 The guileful beast ; the demon Vritra.

8 Ninety spacious floods : the many waters obstructed by Vritra.

104 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK L

10 Indra hath smitten down the power of Vritra, — might with

stronger might.

This was his manly exploit, he slew Vritra and let loose the
floods, landing his own imperial sway.

11 Yea, even this great Pair of Worlds trembled in terror at thy

wrath, c

When, Indra, Thunderer, Marat-girt, thoti slowest Vritra in
thy strength, lauding thine own imperial sway.

1 2 But Vritra scared not Indra with his shaking or his thunder

roar.

On him that iron thunderbolt fell fiercely with its thousand
points, lauding his own imperial sway.

13 When with the thunder thou didst make thy dart and Vritra

meet in war,

Thy might, 0 Indra, fain to slay the Dragon, was set firm in
heaven, lauding thine own imperial sway.

14 When at thy shout, 0 Thunder-armed, each thing both fixed

and moving shook,

E’en Tvashtar trembled at thy wrath and quaked with fear
because of thee, lauding thine own imperial sway.

15 There is not, In our knowledge, one who passeth Indra in his

strength :

In him the Deities have stored manliness, insight, power and
might, lauding his own imperial sway.

16 Still as of old, whatever rite Atharvan, Manus sire of all,
Dadhyach performed, their prayer and praise united in that

Indra meet, lauding his own imperial sway.

HYMN LXXXI. Indra.

The men have lifted Indra up, the Vritra-slayer, to joy and
strength.:

Him, verily, we in vocate in battles whether great or small :
be he our aid in deeds of might.

2 Thou, Hero, art a warrior, thou art giver of abundant spoil.
Strengthening e’en the feeble, thou aidest the sacrificer, thou
givest the offerer ample wealth.

1 6 Atharvan in the priest who first obtained fire and offered Soma and
prayers to the Gods. Dadhyach is his son. Manus or Manu is the progenitor
of mankind.

The refrain, ( lauding his own imperial sway,’ is not always in syntactical con-
nexion with tiie verse of which it forms the conclusion.

1 The mm ; the ministering priests who exalt and strengthen with oblations.

THE MG VEDA.

105

HYMN S 20

3 When war and battles are on foot, booty is laid before the bold.
Yoke thou thy wildly-rushing Bays. Whom wilt thou slay

and whom enrich ? Do thou, 0 Indra, make us rich.

4 Mighty through wisdom, as he lists, terrible, he hath waxed

in strength.

Lord of Bay Steeds, strong-jawed, sublime, he ih joined hands
for glory’s sake hath grasped his iron thunderbolt.

5 He filled the earthly atmosphere and pressed against the lights

in heaven.

Hone like thee ever hath been born, none, Indra, will be bom
like thee. Thou hast waxed mighty over all.

6 May he who to the offerer gives the foeman’s man-sustaining

food,

May Indra lend his aid to us. Deal forth — abundant is thy
wealt h — that in thy bounty I may share.

7 He, righteous-hearted, at each time of rapture gives us herds

of kine.

Gather in both thy hands for ns treasures of many hundred
sorts. Sharpen thou us, and bring us wealth.

8 Refresh thee, Hero, with the juice outpoured for bounty and

for strength.

We know thee Lord of ample store, to thee have sent our
hearts’ desires : be therefore our Protector thou.

9 These people, Indra, keep for thee all that is worthy of thy

choice.

Discover thou, as Lord, the wealth of men who offer up no
gifts : bring thou to us this wealth of theirs.

HYMN LXXXII. Indra.

Graciously listen to our songs, Maghavan, be not negligent.
As thou hast made us full of joy and lettest us solicit thee,
now, Indra, yoke thy two Bay Steeds.

2 Well have they eaten and rejoiced ; the friends have risen and

passed away.

The sages luminous in themselves have praised thee with their
latest hymn. Now, Indra, yoke thy two Bay Steeds.

3 Maghavan, we will reverence thee who art so fair to look upon.
Thus praised, according to our wish come now with richly

laden car. Now, Indra, yoke thy two Bay Steeds.

9 The people : thy worshippers here.

1 Maghavan : Indra, the rich and liberal.

2 Well have they eaten : they, meaning the worshippers.

106 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK L

4 He will in very truth ascend the powerful car that finds the

kine,

Who thinks upon the well-filled bowl, the Tawny Coursers'
harnesser. Now, Indra, yoke thy two Bay Steeds.

5 Let, Lord of Hundred Powers, thy Steeds be harnessed on the

right and left.

Therewith in rapture of the juice, draw near to thy beloved
Spouse. Now, Indra, yoke thy two Bay Steeds.

8 With holy prayer I yoke thy long-maned pair of Bays : come
hitherward ; thou holdest them in both thy hands.

The stirring draughts of juice outpoured have made thee glad :
thou, Thunderer, hast rejoiced with Pushan.and thy Spouse.

HYMN LXXXIII. Indra.

Indra, the mortal man well guarded by thine aid goes fore-
most in the wealth of horses and of kine.

With amplest wealth thou fillest him, as round about the
waters clearly seen afar till Sindliu full.

2 The heavenly Waters come not nigh the priestly bowl : they

but look down and see how far mid-air is spread:

The Deities conduct the pious man to them : like suitors they
delight in him who lovoth prayer.

3 Praiseworthy blessing hast thou laid upon the pair who with

uplifted ladle serve thee, man and wife.

Unchecked he dwells and prospers in thy Jaw : thy power
brings blessing to the sacrificer pouring gifts.

4 First the Angirases won themselves vital power, whose fires

were kindled through good deeds and sacrifice.

The men together found the Pani's hoarded wealth, the cattle,
and the wealth in horses and in kine.

5 Atharvan first by sacrifices laid the paths ; then, guardian of
t the Law, sprang up the loving Sun.

Usana Kavya straightway hither drove the kine. Let us with
offerings honour Yama's deathless birth.

5 Thy Spouse ; Indrdiff See I. 22. 12.

3 Man and wife : the text has only mithund, a couple. The word appa-
rently means here the offerer of the sacrifice and his wife, who took part in
the ceremony, Sfiyaua explains it as the grain and the butter of oblation,

4 The Pani : is the illiberal demon who withholds the rain.

5 The paths : for the rising Bun to travel. Usand Kdri/a is the name of a
celebrated ancient Rishi. Bee I. 51. 10. The meaning of the latter half of the
second verse is obscure. Ludwig renders it c Seek we to win by sacrifice the
immortality which has sprung from Yama.’ Yama seems here to represent
the rising Bun. See Ehni, Der My thus des Yama, p. 62,

HYMN 84.]

THE RIGVEDA.

107

6 When sacred grass is trimmed to aid the auspicious work, or
the hymn makes its voice of praise sound to the sky.

Where the stone rings as ’twere a singer skilled in laud, — Indra
in truth delights when these come near to him.

HYMN LXXXIY. * Indra.

The Soma hath been pressed for thee, 0 Indra ; mightiest,
bold One, come.

May Indra-vigour fill thee full, as the Sun fills mid-air with
rays.

2 His pair of Tawny Coursers bring Indra of unresisted might
Hither to Eishis } songs of praise and sacrifice performed by

men.

3 Slayer of Yritra, mount thy car ; thy Bay Steeds have been

yoked by prayer.

May, with its voice, the pressing-stone draw thine attention
hitherward.

4 This poured libation, Indra, drink, immortal, gladdening, ex-

cellent.

Streams of the bright have flowed to thee here at the seat of
holy Law.

5 Sing glory now to Indrn, say to him your solemn eulogies.

The drops poured forth have made him glad : pay reverence

to his might supreme.

6 When, Indra, thou dost yoke thy Steeds, there is no better

charioteer :

None hath surpassed thee in thy might, none with good steeds
o’ertaken thee.

7 He who alone bestoweth wealth on mortal man who oflereth

gifts,

The ruler of resistless power, is Indra, sure,

8 When will he trample, like a weed, the man who hath no gift

for him 'I

When, verily, will Indra hear our songs of praise 1

9 He who with Soma juice prepared amid the many honours

thee, —

Yerily Indra gains thereby tremendous might.

4 The bright ; Soma juiee. The seat of holy Law : the place where sacrifice,
prdained by rltd } or eternal Law, is performed,

108 TEE EtMES OP [BOOK t.

10 The juice of Soma thus diffused, sweet to the taste, the bright

cows drink,

Who for the sake of splendour close to mighty Indra’s side
rejoice, good in their own supremacy.

11 Craving Ijis touch the dappled kine mingle the Soma with

their milk.

The milch-kine dear bo Indra send forth his death-dealing
thunderbolt, good in their own supremacy.

12 With veneration, passing wise, honouring his victorious might,
They follow close his many laws to win them due preemi-
nence, good in their own supremacy.

13 With bones of Dadhyach for his arms, Indra, resistless in

attack ,

Struck nine-and-ninety Vritras dead.

14 He, searching for the horse’s head, removed among the moun-

tains, found

At Saryanavan v T hat he sought.

15 Then verily they recognized the essential form of Tvash tar’s

Bull,

Here in the mansion of the Moon.

10 The bright cows : the pure and glossy milk which absorbs or drinks the
Soma juiGe with which it is mixed, and which is close to, or united with,
Indra when offered to and accepted by him in libation.

11 Send forth: tlie cows, that is, their milk, exalt and strengthen Indra,

and incite him to battle with the demons. ■ f the refrain of this

triad (verses 10, 11, 12) is not very clear. ■■ 1 Stlyana, translates

it : 'abiding (in their stalls) expectant of his sovereignty.’

13 Dadhyach , or in a later form, Dadhicha, was a Rishi, son of Atharvan,
he and his father being regarded as the first founders of sacrifice. He is des-
cribed as having the head of a horse given to him by the Asvins which was
afterwards cut off by Indra. With his bones, or, as the legend says, the bones
of this horse’s head, converted into a thunderbolt, Indra slew the Yritras or
demons who withheld the rain. The Vedic legend, which was modified and
amplified in later times, appears to have been connected in its origin with that
of Dadhikr&s, often mentioned in the Veda and described as a kind of divine
horse, probably a personification of the morning Sun in his rapid course.
Dadhyach may Ipe the old Moon whose bones, when he dies, become the stars
with which Indra slays the fiends of darkness.

14 Mountains: the morning clouds. Suryandvdn: said to be a lake and
district in Kurukshetra, near .the modern Delhi,

15 Tvashtars BitT: an obscure expression for the Sun. The purport of the
verse may be that when, after the rains, the bright moonlight nights came,
men recognized the fact that the light was borrowed from the Sun, Wilson,
following S&yana, translates the verse : f The (solar rays) found, on this occa-
sion the light of Twashtri, verily, concealed in the mansion of the moving
moon,’ See Hymns of the Atharva-veda, X2£*41.

HYMN 85.]

THE RIG VEDA .

109

16 Who yokes to-day unto the pole of Order the strong and pas-

sionate steers of checkless spirit,

With shaft-armed mouths, heart-piercing, health-bestowing ?
Long shall he live who richly pays their service.

17 Who fleeth forth ? who suffereth ? who feareth ? Who knoweth

Indra present, Indra near us ? *

Who sendeth benediction on his offspring, his household,
wealth and person, and the people ?

18 Who with poured oil and offering honours Agni, with ladle

worships at appointed seasons ?

To whom do the Gods bring oblation quickly ? What offerer,
God-favoured, knows him throughly ?

1 9 Thou as a God, 0 Mightiest, verily blessest mortal man.

0 Magh'avan, there is no comforter but thou : Indra, I speak
my words to thee.

20 Let not thy bounteous gifts, let not thy saving help fail us,

• good Lord, at any time ;

And measure out to us, tliou lover of mankind, all riches
hitherward from men.

HYMN LXXXV. Maruts.

They who are glancing forth, like women, on their way, doers
of mighty deeds, swift racers, Rudra J s Sons,

The Maruts have made heaven and earth increase and grow 7 :
in sacrifices they delight, the strong and wild.

2 Grown to their perfect strength greatness have they attained ;
the Rudras have established their abode in heaven.

Singing their song of praise and generating might, they have
put glory on, the Sons whom Rrisni bare.

16 The strong and passionate steers : the jealous and indefatigable priests,
who are yoked to the chariot-pole of Order or employed in the performance of
sacrifice ordained by eternal Law. The words of the priests are the arrows
with which their mouths are armed.

1 7 The answer to these questions is, the priests, who*represent the feelings
of the man who institutes the sacrifice.

18 The second line of this verse is rendered by Wilson, following S&yana :

‘To whom do t 1 1 .* 1 1 ing (the wealth) that has been called for?’

This would be ' ; but k6ma (oblation) can hardly bear the

interpretation thus forced upon it.

1 Rudra* 8 $ons : the Maruts, or Storm- Gods, are the sons of Rudra and of
Prism, the earth or the speckled cloud.

% The Madras ; the sons of Rudra.

no • TL IF HYMNS OF [BOOR L

3 When, Children of the Cow, they shine in bright attire, and

on their fair limbs lay their golden ornaments,

They drive away each adversary from their path, and, follow-
ing their traces, fatness floweth down,

4 When, mighty Warriors, ye who glitter with your spears, o’er-

throwing with your strength e J en w T hat is ne'er overthrown,
When, 0 ye Maruts, ye the host that send the rain, had har-
nessed to your cars the thought-fleet spotted deer.

5 When ye have harnessed to your cars the spotted deer, urging

the thunderbolt, 0 Maruts, to the fray,

Forth rush the torrents of the dark-red stormy cloud, and
moisten, like a skin, the earth with water-floods.

6 Let your swift-gliding coursers boar you hitherward with their

fleet pinions. Come ye forward with your arms.

Sit on the grass ; a wide scat hath been made for you : delight
yourselves, 0 Maruts, in the pleasant food.

7 Strong in their native strength to greatness have they grown,

stepped to the firmament and made tlieir dwelling wide.
When Vishnu saved the Soma bringing wild delight, the Maruts
sate like birds on their dear holy grass.

8 In sooth like heroes fain for fight they rush about, like com-

batants fame-seek mg have they striven in war.

Before the Maruts every creature is afraid : the men are like to
Kings, terrible to behold.

9 When Tvashtar deft of hand had turned the thunderbolt,

g Aden, with thousand edges, fashioned skilfully,

Indra received it to perform heroic deeds. Yritra he slew,
and forced the flood of water forth.

10 They with their vigorous strength pushed the well up on high,
and clove the cloud in twain though it was passing strong.
The Maruts, bounteous Givers, sending forth their voice, in
the wild joy of Soma wrought their glorious deeds.

3 Children of the Cow : that is, of Prism or the cloud under that type.
Fatness floweth down : the clouds drop fatness ; the fertilizing rain descends

4 The glittering spears are the flashes of lightning. The chariot of the
Maruts is said to be drawn by spotted deer or antelopes.

0 Sit on the grass : on the sacred grass trimmed and strewn for the Gods.

7 When Vishnu saved the Soma; Vishnu prepared the Soma and brought it to
Indra, and the Maruts, Indra’s companions, sat down with him to enjoy it.

8 The men: the Maruts. Rings: that is, warriors.

10 The well : here the cloud, as a reservoir of water.

HYMN 86.]

THE EIGYEDA.

Ill

11 They drave the cloud transverse directed hitherward, and

poured the fountain forth for thirsting Gotama.

Shining with varied light they come to him with help : they
with their might fulfilled the longing of the sage,

12 The shelters which ye have for him who lauds you, bestow

them threefold on the man who offers. *

Extend the same boons unto us, ye Maruts. Give us, 0 Hetoes,
wealth with noble offspring.

HYMN LXXXVI. Manila

The best of guardians hath that man within whose dwelling-
place ye drink,

0 Maruts, giants of the sky.

2 Honoured with sacrifice or with the worship of the sages-'

hymns, 0 Maruts, listen to the call,

3 Yea, the strong man to whom ye have vouchsafed to give a

sage, shall move
Into a stable rich in kine.

4 Upon this hero’s sacred grass Soma is poured in daily rites :
Praise and delight are sung aloud.

5 Let the strong Maruts hear him, him surpassing all men ;

strength be his
That reaches even to the Sun.

6 For, through the swift Gods’ loving help, in many an autumn,

Maruts, we

Have offered up our sacrifice,

7 Fortunate shall that mortal be, 0 Maruts most adorable,
Whose offerings ye bear away.

8 0 Heroes truly strong, ye know the toil of him who sings

your praise.

The heart’s desire of him who loves.

9 0 ye of true strength, make this thing manifest by your great-

ness : strike

The demon with your thunderbolt.

10 Conceal the horrid darkness, drive far from us each devour-
ing fiend.

Create the light for which we long.

3 X Gotama : the llislii to whom the hymn was revealed.

3 Shall move into a stable rich in kine : shall become the wealthy possessor
of many cows.

8 Of him who loves ; of the suppliant who loves and prays to you.

10 Devouring fiend : 'Atrhi, which stands for attrin, is one of the many

112 THE HYMHS OF [BOOK L

HYMN LXXXVIL Maruts.

Loud Singers, never humbled, active, full of strength, immov-
able, impetuous, manliest, best-beloved,

They have displayed themselves with glittering ornaments, a
few in number only, like the heavens with stars.

2 When, Maruts, on the steeps ye pile the moving cloud, ye are

like birds on whatsoever path it he.

Clouds everywhere shed forth the rain upon your cars. Drop
fatness, honey-hued, for him who sings your praise.

3 Earth at their racings trembles as if weak and worn, when on

their ways they yoke their cars for victory.

They, sportive, loudly roaring, armed with glittering spears,
shakers of all, themselves admire their mightiness.

4 Self-moving is that youthful band, with spotted steeds ; thus

it hath lordly sway, endued with power and might.
Truthful art thou, and blameless, searcher-out of sin : so thou.
Strong Host, wilt be protector of this prayer.

5 We speak by our descent from our primeval Sire; our tongue,

when we behold the Soma, stirs itself.

When, shouting, they had joined Indra in toil of fight, then
only they obtained their sacrificial names.

6 Splendours they gained for glory, they who wear bright rings ;

rays they obtained, and men to celebrate their praise.
Armed with their swords, impetuous and fearing naught, they
have possessed the Maruts’ own belovbd home,

names assigned to the powers of darkness and mischief. It is derived from
atra, which means, tooth or jaw, and therefore meant originally an ogre with
large teeth or jaws, a devourer/ — Max Muller. See Vedic Hymns, Part I.
(Sacred Books of the East, XXXII.) for a translation and full explanation of
this and 1 * * * * 6 other Hymns to the Maruts.

1 A few in number only : ' refers to the Maruts, who are represented a*

gradually rising or just showing themselves, as yet only a few in number, like

the first stars in the sky/ — Max Muller.

6 The Soma juice inspires us, and we are guided by the tradition received
from our ancestors.

The Maruts obtained divine honours only as a reward for assisting Indra
in his battle with the demon Vritra.

6 They have possessed the Maruts ’ own beloved home: ‘have established
themselves in what became afterwards known as their own abode, their own
place among the gods invoked at the sacrifice/— Max Muller,

HYMN 89.]

113

THE RIGYEDA .

HYMN LXXXYIII. Maruts.

Come hither, Maruts, on your lightning-laden oars, sounding
with -sweet songs, armed with lances, winged with steeds.
Fly unto us with noblest food, like birds, 0 ye of mighty power.

2 With their red-hued or, haply, tawny courser^ which speed

their chariots on, they come for glory.

Brilliant like gold is he who holds the thunder. Earth have
they smitten with the chariot’s felly.

3 For beauty ye have swords upon your bodies. As they stir

woods so may they stir our spirits.

For your sake, 0 ye ‘Maruts very mighty and well-born, have
they set the stone in motion.

4 The days went round you and came back, 0 yearners, back,

to this prayer and to this solemn worship.

The Gotamas making their prayer with singing have pushed
the well’s lid up to drink the water.

5 No hymn was ever known like this aforetime which Gotama

sang forth for you, 0 Maruts,

What time upon your golden wheels he saw you, wild boars
rushing about with tusks of iron.

6 To you this freshening draught of Soma rusheth, 0 Maruts,

like the voice of one who prayeth.

It rufsheth freely from our hands as these libations wont to
flow.

HYMN LXXXIX. Visvedevas.

May powers auspicious come to us from every side, never de-
ceived, unhindered, and victorious,

That the Gods ever may be with us for our gain, our guardians
' day by day unceasing in their care.

2 He who holds the thunder : the holder of the thunder or thunderbolt is
Indra.

3 Have they set the stone in motion : men have pressed out the Soma juice

and offered libations to you. *

4 And to this solemn worship; (v&rk&ryfCm cha devtfm) * The most likely sup-

position is that v&rk&rya was the name given to some famous hymn, some
paean or song of triumph belonging to the Gotamas, The purport of 'the
whole line then would be that many days have gone for the Maruts as well as
for the famous hymn addressed to them, or, in other words, that the Gotamas
have long been d^Voted to the Maruts ...The pushing up of the lid ;of the
well for to drink, means that they obtained rain from the cloud, which is here,
as before, represented as a. covered well.’— Max Muller. } -

6 This verse is very obscure, I follow M. M.’s translation which [ is to a
great extent conjectural,'

114 THE HYMNS OF [BOON I.

2 May the auspicious favour of the Gods be ours, on us descend

the bounty of the righteous Gods.

The friendship of the Gods have we devoutly sought : so may
the Gods extend our life that we may live.

3 We call them hither with a hymn of olden time, Bhaga, the

friendly* Dak sha, Mitra, Aditi,

Aryaman, Yaruna, Soma, the Asvins* May Sarasvati, auspici-
ous, grant felicity.

4 May the Wind waft to us that pleasant medicine, may Earth

our Mother give it, and our Father Heaven,

And the joy-giving stones that press the Soma’s juice. Asvins,
may ye, for whom our spirits long, hear this.

5 Him we invoke for aid who reigns supreme, the Lord of all

that stands or moves, inspirer of the soul,

That Pushan may promote the increase of our wealth, our
keeper and our guard infallible for our good.

6 Illustrious far and wide, may Indra prosper us : may Pushan

prosper us, the Master of all wealth.

May Tarkshya with uninjured fellies prosper us : Brihaspati
vouchsafe to us prosperity.

7 The Maruts, Sons of Prism, borne by spotted steeds, moving

in glory, oft visiting holy rites,

Sages whose tongue is Agni, brilliant as the Sun, — hither let
all the Gods for our protection come.

8 Gods, may we with our ears listen to what is good, and with

our eyes see what is good, ye Holy Ones.

With limbs and bodies firm may we extolling yon attain the
term of life appointed by the Gods.

9 A hundred autumns stand before us, 0 ye Gods, within whftse

space ye bring our bodies to decay ;

Within whose space our sons become fathers in turn. Break
ye not in the midst our course of fleeting life.

3^ Bhaga, enumerated by Ylska among the deities of the highest sphere, ia
an Aditya regarded in the Veda as bestowing wealth and instituting or pre-
siding over love and marriage. Dakshu is a creative power associated with
Aditi, and therefore sometimes identified with Praj&pati.

4 Oar Father Heaven: pit# Dyafis = 7 rarfjf) Ztuc, Jupiter.

6 Tdvkshya : usually described as a divine horse, and probably a personifi-
cation of the Sun. Brihaspati ; Lord of Prayer.

7 Whose tongue is Agni: who receive oblations through Agni or fire.

9 A hundred autumns : regarded as the natural length of human life, Cf.
Isaiah, LXV. 20 f There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old
man that hath not filled his days ; for the child shall die an hundred years
old/

HYMN 91,]

THE RIO VEDA.

115

10 Aditi is the heaven, Aditi is mid-air, Aditi is the Mother and
the Sire and Son.

Aditi is all Gods, Aditi five-classed men, Aditi all that hath
been born and shall be born,

HYMN XO. Visvedevas.

May Varuna with guidance straight, and Mitra l£ad ns, he who
knows,-

And Aryaman in accord with Gods,

2 For they are dealers forth of wealth, and, not deluded, with

their might

Guard evermore the lioly laws.

3 Shelter may they vouchsafe to us, Immortal Gods to mortal men,
Chasing our enemies away,

4 May they mark out our paths to bliss, Indra, the Maruts,

Pushan, and

Bhaga, the Gods to be adored,

5 Yea, Pushan, Vishnu, ye who run your course, enrich our

hymns with kine ;

Bless us with all prosperity.

6 The winds waft sweets, the rivers pour sweets for the man who

keeps the Law :

So may the plants be sweet for us,

7 Sweet be the night and sweet the dawns, sweet the terrestrial

atmosphere ;

Sweet be our Father Heaven to us,

8 May the tall tree be full qf sweets for us, and full of sweets

the Sun r

May our milch-kine be sweet for us.

9 Be Mitra gracious unto us, and Varuna and' Aryaman r
Indra, Brihaspatl be kind, and Vishnu of the mighty stride,

HYMN XCL Soma.

Thou, Soma, art preeminent for wisdom ; along the etraighteat
path thou art our leader.

Our wise forefathers by thy guidance, Indu, dealt out among
the Gods their share of treasure.

10 Aditi- the Infimte r infm^

9 Vishnu of the mighty stride : as the Sun, striding over or traversing the
three worlds.

1 Indu.: another name of Soma, here identified with the Mom who teaches
men the proper seasons at which to worship the Mane* or deified Fathers.
See I. 43. 8, note.

116 . THE HYMNS OF [BOOK I,

2 Thou by thine insight art most wise, 0 Soma, strong by thine

energies and all-possessing ;

Mighty art thou by all thy powers and greatness, by glories
art thou glorious, guide of mortals.

3 Thine are King Varuna’s eternal statutes, lofty and deep, 0

Soma, is thy glory,

All-pure art thou like Mitra the belovkd, adorable, like
Aryaman, 0 Soma,

4 With all thy glories on the earth, in heaven, on mountains, in

the plants, and in the waters, —

With all of these, well-pleased and not in anger, accept, 0
royal Soma, our oblations,

5 Thou, Soma, art the Lord of heroes, King, yea, V^itra-slayer

thou ;

Thou art auspicious energy,

6 And, Soma, let it be thy wish that we may live and may not

die :

Praise-loving Lord of plants art thou,

7 To him who keeps the law, both old and young, thou givest

happiness,

And energy that he may live.

8 Guard us, King Soma, on all sides from him who threaten^ us :

never let

The friend of one like thee be harmed.

9 With those delightful aids which thou hast, Soma, for the

worshipper, —

Even with those protect thou us,

10 Accepting this our sacrifice and this our praise, 0 Soma, come,
And be thou nigh to prosper us.

11 Well-skilled in speech we magnify thee, Soma, with our

saGred songs :

Come thou to us, most gracious One.

12 Enrioher, healer of disease, wealth-finder, prospering our store,
Be, Soma, a good Friend to us,

13 Soma, be happy in our heart, as milch-kine in the grassy

meads,

As a young man in his own house.

14 0 Soma, God, the mortal man who in thy friendship hath

delight,

Him doth the mighty Sage befriend.

S Thine are K i nr/ Vanina's eternal statutes : thy laws are the same as
Yaruiia’s, or Varuna’s laws have their origin in thee, :

HYMN 91 J THE RIG VEDA. . 1.17

15 Save ns from slanderous reproach, keep us, 0 Soma, from

distress : ’

' Be unto us a gracious Friend.

16 Soma, wax great. From every side may vigorous powers unite

in thee :

Be in the gathering-place of strength.

17 Wax, 0 most gladdening Soma, great through all thy rays of

light, and be

A Friend of most illustrious fame to prosper us.

18 In thee be juicy nutriments united, and powers and mighty

foe-subduing vigour,

Waxing to immortality, 0 Soma : win highest glories for thy-
self in heaven.

19 Such of thy glories as. with poured oblations men honour,

may they all invest our worship.

Wealth-giver, furtherer with troops of. heroes, sparing the
brave, come, Soma, to our houses.

20 To him who worships Soma gives the. mileh-cow, a fleet steed

and a man of active knowledge,

Skilled in home duties, meet for holy synod, for council meet,
a glory to his father.

2*1 Invincible in fight, saver in battles, guard of our camp, winner
of light and water,

Born amid hymns, well-housed, exceeding famous, victor, in
thee will we rejoice, 0 Soma.

22 These herbs, these milcli-kine, and these running waters, all

these, 0 Soma, thou hast generated.

The spacious firmament hast thou expanded, and with the
light thou hast dispelled the darkness.

23 Do thou, God Soma, with thy Godlike spirit, victorious, win for

us a share of riches.

Let none prevent thee : thou art Lord of valour. Provide for
both sides in the fray for booty.

14 The mighty Sage : Soma himself.

16 Be in the gathering place of strength \ be thou the central point and
source of all power.

17 Through all thy rays of light ; through all thy stalks, according to Ludwig
who takes Soma to be the plant. Wilson, following S&yapa, translates :
* Increase with all twining plants.*

22 These milch-hine ; the milk which is to be mixed with the Soma juice*

118 TS'E HYMNS OF [BOOK I.

HYMN XCII. Dawn.

These; Dinro* have raised their banner ; in the eastern half
of the mid-air they spread abroad their shining light.

Like heroes who prepare their weapons for the war, onward
they come bright red in hue, the Mother Cows.

,2 Eeadily have the purple beams of light shot up; the Bed
Cows have they harnessed, easy to be yoked.

The Dawns have brought distinct perception as before : red-
hued, they have attained their fulgent brilliancy.

3 They sing their song like women active in their taskSj along

their common path hither from far &way,

"Bringing refreshment to the liberal devotee, yea, aU things to
the worshipper who pours the juice*

4 She, like a dancer, puts her broider-etd garments on : as a sow

yields her udder so she bares her breast*

Creating light ior all the world of life, the Dawn hath laid
. the darkness open as the cows their stall.

5 We have beheld the brightness of her shining; it spreads

and drives away the darksome monster.

Like tints that deck the Post at sacrifices, Heaven’s Daughter
hath attained her wondrous splendour.

,6 We have o’erpast the limit of this darkness; Dawn breaking
forth again brings clear perception.

She like a flatterer smiles in light for glory, and fair of face
hath wakened to rejoice us.

7 The Gotamas have praised Heaven’s radiant Daughter, the
leader of the charm of pleasant voices.

Dawn, thou eonferrest on us strength with offspring and men,
conspicuous with kine and horses.

1 These Dawns : * We have the term Ushasah, in the plural, intending,
according to the Commentator, the divinities that preside over the morning ;
but, according to Y&ska, the plural is uaed iiouorifically only, for the singular
personification.’— Wilson,

The Mother Cows; the Dawns, with their red clouds, who have just given birth
to the day.

2 The Red Cows .* the red clouds of morning.

3 Who pours the juice : presses out and offers libations of Soma juice.

4 Hath laid the darkness open ; the meaning, rather obscurely expressed
with a harsh zeugma or ellipsis, is, Dawn, with her bright clouds, has opened
and emerged from the darkness which surrounded her, in the same maimer aa
cowa leave the dark pen or Btable in which they have been shut up, aa soon aa
it is opened in the early morning.

5 Like tints that deck the Post: the sacrificial post or pillar, to which the
victims were tied, was anointed by the priests.

7 Pleasant voices ; of the newly-awakened birds, other animals, and human
r> beings.

HYMN 92.]

THE RIO VEDA.

119

8 0 thou who shinest forth in wondrous glory, urged onward by

thy strength, auspicious Lady,

Dawn,' may I gain that wealth, renowned and ample, in brave
sons, troops of slaves, far-famed for horses.

9 Bending her looks on all the world, the Goddess ^hines, widely

spreading with her bright eye westward.

Waking to motion every living creature, she understands the
voice of each adorer.

10 Ancient of days, again again born newly, decking her beauty

with the self-same raiment,

The Goddess wastes away the life of mortals, like a skilled
hunter cutting birds in pieces.

11 She hath appeared discovering heaven’s borders: to the far

distance she drives off her Sister.

Diminishing the days of human creatures, the Lady shines
with all her lover's splendour.

12 The bright, the blessed One shines forth extending her rays

like kine, as a flood rolls his waters.

Never transgressing the divine commandments, she is beheld
visible with the sunbeams.

13 0 Dawn enriched with ample wealth, bestow on us the won-

drous gift

Wherewith we may support children and children^ sons.

14 Thou radiant mover of sweet sounds, with wealth of horses

and of kine

Shine thou on us this day, 0 Dawn, auspiciously.

15 0 Dawn enriched with holy rites, yoke to thy car thy purple

steeds,

And then bring thou unto us all felicities.

16 0 Asvins wonderful in act, do ye unanimous direct
Your chariot to our home wealthy in kine and gold.

17 Ye who brought down the hjmn from heaven, a light that

giveth light to man,

Do ye, 0 Asvins, bring strength hither unto us.

10 Like a shilled hunter cutting birds in pieces : ‘ S&yana takes svaghni for a
* fowler’s wife’, and vijuh fur ‘ birds.’ Benfey takes tijnh for e dice/ and ex-
plains the clause as denoting a cunning gambler who tampers with the dice by -
shaving them down . The phrase rijuh iva d ihiitHi occurs again in B. Y*

II. 12. 5. where S&yaiia takes rijuh for udrejal ah f a vexer.’ So uncertain are
his explanations.’ — J. Muir, 0. &. Texts, Y.,186.

11 Her sister: Night, tier lover: the Sun.

12 Never transgressing ; always obedient to the eternal Law or divine order

of the universe. r*

120 THE HYMNS OB [BOOK L

IS Hither may they who wake at dawn bring, to drink Soma,
both the Gods,

Health-givers, Wonder-Workers, borne on paths of gold.

HYMN XCIII. Agni-Soma.

Aeon and Soma, mighty Pair, graciously hearken to my call,
Accept in friendly wise my hymn, and prosper him who offers
gifts.

2 The man who honours you to-day, Agrii and Soma, with

this hymn,

Bestow on' him heroic strength, increase of kino, and noble
steeds.

3 The man who offers holy oil and burnt oblations unto you,
Agni and Soma, shall enjoy great strength, with offspring, all

his life.

4 Agni and Soma, famed is that your prowess wherewith ye

stole the kine, his food, from Pani.

Ye caused the brood of Brisaya to perish ; ye found the light,
the single light for many.

5 Agni and Soma, joined in operation ye have set up the shining

lights in heaven.

From curse and from reproach, Agni and Soma, ye freed the
rivers that were bound in fetters.

6 One of you M<\tarisvan brought from heaven, the Falcon rent

the other from the mountain.

Strengthened by holy prayer Agni and Soma have made us
ample room for sacrificing.

18 They who wake at daion : according to SAyana, r the horses of the Asvins.
The expression may apply, with at least equal propriety, to the priests who
rise at day-break to perform the morning sacrifices.

1 Agni and Soma : or, 0 Agni-Soma, the two Gods forming a dual deity
agntshomau.

4 Ye stole the kine : recovered the cows (the rain-clouds: or rays of light)
which the niggard demon had carried off and concealed. Brisaya ; the name

of a demon or savage enemy.

5 From curse and from reproach : according to S Ay an a, f the rivers were
defiled by the dead body of Vritra, which had fallen into them; their waters
were, consequently, unfit to bear any part in sacred rites, until they were
purified by Agni and Soma, that is, by oblations to fire and libations of Soma
juice/ — Wilson.

6 MtUarisvan, or, in the nominative case, MAtarisvA, brought Agni or fire
from heaven, and the Falcon brought Soma from the mountain or cloud,
that is, says SAyana, from Svarga on the top of Mount Meru.

THE RIGVEDA.

121

HYMN 94.]

7 Taste, Agni, Soma, tills prepared oblation; accept it, Mighty
Ones, and let it please you.

Vouchsafe us good protection and kind favour : grant to the
sacrificer health and riches.

S Whoso with oil and poured oblation honours, with God-devoted
heart, Agni and Soma, —

Protect his sacrifice, preserve him from distress, grant to the
sacriiicer great felicity.

9 Invoked together, mates in wealth, Agni-Soma, accept our
hymns :

Together be among the Gods.

10 Agni and Soma, unto him who worships you with holy oil
Shine forth an ample recompense.

11 Agni and Soma, be ye pleased with these oblations brought

to you,

And come, together, nigh to us.

12 Agni and Soma, cherish well our horses, and let our cows be

fat who yield oblations.

Grant power to us and to our wealthy patrons, and cause our
holy rites to be successful.

HYMN XCIY. Agni.

Fob Jatavedas worthy of our praise will we frame with our
mind this eulogy as J twere a car.

For good, in his assembly, is this care of ours. Let us not, in
thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.

2 The man for whom thou sacrificcst prospereth, dwelleth with-

out a foe, gaineth heroic might.

He waxeth strong, distress never approacheth him. Let us
not, in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.

3 May we have power to kindle thee. Fulfil our thoughts. In

thee the Gods eat the presented offering.

Bring hither the A dityas, for we long for them. Let us not
in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.

*2 Who yield oblations : who supply milk to be mixed with Soma juice.
Our wealthy patrons : the rich householders who institute the sacrifices.

This Hymn and the four following are attributed to the Rishi Kutsa, the
son of Angiras.

1 Jdtavedas : Agni. Seel. 44. 1.

As ’twere a car : as a carpenter constructs a car or wain.

In his assembly : among those who have met together to worship him. The
meaning might also be: good, or auspicious, is his providence or loving care of us

3 Bring hither the Adity as : the Sons of Aditi ; all the Gods, according to
Sftyana.

122 TEE HYMNS OF [BOOK L

.4 We will bring fuel and prepare burnt offerings, reminding thee
at each successive festival.

Fulfil our thought that so we may prolong our lives, Let us
not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.

5 His ministers move forth, the guardians of the folk, protecting

quadruped and biped with their rays.

Mighty art thou, the wondrous herald of the Dawn. Let us
not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.

6 Thou art Presenter and the chief Invoker, thou Director,

Purifier, great High Priest by birth.

Knowing all priestly work thou perfectest it, Sage. Let us
not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.

7 Lovely of form art thou, alike on every side ; though far,

thou shinest brightly as if close at hand.

0 God, thou seest through even the dark of night. Let us
not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.

8 Gods, foremost be his car who pours libations out, and let our

hymn prevail o’er evil-hearted men.

Attend to this our speech and make it prosper well. Let us
not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.

9 Smite with thy weapons those of evil speech and thought,

devouring demons, whether near or far away.

Then to the singer give free way for sacrifice. Let us not in
thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.

10 When to thy chariot thou hadst yoked two red steeds and two

ruddy steeds, wind-sped, thy roar was like a bull’s.

Thou with smoke-bannered flame attackest forest trees. Let
us not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.

11 Then at thy roar the very birds are terrified, when, eating up

the grass, thy sparks fly forth abroad.

Then is it easy for thee and thy car to pass. Let us not in
thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.

5 Ek ministers : his beams of light.

6 ‘ Agni is here identified with the chief of the sixteen priests engaged at
solemn sacrifices. He is Adhwaryu , usually called the reciter of the Yajush,
—here defined, by the scholiast, as the presenter of ihe offerings : he is the
Hotri } or in void ng priest : he is the Pras&stri , or the Maitr Ivaruna, whose duty
it is to direct the other priests what to do, and when to penorm their func-
tions : he is the potri , or priest so termed, and the family or hereditary
purohita. : oi purohztct may be the same as the Brahwft of a ceremony, — being,
to men, what Byikaspati is to the gods,'— Wilson,

HYMN 95.]

THE MOVED A.

123

12 He hath the power to soothe Mitra and Varuna: wonderful is

the Maruts 5 wrath when they descend.

Be gracious : let their hearts he tunied to us again. Let us
not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.

13 Thou art a God, thou art the wondrous Friend of GodB, the

Vasu of the Vasus, fair in sacrifice.

Under thine own most wide protection may we dwell. Let us
not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.

14 This is thy grace that, kindled in thine own abode, invoked

with Soma thou soundest, forth most benign.

Thou givest wealth and treasure to the worshipper. Let us not
in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.

15 To whom thou, Lord of gooily riches, grantest freedom from

every sin with perfect wholeness,

Whom with good strength thou quickenest, with children and
wealth — may we be they, Eternal Being.

16 Such, Agni, thou who knowest all good fortune, God, lengthen

here the days of our existence.

This prayer of ours may Varuna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi
and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

HYMN XCV. ^ Agni.

To fair goals travel Two unlike in semblance : each in succes-
sion nourishes an infant.

One bears a Godlike Babe of golden colour : bright and fair-
shining is he with the other.

32 He hath the power : Agni persuades Mitra and Varuna to send the rain
and protects men from the fury of the Storm- Gods.

13 The Vasu of the Fasus : best of the class of Gods called Vasus ; or
4 the good among the good/

16 l^he second line of 4 this verse terminates the following hymns, with two
exceptions, as far as the hundred and first Srtkta. Mitra, Varuna, and Aditi
have been before noticed. By Sindhu is to be understood the divinity presid-
ing over, or identified with, flowing water ; and it may mean either the sea
or flowing streams collectively, or the river ludu<*. Prithivi and Div are the
prsenified earth and heaven. These are requested to honour y meaning, to
preserve, or perpetuate, whatever blessing has been asked for ) tat .....wfw-
ahantiin) ; from vnah } to venerate or Worship/ — Wilson,

1 The Two are Day and Night, and the infant that each suckles in turn is
Agni, as the Sun by day and Fire, or the Moon, by night.

12* THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK A

4 That M&tarisvan rich in wealth and' treasure, light-winner,

finds a pathway for his offspring,

Guard of our folk, Fathir of earth and heaven.. The Gods
possessed the wealth-bestowing AgnL

5 Night and Dawn,, changing each the other's colour, meeting

together suckle one same Infant :

Golden between the heaven and earth he shineth. The Gods
possessed the wealth-bestowing AgnL

6 Boot of wealth, gxthering-place of treasures, banner of sacri-

fice, who grants the suppliant's wishes :

Preserving him as their own life immortal, the Gods possessed
the wealth-bestowing Agni.

7 Now and of old the home of wealth, the mansion of what is

born and ; what was born aforetime,

Guard of what is and what will be hereafter, — the Gods pos-
sessed the wealth-bestowing Agnf.

8 May the Wealth-Giver grant us conquering riches; may the

Wealth-Giver grant us wealth with heroes.

May the Wealth-Giver grant us food with offspring, and
length of days may the Wealth-Giver send us.

9 Fed with our fuel, purifying Agni, so blaze to us auspiciously

for glory.

This prayer of ours may Varuna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi
and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

HYMN XCVIT. Agni.

Chasing with light our sin away, 0 Agni, shine thou wealth
on us.

May his light chase our sin away.

2 Fpr goodly fields, for pleasant homes, for wealth we sacrifice

^otTTeeT

May his light chase our sin away.

3 Best praiser of all these be he ; foremost, our chiefs who

sacrifice.

May his light chase our sin away.

4 M&tarhmn : usually the name of the divine being who brought Agni
from heaven (see I. 31. 8.), said by S&yana to mean in this place Agni himself.

5 One mme Infant: Agni (see I, 95. 1.) whom they nourish with the obla- -
tion offered by men.

Golden : as the Sun.

3 May he, that is Kutsa, the Ilislii of the hymn, be preeminent among
these who celebrate thy praises, and may the householders who have inatitut*
ed this sacrifice be similarly distinguished.

HYMN 99.] THE RIG VEDA. 137

4 So that thy worshippers and we, thine, Agni, in our sons may

live.

May his light chase our sin away.

5 As ever-conquering Agni’s beams of splendour go to every side,
May his light chase our sin away.

6 To every side thy face is turned, thou art triuTnphant every-
* where.

May his light chase our sin away.

7 0 thou whose face looks every way, bear us past foes as in a

ship.

May his light chase our sin away.

8 As in a ship, convey thou us for our advantage o’er the flood.
May his light chase our sin away.

hymn xcvm. Ag m.

Still in Vaisvanara's grace may we continue : yea, he is King
supreme o’er all things living.

Sprung hence to life upon this All he looketh. Vaisvanara
hath rivalry with Surya.

2 Present in heaven, in earth, all-present Agni, — all plants that

grow on ground hath he pervaded.

May Agni, may Vaisvanara with vigour, present, preserve ua
day and night from foemen.

3 Be this thy truth, Vaisvanara, to us-ward : let wealth in rich

abundance gather round us.

This prayer of ours may Varuna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi
and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

HYMN XCIX. Agni.

For J&tavedas let us press the Soma: may he consume the
wealth of the malignant.

May Agni carry us through all our troubles, through grief as
in a boat across the river.

1 Vaixv&nara, is an epithet of Agni or Fire as present with, common to, or
benefiting, all men.

Sprung hence, to life : produced from these two aranis or fire-sticks.

* This Hymn, consisting of a single stanza, is ascribed to the Rishi Kasyapa,
the son of Marlchi.

128 THF HYMNS OF [ BOOK L

hymn c. indra.

Mat he who hath his home with strength, the Mighty, the
King supreme of earth and spacious heaven,

Lord of true power, to be invoked in battles, — may Indra,
girt by Maru ts, be our succour.

2 Whose way is unattainable like Sdrya’s : he in each fight is

the strong Vritra-slayer,

Mightiest with his Friends in his own courses. May Indra,
girt by Maruts, be our succour.

3 Whose paths go forth in their great might resistless, forth-

milking, as it were, heaven’s genial moisture.

With manly strength triumphant, foe-subduer, — may Indra,
girt by Maruts, be our succour.

4 Among Angirascs he was the chicfest, a Friend with friends,

mighty amid the mighty.

Praiser mid praisers, honoured most of singers. May Indra,
girt by Maruts, be our succour,

5 Strong with the Rudras as with his own children, in manly

battle conquering his foemen,

With his close comrades doing deeds of glory, — may Indra,
girt by Maruts, be our succour.

6 Humbler of pride, exciter of the conflict, the Lord of heroes,

God invoked of many,

May he this day gain with our men the sunlight. May Indra,
girt by Maruts, be our succour.

7 His help hath made him cheerer in the battle, the folk have

made him guardian of their comfort.

Sole Lord is he of every holy service. May Indra, girt by
Maruts, be our succour,

This Hymn is ascribed to the regal Ilishis the Varsh&giras, the five sons of
the B4j& Vrishftgir, whose names are mentioned in the seventeenth stanza.

3 Whose paths ; pdntkdmh , paths, is explained as * rays’ by S&yapa, Indra
is here represented as the God of light and of rain,

5 Madras : the Maruts, sons of Rudra the chief Storm- God. They are the
close comrades or faithful companions of Indra, who regards them not as his
equals but as his children,

6 The sunlight : the hymn is addressed to Indra for aid in an approaching
battle. S&yana says that the Vftrshagiras pray that they may have daylight
and that their enemies may fight in the dark.

7 Indra is regarded as their helper and inspiriter in battle and their
protector in .peace. He also presides over &11 acts of worship* and as 'such
rewards those who serve him,

HYMN 100.]

THE EIGVEDA.

129

8 To him the Eero, on high days of prowess, heroes for help

and booty shall betake them.

He hath found light even in the blinding darkness. May
Indra, girt by Maruts, be our succour.

9 He with his left hand checketh even the mighty, and with his

right hand gathereth up the booty. ?

Even with the humble he acquiretfi riches. May Indra, girt
by Maruts, be our succour.

10 With hosts on foot and cars he winneth treasures ; well is he

known this day by all the people,

With manly might he conquereth those who hate him. May
Indra, girt by Maruts, be our succour.

11 When in his ways with kinsmen or with strangers he speedeth

to the fight, invoked of many,

For gain of waters, and of sons and grandsons, may Indra,
girt by Maruts, be our succour.

12 Awful and fierce, fiend-slayer, thunder-wielder, with boundless

knowledge, hymned by hundreds, mighty,

In strength like Soma, guard of the Five Peoples, may Indra,
girt by Maruts, be our succour.

13 Winning the light, hitherward roars his thunder like the terri-

fic mighty voice of Heaven.

Eich gifts and treasures evermore attend him. May Indra,
4 girt by Maruts, be our succour.

14 Whose home eternal through his strength surrounds him on

every side, his laud, the earth and heaven,

May he, delighted with our service, save us. May Indra, girt
by Maruts, be our succour.

15 The limit of whose power not Gods by Godhead, nor mortal

men have reached, nor yet the Waters.

Both Earth and Heayen in vigour he surpasseth. May Indra,
girt by Maruts, be our succour.

9 Even the humble : not tlie strong only, but the feeble man also acquires
riches with his help.

12 Guard of the Five Peoples : of the five classes of beings, according to S&y-
ana, that is, Giods, Gandharvas, Apsarases, Asuras and R&kshasas. Probably
the five Arya tribes are intended. See I. 7. 9.

14 The Earth and Heaven, his dwelling-place, are his everlasting song of
praise because they have been established and regulated by him. This is
^Ludwig’s explanation of this obscure verse.

130 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK L

16 The red and tawny mare, blaze-marked, high standing, celes-

tial who, to bring Rijrasva riches,

Drew at the pole the chariot yoked with stallions, joyous,
among the hosts of men was noted.

17 The Y ars^agiras unto thee, 0 Indra, the Mighty One, sing

forth this laud to please thee,

Rijr&sva with his fellows, Ambarisha, Suradhas, Sahadeva,
Bhayamana.

18 He, much invoked, hath slain Dasyus and Sirnyus, after his

wont, and laid them low with arrows.

The mighty Thunderer with his fair-complexioned friends, won
the land, the sunlight, and the waters.

19 May Indra evermore be our protector, and unimperilled may

we win the booty.

This prayer of ours may, Yaruna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi
and Sindh u, Earth and Heaven.

HYMN CL Indra.

Sing, with oblation, praise to him who maketh glad, who with
Rijisvati drove the dusky brood away.

Fain for help, him the strong whose right hand wields the bolt,,
him girt by Maruts we invoke to be our Friend.

2 Indra, who with triumphant wrath smote Vyansa down, and

Sambara, and Pipru the unrighteous one ;

Who extirpated Sushna the insatiate, — him girt by Maruts
we invoke to be our Friend.

3 He whose great work of manly might is heaven and earth, and

Yanina and Surya keep his holy law ;

Indra, whose law the rivers follow as they flow, — him girt by
Maruts we invoke to he our Friend.

16 The epithets in this stanza are taken by Ludwig as names of the six
horses with which Rijrasva drove to battle and conquered. The last four
verses of the hymn appear to have been added after the victory.

18 Dasyus and Simyus ; men of indigenous hostile races.

His fair-complexioned friends : explained by S&yana as the glittering Maruts,
means probably the Aryan invaders as opposed to the dark-skinned races of
the country.

This Hymn and the following thirteen are ascribed to the Rishi Kutsa.

1 Rijisvan : a king, favoured and protected by Indra. See I. 51. 5 ; 53. 8,

The dusky brood : the dark aborigines who opposed the Aryans.

2 Vyansa, Sambara , Pipru } and Sushna are names of fiends of drought.

HYMN 101.]

OT RIQYEDA.

181

4 He who is Lord and Master of the steeds and kine, honoured—

the firm and sure — at every holy act ;

Slayer even of the strong who pours no offering out, — him
girt hy Maruts we invoke to "be our Friend.

5 He who is Lord of all the world that moves and^breathes, who

for the Br&kman first before all found the Cows ;

Indra who cast the Dasyus down beneath 1 is feet, — him girt
by Maruts we invoke to be our Friend.

6 Whom cowards must invoke and valiant men of war, invoked

by those who conquer and by those who flee ;

Indra, to whom all beings turn their constant thought, — him
girt by Maruts we invoke to be our Friend.

7 Refulgent in the Rudras’ region he proceeds, and with the

Rudras through the wide space speeds the Dame.

The hymn of praise extols Indra the far-renowned : him girt
by Maruts we invoke to be our Friend.

8 0 girt by Maruts, whether thou delight thee in loftiest gather-

ing-place or lowly dwelling,

Come thence unto our rite, true boon-bestower : through love
of thee have we prepared oblations.

9 We, fain for thee, strong Indra, have pressed Soma, and, 0

thou sought with prayer, have made oblations.

How at this sacrifice, with all thy Maruts, on sacred grass, 0
team-borne God, rejoice thee.

10 Rejoice thee with thine own Bay Steeds, 0 Indra, unclose thy

jaws and let thy lips be open*

Thou with the fair cheek, let thy Bay Steeds bring thee : gra-
cious to us, he pleased with our oblation.

11 Guards of the camp whose praisers are the Maruts, may we

through Indra, get ourselves the booty.

This prayer of ours may Yaruna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi
and Sindhu, Farth and Heaven.

5 Who for the Brdhmctn : according to S&yana, who recovered for the
Angirases the cows that had been carried off by the Panis. See I. 32. II.

7 The Dame * Ludwig suggests that Kodasi, the wife of Rudra, is intended,
and refers to the Old- German myth of the Wind's- Bride. J

11 Guards of the camp : may we who are the guardians of the camp or
new settlement, praised and favoured by the Maruts, win the spoil. The
words martitstotrasya vrijdnasya are somewhat obscure.

182 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK 1.

HYMN CIL Indra.

To thee the Mighty One I bring this mighty hymn, for thy
desire hath been gratified by my laud.

In Indra, yea in him victorious through his strength, the Gods
have joyed at feast and -when the Soma flowed.

2 The Seven Rivers bear his glory far and wide, and heaven and
sky and earth display his comely form.

The Sun and Moon in change alternate run their course, that
we, 0 Indra, may behold and may have faith.

, 3 Maghavan, grant its that same car to bring us spoil, thy con-
quering car in which we joy in shock of fight.

Tliou, Indra, whom our hearts praise highly in the war, grant
shelter, Maghavan, to us who love thee well.

4 Encourage thou our side in every fight for

our ally, conquer the foeman’s host.

Indrk' bestow oh us’j by"and“Mrdf^n6Feak down, 0 Maghavan,
the vigay.r oijour foes,

5 For Eere in divers ways these men invoking thee, holder of

treasures, sing thee hymns to win thine aid.

Ascend the oar that thou mayest bring spoil to us, for, Indra,
thy fixt mind winneth the victory.

His arms win kine, his power is boundless, in each act best,
with a hundred helps, waker of battle’s din
Is Indra : none may rival him in mighty strength. Hence,
eager for the spoil, the people call on him.

7 Thy glory, Maghavan, exceeds a hundred, yea, more than a

hundred, than a thousand mid the folk,

The great bowl hath inspirited thee boundlessly : so mayst
thou slay the Vritras, breaker-down of forts !

8 Of thy great might there is a threefold counterpart, the three

earths, Lord of men ! and the three realms of light.

Above this whole world, Indra, thou hast waxen great : with-
out a foe art thou, by nature, from of old,

2 The Seven Fivers : the chief rivers in the neighbourhood Qf the earliest
Aryan settlements. See I. 32. 12.

7 The great howl : the vessel containing the exhilarating Soma juice, or
the mighty libation itself. The forts are the cloud-castles of the demons of
the air which Indra destroys with his lightning : ‘ the clouds whose moving
turrets make the bastions of the storm.’ — Shelley, Witch of Atlas .

8 The three earths : perhaps the earth, the atmosphere, and the heaven.

The three realms of light : or according to S&yana, the three fires or fire in

three forms, as the sun in heaven, the lightning in mid-air, and terrestrial
fire on earth. See also I, 105. 5,

HYMN 103;]

TIIE RIG YE DA .

133

9 We invocate thee first among the Deities : thou hast become a
mighty Conqueror in fight.

May Indra fill with spirit this our singer’s heart, and make
our car impetuous, foremost in attack.

10 Thou hast prevailed, and hast not kept the booty back, in

trifling battles or in those of great account.

We make thee keen, the Mighty One, to succour us : inspire
us, Maghavan, when we defy the foe.

11 May Indra evermore be our Protector, and unimperilled may

we win the booty.

This prayer of ours may Varuna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi
and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

HYMN CHI. Indra.

That highest Indra-power of thine is distant : that which is
here sages possessed aforetime.

This one is on the earth, in heaven the other, and both unite
as flag with flag in battle.

2 He spread the wide earth out and firmly fixed it, smote with

his thunderbolt and loosed the waters.

Maghavan with his puissance struck down Ahi, rent Rauhina
to death and slaughtered Vyansa.

3 Armed with his bolt and trusting in his prowess he wandered

shattering the forts of Dasas.

Cast thy dart, knowing, Thunderer, at the Dasyu ; increase
the Arya’s might and glory, Indra.

4 For him who thus hath taught these human races, Maghavan,

bearing a fame-worthy title,

Thunderer, drawing nigh to slay the Dasyus, hath given him-
self the name of Son for glory.

1 That highest Indra-power : Benfey explains this verse as meaning : In-
dra’s might is in a certain way divided : one part of it is possessed by the
sages who by their hymns, sacrifices and libations of Soma juice give him
complete power to perform his great deeds. Sslyana says that the bun and
fire are equally the lustre of Indra, one in heaven and the other on earth ;
and that by day fire is combined with the Sun, and by night the Sun is com-
bined with fire.

2 Rauhina , said to be a demon, is, like the other fiends of drought, a dark
purple cloud that withholds the rain.

3 Ddsas : or Dasyus, the non- Aryan inhabitants of the land.

Knowing : distinguishing the Aryan from the barbarian.

4 The meaning of this verse appears to be, as Ludwig says, that Indra," in
preparing to slay the Dasyus, has become, as it were, a son to the piouS wor-
shipper who has proclaimed his great deeds to men.

134 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK /.

0 See this abundant wealth that he possesses, and put your trust
in Indra’s hero vigour.

He found the cattle, and he found the horses, he found the
plants, the forests and the waters.

6 To him the truly strong, whose deeds are many, to him the

strong Bull let us pour the Soma.

The Hero, watching like a thief in ambush, goes parting the
possessions of the godless.

7 Well didst thou do that hero deed, 0 Indra, in waking with

thy bolt the slumbering Ahi.

In thee, delighted, Dames divine rejoiced them, the flying
Martits and all Gods were joyful,

8 As thou hast smitten Sushna, Pipru, Vritra and Kuyava, and

Sambara’s forts, 0 Indra.

This prayer of ours may Yaruna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi
and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

HYMN CIY. Indra.

The altar hath been made for thee to rest on ; come like a
panting courser and be seated.

Loosen thy flying Steeds, set free thy Horses who bear thee
swiftly nigh at eve and morning.

2 These men have come to Indra for assistance : shall he not

quickly come upon these ~" 4 - l r T ™v* ?

May the Gods quell the fur ; ■■■ m l .-,, and may they lead
our folk to happy fortune.

3 He who hath only wish as his possession casts on himself, oasts

foam amid the waters.

7 Dames divine : the Consorts of the Gods.

8 Kuyava, : meaning, probably, * causing bad harvests/ is the name of an-
other of the demons of drought.

2 The Ddsa : explained by S&yana as the destroying demon. It apparently
means here a chief of non- Aryan race whom the suppliants were going to
attack.

’ 3 S&yana explains : the Asura, or demon, Kuyava, who knows the wealth
of others carries it away of himself, and being present in the water he carries
off the water with the foam. In this water which has been carried away
Kuyava’s two wives bathe. Benfey takes the foamy water to mean the ferti-
lizing rain. Ludwig's explanation is : While the poor Arya who can only wish
for the wealth which he does not possess has not even ordinary water to wash
himself in, the wives of the enemy, in the insolent pride of their riches, bathe
in milk.

THE RIG VEDA.

135

HYMN 104.]

Both wives of ICuyava in milk have bathed them : may they
be drowned within the depth of SiphsL

4 This hath his kinship checked who lives beside us : with an-

cient streams forth speeds and rules the Hero,

Anjasi, Kulisi, and Yirapatm, delighting him, bear milk upon
their waters. *

5 Soon as this Dasyu’s traces were discovered, as she who knows

her home, he sought the dwelling.

Now think thou of us, Maghavan, nor cast us away, as doth a
profligate his treas ure,

6 Indra, as such, give us a share of sunlight, of waters, sinless-

ness, and reputation. .

Do thou no harm to our yet unborn offspring : our trust is in
thy mighty Indra-power.

7 Now we, I think, in thee as such have trusted : lead us on,

Mighty One, to ample riches.

In no unready house give us, 0 Indra invoked of many, food
and drink when hungry.

8 Slay us not, Indra ; do not thou forsake us : steal not away

the joys which we delight in.

Bend not our unborn brood, strong. Lord of Bounty ! our
vessels with the life that is within them.

9 Come to us ; they have called thee Soma-lover : here is the

pressed j uice. Drink thereof for rapture.

Widely-capacious, pour it down within thee, and, invocated,
hear us like a Father.

ICuyava : perhaps a name given by the Aryans to one of the non- Aryan
chieftains.

Sijphd, is said by S&yana to be the name of a river.

4 This stanza is very obscure. The meaning appears to be that the friend-
ship of Indra, who sends down the rain as before, has put an end to the inso-
lence of Kuyava. See Ludwig, Ueber die neuesten Arbeiten auf dem Gebiete
der Rgveda-forschung.

The signification of the three rivers in the second line is obscure. Benfey
considers the names to be feminine personifications of the clouds.

. Virapatni, f the hero’s wife,’ occurs, as Dr. Hall has pointed out, in YI. 49.
7, as an epithet of Sarasvati the Goddess, and it may possibly here mean the
river Sarasvati.

5 As she who knows her dwelling ; as a cow who knows her stall.

7 In no unready house : that is, in a house well supplied and furnished.

8 The joys that we delight in : probably, our children.

Our vessels : our wives with their unborn babes. S&yana gives other ex-
planations of the expression,

136

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOR L

HYMN CY. Visvedevas.

Within the waters runs the Moon, he with the beauteous
wings in heaven.

Ye lightnings with your golden wheels, men find not your abid-
ing-place. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.

2. Surely men crave and gain their wish. Close to her husband
clings the wife,

And, in embraces intertwined, both give and take the bliss of
love. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.

3 0 never may that light, ye Gods, fall from its station in the

sky.

Ne’er fail us one like Soma sweet, the spring of our felicity.
Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.

4 I ask the last of sacrifice. As envoy he shall tell it forth.
Where is the ancient law divine ? Who is its new diffuser

now ? Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.

5 Ye Gods who yonder have your home in the three lucid realms

of heaven,

What count ye truth and what untruth ? Where is mine an-
cient call on you h Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.

6 What is your firm support of Law 1 What Yaruna’s observant

eye ?

How may we pass the wicked on the path of mighty Arya-
man ? Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.

7 I am the man who sang of old full many a laud when Soma

flowed.

Yet torturing cares consume me as the w r olf assails the thirsty
deer. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.

This Hymn is ascribed either to Trita or to Kutsa. It is addressed to the
Visvedevas on behalf of Trita who had been imprisoned in a well. See I. 52. 5.

1 Within the waters ; in the ocean of air. Me with the beauteous wings : the
Sun.

Mark this my woe : the text has only vittain me asyd roda&t, 1 know of this
of me, 0 Heaven and Earth/ which means, according to S&yana, either ‘ be
aware of this my affliction/ or £ attend to this my hymn.’

4 I ask the last : the latest or youngest of the Gods, Agni, as being contin-
ually reproduced.

5 The three lucid realms of heaven : the world is divided into earth, sky,
and heaven, and each of these, again, is sometimes spoken of as threefold.

6 The path of mighty Aryaman : probably the milky way, regarded as the

path to heaven. — Ludwig. The general meaning of " < 'his and

the two preceding verses is : Is there no longer any ' ■ ■ right

and wrong ? Is there no moral government of the world ? If there be, why am
I, a faithful worshipper, allowed to suffer this undeserved misery ?

HYMN 105.]

TEE RIG VEDA.

137

8 Like rival wives on every side enclosing ribs oppress me sore.

0 Satakratu, biting cares devour me, singer of thy praise, as

rats devour the weaver’s threads. Mark this my woe, ye
Earth and Heaven.

9 Where those seven rays are shining, thence my house and

family extend.

This Trita Aptya knoweth well, and speaketh out for
brotherhood. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.

10 May those five Bulls which stand on high full in the midst

of mighty heaven,

Having together swiftly borne my praises to the Gods, return.
Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.

11 High in the mid ascent of heaven those Birds of beauteous

pinion sit.

Back from his path they drive the wolf as he would cross the
restless fioods. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.

12 Firm is this new-wronght hymn of praise, and meet to be told

forth, 0 Gods.

The flowing of the floods is Law, Truth is the Sun’s extended
light. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.

13 Worthy of laud, 0 Agni, is that kinship which tfiou hast

with Gods.

Here seat thee like a man : most wise, bring thou the Gods
for sacrifice. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.

8 Enclosing ribs : according to Sftyana, the walls of the well in which Trita

was confined. Weaver’s threads : the meaning of thus explained by

Sftyana is uncertain. Ludwig is of opinion that wooden phallus-idols are
intended. The line recurs in X. 33. 8.

9 Those seven rags : of the Sun, says S&yana. But probably, as Ludwig
suggests, the rays are the flames of Agni. That is, Agni with his bright
beams, or the worship of Agni, is the central point through which I and
all the members of my family are connected and held together.

Trita A ptya : A mythical being who dwells in the remotest part of the
heavens, and who knows the celestial origin of the human race.

10 Those Jive Balls ; the stars of some constellation. According to Sftyana,
Indra, Yaruna, Agni, Aryaman, and Savitar, or Fire, Wind, Sun, Moon, and
Lightning. S&yau& explains uhshdnah, bulls or oxen, as ‘ shedders of benefits,’

11 Those Birds of beauteous pinion : the stars.

The wolf : darkness or eclipse of the Moon.

12 Law (ritcim.) eternal order. ‘The meaning of the word as applied to
the natural world connects itself with the alternation of day and night, the
regular passage of the sun through the heavens, or the unswerving motion of
the rain in its fall from heaven and of the streams along their courses. This
last application of the word may have determined its special sense of ‘ wafer *
in the later language. Wallis, Cosmology of the Rigveda f p, 93,

183 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK I.

14 Here seated, man-like as a priest shall wisest Agni to the Gods
Speed onward our oblations, God among the Gods, intelligent.

Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.

15 Vanina makes the holy prayer. To him who finds the path

. we pray.

He in the heart reveals his thought. Let sacred worship rise
anew. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.

16 That pathway of the Sun in heaven, made to be highly

glorified,

Is not to be transgressed, 0 Gods. 0 mortals, ye behold it
not. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.

1 7 Trita, when buried in the well, calls on the Gods to succour

him.

That call of his Brihaspati heard and released him from
distress. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.

18 A ruddy wolf beheld me once, as I was faring on my path.

He, like a carpenter whose back is aching crouched and slunk

away. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven,

19 Through this our song may we, allied with Indra, with all our

heroes conquer in the battle.

This prayer of ours may Vanina grant, and Mitra, and Aditi
and Sindh u, Earth and Heaven.

HYMN CVI. Visvedevas.

Call we for aid on Indra, Mitra, Varuna, and Agni and the
Marut host and Aditi.

Even as a chariot from a difficult ravine, bountiful Vasus,
rescue us from all distress.

16 That pathway of the Sun : according to Benfey, the way of truth, right,
eternal order, as in verse 12. According to Ludwig the path of the fc>un
between the tropics is meant. Tho Gods, says S&yana, must not disregard
the path of the Sun, because their existence depends upon him as regulator
of the seasons at which sacrifices are offered to them. Still less may men
disregard it, who as sinners do not behold or understand it aright.

17 Brihaspati ; the Lord of Prayer.

18 Like a carpenter : the comparison is not very clear. It apparently means
that the wolf crept away, arching his back or contracting his limbs, like a
carpenter bending over his work till his back aches. Sfiyana suggests also an
alternative and totally different explanation of the whole passage, by inter-
preting rriha, the wolf, as the Moon, and reading mdsaicrit, maker of months,
instead of md sakHt } me once, bee Ludwig, Uber die neuesten Arbeiten auf
dem Gebiete der iligyeda-forschung.

1 Vasm ; originally meaning { the good ’ is sometimes used, as in this place
to designate Gods in general

THE RIG VEDA.

139

HYMN 107.]

2 Come ye Idityas for our full prosperity, in conquests of the
foe, ye Gods, bring joy to us.

Even as a chariot from a difficult ravine, bountiful Yasus,
rescue us from all distress.

,3 May the most glorious Fathers aid us, and the two Goddesses,
Mothers of the Gods, who strengthen Law. '

Even as a chariot from a difficult ravine, bountiful Yasus,
rescue us from all distress.

4 To mighty Narasansa, strengthening his might, to Pushan,

ruler over men, we pray with hymns.

Even as a chariot from a difficult ravine, bountiful Yasus,
rescue us from all distress.

5 Briliaspati, make us evermore an easy path : we crave what boon

thou hast for men in rest and stir.

Like as a chariot from a difficult ravine, bountiful Yasus, rescue
us tom all distress.

6 Sunk in the pit the Bishi Kutsa called, to aid, Indra the

Yritra-slayer, Lord of power and might.

Even as a chariot tom a difficult ravine, bountiful Yasus,
rescue us from all distress.

7 May Aditi the Goddess guard us with the Gods : may the

protecting God keep us with ceaseless care.

This prayer of ours may Yaruna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi
and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

HYMN CYII. Visvedevas.

The sacrifice obtains the Gods' acceptance : be graciously
inclined to us, Adityas.

Hitherward let your favour be directed, and be our best
deliverer from trouble.

2 By praise-songs of Angirases exalted, may the Gods come to
us with their protection.

May Indra with his powers, Maruts with Maruts, Aditi with
Adityas grant us shelter.

• 3 The Fathers : the Manes or spirits of departed ancestors.

The two Goddesses : Heaven and Earth.

4 Nardsansa: a mystical name of Agni, ‘the Praise of Men. 1
PUshan : the God who nourishes men and flocks and herds.

6 Sunk in the pit : perhaps figuratively for { ia distress.’ Kutsa is the
Kishi to whom the hymn is ascribed.

. 2 Maruts with Maruts : that is, all the Maruts together, or Maruts with
their winds and storm.

140 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK L

3 This laud of oufs may Varuna and Indra, Aryaman, Agni,
Savitar find pleasant. . .

This prayer of ours may Varuna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi
and Sindhu, Earth and Heaveii.

HYMN CVIII. Indra- Agni;

On that most wondrous oar of yours, 0 Indra and Agni, which
looks round on all things living,

Take ye your stand and come to us together, and drink liba^
tions of the flowing Soma*

2 As vast as all this world is in its compass, deep as it is, with

its far-stretching surface,

So let this Soma be, Indra and Agni, made for your drinking
till your soul be sated.

3 For ye have won a blessed name together : yea, with one aim

ye strove, 0 Vritra- slayers.

So Indra-Agni, seated here together, pour in, ye Mighty Ones,
the mighty Soma.

& Both stand adorned, when fires are duly kindled, spreading the
sacred grass, with lifted ladles.

Drawn by strong Soma juice poured forth around us, come,
Indra-Agni, and display your favour.

5 The brave deeds ye have done, Indra and Agni, the forms ye

have displayed and mighty exploits,

The ancient and auspicious bonds of friendship, — for sake of
these drink of the flowing Soma.

6 As first I said when choosing you, In battle we must contend

with Asuras for this Soma.

So came ye unto this my true conviction, and drank libations
of the flowing Soma.

7 If in your dwelling, or with prince or Br&hman, ye, Indra-Agni,

Holy Ones, rejoice you.

Even from thence, ye mighty Lords, come hither, and drink
libations of the flowing Soma.

8 If with the Yadus, Turvasas, ye sojourn, with Druhyus, Anus,

Purus, Indra-Agni !

Even from thence, ye mighty Lords, come hither, and drink
libations of the flowing Soma.

4 f We have, merely, in the text, the epithets in the dual number: the
commentator supplies the Adhwaryu and liis assistant priest.’ — Wilson. Ben-
ley refers the dual epithets to Indra and Agni, translating them severally by
1 honoured/ f for whom sacred grass has been strewn/ * towards whom, the'
ladles have been uplifted.’ A

8 This verse contains the names of the five well-known Aryan tribes or fami-
lies, said to be descendants of the five similarly named sons of Yay&ti. See I. 7, 9,

HYMN 109.] TEN RIGVEDA. 141

9 Whether, 0 Indra-Agni, ye be dwelling in lowest earth, in cen-
tral, or in highest,

Even from thence, ye mighty Lox-ds, come hither, and drink
libations of the flowing Soma.

10 Whether, 0 Indr^-Agni, ye be dwelling in highest earth, in

central, or in lowest, ■*>

Even from thence, ye mighty Lords, come hither, and drink
libations of the flowing Soma,

11 Whether ye be in heaven, 0 Indra-Agni, on earth, on mourn

tains, in the herbs, or waters,

Even from thence, ye mighty Lords, come hither, and drink
libations of the flowing Soma,

12 If, when the Sun to the mid-heaven hath mounted, ye take

delight in food, 0 Indra-Agni,

Even from thence, ye mighty Lords, come hither, and drink
libations of the flowing Soma.

13 Thus having drunk your fill of our libation, win us all kinds

of wealth, Indra and Agni.

This prayer of ours may Varan a grant, and Mitra, and Aditi
and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

HYMN CIX. Indra-Agni,

Longing for weal I looked around, in spirit, for kinsmen,
Indra-Agni, or for brothers.

No providence but yours alone is with me: so have I wrought
for you this hymn for succour.

2 For I have heard that ye give wealth more freely than worth-

less son-in-law or spouse’s brother.

So offering to you this draught of Soma, I make you this ne\y
. hymn, Indra and Agni,

3 Let us not break the cords : with this petition we strive to

gain the powers of our forefathers.

9 In lowest earth , in central , or in highest : in earth, midrair, or heaven, the
word earth being used loosely for sphere or world. Or the reference may be
to the fanciful threefold division of the earth.

2 Than worthless son-in-law or spouse's brother : the worthless or defective
son-in-law, or suitor, who has not, as Y&ska explains, the necessary qualifica-
tions, is obliged to win the consent of his future father-in-law by very liberal
gifts. The maiden’s brother gives her rich presents out of natural affection.

3 Let us not break the cords ; let us not break or irterrupt the long series*
of religious rites observed by our ancestors and continued to our time. Or,
as S&yana explains, let us not cut or break off the long line of posterity, but
ask for * and obtain f descendants endowed with the vigour of their progenh

1*2 THE HYMNS OP [POOP I.

For Indra-Agni the strong drops are joyful, for here in the
bowl’s lap are both the press-stones.

4 For you the bowl divine, Indra and Agni, presses the Soma

gladly to delight you.

With hands auspicious and fair arms, ye Asvins, haste, sprinkle
it with sweetness in the waters,

5 You, I have heard, were mightiest, Indra-Agni, when Yritra

fell and when the spoil was parted.

Sit at this sacrifice, ye ever active, on the strewn grass, and
with the juice delight you.

6 Surpassing all men where they shout for battle, ye Twain ex-

ceed the earth and heaven in greatness.

Greater are ye than rivers and than mountains, 0 Indra-Agni,
and all things beside them.

7 Bring wealth and give it, ye whose arms wield thunder : Indra

and Agni, with your powers protect us.

Now of a truth these be the very sunbeams wherewith our
fathers were of old united.

8 Giv$, ye who shatter forts, whose hands wield thunder : Indra

and Agni, save us in our battles.

This prayer of ours may Yaruna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi
and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

HYMN CX. Kiblms.

The holy work I wrought before is wrought again : my sweet-
est hymn is sung to celebrate your praise.

Here, 0 ye Eibhus, is this sea for all the Gods : sate you with
Soma offered with the hallowing word.

The strong drops : the exhilarating Soma.

In the howl's lap : close to the vessel which receives the juice. But see
Ludwig, Ueber die neuesten Arbeiten, etc. pp. 85 — 88.

4 Ye Asvins : here called upon to perform the duties of the Adhvaryu and
his assistant priest, to mix the sweetness, or Soma, with water to be offered
to Indra and Agni.

7 These he the very sunbeams : The meaning of the line may be that the
worship of Indra and Agni is the great bond which has kept the Ttishi’a
ancestors united. Wilson, following S&yana, translates : c May those rays of
the Sun, by which our forefathers have attained, together, a heavenly region,
shine also upon us.’

• 1 This sea for all the Gods : this vessel containing Soma juice for all the
Gods, or for the particular class of Gods called Visvedev&h or Visvedevas.

The halloieing word: Svdhd (Ave ! Hail !) ; an exclamation used in making
oblations to the Gods,

HYMN 110.]

THE ItIG VEDA.

143

2 When, seeking your enjoyment onward from afar, ye, certain

of my kinsmen, wandered on your way,

Sons of Sudhanvan, after your long journeying, ye came unto
the home of liberal Savitar.

3 Savitar therefore gave you immortality, because ye came pro-

claiming him whom naught can hide ; ' •

And this the drinking-chalice of the Asura, which till that
time was one, ye made to he fourfold,

4 When they had served with zeal at sacrifice as priests, they,

mortal as they were, gained immortality.

The Bibhus, children of Sudhanvan, bright as suns, were in a
year’s course made associate with prayers.

5 The Bibhus with a rod measured, as ’twere a field, the single

sacrificial chalice wide of mouth,

Lauded of all who saw, praying for what is best, desiring glo-
rious fame among Immortal Gods.

6 As oil in ladles, we through knowledge will present unto the

Heroes of the firmament our hymn, —

The Bibhus who came near with this great Father’s speed, and
rose to heaven’s high sphere to eat the strengthening food,

7 Bibhu to us is Indra freshest in his might, Bibhu with powers

and wealth is giver of rich gifts.

Gods, through your favour may we on the happy day quell
the attacks of those who pour no offerings forth.

8 Out of a skin, 0 Bibhus, once ye formed a cow, and brought the-

mother close unto her calf again.

Sons of Sudhanvan, Heroes, with surpassing skill ye made
your aged Parents youthful as before. ^

2 Seeking your enjoyment : desirous of enjoying libations of' Soma juice.

My kinsmen : Sudhanvan, father of the Bibhus, was a descendant of Angl-

ras, as was also Kutsa the Iiishi of the hymn.

3 Him whom naught can hide ; or, from whom nothing can be hidden, that
is, Savitar as the Sun.

The drinking-chdlice of the Asura ; the cup that had been made by the
Asura or immortal God Tvashtar. See L 20. 6. This chalice appears to be the
moon which contains the Amrit or nectar of the Gods. The legend seems to 1
mean that Tvashtar as God of the year created it uniformly bright, and that
the Bibhus, as Gods of the seasons, made it fourfold or diversified with four
phases. See Hillebrandt, Yec' 1 3 ■ M P ' I. p- 515.

4 Associate with prayers : 4 5 6 * 8 \ ■ . he ceremonies (appropriated to

the different seasons) of the year.’ — Wilson,

5 Measured : in order to divide it into four, as is said in verse 3.

6 This great Father : Savitar as the Sun, the source of all life. Strengthening

food: Soma.

8 A skin : perhaps the dried-up earth. A cow : the earth refreshed by the
Jlains. The mother: the earth. Her calf: the autumn Sun. Parents: Hea-
ven and Earth,

144 THE IIYMNS OF [BOOK 7.

9 Help us with strength where spoil is won, 0 Indra : joined
with the Ribhus give us varied bounty.

This prayer of ours may Yaruna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi
and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

HYMN CXI. Ribhus.

Working with still they wrought the lightly rolling car : they
wrought the Bays who bear Indra and bring great gifts.

The Ribhus for their Parents made life young again ; and fa-
shioned for the calf a mother by its side.

2 For sacrifice make for us active vital power ; for skill and wis-

dom food with noble progeny.

Grant to our company this power most excellent, that with a
family all-heroic we may dwell.

3 Do ye, 0 Ribhus, make prosperity for us, prosperity for car,

ye Heroes, and for steed.

Grant us prosperity victorious evermore, conquering foes in
battle, strangers or akin.

4 Indra, the Ribhus’ Lord, I invooate for aid, the Ribhus, Y&jas,

Jdaruts to the Soma draught.

Yaruna, Mitra, both, yea, and the Asvins Twain : let them
speed us to wealth, wisdom, and victory.

5 May Ribhu send prosperity for battle, may Y&ja conquering

in the' fight protect us.

This prayer of ours may Yaruna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi
and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

V HYMN CXII. ^ Asvins,

To give first thought to them, I worship Heaven and Earth,
and Agni, fair bright glow, to hasten their approach.

Come hither unto us, 0 Asvins, with those aids wherewith
in fight ye speed the war-cry to the spoil.

2 Ample, unfailing, they have mounted as it were an eloquent
car that ye may think of us and give.

Come hither unto us, 0 Asvins, with those aids wherewith ye
help our thoughts to further holy acts.

4 Vdjas : that is, Y&ja and his two brothers Ribhu and Vibhvan, more
usually called collectively the Ribhavah or Ribhus. Similarly, in this line
j the Ribhus are Ribhu and his brothers,

1 To give first thought to them .* Heaven and Earth are to he the first objects!
of invocation, Agni, with his signal of bright fire, is also called upon to
hasten the approach of the Asvins to the sacrifice.

2 They : our offerings. An eloquent car : the chariot of our hymns, *

HYMN 112.]

THE RIG Y EE A.

145

3 Ye by , the might which heavenly nectar giveth you are in

supreme dominion Lords of all these folk.

Come hither unto us, 0 Asvins, with those aids wherewith ye,
Heroes, made the barren cow give milk.

4 The aids wherewith the Wanderer through his offspring’s

might, or the Two-Mothered Son shows swiftest mid the
swift;

• Wherewith the sapient one acquired his triple lore, — Come
hither unto us, 0 Asvins, with those aids.

5 Wherewith ye raised from waters, prisoned and fast bound,

Eebha, and Vandana to look upon the light;

Wherewith ye succoured Kanva as he strove to win, — Come
hither unto us, 0 Asvins, -with those aids.

6 Wherewith ye rescued Antaka when languishing deep in the

pit, and Bhujyu with unfailing help,

And comforted Karkandhu, Vayya, in their woe, — Come
hither unto us, 0 Asvins, with those aids.

7 Wherewith ye gave Suchanti wealth and happy home, and

made the fiery pit friendly for Atri’s sake ;

Wherewith ye guarded Purukutsa, Prisnigu, — Come hither
unto us, 0 Asvins, with those aids.

3 Heavenly nectar : the Soma. The barren cow : of the Bialii Sayu,

4 The Wanderer: according to Say ana, the Wind. Agni is called his
offspring as having been excited into flame by the wind. Or MAtarisvan may
be intended (see L 31. 3), who brought Agni from heaven.

The Two-Mothered Son : Agni sprung from the two fire-sticks.

The sapient one : said to he the Bishi Kakshiv&n. His triple lore : know-
ledge of sacrificial food, oblations of clarified butter, and libations of Soma
‘juice. The meaning of the passage is uncertain.

5 Mebha and Vandana are said to have been thrown into wells by the Asuras
or demons, Kanva was somewhat similarly treated. ‘ In these, and similar in-
stances subsequently noticed/ says Wilson, ‘ we may possibly have allusions to
the dangers undergone by some of the first teachers of Hinduism among the
people whom they sought to civilize/

6 Antaka : said to have been a Bajarshi or regal Bishi. Bhujyu : a B&jarshi,
son of Tugra, rescued when in danger of drowning. Vayya: see II. 13. 12 ;
IY. 19. 6.

7 Purukutsa : see I. 63. 7. Of Suchanti and Prisnigu nothing more is
related.

Atri : see I. 45. 3; 51. 3. He is said to have been thrown by the Asuras into
a fiery pit.

10

^0^

146 TEE HYMNS OF [BOOK L

8 Mighty Ones, with what powers ye gave Paravrij aid what

time ye made the blind and lame to see and walk ;
Wherewith ye set at liberty the swallowed quail, — Come hither
unto us, 0 Asvins, with those aids.

9 Wherewith ye quickened the most sweet exhaustless flood, and

•comforted Vasishtha, ye who ne’er decay ;

And to Srutarya, Kutsa, Narya gave your help, — Come hither
unto us, 0 Asvins, with those aids.

10 Wherewith ye helped, in battle of a thousand spoils, Vispalfc

seeking booty, powerless to move.

Wherewith ye guarded friendly Yasa, Asva’s son, — Come hither
unto us, 0 Asvins, with those aids.

11 Whereby the cloud, ye Bounteous Givers, shed sweet rain

for Dirghasravas, for the merchant Ausija,

Wherewith ye helped Kakshiv&n, singer of your praise, — Come
hither unto us, 0 Asvins, with those aids.

12 Wherewith ye made Has a swell full with water-floods, and

urged to victory the car without a horse ;

Wherewith Trisoka drove forth his recovered cows, — Come
hither unto us, 0 Asvins, with those aids.

8 Pardvrij : according to S fly an a, the name of a man. Benfey explains the
word as the setting Sun (sideways departing), called blind because his light is
nearly gone, and lame because he no longer travels. The swallowed quail :
swallowed, or seized, by a wolf. The quail is said by Yftska, as quoted by
S!dy an a, to signify the Dawn seized and swallowed by the bright Sum Benfey
takes it to mean the Sun after setting.

9 As the earliest bringers of light, the Asvins may be said to quicken and

animate by their coming the streams of the ocean of air. We are not told
how the famous Vasishtha was comforted; and Srutarya, Kutsa , and Nary a are
merely said by S&yana to be three Rishis. Kutsa has been mentioned before.
See I. 33. 14 ; 51. 6 ; 63. 3. ’ *

1 0 Vispald ; a lady who was wounded in battle, and made whole by the
As vine. See 1, 116, 15 ; 117. 11 ; 118. 8 ; X. 89. 8. Powerless to move ; pierced
through with a lance, according to Ludwig. The meaning of atharvyam is un-
certain. Fn-sa .* a celebrated Rishi, the seer of Hymn VIIJ. 46.

11 Dirghasravas : said to be a Rishi who traded for his livelihood. Ausija
h a patronymic meaning son of Usij. KaJcshtvdn is also said to have been a
son of Usij, See I. 18. 1.

12 Basd : ‘ The Ras&, known to the Zoroastrians as the Ranhd, was origin-
ally the name of a real river, but when the Aryas moved away from it into
the Punjab, it assumed a mythical character, and became a kind of Okeanos,
surrounding the extreme limits of the earth,’ — M. Huller, Vedic Hymns,
I. 323. No further account is given of the events mentioned in this verse.

HYMN 112.]

the mar mba.

147

1 3 Wherewith ye compass round the Sun when far away, strengths

ened MandMtar in his tasks as lord of lands,

And to sage Bharadvaja gave protecting help, — Come hither
unto us, 0 Asvins, with those aids.

14 Wherewith, when Sambara was slain, ye guarded well great

Atithigva, Divodasa, Kasoju, *

And Trasadasyu when the forts w-ere shattered down, — Come
hither unto us, 0 Asvins, with those aids.

15 Wherewith ye honoured the great drinker Vamra, and Upas-

tuta and Kali when he gained his wife,

And lent to Vyasva and to Prithi favouring help, — Come
hither unto us, 0 Asvins, with those aids.

1*6 Wherewith, 0 Heroes, ye vouchsafed deliverance to Sayu
Atri, and to Manu long ago ;

Wherewith ye shot your shafts in Syumarasmi’s cause, — Come
hither unto us, 0 Asvins, with those aids.

17 Wherewith Patharva, in his majesty of form, shone in his
course like to a gathered kindled fire ;

Wherewith ye helped Saryata in the. mighty fray, — Come hither
unto us, 0 Asvins, with those aids.

13 The Asvins .are said to compass the Sun in order to .save him from
■eclipse.

Mandh&tar : a R&jarshi or regal Rish'i. See VIII. 39. 8.

Phavadv&ja : a very celebrated Rishi, said : to be the son of Brihaspati.

14 Sambara : one of the demons of drought slain by Indra. Sayan a takes
atithigvdm and kasojum as epithets of Divod&sa the king who was aided by
the Asvins : ‘ the hospitable Divod&sa as he sought the water (through fear of
the Asuras).’ Trasadasyu : a prince renowned for his victories and liberality,
and for the favour shown him by the Gods. See IY. 42. 9 ; VII. 19,. 3 ; YHI.
9. 21 ; 19. 36 ; 36. 7.

15 Vamra : called a Rish'i, son of Vikhanas, by SHyana. ‘‘ The test calls

I ♦... *■ much and variously, which the Scholiast explains,

t., '- '■ ■ ■ , ■■ .-'thly moisture or dew. 5 — Wilson. Benfey thinks that

J ,■ ,■ r the name Yamra.

Upastuta ; taken by Sayana as an epithet of Yamra, * praised by all around
him.’

Kali : a Rishi, mentioned again .in X. 39,. 8. 'The Asvins may have restored
him to youth.

Vyasva : taken by Sayana as an epithet of Prithi, * horseless, nr who had lost
his horse.’ Prithi is said to have been a R&jarehi.

16 Sayu ; see note on verse 8 of this Hymn; -see also I. 116. 22 ; 117. 20.

Atri : see note on verse 7 ; also I. 116. 8.

Manu : this Manu is said by S&yana to have been a Rajarshi whom the
.Asvins taught to sow barley and .other grain,

Sydmaraxmi ; said to have been a Rishi, seer of hymns 77, 78, Book X.

17 Patharvd : said by S&yana to have been a R&jarshi. Benfey thinks that
the word patharvan, is a dialectical form of patrdrvan , 4 having winged horses.’
Ludwig considers Sayana’ s explanation (which I have followed) to be er~
.roneouB and impossible He thinks that Palh&ru was the name o.f some

148 TEE EYMiYS OF [BOOK L

18 Wherewith, Angirases 1 ye triumphed in your heart, and

onward went to liberate the hood of milk ;

Wherewith ye helped the hero Manu with new strength, —
Come hither unto us, 0 Asvins, with those aids.

19 Wherewith ye brought a wife for Yimada to wed, wherewith

ye freely gave the ruddy cows away ;

Wherewith ye carried home Sndevi to Sudas, — Come hither
unto us, 0 Asvins, with those aids.

20 Wherewith ye bring great bliss to him who offers gifts, where-

with ye have protected Bhujyu, Adhrigu,

And good and gracious SubhaiA and Bitastup, — Come hither
unto us, 0 Asvins, with those aids.

21 Whrerewith ye served Krisanu where the* shafts were shot,

and helped the young man’s horse to swiftness in the race ;
Wherewith ye bring delicious honey to the bees, — Come hither
unto us, O Asvins, with those aids.

stronghold which the Asvins saved from burning, either through the instru-
mentality of a man called Jathara or by means ' of the rain-clouds. He ac-
cordingly renders : ‘ By means of which, at Patharft, through the power of
Jathara (violence of the rain-clouds) the fire did not flame up, though
prepared and lighted on the way.’ The passage is difficult, and the interpreta-
tions put upon the words hy Sayan a certainly appear to be forced, but on the
whole I think it safer to follow his guidance. I may observe here that * na, 1
which in the Veda means both ‘ not’ and ‘ like * sometimes makes the mean-
ing of a passage uncertain. In this line S&yana takes it in the latter sense,
and Ludwig in the former.

Sarydta : perhaps the same as Sarv&ti, a son of Manu Vaiva.svata.

18 Angirases : the text has Angiras only in the singular form, which may
stand, as Ludwig remarks, for the dual. Wilson, following Sftyana, translates :
‘Angiras, (praise the Asvins).’ S&yatia supposes the Kishi to address himself
by this title. Benfey joins angiras with the following word, making anyiro -
mdnasd, ‘through affection for the Angirases.’

The flood of milk : . the cows shut up in the oave, that is, the rain-clouds
prevented from pouring out their water.

Manu : see verse 16.

19 Yimada : a Kishi, whose name occurs again in 1. 116. 1 ; 117. 20 ; VIII.

9. lo j X. 20. 10 , and X. 23. 7. The wife is said to have been the daughter
of Purumitra. °

The ruddy cows : perhaps the red rain- clouds.

Sudds ; son of Pijivana. See I. 47. 7.

20 Bhujyu: see note on verse 6. Adhrigu, taken by S&yana as a proper name
is said to have been' a sacrificer of the Gods. Bitastup is called a Kishi!
S&yana takes suhhdrdm as an adjective, but has to supply isham food, for it -
to qualify.

21 Ei/isdnu : the Keres^ni of the Avesta ; one of the guardians of the
celestial Boma. See IV. 27. 3.

The young man : whose horse was aided, was Purukutsa.

HYMN 113.]

THE RIGVEDA.

149

22 Wherewith ye speed the hero as he fights for kiiie in hero

battle, in the strife for land and sons,

Wherewith ye safely guard his horses an<i his ear, — Come
hither unto us, 0 Asvins, with those aids.

23 Wherewith ye, Lords of Hundred Powers, helped Kutsa, son

of Arjuni, gave Turviti and Habhiti strength*

Favoured Dhvasanti and lent Purushanti help, — Come hither
unto us, 0 Asvins, with those aids.

24 Make ye our speech effectual, 0 ye Asvins, and this our hymn,

ye mighty Wonder-Workers.

In luckless game I call on you for succour : strengthen us also
on the field of battle.

25 With undiminished blessings, 0 ye Asvins, for evermore both

night and day protect us.

This prayer of ours may Varuna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi
and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

HYMN CXIIL Dawn.

This light is come, amid all lights the fairest ; born is the bril-
liant, far-extending brightness.

Night, sent away for Savitar’s uprising, hath yielded up a birth-
place for the Morning.

2 The Fair, the Bright is come with her white offspring; to her

the Hark One hath resigned her dwelling.

Akin, immortal, following each other, changing their colours
both the heavens move onward.

3 Common, unending is the Sisters’ pathway ; taught by the

Gods, alternately they travel.

Fair-formed, of different hues and yet one-minded, Night and
Hawn clash not, neither do they tarry.

4 Bright leader of glad sounds, our eyes behold her ; splendid

in hue she hath unclosed the portals. *

23 Kutsa : has been mentioned before as a favourite of Indra. See I.
51, 6. Turviti : see I. 36. 18. Dabhiti : see II. 18. 9 ; 15. 9 ; IV. 30, 21 ;
VI. 20. 13 ; 26. 6. Purushanti : a liberal prince. See IX. 5. 8. 3.

-24 In luckless game ; a metaphor borrowed from dicing ; that is,' in a time
of difficulty, perhaps the eve of a desperate battle. S&yana, following a dif-
ferent derivation of the -word, explains it, in the absence of light, or ill the
last watch of night, when the Asvins are especially to be worshipped.

1 Savitar : the Sun.

2 Her white of spring ; white clouds that attend her. Or the word in the
text may be rendered 1 2 * 4 bright offspring/ the Sun whom she precedes.

Both the heavens : or Day and Night.

4 Leader of glad sounds ; awakener of ‘ the charm of earliest birds 5 and

the joyful voices of other animals.

150 THE HYMNS OF {BOOK L

She, stirring tip the world, hath shown us riches : Dawn hath
awakened every living creature.

5 Bich Dawn, she sets afoot the coiled-up sleeper, one for enjoy-
ment, one for wealth or worship,

Those who saw little for extended vision. All living creature^
hath the Dawn awakened.

6 One to high sway, one to exalted, glory, one to pursue his gain,
and one his labour :

All to regard their different vocations, all moving creatures
hath the Dawn awakened.

7 We see her there, the Child of Heaven, apparent, the young

Maid, flushing in her shining raiment.

Thou sovran Lady of all earthly treasure, flush on us here-,
auspicious Dawn, this morning'.

8 She, first of 1 endless moms to come hereafter, follows the path

of moms that have departed.

Dawn, at her rising, Urges forth the living : him who is dead
she wakes not from his slumber.

9 As thou, Dawn,- hast caused Agni to be kindled, and with the

SuiTs eye hast: revealed creation.

• And hast awakened men to offer worship, thou hast performed,
for Gods, a noble service.

10 How long a time, and they shall be together, — Dawns that

have shone and Dawns to shine hereafter ?

She yearns for former Dawns with eager longing, and goes forth
gladly shining with the’ others

11 Gone are the men who in the days before us looked on the

rising of the earlier Morning.

We, we the living, now behold her brightness, and they come
nigh who shall hereafter see her.

5 Those who saw little .* during the darkness of night.

6 This verr ' - 11 ■ b to a division into four castes or classes, regal

and military, ■ ■■ ■ , and servile; But verses 4, 5, ft seem to be

separated by : ■■ ■■ ■ ■ the rest of the hymn, and may perhaps be a

later addition to it.

9 Caused Agni to be kindled : daybreak being the proper time for lighting
the sacrificial fires.

10 The meaning appears to be : How long have we to live? When will
all our future Hawns be with those that have passed away ? Wilson, follow-
ing Sftyana, translates : ‘ For how long a period is it that the dawns have
risen ? For how long a period will they rise ? *

She yearns : the Hawn that now shines as the first of Dawns to come is
already eager to join those that have past.

HYMN 113.1

THE El GY EDA.

151

12 Foe-chaser, bora of Law, the Law's protectress, joy-giver, waker

of all pleasant voices,

Auspicious, bringing food for Gods' enjoyment, shine on us
here, most bright, 0 Dawn, this morning.

13 From days eternal hath Dawn shone, the Goddess, and shows

this light to-day, endowed with riches.

So will she shine on days to come ; immortal she moves on in
her own strength, undecaying.

14 In the sky's borders hath she shone in splendour : the Goddess

hath thrown off the veil of darkness..

Awakening* the world with purple horses, on her well-harnessed
chariot Dawn approaches.

15 Bringing all life-sustaining blessings with her, showing herself

she sends forth brilliant lustre.

Last of the countless mornings that have vanished, first of
bright morns to come hath Dawn arisen.

16 Arise ! the breath, the life, again hath reached us : darkness

hath passed away, and light approaoheth.

She for the Sun hath left a path to travel : we have arrived
where men prolong existence.

17 Singing the praises of refulgent Mornings with his hymn's web

the priest, the poet, rises.

Shine then to-day, rich Maid, on him who lauds thee, shine
down on us the gift of life and offspring.

18 Dawns giving sons all heroes, kine and horses,, shining upon

the man who brings oblations, —

These let the Soma-presser gain when ending his glad songs
louder than the voice of Vayu.

19 Mother of Gods, Adit i’s form of glory, ensign of sacrifice, shine

forth exalted.

Rise up, bestowing praise on our devotion : all-bounteous, make
us chief among the people.

20 Whatever splendid wealth the Dawns bring with them to bless

the man who offers praise and worship,

Even that may Mitra, Varuna vouchsafe us, and Aditi and
Sindliu, Earth and Heaven.

12 Evil spirits vanish when Dawn appears. She comes in accordance with
the eternal law of the universe which she observes and guards. Her coming
is the signal for men to offer oblations to the Gods.

16 Where men prolong existence : a new life begins at the return of day -light.

17 His hymn’s xoeh : the words which he weaves, or carefully composes.

18 Louder than the voice of Vdyu : louder even than the roaring of the
wind. Wilson translates: c At the conclusion of his praises, (enunciated),
like the wind, (.with speed).’

152 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK I.

HYMN CXIY. Rudra.

To the strong Rudra bring we these our songs of praise, to
him the Lord, of Heroes, with the braided hair,

That it be well with all our cattle and our men, that in this
village ill be healthy and well-fed.

.2 Be gracious unto us, 0 Rudra, bring us joy; thee, Lord of
Heroes, thee with reverence will we serve.

Whatever health and strength our father Manu won by sacrifice
may we, under thy guidance, gain.

■ 3 By worship of the Gods may we, 0 Bounteous One, 0 Rudra,
gain thy grace, Ruler of valiant men.

Come to our families, bringing them bliss : may we, whose
heroes are uninjured, bring thee sacred gifts.

4 Hither we call for aid the wise, the wanderer, impetuous Rudra,

perfecter of sacrifice.

May he repel from us the anger of the Gods : verily we desire
his favourable grace.

5 Him with the braided hair we call with reverence down, the

wild-boar of the sky, the red, the dazzling shape.

May he, his hand filled full of sovran medicines, grant us pro-
tection, shelter, and a home secure.

6 To him the Maruts* Father is this hymn addressed, to streng-

then Rudra’s might, a song more sweet than sweet.

Grant us, Immortal One, the food which mortals eat : be
gracious unto me, my seed, my progeny.

7 0 Rudra, barm not either great or small of us, harm not the

growing hoy, harm not the full-grown man.

Slay not a sire among us, slay no mother here, and to our
own dear bodies, Rudra, do no harm.

8 Harm us not, Rudra, in our seed and progeny, harm us not

in the living, nor in cows or steeds.

Slay not our heroes in the fury of thy wrath. Bringing
oblations evermore we call to thee.

1 Rudra,; generally explained as the Roarer, from the sound of stormy
winds, the God of tempests and father of the Maruts. He is called Kapar -
din as wearing hair braided and knotted like a cowry shell (kapar da ). Prof.
Pischel (Yedische Studien, I. 55. sqip) derives Rudra (the Red, the Brilliant)
from a lost root rud , to be red.

2 Won by sacrifice : that is, as an institutor of earliest sacrifice, enabled us
to obtain by offerings to the Gods.

HYMN 115.]

THE RIGVEDA.

153

9 Even as a herdsman I have brought thee hymns of praise :
0 Father of the Maruts, give us happiness.

Blesshd is thy most favouring benevolence, so, verily, do we
desire thy saving help.

10 Far be thy dart that killeth men or cattle ; thy, bliss be with

us, 0 thou Lord of Heroes.

Be gracious unto us, 0 God, and bless us, and then vouchsafe
us doubly-strong protection.

11 We, seeking help, have spoken and adored him : may Budra,

girt by Maruts, hear our calling.

This prayer of ours may Yaruna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi
and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

HYMN CXV. Sfirya.

The brilliant presence of the Gods hath risen, the eye of
Mitra, Yaruna and Agni.

The soul of all that moveth not or moveth, the Sun hath
filled the air and earth and heaven.

2' Like as a young man followeth a maiden, so doth the Sun
the Dawn, refulgent Goddess ;

Where pious men extend their generations, before the
Auspicious One for happy fortune.

3 Auspicious are the Sim’s Bay-coloured Horses, bright, chang-

ing hues, meet for our shouts of triumph.

Bearing our prayers, the sky’s ridge have they mounted, and
in a moment speed round earth and heaven.

4 This is the Godhead, this the nrght of Surya : he hath

withdrawn what spread o’er work unfinished.

When he hath loosed his Horses from their station, straight
over all Night spreadoth out her garment.

9 Even as a herdsman : as a herdsman prays for the well-being of his
cattle, so the poet prays for the prosperity of those for whom lie speaks.

2 The exact meaning of the second line is somewhat -uncertain. As I
have rendered it, in accordance with Ludwig, it reminds one of Shelley’s,
f Man, the imperial shape, then multiplied His generations under the pavilion
Of the Sun’s throne.’ Wilson, following S£ ■ ’ ■ " ‘At which

season pious men perform (the ceremonies , ^es,’ S&yana

proposes an alternative rendering by taking ynglni (generations, . ages,) to
mean f yokes for ploughs’ ; * for, at this season, men seeking to propitiate the
gods by the profit which agriculture yields, equip their ploughs.’

4 He hath withdrawn : that is, says Wilson, ‘ the cultivator or artisan
desists from his lat .■ ■’ unfinished, upon the setting of the sun’;

when the sun 2 * 4 has ■ ■ ■ \ / himself) the diffused (light which has

been shed) upon the unfinished task,’

154 TEE EYMNS OF [BOOK 1,

5 In the shy's lap the Sun this form assumeth that Yaruna and

Mitra may behold it.

His Bay Steeds well maintain his power eternal, at one time
bright and darksome at another.

6 This day, f O Gods, while Surya is ascending, deliver us from

trouble and dishonour.

This prayer of ours may Yaruna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi
and Sin:lhu, Earth and Heaven.

HYMN CXYI. Asvins.

I trim like grass my song for the Nasatyas, and send their
lauds forth as the wind drives rain-clouds,

Who, in a chariot rapid as an arrow, brought to the youthful
Yimada a consort,

2 Borne on by rapid steeds of mighty pinion, or proudly trust-

ing in the Gods' incitements.

That stallion ass of yours won, 0 Nasatyas, that thousand in
the race, in Yama’s contest.

3 Yea, Asvins, as a dead man leaves his riches, Tugra left Bhuj-

yu in the cloud of waters.

Ye brought him back in animated vessels, traversing air, un-
wetted by tbe billows.

& Bhujyu ye bore with wingfcd things, Nasatyas, which for three
nights, three days full swiftly travelled.

To the sea’s farther shore, the strand of ocean, in three cars,
hundred-footed, with six horses.

5 Ye wrought that hero exploit in the ocean which giveth no
support, or hold, or station,

What time ye carried Bhujyu to his dwelling, borne in a ship
with hundred oars, 0 Asvins.

5 His power eternal , as maker and ruler of day and night.

This Hymn and the five following are ascribed to the Rishi Kakshiv&n,

1 Grass : the sacred grass which is spread on the altar.

Ndmtyas : a common name of the Asvins. See I. 3. 3.

Yimuda : the Asvins assisted Vimada, who was attacked when returning
home with his newly- won bride, whom they carried to his house in their own
chariot. Most of the deeds ascribed to the Asvins in this hymn have been
mentioned in I. 112.

2 Stallion ass ; that draws the car of the Asvins. See I. 34. 9.

Tama’s contest : apparently the race instituted by the Gods when Praj&pati
(here represented by Yama) gave his daughter Surya in marriage to King
Soma, the Moon, as related in Aitareya-Br&hmana, IY. 2. See Ehni, Der My-
thus des Yama, p. 160.

3 Bhujyu : see I. 112, 6.

5 * This,’ observes Wilson, e is a rather unintelligible account of a sea- voy-
age, although the words of the test do not admit of any other rendering.’

HYMN 116.]

TEE REEVED A.

155

6 The white horse which of old ye gave Aghasva, Asvins, a gift

to be his wealth for- ever, —

Still to be' praised is that your glorious present, still to be
famed is the brave horse of Pedu.

7 0 Heroes, ye gave wisdom to Kakshiv&n who ^sprang from

Pajra’s line, who sang your praises.

Ye poured forth from the hoof of your strong charger a hun-
dred jars of wine as from a strainer

8 Ye warded off with cold the fire’s fierce burning ; food very

* rich in nourishment ye furnished.

Atri, cast downward in the cavern, Asvins, ye brought, with
all his people, forth to comfort.

9 Ye lifted up the well, 0 ye NAsatyas, and set the base on high

to open downward.

Streams flowed for folk of Gotama who thirsted, like rain to
bring forth thousandfold abundance.

10 Ye from the old Chyav&na, 0 Nasatyas, stripped, as ? twere

mail, the skin upon his body,

Lengthened his life when all had left him helpless, Dasras !
and made him lord of youthful maidens.

11 Worthy of praise and worth the winning, Heroes, is that your

favouring succour, 0 Nasatyas,

What time ye, knowing well his case, delivered Yandana from
the pit like hidden treasure.

12 That mighty deed of yours, for gain, 0 Heroes, as thunder

heraldeth the rain, I publish,

When, by the horse’s head, Atharvan^s offspring Dadhyach
made known to you the Soma’s sweetness.

6 Ayhdsva ; another name of Pedu ; or an epithet of Pedu ‘ having had or
vicious horses.’ Pedu was a royal Rishi who worshipped the Asvins and was
thus rewarded.

7 Kakshivdn ; a famous Ilishi, (see I. 18. 1,) a descendant of the Pajras or

Angirases. Strong charger : that is, the ■ "*v’’ 1 “ud, from which the

Asvins poured down copious showers. Of. ■ ■ 1 ■ ■ , , of the horse Pegasus

and the fountain Hippocrene.

8 Atri : see I. 112, 7.

9 The well ; that is the watery cloud. This deed is ascribed to the Maruts
in I. 85. 11.

10 Dasras : a name of the Asvins ; Wonder-Workers, or Mighty Ones.

11 Vandana : see I. 112. 5.

12 By the horses head : f Indra, having taught the sciences called Pravcny
gyavidyd and Madhumdyil to Dadhyach, threatened that he would cut off his
head if ever he taught them to any one else. The Asvins prevailed upon him
to teach them the prohibited knowledge, and, to evade Indra’s threat, took off
the head of the sage, replacing it by that of a horse.’ — Wilson. See I. 84. 13,

THE HYMNS OF

156

t BOOK l *

13 In the great rite the wise dame called, Nasatyas, you, Lords

of many treasures, to assist her.

Yc heard the weakling’s wife, as ’twere an order, and gave to
her a son Hiranyahasta.

14 Ye from tjie wolfs jaws, as ye stood together, set free the quail,

0 Heroes, 0 Nasatyas.

Ye, Lords of many treasures, gave the poet his perfect vision
as he mourned his trouble.

15 When in the time of night, in Khela’s battle, a leg was se veiled

like a wild bird’s pinion,

Straight ye gave VispaH a leg of iron that she might move
what time the conflict opened.

16 His father robbed Bijrasva of his eye-sight who for the sh e-wolf

slew a hundred wethers.

Ye gave him eyes, Nasatyas, Wonder-Workers, Physicians, that
he saw with sight uninjured.

17 The Daughter of the Sun your car ascended, first reaching as

it were the goal with coursers.

All Deities within their hearts assented, and ye, Nasatyas, are
close linked with glory,

18 When to his house ye came, to Divodasa, hasting to Bharad-

vaja, 0 ye Asvins,

The car that came with you brought splendid riches : a por-
poise and a bull were yoked together.

IB The weakling's wife : or Vadhrimati, which has that meaning.

14 Set free the quail: see I. 112. 8.

15 Khcla' $ battle ; the Commentator says that IChela was a whose

relative Vispal4 lost a foot in battle and received an iron leg from the Asvins
at the prayer of Agastya, Khela’s family priest. See I. 112. 10.

16 Rijrdsva , mentioned in I. 101. 17, was one of the sons of YrisMgir. The
she- wolf for whom* he slaughtered the sheep was one of the asses of the Asvins
in disguise, and the Asvins consequently restored to him the eye-sight of which
his angry father had deprived him.

17 The Daughter of the Sun : ‘ Stirya, it is related, was desirous of giving
his daughter Sftryd to Soma ; but all the gods desired her as a wife. They
agreed that he who should first reach the sun, as a goal, should wed the dam-
sel. The Asvins were victorious ; and Sfiry4, well pleased by their success,
rushed immediately into their chariot.’ — Wilson. See note on verse 2 of tills
hymn.

18 Divoddsa: see I. 112. 14. His family priest was one of the Bliarad-
vdjas. The Asvins, it is said, yoked the porpoise and the bull together as a
proof of power.

HYMN 117.]

THE RIGVEDA,

157

19 Ye, bringing wealth with rule, and life with offspring, life rich

in noble heroes, 0 Nasatyas,

Accordant came with strength to JahmTs children who offered
you thrice every day your portion.

20 Ye bore away at night by easy pathways Jahuslja compassed

round on every quart er,

And, with your car that cleaves the foe asunder, Nasatyas
ne’er decaying ! rent the mountains.

21 One morn ye strengthened Vasa for the battle, to gather spoils

that might be told in thousands.

With Indra joined ye drove away misfortunes, yea, foes of
Prithusravas, 0 ye Mighty.

22 From the deep well ye raised on high the water, so that Bich-

atka’s son, Sara, should drink it ;

And with your might, to help the weary Sayu, ye made the
barren cow yield milk, Nasatyas.

23 To Visvaka, Nasatyas ! son of Krishna, the righteous man

who sought your aid and praised you,

Ye with your powers restored, like some lost creature, his son
Vishuapu for liis eyes to look on.

24 Asvins, ye raised, like Soma in a ladle, Bebha, who for ten

days and ten nights, fettered

Had lain in cruel bonds, immersed and wounded, suffering
sore affliction, in the waters.

25 I have declared your wondrous deeds, 0 Asvins : may this be

mine, and many kinc and heroes.

May I, enjoying lengthened life, still seeing, enter old age
as ’twere the house I live in.

HYMN CXVTI. Asvins,

Asvins, your ancient priest invites you hither to gladden you
with draughts of meath, of Soma.

Our gift is on the grass, our song apportioned : with food and
strength come hither, 0 N&satyas.

1 9 Jahmi’s children : Jahnu was a Maharshi or great Kishi.

21 Vasa ; seel. 112. 10. Prithusravas appears to be identical with Prb
thusravas Kan it a, mentioned in VIII. 46. 21, whose family priest was Vasa.

22 Sayu : has been mentioned in I. 132, 16. Of Sara in this verse and of
Visvaka, Krishna, and Vi&hn&pu in the next we are only told that they were
Bishis.

24 Pehha: seel. 112. 5.

25 May this he mine : may I he master of this place or district, a substan-
tive of some such signification being understood.

153 TEE HYMNS OF [BOOK I.

2 That car of yours, swifter than thought, 0 Asvins, which

drawn by brave steeds cometh to the people,

Whereon ye seek the dwelling of the pious, — come ye thereon
to our abode, 0 Heroes.

3 Ye -freed sage Atri, whom tire Five Tribes honoured, from the

strait pit, ye Heroes, with his people,

Baffling the guiles of the malignant JDasyu, repelling them, ye
Mighty, in succession.

4 Rebha the sage, ye mighty Heroes, Asvins I whom, like a

horse, vile men had sunk in water, —

Him, wounded, with your wondrous powers ye rescued : your
exploits of old time endure for ever.

. 5 Ye brought forth Vandana, ye Wonder- Workers, for triumph,
like fair gold that hath been buried,

Like one who slumbered in destruction’s bosom, or like the
Sun when dwelling in the darkness.

6 KakshivUn, Pajra’s son, must laud that exploit of yours,

Nasatyas, Heroes, ye who wander !

When from the hoof of your strong horse ye showered a
hundred jars of honey for the people.

7 To Krishpa’s son, to Visvaka who praised you, 0 Heroes, ye

restored his son Vishnapu.

To Ghoshft, living in her father’s dwelling, stricken in years,
ye gave a husband, Asvins.

8 Rushatt, of the mighty people, Asvins, ye gave to Syava of

the line of Kanva.

This deed of yours, ye Strong Ones, should be published, that
ye gave glory to the son of Nrishad.

9 0 Asvins, wearing many forms at pleasure, on Pedu ye bestow-

ed a fleet-foot courser,

Strong, winner of a thousand spoils, resistless, the serpent-
slayer, glorious, triumphant.

3 Atri: see I. 116. 8. The Five Tribes: are the confederate Aryan families
named in the note to I. 7. 9.

4 Rebha : see I. 112. 5. Like a horse : sunk deep in water like a horse when
he is bathed in a river.

f» Vandana: see I. 116. 11.

6 Kalcshtvdn: see I. 116. 7. Strong horse ; seel. 116. 7.

7 Ghoshd : Kakshiv&n’s daughter, said to have been afflicted with leprosy
and healed by the Asvins, who found her a husband.

8 Stjdva : a llishi whom the Asvins cured of leprosy, and enabled to marry
Pushati. The son of Nrishad : Kanva or his descendant Sy&va.

9 Pedu : see I. 116. 6. The serpent-slayer : see IX. 88. 4, and Hymns of the
Atharva-veda, X. 4, 47.

HYMN 117.]

THE RIG VEDA,

159

10 These glorious things are yours, ye Bounteous Givers; prayer,

praise in both worlds are your habitation.

0 Asvins, when the sons of Pajra call you, send strength with
nourishment to him who knoweth.

11 Hymned with the reverence of a son, O Asvins, ye Swift Ones

giving booty to the singer,

Glorified by Agastya with devotion, established Vis pal & again,
N&satyas.

12 Ye Sons of Heaven, ye Mighty, whither went ye, sought ye

for his fair praise the home of Kavya,

When, like a pitcher full of gold, 0 Asvins, on the tenth day
ye lifted up the buried ?

13 Ye with the aid of your great powers, 0 Asvins, restored to

youth the ancient man Chyav&na.

The Daughter of the Sun with all her glory, 0 ye Niisatyas,
chose your car to bear her,

14 Ye, ever-youthful Ones, again remembered Tugra, according

to your ancient manner : *

With horses brown of hue that flew with swift wings ye
brought back Bhujyu from the sea of billows.

15 The son of Tugra had invoked you, Asvins ; borne on he went

uninjured through the ocean.

Ye with your chariot swift as thought, well-harnessed, carried
him ofl‘ 0 Mighty Ones, to safety,
lfi The quail had invocated you, 0 Asvins, when from the wolfs
devouring jaws ye freed her.

With conquering ear ye eleft the mountain's ridges ; the off-
spring of Visvaeh fe killed with poison. •

17 He whom for furnishing a hundred wethers to the she-wolf,
his wicked father blinded, —

To him, Hijra sva, gave ye eyes, 0 Asvins; light to the blind
ye sent for perfect vision.

11 Agastya : the family priest of Ivhela. See 1. 116. 15.

12 Kdvya : Usan&, son of Kavi, See I. 83. 6. The buried ; Rebha. The
meaning is, * why did ye delay so long the rescue of Rebha ? *

13 Ohyavdna: see I. 116. 10. The Daughter of the Sun : see X. 116. 17.

14 Ye brought bach Bhujyu; see I. 116. 3.

16 The quail : see I. 116. 14. F?'ai?c2c7i ; said to be an Asura or fiend.

17 j Rijrdsva : seel. 116. 16.

160 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK I .

18 To bring the blind man joy thus cried the she-wolf : 0 Asvins,

0 ye Mighty Ones, 0 Heroes,

For me Rijr&sva, like a youthful lover, hath cut piecemeal one
and a hundred wethers,

19 Great and weal-giving is your aid, 0 Asvins, ye, objects of all

thought, made whole the cripple.

Purandhi also for this cause invoked you, and ye, 0 Mighty,
came to her with succours.

20 Ye, Wonder-Workers, filled with milk for Sayu the milkless

cow, emaciated, barren ;

And by your powers the child of Purumitra ye brought to
Yimada to be hip consort.

21 Ploughing and sowing barley, 0 ye Asvins, milking out food

for men, ye Wonder-Workers,

Blasting away the Dasyu with your trumpet, ye gave far-spread-
ing light unto the Arya.

22 Ye brought the horse’s head, Asvins, and gave it unto Dadh-

yach the offspring of Atharvan.

True, be revealed to you, 0 Wonder-Workers, sweet Soma,
Tvashtar’s secret, as your girdle.

23 0 Sages, evermore I crave your favour : be gracious unto all
' my prayers, 0 Asvins.

Grant me, Nasatyas, riches in abundance, wealth famous and
accompanied with children.

24 With liberal bounty to the weakling’s consort ye, Heroes, gave

a son Hiranyahasta ;

And Sy&va, cut into three several pieces, ye brought to life
again, 0 bounteous Asvins.

25 These your heroic exploits, 0 ye Asvins, done in the days of

old, have men related.

May we, addressing prayer to you, ye Mighty, speak with
brave sons about us to the synod.

19 Purandhi: or as Sfiyana explains, 4 the wise maid/ Ghoshs.

20 Sayu: see I. 112. 16 ; and I. 116. 22. Vimada: see I. 112. 19.

22 JOadhyach: seel. 116. 12. As your girdle : to strengthen and support
you.

24 The weakling's consort : see I. 116.13. Sydva: cut to pieces by the
Asuras, was made whole by the Asvins.

25 The synod : the congregation of worshippers.

m

HYMN 118.] THE RIO VEDA,

HYMN CXVIIL Asvins.

Flying, with falcons, may your chariot, Asvins, most gracious,
bringing friendly help, come hither, —

Your chariot, swifter than the mind of mortal, fleet as the
wind, three-seated,-, 0 ye Mighty. *

2 Come to us with your chariot triple seated, three-wheeled, of

triple form, that rolleth lightly.

Fill full our cows, give mettle to our hprses, and make each
hero son grow strong, 0 Asvins.

3 With your well-rolling car, descending swiftly, hear this the

press-stone’s song, ye Wonder-Workers.

How then have ancient sages said, 0 Asvins, that ye most
swiftly come to stay affliction ?

4 0 Asvins, let your falcons bear you hither, yoked to your

chariot, swift, with flying pinions,

Which, ever active, like the airy eagles, carry you, 0 N&satyas,
to the banquet.

5 The youthful Daughter of the Sun, delighting in you, ascend-

ed there your chariot, Heroes.

Borne on their swift wings let your beauteous horses, your
birds of ruddy hue, convey you near us.

6 Ye raised up Yandana, strong Wonder-Workers ! with great

might, and with power ye rescued Rebha.

From out the sea ye saved the son of Tugra, and gave his
youth again unto Chyavana.

7 To Atri, cast down to the fire that scorched him, ye gave, O

Asvins, strengthening food and favour.

Accepting his fair praises with approval, ye gave his eyes again
to blinded Kanva.

8 For ancient Sayu in his sore affliction ye caused his cow to

swell with milk, 0 Asvins.

The quail from her great misery ye delivered, and a new leg
for Vispala provided.

9 A white horse, Asvins, ye bestowed on Pedu, a serpent-slaying

steed sent down by Indra,

Loud-neighing, conquering the foe, high-mettled, firm-limbed
and vigorous, winning thousand treasures.

10 Sucli as ye are, 0 nobly born, 0 Heroes, we in our trouble call
on you for succour.

5 In this and the following verses most of the wonderful deeds of the
Asvins mentioned in the preceding hymn are briefly referred to,

11

162 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK 1.

Accepting these our songs, for our well-being come to us on
your chariot treasure-laden.

11 Come unto us combined in love, N&satyas ; come with the fresh
swift vigour of the falcon.

Bearing oblations I invoke you, Asvins, at the first break of
everlasting morning.

HYMN CXIX. Asvins,

Hither, that I may live, I call unto the feast your wondrous
car, thought-swift, borne on by rapid steeds,

With thousand banners, hundred treasures, pouring gifts,
promptly obedient, bestowing ample room.

2 Even as it moveth near my hymn is lifted up, and all the re-

gions come together to sing praise.

I sweeten the oblations; now the helpers come. Urjani hath,
0 Asvins, mounted on your car.

3 When striving man with man for glory they have met, brisks

measureless, eager for victory in fight,

Then verily your car is seen upon the slope when ye, 0 Asvins,
bring some choice boon to the prince.

4 Ye came to Bhujyu while he struggled in the flood, with flying

birds, self-yoked, ye bore him to his sires.

Ye went to the far-distant home, 0 Mighty Ones ; and famed
is your great aid to Divodasa given.

5 Asvins, the car which you had yoked for glorious show your

own two voices urged directed to its goal.

Then she who came for friendship, Maid of noble birth, elected
you as Husbands, you to be her Lords.

6 Bebha ye saved from tyranny ; for Atri’s sake ye quenched

with cold the fiery pit that compassed him.

Ye made the cow of Sayu stream refreshing milk, and Van-
dana was holpen to extended life.

2 Urjdnt: strength, personified. According to S&yana, Lrj&ui is Suryft
the daughter of the Bun.

3 Upon the slope : that is, of the sky.

4 Bhujyu , and other persons and incidents referred to in this hymn have
been mentioned in T. 116.

6 She who came for friendship : Silryd. The meaning seems to be, as
Ludwig says, that she came intending to avail lierself of the services of the
Asvins as bridesmen, and that they became her bridegrooms instead.

THE RIGVEDA.

HYMN 120,]

m

7 Doers of marvels, skilful workers, ye restored Vandana, like a
car, worn out with length of days.

From earth ye brought ^ the sage to life in wondrous mode:
be your great deeds done here for him who honours you.

£ Ye went to him who mourned in a far distant place, him who
was left forlorn by treachery of , his sire.

Rich with the light of heaven was then the help ye gave, and
marvellous your succour when ye stood by him.

9 To you in praise of sweetness sang the honey-bee : Ausija
calleth you in .Soma’s rapturous joy.

Ye drew unto yourselves the spirit of Dadhyaeh, and then the
horse’s head uttered his words to you.

10 A horse did ye provide for Pedu, excellent, white, 0 ye Asvins,
conqueror of combatants,

Invincible in war by arrows, seeking heaven, worthy of fame,
like Indra, vanquisher of men.

HYMN CXX. Asvm&

Asvins, what praise may win your grace ? Who may be pleas-
ing to you both %

How shall the ignorant worship you ?

2 Here let the ignorant ask the means of you who know — for

none beside you lmoweth aught —

Not of a spiritless mortal mam

3 Such as ye are, all-wise, we call you. Ye wise, declare to u»

this clay accepted prayer.

Loving you well your servant lauds you.

8 To him who mourned : Bhujyu.

9 The honey-bee : meaning Ausija or the both of Uaij, the sage KakshMn.

With regard to the legends recounted in these hymns to the Asvins, Hr*
Muir remarks. (0. & Texts, V. 248): ‘The deliverances of Rebha, Vandana,
Paravrij, Bhujyu, ChyavS.ua, .and others are explained by Professor Benfey
(following Dr. Kuhn and Professor Muller, ) as referring to certain physical
phenomena with which the Asvins are supposed by these scholars to be con-
nected. But this allegorical method of "eems unlikely to be

correct, as it is difficult to suppose that ■ ■ ■ in question should

have been alluded to under such a variety of names and circumstances. It
.appears, therefore, to be more probable that the rxshis merely refer to certain
legeuds’which were popularly current of interventions of the Asvins in behalf
of the persons whose names are mentioned.'

Parts of this Hymn are difficult and olecure. The first nine stanzas are
in nine different metres,

2 In line 2 I adopt Ludwig’s emendation alcrntau for aJcrau of the text.

164

THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK L

4 Simply, ye Mighty Ones, I ash the Gods of that wondrous

oblation hallowed by the mystic word.

Save us from what is stronger, fiercer than ourselves.

5 Forth go the hymn that shone in Ghosha Bhrigu’s like, the

song wherewith the son of Pajra worships you,

Like some wise minister.

§ Hear ye the song of him who hastens speedily, 0 Asvins, I
am he who sang your praise,

Hither, ye Lords of Splendour, hither turn your eyes.

7 For ye were ever nigh to deal forth ample wealth, to give the

wealth that ye had gathered up.

As such, ye Vasus, guard us well, and keep us safely from the
wicked wolf.

8 Give us not up to any man who hateth us, nor let our milch-

cows stray, whose udders give us food,

Far from our homes without their calves.

• 9 May they who love you gain you for their Friends, Prepare ye
us for opulence with strengthening food,

Prepare us for the food that floweth from our cows.

10 1 have obtained the horseless car of Asvins rich in sacrifice,
And I am well content therewith.

11 May it convey me evermore : may the light chariot pass from

men

To men unto the Soma draught.

12 It holdeth slumber in contempt, and the rich who enjoy eth

not :

Both vanish quickly and are lost.

HYMN CXXI.

Inch* a.

When will men’s guardians hasting hear with favour the song
of Angiras’s pious children ?

When to the people of the home he cometh, he strideth to the
sacrifice, the Holy,

4 Hallowed by the mystic word : by the exclamation vdshat , used in making
an oblation to a God with fire. This word is of the most essential importance
in sacrifice, but if carelessly and inconsiderately used its effects are deadly,
and against these the Rishi’ prays for protection.

5 Ghosha, : S&yana says that Suhastya, the son of Ghoshft, is intended.

The son of Pajra, ; one of the descendants of the Angirases ; here, accord-
ing to S&yana, the Rishi ICakshiv&n.

In this Hymn, as in the preceding, there are several very obscure passages
which can only conjecturally be translated and explained.

the may Ei> a.

165

HYMN 121.]

2 He stablisbed heaven ; he poured forth, skilful worker, the

wealth of kine, for strength, that nurtures heroes.

The Mighty One his self-born host, regarded, the horse’s mate,
the mother of the heifer.

3 Lord of red dawns, he came victorious, daily to the Angirases*

former invocation*

His bolt and team hath he prepared, and stablished the heaven
for quadrupeds and men two-footed.

4 In joy of this thou didst restore, for worship, the lowing com-

pany of hidden cattle.

When the three-pointed one descends with onslaught he opens
wide the doors that Gause man trouble.

5 Thine is that milk which thy swift-moving Parents brought

down, a strengthening genial gift for conquest ;

When the pure treasure unto thee they offered, the milk shed
from the cow who streameth nectar.

6 There is he born. May the Swift give us rapture, and like the

Sun shine forth from yonder dawning,

Indu, even us who drank, whose toils are offerings, poured
from the spoon, with praise, upon the altar,

2 The Mighty One : Indra is here said to have regarded or looted on the
host horn from, or produced by him, that is, perhaps, the heaven and the
earth in general. Specially has he regarded the animals in which the wealth
of the people chiefly consists, among which the mare and the cow naturally
hold the chief place. Ludwig would read mdtaram gdm instead of ■ mdtaram
g6h. He thinks that the mate of the horse (Sflrya) is the earth, the motherly
cow. S&yana says that Indra in sport made a mare bring forth a calf, and
Wilson following him translates ; ‘ he made the female of the horse unnatur-
ally the mother of the cow.’

4 In joy of this : in the rapture arising from drinking this Soma juice.

The lowing company of hidden cattle : the rain-clouds carried off and kept

concealed by the Panis.

The three-pointed one : apparently the thunderbolt. Sftyana takes it to
mean Indra (elevated as a triple crest in the three worlds). He : Indra.

5 Thy swift-moving Parents : Heaven and Earth.

6 The Swift ; the swiftly flowing and efficacious Indu or Soma.

Whose toils are offerings ; whose drops of sweat, as we labour in our saci’ed
duties, count as oblations to the Gods whom we serve.

From yonder dawning ; probably an indication of time only.

m THE HYMNS OF [BOOK I,

7 When the wood-pile, made of good logs, is ready, at the Sun’s

worship to bind fast the Bullock,

Then when thou shinest forth through days of action for the*
Car-bome, the Swift, the Cattle-seeker.

8 Eight steads thou broughtest down from mighty heaven, when

lighting for the well that giveth splendour.

That men might press with stones the gladdening yellow,
strengthened with milk, fermenting, to exalt thee.

9 Thou hurledst forth from heaven the iron missile, brought by

the Skilful, from the sling of leather,

When thou, 0 Much-invoked, assisting Kutsa with endless
deadly darts didst compass Sushna.

10 Bolt-armed, ere darkness overtook the sunlight, thou castest

at the veiling cloud thy weapon,

Thou rentest, out of heaven, though firmly knotted, the might
of Sushna that was thrown around him.

1 1 The mighty Heaven and Earth, those bright expanses that

have no wheels, joyed, Indra, at thine exploit.

Vritra, the boar who lay amid the waters, to sleep thou sentest
with thy mighty thunder.

12 Mount Indra, lover of the men thou guardest, the well-yoked

horses of the wind, best bearers.

The bolt which Kavya Usana erst gave thee, strong, gladden-
ing, Vritra-slaying, hath he fashioned.

13 The strong Bay Horses of the Sun thou stayedst : this Etasa

drew not the wheel, 0 Indra.

Casting them forth beyond the ninety rivers thou dravest
down into the pit the godless.

7 To bind fast the Bullock : the Bullock is the Sun himself : the sacrifice is
to secure the "blessings of sunlight. S&yana explains : the priest is competent
for the attachment of the animal to the stake.

The Oar-borne, the Swift, the Cattle-seeker ; apparently appellations of Indra.

8 The well that giveth splendour : the cloud that sheds fertilizing rain.

The yellow : the Soma juice.

9 The S/cilful : Tvashtar.

Kdvya U§cm&: see I. 51. 10.

13 The first hemistich of this stanza is most difficult, and I do not see how
it can be satisfactorily translated and explained. 1 have followed Gmssmnnn
who* translates : 'Du liessest ruhn der Sonne starke Rosse, nicht zog dor
Renner mehr ihr Rail, 0 Indra.’ If this be the meaning, the reference may
be, perhaps, to an eclipse of the sun.

Etasa : appears in a double character, first as a sacrificer who offered Soma
juice to Indra and was aided and favoured by that God (I. 51. 15), and second-
ly, Etasa is the name of the horses or of one of the horses, or of the single

HYMN 122.]

THE RIG VEDA.

167

14 Indra, preserve thou us from this affliction; Thunder-armed,

save us from the misery near us.

Vouchsafe us affluence in chariots, founded on horses, for our
food and fame and gladness.

15 Never may this thy loving-kindness fail us; mighty in strength,

may plenteous food surround us.

Maghavan, make us share the foemaits cattle ; may we he thy
most liberal feast-companions.

HYMN CXXII. Visvedevas.

Say, bringing sacrifice to bounteous Budra, This juice for
drink to you whose wrath is fleeting !

With Dyaus the Asura’s Heroes I have lauded the Maruts as
with prayer to Earth and Heaven.

2 Strong to exalt the early invocation are Night and Dawn who

show with varied aspect.

The Barren clothes her in wide-woven raiment, and fair Morn
shines with Surya's golden splendour.

3 Cheer us the Boamer round, who strikes at morning, the Wind

delight us, pourcr forth of waters !

Sharpen our wits, 0 Parvata and Indra. May all the Gods
vouchsafe to us this favour.

horse, of SCirya or the Sun, especially, it seems, of the horse who, during the
night, draws back the chariot of the Sun from the west to the east. In this
verse, according to M. Bergaigne, Etasa himself or his substitute (the word
‘ na ’ which I have taken to mean 1 not’ being understood in its alternative
semse of 1 like or as ’) is represented as drawing the wheel when Indra has
stayed the course of the Harits or Bay Horses of the Bun. It is not* difficult,
says M, Bergaigne, to reconcile these two different conceptions of the rdle of
Etasa. A sacrificer especially favoured by Indra may represent either the
sacrificial fire or the S-mia juice that is prepared, consecrated, and offered to
the God, and Soma, in the Veda, is frequently represented as a horse. See
Bergaigne, La Religion Vediqae, Vol. II. 330 — 333.

. 1 The meaning of this very difficult verse appears to be, that the offering of
Soma juice is presented to lludra and to his sons the fierce but easily appeased
Maruts or Storm-Gods, whom the poet has lauded as the Heroes of Dyaus, the
Immortal, and has at the same time supplicated the Deities Heaven and Earth.
Wilson, following Sayan a, paraphrases the second hemistich : £ I praise him
who with his heroic (followers) as (with shafts) from a quiver expelled (the
A suras) from heaven : and (I praise) the Maruts, (who abide) between heaven
and earth.’

2 The barren ; the unfruitful Night ; in which no work is done.

3 The Roamev round : i the circumambient divinity,’ the Wind.

Who strikes at morning * perhaps, blows away all evil spirits of the night.

Parvata : the presiding Genius of the mountains and ruler of the clouds,
frequently associated with Indra.

168 THE HYMNS OF t BOOK I.

4 And Ausija shall call for me that famous Pair who enjoy and

drink, who come to brighten.

Set ye the Offspring of the Floods before you ; both Mothers
of the Living One who beameth.

5 For you shall Ausija call him who thunders, as, to win Arju-

na's assent, cried Ghosli A

I will invoke, that Pushan may be bounteous to you, the rich
munificence of Agni

6 Hear, . Mitra-Yaruna, these mine invocations, hear them from

all men in the hall of worship.

Giver of famous gifts, kind hearer, Sindhu who gives fair fields,
listen with all his waters !

7 Praised, Mitra, Yaruna ! is your gift, a hundred cows to the

Prikshayamas and the Pajra.

Presented by car-famous Priyaratha, supplying nourishment,
they came directly.

8 Praised is the gift of him the very wealthy : may we enjoy it,

men with hero children :

His who hath many gifts to give the Pajras, a chief who makes
me rich in cars and horses.

9 The folk, 0 Mitra- Yaruna, who hate you, who sinfully hating

pour you no libations,

Lay in their hearts, themselves, a wasting sickness, whereas
the righteous gaineth all by worship.

10 That man, most puissant, wondrously urged onward, famed

among heroes, liberal in giving,

Moveth a warrior, evermore undaunted in all encounters even
with the mighty.

1 1 Come to the man's, the sacrificer’s calling : hear, Kings of

Immortality, joy-givers !

While ye who speed through clouds decree your bounty large-
ly, for fame, to him the chariot-rider.

4 Avs'ja ; the son of Usij, that is, Kakshtvan himself, the Rishi of the hymn.

That famous Pair : the Asvins. The Offspring of the Flood : Agni.

The Living One loho beameth : or praiseth. Agni appears to be meant,

5 Him who thunders: Indra. Ghoshd , in I. 117. 5, is said to have been pro-
vided with a husband by the Asvins. Arj una, in this verse, may perhaps have
been the husband’s name. The meaning of the passage is uncertain. S&yana
takes drjuna to mean white skin, or leprosy, from which Ghosha prayed to
be made free.

6 Sindhu : the Indus ; the Deity presiding over waters.

7 Who the Pr 1 - 1 *■. "• ; -mrs of swift horses are, is uncertain.

The Pajra: th ‘. I \ ■ . .• himself, a member of the priestly family

of the Pajras.

11 Kings of Immortality : Yaruna and Mitra.

THE RIG VEDA.

HYMN 123.]

1(59

12 Vigour will we bestow on that adorer whose tenfold draught

we come to taste, so spake they.

May all in whom rest splendour and great riches obtain re-
freshment in these sacrifices.

13 We will rejoice to drink the tenfold present when the twice-

five come bearing sacred viands.

What can he do whose steeds and reins are choicest 1 These,
the all-potent, urge brave men to conquest.

14 The sea and all the Deities shall give us him v T itk the golden

ear and neck bejewelled.

Dawns, hasting to the praises of the pious, be pleased with
us, both offerers and singers.

15 Four youthful sons^of Masarslra vex me, three, of the King,

the conquering Ayavasa.

Now like the Sun, 0 Varuna and Mitra, your car hath shone,
ldhg-shaped and reined with splendour.

HYMN CXXHL Dawn.

The Dakshin&’s broad chariot hath been haimessed : this car
the Gods Immortal have ascended.

Fain to bring light to homes of men the noble and active God-
dess hath emerged from darkness.

12 Tenfold draught ; Soma juice offered in ten ladles, the twice-fivc of the
following verse.

14 Him with the golden ear : perhaps the Sun ; but the meaning of the
hemistich is uncertain.

15 There is no verb in the first hemistich, and I follow S^yana in supplying
1 vex.’ But shvah may mean e young horses’ as well as ‘ youthful sons/ and
the verb to be supplied may be ‘ carry/ as suggested by Grassmann. The
whole hymn, as Wilson observes, ‘ is very elliptical and obscure/ and much of
it is at present unintelligible.

. I The Dalcshin Vs broad chariot ; the Lakshin! itself, that is the honora-
rium or fee presented by the institutor of a sacrifice to the priests who per-
form the ceremony. The meaning of the first hemistich appears to be that all

preparations have been made for '■ v -*■ - * n -e, and especially that the

fee for its performance— a most ■ i ■ s ready, and that the God
are coming to the rite. The word ddhhindi/dh is considered by K&yana to be
an epithet of ushodevatdgdh, understood, that is, { of the Goddess Tishas or
Dawn.’ Wilson accordingly translates, ‘ the spacious chariot of the graceful
{Dawn) ; ’ Ludwig renders the word by f friendly/ and Grassmann by * wealth/
both scholars applying the epithet to Ushas or Dawn who is not mentioned
in the text. I have followed M. Bergaigne who says : * The interpretation of
the word daJcsh ind in the sense of sacrificial salary, in the first verse of our
hymn as also in the fifth, is, not only possible but the on'ly possible one, for the
reason that this word has no other sense in the Rig -Veda than that of “ salary,
■recompense,” given either by the earthly maghavan } that is to say by those

170 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK L

2 She before all the living world hath wakened, the Lofty One

who wins and gathers treasure.

Bevived and ever young on high she glances. Dawn hath
come first unto our morning worship.

3 If, Dawn, # thou Goddess nobly born, thou dealest fortune this

day to all the race of mortals,

May Savitar the God, Friend of the homestead, declare before
the Sun that we are sinless.

4 Showing her wonted, form each day that passeth, spreading

the light she visiteth each dwelling.

Eager for conquest, with bright sheen she cometh. Her por-
tion is the best of goodly treasures.

5 Sister of Yaruna, sister of Bhaga, first among all sing forth,

0 joyous Morning.

Weak be the strength of him who worketh evil : may $e sub-
due him with our carthe guerdon.

6 Let our glad hymns and holy thoughts rise upward, for the

flames brightly burning have ascended.

The far-refulgent Mornings make apparent the lovely treasures
which the darkness covered.

7 The one departeth and the other cometh : unlike in hue day’s

halves march on successive.

One hides the gloom of the surrounding Parents. Dawn on
her shining chariot is resplendent.

8 The same in form to-day, the same to-morrow, they still keep

Var tuna’s eternal statute.

who pay the priest for performing the sacrifice, or by the heavenly mar/havan ,
Indra, who in his turn pays for the sacrifice by favours of every kind to the
man who' causes it to be offered.’ See La Religion Vedique, Yol. III. pp. 2S£, ff.,
for M. Bergaigne’s translation of, and polemical commentary on, this hymn.

The noble and active Goddess ; Ushas, Aurora, or Dawn, The word Goddess
is not in the text.

3 May Savitar : the all-seeing deity Savitar who presides over, but is some-
times distinguished from, the Sun, is appealed to as the best judge of the sup-
pliant’s innocence.

5 Our ear the guerdon : may the liberal fee given for the performance of the

sacrifice be to us as a war-chariot to enable us to overpower those who would
injure us.

7 Day’s halves : day and night. The surrounding Parents are the all-en-
compassing Heaven and Earth : the nightly darkness which envelops them
is hidden or dispelled by the day ■

HYMN 124.]

THE RIO VEDA.

371

Blameless, in turn they traverse thirty regions, and dart across
the spirit in a moment.

9 She who hath knowledge of the first day's nature is born re-
fulgent white from out the darkness.

The Maiden breaketh not the law of Order, day by day coming
to the place appointed.

10 In pride of beauty like a maid thou goest, 0 Goddess, to the

God who longs to win thee,

And smiling, youthful, as thou shinest brightly, before him
thou disco verest thy bosom.

11 Fair as a bride embellished by her mother thou showest forth

thy form that all may see it.

Blessed art thou, 0 Dawn. Shine yet more widely. No other
Dawns have reached what thou attain est.

1 2 Rich in kine, horses, and all goodly treasures, in constant oper-

ation with the sunbeams,

The Dawns depart and come again assuming their wonted
forms that promise happy fortune.

13 Obedient to the rein of Law Eternal give us each thought

that more and moi*e shall bless us.

Shine thou on us to-day, Dawn, swift to listen. With us be
riches and with chiefs who worship.

HYMN CXXIV. Dawn.

The Dawn refulgent when the fire is kindled, and the Sun
rising, far diffuse their brightness.

Savitar, God, hath sent us forth to labour, each quadruped,
each biped, to be active.

2 Not interrupting heavenly ordinances, although she minisheth
human generations,

The last of endless morns that have departed, the first of
those that come, Dawn brightly shineth.

8 They traverse thirty regions : I follow M. Bergaigne in understanding the
thirty regions or spaces to be an indefinite expression for the whole universe.
A more elaborate attempt at explanation will be found in Wilson’s Translation
in a Note from Bentley’s Hindu Astronomy. They are the Dawns, and they
may be said to pass across or through the spirit, to enlighten it. The second
hemistich is very difficult and obscure, and can he translated only provisionally.

10 The God who longs to ivin thee : the Sun, the lover of Dawn.

13 Chiefs xoho ivorship : the wealthy institutors of sacrifices.

1 The fire: the sacrificial fire lighted * 4 "* rites.

2 She minisheth ,* by marking the lapse ‘ ■ \ ■ . time. Cf, I. 92. 1 0, 11 .

172 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK L

3 There in the eastern region, she, Heaven's Daughter, arrayed

in garments all of light, appeareth.

Truly she follow eth the path of Order, nor faileth, knowing
well, the heavenly quarters.

4 Hear is she seen, as 't were the Bright One's bosom : she show-

eth sweet things like a new song-singer.

She cometh like a fly awaking sleepers, of all returning dames
most true and constant.

5 There in the east half of the watery region the Mother of

the Cows hath shown her ensign.

Wider and wider still she spreadeth onward, and filleth full
the laps of both her Parents.

6 She, verily, exceeding vast to look on debarreth from her light

nor kin nor stranger.

Proud of her spotless form she, brightly shining, turneth not
from the high nor from the humble.

7 She seeketh men as she who hath no brother, mounting her

car, as 't were to gather riches.

Dawn, like a loving matron for her husband, smiling and well
attired, unmasks her beauty.

8 The Sister quitteth, for the elder Sister, her place, and having

looked on her departeth.

She decks her beauty, shining forth with sunbeams, like wo-
men trooping to the festal meeting.

9 To all these Sisters who ere now have vanished a later one

each day in course succeedeth.

. So, like the past, with days of happy fortune, may the new
Dawns shine forth on us with riches.

10 Rouse up, 0 Wealthy One, the liberal givers ; let niggard
traffickers sleep on unwakened :

Shine richly, Wealthy One, on those who worship, richly, glad
Dawn ! while wasting, on the singer.

4 Like a pj ; admasduna; see Geklner, Yedische Studicn, II. 179.

5 The watery region : the misty sky. The Coios : rays of light.

Both her Parents : Heaven and Earth.

7 She seeketh men ; this is not very clear. Perhaps the Sun, her lover or
husband, is intended.

8 The elder Sister : Day, for whom Night makes room*

10 While wasting ; as in verse 2.

HYMN 125.]

THE RIGVEDA.

173

11 This young Maid from the east hath shone upon us; she har-

nesseth her team of bright red oxen.

She will beam forth, the light will hasten hither, and Agni
will be present in each dwelling.

12 As the birds fly forth from their resting-places, ’so men with

store of food rise at thy dawning.

Yea, to the liberal mortal wdto remaineth at home, 0 Goddess
Dawn, much good thou bringest.

13 Praised through my prayer be ye who should be lauded. Ye

have increased our wealth, ye Dawns who love us.

Goddesses, may we win by your good favour wealth to be told
by hundreds and by thousands.

HYMN CXXV. Svanaya.

Coming at early morn he gives his treasure ; the prudent one
receives and entertains him.

Thereby increasing still his life and offspring, he comes with
brave sons to abundant riches.

2 Rich shall he be in gold and kine and horses. Jndra bestows

on him great vital power,

Who stays thee, as thou comest, with his treasure, like game
caught in the net, 0 early comer.

3 Longing, I came this morning to the pious, the son of sacrifice,

with car wealth-laden.

Give him to drink juice of the stalk that gladdens; prosper
with pleasant hymns the Lord of Heroes.

4 Health-bringing streams, as milch-cows, flow to profit him who

hath worshipped, him who now will worship.

To him who freely gives and fills on all sides full streams of
fatness flow and make him famous.

5 On the high ridge of heaven he stands exalted, yea, to the

Gods he goes, the liberal giver.

The streams, the waters how for him with fatness : to him this
guerdon ever yields abundance.

12 With store of food : we should expect 'who seek their food/ and. bo
S&yana explains pitubh&jah. The wealthy may be meant who share their
store' with others and must work to replenish it.

This hymn is a dialogue between a wandering priest and a pious and liberal
prince. For the explanatory legend, which is cited by S&yana, see the note
in Wilson’s translation.

1 The priest (Kakskiv&n) speaks. His treasure : the wealth that will follow
sacrifice. The prudent one : the prince.

2 The prince (Svanaya) speaks.

3 The priest speaks. Him : Indra.

174 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK /.

6 For those wlio give rich meeds are all these splendours, for

those who give rich meeds suns shine in heaven.

The givers of rich meeds are made immortal ; the givers of
rich fees prolong their lifetime.

7 Let not the liberal sink to sin and sorrow, never decay the

pious chiefs who worship 1

Let every man besides be their protection, and let affliction
fall upon the niggard.

HYMN CXXYI. BMvayavya.

With wisdom I present these lively praises of Bhavya dweller
on the bank of Siudhu ;

For he, nnconqnered King, desiring glory, hath furnished me
a thousand sacrifices.

2 A hundred necklets from the King, beseeching, hundred

gift-steeds I at once accepted ;

Of the lord’s cows a thousand, I Kakshivan. His deathless
glory hath he spread to heaven.

3 Horses of dusky colour stood beside me, ten chariots, Svanaya’s

gift, with mares to draw them.

Kine numbering sixty thousand followed after. Kakshivan
gained them when the days were closing.

4 Forty bay horses of the ten cars’ master before a thousand lead

the long procession.

Reeling in joy Kakshivan’ s sons and Pajra’s have groomed the
coursers decked with pearly trappings,

<5 An earlier gift for you have I accepted, eight cows, good milk-
ers, and three harnessed horses,

Pajras, who with your w r ains with your great kinsman, like
troops of subjects, have been fain for glory.

1 Bhdvyti: the prince S van ay a of the preceding hymn is here again eulo-
gized for his munificence under the name of his father Bh&va or Bh&vayavya,
who lived ou the bank of Sind hu or the Indus,

3 With mares to draw them : or, with damsels or female slaves. Cf. YI. 2 7. 8,

4 Pajra : the founder of the priestly family £ am which Kakshivdn was
descended.

The sixth stanza of the hymn is ascribed to Svanaya, and the seventh to his
wife Romas*! They have no apparent connexion with what precedes, and are
in a different metre. They seem to be a fragment of a popular song. See Ap-
pendix.

HYMN 127. ]

THE RIG VEDA.
HYMN CXXVII.

175

Agni.

Agni I hold as herald, the munificent, the gracious, Son of
Strength, who knoweth all that live, as holy Singer, know-
ing all.

Lord of fair rites, a God with form erected turning to the Gods,
He, when the flame hath sprung forth from the holy oil, the
offered fatness, longeth for it with his glow.

2 We, sacrificing, call on thee best worshipper, the eldest of Augi-

rases, Singer, with hymns, thee, brilliant One ! with singeiV
hymns ;

Thee, wandering round as ’t were the sky, who art the invok-
ing Priest of men,

Whom, Bull with hair of flame, the people must observe, the
people that he speed them on.

3 He with his shining glory blazing far and wide, he verily it is

who slayeth demon foes, slayeth the demons like an axe :

At whose close touch things solid shake, and what is stable
yields like trees.

Subduing all, he keeps his ground and flinches not, from the
skilled archer flinches not.

4 To him, as one who knows, even things solid yield : through
fire-sticks heated hot he gives his gifts to aid. Men offer
Agni gifts for aid.

. He deeply piercing many a thing hews it like wood with fer-
vent glow.

Even hard and solid food he crunches with his might, yea,
hard and solid food with might.

This hymn, and the twelve that follow it, are attributed to the Rishi Parueli-
ehhepa. They are generally very obscure and frequently unintelligible. One
of their peculiarities is * to reiterate a leading word which occurs the third or
fourth from the end of the first line, and sometimes also of the third, and to
repeat it as the last word of the line. Thus we have here s&num sahaso Jata-
vedasam, vipram na J£tavedasam ; this is little else than a kind of verbal
alliterative jingle, but the Scholiast thinks it necessary to assign to the repeated
word a distinct signification. 7 — Wilson.

2 Eldest of A ngirases ; see I. 1. 6.

3 From the shilled aroh&r flinches not : not even a strong man armed with
his bow can turn him from his course.

4 Fire-sticlcs : the two pieces of wood which are still used to produce the
sacrificial fire.-

176

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK L

5 Here near we place the sacrificial food for him who shines

forth fairer in the night than in the day, with life then
stronger than by day.

His life gives sure and firm defence as that one giveth to a
son.

The during fires enjoy things given and things not given, the
(during fires enjoy as food.

6 He, roaring very loudly like the Maruts’ host, in fertile cul-

tivated fields adorable, in desert spots adorable,

Accepts and eats our offered gifts, ensign of sacrifice by desert ;
So let all, joying, love his path when he is glad, as men pur-
sue a path for bliss.

7 Even as they who sang forth hymns, addressed to heaven, the

Bhrigus with their prayer and praise invited him, the
Bhrigus rubbing, offering gifts.

For radiant Agni, Lord of all these treasures, is exceeding
strong.

May he, the wise, accept the grateful coverings, the wise accept
the coverings.

8 Thee we invoke, the Lord of all our settled homes, common

to all, the household’s guardian, to enjoy, bearer of trxie
hymns, to enjoy.

Thee we invoke, the guest of men, by whose mouth, even as
a sire’s,

All these Immortals come to gain their food of life, oblations
come to Gods as food.

9 Thou, Agni, most victorious with thy conquering strength,

most Mighty One, art born for service of the Gods, like
wealth for service of the Gods.

Most mighty is thine ecstasy, most splendid is thy mental
power.

Therefore men wait upon thee, undecaying One, like vassals,
undecaying One.

10 To him the mighty, conquering with victorious strength, to
Agni walking with the dawn, who sendeth kine, be sung
your laud, to Agni sung ;

As he who with oblation comes calls him aloud in every place.
Before the brands of fire he shouteth singer-like, the herald,
kindler of the brands.

5 Things given and things not given ; both sacrificial offerings and the grass
brushwood of the jungle.

7 The Bhrigus : descendants of Bhrigu, the earliest cherisher of Agni, or
kindler of fire. Rubbing : agitating the fire-sticks. Hhe coverings : according
to S&yana, the oblations of clarified butter, etc.

HYMN 128.]

THE R1GVEDA.

Ill

1 1 Agni, beheld by us in nearest neighbourhood, accordant with
the Gods, bring us, with gracious love, great riches with thy
gracious love.

Give us, 0 Mightiest, what is great, to see and to enjoy the
earth.

As one of awful power, stir up heroic might for those who
praise thee, Bounteous Lord !

HYMN CXXVIII. Agni.

By Manu’s law was born this Agni, Priest most skilled, born
for the holy work of those who yearn therefor, yea, bom
for his own holy work.

All ear to him who seeks his love, and wealth to him who
strives for fame,

Priest ne'er deceived, he sits in P&’s holy place, girt round in
I]a’s holy place.

2 We call that perfeeter of worship by the path of sacrifice, with

reverence rich in offerings, with worship rich in offerings.

Through presentation of our food he grows not old in this his
form ;

The God whom Matarisvan brought from far away, for Manu
brought from far away.

3 In ordered course forthwith he toaverses the earth, swift-swal-

lowing, bellowing Steer, bearing the genial seed, bearing
the seed and bellowing.

Observant with a hundred eyes the God is conqueror in the
wood : -

Agni, who hath his seat in broad plains here below, and in the
high lands far away.

4 That Agni, wise High-Priest, in every house takes thought for

sacrifice and holy service, yea, takes thought, with mental
power, for sacrifice.

Disposer, he with mental power shows all things unto him who
strives ;

Whence he was born a guest enriched with holy oil, born as
Ordainer and as Priest.

1 7M's holy place : the altar ; Id& or 11& is personified Prayer and Wor-
ship.

2 Mdtarhvan : see I. 31. 3.

12

178 TIIE IIYMN8 OF [BOOK I.

5 When through his power and in his strong prevailing flames

the Maruts’ gladdening boons mingle with Agni’s roar, boons
gladdening for the active One,

Then he accelerates the gift, and, by the greatness of his
wealth, ^

Shall rescue us from overwhelming misery, from curse and
overwhelming woe.

6 Vast, universal, good, he was made messenger ; the speeder

with his right hand hath not loosed his hold, through love
of fame not loosed lxis hold.

He bears oblations to the Gods for whosoever supplicates.

Agui bestows a blessing on each pious man, and opens wide
the doors for him.

7 That Agni hath been set most kind in camp of men, in sacri-

fice like a Lord victorious, like a dear Lord in sacred
rites.

His are the oblations of mankind when offered up at Ila's
placo.

He shall preserve xxs from Varuna’s chastisement, yea, from
the groat God's chastisement.

8 Agni the Priest they supplicate to grant them wealth : him,

dear, most thoughtful, have they made their messenger,
him, offering-bearer have they made,

Beloved of all, who knoweth all, the Priest, the Holy One,
the Sage —

Him, Friend, for help, the Gods when they are fain for wealth,
him, Friend, with hymns, when fain for wealth.

HYMN CXXIX. . Indra,

The ear which, Indra, thou, for service of the Go Is, though it
be far away, 0 swift One, bringest near, which, Blameless
One, thou bringest near.

Place swiftly nigh us for our help : be it thy will that it be
strong.

Blameless and active, hear this speech of orderers, this speech
of us like orderers.

2 Hear, Indra, thou whom men in every fight must call to show
thy strength, for cry of battle with the men, with men of
war for victory.

He who with heroes wins the light, who with the singers gains
the prize,

Him the rich seek to gain even as a swift strong steed, even
as a courser fleet and strong.

5 The Maruts' 1 gladdening boom ; storm and rain.

HYMN 129.]

THE RIGVEEA.

179

3 Thou, Mighty, pourest forth the hide that holds the rain ; thou

keepest far away, Hero, the wicked man, thou shuttesfc out
the wicked man.

Indra, to thee I sing, to Dyaus, to Rudra glorious in himself,
To Mitra, Yanina I sing a far-famed hymn, tp the kind God
a far-famed hymn.

4 We wish our Indra here that he may further you, the Friend,

beloved of all, the very strong ally, in wars the very strong
ally.

In all encounters strengthen thou our prayer to be a help
to us.

Ho enemy — whom thou smitest down — subdueth tliee, no
enemy, whom thou smitest down.

5 Bow down the overweening pride of every foe with succour

like to kindling-wood in fiercest flame, with mighty succour,
Mighty One.

Guide us, thou Hero, as of old, so art thou counted blameless
still.

Thou drivest, as a Priest, all sins of man away, as Priest, in
person, seeking us.

6 This may I utter to the present Soma-drop, which, meet to be

invoked, with power, awakes the prayer, awakes the demon-
slaying prayer.

May he himself with darts of death drive far from us the
scorner’s hate.

Far let him flee away who speaketh wickedness, and vanish
like a mote of dust.

7 By thoughtful invocation this may we obtain, obtain great

wealth, 0 Wealthy One, with hero sons, wealth that is
sweet with hero sons.

Him who is wroth we pacify with sacred food and eulogies,
Indra the Holy with our calls inspired and true, the Holy One
with calls inspired.

8 On, for your good and ours, come Indra with the aid of his

own lordliness, to drive the wicked hence, to rend the evil-
hearted ones 1

The weapon which devouring fiends cast at us shall destroy
themselves.

Struck down, it shall not reach the mark ; hurled forth, the
fire-brand shall not strike.

g With riches in abundance, Indra, come to us, come by an
unobstructed path, come by a path from demons free.

180 TEE HYMNS OF {BOOK L

Be with us when we stray afar, he with us when our home is
nigh.

Protect us with thy help both near and far aw r ay : protect us
ever with thy help.

10 Thou art ojur own, 0 Indra, with victorious wealth : let might

accompany thee, the Strong, to give us aid, like Mitra, to
give mighty aid.

0 strongest saviour, helper thou, Immortal ! of each warrior’s
car.

Hurt thou another and not us, 0 Thunder-armed, one who
would hurt, 0 Thunder-armed !

11 Save us from injury, thou who art well extolled : ever the

warder-off art thou of wicked ones, even as a God, of
wicked ones ;

Thou slayer of the evil fiend, saviour of singer such as I.
Good Lord, the Father made thee slayer of the fiends, made
thee, good Lord, to slay the fiends.

HYMN CXXX. Indra.

Come to us, Indra, from afar, conducting us even as a lord of
heroes to the gatherings, home, like a King, his heroes’
lord.

We come with gifts of pleasant food, with juice poured forth,
invoking thee,

As sons invite a sire, that thou mayst get thee strength, thee,
bounteousest, to get thee strength.

2 0 Indra, drink the Soma juice pressed out with stones, poured

from the reservoir, as an ox drinks the spring, a very
thirsty hull the spring.

For the sweet draught that gladdens thee, for mightiest fresh-
ening of thy stength,

Let thy Bay Horses bring thee hither as the Sun, as every day
they bring the Sun.

3 He found the treasure brought from heaven that lay concealed,

close-hidden, like the nestling of a bird, in rock, enclosed in
never-ending rock.

Best Angiras, bolt-armed, he strove to win, as ’t were, the
stall of kine ;

So Indra. hath disclosed the food concealed, disclosed the doors,
the food that lay concealed.

11 The Father : Janit&, the Latin genltor ; the Supreme God, the Maker
and Father of the Universe,

THE MOTE I) A.

131

H7MN 130.]

■A Grasping his thunderbolt with both hands, Indra made its
edge most keen, for hurling, like a carving-knife for Ahi’s
slaughter made it keen.

Endued with majesty and strength, 0 Indra, and with lordly
might,

Thou crashest down the trees, as when a craftsman fells, crash-
est them down as with an axe.

5 Thou, Indra, without effort hast let loose the floods to run
their free course down, like chariots, to the sea, like chariots
showing forth their strength.

. They, reaching hence away, have joined their strength for one
eternal end,

Even as the cows who poured forth every thing for man, yea,
poured forth all things for mankind.

' 6 Eager for riches, men have formed for thee this song, like as
a skilful craftsman fashioneth a car, so have they wrought
thee to their bliss ;

Adorning thee, 0 Singer, like a generous steed for deeds of
might,

Yea, like a steed to show his strength and win the prize, that
he may bear each prize away.

7 For Pdru thou hast shattered, Indra ! ninety forts, for Divo-

dasa tliy boon servant with thy bolt, 0 Dancer, for thy
worshipper.

For Atithigva he, the Strong, brought Sambara from the
mountain down,

Distributing the mighty treasures with his strength, parting
all treasures with his strength.

8 Indra in battles holp his Aryan worshipper, he who hath hun-

dred helps at hand in every fray, in frays that win the
light of heaven.

Plaguing the lawless he gave up to Manu’s seed the dusky
skin i

Blazing, } t were, he burns each covetous man away, he burns
the tyrannous away.

He found the treasure : the Soma. The food concealed : according to S&-
yana, in the first place the rain enclosed in the clouds, and in the second place
the seeds shut up in the earth which await the rain to make them germinate.

5 For man ; or for Manu, the great progenitor of the human race.

7 Prtru : the name of a prince protected by Indra. Divoddsa ; called also
Atithigva. See I. 92, 191.

Sambara : a demon of the air ; or perhaps in this place some human adver-
sary of Atithigva.

Dancer ; thou who dancest in battle ; dancer of the -war-dance.

THE IIYMNS OF

182

[BOOK L

9 Waxed strong in might at dawn he tore the Sun's wheel off.

. Bright red, he steals away their speech, the Lord of Power,
their speech he steals away from them,

As thou with eager speed, 0 Sage, hast come from far away
to help,

As winning for thine own all happiness of men, winning all
happiness each day.

10 Lauded with oar new hymns, O vigorous in deed, save us with
strengthening help, thou Shatterer of the Forts !

Thou, Indra, praised by Divodasa's clansmen, as heaven grows
great with days, shalt wax in glory.

HYMN CXXXI. Indra,

To Indra Dyaus the Asura hath bowed him down, to Indra
mighty Earth with wide-extending tracts, to win the light,
with wide-spread tracts.

All Gods of one accord have set Indra in front preeminent.

For Indra all libations must be set apart, all man's libations
set apart.

2 In all libations men with hero spirit urge the Universal One,

each seeking several light, each fain to win the light apart.

Thee, furthering like a ship, will we set to the chai*iot-pole of
strength,

As men who win with sacrifices Indra's thought, men who win
Indra with their lauds.

3 Couples desirous of thine aid are storming thee, pouring their

presents forth to win a stall of kine, pouring gifts, Indra,
seeking thee.

When two men seeking spoil or heaven thou bnngest face to
face in war,

Thou showest, Indra, then the bolt thy constant friend, the
Bull that ever waits on thee.

9 He tore the Sun's wheel off : according to Sayana, Bralim&had promised
the Asuras or fiends that Indra’s thunderbolt should never destroy them.
Indra, accordingly, cast at them the wheel of the Sun’s chariot and slew them
therewith.

Tie steals their speech : Sayan a thinks that the meaning is that Indra depriv-
ed his enemies of life.

0 Sage ; 0 Indra,

10 B\j Bivod Asa’s clansmen : by me, Paruchchhepa, a member of the house
or family of Divod&sa.

3 Couples : sacrifieers and their wives who are associated with them in offer-
ing oblations.

The Hull : the fiercely rushing thunderbolt.

HYMN 132.]

THE RIGYEDA.

133

4 This thine heroic power men of old time have known, where-

with thou breakest down, Indra, autumnal forts, breakest
them down with conquering might.

Thou hast chastised, 0 Indra, Lord of Strength, the man who
worships not,

And made thine own this great earth and thesfc water-foods,
with joyous heart these water-floods.

5 And they have bruited far this hero-might when thou, 0 Strong

One, in thy joy holpest thy suppliants, who sought to win
thee for their Friend.

Their battle-cry thou niadest sound victorious in the shocks of
war.

One stre im after another have they gained from thee, eager
for glory have they gaiued.

6 Also this morn may he be well-inclined to us, mark at our call

our offerings and our song of praise, our call that we may
win the light.

As thou, 0 Indra Thunder-armed, wilt, as the Strong One, slay
the foe,

Listen thou to the prayer of me a later sage, hear thou a
later sage’s prayer.

7 0 Indra, waxen strong and well-inclined to us, thou veiy mighty,

slay the man that is our foe, slay the man, Hero I with thy
holt.

Slay thou the man who injures us : hear thou, as readiest to
hear.

Far be malignity, like mischief ou the march, afar be all
malignity:

HYMN CXXXII. Indra.

Helped, Indra Maghavan, by thee in war of old, may we sub-
due in fight the men who strive with us, conquer the men
who war with us.

4 Autumnal forts : strongholds on high ground, occupied as places of refuge
during the heavy rains, or £ the brilliant battlemented cloud-castles, which
are so often visible in the Indian sky at. this period of the year.’ — Muir, 0. S.
Texts, II. 379.

Men of old time: I have followed Sftyana here. But ptlrdvah probably
means the Purus, one of the five great Aryan tribes or clans.

1 Th is day : the hymn is addressed to Indra just before an expected battle.

May we divide the spoil : divide it in anticipation' ; secure it by our sacrifice.

184 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK L

This day that now is close at hand bless him who pours the
Soma juice.

In this- our sacrifice may we divide the spoil, showing our
strength, the spoil of war.

2 In war which w r ins the light, at the free-giver’s call, at due

oblatioii of the early-rising one, oblation of the active one,
Indra slew, even as we know — whom each bowed head must
reverence.

May all thy bounteous gifts be gathered up for us, yea, the
good gifts of thee the Good.

3 This food glows for thee as of old at sacrifice, wherein they

made thee chooser of the place, for thou choosest the place
of sacrifice.

Speak thou and make it known to us : they see within with
beams of light.

Indra, indeed, is found a seeker after spoil, spoil-seeker for his
own allies.

4 : So now must thy great deed be lauded as of old, when for the
Angirases thou openedst the stall, openedst, giving aid, the
stall.

In the same manner for us here fight thou and be victorious.
To him who pours the juice give up the lawless man, the law-
less who is wroth with us.

5 When with wise plan the Hero leads the people forth, they

conquer in the ordered battle, seeking fame, press, eager, on-
ward seeking fame.

To him in time of need they sing for life with offspring and
with strength.

Their hymns with Indra find a welcome plg.ce of rest ; the
hymns go forward to the Gods.

6 Indra and Parvata, our champions in the fight, drive ye away

each man who fain would war with us, drive him far from
us with the bolt.

2 The early-rising and active one is the offerer of the sacrifice.

3 They made thee chooser of the place : the meaning appears to be that In-
dra is present at such sacrifices only as he chooses to favour.

Speak thou and make it known : Wilson, following Sayapa. paraphrases : ' do
thou declare that (rite), that men may thence behold the intermediate (firma-
ment bright) with the rays (of the sun).’ I find the passage unintelligible.

4 The man who pours the juice is the worshipper of Indra, and the lawless
man is the non-Aryan inhabitant of the country, the natural enemy of the
new settlers.

6 Parvata : the presiding Genius of mountains and clouds, frequently
associated with Indra, or, according to S&yana, another form of that God,
Cf. 1, 122. 3.

HYMN 133.] TUB RIG VEDA . 185

Welcome to him concealed afar shall be the lair that he hath
found.

So may the Render rend our foes on every side, rend them, 0
Hero, everywhere.

HYMN CXXXIII. . Indra.

With sacrifice I purge both earth and heaven ; I burn up
great she-fiends who serve not Indra,

Where throttled by thy hand the foes were slaughtered, and
in the pit of death lay pierced and mangled.

2 0 thou who castest forth the stone, crushing the sorceresses 7

heads,

Break them with thy wide-spreading foot, with thy wide-spre'ad-
ing mighty foot.

3 Do thou, O Maghavan, beat off these sorceresses 7 daring

strength.

Oast them within the narrow pit, within the deep and narrow
pit.

4 Of whom thou hast ere now" destroyed thrice-fifty with thy

fierce attacks.

That deed they count a glorious deed, though small to thee,
a glorious deed.

5 0 Indra, crush and bray to bits the fearful fiery-weaponed

fiend :

Strike every demon to the ground.

6 Tear down the mighty ones. 0 Indra, hear thou us. For

heaven hath glowed like earth in fear, 0 Thunder-armed,
as dreading fierce heat, Thunder-armed !

Most Mighty mid the Mighty Ones thou speedest with strong
bolts of death,

Not slaying men, unconquered Hero I with the brave, 0 Hero,
with the thrice-seven brave. .

7 The pourer of libations gains the home of wealth, pouring his

gift conciliates hostilities, yea, the hostilities of Gods.
Pouring, he strives, unchecked and strong, to win him riches
thousandfold.

Indra gives lasting weal h to him who pours forth gifts, yea,
wealth he gives that long shall last.

This hymn is a prayer for the destruction of witches, goblins, and evil spi-
rits of various sorts.

2 Who castest forth the stone : hurlest the thunderbolt.

6 Not slaying men : that is destroying evil spirits only. The thrice-seven
brave : the Maruts, Indra’s allies. These were forty-nine in number, and
thrice-seven is used indefinitely for a larger multiple of seven,

186 THE HYMNS OF {BOOK I.

HYMN CXXX1Y. V4yu.

YAytj, let fleet-foot coursers bring thee speedily to this our
feast, to drink first of the juice we pour, to the first
draught of Soma juice.

May om; glad hymn, discerning well, uplifted, gratify thy
mind.

Come with thy team-drawn car, 0 Yayu, to the gift, come to
the sacrificer’s gift.

2 May the ‘-7 0 Yayu, gladden thee, effectual,

well \ v ■ i to the heavens, strong, blent with

milk and seeking heaven ;

*That aids, effectual to fulfil, may wait upon our skilful power.
Associate teams come hitherward to grant our prayers : they
shall address the hymns we sing.

3 Two red steeds Yayu yokes, Yayu two purple steeds, swift-

footed, to the chariot, to the pole to draw, most able, at the
pole, to draw.

Wake up intelligence, as when a lover wakes his sleeping love.
Illumine heaven and earth, make thou the Dawns to shine,
for glory make the Dawns to shine.

4 For thee the radiant Dawns in the far-distant sky broaden

their lovely garments forth in wondrous beams, bright-
coloured in their new-born beams.

For thee the nectar-yielding Cow pours all rich treasures forth
as milk.

The Marut host hast thou engendered from the womb, the
Maruts from the womb of heaven.

5 For thee the pure bright quickly-flowing Soma-drops, strong in

their heightening power, hasten to mix themselves, haste
to the water to be mixed.

To thee the weary coward prays for luck that he may speed
away.

Thou by thy law protectest us from every world, yea, from
the world of highest Gods.

6 Thou, Yfyu, who hast none before thee, first of all hast right

to drink these offerings of Soma juice, hast right to drink
the juice out-poured,

1 Vdf/ a : the God of wind.

4 Nectar- yielding cow: Sabarduglul; yielding amrit, ambrosia, nectar, or
food for the Gods.

IIYMN 135.]

THE RJGYEDA.

187

Yea, poured by all invoking tribes who free themselves from
taint of sin.

For thee all cows are milled to yield the Soma-milk, to yield
the butter and the milk.

HYMN CXXXY. yAyT*, Indra-Vayu.

Strewn is the sacred grass ; come, Vayu, to our feast, with
team of thousands, come, Lord of the harnessed team, with
hundreds, Lord of harnessed steeds !

The drops divine are lifted up for thee, the God, to drink them
first.

The juices rich in sweets have raised them for thy joy, have
raised themselves to give thee strength.

2 Purified by the stones the Soma flows for thee, clothed with

its lovely splendours, to the reservoir, flows clad in its re-
fulgent light.

For thee the Soma is poured forth, thy portioned share mid
Gods and men.

Drive thou thy horses, Vayu, come to us with love, come well-
inclined and loving us.

3 Come thou with hundreds, come with thousands in thy team

to this our solemn rite, to taste the sacred food, Vayu, to
taste the offerings.

This is thy seasonable share, that comes corradiant with the
Sun.

Brought by attendant priests pure juice is offered up, Vayu,
pure juice is offered up.

4 The chariot with its team of horses bring you both, to guaixl

us and to taste the well-appointed food, Vayu, to taste the
offerings !

Drink of the pleasant-flavoured juice : the first draught is
assigned to you.

0 Vayu, with your splendid bounty come ye both, Indra, with
bounty come ye both.

5 May our songs bring you hither to our solemn rites : these

drops of mighty vigour have they beautified, like a swift
steed of mighty strength.

Drink of them well-inclined to us, come hitherward to be our
help.

Drink, Indra-V&yu, of these juices pressed with stones,
Strength-givers 1 till they gladden you.

6 T/ie Soma* milk ; tlxe libation consisting of Soma juice mixed with milk.

188

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK L

6 These Soma juices pressed for you in waters here, borne by

attendant priests, are offered up to you ; bright, V&yu, are
they offered up.

Swift through the strainer have they flowed, and here are shed
for both of you,

Soma-drops, fain for you, over the wether’s fleece, Somas over
the wether’s fleece.

7 0 Vayu, pass thou over all the slumberers, and where the press-

stone rings enter ye both that house, yea, Indra, go ye both
within.

The joyous Maiden is beheld, the butter flows. With richly-
laden team come to our solemn rite, yea, Indra, come ye to
the rite.

8 Ride hither to the offering of the pleasant juice, the holy Fig-

tree which victorious priest surround : victorious be they
still for us.

At once the cows yield milk, the barley-meal is dressed. For
thee,

0 Vayu, never shall the cows grow thin, never for thee shall
they he dry.

9 These Bulls of thine, 0 Vayu with the arm of strength, who

swiftly fly within the current of thy stream, the Bulls in-
creasing in their might,

Horseless, yet even through the waste swift-moving, whom no
shout can stay,

Hard to be checked are they, like sunbeams, in their course,
hard to be checked by both the hands.

HYMN CXXXVI. Mitra-Varuna.

Bring adoration ample and most excellent, hymn, offerings, to
the watchful Twain, the bountiful, your sweetest to the
bounteous Ones.

Sovrans adored with streams of oil and praised at every sacri-
fice,

Their high imperial might may nowhere he assailed, ne’er may
their Godhead be assailed.

6 The wethers's fleece : the filter or strainer made of wool, used in purifying
the Soma juice. See X. 2. 1 .

7 Where the press-stone rings : where men are pressing out the Soma juice.
The joyous Maiden : probably Ushas or Dawn.

8 The holy Fig-tree : the vessel for holding the Soma juice, made of the
wood of the Aavattha or Ficus Religiosa ; or, as S&yana explains it here, the
Soma itself.

The barky-meal : forming a part of the offering.

9 Hulls : blasts of wind.

THE BIG VEDA.

189

HYMN 136.]

2 For the broad Sun was seen a path more widely laid, the path

of holy law hath been maintained with rays, the eye with
Bhaga’s rays of light.

Firm-set in heaven is Mitra’s home, and Aryaman’s and
Varuna’s.

*

Thence they give forth great vital strength which merits praise,
high power of life that men shall praise.

3 With Aditi the luminous, the celestial, upholder of the people,

come ye day by day, ye who watch ^sleepless, day by day.
Resplendent might have ye obtained, Adityas, Lords of liberal
gifts.

Movers of men, mid both, are Mitra, Yaruna, mover of men is
Aryaman.

4 This Soma be most sweet to Mitra, Yaruna : he, in the drink-

ing-feasts, shall have a share thereof, sharing, a God, among
the Gods.

May all the Gods of one accord accept it joyfully to-day.
Therefore do ye, 0 Kings, accomplish what we ask, ye Righte-
ous Ones, whatever we ask.

5 Whoso with worship serves Mitra and Yaruna, him guard ye

carefully, uninjured, from distress, guard from distress the
liberal man.

Aryaman guards him well who acts uprightly following his law,
Who beautifies their service with liis lauds, who makes it beauti-
ful with songs of praise.

6 Worship will I profess to lofty Dyaus, to Heaven and Earth,

to Mitra and to bounteous Yaruna, the Bounteous, the Com-
passionate.

Praise Indra, praise thou Agni, praise Bhaga and heavenly
Aryaman.

Long may we live and have attendant progeny, have progeny
with Soma’s help.

2 Bhaga 1 $ rays of light: ‘the ancient god, Bhaga/ says Mr. Wallis, ‘lias
become in the Kigveda little more than*a source from which descriptions of
the functions of other gods are obtained, or a standard of comparison by
which their greatness is enhanced. His name has survived in the Slavonic
languages as a general name for god, a sense which it also has in the Avesta.
To judge from the Iligveda, Bhaga would seem to be a survival from an ancient
Sun-worship.’ The Cosmology of the Bigveda, p. 11. It is difficult to explain
every expression in the verse ; but the general meaning appears to be that
the heaven has been lighted by the Sun, and that there is the home of the
Gods who thence show forth the powers which men should glorify.

3 Aditi and Adityas : see I. 14. 3.

4 He : Soma himself, meaning perhaps the Moon,

190 THE HYMNS OF {BOOK I.

7 With the Gods’ help, with Indra still beside us, may we be
held self-splendid with the Maruts.

May Agni, Mitra, Vanina give us shelter: this may we gain,
we and our wealthy princes.

HYMN CXXXVIL Mitra- Varuna.

With stones have we pressed out : 0 come ; these gladdening
drops are blent with milk, these Soma-drops which gladden
you.

Come to us, Kings who reach to heaven, approach us, coming
hitherward.

These milky drops are yours, Mitra and Varuna, bright Soma
juices blent with milk-

2 Here are the droppings ; come ye nigh ; the Soma-droppings

blent with curd, juices expressed and blent with curd.

Now for the wakening of your Dawn together with the Sun-
God’s rays,

Juice waits for Mitra and for Varuna to drink, fair juice for
drink, for sacrifice.

3 As ’twere a radiant-coloured cow, they milk with stones the stalk

for you, with stones they milk the Soma-plant.

May ye come nigh us, may ye turn hither to drink the Soma
juice.

The men pressed out this juice, Mitra and Varuna, pressed
out this Soma for your drink.

HYMN CXXXYIIL P a e han.

Strong Pu shan’s majesty is lauded evermore, the glory of his
lordly might is never faint, his song of praise is never faint.

Seeking felicity I laud him nigh to help, the source of bliss,

Who, Vigorous One, hath drawn to him the hearts of all, drawn
them, the Vigorous One, the God.

2 Thee, then, 0 Pushan, like a swift one on his way, I urge with
lauds that thou mayst make the foemen flee, drive, camel-
like, our foes afar.

As I, a man, call thee, a God, giver of bliss, to be my Friend,

So make our loudly-cbanted praises glorious, in battles make
them glorious.

1 Pilshan : see I. 14. 3, and 42. 1.

2 Camel-like ; Sftyana explains : e as a camel carries away his load, so carry
away our enemies from the battle.’ The meaning is obscure.

TUB MG YE DA.

191

HYMN 139.]

3 Thou, Pushan, in whose friendship they who sing forth praise
enjoy advantage, even in wisdom, "through thy grace, in
wisdom even they are advanced.

So, after this most recent course, we come to thee with prayers
for wealth.

Not stirred to anger, 0 Wiile-Ruler, come to us^come thou to
us in every fight.

4r Not stirred to anger, come, Free-giver, nigh to us, to take this
gift of ours, thou who hast goats for steeds, Goat-borne 1
their gift who long for fame.

So, Wonder-Worker ! may we turn thee hither with effectual
lauds.

I slight thee not, 0 Pushan, thou Resplendent One : thy friend-
ship may not be despised.

HYMN CXXXIX. Visveclevas.

Heatid be our prayer ! In thought I honour Agni first : now
straightway we elect this heavenly company, Indraand Vayu
we elect.

For when our latest thought is raised and on Vivasvan centred
well,

Then may our holy songs go forward on their way, our songs
as J t were unto the Gods.

2 As there ye, Mitra, Yaruua, above the true have taken to
yourselves the untrue with your mind, v r ith wisdom’s mental
energy,

So in the seats wherein ye dwell have we beheld the Golden
One,

Not with our thoughts or spirit, but with these our eyes, yea,
with the eyes that Soma gives.

4 Thou who hast goats for steeds ; Pu shan’s chariot, like Thorr’s in the
Edd a, is said to be drawn by a team of goats.

1 Vivasvin : the radiant celestial Agni.

2 This verse is exceedingly difficult. Ludwig’s explanation, if I have under*
stood him rightly, is to the following effect : The Golden One, which is in the
home of Mitra and Varuna, is the Sun which is only the image or copy of the
transcendental reality, the golden shell that covers the face of the satyam or
verity. This apparent Sun Mitra and Varuna have taken to themselves im
addition to their real essence. As this real essence is perceived not with the
eyes of the body but by the eyes of the spirit strengthened by the elevating
Soma- draught, so on the other hand the apparent Sun is not an object of

192

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK L

3 Asvins, the pious call you with their hymns of praise, sound-

ing their loud song forth to you, these living men, to their
oblations, living men.

All glories and all nourishment, Lords of all wealth ! depend
on you.

The fellies of your golden chariot scatter drops, Mighty Ones !
of your golden car.

4 Well is it known, 0 Mighty Ones *. ye open heaven; for you

the chariot-steeds are yoked for morning rites, unswerving
steeds for morning rites.

We set you on the chariot-seat, ye Mighty, on the golden car.
Ye seek mid-air as by a path that leads aright, as by a path
that leads direct.

5 0 Rich in Strength, through your great power vouchsafe us

blessings day and night.

The offerings which we bring to you shall never fail, gifts
brought by us shall never fail.

6 These Soma-drops, strong Indra ! drink for heroes, poured,

pressed out by pressing-stones, are welling forth for thee,
for thee the drops are welling forth.

They shall make glad thy heart to give, to give wealth great
and wonderful.

Thou who acceptest praise come glorified by hymns, come thou
to us benevolent.

7 Quickly, 0 Agni, bear us : magnified by us thou shalt speak

for us to the Gods adorable, yea, to the Kings adorable :
When, 0 ye Deities, ye gave that Milch-cow to the Angirases,
They milked her : Aryaman, joined with them, did the work :
he knoweth her as well as I.

8 Ne’er may these manly deeds of yours for us grow old, never

may your bright glories fall into decay, never before our
time decay.

What deed of yours, new every age, wondrous, surpassing
man, rings forth,

Whatever, Maruts ! may be difficult to gain, grant us, whatever
is hard to gain.

spiritual perception. Consequently the poet says ; 1 With our bodily eyes we
have seen the Sun, but enlightened by the Soma juice we have recognized
it as being only an image of you.* The, untrue is the Sun ; the true is the
transcendental essence of the God.

7 That Mileh-cow : according to S&yana, the Cow of Plenty. M. Bergaigne
(La Iteligion V&lique, I. 135, 310) thinks that prayer is meant, * the ancient
prayer of the Fathers/ The meaning of the latter part of the verse is uncertain.

HYMN 140,]

TEE RIG VEDA,

198

9 Dadhyach of old, Angiras, Priyamedha, these, and Kanva, Atri,
Manu knew my birth, yea, these of ancient days aiid Mann
knew.

Their long line stretcheth to the Gods, our birth-connexions
are with them.

To these, for their high station, I bow down with song, to Indra,
Agni, bow with song.

10 Let the Invoker bless : let offerers bring choice gifts; Brihas-

pati the Friend doth sacrifice with Steers, Steers that* have
many an excellence.

Now with our ears we catch the sound of the press-stone that
rings afar.

The very Strong hath gained the waters by himself, the Strong
gained many a resting-place.

11 0 ye Eleven Gods whose home is heaven, 0 ye Eleven

who make earth your dwelling,

Ye who with might, Eleven, live in waters, accept this sacrifice,

0 Gods, with pleasure.

HYMN CXL. Agni.

To splendid Agni seated by the altar, loving well his home,

1 bring the food as ? twere his place of birth,

I clothe the Bright One with ray hymn as with a robe, him
with the car of light, bright-hued, dispelling gloom.

9 Dadhyach of old : all these ancient sages have been mentioned in former
hymns. As predecessors of Paruchchhepa, the Kishi of this hymn, they are
said to have known his ancestry.

10 Let the Invoke r bless : let the Hotar, or invoking priest utter the Ydjyd,
words of consecration used at sacrifice.

Brihaspati : see I, 14. 3.

With Steers : according to S fly an a, a metaphorical expression for strong
and copious libations of Soma juice.

The very Strong : the Soma. The resting-places are the different recept-
acles into which the juice flows.

11 0 ye Eleven Gods : on this SAyana remarks : * Although, according to
the text, { There are only three gods’, (Nirukta, vii. 5), the deities who repre-
sent the earth, etc., are but three, still through their greatness, i. e. their
respective varied manifestations, they amount to thirty- three, according
to the saying, ‘ other manifestations of Him exist in different places.’ —
J, Muir, 0. S. Texts , v. 10.

This and the twenty-four following hymns are ascribed to the Rishi Dlrgha-
tamas, the son of Uchathya.

1 The food as * tioere his place of birth : the oblation of clarified buttec
which makes the fire spring up into fresh life.

13

194 THE HYMNS OF [BOOH I.

2 Child of a double birth he grasps at triple food ; in the year’s

course what he hath swallowed grows anew.

He, by another’s mouth and tongue a noble Bull,, with other,
as an elephant, consumes the trees.

3 The pair© who dwell together, moving in the dark, bestir

themselves : both parents hasten to the babe,
Impetuous-tong ued, destroying, springing swiftly forth, one to
be watched and cherished, strengthener of his sire.

4 For man, thou Friend of men, these steeds of thine are yoked,

impatient, lightly running, ploughing blackened lines,
Discordant-minded, fleet, gliding with easy speed, urged onward
by the wind and rapid in their course.

5 Dispelling on their way the horror of black gloom, making a

glorious show these flames of his fly forth,

When o’er the spacious tract he spreads himself abroad, and
rushes panting on with thunder and with roar.

6 Amid brown plants he stoops as if adorning them, and rushes

bellowing like a bull upon his wives. ,

Proving his nrght, he decks the glory of his form, and shakes
his horns like one terrific, hard to stay.

7 Now covered, now displayed, he grasps as one who knows,

having his resting-place in those who know him well.

A second time they wax and gather Godlike power, and blend-
ing both together change their Parents’ form.

, 8 The maidens with long tresses hold him in embrace ; dead,
they rise up again to meet the Living One.

Releasing them from age with a loud roar he comes, Ailing
them with new spirit, living, unsubdued.

2 Child of a double birth : born first from the fire-sticks and then anew by-
consecration.

Triple food : clarified butter, fried cakes, Soma juice.

By another's mouth ; according to Sayana, ‘ he receives the oblation by
means of the ladle of the ministering priests, and in another form, that is
the fire that burns forests, he consumes the trees.’

*■

8 The pair who dwell toy ether ; the two fire-sticks from which Agui is
produced by friction. His sire: said to be the insti tutor of the sacrifice.

4 In this and the four following stanzas Agni is described not in his
sacrificial form but as the fire that destroys the jungle and prepares the way
for new settlements.

6 As adorning them : with the glory of his flame.

7 As one who knows : because, coming from heaven with the waters, he
makes the plants grow, and is said to live within them.

, Change their Parents' form : perhaps, as Ludwig suggests, the plants alter
the appearance of the earth, and Agni or fire that of the sky.

8 2 he maidens with long tresses : the curling flames.

m r m 141.3

THE RIG VEDA.

ISo

9 Licking the mantle of the Mother, far and wide he wanders
over fields with beasts that flee apace.

Strengthening all that walk, licking up all around, a blackened
path, forsooth, he leaves where’er he goes.

10 0 Agni, shine resplendent with our wealthy chiefs, like a

loud-snorting bull, accustomed to the house.

Thou casting off thine infant wrappings blazest forth as
though thou hadst put on a coat of mail for war.

11 May this our perfect prayer be dearer unto thee than an

imperfect prayer although it please thee well.

With the pure brilliancy that radiates from thy form, mayest
thou grant to us abundant store of wealth.

12 Grant to our chariot, to our house, 0 Agni, a boat with mov-

ing feet and constant oarage,

One that miy further well our wealthy princes and all the
folk, and be our certain refuge.

13 Welcome our laud with thine approval, Agni. May earth and

heaven and freely-flowing rivers
Yield us long life and food and corn and cattle, and may the
red Dawns choose for us their choicest.

HYMN CXLI. Agni.

.Yea, verily, the fair effulgence of the God for glory was
established, since he sprang from strength.

When he inclines thereto successful is the hymn : the songs
of sacrifice have brought him as they flow.

2 Wonderful, rich in nourishment, he dwells in food; next, in
the seven auspicious Mothers is his home.

Thirdly, that they might drain the treasures of the Bull, the
maidens brought forth him for whom the ten provide.

9 The Mother : the earth, whose vesture of grass and shrubs he licks and
consumes.

Strengthening all that walk ; giving them strength and speed to fly-
before him.

10 Thine infant wrappings : the waters that enveloped the f Child of the Floods.’

11 This our perfect prayer ; see' Yedic Hymns, I, 225.

12 A boat : according to Sdyana, the sacrifice, with priests for oars, and
Gods, prayers and offerings, for feet.

1 From strength : from violent agitation of the fire-stick.

2 He dioells in food : he is the cause of the production of men’s food, as
sender of rain and as sacrificial fire.

T 1 2 •- V , « *f \thers : according to S&yana, the rains which fertilize

th- ■■ ■' ■ :■ v. ■■ .

The Bull : Agni. The maidens, and the ten , are the fingers which produce
the fire by attrition and tend it afterwards.

m THE HYMNS OF [BOOH I .

3 What time from out the deep, from the Steer’s wondrous

form, the Chiefs who had the power produced him with
their strength ;

When Matarisvan rubbed forth him who lay concealed, for
mixture* of the sweet drink, in the days of old.

4 When from the Highest Father he is bimight to us, amid the

plants he rises hungry, wondrous! y.

As both together join to expedite his birth, most youthful he
is born resplendent in his light.

5 Then also entered he the Mothers, and in them pure and

uninjured he increased in magnitude.

As to the first he rose, the vigorous from of old, so now he
runs among the younger lowest ones.

6 Therefore they choose him Herald at the morning rites, press-

ing to him as unto Bhaga, pouring gifts,

When, much-praised, by the power and will of Gods, he goes
at all times to his mortal worshipper to drink.

7 What time the Holy One, wind-urged, hath risen up, serpent-

like winding through the dry grass imrestrained,

Dust lies upon the way of him who burneth all, black-winged
and pure of birth who follows sundry paths.

8 Like a swift chariot made by men who know their art, he

with his red limbs lifts himself aloft to heaven.

Thy worshippers become by burning black of hue : their
strength flies as before a hero’s violence.

9 By thee, 0 Agni, Varuna who guards the Law, Mitra and

Aryaman, the Bounteous, are made strong ;

For, as the felly holds the spokes, thou with thy might
pervading hast been born encompassing them round.

10 Agni, to him who toils and pours libations, thou, Most Youth-
ful ! sendest wealth and all the host of Gods.

Thee, therefore, even as Bhaga, will we set anew, young Child
of Strength, most wealthy l in our battle-song.

3 Agni appears here to have been partly produced by the Chiefs, the Sftris
or Gods, from the depth of the atmosphere, from Parjanya the rainy cloud
symbolically represented as a bull, and partly generated by Matarisvan
(see I. 31. 3) by attrition, and brought by him to the earth to receive
libations of Soma juice.

4 The Highest Father : Dyaus. Both together : Heaven and Earth.

5 The Mothers : the waters. The younger lowest ones : the plants in which
also he dwells.

6 Herald ; or, Hotar. Bhaga ; see I. 136. 2.

THE RI&VEDA*

HYMN 1420

XOt

11 Vouchsafe us riches turned to worthy ends, good luck abiding

in the house, and strong capacity,

Wealth that directs both worlds as they were guiding-reins,
and, very Wise, the Gods’ assent in sacrifice.

12 May he, the Priest resplendent, joyful, hear uas, he with the

radiant car and rapid horses.

May Agni, ever wise, with best directions to bliss and highest
happiness conduct us.

13 With hymns of might hath Agni now been lauded, advanced

to height of universal kingship.

Now may these wealthy chiefs and we together spread forth
as spreads the Sun above the rain-clouds,

HYMN CXLIL Apris.

Kindled, bring, Agni, Gods to-day for him who lifts the
ladle up.

Spin out the ancient thread for him who sheds, with gifts,
the Soma juice.

2 Thou dealest forth, Tanunap&t, sweet sacrifice enriched

with oil,

Brought by a singer such as I who offers gifts and toils for thee.

3 He wondrous, sanctifying, bright, sprinkles the sacrifice with

mead,

Thrice, Narasansa from, the heavens, a God mid Gods adorable.

4 Agni, besought, bring hitherward Indra the Friend, the

Wonderful,

For this my hymn of praise, '0 sweet of tongue, is chanted
forth to thee.

5 The ladle-holders strew trimmed grass at this well-ordered

sacrifice ;

A home for Indra is adorned, wide, fittest to receive the Gods.

6 Thrown open be the Boors Divine, unfailing, that assist

the rite,

High, purifying, much-desired, so that the Gods may enter in.

7 May Night and Morning, hymned with lauds, united, fair to

look upon.

Strong Mothers of the sacrifice, seat them together on the
grass.

1 The ladle ; the sacrificial ladle containing the oblation.

Spin out the ancient thread : perform the sacrifice ordained of old,

2 TanUnapdt : Son of Thyself ; Agni. See I. 13. 2.

3 Nard&ansa : a name of Agni. See I. 13. 2.

The Doors Divine ; of the hall of sacrifice. See I. 13. fi.

198 , THE IIYMNS OF [BOOK I.

8 May the two Priests Divine, the sage, the sweet-voiced lovers

of the hymn,

Complete this sacrifice of ours, effectual, reaching heaven
to-day.

9 Let Hotr& pure, set among Gods, amid the Maruts Bharati, ;
I] a, Sarasvati, Mahi, rest on the grass, adorable.

10 May Tvashtar send us genial dew abundant, wondrous, rich

in gifts,

For increase and for growth of wealth, Tvashtar our kinsman
and our Friend.

11 Vanaspati, give forth, thyself, and call the Gods to sacrifice.
May Agni, God intelligent, 'speed our oblation to the Gods.

12 To Vayu joined with Pushan, with the Maruts, and the host

of Gods,

To Indra who inspires the hymn cry Glory ! and present
the gift,

13 Come hither to enjoy the gifts prepared with cry of Glory !

Come,

0 Indra, hear their calling ; they invite thee to the sacrifice'.

HYMN CXLIIJT. Agni.

To Agni I present a newer mightier hymn, I bring my words
and song unto the Son of Strength,

Who, Offspring of the Waters, beariug precious things sits on
the earth, in season, dear Invoking Priest.

2 Soon as he sprang to birth that Agni was shown forth to

M Otaris van in the highest firmament.

When he was kindled, through his power and majesty his
fiery splendour made the heavens and earth to shine.

3 His flames that wax not old, beams fair to look upon of him

whose face is lovely, shine with beauteous sheen.

The rays of Agni, him whose active force is light, through
the nights glimmer .sleepless, ageless, like the floods. .

8 The two Priests Divine : see I. 13. 8.

9 H otrd : a Goddess of sacrifice, regarded as the consort of Agni,

BMrati : a Goddess of sacred speech.

I Id, Sarasvati, MaM : see I. 13. 9.

II Vanaspati : the sacrificial post, said to he a form of Agni.

. 12 Cry Glory / ; SvaM ! the sacred word uttered at the end of sacrificial
invocations.

2 Mdtarhvan : see I. 31, 3,

THE RIG VEDA.

199

HYMN 144.]

4 Send thou with hymns that Agni to his own abode, who rules,

one Sovran Lord of wealth, like Yaruna,

Him, All-possessor, whom the Bhrigus with their might
brought to earth's central point, the centre of the world.

5 He whom no force can stay, even as the Manfts 5 roar, like

to a dart sent forth, even as the bolt from heaven,

Agni with sharpened jaws chews up and eats the trees, and
conquers them as when the warrior smites his foes.

6 And will not Agni find enjoyment in our praise, will not the

Yasu grant our wish with gifts of wealth ?

Will not the Tnspirer speed our prayers to gain their end 1
Him with the radiant glance I laud "with this my song.

7 The kindler of the flame wins Agni as a Friend, promoter of

the Law, whose face is bright with oil.

Inflamed and keen, refulgent in our gatherings, he lifts our
hymn on high clad in his radiant hues.

8 Keep us incessantly with guards that cease not, Agni, with

guards auspicious, very mighty.

With guards that never slumber, never heedless, never be-
guiled, 0 Helper, keep our children.

HYMN CXLIY. Agni.

The Priest goes forth to sacrifice, with wondrous power send-
ing aloft the hymn of glorious brilliancy.

He moves to meet the ladles turning to the right, which are
the first to kiss the place where he abides.

2 To him sang forth the flowing streams of Holy Law, encom-

passed in the home and birth-place of the God.

He, when he dwelt extended in the waters’ lap, absorbed those
Godlike powers for which he is adored.

3 Seeking in course altern to reach the selfsame end, the two

copartners strive to win this beauteous form.

Like Bhaga must he be duly invoked by us, as he who drives
the car holds fast the horse’s reins.

4 Earth's central 'point : the altar.

6 The PWsu ; the God Agni.

1 The place where he abides : Agni's dwelling-place; the altar.

2 Of Holy Law : flowing in accordance with the order of the universe.

3 The two copartners : the two priests, Hotar and Adhvaryu, according to
S&yana. Perhaps Day and Night are intended, as Ludwig suggests.

200 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK I.

4 He whom the two copartners with observance tend, the pair

who dwell together in the same abode,

By night as in the day the grey one was born young, passing
tmtouched by eld through many an age of man.

5 Him the ten fingers, the devotions, animate : we mortals call

on him a God to give us help.

He speeds over the sloping surface of the land : new deeds
hath he performed with those who gird him round.

6 For, Agni, like a herdsman, thou by thine own might rulest

o’er all that is in heaven and on the earth ;

And these two Mighty Ones, bright, golden, closely joined,
rolling them round are come unto thy sacred grass.

7 Agni, accept with joy, be glad in this our prayer, joy-giver,

self-sustained, strong, born of Holy Law 1
For fair to see art thou turning to every side, pleasant to
look on as a dwelling filled with food.

HYMN CXLV. Agni.

Ask ye of him, for he is come, he knoweth it ; he, full of
wisdom, is implored, is now implored.

With him are admonitions and with him commands : he is
the Lord of Strength, the Lord of Power and Might.

2 They ask of him : not all learn by their questioning what he,

the Sage, hath grasped, as ’twere, with his own mind.'
Forgetting not the former nor the later word, he goeth on,
not careless, in his mental power.

3 To him these ladles go, to him these racing mares : he only

will give ear to all the words I speak.

All-speeding, victor, perfecter of sacrifice, the Babe with
flawless help hath mustered vigorous might.

4 Whatever he meets he grasps and then runs farther on, and

straightway, newly born, creeps forward with his kin.

He stirs the wearied man to pleasure and great joy what time
the longing gifts approach him as he comes.

4 The grey one.' Agni. Of. I. 164, 1.

5 Him the ten fingers : see I. 141. 2. Those who gird him round : his wor-
shippers.

6 These two Mighty Ones : Heaven and Earth.

3 These racing mares : these libations that quickly reach Agni.

The Babe with fiawless help ; the evcr-youthful Agni who protects his
worshippers.

HYMN 146.]

THE RIGVEDA.

201

5 He is a wild thing of the flood and forest : he hath been laid
upon the highest surface.

He hath declared the lore of works to mortals, ■ Agni the Wise,
for he knows Law, the Truthful.

HYMN CXLVL Agni.

I laud the seven-rayed, the triple-headed, Agni all-perfect in
his Parents 1 2 * 4 5 bosom,

Sunk in the lap of all that moves and moves not, him who
hath filled all luminous realms of heaven.

2 As a great Steer he grew to these his Parents ; sublime he

stands, untouched by eld, far-reaching.

He plants his footsteps on the lofty ridges of the broad earth :
his red flames lick the udder.

3 Coming together to their common youngling both Cows, fair-

shaped, spread forth in all directions,

Measuring out the paths that must bo travelled, entrusting
all desires to him the Mighty.

4 The prudent sages lead him to his dwelling, guarding with

varied skill the Ever-Youthful.

Longing, they turned their eyes unto the Biver : to these the
Sun of men was manifested.

5 Born noble in the regions, aim of all mens 1 eyes, to be implored

for life by great and small alike,

Far as the Wealthy One hath spread himself abroad, he is
the Sire all-visible of this progeny.

5 Upon the highest surface ; the meaning is not clear, but the reference
appears to be to celestial Agni in the firmament rather than to the sacrificial
fire upon the altar.

1 ‘ The three heads may be the three daily sacrifices, or the three household
fires, or the three regions, earth, heaven and mid-air. The seven rays are the
seven flames of fire.’ — Wilson.

His Parents' bosom : the lap of Heaven and Earth.

2 The udder : the clouds of the sky.

8 Both Coios ; apparently Heaven and Earth ; according to Sftyana, the
institutor of the rite and the priest, or the saerificer and his wife.

4 The River : Agni, whose bounties flow like streams of water.

5 The Wealthy One : the rich and mighty Agni.

202 THE HYMNS O’F [BOOK /.

HYMN CXLYir. Agni.

How, Agni, have the radiant ones, aspiring, endued thee with
the vigour of the living,

So that, on both sides fostering seed and offspring, the Gods
may joy in Holy Law’s fulfilment ?

2 Mark this my speech, Divine One, thou, Most Youthful !

offered to thee by him who gives most freely.

One hates thee, and another sings thy praises : I thine adorer
laud thy form, 0 Agni.

3 Thy guardian rays, 0 Agni, when they saw him, preserved

blind Mamateya from affliction.

Lord of all riches, he preserved the pious : the foes who fain
would harm them did no mischief.

4 The sinful man who worships not, 0 Agni, who, offering not,

harms us with double-dealing, —

: Be this in turn to him a heavy sentence : may he distress
himself by his reviliugs.

5 Yea, when a mortal knowingly, 0 Victor, injures with double

tongue a fellow-mortal,

TYom him, praised Agni ! save thou him that lauds thee :
bring us not into trouble and affliction.

HYMN CXLVIII. Agni.

What Matarisvan, piercing, formed by friction, Herald of all
the Gods, in varied figure,

Is he whom they have set mid human houses, gay-hued as
light and shining forth for beauty.

2 They shall not harm the man who brings thee praises : such

as I am, Agni my help approves me.

All acts of mine shall they accept with pleasure, laudation
from the singer who presents it.

3 Him in his constant seat men skilled in worship have taken

and with praises have established.

As, harnessed fco a chariot,, fieet-foot horses, at his command
let bearers lead him forward.

X The radiant ones : thy bright rays.

On both sides : both in men and women ; or (offspring) of both sexes. .

3 Mdmateya : Dirgliatamas, the Illahx of the hymn, son of Mamat&, the
wife of Uchathya.

1 Wilson, following Sftyana, translates *. c The wind, penetrating (amidst the
fuel) has excited (Agni) the invoker (of the gods) the multiform, the minister
of all the deities.’ But then ydt , what or when, is left untranslated, and the
explanation of Matarisvan as V£yu or wind cannot be justified by any Rigveda
text, ’ *

HYMN 150.] THE RIG VEDA, 20$

4 Wondrous, full many a thing he chews and crunches : he

shines amid the wood with spreading brightness.

Upon his glowing flames the wind blows daily, driving them
like the keen shaft of an archer.

5 Him, whom while yet in embryo the hostile, both skilled and

fain to harm, may never injure,

Men blind and sightless through his splendour hurt not : his
never-failing lovers have preserved him.

HYMN CXLIX. Agni.

Hither- he hastes to give, Lord of great riches, King of the
mighty, to the place of treasure.

The pressing-stones shall serve him speeding near us.

2 As Steer of men so Steer of earth and heaven by glory, he

whose streams all life hath drunken,

Who hasting forward rests upon the altar.

3 He who hath lighted up the joyous castle, wise Courser like

the Steed of cloudy heaven,

Bright like the Sun, with hundredfold existence.

4 He, doubly born, hath spread in his effulgence through the

three luminous realms, through all the regions,

Best sacrificing Priest where waters gather.

5 Priest doubly born, he through his love of glory hath in his

keeping all things worth the choosing.

The man who brings him gifts hath noble offspring.

HYMN CL. ‘ Agni.

Agni, thy faithful servant I call upon thee with many a gift,
As in the keeping of the great inciting God ;

2 Thou who ne’er movest thee to aid the indolent, the godless man,
Him who though wealthy never brings an offering.

3 Splendid, 0 Singer, is that man, mightiest of the great in heaven.
Agni, may we be foremost, we thy worshippers.

1 The place of treasure : the altar, where riches are obtained by sacrifice
and prayer.

2 As Steer of men : preeminent, like a strong bull, among men.

3 The joyous castle : or the castle Narmini; meaning, probably, the proud
stronghold of some demon,

4 Where waters gather : according to S&yana, in the place of sacrifice where
water is collected for ceremonial purpose. But the reference is probably to
Agui’s appearance in the firmament, the waters above the earth, m the form
of lightning.

5 Doubly born ; from the fire-sticks and again at consecration.

3 That man : who propitiates thee by sacrifice and praise,

0 Singer ; singer of hymns, sage, or priest.

204 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK L

HYMN CLI. Mitra and Varuna.

Heaved and earth, trembled at the might and voice of him,
•whom, loved and Holy One, helper of all mankind,

The wise who longed for spoil in fight for kine brought forth
with power, a Friend, mid waters, at the sacrifice*

2 As these, like friends, have done this work for you, these

prompt servants of Purumilha Soma-offerer,

Give mental power to him who sings the sacred song, and
hearken, Strong Ones, to the master of the house.

3 The folk have glorified your birth from Earth and Heaven,

to be extolled, ye Strong Ones, for your mighty power.

Ye, when ye bring to singer and the rite, enjoy the sacrifice
performed with holy praise and strength.

4 The people prospers, Asuras ! whom ye dearly love : ye,

Bighteous Ones, proclaim aloud the Holy Law.

That efficacious power that comes from lofty heaven, ye bind
unto the work, as to the pole an ox.

5 On this great earth ye send your treasure down with might :

unstained by dust, the crowding kine are in the stalls.

Here in the neighbourhood they cry unto the Sun at morning
and at evening, like swift birds of prey.

6 The flames with curling tresses serve your sacrifice, whereto

*ye sing the song, Mitra and Varuna.

Send down of your free will, prosper our holy songs : ye are
sole Masters of the singer’s hymn of praise.

7 Whoso with sacrifices toiling brings you gifts, and worships,

sage and priest, fulfilling your desire, —

To him do ye draw nigh and taste his sacrifice. Come well-
inclined to us unto our songs and prayer.

8 With sacrifices and with milk they deck you first, ye Bigliteous

Ones, as if through stirrings of the mind.

To you they bring their hymns with their collected thought,
while ye with earnest soul come to us gloriously.

1 Of him : Agni.

2 As these : the priests. Purumtlha; the prince who offers the sacrifice.
Strong Ones : ye mighty Gods, Mitra and Varuna.

3 When ye bring : him, Agni, to the sacrifice.

4 Asuras : immortal Gods, especially the ancient deities.

That efficacious power : as 'Wilson observes, the meaning is not very obvious,
although it is clear that the adequacy of worship or sacrifice to effect its objects,
©r realize its rewards, is intended.

HYMN 152.]

THE RIG VEDA.

205

9 Rich strength of life is yours : ye, Heroes, have obtained
through your surpassing powers rich far-extending might.
Not the past days conjoined with nights, not rivers, not the
Panis have attained your Godhead and your wealth.

HYMN CLII. Mitra-Yaruria.

The robes which ye put on abound with fatness : uninterrupted
courses are your counsels.

All falsehood, Mitra-Varuna I ye conquer, and closely cleave
unto the Law Eternal.

2 This might of theirs hath no one comprehended. True is the

crushing word the sage hath uttered,

The fearful four-edged bolt smites down the three-edged, and
those who hate the Gods first fall and perish.

3 The Footless Maid precedeth footed creatures. Who marketb,

Mitra-Varuna, this your doing ?

The Babe Unborn supporteth this world’s burthen, fulfilleth
Law and overcometli falsehood.

4 We look on him the darling of the Maidens, always advancing,

never falling downward,

Wearing inseparable, wide-spread raiment, Mitra’s and Varuna’s
delightful glory.

5 Unbridled Courser, born but not of horses, neighing he flieth

on with back uplifted.

The youthful love the mystery thought-surpassing, praising in
Mitra-Varuna, its glory.

9 The Panis : the envious demons who carry away and conceal the cows or
rays of light.

X The robes which ye put on : the oblations of clarified butter with which
the Gods may be said to be clothed.

Uninterrupted courses are your counsels : your designs are always fully
carried into effect. Or the meaning may be as Wilson, following S&yana,
renders it : * your natures are to be regarded as without defect/

2 The fearful four-edged bolt ; Ludwig suggests an emendation of the text
and then translates : ‘ thrice strikes the edge [of Indra’s thunderbolt], four
times the fearful edge.’ I give the literal English of the words as they stand,
the sense being, according to S&yana, that he who has more arms is stronger
than he who has fewer, the arms intended being, perhaps, sacrifice and prayer.

8 The Footless Maid : Dawn. The Babe Unborn : the Sun before his
appearance in heaven.

4 The darling of the Maidens : the Sun, the lover of the Dawns.

5 The mystery thought- surpassing : the mystery of the Sun’s motion excites
wonder, and Mitra and Varuna are praised in connexion with it*

m THE HYMNS OF [HOOK /.

6 May the milch-kine who favour Mamateya prosper in this

world him who loves devotion.

May he, well skilled in rites, beg food, and calling Aditi with
his lip$ give us assistance.

7 Gods, Mitra-Varuna, with love and worship, let me make you

delight in this oblation.

May our prayer be victorious in battles, may we have rain
from heaven to make us prosper.

HYMN CLIII. Mitra-Varuna.

We worship with our reverence and oblations you, Mitra-
Varuna, accordant, mighty,

So that with us, ye Twain whose backs are sprinkled with oil,
the priests with oil and hymns support you.

2. Your praise is like a mighty power, an impulse : to you, Twain
Gods, a well-formed hymn is offered,

As the priest decks you, Strong Ones, in assemblies, and the
prince fain to worship you for blessings.

3 0 Mitra-Varuna, Aditi the Milch-cow streams for the rite, for

folk who bring oblation,

When in the assembly he who worships moves you, like to a
human priest, with gifts presented.

4 So may the kine and heavenly Waters pour you sweet drink

in families that make you joyful.

Of this may he, the ancient House-Lord, give us. Enjoy,
drink of the milk the cow provideth.

6 Md matey a ; the son of Mamat&, Dirghatamas the Rishi of the hymn.

Him who loves devotion : apparently Purumillia the institutor of the
sacrifice, mentioned in stanza 6 of the preceding hymn.

May he beg food : the food that remains after the oblations have been
presented and consumed,

Aditi : I follow Ludwig in taking Aditi in the usual signification. S&yana
takes it as meaning £ a perfect ceremony’ which is to be completed, and
Grassmann as famine, dearth, or want, which is to be averted.

The hymn is full of difficulties, and cannot at present be satisfactorily
translated.

2 The prince : the wealthy man who institutes the sacrifice.

3 Aditi , the Milch-cow : aditi regarded as the source of rewards for the
pious ; or Aditi may be taken as aii epithet, c the exhaustless,’ qualifying
Milch-cow.

4 The ancient House-Lord : Agni, the guardian of the homestead.

EYME 155.] • THE RIGVEDA. 207

HYMN CLIV. Vishnu.

I will declare the 'mighty deeds of Vishnu, of him who
measured out the earthly regions,

Who propped the highest place of congregation, thrice setting
down his footstep, widely striding.

2 For this his mighty deed is Vishnu lauded, like some wild

beast, dread, prowling, mountain-roaming ;

He within 'whose three wide-extended paces all living creatures
have their habitation.

3 Let the hymn lift itself as strength to Vishnu, the Bull far-

striding, dwelling on the mountains,

Him who alone with triple step hath measured this common
dwelling-place, long, far extended.

4 Him whose three places that are filled with sweetness, imperish-

able, joy as it may list them,

Who verily alone upholds the threefold, the earth, the heaven,
and all living creatures.

5 May I attain to that his well-loved mansion where men devoted

to the Gods are happy.

For there springs, close akin to the Wide-Strider, the well of
meath in Vishnu’s highest footstep.

6 Fain would we go unto your dwelling-places where there are

many-horned and nimble oxen,

For mightily, there, shineth down upon us the widely-striding
Bull’s sublimest mansion.

HYMN CLV . Vishnu-Indra.

To the great Hero, him who sets his mind thereon, and Vishnu,
praise aloud in song your draught of juice, —

Gods ne’er beguiled, who borne as ’t were by noble steed, have
stood upon the lofty ridges of the hills.

1 The highest place of congregation : heaven, where the Gods are assembled.
Thrice setting down his footstep : see I. 22. 16.

2 For this his mighty deed : I have followed S&yana who takes the active
verb in a passive signification. Prof. Peterson translates : 4 Vishnu makes
loud boast of this/ which is perhaps a more accurate rendering.

5 Meath : or nectar, or honey ; meaning celestial Soma.

6 Your dwelling-places : Vishnu’s and probably Indra’s.

Many-horned and nimble oxen : the stars with their ever-twinkling rays.

• Of. I. 105. 10 ; Valakkilya 7. 2.

1 To the great Eero: Indra. Who sets his mind thereon; who loves praise.

203 THE HYMNS OF ' [ BO'OK /.

2 Your Soma-drinker keeps afar your furious rush, Indra and

Vishnu, when ye come with all your might.

That which hath been directed well at mortal man, bow-armed
Kris&mfls arrow, ye turn far aside.

3 These offerings increase his mighty manly strength : he brings

both Parents down to share the genial flow.

He lowers, though a son, the Father’s highest name ; the third
is that which is high in the light of heayen.

4 We laud this manly power of him the Mighty One, preserver,

inoffensive, bounteous and benign ;

His who strode, widely pacing, with three steppings forth over
the realms of earth for freedom and for life.

5 A mortal man, when he beholds two steps of him who looks

upon the light, is restless with amaze.

But his third step doth no one venture to approach, no, nor
the feathered birds of air who fly with wings.

6 He, like a rounded wheel, hath in swift motion set his ninety

racing steeds together with the four.

Developed, vast in form, with those who sing forth praise, a
youth, no more a child, he cometh to. our call.

HYMN CLVI. Vishnu.

Far-shining, widely famed, going thy wonted way, fed with
the oil, be helpful, Mitra-like, to us.

So, Vishnu, e’en the wise must swell thy song of praise, and
lie who hath oblations pay thee solemn rites.

2 Your Soma-drinker : you gently approach your devout worshipper and do
him no harm.

Krisdnu : one of the guardians of the heavenly Soma, apparently a demon
of drought who prevents men from enjoying the ambrosial rain.

3 Both Parents: Heaven and Earth. The genial flow : the sacrificial offering,
the libation of Soma juice.

lie lowerSf though a son : the meaning appears to be that Vishnu takes rank
in the sacrifice above his own father Dyaus, and that Agni has the third place.

5 { His (Vishnu’s) path on earth and in the firmament is within mortal
observation ; not so that in heaven.’ — Wilson. His third step ; in the highest
heaven. Cf. L 1 54. 5.

(3 This verse is not very intelligible. Wilson following Sfiyana, gives the
following explanation : c Vishnu is here identified with Time, comprising
ninety -four periods : the year, two solstices, five seasons, twelve months,
twenty-four half -months, thirty days, eight watches, and ‘ 1 / ■” •*;

Ludwig translates the first hemistich : 1 and under fo- ■ ■ - t 1 . ' ■ . r

seasons] he, like a round wheel, hath set in motion ninety spokes/ The steeds,
or spokes, are the days of the solar year, ninety in each of the four seasons.

HYMN 157.] THB HIGVE1>A' m

2 He who brings gifts to him the Ancient and the Last* to

Vishnu who ordains, together with his Spouse,

Who tells the lofty birth of him the Lofty One, shall verily
surpass in glory e’en his peer.

3 Him have ye satisfied, singers, as well as ye know, primeval

germ of Order even from his birth.

Ye, knowing e’en his name, have told it forth : may we, Vishpu,
enjoy the grace of thee the Mighty One.

4 The Sovran Varuna and both the Asvins wait on this the will

of him who guides the Marut host.

Vishnu hath power supreme and might that finds the day,
and with his FriendTtmbars the stable of the kine.

5 Even he the Heavenly One who came for fellowship, Vishnu

to Indra, godly to the godlier,

Who, Maker, throned in three worlds, helps the Aryan man,
and gives the worshipper his share of Holy Law.

HYMN CL VII. Asvins.

Agni is wakened : Surya riseth from the earth. Mighty, re-
fulgent Dawn hath shone with all her light.

The Asvins have equipped their chariot for the course. God
Savitar hath moved the folk in sundry ways.

2 When, Asvins, ye equip, your very mighty car, bedew, ye

Twain, our power with honey and with oil.

To our devotion give victorious strength in war : may we win
‘ riches in the heroes’ strife for spoil,

3 High to us come the Asvins’ lauded three-wheeled car, the car

laden with meath and drawn by fleet-foot steeds,
Three-seated, opulent, bestowing all delight : may it bring
weal to us, to cattle and to men,

4 Bring hither nourishment for us, ye Asvins Twain , sprinkle

us with your whip that drops with honey-dew.

2 Together -with his Spouse : sumajjdnaye ; explained by S&yana to mean
‘self -born/ and by Ludwig ‘very delightful.’

4 With his Friend : assists his friend Indra in releasing the rain imprisoned
in the mountains of cloud, or the rays of light that have been stolen.

5 His share of Holy Law : his share of the blessings which follow the per-
formance of sacrifice.

1 Savitar : the Sun as the great cause of life.

3 Three-wheeled car : see I. 34. 5.

4 Your whip : see Hymns of the Atharva-veda, IX. 1, which is a glorifica-
tion of the Asvins’ Honey-VTVr, perhaps, the early stimulating

and life-giving breeze which ■< •*.i ri\- .no first appearance of these Lords

of Light and Heralds of Dawn,

14 ' . ’ ' '

210 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK I.

Prolong our days of life, wipe out our trespasses ; destroy our
foes, be our companions and our Friends.

5 Ye store the germ of life in female creatures, ye lay it up

within all living beings.

Ye haver sent forth, 0 Asvins passing mighty, the fire, the
sovrans of the wood, the waters.

6 Leeches are ye with medicines to heal us, and charioteers are

ye with skill in driying.

Ye Strong, give sway to him who brings oblation and with his
heart pours out his gift before you.

HYMN OLYIII. Asvins.

Ye Vasus Twain, ye Rudras full of counsel, grant us, Strong
Strengtheners, when ye stand beside us,

What wealth Auchathya craves of you, great Helpers when
ye come forward with no niggard succour.

2 Who may give you aught, Yasus, for your favour, for what,

at the Cow’s place, ye grant through worship 2
Wake for us understanding full of riches, come with a heart
that will fulfil our longing.

3 As erst for Tugra’s son your car, sea-crossing, strong, was

equipped and set amid the waters,

So may I gain your shelter and protection as with winged
course a hero seeks his army.

4 May this my praise preserve Uchathya’s offspring: let not

these Twain who fiy with wings exhaust me.

'Let not the wood ten times up-piled consume me, when fixed
for you it bites the ground it stands on.

5 The most maternal streams, wherein the Dasas cast me

securely bound, have not devoured me.

When Traitana would cleave my head asunder, the D&sa
wounded his own breast and shoulders.

5 The sovrans of the wood ; the tall trees of the forest.

1 Ye Yasus Twain, ye Rudras : the Asvins are addressed as identical with
these two classes of Gods. See I. 31. 3, and 34. 11.

Auchathya : the son of Uchathya, Dtrghatamas the Rishi of the hymn.

2 The Cow's place ; according to S&yana, the altar; the Cow being the
the earth.

3 Tugra's son." see I. 116. 3.

4 Uchathya' s offspring : the poet himself. These Twain ; day and night.
From this and the following verse it would appear that Dlrghatamas had been
subjected to the ordeals of fire, water, and single combat with a man called
Traitana, and preserved in all three by the Asvins. See Ludwig, Der Iiig-
veda, IV. p. 44.

mn MM VEDA.

211

BtMtt 160 .]

6 Dirghatam&s the son of MamatH hath come to length of days
in the tenth age of human kind.

He is the Brahman of the waters as they strive to reach their
end and aim ; their charioteer is he,

HYMN OLIX. Heaven and Earth,

I PftAISE with sacrifices mighty Heaven and Earth at festivals,
the wise, the Strengtheners of Law.

Who, having Gods for progeny, conjoined with Gods, through
• wonder-working wisdom bring forth choicest boons,

2 With invocations, on the gracious Father’s mind, and on the

Mother’s great inherent power I muse.

Prolific Parents, they have made the world of life, and for
their brood all round wide immortality.

3 These Sons of yours well skilled in work, of wondrous power,

brought forth to life the two great Mothers first of all.

To keep the truth of all that stands and all that moves, ye
guard the station of your Son who knows no guile.

4 They with surpassing skill, most wise, have measured out the

Twins 'united in their birth and in their home.

They, the refulgent Sages, weave within the sky, yea, in the
depths of sea, a web for ever new.

5 This is to-day the goodliest gift of Savitar : this thought we

have when now the God is furthering us.

On us with loving-kindness Heaven and Earth bestow riches
and various wealth and treasure hundredfold !

HYMN CLX, Heaven and Earth.

These, Heaven and Earth, bestow prosperity on all, sustainers
of the region, Holy Ones and wise,

Two Bowls of noble kind : between these Goddesses the God,
the fulgent Sun, travels by fixed decree.

6 The tenth age : perhaps the tenth decade. The meaning of the verse,
which appears to be a later addition, is obscure.

3 These Sons of yours : the Ttibhus, who restored their Parents* youth.
See I. 20. 4, The two great Mothers : the Parents of all, Heaven and Earth.

Your Son who knows no guile : Suvya, or the Sun, who is regarded as the
symbol of truth. ‘ Solem quis dicere falsum Audeat ? ’

4 The Twins : Heaven and Earth, In the depths of sea ; in the aerial
ocean or atmosphere.

1 Two Bowls: so called from their hemispherical appearance. But see Hille-
brandt, Vedische Mythologie, I, p. 177, and Ludwig, Ueber die N, A, auf dem
Q, der Pgveda-forscliung, p. 87.

212 TEE HYMNS OF - [BOOK I.

, 2 Widely-capacious Pair, mighty, that never fail, the Father and
the Mother keep all creatures safe :

The two world-halves, the spirited, the beautiful, because the
Father hath clothed them in goodly forms.

3 Son of th^se Parents, he the Priest with power to cleanse, Sage,

sanctifies the worlds with his surpassing power.

Thereto for his bright milk he milked through all the days
the party-coloured Cow and the prolific Bulb

4 Among the skilful Gods most skilled is he, who made the two

world-halves which bring prosperity to all ;

Who with great wisdom measured both the regions out, and
stablished them with pillars that shall ne’er decay.

5 Extolled in song, 0 Heaven and Earth, bestow on us, ye

mighty Pair, great glory and high lordly sway,

Whereby we may extend ourselves ever over the folk ; and
send us strength that" shall deserve the praise of men.

HYMN CLXL Eibhus.

Why hath the Best, why hath the Youngest come to us ?

Upon what embassy comes he ? What have we said ?

We have not blamed the chalice of illustrious birth. We,
Brother Agni, praised the goodness of the wood,

2 The chalice that is single make ye into four : thus have the

Gods commanded ; therefore am I come.

If, 0 Sudhanvan’s Children, ye will do this thing ye shall
participate in sacrifice with Gods.

3 What to the envoy Agni in reply ye spake, A courser must be

made, a chariot fashioned here,

A cow must be created, and the Twain made young. When
we have done these things, Brother, we turn to you.

4 When thus, 0 Hibhus, ye had done ye questioned thus,

Whither went he who came to us a messenger ?

2 The Father : Dyaus, or perhaps Tvashfcar.

3 Son of these Parents : the Sun, the offspring of Heaven and Earth,

For his bright milk: he has drawn the dew as milk from his mother Earth,
and obtained his light from Heaven his father.

4 Most skilled is he : Sfiyana observes that haying magnified Heaven and
Earth by praising their son, the poet now magnifies them by landing their
maker. See Muir, 0. S. Texts, v. 80.

1 The Hibhus ask Agni why he comes to them. The chalice : see I. 2Q, 0.

- g ^ comer must be made, etc , ; sea I. 20. 2, 3, 4, and I, 110, and 111,

THE MIG VEDA.

HYMN 161.]

213

Then Tv ash tar, when he viewed the four wrought chalices,
concealed himself among the Consorts of the Gods.

5 As Tvashtar thus had spoken, Let us slay these men who have

reviled the chalice, drinking-cup of Gods,

They gave themselves new names when Soma juipe was shed,
and under these new names the Maiden welcomed them.

6 Indra hath yoked his Bays, the Asvins’ car is horsed, Brihas-

pati hath brought the Cow of every hue.

Ye went as Bibhu, Vibhvan, Vaja to the Gods, and skilled
in war, obtained your share in sacrifice.

7 Ye by your wisdom brought a cow from out a hide ; unto that

ancient Pair ye gave again their youth.

Out of a horse, Sudhan van’s Sons, ye formed a horse : a cha-
riot ye equipped, and went unto the Gods.

8 Drink ye this water, were the words ye spake to them ; or

drink ye this, the rinsing of the Munja-grass.

If ye approve not even this, Sudhanvan’s Sons, then at the
third libation gladden ye yourselves.

9 Most excellent are waters, thus said one of you ; most excel-

lent is Agni, thus another said.

Another praised to many a one the lightning cloud. Then
did ye shape the cups, speaking the words of truth.

10 One downward to the water drives the crippled cow, another
trims the flesh brought on the carving-board.

One carries off the refuse at the set of sun. How did the Pa-
rents aid their children in their task !

4 Then Tvashtar : represented as hiding himself for shame among the God-
desses — probably the Celestial Waters — when he saw this alteration of his work,
dnd in anger proposing to slay the Ribhus who had thus disgraced him.

5 New names : probably Ritus, Seasons, in place of Ribhus. — Ludwig. TM
Maiden : apparently the daughter of Tvashtar, meaning, perhaps, as Ludwig
suggests, the first Dawn of the year, of which Tvashtar is the God.

6 The Cow of every hue ; the fruitful earth restored to youth by the Gods
of the Seasons.

8 The rinsing of the Munja-grass : or Soma juice which has been filtered
through a strainer made of that grass. ‘ The two first alternatives intimate
that the Ribhus may be participant of the libations offered at dawn or at
noon ; the third applies to the evening sacrifice ; the right of the Ribhus tp
share in this being elsewhere acknowledged/ — Wilson.

9 The meaning of these sayings in this place is not clear.

10 The restoration to youth of the aged Parents, Heaven and Earth, ap-
pears to be symbolically described under the figure of a sacrifice.

How did the Parents aid ? ; weak and exhausted with age they were unable
to give any assistance.

214 TUB HYMNS OB \[BOOK 1.

1 1 On the high places ye have made the grass for man, and water

in the valleys, by your skill, 0 Men.

Eibhus, ye iterate not to-day that act of yours, your sleeping
in the house of him whom naught can hide.

1 2 As, compassing them round, ye glided through the worlds,

where had the venerable Parents their abode %

Ye laid a curse on him who raised his arm at you : to him
who spake aloud to you ye spake again.

13 When ye had slept your fill, ye Eibhus, thus ye asked, 0 thou

whom naught may hide, who now hath wakened us ?

The goat declared the hound to be your wakener. That day,
in a full year, ye first unclosed your eyes.

14 The Maruts move in heaven, on earth this Agni ; through the

mid-firmament the Wind approaches.

Yaruna comes in the sea’s gathered waters, 0 Sons of Strength,
desirous of your presence.

HYMN CLXIL The Horse.

Slight us not Varuna, Aryaman, or Mitra, Eibhukshan,
Indra, Ayu, or the Maruts,

When we declare amid the congregation the virtues of the
strong Steed, God-descended.

2 What time they bear before the Courser, covered with trap-
pings and with wealth, the grasped oblation,

11 In the house of him whom naught can hide : in the mansion of the Sun,
to whom the Ttibhus went to obtain immortality. In this and the remaining
stanza, according to Sftyana, the Ilibhus are identified with the rays of the
sun.

13 When ye had slept ; in the mansion of the Sun.

The goat declared the hound to he your walcener : the meaning is obscure.
S&y ana's rendering is, ( the Sun replied that the awakener was the wind/

That day ; Wilson, following S&yana, explains ; f you have made this world
to-day luminous, after the year has expired ; that is, the rainy season being
past, the rays of the sun and moon are again visible/

14 Sons of Strength : ye powerful Ilibhus.

1 Bibhuhshan : a name of Indra, as lord of the Ilibhus.

Ayu : said hy both commentators, Sftyana and Mahidhara, to be used in
this place for Y&yu, the God of Wind. Ayu is probably Agni.

Amid the congregation ; at sacrifice.

God-descended : sprung from the Gods, or, according to S&yana, horn as the
type of various deities.

2 Grasped oblation : the offering that is to be made for the horse, and
which has been taken from the remains of the burnt-offering made the night
before,

HYMN 162.1 VttS &I&VMDA, 215

The dappled goat goeth straightforward, bleating, to the place
dear to Jndra and to Push an.

3 Dear to all Gods, this goat, the share of Pushan, is first led
forward with the vigorous Courser,

While Tvashtar sends him forward with the Charger, acceptable
for sacrifice, to glory.

A When thrice the men lead round the Steed, in order, who
goeth to the Gods as meet ohlation,

The goat precedeth him, the share of Pushan, and to the Gods
the sacrifice announceth.

5 Invoker, ministering priest, atoner, fire-kindler, Soma-presser,

sage, reciter,

With this well ordered sacrifice, well finished, do ye fill full
the channels of the rivers.

6 The hewers of the post and those who carry it, and those who

carve the knob to deck the Horse’s stake ;

Those who prepare the cooking-vessels for the Steed, — may
the approving help of these promote our work.

\ 7 Porth, for the regions of the Gods, the Charger with his
smooth hack is come ; my prayer attends him.

In him rejoice the singers and the sages. A good friend have
we won for the Gods 5 banquet.

8 May the fleet Courser’s halter and his heel-ropes, the head-stall

and the girths and cords about him.

And the grass put within his mouth to bait him, — among the
Gods, too, let all these be with thee.

9 What part of the Steed’s flesh the fly hath eaten, or is left

sticking to the post or hatchet,

Or to the slayer’s hands and nails adhereth, — among the Gods,
too, may all this he with thee.

10 Food undigested steaming from his belly, and any odour of
raw flesh remaining,

This let the immolators set in order and dress the sacrifice
with perfect cooking.

The dappled goat : this goat is to be tied to the horse at the sacrihGial post.
Pttshan here is said by Sayana to stand for Agnh

4 Who goeth to the Gods : the object of the sacrifice is to send the horse to
the Gods that he may obtain wealth and other blessings for his sacrificers.

5 Invoker, etc : these are the designations of eight of the sixteen priestB em-
ployed at solemn rites. The sage ( s'dviprah , a priest of profound knowledge)
is the superintendent of the whole ceremony.

Fill fall the channels : obtain abundance of rain ; or perhaps offer oblations
in abundance.

2J6 TEE ETMm OF [BOOK £

11 What from thy body which with fire is roasted, when thou art

set upon the spit, distilleth, —

Let not that lie on earth or grass neglected, but to the long-
ing Gods let all be offered.

12 They who observing that the Horse is ready call out and say,

The smell is good ; remove it ;

And, craving meat, await the distribution, — may their approv-
ing help promote our labour.

1-3 The trial-fork of the fiesh-cooking caldron, the vessels out of
which the broth is sprinkled,

The warming-pots, the covers of the dishes, hooks, carving-
boards, — all these attend the Charger.

14 The starting-place, his' place of rest and rolling, the ropes

wherewith the Charger’s feet were fastened,

The water that he drank, the food he tasted, — among the
Gods, too, may all these attend thee.

15 Let not the fire, smoke-scented, make thee crackle, nor glow-

ing caldron smell and break to pieces.

Offered, beloved, approved, and consecrated, — such Charger
do the Gods accept with favour.

16 The robe they spread upon the Horse to clothe him, the upper

covering and the golden trappings,

The halters which restrain the Steed, the heel-ropes, — all these,
as grateful to the Gods, they offer.

17 If one, when seated, with excessive urging hath with his heel

or with his whip distressed thee,

All these thy woes, as with the oblations 5 ladle at sacrifices,
with my prayer I banish.

18 The four-and-thirty ribs of the swift Charger, kin to the Gods,

the slayer 5 s hatchet pierces.

Cut ye with skill, so that the parts be flawless, and piece by
piece declaring them dissect them.

19 Of Tvashtar’s Charger there is one dissector, — this is the

custom — two there are who guide him.

Such of his limbs as I divide in order, all these, amid the
balls, in fire I offer.

18 Four-and-thirty : so many out of tke thirty-six. As the Sacrificial
Horse is the symbol of the heavens, the thirty-four ribs represent the sun,
the moon, the five planets, and the twenty-seven nahskatras or lunar as-
terisms. See Ludwig, Her Rigveda, III. p. 186. Piece by piece declaring
them : the dissectors are to name the several parts as they divide them, each
part being sacred to a separate divinity.

19 Amid the balls ; the meat made up into balls.

GYMN 163.] TSM MTGVSbA. 217

20 Let not thy dear soul burn thee as thou comest, let not the

hatchet linger in thy body.

Let not a greedy clumsy immolator, missing the joints,
mangle thy limbs unduly.

21 No, here thou diest not, thou art not injured : Ify easy paths

unto the Gods thou goest.

Both Bays, both spotted mares are now thy fellows, and to
the ass's pole is yoked the Charger.

22 May this Steed bring us all-sustaining riches, wealth in good

kine, good horses, manly offspring.

Freedom from sin may Aditi vouchsafe us : the Steed with
our oblations gain us lordship !

HYMN OLXIII. The Horse .

What time, first springing into life, thou neighedst, proceed-
ing from the sea or upper waters,

Limbs of the deer hadst thou, and eagle pinions. 0 Steed,
thy birth is high and must be lauded.

2 This Steed which Yama gave hath Trita harnessed, and him,

the first of all, hath Indra mounted.

His bridle the Gandharva grasped. 0 Yasus, from out the
Sun ye fashioned forth the Courser.

3 Yama art thou, 0 Horse ; thou art Aditya ; Trita art thou by

secret operation.

Thou art divided thoroughly from Soma. They say thou
hast three bonds in heaven that hold thee.

20 Burn thee : make thee sad,

21 Both Bays : thou art now associated in heaven with the two bay horses
of Indra, the two spotted mares of the Maruts, and the ass that draws
the ’chariot of the Asvins.

A full description of an Asvamedha or Horse-sacrifice in later time 3 may
be found in the B&m&yana, Book I., Cantos 10 — 13.

1 From the sea : the Sacrificial Horse is here identified with the Sun in the
ocean of air.

2 Yama : here said to mean Agnl, as a solar deity. Trita ; as God of the
remote birth-place of the Sun, See I. 187, note.

The Gandharva : Visv&vasu, a heavenly being who dwells in the region of
the air and guards the celestial SomA

3 Aditya : the Sun,

By secret operation : by the mysterious effect of the sacrifice.

Soma ; here, perhaps, the Moon ; but the meaning is uncertain.

218 TUB HYMNS OF [ BOOK L

4 Three bonds, they say, thou hast in heaven that bind thee,

three in the -waters, three within the ocean.

To me thou seemest Yaruna, 0 Courser, there where they say
is thy sublimest birth-place.

5 Here, Courser, are the places where they groomed thee, here

are the traces of thy hoofs as winner.

Here have I seen the auspicious reins that guide thee, which
those who guard the holy Law keep safely.

6 Thyself from far I recognized in spirit, — a Bird that from

below flew through the heaven.

I saw thy head still soaring, striving upward by paths unsoiled
by dust, pleasant to travel.

7 Here I beheld thy form, matchless in glory, eager to win thee

food at the Cow’s station.

Whene’er a man brings thee to thine enjoyment, thou swallow-
est the plants, most greedy eater.

8 After thee, Courser, come the car, the bridegroom, the kine-

come after, and the charm of maidens.

Bull companies have followed for thy friendship : the pattern
of thy vigour Gods have copied.

9 Horns made of gold hath he : his feet are iron : less fleet than

he, though swift as thought, is Indra.

The Gods have come that they may taste the oblation of him
who mounted, first of all, the Courser.

10 Symmetrical in flank, with rounded haunches, mettled like
heroes, the Celestial Coursers

Put forth their strength, like swans in lengthened order, when
they, the Steeds, have reached the heavenly causeway.

4 The three hands in heaven are said by Sftyana to be his c media of origin,
that is the Vasus, Aditya, and Heaven.’ By the waters, it is said that the
habitable work! is intended, and that the three bonds therein are tillage, rain,
and seed. In the ocean , that is the firmament, they are cloud, lightning, and
thunder. Varuna : on account of the- three bonds (See I. 24. 15),

6 In this and the following stanza the horse is regarded as identical with
the Sun in his course through heaven, and as accepting the oblations offered
by the worshipper. The Cow's station : the chief place of earth, the Cow,
is the altar,

7 Most greedy eater : regarded as a mere earthly horse.

9 Ho.rns nuale of gold ; according to S&yana, the word horns is used figur-
atively for mane. The Sun’s rays are probably intended.

Who mounted, first of all , the Courser ; Indra, aB is said in verse 2.

10 The horses of the Sun are said to be spoken of. The exact meaning of
the words is. uncertain,

HYMN 164.]

THE RIG VEDA.

219

1 1 A body formed for flight hast thou, 0 Charger ; swift as the

wind in motion is thy spirit.

Thy horns are spread abroad in all directions: they move
with restless beat in wildernesses.

12 The strong Steed hath come forward to the slaughter, ponder-

ing with a mind directed God-ward.

The goat who is his kin is led before him : the sages and the
singers follow after.

13 The Steed is come unto the noblest mansion, is come unto his

Father and his Mother.

This day shall he approach the Gods, most welcome : then he
declares good gifts to him who offers.

HYMN CLXIV. Visvedevas.

Of this benignant Priest, with eld grey-coloured, the brother
midmost of the three is lightning.

The third is he whose back with oil is sprinkled. Here I
behold the Chief with seven male children.

2 Seven to the one-wheeled chariot yoke the Courser ; bearing

seven names the single Courser draws it.

Three-naved the wheel is, sound and undecaying, whereon are
resting all these worlds of being.

3 The seven who on the seven-wheeled car are mounted have

horses, seven in tale, who draw them onward.

Seven Sisters utter songs of praise together, in whom the
names of the seven Cows are treasured.

11 Thy horns : meaning, here, perhaps hoofs.

13 His Father and his Mother : Heaven and Earth.

Wilson remarks : * Although more mystical than the preceding hymn,
especially in regard to the intimations of the identity of the horse with the
sun, there is nothing in it incompatible with the more explicit description in
the former StiJcta of the actual sacrifice of a horse.’

1 The priest is Aditya, the Sun. His next brother is lightning, another
form of fire, and the third brother is Agni G^rhapatya, the western sacred fire
maintained by each householder, and fed with oblations of clarified butter.

The seven male children are probably the priests.

2 Seven : priests. The one-wheeled chariot: the Sun. Seven names: perhaps
the seven solar rays. Three-naved : with reference, probably, to the three
seasons, the hot weather, the rains, and the cold weather. On this wheel of
the Sun all existing things depend.

3 The seven : according to Sayana, the seven solar rays, or the seven divi-
sions of the year, solstice, season, month, fortnight, day, night, hour. The
seven wheels of the chariot and the seven horses may also, according to Sft-
yana, be the solar rays.

Seven Sisters : probably the seven celestial rivers, which, as emblems of fer-
tility may bear the name of cows. S&yana explains the seven Sisters as the

220 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK I.

4 Who hath beheld him as he sprang to being, seen how the

boneless One supports the bony ?

Where is the blood of earth, the life, the spirit % Who may ap-
proach the man who knows, to ask it ?

5 Unripe i£ mind, in spirit undiscerning, I ask of these the Gods’

established places ;

For up above the yearling Calf the sages, to form a web, their
own seven threads have woven.

6 I ask, unknowing, those who know, the sages, as one all igno-

rant for sake of knowledge,

What was that One who in the Unborn’s image hath stablished
and fixed firm these worlds’ six regions.

7 Let him who knoweth presently declare it, this lovely Bird’s

securely founded station.

Forth from his head the Cows draw -milk, and, wearing his
vesture, with their foot have drunk the water.

8 The Mother gave the Sire his share of Order : with thought,

at first, she wedded him in spirit.

She, the coy Dame, was filled with dew prolific : with adoration
men approached to praise her,

solar rays, or the six seasons and the year, or the six pairs of months with the
intercalary month, and the seven Cows as the seven notes of music as employed
jin. chanting the praises of the Sun.

4 How the boneless One supports the bmy : or in more conventional and less
literal words, how the unsubstantial one (feminine) supports that (masculine)
which is endowed with substance.

The boneless or unsubstantial is Prakriti, Mature, the original source of the
substantial, that is the material and visible world. According to Hillebrandt,
Vedische Mythologie, I. p. 338, the boneless One is the Sun and the bony the
Moon. See M. Muller, India, Wliat can it Teach us ? pp. 245, 246.

5 The yearling Calf : probably the Sun, in reference to his yearly course.
What the seven threads are is uncertain. S&yana says they are the seven
forms of the Soma sacrifice, or the seven metres of the Vedas. Ludwig thinks
that the general meaning of the stanza is ; I (the poet) content myself with
asking for information about the places or traces of the Gods in our world ;
but the sages talk about things which are beyond my power of comprehension.

6 In the Unborn's image : in the form of Aja or the Unborn Creator, repre*
sented by the Sun. Cf. VIII. 41. 10.

7 This lovely Bird's... station : the place of the Sun.

The Cows draw milk: * The solar rays, although especial agents in sending
down rain, are equally active in its re-absorption.’ — Wilson.

8 The mother Barth gave the father Heaven his share in the great work of
cosmical production,

Dew prolific ; the fertilizing raim

m nmvELA.

221

HYMN 164,]

9 Yoked was the Mother to the boon Cow's car-pole ; in the dank
rows of cloud the Infant rested.

Then the Calf lowed, and looked upon the Mother, the Cow who
wears all shapes in three directions.

10 Bearing three Mothers and three Fathers, single he stood

erect : they never make him weary.

There on the pitch of heaven they speak together in speech
all-knowing but not all-impelling.

11 Formed with twelve spokes, by length of time unweakened,

rolls round the heaven this wheel of during Order.

Herein established, joined in pairs together, seven hundred
Sons and twenty stand, 0 Agni.

12 They call him in the farther half of heaven the Sire five-footed,

of twelve forms, wealthy in watery store.

These others say that he, God with far-seeing eyes, is mounted
on the lower seven-wheeled, six-spoked car.

13 Upon this five-spoked wheel revolving overall living creatures

rest and are dependent.

Its axle, heavy-laden, is not heated : the nave from ancient
time remains unbroken.

14 The wheel revolves, unwasting, with its felly ; ten draw it,

yoked to the far-stretching car-pole.

The Sun’s eye moves encompassed by the region : on him depend-
ent rest all living creatures.

9 Yoked was the Mother : Earth undertook the functions of the cow who
supplies milk for sacrifices.

The Infant : the young Sun.

The Calf lowed ; the cloud thundered. In three directions : heaven, mid-air,
and earth.

10 Three Mothers and three Fathers : the three earths and the three heavens.
This fanciful threefold division has occurred before. See I. 105. 5.

they speak : the Gods converse together about the Sun, says S&yana, in
speech that knows all but does not extend to or impress all.

11 The wheel formed with twelve spokes is the year with its twelve months.
The seven hundred and twenty sons, joined in pairs, are the days and nights
of the year, three hundred and sixty of each,

12 Five- footed : the five feet are, Sftyana says, the five seasons, the dewy
and cold seasons being counted as one. The twelve forms are the months of
the year. The seven wheels of the car are said to be the seven solar rays, and
the six spokes of each wheel are the six seasons, I find the stanza unintelli-
gible.

13 The five-spoked wheel : in reference, perhaps, to the five seasons, as in
verse 12.

14 Ten draw it : probably the ten regions of space.

The region ; the firmament, mid-air.

TILE HYMNS OP

222

[MON t

15 Of the co-born they call the seventh single-born; the sis twin

pairs are called Bishis, Children of Gods, .

Their good gifts sought of men are ranged in order due, and
various in their form move for the Lord who guides.

16 They toM me these were males, though truly females! he

who hath eyes sees this, the blind discerns not.

The sou who is a sage hath comprehended : who knows this
rightly is his father's father.

17 Beneath the upper realm, above this lower, bearing her calf

at foot the Cow hath- risen.

Whitherward, to what place hath she departed ? Where calves
she ? Not amid this herd of cattle.

18 Who, that the father of this Calf discerneth beneath the upper

realm, above the lower,

Showing himself a sage, may here declare it? Whence hath
the Godlike spirit had its rising?

19 Those that come hitherward they call departing, those that

depart they call directed hither.

And what so ye have made, Indra and Soma, steeds bear as
't were yoked to the region's car-pole.

20 Two Birds with fair wings, knit with bonds of friendship, in

the same sheltering tree have found a refuge.

15 The co-born : the six pairs of months, or six seasons of two months each.
The single-born is the thirteenth and intercalary month. S&yana explains
rishayah, Rishis, in this stanza as gantdrah, goers; but in what sense is uncertain.

•16 They told me these were males : Wilson observes : ‘ This is a piece of
grammatical mysticism ; rasmi, a ray of the sun, here personified as a female,
is properly a noun masculine.’ But this is just the reverse of the explanation
required. The meaning is obscure.

Grassmann suggests that the meaning is that Night and Morning, both
feminine, have received the masculine name of Day.

The son who is a sage: * According to the Scholiast, the Sun is to be consider-
ed as the father of the rays of light, which again, in their collective capacity,
being the cause of rain, are the fosterers or parents of the earth : the Sun is
therefore father Of the father, and he who knows this is identical with the
Sun.’ — Wilson. The meaning of the last semi-hemistich is probably that an
intelligent son may be called the parent of an ignorant father, as being his
superior in knowledge.

17 Ushas or Dawn hath risen between heaven and earth, carrying with her
the young Sun her offspring. This herd of cattle : the visible world.

18 Ushas is the mother, but who is able to say who the father of the Sun 1st

19 This stanza may refer to the planets which change their relative
position as they revolve. Indra is here the Sun, and Soma the Moon.

20 S&yana says that the two Birds are the vital and the Supreme Spirit,

dwelling in one body. The vital spirit enjoys the fruit or rewards of actions
while the Supreme Spirit is merely a passive spectator. «

THE RIG VEDA,

223

HYMN 164.]

One of the twain eats the sweet Fig-tree’s fruitage ; the other
eating not regardeth only*

21 Where those hue Birds hymn ceaselessly their portion of life

eternal, and the sacred synods,

There is the Universe’s mighty Keeper, who, wise, irath entered
into me the simple.

22 The tree whereon the fine Birds eat the sweetness, where they

all rest and procreate their offspring, —

Upon its top they say the fig is luscious : none gaineth it who
knoweth not the Father.

23 How on the GAyatr! the Gayatri was based, how from the

Trishtup they fashioned the Trishtup forth,

How on the Jagati was based the Jagati, — they who know,
this have won themselves immortal life.

24 With Gayatri he measures out the praise-song, Santa with

praise-song, triplet with the Trishtup,

The triplet with the two or four-foot measure, and with the
syllable they form seven metres.

21 Tlie fine Birds here are perhaps the priests, and the Keeper of the
Universe may be Boma.

22 Sftyana explains suparnfi, well- winged, in this and the preceding stanza
as smooth-gliding (rays). Their offspring is, he Bays, the light, and the Father
is the cherishing and protecting Sun. All explanations of these three stanzas
can be only conjectural. Ludwig is of opinion that they are originally
unconnected fragments and that they have been inserted together in this
hymn merely because the word suparnd (used apparently hi various senses)
has a prominent place in each stanza.

Suparnff, (dual) has been explained by different scholars as two species of
souls ; day and night, Sun and Moon ; (plural) as rays of light ; stars ; metres,
spirits of the dead ; priests ; and the tree on which they rest as the body ;
the orb or region of the Sun ; the sacrificial post ; the world ; and the
mythical World- Tree. A generally satisfactory explanation is scarcely to be
hoped for,

23 Wilson, following Sdyana, paraphrases this stanza as follows : c They
who know the station of Agni upon the earth ; the station of Vftyu that was
fabricated from the firmament, and that station of the Sun which is placed
in heaven, obtain immortality. 5 He observes that the purport of the
phraseology, borrowed from the several metres Gayatri, Trishtubh, and
Jagati, is not very clear, and that it may be merely obscure and mystic
reference to the text of the Veda, a knowledge of which is essential to final
felicity. The meaning seems to be that those who are thoroughly acquainted
with the appropriate rewards which follow the employment of each of the
sacred metres named are on the right road to immortal life.

24 Triplet : the word in the text vdhd is said to mean either two or three
connected stanzas.

Two or four-foot measure : consistingof two or four pd das or semi-hemistichs.

And with the syllable : they form the seven geueric metres of the Yeda with
the syllable, which is the chief element of metre, the Gay at it consisting of eight
syllables, the Trishtup of eleven, and the Jagati of twelve. See Wilson's note.

224 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK L

25 With Jagat! the flood in heaven he stablisbed, and saw the

Sun in the Rathantara Saman.

Gayatri hath, they say, three brands for kindling : hence it
excels in majesty and vigour.

26 I invocafe the milch-cow good for milking, so that the milker,

deft of hand, may drain her.

May Savitar give goodliest stimulation. The caldron is made
hot j I will proclaim it.

27 She, lady of all treasure, is come hither yearning in spirit for

her calf and lowing.

May this cow yield her milk for both the Asvins, and may
she prosper to our high advantage.

28 The cow hath lowed after her blinking youngling $ she licks

his forehead, as she lows, to form it.

His mouth she fondly calls to her warm udder, and suckles
him with milk while gently lowing.

29 He also snorts, by whom encompassed round the Cow lows as

she clings unto the shedder of the rain.

She with her shrilling cries hath humbled mortal man, and,
turned to lightning, hath stripped off her covering robe.

30 That which hath breath and speed and life and motion lies

firmly stablished in the midst of houses.

Living, by offerings to the Dead he moveth, Immortal One
the brother of the mortal.

311 saw the Herdsman, him who never stumbles, approaching
by his pathways and departing.

He, clothed with gathered and diffusive splendour, within the
worlds continually travels.

25 He : Brahmfi, according to Sayana.

Mathantarcb : one of the most important Sdma-hymns ; Samaveda II. I. i.
ll = Bigveda VII. 32. 22, 23.

Three brands : the three pddas, divisions, or lines of the verse being
fancifully likened to the sticks with which the sacrificial fire is kindled.

26 The milch- cow in this and the two following stanzas may be the cow
who supplies milk for the sacrifice. But S&yana says that the cow may be the
rain-cloud, the milk being the rain and the milker V&yu the God of Wind
who causes it to tow. The calf, Sayana says, is the world longing for the
rain to fall.

29 He also: probably Parjanya, the personified Storm-Cloud. The Cow
here is undoubtedly a cloud.

30 The subject of the first hemistich is apparently^ gni. The Moon,
sustained by sacrificial offerings to the Departed, appears to be the subject of
the second. But see Hymns of the Atharva-veda IX. 10. 8.

31 The Herdsman : the Sun, the guardian of the world.

HYMN 164.]

THE ttIGVEDA.

225

32 He who hath made him doth not comprehend him : from him

who saw him surely is he hidden.

He, yet enveloped in his Mother’s bosom, source of much life,
hath sunk into destruction,

33 Dyaus is my Father, my begetter: kinship is#here. This

great earth is my kin and Mother.

Between the wide-spread world-halves is the birth-place ; the
Father laid the Daughter’s germ within it,

34 I ask thee of the earth’s extremest limit, where is the centre

of the world, I ask thee.

I ask thee of the Stallion’s seed prolific, I ask of highest
heaven where Speech abideth.

35 This altar is the earth’s extremest limit; this sacrifice of ours

is the world’s centre.

The Stallion’s seed prolific is tho Soma; this Brahman
highest heaven where Speech abideth,

36 Seven germs unripened yet are heaven’s prolific seed : their

functions they maintain by Vishnu’s ordinance.

Endued with wisdom through intelligence and thought, they
compass us about present on every side,

37 What thing I truly am I know not clearly : mysterious,

fettered in my mind I wander.

When the first-born of holy Law approached me, then of
this speech I first obtain a portion.

38 Back, forward goes he, grasped by strength inherent, the Im-

mortal bom tlie brother of the mortal.

32 Lightning, the immediate cause of rain, with his countless offspring the
f, appears to be alluded to.

. ■ ; literally bowls or vessels into which the Soma is poured,

a figurative expression for heaven and earth. The firmament or space between
these two is, as the region of the rain, the womb of all beings, The Father
is Dyaus and the daughter is Earth whose fertility depends upon the germ of
rain laid in the firmament.

35 The earth's extremest limit : the altar, as the place nearest to heaven, the
place where the Gods visit men.

The Stallion : Dyaus, or Father Heaven.

This Brahman ; The priest so named who recites the texts of the Veda.

36 This stanza, as Ludwig remarks, is one of the most unintelligible in the
whole Veda. The seven , according to S&yana, are the solar rays, and Vishnu
is’said to be the Sun.

37 The first-born of holy Law ; according to S&yana, the first-born (percep-
tions) of the truth, Soma may be intended, as suggested by Bergaine,
lieligion V&lique, I. 150,

38 This stanza appears to refer to the Sun in his daily course from east to
west and his nightly return to tlie east, the former visible to men and tlie
latter invisible.

They , in this case, would mean the Sun by day and the Sun by night.

15

226 ' THE HYMNS OF [BOOK /.

Ceaseless they move in opposite directions : men mark the
one and fail to mark the other.

39 Upon what syllable of holy praise-song, as ’twere their

highest heaven, the Gods repose them, — •

’Who kn<£ws not this, what will he do with praise-song ? But
they who know it well sit here assembled.

40 Fortunate mayst thou be with goodly pasture, and may we

also he exceeding wealthy.

Feed on the grass, 0 Cow, at every season, and coming hither-
ward drink limpid water.

41 Forming the water-hoods, the buffalo hath lowed, one-footed

or two-footed or four-footed, she,

Who hath become eight-footed or hath got nine feet, the
thousand-syllabled in the sublimest heaven.

42 From her descend in streams the seas of water ; thereby the

world’s four regions have their being.

Thence hows the imperishable flood, and thence the universe
bath life.

43 I saw from far away the smoke of fuel with spires that rose

on high o’er that beneath it.

The Mighty Mon have dressed the spotted bullock. These
were the customs in the clays aforetime.

44 Three with long tresses show in ordered season. One of them

shearcth when the year is ended.

One with Ills powers the universe regardeth: of one the
sweep is, seen, but not his figure.

45 Speech hath been measured out in four divisions, the Brah-

mans who have understanding know them.

39 The syllable is the Pranava, the mystical sacred syllable Om. This
•syllable is set forth in the Upanislrads as the object of profound religious
meditation, and the highest spiritual efficacy is attributed to it.

40 This stanza is addressed to the cow who supplies the milk for libations.

41 The buffalo hath lowed: the great rain-cloud has thundered. S&yana

f-v.plr.ir. v footed, as sounding from the cloud; two-footed, from cloud and
a !>y ; 1 from the four cardinal points ; eight-footed, from the four

points and the four-intermediate points ; nine-footed , from these points and
the zenith. (Jftmrt, the buffalo, is, according to Sftyana, Vtih, Speech, the voice
•of heaven.

42 From her : from the buffalo, or cloud. The world's four regions : the
whole world.

43 The smoke of fuel : arising from burning eow-dung. The Mighty Men :
•the Heroes, the Gods. The spotted bullock: the Soma. The whole may,
perhaps, be a figurative description of the gathering of the rain-clouds.

44 The three are Agni who burns up the vegetation, the all-seeing Sum

.and the invisible V&yu or Wind. b 1

HYMN 164.]

THE RIG Y ETA.

227

Three kept in close concealment cause no motion ; of speech,
men speak only the fourth division.

46 They call him Indra, Mitra, Varuna, Agni, and he is heavenly

nobly-winged Garutman.

To what is One, sages give many a title : they*call it Agni,
Yama, Matarisvan.

47 Dark the descent : the birds are golden-coloured ; up to the

heaven they fly robed in the waters.

Again descend they from the seat of Order, and all the earth
is moistened with their fatness.

48 Twelve are the fellies, and the wheel is single ; three are the

naves. What man hath understood it ?

Therein are set together spokes three hundred and sixty,
which in nowise can be loosened.

49 That breast of thine exhaustless, spring of pleasure, where-

with thou feedest all things that are choicest,

Wealth-giver, treasure-finder, free .bestow er, — bring that, Sara-
svati, that we may drain it.

50 By means of sacrifice the Gods accomplished their sacrifice :

these were the earliest ordinances.

These Mighty Ones attained the height of heaven, there
where the Sadhyas, Gods of old, are dwelling.

51 Uniform, with the passing days, this water mounts and falls

again.

The tempest-clouds give life to earth, and fires re-animate the
heaven,

45 Three kept in close concealment : the three might mean the three Vedas;
but this interpretation does not suit the rest of the half-line. The fourth
division : ordinary language. See Wilson for S&yana’s elaborate explanation
of this stanza, and Muir, 0. S. Texts, II. 155.

46 Garutmdn : the Celestial Bird, the Sun. All these names, says the
poet, are names of one and the same Divine Being, the One Supreme Spirit
under various manifestations. .

47 Dark the descent : the rays of light descend into the darkness of the
earbh when wrapped in night, and rise again to heaven with the moisture
which they have absorbed to descend again in the form of fertilizing rain.

' 48 The single wheel is the year ; the twelve spokes are the months ; the
three naves are the three seasons of four months each ; and the spokes are
the days of the luni-solar year. The stanza is out of place here.

49 Sarasvatt : see I. 3. 10.

50 The Sldhyas ; said by Ydska to be ‘ the Gods whose

the sky,’ They are named among the minor divinities in ■■■ ■■ *•

and, as Wilson observes, * it would seem that in Sdyana’s day the purport of
the designation had become uncertain.’

51 Fires re-animate the heaven; the oblations offered in sacrificial fires
delight and strengthen the Gods.

223 .THE HYMNS OF [BOOK L

52 The Bird Celestial, vast with noble pinion, the lovely germ of
plants, the germ of waters,

Him who delighteth ns with rain in season, Sarasvan I invoke
that he may help ns.

HYMN CLXY. Indra. Maruts.

With what bright beanty are the Marnts jointly invested,
peers in age, who dwell together ?

From what place have they come? With what intention?
Sing they their strength through love of wealth, these
Heroes ?

2 Whose prayers have they, the Youthful Ones, accepted? Who

to his sacrifice hath turned the Maruts?

We will delay them on their journey sweeping — with what
high spirit 1 — through the air like eagles.

3 Whence comest thou alone, thou who art mighty, Indra, Lord

of the Brave? What is thy purpose?

Thou greetest us when meeting us the Bright Ones. Lord of
Bay Steeds, say what thou hast against us.

4 Mine are devotions, hymns; sweet are libations. Strength

stirs, and hurled forth is my bolt of thunder.

They call for me, their lauds are longing for me. These my
Bay Steads bear me to these oblations.

5 Therefore together with our strong companions, having adorn-

ed our bodies, now we harness

Our spcrbted deer with might, for thou, 0 Indra, hast learnt
and understood our Godlike nature.

6 Where was that nature then of yours, 0 Maruts, that ye

charged me alone to slay the Dragon ?

For I in truth am fierce and strong and mighty. I bent
away from every foeman’s weapons.

52 Savasvdn : or Sarasvat, is the name of a River- God usually assigned
as a consort to Sarasvatl. In this place the Sun is meant, and sdrasvantam
may be taken as a mere epithet, ( rich in water 5 which he absorbs.

Indra, the Maruts, and the great sage Agastya are regarded as the Rishis
of this hymn, which appears to be, as Wilson observes, a vindication of * the
separate, or at least preferential, worship of Indra, without comprehending,
at the same time, as a matter of course, the adoration of the Maruts.’ The
hymn is translated and fully explained in Prof. Max Muller’s Vedic Hymns,
Part I.

1 Indra speaks.

3 Here the Maruts address Indra whom they meet alone, unattended by
them as was usual.

4 Indra replies,

5 The Maruts again speak.

6 Indra claims for himself the glory of the victory over.. Vritra.

HYMN. 165.]

THE RIGVEDA,

229

7 Yea, much hast thou achieved with mb for comrades, with

manly valour like thine own, thou Hero.

Much may we too achieve, 0 mightiest Indra, with our great
power, we Maruts, when we will it.

8 Vritra I slew hy mine own strength, 0 Maruts, having waxed

mighty in mine indignation.

I with the thunder in my hand created for man these lucid
softly flowing waters.

9 Nothing, 0 Maghavan, stands firm before thee ; among the

Gods not one is found thine equal.

None born or springing into life comes nigh thee. Do what
thou hast to do, exceeding mighty 1

10 Mine only be transcendent power, whatever I, daring in my

spirit, may accomplish.

For I am known as terrible, 0 Maruts : I, Indra, am the Lord
of what I ruined.

11 Now, 0 ye Maruts, hath your praise rejoiced me, the glorious

hymn which ye have made me, Heroes !

For me, for Indra, champion strong in battle, for me, your-
selves, as lovers for a lover.

12 Here, truly, they send forth their sheen to meet me, wearing

their blameless glory and their vigour.

When I have seen you, Maruts, in gay splendour, ye have
delighted me, so now delight me.

13 Who here hath magnified you, 0 ye Maruts h speed forward,

0 ye lovers, to your lovers.

Ye Radiant Ones, assisting their devotions, of these my holy
rites be ye regardful.

14 To this hath Manya’s wisdom brought us, so as to aid, as aids

the poet him who worships.

Bring hither quick ! On to the sage, ye Maruts ! These
prayers for you the singer hath recited.

11 * In this verse Indra, after having declined with no uncertain sound the
friendship of the Maruts, repents himself of his unkindness towards his old
friends. The words of praise which they addressed to him in verse 9, in spite
of the rebuff which they had received from Indra, have touched his heart,
and we may suppose that, after this, their reconciliation was complete.’ —
Max Miiller.

14 This verse is exceedingly difficult, and its translation at present can he
only conjectural.

Mdnya, apparently, means the son of Mftna.

M&nd&rya, probably the name of the poet, but explained differently by
B&yana and Malfidhara,

230 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK I.

15 May this your praise, may this your song, 0 Maruts, sung
by the poet, Mana’s son, M&ndarya,

Bidng offspring for ourselves with food to feed us. May we
find strengthening food in full abundance 1

HYMN CLXVL Maruts.

Now let us publish, for the vigorous company the herald of
the Strong One, their primeval might.

With fire upon your way, 0 Maruts loud of voice, with battle.
Mighty Ones, achieve you? deeds of strength.

2 Bringing the pleasant meath as ’twere their own dear son,

they sport in sportive wise gay at their ^gatherings.

The Rudras come with succour to the worshipper ; self-strong
they fail not him who offers sacrifice.

3 To whomsoever, bringer of oblations, they, immortal guard-

ians, have given plenteous wealth,

For him, like loving friends, the Maruts bringing bliss bedew
the regions round with milk abundantly.

4 Ye who with mighty powers have stirred the regions up, your

coursers have sped forth directed by themselves.

All creatures of the earth, all dwellings are afraid, for bril-
liant is your coming with your spears advanced.

•5 When they in dazzling rush have made the mountains roar,
and shaken heaven’s high back in their heroic strength,
Each sovran of the forest fears as ye drive near, and the
shrubs fly before you swift as whirling wheals.

6 Terrible Maruts, ye with ne’er-diminished host, with great
benevolence fulfil our heart’s desire.

Where’er your lightning bites armed with its gory teeth it
crunches up the cattle like a well-aimed dart.

15 1 borrow three-fourths of this verse from Prof. M. Muller.

This hymn and the twenty-five following are ascribed to the Rishi Agastya,
who appears in the R&mftyana as the friend and counsellor of Rftma. He is
one of those indefinable mythic personages who are found in the ancient
traditions of many nations, and in whom cosmogonical or astronomical
notions are generally figured. Thus it is related of Agastya that the Yin-
dhyan mountains prostrated themselves before him ; and yet the same
Agastya is believed to be the regent of the star Canopus.

1 The Strong One : Indra, who is preceded by the Maruts.

2 The Budras : the Maruts, sons of the Strong-God Rudra.

3 Milk ; fertilizing rain.

5 As ye drive near : similar abrupt changes of person are common in the
Veda.

HYMN 166.]

THE MOVED A.

231

7 Givers of during 1 gifts whose bounties never fail, free from ill-

will, at sacrifices glorified,

They sing their song aloud that they may drink sweet juice :
well do they know the Hero’s first heroic deeds.

8 With castles hundredfold, 0 Maruts, guard ye well the man

whom ye have loved from ruin and from sin, —

The man whom ye the fierce, the Mighty Ones who roar,
preserve from calumny by cherishing his seed.

9 0 Maruts, in your cal’s are all things that are good : great

powers are set as ’twere in rivalry therein.

Bings are upon your shoulders when ye journey forth : your
axle turns together both the chariot wheels.

10 Held in your manly arms are many goodly things, gold chains

are on your chests, and glistering ornaments.

Door-skins are on their shoulders, on their fellies knives :
they spread their glory out as birds spread out their wings.

1 1 Mighty in mightiness, pervading, passing strong, visible from

afar as ’twere with stars of heaven,

Lovely with pleasant tongues, sweet singers with their mouths,
the Maruts, joined with Indra, shout forth all around.

12 This is your majesty, ye Maruts nobly born, far as the sway

of Aditi your bounty spreads.

Even Indra by desertion never disannuls the boon bestowed
by you upon the pious man.

13 This is your kinship, Maruts, that, Immortals, ye were oft in

oldeu time regardful of our call.

Having vouchsafed to man a hearing through this prayer, by
wondrous deeds the Heroes have displayed, their might.

14 That, 0 ye Maruts, we may long time flourish through your

abundant riches, 0 swift movers,

And that our men may spread in the encampment, let me
complete the rite with these oblations.

15 May this your laud, may this your song, 0 Maruts, sung by

the poet, M&na’s son, Mandarya,

Bring offspring for ourselves with food to feed us. May we
find strengthening food in full abundance,

10 On their fellies hiives : their war-chariots have sharp scythe-like blades
attached to their wheels, or sharp edges to their fellies.

11 Sweet singers : the Maruts’ song in the music of - the winds.

12 The sway of Aditi : ‘ What the poet says is simply this, that the bounty
of the Maruts extends as far as the realm of Aditi, i. e. is endless, or extends
everywhere, Aditi being in its original conception the deity of the unbounded
world beyond, the earliest attempt at expressing the Infinite.’ — Max Muller.

This also is one of the hymns translated and fully explained by Prof. Max
Muller in Vedic Hymns, Part I.

232

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK l

HYMN CLXVIL Indra. Maruts.

A thousand are thy helps for us, 0 Indra ; a thousand, Lord
of Bays, thy choice refreshments.

Wealth of a thousand sorts hast thou to cheer us: may preci-
ous goods come nigh to us in thousands.

2 May the most sapient Maruts, with protection, with best boons

brought from lofty heaven, approach us,

Now when their team of the most noble horses speeds even
on the sea’s extremest limit.

3 Close to them clings one moving in seclusion, like a man’s wife,

like a spear carried rearward,

Well grasped, bright, decked with gold ; there is Yak also,
like to a courtly, eloquent dame, among them .

4 Far off the brilliant, never-weary Maruts cling to the young

Maid as a joint possession.

The fierce Gods drave not Rodasi before them, but wished for
her to grow their friend and fellow.

5 When chose immortal Rodasi to follow — she with loose tresses

and heroic- spirit —

She clomb her servant’s chariot, she like Surya with cloud-like
motion and refulgent aspect.

6 Upon their car the young men set the Maiden wedded to glory,

mighty in assemblies,

When your song, Maruts, rose, and, with oblation, the Soma-
pourer sang his hymn in worship.

7 I will declare the greatness of these Maruts, their real great-

ness, worthy to be lauded,

How, with them, she though firm, strong-minded, haughty,
travels to women happy in their fortune.

2 The set^s extremest limit : the skirts of the sea of air, the firmament.

3 Sftyana says that the lightning is spoken of, moving in the clouds, as if in
secret, like the well-attired wife who remains in the women’s apartment, but
sometimes showing itself, like the hymn or prayer recited at religious ceremo-
nies. The comparisons are scarcely intelligible. V&k here is the voice of
Heaven, the thunder. See Max Muller, Vedic Hymns, Part I.

5 Rodasi : usually regarded as the consort of Rudra, said by S&yana to
mean here the lightning, the bride of tlie Maruts.

Stir yd: the daughter of the Sun, who mounted the chariot of the Asvins.
Seel. 116.17.

7 She : Rodasi. In the second hemistich there is no substantive, only ad-
jectives in the feminine gender. Wilson, following S&yana, renders the last
half-line by ‘supports a flourishing progeny.’ Ludwig thinks that Rodasi ap-
pears as ElXddvict of the Greek pantheon, the Goddess who presides over
childbirth.

HYMN 168.]

THE RIG VEDA.

233

8 Mitra and Yaruna they guard from censure : Aryaman too,

discovers worthless sinners.

Firm things are overthrown that ne’er were shaken : he pros-
pers, Maruts, who gives choice oblations.

9 None of us, Maruts, near or at a distance, hath £ver reached

the limit of your vigour.

They in courageous might still waxing boldly have compassed
round their foemen like an ocean.

10 May we this day be dearest friends of Indra, and let us call on

him in fight to-morrow.

So were we erst. New might attend us daily ! so be w r ith us
Itibhukshan of the Heroes !

1 1 May this your laud, may this your song, 0 Maruts, sung by

the poet, M&na’s son, M&ndarya,

Bring offspring for ourselves with food to feed us. May we
find strengthening food in full abundance.

HYMN CLXVIII. Maruts.

Swift gain is his who hath you near at every rite : ye welcome
every song of him who serves the Gods.

So may I turn you hither with fair hymns of praise to give
great succour for the weal of both the worlds.

2 Surrounding, as it were, self-born, self-powerful, they spring

to life the shakers-down of food and light ;

Like as the countless undulations of the floods, worthy of praise
when near, like bullocks and like kine.

3 They who, like Somas with their well-grow r n stalks pressed out,

imbibed within the heart, dwell there in friendly wise.

Upon their shoulders rests as ’twere a warrior’s spear, and in
their hand they hold a dagger and a ring.

10 The hymn appears to have been recited on the eve of an expected battle.
Ribhuhshan ; a name of Indra, as lord of the Kiblius.

1 The text of the first line is manifestly corrupt, and translation is conjec-
tural. See Max Muller, Sacred Books of the East, XXXII, p. 281.

2 The shahers-down : violently sending down the rain which is followed by
sunlight and fertility.

When near : terrific in appearence at a distance, but gentle when propitiated
with worship.

3 The first hemistich is obscure. Perhaps the meaning is that the bene-
ficial effects of the storm are lasting like the inspiring influence of Soma juice.

Warrior's sjpear: ‘Rambhint I now take with S&yana in the sense of a
wife clinging to the shoulders of her husband, though what is meant is the
spear, or some other weapon, slung over the shoulders ; see 1. 167, 3.’ — M,,
Muller, Vedic Hymns, I. 283,

234

TEE HYMNS OF

[BOOK /*

4 Self-yoked they have descended lightly from the sky. With

yotir own lash, Immortals, urge yourselves to speed.
Unstained by dust the Maruts, mighty in their strength, have
oast down e'en firm things, armed with their shining spears.

5 Who among you, 0 Maruts armed wit!) lightning-spears, moveth

you by himself, as with the tongue his jaws 2
Ye rush from heaven's floor as though ye sought for food, bn
many errands like the Sun's diurnal Steed,

6 Say where, then, is this mighty region's farthest hound, where,

Maruts, is the lowest depth that ye have reached,

When ye cast down like chaff the firmly sfcablished pile, and
from the mountain send the glittering water-flood ?

7 Your winning is with strength, dazzling, with heavenly light,

with fruit mature, 0 Maruts, fall of plenteousness.
Auspicious is your gift like a free giver’s meed, victorious,
spreading far, as of immortal Gods.

8 The rivers roar before your chariot fellies when they are utter-

ing the voice of rain-clouds.

The lightnings laugh upon the earth beneath them, what time
the Maruts scatter forth their fatness.

9 Prism brought forth, to fight the mighty battle, the glittering

army of the restless Maruts.

Nurtured together they begat the monster, and then looked
round them for the food that strengthens.

10 May this your laud, may this your song, 0 Maruts, sung by
the poet, Manas son, Mandarya,

Bring offspring for ourselves with food to feed us. May we
find strenthemng food in full abundance.

HYMN CLXIX. Indra.

As, Indra, from great treason thou protectest, yea, from great
treachery these who approach us,

So, marking well, Controller of the Maruts, grant us their
blessings, for they are thy dearest.

5 What, asks the poet, is the moving principle of the Maruts ? Who gives
them their first impulse, as a man when he washes moves hi' - 1 - ■ —v - 1 ?

* This stanza/ remarks Wilson, * is exceedingly elliptical and ;■ : -
.completion of the text is entirely conjectural.’

9 Prisni : the mother of the Maruts. See I. 24. 3. The monster : the mass
of dark storm-clouds.

1 These who approach us : the Maruts,

HYMN 170,]

THE RIG VEDA.

235

2 The various doings of all mortal people by thee are ordered,
in thy wisdom, Indra.

The host of Maruts goeth forth exulting to win the light-
bestowing spoil of battle.

3§That spear of thine sat -firm for us, 0 Indra : the Maruts set
their whole dread power in motion.

E 7 en Agni shines resplendent in the brushwood : the viands
hold him as hoods hold an island.

4 Touch safe us now that opulence, 0 Indra, as guerdon won by

mightiest donation.

May hymns that please thee cause the breast of Yayu to
swell as with the mead's refreshing sweetness.

5 With thee, 0 Indra, are most bounteous riches that further

every one who lives uprightly.

Now may these Maruts show us loving-kindness, Gods who
of old were ever prompt to help us.-

6 Bring forth the Men who rain down boons, 0 Indra : exert

thee in the great terrestrial region ;

For their broad-chested speckled deer are standing like a
King^s armies on the field of battle.

7 Heard isTHBTroa'r'TJ'f^the ‘advancing Maruts, terrific, glittering,

and swiftly moving,

Who with their rush overthrow as 'twere a sinner the mortal
who would fight with those who love him.

8 Give to the Mein as, Indra with the Maruts, gifts universal,

gifts of cattle foremost.

Thou, God, art praised with Gods who must be lauded. May
we find strengthening food in full abundance.

HYMN CLXX. Indra. Maruts,

Naught is to-day, to-morrow naught. Who comprehends the
mystery ?

We must address ourselves unto another's thought, and. lost
is then the hope we formed.

2 The Maruts are thy brothers. Why, 0 Indra, wouldst thou
take our lives ?

Agree with them in friendly wise, and do not slay us in the fight,

3 Sat firm : was firmly and properly held by tlie Warrior- God.

6 The Men : the Maruts. Their chariot is drawn by spotted deer.

8 The Mdnas : men of the family of the poet Mfina.

1 Lost is then the hope we formed .- Indra appears to have appropriated to
himself the sacrifice intended for the Maruts, who complain, accordingly, of
their dependence on another’s will and of their disappointed hopes.

2 This is spoken by Agastya, who offered the sacrifice.

286

THE HYMNS OF [BOOK /.

3 Agastya, brother, why dost thou neglect us, thou who art our

friend 1

We know the nature of thy mind. Verily thou wilt give us
naught.

4 Let them prepare the altar, let them kindle fire in front:

we two

Here will spread sacrifice for thee, that the Immortal may
observe.

5 Thou, Lord of Wealth, art Master of all treasures, thou, Lord

of friends, art thy friends’ best supporter.

0 Indra, speak thou kindly with the Maruts, and taste obla-
„ tians in their proper season.

HYMN CLXXI. Maruts.

To you I come with this mine adoration, and with a hymn I
crave the Strong Ones’ favour,

A hymn that truly makes you joyful, Maruts. Suppress your
anger and unyoke your horses.

2 Maruts, to you this laud with prayer and worship, formed in

the mind and heart, ye Gods, is offered.

Come ye to us, rejoicing in your spirit, for ye are they w T ho
make our prayer effective.

3 The Maruts, praised by us, shall show us favour; Maghavan,

lauded, shall be most propitious.

Maruts, may all our days that are to follow be very pleasant,
lovely and triunphant,

4 I fled in terrror from this mighty Indra, my body trembling in

alarm, 0 Maruts.

Oblations meant for you had been made ready ; these have we
set aside : for this forgive us.

3 The Maruts complain that Agastya does not support their claim.

4 Spoken by Agastya to Indra. We ; Agni and I. The Immortal ; Agni.

5 Agastya continues his conciliatory speech.

1 Unyoke your horses : stay with us and enjoy the sacrifice. * This hymn,
again,’ as Wilson remarks, * indicates a sort of trimming between the worship
pf Indra and the Maruts.’

3 Unable to translate the second hemistich satisfactorily, I have followed
S&yana who takes vdndni as an adjective, lovely. Grassmann translates :
* May all our days stand upright like beautiful trees/ and Ludwig suggests
‘ battling ? spears ? for komytt vdndni. * May our trees (our lances) through
Our valour stand always erect.' — Max Muller.

4 Agastya apologizes for having allowed Indra to enjoy the offerings intend-
ed for the Maruts,

HYMN 173.] THE RIGVEDA. 237

5 By whom the Manas recognize the day springs, by whose strength

at the dawn of endless mornings,

Give us, thou Mighty, glory with the Maruts, fierce with the
fierce, the Strong who givest triumph.

6 Do thou, 0 Indra, guard the conquering Heroes, tmd rid thee

of thy wrath against the Maruts,

With them, the wise, victorious and bestowing. May we find
strengthening food in full abundance.

HYMN CLXXII. Maruts.

Wonderful let your coming be, wondrous with help, ye Bount-
eous Ones,

Maruts, who gleam as serpents gleam,

2 Far be from us, 0 Maruts, ye free givers, your impetuous shaft;
Far from us be the stone ye hurl,

3 0 Bounteous Givers, touch ye not, 0 Maruts, Trinaskanda’s

folk ;

Lift ye us up that we may live.

HYMN CLXXIIL Indra.

The praise-song let him sing, forth bursting bird-like : sing we
that hymn which like heaven’s light expandeth,

That the milk-giving cows may, unimpeded, call to the sacred
grass the Gods’ assembly.

2 Let the Bull sing with Bulls whose toil is worship, with a loud
roar like some wild beast that hungers.

Praised God ! the glad priest brings his heart’s devotion ; the
holy youth pi'esents twofold oblation.

5 By whom : thou, Indra, by wliom, etc.

1 Who gleam as serpents gleam ; referring to the flashes of lightning that
accompany the Gods of storm.

2 The stone : the thunderbolt.

3 Trinaskandu's folk : Trinaskanda appears to be the name of some chief not
elsewhere mentioned. Wilson, following S&yana, translates : ‘ protect my people
(although 1 be) as insignificant as grass.’

1 Let him sing : let the IJdgatar priest sing the S&man or metrical hymn of
praise, which spreads and blesses like the light of heaven.

2 The Bull : perhaps the institutor of the sacrifice ; or Indra himself may
be intended. S&yana offers both explanations.

The Bulls : the officiating priests.

Praised God! : addressed to Indra. The meaning of the hemistich is obs-
cure. The word mithuntt (literally, pairs) which I have rendered in accordance
with S&yana and Wilson, means according to Grassmann, * both the worlds/ and
according to Ludwig, * the couples consisting of the sacrificers and the respec-
tive wives/

238

THE HYMNS OF [BOOK L

3 May the Priest come circling the measured stations, and with

him bring the earth’s autumnal fruitage.

Let the Horse neigh led near, let the Steer bellow : let the
Voice go between both worlds as herald.

4 To him ewe offer welcomest oblations, the pious bring their

strength-inspiring praises.

May Indra, wondrous in his might, accept them, car-borne and
swift to move like the Nasatyas.

5 Praise thou that Indra who is truly mighty, the car-borne

Warrior, Maghavan the Hero ;

Stronger in war than those who fight against him, borne by
strong steeds, who kills enclosing darkness ;

6 Him who surpasses heroes in his greatness : the earth and

heavens suffice not for his girdles.

Indra endues the earth to be his garment, and, God-like, wears
the heaven as ’twere a frontlet,

7 Thee, Hero, guardian of the brave in battles, who roamest in

the van, — to draw thee hither,

Indra, the hosts agree beside the Soma, and joy, for his great
actions, in the Chieftain.

8 Libations in the sea to thee are pleasant, when thy divine Floods

come to cheer these people.

To thee the Cow is sum of all things grateful when with the
wish thou seekest men and princes.

9 So may we in this One he well befriended, well aided as it were

through praise of chieftains,

That Indra still may linger at our worship, as one led swift to
work, to hear our praises.

10 Like men in rivalry extolling princes, our Friend he Indra,
wield or of the thunder.

Like true friends of some city’s lord, within them held in good
rule with sacrifice they help him.

Z The Pnest : Agni who is also the Horse and the Steer. The measured
stations ; the different fire-altars. Fruitage : grain for the oblation. The Voice:
thunder.

4 The Ndsatyas : the Asvi-ns, whose chariot is famed for swiftness.

8 In the sea : reaching thee in the sea of air ; or ‘ the sea’ may mean the
large reservoir of Soma juice. The wish : granting all their desires,
y In this One / this one true friend Indra.

. ™ e s w- Za i-, di *? ult Wflaon, following S&yana, translates: ‘ Emulous
m commendation like (those contending for the favour) of men ma r Indra
the wielder of the thunderbolt, be equally (a friend) to us: like those* who
desirous of hu friendship (conciliate) the lord of a city (ruling) with good
S0 d °° Ur mtennediate (representatives) propitiate g (Indra) with

HYMN 174.]

TUB RIG YEN A.

239

11 For every sacrifice makes Indra stronger, yea, when he goes

around angry in spirit ;

As pleasure at the ford invites the thirsty, as the long way
brings him who gains his object.

12 Let us not here contend with Gods, 0 Indra, for here, 0 Mighty

One, is thine own portion,

The Great, whose Friends the bounteous Maruts honour, as
with a stream, his song who pours oblations.

13 Addressed to thee is this our praise, O Indra: Lord of Bay

Steeds, find us hereby advancement.

So may st thou lead us on, 0 God, to comfort. May we find
strengthening food in full abundance.

HYMN CLXXIV. Indra.

Thou art the Xing of all the Gods, 0 Indra : protect the men,
0 Asura, preserve us.

Thou Lord of Heroes, Maghavan, our saver, art faithful, very
rich, the victory-giver.

2 Indra, thou humbledst tribes that spaU e with insult by break-

ing down seven autumn forts, their refuge.

Thou stirredst, Blameless 1 billowy Foods, and gavest his foe a
prey to youthful Purukutsa.

3 With whom thou drivest troops whose lords are heroes, and

bringest daylight now, much worshipped Indra,

With them guard lion-like wasting active Agni to dwell in our
tilled fields and in our homestead.

4 They through the greatness of thy spear, 0 Indra, shall, to

thy praise, rest in this earthly station.

To loose the floods, to seek, for kine, the battle, his Bays he
mounted, boldly seized the booty.

5 Indra, bear Kutsa, him in whom thou joyest : the dark-red

horses of the Wind are docile.

11 Indra will come at last although he tarries now. We must wait pa-
tiently. The thirsty traveller comes to the stream and reaches his journey’s
end at last.

Wilson observes with truth that c this hymn is in general elliptical and obs-
cure.’ A translator has to endeavour to give the probable meaning of the
words as they stand, without venturing on conjectural completion of fancied
ellipses and the insertion of words at pleasure after the manner of S&yana.

1 The men: the priests. Us: tby worshippers. Asura : immortal and divine.

2 Autumn forts : probably strongholds on high ground, occupied in the rainy
reason. Purukittsa : has been mentioned before. See I. 63. 7.

3 With whom. : the Maruts.

4 They: the enemy, lie : Indra.

5 Kutsa : the Rishi of that name. Wilson paraphrases after S&yana : t Bear
(the sage) Kutsa to that ceremony (to which) thou desirest (to convey him)/

240 THE HYMNS OF [SOON I.

Let the Sun roll his chariot wheel anear us, and let the Thund-
erer go to meet the foemen.

6 Thou Indra, Lord of Bays, made strong by impulse, hast slain

the vexers of thy friends, who give not.

They wlio beheld the Friend beside the living were cast aside
by thee as they rode onward.

7 Indra, the bard sang forth in inspiration : thou madest earth a

covering for the Dfisa.

Maghavan made the three that gleam with moisture, and to
his home brought Kuyavach to slay him.

8 These thine old deeds new bards have sung, 0 Indra. Thou

conqueredst, boundest many tribes for ever.

Like castles thou hast crushed the godless races, and bowed
the godless scorner’s deadly weapon.

9 A Stormer thou hast made the stormy waters flow down, 0 Indra,

like the running rivers.

When o’er the flood thou broughtest them, 0 Eero, thou kept-
est Turvasa and Yadu safely.

10 Indra, mayst thou be ours in all occasions, protector of the
men, most gentle-hearted,

Giving us victory over all our rivals. May we find strengthen-
ing food in full abundance.

HYMN CLXXV. Indra#

Glad thee : thy glory hath been quaffed, Lord of Bay Steeds,
as ’twere the bowl’s enlivening mead.

For thee the Strong there is strong drink, mighty, omnipotent
to win.

2 Let our strong drink, most excellent, exhilarating, come to

thee,

Victorious, Indra! bringing gain, immortal, conquering in
fight.

3 Thou, Hero, winner of the spoil, urgest to speed the car of man.
Burn, like a vessel with the flame, the lawless Dasyu, Conqueror!

6 Who (jive not ; who offer no oblations ; barbarians who do not worship the
Gods of the Aryans. The Friend : Indra. Beside the livinrj ; Ayu, the living
may perhaps be a proper name here. J

1 The three that gleam with moisture ; what the three are is not clear. Wil-
son translates : r has made the three (regions) marvellous by Ms gifts.’ Some
reference to three mornings appears to be intended. Kuyav&ch : probably the
name of a demon, or barbarian,

9 Turvuqa and Yadu ; eponyjni of Aryan tribes. See I. 36. 8.

1 Thy glory hath been quaffed : thou hast drunk what incites thee to glori-
ous deeds, namely the Soma juice contained in the bowl. ° ~

HYMN 176,]

THE RIG VEDA.

241

4 Empowered by thine own might, 0 Sage, thou stolest Surya's

chariot wheel.

Thou barest Kutsa with the steeds of Wind to Sushna as his
death.

5 Most mighty is thy rapturous joy, most splendid is thine

active power,

Wherewith, foe-slaying, sending bliss, thou art supreme in
gaining steeds.

6 As thou, 0 Indra, to the ancient singers wast ever joy, as

water to the thirsty,

So unto thee I sing this invocation. May we find strengthen-
ing food in full abundance.

HYMN CLXXVI. Indra .

Cheer thee with draughts to win us bliss : Soma, pierce Indra
in thy strength.

Thou stormest trembling in thy rage, and findest not a foeman
nigh.

2 Make our songs penetrate to him who is the Only One of men ;
Eor whom the sacred food is spread, as the steer ploughs the

barley in.

3 Within whose hands deposited all the Pive Peoples' treasures

rest.

Mark thou the man who inj ures us and kill him like the heav-
enly bolt.

4 Slay everyone who pours no gift, who, heard to reach, delights

thee not.

Bestow on us what wealth he hath : this even the worshipper
awaits.

5 Thou kolpest him the doubly strong whose hymns were sung

unceasingly.

When Indra fought, 0 Soma, thou holpest the mighty in the
fray.

6 As thou, 0 Indra, to the ancient singers wast ever joy, like

water to the thirsty,

So unto thee I sing this invocation. May we find strengthen-
ing food in full abundance.

4 Thou stolest S&rya's chariot wheel ; Indra is said to have taken the wheel
of the chariot of the {Sun and to have cast it like a quoit against the demon -of
drought.

Kutsa : the Rislii mentioned in the preceding hymn. Indra defended him
against Sush.ua, or protected mankind from drought. See I. 51. 6.

5 Most mighty is thy rapturous joy : Wilson translates : ‘ Thy inebriety is

most intense/ See I. 51. 2.

3 The Etve Peoples' treasures : the wealth of all the Aryans. See L 7. 9.

16

242

TEE HYMNS OF

[BOOR /.

HYMN CLXXVII. Indra .

The Bull of men, who cherishes all people, King of the Kaces,
Indra, called of many,

Fame-loving, praised, hither to me with succour turn having
yokedjooth vigorous Bay Horses !

2 Thy mighty Stallions, yoked by prayer, 0 Indra, thy Coursers

to thy mighty chariot harnessed, —

Ascend thou these, and borne by them come hither : with
Soma juice out-poured, Indra, we call thee.

3 Ascend thy mighty ear : the mighty Soma is poured for thee,

and sweets are sprinkled round us.

Come down to us- ward, Bull of human races, come, having
harnessed them, with strong Bay Horses,

4 Here is God-reaching sacrifice, here the victim; here, Indra,,

are the prayers, here is the Soma.

Strewn is the sacred grass ; come hither, Sakra ; seat thee and
drink : unyoke thy two Bay Coursers.

5 Come to us, Indra, come thou highly lauded to the devotions

of the singer Man a.

Singing, may we find early through thy succour, may we find
strengthening food in full abundance.

HYMN CLXXYIII. v Indra.

If, Indra, thou hast given tliat gracious hearing wherewith
thou holpest those who sang thy praises,

Blast not the wish that would exalt us : may I gain all from
thee, and pay all man’s devotions.

2 Let not the Sovran Indra disappoint us in what shall bring

both Sisters to our dwelling.

To him have run the quickly flowing waters. May Indra
come to us with life and friendship.

3 Victorious with the men, Hero in battles, Indra, who hears

the singer’s supplication.

Will bring his car nigh to the man who offers, if he himself
upholds the songs that praise him.

1 The Bull: the hero, or chief distinguished by superior strength.

2 3 The word here rendered by ‘ mighty ’ (vrishau) is commonly applied

in the Yeda to living beings and things preeminent for strength, and the Yedie
poets delight in repealing it and its compounds and derivatives. * But this is
nothing yet/ observes Prof. Max Muller, ‘compared to other passages, when
the poet cannot get enough of vrishan and vrishabhrf.’ Of. II. Id, 6; V. 30. 5 ;
Y. 40 2, 3 ; VIII. 13. 31—33.

2 Both Sisters : Might and Morning. The quiehly flowing waters : for the
libations. ... . . t *

THE JkIGVEDA.

243

HYMN 180.]

4 Yea, Indra, with the men, through love of glory consumes the

sacred food which friends have offered.

The ever-strengthening song of him who worships is sung* in
fight amid the clash of voices.

5 Aided by thee, 0 Magbavan, 0 Indra, may we subdue our foes

who count them mighty.

Be our protector, strengthen and increase us. May we find
strengthening food in full abundance.

HYMN CLXXX. Asvin*.

Lightly your coursers travel through the regions when round
the sea of air your car is Eying.

Your golden fellies scatter drops of moisture : drinking the
sweetness ye attend the Mornings.

2 Ye as ye travel overtake the Courser who flies apart, the

Friend of man, most holy.

The prayer is that the Sister may convey you, all praised,
meath-drinkers 1 to support and strengthen.

3 Ye have deposited, matured within her, in the raw cow the

first milk of the milch-cow,

Which the bright offerer, shining like a serpent mid trees,
presents to you whose form is perfect.

4 Ye made the fierce heat to be full of sweetness for Atri at his

* wish, like streaming water.

Fire-offering thence is yours, 0 Asvins, Heroes : your car- wheels
speed to us like springs of honey.

5 Like Tugra’s ancient son may I, ye Mighty, bring you to give

your gifts with milk-oblations.

Your greatness compasseth Earth, Heaven, and Waters: decay-
ed for you is sorrow's net, ye Holy.

For Hymn CLXXIX. See Appendix,

2 The Courser : the Sun. The Sister : Uslias, Dawn.

3 The first milk : ye deposited the milk within the Cosmic Cow, and this is-
found unaltered in the cows of earth.

The bright offerer ; I follow Both in taking this to be the fire, creeping
through the fuel as a snake that creeps and gleams through the bushes. But
the hemistich is very difficult and the meaning is doubtful. Wilson, after
S&yana. — . </ rr vigilant in the midst of the ceremony) as a thief
(in the ' . ( Ludwig says that hudvd means neither snake

nor thief, but a tub or wooden vessel.

4 Atri : see I. 112. 7.

5 Tugra's ancient son: see 1. 117. 4. Greatness : I adopt Ludwig’s conjec-
ture mdhimd for mtfhintf* - .

244 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK L

6 When* Bounteous Ones, ye drive your yoked team downward,
ye send, by your own natures, v i.-;-v L ~vV:*.7.

Swift as the wind let the prince pi . , 1 : . , . * you : he, like
a pious man, gains strength for increase.

- 7 For verity we truthful singers praise you: the niggard trafficker
is here excluded.

Now, even now do ye 0 blameless Asvins, ye Mighty, guard
the man whose God is near him.

8 You of a truth day after day, 0 Asvins, that he might win the

very plenteous torrent,

Agastya, famous among mortal heroes, roused with a thousand
lauds like sounds of music.

9 When with the glory of your car ye travel, when ye go speed'

ing like the priest of mortals,

And give good horses to the sacrifices, may we, Nasatyas !
gain our share of riches.

10 With songs of praise we call to-day, 0 Asvins, that your new
chariot, for our own well-being,

That circles heaven with never-injured fellies. May we find
strengthening food in full abundance.

I-IYMN CLXXXI. Asvins.

What, dearest Pair, is this in strength and riches that ye as
Priests are bringing from the waters 1

This sacrifice is your glorification, ye who protect mankind and
give them treasures.

1 2 May your pure steeds, rain-drinkers, bring you hither, swift as
the tempest, your celestial couriers,

Eapid as thought, with fair hacks, full of vigour, resplendent in
their native light, 0 Asvins.

3 Your car is like a torrent rushing downward : may it come
nigh, broad-seated, for our welfare, —

Car holy, strong, that ever would be foremost, thought-swift,
which ye, for whom we long, have mounted.

6 The prince : the institutor of the sacrifice.

8 The very plenteous torrent ; to obtain abundance of rain. Agastya: the
Hishi of the hymn.

*■ 9 When you assist the pious chiefs in battle, and they win the spoil, let the

priests who officiated at the sacrifices which won that aid receive their due share
of the booty aB their reward.

1 From the waters : from the firmament.

TlIB klGYEDA.

Ut>

Ilf MET 1S2J

4 Here sprung to life, they both have sung together, with bodies

free from stain, with signs that mark them ;

One of you Prince of Sacrifice, the Victor, the other counts as
Heaven’s auspicious offspring,

5 May your car-seat, down-gliding* golden-coloured, according to

your wish, approach our dwellings.

Men shall feed full the bay steeds of the other, and, Asvins
they with roars shall stir the regions.

6 Forth comes your strong Bull like a cloud of autumn, sending

abundant food of liquid sweetness.

Let them feed with the other’s ways and vigour i the upper
streams have come and do us service.

7 Your constant song hath been sent forth, Disposers ! that flows

threefold in mighty strength, 0 Asvins.

Thus lauded, give the suppliant protection : moving or resting
.hear mine invocation.

8 This song of bright contents for you is swelling in the men’s

hall where threefold grass is ready.

Your strong rain-cloud, ye Mighty Ones, hath swollen, honour-
ing men as ’twere with milk’s outpouring.

9 The prudent worshipper, like Pushan, Asvins ! praises you as

he praises Dawn and Agni,

When, singing with devotion, he invokes you. May we find
strengthening food in full abundance.

HYMN CLXXXIT. Asvins.

This was the task. Appear promptly, ye prudent Ones. Here
is the chariot drawn by strong steeds : be ye glad.
Heart-stirring, longed for, suecourers of Vispal&, here are
Heaven’s Sons whose sway blesses the pious man.

6 Your Strong Bull: your swift chariot. "Wilson remarks : f This and. the
preceding stanza are not very explicit in the comparison which is intimated
between* the functions of the two Asvins, for the use of anyasya , of the other,
in the second half of the verse, is all that intimates that e/casya , of the one, is
understood in the first half.’

7 That flows threefold : from three priests.

8 Threefold grass : sacred grass arranged to form three layers or seats.

9 As he praises Dawn and Agni : that is, at the morning sacrifice.

1 This was the task : this sacrifice is the work at which you have to preside.
Be ye glad : delight yourselves with the Soma juice.

Suecourers of Vispald : by giving her an iron leg. See I. 316. 15. Or the
word in the text may mean, as explained by S&yana, ‘ rich in benevolence to
men/

246

TIIE HYMNS OF

[BOOK /.

2 Longed for, most Indra-like, mighty, most Marat-like, most

wonderful in deed, car-borne, best charioteers, .

Biing your full " chariot hither heaped with liquid sweet:
thereon, ye Asvins, come to him who offers gifts.

3 What make ye there, ye Mighty ? Wherefore linger ye with

folk who, offering not, are held in high esteem ?

Pass over them ; make ye the niggard’s life decay : give light
unto the singer eloquent in praise.

4 Crunch up on every side the dogs who bark at us : slay ye

our foes, 0 Asvins ; this ye understand.

Make wealthy every word of him who praises you : accept
with favour, both Nasatyas, this my laud.

5 Ye made for Tugra’s son amid the water-floods that animated

ship with wings to fly withal,

Whereon with God-devoted mind ye brought him forth, and
fled with easy flight from out the mighty surge.

6 Four ships most welcome in the midst of ocean, urged by the

Asvins, save the son of Tugra,

Him who was cast down headlong in the waters, plunged in
the thick inevitable darkness.

7 What tree was that which stood fixed in surrounding sea to

which the son of Tugra supplicating clung ?

Like twigs, of which some winged creature may take hold, ye,
Asvins, bore him off safely to your renown.

8 Welcome to you be this the hymn of praises uttered by

Manas, 0 Nasatyas, Heroes,

From this our gathering where we offer Soma. May we find
strengthening food in full abundance.

HYMN CLXXXIir. Asvins,

Make ready that which passes thought in swiftness, that hath
three wheels and triple seat, ye Mighty,

Whereon ye seek the dwelling of the pious, whereon, three-
fold, ye fly like birds with pinions.

5 Tugra' & son: see I. 116. 3, 4,

6 In the midst of ocean ; I can make nothing of the j&thcdasya of the text,
and insert these words as substitute for translation.

7 What tree was that : figuratively of the Asvins who saved him, as, in a
sudden inundation, a tree saves the man who climbs it. An.

pretation of the legend will be found in M. Bergaigne’s La •*. i( ■ ■ ■ :

III. 10. 17.

1 The three- wheeled chariot of the Asvins has been mentioned before?
Bee I. 34, 1 4

THE MOVED A.

HYMN 184,]

247

2 Light rolls your easy chariot faring earth-ward, what time, for

food, ye, full of 'wisdom, mount it,

May this song, wondrous fair, attend your glory : ye, as ye
travel, wait on Lawn Heaven's Daughter.

3 Ascend your lightly rolling car, approaching the* worshipper

who turns him to his duties, —

Whereon ye come unto the house to quicken man and his
offspring, 0 Nasatyas, Heroes.

4 Let not the wolf, let not the she-wolf harm you. Forsake me

not, nor pass me by for others.

Here stands your share, here is your hymn, ye Mighty : yours
are these vessels, full of pleasant juices.

5 Gotama, Purumilha, Atri bringing oblations all invoke you

for protection.

Like one who goes straight to the point directed, come, ye
Nasatyas, to mine invocation.

6 We have passed o'er the limit of this darkness: our praise

hath been bestowed on you, 0 Asvins. ;

Come hitherward by paths which Gods have travelled. May
we find strengthening focd in full abundance.

HYMN CLXXXIY. Asvins.

Let us invoke you both this day and after : the priest is here
with lauds when morn is breaking :

Nasatyas, wheresoe'er ye be, Heaven's Children, for him who
is more liberal than the godless.

2 With us, ye Mighty, let yourselves be joyful, glad in our

stream of Soma slay the niggards.

Graciously hear my hymns and invitations, marking, 0 Heroes,
with your ears my longing.

3 N asatyas, Pushans, ye as Gods for glory arranged and set in

order Surya's bridal.

Your giant steeds move on, sprung from the waters, like an-
cient times of Yaruna the Mighty.

4 Let not the wolf: let no enemy prevent your coming. ^ Ludwig thinks
that there is an ironical reference to the wolf from whose jaws the Asvins
rescued the quail. , Bee I. 117. 16.

6 Gotama, P-urumilha , Atri : sages favoured by the Asvins.

S P'dshans : ye who cherish men like Pushan himself,

Sdri/d : the daughter of the Sun and the consort of the Asvins. See I.
116. 17. Giant steeds: cf. I. 46. B.

What the times or ages of Yaruna are is uncertain.

m TUB HYMNS OF [BOOK L

4 Your grace be with us, ye who love sweet juices : further

the hymn sung by the poet Mana,

When men are joyful in your glorious actions, to win heroic
strength, ye Bounteous Givers,

5 This p raise was made, 0 liberal Lords, 0 Asvins, for you with

fair adornment by the Manas.

Come to our house for us and for our children, rejoicing, 0
]Sf asatyas, in Agastya.

6 We have passed o’er the limit of this darlmess : our praise

hath been bestowed on you, 0 Asvins.

Come hitherward by paths which Gods have travelled. May
we find strengthening food in full abundance.

HYMN CLXXXV. Heaven and Earth.

Whether of these is elder, whether later ? How were they
bom ? Who knoweth it, ye sages 1
These of themselves support all things existing : as on a car
the Day and Night roll onward.

2 The Twain uphold, though motionless and footless, a wide-

spread offspring having feet and moving.

Like your own son upon his parents’ bosom, protect us,
Heaven and Earth, from fearful danger.

3 I call for Aditi’s unrivalled bounty, perfect, celestial, deathless,

meet for worship.

Produce this, ye Twain Worlds, for him who lauds you.
Protect us, Heaven and Earth, from fearful danger.

4 May we be close to both the Worlds who suffer no pain,

Parents of Gods, who aid with favour,

Both mid the Gods, with Day and Night alternate. Protect
us, Heaven and Earth, from fearful danger.

5 Faring together, young, with meeting limits, Twin Sisters

lying in their Parents’ bosom,

Kissing the centre of the world together. Protect us, Heaven
and Earth, from fearful danger.

6 Duly I call the two wide seats, the mighty, the general Parents,

with the Gods’ protection.

3 Aditi* s gift : all the blessings of infinite Nature. According to S&yana,
Aditi means here the firmament, in which case her gift would be seasonable
rain and consequent wealth.

4 Parents of Gods- ; as with the Greeks, Heaven and Earth are regarded as
the father and mother of the Gods.

5 The meaning is obscure. Ludwig suggests Daksha and Aditi as the
parents. The centre of the world means usually the altar,

6 With the Gods 1 protection ; to come to us with the favouring heln nf

Gods. The nectar ; the rain. 6 1

flJB ttjGVllDA.

• 24 9r

HYiVX 186 .]

Who, beautiful to look on,- make the nectar. Protect us*
Heaven and Earth, from fearful danger.

7 Wide, vast, and manifold, whose bounds are distant, — these*

reverent, I address at this our worship,

The blessed Pair, victorious, all-sustaining. Protect us, Heaven
and Earth, from fearful danger.

8 What sin we have at any time committed against the Gods*

our friend, our house’s chieftain,

Thereof may this our hymn be expiation. Protect US, Heaven
and Earth, from fearful danger.

9 May both these Friends of man, who bless, preserve me, may

they attend me with their help and favour.

Enrich the man more liberal than- the godless. May we, ye
Gods, be strong with food rejoicing.

10 Endowed with understanding, I have uttered this truth, for

all to hear, to Earth and Heaven.

Be near us, keep us from reproach and trouble. Father and
Mother, with your help preserve us.

1 1 Be this my prayer fulfilled, 0 Earth and Heaven, wherewith,

Father and Mother, I address yon.

Nearest of Gods be ye with your protection. May we find
strengthening food in full abundance.

HYMN CLXXXVt Yisvedevaa.-

Loved of all men, may Savitar, through praises offered as
sacred food, come to our synod,

That you too, through our hymn, ye ever-youthful, may glad-
den, at your visit, all our people.

2 To us may all the Gods come trooped together, Aryaman,
f Mitra, Yaruna concordant,

That all may be promoters of our welfare, and with great
might preserve our strength from slackness.

3 Agni I sing, the guest you love most clearly : the Conqueror

through our lauds is friendly-minded :

That he may be our Vanina rich in glory, and send food like
a prince praised by the godly.

4- To you I seek with reverence, Night and Morning, like a cow
good to milk, with hope to conquer,

1 Savitar ; the Sun, especially regarded as the vivifier and generator. Ye
ever youthful : Visvedevas, or All- Gods.

3 Our Yaruna : our lord and protector.

4 Like a cow : the singer is the cow and his hymn the milk.

With hope to conquer ; to overcome sins, according to S£yana.

250 '' THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK L

Preparing on a common day the praise-song with milk of vari-
ous hues within this udder.

£> May the great Dragon of the Deep rejoice us : as one who
nourishes her young comes Sindhu,

With wh<Mn we will incite the Child of Waters whom vigorous
coursers swift as thought bring hither.

8 Moreover Tvashtar also shall approach us, one-minded with
the princes at his visit.

Hither shall come the Yritra-slayer Indra, Ruler of men, as
strongest of the Heroes,

'7 Him too our hymns delight, that yoke swift horses, like
mother cows who lick their tender youngling.

To him our songs shall yield themselves like spouses, to him
the most delightful of the Heroes.

8 So may the Maruts, armed with mighty weapons, rest here on

heaven and earth with hearts in concord,

As Gods whose cars have dappled steeds like torrents, destroy-
ers of the foe, allies of Mitra.

9 They hasten on to happy termination their orders when they

are made known by glory.

As on a fair bright day the arrow fiieth, o’er all the barren
soil their missiles sparkle.

10 Incline the Asvins to show grace, and Pushan, for power and

might have they, their own possession.

Friendly are Yishnu, Yata, and Ribhukshan : so may I bring
the Gods to make us happy.

11 This is my reverent thought of you, ye Holy ; may it inspire

you, make you dwell among us, —

Thought, toiling for the Gods and seeking treasure. May we
find strengthening food in full abundance.

A common day : belonging to the past night and the present morning.

Milk of various hues : the libation^ of milk mixed with the yellow or brown
Soma juice.

This udder : apparently a figurative expression for the place of sacrifice
whence the milky libations flow.

5 Dragon of the Deep : Ahibudhnya, a divine being that dwells in, and pre-
skies over the firmament. Sindhu : the Indus.

The Child of Waters : Agni.

6 Tvashtar : the heavenly artist. The princes : institutors of the sacrifice.

7 That yoke swift horses ; that quickly bring the Gods to the sacrifice.

Their tender youngling : S&yana takes the epithet tdrunam as applying to

Indra c tke ever-youthful.’

10 Ribhukshan: a name of Indra, as Lord of the Ilibhus. Seel. 162.1.

HYMN 187.]

THE RIQVED A.

251

HYMN CLXXXVII. Praise of Food.

Now will I glorify Food that upholds great strength,

By whose invigorating power Trita rent Vritra limb from limb.

2 0 pleasant Food, 0 Food of meath, thee have we chosen for

our own, •

So be our kind protector thou.

3 Come hitherward to us, 0 Food, auspicious with auspicious

help,

Health-bringing, not unkind, a dear and guileless friend.

4 These juices which, 0 Food, are thine throughout the regions

are diffused.

Like winds they have their place in heaven.

5 These gifts of thine, 0 Food, 0 Food most sweet to taste.
These savours of thy juices work like creatures that have

mighty necks.

6 In thee, 0 Food, is set the spirit of great Gods.

Under thy flag brave deeds were done : he slew the Dragon
with thy help.

7 If thou be gone unto the splendour of the clouds,

Even from thence, 0 Food of meath, prepared for our enjoy-
ment, come,

S Whatever morsel we consume from waters or from plants of
earth, 0 Soma, wax thou fat thereby.

9 What, Soma, we enjoy from thee in milky food or barley-brew,
V&t&pi, grow thou fat thereby.

10 0 Vegetable, Cake of meal, be wholesome, firm, and strength-

ening :

V atapi, grow thou fat thereby.

11 0 Food, from thee as such have we drawn forth with lauds,

like cows, our sacrificial gifts,

From thee who banquetest with Gods,Hrom thee who banquet-
est with us.

1 Trita : a mysterious ancient deity frequently mentioned in the Iligveda,
principally in connexion with Indra, Vftyu, and the Maruts. His home is in
the remotest part of heaven, and he is called Aptya, the Watery, that is,
sprung from, or dwelling in the sea of cloud and vapour. By S&yapa he is
identified sometimes with V&yu, sometimes with Ipdra as the pervader of the
three worlds, and sometimes with Agni stationed in the three fire-receptacles,

2 The God addressed is the Soma.

5 Dike creatures that have mighty neclcs ; like 'strong bullocks.

6 The spirit of great Gods : thou incitest Indra and the Gods to perform
glorious and benevolent acts.

9 Vdtdpi ; the fermenting Soma. According to Say an a, the body.

HYMNS OP

t Pooh t

HYMN CLXXXYIIL Apris,

Winner of thousands, kindle d* thou shinest a God with Gods
to-day.

Bear our oblations, ehvov, Sage.

2 Child of f'hyself ! the sacrifice is for the righteous blent with
meath,

Presenting viands thousandfold*

8 Invoked and worthy of our praise bring Gods -Whose due is
sacrifice i

Thou, Agnij givest countless gifts*

4 To seat a thousand Heroes they eastward have strewn the
grass with might,

Whereon, Adityas, ye shine forth*

6 The sovran all-imperial Doors, wide, good, many and manifold*
Have poured their streams of holy oil.

6 With gay adornmdnt 3 fair to see, .in glonotis beauty shine

they forth :

Let Night and Morning rest them here*

7 Let these two Sages first of all, heralds divine and eloquent*
Perform for us this sacrifice.

8 You I address, Saras vatq and Bh&rati* and I1A* all i
Urge ye us on to glorious fame.

9 Tvashtar the Lord hath made all forms and all the cattle of

the field j

Cause them to multiply for Us.

10 Send to the Godsj Yanaspati, thyself, the Sacrificial draught *
Let Agni make the oblations sweet.

1 1 Agni, preceder of the Gods, is honoured with the sacred song i
He glows at offerings blest with Hail 1

The Apris are the various forms of Agni, according to S&yapa, which are
invoked in the hymn*

1 Thou : Agni*

2 Child of Thyself : Agui. See L 13. 2*

4 Adityas ; see I. 14. 3.

5 The sovrdn dll-imperial Poors : of the sacrificial hall through which Gods
enter. They are types of the portals of the East through which light comes
into the world. See Wallis, Cosmology of the Rigveda, p. 19.

7 These two Sages : heralds or invokers, because they call the Gods. See I.
13. 8.

8 Sarasvati and Bhdratt and ltd ; see I. 13. 9,

10 Vanaspati ; see I. 13. 11.

11 Blest with Hail ! ; see I. 13. 12.

HYMN 189.] . THE RIG VEDA. 253

HYMN CLXXXIX. Agni.

By goodly paths lead us to riches, Agni, thou God who know-
est every sacred duty,

Bemove the sin that makes us stray and wander ; most ample
adoration will we bring thee. m

2 Lead us anew to happiness, 0 Agni ; lead us beyond all danger

and affliction.

Be unto us a wide broad ample castle ; bless, prosper on their -
way our sons and offspring.

3 Far from us, Agni, put thou all diseases : let them strike

lands that have no saving Agni.

God, make our home again to be a blessing, with all the Im-
mortal Deities, 0 Holy.

4 Preserve us, Agni, with perpetual succour, refulgent in the

dwelling which thou lovest.

0 Conqueror, most youthful, let no danger touch him who
praises thee to-day or after.

5 Give not us up a prey to sin, 0 Agni, the greedy enemy that

brings us trouble ;

Not to the fanged that bites, not to the toothless : give not
us up, thou Conqueror, to the spoiler.

6 Such as thou art, horn after Law, 0 Agni, when lauded give

protection to our bodies,

From whosoever would reproach or injure ; for thou, God,
rescuest from all oppression.

7 Thou, well discerning both these classes, comest to men at

early morn, 0 holy Agni.

Be thou obedient unto man at evening, to be adorned, as keen,
by eager suitors.

8 To him have we addressed our pious speeches, I, Mana’s son,

to him victorious Agni.

* May we gain countless riches with the sages. May we find
strengthening food in full abundance,

This hymn, as Ludwig observes, appears to have been composed at a time of
pestilence.

3 That have no saving Agni : or, which do not maintain the sacred fire ;
whose inhabitants do not worship Agni.

o The fanged ; venomous serpents. The toothless : wild animals that do
not bite, but injure with their horns, etc.

7 Both these classes : worshippers and non- worshippers.

Be thou obedient : be a useful servant in the house.

As keen : akrdh , applied to Agni in all the places where it occurs in the
Itigveda, appears to mean hasty, violent, eager, or keen. Ludwig thinks that
it means here a sacrificial post, and Grassmann, a banner. Wilson, following
fe&yana, paraphrases : ‘ be compliant (with his wishes) ; like an institute of
the rite, (who is directed) by the desires (of the priests).’

[BOOK l

m THE HYMNS OF

HYMN CXC, Brihaspati.

GloriPy thou Brihaspati; the scatheless, who must he praised
with hymns, sweet-tongued and mighty,

To whom as leader of the song, resplendent, worthy of lauds,
“both Ghds and mortals listen.

2 On him wait songs according to the season, even as a stream

of pious men set moving.

Brihaspati — for he laid out the expanses — was, at the sacrifice,
vast Matarisvan.

3 The praise, the verse that offers adoration, may he bring forth,

as the Sun sends his arms out,

He who gives daily light through this God’s wisdom, strong
as a dread wild beast, and inoffensive.

4 His song of praise pervades the earth and heaven : let the

wise worshipper draw it, like a courser.

These of Brihaspati, like hunters’ arrows, go to the skies that
change their hue like serpents.

5 Those, God, who count thee as a worthless bullock, and,

wealthy sinners, live on thee the Bounteous, —

On fools like these no blessing thou bestowest : Brihaspati,
thou punishest the spiteful.

6 Like a fair path is he, where grass is pleasant, though hard

to win, a Friend beloved most dearly.

Those who unharmed by enemies behold us, while they would
make them bare, stood closely compassed.

1 Brihaspati : Lord of Prayer. Bee I. 14. 3.

2 For he laid out the expanses : spread out and revealed to- the eyes of men
the broad regions of heaven and earth. The meaning of the second hemistich
is not clear. Wilson paraphrases ; £ for that Brihaspati is the manif ester (of
all), the expansive wind that (diffusing) blessings has been produced for (the
diffusion of) water/ There seems to be nothing in the Rigveda to justify the
identification of Matarisvan with the wind, and only in the later language has
ritci the sense of water. See I. 31. 3.

3 He; Brihaspati. He who gives daily light : the regular appearance of
the Sun depends upon Brihaspati’s wisdom.

Inoffensive ; arakshdsah, according to S&yana, { free from, the opposition of
B&kshasas/

, 4 These of Brihaspati ; these sacred songs, compared to arrows.

That change their hue like serpents : dhimdydn. See 1. 3. 9.

6 This stanza is unintelligible to me. Wilson render? ’ x : 1 2 3 4 * 6 B-- / " t 1 }

way to him who goes well and makes good offerings, like ' ' . ■ ,i

of (a ruler who) restrains the bad ; and may those sinless men who instruct
us, although yet enveloped (by ignorance) stand extricated from their cover-
ing’ ; and remarks : ^ it is not clear how those who are enveloped by ignorance
should be competent to teach : another explanation is, let those who revile
us, ancl are being protected, be deprived of that protection/

trtiE may ed a.

255

HYMN 101.]

7 He to whom softgs of praise go forth like- torrents, as rivers

eddying under banks flow sea-ward —

Bpihaspati the wise, the eager, closely looks upon both, the
waters and the vessel.

8 So hath Brihaspati, great, strong and mighty, the God exceed-

ing powerful, been brought hither.

May he thus lauded give us kine* and horses*. May we' - find
Strengthening food in full abundance..

HYMN CXCL Water. Grass.. Sun..

VEtfOMOtrs, slightly venomous, or venomous aquatic worm, —
Both creatures, stinging, unobserved, with poison have infected
me.

2 Coming, it kills the unobserved ; it kills them as it goes away,
It kills them as it drives them off, and bruising bruises* them

to death.

3 Sara grass, Darblia, Kusara, and Sairya, Munja, Tirana,

Where all these creatures dwell unseen, with poison have in-
fected me.

4 The cows had settled in their stalls, the beasts of prey had

sought tlieir lairs.

Extinguished were the lights of men, when things unseen in-
fected me.

5 Or these, these reptiles, are observed, like lurking thieves at

evening time,

Seers of all, themselves' unseen : be therefore very vigilant.

7 This stanza also is very obscure. Brihaspati is said to look upon the
waters and the vessel, that is the river to be crossed and the boat which is to-
be used, meaning perhaps the sacrifice and all that is used in performing it..
Ludwig thinks that a play upon the words is intended, ftp ah meaning both
water and a religious ceremony and tar ah both fer^-boat and prompt energy.

This so-called hymn is a spell or charm said to have been recited by Agastya
when he suspected that he had been poisoned. Its silent repetition is said to
be an effectual antidote- against * all venom in reptiles, insects, scorpions, roots,
and artificial poisons/ I generally follow Sfiyana ; but his explanations are
not always satisfactory, and several passages must be left in their original obs-
curity.

1 The exact meaning of the words in the first line is uncertain.

Both ci'eatures ; both classes, either the venomous and the slightly venomous,
or land-reptiles and water-snakes.

2 Coming, it kills the unobserved : the herb, used as an antidote, coming
to the man who has been bitten kills the venomous creatures who secretly at-
tacked him.

3 Sara grass, etc : these are different sorts of grass In which snakes and
other venomous reptiles lurk,.

256 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK L

6 Heaven is your Sire, your Mother Earth, Soma yotir Brother,

Aditi

Your Sister : seeing all, unseen, keep still and dwell ye hap-
P i] J-

7 Biters of shoulder or of limb, with needle-stings, most veno-

mous,

Unseen, whatever ye may be, vanish together and be gone.

8 Slayer of things unseen, the Sun, beheld of all, mounts, east-

ward, up,

Consuming all that are not seen, and evil spirits of the night.

9 There hath the Sun-God mounted up, who scorches much and

everything,

Even the Aditya from the hills, all-seen, destroying things un-
seem

10 1 hang the poison in the Sun, a wine-skin in a vintner’s house,
He will not die, nor shall we die : his path is far : he whom

Bay Horses bear hath turned thee to sweet meath.

11 This little bird, so very small, hath swallowed all thy poison up.
She will not die, nor shall we die : his path is far : he whom

Bay Horses bear hath turned thee to sweet meath.

12 The three-times-seven bright sparks of fire have swallowed up

the poison’s strength.

They will not die, nor shall we die : his path is far : he whom
Bay Horses hear hath turned thee to sweet meath.

13 Of ninety rivers and of nine with power to stay the venom’s

course, —

The names of all I have secured : his path is far : he whom Bay
Horses bear bath turned thee to sweet meath.

6 Heaven, or Dyaus, is here said to he the father of the snakes.

Soma: the Moon.

10/ hang the poison in the Sun : * I deposit the poison in the solar orb, like
a leather bottle in the house of a vender of spirits.’ — Wilson. See Wilson’s
note in which he says that by the Sun or as S&yana paraphrases it, the orb of
the Sun, i is probably to be understood a mystical diagram, or figure wholly
or partly typical of the solar orb : the Sun being considered as especially
instrumental in counteracting the operation of poison.’

He will not die : the Sun will not die from the effects of the poison thus ap-
plied, and we also who have been bitten shall through his favour recover.

11 This little bird: according to Sftyana, the bird which we call the fran-
coline partridge, said to be a ‘ remover of poison.’

12 Bright sparks ofjire : either, says S&yana, the seven flames of fire multi-

plied, or the twenty-one varieties of another kind of bird unaffected by eating
poison. “ *

13 Of ninety rivers and of nine : the numbers are used indefinitely for all
the rivers of the country.

HYMN 191.] TIIE RIGYEDA. 257

14- So have the peahens three-times-scven, so have the maiden
Sisters Seven

Carried thy venom : far away, as girls bear water in their
jars.

15 The poison-insect is so small; I crush the creature with a

stone.

I turn the poison hence away, departed unto distant lands,

16 Forth issuing from the mountain’s side the poison-insect spake

and said ; *

The scorpion’s venom hath no strength ; Scorpion, thy venom
is but weak,

14 The peahens three-times-seven : peafowls are regarded as the great enemies
♦if snakes. The number appears to he merely fanciful and borrowed from
verse 12.

The maiden Sisters Seven : the seven chief rivers of the land,

15 As Jcushumbha means poison-bag, IcushurEbhakdK in the text is taken by
Ludwig and Grassmann to mean venomous insect.

Sly an a explains it as the nakula f nciul or mungoose whose hostility to the
,-make is proverbial. Wilson paraphrases : 1 May the insignificant mungoose
carry off thy venom, (Poison) : if not, I will crush the vile (creature) with a
stone,’

17

BOOK THE SECOND.

HYMN L * Agni.

Thou, Agni, s tuning in thy glory through the days, art brought
to life from out the waters, from the stone :

From out the forest trees and herbs that grow on ground,
thou, Sovran Lord of men art generated pure.

2 Thine is the Herald’s task and Cleanser’s duly timed; Leader

art thou, and Kindler for the pious man.

Thou art Director, thou the ministering Priest : thou art the
Brahman, Lord and Master in our home.

3 Hero of Heroes, ” Agni ! thou art Indra, thou art Vishnu of

the Mighty Stride, adorable :

Thou, Brahmanaspati, the Brahman finding wealth: thou, O'
Sustained with thy wisdom tendest us.

4 Agni, thou art King Varuna whose laws stand fast; as Mitra,

Wonder-Worker, thou must be implored.

Aryaman, heroes’ Lord, art thou, enriching all, and liberal
Ansa in the synod, 0 thou God.

The hymns of this Book, with the few exceptions that will be noted, are as-
cribed to the Itishi Gritsamada. As Book I. is called the Book of the Satar-
chins, that is of the seers of a hundred or large indefinite number of llichas or
verses, so this Book is commonly called -the Gdrtsamada Mandala or Book of
Giitsamada.

1 Through the days : for the days of sacrifice, according to Sdyana.

The waters : from the waters of the firmament, as lightning.

From out the forest trees : in the frequently occurring conflagrations caused
by the friction of dry branches. Agni is also said to have his home in plants,
perhaps originally on account of a phosphorescent light which some plants
emit.

2 Agni concentrates in himself the various functions of different classes of
human priests, the most important of which are mentioned in the verse. The
classification of the priests and the description of their duties are given with
variations by different authorities. The Hotar or Herald invokes the Gods ;
the Potar, Purifier, or Cleanser, is the assistant of the Brahman or praying
priest who remedies any defect in the ritual ; the Neshtar or Leader leads for-
ward the wife of the sacrificer ; the Agnidh or Kindler lights the sacrificial
fire ; the Prasdstar or Director is the assistant of the Hotar ; and the Adh-
varyu or ministering priest is the deacon who measures the ground, builds the
altar, and makes all the preparations necessary for the sacrifice. The dutie&.of
the priests, however, varied at different times and according to the nature of
the ceremony which they were engaged to perform.

3 Vishnu of the Mighty Stride : see I. 32. 1 6.

4 Ansa .* the Distributer ; one of the Adityas,

SCO THE HYMNS OF [BOOK II

5 Thou givest strength, as Tvashtar, to the worshipper : thou,

wielding Mitra’s power, hast kinship with the Dames.

Thou, urging thy fleet coursers, givest noble steeds : a host
of heroes art thou with great store of wealth.

6 Rudra art thou, the Asura of mighty heaven : thou art the

Manats’ host, thou art the Lord of food,

Thou goest with red winds : bliss hast thou in thine home*
As Pushan thou thyself protectest worshippers.

7 Giver of wealth art thou to him who honours thee ; thou art

God Savitar, granter of pi-ecious things.

As Bhaga, Lord of men ! thou rulest over wealth, and gtiard-
est in his house him who hath served thee well.

S To thee, the people’s Lord within the house, the folk press for-
ward to their King most graciously inclined.

Lord of the lovely look, all things belong to thee : ten, hun-
dred, yea, a thousand are outweighed by thee.

9 Agni, men seek thee as a Father with their prayers, win thee,
bright-formed, to brotherhood with holy act.

Thou art a Son to him who duly worships thee, and as a trusty
Friend thou guardest from attack.

10 A Ribhu art thou, Agni, near to be adored ; thou art the

Sovran Lord of foodful spoil and wealth.

Thou shinest brightly forth, thou burliest to bestow : pervad-
ing sacrifice, thou lendest us thine help.

11 Thou, God, art Aditi to him who offers gifts : thou, Hotra

Bharati, art strengthened by the song.

Thou art the hundred-wintei'ed 118, to give strength, Lord of
Wealth ! Vritra-slayer and Saras vati.

12 Thou, Agni, cherished well, art highest vital power; in thy

delightful hue are glories visible.

Thou art the lofty might that furthers each design : thou art
wealth manifold, diffused on every side.

13 Thee, Agni, have the Adityas taken as their mouth; the

Bright Ones have made thee, 0 Sage, to be their tongue.
They who love offerings cling to thee at solemn rites : by thee
the Gods devour the duly offered food.

14 By thee, 0 Agni, all the Immortal guileless Gods eat with thy

mouth the oblation that is offered them.

5 The Dames : the Consorts of the Gods,

11 Hotrd, Bhdrati, Hi are personifications of parts of religious worship.
The epithet £ hundred- wintered ' appears to refer to the natural duration of
human life. Sarasvati: seel, 10.

THE H1Q VEDA.

261

2TTMH2.]

By tb.ee do mortal men give sweetness to tbeir drink.

Bright art thou born, the embryo of the plants of earth.

15 With these thou art united, Agni ; yea, thou, God of noble

birth, surpassest them in majesty,

Which, through the power of good, here spreads abroad from
thee, diffused through both the worlds, throughout the earth
and heaven.

16 The princely worshippers who send to those who sing thy

praise, 0 Agni, guerdon graced withkine and steeds, —

Lead thou both these and us forward to higher bliss. With
brave men in the assembly may we speak aloud.

HYMN IL Agni.

With sacrifice exalt Agni who knows all life; worship him
with oblation and the song of praise,

Well kindled, no ly fed, heaven’s Lord, Celestial Priest, who
labours at the pule where deeds of might are done.

2 At night and morning, Agni, have they called to thee, like

milch-kine in then stalls lowing b> meet their young.

As messenger of heaven thou lightest all night long the fami-
lies of men, thou Lord of precious moos.

3 Him have the Gods established at the region’s base, doer of

wondrous deeds, Herald of heaven and earth ;

Like a most famous car, Agni the purely bright, like Mitra to
be glorified among the folk.

4 Him have they set in his own dwelling, in the vault, like the

Moon waxing, fulgent, in the realm of air.

Bird of the firmament, observant with his eyes, guard of the
place as ’twere, looking to Gp Is and men.
o May he as Priest encompass all the sacrifice : men throng to
him with offerings and with hymns of praise.

Paging with jaws of gold among the growing plants, like heaven
with all the stars, he quickens earth and sky.

16 With brave men, : attended by brave sons, who will support and strong-
then us,

1 Who labours at the pole who takes the chief part in the performance of
all- important, sacrifice. A metaphor from oxen drawing a car or wain.

2 Have they called : the priests.

3 At the region's base: at the altar, according to S&yana.

4 The word hvdr4, here rendered fin the vault/ is difficult. Sdyana explains
it as * solitary.’ Roth would alter the text.

Guard of the place ; of the most sacred place, the altar.

m THE HYMHS OF [EOOK IL

6 Such as thou art, brilliantly kindled for our weal, a liberal

giver, send us riches in thy shine,

For our advantage, Agni, God, bring Heaven and Earth hither
that they may taste oblation brought by man.

7 Agni, give us great wealth, give riches thousandfold : unclose to

us, like doors, strength that shall bring renown.

Make Heaven and Earth propitious through the power of prayer,
and like the sky's bright sheen let mornings beam on us.

8 Enkindled night by night at every morning's dawn, may he

shine forth with red Same like the realm of light, —

Agni adored in beauteous rites with lauds of men, fair guest
of living man and King of all our folk.

9 Song chanted by us men, 0 Agni, Ancient One, has swelled

unto the deathless Gods in lofty heaven — -
A milch-cow yielding to the singer in the rites wealth mani-
fold, in hundreds, even as he wills.

10 Agni, may we show forth our valour with the steed or with the

power of prayer beyond all other men ;

And over the Five Faces let our glory shine high like the realm
of light and unsurpassable.

11 Such, Conqueror ! be to us, be worthy of our praise, thou for

whom princes nobly born exert themselves ;

Whose sacrifice the strong seek, Agni, when it shines for never-
failing offspring in thine own abode.

12 Knower of all that lives, 0 Agni, may we both, singers of praise

and chiefs, be in thy keeping still.

Help us to wealth exceeding good and glorious, abundant, rich
in children and their progeny.

13 The princely worshippers who send to those who sing thy

praise, 0 Agni, guerdon, graced with kine and steeds, —

Lead thou both these and us forward to higher bliss. With
brave men in the assembly may we speak aloud.

HYMN III. A P *1 S .

Agni is set upon the earth well kindled ; he standeth in the
presence of all beings.

Wise, ancient, God, the Priest and Purifier, let Agni serve the
Gods for he is worthy.

8 May he : Agni. !

9 A milch- cow : the hymn of praise brings riches to the worshipper.

1 0 With the steed: with the war- car in battle as well as with prayer in sacrifices.
The Five Races : the five great Aryan tribes. Bee I* 7. 9.

11 The strong ; the wealthy worshippers.

Never-failing offspring : one of the chief rewards of the worship of Agni,

itrtfy 3 .]

THE RIG VEDA.

263

2 May Narasansa lighting up the chambers, bright in his majesty

through threefold heaven,

Steeping the gift with oil-diffusing purpose, bedew the Gods at
ehiefest time of worship.

3 Adored in heart, as is thy right, 0 Agni, serve tire Gods first

to-day before the mortal.

Bring thou the Marut host. Ye men, do worship to Indra
seated on the gi'ass, eternal.

4 G Grass divine, increasing, rich in heroes, strewn for wealth 7

sake, well laid upon this altar, —

On this bedewed with oil sit ye, 0 Yasus, sit all ye Gods, ye
Holy, ye Adityas.

& Wide be the Doors, the Goddesses, thrown open, easy to pass,
invoked, through adorations.

Let them unfold, expansive, everlasting, that sanctify the class
famed, rich in heroes.

6 Good work for us, the glorious Night and Morning, likejemale

weavers, waxen, from aforetime,

Yielders of rich milk, interweave in concert the long-extended ^
thread, the web of ivor ship.

7 Let the two heavenly Heralds, first, most wise, most fair, pre-

sent oblation duly with the sacred verse,

Worshipping Gods, at ordered seasons decking them at three
high places at the centre of the earth.

8 Sarasvati who perfects our devotion, Ila divine, Bharati all-

surpassing, —

"2 Nardsansa : 1 the Praise of Men,’ Agni. The chambers : the receptacles of
the offerings, according to Sa/yana. At ehiefest time of worship when the
oblation of clarified butter is cast into the fire.

3 Before the mortal : before the mortal priest.

4 0 Grass divine: the sacred grass, strewn on the floor of the hall of sacrifice
as a seat for the Gods, is one of the Apris or deified objects which are to be
propitiated in this hymn. All these are regarded as forms of Agni.

5 The Boors : of the hall of sacrifice. These appear to have been regarded
as types of, and even fancifully identified with, the doors of the cosmic house,
the portals of the East through which the morning light enters into the world.
See Cosmology of the Rigreda, p. 19.

The class ; the mag ha vans, the eminent and wealthy men who institute
sacrifices,

Yielders of rich milk : cheerful givers of rewards.

7 Two heavenly Heralds : invokers or priests. According to S&yana, the
personified fire of earth and of the firmament. See I. 13. 8.

The centre of the earth : the altar. The three high places : of the three
fires.

TED HYMNS OP

2G4

t BOOK If,

Three Goddesses, with power inherent, seated, protect this holy
Grass, our flawless refuge !

9 Born is the pious hero swift of hearing, like gold in hue, well
formed, and full of vigour,

May Tv&shtar lengthen out our line and kindred, and may
they reach the place which Gods inhabit.

10 Yanaspati shall stand anear and start us, and Agni with his

arts prepare oblation.

Let the skilled heavenly Immolator forward unto the Gods the
offering thrice anointed.

1 1 Oil has been mixt : oil is his habitation. In oil he rests : oil is
* his proper province.

Come as thy wont is r 0 thou Steer, rejoice thee ; bear off the
oblation duly consecrated.

HYMN IV. Agni.

For you I call the glorious refulgent Agni, the guest of men,
rich in oblations,

Whom all must strive to win even as a lover, God among godly
people, Jatavedas.

2 Bhrigus who served him in the home of waters set him of old

in houses of the living.

Over all worlds let Agni be the Sovran, the messenger of Gods
with rapid coursers.

3 Among the tribes of men the Gods placed Agni as a dear Friend

when they would dwell among them.

* Against the longing nights may he shine brightly, and show the
offerer in the house his vigour.

■ 4 Sweet is his growth as of one’s own possessions ; his look
when rushing fain to burn is lovely.

He darts his tongue forth, like a harnessed courser who shakes
his flowing tail, among the bushes.

8 Three Goddesses : presiding over different departments of worship,

9 The pious herq : a son devoted to the Gods

10 Vanaspati : the sacrificial post, or Agni in that form. See I, 13. 11.

The heavenly Immolator : Agni, typically so called.

11 Oil: the clarified butter oblation. Thou Steer : mighty Agni,

Duly consecrated : offered with the holy word S valid. See I. 13. 12.

This hymn and the three that follow are ascribed to the Rishi Som&huti
of the ancient priestly family of Bhrigu, one of the first institutors of sacrifice.

1 Jdtavedas : Agni, who knows all life. See I. 44. 1.

2 Who served him in the home of waters : existing in the form of lightning
in the firmament before he was brought down to earth.

ZTTMN 8.] THB HTGfEDA* - 265

5 Since they who honour me have praised my greatness, — he gave,

as Twere, his hue to those Who love him.

Known is he by his bright delightful splendour, and waxing
old renews his youth for ever.

6 Like one athirst, he lighteth up the forests ; like nvater down

the chariot ways he roareth.

On his black path he shines in burning beauty, marked as it
were the heaven that smiles through vapour.

7 Around, consuming the broad earth, he wanders, free roaming

like an ox without a herdsman, —

Agni refulgent, burning up the bushes, with blackened lines,
as though the earth he seasoned.

8 I, in remembrance of thine ancient favour, have sung my hymn

in this our third assembly.

0 Agni, give us wealth with store of heroes and mighty
strength in food and noble offspring.

9 May the Gritsamadas, servmg in secret, through thee, 0 Agni

overcome their neighbours,

Kich in goo 1 heroes and subduing foemen. That vital . power
give thou to chiefs _and. singers.

HYMN V. Agni.

Hera un and teacher was he born, a guardian for our patrons
help,

Earner by rites of noble wealth. That Strong One may we
grasp and guide ;

2 In whom, Leader of sacrifice, the seven reins, far extended,
meet ;

Who furthers, man-like, eighth in place, as Cleanser, all the
work divine.

5 Since they who honour one : Agni appears to be the speaker of these word.*.

7 As though the earth he seasoned : as though, by burning the weeds and
bushes, he dressed and prepared the ground for tillage.

8 Third assembly : at the third of the three daily sacrifices.

9 Serving in secret : by the peaceful discharge of priestly duties, not by
warfare like the chiefs who institute the sacrifice.

1 Our patrons: the wealthy institutors of the sacrifice. That Strong One:
Agni.

2 Leader ; Netar, one of the sixteen priests.

The seven reins : the seven priests engaged in their several duties.

Cleanser : Potar, one of the sixteen priests. See II. I. 2,
o The first hemistich, as it stands, is unintelligible to me. Wilson, after
S&yaua, paraphrases : 1 2 Whatever (offerings the priest) presents, whatever

prayers he recites.’

266 WEE HYMNS OF IBOOK II.

3 When swift lie follows, this behest, bird-like he chants the holy

prayers.

He holds all knowledge in his grasp even as the felly rounds
the wheel.

4 Together with pure mental power, pure, as Director, was he

born.

Skilled in his own unchanging laws he waxes like the growing
boughs.

•5 Clothing them in his hues, the ldae of him the Leader wait on
him.

Is he not better than the Three, the Sisters who have come to
us?

<6 When, laden with the holy oil, the Sister by the Mother stands,
The Priest delights in their approach, as corn at coming of the
rain.

7 For his support let him perform as ministrant his priestly task ;
Yea, song of praise and sacrifice : we have bestowed, let us

obtain.

8 That so this man, well skilled, may pay worship to all the

Holy Ones,

And, Agni, this our sacrifice which we have here prepared, to
thee.

HYMN VI. Agni.

Agni, accept this flaming brand, this waiting with xhy prayer
on thee :

Hear graciously these songs of praise.

2 With this hymn let us honour thee, seeker of horses, Son of
Strength,

With this fair hymn, thou nobly born.

4 Director .* Pras&atar, one of the priests. See II, 1. 2.

5 The stanza is obscure. Ludwig thinks that Agni is here called the Leader
because he leads the sister Dawns to the sacrifice, and that they are said to be
three in number to correspond with the number of the cows.

6 The Sister: Ushas or Dawn. The Mother: the northern altar, represent-
ing Earth.

7 Let him ; Agni as priest.

8 This man : the worshipper.

This waiting with my prayer on thee : this ‘ beseeching and besieging ' as
Milton says. Or upasddam taken in a special sense may mean the ceremony
called IJpasad which formed part of the Jyotishtoma, a very important Soma
ceremony.

2 Seeker of horses : in order to bestow them on the worshipper.

HYMN 7.1 TBS SlQVSBA. 267

3 As such, lover of song, with songs, wealth-lover, giver of our

wealth !

With reverence let us worship thee.

4 Be thou for us a liberal Prince, giver and Lord of precious

things. 0

Drive those who hate us far away.

5 Such as thou art, give rain from heaven, give strength which

no man may resist :

Give food exceeding plentiful.

6 To him who lauds thee, craving help, most youthful envoy !

through our song,

Most holy Herald ! come thou nigh.

7 Between both races, Agui, Sage, well skilled thou passest to

and fro,

As envoy friendly to mankind.

8 Befriend us thou as knowing all. Sage, duly worship thou

the Gods,

And seat thee on this sacred grass.

HYMN VII. Agni.

0 Yasu, thou most youthful God, Bharata, Agni, bring us
wealth,

Excellent, splendid, much-desired.

2 Let no malignity prevail against us, either God’s or man’s :
Save us from this and enmity.

3 So through thy favour may vve force through all our enemies

away,

As .Twere through strea ming, water-floods.

4 Thou, Purifier Agni, high shinest forth, bright, adorable,
When worshipped with the sacred oil.

5 Ours art thou, Agni, BMrata, honoured by us with barren

cows,

With bullocks and with kine in calf :

6 Wood-fed, bedewed with sacred oil, ancient, Invoker, excellent,
The Son of Strength, the W onderful.

7 Both races : Gods and men. Well shilled : acquainted with both.

1 Vasit ; one of the class of Gods so named. BMrata : Agni is so called
according to S Ay ana, either as having been produced by attrition by the priests,
or as being the bearer of oblations. The meaning is, probably, specially con-
nected with the Bharatas or W amors.’

5 With kine in calf; ashtdpadibhih is thus explained by S&yana, and is used
in the language of the ritual for animals with young. Both and Grassmann
understand * verses ’ consisting of eight feet, divisions, or syllables. According
to Bergaigne, these cows represent prayers.

fns HYMNS OP

[POOK //.

HYMN VIII. Agni.

Now praise, as one who strives for strength, the harnessing of
Agni’s car,

The liberal, the most splendid One ;

2 Who, guiding worshippers aright, withers, untouched by age,

the foe :

When worshipped fair to look upon 5

3 Who for his glory is extolled at eye and morning in our homes,
Whose statute is inviolate ;

4 Who shines refulgent like the Sun, with brilliance and with

fiery flame,

Pecked with imperishable sheen.

5 Him Atri, Agni, have our songs strengthened according to his

sway ;

All glories hath he made his own.

6 May we with Agnfs, Indra’s help, with Soma’s, yea, of all the
Gods,

tTninjured dwell together still, and conquer those who fight
with us.

HYMN IX. . Agin.

Accustomed to the Herald’s place, the Herald hath seated
him, bright, splendid, passing mighty,

Whose foresight keeps the Law from violation, excellent,
pure-tongued, bringing thousands, Agui.

: 2 Envoy art thou, protector from. the foeman ; strong God, thou
leadest us to higher blessings.

Kefulgent, be an ever-heedful keeper, Agni, for us and for
our seed and offspring.

3 May we adore thee in thy loftiest birth-place, and, with our
praises, in thy lower station.

The place whence thou hast issued forth I worship : to thee
well kindled have they paid oblations.

5 Him Atri: Agni appears here to be called by the name of the ancient
sage Atri. Or dtvim may be an epithet of Agni, signifying the devourer of
the food with which he is supplied, as S&yana explains it.

I Tie Herald: or Hotar ; Agni, the Invoker of the Gods. The name
comes, with more emphasis, at the end of the verse. The Law : especially
sacrifice.

3 In thy loftiest birth-place : as the fire of the Sun in heaven. Thy lower
station : the firmament, where Agni is born as lightning. The place whence
thou hast issued forth : the altar where the sacrificial fire burns.

the may eda.

HYMN 10.]

269

A Agni, best Priest, pay worship with oblation ; quick ly com-
mend the gift to be presented ;

For thou art Lord of gathered wealth and treasure : of the
bright song of praise thou art inventor.

5 The twofold opulence, 0 Wonder-Worker, of th&e new-born

each day never decreases.

Enrich with food the man who lauds thee, Agni : make him
the lord of wealth with noble offspring.

6 May he, benevolent with this fair aspect, best sacrificer, bring

the Gods to bless us.

Sure guardian, our protector from the foeman, shine, Agni,
with thine affluence and splendour.

HYMN X. Agni.

Agni, first, loudly calling, like a Father, kindled by man upon
the seat of worship,

Clothed in his glory, deathless, keen of insight, must bo
adorned by all, the Strong, the Famous.

2 May Agni the resplendent hear my calling, through all my

songs, Immortal, keen of iusight.

Dark steeds or ruddy draw his car, or carried in sundry ways
he makes them red of colour.

3 On wood supine they got the well-formed Infant : a germ in

vario us-fashioned plants was Agni ;

And in the night, not compassed round by darkness, be dwells
exceeding wise, with rays of splendour.

4 With oil and sacred gifts I sprinkle Agni who makes his home

in front of all things living,

Broad, vast, through vital power o'er all expanded, conspicu-
ous, strong with all the food that feed's him.

5 I pour to him who looks in all directions ; may he accept it

with a friendly spirit.

Agni with bridegroom's grace and lovely colour may not be
touched when all his form is fury.

5 The twofold opulence : enriching Gods with sacrifice and men with earthly
blessings.

New-born each day : rekindled at the morning sacrifice.

1 First ; chief of the Gods. Loudly calling : roaring as fire, or, lo be in*
yoked by all, according to S&yana. Like a Father ; supporting the Gods by
conveying oblations to them.

2 Carried in sundry ways : to one fire-receptacle after another.

3 On wood supine : the lower piece of wood in which fire is produced.

A germ : latent in plants, with reference to the luminosity of some plant*.
Sec II. I. 1.

270 THE MYMJtfS OF [BOOK It

6 By choice victorious, recognize thy portion : with thee for
envoy may we speak like Manu.

Obtaining wealth, I call on perfect Agni who with an eloquent
tongue dispenses sweetness,

HYMN XL Indra.

Hijab thou my call, 0 Indra ; be not heedless : thine may w T e
be for thee to give us treasures ;

For these presented viands, seeking riches, increase thy
strength like streams of water flowing.

2 Floods great and many, compassed by the Dragon, thou badest

swell and settest free, 0 Hero,

Strengthened by songs of praise thou rentest piecemeal the
D&sa, him who deemed himself immortal.

3 For, Hero, in the lauds wherein thou joyedst, in hymns of

praise, 0 Indra, songs of Rudras,

These streams in which is thy delight approach thee, even as
the brilliant ones draw near to Vayit.

4 We who add strength to thine own splendid vigour, laying

within thine arms the splendid thunder —

With us mayst thou, 0 Indra, waxen splendid, with Surya
overcome the Dksa races.

5 Hero, thou slewest in thy Valour Ahi concealed in depths,

mysterious, great enchanter,

Dwelling enveloped deep within the waters, him who checked
heaven and stayed the floods from flowing.

6 Indra, we laud thy great deeds wrought aforetime, we laud

thine exploits later of achievement ;

We laud the bolt that in thine arms lies eager; we laud“ thy
two Bay Steeds, heralds of Sflrya.

6 By choice ; according to S&yaiia, ‘ with lustre/ Recognize thy portion :
acknowledge the sacrificial offering to be suitable.

Like Manu ; with the wisdom and authority of Manu who was instructed
directly by the Gods,

2 Compassed ly the Dragon ; obstructed by the great serpent Ahi.

The Ddsa : the savage or demon Ahi, See I. 32. 11.

3 Songs of Rudras : like those sung by the Rudras or Maruts, Indra's
allies.

These streams : sacrificial waters or libations. Vdyti, the God of wind, was
entitled to the first draught of the Soma juice. See verse 14 of this hymn.

4 Splendid .* the word subhm , splendid, occurs in all three places in the text.

5 Concealed in depths : of the atmosphere.

6 Herald of Sdrya : announcing the coming of the sunlight after the heavy
rain which Indra has sent.

THE MormA,

BYMtt IT.]

271

7 Indra, thy Bay Steeds showing forth their rigour have sent a

loud cry out that droppeth fatness.

The earth hath spread herself in all her fulness : the cloud
that was about to move hath rested.*

8 Down, never ceasing, hath the rain-cloud settled r bellowing',

it hath wandered with the Mothers.

Swelling the roar in the far distant limits, they have spread
. wide the blast sent forth by Indra,

9 Indra hath hurled down the magician Vritra who- lay beleaguer-

ing the mighty river.

Then both the heaven and earth trembled in terror at the
strong Hero’s thunder when he bellowed,

10 Loud roared the mighty Hero’s bolt of thunder,, when he, the

Friend of man, burnt up the monster,

And, having drunk his fill of flowing. Soma, baffled the guileful
D&nava’s devices.

1 1 Drink thou r 0 Hero Indra, drink the Soma ; let the joy-giving

juices make thee joyful.

They, filling both thy flanks, shall swell thy vigour. The
juice that satisfies hath holpen Indra,

12 Singers have we become with thee,. 0 Indra : may we serve

duly and prepare devotion.

Seeking thy help we meditate thy praises : may we at once
enjoy thy gift of riches,

13 May we be thine, such by thy help, 0 Indra, as swell thy

vigour while they seek thy favour.

Give us, thou God, the riches that we long for, most powerful,,
with store of noble children.

14 Give us a friend, give us an habitation ; Indra, give us the com-

pany of Maruts,

And those whose minds accord with theirs, the Yayus,, who
drink the first libation of the Soma,

15 Let those enjoy in whom thou art delighted. Indra, drink

Soma for thy strength and gladness.

Thou hast exalted us to heaven, Preserve!-, in battles, through
the lofty hymns that praise thee.

7 The loud cry that drops fatness : is the thunder that precedes the fertiliz-
ing rain. The earth hath spread herself: to receive the rain,

8 The Mothers : the original waters above the firmament.

They : Indra’s attendants, the Maruts or Storin-Gods.

9 The mighty river ; the great cloud that holds the rain,

10 The guileful Tdnava’s devices : the magic arts of the demon Vritra,

14 The Vdyus : the plural is used honorifically for the singular.

272

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK IT.

16 Great, verily, are they, 0 thou Protector, who by their songs

of praise have won thy blessing.

They who strew sacred grass to be thy dwelling, hoZpeu by thee
have got them strength, 0 Indra,

17 Upon the great Trikadruka days, Hero, rejoicing thee, O Indra,

drink the Soma.

Come with Bay Steeds to drink of our libation, shaking the
drops from out thy beard, contented,

18 Hero, assume the might, wherewith thou olavest Vritra piece-

meal, the D&nava Aurnavabha.

Thou hast disclosed the light to light the Arya: on thy left
hand, 0 Indra, sank the Dasyu.

19 May we gain wealth, subduing with thy succour and with

the Arya, all our foes, the Dasyus.

Our gain was that to Trita of our party thou gavest up
Tvashtar ? s son Yisvarupa.

20 He cast down Arbuda what time his vigour was strengthened

by libations poured by Trita.

Indra sent forth his whirling wheel like Surya, and aided by
the Angirases rent Vala.

21 Now let that wealthy Cow of thine, 0 Indra, yield in return a

boon to him who lauds thee.

Give to thy praisers ; let not fortune fail us. Loud may wo
speak, with brave men, in the assembly.

HYMN XII.

Indra,

He who, just born, chief God of lofty spirit by power and might
became the Gods' protector,

Before whose breath through greatness of his valour the two
worlds trembled, He, 0 men, is Indra,

17 Trikadruka days ; the first three days of the Abhiplava festival.

1 8 Aurnavdbha : son of Urnav&bha, a (lemon. The Dasyu : the barbarian,
the original inhabitant of the land. According to S&yaua the demon Vritra is
meant.

19 It is difficult to make anything intelligible of this stanza. Trita is said
by S&yana to be a MahmU or great Ilwbi, and Yisvarupa is said to be a
tliree-headed monster slain by Indra. See Sacred Books of the East, XII. 164.

20 Atbuda: a demon of the atmosphere. See I. 51 6.

Sent forth hh whirling wheel; Indra is said to have used a wheel of the
Bun's chariot as a missile.

Vala : the brother of Vritra or Vritra himself. See I. 11. 5. ■

21 That wealthy Cow of thine; meaning, probably, Ushas or Dawn, who brings
good gifts to man. Qv su ddkshind may/idnl may be translated f that liberal ,M,
meed of thine, that is the rich reward which Indra bestows upon hia worship- j
pers, regarded as the counterpart of the dalcshind or honorarium given by the
institutes of sacrifices to the priests who perform the ceremonies.

HYMN 12.] THE MOVED A. 27$

2 He who fixed fast and firm the earth that staggered, and set

at rest the agitated mountains,

Who measured out the air’s wide middle region and gave the *
heaven support, He, men, is Indra.

3 Who slew the Dragon, freed the Seven Rivers, anS drove the

kine forth from the cave of Yala,

Begat the fire between two stones, the spoiler in warriors’ battle,
He, 0 men, is Indra.

4 By whom this universe was made to tremble, who chased away

the humbled brood of demons,

Who, like a jrambler gather ing his winnings, seized the foe’s
riches, He, 0 "men” lSTMraT — — — *—

<5 Of ivE'om, the Terrible, they ask, Where is He ? or verily they
say of him, He is not.

He sweeps away, like birds, the foe’s possessions. Have faith
in him, for Ho, 0 men, is Indra.

6 Stirrer to action of the poor and lowly, of priest, of suppliant

who sings his praises ;

Who, fair-faced, favours him who presses Soma with stones
• made ready, He, O men, is Indra.

7 He under whose supreme control are horses, all chariots, and %

the villages, and cattle ;

He who gave bemg"to *’the Sun and Morning, who leads the
waters, He, O men, is Indra.

8 To whom two armies cry in close encounter, both enemies, the

stronger and the weaker ;

Whom two invoke upon one chariot mounted, each for himself,
He, O ye men, is Indra.

9 Without whose help our people never conquer ; whom, battling,

they invoke to give them succour ;

He of whom all this world is but the copy, who shakes things
moveless, He, 0 men, is Indra.

10 He who hath smitten, ere they knew their danger, with his
hurled weapon many grievous sinners ;

Who pardons not his boldness who provokes him, who slays
the Dasyu, He, 0 men, is Indra.

3 Begat the five between two stones : generated lightning between heaven and
earth.

5 Like birds : as birds are captured by the fowler. A ceording to others ( like
stakes of gamblers,’ the meaning of vijafy being uncertain. Bee X. 92. 10, note.

7 Who leads the waters : brings the periodical rains.

8 Whom two invoke : the warrior and the charioteer.

18

274 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1L

11 He who discovered in the fortieth autumn Sambara as he dwelt

among the mountains ;

Who slew the Dragon putting forth his vigour, the demon lying
there, He, men, is Indra.

12 Who with seven guiding reins, the Bull, the Mighty, set free

the Seven great Floods to how at ploasuro ;

Who, thunder-armed, rent Eauhina in pieces when scaling
heaven, He, 0 ye men, is Indra.

13 Even the Heaven and Earth bow down before him, before his

very breath the mountains tremble.

Known as the Soma-drinker, armed with thunder, who wields
the bolt, He, 0 ye men, is. Indra.

14 Who aids with favour him who pom's the Soma and him who

brews it, sacrificer, singer.

Whom prayer exalts, and pouring forth of Soma, and this our
gift, He, 0 ye men, is Indra.

15 Thou verily art fierce and true who sendest strength to the

man who brews and pours libation.

So may we evermore, thy friends, 0 Indra, speak loudly to the
synod with our heroes.

HYMN XIII. Indra.

The Season was the parent, and when born therefrom It entered
rapidly the floods wherein it grows.

Thence was it full of sap, streaming with milky juice: the
milk of the plant's stalk is chief and meet for lauds.

2 They come trooping together bearing milk to him, and bring
him sustenance who gives support to all.

The way is common for the downward streams to flow. Thou
who didst these things first art worthy of our lauds.

12 Seven guiding reins ; or, according to Ludwig, seven bright rays, said to
mean seven forms of Indra. Rauhina : the name of a demon of drought,

15 With our heroes : with our brave sons around us.

1 The Season : the Rains, the most important of the seasons. So monsoon,
a corruption of mamim, any season, means the Rains especially. It .* the
Soma- plant.

2 They come : probably the cows whose milk is to be used in sacrifice.

The way is common : referring to the water used in the Soma ceremony.
Sftyana explains the stanza differently, and Wilson paraphrases it thus : ‘ The
•aggregated (streams) eome, bearing everywhere the water, and conveying it as
sustenance for the asylum of all rivers, (the ocean) : the same path is assigned
to all the descending (currents) to follow ; and as he who has (assigned) them
(their course), thou, (Indra), art especially to be praised. 1 2

HYMN 13.] THE RIG VEDA. 275

3 One priest announces what the instroutor gives : one, altering

the forms, zealously plies his task.

The third corrects the imperfections left by each. Thou who
didst these things first art worthy of our lauds.

4 Dealing out food unto their people there they sit/like wealth

to him who comes, more than the back can bear.

Greedily with his teeth he eats the master's food. Thou who
didst these things first art worthy of our lauds.

5 Thou hast created earth to look upon the sky : thou, slaying

Ahi, settest free the rivers' paths.

Thee, such, a God, the Gods have quickened with their lauds,
even as a steed with waters : meet for praise art thou.

6 Thou givest increase, thou dealest to us our food : thou milkest

from the moist the dry, the rich in sweets.

Thou by the worshipper layest thy precious store : thou art sole
Lord of all. Meet for our praise art thou.

7 Thou who hast spread abroad the streams by stablished law,

and in the field the plants that blossom and bear seed ;

Thou who hast made the matchless lightnings of the sky, —
vast, compassing vast realms, meet for our praise art thou.

8 Who broughtest Naramra with all his wealth, for sake of food,

to slay him that the fiends might be destroyed,

Broughtest the face unclouded of the strengthening one, per-
forming much even now, worthy aft thou of praise.

9 Thou boundest up the Dasa’s hundred friends and ten, when,

at one's hearing, thou holpest thy worshipper.

8 According to Sayana. three priests are here indicated, the Hotar who
announces the sacrifice, the Adlivaryu who apportions the several pieces of the
victim, and the Brahman who corrects mistakes and remedies defects in the ritual.

The first four stanzas are full of difficulties and in places absolutely unin-
telligible. My version of stanza 3, which generally follows S&yana, will not
bear critical examination, but at present I have nothing better to propose.

4 There they ■ sit : according to S iyaua, * the householders abide in their
homes/ To him who comes : to a guest. He eats the master's food : probably,
Agni consumes the oblations of the householder.

6 Thou milkest from the moist ; producest the dry nutritious grain from
the moist stalk.

8 This stanza is unintelligible. N dr mar a : said to be a fiend slain by Indra.

The strengthening one: according to Sayana, l)r jay anti is the name of a female

demon or Pisacbl Grassmann takes it to mean the Sun. Ludwig thinks it ia
the name of a stronghold used as a store-house of provisions.

9 The meaning of the first half-verse is uncertain, the text being evidently
corrupt. I adopt Ludwig’s emendation, d$i>asya } in plaee of the unintelligible
vd yasya.

276 THE HYMNS OF ' [ BOOK II.

Thou for Dabhiti boundest Dasyus not with cords; thou wast
a mighty help. Worthy of lauds art thou.

10 All banks of rivers yielded to his manly might ; to him they

gave, to him, the Strong, gave up their wealth.

The six directions hast thou fixed, a fivefold view : thy victories
reached afar. Worthy of lauds art thou.

11 Meet for high praise, 0 Hero, is thy power, that with thy

single wisdom thou obtainest wealth,

>'The life-support of conquering Ja tushthira. Indra, for all
* thy deeds, worthy of lauds art thou.

12 Thou for Turvlti heldest still the flowing floods, the river-

stream for Vayya easily to pass,

Didst raise the outcast from the depths, and gavest fame unto
the halt and blind. Worthy of lauds art thou.

13 Prepare thyself to grant us that great bounty, 0 Yasu, for

abundant is thy treasure.

Snatch up the wonderful, 0 Indra, daily. Loud may we
/ speak, with heroe s, in asse mbly.

x HYMN XIY. Indra.

Ministers, bring the Soma juice for Indra, pour forth the
gladdening liquor with the beakers.

To drink of this the Hero longeth ever; offer it to the Bull,
for this he willeth.

2 Ye ministers, to him who with the lightning smote, like a
tree, the rain-withholding Vritra —

Bring it to him, him who is fain to taste it, a draught of
this which Indra here deserveth.

JOabMti ; a Rishi, named in I. 112. 23. Not with cords : in a prison without
cords, the grave.

30 All banks of rivers: the dams that prevented the rivers of the clouds from
flowing. The six directions .* above, below, before, behind, right, left. The
fivefold view : inasmuch as we cannot see what is below the ground. S&yana
explains the shad vishtlrah as heaven, earth, day, night, water, and plants, and
the pdficha sandrisah as the five races of men. «

11 Jdtdshthira : a certain man of that name, says S&yana ; perhaps the
institute of the sacrifice.

1 2 Turvlti and Vayya appear to have been enabled to ford a great rirer by
the aid of Indra. See I. 61 11. Turvlti was the sou of Vayya. See I. 54. 6.

The outcast : or Par&vrij as a proper name. See I. 112. 8, where the
miracle is ascribed to the Asvins.

13 Snatch up the wonderful ; that is, gain quickly wondrous wealth. This
appears to he the literal meaning of the words which Wilson paraphrases,
after S&yana : * mayest thou be disposed to grant us exceeding abundance.*

1 Ministers ; Adhvaryus, or priests, whose duty was to make the prepara*
tions for sacrifice,

fl¥MN 14.] ‘ TEE niGVBDA, 277

,3 Ye ministers* to him who smote Dfibhika, who drove the kine
forth, and discovered Yala,

- Offer this draught, like Y&ta in the region : clothe him with
Soma even as steeds with trappings.

4 Him who did Urapa to death* Adhvaryus ! though showing

arms ninety-and-nine in number ;

Who cast dowm headlong Ai'buda and slew him, — speed ye
that Indra to our offered Soma.

5 Ye ministers, to him who struck down Svasna, and did to

to death Vyansa and greedy Sushna,

And Rudhikras and Namuchi and Pipru, — to him, to Indra,
pour ye forth libation.

6 Ye ministers, to him who, as with thunder, demolished

Sambara's hundred ancient castles ;

Who cast down Yarchin's sons, a hundred thousand, — to him,
to Indra, offer ye the Soma.

7 Ye ministers, to him who slew a hundred thousand, and cast

them down upon earth's bosom ;

Who quelled the valiant men of Atithigva, Kutsa, and Ayu, —
bring to him the Soma.

8 Ministers, men, whatever thing ye long for obtain ye quickly

bringing gifts to Indra.

Bring to the Glorious One what hands have cleansM ; to
Indra bring, ye pious ones, the Soma.

9 Do ye, 0 ministers, obey his order : that, purified in wood, in

wood uplift ye.

Well pleased he longs for what your hands have tended : offer
the gladdening Soma juice to Indra.

10 As the cow's udder teems with milk, Adhvaryus, so fill with
Soma Indra, liberal giver,

I know him : I am sure of this, the Holy knows that I fain
would give to him more largely.

3 DribMka : one of the numerous demons slain by Indra.

Like Vdta in the region : bringing rain, as the Wind-God does.

As steeds with trappings: the meaning of jtih is uncertain. Sfcyana ex-
plains it, * as an old man (is covered) with gai'inents.’

4 Urana : another demon. Arbuda: a demon mentioned in I. 51. 6.

5 Svasna, Vyansa, and the rest, are demons, some of whom have been
previously mentioned.

6 Sambara : a fiend mentioned several times in Book I, Varchin : a demon
who reviled Indra, and was slain with all his sons and followers.

7 The ‘valiant men : vivctn ; heroes. S&yana supplies f assailants,* as Ati-
thigva, Kutsa, and Ayu appear in Book I. as ‘favoured by Indra. Here their
battle with Turvay&na (1. 58. 10) is referred to,

9 In wood ; in the wooden receptacle,

278 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK II.

1 1 Him, ministers, the Lord of heavenly treasure and all terrest-

rial wealth that earth possesses,

Him, Indra, fill with Soma as a garner is filled with harley
full : be this your labour.

12 Prepare uhyself to grant us that great booty, 0 Yasu, for

abundant is thy treasure.

Gather up wondrous wealth, 0 Indra, daily. Loud may we
speak, with heroes, in assembly.

HYMN XV. Indra.

Now, verily, will I declare the exploits, mighty and true, of
him the True and Mighty.

In the Trikadrukas he drank the Soma : then in its rapture
Indra slew the Dragon.

2 High heaven in unsupported space he stablished : he filled the

two worlds and the air’s mid-region.

Earth he upheld, and gave it wide expansion. These things
did Indra in the Soma’s rapture.

3 From front, as ’twere a house, he ruled and measured ; pierced

with his bolt the fountains of the rivers,

And made them flow * at ease by paths far-reaching. These
things did Indra in the Soma’s rapture.

4 Compassing those who bore away Dabhiti, in kindled fire he

burnt up all their weapons,

And made him rich with kine and cars and horses. These
things did Indra in the Soma’s rapture.

5 The mighty roaring flood he stayed from flowing, and carried

those who swam not safely over.

They having crossed the stream attained to riches. These
things did Indra in the Soma’s rapture.

6 With mighty power he made the stream flow upward, crushed

with his thunderbolt the car of Ushas,

Bending her slow steeds with his rapid coursers. These things
did Indra in the Soma’s rapture.

1 In The Trikadrukas : see II. 11. 17. In its rapture : in the exhilaration

produced by drinking the fermented juice. See I. 51. 2 and note.

3 From front , as 7 twere a house : the formation of the world is compared to
the building of a house. Wilson renders : 1 * 3 4 5 6 (He it is) who has measured the
eastern (quarters) with measures like a chamber. ’

• 4 Dabhiti: see II. 13. 9.

5 Of. I. 13. 12.

6 The car of Ushas : the destruction of the chariot of Ushas or Dawn by
Indra is described more fully in IV. 39. 8.

HYMN 16.]

THE RIG VEDA.

279

7 Knowing the place wherein the maids were hiding, the outcast

showed himself and stood before them.

The cripple stood erect, the blind beheld them. These things
did indra in the Soma's rapture.

8 Praised by the Angirases he slaughtered Vala, an$ burst apart

the bulwarks of the mountain.

He tore away their jieftly-built defences. These things did
Indra in the Soma's raptiireT

9 Thou, with sleep whelming Chumuri and Dhuni, slowest the

Dasyu, keptest safe Dabliiti.

There the staff-bearer found the golden treasure. These things
did Indra in the Soma’s rapture.

10 How let that wealthy Cow of thine, 0 Indra, yield in return

a boon to him who lauds thee.

Give to thy p raisers : let not fortune fail us. Loud may we
speak, with brave men, in assembly.

HYMN XVI. Indra.

To him, your own, the best among the good, I bring eulogy,
like oblation in the kindled fire.

We invocate for help Indra untouched by eld, who maketh
all decay, strengthened, for ever young.

2 Without whom naught exists, Indra the Lofty One ; in whom

alone all powers heroic are combined.

The Soma is within him, in his frame vast strength, the
thunder in his hand and wisdom in his head.

3 Not by both worlds is thine own power to be surpassed, nor

may thy car be stayed by mountains or by seas.

None cometh near, 0 Indra, to thy thunderbolt, when with
swift steeds thou fliest over many a league.

4 For all men bring their will to him the Besolute, to him the

Holy One, to him the Strong they cleave.

Pay worship with oblation, strong and passing wise. Drink
thou the Soma, Indra, through the mighty blaze.

7 Paravrij, here rendered £ the outcast/ is taken by S&yana as the name of
a Itishi who was lame and blind. When some girls made sport of him he
prayed to Indra and was made sound.

9 Chumuri and Dhuni : Asuras or demons.

The staff-bearer ; the door-keeper, or chamberlain, of Dabhiti. The golden
treasure : of Chumuri and Dhuni.

1 Like oblation ; praise that magnifies and strengthens Indra as oblations of
clarified butter cast into the fire increase the flame.

80 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK II.

5 The vessel of the strong hows forth, the hood of meath, unto

the Strong who feeds upon the strong, for drink.

Strong are the two Adhv&ryus, strong are both the stones.
They press the Soma that is strong for him the Strong.

6 Strong m thy thunderbolt, yea, and thy car is strong ; strong

are thy Bay Steeds and thy weapons powerful.

Thou, Indra, Bull, art Lord of the strong gladdening drink :
with the strong Soma, Indra, satisfy thyself.

7 I, bold by prayer, come near thee in thy sacred rites, thee

like a saving ship, thee shouting in the war.

Verily he will hear and mark this word of ours ; we will pour
Indra forth as 7 twere a spring of wealth.

8 Turn thee unto us ere calamity come nigh, as a cow full of

pasture turns her to her calf.

Lord of a Hundred Powers, may we once firmly cling to thy
fair favours even as husbands to their wives.

9 Now let that "wealthy Cow of thine, 0 Indra, yield in return a

booii to him who lauds thee.

Give to thy praisers : let not fortune fail us. Loud may we
speak, with heroes, in assembly.

HYMN XVII. Indra.

Like the Angirases, sing this new song forth to him, for, as
in ancient days, his mighty powers are shown,

When in the rapture of the Soma he unclosed with strength
the solid firm-shut stables of the kine.

2 Let him be even that God who, for the earliest draught mea-

suring out bis power, increased his majesty;

Hero who fortified his body in the wars, and through his great-
ness set the heaven upon his head.

3 Thou didst perform thy first great deed of hero might what time

thou showedst power, through prayer, before this folk.
Hurled down by thee the car-borne Lord of Tawny Steeds, the
congregated swift ones fled in sundry ways.

5 The vessel of the strong : the reservoir containing the strong Soma. In
reference to the repetition of the word ‘ strong ' in this and the following
stanza see 1. 177. 2, S.

Both the stones : for pressing out the Soma Juice.

1 Praise Indra after the maimer of the ancient Angirases with a new song,
because his ancient deeds are continually renewed for our advantage.

2 Fortified- his body : protected it with a coat of mail,

3 The congregated swift ones : according to S&yana, the Asuras or enemies
pf the Gods. According to Both the water* of the heaven.

I1YMN 18.]

TEE MG VEDA.

281

4 He made himself by might Lord of all living things, and strong
in vital power waxed great above them all.

He, borne on high, overspread with light the heaven and earth,
and, sewing up the turbid darkness, closed it in.

§ He with his might made firm the forward-bending hills, the
downward rushing of the waters he ordained.

Fast he upheld the earth that nourisheth all life, and stayed
the heaven from falling by his wondrous skill.

6 Fit for the grasping of his arms is what the Sire hath fabricated

from all kind of precious wealth,

The thunderbolt, wherewith, loud-roaring, he smote down, and
striking him to death laid Krivi on the earth.

7 As she who in her parents' house is growing old, I pray to thee
- as Bhaga from the seat of all.

Grant knowledge, mete it out and bring it to us here : give us
the share wherewith thou rnakest people glad.

8 May we invoke thee as a liberal giver : thou givest us, 0 Indra,

strength and labours.

Help us with manifold assistance, Indra : Mighty One, Indra,
make us yet more wealthy,

9 Now may that wealthy Cow of thine, 0 Indra, give in return

a boon to him who lauds thee.

Give to thy praisers : let not fortune fail us. Loud may wc speak,
with heroes, in assembly.

HYMN XYIII. Indra.

The rich new car hath been equipped at morning ; four yokes
it hath, three whips, seven reins to guide it :

Ten-sided, friendly to mankind, light- winner, that must be urged
to speed wibh prayers and wishes.

4 Borne on high : or perhaps * luminous/ as Prof. Max Muller renders it.

5 Forward-bending : ready to fall until Indra fixed them.

6 Krivi : originally 1 a leather hag * and metaphorically 1 * a cloud,’ said by
S&yana to be an Asura or demon.

7 As Bhaga : as the God who distributes wealth, and also presides over love
and marriage. From the seat of all : from the hall of sacrifice where seats of
sacred grass are provided for all the Gods.

1 The rich new car is the morning sacrifice which travels to the Gods and

obtains wealth for the worshipper. The four yokes are the four pair of stones

for pressing out the Soma juice ; the three whips are the three tones of
prayer ; the seven reins are the seven metres. The meaning of dasdritroh,

( ten sided,’ is not clear. S&yaua explains aritrdh as 4 preservers from enemies,
i t e. sins,’ the planets. Grassmann thinks that’ wheels are meant.

282 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK //.

2 This is prepared for him the first, the second, and the third

time : he is man’s Priest and Herald.

Others get offspring of another parent : he goeth, as a noble
Bull, with others.

3 To India’s car the Bay Steeds have I harnessed, that new

well-spoken words may bring him hither.

Here let not other worshippers detain thee, for among us are
many holy singers, /

4 Indra, come hitherward with two Bay Coursers, come thou

with four, with six when invocated.

Come thou with eight, with ten, to drink the Soma. Here is
the juice, brave Warrior : do not scorn it.

5 0 Indra, come thou hither having harnessed thy car with twenty,

thirty, forty horses.

Come thou with fifty well trained coursers, Indra, sixty or
seventy, to drink the Soma.

6 Come to us hitherward, 0 Indra, carried by eighty, ninety, or

an hundred horses.

This Soma juice among the Sunahotras hath been poured out,
in love, to glad thee, Indra.

7 To this my prayer, 0 Indra, come thou hither : bind to thy

car’s pole all thy two Bay Coursers.

Thou art to be invoked in many places: Hero, rejoice thyself
in this libation.

8 Ne’er be my love from Indra disunited : still may his liberal

Milch-cow yield us treasure.

So may we under his supreme protection, safe in his arms,
succeed in each forth-going.

9 Now may that wealthy Cow of thine, 0 Indra, give in return

a boon to him who lauds thee.

Give to thy praisers : let not fortune fail us. Loud may we
speak, with heroes, in assembly.

2 The first, the second , and the third time : the three daily sacrifices are
referred to. lie is man's Priest : Agni must be meant.

The second hemistich is obscure. Wilson, after Sftyana, paraphrases :
* Other (priests) engender the embryo of a different (rite), but this victorious
(sacrifice), the showerer (of benefits) combines with other (ceremonies).’

4 With two Bay Coursers : this is the usual number. The progressive

multiplication in this and the following stanzas is perhaps intended to in-
dicate the ever increasing rapidity with which the eager worshipper prays
Indra to approach. The {Scholiast says that by their supernatural power the
two horses of Indra multiply themselves indefinitely.

6 The Stmahotms: apparently a family so called; 2 * 4 * 6 'hose who

sacrifice with happy result}.’ According to Sayana, ; '■■■■■■’, certain

vessels into which the Soma juice was poured. ’ ^

HYMN 19,]

THE RIG VEDA.

283

HYMN XIX. Indra.

Draughts of this sweet juice have been drunk for rapture, of
the wise Soma-presser’s offered dainty,

Wherein, grown mighty in the days aforetime, Indra^hath found
delight, and men who worship.

2 Cheered by this meath Indra, whose hand wields thunder, rent

piecemeal Ahi who barred up the waters,

So that the quickening currents of the rivers flowed forth like
birds unto their resting-places.

3 Indra, this Mighty One, the Dragon's sktyer, sent forth the

flood of waters to the ocean.

He gave the Sun his life, he found the cattle, and -with the
night the works of days completed.

4 To him who worshippeth hath Indra given many and matchless

gifts. He slayeth Vritra.

Straight was he to be sought with supplications by men who
struggled to obtain the sunlight.

5 To him who poured him gifts he gave up Surya, — Indra, the

God, the Mighty, to the mortal ;

For Etasa with worship brought him riches that keep distress
afar, as 'twere his portion.

6 Once to the driver of his chariot, Kutsa, he gave up greedy

Sushna, plague of harvest ;

And Tndra, for the sake of Divod&sa, demolished Sambara's nine-
and-ninety castles.

1 Have been drunk : by Indra.

3 And with the night : perhaps, by giving the night for rest enabled men to
perform, the labours of the day. Or, as aktwnd may mean ‘by light/ ‘effected
the manifestation of the days by light/ as Wilson renders it after S&yana.

5 See I. 61. 15. The legend says that a certain King who wished for a son
worshipped Sftrya who, to grant his prayer, was born himself as the King's son.
Afterwards when some dispute arose between' this King’s son who was named
Surya and the Rishi Etasa, Indra sided with the latter. In I. 61. 15, a chariot
race appears to be referred to, and I have translated the passage accordingly,
following S&yaha in taking SUrya to be the name of a man. If, however, as is
very possible, Sftrya there is the Sun- God the meaning is that Indra, in order
to favour his faithful worshipper Etasa, compelled Surya or the Sun to bring
back his chariot and horses to the east; that is the return of day on some parti-
cular occasion is attributed to Indra’ s intervention on behalf of his favourite.
This appears to be the meaning of this verse also. See, also I. 121. 13.

As 'twere his ‘portion ; as (a father gives) his portion (to a son), according
to S&yana.

6 Kutsa and Divoddsa, favourites of Indra, and Sushna and Sambara, demons
of drought, have occurred frequently in Book I.

234 TIIB HYMNS OF [BOOK It.

7 So have we brought our hymn to thee, 0 Indra, strengthening

thee and fain ourselves for glory,

May we with best endeavours gain this friendship, and mayst
thou bend the godless scorner’s weapons,

8 Thus the Gritsamadas for thee, 0 Hero, have wrought their

hymn and task as seeking favour.

May they who worship thee afresh, 0 Indra, gain food axid
strength, bliss, and a happy dwelling,

9 Now may that wealthy Cow of thine, 0 Indra, give in return

a boon to him who lauds thee.

Give to thy praisers : let not fortune fail us. Loud may we
speak, with heroes, in assembly.

HYMN XX, Indra.

As one brings forth his car when fain for combat, so bring we

power to thee — regard us, Indra

Well skilled in song, thoughtful in spirit, seeking great bliss
from one like thee amid the Heroes.

2 Indra, thou art our own with thy protection, a guardian near

to men who love thee truly.

Active art thou, the liberal man’s defender, his who draws
near to thee with right devotion.

3 May Indra, called with solemn invocations, the young, the

Friend, be men’s auspicious keeper,

One who will further with his aid the singer, the toiler, praiser,
dresser of oblations.

4 With laud and song let me extol that Indra in whom of old

men prospered and were mighty.

May he, implored, fulfil the prayer for plenty of him who
worships, of the living mortal.

5 He, Indra whom the Angi rases’ praise delighted, strengthened

their prayer and made their goings prosper.

Stealing away the mornings with the sunlight, he, lauded,
crushed even Asna’s ancient powers.

1 For combat ; or, perhaps, for the race.

3 The toiler : the man who labours in the discharge of religious duties.

4 The living mortal : the present worshipper, as distinguished from the men
of old.

5 Made their goings prosper : by recovering for them the stolen cows, fre-
quently mentioned in Book X. Asna, ‘the voracious,’ said to be the name of
a demon, one of the many foes overthrown by Indra,

THE MOVED A.

28^

H TMN 21.]

6 He verily, the God, the glorious Indra, hath raised him up for

man, best Wonder-Worker.

He, self-reliant, mighty and triumphant, brought low the dear
head of the wicked D&sa.

7 Indra the Vritra-slayer, Fort-destroyer, scattered the D&sa hosts

who dwelt in darkness.

For man hath he created earth and waters, and ever helped the
prayer of him who worships.

8 To him in might the Gods have ever yielded, to Indra in the

tumult of the battle.

When in his arms theyj&id_the bolt, he slaughtered the Dasvus
and cast down t heir forts"oF i ron.

9 Now may that wealthy Cow of thine, 0 Indra, give in return a

boon to him who lauds thee.

Give to thy praisers : let not fortune fail us. Loud may we
speak, with heroes, in assembly,

HYMN XXL Indra,

To him the Lord of all, the Lord of wealth, of light; him who
is Lord for ever, Lord of men and tilth,

Him who is Lord of horses, Lord of kine, of floods, to Indra,
to the Holy bring sweet Soma juice.

2 To him the potent One, who conquers and breaks down, the

Victor never vanquished who disposes all,

The mighty-voiced, the rider, unassailable, to Indra ever-
conquering speak your reverent prayer,

3 Still Victor, loved by mortals, ruler over .men, o’erfchrower,

warrior, he hath waxen as he would;

Host-gatherer, triumphant, ho. loured mid the folk. Indra’s
heroic deeds will I tell forth to all.

6 D4sa ; said by S&yana to be an Asura, or demon of that name. The word
is frequently applied to the foes of the Aryas, to the maliguant demons of the
air as well as to the barbarous and hostile inhabitants of the land, and it is not
always clear whether human or superhuman enemies are intended.

The dear head : the Ddsa’s own head ; dear = <j)(Xov * n Homer.

. 7 The Ddsa hosts xoho dwelt in darkness : the words thus rendered are vari-
ously explained. It is uncertain whether the aborigines of the country ar#
meant, or the demons of air who dwell in the dark clouds.

8 The Dasyus : the Asuras or demons, acecnding to S&yana,

1 The Lord : literally, conqueror of all, of wealth, etc.

2 Mighty -voiced : Sftyana gives two explanations, 1 having a full throat/ or
' praised by many.’ Eider : borne through the sky.

286 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK IL

4 The -strong who never yields, who slew the furious fiend, the

deep, the vast, of wisdom unattainable ;

Who speeds the good, the breaker-down, the firm, the vast, —
Indra whose rites bring joy hath made the light of Dawn.

5 By sacrifice the yearning sages sending forth their songs

found furtherance from him who speeds the flood.

In Indra seeking help with -worship and with hymn, they
drew him to themselves and won them kine and wealth.

6 Indra, bestow on us the best of treasures, the spirit of ability

and fortune ;

Increase of riches, safety of our bodies, charm of sweet speech,
and days of pleasant weather.

HYMN XXII. Indra.

At the Trikadrukas the Great and Strong hath drunk drink
blent with meal. With Yishnu hath he quaffed the poured
out Soma juice, all that he would.

That hath so heightened him the Great, the Wide, to do his
mighty work.

So may the God attain the God, true Indu Indra who is true.

2 So he resplendent in the battle overcame Krivi by might. He

with his majesty hath filled the earth and heaven, and waxen
strong.

One share of the libation hath he swallowed down: one share
he left.

So may the God attend the God, true Indu Indra who is true.

3 Brought forth together with wisdom and mighty power thou

grewest great ; with hero deeds subduing the malevolent,
most swift in act ;

Giving prosperity, and lovely wealth to him who praiseth thee.
So may the God attend the God, true Indu Indra who is true.

4 This, Indra, was thy hero deed, Dancer, thy first and ancient

work, worthy to be told forth in heaven,

What time thou sentest down life with a God’s own power, free-
ing the floods.

All that is godless may he conquer with his might, and, Lord
of Hundred Powers, find for us strength and' food.

4 The furious fiend : Vritra.

6 Ability ; to perform sacred ceremonies, according to Sayana.

1 The Trikadrukas : the first three days of the Abhiplava ceremony.

Indu : a drop, especially of Soraa juice ; another name of the deified Soma.

2 Krivi : a demon. See II. 1 7i 6.

4 Dancer ; active in battle, dancer of the war-dance.

HYMN- 23.]

287

THE RIG VEDA.

HYMN XXIII. Brahmanaspati.

We call thee. Lord and Leader of the heavenly hosts, the wise
among dhe wise, the famousest of all,

The King supreme of prayers, 0 Brahmanaspati]: h^ar us with
help ; sit down in place of sacrifice.

2 ■ Brihaspati, God immortal ! verily the Gods have gained from

thee, the wise, a share in holy rites.

As with great light the Sun brings forth the rays of morn, so
thou alone art Father of all sacred prayer.

3 When thou hast chased away revilers and the gloom, thou

mount est the refulgent car of sacrifice ;

The awful car, Brihaspati, that quells the foe, slays demons,
cleaves the stall of ldne, and finds the light.

4 Thou leadest with good guidance and preservest men ; distress

overtakes not him who offer's gifts to thee.

Him who hates prayer thou pimishest, Brihaspati, quelling his
wrath : herein is thy great mightiness.

5 No sorrow, no distress from any side, no foes, no creatures

double-tongued have overcome the man, —

Thou drivest all seductive fiends away from him whom, careful
guard, thou keepest, Brahman aspati.

6 Thou art our keeper, wise, preparer of our paths : we, for thy

service, sing to thee with hymns of praise.

Brihaspati, whoever lays a snare for us, him may his evil fate,
precipitate, destroy.

7 Him, too, who threatens us without offence of ours, the evil-

minded, arrogant, rapacious man, —

Him turn thou from our path away, Brihaspati : give us fair
access to this banquet of the Gods.

8 Thee as protector of our bodies we invoke, thee, saviour, as

the comforter who loveth us.

Strike, 0 Brihaspati, the Gods’ revilers down, and let not the
unrighteous come to highest bliss.

1 Bmkmanctspaii .* alternating with Brihaspati, the Deity in whom the action
of the worshipper upon the Gods is personified. See I. 14. 3. A comparative-
ly recent God, as the representative of the hierarchy, he is gradually encroach-
ing on the jurisdiction of Indra the Warrior God of the Kshatriyas, claiming

his achievements as his own and assuming his attributes. See Weber, tiber
den Vftjapeya, Sitzungsberiehte der K. P. Academie der Wissenschaften 1892
XXXIX, p. 15. J

3 Rei'ilers : blaspheming demons of darkness. Cleaves the stall of Hne : opens
the prison where the cows or rays of light have been shut up. x

7 This banquet of the Gods ■: sacrifice in' general, and especially the sacrifice
which is performing.

288 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK It,

9 Through thee, kind prospered 0 Brahmanaspati, may we obtain
the wealth of men which all desire :

And all our enemies, who near or far away prevail against us,

crush, and leave them destitute.

♦;

10 With thee as our own rich and liberal ally may we, Brihaspati,

gain highest power of life.

Let not the guileful wicked man be lord of us : still may v T e
prosper, singing goodly hymns of praise.

11 Strong, never yielding, hastening to the battle-cry, consumer

of the foe, victorious in the strife,

Thou* art sin's true avenger, Brahmanaspati, who tamest e'en
the tierce, the wildly passionate.

12 Whoso with mind ungodly seeks to do us harm, who, deeming

him a man of might mid lords, would slay, —

Let not his deadly blow reach us, .Brihaspati; may we humi-
liate the strong ill-doer's wrath.

13 The mover mid the spoil, the winner of all wealth, to be invoked

in fight, and reverently adored,

Brihaspati hath overthrown like cars of war all wicked enemies
who fain would injure us.

14 Burn up the demons with thy fiercest-flaming brand, those who

have scorned thee in thy manifested might.

Show forth that power that shall deserve the hymn of praise-:
destroy the evil-speakers, 0 Brihaspati.

15 Brihaspati, that which the foe deserves not, which shines among

the folk effectual, splendid,

That, Son of Law 1 which is with might refulgent — that trea-
sure wonderful bestow thou on us.

16 Give us not up to those who, foes in ambuscade, are greedy

for the wealth of him who sits at ease,

Who cherish in their heart abandonment of Gods, Brihaspati,
no further rest shall they obtain. .

17 For Tvashtar, he who knows each sacred song, brought thee

to life, preeminent o’er all the things that be.

Guilt-scourger, guilt-avenger is Brihaspati, who slays the spoiler
and upholds the mighty Law.

15 Son of Law ; who hast thy being in accordance with vita, truth or eternal
Law and Order,

♦ 16 This stanza is difficult, and the translation is conjectural. Wilson
observes that S&yana’s explanation is not very intelligible.

1589

ZTTAfy 24.] TIIE UIGVEDA .

18 The mountain, for thy glory, cleft itself apart when, Angir&s !

thou openedst the stall of kine.

Thou, 0 Brihaspati, with Indra for ally didst hurl down water-
floods which gloom had compassed round.

19 0 Brahmanaspati, he thou controller of this ouffhymn and

prosper thou our children.

All that the Gods regard with love is blessed. Loud may we
speak, with heroes, in assembly.

HYMN XX IT. %ahmanaspati.

Be pleased with this our offering, thou who art the Lord; we
will adore thee with this new and mighty song.

As this thy friend, our liberal patron, praises thee, do thou,
Brihaspati, fulfil our hearts’ desire.

2 He who with might bowed down the things that should be

bowed, and in his fury rent the holds of Sambara ;

Who overthrew what shook not, Brahmanaspati,* — he made
his way within the mountain stored with wealth.

3 That was a great deed for the Godliest of the Gods : strong

things were loosened and the firmly fixed gave way.

He drave the kine forth and cleft Vala through by prayer,
dispelled the darkuess and displayed the light of heaven.

4 The well with mouth of stone that poured a flood of meath,

which Brahmanaspati hath opened with his might — -
All they who see the light have drunk their All thereat : to-
gether they have made the watery fount flow forth.

5 Ancient will be those creatures, whatsoe’er they be ; with

moons, with autumns, doors unclose themselves to you.
Effortless they pass on to perfect this and that, appointed works
which Brahmanaspati ordained.

18 Angiras : Brihaspati is here called by the name of the ancient patriarch
as Agni is in I. 1. 6 According to the Bhdgavata Pnrdna Brihaspati is the
son of Angiras.

Thou didst hurl doivn: the deed usually ascribed to Indra is here attri-

buted to Brihaspati as the Lord of effectual prayer. See I. 14. 3 ? and 02 3.

1 Thy friend, our liberal patron : the institutor of the sacrifice, the faithful
worshipper of the God and the rewarder of the priests.

2 The holds of Sxmbara : great black clouds before they pour their rain.

The mountain stored with wealth : the cloud full of precious rain.

5 This stanza is difficult. Ludwig takes tof bhitvanA, * those creatures/
whose nature is imperfectly known, to be the sun and moon, the parents of
months and years, which without any effort on their pai't bring to pass whatever
Brahmanaspati decrees.

19

2,90 THE HYMNS OF [WOK IL

6 They who with much endeavour searching round obtained the

Pams 5 nobl est treasur e hidden in the cave, —

Those SrgT*!, "having luarko : i-lm falsehoods, turned them hack
■whence they had come, and sought again to enter in.

7 The pious ones when they had seen the falsehoods turned them.

back, the sages stood again upon the lofty ways.

Cast down with both their arms upon the rock they left the
kindled fire, and said, No enemy is he.

8 With his swift bow, strung truly, Brahmanaspati reaches the

mark \jhate 7 er it he that he desires.

Excellent are the arrows wherewithal he shoots, keen-eyed to
look on men arid springing from his ear.

9 He brings together and he parts, the great High Priest; extolled

is he, in battle Brahmanaspati.

When, gracious, for the hymn he brings forth food and wealth,
the glowing Sun untroubled sends forth fervent heat.

10 First and preeminent, excelling all besides are the kind gifts of

liberal Brihaspati.

These are the boons of him the Strong who should be loved,
whereby both classes and the people have delight.

11 Thou who in every way supreme in earthly power, rejoicing,

by thy mighty strength hast waxen great, —

He is the God spread forth in breadth against the Gods : he,
Brahmanaspati, encompasseth this All.

1.2 From you, twain Maghavans, all truth proceedeth : even the
waters break not your commandment.

Come to us, Brahmanaspati and Indra, to our oblation like yoked
steeds to fodder.

; 6 The Pan is are the robber-fiends who carry off and hide the cows or raya
of light. Those sages : the Angirases, to whom the stolen cows are said to
have belonged. Hiving marked the falsehoods : having seen through the
guiles of the fiends who sought to mislead them.

■ 7 They left the kindled fire : the cows, or waters and the light which follows
their effusion, were set free by fire-oblations of which the Angirases are regard-
ed as the earliest institutors. No enemy : that is, man’s greatest friend. The
stanza is obscure, and Sftyana’s explanation is unsatisfactory.

8 Springing from his ear : the bow-string being drawn to the right ear.
The word may, perhaps, mean also, * finding their home in, i. e. reaching the
ears * of men, and might be translated 1 levelled to the ear.’

9 He brings together and he parts : brings friends together in worship, and
disperses enemies in battle.

10 Both classes: according to S&yana, the institutors of the sacrifice and the
priests, or Gods and men.

11 In breadth against the Gods: in his mightiness the representative of all
the Gods.

12 Even the watm : all nature, even the strong and rapid water-floods.

BYMN 26.] THE RIGVEDA. 291

13 The sacrificial femes most swiftly hear the call : the priest of

the assembly gaineth wealth for hymns.

Hating the stern, remitting at his will the debt, strong in the
shock of fight is Brahmanaspati.

14 The wrath of Brahmanaspati according to his will had full

effect when he would do a mighty deed.

The kine he drave forth and distributed to heaven, even as a
copious flood with strength flows sundry ways.

15 0 Brahmanaspati, ' may we be evermore masters of wealth well-

guided, full of vital strength.

Heroes on heroes send abundantly to us, when. thou omnipoten
through prayer seekest my call.

16 0 Brahmanaspati, be thou controller of this our hymn, and

prosper thou our children.

All that the Gods regard with love is blessed. Loud may we
speak, with heroes, in assembly.

HYMN XX Y. Brahmanaspati.

He lighting up the flame shall conquer enemies : strong shall
he be who offers prayer and brings his gift.

He with his seed spreads forth beyond another’s seed, whom-
ever Brahmanaspati takes for his friend.

2 With heroes he shall overcome his hero foes, and spread his
wealth by kine ; wise by himself is he.

His children and his children’s children grow in strength,
whomever Brahmanaspati takes for his friend.

3 He, mighty like a raving river’s billowy flood, as a bull con-

quers oxen, overcomes with strength.

Like Agni ? s blazing rush he may not be restrained, whomever
Brahmanaspati takes for his friend.

4 For him the floods of heaven flow never failing down : first

with the heroes he goes forth to war for kine.

He slays in unabated vigour with great might, whomever
Brahmanaspati takes for his friend. *

5 All roaring rivers pour their waters down for him, and many

a lawless shelter hath been granted him.

Blest with the happiness of Gods he prospers well, whomever
Brahmanaspati takes for his friend.

HYMN XXYI. Brahmanaspati.

The righteous singer shall o’ercome his enemies, and he who
. serves the Gods subdue the godless man.

>'T The zealous mail shall vanquish the invincible, the worshipper
share the food of him who worships not.

m TEE HYMNS OF [BOOK 11

2 Worship, thou hero; chase the arrogant' afar: put oil aus-

picious courage for the fight with foes.

Prepare oblation so that thou mayst have success : we crave
the favouring help of Brahma naspati.

3 -Ho with* his folk, his house, his family, his sons, gains booty

for himself, and, with the heroes, wealth,

Who with oblation and a true believing heart serves Brah-
ma naspati the Father of the Gods.

4 Whoso hath honoured him with offerings rich in oil, him

Bralnnanaspati leads forward on his way,

Saves him from sorrow, frees him from his enemy, and is his
wonderful deliverer from woe.

HYMN XXVII. Adilyas,

The^je hymns that drop down fatness, with the ladle I ever
offer to the Kings Adityas.

May Mitra, Aryaman, and Bhaga hear us, the mighty Varuna,
Daksha, and Ansa.

2 With one accord may Aryaman and Mitra and Varuna this
^ day accept this praise-song—

Adityas bright and pure as streams of water, free from all
guile and falsehood, blameless, perfect.

3 These Gods, Adityas, vast, profound, and faithful, with many

eyes, fain to deceive the wicked,

Looking within behold the good and evil : near to the Kings
is even the thing most distant.

4 Upholding that which moves and that which moves not,

Adityas, Gods, protectors of all being,

Provident, guarding well the world of spirits, true to eternal
sj Law, the debtmxaotora .

2 Worship, thou hero : the lvishi addresses the exhortation to himself,

3 The Father of the Gods ; S&yana explains pUdntm , father, by pdluyltdram,
protector,

1 With the ladle : that is, with my tongue that utters praises as the
sacrificial ladle pours out the oblations of clarified butter.

Adityas : Bee I. 14. 3.

Bhaga: the name of this ancient God still survives in the Slavonic
languages as a general^ name for God. Be is frequently invoked together
with Pfishan and the Adityas, See X. 14. 3,

Daksha : active energy, spiritual power personified, and called an Ad it y a
or son of Aditi. Sayan a takes the word as an epithet of Ansa, powerful.

Ansa : another of the Adityas, the Distributer, See II. 1, 4,

3 looking within : iuto the hearts of men.

4 The debt-exactors ; the punishers of sin,

&Tmn 27%] $uB Rwvtii)A ( m

5 May I, A dityas, share in this your favour which, Aryaman,
brings profit e’en in danger.

Under your guidance, Vanina and Mitra, round troubles may
t pass, like rugged places.

8 Smooth is your path, 0 Aryainan and Mitra; excellent is it,
Vanina, ^and thornless.

Thereon, Adityas, send us down your blessing: grant us a
shelter hard to be demolished.

7 Mother of Kings, may Aditi transport us, by fair paths Arya-

man, beyond all hatred.

May we uninjured, girt by many heroes, win Varrma’s and
Mitra’s high protection.

8 With their support they stay three earths, three heavens;

three are their functions in the Gods’ assembly.

Mighty through Law, Adityas, is your greatness; fair is it,
Aryaman, V&runa, and Mitra.

9 Golden and splendid, pure like streams of water, they hold

aloft the three bright heavenly regions.

Ne’er do they slumber, never close their eyelids, faithful, far-
ruling for the righteous mortal,

10 Thou over all, O Varuua, art Sovran, be they Gods, Asura ! or

be they mortals.

Grant unto us to see a hundred autumns : ours he the blest
long lives of our forefathers.

11 Neither the right nor left do I distinguish, neither the east

nor yet the west, Adityas.

Simple and guided by your wisdom, Vasus ! may I attain the
light that brings no danger.

12 He who bears gifts unto the Kings, true Leaders, he whom

their everlasting blessings prosper,

Moves with his chariot first in rank and wealthy, munificent
and lauded in assemblies.

13 Pure, faithful, very strong, with heroes round him, he dwells

beside the waters rich with pasture. .

None slays, from near at hand or from a distance, him who is
under the Adityas’ guidance.

7 Mother of Kings: Adifci, the Infinite, mother of the Adityas.

8 Three are their functions : perhaps the absorption, retention, and effusion
of rain.

10 ; a divine and immortal being ; apparently a higher title than

derdh, Gods or Bright Ones.

Ill know nothing of myself and cannot attain to the light of day, or the
light of true knowledge, without your assistance.

294 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IL

14 Aditi, Mitra, Yaruna, forgive us however we have erred and

sinned against you.

May I obtain the broad light free from peril : 0 Indra, let
not during darkness seize us.

15 For him*’ the Twain united pour their fulness, the rain from

heaven : he thrives most highly favoured.

He goes to war mastering both the mansions : to him both
portions of the world are gracious.

16 Your guiles, ye Holy Ones, to quell oppressors, your snares

•spread out against the foe, Adityas,

May I car-borne pass like a skilful horseman : uninjured may
we dwell in spacious shelter.

17 May I not live, O Yaruna, to witness my wealthy, liberal,

dear friend’s destitution.

King, may I never lack well-ordered riches. Loud may we
speak, with heroes, in assembly.

HYMN XXYrn. Yaruna.

This laud of the self-radiant wise Aditya shall be supreme o’er
all that is in greatness.

I beg renown of Yaruna the Mighty, the God exceeding kind
to him who worships.

2 Having extolled thee, Yaruna, with thoughtful care may we

have high fortune in thy service,

Singing thy praises like the fires at coming, day after day, of
mornings rich in cattle.

3 May we be in thy keeping, 0 thou Leader, wide-ruling Yarupa,

Lord of. many heroes.

0 Sons of Aditi, for ever faithful, pardon us, Gods, admit us
. .to your friendship.

4 He made them flow, the Aditya, the Su Stainer : the rivers run
* by .Yaruna’s commandment.

14 During darkness ; death, night, darkness are to be dreaded : daylight is
Comparatively free from danger.

15 The Twain' united : heaven and earth which together make up the world.
Both the mansions ; that is, he retains possession of his own dwelling and

gainB possession of that of his enemy.

Both portions of the world : heaven and earth.

17 May I never see my wealthy patron, the institutor of the ceremony
reduced to poverty.

1 This laud : the poet magnifies the importance of the worship which he
offers to the Aditya Yaruna, the great King over all, the God of natural, peace-
ful, moral order as contrasted with Indra the God of battles.

295

HYMN 29.] THE RIGVEDA.

These feel no weariness, nor cease from flowing: swift have they
flown like birds in air around us.

5 Loose me from sin as from a bond that binds me : may We

swell, Varuna, thy spring of Order.

Let not my thread, while I weave song, be severed, nor my
work’s sum, before the time, be shattered.

6 Far from me, Varuna, remove all danger : accept me graciously,

thou Holy Sovran.

Cast off, like cords that hold a calf, my troubles : I am not
even mine eyelid’s lord without thee.

7 Strike us not, Varuna, with those dread weapons which, Asufa,

at thy bidding wound the sinner.

Let us not pass away from light to exile. Scatter, that we may
live, the men who hate us.

8 0 mighty Varuna, now and hereafter, even as of old, will we

speak forth our worship.

For in thyself, invincible God, thy statutes ne’er to be moved
are fixed as on a mountain.

9 Move far from me what sins I have committed : let me not suffer,

King, for guilt of others.

Full many a mom remains to dawn upon us: in these, 0
Varuna, while we live direct us.

10 O King, whoever, be he friend or kinsman, bath threatened

me affrighted in my slumber —

If any wolf or robber fain would harm us, therefrom, 0 Varuna,
give thou us protection.

11 May I not live, O Varuna, to witness my wealthy, liberal, dear

friend’s destitution.

King, may I never lack well-ordered riches. Loud may we speak,
with heroes, in assembly.

HYMN XXIX. Visvedevas.

Upholders of the Law, ye strong Adityas, remove my sin like
her who bears in secret.

You, Varuna, Mitra and all Gods who listen, I call to help me,
I w ho know your goodness.

2 Ye, Gods, are providence ap.d ye are power : remove ye utterly
all those who hate us.

5 Swell thy spring of Order * observe and strengthen thy statutes and

ordinances from which life and all blessings flow.

1 Like her who hears in secret ♦ as an un wedded mother abandons her secretly
bora child in some distant place. -

296 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR II.

As givers of good things deal with ns kindly; this day be graci-
ous to us. and hereafter.

3 What service may we do you with our future, what service,

Vasus, with our ancient friendship ?

O Aditif and Varuna and Mitra, Indra and Maruts, make us
-well and happy.

4 Ye, 0 ye Gods, are verily our kinsmen; as such be kind to me

who now implore you.

Let not your car come slowly to our worship : of kinsmen such
as you ne’er let us weary.

5 I singly have sinned many a sin against you, and ye chastised

me as a sire the gambler.

Far be your nets, far, Gods, be mine offences : seize me not
like a bird upon her offspring.

6 Turn yourselves hitherward this day, ye Holy, that fearing in

my heart I may approach you.

Protect us, God ; let not the wolf destroy us. Save us, ye
Holy, from the pit and falling.

7 May I not live, 0 Varupa, to witness my wealthy, liberal, dear

friend’s destitution.

King, may I never lack well-ordered riches. Loud may we
speak, with heroes, in assembly.

HYMN XXX. Indra and Others.

TnB streams unceasing flow to Indra, slayer of A hi, Savitar,
God, Law’s ful filler,

Bay after day goes on the sheen of waters. What time hath
past since they were first set flowing ?

2 His Mother — for she knew — spake and proclaimed him who

was about to cast his bolt at Vritra.

Cutting their paths according to his pleasure day after day
flow to their goal the rivers.

3 Aloft he stood above the airy region, and against Vritra shot

his deadly missile.

Enveloped in a cloud he rushed upon him. Indra subdued
the foe with sharpened weapons.

5 As a sire the gambler : as a father punishes his son for gambling.

Your nets ; the nooses or snares which ye spread for the wicked.

1 Savitar ; the Sun, as identical with Indra. The Scholiast explains the
word here as the instigator or impeller of all.

What time hath passed ? : meaning that the waters are eternal.

2 The first hemistich is obscure. I follow Ludwig’s conjectural interpre-
tation (Der lligveda, V. 63), who reads vidiisht for vidushe, and refers to the
legend related in IV. 18. His Mother : Aditi, the mother of Indra.

3 Aloft he stood: Indra, See I. 32. Enveloped in a cloud : referring to Vritra.

HYMN 31,] THE RTOYEDA. 297

4 As with a bolt, Brihaspati, fiercely flaming, pierce thou

Yrik&dvaras’, the Asura’s, heroes.

Even as iu time of old with might thou si e west, so slay even
now our enemy, 0 Indra.

5 Gast down from heaven on high thy bolt of thuftder where-

with in joy thou smitest dead the foeman.

For gain of children make us thine, 0 Indra, of many child-
ren’s children and of cattle.

6 Whomso ye love, his power ye aid and strengthen ; ye Twain

are the rich worshipper’s advancers.

Graciously favour us, In;lra and Soma ; give us 6rm standing
in this time of danger.

7 Let it not vex me, tire me, make me slothful, and never let

us say, Press not the Soma ;

For him who cares for me, gives gifts, supports me, who comes
with kine to me who pour libations.

8 Sarasvati, protect us : with the Maruts allied thou boldly

conquerest our focmen,

While Indra does to death the daring chieftain of Sandikas
exulting in his prowess.

9 Him who waylays, yea, him who would destroy us,— aim »at

him, pierce him with thy sharpened weapon.

Brihaspati, with arms thou slayest foemen : 0 King, give ufP
the spoiler to destruction.

10 Perform, O Hero, with our valiant heroes the deeds heroic

which thou hast to finish.

Long have they been inflated with presumption : slay them,
and bring us hither their possessions.

11 I craving joy address with hymn and homage your heavenly

host, the company of Maruts,

That we may gain wealth with full store of heroes, each day
'more famous, and with troops of children.

HYMN XXXL Visvedevae,

Help, Yaruna and Mitra, 0 ye Twain allied with Yasus, Budras,
and Adityas, help our car,

That, as the wild birds of the forest from their home, our horses
may fiy forth, glad, eager for renown.

4 Vrikadvarus : supposed by Ludwig to be the King of the Sandikas, the
hymn being a prayer for victory in an approaching battle with him. The
A sura would then mean King.

7 Comes loith hine : referring to Indra who rewards his worshippers with

gifts of cattle.

1 Help our car : in the chariot-race. According to Prof. Windisch, f car ’ is a
figurative expression for ‘hymn of praise. 1 See that scholar’s exhaustive dis-
cussion of this hymn in Festgruss an Rudolf von Roth, 1893, pp. 139 — *144*

298 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IL

2 Yea, now ye Gods of one accord speed on our car what time

among the folk it seeks an act of might ;

When, hasting through the region with the stamp of hoofs,
our swift steeds trample on the ridges of the earth.

3 Or may our Indra here, the Friend of all mankind, coming from

heaven, most wise, girt by the Marut host,

Accompany, with aid untroubled by a foe, our car to mighty
gain, to win the meed of strength.

4r Or may this Tvashtar, God who rules the world with power,
one-minded with the Goddesses speed forth our car ;

Ila and Bhaga the celestial, Earth and Heaven, Pushan, Puran-
dhi, and the Asvins, ruling Lords.

5 Or, seen alternate, those two blessed Goddesses, Morning and

Night who stir all living things to act :

While with my newest song I praise you both, 0 Earth, that
from what moves not ye may spread forth threefold food. •

6 Your blessing as a boon for suppliants we desire : the Dragon of

the Deep, arid Aja-Ekapad,

Trita, Ribhukshan, Savitar shall joy in us, and the Floods’
swift Child in our worship and our prayer.

7 These earnest prayers I pray to you, ye Holy : to pay you
** honour, living men have formed them,

Men fain to win the prize and glory. May they win, as a car-
horse might the goal, your notice.

HYMN XXXII. Various Deities.

Graciously further, 0 ye Heaven and Earth, this speech striv-
ing to win reward, of me your worshipper.

First rank I give to you, Immortal, high extolled [ I, fain to
win me wealth, to you the mighty Pair.

2 Let not man’s guile annoy us, secret or by day : give not us
up a prey to these calamities.

Sever not thou our friendship : think thereon for us. This,
with a heart that longs for bliss, we seek from thee.

4 Purandhi : meaning the bold, or the intelligent, may be either an epi-
thet of Pdshan or the name of a separate deity.

5 I praise you both, 0 Earth ; i e . 0 Heaven and Earth ; the pair being
always regarded as closely connected, the mention of one is sufficient.

From lohcit moves not : from plants as distinguished from animals.

6 The Drcvjon of the Deep: Ahibudhnya, who dwells in the depth of air. See
I. 186. 6. Aja- Bka'p&d : c the unborn one-footed,’ the Sun. See VI. 50. 14,
note. Trita : a Vedie God, appearing in connexion with Indra. The Floods'
swift Child : Agni. For the other names see Index.

2 These calamities : some pressing troubles or imminent dangers not further
specified. From thee ; probably Indra. .

HYMN 33.] THE RIG VET) A. 299

3 Bring hither with benignant mind the willing Cow teeming

with plenteous milk, full, inexhaustible.

0 thou invoked by many, day by day I urge thee with my
word, a charger rapid in his tread.

4 With eulogy I call on Raka swift to hear : may she ^auspicious,

hear us, and herself observe.

With never-breaking needle may she sew her work, and give
a hero son most wealthy, meet for praise.

5 All thy kind thoughts, 0 Rak&, lovely in their form, wherewith

thou grantest wealth to him who offers gifts — *

With these come thou to us this day benevolent, 0 Blessed
One, bestowing food of thousand sorts.

6 0 broad-tressed Sinivali, thou who art the Sister of the Gods,
Accept the offered sacrifice, and, Goddess, grant us progeny.

7 With lovely fingers, lovely arms, prolific Mother of many sons —
Present the sacred gifts to her, to Sinivali Queen of men.

8 Her, Sinivali, her, Gungu, her, Raka, her, Saras vati, IndiAni

to mine aid I call, and Varunani for my weal.

HYMN XXXIII. Rudra.

Father of Maruts, let thy bliss approach us : exclude us not
from looking on the sunlight.

Gracious to our fleet courser be the Hero : may we ti'ansplant
us, Rudra, in our children.

2 With the most saving medicines which thou givest, Rudra, may

I attain a hundred winters.

Far from us banish enmity and hatred, and to all quarters
maladies and trouble.

3 Chief of all bom art thou in glory, Rudra, ' armed with the

thunder, mightiest of the mighty.

Transport us over trouble to well-being: repel thou from tis all
assaults of mischief.

4 Let us not anger thee with worsihxp, Rudra, ill praise, Strong

God 1 or mingled invocation.

4 Rdkd : the Goddess presiding over the actual day of full moon, and appa-
rently associated with child-birth.

6 SinivdU : a similar lunar Goddess, who aids the birth of children.

8 GungH; identified by S&yana with Kuhu, another lunar Goddess, or the
day of conjunction when the moon rises invisible. Indrdni and Varundni are
the consorts respectively of Indra and Varuna.

1 The Hero ; Rudra. According to Ludwig: Let our brave son be mighty
with the charger.

4 With worship : with imperfect worship. Mingled invocation : in which
other Gods also, who have no claim to the particular oblation, are addressed. '

m THE HYMNS OF [tiOOK If.

Do thou with strengthening halms incite our heroes : I hear
thee famed as best of all physicians.

5 May I with praise-songs win that Rudra’s favour who is adored

with gifts and invocations.

Ne’er may the tawny God, fair-cheeked, and gracious, swift-
hearing, 'yield us to this evil purpose*

6 The Strong, begirt by Maruts, hath refreshed tne, with tnost

invigorating food, imploring.

As he who finds a shade in fervent sunlight may I, uninjured,
win the bliss of Rudra.

7 Where is that gracious hand of thine, 0 Rndra, the hand that

giveth health and bringcth comfort,

Remover of the woe that Gods have sent us ? 0 Strong One,

look thou on me with compassion.

8 To him. the strong, great, tawny, fair-complexioned, I utter

forth a mighty hymn of praises*

We serve the brilliant God with adorations, we glorify the
splendid name of Rudra

9 With firm limbs, Uiultiform, the strong, the tawny adonis him-

self with bright gold decorations :

The strength of Godhead ne’er departs from Rudra, him who
is Sovran of this world, the mighty.

10 Worthy, thou earnest thy bow and arrows, worthy, thy many-

hued and honoured necklace.

Worthy, thou cufctest here each fiend to pieces i a mightier
than thou there is not, Rudra.

11 Praise him the chariot-borne, the young, the famous, fierce,

slaying like a dread beast of the forest.

0 Rudra, praised, be gracious to the singer : let thy hosts
spare us and smite down another.

12 1 bend to thee as thou approaches r, Rudra, even as a boy be-

fore the sire who greets him.

1 praise thee Bounteous Giver, Lord of heroes : give medicines

to us as thou art lauded,

13 Of your pure medicines, 0 potent Maruts, those that are

wholesomest and health -bestowing,

Those which our father Manu hath selected, I crave from
Rudra for our gain and welfare.

5 Yield us to this evil purpose : give us up to the maliee of our enemy.

6 The Strong : or the Bull, Rudra, accompanied by his sons the Maruts.

8 Fail •- go m p lexio n ed : the white completion of Siva, the later representative
of Rudra, has, therefore, as Wilson observes, its origin in the Rigveda.

18 Those which our father Manu. hath £ elected ; Wilson observes that * this
All (ides to the vegetable seeds which Manu, according to the Mahdbhdrata %

THE R1QYEBA.

301

mYmk U.]

14 May Rudra’s missile turn aside and spare us, the great wrath

of the impetuous One avoid us.

Turn, Bounteous God, thy strong bow from our princes, and
be thou gracious to our seed and offspring.

15 0 tawny Bull, thus showing forth thy nature, as neither to

be wroth, 0 God, nor slay us,

Here, Rudra, listen to our invocation. Loud may we speak,
with heroes, in assembly.

HYMN XXXIV, Maruts,

The Maruts of resistless might who love the rain, resplendent,
terrible like wild beasts in their strength,

Glowing like flames of fire, impetuous in career, blowing the
wandering rain-cloud, have disclosed the kine. *

2 They gleam with armlets as the heavens are decked with stars,

like cloud-born lightnings shine the torrents of their rain,
Since the strong Rudra, 0 Maruts with brilliant chests, sprang
into life for you in Prism's radiant lap.

3 They drip like horses in the racings of swift steeds ; with the

stream’s rapid oars they hasten on their way.

Maruts with helms of gold, ye who make all things shake,
come with your spotted deer, one-minded, to our food.

4 They have bestowed on Mitra all that live, to feed, they who

for evermore cause their swift drops to flow :

Whose steeds are spotted deer, whose riches never fail, like
horses in full speed, bound to the pole in works.

5 With brightly-flaming kine whose udders swell with milk,

with glittering lances on your unobstructed paths,

was directed to take with him into the vessel la which he was preserved at
the time of the deluge.’

14 Our princes : our wealthy patrons, the institutors of our sacrifices,

1 Have disclosed the hine: ( give vent to its (collected) rain.’— Wilson.

.2 Prhni's radiant lap : P riant the mother of the Maruts, probably ‘the
speckled cloud,’ is, according to S&yaua, the Earth who in the form of a
brindled cow was impregnated by Rudra,

3 With the stream's rapid ears : * The waves raised by the storm may be
regarded as the ears with which the stream listens to the roaring of the
tempest.’ — Ludwig. Wilson, after Sflyana, paraphrases ; < and they rush along
with swift (horses) on the skirts of the sounding (cloud).’

4 The meaning of the first line is not clear. Wilson renders it : 1 * 3 4 5 The
prompt-giving Maruts ever confer upon , the (offerer of sacrificial) food, as
upon a friend, all these (world- supporting) waters/

Hound to the pole in work's : carrying on their appointed duties as horses
draw the chariot to whose pole they are harnessed. *

5 With brightly-flaming hine : clouds that emit flashes of lightning before
they pour down their stores of fertilizing rain.

302 THE HYMNS Of [ BOOK 1L

0 Maruts, of one mind, like swans who seek their nests, come
to the rapturous enjoyment of the meath.

6 To these our prayers, 0 Maruts, come unanimous, come ye to
our libations like the praise of men, *

Make it swell like a mare, in udder like a cow, and for the
singer grace the song with plenteous strength.

,7 Give us a steed, 0 Maruts, mighty in the car ; prevailing prayer
that brings remembrance day by day ;

Food to your praisers, to your bard in deeds of might give
winning wisdom, power uninjured, unsurpassed.

8 When the bright-chested Maruts, lavish of their gifts, bind at

the time of bliss their horses to the cars,

Then, as the milch-cow feeds her calf within the stalls, they
pour forth food for all oblation-bringing men.

9 Save us, 0 Maruts, Yasus, from the injurer, the mortal foe

who makes us looked upon as wolves.

With chariot all aflame compass him round about : 0 Rudras,
cast away the foeman's deadly bolt.

10 Well-known, ye Maruts, is that tvondrous course of yours, when

they milked Prism's udder, close akin to her.

Or when to shame the bard who lauded, Rudra’s Sons, ye the
infallible brought Trita to decay.

11 We call you, such, great Maruts, following wonted ways, to

the oblation paid to Yislinu Speeder-on.

With ladles lifted up, with prayer, we seek of them preeminent,
golden-hued, the wealth which all extol.

6 Like the praise of men : which attends pious worshippers,

Make it swell ,* make our sacred song effectual, metaphorically full of milk.
Prof. M. Muller would read asvftni instead of dsvdm : 1 Fulfil (our prayer) like
the udder of a barren cow.’

7 Brings remembrance : makes the Gods remember ns.

10 Prisni here is the firmament, and her udder is the cloud from which
the Maruts drew the rain. There is a very abrupt change from the second
person to the third, from * ye ’ to ‘ they.’

I can make nothing of the second hemistich. Wilson paraphrses it : ‘ Yon
(destroyed) the reviler of your worshipper, and (came), irresistible sons of
Itudra, to Trita for the destruction of his enemies.’ Trita is said by S&yatm to
be a Iiishi. Ludwig in his note on the passage takes Trita to be a name of
the $oma.

11 Vishnu Speeder-on: who runs his rapid course round heaven. S&yana
explains Vishnu to mean 1 the diffusivs and desirable Soma.’ Perhaps, as
Ludwig thinks, sacrifice in general is intended, of which Vishnu is the repre-
sentative.

HYMN 35,]

THE RIG VESA.

303

12 They, the Dasagvas, first of all brought sacrifice : they at the

break of mornings shall inspirit us.

Dawn with her purple beams uncovereth the nights, with
great light glowing like a billowy sea of milk.

13 The Rudras have rejoiced them in the gathered bands at seats

of worship as in purple ornaments.

They with impetuous vigour sending down the rain have taken
to themselves a bright and lovely hue.

14 Soliciting their high protection for our help, with this our adora-

tion we sing praise to them,

Whom, for assistance, like the five terrestrial priests, Trita
hath brought to aid us hither on his car.

15 So may your favouring help be turned to us-ward, your kind-

ness like a lowing cow approach us,

Wherewith ye bear your servant over trouble, and free your
worshipper from scoff and scorning.

HYMN XXX Y. Son of Waters.

Eager for spoil my flow of speech I utter : may the Floods’
Child accept my songs with favour.

Will not the rapid Son of Waters make them lovely, for he it
is who shall enjoy them?

2 To him let us address the song well-fashioned, forth from the

heart. Shall he not understand it ?

The friendly Son of Waters by the greatness of Godhead
hath produced all things existing.

3 Some floods unite themselves and others join them : the

sounding rivers fill one common storehouse.

On every side the bright Floods have encompassed the bright
resplendent Offspring of the Waters.

4 The never-sullen waters, youthful Maidens, carefully decking,

wait on him the youthful.

He with bright rays shines forth in splendid beauty, unfed
with wood, in w r aters, oil-enveloped.

12 The Eas'tgvas : the Maruts are here said to have been the first performers
of sacrifice, the true Dasagvas. The priests so called belonged originally to the
race or school of Angiras.

14 The second hemistich iB very obscure. S&y ana’s explanation (see Wilson)
is altogether unsatisfactory.

: 1 The Floods* Child : or Son of the Waters, Ap&mnap&t, a name of Agni as
born in the form of lightning from the waters of the aerial ocean or firmament.
Make them lovely : grace them with acceptance.

m TEE HYMNS OF [EOOE IT.

5 To him three Dames are offering food to fecvl him, Goddesses

to the God whom none may injure.

Within the waters hath he pressed, as hollows, and drinks
their milk who now are first made mothers.

6 Here was the horse’s birth ; his was the sunlight. Save thou

our princes from the oppressor’s onslaught.

Him, indestructible, dwelling at a distance in forts un wrought
lies and ill spirits reach not.

7 He, in whose mansion is the teeming Milch-cow, swells the

Gods 5 6 * * 9 10 11 12 nectar and eats noble viands.

The Son of Waters, gathering strength in waters, shines for his
worshipper to give him treasures.

8 He who in waters with his own pure Godhead shines widely,

law-abiding, everlasting —

The other worlds are verily his branches, and plants are born
of him with all their offspring.

9 The Waters 5 Son hath risen, and clothed in lightning ascended

up unto the curled cloud 5 s bosom ;

And bearing with them his supremest glory the Youthful Ones,
gold-coloured, move around him.

10 Golden in form is he, like gold to look on, his colour is like

gold, the Son of Waters.

When he is seated fresh from golden birth-place those who
present their gold give food to feed him.

11 This the fair name and this the lovely aspect of him the Waters 5

Son increase in secret.

Whom here the youthful Maids together kindle, his food is
sacred oil of golden colour.

12 Him, nearest Friend of many, will we worship with sacrifice

and reverence and oblation.

5 Three Dames : lift, Sarasvati, and Bh&rati, the personifications of sacred
prayer and worship. Within the waters : Agni dwelt within the waters as their
•unborn babe.

6 Here was the horse's birth: the produr xf - 1 r : V!. 1 '■ - ■ ■ v' .■

the Bun ; but the meaning is doubtful. T ■■■•i * ' ■

refer to tbe creation of the natural ho" ■ .« .. ■ . *• ' ■

heavenly horse. His was the sunlight: \ - \ ' . , ■ . .

wrought: in the pasties of the clouds as opposed to the stone strongholds of men.

9 The Youthful Ones ; the rivers or waters of the aerial ocean.

10 Golden inform : when wearing the shape of lightning. Those who present
their gold : the institutors of sacriiice who reward the priests.

11 In secret: Aplmnap&t, the celestial Agni, increases and grows strong with-
out men seeing the process. The terrestrial Agni is kindled and tended by the
sister fingers and fed with oil or clarified butter.

12 Nearest Friend of many : lowest down, and so nearest to men, of all the
Gods. Make his back to shine: with butter offered in sacrifice.

THE RIGVEDA.

HYMN 36.]

I make his back to shine, with chips provide him ; I offer food-
and with my songs exalt him.

13 The Bull hath laid his own life-germ within them. He sucks

them as an infant, and they kiss him. .

He, Son of Waters, of unfading colour, hath entered here as in
another’s body.

14 While here he dwelleth in sublimest station, resplendent with

the rays that never perish,

The Waters, bearing oil to feed their offspring, flow, Youthful
Ones, in wanderings about him.

15 Agni, I gave good shelter to the people, and to the princes

goodly preparation.

Blessed is all that Gods regard with favour. Loud may we
speak, with heroes, in assembly.

HYMN XXXVI. Various Gods.

Water and milk hath he endued, sent forth to thee : the men
have drained him with the filters and the stones.

Drink, Indra, from the Hotar’s bowl — first right is thine—
Soma hallowed and poured with Vashat and SvaM.

2 Busied with sacrifice, with spotted deer and spears, gleaming

upon your way with ornaments, yea, our Friends,

Sitting on sacred grass, ye Sons of Bharata, drink Soma from
the Po tar’s bowl, 0 Men of heaven.

3 Come unto us, ye swift to listen : as at home upon the sacred

grass sit and enjoy yourselves.

And, Tvashtar, well-content be joyful in the juice with Gods
and Goddesses in gladsome company.

13 Within them : within the waters. The Bull : apparently Agni himself.

As in another's body : that is, fire originally celestial as Ap&mnap&t, has come
to men as terrestrial and sacrificial fire, contained in the wooden drill from
which it is produced by friction.

1 6 As the result of my hymns to Agni our people have dwelt safely, and
our wealthy men have been enabled to offer well-conducted sacrifices.

1 The Soma juice has been pressed out with the stones, strained through
the filters, and then mixed with water and milk before it is offered to Indra.
The Bo tar's bowl ; the sacred vessel held by the Hotar or Hotri, one of the
chief officiating priests.

Vashat and Sodhd, meaning respectively f may he (Agni) bear it (to the
Gods)’ and Ave ! or Hail ! are words of consecration and blessing used when
oblations are offered.

2 Sons of Bharata : the Maruts, sons of Rudra the Warrior. Potar :
etymologically, Cleanser, the title of another of the priests.

20

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK II.

4 Bring the Gods hither, Sage, and offer sacrifice ; at the three

altars seat thee willingly, 0 Priest.

Accept for thy delight the proffered Soma meath : drink' from
the Kindler’s bowl and fill thee with thy share.

5 This is the strengthener of thy body's manly might : strength,

victory for all time are placed within thine arms.

, Pressed for thee, Maghavan, it is offered unto thee : drink from
the chalice of this Brahman, drink thy fill.

6 Accept the sacrifice ; mark, both of you, my call r the Priest

hath seated him after the ancient texts.

My prayer that bids them come goes forth to both the Kings :
drink ye the Soma meath from the Director’s bowl.

HYMN XXXVII. Various Gods.

Enjoy thy fill of meath out of the Hotar’s cup : Adhyaryus,
he desires a full draught poured for him.

Bring it him r seeking this he gives. Granter of Wealth,
drink Soma with the Ritus from the Hotar’s cup,

2 He whom of old I called on, him I call on now. He is to be

invoked ; his name is He who Gives.

Here brought by priests is Soma meath. Granter of Wealth,
drink Soma with the Ritus from the Potar’s cup.

3 Fat may the horses be wherewith thou speedest on : Lord of

the Wood, unharming, strengthen thou thyself.

Drawing and seizing, Bold One, thou who grantest wealth, drink
Soma with the Ritus from the Nesh tar’s cup.

4 From Hotar’s cup and Potar’s he hath drunk and joyed : the

proffered food hath pleased him from the Nesh tar’s bowl.

The fourth cup undisturbed, immortal, let him drink who giveth
. wealth, the cup of the wealth-giving God.

5 Yoke, O ye Twain, to-day your hero-bearing car, swift-moving

hitherward : your loosing-place is here.

Mix the oblations, then come hither with the meath, and drink
the Soma, ye rich in abundant strength.

4 Sage : Agui. The Kindler : the Agntdh, the priest who lights the fire.
The three altars ; of the G&rhapatya, Ahavaniya, and Dakshina fires.

6 Both the Kings : Mitra and Varuna. The Director : Pras&star, another
priest, first assistant of the Hotar.

1 Agni is addressed as Dravinod&s or Wealth-giver. Adhvavyus : minister-
ing priests. Tfa Bitpf ; the Seasons or the deities presiding over the Seasons.
See I. 15.

3 Lord of the Wood : Agni, regarded as the King of plants. The Nesh tar's
cup ; the Nesh tar is the priest who leads forward the wife of the sacrificer.
r 5 0 ye Twain ; Asvins,

BYMN 38.] - THE MOVED A. 307

6 Agni, accept the fuel an(J our offered gift : accept the prayer of
man, accept our eulogy.

Do thou with all, with Ritu, 0 thou Excellent, fain, make the
great Gods all fain taste the gift we bring.

HYMN XXXVIII. # Savitar.

Uprisen is Savitar, this God, to quicken, Priest who neglects
not this most constant duty.

To the Gods, verily, he gives rich treasure, and blesses him
who calls them to the banquet.

2 Having gone up on high, the God broad-handed spreads his

arms widely forth that all may mark him.

Even the waters bend them to his service : even this wind rests
in the circling region.

3 Though borne by swift steeds he will yet unyoke them : e’en

the fleet chariot hath he stayed from going.

He hath checked e’en their haste who glide like serpents.
Night closely followed Savitar’s dominion.

4 What was spread out she weaves afresh, re-weaving : the skilful

leaves his labour half-completed.

He hath arisen from rest, and parted seasons : Savitar hath
approached, God, holy-minded.

5 Through various dwellings, through entire existence, spreads,

manifest, the household light of Agni.

The Mother gives her Son the goodliest portion, and Savitar
hath sped to meet his summons.

6 With all , with ) Ritu : the meaning is, apparently*, with all the Ritus ; but
Ritu in the text is in the singular number.

1 To quicken: the meaning of Savitar, as a name of the Sun, being the great
generator or vivifier. Priest: vdhnih; or, perhaps, the supporter, or, the luminous.

3 Their haste who glide like serpents : the speed of the fleet-footed horses
who draw the chariot of the Sun.

4 The meaning of this stanza is obscure. I have given what appears to be
the sense of the words as they stand, but the verse, as a whole, is scarcely in-
telligible. Wilson, following S&yana, paraphrases it thus : "She (Night), en-
wraps the extended (world) like (a woman) weaving (a garment) : the prudent
man lays aside the work he is able (to execute) in the midst (of his labour) : .
but all spring up (from repose) when the divine, unwearied Sun, who has divid-
ed the seasons, again appears/ Roth takes ardniatih, which X have rendered
by holy-minded, as a substantive, the Genius of Devotion, and translates :
"Again had the Weaver (Aramati) drawn in what she had spun out (the web
or tissue of devotion and sacrifice), the devout man had left off in the midst of.
his task (at the approach of night) ; then Aramati arises anew and arranges the
seasons : the divine Savitar is present (i, e. morning returns)/

"h The Mother: XJshas or Dawn assigns to her Son Agni the Agnihotra rite
which is performed at : day-break, and Savitar, or the rising Sun, is present at,
the ceremony after the lighting of the sacrificial fire. Thus Agni is honoured
by deifies in heaven as well as by men on earth,

^308 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IT.

6 He comes again, unfolded, fain for conquest : at home was he,

the love of all things moving.

Each man hath come leaving his evil doings, after the Godlike
Savitay’s commandment.

7 The wild beasts spread through desert places seeking their

watery share which thou hast set in waters.

The woods are given to the birds. These statutes of the God
Savitar none disobeyeth.

8 With utmost speed, in restless haste at sunset Varuna seeks

his watery habitation.

Then seeks each bird his nest, each beast his lodging. In due
place Savitar hath set each creature.

9 Him whose high law not Varuna nor Indra, not Mitra, Arya-

man, nor Rudra breaketh,

Nor evil-hearted fiends, here for my welfare him I invoke,
God Savitar, with worship.

10 May they who strengthen bliss, and thought and wisdom, and

the Dames’ Lord and Narasansa aid us.

That good may come to us and wealth be gathered, may we
be Savitar the God’s beloved.

11 So come to us our hearts’ desire, the bounty bestowed by thee,

from heaven and earth and waters,

That it be well with friends and those who praise thee, and,
Savitar, with the loud-lauding singer.

HYMN XXXIX. Asvins,

Sing like the two press-stones for this same purpose ; come
like two misers to the tree of treasure ;

Like two laud-singing Brahmans in the assembly, like the
■ . folk’s envoys called in many places.

J 6 He comes again : Agni, re-kindled in the morning, resumes his full power.
He, whom all living beings love, was present, but latent, during the night,

‘ 7 Savitar provides for the wild beasts of the desert and for the birds of the air.

8 Though not generally regarded in the Veda as the God of the ocean,
Varuna is yet frequently connected with the waters, either of the firmament
or of earth.

10 They who strengthen bliss : the Gods in general. The Dames' Lord: the
guardian of the consorts of the Gods, Tvashtar, who is generally represented
as attending or attended by them.

* Nardsansa ; ‘ the Praise of Men/ a name of Agni.

1 In this hymn the Asvins are compared to a number of objects, animate
and inanimate, in many of which the only point of resemblance is duality.
y$ing like the two press-stones : may your auspicious brightness as you approach
r pft clear as the ringing sound of the press-stones, and may similar blessings
reward the worshippers. '

HYMN 40.] THE R1QVEDA. 309

2 Moving at morning like two car-borne heroes, like to a pair of

goats ye come electing ; %

Like two fair dames embellishing their bodies, like a wise mar-
ried pair among the people.

3 Like to a pair of horns come first to us-ward, like to a pair of

hoofs with rapid motion ;

Come like two Chakwas in the grey of morning, come like two
chariot wheels at dawn, ye Mighty.

4 Bear ns across the rivers like two vessels, save us as ye were

yokes, naves, spokes, and fellies.

Be like two dogs that injure not our bodies ; preserve us, like
two crutches, that we fall not.

5 Like two winds ageing not, two confluent rivers, come with

quick vision like two eyes before us.

Come like two hands most helpful to the body, and guide us
like two feet to what is precious.

6 Even as two lips that with the mouth speak honey, even as

two breasts that nourish our existence,

Like the two nostrils that protect our being, be to us as our
ears that hear distinctly.

7 Like two hands give ye us increasing vigour ; like heaven and

earth constrain the airy regions.

Asvins, these hymns that struggle to approach you, sharpen ye
like an axe upon a whetstone.

8 These prayers of ours exalting you, 0 Asvins, have the Gritsa-

madas, for a laud, made ready.

Welcome them, 0 ye Heroes, and oome ’hither. Loud may we
speak, with brave^men, in assembly.

HYMN XL. Soma and Ptishan.

Soma and Pushan, Parents of all riches, Parents of earth and
Parents of high heaven,

Like two misers to the tree of treasure : as misers come to dig up the gold
they have buried at the foot of a tree, so come ye to the libation made of the
juice of the precious Soma plant. The folk's envoys: the messengers whom the ina-
titutors of sacrifices send to the priests when they wish to. secure their services.

2 Ye come electing ; to choose and accept the offerings made.

3 Ghahwds : the Chakravftka, or as it is now called in Hindi, the ChakwA,

is a bird frequently mentioned in later poetry as a type of love and constancy.
The male bird and his mate are condemned to spend their nights on opposite
banks of a river, and are allowed to meet again in the early morning. The
English name of the bird is Brahmany duck. Chakw& is properly the male
bird, and Chakwi the female.

1 Soma •' addressed in this hymn is the God who represents and animates
the juice of the Soma plant. See I. 18. 4.

PUshan ; a solar deity who protects and multiplies cattle and other property,
See I, 42.

3i'o mn urum op [book tt

You Twain, brought forth as the whole worlds protectors, the
Gods have made Centre of life eternal.

2 At, birth of these two Gods all Gods are joyful : they have

caused darkness, which we hate, to vanish.

With these, with Soma and with Pushan, Indra generates ripe
warm milk in the raw milch-cows.

3 Soma and Pushan, urge your chariot hither, the seven-wheeled

car that measures out the region,

That stirs not all, that moves to every quarter, five-reined and
harnessed by the thought, ye Mighty.

4 One in the heaven on high hath made his dwelling, on earth

and in the firmament the other.

May they disclose to us great store of treasure, much-longed-
for, rich in food, source of enjoyment.

5 One of you Twain is Parent of all creatures, the other journeys

onward all-beholding.

Soma and Pushan, aid my thought with favour : with you may
we overcome in all encounters.

6 May Pushan stir our thought, the all-impelling, may Soma

Lord of riches grant us riches.

May Aditi the perfect Goddess aid us. Loud may we speak,
with heroes, in assembly.

HYMN XLT. Various Deities.

0 VAyu, come to us with all the thousand chariots that are
thine,

w •’ Team-borne, to drink the Soma juice.

2 Drawn by thy team, 0 Vayu, come ; to thee is offered this,

• the pure:

. Thou visitest the presser’s house.

3 Indra and Vayu, drawn by teams, ye Heroes, come to-day and
\ drink

Of the bright juice when blent with milk.

2 Pipe warm milk: see I. 62. 9.

3 That stirs not all: that moves and influences the highest beings only.

4 One in the heaven on high : Pushan, as a celestial God. The other : Soma,
f who dwells on earth in plants, and in the firmament as the Moon.

- 5 One of you : Soma. With allusion, perhaps, to the libations of Soma juice
which produce the rain upon which the production and growth of all creatures
depend. Alkbeholding ; as a solar deity, or the Sun.

1 V&yu, the God of wind, is addressed in the first, two stanzas. In those
' that foilow the poet, invokes Indra and Vfiyu, Mitra and Varuna, the Asvins,
Indra 1 , the Vifjvedevas, Sarasvati, and Heaven and Earth* * <

fi

MYMtf 41.] Tm UtG VEDA.

m

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15
«/l6

This Soma hath been shed for you, Law-strengtheners, Mitra-
Yaruna !

Listen ye here to this my call.

Both Kings >v:ho never injure aught seat them‘in their suprem-
^esFHome,

The thousand-pillared, firmly-based.

Fed with oblation, Sovran Kings, Adityas, Lords of liberal gifts,
They wait on him whose life is true.

With kine, Nksatyas, and with steeds, come, Asvins, Rudras,
to the house

That will protect its heroes well ;

Such, wealthy Gods ! as none afar nor standing nigh to us
may harm,

Yea, no malicious mortal foe.

As such, O longed-for Asvins, lead us on to wealth of varied
sort,

Wealth that shall bring us room and rest.

Verily Indra, conquering all, driveth e’en mighty fear away,
For firm is he and swift to act.

Indra be gracious unto us : sin shall not reach us afterward,
And good shall be before us still.

From all the regions of the world let Indra send security,
The foe-subduer, swift to act.

0 all ye Gods, come hitherward : hear this mine invocation,
seat

Yourselves upon this sacred grass, -

Among the Sunahotras strong for you is this sweet gladdening
drau'ght :

Drink ye of this delightsome juice.

Ye Maruts led by Indra, Gods with P&shan for your bounte-
ousest,

Hear all of you this call of mine.

Best Mother, best of Rivers, best of Goddesses, Sarasvati,

We are, as ’twere, of no repute : dear Mother, give thou us
renown.

14 Among the Sunahotras : the family of which Dritsamada, the Kishi of the
hymn, was a member. Cf. II. 18. 6, note.

15 With PH&han for your bounteomest : that is, among whom Pushan is the

most liberal giver of good gifts ; or the meaning may be, whose benefactor Is
Phshan. ,

16 Sarasvati; see I. 3. 10.

312 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IL

17 In thee, Sarasvati, divine, all generations have their stay.

Be glad with Sunahotra J s sons : 0 Goddess grant us progeny,

18 Enriched with sacrifice, accept Saras vati, these prayers of ours,
Thoughts which Gritsamadas beloved of Gods bring, Holy One,

to thee.

19 Ye who bless sacrifice, go forth, for verily we choose you both,
And Agni who conveys our gifts.

20 This our effectual sacrifice, reaching the sky, shall Heaven and

Earth

Present unto the Gods to-day.

21 In both your laps, ye guileless Ones, the Holy Gods shall sit

them down

To-day to drink the Soma here.

HYMN XLII. Kapinjala.

Telling his race aloud with cries repeated, he sends his voice
out as his boat a steersman.

0 Bird, be ominous of happy fortune ; from no side may
calamity befall thee.

2 Let not the falcon kill thee, nor the eagle : let not the arrow-

bearing archer reach thee.

Still crying in the region of the Fathers, speak here auspicious,
bearing joyful tidings.

3 Bringing good tidings, Bird of happy omen, call thou out loudly

southward of our dwellings,

So that no thief, no sinner may oppress us. Loud may we
speak, with heroes, in assembly.

HYMN XLIII. Kapinjala.

Here on the right sing forth chanters of hymns of praise, even
the winged birds that in due season speak.

19 Ye who bless sacrifice: according to S fly an a, the two havirdMnas or
vehicles on which the Soma and other offerings are put, and which are sup-
posed to represent Heaven and Earth, are addressed. It is more likely, as
Ludwig suggests, that Agni and the human priest are intended. ( We choose
you both, thee, the human priest, and Agni the God.’

This Hymn is said to he addressed to Indra in the form of a kapinjala,
the bird which we call the Francoline partridge.

1 He : the kapinjala.

2 In the region of the Fathers : towards the quarter where the Fathers
Pitaras, or spirits of deceased ancestors dwell, that is, the south, the cry of
birds from that quarter being regarded as auspicious.

This Hymn is said to be addressed, like the preceding, to Indra in the form
of a kapinjala or Francoline partridge.

HYMN 43,] ’ THE RIGVEDA. M.%

He, like a Sama-chanter utters both the notes, skilled in the
mode of Trishtup and of Gayatri.

2 Thou like the chanter-priest chantest the Sima, Bird ; thou

singest at libations like a Brahman’s son. *

Even as a vigorous horse when he comes near the mare, an-

. nounce to us good fortune, Bird, on every side, proclaim in
all directions happy luck, 0 Bird.

3 When singing here, 0 Bird, announce good luck to us, and

when thou sittest still think on us with kind thoughts.

When flying oif thou singest thou art like a lute.

^ With brave sons in assembly may we speak aloud.

1 Sdma-chanter : the Udg&tar, one of the four chief priests whose duty is
to chant the hymns of the Siimaveda. Both the notes * a high and a middle.
Trishtup : the measure consisting of forty -four syllables in a verse or stanza ;
four P&das or demi-hemistichs of eleven syllables each. Gdyatrt : the measure
consisting of twenty-four syllables in a stanza, three lines of eight syllables
each, or one line of sixteen and one of eight.

2 A Brahman's son : the Brahmaputra, or Brahman-priest’s son, is said to be?
the same as the Br&hmati&chchhansi, one of the sixteen priests, who recites
the mantra that iB not to be sung or chanted.

BOOK THE THIRD.

HYMN I. Agni.

Thou, Agni, who wilt have the strong, hast made me the Soma’s
priest, to worship in assembly.

Thou shinest to the Gods, I set the press-stones. I toil ; he
joyful in thyself, 0 Agni.

2 East have we turned the rite ; may the hymn aid it. With

wood and worship shall they honour Agni.

From heaven the synods of the wise have learnt it : e’en for
the quick and strong they seek advancement.

3 The Prudent, he whose will is pure, brought welfare, allied by

birth to Heaven and Earth in kinship.

The Gods discovered in the midst of waters beautiful Agni
with the Sisters’ labour.

4r Him, Blessed One, the Seven strong Floods augmented, him
white at birth and red when waxen mighty.

As mother mares run to their new-born youngling, so at his
birth the Gods wondered at Agni-

The Hymns of Book III. are ascribed to the Rishi Visv&mitra or to mem-
bers of his family. Visv&mitra holds an important place in Indian tradition,
according to which he was born a Kshatriya, but by the virtue of his intense
austerities raised himself to the Brahman caste. The rivalry between Visyamitra
and the Rishi Vasishtlia is alluded to in many passages of the Rigveda, and,
it is thought that as caste distinctions had not at that time become fixed, the
later stories on the subject of this rivalry may have rested on a Vedic legend
which says that King Sudas, having employed Vasishtha as his domestic priest,
allowed on various occasions Visv&mitra also to officiate, which led to jealousies
and quarrel between these two functionaries. The story of Visv&imtra is told
• at full length in the Mmdyana, I. 51—55, (Schlegel’s edition, and Griffith s
translation).

The first and eleven following hymns are ascribed to Visvamitra himself,

1 Bast have we turned the rite ■ towards the region of the Gods ; ‘we have
performed a successful sacrifice.’ — Wilson.

2 The quick and strong : Agni, according to S&yana. Ludwig suggests that
« the quick, or clever’ may mean the priest, and £ the strong ’ the warrior, tne
Maghavan or institutor of the sacrifice.

3 The Prudent : all-knowing Agni, son of Heaven and Earth.

With, the Sisters' labour: the meaning is not dear, Ludwig- suggests upan
instead of apdsi ; f in the sisters’ bosom,’ in the depth of the sister rivers.. _ •

318 THE HYMNS OF [BOOH III

5 Spreading with radiant limbs throughout the region, purging

his power with wise purifications,

Robing himself in light, the life of waters, he spreads abroad
his dgh and perfect glories.

6 He sought heaven’s Mighty Ones, the Unconsuming, the un-

impaired, not clothed and yet not naked.

Then they, ancient and young, who dwell together, Seven sound-
ing Rivers, as one germ received him.

7 His piles, assuming every foi«m, are scattered where flow sweet

waters, at the spring of fatness ;

There stood the milch-kine with full-laden udders, and both
paired Mighty Mothers of the Wondrous.

8 Carefully cherished, Son of Strength, thou shonest assuming

lasting and refulgent beauties.

Full streams of fatness and sweet juice descended, there where
the Mighty One grew strong by wisdom.

9 From birth he knew even his Father’s bosom, he set his voices

and his streams in motion ;

Knew him who moved with blessed Friends in secret, with the
young Dames of heaven. He stayed not hidden.

10 He nursed the Infant of the Sire and Maker : alone the Babe

sucked many a teeming bosom.

Guard, for the Bright and Strong, the fellow-spouses friendly
to men aud bound to him in kinship.

1 1 The Mighty One increased in space unbounded ; full many a

glorious flood gave strength to Agni. .

Friend of the house, within the lap of Order lay Agni, in the
Sister Rivers’ service.

6 Heaven* s mighty Ones ; the waters above the firmament, the seven rivers
of the next hemistich. Not clothed and yet not naked ; having only the lucid
waters for robes.

7 His piles : the heaped clouds. Spring of fatness ; the place whence the
fertilizing rain flows. The milch-kine also are the laden clouds, and the paired
Mighty Mothers are Heaven and Earth, the parents of the Wondrous Agni,

9 His Father's bosom : his father, according to S&yaua, is the firmament ;
hut as the firmament is not represented in the Veda as a God, Dyaus, or Tyash-
tar, is probably intended, as Ludwig suggests.

The blesshd Friends must be the Ribhus, and the young Danes the Gn&s or
consorts of the Gods. He stayed not hidden ; refers not to Agni but to his
father, Tvashtar.

10 He ; the father. Many a swelling bosom : of the celestial Waters.

The Bright and Strong : Agni. The fellow-spouses ; Heaven and Earth, or
Night and Morning.

3 1 In the Sister Fivers' service ; or in their bosom, if upasi may be read for

HYMN 1.] TBE RIGVEDA. 317

12 As keen supporter where great waters gather, light-shedder

whom the brood rejoice to look on ;

He who begat, and will beget, the dawn-lights, most manly,
C hild of Floods, is youthful Agni.

13 Him, varied in his form, the lovely Infant of floods and plants

the bless&d wood hath gendered.

Gods even, moved in spirit, came around him, and served him
at his birth, the Strong, the Wondrous.

14 Like brilliant lightnings, mighty luminaries accompany the

light-diffusing Agni,

Waxen, as 7 1 were in secret, in his dwelling, while in the
boundless stall they milk out Amrit.

15 I sacrificing serve thee with oblations and crave with longing

thy good-will and friendship.

Grant, with the Gods, thy grace to him who lauds thee, pro-
tect us with thy rays that guard the homestead.

16 May we, 0 Agni, thou who leadest wisely, thy followers and

masters of all treasures,

Strong in the glory of our noble offspring, subdue the godless
when they seek the battle,

17 Ensign of Gods hast thou become, 0 Agni, joy-giver, knower

of all secret wisdom.

Friend of the homestead, thou hast lightened mortals : car-
bjrne thou goest to the Gods, fulfilling,

18 Within the house hath sate the King Immortal of mortals,

filling full their sacred synods.

Bedewed with holy oil he shineth widely, Agni, the knower of
all secret wisdom.

19 Come unto us with thine auspicious friendship, come speeding,

Mighty, with thy mighty succours.

Grant us abundant wealth that saves from danger, that brings
a good repute, a glorious portion.

20 To thee who art of old these songs, 0 Agni, have I declared,

the ancient and the later.

These great libations to the Strong are offered : in every birth
is Jatavedas stablished.

12 The brood : par excellence , the host of Maruts.

13 The blessbd wood : one of the fire-stieks by which Agni is kindled.

14 The boundless stall : limitless aerial space. Amrit : water, according to
S&yana.

17 Thou goest to the Gods, fulfilling : completing our sacrifices and making
them effectual.

20 Songs : literally, births ; that is, productions. In every birth is Jdtave-
das stablished : Agni who knows all life ia appointed in every generation aa
the great high priest who mediates between Gods and men.

318- THE HYMNS OF [BOOK UL

21 Stablishe4 in every birth is J&tavedas, kindled perpetual by
the Visvamitras.

May we rest ever in the loving-kindness, in the auspicious
grace of him the Holy.

2,2 This sacrifice of ours do thou, 0 Mighty, 0 truly Wise, bear
to the Gods rejoicing.

Grant us abundant food, thou priestly Herald, vouchsafe to
give us ample wealth, OAgni.

23 As holy food, Agni, to thine invoker give wealth in cattle,
lasting, rich in marvels.

To us be born a son, and spreading offspring. Agni, be this
fchy gracious will tp us-ward,

HYMN II. Agni.

To him, Yaisvanara, who strengthens Holy Law, to Agni we
present our praise like oil made pure.

With thoughtful insight human priests bring him anear, our
Herald from of old, as an axe forms a car.

2 He made the heaven and earth resplendent by his birth : Child

of two Mothers he was meet to be implored,

Agni, oblation-bearer, gracious, ever-young, infallible, rich in
radiant light, the guest of men.

3 Within the range of their surpassing power, by might, the

Gods created Agni with inventive thought.

I, eager to win strength, address him, like a steed, resplendent
with his brilliance, with his ample light.

4 Eager to gain, we crave from him the friendly God strength

confident, choice-worthy, meet to be extolled :

The Bhrigus’ bounty, willing, strong with sages’ lore, even'
Agni shining forth with light that comes from heaven.

5 For happiness, men, having trimmed the sacred grass, set

Agni glorious for his sti’ength before them here ;

Yea, with raised ladles, him bright, dear to all the Gods,
perfecting aims of works, Budra of solemn rites.

1 Vaisvdnam : Agni who belongs to all men ; the God of all Aryan
families.

Our praise : literally ‘ the wish/ explained by Sayana as stutim, that is the
praise which thou wishest for and which we now offer, *

% Child of two Mothers : of Heaven and Barth, or of the two fire-sticks.

4 The Bhrigm ’ bounty : Agni, the treasure which the Bhrigua received -
from M&fcarisvan and bestowed on other men.

1 £ Fudra; here a synonym* of Agni, See I, 27. 10,

HYMN XI.] THE RIGVEDA, 310

6 Around thy dwelling-place, O brightly-shining Priest, are men

at sacrifice whose sacred grass is trimmed.

Wishing to do thee service, Agni, they are there, desirous of
thy friendship : grant them store of wealth.

7 He hath filled heaven and earth and the great realm of light,

when at his birth the skilful held- him in their hold.

He like a horse is l'ed ( forth to the sacrifice, Sagey. graciously
inclined, that he may win us strength.

8 Honour the oblation-bearer, him who knows fair rites, serve

ye the Household Friend who knows all things that be.

He drives the chariot of the lofty ordinance : Agni most
active, is the great High Priest of Gods.

9 They who are free from death, fain for him, purified three

splendours of the mighty Agni, circling all.

To man, for bis enjoyment, one of these they gave ; the other
two have passed into the sister sphere.

10 Man’s sacrificial food hath sharpened like an axe,, for bright-

ness, him the Sage of men, the people’s Lord.

Busied with sacred rites he mounts and he descends^ He hath
laid down his vital germ within these worlds.

1 1 He stirs with life in wombs (dissimilar in kind, born as a Lion

or a loudly-bellowing Bull ;

Vaisvanara immortal with wide-reaching might, bestowing
goods and wealth on him who offers gifts.

12 Vaisvanara, as of old, mounted tlie cope of heaven, heaven's

ridge, well greeted, by those skilled in noble songs.

He, as of old, producing riches for the folk, still watchful, tra-
verses the common way again.

13 For new prosperity we seek to Agni, him whose course is splen-
did, gold-haired, excellently bright,

Whom Matarisvan stablished, dweller in the heaven, meet for
high praise and holy, sage and true to Law.

7 He : Agni. The skilful : the priests.

3 He drives the chariot : he is the leader of sacrifice ordained by holy law.

0 They who are free from death ; the immortal Gods. Three splendours :
with reference to his appearance as the Sun, the lightning, and domestic fire,
the last of which is given to man as his own special possession.

1 0 Within these, worlds : the germ of fire is always latent in the fire- sticks
or two pieces of wood which are employed to produce the flame.

11 Born as a Lion: destructive and voracious, and as a loudly-bellowing Bull ,
with reference to his strength and the roar of his fiames.

12 The common way : the path of the Gods, which as- the- Sun he travel*
over.

320

THE HYMNS OF [BOOK III \

H As pare and swift of course, beholder of the light, who stands
in heaven's bright sphere a sign, who wakes at dawn,

Agni, the head of heaven, whom none may turn aside — to him
the Powerful with mighty prayer we seek.

T5 The cheerful Priest, the pure, in whom no guile is found, Friend
of the House, praise- worthy, dear to all mankind,

Fail* to behold for beauty like a splendid car, — Agni the Friend
of men we ever seek for wealth.

HYMN III. Agni.

To him who shines afar, VaisvUnai'a, shall bards give precious
things that he may go on certain paths :

For Agni the Immortal serves the Deities, and therefore never
breaks their everlasting laws.

■2 He, wondrous envoy, goes between the earth and heaven, firm-
seated as the Herald, great High Priest of men.

He compasseth with rays the lofty dwelling-place, Agni, sent
forward by the Gods, enriched with prayer.

3 Sages shall glorify Agni with earnest thoughts, ensign of sacri-

fice, who fills the synod full ;

In whom the singers have stored up their holy acts : to him
the worshipper looks for joy and happiness.

4 The Sire of sacrifice, great God of holy bards, Agni, the measure

and the symbol of the priests,

Hath entered heaven and earth that show in varied form : the
Sage whom many love rejoicefch in his might.

5 Bright Agni with the bright car, Lord of green domains, Yaisva-

nara dweller in the floods, who finds the light,

Pervading, swift and wild, encompassed round with powers,
him very glorious have the Gods established here,

6 Agni, together with the Gods and Manu's folk by thought ex-

tending sacrifice in varied form,

Goes, car-borne, to and fro with those who crown eaoh rite, the
fleet, the Household Friend, who turns the curse aside.

14 Who wakes at dawn : when re-kindled for the morning sacrifice.

1 That he may go on certain paths : may constantly visit men,

2 The lofty dwelling -place: the hall or chamber in which sacrifice is celebrated.

5 Lord of green domains : who has dominion over bushes and trees.

6 To and fro : between heaven and earth. < $'hoxc who crown each rite ; the
Qods who make sacrifice effectual.

HYMN 4.]

TUB RIG VEDA,

321

7 Sing, Agni, for long life to us and noble sons : teem thou with
plenty, shine upon us store of food.

Increase the great man’s strength, thou ever-vigilant : thou,
longing for the Gods, knowest their hymns full well.

£ The Mighty One, Lord of the people and their guest, the
leader of their thoughts, devoted Friend of priests,

.Our solemn rites’ announcer, Jata vedas, men with worship
ever praise, with urgings for their weal.

9 Agni the God resplendent, giver of great joy, hath on his
lovely car compassed the lands with might.

Let us with pure laudations in his house approach the high
laws of the nourisher of multitudes.

H> I celebrate thy glories, 0 Vaisvanara, wherewith thou, 0 far-
sighted God, hast found the light.

Thou filledst at thy birth both worlds, ;the earth and heaven :
all this, 0 Agni, hast hhou compassed of thyself.

I’l By his great skill the Sage alone hath brought to pass a great
deed, mightier th$,n Vaisv&nara’s wondrous acts.

Agni sprang into being, magnifying both his Parents, Heaven
and Earth, rich in prolific seed.

HYMN IV. Apr is.

Be friendly with each kindled log of fuel, with every flash
bestow the boon of riches.

Bring thou the Gads, O God, unto our worship : serve, well-
inclined, as Friend thy friends, 0 Agni.

2 Agni whom daily Varuiia and Mitra the Gods bring thrice a
day to this our worship,

Tanunapat, enrich with meath our service that dwells with
holy oil, that offers honour.

7 The great man' $ strength : the strength of the eminent man who is the
institutor of the sacrifice.

Approach the high laws : perform the sacrifices. — M. Muller,

11 The first hemistich of this stanza is somewhat obscure. S&y ana’s
paraphrase as given by Wilson is : ‘ From acts that are acceptable to

Vaisvanara comes great (wealth) ; for he, the sage (Agni) alone, bestows (the
reward) of zeal in (the performance of) his worship.’

The Apris who are said to be the deities of this hymn are the divine or

deified beings and objects to which t 1 ’ ' -y verses are addressed.

The hymu, as Wilson remarks, * is" more . ■ ^ i ■» obscure than any of
the preceding addressed to the Apris, except Sftkta III, of the Second
Mandala [II. 3.], to which it bears the nearest analogy : they are both perhaps
of somewhat later date than the others.’

2 TanUnapdt ; a name of Agni ; * Child of Thyself/ See X. 12, 2.

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK II I

322

3 The thought thatbringeth every boon proeeedeth to worship

first the Priest of the libation,

That we may greet the Strong One with oifr homage. Urged,
may he bring the Gods, best Sacrificer.

4 On high" your way to sacrifice was made ready ; the radiant

flames went upward to the regions.

Full in the midst of heaven the Priest is seated : strew we
the sacred grass where Gods may rest them.

5 Claiming in mind the seven priests’ burnt-oblations, inciting

all, they came in settled order.

To this our sacrifice approach the many who show in hero
beauty at assemblies.

6 Night and Dawn, lauded, hither come together, both smiling,

different are their forms in colour,

That Yanina and Mitra may accept us, and Indra, girt by
Maruts, with his glories.

7 I crave the grace of heaven’s two chief Invokers : the seven

swift steeds joy in their wonted maimer.

These speak of truth, praising the truth eternal, thinking on
Order as the guards of Order.

8 May Bharat! with all her Sisters, I]a accordant with the Gods,

with mortals Agni,

Sarasvat! with all her kindred Rivers, come to this grass, Three
Goddesses, and seat them.

9 Well pleased with us do thou 0 God, 0 Tvashtar, give ready

issue to our procreant vigour,

Whence springs *the hero, powerful, skilled in action, lover of
Gods, adjuster of the press-stones.

10 Send to the Gods the oblation, Lord of Forests; and let the
Immolator, Agni, dress it.

He as the truer Priest shall offer worship, for the Gods’ genera-
tions well he knoweth.

4 Your way ' ; a path for Agni and the Barkis or sacred grass, the God and
the deified object addressed in the stanza.

In the midst of heaven ; in the centre of the radiant hall of sacrifice, as
S&yana explains it.

5 This stanza refers to the deified doors of the hall of sacrifice, and to the
deities who preside over them.

7 Heaven's two chief Invokers : Agni and perhaps Yanina. See I. 13.8.

The seven swift steeds ; seven ministering priests.

8 Bhdrati, lid, and Sarasvati are Goddesses presiding over different depart-
ments of religious worship. See I. 13. 9. The name of Agni is inserted some-
what uiieoimectedly.

10 Lord of Forests .* Vanaspati, a large tree ; here the sacrificial post which
is said to be a form of Agni.

Truer Priest : as compared with human priests,

THE RIG VEDA.

323

HYMN 5.]

11 Come thou to us, 0 Agni, duly kindled, together With the
potent Gods and Indra.

On this our grass sit Aditi, happy Mother, and let our Hail !
delight the Gods Immortal.

HYMN V.

Agni.

Agni who shines against the Dawns is wakened, the holy
Singer who precedes the sages.

With far-spread lustre, kindled by the pious, the Priest hath
thrown both gates of darkness open.

2 Agni hath waxen mighty by laudations, to be adored with

hymns of those who praise him.

Loving the varied shows of holy Order at the first flush of dawn
he shines as envoy.

3 Amid men’s homes hath Agni been established, fulfilling with

the Law, Friend, germ of waters.

Loved and adored, the height he hath ascended, the Singer,
object of our invocations.

4 Agni is Mitra when enkindled duly, Mitra as Priest, Varuna,
Jatavedas ;

Mitra as active minister and House-Friend, Mitra of flowing
rivers and of mountains.

5 The Earth’s, the Bird’s dear lofty place he guardeth, he guard-

eth in his might the course of Surya,

Guardeth the Seven-headed in the centre, guardeth sublime the
Deities’ enjoyment.

6 The skilful God who knows all forms of knowledge made for

himself a fair form, meet for worship.

This Agni guards with care that never ceases the Soma’s skin,
the Bird’s place rich in fatness.

II Happy Mother : literally, having excellent sons, the Adityas.

1 Who shines against the Dawns : rekindled for the morning sacrifices.

Who precedes the sages: as their guide and teacher. The Priest : Agni,

3 The height : the place called the north altar, says S&yana. Perhaps the
height of heaven may be intended.

4 Agni is here identified with Mitra, the Sun, and both these Gods are
identified with Varuna.

5 The dear lofty place of the earth may he the altar, or the eastern point.
The Bird is the Sun who flies through heaven. The Seven headed, said by
Sayana to be the host of Maruts, is more probably the Sun drawn by hie seven
horses,

6 The Soma’s shin ; the meaning of the words sasasya chdrma is not clear.
An envelope or a covering, which in some mystical way is supposed to conceal
the Soma-plant, appears to be intended. The Bird's place : the station of the
Bun, who is adored with oblations of clarified butter.

324 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK III.

7 Agni hath entered longingly the longing shrine rich with fat-

ness, giving easy access.

Resplendent, pure, sublime, and purifying, again, again he
renovates his Mothers.

8 Born suddenly, by plants he grew to greatness, when tender

shoots with holy oil increased him,

Like waters lovely when they hasten downward : may Agni
in his Parents’ lap protect us.

9 Extolled, the Strong shone forth with kindled fuel to the

earth’s centre, to the height of heaven.

May Agni, Friend, adorable Matarisvan, as envoy bring the
Gods unto our worship.

JO Best of all luminaries lofty Agni supported with his flame
the height of heaven,

When, far from Bhrigus, MAtari§van kindled the oblation-
bearer where he lay in secret.

J J, As holy food, Agni, to thine invoker give wealth in cattle,
lasting, rich in marvels.

To us be born a son and spreading offspring. Agni, be this
thy gracious will to us-ward.

HYMN VI. Agni.

Urged on by deep devotion, 0 ye singers, bring, pious ones,
the God-approaching ladle.

Borne onward to the right it travels eastward, and, filled with
oil, to Agni bears oblation.

: 2 Thou at thy birth didst fill both earth and heaven, yea, Most
Adorable, thou didst exceed them.

Even through the heayen's and through the earth’s expanses
let thy swift seven-tongued flames roll on, 0 Agni.

7 71 is Mothers ; or his parents, Heaven and Earth, who are strengthened
and restored to their youth by sacrifice.

The plants are the twigs used fuel, and the tender s/wots are the bunch
of grass used in sprinkling the clarified gutter over the fire.

9 The earth's centre : earth's most important place, the altar.

In the second hemistich Agni is identified with Matarisvan the divine or
semi-divine being who brought him from heaven.

10 Far from Bhrigus ; the words in the text WQuld seem to mean that
Matarisvan took the fire from the Bhrigus ; but, as Ludwig suggests, pari
perhaps implies separation. S&yana explains .Bhrigus in this place by rays
of the Sun.

* 1 The C 7 ■*'' T ladle : the sacrificial ladle with which the oblation

of clarifie " . : ■ offered to the Gods.

Borne onward to the right: or to the south of the fire-altar. According to
Ludwig, bearing the sacrificial gift.

HYMN 6;] THE MiaVEHAi 825

3 Both Heaven and Earth and Gods who should be worshipped

establish thee as Priest for every dwelling,

Whenever hUttisln faniilids, God-devbted, bringing oblations,
laud thy splendid lustrd;

4 Firni in the Gods’ home is the Mighty seated,- between vast

Heaven and Earth, the well-beloved —
those' who' yield, Unharaldd, their nectar, SpoUses of the
Far-Strider, ever-young, United.

& Great are the deeds of thee, the Great, 0 Agni : thou by thy
power hast spread out earth and heaven.

As sooii as thou wast bdrri thou Wast ail envoy, thou,- Mighty
One, wast Leader of the people.

6 Bind to the pole with cords of holy Order thy long-maned

ruddy steeds who sprinkle fatiiess.

Bring hither, 0 thou God, all Gods together : provide them
noble worship, Jata vedas.

7 Even from the sky thy brilliant lights shone hither : still

hast thou beamed through many a radiant morning,

That the Gods praised their joyous Herald’s labour eUgerly
burning, Agni, in the forests.

8 The Gods who take delight in air’s wide region, or those the

dwellers in heaven’s realm of brightness,

Or those, the Holy, prompt to hear, our helpers, who, car-
borne, turn their horses hither, Agni —

9 With these, borne on one car, Agni, approach us, or borne on

many, for thy steeds are able.

Bring, with their Dames, the Gods, the Three-and-Thirty,
after thy Godlike nature, and be joyfuL

10 He is the Priest at Whose repeated worship even wide Heaven

and Earth sing out for increase;

They fair and true and holy coming forward stand at his
sacrifice who springs from Order.

11 As holy food, Agni, to thine invoker give wealth in cattle,

lasting, rich in marvels.

To us he born a son and spreading offspring. Agni, be this
thy gracious will to us-ward.

4 The Mighty : Agni. Those Cows : Heaven and Earth who yield all bless-
ings, here called also the spouses of Vishnu the God of the mighty stride,
that is, the Sun, or as S&yana says, of the far- extending Agni,

9 The Three- and- Thirty ; see I, 34, 11,

326 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK HI.

HYMN VII. Agni.

The seven tones risen from the white-backed viand have
made their way between the pair of Mothers.

Both circumjacent Parents come together ; to yield us length
of days they hasten forward.

2 The Male who dwells in heaven hath Mares . and Milchkine :

he came to Goddesses who bring sweet treasure.

To thee safe resting in the seat of Order the Cow alone upon
her way proceodeth.

3 Wise Master, wealthy finder-out of riches, he mounted those

who may with ease be guided.

He, dark-backed, manifold with varied aspect, hath made
them burst forth from their food the brush-wood.

4 Strength-giving streams bear hither him eternal, fain to sup-

port the mighty work of Tvashtar.

He, flashing in his home with all his members, hath entered
both the worlds as they were single.

5 They know the red Bulbs blessing, and are j oyful under the

flaming-coloured Lord’s dominion :

They who give shine from heaven with fair effulgence, whose
lofty song like Ija must be honoured.

This hymn and the five following are ascribed to the Itishi Visv&mitra.

1 The seven tones are the hymns sung in seven tones, or metres. The
white-hacked viand is the Soma mingled with milk, and the 'pair of Mothers
or Mother and Father are Heaven and Earth whose intermediate space the
hymns have reached. The circumjacent Parents are Heaven and Earth. The
construction in the first half of the stanza is difficult, the masculine form
ye being apparently used for the feminine. S&yana inserts rasmayah, rays,
which he makes the subject of the first sentence, and explains dMs% viand,
by ‘the all-sustaining Agni,’ and saptd yflnth, seven voices or tones, by ‘the
flowing rivers.’ The hymn is full of difficulties ; ‘ an intentionally obscure
hymn,’ says Professor Grassmann, ‘ whose partially corrupt text cannot, on
account, of this obscurity, be satisfactorily re-established.’

. 2 The Male who dwells in heaven : celestial Agni. The Mares and Milch-
Jcine are the Goddesses of the air. To thee : to Agni,

The Cow ; V&k the Goddess of Speech, i. e. speech itself, prayer.

3 Wise Master : Agni. Those : his mares, the rapidly advancing flames
'that bear him onward. Dark-hacked : with smoke.

4 Strength-giving streams : the waters of the air which bring down the
embryo Agni in rain. The mighty work of Tvashtar : the whole creation, or,
as there is no substantive expressed, the son of Tvashfcar, the Sun, may be
intended. A s they were single ; hath pervaded and illumined heaven and
earth simultaneously, as though they were one world.

§ The red Ball ; Agni, They : perhaps the Gods, lid ; Prayer or Praise,

®YMN 8 .] TMM RTOVEDA. 327

6 Yea, by tradition from the ancient sages they brought great

strength from the two mighty Parents,

To where the singer’s Bull, the night’s dispeller, after his
proper law hath waxen stronger.

7 Seven holy singers guard with five Adhvaryus* the Bird’s

beloved firmly-settled station.

The willing Bulls, untouched by eld, rejoice them : as Gods
themselves the ways of Gods they follow.

8 I crave the grace of heaven's two chief Invokers : the seven

swift steeds joy in their wonted manner.

These speak of truth, praising the Truth Eternal, thinking
on Order as the guards of Order.

9 The many seek the great Steed as a stallion : the reins obey

the Lord of varied colour.

0 heavenly Priest, most pleasant, full of wisdom, bring the
great Gods to us, and Earth and Heaven.

10 Rich Lord, .the Mornings have gleamed forth in splendour,

fair-rayed, '*-■'» , 1 \ r. -worshipped with all viands,

Yea, with th :! .■ ■.' :!■ earth, 0 Agui. Forgive us, for

our weal, e’en sin committed.

11 As holy food, Agni, to thine invoker, give wealth in cattle,

lasting, rich in marvels.

To us be born a son, and spreading offspring. Agni, be this
thy gracious, will to us- ward.

HYMN VIII. Sacrificial Post.

God-serving men, 0 Sovran of the Forest, with heavenly
meath at sacrifice anoint thee.

Grant wealth to us when thou art standing upright as when
reposing on this Mother’s bosom.

6 They ; the men who first honoured Agni who is called the singer’s Bulb
the strong God who protects his worshipper.

7 Adhvaryus: ministering priests. The Bird: the rapidly-flying Agni.
The willing Bulls : the zealous priests, who in this stanza are boldly called
Gods. Of, 'Is it not written in your law, I said, Ye are G-orls ?’ (St. John, x. 1 1).

8 Ifmven's two chief 1 nvohers : or Hotars; according to Sayan a, the celestial
and the terrestrial Agni. Thisatanza is repeated from III. 4. ‘7.

9 The many : the adjective is feminine and has no substantive expressed.
The Dawns may be intended, or perhaps libations.

11 This concluding stanza is the burden of several hymns of this Booh,
and there is considerable variation in S&y ana’s interpretation of it in the
different places in which it occurs.

1 0 Sovran of the Forest : the tall tree ( vdnaspdti ) out of which is made
the sacrificial post to which the victim is tied. The post when consecrated
is a deified object and is regarded as a form of Agni.

With heavenly meath : or balm; sacred oil or clarified butter. For a full
account of the ceremony of anointing the Sacrificial Post, see Haug’s Aitarey.
Br&hmanam, Vol. II. pp. 74-78,

328 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK TIL

2 Set up to eastward of the fire enkindled, accepting prayer

that wastes not, rich in heroes,

Driving far from us poverty and famine, lift thyself up to
bring us great good fortune.

3 Lord of the Forest, raise thyself up on the loftiest spot of

earth.

Give splendour, fixt and measured well, to him who brings
the sacrifice.

4 Well-robed, enveloped, he is come, the youthful : springing to

life his glory waxeth greater.

Contemplative in mind and God-adoring, sages of high in-
telligence upraise him.

5 Sprung up he rises in the days' fair weather, increasing in

the men-frequented synod.

With song the wise and skilful consecrate him : his voice the
God-adoring singer utters.

6 Ye whom religious men have firmly planted; thou Forest-

Sovran whom the axe hath fashioned, —

Let those the Stakes divine which here are standing be fain
to grant us wealth with store of children.

7 0 men who lift the ladles up, these hewn and planted in the

ground,

Bringing a blessing to the field, shall bear our precious gift
to Gods.

8 Adityas, Budras, Yasus, careful leaders, Earth, Heaven, and

Prithivi and Air’s mid-region,

Accordant Deities, shall bless our worship and make our
sacrifice’s ensign lofty.

9 Like swans that flee in lengthened line, the Pillars h^ve come

to us arrayed in brilliant colour.

They, lifted up on high, by sages, eastward, go forth as Gods
to the Gods’ dwelling-places.

1 0 Those Stakes upon the earth with rings that deck them seem
to the eye like horns of horned creatures ;

3 The loftiest spot of earth : the altar.

4 Well-robed, enveloped : with a cord or garland.

5 In the days' fair weather : when the periodical Rains are over.

7 These hewn and planted : apparently splinters cut from the tree.

8 Prithivi ; Earth regarded as single, aucl not as one of the constantly
connected pair Heaven and Earth.

9 Pillars: apparently chips or splinters (of. stanza 7) which fall from the
tree, as it is cut to form the Saoriftciftl ftt&ke, like white or grey birds alight-
ing on the ground.

JKYMN 9.]

THE RIG VEDA ,

329

Or, as upraised "by priests ill invocation, let them assist us in
the rush to battle.

11 Lord of the Wood, rise with a hundred branches: with thousand
branches may we rise to greatness, *

Thou whom this hatchet, with an edge well whetted for great
felicity, hath brought before us.

HYMN IX. Agni,

We as thy friends have chosen thee, mortals a God, to be our
help,

The Waters* Child, the blessed, the resplendent One, victorious
and beyond compare.

2 Since thou delighting in the woods hast gone unto thy mother

streams,

Not to be scorned, Agni, is that return of thine when from
afar thou now art here.

3 O’er pungent smoke hast thou prevailed, and thus art thou

benevolent.

Some go before, and others round about thee sit, they in whose
friendship thou hast place.

4 Him who had passed bey ond his foes, beyond continua l pursuits.
Him the unerring Ones, observant^ found in 3oo’3s7c6uched like

a lion in his lair.

5 Him wandering at his own free will, Agni here hidden from

our view,

Him Matarisvan brought to us from far away produced by fric-
tion, from the Gods.

6 0 Bearer of Oblations, thus mortals received thee from the

Gods,

Whilst thou, the Friend of man, guardest each sacrifice with
thine own power, Most Youthful One.

7 Amid thy wonders this is good, yea, to the simple is it clear,
When gathered round about thee, Agni, lie the herds where

thou art kindled in the morn.

2 That return of thine ,* thy descent from the celestial waters in which thou
art horn as lightning.

3 Some : according to S&yana, the Adhvaryus ; others ; the S&ma-priesfs who
sit and recite the prayers and hymns.

4 The unerring Ones : the Gods, who followed and found the fugitive Agni.

5 Matarisvan ; the divine or semi-divine being who brought Agni to men.
See Index.

7 In the morn : before the cattle are sent out to graze. The herds , accord-
ing to the Scholiast, include men as well as quadrupeds.

330 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK III

8 Offer to him who knows fair rites, who burns with purifying

glow,

Swift envoy, active, ancient, and adorable : serve ye the God.
attentively.

9 Three times a hundred Gods and thrice a thousand, and three

times ten and nine have worshipped Agni,

For him spread sacred grass, with oil bedewed him, and
stablished him as Priest and Sacrificer,

HYMN X. Agni.

Thee, Agni, God, Imperial Lord of all mankind, do mortal
men

With understanding kindle at the sacrifice.

2 They laud thee in their solemn rites, Agni, as Minister and

Priest.

Shine forth in thine own home as guardian of the Law.

3 He, verily, who honours thee with fuel, Knower of all Life,

He, Agni ! wins heroic might, he prospers well.

4 Ensign of sacrifices, he, Agni, with Gods is come to us,

Decked by the seven priests, to him who bringeth gifts.

5 To Agni, the Invoking Priest, offer your best, your lofty

speech,

To him Ordainer-like who brings the light of songs.

6 Let these our hymns make Agni grow, whence, meet for laud, •

he springs to life,

To mighty strength and great possession, fair to see.

7 Best Sacrificer, bring the Gods, 0 Agni, to the pious man :

A joyful Priest, thy splendour drive our foes afar !

8 As such, 0 Purifier, shine on us heroic glorious might :

Be nearest Friend to those who laud thee, for their weal.

9 So, wakeful, versed in sacred hymns, the holy singers kindle

thee,

Oblation-hearer, deathless, cherisher of strength.

HYMN XL Agni.

Agni is Priest, the great High Priest of sacrifice, most swift
in act :

He knows the rite in constant course. *

9 In the Vaisvadeva Nivid or Hymn of Invitation to the Yisvedevas, the
number of the Gods is said to be 3 times 11, then 33, then 303, then 3003.
By adding together 33 4- 303 + 3003 the number 3339 is obtained. See Haug’s
Aitareya Br&hmanam, II. p. 212, note.

5 Who brings the light of songs ; who brightens and inspires our hymns,

HYMN 12.]

THE RIG VEDA.

331

2 Oblation-bearer, deathless, well inclined, an eager messenger,
Agni comes nigh us with the thought.

3 Ensign of sacrifice from of old, Agni well knoweth with his

thought *

To prosper this man’s aim and hope.

4 Agni, illustrious Irom old time, the Son of Strength who

knows all life,

The Gods have made to be their Priest.

5 Infallible is Agni, he who goes before the tribes of men,

A chariot swift and ever new.

6 Strength of the Gods which none may harm, subduing all his

enemies,

Agni is mightiest in fame,

7 By offering sacred food to him the mortal worshipper obtains
• A home from him whose light makes pure.

3 From Agni, by our hymns, may we gain all things that bring
happiness,

Singers of him who knows all life.

9 0 Agni, in our deeds of might may we obtain all precious
things :

The Gods are centred all in thee.

HYMJSF XII. Indra-Agni.

Moved, Indra-Agni, by our hymn, come to the juice, the pre-
cious dew :

Drink ye thereof, impelled by song.

2 0 Indra-Agni, with the man who lauds you comes the waken-

ing rite :

So drink ye both this juice outpoured.

3 Through force of sacrifice I choose IndraAgni who love the wise ;
With Soma let these sate them here.

4 Indra and Agni I invoke, joint-victors, bounteous, unsubdued,
Foe-slayers, best to win the spoil.

5 Indra and Agni, singers skilled in melody hymn you, bringing

lauds :

I ohoose you for the sacred food.

6 Indra and Agni, ye c ast do wn the ninety forts which Dasas held,
Together, with one miglify^aBM:

2 With the thought : or, through our prayer.

3 This man's : who institutes the sacrifice.

6 The ninety forts : ninety is used A indefinitely for a large number. The
forts are the strongholds of the non-Aryan inhabitants of the country.

332 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 111 .

7 To Indra-Agni reverent thoughts go forward from the holy

task

Along the path of sacred Law.

8 0 Ind*&-Agni, powers are yours, and dwellings and delightful

food :

Good is your readiness to act;

9 'Indra and Agni, in your deeds of might ye deck heaven^

lucid realms :

Famed is that hero strength of your&

HYMN XIII, Agni.

To Agni, to this God of yours I sing aloud with utmost
power.

May he come to us with the Gods, and sit, best Offerer, on
the grass.

2 The Holy, whose are earth and heaven, and succour waits

upon his strength ;

Him meii who bring oblations laud, and they who wish to
gain, for grade.

3 He is the Sage who guides these men, Leader of sacred rites

is he.

Him, your own Agni, serve ye well, who winneth and bestow-
eth wealth.

4 So may the gracious Agni grant most goodly shelter for our

use;

Whence iti the heavens or in the floods Ire shall pour wealth
upon our lands.

5 The singers kindle him, the Priest, Agni the Lord of tribes

of men,

Resplendent and without a peer through his own excellent
designs,

6 Help US, thou Brahman, best of all invokers of the Gods in

song'.

Beam, Friend of Maruts, bliss on us, 0 Agni, a most liberal
God,

7 Yea, grant Us treasure thousandfold with children and with

nourishment,

And, Agni, splendid hero strength, exalted, wasting not away.
7 The holy task : sacrifice,

The hymn and that which follows are ascribed to the Iltshi Bishabha, a son
of Visv&mitra.

6 Thou Brahman ; Agni i& here addressed, as the Brahman or praying
priest*

EYMN 15,] TEE MOVED A. 333

HYMN XIV. Agni,

The pleasant Priest is come into the synod, true, skilled in
sacrifice, most wise, Ordainer.

Agni, the Son of Strength, whose Gar is lightning, whose hair
is flame, hath shown on earth his lustre.

2 To thee I offer reverent speech : accept it : to thee who mark*?

est it, victorious, faithful !

Bring, thou who knowest, those who know, and seat thee amid
the sacred grass, for help, O Holy.

3 The Two who show their vigour, Night and Morning, by the

wind’s paths shall haste to thee, 0 Agni.

When men adprn the Ancient with oblations, these seek, as on
two chariot-seats, the dwelling.

4 To thee, strong Agni ! Varpna and Mitra and all the Maruts

sang a song of triumph,

What fime unto the people’s lands thou earnest, spreading
them as the Sun of men, with lustre.

5 Approaching with raised hands and adoration, we have this

day fulfilled for thee thy longing.

Worship the Gods with most devqted spirit, a Priest with no
unfriendly thought, 0 Agni.

6 For, Son of Strength, from thee come many succours, and

powers abundant that a God possesses.

Agni, to us with speech that hath no falsehood grant riches,
real, to be told in thousands.

7 Whatever, God, in sacrifice we mortals have wrought is all for

thee, strong, wise of purpose I

Be thou the Friend of each good chariot’s master. All thi§
enjoy thou here, immortal Agni.

HYMN XV. Agni.

Resplendent with thy wide-extepding lustre, dispel the terrors
of the fiepds who hate us* %

May lofty Agni be my guide and shelter, the easily-invoked,
the good Protectqr,

2 Be thou to us, while now the morn is breaking, be thou a
guardian wbep the Sun hath mquqted.

2 Those who lenow : the Gods.

3 The Ancient : Agni.

4 Spreading them : causing Aryap men to spread as the sun spreads his
rays.

5 Thy longing : for oblations.

6 All this ; all our sacrificial offerings.

334 TIIE HYNMB OF [ BOOK IIL

Accept, as men accept a true-born infant, my laud, O Agni
nobly born in body.

3 Bull, who beholdest men, through many mornings, among

the $ark ones shine forth red, 0 Agni.

Lead us, good Lord, and bear us over trouble : Help us who
long, Most Youthful God, to riches.

4 Shine forth, a Bull invincible, O Agni, winning by conquest

all the forts and treasures.

Thou Jatavedas who art skilled in guiding, the chief high sav-
ing sacrifice’s Leader.

5 Lighting Gods hither, Agni, wisest Singer, bring thou to us

many and flawless shelters.

Bring vigour, like- a car that gathers booty : bring us, 0 Agni,
beauteous Earth and Heaven.

6 Swell, 0 thou Bull and give those powers an impulse, e r en

Earth and Heaven who yield their milk in plenty,

Shining, 0 God, with Gods in clear effulgence. Let not a
mortal’s evil will obstruct u&

7 Agni, as holy food to thine invoker, give wealth in cattle, last-

ing, rich in marvels.

To us be bora a son and spreading offspring. Agni, be this
thy gracious will to us- ward.

HYMN XYT. Agni.

This Agni is the Lord of great felicity and hei’o strength ;

Lord of wealth rich in children, wealth in herds of kine ; Lord
of the battles with the foe.

2 Wait, Maruts, Heroes, upon him the Prosper or in whom is

1 ‘- ’ v ■■■ wealth;

W;. ■ '■ -i 0 conquer evil-hearted men, who overcome

the enemy.

3 As such, G Agni, deal us wealth and hero might, O Bounteous

One !

Most lofty, very glorious, rich in progeny, free from disease
and full of power.

4 He who made all that lives, who passes all in might, who

orders service to the Gods,

He works among the Gods, he works in hero strength, yea, also
in the praise of men.

3 Among the dark ones ; in the darkness of the nights.

6 Their milk ; rain and all fertilizing influence.

2 Who : referring to the Maruts ; the verbs being in the third person.

3 Most lofty, etc ; these epithets qualify wealth and hero might.

HYMN 18,]

THE RIG VEDA,

335

5 Give us not up to indigence, Agni, nor want of hero sons,

Nor, Son of Strength, to lack of cattle, nor to blame. Drive

thou our enemies away.

6 Help us to strength, blest Agni ! rich in pi-ogeny, abundant,

in our sacrifice. * *

Flood us with riches yet more plenteous, bringing weal, with
high renown, most Glorious One 1

HYMN XYII. Agni.

Duly enkindled after ancient customs, bringing all treasures,
he is balmed with unguents, —

Flame-haired, oil-clad, the purifying Agni, skilled in fair rites,
to bring the Gods for worship.

2 As thou, 0 Agni, skilful Jatavedas, hast sacrificed as Priest of

Earth, of Heaven,

So with this offering bring the Gods, and prosper this sacrifice
to-day as erst for Manu.

3 Three are thy times of life, 0 Jatavedas, and the three morn-

ings are thy births, 0 Agni.

With these, well-knowing, grant the Gods 3 * 5 kind favour, and
help in stir and stress the man who worships.

4 Agni most bright and fair with song we honour, yea, the ador-

able, 0 Jatavedas.

Thee, envoy, messenger, oblation-bearer, the Gods have made
centre of life eternal.

5 That Priest before thee, yet more skilled in worship, sfcablislied

of old, health-giver by his nature, —

After his custom offer, thou who knowest, and lay our sacri-
fice where Gods may taste it.

HYMN XVIII. Agni.

Agni, be kind to us when we approach thee, good as a friend
to friend, as sire and mother.

The races of mankind are great oppressors : burn up malignity
that strives against us.

2 Agni, burn np the unfriendly who are near us, burn thou the
foeman 5 s curse who pays no worship.

3 Three are thy times of life : the existence of Agni upon earth is said to be
threefold as dependent on the supply of fuel, clarified butter, and Soma. The

three mornings ; Agni is re-born every morning, and the number three appears
to be used merely for the sake of accordance with the three times of life pre-
viously mentioned.

5 That Priest before thee : Agni’s more skilful predecessor is probably the
celestial Agni, the high priest who sacrifices for the Gods, The terrestrial
Agni is to take him for his model.

336 . THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK TIL

Bum, Vasu, thou who markest well, the foolish : let thine
eternal nimble beams surround thee.

3 With fuel, Agni, and with oil, desirous, mine offering I present;

for strength and conquest,

With prayer, so far as I hays power, adoring — this hymn
divine to gain a hundred treasures.

4 Give with thy glow, thou Son of Strength, when lauded, great

vital power to those who toil to serve thee.

Give richly, Agni, to the Visvarnitras rest and stir. Oft have
we decked thy body,

5 Give us, 0 liberal Lord, great store of riches, for, Agni, such

art thou when duly kindled.

Thou in the happy singer’s home bestowest, amply with arms
extended, things of beauty.

HYMN XIX. J4 Agni.

Agni, quick, sage, infallible, all-knowing, I choose to be our
Priest at this oblation.

In our Gods’ service he, best skilled, shall worship : may he
obtain us boons for strength and riches.

2 Agni, to thee I lift the oil-fed ladle, bright, with an offering,

bearing our oblation.

From the right hand, choosing the Gods’ attendance, he with
riph presents hath arranged the worship.

3 Of keenest spirit is the man thou aidest : give us good off-

spring, thou who givest freely.

In power of wealth most rich in men, 0 Agni, of thee, the
Good, may \ve sing forth fair praises.

4 Men as they worship thee the God, 0 Agni, haye sot on thee

full many a brilliant aspect.

So bring, .Most Youthful One, the Gods’ assembly, the
Heavenly Host which thou to-day shalt honour.

,5 When Gods anoint thee Priest at their oblation, and seat thee
for thy task as Sacrihcer,

0 Agni, be thou here our kjrjd defender, and to ourselves
vouchsafe the gift of glory.

HYMN XX. Agni,

With lauds at break of morn the priest invoketh Agni, Dawn,
Dadhikras, and both the Asvins.

4 Full many a brilliant aspect: bright appearance, or splendid presence.

I Hadhihvds : or Dadhikr&, is a ipytincal being described as a kind of
divine horse, and probably a personification of the morning Sun. He is
invoked in the morning together with Agni, Ushas, and the Asvins.

BYMN 21 J THE RIQYEDA . 33 7

*

With one consent the Gods whose light is splendid, longing
to taste our sacrifice, shall hear us.

2 Three are thy powers, 0 Agni, three thy stations, three -are

thy tongues, yea^ many, Child of Order ! m

Three bodies hast thou which the Gods delight in : with
these protect our hymns with care unceasing,

3 0 Agni, many are the names thou bearest, Immortal, God,

Divine, and Jatavedas :

And many charms of charmers, All-Inspirer ! have they laid in
thee, Lord of true attendants i

4 Agni, like Bhaga, leads the godly people, he who is true to

Law and guards the seasons.

Ancient, all-knowing, he the Vritra-slayer shall bear the singer
safe through every trouble.

5 I call on Savitar the God, on Morning, Brihaspati, and

Dadhikras and Agni,

On Varuna and Mitra, on the Asvins, <dBhaga, the Yasus,
lludras, and Adityas.

HYMN XXL Agni,

Set this our sacrifice among the Immortals : be pleased with
these our presents, Jatavedas.

0 Priest, 0 Agni, sit thee down before us, and first enjoy the
drops of oil and fatness.

2 For thee, 0 Purifier, flow the drops of fatness, rich in oil.
After thy wont vouchsafe to us the choicest boon that Gods

may feast.

3 Agni, Most Excellent ! for thee the Sage are drops that drip

with oil.

Thou art enkindled as the best of Seers. Help thou the
sacrifice.

4 To thee, 0 Agni, mighty and resistless, to thee stream forth

the drops of oil and fatness.

Witli great light art thou come, 0 praised by poets ! Accept
our offering, 0 thou Sage.

2 Three are thy powers : or three kinds of strengthening food, clarified
butter, fuel, and Soma. Three thy stations : three altars, or the three worlds.
Three are thy totvnm : the three fires, G&rkapabya, Ahavaniya, and Dakshina.
Three bodies : or forms as Pavaka, Pavamftna, and Suchi.

3 The names thou bearest : or the natures thou possesses^ Many charms ;
or supernatural powers.

22

m THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Ilf.

5 Fatness exceeding rich, extracted from the midst, — this as our
gift we offer thee.

Excellent God, the drops run down upon thy skin. Deal
them^to each among the Gods.

' ■ • . HYMN XXII. Agni.

This is that Agni whence the longing Indra took the pressed
Soma deep within his body.

Winner of spoils in thousands, like a courser, with praise art
thou exalted, Jlfcavedas.

2 That light of thine in heaven and earth, 0 Agni, in plants,

0 Holy One, and in the waters,

Wherewith thou hast spread wide the air’s mid-region—
bright is that splendour, wavy, man-beholding.

3 0 Agni, to the sea of heaven thou goest : thou hast called

hither Gods beheld in spirit.

The waters, too, come hither, those up yonder in the Sun’s
realm of lights and those beneath it.

4 Let fires that dwell in mist, combined with those that have

their home in floods,

Guileless accept our sacrifice, great viands free .from all disease.

• 5 Agni, as holy food to thine invoker give wealth in cattle,

lasting, rich in marvels.

To us be born a son and spreading offspring. Agni, be this
thy gracious will to us- ward.

HYMN XXril. Agni.

Rubbed into life, well stablished in the dwelling, Leader of
sacrifice, the Sage, the Youthful,

Here in the wasting fuel Jatavedas, eternal, hath assumed
immortal being.

2 Both Bharatas, Devasravas, Devavata, have strongly rubbed

to life effectual Agni*

0 Agni, look tliou forth with ample riches : be, every day,

• ■ bearer of food to feed us.

3 Him nobly born of old the fingers ten produced, him whom

his Mothers counted dear.

5 Fat nets exceeding rich , extracted from the midst : this hymn, S&yana says,
is suitable for animal sacrifices. The fatness here spoken of is, as Professor
Wilson remarks, the same that is described in Leviticus, IV. 9, as ‘ the fat
that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards.’

1 Whence : literally, wherein ; that is poured out on whom or which.

. 2 Both BMratas : sons of JBharata, the two Ilishis of the hymn.

, 3 His Mothers ; the two fire-sticks from which Agni springs to life.

B-YMN 25.] THE RIG VEDA. 339

Praise Devavata’s Agni, thou Devasravas, him who shall be
the people’s Lord.

4 He set thee in the earth’s most lovely station, in La’s place,

in days of A fair bright weather. A

On man, on Apaya, Agni ! on the rivers Drishadvati, Saras-
vati, shine richly.

5 Agni, as holy food to thine invoker give wealth in cattle,

lasting, rich in maiwels.

To us be born a son and spreading offspring Agni, be this
thy gracious will to us-ward

HYMN XXIV. Agni.

Agni, subdue opposing bands, and drive our enemies away.
Invincible, slay godless foes; give splendour to the wor-
' shipper.

2 Lit with libation, Agni, thou, deathless, who eallest Gods to

.feast,

*. Accept our sacrifice with joy.

3 With splendour, Agni, Son of Strength, thou who art wor-

shipped, wakeful One,

Seat thee on this my sacred grass.

4 With all thy fires, with all the Gods, Agni, exalt the songs

we sing.

And living men in holy rites.

5 Grant, Agni, to the worshipper wealth rich in heroes, plen-

teous store :

Make thou us rich with many sons.

HYMN XXV. Agnt

Thou art the sapient Son of Dyaus, 0 Agni, yea, and the
Child of Earth, who knowest all things.

Bring the Gods specially, thou Sage, for worship.

2 Agni the wise bestows the might of heroes, grants strengthen-
ing food, preparing it for nectar.

Thou who art rich in food bring the Gods hither.

4 He : the worshipper. Earth's most lovely station : according to S&yapa,
on the northern altar, lid’s place ; the place of prayer and praise.

Drishadvati and Sarasvati (see Book I. 3. 10.) are well known streams ;
Apayd, which is not mentioned elsewhere, appears to have been a little stream
m the same neighbourhood, near the earlier settlements of the Aryan immi-
grants. •

This hymn and the eight following are ascribed to -the Bishi YiavAmitr-a..

S40 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK III

'3 A gni,. infallible, lights Earth and Heaven, immortal Goddesses
gracious to all men, —

1 Lord through his strength, splendid through adorations.

4 Come to r the sacrifice, Agni and Indra: come to the offerer’s

house -who hath the Soma.

Come, friendly-minded, Gods, to drink the Soma.

5 In the floods’ home art thou enkindled, Agni, 0 J&tavedas',

Son of Strength, eternal,

Exalting with thine help the gathering-places.

HYMN XX VL Agni

Severing in our heart Agni Vaisvfinara, the findor of the light,
whose promises are true,

‘ The liberal, gladsome, car-borne God, we Kusikas invoke him
with oblation, seeking wealth with songs.

2 That Agni, bright, Vaisvanara, we invoke for help, and

Matarisvan worthy of the song of praise ;

Brihaspati for man’s observance of the Gods, the Singer
prompt to hear, the swiftly-moving guest.

3 Age^ after age Vaisvanara, neighing like a horse, is kindled

with the women by the Kusikas.

i May Agni, he who wakes among Immortal Gods, grant us
heroic strength and wealth in noble steeds.

4 -Let them go forth, the strong, as flames of fire with might.

Gathered for victory they have yoked their spotted deer.
Pourers of floods, the Maruts, Masters of all wealth, they
who can ne’er be conquered, make the mountains shake.

5 The Maruts, Friends of men, are glorious as the fire; their

. mighty and resplendent succour we implore.

-•■Those storming Sons of Kudra clothed in robes of rain,
boon givers of good gifts, roar as the lions roar,

6 We, band on band and troop following troop, entreat with

* ■ fair lauds Agni’s splendour and the Maruts’ might.

m/ 71 home : in the firmament, the home of the aerial waters.

y'\ : *; . r ■ * the worlds or regions inhabited by living beings,

. . 1 Va78V'fnara, : common to, dear to, or dwelling with, all Aryan men.

- Kunkus men of the family of the Iliahi Kusika.

; 2 Mdtarman: said here by Sayann to mean Agni as God of the lightning :
buc the usual sense of the word is appropriate enough,

, 3 With • the fingers, elsewhere called the damsels, and the

Bisters, which agitate the fire-stick. ;

kZW'ifim go forth • the Maruts, or Storm -Gods,

*lbe mars da.

&7MN 27.}

-341

With spotted deer for steeds, with wealth that never fails,
they, wise Ones, come to sacrifice at our gatherings.

7 Agni am I who know, by birth, all creatures. Mine eye is

butter, in my mouth is nectar #

I am light threefold, measurer of the Region ; exhaustive
heat am I, named burnt-oblation.

8 Bearing in mind a thought with light accordant, he purified

the Sun with three refinings ;

By his own nature gained the highest treasure, and looked
abroad over the earth and heaven.

9 The Spring that fails not with a hundred streamlets, Father

inspired of prayers that men should utter,

The Sparkler, joyous in his Parents 7 8 9 bosom, — him, the Truth-
speaker, sate ye, Eai'th and Heaven.

HYMN XXVII. Agni.

, In ladle dropping oil your food goes in oblation up to heaven,
Goes to the Gods in search of bliss.

2 Agni I laud, the Sage inspired, crowner of sacrifice through

song,

Who listens and gives bounteous gifts.

3 0 Agni, if we might obtain control of thee the potent God,
Then should we overcome our foes.

4 Kindled at sacrifices lie is Agni, hallower, meet for praise,
With flame for hair : to him we seek.

5 Immortal Agni, shining far, enrobed with oil, well worshipped,

bears

The gifts of sacrifice away.

6 The priests with ladles lifted up, worshipping here with holy

thought.

Have brought this Agni for our aid.

7 Here Agni speaks and declares his universality as the Soul of all. He
knows all living creatures. His eye, or in his eye, is the light which is fed
with offerings of sacred oil. The ainrit, nectar, or ambrosia, which ia^the
re ward of piety, is obtained by burnt- offerings or through the mouth of
Agni. He traverses or measures out the firmament, and as light he shines as
the sun in heaven, the lightning in mid-air, and fire on earth. See note on
the passage in Wilson’s Translation.

8 With three refining*: according to S&yana, with his three purifying forma
as Agni, V&yu, aud Sdrya, or fire, wind, and sun. But pavitraih may mean
* with mental divisions,’ and the sense would be that Agni divided light into
three, sun, lightning and fire.

9 Hu Par entx’ boson ; in close connexion with Heaven and Earth.

342 THE HYMXS OF [BOOK tTf.

7 Immortal, Sacrifice^ God, with wondrous power he leads the

way,

Urging the great assembly on,

8 Strong, r ‘he is set on deeds of strength. In sacrifices led in

front,

As Singer he completes the rite.

9 Excellent, he was made by thought. The Germ of beings have

I gained,

Yea, and the Sire of active strength.

10 Thee have I stablished, Excellent, 0 strengthened by the sage’s

prayer !

Thee, Agni, longing, nobly bright.

11 Agni, the swift and active One, singers, at time of sacrifice,
Eagerly kindle with their food.

12 Agni the Son of Strength who shines up to the heaven in

solemn rites,

The wise of heart, I glorify.

1 3 Meet to be lauded and adored, showing in beauty through the

dark,

Agni, the Strong, is kindled well.

14 Agni is kindled as a bull, like a horse bearer of the Gods :

Men with oblations worship him.

15 Thee will we kindle as a bull, we who are Bulls ourselves, 0

Bull,

Thee, Agni, shining mightily.

HYMN XXVIII, Agni.

Agni who knowest all, accept our offering and the cake of
meal,

At dawn’s libation, rich in prayer !

2 Agni, the sacrificial cake hath been prepared and dressed for

thee :

Accept it, 0 Most Youthful God.

3 Agni, enjoy the cake of meal and our oblation three days old :
Thou, Son of Stoength, art stablished at our sacrifice.

9 He was made by thought : by holy thought, or devotion.

15 We koho are Bulls ourselves : priests are frequently called bulls, on ac-
count of their great power. Cf. III. 7. 7.

3 Our oblation three days old ; the Soma juice prepared the day before yes-
terday and Mb to ferment. *

HYMH 2?,] THE RIGVEDA. 343

4 Here at the midday sacrifice enjoy thou the sacrificial cake,

wise, J &ta vedas !

Agni, the sages in assemblies never minish the portion due to
thee the Mighty.

5 0 Agni, at the third libation take with joy the offered cake of

sacrifice, thou, Son of Strength.

Through skill in song bear to the Gods our sacrifice, watchful
and fraught with riches, to Immortal Gods.

6 0 waxing Agni, knower, thou, of all, accept our gifts, the cake,
And that prepared ere yesterday.

HYMN XXIX. Agni

Herb is the gear for friction, here tinder made ready for the
spark.

Bring thou the Matron : we will rub Agni in ancient fashion
forth.

•2 In the two fire-sticks Jaba vedas lieth, even as the well-set germ
in pregnant women,

Agni who day by day must be exalted by men who watch and
worship with oblations.

3 Lay this with care on that which lies extended : straight hath

she borne the Steer when made prolific.

With his red pillar — radiant is his splendour — in our skilled
task is born the Son of Ila.

4 In Ila’s place we set thee down, upon the central point of earth,
That, Agni Jatavedas, thou mayst bear our offerings to the

Gods,

5 Rub into life, ye men, the Sage, the guileless, Immortal, very

wise and fair to look on.

O men, bring forth the most propitious Agni, first ensign of
the sacrifice to eastward.

1 Here is the gear for friction : the word adhimdnthanam means the upper
-fire- stick and the string used in agitating it. The tinder is a tuft of dry
Kusa grass placed so as to catch the flame produced by attrition. The Matron :
the lower piece of wood in which the spark is genez’ated. S&yana explains
the word vh^itnini, feminine of vhpati , lord of the people, as protectress of
men by means of the sacrifices which are performed with the help of the fire
which she produces.

3 Lay this with care : place the upper fire-stick, which is to be turned rap-
idly ruund, upon the lower piece of wood which is prepared to receive it. The
/Son of lid : Agni.

4 In II Vs place ; on the northern altar, the place of worship and libation,
■or prayer and praise.

344 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK HI,

6 When with their arms they rub him straight he shineth forth

like a strong courser, red in colour, in the wood.

Bright, checkless, as it were upon the Asvins.’ path, hepasseth
by the stones and burneth up the grass.

7 Agni shines forth when born, observant, mighty, the bountiful,

the Singer praised by sages ;

Whom, as adorable and knowing all things, Gods set at solemn
rites as olFering-bearer.

8 Set thee, 0 Priest, in thine own place, observant : lay doVra

the sacrifice in the home of woi’sliip.

Thou, dear to Gods, shalt serve them with oblation : Agni, give
long life to the sacrincer.

9 Raise ye a mighty smoke, my fellow-workers 1 Ye shall attain

to wealth without obstruction.

This Agni is the battle- winning Hero by whom the Gods have
• overcome the Dasyus.

JO This is thine ordered place of birth whence sprung to life thou
shonest forth.

Knowing this, Agni, sit thee down, and prosper thou the songs
we sing.

11 As Germ Celestial he is called Tanunapat, and Narasansa born

diffused in varied shape.

Formed in his Mother he is Matarisvan ; he hath, in his course,
become the rapid flight of wind.

12 With strong attrition rubbed to life, laid down with careful

hand, a Sage,

Agni, make sacrifces good, and for the pious bring the Gods.

13 Mortals have brought to life the God Immortal, the Conqueror

with mighty jaws, unfailing.

The sisters ten, un wedded and united, together grasp the
Babe, the new-born Infant.

Served by the seven priests, he shone forth from ancient time,
when in his Mothers bosom, in her lap, he glowed.

Giving delight each day he closeth not his eye, since froftt
the Asura’s body he was brought to life.

6 As it were upon the Asvins' path : with the speed of the Asvins’ chariot.

8 In thine own place : the centre of the north altar.

11 A* Oerm Celestial: or child of the Asura Dyaus, that is, in the form of
lightning. In his Mother ; according to S&yana, in the maternal atmosphere,

13 The sisters ten ; the ringers used in producing fire.

14 The Asura's body : the Asura i~. * 1 ‘v Byaus. Professor Wilson,

following S&yana, translates, ‘from !, . : ■ (spark-) emitting wood,’’

HYMN 30.J

THE MOVE DA.

346

15 Even as the M&ruts 1 onslaughts who attack the foe, those

born the first of all knew the full power of prayer.

The Eusikas have made the glorious hymn ascend, and, each
one singly in his home, have kindled fire. ^

16 As we, O Priest observant, have elected thee this day, what

time the solemn sacrifice began, %

So surely hast thou worshipped, surely hast thou toiled : come
thou unto the Soma, wise and knowing all.

HYMN XXX. In dr a.

The friends who offer Soma long to find thee : they pour forth
Soma and present their viands.

They bear unmoved the cursing of the people, for all our
wisdom comes from thee, 0 Indra.

2 Not far for thee are mid-air’s loftiest regions : start hither,

Lord of Bays, with thy Bay Horses.

Made for the Firm and Strong are these libations. The
pressing-stones are set and fire is kindled.

3 Fair cheeks hath Indra, Maghavan, the Victor, Lord of a

great host, Stormer, strong in action.

What once thou didst in might when mortals vexed thee,—
where now, 0 Bull, are those thy hero exploits %

4 For, overthrowing what hath ne’er been shaken, thou goest

forth alone destroying Vritras.

For him who followeth thy Law the mountains and heaven
- and earth stand as if firmly stablished.

5 Yea, Much-invoked ! in safety through thy glories alone thou

spakost truth as Vritra’s slayer.

E’en these two boundless worlds to thee, 0 Indra, what time
thou graspest them, are but a handfuL

6 Forth with thy Bay Steeds down the steep, 0 Indra, forth,

crushing foemen, go thy bolt of thunder!

Slay those who meet thee, those who flee, who follow : make
all thy promise true ; be all completed.

7 The inan to whom thou givest as Provider enjoys domestic

plenty undivided.

Blest, Indra, is thy favour dropping fatness : thy worship,
Much-invoked ! brings gifts in thousands.

8 Thou, Indrn, Much Invoked 1 didst crush to pieces Kun&ru

handless fiend who dwelt with DAnu.

15 Those born the first of all; the most ancient Rishis such as Kusika and
his sons.

8 Kundvu; the name o£ a demon. Edna: mother of Yritra. Seo I. 32. 9,

346 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IJI.

Thou with might, Indra, smotest dead the seorner, the
footless Vritra as he waxed in vigour.

9 Thou hast established in her seat, 0 Indra, the level earth,
vast, vigorous, unbounded.

The Bull hath propped the heaven and air’s mid-region; By
thee sent onward let the floods flow hither.

10 He who withheld the kine, in silence yielded in fear before
thy blow 0 Indra.

He made paths easy to drive forth the cattle. Loud-breath-
ing praises helped the Much-invoked One.

■11 Indra alone filled full the earth and heaven, the Pair who
meet together, rich in treasures.

Yea, bring thou near us Jro.n the air’s mid-region strength,
on thy car, and wholesome food, 0 Hero.

12 Surya transgresses not the ordered limits set daily by the

Lord of Tawny Coursers.

When to the goal he comes, bis journey ended, his Steeds he
looses : this is Indra’s doing.

13 Men gladly in the course of night would look on the broad

bright front of the refulgent Morning ;

And all acknowledge, when she comes in glory, the manifold
and goodly works of Indra.

14 A mighty splendour rests upon her bosom : bearing ripe milk

the Cow, unripe, advances.

All sweetness is collected in the Heifer, sweetness w T hieh
Indra made for our enjoyment.

15 Barring the way, they come.- Be firm, 0 Indra; aid friends

to sacrifice and him who singeth.

These must be slain by thee, -malignant mortals, armed with
ill arts, our quiver-bearing foemen.

1 6 A cry is heard from enemies most near us : against them

send thy fiercest-flaming weapon.

Bend them from under, crush them and subdue them. Slay,
Maghavan, and make the fiends our booty.

9 The Hall : the mighty Indra.

10 In silence : I adopt Prof. M. Muller’s interpretation (Yedic Hymns, I. pp.
'227, 228) of the difficult word aldtrindh, ' which had evidently become
unintelligible even at the time of Y&ska.’

*1% Set daily : with reference, perhaps, as Professor Ludwig remarks, -to
the apparent change in the sun’s place of rising.

14 The Cow , and the Heifer : beneficent Uslias or Morning.

15 They come ; those who revile and hinder the worship of Indra.

jftrMN SlJ THE MIG VEDA. 347

17 Root up the race of Rakshasas, 0 Indra ; rend it in front and

crush it in the middle.

How long hast thou behaved as one who wavers 1 Cast thy
hot dart at him who hates devotion : «

18 When borne by strong Steeds for our weal, 0 Leader, thou

seatest thee at many noble viands,

May we be winners of abundant riches. May Indra be our
wealth with store of children.

19 Bestow on us resplendent wealth, 0 Indra; let us enjoy thine
* overflow of bounty.

Wide as a sea our longing hath expanded, fulfil it, 0 thou
Treasure-Loi'd of treasures.

20 With kine and horses satisfy this longing ; with very splendid

bounty still extend it.

Seeking the light, with hymns to thee, 0 Indra, the Kusikas
have brought their gift, the singers.

21 Lord of the kine, burst the kine’s stable open : cows shall be

ours, and strength that wins the booty.

Hero, whose might is true, thy home is heaven : to us, 0
Maghavan, grant gifts of cattle.

22 Call we on Maghavan, auspicious Indra, best Hero in this

fight whei^e spoil is gathered,

The Strong who listens, who gives aid in battles, who slays
the Vritras, wins and gathers riches.

f HYMN XXXI. Indra.

Wise, teaching, following the thought of Order, the soilless
gained a grandson from his daughter.

Fain, as a sire, to see his child prolific, he sped to meet her
with an eager spirit.

1 I am unable to give a satisfactory or even an intelligible version or
explanation of the first two stanzas which appear to attribute, in a very
obscure manner, to Agni and the Gods in heaven the customs or laws of
succession to property among men. In the first stanza vdhnih, which usually
means an oblation-bearer, a sacrificer, a priest, or one who is borne along as a
God in a celestial car, is said by Sftyana to mean son less, the father of a
daughter only, because he transfers his property through his married
daughter into another family. The sonless father, according to B&yapa,
* stipulates that his daughter’s son, his grandson, shall be his son, a mode of
affiliation recongnized by law ; and, relying on an heir thus obtained, and one
who can perform his funeral rites, he is satisfied.’ This may be intelligible,
but what it has to do with Agni or with the rest of the hymn is nat clear.
Grassmann takes vdhnih to mean the upper fire-stick, and 'the daughter to
mean the lower piece of wood. .

■348 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK TIL

2 The Son left not his portion to the brothel, he made a home

to hold him who she aid gain it*

What time his Parents gave the Priest his being, of the good
pair one acted, one promoted.

3 Agni was horn trembling with tongue that flickered, so that

the Red’s great children should be honoured.

Great is their germ, that born of them is mighty, great the
Bays’ Lord’s approach through sacrifices.

4 Conquering bands upon the Warrior waited : they recognized

great light from out the darkness.

The conscious Dawns went forth to meet his coming, and the
sole Master of the kine was Indra.

5 The sages freed them from their firm-built prison : the seven

priests drave them forward with their spirit.

All holy Order’s pathway they discovered : he, full of know-
ledge, shared these deeds through worship,

6 When Sarama had found the mountain’s fissure, that vast and

ancient place she plundered throughly.

In the floods’ van she led them forth, light-footed : she who
well knew came first unto their lowing.

7 Longing for friendship came the noblest singer : the hill pour-

ed forth its treasure for the pious.

2 The Son left not his portion to the brother : Wilson, following Sayana tran-
slates: ‘(a son) born of the body does not transfer (paternal) wealth to a
sister.’ Ludwig tabes the meaning to be : the bodily son (of Dyaus, or of the
heavenly waters) did not transmit his inheritance (that is, sacrifice) to a bro-
ther. A home : the plants which receive and hold Agni, who obtains the in-
heritance of sacrifice. II is Parents : perhaps the fire sticks, one of which by
agitation produces the flame in the other. The good pair : the terrestrial offerer
who performs the sacrifice, and the celestial offerer who makes it effectual.
See Bergaigne, La Religion Vedique, I. 234.

Ludwig allows that the meaning of the first two stanzas is problematical, and
Wilson says of his own translation : 2 3 4 5 6 7 these two verses, if rightly interpreted,
are wholly unconnected with the subject of the Siikta, and come in without
any apparent object : they are very obscure, and are only made somewhat in-
telligible by interpretations which seem to be arbitrary, and are very unusual,
although not peculiar to Sayaru, his explanations being based on those of Iblskad

3 The Red's great children ; the hot rays of the glowing fire. That born of
them; Indra’s coming, which is caused by the kindling of sacrirical fire.

4^ Conquering b nids : the over-victorious Marufcs, The Warrior : Indra,
.their leader. Master of the kine ; reeoverer of the vanished rays of light.

5 The sages and the seven priests ; are the Angirases.

6 Saramd : the hound of Indra. See I. 62. 3. In the floods' van : hasten-
ing out of the mountain cavern in advance of the liberated waters. Them;
the cows, the waters and the rays of light

7 The noblest singer ; as a noun of multitude, all the Angirases,

349

HYMN SI.] THE RIG VEDA.

■ The Hero with young followers fought and conquered, and
straightway Angiras was singing praises.

8 Peer of each noble thing, yea, all- excelling, all creatures doth

he know, he slayeth Suslina. 19

Our Leader, fain for war, singing from heaven, as Friend ha
. saved his lovers from dishonour.

9 They sate them down with spirit fain for booty, making with

hymns a way to life eternal.

And this is still their place of frequent session, whereby they
sought to gain the months through Order.

10 Drawing the milk of ancient seed prolific, they joyed as they

beheld their own possession.

Their shout of triumph heated earth and heaven. When the
kine showed, they bade the heroes rouse them.

11 Indra dravo forth the kine, that Vritra-slayer, while hymns

of praise rose up and gifts were offered.

For him the Cow, noble and far-extending, poured pleasant
juices, bringing oil and sweetness.

12 They made a mansion for their Father, deftly provided him a

great and glorious dwelling ;

With firm support parted and stayed the Parents, and, sitting,
fixe:l him there erected, mighty.

13 What time the ample chalice had impelled him, swift waxing,

vast, to pierce the earth and heaven, —

Him in whom blameless songs are all united : all powers invim
cible belong to Indra.

14 1 crave thy powers, I crave thy mighty friendship : full many

a team goes to the V'fitra-alayer.

Great is the laud, we seek the Prince’s favour. Be thou, O
Maghavan, our guard and keeper.

The Hero : Ipdra with his allies the Marais.

9 They : the Angirases, who had been eager to recover the cows. To gain
the months : to acquire the power of keeping the monthly festivals.

10 Or, 4 They joyed to see them, as their own possession, yielding the milk
of ancient seed prolific.’ The Angirases rejoiced as they again beheld the rays
of light, shedding what originates and supports all life. SAyana’s rendering
of this difficult stanza is thus given by Wilson : f Comte; n plating their own
(cattle) giving milk to their former progeny (the Any i rasas) were delighted ;
their shouts spread through heaven and earth ; they replaced the recovered
kine in their [daces, and stationed guards over the cows.’

12 For their Father : according to B&yana, for their protector Indra. But
Agni may be meant, the mansion being the place of sacrifice. The Parents :
Heaven and Barth, parents of all things.

13 The ample chalice : the bowl of Soma juice. But, according to Ludwig,
Bhishdrid here and elsewhere, means earnest wish, longing.

14 Fall many a team : hymns sent forth like teams of horses.

m THE HYMNS OF IBOOK ■ JIL

15 He, having found great, splendid, rich dominion, sent life and

motion to his friends and lovers.

Indra who shone together with the Heroes begat the song,
the £re, and Sun and Morning.

16 Vast, the Hoitse-Friend, he set the waters flowing, all-lucid,

widely spread, that move together.

. By the wise cleansings of the meath made holy, through days
and nights they speed the swift streams onward.

17 To thee proceed the dark, the treasure-holders, both of them

sanctified by Siirya’s bounty,

The while thy lovely storming Friends, 0 Indra, fail to attain
the measure of thy greatness.

18 Be Lord of joyous songs, 0 Vritra-slayer, Bull dear to all, who

gives the power of living.

Come unto us with thine auspicious friendship, hastening,
Mighty One, with mighty succours.

19 Like Angiras I honour him with worship, and renovate old song

for him the Ancient.

Chase thou the many godless evil creatures, and give ys, Magha-
van, heaven’s light to help us.

20 Far forth are spread the purifying waters : convey thou us

across them unto safety!

Save us, our Charioteer, from harm, 0 Indra, soon, very soon,
make us win spoil of cattle. . «

21 His kine their Lord hath shown, e’en Vritra’s slayer : through

the black hosts he passed with red attendants.

Teaching us pleasant things by holy Order, to us hath he
thrown open all his portals.

22 Call we on Maghavan, auspicious Indra, best Hero in this light

where spoil is gathered,

The Strong who listens, who gives aid in battles, who slays the
Vritras, wins and gathers riches.

16 By the wise cleansings : or according to Sdyana, the wise purifiers, that is,
Agni, V&yu, and Surya, who act as purifiers of the libation of Soma juice.

17 The dark , the treasure-holders : or, the dark one and the treasure-holder ;
Night and Day. Storming Friends : the Maruts.

20 The purifying waters : the epithet pdvaMh, purifying, is entirely out of
place here. Ludwig suggests pdpakdh, wicked, which would be more suitable.

21 Kine ; rays of light. Med attendants ; the Maruts.

■ ‘ c of the verses in this hymn/ Prof. Wilson observes, c are of more

than usual obscurity.’ Prof. Grassmann places the hymn in his Appendix.

MYMN 3*2;}

THE RIG VEDA.

351

HYMN XXXIL Indra.

Drink thou this Soma, Indra, Lord of Soma ; drink thou the
draught of noonday which thou lovest.

Puffing thy cheeks, impetuous,^ liberal Giver, here loose thy
two Bay Horses and rejoice thee.

2 Quaff it pure, meal-blent, mixt with milk, 0 Indra ; we have

poured forth the Soma for thy rapture.

Knit with the prayer-fulfilling band of Maruts, yea, with the
Rudras, drink till thou art sated ;

3 Those who gave increase to thy strength and vigour, the Maruts

singing forth thy might, 0 Indra.

Drink thou, 0 fair of cheek, whose hand wields thunder, with
Rudras banded, at our noon libation.

4 They, even the Maruts who were there, excited with song the

meat h -created strength of Indra.

By them impelled to act he reached the vitals of Vritra, though
. v he deemed that none might wound him.

5 Pleased, like a man, with our libation, Indra, drink, for endur-

ing hero might, the Soma.

Lord of Bays, moved by sacrifice come hither : thou with the
Swift Ones stirrest floods and waters.

6 When thou didst loose the streams to run like racers in the

swift contest, having smitten Vritra
With flying weapon where he lay, 0 Indra, and, godless, kept
the Goddesses encompassed.

7 With reverence let us worship mighty Indi*a, great and sub-

lime, eternal, ever-youthful,

Whose greatness the dear world-halves have not measured, no,
nor conceived the might of him the Holy.

8 Many are Indra’s nobly wrought achievements, and non6 of all

the Gods transgress his statutes.

He beareth up this earth and heaven, and, doer of marvels, he
begat the Sun and Morning.

1 Pujincf thy cheeks: meaning, apparently, smacking thy lips in anticipation
of the Sonia-draught. Sflyana explains it. as, ‘ filling their (Indra's horses’)
jaws with fodder.’ Impetuous : this appears to be the meaning of the epithet
rijtshin as derived from the root rij, rather than, as Sftyana explains it, ‘drinker
of the spiritless residue of the Soma.’ The latter meaning, however, is admis-
sible, and is supported by good authority.

3 The Maruts singing forth thy might : the song of the Maruts is the music
of * The wingM storm’s, chaunting their thunder-psalm,’ — Shelley.

5 Like a man : ot } as thou wast pleased with the libation of Manu.

The Swift Ones : the Maruts.

" 6 The Goddesses : the heaven' y waters.

7 The dear world-halves : heaven and earth.

352 THE HYMN'S OF [BOOK III.

'9 Herein, 0 Guileless One, is thy true greatness, that soon as
horn thou (frankest up the Soma.

Bays may not check the power of thee the Mighty, nor the
nights, Indra, nor the months, nor autumns.

10 As soon as thou wast bom in highest heaven thou drankest

Soma to delight thee, Indra ;

And when thou hadst pervaded earth and heaven thou wast
the first supporter of the singer.

11 Thou, puissant God, more mighty, slowest Ahi showing his

strength when couched around the waters.

The heaven itself attained not to thy greatness when with one
hip of thine the earth was shadowed.

12 Sacrifice, Indra, made thee wax so mighty, the dear oblation

with the flowing Soma.

0 Worshipful, with worship help our worship, for worship helped
thy bolt when slaying Ahi.

13 With sacrifice and wish have I brought Indra j still for new

blessings may [ turn him hither,

Him magnified by ancient songs and praises, by lauds of later
time and days yet recent. ^

14 I have brought forth a song when longing seized me : ere the

decisive day will I laud Indra ;

Then may he safely bear us over trouble, as in a ship, when
both sides invooate him.

15 Full is las chalice : Glory 1 Like a pourer I have filled up the

vessel for his dripking.

Presented on the right, dear Soma juices have brought us
Indra, to rejoice him, hither.

16 Hot the . deep-flowing flood, 0 Much-invoked One ! not hills

that compass thee about restrain thee,

Since here incited, for thy friends, 0 Indra, thou brakost e’en
the firm-built stall of cattle.

17 Call we on Maghavau, auspicious Indra, best Hero in tho fight

where spoil is gathered,

The Strong who listens, who gives aid in battles, who slays
the Vritras, wins and gathers riches.

11 When with one kip of thine tho earth <ii m shadowed : Prof. Wilson, follow-
ing Say ana, translates: ‘as th »u remaiuwlst concealing the earth by one of
{thy) flames/ and observes that rhe meaning is not very clear. But aphid
means a hip anti not a flame, and the poet appears to mean that a portion of
Indra’s body shadowed or covered the earth while the rest was in the heavens.
So, in Book X. 119 11, Indra is represented as saying when exhilarated by
Soma : divi me any 'tty palesht) \ih6 any dm aehtkrisham % one side of me is in
tie sky, and I have drawn the other down.

14 Ere the decisive day : un the eve of au important, battle.

HYMN 33.]

THE MG Y ED A,

353

HYMN XXXIII. Indra.

Forth from the bosom of the mountains, eager as two swift
mares with loosened rein contending,

Like two bright mother cows who lick their youngling,
Vip&s and Sutudri speed down their waters.

2 Impelled by Indra whom ye pray to urge you, ye move as

’twere on chariots to the ocean.

Flowing together, swelling with your billows, 0 lucid Streams,
each of you seeks the other.

3 I have attained the most maternal River, we have approached

Vipas, the broad, the blessed.

Licking as ’twere their calf the pair of Mothers flow onward
to their common home together.

4 We two who rise and swell with billowy waters move forward

to the home which Gods have made us.

Our flood may not be stayed when urged to motion. What
would the singer, calling to the Rivers ?

5 Linger a little at my friendly bidding ; rest, Holy Ones, a

moment in your journey.

With hymn sublime soliciting your favour Kusika’s son hath
called unto the River.

6 Indra who wields the thunder dug our channels : he smote

down Vritra, him who stayed our currents.

Savitar, God, the lovely-handed, led us, and at his sending
forth we flow expanded.

The hymn is a dialogue between Visv&mitra and the rivers Vipfts and Sutu-
dri who are regarded severally as the Rishis or seers of the verses ascribed to
them. The legend cited by S£yana ’says that Visv&mitra, the Purohita or
family priest of King Sud&s, having obtained wealth by. means of his office,
took the whole of it and came to the confluence of the Vip&s and the Sutudri.
Others followed. In order to make the rivers fordable he lauded them with
the first three verses of the hymn. The hymn has some poetical beauty, and
is interesting as a relic of the traditions of the Aryans regarding their pro-
gress eastward in the Land of the Five Rivers.

1 Viptis .* considered to be identical with the Hyphasis of Arrian, is the
modern Beils which rises in the Himalaya and falls yito the Sutlej, the
& itudri of the text, a little to the south-east of Amritsar.

4 The rivers speak in reply to Visvftmitra’s address.

5 Visv&mitra speaks again. At my friendly bidding : according to the
Scholiasts, Y&ska and Sctyana, the meaning of me vdchase somyftya is, ‘ to my
speech importing the Soma ; ’ that is, the object of my address is that I may
cross over and gather the Soma-plant. The word somyd , consisting of, con-
nected with, or inspired by, Soma, appears to have here its more general
meaning of lovely, pleasant, or friendly. Husika's son : Visv&mitra.

6 The rivers speak. Savitar : said by S&yana to be used here as an epithet
of Indra, f the impeller of the whole world,’

23

354 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK ill .

7 That hero deed of Indra must be lauded for* ever that he i^ent

Ahi in pieces.

He smote away the obstructed with his thunder, and eager
for their course forth flowed the waters.

8 Never forget this word of thine, 0 singer, which future gene-

rations shall reecho.

In hymns, 0 bard, show us thy loving-kindness. Humble us
not mid men. To thee be honour i

9 List quickly, Sisters, to the bard who eometh to you from far

away with car and wagon. ■

Bow lowly down; be easy to be traversed: stay, Rivers, with
your floods below our axles.

10 Yea, we will listen to thy words, 0 singer. With wain and

car from far away thou comes t.

Low, like a nursing mother, will I bend me, and yield me as a
maiden to her lover.

11 Soon as the Bhai'atas have fared across thee, the warrior band,,

urged on and sped by Indra,

Then let your streams flow on in rapid motion. I crave your
favour who deserve our worship.

i 2 The warrior host, the Bharatas, fared over : the singer won the
favour of the Rivers.

Swell with your billows, hasting, pouring riches. Fill full your
channels, and roll swiftly onward.

13 So let your wave bear up the pins, and ye, 0 Waters, spare the
thongs ;

And never may the pair of Bulls, harmless and sinless, waste
away.

HYMN XXXIV. indra.

Fort-renuer, Lord of Wealth, dispelling foemen, Indra with
lightnings hath o’ercome the Dasa.

7 Visvamitra speaks.

8 The rivers speak.

9 Vis vara itra speaks.

10 The rivers speak.

11 Visvdmitra speaks. The Bharatas : the family of Visv&mitra.

13 This verse, in a different metre,, is manifestly a later addition. The pins :
of the yokes. The pair of Bulls: the two strong rushing rivers. Of.
Horace’s tauriformis Aufidus. Prof. Wilson, following Sftyana, gives a some-
what different version of the stanza : ‘ Let your waves (rivers) so flow that
the pin of the yoke may be above (their) waters : leave the traces full, and
may (the two streams) exempt from misfortune or defect, and uncensured,
exhibit no (present) increase.’ 1

1 Fort-render ; breaker-down of the cloud-castles of the demons who with-
hold the rain as well as of the strongholds of the hostile non-Aryan tribes,

THE RIG VXD A.

3&5

HtMN 34.]

Impelled by prayer and waxen great in body, lie hath filled
earth and heaven, the Bounteous Giver.

2 I stimulate tliy zeal, the Strong, the Hero, decking my song

of praise for thee Immortal. #

0 Indra, thou art equally the Leader of heavenly hosts and
human generations.

3 Leading his band Indra encompassed Vritra; weak grew the

wily leader of enchanters.

- He who burns fierce in forests slaughtered Yyansa, and made
the Milch-kine of the nights apparent.

4 Indra, light-winner, days 5 Creator, conquered, victorious, hos-

tile bands with those who loved him.

For man the days 5 bright ensign he illumined, and found the
light for his great joy and gladness,

5 Forward to fiercely falling blows pressed Indra, herolike

doing. many hero exploits.

These holy songs he taught the bard who praised him, and
widely spread these Dawns 5 resplendent colour.

6 They laud the mighty acts of him the Mighty, the many

glorious deeds performed by Indra.

He in his strength, with all-surpassing prowess, through
wondrous arts crushed the malignant Dasyus.

7 Lord of the brave, Indra who rules the people gave freedom

to the Gods by might and battle.

Wise singers glorify with chanted praises these his achieve-
ments in Vivasv t Ws dwelling.

8 Excellent, Conqueror, the victory-giver, the winner of the

light and Godlike Waters,

He who hath won this broad earth and this heaven, — in
Indra they rejoice who love devotions.

9 He gained possession of the Sun and Horses, Indra obtained

the Cow who feedeth many.

Treasure of gold he^won ; he smote the Dasyus, and gave
protection to the Aryan colour.

3 He who burns fierce in forests : perhaps the thunderbolt. Vyansa ; the
name of one of the demons of drought. See I. 101. 2, and 103, 2.

Made the MUch-Hne of the nights apparent according to Sflyana, ‘made
manifest the (stolen) cows (that had been hidden) in the night ; ’ that is,
recovered the rays of light.

7 In Vivasvdns dwelling : in the sacrificial chamber, in' the home of the
worshipper who represents Vivasv&n, the Radiant God, regarded as the
Celestial Sacrificer.

9 The Aryan colour; or, race of Aryas ; according to S&yana, the noblest
tribe or order, meaning the first three classes or castes.

356 TBE HYMNS OF [BOOK 111 .

10 He took the plants and days for his possession • he gained the

forest trees and air’s mid-region.

Yala he cleft, and chased away opponents : thus was he tamer
of the overweening.

11 Call we on Maghayap, auspicious Ipdra, best Hero in the fight

where spoil is gathered,

The Strong, who listens, who gives aid in battles, who slays
the Vritras, wins and gathers treasures.

HYMN XXXY. Ipdra,

Mount the Bay Horses to thy chariot harnessed, and come to
us like Y&yu with his coursers.

Thou, hastening to us, shalt drink the Soma. Hail, Indra !
We have poured it for thy rapture.

2 For him, the God who is invoked by many, the two swift Bay

. Steeds to the pole I harness,

That they in fleet course may bring Indra hither, e’en to this
sacrifice ai’ranged completely.

3 Bring the strong Steeds who drink the warm libation, and,

Bull of Godlike nature, be thou gracious.

Let thy Steeds eat ; set free thy Tawny Horses, apd roasted
grain like this consume thou daily.

4 Those who are yoked by prayer with prayer I harness, fleet

friendly Bays who take their joy together.

Mounting thy firm and easy car, 0 Indra, wise and all-know-
ing come thou to the Soma.

5 No other worshippers must stay beside thepi thy Bays, thy

vigorous and smooth-backed Coursers.

Pass by them all and hasten onward hither: with Soma
pressed we will prepare to feast thee.

6 Thine is this Soma : hasten to approach it, Drink thou there-?

of, benevolent, and cease not.

Sit on the sacred grass at this our worship, apd take these
. drops into thy belly, Indra.

7 The grass is strewn for thee, pressed is the Soma; the graip

is ready for thy Bays to feed on.

To thee who lovest them, the very mighty, strong, girt by
Maruts, are these gifts presented.

2 7 harness ; my prayer causes Indra to harness.

3 Who drink the warm libation t or, according to S&yana, * who protect. us
from our enemies.’ Roasted grain ; ft ied barley, according to Sayana. The
grain would appear to be intended for Indra’s horses, Sec stanza 7.

f&E MOVED A.

BVMtf 36.]

357

8 This the sweet draught, with cows, the men, the mountains,

the waters, Indra, have for thee made ready.

Come, drink thereof, Sublime One, friendly-minded, foreseeing,
knowing well the ways thou goest.

9 The Maruts, they with whom thou sharedst Soma, fndra, who

made thee strong and were thine army, —

With these accordant, eagerly desirous drink thou this Soma
with the tongue of Agni.

10 Drink, Indra, of the juice by thine own nature, or by the

tongue of Agni, 0 thou Holy.

Accept the sacrificial gift, 0 Sakra, from the Adhvaryu’s hand
or from the HotaFs.

11 Call we on Maghavan, auspicious Indra, best Hero in the fight

where spoil is gathered,

The Strong, who listens, who gives aid in battles, who slays
the Yritras, wins and gathers riches.

HYMN XXXYI. Indra.

With constant succours, fain thyself to share it, make this
oblation which we bring effective.

Grown great through strengthening gifts at each libation, he
hath become renowned by mighty exploits.

2 For Indra were the Somas erst discovered, whereby he grew

strong-jointed, vast, and skilful.

Indra, take quickly these presented juices : drink of the strong,
that which the strong have shaken.

3 Drink and wax great. Thine are the juices, Indra, both Somas

of old time and these we bring thee.

Even as thou drankest, Indra, earlier Somas, so drink to-day,
a new guest, meet for praises.

4 Great and impetuous, mighty-voiced in battle, surpassing

power is his, and strength resistless.

Him the broad earth hath never comprehended when Somas
cheered the Lord of Tawny Coursers.

8 With coios : that is, with the milk which is mixed with Soma. The men :
who mate all preparations for the sacrifice. The mountains : on which the
Soma grows ; or perhaps the pressing-stones brought from the hill-side. The
waters : used to purify the Soma.

10 By thine own nature: by thine own strength, or effort ; spontaneously.
Sakra ; Mighty One ; a common name of Indra.

2 Brink of the strong : that is, of the strong Soma juice, which has been
shaken , i. e. violently pressed out, by the strong pressing-stones.

4 Mighty-voiced : the exact meaning of vir opsin is uncertain. Prof. Wilson
renders it, after S&yana, by ‘ defier of foes,’

m THE HYMNS OF [BOOK TIL

5 Mighty and strong he waxed for hero exploit : the Bull was

furnished with a Sage's wisdom.

Indra is our kind Lord; his steers have vigour ; his cows are
many with abundant offspring,

6 As floods according to their stream flow onward, so to the sea,

as borne on cars, the waters.

Vaster is Indra even than his dwelling, what time the stalk
milked out, the Soma, fills him,

7 Eager to mingle with the sea, the rivers carry the well-pressed

Soma juice to Indra.

They drain the stalk out with their arms, quick-handed, and
cleanse it with a stream of mead and filters.

■8 Like lakes appear his flanks filled full with Soma : yea, he con-
tains libations in abundance.

When Indra had consumed the first sweet viands, he, after
slaying Vritra, claimed the Soma.

8 Then bring thou hither, and let none prevent it : we know

thee well, the Lord of wealth and treasure.

That splendid gift which is thine own, 0 Indra, vouchsafe to
us, Lord of the Tawny Coursers.

10 0 Indra, Maghavan, impetuous mover, grant us abundant

wealth that brings all blessings.

Give us a hundred autumns for our life-time : give us, 0 fair-
cheeked Indra, store of heroes.

11 Call we on Indra, Maghavan, auspicious, best Hero in the fight

where spoil is gathered,

The Strong, who listens, who gives aid in battles, who slays
the Vritras, wins and gathers riches.

HYMN XXXVII. Indra.

0 Tndba, for the strength that slays Vritra and conquers in
the fight,

We turn thee hitherward to us.

5 His cows : I follow S&yana, Roth, Ludwig, and Grassmann in giving this
^meaning to ddkshinrth, as the meaning ‘ guerdons,’ ‘donations,’ does not suit

the passage.

6 As livers increase the size of the ocean, so libations of Soma juice aug-
ment the greatness of Indra until he is too vast for his home the heaven to
contain him.

7 The sea, : perhaps the sacrificial reservoir. The rivers ; waters used in the
Soma ceremonies.

They drain : that is, the officiating priests.

9 Bring thou hither : bring the wealth for which we pray,

10, A hundred autumns ; see I. 89, 9,

HYMN 88. J

THE MOVE DA,

359

2 0 Indra, Lord of Hundred Powers, may those who praise thee

hitherward

Direct thy spirit and thine eye,

3 0 Indra, Lord of Hundred Powers, with all our songs we in-

vocate 0

Thy names for triumph over foes.

4 We strive for glory through the powers immense of him whom

many praise,

Of Indra who supports mankind.

5 For Vritra’s slaughter I address Indra whom many invocate,
To win us booty in the wars.

6 In battles be victorious. We seek thee, Lord of Hundred Powers,
Indra, that Vritra may be slain.

7 In splendid combats of the hosts, in glories where the fight

is won,

Indra, be victor over foes.

8 Drink thou the Soma for our help, bright, vigilant, exceeding

strong,

0 Indra, Lord of Hundred Powers.

9 0 Satakratu, powers which thou mid the Five Races hast dis-

played—

These, Indra, do I claim of* thee.

10 Indra, great glory hast thou gained. Win splendid fame which

none may mar :

We make thy might perpetual.

11 Come to us either from anear, or, Sakra, come from far away.
Indra, wherever he thy home, come to us thence, 0 Thunder-
armed.

HYMN XXXVIII. Indra.

Hasttng like some strong courser good at drawing, a thought
have I imagined like a workman.

Pondering what is dearest and most noble, I long to see the
sages full of wisdom.

2 Those who ‘praise thee : the institutors of the sacrifice.

S Vigilant : according to S&yaua, Soma prevents sleep,

9 Satakratu : Lord of a hundred, or countless, powers.

The Five Faces : Indra is the special protector of the five Aryan tribes.

This hymn is ascribed to the Tlislii Prajdpati, of tlie family of Visv&mitra,
or Prajftpati, son of Vfik, or both together, or Visvamitra himself. Tlie deity
is said to be Indra, although he is mentioned only in the concluding vgrae.
The hymn is intentionally obscure, and in parts unintelligible.

1 Like a xoorkman : as a carpenter prepares his wood.

1 long to see the sages ; that I may learn from them what I wish to know.

360 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Jit

2 Ask of the sages 1 mighty generations : firm-minded and devout

they framed the heaven.

These are thy heart-sought strengthening directions, and they
have come to be the sky’s upholders.

3 Assuming in this world mysterious natures, they decked the

heaven and earth for high dominion,

Measured with measures, fixed their bimd expanses, set the
great worlds apart held firm for safety.

4 Even as he mounted up they all adorned him : self-luminous he

travels clothed in splendour.

That is the Bull’s, the Asura’s mighty figure : he, omniform,
hath reached the eternal waters.

5 First the more ancient Bull engendered offspring : these are

his many draughts that lent him vigour.

From days of old ye Kings, two Sons of Heaven, by hymns of
sacrifice have won dominion.

6 Three seats ye Sovrans, in the holy synod, many, yea, all, ye

honour with your presence.

There saw I, going thither in the spirit, Gandharvas in their
course with wind-blown tresses.

7 That same companionship of her, the Milch-cow, here with the

strong Bull’s divers forms they stablished.

Enduing still some new- celestial figure, the skilful workers
shaped a form around him.

8 Let no one here debar me from enjoying the golden light which

Savitar diffuses.

He covers both all-fostering worlds with praises even as a wo-
man cherishes her children.

3 For high dominion : that Indra might rule over them.

4 Even as he mounted : that is, Indra as the Sun.

The eternal waters : or, according to Prof. Roth, ‘ the forces of eternity/

5 The more ancient Bull : Indra as the Sun.

Two Sons of Heaven : or of Dyaus ,* Vanina and perhaps Mitra.

6 The three seats are heaven, the firmament or mid-air, and the earth. The
poet appears to mean, by the words that follow, that no place of sacrifice is
duly consecrated unless these Gods are present.

The Gandharvas, according to the Scholiast, are the guardians of the Soma.
Here, probably, they are merely sunbeams.

7 The Milch-cow is Dawn, and the strong Bull is apparently Indra as the
Sun.* ‘This stanza/ Professor Wilson remarks, ‘is singularly obscure, and is
very imperfectly explained by the commentators/

8 This stanza also is hardly intelligible.

TEM hiqymda.

EYMN 39.1

36l

9 Fulfil, ye Twain, his work, the Great, the Ancient r as heavenly
blessing keep your guard around us.

All the wise Gods behold his varied actions who stands erect*
whose voice is like a herdsman's.

10 Call we on Indra, Maghavan, auspicious, best Hero in the 4
fight where spoil is gathered,

The Strong, who listens, who gives aid in battles, who slays-
the Vritras, wins and gathers riches,

HYxAHNf XXXIX, Ia&a,

To Indra from the heart the hymn proceedeth, to hirn the Lord*
recited, built with praises ;

The wakening song sung forth in holy synod : that Which i&
born for thee, 0 Indra, notice.

2 Born from the heaven e'en in the days aforetime, wakening*

sung aloud in holy synod,

Auspicious, clad in white and shining raiment, this is the
ancient hymn of our forefathers.

3 The Mother of the Twins hath borne Twin Children : my

tongue’s tip raised itself and rested silent.

Killing the darkness at the light's foundation, the Couple newly
born attain their beauty.

4 Not one is found among them, none of mortals, to blame our

sires who fought to win the cattle.

Their strengthen er was Indra the Majestic ; he spread their
stalls of kine, the Wonder-Worker.

5 Where as a Friend with friendly men, NavagVas, with heroes*

on his knees he sought the cattle.

There, verily with ten Daeagvas Indra found the Sun lying
hidden in the darkness.

9 Ye Tioain ; apparently Mitra and Varuna, The Great , the Ancient : Dyaus.
Whose voice is like a herdsman’s : Professor Wilson renders this, { blandly-
speaking.’ The meaning appears to be, using his voice for the protection of
man, like a herdsman who calls out to his cattle.

This hymn and the following thirteen are ascribed to the Rishi Visv&mitra.

2 Glad in white and shining raiment .* clothed with energy and splendour.

3 The Mother of the Twins: according to S&yana, Ushas or Dawn. Twin
Children : the Asvins. My tongue’s tip raised itself : I prepared to praise the
Asvins, but was unequal to the task.

4 See M. Muller, Chips, IV. 29 (Edition of 1895).

5 Navagvas : f - 1 ,/* \tnily often associated with the Angirasea

and described as : !■ ■■■ battles. See I. 33. 6, and 62. 4.

Easagvas : memoers oi, or priestly allies connected with, the family of
Angiras. See I. 62, 4.

m. THE HYMNS OF [BOOK ITT.

*6 Indra found meath collected in the milch-cow, by foot and.
hoof, in the cow’s place of pasture*

That which lay secret, hidden in the waters, he held in his
right r hand, the rich rewarder.

7 He took the light, discerning it from darkness : may we be far

removed from all misfortune.

These songs, 0 Soma-drinker, cheered by Soma, Indra, accept
from thy most zealous poet.

8 Let there be light through both the worlds for worship : may

we be far from overwhelming evil.

Great woe comes even from the hostile mortal, piled up ; but
good at rescue are the Yasus.

9 Gall we on Magfiavan, auspicious Indra, best Hero in the fight

where spoil is gathered,

The Strong, who listens, who gives aid in battles, who slays
the Yritras, wins and gathers riches.

HYMN XL. Indra,

Thee, Indra, we invoke, the Bull, what time the Soma is
expressed.

So drink thou of the savoury juice.

2 Indra, whom many laud, accept the strength-conferring Soma

juice :

Quaff, pour down drink that satisfies.

3 Indra, with all the Gods promote our wealth-bestowing

sacrifice,

Thou highly-lauded Lord of men.

4 Lord of the brave, to thee proceed these drops of Soma juice

expressed,

The bright drops to thy dwelling-place.

5 >Vithin thy belty, Indra, take juice, Soma the most excellent :
Thine are the drops celestial.

6 Drink our libation, Lord of hymns : with streams of meath

thou art bedewed :

Our glory, Indra, is thy gift.

7 To Indra go the treasures of the worshipper, which never

fail:

He drinks the Soma and is strong,

6 Indra found meath : sweet rain. By foot and hoof: tracking the cows
by their foot-marks. That which lay secret : the rain which was imprisoned
the clouds.

HYMN 42.] THE RIGVEDA. 3*63

8 From far away, from near at hand, O Vritra-slayer, come
to us :

Accept the songs we sing to thee.

■9 When from the space between the near and fa» thou art
invoked by us,

Thence, Indra, come thou hitherward.

HYMN XLI, Indra.

Invoked to drink the Soma juice, come with thy Bay Steeds,
Thunder-armed !

Come, Indra, hitherward to me.

2 Our priest is seated, true to time; the grass is regularly

strewn ;

The pressing-stones were set at morn.

3 These prayers, 0 thou who hearest prayer, are offered : seat

thee on the grass.

Hero, enjoy the offered cake.

4 0 Vritra-slayer, be thou pleased with these libations, with

these hymns,

Song-loving Indra, with our lauds.

5 Our hymns caress the Lora of Strength, vast, drinker of the

Soma’s juice,

Indra, as mother-cows their calf.

6 Delight thee with the juice we pour for thine own great

munificence ;

Yield not thy singer to reproach.

7 We, Indra, dearly loving thee, bearing oblation, sing thee

hymns :

Thou, Vasu, dearly lovest us.

8 0 thou to whom thy Bays are dear, loose not thy Horses far

from us :

Here glad thee, Indra, Lord divine.

9 May long-maned Coursers, dropping oil, bring thee on swift

car hitherward,

Indra, to seat thee on the grass.

HYMN XLII. Indra.

Come to the juice that we have pressed, to Soma, Indra, blent
with milk :

Come, favouring us, thy Bay-drawn car !

9 The space between the near and far : the firmament or mid-air, between
the earth and the distant sky.

iU Me tifiim of [book hi.

2 Come, Indra, to this gladdening drink* placed on the grass,
pressed out with stones :

Wilt thou not drink thy fill thereof?

8 To Indira have my songs of praise gone forth, thiis rapidiy
sent hence,-

To tarn him to the Soma-draught.

4 Hither with songs of praise we call Indra to drink the Soma
juice :

Will he not come to us by lauds ?

6 Indra, these Somas are expressed. Take them within thy
belly, Lord

Of Hundred Powers, thou Prince of Wealth/

6 We know thee winner of the spoil, and resolute in battles,
Sage !

Therefore thy blessing we implore.

*1 Borne hither by thy Stallions, drink, Indra, this juice which
we have pressed,

Mingled with barley and with milk.

8 Indra, for thee, in thine own place, I urge the Soma for thy

draught :

Deep in thy heart let it remain.

9 We call on thee, the Ancient One, Indra, to drink the Soma

juice,

We Kusikas who seek thine aid.

HYMN XLIIL Indra.

Mounted Upon thy chariot-seat approach us : thine is the
Soma-draught from days aforetime.

Loose for the sacred grass thy dear companions. These men
who bring oblation call thee hither*

2 Come our true Friend, passing by many people ; come with

thy two Bay Steeds to our devotions ;

3?or these our hymns are calling thee, 0 Indra, hymns formed
for praise, soliciting thy friendship.

3 Pleased, with thy Bay Steeds, Indra, God, come quickly to

this our sacrifice that heightens worship ;

For with my thoughts, presenting oil to feed thee, I call
thee to the feast of sweet libations.

9 We Kusikas ; members of the family of Kusika who was the father or
the grandfather of Visvamitra, the Rishi of the hymn.

I Thy dear companions : thy horses.

hymn 44 .] , tiie rigyeda, m

i Yea, let thy two Bay Stallions bear thee hither, well limbed
and good to draw, thy dear companions.

Pleased with the corn-blent offering which we bring thee,
may Indra, Friend, hear his friend's adoration. 9

5 Wilt thou not make me guardian of the people, make me, im

petuous Maghayan, their ruler ?

Make me a Rishi haying drunk of Soma? Wilt thou not give
me wealth that lasts for ever ?

6 Yoked to thy chariot, let thy tall Bays, Indra, companions of

thy banquet, bear thee hither,

Who from of old press to heaven's farthest limits, the Bull’s
impetuous and welhgroomed Horses.

7 Drink of the strong pressed out hy strong ones, Indra, that

which the Falcon brought thee when thou longedst ;

In whose wild joy thou stirrest up the people, in whose wild
joy thou didst unbar the oow-stalls.

8 Call we on Indra, Maghavan, auspicious, best Hero in the fight

where spoil is gathered ;

TJbe Strong, who listens, who giv^es aid in battles, who slays the
Vritras, wins and gathers riches.

HYMH XLIW ipdra.

May this delightsome Soma be expressed for thee by tawny
stones.

Joying thereat, 0 Indra, with thy Bay Steeds come : ascend
thy goldemcoloured car,

% In loye thou madest Ushas glow, in love thou madest Surya
shine.

Thou, Indra, knowing, thinking, Lord of Tawny Steeds, above
all glories waxest great.

3 The heaven with streams of golden hue, earth with her tints
of green and gold —

The golden Pair yield Indra plenteous nourishment : between
them moves the golden One.

7 The strong ; the Soma juice. The strong ones : the press- stones.

That which the Falcon brought thee : the Soma is said to haye been brought
from heaven by a falcon. See I. 8Q. 2, and 93. 6.

Throughout the hymn the poet rings the changes on words said to be deriva*
tives of the root hri to take, as haryatd , delightsome, harydn^ loving, hari, hay
pr tawny, hdrit, green , yellow, or gold-coloured.

3 The golden One : the Sun.

m Trn hymns op [book m

4 When bom to life the golden Bull illumines all the realm of

light.

He takes his golden weapon, Lord of Tawny Steeds, the golden
thunder in his arms.

5 The bright, the well-loved thunderbolt, girt with the bright,

Indra disclosed,

Disclosed the Soma juice pressed out by tawny stones, with
tawny steeds drave forth the kine.

HYMN XLY. Inch^

Comb hither, Indra, with Bay Steeds, joyous, with tails like
peacocks* plumes.

Let no men check thy course as fowlers stay the bird : pass
o’er them as o’er desert lands.

2 He who slew Vritra, burst the cloud, brake the strongholds

and drave the floods,

Indra who mounts his chariot at his Bay Steeds* cry, shatters
e'en things that stand most Arm.

3 Like pools of water deep and full, like kine thott cherishest

thy might ;

Like the milch-cows that go well-guarded to the mead, like
water-brooks that reach the lake.

4 Bring thou us wealth with power to strike, our share ’gainst

him who calls it his.

Shake, Indra, as with hooks, the tree for ripened fruit, for
wealth to satisfy our wish.

5 Indra, self-ruling Lord art thou, good Leader, of most glorious

fame.

So, waxen in thy strength, 0 thou whom many praise, be thou
most swift to hear our call.

4 The golden Bull / Indra as the Sun.

5 Girt with the bright : surrounded by flashes of light. With tawny steed $ :
or by means of the tawny pressing-stones, i, e, inspirited by draughts of the
expressed Soma juice.

1 Tails like peacock* s plumes : trailing clouds with fringes of purple and gold,

"3 Mice pools of water : the meaning appears to be, as Prof. Ludwig suggests :
thy mental power is as inexhaustible as the water in deep springs, as safe from
harm as carefully guarded cows that go without straying to their pasture, and
ever full like streams that pour water into a lake. Professor Wilson, follow-
ing Sftyana, paraphrases thus : * Thou cherishest the celebrator of the pious rite
as (thou fillest) the deep seas (with water) ; or as a careful herdsman (cherishes)
the cows : (thou imhibest the Soma) as cows (obtain) fodder, and the juices
flow into thee) as rivulets flow into a lake.’ Kratu } which I have rendered by
1 might,’ means power, either mental or bodily, and sometimes also, especially
in later works, a sacrificial ceremony, S&yana has filled up supposed ellipses -
in the most arbitrary way.

IIYMN 47'.]

TIIB RIG VEDA. * 36?

HYMN XLVL ' i n<fc *

Of thee, the Bull, the Warrior, Sovran Euler, joyous and fierce*
.ancient and ever youthful,

The undecaying One who wields the thunder, ren&wned and!
great, great are the exploits, Indra.

2 Great art thou, Mighty Lord, through manly vigour, 0 fierce

One, gathering spoil, subduing others,

Thyself alone the universe’s Sovran ; so send forth men to
combat and to rest them.

3 He hath surpassed all measure in his brightness, yea, and the

Gods, for none may be his equal.

Impetuous Indra in his might exceedeth wide vast mid-air and
heaven and earth together.

4 To Indra, even as rivers to the ocean, flow forth from clays of

old the Soma juices ;

To him wide deep and mighty from his birth-time, the well of
holy thoughts, all-comprehending.

5 The Soma, Indra, which the earth and heaven bear for thee as

a mother hears her infant,

This they send forth to thee, this, vigorous Hero ! Adhvaryus
purify for thee to drink of.

HYMN XLVIL Indra.

Drink, Indra, Marut-girt, as Bull, the Soma, for joy, for rap-
ture even as thou listest.

Pour down the flood of meath within thy belly : thou from of
old art King of Soma juices.

2 Indra, accordant, with the banded Maruts, drink Soma, Hero,

as wise Vritra-slayer.

Slay thou our foemen, drive away assailants and make us safe
on every side from danger.

3 And, drinker at due seasons, drink in season, Indra, with friend-

ly Gods, our pressed-out Soma.

The Maruts following, whom thou madest sharers, gave thee
the victory, and thou slewest Vritra.

4 Brink Soma, Indra, banded with the Maruts who, Maghavan,

strengthened thee at Ahi’s slaughter,

’Gainst Samhara, Lord of Baysl in winning cattle, and now re-
joice in thee, the holy Singers.

3 Impetuous : or, according to Sftyana, whom Professors Wilson and Ludwig
follow, ‘ drinker of the spiritless Soma juice/ * er des auch die sornatr ester/

4 In winning cattle : ' r 7 t! stolen kine, the vanished rays of light,

or, generally, in battle ■■ ‘ of drought.

MS . THE HYMNS OF [BOOK III,

5 The Bull whose strength hath waxed, whom Maruts follow,
free-giving I'ndra, the celestial Euler,

Mighty, all-conquering, the victory-giver, him let us call to
grani us new protection.

HYMN XLVIII. Indra.

Soon -as the young Bull sprang into existence he longed to
taste the pressed-out Soma’s liquor.

Prink thou thy fill, according to thy longing, first, of the
goodly mixture blent with Soma.

% That day when thou wast horn thou, fain to taste it, drankest
the plant’s milk which the mountains nourish.

That milk thy Mother first, the Dame who bare thee, poured
for thee in thy mighty Father’s dwelling.

5 Desiring food he came unto his Mother, and on her breast
beheld the pungent Soma.

Wise, he moved on, keeping aloof the others, and wrought
great exploits in his varied aspects.

4 Fierce, quickly conquering, of surpassing vigour, he framed

his body even as he listed.

E’en from his birth-time Indra conquered Tvashtar, bore off
the Soma and in beakers drank it.

5 Call we on Maghavan, auspicious Indra, best Hero in the

fight where spoil is gathered ;

The Strong, who listens, who gives aid in battles, who slays
the Yyitras, wins and gathers riches.

HYMN XLIX, Indra.

Gbeat Indra will I laud, in whom all people who drink the
Soma have attained their longing ;

Whom, passing wise, Gods, Heaven and Earth, engendered,
formed by a Master’s hand, to crush the Vritras.

5 'This stanza recurs in VI. 19, 11.

1 The young Bull : Indra.

2 Which the mountains nourish ; the Soma plant is said to have grown on
the hills. Thy Mother : Aditi. Thy mighty. Father : according to the later my-
thology Kasyapa was the husband of Aditi and father of Indra and the other
deities, and S&yana says that in this passage Kasyapa is intended. But it
seems almost certain that Tvashtar, whom Indra conquered at his birth, is
here referred to as his mighty Father. See Bergaigne, La Religion Vidique,

1 Formed by a Master's hand : or fashioned by Viblivan one of the Ribhus.
According to Sayana, appointed by Brahma, for the government of the* world.
The Vritras : Vritra and similar fiends, or, generally, the enemies of the Gods
and Aryans.

HYMN 50.]

THE JUG VEDA,

3,69

2 Whom, most heroic, borne by Tawny Coursers, verily none

subdueth in the battle ;

Who, reaching far, most vigorous, hath shortened the Dasyu’s
life with Warriors bold of spirit.

3 Victor in fight, swift mover like a war-horse, pervading both

worlds, rainer down of blessings,

To be invoked in war like Bhaga, Father, as ’twere, o£ hymns,
fair, prompt to hear, strength-giver.

4 Supporting heaven, the high back of the region, his car ft

Vayu with his team of Vasus.

Illumining the nights, the Sun’s creator, like Dhishana he
deals forth strength and riches.

5 Call we on Maghavan, auspicious Indra, best Hero in the fight

where spoil is gathered ;

The Strong, who listens, who gives aid in battles, who slays
the Vritras, wins and gathers treasure.

HYMN L. Indra.

Let Indra drink, All-bail ! for his is Soma, — the mighty Bull
come, girt by Maruts, hither. '

Far-reaching, let him fill him with these viands, and let ouf
offering sate his body’s longing.

2 I yoke thy pair of trusty Steeds for swiftness, whose faithful

service from of old thou lovest.

Here, fair of cheek ! let thy Bay Coursers place thee : drink
of this lovely well-effused libation.

3 With milk they made Indra their good Preserver, lauding for

help and rule the bounteous rainer.

Impetuous God, when tliou hast drunk the Soma, enraptured
send us cattle in abundance.

2 With Warriors bold of spirit : bis allies the Maruts.

4 His car is Vdi/n : the construction of the first hemistich is difficult;
and the sense is doubtful. The meaning may be, as V&yu the God of wind
moves like a chariot on high drawn by the coursers of the air, so Indra
moves accompanied by the Vasus or Maruts.

Like Dhishand : the Wish- Goddess, a deity presiding over prosperity. See
I. 96. 1, note ; IV. 34. 1 ; V. 41. 8.

1 All-hail ! : I take svdhi here as an exclamation addressed to Indra*
S&yana explains the word by svdhdkrikmimam so?mm f (let Indra drink) this.
Soma offered with Sv&lid,

3 With milk ; with libations of Soma juice mingled with milk.

24

370 TEE HYMNS OF [ BOOK 111.

4 With kine and horses satisfy this longing ; with very splendid
bounty still extend it.

Seeking the light, with hymns to thee, 0 Indra, the Kusikas
hav$ brought their gift, the singers.

, 5 Call we on Maghavan, auspicious Indra, best Hero in the fight
where spoil is gathered ;

The Strong, who listens, who gives aid in battles, who slays
the Vritras, wins and gathers riches.

HYMN LL Indra.

High hymns have sounded forth the praise of Maghavan, sup-
porter of mankind, of Indra meet for lauds ;

Him who hath waxen great, invoked with beauteous songs,
Immortal One, whose praise each day is sung aloud.

2 To Indra from all sides go forth my songs of praise, the Lord

of Hundred Powers, strong, Hero, like the sea,

Swift, winner of the booty, breaker-down of forts, faithful and
ever-glorious, finder of the light.

3 Where battle’s spoil is piled the singer winnetli praise, for

Indra taketh care of matchless worshippers.

He in Vivasvan’s dwelling findeth his delight : praise thou the
ever-conquering slayer of the foe.

4 Thee, valorous, most heroic of the heroes, shall the priests

glorify with songs and praises.

Full of all wondrous power he goes to conquest : worship is
his, sole Lord from days aforetime.

* 5 Abundant are the gifts he gives to mortals : for him the earth
bears a rich store of treasures.

The heavens, the growing plants, the living waters, the forest
trees preserve their wealth for Indra.

6 To thee, 0 Indra, Lord of Bays, for ever are offered prayers

and songs : accept them gladly.

As Kinsman think thou of some fresh assistance ; good Friend,
give strength and life to those who praise thee.

7 Here, Indra, drink thou Soma with the Maruts, as thou didst

drink the juice beside Sary&ta.

Under thy guidance, in thy keeping, Hero, the singers serve,
skilled in fair sacrifices.

4 This stanza Is found also in Hymn XXX. 20 of this Book.

3 In Vivasvdn's dwelling : in the sacrificial chamber of the worshipper.
See III. 34. 7.

7 Shy dta: said by Sfiyana to have been a son of Sary&ta who was
perhaps the same as gary&ti, a son of Manu Yaivasvata. See I. 51. 12 ; 112. 17

BY MX 52.] THIS &1GY2DA.

art

8 So eagerly desirous drink the Soma, our juice, 0 Indra, with

thy friends the Maruts,

Since at thy birth all Deities adorned thee for the great fight,
0 thou invoked of many. ~

9 He was your comrade in your geal, 0 Maruts : they, rich in

noble gifts, rejoiced in Indra.

With them together let the Vifitra-slayer drink in his home the
worshipper’s libation.

10 So, Lord of affluent gifts, this juice hath been expressed for

thee with strength ;

Drink of it, thou who lovest song,

11 Incline thy body to this juice which suits thy Godlike nature

well ;

May it cheer thee who lovest it.

12 Brave Indra, let it work through both thy flanks, and through

thy head by prayer,

And through thine arms, to prosper us,

HYMN LIL Indra,

Indra, accept at break of day our Soma mixt with ro asted

corn,...

With groats, with cake, with eulogies,

2 Accept, 0 Ineira, and enjoy the well-dressed sacrificial cake ;
Oblations are poured forth to thee.

3 Consume our sacrificial cake, accept the songs of praise we sing,
/ As he who Woos a ccepts his bride.

4 Famed from of old, accept the cake at our libation poured at

dawn,

For great, 0 Indra, is thy power.

5 Let roasted corn of our midday libation, and sacrificial cake

here please thee, Indra,

What time the lauding singer, keen of purpose arid eager as a
bull, with hymns implores thee.

C At the third sacrifice, O thou whom many praise, give glory
to the roasted corn and holy cake.

With offered viands and with songs may we assist thee, Sage,
whom Vaja and the Ribhus wait upon.

8 For the great fight ; the battle with Viitra and the demons of drought.

1 With groats , 'With calce : harambhinam apdpdv'ctntam ; harambha is coarse-
ly ground corn, or meal mixed with curds, a kind of gruel : apUpd ie a cake
made of flour.

Stanzas 1 — 4, in G&yatri metre, accompany the morning offering ; stanza 5,
in flViahtup, the offering of noon ; and 6 , in Jagatt, the evening libation.

6 Give glory ; honour by accepting. Vdja and the Mibhas: the three IJibhuSr

372 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK III.

7 The groats have wo prepared for thee with Pushan, corn for

thee, Lord of Bay Steeds, with thy horses.

Eat thou the meal-cake, handed with tho Maruts,* wise Hero,
Vrit^a-slayer, drink the Soma.

8 Bring forth the roasted corn to meet him quickly, cake for

the bravest Hero mid the heroes.

Indra, may hymns accordant with thee daily strengthen thee,
Bold One, for the draught of Soma.

HYMN LIII. Indra, Parvata, Etc.

Oy a high car, 0 Parvata and Indra, bring pleasant viands,
with brave heroes, hither.

Enjoy the gifts, Gods, at our sacrifices; wax strong by hymns,
rejoice in our oblation.

2 Stay still, 0 Maghavan, advance no farther; a draught of

well-pressed Soma will I give thee.

With sweetest song I grasp, 0 Mighty Indra, thy garment's
hem as a child grasps his father's.

3 Adhvaryu, sing we both ; sing thou in answer ; make we a

laud acceptable to Indra.

Upon this sacrifice's grass be seated ; to Indra shall our eulogy
be uttered,

4 A wife, 0 Maghavan, is home and dwelling : so let thy Bay

Steeds yoked convey thee hither.

AVhenever we press out for thee the Soma, let Agni as our Herald
speed to call thee.

5 Depart, 0 Maghavan ; -again come hither ; both there and here

thy goal is, Indra, Brother,

Where thy tall chariot hath a place to rest in, and where thou
loosest thy loud-neighing Courser.

7 With Pihhan : because karainbkd, groats or gruel, is the usual offering to
that God. Coni : for Indra" a horses.

In addition to Indra and his frequent associate Parvata, the Genius of the
mountains and clouds, the Goddess V&k or Speech (stanzas 15, lt>), and the
several parts of the chariot or wain (17—20) are regarded as the deities or
objects reverently mentioned or addressed in this hymn.

1 With brave heroes : accompanied, or followed by heroic sons.

3 Adhvaryu, sing we both : the Ho tar calls on the Adhvaryu to join him in
the performance of the ceremony.

4 A wife, is home and dwelling : or, perhaps, ‘Wife, Maghavan, is home,

so is this chamber that is, Indra is to regard the sacrificial chamber as his
home for the present, until he returns to his consort and his other homo in
heaven.

THE RIO VEDA,

373

tttMft 53,]

6 Thou hast drunk Soma, Tndra, turn thee homeward ; thy joy

is in thy home, thy gracious Consort ;

Where thy tall chariot hath a place to rest in, and thy strong
Courser is set free with guerdon. *

7 Bounteous are these, Angirascs, Virupas : the Asura’s Heroes

and the Sons of Heaven.

They, giving store of wealth to Visvamitra, prolong his life
through countless Soma-pressings.

8 Magliavan weareth every shape at pleasure, effecting magic

changes in his body,

Holy One, drinker out of season, coming thrice, in a moment,
through fit prayers, from heaven.

9 The mighty sage, God-born and God-incited, who looks on men,

restrained the billowy river.

When Visvamitra was SudAs's escort, then Indra through the
Kusikas grew friendly.

10 Like swans, prepare a song of praise with pressing-stones, glad

in your hymns with juice poured forth in sacrifice.

Ye singers, with the Gods, sages who look on men, ye Kusikas,
drink up the Soma's savoury meath.

11 Come forward, Kusikas, and be attentive; let loose Sudas's

horse to win him riches.

East, west, and north, let the King slay the foeman, then at
earth's choicest place perform his worship.

1 2 Praises to Indra have I sung, sustainer of this earth and heaven.
This prayer of Visvamitra keeps secure the race of Bharatas.

6 Thy gracious Consort : Intlrftui. With guerdon : with corn and water.

7 Professor Wilson, following Sftyana, paraphrases; ‘ These eaorificera are

f Bhojas ), of whom the diversified Angirases (are the priests); and the heroic
sons of the expeller (of the foes of the Gods) from heaven, bestowing riches upon
VigvAmitra at the sacrifice of a thousan 1 - 4 ~>r- *' . r — 1 'y jr his life.* The Bhojas
(bounteous ones) are said to be the K * ;> <‘- ■ v ■ of Sudds, and the

diversified Angirases MedMtithi and the rest of the race of Angiras. ‘ The Asura,’
explained by Sdyana as the expeller of the foes of the Gods from heaven, is said
to be Budra, and his sons are the Maruts. The Virupas are connected with
Angiras in X, 62. 5., and a Virftpa i& mentioned in I. 45, 3. and VIII. 64. 6.

8 Dnnfcer out of season : drinking the celestial Soma whenever he wishes,
irrespectively of the appointed times for libations on earth. Thrice ; to the
three daily libations.

9 The mighty sage: Vhv&mitra. See III. 33, note. .

1 1 In this and the two following stanzas the priests implore the aid of Indra
for King Sudds who is going forth to battle.

Earth's choicest place : th& altar. ■*+» . *» . , ,

12 The race of Bharatas : the descendants of Visvdmitra, Bharata being the

son of the celebrated Sakuntald who was Visvdmitra’s daughter by the Apsa-
ras Mend. ^ «,

£ee Vedic India (Story of the Nations series), pp. 319 ff.

THE HYMNS OF

S74

[BOOK IXL

13 The Visvamitras have sung forth this prayer to Iuclra Thunder-

armed :

So let him make us prosperous.

14 Among^the Kikatas what do thy cattle ? They pour no milky

draught, they heat no caldron.

Bring thou to us the wealth of Pramaganda ; give up to us 0
Maghavan, the low-born.

15 Sasarpart, the gift of Jamadagnis, hath lowed with mighty

voice dispelling famine.

The Daughter of the Sun hath spread our glory among the
Gods, imperishable, deathless.

16 Sasarpari brought glory speedily to these, over the generations

of the Fivefold Race ;

Daughter of Paksha, she bestows new vital power, she whom
the ancient Jamadagnis gave to me.

Tk? ^% a9 , : the non- Aryan inhabitants of a ' \ f . Tyosala

or Oudhj usually identified with South Bihar. The

bestowed by Indra are unprofitable when in the possession of men who do not
worship the Aryan Gods. Pramaganda : the prince of the K&afcas * ac^vm?
mg to Sfiyana the word means - the son of the usurer/ \ * J

15 Sasarpari, the gift of JT xmadagnk .* according to Sayan a, Sasarpari fswiftlv
moving, or gliding everywhere), is a name or an epithet of V&k Voice J

0f . S ?. rya or the Sun - The followhig is VumLZ
latxon of Sayanas quotation from Shadgurusishya's Commentary on the

it*' “ X Mition T Weber YlndM*

£§ f m ! «/,T“ g , ? asa rt ” those •«!««*»« with antiquity-
tea a story. At a sacrifice of king Saud&aa the power and sp^rh nf vLJf

^,7 completely vanquished by Sakti, son of Vasish thaTInd tbe lon of
Gfidhi (Visvamitra) being so overcome became defect &r\ nnKc i i
drew from the abode of the sun a Cce S " sS^tvi damada S“?

Brahmft, or of the sun, and gave her to him TheVttmt V W da Vf ter of

gg£gm9&gg3£

argues that inmdya, hath lowed, is ar.nlina.bU lb/!“ 1 li _^ ro £ Gra f i ' s ? lto11

argues that J bull

The /am^^ aeeordmg to S^yana, are Itishis who maintain a Mazing fire,
the four 'eastes,°and Sarians or non-Aryam ' **“ ; aooordin S to Siyapa,

^ i3 ‘ ° fthe <~-the light and dark

!

HYMN 53*] THE RIQVEDAv 375

17 Strong be the pair of oxen, firm the axles, let not the pole slip

nor the yoke be broken.

May Indra keep the yoke-pins from decaying : attend us, thou
whose fellies are uninjured.

18 0 Indra, give our bodies strength, strength to the bulls who

draw the wains,

Strength to our seed and progeny that they may live, for thou
art he who giveth strength.

1 9 Enclose thee in the heart of Khayar timber, in the car wrought

of Sinsap& put firmness.

Show thyself strong, 0 Axle, fixed and strengthened : throw us
not from the car whereon we travel.

20 Let not this sovran of the wood leave us forlorn or injure us.
Safe may we be until we reach our homes and rest us and un-
yoke.

21 With various aids this day come to us, Indra, with best aids

speed us, Maghavan, thou Hero.

Let him who hateth us fall headlong downward i him tvhom
we hate let vital breath abandon.

22 He heats his very axe, and then cuts a mere Semal blossom off.
0 Indra, like a caldron cracked and seething, so he pours out

foam.

17 In this and the three following stanzas Visvdmifcra being about to depart
from King Sudds’s sacrificial hall blesses, or invokes good luck for, the several
parts of the chariot or wain on which he is going to travel.

Attend us : the chariot is here addressed.

19 Khayar timber : the hard wood of the Khadira, or Acacia Catechu, of
which the pin of the axle was .made. Sinm'pd : Dalbergia Sisu, also a com-
mon timber-tree.

20 This sovran of the wood: the timber of which the body of the car is made.

21 Prof. Roth is of opinion that this hymn consists of fragments composed
by Visvdmitra or his descendants at different dates, and that the verses (9 —
13), in which that Uishi represents himself and the Kusikas as being the priests
of Sudas are earlier than the concluding verses (21 — 24), which consist of im-
precations directed against Vasishtha. These last verses, he remarks, contain
an expression of 'wounded pride, and threaten vengeance against an enemy
who had come into possessioix of some power or dignity which Visv&mitra him-
self had previously enjoyed. With regard to the relations between Visvd-
mitra and Vasishtha as priests of Sudds, see Muir’s Original Sanskrit Texts , I.
pp. 371 ff-

22 Professor Wilson remarks : 1 The construction is elliptical : the ellipse is
supplied by the scholiast, as the tree is. cut down by the axe so may the enemy
be cut down as one cuts off without difficulty the flower of the Simbala. so
may he be destroyed *. as the cauldron when struck, and thence leaking, scat-
ters foam or breath from its mouth, so may that hater, struck by the power
of my prayer, vomit foam from his mouth.’ The phrases are probably, as
Ludwig explains, merely proverbial expressions for threats full of sound and
fury followed by insingnificant results.

The Semal (Simbala) is the Silk-cotton tree. .....

376 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK UL

23 Men notice not the arrow, 0 ye people; they bring the red
beast deeming it a bollock.

A sluggish steed men run not with the courser, nor ever lead
an a$s before a charger.

M These men, the sons of Bharata, 0 Indra, regard not severance
or close connexion.

They urge their own steed as it were another’s, and take him,
swift as the bow’s string, to battle.

HYMN LIY. Visvedevas.

To him adorable, mighty, meet for synods, this strengthening
hymn, unceasing, have they offered.

May Agni hear us with his homely splendours, hear us, Eter-
nal One, with heavenly lustre.

2 To mighty Heaven and Earth I sing forth loudly : my wish
goes out desirous and well knowing

Both, at whose laud in synods, showing favour, the Gods re-
joice them with the living mortal.

. 23 Men notice not the arrow : or, according to Sftyana, ‘men heed not the
destroyer/ i. e. the power of Visv&mitra who will destroy his enemies is not
known to, or regarded hy, his opponents.

They bring the red beast : the meaning of lodhCm is uncertain. S&yana ex-
plains it as lubdham, desirous (that his penance might not be frustrated).
Prof. Roth suggests that lodham means red, and denotes an animal of some
kind contrasted withp<w£ (a tame or sacrificial animal, a bullock), so that the
clause would have somewhat the same meaning as * they look on the wolf as if
it were a hare.’ Durga, the commentator on the Nirukta, says : ‘ The text in
which this word (lodhd) occurs is a verse expressing hatred of Vasishtha. But
X am a KApishthala of the family of Vasishtha ; and therefore do not interpret
it.’ See Muir’s 0. S. Texts, I. pp. 344, 372.

Deeming it a budock „■ according to SAyana, thinking the sage, VisvAmitra,
who kept silence of his own accord to be merely stupid like some inferior ani-
mal. In the secoad line the rivalry of Vasishtha with himself appears to be
ridiculed.

24 The son of Bharata : descendants and adherents of VisvAmitra. Prof.
Wilson, following SAyana, paraphrases the stanza : ‘ These sons of Bharata,
Indra, understand severance (from the Vasishthas), not association (with
them) ; they urge their steeds (against them) as against a constant foe ; they
bear a stout bow (for their destruction) in battle.’ The word dranam, strange,
foreign, another’s, gives no intelligible sense. Prof. Ludwig suggests in its place
Jcaranam , an ever-ready helper. Dr. Muir suggests that the word may mean
f as if to a distance.’ -

} To Mm : Agni. Meet for synods ; to be worshipped in sacrificial assem-
blies. May Agni hear as: both as terrestrial fire used for sacrifice and
domestic purposes and as celestial fire in the form of the Sun. They ; the
priestly singers.

2 Knowing both : recognizing the greatness of Heaven and Earth, The Hi?-
ing mortal ; caen as worshippers.

HYMN 54.] THE RtGVUDA, S77

3 0 Heaven and Earth, may your gi'eat law be faithful : he ye

our leaders for our high advantage.

To Heaven and Earth I offer this my homage, with food, 0
Agni, as I pray for riches. *

4 Yea, holy Heaven and Earth, the ancient sages whose word

was ever true had power to find you ;

And brave men in the fight where heroes conquer, 0 Earth,
have known you well and paid yon honour.

5 What pathway leadeth to the Gods Who knoweth this of a

truth, and who will now declare it ?

Seen are their lowest dwelling-places only, but they are in re-
mote and secret regions.

6 The Sage who looketh on mankind bath viewed them bedewed,

rejoicing in the seat of Order.

They make a home as for a bird, though parted, with one same
will finding themselves together.

7 Partners though parted, with far-distant limits, on one firm

place both stand for ever watchful,

And, being young for evermore, as sisters, speak to each other
names that are united.

8 All living things they part and keep asunder ; though bearing

up the mighty Gods they reel not.

One All is Lord of what is fixed and moving, that walks, that
flies, this multiform creation.

9 Afar the Ancient from of old I ponder, our kinship with our

mighty Sire and Father, —

5 Seen are their lowest dwelling-places : the constellations ; hut the Gods
are also in mysterious and higher realms beyond, and who knows the path
that leads thither ?

6 The Sage who looketh on mankind : the all-seeing and omniscient Sun.
Them : Heaven and Earth. Bedewed : with the water above the firmament
and rain respectively. In the seat of Order : in the place which the eternal
Order of the Universe has assigned to them. They make a home : though
meeting together, they leave a space, like a bird’s nest, between them.

7 Speak to each other names that are united : address each other or perhaps,
are addressed, by dual appellations, such as urvi } the Two Spacious Ones,
dydvdprithivt , Heaven-Earth, etc.

8 One All : ‘We find mention in one hymn of a primordial substance or
unit out of which the universe was developed, This is 1 the one thing * ( 6k am )
which we have met with in connection with Aja, the Unborn (Book I. 164, 6,
46.), and which is also used synonymously with the universe in accordance
with the principle which is the key to much of the later mysticism that cause
and effect are identical. The poet endeavours, in a strain which preludes the
philosophy of the Upanishads, to picture to himself the first state of the
world, and the first signs of life and growth in it.’ — Wallis, Cosmology of the
Bigveda } p, 58.

378 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK JIL

Singing the praise whereof the Gods by custom stand on the
spacious far-extended pathway.

10 This laud, 0 Heaven and Earth, to you I utter : let the kind-

hearted hear, whose tongue is Agni,

Young, Sovran Eulers, Yaruna and Mitra, the wise and very
glorious Adityas.

11 The fair-tongued Savitar, the golden-handed, comes thrice from

heaven as Lord in our assembly.

Bear to the Gods this song of praise, and send us, then, Savi-
tar, complete and perfect safety.

12 Deft worker, skilful-handed, helpful, holy, may Tvashtar, God,

give us these things to aid us.

Take your delight, ye Eibhus joined with Pushan : ye have
prepared the rite with stones adjusted.

13 Borne on their flashing car, the spear-armed Maruts, the nim-

ble Youths of Heaven, the Sons of Order,

The Holy, and Sarasvati, shall hear us : ye Mighty, give us
wealth with noble offspring.

14 To Vishnu rich in marvels, songs and praises shall go as singers

on the road of Bhaga, —

The Chieftain of the Mighty Stride, whose Mothers, the many
young Dames, never disregard him.

15 Indra, who rules through all his powers heroic, hath with his

majesty filled earth and heaven.

Lord of brave hosts, Port-crusher, Yritra-slayer, gather thou
up and bring us store of cattle.

16 My Sires are the N&satyas, kind to kinsmen; the Asvins 5

kinship is a glorious title.

For ye are they who give us store of riches ; ye guard your
gift uncbeated by the bounteous.

9 Singing the praise whereof : that is, with reference to which kinship with
our father Dyaus or Heaven the Gods themselves bear witness to its exis-
tence.

11 Comes thriee ; at the three daily sacrifices.

12 These things ; for which we pray.

li On the road of Bhaga, ; or on the path of good fortune or felicity.

The Chieftain of the Mighty Stride ; Vishnu as the Sun. The Mothers, ,
according to S&yana, are the regions of space which generate all beings. S&-
yana supplies djhdm, command, after ydsya, whose, and Prof. Wilson renders
the passage accordingly, 'whose commands the many-blending regions of space,
the generators (of all beings) do nob disobey.'

16 My Sires are the Ndsatyas ; the As y ins regard me with fatherly affection,
Ye ; the Asvins. Uneheated by the bounteous : never deceived by liberal men
ike us. ~ ~

HYMN 55.]

THE RIG VEDA,

379

17 This is, ye Wise, your great and glorious title, that all ye

Deities abide in lndra.

Friend, Much-invoked ! art thou with thy dear Eibhus :

. fashion ye this our hymn for our advantage. n

18 Aryaman, Aditi deserve our worship ; the laws of Varuna re-

main unbroken.

The lot of childlessness remove ye from us, and let our course
he rich in kine and offspring.

19 May the Gods’ envoy, sent to many a quarter, proclaim us

siuless for our perfect safety.

May Earth and Heaven, the Sun, the Waters, hear us, and
the wide firmament and constellations.

20 Hear us the mountains which distil the rain-drops, and, rest-

ing firm, rejoice in ^freshening moisture.

May Aditi with the Adityas hear us, and Maruts grant us
their auspicious shelter.

21 Soft be our path for ever, well-proyisioned : with pleasant

meath, 0 Gods, the herbs besprinkle.

Safe be my bliss, 0 Agni, in thy friendship : may I attain
the seat of foodful riches,

22 Enjoy the offering ; beam thou strength upon us ; combine

thou for our good ail kinds of glory.

Conquer in battle, Agni, all those foemen, and light us every
day with loying-kindness.

HYMN LV, Visvedevas.

At the first shining of the earliest Mornings, in the Cow’s
home was born the Great Eternal.

Mow shall the statutes of the Gods be valid. Great is the
Gods’ supreme and sole dominion,

17 Abide in lndra : not, an Sftyana explains, in the sphere or world of
lndra. The meaning is, as Professor Luclwig points out, that the glory of
the Gods consists in their recognition as forming a part of the true, supreme
and all-embracing divine principle, in which, as the Absolute God, all their
individual attributes are absorbed and vanish.

Fashion ye ; perhaps merely, giye a favourable issue to,

19 The Gods' envoy : Agni.

21 With pleasant meath ; with refreshing rain.

1 In the Cow's home : in the firmament or heaven, the place of the
mystical Cosmic Cow. The Great Eternal : the two adjectives are in the
neuter gender without a substantive. S&yana supplies jyotih , light, in the
form of the Sun. Great is, etc. ‘Great' and incomparable is the divine
nature of the gods.’ — Muir.

380 THE HYMNS OF [ZOOK III

2 Lot not the Gods here injure us, 0 Agni, nor Fathers of old

time who know the region,

Nor the sign set between two ancient dwellings. Great is the
Gods?, supreme and sole dominion.

3 My wishes fly abroad to many places : I glance back to the

ancient sacrifices. ,, .

Let us declare the truth when fire is kindled. Great is the
Gods’ supreme and sole dominion.

4 King Universal, borne to sundry quarters, extended through

the wood he lies on couches.

One Mother rests : another feeds the Infant. Great is the
Gods’ supreme and sole dominion.

5 Lodged in old plants, he grows again in younger, swiftly within

the newly- born and tender.

Though they are unimpregned, ho makes them fruitful.
Great is the Gods’ supreme and sole dominion.

6 Now lying far away, Child of two Mothers, he wanders unres-

trained, the single youngling.

These are the laws of Varuna and Mitra. Great is the Gods’
supreme and sole dominion.

7 Child of two Mothers, Priest, sole Lord in synods, he still pre-

cedes while resting as foundation.

They who speak sweetly bring him sweet addresses. Great
is the Gods’ supreme and sole dominion.

2 The meaning of the stanza is, as Professor Ludwig says ; May we be
able to calculate correctly the time of the {Sun’s approach, that is, the
moment of his rising, when we should begin our sacred ceremonies. Let not
the Gods lead us astray, or allow us to err, in this matter ; let not the
Fathers, or spirits of the departed, who are acquainted with the region in
which the Sun first appears, and who have transmitted their knowledge to
their descendants, nor the Sun himself (or, perhaps, Agni) deceive us. Two
ancient dwelling ; 'heaven and earth, the homes respectively of Gods and
men.

3 I glance bach : so Prof. M. Muller translates the passage.

4 King Universal: Agni, the God of all Aryan men. To sundry quarters:
to various altars, for sacrificial purposes.

One Mother : the earth. Another : the heaven. Or, as Prof. Ludwig
suggests, the lower of the two fire-sticks remains still while the upper stick,
which is agitated, gives him life and strength.

5 Agni is latent in all plants, and from those that are old and decaying he
passes into the young and tender ones.

6 Far away : or, in the west, as Sftrya or the Sun when he has set.

He wanders : when he has risen again.

7 Priest : Agni, the herald who calls the Gods, the hotar or invoker.

As foundation : as the root and basis of every religious act.

HYMN 55.]

TEE RIG VEDA .

361

8 As to a friendly warrior when he battles, each thing that-

comes anear is seen to meet him.

The hymn commingles with the cow's oblation. Great is the
Gods' supreme and sole dominion. n

9 Deep within these the hoary envoy pierceth ; mighty, he goeth

to the i*ealm of splendour,

And looketh on us, clad iu wondrous beauty. Great is the
Gods' supreme and sole dominion.

10 Vishnu, the guardian, keeps the loftiest station, upholding

deal', immortal dwelling-places.

Agni knows well all these created beings. Great is the Gods'
supreme and sole dominion.

11 Ye, variant Pair, have made yoursolves twin beauties: one of

the Twain is dark, bright shines the other;

And yet these two, the dark, the red, are listers. Great is
the Gods' supreme and sole dominion.

12 Where the two Cows, the Mother and the Daughter, meet and

give suck yielding their lordly nectar,

1 praise them at the seat of law eternal. Great is the Gods’
supreme and sole dominion.

13 Loud hath she lowed, licking the other's youngling. On what

world hatli the Milch-cow laid her udder?

This iJa streameth with the milk o! Order. Great is the Gods’
supremo and sole dominion.

14 Earth weareth beauties manifold: uplifted, licking her Calf

of eighteen months, she staudeth.

8 Agui is here represented as a champion who draws men to meet him as
a friend. The hymn eomminytes; penetrates, as it were, and accompanies the
libation of milk and fcSoma juice.

9 Within these ; plants in general. The hoary envoy ; Agni, the ancient
messenger between Uods and men. To the realm of splendour ; to heaven as
the &um

1U Loftiest station : in the zenith. Cf. L 154. 5, 6.

11 Ye, variant Pair : Bay and Night.

Id The two Cows : Earth and Heaven, according to S&yana ; more pro-
bably iSiglit and Morning are iu tended. The scat of law eternal: the altar,
the place of sacrifice appointed by everlasting law or rttd.

13 Loud hath she lowed: Heaven, as the . rain pours down. The other's
yo any liny, or calf, is Agni. On what world ; no one knows where the rain
ooiiies from. This 1 14 : a name of the earth ; or lid may mean, with the
freshening draught (of rain),

14 Earth:’ padyd, according to Sdyana, has this meaning. Uplifted,.,

she standelh : apparently, Heaven, but according to B&yaua, the Earth
elevated in the form of the northern altar.

Her calf of eighteen months : or according to B&yana’s alternative ex-
planation, 4 her calf who protects the three worlds.’ The calf is the Sun.

382 TEE HYMNS OF [BOOK HI.

Well-skilled I seek the seat of law eternal. Great is the Gods’
supreme and sole dominion.

15 Within a wondrous place the Twain are treasured : the one is

manifest, the other hidden.

One common pathway leads in two directions. Great is the
Gods’ supreme and sole dominion.

16 Let the niilch-kine that have no calves storm downward, yield-

ing rich nectar, streaming, unexhausted,

These who are ever new and fresh and youthful. Great is the
Gods’ supreme and sole dominion.

17 What time the Bull bellows in other regions, another herd

receives the genial moisture ;

For lie is Bhaga, King, the earth’s Protector. Great is the
Gods’ supreme and sole dominion.

J8 Let us declare the Hero’s wealth in horses, 0 all ye folk : of
; this the Gods have knowledge.

re harnessed. Great is the
Gods’ supreme and sole dominion*

19 Tvashtar the God, the omniform Creator, begets and feeds man-

kind in various manner.

His, verily, are all these living creatures. Great is the Gods 7
supreme and sole' dominion.

20 The two great meeting Bowls hath he united ; each of the’

Pair is laden with his treasure,

The Hero is renowned for' gathering riches. Great is the
Gods’ supreme and sole dominion.

21 Yea, and on this our earth the AILS us taker dwells like a King

with noble friends about him.

In his protection heroes rest in safety. Great k the Gods’*
supreme and sole dominion,

15 Within a wondrous place : when Morning comes, Highi is concealed
in some mysterious place to which Morning or Day also retires in turn when
Night succeeds. From this mysterious prison Morning and Night come to 1
us by the same path, one departing as the other approaches,

16 The milch-kine ifiut have no calves: the heavy clouds which pour out
their fertilizing rain as cows yield their refreshing milk, hut which are 1
unlike cows inasmuch as they have no calves.

17 The Bull: Indra as Parjanya the God of the rain cloud.

Another herd ; the fertilizing shower fall's in other regions.

1 8 The number of Indra’s horses is variously stated. Here he is said io>
be drawn by six horses, the six seasons of the year, or by five at a time or
the seasons regarded as five by the combination of hemanta and fyira : the;
cold and the dewy seasons,

20 The two great meeting Bowls : the heaven and’ earth,, hemispherical in
appt arauce, which meet at the horizon, So the author of The Witness of the
Sun speaks of f the great bowl of the earth, which hollowed to the horizon/

THE MOVED A.

IlYkN 56-1

383

22 Iiioh in their gifts 1 for thee are herbs and waters, and earth
brings all her wealth for thee, 0 Indra.

May we as friends of thine share goodly treasures. Great is
the Gods’ supreme and sole dominion. >

HYMN LVI. Vbvedevas.

Not men of magic skill, not men of wisdom impair the Gods’
first s bedfast ordinances.

Ne’er may the earth and heaven which know not malice, nor
‘ the fixed hills, be bowed by sage devices.

2 One, moving not away, supports six burthens : the Cows pro-

ceed to him the true, the Highest.

Near stand three Mighty Ones who travel swiftly : two are
concealed from sight, one is apparent.

3 The Bull who wears all shapes, the triple-breasted, three-ud-

dered, with a brood in many places,

liuleth majestic with his triple aspect, the Bull, the Everlast-
ing Ones’ impregncr.

4 When nigh them, as their tracer he observed them : he called

aloud tho dear name of Adityas.

The Goddesses, the Waters, stayed to* meet him : they who
were wandering separate enclosed him.

5 Streams ! the wise Gods have thrice three habitations. Child

of three Mothers, he is Lord in. synods*

22 The A ll-Snstainer : Indira.

1 The statutes of tho Gods are unalterable-;- they stand fixed for ever like
the benignant heaven and earth and like the mountains that never can be
moved.

2 The meaning of the- stanza is uncertain* According, to Sftyana, the one,
moving not away, is the stationary year which sustains the load of the six
seasons, and the Cows are the solar rays which pervade the year, or the Sun
as its representative. Professor Ludwig. thinks that Tvashtar may be intend-
ed, and that the cows may be the- consorts of the God's who * are generally
represented as beiring him company. Three Mighty Ones : according to
Sayana, heaven, the firmament,, and the earth, of which the ea» th is fully
visible and the first two are only seen imperfectly. Who travel swiftly : this
is S3yana v s explanation- of dtydfc, coursers ; but the meaning is not clear.

3 The Bull: the God who presides over the year. The three breasts and
the three udders are probably heaven, the firmament, and’ the earth. His
triple aspect * the six seasons, reduced 1 by combination to three, the hot season,
the rains, and the cold season. The Everlasting Ones , according to Sayana,
are the plants : but the three Mighty Ones , or the Waters,, may be intended.

4 H ViV” r.,~ P-^^ssor Ludwig, says, Agni as Savitar, the God pre-
siding - " 1 '■ ■■ ■ T ■ Adityas Here appear to He the months.

5 TV. 1 ■ ; each of the three worlds having three subdivi-

sions. Child of three Mothers : Agni as Savitar. appears to- be meant, the
three mothers being, perhaps, the three seasons. According to Sayana,
trim itit here means "'the measurer of the three* (worlds),’ the Sun. Ladies
of the Waters i * 113, Sarasvatip and’ Bh3rati. Thrice : at the three daily
sacrifices.

384 * TEE HYMNS OF { BOOK IIL

Three are the holy Ladies of the Waters, thrico here from
heaven supreme in our assembly.

6 Do thou, 0 Savitar, from heaven thrice hither, three times a

day* send down thy blessings daily.

Send us, 0 Bhag i, triple wealth and treasure ; cause the two
worlds to prosper us, Preserver !

7 Savitar thrice from heaven pours down abundance, and the

fair-handed Kings Vanina, Mitra ;

And spacious Heaven and Earth, yea, and the Waters, solicit
wealth that Savitar may send us.

8 Three are the bright realms, best, beyond attainment, and

three, the Asura’s Heroes, rule as Sovrans,

Holy and vigorous, never to be injured. Thrice may the Gods
from heaven attend our synod.

HYMN LVII. Visvedevas,

Mr thought with fine discernment hath discovered the Cow
who wanders free without a herdsman,

Her who hath straightway poured me food in plenty *. Indra
and Agni therefore are her p raisers.

2 Indra and Pdshan, deft of hand and mighty, well-pleased have

drained the heaven's exhaustless udder.

As in this praise the Gods have all delighted, may I win bles-
sing here from you, 0 Vasus.

3 Fain to lend vigour to the Bull, the sisters with reverence re-

cognize the germ within him.

The Cows eorne lowing hither to the Youngling, to him endued
with great and wondrous beauties.

6 Cause the two worlds ; I follow Prof. Ludwig in taking dhishane as an
.accusative,

8 The bright realms: heaven, divided into three. The A sard's Heroes:
according to &£yana, Agni, Yftyu, and Siirya.

This hymn and the five following are attributed to the Kishi Visv&mitra.

1 With fine discernment : the participle vivikvcfn in the masculine form ap-
pears to he used instead of the feminine form with mcuiisM ) thought. S&-
yana reads manUhftm in the accusative case, and following liiraf Professor Wil-
son translates : ‘ May the discriminating Indra apprehend my glorification (of
the Gods), which is free as a milch-cow grazing alone, without a cowherd.’
The Cou j ; V4li t Voice or Speech, the voice of prayer and praise which the poet
proceeds tc v 'V’-v 1 employ, ancl which Indra and Agni are said to
approve an . ■■■ ■ '■ acceptance.

"2 As in ^ . . ■: is no substantive in the text. Sdyana supplies

vedydm, altar.

3 The Full ; Agni. The sisters : the fingers which produce the fire by fric-
tion. The germ, within Mm : Agni’s fructifying power. The Youngliny :
Agni. According to S&yana the Cows are the plants which spring up in the
vegetable world, adorned with all its various products, as cows go eagerly to
their calves, f

THE MG VEDA,

HYMN 5$,]

385

4 Fixing with thought, at sacrifice, the press-stones, I bid the
.. well-formed Heaven and Earth come hither ;

For these thy flames, which give men boons in plenty, rise up
on high, the beautiful, the holy, ,

5 Agni, thy meath-sweet tongue that tastes fair viands, which

among Gods is called the far-extended, —

Therewith make all the Holy Ones be seated here for our help,
and feed them with sweet juices.

6 Let thy stream give us drink, 0 God, O Agni, wonderful and

exhaustless like the rain-clouds.

Thus care for us, 0 Vasu J&tavedas, show us thy loving-kind-
ness, reaching all men.

HYMN LYIIL Asvins.

The Ancient’s Milch-cow yields the things we long for : the
Son of Dakshina travels between them.

She with the splendid chariot brings refulgence. The praise
of Ushas hath awoke the Asvins.

2 They bear you hither by well-ordered statute : our sacred

offerings rise as if to parents.

Destroy in us the counsel of the niggard : come hitherward,
for we have shown you favour.

3 With lightly-rolling car and well-yoked horses hear this, the

press-stone’s song, ye Wonder-Workers.

Have not the sages of old time, ye Asvins, called you most
prompt to come and stay misfortune ?

4 Remember us, and come to us, for ever men, as their wont is,

invoeate the Asvins.

Friends as it were have offered you these juices, sweet, blent
with milk at the first break of morning.

5 Even through many regions, 0 ye Asvins — high praise is yours

among mankind, ye Mighty —

Come, helpers, on the paths which Gods have travelled : here
your libations of sweet, meath arc ready.

4 T-hy flames : 0 Agni.

6 Jdtavedas : knowing all things that live or exist.

1 The Ancient's Milch-cow : bounteous Ushas or Dawn, daughter of an-
cient Dyaus or Heaven. Dakshind : the sacrificial guerdon, personified.
Her son is Agni, the Sun who travels between in aveu and canli.

2 They : our offerings of prayer and praise. Destroy %n u$ : remove from
us all illiberal thoughts, and let us be bounteous in our worship of the Gods.

5 Even throuyh many regions : come to us even from far away, although
many other worshippers also will try to detain you,

25

386 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK III .

6 Ancient your home, auspicious is your friendship : Heroes,

your wealth is with the house of Jahnu.

Forming again with you auspicious friendship, let us rejoice
witli draughts of meath together.

7 0 Asvins, Very Mighty Ones, with Vayu and with his steeds,

one-minded, ever-youthful,

NAsatyas, joying in the third day’s Soma, drink it, not hostile,
Very Bounteous Givers.

8 Asvins, to you are brought abundant viands in rivalry with

sacred songs, unceasing.

Sprung from high Law your car, urged on by press-stones,
goes round the earth and heaven in one brief moment.

9 Asvins, your Soma sheds delicious sweetness : drink ye thereof

and come unto our dwelling.

Your car, assuming many a shape, most often goes to the
Soma-presser’s place of meeting.

HYMN LIX. Mitra.

Mttra, when speaking, stirreth men to labour : Mitra sustam-
eth both the earth and heaven.

Mitra behold eth men with eyes that close* not. To Mitra
bring, with holy oil, oblation.

2 Foremost he he who brings thee food, 0 Mitra, who strives to-

keep thy sacred Law, Aditya.

He whom thou helpest ne’er is slain or conquered, on him,
from near or far, falls no affliction.

3 Joying in sacred food and free from sickness, with knees bent

lowly on the earth’s broad surface,

Following closely the Aditya’s statute, may we remain in
Mitra’ s gracious favour.

t 4 Auspicious and adorable, this Mitra was bom with fair dominion.
King, Disposer.

May we enjoy the grace of him the Holy, yea, rest in his pro-
pitious loving-kindness.

5 The great Aditya, to be served with worship, who stirreth
men, is gracious to the singer.

6 The house of Jahnu ; the family of the Kusikas, of whom Jahnu was
the ancestor, i Jahnu’s children’ are mentioned as having been favoured
worshippers of the Asvins in Book I. 116. 19.

7 The third, day's Soma : pressed out the day before yesterday, and in the
meantime left to ferment,

1 Stirreth men to labour ; Mifcra being the God of Day, Cf, YII, 302,

THE JUG VEDA.

Mr ME GO.]

m

To Mitra, him most highly to be lauded, offer in fire oblation
that he loveth.

6 The gainful grace of Mitra, God, supporter of the r&ce of man,
Gives splendour of most glorious fame.

7 Mitra whose glory spreads afar, he who in might surpasses

heaven,

Surpasses earth in his renown.

8 All the Five Races have repaired to Mitra, ever strong to aid.
For he sustaineth all the Gods.

9 Mitra to Gods, to living men, to him who strews the holy
„ grass,

Gives food fulfilling sacred Law.

HYMN LX. Ribhifc.

Herb is your ghostly kinship, here, 0 Men : they came desir-
ous to these holy rites with store of wealth,

With wondrous arts, whereby, with schemes to meet each
need,

Ye gained, Sudhan van’s Sons S your share in sacrifice.

2 The mighty powers wherewith ye formed the chalices, the

thought by which ye drew the cow from out the hide,

The intellect wherewith ye wrought the two Bay Steeds, ^
through these, 0. Ribhus, ye attained divinity.

3 Friendship with Indra have the Ribhus fully gained : grand-

sons of Manu, they skilfully urged the work.

Sudhanvan’s Children won them everlasting life, serving with
holy rites, pious with noble acts.

4 In company with Indra come ye to the juice, then gloriously

shall your wishes be fulfilled.

Not to be paragoned, ye Priests, are your good deeds, nor
your heroic acts, Ribhus, Sudhanvan’s Sons.

5 0 Indra., with the Ribhus, Mighty Ones, pour down the Soma

juice effused, well-blent, from both thy hands.

Maghavan, urged by song, in the drink-offerer’s house rejoice
thee with the Heroes, with Sudhanvan’s Sons.

8 All the Five Facts : all Aryan men. ^ I

9 Gives food fulfilling sacred Law : the food which enables men to offer the

appointed sacrifices. ^

1 Here is your ghostly kinship : here, in the sacrificial chamber where the

deities are worshipped, ye, Iiib 1 -.-"V ~-n, are spiritually connected

with the Gods as partakers of ■ They: the Ribhus. . With

store of wealth : their great skill the ' wondrous arts * of the following line.

2 Sec X. 20. 2, 3, 6. .....

m the hymns of [book hi.

6 With Eibhu near, and Vaja, Indra, here exult, with Saehi,

praised of many, in the juice we pour.

These homes wherein we dwell have turned themselves to thee,
— devotions to the Gods, as laws of men ordain.

7 Come with, the mighty Eibhus, Indra, come to us, strengthen-

ing with thy help the singer’s holy praise;

At hundred eager calls come to the living man, with thousand
arts attend the act of sacrifice,

HYMN LXI. Ushas.

0 Ushas, strong with strength, endowed with knowledge,
accept the singer’s praise, 0 wealthy Lady.

Thou, Goddess, ancient, young, and full of wisdom, moves b,
all-bounteous ! as the Law ordain eth.

2 Shine forth, 0 Morning, thou auspicious Goddess, on thy

bright car awaking pleasant voices.

Let docile horses of far-reaching splendour oonvey thee
hitherward, the golden-coloured.

3 Thou, Morning, turning thee to every creature, standest on

high as ensign of the Immortal,

To one same goal ever and ever wending : now, like a wheel,
0 newly-born, roll hither.

4 Letting her reins drop downward, Morning cometh, the

wealthy Dame, the Lady of the dwelling ;

Bringing forth light, the Wonderful, the Blesskd hath spread
her from the bounds of earth and heaven.

5 Hither invoke the radiant Goddess Morning, and bring with

reverence your hymn to praise her.

She, dropping sweets, hath set in heaven her brightness, and,
fair to look on, hath beamed forth her splendour.

6 From heaven, with hymns, the Holy One was wakened :

brightly to both worlds came the wealthy Lady.

To Morning, Agni, when she comes refulgent, thou goest
forth soliciting fair riches.

7 On Law’s firm base the speeder of the Mornings, ths Bull,

hath entered mighty earth and heaven.

Great is the power of Vanina and Mitra, whieh, bright, hath
spread in every place its splendour.

6 BacM: Might, personified, the Consort of Indra,

7 The living man : the worshipper.

3 The Immortal : the Sun.

4 Letting her reins drop : perhaps, sending down rays of light.

•7 The Bull? the Sun, who, as following the Dawns, may be said to urge
them onward,

&TMX Gt]

Win kwVtibA.

S89

HYMN LXIL Indra and Others.

YotTR well-known prompt activities aforetime needed no im-
pulse from your faithful servant.

Where, Indra- Yanina, is now that glory wherewith ye
brought support to those who loved you?

2 This man, most diligent, seeking after riches, incessantly

invokes you for your favour.

Accordant, Indra-Varuna, with Maruts, with Heaven and Earth,
hear ye mine invocation.

3 0 Indra-Yaruna, ours he this treasure, ours.be wealth, Maruts,

with full store of heroes.

May the Varutris with their shelter aid us, and Bharati and
Hotrli with the Mornings.

4 Be pleased with our oblations, thou loved of all Gods, Brihas-

pati ;

Give wealth to him who brings thee gifts.

5 At sacrifices, with your hymns worship the pure Brihaspati —
I pray for power which none may bend —

6 The Bull of men, whom none deceive, the wearer of each

shape at will,

Brihaspati Most Excellent.

7 Divine, resplendent Pushan, this our newest hymn of eulogy
By us is chanted forth to thee.

8 Accept with favour this my song, be gracious to the earnest

thought,

Even as a bridegroom to his bride.

The hymn consists of sis trichas or triplets, the deities of which are
severally (1) Indra and Vanina, (2) Brihaspati, (3) Pdshan, (4) Savitar, (5)
Boma, (6) Mitra and Varuna.

X This stanza is difficult on account of the uncertainty of the meaning of
bhrimdyah in the first line and of sinam, in the second. Professor Wilson
renders it : ‘ Iudra and Varuna, may these people who are relying upon you,
and wandering about (in alarm), sustain no injury from a youthful (adver-
sary) ; for where is that reputation (you enjoy) on account that you bestow
sustenance on your friends ? ’ Professor Ludwig’s translation is to the follow-
ing effect : 4 These that are counted yours, these whirling weapons, were
made not to be hurled at your dependent. Varuna, Mitra, where is this your
glory, wherewith against your friends ye send your missile ? * ^ My version
follows Professor Both’s interpretation in the St. Petersburg Lexicon.

2 This man : the worshipper.

3 The VarMrls : guardian Goddesses ; the Oonsorfcs of the Gods, accord-
ing to the Commentator. J Bhdratt and Jffotrd; Goddesses presiding over
different departments of religious worship.

4 Brihaspati : Lord of Prayer. .

390 TEE RIOT TEA, IBOOK TIL

9 May lie who sees all living things, sees them together at a
glance, —

May he, may Pushan be our help.

10 May wp attain that excellent glory of Savitar the God :

Bo may he stimulate our prayers.

11 With understanding, earnestly, of Savitar the God we crave
Our portion of prosperity.

12 Men, singers worship Savitar the God with hymn and holy

rites,

Urged by the impulse of their thoughts.

13 Sonia who gives success goes forth, goes to the gathering-

place of Gods,

To seat him at the seat of Law.

14 To us and to our cattle may Soma give salutary food,

To biped and to quadruped.

15 May Soma, strengthening our power of life, and conquering

our foes,

In our assembly take his seat.

16 May Mitra-Varuna, sapient Pair, bedew our pasturage with

oil,

With meath the regions of the air.

17 Far-ruling, joyful when adored, ye reign through majesty of

might,

With pure laws everlastingly.

18 Lauded by Jamadagni’s song, sit in the place of holy Law ;
l)rink Soma, ye who strengthen Law.

10 This stanza is the S&vitri, the G&yatri par excellence , * the celebrated verse
of the Vedas which forms part of the daily devotions of the Brahmans,, and
was tot made known to English readers by Sir AV. Jones’s translation of a
paraphrastic interpretation ; he renders it, Let us adore the supremacy of that
divine sun, the godhead, who illuminates all, from whom all proceed, to whom
all must return, whom we invoke to direct our understandings aright in our
progress towards his holy seat.’ — AVilson* See Rigveda Sanhitd, Vol. III. p.
111 .

13 The gathering -place of Gods : the sacrificial chamber. The seat of Law :
the place where sacrifice ordained by eternal Law is performed.

16 With oil: with clarified butter, with fatness, that is, with fertilizing
rain. With menth : ur with lnmey, that is with sweet refreshing dew.

18 Jamadagni , may, according to Havana, be in this place an epithet of
ATv/imitra, and mean c bv whom the lire has been kindled ; ’or Jamadagni
may be another llislii and the seer of the hymn.

BOOK THE FOURTH.

HYMN L Agni.

Thee, Agni, have the Gods, ever of one accord, sent hither
down, a God, appointed messenger, yea, with their wisdom
sent thee down.

The Immortal, 0 thou Holy One, mid mortal men, the God-
devoted God, the wise, have they brought forth, brought
forth the omnipresent God-devoted Sage.

2 As such, 0 Agni, bi'ing with favour to the Gods thy Brother

Yaruna who loveth sacrifice, the Chief who loveth sacrifice,
True to the Law, the Aditya who supporteth men, the King,
supporter of mankind.

3 Bo thou, 0 Friend, turn hither him who is our Friend, swift

as a wheel, like two car-steeds in rapid course, Wondrous 1
to us in rapid course.

0 Agni, find thou grace for us with Yaruna, with Maruts
who illumine all.

Bless us, thou Radiant One, for seed and progeny, yea, bless
us, 0 thou Wondrous God.

4 Do thou who knowest Yaruna, 0 Agni, put far away from us

the God's displeasure.

Best Sacrificer, brightest One, refulgent, remove thou far
from us all those who hate us.

5 Be thou, 0 Agni, nearest us with succour, our closest Friend

while now this Morn is breaking.

Reconcile to us Yaruna, be bounteous : enjoy the gracious
juice ; he swift to hear us.

6 Excellent is the glance, of brightest splendour, which the

auspicious God bestows on mortals, —

The God's glance, longed-for even as the butter, pure, heated,
of the cow, the milch-cow's bounty.

7 Three are those births, the true, the most exalted, eagerly

longed-for, of the God, of Agni,

He came invested in the boundless region, pure, radiant,
friendly, mightily resplendent.

This hymn, and the following forty, are ascribed to the Rishi V&madeva*
son of Gotama. £ •

‘ 7 Three, are those births : the manifestations of Agni in heaven as the Sun ,
in the firmament as lightning, and on earth as sacrificial and domestic fire.

■392 THE HYMNS ON [BOOK It.

8 This envoy joyeth in all seats of worship, borne on his golden

car, sweet-tongued Invoker :

Lovely to look on, with red steeds, effulgent, like a feast rich
in fopd, joyous for ever.

9 Allied by worship, let him give man knowledge : by an ex-

tended cord they lead him onward.

He stays, effectual, in this mortal's dwelling, and the God
wins a share in his possessions.

10 Let Agni — for he knows the way — conduct us to all that he

enjoys of God-sent riches,

What all the Immortals have prepared with wisdom, Dyaus,
Sire, Begetter, raining down true blessings.

11 In houses first he sprang into existence, at great heaven's base,

and in this region's bosom ;

Footless and headless, both his ends concealing, in his Bull's
lair drawing himself together.

12 Wondrously first he rose aloft, defiant, in the Bull's lair, the

home of holy Order,

Longed-for, young, beautiful, and far-resplendent : and seven
dear friends sprang up unto the Mighty.

13 Here did our human fathers take their places, fain to fulfil

the sacred Law of worship.

Forth drave they, with loud call, Dawn's teeming Milch-kinO.
hid in the mountain-stable, in the cavern.

14 Splendid were they when they had rent the mountain : others,

around, shall tell forth this their exploit.

They sang their song, prepared to free the cattle : they found’
the light; with holy hymns they worshipped.

8 Sweet-tongued ; with tasting the oblations ; or, perhaps, pleasant- voiced.

9 By an extended cord : by virtue of the endless chain or series of regularly
performed sacrifices. Effectual : perfecting the sacrifices, or fulfilling all the
desires of the worshipper.

A share in Ms possessions • because the wealth of the worshipper depends
upon the favour of Agni.

11 Footless and headless : without distinguishable head or feet.

His Bull's lair ; apparently the fuel in which he grows strong ; according
to S&yana, £ in the nest of the rain cloud.’

12 The home of holy Ordei* : the altar, the place of law- appointed sacrifice.
Seven dear friends : seven minor priests ; or the frequently mentioned seven
tongues or rays of fire.

13 Our human fathers : the Angirases. Teeming MUch-Mne : the fays of *
light.

H Splendid ; illumined by the recovered rays of light;

THE im VEDA.

HYMN l.J

m

15 Eager, with thought intent upon the booty, the men with

their celestial speech threw open
The solid mountain firm, compact, enclosing, confining Cows,
the stable full of cattle.

o

16 The Milch-cow's earliest name they comprehended ; they found

the Mother’s thrice-seven noblest titles.

This the bands knew, and sent forth acclamation : with the
Bull's sheen the Bed One Was apparent.

17 The turbid darkness fled, the heaven was splendid : up rose

the bright beam of celestial Morning.

Surya ascended to the wide expanses, beholding deeds of men
both good and evil,

18 Then, afterwards they looked around, awakened, when first

they held that HeaVen-allotted treasure.

Now all the Gods abide in all their dwellings. Varuna, Mitra,
be the prayer effective,

19 1 will call hither brightly-beaming Agni, the Herald, all-sup-

porting, best at worship.

He hath disclosed, like the milch-cows' pure udder, the Soma's
juice when cleansed and poured from beakers.

20 The freest God of all who should be worshipped, the guest who

is received in all men's houses,

Agni who hath secured the Gods' high favour, — may he be
gracious, to us, Jdtavedas.

15 The booty : the Cows, the rays of light. Their celestial speech : prayer.

1 6 The Milch-cow's : here, according to S fly ana, Vak or Voice, Speech, or
especially prayer. It is uncertain what is meant by the Mother's thrice-seven
noblest (titles, names, forms, or some similar word being necessarily under-
stood). Professor Wilson, following S&yana, renders the passage : * knowing
the thrice-seven excellent (forms) of the maternal (rhythm)/ that is, the twenty-
one metres of the Vedas ; or, he adds, the passage may refer ‘ to the ancient
nomenclature of cattle, as uttered by the Angirases as JEM, surabhi , guggulu,
gandhinij etc/

With the Bull's sheen ; with the splendour of the Sun. The Red One : TJslias
or Dawn,

1 8 That Heaven-allotted treasure : the recovered rays of light.

19 Sdyana’s explanation of the second line of this stanza is different, and
Professor Wilson, following him translates : f without milking the pure udder
(of the cow), without purified food of the Soma offered in libation/ implying,
according to the Scholiast, * that no offering is made to Agni on the occasion ;
praise alone is addressed to him/ Nd, in the Veda, it may be remembered,
means both not and like, and in some passages it is difficult to determine in
which of its senses the word is to be taken.

304

THE HYMNS OF

[KOOK IV.

HYMN II. Agni*

The Faithful One, Immortal among mortals, a God among
the Gods, appointed envoy,

Priest, best at worship, must shine forth in glory : Agni shall
be raised high with man’s oblations.

2 Born for us here this day, 0 Son of Vigour, between both

races of born beings, Agni,

Thou farest as an envoy, having harnessed, Sublime One !
thy strong-muscled radiant stallions.

3 I laud the ruddy steeds who pour down blessing, dropping

oil, fleetest through the thought of Order.

Yoking red horses to and fro thou goest between you Deities
and mortal races.

4 Aryaman, Mitra, Varuna, and Indra with Vishnu, of the

Gods, Maruts and Asvins —

These, Agni, with good car and steeds, bring hither, most
bountiful, to folk with fair oblations.

5 Agni, be this our sacrifice eternal, with brave friends, rich in

kine and sheep and horses,

Bich, Asura ! in sacred food and children, in full assembly,
wealth broad-based and during.

6 The man who, sweating, brings for thee the fuel, and makes

his head to ache, thy faithful servant, —

Agni, to him be a self-strong Protector : guard him from all
who seek to do him mischief.

7 Who brings thee food, though thou hast food in plenty, wel-

comes his cheerful guest and speeds him onward,

Who kindles thee devoutly in his dwelling, — to him be
wealth secure and freely giving.

5 Whoso sings praise to thee at eve or morning, and, with

oblation, doth the thing thou lovest, —

In his own home, even as a gold-girt courser, rescue him from
distress, the bounteous giver.

9 Whoso brings gifts to thee Immortal, Agni, and doth thee
service with uplifted ladle,—

Let him not, sorely toiling, lose his riches; let not the sinner’s
wickedness enclose him.

,2 Between both races of born beings ; between Gods and men, the Gods also
being called jdtfth or born, as sons of Heaven and Earth.

3 The thought of Order : the thought of Law-appointed sacrifice.

You Deities : the Gods of whom thou, Agni, art one.

6 Makn his head to ache : with the load of wood which He carries on it.

7 Freely giving : enabling the possessor to be bountiful in turn.

MYMN 2.]

THE RIG VEDA.

395

10 Whose well- wrought worship thou accept est, Agui, thou God

a mortals gift, thou liberal Giver, —

Dear be his sacrifice to thee, Most Youthful ! and may we
strengthen him when he adores thee.

11 May he who knows distinguish sense and folly of men, like

straight'and crooked backs of horses.

Lead us, 0 God, to wealth and noble offspring : keep penury
afar and grant us plenty.

12 This Sage the Sages, ne’er deceived, commanded, setting

him down in dwellings of the living.

Hence mayst thou, friendly God, with rapid footsteps behold
the Gods, wonderful, fair to look on.

13 Good guidance hast thou for the priest, 0 Agni, who,

Youngest God ! with out-poured Soma serves thee.

Ruler of men, thou joyous God, bring treasure splendid and
plentiful to aid the toiler.

14 Now all that we, thy faithful servants, Agni, have done with

feet, with hands, and with our bodies,

The wise, with toil, the holy rite have guided, as those who
frame a car with manual cunning.

15 May we, seven sages first in rank, engender, from Dawn the

Mother, men to he ordainers.

May we, Angirases, he sons of Heaven, and, radiant, burst
the wealth-containing mountain.

16 As in the days of old our ancient Fathers, speeding the work

of holy worship, Agni,

11 He who knows: the wise Agni. Like straight and crooked lacks:
asvdnfon, of horses, is supplied by S ay ana ; as a horse-keeper or groom
di- ! T.rw’s! between well-shaped and ill-shaped backs. Keep penury afar:

I f, "„v. Roth in his interpretation of ditim and dditim in this

passage. Professor Wilson, following S&yana, translates * be bountiful to the
liberal giver ; shun him who gives not.’ ‘.Give us this life on earth, keep off
the life to come.’ — Max Muller.

12 This Sage : Agni. The Sages : the other Gods. Commanded : ordered
to become a priestly herald or invoker. With rapid footsteps: I follow
S&yana ; but the correctness of his explanation is doubtful. According to
Pischel, padbhih here means ‘ with (thine) eyes.’

15 ‘Again, through the identification of the fathers with the light they are

brought into connection with the metaphor of generation The fathers

are united with the Dawn, and desire with her to beget male children. In a
hymn to Soma they are mentioned along with the morning Sun as having
placet! the germ in the earth ; and the fruitfulness of heaven and earth,
which give birth to gods and men, is described as produced by the fathers.’ —
Wallis, Cosmology of the Rigrcda , p. 72.

..The wealth- contain l ng mountain.; t he cloud with its store of rain, or the
cave in which the cows or rays of light were imprisoned.

m THE HYMNS OF [BOOK TV*

Sought pure light and devotion, singing praises ; they cleft
the ground and made red Dawns apparent.

1? Gods, doing holy acts, devout, resplendent, smelting like ore
theii; human generations,

Enkindling Agni and exalting Indra, they came encompassing
the stall of cattle.

18 Strong One ! he marked them-— and the Gods before them —

like herds of cattle in a foodful pasture.

There they moaned forth their strong desire for mortals, to
aid the True, the nearest One, the Living.

19 We have worked for thee, we have laboured nohly — bright

Dawns have shed their light upon our worship —

Adding a beauty to the perfect Agni, and the God’s beauteous
eye that shines for ever.

20 Agni, Disposer, we have sung these praises to thee the Wise :

do thou accept them gladly.

Blaze up on high and ever make us richer. Give us great
wealth, 0 thou whose boons are many.

HYMN IIL Agni.

Win, to assist you, Rudra, Lord of worship, Priest of both
worlds, effectual Sacrificer,

Agni, invested with his golden colours, before the thunder
strike and lay you senseless.

2 This shx-ine have we made ready for thy coming, as the fond

dame attires her for her husband.

Performer of good work, sit down before us, invested while
these flames incline to meet thee.

3 A hymn, 0 Priest, to him who hears, the gentle, to him who

looks on men, exceeding gracious,

A song of praise sing to the God Immortal, whom the stone,
presser of the sweet juice, worships.

17 Gods ; the godlike Angirases. Smelting like ore : purifying their hum-
anity, as ore is purified by smelting.

18 Strong One: 0 mighty Agni. Re marked them: Indra saw the kine of

the Angirases, the stolen rays of light. The True , the Nearest One , the Living :
Agni appears to be meant.

J Rudra: here meaning Agni. Before the thunder strike: before death
overtakes you. Professor Ludwig refers to the Atharvaveda, XIX. 2. 9, where
Agni Kravy&d, or Agni in his most terrific form, is spoken of as the God of
Death who stupefies men with his thunderbolt.

2 The fames : there is no substantive in the text. S&yana supplies c flames or
songs of praise,’ or ‘ladles’ may be the word understood. Professor Ludwig
supplies visah or prajdh ( families or people/ and Professor Grassmann
‘libations,’ ' \

HYMN 3.] THE RIG VEDA, 397

4 Even as true knower of the Law, 0 Agni, to this our solemn

rite be thou attentive.

When shall thy songs of festival be sung thee ? When is thy
friendship shown within our dwelling ? s

5 Why this complaint to Yaruna, 0 Agni? And why to

Heaven ? for what is our transgression ?

How wilt thou speak to Earth and bounteous Mitra ? What
wilt thou say to Aryaman and Bhaga ?

6 What, when thou blazest on the lesser altars, what to the

mighty Wind who comes to bless us.

True, circumambient ? what to Earth, 0 Agni, what wilt
thou say to man-destroying Rudra ?

7 How to great P ushan who promotes our welfare,- — to honoured

Rudra what, who gives oblations ?

What sin of ours to the far-striding Vishnu, what, Agni, wilt
thou tell the Lofty Arrow.

8 What wilt thou tell the truthful band of Maruts, how answer

the great Sun when thou art questioned %

Before the Free, before the Swift, defend us : fulfil heaven’s
work, all-knowing Jata vedas.

9 I crave the cow’s true gift arranged by Order : though raw,

she hath the sweet ripe juice, 0 Agni.

Though she is black of hue with milk she teemeth, nutritious,
brightly shining, all-sustaining.

10 Agni the Bull, the manly, hath been sprinkled with oil upon
his back, by Law eternal.

He who gives vital power goes on unswerving. Prism the
Bull hath milked the pure white udder.

5 Why this complaint ; why dost thou accuse us of sin ?

6 On the lesser altars : on the dMshny6$ } s : ^ r rever-
ed with sand on which the fire is placed. - ■ ' . ; of

wicked me n, says the Scholiast. Rudra is generally represented as a bene*
volent God.

7 The Lofty Arrow : the lightning.

8 Now answer the great $un : the sense of stanzas 5 — 8 appears to be, as

Profr"-” T.*' bserves : thou hast no grounds for complaining of us to

any : y i ; be, rather, our advocate if Snrya comes forward as our

accuser.

Before the Free, befwe the Swift : the Sun.

9 The first, line is difficult. ( l solicit the milk of the cow essential for the
sacrifice.’ — Wilson. Though raw : this opposition of the uncooked cow and
the milk cooked or ripened in her udder has been noticed before. See ,1. 62. 9.

10 Prisni : here said to he Surya or the Sun, whp draws his light from the
sky. But see Bcnfcy, Yedica und Verwandtcs, pp. 71, 75.

S9S THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1\\

11 By Law the Augirases cleft the rock asunder, and sang their

hymns- together with the cattle.

Bringing great bliss the men encompassed Morning ; light
warf apparent at the birth of Agni;

12 By Law the Immortal Goddesses the Waters, with meath-rich

waves, 0 Agni, and uninjured,

Like a strong courser lauded in his running, sped to flow
onward swiftly and for ever,

,13 Go never to the feast of one who harms us, the treacherous
neighbour or unworthy kinsman.

Punish us not for a false brother’s .trespass. Let us not feel
the might of friend or foeman.

14 0 Agni, keep us safe with thy protection, loving us, honoured

God ! and ever guarding.

Beat thou away, destroy severe affliction : slay e’en the demon
when he waxes mighty,

15 Through these our songs of praise he gracious, Agni; moved

by our prayers, 0 Hero, touch our viands.

Accept, 0 Angiras, these our devotions, and let the praise
which Gods desire address thee.

16 To thee who knowest, Agni, thou Disposer, all these wise

secret speeches have 1 uttered,

Sung to thee, Sage, the charming words of wisdom, to thee,
0 Singer, with my thoughts and praises.

HYMN IV. Agni.

Put forth like a wide-spreading net thy vigour ; go like a
mighty King with his attendants.

Thou, following thy swift net, shootest arrows ; transfix the
fiends with darts that burn most fiercely.

2 Forth go in rapid flight thy whirling weapons : follow them

closely, glowing in thy fury.

Spread with thy tongue the winged flames, 0 Agni ; unfet-
tered, cast thy firebrands all around thee.

3 Send thy spies forward, fleetest in thy motion ; be, ne’er de-

ceived, the guardian of this people
From him who, near or far, is bent on evil, and let no trouble
sent from thee overcome us.

This hymn is said by S&yana to be addressed to Agni as slayer' of the Rak-
shasas, that is, as God of the fire with which the immigrant Aryans burnt the
jungle, drove back the hostile aborigines, and cleared the ground for encamx>
ment or permanent settlement.

3 Thy spies : thy first flames, sent forward as if to reconnoitre.

TI1B MGVBDA.

399

IlYMM 4 .]

4 Bise up, 0 Agni, spread thee out before us : burn down our

foes, thou who hast ^sharpen ed arrows.

Him, blazing Agni ! who haHTlvork ed us mischief, consume
thou utterly like dried-up stubble. #

5 Eise, Agni, drive off those -who fight against us : make mani-

fest thine own celestial vigour.

Slacken the strong bows of the demon-driven : destroy our
foemen whether kin or stranger.

G Most Youthful God, he knoweth well thy favour who gave an
impulse to this high devotion.

All fair days and magnificence of riches hast thou beamed
forth upon the good man’s portals.

’ 7 Blest, Agni, be the man, the liberal giver, who v T ith his lauds
and regular oblation

Is fain to please thee for his life and dwelling. May all his
days he bright : he this his longing.

8 I praise thy gracious favour : sing in answer. May this my

song sing like a loved one with thee.

Lords of good steeds and cars may w r e adorn thee, and day by
day vouchsafe thou us dominion.

9 Here of free choice let each one serve thee richly, resplendent

day by day at eve and morning.

So may -we honour thee, content and joyous, passing beyond
the glories of the people.

10 Whoso -with good steeds and fine gold, 0 Agni, comes nigh

thee on a car laden with treasure,

His Friend art thou, yea, thou art his Protector whose joy it
is to entertain thee duly.

11 Through words and kinship 1 destroy the mighty: this power

I have from Got am a my father.

Mark thou this speech of ours, 0 thou Most Youthful, Friend
of the House, exceeding wise, Invoker.

12 Knowing no slumber, speedy and propitious, alert and ever

friendly, most umvearied,

May thy protecting prnvers, unerring Agni, taking their places
here, combined, preserve us.

5 The demon-driven : those whom evil spirits incite to attack ub.

8 Sing in answer : with the auspicious sound of thy crackling flames.

11 Through words and kinship : that is, through my close alliance with
Agni, effected by the prayers with which my fathers and I have worshipped
him.

The mighty ; the B&ksliasas or demons; according to S&yana.

400 TEE HYMNS OF [BOOK IV •

13 Thy guardian rays,, 0 Agni, when they saw him, preserved
blind Mkmateya from affliction.

Lord of all riches, he preserved the pious : the foes who fain
would harm them did no mischief,

4ided by thee with thee may we be wealthy, may we gain
strength with thee to guide us onward.

Fulfil the words of both, 0 Ever Truthful : straightway do
this, thou God whom power emboldens. *

15Q Agni, with this fuel will we serve thee; accept the laud we
sing to thee with favour.

Destroy the cursing B&kshasas : preserve us, 0 rich in friends,
from guile and scorn and slander,

HYMN V. Agni.

How shall we giye with one accord oblation to Agni, to
V^sv&nara the Bounteous 1

‘Cheat light, with full high growth hath he uplifted, and, as

, v /,a pillar hears the roof, sustains it.

% Beproach pot him who, God and self-reliant, vouchsafed this
bounty unto me a mortal, —

Deathless, discerner, wise, to me the simple, Vaisv&nai'a most
manly, youthful Agni.

3 Sharp-poiuted, powerful, strong, of boundless vigour, Agni
who knows the lofty hymn, kept secret

As the lost milch-cow’s track, the doubly Mighty, — he hath
declared to me this hidden knowledge.

A May be with sharpened teeth, the Bounteous Giver, Agni,
consume with flame most fiercely glowing 4

Those who regaz'd not Varuna’s commandments and the dear
stedfast laws of sapient Mitra.

13 This stanza has occurred before, I. 147.3. Blind Mdniateya : the Riahi
Dirghatamas. Lord of all riches : Agni.

fl The words of both : the wishes of Gods and men. S&yana gives a differ-
ent explanation, and Prpfessor Wilson translates accordingly ; * destroy both
(sorts of calumniators.)*

The ftishi V&madeva, as Professor Roth observes, ‘professes to make
known a mysterious and recondite wisdom, which had been revealed to him

by Agni,* and the language of the hymn is correspondingly difficult and
obscure.

*' 1 Vaisvdmra * common God of all Aryan men.

$ This bounty ; the gift of this mysterious knowledge.,

HYMISf 5,]

THE JUG VEDA.

401

5 Like you f h f ■ i 1 yro.HI ,T 1 w : f ' h * P'— *T
wl^rte- .. ' r : — TT

They wli ■ ‘ . II - * - In.

der%d this abysmal station.

J - n: {■ :;u >
' " •) j ^

6 To me, weak, innocent, thou, luminous Agni, hast boldly given

as ’twere a heavy burthen,

This Prishtha hymn, profound and strong and mighty, of
seven elements, and with offered dainties.

7 So may our song that purifies, through wisdom reach in a

moment him the Universal,

Established on the height, on earth's best station, above the
beauteous grassy skin of Prism.

8 Of this my speech what shall I utter further ? They indicate

the milk stored up in secret

When they have thrown as ’twere the cows’ stalls open. The
Bird protects earth’s best and well-loved station.

9 This is the Great Ones’ mighty apparition which from of pld
the radiant Cow hath followed.

This, shining brightly in the place of Order, swift, hasting
on in secret, she discovered.

10 He then who shone together with his Parents remembered
Prisni’s fair and secret treasure,

Which, in the Mother Cow’s most lofty station, the Bull’s
tongue, of the flame bent forward, tasted.

5 This abysmal station; that is, says S&yana, narakasthdnam or hell. The
wicked are the cause of the existence of the place of punishment prepared
for them.

C This Prishtha hymn : Prishtha is the name of a particular arrangement
of S&mans employed at the mid-day oblation.

7 The Universal: Vaisvlnara Agni. Established on the height: according
to this conjectural translation, which follows a suggestion of Professor
Ludwig, the reference is to Agni placed on the altar, above the surface of the
earth (Prism). But the meaning of jabdru (on the height ?) is uncertain.
Professor Wilson translates : * whose swift- ascending brilliant (orb) is sta-
tioned on the east of the earth, to mount, like the sun, above the immove-
able heaven.’

8 This stanza appears to allude to the Angirases recovering the lost rays
of light, the milk stored up in secret. The Bird : the Sun who flies through
heaven.

9 The Great Ones" mighty apparition : the solar orb ; the Great Ones being
the Sun’s rays. The radiant Cow : Ushas or Pawn who disoowers the Sun' as
he travels in secret, or by night, from west to east, and follows him till he ia
about to rise.

10 He: Agni. Ills Parents: Heaven and Earth. Prisni is the Cow whoso ^
milk is used in the oblation which Agni, the Bull, devours,

26

' m THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IV*

1 1 With reverence I declare the Law, 0 Agni ; what is, comes

by thine order, J&ta vedas.

Of this, wbate’er it be, thou art the Sovran ; yea, all the
wealth that is in earth or heaven.

12 What is our wealth therefrom, and what nur treasure? Tell

us, 0 Jatavedas, for thou knowest,

What is our best course in this secret passage : we, unre-
proached, have reached a place far distant.

13 What is the limit, what the rules, the guerdon? Like fleet-

foot coursers speed we to the contest.

When will the Goddesses, the rmmortars Spouses, the Dawns,
spread over us the Sun~God 5 s splendour ?

14 Unsatisfied, with speech devoid of vigour, scanty and frivolous

and inconclusive,

Wherefore do they address thee here, O Agni ? Let these who
have no weapons suffer sorrow.

15The‘ majesty of him the Good, the Mighty, aflame, hath
shone for glory in the dwelling.

He,- clothed in light, hath shone most fair to look on, wealthy
in boons,, as a home shines with riches.

HYMN YL Agm.

Priest of our rite, stand up erect, 0 Agni, in the Gods’ ser-
vice best of sacrifices,

For over every thought thou art the Euler : thou furtherest
e’en the wisdom of the pious.

2' He was set down mid men as Priest unerring, Agni, wise,
welcome in our holy synods.

Like Savitar he hath lifted up his splendour, and like a
builder raised his smoke to heaven.

3 The glowing ladle-, filled with oil, is lifted: choosing Gods’ 1
service to the right he circles.

Eager he rises like the new-wrought pillar which, firmly set
and fixed, anoints the victims.

"I When sacred grass is strewn and Agni kindled, the Adhvaryu
rises to his task rejoicing.

Agni the Priest, like one who tends the cattle, goes three
times round, as from of old he wills it.

14 These ivho have no weapons : who are unprovided with the necessary
elements of sacrifice, and therefore unable to please Agni.

2 Like a builder : as- the builder of a house raises a pillar.

3 To the right he circles : is carried round to the altars. Anoints the
victims: smears them with the clarified butter with which it (the sacrificial
post) has been previously anointed,

HYMN 7 . J THE RIG VEDA . £0B

5 Agni himself, the Priest, with measured motion, goes round,

with sweet speech, cheerful, true to Order.

His fulgent flames run forth like vigorous horses : all crea-
tures are affrighted when he blazes. * •

6 Beautiful and auspicious is thine aspect, 0 lovely Agni, ter-

rible when spreading.

Thy splendours are not covered by the darkness : detraction
leaves no stain upon thy body.

7 Naught hindered his production, Bounteous Giver : his Mother

and his Sire wei*e free to send him.

Then as a Friend benevolent, refulgent, Agni shone forth in
human habitations.

8 He, Agni, whom the twice-five sisters, dwelling together, in

the homes of men engendered,

Bright like a spear’s tooth, wakened in the morning, with
powerful mouth and like an axe well-sharpened.

9 These thy Bay Coursers, Agni, dropping fatness, ruddy and

vigorous, speeding straightly forward,

And red steeds, wonderful, of mighty muscle, are to this
service of the Gods invited :

10 These brightly-shining flames of thine, 0 Agni, that move for

ever restless, all-subduing,

Like falcons hasting eagerly to the quarry, roar loudly like
the army of the Maruts.

11 To thee, 0 flaming God, hath prayer been offered. . Let the

priest laud thee : give to him who worships.

Men have established Agni as Invoker, fain to adore the
glory of the living.

HYMN YIT. Agni;

Hebe by ordainers was this God appointed first Invoker, best
at worship, to be praised at rites ;

Whom Apnavana and the Bhrigus caused to shine bright-
coloured in the wood, spreading from home to home.

7 His Mother and his Sire : Earth and Heaven. To send him : to he
messenger between men and Gods.

8 The twice-five sisters : the priest’s fingers which produce the sacrifieial fir©,-

9 Bay Coursers : haritah ; Harits ; the prototype (the word being feminine)
of the Greek c Charites.’ ’ See M. M tiller, Chips from a German Workshop,
IV, 141 (new edition).

11 The glory of the living: Agni as Narisansa, the Praise or Glory of Men. ’

1 Here : at this ceremony. Ordainers: the regulators of the sacrifice*
Apnavdna : a Ilishi of the family of Bhrigu,

404 TJ±ti Mi MMo Oi [bVOfi. lY,

2 When shall thy glory as a God, Agni, be suddenly shown

forth ?

For mortal men haye held thee fast, adorable in all their
homes,

3 Seeing thee faithful to the Law, most sapient, like the starry

heaven,

_ Illumining with cheerful ray each solemn rite in every house.

4 Vivasv&n’s envoy living men have taken as their ensign, swift,
The ruler over all mankind, moving like Bhrigu in each home.

5 Him the intelligent have they placed duly as Invoking Priest,
. Welcome, with sanctifying flame, best worshipper, with seven-
■' fold might ]

. '6 In his Eternal Mothers, in the wood, concealed and unapproa^
ched ;

Kept secret though his flames are blight, seeking on all sides,
quickly found,

7 That,, as food spreads forth in this earthly udder, Gods may

rejoice them in the home of Order,

'Great Agni, served with reverence and oblation, flies ever to
the sacrifice, the Faithful.

8 Bird of each rite, skilled in an envoy’s duties, knowing both

worlds and that winch lies between them,

Thou goest from of old a willing Herald, knowing full well
heaven’s innermost recesses.

9 Bright ■ God, thy path is black ; light is before thee : thy

moving splendour is the chief of wonders.

When sbe, yet unimpregnate, hath conceived thee, even when
newly born thou art an envoy.

10 Yet newly bom, his vigour is apparent when the wind blows
upon his fiery splendour.

His sharpened tongue he layeth on the brushwood, and with
his teeth e’en solid food consume th,

4 Vivasvdn’s envoy ; according to S&yana, the messenger of the worshipper.
Moving like Bhrigu ; or shining ; Bhrigu being originally a personification
of lightning.

5 Sevenfold might : A'gni’s seven flames,

6 Eternal Mothers : tlie Celestial "Waters. Seeking on all sides ' roaming at
will in search of food.

7 In this earthly wider : here on earth, and especially at the altar from
which oblations come. Only when the elements of sacrifice are furthcoming
can Agni invite and bring the Gods. The Jiopie of Order * the place of law-
ordained sacrifice.

,l S ’Bird of each rite : attending all sacrifices. That which lies between them*.
the firmament or mid-air between heaven and earth.

I) She, yet uhivipfpgnate : the piece of wood in which fire is produced,

irfMN 9,] ' ' TEE TIG VEDA. 405

11 When he hath borne off food with swift flame swiftly, strong
Agni makes himself a speedy envoy,

Follows the rustling of the wind, consuming, and courser-like,
speeds, drives the swift horse onward. •

HYMN VIII. Agni.

Your envoy who possesses all, Immortal, bearer of your gifts,
Best worshipper, I woo with song.

2 He, Mighty, knows the gift of wealth, he knows the deep

recess of heaven :

He shall bring hitherward the Gods.

3 He knows, a God himself, to guide Gods to the righteous in

his home :

He gives e’en treasures that we love.

4 He is the Herald : well-informed, he doth his errand to and

fro,

Knowing the deep recess of heaven.

5 May we be they who gratify Agni with sacrificial gifts,

Who cherish and enkindle him.

.6 Illustrious for wealth are they, and hero deeds, victorious,
Who have served Agni reverently.

7 So unto us, day after day, may riches craved by many come,
And power and might spring up for us.

8 That holy Singer in his strength shoots forth his arrows

swifter than

The swift shafts of the tribes of men.

HYMN IX. Agni.

Agni, show favour ; great art thou who to this pious man art
come,

To seat thee on the sacred grass.

11 When he hath borne off food ; I follow Sfiyana, but am not satisfied with
his explanation. Courser-like ; Agni, himself a courser, drives on the wind as
it were a courser. Professor Ludwig suggests that drvd here may mean a
rider, not a courser,

2 Knows the gift of wealth ; how to enrich liis worshippers. ” ;

4 Doth his errand to a/nd fro : bears to the Gods the prayers, praises, and
oblations of their worshippers, and brings them down to the sacrifice. .

8 That holy Singer : Agni the Priest. The stanza is difficult. Professor
Wilson, following S&yana, translates : ‘ May the wise Agni entirely obviate
by his power the removeable (ills) of 'men the descendants of Mann/ I have
adopted Professor Ludwig’s interpretation.

m TEE HYMNS OF [ BOOK IV .

2 May he the Immortal Helper, hard to be deceived among

mankind,

Become the messenger of all.

3 Around the altar is he led, welcome Chief Priest at solemn

rites,

‘ Or as the Potar sits him down.

4 Agni in fire at sacrifice, and in the house as Lord thereof,

And as a Brahman takes his seat.

5 Thou comest as the guide of folk who celebrate a sacrifice,
And to oblations brought by men.

6. Thou servest as his messenger whose sacrifice thoti lovest
well,

To bear the mortal’s gifts to heaven.

7 Accept our solemn rite ; be pleased, Angiras, with our

sacrifice :

Give ear and listen to our call.

8 May thine inviolable car, wherewith thou guardest those

who give,

Come tiear to us from every side.

HYMN X. # A & ni -

Tins day with praises, Agni, we bring thee that which thou
lovest.

Right judgment, like a horse, with our devotions.

2 For thou hast ever been the Car-driver, Agni, of noble
Strength, lofty sacrifice, and rightful judgment.

3 Through these our praises come thou to meet us, bright as

the sunlight,

0 Agni, well disposed, with all thine aspects.

4 Now may we serve thee singing these lauds this day to thee,

Agni.

Loud as the voice of Heaven thy blasts are roaring.

5 Just at this time of the day and the night thy look is the

sweetest :

It shineth near us even as gold for glory.

6 Spotless thy body, brilliant as gold, like clarified butter :

This gleams like gold on thee, 0 Self-dependent.

8 Chief Priest : Hotar, the presen tei’ of the oblation. The Potar * literally,
Cleanser or Purifier, another of the sixteen priests usually employed.

4 I rear! wttignd as proposed by Prof. Max Muller and Prof, Ludwig m place
of the almost impossible utd gnflh of the text. ^

Car-driver : promoter,

6 Thk : thy splendour,

HYMN 12;] THE RIG YE I) A. > 40f

.7 All hate and mischief, yea, if committed, Agni, thou turnesf,
Holy One, from the man who rightly worships.

8 Agni, with you Gods, prosperous be our friendships and kin-
ships. . •

Be this our bond here by this place, thine altar.

HYMN XI. Agni.

Thy blessed majesty, victorious Agni, shines brightly in the
neighbourhood of Shrya.

Splendid to see, it shows even at night-time, and food is fair
to look on in thy beauty.

2 Agni, disclose his thought for him who singeth, the well,

Strong God ! while thou art praised with fervour.

Vouchsafe to us that powerful hymn, 0 Mighty, which, Ra-
diant One ! with all the Gods thou lovest.

3 From thee, 0 Agni, springs poetic wisdom, from thee come

thoughts and hymns of praise that prosper ;

From thee flows wealth, with heroes to adorn it, to the true-
hearted man who gives oblation.

4 From thee the hero springs who wins the booty, bringer of

help, mighty, of real courage.

From thee comes wealth, sent by the Gods, bliss-giving;
Agni, from thee the fleet impetuous charger.

5 Immortal Agni, thee whose voice is pleasant, as first in rank,

as God, religious mortals

Invite with hymns ; thee who removest hatred, Friend of the
Home, the household’s Lord, unerring.

6 Far from ns thou removest want and sorrow, far from us all

ill-will when thou protectest.

, Son of Strength, Agni, blest is he at evening, whom thou as
God attendest for his welfare.

HYMN XII. Agni.

Whoso enkindles thee, with lifted ladle, and thrice this day
offers thee food, 0 Agni,

May he excel, triumphant through thy splendours, wise
through thy mental power, 0 JAtavedas.

8 This altar : literally, this udder ; that is, the place whence oblations
proceed.

1 In th$ neighbourhood of Sdrya ; by day", in the sunshine,

2 The well: the source of sacred song.

4 The hero : or the strong horse. '

40S THE, HYMNS OF [BO OH 1V<

2 Whoso with toil and trouble brings thee fuel, serving the

majesty of mighty Agni,

He, kindling thee at evening and at morning, prospers, and
comes to wealth, and slays his foemen.

3 Agni is Master of sublime dominion, Agni is Lord of strength
- and lofty riches.

Straightway the self-reliant God, Most Youthful, gives trea-
sures to the mortal who adores him.

4 Most Youthful God, whatever sin, through folly, we here, as

human beings, have committed,

In sight of Aditi make thou us sinless : remit, entirely, Agni,
our offences.

5 Even in the presence of great sin, 0 Agni, free us from prison

of the Gods or mortals.

Never may we who are thy friends be injured : grant health
« and strength unto our seed and offspring.

6 Even as ye here, Gods Excellent and Holy, have loosed the

cow that by the foot was tethered,

So also set us free from this affliction ; long let our life, 0
Agni, be extended.

HYMN XIII. . Agni.

Agni hath looked, benevolently-minded, on the wealth-giving
spring of radiant Mornings.

Come, Asvins, to the dwelling of the pious : Sftrya the God is
rising with his splendour.

2 Savitar, God, hath spread on high his lustre, waving his flag
like a spoil-seeking hero.

Theiv stablished way go Yanina and Mitra, what time they
make the Sun ascend the heaven.

4 Aditi : apparently the great omnipresent Power which controls the
forces of the universe, and from which no sins are hidden.

5 Prison of the Gods or mortals : actual imprisonment by men and
corresponding chastisement by the Gods.

, ft The cow : the cow-buffalo, tied to a post, representing symbolically the
man, who is in the bonds of sin. Of. X. 126. 6.

2 Waving his flag : according to S&yaua, f scattering the dew.’ But there
can be no doubt that draped, the Zend drafsha, means a banner in this place.
S&yana explains satvd, a hero, as 1 a bull,’ but this interpretation cannot be
accepted.

Their stablished way ; the course appointed for them in the eternal order of
the universe.

MTMN 15.]

THE RIQVEDA ,

40,0

3 Him whom they made to drive away the darkness, Lords of

sure mansions, constant to their object,

Him who beholds the universe, the Sun-God, seven strong and
youthful Coursers carry onward. *

4 Spreading thy web with mightiest Steeds thou comest, rending

apart, thou God, the blaek-hued mantle.

The rays of Surya tremulously shining sink, like a hide, the
darkness in the waters.

5 How is it that, unbound and not supported, he falleth not

although directed downward %

By what self-power moves he ? Who hath seen it ? He guards
the vault of heaven, a close-set pillar.

HYMN XIV. Agni.

The God hath looked, even Agni J&ta' vedas, to meet the
Dawns refulgent in their glories.

Come on your chariot, ye who travel widely, come to this
sacrifice of ours, Nasatyas.

2 Producing light for all the world of creatures, God Savitar

hath raised aloft his banner.

Making his presence known by sunbeams, Surya hath filled
the firmament and earth and heaven.

3 Red Dawn is come, riding with brightness onward, distin-

guished by her beams, gay-hued and mighty.

Dawn on her nobly-harnessed car, the Goddess, awaking men
to happiness, approacheth.

4 May those most powerful steeds and chariot bring you, O

Asvins, hither at the break of morning.

•Here for your draught of meath are Soma juices : at this our
sacrifice rejoice, ye Mighty.

5 How is it that, unbound and unsupported, he falleth not

although directed downward ?

By what self-power moves he ? Who hath seen it 1 He guards
the vault of heaven, a close-set pillar ?

HYMN XV. Agnf.

Agni the Herald, like a horse, is led forth at our solemn rite,
God among Gods adorable.

3 Courser's : haritah; Harits. Of. IV. 6. 9.

This hymn is an imitation of the preceding. The last stanza is adopted
word for worth

5 He : in the text ay am, this, that is Sttrya, the Sun, mentioned in stanza 2.

1 Is led forth : implying the formal bringing of fire from the household
fire to light the sacrificial fire,

410 TMEIEYMN^OF [BOOK IY .

2 Three times unto our solemn rite comes Agmi like a charioteer*
Bearing the viands to the Gods.

Z Bound the oblations hath he paced, Agni the Wise, the Lord
of Strength,

Giving the offerer precious boons.

4 He who is kindled eastward for Srinjaya, Devavata’s son,
Resplendent, tamer of the foe.

5 So mighty be the Agni whom the mortal hero shall command,
With sharpened teeth and bountiful.

6 Day after day they dress him, as they clean a horse who wins

the prize,

Dress the red Scion of the Sky.

7 When Sahadeva's princely son with two bay horses thought

of me,

Summoned by him I drew not back.

S And truly those two noble bays * I straightway took when
offered me,

' From Sahadeva’s princely son.

9 Long, 0 ye Asvins, may he live, your care, ye Gods, the
princely son
Of Sahacleva, Somaka.

10 Cause him the youthful prince, the son of Sahadeva, to enjoy
Long life, 0 Asvins, 0 ye Gods.

HYMN XVL indra.

Impetuous, true, let Maghavan coine hither, and let his Tawny
Coursers speed to reach us.

For him have we pressed juice exceeding potent; here, prais-
ed with song, let him effect his visit.

2 Three times : with reference to the three sacrifices,

4 Eastward ; on the uttaravedi or north altar. Sr injay a : a certain Soma-
saerificer, haschit somaydji i says Sayana. Professor Wilson observes: f We
have several princes of the name in the Purlnas, but none distinguished by
this patronymic : the Srinjayas are also a people in the west of India.’

6 2 he red Sdon of the Sky : or, Arusha, the Child of Heaven, i. e. the Sun.

7 Sahadeva 1 s princely son : Somaka, the institutor of the sacrifice, son of a

named Sahadeva. With two bay horses : which were to be the priest’s
honorarium.

9 Your care: there is no substantive in the text, S&yana supplies tarpahah
satisfier, i. e. worshipper. Professor Ludwig regards vdm as a dativus ethicus.

1 Impetuous : according to Sayana, rijish% the word in the text, means
accepter, or drinker, of the. spiritless Soma, of the Soma when its essence or
strength has passed away. Professor Ludwig follows S&yana.

THE RIG VEDA.

m

HYMN 16.]

2 Unyoke, as at thy journey's end, 0 Hero, to gladden thee to-

day at this libation. , ■ •

Like Usanll, the priest a laud shall utter, a hymn to thee, the
Lord Divine, who markest. 5

3 When the Bull, quaffing, praises our libation, as a sage paying

holy rites in secret,

Seven singers here from heaven hath he begotten, who e'en
by day have wrought their works while singing.

4 When heaven's fair light by hymns was made apparent (they

made great splendour shine at break of morning),

He with his succour, best of Heroes, scattered the blinding
darkness so that men saw clearly.

5 Indra, Impetuous One, hath waxed immensely ; he with his

vastness hath filled earth and heaven.

E'en beyond this his majesty extendeth who hath exceeded all
the worlds in greatness.

6 SUvra who knoweth well all human actions hath with his

eager Friends let loose the waters.

They with their songs cleft e’eu the mount ua open and will-
ingly disclosed the stall of cattle.

7 He smote away the Hoods' obstructor, Vpitra ; Earth, conscious,

lent her aid to speed thy thunder.

Thou sentest forth the waters of the ocean, as Lord through
power and might, 0 daring Hero.

8 When, Much-invoked l the water’s rock thou deftest, Saramid .

showed herself and went before thee.

Hymned by Angirases, bursting the oowstalls, much strength
thou foundest for us as our leader.

9 Gome, Maghavan, Friend of Man, to aid the singer imploring

thee in battle for the sunlight.

Speed him with help in his inspired invokings : down sink the
sorcerer, the prayerless Dasyu.

2 Like Usavd : the Rishi TJsanft, or (Jsanas, called also K&vya or Ravi's
sQfi, appears in the Veda as the especial friend of Indra. See I. 51. 10 ; 33,
5 ; 117, 12.

3 TU Bull : the mighty Indra, Seven singers : the meaning of -this line is
not clear. Professor Wilson, hallowing S&yana, translates : 2 3 4 * 6 and this gene-
rates the seven efficient (r*ys) from heaven, which, being glorified, have made
(manifest) the objects of (human) perception,’

■ 4 Scattered , etc : or, fashioned blind turbid darkness so that men saw

clearly.

6 Sakra : Indra, the powerful. His eager Friends : the Maruts.

" 8 Stmmd : the hound of Indra, who tracked the stolen cows, See I,
62. 3, and 72, 8.

m the i/ymns op [ book it.

10 Come to our home resolved to slay the Dasyu : Kutsa longed

eagerly to win thy friendship.

Alike in form ye both sate in his dwelling ; the faithful Lady
was in doubt between you.

11 Thou contest, fain to succour him, with Kutsa, — a goad that

masters both the Wind-God’s horses,

That, holding the broWn steeds like spoil for capture, the sage
may on the final day be present.

12 For Kutsa,' with thy thousand, thou at day-break didst hurl

down greedy Sushpa, foe of harvest.

Quickly with Kutsa’s friend destroy the Dasyus, and roll the
chariot-wheel of Sfirya near us.

13 Thou to the son of Yidathin, Kijisvan, gavest up mighty Mxi-

gaya and Pipru.

Thou smotest down the swarthy fifty thousand, and rentest
forts as age consumes a garment.

14 What time thou settest near the Sun thy body, thy form,

Immortal One, is seen expanding :

. Thou a. wild elephant with might invested, like a dread lion
as thou wieldest weapons.

15 Wishes for wealth have gone to Indra, longing for him in war

for light and at libation,

Eager for glory, labouring with praise-songs : he is like home,
like sweet and fair nutrition.

16 Call we for you that Indra, prompt to listen, him who hath

done so much for men’s advantage ;

Who, Lord of envied bounty, to a singer like me brings quick-
ly booty worth the capture.

1 0 Kutsa : a Rajarshi or royal Riahi, frequently mentioned as the favoured
friend of Indra.

The faithful Lady ; even Kutsa’ s wife could hardly distinguish one from
the other; or, as Sftyana explains, Indra took Kutsa to his own home where
§acht his consort was uncertain which of the two was Indra,

11 The sage : Kutsa. The final day : the decisive day of battle.

12 With thy thousand : thy many followers. Foe of harvest : orKuyava
maybe the name of another fiend or barbarous enemy, See I. 104.3,
Kutsa’s friend : the thunderbolt, according to Sftyana, Roll the chariot-wheel
of Stir y a near us ; bring back the daylight.

13 Rijisvan: a prince mentioned before as protected by Indra. See I. 51. 5.
Mrigaya and Pipru : demons of the air. The swaffhy fifty thousand : black
R&kshasas, fiends, or hostile aborigines.

• 14 What time thou settest near the Sun thy body : perhaps, as Professor
Ludwig suggests, a poetical explanation of an eclipse of the sun,

15 Eager for glory : a transition from ‘wishes’ to ‘wishers’ implied
therein. Nutrition ; according to S&yana, like Lakshmi th© Goddess of
prosperity.

BY MX If] THE RIG VXD A. 413

17 When the sharp-pointed arrow, 0 thou Hero, flieth mid any

conflict of the people,

When, Faithful One, the dread encounter eometh, then be
thou the Protector of our body.

18 Further the holy thoughts of Vlmadeva; be thou a guileless

Friend in fight for booty.

We come to thee whose providence protects us ; wide be thy
sway for ever for thy singer.

19 0 Indra, with these men who love thee truly, free givers,

Maghavan, in every battle,

May wo rejoice through many autumns, quelling our foes, as
days subdue the nights with splendour.
gO Now, as the Bhrigus wrought a car, for Indra the Strong, the
Mighty, we our prayer have fashioned,

That he may ne’er withdraw from us his friendship, but be
our bodies’ guard and strong defender,
gl Now, Indra ! lauded, glorified with praises, let power swell
high like id vers for the singer.

For thee a new hymn, Ford of Bays, is fashioned. May we,
PQ,r-bon>e, through song be victors ever.

HYMN XVII Indra,

Great art thou, Indra ; yea, the earth, with gladness, and
heaven confess to thee thine high dominion.

Thou in thy vigour having slaughtered Vritra didst free the
floods arrested by the Dragon* - •

2 Heaven trembled at the birth of thine effulgence ; Earth trem-
bled at the fear of thy displeasure.

The stcdfast mountains shook in agitation : the waters flowed,
and desert spots were flooded,

S Hurling his bolt with might he cleft the mountain, while,
putting forth his strength, he showed his vigour.

He slaughtered Vritra with his bolt, exulting, and, their lord
slain, forth flowed the waters swiftly.

4 Thy Father Dyaus esteemed himself a hero : most noble was
the work of Indra’s Maker,

His who begat the strong bolt’s Lord who roareth, immovable
like earth from her foundation,

1 9 Free givers ; liberal ipstitutors of sacrifice,

20 As the Bhrigus : according to S&yana== splendid carpenters ; but the
reference must be to the celebrated priestly family, and *car* may be used
metaphorically for tlie hymn which rapidly reaches tjie Gods,

1 The Dragon : Ahi, the serpent- demon who stays the rain from falling*

4 Esteemed himself a hero : a* being the father of such a son.

*14 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IV,

5 He who alone overthrows the world of creatures, Indra the

peoples 5 King, invoked of many —

Verily all rejoice in him, extolling the boons which Maghavau
the God hath sent them.

6 All So&a juices are his own for ever, most gladdening draughts

are ever his, the Mighty,

Thou ever wast the Treasure-Lord of treasures : Indra, thou
lettest all folk share thy bounty.

7 Moreover, when thou first wast born, 0 Indra, thou struckest

terror into all the people.

Thou, Maghavan, rentest with thy bolt the Dragon w T ho lay
against the water-floods of heaven.

8 The ever-slaying, bold and furious Indra, the bright bolt’s

Lord, infinite, strong and mighty,

Who slayeth Vritra and acquireth booty, giver of blessings,
Maghavan the bounteous :

9 Alone renowned as Maghavan in battles, he frighteneth away

assembled armies.

He bringeth us the booty that he winneth : may we, well-
loved, continue in his friendship.

10 Renowned is he when conquering and when slaying: ’tis he

who winneth cattle in the combat,

When Indra hardeneth his indignation all that is fixed and
all that moveth fear him.

11 Indra hath won all kine, all gold, all horses, — Maghavan, he

who bre&keth forts in pieces ;

Most manly with these men of his who help him, dealing out
wealth and gathering the treasure.

12 What is the care of Indra for his Mother, what cares he for

the Father who begat him ?

His care is that which speeds his might in conflicts, like wind

J borne onward by the clouds that thunder.

— _ — - —

5 Extolling : X follow Professor Wilson in taking grinatnh as a nominative
plural, a lightened form for grinantdh. Otherwise it is difficult to make
sense out of the second line.

8 Indra .* in this stanza is in the accusative case without a subject or a
governing verb. S&yana supplies vayam stotdrah stumeti , £ we Bingers praise/

11 Who breaketh forts in pieces : as it seems impossible to make any sense
out of pttrvtih, I have adopted Professor Grassmann’s conjecture, which is
Bomewhat reluctantly accepted by Professor Ludwig, and read pUrbhid ins-
tead of the word in the text. S&yana supplier s ttrusendh, 1 armies of
enemies.’ These men : who sing his praises and so increase his strength.

12 His care is : there are no corresponding words in the text, but it un-
necessary to supply something of the kind. The meaning is, Indra is in-
dependent of, and cares nothing about, his parents, but he does care for his
dear ally the thunderbolt.

THE MOVED A.

m

13 Maghavan makes the settled man unsettled : he scatters dust

that he hath swept together,

Breaking in pieces like Heaven armed with lightning ;
Maghavan shall enrich the man who lauds him.

14 He urged the chariot-wheel of Sdrya forward: Etasa,< speed-

ing on his way, he rested.

Him the black undulating cloud bedeweth, in this mid-air's
depth, at the base of darkness,

15 As in the night the sacrificing priest.

1 6 Eager for booty, craving strength and horses, we singers stir

Indra, the strong, for friendship,

Who gives the wives we seek, whose succour fails not, to
hasten, like a pitcher to the fountain.

17 Be thou our guardian, show thyself our kinsman, watching

and blessing those who pour the Soma ;

As Friend, as Sire, most fatherly of fathers, giving the-
suppliant vital strength and freedom.

18 Be helping Friend of those who seek thy friendship : give

life, when lauded, Indra, to the singer.

For, Indra, we the priests have paid thee worship, exalting
thee with these our sacrifices.

19 Alone, when Indra Maghavan is lauded, he slayeth many

ne'er-resisted Yritras.

Him in whose keeping* is the well-loved singer never do Gods
or mortals stay or hinder.

20 E'en so let Maghavan, the loud-voiced Indra, give us true

blessings, foeless, men's upholder.

King of all creatures, give us glory amply, exalted glory due
to him who lauds thee.

21 Now, Indra ! lauded, glorified with praises, let power swell

high like rivers for the singer.

For thee a new hymn, Lord of Bays I is fashioned. May w%
car-borne, through song be victors ever.

13 Scatters dust: causes commotion and keeps the world in a state of unrest

14 This difficult stanza appears to refer to an eclipse of the Sun. Indra
was urging on the Sun’s chariot when suddenly he rested or stopped Etasa
the hprse that drew it, and threw him hack Into the black moist cloud of
the darkness of night. See 1. 121. 13, and A. Kuhn, Mythologisehe Studien,
1. pp. 58—50.

15 The sacrificing priest : lets the fire shine, understood. S&yaua explain?,
'* as the sacrificer sprinkles Soma upon the invoking priest Agm/ taking h6td,
a nominative case, as hdtdram , an accusative. Professor Graesmann thinks
that the single Pdda was originally a gloss on the preceding stanza.

16 Who gives the wives we seek ; perhaps referring, as Professor Ludwig
observes, to the forcible abduction of women after a victory.

m

TUB. HYMNS OF

[BOOK IV \

HYMN XVIII. Indra and Others,

This is the ancient and accepted pathway by which all Gods
haye come into existence.

Hereby could one be born though waxen mighty. Let him
not, otherwise, destroy his Mother.

2 Not this way go I forth : hard is the passage. Forth from

the side obliquely will I issue.

Much that is yet undone must I accomplish : one must I
combat and the other question.

3 He bent his eye upon the dying Mother : My word I now

withdraw. That way I follow.

In Tvashtar’s dwelling Indra drank the Soma, a hundred-
worth of juice pressed from the mortar.

4 What strange act shall he do, he whom his Mother bore for a

thousand months and many autumns ?

No peer hath he among those born already, nor among those
who shall be born hereafter.

j 5 Deeming him a reproach, his . Mother hid him, Indra, endow-
ed with all heroic valour.

Then up he sprang himself, assumed his vesture, and filled,
as soon as horn, the earth and heaven.

6 With lively motion onward flow these waters, the Holy Ones,
shouting, as Twere, together.

Ask them to tell thee what the floods are saying, what girdling
rock the waters burst . asunder.

Itt&ra, Aditi, and V&madeva are said tctye the Ilishis or seers as well as
the deities of the hymn, as it consists of conversation in which all bear part.

The hymn appears to be made up of somewhat - - " * '■ ", * 1 ■ . ■ 1 X1

Commentators do not seem to have been success ' . 1 :

the stanzas to the several speakers. See Prof. " ■ ' ■ A *'

Btudien, II. pp. 42—54), and Prof; Ludwig's criticism thereon, Ueber die
fieuesten Arbeiten auf dem Gebiete der P P pp. 142 sqq.

1 The main subject is the birth and ■' !' He refuses to be

iorn in the usual manner and insists on coming into the world in another
way. The ■ V. w* his father, Aditi his motlmr, or some other—

dissuades Hi ■ ' seems, (stanza 3) with success. The Commen-

tators erroneously take the stanza as referring to the birth of V&madeva.

2 Indra, as yet unborn, is the speaker. One ; perhaps Vritra. The other :
perhaps Vishnu, Whom he addresses in stanza 11.

3 Indra, who has changed his mind, speaks the second half of the first line.

4 It is not clear who the speaker is. Professor Wilson observes i 4 Aditi
defends her son upon the plea that, a* his period of gestation wa$ marvellous,
his actions are not to be compared with those of any others.’

5 Deeming him a reproach ; either because he appeared to be weak, or
because, as SAyana says, he was born in a chamber in privacy unworthy of so

great a God. . ' *“•

6 What girdling rock : an allusion to the prison of thick cloud from which

Indra freed the waters.

THE MOVED A. • '* Ht

7 Are they addressing him with words of welcome ? Will th$

floods take on them the shame of Indra ?

With his great thunderbolt my Son hath slaughtered Vritra,
and set these rivers free to wander.

8 I cast thee from me, mine, — thy youthful mother ; thee, mine

own offspring, Kuahava hath swallowed.

To him, mine infant, were the waters gracious. Indra, my
Son, rose np in conquering vigour.

9 Thou art mine own, 0 Maghavan, whom Yyansa struck to

the ground and smote thy jaws in pieces.

But, smitten through, the mastery thou wonnest, and with
thy bolt tbe Dasa’s head thou crush edst.

10 The Heifer hath brought forth the Strong, the Mighty, the

unconquerable Bull, the furious Indra.

The Mother left her unlicked Calf to wander, seeking, himself,
the path that he would follow.

1 1 Then to her mighty Child the Mother turned her, saying, My

son, these Deities forsake thee.

Then Indra said, about to slaughter Vritra, 0 my friend
Vishnu, stride full boldly forward.

1 2 Who was he then who made thy Mother widow ? Who sought

to slay .thee lying still or moving ?

What God, when by the foot thy Sire thou tookest and slowest,
was at hand to give thee comfort ?

7 Words of welcome : nivids, sentences or short formularies inserted in a
liturgy and containing epithets or short invocations of the Gods.

The shame of Inch'a ; his fancied guilt incurred in Blaying V ritra. See I.
S2. 14.

8 Mine : Sftyana explains mdmat as * exulting/ Professor Roth, whom
Professor Grassmann and the translators of the Siebenz%g I/ied&r fotlow^ ren-
ders it by now— now. I have preferred Professor Ludwig’s^ interpretation ,
originally due to Benfey, and taken the word as another form of mama. The
word is important as expressing Aditi’s acknowledgment of Indra as, her son.
Eushatd : according to S&yana, a R&kshasf or female demon who swallowed
Indra at his birth; according to von Roth, the name of a river.

10 The Heifer ; Aditi, the young mother of Indra.

11 Stride full boldly forward ; that is, assist rup in my battle with Vritra,
Professor Grassmann and the translators of the Siepenzig Jjitdtr render the
passage differently. ‘ O Vischnu, Freund, geh etwas doch zur Seite, and,

1 Vishnu tpein Freund geh etwas aus dem W oge ; that is, ‘ step aside,’ or ‘put
of the way/ and let me conquer Vritra without thy aid- . / „

12 This appeals to be Vishnu’s answer. Why dost thou ask W e to help
thee now 1 Didst thou not slay thine own father, thy father who sought to
kill thee when yet unborn and when opining to the birth ! Vy^nsa appears
to be the father whom Indra slew (stanza 5), Skyana merely says that the
allusions are variously explained by the followers of the Taittiriya school qx
the Yajurveda.

27

418

THE HYMNS OF

BOOK 7T,

13 In deep distress I cooked a dog’s intestines. Among the Gods
X found not one to comfort.

My consort I beheld in degradation. The Falcon then brought
me the pleasant Soma.

HYMN XIX. Indra.

Thee, verily, 0 Thunder-wielding Indra, all the Gods here*
the Helpers swift to listen,

And both the worlds elected, thee the Mighty, High, waxen
strong, alone to slaughter Vritra.

2 The Gods, as worn with eld, relaxed their efforts : thou*

Indra, bom of truth, wast Sovran Euler.

Thou slewest Ahi who besieged the waters* and duggest out
their all-suppsorting channels.

3 The insatiate one, extended, hard to waken, who slumbered in

perpetual sleep, 0 Indra, —

The Dragon stretched against the seven prone rivers, where
I . ho joint was, thou rentest with thy thunder.

4 Indra with might shook earth and her foundation as the
' wind stirs the water with its fury.

Striving, with strength he burst the firm asunder, and tore
away the summits of the mountains.

5 They ran to thee as mothers to their offspring : the clouds*

like chariots, hastened forth together.

Thou didst refresh the streams and force the billows :• thou*
Indra, settest free obstructed rivers.

6 Thou for the sake of Vayya and Turviti didst stay the great
. stream, flowing, all-sustaining;

Yea, at their prayer didst check the rushing river and make
the floods easy to cross* 0 Indra.

13 This appears to be V&inadeva’s excuse for haring in his utmost need
cooked and eaten, or desired to- eat, impure flesh. ‘ Bo Mann has, V&madeva
who well knew right and wrong, was. by no means rendered impure, though
desirous, when oppressed with hunger* of eating the flesh of dogs for the
preservation of his life, X. 106.’ — Wilson. According to Ludwig, Bergaigne,
and Hillebrandt, the stanza is spoken by Indra. The Falcon : alluding to the
way in which the Soma was first brought from heaven. S&yana explains it
a& c Indra coming swiftly as a falcon.’

2 Relaxed their efforts : or abdicated their functions as protectors and made
over to Indra the duty of slaying the oppressor Vritra.

3 Where no joint wets : that would have facilitated his dismemberment.

5 The clouds : according to B&yana, a dr ay ah, mountains or clouds, here
means the Maruts.

6 Vayya and TurvUi : Turviti has been mentioned frequently in Book I. as
having been protected by Indra, and Vayya is said to have been his father
and companion* See I. 54. 6; II. 13. 12.

HYMN 20.]

THE RIO VEDA.

419

7 He let tlie young Maids skilled in Law, unwedded, like foun-

tains, bubbling, flow forth streaming onward.

He inundated thirsty plains and deserts, and milked the dry
Cows of the mighty master. •

8 Through many a morn and many a lovely autumn, having

slain Vritra, he set free the rivers.

Indra hath set at liberty to wander on earth the streams
encompassed, pressed together.

9 Lord’ of Bay Steeds, thou broughtest from the aiit-bill the

unwedded damsel’s son whom ants were eating.

The blind saw clearly, as he grasped the serpent, rose, brake
the jar: his joints again united.

10 To the wise man, 0 Sage and Sovran Ruler, the man who

knoweth all thine ancient exploits
Hath told these deeds of might as thou hast wrought them,
great acts, spontaneous, and to man’s advantage.

11 Now, Indra ! lauded, glorified with praises, let powers swell

high, like rivers, for the singer.

For thee a new hymn, Lord of Bays I is fashioned. May we,
car-borne, through song be victors ever.

’ HYMN XX. # Indra.

From near or far away may mighty Indra, giver of succour,
come for our protection,

Lord of men, armed with thunder, with the Strangest,
slaying his foes in conflict, in the battles.

2 May Indra come to us with Tawny Coursers, inclined to us, to
favour and enrich us.

May Maghavan, loud-voiced and wielding thunder, stand by
us at this sacrifice, in combat.

S Thou, honouring this our sacrifice, 0 Indra, shaft give us
strength and fill us full of courage.

To yin the booty, Thunder-armed I like hunters may we with
thee subdue in fight our foemen.

1 The young Maids shilled in Lav} : the rivets that know aud follow the
law of their being, the Order of the universe. ^ H 1 _ ,

He milked the dry Cows : he drew rain from the clouds which had hitherto
been prevented by their mighty master Yritra from yielding' their stores.

9 S^yana says that Agru (unwedded) was a woman of that name, whose sou
Was hidden in an ant-hill, whence Indra rescued him, restored his bight, and
reunited his broken joints. ... * „ , '

Brahe the jar ; broke through the ant-hill m which he was confined.. .Pro-
fessor Ludwig thinks that the son of the unwedtfed damsel is the lightning
which burst forth from the parent cloud. The passage k obscure.

1 With the Strongest : the most powerful Maruts.

<*20 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IV ,

4 Loving us well, benevolent, close beside ns, drink, Godlike
Indra, of tbe well-pressed Soma.

Drink of tbe. me^tb we offer, and delight thee with food that
cometh from the mountain ridges.

6 JJim who is sung aloud by recent sages, like a ripe-fruited
tree, a scythe-armed victor, —

I, like a bridegroom thinking of his consort, call hither Indra,
him invoked of many ;

. 6 Him who in native strength is like a mountain, the lofty
Indra born of old for conquest,

Torrid e wielder of the ancient thunder, filled full with
splendour as a jar with water,

t 7 Whom from of old there is not one to hinder, none to curtail
the riches of his bounty.

Pouring forth freely, 0 thou Strong and Mighty, vouchsafe us
riches, God invoked of many !

8 Of wealth and homes of men thou art the ruler, and opener

of the stable of the cattle.

Helper of men, winner, of spoil in combats, thou leadest to an
ample heap of ri°lies.

9 By what great might is he renowned as strongest, wherewith

the Lofty One stirs up wild battles ?

Best soother of the worshipper’s great sorrow, he gives pos-
sessions to the man who lauds him.

10 Slay us not; bring, bestow on us the ample gift which thou
bast to, give to him who offers.

At this new gift, with this laud sixng before thee, extolling
thee, we, Indra, will declare it.

4 That cometh from the mountain ridges : where the Soma was said especi-
ally to grow. According to S&yana’s interpretation, the translation would
be, 4 5 6 with the food brought thee with the hymn of noonday. L Pvishtha
means both ( back, or high ridge/ and ‘ a hymn employed at the midday
oblation/ and the meaning of tbe adjeotive priahthya is similarly ambiguous.

5 A 8cythe’armed victor : the meaning is uncertain. Skyana explains srinyah,
as ‘armed with a hook or sickle/ f skilled in the use of arms/ Professor
Ludwig translates, ‘ wie, ein fassender haken/ ‘ like a grasping hook.’ Pro-
'fessor Aufrecht thinks that Briny o najdtd may perhaps mean, 1 like a winner
of sickles (as a prize)/ Professor Grassmann thinks that a reaper, cutting
down corn with his sickle, is intended,

6 Wielder of the. ancient thunder ; I follow S&yana, but am not satisfied
with^ his explanation. Professor Grassmann follows Bolletfsen in reading
r raj am, cowpen, instead of vdjram, thunderbolt, and this is the reading given
also in the St. Petersburg Lexicon. If this alteration were adopted the
translation would be, * the fierce disdoser of the Arm-built cow-stall/

THE Em VEDA.

mrM&'b i;j '

11 Now, Iudra l lauded, glorified with praises, let power swell
high, like rivers, for the singer.

A new hymn, Lord of Bays 1 for thee is fashioned. May we*
car-borne, through song be victors ever. *

HYMN XXI. Indra.

May Indra come to us for our protection ; here be the Hero *
praised, our feast-companion.

May he whose powers are many, waxen brighty, cherish, like
Dyaus, his own supreme dominion.

2 Here magnify his great heroic exploits, most glorious One,

enriching men with bounties,

Whose will is like a Sovran in assembly, who rules the
people, Conqueror, all-surpassing.

3 Hither let Indra come from earth or heaven, hither with

speech from firmament or ocean ;

With Maruts, from the realm of light to aid us, or from a
distance, from the seat of Order.

d That Indra will we laud in our assemblies, him who is Lord
of great and lasting riches,

Victor with V&yu where the herds are gathered, who leads
with boldness on to higher fortune.

5 May the Priest, Lord of many blessings, striving, — who

! fixing reverence on reverence, giving

Vent . to his voice, inciteth men to worship — with lauds bring
Indra hither to our dwellings.

6 When sitting pondering in deep devotion in Ausija’s abode

they ply the press-stone,

May he whose wrath is fierce, the mighty bearer, come as the
house-lord’s priest within our chambers.

7 Surely the power of Bh&rvara the mighty for ever helpeth to

support the singer ;

§ Fi'om a distance, from the seat of Order: perhaps, from the farthest limit of
the ordered universe. According to S&yana, from the region of cloud, meghalok&t,

% Where the herds are gathered : in places where cattle, the prize of victory,
abound.

5 The Piiest : apparently Agni. Fixing reverence on reverence : urging men

to continual adoration. .

6 Avsija is generally a patronymic of the Rishi Kakshivan and others.
According to S&y ana the institutOrof the sacrifice is meant. The stanza is obscure.

7 Bhdrvara : according to S&yana, a name of Indra as son of Bharvara, the
supporter of the world, that is, Prajfipati. Professor Gr^ssmann thinks that
Agni is meant, and Professor Ludwig considers it tolerably clear that Bh&rvara
is identical with Ausija. The exact meaning of the stanza is doubtful, but its
general purport appears to be that Bh&rvara, whether he be Ausija. or Indra,
or Agni, has a store of wealth or power to protect the worshipper and assist
him in the performance of his religious duties,

422 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IV. \

That which in Ausija’s abode lies hidden, to come forth for
delight and for devotion.

8 When he unbars the spaces of the mountains, and quickens

with his floods the water-torrents,

He finds in lair the buffalo and wild-ox when the wise lead
\\ him on to vigorous exploit.

9 Auspicious are thv hands, thine arms well-fashioned which

proffer bounty, indra, to thy praiser.

What sloth is this? Why dost thou not rejoice thee ? Why
dost thou not delight thyself with giving ?

10 So Indra is the truthful Lord of treasure. Freedom, he gave
to man by slaying Vritra.

Much-lauded ! help us with thy power to riches : may I be
sharer of thy Godlike favour.

- 11 Now, Indra 1 lauded, glorified with praises, let ]Jbwer swell
high, like rivers, for the singer.

For thee a new hymn, Lord of Bays ! is fashioned. May we,
care-borne, through song be victors ever.

‘ HYMN XXI L Indra.

That gift of ours which Indra loves and welcomes, even that
he makes for us, the Great and Strong One.

He who comes wielding in his might the thunder, Maghavan,
gives prayer, praise, and laud, and Soma.

2 Bull, lmrler of the four-edged rain-producer with both’Tiis
arms; strong, mighty, most heroic ;

Wearing as wool Pamshni for adornment, whose joints for
sake of friendship he hath covered,

8 When he unbars ; when Indra lays open the interior of the mountain of
clouds within which the rain is imprisoned.

The buffalo and wild-ox : the Gaura (Bos gaurus) and the Gavaya (Bos
gavaeus) are two kinds of wild cattle. The gaurdsya and gavayasya of the
text must be taken as partitive genitives after vidctt, he finds. ‘ The purport
of the expression, according to the scholiast, is, that Indra obtains these two
animals tan dwau paail labhate, either for himself as sacrificial flesh, or for hie
worshippers, some of whom, at least, even now, would not object to eat the
flesh of the wild oxen,’ — Wilson,

2 Rain-producer : the thunderbolt or lightning which is supposed to oause
rain by opening the cloud.

Parushni : one of the rivers of the Panj&b, called in later times Ir&vatt, the
modern ltdvi, Indra appears to be represented as clothing himself in the
wool-like waves, or fleecy vapours, of the river, and lovingly covering or unit-
ing in one stream her several joints, limbs, or branches. * The phraseology
here,’ Professor Wilson remarks, c is somewhat obscure, and the scholiast does
not materially enlighten us,’ - - -

MYMN 22.] TUB RIG VEDA. 423

3 God who of all the Gods was born divinest, endowed with

ample strength and mighty powers,

And bearing in his arms the yearning thunder, with violent
rush caused heaven and earth to tremble. #

4 Before the High God, at his birth, heaven trembled, earth,

many floods and all the precipices.

The Strong One bringeth nigh the Bull’s two Parents : loud
sing the winds, like men, in air’s mid -region.

5 These are thy great deeds, Indra, thine, the Mighty, deeds to

be told aloud at all libations,

That thou, 0 Hero, bold and boldly daring, didst with thy
bolt, by strength, destroy the Dragon.

6 True are all these thy deeds, 0 Most) Heroic. The Milch -kine

issued from the streaming udder.

In fear of thee, 0 thou of manly spirit, the rivers swiftly set
themselves in motion.

7 With joy, 0 Indra, Lord of Tawny Coursers, the Sisters then,

these Goddesses, extolled thee,

When thou didst give the prisoned ones their freedom to
wander at their will in long succession.

8 Pressed is the gladdening stalk as ’twere a river : so let the

rite, the toiler’s power, attract thee
To us-ward, of the Bright One, as the courser strains his
exceedingly strong leather bridle.

9 Ever by us perform thy most heroic, thine highest, best

victorious deeds, 0 Victor.

For us make Vritras easy to be conquered : destroy the
weapon of our mortal foeman.

10 Graciously listen to our prayer, 0 Indra, and strength of
varied sort bestow thou on us.

Send to us all intelligence and wisdom : 0 Maghavan, be he
who gives us cattle.

4 The meaning of the second line is, Indra brings near, but holds apart,
the heaven and the earth, the parents of the mighty Sun, and the winds smg
in the intermediate space which has thus been provided for them,

6 The Mllch-hine : streams of fertilizing rain. The udder is the cloud.

7 The Sisters : the rivers.

g The construction of the middle portion of the stanza is very difficult.

The general meaning appears to be, * The Soma has been Passed and the
•mice flows copiously. Let our sacrifice draw thee hither with all the strength
of a hard- pulling horse.’, Who / the Bright One' is lanofc clear ; probably Agm
is meant. . . - „

m THK HYMNS OF [BOOK TV.

11 Now-, Indra ! lauded, glorified with praises, let wealth Swell
high like rivers to the singer.

For thee a new hymn, Lord of Bays ! is fashioned. May we,
car-borne, through song he victors ever.

HYMN. XXIII. Indra.

How, what priest’s sacrifice hath he made mighty, rejoicing
in the Soma and its fountain ?

Delighting in the juice, eagerly drinking, the Lofty One hath
waxed for splendid riches.

2 What hero hath been made his feast- companion ? Who hath

been partner in his loving-kindness ?

What know we of his wondrous acts 1 How often comes he to
aid and speed the pious toiler?

3 How heareth Indra offered invocation ? How, hearing, marketh

he the invoker’s wishes ?

What are his ancient acts of bounty? Wherefore call they
him t)ne who filleth full the singer ?

4 How doth the priest who laboureth, ever longing, win for

himself the wealth which he possesseth ?

May he, the God, mark well my truthful praises, having
received the homage which he loveth.

5 How, and what bond of friendship with a mortal hath the

God chosen as this morn is breaking ?

How, and what love hath he for those who love him, who
have entwined in him their firm affection ?

6 Is then thy friendship with thy friends most mighty ? Thy

brotherhood with us, — when may we tell it ?

The streams of milk move, as most wondrous sunlight, the
beauty of the Lovely One for glory.

1 Mighty : effectual. Its fountain : more literally, udder ; the sacrifice,
the source from which the Soma flows as milk from the udder of the cow.

For splendid riches : in order to bestow splendid wealth on the aacrificer,
according to S&yana.

2 What hero , etc : no one ia allowed to share the offerings made to Indra
or to know his benevolent intentions.

6 The streams of milk : this line is difficult. Indra’s close connexion with
the Sun is referred to, and the general purport may be, as Professor Ludwig
suggests : When thou rieest up as the Sun, then we declare thy brotherhood
with us ; or in other words, Indra's beauty is made known as the light of
the Sun. S&yana explains sargdh as,, the efforts, ( udyogdh), gdh, of the mQY'
ing one (Indra),

J TfMJrmi THE MGYEEA. 425

' :

7 About to slay the Indradess destructive spirit he sharpens

his keen arms to strike her.

Whereby the Strong, although our debts’ exactor, drives in
the distant mornings that we know not. ,

8 Eternal Law hath varied food that strengthens ; thought of

eternal Law removes transgressions.

The praise-hymn of eternal Law, arousing, glowing, hath
oped the deaf ears of the living.

9 Firm-seated are eternal Law’s foundations ; in its fair form

are many splendid beauties.

By holy Law long lasting food they bring us ; by holy Law
have cows come to our worship.

10 Fixing eternal Law he, too, upholds it: swift moves the might

of Law and wins the booty.

To Law belong the vast deep Earth and Heaven : Milch-kine
supreme, to Law their milk they render.

11 How, Indra ! lauded, glorified with praises^ let power swell

high like rivers to the singer.

For thee a new hymn, Lord of Bays, is fashioned, May we,
car-borne, through song be victors ever.

HYMH XXIY* Indra.

What worthy praise will bring before us Indra, the Son of
Strength, that he may grant us riches ;

For Jhe the Hero, gives the singer treasures : he is the Lord
who sends us gifts, ye people.

7 Spirit ; the Druh, or mischievous female sprite who does not acknow-
ledge Indra. The purport of the second line is : Indra, although the punisher
of our sins, does nob suffer U3 to be destroyed by evil spirits, but continuing
to rise as the Sun, urges on a succession of mornings in the light of which
the demons of the night disappear.

8 Eternal Law : here, S&yana says, the word ritd means Aditya, or Indra,
or sacrifice. Its meaning varies slightly in this and the two following stanzas,
but the original idea of regularity, conformity to, or establishment by, eternal
order or law, is found throughout. In the second line eternal Law is the
regular law-ordained sacrifice. Glowmg : brilliant, or clearly sounding. The
living ; the worshippper.

9 They bring us ; that is, the cows which have come to our worship , to be
.presented to the priests as payment of their services.

10 Fixing eternal Law : the establisher of the law is also its upholder or
administrator. Professor Wilson translates : ‘ The (worshipper) subjecting
pita (to his will) verily enjoys ltita/

To Law belong: or, were made for the sake of order or law-ordained
sacrifice. Milch-hine supreme : bounteous heaven and earth, which cherish
and support sacrifice or eternal order in general.

1 Thu Son of Strength ; the Mighty One,

426 TEE HYMNS OF \B00KIV.

2 To be invoked and hymned in fight with Vritra, that well-

praised Indra gives us real bounties.

That Maghavan brings eomfort in the foray to the religious
man, who pours libations.

3 Him, verily, the men invoke in eombat ; risking their lives

they make him their protector,

When heroes, foe to foe, give up their bodies, fighting, each
side, for children and their offspring.

4 Strong God i the folk at need put forth their vigour, striving

together in the whirl of battle.

When warrior bands encounter one another some in the
grapple quit themselves like Indra.

5 Hence many a one worships the might of Indra : hence let

the brew succeed the meal-oblation.

Hence let the Soma banish those who pour not : even hence
I joy to pay the Strong One worship.

6 Indra gives comfort to the man who truly presses, for him

who longs for it, the Soma,

Not disaffected, with devoted spirit this man he takes to be
his friend in battles.

7 He who this day for Indra presses Soma, prepares the brew

and fries the grains of barley —

Loving the hymns of that devoted servant, to him may Indra
give heroic vigour-.

S When the impetuous chief hath sought the conflict, and the
lord looked upon the long-drawn battle,

The matron calls to the Strong God whom pressers of Soma
have encouraged in the dwelling.

9 He bid a small price for a thing of value : I was content,
returning, still unpurchased.

He heightened not his insufficient offer. Simple and clever,
both milk out the udder.

5 Let the brew succeed the meal- oblation: or, let the offering of cooked viands
follow that of the sacrificial cake; let varied offerings be made in rapid suc-
cession. Let the Soma banish : let those who pour no Soma-libations to Indra
be kept at a distance from those who thus worship him. 1

8 When the chieftain has gone out to fight, his wife^ calls on Indra to
protect him. According to S&yana, the ‘ impetuous chief/ 1 the lord/ is
Indra whom his consort recalls to drink the Soma juice which has been
prepared for him by men.

9 I was content : spoken by Indra. Both milk out the udder ; both the
simple, or needy, buyer and the shrewd seller make as much as they can out
of the bargain ; that is, the buying and selling of Indra, meaning the Settle-
ment of the fee to be paid to the priest for obtaining Indra* s favour by sacrifice.
Professor Grassmann banishes stanzas 9 and 10 to an appendix, as not origin-
ally belonging to the hymn.

HYMN 25,] THE RIG VEDA. 427

10 Who for ten milch-kine purchaseth from me this Indra who is

mine ?

When he hath slain the Vritras let the buyer give him back
to me. .

11 N ow, Indra 1 lauded, glorified with praises, let wealth swell

high like rivers for the singer.

For thee a new hymn, Lord of Bays, is fashioned. May we,
ear-borne, through song be victors ever.

HYMN XXV. Indra.

What friend of man, God-loving, hath delighted, yearning
therefor, this day in Indra’s friendship ?

Who with enkindled flame and flowing Soma laudeth him
for his great protecting favour ?

2 Who hath with prayer bowed to the Soma-lover? What

pious man endues the beams of morning 2
Who seeks bond, friendship, brotherhood with Indra % Who
hath recourse unto the Sage for succour %

3 Who claims to-day the Deities’ protection, asks Aditi for

light, or the Adityas 2

Of whose pressed stalk of Soma drink the Asvins, Indra, and
Agni, well-inclined in spirit?

4 To him shall Agni Bharata give shelter : long shall he look

upon the Sun uprising,

Who sayeth, Let us press the juice for Indra, man’s Friend,
the Hero manliest of heroes.

h Him neither few men overcome, nor many : to him shall Aditi
give spacious shelter.

Dear is the pious, the devout, to Indra ; dear is the zealous,
dear the Soma-bringer.

6 This Hero curbs the mighty for the zealous : the presser’s
brew Indra possesses solely :

No brother, kin, or friend to him who pours not, destroyer of
the dumb who would resist him,

2 Endues the beams of morning V the expression means, apparently, ‘betakes
himself to prayer at day -break.’ S&yana’s interpretation is, ‘Who covets

that is, supports, the cows given by Indra V , „ • ~ , , *

4 Agni Bhtfnita ; Agni as the especial God of the Bharata family to which

V&madeva the Rishi of the hymn belonged.

6 Curbs the mighty : the meaning pf prasushftt is somewhat uncertain 2 * 4 5 6
‘prompt discomfiter of foes.’ — Siyana. ■ Bridling, leading, driving or having
swift horses,’ — Prof. Robh. ‘ Conqueror of the mighty.’ — Prof. Ludwig. The
dumb : the man who has no voice to praise him, - ' ,

m THE HYMNS &F [BOOK IV.

7 Not With the wealthy churl who pours no Soma doth Indra,

Soma-drinker, bind alliance.

He draws away his wealth and slays him naked, own Friend
to him who offers, for oblation.

8 Highest amj lowest, men who stand between them, going,

returning, dwelling in contentment,

Those who show forth their strength when urged to battle — >
these are the men who call for aid on Indra,

HYMN XXVI. Indra.

I was * aforetime Manu, I was S&rya ; I am the sage Kakshiv&n,
holy singer.

Kutsa the son of Arjuni I master. I am the sapient Usana :
behold me.

2 I have bestowed the earth upon the Arya, and rain upon the

man who brings oblation.

I guided forth the loudly-roaring waters, and the Gods moved
according to my pleasure.

3 In the wild joy of Soma I demolished Sambara’s forts, ninety-

andmine, together;

And, utterly, the hundredth habitation, when helping Divo-
d&sa Atithigva.

4 Before all birds be ranked this Bird, 0 Maruts ; supreme of

falcons be this fleet-winged Falcon,

Because, strong-piuioned, with no car to bear him, he brought
to Manu the God-loved oblation.

5 When the Bird brought it, hence in rapid motion sent on the

wide path fleet as thought he hurried.

Swift he returned with sweetness of the Soma, and hence the
Falcon hath acquired his glory.

6 Bearing the stalk, the Falcon speeding onward, Bird bringing

from afar the draught that gladdens,

7 Naked; stripped of all his property; destitute. To him who offers, for oblation ;
according to S&/aya, ‘to the man who pours the libation and prepares the
dressed food ; ‘to him who presents the libation and oblation/ — Wilson.

The deity of the first three stanzas is said to be either Indra or Paramdtmft
[the Supreme Spirit or Soul of the universe]; the deity or deified object of the
other stanzas is the Syena or Falcon.

1 Indra is the speaker of the first three verses, although it is not clear
what he means by saying that he is Kakshiv&n and TJsanA, unless he intenda
to identify himself with all existence.

3 Sambara ; Divoddsa; Atithigva (here an adname or epithet of Divo&Asa);
see Index of Names,

, 4 With no car to bear him : literally, ‘with his own wheel-less nature,’ that .

W, by his own natural impulse. Oblation : the Soma.

0 The draught that gladfynf ; the plant that yields the exhilarating; juice,

M JMN 21] TE$ BIG VEDA. *

Friend of the Gods, brought, grasping fast, the Soma which
he had taken from yon loftiest heaven.

7 The Falcon took and brought the Soma, bearing thousand
libations with him, yea, ten thousand. °

The 'Bold One left Malignities behind him, wis§, in wild joy of
-Soma, left the foolish. v .

HJMN XXVII. ThtfFalcon.

I, as I lay within the womb, considered all generations of „
these Gods in order,

A hundred iron fortresses confined me, but forth Iffew %ith
rapid speed a Falcon,

2 Not at his own free pleasure did he bear me : he conquered

with his strength and manly courage.

Straightway the Bold One left the fiends behind him and
passed the winds as he grew yet more mighty.

3 When with loud cry from heaven down sped the, Falcon,

thence hasting like the wind he bore the Bold One,

Then, wildly raging in his mind, the archer Kris&nu aimed
and loosed the string to strike him.

4 The Falcon bore him from heaven’s lofty summit as the swift

car of Indra’s Friend bore Bhujyu.

Then downward hither fell a flying feather of the Bird
hasting forward in his journey.

5 And now let Maghavan accept the beaker, white, filled with

milk, filled with the shining liquid ;

The best of sweet meath which the priests have offered : that
Indra to his joy may drink, the Hero, that he may take
and drink it to his rapture.

7 The Bold One : Indra.

1 The womb : of the rain cloud. A hundred fortresses : cf * Sambara’s hundred
ancient castles’ (II. 14.6,) Considered: or reviewed, in hope of finding a deliverer.

The speaker is Agni, that is, the lightning which rends the cloud and brings
down the sweet rain — the fleet Falcon who brings Soma from heaven. See
Prof. Bloomfield, The Myth of Soma and the Eagle, Festgruss an Kudolf von
Both, 1893, pp 149 — 155. Cf. Hymns of the Atharva-veda, YI. 48, 1.

2 Not at his oion free pleasure : the falcon’s mere will was not enough, says
Soma ; he had first to fight and conquer my keepers.

The Bold One ? Indra. See stanza 7 of the preceding hymn,

8 The Bold One : meaning Soma. The cons hr action of the first line Ig
difficult. Kfisdnu ; one of the guards of the celestial Soma. See I. 155 %

4 The allusion in the first line is to the rescue of Bhujyu, by the Asvins (see
I. 112. 6), and we should therefore expect indrdvatofy, ‘ of Indra’s two Mend's,!
instead of itidrdvato. Feather : parriam ; which, became on earth the sacred
Parna or pal&^a tree, the beautiful Butea Frondosa.

5 The metrical form and the ritual application indicate the comparatively
recent addition of this stanza to the. ancient hymn.

The hymn has been discussed by Weber, Yedische Beitrage, pp. 4.

m THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IV.

6 When also for a mortal man, Indra, thou speddest forth the

Sun,

And bojf est Etasa with might.

7 What i Yritra-slayer, art not thou, Maghavan, fiercest in thy
, t wrath 1

So ha^t thou quelled the demon too.

§ And this heroic deed of might thou, Indra, also hast achieved,
4 That thou didst smite to death the Dame, Heaven’s Daughter,
meditating ill.

9 Thou, Indra, Mighty One, didst crush Ushas, though Daughter
of the Sky,

When lifting up herself in pride.

10 Then from her chariot Ushas fled, affrighted, from her

ruined car,

When the strong God, had shattered it.

11 So there this car of Ushas lay, broken to pieces, in Vip&s,

And she herself fled far away.

12 Thou, Indra, didst with magic power resist the overflowing

stream

Who spread her waters o’er the land.

13 Valiantly didst thou seize and take the store which Sushna

had amassed,

When thou didst crush his fortresses.

14 Thou, Indra, also smotest down Kulitara’s son Sambara,

The Dasa, from the lofty hill.

15 Of Dasa Varchin’s thou didst slay the hundred thousand and

the five,

Crushed like the fellies of a car.

6 And holiest Mam ; that is, the return of day on some particular occasion
is attributed to Indra’s intervention on behalf of his favourite. Seejndex,

7 The demon : Vritra the son of Danu.

8 The destruction by Indra of the chariot of Ushas or Dawn appears to
mean the extinction of her light after the rising of the Sun. So in II. 15. 6.
Indra is said to have * crushed with his thunderbolt the car of Ushas, rend'
ing her slow steeds with his rapid Coursers.’ The myth is alluded to in other
passages also. See X. 138, 5.

11 In Vipd$ : or on the bank of that river.

3 2 'The overflowing stream ,* or, possibly, some stream called VibAli, the
exact meaning of the word being doubtful,

14 Kulitara's son : this is S&yana’s explanation of haulitardm.

15 Of Ddsa Var chin's ; of the followers of the demon or savage Varchin,
See II. 14* 6. And the five: the position of pdheha in the stanza seemstp
indicate that it is taken separately. S&yana prefixes it to satft, making the
number slain a thousand and five hundred.

Crushed like the fellies of a par: i (surrounding) him like the fellies (round
the spokes of a wheel).’ — Wilson,

EYMW Ml THE RI&YEDA’ uk

16 So Indra, Lord. of Heroes, Powers, caused the un wedded

damsel's son,

The castaway, to share the lauds*

17 So sapient Indra, Lord of Might, brought Turvasa and Yadu,

those

Who feared the flood, in safety o’er.

18 Arna and Chitraratha, both Aryas, thou, Indra, slewest swift*
On yonder side of Sarayu.

19 Thou, Vritra slayer, didst conduct those two forlorn, the

blind, the lame :

Hone may attain this bliss of thine.

20 For Divod&sa, him who brought oblations, Indra overthrew
A hundred fortresses of stone.

21 The thirty thousand D&sas he with magic power and weapons

sent

To slumber, for Labliiti's sake.

22 As such, 0 Vritra-slayer, thou art general Lord of kinefor all,
Thou Shaker of all things that be.

23 Indra, whatever deed of might thou hast this day to execute,
None be there now to hinder it.

24 0 Watchful One, may Aryaman the God give thee all goodly

things.

May Pdshan, Bhaga, and the God Kardlati give all things fair.

The unwedded damsel's son : the son of Agra, according to S&yana. Bee
IV. 19. 9.

17 Turvasa and Yadu : so I. 174. 9 f When o’er the flood thou broughtest
them, 0 Hero, thou keptest Turvasa and Yadu safely,’

Who feared the food : literally, f non- bathers' (asndtftrd), meaning probably
unable to swim.

18 A rna and Chitraratha : two kings, says the Scholiast, * presuming on
their dignity as Aryas and devoid of faith in, or devotion to, Indra.’ Sarayu
here is probably some river in the Panj&b, and not the Sarayu of Oudh the
modern Sarju. Turvasa and Yadu may perhaps have crossed the river, and
under the protection of Indra conquered two Aryan chiefs whose lands lay
beyond it,

19 The blind, the lame ; see II. 13. 12. where one man only, the outcast,
or Par^vrij, is spoken of as * the halt and blind.’

20 Hivoddsa : see Index.

21 Babhtti : a Kishi favoured by Indra See Index.

24 KdrMatt : from the position of the word in the stanza would appear to
be the name of a separate God, but Sly ana (who is followed by Professors Roth
and Grassmann as well as Wilson) takes it as an epithet of Pfishan, i. e. the-
broken- toothed or toothless God. ‘ According to the Pur&nas, Pushan had his
teeth knocked out by Yirabhadra’s followers at Daksha's sacrifice. 5 — Wilson.
The institutor of the sacrifice appears to be addressed in this verse which is
probably a later addition to the original hymn.

28

4M THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IT .

HYMN XXXI. I»dr*

With what help will he come to us, wonderful, ever-waxing
Friend,

Withfwhat most mighty company?

2 What genuine and most liberal draught will spirit thee with

juice to burst

Open e’en strongly-guarded wealth ?

3 Do thou who art Protector of us thy friends who praise tliee
With hundred aids approach u&.

1 Like as a courser’s circling wheel, so turn thee hitherward

to us,

Attracted by the hymns of men.

5 Thou seekest as it were thine own stations with swift descent
' of powers:

I share thee even with the Sun.

6 What time thy courage and his wheels together, Indra, run

their course

With thee and with the Sun alike,

7 So even, Lord of Power and Might, the people call thee

Maghavan,

Giver, who pauses not to think.

8 And verily to him who toils and presses Soma juice for thee
Thou quickly gives t ample wealth.

9 No, not a hundred hinderers can check thy gracious bounty’s

flow,

Nor thy great deeds when thou wilt act.

10 May thine assistance keep us safe, thy hundred and thy

thousand aids :

May all thy favours strengthen us.

1 1 Do thou elect us in this place for friendship and prosperity,

- And great celestial opulence.

2 Genuine and good results and' causing thee to be

most bountiful. s 1 , i ; : ■ ■' r : ■ : to burst open the treasure-houses-
of our enemies and give us their contents ' r or the allusion may be to the
waters shut up in the clouds.

4 By the hymns: literally, "by the teams/ niyildbhi (v, that is, strings of
verses, hymns, or praises.

With swift descent of powers: by the natural and spontaneous outflow of 1
divine strength, as water pours down a precipice.

/ share thee : 1 1 glorify thee together with the Sun/— Wilson.

7 Maghavan t the rich and munificent One*

'MYUN 82.] TEE niGVEDA. ',185

12 Favour us, Indra, evermore with overflowing store of wealth ;
With all thy succours aid thou us.

13 With new protections, Indra, like an archer, open thou for us

The stables that are filled with kine. *

,14 Our chariot, Indra, boldly moves endued with splendour,
ne’er repulsed,

Winning for us both kine and steeds. *

15 0 Surya, make our fame to be most excellent among the Gods,
Most lofty as the heaven on high,

HYMN XXXII. Indra.

0 thou who slewest Yritra, come, 0 Indra, hither to our side,
Mighty One with thy mighty aids.

2 Swift and impetuous -art thou, wondrous amid the well-

dressed folk :

, Thou doest marvels for our help.

3 Even with the weak thou smitest down him who is stronger,

with thy strength

The mighty, with the Friends thou hast.

4 0 Indra, we are close to thee; to thee we sing aloud our songs:
Help and defend us, even us.

5 As such, 0 Caster of the Stone, come with thy succours

wonderful,

Blameless, and irresistible.

6 May we be friends of one like thee, 0 Indra, with the wealth

of kine,

Comrades for lively energy.

7 For thou, 0 Indra, art alone the Lord of strength that comes

from kine :

So grant thou us abundant food.

8 They turn thee not another way, when, lauded, Lover of the

Song,

Thou wilt give wealth to those who praise,

9 The Gotaraas have sung their song of praise to thee that thou

mayst give,

Indra, for lively energy. * .

2 Amid the well-dressed folic: the adjective ehi trintshu, feminine plural
in the locative case, stands without a substantive, and S&yana supplies prajfou,
people ; well-dressed, perhaps, for a religious ceremony, or possibly, armed for
war.

5 Caster of the Stone : wielder of the thunderbolt.

m THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IV.

10 We will declare thy hero deeds, what Dasa forts thou brakest

down.

Attacking them in rapturous joy.

1 1 The sftges sing those manly deeds which, Indra, Lover of the Song,
Thou wroughtest when the Soma flowed.

12 Indra, the Gotamas who bring thee praises have grown strong

loy thee.

Give them renown with hero sons.

13 For, Indra, verily thou art the general treasure even of all;
Thee, therefore, do we invocate.

14 Excellent Indra, turn to us : glad thee among us with the juice
Of Somas, Soma-drinker thou.

15 May praise from us who think on thee, 0 Indra, bring thee

near to us.

Turn thy two Bay Steeds hitherward;

16 Eat of our sacrificial cake: rejoice thee in the songs we sing,
Even as a lover in his bridp.

17 To Indra for a thousand steeds well-trained and fleet of foot

we pray,

And hundred jars of Soma juice. ’

18 We make a hundred of thy kine, yea, and a thousand, hasten

nigh :

So let thy bounty come to us.

19 We have obtained, a gift from thee, ten water-ewers wrought

of gold :

Thou, Vritra-slayer, givest much.

20 A bounteous Giver, give us much, bring much and not a

trifling gift :

Much, Indra, wilt thou fain bestow.

210 Vritra-slayer, thou art famed in many a place as bountiful :
Hero, thy bounty let us share.

22 I praise thy pair of Tawny Steeds, wise Son of him who
giveth kine :

Terrify not the cows with these.

i . ■

10 In rapturous joy : in exhilaration produced by the Some juice.

17 J or* ; a khdrf is properly a measure of grain, and by metonymy a vessel,
jar, or pitcher, containing that quantity, which is said to be equal to about
three of our bushels.

22 Wise Son of him who giveth Tcine : Indra himself is the special giver of
cattle, and this attribute of bis may perhaps, as Professor Ludwig conjectures,
he personified in an imaginary father Gosha, the winner or bestower of kine,
S4yan a would force on naplt, son, the meaning net pdtayitah } c thou who dost
not cast down’ (thy worshippers). With these : two horses of thine. The
meaning of this last T&da is uncertain.

the rioted a. m

25 Like two slight images of girls, unrobed, upon a new-wrought
post,

So shine thy Bay Steeds in their course.

24 For me the Bays are ready when I start, or start not,Vith the
dawn, Innocuous in the ways they take.

HYMN XXXIII. bibhus.

I send my voice as herald to the Bibhus ; I crave the white cow
for the overspreading.

Wind-sped, the Skilful Ones in rapid motion have in an instant
compassed round the heaven.

2 What time the Bibhus had with care and marvels done proper

service to assist their Parents,

They won the friendship of the Gods ; the Sages carried away
the fruit of their devotion.

3 May they who made their Parents, who were lying like posts

that moulder, young again for ever, —

May Vaja, Vibhvan, Bibhu, joined with Indra, protect our
sacrifice, the Soma-lovers.

4 As for a year the Bibhus kept the Milch-cow, throughout a

year fashioned and formed her body,

And through a year’s space still sustained her brightness,
through these their labours they were made immortal.

f) Two beakers let us make, — thus said the eldest, Let us
make three, — this was the younger’s sentence.

Four beakers let us make, — thus spoke the youngest. Tvashtar
approved this rede of yours, 0 Bibhus.

6 The men spake truth and even so they acted : this Godlike
way of theirs the Bibhus followed.

And Tvashtar, when he looked on the four beakers resplend-
ent as the day, was moved with envy.

23 ravages of girls ; perhaps as caryatids, but the passage is obscure. Pro-
fessor Wilson translates : f Like two puppets on an arranged, new, and
slender stage,’

• 24 According to S&yana, Let thy inoffesive hay horses give me a sufficiency
at sacrifices whether I go to them in a car drawn by oxen or without a car so
drawn, that is, on foot.

* 1 For the overspreading : a technical expression for pouring the milk into or
over the Soma juice. f For the dilution ( of the Soma libation).’— Wilson. For
tfie Ribhus, see Index.

5 Two beakers : or sacrificial ladles. See I. 20. 6,

438 THE HYMNS OF [BOQR IV,

7 When for twelve days the Ribhus joyed reposing as guests pf

him who never may be hidden,

They made fair fertile fields, they brought the rivers. Plants
spread o’er deserts, waters filled the hollows.

8 May they who formed the swift car, bearing Heroes, and the

Cow omniform and all-impelling,

Even may they form . wealth for us, — the Eibhus, dexterous-
handed, deft in work and gracious.

9 So in their work the Gods had satisfaction, pondering it with

thought and mental insight.

The Gods’ expert artificer was Vaja, Indra’s Ribhukshan,
Varuna’s was Yibhvan.

10 They who, made glad with sacrifice and praises, wrought the

two Bays, his docile Steeds, for Indra, —

Ribhus, as those who wish a friend to prosper, bestow upon
us gear and growth of riches.

11 This day have they set gladdening drink before you. Hot

without toil are Gods inclined to friendship.

Therefore do ye who are so great, 0 Ribhus, vouchsafe us
treasures at this third libation.

HYMN XXXIV. Eibhus.

To this our sacrifice come Ribhu, Yibhvan, Yaja, and Indra
with the gift of riches,

Because this day hath Dhishanft the Goddess set drink for
you : the gladdening draughts have reached you.

7 Him %vho never may be hidden : the Sun ; Savitar.

8 The swift car : the three- wheeled chariot which bears the Asvins.

The Cow omniform : or of every hue. ‘ Indra hath yoked his Bays, the
Asvins’ car is horsed, Brihaspati hath brought the Cow of every hue.’ I

161. 6 . *335

11 At this third libation: in the evening, the proper time for drink-offerings
to the Ribhus. e

The myth of the Ribhus is exceedingly obscure. They are regarded as
ancient sacrifices who attained immortality as the reward of their pious
labours. The parents whom they restored to youth appear to be the univer-
sal parents, heaven and earth, rejuvenated each and

spring. The milch-cow (stanza 4) is perhaps thei-v: . ■ , : /

tive soil. The twelve days (stanza 7) are perhap. i ■■■; r.: e

twelve nights vratydh prajdpateh, or f holy to P.\ ' i ,

Atharva-veda, IV. 11 . 11 . For careful study and inrrer , ‘^n c ' of the

myth, see F. N4ve, Essai sur le mythe des > - . j» ; ; s
Bergaigne, La Religion Vddique, 11.403 — 413; III. 51— *55. ' *

EMshani ; a divinity closely connected with Soma and presiding over
prosperity. ...

WTMJSr 34.] THE RIG VEDA. 439

^2 Knowing your Tairtli and rich in gathered treasure, Ribbus,
rejoice together with the Ritus.

! The gladdening draughts and wisdom have approached you :
send ye us riches with good store of heroes

3 For you was made this sacrifice, 0 Ribhus, which ye, like

men, won for yourselves aforetime.

To you come all who find in you their pleasure : ye all were
— even the two elder — V&jas.

4 Kow for the mortal worshipper, 0 Heroes, for him who served

you, was the gift of riches.

Drink, Vajas, Ribhus ! unto you is offered, to gladden you,
the third and great libation.

5 Come' to us, Heroes, Vajas and Ribhukshans, glorified for the

sake of mighty treasure.

These draughts approach you as the day is closing, as cows,
whose calves are newly-born, their stable.

Come to this sacrifice of ours, ye Children of Strength, in-
voked with humble adoration.

Drink of this meath, Wealth-givers, joined with Indra with
whom ye are in full accord, ye Princes.

7 Close knit with Varuna drink the Soma, Indra ; close-knit,
t Hymn-lover i with the Maruts drink it :

Close-knit with drinkers first, who drink in season ; close-knit
with heavenly Dames who give us treasures.

8 Rejoice in full accord with the Adityas, in concord with the

Parvatas, 0 Ribhus;

In full accord with Savitar, Divine One ; in full accord with
floods that pour forth riches.

2 Knowing your birth : knowing how you have attained immortality and
deification. The Ritus : the seasons personified and honoured as deities. The
Ribhus as cosmic powers are closely connected with them.

3 Vdjas ; that is, although V&ja is strictly the name of the- youngest of the
three only, you are all entitled to that appellation which means active, strong,
or spirited. Professor Grassmann translates : ‘ ihr alle seid die ersten hier,
0 Vadscha’s ;* ye are all the first (entitled to precedence) here, 0 V&jas ;
but the word utd is then left untranslated.

4 The third and great libation: see the preceding hymn, stanza 11.

5 Ribhukshans : Ribhukshan is another name of Ribhu, the eldest of
the three.

7 Drinkers first : those who claim and receive the libation first ; here,
apparently, the Ritus or Seasons.

8 Parvatas : Gods presiding over mountains and clouds.

m tee mymns of [book in ,

9 Ribhus, who helped their Parents and the Asvins, who formed

the Milch-cow and the pair of horses,

Made armour, set the heaven and earth asunder, — far-reach-
ing JBCeroes, they have made good offspring.

10 Ye who have wealth in cattle and in booty, in heroes, in rich

sustenance and treasure,

Such, 0 ye Ribhus, first to drink, rejoicing, give unto us and
those who laud our present.

1 1 Ye were not far : we have not left you thirsting, blameless in

this our sacrifice, 0 Ribhus.

Rejoice you with the Maruts and with Indra, with the Kings,
Gods ! that ye may give us riches.

HYMN XXXY. Ribhus#

Comb hither, 0 ye Sons of Strength, ye Ribhus ; stay not afar,
ye Children of Sudhanvan.

At this libation is your gift of treasure. Let gladdening
draughts approach you after Indra’s.

2 Hither is come the Ribhus’ gift of riches ; here was the drink-

ing of the well-pressed Soma,

Since by dexterity and skill as craftsmen ye made the single
chalice to be fourfold.

3 Ye made fourfold the chalice that was single : ye spake these

words and said, 0 Friend, assist us ;

Then, V&jas l gained the path of life eternal, deftrhanded
. Ribhus, to the Gods’ assembly.

4 Out of what substance was that chalice fashioned which ye

made fourfold by your art and wisdom ?

Now for the gladdening draught press out the liquor, and
drink, 0 Ribhus, of the meath of Soma.

5 Ye with your cunning made your Parents youthful; the cup,

for Gods to drink, ye formed with cunning ;

With cunning, Ribhus, rich in treasure, fashioned the two
swift Tawny Steeds who carry Indra.

$ Made armour : for the Gods.

10 Those who laud our present : who accompany with hymns, and so recom-
mend to the Gods, our oblation.

11 The Kings : the other Gods, or the Gods in general.

V

1 After Indr a? s libations having been offered to Indra at dawn and at
noonday. See stanza 7.

AO Friend: Agni.

5 Cunning : power and skill as craftsmen ; sdchgd*

BYMN 36.3 *?m RtGt&DA. m

6 Whoso pours out for you, when days are closing, the sharp

libation for your joy, 0 V&jas,

, For him, 0 mighty Eibhus, ye, rejoicing, have fashioned
wealth with plenteous store of heroes.

7 Lord of Bay Steeds, at dawn the juice thou drankest: thine,

. only thine, is the noonday libation.

Now drink thou with the wealth-bestowing Eibhus, whom for
their skill thou madest friends, 0 Indra.

8 Ye, whom your artist skill hath raised to Godhead, have sat

you down above in heaven like falcons.

So give us riches, Children of Sudhanvan, 0 Sons of Strength ;
ye have become immortal.

9 The third libation, that bestoweth treasure, which ye have

won by skill, ye dexterous-handed, —

This drink hath been effused for you, 0 Eibhus : drink it with
high delight, with joy like Indra’s.

HYMN XXXVL liibhus.

The car that was not made for horses or for reins, three-wheel-
ed, worthy of lauds, rolls round the firmament.

That is the great announcement of your Deity, that, 0 ye
Eibhus, ye sustain the earth and heavem

2 Ye Sapient Ones who made the lightly-rolling oar out of your

mind, by thought, the car that never errs,

You, being such, to drink of this drink-offering, you, 0 ye
Vajas, and ye Eibhus, we invoke. *

3 0 Vajas, Eibhus, reaching far, among the Gods this was your

exaltation gloriously declared,

In that your aged Parents, worn with length of days, ye
* wrought again to youth so that they moved at will.

4 The chalice that was single ye have made fourfold, and by

your wisdom brought the Cow forth from the hide.

So quickly, mid the Gods, ye gained immortal life. V&jas and
Eibhus, your great work must be extolled.

6 Fashioned wealth : made or fabricated as craftsmen.

1 The car : the three-wheeled chariot of the Asvins, 3rawn by asses, i. e. the
grey clouds of morning twilight-.

3 Ye wrought again to youth : forms of the -verb talcsh, to form, fabricate,
fashion, as a carpenter does with wood, are used in this and other hymns to
the Itibhus, the artificers, instead of words signifying restoring, giving, pro-
ducing, and the like.

442

[BOOK IV ;

SPHF HYMN'S OF

6 Wealth from the Ribhus is moat glorious in renown, that

which the Heroes, famed for vigour, have produced.

In synods must he sung the car which Vibhvan wrought: that
which ye favour, Gods ! is famed among mankind.

€ Strong is the steed, the man a sage in eloquence, the bowman
is a hero hard to beat in fight,

Great store of wealth and manly power hath he obtained
whom Vaja, Yibhvan, Ribhus have looked kindly on.

7 To you hath been assigned the fairest ornament, the hymn of

praise: V&jas and Ribhus, joy therein;

For ye have lore and wisdom and poetic skill : as such, with
this our prayer we call on you to come.

8 According to the wishes of our hearts may ye, who have full

knowledge of all the delights of men,

Fashion for us, 0 . Eibhus, power and splendid wealth, rich in
high courage, excellent, and vital strength.

9 Bestowing on us here riches and offspring, here fashion fame

for us befitting heroes.

Vouchsafe us wealth of splendid sort, 0 Ribhus, that we may
make us more renowned than others.

HYMN XXXVII. Ribhus.

Comb to our sacrifice, V&jas, Ribhukshans, Gods, by the paths
which Gods are wont to travel,

As ye, gay Gods, accept in splendid weather the sacrifice
among these folk of Manus.

2 May these rites please you in your heart and spirit ; may the

drops clothed in oil this day approach you.

May the abundant juices bear you onward to power and
strength, and, when imbibed, delight you.

3 Your threefold going near is God-appointed, so praise is given

you, Vajas and Ribhukshans.

So, Manus-like, mid younger folk I offer, to you who are aloft
in heaven, the Soma.

5 The car which Vibhvan wrought : or the sacrificial cup ; the text has only
vibhvatashtdh, that which was fabricated by Yibhvan, or as S&yana says, by
the Ribhus. 9

8 According to the wishes of our hearts : or, according to S&yana, on account
of the praises which we have offered to you.

1 In splendid weather : after the rains, when protracted sacrifices are not
interrupted by storms. These folk of Manus : Aryan men.

3 Threefold going near : coming to the altar at the three daily sacrifices,

HYMN 38.] THE MOVED A . 443

4 Strong, with fair chains of gold and jaws of iron, ye have a

splendid car and well-fed horses. v .

Ye Sons of Strength, ye progeny of Indra, to you the best is
offered to delight you. *

5 Eibhukshans. ! him, for handy wealth, the mightiest comrade

in the fight,

Him, Indra's equal, we invoke, most bounteous ever, rich in
steeds.

6 The mortal man whom, Eibhus, ye and Indra favour with your

help,

Must be successful, by his thoughts, at sacrifice and with the
steed.

7,0 Vajas and Ribhukshans, free for us the paths to sacrifice,
Ye Princes, lauded, that we may press forward to each point
of heaven.

8 0 Vajas and Eibhukshans, ye Nasatyas, Indra, bless this wealth,
And, before other mens’, the steed, that ample riches may
be won.

HYMN XXXVIII. Dadhikr&s.

From you two came the gifts in days aforetime which Trasa-
dasyu granted to the Purus %

Ye gave the winner of our fields and plough-lands, and the
strong smiter who subdued the Dasyus.

5 Him : Ribhu, as representing his brothers also.

6 By his thoughts : referring to the worshipper who by his devout thoughts
and acts will obtain success in sacrifice. With the steed ; referring to the war-
rior who will be victorious in battle with his war-chariot.

7 Press onward to each point of heaven ; that is, be everywhere victorious,
achieve, what was in later times the objept of great kings’ highest ambition,
the digvijaya or conquest of lands in every direction.

8 Ndsatyas : Asvins. The steeds .* either the war-horses in general, or, as
Professor Ludwig suggests, a particular horse that is to be sacrificed.

Dadhikrds , in the nominative case, or Dadhikr& in the crude form, is the
name of a mythical being often mentioned in the lligveda and the actual sub-
ject of this hymn and three others. He is described as a kind of divine horse,
and probably, like T&rkshya, is a personification of the morning sun ; some-
times he is considered as a creation of heaven and earth, sometimes of Mitra-
■Varuna, and is invoked in the morning together with Agni, Ushas, and the
Asvins. The name is probably derived from dadhi , thickened milk, and kri,
to’ scatter, in allusion to the rising sun spreading deW jpd hoar-frost like milk,
(nr ayyriv criceSy 7 raXtv. Aeschylus). See St, P. Lexicon,

or M. Williams’s Dictionary. Professor Ludwig thinks that the hymn is a
fragment, referring not, to the mythical being but to an actual war-horse bear-
ing his name. .

1 » From you two : Mitra and V&runa, according to stanza 2 of the following
hymn j Heaven aud Earth, according to S&yana. Trasadasyu ; this king has

4#, TttMEtMNS OF {BOOK tv.

2 And ye gave mighty Ladhikrds, the giver of many gifts, who
visiteth all people,

Impetuous hawk, swift and of varied colour, like a brave King
whom each true man must honour*

,3 Whom, as ? twere down a precipice, swift rushing, each Pfiru
praises and his heart rejoices,—

' Springing forth like a hero fain for battle, whirling the car and
flying like the tempest.

4 Who gaineth precious booty in the combats, and moveth,

winning spoil, among the cattle ;

Shown in bright colour, looking on the assemblies, beyond the
churl, to worship of the living.

5 Loudly the folk cry after him in battles, as ’twere a thief who

steals away a garment ; < ■

Speeding to glory, or a herd of cattle, even as a hungry falcon
swooping downward.

6 And, fain to come forth first amid these armies, this way and

that with rows of cars he rushes,

Gay like a bridesman, making him a garland, tossing the dust,
champing the rein that holds him.

7 And that strong Steed, victorious and faithful, obedient with

his body in the combat,

Speeding straight on amid the swiftly pressing, casts o’er his
brows the dust he tosses upward.

8 And at his thunder, like the roar of heaven, those who attack

tremble and are affrighted ;

For when he fights against embattled thousands, dread is he
in his striving ; none may stay him.

9 The people praise the overpowering swiftness of this fleet Steed

who giveth men abundance.

Of him they say when drawing back from battle. Dadhikr&s
hath sped forward with his thousands.

been mentioned before (I. 112. 14.) as a favourite of the Asvins. Professor
Ludwig points out that, to accord with what is said in IV. 42. 8., the reading
should be Trasadasyum ; ‘ ye who gave Trasadasyu to the PUrus,’ the verb
nitosi standing for the dual nito$ethe . The Pilrus ; one of the Aryan tribes.
See Index.

4 Beyond the churl .'passing by the niggard who offers no oblations, and
looting kindly ©n the Ipbrifice of the living man or devout worshipper. The
Word ar atim apparently = drdtim.

5 Speeding : referring to Dadhikr&s seeking fame and booty.

6 Making him a garland : of the chariots that surround him. /

7 Amid the swiftly pressing ; the text has no substantive : smdsu, hosts, or
yikshu, people, may be understood*

THE RWVEDA.

HYMN

10 Dadhikras hath o^rspread the Fivefold People with vigour, as
the Sun lightens the waters.

May the strong Steed who winneth hundreds, thousands, requite
with sweetness these my words and praises. 2 3 * * 6

HYMN XXXIX. Dadhikr&s.

Now give we praise to Dadhikras the rapid, and mention in
our laud the Earth and Heaven.

May the Dawns flushing move me to exertion, and bear me
safely over every trouble.

2 I praise the mighty Steed who fills my spirit, the Stallion

* Dadhikravan rich in bounties,

Whom, swift of foot and shining bright as Agni, ye, Yaruna
and Mitra, gave to Purus.

3 Him who hath honoured, when the flame is kindled at break

of dawn, the Courser Dadhikr&van,

Him, of one mind with Varuna and Mitra may Aditi make
free from all transgression.

4 When we remember mighty Dadhikravan our food and strength,

then the blest name of Maruts,

Yaruna, Mitra, we invoke for welfare, and Agni, and the
thunder-wielding Indra.

5 Both sides invoke him as they call on Indra when they stir

forth and turn to sacrificing.

To us have Yaruna and Mitra granted the Courser Dadhikras,
a guide for mortals.

6 So have I glorified with praise strong Dadhikravan, conquer-

ing Steed.

Sweet may he make our mouths j may he prolong the, days we
have to live.

HYMN XL. Dadhikrdvan.

Let us recite the praise of Dadhikravan : may all the Morn?
ings move me to exertion :

Praise of the Lord of Waters, Dawn, and Agni, Brihaspati
Son of Angiras, and Surya.

2 Hadhikrdvan : a lengthened, interchangeable form of Dadhikras.

3 Aditi : here a male deity, probably Agni.

5 When they stir forth and turn to sacrificing: when, men who are going out
on a foray, or to battle, offer sacrifices for their success. Or the meaning may
be, both those who go out to battle and those who remain at home and

sacrifice.

6 Smet may he make our mouths : purify our lips if we have spoken wick-
ed words.

1 1 The Lord * literally, the conqueror, that is, the winner, the obtainer.

iih THB HYMNS OB IBOOK IV.

2 Brave, seeking War and booty, dwelling with the good and

with the swift, may he hasten the food of Dawn.

May he the true, the fleet, the lover of the course, the bird-
like Dadhikr&van, bring food, strength, and light.

3 His pinion, rapid runner, fans him on his way, as of a bird

that hastens onward to its aim,

And, as it were a falcon's gliding through the air, strikes
Dad hikril van's side as he speeds on with might.

4 Bound by the neck and by the flanks and by the mouth, the

vigorous Courser lends new swiftness to his speed.

Drawing himself together, as his strength allows, Dadhikr&3
springs along the windings of the paths.

5 The Hansa homed in light, the Yasu in mid-air, the priest

, beside the altar, in the house the guest,

Dweller in noblest place, mid men, in truth, in sky, born of
flood, kine, truth, mountain, he is holy Law.

HYMN XLT. Indra- Vanina,

What laud, 0 Indra-Varuna, with oblation, hath like the
Immortal Priest obtained your favour ?

Hath our effectual laud, addi*essed with homage, touched you,
0 Indra-Varuna, in spirit 1

2 Ho who with dainty food hath won you, Indra and Varuri a,
Gods, as his allies to friendship,

Slayeth the Vritras and his foes in battles, and through your
mighty favours is made famous.

2 Hasten the food of Dawn : * accept the (sacrificial) food at the time of
the desirable dawn/ — Wilson. This line is difficult, and the meaning is
somewhat obscure.

; 4 Lends new swiftness to his speed : I adopt S&yana’s interpretation,
tvarah/ati gantum , Prof. Eggeling translates more literally ‘ speedeth after the
whip* (Satapatha-Br&hmana, V. 1. 5. 19).

5 In this stanza Dadbikr&s is identified with the eternal Law of the
universe and with all types or forms of the Supreme Being, He is the
Hansa, the Swan of heaven, or the Sun, the Vasu in mid-air or the Wind,
Agni as the priest and guest of men. As the Sun he is bom from, or amid,
kine or rays of light and springs up from the celestial ocean and the mountains
of cloud behind which he rises. See Professor Wilson’s note on the passage.
The stanza is explained also in Satapatha Br&hmana Vf. 7. 3, 11 (Sacred Books
of the East, XLI. p. 281).

The hymn is addressed to Indra-Varuna, that is, Indra and Varuna, con-
jointly. ’ \ ’

1 The Immortal Priest .* Agni.

%rm 44 Tm moved a, dr

3 Indra and Yaruna are most liberal givers of treasure to the
men who toil to serve them,

When they, as Friends inclined to friendship, honoured with
dainty food, delight .in flowing Soma. ^

A Indra and Yaruna, ye hurl, 0 Mighty, on him your strongest
flashing bolt of thunder

Who treats us ill, the robber and oppressor : measure on him
your overwhelming vigour.

5 0 Indra-Yaruna, be ye the lovers of this my song, as steers

who love the milch-cow.

Milk may it yield us as, gone forth to pasture, the great Cow
pouring out her thousand rivers.

6 For fertile fields, for worthy sons and grandsons, for the Sun's

beauty and for steer-like vigour,

May Indra-Yaruna with gracious favours work marvels for us
in the stress of battle.

7 For you, as Princes, for your ancient kindness, good comrades

of the man who seeks for booty, .

We choose to us for the dear bond of friendship, most liberal
Heroes bringing bliss like parents.

8 Showing their strength, these hymns for grace, Free-givers !

have gone to you, devoted, as to battle.

For glory have they gone, as milk to Soma, to Indra-Yaruna
my thoughts and praises.

9 To Indra and to Yaruna, desirous of gaining wealth have

these my thoughts proceeded.

They have come nigh to you as treasure-lovers, like mares,
fleet-footed, eager for the glory.

10 May we ourselves be lords of during riches, of ample suste-

nance for car and horses.

So may the Twain who work with newest succours bring
yoked teams hitherward to us and riches.

11 Come with your mighty succours, 0 ye Mighty ; come, Indra-

Yaruna, to us in battle.

What time the flashing arrows play in combat, *nay we
through you be winners in the contest.

5 Milk may it yield ns : bring us a rich reward. The great Cow : of plenty.

6 For the Sun's beauty ,* for long life wherein we may continue to aee the
glory of the sun.

8 For glory; to glorify you. ,

9 Eager for the glory : of winning the prize in the chariot-race.

11 The hymn is a prayer for aid in a coining battle.

m Tm HYMNS OF [BOOK TV.

HYMN XLII. IndraVaruna.

I am the royal Haler, mine is empire, as mine who sway all
7 . life are all Immortals.

Varuna’s will the Gods obey and follow. I am the King of
men’s most lofty coyer.

2 I am King Varuna. To me were given these first existing

high celestial powers.

Vanina’ s will the Gods obey and follow. I am the King of
, men’s most lofty cover.

3 I Varuna am Indra : in their greatness, these the two wide

deep fairly-fashioned regions,

These the two world-halves have I, even as Tvashtar knowing
all beings, joined and held together.

4 I made to flow the moisture-shedding waters, and set the

heaven firm in the seat of Order.

By Law the Son of Aditi, Law Observer, hath spread abroad
the world in threefold measure.

5 Heroes with noble ' horses, fain for battle, selected warriors,

call on me in combat.

I Indra Maghavan, excite the conflict ; I stir the dust, Lord
of surpassing vigour.

6 All this I did. The Gods’ own conquering power never im~

pedeth me whom none opposeth.

When lauds and Soma juice have made me joyful, both the
unbounded regions are affrighted.

7 All beings know these deeds of thine : thou tellest this unto

Varuna, thou great Disposer !

Thou art renowned as having slain the Vritras. Thou madest
flow the floods that were obstructed,

8 Our fathers then were these, the Seven Bishis, what time the

son of Durgahu was captive.

Varuna arid his sapersessor Indra severally urge their claims to superiority,,
and the poet decides between them. Cf. X. 124.

I Varuna is the speaker of the first four stanzas. Men's most lofty cover :
the highest heaven.

3 Indra ; all that Indra represents, Prince and King of all.

As Tvashtar : or, as their great artificer.

4 In tm scat of Order : in the place appointed by Law or the eternal Order
of the universe. The Son of Aditi : I, Varuna.

5 Indra is the speaker of this and of the following stanza.

7 The poet speaks.

8 Our fathers then were these : * The seven Fishis were the protectors of
this our (kingdom).’ — Wilson. The meaning is obscure. Professor G-rassmanh
banishes stanzas 8, 9, and 10 to the appendix as late additions to the hymn,
SSyana says that Purukutsa, son of Durgaha, being in captivity, his wife
propitiated the Seven Rishis, who by the favour of Indra and Varuna obtain-
ed for her a eon named Trasadasyu. For her : the wife of Purukutsa.

EYMN 43.] TEE RIQYEDA.

For her they gained by sacrifice Trasadasyu, a demi-god, like
Ihdra, conquering foemen,

9 The spouse of Purukutsa gave oblations to yon, 0 Indra-
Varuna, with homage. *

Then unto her ye gave King Trasadasyu, the demi-god, the
slayer of the foeman.

10 May we, possessing much, delight in riches, Gods in oblations
and the kine in pasture ;

And that Milch-cow who shrinks not from the milking, 0
Indra- Yaruna, give to us daily.

HYMN XLIIL Asvins,

Who will hear, who of those who merit worship, which of all
Gods take pleasure in our homage %

On whose heart shall we lay this laud celestial, rich with fair
offerings, dearest to Immortals ?

2 Who will be- gracious - ? Who will come most quickly of all

the Gods - ? who will bring bliss most largely?

What car do they call swift with rapid coursers % That which
k the Daughter of the Sun elected.

3 So many days do ye come swiftly hither, as Indra to give help

in stress of battle.

Descended from the s]cy, divine, strong-pinioned, by which of
all your powers are ye most mighty 1

4 What is the prayer that we should bring you, Asvins, whereby

ye come to us when invocated %

Whether of you confronts e'en great betrayal ? . Lovers of
sweetness, Dasras, help and save us.
b In the wide space your chariot reacheth heaven, what time it
turheth hither from the ocean.

Sweets from your sweet shall drop, lovers of sweetness ! These
v have they dressed for you as dainty viands.

6 Let Sindhu with his wave bedew your horses : in fiery glow

have the red birds come hither.

Observed of all was that your rapid going, whereby ye were
the Lords of Surya's Daughter.

7 Whene'er I gratified you here together, your grace was given

us, 0 ye rich in booty.

Protect, ye Twain, the singer of your praises \ to you, N&sa-
tyas, is my wish directed. *

10 That Milch-cow : wealth.

2 The Daughter of the Sun: S£\ry&, bride of the Asvins. See I. 116. 17.

4 Dasras : workers of marvels, mighty ones, a common appellation of the
Asvins.

6 Birds : flying steeds. Cf . IV. 46. 4.

29

450

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK IK

HYMN XLIV. Asvins.

We will invoke this day your car, far-spreading, 0 Asvins,
even the gathering of the sunlight, —

Car praised in hymns, most ample, rich in treasure, fitted with
seats, the car that beareth Sarya.

2 Asvins, ye gained that glory by your Godhead, ye Sons of

Heaven, by your own might and power.

Food followeth close upon your bright appearing when stately
horses in your chariot draw you.

3 Who bringeth you to-day for help with offered oblation, or

with hymns to drink the juices ?

Who, for the sacrifice’s ancient lover, turneth you hither,

, Asvins, offering homage ?

4 Borne on your golden car, ye omnipresent ! come to this sacri-

fice of ours, N&satyas.

Drink of the pleasant liquor of the Soma : give riches to the
people who adore you.

5 Gome hitherward to us from earth, from heaven, borne on

your golden chariot rolling lightly.

Suffer not other worshippers to stay you : here are ye bourid
by earlier bonds of friendship.

6 Now for us both, mete out, 0 Wonder-Workers, riches exceed-

ing great with store of heroes,

Because the men have sent you praise, 0 Asvins, and Aja-
miJhas come to the laudation.

7 Whene’er I gratified you here together, your grace was given

us, 0 ye rich in booty.

Protect, ye Twain, the singer of your praises : to you,
Nasatyas, is my wish directed.

HYMN XLY. Asvins.

Yonder goes up that light : your chariot is yoked that travels
round upon the summit of this heaven.

Within this car are stored three kindred shares of food, and
a skin filled with meath is rustling aS the fourth.

1 The gathering of the sunlight : Professor Wilson translates, after S&yapa,
c the associator of the solar ray/ and observes : * Sangatim goh, is only
explained, goh sangamayitdram , the bringer into union, or associator, of Go ;
what the latter is intended for is not explained, and the translation 1 b purely
conjectural, founded upon the connection of the Asvins with light or the sun/
Professor Grassmann translates: ‘der zur Milch eilt/ ‘which hastens to the milk/
6 Both ; priests and patrons. Ajamilhas : men of the Rishi’a family

The Rishi of this and the remaining hymns of this Book is V&madeva,

1 Three hindered shares : shares of similar food, for both Asvins and Sury&,
the Skin of meath being intended for earthly beings,-— Ludwig.

tbs Rmvsm.

MtTMft 4k]

mi

2 Forth come your viands rich with store of pleasant meath,

aud cars and horses at the flushing of the dawn,

Stripping the covering from the surrounded gloom, and
spreading through mid-air bright radiance like the Sun.

3 Drink of the meath with lips accustomed to the draught ;

harness for the meath *s sake the chariot that ye love.
Eefresh the way ye go, refresh the paths with meath ; hither,
0 Asvins, bring the skin that holds the meath,

4 The swans ye have are friendly, rich in store of meath, gold-

pinioned, strong to draw, awake at early morn,

Swimming the flood, exultant, fain for draughts that cheer :
ye come like flies to our libations of the meath.
f> Well knowing solemn rites and rich in meath, the flres sing
to the morning Asvins at the break of day,

When with pure hands the prudent energetic priest hath
with the stones pressed out the Soma rich in meath.

8 The rays advancing nigh, chasing with day the gloom, spread
through the firmament bright radiance like the Sun ;

And the Sun h miessing his horses goeth forth ; ye through
your Godlike nature let his paths be known.

7 Devout in thought I have declared, 0 Asvins, your chariot
with good steeds, which lasts for ever,

Wherewith ye travel swiftly through the regions to the
prompt worshipper who brings oblation.

HYMN XL VI. Vayu . Indra-Viyu.

Drink the best draught of Soma juice, 0 Vayu, at our holy-
rites :

For thou art he who drinketh first.

2 Qome, team-drawn, with thy hundred helps, with Indra seated

in the car,

V&yu, and drink your fill of juice.

3 May steeds a thousand bring you both, Indra and V&yu,

hitherward

To drink the Soma, to the feast.

4 For ye, G Indra-V&yu, mount the golden-seated car that aids
The sacrifice, that reaches heaven.

4 Swans ; the Asvins’ cliariot-Steeds.

6 The rays advancing nigh : I follow the interpretation of S&yana who
supplies c the rays’ and * the gloom ;* but the exact meaning of the half-line
is uncertain.

2 Drink your Jilt ; the verb is in the dual number, Indra being included.

m TEK fftMNS OF [BOOK IK

5 On far-refulgent chariot come unto the man who offers gifts :
Come, Indra-Y&yu, hitherward,

6 Here* Indra-Vayu, is the juice ; drink it, accordant with the

Gods,

Within the giver's dwelling-place.

7 Hither, 0 Indra-Vayu, be your journey: here unyoke your

steeds,

Here for your draught of Soma juice.

HYMN XLYII. V£yu. Indra-V£yu.

Yayu, the bright is offered thee, best of the meath at holy rites.
Come thou to drink the Soma juice, God, longed-for, on thy
team-drawn car.

2 0 Yayu, thou and Indra are meet drinkers of these Soma-

draughts,

For unto you the drops proceed as waters gather to the vale.

3 0 Indra-V&yu, mighty Twain, speeding together, Lords of

Strength,

Come to our succour with your team, that ye may drink the
Soma juice.

4 The longed-for teams which ye possess, 0 Heroes, for the

worshipper,

Turn to us, Indra- Yayu, ye to whom the sacrfice is paid.

HYMN XLYIII. # v&yu.

Taste offerings never tasted yet, as bards enjoy the foeman's
wealth.

0 V&yu, on refulgent car come to the drinking of the juice.

2 Removing curses, drawn by teams, with India seated by thy side,
0 Yayu, on refulgent car come to the drinking of the juice.

3 The two dark treasuries of wealth that wear all beauties wait

on thee.

0 V&yu, on refulgent car come to the drinking of the juice.

1 The bright : juice, understood.

1 As bards enjoy the foeman's wealth : vipo nd rttyo ary ah : Sftyana explains
vlpo nd as ‘ like a king who makes his enemies tremble/ and rftyo arydh as
‘bestow wealth upon the worshipper.’ Professor Grassmann translates : ‘gleich
IteiBern spriess des Frommen Gut/ c May the pious man’s wealth sprout like
twigs or suckers.’ Vipo ( vipah ) may mean either inspired singers, bards, or
twigs, and arlh , of which* aryah is the genitive, means both an enemy and a
pious man, a worshipper. I follow Professor Ludwig’s interpretation. The
* bards’ are the inspired singers of the victorious party who share the booty
after the battle.

3 The two dark treasuries of wealth : heaven and earth, not yet illuminated
by the sun.

mm sq.i

TR ® RTGVBBA.

4 May ninc-and-nmety harnessed steeds who yoke them at thy
will bring thee,

O Vayu, on refulgent oar come to the drinking of the Juice,

t> Harness, 0 Vayu, to thy car a hundred well-fed tawny
steeds,

Yea, or a thousand steeds, and let thy chariot come to us
with might,

HYMN XLIX, Indra-Bribaspati.

Beau Is this offering in your mouth, 0 Indra and Brihaspati ;
Famed is the laud, the gladdening draught.

2 This lovely Soma is effused, O Indra and Brihaspati,

For you, to drink it and rejoice,

3 As Soma-drinkers to our house come, Indra and Brihaspati —

and Indra — to drink Soma juice,

4 Vouchsafe us riches hundredfold, 0 Indra and Brihaspati,
With store of horses, thousandfold.

i» 0 Indra and Brihaspati, we call you when the meath is shed,

’ With songs, to drink the Soma juice.

6 Brink, Indra and Brihaspati, the Soma in the giver’s house :
Belight yourselves abiding there,

HYMN Li. Brihaspati.

Him who with might hath propped earth’s ends, who sitteth
in threefold; seat, Brihaspati, with thunder,

Him of the pleasant tongue have ancient sages, deep-thinking,
holy singers, set before them,

2 Wild in their course, in well-marked wise rejoicing were they,

Brihaspati, who pressed around us.

Preserve, Brihaspati, the stall uninjured, this company’s rain-
ing, ever-moving birth-place.

3 And Indra: the words indrascha of the text are manifestly superfluous.

Indra and Brihaspati conjointly are the deities of stanzas 10 and 11, which,
with 7, 8, and 9, are evidently a late addition to the original hymn.

1 In threefold seat : heaven, mid-air, and earth. Set before them : for adora-
tion ; or given them the foremost place in sacrifice.

% They,., who pressed around us: apparently the Maruts. The stall: like
t the boundless stall 7 of III. 1. 14, the aerial home of the Maruts.

This company's : the text has only asya, ‘ of this.’ I follow Professor Ludwig
in. his interpretation of this very difficult stanza, and supply ganasya, troop or
company, i. e. of the Maruts. According to S&yana, Biihaspati is asked to
protect the worshipper or institutor of the sacrifice.

iU TBE HYMNS OF IBOOK IT;

3 Bphaspati, from thy remotest distance have they sat do vu

who love the law eternal.

For thee were dug wells apnng ms^

murmurin g roun3 abo ut pour streams of sweetness.

4 Brihaspati, when first he had his being from mighty splendour

in supremest heaven.

Strong, with his sevenfold month, with noise of thunder, with
his seven rays, blew and dispersed the darkness.
b With the loud-shouting hand who sang his praises, with
thunder, he destroyed obstructive Vala.

Brihaspati thundering drave forth the cattle, the lowing cows
who make ^ ablations ready.

6 Serve we with sacrifices, gifts, and homage even thus the

Steer of all the Gods, the Father.

Brihaspati, may we be lords of riches, with noble progeny and
store of heroes.

7 Surely that King by power and might heroic hath made him

lord of all his foes? possessions.

Who cherishes Brihaspati well-tended, adorns and worships
him as foremost sharer.

8 In his own house he dwells in peace and comfort : to him for

‘ ever holy food flows richly.

To him the people with free will pay homage — the King with
whom the Brahman hath precedence.

9 He, unopposed, is master of the riches of his own- 'subjects

and of hostile people.

The Gods uphold that King with their protection who helps
the Brahman when he seeks his favour.

10 Indra, Brihaspati, rainers of treasure, rejoicing at this sacrifice
drink the Soma.

Let the abundant drops sink deep within you : vouchsafe us
riches with full store of heroes.

3 Rave they: sat down : probably the Maruts are intended, and not horses
as S&yanasays. Wells springing from the mountain: reservoirs of Soma
juice, pressed out by the stones, have been prepared.

4 Sevenfold mouth....,, seven rays: as identified with Agni.

5 Obstructive : or retentive ; the meaning- of phaligdm is somewhat un-

certain ; probably, reservoir, i. e. holder and withholderof the rain. The loud
shouting band : the Maruts. ;

10 Rainers of treasure : the meaning of vri&kanvasti is uncertain ; ■ strong
dr excellent as bulls/ according to Ludwig and Grassmann. Perhaps * strong
with treasures/

HYMN 51.] THE RWVEDA, 455

1 1 Brihaspati and Indra, make us prosper : may this be your
benevolence to us-ward.

Assist our holy thoughts, wake up our spirit : weaken the
' hatred of our foe and rivals; *

HYMN LI. Dawn,

Forth from the darkness in the region eastward this most
abundant splendid light hath mounted.

Now verily the far-refulgent Mornings, Daughters of Heaven,
bring welfare to the people.

2 The richly-coloured Dawns have mounted eastward, like

pillars planted at our sacrifices,

And, flushing far, splendid and purifying, unbarred the
portals of the fold of darkness.

3 Dispelling gloom this day the wealthy Mornings urge liberal

givers to present their treasures.

In the unlightened depth of darkness round them let niggard
traffickers sleep unawakened.

4 0 Goddesses, is this your car, I ask you, ancient this day, or

is it new, ye Mornings,

Wherewith, rich Dawns, ye seek with wealth Navagva,
Dasagva Angira, the seven-toned singer 1

5 With horses harnessed by eternal Order, Goddesses, swiftly

round the worlds ye travel,

Arousing from their rest, 0 Dawns, the sleeping, and all that
lives, man, bird, and beast, to motion.

6 Which among these is eldest, and where is she through whom

they fixed the Ribhus’ regulations 1
What time the splendid Dawns go forth for splendour, they
* are not known apart, alike, unwasting.

7 Blest were these Dawns of old, shining with succour, true

with the truth that springs from holy Order;

With whom the toiling worshipper, by praises, hymning and
lauding, soon attained to riches.

3 Niggard traffickers : wealthy churls who offer no sacrifices.

4 Navagva , Dasagva : individual members of the so-named mythical priestly
families which are frequently associated with the* Angirases. Angiva: a
member of the family of Angiras. Seven4oned : literally, * seven-mouthed/
using in his hymns the seven metres of the Veda, or repeating hymns of
seven kinds.

6 The Ribhus' regulations ; the seasons of the year, the RibhUs being
cosmic powers and closely connected with the Ritas.

m THEHYMNS OF [BOOK in

8 Hither from eastward all at once they travel, from one place

spreading in the self-same manner.

Awaking, from the seat of holy Order the Godlike Dawns
come nigh like troops of cattle.

9 Thus they go forth with undiminished colours, these Morn-

ings similar, in self-same fashion,

Concealing the gigantic might of darkness with radiant bodies
bright and pure and shining.

10 0 Goddesses, 0 Heaven’s refulgent Daughters, bestow upon

us wealth with store of children.

As from our pleasant place of rest we rouse us may we be
masters of heroic vigour.

11 Well-skilled in lore of sacrifice, ye Daughters of Heaven,

refulgent Dawns, I thus address you.

May we be glorious among the people. May Heaven vouchsafe
us this, and Earth the Goddess.

HYMN LTI. Dawn.

4 This Lady, giver of delight, after her Sister shining forth,
Daughter of Heaven, hath shown herself.

2 Unfailing, Mother of the Kine, in colour like a bright red mare,
The Dawn became the Asvins’ Friend.

3 Yea, and thou art the Asvins’ Friend, the Mother of the Kine

art thou :

0 Dawn, thou rulest over wealth.

4 Thinking of thee, 0 Joyous One, as her who driveth hate away,
We woke to meet thee with our lauds.

5 Our eyes behold thy blessed rays like troops of cattle loosed

to feed.

Dawn hath filled full the wide expanse.

6 When thou hast filled it, Fulgent One ! thou layest bare the

gloom with light.

After thy nature aid us, Dawn.

7 Thou overspreadest heaven with rays, the dear wide region of

mid-air

With thy bright shining lustre, Dawn. .

8 Like troops of cattle : going forth to pasture at day-break.

I After her Sister : when Night has departed.

3 TheJLine ; the early rays of light, or fleecy clouds of morning. Friend
of the Asvins : as- being worshipped at the same time,

4 Driveth hate away ; especlaly the malignity of the evil spirits of the nights

JEYME 54.}

TEE R1GVEDA .

m-

HYMN LIII. Savior.

Of Savitar the God, the sapient Asura, we crave this great
gift which is worthy of our choice, #

Wherewith he freely grants his worshipper defence. This with
his rays the Great God hath vouchsafed to us.

2 Sustainer of the heaven, Lord of the whole world’s life, the

Sage, he putteth on his golden-coloured maxi.

Clear-sighted, spreading far, filling the spacious realm, Savitar
hath brought forth bliss that deserveth laud.

3 He hath filled full the regions of the heaven and earth : the

God for his own strengthening waketh up the hymn.

Savitar hath stretched out his arms to cherish life, producing
with his rays and lulling all that moves.

4 Lighting all living creatures, ne’er to be deceived, Savitar,

God, protects each holy ordinance.

He hath stretched out his arms to all the folk of earth, and,
with his laws observed, rules his own mighty cotxrse.

5 Savitar thrice surrounding with his mightiness mid-air, three

regions, and the triple sphere of light,

Sets, the three heavens in motion and the threefold earth, and
willingly protects us with his triple law.

6 Most gracious God, who brings to life and lulls to rest, he

who controls the world, what moves not and what moves,
May he vouchsafe us shelter, — Savitar the God, — for tranquil
life, with triple bar against distress.

7 With the yeai*’s seasons hath Savitar, God, come nigh : may

he prosper our home, give food and noble sons.

May be invigorate us through the days and nights, and may
he send us opulence with pi’ogeny.

HYMN LIY. Savitar.

Now must we praise and honour Savitar the God : at this
time of the day the men mnst call to him,

Him who distributes wealth to Manu’s progeny, that he may
grant us here riches most excellent.

2 For thon at first producest for the holy Gods the noblest of

all portions, immortality :

Thei’eafter as a gift to men, 0 Savitar, thou openest existence,
life succeeding life.

1 Savitar ; the Sun as the great vivifier, generator, and producer.

3 Lulling : the word in the text, nivesdyan, means * bringing to rest.* S&yana

explains it by ‘ establishing in their several duties.’ -

5 Triple law : according to S&yana, his functions as distributer Of heat, rain,
and cold. Three heavens ; see I. 105. 5,

458

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK IK

3 If we, men as we are, have sinned against the Gods through

want of thought, in weakness, or through insolence,

Absolve us from the guilt and make us free from sin,
0 Savitar, alike among both Gods and men.

4 None may impede that power of Savitar the God whereby he

will maintain the universal world.

What the fair-fingered God brings forth on earth's expanse or
in the height of heaven, that work of his stands sure.

5 To lofty hills thou sendest those whom Indra leads, and

givest fixed abodes with houses unto these.

However they may fly and draw themselves apart, still,
Savitar, they stand obeying thy behest.

6 May the libations poured to thee thrice daily, day after day,

0 Savitar, bring us blessing.

May Indra, Heaven, Earth, Sindhu with the Waters, Aditi
with Adityas, give us shelter,

HYMN LV. Visvedevas.

Who of you, Vasus, savetb? who protecteth? 0 Heaven and
Earth and Aditi, preserve us,

Yanina, Mitra, from the stronger mortal. Gods, which of you
at sacrifice giveth comfort ?

2 They who with laud extol the ancient statutes, when they

shine forth infallible dividers,

Have ordered as perpetual Ordainers, and beamed as holy-
thoughted Wonder-Workers.

3 The Housewife Goddess, Aditi, and Sindhu, the Goddess Svasti

1 implore for friendship :

And may the unobstructed Night and Morning both, day and
night, provide for our protection,

4 Aryaman, Yaruna have disclosed the pathway, Agni as Lord of

Strength the road to welfare.

Lauded in manly mode may Indra-Vishnu grant us their power-
ful defence and shelter,

5 To lofty hills : ‘ Thou elevatest those, of whom Indra is chief, above the

vast clouds : for these, (thy worshippers), thou providest dwelling (places)
filled with habitations. ’—Wilson. ‘The difficulties in connection with this
verse are very great, and perhap ■ -Vt— ’ "ays Professor Peterson, in

whose Hymns from the Kigveda ! ■ ' I 1 Series, No. XXX VI.) the

Sanskrit student will find a full statement of these difficulties, and the inter-
pretations proposed by S&yaua and by European scholars, not one of Which
is convincing,

2 They : the deities of light ; * dividers * as separating day from night, and
*£)rdamers t as fixing and regulating the year and the seasons.

3 Housewife Goddess : as being the mother of the Gods. Svasti : Prosperity*

BYMN W.] TEE RIG VEDA . 459

5 I have besought the favour of the Maruts, of Parvata, of Bhaga

God who rescues.

From trouble caused by man the Lord preserve us ; from woo
sent by his friend let Mitra save us. *

6 Agree, through these our watery oblations, Goddesses, Heaven

and Earth, with Ahibudhnya.

As if to win the sea, the Gharma-heaters have opened, as they
come anear, the rivers.

7 May Goddess Aditi with Gods defend us, save us the savkmr

God with care unceasing.

We dare not stint the sacred food of Mitra and Varuna upon
the back of Agni.

8 Agni is Sovran Lord of wealth, Agni of great prosperity ;

May he bestow these gifts on us.

9 Hither to us, rich pleasant Dawn, bring many things to he

desired,

Thou who hast ample store of wealth.

10 So then may Bhaga, Savitar, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, Indra,
with bounty come to us.

HYMN LVI. Heaven and Earth.

May mighty Heaven and Earth, most meet for honour, be
present here with light and gleaming splendours ;

When, fixing them apart, vast, most extensive, the Steer roars
loudly in far-reaching courses.

2 The Goddesses with Gods, holy with holy, the Two stand pour-
ing out their rain, exhaustless :

Faithful and guileless, having Gods for children, leaders of
sacrifice with shining splendours.

5 The Lord : Varuna. Sent by his Friend : Varuna, as the great chastiser of
men. Professor Roth, whom Professor Grassmann follows, takes janydt to
mean caused by strangers, and mitriydl caused by friends.

6 This stanza is difficult and its meaning is obscure. The words dpyebhir
ishtaih , ‘through watery oblations/ are rendered by Professor Grassmann,

‘ nebsfc den erwunschten Wasaergottern/ ‘together with the wished-for
Water- Gods.’ Ahibudhnya : the Dragon of the Deep, is a divine being who
dwells in the depths of the ocean of air. Cf I. 188. 5 ; II. 31. 6, .ds if to
win the sea .* as if wishing to gain the ocean of abundant wealth. The Oharma
heaters : the priests who prepare the oblation of hot milk or other hot
beverage which is offered especially to the Asvins. Or Gharma may mean the
caldron or vessel in which the oblation is boiled. The meaning seems to be,
as Professor Ludwig explains it, that the priests, sacrificing, and hy m ning
lead down towards themselves the rivers of the ocean of plenty,

7 The saviour God ; Indra. Upon the back of Agni : poured upon the flames,

1 The Steer : according to S4yana, Parjanya the God of rain-clouds.

2 Pouring out their rain ; bestowing good gifts.

460

TffM HYMNS OF [BOOK IK

3 Sure in the worlds he was a skilful Craftsman, he who produced

these Twain the Earth and Heaven.

Wise, with his power he brought both realms together, spacious
and deep, well-fashioned, unsupported.

4 0 Heaven and Earth, with one accord promoting, with high

protection as of Queens, our welfare,

Far-reaching, universal, holy, guard us. May we, car-borne,
through song be victors ever.

5 To both of you, 0 Heaven and Earth, we bring our lofty song

of praise,

Pure Ones ! to glorify you both.

6 Ye sanctify each other’s form, by your own proper might

ye rule,

And from of old observe the Law.

7 Furthering and fulfilling, ye, 0 Mighty, perfect Mitra’s Law.
Ye sit around our sacrifice.

r

HYMN LVII. K ghetrapat i, Etc.

We through the - Field, even as through a
friend, obtain

What nourisheth our kine and steeds. In such may he be
good to us.

2 As the cow yieldeth milk, pour for us freely, Lord of the Field,

the wave that beareth sweetness,

Distilling meath, well-purified like butter, and let the Lords
of holy Law be gracious.

3 Sweet be the plants for us, the heavens, the waters, and full

of sweets for us be air’s mid-region.

May the Field’s Lord for us be full of sweetness, and may we
follow after him uninjured.

4 Happily work our steers and men, may the plough furrow

happily.

Happily be the traces bound ; happily may he ply the goad.-

'4 -4s of Queens : X follow with some hesitation Professor Ludwig’s inter-
pretation of patntvadbhir. Professor Wilson, following S&yapa, translates,
with our spacious dwellings, inhabited by our wives.'

6 These three concluding verses form in reality another hymn.

In this hymn various agricultural personifications are addressed, the deity
of the first three stanzas being called Kshetrapati, of the fourth £Lma v of
the fifth and eighth Bun&sira, of the sixth and seventh SitiL ‘ It is said in
the Q-rihya Sfitras that each verse is to he silently repeated, with an oblation
to fire, at the commencement of ploughing.’ — Wilson.

1 The Master of the Field; Fshetrapati, the popular Genius Loci, said to
mean either Pudra or Agni,

Mr MS 584 THE KIGVED A. ml

5 Suna and Sira, welcome ye this laud, and with the milk which

ye have made in heaven
Bedew ye both this earth of ours.

6 Auspicious Sit&, come thou near : we venerate and worship thee
That thou mayst bless and prosper us and bring us fruits

abundantly.

7 May Indra press the furrow down, may Pushan guide its

course aright.

May she, as rich in milk, be drained for us through each
succeeding year.

8 Happily let the shares turn up the ploughland, happily go the

ploughers with the oxen.

With meath and milk Parjanya make us happy. Grant us
prosperity, Suna and Sira,

HYMN LVIII. Ghnta.

Forth from the ocean sprang the wave of sweetness : together
with the stalk it turned to Amrit,

That which is holy oiks mysterious title : but the Gods* tongue
is truly Amrit’s centre.

5 Suna and Sira: two deities or deified objects who bless or are closely con-
nected with agriculture. According 1 to Yaska. Suna (th© auspioious) is V&yu,
and Sira '.pi is A.lirya or the Sun Professor Roth conjectures that the
words mean hero, plonjrh.diiin? and plough. Professor Grassmann translates ;
f 0 Pflug und Lenker/ ‘plough and ploughman.’

6 Sltrt : the Furrow or Husbandry personified and addressed as a deity ;
in after time the heroine of the Ram&yana.

7 indra ; as the God who sends the necessary rain, Indra is prayed to bless
the work by pressing down and deepening the furrow. ‘May Indra take hold
of SUd' — Wilson. May she, as rich in milk : according to the Scholiast, sX,
she, here means the sky.

The hymn is in praise of Qhrita. the clarified butter or oil used in sacrifices,
but a choice of deities is offered in the Index— Agni or Surya, Waters, Cows,
or Ghrita. It is, as Professor Wilson observes, t a good specimen of Yaidik
vagueness, and mystification, and of the straits to which commentators are put
to extract an intelligible meaning from the text,’

1 It would be* fruitless, as Professor Ludwig remarks, to repeat all the
various explanations which S&yana gives of the first line of this stanza : they
only show the utter uncertainty of tradition in reference to the passage, For
instance, samudra, ocean, is said to mean, sacrificial fire ; or celestial fire ; or
the firmament ; or the udder of the cow ; and drmi, wave, may accordingly
mean-reward ; or rain ; or butter. Professor Ludwig thinks that the sense: of
the stanza may be : the life-giving essence which develops itself out of the
world-ocean turns into Soma, in the Moon, but it is neither of these two, but
the tongue of the Gods (Agni ?) from which the Amrit proceeds and to which
it returns. But see A. Hillebrandt, Vedische Mythologie, I. 321, 322.

m mi bt&m op [moK m

2 Let us declare aloud the name of Ghiita* and at this sacrifice
hold it up with homage.

So let/the Brahmaii hear the praise We utter. This hath the
four-horned Buffalo emitted.

*3 Four are his horns, three are the feet that bear him ; his heads
are two, his hands are seven in number.

Bound with a triple bond the Steer roars loudly : the mighty
God hath entered in to mortals.

4 That oil in triple shape the Gods discovered laid down within

the Cow, concealed by Panis.

Indra produced one shape, Sflrya another : by their own power
they formed the third from Vena.

5 From inmost reservoir in countless channels flow down these

rivers which the foe beholds not.

I look upon the streams of oil descending, and lo ! the Golden
Reed is there among them.

6 Like rivers our libations flow together, cleansing themselves

in inmost heart and spirit.

The Brahman : according to Mahldhara, the ritvij or priest. Probably
Agni is meant. The last half-line of the stanza is translated, after S&yana,
by Professor Wilson: ‘the fair-complexioned deity perfects this rite/ the
epithet * four-horned 5 being transferred to ‘Brahman.* The God maybe
called a buffalo (gaurd, Bos Gaums) as a type of extraordinary strength. Mahl-
dhara explains gaurd by yctjna, sacrifice, having four horns, that is, four offi-
ciating priests.

3 Four are his horns : the four horns of Agni as identified with sacrifice are
said by S&yana to be the four Vedas, and, if identified with Aditya, the four
cardinal points The three feet are, in the former case, the three daily sacri-
fices, in the latter, morning, noon, and evening. The two heads are, in the
former case, the Brahma udana and the Pravargya ceremonies, in the latter,
day and night. Similarly, the seven hands are explained, alternatively, as the
seven metres of the Veda or the seven rays of the Sun ; and the triple bond
as the Mantra , Kalpa , and Brdhmana , prayer, ceremonial, and rationale, of
the Veda, or the three regions, heaven, firmament, and earth. The Steer is,
either as sacrifice or Aditya, the pourer down of rewards, and the loud roar-
ing is the sound of the repetition of the texts of the Veda. Mahidhara s
explanation differs from that of Say ana. The four horns are priests ; or nouns,
verbs, prepositions, and particles ; the three feet are the Vedas, or the first,
second, and third persons, or the past, present, and future tenses ; the two
heads are two sacrifices, or the agent and object ; the seven hands are the
metres or the cases of the noun ; and the three bonds are the three daily
sacrifices, or the singular, dual, and plural numbers. See Wilson's note.

4 In triple i shape : as milk, curds, and butter, according to S&yaua. The
meaning seems to be that Indra, Sfirya, and Vena (who is probably Agni),
restored the power of the elements of sacrifice respectively in heaven, the
firmament, and the earth, after they had been rendered ineffectual for a time
by the malignant Panis.

5 The Golden Reed : Celestial Agni,

the moved a.

j WYMH 58. j

The streams of holy oil pour swiftly downward like the wild
beasts that fly before the bowman.

7 As rushing down the rapids of a river,- flow swifteri than- the

wind the vigorous currents,.

The streams of oil in swelling fluctuation like a red courser
bursting through the fences-

8 Like women at a gathering fair to look on and gently smiling,,

they incline to AgnL

The streams of holy oil attain the fuel, and Jatavedas joyfully
receives them.

9 As maidens deck themselves with gay adornment to join the*

bridal feast, I now behold them.

Where Soma flows and sacrifice is ready,, thither the stream#
of holy oil are running.

10 Send to our eulogy a herd of cattle ;■ bestow upon us excellent

possessions.

Bear to the Gods the sacrifice' we offer ; the streams of oil flow
pure and full of sweetness.

1 1 The universe depends upon thy power and might within the

sea, within the heart* within all life.

May we attain that sweetly -flavoured wave of thine, brought*
at its gathering, o’er the surface of the floods.

10 Send to our eulogy a herd of cuttle: tins is S&yanar’s interpretation. The
Gods are addressed, and asked to- reward the singers.

11 Thy power: Agni’s. In the sea : in the aerial ocean, the firmament,, in
which Agni is present as lightning. Within the heart : as VaisvAnai a, bekmg-
ing to all men. Within all life : as the vital principle, or heat. The warn
is the butter of the oblation.

BOOK THE FIFTH.

HYMN I. Agni.

Agni is wakened by the people’s fuel to meet the Dawn who
come th like a milch-cow.

Like young trees shooting up on high their branches, his flatties
are rising to the vault of heaven.

2 For worship of the Gods the Priest was wakened : at morning

gracious Agni hath arisen.

Kindled, his radiant might is made apparent, and the great
Deity set free from darkness,

3 When he hath stirred the line of his attendants, with the pure

milk pure Agni is anointed.

The strength-bestowing gift is then made ready, which spread
in front, with tongues, erect, he drinketh, ■

4 The spirits of the pious turn together to Agni, as the eyes of

all to Surya.

He, when both Dawns of different hues have borne him, springs
up at daybreak as a strong white charger!

5 The noble One was born at days’ beginning, laid red in colour

mid the well-laid fuel.

Yielding in every house his seven rich treasures, Agni is seat-
ed, Priest most skilled in worship.

6 Agni hath sat Jiim down, a Priest most skilful, on a sweet-

smelling place, his Mother’s bosom.

Young, faithful, sage, preeminent o’er many, kindled among
the folk whom he sustaineth.

7 This Singer excellent at sacrifices, Agni the Priest, they glorify

with homage.

Him who spread out both worlds by Law Eternal they balm
with oil, strong Steed who never faileth.

1 Young trees ; the meaning of yahvdh’ here is uncertain. * Like birds ( ? )
flying up (or like strong men reaching up) to a branch’ (M. Midler).

3 The line of his attendants : the row imr priests, the people of

st, 1. But the exact meaning of the v. • i ■ ■■ ■ is uncertain. *

& To SHrya: to the Sun. Both Dawns : Night and Morning.

5 Berea rich treasures : wealth of various sorts.

Q Mis Mother's bosom ; the altar raised above the ground.

30

466 HUE HtMffl OF [BOOK T*

8 He, worshipful House-Friend, in his home is worshipped, our

own auspicious guest, lauded by sages.

That strength the Bull with thousand horns possesses.

In might, 0 Agni, thou excellest others.

9 Thou quickly passest by all others, Agni, for him to whom

‘ ‘ thou hast appeared most lovely,

Wondrously fair, adorable, effulgent, the guest of men, the
darling of the people.

10 To thee, Most Youthful God ! to thee, 0 Agni, from near and

far the people bring their tribute.

,, - Mark well the prayer of him who best extols thee. Great,
high, auspicious, Agni, is thy shelter.

11 Ascend to-day thy splendid car, 0 Agni, in splendour, with the

Holy Ones around it.

Knowing the paths by mid-air’s spacious region bring hither
Gods to feast on our oblation.

. 12 To him adorable, sage, strong and mighty we have sung forth
our song of praise and homage.

Gavishfehir&hath raised with prayer to Agni this laud far-reach-
ing, like gold light to heaven.

HYMN II. Agni.

The youthful* Mother keeps the Boy in secret pressed to her
close, nor yields him to the Father.

But, when he lies upon the arm, the people see his unfading-
countenance before them.

2 What child is this thou earnest as handmaid, 0 Youthful One ?

The Consort-Queen hath borne him.

The Babe unborn increased through many autumns. 4 I saw
him born what time his Mother bare him.

3 I saw him from afar gold-toothed, bright-coloured, hurling

his weapons from his habitation,

8 The BuM with thousand horns : Agni as the Sun with his countless rays.

1 The kindling of the sacrificial fire is figuratively described. The lower
piece of wood retains the latent spark and will not give it up to the yajamdna
or worshipper until he has generated it by attrition. When the fire has been
produced, and is shown like a child that is carried on the arm, its brightness
is apparent to all. This seems to be the meaning of the stanza ; but to arrive
at it aratnati must be read instead of the aratati of the text ; and this or some
similar alteration is required by the metre. But see Ludwig’s Commentary.

2 The meaning is obscure. The handmaid and the Consort-Queen (mdhisht)
are perhaps the two fire-sticks. The fire thus produced is not the genuine
Agni, who is born as lightning from the cloud.

3 I offered sweet libations of Soma juice to Agni when I beheld him. in the

form of lightning, and consequently the godless who do not acknowledge Indra
are unable to injure me. > •

HYMN 2.] . THE RMYEDA. 'i&X

1 ~

Wbat time T gave him Amrit free from mixture. How can
the Indraless, the hymnless harm me %

4 I saw him moving from the place he dwells in, even with a

herd, brilliantly shining.

These seized him not : he had been born already. They who
were grey with age again grow youthful.

5 Who separate my young bull from the cattle, they whose pro-

tector was in truth no stranger ?

Let those whose hands have seized upon them free them. Maj
he, observant, drive the herd to ns-ward.

6 Mid mortal men the godless have secreted the King of all who

live, home of the people.

So may the prayers of Atrigive him freedom. Reproached in
turn be those who now reproach him.

7 Thou from the stake didst loose e’en Sunahsepa bound. for a

thousand ; for he prayed with fervour.

So, Agni, loose from us the bonds that bind us, when thou art
seated here, 0 Priest who knowest.

8 Thou hast sped from me, Agni, in thine anger : this the protec-

tor of Gods’ Laws hath told me.

Indra who knoweth bent his eye upon thee : by him instructed
come, 0 Agni,

9 Agni shines far and wide with lofty splendour, and by his

/ greatness makes all things apparent.

tie conquers godless and malign enchantments, and sharpens

 both his horns to gore the Rakshas.

4 Even as with a herd : Agni is here represented as the Sun with his hoBt of
rays. These seized him not : the Dawns could not detain him : the Sun was
too powerful. But the meaning of t&K, 4 these/ without a substantive, is
somewhat uncertain. They xoho were grey * the ancient flames of the Sun re-
cover their youth and strength. Or the half -line may be rendered: 'lhe
Dawns, the youthful Maidens, grow decrepit.’ This is Professor Ludwig •
interpretation, and it has much to recommend it,

5 This stanza is extremely obscure. It may refer to some actual occurrence
to which a mythical colouring has been added. 4 What enemies have despoiled
my kingdom ? * is S&yana’s explanation of the first half-line.

0 This stanza appears to refer to some contention between the descendants
of Air! and some other priestly family, perhaps the Bhrigus, as Professor Dud-
wig thinks, regarding the worship of Agni. Home of the people: Agm ; t he
asylum of men/ — Wilson.

7 Sunahsepa: see I. 24. Bound for a thousand ; bought for a thousand
cows in order that he might be bound to the sacrificial post. SAyana, who is
followed by Professors Wilson, Roth, and Grassmann, takes sahasrddyUpM
together, * from a thousand stakes/

9 Rakshas : a collective noun signifying the whole race of Rftkshasw ;
originally, harm, injury.

468 THE HYMNS OF [BOOH V.

10 Loud in the heaven above be Agni’s roarings with keen-edged

weapons to destroy the demons.

Forth. burst his splendours in the Soma’s rapture. The godless
bands press round but cannot stay him.

11 As a skilled craftsman makes a car, a singer I, Mighty One !

this hymn for thee have fashioned.

If thou, 0 Agni, God, accept it gladly, may we obtain thereby
the heavenly Waters.

12 May he, the strong-necked Steer, waxing in vigour, gather the

foeman’s wealth with none to check him.

.. Thus to this xAgni have the Immortals spoken. To man who
spreads the grass may he grant shelter, grant shelter to the
man who brings oblation.*

HYMN III. Agni.

Thou at thy birth art Yaruna, 0 Agni ; when thou art kindled
, thou becomest Mitra.

In thee, 0 Son of Strength, all Gods are centred. Indra art
, thou to man who brings oblation.

2 Aryaman art thou as regarde th maidens : mysterious is thy

name, 0 Self-sustainer.

As a kind friend with streams of milk they balm thee what
, time thou makest wife and lord one-minded.

3 The Maruts deck their beauty for thy glory, yea, Budra ! for

thy birth fair, brightly-coloured.

That which was fixed as Vishnu’s loftiest station — therewith
the secret of the Cows thou guardest.

4 Gods through thy glory, God who art so lovely ! granting abund-

ant gifts gained life immortal,

, As their own Priest have men established Agni ; and serve him
fain for praise from him who liveth.

1 Varum : regarded as the type of royalty. Mitra : the friendly, bene-
ficent God. Indra : the chief of all the Gods,

2 Aryaman : in connexion with, marriage ; aryamdn meaning also a com-

panion, especially a friend who asks a girl in marriage for another, and Agni
being, as the, Sun, the regulator of the season for marriage, and its consecrator
as the sacrificial fire. *

3 Hudra : here, as in other places, a name of Agni.

Vishnu's loftiest station : the height of the firmament, which supplies milk to
the celestial Cows, and, as mysteriously connected with them, to the cows of
earth. The secret of the Cows ; apparently, their udder — the cloud — is meant
by giXhyam n$ma gdndtn, * the cows’ secret name.’

„ ,4 Gained life immortal : Agni alone, it is said, was originally immortal, and
the other Gods obtained immortality through hini. v

From him who liveth : Agni, the special represen taut of vital power. *

QTWft t] 1T&& ttlQV&DJL. m

& There is no priest more skilled than thou in worship ; noiie
Self-sustainer ! passes thee in wisdom.

The man within whose house as guest thou dwellest, 0 God,
by sacrifice shall conquer mortals.

6 Aided by thee, 0 Agni may we conquer through our oblation,

fain for wealth, awakened :

May we in battle, in the days’ assemblies, 0 Son of Strength,
by riches conquer mortals,

7 He shall bring evil on the evil-plotter whoever turns against us

sin and outrage.

Destroy this calumny of him, 0 Agni, whoever injures us with
double-dealing.

8 At this dawn’s hushing, God ! our ancient fathers served thee

with offerings, making thee their envoy,

When, Agni, to the store of wealth thou goest, a God enkindled
with good things by mortals,

9 Save, thou who knowest, draw thy father near thee, who counts

as thine own son, 0 Child of Power.

0 sapient Agni, when wilt thou regard us ? When, skilled in
holy Law, wilt thou direct us t

10 Adoring thee he gives thee many a title, when thou,. Good

Lord ! acceptest this as Father.

And doth not Agni, glad in strength of Godhead, gain splendid
bliss when he hath waxen mighty ?

11 Most Youthful Agni, verily thou bearest thy praiser safely

over all his troubles.

Thieves have been seen by us and open foemen: unknown
have been the plottings of the wicked.

12 To thee these eulogies have been directed: or to the Vasu

hath this sin been spoken.

But this our Agni, flaming high, shall never yield us to calumny,
to him who wrongs us.

fi In the days 1 assemblies : gatherings on days appointed for sacrifice.

8 The store of wealth ; according to S&yana, the place containing the riches
of sacrificial offerings.

9 Thy father ; the sacrifices, who supports Agni with oblations, and in his
turn is loved and cherished as a son.

30 Acceptest this; the homage of the worshipper, When he hath waxen,
mighty : or been exalted by our praise.

11 Thieves have been seen : although we have seen thieves and enemies we
have been saved by Agni from suffering injury from their evil designs.

12 Hath this sin been spohen: if my praise he not acceptable to Agni, it is

an offence and a sin. Or '■'■■■vri: r-.ay be, this sin of our enemies who
plot against us has been .v a r...

470

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK V.

HYMN IV. Agni.

0 Agni, King and Lord of wealth and treasures, in thee is my
delight at sacrifices.

Through thee may we obtain the strength we long for, and
overcome the fierce attacks of mortals.

2 Agni, Eternal Father, offering-bearer, fair to behold, far~reach~

ing, far-refulgent,

From well-kept household fire beam food to feed us, and mea-
sure out to us abundant glory.

3 The Sage of men, the Lord of human races, pure, purifying

Agni, balmed with butter,

Him the Omniscient as your Priest ye stablish : he wins among
the Gods things worth the choosing.

4 Agni, enjoy, of one accord with I]a, striving in rivalry with

beams of Surya,

i Enjoy, 0 JAtavedas, this our fuel, and bring the Gods to us
to taste oblations.

p As dear House-Friend, guest welcome in the dwelling, to this
our sacrifice come thou who knowest.

And, Agni, having scattered all assailants, bring to us the
possessions of our foernen.

6 Drive thou away the Dasyu with thy weapon. As, gaining

vital power for thine own body,

0 Son of Strength, the Gods thou satisfiest, so in fight save
us, most heroic Agni.

7 May we, 0 Agni, with our lauds adore thee, and with our

gifts, fair-beaming Purifier !

Send to us wealth containing all things precious : bestow upon
us every sort of riches.

8 Son of Strength, Agni, dweller in three regions, accept our

sacrifice and our oblation.

Among the Gods may we be counted pious : protect us with
a triply-guarding shelter.

4 IM : prayer and praise, personified. With beams of Sdrya ; putting forth
thy power at day- break and so vying with the sun.

6 gaining vital power v as the oblations of men which thou earnest to
the Gods increase thine own strength also. SSyana takes the second half-line
in connexion with the first : ‘Drive thou away the Dasyu with thy weapon,
obtaining vital strength for thine own body/

8 D wet lev in three regions ; heaven, firmament 1 and earth, as the sun, the
lightning, and terrestrial fire.

THE MW VEDA .•

471

EYMN 1 ]

t

9 Over all woes and dangers, J&tavedas, bear us as in a boat
across a river.

Praised with our homage even as Atri praised thee, 0 Agni, be
the guardian of our bodies. „

10 As I, remembering thee with grateful spirit, a mortal, call with

might on thee Immortal,

Vouchsafe us high renown, 0 Jata vedas, and may I be immor-
tal by my children.

11 The pious man, 0 J^ta vedas Agni, to whom thou grantest

ample room and pleasure,

Gaineth abundant wealth with sons and horses, with heroes
and with kine for his well-being.

HYMN V. Aprts.

To Agni, Jltavedas, to the flame, the well-enkindled God$

Offer thick sacrificial oil.

2 He, Nar&sansa, ne’er beguiled, inspiriteth this sacrifice:

For sage is he, with sweets in hand.

3 Adored, 0 Agni, hither bring I ndra the Wonderful, the Friend,
On lightly-rolling car to aid,

4 Spread thyself out, thou soft as wool I The holy hymns have

sung to thee.

Bring gain to us, 0 beautiful !

5 Open yourselves, ye Doors Divine, easy of access for our aid :
Fill, more and more, the sacrifice*

6 Fair strengtheners of vital power, young Mothers of eternal

Law,

Morning and Night we supplicate.

7 On the wind’s flight come, glorified, ye two celestial Priests of

man :

Come ye to this our sacrifice.

,S Ija, Saras vati, Mahi, three Goddesses who bring us weal,

Be seated harmless on the grass.

9 Atri : the famous Rishi, ancestor of Vasusruta the Riahi or seer of this hymn.

Aprts is the collective name of the Gods and deified objects addressed in
the hymn. See I, 3 3 ; 142 ; 188 ; IX 3 ; III. 4.

4 Thou soft as wool ! : the Barkis or sacred grass, on which the Gods are
to sit, is addressed.

5 Doors Divme ; of the sacrificial hall, types of the portals of the East. See
I. 188. 5.

6 Eternal Law : law-ordained sacrifice.

7 Two celestial Priests : see I. 13. 8.

[B OOK F.

m TEE HYMN 8 OF

9 Eieh m all plenty, Tvashtar, come auspicious of thine own
accord :

Help us in every sacrifice.

10 Vanaspati, whei’ever thou knowest the Gods’ mysterious names,

1 Send our oblations thitherward.

11 To Agni and to Varuna, Indra, thTe Maruts, and the Gods,
With Svaha be oblation brought.

HYMIST VI. Agni,

I value Agni that good Lord, the home to which the kine
return :

Whom fleet-foot coursers seek as home, and strong enduring
steeds as home. Bring food to those who sing thy praise.

2 ’Tis Agni whom we laud as good, to whom the milch-kine

come in herds,

To whom the - chargers swift of foot, to whom our well-born
princes come. Bring food to those who sing thy praise.

3 Agni the God of all mankind, gives, verily, a steed to man.
Agni gives precious gear for wealth, treasure he gives when

he is pleased. Bring food to those who sing th^praise. *.

4 God, Agni, w T e will kindle thee, rich in thy splendodr, fading

not,

So that this glorious fuel may send forth by day its light for
thee. Bring food to those who sing thy praise.

5 To thee the splendid, Lord of flame, bright, wondrous, Prince

of men, is brought '

Oblation with the holy verse, 0 Agni, bearer of our gifts.
Bring food to those who sing thy praise.

6 These Agnis in the seats of fire nourish each thing most

excellent.

They give delight, they spread abroad, they move themselves
continually. Bring food to those who sing thy praise.

7 Agni, these brilliant flames of thine wax like strong chargex^s

mightily,

10 Vanaspati ; the sacrificial stake, regarded as a form of Agni.

11 Svdhd ; Hail ! Glory I is here an Apr!, as a personification of Agni. See I.

1 Strong enduring steeds : or constant worshippers, according to Sftyana :
and this interpretation is supported by stanza 2, which is a slightly -varied
repetition of this stanza.

6 These Agnis : the original flames of Agni manifested in the three fire-
altars, each fire being regarded as an independent representative of Agni,

HYMN 7,] THti RlG VEBA. 08

Who with the treadings of their hoofs go swiftly to the Stalls
of kine. Bring food to those who sing thy praise.

8 To us who laud thee, Agni, bring fresh food and safe and happy

homes.

May we who have sung hymns to thee have thee fot* envoy
in each house. Bring food to those who sing thy praise.

9 Thou, brilliant God, within thy mouth warmest both ladles

of the oil.

So fill us also, in our hymns, abundantly, 0 Lord of Strength.
Bring food to those who sing thy praise.

10 Thus Agni have we duly served with sacrifices and with hymns.
So may he give us what we crave, store of brave sons and fleet-
foot steeds. Bring food to those who sing thy praise.

HYMN VJI. Agni,

Offer to Agni, 0 my friends, your seemly food, your seemly
praise ;

To him supremest o’er the folk, the Son of Strength, the
mighty Lord :

2 Him in whose presence, when they meet in full assembly, men

rejoice ;

Even him whom worthy ones inflame, and living creatures
bring to life.

3 When we present to him the food and sacrificial gifts of men,
He by the might of splendour grasps the holy Ordinance’s rein.

4 He gives a signal in the night even to him who is afar,

When he, the Bright, unchanged by eld, consumes the sovrans

of the wood.

5 He in whose service on the ways they offer up their drops

of sweat,

On him as their high kin have they mounted, as ridges on
the earth.

7 To the stalls of Trine ; the flames of Agni who longs for oblations of milk
and butter are compared to the horses of raiders who seize the cattle of their
enemies.

The llishi of this and of the following hymn is said to be Islia of the family
of Atri. But this name appears to have been formed from the word izhayn
(food) in stanza 1, or ishdh in stanza 10, and not to be the name of a real
person. ^ , ’

3 Grasps the holy Ordinance’s rein : assumes the direction of the sacrifice
as invoker of the Gods and conveyer of men’s oblations.

5 On the ways : in the course of sacrifice. The toil of the ministering priests
is often regarded as their offering to the Gods, On him; the meaning of this

474 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK K

6 Whom, sought of many, mortal man hath found to be the
Stay of all ;

He who gives flavour to our food, the home of every man that
lives*,

,7 Even as a herd that crops the grass he shears the field and
wilderness,

With flashing teeth and beard of gold, deft with his unabat-
ed might.

8 For him, to whom, bright as an axe he, as to Atri, hath flashed

forth,

Hath the well-bearing Mother borne, producing when her time
is come.

9 Agni to whom the oil is $hed by him thou lovest to support,

Bestow upon these mortals fame and splendour and intelli-
gence.

10 Such zeal hath he, resistless one : he gained the cattle given
by thee.

Agni, may Atri overcome the Easy us who bestow no gifts,
subdue the men who give no food.

HYMN VIII. Agni.

0 Agni urged to strength, the men of old who loved the Law
enkindled thee, the Ancient, for their aid,

Thee very bright, and holy, nourisher of all, most excellent,
the Friend and Master of the home.

2 Thee, Agni, men have stablished as their guest of old, as

Master of the household, thee, with hair of flame ;

High-bannered, multiform, distributer of wealth, kind helper,
good protector, drier of the floods.

3 The tribes of men praise thee, Agni, who knowest well burnt

offerings, the Discerner, lavish est of wealth,

line is obscure. Professor Wilson, following Sftyana, translates : * and (the
drops) mount upon tbe fire as if they were its own numerous offspring as (boys
ride) upon the back (of a father).’ The meaning maybe that the drops mount
upon Agni, who bears the oblations to heaven, as the backs or ridges (of the *
hills) raise themselves above the ground. My version, which follows Professor
Ludwig's explanation, is only conjectural.

8 This stanza also is obscure. The well-bearing Mother is the lower fire-
stick which at the proper time produces the spark for the man to whom Agni,
keen and bright as an axe, is manifested as he was to the ancient sage Atri,
the ancestor of the Rishi of the hymn.

10 The last P&da h difficult. Professor Wilson, after S&yana, renders it:
( may Isha overcome (hostile) men.’ But ishdh is evidently ‘food,’ and not the
name of a man.

&YMtf 9.] THE RIGVEDA, 475

Dwelling in secret, Blest One I visible to all, loud-ro&ring,
skilled in worship, glorified with oil.

4 Ever to thee, 0 Agni, as exceeding strong have we drawn

nigh with songs and reverence singing hymns. 0
So be thou pleased with us, Angiras ! as a God enkindled by
the noble with man’s goodly light.

5 Thou, Agni ! multiform, God who art lauded much ! givest in

every house subsistence as of old.

Thou rulest by thy might o’er food of many a sort : that light
of thine when blazing may not be opposed.

6 The Gods, Most Youthful Agni, have made thee, inflamed, the

bearer of oblations and the messenger.

Thee, widely-reaching, homed in sacred oil, invoked, effulgent,
have they made the Eye that stirs the thought.

7 Men seeking joy have lit thee worshipped from of old, 0 Agni,

with good fuel and with sacred oil.

So thou, bedewed and waxing mighty by the plants, spreadest
thyself abroad over the realms of earth.

HYMN IX. Agni.

Bearing oblations mortal men, 0 Agni, worship thee the God.
I deem thee^Jatavedas : bear our offerings, thou, unceasingly.

2 In the man’s home who offers gifts, where grass is trimmed,

Agni is Priest,

To whom all sacrifices come and strengthenings that win
renown.

3 Whom, as an infant newly-born, the kindling-sticks have

brought to life,

, Sustainer of the tribes of men, skilled in well-ordered sacrifice.

4 Yea, very hard art thou to grasp, like offspring of the wrig-

gling snakes,

When thou consumest many woods, like an ox, Agni, in the
mead.

8 Dwelling in secret : latent in the fire-sticks, or dwelling in men’s hearts.

4 The noble : the patron of the sacrifice.

7 Bedewed ; anointed with clarified butter. By the ‘plants : which supply
fuel

1 I deem thee Jdtavedas : I hold thee to be the knower of all created beings.
" 4 Like an ox ; as an ox eats up the grass,

m mn smm op (book p*

- 5 Whose flames, when thou art sending forth the smoke, com-
pletely reach the mark*

When Trita in the height of heaven, like as a smelter fannefch
thee/e’en as a smelter sharpeneth thee.

6 0 Agnh by thy succour and by Mitral friendly furtherance,
May we, averting hate, subdue the wickedness of mortal men.

7 0 Agni, to our heroes bring such riches, thou victorious God,
May he protect and nourish us, and help in gaining strength i

he thou near us in fight for our success.

• HYMN X. Agni.

BRifrG us most mighty splendour thou, Agni, resistless on
thy way.

With overflowing store of wealth mark out for us a path to
strength.

2 Ours art thou, wondrous Agni, by Wisdom and bounteousness

of power.

The might of Asuras rests on thee, like Mitra worshipful in act.

3 Agni, increase our means of life, increase the house and home

of these,

The men, the princes who have won great riches through our
hymns of praise,

4 Bright Agni, they who deck their songs for thee have horses

as their meed.

The men are mighty in their might, they whose high laud, as
that of heaven, awakes thee of its own accord.

5 0 Agni, those resplendent flames of thine go valorously forth,
Like lightnings flashing round us, like a rattling car that

seeks the spoil.

6 Now, Agni, come to succour us ; let priests draw nigh to offer
• gifts;

And let the patrons of our rites subdue all regions of the earth.

7 Bring to us, Agni, Angiras, lauded of old and lauded now,
Invoker ! wealth to quell the strong, that singers may extol

thee. Be near us in fight for our success.

5 Trita : here perhaps V&yu, the Wind. According to S&yapa, Trita here
means Agni himself diffused in the three regions ,

4 Awakes thee of its own accord : the meaning of this last P&da is doubtful.
Sc) yap a disconnects bddkati tmand from the preceding words, and supplies the
name of the Rishi Gaya : Gaya of his own accord arouses thee.

6 Subdue all regions of the earth : an allusion to the digvijaya, universal
conquest, or subjugation of all neighbouring princes. S&yana explain^
alternatively as * wishes ’ \ ‘ compass all their defcires,’

BYMN 12.] TEE RIGVEDA. m

HYMN XL a &L

The watchful Guardian of the people hath been born, Agni,
the very strong, for fresh prosperity. ?

With oil upon his face, with high heaven-touching flame, he
shineth splendidly, pure, for the Bharatas.

2 Ensign of sacrifice, the earliest Household-Priest, the men have

kindled Agni in his threefold seat,

With Indra and the Gods together on the grass let the wise
Priest sit to complete the sacrifice.

3 Pure, unadorned, from thy two Mothers art thou bom : thou

earnest from Vivas vim as a charming Sage.

With oil they strengthened thee, 0 Agni, worshipped God ;
thy banner was the smoke that mounted to the sky.

4 May Agni graciously come to our sacrifice. The men bear

Agni here and there in every house.

He hath become an envoy, bearer of our gifts : electing Agni,
men choose one exceeding wise.

5 For thee, 0 Agni, is this sweetest prayer of mine : dear to

thy spirit be this product of my thought.

As great streams fill the^ river so our songs of praise fill thee,
and make thee yet more mighty in thy strength.

6 0 Agni, the Angirases discovered thee what time thou layest

hidden, fleeing back from wood to wood.

Thou by attrition art produced as conquering might, and men,
0 Angiras, call thee the Son of Strength.

HYMN XII. Agni.

To Agni, lofty Asura, meet for worship, Steer of eternal Law,
my prayer I offer ]

I bring my song directed to the Mighty like pure oil for his
mouth at sacrifices.

*2 Mark the Law, thou who knowest, yea, observe it : send forth
the full streams of eternal Order.

I use no sorcery with might or falsehood : the sacred Law of
the Red Steer I follow.

1 For the Bharatas .* for the sake of the priests, according to Say aim and
Mahidhara.

2 In his threefold seat ; the three fire-altars.

3 Thy two ’Mothers ; the fire-sticks, Vivasvdn : the sacrificer, according to
S&yaua. But see Index.

4 Here and there : or in different places ; from one altar to another,

fi Thou layest hidden alluding to the legend of the flight and capture of
Agni, See I, 65, 1.

m TUB EYMNB OP [BOOK f*

3 Mow hast thou, follower of the? Law eternal, become the

knower of a rie\y song, Agni ?

The God, the Guardian of the seasons, knows me : the Lord
of him who won this wealth I know not,

4 Who, Agni, in alliance with thy foeman, what splendid help-

ers Won for them their riches %

Agni, who guard the dwelling-place of falsehood'? Who are
protectors of the speech of liars ?

5 Agni, those friends of thine have turned them from thee ;

• gracious of old, they have become ungracious.

They have deceived themselves by their own speeches, uttering
wicked words against the righteous.

6 He who pays sacrifice to thee with homage, 0 Agni, keeps the

Red Steer’s Law eternal ;

Wide is his dwelling. May the noble offspring of Nahusha who
wandered forth come hither.

HYMN XIII. Agni.

With songs of praise we call on thee, we kindle thee with songs
of praise,

Agni, with songs of praise, for help.

. 2 Eager for wealth, we meditate Agrri’s effectual praise to-day,
Praise of the, God who touches heaven.

3 May Agni, Priest among mankind, take pleasure in our songs

of praise,

And worship the Celestial Polk.

4 Thou, Agni, art spread widely forth, Priest dear and excellent ;

through thee

Men make the sacrifice complete.

5 Singers exalt thee, Agni, well lauded, best giver of our strength:
So grant thou us heroic might.

6 Thou, Agni, as the felly rings the spokes, encompassest the

Gods.

I yearn for bounty manifold.

3 Knower of a new song : according to Professor Ludwig, the new song is
one in which for the first time we have been obliged to remind thee of thy
duties as the champion of eternal Law, whereas formerly we had only thanks
and prayers to offer thee. The Guardian of the seasons : thou, Agni, who, as
the Sun, regulatest the seasons, knowesfc me ,* but I know nothing of the God
who has befriended my wealthy enemy.

4 Who are the Gods who have enriched the wicked who hate both thee and
me ?

6 The meaning of the second line ia obscure. Professor Wilson, following
S4yapa, translates : ‘ and may a virtuous successor of the man who diligently
worships thee come in his place.’ I adopt Professor Ludwig’s rendering.

MYMlSt 15.]

THE MGVEDA.

m

HYMN XIV, Agni.

Enkindling the Immortal, wake Agni with song of praise ; may
he bear our oblations to the Gods- *

2 At high solemnities mortal men glorify him the Immortal, best
At sacrifice among mankind,

3 That he may bear their gifts to heaven, all glorify him Agni,

God,

With ladle that distilleth oil.

4 Agni shone bright when born, with light killing the Dasyus

and the dark :

He found the Kine, the Floods, the Sun-

' 5 Serve Agni, God adorable, the Sage whose back is balmed* with
oil :

Let him approach, and hear my call.

6 They have exalted Agni, God of all mankind, with oil and hymns
Of praise, devout and eloquent.

HYMN XV- Agni.

To him, the far-renowned, the wise Ordainer, ancient and glori-
ous, a song I offer.

Enthroned in oil, the Asura, bliss-giver, is Agni, firm support
of noble riches.

2 By holy Law they kept supporting Order, by help of sacrifice,

in loftiest heaven, —

They who attained with born men to the unborn, men seated
on that stay, heaven’s firm sustainer. t

3 Averting woe, they labour hard to bring him, the ancient,

plenteous food as power resistless.

May he, born newly, conquer his assailants ; round him they
stand as round an angry lion.

^ When, like a mother, spreading forth to nourish, to cherish
and regard each man that livetb, —

Consuming all the strength that thou hast gotten, thou wander-
est round, thyself, in varied fashion.

The Rishi of Hymn XV\ is said to be Dharuna of tbe family of Atri, but-
this name is evidently taken from the words dharuna h (firm) in stanza 1, and
. dhar&ncm in stanza 2.

2 They who attained : ovly ancestors, or the Fathers, who with, or by the
aid of, the priests, were raised to seats in the firmament.

4 f Thou wander est round ; seeking fresh wood to bum in order to restore thy
exhausted strength.

m TME HYMNS OF [BOOK V .

5 May strength preserve the compass of thy vigour, God l that
broad stream of thine that beareth riches.

Thou, like a thief who keeps his refuge secret, hast holpen
Atri to great wealth, by teaching.

HYMN XVI. Agni.

Grbat power is in the beam of light, sing praise to Agni, to
the God

Whom men have set in foremost place like Mitra with their
eulogies.

2 He by the splendour of his arms is Priest of every able mam
Agni conveys oblation straight, and deals, as Bhaga deals, his

boons.

3 All rests upon the laud- and love of him the rich, high-flaming

God,

On whom, loud-roaring, men have laid great strength as on a
faithful friend.

4 So, Agni, be the Friend of these with liberal gift of hero
, - strength.

Yea, Heaven and Earth have not surpassed this Youthful One
iu glorious fame.

h 0 Agni, quickly come to us, and, glorified, bring precious
wealth.

So we and these our princes will assemble for the good of all.
Be near in fight to prosper us.

HYMN XVII. ‘ Agni.

Gob, may a mortal call the Strong hither, with solemn rites,
to aid,

A man call Agni to protect when sacrifice is well prepared.

2 Near him thou seemest mightier still in native glory, set to
hold

Apart yon flame-hued vault of heaven, lovely beyond the
thought of man.

5 May strength preserve: mayesfc thou ever And fresh fuel or strengthening food.

Thon, like a thief : 1 2 This may, perhaps, imply that the wealth bestowed
upon the Rishi iiNjleposited in a secure receptacle, like the hidden booty of a
thief, but the whole'\S^hta is obscurely worded/ — Wilson.

1 Like Mitra: or as af4 en d.

2 Every able man : who haS^eans, will, and skill as a sacriflcer.

4 Of these : institutes of the sacrifice. This Youthful One : Agni. The
exact meaning of the second line is somewhat uncertain.

1 The Strong: Agni.

2 Near him: Sfirya.

THE MOVED A.

HYMN 18.]

3 Yea, this is by the light of him whom powerful song hath

bound to act.

Whose beams of splendour flash on high as though they sprang
from heavenly sqed.

4 Wealth loads the Wonder-Worker’s car through his, the very

wise One’s power.

Then, meet to be invoked among all tribes, is Agni glorified.

5 Now, too, the princes shall obtain excellent riches by our lips.
Protect us for our welfare : lend thy succour, 0 thou Son of

Strength. Be near in fight to prosper us.

HYMN XVIII. AgnL

At dawn let Agni, much-beloved guest of the house, be glori-
fied ;

Immortal who delights in all oblations brought by mortal men.

2 For Dvita who receives through wealth of native strength

maimed offerings,

Thy praiser even gains at once the Soma-drops, Immortal Gods!

3 Nobles, with song I call that car of yours that shines with

lengthened life,

For, God who givest steeds ! that car hither and thither goes
unharmed.

3 This is by the light of him : this Sftrya, or the Sun, shines only hy the
light of Agni.

4 When the wonder-working Sun brings us wealth, the merit is due to Agni
— Ludwig. According to Sftyana, theuneaning is, as given hy Professor Wilson:
* By the worship of him who is pleasing of aspect the provident (heap) wealth
in their cars.’ The absence of a verb makes the exact meaning uncertain.

The hy«m is ascribed to a Rishi Dvita of the family of Atri, but the name
seems to be borrowed from the Dvita of stanza 2.

2 The meaning of this stanza is obscure. According to S&yana, Dvita is the

Rishi of the hymn, and the first line is rendered by Professor Wilson : * Be
('willing to main-' a -A thine r’-r-i st'v-narth D -vita, the bearer of the
pure libation.’ Iv.- ■ . * . . * r >■ m .. ■: mv in ■ \u- :■ ..i receiver of a maimed

or imperfect oblation, aud Dvita then would be the mythical personage of that
name to whom, together with Trita, it was customary to wish away and con-
sign any- threatened calamity or unpleasantness (To Trita and to Dvita, Dawn i
bear thou away the evil dream — R. V. X. 47, 16). In the present case, any
possible imperfection in the offering made to Agni is previously removed by a
libation to Dvita. See Professor Ludwig’s Commentary, Part I. 338. M. Ber-
gaigne (Religion Vddique, II. 327) gives a different explanation.

3 Nobles : wealthy institutors of the sacrifice; Maghavans, That car of
yours ; apparently Agni, who carries oblations to the Gods.

31

432

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK V.

4 They who : have varied ways of thought, who guard the lauds
within their lips,

And strew the grass before the light, 'have decked themselves
wittf high renown.

,5 Immortal Agni, give the chiefs, heroes who institute the rite,

: Heroes’ illustrious, lofty fame, who at the synod met for praise
presented me with fifty steeds.

HYMN XIX. Agni.

One state begets another state ; husk is made visible from husk ;
Within his Mother’s side he speaks.

2 Discerning, have they offered gifts : they guard the strength

that never wastes.

To a strong fort have they pressed in.

3 Svaitreya’s people, all his men, have gloriously increased in

might.

A pold chain Brihaduktha wears, as, through this Soma, seek-
ing spoil.

4 I bring, as ’twere, the longed-for milk, the dear milk of the

Sister-Pair.

Like to a caldron filled with food is he, unconquered, con-
quering all.

4 Varied ways of thought : manifold modes of showing their devotion.
Guard the lauds : perpetuate hymns of praise by frequent repetition. Before
foe light : according to S&yana, svdrnare means, * in the sacrifice which leads
man to heaven.’ Professor Grass maun renders the word by * Dem Glanzes-
herrn,’ ‘ for the Lord of Light.’

1 We know only outward forms and circumstances, and the real nature of
the God is concealed from us. The God speaks only in the bosom of his mother.
—Ludwig. S&yana gives a totally different interpretation, the word vavri
(husk or covering) in the first stanza being taken as the name of the Bishi of
the hymn.

2 Discerning: perhaps, as Prof. Ludwig suggests, distinguishing thy essence
from thy appearance. The strong fort^ which the worshippers have entered and
settled in is, perhaps, their religious knowledge.

3 Svaitreya’s people have conquered, and their priest Brihaduktha has been
rewarded for his services with a chain of gold, won for him by the Soma-liba-
tions which he has offered. — Ludwig. Svaitreya (son of Svitri. See I. 33. 14)
and Brihaduktha are, apparently, proper names. S&yana explains the former
as Agni or lightning f abiding in the white firmament,’ and the latter as
‘zealously or highly praising.’

4 The dear milk of the Sister-Pair : the Soma dear to Heaven and Earth,
yhe exact meaning of the line is uncertain,

THE RIGVEDA;

HYMN 21.]

d Beam of light, come to us in sportive fashion, finding thyself
close to the wind that fans thee.

These flames of his are wasting flames, like arrows keen-pointed,
sharpened, on his breast. ■ *

; HYMN XX. Agni.

Agni, best winner of the spoil, cause us to praise before the
Gods

As our associate meet for lauds, wealth which thou verily
deemest wealth.

2 Agni, the great who ward not off the anger of thy power and

might

Stir up the wrath and hatred due to one who holds an alien
creed.

3 Thee, Agni, would we choose as Priest, the perfecter of strength

and skill ;

We who bring sacred food invoke with song thee Chief at
holy rites.

4 Here as is needful for thine aid we toil, 0 Conqueror, day

by day,

For wealth, fou Law, May we rejoice, Most Wise One ! at the
feast, with kine, rejoice, with heroes, at the feast.

HYMN XXI. . Agni.

We stablish thee as Manus used, as Manus used we kindle thee.
Like Manus, for the pious man, Angiras, Agni, worship Gods.
2 For well, 0 Agni, art thou pleased when thou art kindled
mid mankind.

Straight go the ladles unto thee, thou high-born God whose
food is oil.

5 This stanza is very difficult, and, like much of the rest of the hymn, can
be only conjecturally translated.

The Bishis of the hymn are said to be certain members of the family of
Atri called Prayasvats, that is, bringers or possessors of sacred food, a word
which occurs in stanza 3.

2 Wh6 holds an alien creed : who follows other than Vedic observances./

4 Fov Law : to maintain the holy law, and especially the eternally-ordained
sacrifice. With kine : possessing plenty of cattle. With heroes : with brave
sons about us.

The hymn is ascribed to a llishi Sasa, this name being taken from the word
sascisya in the last Pftda of stanza 4.

1 Manus : another form of Manu.

484 TME HYNMS OF [BOOK V.

3 Thee have all Gods -of one accord established as their mes-
senger.

Serving at sacrifices men adore thee as a God, 0 Sage.

& Let mortal man adore your God, Agni, with worship due to
■ Gods.

Shine forth enkindled, Radiant One. Sit in the chamber of
the Law, sit in the chamber of the food,

HYMN XXII. Agni.

Like Atri, Visvasaman ! sing to him of purifying light,

Who must be praised in holy rites, the Priest most welcome
in the house.

2 Set Jltavedas in his place, Agni the God and Minister.

Let sacrifice proceed to-day duly, comprising all the Gods.

3 All mortals come to thee for aid, the God of most observant

mind.

Of thine excelling favour we bethink us as we long for it.
i Mark with attention this our speech, O Agni, thou victorious
One.

Thee, Strong-jawed ! as the homestead’s Lord, the Atris with
their lauds exalt, the Atris beautify witfy songs.

HYMN XXIII. Agni,

By thy fair splendour’s mighty power, 0 Agni, bring victori-
ous wealth,

Wealth that o’ercometh all mankind, and, near us, conquereth
in fight.

. 2 Yictorious Agni, bring to us the wealth that vanquisheth in
war ;

For thou art wonderful and true, giver of strength in herds
of kine.

3 For all the folk with one accord, whose sacred grass is trim-

med and strewn,

Invite thee to their worship-halls, as a dear Priest, for choicest
wealth.

4 The chamber of the Law : the sacrificial chamber or hall. Of the food ;
crt, *as Professor Roth explains it, where the sacred grass is strewn ; accord-
ing to S&yana, of Sasa, the supposed Riehi of the hymn,

The ljishi is Visvas&man, of the family of Atri.

The Rishi is said to be Dyumna Visvacharehani — both these names being
words occurring in the hymn,

1 By thy fair splendour's mighty pomv ; the words of the text are dyunir
nhsya prdsdhd,

HYMN 25.] THE R/GVEDA, 485

* ,

4 For he, the God of all men, hath gotten him might that quel-
letli foes.

0 Agni, in these homes shine forth, bright God ! for our pro-
sperity, shine, Purifier ! splendidly. *

HYMN XXIV.

0 Agni, be our nearest Friend, be thou a hind deliverer and a
gracious Friend.

2 Excellent Agni, come thou nigh to us, and give us wealth most

splendidly renowned.

3 So hear us, listen to this call of ours, and keep us far from

every sinful man.

4 To thee then, 0 Most Bright, 0 Radiant God, we come with

prayer for happiness for our friends.

HYMN XXV. A 8 ni ‘

1 will sing near, for grace, your God Agni, for he is good to
us.

Son of the Brands, may he give gifts, and, righteous, save us
from the foe.

2 For he is true, whom men of old enkindled, and the Gods

themselves,

The Priest with the delicious tongue, rich with the light of
glorious beams.

3 With wisdom that surpasseth all, with gracious will most

excellent,

0 Agni, worthy of our choice, shine wealth on us through
hymns of praise.

4 Agni is King, for he extends to mortals and to Gods alike.
Agni is bearer of our gifts. Worship ye Agni with your

thoughts.

5 Agni gives to the worshipper a son, the best, of mightiest

fame,

Of deep devotion, ne'er subdued, bringer of glory to his sire.

4 The God of all men .* visvdcharshanih, a common epithet of Agni.

The legend connected with this hymn is discussed by Prof. Max Muller in
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Xew Series, II. 441 f. See Lantnaifs
Sanskrit Reader, p. 368.

The Rishis of the hymn are members of the family of Atri called Yaauyus
(seekers of ricbes). Cl stanza 9.

1 1 will sing near : I will invite '"and bring near with my song.

2 For he is true , the faithful re warder of his worshippers.

m the hymns of • [book y,

6 Agni bestows tbe hero-lord who conquers with the men in

fight.

Agni bestows the fleet-foot steed, the victor never overcome.

7 The mightiest song is Agni’s : shine on high, thou who art

rich in light.

Like the Chief Consort of a King, riches and strength proceed
from thee.

8 Resplendent are thy rays of light : loud is thy voice like

pressing-stones.

Yea, of itself thy thunder goes forth like the roaring of the
heaven.

9 Thus, seeking riches, have we paid homage to Agni Conqueror.
May he, most wise, as with a ship, carry us over all our foes.

HYMN XXYI. Agni.

0 Agni, Holy and Divine, with splendour and thy pleasant
tongue

Bring hither and adore the Gods.

2 We pray thee, thou who droppest oil, bright-rayed ! who look-

est on the Sun,

Bring the Gods hither to the feast.

3 We have enkindled thee, 0 Sage, bright caller of the Gods to

feast,

0 Agni, great in sacrifice.

4 0 Agni, come with all the Gods, come to our sacrificial gift :
We choose thee as Invoking Priest.

5 Bring, Agni,. to the worshipper who pours the juice, heroic

strength :

Sit with the Gods upon the grass. '

6 Victor of thousands, Agni, thou, enkindled, cherishest the laws,
Laud-worthy, envoy of the Gods.

7 Set Agni Jatavedas down, the bearer of our sacred gifts,

Most Youthful, God and Minister.

7 The exact meaning of the stanza is uncertain. Professor Wilson, follow-

ing S&yana, paraphrases the first line : £ That (praise) which best conveys
(our veneration is due) to Agni i affluent in splendour, grant us. (Agni), great
(wealth)/ '

like the Chief Consort of a King: as the chief jueen proceeds, from her home
in royaL state. Professor Ludwig translates mahishivct by ‘ as a, strong cow/
but gives in his Commentary the alternative rendering f as a king's wife/
S&yana makes mdhisM an adjective agreeing with rayfh, md says that
}ike, is pleonastic. I have followed Mahidhara.

8 Loud is thy voice : the meaning of this half-line is not certain.

8 Cherished the l<ms : especially religious ordinances, sacrifices,

THE RIO VEDA.

HYMN 28 .]

487

' 8 Duly proceed our sacrifice, comprising all the Gods, to-d&y :
Strew holy grass to be their seat.

9 So may the Maruts sit thereon, the Asvins, Mitra, Varuna :
The Gods with all their company.

HYMN XXVIL Agni.

The Godlike hero, famousest of nobles, hath granted me two
oxen with a wagon.

Trivrisharis son Tryaruna hath distiguished himself, Vaisva-
nara Agni ! with ten thousands.

2 Protect Tryaruna, as thou art waxing strong and art highly

praised, Yaisvanara Agni !

Who granteth me a hundred kine and twenty, and two bay
horses, good at draught, and harnessed.

3 So Trasadasyu served thee, God Most Youthful, craving thy

favour for the ninth time, Agni ;

Tryaruna who with attentive spirit accepteth many a song
from me the mighty.

4 He who declares his wish to me, to Asvamedha, to the Prince,
Pays him who with his verse seeks gain, gives power to him

who keeps the Law.

5 From whom a hundred oxen, all of speckled hue, delight my

heart,

The gifts of Asvamedha, like thrice-mingled draughts of
Soma juice.

6 To Asvamedha who bestows a hundred gifts grant hero power,
0 Indra-Agni ! lofty rule like the unwasting Sun in heaven.

HYMN XXVIII. Agni.

Agni inflamed hath sent to heaven his lustre : he shines forth
widely turning unto Morning.

Eastward the ladle goes that brings all blessing, praising the
Gods with homage and oblation.

The Rishis are said to be Tryaruna, Trasadasyu, and Asvamedha; or Atri
alone. The metre is Trishtup in stanzas 1,2, 3, and Anush tup in 4, 5, 6;
and, correspondingly, the hymn is made up of two separate and independent
eulogies of munificent princes.

3 Trasadasyu : Terror of Dasyus ; apparently, as Ludwig suggests, an hon-
orary name or title of several princes. A ccepteth ; rewards with gifts.

4 The stanza is difficult. Asvamedha apparently says that the man_ who
requests him to institute a sacrifice is by so doing the enricher of the priestB.

5 Thrice-mingled ; mixed with milk, curds, and parched grain.

The hymn is ascribed to a supposed Visvav&nt, a lady of the family of Atri,
1 The ladle: the sacrificial tydle with which the oil or clarified butter is
token up and poured out. The text has the feminine adjective ghrMcht only.

488 THE HYMNS OH [BOOK V.

<>f' > ' v

2 Enkindled,, thou art King of the immortal world : him who

: brings offerings thou attendest for his weal.

He whom thou urgest on makes all possessions his : he sets
befqfe thee, Agni, gifts that guests may claim.

3 Show thyself strong for mighty bliss, 0 Agni, most excellent
. - : K be thine effulgent splendours.

. Make easy, to maintain our household lordship, and overcome
the might of those who hate us.

4 Thy glory, Agni, I adore, kindled, exalted in thy strength.

A Steer of brilliant splendour, thou art lighted well at sacred
rites.

5 Agni, invoked and kindled, serve the Gods, thou skilled in

sacrifice :

For thou art bearer of our gifts.

6 Invoke and worship Agni while the sacrificial rite proceeds :
For offering-bearer choose ye him.

HYMN XXIX. Agni.

Man’s worship of the Gods hath three great lustres, and three
celestial lights have they established.

The Maruts gifted with pure strength adore thee, for thou,
O Indra, art their sapient Kishi.

2 What time the Maruts sang their song to Indra, joyous when

he had drunk of Soma juices,

He grasped his thunderbolt to slay the Dragon, and loosed,
that they might flow, the youthful Waters.

3 And, 0 ye Brahmans, Maruts, so may Indra drink draughts of

this my carefully pressed Soma ;

For this oblation found for man the cattle, and Indra, having
quaffed it, slew the Dragon.

jiM being understood. That brings all blessing : S&yana takes visvdvdrd to
be the name of a woman. Praising the Gods : said figuratively of the ladle
held by the priest who praises.

8 Make easy to maintain : or, to follow S&yapa : Perfect the well-knit bond
of wife and husband.

1 Three great lustres : this is S&yana’s explanation of the trydvyamti of
the text. Professor Ludwig suggests that human relationships, such as
Mag havans or nobles, priests, and visas or the people, may be intended. The
three celestial lights ; the Sun, the Wind, the Fire, according to S&yapa.
They ; the Maruts, says S.iyana. Bishi : here meaning beholder, according to
$&yana.

$ Brahmans : priests, S&yaua explains the word as meaning lofty or
mighty in this passage,

HY&FN 29.] / THE RIG VEDA. 48f

4 Then heaven and earth he sundered and supported : wrapped

even in these he struck the Beast with terror.

So Indra forced the Engulfer to disgorgement, and slew the
Danava panting against him. *

5 Thus all the Gods, 0 Maghavan, delivered to thee of their free

will the draught of Soma ;

When thou for Etasa didst cause to tarry the flying mares of
Surya racing forward.

6 When Maghavan with the thunderbolt demolished bis nine-

and-ninety castles all together,

The Maruts, where they met, glorified Indra : ye with the
Trishtup hymn obstructed heaven.

, 7 As friend to aid a friend, Agni dressed quickly three hundred
* buffaloes, even as he willed it.

And Indra, from man’s gift, for Vritra’s slaughter, drank off
at once three lakes of pressed-out Soma.

8 When thou three hundred buffaloes’ flesh hadst eaten, and

drunk, as Maghavan, three lakes of Soma,

All the Gods raised as ’twere a shout of triumph, to Indra
praise because he slew the Dragon.

9 What time ye came with strong steeds swiftly speeding, 0

Usana and Indra, to the dwelling,

Thou earnest thither conquering together with Kutsa and the
Gods : thou slowest Sushna.

10 One car-wheel of the Sun thou rolledst forward, and one thou

settest free to move for Kutsa.

Thou slowest noseless Dasyus with thy weapon, and in their
home o’erthrewest hostile speakers.

11 The lauds of Gauriviti made thee mighty rto Vidathin’s s,on,

as prey, thou gavest Pipru.

Bijisvan drew thee into friendship, dressing the sacred food,
and thou hast drunk his Soma.

4 The Beast : the demon Yritra. The Engulfer : Vritra, who had swallowed
the celestial waters. The Fdnava ; the son of Danu, Yritra.

5 For Etasa : see II. 19. 5.

6 Hu nine-and-ninety castles : the aerial castles of Sambara, the demon
of drought. Obstructed heaven : made the loud hymn strike the sky.

7 Three lakes : large vessels or tubs are probably intended.

9 U$cmd ; Indra’s special friend. See Index. To the dwelling : of Kutsa.

10 One cartwheel : an eclipse of the sun appears to he referred to. Noseless :
that is, the flat-nosed barbarians, a-ntfsah ; or the word may be, as S&yana
explains it, an-&3ah, i, e. mouthless, voiceless, unintelligibly speaking. See
Muir, Original Sanskrit Texts , II. 377.

11 Gauriviti : the Rishi of the hymn, Vidathin's son: Rips van, mentione
n Book I. as a favourite of Indra.

490 TBE ffTMtfS OF [BOOK F,

12 Navagvas and Dasagvas with libations of Soma juice sing

hymns of pi'aise to Indra.

Labouring at their task the men laid open the stall of Kine
thcShgh firmly closed and fastened.

13 How shall I serve thee, Maghavan, though knowing full well

what hero deeds thou hast accomplished *1
And the fresh deeds which thou wilt do, Most Mighty ! these,
too, will we tell forth in sacred synods.

14 Resistless from of old through hero courage, thou hast done

all these many acts, 0 Indra.

What thou wilt do in bravery, Thunder-wielder ! none is there
who may hinder this thy prowess.

15 Indra, accept the prayers which now are offered, accept the

new prayers, Mightiest ! which we utter.

Like fair and well-made robes, I, seeking riches, as a deft
craftsman makes a car, have wrought them.

HYMN XXX. Indra.

Where & that Hero ? Who hath looked on Indra borne on
light-rolling car by Tawny Coursers,

Who, Thunderer, seeks with wealth the Soma-presser, and to
his house goes, much-invoked, to aid him ?

2 I have beheld his strong and secret dwelling, longing have

sought the Founder’s habitation.

I asked of others, and they said in answer, May we, awakened
men, attain to Indra.

3 We will tell, Indra, when we pour libation, what mighty deeds

thou hast performed to please us.

Let him who knows not learn, who knows them listen. : hither
rides Maghavan with all his army,

4 Indra, when born, thou madest firm thy spirit : alone thou

seekest war to fight with many.

With might thou clavest e’en the rock asunder, and foundest
out the stable of the Milch-kine.

5 When thou wast born supremest at a distance, bearing a name

renowned in far-off regions,

Since then e’en Gods have been afraid of Indra : he conquered
all the floods which served the D&sa.

12 N avagvas and Dasagvas : priestly families connected or identified with

the Angirases.

2 I have beheld : meaning, perhaps, I have tried to behold, I have looked
for. The Founder's habitation : the dwelling-place of Indra who established
the world. . .

5 Which served the JDdsa ; which were subject to the demon Vritra, y~

BY UN 30.] THE RIGYEDA . 401

6 These blissful Maruts sing their psalm to praise thee, and pour

to thee libation of the Soma.

Indra with wondrous powers subdued the Dragon, th^ guileful
lurker who beset the waters.

7 Thou, Maghavan, from the first didst scatter foemen, speeding,

while joying in the milk, the Giver.

There, seeking man's prosperity, thou torest away the head
of Namuchi the D&sa.

8 Pounding the head of Namuchi the Dasa, me, too, thou madest

thine associate, Indra !

Yea, and the rolling stone that is in heaven both worlds, as
on a car, brought to the Maruts.

9 Women for weapons hath the Dasa taken. What injury can

his feeble armies do me ?

Well he distinguished his two different voices, and Indra then
advanced to fight the Dasyu.

10 Divided from their calves the Cows went lowing around, on

every side, hither and thither.

. These Indra re-united with his helpers, what time the well-
pressed Soma made him joyful.

11 What time the Somas mixed by Babhru cheered him, loud the
. Steer bellowed in his habitations.

So Indra drank thereof, the Fort-destroyer, and gave him
guerdon, in return, of milch-kine.

7 The giver ; the offerer of oblations. But the meaning of dttncm is un-
certain. Professor Ludwig translates it by ‘ the splitting ( thunderbolt},’ and
S&yana explains it as ‘ the assailant of the Gods (Vritra).’

Namuchi : one of the malignant demons of the atmosphere who withhold
the rain.

8 The rolling stone: perhaps the /thunderbolt; or if the thunderbolt is
supposed to be the speaker of this stanza, as Professor Ludwig is inclined to
think, the Sun must he meant ; that is, heaven and earth brought the Sun to
the Maruts to aid Indra in his fight with the demon.

9 Indra is the speaker of the first line. Women •" perhaps the subject

waters. Bis two different voices : the meaning may be that Indra heard the
voices of the women as well as the voice of Namuchi, and so knew that he
had not an army of demon -warno: ■■ 1 ■ r -' ! "t. Professor Wilson, follow-
ing S&yana, translates : ‘the two *: • c* Indra) confined in the mner

apartments. ’

10 With his helpers : with the aid of the Maruts.

11 Eicbhru : the Ilishi of the hymn, who appears to have assisted the

Busamas, a m’: 11 V* v : eople, in a successful foray, and to have been

rewarded with .. .rv- p r::.T. Of the booty. Binanchaya was the king of this
people. ;

492 THE nr Mm OF {BOOK F.

12 This good deed have the Busamas done, Agni ! that they have

granted me four thousand cattle*

We Ijiave received Binanchaya’s wealth, of heroes the most
heroic, which was freely offered.

1 3 The Busamas, 0 Agni, sent me homeward with fair adorn-

ment and with kine in thousands.

The strong libations have made Indra joyful, when night,
whose course was ending, changed to morning.

14 Night, well-nigh ended, at Binaxichaya’s coming, King of the

Busamas, was changed to morning.

Like a strong courser, fleet of foot, urged onward, Babhru
hath gained four thousand as his guerdon*

15 We have received four thousand head of cattle presented by

the Busamas, 0 Agni.

And we, the singers, have received the caldron of metal which
Was heated for Pravargya.

HYMN XXXI. Indra,

Maghavan Indra turns his chariot downward, the strength-
displaying car which he hath mounted.

Even as a herdsman driveth forth his cattle, he goeth, first,
uninjured, fain for treasure.

2 Haste to us, Lord of Bays ; be not ungracious : visit us, lover

of gold-hued oblation.

There is naught else better than thou art, Indra : e’en to the
wifeless hast thou given spouses*

3 When out of strength arose the strength that conquers, Indra

displayed all powers that he possesses.

Forth from the cave he drove the milky mothers, and with the
light laid bare investing darkness,

4 Anus have wrought a chariot -for thy Courser, and Tvashtar,

Much-invoked ! thy bolt that glitters.

The Brahmans with their songs exalting Indra increased his
strength that he might slaughter Ahi.

15 Heated for Pravargya : a ceremony introductory to the Soma- sacrifice,
in which fresh milk was poured into a heated vessel called makdvtrd or, as in-
this place, gharmd.

. 1 Even as a herdsman driveth forth his cattle : so, says S&yana, Indra drives
his enemies before him. Fain for treasure : wishing to obtain the riches of his
enemies.

2 Gold-hued oblation : consisting of yellow Soma juice. Spouses : carried
off in raids favoured by the Warrior-God.

4 Amts : probably meaning $hrigus, who belonged to that tribe.

The Brahmans : according to Siyana, the Angirases, or the Maruts,

HYMN 31.] THE RIG VELA, 493

5 When heroes sang their laud to thee the Hero, Indra ! and

stones and Aditi accordant,

Without or steed or chariot were the fellies which, sped by
Indra, rolled upon the Dasyu%. c

6 I will declare thine exploits wrought aforetime, and, Maghavan*

thy deeds of late achievement,

When, Lord of Might, thou sunderedst earth and heaven, win-
ning for man the moistly-gleaming waters.

7 This is thy deed, e’en this, Wonderful ! Singer I • that, slaying

Ahi, here thy strength thou showedst,

Didst cheok and stay e’en Sushna’s wiles and magic, and, draw-
ing nigh, didst chase away the Dasyus.

8 Thou, Indra, on the farther bank for Yadu and Turvasa didst

stay the gushing waters.

Ye both assailed the fierce thou barest Kutsa: when Gods and
Usani came to you together.

9 Let the steeds bring you both, Indra and Kutsa, borne on the

chariot within hearing-distance.

Ye blew him from the waters, from his dwelling, and chased
the darkness from the noble’s spirit.

10 Even this sage hath come looking for succour even to V&ta’s

docile harnessed horses.

Here are the Maruts, all thy dear companions: prayers have
increased thy power and might, 0 Indra.

11 When night was near its close he canned forward e’en the Sun’s

chariot backward in its running.

Etasa brought his wheel and firmly stays it : setting it east-
ward he shall give us courage.

5 Stones ; used for expressing the Soma juice. Without or steed or chariot :
that* is, the worshippers of Indra overcame their enemies by prayer and the
favour of their God.

3 Yadu and Turvasa: see Index. Ye both: Indra and Kutsa. The fierce •
Sushna, a demon of drought Thou barest Kutsa : to his home.

9 Ye blew him from the waters : drave Sushna from the atmosphere in which
he dwelt, and thus removed the grief of the eminent men who instituted sacri-
fipes

10 Looking for succour : S&yana takes avasytih here as the name of a Rishi
the seer of the hymn.

11 The return of the lingering morning sun appears to be attributed^ on
some particular occasion, to the special intervention of Indra on his favourite’s
behalf. The stanza is hardly intelligible as it stands. S&yana explains Etasa
by * for Etasa ’ The verse is discussed by Prof. Geldner (Vedische Studiep,
II. 162f)j and his explanation is criticized by Prof. Ludwig (Ueber die EeueS*
ten Arbeiten &c. p. 171).

4:94 THE HYMm OF ' [BOOK V .

12 This Indra, 0 ye men, hath come to see you, seeking a friend
who hath expressed the Soma.

The creaking stone is laid upon the altar, and the Adhvaryus
come to turn it quickly#

 3 Let mortals who were happy still be happy : let them not come
to sorrow, 0 Immortal.

„ Love thou the pious, and to these thy people — with whom may
we he numbered — give thou vigour.

HYMN XXXII Indra.

The well thou clavest, settest free the fountains, and gavest
rest to floods that were obstructed.

Thou, Indra, laying the great mountain open, slaying the
Danava, didst loose the torrents.

2 The* fountain-depths obstructed in their seasons, thou, Thun-

derer 1 madest flow, the mountain's udder.

Strong Indra, thou by slaying e'en the Dragon that lay extend-
ed there hast shown thy vigour.

3 Jndra with violence smote down the weapon, yea, even of that

wild and mighty creature.

Although he deemed himself alone unequalled, another had been
born e’en yet more potent.

4 Him, whom the heavenly food of these delighted, child of the

mist, strong waxing, couched in darkness,

Him the bolt-hurling Thunderer with his lightning smote down
and slew, the Danava's wrath-fire, Sushna.

5 Though he might ne'er be wounded still his vitals felt that,

the God's bolt, which his powers supported,

When, after offered draughts, Strong Lord, thou laidest him,
fain to battle, in the pit in darkness.

6 Him as he lay there huge in length extended, still waxing in

the gloom which no sun lightened,

Him, after loud-voiced threats, the Hero Indra, rejoicing in the
poured libation, slaughtered.

7 When 'gainst the mighty Danava his weapon Indra uplifted,

power which none could combat,

When at the hurling of his bolt he smote him, he made him
lower than all living creatures.

12 The creaking stone ; the upper press-stone.

1 The well: the rain-cloud. The fountains : the sources of the waters- of
the firmament. The mountain : the massive cloud.

The Dtinava : Vritra, the son of Danu,

4 Of these ; of living creatures.

THE RIG VEDA.

495

JHY0N 33.]

8 The fierce God seized that huge and restless coder, insatiate,

drinker of the sweets, recumbent,

And with his mighty weapojt ii his dwelling smote down the
footless evil-speaking ogre.

9 Who may arrest his strength or check his vigour ? Alone, resist-

less, he bears off all riches.

Even these Twain, these Goddesses, through terror of Indra’s
. might, retire from his dominion.

10 E’en the Celestial Axe bows down before him, and the Earth,
lover-like, gives way to Indra.

As he imparts all vigour to these people, straightway the folk
bend them to him the Godlike.

Ill hear that thou wast born sole Lord of heroes of the Five Eaces,
famed among the people.

As such my wishes have most lately grasped him, invoking
Indra both at eve and morning.

12 So, too, I hear of thee as in due season urging to action and en-
riching singers.

What have thy friends received from thee, the Brahmans who,
faithful, rest their hopes on thee, 0 Indra ?

HYMN XXXIII. Indra,.

Great praise to Indra, great and strong mid heroes, I ponder
thus, the feeble to the Mighty,

Who with his band shows favour to this people, when lauded,
in the fight where spoil is gathered .

2 So made attentive by our hymns, Steer! Indra! thou fastenedst

the girth of thy Bay Coursers,

Which, Maghavan, at thy will thou drivest hither. With these
subdue for us the men who hate us.

3 They were not turned to us-ward, lofty Indra! while yet through

lack of prayer they stood unharnessed.

Ascend this chariot, thou whose hand wields thunder, and draw
the rein, 0 Lord of noble horses.

9 These Goddesses : Heaven and Earth.

10 E'en the Celestial Axe : perhaps the thunderbolt, which is one of the mean-
ings assigned to svddhitih . S&yana explains the word in this passage as ‘ the
self-supported heaven,’ and Professor Roth thinks that a tree of very hard
wood, called Svadhiti, is intended, as we might say, even the oak bends down
before him.

11 Of the Five Races: belonging to the five Aryan tribes. But see Muir,
Original Sanskrit Texts i Yol, I, 178,

6 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V t

i Thou, because many laud! are thine ? 0 Indra, Avast active war-
ring in the fields for cattfe.

For Surya in his own abodesthou, Hero, formedst in fights even
a £) Elsa’s nature.

5 Thine are we, Indra ; thine are 4 JI these people, conscious of
' might, whose cars are set in motidn.

Some hero come to us, 0 Strong as Ahi ! beauteous in war, to
be invoked like Bhaga.

6 Strength much to be desired is in thee, Indra : the Immortal

dances forth his hero exploits.

Such, Lord of Treasure, give us splendid riches. I praise the
Friend’s gift, his whose wealth is mighty,

7 Thus favour us, 0 Indra ? with thy succour ; Hero, protect

the bards who sing thy praises.

ge friendly in the fray to those who offer the skin of beauti-
: ful and well-pressed Soma.

8 And these ten steeds which Trasadasyu gives me, the gold-

rich chief, the son of Purukutsa,

Resplendent in their brightness shall convey me. Gairikshita
willed it and so came I hither.

9 And these, bestowed as sacrificial guerdon, the powerful tawny

steeds of Marutllsva;

And thousands which kind Chyavat&na gave me, abundantly
bestowed for my adornment.

10 And these commended horses, bright and active, by Dhvanya
son of Lakshmana presented,

Came unto me, as cows into the Rishi Samvarana’s stall, with
magnitude of riches.

HYMN XXXIV. Indra.

Boundless and wasting not, the heavenly food of Gods goes to
the foeless One, doer of wondrous deeds.

Press out, make ready, offer gifts with special zeal to him
whom many laud, accepter of the prayer,

4 The second half of the stanza refers to an eclipse of the sun. Indra is said
to have formed for Sftrya in 1m own abode, that is, in the eastern heaven, the
nature of a D&sa, i. e. made him a slave or dark.

6 Dances forth his hero exploits : battle being regarded as a war' dance, as in
the Old German poetry, and in Homer’s fxiXiTEor^aL *A pr}i. — Ludwig.

8 Son of Pwnthutsa : Paurukutsya and Gairikshita are both patronymics
of Trasadasyu.

9 This stanza is obscure. Nothing further is known of M&rutdsva or
Ohyavat&na.

10 Dhvanya and his father Lakshmana are also unknown to fame. These
r three concluding stanzas are banished fco the appendix by Professor Grassmann
as being a later addition to the original hymn.

8YMNU.] TED MOVE DA. m 7

% He who filled full his belly with the Soma’s juice, Maghavan,
was delighted with the meath’s sweet draught,

When tlsani, that he might slay the monstrous beast, gave
him the mighty weapon ^with a thousand points, /i

3 Illustrious is the man whoever presseth out Soma for him in

sunshine or in cloud and rain.

The mighty Maghavan who is the sage’s Friend advanceth
more and more his beauteous progeny.

4 The Strong God doth not flee away from him whose sire, whose

mother or whose brother he hath done to death.

He, the Avenger, seeketh this man’s offered gifts : this God,
the source of riches, doth not flee from sin.

5 He seeks no enterprise with five or ten to aid, nor stays with

him who pours no juice though prospering well.

The Shaker conquers or slays in this way or that, and fro the
pious gives a stable full of kine.

fi Exceeding strong in war he stays the chariot wheel, and, hating
him who pours not, prospers him who pours.

Indra the terrible, tamer of every man, as Arya leads
the Dasa at his will.

7 He gathers up for plunder all the niggards’ gear ; excellent

wealth he gives to him who offers gifts.

. Hot even in wide stronghold may all the folk stand firm who
have provoked to anger his surpassing might.

8 When Indra Maghavan hath marked two wealthy men fight-

ing for beauteous cows with all their followers,

He who stirs all things takes one as his close ally, and* Shaker,
with his Heroes, sends the kine to him.

. 2 Usand : see I. 51. 10. The monstrous least : Vritra or Ahi ; according to
S&yana, a demon called Mriga.

8 The meaning of the second half of this stanza is somewhat uncertain.
Professor Wilson, following S&yana, renders it: * Sakra disregards the man
who is proud of his descendants and vain of his person, and who, though
wealthy, is a friend of the base.’ Professor p Vt " v Professor

Both/s interpretation of the doubtful words, v> 1 ".i" ' i en Prahler

stosst zurdek der starke, machtige den eitlen Stutzer, der clem Kargen sich
gesellt.’ Professor Ludwig, whom 1 here follow with hesitation, explains
kaudsaklut lb,- or hard sahhd (like Agn£ vishnu, Agndmarut, 1ST ftbMnedishtha,
etc.) as, friend with the wise.

4 Sakra or the Strong G-od does not fear the vengeance of those whose
nearest relations he has killed for neglect of his worship.

Doth not flee from sin : perhaps, as Dr. Muir suggests, does not fear to
punish the offender against him.

5' The Shaker ; he who makes his enemies tremble, according to S&yana.

6 The chariot wheel : of his enemies.

32

m tee hymns of [book v.

9 Agni ! I laud the liberal Agnivesi, Satri the type and stand-
ard of the pious.

May the collected waters yield him plenty, and his be power-
ful Sjiid bright dominion.

HYMN XXXV. Indra.

Indra, for our assistance bring that most effectual power of
thine,

Which conquers men for us, and wins the spoil, invincible in
fight.

2 Indra, whatever aids be thine, four be they, or, 0 Hero, three,
Or those of the Five Tribes of men, bring quickly all that help

to us.

3 The §.id most excellent of thee the Mightiest hitherward we

call,

For thou wast born with hero might, conquering, Indra, with
the Strong.

"4:. .Mighty to prosper us wast thou born, and mighty is the
"V s strength thou hast.

In native power thy soul is firm : thy valour, Indra, slays a €
host.

5 0 Satakratu, Lord of Strength, 0 Indra, Caster of the Stone,
With all thy chariot’s force assail the man who shows himself

thy foe.

6 For, Mightiest Vritra-slayer, thee, fierce, foremost among many,

folk

Whose sacred grass is trimmed invite to battle where the
spoil is won.

7 Indra, do thou protect our car that mingles foremost in the

fights,

That bears its part in every fray, invincible and seeking spoil.

8 Come to us, Indra, and protect our car with thine intelligence.
May we, 0 Mightiest One, obtain excellent fame at break of

day, and meditate our hymn at dawn.

9 Agnivcsi ; son of Agnivesa, Satri, a prince or chief whose name does not
occur again in the Rigveda.

2 Four be they : according to S&yana, the favours or succours given to the
four castes ; three, similarly meaning the succours given to the three worlds.

3 With the Strong ,* the Maruts,

HYMN 37 J

THE RIGVELA.
HYMN XXXVL

499

Indra.

May Indra come to us, he who knows rightly to give forth
treasures from his store of riches. 4

Even as a thirsty steer who roams the deserts may he
eagerly the milked-out Soma.

2 Lord of Bay Horses, Hero, may the Soma rise ~to thy cheeks

and jaws like mountain-ridges.

May we, 0 King, as he who driveth coursers, all joy in thee
with hymns, invoked of many !

3 Invoked of many, Caster of the Stone 1 my heart quakes like

a rolling wheel for fear of penury.

Shall not Puruvasu the singer give thee praise, 0 ever-pros-
pering Maghavan, mounted on thy car ?

4 Like the press-stone is this thy praiser, Indra. Loudly he lifts

his voice with strong endeavour.

With, thy left hand, O Maghavan, give us riches : with thy
right, Lord of Bays, be not reluctant.

‘ 5 May the strong Heaven make thee the Strong wax stronger :
Strong, thou art’borne by thy two strong Bay Horses.

So, fair of cheek, with mighty chariot, mighty, uphold us,
strong-willed, thunder-armed, in battle.

6 Maruts, let all the people in obeisance bow down before this
youthful Srutaratha,

Who, rich in steeds, gave me two dark red horses together
with three hundred head of cattle.

*

HYMN XXXVII. Indra.

Bedbwed with holy oil and meetly worshipped, the Swift One
vies with Surya’s beam in splendour.

For him may mornings dawn without cessation who saith, Let
us press Soma out for Indra.

2 With kindled fire and strewn grass let him worship, atid,
Soma-presser, sing with stones adjusted :

And let the priest whose press-stones ring forth loudly, go
down with his oblation to the river.

3 Purdvasu ; I, the Eishi ; apparently the same as Pr&bhuvasu, the seer of
the hytrm,

1 The Swift One : Agni.

2 To the Hver ; for ablution before sacrificing.

m

TEE HYMNS OF [BOOH V.

3 This wife is coming near who loves her husband who carries

to his home a vigorous consort.

Mere ? may his car seek fame, here loudly thunder, and his
wheel make a thousand revolutions,

4 No troubles vex that King in whose home Indr a drinks the

sharp Soma juice with milk commingled.

With heroes he drives near, he slays the foeman : Blest, che-
rishing that name, he guards his people.

5 May he support in peace and win in battle : he masters both

the hosts that meet together.

Dear shall he be to Surya, dear to Agni, who with pressed
Soma offers gifts to Indra.

HYMN XXXVIII. Indra.

Wide, Indra Satakratu, spreads the bounty of thine ample
grace :

So, Lord of fair dominion, Friend of all men, give us splendid
wealth.

2 The food which, Mightiest Indra, thou possessest worthy of

renown

Is bruited as most widely famed, invincible, 0 Grolden-hued !

3 0 Darter of the Stone, the powers which readily obey thy

will, —

Divinities, both thou and they, ye rule, to guard them, earth
s* and heaven.

4 And from whatever power of thine, 0 Vritra-slayer, it may be,
* Bring thou to us heroic strength : thou hast a man's regard

for us.

5 In thy protection, with these aids of thine, 0 Lord of Hundred

Powers,

Indra, may we be guarded well, Hero, may we be guarded well*

HYMN XXXIX. Indra.

Stoke-barting Indra, Wondrous One, what wealth is richly
given from thee,

That bounty, Treasure-Finder ! bring, filling both thy hands,
to us. .

3 This wife : according to S&yana, the wife of Indra who accompanies , Iii-m
to the sacrifice.

4 The foeman: or the wicked man, or his enemy, pdpcm raivinam vd, - S&yana,
3 The powers : according to S&yana, the strong Maruts,

MrM-N 40.] THE RWVEDA. 601

2 Bring what thou- deemeafc worth the wish, 0 Indra, that which

is in heaven.

So may we know thee a& thoii art, boundless in thy lUifhificence.

3 Thy lofty spirit, far-renowned as fain to give and prompt to

win,—

With this thou rendest e’en the firm, Stone-Darter ! so to gain
thee strength.

4 Singers with many songs have made Indra propitious to their

fame*

Him who is King of humankind, most liberal of your wealthy
ones.

5 To him, to Indra must be sung the poetfs word, the hymn of

praise.

To him, accepter of the prayer, the Atris raise their songs on
high, the Atris beautify their songs. ■

HYMN XL. Indra. S&rya, Atri,

OoaiE thou to what the stones have pressed, drink Soma, 0
thou Soma’s Lord,

Indra best Vritra-slayer Strong One, with the Strong.

2 Strong is the stone, the draught is strong, strong is this Soma

that is pressed,

Indra, best Vritra-slayer, Strong One with the Strong*

3 As strong I call on thee the Strong, 0 Thunder-armed, with

various aids,

Indra, best Vrita-slayer, Strong One With the Strong.

4 Impetuous, Thunderer, Strong, quelling the mighty, Sing,

potent, Vritra-slayer, Soma-drinker,

May he come hither with his yaked. Bay Horses ; may Indra
gladden him at the noon libation.

f> 0 Siirya, when the As lira’s descendant, Svarbhanu, pierced
thee through and through with darkness,

All creatures looked like one who is bewildered, who knoweth
not the place where he is standing.

The hymn is not homogeneous. The first part (1 — 4) is a separate invoca-
tion of Indra, and the subject of the second part is the Sun’s eclipse by
Svarbhanu and release by Atri. .

1 With the Strong ; together with the Maruts.

5 SvarbMim : the Asura or demon who causes eclipses of the sun and
moon, the B&hu of later times. The name does not occur again in the Big-
veda.

m THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V.

6 What time thou smotest down Svarbhanu’s magic that spread

itsglf beneath the sky, 0 Indra,

By his fourth sacred prayer Atri discovered Surya concealed
in gloom that stayed his function.

7 Let not the oppressor with this dread, through anger swallow

me up, for I am thine, 0 Atri.

Mitra art thou, the sender of true blessings : thou and King
Varuna be both my helpers.

8 The Brahman Atri, as he set the press-stones, serving the

Gods with praise and adoration,

Established in the heaven the eye of Surya, and caused Svar-
bhanu’s magic arts, to vanish.

9 The Atris found the Sun again, him whom Svarbhanu of the

brood

Of Asuras had pierced with gloom. This none besides had
power to do.

HYMN XLL Visvedevas.

Who, Mitra-Varuna, is your pious servant to give you gifts
from earth or mighty heaven ?

Preserve us in the seat of holy Order, and give the offerer
power that winneth cattle.

2 May Mitra, Varuna, Aryaman, and Ayu, Indra Ribhukshan,

and the Maruts, love us,

And they who of one mind with bounteous Rudra accept the
hymn and laud with adorations.

3 You will I call to feed the car-horse, Asvins, with the wind’s

flight swiftest of those who travel :

6 By his fourth sacred prayer : according to S&yana, by four stanzas
(5—8) of this hymn. Probably, as Ludwig suggests, a fourth prayer in
addition to the usual liturgy of three prayers against an eclipse. Prof. Lan-
man discusses and translates the latter portion of the hymn in Festgruss an
R. von Roth, pp. 187 f., and adduces an interesting Buddhist parallel from
the Samyutta-bTMya, I. ii. 1.

7 Surya or the Sun is the speaker. The oppressor : Svarbh&nu,

9 Of the brood of Asuras ; the word dsurdk in this hymn means belonging
to, or descendant of, Asuras, demons or evil spirits. This use of the word is
unknown in the earliest portions of the Rigveda.

A

2 Ayu ; here said to mean V&yu, the God of wind. See 1, 162. 1. The celestial
Agni is probably intended. Bibhuhhan : a name of Indra, as Lord oi the
Jtibhus. *

And they who ; the Maruts especially, as being Rudra’s sons.

HYMN 41 .] THE RIG VEDA . 503

Or also to the Asura of heaven, Worshipful, bring a hymn as
’twere libation. />

4 The heavenly Yicte, he whose priest is Kanva, Trita with

Dyaus accordant, Vata, Agni,

All-feeding Pushan, Bhaga sought the oblation, as they whose
steeds are fleetest seek the contest.

5 Bring ye your riches forward borne on horses : let thought be

framed for help and gain of treasure.

Blest be the priest of Ausija through courses, the courses
which are yours the fleet, 0 Maruts.

6 Bring hither him who yokes the car, your Yayu, who praises

with his songs, the God and Singer ; '

And, praying and devout, npble and prudent, may the Gods’
Spouses in their thoughts retain us.

7 I speed to you with powers that should be honoured, with

songs distinguishing Heaven’s mighty Daughters,

Morning and Night, the Two, as ’twere all-knowing : these
bring the sacrifice unto the mortal.

8 You I extol, the nourishers of heroes, bringing you gifts,

Vastoshpati and Tvashtar —

Bich Dhishana accords through our obeisance — and Trees and
Plants, for the swift gain of riches.

9 Ours be the Parvatas, even they, for offspring, free-moving?

who are Heroes like the Yasus.

May holy Aptya, Friend of man, exalted, strengthen our
word for ever and be near us.

3 The Asura of heaven: or the Lord of heaven. According to Sdyarja
Asura means here either the destroyer of life, Rudra, or the giver of life,
Stirya or V&yu.

4 The heavenly Victor ; Indra. Trita j according to Scty&na Trita here is
not the name of a separate deity (Trita Aptya), but an epithet of Y&yu, per-
vading the three regions of earth, firmament, and heaven.’

5 The priest of Ausija : Atri, the ministrant priest of Kaksliiv&n the son
of XJsij. — S&yana.

8 Vdstoshpati : Lord of the Homestead, Indra,

Dhishund : a Goddess presiding over prosperity and gain ; according to
S&yana, Vagdevatft, the Goddess of speech. *

9 The Parvatas : the genii who preside over mountains and clouds. For
offspring : that they may give us children and children’s children.

Holy Aptya : Trita Aptya, a divinity or mythical being who dwells in the
remotest part of the heavens.

m THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V,

10 THta praised" him, germ of the earthly hero, with pure songs

hir^ the Offspring of the Waters.

Agiil with might neighs loudly like a charger; he of the
flaming hair destroys the forests.

11 How shall we speak to the great might of Rudra % How

speak to Bhaga who takes thought for riches
May Plants, the Waters, and the Sky preserve us, and Woods
and Mountains with their trees for tresses.

12 May the swift Wanderer, Lord of refreshments, list to our

songs, who speeds through cloudy heaven;

And may the Waters, bright like castles, hear us, as they flow
onward from the cloven mountain.

*13 We know your ways, ye Mighty Ones : receiving choice meed,,
ye Wonderful, we will proclaim it.

Even strong birds descend not to the mortal who strives to
; , reach them with swift blow and weapons.

LA Celestial and terrestrial generations, and Waters will I sum-
mon to the feasting.

May days with bright dawns cause my songs to prosper, and
may the. conquered streams increase their waters.

15 Duly to each one hath my laud been offered. Strong be Va-
rutri with her powers- to succour.

10 Germ of the earthly hero : Agni, the Offspring of the Waters, who de-
velops into the strong God, or Hero, who appears on earth in the form of ter-
restrial fire.

12 Swift Wanderer: Vftyu, God of the circumambient wind.

As they flow onward : the text has pdri snicho. S&yana explains srtich o
(ladies) by saranastldh } inclined or accustomed to flow. Professor Ludwig
suggests parisruto (flowing round or over) a s the original reading.

Cloven mountain : according to Sftyana, the increasing, i. e. the towering,
or swelling, mountain, or cloud.

18 This stanza is exceedingly difficult. I follow Professor Ludwig in his
interpretation, and understand the meaning to be : we know what your ways
are, and we glorify you because you reward us for doing so. If you appeared
to us only as hostile and terrible deities we should, not praise you. any more
than birds allow themselves to be lured down by the man who shoots at them.
Professor Wilson, following S&yana, paraphrases the stanza : ‘ Mighty Maruts,
of goodly aspect) quickly hear (the praises) that we who repair to you repeat,
offering acceptable (oblations) : (the Maruts) ooming hither, well disposed,
come down to us (destroying) with their weapons the mortals opposed to them,
(overcome) by agitation/

14 The conquered streams : won from the hostile barbarians.

W VarfUrt: one of a class of guardian Goddesses. See I. 22, 10, and III,
62, 8,

MtMN -43.] Ate® RIGVMDA, 505,

May the great Mother Easfi here befriend us : , straight-handed,
with the princes, striving forward.

16 How may we serve the Liberal Ones with Worship, the Maruts

swift of course in invocation, the Maruts far-renowned in
‘ invocation A

Let not the Dragon of the Deep annoy ns, and gladly may
he- welcome our addresses.

17 Thus thinking, O ye Gods, the mortal wins you to give him

increase of his herds of cattle ; the mortal Wins him, O ye
Gods, your favour. ,

Here he wins wholesome food to feed this body : as for mine
old age, Nirriti consume it 1

18 0 Gods, may we obtain from you this favour, strengthening

food through the Cow's praise, ye Vasus.

May she who gives good gifts, the gracious Goddess, come
speeding nigh to us for our well-being.

19 May Ila, Mother of the herds of cattle, and Urvasi with all

the streams accept us ;

May Urvasi in lofty heaven accepting, as she partakes the
oblation of the living,

20 Visit us while she shares fJrjavya’s food.

HYMN XLIL . Vijfvectevas,

Now may our sweetest song with deep devotion reach Vanina*
Mitra, Aditi, and Bhaga.

May the Five Priests 3 Lord, dwelling in oblations, bliss-giving
Asura, hear, whose paths are open.

Mastd : a mythical stream which flows round the earth and the atmosphere,
here personified as. a benignant Goddess i earth, according to Sftyana. Seel.
112; !2. Straight-handed ; holding out her hand to guide and help us*

16 The Dragon of the Bee$ : Ahlbudhnya, the regent of the depths of the
firmament.

17 Nirriti : the Goddess of destruction. ‘ May Xirriti (he thinks) swallow
up my old age (not me).’ — Ludwig.

19 lid : here meaning Barth, according to S&yana. Urvasi: apparently
Fervour or Enthusiasm personified as a divine being.

20 Urjavyd’s food : the viands provided by Orjavya, the prince or patrons
who institutes the sacrifice,

The hymn is generally difficult and obscure ; and parts of the - translation
are, and must at present be, conjectural.

1 The Five Priests ’ L W: -r~~f!y Vmina, the five priests who serve

him being five Adityas, A. .. >. ■■y . tt.j, ; Y&yu is meant.

506 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK F

2 May Aditi welcome, even as a mother her dear heart-gladden-

ing son, my song that lauds her.

The prayer they love, bliss-giving, God-appointed, I offer unto
Yaruna and Mitra.

3 Inspirit him, the Sagest of the Sages; with sacrificial oil and

meath bedew him.

So then let him, God Savitar, provide us excellent, ready, and
resplendent treasures.

4 With willing mind, Indra, vouchsafe us cattle, prosperity, Lord

of Bays ! and pious patrons ;

And, with the sacred prayer by Gods appointed, give us the
holy Deities’ loving-kindness.

5 God Bhaga, Savitar who deals forth riches, Indra, and they

who conquer Vritra’s treasures,

And V&ja and Ribhukshan and Purandhi, the Mighty and Im-
mortal Ones, protect us !

6 Let us declare his deeds, the undecaying unrivalled Victor

whom the Maruts follow.

None of old times, 0 Maghavan, nor later, none of these days
hath reached thy hero prowess.

7 Praise him the Chief who gives the boon of riches, Brihaspati

distributer of treasures,

Who, blessing most the man who sings and praises, comes with
abundant wealth to his invoker.

8 Tended, Brihaspati, with thy protections, the princes are un-

harmed and girt by heroes.

Wealth that brings bliss is found among the givers of horses
and of cattle and of raiment.

9 Make their wealth flee who, through our hymns enjoying their

riches, yield us not an ample guerdon.

Far from the sun keep those who hate devotion, the godless*
prospering in their vocation.

10 With wheelless chariots drive down him, 0 Maruts, who at

the feasts of Gods regards the demons.

May he, though bathed iu sweat, form empty wishes, who
blames his sacred rite who toils to serve you.

11 Praise him whose bow is strong and sure his arrow, him who

is Lord of every balm that healeth.

3 The Sayest of the Sages ; Savitar, perhaps as identified with Agni,

5 Rlblmkskan : in this place is said by S&yana to mean Ribhu, and Parana
dhi (the intelligent) to mean Vibhvan,

11 Pram Mm ; Rudra.

THE RIGVEDA.

HYMN 43.]

507

Worsjhip thou Rudra for his great good favour : adore the Asura,
God, with salutations.

12 May the House-friends, the cunning-handed Artists/ 7 may the

Steer's Wives, the streams carved out by Vibhvan,

And may the fair Ones honour and befriend us, Sarasvati,
Rrihaddiva, and R&ksL

13 My newest song, thought that now springs within me, I offer

to the Great, the Sure Protector,

Who made for us this All, in fond love laying each varied form
within his Daughter’s bosom.

14 Now, even now, may thy fair praise, 0 Singer, attain Idaspati

who roars and thunders,

Who, rich in clouds and waters with his lightning speeds forth
bedewing both the earth and heaven.

15 May this my laud attain the troop of Maruts, those who are

youths in act, the Sons of Rudra.

The wish calls me to riches and well-being : praise the unwea-
ried Ones whose steeds are dappled.

1 6 May this my laud reach earth and air’s mid-region, and forest

trees and plants to win me riches.

May every Deity be swift to listen, and Mother Earth with no
ill thought regard me.

17 Gods, may we dwell in free untroubled bliss. *

18 May we obtain the Asvins’ newest favour, and gain their health-

bestowing happy guidance.

Bring riches hither unto us, and heroes, and all felicity and
joy, Immortals !

HYMN XLIII. Visvedevas,

May the Milch-cows who hasten to their object come harmless
unto us with liquid sweetness.

The Singer, lauding, calls, for ample riches, the Seven Mighty
Ones who bring enjoyment.

12 The cunning -handed Artists : the Ribhus. The Steer* s Wives : the spouses
of the mighty Indra. Carved out by Vibhvan : whose channels were formed
by him as the artificer of Varuna.

Brihaddivd : a Goddess frequently associated with lift, Sarasvati, and others.
S&yana takes the word in this place as an epithet, 4 very brilliant/ of Mkd,
the Goddess who presides over the day of full moon.

13 The Great, the Sure Protector : Indra. Sis Daughter : Earth. Here, as
Ludwig observes, we have the germ of the myth of Praj&pati and his daughter.
Cf. X. 61.

14 Idaspati : the Lord of the libation ; here Par] any a, God of the rain-

clouds. —

1 The Milch- cows ; the rivers. The Seven Mighty Ones : probably the Indus, ,
the five rivers of the Panj&b, and the Sarasvati, or the Kubh&, See I, 32. 12.

m Tm mMM &P [book %

% With reYemnoe-and fair, praise will X bring hither, for sake of
strength, exhaustless Earth and Heaven,

Eating and Mother* sweet of speech, fair 'handed, may they,
far-famed, In every flight protect us.

& AdhvarynSj; make the sweet libations toady, and bring the
beautiful bright juice to V&yu,

Grod,. as our Priest, be thou the fir's, t to drink it : we give thee
of the mead to- make thee joyful,

i Two arms 1 — the Soma’s dexterous immolators—^and the ten
fingers set and fix the press*stone.

The stalk hath poured, fair with its spreading branches, the
mead’s bright glittering juice that dwells on mountains.

8 The Soma hath been pressed for thee, its loYer, to give thee
power and might and high enjoyment.

Invoked-, turn hither in thy oar, 0 Indra, at need, thy two Well-
trained and dear Bay Horses.

6 jIMng by God-traversed paths, accordant, Agni, the great Ara-

Uxati, Celestial Lady,

Exalted,, Worshipped with our gifts and homage, who knoweth
holy Law, to drink sweet Soma,

7 As on his father’s lap the son, the darling, so on the fine is set

the sacred caldron,

Which holy singers deck, as- if extending and heating that
which holds the fatty membrane.

8 Hither, as herald to invite the Asvins, come the great lofty

song, most sweet and pleasant 1

Come in one car, Joy-givers ! to the banquet, like the bolt bind-
ing pole and nave, come hither.

9 I have- declared this speech of adoration to mightiest Pdshan

and victorious Vayu,

4 Immolators : or preparer^.

6 Ammati: the Goddess who presides over worship and active piety, and
also personifies the Earth ; the 8penta-Armaiti, or Holy Piety, and Spirit of
Earth, of the Zoroastrians.

7 As if extending ; perhaps, stretching (over the fire) and so roasting, as
Prof. Roth explains. Beating that which holds the fatty membrane : 1 roasting
a marrow-yielding animal.’ — Wilson. The mpft is the omentum or membrane
enfolding the intestines of the victim, specially offered to Gods in the Vapdr
huti sacrifice.

8 J oy -givers : ye beneficent Asvins. Like the bolt: f As the 1 cart' cannot
moye if the axle of the wheel is not fastened by the pin or bolt, so the offer*
ing of the Soma is without efficacy unless the Aswins be present.’ —Wilson,
from Sftyana,

HYMN 48.] tHA EIGVEHA. $09

Who by their bounty are the hymns’ inspirers, and of them-
selves give power as a possession.

10 Invoked by us bring hither, Jatavedas ! the Maruts fill* under

their names and figures.

Come to the sacrifice with aid all Maruts, all to the songs and
ptaises of the singer !

11 From high heaven may Sarasvati the Holy visit our sacrifice,

and from the mountain.

Eager, propitious, may the balmy Goddess hear our effectual
speech, our invocation.

12 Set in his seat the God whose back is dusky, Brihaspati the

lofty, the Disposer.

Him let us worship, set within the dwelling, the red, the
golden-hued, the all-resplendent.

13 May the Sustainer, high in heaven, come hither, the Bounteous

One, invoked, with all his favours,

Dweller with Dames divine, with plants, unwearied, the Steer
with triple horn, the life-bestower.

11 The tuneful eloquent priesl/s of him who liveth have sought
the Mother’s bright and loftiest station.

As living men, with offered gifts and homage they deck the
most auspicious Child to clothe him..

15 Agni, great vital p.ower is thine, the mighty : pairs waxing old
in their devotion seek thee.

May every Deity be swift to listen, and Mother Earth with no
ill thought regard me.

1 fi Gods, may we dwell in free untroubled bliss.

17 May we obtain the Asvins’ newest favour, and gain their
health-bestowing happy guidance
Bring riches hither unto us, and heroes, and all felicity and
joy, Immortals !

11 Balmy : literally, filled with, or sprinkling ghritd , oil, fatness, or fertilis-
ing fluid. f The shower er of water.’ —Wilson.

1-2 Whose booh is dusky : darkened by enveloping smoke, Brihaspati being
here identified with Agni.

13 The Sustain,#' ; or the very strong One, Agni. With triple horn : ac-

cording to S&yaua, having horns or flames of three colours, red, white, and
black (with sm oke). .

14 Eloquent ; the meaning of rdspirtfsah is uncertain. S&yana explains it by

^holders of sacrificial ladles,’ The Mother is the earth, and her loftiest station
is the altar. Of him who liveth : of the living man, the worshipper, The Child
is Agni. • .

15 Pairs : human pairs of worshippers ; husbands and wives. The second
half of this stanza is repeated from stanza 16 of the preceding hymn.

16 This line and the fallowing stanza are identical with 17 and- .18 of the
preceding hymn.

510

TRE HYMNS OF

[BOOR K

HYMN XLIY. , Visvedevas.

As in the first old times, as all were wont, as now, he draweth
forth the power turned hitherward with song,

The Princedom throned on holy grass, who findeth light, swift,
conquering in the plants wherein he waxeth strong.

2 Shining to him who leaves heaven’s regions undisturbed, which

to his sheen who is beneath show fair in light,

Good guardian art thou, not to be deceived, Most Wise ! Far
from deceits thy name dwelleth in holy Law.

3 Truth waits upon oblation present and to come : naught checks

him in his way, this victory-bringing Priest :

The Mighty Child who glides along the sacred grass, the un-
decaying Youth set in the midst of plants.

4: These come, well-yoked, to you for furtherance in the rite :
down come the twin-born strengtheners of Law for him,
With reins easily guided and commanding all. In the deep
: fall the hide stealeth away their names.

5 Thou, moving beauteously in visibly pregnant ones, snatching
with trees the branching plant that grasps the juice,

Shinest, true Singer ! mid the upholders of the voice. Increase
thy Consorts thou, lively at sacrifice.

1 Re draweth forth: the Agnfdh, or priest who kindles the sacrificial fire, draws,
or literally milks out, Agni from the fire-sticks by attrition. I follow Professor
Ludwig in taking dohase and vardhase as third persons singular. Professor
Grassmann banishes to his Appendix this c most bombastic and intentionally
obscure hymn,’ which he considers to be a later interpolation. The Princedom:
the Prince, Apxv, yyeshUtdtwn the abstract being used for the concrete.

2 Shining to him : apparently, to the Sun ; but the meaning is uncertain.

Who is beneath ; the Sun when he is setting, or perhaps Agni. Thou : Indra,

3 Ti'uth waits upon oblation } the hopes and wishes of the sacrificed are

realized. It seems impossible to get any meaning out of dtyam (courser) and
I follow Professor T.v • 1 2 3 4 5 **.: '■ v . 1*; ;■ satydm (truth or realization). The victory-
bringing Priest, the ."■/ „ \ ’ " ■, ■ ■ undecaying Youth , is Agni.

4 These come, well-yoked : probably the priests, closely associated in their
sacred duties, who bring the waters used in the preparation of the Soma and
so are called strengtheners of Law , i. e, furtherers of the law- appointed sacrifice
for him , for Agni the Child of the Waters.

The hide stealeth away their names : according to S&yana, Aditya or the Sun
steals (that is, absorbs) the waters in low places ; or Agni appropriates the
offerings presented to him. Professor Ludwig is of opnion that krlvih
(literally, leather bottle or bag, and metaphorically cloud, cistern, or well) in
this place— samudra K in its twofold signification as Soma reservoir and sea.
The meaning then would be that the names of the waters, i, e. the waters
themselves, fall into the reservoir and into the sea. According to Sfiyana the
whole stanza refers to the Sun, the well-yoked being his ‘ well-combined rays,’

5 This stanza is addressed to Agni. Visibly pregnant ones: perhaps the
Waters. With trees: with burning fuel. Thy Consorts : the flames,

511

HYMN 44.] TEE RIGVFDA.

6 Like as he is beheld such is he said to be. They with effectual

splendour in the floods have made
Earth yield us room enough and amply wide extent, great
might invincible, with store of hero sons.

7 Surya the Sage, as if unwedded, with a Spouse, in battle-loving

spirit moveth o'er the foes.

May he, self-excellent, grant us a sheltering home, a house
that wards the fierce heat off on every side.

8 Thy name, sung forth by Bishis in these hymns of ours,

goes to the loftier One with this swift mover’s light.

By skill he wins the boon whereon his heart is set : he who
bestirs himself shall bring the thing to pass.

9 The chief and best of these abideth in the sea, nor doth libation

fail wherein it is prolonged.

The heart of him who praiseth trembleth not in fear there
where the hymn is found connected with the pure.

10 For it is he: with thoughts of Kshatra, Manasa, of Yajata,

and Sadhri, and Evavada,

With Avatsfira’s sweet songs will we strive to win the mightiest
strength which even he who knows should gain.

11 The Hawk is their full source, girth-stretching rapturous drink

of Visvavara, of Mayin, and Yajata.

They ever seek a fresh draught so that they may come, know
when thy time to halt and drink thy All is near.

12 Saclaprina the holy, Tarya, Srutavit, and Bahuvrikta, joined

with you, have slain the foes.

He gains his wish in both the worlds and brightly shines —
when he adores the host — with well-advancing steeds.

7 As if umoedded : Sfirya the Sun-God, although wedded to Ushas or Dawn,
is courageous as an unmarried man untroubled by care for wife and child ;
may he give us assurance of security as he himself knows how delightful that is.

8 Thy name: the name of the institutor of the sacrifice. The loftier One :
Sfirya. This swift mover's light : the flames of Agni. Ee who bestirs himself :
the restless Agni.

9 Of these : hymns of praise. Abideth in the sea : is closely connected with
the vat or reservoir of Soma. According to Sayan a the meaning is that the
best of the hymns proceed to the ocean-like Sun ( samudravatparyavasdimbhiltam
stiryam ).

10 For it is he : ‘ He verily (is to be glorified).’ — Wilson. Kshatra, Manasa ,
etc . are said to be the names of Bishis associated with Avats&ra to whom
especially the hymn is ascribed.

11 The ffawh: who brought the Soma from heaven. See IV. 27. Visvavdra,
Mdyin, and Yajata are said to be Bishis.

12 Saddprina and the others mentioned in this verse are also Bishis. Ee :
each of the ’Bishis, The host : of Gods.

BOOR V.

m THE HYMNS OF

13 The worshippers defender is Sutambhara, producer and up-

lifter of all holy thoughts.

The ^nilch’coy brought, sweet-flavoured milk was dealt around.
Who speaks the bidding text knows this, not he who sleeps.

14 The Sacred hymns love him who wakes and watches ; to him

who watches come the Sama verses.

This Soma saith unto the man who watches, I rest and have
my dwelling in thy friendship,

15 Agni is watchful, and the Bichas love him; Agni is watchful,

S&ma verses seek him.

Agni is watchful, to him saith this Soma, I rest and have my
dwelling in thy friendship.

HYMN XLY. Yisvedevas.

Bauds of approaching Dawn who know the heavens are come
with hymns to throw the mountain open. .

The Sun hath risen and oped the stable portals ; the doors of
men, too, hath the God thrown open.

2 S&rya hath spread hie light as splendour : hither came , the

Cows 1 2 3 * 5 Mother, conscious, from the stable,

To streams that flow with biting waves to deserts ; and heavotf
is stablished like a firm-set pillar.

3 This laud hath won the burden of the mountain. To aid the

ancient birth of mighty waters

The mountain parted, Heaven performed his office. The wor-
shippers were worn with constant serving.

4 With hymns and Coddoved words will I invoke you, Indr a

and Agni, to obtain your favour,

For verily sages, skilled in sacrificing, worship the Maruts and
with lauds invite them,

13 Sutambkam : said to be the name of a Xvislii. The word means the
bearer of the juice or libation, professor Ludwig says that the Hawk (et.
11) is intended.

15 The Mchas : the hymns and verses of the Rigveda.

The hymn is uxi'OPtlfngly dinkO’ and obscure, and in parts it seems to be
hopelessly uiiiue!:i»ii)!e. Wilson’s paraphrase and Professor Gras-

amann’a translation differ very widely from the version — founded mainly on
Professor Ludwig’s interpretation — which I offer as a temporary makeshift.

1 Bards : the Angirases who sing the praises of ITshas and who know the
exact time when morning rites are to be celebrated. The mountain ; the
cloud in which the stolen Cows, or vanished rays of light, have been Concealed.

2 The Cows' Mother : Bawn ; the parent of the rays of light.

3 The burden of the mountain : the store of water which lies like an unborn’

babe in the bosom of the mountain-like cloud. Performed his office ; aided

the production of the rain. The worshipers : the Angirases.

HYMN 45.]

THE RIGVEDA.

513

5 This day approach us : may our thoughts he holy, far from us

let us cast away misfortune.

Let us keep those who hate us at a distance, and chaste to
meet the man who sacrifices.

6 Come, let us carry out, 0 friends, the purpose wherewith the

Mother threw the Cow’s stall open,

That wherewith Manu conquered Visisipra, wherewith the
wandering merchant gained heaven’s water.

7 Here, urged by hands, loudly hath rung the press-stone where-

with Navagvas through ten months sang praises.

Sarama went aright and found the cattle. Angiras gave effect
to all their labours.

8 When at the dawning of this mighty Goddess, Angirases all

sang forth with the cattle, —

Their spring is in the loftiest place of meeting, — Sarama
found the kine by Order’s pathway.

9 Borne by his Coursers Seven may Surya visit the field that

spreadeth wide for his long journey.

Down on the Soma swooped the rapid Falcon. Bright was
the young Sage moving mid his cattle.

10 Surya hath mounted to the shining ocean when he hath
yoked his fair-backed Tawny Horses.

The wise have drawn him like a ship through water : the
floods obedient have descended hither.

6 Wherewith ; I follow Professor Grassmann in taking yet as instrumental —
ydyd. The Mother : Dawn.

Vi isipra ; meaning, perhaps, jawless or chinless, may, S&yana says, be
Vritra, and Manu here may mean Indra. Manu probably represents the vic-
torious Aryan invader and Visisipra the conquered barbarian.

The wemdering merchant ; S&yana says that this refers to the story of Kak-
shlv&n to whom the Asvins sent rain. See I. 112. 11.

7 Through ten months : referring to the sacrifices of nine and ten months'
duration performed by the Navagvas and the Dasagvas, priestly families fre-
quently mentioned in connexion with the Angirases. These names mean, re-
spectively, nine-month ministrants and ten-month ministrants, and are trans-
lated in the St. Petersburg Lexicon by Neuner and Zehner, Niners and Tenners. t
Saramd : see Index. Angiras: Agni.

8 Their spring ; the source of the Cows, that is the Cows themselves.
The loftiest place of meeting : the height of heaven. The half-line is ap-
parently parenthetical.

9 The rapid Falcon : . which brought the Soma from heaven. The young '
Sage: ‘ever young and far-seeing.’ The Sun is intended, moving in the
midst of his rays.

10 The shining ocean : the luminous firmament,

33

m THE HYMN'S, OF [BOOK V.

Ill lay upon the Floods your hymn, light-winning, wherewith
N&vagvas their ten months completed,

{ Through this* pur hymn may we have Gods to guard us :
through this our hymn pass safe beyond affliction.

' HYMN XLVI. Visvedevas.

Well knowing I have bound me, horse-like, to the pole ;

I carry that which bears us on and gives us help.

I seek for no release, no turning back therefrom. May he who
knows the way, the Leader, guide me straight

2 0 Agni, Indra, Varuna, and Mitra, give, 0 ye Gods, and

Marut host, and Vishnu.

May both Nasatyas, Rudra, heavenly Matrons, Pushan, Sara-
svati, Bhaga, accept us.

3 Indra and Agni, Mitra, Varuna, Aditi, the Waters, Mountains,

Maruts, Sky, and Earth and Heaven,

Vishnu I call, Pushan, and Brahmanaspati, pud Bhaga, Sausa,
Savitar that they may help.

4 May' Vishnu also and V&ta who injures none, and Soma grant er

of possessions give us joy ;

And may the Ribhus and the Asvins, Tvashtar and Vibhvan
remember us so that we may have wealth.

5 So may the band of Maruts dwelling in the sky, the holy, come

to us to sit on sacred grass ;

Brihaspati and Pushan grant us sure defence, Varuna, Mitra,
Aryaman guard and shelter us.

6 And may the Mountains famed in noble eulogies, and the fair-

gleaming Rivers keep us safe from harm.

May Bhaga the Dispenser come with power and grace, and
far-pervading Aditi listen to my call.

7 May the Gods’ Spouses aid us of their own free will, aid us to

offspring and the winning of the spoil.

Grant ns protection, 0 ye gracious Goddesses, ye who are on
the earth or in the waters’ realm.

H I lap upon the floods : I offer to the Waters. Light-winning ; which
gains for the worshipper the light of heaven.

The Consorts of the Gods are the deities of the last two stanzas,

1 / : The llishi Pratikshafcra. The pole ; a metaphorical expression for
sacrificial duties. That which hears us on : the pole, the performance of
sacrifice. ‘I support that transcendant and preservative load.’— -Wilson. He
•wjto hiows the way ; the divine inner guide : m&vg&bhijfto' ntarydmi devah—
S&yana.

3 S ansa ; prayer or wish, personified. Or sdhsam may be a verbal form,
1 praise. *

HYMN m ME MG VEDA. 515

8 May the Dames, wives of Gods, enjoy our presents, R&t, Asvinf,
Agn&yi, and Indian!.

May Rodasi and Varun&ni hear us, and Goddesses cpme at the
Matrons' season.

HYMN XLVIL Visvedeva*,

Urging to toil and making proclamation, seeking Heaven's
Daughter comes the Mighty Mother :

She comes, the youthful Hymn, unto the Fathers, inviting to
her home and loudly calling,

2 Swift in their motion, hasting to their duty, reaching the cent-

ral point of life immortal,

On every side about the earth and heaven go forth the spaci-
ous paths without a limit.

3 Steer, Sea, Bed Bird with strong wings, he hath entered the

dwelling-place of the Primeval Father.

A gay-liued Stone set in the midst of heaven, he hath gone
forth and guards mid-air's two limits.

4 Four bear him up and give him rest and quiet, and ten invigor-

ate the Babe for travel.

His kine most excellent, of threefold nature, pass swiftly round
the boundaries of heaven.

5 Wondrous, 0 people, is the mystic knowledge that while the

waters stand the streams ar$ flowing ;

Thar, separate from his Mother, Two support him, closely-united,
twins, here made apparent.

8 Edl : the name of a Goddess, or, as S&yana takes it, bright, qualifying
A stint, the Consort of the Kevins. Rada si: the Spouse of Rudra. See Index.
At the Matrons * season ; at the .time appointed for the celestial dames,
the Consorts of the Gods.

1 Heaven's Daughter : Ushas or Dawn. The Mighty Mother : perhaps, as
Professor Ludwig suggests, V&k or Speech is intended, who appears in the
second line as the Hymn personified.

2 The central point of life immortal ’ the Sun. The paths : the long lines
of light.

3 Sea : as the great attracter and receptacle of the waters.

He : the Sun. The Primeval Father : Dyaus, or Heaven.

A gay-luted Stone: Professor Ludwig would read prhni-rasmd, ( with variegat-
ed rays,’ instead of the prlsnir-d&md of the text. But the alteration seems to
be unnecessary.

4 Four: according to S&yana, the four chief priests. Possibly Varuna,
Mitra, Aryaman, Bhaga are intended — Ludwig.

Ten : the regions of space ; as the Sun attracts the waters from all sidetf.
His Tcine : his rays. Of threefold nature : producing heat, cold (by their ab-
sence), and rain.

'5 The marvel is that the waters stand still in the sea while the rivers are
continually flowing into it. Of. Eclesiastes, I. 7. Separate from his Mother :
Sfirya’s Mother is the invisible Aditi ; and he is supported by Heaven and
Earth, the closely- connected pair who are visible in this world. — Ludwig.

5X6 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK K

6 For him they lengthen prayers and acts of worship : the

Mothers weave garments for him their offspring.

Rejoicing, for the Steer’s impregning contact, his Spouses move
on pa^fchs of heaven to meet him.

7 Be this our praise, 0 Varuna and Mitra ; may this be health

and force to us, 0 Agni.

May we obtain firm ground and room for resting : Glory to
Heaven, the lofty habitation !

HYMN XLVIIL Visvedevas.

What may we meditate for the beloved Power, mighty in na-
tive strength and glorious in itself,

* Which as a magic energy seeking waters spreads even to the
immeasurable middle region’s cloud ?

2 : O’er all the region with their uniform advance these have
spread out the lore that giveth heroes strength.

Back, with their course reversed, the others pass away : the
pious lengthens life with those that are' before.

3/ With pressing-stones* and with the bright beams of the day he
* hurls his broadest bolt against the Guileful One.

Even he whose hundred wander in his own abode, driving the
days afar and bringing them again,

4 I, to enjoy the beauty of his form, behold that rapid rush of

his as ’twere an axe’s edge,

What time he gives the man who calls on him in fight wealth-
like a dwelling-house filled full with store of food.

5 Four-faced and nobly clad, Varuna, urging on the pious to his

task, stirs himself with the tongue.

Naught by our human nature do we know of him, him from
whom Bliaga Savitar bestows the boon.

6 They ; worshippers. The Mothers : the Dawns, or the regions of space,
which clothe the Sun with light. His Spouses ; the solar rays,

7 Firm ground and room for vesting ; f stability and permanence,’ — Wilson,

1 Which as a magic energy : or, what time the magic energy, that is V&k,
Voice or Speech.

% These ; Dawns. Before ; yet to come.

3 • With pressing -stones ; in alliance with, and strengthened by them, that is,
the libation p which they aid. He ; Indra. The Guileful One; Vritra. Even he;
Indra as the Sun. Whose hundred ; S&yana supplies, rays.

4 His form ; Agni’s.

5 Varuna; accoording to S&yana, varunah here is an adjective = toia-
v&rdkah, darknessnrepelling, and an epithet of Agni.

With the tongue : causing the worshipper to speak of him.

Naught by our human nature : all our knowledge of the Q-Qd comes by his
inspiration.

Shaga ; according to S&yana, bhdgah here is an epithet of Savitar, mighty
or adorable.

617

nfMN 50] ms Hi a VEDA,

HYMN XLIX. Visvedevas.

I^his day I bring God Savitar to meet you, and Bhaga who
allots the Wealth of mortals. *

^Tou, Asvins, Heroes rich in treasures, daily seeking your friend-
ship fain would I turn hitheh

2 Knowing full well the Asura’s time of coming, worship God

Savitar with hymns and praises*

Let him who rightly kiioweth speak with homage to him who
dealeth out man’s noblest treasure.

3 Not for reward doth Pushan send liis blessings, Bhaga, or

Aditi : his garb is splendour.

May Indra, Yishnu, Yaruna, Mitra, Agni produce auspicious
days, the Wonder-Workers*

1 Sending the shelter which we ask, the foeless Savitar and

the Rivers shall approach us*

When I, the sacrifice’s priest, invite them, may we be lords of
wealth and rich possessions.

h They who devote sueh worship to the Yasus, singing their
hymns to Yaruna and Mitra,

Youchsafe them ample room, far off be danger* Through
grace of Heaven and Earth may we be happy.

HYMN L. Visvedevas.

Let every naortal man elect the friendship of the guiding God.
Each one solicits him for wealth and seeks renown to prosper
him.

2 These, leading God, are thine, and these here ready to speak

after us.

As such may we attain to wealth and wait with services on
thee.

3 So further honour as our guests the Hero Gods and then the

Dames.

May he remove and keep afar our foes and all who block our
path.

2 The Asura's time of coding : the V s the divine Savitar.

3 Aditi: according to S '■/v.a- -r '-A / u who cannot be impaired,

Used here as an epithet of Agni, understood, as are also pUskft, * nourishing,’
and bhdgah, t adorable.’ But S&yana gives also the alternative interpretation
of the words as three deities.

The Rishi is said to be Svasti (a name apparently borrowed from svastdge 3
for weal, in stanza 5).

1 The guiding God : Savitar.

2 These : worshippers.

3 The Dames : the Consorts of the Gods. May he : Savitar,

■51? TEE EYMNS OF f BOOK V,

4 Where fire is set, and swiftly runs the victim dwelling in the
trough,

He wing, with heroes in his home, friendly to man, lik» con-
stant streams.

May these thy riches, Leader God ! that rule the car, be blest
, , to us,

Yea, blest to us for wealth and weal. This will we ponder
praising strength, this ponder as \ye praise the God.

HYMN LI. : Yijrodetfw.

With all assistants, Agni, come hitherto drink the Soma-
juice;

With Gods unto our sacred gifts.

2 Come to the sacrifice, 0 ye whose ways are right, whose laws

. are true, ;

And drink the draught with Agni ’s tongue.

3 0 Singer, with the singers, 0 Gi'acious, with those who move

at dawn,

: ^ome to thp Soma-draught with Gods.

4 To Indra and to Vayu dear, this Soma, by the mortar pressed,
Is now poured forth to fill the jar.

5 Vayu ? come hither to the feast, well-pleased unto our 'Sacred

gifts :

Drink of the Soma juice effused ; come to the food.

6 Ye, Indra, V&yu, well deserve to drink the juices pressed by us.
Gladly accept them, spotless Pair : come t6 the food. ~

7 For Indra and for V&yu pressed are Soma juices bfent with

curd, * .

As rivers to the lowland flow : come to the fooct.

3 Associate with all the Gods, come, with the Asvins and with;"
Dawn, * .

Agni, as erst with Atri, so enjoy the juice. , / v ■

4 This stanza is obscure. JDrdnyah petstih, the victim or beast connected
with, Or dwelling in, the ck'tina,, iuh or trough, is apparently the Soma. The
meaning may be that the man who causes the sacrificial fire to be kindled and
libations of Soma juice to be prepared is rewarded with brave sons and general
prosperity.

1 With all assistants : 'with all the protecting deities/ — Wilson. -

2 0 ye : other Gods,

3 0 Singer : Agni. With the singers: with the Human priests. Those who
move at claaon : the Gods who come to the morning sacrifice.

3 As erst with Atri: as thou wast accustomed to enjoy the libation offered
by the ancient Atri, the progenitor of the Ilishi of the hymn,

HYMN 52,]

TIIE MIG VEDA ,

m

9 Associate with Varuna, with Mitra* Soma, Vishnu, com£,

Agni, as erst with Atri, so enjoy the juice.

10 Associate with Vasus, with ^dityas, Indra, V&yu, cgme, Agni

as erst with Atri, so enjoy the juice.

11 May Bhaga and the Asvins grant us health and wealth, and

Goddess Adifci and he whom none resist.

The Asura Pfishan grant us all prosperity, and Heaven and
Earth most wise vouchsafe us happiness.

12 Let us solicit Vayu for prosperity, and Soma who is Lord of

all the world for weal;

For weal Brihaspati with all his company. May the Adityas
bring us health and happiness.

13 May all the Gods, may Agni the beneficent, God of all men,

this day be with us for our weal.

Help us the Ribhus, the Divine Ones, for our good. May Ru-
dra bless and keep us from calamity.

14 Prosper us, Mitra, Varuna. 0 wealthy Pathyfi, prosper us.
Indra and Agni, prosper us ; prosper us thou, 0 Aditi.

15 Like Sun and Moon may we pursue in full prosperity our path,
And meet with one who gives again, who knows us well and

slays us not.

HYMN LIL * Maruts.

^ Sim boldly forth, Syfivasva, with the Maruts who are loud in
' song, ^ :

Who, holy, as their wont is, joy in glory that is free from guilb.
2 For in their boldness they are friends of firm and sure heroic
strength.

They m their course, bold-spirited, guard all men of their
own accord.

' '3 Like steers in rapid motion they advance and overtake the
' ' nights ;

And thus the Maruts’ power in heaven and on the earth we
celebrate.

1% Health and wealth: svasti ; well-being, prosperity. I have slightly
varied the translation of the word, which recurs in every line of stanzas 11 — 14
and in the first line of 15. The Asura : the divine and immortal being. S&-
yana explains the word as { the expeller of enemies, or the giver of life and
strength/

12 With all his company : with all the host of heaven,

14 Wealthy Patkyd : ‘ the rich path,' personified as a deity of happiness
and welfare.

15 Who gives again : who repays the kindness we have shown him when he
was our guest. These, as .Professor Ludwig observes, are the wishes of a man
who is starting on a journey to a distant place,

Bad mn MMrfs op [book v.

4 With boldness to you? Maruts let us offer laud and sacrifice ;
Who all, through ages of mankind* guard mortal man from

injury*

5 Praiseworthy, givers of good gifts, Heroes With full and per-

fect strength —

. To Maruts, Holy Ones of heaven, will I extol the sacrifice.

6 The lofty Heroes cast their spears and weapons bright with

gleaming gold.

After these Maruts followed close, like laughing lightning from
the sky, a splendour of its own accord.

7 They who waxed mighty, of the earth, they who are in the

wide mid-air,

Or in the rivers’ compass* or in the abode of ample heaven.

8 Praise thou the Maruts’ company, the Valorous and truly

strong.

The Heroes, hasting, by themselves have yoked their deer for
victory.

9 Fair-gleaming, on Parushni they have clothed themselves in

robes of wool,

And with their chariot tires they cleave the rock asunder in
their might.

10 Whether as wanderers from the way or speeders on or to the

path,

. Under these names the spreading band tend well the sacrifice
for me.

11 To this the Heroes well attend, well do their teams attend to

this.

Visible are their varied forms. Behold, they are PA-r&vatas.

12 Hymn-singing, seeking water, they, praising, have danced

about the spring.

What are they unto me 'l Ho thieves, but helpers, splendid to
behold,

9 Parushni : one of the rivers of the Panj&b, now called the R&vt. Robes
of wool : the fleecy vapours whieh rise from the waters. See IV. 22. 2.

11 Pdrdvatas : a tribe who dwelt on the banks of the Parushni who may
have been in the habit of making sudden incursions into the country through
which the Sindhu or Indus flows.

12 Seeking water : this is Slyana’s explanation of hubhanydvah } the mean-

ing of which is uncertain. The spring : apparently, the cloud. According to
S&yana the reference is to the water— or the well— which was miraculously
brought to the thirsting Gk>t$ma by the Maruts. See I. 85. 11. The stanza
is difficult and obscure. * \

tlYMM §2.] RlQVtiDA. 621.

13 Sublime, with lightnings for 1 their spears, Sages and Order era

are they.

Rishi, adore that Marut host, and make them happy* with thy
song.

14 Rishi, invite the Marut band with offerings, as a maid her

friend.

From heaven, too, Bold Ones, in your might haste hither glo-
rified with songs.

15 Thinking of these now let him come, as With the escort of the

Gods,

And with the splendid Princes, famed for rapid courses,' to
the gifts.

16 Princes, Who, when I asked their kin, named Prism as their

Mother-cow,

And the impetuous Rudra they, the Mighty Ones, declared
their Sire.

17 The mighty ones, the seven times seven, have singly given

me hundred gifts.

I have obtained on Yamuua famed Wealth in kine and wealth
in steeds.

14 As a maid her friend ; this seems to be the meaning of mitrdm nd
yoshand, which S&yana explains, as a friend (or as Aditya, the Sun) with praise.

15 The three concluding stanzas are very difficult, and attempts at transla-
tion and explanation must be purely conjectural. The following is the subs-
tance of Professor Ludwig’s note. Bakins [mighty ones] in stanza 17 are ap-
parently a clan (yajam&niih, or institutors of sacrifice) whose number consisting
of a multiple of seven, gave occasion to their comparison to the Maruts, and
an easy transition to the ddnastuti or eulogy of their liberality. The construc-
tion is : now thinking of these sacrificers [or, Maruts] may he [the Rishi] come
together, as with the escort of the Gods [invited in stanza 14], in company
With [the Maruts or] the S fir is to the sacrificial offerings.

Stanza 16 is to be understood figuratively as eulogy of the §fikins who are
here directly identified with the Maruts. The priest must know the lineage
of the sacrificers, because in certain ceremonies he must proclaim their names,
and here S a kins are considered to have inherited their liberality from P risni
as their mother and their power from Rudra as their father.

17 The Mighty Ones : or the Sfikins, as Professor Ludwig explains.

The seven times seven : there are said to be seven troops of the Maruts,
each consisting of seven. The S&kins, or powerful institutors of . sacrifice,
appear to be intended here (see preceding note) as compared to, or identified
with the Maruts. On Yamund : on the banks of the river now known as the
Jumna.

This and all Rigveda hymns addressed to the Maruts have been translated
and thorougly discussed by Professor Max Muller ha Vedic Hymns, Part I,
(Sacred Books of the East, Vol. XXXII.)

522

THE HYMNS OF

IBOOK V,

HYMN LIII. Maruts.

Who knows the birth of these, or who lived in the Maruts’
favour in the days of old
What time their spotted deer were yokedj

Who, when they stood upon their cars, hath heard them tell
the way they went?

Who was the bounteous man to whom their kindred rains
flowed down with food of sacrifice ?

3 To me they told it, and they came with winged steeds radiant

to the draught,

. Youths, Heroes free from spot or stain : Behold us here and
praise thou us ;

4 Who shine self-luminous with ornaments and swords, with

breastplates, armlets, and with wreaths,

Arrayed on chariots and with bows.,

5 0 swift to pour your bounties down, ye Maruts, with delight

I look upon your cars,

Like splendours coming through the rain.

6 Munificent Heroes, they have cast heaven’s treasury down for

the worshipper’s behoof :

They set the storm-cloud free to stream through both the
worlds, and rainfloods flow o’er desert spots.

7 The bursting streams in billowy flood have spread abroad, like

milch-kine, o’er the firmament.

Like swift steeds hasting to their journey’s resting-place, to
every side run glittering brooks.

5 Hither, 0 Maruts, come from heaven, from mid-air, or from
near at hand :

Tarry not far away from us.

9 So let not Basfi, Krumu, or Anitabha, Kubba, or Sitidhu hold
you back.

Let not the watery Sarayu obstruct your way. With us be
all the bliss ye give.

10 That brilliant gathering of your cars, the company of Maruts,
of the Youthful Ones,

The rain-showers, speeding on, attend.

1 Of these : Gods ; the Maruts.

9 JRasd : a river, probably an affluent of the Sindhu or Indus, as Aniiabhd
also seems to have been. Krumu ; a tributary of the Indus, identified by
some with the Kurum. Kubhd : the Koph&n, or Kabul river which falls into
the Indus near AUock. Sarayu : probably a river in the Panjab which gW 1
Its name to the Sarayu or Sarju of Oudh,

THE RIG YE DA.

523

HYMN 511

1 1 With eulogies and hymns may *vve follow your army, tx*oop by

troop, and hand hy band,

And company by company. *

12 To what oblation-giver, sprung of noble ancestry, have sped
* The Maruts on this course to-day ?

1 3 Vouchsafe to us the' bounty, that which we implore, through

which, for child and progeny,

Ye give the seed of corn that wasteth not away, and bliss
that reacheth to all life.

14 May we in safety pass by those who slander us, leaving be-

hind disgrace and hate.

Maruts, may we be there when ye, at dawn, in rest and toil,
rain waters clown and balm.

15 Favoured by Gods shall be the man, 0 Heroes, Maruts! and

possessed of noble sons,

Whom ye protect. Such may we be.

1 6 Praise the Free-givers. At this liberal patron’s rite they joy
like cattle in the mead.

So call thou unto them who come as ancient Friends ; hymn
those who love thee with a song,

HYMN LIV, Maruts.

This hymn will I make ready for the Marat host who bright
in native Splendour cast the mountains down.

Sing the great strength of those illustrious in renown, who
stay the heat, who sacrifice on heights of heaven.

2- 0 Maruts, rich in water, strengtheners of life are your strong
bands: with harnessed steeds, that wander far,

Trita roars out at him who aims the lightning-flash. The
Waters sweeping round are thundering on their way.

3 They gleam with lightning, Heroes, ^Casters of the_Sto_ng ,
wind-rapid Maruts, overthrow ex's of the hills,

Oft through desire to rain coming with storm of hail, roaring
in onset, violent and exceeding strong.

1 Who sacrifice on heights of heaven : * to whom solemn rites are familiar *
hy whom the sacrifices called JPrishtha are made,’ — Wilson. The word prishr
thd is ambiguous, signifying hoth height or ridge and a oertain arrangement
‘of hymns (see IV. 20. 4). So also gharmci in the same halfdine signifies both
heat and an oblation of hot milk or other heated beverage, and the meaning
of the compound gharmasttibhe is accordingly ambiguous.

2 Trita : the Vedic God who frequently appears in connexion with the

Maruts, According to S&yana, Trita is the cloud or company of Maruts sta*
tinned in three places, ♦ ;

524 PbM tifMtiS OP [nook V. v

4 When, mighty Eudras, through the nights and through the v
days, when through the sky and realms of air, shakers of all,
When over the broad fields ye drive along like ships, e’eti to
strongholds ye Gome, Maruts, but are not harmed.

6 Maruts, this hero strength and majesty of yours hath, like ,
the Sun, extended o'er a lengthened way,

When in your course like deer with splendour unslibdued ye
bowed the hill that gives imperishable rain*

6 Bright shone your host, ye Sages, Maruts, when ye suiote the
waving tree as when the worm cotisumeth it.

Accordant, as the eye guides him who walks, have ye led out
devotion onward by an easy path.

? Never is he, 0 Maruts, slain or overcome, hever doth lie decay,
ne’er is distressed or harmed j

Sis treasures, his resources, never Waste away, whom, whether
he be prince or Bifjhi, ye directs ‘

8 With harnessed team like heroes overdoming troops, the friendly

Maruts, laden with their water-casks,

Let the spring flow, and when impetuous they rear they
inundate the earth with floods Of pleasant mOath*

9 Free for the Maruts is the earth with sloping ways, free for the

rushing Ones is heaven with steep descents.

The paths of air’s mid-region are precipitous, precipitous the
mountains with their running streams*

10 When, as the Sun hath risen up, ye take delight, 0 bounteous

radiant Maruts, Heroes of the sky,

Your coursers weary not when speeding on their way, and
rapidly ye reach the end of this your path.

1 1 Lances a re on your shoulders, anklets on y our feet, gold chains

-tv,,, rS..y r ‘

I. ;igVi' v ;!i . ! u : n-' civ :!fidi :, .g in your hands, and

visors wrought of gold are laid upon your heads.

12 Maruts, in eager stir ye shake the vault of heaven, splendid .

beyond conception, for its shining fruit.

They gathered when they let their deeds of might flash forth.
The Pious Ones send forth a far*resounding shout,

13 Sage Maruts, may we be the drivers of the car of riches full

of life that have been given by you.

0 Maruts, let that wealth in thousands dwell with us which
never vanishes like Tishya from the sky,

12 For Us shining fruit : the bright water.

13 The drivers of the car : that is, the controllers. May we by our prayers
and sacrifices bring down and enjoy the riches which you giye, ■

HYMH 55.] THE RIGYEEA . 52S

14 Maruts, ye further wealth with longed-for heroes, further the

Bishi shilled in chanted verses.

Ye give the Bharata as his strength, a charger, and ye^bestow
a King who quickly listens.

15 Of you, most swift to succour ! I solicit wealth wherewith we

may spread forth mid men like as the Sun.

Accept, 0 Maruts, graciously this hymn of mine that we may
live a hundred winters through its power,

HYMN LV. Maruts.

With gleaming lances, with their breasts adorned with gold,
the Maruts, rushing onward, hold high power of life.

They hasten with swift steeds easy to be controlled. Their
cars moved onward as they went to victory.

2 Ye, as ye wist, have gained of your own selves your power:

high, 0 ye Mighty Ones, and wide ye shine abroad.

They with their strength have even measured out the sky.
Their cars moved onward as they went to victory.

3 Strong, born together, they together have waxed great : the

Heroes more and more have grown to majesty.

Besplendent as the Sun’s beams in their light are they. Their
cars moved onward as they went to victory.

4 Maruts, your mightiness deserves to be adored, sight to be

longed for like the shinin g of the Sun.

So lead us with your aid to immortality. Their cars moved
onward as they went to victory.

5 0 Maruts, from the Ocean ye uplift the rain, and fraught with

vaporous moisture pour the torrents down.

Never, ye Wonder-Workers, are your Milch-kine dry. Their
cars moved onward as they went to victory.

6 When to your car-poles ye have yoked your spotted deer to be

your steeds, and put your golden mantles on,

0 Maruts, ye disperse all enemies abroad. Their cars moved
onward as they went to victory,

Tishya : an asterism regarded as shaped like an arrow and containing three
stars. According to S&yana Tishya here is synonymous with Aditya.

14 The Bharata : a warrior, or one of family of Bharata. See Index. Ac*
cording to S&yana, ?3y&v£sva tkeBishi of the hymn is intended : ‘to .(me) the.,
ministrant priest.’ — Wilson.

Who quickly listens : to his people’s prayers. S&yana explains srushtimdntain
as sukhavantaniy happy and prosperous.

lo J hundred winters : a frequently occurring expression, * from which we
might infer/ says Dr. J. Muir, ‘that the Indians still retained some recollec-
tion of their having at one time occupied a odder country.’ See Original Sans*

krit Texts , II. 323. *

5 Your Milch-Jcine : the rain-clouds,

S20 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V.

7 Neither the" mountains nor the rivers keep you back ; whither

ye have resolved thither ye, Maruts, go.

- Ye compass round about even the heaven and earth. Their
cars moved onward as they went tn victory.

8 Whate’er is ancient, Maruts, what of recent time, whate’er is

spoken, Yasus, what is chanted forth,

* They who take cognizance of all of this are ye. Their cars

moved onward as they went to victory.

9 Be gracious unto us, ye Maruts, slay us not : extend ye unto

us shelter of many a sort.

Pay due regard unto our friendship and our praise. Their
cars moved onward*as they went to victory.

10 0 Maruts, lead us on to higher fortune: deliver us, when
lauded, from afflictions.

Accept, ye Holy Ones, the gifts we bring you. May we be
masters of abundant riches.

HYMN LVL Maruts.

Aonx, that valorous company adorned with ornaments of gold,
The people of the Maruts, I call down to-day even from the
luminous realm of heaven.

2 Even as thou thinkest in thy heart, thither my wishes also

tend.

Those who have come most near to thine invoking calls,
strengthen them fearful to behold.

3 Earth, like a bounteous lady, liberal of her gifts, struck

down and shaken, yet exultant, comes to us.

Impetuous as a bear, 0 Maruts, is your rush terrible as a
dreadful bull.

4 They who with mighty strength overthrow like oxen difficult

to yoke,

Cause e’en the heavenly stone to shake, "yea, shake the rocky
mountain as they race along.

& Rise -up ! even now with lauds I call the very numexxms com-

* P&ny,

Unequalled, of these Maruts, like a herd of l^ine, grown up
together in their strength.

2 i Strengthen them : that is, the Maruts, with oblations.

3 The exact meaning of the first line is somewhat uncertain. S&yana ex-
plains it : f As the earth — that is the people of the earth — having a powerful
masters, when oppressed by others, has recourse to him her own master, so
. the army of Maruts comes exulting to us.’ But mWifahnati (bounteous, liberal,
bringing forth abundant fruit) cannot mean prabulasvdmifcti, having a power-
ful master.

Struck doivn ; by the rain sent by the Maruts,

HYMN 57.] ' THE RIG VEDA, 527

6 Bind to your car the bright red mares, yoke the red coursers

to your car.

Bind to the pole, to draw, the fleet-foot tawny steeds, the
best at drawing, to the pole. '

7 Yea, and this loudly-neighing bright red vigorous horse who

hath been stationed, fair to see,

Let him not cause delay, 0 Maruts, in your course, urge ye
him onward in your cars.

8 The Maruts’ chariot, ever fain to gather glory, we invoke,
Which Rodasi hath mounted, bringing pleasant gifts, with

Maruts in her company.

9 I call that brilliant band of yours, adorable, rapid on the car
Whereon the bounteous Dame, auspicious, nobly bom, shows

glorious with the Marut host.*

HYMN LVII. Maruts.

Of one accord, with Indra, 0 ye Rudras, come borne on your
golden car for our prosperity.

An offering from us, this hymn is brought to you, as, unto one
who thirsts for water, heavenly springs.

2 Armed with your daggers, full of wisdom, armed with spears,

armed with your quivers, armed with arrows, with good bows,
Good horses and good cars have ye, 0 Prism’s Sons : ye, Maruts,
with good weapons go to victory.

3 From hills and heaven ye shake wealth for the worshipper : in

terror at your coming low the woods bow down.

Ye make the earth to tremble, Sons of Prisni, when for victory
ye have yoked, fierce Ones ! your spotted deer.

4 Bright with the blasts of wind, wrapped in their robes of rain,

like twins of noble aspect and of lovely form,

The Maruts, spotless, with steeds tawny-hued and red, strong
in their mightiness and spreading wide like heaven. .

5 Rich in adornment, rich in drops, munificent, bright in their

aspect, yielding bounties that endure,

Noble by birth, adorned with gold upon their breasts, the
Singers of the sky have won immortal fame.

7 Who hath been stationed : or harnessed to the car.

8 Rodasi : the Consort of Rudra and mother of the Maruts.

9 The bounteous Dame : Rodasi. Shows glorious ; or, is glorified.

1 0 ye Rudras : or Sons of Rudra. For our prosperity : 4 to the accessible
(sacrifice).’ — -Wilson. Heavenly springs ; an allusion, says S&yana, to the well,
that is, the cloud which was brought by the Maruts to thirsty Gotama, See
I. 85. 11.

4 Like twins : all alike.

5 The Singers of the sky ; chanters of their tlxunder-psalm.

528 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK V.

6 Borne on both shoulders, 0 ye Maruts, are your spears : within

your arms is laid your energy and strength.

Bold thoughts are in your heads, your weapons in your cars,
all glorious majesty is moulded on your forms.

7 Vouchsafe to us, 0 Maruts, splendid bounty in cattle and in

steeds, in cars and heroes.

Children of Budra, give us high distinction : may I enjoy your

Godlike help and favour. J 4

8 Ho ! Maruts, Heroes, skilled in Law, immortal, be gracious un-

to us, ye rich in treasures,

Ye hearers of the truth, ye sage and youthful, grown mighty, <

dwelling on the lofty mountains. ■

HYMN LVIIL Maruts. ‘i

Now do I glorify their mighty cohort, the company of these the

youthful Maruts, j

Who ride impetuous on with rapid horses, and radiant in .?

themselves, are Lords of Amrit, . ;

2 The mighty glittering hand, arm-bound with bracelets, givers ^

of bliss, unmeasured in their greatness, t.

With magical powers, bountiful, ever-roaring, — these, liberal 0

Heroes, venerate thou singer.

3 This day may all your water-b ringers, Maruts, they who impel

the falling rain, approach us. ;

This fire, 0 Maruts, hath been duly kindled ; let it find favour h

with you, youthful Sages, i

4 Ye raise up for the folk an active ruler whom, Holy Ones 1 a

Master’s hand hath fashioned.

Ye send the fighter hand to hand, arm-mighty, and the bi*ave
hero, Maruts ! with good horses.

, . — —

6 Bold thoughts : S&yana explains nrimwlt — nrimndrii as golden tiaras. The k

word nrim.no, in one or another of its cases occurs some thirty times in the h

Rigveda, and always in the sense of manly power, valour, or valorous deed.

8 Ye hearers of the truth ; or, famous for your truth, for the realization of 'j ■

your promises. ■.£/'

1 Lords of Amrit : controllers of the sweet life-giving rain. /

2 Arm-bound with bracelets : or, rather, ‘ adorned with quoits on their

hands/— M. Muller. ;

4 Whom a Master’s hand hath fashioned ; according to S&yana vibhva- j*

tashtam means fabricated or modelled by Vibhvan, the second of the three ^

Ribhus. i. e. atyan tar Upavantam or exceedingly handsome. The fighter hand ii

to hand : the man who fights on foot is your gift as well as the warrior who is i;

borne to battle in a chariot,

MTMN 59.]

TEE RIQVEDA.

529

5 They spring forth more and more, strong in their glories, like

days, like spokes where none are last in order.

Highest and mightiest are the Sons of Prisni. Ei:gn to their
own intention cling the Maruts.

6 When ye have hastened on with spotted coursers, 0 Maruts,

on your cars with strong-wrought fellies,

The waters are disturbed, the woods are shattered. Let Dyaus
the Red Steer send his thunder downward.

7 Even Earth hath spread herself wide at their coming, and

they as husbands have with power impregned her.

They to the pole have yoked the winds for coursers ; their
sweat have they made rain, these Sons of Rudra.

8 Ho ! Maruts, Heroes, skilled in Law, immortal, be gracious

unto us, ye rich in treasures,

Ye hearers of the truth, ye sage and youthful, grown mighty,
dwelling on the lofty mountains.

HYMN LIX. Maruts.

Your spy hath called to you to give prosperity. I sing to Heaven
and Earth and offer sacrifice.

They bathe their steeds and hasten through the firmament :
they spread abroad their radiance through the sea of cloud.

2 Earth shakes and reels in terror at their onward rush, like a

full ship which, quivering, lets the water in.

Marked on their ways are they, visible from afar : the Heroes
press between in mighty armament.

3 As the exalted horn of bulls for splendid might, as the Sun’s

eye set in the firmament’s expanse,

Like vigorous horses ye are beauteous to behold, and for your
glory show like bridegrooms, 0 ye Men.

4 Who, 0 ye Maruts, may attain the mighty lore of you the

mighty, who may reach your manly deeds?

Ye, verily, make earth tremble like a ray of light what time
ye bring your boons to give prosperity.

5 Like steeds of ruddy colour, scions of one race, as foremost

champions they have battled in the van.

The Heroes have waxed strong like well-grown manly youths :
with floods of rain they make the Sun’s eye fade away.

6 Having no eldest and no youngest in their band, no middle-

most, preeminent they have waxed in might,

1 Your spy : Agni, as the lightning. According to S&yana spat is for
sprashtd, one who touches (the oblation), the Hotar or presenting priest.

2 Press between ; rush through the air between heaven and earth,

34

530 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V.

These Sons of Prisni, sprung of noble ancestry : come hither-
ward to us, ye bridegrooms of the sky.

7 Like birds of air they flew with might in lengthened lines from

healyeifls high ridges to the borders of the sky.

The steeds who carry them, as Gods and mortals know, have
caused the waters of the mountains to descend.

8 May Dyaus, the Infinite, roar for our banquet : may Dawns

toil for us, glittering with moisture.

Lauded by thee, these Maruts, Sons of Rudra, 0 Rishi, have
sent down the heavenly treasure.

HYMN LX. Maruts.

I laud with reverence the gracious Agni : here may he sit and
part our meed among us.

As with spoil-seeking cars I bring oblation : turned rightward
I will swell the Marut’s praise-song.

2 The Maruts, yea, the Rudras, who have mounted their famous

spotted deer and cars swift-moving, —

Before you, fierce Ones ! woods bow down in terror : Earth,
even the mountain, trembles at your coming.

3 Though vast and tall, the mountain is affrighted, the height

of heaven is shaken at your roaring
When, armed with lances, ye are sporting, Maruts, and rush
along together like the waters.

4 They, like young suitors, sons of wealthy houses, have with

their golden natures decked their bodies.

Strong on their cars, the lordly Ones, for glory, have set their
splendours on their forms for ever,

5 None being eldest, none among them youngest, as brothers

they have grown to happy fortune.

May their Sire Rudra, young and deft, and Prisni pouring
much milk, bring fair days to the Maruts.

7 Gods and mortals : the text has only ubhdye, both (sides or parties). The
word generally means Gods and men ; but perhaps, as Professor Ludwig sug-
gests, Heaven and Barth may be intended here.

8 Dyaus, the Infinite ; Ot X. 63. 3.

1 Turned rightward : making reverential salutation by circumambulation
from left to right ; the Gaelic deasil.

4 With their golden natures: with some hesitation I follow Professor Ludwig

: ' 1 * * * 5 * ' Y ‘ 7 ' 1 . ■ . . 1 ‘i old form of the feminine, with svadMih, Professor

■ ' ■ ' ■ " " " \' ... translates ; ‘with golden (ornaments) and purifying

waters/

5 Pouring much milk : Prisni, the mother of the Maruts, the cloud of the
firmament, being represented as a cow.

Bring fair days to the Maruts : perhaps the bright weather which follows

the Rains. * Grant favourable days for (the sake of; the Maruts/— Wilson.

HYMN 61.] THE RWVEDA , $3}

6 Whether, 0 blessed Maruts, ye be dwelling in highest, mid-

most, or in lowest heaven,

Thence, 0 ye Rudras, and thou also, Agni, notice themerifieial
food we offer,

7 0 Maruts, Lords of all, when Agni and when ye drive down-

ward from sublimest heaven along the heights,

Shakers of all, rejoicing, slayers of the foe, give riches to the
Soma-pressing worshipper.

S 0 Agni, with the Maruts as they gleam and sing, gathered in
troop, rejoicing drink the Soma juice ;

With these the living ones who cleanse and further all, joined
with thy banner, 0 Vaisvanara, from of old.

HYMN LXI. Maruts,

0 heroes lordliest of all, who are ye that have singly come
Forth from a region most remote?

2 Where are your horses, where the reins 2 How came ye ? how

had ye the power ?

Rein w r as on nose and seat on back.

3 The whip is laid upon the flank. The heroes stretch their

thighs apart,

Like women when the babe is born.

4 Go ye, 0 Heroes, far away, ye bridegrooms with a lovely

Spouse,

That ye may warm you at the fire.

5 May she gain cattl(L jQr~..her. ... meed, hundreds of sheep and

steeds” and kme,

Who threw embracing arms around the hero whom Syav&sva
praised.

6 Yea, many a woman is more firm and better than the man t

who YurrTs “ “ ~~ ~~ ~~

Away from Gods, and offers not.

7 She who discerns the weak and worn, the man who thirsts

' ancTis rnlvantl

She sets her mind upon the Gods.

8 Joined with thy banner ; closely connected with thy ensign or banner of
flame.

4 With a lovely Spouse : apparently Rodasi, who is sometimes regarded as
the wife of the whole hand of Maruts.

5 She : according to S&yana, the wife of Taranta (stanza 10) who is 'the.*
hero whom Sy&v&sva praised.*

6 More firm : the word thus rendered, sdsiyasi, is taken by S&yana to be the
name of Taranta’s wife.

532 THE HYMNS OH [ BOOK V.

8 And yet full many a one, unpraised, mean niggard, is entitled

man :

Only 2n weregild is he such.

9 And she, the young, the joyous-spirited, divulged the path to

Syava, yea, to me.

Two red steeds earned me to Purumtlha's side, that sage of
far-extended fame,

10 Him who, like Vaidadasvi, like Taranta, hath bestowed on me
A hundred cows in libei’al gift.

1 1 They who are borne by rapid steeds, drinking the meath that

gives delight,

They have attained high glories here.

12 They by whose splendour both the worlds are over-spread ;

they shine on cars

As the gold gleams above in heaven.

13 That Marut band is ever young, borne on bright cars, un-

blamable,

Moving to victory, checked by none.

14 Who knoweth, verily, of these where the All-shakers take

delight,

Born, spotless, after sacred Law ?

15 Guides are ye, lovers of the song l to mortal man through holy

hymn,

And hearers when he cries for help.

16 Do ye, destroyers of the foe, worshipful and exceeding bright.
Send down the treasures that we crave.

17 0 tj rmya, bear thou far away to Darbhya this my hymn of

praise,

Songs, Goddess, as if chariot-borne.

18 From me to Bathaviti say, when he hath pressed the Soma

juice,

The wish I had departeth not.

19 This wealthy Bathaviti dwells among the people rich in kine,
Among the mountains, far withdrawn.

8 Only in weregild : only as regards the fine to be paid for manslaughter,
either by him or for him, can he be accounted a man. The verse is obscure.
See Vedic Hymns (Sacred Books of the East), Part I, p» 360, and Ludwig,
Ueber die neuesten Arbeiten, &c., p. 40.

9 And she : Taranta’s wife. Sydva — Sy&v&sva, the llishi of the hymn.

10 F aidadasvi; Purumilha, eon of Vidadnsva.

11 This stanza is apparently the beginning of a separate hymn, in honour
of the Maruts.

12 As the gold: the golden Sun.

17 Urrnyd : Goddess of Night. Edrlhya : Rathaviti, son of Darbha.

18 The wish 1 had: to perform a sacrifice for the rich and liberal Bathaviti. *

BYMtft 2.] mn nrovMM, ’ ssa

HYMN LXIL Mitra-Varuna.

By your higli Law firm order is established there where they
loose for travel Sirya’s horses. #

Ten hundred stood together : there I looked on this the most
marvellous Deities’ one chief glory.

2 This, Mitra-Varuna, is your special greatness: floods that stood

there they with the days attracted.

Ye cause to flow all voices of the cow-pen : your single chariot-
felly hath rolled hither.

3 0 Mitra-Varuna, ye by your greatness, both Kings, have firmly

stablished earth and heaven.

Ye caused"the cows to stream, the plants to flourish, and, scat-
tering swift drops, sent down the rain-flood.

4 Let your well-haraessed horses bear you hither : hitherward

let them come with reins drawn tightly.

A covering cloud of sacred oil attends you, and your streams
flow to us from days aforetime.

5 To make the lustre wider and more famous, guarding the

secred grass with veneration,

Ye, Mitra-Varuna, firm, strong, awe-inspiring, are seated on a
throne amid oblations.

6 With hands that shed no blood, guarding the pious, whom,

Varuna, ye save amid oblations.

Ye Twain, together, Kings of willing spirit, uphold dominion
based on thousand pillars.

7 Adorned with gold, its columns are of iron : in heaven it glit-

ters like a whip for horses ;

1 By your high Laio : the eternal order of the universe, which in the region
©f the Sun regulates the starting and the journeying of his horses, depends
on, or is identical with, the everlasting statutes of Mitra and Varuna. Ten
hundred ; rays of the Sun. One chief glory ; the orb of the Sun, the noblest
visible form of Agni and other Gods.

2 Floods that stood there : they, that is the sunbeams, have in the course of
days milked out or attracted to themselves the waters that stood apart from
the Sun. TasthusHh (standing, stationary) has no substantive expressed,
and the meaning of the second half line is consequently somewhat uncertain.
All voices of the cow-pen : the cow-pen is the vast aerial stall which holds
the rain -clouds, the milch-kine of the firmament. The W'—' r.-* 1 2 * 4 5 6 7

the thunder and the roar of the rushing rain. Your single . i ■ ft • ■

circumference or felly of the wheel being, by metonymy, put for the chariot.

4 A covering cloud of sacred oil of ghrita f butter, £. e. fertilizing rain.

5 On a throne : or on your car.

6 Ye save amid oblations ; the sacrificial hall with its precincts being regard-
ed as an inviolable asylum.

7 Adorned with gold : the chariot of Mitra and Varuna. Like a whip for
horses : according to S&yana, the whip is the lightning and the horses are the
flying clouds.

hi * 1 f&f MYum of \sook v.

Or stablished on a field deep-soiled and fruitful. So may we
share thie meath that loads jour car-seat.

8 Ye mount your car gold-hued at break of morning, and iron-

pillared when the Sun fs setting',

And from that place* O Varupa and Mitra, behold infinity and
■ limitation.

9 Bountiful guardians of the world ! the shelter that is impene-

trable* strongest, flawless,

Aid us with that, 0 Yaruna and Mitra, and when we long to
win may we be victors.

HYMN LXIII. Mitra-Varuna,

Gtjabdians of Order, ye whose Laws are ever true, in the
sublimest heaven your chariot ye ascend.

0 Mitra-Yaruna whomsoe'er ye favour, here, to him the rain
with sweetness streameth down from heaven.

2 This world 7 s imperial Kings, 0 Mitra-Yaruna, ye rule in holy
synod, looking on the light.

We pray for rain, your boon, and immortality. Through heaven
and over earth the thunderers take their way.

8 Imperial Kings, strong, Heroes, Lords of earth and heaven,
Mitra and Yaruna, ye ever active Ones,

Ye wait on thunder with the many-tinted clouds, and by the
Asura’s magic power cause Heaven to rain.

4 Your magic, Mitra-Yaruna, resteth in the heaven. The Sun,
the wondrous weapon, cometh forth as light.

Ye hide him in the sky with cloud and flood of rain, and water-
drops, Parjanya ! full of sweetness flow.

Or stablished: tlie meaning of this third P&da is not clear. Professor
Wilson, following S&yana, translates : *may we load the vehicle with the liba-
tion in an auspicious place, or in the sacrificial hall, (where the columns) are
erected."

8 Iron-pillared : the chariot which shines like gold in the light of the rising
sun looks dim and dark like bronze or iron at sunset.

Infinity and limitation : dditim ditim aha j according to S&yana, Aditi or.
the Earth as an indivisible whole, and Diti as representing the divisible people
and living creatures inhabiting it. Aditi appears to mean infinite Nature, and
Diti to be a Goddess connected with Aditi without any distinct conception,
and merely as a contrast to her. The two words may perhaps mean the eter-
nal and the perishable, yonder boundless space and the bounded space near us,
or Sky and Earth, or Nature by day and Nature by night. ‘ At all events,
as Dr. Muir observes, ‘ the two together appear to be put by the poet for the
entire aggregate of visible nature.’ See Original Sanskrit Texts, Y. pp. 42, 43.

The hymn is a prayer for rain.

2 The thunderers : the roaring winds.

3 The A sura's magic power : the Asura or divine Being here is either Dyaus
or Parjanya.

TEE MOVE DA,

535

BYMN 640

4 The Maruts yoke their easy oar for victory, O Mitra-Varuna,
as a hero in the wars.

The thunderers roam through regions varied in t&eir hues.
Imperial Kings, bedew us with the milk of heaven.

6 Refreshing is your voice, O Mitra-Varuna : Parjanya sendeth

out a wondrous mighty voice.

With magic power the Maruts clothe them with the clouds.
Ye Two cause Heaven to rain, the red, the spotless One.

7 Wise, with your Law and through the Asura’s magic power

ye guard the ordinances, Mitra-Varuna.

Ye by eternal Order govern all the world. Ye set the Sun in
heaven as a refulgent car.

HYMN LX IV, Mitra-Varuna.

You, foeman-slaying Varuna and Mitra, we invoke with song,
Who, as with penfold of your arms, encompass round the realm
of light.

2 Stretch out your arms with favouring love unto this man who

singeth hymns,

For in all places is sung forth your ever-gracious friendliness.

3 That I may gain a refuge now, may my steps be on Mitra's

path.

Men go protected in the charge of this dear Friend who harms
us not.

A Mitra and Varuna, from you may I, by song, win noblest
meed

That shall stir envy in the homes of wealthy chiefs and those
who praise.

5 With your fair splendours, Varuna and Mitra, to our gather-

ing come,

That in their homes the wealthy chiefs and they who are your
friends may thrive.

6 With those, moreover, among whom ye hold your high supre-

macy,

Vouchsafe us room that we may win strength for prosperity
and wealth.

1 With p enfold of your arms; I follow- Professor Ludwig in taking vrajfl as
an instrumental case.

3 May my steps he ; may I walk in the way of Mitra, that m, may I keep
his holy law.

5 The wealthy chiefs : the institutors of sacrifice. Your friends ; we, the
priests.

6 With those ; with the Gods.

m the hymns of [soon r.

7 When morning flushes, Holy Ones ! in the Gods ? realm where
white Cows shine,

Supporting Archananas, speed, ye Heroes, with your active
feet hither to my pressed Soma juice.

HYMN LXY. Mitra- Yaruna.

Full wise is he who hath discerned ; let him speak to us of
the Gods, —

The man whose praise-songs Varuna the beautiful, or Mitra,
loves.

2 For they are Kings of noblest might, of glorious fame most

widely spread ;

Lords of the brave, who strengthen Law, the Holy Ones with
every race.

3 Approaching you with prayer for aid, together I address you

first.

We who have good steeds call on you, Most Sage, to give u»
strength besides.

4 E’en out of misery Mitra gives a way to dwelling at our ease,
For he who worships hath the grace of Mitra, fighter in the

van.

5 In Mitra’s shelter that extends to utmost distance may we

dwell,

Unmenaced, guarded by thy care, ever as sons of Yaruna.

6 Ye, Mitra, urge this people on, and to one end direct their

ways.

Neglect not ye the wealthy chiefs, neglect not us the Bishis :
be our guardians when ye quaff the milk.

HYMN LXYL Mitra- Yaruna

0 sapient man, call the Two Gods, the very wise, who slay
the foe.

For Yaruna, whose form is Law, place offerings for his great
delight.

7 White Cows; the white clouds of early morning. Archandnas : the RMu
of the hymn. With your active feet : the literal translation of hmtibhih pad -
bhih would be, with feet provided with hands : * With rapid steeds.’ — Wilson.
See M. Bloomfield, Contributions to the Interpretation of the Yeda, Second
Series, p. 35.

1 Of the Gods : regarding Mitra and Varuna.

5 As sons of Varuna ; or perhaps, as Professor Ludwig suggests, with
Yaruna as our son, that is with kingly descendants.

6 Ye, Mitra : and Varuna.

When ye quaff the milk ; f in the presenting of the libation.’ — Wilson,

1 0 Sapient man : thou who knowest how to praise the Gods.

Whose form is Law ; according to Sayana, ‘ whose form is water.’

JBYMN 67.] THE RIG VEDA. 637

2 For they have won unbroken sway in full perf^otm^^praver

divine.

And, like high hath been made beautb

fhl asllgbt. ^

3 Therefore we praise you that your cars may travel far in front

of ours —

You who accept the eulogy of R&tahavya with his hymns.

4 And ye show wisdom, Wondrous Gods ! with fulness of intelli-

gence.

By men's discernment are ye marked, 0 ye whose might is
purified.

5 This is the Law sublime, 0 Earth : to aid the Rishis' toil for

fame

The Two, wide-spreading, are prepared. They come with
.ample overflow.

6 Mitra, ye Gods with wandering eyes, would that the worship-

pers and we

Might strive to reach the realm ye rule, most spacious and
protected well.

HYMN LXVir. Mitra- Varuna,

Ye Gods, Adityas, Yaruna, Aryaman, Mitra, verily
Have here obtained supremest sway, high, holy, set apart for
you.

2 When, Yaruna and Mitra, ye sit in your golden dwelling-place.
Ye Twain, supporters of mankind, foe-slayers, give felicity.

3 All these, possessors of all wealth, Yaruna, Mitra, Aryaman,
Follow their ways, as if with feet, and guard from injury

mortal man.

2 Like high laws : Professor Ludwig would read vratena instead of vrativa,
that is, through holy ordinance.

3 Udtaharya : the Rishi of the hymn. X can make nothing out of thi»
stanza, and I follow Sayan a in despair of finding a reasonable interpretation,

4 This stanza also is difficult and obscure.

5 0 Earth: Prithivl, or Earth, is quite out of place here. Professor Ludwig
suspects a corruption of the text, and Professor Grassmann thinks that the
whole stanza has been inserted by mistake. The two wide-spreading or far-
reaching Gods, Mitra and Yaruna, are said to be ready to listen to the Rishis'
prayers and so to increase their renown. The copious fall of rain is proof that
their prayers have been heard.

6 Ye Gods : Mitra and Yaruna, Mitra only being named.

2 Your golden dwelling-place : the delightful place of sacrifice, according to
S&yana.

3 Follow their ways ; their royal ordinances, vratft, that is vratftni.

m

THE HYMNS OF

{BOOK F»

4 For*thcy arc true, they cleave to Law, held holy among every
race,

Goocf leaders, bounteous in -their gifts, deliverers even from
distress.

£> Which of your persons, Varuna or Mitra, merits not our praise ?
Therefore our thought is turned to you, the Atria* thought is
turned to you.

HYMN LXVIIL Mitra-Varuna.

Sing forth unto your Varuna and Mitra with a song inspired.
They, Mighty Lords, are lofty Law :

2 Full springs of fatness, Sovran Kings, Mitra and Varuna, the

Twain,

Gods glorified among the Gods,

3 So help ye us to riches, great terrestrial and celestial wealth :
Vast is your sway among the Gods.

4 Carefully tending Law with Law they have attained their

vigorous might.

The Two Gods wax devoid of guile.

5 With rainy skies and streaming floods, Lords of the strength

that bringeth gifts,

A lofty seat have they attained,

HYMN LXIX, Mitra-Varuna.

Three spheres of light, 0 Va»una, three heavens, three
firmaments ye comprehend, 0 Mitra ;

Waxed strong, ye keep the splendour of dominion, guarding
the Ordinance that lasts for ever. °

2 Ye, Varuna, have kine who yield refreshment; Mitra, your
floods pour water full of sweetness.

There stand the Three Steers, splendid in their brightness,
who fill the three world-howls with genial moisture.

1 They, Mighty Lords , are lofty Law ; * (come) mighty deities, to the great
sacrifice.’ — Wilson.

2, Full savings of fatness ; originators of streams of fertilizing rain ; or
gkritdyont may mean here as it does elsewhere, dwelling or having their home
with ghritd, clarified butter or oil used in sacrifice.

5 Lords of the strength that bringeth gifts ; * lords of sustenance, suited to
.the liberal donors (of oblations).’— Wilson.

1 Three firmaments ; according to Say ana, three realms of earth, an inter-
pretation which is more in accordance with the second half of stanza 2.

2 Three Steers ; Agni as terrestrial fire on earth, Vdyu as the wind in

Surya as the Sun in heaven. World bowls : Ludwig explains
differently. See his Ueber die neuesten Arbeiten auf dem Gebiete der ltgveda-
forscliung, p, 85, Genial moisture : the fertilizing rain.

IIYMN 72.] THE RIG VEDA ,

3 I call at dawn on Aditi the Goddess, I call at noon and when

the Sun is setting.

I pray, O Mitra-Varuna, for safety, for wealth and progeny*
in rest and trouble.

4 Ye who uphold the region, sphere of brightness, ye who

support earth’s realm, Divine &aicyas,

The Immortal Gods, O Y^run a and Mitra, never impair your
everlasting statutes.

HYMN LXX. Mitra-Varuna.

Even far and wide, 0 Varuna and Mitra, doth your grace
extend.

May I obtain your kind good-will.

2 From you, benignant Gods, may we gain fully food for

sustenance.

Such, 0 ye Eudras, may we be.

3 Guard us, 0 Eudras, with your guards, save us, ye skilled to

save, may we

Subdue the Dasyus, we ourselves.

4 Or ne’er may we, 0 Wondrous Strong, enjoy another’s

solemn feast,

Ourselves, our sons, or progeny.

HYMN LXXI. Mitra-Varuna.

0 Varuna and Mitra, ye who slay the foemen, come with
might

To this our goodly sacrifice.

2 For, Varuna and Mitra, ye Sages are Eulers over all. Fill

full our songs, for this ye can.

3 Come to the juice that we have pressed. Varuna, Mitra,

come to drink

This Soma of the worshipper.

HYMN LXXII. Mitra-Varuna.

To Varuna and Mitra we offer with songs, as Atri did. Sit
on the sacred grass to drink the Soma juice.

2 0 ye Rudras : 0 Mitra and Varuna.

4 Or ne’w' may we: I adopt Professor Ludwig’s explanation. "We will
overcome the Dasyus by our own power, or we will never again participate in
any man’s solemn festival held in honour of the Gods : a self-imprecation in
case of failing to carry out their purpose.

1 With might : S&yana explains bar hand as hantdrau sairtindm, destroyers
of enemies.

; 2 Fill full our songs: let them overflow with, or produce abundantly, the
results for which we pray.

1 -da Atri did: after the manner of Atri, the founder of our family.

MO mn HYMNS OP IBOOK V.

2 By Ordinance and Law ye dwell in peace secure, bestirring men*
Sit on the sacred grass to drink the Soma juice.

3 May Varuna and Mitra, for our help, accept the sacrifice.

Sit on the sacred grass to drink the Soma juice.

~~ “ '' Asvins,

Whether, 0 Asvins, ye this day'W^f&y remote or near at hand,
In many spots or in mid-air, come hither, Lords -of ample
wealth.

2 These here, who show o’er widest spaoe, bringing full many a

wondrous act,

Besistless, lovingly I seek, I call the Mightiest to enjoy.

3 Another beauteous wheel have ye fixed there to decorate your

car.

With others through the realms ye roam in might unto the
neighbouring tribes.

4 That deed of yours that is extolled, Yisvas! hath all been done

with this.

Bom otherwise, and spotless, ye have entered kinship’s bonds
with us.

5 When Sury& mounted on your car that rolls for ever rapidly,
Birds of red hue were round about and burning splendours

compassed you.

6 Atri bethinks himself of you, 0 Heroes, with a friendly mind,
What time, Nasatyas, with his mouth he stirs the spotless

flame for you.

1 In many spots : the purft, in the text is thus explained by SSyana.

2 To enjoy : the libation offered to you. According to S&yana, bhuj£ here
means for enjoyment, or for protection.

3 There : the third wheel of their chariot, standing by itself in front, is

especially ornamental. With others : S&yana explains any St by anyena chaJc-
rena , i. e. with another, or the other, wheel ; but the two hind wheels must
be intended, or «« : i*» with yugct. The neighbouring tribes t

the meaning of • i t Professor Ludwig translates the

words by ‘zu den geschlechtern der Nahusa/ ‘ to the tribes of the [people
called] Nahushas.’ Professor Wilson, following Sayana, translates the stanza
differently : * You have arrested one luminous wheel of (your) car for illumin-
ing the form (of the sun), whilst with the other you traverse the spheres (to
regulate) by your power the ages of mankind.’

4- Visvas /; S&yana explains vi&vd, by vydptau, the two who spread through
or pervade: ‘universal (deities),’ — Wilson. With this: according to S4yana,
with this Paura (the IJishi of the hymn). Or ‘this’ may mean, as Professor
Ludwig thinks, the third wheel of the car, in which mysterious virtue more
especially resides. Born otherwise : of divine and not human origin.

5 Sdryd ; fche Daughter of the Sun. See I. 116. 17.

HYMN 74.] THE RIG VEDA. HI

7 Strong is jour swiftly moving steed, famed Lis exertion in the

course „

When by your great deeds, Asvins, Chiefs, Atri is brought to
us again.

8 Lovers of sweetness, Rudras, she who streams with sweetness

waits on you.

When ye have travelled through the seas men tiring you gifts
of well-dressed food.

9 Asvins, with truth they call you Twain bestowers of felicity ;

At sacrifice most prompt to hear, most gracious ye at sacrifice.

10 Most pleasing to the Asvins be these prayers which magnify
their might,

Which we have fashioned, even as cars : high reverence have
we spoken forth.

HYMN LXXIY. Asvins.

Where in the heavens are ye to-day, Gods, Asvins, rich in
constancy ?

Hear this, ye excellent as Steers : Atri inviteth you to come.

2 Where are they now ? Where are the Twain, the famed,

Nfisatyas, Gods in heaven?

Who is the man ye strive to reach ? Who of your suppliants
is with you ?

3 Whom do ye visit, whom approach ? to whom direct your

harnessed car ?

With whose devotions are ye pleased? We long for you to
further us.

4 Ye, Strength eners, for Paura stir the filler swimming in the

flood,

Advancing to be captured like a lion to the ambuscade.

7 Atri is brought to us again: see I. 112. 7.

8 She who streams with sweetness : V&k, Vo: :-'' ■■ Q ■■■ ■ - 7 . or our praise,

stutirasuiatkntd. e Our nutritious (adoration)/ seas.* of air.

1 Rich in constancy: faithful friends of your worshippers. Excellent as
Steel's : 1 2 * 4 liberal showerers (of benefits).’ —Wilson.

2 Ofyo-r' r « 7 — - j-.^ough not entirely satisfactory, seems to be

the only : o - 1 ■ . ‘ 'ladffn&m in this place. Professor Ludwig

remarks, .. ■ ■ . » (quis ?) could be taken as = (quae), the

passage w • ■■ ■ . ■ . . The meaning would then be, which of the

rivers (of 1 '■ / ■■ 'u your presence? S&yana paraphrases the

passage : hah stot 1 vd in yuvayorn adtndm stutindm suchd sahlyah sydt; ‘ what
praiser may be the associate of the praises of you twain ? *

4 This Stansa is desperately difficult. Professor Wilson translates in accor-
dance with £>&yana’s explanation : * P auras, send to Paura the rain-shedding

542 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK F.

5 Ye from Chyavana worn with age removed his skin as ’twere

a robe.

So, $hen ye made him young again, he stirred the longing of
a dame.

6 Here is the man who lauds you both : to see your glory are

we here.

Now hear me, come with saving help, ye who are rich in store
of wealth.

7 Who among many mortal men this day hath won you to himself 1

What bard, accepters of the bard % Who, rich in wealth ! with

sacrifice %

8 0 Asvins, may your car approach, most excellent of cars for

speed.

Through many regions may our praise pass onward among
mortal men,

9 May our laudation of you Twain, lovers of meath ! be sweet

to you.

Fly hitherward, ye wise of heart, like falcons with your wing-
ed steeds.

10 0 Asvins, when at any time ye listen to this call of mine,

For you is dainty food prepared: they mix refreshing food for yon,

cloud ; drive it to him who is engaged in sacrifice, as (hunters chase) a lion in a
forest.’ Professor Wilson remarks : ‘The name of the Rishi is here, according
to the scholiast, arbitrarily applied, first to the A swins , because they are in
relation with Paura as the author of the Suhta ; and although the text gives
Paura in the vocative singular, it is to be understood in the dual Paura,
therefore, being Amins: next it implies, as Pauram, a cloud, from its
being solicited by the Rishi for the fall of rain, as implied by the last term,
Paurdya , to me the Rishi so called. 5 Professor Roth is of opinion that Paura,
in the vocative case, means the Asvins, as fillers, increasers, or strengtheners ;
and that pauram, in the accusative case, means the Soma, the filler or satisfy-
ing juice (ef. II. 11. 11, The juice that satisfies hath holpen Indra), said to be
swimming in the flood, i. e, mixed with water. The second half of the stanza
would then probably mean that the Soma flows on in order to be taken up and
used in libations as a lion goes to the place where men lie in wait to capture
him or where a pitfall has been^ prepared to entrap him. Still there remains
the very great difficulty of Paura in the singular being used instead of the
dual Paurau. Professor Ludwig remarks : ‘Paura : S. etad asvinoh sambodha-
nam ; but it is to be taken direct as a cry of warning. Paura is to mean the
Asvins, Paura is to mean the Rishi of the hymn, Paura is to mean the cloud.
This is naturally too much. The word udaprutam (swimming in water) shows
that Paura had been enticed to a place where his enemies intended to drown
him. He had gone to the spot as unsuspiciously as a lion approaches the
pitfall, and was already in the water when the Asvins called out to him and
stopped him. According to this explanation the translation would be ; ‘ For
Paura ye cried, Paura 3 and saved him when swimming in the flood, Him who
had reached the ambush as a lion to the capture goes.

5 Ckyavdna: seel. 116. 10.

6 Rich in store of wealth : 1 affluent in food/— Wilson, after S&yana ; ‘ lords
■of swift horses/ — Roth ; ‘possessors of excellent mares/ — Ludwig.

HYMN 75,]

THE RIGYEBA*

543

HYMN LXXY. , Asvins,

To meet your treasure-bringing ear, the miglity car most dear
to us, '

Asvins, the Bishi is prepared, your praiser, with his song of
praise. . Lovers of sweetness, hear my call.

2 Pass, 0 ye Asvins, pass away beyond all tribes of selfish men,
Wonderful, with your golden paths, most gracious, bringers

of the flood. Lovers of sweetness, hear my call.

3 Come to us, O ye Asvin Pair, bringing your precious treasures,

come

Ye Rudras, on your paths of gold, rejoicing, rich in store of
wealth. Lovers of sweetness, hear my call.

4 0 Strong and Good, the voice of him who lauds you well

cleaves to your car.

And that great beast, your chariot-steed, fair, wonderful, makes
dainty food. Lovers of sweetness, hear my call.

5 Watchful in spirit, horn on cars, impetuous, listing to his cry,
Asvins, with wingM steeds ye speed down to ChyavUna void

of guile. Lovers of sweetness, hear my call.

6 Hither, 0 Heroes, let your steeds, of dappled hue, yoked at

the thought,

Your flying steeds, 0 Asvins, bring you hitherward, with bliss,
to drink. Lovers of sweetness, hear my call.

7 0 Asvins, hither come to us ; N&satyas, be not disinclined.
Through longing for the pious turn out of the way to reach

our home. Lovers of sweetness, hear my call.

8 Ye Lords of Splendour, free from guile, come, sta nd at this

our sacrifice

Beside the singer, Asvins, who longs for your grace and lauds
you both. Lovers of sweetness, hear my call.

9 Dawn with her white herd hath appeared, and in due time

hath fire been placed.

Harnessed is your immortal car, 0 Wonder-Workers, strong
and kind. Lovers of sweetness, hear my call.

1 Lovers of sweetness : drinkers of the sweet Soma juice: according to S&yana,
masters of the Madhuvidy&, or knowledge of sweetness, that is, the knowledge
that teaches where the Soma is to be found. See I. 84. 13.

2 Selfish men : reading ahamsanfik for aham sand . See Aufrecht, II. V. II,
XLII. note.

3 Rich in store of wealth ; or, Lords of rapid steeds. See note on stanza 6 of
the preceding hymn.

4 And that great beast : the chariot of the Asvins is sometimes said to be
drawn by a stallion ass (see I. 34. 9 ; 116. 2 ; 16*2. 21), the dun-coloured animal
representing the grey tints of early morning,

5 Ohyavdna : see I. 116. 10.

8 Who longs for your grace : S&yana takes avasy&m here to be a proper
name, Avasyu, who is said to be the Rishi of the hymn.

9 In due time : for the morning libation.

544

TEE EYMNS OF

[BOOK F,

HYMN LXXYI. Asvins,

Agni, the bright face of the Dawns, is shining ; the singers'
pious voices have ascended.

Borne on your chariot, Asvins, turn you hither, and come
unto our fall and rich libation.

2 Most frequent guests, they scorn not what is ready: even now

the lauded Asvins are beside us.

With promptest aid they come at mom and evening, the
worshipper's most blessed guards from trouble.

3 Yea, come at milking-time, at early morning, at noon of day

and when the Sun is setting,

By day, by night, with favour most auspicious. Not only
now the draught hath drawn the Asvins.

4 For 'this place, Asvins, was of old your dwelling, these were

your houses, this your habitation.

Come to us from high heaven and from the mountain. Come
from the waters bringing food and vigour.

5 May we obtain the Asvins’ newest favour, and gain their

health-bestowing happy guidance.

Bring riches hither unto us, and heroes, and all felicity and
joy, Immortals I

HYMN LXXYII. Asvins.

First worship those who come at early morning : let the
Twain drink before the giftless niggard.

The Asvins claim the sacrifice at day-break : the sages yield-
ing the first share extol them.

2 Worship at dawn and instigate the Asvins : nor is the wor-
shipper at eve rejected.

Besides ourselves another craves and worships : each first in
worship is most highly favoured.

I The bright face ; making his first appearance at early m orning. Libation ;
gharmdm , the offering of hot milk or other heated beverage.

3 t The Asvins are invited to come at different times, at morning, mid-day
and sunset ; and in VIII. 22. 14, it is similarly said that they are invoked in
the evening as well as at dawn. It need not, however, surprise us that they
should be invited to attend the different ceremonies of the worshippers, and
therefore conceived to appear at hours distinct from the supposed natural
periods^ of their manifestation/— J. Mum, 0, Sanskrit Texts , V, 239.

5 This stanza is identical with Y, 42. 18.

1 Before the giftless niggard : * before the greedy withhold ers (of the offer -
. mg)/ — Wilson.

2 Nor is the worshipper at eve rejected : literally, a thing unaccepted or

rejected. S&yana explains differently : ‘ the evening is not for the gods; it is
unacceptable to them * — Wilson. T K;<r> ^ough, supported by the

text pUrvdhno vai deodni»i t the ■ ■ ■ ; to the Gods, is not in

accordance with the use of Vedic times.

MYMN 78.]

THE HIQYBDA.

'545

3 Covered with gold, meath-tinted, dropping fatness, your

chariot with its freight of food comes hither,

Swift as thought, Asvins, rapid as the tempest, wherewith ye
travel over all obstructions.

4 He who hath served most often the Nasatyas, and gives the

sweetest food at distribution,

Furthers with his own holy works his offspring, and ever
passes those whose flames ascend not.

5 May we obtain the Asvins 5 newest favour, and gain their

health-bestowing happy guidance.

Bring riches hither unto us, and heroes, and all felicity and
joy, Immortals !

HYMN LXXVIII. Asvins.

Ye Asvins, hither come to us : N&satyas, be not disinclined.
Fly hither like two swans unto the juice we shed.

2 0 Asvins, like a pair of deer, like two wild cattle to the mead :
Fly hither like two swans unto the juice we shed,

3 0 Asvins rich in gifts, accept our sacrifice to prosper it :

Fly hither like two swans unto the juice we shed.

4 As Atri when descending to the cavern called on you loudly

like a wailing woman,

Ye came to him, 0 Asvins, with the freshest and most auspici-
ous fleetness of a falcon.

-5 Tree, part asunder like the side of her who bringeth forth a child.
Ye Asvins, listen to my call : loose Saptavadhri from his bonds.

6 For Saptavadhri, for the seer affrighted when he wept and wailed,
Ye, Asvins, with your magic powers rent up the tree and shat-
tered it.

7 Like as the wind on every side ruffles a pool of lotuses,

So stir in thee the babe unborn, so may the ten-month babe
descend.

, 8 Like as the wind, like as the wood, like as the sea is set astir,
So also, ten-month babe, descend together with the after-birth.
9 The child who hath for ten months 5 time been lying in his
mother’s side, —

May he come forth alive, unharmed, yea, living from the living
dame.

2 Wild cattle : Gauras, or Boves Gauri.

4 The cavern : the abyss or deep pit into which he was cast by AsuraS or
evil spirits. See I. 112. 7 ; 116. 8 ; 117. 8.

5 Tree, part asunder : Saptavadhri appears to have got his hand or foot

Jammed in a split tree, and to have been extricated when he called on the
Asvins to aid him. ,

*9 * This and the two stanzas preceding are termed by Sayan a the garb has-
rdvmyupaniskad, the liturgy of child-birth.’ — Wilson,

35

m

[BOOK V.

TIIB HYMNS OB

, HYMN LXXIX. Dawn.

0 heavenly Dawn, awaken us to ample opulence to-day
Even as thou hast wakened us with Satyasravas, Vayya’s son,
high-born i delightful with thy steeds !

2 Daughter of Heaven, thou dawnedst on Sunitha Suchadratha’s

sop, *

So dawn thou on one mightier still, on Satyasravas, Vayya's
son, high-born 1 delightful, with thy steeds !

3 So, bringing treasure, dawn to-day on us thou Daughter of the

Sky,

As thou, 0 mightier yet, didst shine for Satyasravas, Yayya's
, son, high-born ! delightful with thy steeds !

4 Here round about thee are the priests who laud thee,. Bright

One, with their hymns,

. And men with gifts, 0 Bounteous Dame, splendid with wealth
and offering much, high-born 1 delightful with thy steeds !

5 Whatever these thy bands perform to please thee or win them

wealth,

E’en fain they gird us i'ound and give rich gifts which ne’ei*
are reft away, high-born ! delightful with thy steeds !

The connexion between 1 — 6, and 7 — 9 is not clear. By y valid nadhamdnd
(a wailing woman) a parturient woman may perhaps, Professor Ludwig thinks,
be intended. Atri, as he descended into the pit, invoked the Asvins that
they might release him as a woman releases the child she bears. A tree —
which is much harder and firmer than a woman’s body — unclosed itself when
Saptavadhri invoked the Asvins. Bo shall the parturient woman bring forth
her child through the help of the Asvins and at Atri’s intercession, A con-
nexion may thus be established, though here and there it would be rather
forced.

1 Satyasravas ; the Rishi of the hymn. Delightful with thy steeds ; pleas-
ant to those whom thou favourest on account of the horses which thou bestow-
est. The word asvus&nrite is variously rendered, e. g. by Professor Wilsoh,
after S&yana, £ praised sincerely for (the gift of) horses ; ’ by Prof. Ludwig,.

‘ an rossen trefliohes besitzende/ ‘ having an excellent possession in horses . ; r
by Prof. Roth, ‘ vom jubel der Rosse begleitete/ ‘ accompanied by the joyous
neigh of horses and by Prof. Q-rassmann, ‘rossereiche/ ‘rich in horses/

4 Men with gifts : the Maghavans, or wealthy householders, who institute
the sacrifice and provide offerings for the Gods and presents for the officiating
priests.

5 These thy hands; the congregation of worshippers. Which ne'er are

reft away ; or which are never in vain, never fail to obtain their due reward
from heaven : ‘ S&yana,’ Professor Wilson remarks, c seems rather dubious as
to the proper sense of several of these words : ...the sum of the mean-

ing, agreeably to the scholiast, is, all they who, offering oblations, worship the
dawn, receive the reward for the benefit of us, of me, that is the author of the
hymn, ye twum havir-dadutuh stavanti te sctrve upy-asm ada rth am yhala m
ih&raymlL*

TUM JR tQttitA.

tttMN S6.]

U1

6 Give to these wealthy patrons fame, 0 affluent Dawn,' with

hero sons,

Tc these our princes who have brought rich gifts ne’er to be
reft away, high-born ! delightful with thy steeds !

7 Bring lofty and resplendent fame, 0 thou munificent Dawn,

to these

. Our wealthy patrons who bestow rich gifts on us of steeds and
kine, high-born J delightful with thy steeds !

8 Bring us, 0 Daughter of the Sky, subsistence in our herds of kine,
Together with the sunbeams, with the shine of pure refulgent

flames, high-born 1 delightful with thy steeds !

.. 9 0 Daughter of the Sky, shine forth ; delay not to perform
thy task.

Let not the Sun with fervent heat consume thee like a robber
foe, high-born ! delightful with thy steeds !

10 So much, and more exceedingly, 0 Dawn, it suits thee to bestow,
Thou Badiant One who ceasest not to shine for those who sing
thy praise, high-born ! delightful with thy steeds !

HYMN LX XX. Dawn.

The singers welcome with their hymns and praises the Goddess
Dawn who bringeth in the sunlight,

Sublime, by Law true to eternal Order, bright on her path, red-
tinted, far-refulgent.

2 She comes in front, fair, rousing up the people, making the

pathways easy to he travelled.

High, on her lofty chariot, all-impelling, Dawn gives her splen-
dour at the days’ beginning.

3 She, harnessing her car with purple oxen, injuring none, hath

brought perpetual riches.

Opening paths to happiness, the Goddess shines, praised by all,
giver of every blessing.

4 With changing tints she gleams in double splendour while

from the eastward she displays her body.

She travels perfectly the path of Order, nor fails to reach, as
one who knows, the quarters.

5 As conscious that her limbs are bright with bathing, she

stands, as ’twere, erect that we may see her.

9 Delay not to perform thy task : ‘ delay not our (sacred) rite.’ — Wilson.

2 In front of the Sun ; sdryasya purastdt. — S4yana<

4 The quarters * the regions of the sky which she visits in obedience to
the eternal law of the universe.

5 With bathing : in the dews of heaven.

548 TUB HYMNS OH [BOOK V .

Driving away malignity and darkness, Dawn, Child of Heaven,
hath come to ns with lustre,

6 The Daughter of the Sky, like some chaste woman, bends,
opposite to men, her forehead downward.

The Maid, disclosing boons to him who worships, hath brought
again the daylight as aforetime.

HYMN LXXXI. Savitar.

The priests of him the lofty Priest well-skilled in hymns
harness their spirit, yea, harness their holy thoughts.

He only knowing works assigns their priestly tasks. Yea,
lofty is the praise of Savitar the God.

2 The Sapient One arrays himself in every form : for quadruped
and biped he hath brought forth good.

Excellent Savitar hath looked on heaven’s high vault, and
shineth after the outgoing of the Dawn.

. 3 Even he, the God whose going-forth and majesty the other
Deities have followed with their might,

He who hath measured the terrestrial regions out by his great
power, he is the Courser Savitar.

4 To the three spheres of light thou goest, Savitar, and with

the rays of Surya thou combi nest thee.

Around, on both sides thou encompassest the night : yea,
thou, 0 God, art Mitra through thy righteous laws.

5 Over all generation thou art Lord alone : Pushan art thou,

0 God, in all thy goings-forth.

Yea, thou hast domination over all this world. Syav&sya
hath brought praise to thee, 0 Savitar.

HYMN LXXXII. Savitar.

We crave of Savitar the God this treasure much to be enjoyed.

The best, all-yielding, conquering gift of Bhaga we would
gladly win.

2 Savitar’s own supremacy, most glorious and beloved of all,

No one diminisheth in aught.

1 The lofty Priest ; Savitar. Knowing works .* skilled in rules which regulate
religions functions, or perhaps understanding the intentions or wishes of the
worshippers : ‘he alone knowing their functions directs the priests/— Wilson.

2 Arrays himself in every form : makes all erternal objects clearly visible at
sunrise,

8 The Courser Savitar ,* S&yapa explains dta&ah as white, bright, shining. It
also means a horse, especially one of the horses of the Sun, and here designates
the Sun himself under that form. See Sat&patha-Br£,hmaua, VI, 3. 1, 18 :
Sacred Books of the East, XLI p. 195.

4 According to Sdyana, Savitar is especially the Sun before rising, and
Surya is the Sun in general.

fm MGftihA,

549

tlVMtf 83. j

3 For Savitar who is Bhaga shall send riches to his worshipper, ?
That Wondrous portion we implore.

4 Send us this day, God Savitar, prosperity with progeny*

Drive thou the evil dream away.

5 Savitar, God, send far away all .sorrows and calamities,

And send us only what is good.

6 Sinless in sight of Aditi through the God SavitaFs influence,
May We obtain all lovely things.

7 We With our hymns this day elect the general God, Lord of

the good,

Savitar whose decrees are true*

8 He who for ever vigilant precedes these Twain, the Day and

Night,

Is Savitar the thoughtful God*

9 He who gives glory unto all these living creatures with the song,
And brings them forth, is Savitar.

HYMN LXXXIII* Parjanya.

Sing with these songs thy welcome to the Mighty, with adora-
tion praise and call Par j any a.

The Bull, loud roaring, swift to send his bounty, lays in the
plants the seed for germination.

2 He smites the trees apart, he slays the demons: all life fears

him who wields the mighty weapon.

From him exceeding strong flees e’en the guiltless, when thund-
ering Parjanya smites the wicked.

3 Shall send; suvtfti, from, the root sic or sii, from which Savitar also is form-
ed. The principal significations of the root are (1) to generate orbring forth ;
(2) to pour forth, a libation ; and (3) to send or impel. See Muir, 0. S.
Texts, V* 165.

4 Send us : sdvih, from the same root : Drive thou away : pdrd sum.

5 Send far away : pdrd suva.

6 Influence : savL

7 The general God : visvddevmt : * who possesses all divine attributes,' —
Muir; ‘(identical with) all the gods,’ — Wilson; ‘den allgott,’ ‘the all-god,’ —
Ludwig; ‘ den allgottUchen,’ ‘ the all-divine,’ — Grassmann. Whose decrees are
true : satydsavam : ‘ who possesses true energy.’ — Muir.

9 He who gives glory : ‘ he who by his creative power produces the objects
of the song of praise.’ — Ludwig.

1 Parjanya ; God of thunderstorms and rain, the generator and nourisher
of plants and living creatures See Muir, 0. S. Texts, V. 140 ffi, and, especially,
M. Muller, India, What can it Teach us ? pp. 186 — 194.

2 The wicked : dashkHtah, evil-doers. ‘ There does not seem to be any
sufficient reason to understand evil-doers here, and, in verse 9, of the cloud
demons, or simply of the malignant clouds, as S&yana in his explanation, of
verse 9 does. The poet may naturally have supposed that it was exclusively,
or principally the wicked who were struck down by thunderbolts.’ — Muir,
0. & Texts > V. 141,

550 TEE HYMNS OF [SO OK V,

3 Like a car-driver whipping on his horses, he makes the messen-

gers of rain spring forward

Far off "resounds ' \ ~f „thQ.jAfi I h wha t time Parjanya

^ fills 'the sky' ! ■- !■

4 Forth burst the winds, down come the lightning-flashes : the

plants shoot up, the realm of light is streaming.

Food springs abundant for all living creatures, what time
Parjanya quickens earth with moisture.

5 Thou at whose bidding earth bows low before thee, at whose

command hoofed cattle fly in terror,

At whose behest the plants assume all colours, even thou
Parjanya, yield us great protection.

6 Send down for as the rain of heaven, ye Maruts, and let the

Stallion's flood descend in torrents.

Come hither with this thunder while thou pourest the waters
down, our heavenly Lord and Father.

T Thunder and roar : the germ of life deposit. Fly round us on .
thy chariot water-laden.

Thine opened water-skin draw with thee downward, and let
the hollows and the heights he level.

8 Lift up the mighty vessel, pour down water, and let the

liberated streams rush forward.

Saturate both the earth and heaven with fatness, and for the
cows let there be drink abundant.

9 When thou, with thunder and with roar, Parjanya, smitest

sinners down,

This universe exults thereat, yea, all that is upon the earth,

10 Thou hast poured down the rain*flood : now withhold it.
Thou hast made desert places fit for travel.

Thou hast made herbs to grow for our enjoyment : yea, thou
hast won thee praise from living creatures.

HYMN LXXXIV. Pdthivi.

Thou, of a truth, 0 Prithivl, bearest *' the tool that rends the
hills :

Thou rich in torrents, who with might quiekenest earth, 0
Mighty One.

10 Thou hast won thee praise ; or, perhaps, ‘thou hast fulfilled the longing

of the people/

1 Pnthivt: in this place not the Goddess Earth or earth personified, but a deity
of the middle air or firmament. ‘ DvirUpd Prithivi says S&yana, ‘ Prithivi
has two forms/ The tool that rencls the hills : the instrument that strikes and
pierces the mountains and opens the water-springs, the thunderbolt or the
power that produces similar results.

THE RIO VEDA.

551

iiTMtf 80. J

2 To thee, 0 waiideter at will, ring out the lauds with beams

of day, ,

Who drivest, like a neighing steed, the swelling ^cloud, O
bright of hue.

3 Who graspest with thy might on earth e’en the strong sovrans

of the wood,

When from the lightning of thy cloud the rain-floods of the
heaven descend.

HYMN LXXXY. Vanina.

Sing forth a hymn sublime and solemn, grateful to glorious
Varuna, imperial Ruler,

Who hath struck out, like one who slays the victim, earth as
a skin to spread in front of Surya.

2 In the tree-tops the air he hath extended, put milk in kine

and vigorous speed in horses,

Set intellect in hearts, fire in the waters, Surya in heaven and
Soma on the mountain.

3 Varuna lets the big cask, opening downward, flow through the

heaven and earth and air’s mid-region.

Therewith the universe’s Sovran waters earth as the shower of
rain bedews the barley.

4 When Varuna is fain for milk he moistens the sky, the land,

and earth to her foundation.

Then straight the mountains clothe them in the rain-cloud :
the Heroes, putting forth their vigour, loose them,

2 The swelling cloud : pertim ; the exact meaning of the word is doubtful.
Professor Ludwig thinks that the lightning is intended.

1 Sing forth ; prd arcM. The Rishi addresses himself. Or archd may-

be the first person singular, I sing. Like one who slags the victim ; * not the
ordinary Immolator, but the priest who spreads out the skin of the slaughtered
victim to receive its disjointed members.’ — Ludwig.

2 In the tree-tops: vaneshu , explained by S&yana as vrikshdgreshu : ‘in the
clouds,’ according to the St. Petersburg Lexicon. Soma on. the mountain ;
‘the Soma creeper, Mahidhara observes, grows in the clefts of the stones of
mountains, parvatdnam pdshnasandhishu somavallyd utpddyamdnatioaV —
Wilson.

4 Is fain for milk : wishes for libations of milk; or the meaning may be,
when he wishes to draw forth the milk, the fertilizing rain, of the clouds.
Earth to her foundation ; the text has only prithivVm, meaning earth in its
full extent (terra) as distinguished from hhtmim. , the land, soil, or ground,
(humus or solum). Or prithivtim may perhaps mean the firmament here as
S&yana explains it. See note on Prithivt in the preceding hymn. ^ The Heroes :
the strong Maruts. Loose them ; loosen the roots of the mountains and make
them tremble. “ ...

m THM HYMNS ON [BOON ft

5 I will declare this mighty deed of magic, of glorious Varurr.a

the Lord Immortal,

Who Standing in the firmament hath meted the earth out with
the Sun as with a measure*

6 None, verily, hath ever let or hindered this the most wise

God’s mighty deed of magic,

Whereby with all their flood, the lucid rivers fill not one sea
wherein they pour their waters.

7 If we have sinned against the man who loves us, have ever

wronged a brother, friend, or comrade,

The neighbour ever with us, or a stranger, 0 Varu^a, remove
from us the trespass.

8 If we, as gamesters cheat at play, have .cheated, done wrong

unwittingly or sinned of purpose,

Cast all these sins away like loosened fetters, and, Varuya, let
us be thine own beloved.

HYMN LXXXVI. Indra-Agni*

The mortal man whom ye, the Twain, Indra and Agni, help
in fight,

Breaks through e’en strongly-guarded wealth as Trita burst
his way through reeds.

2 The Twain invincible in war, worthy to he renowned in frays,
Lords of the Hivefold People, these, Indra and Agni, we

invoke.

3 Impetuous is their strength, and keen the lightning of the

mighty Pair,

Which from their arms speeds with the car to Vritra’s slayer
for the kine.

4 Indra and Agni, we invoke you both, as such, to send your cars :
Lords of quick-coming bounty, ye who know, chief lovers of

the song.

5 These who give increase day by day, Gods without guile for

mortal man,

Worthy themselves, I honour most, Two Gods as partners,
for my horse.

5 Deed of magic : mdy&m ; or the word may be rendered by ‘ device * or
‘•design.’ See Wallis, Cosmology of the Riyveda, pp. 102, 103.

1 Through reeds : so Professor Both interprets the v&aih of the text. See
I. 52. 5. According to S&yana the meaning is, as Trita* the Bishi breaks

down and refutes the words or arguments of his opponents.

2 The Fivefold People ; the five Aryan tribes.

5 I honour most : pur 6 ditdh6 ; I set in front, in the most honourable place.
For my horse : that I may win the chariot-race. ‘ For (the sake of obtaining)
horses.’ — Wilson.

BYMN 87, J THE RtGVtitiA, MB

6 The strength-bestowing offering thus to Indra-Agni hath been
paid, as butter, purified by stones.

Deal to our princes high renown, deal wealth to tiose wha
sing your praise, deal food to those who sing your praise.

HYMN LNXXYIL . Maruts.

To Vishnu, to the Mighty whom the Maruts follow let your
hymns born in song go forth, Evay&marut j
To the impetuous, strong band, adorned with bracelets, that
- rushes on in joy and ever roars for vigour.

2 They who with might were manifest, and who willingly by

their own knowledge told it forth, Evay&marut.

Maruts, this strength of yours no wisdom comprehend etli i
through their gifts’ greatness they are moveless as the
mountains.

3 Who by the psalm they sing are heard, from lofty heaven, the

strong, the brightly shining Ones, Evayamarut ;

In whose abode there is no mightier one to move them, whose
lightnings are as fires, who urge the roaring rivers.

6 A $ butter : S&yana explains gkritdm, sacrificial oil or clarified butter, by
Soma juice ; but ptittim, purified, qualifies havydm, the offering, and not
ghritdm. The libation of Soma juice which has been purified by the operation
of the press-stones, strainer, etc., has been offered like clarified butter or
holy oil*

The hymn is ascribed to a Rishi Evayamarut, a name which is evidently
borrowed from the refrain.

1 Born in song : developing themselves and taking form in song : vdclii
nishpannd : — S&yaaa. 4 Voice-born.’ — Wilson. Or girijft may have its usual
meaning, mountain-born, with reference to the close connexion of the hymns
with the pressing-stones which came from the hills. Evaydmarut : Professor
Wilson, following Sfiyana, translates .* ‘ May the voice-born praises of Evay&^
marut reach you, Vishnu, attended by the Maruts,’ and observes that { the
name of the Rishi , Evaydniarut , remains unaltered in its case termination,
whatever may be its syntactical connection with the rest of the sentence/
This is manifestly impossible, and the word is certainly not a proper name.
Eva ydf, in I. 156. 1, ‘going thy wonted way,’ is an epithet of Vishnu, and
Professor Roth thinks that Evayamarut is an exclamation meaning, 0 Vishnu
and Maruts ! or, 0 Maruts who speed around ! But in both these cases it
would be necessary to change the accent, both in this hymn and in the Sfima-
veda where stanza 1 occurs again. Professor Grassmann suggests, 4 speeding
(like Vishnu) is the Marut host,’ or, ‘ The speeding Vishnu is the true Marut,
or lord of the Maruts,’ as the probable meaning of the word. I find Evayft -
mai*ut unintelligible, and, as Professor Ludwig has done, leave it untranslated,
as a mere sacrificial exclamation. See Vedio Hymns (Sacred Books of the
East) Part 1. p. 365.

THE RIQVBDA* BOOK F.

4 He of the Mighty Stride forth strode, Evay&marut, out of the

spacious dwelling-place, their home in common.

Wheft he, himself, hath yoked his emulous strong horses on
hei hts, he cometh forth, joy-giving, with the Heroes,

5 Like your tremendous roar, the rainer with light flashing,

■strong, speeding, hath made all tremble, Evay&marut,
Wherewith victorious ye, self-luminous, press onward, with
strong reins, decked with gold, impetuous and well-
weaponed.

6 Unbounded is your greatness, ye of mighty poAver : may your

bright vigour be our aid, Evay&marut.;

For ye are visible helpers in the time of trouble : like fires,
aglow with light, save us from shame and insult.

7 So may the Budras, mighty warriors, Evayamarut, with

splendid brilliancy, like fires, be our protectors;

They whose terrestrial dwelling-place is wide-extended, whom
none suspect of sin, whose bands have lofty courage.

8 Come in a friendly spirit, come to us, 0 Maruts, and hear his

call who praises you, Evayamarut.

Like car-borne men, one-minded with the mighty Vishnu,
keep enmity far from us with your deeds of wonder.

9 Come to our sacrifice, ye Holy Ones, to bless it, and, free

from demons, hear our call, Evayamarut.

Most excellent, like mountains in the air’s mid-region, be
irresistible, ye Wise, to this man’s hater. „ -

4 He of the Mighty Stride: Yishnu. According to S&yana, the wide-spread-
ing (band of Maruts). Their home : Yishnu’s and Indra’s. With the Heroes ;
with the Maruts.

6 In the time of trouble : the meaning of prasitau is uncertain. Professor
Wilson, after S&yana, translates : 1 for you are regulators for overseeing (what
is fit for) the limits of the sacrifice.’

9 This man's hater: him who hates the institutor of the sacrifice, or derides
and reviles the holy ceremony.

BOOK THE SIXTH.

i

HYMN I. Agni.

Thou, first inventor of this prayer, 0 Agni, Worker of Marvels,
hast become our Herald.

Thou, Bull, hast made us strength which none may conquer
strength that shall overcome all other prowess.

2 As Priest thou sattest at the seat of worship, furthering us,

best Offerer, meet for honour.

So first to thee have pious men resorted, turning thy mind to
thoughts of ample riches.

3 In thee, still watching, they have followed riches, who goest

with much wealth as with an army,

The radiant Agni, lofty, fair to look on, worshipped with mar-
row, evermore resplendent.

4 They who approached the God’s abode with homage, eager for

glory, won them perfect glory :

Yea, they gained even sacrificial titles, and found delight in
thine auspicious aspect.

5 On earth the people magnify thee greatly, thee their celestial

and terrestrial riches.

Thou, Helper, must be known as our Preserver, Father and
Mother of mankind for ever.

6 Dear priest among mankind, adorable Agni hath seated him,

joy-giver, skilled in worship.

Let us approach thee shining in thy dwelling, kneeling upon
our knees, with adoration,

7 Longing for bliss, pure-minded, God-devoted, Agni, we seek

thee, such, meet to be lauded.

Thou, Agni, leddest forth our men to battle, refulgent with
the heaven’s exalted splendour.

The Rishi of the hymn is Bharadv&ja, to whom, with a few exceptions, all
the hymns of this Book are attributed.

1 Our Herald : or Invoking Priest who calls the Gods to the sacrifice,
o vy ... . .. i r mavrow . -t 0 w hom especially the fat covering of the

j*. . ji 1 ' ■ ■ ■ actims was offered.

4 They who approached the God's abode : the Itibhus, Maruts, or Angirases
may be meant.

5 Their celestial and terrestrial riches : rttyali ubhai/dsah ; literally, riches of
both kinds. According to S&yana, consisting in cattle and in possessions other
than cattle.

65d TMP Stum OP [POOP VL

8 Sage o f mankind, all peoples’ Lord and Master, the Bull of
men, the sender down of blessings,

Still pressing on, promoting, purifying, Agni the Holy One,
the Lord of riches.

& Agni, the mortal Who hath toiled and worshipped, brought
thee oblations with his kindled fuel,

And well knows sacrifice with adoration, gains every joy with
thee to guard and help him.

10 Mightily let us worship thee the Mighty, with reverence, Agni !

fuel and oblations,

With songs, 0 Son of Strength, with hymns, with altar : so
may we strive for thine auspicious favour.

11 Thou who hast covered heaven and earth with splendour and

with thy glories, glorious and triumphant,

Continue thou to shine on us, 0 Agni, With strength abundant,
rich, and long-en during.

12 Vpuehsafe us ever, as man needs, 0 Vasit, abundant wealth of

kine for son and offspring.

Food noble, plenteous, far from sin and evil, be with us, and
fair fame to make us happy,

13 May I obtain much wealth in many places by love of thee and

through thy grace, King Agni ;

For in thee, Bounteous One, in thee the Sovran, Agni, are
many boons for him who serves thee.

HYMN II. Agni.

Thou, Agni, even as Mitra, hast a princely g lory of thine own.
Thou, active Vasu, makest fame increase like full prosperity.

2 For, verily, men pray to thee with sacrifices and with songs.
To thee the Friendly Courser, seen of all, comes speeding

through the air.

3 Of one accord men kindle thee Heaven’s signal of the sacrifice,
When, craving bliss, this race of man invites thee to the

solemn rite.

4 Let the man thrive who travails sore, in prayer, for thee the

Bountiful.

8 Sage of mankind, etc : Sage, Lord, Bull, etc. are in the accusative case, in
apposition with ‘thee’ in stanza 7, though separated by an intervening half-
stanza.

2 The Friendly Courser : the Sun.

3 Or, possibly, as suggested by Professor Ludwig, ‘ The men accordant with
the heaven light thee the sign of sacrifice;’ that is, understanding the signs
in heaven and so knowing the proper time for the ceremony.

MYMN 3.]

TUB III GY BB A.

U7

He with the help of lofty Dyaus comes safe through straits
of enmity. /

5 The mortal who with fuel lights thy flame and offers unto

thee,

s. ...Supports a house with many a branch, Agni, to live a hund-
red years: — — — - —

6 Thy bright smoke lifts itself aloft, and far-extended shines in

* heaven.

For, Purifier ! like the Sun thou beamest with thy xadiant
glow.

7 For in men's houses thou must be glorified as a well-loved

guest,

Gay like an elder in a fort, claiming protection like a son.

8 Thou, Agni, like an able steed, art urged by wisdom in the

wood.

Thou art like wind ; food, home art thou, like a young horse
that runs astray.

9 E’en things imperishable, tbou, 0 Agni, like a grazing ox,
Eate-st, when hosts, Eternal One! of thee the Mighty rend

the woods.

10 Agni, thou enterest as Priest the home of men who sacrifice.
Lord of the people, prosper them. Accept the offering,
Angiras !

110 Agni, God with Mitra’s might, call hither the favour of the
Gods from earth and heaven.

Bring weal from heaven, that men may dwell securely. May
we o’ercome the foe’s malign oppressions, may we o'ercome
them, through thy help o’ercome them.

HYMN IIP Agni.

True, guardian of the Law, thy faithful servant wins ample
light and dwells in peace, 0 Agin,

Whom thou, as Varuna in accord with Mitra, guardest, 0 God,
by banishing his trouble.

2 He bath paid sacrifices, toiled in worship, and offered gifts to
wealth-increasing Agni.

7 Gay like an elder ; Agni must be respected and eared for like a father as
well as protected like a son.

8 In the wood : wherein fire is produced by attrition. The exact meaning
of the stanza is somewhat uncertain. Like wind ; moving everywhere.

9 Bateit : this or some similar verb must be supplied.

1 As Varuna in accord with Mitra: that is, Agni, Varuna, and Mitra as
one. — Ludwig.

THE HYMNS OF

558

[BOOK VI.

Him the displeasure of the famous moves not, outrage and
sc^nx affect not such a mortal.

3 Bright God, whose look is free from stain like Surya’s, thou,

swift, what time tbou earnestly desirest,

Hast gear to give us. Come with joy at evening, where,
Child of Wood, thou mayest also tarry.

4 Fierce is his gait and vast his wondrous body r he champeth

like a horse with bit and bridle,

And, darting forth his tongue, as 'twere a hatchet, burning the
woods, smelteth them like a smelter.

5 Archer-like, fain to shoot, he sets his arrow, and whets his

splendour like the edge of iron :

The messenger of night with brilliant pathway, like a tree-
roosting bird of rapid pinion.

6 In beams of morn be clothes him like the singer, and bright

as Mitra with his splendour crackles.

Bed in the night, by day the men’s possession : red, he be-
longs to men by day, Immortal. .

7 Like Heaven’s when scattering beams his voice was uttered ;

among the plants the radiant Hero shouted,

Who with his glow in rapid course came hither to fill both
worlds, well- wedded Dames, with treasure.

8 Who, with supporting streams and rays that suit him, hath

flashed like lightning with his native vigour.

Like the deft Maker of the band of Maruts, the bright im-
petuous One hath shone refulgent.

, 3,1 gratefully adopt Professor Pischel’s interpretation of this very difficult
stanza which I had regarded as hopelessly obscure. See Vedische Studien ,
I. pp. 87 — 50.

4 With hit and hr idle : yamasdnd dstf; ‘ champing fodder with his mouth.’ —
■Wilson. As ’twere a hatchet : Agni, and not his tongue, is likened to the
hatchet.

5 Of iron : or metal, the exact meaning of dyas being uncertain.

6 In beams of morn ; the light of e"-V * l ' : ^es on the fire and the

singer alike and simultaneously. :> ' ■■ “./ .■ : f diffusing friendly
light.’ — Wilson.. The men’s possession : X take nrtn as a shortened form of
nrin&m; but it is difficult to make sense of the half-stanza. Professor Wilson,
following S&yana, translates : ‘(lie it is) who is luminous by night, and who
lights men (to their work) by day ; who is immortal and radiant ; who lights
men by day’. The verb is supplied by S&yana.

7 Like Heaven’s : like the voice of Dyaus, the thumder. Well-wedded
Dames : having excellent Lords, perhaps Indra and Agni,

8 The deft Maker of the hand of Maruts : Dyaus is probably intended.

HYMN 4.]

THE' MIGVEDA,.

m3

‘ HYMN 1Y. ’ Agtii,

As at man’s service of the Gods, Invoker, tlioil, Son of
Strength, dost sacrifice and worship,

So bring for ns to-day all Gods together, Bring willingly the
willing Gods, O Agni.

2 May Agni, radiant Herald of the morning, meet to be known,

accept our praise with favour.

Dear to all life, mid mortal men Immortal,, our guest, awake
at dawn, is Jatavedas,

3 Whose might the very heavens regard with wonder r bright

as the Sun he clothes himself with lustre.

He who sends forth, Eternal Purifier, hath shattered e’en the
ancient works of Asna.

4 Thou art a Singer, Son t our feast-companion : Agni at birth

prepared his food and pathway.

Therefore vouchsafe us strength, 0 St rength-besto wer. Win
like a King : foes trouble not thy dwelling.

5 Even he who eats his firm hard food with swiftness, and over-

takes the nights as V&yu kingdoms.

May we o’ercome those who resist thine orders, like a steed
easting down the flying foemen.

6 Like Sfirya with his fulgent rays, 0 Agni, thou overspreadest

both the worlds with splendour.

Decked with bright colour he dispels the darkness, like Ausija,
with clear flame swiftly flying.

7 We have elected thee as most delightful for thy beams 1 * * * * 6 7 glow ;

hear our great laud, 0 Agni.

The best men praise thee as the peer of Indra in strength, mid
Gods, like Vayu in thy bounty.

1 Invoker ; Hotar , herald or inviter of the’ Gods.

8 A sna : apparently one of the demons of drought.

4 His food and 'pathway : or his pathway to his food may be intended.

5 His firm hard food : v&rariam otnnam ; the food of elephants, i . e. trees,
according to Professor Ludwig. Professor Wilson, following S&yapa, translates
the first half-line *. f He who whets his (gloom)— dispersing (radiance), who eats
the (offered) oblation.’ 4s Vdyu kingdoms : rttshtri standing, perhaps, for rd sh-

ir yd (rfls/drydni), but the exact meaning is uncertain. Perhaps, as Professor .
Ludwig suggests, as V&yu or the wind blows uninterrupted through the
whole land, so Agni is kindled at night-fall and again at early dawn before
the night has entirely passed away.

6 Like A usija ; perhaps some contemporary priest, who is regarded as
bringing back the daylight by prayer and sacrifice. f Like the adored

(sun)/— Wilson-

500 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VI.

& Now, Agni, on the tranquil paths of riches come to us for oui?
w^l : save us from sorrow.

Grant chiefs and bard this boon. May we live happy, with hero
children, through a hundred winters,

HYMN V. Agni,

I invocate your Son of Strength, the Youthful, with hymns,
the Youngest God, whose speech is guileless ;

Sage who sends wealth comprising every treasure, bringer of
many boons, devoid of malice.

2 At eve and morn thy pious servants bring thee their precious
gifts, 0 Priest of many aspects,

On whom, the Purifier, all things living, as on firm ground
their happiness have stablished.

% Thou from of old hast dwelt among these people, by mental
power the charioteer of blessings.

Hence sendest thou, 0 sapient Jata vedas, to him who serves
thee treasures in succession,

4 Agni, whoever secretly attacks us, the neighbour, tbou with
Mitra’s might ! who harms us.

Burn him with thine own Steers for ever youthful, burning
with burning heat, thou fiercest burner.

I) He who serves thee with sacrifice and fuel, with hymn, 0 Son
of Strength, and chanted praises,

Shines out, Immortal ! in the midst of mortals, a sage, with
wealth, with splendour and with glory.

6 Do this, 0 Agni, when we urge thee, quickly, triumphant in

thy might subdue our foemen.

When thou art praised with words and decked with brightness,
accept this chanted hymn, the singer's worship.

7 Help us, that we may gain this wish, 0 Agni, gain riches,

Wealthy One ! with store of heroes.

Desiring strength from thee may we be strengthened, and win.
Eternal ! thine eternal glory.

8 Tranquil : avrihibhih ; literally untroubled by wolves, or enemies. Grant
chiefs and bard : tbe wealthy men who institute the sacrifice and the priest
Who sings. Or it may be rendered, ‘ Grant the chiefs' bard/ that is, the priest
who sings for his wealthy patrons. A hundred winters : see V. 54. 15, note.

2 Priest of many aspects : purvantha, having many faces, aspects, or mani-
festations. According to S&yana, having many flames instead of faces.

, 4 Thine own Stem ; thy strong flames. Bum Mm , etc. : tdpd tapishiha tdpasd
tapasvdn.

BYMN 7.]

THE RIG VEDA.

561

HYMN VI. Agni.

He who seeks furtherance and grace to help him gaps to the
Son of Strength with newest worship,

Calling the heavenly Priest to share the banquet, who rends
the wood, bright, with his blackened pathway.

2 Y[hite-hue& and thundering he dwells in splendour, Most

Youthful, with the loud-voiced and eternal —

Agni, most variform, the Purifier, who follows crunching many
ample forests.

3 Incited by the wind thy flames, 0 Agni, move onward, Pure

One J pure, in all directions.

Thy most destructive heavenly Navagvas break the woods
down and devastate them boldly.

4 Thy pme white horses from their bonds are loosened : O

Kadiant One, they shear the ground beneath them,

And far and wide shines out thy flame, and flickers rapidly
moving over earth’s high ridges.

5 Forth darts the Bull’s tongue like the sharp stone weapon dis-

charged by him who fights to win the cattle.

Agni’s fierce flame is like a hero’s onset : dread and resistless
he destroys the forests.

6 Thou with the sunlight of the great Impeller hast boldly over-

spread the earth’s expanses.

So drive away with conquering might all perils : fighting our
foemen burn up those who harm us.

7 Wondrous ! of wondrous power I give to the singer wealth

wondrous, marked, most wonderful, life-giving.

Wealth bright, O Bright One, vast, with many heroes, give
with thy bright flames to the man who lauds thee.

HYMN VII. Agni.

Him, messenger of earth and head of heaven, Agni Vaisvanara,
born in holy Order,

The Sage, the King, the guest of men, a vessel fit for their
mouths, the Gods have generated,

2 The loud-voiced and eternal : the Maruts.

3 Navagvas : the flames of fire being regarded as the ministers of Agni, who
is the best or oldest of the Angirases of whom the Navagvas are a class.

4 Earth's high ridges: adhi sttau prisneh; Prisni here being the multiform earth.

5 Who fights to win the cattle : Indra who wars with demons of drought and
darkness.

6 The great Impeller : SClrya, the vivifying Sun.

7 ji Sd chitra chit :vf-r -?-*-*•< T ■-**: 4 •»-: 7 ™ ' chitralcshatra chitrdtamam vasodhtfm j

Chandram rayim ± ■■ ■ \'' :n.\ % • ■ . chdndra chandrflbhir grinaU yuvasva,

1 A vessel fit for their months : through whose means they receive men’s
offerings.

36

m TEE EYMNS OF [BOOK VI,

2 Him have they praised, mid-point of sacrifices, great cistern of

libations, seat of riches.

Vaisv&nara, conveyer of oblations, ensign of worship, have the
; Gods engendered.

3 From thee, 0 Agni, springs the mighty singer, from thee come

heroes who subdue the foeman.

0 King, Vaisv&nara, bestow thou on us excellent treasures
worthy to be longed for.

4 To thee, Immortal ! when to life thou springest, all the Gods

sing for joy as to their infant.

They by thy mental powers were made immortal, Vaisvanara,

' when thou shonest from thy Parents.

5 Agni Vaisvanara, no one hath ever resisted thaseJdiy mighty

ordinances,

When thou, arising from thy Parents 2 * * 5 bosom, foundest the
light for days 5 appointed courses.

6 The summits of the heaven are traversed through and through

by the Immortal's light, Vaisvanara's brilliancy.

All creatures in existence rest upon his head. The Seven
swift-flowing Streams have grown like branches forth.

1 Vaisvanara, who measured out the realms of air, Sage very

wise who made the lucid spheres of heaven,

The Undeceivable who spread out all the worlds, keeper is he
and guard of immortality.

HYMN VIII. Agni.

At Jata vedas 5 holy gathering I will tell aloud the conquering
might of the swift red-hued Steer.

A pure and fresher hymn flows to Vaisvanara, even as for Agni
lovely Soma is made pure.

2 That Agni, when in loftiest heaven he sprang to life, Guardian

of Holy Laws, kept and observed them well.

Exceeding wise, he measured out the firmament. Vaisvanara
attained to heaven by mightiness.

3 Wonderful Mitra propped the heaven and earth apart, and

covered and concealed the darkness with his light.

2 Mid-point of sacrifices : { the bond of sacrifices.’ — Wilson. Agni or fire is 1

essential in all sacrifices.

6 The Seven swiftfiowing Streams : the five rivers of the Panj&b, the Indus
and the Sa'rasvati or the Kubha. Have grown: from Vaisvanara Agni.

7 Of immortality : according to Sftyana, of water which is the cause of
immortality. ‘ Of ambrosial (rain). 5 — Wilson.

EtMN 9,]

tub jriqveda*

5

He made the two bowls part asunder like two skins. Vaisvanara
put forth all his creative power. jj *

4 ’The Mighty seized him in the bosom of the floods : the people
waited on the King who should be praised.

As envoy of Vivasv&n Matarisvan brought Agni Vaisv&nara
hither from far away*

In every age bestow upon the singers wealth, worthy of holy
synods, glorious, ever new.

King, undecaying, as it were with sharpened bolt, smite
down the sinner like a tree with lightning-flash.

> Ho thou bestow, 0 Agni, on our wealthy chiefs, rule, with
good heroes, undecaying, bending not.

So may we win for us strength, 0 Yaisvanara, hundredfold,
thousandfold, 0 Agni, by thy help.

0 thou who dwellest in three places, Helper, keep with effective
guards our princely patrons.

Keep our band, Agni, who have brought thee presents. Leng-
then their lives, Yaisvanara, when lauded.

HYMN IX. Agni.

One half of day is dark, and bright the other ; both atmos-
pheres move on by sage devices.

Agni Yaisvanara, when born as Sovran, hath with his lustre
overcome the darkness.

2 I know not either warp or woof, I know not the web they

weave when moving to the contest.

3 The tivo hotels : the heaven and earth, called dhishdne or bowls from their
hemispherical appearance.

4 The Mighty : the Gods who followed and found the fugitive Agni. The

people : or the subjects, viacih. Of Vivasvda ; according to S&yana, from
Aditya or the Sun. " '

7 Who dwellest in three places : in heaven as. the Sun, in the firmament as
lightning, and on earth as fire.

• The hymn is somewhat obscure ; but the general purport appears to be ;
Agni is the priests’ guide and teacher. As sunlight dispels the darkness so
he enlightens our understandings. I know nothing of the mysteries of
sacrifice ; but X look to Agni for light, and prepare the ear and eye of my
mind to receive knowledge and inspiration from him.

1 Both atmospheres : the rajas or atmosphere is divided into two parts, one
half belonging to the sky and the other to the earth. See Wallis, The
Cosmology of the Rigveda , pp. 115, 116.

2 / knmo not either warp or woof : f The first half of the stanza... implies,

according to those who know tradition, says Sdyana } a

figurative allusion to the mysteries of sacrifi-. <■: : ■.:> \ : the warp, tantu>

are the metres of the Vedas, those of the woof, otu, the liturgic prayers and
ceremonial, the combination of which two is the cloth, or sacrifice : the
dtmavidah , or, Veddntis, understand i 4- r.« ^Y.lir.r t ~ the mysteries of creation,
the threads of the warp being the ,!.■„* ,■>! those of the woof the

gross, and their combination the universe,’ — Wilson. Professor Grassmann

m THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VI

Whose son shall here speak words that must be spoken without
* Assistance from the Father near him ?

3 For both the warp and woof he understandeth, and in due

time shall speak what should be spoken,

Who knoweth as the immortal world’s Protector, descending,
seeing with no aid from other.

4 He is the Priest, the first of all : behold him. Mid mortal men

he is the light immortal.

Here was he born, firm-seated in his station, Immortal, ever
waxing in his body.

5 A firm light hath been set for men to look on : among all

things that fly the mind is swiftest.

All Gods of one accord, with one intention, move unobstructed
to a single purpose.

6 Mine ears unclose to hear, mine eye to see him j the light that

harbours in my spirit broadens.

Far roams my mind whose thoughts are in the distance. What
shall I speak, what shall I now imagine ?

7 AH the Gods bowed them down in fear before thee, Agni, when

thou wast dwelling in the darkness.

Vaisvanara*be gracious to assist us, may the Immortal favour
us and help us.

HYMN X. Agni,

Install at sacrifice, while the rite advances, your pleasant,
heavenly Agni, meet for praises.

With hymns — for he illumines us — install him. He, J atavedas,
makes our rites successful.

and the translators of the Siebenzig Liedev think that a young singer is pre*
paring himself for a contest with older bards, and, being distrustful of his
own unaided powers to find material for his song, expresses his reliance upon
Agni, and seeks inspiration from him. To the contest .* the sacrifice is here
intended : a meeting for religious worship ; mngamane devayajune, — S&yana,
Whose son : Agni is the Father whose aid every one requires, however
excellent his own human father may be,

6 A firm Ught : Agni remains in his place, and the effectual performance of
the sacrifice depends upon the activity of his mind.

* According to the Veddnli view of the text, the light is Brajimct , seated
spontaneously in the heart as the means of true knowledge, to which all the
senses, together with the mind and consciousness, refer, as to the one cause of
creation, or Paramdtmd, supreme spirit.’— Wilson. The stanza is translated
by Prof. Wilson, after S&yana : ‘ A steady light, swifter than thought,
stationed among moving beings to shew (the way) to happiness t all the gods
being of one mind and of like wisdom, proceed respectfully to the presence of
the one (chief) agent, (Vaisvdnara)\

1 Install: establish him as your Parohita or Chief Priest ; or set fiim in
front as the Ahavaniya fire,

ii,] - the rigveda. ses

2 Hear this laud, Kadiant Priest of many aspects, 0 Agni with
the fires of man enkindled,

Laud which bards send forth pure as sacred butter/ strength
to this marl) as J twere for self -advantage.

B Mid mortal men that singer thrives in glory who offers gifts
with hymns of praise to Agni,

And the God, wondrous bright, with wondrous succours helps
him to win a stable filled with cattle.

4 He, at his birth, whose path is black behind him, filled heavCn
and earth with far-apparent splendour :

And he himself hath been, through night’s thick darkness,
made manifest by light, the Purifier.

i> With thy most mighty aid, confer, 0 Agni, wonderful wealth
on us and on our princes,

Who stand preeminent, surpassing others in liberal gifts, in
fame, and hero virtues.

6 Agni, accept this sacrifice with gladness, which, seated here,

the worshipper present eth.

Fair hymns hadst thou among the Bharadvajas, and holpest
them to gain abundant vigour.

7 Scatter our foes, increase our store. May we be glad a hund-

red winters with brave sons.

HYMN XL Agni.

Eagerly sacrifice thou, most skilful, Agni I Priest, pressing
on as if the Maruts sent thee.

‘To our oblation bring the two Nasatyas, Mitra and Yaruna
and Earth and Heaven.

2 Thou art our guileless, most delightful Herald, the God, among
mankind, of holy synods.

A Priest with purifying tongue, 0 Agni, sacrifice with thy
mouth to thine own body.

2 Strength to this yuan : the hymn is to give strength to the worshipper,
and the priests are to siug with vigour as though their own interests were
immediately concerned. S&yana takes mamatd (out of self-interest) as a pro-
per name, 2 * 4 As Mamat& (formerly offered it).’ — Wilson.

3 A stable filled with cattle : the expression includes the waters of heaven,
the light of day, and booty in cattle-lifting expeditions.

6 Bharadvdjas: the family of the great Rishi to whom the hymn was revealed,

7 A hundred winters ; see note on VI. 4. 8.

2 Of holy synods ; I follow Professor Ludwig in taking ridatkd as an old

genitive plural, and not = vidatke, as S&yana does. Sacrifice to thine own

body : or, sacrifice.. ,,,, thy proper body ; or, 4 keep thine own body near us to
be worshipped,’

Mb TEE EYMMS OP [BOOK VI

3 For even the blessed longing that is in thee would bring the

Gods down to the singer’s worship,

When* the Angirasea’ sagest Sage, the Poet, sings the sweet
measure at the solemn service.

4 Bright hath he beamed, the wise, the far-refulgent. Worship

the two wide-spreading Worlds, 0 Agni,

Whom as the Living Ohe rich in oblations the Five Tribes,
bringing gifts, adox'n with homage.

5 When I with reverence clip the grass for Agni, when the trim-

med ladle, full of oil, is lifted,

Firm on the seat of earth is based the altar : eye-like, the
sacrifice is directed Sun-ward.

• 6 Enrich us, 0 thou Priest of many aspects, with the Gods, Agni,
with thy fires, enkindled.

0 Son of Strength, clad in the robe of riches, may we escape
from woe as from a prison.

HYMN XII. Agni.

Kim of trimmed grass, Herald within the dwelling, may
Agni worship the Impeller’s World-halves.

He, Son of Strength, the Holy, from a distance hath spread
himself abroad with light like Surya.

2 In thee, most wise, shall Dyaus, for full perfection, King !

Holy One ! pronounce the call to worship.

Found in three places, like the Speeder's footstep, come to
present men’s riches as oblations !

3 Whose blaze most splendid, sovran in the forest, shines waxing

on his way like the Impeller.

He knows himself, like as a guileless smelter, not to be stayed
among the plants, Immortal.

4 Our friends extol him like a steed for vigour, even Agni in the

dwelling, J&tavedas.

1 The Impeller's World-halves : the heaven and earth, illumined by, and so
belonging to, the all-vivifying Sun.

2 In thee : or by thee, in thy lightning form, Dyaus or Heaven shall
pronounce the ydjijd , the consecrating text used at sacrifices, and thus invite
the Gods to be present. Found in three places : in heaven, atmosphere, and
earth, and in the corresponding fire-receptacles at sacrifice. The Speeder's
footstep : the threefold step of Vishnu as the Sun, traversing the three worlds
of earth, air, and sky.

3 A guileless smelter : he knows his power to consume what he attacks,
like a melter of metal who knows what he can do and does not deceive himself.
According to S&yana, dmvittf here, means runner, ‘ rushing like the innoxious
(wind).’ —Wilson.

THE RIGVEDA.

m

BYMN 130

Tree-fed, he fights with power as doth a champion, like Dawn’s
Sire to be praised with sacrifices.

5 Men wonder at his shining glows when, paring the Woods with

ease, o’er the broad earth he goeth,

. And, like a rushing flood, loosed quickly, burneth, swift as' a
guilty thief, o’er desert places.

6 So mighty thou protectest us from slander, 0 Champion, Agm I

with all fires enkindled.

Bring opulence and drive away afflicton. May brave sons glad-
den us through a hundred winters.

HYMN XIII. Agni.

From thee, as branches from a tree, 0 Agni, from thee, Auspici-
ous God 1 spring all our blessings — 9

Wealth swiftly, strength in battle with our foemen, the rain
besought of heaven, the flow of waters.

2 Thou art our Bhaga to send wealth : thou dwellest, like.

circumambient air, with wondrous splendour.

Friend art thou of the lofty Law, like Mitra, Controller, Agni !
God ! of many a blessing.

3 Agni I the hero slays with might his foenmn ; the singer bears

away the Pani’s booty —

Even he whom thou, Sage, born in Law, incitest by wealth,
accordant with the Child of Waters,

4 The man who, Son of Strength ! with sacrifices, hymns, lauds,

attracts thy fervour to the altar,

Enjoys each precious thing, 0 God, 0 Agni, gains wealth of
corn and is the lord of treasures.

5 Grant, Son of Strength, to men for their subsistence such

things as bring high fame and hero children.

For thou with might givest much food in cattle even to the
wicked wolf when he is hungry.

6 Eloquent, Son of Strength, Most Mighty, Agni, vouchsafe us

seed and offspring, full of vigour.

May I by all my songs obtain abundance. May brave sons
gladden us through a hundred winters.

4 Dawn's Sire ; Dyaus or Heaven, the Father of Ushas or Dawn,

3 Bis foeman : vritram signifying any enemy ; dvarakam satrum — Sftyana.
The Child of Waters : here said to mean the lightning, born of the watery
cloud.

5 To the wicked wolf: or, perhaps, even to the foe Vrika, Cf. VII, 68, 8»

568

THE HYMN'S OF

l BOOK r/.

HYMN XIV. AgnL

Whoso to Agni hath endeared his thought and service by his
hyihns,

^That mortal eats before the rest, and finds sufficiency of food*

2 Agni, in truth, is passing wise, most skilled in ordering, a Seer.
At sacrifices Manus’ sons glorify Agni as their Priest.

3 The foeman’s wealth in many a place, Agni, is emulous to help.
Men fight the fiend, and seek by rites to overcome the riteless foe*

4 Agni bestows the hero chief, winner of waters, firm in fray.
Soon as they look upon his might his enemies tremble in alarm.

5 For with his wisdom Agni, God, protects the mortal from

reproach,

Whose conquering wealth is never checked, is never checked
in deeds of might.

6 0 Agni, God with Mitra's might call hither the favour of the

Gods from earth and heaven.

Bring weal from heaven that men may dwell securely. May we
o’ercome the foe's malign oppressions, may we o’ercome
them, through thy help o’ercome them.

HYMN XV. Agni.

With this my song I strive to reach this guest of yours, who
wakes at early morn, the Lord of all the tribes.

Each time he comes from heaven, the Pure One from of old :
from ancient days the Child eats everlasting food.

2 Whom, well-disposed, the Bhrigus stablished as a Friend,

whom men must glorify, high-flaming in the wood.

As such, most friendly, thou art every day extolled in lauds
by Vitahavya, 0 thou wondrous God.

3 Be thou the foeless helper of the skilful man, subduer of the

enemy near or far away.

Bestow a wealthy home on men, 0 Son of Strength. Give
Vitahavya riches spreading far and wide, give Bharadv&ja
wide-spread wealth.

4 Him, your refulgent guest, Agni who comes from heaven, the

Herald of mankind, well-skilled in sacred rites,

1 That mortal eats before the rest ; ‘May the mortal quickly become

distinguished as first (amongst men).’ — Wilson. ■>

2 Most shilled in ordering : the chief regulator of religious rites.

3 Emulous to help : waiting for us to seize and use.

1 The Child ; born of the fire-sticks, or of Heaven and Earth. Everlasting
food: the Amrita contained in the sacrificial offerings.

2 Vitahavya : either the name of the Rishi, as S&yana takes it, or an
epithet * whose oblations are enjoyed/ qualifying Bharadvdja understood, -

&YMWI&.}. fllE RIOVEDA.

Who, like a holy singer, utters heavenly words, oblation-beareV*
envoy, God, I seek with hymns* ^

5 Who with his purifying, eye-attracting form hath shone' upon

the earth as with the light of Dawn j
Who speeding on, as in the fight of Etasa, cometh, untouched
by age, as one athirst in heat.

6 Worship ye Agni, Agni, with your log of wood ; praise you?

belovM, your beloved guest with songs.

Invite ye the Immortal hither with your hymns. A God among
the Gods, he loveth what is choice, loveth our service, God
mid Gods.

7 Agni inflamed with fuel in my song I sing, pure, Cleanse^

stedfast, set in front at sacrifice.

Wise Jfttavedas we implore with prayers for bliss, the Priest,
the holy Singer, bounteous, void of guile.

8 Men, Agni, in each age have made thee, Deathless One, their

envoy, offering-bearer, guard adorable.

With reverence Gods and mortals have established thee, the
ever-watehful, omnipresent Household Lord.

9 Thou, Agni, ordering the works and ways of both, as envoy of

the Gods traversest both the worlds.

When we lay claim to thy regard and gracious care, be thou
to us a thrice-protecting friendly guard.

10 Him fair of face, rapid, and fair to look on, him very wise may

we who know not follow.

Let him who knows all rules invite for worship, Agni announce
our offering to the Immortals.

11 Him, Agni, thou deliverest and savest who brings his prayer

to thee the Wise, 0 Piero,

The end of sacrifice or its inception ; yea, thou endowest him
with power and riches.

12 Guard us from him who would assail us, Agni ; pi'eserve us,

O thou Victor, from dishonour.

Here let the place of darkening come upon thee : may wealth
be ours, desirable in thousands.

5 In the fight of Etasa : when he contended with Sffrya, See II, 19. 5,
where Indra is said to have assisted Etasa.

9 Of loth ; of Gods and men.

11 The second half of the stanza is not clear. Professor Wilson paraphra-
ses it after S&yana : * thou rewardest with strength and with riches him
(who undertakes) the institution, (who effects) the accomplishment, of the

^sacrifice.

12 The place of darkening : this passage is very obscure. Professor Ludwig
thinks that the time of battle is meant. May the foes who attack us find

THE HYMNS OF

570

[BOOK VI

13 Agni, the Priest, is King, Lord of the homestead, he, Jatayedas,

knows all generations.

Most 'skilful worshipper mid Gods and mortals, may he begin
the sacrifice, the Holy.

14 Whate’er to-day thou, bright-flamed Priest, enjoy est from the

man’s rite — for thou art Sacrificer —

Worship, for duly dost thou spread in greatness: bear off thine
offerings of to-day, Most Youthful.

15 Look thou upon the viands duly laid for thee. Fain would he

set thee here to worship Heaven and Earth.

Help us, 0 liberal Agni, in the strife for spoil, so that we
may o’ercome all things that trouble us, o’ercome, o’ereome
them with thy help.

16 Together with all Gods, 0 fair-faced Agni, be seated first

upon the wool-lined altar,

Nest-like, bedewed with oil. Bear this our worship to Savitar
who sacrifices rightly.

17 Here the arranging priests, as did Atharvan, rub this Agni

forth,

Whom, not bewildered, as he moved in winding ways, they
brought from gloom.

18 For the Gods’ banquet be thou born, for full perfection and

for weal.

Bring the Immortal Gods who strengthen holy Law: so let our
sacrifice reach the Gods.

that they have to deal with thee as our ally. S&yana explains p$thah as food
offered in sacrifice, and dkvasmanvfit as dhvastado&ham, freed from defects ;
‘May tfie food reach thee free from imperfection.' Professor Grassmann
translates : ‘ ISe dring mit dir dein rauchumhiillter Gang vorf ‘Thy smoke-
enveloped course press forward with thee/

13 Knows all generations : vfavd veda jdnimd ; etymology of Jatavedas. —
Ludwig.

14 The man's ; who institutes the sacrifice.

15 Fain would he : the patron of the sacrifice.

The original hymn seems to end with this stanza, as the repetition,
o’ercome o’ercome, o’ercome, tavema...tarema.,,.,, .. .tarema also indicates.

36 WooUlined altar : built up like the nest of a bird with layers of wool,
in which wool and resins for incense are placed. See Aitareya-Br&hmana,

1. 5. 28 (Haug’s translation p. 62), To Savitar ; according to S&yana, Savitar
means the originator, the institutor of the sacrifice, and the dative case is
used in the sense of the genitive, ‘ the sacrifice of the institutor of the rite/

In another place he explains savitri ydjamdndya by ( for the sake of the
benefit of the sacrificing institutor of the ceremony.’

■ 17 Atharvan : the priest who first obtained fire and offered Soma and pray-
ers to the Gods. As he moved in winding \oays ; when he fied and tried to
hide himself from the Gods,

HYMN 16.] THE RIQVEDA. -571

19 0 Agni, Lord and Master of men's homesteads, with kindled
fuel we have made thee mighty.

Let not our household gear he found defective. Sharpen us
with thy penetrating splendour.

HYMN XVT. Agni.

Priest of all sacrifices hast thou been appointed by the Gods,
Agni, amid the race of man.

2 So with thy joyous tongues for us sacrifice nobly in this rite.
Bring thou the Gods and worship them.

3 For well, 0 God, Disposer, thou knowest, straight on, the paths

and ways,

Agni, most wise in sacrifice.

4 Thee, too, hath Bharata of old, with mighty men, implored

for bliss, ' :

And worshipped thee the worshipful.

5 Thou givest these abundant boons to Divodasa pouring forth,
To Bharadvaja offering gifts.

6 Do thou, Immortal Messenger, bring hither the Celestial Folk,
Hearing the singer’s eulogy.

7 Mortals with pious thought implore thee, Agni, God, at holy rites.
To come unto the feast of Gods.

8 I glorify thine aspect and the might of thee the Bountiful.

All those who love shall joy in thee,

9 Invoker placed by Manus, thou, Agni, art near, the wisest

Priest :

Pay worship to the Tribes of Heaven.

10 Come, Agni, lauded, to the feast; come to the offering of the

gifts

As Priest be seated on the grass.

11 So, Angiras, we make thee strong with fuel and with holy oil.
Blaze high, thou youngest of the Gods.

12 For us thou winnest, Agni, God, heroic strength exceeding great,

Far-spreading and. of high renown. *

13 Agni, Atharvan brought thee forth, by rubbing, from the lotus-

flower,

The head of Visva, of the Priest.

14 Thee, Vritra’s siayer, breaker down of castles, hath Atharvan’s

son,

Dadhyach the Hishi, lighted up.

4 Bharata : according to S&yana the King of that name, son of Dushyantk
and Sakuntalft,

13 The lotU8xfiawer : apparently a figurative expression for heaven. Visva ;
Heayeu, personified.

14 Dadhyach ; see I. 84. 13, note,

6^2 ir/TT? HYMNS OF [BOOK FA

15 The hero P&thya kindled thee the Dasyus’ moat destructive

foe,

WinW of spoil iii every fight.

16 Come, here, 0 Agni, will I sing verily other songs to thee.
And with these drops shalt thou grow strong.

17 Where’er thy mind applies itself, vigour preeminent hast

thou :

There wilt thou gain a dwelling-place.

18 Not for a inoment only lasts thy bounty, good to many a one 1
Our service therefore shalt thou gain;

19 Agni, the Bh&rata, hath been sought, the Yritra-slayer, marked

of all,

Yea, Divod&sa’s Hero Lord.

20 For he gaVe riches that surpass in greatness all the things of

earth,

lighting untroubled, unsubdued.

21 Thou, Agni, as in days of old, with recent glory, gathered

light,

Hast overspread the lofty heaven.

23 Bring to your Agni, 0 my friends, boldly your laud and
sacrifice i

Give the Disposer praise and song.

23 For as sagacious Herald he hath sat through every age

of man,

Oblation-bearing messenger.

24 Bring those Two Kings whose ways are pure, Adityas, and

the Marut host,

Excellent God ! and Heaven and Earth.

25 For strong and active mortal man, excellent, Agni, is the look
Of thee Immortal, Son of Strength !

26 Rich through his wisdom, noblest be the giver serving thee

to-day :

The man hath brought his hymn of praise.

15 Pdthya: probably some celebrated sacrifices Dr. G-arbe (Yait&na-Sfitra
II. 14) translates pdthyd vrishd in this text by { der Hengst auf der Strasse,
the Stallion on the way.’

18 Not for a moment only lasts thy bounty : Sftyana understands this differ-
ently : ‘Let not thy full (blaze) be distressing to the eye,’ — Wilson,

1 9 The Bhdrata : the especial protector of the Bharatas. According to
S&yapa the word means either ‘descended from the priests called Bharatas,*
or ‘ the bearer of oblations.’

if

Those Two Kings : Mitra and Varuna,

HYMN 16.] THE 1UQYEDA, 573.

27 These, Agn i, these are helped by thee, who, strong and active

all their lives, *

O’ercome the malice of the foe, fight down the malice of
the foe.

28 May A<?ni with his pointed blaze oast down each fierce devour-

ing fiend :

May Agni win ns wealth by war.

29 0 active Jatavedas, bring riches with store of hero sons;

Slay thou the demons, O Most Wise.

30 Keep us, 0 J4ta vedas, from the troubling of the man of sin :
Guard us thou Sage who knowest prayer,

31 Whatever sinner, Agni, brings oblations to procure our death.
Save us from woe that he would work.

32 Drive from us with thy tongue, 0 God, the rnan who doetb

evil deeds,

The mortal who would strike us dead.

33 Give shelter reaching far and wide to Bharadv&ja, conquering

Lord !

Agni, send wealth most excellent.

34 May Agni slay the Yritras, — fain for riches, through the lord

of song,

Served with oblation, kindled, bright.

35 His Father’s Father, shining in his Mother’s everlasting side,
Set on the seat of holy Law.

36 0 active Jatavedas, bring devotion that wins progeny, Agni,

that it may shine to heaven,

37 0 Child of Strength, to thee whose look is lovely we with

dainty food, *

0 Agni, have poured forth our songs.

38 To thee for shelter are we come, as to the shade frorn fervent

heat,

Agni, who glitterest like gold.

39 Mighty as one who slays with shafts, or like a bull with sharp*

ened horn,

Agni, thou brakest down the forts.

35 Bis Father’s Father : 1 here, as before, the mother of Agni is the
the father is heaven : Agni is said to be the father or f o J
heaven by transmitting to it the flame and smoke of
Wilson.

37 Child of Strength : sahashrita ; literally, made or
i, e, the violent agitation of the fire-stick,

tu

ttSM HYMNS OP [BOOR tf.

40 Whom, like an infant newly born, devourer, in their arms

they bear,

Men 5 s Agni, skilled in holy rites.

41 Bear to the banquet of the Gods the God best finder-out of

Wealth.

Let him be seated in his place*

42 In JAtavedas kindle ye the dear gitest who hath now appeared
In a soft place, the homestead’s Lord.

43 Harness, 0 Agni, 0 thou God, thy steeds which are most

: excellent :

They bear thee as thy spirit wills. •

44 Come hither, bring the Gods to us to taste the sacrificial feast,
To drink the draught of Soma juice.

45 0 Agni of the Bharatas, blaze high with everlasting might,
Shine forth and gleam, Eternal One.

46 The mortal man who serves the God with banquet, and, bring-

ing gifts at sacrifice, lauds Agni,

May well attract, with prayer and hands uplifted, the Priest
of Heaven and Earth, true Saerificer.

47 Agni, we bring thee, with our hymn, oblation fashioned in

the heart.

Let these be oxen unto thee, let these be bulls and kine to
thee.

48 The Gods enkindle Agni, best slayer of Vritra, first in rank,
The Mighty One who brings us wealth and crushes down the

B&kshasas.

2

x

HYMN XVII. Indra.

Drink Soma-, Mighty One, for which, when lauded, thou brak-
est through the cattle-stall, 0 Indra ; »

Thou who, 0 Bold One, armed with thunder smotest Vritra
with might, and every hostile being.

Drink it thou God who art impetuous victor, Lord of our
hymns, with beauteous jaws, the Hero,

Bender of kine-stalls, car-borne, thunder-wielding, so pierce
thy way to vvondrous strength, 0 Indra.

Drink as of old, and let the draught delight thee : hear thou
our prayer and let our songs exalt thee.

Make the Sun visible, make food abundant, slaughter the foes,
pierce through and free the cattle.

dtawdas kindle ye : the meaning is said to he, that the fire of burnt-
^kindled by the fire produced by attrition.

" l " ; whose sacrifices are always effectual.

let our oblations be as acceptable to thee as herdB of

EYME 17. J TEE MOVED A, £75'

4 These gladdening drops, 0 Indra, Self-sustaiuer, quaffed shall
augment thee in thy mighty splendour.

Yea, let the cheering drops delight thee greatly, great, perfect,
strong, powerful, all-subduing.

£ Gladdened whereby, bursting the firm enclosures, thou gavest
splendour to the Sun and Morning.

The mighty rock that compassed in the cattle, ne’er moved,
thou shookest from its seat, 0 Indra.

6 Thou with thy wisdom, power, and works of wonder, hast-

stored the ripe milk in the raw cows’ udders,

Unbarred the firm doors for the kine of Morning, and, with
■ the Angirases, set free the cattle.

7 Thou hast spread out wide earth, a* mighty marvel, and, high

thyself, propped lofty heaven, 0 Indra.

Both worlds, whose Sons are Gods, thou hast supported,
young, Mothers from old time of holy Order.

8 Yea, Indra, all the Deities installed thee their one strong

Champion in the van for battle.

What time the godless ’was the Gods’ assailant, Indra they
chose to win the light of heaven.

9 Yea, e’en that heaven itself of old bent backward before thy

bolt, in terror of its anger,

When Indra, life of every living creature, smote down within
his lair the assailing Dragon.

10 Yea, Strong One ! Tvashtar turned for thee, the Mighty, the

bolt with thousand spikes and hundred edges,

Eager and prompt at will, wherewith thou crushedst the boast-
ing Dragon, 0 impetuous Hero.

11 He dressed a hundred buffaloes, 0 Indra, for thee whom all

accordant Maruts strengthen.

He, Pdshan Vishnu, poured forth three great vessels to him,
the juice that cheers, that slaughters Vritra.

, 6 The ripe milk : the cows are called raw as contrasted with the warm
milk matured in their udders. See 1* 62, 9, This miracle is ascribed to the
Asvins also. See 1. 180. 8.

7 Whose Sons are Gods : Heaven and Earth are frequently called the parents
of the Gods. So in Greek mythology the Gods sprang from the union of
Uranus and Gaia. ‘ Cent mythologies/ M. Beville remarks, sont fondles but
le mariage du ciel et de la terre/ See Muir, 0. S . Texts , V. p. 24.

• 8 The godless : the demon Vritra,

11 lie : Agni. See V. 29. 7. Three great vessels : literally, lakes. See Y.
29. 7. That daughters Vritra ; inspirits Indra to sfay him.

576 THE HYMNS OH [BOOH VI.

12 Thou settest free the rushing wave of waters, the floods' great
swell encompassed and obstructed.

Along' steep slopes their course thou turnedst, Indra, directed
downward, speeding to the ocean.

J3 So may our new prayer bring thee to protect us, thee well-
armed Hero with thy bolt of thunder,
jlndra, who made these worlds, the Strong, the Mighty, who
never groweth old, the victory-giver.

14 So, Indra, form us brilliant holy singers for strength, for

glory, and for food and riches.

Give Bharadvaja hero patrons, Indra ! Indra, be ours upon the
day of trial.

1 5 With this may -we obtain, strength God-appointed, and brave

sons gladden us through a hundred winters.

HYMN XVIII. Indra,

Glorify him whose might is all-surpassing, Indra the much-
invoked who flglits uninjured.

Magnify with these songs the never-vanquished, the Strong,
the Bull of men, the Mighty Victor,

2 He, Champion, Hero, Warrior, Lord of battles, impetuous,

loudly roaring, great destroyer,

Who whirls the dust on high, alone, o'erthrower, hath made
all races of mankind his subjects,

3 Thou, thou alone, hast tamed^the Dasyus; singly thou hast

subdued the people for the Arya.

Is this, or is it not, thine hero exploit, Indra ? Declare it at
the proper season.

4 For true, I deem, thy strength is, thine the Mighty, thine, O

Most Potent, thine the Gonquering Victor/

Strong, of the strong, Most Mighty, of the mighty, thine,
driver of the churl to acts of bounty,

5 Be this our ancient bond of friendship with you and with
x Angirases here who speak of Vala.

f Thou, Wondrous, Shaker of things Arm, didst smite him in his
' fresh strength, and for ce his doors and cas tles.

14 The day of trial : the decisive day of battle,

15 With this ; stutyd, praise, is understood,

3 At the proper season ; show that thou hast this power by aiding us before
t is too late and when our enemies have conquered us,

5 With you ; with Indra and his allies, the Maruts,

577

HYMN 18.]

THE Em VEDA.

6 With holy thoughts must he be called, the Mighty, showing

his power in the great fight with Vritra.

He must be called to give us seed and offspring, the Thunderer
must be moved and sped to battle.

7 He in his might, with name that lives for ever, hath far sur-

passed all human generations.

He, most heroic, hath his home with splendour, with glory and
with riches and with valour.

8 Stranger to guile, who ne’er was false or faithless, bearing a

name that may be well remembered,

Indra crushed Chumuri, Dhuni, Sambara, Pipru, and Sushna,
that their castles fell in ruin.

9 With saving might that must be 'praised and lauded, Indra,

ascend thy car to smite down Yritra.

In thy right hand hold fast thy bolt of thunder, and weaken,
Bounteous Lord, his art and magic.

10 As Agni, as the dart burns the dry forest, like the dread shaft

burn down the fiends, 0 Indra ;

Thou who with high deep-reaching spear hast broken, hast
covered over mischief and destroyed it.

1 1 With wealth, by thousand paths come hither, Agni, paths that

bring ample strength, 0 thou Most Splendid.

Come, Son of Strength, o’er whom, Invoked of many ! the
godless hath no power to keep thee distant.

12 From heaven, from earth is bruited forth the greatness of him

the firm, the fiery, the resplendent.

ST< o foe hath he, no counterpart, no refuge is there from him
the Conqueror full of wisdom

13 This day the deed that thou hast done is famous, when thou,

for him, with many^ thousand others
Laidest low Kutsa, Ayu, Atithigva, and boldly didst deliver
Turvayana.

14 In thee, 0 God, the wisest of the Sages, all Gods were joyful

when thou, slewest Ahi.

8 Ohumuriy etc : demons of drought. See Index.

10 The exact meaning of the second half -stanza is uncertain, as gambhirayd
and rishvayd , deep and high, have no substantive.

13 For him : for T&rvay&na, who appears to have been an especial favour-
ite of Indra. According to Sftyana, turvaydna , ‘ quickly going,’ is an epithet
of Divoddsa. S&yana represents the r-v hnv-.ir ^een achieved for Kutsa,
Ayu, and Atithigva, but this is not - ■ ■ ' ■ ■ words of the text. A

new hymn : of praise for some new favour shown to us.

37

578 Tm HYMNS OF [BOOK VL

When, lauded for thyself, thou gavest freedom* to sore-afflicted
Heaven and to the people.

15 This power of thine both heaven and earth acknowledge, the
deathless Gods acknowledge it, 0 Indra.

’ Ho what thou ne’er hast done, 0 Mighty Worker : beget a new
hymn at thy sacrifices.

HYMN XIX. Indra.

Great, hero-like controlling men is Indra, unwasting in his
powers, doubled in vastness.

He, turned to us, hath grown to hero vigour: broad, wide, he
hath been decked by those who serve him.

2 The bowl made Indra $wift to gather booty, the High, the
f Lofty, Youthful, Undecayiug,

Him who hath waxed by strength which none may conquer,

1 and even at once grown to complete perfection.

3 Stretch out those hands of thine, extend to us-ward thy wide

capacious arms, and grant us glory.

Like as the household herdsman guards the cattle, so move
thou round about us in the combat.

4 Now, fain for strength, let us invite your Indra hither, who

lieth hidden with his Heroes, —

Free from all blame, without reproach, uninjured, e’en as
were those who sang, of old, his praises.

5 With stedfast laws, wealth-giver, strong through Soma, he

hath much fair and precious food to feed us.

In him unite all paths that lead to riches, like rivers that
commingle with the ocean.

6 Bring unto us the mightiest might, 0 Hero, strong and most

potent force, thou great Subduer 1
All splendid vigorous powers of men vouchsafe us, Lord of Bay
Steeds, that they may make us joyful.

7 Bring us, grown mighty in its strength, 0 Indra, thy friendly .

rapturous joy that wins the battle,

Wherewith by thee assisted and triumphant, we "may laud thee
in gaining seed and offspring.

X Controlling men ; or, satisfier of men. £ Fulfiller (of the desires) of men/
— Wilson.

2 The bowl ; that is, the libation of Soma juice. But see Ludwig, Ueher

die neuesten Arbeiten, &c,, p. 87.

4 Who lieth hidden .* S&yani explains chatinam as satrtindm chdtakam

ndsalcam; 1 the destroyer (of enemies) 2 * 4 5 . — Wilson,

HYMN 20.]

THE UIQYEEA,

579,

8 Indra, bestow on us the power heroic, skilled and exceeding

strong, that wins the booty,

Wherewith, by thine assistance, we may conquer our foes in
battle, be they* kin or stranger.

9 Let thine heroic strength come from behind us, before us, froni

above us or below us.

From every side may it approach us, Indra. Give us the glory
of the realm of splendour.

10 With most heroic aid from thee, like heroes, Indra, may we

win wealth by deeds of glory.

Thou, King, art Lord of earthly, heavenly treasure : vouchsafe
us riches vast, sublime, and lasting.

1 1 The Bull, whose strength hath waxed, whom Maruts follow,

free-giving Indra, the Celestial Ruler,

Mighty, all-conquering, the victory-giver, him let us call to
grant us new protection.

12 Give up the people who are high and haughty to these metx

and to me, 0 Thunder- wielder !

Therefore upon the earth do we invoke thee, where heroes
win, for sons and kine and waters,

13 Through these thy friendships, God invoked of many ! may we

be victors over every foeman.

flaying both kinds of foe, may we, 0 Hero, be happy, helped
by thee, with ample riches.

HYMN XX. Indra,*-

Give us wealth, Indra, that with might, as heaven o’ertops the
earth, o’ercomes our foes in battle,

Wealth that brings thousands and that wins the corn-lands,
wealth, Son of Strength ! that vanquishes the foeman.

2 Even as the power of Dyaus, to thee, O Indra, all Asura sway

was by the Gods entrusted,

When thou, Impetuous 1 leagued with Vishnu, slevvest Vritra
the Dragon who enclosed the waters. ,

3 Indra, Strong, Victor, Mightier than the mighty, addressed

with prayer and perfect in his splendour,

Lord of the bolt that hreaketh forts in pieces, became the King
of the sweet juice of Soma.

9 From behind us y etc : or, from, the west, from the north, from the south,
from the east.

11 This stanza has occurred in III. 47- 5,

1 2 Where heroes win : sflrasdtau ; in battle.

13 Both kinds of foe ; kinsman and strangers. See stanza 8*

m THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VL

4 There, Indra, while the light was won, the Panis fled, ’neath

a hundred blows, for wise Dasoni,

And greedy Sushna's magical devices; nor left he any of
their food remaining.

5 What time the thunder fell and Sushna perished, all life's

support from the great Druh was taken.

Indra made room for his car-driver Kutsa who sate beside
him, when he gained the sunlight.

6 As the Hawk rent for him the stalk that gladdens, he wrenched

the head from Namuchi the Dasa.

He guarded Naur, Sayya’s son, in slumber, and sated him
with food, success, and riches.

7 Thou, thunder-armed, \^ith thy great might hast shattered

Pipru's strong forts who knew the wiles of serpents.

Thou gavest to thy worshipper Hijisvan imperishable wealth,
0 Bounteous Giver.

8 The crafty Vetasu, the swift Dasoni, and Tugra speedily with

all his servants.

Hath Indra, gladdening with strong assistance, forced near as
Twere to glorify the Mother.

9 Besistless, with the hosts he battles, bearing in both his arms

the Vritra-slaying thunder.

He mounts his Bays, as the car-seat an archer ; yoked at a
word they bear the lofty Indra.

10 May we, 0 Indra, gain by thy new favour ; so Purus laud
thee, with their sacritices,

That thou hast wrecked seven autumn forts, their shelter,
slain Dasa tribes and aided Purukutsa.

4 For wise Dasoni : Dasoni would appear in this place to be the name of
some man whom Indra protected. S&yana says that the dative case is put
for the ablative, and that the meaning is, { from the sage who offers many
oblations/ that is, from Kutsa. Ludwig takes Dasoni here to be tho priest of the
Panis: ' fled or fell for or to bim ' meaning that he was powerless to save them,

5 Druh : or, oppressor. Gf IV. 28. 2.

6 The Hawk ; which brought the Soma from heaven. See I. 9S. 6 : IV.
27. Numi ; see X. 48. 9.

8 Vetasu, Dasoni, and Tugra appear to be names of enemies on.pio <■.»,! by
Indra. But swift, tdtujlm, may be a Proper Name, Tin ;/■: -Tuii VI. *20. 4),
and Dasoni (dasonim) may be an adjective, ‘ having ten arms or helpers/ Of.
X. 49. 4, and see Ludwig, Der Kigveda, III. p. 156. As 1 twere to glorify the
Mother ; bayana takes dy6tcin&yci as the name of a and according to his
interpretation Indra compelled the conquered foes to approach Dyotana sub-
missively as a son comes before a mother. The Mother : the great Mother Aditi.

10 Autumn forts : probably strong places on elevated ground occupied by
the D&sas or original inhabitants during the rains and autumn. According to
S&yana, cities or strongholds of Sarat, a demon.

TBE RIOVEDA,

HYMN 21.]

581

11 Favouring ITsana tlie son of Kavi, thou wast his ancient

strength ener, 0 Indra.

Thou gavesfc Navav&stva as a present, to the great father
gayest back his grandson.

1 2 Thou, roaring 4 Indra, dravest on the waters that made a roar-

ing sound like rushing rivers,

What time, 0 Hero, o’er the sea thou broughtest, in safety
bro lightest Turvasa and Yadu.

13 This Indra, was thy work in war: thou sentest Dhuni and

Chumuri to sleep and slumber,

Dabhiti lit the flame for thee, and worshipped with fuel,
hymns, poured Soma, dressed oblations,

HYMN XXL Indra. Visvedevas.

These the most constant singer’s invocations call thee who
art to be invoked, 0 Hero ;

Hymns call anew the chariot-borne, Eternal : by eloquence
men gain abundant riches,

2 I praise that Indra, known to all men, honoured with songs,

extolled with hymns at sacrifices,

Whose majesty, rich in wondrous arts, surpasseth the magni-
tude of earth, and heaven in greatness.

3 He hath made pathways, with the Sun to aid him, throughout

the darkness that extended pathless.

Mortals who yearn to worship ne’er dishonour, 0 Mighty God,
thy Law who art Immortal.

4 And he who did these things, where is that Indra ? among

what tribes ? what people doth he visit ?

What sacrifice contents thy mind and wishes? What priest
among them all? what hymn, 0 Indra?

5 Yea, here were they who, born of old, have served thee, thy

friends of ancient time, thou active Worker.

Bethink thee now of these, Invoked 'of many 1 the midmost
and the recent, and the youngest.

11 Navavdstva : an Asura, or a mysterious being who perhaps represents
the Sun, released from captivity or eclipse by Indra and by him restored to
his own or to Indra’s father — apparently to Us&nft or Heaven, Gf. X. 49. 6 ;
Bergaigne, II. 223 ; Pisehel (Vedisehe Studien* II. 128) ; Ludwig, Ueber die
n. Arbeiten auf dem Gebiete der Rgveda-forschung, 160.

12 See I, 174. 9.

13 Dhuni and Chumuri : A suras or demons, sent to sleep, that is slain, by
Indra. ‘ Thou, with sleep whelming Chumuri and Dhuni, slowest the Dasyu
keptest safe Dabhfti’ (II. 15. 9). Cf. VL 18. 8.

,582 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 71.

6 Inquiring after him, thy later servants, Indra, have gained thy

former old traditions.

Hero, to whom the prayer is brought, we praise thee as great
for that wherein we know thee mighty.

7 The demon’s strength is gathered fast against thee ; great as

that strength hath grown, go forth to meet it.

With thine own ancient friend and close companion, the
thunderbolt, brave Champion 1 drive it backward.

8 Hear, too, the prayer, of this thy present beadsman, 0 Indra,

Hero, cherishing the singer*

For thou wast aye our fathers’ Friend aforetime, still swift to
listen to their supplication.

9 Bring to our help tins Jay, for our protection, Varuna, Mitra,

Indra, and the Maruts,

P ii shan and Vishnu, Agni and Purandhi, Savitar also, and the
Plants and Mountains.

10 The singers here exalt with hymns and praises thee who art

very Mighty and Most Holy,

v Hear, when invoiced, the invoker’s invocation. Beside thee
there is none like thee, Immortal !

11 Now to my words come quickly thou who knowest, 0 Son of

Strength, with all who claim our worship,

Who visit sacred rites, whose tongue is Agni, Gods who made
Manu stronger than the Dasyu.

12 On good and evil ways be thou our Leader, thou who art

known to all as Path-preparer.

Bring power to us, 0 Indra, with thy Horses, Steeds that are
best to draw, broad -backed, unwearied.

HYMN XXII. I ndr a,

With these my hymns I glorify that Indra who is alone to be
invoked by mortals,

The Lord, the Mighty One, of manly vigour, victorious, Hero,
true, and full of wisdom.

2 Our sires of old, Navagvas, sages seven, while urging him to
show his might, extolled him,

Dwelling on heights, swift, smiting down opponents, guileless
in word, and in his thoughts most mighty.

Q Purandhi ; e the intelligent/ or { the bold 9 may be either an epithet of
Agni or the name of a separate deity.

2 Navagvas ; here, apparently, identified with the Angir

HYMN 22,] THE RIG VEDA . 58$

- 3 We seek that Indra to obtain his riches that bring much food,
and men, and store of heroes.

Bring us, Lord of Bay Steeds, to make us joyful, celestial
wealth, abundant, undecaying.

4 Tell thou us this, if at thy hand aforetime the earlier singers
have obtained good fortune,

What is thy share and portion, Strong Subduer, Asura-slayer,
rich, invoked of many ?

r 5 He who for car-borne Indra, armed with thunder, hath a hymn,
craving, deeply-piercing, fluent,

: Who sends a song effectual, firmly-grasping, and strength-

bestowing, he comes near the mighty.

: 6 Strong of thyself, thou by this arkhast shattered, with thought-
swift Parvata, him who waxed against thee,

And, Mightiest! roaring! boldly rent in pieces things that were
firmly fixed and never shaken.

' 7 Him will we fit for you with new devotion, the strongest An-
cient One, in ancient manner.

So may that Indra, boundless, faithful Leader, conduct us o’er
all places hard to traverse.

8 Thou for the people who oppress hast kindled the earthly

firmament and that of heaven.

With heat, 0 Bull, on every side consume them : heat earth
and flood for him who hates devotion.

9 Of all the Heavenly Folk, of earthly creatures thou art the

King, 0 God of splendid aspect.

In thy right hand, 0 Indra, grasp the thunder ; Eternal !
thou destroyest all enchantments.

10 Give us confirmed prosperity, 0 Indra, vast and exhaustless
for the foe’s subduing.

Strengthen therewith the Arya’s hate and Dasa’s, and let the
arms of Nahushas be mighty.

4 What is thy share and portion : t what is tile portion, what the offering

(due) to thee.’ — Wilson. Asura-slayer: possibly, the smiter.and conqueror
of the Asura Dyaus. •*

5 Comes near the mighty : 1 encounters (with confidence) the malevolent.’ —
Wilson.

6 Parvata : the Genius of the mountains and clouds, frequently associated
with Indra. According to S&yana ( bahvparvand vajrena ), the many -knotted
thunderbolt is intended. Him who waxed against thee : Vritra.

• 8 The people who oppress : the R&hshasas and other enemies.

10 Nahushas ; see VI. 48. 7, note. .'

534 TBF HYMNS OF [BOOK Yh

11 Come with thy team which brings all blessings hither. Dis-
poser, much-invoked, exceeding holy.

* Than whom no fiend, no God can stay or hinder, come swiftly
with these Steeds in my direction.

HYMN XXIII. Indra.

Thou art attached to pressed-out Soma, Indra, at land, at
prayer, and when the hymn is chanted;

Or when with yoked Bays, Maghavan, thou comest, 0 Indra,
bearing in thine arms the thunder.

2 Or when on that decisive day thou holpest the presser of the

juice at Vritra’s slaughter ;

Or when thou, while the strong one feared, undaunted, gavest
to death, Indra, the daring Dasyus.

3 Let Indra drink the pressed-out Soma, Helper and mighty

Guide of him who sings his praises.

He gives the hero room who pours oblations, and treasure
even to the lowly singer.

4 E’en humble rites with his Bay Steeds he visits : he wields

the bolt, drinks Soma, gives ns cattle.

He makes the valiant rich in store of heroes, accepts our
praise and hears the singer’s calling.

5 What he hath longed for we have brought to Indra, who from

the days of old hath done us service.

While Soma flows we will sing hymns ancj, laud him, so that
our prayer may strengthen Indra’s vigour.

6 Thou hast made prayers the means of thine exalting, therefore

we wait on thee with hymns, 0 Indra.

May we, by the pressed Soma, Soma-drinker 1 bring thee, with
sacrifice, blissful sweet refreshment.

7 Mark well our sacrificial cake, delighted : Indra, drink Soma

and the milk commingled.

Here on the sacrihcer’s grass be seated : give ample room* to
thy devoted servant.

8 0 Mighty One, he joyful as thou wiliest. Let these our sac-

rifices reach and find thee ;

And may this hymn and these our invocations turn thee,
whom many men invoke, to help us.

9 Friends, when the juices flow, replenish duly your own, your

bounteous Indra with the Soma.

Will it not aid him to support us ? Indra spares him who sheds
the juice to win his favour.

HYMN 24.]

THE RIOVEEA.

m

10 While Soma flowed, thus Indra hath been lauded, Euler of
nobles, mid the Bharadv&jas,

That Indra may become the singer’s patron and give him
wealth in every kind of treasure.

HYMN XXIV. Indra.

Strong rapturous joy, praise, glory are with Indra : impet-
uous God, he quaffs the juice of Soma :

That Maghavan whom men must laud with singing, Heaven-
dweller, King of songs, whose help is lasting.

2 He, Friend of man, most wise, victorious Hero, hears, with

far-reaching aid, the singer call him.

Excellent, Praise of Men, the bard’s Supporter, Strong, he
gives strength, extolled in holy synod.

3 The lofty axle of thy wheels, 0 Hero, is not surpassed by

heaven and earth in greatness. '

Like branches of a tree, Invoked of many! manifold aids
spring forth from thee, 0 Indra.

4 Strong Lord, thine energies, endowed with vigour, are like the

paths of kine converging homeward.

Like bonds of cord, Indra, that bind the younglings, no bonds
are they, 0 thou of boundless bounty.

5 One act to-day, another act to-morrow ; oft Indra makes what

is not yet existent.

Here have we Mitra, Varupa, and Pfishan to overcome the
foeman’s domination.

6 By song and sacrifice men brought the waters from thee, as

from, a mountain’s ridge, 0 Indra.

Urging thy might, with these fair lauds they seek thee, O
theme of song, as horses rush to battle.

1 Strong rapturous joy : produced by drinking Soma-libations.

2 Praise of Men : sdhso navttm, as Agni is called Nardsansa.

4 Converging homeward: all Inclra’s great deeds indicate their divine
author as the tracks made by gracing cows may be traced back to the common
pen from which they have come forth.

Like bonds : the ties by whitsh Indra’s worshippers are bound to him are
ties of love and not fetters of slavery. There is a play on the word dtfman
in the text which derived from dd, to give, means gift or bounty, and derived
from dd, to bind, means, cord, rope, bond, or fetter : vatsctn&m nd tantdyah
te Indra d&manvantah adamotnah suddman (Pada text). The word vatsd also
means a youngling, especially a calf, and a dear child, a darling, so that
Indra’s favoured worshippers are also intended.

5 Here : that is, in Indra we have a champion equal to the three Gods
mentioned.

58$ THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VI.

7 That Indra whom nor months nor autumn seasons wither with

age, nor fleeting days enfeeble, —

Still may his body wax, e’en now so mighty, glorified by the
lauds and hymns that praise him.

8 Extolled, he bends not to the strong, the stedfast, nor to the

bold incited by the Dasyu.

High mountains are as level plains to Indra : even in the deep
he finds firm ground to rest on.

’ 9 Impetuous Speeder through all depth and distance, give
strengthening food, thou drinker of the juices.

Stand up erect to help us, unreluctant, what time the gloom
of night brightens to morning.

10 Hasting to help, come hither and protect him, keep him from
harm when he is here, 0 Indra.

At home, abroad, from injury preserve him. May brave sons
gladden us through a hundred winters.

HYMN XXV. Indra.

With thine assistance, 0 thou Mighty Indra, be it the least,
the midmost, or the highest, —

i Great with those aids and by these powers support us, Strong
God 1 in battle that subdues our foe men.

2 With these discomfit hosts that fight against us, and check
the opponent’s wrath, thyself uninjured.

With these chase all ourjfoes to every quarter : subdue the
tribes of Dasas to the Arya.

■ 3 Those who array themselves as foes to smite us, 0 Indra, be
they kin or be they strangers, —

Strike thou their manly strength that it be feeble, and drive
in headlong flight our foemen backward.

* 4 With strength of limb the hero slays the hero, when bright in
arms they range them for the combat.

When two opposing hosts contend in battle for seed and off-
spring, waters, kine, or corn-lands.

30 Hasting to help : I follow Professor Pischel (Vedische Studies, I. p. 41).
xn his explanation of ndijdm ' '- 1 ■ v ■. P 'essor Ludwig translates

somewhat similarly. JS&yana / . , . ,f - Wilson and G-rassmann)

takes ndy&m in the signification of leader ; c accompany the leader.’ Professor
Roth thinks it may he a proper name. Him ; the iustitutor of the sacrifice.

The poet prays for victory in a coming battle.

\ 1 By these powers : on account of, or by means of, the sacrificial food which
increases thy strength.

HYMN 26,] THE R1QVEDA. ,587

5 Yet no strong man hath conquered thee, no hero, no brave,

no warrior trusting in his valour,

Not' one of these is match for thee, 0 Indra. Thou far sur-
passest all these living creatures.

6 He is the Lord of both these armies’ valour when the com-

manders call them to the conflict :

When with their ranks expanded they are fighting with a great
foe or for a home with heroes.

7 And when thy people stir themselves for battle, be thou their

saviour, Indra, and protector,

And theirs, the manliest of our friends, the pious, the chiefs
who have installed us priests, 0 Indra. •

8 To thee for high dominion hath t>een given, for evermore, for

slaughtering the Vritras,

All lordly power and might, 0 Holy Indra, given by Gods for
victory in battle,

9 So urge our hosts together in the combats : yield up the

godless bands that fight against us.

Singing, at morn may we find thee with favour, yea, Indra,
and e'en now, we Bharadv&jas.

HYMN XXVI. Indra.

0 Indra, hear us. Raining down the Soma, we call on thee
to win us mighty valour.

Give us strong succour on the day of trial, when the tribes
gather on the field of battle.

2 The warrior, son of warrior sire, invokes thee, to gain great

strength that may be won as booty :

To thee, the brave man’s Lord, the fiends' subduer, he looks
when fighting hand to hand for cattle.

3 Thou didst impel the sage to win the daylight, didst ruin

Sushna for the pious Kutsa.

The invulnerable demon's head thou olavest when thou wouldst
win the praise of Atithigva.

4 The lofty battle-car thou broughtest forward; thou holpest

Dasadyu the strong when fighting.

6 He is the Lord : Indra can give valour and victory to either side as he
chooses. S&yana explains the first half-stanza differently : ‘ Of both these
' il i -■ ; ■ 1 1 ! :\ r. !: * \ th at one acquires wealth whose priests invoke (Indra ) at the

hiisT'i. ■■ - Wil'sOM.

S The sage : bhdrgavam rishim : — S&yana ; the Rishi, descendant of Bhrigu,

4 Vetasu : according to S&yana, either a king aided by him or a demon slain
by him. Cf. YI. 20. 8.

m THE HVMNJS OF [BOOH VI

Along with Vetasu thou slewest Tugra, and madest Tuji strong,
who praised thee, Indra.

5 Thou madest good the laud, what time thou rentest a hundred

thousand fighting foes, 0 Hero,

Slewest the D&sa Sambara of the mountain, and with strange
aids didst succour Divodasa.

6 Made glad with Soma-draughts and faith, thou sentest Chumuri

to his sleep, to please Dabhiti.

Thou, kindly giving Raji to Pitbinas, slewest with might, at
once, the sixty thousand.

7 May I too, with the liberal chiefs, 0 Indra, acquire thy bliss

supreme and domination,

When, Mightiest ! Hero-girt ! Nahusha heroes boast them in
thee, the triply-strong T)efender.

8 So may we be thy friends, thy best belovM, 0 Indra, at this

holy invocation.

Best be Pratardani, illustrious ruler, in slaying foemen and in
gaining riches.

HYMN XXVII. Indra.

What deed hath Indra done in the wild transport, in quaffing
or in friendship with, the Soma 1
What joys have men of ancient times or recent obtained within
the chamber of libation It

2 In its wild joy Indra hath proved him faithful, faithful in

quaffing, faithful in its friendship.

His truth is the delight that in this chamber the men of old
and recent times have tasted.

3 All thy vast power, 0 Maghavan, we know not, know not th e

riches of thy full abundance.

No one hath seen that might of thine, productive of bounty
every day renewed, 0 Indra,

4 This one great power of thine our eyes have witnessed, where-

with thou slewest Varasikha’s children,

Tuji: a of that name, says S&yana.

6 Baji: a maiden of that name. — Sayana. Pithinas: a man so called. — S&yana.
8 Prdtavdani : son of a prince named Pratardana.

The other names have occurred before. See Index.

The liberality of Abhy&vartin CMyam&na is said to be the deified object of
stanza 8.

1 * According to Sdyana the Rishi here expresses his impatience at the delay
of the reward of his praises : in the next verse he sings his recantation/ —
Wilson.

4 Vara&ilcha : a certain Asura or demon, says S&yana. He seems to have
been the leader of the Vrichlvans,

HYMN 28.] THE RIO YE DA , 589

When by the force of thy descending thunder, at the mere
sound, their boldest was demolished.

5 In aid of Abhy&varbin Chayam&na, Indra destroyed the seed of

Varasikha.

At HariyupiyU. he smote the vanguard of the Vrichivans, and
the rear fled frighted;

6 Three thousand, mailed, in quest of fame, together, on the

Yavyavatf, 0 much-sought Indra,

Vrichivan’s sons, falling before the arrow, like bursting vessels
went to their destruction.

7 He, whose two red Steers, seeking goodly pasture, plying their

tongues move on Twixt earth and heaven,

Gave Turvasa toSrinjaya, and, to $,id him, gave the Vrichivans
up to Daivav&ta.

8 Two wagon-teams, with damsels, twenty oxen, 0 Agni,

Abhyavartin Chayam&na,

The liberal Sovran, givefch me. This guerdon of Pritliu’s seed
is hard to win from others.

HYMN XXVIII. Cows.

The Kine have come and brought good fortune : let them rest
in the cow-peu and be happy near us.

Here let them stay prolific, many-coloured, and yield through
many morns their milk for Indra.

2 Indra aids him who offers sacrifice and gifts : he takes not
what is his, and gives him more thereto.

Increasing ever more and ever more his wealth, he makes the
pious dwell within unbroken bounds.

5 Abhydvartin Ohdyamdaa : a king, apparently the leader of the P&rtliavas,
the enemies of Varasikha and the Vrichivans.

IIw’iyiLpiyd : (having golden sacrificial posts), the name of a town, or, accord-
ing to others, of a river.

Vrichivans : Vrichivaii is said to have been the eldest son of Varasikha, and
to have given his name to the family or tribe. The name does not occur again
in the Hymns.

6 Yawjdvati ; the name of a river, according to S&yana identical with the
Hariyftpiyd of stauza 5.

7 He : Indra. Red Steers ; bright horses, according to S&yana.

Gave Turvasa to Srinjaya ; gave up the Turvasas, a tribe apparently settled
in the north-west of India, to their neighbours and enemies the Srinjayas.
Haimvdta : Abhydvartin CMyam&ua, son of Devav&ta.

8 With damsels : accompanied with slave-girls ; or, drawn by mares, Cf.
I. 126 8. Of Pfithu's seed : or ‘bestowed by P&rth&Wv l&at presented
by Abhydvartin, * one of the descendants of Prithu.

5P0 THE HYMNS OF,. [BOOK VI<

3 These are ne’er lost, no robber ever injures them : no evil-

minded foe attempts to harass them.

The master of the Kine lives many a year with these, the Cows
whereby he pours his gifts and serves the G-ods.

4 The charger with his dusty brow o’ertakes them not, and

never to the shambles do they take their way.

These Cows, the cattle of the pious worshipper, roam over wide-
spread pasture where no danger is.

5 To me the Cows seem Bhaga, they seem Indra, they seem a

portion of the first-poured Soma.

These present Cows, they, 0 ye men, are Indra. I long for
Indra with my heart and spirit.

■ 6 0 Cows, ye fatten e’en the worn and wasted, and make the
unlovely beautiful to look on.

- Prosper my house, ye with auspicious voices. Your power is
glorified in onr assemblies.

7 Crop goodly pasturage and be prolific : drink pure sweet water

at good drinking-places.

Never be thief or sinful man your master, and may the dart of
Rudra still avoid you.

8 Now let this close admixture be close intermingled with these

Cows,

Mixt with the Steer’s prolific flow, and, Indra, with thy hero
might.

HYMN XXIX. Indra.

Yoxjr men have followed Indra for his friendship, and for his
loving-kindness glorified him.

For he bestows great wealth, the Thunder-wielder ; worship
him, Great and Kind, to win his favour.

3 Are ne'er last : nd t(t nasanti : S&yana assigns an imperative meaning to
nasanti and the other verbs in the indicative mood which occur in this and
the following stanzas : * Let not the Coivs be lost : let no thief, etc.’— Wilson.

4 The charger ... . o'ertakes them not • they are not, or, according to Sayana,
let them not be, carried off in predatory incursions.

5 The worshipper regards the Cows as the deities, Bhaga and Indra, who
bring him happiness. They 0 ye men, are Indra : an allusion, apparently, to
the refrain of hymn 12 of Book II., He, 0 men, is Indra.

7 May the dart of Rudra still avoid you : so, I. 114, 10. ‘ Far be thy dart

that Mlleth men or cattle,’ and II. 33. 14. ‘ May Jftudra’s missile turn aside

and spare us, the great wrath of the Impetuous One avoid us.’

8 This stanza appears to refer to the mingling of the milk (the cows) with
the juice of the strong Soma (the steer), which when offered as a libation to
Indra will increase his heroic strength. But the phraseology is somewhat
obscure,

THE RIO VEDA.

HYMN 30.]

501

2 Him to whose hand, men closely cling, and drivers stand op

his golden chariot firmly stationed.

With his firm arms he holds the reins ; his Horses, the Stal-
lions, are yoked ready for the journey.

3 Thy devotees embrace thy feet for glory. Bold, thunder-arm-

ed, rich, through thy strength, in guerdon,

Bobed in a garment fair as heaven to look on, thou hast dis-
* played thee like an active dancer.

.4 That Soma when effused hath best consistence, for which the
food is dressed and grain is mingled ;

By which the men who pray, extolling Indra, chief favourites
of Gods, recite their praises.

5 Ho limit of thy might hath been appointed, which by its

greatness sundered earth and heaven.

These the Prince filleth full with strong endeavour, driving,
as ffwere, with help his flocks to waters.

6 So be the lofty Indra prompt to listen, Helper unaided, golden-

visored Hero.

Yea, so may he, shown forth in might unequalled, smite down
the many Vritras and the Dasyus.

HYMN XXX, Indra,

Indra hath waxed yet more for hero prowess, alone, Eternal*
he bestoweth treasures.

Indra transcendeth both the worlds in greatness : one half of
him equalleth earth and heaven.

2 Yea, mighty I esteem his Godlike nature ; none hindereth -
what he hath once determined.

Hear and afar he spread and set the regions, and every day
the Sun became apparent.

5 The Prince: Indra appears to be meant. Driving ...his flocks: op. I. 10.
2. f And the Ram hastens with his troop,’ that is, Indra comes with his
band of Maruts. S&yana takes sftrih in its more usual signification of wor-
shipper or institutor of the sacrifice ; and Professor Wilson translates ; * the
pious worshipper, hastening (to sacrifice), and earnestly performing worship,
gratifies thee with the offering, as (the cowkeeper satisfies) the herds with
water.’

6 Helper unaided : this seems to be the meaning of dtt anUM, with help
that needs no other help. S&yana explains the words, ‘ by coming or by not
coming,’ whether he be present or absent.

Oolden-visored : ‘ Azure-chinned.’ — Wilson, * With yellow- coloured jaws,’ —
Ludwig. I have followed Professor Roth.

1 Indra hath grown stronger and stronger for the performance of his mighty -
deeds.

592 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VI.

3 E’en now endures thine exploit of the Rivers, when, Indra,

for their floods thou clavest passage.

Like men who sit at meat the mountains settled : by thee,
Most Wise ! the regions were made stedfast.

4 This is the truth, none else is like thee, Indra, no God supe-

rior to thee, no mortal.

Thou slewest Ahi who besieged the waters, and lettest loose
the streams to hurry sea-ward.

5 Indra, thou brakest up the floods and portals on all sides, and

the firmness of the mountain.

Thou art the King of men, of all that liveth, engendering at
once Sun, Heaven, and Morning.

HYMN XXXI. Indra.

Sole Lord of wealth art thou, 0 Lord of riches : thou in thine
hands hast held the people, Indra !

Men have invoked thee with contending voices for seed and
waters, progeny and sunlight.

2 Through fear of thee, 0 Indra, all the regions of earth, though

naught may move them, shake and tremble.

All that is firm, is frightened at thy coming, — the earth, the
heaven, the mountain, and the forest.

3 With Kutsa, Indra I thou didst conquer Stishna, voracious,

bane of crops, in fight for cattle.

In the close fray thou rentest him : thou stolest the Sun’s
wheel and didst drive away misfortunes.

3 Like men who sit at meat : or, perhaps, like flies who settle on food. See
Geldner, Vedische Studien, II. 180.

1 Men with contending voices : the combatants oil both sides invoke

Indra’s aid in battle.

According to Prof. Pischel, Vedische Studien, I. 34, the meaning is as
follows :

‘ Alone wast thou, Lord of all wealth and riches, yet hast thou made the
folk submissive, Indra,

When with uplifted voice the tribes invoked thee for water, sons, posterity
and sunlight.’ .

1 The folk,’ TcrishtKh meaning the speaker’s enemies, and * the tribes,’
ckarshandyo , meaning the five Aryan tribes.

3 Kutsa : the special favourite of Indra. Bane of crops ■: or Kuyava may
be the name of another demon of drought or savage enemy. See Index*.
Thou rentest him : literally, c bittest ddsa, according to Sftyana, standing for
ada&ah. Stolest the Sun’s wheel : see I. 175. 4.

Misfortunes : according to S&yana, * disturbing or injurious Kftkshasas, etc,’

593

HYMN 32.] THE HIGVEDA.

4 Thou smotest to the ground the hundred cattles, impregnable,

of Sambara the Dasyu,

When, Strong, with might thou holpest Divod&sa who poured
libations out, 0 Soma-buyer, and madest Bharadvaja rich
who praised thee.

5 As such, true Hero, for great joy of battle mount thy terrific

car, O Brave and Manly.

Come with thine help to me, thou distant Roamer, and, glori-
ous God, spread among men my glory.

HYMN XXXII. Indra.

I with my lips have fashioned for this Hero words never
matched, most plentiful and auspicious,

For him the Ancient, Great, Strong, Energetic, the very
mighty Wielder of the Thunder.

2 Amid the sages, with the Sun he brightened the Parents :

glorified, he burst the mountain ;

And, roaring with the holy-thouglited singers, he loosed the
bond that held the beams of Morning.

3 Famed for great deeds, with priests who kneel and laud him,

he still hath conquered in the frays for cattle,

And broken down the forts, the Fort-destroyer, a Friend with
friends, a Sage among the sages.

4 Come with thy girthed mares, with abundant vigour and

plenteous strength to him who sings thy praises.

Come hither, borne by mares with many heroes, Lover of song !
Steer ! for the people’s welfare.

4 The hundred castles : probably the castles of cloud which retain, the
rain. So, II. 19. 6, ‘And Indra, for the sake of Divod&sa, demolished
Sambara’s nine-and-ninety castles.*

4 Soma-buyer • purchaser of Soma-libations with the help which he gives to
the worshipper.

2 He brightened the Parents : illuminated the universal parents, Heaven
and Earth, The sages ; the Angirases, the holy-thoughted singers of the next

4 * With thy girthed mares: the meaning of nivy&bhih, a feminine _ plural
adjective in the instrumental case, standing without a substantive, is
uncertain. Sftyana explains the word by navydbhirnavatardbhih, ‘very new
or young,’ and supplies vadavdbhih , ‘mares’ Professor- Both thinks that
rtivyftbMh may be a substantive meaning * with garments,’ and Professor
Grassmann translates ‘ mit Gaben,’ ‘ with gifts,’ that is, presents earned m a
nivi or apron; With many heroes : puruvtirdbhih again is an adjective with-
out a substantive, in the same gender, number, and case as nivyabhiK. Ac-
cording to S£yana, it also qualifies vadavdbhih , ‘ with mares/ understood,
and means ‘ having many colts/

38

m the rio veda, [book vi

5 Iudra with rush and might, sped by his Coursers, hath swiftly
won the waters from the southward.

Thus set at liberty the rivers daily how to their goal, incessant
and exhaustless.

HYMN XXXIII. Indra.

Givi us the rapture that is mightiest, Indra, prompt to bestow
and swift to aid, 0 Hero,

That wins with brave steeds where brave steeds encounter,
and quells the Vritras and the foes in battle.

2 For with loud voice the tribes invoke thee, Indra, to aid them

in the battle-field of heroes.

Thou, with the singers, hast pierced through the Panis : the
charger whom thou aidest wins the booty.

3 Both races, Indra, of opposing foemen, 0 Hero, both the Arya

and the D&sa,

Hast thou struck down like woods with well-shot lightnings :
thou rentes t them in fight, most manly Chieftain l
A Indra, befriend us with no scanty succour, ^prosper and aid us,
Loved of all that liveth,

When, fighting for the sunlight, we invoke thee, 0 Hero, in
the fray, in war's division.

5 Be ours, 0 Indra, now and for the future, he graciously in-
clined and near to help us.

Thus may we, singing, sheltered by the Mighty, win many
cattle on the day of tidal.

HYMN XXXIY. Indra.

Full many songs have met in thee, 0 Indra, and many a
noble thought from thee proceedeth.

Now and of old the eulogies of sages, their holy hymns and
lauds, have yearned for Indra.

2 He, praised of many, bold, invoked of many, alone is glorified

at sacrifices.

Like a car harnessed for some great achievement, Indra must
be the cause of our rejoicing.

3 They make their way to Indra and exalt him, him whom no

prayers and no laudations trouble ;

5 From the southward ; from the quarter whence the Rains come.

1 Give us the rapture : let us he benefited by the transport which draughts
of Soma juice produce in thee.

3 They make their way .« that is, prayers and laudations reach Indra and
strengthen him. They do not vex him as they would vex a man who would
be unable to fulfil the prayers and would be conscious that he did not deserve
the laudations.

HYMN 35.] THE RIGVEDA . m

For when a hundred or a thousand singers laud him who loves
the song their praise delights him.

4- As brightness mingles with the Moon in heaven, the offered
Soma yearns to mix with Indra.

Like water brought to men in desert places, our gifts at sacri-
fice have still refreshed him.

5 To him this mighty eulogy, to Indra hath this our laud been
uttered by the poets,

That in the great encounter with the foemen, Loved of all life,
Indra may guard and help us.

HYMN XXXV* Indra.

*

When shall our prayers rest in thy car beside thee ? When
dost thou give the singer food for thousands 1
When wilt thou clothe this poet’s laud with plenty, and when
wilt thou enrich our hymns with booty ?

2 When wilt thoix gather men with men, 0 Indra, heroes with

heroes, and prevail in combats

Thou shalt win triply kine in frays for cattle, so, Indira, give
thou us celestial glory.

3 Yea, when wilt thou, 0 Indra, thou Most Mighty, make the

prayer all-sustaining for the singer ?

When wilt thou yoke, as we yoke songs, thy Horses, and come
to offerings that bring wealth in cattle ?

4 Grant to the singer food with store of cattle, splendid with

horses and the fame of riches.

Send food to swell the milch-cow good at milking : bright be
its shine among the Bharadvajas.

4 4s brightness mingles with the Moon : I follow Professor Ludwig in his
interpretation of this difficult passage ; but its exact meaning still seems
doubtful. * ArcM is the nominative singular. We have here the later
Jyotsnd or Kaumudi as the wife or feminine power of the Moon. S&rya, the
daughter of the Sun, i. e. the Moon's light which is borrowed from the Sun
is an earlier conception.’-— Ludwig.

5 By the 'poets: by thoBe who sing hymns of praise. MaHhhih — stotribhh

S&yana. In the great encounter with the foemen : mah'B.i rritrafuryc i ri

the great victory over Vritra ; that is, generally, in battle with enemies ;
sangrdmc, — Sciyana.

1 Rest in thy oar beside thee ? ; when shall our prayers reach thee as thou
standest on thy chariot ? The poet expresses impatience at Indra’ » inattention
to his petitions.

596 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VI.

5 Lead otherwise this present foeman, Sakra ! Hence art thou
praised as Hero, foe-destroyer.

Him who gives pure gifts may I praise unceasing. Sage, quick-
en the Angirases by devotion.

HYMN XXXVI. Indra.

Thy raptures ever were for all men’s profit : so evermore have
been thine earthly riches.

Thou still hast been the dealer-forth of vigour, since among
Gods thou hast had power and Godhead.

2 Men have obtained his strength by sacrificing, and ever urged

him on to hero valour.

For the rein-seizing, the impetuous Charger they furnished
power even for Vritra r s slaughter.

3 Associate with him, as teams of horses, help, manly might, and

vigour follow Indra.

As rivers reach the sea, so, strong with praises, our holy
songs reach him the Comprehensive.

4 Lauded by us, let flow the spring, 0 Indra, of excellent and

brightly-shining riches.

For thou art Lord of men, without an equal ; of all the world
thou art the only Sovran,

5 l find this stanza hopelessly obscure, and do not attempt to translate it,
giving instead of a conjectural translation a reproduction of the substance of
S&yana’s absolutely 'worthless paraphrase. Lead otherwise: according to S&yana,
c consign to death, to a course different from that of living beings.*— Wilson.

The Angirases : the descendants of Angirases, that is the Bharadv&jas.

Professor Ludwig translates : ‘ Also at another time (I wish) hither this
strong (defence), when thou as a hero, Sakra, singest open [aufsingst] the
doors; may I never lose the cow that yields bright juice ; cause thou her to
hasten through the prayer of the Angirasas/ In his Commentary Prof,
Ludwig alters ‘lose the cow, eto.* into ‘lose the seed-pouring (bull) of the
mileh-cow. 1 2 Professor Aufrecht would read vrijanam instead of vrijdnam
and winishe instead of grinishe, and Prof. Grassmann translates accordingly ;

* Now too, as formerly, X choose for myself this man, when, Strong One, as
hero thou openest the doors. Never then may the steer whose seed streams
fail me. Quicken, 0 Sage, the singers through prayer.’

1 Thy raptures ; produced by drinking the Soma juice. Power and God -
head : asurydm : Asura-hood, the nature and power of an Asura or High
God, Some give a different meaning to dhdrdyathdk: ‘thou maintainest
vigour among the gods/— Wilson. ‘ Indra is said to give divine power to the
other gods/ — Muir, 0. S. T., V. 92,

2 His strength : the powerful aid of Indra. Qharger : Indra, impetuous as
a war-horse who takes the bit between his teeth. Sctyana explains syUma-*
gribhe : as ( seizer of enemies who are in uninterrupted fines/ ‘ They offer
sacrifices to him as the seizer of an uninterrupted series of foes, their assaih
ant, their subduer, and also for the destruction of Yritra/— Wilson,

Mfctf RIQVtibA.

38.1

m

5 Hear what thou mayst hear, thou who, fain for worship, as
heaven girds earth, guardest thy servant’s treasure ;

That thou mayst be our own, joying in power, famed through
thy might in every generation.

HYMN XXXVII.

JLe t thy Bay Horses, yoked, O mighty Indra, bring thy car
hither fraught with every blessing.

For thee, the Heavenly, e’en the poor invoketh, may we this
day, thy f east-companions, prosper.

2 Forth to the vat the brown drops flow for service, and purified
proceed directly forward >

May Indra drink of this, our guest aforetime, Celestial King
of the strong draught of Soma.

8 Bringing us hitherward all-potent Indra on well-wheeled
chariot, may the Steeds who bear him

Convey him on the road direct to glory, and ne’er may Vayu’s
Amrit cease and fail him.

4 Supreme, he stirs this man to give the guerdon, — Indra, most

efficacious of the princes, —

Wherewith, O Thunderer, thou removest sorrow, and, Bold
One ! partest wealth among the nobles.

5 Indra is he who gives enduring vigour : may our songs magnify

the God Most Mighty.

Best Vritra-slayer be the Hero Indra : these things he gives as
Prince, with strong endeavour.

HYMN XXXVII T. Indr?,

He hath drunk hence, Most Marvellous, and carried away our
great and splendid call on Indra.

The Bounteous, when we serve the Gods, accepteth song yet
more famous and the gifts we bring him.

1 Thee, the Heavenly : sv&rvdn appears to apply to tvd, thee, Indra, and to
stand for svarvantam. See Pischel, Vedische Studien, I. 198, 218.

3 To glory : c to the prize of battle.’— G-rassmann. ( To our rite.’ — Wilson.

Vdyu's Amrit : 1 V&yu is possessor of the Amrit probably as being Tvashtar’s

son-in-law. VIII. 26. 21.’ — Ludwig.

4 This man : the institutor of the sacrifice. Wherewith; on account of
which guerdon. The liberal guerdon given by the nobles who defray the ex-
penses of the sacrifice causes Indra in his turn to be gracious and liberal of his
gifts to them.

5 With strong endeavour ; exerting his power on behalf of his worshippers.

1 lie hath drunh hence : Professor Ludwig thinks that the first line must
refer to Agni, who receives the libation hence , that is, from the priest’s cup,
and conveys to Indra the invocation addressed to him. But Indra himself
may be intended in the first line as well as in the second,

608

Tim HYMNS OH [ BOOK VI

2 The speakei* filleth with a cry to Indra his ears who cometh

nigh e’en from a distance.

May this my call bring Indra to my presence, this call to Gods
composed in sacred verses.

3 Him have I sung with ray best sang and praises, Indra of

ancient birth and Everlasting.

Eor prayer and songs in him are concentrated ; let laud wax
mighty when addressed to Indra :

4 Indra, whom sacrifice shall strengthen, Soma, and song and

hymn, and praises and devotion,

Whom Dawns shall strengthen when the night departeth, Indra
whom days shall strengthen, months, and autumns.

5 Him, horn for conquering might in full perfection, and waxen

strong for bounty and for glory,

Great, Powerful, will we to-day, Q singer, invite to aid us and
to quell our foemen.

HYMN XXXIX. i nto .

Of this our charming, our celestial Soma, eloquent, wise, Priest,
with inspired devotion,

Of this thy close attendant, hast thou drunken. God, send
the singer food with milk to grace it.

2 Craving the kine, rushing against the mountain, led on by Law,

with holy-minded comrades,

He broke the never-broken ridge of Vala. With words of
might India subdued the Panis.

3 This Indu lighted darksome nights, O Indra, throughout the

years, at morning and at evening.

Him have they stablished as the days’ bright ensign. He
made the Mornings to be born in splendour.

4 He shone and caused to shine the worlds that shone not. By

Law he lighted up the host of Mornings.

3 Let laud wax mighty : when the power of Indra is celebrated, the soner
should be lofty as the dignity of the subject demands. &

6 To quell our foemen: or, to conquer Vritras, that is, Vritra and similar fiends.

- 0i l r Bonn : as Professor Wilson observes, ‘ Several of the epithets

m the test are unusual, and agreeably to European notions, very inapplicable
to a beverage. ( The Soma is called eloquent and w-ise as giving eloquence and
1V1 P ne& l because it is employed in offerings to the Gods.

excellent parf *’ that iS ’ ° f which milk and butter const itute the most

fh? T mdeS L the Al ^ ses - Fal» ; a demon who stole away

th f of the Gods, e. the rays of light. See Index. J

S 2/m Indu : Indu Is here the Moon, which is identified with Soma.

The days bright ensign : the standard by which time is measured.

TEE RIG Y ED A.

EYMN 41.]

m

He moves with Steeds joked by eternal Order, contenting bien
with nave that finds the sunlight.

5 Now, praised, 0 Ancient King ! fill thou the singer with plente-
ous food that he may deal forth treasures.

Give waters, herbs that have no poison, forests, and kine, and
steeds, and men, to him who lauds thee.

HYMN XL. In dra.

Brink, Xndra ; juice is shed to make thee joyful ; loose thy
Bay Steeds and give thy friends their freedom.

Begin the song, seated in our assembly. Give strength for
sacrifice to him who singeth.

2 Brink thou of this whereof at birth, 0 Indra, thou drankest,

Mighty One ! for power and rapture.

The men, the pressing -stones, the cows, the waters have made
this Soma ready for thy drinking.

3 The fire is kindled, Soma pressed, 0 Indra : let thy Bays, best

to draw, convey thee hither.

With mind devoted, Indra, I invoke thee. Come, for our great
prosperity approach us.

4 Indra, come hither : evermore thou earnest through our great

strong desire to drink the Soma.

Listen and hear the prayers which now we offer, and let this
sacrifice increase thy vigour.

5 Mayst thou, 0 Indra, on the day of trial, present or absent,

wheresoe’er thou dwellest,

Thence, with thy team, accordant with the Maruts, Song-lover !
guard our sacrifice, to help us.

HYMN XLI. Indra.

Comb gracious to our sacrifice, 0 Indra : pressed Soma-drops
are purified to please thee.

As cattle seek their home, so, Thunder- wielder, come, Indra,
first of those who claim our worship.

2 With that well-formed most wide extending palate, wherewith
thou ever drink est streams of sweetness,

Brink thou ; the Adhvaryu standeth up before thee : let thy
spoil-winning thunderbolt attend thee.

4 Nave : used by synecdoche for chariot,

1 Thy friends ; thy dear horses.

1 Gracious : more literally, ( without anger.’ 4 Unirascihle,’ — Wilson,

2 The Adhvaryu ; the ministering priest.

600 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK YL

3 This drop, steer-strong and omniform, the Soma, hath been

made ready for the Bull, for Indra.

Drink this, Lord of the Bays, thou Strong Supporter, this
that is thine of old, thy food for ever.

4 Soma when pressed excels the nnpressed Soma, better, for one

who knows, to give him pleasure.

Come to this sacrifice of ours, O Victor : replenish all thy
powers with this libation.

5 We call on thee, 0 Indra : come thou hither : sufficient be the

Soma for thy body.

Bejoice thee, Satakratu ! in the juices : guard us in wars, guard
us among our people.

HYMN XLIL Indra.

Bring sacrificial gifts to him, Omniscient, for he longs to drink, .
The Wanderer who comes with speed, the Hero ever in the van.

2 With Soma go ye nigh to him chief drinker of the Soma's

juice :

With beakers to the Impetuous God, to Indra with the drops
effused.

3 What time, with Soma, with the juice effused, ye come before

the God,

Full wise he knows the hope of each, and, Bold One, strikes
this foe and that.

4 To him, Adhvaryu ! yea, to him give offerings of the juice

expressed.

Will he not keep us safely from the spiteful curse of each
presumptuous high-born foe 1

HYMN XLIII, Indra.

In whose wild joy thou madest once Sambara Divod&sa's prey,
This Soma is pressed out for thee, 0 Indra : drink !

3 Support er: sth&tar— Stator in Jupiter Stator, one who causes to stay or
stand, rallier of men in battle.

4 Replenish all thy powers : or, ‘ give us all powers in full.*

6 Satakratu ; Lord of a hundred, i. e, countless, powers.

3 Strikes this foe and that ; there is no substantive in the text. S&yana
makes tdm tam refer to kdmam, hope or wish: ‘And the suppresser (of ene-
mies) assuredly grants it, whatever it may be.’ —Wilson.

1 Scmibara: a demon of draught. Divoddsa; called also Atithigva: f Thou
savedst Kutsa when Sushna was smitten down : to Atithigva gavest Sambara
for a prey.’— I. 51. 6. *

TMM RtGTEDA.

601

HYMN 44J

2 Whose gladdening draught, shed from the points, thou guard-

est in the midst and end,

This Soma is pressed out for thee, 0 Indra : drink ! %

3 In whose wild joy thou settest free the kine held fast within

the rock,

This Soma is pressed out for thee, 0 Indra : drink !

4 This, in whose juice delighting thou gainest the might of

Maghavan,

This Soma is pressed out for thee, 0 Indra : drink !

HYMN XLIY. Indra.

That which is wealthiest, Wealthy God ! in splendours most
illustrious,

Soma is pressed : thy gladdening draught, Indra ! libation’s
Lord ! is this.

2 Effectual, Most Effectual One ! thine, as bestowing wealth of

hymns,

Soma is pressed : thy gladdening draught, Indra ! libation’s
Lord ! is this.

3 Wherewith thou art increased in strength, and conquerest with

thy proper aids,

Soma is pressed : thy gladdening draught, Indra ! libation’s
Lord ! is this.

4 Him for your sake I glorify as Lord of Strength who wrong-

eth none,

The Hero Indra, conquering all, Most Bounteous, God of all
the tribes.

5 Those Goddesses, both Heaven and Earth, revere the power

and might of him,

Him whom our songs increase in strength, the Lord of bounty
swift to come.

6 To seat your Indra, I will spread abroad with power this song

of praise.

The saving succours that abide in him, like songs, extend
and grow.

2 From the points : from the sharp ends of the branchlets of the plant.
See Hillebrandt, V. Mythologie, p. 282. In the midst and end : according
to S&yana, at noon and at the evening libation.

4 Gainest the might of Maghavan ; Indra acquires his power from libations
of Soma juice.

6 To seat your Indra : as Indra’ s seat is on the barhis or sacred grass that
is spread on the floor of the chamber of sacrifice, so the hymn also, as his
spiritual seat, is supposed to have thejpower of inducing him to come.

602 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 7L

7 A recent Friend, lie found the skilful priest : he drank, and

showed forth treasure from the Gods.

He conquered, borne by strong all-shaking mares, and was
with far-spread power his friends’ Protector.

8 In course of Law the sapient juice was quaffed : the Deities

to glory turned their mind.

Winning through hymns a lofty title, he, the Lovely, made
his beauteous form apparent.

9 Bestow on us the most illustrious strength : ward off men’s

manifold malignities.

Give with thy might abundant vital force, and aid us gra-
ciously in gaining riches.

10 We turn to thee as Giver, liberal Indra. Lord of the Bay

Steeds, be not thou ungracious.

No friend among mankind have we to look to : why have men
called thee him who spurs the niggard ?

1 1 Give us not up, Strong Hero ! to the hungry : unharmed be

we whom thou, so rich, befriendest.

Full many a boon hast thou for men : demolish those who
present no gifts nor pour oblations.

12 As Indra thundering impels the rain-clouds, so doth he send

us store of kine and horses.

Thou art of old the Cherisher of singers : let not the rich who
bring no gifts deceive thee.

13 Adhvaryu, hero, bring to mighty Indra — for he is King there-

of — the pressed-out juices ;

To him exalted by the hymns and praises, ancient and modern,
of the singing Rishis.

14 In the wild joy of this hath Indra, knowing full many a form,

struck down resistless Vritras.

7 He found the skilful priest ; * Indra appreciates him who is skilled (in
holy rites).’ — Wilson. The word yashtdram , sacrifices is supplied by Sftyana.

Borne hi ■■ ' .. ” 11 ‘ ■ .* this is S&yana’s first explanation of

staul&bhir ■ j , ■ ‘ plurals in the instrumental case, vcidavd-

bhih , f with mares/ being understood. f Brought by his robust agitators (of
the earth, his steeds)/ —Wilson. Or, S&yana says, although the words are
feminine, the Maruta may be intended. Other conjectural explanations have
been attempted, but they are not convincing.

10 Who spurs the niggard : urges even the niggardly to be liberal. See
Pischel, Vedische Studien, I. p. 124.

12 The Cherisher of singers : or, f he whom the singers nourish/ that is,
strengthen by their hymns.

14 Knowing full many a form ; detecting and not deceived by the various
forms assumed by the demon Yritra and his crew.

HYMN 44,]

THE X2GVEDA.

603

Proclaim aloud to him the savoury Soma so that the Hero,
strong of jaw, may drink it.

15 May Indra drink this Soma poured to please him, and cheered

therewith slay Yritra with his thunder.

Come to our sacrifice even from a distance, good lover of our
songs, the bard’s Supporter.

16 The cup whence Indra drinks the draught is present : the

Amrit dear to Indra hath been drunken,

That it may cheer the God to gracious favour, and keep far
from us hatred and affliction.

17 Therewith enraptured, Hero, slay our foemen, the unfriendly,

Maghavan ! be they kin or strangers,

Those who still aim their hostile darts to smite us, turn them
to flight, 0 Indra, crush and kill them.

18 0 Indra Maghavan, in these our battles win easy paths for

us and ample freedom.

That we may gain waters and seed and offspring, set thou our
princes on thy side, 0 Tndra.

19 Let thy Bay Stallions, harnessed, bring thee hither, Steeds

with strong chariot and strong reins to hold them,

Strong Horses, speeding hither, bearing thunder, well-harness-
ed, for the strong exciting potion.

20 Beside the vat, Strong God ! stand thy strong Horses, shining

with holy oil, like waves exulting.

Indra, they bring to thee, the Strong and Mighty, Soma of
juices shed by mighty press-stones.

21 Thou art the Bull of earth, the Bull of heaven, Bull of the

rivers, Bull of standing waters.

For thee, the Strong, 0 Bull, hath Indu swollen, juice pleasant,
sweet to drink, for thine election.

22 This God, with might, when first he had his being, with Indra

for ally, held fast the Pani.

This Indu stole away the warlike weapons, and foiled the arts
of his malignant father.

15 The bard's Supporter : or, ‘whom singers nourish/ as in stanza 12.

19 In this and the two following stanzas we have the repetition, so dear to
some of the Yedio poets, of vrisha in composition, vrishan and vrishabhc ?, so
commonly applied in the hymns to living beings and things preeminent for
strength.

22 This God: Indu or Soma, the Moon. Of his malignant fathei* ; Tvashtar
appears to be meant. S&y ana’s paraphrase is non-natural : ‘ of the malignant
secreter of (the stolen) wealth, (the cattle).’ — Wilson. S&yana makes pitnh,
as derived from pd, to protect ,—pdlayituh, e the safe keeper/ and s =Lat.
siit, f of his property.’ This safe keeper, secreter, and robber would be the
demon Vala.

604 M# St Mm OP t boot tt

23 The Dawns he wedded to a glorious Consent, and set Within

the Sun the light that lights him.

He found in heaven, in the tliii'd lucid regions, the threefold

Amrit in its close concealment.

24 He stayed and held the heaven and earth asunder : the chariot

with the sevenfold reins he harnessed.

This Soma set with power within the milch-kine a spring

whose ripe contents ten fingers empty.

HYMN XLY. ^ Indra.

That* Indra is our youthful Friend, who with his trusty

guidance led

Turvasa, Yadu from afar.

2 Even to the dull and uninspired Indra gi v es vital power, and wins

Even with slow steed th« offered prize.

3 Great are his ways of guiding us, and manifold are his eulogies:

His kind protections never fail.

4 Friends, sing your psalm and offer praise to him to whom the

prayer is brought :

For our great Providence is he.

5 Thou, Slaughterer of Yritra, art Guardian and Friend of one

and two,

Yea, of a man like one of us.

6 Beyond men’s hate thou leadest us, and givest cause to sing

thy praise :

Good Hero art thou called by men.

7 I call with hymns, as ’twere a cow to milk, the Friend who

merits praise,

The Brahman who accepts the prayer.

23 Glorious Consort : the Sun. In the third lucid regions : perhaps, as Pro-
fessor Ludwig suggests, in the spheres of the Sun, the Moon, and the stars.
1 According to the scholiast, this may merely mean that the Soma becomes
as it were ambrosia when received or concealed in the vessels at the three
diurnal ceremonies, which ambrosia is properly deposited with the gods abid-
ing in the third bright sphere, or in heaven.’ — Wilson.

24 The chariot: of the Sun, drawn by seven horses. Whose ripe contents
ten fingen empty ; this appears to he the meaning of the pakvam dasayan-
tram titsam of the text, literally, e the ripe spring with ten engines. 5 * c The
mature deeply-organized secretion.’ — Wilson.

1 Turvasa, Yadu : the names of these two eponymi of Aryan tribes are
frequently associated. See Index. An expedition against Divodasa appears
to be referred to.

2 Even to the dull and uninspired : he favours whom he will, and the race
is not always to the swift.

7 As 1 2 truer e a coto to milk : like the cow that is brought to give the milk
that is to be mingled with the Soma libation. The Brahman: Indra regarded
as a Priest*

TEE RTGYEDA.

60S

HYMN 45.]

8 Him in whose hands they say are stored all treasures from the

days of old,

The Hero, conquering in the fight,

9 Lord of Strength, Caster of the Stone, destroy the firm forts

built by men,

And foil their arts, unbending God !

10 Thee, thee as such, 0 Lord of Power, 0 Indra, Soma-drinker,

true,

We, fain for glory, have invoked.

11 Such as thou wast of old, and art now to be called on when

the prize

Lies ready, listen to our call.

12 With hymns and coursers we wili gain, Indra, through thee,

both steeds and spoil
Most glorious, and the proffered prize.

13 Thou, Indra, Lover of the Song, whom men must stir to help,

hast been

Great in the contest for the prize.

H Slayer of foes, whatever aid of thine imparts the swiftest
course,

With that impel our car to speed.

15 As skilfullest of those who drive the chariot, with our art

and aim,

0 Conqueror, win the proffered prize.

16 Praise him who, Matchless and Alone, was born the Lord of

living men,

Most active, with heroic soul.

17 Thou who hast been the singers’ Friend, a Friend auspicious

with thine aid,

As such, 0 Indra, favour us,

18 Grasp in thine arms the thunderbolt, 0 Thunder-armed, to

slay the fiends :

Mayst thou subdue the foemen’s host,

19 1 call the ancient Friend, allied with wealth, who speeds the

lowly man,

Him to whom chiefly prayer is brought.

20 For he alone is Lord of all the treasures of the earth * he speeds
Hither, chief Lover of the Song,

11 When the prize lies ready : to be given to the victor in the chariot race,
the chief object of the hymn being to secure victory in the approaching
contest through the favour of the God,

THE HYMNS OF

606

[BOOK VL

21 So with thy yoked teams satisfy our wish with power and
wealth in steeds

And cattle, boldly, Lord of kine !

,22 Sing this, what time the juice is pressed, to him your Hero,
Much-invoked,

To please him as a mighty Steer.

23 He, Excellent, withholdeth not his gift of power and wealth

in kine,

When he hath listened to our songs.

24 May he with might unclose for us the cow’s stall, whosesoe’er

it.be,

To which the Dasyu-slayer goes.

25 0 Indra Satakratu, these our songs have called aloud to thee,
Like mother cows to meet their calves.

26 Hard is thy love to win : thou art a Steer to him who longs

for steers :

Be to one craving steeds a Steed.

27 Delight thee with the juice we pour for thine own great

munificence :

Yield not thy singer to reproach.

28 These songs with every draught v T e poxir come, Lover of the

Song, to thee,

As milch-kine hasten to their young :

29 To thee most oft invoked, amid the many singers’ rivalry
Who beg with all their might for w r ealth.

30 Nearest and most attractive may our laud, 0 Indra, come

to thee.

Urge thou us on to ample wealth.

31 Bribu hath set himself above the Panis, o’er their highest head,
Like the wide bush on Ganges bank.

24 Wkosesoe’er it be : the meaning of huvitsasya here is somewhat uncertain.
S&yana explains it as, of Kuvitsa, a certain person who does much harm.
The meaning appears to be, may Indra open for us the cow-stall and give us
the cattle of any Dasyu whom he, that is, we under his guidance, may attack.

26 Thou art a Steer: gavdm praddtd, ‘ a giver of cattle.’ — S&yana. A Steed ;
asvapraduk , a giver of horses. — S&yaiia.

27 This stanza is repeated, word for word, from III. 41. 6.

31 Bribu : according to S&yana, the carpenter or artificer of the Panis.

The Panis here are, in accordance with the original meaning of the words,
merchants or traders, and the merchant Bribu is eulogized for his piety and
liberality, qualities which were not the usual characteristics of the class to
which he belonged. A legend, referred to by S&yana, and recorded in the
Mdnava dharma-sdstra or Laws of Manic, 1 0, 107, relates that Bharadv&ja, when
distressed by hunger in a lonely forest, accepted many cows from the

THE MOVE DA.

MY MX 46.]

60 T

32 He whose good bounty, thousandfold, swift as the rushing of

the wind,

Suddenly offers as a gift.

33 So all our singers ever praise the pious Bribu's noble deed,
Chief, best to give his thousands, best to give a thousand

liberal gifts.

HYMN XLVI. Indra,

That we may win us wealth and power we poets, verily, call
on thee :

In war men call on thee, Indra, the hero's Lord, in the steed's
race-course call on thee.

2 As such, 0 Wonderful, whose hand holds thunder, praised as

mighty, Caster of the Stone ! *

Pour on us boldly, Indra, kine and chariot-steeds, ever to be
the conqueror's strength.

3 We call upon that Indra, who, most active, ever slays the foe;
Lord of the brave, Most Manly, with a thousand powers, help

thou and prosper us in fight.

4 Bichtshama, thou forcest men as with a bull, with anger, in

the furious fz'ay.

Be thou our Helper in the mighty battle fought for sunlight,
water, and for life.

5 0 Indra, bring us name and fame, enriching, mightiest,

excellent,

Wherewith, 0 Wondrous God, fair-visored, thunder-armed,
thou hast filled full this earth and heaven.

carpenter Bribu ; the moral being that men of inferior caste and low condition
may distinguish themselves by their liberality. See Wilson’s Note, Vol. HI.
p. 466. The wide bush ; the belt of underwood. Others would read uruhahshah
as one word instead of unth kakshuh, and explain it as the name of a man,
son of a woman called Gangft.

33 Chief: sdri, as institutor of the sacrifice. See, on stanzas 31 —33, Prof.
Weber’s Episches im vedischen Iiitual (Sitzungsberichte der K P. Akadeinie
der Wissenschaften, XXXVIII. pp. 28 sqq.), and M, Muller, Chips from a Ger-
man Workshop, IV. 138 (new edition).

3 With a thousand powers : sahasramushlca, literally, mille testiculos habens.
The reading of the Sdmaveda, stihawamanyo, full of boundless ardour, is, as
Professor Ludwig remarks, much more aesthetic.

4 Mchishama : or, worthy of praise ! But the exact meaning of the epithet
is somewhat uncertain.

5 Fair-visored ; or, fair of cheek.

608 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VL

6 We call on thee, 0 King, Mighty amid the Gods, Euler of

men, to succour us.

All that is weak in us, Excellent God, make firm : make our
foes easy to subdue.

7 All strength and valour that is found, Indra, in tribes of Na-

hushas, and all the splendid fame that the Five Tribes enjoy,
Bring, yea, all manly powers at once.

8 Or, Maghavan, what vigorous strength in Trikshi lay, in Dru-

hyus or in Puru’s folk,

Fully bestow on us, that, in the conquering fray, we may
subdue our foes in fight.

9 0 Indra, grant a happy home, a triple refuge triply strong.
Bestow a dwelling-place on the rich lords and me, and keep

thy dart afar from these.

10 They who with minds intent on spoil subdue the foe, boldly

attack and smite him down, —

From these, 0 Indra Maghavan who lovest song, be closest
guardian of our lives.

11 And now, 0 Indra, strengthen us : come near and aid us in

the fight,

What time the feathered shafts are flying in the air, the
arrows with their sharpened points.

12 "Give u^, where heroes strain their bodies in the fight, the

shelter that our fathers loved.

To us and to our sons give refuge ; keep afar all unobserved
hostility,

1 3 When, Indra, in the mighty fray thou urgest chargers to their

speed,

On the uneven road and on a toilsome path, like falcons, eager
for renown,

14 Speeding like rivers rushing down a steep descent, responsive

to the urging call,

That come like birds attracted to the bait, held in by reins in
both the driver’s hands.

7 Nahushas : people, apparently distinct from the five Aryan tribes par
excellence , and dwellers on or near the Indus. According to S&yana, human
beings ip general are meant, and Professor Both explains the word as men
generally, but with the .special sense of stranger, or neighbour. See Muir,
0. S. Texts,, I. 176, 180,

8 Trikshi : a king so named, says S&yana. In another place (VIII, 22. 7)
he has the patronymic Tr&sadasyava, son, i. e. peer of, Trasadasyu. In JDruhyus
or in Peru's folk ; literally, c in Druhyu or in Puru,’ the names of the eponymi
of these tribes being used for the tribes themselves.

12 To us and to our sons give refuge ; the Commentator takes acMttam
'-unobserved/ with chardth, and explains the words as f armour unknown by
the enemies/

JS7MN 47.]

TEE RIG VEDA.

609

w HYMN XLYII. Indra* Etc.

Yea, this is good to taste and full of sweetness, verily it is
strong and rich in flavour.

No one may conquer Indra in the battle when he hath drunken
of the draught we offer.

2 This sweet juice here had mightiest power to gladden : it bolden-

ed Indra when he slaughtered Vritra,

When he defeated Sambara’s many onslaughts, and batteredi
down his nine-and-ninety ramparts.

3 This stirreth up my voice when I have drunk it ; this hath

aroused from sleep my yearning spirit.

This Sage hath measured out the six expanses from which no
single creature is excluded. 0

A This, even this, is he who hath created the breadth of earth,
the lofty height of heaven.

He formed the nectar in three headlong rivers. Soma supports
the wide mid-air above us.

5 He found the wavy sea of brilliant colours in forefront of the

Dawns who dwell in brightness.

This Mighty One, the Steer begirt by Maruts, hath propped
the heavens up with a mighty pillar.

6 Drink Soma boldly from the beaker, Indra, in war for trea-

sures, Hero, Vritra-slayer !

Eill thyself full at the mid-day libation, and give us wealth,
thou Treasury of riches.

7 Look out for us, 0 Indra, as our Leader, and guide ns on to

gain yet goodlier treasure.

Excellent Guardian, bear us well through peril, and lead us on
to wealth with careful guidance.

8 Lead us to ample room, 0 thou who knowest, to happiness,

security, and sunlight.

High, Indra, are the arms of thee the Mighty : may we betake
us to their lofty shelter.

9 Set us on widest chariot-seat, O Indra, with two steeds best

to draw, 0 Lord of Hundreds !

3 This Sage hath measured out : the creative acts of Indra are ascribed to
Soma which inspirits him to perform them. The six expanses, are the two
worlds, heaven and earth, and the three subdivisions of each ; or, according
to the Commentator, heaven, earth, day, night, water, and plants.

4 In three headlong rivers : perhaps the three unknown rivers Anjatt, Kuli^i,

and Vir'apatnJ, of 1, 104. 4, which Benfey considers to be personifications of the
clouds ; but the meaning of the half dine is uncertain. * This Soma has de-
posited the ambrosia in its three principal (receptacles).’ — Wilson, Soma in
stanzas 4 and 5 is probably the Moon -God. , ;

39

610 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 71.

Bring us the best among all sorts of viands ; let not the foe’s
wealth, Maghavan, subdue us,

10 Be gracious, Indra, let my days be lengthened : sharpen my

thought as ’twere a blade of iron.

Approve whatever words I speak, dependent on thee, and grant
me thy divine protection.

1 1 Indra the Bescuer, Indra the Helper, Hero who listens at each

invocation,

Sakra I call, Indra invoked of many. May Indra Maghavan
prosper and bless us.

12 May helpful Indra as our good Protector, Lord of all treasures,

favour us with succour,

Baffle our foes, and givers rest and safety, and may we be
the lords of hero vigour.

13 May we enjoy the grace of him the Holy, yea, may we dwell

in his auspicious favour.'

May helpful Indra as our good Preserver drive from us, even
from afar, our foemen,

14 Like rivers rushing down a slope, 0 Indra, to thee haste songs

and prayers and linked verses.

Thou gatherest, Thunderer ! like wide-spread bounty, kine,
water, drops, and manifold libations.

15 Who lauds him, satisfies him, pays him worship? E’en the

rich noble still hath found him mighty.

With power, as when one moves his feet alternate, he makes
the last precede, the foremost follow.

16 Famed is the Hero as each strong man’s tamer, ever advancing

one and then another.

King of both worlds, hating the high and haughty, Indra pro-
tects the men who are his people.

17 He loves no more the men he loved aforetime ; he turns and

moves away allied with others.

Rejecting those who disregard his worship, Indra victorious
lives through many autumns.

9 Let not the foe's wealth , Maghavan , subdue us: it seems necessary to
follow Professor Lridwig in taking vftyah in the plural as the subject of the
singular verb tdrtt. Other examples of such an irregularity are found in
the Veda.

18 This stanza is apparently the conclusion of the original hymn ; a new
hymn or fragment of a hymn begins with the following stanza. —Ludwig.

15 With power ; he rules the fortunes of men according to his pleasure,
setting up one and putting down another, making the first last and the last first.

HYMN 47:] THE MIG VMS A > 611

18 In every figure lie hath been the model : this is his only form

for us to look on.

Indra moves multiform by his illusions ) for his Bay Steeds
are yoked, ten times a hundred.

19 Here Tvashtar, yoking to the car the Bay Steeds, hath extended

sway.

Who will for ever stand upon the foeman’s side, even when
our princes sit at ease 2

20 Gods, we have reached a country void of pasture : the land,

though spacious, was too small to hold us.

Brihaspati, provide in war for cattle ; find a path, Indra, for
this faithful singer.

21 Day after day far from their seatjie drove them, alike, from

place to place, those darksome creatures.

The Hero slew the meanly-huckstering Diisas, Varchin and
Sambara, where the watei's gather.

22 Out of thy bounty, Indra, hath Prastoka bestowed ten coffers

and ten mettled horses.

We have received in turn from Divod&sa Sambara’s wealth, the
gift of Atithigva.

23 Ten horses and ten treasure-chests, ten garments as an added gift,
These and ten lumps of gold' have I received from Divodasa's

hand.

24 Ten cars with extra steed to each, for the Atharvans hundred

cows,

Hath Asvatlia to Payu given.

18 * Indra presents himself as Agni, Vishnu , or Rudra t or any other deity
who is the actual object of worship, and is really the deity to be adored : he
is identifiable with each.’ —Wilson.

■ Ten times a hundred : e His chariots and horses are multiplied according to
the forms in which he manifests himself : agreeably to the Vaiddvtlk inter*
pretation of the stanza, Indra is here identified with Parameswara, the supreme
first cause, identical with creation.’ — Wilson.

19 Tvashtar : supposed by the Commentator to be identified with Indra ;
but this is unnecessary. The sway may be merely the authority which
Tvashtar exercises in yoking the chariot-steeds for Indra.

Who will for ever stand upon the foe man's side ? : that is, Indra will not al-.
ways favour our enemies, even when, as is now the case, our nobles are not
engaged in war. — Ludwig.

21 Indra is represented as having put to flight the dark aborigines and slain
the niggardly demons or savages Yarohin and Sambara. See IV. 80. 14, IS.

22 Prastoha , Divoddsa f and Atithigva are names of one and the same prince^
who is oalled also Asvatha, and S&rnjaya or son of Srinjaya,

24 For the Atharvans; for the Rishis of the family of Atharvan, says
S&yana. Prfyu : the brother of Garga the Rishi of the hymn.

This stanza consists of two Pit das only instead of four.

612 THE nmm OF [nO'OK VL

25 Thus Srinjaya’s son honoured the Bharadvajas, recipients of

all noble gifts and bounty.

26 Lord of the wood, be fifth and strong in body : be, bearing us,

a brave victorious hero. \ '

Show forth thy strength, compact with straps of leather, and
let thy rider win all spoils of battle.

27 Its mighty strength was borrowed from the heaven and earth :

its conquering force was brought from sovrans of the wood.
Honour with holy gifts the Car like Indra’s bolt, the Car bound
round with straps, the vigour of the floods.

28 Thou Bolt of Indra, Vanguard of the Maruts, close knit to

Varuna and Child of Mitra, —

As such, accepting gifts which here we offer, receive, 0 Godlike
Chariot, these oblations.

29 Send forth thy voice aloud through earth and heaven, and let

the world in all its breadth regard thee ;

0 Drum, accordant with the Gods and Indra, drive thou afar,
yea, very far, our foemen.

30 Thunder out strength and fill us full of vigour : yea, thunder

forth and drive away all dangers.

Drive hence, 0 War-drum, drive away misfortune : thou art
the Fist of Indra : show thy firmness.

31 Drive hither those, and these again bring hither; the War-

drum speaks aloud as battle’s signal.

Our heroes, winged with horses, come together. Let our car-
warriors, Indra, be triumphant.

HYMN XL VI II. Agni and Others.

Sjng to your Agni with each song, at every sacrifice, for
strength.

Come, let us praise the Wise and Everlasting God, even as a
welhbelovM Friend,

26 Lord of the wood ; forest tree, that is the timber of which the car is
hiade. This car is the deified object of this and the two following stanzas.

29 0 Dmm : the dundubhi addressed and glorified in these concluding
verseB was a sort of loud kettle-drum, like that still used.

^ Jr # * ve US 00 ws enemy and send our own cows home in safe-
ty. Gah , cows, is understood with amtih, those, and imflfi, these.

• 1 Come, let us sing : it seems necessary to take the singular verb with the
plural pronoun.

mn nmvnbjL,

M¥MN 480

813

2 The Son of Strength ; for is he not our gracious Lord 1 Let

us serve him who bears our gifts.

In battle may he be our help and strengthened yea, be the
saviour of ottr jives.

3 Agni, thou beamest forth with light, great Hero, never

changed by time.

Shining, pure Agni 1 with a light that never fades, beam with
thy fair beams brilliantly.

4 Thou worshippest great Gods : bring them without delay by

wisdom and thy wondrous power.

0 Agni, make them turn hither to succour us. Give strength,
and win it for thyself.

h He whom floods, stones, and trees support, the offspring of
eternal Law ;

He who when rubbed with force is brought to life by men upon
the lofty height of earth ;

6 He who hath filled both worlds full with his brilliant shine,

who hastens with his smoke to heaven *

He made himself apparent through the gloom by night, the
Bed Bull in the darksome nights, the lied Bull in the dark-
some nights.

7 0 Agni, with thy lofty beams, with thy pure brilliancy,

0 God,

Kindled, Most Youthful One ! by Bharadvaja’e hand, shine on
us, 0 pure God, with wealth, shine, Purifier ! splendidly.

8 Thou art the Lord of house and home of all the tribes, O

Agni, of all tribes of men.

Guard with a hundred forts thy kindler from distress, through
hundred winters. Youngest God ! and those who make thy
singers rich.

9 Wonderful, with thy favouring help, send us thy bounties,

gracious Lord.

Thou art the Charioteer, Agni, of earthly wealth : find rest
and safety for our seed.

10 With guards unfailing never negligent speed thou our child-
ren and our progeny.

Keep far from us, 0 Agni, all celestial wrath and wickedness
of godless men.

2 Who hears our gifts : conveys our sacrificial offerings to the Gods.

5 Floods, stones , and trees : the waters that are mixed with the Soma juice,
the press-stones which crush the plant, and the wood which produces the fir®
by attrition or feeds it as fuel. The Ufty height of earth : the altar.

m TRBRYMNS OF [BOOK VI.

Thou, Sage, with bright path, Lord of harnessed horses* impe-
tuous, promptly honourest the prudent.

5 That chariot of the Asvins, fair to look on, pleaseth me well,

yoked with a thought, refulgent,

Wherewith; Hasatyas, Chiefs, ye seek our dwelling, to give
new strength to us and to -our children,

6 Lulls of the Earth, 0 Vata and Par j any a, stir up for us the

regions of the water.

Hearers of truth, ye, Sages, World-Supporters, increase his
living wealth whose songs delight you.

7 So may Sarasvati, the Hero’s Consort, brisk with rare life, the

lightning’s Child, inspire us,

And, with the Dames accordant, give the singer a refuge unas-
sailable and flawless. *

8 I praise with elocpiuence him who guards all pathways. He,

when his love impelled him, went to Arka.

May he vouchsafe us gear with gold to grace it ; may Pushan
make each prayer of ours effective.

9 May Herald Agni, fulgent, bring for worship Tvashfcar adored,

in homes and swift to listen,

Glorious, first to share, the life-bestower, the ever active God,
fair-armed, fair-handed.

10 Rudra by day, Rudra at night we honour with these our songs,
the Universe’s Father.

Him great and lofty, blissful, undecaying let us call specially
as the Sage impels us.

6 Bulls of the Barth : or of Prifchiv! as identified with Prism. Vdta is
another name of VAyu, the Wind-God; and JParjani/a is the Bain-cloud
personified. Rearers of tmth ; the Maruts are thus addressed, as making true
or realizing the prayers of men to which they listen. I follow S&yana’s inter-
pretation of the second half of the stanza.

7 The Hero's Consort : virdp Uni ; according to S&yana, she whose husband
is the hero Praj&pati, or, the protectress of heroes. The River-God Sarasv&n
or Sarasvat is more usually considered to be the consort of Sarasvati, who
originally a River-Goddess, appears in this place in her later and present-day
character of the Goddess of learning and eloquence. See note, borrowed
from Muir, on I. 3 10. The Dames: Gilds, or Consorts of the Gods.

8 Rim who guards all pathways : PCishan, the special protector of travellers
and guardian of roads and paths. See I. 42. Arha: the Sun, to whom PCishan
appears to have gone both as an envoy on behalf of the other Gods when Sfiryd
was to be given in marriage* and as a suitor on his own account, Surya, it may
be remembered, chose the Asvins to be her husbands. See I. 116. 17. 1 follow
Professor Pischel ( Vedisehe Studien, I. pp. 1 — 52) in his interpretation of this
difficult stanza.

10 The Sage ; the wise, that is, wisdom-giving, Soma,

EFMN 50.} THE MIG VEJ>A . 61?

11 Ye who are youthful, wise* and meet for worship, come,

Maruts, to the longing of the singer.

Goming, as erst to Angiras, 0 Heroes, ye animate and quicken
e’en the desert.

12 Even as the herdsman driveth home his cattle, I urge my

songs to him the strong swift Hero.

May he, the glorious, lay upon his body the singer’s hymns,
as stars bedeck the heaven.

1 3 He who for man’s behoof in his affliction thrice measured out

the earthly regions, Vishnu —

When one so great as thou affordeth shelter, may we with
wealth and with ourselves be happy.

14 Sweet be this song of mine to Alybudhnya, Parvata, Savitaif,

with Floods and Lightnings ;

Sweet, with the Plants, to Gods who seek oblations. May
liberal Bhaga speed us on to riches.

15 Give riches borne on cars, with many heroes, contenting men,

the guard of mighty Order.

Give us a lasting home that we may battle with godless bands
of men who fight against us, and meet with tribes to whom
the Gods are gracious.

HYMN L. Visvedevas.

I call with prayers on Aditi your Goddess, on Agni, Mitra,
Varuna for favour,

On Aryaman who gives unasked, the gracious, on Gods who
save, on Savitar and Bhaga.

2 Visit, to prove us free from sin, 0 Surya, Lord of great might,
the bright Gods sprung from Daksha,

Twice-born and true, observing sacred duties, Holy and full of
light, whose tongue is Agni.

11 As erst to Angiras : angirasvdt ; 1 like rays (of light).’ — Wilson; Gibe the
Angirasas.’ — Roth ; ‘like messengers of the Gods.’ — Grassmann.

12 The strong swift Eero : Vishnu seems to be intended, and not the
company of Maruts as S&yana explains the passage, taking virttya as an'
adjective = heroic or powerful.

14 Ahibudhnya : the Dragon of the Deep, or * leviathan of the Sea of
Heaven,’ the distant, invisible and deified being who presides over the
firmament.

15 The guard of mighty Order : the wealth that enables men to institute
the law-ordained sacrifices. To whom the Gods are gracious : c to whom the
Gods come to accept libations.* I follow S&yana in thus distinguishing tfdevth
from adevih, godless.

2 Visit, to prove us free from sin .* visit and invite the Gods to come and
bear witness to our innocence before the all-seeing Sun, The word andgdstvc

318 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VI

3 And , 0 ye Heaven and Earth, a wide dominion, 0 ye most

blissful Worlds, our lofty shelter,

Give ample room and freedom for our dwelling, a home, ye
Hemispheres, which none may rival.

4 This day invited may the Sons of Rudra, resistless, excellent,

stoop down to meet us ;

For, when beset with slight or sore affliction, we ever call upon
the Gods, the Maruts ;

5 To whom the Goddess Eodasi clings closely, whom Pushan

follows bringing ample bounty.

What time ye hear our call and come, 0 Maruts, upon your
separate path all creatures tremble.

6 With a new hymn extol, J3 thou who singest, the Lover of the

Song, the Hero Indra,

May he, exalted, hear our invocation, and grant us mighty
wealth and strength when lauded.

7 Give full protection, Friends of man, ye Waters, in peace and

trouble, to our sons and grandsons.

For ye are our most motherly physicians, parents of all that
•standeth, all that moveth.

5 May Savitar come hither and approach us, the God who rescues,
Holy, golden-handed,

The God who, bounteous as the face of Morning, discloses
precious gifts for him who worships.

9 And thou, 0 Son of Strength, do thou turn hither the Gods
to-day to this our holy service.

May I for evermore enjoy thy bounty, and, Agni, by thy
grace be rich in heroes.

10 Gome also to my call, 0 ye N&satyas, yea, verily, through my
prayers, ye Holy Sages.

As from great darkness ye delivered Atri, protect us, Chiefs,
from danger in the conflict.

in the locative case (in sinlessness) is used with ‘ d“j :vo -L r.'Vs n Sprung,
from Daksha: Daksha is a creative Power assoc:..:.*.- .i i: \ ii i. ; 1 therefore

sometimes identified with Praj&pati. S&yana explains ddkshapitrbi in his
commentary on VII. 6*6. 2, as * preservers or lords of strength,’ and the com-
pound may mean Lords of vigour, or fathers of strength in this passage also.
Twice-born : having two births or manifestations, dwelling in heaven and ap-
pearing also on earth. Whose tongue is Agni : who consume oblations by means
of fire.

3 Ye Hemispheres : dhishane ; literally, ‘ two bowls,’ a frequently- occurring
expression for heaven and earth.

5 Eodasi ; the Consort of Kudra,

HYMN 51.] * THE RIG YE DA . 61 &

110 Gods, bestow., upon us riches, splendid with strength and
h eroes, bringing food in plenty.

' Be gracious, helpful Gods of earth, of heaven, bom of the Cow,
and dwellers in the waters.

12 May Budra and Saras vati, accordant, Vishnu and Vayu, pour

down gifts and bless us ;

Bibhukshan, Vaja, and divine Vidhatar, Parjanya, Vata make
our food abundant.

13 May this God Savitar, th.eLoi*d, the Offspring of Waters, pour-

ing down his dew be gracious,

And, with the Gods and Dames accordant, Tvashtar; Dyaus
with the Gods and Prithivi with oceans.

14 May Aja-Ekapad and Ahibudhnya, and Earth and Ocean hear

our invocation ;

All Gods who strengthen Law, invoked and lauded, and holy
texts uttered by sages, help us.

15 So with my thoughts and hymns of praise the children of

Bharadvaja sing aloud to please you.

The Dames invoked, and the resistless Vasus, and all ye Holy
Ones have been exalted.

. HYMN LI. Visvedevas.

That mighty eye of Vanina and Mitra, infallible and dear, is
moving upward.

The pure and lovely face of holy Order hath shone like gold of
heaven in its arising.

1 1 Born of the Cow : the Maruts, sobs of the Oow Prisni, according to Sdyana.
The Gods of heaven are said to be the Adityas, those of earth the Vasus, and
those of water, that is, the firmament, the Budras. Both explains gdjdtdh as
e born of the starry heaven. 1

12 This and the four following stanzas form a new hymn, or are a recapitu-
lation, with additions, of the preceding verses. And divine Vidlidtar : or
‘the divine Disposer.’

14 Aja-Ekapdd : according to Both, probably a genius of the storm, 6 the
stormer of one foot 5 See II. 31. 6. But aja may signify ‘ unborn’ rather than
1 driver,’ and the Sun may be intended, in accordance with the explanation of
the Commentators. Aja-Ekapftd is called in X. 65. 13. the bearer of heaven,

‘ and the ascription of one foot to the Sun might be due to his appearance
alone in the sky as opposed to the Dawns and the Asvins/ See Wallis,
Cosmology of the Rigveda , p. 51 M. Bergaigno says : ‘ Aja-EkapM, then is
the £ unborn who has only one foot/ that is to say, ‘ who dwells in the single
isolated world, the place of mystery/ in opposition to the god who manifests
himself in divers worlds, to Agni or Soma in their various visible forms/ See
La Religion Vddique, III. pp. 20 — 25.

1 5 S^yana interprets the first line somewhat differently : 1 Thus do my sons
the Bharadvcljas worship the Gods with sacied rites and hymns/

1 Eye of Varuna, and Mitra ; the Sun.

620 f&B 8TMMS OP [BOOK Vt

2 The Sage who knows these Oods ? three ?&nks and orders, and

all their generations near and distant,

Beholding goad and evil acts of mortals, Sara marks well the
doings of the pious,

3 I praise you Guards of mighty Law eternal, Aditi, Mitra, Yaruna,

the noble,

1 Aryaman, Bhaga, all whose thoughts are faithful : hither 1 call

the Bright who share in common.

4 Lords of the brave, infallible, foe-destroyers, great Kings, be-*

Stowers of fair homes to dwell in,

Young, Heroes, ruling heaven with strong dominion, Adityas,
Aditi I seek with worship.

5 0 Heaven our Father, E$rth our guileless Mother, 0 Brother

Agni, and ye Yasus, bless us.

Grant us, 0 Aditi and ye Adityas, all of one mind, your mani-
fold protection,,

6 Give us not up to any evil creature, as spoil to wolf or she-

wolf, 0 ye Holy.

For ye are they who guide aright our bodies, ye are the rulers
of our speech and vigour.

7 Let us not suffer for the sin of others, nor d o th e deed which

ye, 0 Yasus, punish.

Ye, Universal Gods ! are all-controllers : may he do harm unto
himself who hates me.

8 Mighty is homage : I adopt and use it. Homage hath held

in place the earth and heaven.

Homage to Gods ! Homage commands and rules them. I
banish even committed sin by homage.

9 You Furtherers of Law, pure in your spirit, infallible, dwel-

lers in the home of Order,

Tq you all Heroes mighty and far-seeing I how me down, 0
Holy Ones, with homage.

10 For these are they who shine with noblest splendour ; through
all our troubles these conduct us safely—

2 Three ranks and orders : according to S&yana, the three cognizable worlds
or stations of the Gods, the earth of the Yasus/ the firmament of the Eudras,
and heaven of the Adityas. Silva : Surya ; the Sun.

a Who share in common : sadhanydh ; according to S&yana, dhanasaMMn
1 accompanied by wealth.’ * *

7 Let us not suffer for the sm of others .* so, YIX, 86. 5. * Loose us fro m sins
committed by our fathers/ Compare also Taittirfya-Brdhmana, XU. 7. 12. 3.
cited by Muir, 0. S. T, } V. 66. ‘May Agni free me from the sin which my
mother or my father committed when I was a babe unborn/

TEE RIG VEDA,

HYMN 52.]

.621

Varuira> Mitra, Agni, mighty Rulers, true-minded, faithful to
the hymn's controllers.

1 1 May they, Earth, Aditi, Indra, Bhaga, Pushan increase our laud,

increase the Fivefold people.

Giving good help, good refuge, goodly guidance, he they our
good deliverers, good protectors.

1 2 Come now, 0 Gods, to your celestial station : the Bhara-

dv&jas' priest entreats your favour.

He, sacrificing, fain for wealth, hath honoured the Gods with
those who sit and share oblations.

13 Agni, drive thou the wicked foe, the evil-hearted thief away,
Far, far, Lord of the brave! and give us easy paths.

14 Soma, these pressing-stones have* called aloud to win thee for

our Friend.

Destroy the greedy Pani, for a wolf is he.

15 Ye, 0 most bountiful, are they who, led by Indra, seek the

sky.

Give us good paths for travel : guard us well at home.

16 How have we entered on the road that leads to bliss, without

a foe,

The road whereon a man escapes all enemies and gathers
wealth.

HYMN LII. Visvedevas.

This I allow not in the earth or heaven, at sacrifice or in
these holy duties.

May the huge mountains crush him down : degraded be
Atiyaja's sacrificing patron.

10 The hymn's controllers ; ‘ those who are prominent in (their) praise/ —

Wilson. A

11 The Fivefold People ; pdftcha janfth; the five Aryan tribes ; 'the five
orders of beings/ — Wilson.

12 This stanza is difficult, and I do not thoroughly understand it.

14 Pani : either one of the envious demons who steal away the light, or the
avaricious and niggardly trafficker who offers no sacrifices to the Gods.

15 Ye f O Most Bountiful : all ye Gods,

16 These four concluding stanzas, in changed metres, are a prayer for
protection on a journey. Professor Grassmann banishes them, together with
stanzas 11 and 12, to the Appendix as being in his opinion later additions to
the original hymn.

1 According to S&yaoa. Xlijisvan curses a rival Ilishi Atiy&ja : but the name
Atiy&ja (from uti and yaj) seems to be employed expressly to signify one who
over- sacrifices, that is, sacrifices more than is necessary or prescribed, super-
fluity, as well as deficiency, being a fault that causes a sacrifice to fail. See
Ludwig, IV, 220.

mn hymns of [book vi

2 Or he who holds us in contempt, 0 Maruts, or seeks to blame

the prayer that we are making,

May agonies of burning be his portion. May the sky scorch
the man who hates devotion.

3 Why then, 0 Soma, do they call thee keeper of prayer % why

then our guardian from reproaches 1
Why then beholdest thou how men revile us? Cast thy hot
dart at him who hates devotion.

4 May Mornings as they spring to life protect me, and may the

Rivers as they swell preserve me.

My guardians be the firmly-seated mountains : the Fathers,
when I call on Gods, defend me !

5 Through all our days we be healthy-minded, and look up-

on the Sun when he arises.

Grant this the Treasure-Lord of treasures, coming, observant,
oftenest of Gods, with succour !

6 Most near, most oft comes Indra with protection, and she,

Sarasvati, who swells with rivers :

Paijanya, bringing health with herbs, and Agni, well lauded,
swift to listen, like a father.

7 Hear this mine invocation; come hither, 0 Universal Gods.

Be seated on this holy grass.

8 To him who comes to meet you, Gods, with offerings bathed

in holy oil —

Approach ye, one and all, to him.

9 All Sons of Immortality shall listen to the songs we sing,

And be exceeding good to us.

10 May all the Gods who strengthen Law, with Ritus, listening

to our call,

Be pleased with their appropriate draught.

11 May Indra with the Marut host, Tvashtar, Mitra, Aryaman,
Accept the laud and these our gifts.

12 0 Agni, Priest, as rules ordain, offer this sacrifice of ours.
Remembering the Heavenly Folk.

3 Soma : the Moou*Grod.

gs ' Asni ’ fr0m Wll0M ' ° r thl-ough whom > a11 Mess-'

THE ilia VEDA.

HYMN 53.]

13 Listen, All-Gods, to this mine invocation, ye who inhabit

heaven, and air’s mid-regions,

All ye, 0 Holy Ones, whose tongue is Agni, seated upon this
sacred grass, be joyful,

14 May the All-Gods who claim our worship hear my thought ;

may the two World-halves hear it, and the Waters’ Child.
Let me not utter words that ye may disregard. Closely allied
with you may wc rejoice in bliss.

15 And those who, Mighty, with the wiles of serpents, were bom

on earth, in heaven, where waters gather —

May they vouchsafe us life of full duration. May the Gods
kindly give us nights and mornings.

16 At this my call, 0 Agni and Parjanya, help, swift to hear, my

thought and our laudation.

One generates holy food, the other offspring, so grant us food
enough with store of children.

17 When holy grass is strewn and fire enkindled, with hymn, and

lowly homage I invite you.

All-Gods, to day in this our great assembly rejoice, ye Holy-
in the gifts we offer.

HYMN LIIL PAsham

Lord of the path/O Pushan, we have yoked and bound thee
to our hymn.

Even as a car, to win the prize.

2 Bring us the wealth that men require, a manly master of a

house,

Free-handed with the liberal meed.

3 Even him who would not give, do thou, O glowing Pushan,

urge to give,

And make the niggard’s soul grow soft.

* 13 All-Gods : Visve devdh , or Universal Gods.

15 With the wiles of serpents; ahimdijdh ; according to- Sftyana, * possessed
of the wisdom or knowledge that kills.’ Cf. I. 3. 9, note.

16 The other offspring : Parjanya, the personified Rain-cloud, produces com
and food offered in sacrifice, and Agni promotes the procreation of children.

1 Lord of the path : custodian of roads and guide of travellers. To win the
prize : or, to win us wealth or food.

2 Master of a house ; a householder who will institute sacrifices and liber-
ally reward the officiating priests.

[BOOK VI.

m THK HYMN'S OB

A: Clear paths that we may win the prize ; scatter our enemies afar.
Strong God, be all our thoughts fulfilled.

5 Penetrate with an awl, 0 Sage, the hearts of avaricious churls,
And make them subject to our will.

6 Thrust with thine awl, 0 Pash an : seek that which the nig-

gard’s heart holds dear,

And make him subject to our Will.

7 Tear up and rend in pieces, Sage, the hearts of avai'icious churls,
And make them subject to our will.

S Thou, glowing Pushan, carriest an awl that urges men to
prayer;

Therewith do thou tear up and rend to shreds the heart of
every one. „

9 Thou bearest, glowing Lord ! a goad with horny point that
guides the cows :

Thence do we seek thy gift of bliss.

10 And make this hymn of ours produce kine, horses, and a store
of wealth

For our delight and use as men.

HYMN LIT. pa 8 han,

O PftsHAN, bring us to the man who knows, who shall direct
us straight,

And say unto us, It is here.

2 May we go forth with Pdslian who shall point the houses out
to us,

And say to us, These same are they.

$ Unharmed is Pushan’s chariot wheel ; the box ne’er falleth to
the ground,

Itfor doth the loosened felly shake.

4 Win the prize : or, win us wealth, or food.

With an awl ; 4 with a goad.’ — Wilson.

9 With horny point : the exact meaning of g6opas& is uncertain. Others ex-
plain jt as * director of cattle;' ‘furnished with leathern thongs ‘ cow tailed/
This hymn and the five following have been translated by Dr. Muir, Origi-
nal Sanskrit Texts, V. 176 — 180. Professor Peterson also gives a translation
of Hymns LIII ; — LVII. in his Hymns from the Jtigveda {.Bombay Sanskrit
Series No. XXXVI).

1 This stanza, S&yana says, is to be muttered by one who seeks his lost
property. The man who knows : the wise man or wizard.

2 These same are they : these are the houses in which the stolen property is
concealed.

3 The box : basket, or inner part of the car. Professor Wilson, following
S&yana, translates : * The discus of PQshan does not destroy ; its sheath is not
discarded, its edge harms not us.’ But the three things mentioned are evi-
dently parts of Pdshan’s chariot.

HYMN 55.1 THE RIG VEDA. 625

4 Pushan forgetteth not the man who seryeth him with offered

gift:

That man is first to gather wealth.

5 May Pushan follow near onr kine; may Pushan keep our

horses safe ;

May Pushan gather gear for us.

6 Follow the kine of him who pours libations out and worships

thee ;

And ours who sing thee songs of praise.

7 Let none be lost, none injured, none sink in a pit and break

a limb.

Return with these all safe and sound.

8 Pushan who listens to our prayers, the Strong whose wealth

is never lost,

The Lord of riches, we implore.

9 Secure in thy protecting care, 0 Pushan, never may we fail :
We here are they who sing thy praise.

10 From out the distance, far and wide, may Pushan stretch his
right hand forth,

And drive our lost again to us.

HYMN LY. POshan.

Son of Deliverance, come, bright God ! Let us twain go to-
gether ; be our charioteer of sacrifice.

2 We pray for wealth to thee most skilled of charioteers, with

braided hair,

Lord of great riches, and our Friend.

3 Bright God whose steeds are goats, thou art a stream of wealth,

a treasure-heap,

The Friend of every pious man.

7 With these ; cows.

8 We pray to POtshan for the safety of our property because he is the Lord
of wealth ; he himself loses nothing that is his, and he always listens to our.
prayers.

X Son of Deliverance : that is, 1 Deliverer/ one who gives men ample room
and freedom. Sftyana explains vimucho napdt in another place as 4 offspring
of the cloud.’ See I. 42. X. Here, he says, the meaning is, ‘ son of Prajftpati,
who at the creation sends forth from himself all creatures/ Roth explains
vimtick as ‘ unyoking ’ horses at the end of a journey, Pushan would then be
* the son of return/ the God who brings travellers safely home, which is one
of his especial functions.

2 With braided hair : kapardina.m ; an epithet of Rudra also.. See I. 114. 1, *

3 Whose steeds are goats: cf. I. 138. 4.

40

628 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VI.

4 Pushan, who driveth goats for steeds, the Strong and Mighty,

who is called

His Sister’s lover, will we laud.

5 His Mother’s suitor I address. May he who loves his Sister hear,
Brother of India, and my Friend.

6 May the sure-footed goats come nigh, conveying Pushan on

his car,

The God who visiteth mankind.

HYMN LVL Pushan.

Whoso remembers Pushan as eater of mingled curd and meal
Need think no more upon the God.

2 And he is best of charioteers. Indi'a, the hero’s Lord, allied
With him as Friend, destroys the foes.

3 And there the best of charioteers hath guided through the

speckled cloud

The golden wheel of Sara’s car.

4 Wkate’er we speak this day to thee, Wise, Wondrous God

whom many praise,

Give thou fulfilment of our thought.

5 Lead on this company of ours, that longs for kine, to win the spoil:
Thou, Pushan, art renowned afar.

6 Prosperity we crave from thee, afar from sin and near to wealth,
Tending to perfect happiness both for to-morrow and* to-day.

4 Hi s Sisters lover : according to Sftyana, Pushan’s sister is Ushas or Dawn.

5 His Mother's suitor : S&yaua explains mdtr&r didhishum as rdtreh patim ,
lord or husband of Night. Probably SuryS. is intended. See Bergaigne, La
Religion Vidique , II. 428. Compare also Book VI. 48. 8. Brother of Indr a ;
as an Aditya or son of Aditi.

6 Sure-footed: nisrlmbhdh : this word does not occur elsewhere and its
meaning is uncertain. Wilson renders it £ harnessed/ and other explanations
have been proposed, but as Dr. Muir observes : * All seems guess work.’

1 Hater of mingled curd and meal: JcarambMt ; harambhd was some soft
food, a sort of gruel, offered especially to Pdsban.

I have followed Professor Ludwig in my translation of this difficult passage,
the meaning seeming to be that in setting before PClshan the food that he loves
the worshipper has done all that is necessary to secure his help. Sfiyana’s expla-
nation is much the same if £ a God * be substituted for ‘ the God * in line 2, that
is, Pdshan alone is sufficient : the worshipper need think upon no other God.

3 Pushan seems to be intended. He is said to have driven the Sun’s wheel
parushi gdvi, literally, * in the brindled bull/ meaning apparently, the speck-
led cloud, or train of variegated clouds. £ He, the impeller, the chief of
charioteers (Pushan), ever urges on that golden wheel (of his car) for the radi- '
ant sun.’ — Wilson. Others think that the verse refers to Indra’s pressing 1 * 3
down the wheel of the Sun from the mountain of cloud and bringing back the
light. See Peterson, Hymns from the Rlgveda 7 p. 171,

HYMN 58.]

mz rig vs da. flay

HYMN LVII. Mra and Pdshan.

Indea and Piishan will we call for friendship and prosperity
And for the winning of the spoil.

2 One by the Soma sits to drink juice which the mortar hath

expressed :

The other longs for curd and meal.

3 Goats are the team that draws the one : the other hath Bay

Steeds at hand ;

With both of these he slays the fiends.

4 When Indra, wondrous strong, brought down the streams, the

mighty water-floods,

Piishan was standing by his side. m

5 To this, to Pushan’s favouring love, and Indra’s, may we closely

cling,

As to a tree’s extended bough.

6 As one who drives a car draws in his reins, may “we draw

Piishan near,

And Indra, for our great success.

HYMN LVJII. Pilslian,

Like heaven art thou : one form is bright, one holy, like Day
and Night dissimilar in colour.

All magic powers thou aidest, self-dependent ! Auspicious be
thy bounty here, 0 Pushan.

2 Goat-borne, the guard of cattle, he whose home is strength,

inspirer of the hymn, set over all the world ;

Brandishing here and there his lightly-moving goad, beholding
every creature, Pushan, God, goes forth.

3 0 Piishan, with thy golden ships that travel across the ocean,

in the air’s mid-region,

Thou goest on an embassy to Surya, subdued by love, desirous
of the glory.

3 The fiends : the Vritras, the demons of drought, or enemies in general.

1 One holy ; ‘venerable.’ — Wilson, This is apparently a euphemism for
e dark,’ Pushan is here regarded as the Sun present by day and. even in his
absence regulating the night also. According to Professor .Ludwig, he is re-
presented as the summer Sun and the winter Sun. Thou aidest : * thou exer-
cisest.* — Muir.

S Subdued by love : of SuryA, the daughter of the Sun. See YI. 49, 8. Of
the glory : of winning S ary A for his bride.

62B THE HYMXS OF f BOOK YT,

4 Near kinsman of the heaven and earth is Pdshan, liberal. Lord
of food, of wondrous lustre,

Whom strong and vigorous and swiftly-moving, subdued by
love, the Deities gave to Sfiryfi.

HYMN LIX. iDdra-Agiii,

I will declare, while juices flow, the manly deeds that ye
have done :

Your Fathers, enemies of Gods, were smitten down, and, Indra-
Agni, ye survive.

2 Thus, Indra- Agni, verily your greatness merits loftiest praise.
Sprung from one common Father, brothers, twins are ye ; your

Mother is in every place.

3 These who delight in flowing juice, like fellow horses at their

food,

Indra andAgni, Gods armed with the thunderbolt, we call this
day to come with help.

4 Indira and Agni, Friends of Law, served with rich gifts, your

speech is kind

To him who praises you while these libations flow : that man,
0 Gods, ye ne’er consume.

5 What mortal understands, 0 Gods, Indra and Agni, this

your way ?

One of you, yoking Steeds that move to every side, advances
in your common car.

4 The Deities gave to Sdry4 : 1 * * 4 5 the formula of the verse gives the idea
rather of a birth than of a marriage. But Piishan is the lover of his mother,
VI. 55. 5 : Sitry& then might be the spouse as well as the mother of Pushan.
She is doubtlessly also the sister with whom Pfishan is united, VI. 55. 4. 5.’ — *
Bergaigne, La Religion Vedique, II. 428.

I Your Fathers were smitten down: hatftso vdm pitdro ; the meaning is

obscure. Sftyana explains pitdro as As liras or demons, deriving the word from
a root pi, to injure : ( The Pitris the enemies of the gods, have been slain by
you.’— Wilson. Prof Grassmann reads, conjecbi. ■' ,1 ' ‘ins-

tead of the unsuitable pitaro.' Gods of an elder . 1 ■ ■' Indra

and Agni, appear to be intended, and the wordt- ; ■ ! i ■ ■■ ■■■«■ bear

any other meaning. Hatttso then would mean , f not were slain,’ but were struck
down, degraded, and deprived of their power, like the earlier Hellenic Gods,
Professor Ludwig suggests other possible explanations. See also Bergaigne,
La Religion Vddiqua, III, 75, and Ehni, Per Mythus des Yama, p, 80.

, 2 One common Father : Dyaus. \ 1 Q*yana, Praj&pati

Your Mother: Aditi, infinite . : according to S&yapa, ,

identified with the wide-extended earth* But see Efimi, Der Mythus ties
Yama, p. 79.

4 Ye ne’er consume : Prof. Ludwig suggests the reading bhartsatkah , f threa-
ten/ instead of bhasdtah.

5 One of yon : Indra, as the Sun, whose horses here are the spreading
beams of light, pursues his appointed way through heaven.

TEE EM VEDA.

MtMN @9vJ

m

6 First, ludra-Agui, hath this Maid come footless unto those

with, feet.

Stretching her head and speaking loudly with her tongue, she
hath gone downward thirty steps.

7 JS’en now, 0 Indra-Agni, men hold in their arms and stretch

their bows,

, Desert us not in this great fray, in battles for the sake of kine,

8 The foeman’s sinful enmities, Indra and Agni, rex me sore.
Drive those who hate me far away, and keep them distant

from the Sun.

9 Indra and Agni, yours are all the treasures of the heavens

and earth.

Here give ye us the opulence that ^prospers every living man,
10 0 Indra Agni, who accept the laud, and hear us for our praise,
Come near us, drawn by all our songs, to drink of this our
Soma juice.

HYMN LX. Indra-Agni.

He slays the foe and wins the spoil who worships Indra and
Agni, strong and mighty Heroes,

Who rule as Sovrans over ample riches, victorious, showing
forth their power in conquest.

2 So battle now, 0 Indra and thou, Agni, for cows and waters,

sunlight, stolen Mornings,

Team-borne, thou makest kine thine own, 0 Agni, thou,
Indra, light, Dawns, regions, wondrous waters.

3 With Yritra-slaymg might, Indra and Agni, come, drawn by

homage, 0 ye Vritra-slayers.

Indra and Agni, show yourselves among us with your supreme
and unrestricted bounties.

6 This Maid ; the text has only the feminine pronoun iydm (baec) ; Ushas
or Dawn is intended. Footless : moving unsupported in the sky. Of. I. 152. 3.
Stretching her head : according to one of S&yana’s explanations, f having,
abandoned the head, being herself headless/ which is hardly consistent with
what follows. Thirty steps : the thirty divisions of the Indian day and night
through which Dawn passes before she reappears. But cf. I, 123. 8.

7 The hymn is a prayer for aid in a fray.

2 Stolen Mornings : the Dawns and light that have been carried away and
concealed by the Panis or demons of darkn ess.

3 V ritv a- slaying ; or, generally, < foeman-slaying/

m THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK VI

4 I call the Twain whose deeds of old have all been famed in

ancient days :

0 Indra Agni, harm us not.

5 The Strong, the scatterers of the foe, Indra and Agni, we

invoke ;

May they be kind to one like me. I

'6 They slay our Arya foes, these Lords of heroes, slay our Dasa
foes :

And drive our enemies away.

7 Indra and Agni, these our songs of praise have sounded-

forth to you :

Ye who bring blessings ! drink the juice.

8 Come, Indra-Agni, with? those teams, desired of many, which

ye have,

0 Heroes, for the worshipper.

9 With those to this libation poured, ye Heroes, Indra-Agni,

come :

Come ye to drink the Soma juice.

10 Glorify him who compasses all forests with his glowing flame,
And leaves them blackened with his tongue.

11 He who gains Indra’s bliss with fire enkindled finds an easy

way

Over the floods to happiness.

12 Give us fleet coursers to convey Indra and Agni, and bestow
Abundant strengthening food on us.

13 Indra and Agni, I will call you hither and make you joyful

with the gifts I offer.

Ye Twain are givers both of food and riches : to win me
strength and vigour I invoke you.

14 Come unto us with riches, come with wealth in horses and

in kine,

Indra and Agni, we invoke you both, the Gods, as Friends for
friendship, bringing bliss.

15 Indra and Agmi, hear his call who worships with libations

poured.

Come and enjoy the offerings, drink the sweetly-flavoured
Soma juice.

10 Glorify ; addressed to the stotar or praise-singer.

11 Over the floods : the dangers and troubles that bar his way.

12 To convey Indra and Ayni : to bring you, Indra and Agni, to our sacrifice.

MYMJST 61.]

TEE RIG VEDA. ©31

HYMN LXL Sarasvati,

To Vadhryasva when he worshipped her with gifts she gave
fierce Divodasa, canceller of debts.

Consumer of the churlish niggard, one and all, thine, O
Sarasvati, are these effectual boons.

2 She with her might, like one who digs for lotus-stems, hath

burst with her strong waves the ridges of the hills. /

Let us invite with songs and holy hymns for help Sarasvati who
slayeth the Paravatas.

3 Thou castest down, Sarasvati, those who scorned the Gods,

the brood of every Bri>aya skilled in magic arts.

Thou hast discovered rivers for the tribes of men, and, rich in
wealth ! made poison flow away* from them.

4 May the divine Sarasvati, rich in her wealth, protect us well,
Furthering all our thoughts with might ;

5 Whoso, divine Sarasvati, invokes thee where the prize is set,
Like Indra when he smites the foe.

6 Aid us, divine Sarasvati, thou who art strong in wealth and

power :

Like Pushan, give us opulence.

7 Yea, this divine Sarasvati, terrible with her golden path,
Foe-slayer, claims our eulogy.

8 Whose limitless unbroken flood, swift-moving with a rapid

rush,

Comes onward with tempestuous roar.

9 She hath spread us beyond all foes, beyond her Sisters, H oly One,
As.Sfirya spreadeth out the dnys.

1 Vadhryasva : a celebrated Rishi. See X. 69. She : Sarasvati, the River-
Goddess. Gave: as a son. Canceller of debts: r.criui 1 2 3 . ::ig. by his birth, the
debt which his father owed to his progenitors, riio *■«' obligation of
begetting a son who should perform the ceremonies which they require.
Churlish niggard : who offers no sacrifices. The meaning of avasam is uncer-
tain. Sayana explains it as ‘gratifying himself only ’ Professor Ludwig
regards it as compounded of a + vasd = thin or meagre. These effectual boons :
the gift of a son.

2 She : Sarasvati as the river. The description given in the text can hardly
apply to the small stream generally known under that name; and from this
and other passages which will be noticed as they occur it seems probable that
Sarasvati is also another name of Sindhu or the Indus. See Zimmer, Altm«
disches Leben , pp. 6 ff. Pdrdvatas : see V. 52. 11.

3 Every Brisaya ; every demon like Brisaya, who Is said to have been the
father of Vrifcra, See I. 9*3. 4. Rich in wealth: vljiutvati: according to
Sayana, * giver of sustenance.’

9 Tier Sisters : the other rivers of the Panj&b.

m THE HYMNS OF IBOOK VI.

10 Yea, she most dear amid dear streams, Seven-sistered, graciously

inclined,

Sarasvati hath earned our praise.

11 Guard us from hate Saras vati, she who hath filled the realms

of earth,

And that wide tract, the firmament !

12 Seven-sistered, sprung from threefold source, the Five Tribes’

prosperer, she must he
Invoked in every deed of might.

13 Marked out by majesty among the Mighty Ones, in glory swift-

er than the other rapid Streams,

Created vast for victory like a chariot, Sarasvati must be ex-
tolled by every sage. *

14 Guide us, Sarasvati, to glorious treasure: refuse us not thy

milk, nor spurn us from thee.

Gladly accept our friendship and obedience : let us not go from
! thee to distant countries.

HYMN LX3X Asvins.

I laud the Heroes Twain, this heaven’s Controllers : singing
with songs of praise I call the Asvins, f

Fain in a moment, when the morns are breaking, to part the
earth’s ends and the spacious regions.

2 Moving to sacrifice through realms of lustre they light the

radiance of the car that bears them. X

Traversing many wide unmeasured spaces, over the wastes ye f
pass, and fields, and waters. \

3 Ye to that bounteous path of yours, ye mighty, have ever

borne away our thoughts with horses, \

Mind-swift and full of vigour, that the trouble of man who ft
offers gifts might cease and slumber.

* — .g,

12 Sprung from threefold source; ‘abiding in the three worlds/ that is, ?

pervading heaven, earth, and hell, according to S&yana, like Uangfi in later I

times. * ft"

1 To part the earth’s ends: as heralds of light to define the limits of earth t'
and sky and so separate one from the other. $• '

3 This stanza is very obscure. S&yana’s paraphrase is inconsistent with «

the plain meaning, of several of the words of the text. ‘ Fierce Aswins, from & ■

that humble mansion to which (you have repaired), you have ever borne with
your desirable horses, as swift as thought, the pious worshippers in some
manner (to heaven) : Let the injurer of the liberal man (be consigned by
you) to (final) repose.’— Wilson.

THE MOVED A.

HYMN 62.]

633

.4 So ye, when ye have yoked your chariot-horses, come to the
hymn of the most recent singer.

Our true and ancient Herald Priest shall bring you, the Youth-
ful, bearing splendour, food, and vigour.

5 With newest hymn I call those Wonder-Workers, ancient and

brilliant, and exceeding mighty,

Bringers of bliss to him who lauds and praises, bestowing
varied bounties on the singer.

6 So ye, with birds, out of the sea and waters bore Bhujyu, son

of Tugra, through the regions.

Speeding with wingM steeds through dustless spaces, out of
the bosom of the flood they bore him.

7 Victors, car-borne, ye rent the ro#k asunder; Bulls, heard the

calling of the eunuch’s consort.

Bounteous, ye filled the cow with milk for Sayu : thus, swift
and zealous Ones, ye showed your favour.

8 Whate’er from olden time, Heaven, Earth ! existeth, great

object of the wrath of Gods and mortals,

Make that, Adityas, Vasus, sons of Rudra, an evil brand to
one allied with demons.

9 May he who knows, as Varuna and Mitra, air’s realm, ap-

pointing both the Kings in season,

Against the secret fiend cast forth his weapon, against the
lying words that strangers utter.

10 Come to our home with friendly wheels, for offspring; oome

on your radiant chariot rich in heroes.

Strike off, ye Twain, the heads of our assailants who with
man’s treacherous attack approach us.

11 Come hitherward to us with teams of horses, the highest and

the midmost and the lowest.

Bountiful Lords, throw open to the singer the doors e’en of
the firm-closed stall of cattle.

6 Bhujyu : see I. 116, 3—5.

7 The eunuch's consort: Vadhrimatl Seel Sayu : see X. 316. 22.

9 Mitra and Varuna appear liere-as^comprehended in a third God, who
must be the Asura Lyaus. ILe, ^comprising the heaven of night as well as the
heaven of day, assigns to Mitra and Varuna the charge, respectively of day
and night. See Ludwig’s Commentary.

10 For offspring ; tdnaydya ; to give us offspring. The second line of the
stanza might be rendered ; 1 Turn back, ye Twain, the heads, with secret on-
slaught, even of those who seek to harm the mortal.’

1 1 The highest and the midmost or the loioest : or, as Professor Ludwig trans-
lates ; * the earliest, the midmost, and the latest.’

634 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VT,

HYMN LXIIL Asvins.

Where hath tlie hymn with reverence, like an envoy, found
both fair Gods to-day, invoked of many —

Hymn that hath brought the two N&satyas hither 1 To this
man’s thought be ye, both Gods, most friendly.

2 Come readily to this mine invocation, lauded with songs, that

ye may drink the juices.

Compass this house to keep it from the foeman, that none
may force it, either near or distant.

3 Juice in wide room hath been prepared to feast you: for you

the grass is strewn, most soft to tread on.

Wifch lifted bands your servant hath adored you. Yearning
for you the press-stones shed the liquid.

4 Agni uplifts him at your sacrifices : forth goes the oblation

dropping oil and glowing.

Up stands the grateful-minded priest, elected, appointed to
invoke the two N&satyas,

5 Lords of great wealth ! for glory Surya’s Daughter mounted

ynur car that brings a hundred succours.

Famed for your magic arts were ye, magicians ! amid the race
of Gods, ye dancing Heroes !

6 Ye Twain, with these your glories fair to look on, brought, to

win victory, rich gifts for Surya.

After you dew your birds, marvels of beauty : dear to our
hearts j the song, well lauded, reached you.

7 May your wing*ed coursers, best to draw, Nasatyas ! convey

you to the object of your wishes.

Swift as the thought, your car hath been sent onward to food
of many a sort and dainty viands.

8 Lords of great wealth, manifold is your bounty : ye filled our

cow with food that never faileth.

Lovers of sweetness ! yours are praise and singers, and poured
libations which have sought your favour.

2 Either near or distant : neighbour or stranger.

3 In wide room ; where there is ample space for the sacrificial ceremonies.

5 SilA'ya’s Daughter see I. 116. 17. Dancing Heroes j ye who dance
through the air. Of, VIII. 20. 22, and f Day’s harbinger comes dancing from
the enst (Milton — Song On May Morning).

6 Rich gifts for Stir yd : who chose the Asvins to be her husbands.

the mav ed a.

HYMN 64.]

635

9 Mine were two mares of Puraya, brown, swift-footed ; a hun-
dred with Sum; d ha, food with Pernk.

Sand a gave ten gold-decked and well-trained horses, tame and
obedient and of lofty stature.

10 N&satyas ! PurupantMs offered hundreds, thousands of steeds

to him who sang your praises,

Gave, Heroes ! to the singer Bbaradvaja. Ye Wonder-Workers,
let the fiends be slaughtered.

11 May I with princes share your bliss in freedom.

HYMN LXIV. Pawn.

The radiant Dawns have risen up for glory, in their white
splendour like the waves of waters.

She maketh paths all easy, f^r to travel, and, rich, hath
shown herself benign and friendly.

2 We see that thou art good : far shines thy lustre ; thy beams,
thy splendours have down up to heaven.

Decking thyself, thou makest bare thy bosom, shining in
majesty, thou Goddess Morning.

.3 B,ed are the kine and luminous that bear her the Blessed One
who spreadeth through the distance.

The foes she chaseth like a valiant archer, like a swift warrior
she repelleth darkness.

4 Thy ways are easy on the hills : thou passest Invincible !
Self-luminous ! through waters.

So lofty Goddess with thine ample pathway, Daughter of
Heaven, bring wealth to give us comfort.

9 This and the following stanza eulogize the liberality of several wealthy
institutors of sacrifice ; but it is difficult to make out what wero the gifts
they gave as the verses are filled with epithets- without nouns, Vaduve,
mares, suits the dual epithets rijr6, and raghv% brown and swift After sat dm,
a hundred, Say an a supplies gduah, cows. Instead of * well-trained * Sftyana’s
rendering is £ handsome,’ and he supplies tt&vdn, ‘ horses,’ or rathdn, i * 3 4 chariots’
for the absent noun. * Obedient, gallant, and well-favoured servants T would
represent his rendering of the last half-line of the stanza. The translations
given by Professors Ludwig and Grassmann differ from each other and from
SrLyaoa’s version. As Professor Wilson remarks : * If we render the stanza
literally, it is utterly unintelligible : the greater part of the Silhta is very
obscure.’ Puraya, Sumidha, and Peruka are the names of liberal patrons.

10 Parupmthds : another of these generous nobles. In this case dsvandm,
of horses, appears in the text.

1 1 Your bliss ; the felicity which the Asvins bestow.

1 Dawns : the plural may be honorific, or may signify Pawn and her rays

of light.

3 Warrior ; borne on a chariot.

4 Through waters : of the firmament.

m TB$ HYMNS OF [ BOOK VI.

5 Dawn, bring me wealth : untroubled, with thine oxen thou
bearest riches at thy will and pleasure ;

Thou who, a Goddess, Child of Heaven, hast shown thee
lovely through bounty when we called thee early.

s6 As the birds fly forth from their resting-places, so men with
store of food rise at thy dawning.

Yea, to the liberal mortal who remameth at home, 0 God-
dess Dawn^much good thou bringeat.

HYMN LXV. Dawn.

Shedding her light on human habitations this Child of Heaven
hath called us from our slumber ;

She who at night-time with her argent lustre hath shown her-
self e’en through the shades of darkness.

2 All this with red-rayed steeds have they divided : the Dawns

on bright cars shine in wondrous fashion.

They, bringing near the stately rite’s commencement, drive
far away the night’s surrounding shadows.

3 Dawns, bringing hither, to the man who worships, glory and

power and might and food and vigour,

Opulent, with imperial sway like heroes, favour your servant
and this day enrich him.

A Now, is there treasure for the man who serves you, now for the
hero. Dawns ! who brings oblation;

Now for the singer when he sings the praise-song* Even to
one like me ye brought aforetime^. —

5 0 Dawn who stan<^^.^'^M^mountain ridges, Angirases now
praise thy-^aiTs of cattle.

■gTiih^prayer and holy hymn they burst them open : the
heroes’ calling on the Gods was fruitful.

6 This stanza occurs in a hymn to Dawn ascribed to the Rishi Kakshivdm
I. 1 24- 12. With store ?■ 'enjoying or sharing food,’ is

explained by S4yana as <■ ■' : . ‘ a ’ > have to gain their sustenance.’

The wealthy may be meant, who share their store with others and must work
to replenish it. The liberal mortal * the man who sacrifices to the Gods. To
bring out this meaning more clearly the last line may be translated : * To him
who stays at home and pours oblations, 0 Goddess Dawn, thou givest ample
riches/

1 At night-time : an allusion, perhaps, to the ' false dawn’ before the
appearance of the real dawn, although this faint glimmer can hardly be called
lustre. Or the light of stars may be intended, as belonging to Dawn rather
than to Night.

% All this have they divided: separated light from darkness. The

stately rite : the Agnihotra, or great morning sacrifice.

5 Angivases here praise: 'What we are doing here is in reality only a
repetition of _ what the Angirasas did in ancient times/ — Ludwig.

HYMN 66.] THE III GV EDA. 637

6 Shine on us as of old, thou Child of Heaven, on him, rich
Maid ! who serves like Bharadvaja.

Give to the singer wealth with noble heroes, and upon us. bestow
wide-spreading glory,

HYMN LXVI. Maruts.

E’en to the wise let that be still a wonder to which the gene-
ral name of Cow is given.

The one hath swelled among mankind for milking : Prism
hath drained but once her fair bright udder.

2 They who like kindled flames of fire are glowing, the Maruts,

twice and thrice have waxen mighty.

Golden and dustless were their cars, invested with their great
strength and their heroic vigour.

3 They who are Sous of the rain-pouring Budra, whom the long-

lasting One had power to foster :

The Mighty Ones whose germ great Mother Prism is known
to have received for man’s advantage.

4 They shrink not from the birth ; in this same manner still

resting there they purge away reproaches.

When they have streamed forth, brilliant, at their pleasure,
with their own splendour they bedew their bodies.

5 Even those who bear the brave bold name of Maruts, whom

not the active quickly wins for milking.

Even the liberal wards not off those fierce ones, those who are
light and agile in their greatness.

6 Bharadvija : the great ancestor of the priestly family of which the Eishi
of the hymn was a member.

1 This meaning may be that while things of different nature are designated,
by the name of Cow, all that is so called has a claim to our wonder and ad-
miration. The Cow of earth yields her milk frequently and in abundance :
prisni, the Cow of the firmament, has given milk but once, when she brought
forth her offspring, the Maruts. ‘ Once only Prisni’s milk was shed : no second,
after this, is born* (VI, 48. 22), Sly ana’s interpretation is utterly inconsistent
with the plain meaning of the words of the text.

2 Twice and thrice : perhaps in relation to earth and heaven., and to earth,

firmament, and heaven,

4 Still retting there ; while yet unborn they free their mother from the
reproach of barrenness,

5 Wins for milking : persuades to grant bis petitions, The^ version of the'

second line is merely conjectural as the meaning of stating YrvpVmH v y
ftayana as 3 = stcn rfh, robbers) is unknown. ( The liberal donor 1 2 * 4 5 ■ 1 ■ ' 1 ■ : : S

Maruts who are otherwise in their might the resistless plunderers (of their
wealth),’ — Wilson.

ess THE HYMXS OP {BOOB VI

6 When, strong in strength and armed ■ with potent weapons,
they had united well-formed earth and heaven,

Rodasi stood among these furious Heroes like splendour shin-
ing with her native brightness*

, 7 No team of goats shall draw your ear, 0 Maruts, no horse ;
no charioteer be he who drives it.

Halting not, reinless, through the air it travels, speeding
along its paths through earth and heaven.

8 None may obstruct, none overtake, 0 Maruts, him whom ye

succour in the strife of battle

For sons and progeny, for kine and waters : he bursts the cow-
stall on the day of trial.

9 Bring a bright hymn to praise the band of Maruts, the Singers,

rapid, strong in native vigour,

Who conquer mighty strength with strength more mighty :
earth shakes in terror at their wars, 0 Agni.

10 Bright like the flashing flames of sacrifices, like tongues of fire

impetuous in their onset,

Chanting their psalm, singing aloud, like heroes, splendid from
birth, invincible, the Maruts.

11 That swelling band I call with invocation, the brood of Rudra,

armed with glittering lances.

Pure hymns are meet for that celestial army : like floods and
mountains have the Strong Ones battled.

HYMN LXVII. Mitra-Varuna.

Now Mitra-Varuna shall be exalted high by your songs, noblest
of all existing ;

They who, as ’twere with reins are best Controllers, unequalled
with their arms to check the people.

6 United: by obscuring the horizon with cloud and rain.

7 No feeble or ordinary team must convey you ; no common charioteer
must drive your chariot.

8 Bursts the cow-stall : carries away the enemy’s cattle.

10 Singing aloud : 1 causing their opponents to tremble/ according to S&yana,
who derives the word from the root dhU, to shake. Derived from dhvun, ‘to
sound, dhmiayah means singers, musicians, minstrels, leaders of the wild music
of the wind and storm (sturmer.— Ludwig). See Vedische Studien , I. 269.

11 Like floods and mountains : perhaps, with the impetuosity of rushing
waters and the firm strength of mountains. But the meaning of this last
half-line, as of many other passages of the hymn, is very obscure.

The hymn has been translated and thoroughly discussed by Peter von Bradke
(Festgruss an R. von Roth, 1893, pp. 117-125). See also Vedic Hymns I
36g — 372 Sacred Books of the East, XXXII). y ? A ’

MYMJSf 67.]

THE JUG YE DA.

639

2 To you Two Gods is this my thought extended, turned to the

sacred grass with loving homage.

Give us, 0 Mitra-Varuna, a dwelling safe from attack, which
ye shall guard, Boon-Givers !

3 Come hither, Mitra-Yaruna, invited with eulogies and loving

adoration,

Ye who with your own might, as Work-Controllers, urge even
men who quickly hear to labour.

4 Whom, of pure origin, like two strong horses, Aditi bore as

babes in proper season,

Whom, Mighty at your birth, the Mighty Goddess brought
forth as terrors to the mortal foeman.

5 As all the Gods in their great joy*and gladness gave you with

one accord your high dominion,

As ye surround both worlds, though wide and spacious, your
spies are ever true and ne’er bewildered.

6 So, through the days maintaining princely power, ye prop the

height as ’twere from loftiest heaven.

The Star of all the Gods, established, filleth the heaven and
earth with food of man who liveth.

7 Take the strong drink, to quaff till ye are sated, when he &nd

his attendants fill the chamber.

The young Maids brook not that none seeks to win them, when,
Quickeners of all ! they scatter moisture.

8 So with your tongue come evei% when your envoy, faithful

and very wise, attends our worship.

Nourished by "holy oil ! be this your glory : annihilate the
sacrificer’s trouble.

9 When, Mitra-Yaruna, they strive against you and break the

friendly laws ye have established,

They, neither Gods nor men in estimation, like Api’s sons have
godless sacrifices.

5 Your spies : messengers or angels, probably the rest of the Adityas. See
I. 2f>. 13.

6 The height; the high ridge or summit of heaven. The Star of all the
Gods ; representing all the G-ods : the Sun, He draws up the waters, which
descend to fertilize the earth.

7 Lie ; the worshipper ; or, perhaps, Soma, The chamber : of sacrifice.
The Young Maids; the water, necessary for the preparation of the Soma libation,
is ready and impatiently waiting to be used.

8 With your tongue ; Agni, by whose tongue of fire they consume the obla-
tions Your envoy ; Agni.

9 Like Apts sons ; e sons of the Waters,’ — Grassmann. The meaning is un-
certain, Godless sacrifices ; unattended by Gods, and therefore fruitless.

THE HYMNS OF

640

[BOOK VL

10 When singers in their song uplift their voices, some chant the

Nivid texts with steady purpose.

Then may we sing you lauds that shall be fruitful : do ye not
rival all the Gods in greatness ?

11 0 Mitra-Varuna, may your large bounty come to us hither,

near to this our dwelling,

When the kine haste to us, and when they harness the fleet-
foot mettled stallion for the battle,

HYMN LXVIII. Indra-Varuna.

His honouring rite whose grass is trimmed is offered swiftly
to you, in Manu’s wise, accordant,

The rite which Indra-Varuna shall Carry this day to high
success and glorious issue.

2 For at Gods’ worship they are best through vigour ; they have

become the strongest of the Heroes ;

With mighty strength, most liberal of the Princes, Chiefs of
the host, by Law made Vritra’s slayers.

3 Praise those Twain Gods for powers that merit worship, Indra

and Varuna, for bliss, the joyous.

One with his might and thunderbolt slays Vritra ; the other
as a Sage stands near in troubles,

4 Though dames and men have waxen strong and mighty, and

all the Gods self-praised among the Heroes,

Ye, Indra-Varuna, have in might surpassed them, and thus
were ye spread wide, 0 Earth and Heaven.

5 Righteous is he, and liberal and helpful who, Indra-Varuna,

brings you gifts with gladness.

That bounteous man through food shall conquer foemen, and
win him opulence and wealthy people.

6 May wealth which ye bestow in food and treasure on him who

brings you gifts and sacrifices,

Wealth, Gods ! which breaks the curse of those who vex us,
be, Indra-Varuna, e’en our own possession.

10 Nivid texts ; short formularies of invocation inserted in a liturgy.

11 When the kine haste to us : when the cattle of the men whom we are
about to attack are ready and eager to be carried off. S&yana’s interpretation
of the last line is totally different : ( when (your) praises are* uttered, and the
sacrifices add in the ceremony the Soma that inspires straightforwardness
and resolution, and is the showerer (of benefits).’ — Wilson.

3 In troubles : 1 in deeds of might/ — Ludwig. * With snares, or nooses/
according to Professor Geldner, Vedische Studien, X. 142.

4 Self-praised : on account of their own deeds, or their own nature.

HYMN 69,] THE R1GVEDA. 641

7 So also, Indra-Varuna, may our princes have riches swift to

save, with Gods to guard them —

They whose great might gives victory in battles, and their
triumphant glory spreads with swiftness.

8 Indra and Varuna, Gods whom we are lauding, mingle yo

wealth with our heroic glory.

May we, who praise the strength of what is mighty, pass
dangers, as with boats we cross the waters.

9 Now will I sing a dear and far-extending hymn to Varuna

the God, sublime, imperial Lord,

Who, mighty Governor, Eternal, as with flame, illumines both
wide worlds with majesty and power.

10 True to Law, Indra-Varuna, drillers of the juice, drink this

pressed Soma which shall give you rapturous joy.

• Your chariot cometh to the banquet of the Gods, to sacrifice,
as it were home, that ye may drink.

11 Indra and Varuna. drink your fill, ye Heroes, of this in-

vigorating sweetest Soma.

This juice is shed by us that ye may quaff it : on this trim-
med grass be seated, and rejoice you.

HYMN LXIX. Indra- Vishnu.

Indra and Vishnu, at my task’s completion I urge you on
with food and sacred service.

Accept the sacrifice and grant us riches, leading us on by
unobstructed pathways.

2 Ye who inspire all hymns, Indra and Vishnu, ye vessels who

contain the Soma juices,

May hymns of praise that now are sung address you, the lauds
that are recited by the singers.

3 Lords of joy-giving draughts, Indra and Vishnu, eome, giving

gifts of treasure, to the Soma.

With brilliant rays of hymns let chanted praises, repeated
with the lauds, adorn and deck you.

8 Of what is mighty : apparently, riches.

9 This stanza, in honour of Varuna alone, appears to be the beginning of
another hymn. Professor Grassmann banishes stanzas 9 and 10 to his Ap-
pendix,

1 A t my task's completion ; when all arrangements for the sacrifice have
been made,

2 ; Who .inspire : literally, ‘ the generators janitftrd. By the singers ; or,
* with laudations.’ -

41

m THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK YL

. 4 May your foe-conquering horses bring you hither, Indra and
Vishnu, sharers of the banquet.

^ Of all our hymns accept the invocations : list to my prayers
and hear the songs I sing you.

This your deed, Indra-Vishpu, must be lauded : widely ye
strode in the wild joy of Soma.

- Ye made the firmament of larger compass, and made the
regions broad for our existence,

6 Strengthened with sacred offerings, Indra-Vishnu, first eaters,
served with worship and oblation,

Fed with the holy oil, vouchsafe us riches : ye are the lake,
the vat that holds the Soma.

:7 Drink: of this meath, 0 Jndra, thou, and Vishnu ; drink ye
your .fill of Soma, Wonder-Workers.

, The sweet exhilarating juice hath reached you. Hear ye my
prayers, give ear unto- my calling.

*8 Ye Twain have conquered, ne’er have ye been conquered ;
never hath either of the Twain been vanquished.

* Ye* Indra-Vishnu, when ye fought the battle, produced this
infinite with three divisions.

HYMN LXX. Heaven and Harth.

Filleo full of fatness, compassing all things that be, wide,
spacious, dropping meath, beautiful in their form,

The Heaven and the Earth by Varuna’s decree, un wasting,
rich in germs, stand parted each from each.

% The Everlasting Pair, with full streams, rich in milk, in their
pure rule pour fatness for the pious man.

Ye who are Regents of this world, 0 Earth and Heaven, pour
into us the genial flow that prospers men.

3 Whoso, for righteous life, pours offerings to you, 0 Heaven
and Earth, ye Hemispheres, that man suceeds.

8 Produced this ignite : brought into existence the world with ail its crea-
tures, the three divisions being heaven, firmament, and earth. See Professor
Wilson s note for S&yana’s explanation of the passage.

The deities are Dy&v&prithivf, that is Dyaus, Heaven., and Prithivf, Earth*
combined in a compound dual.

1 I containing gh'itu, gM } clarified butter, fatness in general,

especially the fertilizing rain.

, a Pe HeinhpJto'es : dhuhme ; two bowls. * Firm* set/ —Wilson. JBu Lam;
m the course of nature. *

THE MOVE DA.

J3YMN 1 l.J

04$

He in his seed is born again and spreads by Law : from you
flow things diverse in form, but ruled alike.

3 4 Enclosed in fatness, Heaven and Earth are bright therewith ;
they mingle with the fatness which they still increase.

’ Wide, broad, set foremost at election of the priest, to them
the singers praj^ for bliss to further them,

‘ 5 May Heaven and Earth pour down the balmy rain for us,
balm-dropping, yielding balm, with balm upon your path,
Bestowing by your Godhead sacrifice and wealth, great fame
and strength for us and good heroic might.

6 May Heaven and Earth make food swell plenteously for ps,
all-knowing Father, Mother, wondrous in their works.
Pouring out bounties, may, in union, both the Worlds, alb
beneficial, send us gain, and power, and wealth.

HYMN LXXI. Savitar.

Full of effectual wisdom Savitar the God hath stretched out
golden arms that he may bring forth life.

Young and most skilful, while he holds the region tip, thp
Warrior sprinkles fatness over both his hands.

2 May we enjoy the noblest vivifying force of Savitar the God,

that he may give us wealth ;

For thou art mighty to produce and lull to rest the world of
life that moves on two feet and on four.

3 Protect our habitation, Savitar, this day, with guardian aids

around, auspicious, firm and true.

God of the golden tongue, keep us for newest bliss : let not
the evil-wisher have us in his power.

4 This Savitar the God, the golden-handed, Friend of the home,

hath risen to meet the twilight. '

With cheeks of brass, with pleasant tongue, the Holy, he sends
the worshipper rich gifts in plenty.

4 Set foremoat at election of the priest : ‘ first propitiated at the sacrifice/—
Wilson.

1 Savitar : the Sun as the great generator or vivifier. Sprinkles fatness:

Professor Ludwig thinks that this may be somewhat ironical 1 * * 4 The god
sprinkles his hands, probably, as a preparation for the hard work which he
is about to perform ; but there is an underlying thought that a good dealot

the fatness [in the shape of fertilizing rain] also falls down to the earth.

4 To meet the twilight : ‘at the close of night/- Wilson. Checks of brass:
ayohaauh ; according to SSyana, * golden -jawed.

644 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VI,

5 Like a Director, Savitar bath extended his golden arms, exceed'
ing fair to look on.

He hath gone up the heights of earth and heaven, and made
each monster fall and cease from troubling.

(j Fair wealth, 0 Savitar, to-day, to-morrow, fair wealth produce
for us each day that passes.

May we through this our song be happy gainers, God, of a
fair and spacious habitation;

HYMN LXXII. Indra-Soma,

Great is this might of yours, Indra and Soma : the first high
exploits were your own aehivements.

Ye found the Sun, ye found the light of heaven : ye killed all
darkness and the God^ blasphemers.

2 Ye, Indra-Soma, gave her light to Morning, and led the Sun

on high with all his splendour.

Ye stayed the heaven with a supporting pillar, and spread
abroad, apart, the Earth, the Mother,

3 Ye slew the flood-obstructing serpent Vritra, Indra and Soma:

Heaven approved your exploit.

Ye urged to speed the currents of the rivers, and many seas
have ye filled full with waters,

4 Ye in the unripe udders of the milch-kine have set the ripo

milk, Indra, thou, and Soma.

’ Ye have held fast the unimpeded whiteness within these many-
coloured moving creatures.

5 Verily ye bestow, Indra and Soma, wealth, famed, victorious,

passing to our children.

Ye have invested men, ye Mighty Beings, with manly strength
that conquers in the battle.

HYMN LXXIII. Brihaspati.

Served with oblations, first-born, mountain-render, Angiras’
son, Brihaspati, the Holy,

With twice-firm path, dwelling in light, our Father, roars
loudly, as a bull, to Earth and Heaven.

5 A Director ; a priest who directs others. Or, perhaps, ( an. Invoker/ as
Professor Ludwig suggests. Back monster: every terror of the night. S&yaua’s
interpretation of the last line is totally different : ‘ and, moving along,
delights every thing that is.’ — Wilson.

4 Ye in the unripe udders ; the unripe, that is raw, udders are contested
with the warm milk that is cooked or matured in them. See I. .62. 9, The
unimpeded whiteness : the milk which is not prevented f rom flowing. The
colour of the milk is contrasted with the colour of the cows that produce it,

1 Brihaspati ; Lord of Prayer ; the -Deity in whom the action of the worship-'

THE mo VEDA.

HtMN 75.]

m

2 Brihaspati, who made for such a people wide room and verge

when Gods were invocated,

„ Slaying his enemies, breaks down their castles, quelling his
foes and conquering those who hate him.

3 Brihaspati in war hath won rich treasures, hath won* this God,

the great stalls filled with cattle.

Striving to win waters and light, resistless, Brihaspati with
lightning smites the foeman.

HXMN LXXIV. Soma-Rudra,

Hold fast your Godlike sway, 0 Soma-Rudra ; let these our
sacrifices quickly reach you.

Placing in every house your seven great treasures, bring bless-
ing to our quadrupeds and bipBds.

2 Soma and Rudra, chase to every quarter the sickness that

hath visited our dwelling.

Drive Nirriti away into the distance, and give Us excellent
and happy glories.

3 Provide, 0 Soma-Rudra, for our bodies all needful medicines

to heal and cure us.

Set free and draw away the sin committed which we have
still inherent in our persons.

4 Armed with keen shafts and weapons, kind and loving, be

gracious unto us, Soma and Rudra.

Release us from the noose of Varuna; keep us from sorrow, in
your tender loving-kindness.

HYMN LX XV. Weapons of War.

" The warrior’s look is like a thunderous rain-cloud’s, when, aimed
with mail, he seeks the lap of battle.

Be thou victorious with unwounded body : so let the thickness
of thy mail protect thee. ,

2 With Bow let us win kine, with Bow the battle, with Bow be
victors in our hot encounters.

per upon the Gods is personified. See I. 14. 3. Mountain-render : 1 2 Brihaspati
cleft the mountain * (I. 62. S ). Dwelling in light; or, perhaps, in the Sun.
The meaning oi prdghurmasdd is uncertain.

2 Such a people: so good a people. When Gods were invocated : in battle.

3 With lightning : or with Sunlight : * with sacred prayers.’ — Wilson. '

1 Quadrupeds and bipeds : or, ‘ bless all of us, men and four-footed creatures.

2 Nirriti : the Goddess of Death and Destruction.

4 The noose of Varnna ; Varuna, the moral Governor of the world, is repre-
ented as armed with a noose or lasso for the capture and destruction of
the wicked.

m THE 11YMXS OF {BOOK VI.

The Bow brings grief and sorrow to the foeman ; armed #ith
the Bow may we subdue all regions,

3 Close to his ear, as fain to speak, She presses, holding her

well-loved Friend in her embraces.

Strained on the Bow, She whispers like a woman — this Bow-
string that preserves us in the combat,

4 These, meeting like a woman and her lover, bear, mother-like,

their child upon their bosom,

. May the two Bow-ends, starting swift asunder, scatter, in uni-
son, the foes who hate us.

5 With many a son, father of many daughters, He clangs and

clashes as he goes to battle.

Slang on the back, pouring his brood, the Quiver vanquishes
all opposing bands and armies.

6 Upstanding in the Car the skilful Charioteer guides his strong

Horses on whithersoe’er he will.

See and admire the strength of those controlling Reins which
from behind declare the will of him who drives.

7 Horses whose hoofs rain dust are neighing loudly, yoked to

the Chariots, showing forth their vigour.

With their forefeet descending on the foemen, they, never
flinching, trample and destroy them.

S Car-hearer is the name of his oblation, whereon are laid his
Weapons and his Armour.

So let us here, each day that passes, honour the helpful Car
with hearts exceeding joyful.

9 In sweet association lived the fathers who gave us life, profound
and strong in trouble,

Unwearied, armed with shafts and wondrous weapons, free,
real heroes, conquerors of armies.

3 She; the bowstring. Her well-loved friend : the arrow. Whispers lilted
woman ; * twangs like the scream of a woman.' — Muir. But the faint sound
made by the string while it is being drawn to the ear is intended. Homer
likens the sound to the voice of a swallow.

4 These: the two ends of the bow. Like a woman and kei* lover ; or, 1 draw-
ing close like two women to their lovers.’ Their child : the arrow.

5 With many a son ; the quiver is called the father of sons and daughters,

it is said, because tV ~-* r — * *«-*- - ■ ;■ are both masculine" and feminine,

8 Car-bearer ; ' . ?' stand, or truck on which the

chariot is placed when not in use. The word seems in this place to mean also
the oblation offered by the warrior to the ideal war-chariot personified, or to
a tutelary deity of chariots.

9 There is no verb in this stanza, and the only substantive, pitarahy fathers,
is, explained by both Commentators as p&layitdcuk, guards, defenders, that is,
apparently, those who attend the chariot of the chief. Professor Wilson, fob

THE MOVE DA,

HYMN 75,]

n?

10 The Br&hmans, and the Fathers meet for Soma-draughts* and,

graciously inclined, unequalled Heaven and Earth.

Guard us from evil, Pushan, guard us strengtheners of Law :
let not the evil-wisher master us.

1 1 Her tooth a deer, dressed in an eagle’s feathers, bound with“

cow-hide, launched forth, She flieth onward.

There where the heroes speed hither and thither, there may
the Arrows shelter and protect us.

12 Avoid us thou whose flight is straight, and let our bodies be"

as stone.

May Soma kindly speak to us, and Aditi protect us well.

13 He lays his blows upon their backs, he deals his blows upon

their thighs.

Thou, Whip, who urgest horses, drive sagacious horses in the
fray.

11 It compasses the arm with serpent windings, fending away the’
friction of the bowstring :

So may the Brace, well-skilled in all its duties, guard manfully
the man from every quarter.

15 Now to the Shaft with venom smeared, tipped with deer-horn,

with iron mouth,

Celestial, of Parjanya’s seed, be this great adoration paid.

16 Loosed from the Bowstring fly away, thou Arrow, sharpened

by our prayer.

Go to the foemen, strike them borne, and let not one be left alive.

owing S&y an a, translates : 4 The guards (of the chariot), revelling in the
savoury (spoil), distributors of food, protectors in calamity, armed with spears,
resolute, beautifully arranged, strong in arrows, invincible, of heroic valour,
robust, and conquerors of numerous hosts.’

10 The Brdhmans and the Fathers : or, perhaps, the sacerdotal Fathers.
The stanza, which is grammatically difficult, seems out of place.

11 Her tooth a deer : the point of the arrow is made of a piece of deer’s
horn attached to the shaft with leather strings. The butt of the arrow is
feathered.

13 He: the whip.

14 It : the brace or guard worn on the archer’s left arm, fastened on with
leather straps.

15 With venom smeared : by the Laws of Manu, that is, the ideal Code of
the M&navas, Kshatriyas were forbidden to poison their arrows. Arrows ap-
pear to have been of two kinds, one, the older and less effective, tipped with
de&r-horn, and the other with iron mouth } pointed with dyas, bronze or iron.
Celestial , of Parjanya's seed : made of the tall reeds that grow in the -Rains
under the influence of Parjanya the God of the rain -cloud.

16 Sharpened by our prayer : ‘ whetted by charm.'— Wilson.

[BOOK VI

048 TEE RIG VEDA.

17 There where the flights of Arrows fall like boys whose locks

are yet unshorn.

Even there may Brahmanaspati, and Aditi protect us well,
protect us well through all our days.

18 Thy vital parts I cover with thine Armour : with immortality

King Soma clothe thee.

Varuna give thee what is more than ample, and in thy triumph
may the Gods he joyful.

19 Whoso would kill us, whether he be a strange foe or one of us,
' May all the Gods discomfit him. My nearest, closest Mail is

prayer.

17 Like loys whose locks are yet unshorn : t tlie point of the comparison is
not very obvious, but it may mean that the arrows fall where they Hat, as
boys before they are left with the lock of hair, before the religious tonsure,
play about wherever they like.’ — Wilson. Professor Roth separates vigilcM
from Tcum&rft, and translates : ‘ Where the arrows fly, young and old ; that is,
feathered and unfeathered. ’

38 Thy vital parts : the t dr man, or coat of mail, protected the shoulders,
back, chest, and lower parts of the body. If not made of metal, it was
strengthened and adorned with metal of some kind. The Indians in the
army of Xerxes are said by Herodotus to have worn Ei/uara aw 6 %v\ojv
wewoirjjuiva, clothes made out of the bark of trees ( VII. 65) ; but he pro-
bably meant the common soldiers only, and not the chiefs. For a full des-
cription of the arms, offensive and defensive, used in Vedic times, see Muir,
0. S. Texts, V. 469 ; Altindixches Lebeiij pp. 293 — 301 ; or Butt’s History of
Civilization in Ancient India , I. p. 88.

APPENDIX I.

Page 174, Hymn CXXVL

1 subjoin a Latin version of the two stanzas omitted in my 4
translation. They are in a different metre from the rest of the
hymn, have no apparent connexion with what precedes, and look
like a fragment of a liberal shepherd’s love-song. The seventh
stanza should, it seems, precede the sixth :

6 [Hie loquitur]. Adhaerens, * arete adhaerens, ilia quae
mustelae similis se abdidit, multum humorem effundens, dat mihi
complexuum centum gaudia.

7 [Ilia loquitur]. Prope, prope accede ; moliiter me tango.
Ne putes pilos corporis mei paucos esse : tota sum villosa sicut
Gandharidum ovis.

Professor Ludwig thinks that Ydduri (multum humorem,
%. e semen genitale, effundens) may be the name of a slave-girl.
Gandhctridun ovis : a ewe of the GandMris. The country of
Gandhara is placed by Lassen to the west of the Indus and to the
douth of the Kophen or Kabul river. King Darius in a rock-
inscription mentions the Ga( n )ddra together with the Hi( n)du
as people subject to him, and the Gandarii, together with the
Parthians, Khorasmians, Sogdians, and Dadikae, are said by Hero-
dotus to have formed part of the army of Xerxes. The name of
the country is preserved in the modern Kandahar. See Muir,
Q. S. I'exts, ii, 342, and Zimmer, Altindisches Leben t p. 30.

Page 243, Hymn CLXXIX.

The deified object of this omitted hymn is said to be Rati or
Love, and its Rishis or authors are Lop&mudra, Agastya, and a
disciple. LopUmudra is represented as inviting the caresses of
her aged husband Agastya, and complaining of his coldness and
neglect. Agastya responds in stanza 3, and in the second half of

APPENDIX I.

mo

stanza 4 the disciple or the poet briefly tells the result of the
dialogue. Stanza 5 is supposed to be spoken by the disciple who
has overheard the conversation, but its connexion with the rest of
the hymn is not very apparent. In stanza 6 ‘ toiling with strong en-
deavour" is a paraphrase and not a translation of the original kha-
namdnali khanUraih (ligonibus fodiens) which Sayana explains by
* obtaining the desired result by means of lauds and sacrifices. 1

M. Bergaigne is of opinion that the hymn has a mystical
meaning, Agastya being identifiable with the celestial Soma whom.
Lopamudra, representing fervent Prayer, succeeds after long labour
in drawing down from his secret dwelling place. See La Religion
VMique, ii. 354 t

1 * Through many autumns have I toiled and laboured, at night
arid morn, through age-inducing dawnings.
k Old age impairs the beauty of our bodies. Let husbands still
come near unto their spouses.

5 For even the men aforetime, la w-ful fillers, who with the Gods
.declared eternal statutes, —

* They have decided, but have not accomplished : so now let
wives come near unto their husbands.

3 £Ton inutilis est labor cui Dii favent : nos omnes aemulos et

aemulas vineamus.

Superemus in hac centum artium pugna in qua duas partes
.eonvenientes utrinque commovemus.

4 Cupido me cepit illius tauri [viri] qui me despicit, utrum hinc

utmna illinc ab aliqua parte nata sit.

Lopamudra taurum [maritum suum] ad se detrahit ; insipiens
ilia sapientem anhelantem absorbet.

5 This Soma I address that is most near us, that which hath

been imbibed within the spirit,

To pardon any sins we have committed. Verily mortal man
is full of longings.

6 Agastya thus, toiling with strong endeavour, wishing for child-

ren, progeny and power,

Cherished — a sage of mighty strength — both classes, and with
the (3ods obtained his prayer's fulfilment.

By 4 both classes * probably priests and princes, or institutors
of sacrifices, are meant. M. Bergaigne understands the expression to
mean the two forms or essences of Soma, the celestial and the
terrestrial

APPENDIX II.

Metre,

Rhyme is not used in the Rigveda, The metres are regulated
• by the number of syllables in the stanza, which consists generally'
I of three or four Pad as, measures, divisions, or quarter verses, with
 a distinctly marked interval at the end of the second Pada, and
so forming two hemistichs or semi-stanzas of equal or unequal
j length. These Padas most usually contain eight or eleven or
twelve syllables eaeh ; but occasionally they consist of fewer and
sometimes of more than these numbers. The Padas of a stanza
are generally of equal length and of more or less corresponding-
prosodiai quantities ; but sometimes two or more kinds of metre
are employed in one stanza, and then the Padas vary in quantity
and length. As regards quantity, the first syllables of the P&da
are not subject to very strict laws, but tbe last four are more
regular, their measure being generally iambic in P&das of eight .
I and of twelve syllables and trochaic in those of eleven. . In the
> printed text the first and second Padas form one line, and the third, .
 or third and forth, or third, fourth, and fifth, complete the distich
\or stanza. This arrangement I have followed in my translation.

Subjoined, in alphabetical arrangement, are the names, with
brief descriptions, of the metres used in the Hymns of the Rigyeda, *
The Index of Hymns will show the metre or metres employed in
each Hymn.

Abhisdrini : a species of Trishtup, in which two P&das contain
twelve instead of eleven syllables.

Anushtupi or Anushtubh : consisting of four Padas of eight syl-
lables each, two P&das forming a line. This is the prevailing
form of nmtre in the M&nava-dhama-sastra> the Mahabharata,
the Ram&yana, and the Puranas,

(552

AKF^Nbix tr.

Anmiilubgarbhd : a metre of the Ushnih class; the first P&da
containing five syllables; and the three following Padas eight
syllables each.

Anushiup Pipilika madfiyd : a species of Anush tup having the second

, F&da shorter than the first 'and third (8 syllables + 4 + 8 + S).

Ashti: consisting of four P&das of sixteen syllables each, or sixty-
four syllables in the stanza,

AstdrapanJdi : consisting of two Padas of eight syllables each,
followed by two Padas of twelve syllables each.

o

Alidhriti : four Padas of nineteen syllables each, = 76 syllables,

Atijagati: four Padas of thirteen syllables each*

Atinichrit: consisting of three Padas containing repectively seven,

• six, and seven syllables*

Atifdkvart: four P&das of fifteen syllables each.

Aty ashti : four P&das of seventeen syllables each,

Erihati : four Padas (8 + 8 + 12 + 8) containing 36 syllables in the
stanza,

Chaturvinsatiled Doipadd: a Dvipada containing 24 syllables in-
stead of 20.

Dhpti : consisting of seventy-two syllables in a stanza.

Evipadd Virdj ; a species of Gayatri consisting of two Padas only
(12 + 8 or 10+10 syllables); inadequately represented in the
translation by two decasyllabic iambic lines,

Ehapadd Trishtup: a Trishtup consisting of a single Pada or
quarter stanza.

Ehapadd Virdj : a Viraj consisting of a single Pada.

Gdyatrt: the stanza usually consists of twenty-four syllables,
variously arranged, but generally as a triplet of three P&das
of eight syllables each, or in one line of sixteen syllables and a

METRE.

653

second line of eight. There are eleven varieties of this metre,
and the number of syllables in the stanza varies accord ingly
from nineteen to thirty-three.

Jagctli : a metre consisting of forty-eight syllables arranged in
four PMas of twelve syllables each, two PMas forming a line or
hemistich which in the translation is represented by a double
Alexandrine.

Kakup or Kahubh : a metre of three Padas consisting of eight,
twelve, and eight syllables respectively.

9

Kahubh Nyankusird : consisting of three Padas of 9 + 12 + 4
syllables.

Kriti : a metre of four Padas of twenty syllables each.

Madhyejyotis : a metre in which a Pad a of eight syllables stands
between two Padas of twelve.

Mahdbrihati ; four Padas of eight syllables each, followed j^y one
of twelve.

Mahdpadapankti : a two-lined metre of thirty-one syllables, the
first line consisting of four Padas of five syllables each, and the
second being a Trishtup of the usual eleven syllables. Sea
Yedic Hymns, Part I. (S. Books of the East, XXXII), p. xcviii,

Mahdpankti : a metre of forty-eight syllables (8 x 6 or 12 x 4),

Mahdsatobnhctti : a lengthened form of Satobrihat*.

Nashtardpi ; a variety of Anushtup.

Nyankus&rini : a metre of four Padas of 8 + 12 + 8 + 8 syllables,

Pddanichrit : a variety of Gayatri in which one syllable is want-
ing in each Pada : 7x3 = 21 syllables.

PadapanHi: a metre consisting of five Padas of five syllables
each.

Pankti : a metre of five octosyllabic PMas, like Anushtup with
an additional Pada.

m

APPEXViX it 4

Panhtyuttard : a metre which ends with a Pankti of 5 + 5 sylla-
bles*

PipiWcamadhyd : any metre the middle PMa of which is shorter
than the preceding and the following,

Prdg&tka : a metre in Book VIII. consisting of strophes combining
v two verses, viz. a Brihati or Kakup followed by a SatobrihatL

Prastdr apart hi : a metre of forty syllables : 12 + 12 + 8 + 8.

PratishtM t a metre of four Padas of four syllables each ; also a
variety of the Gayatri consisting of three Padas of eighty seven,

- and six syllables respectively.

Purastddbrihati : a variety of Brihati with twelve syllables in the
first P&da.

Pura-ushnih : a metre of three Padas, containing 12 + 8 + 8 sylla-
bles.

Sakvari : a metre of four Padas of fourteen syllables each.

fiatobrihati : a metre whose even Padas contain eight syllables,
each, and the uneven twelve : 12 + 8 + 12 + 8=- 40.

fSJcandhogriva : consisting of four Padas of 8 + 12+8 + 8 syllables.

Tanusird : consisting of three Padas of 11 + 11 + 6 syllabus.

Trishtup or Trishiubh : a metre of four Padas of eleven syllables
each.

Uparisktddbrihati : consisting of four P&das of 12 + 8 + 8 + 8
syllables.

Uparishtdjjyotis : a Trishtup stanza the last Pada of which con-
tains unly eight syllables.

Urdkvabrihati : a variety of Brihati.

Urobrikati : a variety of Brihati : 8+12 + S + 8 syllables.

U shniggarhhd : a Gayatri of three P&das of six, seven, and eleven
syllables respectively.

tfshnih ; consisting of three Padas of 8 4 * 8 + 12 syllables*

Vardhamdnd : a species of Gayatrl : (>+7 + 8=2! syllables

Yiparitd : a metre of four Padas resembling VishtarapanktL

Virddrdpd ; a Trishtup metre of four Padas, 11 + 11+11+7 or
8 syllables.

Vir&j : a metre of four Padas of ten syllables each.

Yirdtptirvd : a variety of Trishtup..

Viratsthdnd : a variety of Trishtup.

Vishamapadd : metre of uneven stanzas-.

Yisht&rabrihatt : a form of Brihati of four Padas containing 8 +
10 + 10 + 8 = 36 syllables.

Yishtdrapankti : a form of Pankti consisting of four Padas of 8 :
+ 12 + 12 + 8 — 40 syllables.

Yavamadhyd ; a metre having a longer Pada between two shorter

ones*

Hymn,

INDEX OF HYMNS.

BOOK I.

Rishi. Deity,

1 Madhuch*

chhand&s. Agni.

2 The same. Ydyu. Indra-Varuna.

Mitra-Varuna,

3 Asvins. Indra. Yisvedevas.

Sarasvati,

4 Indra.

5 Indra.

6 ........ . Ind ra, Mar uts, Indra and

Maruts.

7 Indra.

8 The same.

9 •

10

11 Jetar or Jetd

12 Medh&tithi. Agni.

13 The same. Aprls.

14 Yisvedevas.

15 Kitus. Indra. Maruts. Tvash-

tar. Agni. Mitra-Yaruna.
Asvins.

16 Indra.

17 Indra-Varuna.

18 Brahmauaspati. Indra and

Soma. DakshinA

19 Agni and Maruts.

20 Bibhus.

21 Indra -Agni. . -

22 . Asvins. Savitar. Agni. In-

dr&ni, Varun&ni, and Ag-
n&y£. Heaven and Earth.
Earth. Vishnu.

28 MedMtithi. V&yu. Indra- V&yu. Mitra-

Varuna. Visvedevas. Pd-
shan. Waters.

24 Sunahsepa. Varuna. Agni. Savitar.

25 The same. . Varuna,

26 ......... Agni.

Metre .

G&yatri.

The same.

Anushtup*
The same.
G&yatri.
The same,
4 -

G&yatrl. 4, 5 P4daniekrit,
G&yatri.

The same.

Gayatrl. 19 Pura-ushnih. 20
Anushtup. 21 Pratishtha,
22-24 Anushtup.
Trishtup. 3-5 Gdyatri,'
GSyatri.

The, same.

42

P Jtishi

27 Sunahsepa.

28 The same

29

30 .

31 HiranyastOpa,
82 The same.

33

34

35

86 Kanra.

37 The same.

38

39

40

41

42

43

44 Praskanva.

45 The same.

46

47

48

49 „

50

51 Savya.

52 The same.

53

54

55

56

57

58 Nodhas,

59 The same,

60

61

62

Deity,

Indra. Visvedevas.

Indra. Pestle and Mortar.
Indra,

Indra. Asvin3, Ushas.

Agni.

Indra.

The same*

Asvins.

Savitar, Agni. Mitra-Ya-
runa. Night.

Agni, 13-14 Sacrificial Post.

Maruts.

. Maruts.

The same.

Brahmanaspati.
Varuna-Mitra-Aryaman.

Adityas.

POshan.

Budra. Mitra-Yaruna. Sc
Agni.

Agni.

Asvins.

The same,

Ushas,

The same,

SOrya.

Indra.

The same.

Agni.

Agni YaisvAnara.
Agni.

Indra
The same.

Metre.

G&yatri. 13 Trishtup.
Anushtup. 7-9 G&yatri,
Pankti.

G&yatri. 11 P&danichrit. 16
Trishtup.

Jagatf. 8, 16, 18 Trishtup,
Trishtup.

The same.

Jagati. 9 and 12 Trishtup.
Trishtup. 1 and 9 Jagati.

Brihati and Satobrihati
alternately.

G&yatri.

The same,

Brihati and Satobrihati
alternately.

The same,

G&yatri,

The same.

G&yatrl 9 Anushtup.
Brihati and S atobrihati
alternately.

Anushtup.

GSyatri.

Brihati and Satobrihati
alternately.

The same.

Anushtup. *

G&yatri. 10-13 Anushtup,
Jagati. 14-15 Trishtup,
Jagati. 13 and 15 Trishtup,
Jagati. 10 and 11 Trishtup,
Jagati. 6,8,9,11 Trishtup,
Jagati.

The same.

Jagati. 6-9 Trishtup,
Trishtup.

The same,

INDEX OF HYMNS,

Deity. Metre.

Trishtup.

Jagati. 15 Trishtup*
Dvipadd Viriij.

The same.

69 ........ .

70

71 Trishtup,

72 The same.

78 ..

. 74 Gotama. * G&yatH. •

75 The same. The same,

76 Trishtup.

77 * The same.

78 Gdyatri

79 1-8 Trishtup. 4-6 Ushnih.

7-12 Gdyatri.

80 Indra. Pankti.

81 The same. The same.

82 ......... Pankti. 6 Jagatt

.83 Jagatt.

84 1-6 Anush tup. 7-9 Ushnih,

10-12 Pankti ; 13-15 Gd-
yatrt. 16-18 Trishtup. 19
Brihati 20 Satobrihatt,

85 Gotama. Maruts. Jagatt. 5 and 12 Trishtup.

86 The same. The same. GdyatrL

87 ......... J agati

8$ 1 and 6 Prastdrapankti. 5

Viradrupd. 2-4 Trishtup.

89 Visvedevaa. Jagatt. 6 Virdtsfchdnd, 8-10

Trishtup.

90 .. The same. G&yatrl. 9 Anush tup.-

91 Soma. Trishtup. 5-16 Gdyatrh IT

Ushnih.

92 ITshas. Asvins. Jagati. 5-12 Trishtup. 13-

18 Ushnih.

*93 ......... Agni-Soma. Anush tup. 9-11 Gdyatri.

4-7 and 12 Trishtup. &
Trishtup and Jagati.

$4 Rutsa. Agni. Gods. Mitra, Varuna, Jagati 15 and 16 Trishtup*

Aditi, Sindhu, Heaven and
Earth,

Agni

kC{

63 Nodhds.

64 The same

65 Pardsara.

66 The same.

67

68

Indra.

Maruts.

Agni.

The same.

59 The same,

Trishtup,

m

ItfDEX OF HYMNS,

S JRishi. Deity, Metre ,

tel

96 Kutsa.

Agni.

Trishtup.

97 The same

The same.

G^yatri.

98

..

Trishtup,

99 Kasyapa,

The same.

300 Ifcir&sva, and

Indra.

others.

1.01 Kutsa.

The same.

Jagati. 8-12 Trishtup,

302 The same.

Jagati. 11 Trishtup.

103

Trishtup.

104

The same.

305 The same, or
Trita Aptya,

Vxsvedevas,

Pankti. 8 Mah&brihati. Ya*

vamadhyA 39 Trishtup,

306 Kutsa.

The same.

Jagati 7 Trishtup,

107 The same.

Trishtup,

108 .........

Indra- Agni,

The sam^t

1Q9

The same,

'410

IJibhus.

Jagatit. 8 and 9 Trishtup,

Ill .....

The same,

Jagati. 5 Trishtup.

112 Kutsa.

Heaven and Earth. Asvins
Agni.

. Jagati, 24 and 25 Trishtup,

113 ,

Ushas. Ushas and Hight.

Trishtup.

314

Rudra.

Jagati. 10 and 31 Trishtup,

ii*

Buryat

Trishtup,

116 KakahivAn.

Asvins.

The same.

117 The same.

The same,

118

119

Jagati.

m

J, 10-12 G&yatrh 2 Kakup.
3 KftvirAj. 4 NashtarOpf,
5 TanusirA 6 Ushnih. j
Visht&rabrihati 8 Kriti.
9 Yirjj.

121

Visvedevas or Indra,

Trishtup.

122

Visvedevas

Trishtup. 5 and 6 Vir&drOpd,

123

Ushas.

Trishtup,

324

The same,

Trishtup.

125 ........

Svanaya.

Trishtup, 4, 5 Jagati.

126 Kakshivdn,

Bh&vayavya. RomasA

Trishtup. 6 and 7 Anush tup,

BMvayavya,

R omas A

127 Faruchchhepa.

Agni.

Atyashti. 6 Atidhriti,

328 The same.

The same.

Atyashti.

329

Indra, Indu,

Atyashti, 8, 9 Atlsakvart

J1 Ashti,

teJBEX of Hymns.

0fll

jvnan*. jLscii>y* JMwrc.

130 Paruchchhepa. Indra. Atyashti. 10 Trishtup.

131 The same The same* Atyashti.

132 *... Indra. Indra and Parvata. The same.

133 Indra. Trishtup. 2-4 Anush tup. 5

G&yatrt 6 Dhriti. 7 Aty-
ashti.

134 V&yu. Atyashti. 6 Ashtt

135 V&yu. V&yu and Indra. Atyashti 7, 8 Ashti

136 Mitra and Vanina. Atyashti. 7 Trishtup,

137 Mitra and Varuna. Atisakvart

138 Pftshan. Atyashti.

139 Visvedevas. Mitra ancfVaru- Atyashti OBrihatt. 11 Tmh-

na, Asvins. Indra. Agni. tup.

Maruts. Indra and Agni.

Brihaspati.

140 Dtrghatamas. Agni. Jagatt 10 Trishtup or Jaga-

tt 12, 13 Trishtup.

141 The same. The same. Jagatt 12, 13 Trishtup.

142 Aprls. Indra. Agni. Anush tup.

143 ......... Agni. Jagatt. 8 Trishtup.

144 The same. Jagatt.

145 Jagatt 5 Trishtup.

146 .. Trishtup.

147 ......... The same.

148

149 Virftj.

150 Ushnih.

151 Mitra. Mitra and Varuna. Jagatt.

152 Mitra and Varuna. Trishtup.

153 The same. The same.

154 ......... Vishnu.

155 Vishnu and Indra. Vishnu. Jagatt

156 Vishnu. The same.

157 Asvins. Jagatt 5, 6 Trishtup.

158 .... The same. Trishtup. 6 Anush tup.

159 Heaven and Barth. Jagatt.

160 The same. The same.

161 ......... Bibhus. Jagatt 14 Trishtup.

162 Eulogy of the Horse. Trishtup. 3, 6 Jagatt

163 ......... The same. Trishtup.

164 Visvedevas. V&k. Waters, Trishtup. 12, 15, 23, 29, 36,41

Soma. Agni. Surya. V&yu. Jagatt 42 Prast&rapankti.
Time. Saras vatt Sadhyas. 51 Anush tup.

Saras v^n or Surya.

662

INDEX OF HYMN#,

^ j Ritshi.

Deity ,

Metre.

ft}

166 Indra. Maruts.

Indra.

Trishtup.

Agastya.

166 Agastya.

Maruts.

Jagati. 14, 15 Trishtup.

167 The same.

Indra Maruts.

Trishtup.

168

Maruts.

Jagati 8-10 Trishtup.

169 ...

Indra.

Trishtup. 2 VirAj.

170 Indra- Agastya.

Indra.

1 Brihati. 2-4 Anushtup.

5 Trishtup.

171 Agastya.

Maruts. Indra.

Trishtup.

172 The same.

Maruts.

G&yatri.

173

Indra.

Trishtup.

174

The same *

Trishtup.

176

Anushtup. 1 Skandhogrivi,
6 Trishtup.

176

Anushtup. 6_Trishtup.

177

Trishtup.

178

The same.

179 Lop&mudra Ag- Eati (Pleasure),

Trishtup. 5 Brihati.

astya. Pupil.

180 Agastya.

Asvins.

Trishtup.

181 The same.

The same.

The same.

182 .

Jagati. 6, 8 Trishtup.

183

Trishtup.

184 ..

The same.

185

Heaven and Earth.

186

Visvedevas.

187

Praise of Food.

1 Anushtubgarbhd. 2, 4,

8, 10 G&yatrl 3, 5, 6, 7
Anushtup or Brihati.

188

Aprls,

G&yatrl.

189

Agni.

Trishtup.

190

Brihaspati.

The same.

191

Water. Grass. Sttrya,

BOOK II.

Anushtup. 10-12 MalApank
ti. 13 Mah&brihati,

1 Gritsamada.

Agni.

Jagati,

2 The same.

The same.

The same.

3

Apris.

Trishtup, 7 Jagati

4 Som&huti.

Agni.

Trishtup.

5 The same

The same,

Anushtup,

6

Gayatri.

7

The same,

8 Gritsamada.

.........

G&y&tvi. 6 Anushtup,

INDEX OF HTMNS.

i Itishi. Deity . Metre .

tel

9 Gritsamada. Agni. Trishtup.

10 The same. The same The same.

11 Indra. * Vir&tstMn& Trishtup.

* 21 Trishtup.

12 The same. Trishtup,

13 Jagati 13 Trishtup.

14 Trishtup.

15 ......... The same.

16 ......... Jagati. 9 Trishtup.

17 ... ., Jagati 8, 9 Trishtup.

18 Trishtup.

19 * The same.

20 ......... Trishtup. 3 Vir&drup3L

21 Jagatt. 6 Trishtup.

22 Ashti. 2,3 Atisakvari. 4 Ati-

sakvari or Ashti.

23 ......... Brahmapaspati. Brihaspati. Jagati. 15, 19 Trishtup.

24 Brahmapaspati. Brahmapas- Jagati. 12, 16 Trishtup.

pati and Indra.

25 Brahmanaspati, Jagati.

26 The same. The same.

27 Kurma. Grit- Adityas. Trishtup.

samada’s son,
or Gritsamada,

28 The same. Varuna. The same,

29 Visvedevas.

30 Gritsamada, Indra. Indra and Soma. Sa- Trishtup. 15 Jagati,

rasvatL Brihaspati. Maruts.

31 The same, Visvedevas. Jagati. 7 Trishtup.

32 Heaven and Earth. Indra or Jagati. 6-8 Anushtup,

Tvashtar. Sinivftlt

33 Budra. Trishtup.

34 Maruts. Jagati. 15 Trishtup.

35 .... Ap&mnap&t. Trishtup,

36 .. Ritus. * Jagati

37 The same. The same.

38 Savitar, Trishtup,

39 Asvins. Trishtup.

40 Soma and Rushan, Aditi. The same.

41 V&yu. Indraand V&yu. Mitra G&yatrt 16, 17 Anushtup,

and Varuna. Asvins. Indra. 18 Brihati.

Visvedevas. Sarasvatl.

42 The Kapinjala. Trishtup. [Ashti,

43 The same. 1-3 Jagati. 2 Atisakvari or

064

OTEX OP HTMm

§ Jtishi.

t

BOOK in.

*

Deity.

Metre.

1 Visv&mitra,

Agni,

Trishtup,

2 The same.

VaisvAnara.

JagatL

3

The same.

The same.

4

Apris.

Triahtup.

5

Agni.

The same.

6 .........

The same.

7 Visv&mitra.

Agni.

8 The same.

Yftpa. Yisvedevas.

Trishtup. 3, 7 Anushtup.

9

Agni.

Brihati. 9 Trishtup.

10

The same.

Ushnih.

11

r

G&yatrt.

12

Indra and Agni.

The same.

13 Riahabha.

Agni.

Anushtup.

. 14 The same.

The same.

Trishtup.

15 Utkfla.

„

The same.

16 The same.

Brihati and Satobrihati.

17 Kata.

Trishtup.

18 The same.

The same.

19 G&thin.

20 The same.

Yisvedevas. Agni,

21

Agni.

3, 4 Trishtup. 2,3 Anushtup.
5 Vir&dnipA Satobrihati.

22

The same.

Trishtup. 4 Anushtup.

23 Devasravas and

Devav&ta.

Triahtup. 3 Satobrihatt

24 VisvAmitra.

GAyatrl 1 Anushtup.

25 The same.

Agni. Agni and Indra.

Yir&j,

26

Vaisv&nara. Agni. Maruts.

1-6 Jagatl, 7-9 Trishtup.

27

Agni. *

GAyatrl.

28

The same.

1, 2, 6 GAyatrl. 3 Ushnih.

4 Trishtup. 5 Jagatl.

29

Trishtup. 1, 4, 10. 12 Anush-
tup. 6, 11, 14, 15 Jagatt,

30

Indra.

Trishtup.

31

The same.

The same.

82

38 Visv&mitra. The The Rivers. Yisv&mitra.
Rivers. Indra.

Trishtup. 13 Anush hip.

34 Yisv&mitra,

Indra.

Trishtup,

35 The same.

36

The same.

The same.

87

GAyatrl, 11 Anushtup,

IHD8X OP HYMNS,

666

1!, RiaM*

to

Deity*

Metre*

38 Praj&pati, or

Indra.

Trishtup.

Visv&mitra.

39 Yisvtoitra.

The same. 1 *

The same.

40 The same.

G&yatrh

41 .........

42

The same.

43

Trishtup,

44

Brihati.

45

The same.

46

Trishtup.

47

48

The same.

49

50

51

1-3 Jagatl. 4-9 Triafitvfp,
10-12 G&yatrf.

52

1-4 Gdyatri. 5, 7, 8 Trishtup.
6 Jagatt.

53

Indra, Parvata, Yak.

Trishtup. 10, 1 6 Jagatt. 13
Gdyatrt. 12, 20, 22 Anush-
tup. 18 Brihatt.

54 Praj&pati.

Visvedevas.

Trishtup.

55 The same.

The same.

The same.

56

57 Visv&mitra.

58 The same.

Asvins.

59

Mitra.

Trishtup, 6-9 Gdyatrt.

60

Pibhus. Indra.

Jagati.

61

Ushas (Dawn).

Trishtup.

62

Indra and Yaruna. Brihas- 1-3 Trishtup. 4-18. GAyatrf,
pati. PQshan. Savitar.

Soma. Mitra and Yaruna.

BOOK IV.

1 V&madeva,

Agni. Yaruna,

Trishtup, 1 Ashti. 2 Atija-
gatt. 3 Dhriti,

2 The same.

Agni.

Trishtup.

3

The same.

The same.

4 .........

Agni Rakshohd.

5

Agni Vaisvdnara.

6 .........

Agni.

7

The same.

1 Jagatt. 2-6 Anushtup, 7-11
Trishtup.

666 INDEX OF HYMNS.

I SUM.

Deity.

Metre.

8 VAmadeva.

Agni.

GAyatri.

9 The same.

The same.

The same.

10

Padapankti. 5 MahApada-
pankti. 8 Ushnih,

11

Trishtup.

12

The same.

18

14

15

Agni. Somaka. Asvins.

GAyatri,

16

Indra.

Trishtup.

17

The same. r

Trishtup, 15 EkapadA VirAj .

18 Indra. Aditi.

Indra. Aditi. VAmadeva.

Trishtup.

VAmadeva.

19 VAmadeva,

Indra.

The same.

$0 The same.

The same.

21

22

23 „

...... .<4

24

Trishtup. 10 Anush tup.

25

Trishtup.

26

Indra The Falcon.

The same.

27

The Falcon.

Trishtup. 3 Sakvari,

28

Indra and Soma.

Trishtup.

29

Indra.

The same.

30

Indra and Uskas.

GAyatri. 8, 24, Anushtup.

31

Indra.

GAyatrl. 3 PAdanichrii,

32

Indra. Indra’s Horses.

GAyatri.

SS

Eibhus,

Trishtup.

34

The same,

The same.

35

36

Jagatl. 9 Trishtup.

37

1-4 Trishtup. 5-8 Anushtup.

38

Heaven and Earth. Dadhi-
krAs.

Trishtup,

39

DadhikrAs.

Trishtup. 6 Anushtup,

40

DadhikrAs. Sarya.

1 Trishtup. 2-5 Jagatt,

41

Indra and Varuna.

Trishtup.

42 Trasadasyu,

Trasadasyu. Indra and

The same.

Varuna.

43 Purumllhaand
Ajamilha.

Asvins,

44 The same

The same.

i5 VAmadeva,

tfagati, 7 Trishtup,

INDEX of hymns.

Is Rkhi.
£

46 V&madeva.

47 The same,

48

49

50

51

52

53

54

55 '

56

57

58

Deity.

Vayu. Indra and Vayu.
The same,

V&yu.

Indra and Brihaspati.
Brihaspati. Indra and
Brihaspati.

Ushas (Dawn).

The same.

Savitar.

The same.

Visvedevas.

Heaven and Earth.
Kshefcrapati, Suna. Suna
and Sira. Sith

Agni, or Surya, or Waters,
or Cows, or Ghrita.

667 ’

Metre.

G&yatrl.

Anushtup.

The same.

(Myatri.

Trishtup. 10 Jagati,

Trishtup.

Gdyatri.

Jagati.

Jagati. 6 Trishtup.

Trishtup. 8-10 G&yatrf.
Trishtup, 5-7 G&yatri.

1, 4, 6, 7 Anushtup. 2, 3, 8
Trishtup. 5 Pura-ushnih,

Trishtup. 11 Jagati.

BOOK V.

1 Budha and Ga- Agni. Trishtup.

vishthira.

2 Kum&raorVrisa. The same. Trishtup. 12 Sakvari.

3 Vasusruta, Agni. Maruts. Rudra Trishtup.

and Vishnu,

4 The same, Agni. The same.

5 Apris, G&yatri.

6 Agni. Pankti.

7 Isha. The same, Anushtup, 10 Pankti.

8 The same. Jagati.

9 Gaya, Anushtup. 5, 7 Pankti.

10 The same, Anushtup. 4, 7 Pankti,

11 Sutambhara Jagati.

12 The same, Trishtup.

13 ......... G&yatrl.

14 The same,

15 Dharuna. Trishtup.

16 Puru. ......... Anushtup, 5 Pankti.

17 The same. The same.

18 Dvita.

19 Yavri. 1, 2 G&yatri, 3, 4 Anushtup,

5 Vivadrttpa.

20 Prayasvat# Anushtup. 4 Pankti.

m

S Rukii

bq

21 Sasa.

22 Viflvas&man,

23 Dyumna Visva-

charahanl

24 Gaup&yanasor

Laup&yanas.

25 Vashyus.

26 The same,

27 Tryaruna Trasa-

dasyuj and As-
vamedha, or
Atri.

28 Vi§vav&r&.

29 Gauriviti.

30 Rabbru.

81 Avasyu.

32 GWtu.

33 Samvarana.

84 The same*

35 PrabhftvasU*

36 The same,

37 Atri Bhauma.

38 The same.

39

40

41

42

43 ......

44 Avats&ra and

others.

45 Sad&prina,

46 Pratikshatra.

47 Pratiratha.

48 PratibMnu.

49 Pratiprabha.

50 Svasfci.

51 The same.

ItfDEX OP HYM'tfS.

Deity*

Agm.

The same.

Agni. Visvedevas.
Agm. Indra and Agni,

Agni,

Indra. Indra or tfsanA
Indra.

The same.

Indra. Surya. Atri.

Visvedevas.

VijjvedSvas. Rudra.

Visvedevas.

The same.

Yisvedevas. Consorts of
the Gods.

Yisvedevas.

The same.

Metre,

Anushtup. 4 Pankti.
The same.

Dvipada Vir&j.

Anushtup#

G&yatrl

Trishtup. 4-6 Anushtup.

1, 3 Trishtup. 2 Jagatl 4
Anushtup. 5, 6 Gay atri,
Trishtup*

The same.

Jagatl 9 Trishtup.

Anushtup. 8 Pankti.
Trishtup. 3 Jagatt.

Trishtup.

Anushtup.

Anushtup. 5 Pankti.

1, 3 Ushnih. 4 Trishtup.
5-9 Anushtup. 6-8 Trish-

fop-

Trishtup, 3 6, 17 Ati jagatl
20 Ekapadd Viraj.

Trishtup. 1 7 Ekapada Viraj. -
Trishtup. 16 Ekapada Viraj.
Trishtup.

Jagatl 14, 15 Trishtup.
Trishtup.

Jagatl 2, 8 Trishtup.

Jagatt.

Trishtup.

Anushtup. 5 Pankti.

1-4 Gayatri. 5-10 Ushnikll-
13 Jagatt or Trishtup. 14,
15 Anushtup,

INDEX OF HYMNS,

669

(? Rlshi.

sj*

Deity .

Metre,

52 Sy&v&sva,

Mamts.

Anush tup. 6, 16, 17 Pankti,

53 The game.

The same.

1, 5, 10, 11, 15 Kakup. 2
Brihath 3 Anushtup. 4
Pura-ushnih. 6, 7, 9, 13,

■ -14, 16 Sfttobfihatl. 8, 1%
G&yatr t.

54 ,

Jagati. 14 Trishtup.

55 ..

Jagati. 10 Trishtup.

56

Brihatt. 3, 7 SatobrihatJ.

57

Jagati. 7, 8 Trishtup,

58

Trishtup.

59

Jagati. 8. Trishtup.

60

Trishtup. 7, 8 Jagatt.

61 ,

Mftruts and others.

G&yatri. 5 Anushtup. 9
Satobrihati,

62 Srutavid.

Mitra and Yaruna,

Trishtup.

63 Archan&nas.

The same.

Jagati.

64 The same,

,

Anushtup. 7 Pankti,

65 R£tahavya,

Anushtup. 6 Pankti,

66 The same.

Anushtup.

67 Yajata.

The same.

68 The same.

G&yatri.

69 Uruchakri.

Trishtup,

70 The same.

G&yatH,

71 B&huvrikta.

The same.

72 The same.

XJshnih.

73 Paura.

Asvins,

Anushtup,

74 The same.

The same.

The same.

75 Avasyu.

Pankti,

76 Atri Bhauma.

Trishtup.

77 The same.

Tlie same.

78 Saptavadhri,

1-3 Ushnih. 4 Trishtup. 5-9
Anushtup.

79 Satyasravas,

Ushas (Dawn),

Pankti.

80 The same.

The same.

Trishtup.

81 Sy&v&sva.

Savitar,

Jagati.

82 The same.

The same.

G£yatri. 1 Anushtup.

83 Atari Bhauma.

Jparjanya,

1, 5-8, 10 Trishtup. 2-4 Ja-
gati. 9 Anushtup.

84 Thd same.

Pritbivt.

Anushtup,

85 ..

Yaruna.

Trishtup.

86

Indra and Agni,

Anushtup. 6. Vir&tpurY^.* .

87 JSvay&marut.

l^aruts,

Atijagatl.

INDEX OF HYJINS,

17 Indra,

18 The same.

19

20

21 Indra. Yisvedevas.

22 The same.

23

24

25

26

27

28 The Cows,

-29 Indra.

30 The same*

31 Subotra,
82 The same.

33 Sunahotra.

34 The same.

Metre,

Trishtup.

Anushtup. 11 Sakvart
Trishtup.

The same.

Trishtup. 7 Dvipadi Yir&j.
Jagati. 7 Trishtup.
Trishtup.

Trishtup. 7 Dvipad& Yii4j.
Trishtup.

Anushtup. 6 Sakvart.

Jagati. 3, 15 Sakvart. 6 Ati-
sakvari. 10- 1 4, 1 6, 19 Trish-
tup. 17 Anushtup, 18 Bri-
iiati.

G&yatrt 1, 6 Yardham&nA.
27, 47, 48 Anushtup, 46
Tiishtup.

Trishtup. 15 Dvlpadft Trish-
tup.

Trishtup,

The same.

Trishtup. 7 Yir&j.

Trishtup.

The same.

Trishtup. 2-4 Jagati,
Anushtup,

Trishtup.

The same,

Trishtup. 4 Sakvart*
Trishtup,

The same,

Hymn.

INDEX OP HYMNS.

671

Rishi . Deity. Metre .

35 lilara.

Indra.

Trishtup.

36 The same.

The same.

The same.

37 Bharadv&ja,

38 The same.

39

40 ..

41 _

42 ....

Anushtup. 4 Brihati,

43

Ushnih.

44 Samyu.

Trishtup. 1-6 Anushtup. 7-9
Yirftj or Trishtup. 8 YirAj.

45 The same*

Indra. Bribu, ->

Gftyatri 29 Atinichrit.. 31
P&danichrit. 33 Anushtup,

46

Indra.

Brihati and Satobrihatt al-
ternately.

47 Garga.

Soma. Indra. Brihaspati.

Trishtup, 19 Brihatt 23 An-

Prastoka. Chariot. Drum, ushtup. 34 G&yatrl, 25

DvipadA 27 Jagati.

48 Samyu.

Agni. Maruts. PQshan,

1,3,5, 9, 14, 19, 20 Brihatt,

Prism and others.

2, 4, 10, 12, 17 Satobrihatt.

6, 8 Mah&satobrihath 7
Mah&brihati 11,16 Kakup.
13, 18 Pura-ushnih. 51
Atijagatf. 2 1 Yavamadhy A
maMbrihati.22 Anushtup,

49 Hi j is van.

Visvedeva8.

Trishtup. 15 Sakvart

50 The same.

The same.

Trishtup.

51

Trishtup. 13-15 Ushtiih. 16
Anushtup.

52

Trishtup. 7-12 G&yatri. 14

Jagati.

53 Bliaradv&ja.

Pftskan.

G&yatri. 8 Anushtup,

54 The same.

The same.

G&yatri,

55

The same.

56

G&yatri. 6 Anushtup,

57

Pftshan and Indra,

G-iyatri.

58

Pfishan.

Trishtup. 2 Jagati.

59

Indra and Agni.

Brihati. 7-10 Anushtup.

60

The same.

G&yatri. 1-3, 13 Trishtup*
14 Brihati. 15 Anushtup.

61

Sarasvati.

G&yatrt 1-3, 13 Jagati’. \ 14

Trishtup. l > k

62

Asvins,

Trishtup.

63

Ae same.

Trishtup, 1 Vir&j. 11 Eka-

pad& Trishtup.

• mu/iff

m

INE*EX OF HYMNS,

Rishi, Deity, Metre,

64 Bharadv&ja. Uskas (Dawn), Trishtup.

65 The same. The same. The same,

66 Maruts,

67 JJitra and Yaruna, .........

68 Indra and Yaruna. Trishtup. 9, 10 Jagati.

69 Indra and Yishnu. Trishlbup.

70 Heaven and Earth. Jagati.

71 ......... Savitar. 1-3 Jagati. 4-6 Trishtup.

72 Indra and Soma. Trishtup.

,73 ' Bphaspati. The same.

74 ,, Soma and Rudra,

75 R4yu, Hen, Weapons; andTmple- Trishtup. 6, 10 Jagati, 12,

ments of War. Armour. 13, 15, 16, 19 Anushfcup,
Bow. Bowstring, Quiver. 17 Pankti,

Arrow. Charioteer, Hora-
ces, Chariot. Whip, etc. etp.

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC.

Abhiflava, the name of
a religious ceremony,
43, 272, 286 notes,

Abhy&vartin CMyam&na,
the name of a king, 589.

Aborigines, 184, 412 notes ;
see D&sas, Dasyus, Kit-
katas, Simyus.

Absolute God, the, 379
note.

Acknowledgment of a son,
334.

Adhrigu, the name of a
Ilishi, 148.

Adhvara, primary essen-
tial sacrifice, 19 note.

Adhvaryu(s), the priest
and priests who per-
form the practical work
of the sacrifice, 122,
140, 142, 199, 259, 275-
277, 280, 306, 327, 357,
402, 494, 508, 600, 60*2.

Aditi, Infinity, Infinite
Nature, the mother of
the Gods, 30, 32, 59, 83,
97, 114, 115, 121, 123,
125, 126, 138, 139,151,
389, 208, 217, 231,255,
260, 292-294, 296, 310,
323, 329, 367, 368, 372,
379, 391,408, 416,417,
427, 448, 458, 459, 493,
505, 506, 514, 515,51 7,
51$, 539, 549, 5 SO, 617,
618, 620, 626, 628, 639,
648.

a masculine deity,

445-

Aditya, a eon of Aditi,
especially Varuna and
the Sun, 16, 3*2-34, 68,
43

114, 217-219, 255, 294,
386, 425, 461, 530,521,
525, 563, 626.

Adityas, Varuna, Mitra,
Aryaman, Bhaga, Dak-
sha, Ansa, and one or
two others, 17, 24, 27,
32, 33, 48, 58, 62, 97,
121, 139, 189, 252,259,
260, 263, 292-294, 297,
311, 313, 328,337,378,
379, 383, 427, 439, 458,
505, 519, 537, 539, 572,
619, 633.

Adoption of sons, 347 note.
Aeschylus, 443 note.
Agastya, a great Vedic
Ilishi, 228, 230, 235,
236, 244, 248, 255, 649,
650.

the family priest of

King Khela, 156, 159.
AgMsva, a name or epi-
thet of Pedu, a royal
Ilishi protected by the
Asvins, 155.

Agn&yi, the consort of
Agni, 26, 515.

Agni, the God of Fire
and Light, vi., 1,2, 14-
19, 21, 24, 26, 28-30,
34-36, 40-42, 48, 50-52,
54, 56, 60-63, 80-82,
90-102, 114, 120-127,
136-138, 140, 144, 145,
150,153,168,173,175-
178, 190-204, 208, 209,
212-215, 217, 223, 226,
227, 235, 236, 239, 245,
250, 259-270, 275, 282,
290, 298, 304-307, 312,
315-377, 329-344, 350,

357, 376, 378-381, 383-
385, 388, 391-410, 421,
423, 427, 429, 430, 440,
443, 446, 458-460, 463-
488, 492, 498-500, 502-
504, 506, 509-512, 514,
516-518,526, 529-531,
533, 538, 544, 552, 553,
555-574, 577, 612, 613,
615-618, 622, 623, 628-
630, 634.

Agni, the Soul of All, 341 ;
Universal King, 380;
Mother and Father,
401,403,555, 573; Fa-
ther and Brother of
men, 41 ; identified with
all Gods, 259, 266, 468;
essential in all sacri-
fices, 562 ; his names*
epithets, and qualities,
1, 2, 15, 16, 35, 80, 81,
344 ; his functions as
priest, oblation-bearer,
and mediator, 1, 14, 15,
18, 35, 50, 51, 79, 80,
122, 178, 267, 330, 336,
475 ; consecrator of
marriage, 468; spiri-
tual husband of maid-
ens, 91, 468 ; Lord of
matrons, i e , giver of
children, 91, 92 ; jun-
gle-clearing fire, 79, 80,
194,264, 265,398,399;
funeral fire (KravyM),
396 ; his flight from his
duties, 329, 477, 563,
570 ; his birth, 40, 41,
81, 82, 145, 195, 196,
259, 318 ; his produc-
tion by attrition, 14,

674

INDEX OP NAXfES, fcTCt

195, 342, 380 ; his Agrfi, the name of a wo- Ambartsba, the name of
double birth, 81, 82, man, 419, 433 notes, a man, 130,

1 4 5, 194,' 203 ; his three Ahayanfya, the eastern Ambrosia, 29, 341, 604,
"bodies, 337 ; three ma* sacrificial fire, 41, 306, Amrit, nectar, the drink
infestations, 391 ; three 337, 464 notes. of Gods, 29, 97, 143,

splendours, 319; three Ahi, the serpent of the 786, 317, 341, 461, 46$,

horns, 509; tbreebirth- cloud, demon of drought, 528, 597, 603, 604,
places, 124; three 6, 43, 44, 193, 133, Amritsar, 353 note.
homes, 470, 563, 566 ; 134,181,270,275,283, Ancient, the, Dyaus,He»v-

three receptacles or 296, 352, 354, 367, en, 385,

hearths, 472; three 413, 430, 492, 493, Indra, 582.

stations, 337 ; three 496, 497, 577, 592. Angara, a member of the
forms, 101, 219, 319 ; Ahibudhnya, the dragon family of Angiras, 456.

various forms, 15, 252 ; of the /Jeep, an atmos- Angiras, a semi-divine

three powers, 337 ; pherie deity, 250, 298, patriarchal Rishi ; also

three tongues, 337 ; re- 459, 505, 617, 619. a name of Agni and

gulator, as the Sun, of Ahim&y&sat, versatile or Brihaspati, 1, 23, 30,

fcbeseasons,! 24,468,478; wise as serpents, 4 note, 42,45,50, 62, 69, 84,
and of sacred rites, 568.Ahura, God, Iranie equi- 99, 101, 121,. 143, 148,
Agniehayana, preparation valent of Asura, 32 164, 180, 193, 289, 303,

of the sacred hearth, note. 349, 350, 361, 373,

96 note. Air, personified, 328. 398, 406, 445, 475,477,

Agnidh, Kindler, the Aitareya-Br&hmana, 30, 483, 490, 513, 517,

priest who lights the 154, 327, 330, 570. 617, 644.

sacred fire, 259, 306, Aitchison, Dr., 2. Angirases, descendants

510 notes. Aja, the Unborn, 377 vote, of Angiras, 1, 40, 69,

Agnihotra, oblation to Aja-Ekap&d, the Unborn- 71, 84, 85, 94, 106, 12 8,
Agni, 307, 636 notes. One- footed, the Sun, 133, 139, 148, 155, 164,

Agnishtoma, Praise of 298,619. 165, 175, .184, 192, 272,

Agni, a protracted Soma Ajamilhas, men of the 279, 280, 284, 290, 348,
ceremony, 19 note. family of the Rishi 349,361,373,392,395,

Agni-Soma, the two Gods Ajamillia, 450. 396, 398, 401, 411, 455,

as a dual deity, 21 note. Ajigarta, a Itishi, father 477, 492, 512, 513, 555,
Agnivesa, the name of a of Sunahsepa, 30 note. 566, 575, 576, 593, 596,

‘ prince, 498 note. All-Gods, 623; see Vis- 598,627,636,

Agnivesi, Satri son of vedevas, Angirases, the BliaradvS-

Agnivesa, 498. All-pervading, Vishnu, }as, descendants of An-

Agriculture, 460, 461; 27 note. giras, 596.

plough, ploughing, 29, Altar(s), 4, 177, 199, Animals, tame and wild,

460, 461; ploughing 203, 225, 238, 263, horse, bull, cow, pas -

and sowing, 160; goad, 268, 323, 324, 339, sim; ram, ewe, 60, 69,

460 ; sickle, 80, 420; 343, 344, 373, 381, 71; goat, 191, 215,

garner, 278; barley or 397, 401, 406, 407, 219, 309; ass, 48, 156,

grain, 160; furrowper- 410, 477, 566, 567, 613. 217, 441; dog, 214,246,

sonified, 461. Amarakosha, 227. 309, 418; Hon, 88, 340,

mtmt OF FAMES, ETC.

675

, 412, 479, 541, 542; title of Agni as Light- 132-135, 140,146,158,

buffalo, 422} gaufa* hing, 26, 303 305; see 160,181,183,209,240,

4^2, 462; gavaya, 462; Waters, Child of the. 241,262,272, 285, 333,

antelope* 88; deer, 54, Apay&, a small unidenti- 339, 340, 355, 374, 380,

136, 217; spotted deer, fled stream, 339. 387, 398, 428, 433, 495,

52, 69; hear* 526; wild Aphav&na, the name of a 497, 513, 552, 676* 588,

boar, 83, 113, 152; wild Rishi, 408. 586, 592, 594, 604, 621,

ox, 422; wolf, 136^138, Apri(s), a class of pro* 630.

156* 160, 203; mun- pitiatory hymns ad- Avya* colour* £ e race, 358,

goose, 257; scorpion, dressed to Agni, 15,16* Aryaman, one of the Adi-

257 ; serpent, 4, 254 ; 197, 252, 262, 263, 321* tyas, 34, 50, 57, 58, 61*

eagle, 161* 217, 312; 471, 472. 102, 114-116, 136, 137,

falcon, hawk, 44, 161, Apsaras, a celestial nyrm 140, 189* 192, 196, 214*
312, 403; peafowl, 257, ph, 373. 233, 249, 259, 292, 293,

366 ; swan, 90, 218 ; Apsarases, 129. ' 808, 379, 394, 397, 433*

ehakw&, 309; pigeon* Aptya, dwelling in the 458,459, 468,502,514,
38 ; quail* 146* 156, waters (of air)* Trita* 515, 537, 614, 617, 622.

169 ; kapinjala, 312} 137, 26 1, 503. Asiknt, one of the five

parrot, 68 : starling* Aramati, the Genius of rivers of the Pan j 4b,
68* See also Under se - devotion, 307, 608. 44 note,

parate words. Irbuda, a demon of the Asna, the name of a da-

AnitabM, probably an air, 70, 272, 2 77. mon, 384, 559.

affluent of the Indus, Archan&nas, a Rishi, 536. Ass, figurative, a rival
522. Archer* 89, 91, 91, 95, worshipper, 38.

Anjasi, apparently an 175, 203, 538, 635. Asses of the Asvins,

unidentified river, 135* Arjuna, a man’s name, 48, 156, 217, 441.

609 note . 168. Assembly, congregation,

Anklets, 524. Arjuni, the father of synod, 41, 206, 469.

Annastuti, hymn to Food, Kutsa, 149, 428. Assembly’s Lord, Agni,

i . e. Soma, 251. Arka* the Sun, 616. 22.

Ansa* tlta distributer, one Armlets, 522, Asura, Lord God, 82, 49,

of the Adityas, 25 9*292. Armour, 33, 42, 195, 440, 75, 143, 167, 182, 239,

Antaka, the Ender* Death, 646, 648 260, 293, 297, 344, 360,

144. Arna, a prince slain by 373, 384,457, 477,479,

Ant-hill, 419. ’ Indra, 433. 503, 517, 519, 534, 535,

Anus, a Vedie tribe, des- Arrian, viii., 353. 579, 596, 683.

cendants of Anu, 10, Arrow, the Lofty, light- demon (later use),

140, 492* ning, 397.' 134* 159, 501.

Anuy&ja, an after-sacri- Arrows* 527* 608, 647. Asura-slayer, Indra, 583.

fice, 57 note. poisoned, 647. Asuras, ancient Gods,

Any&dris, the invoking Arusha, the Red, the Sun, 204, 276.

name of one of theMa- 410 note. demons (later use),

ruts, 96 note. Arya(s), Aryan, v., vi., 43, 72, 74, 129, 140, 145,

Ap&mnap&t, offspring of xvi., 3, 10, 22, 70, 80, 147, 100, 182, 281, 285,

the Waters (of air), a 81, 101, 125, 129, 130, 505, 545, 681, .

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC?.

m

Aeva, father of the Rishi Atharvans, 611. Axe, the celestial, Agni

Vasa, 146. Atharva-veda, vi., 25, as Lightning, 495.

Asval&yana, 24 note . 108, 209,224,896, 429. Ayas, metal, iron, 72, 78.

Asvamedha, Horse- sacri- Atithigya, a name of Ayavasa, the name of a
fice, 217. Divod&sa, 70, 74, 75, King, 169.

-—the name of a prince, 147,181,277,428,577, Ayu, 75, 125, 214, 240,

487. 587, 600, 611. 277, 502, 577.

Asvatha, a name of Divo* Atiy&ja, one who over-
d&sa, 611. sacrifices, 621. Bab^xj, the name of a

Asyattha, the Holy Fig Atmospheres, two, 563. Rishi, 491.

Tree, 188 note. Atri, a great Ilishi, 30, Bacchus, 22,

Asvini, the consort of 62, 69, 145, 158, 161, Bahuvrikta, a Rishi, 511.

the Asvins, 515. 162, 193, 243, 247, 268, Barhis, 322, 471, 001 ; see

Asvins, the two horse- 501-503,^5*8, 519,539- Sacred Grass,
men, Twin Heralds of 541, 545, 546, 618. Barley, 74, 426, 551,

Bawn, 3, 4, 20, 24, 25, Atrin, a voracious fiend, Battle, 41 9, 420, 426, 444.

89, 40, 47, 48, 60, 61, 111, 112. = dance, 496.

63*65, 87, 108, 114, Atris, descendants of Bay Horses, Lord of, a
119, 120, 142, 144-164, Atri, 484, 501, 538. title of Indra, passim.

168,192,209,210,213, Attock, the river, 522 steeds of Agni, 18 ;

217, 224, 232, 238, 243- note. of Dyaus, 75 ; of S&vi-

248, 250, 298, 306, 308, Auchafchya, a Rishi, 210. tar, 49 ; of Sfirya, 68,
309, 311,336, 337, 344, Aufidus, 354 note. Bear, 526.

861, 378, 385, 386, 394, Aufrecht, Prof. Th., 420, Beds, 353 note.

408*410, 417, 429, 438, 596. Beast, the, Vritra, 489,497.

440, 441, 444, 449-451, Aurnav^bha, a demon, Benfey, Prof. Tb.,xii. xiv.
456, 459, 487, 502, 50 7- 272. xv., 5, 8, 10, 30, 39, 45,

509, 513, 514, 517-519, Aurora, 170 note. 47, 52, 58, 88, 119, 133,

540*546, 575, 616, 632- Ausija, the Rishi Kakshi- 135, 138, 140, 146*148,
634. v&n, son of Usij, 21, 163, 417, 609.

— , their character, 4, 146, 163, 168, 421, 422, Bentley, 171,

25, 47, 78 ; their mb 503, 559, Bergaigne, Abel, xiv. 58,

racles, 145-149, 154* Autumn forts, 183, 239, 167, 169-171, 192, 225

163, 245, 246, 633; 580. 246, 368, 43s" 581, 619*

their chariot, 25, 540 ; Autumns, 598, 610. 626, 628, 650,

their steed or steeds, Avasyu, a Rishi accord* Bhaga, one of the Adit-

48, 154, 217, 541-543; ing to S&yana, 493,
their whip, 25, 209 ; 543.

their favourite num- Avatsdra, a Rishi, 511.
her, 47, 48, A vesta, 22, 148, 189 notes.

Asylum, the sacrificial Awl, Pdshan’s, 624.

. enclosure, 533. Axe, hatchet, 215, 217,

Atharvan, the first Fire- 318, 319, 329, 375,
priest, 104, 106, 10S, 516, 558.

lbs, 160, 570, 571, figurative, 175, 474,

yas, God of Good For-
tune, 17, 30, 31, 58, 61,
85, 114, 115, 170, 189,
196,199, 280, 281, 292,
298, 337, 869, 378, 382,
384, 397, 433, 450, 480,
496, 503-506, 514-517,
519, 549, 567, 590, 617
621,

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC.

677

Bh&gavata-Pur&na, 289, Birds, see Anirhals. Brahman&spati, Lord of

Bharadvdja(s), a great *= stars, 137. Prayer, another name

IJishi and his descend- ^ flying horses* 449, of Brihaspati, 17, 21,

ants, 81, 147, 156, 555, 633. 22, 55-58, 114,115,259.

565, 568, 571, 573, 576, Bird-catching* 296, 366, 287-292, 514, 648.

585* 587, 595, 596, 606, 614. Brahmanism, viii.

612-614, 619* 621, 635, Bloomfield, Prof. M.> 429, Brahmaputra, a Brah-
637. 536. man-priest’s son, 313

Bharata, Warrior ; the Boar, see Wild Boar. note,

name of a king, 305, = Vritra, 166. Braiimaudana, a ceremon-

338, 373, 376, 427, 525, Boat, 471 ; see Ship. ial distribution of boil-

671. « sacrifice, 195. ed rice to Brahmans,

Bharatas, 267, 354* 373, Bohtlingk and Both, see 462 note,

477, 572, 574. St. Petersburg Lexicon. Brahm&vartta, a sacred

Bh&rata, a title of Agni, Bollensen, 420. region, 5 note .

267, 427, 572, Boneless, the, Nature, 220.Breastplate, 522.

Bh&ratas, sons of Bharata, Bony, the, the Visible Bribu, a liberal merchant,
•33& World, 220. 606, 607.

Bh&rati, a Goddess of Bornmuller, Dr. J., 2. Bride, gifts to obtain a,
Speech, 16, 26,198,252, Bow, 645, 646. . 141.

260, 263, 304, 322, 383, Bowls, two, heaven and Brihaddivd, a Goddess of

389. earth, 211, 225, 382, Speech, 507.

Bharvaria, 421. 563, 618. Brihadratha, name of a

Bh&rvara, 421. — — three, heaven, fir- chief, 52.

Bh&vayavya, a liberal mament, and earth, 538. Brihaduktha, name of a
prince, 174. Bracelets, 528. priest, 482.

Bh&vya, the same, \7inote, Bradke, Peter von, 638, Brihaspati, Lord of Pray-
Bhayam&na, the name of Brahma, the Absolute, er, 17, 24, 55, 85, 122,

a man, 130, 564 note, 138, 139, 147, 193, 213,

Bhojas, descendants of Brahm&, 182, 224, 368, 254, 255, 287-290, 297,

King Sudds, 373 note, 374, 337, 340, 389, 445, 453-

Bhrigu, an ancient Rishi, Brahman (s), priest (s), 103, 455, 506, 509, 514, 519,

1, 40, 71, 81, 95,’ 164, 122,225,259,275,306, 611, 644, 645.

176, 264, 403, 404, 313, 332, 406, 454, 462, Brisaya, a fiend or savage

Bhrigus, 80,176,199, 264, 488, 492, 495, 502, 604, 'enemy, 120, 631.

318, 324, 403, 413, 467, 647. Budha, the father of Pu-

492. Brdhman(s), 2, 77, 131, rfiravas, 41 note,

Bhujyn, a proMgt of the 140, 211, 375. Buffalo, 20 ; = Agni,

Asvins, 145, 148, 154, Br&hmana, theological 462 ; = cloud, 226.
159, 162, 163, 429, 633. exegesis, vi., 46, 462 Buffaloes, three hundred

Bih&r, 374 note , notes. dressed for and eaten

Bird, the, the Sun, 97,218, a priest, 19. by Indra, 489.

227, 228, 323, 401, 614. Br&hman&chchhanst, the Building, 278, 400, 402.
Agni as the Sun, Brahman’s assistant, Bull (the Male, the

261, 327. 19, 613 notes. Strong), Indra, 75, 77,

m

INDEX OP NAMES, ETC*

134, 237, 242, 274, 276, Camel, 190. Chariot, parts of a, 3 75.

280, 345, 346, 350, 356, Canopus, 230. —blessing of a, 375 ;

358, 360, 362, 366-369, Car, deified, 612, 646. see Car.

382, 411, 417, 491, 495, used in battle, 3 75. ^sacrifice, 319.

576, 579, 583, 603, 606, — with sharp-edged f el- = Dakshin&, priest's

609. lies, 231, 520. fee, 169.

BuR, Agni, 41, 50, 175, hymn or sacrifice, Chariot-pole === sacrificial

177, 194-196, 201, 203, 144, 281, 287. task, 109, 261, 325, 514,

264, 305, 319,326, 327, golden, - hymn, ri- Charites, 403 note .

834, 342, 343, 384, 392, ehes, 39. Childbirth, liturgy of,

397, 401, 466, 468, 477, priests’ guerdon, 170. 545 note.

488, 509, 555, 556, 561, Agni, 481. Goddesses associated

562, 613. Dyaus, 75. with, 232, 299.

— the Sun, 40, 108, the &yin, 535. Children, prayer for; see

166,388,393, 423,515, Car-pole •= sacrificial task, Prayer.

516. 109, 261, 375. the gift of Agni, 44,

— Dyaus, 75. Carpenter, 83, 121, 138, 92,262,334, 485, 623.

— Vishnu, 207. 139, 490. the Asvins, 48,

— -*■ Rudra, 300, 801. of the Gods, Tvash- 633.

Brihaspati, 389. tar, 24. Dawn, 151.

Parjanya, 459, 616. Caste, unknown in ear- Sara svati, 631.

Prisni, 397. . Hest Vedie time, 10 Sinivdli, 299.

n — Regent of the Year, note. Soma, 189.

383. Castes, allusions to four, Chitraratha, an Aryan

Marut host, 52. 150, 374, 498. kingslainbylndra,433.

— thunderbolt, 182. Castles, cloud-forts of Chumuri, a demon, 279,

V&fca, 616. fiends, 83, 576, 577; 577, 581, 588.

— rain-cloud, 102. see Ports. Chuming-staff, 36.

— Asvins’ chariot, 245. Cattle, rain-clouds or rays Chyavana, a prottg6 of

institute of sacri- of light, 84, 283, 396, the Asvins, 155, 159,

fiee, 237. 398, 411, 420, 454, 465, 161, 163, 343, 543.

Bulls, the M&ruts, 88. 575. Chyavat&na, a liberal

Asvins, 633* Cattle-raiding, 473, 563, prince, 496.

• priests, 109, 237, 593. Cleanser, one of the

327, 342. Cattle-stealing, 90. priests, 100, 259, 265,

— rivers, 354. Cave = cloud that impri- 305, 406, 569; see Pofcar.

— stars, 137. sons rain, 8, 14,44, 392. Colebrooke, vii.

*— blasts of wind, 188. Centre of earth — altar, Consorts of the Gods, 83,

blames of Agni, 560. 324, 134,213, 260, 503, 514,

Bullock = Soma, 226. Chakrav&ka, Chakwfc, 517, 616,

Butter, clarified, see Ghrita. Chakwi, a species of Constellations, 31, 67.

bird, 309. Copartners, Day and

* Calendar, Vedic, vii. Chandragupta, viii, Night, 199, 200.

Calf, cloud, 221; young Chariot, used in war, 10, Cord, series of sacrifices,
Sup, 222 ; Sun, 381, 13. 141,392,

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC.

679

Courser, Agni, 203; the Cows, Day and Night, 381, Daivav&ta, son of Deva-
Sun, 204, 243, 348, 566. - — ripe milk in raw, 86, v&ta, another name of
Cow, the Cosmic, 243, 379. 575,644. Abhy&vartin, 589.

* Ushas, Dawn, 222, white milk in black Daksha, Creative Power,

272, 346, 349, 360, or red, 86, 397, 644. an Aditya, 114, 292,

385, 401, 513. Cow-pen, the aerial stall, 433, 617, 618.

Earth, 210, 212, 213, the firmament, 533, Dakshina, southern, name

218, 301, 437, 438, Cowell, Prof. E. B , viii., of one of the sacrificial

440. xiii. fires, 306, 337 notes.

— Plenty, 192, 299, Creation of the worlds, Dakshina, Priests’ honor-

355, 447, 449. ascribed to Agni, 91, jj arium, 22, 169, 272,

■Prisni, 110, 530, 619 465, 562. * ’ 385 ; see Q-uerdon, and

— -A. — Indra, 507. Liberality to Priests.

— — Indra aijd Soma, Dame, the, Y&k or Koda-

609, 644. si, 131.

Soma, 609. Dames, Consorts of Gods,

the Unborn, 18, 83, 85, 134, 260,

the Sun, 91. 308, 316, 325, 439, 509,

Tvashtar, 124, 515, 517, 616, 619,

382. D&nava, one of a class of

Sages or Uishis, demons, 271, 272, 489,

360. * 494.

Creator, Agni, 92. Dancer, of the war- dance,

Supreme God, 180. Indra, 181, 286, 496,591.

— — Tvashtar, 124, 382. * female, 118.

Dancers, Asvins, 634/

325,

637.

Cloud, 224.

■ V 4k, Speech,

384, 393.

—hymn of praise, 262.

poet, 249.

• boon given by Indra,

272*285.

buffalo tied as repre-

sentant of a penitent
sinner, 408.

Cows, hymn in honour
of, 589, 590.

■———of Ushas, light clouds,

67, 94, 118, 536. DabhIti, a Rishi protect- Danu, the mother of the

— rays of light, 14, 85, ed by Indra, 149, 276- D&navas, 432, 489, 494.
118, 120, 131, 172, 287, 279, 433, 581, 588. D4nu, a kind of demon,

290, 348,383,392,393, Dadhicha - Dadhyach, 44, 345.

401, 411, 512, 513, 108 note. Darbha, a species of grass,

Dadhikr& = Dadhikr&s, 255.

336, 443 notes. a man’s name, 5 32 note.

Dadhikr&s, a personifica- D&rbhya, son of Darbha,
tion of the morning 532.

Sun, 108, 336, 337,443- Darius, 649.

575.

— rain-clouds, 1 1 4, 316,
382, 419.

of the Maruts, 54,

301, 525.

-—floods of rain, 423.

446.

-sacrificial, 54,98,121, Dadhikr&van — Dadhi-

384.

. milk, 108, 357.

ft Heaven and Earth,

H ?01, 325, 381, 425.

Air- Goddesses, 326.

— Waters, 468,

•= Rivers, 507*

kr&s, 445, 446.
Dadhyach, son of Athar-
van, 104, 108, 155,160,
163, 193, 571.

Dadikae, 649.

Daggers, of the Marat*,

517 ,

Dark, aborigines, 611 ;
see Dusky, etc.

Ddsa(s) savage foe(s), de-
mons), 44, 133, 134,
210,240, 270,275, 285,
351, 354, 417, 430, 432,
433, 436, 490, 491, 496,
497,580, 583, 586, 588,
594, 6U, 630,

680

INDEX OP NAMES, ETC.

Dasadyu, the name of a Dead, Departed, God of Dhishny&s, side- altars,
Riahi, 46, 47, 587. the, Yama, 37, 54, 85. 397 note.

Dasagvas, a priestly fami- Death, Agni, as a God of, Dhuni, a demon, 279,
ly, 85, 303, 361, 455, 396. 677, 581.

490, 513. Decay, 31. Dhvanya, the name of a

Daaow, a man’s name, 580.Deer, 524, 545 ,* red, 56; man, 496.

Dasra(s), "Wonder-work- Spotted (the steeds of Dhvasanti, a prottgd of
er(s),Asvins,4,155,449, the Maruts, rain-clouds), the Asvins, 149.
Dasyu(s), demon(s), 56, 88, 110, 128, 225, Diespiter, 75.

savage foe(s), 45, 46, 301,522, 525*527. Dice, 58, 149,

62, 70, 74, 81, 87, 101, Deer-skinB, 231. Digvijaya, conquest in all

180, 131,133, 135,158, Deification, of the Ribhus, directions, 443, 476.
160, 240, 272, 278, 276, 23, 24, 143, 387 ; 437, Dionysus, 22.

279, 285, 344, 3 55, 369, 438, 44< , 442 ; of the Director, Pras&star, 122,

411, 412, 430, 443, 470, Maruts, 96, 112. 306, 644.

474, 479, 487, 489, 491, Delhi, 108. Dirghasravas, the name

493, 539, 572, 576, 581, Deluge, the, 301 note, of a Rishi, 146.

582, 584,586,591,593. Demons of drought or Dirghatamas, a celebrated
Dasyu-slayer, the, Indra, darkness ; see Ahi, Ar- Rishi, , 193, 202, 210,

606. buda, Aurnav&bha, As- 211, 400.

4 Dfcwny vi., 40, 43, 60,63- na, Brisaya, Ohumuri, Diseases, jaundice, 88 ;
67, 78, 85, 93, 94, 118, Dasoni, Dhuni, Dribhl- leprosy, 158, 168.

119, 149-151,153,169- ka, Ilibisa, Karanja, Dispenser, the, Bhaga,
173,188, 190, 209, 222, Kun&ru, Kushav&, Kri- 514.

243;, 245, 247, .266, 272, vi, Kuyava, Mriga, Distributer, the. Ansa,
278, 286, 303, 307, 336, Mrigaya, Namuchi, 259, 292.

361, 385, 392, 393, 395, Parnaya, Pipru,Rudhi- Diti, the antithesis of

401, 409, 432, 445, 446, kriis, Sambara, Sushna, Aditi, 534.

455, 456, 459, 465, 481, Svarbh&nu, Svasna, Div, Heaven, 123 note.

512, 513, 515, 518, 543, Urana, Yala, Vangrida, Divod&sa, a liberal prince,

546-54 8,567, 609, 626, Varchin, Vetasu, Vis- 70, 147, 156, 162, 181,

629, 635, 636, v&ch, Vyansa. 182, 283, 453, 571, 572,

Dawns, 9, 118, 150, 151, Destruction, 31, 305. 577, 588, 593, 600, 011,

169,171, 186, 195,266, Devfih, Bright Bangs, 631.

323, 348, 355, 388, 396, Gods, 29 3 note, see Gods. Dogs, 309, 418.

402, 409, 445, 458, 465, Devasravas, a Rishi, 338, figurative, 246.

467, 515, 530, 544, 598, 339. Donations, eulogies of,

604, 629. Devavdta, a Rishi, 338, 168, 174, 410, 496; see

— Consort of the, the 839, 410, 589 note. Liberality to Priests.

Sun, 604, 635, 636. Dharuna, said to be a Doors, divine, 16, 197,

* the two, night and Ilishi’s name, 479 note. 252, 263, 322, 471.

morning, 465. Dhishan&, a Soma bowl ; Dragon (s), cloud-serpen t(s),

Day, 172, Wish, Wish-Goddess, a drought-demon(s), 43,

Pay and Night, 3, 128, Goddess of prosperity,20, 44, 69, 73, 83, 103,

172* 210, 549, 627, 125, 349, 369, 438,503, 104, 228, 251, 270, 273*

index of names, etc*

m

274, 278, 283, 413, 414, Dyaushpitar, Father Hea- Eos, 40.

488, 489,491,494,575, ven, 75, 114 notes, Ephedra, a species of
579. Dyaus-Prithivi, Heaven* plant, 2 note.

Dragon of the Deep* Ahi- Earth, 21 note. distachya, 2 note.

budhnya, an atmosphe- Dyavaprithivl, Heaven- Etasa, a favourite of In-
ric deity, 250, 298, 459, Earth; 87 7, 642 notes. dra, 84, 166, 167, 283,
505, 617. Dyotana, said to be the 432, 489, 569.

Dr&vinodfts, Wealth- name of a king, 580 note. one of the Sun’s hor-

Giver, Agni, 19, 306 Dyu = Dyaus, 40, 88, 615 ses, 415, 493, 548.
notes. notes . Evavada, a Rishi, 511.

Dribhika*, the name of a Dyumna, splendour, said Evay&marut, a sacrificial
demon, 277. to be a Rishi’s name, exclamation, 553, 554*

Drishadvatt, Rocky, the 484 note. Exorcism, see Incantation*

name of a stream, 5, « Exposure of children, 295.

339. /Earth, 27, 56, 114, 323, Eye, the, the Sun, 189.

Druh, a spirit of mis- 125-127, 129, 225-255, — ^Agni, 475.

chief, an oppressor, 425, 266, 298, 328, 335,339, of Varunaand Mitra,

480. 377, 397, 411, 418, 456, the Sun, 619.

Druhyus, men of a cer- 458, 495, 505, 507, 509, EyeB of heaven, Sun and

tain Vedic tribe, 10, 511, 514, 529, 537, 616, Moon, 97.

140, 608. 619, 621.

Drum, 36, 612, central point of, the Fair-complexions©,

addressed and glori- altar, 199. Aryas, 130.

fied, 612, and Heaven, 41, 167, Rudra, 300.

Dual deities, 3, 21. 249 ; see Heaven and Falcon, hawk, 44, 45,

Durga, a commentator, Earth. 162, 542, 545, 608*

' 376 note. Ecclesiastes, 515. Soma-bringer,

Durgaha, the father of Eclipse, 182, 412, 415, 120, 365, 418, 428, 429,

Purukutsa, 44 8 note. 430, 431,489,501,502, 511, 513.

Dushyanta, a famous 581, 592. Falsehood, 205, 478.

King, 571 note. Edda, 192 note. False worshipper, 70 note.

Dusky, dark, brood, skin Eggeling, Prof. J., 446. Famine, 328, 374.

(hostile natives), 130, Ehim&y&sah, 4 note y Far-strider, Vishnu, 326.
181. Ehni, Dr. J., 49, 106, 154, Fate, 31 note.

Dutt, R. Ch., 648. 628. Father, Heaven, 95, 114,

D vita, the name of a God, Eight points of earth, 49. 115, 196, 208, 211,

481. Eight-footed, Gauri, Vak, 212, 225.

Dyaus, Heaven, 40, 75, 226. Agni, 564.

88, 114, 167, 179, 182, Eileithyia, 232. Brlhaspati, 454, 644.

189, 196, 208, 212, 225, Elephant, 88, 559. Parjanya, 550.

255, 339, 344, 348, 360, Eleven Gods of heaven, the Primeval, 515.

378, 385, 392, 413, 421, of waters, of earth, 193. Rudra, 616.

503, 515, 529, 530, 534, Enchanter, Ahi, 270. Savitar, 143.

558,566, 567, 579, 615, Engulfer, Vritra, 489. Sun, 223.

619, 628, 633, 642. Enthusiasm, 505. Supreme God, 180.

682

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC.

Father and Mother, Hea- Forest life of Br&hmans, Garbe, Dr., 572.

ven and Earth, 211, appar ent allusion to, 77. Garga, a Vedic Rishi, 611

212, 219, 643.

Fathers, Manes, Ances-
tral Spirits, 115, 159,
192, 312, 380, 395, 479,
515, 622, 647.
—-—cause of the fruitful-
ness of heaven and
earth, 395.

Forts, cloud-castles, 46, note.

70,74,132, 183, 304, G&rhapatya, householder’s
489, 573, 580. western sacred fire, 20,

of aborigines, 133, 41, 219, 306, 337,

183, 60S. Gartsamada, a name of

autumnal, 183, 239. R. V. Book IL, 259.

of iron, 80, 285, 429. Garutmkn, the Celestial

Fortune, 31 note. Bird, the Sun, 227.

Fervour, personified, 505 Four, priests or Gods, 515. Gaura, a wild hull, 20,

note* * castes, 374. 422, 462, 545, notes.

Field, Master of the, the chalices, 213, 437, Gaurt, a wild cow; buffalo;

Genius Loci, 460. 440, 44*. cloud, 226 note.

Fig-tree, Holy, 188. dice, 58 note. Gauriviti, a Yedic Rishi,

Filter for Soma juice, 37, horns of Agni, 462. 489.

188. Vedas, 462 note .

Fire, 137, 488 ; see Agni. Four- eyed, Agni, 42.

— -production of, 343.

Fire-altars, 477. Four-footed, cloud,

Fire-drill, 34, 41 , 82, 124, Gauri, V&k, 222.

125, 175, 176, 343, Fowler, 119.

466, 474, 477. Friend, Mitra, 535.

Five Races, Tribes, etc., Fruit, 366, 524.

10, 115, 129, 158, 183, Furrow, personified, 461.

241, 262, 359, 374, 387,

445, 495, 498, 552,566, QX dhi, father of VisvA
608, 621, 632. mitra, 374 note.

" — Rivers, Land of the, Gaia, 575 note.

35$' Gairikshiia, a patronymic

Adhvaryus, 327, 505. of Trasadasyu, 496.

Bulls, 327.

Hotar-prieats, 303.

Seasons, 221, 382. 552.

Fivefold gift, 56. - — —cheating in, 552.

Five-footed Sire, the Year, Ga(n)d&ra, Gandarii,
221 ' Gandh&ra, Gandhdris,

Floods, waters of heaven, modern Kandahar and

479, 614, 617. its people, 649 note.

Floods' Child, Agni, 298, Gandharva, the, a Genius
303, 317.

Flower, see Lotus.

Gavaya, a wild ox, 422
note.

Four- faced, Varuna, 516. Gaya, a Rishi, 476 note.

Gayatri, a Vedio metre ;
a specially sacred verse
in that metre, 83, 223,
224, 312, 390.

Gcidner, Prof. K, xiv.,
172, 493, 592, 640.
Gharma, libation of hot
milk ; caldron ; 459,
492, 523, 544.

Gliora, father of the
i$hi Kanva, 50,
Gliosha, said to be son of

Gambler, 58, 273, 296. Ghosha, 164.

Gambling, 58, 149, 296, Ghosha, a proMgte of the
Asvins, 158, 160, 164.
168.

Ghrita'm), clarified but-
ter, 3, 461, 462, 509,
53 8, 642 notes.

fatness, fertilizing

rain, 533, 538 notes .
closely connected with Gnfis, consorts of the
the Sun, 26, 217. Gods, 316, 616 notes .

Food, Soma, 251. Gandharvas, 26, 119, 360. Goad, 624, 627.

Footless Maid, Dawn, Gang4, 606, 632 note. Goat, sacred to Pftshan,

629, Ganges, rii., 5, 85 notes. $15,

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC.

683

Goat-borne, Pushan, 1 91, Golden-handed, Savitar, H&ridrava, 68 note.

625-627. 25, 49, 618 ; Golden Harisohandra, the name

God, One, see Monotheism. One, the Sun, 19, 365 ; of a king, 30 note .
Goddess, Goddesses, 16, Golden Bull, the Sun, Harit&la, a tree, according

22, 26, 29, 31, 65, 67, 866; Golden Pair, Hea- to Sdyana, 68.

74, 78,119, 139, 151, ven and Earth, 365; Harits, horses of the Sun,

153, 169-171, 173, 211, golden ornaments, 110, 167, 403, 409.

264, 340, 351, 398, 231,526 ; car, 39, Hariv&n, Lord of Bay

402, 423, 455, 456, 78,192,517; chain, Steeds, Indra, 4 note.

459, 495, 504, 505, 509, 482, 524 ; ~mail,33, Hariydpiy&, the name of

513-515, 539, 547, 601, Heed (Agni), 462; a place, 589.

635, 639. ear, 169 ; — sword, 59 ; Haryasva — Hariv&n, 4

Gods, Devas, Bright — visors, 524 ; — man- note.

Beings, passim. ties, 525. « Haug, Dr. M., 327, 330,

——origin of* 62, 211, Goldstiicker, Prof. Th., 570.

"248, 394, 459, 575.' xiii, Havirdh&nas, carts for

number of, 48, 330. Gotama, a celebrated bringing Soma, 312,

made immortal by Rishi, 79, 82, 86, 99, note.

Agni, 468 ; by Savitar, 101, 102, 111, 155, Hawk, 44 ; Soma-bringer,

457. 247, 391, 399, 520,527. 103, 580 ; sec Falcon.

immortal, 39, 97, Gotamas, 82, 84, 87, 101, Heaven, Dyaus,40,43,73,

253,319, 323, 448,539. 113, 118, 435, 436. 75, 88, 95,114,115,118,

— — dwelling-places of, Grassmann, Prof. H., xiv. 123,125-127.218,225,

377, 383, 5S7, 620, 623. xv., et passim. 247, 255, 328, 335, 341,

—abide in Indra, 379. Gutsamada, a Vedic 360, 373, 378, 385, 395,

mother of, Aditi, Rishi, 259, 811. 397, 410, 415, 432, 450,

458 ; Uskas, 151. Gritsamadas, 265, 284, 455, 456, 458, 503, 512,

• Father of, Agni, 93 ; 309, 312. 514, 515, 534, 548, 566,

Brahmanaspati, 292 ; Guerdon, 57, 170, 173, 567, 578, 581, 615, 635-

Dyaus, Heaven, 211, 385 ; see DakshinA 637, 642-644.

248, 575. Guest, 95, 519. * home of the Blest,

consorts of, 26, 83, of men, Agni, 97, 207, 516.

213,260,316,325,389. 177, 262, 318, 393, 446, Heaven-Earth, a dual

greater and lesser, 36. 469,481,574. deity, 377.

elder and younger, 3 6. Guests, the Asvins, 299, Heaven and Earth, 3, 24,

King of, Indra, 239. Gungtl, a lunar Goddess, 26, 41, 100, 123, 124,

akin to men, 193, 299. 136-139, 143, 144, 165-

296, 370, 372, 378. 167, 170, 172, 189, 190,

priests, 327. Hair, braided, 152. 200, 204, 208, 211, 212,

Gold, 39, 60, 64, 79, 88, Hall, Dr. F. E., 135. 219, 248, 249, 262, 274,

218, 304,399, 443, 520, Hands, uplifted in prayer, 294, 298, 312, 315, 316,

525, 533. 333, 634. 321, 324-327, 334, 340,

—the Sun, 532. healing by touch of, 349, 368, 376, 377, 379,

Gold-eyed, Savitar, 49 ; 300. 384, 385, 38.9, 394, 401,

gold-girt, horse, 394. Haw, Swan, the Sun, 446, 403, 43$, 4^5, 438, 443,

534 imtx m nat^ss, fil’d.

444, 459, 460, 480, 482, Horn, emblem of Hundred autumns, ditto}
495, 508, 5X5, 517, 519/ strength, 46, 529. 114, 293, 358.

529, 505, 568, 570/ 572, Horse, rain-cloud, 88. - — Powers, Lord of/

674j 593, 601, 615, 618, lightning or the Sun, Indra, passim; see

633, 642, 643,647. 304. Satakratu*

Heaven and Earth, Fathet Aghi, 238, Hundred- wintered, Il&,

and Mother, 508. -* — halter, headstall, 260.

Heifer, Ushas, 346; Aditi, girths, etc., 216. Hunting, wild beasts,

417, — * — head of, given to 463; birds, 3i2.

Hell, 401. Dadhyach, 108 note. Husband and wife as-

Hemispheres, 618, 642. Sacrifice of the, 214- sociate in sacrifice, 106,

Hephaistos, 16, 72. 219. 182, 509.

Herald, Agni, 34, 36, 62, Horses* Indra’s, 8, 20, Husbandry, personified/

70^81, 94, 100, 190, 202, 39, 86 r 105, 107, 131, 461.

259,261,265,267,268, 180, 217, 282, 382, Hytfin, personified, 515.

318,319,372, 393,404, 451, 452, 482, 611* Hyphasis, the model'll

405, 409, 555, 565, 572, — -Agni’s, 268, 392, 394/ Be4s, 353.

615. 403, 561, 574.

Herdsman, the Sun, 224 ; the Asvins’, 450, 45l, Icterioi, Icterus/ 68 note *

Indra, 361. 633. Ida, libation; Prayer, 57,

Herodotus, 648.

Heroes = Hods, 26, 252.

Maruts, 529,531,

551, 554, 578, 617.

* Alvins, 540.
Hillebrandt, Prof. A.,
143, 211, 461, 601.
Himalaya, 353.

Hi(n)du, 649 note .
Hindustan, vii„ viii.
Hippocrene, 155.
Hiranyahasta, name of a
man, 156, 160.
Hiranyastupa, a son of
Angiras, 40, 42.

Dawn’s, 388, 636. 117.

the Sun’s, 68, 2 18, Idaspati, a name of Par-

451, 533, 604. janya, 50 7*

the Maruts’, 252, 522, Idris, the sacrificial title

523, 525, 527-529, 532. of one of the MarutB,

96 note.

114, a Goddess of Prayer,
16, 42, 57, 177, 178,
198, 252, 260, 293,
304, 326, 339, 343,
381, 383, 470, 471, 505.
259, 268, 275, 305,306, Ilibisa, a drought-demon,
357, 372, 380, 406, 529. 46*.

Hotars, the two Celestial, Immolator, the celestial,
3 6,198,252,322,327,471. 264.

Mitra-Yaruna’s, 533.

Vstyn’s, 451-453.

* in battle, 645.

Hotar, thief priest; in-
voker; 1, 65, 81, 100,
122, 193, 196, 199,

Holy Grass, 323, 481 ; Hot r4, Invocation per- Immortal, originally only
see Grass, aud Sacred sonified, 26, 198, 260, Agni, and the other
Grass. 389. Gods by him, 468.

Holy Speech, 26. Hundred castles, forts, men, in their child-

Homa, oblation, 109 note . 277, 429, 483, 593, 613. ren, 127, 471.

Homer, 496, 646. Years, natural life- Immortality of man, 525.

Honey, 33, 82, 243. time, 556. —the drink of, 29; see

Honey-whip of the Asvins, winters, ditto, 89, Amrit.

25, 209. 98, 260, 525* 560,565, Impeller, the Sun, 561/

Horace, 354. 507, 576, 586, 613, 566.

IHDE& OE NAMES, ETC,

m

Incantation, against Chief of Cods, 182, Indu, Soma; Hoon; 60,

jaundice, 68; against 239 ; King of all things, 115, 165, 286, 430, 520 f

venomous reptiles, etc , 45, 415; All-sustainer, 598, 603,

255, 256. 383; identifiable with Indtfs, vi., 35, 44, 61, 90,

Indians, originally in- other Gods, 611; tute- 123,168,174,250,430,

habitants of a colder lary j God of the Ar- 507, 522, 562, 608, 631.

country, 525 note . yajas, 3, 9, 128, 129; Infinite, Aditi, 30, 115,

Indigence, 835. God of Battles, 71, 231, 293.

Indigenous races, see Ab- 419, 426, see Battle; Dy aus, 530.

origines. his birth, 416; his Inspiration, 112, 355,

Indika, Arrian’s, viii. mother, 296, 416, 417; ' 400, 407, 516, 563,

Indra, vi., 3-5, 14, 17-21, his father, Dyaus, 119, 564, 641.

23, 24, 26, 28, 34, 36- 413; Tvashtar, 368; Invoker, 100, 122, 399;

39, 43-46, 51, 56, 57, Vyaftsa, 416, 417; his see Hotar.

60, 69-79, 81, 82-87, Consort, Indr5.nl, 26, Invokers, the two celes-

95, 99, 101, 108-110, 106, 373, 388; his tial, 16, 263, 322, 327;

112, 113, 115, 128-135, greatness, 13, 73, 83, see Hotars,

137-140, 143,144,147, 351, 411; his battles LAvatf, the river R&vt,

155,157,163-168,173, with demons of the 422 note.

378-185, 187, 191,193, air, 14, 43, 44, 46, 69, Iron, or bronze, (dyas),

197, 207-209, 213-215, 70, 80, 103, 104; his 78, 80 113, 218, 443,

217, 218, 222, 227*229, attributes and deeds, 533,534,558,610,647.

232-243, 246, 250, 251, 9, 272-274; his rivalry Isaiah, 114.

259, 263, 268, 270-287, with Vanina, 448; his Isha, said to be a Riahi’s

290, 294, 296,-298, 305, relations wibh his wor- name, 473 note .

308, 310-313, 322, 323, shippers, 6, 7, 11, 12,

340, 845-379, 332-884, 45, 76, 77, 128, 129, JagatI, a Vedic metre,

387-389, 394, 410-441, 284, 285; his various 223, 224.

445,449,451-455, 458, forms, 373; his horses, Jahnu, a Great Rishi,

459. 461, 462, 465, 466, 382 ; his flight, 44. 157, 386.

468, 471, 472,477, 488, Indra- Agni, 21, 24, 25, J&husha, & protege of. the
503, 506-508, 510*512- 331, 332, 487, 552, 553, Asvins, 157.

514, 517-519, 527, 552, 628, 629. jamadagni, a Rishi, 390.

553, 558, 561, 569, 574- Indr&gnt, 24, 140-142. Jamadagnis, 374.

612, 618, 621, 622, 626- Indrant, 26, 106, 373, 515. JanitA« Latin genito(r),
631, 640-642, 644. Indra* Brihasnati, *~1, 433, 180 note.

— r-God of the blue sky; Indra-Pfishan, 21. J&tavedas, Omniscient

Thunderer; Caster of Indra-Soma, 644. Agni, 60-62, 81, 101,

the Stone; Bounteous Indra-Varuna, 21, 389, 102,121.127,264,317,

Lord (Maghavan); The 446-449, G40, 641. 322, 323. 325, 334, 335,

Highty (Sakra); Lord Indr&varun5, 21, 337,338,340,343,385,

of Hundred Powers Indra- V4yu, 3, 187,451, 393, 397. 402, 470, 409,

(§atakratu); Lord of 452. 470, 471, 475, 484, 486,

the Brave; Lord of Indra-Vishtm, 21, 458, 509, 559, 560, 564, 566,

Bay Steeds, etc,, passim, 641,642. 570, 573, 574.

SfiJ ISIBEX OF HaMeS, ETOi

Jaihara, a word of doubt* Karanja, a demon, 74. King, Soma, 29, 11&

ful meaning, 148 note. Karkandhu, a proUg6 of Yaruna, 21, 31, 32*

jitdahthira, a man’s the Aeviiis, 145. 294, 290.

name, 276.

Jaundice, 68;
jetar, a Rishi, 13 note.
Jewels, 46.

Jones, Sir W., 390.
Joshua, the Book of, 431 ,

Kardlati, a liame of Kings, Adityas, 24, 293,

Piislian, 433. Asvins, 3.

Kasoju, the name of a Gods, 440.

prince, 147. -Mitra and Vartmfy

Kasyapa, a famous Ijishi, 95, 168, 189, 190, 192*
127, 368. * 306, 311, 360, 384, 533-

sonified, 47, 595 notes.

Kabul, til, 622, 649.

, Prof, A., xiv., xv.

Jumna, the Yamuna, 5, Kaumudi, Moonlight per- 536, 538, 572, 633.

511 notes. * sonified, 47, 595 notes. Yaruna, Mitra, Arya-

Jupiter* 45, 75, 114, Kausika, God of Kueikas, man, 57,

600* Indra* 13. warriors, ilO*

Jyotishtoma, a St>ma Kavij father of Usan5, K6phen, Greek name of
ceremony, 266 note . 70, 159, 4il, 580. the Kabul river, vii.,

Jyotsna, Moonlight per- Kavya, tJsanft, Kavi’s 522, 649 notes .

son, 70, 71* 106, • 159, Kosala, the modern Oudh,
166,411s 374 note.

Keres&ni, Iranic form of Kratu, act, power, 6 note.

Krisanu, 148. the name of a Great

Kakambtra, a branching Khadi, ring, discus/quoit, Rishi, 30 note.
tree, symbolizing father 89. Krisanu, a guardian of

and sons, 614. Khadira, Kbayar, a spe- the celestial Soma, 148,

Kakshtvfin, a Rishi, 2l, cies of tree, 375. 208, 429.

71, 145. 146, 154, 165, Khela, the name of a Krishna, the name of a
168s 163, 164, 168, 173, King, 156, 159. Riahi, 157, 158.

174, 421, 428, 503, 513. Khotasmiaus, 649. Krivi, a cloud-demon*
Kali, a $ishi, 347. Kikafas, a non- Aryan 281,286.

Kalpa, theceremoniaiof people, 374. Krumu, a tributary of

_ the Veto 462 note. Kindler, Agnidh, Fire- the Indus, 522.
KAudih&r, 649. ' lighter, 289, 306. Kshatra. the name of «,

K^ ta, patronymic of Kme, rays of light, RishffiH.

Prithusravas, 157 note. streams of rain, 8, 13, Kshatriya, 3*15, 647.

44, 69, 106, 120, 348- Kshetrapati, Lord of the
350, 355, 367, 430, Field, Genius Loci, 460
456, 479, 515, 533, note.

538, 575, 598, 635. KubM, the K&bul river.
King, taxer of the rich, 90. vii., 44, 507, 522, 562.

Kanva, a Rishi, 14, 17,18,
50-53. 56, 60, 64, 66,
H5, 1 58,161, 193,503.
Kanvas, 17, 52, 61, 63-
65, 67.

Kapardin, wearing braid Agni, 51, 127, 317, Kuhn, Prof. ~ A ~163

Kanin^T’ U2 ’ m - n ° te ' S8 °' 553 ‘ m - 563 > 566 ’ Kuhit, a lunar Goddess, 299

itapmjala, a species of 635. xr„i; a i ,

nartrifW qio ^ . Kulisi, an unidentified

312 ’ l ■ Brihas P atl - 2!) 7- stream, 135, 609 note.

S S n a Pat T-r ~J ndra - iS - 87 - 41 S - Kulitara, a demon orsa-

Z Sh 3,6 JllZZ 610 ' said 1- the

Mitra, 386. father of Sambara, 432.

Index op names, bto.

Kun&ru, a demon, 345.-

Kurukshetra, a district in
N.-W. India, 108- note .

Kuruin, 522 note.

Kusa grass, 4, 843; see
Sacred Grass.

Kush&vft, name of a fe-
male fiend, 41 7.

Kusika(s), a famous IJishi
and Ills descendants,
13, 340, 345, 347, 353,
364, 370, 373, 374, 386.

Kutsa, a favourite of
Indra, 46, 70, 75, 37,
121,126, 130, 136, 139,
143,146,166,239, 241,
277,283,412, 428, 431,
489,493, 577, 580, 587,
592, 600.

Kuvitsa, a certain mali-
cious man, according
to S&yana, 606 note.

Kuyava, Harvest-Spoiler,
a demon, 134, 135, 412,
592 note.

Kuyavdch, a demon or
savage 240..

Ladt op the Light, 65,

66 .

Lakahmana, the* name of
a man, 496'. *

Lakahmt, 412 note.

Lances of theMaruts, 524,
525,638; see Spears.

Lanraan, Prof’ O., 485,
502.

Lassen, Prof. Ch., viii.,
44, 649’.

Law, Cosmic and Moral
(ritrf), 2, 3, 28, 52 61,
64, 90, 92,97,100, 106,
115, 119,136, 137, 151,
171, 199-202,204, 205,
209,211,225, 253,268,

28S, 292,295, 296,318,
323, 330, 337, 388,397,
402,404, 419, 425, 446,
448,460, 465, 471, 478,
483,510.528,529, 533,
536, 538. 540, 547, 557,
567, 570, 598, 613, 619,
622, 628, 640, 642, 643,
647.

Law, Sacrifice, 40, 58, 60,
90. 92, 107, 268, 381,
882, 390, 397, 398, 425,
468, 477,484, 486,508,
510, 573, 598, ,p02.
Leader, Neshtar, one of
tile' priests, 259, 266.
Leprosy, 158 note.-
Leviticus, 338.

Liberality to' priests,
praises of, 76, 168, 173,
174, 410, 482, 487, 492;
496, 499,532,607,635.
Life; natural duration of,
see Hundred Winters.

duration of, fixed by

the Gods, 114.-
Lightning, a form of
Agni, 101, 124, 137,
2l9‘, 264, 268.

the' bride of the'

Maruts, 232 note.
Lightnings, personified,
617'.

Linch-pin, emblem of
stability, 49.

Lion, 88, 340; 412, 479,
541, 541

the, ‘Agni, 124, 319.

— P'arjanya, 550.
Loptaudrft, Agastya’s
Wife, 649, 650.
Lotu’s(ek), 545, 571.

stems, G3L

Ludwig, Prof. A., xiv.,
xv./ef passim.

Macdoneel, Prof.- A. A.j
S3.

Mada, delight, rapturous
joy, 69 note.

Madhuchchhand&s, a Ve«
die Iyishi, 1, 13.
Madhuvidy^, knowledge
of Soma, 155, 543 notes .
Magbavan, Lord of Boun-
ty, Indra, passim.-
Magha vans, wealthy men;
nobles,- institutors o i
sacrifice, 77, 26 3> 48 8y
546.

Magic, power of Goda,-
433, 552, 627, 634,

of fiends, 43, 44, 46,

70, 75, 631.

Mali &bh& rata, viii., 300'.
Maid, Great Goddess, as-
sociated with lift and
Saras vat J, 16, 198,- 471,
Mahfdhara, xi., 214, 229,-
462, 477, 486, 551.
Maiden, the, Lawn, 213,

Rodasi, 232.

Maidens, fingers, 195, 3041

Dawns, 205. •

*— — Waters, 3031 *

Rivers, 419.

Maitr&varuna, one of the'
priests, 122 note.

Male, the, Agni, 326.
Mamata, wife of IJchath-
ya, 202\ 211, 565.
M&mateya, Dirgbatamas,
son of Mamat&, 202,
400.

Man, service of, 42.
Mtina : , a Rishi, 229, 335,
242, 248, 253.

M&nas, men of Mana's
family, 236,. 237, 246,
248,

Manasa, a Rishi, 511*

688

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC.

Mandate, division, Book 260, 263,270,271, 296- Mend, daughter of King
of the R. V., vi. 269. 303, 305, 311, 317, 322, Vrishanasva, 71.

Mdnddrya, a Vedic bard, 323, 332-334, 340, 345, an Apsaras, mother

230, 231, 233, 234. 348-351, 356, 357, 403, of S ikuntald, 373 note.

Mandhdtar, a royal IJishi, 411, 418, 419, 421, 428, Meru, a sacred mountain,

ig. 439. 440, 453, 454, 459, 120 note .

Manes, 115,1 39 ;seeFathers. 468, 472, 487-489, 491- Metal, 72, 78 ; see Iron.

Manning, Mrs., xv. 493, 499,501-507, 509, Metres, 223, 563.

Manslaughter, fine for, 512, 514, 519-532, 550, of the Rigveda, 223 £

543 note. 553-555, 558, 561, 565, see Appendix.

Mantra, vi., 462. 572, 575, 576, 579, 582, Milch-oow, milch-kin© ;

Manu, man ; the father 591, 599, 602, 509, 612, see Cow, Cows, Kine.

of mankind, 16, 18, 34, 614-619, 622, 637, 638. • « hymn, 262.

42, 51,52, 61, 62, 64, Maruts, oi^ginally storms, Milk, passim.

92, 100, 125, 147, 148, deified, 8, 96, 112. = rain, 88, 230,551

152,177, 181,193,270, Music of the, 53, note .

300, 320. 370, 387, 405, 55, 88, 109, 112. = hymn, 249.

418, 428, 457, 483, 513, Mdrutteva, the name of a water, 632,

582,640. prince, 496. Milky Way, 136 note.

— p— Institutes of, 5, 21, Masarsdra, a man’s name, Milton, 266, 634.

’36, 606, 647, 169. Mitah, sacred name of

Manus a» Manu, 34, 42, 100, Mdtarisvan, a mystic one of the Maruts, 96

104, 442, 488, 568., 571. being, 40, 81,* 95, 120, note.

Mdnya, son of Mdna, 229. 126, 145, 177, 193, 198, Mitra, a Light-God, 3,

MW) Ushas compared to 202,227,254,318,319, 17-19, 25, 28-32, 34,

a, 40, 456. 329, 340, 344, 563. 48, 50, 52, 55, 57-59,

Mares, Indra’s 593, 602. Matrons, Heaven and 61. 95, 99, 102, 114*

. livers compared to, Earth, 615. 116, 123, 125-127, 138,

353. Measure, measuring line, 144, 153. 154, 168, 169,

hymns, 447. 55. 179,180, 189-191, 196,

= libations, 200, Meath — rain, 524, 204,208, 214,22 7, 233,

Waters or Air-God-Medhdtithi, a Vedic Rishi, 249, 258, 259, 261, 292-

desses, 326. 14, 21, 69, 373. 297, 303, 306, 308, 321-

Maiichi, a Great Rishi, Medhydtithi, a Rishi, 51, 323, 337, 360, 361, 378,

30, 127. 52. 380, 336-389, 393, 394,

Maruts, Storm -Gods, 7, Mediator, Agni, 1, 123, 397, 400, 408, 443, 445,

8, 12, 17-19, 23, 24, 27, 192, 391, 393, 397. 458-460, 468, 480, 487,

28, 4 n t 52-56, 61, 69, Rudra, 152. 502, 505, 506, 514-517,

73, 87-89, 95, 96, 103, Medicine, 29, 60, 114, 152, 519, 533-540, 548, 556-

109-115, 123, 128-131, 210, 645. 558, 560, 562, 565, 567,

134, 138, 139, 144, 152, heavenly, 47. 568, 572, 582, 585, 612,

1 53, 155, 167, 176, 178, Megasthenes, viii. 615, 617, 619,622, 633.

185, 186, 190, 192, 198, Men, deification of, 23, Mitra-Varuna, 3, 21, 168,
199, 209, 214, ;17, 228- 387. 188, 204, *205, 311,390,

237, 239, 246, 250, 251, akin to Gods, 225. 502,533,539,638-640.

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. ©$9

Monogamy, indications Mouthless, barbarians, Navav&stva, 52, 581.

of, 186, 172, 396. 489. Nectar, 29, 188, 609. .

Monotheism, 227, 377. Mriga, the Beast, a de- Neshtar, one of the priest®,
Month, intercalary, 33, mon, 497. 19, 259,306.

222. Mrigaya, a demon of air, N&ve, F&ix (Essay on the

Months - monthly fasti- 412. Ribhus), 438.

vals, 349. Muir, Dr. J., ix,, xii, xiii., 'Nighantu, a Vedic gloss-'

Moon, 31, 33, 47, 108, xv., et passim. ary, 48.

123, 132, 136-131, 154, Muller,. Prof. F. Max, ix , Night, 48, 85,119, 172,
189, 217, 222, 234, 255, xi., xiv., xv., et passim. 298, 307, 456, 471,532,
261,310,461,595, 598, Mungoose, 257 note , 626.

603, 609, 622. Muuja-grass, 213. and Day, 350.

Moonlight, personified, and Dawn, 16, 98,

47, 575 notes. Nahusha, Man,M2, 478. 126, 167, 322.

Moons, twelve, 33. Nahushas, men, neigh- and Morning, 86, 197,

Morning, 40, 63, 65, 167, bouring people, 540 222, 242, 249, 252, 263,

170, 273, 298, 337, note , 583, 588, 608. 298, 316, 333,382, 458,

346, 350, 351, 388,398, Nami,a friend and proUgi 465, 471.

471, 575, 593, 635,644. of Indra, 74, 580. Nine-footed, Gaurf, Vdk,
Mornings, 151, 170, 213, Namuchi, a demon 6, 226.

327, 379, 408, 445,455, 75, 277, 491, 580. Niners, ninefold, the Na-

456, 598, 622. NarakastMnam, hell, 401 vagvas, 513 note.

Mortar, 36, 37, 627. note. Ninety floods, rivers,

Mother, Earth, 211, 220, Nar&sansa, Praise of Men, 103.

644. ’ Agni, 16, 22, 139, 197, forts, 181, 331.

Aditi, 580. 263, 308, 344, 403,471, — — steeds = days, 208*

Dawn, 395, 513. 585. Ninety-nine arms, 2 77.

•——the Mighty, V&k, 5 1 5 , N 4rmara, a fiend, 275. forts, 76, 283, 428,

Prisni, 637. N&rminl, perhaps the 489, 609.

Ras^ 505. name of a fort, 203. rivers, 44, 255.

Mothers, Heaven and Narya, a chief or Rishi, V&yu’s horses, 453.

Earth, 316, 318, 324. 76, 146. Vritras, demons,

— Waters, 29, 48, 196, N&satyas,theAsvins,4,24, 108.

271 . 47, 48, 63, 65, 154-162, Nirriti, Destruction, 31,

— — Rivers, 48, 353. 238, 244, 246-248, 311, 54, 505, 645.

Dawns, 516. 378, 386, 409, 443, 449, Nirukta, Y&ska’s Com-

regions of space, 378. 450,514, 540,543, 545, mentary on the Ni-

Mountain = cloud, 9, 69, 565, 616, 618, 634,635. ghantus, xi., 3, 5, 193

83, 93,94,108, 392-394, Nature, Aditi, BO, 32, 97, 376.

411,. 413, 593, 598. 115, 534. NisMdas, aboriginal iri-

—home of the Soma Prakriti, 220, bes, 10 note .

plant, 2; 12, 60. Diti, 534. Nlti-Manjari, a treatise

Mountains, Gods presid- Navagvas, a mythical on ethics, 24 note.
ing over, 439. ‘ race, 45, 85, 361, 455, Nivid(s), liturgical invo*

personified. St 4, 582. 490, 513, 514, 561, 562. cations, 330, 417, 640,

44

m

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC,

Nodhas, a Vedie Rishi, 323, 325, 349, 392, 394, Pari j man, the Roamef
79, 84, 86, 87, 89. 404. round, Indra* the Sun,

Noose of Varuna, 58, 645. Ornaments, of the Maruts, 87, 102.

Non- Aryans, 44, 33l, 88. Parjanya, God of the rain-

JNoseless, Dasyus, barba -of priests, 51 . cloud, 106, 224,. 382,

dans, 489. Oudh, 374, 433, 522 notea. 461, 507, 534, 535, 549,

Nriyajfia, service of man, Oxen = s fears, 207. 550, 616, 622, 623, 647.

42 note. Oxhide, laid under the Parna, the Pal&sa tree, 429.

Nrishad, the father of Soma mortar, 37. Parnaya, a demon, 74.

* Kanva, 158. Parrots, jaundice irans-

Pair, the ancient, Hea- ferred to, 68.

Ocean, -77, 95, 246, 353, ven and Earth, 122. P&rthavas, descendants-

>867, 461, 525, 619. Pajra(s), a Rishi and his of Prithu, 589 note.
-~r- of air, 23, 513> 627, family^ 91. 71, 155, 158, Parthians, 649.

Oceans, 619. 159, 164, 168, 174. Parachchhepa, a Vedie

Offspring of the Flood, Paksha, the Sun, 374, Rishi, 175, 182, 193. ,
Agpi* 168 ; gee Waters, Paldsa, a tree, ButeaFron- Parushnt, the modem
Son of the. dosa, 429. R&vi, 44, 422, 52Q,

Okeanos, I4t6.

Old age, 157.
Oidenberg, Dr. H.,xiv.
Om, 226 .

Omen, 312, 313.
Qranific, Indra, 11. ,
Omniscient, Gods, 221.

Agni, 60, 470.

Asvins, 64.

‘Indra, 600.

the Sun, 377.

Varuna, 32, 33.

One, 220.

On© All, 377.

Pani(s), demons of dark-
ness, 44, 85, 106, 120,
181, 165, 204, 290, 462,
567, 580, 594, 598, 603,
606, 621, 629.

Panj&b, vii., 44, 146, 422,
430, 433, 507, 520, 522,
562, 631.

Pantheism, 115.

Pdpadevatd, Goddess of
Sin, 31 note .

Paramdfeind, Supreme
Spirit, Self, or Soul,
428, 564 notes.

One Supreme Being,227. Paramesvara, the Supra-
Qne-footed, buffalo, cloud, me Lord, God, 611 note.

226. Pardsara, a Vedie Rishi,

Ordeals, by fire, water, 90.

combat, 210, Pdrdvatas, a hostile tribe,

Order, Cosmic and Moral, 520, 631.

31, 102, 171, 172, 227, Pardvrij, an outcast, 146,
295, 316, 327, 347, 382, 163,’ 279, 433.

397, 401, 403, 408, 421, Parents, the, Heaven and
448, 455,456,479,513, Earth, 208, 211, 213,
534, 535, 547, 575, 599, 214, 349, 593.

617, 619. — of all, the Waters,

sacrifice, 109, 322, 618,

Parvata, Genius of moun-
tain and cloud, 16:7, 1&4,
372, 459, 583,617.

Parvafeas, 439, 503.

Pasupati, Lord of Cattle,
Rudra, 60 note.

PatharO, 147, 148 notes.

Patharvd, said to be a
man’s name, 147.

P&tbya, the name of. a
sacrificer? 572.

Pathyd, a Goddess of
wealth, wife of Pftshan,
519.

Paura, perhaps the name
of a Rishi, 540, 542.

Paurukutsya, son of Pu*
rukutsa, 496 note.

P&vaka, Purifier, pure,
bright, Agni, 1 5, 337,

Pavamdna, a name of
Agni, 337 note.

Pdyu, a Rishi, 611,

Pearl, 49, 174.

Pedu, a prottgi of the
Asvins, 155, 158, 101-
163.

INDEX OE -NAMES, ETC'.-

Pegasus, 155 Pole, sacrificial task, 261. Pravargyav i d y & , th e?

Penury, 395, 49 & .514; sec Car-pole, Cha- seienee of the ahcrve f

— deprecated for others,- riot-pole*. 155 note*

294-296. Polygamy, indications of. Pray 5j a, a preikmfcaf'j'

Per uk(a), a liberal prince, 8,6,94. offering, 57*

635, troubles of, 1 3 7. PrayaSsvats, sacred food

Pestle, for pounding the Porpoise, 156. bringers, the title of

Soma plant, 36, 37. Po tar, the Cleanser, one certain Bishis, 483 note,
Peterson, Prof. P., xiv;- of the priests, 19, 122, Prayer, personified, 26,
207, 453, 624, 626. 259, 265, 305, 306, 406. 42 : see HotiA, 114.

Physician, Kudin, 300. Poverty, 74, 328. Lord of, Brihaspati,

Yaruna, 3L Prabhuvasu, a Yedic 56, 85, 114, 254, 287,

Physicians, Asvins, 146, Bishi, 499. 389, 644.

156, 210. Praise of Hen, ftfar&sansa, Agni, 56.

Maruts, 300* Agni, 16, 263, 308, 403. power of, 85, 94.

- — ~ Waters, 29. Indra, 585. the best armour, *6 4 8,

Pijivaua, the name of Praj4pati, Lord of Crea- for aid in battle, 10,

' a prince, 65, 148, tures, 30, 48, 62, 154, 38, 7l, 98, 128-130, 132,

Pillars, splinters from the 421, 438, 507, 618, 628 133, 183, 184, 297, 497.

sacrificial stake, 328. notes , for general .safety,

Pipru, a demon of air* ;a IJiahi, 359. 7, 27, 49, 189, 190.

• 6, 70, 130, 277, 412, Praj&patis, the progeni- for long life, 13, 36,.

418, 577, 580. tors of men, 6‘9 note. 31, 48, 114, 116, 157,

PMchi, a female fiend,- Frakriti, Mature, 22-0 note. 189, 210. .

2 75 note. ' ■ Pramaganda, a prince 1 of for children, 15, 4 8,.

Pischel, Prof. 152, the Kikatas, 374. 151,299, 518..

416, 558, 581, 586, 592, Franava, the sacred syl- for health, Wealth,

59 7, 602, 616. lable On, 226 note. and happiness, 47, 51, .

Pitaras, 812; see Fathers. Fras&star, Director-priest, 59, 66, 119, 121, 126,

Pibblnas, a man’s Jname, 122, 259, 266, 306 notes . 152, 253, 299, 300,

588. ■ Praskanva, a Yedic Bishi, 384, 335, et passim*.

Plants,- personified, 582, 60-62. for rain, 534, 535,648.

617# Prastoka, a name of Di- ►for a safe 1 and spaci-

King* of, Agni, 306. vod&s-a, 611. ous home, 643, 644.

— — sLord of, Soma the Fratardana, a prince, 588. for freedom' from

Moon, 29, 11 6v Pr&tardani, son of Pra- sickness,- 645.

— t~ luminosity of, 173, tardana, 588. — — for Divine mercy-

17 4, 269. Fratidris, sacrificial title and pardon of sin, 31,

medicinal, Lord of, of one of the Maruts, 32, 42, 295, 408, 55 2.

•59, 60. 96 note , -for sinlessness, 135.

Pleasantness, personified, Fratikshatra, a Yedic for victory -in a

5®- pishi, 514 vote. chariot race, 297.

Pliny, 68, Pravargya, an introduce ——for the destruction

Poison, poisonous reptiles, tory Soma cere&ony, of fiends, etc., 51, .52,

charm against,_255-257. 462, 492.- .111, 185,

692

INDEX OP NAMES, ETC/.

Priests, names and duties 490 ; boatbuilding, Pfishan, a Sun-God, giver \

of, 259 note. 154, 226; leather- of prosperity, and guide f

the two divine, 198, working, 110, 256, 450; of travellers, 17, 28, 29, \

471. physic, 29, 31, 146,156; 58, 59, 106, 114, 115, f

—.-^called Gods, 327. rope-making, 216, 276; .139, 168, 190, 1 91, 198, [

— -4he Asvins, 244, smelting, 337, 476, 558; 215, 245, 247 , 250, 260,

— — fee of, 169 ; see vintner. 256; weaving, 292,298, 309-311.372,

Dakshinft. 563; working of iron, see 378, 384, 389, 390, 397,

—.--special gifts to ; see Axe, Dagger, Spear, etc. 433, 461.503, 508, 514,

Liberality to Priests. Prosperity, personified, 517, 519,548, 585, 614-

Frikahay&mas, a Proper 160, 298, 506. 616,618,621, 623, 628,

Name, 168. Providence, 41, 74, 604. 631,647.

Prishtha, a kind of Sfcotra PuiArta, 433. Pasham Vishnu, 575.

or >ud, 401,523 note. Purandhi, the Intelligent Pashans = Asvins, 247,

Priimi, mother pf the or Spirited, 3 60, 298,

Maruts, 18, 28, 54, 506, 532, Quail, Dawn; the set-

109, 110, i 14, 234, Puraya, a liberal prince, ting Sun, 146, 153,

301, 397, 401, 521, 635. 159, 161, 247.

527 , 529, 530, 637. Purifier, Fotar, Gleanser, Quarterly Review, on the
— ^-Earth, 561, 614- 19, 259. Soma plant, 2,

616,619, Purohita, family or tribal Queen, the ohief, 486.

Ptisnigu, a prot6y6 of the priest, 1, 17, 12*2, 564. Questionings regarding
^Bvina, 115. Pfiru(s), the eponymus Gods, Nature, Man, 31,

Priinimfttarafy , Prisni’s and men of a great 220, 222, 225, 248, 296,

Bona, the Moruts, 1 8 -note. Vedic tribe, 10, 81, 87* 377,409.

Prison, 408. 140, 181,183, 443-445, Quivers, 527, 646.

Prithi, a royal Rishi, 147. 580, 608. Quoits, missiles and ornar

Prithivl, Broad Earth, Purukutsa, a favourite meats of the Maruts,

123, 328, 537, 616, 619, of Indra and the As- 89, 528. .

642 ; see Earth. vins, 87, 145, 148, 239,

, — —a Goddess of the 448, 449, 496, 5S0. Raoe-Couuse, 87.
firmament, 550, 551 Purumi]ha(s), a prince Pacing, see Chariot-race,
note. or IUshi and his peo- Rfihu, the post- Vedic Da.

Frifchu, an ancient King, pie, 204, 247, 502. mon of eclipse, 501 note f

589 note. Purumitra, a Rishi, 148, Eahugana, a Rishi, 99 f '

Pntliusravas, a prince, 160, 10L

157. Purunltha, a prince, 81. Rains, the, 328, 594 note.

Priyamedha, a famous Purupanbh&s, a liberal RAjarshi, royal sage, 71
Rishi, 62, 193. prince, 635. note.

Priyaratha,. a prince, 168, Purfiravfis, an ancient Raji, the name of a girl ?
Professions, trades, and king, 41. 588.

crafts, indications of, Purushanti, a liberal R&kfi, Goddess of Full
agriculture, 460, 461 ; prince, 149. Moon, 299, 507.

carpentry, 83, 121, Puruvasu, a Vedic Tfishi, Rakslias, the race of R&k-

188, 181, 359, 468, 499. ‘ • - shasas, 467. * y

INDEX OF NAilES, ETC, 598.

It ikshaeas, nocturnal EibhuVshan, chief of Eitus, seasons, personi-
demons, 1,25,46,49, ' the Ribhus, Indra, 214, fieri, 19,20.213, 306,

5 '2, 100, 102, 129, 347, 233.250,293,439,502. 439,455,622.

393,400,412,574,583. IJibhu as eldest of Ritvi j, a sacrifieer in due

R4kshasi, a female de- the three, 438, $06, 610. season, a priest, 1
mon, 417 note . Ribhukshans = R i b h u s, note ;

Ram, Indra as lover of 439, 442, 443. Rivers, personified, 322>

battle, 12, 69, 71. Richas, sacred verses for 514, 517, 622.

R&ma, 230 note. recitation, v,, 512. the Seven, 44, 132*

R&m&yana, viii., 2l7, 230,Richatka, a Rishi, 157. Roaitter, the, Wind, 167.

315* pioMshama, a title of Indra, 593.

Ranhd, Zoroastriaiis’ Indra, 607. Roarer, the, Agni, 36.

name of Ras&, 146. Riding on horseback, 216, Robber, 547 ; see Thief*
Ras^, a semi-mythical 217, 531 * # Rook® cloud, 416, 601.

river, 146, 505, 522. Rigveda, v, vi., vii,, ix , Roclasi, Lightning per-
a Light-Goddess,115. xiii., xv., 512. sonified as the wife of

Ritahavya, a Rishi, 537. Rijishin, 351 note, Rudraor of theMaruts,

Rabhaviti, a prince, 532 Rijisvan, a proUr/4 of 131,232,515,527, 531#

Rathantara, an iinpor- Indra, 70, 74, 130, 412, 618, 638.

tant S&man, 224. 489,580, 621* Rohita, son of KingHaris-

Rati, sexual enjoyment, Rijr&sva, a royal Rishi, chandra, 30 note,

019. 130, 156, 159, 160. Ramasft, wife of King

Rats, 137, Rmanchaya, king of Svanaya, 174 note.

Rauhina, a cloud-demon, theRusamas, 491, 492, Roth, von, Prof. R., ix*
133, 274. Rings, or quoits, 112, xiv., 3, 5, 17, 18, 21, SO,

R&vf , modern name of the 231, 233. 57, 85, 243, 201, 267*

river Parushni, 122, 520.Rishabha, a Rishi, son of 417, 461, 484, 495, 497,

Rebha, a proUgd of the Visv&mitra, 332. 508, 542, 546, 552, 553,

Asvins, 145, 157-159, $ishi, Seer of a hymn, 691, 593, 617, 619, 648*

161-163. an inspired bard, vi., Rudra, the roaring or

Red Bird, the Sun, 515. 21, 108, et passim. flashing Tempest-God,

• Bull, Agni, 613. Rishis, vi., vii., xiii., 39, father of the Maruts ;

-Steer, Dyaus, 529. 66, 107, 222, 511, 602. sometimes a gentle

Revelation, 400 note * childlike simplicity healer and beneficent

Rdville, M., 375. of questions and pra- deity, 18, 27, 54, 59, 60,

Ribhu, 23, 24, 144,213, 260, yers of, 409. 80, 88, 96, 109,128, OT,

388, 437, 43 i, 413, 506. the Seven, 30, 44S. 152, 153, 167, 179, 230,

Ribhus, three deities of Rita, Right, the True, 232, 260, 299-302, 305,

mid-air, of whom Ri- Cosmic Order, Moral 308,340,873,397,460,

bhu is the eldest bro- Law, 2, 3, 107, 137, 468,502-504,506,507,

ther, 8, 23, 24, 69, 87, 288, 425 ; we Law, Order. 515, 521, 527 530,590.

96, 142-144, 211-214, Ritastup, a Rishi, 148. 616, 618, 619, 633, 638#

223, 250, 868, 871, 379, Ritu, a season of the year, 645.

387, 388, 437-448, 455, sometimes personified, — - — a name of Agni, 35,
$07,514,519,528,555. 18*20,307. 318,396.

69 i

INDEX OP NAMES, ETC.

Kudras, sons of Rudra, Sacrifice^ 73, 77, 78, 80,95.Sakra, Mighty One,Indra,

the Maruts, 48, 55, 56, Celestial, Vivasv&n, 12, 75, 85, 242, 857,

62, 88, 109, 128,131, 79,355. 359, 411, 497, 596,610.

210, 230, 270; 297, 302, Sacrifiqer’s wife, associat- Sakti, a Rishi, 90, 374.
303, 328, 337, 351, 524, ed in the performance SakuntaM, daughter of

527, 554, 619, 625. of sacred rites, 106, Visy&mitra, 373, 571

r the Asvins, 210, 541. 182,509. notes .

Mitra and Varuna, Sacrificial names, titles, S&ma, S&man, song, chan-

539. 8, 112, 555. ted hymn, 224, 237,

Rusamas, the name of a assembly, 41. ~ 313, 401, 412.

people, 491, 492. hall, 2, 322. Sdma-priests, 65 ; Sfima-

Emshatt, wife of the Rishi fire(s), 20, 41, 42, 64. chanter, 313.

Sy&va, 158. victim, goes straight Sdmaveda, v., 11, 224,

to keave% 215, 217. 313, 607 notes ,

SabaEduGhA, nectar-yield * — victims, 402. Sambara, a demon of

ing, the Cow milked for post or stake, 16, drought, 6, 70, 75, 81,

sacrificial libations, 186. 32,51, 118, 225, 264, 130,147, 274,277,283,

Sack!, Power, personified 327, 328,402,456. 289, 367, 428, 429, 432,

as Indra’s wife, 388, 412. offerings, milk, 121, 577, 588, 593, 600,

Sacred Books of the East, 165, 206, et passim ; 609, 611.

448,532,548. ghriba (clarified butter) Sammitah, one of the

Sacred grass, 42, 72, 107, 5, 187 ; gharma (heated Maruts, 96 note ,

110, 484, 584, 623. milk), 459; Soma juice, Samudra, sea, gathering

Sacrifice, first institutors 6,18, 20, 25, 37, 62, or receptacle of waters,

off iee Angiras, Atkar- 307, 140, et passim; 78.

van, Bkrigu, Dadbyaok, Soma juice and milk, 7, Samvarana, a Rishi, 496.

Mann. 28, 38, 108, 190, 250, Samyu, a Rishi, 614.

— - importance of, 50. et passim; Soma juice Sfinda, a prince, 635.

* makes priests and with- grain, groats, Sandikas, a family or

sacrificers immortal, meal, cakes, etc. 188, clan, 297.

41, 175. 342, 371, 487; man 30; Sankitd, Collection of

morning and even- horse, 214-219; bul- Yedic hymns, v., vi , vii.

ing, 408. locks, 267; barren cows, Sanaa, Prayer or Wish,

morning, noon, and 267 ; cows in calf, 267. personified, 514.

evening, 20, 47, 265, vessels and irnple- Sanskrit, ix-xii.

373, 407, 410. ments, 215. Saptavadhri, name of a

— —nine and ten months’, Sad&prina, a Rishi, 511: - -manp545'~546.“

513, 514. Sadasaspati, Lord of the S vra, a Rishi, 157.

of first-born son, Assembly, Agni, 22. Saramfi, Indra’s hound
30 note. Sadhri, a Rishi, 5 1 1 . and messenger, per*

— — = chariot, 319. S&dhyas, a class of deities, haps the Dawn, 85,

ship, 63, 195. 227. 97,348, 411,513.

» thunderbolt,! 0,57. Sahadeva, aprince, 130,410 Sirameyas,Saramd’s sons,

— r^ir ss .woven cloth, 563 Sdkins, Mighty Ones, Yama’s watch-dogs, 85
note, 1 Nobles, 521. note,, . ,*,i

tS'mX OF tfAMES, ETC.

m

Sarasv&n, Sttfasvat, name Satapatha-Br & h m a n a , Sea, of air, cloud, 32,40,
of a River-God, 610 446, 548. 63, 217, 232, 243, 463,

note; applied to the Satar chins, epithet of the 529, 541.

Bun, 228* Seers of Book I. of the ’Sons of the, the

Sarasvati, a river; a Rigveda, 259 note. Asvins, 63.

River-Goddess,* God- Satavani, a prince, 81. Season, the, theRains, 274.

dess of eloquence and $atri, a, prince, son of Seasons, the, 29, 221, 222,
sacred poetry, vii. 5, Agnivesa, 498. 382 notes .

16, 44, 114, 135, 198, Satyasravas, a Rishi, 546. personified, 306, 439.

227, 252, 260, 263, Sauchtsa, a prince, 374. Seleucus, viii.

297, 304, 811, 312, Savitar, the Sun as ge- Semal, Silk-cotton tree,

322, 339, 378, 383, nerator, vivifier, and 375.

430, 471, 507, 509, stimulator, 25, 26, 30, Serpents, wisdom of, as-

514, 562, 616, 619, 48, 49, 51, 61*>97, 124, cribed to Gods, 623.

622, 631, 632. 137, 140, 143, 149, 170, Service of man, 42.

Sarat, according to Sd- 171,209,211,224,249, Seven, castles, 87.
ya?a a demon, 580 260,296,298,307,308, celestial streams, 97,

note. 337, 353, 360, 378, 383, 2 19 note ,

Sarayu, the Sarjsi, 433, 384,389,390, 402,408, cows, 219.

622. 409, 438,439,457-459, days of the week,

Sarja, a river in Oudh, 506, 51 4, 516, 517, 548, 68 note.

433, 522. 549,570,582,617, 618, divisionsof the year,

S&rnjaya, son of Srinja- 619, 643, 614. 219 note.

ya, 611 note . S&viM, the G&yatrtpar flames of Agni, 137,

?aryan&v&n, a lake and excellence , a verse of 201, 392, 404, 454.

district, 108. especial sanctity ad- forts of the abori-

Siry&ta, a Ilishi, 147, 370. dressed to Savitar, 390. gin es, 239.

§iry&ta, son of Sary&ta, Savya, a Rishi, seer of germs, solar rays, 225.

370. Hymns 51-57 of Book horses, 219.

Sary&ti, probably the I,, 69. horses of the Sun,

same as Sary&ta, 148, S&yana, S&yarAcMrya, 68, 323, 409, 513, 604.

3 70. the great Oommenta- metres of the Yeda,

* Sasa, a Rishi; or food, or tor of the Rigveda, 27, 326, 455, 462.

sacred grass, 483, 484, ix. xi. xiii. xiv. xv. xvi., Mothers, 195.

Sasarpari (the meaning et passim, mouths of Bnhas-

is uncertain) 374. Sayu, a Rishi, proUgi of pati, 454.

Sasiyasf, wife of Taranta, the Asvins, 145, 147, priests, 219, 265,

note. 157, 160-162, 633. 322, 344, 348, 392.

Sastram, recited laud or Sayya, the father of reins (priests), 265.

invocation, 65 note . Nami, 580. regions of the earth, 27.

Satakratu, Lord of Hun- Scorpion, 257. Rishis, 30, 443.

dred Powers, Indra, 6, Sea, 32, 38, 72. Rivers, v., 44, 48,

7, 12, 20, 38, 39, 76, the Sun, 515. ' 49, 95, 132, 219, 257, “

137, 359, 498, 500, of wealth and boun- 273, 315, 316, 430, 507,

600, 606, ty, lndra r 14> 69.-- 562.

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC,'

m

Seven sages, 395, 582. Sin, the deity of, Nirriti, Six-spoked car, the year

Singers, 85, 112, with six seasons, 221.

Sisters, 219, 257,632. searchers-out of, Sky, personified, 40, 63,

—* — sunbeams, 137, 219, Maruts, 112. 65-67, 432, 514, 5,47,

2^5, 462. punisher of, Arya- 548,

— « times seven, the, man, 233; Brahraanas- Smelter, 476, 558, 5661
Maruts, 521. pati, 288 ; Varuna, 178 ; Sogdians, 649,

* tones, 326, 455. Agni, 563. Soma, the Moon-God, 21,

*— — treasures, 645. Sindhu, the Indus, 35, 22, 29, 47, 60, 90,

Seven-headed, the, the 61,90,106,123, 125, 114-117, 120,121,154,

Sun, 323, 127, 168, 174, 250, 449, 156,217, 222, 255, 263,

Seven-rayed, Agni, 201. 458, 520, 522, 631. 309, 310, 389, 390, 430,

— *— reined car, of the Siniv&li, a lunar Goddess, 512, 514,519,603, 609,
Sun, 604. 299. 622, 644, 645, 648.

Seven-Wheeled car, the, Sinless, 1 fo, 549, 617. Soma, the plant, 2,12,16,
219, 221. Sinlessness, 30, 617, 618. 60, 868.

Shafeurusishya, 374. Sinsipft, Sisu, Sissoo wood, deified juice of, vi.,

Shelley, 132, 153, 351. 375. viii., et passim.

Ship, 32, 65,127, 182,354,SipM, a river, 135. grown on mountains,

486, 513, 524, 529, 627. Sira, Plough, Agricul- 363,420, 508, 551.

— » hymn, sacrifice, tural deity, 461. preparation of, 2,

63, 195. Sister, the, Dawn, 243, 19, 36, 37.

Siokle(s), 80, 420. 266. drunk by Brahmans, 2.

Siebenzig Lieder des Rig- Sisters, Heaven and produces inspiration,

veda(Geldner andKae- Earth, 377, 482, 112.

gi), xiv., 417. the Dawns, 1 72. — — eloquence and wi3-

Sikhs, 89. Day and Night, 381. dom, 598.

§inibala, the Silk-Cotton Night and Dawn, rapture, 6, 22, 69,

tree, 375. 149, 172 242. 71, 73, 78, 110, 448.

Simyus, a race of hostile of priests, the waters, Lord of, Indra, 100,

natives, 130. 29. 351, 501,

Sin, a burden, 295. rivers, 315, 354, 423, Soma-drinker, a title of

the bonds of, 32, 34, 631. Indra, 6, 7, 12, 37, 274,

295, 408, 467, 552. fingers, 86, 94, 344, 362, 368, 436, 584, 605.

prayer for pardon 334, 403. Som&hutt, a Rishi, 264.

or removal of, 29, 31, Sit&, Furrow personified, Somika, a prince, son of
32, 42, 48, 54, 126, 127, 460, 461. Sahadeva, 410.

210, 217, 249, 253, 294- Siva, the Auspicious One,Soma-Rudra, 21, 645.

295, 311, 827, 408,458, viii., 300 note. Son, begetting of, a debt

457, 552, 645. Six, the, seasons, 29, 222, to Fathers, 631.

- — imputed, prayer for 382, 383. Son of Strength, Agni,

freedomfrom, 295, 398. regions, 220. 34, 35, 56, 62, 267 ;

* punishment of, 178, directions, 276. tee Strength, Son of.

233, 288, 292, 295, 296, expanses, 609. Sous, 720, days and

08, 425, 563, —-burthens, 383. nights, 221,

3NDB2: OF NAMES', FTC.

697

Sorcerers, Sorcery, 49, Stator, Jupiter, 45, 600 Sun, Sun-God, vi,. 7, 8,

52, 75, 477.

Sorceresses, 185.

Spear, India’s 577.

Spears of the* Manats, 40,
52, 10, 112, 520; see
Lances.

Speech, Goddess of, 5,
28, 56 : , 125, 225, 503,
.515, 541 ; see V&k.

fourth division of,

ordinary language,
227.

Speeder, the, Yishnu,
as the Sun, 566.
Spenta-Armaiti (cf. Ara-
mati), 508 note .

Spies of Varuna, 3$.

of Agni, 398.

Spirit, the Supreme, 222,
Spokes, twelve, the
months, 227.

• 360, the days of the

year, 227.

Spouses of Gods, 26 ; see
Dames, Consorts.
Spread of Aryan popula-
tion, 631.

Srinjaya, the name of a
prince, 410, 589, 612.
Srinjayas, a people in
N.-W. India, 410 note .
Srutaratha, a prince, 499.
Srutarya, a Rishi, 146.
Srutavit, a Rishi, 511.
St. John, 327.

St. Petersburg Lexicon,
ix., xiii., et passim.
Stall, aerial home of the
Maruts, 453.

Stallion, the rain -cloud,
550, 551.

Star of the Gods, the
Sun, 639.

Stars, 92, 108, 112.

notes.

Stayer, the, Indra, 45.

Steed, Agni, 50, 93,203,
327.

Steeds, priests, 322,327.

Red, flames of Agni,

97.

Steer, see Bull.

Steers, strong Soma li-
bations, 193.

Stoma, hymn of praise,
11 .

Stone, the heavenly, the
Sun, 491, 526.

Strength, a Goddess, 78.

Son of, Agni, 34,

35, 56, 62, 79, 80,

102, 125, 175, 195,
198, 267, 316, 333,

335, 336, 336, 339,
340, 342, 343, 407,
425, 468-470, 473,477,
481, 556, 559, 560,
560, 567, 572, 573,
577, 613, 615, 618.

Indra, 379, 383*.

— Sons of, the

Ribhus, 214, 4 10, 441,
443.

Subhard, the name of a
woman, 148.

Suehadratha, a prince,
546.

S ichi, Radiance, a form
of Agni, 837.

Sudds, King of the Trit-
sus, 63, 87, 148, 315,
353, 373, 375.

Sudhanv an, father of the
Ribhus, 23, 143, 212,
213, 387, 440, 441.

Suhastya, son of Ghoshd,
164 note.

Sumidha, a prince, 625-

40 43, 47, 48, 58, 78,
8*5,91-93, 95, 106,108,
114, 119, 123, 124,126 y
132,133,136, 138,147,
149, 153,161, 162, 166V
170-172, 190, 205,211,
212, 214, 217-219,221,
224-226, 228, 234,240 r
243,245,247, 254,255,
268, 273,283, 298, 323y
325,338, 360,351, 360,
374,379, 380, 385,307,
409,410,424, 425, 435,
438; 419, 451,457,461,
479, 481,488, 502, 510,
512,513,515, 529,534,
538,540, 561,563, 57-),
604, 615,627, 639,644.

— - — judge of innocence,
170,

and Moon, 3, 97,223,

519

Sana, the Luck of agri-
culture, 460, 461.

Sunahotra(s), the chief
and members of a fami-
ly, 282, 311, 312.

Sanahsepa, a youth about
to be sacrificed, saved
by prayer, 30, 32, 36,
467.

Sunitha, a man’s name,
546.

SOnritd, Pleasantness,
Gladness, personified,
56.

Suparna, Strong-winged,
Fair-winged, an eagle,
the Sun, 49 note .

Suparnd, (dual), perhaps
Sun and Moon, 223 note

Supporter, Indra, 600.

Supreme God, 2, 91,, 92,
180, 446 noki*

ittiDEX of names, etc.

Supreme Spirit, Soul, or Svadhiti, axe, perhaps the Taranta, a liberal prince*
Self, 222, 428 notes. thunderbolt, 495 note. 151, 152.

Sftrd, the Sun, 520, 626. Sv&ha, a sacrificial excla- Tdrkshya, a mythical
SurMMs, a regal Rishi, mation, Ave .1 Hail 1 being, probably a form
ISO. ' Blessing!,!?, 142,198, of the Sun, 114, 448.

, Sftri* matifcufcor of sacri- 264, S05, 369, 472. Tarya, a Rishi, 511.

$ce y prince, chief, 27* Svaitreya, son of Svitrd, Tempest- Gods, 8 ; sec
41, 431, 521. 47, 482. Maruts.

Sfiris, Gods, 196; Maruts, Svanaya, a pious prince, Ten, the, the fingers, 195.

521. 173, 174. * sisters, fingers, 344.

Sfirya, the Sun-God, 25, SvarbMnu, the demon of -daughters of Tvaeh*

. 49, 67, 68, 84, 87, 124, eclipse, 501, 502. tar* fingers, 124.

127,128, ISO, 153, 154; Svarga, heaven, 25, 120 —regions, 221, 515.

156, 165,167, 209, 211, notes. # Sfirya’s horses, 221..

241, 270* 272, 283, 323, Svasna, a demon, 277. months’ sacrifice, 5 13.

341, 346, 350, 365, §74, Svasti, Prosperity, 458. indefinitely for many,

380, 384, 393, 397, 407- said to be a Rishi’s 361, 427.

409, 412,415,428,430, name, 517. - — usual number of

485, 445, 449, 462, 465, Svitr&, the name of a things presented, 174,
470, 480, 481, 489, 496, woman, 47, 482. 496, 611, 635.

499-503, 511-513, 515, Svitriya, son of Svitrft, months of human

533, 538, 548,551,558, 47 note. gestation, 545.

559, 561, 566, 569, 617, Swan(s) 90, 218, 446, Tenfold draught, 169.

627, f63l, 634. 451, 545. Tenth age, or decade of

SfiryA S untight, daughter Swords, or daggers, 52. fife, 211.
of the Sun-God, 47, Sy&va, a Rishi, 158, 360, Thief, thieves, 67, 90,134,
154, 156, 162, 232, 247, 532. 444, 4 69, 480, 021.

449, 450, 540, 6T6, 023, Sy&v&sva, a Rishi, 519, Third lucid regions, 604,
525, 531, 532, 548. Thirty regions, 171.

Sushna, Parcher, a de- Synod, sacrificial assem- sfceps, divisions of

monof drought, 6, 1 4, bly, 41, 57, 78, 160, day and night, 629.

46, 70, 72, 76, 78, 130 565 ; see assembly. Thirty-three Gods, 48,

134, 166, 241, 277,283, inviolability of, 41 62, 193, 325,

349, 412, 432,489,493, note. Thdrr, 191.

494, 577, 580, 587, 592, Syfimarasmi, a Rishi, 147. Three, Agni, S urya, V&yu,

600. oofi

Susrav&s, a prince, 74,75.Tadris, the sacrificial
Sustainer, the, Agni, 509. name of one of the
—-Varuna, 294. Maruts, 96 note.

Sutambhara, a Rishi, 512, Taittiriyas, followers of
Sufclej, one of the Five the Taittiriya school

Rivers of the Punjab, of the Yajurveda, 27.

333 Tanfinap&t, Son of Him-

?utudri, the Sutlej, 44, self, a title of Agni,
S53 ‘ " ‘ ,15, 197, 321, 344. ’ >

• Gods, 193 note.

favourite number of

the Asvins, 47, 48,

altars, 306, 477.

birth-places of Agni, '

124.

‘ forms of Agni, lOl, ■

819, 341, 391.

• lights, 488f

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC.

m

Three, lustres, 488. Three-and-Thirty, the, Trasadasyu, Tenor of

forms of light (Agni), 325; see Thirty-three Dasyus, a prince, 147,

n, 101, 457. Gods. 443, 444, 448, 449,

—feet of Agni, 462. Three-wheeled car, of 487, 496, 608 note,

divisions, heaven, Asvins, 209, 246, 441. Tricha (triplet), 19, 68.

firmament, earth, 642. Threefold, the, earth, hea- Trikadrukas, three Soma

daily sacrifices, 201, ven, living creatures, 20 7. vessels; or the first

373, 378, 383, 442, 458. Amrit, 604. three days of the Abhi-

Steers, Agni, Sflrya, Three thousand, three plava ceremony, 43,

V&yu, 538. hundred, and thii’ty- 272, 278, 286.

■ Sister’s, Dawns, 266. nine Gods, 330. Trikshi, a prince, son, i.e .

■ sacrificial fires, 19, 41, Thrice, in connexion peer, of Trasadasyu, 608.

201. with Asvins, 47, 48. Trtnaskanda, a prince, 23 7.

horns of Agni, 509. Thrice-eleven Gads, 48, Triple-headed, Agni, 201.

Mornings, 335. 193; see Thirty-three Trishtup, one of the

Goddesses, 322. Gods. chief Vedic metres,

steps or strides of Thrice-seven brave (Ma- 228, 312, 489.

Vishnu, 27, 207, 208, ruts) 185. Trisoka, a. prottgi of the

566, 617. names or forms of Asviqr, 146,

Ladies of waters, the cow, 393. Trita, an old Vedic God,

383,884. libations, or treasures, 217, 251, 298, 303, 476,

earths, 132, 141, 221, 24. 481, 503, 504, 513.

293, 457, 538, 609. mystic things, 97. a Rishi, 72, 136,

heavens, 49, 221, 293, peahens, 257. 138, 272, 302, 552.

609. Thrice-mingled Soma li- Trivikrama Avat&ra, 27

firmaments, 49, 221, hation, 487. note .

293. Thunderbolt — sacrifice, Trivrishan, a Rishi, 487.

castes, 356. 10, 57. Truths natural la w, 137.

pillars, stakes for — — Indra’s friend, 13, Tryaruna, a Rishi, 437.

human victim, 32. 74, 582. Tugra, father of Bhujyu,

ranks or orders of of gold, 79, 110. 47, 145, 154, 159, 161,

Gods, 620. of ay as (iron or 210, 243, 246, 580, 58 .8,

•——realms of earth, 538. bronze), 78, 105. 633,

— — regions, 201, 457. Time, 208 note. — —a demon, or savage

rivers, 6C9. Tisbya, an asterism, 524, enemy, conquered by.

spheres of light, 548. 525. Indra, 580, 588.

stations of the Sun, Tibhonus, 40 note. Tugryans, families des-

27. Tools, awl, 624; axe, cended from Tugra, 47.,

worlds, 7, 48, 383, 215, 216, 318, 319; Tuji, 580 note , 588.

498, 566, 632. knife, 181; needle, 299; Tumblers, 12 note.

world-bowls, 538, sickle, 80, 420. Turvasa(s), the epony-

sacred beakers, 43; Towns, cloud-castles of mus of one of the Five

see Trikadrukas. drought fiends, 14. Tribes, and his people,

Dawns, 266. Traitana, name of a DfUa, 10, 52, 65, 76, 140,240,

naves = seasons, 227. 210. 433, 403, 581,589, 604,

TOO

INDEX OE NAMES, ET0;

TOrnyfau.aUn* aided Udder ^orifice, 424 ■ Uaha^har chariot sUtter-

by Indra, 74, 75, 277, = source of profit, 426 edby Indra, 278,432

5^7^ Ugradeva, a chief, 6*2, Uerj, a Rishi, 21, 7 ,

l' ur viti, a prince, 52, 76, Uktha, a recited land, 2, 146, 163, 168, 503.

84, 149, 276, 318. 11, 65 notes ,

Tutttji, a Proper Name, Ukthya, an offering with VadhkimatI, a p-Mc/ie
680 note. Soma, 19 note. of tKe A?Vma ’ ® '

Twain, Day and Night, 649. Unborn, the, the Sun as Vadhryasra a celebrated
Twain, the, Heaven and Supreme God, 91, 377. ’ ■

Earth, 294. —Babe, the, the Sun Vigdevatft, Goddess of

Tvashtar, the Artificet before rising, 205. Speech, , no .

of the Gods, 16, 19, 24, Universal Gods, 28, 36, Vftgdevi, the same, -Quote.
26, 43, 79, 72, 83, 104, 622 ; see Yisvedevas. Yahnili, pi'iest ; or lunar-

108, 110, 124,143,160, Upauish*ds, theological nous, 307 note.
166,198,212,213,216, treatises, 377. Yaidadagvi a prince, ^ <

250, 252,260, 264, 272, Upasaa,a Soma ceremoPy,YaisvadeTa Kvid, mvo-

288, 298, 305, 308,322, 266. cation of the All-Gods,-

868, 878, 382,888, 416, Upastuta, a Rishi, 51, 830.

437, 448, 472,493, 603, 52, 147. Vaisv&mitra, defendant

514,675, 597,603,611, Uraria, a demon oMrought, of Yisv&mitra, 1 note.

016, 619, 622. 6,277. Yaisv&nara, Bear to All

Twelve days, 438- Uranus, 575 note. Men, Agfii, 80, 81,127,

r -+ — moons (months)* 33. Orj&ni, Strength perso- 318-321, 840, 400, 401,

•s—i — forms (months), 221. nified, 162.

•^--spokes (months), 221. iJrjavya, a prince, 505.

Adifcyas, Sun-Gods, l^rjayanti, she who Yaitasvata, son of Yivas*

17, 58. strengthens, 275. v&n, 148, 370.

Twice-ten kings, 74. tJrmyd, Night, 532. Y&ja, one of the Ribhua*

Twins, tbe, Heaven and Griavdbha, a demon, 272 23, 24, 144, 213, 871,

Earth, 211. note. 388, 437-439, 442-506,

Two Sages, celestial Urukaksha, the name of 619.

priests, 252. a man, 607 note , Y&jas, Y&ja and his bro-

— —Heralds, Divine Ho- Urvasi, an Apsaras or there, the three Ribhus,-
tar-priests, 263. celestial nymph, 505. 144, 439.

Two-footed, Gaurt, Y4k, Usan&, a Rishi favoured Y&k or V&eh, Yoice, the
226. by Indra, 70, 71, 106, 'Word, Speech personi-

359, 166, 411,428,489, fied, 5, 26, 125, 232,
Uohathta, a Rishi, 193, 493, 497, 581. 359, 372, 374, 384,

202,210, * Ushas, Eos, Aurora, 393,515,510,541.

TJdg&tar, a prieat who Dawn, 40, 60, 61, 63, Yala, cave, imprisoning
chants S&ma-hymns, 65*67, 93, 169, 188, cloud, personified as a
237, 318. 222, 243, 272, 278,307,

Udder = altar; 404, 407. 836,861, 385, S88„S93,

« cloud, 88, 201, 401, 432,443, 512,515,

423, 468* 567, 626, 029*

403, 487, 561-564.
Yait&na*S titra, '■ o 7 2 note.

drought-demon, 14,72,
85, 272, 273, 277, 279,
289, 356,454, 576)598*
003*

INDEX OV NAMES, ETC, 70T

V4madeva, a $ishi, 391, 585, 612, 614, 015,617, Vasfiyus, a Rishi family,

413, 416, 418, 427,450. 619, 633, 640, 641,645, 485.

Vamra, said to be a Rishi, 648. V&ta, Wind, tbe Wind-

70, 147. Varuna, chief of the God, 70, 71, 250, 493,

Vanaspati, Sovran of the Lords of Natural and 563, 514, 610, 619.

Wood, a tall tree, the Moral Order, 31, 33, V&t&pi, the fermenting
sacrificial stake, 10, 68, 136. Soma, 251.

198, 252, 264, 322, ——King of heaven and Vavri (covering), a Rishi
327, 472. earth, 33. according to Sdyana,

the mortar for pound- Punisher of the 482.

ing the Soma plant, wicked, 178. Y4yu, Wind, the Wind-

and in the dual, mor- pardons the sins of God, 2, 3, 17, 18, 27,

tar and pestle, 37. penitents, 32, 34, 295 28, 40, 81, 151, 154,

Vandana, a prot dg6 of the 552. A 186-188, 191, 198,214,

Asvins, 145, 155, 158, sends rain, 551. 223, 224, 226, 235,251

161-163. his rivalry within- 270, 310, 341,350,356,

Vangrida, a demon, 74. dra, 448. 369, 384, 380, 421,

Vap&huti, name of a Varu\&ni, Varuna’s Con- 451-453, 461, 470,502,
special sacrifice, 508 sort, 26, 515. 503, 508, 518,519, 538,

note. Varfitri, a tutelary God- 559, 597, 615, 616, 619.

Varasikha, a demon or dess, 26, 504. V&yus, honorific plural

savage enemy, 588, 589. VarCitris, 389. for Y^yu, 271.

Yarchin, a demon or Vasa, a Rishi, 146, 157. Vayya, father or comrade
savage, 277, 432, 611. Yash at, a sacrificial excla- of Turviti, 76, 145,
Vftrsh&giras, sons of King mation, 41, 164, 305. 276, 418, 546.

Vrish&gir, 128, 130. Vashatk&ra, the cry Ya- Yeda, v. ix. xi. xii. xiv.
Yaruna,the Encompasser, shat deified, 48 note . Vedas, three, 462 note .

God of the starry hea- Yasishtha, a famous — —four, v. vi. 462 note*

ven, 3, 16,19, 21,26-28, Rishi, seer of Rook YI I. Veddnti(s), 563,564.

30-34, 48, 50, 51,57-59, of the R. V., 30, 90, Yedi, altar, 4 note ; see

61, 68,95, 99,102, 114- 140, 315, 374, 376. Altar.

116, 123,125, 126,130, V£stosbpati, Lord of the Vedic India, 378 note .
136-138,144, 153,154, Homestead, Indra, 503. Yedische Studien, 172,
163-170, 178, 179,189- Vasu, good, kind, Good 592, 597, 602,616,638,
191, 196, 199, 204,200, Lord, 40,123, 199,267, 640.

214, 218,227, 233,247, 276, 2 78, 336,303,385, Vena, probably Agni, 462.

•249, 259,292, 297,306, 446, 439, 33 0. Venomous re ptiles, charm

308,321-323, 333, 337, Yasus, a class of Gods, against, 255, 256 f
360, 301, 378-380,388, 40, 48, 62, 80, 123, Yetasu, a fiend or sav«

391,394, 397, 400,408, 138, 139, 104, 210,217, age, 580, 587, 588.

438, 438, 439, 443,445, 218, 263, 293,297,302, YiMli, a brook? 432.

448, 458,459,408,472, 328, 337, 362, 369,384, Yibhvan, one of the

487, 502, 505-507,514- 384, 458,503, 505, 517, Ribhus, 23, 24, 144,

517, 519, 533-540, 551, 519/ 526, 019, 633. 213, 368,437, 438,442,

552, 557, 505,57 2,582, Y^usruta, a Rishi, 471. 506, 507, 514, 528,

m

forms, or nnfos, wtd,-

Yidadasva, father of Visva, Heaven person!- Sun; a sacrificer, 40',
Puruinllha, 532 note, fied, 5/1. 04, 73, 79; 81, 191,'

Vidatha, sacrificial as- Visv&ch, an Asura or 885 , 370, 404, 477,502;
sembly, 41 note. fiend, 159. Voice, see V&k, Speech;

Yidathin, father of Rijis- Yisvacharshani, Bear to = thunder, 238.

' van, 412, 489. all men, Agni, 485. Vrichayfi, a damsel given

Yidhdtar, the Disposer, -a Bishi, 484. to Kakshiv&n by the'

■619. Vis v aka, a Bishi, 167, Asvins, 71.

Vikhanas, a Rishi, 147 158. Yrichivan(s), chief and

note, Visvdmitr'a, a famous people' of a tribe, 5891

Vimada, an ancient Eishi, ^ishi, 1, 13, 30, 315, Vrika, Wolf, robber, 59'.

69, 148, 154, 100, 332, 339, 353, 354,359, Vrikadvaras, the name'

Vindhyan Mountains, 361, 364, 373, 375, of a king, 297.

23 0 note. 376, 334, 390. Yrishabha, bull, manly,

Vintner, 255. Visv&mitras, 31 8y 330, strong, 242 note .

Yip&s, the river Bells, 374. Yrishagir, a royal Bishi,

44, 353, 432. Yisvarup’a, a three-head- 128, 156’.

Yirabhadra, the destroy er’ ed monster slain by Yyiahan, • male; strong,
ot Dakshate sacrifice, Indra, 272. bull, hero, chief, 242;

433 note. Yisvaa, a class of God’s, note.

Yhapatni, the Hero’s Wife, 4,540. a Bishi, 51.

perhaps the river Saras- Visvastaan, a Bishi, 484. Vrishanasva, a king, 71.
vati, ,135, 609,616 notes. Vis va vara, a Bishi, 511. Yiitra, Vritras, the chief
Vufipa(s), a Bishi and his Yisvav&r&, a woman said cloud-demon and fiends-

descendants, 02, 373. to be the seer of hymn of drought, 6‘, 14, 28,

VishxApfi, a Rishi’s son* V. 28. 43-40, 50, 69, 72-74,

restored to his father Visv&vasu, chief of the
by the Asvins, 157, GandharVas, 21 7 note.

158 .

Vishnu, Pervader, oj
Active Worker, a per-
sonification of the Sun,
27, 83, 110, 115, 207-
, 209, 220, 250,259,286,
302, 325, 378,581,394,

, 397, 416, 417, 468,514,

. 517, 519, 553, 554,560,
575, 579, 582, 614,617,
619, 641, 042.

Indra, 207,

Yisisipra, probably a
barbarian, 513.

Yisvedevas, Visvedevah,

‘ Yisve DevHb, All- Gods,
Universal Gods, a class
of deities, 4, 24, 28,
36, 113, 115, 136,142,
167, 191, 219,249,297,
330, 376, 379, 383,
384, 458, 502, 507,510,
5? 2, 514, 518, 581,
615, 617, 619, 621.
Vftahavya, a Bishi, 508.
VitastSi, Greek H ydaspes,
modern Jehlam or Jhe-
lum, a river’ of the

Yifpalfi, a proUgie of the Panj&b, 44.

Asvins, 40, 150, 159 , Vivasv&n, Brilliant, a
161, 245. name of the morning

70, 78, 88, 84, 87, 99 J ,
103, 1 04, 107, 108,110,
112, 120, 132, 134,142,'
, 160, 228, 229, 251, 271,.

272, 276 : , 283; 280; 200,
345, 347, 350, 351,353,
355, 358, 350, 306-368,
411, 413-415, 417-419;.
422, 423, 426; 427, 435,
440, 448, 489-491, 494,
497, 500, 513, 516,573,
574, 575, 577, 579, 583,
584, 587, 594-596, 598,
602, 604, 609, 615,627,
681, 640-644.

VVitra’s mother, 44. ’

'Yritra-slayer, a title of’
Indra, 20, 104,107, 128,
139; 250, 285, 34%350,

index m Names, etc. 703

303, 367, 371, 372,378, Waters, S'oti of the, Agni, 2 6, Wish- Goddess, Bhisliav^
431-433, 436, 498, 500, 124, 198, 250, 303-305, 369.

..501, 597, 609, 329, 504, 510, 567, 623. Witches, 135 ; see Sprce-

Vritra-slayer, Agni, 81, Savitar, 26, 619. resses.

101,260, 337,571,572, Wealth-giver, Agni, 19, Wizard, 624 note.

574. 100, 126, 300. Wolf, 50, 138, 156 : , 150,

— Soma, the Moon- Xndra, 45, 46. 247 567; she-wolf,

God, 116. Weavers, weaving, web, 159, 160, 247, 621.

Vritra-slayers, Indra- 263,307. Wolves = enemies, 560.

Agni, 140, 629. Web — hymn, 151. Women, praised, 531 ;

Indra-Varuna, 640. — worship, 263. abduction of, 415, 492;

Yulcan, 16, 72 notes, Weber, Prof. A., vii. xiv. prize of war, 415;. at-

Vyansa, a demon of xv. 287, 607, tend festivals, 172, 463;

drought, 130, 133,275, Weregild, 532. .5 take- part in sacrifice,

355. Wheel « the year, 227. 96, 1 06, 182,

Indra’s father, 416, Whip, of the Asvins, 25, =3 fingers, see Mai-

417 notes. 209, dens, Sisters.

Vyasva, a protegi of the — ■ — of the Maruts, 52, Woods, personified, 504.

Asvins. deified, 647. Wool, 242, 520.

lightning, compared Words, play upon, vrishan

Wallis, H. W., xiv. 2, 31, to- a, 533. strong, 242, 280, 357,

137, 189, 252, 552, 619. Whitney, Prof. W. D., 22, 499, 501, 603 ; dfiman,

Wanderer, the. Wind, Wicked, place of punish- bond, bounty, 585.

102, 145, 504. ment of the, 401. World-halves, heaven and

Indra as the Sun, 9, Wide-strider, the, Vishnu earth, 81, 566.

600. as the Sun, 207, 378, Worlds, pair of, 104.

War, weapons of, bow, Wife, careful and active, three, 7, 48, 383,

arrow, chariot, armour, 91, 1(11 ; benevolent, 498, 566, 632.

etc., 645 ; spear, lance, 531 ; decks herself for World-tree, 31, 223 notes.

40, 88, 110,112, 113, herhusband, 396; takes

232, 235; -sword, 52, part in sacrifice, 96, Xerxes, 648 note.

112, 113 ; dagger, 527; 106, 162.

club, 51, 87; sling, 166. Williams, Sir M. M,, xiv., Yadtj(s), chief and mem-
Warrior, the (Bharata), 443. bers of a great Aryan-

Rudra, 305. Wilson, Prof. H. H., viii. tribe, 10, 52, 76, 140,

— — Savitar, 643. xi. xiv. xv. et passim. 240, 433, 493, 581,604.

Warp and woof, 563,564. Wind, personified, 114, Yajam&na, institutor of

Waters, personified, 28, 145, 167, 214, 226,412; sacrifice, worshipper,

29, 83, 106, 124, 129, see V&ta, V&yu. wealthy householder,

213, 305, 379, 383,384, WmdVBride, 131 note. 12 note.

398, 404, 458, 514,618. Windisch, Prof., 297. Yajata, a Rishi, 511.

healing power of the, Wine (sur f l), 1 55. Yajnas, sacrificial cere-

29. Wine-skin, 255. monies, 19.

removers of sin, 29, Winters, hundred, see Yajurveda, the Veda of

physicians, 618, Hundred Winters. sacrificial texts, v.,417.

704 ' ’ "1 INDEX OF ‘NAMES, EJ>a, . j;

Yajus, sacrificial text, dis- Yamun£, tile A tafiovva YaVydvatf, t-he^
tinguished from recited of Ptolemy, the Jotnanea a river, 58 9.
hymn and claim t, 122, of Pliny, the modern Yay&fci, an^ anoint pa-
Ydjyd, sacrificial verse Jumna, 521, triarch, 42, 1 4, Of

uttered when the oh- Ydska, author of the « .j Y «

lation is offered, 1.93, Nirukta, 3, 5, 58, 114, Zend, xii. <

566 notes. 1J8, 141, 148, 227,346, Zeus, 75, 114. :■)

Yams, King of the De- 348, 353, 461. Zimmer, Prof. ‘ f H., 86,

parted, son of Yivasv&n, Y&tndbdnas, soreerers, 681, 648. *

37,40,49, 54, 64, 85, fiends. 4.9, JJoroastrians, I4^508i

%d 6, 1 St, 217, U ,

T»g§ ft

p 19
» 2ft
» 44

* 47

• 56
w 5ft
ft ftO

64

• 70

» 71

* 72

74

85

00

101

121

125

186

147

148

157

158

174

176

188

206

210

230

231
234
245

CORKIGENDA ET ADDENDA.

line 4 from below, after Vrittra insert a comma
t 2 from below, read resist for resis,

» 1 of note 7, read grdrahastdscth for grdhvakaitdtah

» 4 dele the full stop*o/ter invoice

* 3 from below, read flight for fight

* 1 of stanza 5, read thrice for tbirce

» 1 of stanza 10, insert a hyphen after earth

» 3 of notes, read bibMydd for bibkiydd

» "3 of stanza 9, read Immortal for Imortal

* 1 of notes, read 'came for come

p "3 of note 9, read collections for collection
p 3 of stanza 13, read Yrishanasva’s for Vri^hanasva's
ft 4 of note 13, read Vrishanasva for Yrisanasva
ft 4 of stanza 5, substitute ae Tiita cleaveth Vala’s fences, cleft
him through.

ft 5 from below, add But^Trita appears to be Indra’s associate
Agni. See Macdonell, Journal R. A. Society, July, 1893.
» 4 of notes, read Naml for Hami.

p 7,8, substitute Thou hast, with speeders, with Basagvas, India,
Sakra, with thunder rent obstructive Vala.
it 2 of notes, read Vasishtha for VaBish^ka
ft 19, read thee for the
p 2 from below, read for for to
p 3 from below, insert a full stop after ub
p 35, read Mitra fur Mitra.

ft 2 of notes, add But see Macdonell, Journal of the R. A*
Society, July, 3893, pp. 422 note 2, and 460.

9 13, insert a coipma after Sayu

ft 7, substitute brought the host of kind ‘Gods for carried home
Sudevl

p 4 of Btanza 23 and 5 from below, read Vish'n&pfl for Vishn&pu
p 2 of stanza 7, make the same correction ; and correct the
Index accordingly.

p 2 of notes, read Bh&vya/or Bb4va
p 2 of stanza 10, read Waking for walking
ft 1 of notes, after graSB insert and

• 15, read priests for prieBt

p 1 of note, read wiker's for udlers’t

p 3 and 4 from below, read Aditi for aditi and aditi /er Aditi
p 6 of notes, dele the

* 4 from below, read Strong God for Strong-God
p 3 of notes, read is for in

p 2 of stanaft 10, read M&ua’fl for Minas
v 7, after Asvins insert a comma

706

CORKIQKKPA m ADDENDA.

Page 267 line 3, after venom dele the colon. - 4 jb ■ ‘ \ *^'1

pr 260 »» 1 of stanza 11, after Hotra insert a comma

n 26 A i» 4 from below, put the line of division under 6 of notes

* 265 » 1 of stanza 9, after Agm insert a comma i \ ' s

* » 9 of notes, dele first line of note 2

* 267 • 25, read a way for away v V

i 272 « 2 of stanza 19 after Dasyus mseri a full stop < >•«.

if ... * 2 of notes read Drnav&bha for Urnav&bha **

* n 7 of notes, add Prof. Macdonell’s interpretation of thetlfcanza

has much to recommend it; ‘That wc : overcoming all our
foes by thy aids, (and) the barbarian by Aryan prowess,
might prosper, therefore for our benefit thou, didst deliver
oyer Yi^varupa, the son of Tvastr, to the Trita of (thy)
friendship’ i,c. te thy ally the God Trita. See Journal of
the R. A. Society, July, 1893, pp. 432, 433,
jr 291 . » 11, read omnipotent for omnipoten

y 299 w 12 from below, read worship for woraihip

a 302 r 3, 4 of stanza 10 , rea ^ 0 infallible, for the infallible a ■ v

Mi' 305 p 3 of stanza 3, read Tvashtar for TvaBhtar

p ,307 » 4 of notes, read vdhnih for vdhnih

« 827 » 2 from below, read Aitareya for Aitarey. . f . ■.>«?, •

m 345 r 2 of stanza 4, read Vritras for Vritras

. $t ‘ 347 f 5 from below, read recognized for reeongnized

r 352 » 1 of stanza 17,, read this for the. Make the same correction

in other places where this concluding stanza recurs .

» 315 r 5, insert a hyphen after im

n 3 66 » 5 from below, insert the sign of parenthesis after fodder,

R 378 r last of notes, reac? like /or ike

r 393 r 3 of stanza 2, mw? wingdd for winged

r 419 n 1 of stanza 11, read power for powers

r 432 r 6 from below, after Varchin substitute a full stop for the

comma

« 433 it 3 of stanza 24, read Karalati/or Kardlati

* ... r 1 of note 24, read KarMaii for Kardlati

r 438 r 4 from below, N5ve/br Ndve

" 442 r 2 of notes read vibhvatashtdh for vibhvatashtdh

w 443 n 7 of notes, a/fcr milk dele the full Stop

r 476 * 2 of note, add ^ee Maedonell, R. A. S. Journal, July, 1893,

p. 446

r 489 r 2 from below, read mentioned /or mentione

* r last of notes, in /or n

r 492 » 2 of stanza 4, insert a full stop after, glitters.

n 500 « 6 from below, insert full after filling ‘ :

» 523 » 3 of note, insert the after of

CORRIGENDA ET ADDENDA.

707

Page 526
, » 534

if 542
» 543
ir 546
» 550
» 552

* 555
if 571
» ...

* 576
5 * 581

» 586

* 588
n 593
» 597

* 608

» 615
>» 622
if 629
» 635

• 655

if

w ...

line 4 of note, read master for masters * 1 1 S

» 13, insert a comma after Mitra- V aruna

«» 5 of notes, insert a comma after dual

» 9, insert a comma after come

» 1 of stanza 5, insert to after or

« 2, insert a full stop after forward

if 5 of notes, add See Macdonell, R. A. S. Journal, July 1893,
p. 426.

» 3, insert a comma after conquer

i» 1 of stanza 7 substitute a comma for the full stop after rites
if 2 of stanza 10, insert a full stop after gifts
n 2 from below, read it for t
n 2 from below, insert a comma after Dasyu
if 1 of notes, dele the full stop after 41)

» 1 of stanza 1, insert a comma after quaffing

if 7 from below, put a full stop after ‘ mares *
w 7, substitute a colon for the comma after mvoketh
if 4 of stanza 12, substitute a full stop for ibhe comma after
hostility

/f 3 of stanza 22, dele the comma after once
i» 1 of stanza 11, after host insert with

» 3 of stanza 2, substitute a semicolon for the comma after Agni

» 7 from below, read dsvdndm for asvandm

n 3, read Visht&rapankti for Vishffirapankti
, p 4 from below, read Vishtdrapanhti for Vishtdrapanhti
h 4 from below, read Pankti for Pankti

Printed & published by k, j, lazarus <fe co,, at the Medical Mall Press, Benares,

Central Archaeological Library*

NEW DELHI*

4 * /o *s//

Call No. \j f ^

Author —

/<?■ Y^-^^/fcYsT

Title—//

1/rrj

Borrower No*

ii -

Date of Issue Date of Return

..-.A “Abode

thatteshirtism

"A \i

goVT. ; 0F-.lS 0t^ :

•..' ^ -’Ai^'A Department of ArcliaMei

; :;// ^ '‘A v V > ' ■

IVI 1 ./* * ' *\ ■’■'>'

'feiPi

; !

ttS ,;t£

':H>r

:- *£p , ....
