ROLL


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS

Microfilm Publication M887


RECORDS OF TOE UNITED STATES
NUERNBERG WAR CRIMES TRIALS

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KARL BRANDT ET AL. (CASE I)
NOVEMBER 21, 1946-AUGUST 20, 1947

Roll 36 l

Prosecution Closing Statements and Briefs

on All Defendants

(English and German Versions)


THE NATIONAL ARCHIVES
NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDS SERVICE
GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION


WASHINGTON: 1974


INTRODUCTION

On the 46 rolls of this microfilm publication are reproduced
the records of Case I (United States of America v. Karl Brandt
et al., or the "Medical" Case), 1 of the 12 trials of war criminals
conducted by the U.S. Government from 1946 to 1949 at Nuernberg
subsequent to the International Military Tribunal held in the
same city. These records consist of German- and English-language
versions of official transcripts of court proceedings, prosecution
and defense briefs, and final pleas of the defendants as well as
prosecution and defense exhibits and document books in one lan¬
guage or the other. Also included in this publication are a
minute book, the official court file, order and judgment books,
clemency petitions, and finding aids to the documents.

The transcripts of this trial, assembled in 2 sets of 30
bound volumes (1 set in German and 1 in English), are the recorded
daily trial proceedings. The prosecution and defense briefs and
answers are also in both languages but unbound, as are the final
pleas of the defendants delivered by counsel or defendants and
submitted by the attorneys to the court. The unbound prosecution
exhibits, numbered 1-570, are essentially those documents from
various Nuernberg record scries offered in evidence by the
prosecution in this case. The defense exhibits, also unbound,
are predominantly affidavits by various persons. They are
arranged by name of defendant and thereunder numerically. Both
prosecution document books and defense document books consist
of full or partial translations of exhibits into the English
language. Loosely bound in folders, they provide an indication
of the order in which the exhibits were presented before the
tribunal.

The minute book, in one bound volume, is a summary of the
transcripts. The official court file, in four bound volumes,
includes the progress docket, the indictment, amended indictment,
and the service thereof; appointments and applications of defense
counsel and defense witnesses and prosecution comments thereto;
defendants applications for documents; motions; uniform rules of
procedures; and appendixes. The order and judgment books, in
two bound volumes, represent the signed orders, judgments, and
opinions of the tribunal as well as sentences and commitment
papers. Clemency petitions of the defendants, in five bound
volumes, were directed to the military governor, the Judge
Advocate General, the U.S. district court, the Secretary of
Defense, and the Supreme Court of the United States. The finding
aids summarize transcripts, exhibits, and the official court file.

Case I was heard by U.S. Military Tribunal I from November 21,
1946, to August 20, 1947. The records of this case, as the

1


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


records of the other Nuernberg and Far East (IMTFE) war crimes
trials, are part of the National Archives Collection of World War
II War Crimes Records, Record Group 238.

The Brandt case was 1 of 12 separate proceedings held before
several U.S. Military Tribunals at Nuernberg in the U.S. Zone of
Occupation in Germany against officials or citizens of the Third
Reich, as follows:


Case No.

United States v.

Popular Name

No. of
Defendants

1

Karl Brandt et al.

Medical Case

23

2

Erhard Milch

Milch Case

1

3

Joeef Alt8tcetter

(Luftwaffe)

Justice Case

16

4

et al.

Oswald Pohl et al.

Pohl Case (SS)

18

5

Friedrich Flick

Flick Case

6

6

et al.

Carl Krauch et al.

(Industrialist)

I. G. Farben Case

24

7

Wilhelm List et al.

(Industrialist)
Hostage Case

12

8

Ulrich Greifelt

RuSHA Case (SS)

14

9

et al.

Otto Ohlendorf

Einsatzgruppen

24

10

et al.

Al fried Krupp

Case (SS)

Krupp Case

12

11

et al.

Ernst von

(Industrialist)
Ministries Case

21

12

Weissaecker et al.
Wilhelm von Leeb

High Command Case

14


et al.


Authority for the proceedings of the International Military
Tribunal against the major Nazi war criminals derived from the
Declaration on German Atrocities (Moscow Declaration) released
November 1, 1943, Executive Order 9S47Lof May 2, 1945, the London
Agreement of August 8, 1945, the Berlirt Protocol of October 6,

1945, and the Charter of the International Military Tribunal.

Authority for the 12 subsequent cases steamed mainly from
Control Council Law 10 of December 20, 1945, and was reinforced
by Executive Order 9679 of January 16, 1946; U.S. Military Govern¬
ment Ordinances Nos. 7 and 11 of October 18, 1946, and February 17,
1947, respectively; and U.S. Forces, European Theater General
Order 301 of October 24, 1946. The procedures applied by U.S.
Military Tribunals in the subsequent proceedings were patterned
after those of the International Military Tribunal and further
developed in the 12 cases, which required over 1,200 days of
court sessions and generated more than 330,000 transcript pages.


:


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


The crimes charged in the Brandt case consisted largely of
medical experiments performed on defenseless concentration camp
inmates against their will; "euthanasia" carried out on the
mentally defective, the physically sick, the aged, and ethnic
and racial groups; and the murder of concentration camp inmates
for the express purpose of collecting skulls and skeletons for
the Anatomical Institute of the Reich University of Strassburg.

The following medical experiments were conducted:

1. High altitude: to investigate effects of low pressure
on persons.

2. Freezing: to test human resistance to extemely low
temperatures.

3. Malaria: to develop controls over the recurring nature
of the disease.

4. Nfcjstard gas: part of a general research program in gas
warfare.

5. Sulfanilamide: to test the efficacy of the drug in bone
muscle and nerve regeneration and bone transplantation.

6. Seawater: to test methods of rendering seawater potable.

7. Epidemic jaundice: to develop an antitoxin against the
disease.

8. Sterilization: to test techniques for preventing further
propagation of the mentally and physically defective.

9. Typhus: to investigate the value of various vaccines.

10. Poison: to test the efficacy of certain poisons.

11. Incendiary bomb: to find better treatment for phosphorus
bums.

The prosecution alleged and the judgment confirmed that these
experiments wero not isolated acts of individual doctors and
scientists on their own responsibility but that they were the
result of high-level policy and planning. They were carried out
with particular brutality, often disregarding all established
medical practice. Consequently, large numbers of the victims
died in the course of or as a result of the experiments.

The euthanasia program was the direct result of a directive
by Hitler of September 1, 1939. It resulted in the secret killing
not only of aged, insane, incurably ill, and deformed German
citizens in sanatoriums in Germany but also in the clandestine
murder of foreign workers. The killing in gas chambers and by
injections in the sanatoriums served as a proving ground for
these forerunners of much largpr installations in the mass
extermination camps. *‘~ T

In addition to these experiments, over 100 concentration
camp inmates were killed for the purpose of obtaining their
skeletons. Their ghastly remains were found in Strassburg by
Allied troops.


3


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


The transcripts of the Brandt case include the indictments
of the following 23 persons all of whom were physicians except
defendants Rudolf Brandt, Viktor Brack, and Wolfram Sievers:

Karl Brandt: Personal physician to Adolf Hitler, Gruppcn-
fuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant (Major General) in
the Waffen SS, Reichskomnissar fuer Sanitaets- und Gesund-
heitswesen (Reich Commissioner for Health and Sanitation),
and member of the Reichsforschungsrat (Reich Research
Council).

Kurt Blcme: Deputy [of the] Reichsgesundheitsfuehrer (Reich
Health Leader) and Plenipotentiary for Cancer Research in the
Reich Research Council.

Rudolf Brandt: Standartenfuehrer (Colonel) in the Allgemeine
SS, Persoenlicher Referent von Himmler (Personal Admin¬
istrative Officer to Reichsfuehrer SS Himmler), and Min¬
isterial Counselor and Chief of the Ministerial Office in
the Reich Ministry of the Interior.

Joachim Mrugowsky: Oberfuehrer (Senior Colonel) in the
Waffen SS, Oberster Hygieniker, Reichsarzt SS und Polizei
(Chief Hygienist of the Reich Physician SS and Police),
and Chef des Hygienischen Institutes der Waffen SS (Chief
of the Hygienic Institute of the Waffen SS).

Helmut Poppendick: Oberfuehrer in the SS and Chef des
Persoenlichon Stabes des Reichsarztes SS und Polizei (Chief
of the Personal Staff of the Reich Physician SS and Police).

Wolfram Sievers: Standartenfuehrer in the SS, Roich Manager
of the "Ahncnerbe" Society and'Director of its Institut
fuer Wehrwissenschaftliche Zweckforschung (Institute for
Military Scientific Research), and Deputy Chairman of the
Managing Board of Directors of the Reich Research Council.

Karl Genzken: Gruppenfuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant
in the Waffen SS and Chef des Sanitaetsamts der Waffen SS
(Chief of the Medical Department of the Waffen SS).

Karl Gebhardt: Gruppenfuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant
in the Waffen SS, personal physician to Reichsfuehrer SS
Himmler, Oberster Kliniker, Reichsarzt SS und Polizei
(Chief Surgeon of the Staff of the Reich Physician SS and
Police), and President of the German Red Cross.

Viktor Brack: Oberfuehrer in the SS and Sturmbannfuehrer
(Major) in the Waffen SS and Oberdienstleiter, Kanzlei
des Fuehrers der NSDAP (Chief Administrative Officer in
the Chancellery of the Fuehrer to the NSDAP).


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Waldemar Hoven: Hauptsturafuehrer (Captain) in the Waffen
SS and Chief Physician of the Buchenwald Concentration Canp.

Herta Oberheuser: Physician at the Ravensbrueck Concentration
Canp and assistant physician to the defendant Gebhardt at the
hospital at Hohenlychen.

Fritz Fischer: Sturabannfuehrer in the Waffen SS and assist¬
ant physician to the defendant Gebhardt at the hospital
at Hohenlychen.

Siegfried Handloser: Generaloberstabsarzt (Lieutenant
General, Medical Service), Heeressanitaetsinspekteur
(Medical Inspector of the Arny), and Chef des Kehr-
machtsanitaetswesens (Chief of the Medical Services of the
Armed Forces).

Paul Rostock: Chief Surgeon of the Surgical Clinic in
Berlin, Surgical Adviser to the Army, and Amtschef dcr
Dienststelle Medizinische Wissenschaft und Forschung
(Chief of the Offico for Medical Science and Research)
under the defendant Karl Brandt, Reich Cocanissioner for
Health and Sanitation.

•

Oskar Schroeder: Generaloberstabsarzt; Chef des Stabes,
Inspekteur des Luftwaffe-Sanitaetswesens (Chief of Staff
of the Inspectorate of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe);
and Chef dos Sanitaetswesens der Luftwaffe (Chief of the
Medical Service of the Luftwaffe).

Hermann Becker-Frcyseng: Stabsarzt in the Luftwaffe
(Captain, Medical Service of the Air Force) and Chief of
the Department for Aviation Medicine of the Medical Service
of the Luftwaffe.

Georg August Weltz: Oberfcldarzt in the Luftwaffe (Lieu¬
tenant Colonel, Medical Service of the Air Force) and
Chief of the Institut fuer Luftfahrtnedizin (Institute for
Aviation Medicine) in Munich.

Wilhelm Beiglboeck: Consulting physician to the Luftwaffe.

Gerhard Rose: Generalarzt of the Luftwaffe (Brigadier
General, Medical Service of the Air Force); Vice President,
Chief of the Department for Tropical Medicine, and Professor
of the Robert Koch Institute; and Hygienic Adviser for
Tropical Medicine to the Chief of the Medical Service of
the Luftwaffe.

Siegfried Ruff: Director of the Department for Aviation
Medicine at the Deutsche Versuchsanstalt fuer Luftfahrt
(German Experimental Institute for Aviation).

5


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Hans Wolfgang Romberg: Physician on the staff of the Depart¬
ment for Aviation Medicine at the German Experimental Institute
for Aviation.

Konrad Schaefer: Physician on the staff of the Institute for
Aviation Medicine in Berlin.

Adolf Pokomy: Physician, specialist in skin and venereal
diseases.

The indictment consisted of four counts. Count one charged
participation in a common design or conspiracy to commit war crimes
or crimes against humanity. The ruling of the tribunal disregarded
this count, hence no defendant was found guilty of the crime charged
in count one. Count two was concerned with war crimes and count
three, with crimes against humanity. Fifteen defendants were found
guilty, and eight were acquitted on these two counts. Ten defendants
were charged under count four with membership in a criminal organiza¬
tion and were found guilty. 1

The transcripts also contain the arraignment and plea of each
defendant (all pleaded not guilty), opening and closing statements
of defense and prosecution, and the judgment and sentences, which
acquitted 7 of the 23 defendants (Blome, Pokorny, Romberg, Rostock,
Ruff, Schaefer, and Weltz). Death sentences were imposed on
defendants Brack, Karl Brandt, Rudolf Brandt, Hoven, Gebhardt,
Mrugowsky, and Sievers, and life imprisonment on Fischer, Gcnzkcn,
Hand loser, Rose, and Schroeder; varying terms of years were given
to defendants Becker-Freyscng, Beiglboeck, Oberhcuser, and
Poppendick.

The English-language transcript volumes arc arranged numer¬
ically, 1-30; pagination is continuous, 1-11538. The German-
language transcript volumes are numbered la-30a and paginated
1-11756. The letters at the top of each page indicato morning,
afternoon, and evening sessions. The letter "C" designates com¬
mission hearings (to save court tine and to avoid assembling
hundreds of witnesses at Nuernberg, in most of the cases one or
more commissions took testimony and received documentary evidence
for consideration by the tribunals). Several hundred pages arc
added to the transcript volunes and given number plus letter
designations, such as page number 1044a. Page 1 in volume 1
(English) is preceded by pages numbered 001-039, while the last
page of volume 28 (English) is followed by pages numbered 1-48.

Of the many documents assembled for possible prosecution use,
570 were chosen for presentation as evidence before the tribunal.
These consisted largely of orders, directives, and reports on
medical experiments or the euthanasia program; several interrogation
reports; affidavits; and excerpts from the Reiahsgesetzblatt (the
official gazette of Reich laws) as well as correspondence. A number


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


of the medical reports were accompanied by series of photographs
and charts of various experiments.

The first item in the arrangement of the prosecution exhibits
is usually a certificate listing the document number, a short
description of the exhibit, and a statement on the location of
the original document of the exhibit. The certificate is followed
by the document, the actual prosecution exhibit (most of which are
photostats), and a few mimeographed articles with an occasional
carbon of the original. In rare'cases the exhibits are followed
by translations or additional certificates. A few exhibits are
original documents, such as:


ibit No.

Doc. No.

Exhibit No.

Doc. No.

301

NO-1314

410

NO-158.

307

NO-120

441

NO-1730

309

NO-131

443

NO-890

310

NO-132

451

NO-732

357

1696 PS

462

NO-1424

362

628 PS

507

NO-365

368

NO-817

546

NO-3347

403

616 PS


No certificate is attached to several exhibits, including
exhibits 433, 435-439, 462, 559, and 561. Following exhibit 570
is a tribunal exhibit containing the interrogation of three
citizens of tho Netherlands. Number 494 was not assigned, and
exhibit 519 is followed by 519a and 519b.

Other than affidavits, the defense exhibits consist of newspaper
clippings, reports, personnel records, Reiohageoetzblatt excerpts,
and other items. There are 901 exhibits for the defendants. The
defense exhibits arc arranged by name of defendant and thereunder by
exhibit number, each followed by a certificate wherever available.

The translations in the prosecution document books are
preceded by indexes listing prosecution document numbers, biased
descriptions, and page numbers of the translation. They are
generally listed in the order in which the prosecution exhibits
were introduced into evidence before the tribunal. Pages 81-84
of prosecution document book 1 are missing. Books 12, 16, and
19 arc followed by addenda. The document books consist largely
of mimeographed pages.

The defense document books are similarly arranged. Each
book is preceded by an index giving document numbers, description,
and page number for each exhibit. The corresponding exhibit
numbers are generally not provided. There are several unindexed ’
supplements to numbered document books. Prosecution and defense
briefs are arranged alphabetically by names of defendants; final
pleas and defense answers to prosecution briefs follow a similar


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM


PUBLICATIONS


the " “* “ he ”

ro E "? lis J* la ^g ua ge final pleas, closing briefs, and replies

i fS! r! X °V briCfS ° f several defendants are missing, as are
briJfs? g “ agC briCfS and replies t0 Prosecution

which A ^r^n^ 8 :T n ? °5 r0U 1 filDed k0y documents from
„ h * h Trib ^? al * derived its jurisdiction: the Moscow Declaration

; ' < p C ^ 1Ve ,° rd ! rS ^ S47 md 9679 * the ^on Agreement, the

; thC Charter of the International Military Tri-

T^d'lS^S ll^ Un S 11 UW l 0, U ’ S - MiUtary Govern ®ent Ordinances
Following Forces ' ^ropean Theater General Order 301.

° d ^ese documents of authorization is a list of the names
and functions of the members of Tribunal I and counsels.

„ lt . Th c SC do ^ ujnents are followed by the transcript covers giving
s ch information as name and number of case, volume numbers,
language, page numbers, and inclusive dates. They are followed

findi^TIid’for J£ e ? aily proceedin 8 5 providing an additional
finding aid for the transcripts. The exhibits are listed in an
index, which notes type of exhibit, exhibit number and name,
corresponding document number and document book and page, a short
courl lP Z °U the f xhibi V nd the date when it wasof fired in

C °Vf t flle is lndexed in the court docket,
which is followed by a list of witnesses.

film XlEiSL™ l CC ° TdS duplicated elsewhere in this micro-
r 11 ? ' SUCh as P^^tion and defense document books

languj * ge that are largely duplications of pros-
- dofensc «hibits already microfilmed or opening
statements of prosecution and defense, which can be found in
the transcripts of the proceedings.

mirrnfMm r r° rdS ^ ! he Brandt Case arc close ly related to other
exhihits^nhmitr r< | S » ln Pec ° rd Gr °“P 238. specifically prosecution
NI SilJLSSl 1 ? ? • I ; tern * ti «»l Military Tribunal, T988;

? Indu strialist) Series, T301; NOKW (Nuernberg Armed
1*1, * H ifJ,C 0B ® a n d ) Senes, T1119; NG (Nuernberg Government)

MRQt in T1 J 39 i/? d rccords of the MiIch “se, M888, the List case,
M893 the Greifelt case, M894. and the Ohlendorf case, M89S.
in addition, the record of the International Military Tribunal

!“ !•" P ? b Mf bed in 1 <>f the Major War CrMnale
Before the International Military Tribunal (Nuernberg, 1947), 42
vois. Excerpts from the subsequent proceedings have been pub-

86 fore the Nuernberg Military
Tribunal Under Control Counoil Law No. 10 (U.S. Government *
Printing Office: 1950-53), 15 vols. The Audiovisual Archives

nirtnr- 0 ” ° f *5® N ^ io !^ 1 Archives and Records Service holds motion
picture records and photographs of all 13 trials and tape re¬
cordings of the International Military Tribunal proceedings


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


John Mendelsohn wrote these introductory remarks and arranged
the records for microfilming in collaboration with George Chalou.


. % la^

lilL^TARY T R I 3U .V A L KO^ I
CASE NC. 1

U. S. v. KARL BRANDT, ET AL.

CLOSING ARGUMENT for
THE UNITED STATES 0? AMERICA


J. M. HcVancy

Dr. Leo Alexander Alexander G . “ardy

Medical Consultant Arnost w 0 rlll'-“och"ald

^sther jane Johnson

For:

Telford Tavlor

Brltradler General, M.S.A.

Chief of Counsel 'or ’'ar crimes


Today marks the dosing ''••it of this trial, which
began on December 9, 1946. Today re have behind us 133
trial days, approximately 33 of which rare consumed by
the Prosecution in presenting the case-in-chief and
rebuttal evidence. Thirty-two witnesses gavo evidence
orally for the Prosecution and thirty witnesses, in
addition to the tv.-enty-three defendants, gavo evidence
for the Defense. The Proseoution submitted in evidence
570 exhibits, most of vfcioh were German tocumants
captured by the Allied armies. Defense exnibits totalled
855, consisting primarily of affidavits. By the timo
the Judgeont has been read, the record will exceed
12,000 pages.

It is appropriate, in looking beck over the history
of this proceeding, to note the fairness with which the
trial has beon conducted. Whitevor the defendants could
say in their behalf, they were ollw-sd to say. Tho
Tribunal has boon unstinting in its efforts to procure
such witnesses, documents, and facilities as tho Defense
has requested. As Justlco Jackson has stated, “Thoy
have beon given tha kind of a trial, ’-hioh they, in the
days of th:ir pomp and powor, never gave to any man." 1
Sovoral of these dofondants are peculiarly able to
opprooiato tnat fact to the fullest. The defendant Karl
Brandt, for oxccple, is no strengar to Nazi Justice. In
April 1945, as a result of difficulties with Hitlor and
3ormann, ho was affordod a trial of a few hours on a charge
of treason. Tried by aa C -S Cbergruppenfuchrer, he was
sentenced to death. Only the confusion of the dying days
of tha '-ar saved him for this reunion. Brandt admitted to
this Tribunal that there was some fault to be found with


1. I.M.T. transcript, p. 14333


- 2 -

that trial because, as he put it, "the sentence had been
established beforehand." 1

The responsibility of a fair trial to the defendants
has been discharged. So also for the Prosecution has
that obligation to tho pecples and races on vhoa thj scour.'J
of these crimes was laid. The crimes which those defendants
jwrpotrat3d in the nano of medical science neve been
established by clear and overwhelming proof which is
indelibly written in the record of this proceeding. No
ono oan doubt that these incredible events wore feot and
not fable. The tine for suspended Judgment is no u passod.
The time for docision has bojn rcaohed.


Tho Law of the Case


Bofore proceeding to outlino the Prosecu .ion's oaso,
it nay perhaps be desirable to anticipate sovoral legal
questions which ”ill undoubtedly bo raised with respoot
to War Crises and Crinos against Hanonlty, as dufinod in
Article II of Control Council Law No. 10. Lav- No. 10 is,
of course, the law of this case and its terns are con¬
clusive upon ovory party to t.iis proceeding. T.iis
Tribunal is, '0 rospactfully submit, bcund by the defini¬
tions in Lav; Ho. 10, Ju3t as the InternationrI kilitary
Tribunal was bound by toe definitions in the London
Charter. It '-aa statod in the I.U.T. Judgment tnat:

"Tho Jurisdiction of the Tribunal
is dofined in too Agreement and
Charter, and the crimes ooaing
within the Jurisdiction cf tho
Tribunal, forv-hloh thoro shall
bo individual responsibility,
arc set out in Article 6. Tho
law of the Charter is dooisivo,
and binding upon the Tribunal.


1. Transcript, p. 2622


"The Tribunal is, of course, bound
by the Charter, in the definition
which it gives both of ’.Jar Crises
and Crises asainst Humanity. "j

In outlining briefly the Prosecution's conception
of sons of the legal principles underlying War Crimes
and Crises against aimanity, I snail, with the Tri¬
bunal's permission, adopt some of tne language from
the opening statement of the Prosocution in the case
against Friedrich Flick, et al., now pending before
Tribunal No. IV. General Taylor tnero said:

••The definitions of crimes in Law 2Jo.

10 , and the comparable definitions in
the London A^reomoat and Chcrter of 8
August 1945, are statements and declara¬
tions of vtoat the law of nations was at
tnat time end before that time. Tnoy do
not create 'new' crimes; Article II of
Law No. 10 states that certain acts aro
'recognised* as crimes. International
lav- does not spring from legislation; it
is a 'customary' or 'ccomon' low which
develops from the 'usages established
among civilized pooples' and the 'dic¬
tates of the public conscience.’ 2 As
they dovolop, th jso usages and customs
become the basis and roason for acts and
conduct, and from tine to time they are
recognized In treaties, agreements, declara¬
tions, and larned texts. The London Charter
and Law No. 10 aro important items in this
3treaa of acts and declarations through which
international lav- grows; they aro way stations
from which tin outlook is both prospective and
retrospective, but they are not rProactive.
Lr. Henry L. Stinson has recently expressed'
tneso principles with admirable clarity: 3

'International law is not a body
of autaoritative codes or statues;
it is tao gradual expression, caso
by case, of the moral Judgments of
the civilized wedd. As such, it
corresponds precisely to the common
law of Anglo-American tradition.

\.e can understand the law of Nurem¬
berg only if wj soo it far what it
is - a groat new caso in the book of
enforcement of codified statutes'.


1. Trial of the Major T/ar Criminals, Vol. 1, pp. 218, 253

2. Hogue Convention No. IV‘of 18 October, 1907.

3 * The. Nuremberg Trial:_ Landmark in Law . Henry L. Stimson

published in "Foreign Affairs", January 1947.


- 4 -

"Lav* No. 10 is all this and something more
besides. It is a legislative enactment by
the Control Council, and is therefore part
of tha lav of and within Germany. One of
tha infirmities of dictatorship is that,
whan it suffars irretrievable end final
military discster, it usually crumbles
into nothins and leaves the victims of its
tyranny laadarless amidst political chaos"

Tha Third Reich had ruthlessly hunted down
every son and woman in Germany who sought
to express political ideas or develop

{ olitical leadership outside of tha bestial
deolosy of Nazism. When the Third Reich
collapsed, Germany tumbled into a political
vacuum. Thu I/eclaration by tno Allied Powers
of 5 JUne, 1945, announced the 'assumption of
supreme authority' in Germany 'for the main¬
tenance of ordor' and 'for too administration
of the country' , and recited that:

'There is no central government
or authority in Germany capable
of accepting responsibility far.
thd maintenance of order, tho
administration of the oountry,
and compliance with the retire¬
ments of the victorious payors.'

■'Following this declaration, the Control Council
v/as constituted as the repository of centralized
authority in Germany. Lav* Ho. 10 is an onaot-
suat of that body, and is the law of Germany,
although its substantive provisions derive from
and eaobdy the law of nations. The Nurnberg
Military Tribunals are established under the
authority of Law No. 10 ,± and they render Judg¬
ment not only undor international law .as declared
in Law No. 10, but under the law of Germany as
enacted in Lv- No. 10. Tho Tribunals, in short,
enforce both international law and German law,
and in interpreting and applying Law Ho. 10. thoy
must viovr Law No. 10 not only as a delcnration of
international lav, but as an enactment of too
ocoupying powers for the governanco of and ad¬
ministration of Justice in Germany. The onaot-
mont of Lew ..‘o. 10 was an exercise of logisln-
tivo power by t.ae four countries to whloh tho
Tnlrd Reich surrendered, and, as was held by tho
International Military Tribunal: 2

'.the unimbted ri^t of these

countries to legislate for the N
ocoupied territories h-s been
recognized by the civilized world.'"

'War Crimes are definod in Law 2«*o. 10 r.s atrocitios or

offenses in violation of tho laws or oust ass of war. This

definition is basod primarily upon toe Hague Conventions of


Control Council Law No. 10, Article III, par. 1 (d) end
2; Military Governnent Ordinance No. 7, Articlo II.

Judgment of the International Military Tribunal, Vol. I,
Trial of the Major War Criminals, p. 218.


- 5 -


1907 end tpe Gepava Convention of 1929, v'hich declare the
law of nations at those tines with respect to lead war¬
fare, the treatment of prisoners of war, the rights and
duties of a belligerent po' er ''hen occupying territory of
a hostile state, and other setters. The laws and oustons
of war apply botwoon belligerents, but not domestically or
among allies. Crises by Goman nationals against other
Gorman nationals are not War Crises, nor are acts by Goman
nationals against Hungarians or Roumanians. The War Crises
ohergod in this Indictment all occurred after 1 September
1939, and it is therefore unnecessary to consider the some¬
what narrow limitation of the scope of War Crises by the
International Military Tribunal to acts cosnittod after the
outbroak of war. One night argue that the occupations of
Austria and the Sudet^nl-nd in 1938 and of Bohemia and
Moravia in Maroh 1939 wore sufficiently similar to a stato
of bolligeronoy to bring the laws of war Into offeot but
such questions are aoadeoio for purposes of this case.

However, in the case of saw of the defendants, and
this is especially true with respect te Oobnordt, Fischer,
and Oberhauser in connection with tn. sulf-nilaalda experi¬
ments, it is to be expected that tno argument ' ill be nado
that crimes against Polish, and perunps also Czech, nationals
do not constitute War Crimes 'lthin the senni: 3 of Control
Council Lav.* iio. 10. This argument is based upon the propo¬
sition that Gomony was no lor^er bound by the rules of land
warfare in may of the territories occupied Airing the wer
beoouso Germany had coxpletoly subjugated those countries
and Incorporated then into the German Reich, and tnoi\jforo
Germany had tho authority to deal with the occupied countries
as though they '-are part of Germany. Thus, the defense
placed in evidence tho Russo-Geman Boundary and Friendship
Treaty of 30 December 1939 as well as certain German decreos


I '


- 6 -


concerning tha adfcinistration of occupied Poland^

Ylithout stopping to argue tha point that that part of
Poland administered by the so-called General Govern¬
ment, from vhich cans the Polish subjects for the
sulfanilamida experiments, was n^ver incorporated into
the Heich, it will be sufficient to point out that this
argument wgs disposed of by tha International Military
Tribunal. In its Judgment, the following was said:

•'In the view of the Tribunal, it is
unnecessary in this case to decide
whether this doctrine of subjuga¬
tion, dependent as it is upon mili¬
tary conquest, has any application
whore the subjugation is the result
of the crime of aggressive war. Tho
doctrine was never considered to be
applicable so long as thoro was any
army in the field attempting to
rcstoro tho occupiod ccuntrios to
thoir true owners, and in this case,
therefore, the doctrine caild not
apply to any territories occupied
aftor 1 September 1939."

Tho argument also has no validity with respect to
Czech nationals. The International Military Tribunal
said that:

"As to Y.'ar Crimes ooomitt jd in Bohemia
and Moravia, it is a sufficient -.never
that these territories vjtv r.ov„>- adv\od
to tno xieich, but a mere protectorato
was established over the...

In connection with the charge of CrUae* against
Humanity, it is .also anticipated that -r. argumjnt will bo
made by tho defense to t.io effect that crimes committed by
German nationals against other German nationals cannot
constitute Crimes against Humanity as defined by Article
II of Control Council Law Ho. 10 and hence are not within


1. Gebhardt Exhibits 13, 14 and 15.

2. Trial of the Major War Criminals, Vol. 1, p. 254.


the jurisdiction of this Tribunal. The evidence of the
Prosecution has proved that in substantially all of the
experiments prisoners of war or civilians from Goman
ocoupied territories were used as subjects* .-This proof
stands uncontradictod save by general statements of the
defendants that they were told by Himmler or some un¬
identified person that the experimental subjects wore
all German criminals or that the subjects all spoke
fluent German. ThU3, for the most part, the acts horo
in issue constitute Viar Crimes and hence, at the same
time, Crimes against Humanity. Certainly thero has boon
no proof whatovor that an order was over issued restricting
the experimental subjocts to German criminals as dis¬
tinguished from non-Gorman nationals. If, in this or
that minor instance, th3 proof has not disclosed the
precise nationality of the unfortunate victims or has
oven shown them to be Gornans, wo may rest assured that
it was meroly a chance occurrence.

Bo that as it may, the Proseoution does ot 'o.nh to
ignore a challjngo to the jurisdiction of the T-lbuml
oven though it is of minor importance to thi3 aa?o. One
thing should be made clear at the outset: v*o ore not
hero concerned with any quostion as to JurS •’diction over
orirnos committed before September 1 , 3?~.' ?bother
against Gorman nationals or other-iso. Tnat subjoct
has boon mcotod and is in issue in another case now on
trial, but the crimes in this case all occurred after
tho war began.

Moreover, wo ore not ooncornod with the question
whether Crimes against Humanity oust have been conzaittod
*in execution of or in connection with any crimes within
tho Jurisdiction of tho Tribunal". The International
Military Tribunal construed its Charter as requiring that


- 8 -

Crimes against Hunanity be conaitted in execution of, or in
connection with, the criae of aggressive war. Whatever
the merit of that holding, the language of the Charter of
the International Military Tribunal which led to it is
not included in the definition of Crimes against Humanity
in Control Council Law No. 10. There can be no doubt that
Grilles against Humanity as defined in Law Ho. 10 stand on
on independent footing and oonstituta crimes per sa . In
any ovont, the orimus with which this ca30 is concerned
wore in fact all "committed in execution of, or in connec¬
tion with, the aggressive war". This is true not only of
tho nodical experiments, but also of the outh .nasia pro¬
gram, pursuant to whioh a largo number of non-Gorman
nationals woro killed. Tho Judgment of the International
Military Tribunal expressly so holds.,

Thus, It is clear that the only issue which is raised
In this oasu as to Crimoa against Humanity is whothor tho
Tribunal has Jurisdiction over crimes connittod by Gennr.ns
against Gomans. Does tho definition of Crimes against
Humanity In Control Council Law No. 10 coaproh CVJT.08
by Gomans against Germans of the typo ’-ith which this caao
is concerned. The provisions of Law No. 10 nio binding
upon tho Tribunal as the law to be applied *o the onso.g
Tho provisions of Section 1(c) of .irtis*. II arc clear and
unambiguous. Crimes against Humanity are tnero defined as:

"Atrocities and offenses, including
but not limited to murder, exter¬
mination, enslavement, deportation,
imprisonment, torture, rape, or other
inhumane acts committed against any
civilian population or persecutions
on political, racial or religious
greunds whothor or not in violation
of the domestio laws of the oountry
whore perpetrated."


1 . Trial of tho Major War Criminals, pp. 231, 247, 252, 254,301

2 . Trial of the Major ’.'or Criminals, pp. 174, 253.


The words 'any civilian population 1 ' cannot possibly be
construed to excluds German civilians. If Gqrrr.ns ape
deemed to be excluded, thora is little or nothing left
tc give purpose to the concept of Crinos against Humanity.
War Crimes include all acts listed in tbo definition of
Crimes against Humanity when committed against prisoners
of war and the civilian population of occupied territory.
The only remaining significant groups are Germans and
nationals of tho sctolite countries, such ns Hungary or
Houmanin. It is one of the Tory purposes of tho ccncopt
of Crinos against Huarmity, not only as set forth in Law
No. 10 but also as long recognized by internet ionnl law,
to roach tho systaeatio commission of etrooitles and
offonsos by e Steto against Its own pooplo. Tho con¬
cluding phrase of tto dofinition of Crinos against
Humanity, which is in tho altomatlvo . makes it quito
clonr that crinos by Gomans against Gomans are rlthin
the Jurisdiction of this Tribunal. It rseds "or por-
sooutions on political, racial or religious grounds
whothor or not in violation of tho domostlo laws of_t ho
country where perpetrated" . This referonoe to "drner.tio
laws" can only moan discriminatory and oppressive legis¬
lation dirooted against a State's own pooplo, as for
example, tho Nflrnborg Laws against Goman Jews.

Tho mattor is put quito boyond doubt by Article III
of Law No. 10 which authorizes each of tho occupying powors
to arrost persons suspected of having coumittod crinos
defined in Law No. 10, and to bring thorn to trial "before
an appropriate tribunal". Paragraph 1(d) of Article III
further provides that:

"Such Tribunal nay, in tho caso of crimes
commit tad by persons of German citizenship
or nationality against other persons of
German citizenship or nationality, or
stateless persons, bo a German court, if
authorized by tho occupying authorities."


This constitutes an explicit recognition that acts
cccmittod by Germans against othor Gormans are punish¬
able as crines under Law No. 10 according to the
definitions contained therein, in the discretion of the
occupying power. Biis has particular reference to Crines
against Humanity, since the application of Crimes against
Peace and War Crines, while possible, is almost entirely
theoretical. If the occupying power fails to authorize
Goman courts to try crines committed by Go naans against
other Gomans (and in the American zone of occupation
no such authorization has been given), then tnese cases are
tried only before non-Goman tribunals, such as these
Military Tribunals.

What would be tho effect of a holdin" that crines by
Gomans egainst Gomans can under no circunstances bo
within tho Jurisdiction of the Tribunal? Is this Tribunal
to ignore the proof that tens of thousands of Gomans wore
oxtorninatod pursuant to a soorot docroo, bacauso a group
of criminals in control of a police State thought thon
"useless outers- 1 and an unnecessary turden, or that Goman
prisonors were murdered and nistreatod by the thousands in
concentration oonps, in part by nodical experimentation?
Military Tribunal II in the Milch case held that crluos
against nationals of Hungary and Rouucnir. wore Crimes
against Humanity. There is certainly no ronson in saying
that there is Jurisdiction over crines by Gomans agoinst
Hungarians but not against Corn-ns.

The Judge©nt of the International Military Tribunal
shows n clear recognition of its Jurisdiction over crines
by Gomans against Gomans. After reviewing a large number
of inhumane acts in connection with War Crimes and Crimes
against Humanity, the Tribunal concluded by soying that:


- 11


-.fros tho boginning of the war

in 1939 War Crinas wore comittod
on a vast scale, which were also
Crises against Humanity} and insofar
as tho inhunana acts charged in tho
Indictnent, and ae re it tod after tho
boginning of tho war, did not con¬
stitute Vi or Crises, they wore all
ocssitted in execution of, or in
connoction with, the aggressive war,
and therefore constituted Crinos
against Husanity"^

Sinco Viar Crises are nocossarily also Crises against
Husanity, the broader definition of tho latter oan only
refer to crises not covered by tho forcer, n'uaoly, crises
against Gomans and nationals of countries other than
those oocupiod by Gemany. Moreover, the Prosecution in
that case srlntninod that the inhusnno troatsent of Jov/s
and political opponents in Go many t*oforo tho war con¬
stituted Crises against Husanity. Iho Tritxinal said in
this connootion:

•niith regard to Crises against Husanity
thoro is no doubt vfcntcver that political
opponents wore surderod in Gornany boforo
tho war, and that nany of then were kept
in concentration c^aps In ciramstancos
of great horror and cruelty. The polioy
of terror was certainly carried out on a
vast scriio, and in many cases v~s org“nlzod
and systxaatio. Tho policy of persocution,
repression, and nurder of civilians in Gar¬
s'-ny before the v»ar of 1939, who r.re
likely to bo h03tilo to the Governsom ,
was sost ruthlessly oarriod out. Tho
persocution of Jews during tho sano period
is established beyond all doubt.

The Tribunal was there speaking exclusively of crises
by Gomans against Gomans. It hold that such acts wore
not Crises against Husanity, as dofinod by tho Charter,
not because they ware crises against Gomans, but bocauso
thoy wore not oossitted in execution of, or in connootion
with, aggressive war. Indeed, the Tribunal went on to

•

hold that the very s-ae acts connitted eftor tho war began


1. ibid, p. 254.


- 12 -


wora Crlnas against amenity. No distinction was drawn
between the murder of German Jews and Polish or Hussion
Jovs. And, moreover, no distinction was drawn between
criminal nodical experimentation on German end non-Geroan
concentration camp inmates or the nurdor of German and
non-Goman civilians undor tto euthanasia program. Tho
Tribunal hold then all to bo War Crlnoa and/or Crinos
against Human ity.

TH2 TH3C3Y 0? TiLS CASJS

What is chargod in tho Indictmunt against those
dofondnnts? Vihat is tho nature of tho crimes for which
thoy are on trial? In Count I of the Indictment all of
tho defendants aro ohargod vdth having participated in
a common plan or conspiracy to ooneit, and which involved
tho commission of, criminal nod loci experiments on
involuntary human suttf octs, which roailtod in nurdors,
atrooities, and other inhunano sots. Tho Tribunal has
already heard argument on tho question of jurisdiction .
to entertain tho chargo of conspiracy, and accordingly 1
shall limit myself, at a lator point, to a few remarks on
tho law of ocnspir-cy ns such, tho form of participation
set forth in Oootion 2 of Article IV of Law No. 10, and
the application of both to the facts of this case.

Under Counts II and III (War Crimos and Crimes against
Humanity, respectively), certain of tho defendants aro

ohargod with participation in the murder of persons
pursuant to the outhanasia program, the nurdor and ill-
treatmont of tubercular Poles, and tho murder of 112 Jews
for a skeleton collection. Undor Paragraphs 6 and 11 of
same oounts, all of the defendants are charged with parti¬
cipation in criainr.l nodical oxporientation on human
subjects without their consent, which rewiltod in murders.


- 13 -


atrocities, and other Inhumane acts4 It should me emphasized,
as the Prosecution hcs frequently pointed out during the
trial, that the basic charge under Paragraphs 6 and 11 of
the Indictment is participation in criminal experiments,
whatever those experiments nay have been. Particulars
concerning certain experiments were setlbrth In the Indict¬
ment and certain of the defendants were listed as having
boen specially active in and responsible for then. This,
however, in no way Units the Prosecution In supporting the
haslo charge by whatever evldenco Is In tho record. It Is
a completely erroneous conception of tho Indictment to view
it as charging this or that defendant with having participated
In this or that exporlmont. This amounts to confusing tho
proof to sustain tho charge with tho ohargo ltoolf.

Moreover, tho proof with respect to a given defendant
should not be vlowed by dlcmenberlng It »nd examining Its
separate parts. The ovldonce must bo vlowod as a whole to
roach a .ludgmont as to the real guilt of the defendants.

It is Impossible to assess the cumulative effect of tho
proof If tho doouner.ts aro separately considered and wclghod
as so ninny plocee of lifeless paper. I vonturc to prodlct
that In tho closing statements of dofenso oounsol thoro will
be a tedious torturing of oach doouner.t, each to be discarded
beforo proceeding to the next, without evor mooting tho oneo
established by the full sweep of the proof. One is sonotlmoo
able to brook Individual sticks from a treo. But If those
some stloks arc bound together, the result is unbreakable.

80 It Is with proof.

No more can the experiments be viewed as hermetically
sealed containers. Various experiments must be considered
together to appreciate the full guilt of a defendant even
though a Judgment of guilt nay not be sought with respect
to eaoh such experiment. For example, all of the Luftwaffe
defendants would have the Tribunal find that In the high
altitude experiments the dead Ra6cher was somehow exclusively


-Ir¬


responsible for all fatalities, even though et the time he
was or. active duty with the Luftwaffe. When the defendants
Ruff and Roaberg allegedly first learned of hlB ■extra¬
curricular" ourder8 by having one killed In front of Ronborg,
they only hung around Dachau working with Rascher for another
6 weeks or so, and after all, according to Ronberg, ho saw
.lust two aoro men killed In that tlae. Row, if one were
somehow to think for a noscnt that there Is some faint
mitigating dreamstance In the exemplary conduct of those
two knights of Luftwaffe medical virtue, lot U6 test the
truth of their alleged dlsassoclatlon from R»sohor by looking
at the freezing experiments which bog-in lcos than 30 days
after Ruff, Roraborg, and Raschor published their Joint report
on the high nltltudo "tea-party". Did the Luftirnffo -Codlcal
Service have anything to do with those experiments on Inmates
In Dachau after that blackguard Raschor had killed men In
their decompression chonbor? Yes, tho experiments wore
ordored by the Luftwaffe and oxeouted exclusively by
Luftwaffo doctors. Did Raschor have anything to do with then?
Yos, Indeed. Ho assisted Holzloohncr and Flnke In torturing
to death many more concentration camp vlotlns. Did Ruff
and Ronborg know anything about this oontlnuod criminal
aotlvlty? Yes, Ronberg was awarded a nodal on Rnsohcr's
reconmondntlon In Soptcaber and In October 1942 both Ruff
and Romberg wore here In '..’urnberg listening to the very
odifylng reports on tho freezing experiments by Holzloohnor
and Rneoher. Thus, to appreciate tho full guilt of the
defendants Ruff and Ronberg In connection with tho high

4

altitude experiments It Is necessary to look to the freezing
experiments to sec th-t Rascher, far from being court
martlaled by the Luftwaffe, after obtaining full knowledge
of exactly what had happened, retained his rank and continued
his murderous work In ocoperation with other Luftwpffo doctors.


- 15 -


tt will fee seen from this review of the Indictment
and from the evidence submitted by the Prosecution that
these defendants are, for the nost port, on trial for the
orixao of murder. As in all orininol cases, two simple
issues arc presented: Were crlnos connltted and, if so,
woro these defendants connected with their commission in
my of tho ways specified by Law Ko. 107 It is only the
fact that those crimes were connltted in part as a result
of nodical experiments on hunan beings that nnhos this caso
somewhat unique. And while considerable evldenoe of a
technical nature has been subnlttod, one should not loeo
sight of the true slnpliclty of this case. The defendant
Roso, who was pornlttod to cross-examine the Prosecution's
witness Dr. A. C. Ivy of tho Uodlcnl School of the Univer¬
sity of Illinois, boenno quite oxasporated at his
reltoratlon of tho basic principle that hunan cxpcrlnontal
subjects must bo volunteers. That, of course, Is tho
oomorstono of this oaso. Thorc nro, indood, other pre¬
requisites to a pormisslblo medical experiment on human
bolngo. Tho experiment must be based on the results of
animal experimentation and a Knowledge of the natural
history of the disease under study and designed In such a wry
that tho anticipated rosults will Justify tho performance
of tho exporlmont. This is to sny that tho experiment
must bo such as to yield results for the good of socloty
unprocurable by othor methods of study and must not be
random and unnecessary In nature. Moreover, tho experiment
oust be conducted by scientifically qualified persons in
such manner as to avoid all unnecessary physical and mental
suffering and injury. If there is an a priori reason to
believe that death or disabling injury might occur,


- 15 -


the experlaentore must serve as subjects themselves along
with the non-sclentIflc personnel. These arc nil*important
principles and they were consistently violated by these
defendants and their collaborators. For example, wo have
yet to find one defendant who subjected hinself to the
experiments which killed and tortured their victims in
concentration comps. But important as those other consider¬
ations are, It is the most fundamental tenet of medical
ethics and human decency that the subjects volunteer for the
experiment after being informed of Its nature and hazards.
This is tho clear dividing line botween the criminal and
what may be non-orlnin-a. If the oxperinental subjects
cannot bo said to hnvo volunteered, then the Inquiry need
proceed no further. Such is tho simplicity of this caso.

What then is a volunteor? If one has a fertile
imagination, supposititious oases might to put which would
roqulro a somowhat refined Judgment. Ho cuch problem faces
this Tribunal. Tho proof is overwhelming that there was
never tho slightest pretext of using volunteers. It was
for tho very reason that volunteors could not bo oxpected
to undergo the murderous experiments which pro tho sub.loct
of this trial that these defendants turned to the in¬
exhaustible pool of miserable and oppressod prisoners In
tho concentration camps. Can anyone seriously believe
that Poles, Jews, and Russians or even Germans, voluntarily
submitted themselves to the tortures of tho decompression
chamber and freezing basin in Dachau, the poison gas
chamber In Natzwollor, or the sterilization X-ray machines
of Auschwitz? Is it to be held that the Polish girls In
Rr.vonsbruck gave their unfettered consent to be nutllatod
and killed for tho glory of the Third Reich? Has the
miserable Gypsy who assaulted the defendant Belglboeck


- 17


In this very court roon a voluntary participant .In the
sea voter experlmerts? Did the hundreds of victims of
the nurderous typhus stations In Buchenwald and Natsweiler,
by any stretch of the Imagination, consent to those
experiments? The preponderance of the proof leaves no
doubt whatever a6 to the answer to these questions. The
testimony of experimental subjects, eye-witnesses, and
the documents of the defendants own making establish
beyond a shadow of a doubt, that these experimental subjects
were non-voluntoors In every sense of the word.

This fact Is not seriously denied by tho defendants.

U .oat of thorn who performed the experiments themselves have

adnlttod that thoy nover so much as asked tho subjects

whether they were volunteering for tho experiments. As to

the logal and moral necessity for consont, the defendants

pay theorotloal lip service while at tho sane tine leaving

tho back do^r ajar for a hasty retreat. Thus, It Is said

•

that the totalitarian "State" ascuncd tho responsibility

for tho designation of tho oxporlmontal subjects and under

such circumstances tho men who planned, ordcrod, performed,

or otherwise participated In, the experiment cannot be hold

orlnlnnlly responsible even though non-volunteers wore

tortured and killed as a result. This was perhaps brought

out moot clearly as a result of questions put to tho

defendant Karl Brandt by the Tribunal. 3hon asked hl6

view of an experiment whloh was assumed to have teen of

highest military necessity, and of Involuntary character

with resultant deaths, Brandt replied:

"In this case I am of tho opinion that,
when considering the clrcunstancos of the
situation cf the war, this state Institution
which has laid down the In; ortnnee lr. the
Interest of the state at the sane time takes
the responsibility away ;*rom the physician
If such an experiment ends fatally and such a
responsibility has to be taken by the state." 1


1 Transcript, p. 2567


- IS -


Further questioning elicited the opinion that the
only nan possibly responsible in this suppositious caso
wr.s Hlnaler, who had the power of life and death over
concentration caap inmates, even though the experinent
any have been ordered, for example, by the Chief of the
iiodlcnl Service of the Luftwnffe and executed by doctors
subordinated to hln. Host of the other defendants took
a slnllnr position, that they had no responsibility In
tho selection of the experimental subjects.

This defense Is, In the view of the Prosecution,
completely spurious. The uso of Involuntary subjects
In a nodical experiment Is a crime and, If It rosults In
donth, It Is tho crlno of murder. Any party to the
oxporlnont Is guilty of nurdor and that guilt cannot bo
esoaped by having a third porson supply tho victims.

The norson planning, ordorlng, supporting, or oxeoutlng
tho exporlnont Is urder a duty, both moral and lcKri, to
soe to It that tho experiment Is properly performed.

This duty cannot bo delegated. It Is surely Incumbent
on the doctor performing the experiment to satisfy himself
that tho subjects voluntocrcd after having been Informed
of tho nature and hazards of the experiment. If they nro
not volunteers, It is his duty to report to his superiors
and discontinue tho experiment. These defendants have
ooepotod with oaoh other In feigning complete ignornneo
about the consent of the experimental victims. They knew,
r.s the evidonce proves, that the miserable inmates did
not volunteer to be tortured and killed. 3ut even assuming
tho impossible, that they did not know, It Is their
damnation not their exoneration. Xnowlodge could have
beer, obtained by the simple expedient of asking the
subjects. The duty of Inquiry could not be clearer and
cannot bo avoided by such lane excuses as "I understood
they were volunteers' or 'Himmler assured me they were


volunteers"i

In this connection, It should never be lost sight of
thr.t these experlnents were performed In concentration
camps on concentration camp Inmates. However llttlo some
of these defendants say they knew of the lawless Jungles
which were concentration canps, where violent death,
torture and starvation nnde up the dally life of the
inmates, they at least knew that they were places of
torror where all persons opposed to the Nazi government
wore Imprisoned without trial, where Jews and Poles and
other so-called "racial Inferiors" for no crime whntovor,
unloss tholr race or religion be a crime, were lncarceratod.
Those simple facts were known during the war to people
all over the world. How much greater then was the duty
of these defendants to determine very carofully tho
voluntary character of these experimental subjects who
xioro so conveniently available. True it Is that these
defendants nro not chruvod with responsibility for the
manifold complex of crimes which nndo up the conoontratlon
onmp System. But It cannot be held that they could enter
tho gatos of tho Inforno and any in effect: "Bring forward
the oubjccts. I see no evil; I hear no evil; I spoak
no evil." They asked no questions. T^oy didn't lnqulro
of tho Inmates ns to such details as consent, nationality,
whethor a trial had been held, what crlmo had been committed,
and the like. They did not because they know that tho
wretched Inmates did not volunteer for tholr experiments
and were not expected to volunteer. They embraced the Nazi
doctrines and the Nazi way of life. The things these
defendants did were the result of the noxious merger of
German militarism and Nazi racial objectives. When, in
the face of a critical shortage of typhus vaccines to
protect tho ^ehrmacht In Its Eastern Invasions, Handleser


" 2C -


nnd his cohorts decided that anInal experimentation was
too slow, the Inmates of cuchenwald were sacrificed by the
hundreds to test new vaccines. Then Schroeder wanted to
determine the Halt of hunon tolerance of sea water, he
trod the path well-worn by the Luftwaffe to Dachau and
pot forty gypsies. These defendants with their eyes
open used the oppressed and persecuted victims of the Nazi
repine to wring froa their wretched and unwilling bodies
a drop of scientific Information at a cost of death, torture,
nutllntlon, and perannent disability.. For these palpable
crlncs Justice demands stern retribution.

The Conaon Design cr Conspiracy

• It nuct not bo overlooked that the experiments proved
In this case were not haphazard and unrelated crimes. On
the contrary, they constituted a well Integrated criminal
program, In which the defendants planned and collaborated
among themselves and with other porcons. One thing should be
made clear at the outoot. Each experiment constituted a
criminal conspiracy In and of itself. Hone of the experiments
woro formulated and executed by one man. Each required the
efforts of a number of men and the cooperation of several
agonclos. Thun, In tho typhus experiments In Buchonwold,
tho medical services of the Army, Luftwaffe, and S3 all
played an Important role. The measure of the guilt of 6uch
defendants as Hnndloser, Schroeder, Rose, Genzkon, Hrugowsky,
Poppondlok, and Hoven Is the totnl of tho crimes committod
there. These experiments were, indeed, one continuous
crime In which all played a substantial part.


- 21 -


For example, the defendant Hose personally Initiated
experiments In Buchenwald in August 1S42 and -arch 1944
which resulted in the death of ten persons. But he is
equally guilty of the several hundred other murders since
he joined in and furthered the Joint venture.

Thus, it is incontrovertible that each experiment .
constituted £er se a small conspiracy and every participant
in it must be found responsible for the sum total of crimes
committed in Its execution, dut It Is also clear that these
criminal conspiracies overlapped and blended, together to
form a broad common design. These crimes were systematic
and were committed pursuant to a oollcy, formulated by the
leaders of the German medical services, approving of, and
ordering, the execution of highly dangerous experiments on
human subjects without their consont. The Inter-relation
and common basis of these crimes in brought Into sharp
focus by a simple chronological review. The program had
its early beginning In uay 1941, when Luftmlfe Captain
Hascher, aided and abetted by Che defendant ./cltz and an
assistant named Kottenhof, made overtures to Himmler for
prisoners to be used In high altitude experiments, which,
ho stated, "ere so dangerous that "nobody was volunteering".
In December 1941, when typhus vaccines rere ncede” for the
V/ehrm-.cht 1 s Invasion of the Ea6t, the defendant Handloser,
as Army aedical Inspector, met with Conti, Secretary cf
State for Health, and -rugowsicy, subordinate of the defen¬
dant Genthen and Chief of the Hygiene Institute of the
Y/affen 36, nnd ma'e the basic decision tc test typhus
vaccines by experiments on human beings, as a result, by
the turn of the year, the crlcl. il typhus experiments,
which wero tc cost the lives of sever.JL hundred human beings,
were underway in Buchenrald. Dr. Schilling was provided with
"human material" for malaria experiments at Dachau In
February 19*12, through the good offices of Conti, and in


Che same nonth at the same pj-~.ce, the defer.dants Ruff and
Ronberg Jclnee partners In the dance of death with Rancher
and 'ieltz. In Kay 1942 at the meeting cf the Consulting
Physicians of the aehrnacht, the defendant Rostock lectured
or. the chemlo-therapeutical treataent of wound infections,
especially with sulfanilamide. Forty-five days later, the
defendant Gobhardt, spurred on by his loss of "Hangman"
Heydrlch, began his sulfanilamide experiments in Ravensbruck
with the assistance of the defendants Fischer and Oberhauser
and the gangrenous cultures furnished by Genzken and
.'IrugowsUy. Under the direction ef Grawltz, companion ex¬
periments to tost the blo-chenlcal treatment of sepsis,

Induced by Injections of -?us, were run simultaneously in
Dachau. In August 1942, rhon the blood of inmates autop-
sled In the decompression chamber had scarcely dried, the
liedlcol dervico of the Luftv .ffo ordered Holzloehner, Flnko,
and Rancher to perform freezing oxporinonts to establish tho
most effective moans of treating prolonged oxpoouro to cold.

In November 1942, Ai^uct Hlrt, under tho aegis of the recently
created Institute of military Scientific Research of
the Ahnonerbo directed by the depraved Slevors, began his
murderous gas experiments aided and abetted by tflmnor,
medlc.il officer of the Luftenffe. la ccnr.ectlon . 1 th thece
same experiments, the defendant Sievers, who was at the
sane time seeing to It that things ran smoothly with tho
malaria and freezing crimes, wrote tc Rudolf 3randt of his
outrage at the suggestion that the wretched victims be paid
for. Like the helpful man that he was, Brandt Immediately
put things straight with Obergrupponfuehrer Pohl, administra¬
tive chief of the concentration camps.

These crimes were not cos.ltced as a simple academic
pursuit as were some cf the mere "garden variety" concentration
car.f) atrocities. In October 1942 a groat Cold Congress m


-2 c-


Nurnberg was Attended by the defendants Becker-Freyseng, Huff,
Romberg, Rose, Schaefer, And Welts, together with nearly 100
representatives of nil the medical services In Germany. The meet¬
ing was arranged by Anthony and the defendant Bcckcr-Freyseng on
behalf of the Luftwaffe. Schrelber, one of tho principal subordin¬
ates of Handloser, was there. Kolsloehner and Rascher gavo a re¬
port on their freezing experiments and It was made clear to all who
cared to listen that concentration camp inmates wore used as sub¬
jects and that deaths had occurred. Schrelber apparently gave his
chief Handloscr such a glowing report that Holzloohnor was invited
to a repeat performance at the Second meeting East of tho Consult¬
ing Physicians of tho ./ehrnacht In December 1S42. Handlooer per¬
sonally heard tho lecture this tine. It was at the sane nectlng
that Ding ras or : orcd by hlo superior ..rugorcKy, at tho Instiga¬
tion of Handloser'c henchmen Schrelber and Killian, to give several
of tho Inmates in Buchcnvald aftd Intravenous doso of phenol and re¬
port bach on tho clinical d tails of tho ensuing deaths. Thoso
gentlemen ”crc troubled by the observation that some of their
soldiers -cro dying after receiving gas oedema scrum and they want¬
ed to ascertain whether It was caused by the phenol content.

At tho Third ..octlng of Consulting Physicians In may 194b,
Gobhardt told of hlo cxporlconto to the sction on surgery. Ros¬
tock arranged tho program and presided, while Karl Brandt and Hand-

loser "ore In the seats of honor. What they hoard c.-xsc as no sur- .

/

prise. Gobhardt and Fischer gave a full roporW>n thOsSulfanlla.-/
mldc oxp rlments down to the Last do th. Gebharafi /-as so anxlWo
to spread hlo guilt senowhat thinner that he emphasized to the
Tribunal the con lute nature of their report. Ihl6 proved a little
embarrassing to his predecessors In the witness box who were quite
cure that nothing had been said about artificial infection or
deaths. Karl Brandt had no more than left this me ting when he
made arrangements with Grarltz to got Inmates at tho Sachscnhausen
Concentration Camp for the epidemic Jaundice experiments by Dohmen,
a medical officer of the Amy under Handloscr. This dlscaso was
causing casualties up to 6C> in tho Jchroacht units In the East.


At the very anac neetlng, Ding lectured to the hygiene
section on his curderous typhus experinents At Buchenwnld.
Schrclber presided and the defendants ?.csc and Lrugorsky wore
In Attendance as cell as the Luftwaffe typhus expert Haagon,
who, to say the least of It, was exceedingly parslnonlous cith
tho truth when ho testified before this Tribunal. There is no
question that Roso took strong exception to this report,
although his prior and subsequent conduct leave little doubt
that It was on scientific rather than coral grounds. In any
ovont, what -.ms :,ood enough for Ding was good onough lor Haagon.
That vory suae oonth he began hlc own typhus vaccine tests in
the 8chlrnock Concentration C-np, aided and abetted by nose and
the Lcdlcal Service of the Luftwaffe. In a natter of thirty
days, two Inn-tec had already died as a rosult. In tho fall of
194o, Haag on chi-tod hlc activities to the larger cant* of
Nat swell or whore he continued his original 'cork antil tho late
sunnor of 1944, under the aucplcco of th t Schroedor.

In tho fall of 1945, Karl Brandt, ac Ooncral Com ilscl oner
of the iicdlcal and Health Services, undertook personal cooncor-
Bhlp of tho phoo-cno gas experiments of Blckcnbach, who had
previously ’-or :ed with Klrt on Inmates at Hatr.Joiler. The
tfohrufcht was alco Interested in these experiments. urandt
rccolvod broad powers In the field of chortle .1 warfare In a
Fuehrer docrcc of 1 Larch 194*i. Shortly thereafter he con¬
ferred »-lth the defendant Slovcrs and Klrt on the experiments
in Nntzmcllor. He personally supplied Blckcnbach with labo¬
ratory facilities, who, by September 1944, had nurdored four
Russian prisoners of war.

In Juno 194*:, the defendant Schroedor pcrconaliy Initiated
plans for the sea water experinents, with the assistance of his
subordinates Bockcr-rreya ng and Schaefer. In a latter to
Himmler, through Crawltz, asking for "40 healthy test subjects"
for cxocrlncntc he knew -rould probably end In deaths, ho said


th.-.t: "Earlier already you Bade 1- possible for the Luftwaffe
to acttlc^urgent medical matters through experiments on human
beings". He concluded by saying: "as It is h,no:m from pre¬
vious experiments, that necessary laboratories exist in the
concentration camp Dachau, this camp would bo very suitable".

7hc defendant Belglboeck Joined In the conspiracy and executed
the experiments.

In June 1944, a conference ms called at 3rcclau by the
defendant Handloser for the purpose of coordinating jaundlco
research. Jaundice experts from all branches of the rfehraacht
'•oro prosont, including Knagen, and Handloocr's subordinate
Schrolber presided. Experiments on human bolngs were discussed
and a fen weeks later Haagc.a and throe other officers of tho
Lufumffo began laying plans for experiments on human beings
In "Strassbourg or its vicinity”, an obvious reference to
Hatzroller. That cr In Inal exponnente on concentration comp
inmates were dircucaod at the 3rcslau nc ting is clear from the
fact th-t Schrcibor personally requested ..rugovsicy somewhat later
to naiic available Inmates in Buchcnwald for Jaundice cxpcrlocnto
by Dr. Drorel.

Tho foregoing chronological a...alyslo of cone of the ex¬
periments, while not complete, Is sufficient to show that
there nas a systematic and coll Integrated program involving
cedlc-1 experimentation on concentration cusp inmates without
their consent. The demands upon the So for human guinea pigs
had become so oxtonclvo that by uay, 1944 a central clearing
commit toe had boon set up by Hloolor. The defendant Jcbhardt
passed on th3 nodical nccccslty of the proposed experiment,
while GluccKs and Nebc actod as the Valkyries in selecting the
sacrlfldnl victims. As early as August 1942, the Institute of


1/ NO-185, Pros. £x. lo4, R.485.


illllt/iry Scientific Research of the Ahnenerbe under SI vers
was creatod to finance and to furnish eo.ulpmont, prisoners,
nnd adninIstratlvc assistance for experiments m which Himmler
r".3 especially Interested. This criminal program me motivated
'.roe two principal sources. Himmler, a3 head of the SS, pro¬
vided uncounted victims for the experiments and thereby gained
r.er prcotlgo and sorer for his crlnlnal organization. The
loaders of the Gem an nllitary and civilian nodical services, as
the other driving forco, ruthlessly seized the opportunity
nth which they wore presented and submitted their scientific
nroblcnc for solution In the concentration camps. The scien¬
tific lnpctus cane froa Karl brand!, Handloccr, ochrolbor,

Hlopkc, Schroedcr, Conti, and their oubordinaten, anon 0 othorc.
Rudolf 3randt and Siovcrc gave effect to Himmler's approval to
furnish the victims and tho administrative machinery was handled
by thon. The 3S nodical 1 oa'crn - Gra*ltz, Genzhon, Gebhardt,
tfrugowaky, and. Poppcndlck - gave directions to their underlings
ruoh an Ding, Hoven, and Fischer, and assisted :n the execution
of tho crimen, Brandt, blooc, and Schrclbcr xtonded financial
support through tho Reich Rosearch Council, which approved an
alloc tlon ox' governmont lundc to enlarge the bS nod.lc 1 service
on the ground It had human "experimental rvitorial" available.
Rostock, as Chief of the Office for Science and Research,
classified as "urgent" the criminal research of Hlrt, Haagon, and
Blclconbach. The »/chrmacht provided supervision and technical
assistance for those exporlnonts in which it \;.\s most interested.
A lor pressure cir.mber ran furnished for the high altitude
experiments, the services of Welt 2 , Ruff, Romberg, Raschor,
Holzlochncr, and Finite for tho high ltltude and freezing
atrocities and those of Seckor-Froyseng, behaefor, and
Belglbocck for sea rater. Rose was in and out of tho Buchonrnld
tj-phus station for tho Luftwaffe and checked tho -ork of Haagon
at Schlrmech and Katz -clier.- Handloeer kept ar. eye on Ding's


-27-


oxporlnents through bchroibcr, Sycr, and Schmidt and furnlehcd
hln with vaccines and typhus infected llco. Ho saw to It that
the useful results of the crlncs were reported to his Consult¬
ing Physicians and passed on to the Wchroacht.


Thi3 ras Che unholy trinity; this was the ccnnon design.

It was like n gigantic wagon wheel, the spoken of which were
the exp.-risent c leading into the common hub of the SS which
furnished the victims, nnd nil bound together by the policies
nnd orders of the lenders of the German medical services which
formed the outer "in. .fhllc the defendants deny that there wao
a common dcciyn or that they participated in It, all seek at


the p-Jtc tine the contradictory "protection" of the State ap¬
proval of the experiments. The defendant Hose, broken by proof
from his own hand that he participated m the typhus crlncs of
Buchcnwalv, gave something of a v ledlctory when ho said:


"This In: tltuto had boon set up lr. Germany and was
approv by the State and covered by tho’ State. At

that moment i vac in a position which perhaps corre¬
sponds tc a la 1 yer who lc, perhaps, a bade* opponent
of cxoouvlon, or death sentence. On occasion when ho
lr ao'-.llng vltn leading n mb ore oi tho covcrnncnt, or
• lth lawyers during public Congresses or me-tings, he
will do everything in his power to maintain hie opinion
on the subject and have it put into effect. If, hov;-
over, ho does not cuccood, he stays In hie profession,
and l.a his .nvlronncnt In spite of this. Under cir¬
cumstance ho may perhaps oven bo forced to oronounce
such death sentence himself, although he lc basi¬
cally an opponent of that set up.“ 1 /

GebharJt testified that Hitler approved tho policy of


oxporl. ontatlon on concentration camp Inmates. He admitted
that these experiments would not have been performed without


approval from tho tep; oven Himmler himself sought cover from
Hitler. Tho Prosecution cl.-ms no more. Phis oollcy of sys¬
tematic experimentation on Involuntary subjects was formulated
and exccutod by those defendants rr.d their accomplices.


Thisi then, me the nodical service of the Third Hclch
at vrorh. There car. be no doubt th.it these were not a hotcro-
geneouG and unrcl' tod. group of crime o. They mesh together to
fora i clc'r conspiracy. Snch experiment in turn ratified Its
predecessors and gave lapetus to Its successors. .Whatever may
be the Judgment of the Tribunal or. the Question of Jurisdiction
thoro TTa a conspiracy In fact. Since a conspiracy was charged
In Count I of the Indictment, It Is Important to hnou what a
conspiracy co.mar abends ar.d punlchoc. Justice Jachson statod in
hi" clocln- ad.'roes to tho Intern tlonal ..lilt ry Tribunal that

“In conspiracy re do not :unloh one n/ui for another
nan's crlnc. rfc ooch to punish each for hlo ov:n crime
of Joining a cor. :on plan in which others also -nrtlcl-
P-' ted. The measure of the criminality of the clan and
therefor, of the ,ullt of oach participant Is,'of course,
the aun total of crimen con It tod by all In executing
tho alan. 3ut the gist o: the offonce is participation
In the formul- tlor. or execution of tho . lah. Then aro
ruler • hlch every rocioty has found nocora-.ry In order
to r.ach .en .... v.ho never got blood on their orn
h"n^- but '-ho lay plans that rcoult in tho sheafing of
blood. All over Gcr.: ny today, in every sono of occupa¬
tion, little men who carried out there crlnln 1 oolIcier
und r orders .ro bolng convict d uid punish . it would
prj'- .it a vart m3 unforglvoablo caricature of Jur.tlco
If tho non vho Planned these policies on* directed those
llttl. non should oscapo all :c.n aity." 1 /

Tho essence of the crime of conspiracy lc t-o cr more
porronn combining and confederating nth the intent and purpose
of committing an offence by doing an unlawful act or *olng a
la-ful act In an unlawful manner. It can be established by
direct testimony but it nay also be Inferred from things
actually done. It lc onough if the minds of tho parties meet
and unlto in an understanding way with the design to accomplish
a common purpose which may bo established by substantial evi¬
dence or by deduction from facts, from which a natural infer¬
ence nrires th t the overt acts re re In furtherance of a common
dorlgn, Intent, and purpose. The common dc6i.pi lr the encence
of tho crime and this may be ;aadc to appear vh.::i~thc martles


17 transcript, p. 14b70


- 29 -


contlnuou"ly "ureuc the erce object , whether acting cop-ratoly
or together by coenon or different neons, but ever lending to
the cone unlawful result. Wien one cr ncre of the conspira¬
tors mice8 an open declaration and the othorn thereafter adhere
by words or acts, their responsibility in conplcto and their
guilt thereby established for they have bocone agents, ad hoc in
the crlnos. The conspirators nay not Unow each other or such
others 1 part In the plan, nor, indeed, all the details of the
plan itself. He cay icnow omy his own part. That is enough
if there Is an intentional contribution to the wholo. It In
enough If one had hnovlcdgc of the general purpose and Joins
hlncclf. Zach 1r rccponrlblo for all acts done In furtherance
of the objects of tho conspiracy and during lie life. Once a
person Joins a conspiracy, ho ratifies all that has been done
before by each o. tho othorc.

What has been cald rlth respect to tho con.eon design or
conspiracy 1 r, of course, quite pcrtl.aont even though the
Tribunal has decided th-.t It has no Jurisdiction over conspir¬
acies to co.a:lt War Crlr.ee and Crlnoo against Hunanlty. rar-v
graph 2 of Article II of Law ho. 10 reads, in part, an follows:

*An v person without regard to nationality
or the caps.city in which he acted, lr. docr.cd
to have coa.lttcd a crlno as define' In
par* .raph 1 of this Article, if he vrae (a)
a prlnclpsj. or (b) vac nsi accessory tc the
corv Isslon of any such crlno or or'-crcd cr
abotted the sane or (c) tooh a consenting
part t lie re in or Id) was connected with plans
and enterprises Involving Its conolcslon or
(o) was a no .ber of any organization or
group connected with tho con .lorlon of any
such crlnc."

This ir.ragr.aph, although It does not enploy the word
"conspiracy 0 or the phrase °co.i.on plan", recognizor the crlclnal


1 U.S. v. Borden, 158 F. (2d), C.C.*.7, certiorari denied.


substantially connected with


liability of those rho were

the emission of * crine, even though the final crlninnl
net is comittcd by sonconc else, Those who arc found to
hnvo been connected with crlnes in the way specified by the
quoted paragraph oust bo found guilty or the substantive
crine Itself, which In this c--.se Is prcdomlnnntly the crloe
of nurder. Qyitc clearly the status of crlnlnnl responsibility
of a person who "too* a consenting part" in or “war. connected
with plans or enterprises Involving" or "was a nenber of any
organization or group connected with" the conulsslon of a crine
noro than conprchcnds the crlnlnnl liabilities which arc held
to attach to thoco who enter into a crlnlnnl conspiracy.

Thus, whether the crlnlnnl cxperincntatlon progran be callod
a "connon design", "conspiracy", or clnply "plans and
enterprises", these defendants who Jointly participated in
Its execution nust bo found guilty of the nun tot'.l of crlncs
comltted.

THE R£jr01.'Slol£ OF THE S LaVICES

In view of tho clear and ovcrv.-hclr.lng proof, It can only
bo concluded that the practice of cxperlncntatlon on con¬
centration ennp inflates without their consent tins an organize-
and systemtic progran. It ir thereforo appropriate to con¬
sider whether wo havo m this dock the leaders of the Oonson
medical services without whoa these crinea would not havo
boon possible. It would be an unforgivable nlscarrlagc of
justice to ounich tho doctors who ~ork * cr. the vlctins in
the concentration canpc while tholr superiors, tho leaders,
organizers, and instigators, go free. It has bocn crtabllrhcd
beyond controversy that these things could not h~vc happened
without cover iron the top. ./ho, then, -era theso nen on the
top? Their survivors, with ono exception, arc all In this


dock.


v


In the number one sent we have the defendant Karl
Brandt. K a held supreme authority over nil the medical
services In Germany, both military and civilian. Ho .lolned
the Nazi Party In January 1932 and the 6S In 1934, In which
he rose to tho rank of Gruppe.nfuehrer (Major General.). In
the latter year, at the ago of 30, he became the attending
physician to Adolf Hitler and retained this position until
1945. His close personal relationship to the Fuehrer
explains his rapid rise to power. 0 n the day Poland was
Invaded in 1939, Hitler ordered Brandt and Philipp
BouM-er,"the Chief of tho Chancellery of the Fuehrer, to
carry out the so—callod outhanRsla program.

Ad do from his personal lnfluonoo and intimate conncc-

- tion with Hitler, Brandt's greatest power In the medical

oorvlces came from his position ns General Commissioner

and later Reich Commissioner of the Health and Uodionl

Services. As n result of the dlsastcrouo winter campaign

in tho East In 1941, Hitler established for tho first

time a medical and health official under his direct

control by dooroe of 28 July 1942. This dccroo made

Brandt tho supremo authority over all nodical scrvlcoo

In Gornnny. It statod In part - s follows:

“3. I empower Prof. Dr. Karl Brandt,
subordinate only to no personally and
receiving hls Instructions directly from
n.i. to carry out speclaj tasks and nego¬
tiations, to readjust the requirements
for doctors, hospitals, medical supplies,
etc., between tho military and the
civilian sectors of tho Health and -‘cdlcal
Services.

"My plenipotentiary for Health and Medical
Services is to bo kept Informed about the
fundamental events In the Medical Service .
of the tf c broacht and In the Civilian nenlth
Sorvico. n e Is authorized to intervene In
a responsible manner." 1


1 N0-080 , Pros. Ex. 5, R. 93.


- 32 -

By the same decree chiefs were also commissioned for the
medical services of the Wehrmacht and the civilian health
sector. The defendant Handloaer became Chief of the Medical
Services of the ffehrmacht, while Db. Leonardo Conti,

Secretary of State for Health and the Reich Health Loader,
was made Chief of the Civilian Health Services. Brandt was
the superior of both Handloscr and Conti, and through them
had extensive powers over the army, Navy, Luftwaffe, tfnffcn
SS, and civilian medical services. Brandt stood at the

•

apex of power. He was subordinated to no ono save the
Fuehrer. He was the non to act for the Fuehrer In medical
matters. The decree authorised Brandt "to Intervene In
a responsible manner" and directed th*t ho be kopt In¬
formed of "fundamental events". Certainly nothing oould
be noro fundamental than a policy of performing nodical
experiments Involving the torturo and death of Involuntary
human subjects.

On 5 September 1943 Hitler issued a second docrcc
empowtring Brandt “'1th centrally coordinating and direct¬
ing the problems and activities of the entlro medical and
health sorvicoo ,.." 1 Tho order expressly stated that
Brandt's authority covered the field of medical scicnco
and research. Shortly following tho issuance of this
decree, the defendant Rostock was appointed by Brandt as
Chief of tho Office for Science .and Research, with
plenary powers in that field.

Finally, on 25 “ugust 1944, the Fuehrer elevated Brandt
to Reich Commissioner for the Health and Ucdlcnl Servicos and
stated that in this capacity "his office ranks -s highest


1 N0-081, Pros. Ex. 6, R. 94.


Reich authority". Brandt's position was thus equivalent to
the.t of r Reich Minister. Ke was authorized "to Issue In¬
structions to the offices ~nd organizations of the State,
Pa.rty, and V/ohraacht, which are concerned with the problems
of the medical and health services”. It is clear that
this docree was Issued to resolve a struggle for cover
between Brandt and Conti. Certainly the decree does no more
than give Brandt a more august title and restate his powers,
powers which he h"d already received .as e'Tly as July 1942.
Brandt testified that it merely "strengthened" his position.

* Service Regulation Issued by ^eltel for Handloser, as
Chief of the Hodlcal Services of the V7ehrn''cht, at a time
when Brandt was still General Commissioner, provided that
Handloser was subjoct to the "goneral rules of the Fuehrer's
Commissioner Goneral for the Medical and Health Services" and
that Brnndt had to be informed of tho "basic events" In the
field of the Medical Services of tho Wehrnacht. In a pro-
trln'l affidavit the defendant handloser stated that after
he became Chief of tho Medical Services of the v/ehrraacht

on 20 July 1942 "Brandt */rs my immediate superior In medical
2

affairs". Schrooder stated that "Karl Brandt, Hnndloscr,

and Rostock were Informed of the medical research work

3

conducted by the Luftwaffe". In addition to his position
ns General and Reich Commissioner of the Health and
Medical Services, Brandt was also a member of the Presidential
Council of tho Reich Research Council, an organization
v/hich gave financial support for criminal experiments.


1 N0-082, Pro3. Ex. 7, R. 95

2 NO-443, Pros. Ex. 10, R. 99.

3 NG-449, Pros. Ex. 130, R. 474


- 34 -


In the number two sect Is the defendant *Widloser who
held supreme power over the Medical Scfrvlcos of nil branches
of the Wehrnncht. Early In 1941 he was appointed Army
Medical Inspector and Army Physician. He held, these
positions until September 1944, and as such had complete
command over the entire Army Medical Services, which was by
far the largest of the medical branches of the v/ehrmacht.

In his capacity as Army Medical Inspector, Hnndloser had
subordinated to him the Consulting Physicians of the Army,
the Military Medical Academy, tho Typhus and Virus Institutes
of the OKH at Cracow and Lemberg, and the Medical School for
Mountain Troops nt St. Johann. Ho attained the rank of
Gcnernlobcrstnbsarzt (Llcutonant General), the highest
military medical rank.

On 28 July 1942, Hnndloser was elevated to the newly
created position of Chief of the Medical Servlcoc of tho
Wohrmacht. This was the same docroe which appointed Brandt
General Conniesloner, to whom Hnndloser, on the military
sldo, and Conti, on the civilian side, were subordinated.
Hnndloser was charged with the coordination of the Medical
Services of the Wchrnncht and all organizations and units
subordinated or attached to the './ehrnr'cht, including the
Medical Services of the Waffon SS. ?rlor to this decree
there were four separate medical branches of the Wehrmacht,
the Army, Luftwaffe, “nvy, rnd VTaffcn SS, each operating
independently of the other. Pursuant to this decree,
Hnndloser was appointed to coordinate and unify their
operations and was directly responsible to Keitel as
Chief of the High Command of the Wehrmacht (OK‘.V). He had
authority over the Chiefs of the Army, Navy, Luftwaffe,

.and Waffen S3 Medical Services, and all organizations and
services employed within the framework of


~ 35 -


the .Tehrmaent, and over " nil scientific medical Institutes ,
academic s and other acdlcol lnstitutl one of the Services of
the ffehr mncht and of the .fatten SS ". 1 He was the Advisor of
the Chief of the High Command nnd of the Wehmncht in all
questions concerning the Medical Services of the ^ehrnncht
and of Its health guidance. In the field of nodical science,
his duties were to carry out uniforn nensurcs in the field
of health guidance, research and combatting of eol'cral cs. and
all medical matters which required a uniform ruling among
the Wchror.cht, .and further, In the evaluation of nodical
experienc es.

One of tho principal means used by the defendant
Handlooer In coordinating scientific resc-rch was tho Joint
mooting of Consulting Physicians of tho four branches of
tho ’.Vehrnncht. t the Second Hooting E*et of Consulting
Physicians In Doconbor 19-12 at tho Military Hodlcal Academy,
H andioeor himself pointed out quite clearly the t-sk of tho
Ghiof of tho Medical Services of tho ./ohrm-'cht In unifying
medical scientific roso-rch. In addressing tho full meet¬
ing he said:

•

"The demands and extent of thin total war,
as well as the relationship between needs
and availability of personnel and nat.rial,
require measures, also In military and nodical
fields, which will serve tho unlfic-tlon and
unified leadership. It Is not a question of
’marching separately and battling together',
hut marching and battling must be done in
unison from the beginning In all fields.

"As a result, as concerns the military sector,
tho .Vehrmacht Medical Service and with It tho
Chief of the Medical Services of the T/ehrmaoht
came into being. Not only in natters of personnel
and material — evon as fa.r as this Is possible
In view of special fields and special tasks which
must be considered — but also with a view to
medical scientific education and research, our
path in the v?ehrn*cht Medical Service must and
*111 bo a unified one. Accordingly, the group
of participants in this Second 3orfc Conference
Ea6t, which I have now opened. Is differently
composed from the First >7ork Conference In May


1 N6-227, Pros. Ex. 11, R. 101.


of this yc-r. Then it was ft conference
of the army; today the three branches of
the v/ehraacht, the * at ten 89 and Police, the
Labor Service and the Organization Todt
ore participating and unified.

"You will surely permit that I greet you with
a general elcono and with the sincere wish
that our common work nay be blessed with tho
hoped for Joint success.

"I would, however, like to extend a special
greeting to the Reich Chief of Health Services,

Under Secretary Conti, who holds tho central
leadership of medical services in the civilian
sector. I see in his presence not only an
interest in our work themes, but the expression
of his connection with tho Wehrmncht Medical
b crvlcc and his understanding of tho special
Importance of tho >7ohrmacht in the field as
well as at hone. I need not emphasize that
we are as one in the recognition of the necessity
to assure and ease the mind of the soldier, that
he need not worry about the physical well being
of the homoland as far as this is within tho
realm of possibility in wartime." 1

Again, at the Fourth Meeting of Consulting Physicians

in May 1944, the defendant Karl Brandt stressed the importance

of Handloscr 1 s position, saying:

"Gcncraloberstabsarzt Handloscr, you a
soldier and. a physician at the same tino,
arc responsible for the use and the per¬
formance of our medical officers.

"I bcllcvo, and this probably is the solo
expectation of all concerned, that this
mooting which today starts in Hohenlychen
will bo held for the benefit of our soldiers.

Tho achievements to date of your physicians,

Horr Gcncralobv rstabsarzt, confirm this un¬
equivocally, and their readiness to do their
sharo makes all of ur jroud and - I may also
say - confident.

"It is good simply to call these thlngo by
their names and to look -t them as they arc.

This meeting is the visible expression of it -
it is, it shall be and it must be so in every
respect; the consulting physicians are
gathered around their Medical Chief. When I
look rt these ranks, you Gener.aloberstabsarzt
Handloscr, are to be envied; medical exp.'-rts,
with the best and most highly trained special
knowledge, are at your disposal for care of
tho soldiers. In reciprocal action between


NO-922, Pros. Ex. 435, R. 2050


- 37 -


yourself and your oedlcnl officers, tUe
orohlen of our nodical knc^ledac nnd
capacity are kept alive.

This W"B n0 acoolnde paid to a nan without power and Influence,
If Handloaer la not responsible for the crlncs connlttcd hy
the iiedlcal Services of the Wehroncht, and especially of the
array nnd Luftwaffe, thon no one Is responsible.

In the number three sent we have the defendant Sostock
who, as Brandt's special deputy, was charged with the task
of "centrally coordinating and directing the problems and
activities of the entire Medical and Health Services" In the
field of science and research. Even prior to his appointment
to that position in the Fall of 1943, Rostock was one of the
responsible loaders of the German nodical profession. In
1942 he was appointed Doan of the Medics! Faculty of the
Unlvorslty of Berlin. In the s-me year he hecarao Consulting
Surgeon to Hnndloscr as the Array Medical Inspector. Ho
attained the rank of Brigadier General (Ocncralartt). As
Chief of the Office for Science nnd Rosearch under Brandt,

It was Rostock's task to coordinate scientific research In
Germany. He received reports a 8 to the Issuance of research
assignments by the various agencies In Germany, and determined
„hloh of such assignments should be considered "urgent". He
also served as Br-ndt's alternate on the Reich Research

Council.

In the nurabor four scat so have the defendant Schroodor,
„ho from 1 Janu-ry 1944 until the nd mas the Chief of the
Medical Services of the Luftwaffe. From 1935 until February
1940 Schroodor mas Chief of Staff to his orcdccessor, Erick
Hlppke as Luftwaffe Medical Inspector. From February 1940


1 NO-924, Pros. Ex. 437, H. 2057.


- 30 ~

until January 1944 he served ns Air Fleet Physician of
Air Fleet II, when he replaced Klppke ns Chief of the
Medical Services of the Luftwaffe. Simultaneously he was
pronoted to the rank of Generaloberstabsarzt. As Chief of
the Medical Services of the Luftwnffe, nil nedicnl officers
of the Gernnn Air Force were subordinated to hln. His
position and responsibility are cle^r and unequivocal.

In sent number five is the defendant Gonzkcn, who, ns
Chief of the Medical Services of the -nffen SS, was ono of
the highest ranking nodical officers in the SS. He Joined
tho N*zl Party in 1926 and in 1936 he went on "Ctlvc duty
W lth the SS In tho Medical Office of tho SS Special Scrvico
Troops (SS-Vorfuogungstruppe), which subsequently bocanc
tho Waffon SS. In the Spring of 1937 tho Medical Offlco
(Snnltactsnnt) of tho SS was enlarged md split into two
departments. Gonzkon was nado Director of tho Dopartncnt
charged with tho supply of medical equipment to and the
supervision of radical personnel In the concentration camps.

In this capacity ho was tho nodical adviser to the notorious
Elcko, predecessor of Pohl as the connmdcr of all concen¬
tration camps. Sachsenh''Uoon, Dachau, Buchcnwald, Mauthausen,
Flossonburg, -nd Nouonganne, nnong others, w. re under the
nodical supervision of Genzkon. Fow men could have boon
better advised .as to the systematic oppression and
persecution of the hapless prisoners of theso institutions.

In May 1940, Gcnzkcn bec-no Chief of tho -edlcal Office
of the Waffen SS In the SS Operational Headquarters, -'ith
the rank of Oborfuchrcr (Senior Colonel), ^nc SS Operational
Headquarters was subordinated to Gruppcnfuohror Hans Jucttner


t


- 39


and was one of the twelve main offices of the Supreme
Command of the S3, While Juettncr was Genzkon's military
superior, hla tcehnicel or medical superior was Rcichshrat-
SS Grawitz for whoa he served ~s deputy on nary occasions.

In 19-12 his position became known ns Chief of the Medical
Sorvlcos of the Waffon SS, Division D of tho SS Operational
Headquarters. He attained tho rank of Gruppenfuchrcr in
the SS and Gencrnllcutnant of the Waffon SS (Lieutenant
Gon ?rnl). Among tho offices subordinated to Genzkcn was
that of tho Chemical and Pharmaceutical Service under
Bluemonrouter, «nd Hygiene under tho defendant Mrugowsky.
Wrugowsky was attached to Gcnzken's office as a hygienist
in 1940 and was at the sane tine Chief of the Hygiene
Institute of the Waffon SS which, !n turn, was subordinated
to Genzkcn. On 1 September 1943, the Medical Services
of the SS was reorganized and, among other things,
Bluemonrouter, Mrugowsky, and the Hygiene Institute of tho
Waffon SS were transferred to the Office of the Hclchsnrzt SS,
Grawitz. Thereafter tho direct subordination wag to
Grawltz rather than to Genzkcn.

And then there Is the defendant Blonc, Gruppenfuchrcr
(iJn.lor General) in the SA, D c puty Reich Health Loader,

Doputy Loader of tho Reich Chamber of Physicians and thu
National Socialist Physicians association, Representative
for the Department of Medical Study, Plenipotentiary In
tho Reich Research Council, and Chief of Research on
Bacteriological Warfare. As tho closest associate of Conti,
ho cannot be omitted from the list of tho powerful.

Conti was the highest authority in the field of civilian
honlth administration. Tho decre of 28 July 1942, signed
by Hitler, concerning the reorganization of the medical
services, defines the position of Conti a S follows:


_ Uo -


in the field of civilian he' 1 th ad¬
ministration the Secretary of State In
the ministry of Interior, and the Chief
of the Health Administration Of the Reich
(Relchscresundheltsfuehrer), Dr. Conti, Is
responsible for coordinated measures. ?or
this ournose hr has at his disposal the
competent departments of the highest Reich!
authorities and their subordinate officeR."-

There was not a single medical curst ion -hlch did not "each
the Reich Health Department of the yazl Party and the Reich
Chamber of Physicians, subordinated to "Mch "or r all ohysl-
clans in Germany, "1th the exception of those on active ser¬
vice "ith the armed forces an* 4 In the S3. a member o' the
Rrich Research Council, Blome -as nrrsonallv connected "1th plans
and enterprises Involving r^imlnal medical experimentation.

Thcso "cro the responsible lrarie-s o' th" Medical Services
of Germany. ’The, then, Is missing from this ll'u«tr'ous
gathering^ During the course of tho trial, we have frequently
heard mentioned th« names of Conti and Orawiti. Indeed, the
defendants "ould have believe that in these t~o nen, to¬
gether "1th 1 1 1 er and lranler, resided the exclusive resper.-
nlbillty for the manifold crimen «-lth ~Mch "c are h< re con¬
cerned. I hardly need call attention to the 'act that all are
dead. All of them took their o-n lives rather than face the
bar of Justice. »*o one eon denv that those men were, Indeed,
guilty. But thin in no «.iv serves to exonerate those defend¬
ants, "ho all Played irnor'ant roles in the mad scheme. It
.a a curious thing that not one of the defendants ha" pointed
an accusing finger at a living man. I' they are to be believed,
all the gull tv ncrtlm to these crimes are dead. According to
them, Justice must seek retribution onlv 'rora the cadavers.

The tuft^affr de'endants ’-eve hern st^ancr*-!v silent as to
Fiooke, who, but 'or a belated capture, have a prominent

seat In the dock. Those defendants -ho -nrk*-d -ith the dead
criminals - such as Gebhardt, ' f rugo"skv, and Ponpendlok with


1 vp-091, t>ros. Hx. H, R. 91


- Ill -

Gramtz, and Bione nith Conti - ask the ?r*bunal to nay that
tneir association «»aa honorable «nd nurr, that their -ort <>as
in another field, that their masters' crimes cone as a greet
Rurnrlaa and -e-p nevrr Vno-n to thro. ?he evidence waves,
.iOvr. ver, “hat thrv not only knr«” of and suonort'd these minor,
but also took a oorsonal nart In then.

In connection "ith the rrsnonsible no* It ions o' these

• _

defendants, end most narticulerly of .varl Brandt and his
assistant Rostock, ^andloser, Schrorder, Grnzken, and 5lomc,

I •"s- te call tbr Tribunal's attentien to the decision of
tho Suoreme Court o' the United States in the case of jn rr
va nashita . 1 rn ’q Sentember l<jUq, ''arssbita, tbr Commanding
General 0  the Fourteenth Grouo of the innerial jananrso
Anay ln thc PhilInninr islands -as charged with violation of
tho laws of -ar. «e thereafter nlrad.rd not evilty, -as tried,
found guilty as charged and sentenced to death by baturinfr.

* oot it ion for a Tit of habras cornua -as filed -ith tho
Suorrmo Court ournort lrnrjo sho~ that v an ashlta.s detention
-as unla-ful for the reason, anonr others, that the charge
oreferred ac-’innt him failed to charge him -ith a violation
of thc lar»s of -ar.

Thr charge stated that vananhlt.s, bet-ren October lqlUi
and 3, ntcmbor ?, 19b*?, ln thr Philioninr Islsnds, *~bllr

•ommnnder of armed forces of Janan at -or -*th the "nitrd
taten of America and its allies, unla-fully disregarded and.
foiled to discharge his duty as commander to control t*c
oner?tions of the members of his command, nermittln- then to
commit brutal atrocities and other hie'- ^« r .rs against nennlc
of thr United States and of its A1H M and denendencies,
Dartlcularly thr philinoinon; and he . thereby violated


1 6^ 3uo. Ct. ^Uo (iqU6).


7


the la<-s of -ar"


?hr military commission "hieh tried


vamashlta found that atrocities and other hieh chines had

been committed b v members of the Japanese armed fores under

his command, that they "er<- not snoradic in nature but in

n. ny cases "err methodically supervised by jaoanese officers,

and that during thr nrrlod in Question Yamash.ita failed to

provide effective control of his troops as "as required by

the circumstances. *he Supremo Court stated the question

for thnir decision in the 'ollo"ine lenruage:

"it is not d'-nl-d that such acts directed
against the civilian population of an occupied
country and against prisoners of "sr are re¬
cognized in international la-- as violations

of the la-" of ”°r.But it is urged that

the charge does not allege chat ort it loner has
either committed or directed the commission
of such acts, and consequently that no violation
is charged against him. 3ut this overlooks the
fact that thr 3:1st of the chare.- Is an unlawful
breach o duev by the petitioner as an army
commander to control the operations of the
members of his command by 'pennlttlng them to
commit' the extensive and -ldesor'-ad atrocities
specified. 4 he question then in "bother the
la" of "ir imposes on an arr.v commander a duty
to take such appropriate measure*! as «re -ithln
Ms po« rr to control the troops under his command
for the prevention of thr specified acts "hich
■re violations of Che la~ of "ar and which are
likely to attend the occupation of hostile
territory by an uncontrolled soldiery, and
"bother h' may be charged "ith oeT'snn~l r<-n-
DOnolblllty for his 'allure to take such
measures -hen violations result".

T hc Court held th9t the charge -as sufficient and that
:hc la" of >-ar "plainly innosed on petitioner, "ho at thc
time specified "as military governor of the Philippines, ao
"ell as commander of the Japanese forces, an affirmative duty
to take such neosur ° as ••ere ~it u ir. his no- r and appropriate
in the circumstances to nrot ct prisoners o' -ar nn‘ the
civilian population. Thin dutv of a comm' 1 nd inm o'-'icer has
heretofore been recognized, and its breach penalized by our
o>"n military tribunals".


- 3 A

This decision is squarely in ooiht as to the criminal

resDonsibillty of those defendants in this dock "ho had the

oo^er and authority to control the agents through -horn these

crimes -ore committed. It is not incumbent uoon the prose-

cution to sho- that this or that defendant "ns familiar - 1 th

all of the details of all of these exoerincnts. Indeed, in

the Yamashita case, there was no charge or proof that he had

knowledge of the crimes. In the case before the International

Military Tribunal, proof -as submitted that the Reichsbank,

of which the defendant Funk was president, had received from

the SS the personal belongings of victims -ho had been ex-

terrnlnated in concentration camns. In that connection tho

Tribunal said in its Judgment:

"Funk hasorotcstcd that he did not kno-
that the F-elchbank -as receiving articles
of this kind. T he Tribunal is of the
opinion that he either knc- -hat was being
received or -as deliberately closing hlo
eyes to "hat r»p 8 being done* 1 . 1

3ut '"0 need not discuss the requirement of kno-ledgc on
the facts of this cose. It Joss been repeatedly proved thet
those responsible leaders of the Ccmon medical services in
this dock not only kne- of the systematic and criminal use
of concentration ramn Inmates for murderous medical experiments,
but also actively participated in such crimes. c an it be
held that Karl 3rendt had no kno~ledgc of these crimes -hon
he Personally initiated the Jaundice experiments by Dohr«n
In the Sachsenhausen Concentration Cano and the phosgene
experiments of D 1ekenbach? Can it be found that he kne"
nothing of the criminal euthanasia program "hen he —as charged
by Hitler -1th its execution? ^an lt hp sald that a an dloser
had no kno-ledge -hen he participated In the conference of
?9 D erc mbcr 19^1 -here lt -as decided to ner'orm the 3uchen-'ald
typhus crimes, —hen reports —e-c given on criminal exp°rlmcnt8
at meetings called and nresided ovrr by him? u as ^stock
an Island of ignorance —hen he arranged the orogra - f or and
1 Trial of the Major *'ar Criminals, v ol. 1, o. ^ 06 .


presided over the meetings at -hioh Gebherdt and Fischer lec¬
tured on their sulfanilamide experiments, "hen he classified
as ’urgent" the criminal research of “lrt, “asgen, and
Blohehbach? Did S c hroeder lack kno-ledge -hen h« prrsonall"
requested “irar.il ~r to supply him - 1 th Inmates for the sea -ater
experiments? Can it be found that Gonzfcen had no knowledge
of these crimes "hen the mlser'-blr Dr. Ding -as subordinated
to and received orders from him in connection -1th the tyohus
experiments in Buchan">Id, -hen his office suppI led. P*aschor
"1th equipment for the freezing experiments? 7as Blorae in¬
sufficiently informed in the face of nroof that he collabor¬
ated "'1th Raacher in the blood coagulation experiments,
issued a research assignment to him on freezing experiments
and to "irt on the gas experiments, as -ell an oerformed bac¬
teriological -erfarr and poison exnerln.nts himself?

No, it -as not lack cf information as to the criminal
program "hlch explains the culpable failure of these men to
destroy this Frankenstein's monster. Normas it Lack of
power. Can anyone doubt that Karl Brandt could have lssuod
Instructions to “andloser end Conti that doctors subordinated
to them -ere ne.t to experiment on concentration camp lnnrtcs.
It is no excuse to nay that “ltler and “lnmler approved, tho
policy and that his efforts may have failed. Certainly they
aoorovod. it. But the fact is that Brandt also approved of
and personally participated in the program. “o -as tho "high¬
est Belch authority" in the medical sen’ices, not “lmml r.

The mc-Ucel sorvlcee -err Brandt's primary functlon, "hlle
“lmrnler had a fe- other trsks to keen him busy, such as
running the S3, thr ’'ir.lstrv of int' rior, the German Police,
and the Pome Arm*^ to mention a fe~.


- 45 -


Kothlng could heve been easier for Handloser than
to Issue n general directive thct officers of the
Medical Services of the Wehrmacht were to keep out of
concentration camps. If he could not have done so,
then we nust conclude that no one could have. Hnndloser
had no peer lr. the military medic*'! services. And
what Handleser could have done for nil the branches of
the Pehmncht, Schroeder, Genzken, and 51ome could
have done with respect to the Luftwaffe, the tfnffen SS,
and the Reich Health Department.

The conclusion is Inescapable that the crimes of
these reopensiblc leaders is a hundred fold greater than
that of the wretchco who exeouted tho murderous experiments
in tho concentration cnnrps. Theirs wa6 tho power, the
opportunity, and the duty to control and their failure lo
tholr evorlaoting guilt.


- 46 -


PRECEDENTS


This Tribunal la faced with no difficult legal

questions as to whether the acts proved In this case

constituted crises. Many of the medical experiments with

which this case Is concerned have long since been held to

have been criminal by a number of different courts. The

International Milltary Tribunal stated that:

"The Inmates were subjected to cruel
experiments at Dachau In August 1942,
victims were Immersed In cold water
until their body temperature was reduced
to 28° Centigrade, when they died lnned-
intely. Other experiments included high
altitude experiments in pressure chambers,
experiments to determine how lrng human
bolngs could survive In freezing water,
experiments with poison bullets,
experiments with contagious diseases, and
experiments dealing with sterilization
of non and women by X-rays and other methods. nl

The International Military Tribunal hold that the foro-

golng experiments osnstltutod ’Jar Crimes and Crimes against

Humanity.

In tho case against Erhard Milch, reoently concluded
before Military Tribunal No. II, tho high altltudo and
froozing experiments porformod at Dachau were adjudged
to be orlmec. Similarly, In U.S. vs. Jelss et al .,
tried beforo a Military Commission In Dachau, a large
number of Dachau concentration can officials wore found
guilty on proof Including the high altitude, freezing,
malaria, sepsis, and seawater experiments. Dr. Claus
Schilling was sentenced to death for his part in tho
malaria experiments. In a recent c^se In the British
Zone concerning atrocities committed in the Rnver.sbruck
Concentration Camp, Schledlausfcy, Rosenthal, and Trelte,
who were camp doctors In Rnvensbruck, were all tried and
sentenced to death, In part on the basis of evidence
of sulfanilamide and bone, muscle, and nerve regeneration
experiments which were performed by the defendants
Gebhardt, Fischer and Oberhauser.


^-Trlol of the Major Vfar Criminals, Vol. 1, p. 252.


4?


The law with respect to the criminality of the so-celled
euthanasia program In the Third Reich is equally clear.

4

This Tribunal is not called upon to define with Juridical

nicety what a state nay lawfully legislate with respect to

euthanasia. The Prosecution G6ks only that this Tribunal

find, as other Tribunals have already held, that there.was

no valid lm in the Third Reich permitting euthanasia and

that the execution of persons under the guise of euthanasia,

with the connivance and assistance of the defendants Karl

Brandt, Brack, Blome and Hoven constituted the crime of

murder and was a tfnr Crime and Crime against Huranlty.

Again, the foremost authority or. the legality of euthanasia

ns practiced under the Nazis is in the Judgment of the

International military Tribunal. It was there held that:

"During tho war nursing hones, hospitals,
and asylums in which euthanasia was
practiced as described elsewhere in this
judgment, cane under Frick’s Jurisdiction.

He had knowledge that insane. Blok, and
agod people, 'useless eaters' , were being
systematically put to death. Conolaint
of these nurdcr6 reached him but he did
nothing to stop then. A roport of tho
Czechoslovak 'Jar Crimes Commission estimated
that 275,000 mentally deficient and aged
pooplo, for whose welfare he was resoonolblo,
fell victim to it." 1

This finding draws no distinction between German nation¬
als cxocutod undor the program and non-Gernan nationals.

Those executions are described with the word "nurder" and
constitute 7ar Crlnes and Crimes ng^lnct Humanity under the
Charter and Control Council Law :*o. 10. This was one of
the principle crimes which led to the Judgment of guilty
and the sentence of death against Frick. How much greater
is the guilt of the defendant Karl Brandt.

The review of the Deputy Theater Judge Advocate in
the case of the U.S. vs. Klein, Wahlman, et hi., hold at
Wiesbaden, Germany from 8 through 15 October 1945, is a


1 Ibid., Vol. 1, p. 301; see also p. 247.


clear precedent that the execution of non-Gernnr. nationals
pursuant to the euthanasia program constituted the crine
murder. Since the end of the war, German and Austrian
courts have repeatedly held that the killing of persons of
any nationality under the guise of euthanasia was in violation
of the German Criminal Code find punishable as murder. It is
Interesting to note that in a case before the District Court
for Criminal Cases in Vienna in J u ly 1946, Dr. Ernst Illlng,
who was charged with putting to death children under the
cuthnnasin program, testified that he was called up by
Hefelnann, one of the subordinates of the defondant BracJ:,
and given a letter signed by Adolf Hitler according to which
the defendant Karl Brandt was given the task of putting into
effect and working out administrative regulations for tho
killing of incurable idiotic children. Illlng otatod that
after examination and decision by a scientific medic!
commlttoe, Dr. Brandt, or tho deputy designated by him,
would give the order in each individual caso. Illlng was
found guilty aa charged and sentenced to death by hanging.

The C 0 urt of Assizes in Berlin, in tho session on 25
March 1946, found the defendants Klldo tfornioko and Hclono
Wleczorek guilty of nurdor and sontonoed then to death for
their activities in the outhanasia program. Tho Court of
Appeals in tho sane case rejected the appeals of both
dofondanto. Tho court stated that, "It cannot bo mistaken
that tho defendants ffcmlckc and •71oczorok arc only tho
Inst links of a long chain, and that they were preceded
by persons whdse guilt is still greater." In Karl Brandt
and Victor Brack wo have in this dock the first and third
links in that lon^ chain. The second link, Mr. Bouhler,
has found his salvation in self destruction with a time bomb.
Hot far behind in thl6 chain of organized mass murder was


- 49 -

the defendant Blone and while Hoven nay not have sat
among the leaders, he was nore tangibly rewarded by way
of bribes as the paid killer of Buchenwald.

Defenses

Tine does not pernlt a detailed analysis of the proof
against these defendants. The Prosecution Is filing with
the Tribunal briefs against each of the defendants, and I
shall therefore restrict nyself to a few observations about
the common defenses and a number of the nore Interesting
specific defenses.

The defense evidence comes from throe main sources -
affidavits, witnesses, and testimony of the defendants.

Tho overwhelming bulk of the defense documents consists
of affidavits. These, for the most part, are affidavits
as to oharnctor, whloh are replete with such etatenents

rxe ».I cannot Imagine that he approvod or even knew

of the 'scientific' experiments which scorn all humanity
and all medical ethics."1 Then there was a great flood
of affidavits swapped around among tho defendants thonselvcc,
whloh usually take tho form of saying, In offeot, "I didn't
mean what I said about you beforo the trial began." There
is scarcely a defendant In the dock who was not the
gratoful beneficiary of a few kind words from that
resistance worker Slovcrs. This reached the extreme
when several defendants submitted affidavits In their own

behalf.

Then one sifts through this mountain of affidavits, a
small residue is finally reached which bears, to r greater
or lesser degree, upon the ultimate facts In Issue. These


H*>ndloser Ex. 49


- 50


we find are, In the cost part, sworn to by parties to the

very crimes which they seek to explain away. Among then,

to name a few, are statements by Miss Crodel, assistant to

Haagerx In the Natzweller typhus experiments; Blumenreuter,

chief of the office for Chemical and Pharmaceutical Service

under Genzke.n and supplier of equipment for a number of

experiments, including the sulfanilamide and freezing crimes;

Cromer, chief of the Medical School for Mountain Troops

at St. Johann under Handloser, and a collaborator with

Rascher; and Vonkennel, chiof of the Experimental Department

V in Leipzig and a collaborator of Poppendlck in tho

Suchenwnld typhus experiments. Such affidavits lack any

credibility whatever. Vonkonnol, to give a specific caoo,

Golonnly aosured us in his sworn statement that his Research

Department V "never had anything to do with the hormone

experiments of Dr. Vnernct, with typhus, or with experiments

concerning burns".* However, in a letter from Poppendlok

to Mrugowsky, which was submitted by the Prosooutlon aftor

Herr Vonkennol's affidavit, he requested that a drug

developed by Vonkennel bo tested as to its therapeutical

effect on typhus in the experimental station in Suohenwald

and concluded his letter by stating thnt:

"Professor Dr. Vonkennel considers it very
advisable that Dr. Ding should call on him
in his clinic in Leipzig for the purpose of
discussing this rather different therapy.

Tho necessity for absolute secrecy is stressed
to all institutions concerned.“2

1 need not remind the Tribunal that the drug ms in fact sent
to Buchenwald for testing in the criminal typhus experiments.

Then there are the affidavits which attompt to explain
away this or that document which shows the crime on its
very face. Schroeder and Becker-Freyseng, finding themselves
in this embarrassing dilemma with respect to the report on the

* Poppendlck Ex. 7

2 NO-1184, Pros. Ex. 476, R. 5639.


- 51 -


seawater conference of 19 and 20 May 1944, obtained from
tne obliging Christensen, who signed the damning reoort,
an answer to their figurative appeal to "say it ain’t so".
Cnrlstenson In his sworn statement said, In effect, that
the report was drawn up from memory several days after the
event by his assistant Schiokler, who was really a protty
stupid follow any,ray and was not apt to understand or
renenher much which went on In the meeting, that although
ho (Christenson) signed the report ho didn't rend It,
and In any event Schroeder's office called him after their
receipt of the report and pointed out numerous, but
unspecified, mistakes, and that he didn't change the
report because It was superseded by n lattor mooting.

yes, it was on sweetness and light, if one finds It
possible to believe the statements of those parties to tho
crlmos. What has boon said with respect to tho dofenoo
affidavits Is aloo true of the defense witnesses. Those
few who wore In a position to Jcnovr what they were talking
about wore testifying as much for thcmsolves no for tho
defendants. It Is patently Impossible to deal with tho
testimony of all those witnesses, but one may t*ko Bernhardt
Schmidt and Eugene nnngon ns typical oaooo. Tho Ding
Diary on tho typhus experiments In Buchonwald proves that
on 8 February 1943 , Dr. Syer of the Typhus and Virus
Institute of the OXK in Cracow, which was subordinated
to Hnndioeor, and Dr. Schmidt, a hygienist attached to
Handloser's staff, lnspoctod the typhus experimental
station. This entry in tho Ding Diary was corroborated
by the work roport of the Typhus and Virus Institute of
the Vaffen S3 In Buchonwald for the year 1943. Schmidt
was called as a witness for the defendant Hondloscr and
tostlflod that he and Eyer made the long trip to Buchenwald
for the very important purpose cf demonstrating to certain
Ss doctors, whom he could not


name, how a glass


*

I


♦

/


- 52 -

container of yellow fever vaccine should be broken open.
Although Eyer and Schmidt were very much Interested In typhuG
problems, ~nd although there wrs a typhus experiment In
progress In Buchenwold on the very day they were there,

Dr. Schmidt asks the Tribunal to credit his testinony that
they know nothing of that. Even the defendant Rose found
Dr. Schmidt's testimony somewhat hard to accept. He said:
"Bernhardt Schmidt's testimony is clear proof to me what
sort of nonsense a witness can say when he is under the
pressure of fear and if afraid he will express hlnsolf to
publicity and to the public eye by his testimony". 1

Eugene Hnngen, who was called principally on behalf of
Schroedor, Rose and Bcckor-Froyseng, to explain his typhus
experiments in Schlrneck and Buchencald, told an equally
incredible story. He carried out vaccinations in those
concentration camps only because the coop comnndor foarod
an epidemic and Hnngen wished to do what he oould to avoid
this danger. Although thore was lnsufflolont typhus vacclno
in Germany to vncclnato all personnel especially oxposed to
the disease, Hnngen showod adnlrnblo ooncorn for the
concentration camp inmates. He affirmed to the Tribunal
time and again that he onrrled out no vacoinatlona in
Schlrneck after Hay 1943 and in Natrwellcr after February 1944.
Ho testified that tho Prosecution witness Kirtr porjurod
himself when ho said that two of the lnnatcs used by Hanger,
as experimental subjects in Schlrncck in tho Summer of
1943 died. Hnngen was squarely lmponchcd on these and
other significant points by the notes on his own typhus
experiments, which he identified as having been written by
Lilss Crodcl, his trusted nsslstnat for many years. The
entry for 6 July In these notes proves that on that day
Hnagon was in Schlrmeck for the purpose of withdrawing blood

Transcript, p. 6201 - 2.


- 53 -


from ten lncates who had been U6ed to test a new living
typhus vaccine» The entry gives the serun titer value
of 8 of the experimental subjects, and is concluded with the
laconic note "the other two were not here any more - . 1
Thus, it would seem to even the most critical observer
that the testimony of Kirtz, who personally sewed up the
bodies of those two Inmates in paper bags and delivered
then for cremation, is sonewhat more reliable than that of
Haagen. The Crodel notes show that not only did Haagen
conduct experiments in Schlraech after toy 1943, but that
he was still doing so as late as January 1944. V7ith respect
to the criminal experiments in Natzweller which he swore
were finished in February 1944, the entry for 25 toy 1944
states that 30 persons wore lnnooulated In Hatzwoilor ...
during the incubation period (a transport containing also
sick people) 13 became sick in the period from 29 .'Jay to
9 June, of these 2 died*.

Insufficient time is available to give the perjurous
testimony of Haagen the attention it so richly desorveo.

But I think it fair to say by way of summary that substantially
the only truthful answer ho gavo to questions propounded
both by the defense and prosecution was when ny distinguished
opponent, Dr. Tlpp, oponed the examination by saying:

"Your name is Dr. Eugene Haagen. You were born on tho
17 June 1890 in Berlin. At present you are a prisoner
in the court prison in Kurnberg. You arc a doctor of
medicine by profession and your speciality is hygiene
and bacteriology*, to which the witness responded: *Yes,
that is correct*. 2

That other great source of defense proof - the
testimony of the defendants themselves - must also be
described, if one wishes to be charitable, a6 not above
reproach. How many times have the defendants said,

1 NO—3852, Pros. Ex. 521, R. 9660.

2 Transcript, p. 9409.


- 5 * -

n I have heard of that for the first tine here In Number?'.

This propensity for perjury on the part of the defendants

t.t.s typified by the "highest Reich authority" in the nedionl

services, Karl Brandt. Under questioning during cross-

examination as to his connection with the phosgene gas

experiments performed by Otto Slckenbcch, Brandt testified

that this research canc to his attention in the fall of

1943 on tho occasion of a visit to Strassbourg to see a

cyclotron; that later he helpod Blokenbach to obtain

a laboratory for his work; that he assisted him In

obtaining experimental animals oven to tho extent of

having thorn flovm from Spain; that Blckenbach did not

conduct experiments on human bolngs; that ho holpod him

In 1944 af tor 'he laboratory had boon ostnbllshod In tho

vlolnlty of 8trassbourg. The defendant Rostock was with

Brandt whon ho saw Blckenbach In 1943 and later classified

his research as 'urgent'. The Slevers Diary for 1944 provoe

that Elckenbncn was performing his work under tho oontrol

of Brandt. Tho entry for 2 February states thrt:

"....met Prof. Blckenbach In Xnrloruhc,
and he advises that he has put his
research work under the oontrol of General
Commissioner Prof. Dr. Brandt.' 1

Brandt admitted that ho was In Notruollor with Blokonbcch,

but ln3lstod that, strangely enough, only animal experiments

v/cro conducted In this concentration camp. Evidence

submitted by the Prosecution following this cross-examination

proved beyond controversy that Brandt was advised of the

details cf Blckenbach's orInInal experiments on Russian

prisoners of war .and that, Indeed, this research was carried

out with nls support. An affidavit from 5lckenbach himself

states th«t he discussed the necessity of carrying out

phosgene go6 experiments on human beings with Brandt before

^ 3546-PS, Pros. Ex. 123, R. 2629.


- 55 -


they vere performed and that Brandt later advised him
that the experiments had to be executed. The reports by
Blckenbach on nls experiments were all addressed to 3rondt
as Comals6loner General of the Health and Medical Services.

They show or. their face that the experiments were performed
on forty Russian prisoners of war and that four were killed
as a result.

The defendant Gobhnrdt, who figuratively beat his ohcst

and loudly proclaimed his willingness to tell the full truth,

was not above folso testimony on his own behalf p.s \70ll

as a few gratuitous perjuries for his oolleagues Gonzkcn

and Ltrugowsky, among others. Gebhardt, while assuming

responsibility for the sulfanilamide experiments on Polish

women In the Ravcnsbruck Concentration Camp, attempted

to dissociate himself from the vivisections performed In

the oourse of the bone, muscle, and norvo experiments.

He testified that his sulfanllanldo experiments wore

completed by Doocmbcr 1942 and he had no further connection
The affidavit of Fritz Suhren, oamr, commander of RavensnruciC,
with oxncrlmontal work In Rnvjnsbruok./ squarely contradicts

Gebhardt In that regard. Ho stated that In the boginning

of 1943 he contacted Grupponfuchrcr l£uoUcr of the RSHA

to have tho experiments stopped because, among other reasons,

they could not be kept socret, and that Huellor agreed.

A short time later an assistant of Gebhardt'6 requested

additional women for experimental purposes which

Suhron refused. That same evening Gebhardt reprimanded

Suhren and threatened to submit the matter to the Relchs-

fuehrer. Sometime later Suhren ms forced to go to

Hohenlychen and apologize to Gebhardt, a6 he nuts It

"In a very humiliating way". He was ordered to make throe

additional v/omen available for Gebhardt's experiments.

Ko or.e who has had occasion to observe Gebhardt 1 s vain and

overbearing manner In this courtroom can doubt the truth

of Suhren's statements.

In his zealousness to protect his fellow defendants and
heap all the guilt on Grawltz, Gebhardt testified that neither


- 56


the Hygiene Institute of the 7affer» SS nor the defendant
Mrugowsky, who at that time was subordinated to Genzken,
played any part in the sulfanilamide cxperlnonts, and that
the infection naterlal was sent to him by Grnwltz.

Genzken and .Irugowsky, needless to say, ardently supported
Gebhardt on this point. A preliminary report by Gobhordt
on theso experiment^ certified ns a true copy by Grawltz's
assistant Poppon dick, proves precisely the contrary. It
states that “SS Obcrfuchrer Dr. Blumenrouter put the
conpleto surgical lnstrunentatlons and nodlcnnentations
at ny disposal. SS Standr.rtcnfuehrcr Mrugowsky put his
laboratory and co-workers at ny disposal." The report
"Iso states that:

'•Since In this experiment too a doflnltc
gangrene could be produced clinically
speaking, yet Its picture did net In any
way correspond to tho one known In
war surgery, after further consultation
with the collaborators in the Hygiene
Institute of the Vnffen SS the vaccine
was changed by adding wood shavings."!

Evon the moat eminent scientist in the dock, tho
defendant Roso, tried to shield his guilt by a tissue of
lies. The ontrles In the Ding Diary for 19 August 1942 and
8 March 1944 prove that typhus experiments wero carried out
in Buchonwnld by Ding at the suggestion of Roso. Ten
inmates were killed during the course of these experiments.
Rose expressly denied the accuracy of these entries In
tho Ding Dinry. Ho denied over having sent vaccine to
Mrugowsky or Ding to have tested in Buchcnwald. He
denied that Mrugowsky ever asked him for vaccines to bo
used in typhus experiments or that he ever negotiated with
Mrugowsky In that regard. Mrugowsky has cheerfully
testified that he, also, had nothing whatever to do with
DlnHs experiments in Buchenwald. H e denied that he was
ever approached by Rose to have vacdlnes tested In
Buchenwald. He stated that: "If he had cone to me I

1 NO-2734, Pros. Ex. 473, R. 5622.


.


57 -


to me I would have sent him on to someone else. I would
ha.ve said, *Hy dear nan, that does not h~ve anything Co
do with ne'.“ 1 The perjurous testimony of these two
defendants was clearly revealed by the subsequent Intro¬
duction of the correspondence between then on the very
experiments with which they denied any connection. On 16
May 1942 Mrugowsky -/rote to Rose as follows:

"The Reich Physician SS and Police has con¬
sented to the execution of experiments to
test typhus vaccines. May I therefore ask
you to let me have chc vaccines.

"The other question which you raised, as to
whether the louse can be Infected by a
vaccinated typhus patient, will also bo
dealt with, in principle, this also has
been approved. There are, however, still
some difficulties at the noner.t about tho
practical execution, since we have at
presont no facilities for breeding lice.

"Your suggestion to use Oltsohn h"S been
passed on to the Porsonnol Department of tho
SS Medical Office. It wlllgbo given con¬
sideration In duo course."

Thlo letter forms the basis for the experiments carried out
by Ding in 3uchenwald on 19 August 1942 ns reported in the
Ding Diary.

These defendants wore again thoroughly lmpoachod by

the letter of Roso to Mrugowsky of 2 December 1943 which

ron do , in part, as follows:

"At present I have at my disposal a number
of samples of a. now murine virus typhus
vaccine which was prepared from mice livers
and Proved in animal experiments to be

quantitatively a 1000 times more effective
than the vaccine prepared from mice lungs.

To decide whether this first r~te murine
vaccine should be used for protective
vaccination of huma.n beings against lice
typhus It would be desirable to know If this
vaccine showed In your and Ding's oxoerl-
mental arrangement at Suchcnwald an effect
similar to that of the classic virus vaccines.


IT NO-2734, i*r08. Ex. 473, R.
2 NO-1754, Pros. Ex. 491, R.


5622.

6460.


- 58 -


"'.?ould you be able Co have such an
experimental series carried out?

Unfortunately I could not reach you over
the phone. Considering the slowness
of postal communications I would be
prateful for an answer by telephone." 1 2

This letter in turn substantiates the entry in the Ding Diary

for 8 March 1344.

These defendants, without exception, showed a very
remarkable practice of economising in the use of truth.

The record is full of their outright false statements, double
talk, fantastic explanations, absurd professions,
dissimulations, and evasions. tfe have not even been
spared the experience of at least one Instance of deceitful
and contemptuous alteration of original documents in a
vain attempt to cask the truth. These things typify
the philosophy of the National Socialists. As Justice
Jackson said:

■When for years they havo deceived the world,
and naskod falsehood with plausibilities, can
anyone be surprised that they continue the
habits of a lifetime in this dock? Credibility
is ono of the main issues of this trial. Only
those who have fnllod to learn the blttor
lessons of the last decade car. doubt that non
who have always played on the unsuspecting
oredullty of the generous oo.oonents wouid not
hesitate to do the same, now."2

One of the common defenses which has been utilized
rather extensively in this case is n variation of the old
"shell game" - now you see it, now you don't. This cones
into most active play when we have a criminal who hnd two or
more titles. Thus, for example, Kaagen was simultaneously
Consulting Hygienist to Air Fleet Reich with the rank of
8tabsorzt and the Director of the Hygiene Institute of the
University of Stras6bourg. Alsc, Oenerelarzt Schreiber,
ono of the principal subordinates of Hnndloser n6 Army
iledlcal Inspector, was Commander of the


1 NO-1186, Pros. Ex. 492, R. 6453.

2 I.K.T. Transcript, p. 14377.


Scientific Group of the Military Medical Acadeny and at
the sane tlae Plenipotentiary for the Combatting of
Epidemics In the Reich Research Council. In the face of
proof that both of these men engaged In a variety of
crimes, the Incriminated defendants have made the effort
to hide the pea which is the crime under the shell for
which they deny responsibility, while at the same time
hopefully Ignoring the obvious fact that the pen is under
both shells. Thus, Schroeder, Roso, and Becker-Freyeong
would have the Tribunal make tho fantastic finding that tho
Roctor of the University of Strasbourg was exclusively
Haugen's boss and, if he did anything wrong, it was tho
Rector's responsibility. Hnndloscr takes a similar line
with the very unpopular Schrelbor, and by somo wonderouo
working of fate, overy time Schrelbcr was sponsoring a
criminal experiment he was acting in his capacity as a
member of the Reich Research Council. Blome, according to
his story, was only deputy to the "good 9 Conti while tho
"bnd" Conti wont his criminal way without the assistance
of his chief collaborator. Poppendlck and Grawltz had tho
sane unique relationship. Qcnzkcn and Mrugowsky porform a
similar bl-scctlon of Ding; while his right hand was in
the vacclno production plant at Buchonwald under their
command, his left hand performed tho criminal typhus
experiments at the direction of Grawltz, and never tho
twain did neet. I will not oonoumc tho time and patience
of thl6 Tribunal by pointing up the wealth of evidence
which proves that «aagcn, ns ho Indeed admitted, nnd Schrolher
and Ding wore performing their criminal research with tho
knowledge and active support of these defendants who are
now so anxious to disown them. The Prosecution does not
dissent from the concensus that other persons are also
guilty of theso crimes, including most certainly the Rector
of the University of Strassbourg and the members of the Reich

i x* pil, we have Sr "r-ndt -n*


- 60


31ome, two of the six doctors who were members of the Reich
Research Council. But the fact that other persons are
equally guilty In no way serves to exculpate these
defendants. The fact that these criminal experiments were
performed with the knowledge and assistance and for the
benefit of several different agencies only goes to prove
that they woro executed pursuant to a common design.

Thus, the roport on the first typhus experiment In
Buchonwald, which cost the lives of fl\*> lnnates, was sent
by Urugowsky to Conti as Reich Health Leader, In whioh
capacity Blomo was his doputy, Grnwitz, Genzkon, Eycr
of the Typhus and Virus Institute subordinated to Handloser,
and Dr. Domnltz of the Behring Works. The "shell game"

Is no defense. Guilt was Indeed widespread, but that Is
neither oxoulpntlon nor mitigation for those defendants.


- 61 -


Another of the rather cordon defenses urged by the
defendants is that the experimental subjects were criminals
condenned to denth who, provided they survived the experiment,
were rewarded by commutation of their sentence to life
imprisonment in a concentration camp. For one who has
even the slightest knowledge of the conditions in
concentration camps and the life expectancy of an average
innate, this alleged defense assures the aspect of a ghastly
Joke. We need only recall the remark made by ono of the
women used by Rasoher to reward his frozen victims in
Dachau, who when asked by him why she had volunteered for
tho camp brothel, replied: "rather half a year in a
brothel than half a year In e concentration camp". But
the defects in this spurious defonse run much deeper.
Concentration oamps were not ordinary penal institutions,
such as are known in other countries, for the oonmlttment
of persons conviotod of crimes by courts. The very
purpose of conoontratlon camps was the oppression and
poroocution of persons who were considered undesirable by
the Nazi roglae on racial, political, and religious grounds.
Hundreds of thousands of victims were confined to
concentration camps because they were simply Jews, Slavs,
or Oypsles, Free iiasons, Social Democrats, or Communists.

They were not tried for any offense and sentenced by n
court, not evon a Nazi court. They were imprisoned on the
bnale of "protective custody orders" issued by the RSHA.

Tens of thousands were condenned to death on the single
order of Himmler, who, ns Gebhardt put it so well, "had
the power to execute thousands of people by a stroke of
his pen".* There were, Indeed, a relatively small group
of inmates who night be classed as ordinary criminals.

These were men who had served out their sentences in an
ordinary prison and then were c- nltted to concentration camps


1 Transcript, p. 4025.


- 62 -

for still further detention. A ne-orandun of IB September
1S42 by Minister of Justice Thelrack concerning a
conversation with Himmler tells us the fate of those
unfortunp.tes:

■The delivery of antl-socisl elements
from the execution of tholr sentence to
the Relchfuehrer SS to be worked to dent...

Persons under protective arrest, Jews*

Gypelos, Russians and Ukronians, Poles
with more than 3 year sentences, Czechs
and Germans with more than 8 year sentences,
according to the decision of the Reich
Minister for Justice". 1

The proof In this case has demonstrated beyond all
doubt that so-called criminals -jntenced to death were very
rarely used In any of tho experiments. True It la that
Himmler said prisoners condemned to death should be used In
those high altitude experiments whore the long-continued
activity of the heart aftor death was observed by the
cxperlmontors. He was gonorouo enough to say that If such
persons could bo brought back to life, then they wore to bo
"pardoned" to concentration camp for llfo. But oven this
unique amnesty had no application to Russians and Polos,
who wore used exclusively In thoso experiments.

But, assuming for the nomont, that this alleged defenso
night have a mitigating effect under some circumstances,

It certainly has no application to this case. Be It noted
that this Is an afflmatlve defenso by way of avoidance or
mitigation. There has been no proof whatever that criminals
sentenced to death by an ordinary court oould possibly bo
executed In a concentration canp. Such natters were within
the Jurisdiction of the Ministry of Justice, not Hlmnlor and
the SS. Tho experimental subjects we are deallngwith are
those that Himmler could condemn by a "stroke of his pen".

If the Inmate used In the experiments was condemned for
merely being a Jew, Pole, or Russian, or, for example, having


1 654-PS, Pros. Ex. 562, R. Uo95.


- 63 -


•

had sexual Intercourse with p. Jew, It does not answer the
criminal charge to say that the victim was doomed to die.
Experimentation on such a person la to compound the crime
of his Initial unlawful detention as well ns to commit
the additional crime of murder or torture. As has been
said by another Tribunal, "Exculpation from tho charge of
criminal homicide can only possibly bo based upon bone
fide proof that the subject had committed murder or any
othor rocognlzod capital offense; and, not even then,
unloBo the sentencing Tribunal with authority granted by
tho State In the constitution of the court, declared that
tho exooutlon would bo accomplished by means of a lovr-
prooeuro chamber". 1

In this connection, It might be noted that German law
rocognlzod only throe mothods of exooutlon, namely, by
decapitation, hanging, and shooting. (Gem. Penal Code, .
Part I, Par. 13; R.G.B.L. 1933, Part I, p. 151; R.G.B.L.

1939, Part I. p. 1457). Moreover, there Is no proof that
any of tho experimental oubjccts had their death sentonoe
commuted to any lessor degree of punishment. Indeed, In the
sulfanilamide crimes it was tho experiment plus later
execution for at loast six of the subjects.

Since the defendants GcbharJt, Fischer, and Oberhausor
have put particular stress on this alleged defonse, I
should like to make a few remarks In that connection^ but
It should be remembered thnt they apply with equal force to
most of the othor defendants. Gebhardt, speaking for his
co-defendants Fischer and Oberhauser, took the position
that the Polish women who had been used in the sulfanilamide
experiments had been condemned to death for partialDatIon
In a resistance noveraent and that by undergoing the

1 u.8. v. Milch, Concurring Opinion of .lusmanno, J., p.53-4.


- 54 -


experinents voluntarily or otherwise, they were to have
their death sentences connuted to sone lesser degree of
punlshnent, provided they survived the experinents.

This was no bargain renohod with the experlnentnl subjects;
tholr wishes wore not consulted in the nntter. It was,
according to Gebhnrdt, left to the good fnith of sone
one unnaned to see to It that the death sentences were
not carried out on the survivors of the experinents.
Certainly Gebhnrdt, Fischer, and Oberhauser assuned no
responsibility or even interest In that regard.

It should be pointed out that the proof shows thnt
the experlnentnl oubjeots who testified before this
Tribunal were never so nuch as afforded trial; they had
no opportunity to defend thenselves against whatever
orlneo they wore said to have conalttod. They wero slnply
arrested and Interrogated by the Gestapo In Poland and
cont to tho concentration ennp, They had never so nuch
as boen Informed that they had been narkod for , not
sentenced to, death. Articlo 30 of the Regulations
Respecting tho Laws and Custons of War on Land, annexod
to tho Hague Convention, specifically provides that ovon
a spy "shall not bo punished without previous trial".

Gebhnrdt would have the Tribunal believe that but for
tho oxporlnonta all these Pollch girls would be doad;
that ho preserved the evidence uhl oh was used against hln.
Nothing could be further fron tho truth. There is no
proof in the i-uoord that these wonen would have been
executed If they had not undergone the experinents. The
witness Magrkn is living proof of the contrary. She
was arrested for resistance activities on 11 September
1S41 and shipped to Rnvensbrucfc on 13 Septenber. She
was not an experlnentnl subject yet she lives today.
Substantially all of the Polish experlnentnl subjects


- 65 -


arrived lr. Havenstouok In September 1941. These girls
had not been executed by August 1942 when the experiments
began. There were some 700 Polish girls In thnt transport.
There Is no evidence that n substantial number were ever
executed dven though most of then were not experimented on.

The proof submitted by the Prosecution has shown beyond

controversy that these Polish women could not have been

legally e xecuted . The right to grant pardons In cases of

death sentences was exclusively vested in Hitler by a

decree of 1 February 1935. On 2 May 1935, Hitler delegated

the right to nmko nogntlve decisions on pardon applications

to the Reich Uinlstor of Justice. Or. 30 January 1940

Hitler dolegated to the General Governor for the occupied

Polish territories the authority to grant and deny pnrdons

for tho occupied Polloh territories. By edict dated 8 IXnrch

1940, the Goncral Governor of occupied Poland ordered thnt:

"Tho oxocutlon of a death sontonco pro¬
mulgated by a rogul^r court, a special
court, or a Police oourt martial, shall
take plaoo only when my decision has been
lGsued not to make use of my right to
pardon".1

Thus, oven though we nssumo arguendo, thnt tho
experimental oubjocts had all committed substantial
crimes, that they were all properly trlod by a duly constit¬
uted oourt of law, and thnt they were legally sentenced
t~ -’'.nth, it is 8 1111 clear from these decrees that these
women could not have been legally executed until such time
an the Governor Oenrrnl of occupied Poland had decided
In onch case not to make use of his pardon right. There
has been no proof that the Governor General ever acted
with respect to pardoning the Polish women used In the
experiments, or, for that matter, any substantial number


1 N0-3073, Pros. Ex. 534, R. 10359.


- 66 -


of those not used In the ex : erl: .:ts. The only reason
these 700 P 0 llsh women were transported fron tfarsaw and
Lublin to Rnvensbruck, In the first place, was because the
Governor General had not approved their execution.

Otherwise they would have been immediately executed In
Poland. At the very least, these women were entitled to
remain unmolested so long ns the Governor General took no
action. He may never have acted or, when ho did, ho nny
have acted favorably on the pardon. Who Is to say that the
majority of these 700 women did not ll've through the war
even though they did not undergo the experiments? Certainly
It was Incumbent on the defense to prove the contrary by
a preponderance of the evidence. This It did not do by
nny evldenoe.

The defendants Gebhnrdt, Fischer, and Oberhnusor
certainly cannot claim that they believed In good faith
that the Polish women could hnvo been legally cxocuted.

Evon the camp dootor, Schledlnuoky, knew that the Governor
General h-'d to approve onoh execution. Moreover, the
large number of 700 womon being oenter.cod to death at this
early stngo of the war was enough to put nny reasonable
person on notice that something was wrong.

Additionally, the uncontroverted ovldence proves that
survival of the experiments was no guarantee whatever of
avoiding execution In any event. At least six of the
experimental subjects were proved to hnvo been executed
after having survived the experiments. It was not a
question of the experiment or execution, but rathor tho experiment
and execution. Indeed, in February 1945, an effort was
made to execute all of the experimental subjects, but
because of confusion In the camp due to the war situation,
the experimental subjects were able to obtain dlfforent
Identification numbers and so avoid detection.


- 67 -


But even If one takes the case J the hefense at Its
face value, the Tribunal is in effect asked to rule that
it is legal tec military doctors of a nation at war to
experiment on political prisoners of an occupied country
uho are condemned to death, to experinent on then in such
a nay that they nay suffer death, .xcrutiatlng pain,
mutilation, and pernanent die ability, all this without
their consent and in direct aid o’ the nllltary potential
of their enemy. There .ould, o: course, be no valid
reason for limiting such a decUlon to civilian prisoners;
... vA^rinenta would certain// hnve boon no worse had
they been performed on Polls.1 or American prisoners of v/nr.
It Is impossible to consider seriously this ghoulish
ruling being sought for by the defense.

I should now like to turn briefly to the sneclflo


defonses of some of the defendants. It Is n temptation
to tnko uo each defendant In his turn, but since ny
appropriate tine docs not permit, I can ohly hope that v/e
Will not be accused of pnrtUMty In selecting only a few
for comment.

The dofensc of Hnndloser Is a goneral denial. He
says In offeet that: I was a soldier. I was in charge
of the nodical administration of the Wchroacht, but had


no powor and no right to issue orders, and that whatever
may have happened, I oa not responsible for It. It is
Interesting to note that this defense is very similar


to that put forward by Field Jarshal Keitel In this
court room approximately a year ago. He was represented
by the same defense counsel. Keitel also said that he
could not issue orders. We have already discussed In
some detail the position of Hnndloser, and It has been
established beyond a shadow of a doubt that he was the
supreme authority in the ailJrary medical services. *7e
need not stop to consider the practical difference between


on order and n directive* ffe have pointed out that the
opportunity end power to control the participation of the
military medical services in these crimes was his. The
evidence shows that Kandloser was connected with a number of
criminal medical experiments including the typhus and other
vaccine experiments both in Buchenwnld and Natzweiler, and
the freezing, sulfanilamide, Jaundice, gas, and the pas
oedema experiments, among others. But it was his
participation in the Buchenwald typhus experiments which
now causes Kandloser the most distress. The first entry in
the Ding Diary proves that Handloser participated in the
conference whloh doclded that those experiments should be
performed. This has brought forth a concerted attaoK on
the authenticity of this doounc.-t by Kandloser as well as
JurugowBky. But after months of torturing and twisting,
tho diary has not been disproved in a single respect. To
the contrary, it has been substantiated tine and again by
tho introduction of independent documents which are too
numerous to hero detail. Thoro is scarcely a line in tho
whole diary which has not boon corroborated either by
doounonto or by testimony. Tho defense Itself proved that
the diary was all typed on the onno nnchlnc. The genuineness
of the signatures of Dr. Ding, which appear on substantially
every page, has been proved boyond controversy. Tho
diary must be accepted as accurate in its entirety. There
\g r.c basis for accepting some entries and rejecting others.
Tho defense has presented no creditable evidence of any
inaoouraolc6. The living reoor J of the deceased Ding is
tho best evidence of what actually happened.

But one could disregard the Ding Diary and tne proof
would still require a Judgment of guilty with respect to


Handloser. The Buchenwald typhus oxperlnents were also

dlsucssed at ft preliminary conference on 29 December 1941

%

attended by a subordinate of Handloser. Ki6 office
received a copy of the confcrer.r report. Medical officers
under the dlroct command of Handloser were Informed of the
details of these experiments — Eyer, Schmidt, and Schrelber.
Eyer received a report on the first series of experiments
and later, nccompanlod by Schmidt, visited the experimental
station. Typhus Infected lice as well as vaccines were
furnished to Ding by the Typhus and Virus Institute of the
OKH under Handloser. Dlnp reported on the typhus experim¬
ents at a Meeting of the Consulting Physicians called by
Handloser and presided ovor by Schrelber. Additionally,
the Buchonwald experimental station was used by Handloser
to have yellow fever vaocine8 tested on inmates, tho results
of which were sent to his hygienist Dr. Schmidt. Corahlnod
vaccino experiments wore conduotcd at Buchonwald on the
suggestion of Handloser. Old blood plasma was tested on
inmates of the "Little Camp" at Buchonwald for tho Military
Medical Acadony under Handloser. Tho proof Is qulto
clear that Handloser had knowledge of and participated In
tho criminal typhus experiments In Buchonwald, as well ns
other medical crimes.

Rudolf Brandt renchod the pinnacle In the contest
of self-abasement among the defendants. His testimony
before the Tribunal can be sunned up In or.e sontenco:

"I romember nothing". Aside from a description of Himmler
as something in the nature of a Jekyll and Hyde, he
contonted himself with giving answers to leading questions
put by his attorney which were calculated to reveal him
as a disembodied stenographic automaton Or a mechanically
proficient half-wit. He ccoplalns that the Prosecution


- 70


only submitted 113 letters written or received by hln
to establish his complicity in these crimes - which he,
indeed, admits. He wants the Tribunal to sny he is really
not very guilty since he was concerned with over 160-000
letters in a life-time at Himmler's side. Of course,
thio mechanical measure of proof submitted by the Defense
works both ways. It can be urged with equal validity
that he is twice the murderer that Slevers has been proved
to be on, shall we sny, 50 documents. I need hardly
mention that a great number of theso many other letters
mentioned by Brandt concerned such natters as the
kidnapping of Czechoslovakian children, the destruction
of the V7arsaw Ghetto, extermination of Jews, «nd tho
notorious Flier Order, which enoournged the lynching
of Alllod fliers who balled out ovor Germany. Tho
Prosecution does not contond that Rudolf Brandt was as
important as Hlmmlor. But he was an inportant administra¬
tive assistant to Himmler. While the basic decisions
wero made by Himmler, Brandt saw to it that they were
carried out. If the principle of relntlve guilt has any
plnoe in the trial of men directly connected with the
murder of thousands of porson6, which tho Proseoutlon
submits it has not, then the significance of Brandt's
position and his criminal activities cones Into clear
relief by oonparlson with that of the camp commander of
Dachau and many of his subordinates, who have long since
been sontor.cod to death for their participation in some
of tho same crimes charged in this Indictment.

Rudolf Brandt also ploads superior orders in
mitigation. There is no evidence that Himmler ordered
Brandt to participate in any crime. Brandt did so wilfully.
There is no evidence thnt Brandt retained his nosltlon out
of fear. He flourished lr. it. H 0 thlng would have been
easier for him than to be replaced out of requdst or


- 71 -


feigned Inefficiency. Brandt was not a soldier on the field
of rattle. His activities were far recoved froc the
confusion of the front lines. He did not act In the
spontaneous heat of passion; he had full tine to consider
and reflect upon his course of action. He continued In
his position from 1933 until his arrest by the Allies in
1945, no less than 12 years. This fact alone removes any
basic for mitigation. Moreover, assuming that Brandt
was ordered to commit the criminal acts which are the
cub.lect of this trial, when there Is no fear of reprisal
for disobedience, obedience represents a voluntary
participation In the crime. Such Is the case with Rudolf
Brandt. Finally tho doctrine of superior orders cannot be
considered In mitigation v/hore such malignant and numerous
crlraos have beon continuously and ruthlessly committed
over a period of many years.

What has been said with rospeot to Brandt applies
oqunlly to the defendant Fischer who also ploads ouperlor
orders. Ho knew at the time he performed these experiments
that he was committing a crlne. He know the pain,
dlcflgureraont, disability, and risk of death to whloh hlG
exporlmontal victims would be subjected. Ho ccxild have
refuoed to participate In the experiments without any
fear of consequences. This ho admitted In saying, "At
was not fear of a death sentence or anything like that,
but the alternative was to either ho obedient or dis¬
obedient during war, and thereby set ar. example, an
example of disobedience.Such an admission removes
any basis for mitigation. A soldier Is always faced with
the alternative of obeying or disobeying an order. If he
lsno*7B the order Is criminal, It is surely a hollow excuse
to s"y It must be obeyed for the sake of obedience alone.


1 Transcript, p. 4374.


- 72 -


The defendant Belglboeck attempts to run In nil
directions at once. The gypsies which he used in his
experiments he tells us were volunteers, although he carried
c. plBtol on his hip; they took the seawater willingly,
although he found It necessary to tie one to his bed and
seal his mouth with adhesive plaster to prevent him from
obtaining fresh water; nohe of the experimental subjects
suffered any harmful offects, although he contemptuously
orased and altered the wording of a clinical record of one
of the subjects In a vain effort to conceal from the
Tribunal his desperate condition. This reluctant admission
of fraud and deceit on his part came only after tho proof
left him no alternative, but he solemnly assured the
Tribunal that he made no furthor changes In tho documents.

A further examination, however, shows that ho did exactly
the same thing with respoct to another report of a subJoot'c
condition. But Belglboeck'6 primary defenoo seoms to be
based oh the proposition that It is not a crime against
humanity to experiment on gypsies, since thoy are, at loast
according to Nazi doctrlno, necessarily "asocial" persons.
Bolglboeok apparently ccnsldors himself soncthlhg of an
expert on this subject. He tostlfled that It was his
understanding that a whole family could be classified asocial,
althouth this "does not exclude the possibility that, In
this family, thero can bo a largo number of persons who did
not commit any crime". 1 This notion that all gypsies are
asoclalo la also apparently shared by his defense counsel
who when cross-examining tho witness Hoellenrelner said,
"Liston, Hr. Hoellenrelner, don't evade ay question after
the fashion of gypsies". 2 It vms also felt neoeecnry
to submit an extract from a work known as the "Gypsy Book”,
v/hlch reads In part as follows 1


1 Transcript p. 8848.

2 Transcript 10518.


■The 'gypsy plague* fron which we suffer Is
caused by large nunbers of gypsy bands and
Individual gypsies roaalng about the country
between the Austrian, Swiss and French borders
under the cloak of trading .... thereby
seriously endangering public security by
their vagrancy. Besides begging, trespassing
on fields, forest land and nendows, spreading
the risk of epidemics and fires, trickery,
these people are inclined to thievery."

While thl6 book was published In 1905, It could not have been

better V7rltten by Julius Strelcher. Such Nazi doctrines of

inferior races and oeoples simply serve to exolaln how these

crimes of nan's Inhumanity to nan could have ocourred.

In Slevers we have an unresisting ncnber of a so-called
resistance novcnent. He neks the Tribunal to free hln
fron guilt for his bloody crlnes on tho around that he was
really working as an anti-Nazi resistance agent. Nor was
he a lnte-oonor to tho resistance novenent; according to
him, he has been resisting slnco 1933. Yet In those 14
years, yes to this vory day, he has not porforned ono overt
not against the r.en who ran tho systen he now profossos to
have always detested. Ho Joined tho Nazi party as early no
1929 and tho SS in 1935. Ho stayed with Hlnnler's gang
until tho last days of tho oollapso. He cano to Numberg
In 1946, not to givo ovldcnco of tho horrible crlnes of
which he had first hand knowledge, but to testify In dofenso
of tho SS. During his testimony boforo tho International
Kllltary Tribunal, he consistently denied «ny knowledge of
or connection with crlnes connlttod by the Ahnonorbo of
the SS. It was left to the cross-examination of Ur. E'lwyn
Jones to prove hln the nurdcrer and perjurer that ho Is.

Nor did he show any signs of resistance in this trial except
to the manifold crlnes with which he Is charged. Not ono
new fact did ho reveal to this Tribunal, although
specifically asked to tell all he knew. If asked today, he
will assure one and all that there Is not a guilty ann In
tho dock, *nd least of all hinsolf. But, for purposes of
argument, let us concede the truth of his many lies. It doe6
not harm our on6e. It 16 not the law that a resistance


74 -


worker oan connit no crime and, least of nil, ngeinet the
people he Is supposed to be protecting. It le not the Inn
that nn undercover agent, even an F.B.X. "gent> can .loin
a gang of murderers, lay the plon6 with then, execute the
kllllng8, ahnre the loot, and go hie merry nay. iiany ore
the polloenon who have been convicted for taking part In
crimes they were entrusted to prevent. Ho, the sad thing
Is that this collector of living Jews for transformation
Into skeletons has only one life with which to pay for his
many crimes.

In view of the clear nnd unequlvooal proof of tho
defendant Rose's participation In the typhus nurders of
Buchenwald he can only plead that ho didn't onjoy doing
what ho did, that he objected to tho oxporlnonts at tho
Third Meeting of tho Consulting Physicians of the Vohrflaoht
In May 1943. But this lo his condennntlon, not his
salvation. In March 1942 he was in Buchenwald and saw
what was being done. In May of tho oaao year he nskod
Mrugowsky to test a vaccine for hln in those experiments.
Four Inmates wore klllod as a result. In May 1943, he
objeoted to tho exporinents lr. what ho desorlbes as strong
torms. But In December, he was again instigating still
another experiment which resulted In tho murder of six
men. He Is a living example of a nan who oould have
abstained fron participating In these crlnes without throat
of harm to his person or position by any agenoy of the
Hnri Government. He n»s not arrested nnd tried by the
S3 because of his objection. He was not oonnitted to a
concentration canp. In spite of that, he voluntarily
participated In these sane crlne6 to which he said he
objected. With his knowledge, prestige, and position, he
Is even more culpable than the miserable and Inexperienced
Ding who actually performed the experiments In the murder
wards of Buchenwald.


- ?5 -
CONCLUSION

I have already mentioned briefly the principle of
relative guilt, but before concluding I should like to say
a ferr nore words In that connection. Over the past half-
year or more, we have all become acquainted with ghastly
evidence of mass murders both from the record of this
proceeding and the trials which have preceded It. It would
not be surprising, therefore, that we might tend to regard
a man who killed only three or five persons as a pretty
nice fellow by comparison. For example, It night be said
that Gebhardt, who adnltted that three wonen died In his
sulfanilamide experiments, Is entitled to a somewhat
different punishment than Karl Erandt, who conceded that
60,000 persons were executed under his euthanasia program.

In response to a question put by a defense counsel, Dr.

Ivy emphatically statod that "thorc lo no Justification In
killing flvo people In order to save the lives of 500". 1
The Idea that such thinking m^y be Justified, with Its
Inherent usurpation of the Lord's prerogative, Is typical
of Natl thought. This whole system of Natl mathematics
Is untenable In clvllited society. This corruption of
thought Is found even In a mathematics problom book, put>-
llshed In 1935, for use by German school ohlldron. Under
the pulse of mathematics, the revulsion of nomal children
against tho spreading of death by poison gas Is Insidiously
broken down. Lot us look at Problem 200 In this text book
on mnthenntlcs and soe what It says:


1 Transcript, 9229


76 -


“According to statements of the Draeger
Works in Luebech, In the passing of a city
only 50/e of the evaporated poison pas is
effective. The atmosphere must be poisoned
up to a height of 20 neters in a concentration
of 45 np/n3. How nuch phosgene is needed

to poison r. city of 50,000 inhabitants, who
live in an area of 4 square kilometers?

How nuch phosgene would the population Inhale
with the air they breathe in 10 minutes
without protection against gas, if one person
uses 30 litres of breathing air per minute?

Conpare this quantity with the quantity of
the pclson gas used. B l

The 8nno perversion of thinking in terns of Nazi

mathematics also explains the mass extermination of what

sovornl defendants have called “lives unworthy of living",

tho aged, the crippled, and the Insane. Any German high

school studont who had studied this book on mathematics

could havo told us that. Problems 95 and 97 toll tho

story noro oloquontly than wo could possibly state it.

■Problem 95. The construction of an
insane asylum roaulrod 6 million R.«.

How many settlement housoo at 15000
R.M. oach could have been built for this
sum?

■Problem 97. An Insane person oosts about
4 R.~. dally, a cripple 5* R.M., a criminal
3$ R.U. In many cases a civil servant
only has about 4 R.U., an office employee
barely 3$ R.H., an unskilled laborer not
even 2 R.2J. per head of his family. (a)
Illustrate these figures graphically.

According to oautlous estlnateo there arc
in Germany 300,000 insane porsons, epileptics,
etc. undor institutional care.

(b) What is their total annual cost at a
figure of 4 R.LI.?

( 0 ) How many marriage allowance loans nt
1000 R.U. each - subject to rcnunclatloh of
repayment of the money later - could bo paid
out from thi3 money yearly?"

This Tribunal must solemnly reaffirm an entirely

different type of mathematics; mathematics in the light of

religious and humane education which tenches that the valuo

of even one human life is infinite, which means, again

mathematically expressed, that one times infinity is .lust

as infinite as 500 times infinity.


1 Mathematics in the Service of National Political Education
With Practical Examples from Economics, Geography and
Natural History, Adolf Domer, 1935.


- 77 -


a distinguished American scientist snld in this court

room!

"There 16 no state or politician under
the sun who could force ne So perform
a medical experiment which 1 thought was
morally unjustified". 1

This was more than the viewpoint of an Individual or of an
American. Dr. Ivy expressed the opinion of all nodical
non and decont people of the clvlllred world. These
defendants held a very different view in their day of pomp
and power, and so these orlnes resulted.

A pronlnent present dAy Ocrnnn leador has expressed
tho opinion that we are partly responsible for the snow¬
balling ooncequencos of rearmament in violation of treaties
in 1936, beoauso wo did not then strongly enough expross
our disapproval. There is some logic in this statement,
although it llluninatos the tragic failure of being too
dependent on guidance froc outsldo rather than on the
dictates of one's own conscience. Therefore, let thoro bu
no doubt about tho dogreo of your condemnation of the note
of those defendants.


1 Transcript, p. 9229.


- 77 -


a distinguished American scientist snld In this court

room:

"There Is no state or politician under
the sun who could force me to perform
a medical experiment' which 1 thought was
morally unjustified". 1

This was more than the viewpoint of an individual or of on
American. Dr. Ivy expressed the opinion of all ncdloal
non and decent people of the civilized world. These
defendants held a very different view in their day of pomp
and power, and so these crimes resulted.

A prominent present day German leader has expressed
the opinion that we are partly responsible for the snow¬
balling consequences of rearmament In violation of treaties
In 1936, because wo did not then strongly enough expross
our disapproval. Thore Is oomo loglo In this statement,
although it illuminates the traglo failure of being too
dopondent on guidance from outsldo rather than on the
dictates of one's own conscience. Therefore, let thoro be
no doubt about tho dogreo of your condemnation of the aot a
of these defendants.


Transcript, p. 9229.


%

MILITARY !RI3U1*L SO. I
CASE HO. 1


CLOSING BRIEF FOR
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
AGAINST

HERMANN bECKER-FRSYSEHG


Nurnborg,

16 June 1947


Jones k. kcHoney
Alexander G. Hardy
nmost Horilk-Hochwald
Esther Jnno Johnson

For:

Telford Taylcr
3rlgadlor General, U.S.A.

Chlof of Counsel for War Crimes


XinRODOCT IOK


It is alleged in essence under Ccur.t One of the
Indictment that tho defendant Eeraorn Beckcr-Freysong
conspired end egrood with others, purusant to c con.on do-
..3ign, tj perform . odiccl oxp-ria.cnts on Involuntary hur.an
subjects; urxier Counts Two and fhreo ( !Qr cri.-es end Ori. es
against Humanity, respectively) that he wes a principal in,
accessory to, ordered, abetted, took a consenting ,-art in
nd was connected with plans and enterprises Involving nodi¬
cal experimentation on involuntary human auojccts. The de¬
fendant Bocker-Froys-ng is ciiargcl with special responsi¬
bility for and participation in th~ high altitude, freezing,
sea wr.tor, end typhus experiments.

In order to airplify the issues and to expedite the
trial, thw rroscc.tion has alr-cdy withdrawn the charges of
having r a:ticlpotcd in the yellow f-v-r, smallpox, pcratyphus
A end 3, al-ric, diphthvria, nd oulfenil-xlde expert -nta,
end no* .ithdrows the charge with r^spwct to tho opide ic
jiunt iCv wxpwrir.ents.

I. ^ .SITlCho OF hwSrOKSI 3ILm

The do fondant B^ckor-Froy Sv-ng Joined the i;S0«* in ..ey
1S33. Ho also hold eo. berahip in the XS&, tha national
Socialistic .^toriaod Corps, nd the hSF.t, the I.etlonal
Socialistic Flying Corps. (BccSccr-Froyseng, K. 7780).

nfter the oompletion of his edicel studi-s at Hoidel-
berg, Ir.ssbruck rvi Berlin, the defend.nt - b-ce c an assis¬
tant at the University Clinic in ©-rlin. In august 1938, ho
booc.io an assistant scientist =t the Aviation tedic-1 «cac:roh
Institute of the *w.ich Air . inistry in Berlin und-r Professor
Strughold. He eventually received his lector of ^vd. Habil.
lr. J-rlin in 194, -nd ir. 195 sms appointed e lecturer on
i;.t-r 1 nd vietlon . .odicir.o. (BocJcer-Freyson", < 78).

In th« summer of 19-^0, the dcf-nd.nt entered the

- 1 -


*


Luftv-ffo with the rank of Ur.tcrc.rzt end eventually attained'
-be rcnlc cf Stabs:rzt. His first duty was at the Aviation
examination Station end in august 1941 was transferred to tho
..odiccl Inspectorate of the Luftwaffe cs assistant r-forent
in the Referst (Depart., entj for aviation -odlcinc. He rc-
ained in this position cs assistant referent to Professor
withony, the r-for-nt in tnc ncforct for aviation i edicino
until Hay 1944. In i.cy 19,4, he bccaa.c the Chief of the
Department for aviation medicine end hold that position un¬
til 8 liarch 1945.

In the Kcdicel Service of th- Luftwaffe, there existed
twenty-five ref-rats. « referot was department within tho
Luftwaffe organization which dealt with speclrliz-d subjects;
for example, thoro existed the Roferat for nvietion .vdioino,
the Roferat for H;gi-n-, the Ref-rat for Internal medicine,
etc. *»s vc h:vc already pointed out, the Refcrct for evic¬
tion Medicine was first headed by Prof-ssor «nthony with
aockcr-i-’r-yseng os his Uoputy and lat-r by Beckcr-Frcy3-ng
hi self. (Bocker-Proyscng, R. 7779, 7809, 8007; NO-669,

Pres. Sx. 16, h. 110).

Bcokcr-Fr-yacng t.stifled the t the joaltion of tho
referent va one dealing with thetechnicvl and .cterlnl pre-
r rations, whoroas the consulting physician only rendered ex¬
pert opinions to the .radical Chi-f. ‘.hen the Inspectorate
was concerned with r. scl-ntlfic proposal, then tho ref-rat
AOUxd obtain the opinion or attitude of the consulting phy¬
sician . nu r-port to th- Inspector. The refer-nt -Iso save
his view regarding any such propos Is. In order to put it
bxplicitly, while a p-rsoncl view - s cx^-otcd fro ’• the c-n-

oulting physldah, u material view was axpcctcd Den the referent.
(Bocker-Freyseng, R. 7811-2).

It is access ry to c-nsid-r th- work of the Ref-rat ftr

nvl tion i.udicine. The problc s for which this refer't . s

- 2 -


*


responsible were first, the -fleets of acceleration, and
s-cond, the effects of high altitudes, or, ir. ether words,
the effects of the. Irek of oxygen, i'hese too fields i.ri-
rrily were the classical fields involved in aviation . adi-
cin-, but during tho course of the war any now problcca
rose, e.g. gen-ral physiological questions rbout respira¬
tion end clrc il'.tion, questions concerning general and
special pahtology which resulted froei cir accidents in the
case of high altitudes, pharmccouticnl questions, section
of flyers end tr'ining of fly-rs, sea, desert, and mountain
emergencies, end the dcvclopncfat of apparatus for the pilot¬
ing of irplanos fror the point of vi-w of physiological end
psychologic." 1 considerations. In cddlti-n, carbon r.onoxldo
offoots -nd tho effects of heat, also arose during tho air
war and the roferat had to doal with the construction end
modernizing of lou-pr.ssuro ohc ibora, education of flying
physicians, and oriintation about ap-cial llteraturo. In
summation, aviation medicine comprises all sph-res of medi¬
cine in its connection to the operation cf sirereft,(Becker-
Preyseng, R. 7024).

In the Office for 4 »vl: tien -cdlclne d-aring the porioc*
fro:.. lS*il until the end of tho .or, no ..ore than two porsons
were in uthority, n cely Professor ^nthony and the defon-
dent OeCker-Preyseng. (Bccker-Preyseng, h. 3087). Bocker-
Ftfoysong joined the chorus of Self-aba.aoaent toon the dock
•nd would h vo the Tribunal belie vo that he really had no
authority and th t «*nth~ny limited his field considerably.
This is a rcductlo :d bsurdur. It ..ould nrve to be conclu¬
ded that when *nthony left the of!ice for an extended peried
of time cs he so; etir.es did, all business stopp-d and the
office was literally locked. In -edition to *nthony a.nd
3 ockor-Preyseng, they had only clerical help in the Refer t


- 3 -


Aviation medicine ar.G on nc occasion did th- number of


personnel exce-d four. (Bccker-Prcyseng, H. 8088 ).

The, do fond'nt ^chrocdcr testified that Bcckor-Froysong
v«-’.3 his consultmt on eviction medicine, that "ho laic.;/ best
cs to /hot wes going on in general in the fi-ld of eviction
*dicjnu‘ ; , thet he was infer -d on ell eviction medicine ru-


3s. rch work c-rriod out bj the Luftwaffe, that he roooivod
rno r-viuwed oil ruperts on such resoorch. Bcckor-Froyscng
wrs respensiblo for thu collecting end utilization of nil
the. utilization of all th- results of the r-sc~rch work in
aviation m.dicinc. H- decided whether oney should bo gran-
ted, *chroedor sc id he was his scientific advisor.
(Schrocdor, K. 3606-7).

The heferat for eviction . edicin-, in eddition to con¬
cerning itself with probl-: a in the fluid of evi tlon ,-odi-
cino, : Iso issued oil oth.r r-so ren : sign onto . ado by the
Luftwaffe. The defend: nt ^chrocdcr stated th-t:


"Bccauso of ofiico t-chnic.:l r-asor.s , all re¬
search rsalgm-nts wer- do.lt with in the do-

E rt -nt of oeck-r-Fr song, but it snould not
e understood that theso assign..-nts which hod
nothing to do with aviation odicln-, f^»r in¬
stance in the fluid or h;giuno or dental c »o

SSnEWtfefVoK%a§*? . MS • ■: n°e . ii? m&JT - rt ■
cn •- f f ic i .1 technic*.‘l enn.r.. ..s I cxpla4nod

f asten'’vs in .r'.or to !o 1 with such ssign uhts,
-rf m rer ilti-s had to bu bided by. Thoso
things wer- well known in th- Deport.-nt -f
Beckor-r'roysong end since tho irpbrtmcc of those
-sslgnrcv-nts c*ao fro:: th- sphere of nvictivn medi-
cinu, this b-j rtr out lr--dy befor- tho tL.o I
car.o there received tav office work with rofwrer.co
to ell these assign -nts. *<lth reference to tho
contenplated assign, -r.ts which remained in the
Dup art cent, we could see t '11 tL.-s wh t og-ncy
of ny Dopartm-nt v; s ctually working on the
3ciontific queoti-ns." (Schreedcr, R. 3618-C/.

Thus, the testi. ony of Scl roed-r pr-ves that the

D-pert. -nt for «vir.ticn ..edicine was rospon3ibl_ fur the

coordination of nil ruse; rch assignments within the luft-

vffo. .,11 r.ssignn-nts • -re issued out of that office.


- 4 -


*


3«.cl:cr-Pr yscng was In a position to rend reports end to

v- a clear knew-l-dgc of research in which the Luftwaffe

,;c.s interested. Bcckor-Frey3cng, in effect, admitted this

control over oth-r fields. He stated:

“I said th:t the Referent for Aviation
. edlcine, cside from hi3 95> aviation
assignments, - lsc did purely formal
work for the r-st of the research as¬
signments, ov^n if not aviation .-cdicr.l
assignments or in other fields.' 1
(Bcckcr-Frcyscng, R. e089).

Bocko r-rre ySeng attempted to limit bisrosponsibility by-
test ifying that the r-sc rch assignments were issued only by
the Chief of tho -^Qicrl Inspectorate hi. self, personally.
(Bockor-Froyscng, R. SOSO). That th. Chief of tho ^diccl
Services was ultimately responsible goes without saying, but
nothing could be clc-r-r that th- bulk of the work was done
by nnthony and Bcckor-Frcyscng. The defendant *eltz srid that
tho subordination of his Institute for «vl tion (.odicine
at ainich was to Luftgcu 0 for discipline;- . -asuros end
to thw Office of Anthony, 'nd later Beckcr-Froyseng, for
acl-ntific purposes. It is, therefore, eat blished that tho
Refor-nt for aviation medicine was tho research coordinator
for the Chief of th* .xdic 1 Services of tho Luftwaffe.

In order to follow th». activities with which the Roferat
for Aviation Kcdlcine htd int-r-st, it is necoss ry to cl ri-
f; the fll- designation of that office. The letter desig¬
nation for the Aviation odicine h-forat was "2 11 E“ until

•

the winter of 1942-43. This designation stood for *'«btoil-
ung 2, Group H, Rofornt S". In the winter of 19*2-4$, the
letter designation of th- «vl tion -edicln- noferct /r.s
chang-d to "2 F° -nd it remained "2 r B until about January
1944, when it booa-je kn-wn cs “2 II Th- *-rk of the
-ffice was th- sene during all this time and th- change in
th- lute-r designation a-r-ly roflcct-d inter 1 reorg-niza-
ati^r. -f th- ..adic-1 Services af the Iaiftwcff-. (NG-v48, -


- 5 -


-'--S. 3x. 31, R. 235}. In addition to the above letter or
:ilw cl. signet Iona, the. ftcfcrct for Aviation o.cdicino hod a
registration nunber, “55". T7o will note lcter in this brief
thrt those file or lettor designations bocono Very apparent
in connection with the high altitude, freezing, see wntor,
cpido.sic jaundice, end typhus oxperi_vnts.

It will bo appreciated that In the course of pedicel
*• esecrch a pxoper coordination wns necessary. During tho
wcp, the Luftwaffe nos in a position ..here the use of sup¬
plies end .-ctcriols, of physicicns me scientists, -nd other
research oquipoent, hod to be carefully 'Hoc ted. Coordina¬
tion was ncceS3"ry in order to avoid duplication of work. In
c edition to the hcforcts in the Luftw fie Medici Inspectorate
fvr v rious fields of cdicinc, there 'Iso existed o budget
reforat. But since this affico was not fr.iillar with oil
tho r-se-rch assignments in the Luftwaffe, it was hot in a
position to doter.-ino the rlloc. tion of funds necoss ry to
carry out the v-rious tasks. H-ncc, whenever cny problem
rroee c.ncerning the su:. af or.oy fer ox^-rLr.entr .1 purposes,
Bock^r-Pr-yseng u de the necessary rvC0.:..-n<5 tiona to the
budget effico. He testified:

“The -p,r.-v 1 for cny r-so rch sslgn::ent
(vihea.ln it wra r.eceao'r;, t- allocate
funds) wjs reserved f-r the .ixdic 1 Chief
nd before for the ..odic 1 I„sp-ctor. It
vrro the task of the Rcfcrat tj furnish nc-
ecss ry d-ta in order tc -.eke tr.: t d-cisien."
(Btcker-Freyscng, h. 0109).

Bcckor-Preyswng takes th- .coition that the Chief f the
kodic 1 Services of th- l^ft • fie, formerly Hippk- nd la-
t.r the defend nt SciJ’j-'.-i, \ s the only per3. n in a‘ posi-
tien t> ipr v- the allocation of fhnd3 fer uc~ in -x;..ri-
Ronficl progr.c.s. "hile this my undoubtedly be true, tho
det. il3 Upon ..hich his decision .. s based ^r. worked out
by 3oCker-Freyseng's afficc, s he hl s.lf a&;lt£.

- 6 -


II. PERSONA L PARTICI PA TION IN' CRI1IIKAL EXPERIMEN TS.

Ai Hi gh a l tit u de Exp eriments (Indictment, Par. 6 (A)).

The high altitude experiments are described In detail In
the Prosecution*s brief against Ruff, Rcmberg, and Woltz,

Becker-Freyseng* b scientific knowledge In the fiold of
hign altitude research Is considerable. In tho yoars 1938 and
1939, ho worked cn time rosoarch experiments up to 9,000
motors and, in 1940, his work dealt with questions regarding
adaption to high altitudes. (B-F, R. 7784).

The high altitudo experiments which wcro perfcrnod In
Dachau fell squarely within tho field of aviation medicine
for which *nthony and Bockcr-rrcyseng wore responsible. Yet
Beckbr-Froyscng would have tho Tribunal believe boliove that
ho know nothing about thoso experiments before they wore
performed. Ho ccntondo that ho first ho-.rd of tho high
altitudo experiments conducted by Ruff, Romberg, and Rasoher
waon ho was Informed that a film was tc bo shown at Milch* c
office on tho experiments. This was In September, 1942.

(R. 8114). It Is quite obvious that an experiment of tho
scope performed in Dachau could not possibly have boon
carried out without the coordinated offorts of a largo group
of persons and very clonrly tho Deportment for *vlxitlcn
Mediolne was responsible for making all of tho necessary
arrangonents. * research assignment had to bo l6suod beforo

tho experiments could bo performed. Fund6 had to bo allo¬
cated to finance tho experiments. *11 manner of equipment,

Buoh as tho high altitude chamber, electrc-cnrdlcgraphs, and
tho liko had to bo provided. It was tho very function of the
Department for Aviation Medicine to take oaro of thoso pro¬
blems. Tho high altitude oxperioonts did not begin In full blocra
on February 22, 1942 without considerably preparation and pro¬
vision of equipment for thoso experiments. Thoy had been dis¬
cussed for nearly a year beforo they wore performed and It 16
ridiculous to even consider that tho deputy chief for tho


- 7 -


Department for Aviation iledlclno was not Informed, r.nd
did not actively support those experiments. To bollcVe
Bockor-Freyseng would require a holding that nobody knew
anything aocut or did anything In connection with the
cxpcrlaents except Hlppke, -teltz, Ruff, Romberg, and
Raschor.

The movouent of the low pressure chambor to Dachau Is
a go*d example of the necessity for the performance of
substantial tasks by beckor-Froyseng's office. Ho admitted
that ono of his first assignments In his capacity as
assistant to Anthony In the Department for Aviation Modlclno
was to conduct a eurvoy of all the low pressure chambers.

(R. 7827). ’they wero under the central ocntrol cf that
office-and In 1941 the German Luftwaffe had only four
ncbllo chambers. Bockur-Froysong adnlttcO^that tho
pressure chambers were under hlo control, but as to tho
ono used in tho criminal high altitude experiments he
argues that Ruff obtolnod permission for tho transfer of
tho ohaober to Dachau from Hlppke directly. IR. 8103—1).
'./hatever may be tho truth of this assertion, it is
perfectly obvious that Hlppko did not Issue the orders
himself to tho drlvor of tho low pressuro ohumbor who took
it to Dachau. Nothing could bo dearer than that Hlppko
passed down Instructions to tho Department for Aviation
Uodlclno tc supply tho necessary equipment fer tho Dachau
experiments and that the physical movement cf the chamber,
together with the supply cf ether neooesury equipment,
was handled by anthony /md becker-Froysong. i‘ho chamber
cculd not possibly have boon movod to Dachau and retained
there fer six months without their knowledge.

Tho defendant froltr tostlfiod that he was not in a
position tc give the basic permission to perform the Dachau
experiments because the necessary orders had to orlglnato


with the Luftwaffe Medical Inspectorate* (Ri 7050-7178).

Is It to be held that Hlppkc personally wrote out the
research orders for the high altitude experiments and
concealed the fact of their execution frcn his own dopart-
nent which was created to handle Just such things a6 that?
a list of nodical research cocclsslcns cf Ofce Luftwaffe
in 19-14, signed by Beckcr-Freyseng, shews six assignments
to Ruff under nvlntlon Medicine. (NO-934, Pros. Ex. 458,

R. 3655). Things wure no different in 1942. lioroovor,
the results of the high altitude experiments were known
to oeckcr-Ereyseng. Those experlnents woro not perfernod
as a simple ncadonic pursuit, but for the purposo of pro¬
viding scientific infernation of value to tho Luftwaffe.

The Department for «vlatlcn Uodicino was the very agency whlol
reoolvod all such reports, which evoluatod then, and which
issued the nocosaary instructions based upon such roporto.

Thu purposo of porfcrclng tho high altitude experiments
was to dotoralno tho possibility of rosculng air orows from
high altitudes. This involved such questions no tho
proper equipment which air crows should bo provided to
aid in such ruecuo, for example, automatic parachuto
releases, oxygen bottloe, warn clothing, and tho llko.

Nothing could bo clo;ircr than that tho cfflco cf .uithrny
and Becker-Froysong knew of the high iltltudo experinento
from tholr very lncopticn, lssuod tho research assignment
ror them, provided the necessary oqulpnunt and funds for
their execution, assisted in tho preparation of tho report,
and evaluated tho report for subsoquent use in developing
equipment by the Luftwaffe.

b. Freez ing Expe riments (Indictnent, Par. 6 (B)).

The freezing experiments are described in detail in the
Prosecution's orief against Slevcrs.

The defendant Bocker-Freysong admitted that in June 1942,


he saw files containing the proposals for a cold meeting
to beheld in Nurnberg in October. (R. 73*19). «t a Inter
point, he said:

"I received an order to go down to
Klppko with the files concerning the
planned cold meeting In Nurnberg.

Originally Anthony was to go thero,
but 6lnco he was not presont, I was ,
to replace hln.■ (R. 8117).

He testified further that ho was callod to a confcrenco by
Hlppke In Anthony's absence and that at such conference,
Rnschor was making arrangements for an experimental
program to bo conducted on concentration camp lnnnteo.

IR. 7850). It was perfectly clear in this ccnfcronco In
June 1942 botwoon Hlppke, Rnschor and bocker-Froysong
that the experiments wore to be performed In Dachau cn
concentration camp inoatoe. bccker-Froy6ong stated that
this was the occasion cn whloh ho first met Raschcr and
that ho did not ooo Rnschor again until the Nurnborg Cold
Conference In October 1942. (R. 7855, R. 8116).

Bocker-Froysong asserted that he hud nothing to do
with tho actual oxperlmonto and that his participation
ondud aftor the Raschor-Hippko-Bocker-Freysung conference
in June 1942. (R. 7884-92).

Tho Prosecution dcos not contend that Bocker-Froysong
porfornod tho experiments. But It is c-ntendcd that the
ncoossnry research order was issued by tho Department for
Aviation -.odlclno, that the fund6 and equipment wore
supplied by that offlco, and that Bockcr-Freysong had
knowledge of tho experiments, as lndood ho admitted.

A letter of 8 October 19.12 from Anthrny to Hlnnler,
concerning the Nurnberg Gold Congress and tho proposed
report on the experiments by Hclzloohner and Rascher, proves
that the research order was Issued by tho Department for
Aviation hedlclne In which 3ecker-Freyseng served as
deputy to Anthony. The letter reads as follows:


- 10 -


" Subject : Research crd«r cn Freezing
(Abkuehlung)»

REFERENCE! 1) DiRtdtL. find Ob.d.L.Ch.d.Lw.

L.In. 14 *z: 55 Nc. 20058/41
(211 B) dated: 24/2/42

2) D.R.d.L. and Ob.d.L.Ch.d.Lw.
L.In. 14 Az: 21 c-r Nc. 10909/42
(1 II A) dutod: 6/8/42

r- the R ulchsfuehrer-SS

The Inspectorate of the kcdlcol Service of
the Luftwaffe has given an order fer research
to the Stabsarzt Profc6scr Dr. Hclzlcehnor,
reference above, dated 24 February 1942, for
work on the following prcblen:

•The offect of freezing -on waru-blocdcd
subjects. 1

At the proposal cf Stabsarzt Dr. Raschor
appropriate exanlnatlons wore made cf human
beings, and In agreement with the Rolchsfuohror-
S3 suitable S3 facilities were used for tho
examinations.

In order to carry cut these examinations a
research group "Hardships at Sea' ("Se^not")
was sot up, consisting cf Professor Dr.
Holzloohner ns lender and Stabsarzt Dr.

Rascher and Dr. Finke.

i’hu leader of this research group reported that
tho examinations have boon concluded.

It Is intended tc dissolve tho research group
at the latest by 15 October 1942.

Thu rusoaroh documents and an extonslvo roport
will be proocntud tc the Rolchsfuchror-SS by
Stabsarzt Dr. Rasch. r. It Is requested that
tho originals or copies of tho report and
of the documents bo put at tho disposal of
the Inspectorate of tho Medical Servlco of
tho Luftwaffe.

It 18 Intended to make the rosults. In the
form of an extract, accessible tc experts
at a c-nforenco which will toko placo In
Nuernberg cn 26 end 2? October 1942. Tho
dally schedule cf tho conference 1 g cnclcood".
(NO-286, Pres. Ex. 80, R. 248).

Tho references In tho research ordor to “2 II B" and

"SS" prove the order was Issued out of tho office for

Aviation liediclnc In which Secker-Freysong worked. Their

Interest In freezing problems began as early as February

1942 with the assignment t: Holzleohnor. Before the high


- 11 -


altitude expc-rimohtB were even completed, the research
tenci was enl«-.rged to lnolude Flnke and Rnscher. Ncto
also the second assignment Issued on August 6, 1942.

This docuaent proves conclusively that 3ecker-Freyseng's
office supported the criminal freezing experiments from
the very beginning.

The Cold Congress of tho Luftwaffe held In Nurnborg
on 26-27 October 1942, at which holzlcehncr and Rnscher
roported on tho criminal froozlng experiments, was called
and arranged by *nthony and Bocker-Froyseng In tho
Department fer *vlatlcn medicine. «nthony served as
Chairman of tho meeting, as to hlo functions In
connection with such nestings, Bocker-Frey6cng testified
that “all tho ccnforonccs thnt took plnco undor Anthony'6
reforat, I had to organize. That is qulto n Job booauso
there woro discussions by 80 or 90 scientists who wore
going to road papers in two days". (R. 7894). Ho stated
further that "tho preparations for the meeting, not only
this mooting, but all of tho 12 meetings of this naturo
which tho Luftwaffe hold, word always made by tho roforent
bocauso he was in charge cf discussions later and I hud
organizational tasks, Just as later, for example In
1944, I nsslgnod such duties to somoono olso". (R. 8121).
Bocker-Froysong, cf ccursc, had to admit that he attended
tho conference in October 1942 and heard the locturos
given by Hclzlcenner and Rascbor. (NO—401, Pros. Ex. 93,

R. 309). Yet, he tries tho untenable position that this
report did not make clour that the roeults woro obtained
by experiments on human bclng6, but that It could be
concluded that they wore tests made on persons rcscuod
from the sea. This Is hardly a defense for Bockcr-Froysong
since, -.s has already boon pointed out, ho was nwnro that


- 12 -


the frcozlng experiments were to be performed on con¬
centration coop lrinates as n Result cf hie conference
with Hippke and Raioher in June 1942. Certainly the
report prepared under the auspices of the Department
for Aviation Medicine, on this Cold Congress makes it
perfectly clear that Hclzlcehner and Rnscher were report¬
ing on experim ents , net on field observations. It la
a llttlo difficult to imagine hew one could aeasuro the
rectal temperature <md the strnach tenperature therno-
eloctrlcally of an aviator in sea distress. Such things
could be done only as a result of carofully plannod and
executed experiments. Moreover, the summary of Raocher's
locturo in the report spooks of experiments whore tho
r ock only was coded with freezing water. Such a thing
would bo utterly impossible in the enso r.f -bservations
made on an aviator who had beon forced to ball out over
tho oconn. fho comments of participants in tho mooting
cn thoso locturoo made it perfectly obvious that ovory
one understood that tho reports concerned experiments
on human beings, fho witness. Lutz, who nttondod this
mooting, testified that tho reports by Kolzlochnor and
Raschor croatod n sonsadon at tho mooting and that it
was nado evident that experiments had beon performed
cn concentration camp inmates .and that deaths had
cccurrod. (Lutz, R. 272).

Freezing problems fell squarely within tho
Jurisdiction cf tho Department for aviation ..edlclno
of which Bockor-Freyseng was deputy chief, ^t is
cloar that tho final report cn the Kolzloohncr, Flnko,


find R/ischer experiments was received artd carefully
studied by thfit office! This report described the
0xperlnent6 In nlnute detail, even to the point of
listing the nunber of de*ths which resultod. (NO-428,
Pros. Ex. 91, R. 252). It has been repeatedly tostlfled
to that the discovery of the wnrn bath nethod of
treating prolonged exposure to cold w.s regarded as
highly Important and that nodical directives were
Issued which prescribed this forn of trontnent.

Prior to that tine, the onphnsls had been cn uso cf
slow ro-warmlng and nedlclnal treataent. ihoso
nodical directives could havo b-on Issued by no
office other than the Dcpartncnt for Aviation
liedlclno. *nd thoy would nevor havo boon Issued
without a very careful study and evaluation having
boon nado of tho orlnlnal e xporlnonte porfornod by
Holtloohnor, Finke, and Raschor which fernod tho basis
for tho diroctlvoo.

Thus, oockor-Freysong was assistant reforant in

the offlco which Issued the rosoarch order pursuant to

which tho frooting oxperlnonts wero carried out; ho

knew tho crlnlnal cxperlaonts wore to be porfornod

as oarly as Juno 1942 whon ho conferred with Hlppko

•

and Raschor; and ho assisted In -rganizlng and was In
attondanco at tho Cold Congress whero Hcltlcchncr and
Rasche-r lectured on tho exponents.


c. Trchus £xccri.:,r.ts m thw Kr.tzws.ilcr C c -nt _r ^lonJ^jr.

The typhus experiments perfor* -d by Stabsarzt
i-r.fcsa.r Dr. Eu^on Kc~_on, Consultin 0 Hygienist of tho «ir-
flcct “Reich" in tho Schirmock -nd Nntzwoilvr Conccntra-
tion Cci:p ere. described in detail in the Prvsccution's
briefs 2^: Inst R-sc end Schr-odcr.

Tho defend-nt Becker-Frvyscn^ stated that these typhus
ox.vrl’.vnta wore likewiso n^t of interest to tho Reforat for
«vi tic n ^edlclno ~nd h^nco ho was unnwere thet thoy wore
bolnt c nductod. Kc claims it was Lay 194*, bof^r^ ho found
out that Hca 0 on had a research assign, er.t on typhus vaccines.
(R. 7933). H_wovcr, wo find that aa early r.s 9 June 1943,
R.j«o was correspondln 0 with Haa 0 en Concerning the establish¬
ment vf vccclno producti.n at tho Hygiene Institute of the
University of Str sbour^. In this lottor Roso stated that
ho was requesting’the Luftwaffo ..odic-1 Inspectorate’ tv ur^o
the Chief of‘tho Lodical Servico of the -ohxtiacht to order
tho production of typhus vaccines for ell anted fcrcos in tho
Eastern *rca. (N0-306, Fros. 2c. 296, R. 1385). This docu¬
ment indie tes that tho rose rch order for typhus vaccines
had te e ri u inato from the Depart.:cnt of Aviation ..odlcino.
R.Sv Stated that it would bo "so o ti.:e until '2F« produces
its new rvscarch order." Tho reforonev tv '2F' dosl^nrtes
the fiico of «ntheny and Bockor-Proyson c *. Bocker-Froyson^; , s
contontion that a research assignment or order in a field
other than that vf avictlvn medicine -could not initiato free
his office is without foundation in view of this document,
signed by the defend:nt Rvsc, a 3 on vr-:lsrzt in tho Luftw-ffo.

tr*-of that tho research orders given to Ho~gon, pur¬
suant to which he perforated his crininrl experiments, ori¬
gin tod fror the office cf nnth-ny -nd Bocker-Froysen.,, is
found in a report dated 7 Octob-r 1943 to the Rector of tho

-14 a -


Reich University Strasbourg free Dri Kcagon, listing the
urgent research tasks with which his Institute was charged
by tho Luftwaffcj Knong these, arc yellow fever, typhu3, cni
influcr.ea assignments. Every one of these Luftwaffe rcscarcl
orders was issued by the office of «nthony and bcckcr-Fr-ysea
as proved by the designations "2 II A", "2F", nd .2 II B"
and the file rcfcr^nco "SS". (NC-137, Pros. Ex.189, *.737).

.1 list of medical research commissions issued by tho
Luftwaffe in 19-.4, on which flcckor-Froyseng was listed as
reviser, includes Ha'gcn's typhus v-.ccino research which was
classified secret. (NO-93-, rr^s. Ex. -58, n. 3655). A
state.ent of expenditures by Haagn during 1943 . nd 1944 for 1
fluonza research assignments issued by Beckur-Freys^ng's
effice shows charges to'the Luftwaffe for sevwrcl trips to
Schirmcok end I.atzwciler Concentration Camps cs Wv.ll as
telephone calls there. (N0-3450, iros. -x. 519, R. 9587).

slr.ilar account book k«pt by He g-n on yellow f-v».r and
typhus rose rch tanks issued by bocker-Fr-yseng's jfficc

shvjws expenditures fro February 1942 to Hovonber 1944. His
long continued activity in Sohinmoek -nd Natzweilor is
cl«:rly apparent fror. those accounts, which »ar- noted as
having been settled with th^ Luftwaffe. (NC-3837, rr^s. *-x.
542, H. 10365). *lncw B„ckor-Fr«ysong 'a effice ruthorizod
tho issuance of funds for such research, it was Iso con-
c.rnod with tho wXjunditurcs.

Beckcr-Fr^yseng denied that he knew that Hsagon was
parlor :ing experiments on concentration ccnp inmates. This
is clearly pr^vv-d to b- a lie by Kohnt's lvttvrs tu Ha gen
of 29 .»ugust 19-*4. (NC-131, Pros. -x. 309, h. 1404). ^he
original of this 1-ttor c-rai-s tho file notation. "«z. :

55 hr. 6028/44 gwh. (2 II .-*)“. (Fil- notation net translated
in English copy so r^f-r to G^r an). A hns, thv. lett-r was

-15-


written by the Dupr.rtccnt for Aviation Iodicinc of which
3cckcr-Frcysong was ct that fcie-o Chi^f. ^his lott-r reads
as follows:

11 1 . Thu research dealing with the dry spotted
f-vur vaccine free; vitelline see cultures ere
to be continued. Therefore tho 4,u00 R. ; roquos-
ted for the rusoarch fund cr- being placed at
jour disposal.

II. decision as to the establishment of a
vaccine rnuf'-cturing plant oennot yet bo ado
because the chief of the Aruy Acdiccl ^urvico,
who flono is cor.potent to.docidc upon the
procuror.ont of vaccines, has net jut tekun o
stand In the -atter.

III. Please edvisc whether it . ay be cssuued
that thu spotted fever epid-ric pr.vailing ct
Netzwcll.r at prcs.nt is connoctud with the
vaocinc resc'rch.

IV. Tho report of 21 June 44 in which thu in¬
vestigations at Natzwoil«r ok . entl-ned should
heVu boun sent as secret. In thu future this
procedure 1ft to be followed." (NO-131, supra).

hen Bockor-Proyseng w s confronted with this letter en
cress-ux ln';tlon, ho :odc the ridiculous assertion that onl y
the first paragraph w:s written bj hi::, (A. 8177). The prac¬
tice of asvlng sop.r.tc paragraphs in thu s:r.:e letter
writtun bj sev.r-'l dlflerunt p-rsuns is rathur too ‘.uch to
beliuve ovun in .,-rvclous disorg'nlzntion of the medical
Service of the Luftn:ffo painted by tho dofund-nts, ,is to
phe first paragraph, Beckor-Frcyscng 3trted:

"I was rufurent. Of course 1 had a p rt in
the coordination of thi3 oney, nut only i,
but v rlous oth-r peoplu, hod part in the

coordin tlun of this on-j, . -nd the

final w-rd was up tu ^chra-dur, tho Chiuf of
the uudic. 1 -Service «r the ^hief of Staff."
(Bcckur-Frejsong, R. 8181).

Hero in this letter written bp Becker-Prejrscng and
signed by K:hnt, Chief of Staff to -chruoder, Ha. g~n is
asked whether thu tj*phus opidor:ic prevailing 't Natzwoilur
had any connectl.n with his typhus research work there. This
proVuS that Bccker-FrujSung knew that Ho gun was p-rfor..ing


cxpen -nts on Inr.ateS with virulent typhus. Here wo sco
that the office of 3oCKor-?r-yseng inltiat-d a 1-tt^r for
the signateitro of tho Chief of Staff, which brings h>::0
knowledge on tho part of 3ockcr-Fr-ysong that research
work was being conduotod in the Natzweilcr Concentration
Cr.. 4 , that such research work was classified Secret, nd th. t
Bockor-Freyseng, fully aware of the situation, allofentod
/jOOu Ri. for the continuation of tho work. The answer to
this letter frop Ho agon, dated 19 September 194-i, *lso re¬
fers to the c-».iaunic:ti-n d ted 29 «uguet 19*4, boa ring the
cede designation “2 II R". ..crcovcr, Becker-Fr-iseng
visited Ha:gen in Str-ssbeurg before the letter of 29 august
1944 was written r.d while the experiments were stilJ in
progress. (Kr.-gen, 9569). Haegcn testified Beckcr-
Freyseng cone t^ 5.. Mia about ani a Is. Becker-Freysong ed¬
ited th t he had seer, -any deCai.ents r-f-rrlng to Har.gon's
^rk (H. 703-O nd that h- knew pr.f-sser H gen since he
had et hit: with -clb'eeder '.nd, ir. addition, had visited hin
in Serassb.urg. (h. 7935).

E. S£k> VirtTEP. EXFwR IuSHTS

The sec water experiments c.nducted -n in.~t-s of the
Dcch-au Conccntr tlea Camp are : ,r. specific lly outlined in
the briefs eg'Inst the defendant Schroodcr. Beckcr-Fr-yscng
admits his knowledge of and participation in the see water
experiments. The proof has shows that he w-o tho most ac¬
tive participant in the pi.nning -nd preparations for tho
expert -nts.

On 19 Lay 19i-», r confer.nee was h-ld at th- Gci^an
Air - inistry which w-s attended b; bhristens-n, Schickler,
Bccker-Freys-ng 'nd th- defend.nt ^chaofer. ^his confer¬
ence was c-z.Cerned *ith the probl-a: of th- potobility of

s-a t.r. Two methods cf .aking s-a water drinkable wore


chwn available t^ the _cdic'l services of the Luftwaffe,
onc th ~ ao_c llcd "Schaefer etfcod n , which had boon chciai-
cal1 '- tested end apparently preduced potable sec water. It
hrd the iisadvantage, however, of requiring substantial
quantities of silver which was available enly in li ited
quantities. The SeC-nd ..ethed, so-called ,, Bcrkatit"
was a subst'.nce which changed the teste -f scaw ter, but
did not ronevo the salt. It had the advrntago ef simplicity •
of nanufseturo and use.

The background concerning the possibilities of pro¬
ducing a method te render seawater potable dated baok to
April 10^2, When, t the suggestien of Bocker-Froysong, the
defendant Schaefer w-a giver, the assignment to see to it
that th- thirst pr. blot was dealt with scientifically and
for this purpose, he w-s Sent t- the ,.vi=tion medical
Research Instltuto in Berlin. (Bccker-Froyscng, K, 7980).
During 19-.2 end 1943, Scliaefer Werked on this problem and
oxportaonted exhaustively on an lex la and technical
assistants who h-d veluntoercd fer this purpose. Schaefor
finished his work In November 19.3 and dcaxnstrrted his
!ethod to Bccker-Froyscng, Hippke, and Christonson. (it. 7982).
However, in tho r.eantlt:e, another cothod h-d been developed
which w s referred to nbovo rs the Se-c-lled "3erkr
:tothod" or '•Berkctit".

.<t tho o.nroronco jn 1£ Jay, tho defendant 3eCker-

Freysong reported on certain clinical experiments which

h'd beon Conducted by von Sirany to tect Berkatit. Ho

cduo tw tho conclusion that the experiments had net been

conducted under realistic eneUgh conditions of sea

distress. He reported that tho Chief of the medical

Service of the Miftwnffc was

"convinced that, if tho Borka nothod
is us„d, damage to health h- s tu bo
expected n^t later than 6 davs fter


tricing 3*-rk;tit, which damage will
result in pv.rcsr.cnt injuries to health
end - according to the opinion of
Untcr-rzt Dr. Schaefer - *111 finally
result In death eft>,r not 1 'tv.r than
12 days. External symptoms nro to
be expected such ca dohydration, di-rrhoc,
convulsions, hallucinations, rnd finally
death”. (NO-177, Pros. Zx. 133, R. 479).

..s s result cf this conference, it was agr«v.d to
conduct new experiments. They were te include c seri-s


of experiments for o caxioua of six days during which .no
greup of subjects was to be given sea water processed • ith
B-rketit, another group ordinary drinking water, cnoth-r
group ne drinking we Ur at -11, *nd the final group such
water as was available in the oaergency sea distress kits
thon used. « second Series of experiments was Oecidod upon


and the report stated:

“Persons nourished with soiv't.r and
Berks tit, rr.d :a diet also the c=-rg.ncy
see r ti-ns.


Dura: i-n .f expe riments: 12 Osya.

Sinco in the opinion of th- Chief ef
the -.edicol Service permnent injuries
to health, th-t is, the d cith of the _
experimental subjects J. c tv bo cx;cctOo.,
es exp ri.-.entcl subjects such persons o.. uld
be used s will bo put .t the disposal by
hoichsfuehrer SS.“


Thus, with full knowledge that the uso of oerkatit for

poriwda of six days would result in permanent injuries

to the exporicontal subjects end that doath would result

no lat-r than the 12 th day, plans were m do te conduct

experiments of 12 days* duration. It should bo noted th t

the conference report does net st:tc that the duration

w-n n *crirUL- ef 12 days as in the case of the first
w .3 ^.i.-rn.^ ^ ^ conducted for 12 days in any event.

series of experiments, / Since it w s kn wn that Vvluntoors


could not be expected under such Conditions, the conference
determined to uso inmates of concentr*tion c.:.-?s which
would be put at their disposal by the SS. ~t a second
.acting -n 20 I.ay 194-1, the report states that "it was


- 19 -


decided thet Dachau w~s to be tho piece shore the
cxp-rl.^cnta wore (tu bo) conducted." (NO-177, supra),
C^^lv.3 uf the report or. the conferences were Sunt,
aseun^ others, t; tho Loclical Experiment: tion end
Instruction Division of tho ,.ir Perce, Juut^rbog, to
which tho defendant Schacf-r and Holzlochnor, whv con¬
ducted tho freozing expurlr.onts with R schor, were
attached; tho D.V.L., Borlin-.uUorshuf, tu which the
dofondents huff nd Romberg wero -ttached; tu tho medical
Inspect ora to uf the Luftwaffe (L.In.14); nd tho R 0 ichs-
fuohror SS. The report was signed by Clirlstonscn of the
Technical Offioo of the R.L.*.:,

On 7 June 1944 the dcfondant Schr^cdcr wreto to
Hi.a.lor through Grawitt asking f-r c.ncentr tion camp
Itli tea to bo used as subjects in the soaw:t-r oxpurlmonts.
This letter ro.'da in pert c* follows:

"Earlier already yuu nado It possible
for tho Luftwaffe to settle urgent
medical .-.otters through experiments on
human beings. To das egr in I stand boforo
n doclalon which, after numerous experi¬
ments on animals as well as human
experiments ,n voluntary experiment- 1 sub¬
jects, demands c fincl solution: The
Luftwaffe has simultaneously devolopcd
two methods fur r.oklng sc'.watvr pot ble.

Tho ..no method, developed by e ^cdlcal
Officer, re; vvos tho salt fxon tho
seawater and transforms it lnt> rool
drinking water; the second ;.cth-d,
suggested by r.n englnoor, la ves tho salt
c-ntont unchanged, •- nd „nly r-: »vc3 the
unpleasant taato from thu seswter. The
latter nothud, in c.ntr. st t- the first,
required n critical raw notarial
(Sngp'ssr-hstoffc). FT.,.; the • edlcal

point uf view this method :ust be viewed
critically, 23 tho ad inlstr tl n uf con¬
centrated 3~lt solutions can produce severe
syn;turns of poisoning.

h o tho exper i ments >.n h u an bri ngs C uuld
thus far Inly fro ca rried - at ‘fo r o period
o f fuiir "Hays. : nd r. s_p ractica l" fle;:: nSSf
r equire c ka-ey for thuso who ere in
distress"?t sVe ujf t 12 tFysT approp ri ate
exporL-.un ts ere necess ary .


- 20 -


■Required are 40 healthy teBt 6ubJeots,
who must be Available for 4 whole weeks.

Is free prg y ;?viff. 9;?p^ggala»

that necessary lab-.ratorlea exist In tho
Sx. 134, R. 493, emphasis added).

•

Schroeder concluded his letter by stating that tho
oxporlnonte will bo directed by tho defendant Beiglboeok.

It la Important tc note that tho first draft of this
letter from Schroeder to Himmler wn6 dlotatod by the de¬
fendant Bockor-Froyseng. tBooker-Freyseng, R. 8210).

P r .9. v og. b.vV.^d_an;/_doubt i that, thq defendant
beckfcr*F r eyogng had knowl edg e of tho previous, criminal
experiments conducted by.dj o t-rg of tho Lv»/twnfffl_cn
con centration c amp inmates . Iwlce he aentlona previous
experiments which were cade possible through tho fur¬
nishing of Inantoe by tho 8S. Tho lottor furthor proves
that tho experimental subjects woro not to bo volunteers.
Schroeder, tho signatory, and Bockor-Froyeong, tho
writer, cxprossly stated In tho socond oontenoo of tho
first paragraph that animal exporinonts had already boon
conducted, no well ns human experiments cn "voluntary
experimental subjects", but that tho problom new demands
final resolution slnco such experiments had boon carried
cut fer a period of only four days, while practical de¬
mands require n remedy for those In dlstross at sea up to
12 days. Tho defense has contested the translation of
tho second sentence In the first paragraph and has offer¬
ed an alternative translation which would have Schroeder
asking the R-lchefuohror for voluntary experimental sub¬
jects. Tho translation experts of the Office of Chief
of Counsel for Var Crimes have certified to the transla¬
tion quoted above and It Is rolled upon by tho Prcsocu-
tlon.


- 21 -


That this translation is correct is entirely -bvieus froa
the conference report of 12 end 20 Kay 194. «hich ex¬
pressly stated that since deaths ware anticipated in
these expurL.cnts, unly such pers-ns would bo used as
were .ado eva liable by Kin..lor. It is ridiculous t.:-
apeak -f Volunteers in expurinonts in which death is en-
tidipated as a foregone conclusion. ..~re-vcr, it should
be re. .a. bored that the Luftwaffe had lung since bCun ex¬
perimenting ,-n inv«. lur.t ry subjocts in c-ncentrr-tion
camps. ' A ’hc 3ca weter experiments ware enlj one ir. a series
vf criminal experi-onts initiated by the luftw. ffc.

Schrecdor -nd oecker-Preyseng turned te tho SS because thuy
knew of these previous cx. c: ii.onts.

That these experiments wore c rricu -ut -n Involuntrry

s bjccts is Isj p/ rent fr.r: Gr'-witz' iott-r t Hi lor

of 28 June 1944 (2IC-179, lr-s. -*x. 135, -.85). In this

•

Utter, Gr-..T.ltt rup.r s the opinions -f °obhcrdt, Oluccks,
.nd l.'-bo, s well rs his m.n, on th: proposed axporiaents.
Gluucks stated that ho had n- "-bjectiuns whrts.evcr to tho
experiments requested by the Chief of the medical Service
ef the Luftwaffe te bo c-nductcd. at the oxpe: iacntrl sta¬
tion i»cochcr in the Cuncontr-ti.n C-r:p ^'Cheu. IJLj^aslble,
Jews u r prisoners h-ld in cu:rar.tir- re t- bu us ed. 11 It
is impossible tw L-agino a Jew being sked t. volunteer f- r
anything in th- Third Reich when thuy were being si ugh-
tered by thu millions in thu c r.ccntr ti-n c mps. Kobo
stated that:

••I prepvsod t'king f-r this purpose the
asocial gyps' haif-br-eCs. There r- people
::xng the..*, who Ith.ugh healthy, r. -ut
of th- questi.n a3 r ga.rds labor c it. ent.
x Regarding these gy si-s, I shall shortly make
a special pr» p-s 1 t th- Reichsfu-hr-r, but
I think it right t- sal-ct fr-c taung these
p-opl- the necossary number - f test subjects.
Sh-uld the noIchsfuahr-r agree te this, I ah: 11
list by nc.. a the persons to b- used".


It is - little difficult to iiugino how iiubc, CfcJef of
the hoich Crialnal Police, could "list by ncac" gypsy
volunteers for these expert cats. Grewits raised the
objection to the use of g/FSios on the ground that they
wore “of sonicwh t different racial corpus it i n" end he
therefore wanted cxpcrL-ontal subjects racially comparable
to European peoples. EL.-lor decided th t gypsies plus
throo others for control 3hculd bo usee. (NO-183, Pr~s. -x.
136, R. 487).

The defendant Bockcr-Frcyscng, like Schr.euor, testi¬
fied thet thv.y tri.d to cmongo fur errrying out the sea
wator oxporLt-nts *t the liiftwr.ffo K spltal in Brunswick
end that they elsu attempted to obtain students as expuri-
...ontal subjects from the Luftw-fic uedicol «ccdcmy in the
latter part -f ^cy 19-;.. They strte that they only wont
to the SS rftor they had exhausted all uth-r pussibilitlos.
The decision to use ojnc-r.tr'tion ca -p inrtes did n t
await cny vfforts t. find vJluntocro. It was knewr. that
beoauso of the v-ry nctur- . f the expel la-nts ta t were
planned, v-lunt-ers could n t be -bt ined. Contrariwise,

it is i possible to bolls.vo that Schroeder and 3-ok-r-
Preysong, In tholr positions of import.ncc ir. the Lu*t-
waffe, were unabl- to obtain 40 volunteers fur thu ex¬
ponents if they were so innecueus s they d Ls. Thor °
wore nc regulations which frbado experiments .n labors
of ttao -ohrmacht. Profossur Hagen, in connection vith
his proposed epidemic jaundice .xporimunts on huoan
beings, -s set furth in his letter uf 27 Junu to ICelk, whe
was attached tc tho staff -f Schroder, insist-d at great
length that ho planned te use voluntoors fro-, the studont
companies uf the ./chrmacht at Strasbourg, Freiburg .r
Hoidolborg. (R. So76). Ha gen was p.sitiVu that student

- 23 - •


volunteers would have been nado available. He stated


that ho c-uld have used the:, during vacations. Kr.lk was
alsj sura that this could have boon dene. Ha a gen oc-
phnsizod repeatedly that volunteers wore, avcliable.

(H. 9580). Beckcr-Preyscng testified tht he know that
Berketit would cruse doath in no more than 12 days. In
fact, ho or.phctically stated that he w-s convinced that
undor cortain circu:3t~ncos, doath would .ccur '.uch Sooner
then 12 d'ys if the Borkc .jothwd wore used. (R. 8198).

The testimony concorelng the charts.and tho c>.nui-
tiens under which tho ex>ori. -ntal subjects endured the
. uxperiz-nts is -utllnud specifically in th- a C hr-odcr,

3„iglbeock and Schaefer briefs and will n ,t bo dealt with
• hero.

The defendant B-ckcr-FroySung testified that ho is
responsible f_r tho initiation -f tho sea water experi¬
ments at ^achau :r.d that tho. reason f.r the experiments
was banod «n the fact that tho toehnic 1 -fi ice believed
thot fur -Cv-n—lie ror.a_-ns, the Berko vth.U »-.ald b- tho
best to bu put into use. He stated that:

"I hav. explained in greet detail us 1 believc
that those oconcraic reasons nnd raw rateriol_
r.aoons wor- whfct influenced tho technical
office to advocate Borkatit -nd what, in tho
final analysis, determined Suneralorzt
Schroedur to hrve tho question cf Borkntit
investigated by Epping-r and Kuebn-r. Of
course, if Borkatit had been juat s g-.-d in
its final effect, it would havu b^n a greet
advantage if u:ic cuuld get along with ut tho
sllv-r." (R. 8190-1).

The defend nts Schr.edor, Beckcr-Frcy3ung, roiglb.ock,
and Schnofor sore well aware of the f*ct thr t B„rkotit was
dangor-us, but they were willing t: te3t it in urdor to
satisfy thonsulvv-s - nd the e o^rs ,f the tec.nnic 1 office
th t 3uch ,:cth-d w-uid nut effectively r-nd«r sea water
p- table. Bockar-Fruyscng st tod, r,non -ck_d why ho ordered

- 24 -


theso expuriiawnts, :s fallows:

U I didn't want tc have the -x. eri-cunts.

Hat her, I hod to pcrtialpcfca in thw pi oprra¬
tion for the experiments because it wo3 jy
duty." (R. 81S2).

Ho clearly admitted that Sirany's expwrincats showed
that tho Borka r.oth.d was no good, ( R * 81S& ) - nd * hon ask *' d


on cross oxcainstien, who sugg-sted that in:-'tos bu usod

in tho exponents, 3cckcr-Frcysong stated:

"I spoke of the possibility, in ease wo round
no _ther experimental subjects, wf -nking an
off rt tw use In:-a to a and n.t because the ox-
pwrLients wer- d.ngor.us -r could causw aeat.i
but purely f,r wrgoi izati-nal reasons . a ^ c '£) •

In drafting thw letter to HL:-l~r through Grewitz,


Bcclcor-^reysong exhibited clo:r knowledge of thw procedure
to botr.in concentration ca.ip in. .a tea ..s oxpwriauntr.l sub¬
jects. Bocker-Freyaeng doos net deny that he gave
Beiglbweck the orders nd instructi-na to exp-riaent on
concentration canp in-atca at Dachau. He st ted that
Beiglboeck was subr^dlnatod to the oodicrl Inspectorate
end th-t he . rdcrwd hln to conduct such cx^rf-onts in a
nnnnor os to "cause n- Swrioua d- ..gc to tho health ef the
subjeots end, of coucao, thwr- should be n- fatalities."

(R. 8050). Isn't It CwnvcnKnt f r - dofond nt new to
testify that he specifically said te a subordinate that
under no circur.ist .ncos «or- thw cxp-rlmonts t- c use
owrlous damage to thw health -f thw subjects, let clone
fatalities? Sciglbocck testified that he requested that
thw oxpwrir.wnts be conducted cls.wher-, but deckor-*Twyaeng
refused this request ef Bciglbeeck's end .rdwred tho ex¬


periments continued at w achQU. (R. 8o82).

Bocker-Preyseng'a p. rticip tion in these experiments

did net end with his making tho arrange ^ntr f.r thw cx-

perL -r.ts 'nd in hi3 instructions to thw defend nt

Beiglbweck. He Ise attended the

- 25 -


ewting In Oct-b-r 19-i-«,


whon Bciglboock g-v_ a full revert -r. toe results -f his
ox poriacntnl w.rk at the u cchau C„nccntr tion Car_p.

III. *Cui.CLUSIOi:


Tho rr-secution submits that the evidence proves that
Beckor-Freyscng was ~ princicpl in* accoss„ry t^> ordered,
abetted, took a consenting part in, -nd was c.nncctcd with
plana and enterprises involving, and was a ..o./.ber of an
organization or group connoctod with edic 1 experimentation
on human 6utjoet3 without thoir consent, in tho course of
which experiments, .urd-rs, brutrlltics, cruelties, tortures,
atrocities, • nd other inhumane acts »-re c..,. itted, nd
that thoir guilt has bo-n established und-r Counts I, II,
and III of the indictment.


- 26 -


TRIBUNAL no. I
C/»oE No. 1


CLOSING 3KIEr FOR
THE UNI* ED STATES OF aL JUCa
AGAINS?

rfILHEi— bElOuaOECK


J-'xics II. LicHnncy
Alcx-xn:' r G. Hnjtly
Arnost Horlik-Hochwr.lc'.
c-Gthcr J'fno Johnson


Numbers,

13 June 1947


- clford Taylor
Brl^nr.lor ^cnc
Chief of Ccuns-


INTRODUCTION

It 16 nllogod under Count One of tho Indictment thnt
the dofondnnt Bclglboock conspired end agreed with others,
pursuant to r. connon design, to perrons nodical oxpcrlncnts
on involuntary human subjects; under Counts Two and Three
(./or Crimes and Crimes Against Humanity, respectively) that
ho was a principal In, accessory to, ordered, abetted, took
a consenting part In, and was connected with plans and entcr-
nrloos involving nodlc-A experimentation on Involuntary human

subjects.

The defendant Bolglbocck lo charged with special res¬
ponsibility for and participation in tho sea water experi¬
ments, as cot forth In Paragraph 6 (0) of the Indictment.
nr^iATMLIIYFCR *ND PSS33NAL

Tho defendant i olglboook Joined Iho NSDaP in 1933 and
tho SA In 1934. As membership In the H8 DaP was Illegal in
Austria at different tines betwoen 1933 and the occupation
of this country by Germany In 1938, he received hlo party
number after tho annexation of Austria. In tho Sfl,
Bolglbocck attained tho rank of an Obersturnbannfuehrer
(Lieutenant Colonel). (NO-674, Pros. -x. 20, R. 116).

Bolglbocck bccano a lecturer at the Vienna University
In 1939 and an extraordinary professor of this University
in 1944. (Bolglbocck, R. 8669-70). Ke obtained these two
positions as assistant to Professor Epolngcr. (Bolglbocck,

R. 8669).

During the war, he served as a medical officer In the
German Air Force with the rank of Stabsarxt (Captain).
(Bolglbocck, R. 8674-5). In that capacity ho was directed
by the defend nt Beckcr-Frcyscng in June 1544 to oarry out
sea water cx>«.rlmcnts in tho Dachau Concentration Camp.

(Bciglbocc-i, R. 8677; cf. NO-674, supra).

- 1 -


Tho sc", water experiments conducted on lnnatcc of the
Dachau Concentration Camp was a criminal undertaking fron Its
very inception in liny 19-:-*. «ftor two and one half years of
murderous medical experimentation on concentration canp Io¬
nites by doctors of the Luftwaffe, lnclu'lng the high altitude
freezing, gas, and typhus experiments at Buchenwald and
Natzvroller, the defendant Schrocdcr, with certain knowledge
that oono of tho subjects wouid probably die, personally
ordorod tho carrying out of the sea water experiments. His
subordinates, Becker-Freyseng, Bclglbocck, and Schaefer par¬
ticipated In the planning and execution of then.

On 19 iiay 194-i a conference was held at tho Germah *lr
Lllnlstry which was attended by Christensen, Schlcklcr,

Becker-Freyseng, artl Schaefer, among others. H*.is conference
was cone rnod rrlth tho problem of the potability of soa water.
Two methods of making sea water drlnklblo were then avallablo
to tho Uodlcal Service of tho Luftwaffo. One, the so-called
Schaefer method, had been chemically tested and it apparently
produced potable oca water. It had the disadvantage, hovrover,
of requiring substantial -mounts of silver which wa3 available
only in United quantities. Iho second method, so-called
BerkatU, "an a substance which changed the taste of seawater
but did not remove the sale. It had tho advantage of simpli¬
city of manufacture and use.

It the conference on 19 Lay, the defendant Bcckcr-
Freyseng reported on certain clinical cxco'lncnts which had
been conducted by von Sirany tc test 3erkatlt. He cane to
tho conclusion that tho experiments had not been conducted un¬
der realistic enough conditions of sea distress. He reported

that the Chief of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe was

"convinced that, If tho Berka ethod is used,
oarage to health has to be expected not later
than 6 days after taking 3 c rkatlt, which dan igc
wlxl result in permanent Injuries to health
and - according to the opinion of Untcrnrzt

- 8 -


Srhrcf-r - will finally result lndonth
?r : T MWer than 12 days. External epp-
toris arc to be ejected aich as dehydration,
diarrhea, convulsions, hallucinations, and
finally death." (NO-177, Pros. S-x. loo,

R. 479).

An a result of this oonforonoo, It "to agreed to con¬
duct no,, experiments. They -ore to Includo n series of ex¬
periments for a maximum of six days during which me group
of subjects was to be given sea-water processed nth Berka-
Ut, another group ordinary drinking water, mother group
ordinary drinking water, another group no drinking water at
all, and the final group such water as as available In the
emergency sea distress kits then used. A second series of
experiments v,ao decided upon tod the report stated:

“Persons nourished with sea water and 3crkatlt,
and ao diet ''Iso tho onersoncy sea rations.

"Duratio n of experimen ts: 12 days

“Slnco in the opinion of the Chief of J-ho

ilrdlcal Scrvlco pernanent Injuries to healt..,

£t lD, the death of tho xperinontal subjects
has to bo expected, ao experimental
such persons should be used nil will bo put at
the disposal by tho Holchofuehrer SS. tNO-177,

supra).

Thus, vdth full knowledge that the use of B.-rkatlt for
nerlods of six days would result In pernanent Injuries to the
experimental subjects and that death would result no later
than the 12th day, plans «0I*Oado to conduct experiments of
6 and 12 days' duration. It_should_b^not i ; d that the con fer;


1513


duration war.


of


13 case of the first serlog„Qj


S^nco It vr.o known that voluntocro could not be expected un¬
der such conditions, the conference dotemlnod to use lnnatco
of concentration canps which would bo put at their disposal
by the SS. At a second mooting on 80 Lay 1944, tho report
states that “it ms decided that Dachau -ms to be the place
vfhere th? c:: crlr.cnts were (to bo)conducted".(NO-17?, supra).
Copies of the report on the conferences were sent, among


others, to the iicdic-al Experimentation and Instruction
Division of the «lr Force, Jucterbog, to which the defendant
Schaefer and Holzlochner, who conducted the freezing experi¬
ments "1th Raschor, were attnehod; the D.V.L., Bcrlin-Aldcrc-
hof, to which the defendants Ruff and Romberg were attached;
to the iiodloal Inspectorate of tho Luftwaffe (L. In. 14);
and the Roichcfuohrcr SS. The report was slgnod by Christen¬
sen of tho Technical Offlco of tho R-i-.k.

On 7 June 1944, the defendant Schroedor wroU to Hlnnlcr
through Grawltz asking for concentration camp inmatoo to bo
usod as oubjccto In tho seawater experiments. This letter


reads In part as follows:


" As the expe rim ents on human b ;ings_could thus far

oni^.gT
as_ L >rac’

arc lr. <__

ex j rlr.cn 18 are nocosgory .

"Required aro 40 healthy test subjects, who must be


the experiments on human e ingc couia tr.us lar
■ be car rlcH out for a perl off 'o f ~ 'four^ay a ,._3_n <S
>ractlcal demands rooulro ' rem edy for th o se w he
lr. distr ess at se a up to ,2^ ayo , approp r iate


available for 4 wholo
previous ex per im ents .


rcci’.s. as
that nee


11 L


_ .... . ....._„_ osoary _

oxio t in tfic 'concc ntra tlor. cap D ach au, this camp
would bo vor y sultablcT "


lo Known from
xaboratorlco


Schrocder concluded his letter by stating:


"Direction of the experiments shall be tofcon over
by Stabcarzb, lecturer (Dozent) Dr. BclglboocK,
civilian profession: Chief Physician of the Uodleal
University Clinic In Vienna (Prof. Er. Epplngcr). 11
(110-185, rros. Ex. 15*, R. 485, emphasis addod).

That these experiments were carried out on Involuntary


subjects lo also proved by Qraoltz' letter to Hlnnlcr of
28 June 19*14. (1,‘0-179, Pros. 2x. 155, R. 485). In this
letter Gravity reports the opinions of Gobhardt, Gluocks,


ni.d Nebe, as well ag his own, on tho px*oposcd cxr erlm_-nts.
Glucclta stated that he had no "objections whatsoever to tho


experiments requested by the Chief cf tho liodlcal Service of
the Luftwaffe to be conducted at the experiments station
Rascher in the Concentration Camp Dachau. If possible, Jews
o r prisoners held In cuarantl.no are to be used ." It Is im¬
possible to Imagine a Jew being ashed to volunteer for any¬
thing in the Third Reich when they were being slaughtered

- 4 -


by tho nllllons In the concentration camps. Kobe stated
that: "I proposed taking for this purpose the asocial gypsy
h lf-broods. Thcro aro people among then, who, although
healthy, arc out of the question as regards labor commit¬
ment. Regarding these gypsies, I shall shortly cake a spe¬
cial propos'l to the Rolchsfuehrcr, but I think It right to
select from among those people the necessary nunber of test
subjocts. Should tho Rolchsfuohrcr agroo to this, I shall
list by nano tho pcrsor.3 to be used, ° It Is a little diffi¬
cult to Imagine how Nebo, Chief of tho Reich Criminal Police,
could "list by name" gypsy volunteers for thoso cxporlncnto.
Granite ralsod the objection to tho uso of gyp6los on the
ground that they wero "of concwhat dlfforcnt racial composi¬
tion" and ho.therefore wnted experimental subjects laclally
comparablo to European peoples. Hinder decided that gypsies
plus threo others for control should be usod. (NO-183, Pros.
Ex. 136, R. 487).

Schrocdor testified that he tried to arrange for carry¬
ing out tho sea water experiments at the i-uftwaffo Hospital
In Brunswick. Ho renenbored very specifically, according to
his testimony, that ho had contacted tho commander of that
hospital on 1 Juno 19*14. He stated that ho al60 attempted to
obtain students as experimental subjects from the .uftwaffo
Modlcal Academy *n tho iattor part of kay 1944. Both of
these attempts to obtain volunteers allegedly failed because
of tho lack of clinical facilities and the calling up of
students to actlvo service. Schroodcr :estlflcd that ho
wont to the SS only after ho had exha- r, ted all other possi¬
bilities. He would have the Tribunal believe that there was
no place in all of Germany to find 40 volunteers and the ne¬
cessary cllnlc-1 facilities. (R. 3657-9).

In connection with this testimony of Schrocdor 1 s. It

should be noted that the record of the conferences or.

- 5 -


19 nnd 20 Ur .y 1944 was immediately sent to the SS. The
decision to use concentrAtlon c-amp Inmates did not await
Any offorts to find volunteers but was nndo At the confer¬
ence of 19 liny. It was Known that, because of the very
nature of tho cxpcrlncnts which were planned, volunteers
could not bo obtained. Contrariwise, It Is Impossible to
believe that the commanding officer of the whole of the
HodloAl Service of the Luftwaffe wn6 unable to obtain 40
voluntoors for tho experiments which he claims were so
Innocuous. Thorc wore no regulations which forbado experi¬
ments on members of tho «ohraacht. (Schrocddr, R. 3660).

The defense witness.Haagen, In connectionV'vlth hie proposed
opldonic Jaundice experiments on human beings, an set forth
in his letter of Juno 27, 1944 to Xalfc, who was attached to
tho staff of Schroeder, lnslstod at groat iongth that ho .
plannod to uso volunteers from the student companies of tho
iVehmacht at Strasbourg, Freiburg, or Heidelberg. (R. 9508).
He wa3 pooltlv-j that studont volunteers would havo boon made
available. He stated that ho could havo used then during
their vacations. (Knagor., R. 9579). Kalk was also ouro that
this could havo been done. Kaagon cnphaslsed repeatedly that
volunteers V'crc available. (R. 9500). Clinical facilities
would have been easily obtained In reserve hospitals.

(Haagen, R. 9501).

The letter of the defendant Sicvcrs to Grawltz, dated
26 July 1944, reveals that Bolglboock, together "lth Sicvcrs
and Plootncr, tho successor of Raschor, cade arrangements
for the experiments In tho Concentration Camp Dachau. The
experiments were to start on July 23 "If until then experi¬
mental persons arc available and the camp connanr r Id In
possession of the order of the Rclchsfuchrcr SS ho needs".
(NO- 182, Pros. Ex. 157, R. - ; 87).

- 6 -


Tho charts kept by the defendant Belglboeck on oach of
tho experimental subjects, which the defense was finally *
forced Into submitting in evidence, after attempting to uno
then through the defense "expert 3 Vollhardt without offering
tho documents them selves, give some of the details as to the
experiments, although under the clrcunstanccs their reliabili¬
ty is doubtful. (Bolglbocck Sx. 34, d. 9381). Certain altera¬
tions in these records, «hlch mil be discussa* at a later
point, Indicate that they vc not entitled togroat weight.

Tho cxperlncnts began in August 1944 and continued until the
first part of September, forty-four experimental subjocts
were used. Subjocts 1 to 6 were deprived of all food and
vmtor for periods from 5$ to 7$ days. Tho duration of tho
oxoorlmcnto given herein is basod upon the starting dato of
tho morning of 22 august as contended by tho defense, although
there is some evidence indicating that tho starting dato was
21 Auguot. If tho experiment was interrupted in tho forenoon,
no additional Ir.y or part thereof is counted. If it was in¬
terrupted between noon and 1700hours, ono-half day is added,
w hllo if it v.*as interrupted after 1700 hours, a full day lo
added. Subjects 7 through 10 were given 1,000 cc of Schaefer
wator for 12, 13, and i2 days respectively, and hungered for
9, 8, and 9 days, respectively. Subject No. 9 - as not used
for reasons of he ith. This was the defense witness
Mottbach. Subjocts 11 through 18 were given 500 cc of son
• ator plus the emergency son ration which contained approxi¬
mately a total of 2400 calorics. These experiments lasted
from 5 to 10 days. They hungered up to 6.5 days. Several
of those subjocts, for example, 11, 13, 17, and 18 were
subjoctcd to two soparato experiments of 8 and 6 days, 6
and 5 days, 7.5 and 5 days, .and 10caild.'4 days respectively.


7


Subjects 19 through 25 were given 500 cc of Bcrkatlt plus the
emergency sea ration. ^he duration of the experiments
lasted from 5 to 9$ days with periods of hunger up to 6.5
days. Subjects 19 and 20 undorwent two separate experiments
of 7 and 5 days each. Subjocts 26 through 30 were given
1,000 cc of Bcrkatlt plus the emergency soa ration. Duration
of the experiments was from 5 to 9j days with periods of
hungor up to 6j days. Subject 29 undorwent two cxporlncnto
of Q and 5 days. Subjects 31 and 32 were glvon 1,000 cc of
sea water for 8 and 6 days respectlvcly. Subject 31 was
oubjoctod to an additional oxporlncnt of 5 days. Subjoct
33 was given 500 cc of Bcrkatlt for 6 days; subjoct 34,

1,000 cc of Schaofer for i2 days; subjects 35 through 37,

39, 41, and 42 rroro given 500 cc of sea water for oorlods
ranging from 4 to 6 days; subjocts 38, 40, and 43 wero
given 1,000 cc of soa water for 6, 6, and 6 days; and
subject 44 was given Schaofor Qatar for 12 days.

The clinical charts on the experiments also supply
us with the ages of tho experimental oubjocts. Subjocts
17, 19, 20, 35, 37, 40, and 43 wero all undor the age of
21. Subject 40 was 16 years old; subjects 17, 19, and 37
wore i7 ycaro old; subject 35 was 18 years old; subject
43 was 19 years old; and subject 20 was 20 yo^rs old.

Noodless to say, no effort was made to obtain the concent
of tho parents or guardians of these minors.


The defendant Beiglboeck testified that he reported

to 3erl ir. at the end of June 1944 where he was told by

oecker-Freyseng that he was to carry out the seawater

experiments at Dachau. He also saw Schroeder in connection

y ith the experiments. He said he attempted to withdraw

because he had a horror of working in a concentration camp.

Ho did not refuse to perform the experiments because he was

afraid of being called to account for failure to obey

order. (R. 8828-9). Becker-Freyseng told him that the

purpose of the experiments was, first, to find out if

Berkatit was useful; second, to test the Schaefer method;

and third, to see whether it would be better to go

completely without sea water or to drink small quantities

of it. (R. 8832). He said he was told by the officials

in Dachau that the gypsies who wore to bo used in the

experiments were held as "asocial" persons. Beiglboeck

considers himself as an expert on asoolals. He testified

that it was his understanding that a whole family could bo

classified asocial, although this "does not exclude the

possibility that, in this family, there can be a large

nurabor of persons who did not commit ar.-- crime." (R. 8948).

His defense counsel is also apparently of the opinion that

tho torture of Gypsies is no crime - they are all asocial

persons. In explaining his conduct in removing the names

of the experimental subjects from a document which he had

been ordered to produce by the Tribunal, he said:

"The motive was that in the case of
the experimental subjects which wo were
concerned with, they were primitive, simple
people who, as I already have tried to
make clear from the gypsy book, in large
part belong to families who are listed by
the public authorities as asocial. I
found 17 among these names who belong t.
asoclal families here in Bavaria. I do not
want to sa^r anything about the experimental
subjects . who suffered terribly" But if
the matter should be followed up further,
one would have to get a police record of
everyone, and the family tree, and then
one would certainly find out that my
statements are correct". (Stcinbauer, R. 9378).


- 9 -


To say the least of It, It was hardly the proper function
of defense counsel to relegate to himself the decision
as to the character and reliability en masse of the
possible testimony cf all the experimental subjects.

Ke said In effect that he removed the names from the book
In order to avoid having to meet their testimony. This
mass condemnation of Gypsies Is also apparent In the
question put by Belglboeck's defense counsel on cross-
examination: "Listen, Ur. Hoellenreiner, don't evade
my question after the fashion of gypsies". (R.lOoiS).

See, also, the very odlfylng extract submitted from the
"Gypsy Book" (Prosecution 1 s closing argument).

He tostlfled that he called the experimental sub.lcots

together and told thorn what the experiment was about

and aokod them’if thoy wanted to participate. (R. 8849).

He did not toll them how long the experiment would last.

Ho did not tell them that thoy could withdraw at any tine.

He testified that ho had to require that thoy thirst for a

certain period. The decision ns to their being rcllcvod

from the experiment lay with him. (Bclglbocck, R. 8850).

During tho course of the experiments ho testified that tho

subjeots revolted on one occnclon because they did not

got the food they had been proralsod. (R. 8e63) . Thoy did

not got food for sovoral days because of a dolay In

delIvory. (R. 8868). The subjects were locked In a room

during the experiments. Bolglboeck testified that:

■Thoy should have been locked In n lot
better than they wore beoause ther. they
would have had no opportunlt- at all to
got fresh water on the side." (R. 8864).

Ke stated that the danger tone would be reached In about

seven days, drinking 500 cc of sea water, while In cases

of 1,000 cc of sea water, It would be 4$ days. (R. 8876-7).

Compare the much longer duration of the experiments ns set


out above.


- 10 -


It was readily apparent to the Prosecution after an

Inspection of the clinical charts kept during the course

of the experiments that a number of alterations had been

made in them. These records were In the oxcluslve

possession of dofense counsel prior to the testimony of

Voithprdt, whose expert opinion was based in part upon

such records. In a large number of Instances the names

of the experimental subjeots havo been erased from the

charts, obviously in an effort to make It impossible to

locate ouch persons for tho purpose of giving testimony.

An examination of the ohorts further reveals that tho final

wolghts of the experimental subjects wore written on the

oharto In a different ohado of Ink than the remainder of

tho records. I n some oases, those weights were written

over the original pencil notations, for exomplo on Chart C-2

tho final weight of 62 kilograms lr. per jll wno written ovor

in Ink to rend 64$ kilograms. Bolglboock admitted that

the red arrows purporting to Indicate the start of tho

experiments, usually appearing under the dato August 22,

wore made by him In 1945, long after tho oxporimonto had

boon completed. (R. 8909). In charts 1 to 32 a rod mark

under tho date August 21 appears, which would lndlonto

that tho experiments very probably began on that dato.

Certain notos In Gorman shorthand appear on the back of

chart C-23. B'clglboock admitted that ho wrote these

notes hlnself. (R. 6970). Belglboock testified that:

"\To .Belglboock end his defense counsel)

were In agreement at all times that the

chartG and curves should be sutoltted In

tho same way ns we recolvod then here." (R. 8921:.

He rcpontodly stated that he did not mxc any erasures

on tho charts In Kurnborg. (R. 8922. 3973, 6975-6).

\7hcn the proof left him no alternative, Beiglboeck finally

admitted having nade changes and erasures In the notes on

the back of chart C-23 In Nurnberg. (R. 8978). Theso

notes give a clinical report or. one of the experimental

" I. 1 “


Subjects who was critically ill. The following is a

restoration of tho original stenographic notes Insofar

as they could bo translated:

"The thirst assunes force difficult to
endure. The patient lies there quite
notlonlcss with half-closed eyes. He
takes no notice of his surroundings. He
asks for water only when he awakes from
his 6eRlcon8clous condition, (half a
line erased).

"The appearance Is very bad and doomed.

The general condition gives cause for
alam.

"Respiration flatter, labored, moderately
frequent.

■Respiration 25 per minute.

■The eyes aro deeply haloed, the turgor
of the skin greatly reduoed.

■Skin dry, tonguo completely dry, whitish
coating In tho middle fairly loose.

■Tho mucous membranes of the mouth and tho
lips dry, latter covered with crusts.

Lungs show slight vory dry bronchltlo
lower border VI-XII, sharpened vesicular
respiration.

■Heartbeats very lorr hardly audible.

Filling of tho pulse weakor. Increased
thickness of wallo of blood vessels,
rrequoncy 72, liver 2^-3 fingers below
Gternal margin, rather soft, moderately
sensitive to pressure, cplocn on
porcuoslon ollghtly enlarged.

"Uusculnturo hypotonic. Joints over-
cxtendablo. Calves slightly sonsltivo
to pressure. Indications of transverse
wolt .'ormntlon, narked longdltudlnal
wolt formation. Ronberg plus plus.

Reflexes plus plus. abdominal reflexes
plus plus Bablnskl negative. Elfo
phenomenon. Oppcnhcln negative. Rossollmo
negative. Tonus of the bulb if the eye
bad. Bulbu6 reflex positive. (Interruption)”.

Belglbocck had substituted the v.crd "somnolent" for
tho word "scnl-consclous* In the lost line of the first
p aragraph. In this 6ono paragraph half a lino was
completely erased and could not be translated. Eclglboock
purported not to remember what it said, an obvious false¬
hood since it was orased out of fear of the truth. In
the last sentence of the second paragraph, Belglboeck
altered the notes to rend, "The general condition gives


- 12 -


no cause for alarm". In the first line of the eighth
paragraph, 3clglboeck substituted the word ■poorly 0 for
■hardly*. The notation ■RCnbcrg plus plus" neons that
the subject had an "uncertain" ability to stand.
(Bciglboedk, R. 8982). Ke srld that these notes refer
to subject number 30 rather than subject 23. (R. 6984).

Beiglboeck testified that he nade no further changes,
erasures, or alterations In Kurnberg. (R. 8992'. That
Beiglboeck's testimony ns n whole Is completely unreliable
Is evldonoed by the fact that he also made erasures in the
notes on the bnok of chart A-29. These notes, Insofar an


they can be translated, read as follows:

■The thirst again becomes very oevoro.
Patient lies down on his back and rolls

about. Also gets-- typloal

storootypod organic rigid seizure wi tn
novero tetanic symptoms such as from his

-, symptoms-•

In view of tho fact that In the laot two
days he has boon drinking a groat deal or

water-ouartor plus half liter

has boon, ho Is being takon out of the
experiment.

■3/9 Again takon Into tho experiment.


"5/9 Again complains about very acvorc
thirst.


■6 Fooling of thirst very severe, tongue
dry nnd oontod. Fetid »nol. fron the south.

Skin dry and hot, liver slgnlflcantly
enlarged, reflexes very lively, blood
vessels show thickening of walls,
musculature over-cxcltablc.

"7/9 Psychic statu has changed. Sonnolonco.
Tongue dry, nusculaturc feels stiffened.
Considerable weakness of musculature with
ntoxlo manifestation. Romberg positive.

Blood vessels still-“• oul8G

poorly flllod, marked bradycardia,
respiration accelerated. General condition
(the next word erased and not lcgllc;,
liver greatly enlarged.

In the case of subject 25, Eelglbocck testified that

this man was X-rayed several times and apparently had acute

bronchitis. Kls fever went up to 39.8 contlgrade. (R. 6?°8)

He complained of a stomach ailment before the experiment

- 13 -


bognn. C£. 9000). He was still sick when Selglbocck
loft Dachau on 15 September. (?.. 9002). Subject 39
was a nan 49 years old . He was given 500 cc of Borkntlt
for a period of four days, namely, from 1 September to
4 September, when the experlnent wns Interrupted at 1930
hours. Bclglboeck used the truth with characteristic
econony when ho tostifled that the men was under the
experiment only three days. (R. 9010). He adnltted
having porforned nuncrous lunbar and liver punctures
on the subjects. (R. 6933).


a nunber of experimental subjects were able to
gain access to frosh water in spite of the offorts of
Bolglboock to prevent it. Selglboeck and his defense
counsel assumed the anomalous position that this somehow
mitigates his guilt. It is difficult to understand how
this oolf holp on the part of tho subjects, which
undoubtedly savod tho llvos of tho majority of then,
could be raised ns a mitigating factor nhen Bolglboock
did everything in his power to prevont that. At a nnttor
of fact, he did not oven know that the cxporlnontol
subjects in tho first group, thnt is to say from 1 to 32,
had boon nblo to got to fresh water. Ho testified thnt:


“I should like to oay that *.n the
second group, whon I knew their devices
from my cxpcrlcnoc with tk. first group,

I knew what to do and broke off the
oxporlracnts. If : had wanted to continue
tho experiments, I would have done it in
tho second group too. T h ls I did in the
first group onljr because r.t first I did not
realize the significance of the failure to
lose weight . y (a. §6321.


Thus oclglhoeck cays , in effect , that although he did
not know that the experimental subjects gained access
to fresh water and although ho continued the experiments
frr boyond what he himself knew to be the danger point ,
nonetheless he Is to bo excused because some of the
experimental subjects drank fresh -.-ater secrotly in spite
of hi- efforts to prevent it .


- 14 -


The expert witness, Dr. Ivy, testified for the

Prosecution concerning: sea water experiments. He, himself,

participated in an experifiont of three days durlr- which he

consumed 2,4CO cc of sea water with a caloric intake

of 108 per day in the fora of candy. Ho suffered narked

dehydration and was at the point of developing hallucinations.

A second volunteer in these experiments took 2,000 cc

in a little over one day and developed vomiting and

diarrhea to such an extent that the experiment had to ho

stopped. (R. 903Q-9). Compare the amounts of sea water

taker, by Boiglboock's subjects. For scientific data

concerning tho effect of seawater on the human body, soc

transcript pages 9039-41. Dr. Ivy pointed out certain

basic inconsistencies in thetostinony of the dofenso oxpert

wltnoss, Vollhardt. (R. 9041-43). Dr. Ivy testified

that it was ontlrcly unnecessary to porform theso

experiments for tho purpose of establishing the potability

of non water processed by tho Borkn method. This could

havo boon determined chemically in a nattor of one-half

hour. (R. 9043-4). Ho stated that if 1,000 cc of son

viator or Berkatit wore taken per day, it would cause death

in loss than 12 days. Death would occur between tho

0th and tho 14th day if 500 cc were concurred per day under

ideal conditions. (R. 9045). The statement in tho

report of the conferences on 19 and 20 Hay 1944 that if

Berka water was'used, dnnngo to the health was to bo

expoctod not later than six days and would lead to death

not later than 12 days, is essentially correct. (R. 9044).

This document show6 that the planned duration of tho

experiments was 12 days. Dr. Ivy testified '.hat it would be

‘unnecessary to conduct experiments for more than three to

four days to show that Berkatit was Just as dehydrating ns

seawater. (R. 9046). He stated that these experiments

make 6cnse only if they '-ere trying to determine th: survival

-15-


tine of human beings on 500 cc end 1,000 cc of sea vator
per day. It Is clear that the experlnentcl plan
anticipated deaths. (R. 9046-7).

Dr. Ivy testified that on the basis of his studies
of the charts kept during the course of the experiments,
thore was insufficient observation period after the
experiments to determine whether there were any delayed
damaging effects to the experimental subjects. (R. 9049).

The results of the oxperinont3 are not scientifically
reliable. (R. 9051).

Dr. Ivy pointed out that the chart of subject 3
provod that he was too weak to stand and have his blood
pressure taken on several occasions. (R. 9052). *hls
was one of the subjects in the fasting and thirsting group.

Ho was glvon an Injection of ooronlnc on 25 August and
strychnine on 30 and 31 August. Both of these drugs aro
heart stimulants and tho clinical plcturo lndlcatos that
this aubjoot was 111 or norkodly disabled by the experiments.
(R. 9053). Eight to fourtoon days is tho range of
ourvlvnl tine of strong non under Ideal conditions for
thirsting and fasting. (R. 9053).

As a result of his study of tho ollnioal records, Dr.

Ivy testified that subjoots 3, 14, 36, 37, 39, 31, 23 (or 30),
25, 28, and 29 woro ill during the experiments. Subjects
3, 23 (or 30), and 25 wero especially HI and thoro is a
possibility that they were permanently injured or dlod
as a result of the experiments. (R. 9058-9).

Tho subject to whom the notC6 on the back of chart
C-23 nppllcd was very sick and In a conn. (Ivy, R. 9061).

Tho changes made in the stenographic notes by the defendant
Bclglbocck make tho subject appear to bo in a bettor
condition than ho actually was. (Ivy, R. 9062-3). The
bulbous reflex referred to In those notC6 means the
pressing of tho eyeball to determine the degroo of cona.


■Tonus of boll of eyes la bad" Indicates the Mood
pressure was low and the circulation was quite poor. This
Is a bad prognostic sign and night Indicate Impending death.

(R. 9065). These notes Indicate that the subject was in
a dangerous condition and required Immediate rencdinl
thorapy. Tho follow-up observation x‘cr subject 23 was
four days, while on subject 30, five days. This was entirely
Insufficient. This subject could have died If not properly
cared for. (Ivy, R. 9065-6).

Dr. Ivy testified that of the 44 subjects, 13 were too
weak to stand on ono or norc occasions, had fever, required
cardiac atlnulnnts, or wore unconscious, nanely, subjects
3, 4, 14, 21, 23, 25, 28, 29, 32, 36, 37, 39, and 40.

(R. 9067-8). Tho statonent of tho affiant 5auor to tho
offoct that ho o^oervod symptoms of heart weeknoos In the
experimental subjects no a result of certain electro¬
cardiograms ho took was corroborated by Ivy. (Ivy, R. 9069).

In Dr. Ivy's opinion, or. experimental oubjoot who
ngrooc to undorgo an experiment is r.o longer a volunteer
If, during tho oourso of tho cxporlnont, ho Is forced
to oontinuo after having expressed a doslrc to be rcllovcd.

(R. 9076-7).

The testimony of tho defon6C expert, Vollhnrdt, Is

entirely unreliable. Although Vollhnrdt had nothing

whatever to do with these experiments lr. Lachnu, he

repeatedly testified In a highly partial manner concerning

mnttor8 about which ho could not possibly h^vc had any

knowledge. For example, ho Insisted that the subjects In

Dachau were vo_untccrs. He testified that Bclglbocck

eliminated three subjects before the experiments began

becauso of their physical condition and that three other

persons Immediately volunteered. (R. 8457-8). Sven

Bolglboeck made no such contention. He said that ho

considered It "quite out of the question that the experimental

subjects felt it nccessary’to drink water out of mbps, beenuso

- 17 -


there wero air raid buckets and if they felt thoy needed
a drink, they could drink out of then 8 . (R. 8467). It
is passing strange that Vollhardt could have such information
when he was never in Dachau. He believed it quite impossible
that any of the experimental subjects had cramps, although
subject 29 is proved to have had cramps and organic solzurcs
by the notes quoted above. Although Vollhardt admitted that
the clinical data showed that a number of the exporlmontal
subjects had socretly obtained fresh water and although
Boiglboook admitted that some of the subjects throw thoir
urire away (R. 8865), Vollhardt was quite sure that tho
experimental subjects wore ell volunteers.

Vollhardt made no 3tudy of the clinical notes himself
but turned then over to a 25 year old asslstrrtto digest
for him. (R. 8432). He admitted that'ho rolled on
descriptions of the oxporlments made by Bcckcr-Frcysong
and Bclglboock 3lnco tho trial began. (R. 8438). Vollhardt
had had ,-.o provlous oxpcrlcnco with sen vrat. r problone nor
had hio assistant. (R. 8451). Vollhardt testified that
he conducted a voluntoor experiment on five of his doctor
assistants after he had been approaches by defense counsel.

His subjects drank 500 cc of simulated sea water per day
and rcoolvod 1600 calorics per day. (R. 8440-2). Four of
the subjocts continued the experiment for five days and ono
for six days. Tho latter subject drank an extra 500 oo on
the last day. The purpose of these experiments was to
asocrtaln how much a person suffers undergoing a son water
experiment. (R. 8443). Vollhardt's subjects continued
thoir work about the clinic although they ate and slept
in tho same room. He docs not know whether they went to


the local cinema or left tho clinic for othortmrpcscs during
tho course of the experiments. (R. 8-145). Four of tho
subjects quit on tho fifth d'-y because of an engagement with


a young lady. (R. 8450). He testi

‘ S7U - 18 - J


fi.l that his subjects


had no severe thirst on the first two days, It become un¬
pleasant on the third, reduced thirst or. the fourth, and
very strong thirst on the fifth dny; the subject who went
six days reported th«t It made very little difference. All
continued their work during the experiment. (R. 8453). It
Is obvious that this experiment In no way oompnrod to those
conduotod In Dachau. While some of tho experimental subjects
In Dachau were too weak on many occasions to hnve tholr
blood prossuro tnken, Vollhnrdt's subjects were able to
continue their work, rnlle Vollhnrdt's subjects were
trained doctors who participated In the experiment booausc
of Interest, who wero poraltted to withdraw from the
experiment at any.tine, who woro permitted to control tholr
own activities during the experiment, none of these lrapo:—
tnnt factors wero present In the D„chau experiments.

(R. 8479). Tho wrotchod gypsies wore not permitted to
withdraw when they folt like It. Thoy did not know how
long tho experiments wero to last, thoy hrd no freedom of
activity, thoy had no Interest In the experiment. Vollhnrdt's
rogrrd for thcoo gypsies Is apparent from his st^toment that

».pooplo like that will of course find a way" to choat.

(R. 8468). That Vollhnrdt know nothing of tho experiments
ho purported to testify «bout 13 npparont from his testimony
regarding their duration. For example, ho stated that In
tho Sorkrtlt group of 500 cc, tho experiments were dis¬
continued after six days. (R. 8462). The cllnloal charts
which Vol lharclt had In hlo possession , and upon which his
testimony purported to be based , show th"t the duration of
the experiments In this group ran as high as 9* dnjrg, and
In all but two cases exceeded six days . He testified that
the group 6n seawater was also discontinued after six days,
vfhllc the clinical charts show some of them to hnve run ne
long 's ten days , ^n the fasting and thirsting group he


testified that they were discontinued "ftcr four to flvo
•Anys , v;hlle the chert shows that they L r -S te< r 1123 ^ 12
Tfc en^s. (R. 8462-3). No, Vollh-rdt's tcstlnony nould
indeed hnve been an unreliable subrtltutc for the charts.

The tcstlnony of the Prosecution witnesses proves
that the seawater cxperlacnts resulted in nurder and
tortures. The Austrian witness, Vorllock, who was tried
for "preparation of high treason" in 1939 and sentenced to
four yo«rs In a penitentiary, was transferred to Dachau
In Earch 1944 -nd acted cs an assistant nurse In the
expcrinontal station during the course of the seawater
experiments. <R. 9383-5). One of the innate guards who
foil nslcop was transferred to a penal, company. vR. 9386).

At least one of the eubjoots suffered a violent attack of
cramps. (R. 9386). On one occasion Vorllcok spilt some
fresh water on the floor and forgot the rag which ho used
to mop It up. Tho experimental subjects eoltod tho dirty
rag and sucked the water out of It. Bolglboock threatened
to put him in the experiments If It ever hapooned again.

(R. 9387). Tho expcrinontal subjooto were not volunteers.
Vorllcok talked to some of the Czech subjects who told
him thoy had boon asked In another camp to volunteer for
n good outside assignment and only when thoy got to Dachau
did thoy find out that thoy were to undergo the experiments.
(R. 9388, 9392). Ho testified that tho subjects wero of
Czech, Polish, Hungarian, Austrian, and Gorman nation¬
alities. (R. 9388). Some of tho subjects w.-ro quite ill *nd
he was under the Impression that they would not live much
longer. About three months after the experiments, ho not
Frr.nz, one of the subjects, and ho told him thnt ono of the
victims of tho experiments had already died. (R.,939


Th? witness Lnubinger, who was subject number 7,
testified that he was arrested by the Gc6tapo In March
1943 because he was n gypsy. Ke was sent to Auschwitz
In the spring of 1943 without having been tried for any
crime. (R. 10199). He was lator transferred to Buchcnvmld
for a few weeks and while thorc he, together with othor
Initiates, was naked to volunteer for n cleaning up work
dotail In Dnchnu. The innotes wero under the Impression
that conditions were better in Dnchnu so they ngrerd to go.

Upon their arrival at Dnchnu they woro given n physical
examination and X-rayod and then taken to the experimental
station. (R. 10200) Bclglbocck told thon that they woro
to participate In the sen water oxporlnc.t nnd this was the
first they knew of It. (R. 10201). Laublngor identified
Bniglboook in the dook. (R. 1C202). Ho told Bclglboook that
ho had had two otoar.ch operations but Bclglboock did not permit
him to withdraw. Bclglboook did not ask uhethor the subjects
wished to volunteer and thoy did not voluntoor. (R. 10203).
Laublngor, who was In the Schaefer group, was given Schaofor
water for 12 dnys and fasted for at least nino d«ys. (Sco
oh"rt). He got so weak ho could hardly staid up. Tho
oxporlmontal subjects received special food for only one day
after the experiment. Bclglboock had promised then extra
rations and an .»asy work detail, but these promises were
not kept. (R. 10205). One of the subjects triod to
porsundo tho othors to refuse to drink tho son water.
Boiglboock throatoned to have him hanged for sabotage. Tho
subject later vomittod after drinking sea water, whereupon
Bclglbocck had the wnter adnlnlstorod through a stomach tub 0 .
(R. 10207). Another subject was tied to his bod and adhesive
tape was plastered ovor his mouth, bocruso he had obtained
some fresh water nnd bread. Most of tho subjects were Czech,

Polish, nnd Russian nationalities with approximately eight

- 21 -


Germans. (R. 10208). A number of subjects buffered attacks
of delirium end two were transferred to the hoapl nl and
Laubinger did not see then again. (R. 1020$).

The witness Hollenrclncr corroborated the testimony
of Laublngcr In all Important points. He testified that
the experimental subjects did not volunteer (R. 10509) and
that the majority of then wero non-Gcr".an nationals (r. 10513)
Hollonrclncr testlflod further that Bclglbocck showed no
conoorn for the experimental subjects, but, on tho oontrary,
threatened to shoot then vbon thoy beenne excited. (It
hardly seona appropriate to wear-a gun when experimenting
on volunteers). Ho had no pity for them whon they hoenrao
delirious from thirst and hunger. (R. 10510). The wltnOsc
Kollonrolnor unfortunatoly assaulted Boiglboook In open
court. This lapulso act of tho witness, however, spooks
more forcoably than volunos of testimony as to the Inhuman
troatraont of tho experimental subjects and tho cuffcrlng
which was Inflicted on then no n result of these experiments,
ffo may root nssurod that Hollonralnor was no voluntoor.

Phon explaining hlc behaviour to tho Tribunal, Kollonrolnor
characterized Bclglbocck a "murderer". (R. 10233-4).

The wltnooo Tsohofonlg wrs connlttcd to Dachau In

Wovambor 1940 whore ho remained until April 1945. He was

a political prisoner. (R. 9331). He Is presently a

member of tho Corinthian Land Diet In Auotrl-. (R. 9332).

From the summer of 1942 until tho end, he was in chargo of

the X-ray station In Dachau. (R. 9334). He examined tho

transport of gypsies In the summer of 1944 before tho

experiments began and excluded a number of then as being

unfit. (R. 9034-5). He saw Bclglbocck several times in

the camp and In tho X-ray station. (R. 9335). During the

experiments, a number of those who got sick wore brought to

the X-ray station for examination. Their physical

condition had deteriorated considerably as a result of tho

- 22 -


experiments. He hoard that one of the subjects had a
maniac attack. (R. 9336). At the conclusion of the
experiments, three of the subjects wore brought to tho
station for Internal diseases. One was on a 6trctchcr and
unable to walk. All of then were X-rayed by Tschofcnlg.

(R. 9338). It was customary to send the results of tho
X-ray examinations to tho hospital word where tho Inmates
wore kept. Tschofonlg rocolvod an official order from
tho station for Internal diseases that It was not necossary
to roport on tho stretcher case as he had died two days
aftor hlo tranofer. Tho statlon physician reported that tho
doath resulted from the sea water experiments. Tschofonlg
oxnmlnod tho death rocords himself. (R. 9339).

Evon Dr. Stolnbaucr, dofonac counsel for Bclglbocck,
has apparently convinced himself that these experiments
Involved torture. Ho said, In explaining hlo conduct in
wlth-holding part of a document tho Tribunal had ordcrod
produood, that: "I do not want to say anything about tho
experimental subjects, who sufforod terribly." (R. 9378).

CCKCLUSIOH

Tho Prosooutlon submits that the ovldcncc proves that
Bolglboook was a principal In, -cccssory to, ordered,
abettod, took a consenting part In, was connected with plans
and enterprises Involving, and was a member of a group or
organization connected with medical experimentation on
human subjects without their consent, In the course of
which experiments murders, brutalities, cruelties, tortures,
atrocities, and other Inhumane acts wore committed, and that
his guilt has been established under Counts I, II, and III
of the Indictment.


= LkI£a£I k r I £ Si li s L k2* I

CASE NO. 1


CLOSING LRlLr FOR
THE UNITED SI^iES OF ERICA
^GAINST
KURT SLOES


V

t

» J/JuCD -cH^ncy

*lux\ndcr G. H.t-rdy
nm-st K:rll).-H: ch:mld
Esther J'-no J^hns:n

Nurnb<.rg, For:

16 Juno 1947

Tclf;rd Tnylnr
Srl£r.dler Gcn-rnl, U.S.A.

Chief -f Crunsel f~r 7nr Crlnes


y>


bloue


Golden Pnrty Bsdp.e, the highest decor-tion of the Nazi

Party. (Blame, It. 4455-7).

In 1924 he became Minister of the Leatue of Geraun
Physicians v/hlch Inter developed into the Reich Chanter of
GoiBtsn Physicians. Bloae held this position until the end
of the v cr. In 1925 he wes appointed Represent tivc for
the Development of Medical Study. In this position it ves
his task to orrunizt the German ncdicol educ tionnl system
(B10-4C, R. 4458, UD-675, Pros. Ex. 37, ". 142-4). It wus
durinr his term of office *3 Representative for the Devel¬
opment of "ledic.'.l ’Study th-t German medical science* deter¬
iorated and .dheronce to the Nuzi ideology became the cri¬
terion for j scientific c-rcer. ..n ttc ipt w s nudt to
shorten the ti :e of medic 1 studies in order to encour.pc
studonts to :rry 3 e rly -a possible. New subjects,
which were •- fertile field for H-tional Soci-listic nropu-
pvnflj , were introduced in St .te ex .1 nations in order to
Indoctrinate the students with ty-ic.l Mationel 3oci 113-
tic ideas. The ll tion.l S claliat Le-puc of Stufionta v a
or Gated. Its ;ur t o3t was to determine, dor in* the first
yc .r of university study, whether the students were rcl-
i tlo from the K-tioncl Soci listic point of view. (Lell-
br.ndt, B. 1971). «. student who did not belrnr to the

II tion 1 Socialist Lc.puc of Students w: n considered sua-
: ict. If he did r.ot belnr to :ny : rty r niz tion it
vns vory difficult or even impossible for him to be d-
mitted to the St tc ex vin tion. (Uibbr ndt, It. 13P4).

Medic .l students h-d to r:;ss examin-tiona '3 r oi-1 theories
•nd the Nurnbcrr L ws, which Ciscrtmin.ua • c-inst the Jews.
In qualifying for the : ositi-n of University Lecturer, the


INTRODUCTION


It is elleced under Count I of the Indictment that
the defend-nt Blomc conspired and of-reed with others, pur¬
suant to e common dosipn, to perform medic ;1 experiments
on involunt .ry hum.n subjects; under Counts II end III
(•?cr crimes und Crimes r-puinst Humanity, res-ectively)
th: t he wes a princip -1 in, eccessory to, ordered, abetted,
took .• consenting purt in, nd w a connected with pi no
_nd enterprises involving aedic 1 experiment tlon on in-
volunt- ry hut'n subjects, the murder tnd ni3trc tnent of
tens of thous-.nds of Polish nation-Is, llcpedly sufferinr
from incur :ble tuberculosis, und the "Euth n&ai " prorren.

The defend .nt Blor.c is churned with s. cci 1 responsi¬
bility ir. o mnectlon with the -wl» rio -nd -co experiments,
the -.urdor :nd r.istre-.t tint of tubercular Poles, nd the
execution of the euth.neoi prorran. The .roof h s olso
sho\n th 1 1 he • rtici: ted in the frtczinr, b otcriolori-
cal v/ rfore, and blood coorul.tion experiments. In order
to simplify the issues, the Prosecution withd-mJiJ thu
ch..rco -f having n .rticipi.ted in the sulf inilaoldc exjeri-
nents.

I. POSITIONS OF IxoPOToIRILITy

The defend .nt Blomc held positions »f -'re t pewer
nd responsibility in the Iledicr-l Services of the German
Reich nd It-.zi P.rty.

H* joined the in 1931 -nd bee at C. u : : nn, i.c.,
Hiphcst ’Tedleui Cffici 1 of the in the st ti of Mecklen¬
burg. In 1934 he vr s ppointed Cmuomtsleitcr (Province
Office Levder). In the 3. he -tt ined the r nK of GrupHn-
fuehrer C:-:Jor Gencr 1). In 1943, he v.s tmrurded the


- 1 -


5L03E


question of whether the --lie ..at * s . rood ’’ zi v s de¬
cisive. In Drier to - ke sure tt t only , : N zis were
•irr^intci, ' cov>lex ayy era tea * .s cvloycd. (Lcib-

br net, I*. 1965).

Blo.nc hinsclf vs in eh-rrc of the Fuehrer Scho'l
for Gera' n Doctors in ..ltrcse. (Slone, i-165). '“he
pur.osc of t is Fuehrer School v.-.s to ind^ctrin tc younp
Ctrl n rhysici-ns i.ith ttu ::.zi ifcolcry. lUittr.net,

R, 1963). The - rtici>tion in the tr inint .rocc33 in
..ltrcse ilpht well h ve been "volant-ry*, tut it foes not
need . n ex;l..n tion th -1 it w s cert-inly rcreouisitc

for successful Ktic 1 c rar in Vt.7.1 ny.

In 1979 Bl.nc \..a anointed Deputy to the ’.tich
He 1th Leader (*.eichapcOundhcit3fuehrer), Dr. Leon rfo

, R. 4450. Conti wu« the hi best uthor-
ity in the field of civilia health rfaiaistr'ti^n mi
h f au/reie -svtrs over the highest Reich uthnritKs in
. Tho decree of 28 July M42, sirnef by Rlt-

ler, ooncerninr he 1 th :nf s nit tion defines t! i; i;i-

•

tion of Conti: f

"In the field of civil! n tc 1th ’ .iniJ-
tr.tion the Secret ry of St- tc in the
‘iiniotry of the Interior, nc- the C.;icf
Of the Veelth dniniatr tion 'f the .-.cich
(I.* ichn‘'e3un''.hi it3fuehrer), Dr. C nti, ia
responsible for coord intted u .euros,
vor this -ur-ose hi h 8 't hia cia. oa 1
the co-.-etent do- rt .ents of thi ji. h
helch uthoritica at* other sub r in tc
rfficea.” CJ3-060, Fr >2. Ix. u, . 93).

Conti vs In ch rrc of the "ublic ;t lt‘ Office of
the SSc.zl ? rty, the rofescion-1 .ecic 1 no ci tionn, D«

- rt.icnt IV in the Reich .‘ini a try of Interior (::*..lth Ce-

- rticnt), nc the Dt.~rtaant for 3 jc 1 1 courity in the

«•


ELCv'Z


Reich Ministry of Labor. (710-645, Pros. Lx. 5, ?. 84,
Leitbr ndt, 197e-9). In his c-yscity rs Reich Health Le .• d-
or (aclchsrcsundhcitsfuchrcr), he vs in ch rre of the
F.eich Chtaber of Physicians ..nd consccucntly 'll physicians
in the Oc-rnnn P.eich, v.ith the execution of those on active
service in the .roed force ; and in the were 3ubrrdin’te
to hit. There was not single oedic.l question vhich did
n:t re-ch hia, ' nd which he did not rcrul.te. (Leibbr ndt,
F. 1979-80). Conti's iiportant position in the -1 nninr
•nd execution of the euth.n.si:. rrorr' a i3 ;roved by the
ch> rt drawn by the defend nt Dr ck (110-253, Pros. Lx. 881,
l. 1532), nd by the testimony of the defend nts 11- rl
Dr ndt (Fi. 2399, 2<i00) nd Hr ck (L. 7552-,).

Plate, tccordinr. to his own testimony, v 3 Conti's de-
-uty • s (• ) Le-der of the Reich Ch- ’.her f Physiol ns; (b)
He-d of the ;i in Office for Public He-lth of the NSD.P
Ctich He .1th Le Cer); (c) Le der of.the 7? tion- 1 loci’1-
ist Physiol-ns' ..sooci tion. (’10-670, su-r-; Bine, R.

4458 ).

Blvic v u - Is' le-d or “.eiber of the . cich P.cse rch
Council, (Pl' ic, T. 4406). He bec le ?lcii;'tonti ry f-r
C neer Rene rch when tills orr niz tion vs 1 M und* r the
lc .tiorshlf *Jf Cocrinr by decree c'-ted 9 June 1912. (B1 le,

, ro-F94, Pros. ix. 38, 3. 1 ). It v s the t-sk of
the -leni-Miatl rie3 t> deter line vh t Kind f rcsc.roh in
particular w a to tc cnoour red nd su'ysrtu , aid to
choose the suit*.; le scientists vho should c rry out such
res- rch. (E 1 , . Is 0 oitj •

tiry cn bled Dl' •- ti issue research ssi. n tents for the
freczinc oxeriaents of .. scher, r»c f e L Bt , s ex;*.ri-
nents oT Hirt. (110-690, Pros. Uc. 1£C. ?. 3~1). He Iso


sur „rte« Rcscher-. PoXyyrt experiments. (Bln*. R. -4527).
Elorae rise vrs oL. cca in ch~r« of research in conneetiSn
vdth V cterlologicel vrrfcre, «hich he c-rrlefl on-, under
the cover nr-.c Pleni-otentlery for C-ncer r.cacrcu.

(Pln-.c, P. 4458).

The proof hoe sho«n that the Belch reac rch Council
supported end furthered -nedlc, 1 ex-crlncoftlon on Invol¬
untary hu-. n subjects - concentr tlon « ao irn-tea. a
e-rly 3 December 1942. the P.eich BeaeTch Council v.oa
.sKed to p* 33 Judpnent by the Roich.nlniat.r of narae. on
e rooueat for rose- rch fund, by Reiche-rzt 33 Orn.lt*.

Dr. Hentzel of the Belch Research Council -roved of this
1locution of funds on 25 it.rch 1943 s-yinc: '„ 8 f-.r .a
they, to . a teller -.rt, re oe-.nt for the extension of
acientlflc research possibilities they pert in exclusively
to such n ttera v.hich cun be c rrled out only .1th the »-
terlM (orisoners) ■ ccessl* la to the • ffen S3 :nd there¬
fore c nnot be undent-Ken by any other rest rch waay."

(002- r 3. Pros. Ex. 39. R. 132). (Tr : n3cri : t is Inc-rrect
• t this oolnt nd reference should he -vdc to r-cuneht

1). The -r-aecutlon c lied the Trltun l'a tten-
tlo„ to -.e finding Of the intern tlon 1 Mint ry Trltun, 1
In C-sc Hi. 1 which rc.es o f-'llor.s:

"IQ conne-ctiin with the C

-erl-.ent. included freezing todett. ne

a&KS SSS^lhsr*

funds far this Kind f rea, ■ rch n t .

153).

The ctivities of the Seict P.cse rch Council in cri-
ain 1 cxrerlacnt-tion on involuntary hun,n subjects v,e're


B.LCriE


not limited to .pprovinc funds for resc .rch by the SS.

Pese rch nssirmcnts were c'missioned by it, involvinr
experiments on concentration crap inorte3. Thus, in the
autumn of 1943, r.'seher recti-cd *.n rssirn-.ent fron the
Reich nest'rch Council to conduct dry frtczinr experiments,
while Hirt v 3 carrying out the nusterd r s experinents in
:?«*tzweiicr with Its support. (H0-690, Pros. Tot. 120, R.
f71, ct see; Toe. NO-432, Pros. Ix, 119, R. 369). „n in¬
terest w.s -Iso shown in the blood co'fuI nt developed by
p.rschcr in D ch> u, during experiments with which concen-
tr tion C'. ip ina tea were shot. (NO-613, Pros. Lx. 243, ?..
962). Bloic person’.lly ir.do these ’-3sirn:tnts to R* seller
• nd Hirt. ..nd, torethcr with the Luftwffe, the Reich He¬
at'rch Council sponsored typhus, yellow fever, nd y un-
c ice experiments by H; rtn on inn tts of the :i- tzweilcr
Concentration Crap. (N'O-137, Pro3. Ix. 189, T. 737).

Such were the -ctivitic3 or the Reich Research Council.

.o ”n inport nt member of this ft ouo or ort-oniz'tion (Reich
rcst’.rch Council) connected with the co-mission of such
crinea, -nd indeed -s r -'erson-1 o-.rUcio-nt in then, Blono
must be found ruilty under the provisions of Section 2 of
..rticli : T of Control Council L w ?Io. 10.

These then were the positions of re3-onsi ility of
the defend nt Blo.me: Crup-'tnfuthrer ( V J or General) in
the 3/.; Deputy Reich He 1th Le .der; Deputy Le der of the
Reich Ch-nber of Phy3icl; ns nd the Notion' 1 Socir-list
Physici.n3' ,.ssoci tion; Representative for the Develop¬
ment of ilceic: 1 Study; Plenipotentiary for C nccr Reseerch
in the Reich Rest rch Council; ..nd Chief of P.est-rch on
B ctcrioloric 1 ' r rfr.rc.


- 6 -


r


-LC

II. ?u 3C xti czz'j^zsi: _r;_cj_ixi. _l .,<££££5

•• • turc cr .nc’.riatrc. tic at if P olish ' tl-a-la _ (In-
Tic t”eat, ?. r. J 1

By 19*1 it v; s the . cccj-tef -'licy .1 the Tfcir Teich
t cxterninr-tc the Je\ ish ^ ul.ti^n f Ger. ay nc the
;ccu~ied c "uatrics. (Jud r ie at, I. ... 16920 et sec),

la ursu-.ncc if this ''Licy the r.tich ' 'trnur 'f the
' Tthepnu, ^reiser, 'tt int:* -fnissi a fr Hi inler t-
exter:.in te the Jcvish wul-ti-a la this r vj.ic. In
letter -f 1 ley 19-.2, he inr'rief Hi'.-.lcr th t the ’ s't-
cl■* 1 *ri t :cnf f Inut 100,COC .tex t - ul' ‘e cn-lttif
vlthla 2-3 l athc. |T» st te- th.t can s this t. sk
v »* civile tit the 'cxiatiar a C efficieat a »ci 1 c i-
Vitf.s' c'ul-' te used f >r the exter .ia ti n f .* -rixi-
i t. ly 3o,000 Palish a.ti -a Is v»h-* suff re: fr i 'pen
tutercul ‘•ais. These ?Mea llcccfly \ a. f a. er tj the
Ger ...a fflci Is .ai their f. lilies l -c .use they vere
.sslblc source ->f tubcrcul r infecti ... Greiser vent :n

•

t: a y:

The ever iacre cia risks vere la ree v-
nlzct a C •‘•reel tef by the 'e.uty f the
r.eich Le dcr f >r Public He 1th (: eichsre sunt-
heitsfuehrer) C'~r ft ?r fcas r Lr. FLCT.

.s well s by the Le ter f y or X-r y
b tt Ilia SS St.nf rteafuchrer 7r r. Lr.
K0HLFT.LDL7..


•Th:u-h In Gen.nr r *er it is a t >s-
sible t • t ke r*~rl-te c aic stc s
r last this ublie 1 rue , 3 think I
c ulc* t^k. reo- nsidlity f r y su resti n
t h'vc c scs 'f cn Tr oxter -in ter i:li¬
the P :lish r e. h« - ia the * rthc r u. Of
course 'nly ? le sh'uld e h v\ ver t:
such a -cti a, t.fr is n-t ily sufferin'-
ea tuberculosis, but vh ae 1 .cur bility
is r »vee n?* certified by u* lie he 1th
fficer.

Considerin'- the urgency -of this r.Ject 3
sk f-r your -r v 1 in riaci le s s m .3
^nsaiblc. Thin v ulC en blc us t l-lct the
re r ti'iis vith 11 access ry rtc oti'.an


- 7 -


5LC.IZ


i


now to tret the .cti^a - last the ??les
suffering frnn _-n tuberculosis oncer
v_y, while the cti a ug-inst the Tews
Is in it3 closing stages. (.:0-2i6,

Pr23. Ex. 196, R. 474-5).

Ia letter of 27 June 1942 Hirulcr • vc consent in

' rinciple t*> this pi-n :ad instructed Greiner to Ciscu3S

the individual ne.3ures In det ii with the Security Police

first h. -'rder to asurc .n incon3 icuous cc* .. lishcmt

of the t s.:. (::o-244, Pros. Ix. 201, R. 752). On 21 JIov-

c-.ber 1942 Crei3cr informed Hi-viler th-1 rhe ex ^nations

which were t be c rried ^ut in order to &e r te the

cur ifclc ad iuourible v. uld be executed by 7r'f. HohI2ll«*tr

'nd his X-r.y b .v lli->n. He csti i ted th t the first uti-

liz tlon of the icthod would be in s^r'-xi tdy six

v*nthu. !'e furth-r 3t ted:

"In this st r. of the ;r cec'lncs r f.

Hr. ri' ., in hi c .; city a Dc uty
Chief >f the Public He 1th Office (:: u.-
t . it fuer V:lkSf eBUi'dheit) T the 3C.a
Is r icier a* .< vbjtcti'.na .s t ita
exequti:n, s he at tea in - letter of

10 ::>Ve *fcer. These 'bJeCti'.IS re eX-

prtssed mly now lthough Br. 31 ie :h<

Dr. Hohlfelder nd -.ysclf fc ve e . r.t
tonttas of preli iln ry % or* on a .in -
ti >n, cl rific tlon .nd str ifhV.airw-
jut the v;h le jr Cetur* .

"I enclose C'-'y 'f Plot's letter f
.6 II ve..ber f r y ur inf r . ti r..

\ .JO-249, ?r's. lx. 202, ?. 752-3).

In this letter R 1 :e st ted th- t vn«: the ' lish «?3pul -
ti >n of the r>vincc, t le st 35,000 -trs as '-re suf¬
fering fr n ren tuberculosis, *at besides V ia nu-ter,
b ut 120,000 c ncu ■* iVe j vc re i:i nee ' f tre t-.< nt.

•“his constituted a en~r .'us t ngtr to th “< r . n settlers
in .11 ? rts 'f the -r'vtace. In Tier t •. he further
Gera n irairr ti'n possible, counter surcs Vert t be
t ken 8 a. t .lined the three - ys f r t


- e -


r.ctic-1 'a *>f the r .npcr inf^ctin


Special tri (3 a- erbeh :..lunr)

nf the seriously ill ?tra~ns.

£. :'-5St rip or ":us iaSltioa ~f t.u Siri¬

us ly ill .-.era-'ns.

3. Cre _ti-n u* - restrv ti'n it 11
CS-; tituts."

..a t the first prorra.l he at ted:

The p.pr'xin tely Zt.OCO ?>lc3 *h re
incur bit nd infteti us vill bt a c-
ci lly trt t^c’ (a nderbeh-adelt). ,,11
nhtr ? llsh c^nsuhntivc3 \ ill e au’e-
Jecter t» r. rpr^ri tt cur« in re'er
t • o vt then f >r \ Tic ac t, v i: their
c.usiup c »nt-pi a .

El'.ic p}intc< *ut th t nt f the pr.ctic 1 difficul-
tUs f utricht exttriin *1 t. :f -11 T5 ?-lts v a th. t it
-:i,-ht provide excellent pr’vvf nd : t.ri 1 f r the tae-
nies f C- r'rny, taped lly vith rer rd t the. str'nply
C- th.lie fee lines jf the It 11 a n ti-n • af 11 the ;hy-
oici ns -»f the v ri". He therefAw c :.,i r. •• it n.os-
o ry th t Hi* 1 r . 1 . trlu ; ;U;.

ShjuK HI “Ur c noit\r this r t ic.l s luti n a unauit-
'blc, -re.* r ti-na f t the exccuti>n -f the 1 n a ut-

' in riat« £ • ai 3 ah ; . • . exoluaive

3ettlcicr.t f 11 T r ? lea, IrreS'ective I >r.< ther they
v.ert cur bit r Incur bit, -i ul rei ve the arer tf in¬
fection f r the 0- r.rn utttiers. Thee-, i lea si: ult be
used f r l t r. :: t >nly the TS ?olta r the • rthtp u,
but Ioj in E nzi -’ tat Truss! , *r the C Xiiotr tive t ’is-

trict f tiechen; u, nt’ f the ”r vinot f U tr Sileai ,

sh-ul. be ia *1 ted ir. the - :e settle lent. at ted:

..n'thcr s luti-n t' be t icen i.it consi¬
der ti'n voulc be . o»rict Is -1 ti*a f
11 the inficti-ms a C incur blc e nsu. -
tives, v.ith ut exception, in nursiiv es-
t MIsl • . : hti t v

t the cor r tTvlTv - r" -id e th ‘Y TEt


PL0:3:


sick, Mth the nccc3s ry iVition of
P-'lish factors f o£ nursin' -ers nncl,
the chrr-cter ~f rurc <*c th c 1 ?
v.^uie he svicvh't litir tee."

?in-lly El'ic evoc-tce is the nst -r ctic ble s lu-
ti n th-- ere ti n f reserv-tion si il*r t the reserv -
ti'n f>r . -era. * ithir. the reserv ti n the strict is 1 -
ti\n if the 3tr-nf ly c nt ri us c .ul e ally be chicvcf.

In this v< y the e* nrer of infecti n wulC ’:e re .-vef*. .n. #
the -r'tle.i f the Gor v n c'nsuirtiv<-8 in the :r vincc
vnuie be verc ;c. (110-250, Pr'-a. Ex. 203, R. 753-6).

Blue «T.;ittec' th t the a; ressi >n 'a;tci 1 tre t icnt'
which he U3c0 in the letter it nt the killinr *f the TP
r Its. (Bl'ic, r.. 4791).

Hi viler .ppr-vcf* Bl'V's rl* n t ere tc reserv ti n
fir TB I’ Us, incur .Me nf cur ble - like, in letter ti
Greiner tof 3 Duceibtr 19-:?-. It V ule. be . 'scible t >x-
rl-it this -cti-n f'r rr^ r.n-' -ur^sen, where s 'n the
other htW, utrirht oxtcriin-tl n f th'oc inflicted with
jen tubcrcul sis would t la n 1 nr 1 3 thc - :  r -. v ex iin -
ti ns of the Polish jcruluti-tn wiul« recuire t le at six
nnths. (NO-251, ?r>o. lx. 20-1, l. fie).

Th t t lent rt 'f the tubcrcul r 7 lea v. s a-
teriin-tee', while the others ure t ken t 'e .th c 1 s
where they were left t' die, is ;rwcf by the TfK .vit f

nt . t Brva t. (NO-%41, Pr s. Esc* 20b, R.
760 ). Br-nOt tried. t> cx;l-in, not to s-.y re/u< i te, this
effifvit, by testlfyinr th t ho t«c the st to.lents n
the t sl 3 if O-'cuients sh'vn to hii in rre-tri 1 interr --
ti>ns. He stressed the - Int, h v.cver, th t he instate-
the mrfinr of - > nc sentence be ch nrtt . This sentence ri
,-i.r lty re-d: "..s • result of the surresti ns V'*o by


10 -


-10’ c


Bl>» end Oxeiser, E - 10,000 Poles ~ere exteriin tec .

He, ch . the expression e - 10,COO- t~ -numerous'. (P.

Er W*.t, B. 4691, -.952). This proves In itself th t B-r» nfit
fli n t T«.kfc his st"teoient in exclusive reliance -»n the
contents.of the documents shown to hi^ in rrc-tril iaterro-
r.ti ns (R. Er nit, P-. -.691), but rlso on the tr.sis of the
knowlc «'fc he ott inti s coll bor-tor of Hi -ilcr. The do¬
cuments t • not show the execution of "nuoer 'us'- K'Ua.
Moreover, Br-nc’t stntcs in these docaaents th t Er. Blone
visited Kl-uler from tile to ti e end. sun. rted. r.reistr's
BUf^estions. There i3 no C icuucnt in evi-er.ee :r in the
possession of the ?r;secuti on which would tivc the fc sis
for this st te lent. It is therefre cl«. r th t Br.net's
st-teaents .re founded upon knovlcdft which he -bt.ineC
fr o i rir. iler.

’ ithout • doubt, P.uC-Of Sr'm*t is a veil .<"vlae£ h
the cri ;cs which - rt the subject of this tri 1 s -ny v n
in Ctrl ny. "-here is no re-son wh tever fr rcfuuinr to
five full Vicirht t the -r.-tri-l at t* icnta i

* There h. s been no -rof th t these at tcicnto w-re -tr ined

by fr uc* or duress. Hr ndfs tertinny bef re the Tribunal

c n i;e BO ..c ttf in ’nc sent nod: I t« st-cr i tfainp .
..si'-e fro. description of Hi Tiler a jers n-lity, he c pa¬
tented hiiself vith rivinr *r.avera t lc dl.v questions by
his ttorncy which were c lcul .teC t i-vc 1 hi . s . t is-
e oboe led sten'rr-'hic utr-.it <n - s iet..lar in the n.turc
,1* proficient b lf-wit. Sorely his re-tri 1 ffi' vits
re entitled t? i^re veirht th-n the tl t ut n nsencv. which
v. s his testl-i'ny.

Bio ic denied th- t he .nr nl- fined *r su fes tee th t


- 11 -


l:-z


? les sufferin' fr . n-cn tut. rsul-sis sh ul ><. extcnlh-
tec 1 nr* t the re-.: ia^cr slrmlC be “ut in rcserv: ti ns
nf left there to fie (Bloat, F.. 4578, 4790-1), but he is
c r.tr icte* by the yro>f 'f his ora :?king,.

E. luth-n si- Vrvr . (Inclct lent, ? r. 9)

The ?r secuti n relie3 rivrily >n the -'siti^n of
the -cfent nt Bloic in c nance ti on vith the eh rrc if r-.s-
: asitility f>r the execution -f the cuth a ai r fr a.

c*»nti pi- yet’ *n 'utst :n 1 .^ p. rt in the *1 nniiu -ntf
execution f this ;r rr .. (;: rl hr aft, .. 2399-2,00;

Sr-.ck, n. 7552— ; *0-252, su r }. 31 it o'utcnfef th t

CDnti vac nncctcd vith the cuth a ai. ;r r nly in his
c : .city .a Secret .ry nf 3t te in the Ministry f the Int¬
erior .iid thrt he CIC mt deputize f^r C*nti in the Pinia-
try if Jnuri r. 3c testified further th t the rach
Ch iber >: "hy3ici ns, f rbich he • a <’e uty le d. r under
C-r.ti, h'-fl n*> c oaa.ctl a vith the cuth. a ;i r it -j.

It la ;r v«d rr-M =1 .t’3 'v.n teotii'ay th t such v a

n>t the ccoc. The fetch Ch aber of Physici r.a ac* th. P in
Ot’rici f r Public Hi 1th nctlvcd c 1 i:.t~ fr . the ^ r-

i n -u' llc in HKO a- 1941. (1 , *. fifl). '?.cn these

c-i^liato c.ie to T1 ''it 1 s he 3 T th* -Ini on

th t this i s ; tt* r 'f c ..Cera r r the ..eich th .ter >f
Physlci .as, ni. rc-u stc: C nti’e iaterv.ati n. lit testi¬
fied ia t:.i3 r».3:cct:

•Isl's iethinf t* this effect t C ati,
ni I reoucstec th t vi th.. .lc:
physici uc lc ders sh'ui t ke : re in¬
terest ia this j tt-.r. In the 1 .t a-
Lyais the thinr v ule btc .e t.-e rvsy'n-
sibility f the I'd-rs, :»t it v uli be
a*-iii th t the < ict *rs ver-. r<.s sib 1c

f r it, .nd I C i-‘ .. t • nt th t t
n. (11 ie, . 45£1 ] .


- II


' LO. X


*


Th-t the euth n si* ;nrr r. ffectcf the ath rity -f the
ridch Ch ib. r 'f Physic! ns i3 further pr vef V v the f .ct
th t in 1941 C atl invited the Ceftnf nt K rl °r nc t t
lecture before the lc.ccra .'f this >rr: r.lz tlm -n the
subject >r euth^nusiu. The lecture v s ctu lly •'cliviiref
by the ie nfi-.-nt Brick in th Pmsc -f D'et rs in Munich.
Plie m : litter’ h vine- bten '-resent t tU lecture. (.-1 at,
r. 45£u). He st tef in cirect ex uifl t! m:

-..ftcr the leetinr in Huaich I \- in
sucrcstci! t Er. C'.nti th t ve _. _f_t_he
Ch* iber f Phralcl ns sh ul try t
interv ue (El .e, e.' -

sis aupylie’.*).

JPthinr ciul< be clc rer tn-.n the j«r siti n th t the
euth n si. nrr : in Gen ny v «W h ve teen 1-.possible


v.ith’ut the ci* 'er ti-n 'f nuch !! zi 7-rty .etio 1 U icro
a ElMt . The euth- a.si r;r .x itself \ a au ■ ru , in
rre t n..-.sure by rty .resoleo. In e, ’ r e p rt f

the C ilaiotri tivc i chlncry fw the -r-rr ' s net u. un-

Ot Bjuhl r, Chief f the Ch icdlery f the ”uehr. r ^f the


nsr.r . This ' a :• zl : .rty • r,ncy a*- i_t te frency.
B'uhlcr, m-flrect r f the -rvr: i «ith Br a t, • r/ 'r ck
v.eri P rty n t ;t .te function rKc. C. rt Inly th< Heiol
•Ilnictry -tf Inter! *r, 3t te -ency, ?l ye a i-.r runt
. rt in euth- n-.»l , tut the evidence -r veu th t i: zi 7 rty
i*tnclts -l yef n even i r, cssontitl rvlw The '• i'
zi Le.eershi: C rn, >f which the Ch notlUry V tne Puch
ror the ,‘TSDnI’ i 3 l-rt, vr.s access ry rty t i the
cri ic if f *»r .v sther re .s «n th .n t. Kee. *v.n utlic ciiti
cir. .. I.. , thej were --<* - r. ct th,t * Tho

Vit% f the : rcee- in' V.S. v. 1 In ot 1. Bh vs th-t
Gauleiter S rinror exercise: c,.3i<-er K influence ver


- 13 -


tlce


euth.n'.si s executed in Hi: ;.r. (liO-llloj _ r~s* 7.x.

415, R. 1761). G: ulcit«.rs vert ? rty functi-n rits, ait
3 1 t . Pl'ic *3 close offici 1 connection vith the c-- u-
lcitcrs c .a be j.-*n fr'~ his criii.i 1 v irk v-itk 0 uleitcr
f reiser in c nnteti^n with the ixtenin ti n f tubercul r
? 1.3. It is utterly i v- ssible th t the uth n si- ,r'-
c r c?ult h n been c rrie' *ut by the T rty, vith-ut the
ctive .ssiot nee .at 1 c"'tr ti'n f B1 ic d C* uty ;?*ichs-
leitcr f the Office f-r miic He .1th f the .-'3 Ini'. ..3
such he v. .3 :n Liyrt r.t w-iber 'f the Le dershi-' C r;s *f
the ? rty v.tich vr_s dcol red. - crilio.l rt aiz.tim by the
Intern ti n.l Ililit ry Tribun.1. ( r .rl 1 r t :.e j r ’ r
Crl .la Is . :. 257 t2u 2). One lifht s v.ell a y th t euth-
n si c-ulf be ay a ten-tic lly -rncticeC la aylu-.a of the
. United it *c3, yurau nt t n edict f the ireslecnt, vith-

-ut the kaovledrc nd aurport 'f the responsible fflci la
of the ..icric n \dic l ,.au*ci ti n 'r the Pe rt-.L.nt *f
Public He 1th. Un-’cr the r viol as f 3eoti n ?. f rticle

II *f Control C uncil L v. '.lu 10, ?1 :e ia clt rly uilty 'f

h vinr bun _ it ’.ber '£ _ r Tr :i2 ti j - ^ L< “

' <crohip C r-j) c niected \ jth the eX.cuti . f the cuth .11-

3i -r rr .. Hr t PI u \ a .n i. -rt-it n influent! 1
■ 4 it iter f this -r »u* c n t* 3een fr •. his e rly nd C’nsia-

tent su rt f • rty r. ito nxiua • :ctrinea.

(bi"... , r. -.Go?-.?©!).

;;>re>ver, the c hteuti n i.dc by :!.• th t i ati did
not ct in Ms c city .a I.cich He 1th Le cr i.. connec-

ti n with the euth n.si. r<r r i is n t su r*.' by the

evidence. L Uers, wh v s Chief f the . « ich Cn nocilery
.ad the lv 1 uth*-rity i.i *7 zi Ger : ny . 1c 1 c.nstitu-

- u-


FLO'S


ti n 1 questions (L Tiers, . 2662), used. t~ sen-! rep rts
c accrninr the cuth .n si- ;r-~r i, which rc_chcr his f-
ficc, t the _ r »ich He 1th Le .dir nd a t t the Secret ry
f State. This f-ct, proved by tv Utters which L.i-.ers
sent t-> the Minister -f Justice, C.ucrtnir (621-FS, Pr-s.
IX. 395, 1681; 620-PS, Pr'3. Zx. 396, 7.. 1681), in<*ic_-

tes cli rly th-t the diff crcnt i ti-a -f the . sitUna nf
C nti, which B1 it tried t' C3t blish f r the 3 kc f his
defense, did n^t exist.

El ne v a the Deuty Le der -f the Reich Ch- nber f
Physici-ns, Deputy Reich He-lth Le der, -ad De. utv Lt .der
'f the Il.tl'n.l S-*ci list ajsici.ns' /.ss ci ti a fr \ the
’crinnin; t- the car f the cri :in 1 cuth n Ji ;r r ..

He knew f the -r\r i .nt re lizt< tfc-t it i-.a illcr.l.

(B1 >ac, Ti. -.583). M't nly di he t ke a 3te s t at

•

the :rvr but hia 'v.n writinra ah'w th t he 3u;--->rtcd

it. In hia b k "Dtt r in Battle", which v ;a ubliahcd

in Oct'be* 19-11 when the cuth- n_ei • •r rr.; h d been ii.

r-irtBs f r tvn ye-rs, he a-id:

,M e c nsidered it t^ be n nmasic .l th-t,
f*r Inst nee, ins ne . e’■'le v»h threat¬
ened their wn life a well s -tiers,
r idi -.ta .'f . hi' h derrec \.h . erh ;3

c-nn't even keep the selves clc .r: r e-t
by the i3elvca, were br'u«-ht u- nd kejt
'-live with - re-1 effort • nd tx east. In
free n ture these ere tures w -ul a t be
ble t» exist nd wnult be exter in tec
ecc^r' in>'- t) the Divine L wv "e Is
fid. n t undcrat nd th t 'crs'n3 inferi >r
in ch r cter .ad 3;irit, s'ci 1 ere -
tuna, wh: h- * - ir tree were, it is true,
c intituled ti de th, but were then fur-
c* ned in principle ad ke -1 .live la
penitenti. rie3 • t the expense f the -uV-
11C; -.but -Is J ih .quite ifferent c sos
v.here it is n:t questi >n *f uttinr an
end. t.* inftri r life, we w)nd-.re. whether
the rtyaici-n sh'ule ant be riven the
ltr 1 .-isaibility tj end n unh .;y life


revturely. r 'e ere thinkinr ?f serious¬
ly sufferin'*, incurable sick ers ns, v.h--
until their r'ccth h* r t? expect *aly en-
“ir .ous aent-1 nr. yhyaic 1 sufferin' n£
wh- the*iselvc.3 skef the rhyslri .n tn free
thev fran their sufferin''. 1 {Bl*".c, 7x.

1, 7. -.76-;).

The evidence shnrs, 3 lining, th t Sir v s c *n-
nectcf \ ith ylns :r.c* enter; rises invnlvin: , tvic con¬
sentin'- *. rt in, .nd v s nether *.f n or- nit ti^.n or
rou; c nnectet’ with the .xecutim if the cuth.n ci r -
. r - i.

F'r .. ccscri; ti >n of the cri-in lity f the euth-n-si.
;jjof r reference is . :’c t' the Fr accuti a'a brief
■ ifuinst the rtefcm .nt I7;rl Br.ru.t.

. C . :eeic l :.y. eri -eat*

l. F* cterl l-’i ic I ‘ rf re 7?: r i .e,*,ts

In 1943 L-ctcrl-.lvlo.l w-rf-rt hec :c : tter ~S
c .nsie’er Me interest in -.Hit ry circles in r- : In

:’.y -f th t ye-r, BI ic v a ut in ch rt f resevreh In
thla fie It’ y 7 ichs rsch 11 G*'crir.r, (1 , . -6-4;

‘10-671, r 'C. !x. 37, 7. 14P). FI .e c rr. ' ut this s-
sl nuat unecr th* c-'v r of his vitl^n . * 5 Uni-otenti* ry
f r C-nctr at rch in the Ich ’ ,r« .rch C uncil. (1 v,
7 .. 459 * 1 ).

In v. secret ;cetinr in July 19i3 c l the Tlirh

C-'i.-n" 'f the • ehr i oht, it v ,s st.tc? th t n tiistHutc
t risen 1*3 t~ v- ere tec t vhlch b ct ri 1 cultures \
to he rxuce*. n . l r e sc le nr scientific ex ,riunta
vere t*> be c .rriec. -ut test the • sri.ilUi-s f their
use. Thi institute *. .. r * r :

(SchreiCer, B1 1 D'C. 7, FI .e ;Jt . 11, . v631).

.. s eci 1 crviittcc under the n-tc Ilitz . letter* \ a


- 16 -


BL'T.'Z


founded t invest!.- tc letters c^ncerni cr b-ctcri »l;cic. 1
v,.rf ,rc. Blriu v js a acnfcer >f this cxinittec. ,.t . ses¬
sion in 24 September 1943, cx-cri-ients in the field ?f hu-
aan t cteriil'rv uerc discussed. Since it v s n't kn v:n
under wht c-'nditi'ns inh-led -cr'sols ir disrersed. dr—
lets 'f cert in p- th-'pcnic peris c used disease in avn,

B1 nc 'dv'C'tcd exyeriaents ->n hurt n bciu 3. ('IO-13CP,

Pros. Ex. 325, E. 14e4). ..-in in - uctiiv 'n 23 Febru¬

ary 1944, El -:c pointed ou* the necessity f r ex-'eri unts
->n huicn beinrs, -nd re - irtcd th t . a«»v t cteri:l ric. 1
•. t- nn v. -S t be studied .nd tested. Field I! rsh .ll ..ci¬
te 1 h’.d ri'en the >r ;issi 'n ti build the institute in i
sen under hia c ntr-*l, nd Hi-salt r .nf the defe.r. ~nt \ rl
Pr.n-'t saured hia 'f their su: 'rt. El .c Is- 3t-ted

I

th t u .1 ae alrht cnstltutc 3eri os h .. r , .nd .c-

c >r<‘ in- ly It w.-s nccess ry t' cx :int the 1 • uc v ccine
in ox?cri lento *n huv n btlnrs. The effect nf : zi tun
Coses .r cert: in ; >ia -ns v s .Is*- t' be tented by txycri-
unts in ha. a beinrs. ( ’0-1309, Fr a. Ex. 326, E. K87).

In order to c rry >ut his t sk, ?l-sc rcoucatcd
c ltil tim 'f the T'nt i 'rt nt scientific v tcri 1 c n-
cerninr b cte ri' 1 'ric- 1 w.rf re fr the efen at Erur-w-
sky. !!rur 'wsky rc-rcd n :irr ndun a this subject nd
Bl-nc received - c >-y. (EO-llV, Pr s. Ix. ' E. 1-Pi;

PI at, n. 1620).

Schrciber testified, before the Intern ti'h 1 -ili-
t,ry Tribun 1, thrt in !!• refc 19.5 PI sc viaite : hi a in the
Hilit-.ry :icCic-l i.C-idt iy in Berlin. Fie h ‘ c :e rr T '-
sm .nd v. s very czeitee. He s ic he h d Feen f'rce< t*
flee hi 3 institute by the dv..ncc f the. ed ..ray. He v.o


17 -


-lo:z


worried th~t the .rrenfe rents fsr faun&a ex ori-.cats in the

»

institute would. be recognized -s such by the r.ussi_ns. He
hC t tear tod to h.vc it dosfcr yee tut v.ith'ut succes-.
Schreibcr st-ted th.t he .s ahfortun tely f reed to five
21 r.e -1 ce to continue his w-rfc t Stchsen’urf. (Flric
D-c. 7, ri'uc ~x. 11, 3. *--621). Schreitcr further testi¬
fied th’t: -.s u result 'f -11 these del.ys the vh lc f-

f.ir never at int^ effect.' This st tcic'.t h s reference
t^ the r\'8e<f use >f t cteriol-<-ic 1 •. if r ty Gcr.r.ny,

, nd not t the aei’ic 1 . x eri'.eats' c rried ut by El re.

In its Juer-unt, the IrTtern .ti-'nel 'Hit ry 'Tibunwl
n cc . fineinr f f-ct, ur n v*hich the ?r secuti n rclK3,
t' the effect th.t 3>vlet .rls'ners 'f v -r vert used in
icdic.l ex.erl.ents c acerninp b-cteri 1 ic 1 v rf re,
vshich . re often th n n't roved f.t-1. I ". I.T., C .sc : .
l, LOrvi). Th’t El :e otu.lly c.rxi • :> T

exoeri'.ents ;ith : *is a n hu ; n bei.T-a is r vtd by
tclety c fr.lSicvtra to r If Br Bt « te ' ..U'U3t 1C, 1-ii.

( '0-G41, Ir s. lx. 227, I.. K93). This o . unlc.tl n
ot ten th* t ?1 ie shed to re; rt to Ki viler c r.ctraiar
the -"is'n ex-eriunts in rlific ti~a 'f the re^ rt f
21 July.

r l at vuld h ve the -ribun.l hili-.vc th t ht n-.v.r
c rried * nv trcrl ent9 n hu . a b- in-s. . It!, a h
he t Iked r it c ist fitly - v.ith vluatccrs in liad -
he fitvtr miitc t r und t h vi.-v the-. rf i .e'. a

testified th t : i . ;1 r aked hi . t c rry ut ex eri-

lents -n hun n b-inrs t test 1 -at v cciac in the
iidr'lc f lrf-.3. ::e - t 1 f the ty hu# v cclne cx-

; cri rents in tuch« rn-lc t\ \ s >ffere«‘ 3 ce .id f ci-

• - 18 -


*


I 3


lities in c lacontr ti n c This he s it. he re.lccte

tec use f his "s iritu 1 re.uti ti n . iuch st-toieat

c na t te t. lievee c liar frM n vfcj c 11 v . r t<-c 3

clsely vith : .2cher (see infr ). 51 Me - ic he 1 .met

c rry ut such ex; - ri-icnt3 t his institute in 'Tcssblstc t

ne r F sen. (F1 mc , '•. -,610-1). El'ic -ffejef - .sch- r the

•

• y-vrtun. 'f r-'rkinr vith hi: in Ilcsselste't. (25-16-rs,

Pr s. Lx. 123, 97£, entry fr ?0 ,.-rll).

The fefenr-nt 31cvcrs, in his ffi vit, st tec th t
Bl .ne c nferrctf •. i*h r .scher ■»r, ay *cc si ns, r-ceiver"
rc-'rts n his Tie in C .ch u, n- visit * i there. :

&t tc-* furti er th t:

..t the en' 'f 19-.3 I :et 51 .e - in ir. :-l
Ur’s rcseiice, I c n rtc.ll th t curls t; is
c >aforcnoe Bl mc .ske' Kiiil-r th t .V scher te
ssirnec ti hi i f r res rch v r.. in nis insti¬
tute .t roast. 1 st t. . t this c afcrcace It \ s
Ceci<’ee th t J scher ah uli t ri: in cl ae c'
tr. tim vith "1 ;e. I scher v.a Is t soi3t
"1 le in the fie 16 f Li 1 ;fic 1 reu .rcn.

(•:o-.73, rr s. rx. 237 , 9li).

Bl le c ule 'ffer n s .tiaf’ct ry eX'l u ti r. f n it v a

he nevt r tested the 1 rut v ccine -a hu . .. ini a s r.\r-

e , -1th u h he •. rk. •’ >n 1 ct> ri 1 .*ic 1 rf re r fcle.-.a

f r v r y rn. Tn^'cccf, fr nia t«.sti ay it v uK

h vc t- ^e ctnoluCcf th. t he fi£ r.-thinr i„ c anecti r. v.ith

t cteri 1vie l • rf re.

"hile It is r a* : teri l sUnific noe, there is -r*» f
la the r.crf th t the rcs^ rch f r ' * ct ri 1 .-ic 1 v rf re
v s ly n-> tt -ha confine? t . t t..e c a-

fcreacc f the litz.tl.lt : ev..itt_* . L • t «r 19»3,
•nc f the rtlci ats, ’ir.Ht. ri 1 iri *t ?chu; oa, -
cl reC:


19


=lc::e


"./e cannot piny the part of lnalf-
fercnt spectr.t.rs; we roust .•‘.Iso j»rc-
pr.ro Che -.£88 utilisation cf bac¬
terial materials. Especially
America would have to -Je attack¬
ed simultaneously with differ¬
ent huaun and .nlaul disease
agents no well as with plant
parasites, fhe fuehrer was t:

3e w.n t; the plan, r'or this
purpose the scientists were t;
submit u orief,out c:r,pleto,
paper n onct;' prop, rati nc
»jid n sabot..ge activity :f
the enemy with o..ct-ri- and
p-l« no. J\irthem re, they
were to indicate the ncth-ds
•f lntnduotl-n, and the re¬
quisite nuaber -f personnel,

1 ;.Vru:;riu8, inntrunent s,
alrpl-nes, submarine3, etc.,
for the k >r..«.r:.U n Mid the
attack.* (iiO-1303, supra).


- 20 -


BLOh£


2. P3lYKf.l atoerlme-nts .

In ordor to toat .the effectiveness of n blood

coagulant "Polygal*, Rnscher carried cut experiments

In which Inmates of the Dachau Concentration Canp were

shot, Rascher's uncle. In his affidavit, describes the

murderous experiments which w«re carried out by his

nephew. In August 19*13, he visited Rnscher in Dachau

and, while Rnscher was away from his office, he saw

a report which he describes as follows:

"It re-ferred to a report about the shooting
(execution) of four people- for the purpose
of uxoerlmentlng with the hemostatic pre¬
paration "Polygal 10." «c far as-I renemoer
they wore a Russian Commissar and a Cretin,

I do not remember who t.:o other two Were.

The Russian was shot in the right shoulder
fr:m above by an o5 man who stood in a chair.

The bullet emerged near the spleen. It was
described how the Russian twitched (con¬
vulsively), then sat down on a chair and
uled after about CO minutes. In the dis¬
section protoool the rupture of the pulmonary
Vesselo and the aorta was described. It was
further described that the ruptures were
tamponed by hard blood-clots, ,'h -t o-uld
have been t..e only eXplnnatIon for the com-
puratlvoly 1 ng 8. an of life after the ohot.

(NO-1424, Pros. fcx. 462, R. 4773-4).

This evidence lo corroborated 'ey the testimony of tho

witness Stoehr (R. b87) and tj.u affidavit of Pohl (N0-065)

Pres. ax. 127, R. 410). ivon the defendant Gothordt

admitted, during his testimony, that he fcnvW that

Rnscher had carried out blcod coagulation experiments on

concentration camp Inmates who nnd been shot fer the

purpose. (Gobhnrdt, F.. 4240—1).

Tho evidence proves that 91one collaborated
with Rnscher In the Polygal research. 7 Is .collaboration
began at least ns early ns the middle of lf43 in connection
v/ 1th cancer research. (110-473, Pros. £x. 237, ;

see also :.‘0-538, Pros. Rx. 122, R. , entries for
16 February, 7 April, 14 April,


and 26 June 1943). The


SLOLiE


defendant Silvers stated In his affidavit that;

"wloao also had full knowledge of the blood coagulation

experiments at Dachau. Ke received reports fron Rnscher

and should have a complete knowledge of the6e nutters."

(HO—473, supra). Blcne admitted that Rnsohcr had been

comnissioned by Hitinler to work with hla in the field of

blood coagulation. (R, 4642). One of the collaborators

of Rnscher in the Polygal research was an lnnnto of the

Dachau Concentration Canp by the none of Robert Felx.

By letter of 15 Septonbcr 1943, Rnscher requested Slevers

to approach Bloce, sc that the latter night arrange for

the release of Felx and for his reinstatement in his

former category as nulf-^ryon. Rnscher stated in hlo

letter that "aiooo has given no great hopes in this

respeot." (NO-611, Pres. Ex. 239, R. 955). This provee

that Blone was already collaborating with Rascher on

Polygal research In the summer cf 1943. Obviously,

Blono would not have put himself out tr. assist in this

* •

work without knowing precisely what had been done to
toot Polygal.

In the latter pnrt of 1943, Rnscher and Dr.
Hnfurkocp wrote a paper on the* Pc^ygal. This paper
drav/s a clear distinction between oxperlnents on human
beings to test the effect of Polygal and clin ical tests.

It states that: “Before w y tried the clinical use of tho
drug and had it probed, it was t«.6ted cn hum an bcln tra
by thorough experiments as to it6 influence on the period
of clotting ana bleeding." Curves were included to show
the reaction of Polygal on clotting md bleeding. Later
cn the paper discusses clinical ebserv .tlor.s during opera¬
tions. (NO-438, Pros. zx. 240, R. 956). The experiments

- 22 -


bLOZZ


mentioned In this paper obviously arc the ones during
which Inciatos wtrt shot. *hoy wore not sc described In
the paper because It was written for publication. 31or.e
testified that the only experiments he knew about were
ones where one ou'cic centimeter of bleed wns withdrawn to
8oo how fast it would coagulate In a te6t tube. (R. 4643).
Such test g cannot be desorimed as experiments. It Is
Impossible* tc conceive of Rnschor's testing a bicod
coagulant to be used on soldiers -rounded on the battlefield
In such a manner. *nd this was better known tc Blono at
the time than It Is now to the *rlbunal. He knew that
Rasoher had conducted tnu freezing experiments with result¬
ant loos of life, no had been informed about the Buohon-
vmld typhus experiments. (Blo~e, R. 4640). Moreover,
this devious uXplan tlon of Blo.o does not cover experi¬
ments.to bfcstet .e effect of Poly gal cn bleeding; to too*
blood In a test tube covers only coagulation ranotlon, not
blooding reaction. So he had to ndd to tho Implausible
by opyl.ig that Rasoher cnco told hir th»t ho or another
doctor had rubbed the upper thigh i pers :n under
anaesthesia until it cecaao bloody end t en tested the
efficacy cf Polygal. out, Blcme said, -I didn't tnfc*
this statement of mis seriously." (R. 4635). The thing
wile:, cannot token seriously is Slope's display ?f
Ignorance -bout experiments in triioh the documents prove
ho had r. direct personal Interest.

Bicne approved the publication of the- paper
Mentioned amove In the Munich .. dic.nl '.'cckly Uuonc.u.ner
uedlzinlsche 7cc..ensc .rift). (Blome, R. 4639; H0-SL6,

Pros. iX. 244, R. 964). Both ttrawltz and ?ohl raised
objections to the judication o: ;.ic article because they
had,not benn orncul -,nd because* Dici.au 3 K and human


bLOLE


experimental 6uojects were oentioned. 12*0-614, ?ro6.

Ex. 245, R. 964; NO-615, Pros. Ex. 246, R. 966). Both
these non >new the murder-us experiments carried out by
Rnechor to test Polygnl. Ovbhf-rdt Knew. STet 31ouo ns?o
the .ribunr .1 to ns suae th» t he was too naive to have
hnewn; that ho didn't even believe Rnsor.cr when he was
told that he had deliberately ruobud the hide off cf an
innate's leg to test Pclygal.

On 23 February 1344 Rasohcr received a
research assignment on Polygnl from the Reich Research
Counoil. (NO-656, Pres. Ex. 247, R. 967). b^c admitted
tfcnt bsi J-.SSU.s4 tr-.ls afgifinmont. (Slor.o, R. -,634).

Slavers' Diary reveals tnat on 1 February 1944, Polygnl
production oy Rnsor.er wi.s listed r.6 a war economy In¬
dustry by the Relcr. ReBuaren Council. On 22 February
dievers had a oor.fvrs.nce with R/.schur In which supply
questions for the production oi t.nlo drug, ox£s.£ 4 £ent§ cf
blono. and thu Pclygul report for t..e defendant Gebhr.rdt
wore dlccussed. On 2. February Sleve-rs hd • telephone
conversation wit.-, blonu In which bloce l.il'-r-.ed hin that
hlnuler h 4 issued an order concerning Slone's worfc in
Dn.onau in colluborntl n with Raschor. (3546-PS, Pros.

Ex. 123, R. 972). olono admitted that Hlnnler requested
him t c-operate with Rasoher n Polygnl re6enrch. CR.4510).
.hen Ploetnur tool v r Rjpcber's worfc or. 31 hnroh, U'Dld,

R. 973), blone continued l.is lntcrast in Plygnl ao shown
by n telephone conv-.rs-tlm with jjieVers n t.:is R' tter
or. 24 July. (Ibid, R. 976).

3. L ost Ons Exporl -. ynts . { Indict::vnt , ?> v. 6 (d)).

From the winter of ifi-»2 thr ugh the summer of
19.,.*, eXperl ents -:i c ncentrr.tl.-n c:~p inmates were con¬
duct..'! r:r *:.o purpose o’ determining t:.e t-.st effect ivo


3L 'flX


trcr.taent of wounds caused by Lest (mustard) gas.

These experiments were, for the most pnrt, performed in
the !Jntzwdlle'r Concentration Onp under the- direction of
Dr. r.lrt of the University of Strasbourg. T~r a detailod
description of the6c experiments, reference any be nr.de
to the prosecution's brief r.gr.lnst glovers.

Hlrt's gr.r exp-rla-nts In Kntzwoller began In
Novenbur 1942. (»0-098, Pros. Lx. 26b, R. 1029). Ihey

continued through t.:e suntar of 1544. (Hell, R. 1053).
During this period approximately 220 lnor.tus of Russian,
Polish, Czech, *Jid (Verann a tl.niJ.ity were uxp.riaentod
on with g-.s, of whom about 50 died. *hoy lid not volunteer,
(Holl, R. 1062, 1057).

In Oct.Der 1943, tne defendant clone, In his
capacity as Plenipotentiary for Cancer Research lr. the
Reich Research Council, issued research assignment to
hlrt lr. support of his gas experiments, fi.is Ip proved
by the file Index c nl or. clone's res.vrcm neslgm.untn
In the F.elch Research Ctunoll, where the ns-ignnont t:

Hlrt by blcn.i 1 b listed under 33 pri rlty number 0325.

Thu -splgni ent was r.glstered -o Ko. 15bl/l5, (!'C-6:0,

Pros. £x. 120, R. 373). clone -dnlttod thrt registrations
carrying the suffix number 15 Indicated assignments by
hlB. (R. 4531; Oloue D=0. 21, cl-Ue LX. 6, R. 4535).
ihe di te f t..e issuance :f t ic r\.Senro. assignment t«
hlrt’by rl-rie oun be established with accuracy by reference
t; . file men .r- nduu by dlev.rs on t..e freezing assign*- ..t
issued by cl t P/.sc.ier n  October 1&3. This froiz-
lng experiment carried thu S3 pri:rlty nunbur 0323. Since
thu assignment t-. hlrt i.-.d ti.c SS priority number 0329, It
Is bvi.us that the assignments Were issued ;n or a ut the

- £5 -


5L0I-S


some tine. (HC-656, ?T08. i*. 247, R. 966). Iho
tu.fcr.sc apparently h:.6 r.o objection t fixing the date
In this manner. (clone, R. 4540-1).

clone, while denying tiu.t ho Issued any
research osslgno-ntB to hlrt concerning g'.6 experiments,
offered no explanation whateVwr t the notations on his
file card in the Reich fcsctxoh Council, re testified
thr.t It must hav* been n mlstaho. no attempted to
shift responsibility f-r t .o assignment to Professor
dnuerbruch whe w s In charge of general Medicine In the
Rolch Research C'unoll nd whose assign -nt3 Were Issued
under the registration number 1C '5 c :ip* red t- number
lo for clone. Thu file card of dnuarbruoh wr.s Intro¬
duced which showed tfle.t he h'.d issued an assignment -n
gas research i. r.lrt under t;.e dS priority number 0323
and registration number 543/10. (bier.* Doc. 19, biotic
hx. b, ibbl). *ne difference in t e pr rlty and
registration nuuoors precludes any possibility of nlst:J:o.

clone v-uld r.'.vw tho .rlbun .1 believe that

f

b.tn the gas asclg:.:.ent t: hlrt and the freezing assign-
Uent to Rnsol.cr, whlon t.ppe'X n mis file card under
priority numbers 0328 and 0329 respectively, molly
belonged to S-u.r.rici.'c field and were n t r.cslgnnonts
Issued by hln. (Blrnu, 4t29, ot. ceq.). Tils ox/Lnnntion
nakes no Sense whatever. It is cult- r jp -.rent fr^o the
records t.i*.t b:th bl *r.e and Sru-rcruch lseu-d assignments
t; hlrt. i'he respective assignments carry n t nl.v
different prl rlty numbers cut is different reglstr-tl~n
nuaoors. Contrary tc air no's statu -nt that gas rosunroh
belonged more n .tuxlly *. d-.uerbruch's field, It is
quite oevl'us tr. .t 1- was •. m-.tter IT. which Blone had a


zLo:;s

vory direct interest In view of hi* work concerning
boot oriel Cgical warfnro. xhe Frlbunr .1 win recall
thr.t chut work. wr. s curled cut under the cover of his
position as Plenipotentiary for Cancer Researoh. iioro-

ZV '* r ’ procf BhGWS thi * c alone, contxv-ry to Sr.uororuch,
“• o;nnectlons wltn both Rase her and Hirt.

blcae's participation In and knowledge of
Klrt's experiments with Lost gas is further proved by
thtf ontrl> - 6 m dlevers Dlnry for 2 and 28 February,

3, 4, and 8 tfr.roh 1944. On 2 February Siovors got m
t-uoh with the Reich Re b ouch Council to deter- lne who
had been ocaalsalaoed by then to d; reaoi.roh work on
Lost s that enosc scientists could be gathered together
i-r discussion. On 28 February the dlsoueolcn was hnd

9 •

11 tho Rtloil I^«waron C-unoll and was participated in by
alcuo, Rue oner, x'hleaaon, and dl.vers. Lost rosearoh
was dlocuosod. a slmll;r c:nfeTenco t-ck place' on 3
““ roh Ij-, 4. On 4 ~arc nlo«ler -rdered a meeting

OwtWuen nlrt and Rr.scr.ur, naong otr.ers, to be held on

*

8 .:arch, at w.ilon tine nlrt gave n report on his Lost
re Search. (3545-pa, .Pros. •*. 123, R. 392).

•fhu re./ert Dj nlrt on his g: s experiaento
w- s written la 194 teid spuiCs -f heavy, indium, and
llg-it '• unds caused by Lost. It saows cn Its face ». at
experiments were performed on hurnn beings. (K 0 ~ 0 : 5 *,

Pros. ihc. 268, R. 1035). Certainly sh* nnn who was
supporting th, w-tr: received a copy of this rep-rt.

4 - tostiilJfiJgSfierinents (Inulctnent, ?.-r. 6 (b)).
For r. detailed description of the freezing
experiments, reference a-;.* be aado t: the Prosecution 1 s
01*1 Of against dievus,

*ho or .f smews that w., 5 in t-uoh with


- 27 -


BLOKE


Rftscher at least ns early as the Spring cf 1943. On
11 April 1943, Rr.scner sent a report to Kinnlcr concern¬
ing freezing oxpwrl3eT.t8 on huonn oe^ngs exposed t'. the
open air. Ir. the sane letter ho stated that ho hoped to
sutalt to Klonler his hrbilltatlon thesis early in Eay
• nd that Fr fess.r Pfannenstlul at Aurturg was prepared
t; aocept it as a secret thesis or hutilltatlcn s'- that
R'.scher c uld oeocne an -cndcnlc lecturer. (N0-240, Pres.
Ex. 112, R. 354). On 17 ,.:iy 1943, Rnschor subnitted a
::wr.:rsjidur.; cri nis Medical training nd specifically
tKutioned the high altitude and freezing exporinents.
no stated t:v t further fr« ezlng experiments were
necer^rry and cncluded by saying that he intended, ns
growd up-n, t return f: the Ur.l'eraity Institute f r
A*/l tlon Medicine ;.nd hygiene (Prof. Dr. Pfannenstlul, *
Marburg) for further scientific training, a research
schedule ind already Coo:, v-rked cut with Pfannenstlul.
(♦10-230, Pros. Ex. 115, R. 356). ihat it was the
dufendant =lor. y who or;ught Hneo.jor and Pfannenstlul
c ..other is pr:ved oy Si-Vers 1 letter to =>r/ndt dated
27 duptot.ber 1943. i is v. s In reply t:i a letter .f
ir -ndt .f 12 august 1943 concerning the nppointnont of
R’iBCher i.a u lecturer. dleVers ct< ted that ho h< i
dre .dy n: a conference with rl:n., aentzel and ft.schor
:n this subject .nd that 11 ,:a. had tal? .a wltn Pfannun-
stiol at Marburg. (i.'0-229, ?r e. Ex. lid, R. 367).

It i3 apparent l’r a tr.us.. documents that
Bl-no was supjr.rtlng Rasoher t least as early as .»prll
1943 .n the dry freezing experiments were still in
pr:*;roG5. P.-.sci.er had 'Ire dy cmtr.ctod pfannonstlel
far ugh lime. rl:ue .aintainud th -1 this early cntact
with Pfannenstlul by ha scaur w* o un!:n?wn t hln rmd that


3L0«£


It wr.s pure c:Incidence th-.t he .Isc, hit upen Pfnnncnstiol.
(R. 4516). rime's testimony on t..ls ccllibcrntl.-n is
nonsensical. r.o conceded that he undo nmiigcncnts f~r
Rc.sc.icr t; ootain i. cortificnti n ns a specialist, which
u prerequisite for hnollltc-tion, and tr.it the
6uggeRticn t; approach Pfnnnensticl originated fr-.a hln.

IR. 4312-3). rut, he said, Rnscher t*.ld hin he wrr.tcd to
Jo habilitated as a result zt his w rfc on ?:lygal. He
reCelVeU the n-wil lt..ti-n thesis, out c nt.ndud ho did
n.t re d it. IR. *514). It is difficult tc understand
how ^l;ue can ar.lntr.lu, on tae :r.v hnntx, that he supported
Rascher in nis Ptlygr.l w;ri t-na w.s lnte-r-sted in it yet,
in the .thvr hind, ho did nit rc-d n scientific pup .nn
tut subject by Rnsohor. alone's testlnmy, rt c*uroe,
is explained oy the fact that the hnblllt ticn thesis
dealt n:t with ?;lygal, but with the freezing oxporioents.

(H0-240, N0-230, supra).

having lcanud :f R:.sober 1 o freezing uxpori-
□onto, rlcr was intwTent.d uhiugh in the n tt.r t issue
te ijasohur in Oct .j.r 1J43 u resc.rch aaofgnuent. On the
Bu--c file O'.rd zt bl;r.o, s a acuber r the Reich Ro¬
se ren Council, vf.-.ich lists tr.o reSoarc/i assignnont to
r.lrs, -ppearo the assign..ent to Hasoher f*r rownmlng
aft.jr goner-1 freezing o: the hun:.n o.dy, healing after
partial freezing, -r.u adjustment f trto humn h"dy ts
l:w temperatures. N. suon detailed assignment c uli have
boon issued except by •. nan th r;ugnly fanili r with
Rr.scher's w:n . -he r.gistrati .n number Id79/15 pr VeB
tnr.t blotto issued t.'.ls assignment. t Se. Lost (.e Kxperl-
aents, supra). -Irretv.r, a nctu cn the c^rd says that
the assignments listed r.n the file card wore w-rlel -n
oy rl-.no. (K0-6S0, Pros. £x. 120, R. 371; 1*0-656, ?r's.
gx. 2-t", R. 966). r-re gnlu, bltno testified that this


=LO:S

wr.s m unfortunate .mistake, that Smuorbruch was really

Rnscher* e supporter. rut th- cviomej proves thr.t it
wr.s 21 in-, net Suuorbruch, who collf.ccrr.tod with Rnschor
and 'rn-w of his prcvl us cxperlnoRts. 21 one adnlttod
th t Rilsohor Informed hin no ut ...o freezing experiments
nnd thrt u fatality h .d occurred. IR. *i5CS) . His
collaboration wit.-. Rr.ecr.or rr.s o rd^r-d by hlnnlor and
wn6 so cl-sc th".t no intended tc onploy hin In hie
institute at KwBScletodt.

While donyl • connect 1 r. with tha freez¬

ing cxperlnentB, wlsn« prcco-. i-d t- te-tify that no
freezing experiments occur:-, i feer Oot -or 1&3. (R.vS-Sl,
'Hu dleVert' Dl-.ry f r tr.e last hnlf "f 1^ 10
.■ valla-ie t* el”o f. definitive ..nover t t .is que-’ti-n.
rut it 13 quite clear fr tr.e d.'.nry f:r 1,‘4-i thr.t
>rep r tlone wore certainly - (.do. .ntr5. * for 6 and

Jil Jnnw ry >rov. t la. (39 m€-? 3, Pros. £x. 123, K. o32;
c*-e • Is t.'c entry for 22 anroh) • -e that me $t any,

Slone entered tr.e picture w ;ea t. o dry freezing wXporl-
nentn w v re still in progress drrlr.c,- t.-.o first part ~f
13-i3. In any ev.nt, nis activities constitute him nn
access ry after tr.e f-et. .. ;rc v-:\ nc was connected
with pirn® f.nc er.torprls o lnv lvlng, tx-J a c haunting
part in, « nd was u ae 1 her f a group or organization
connected . 1 th tr.e c r.mlscl n f the freezing experiments.

5. ::r.lnrlr. fcxp erlmwntB (Indlotr.oat, ?*r. 6 (C) >.

The Pro 6v. out ion relies prl -rlly n the
position -f tne defcnd'uit alone In connection with the
charge -f responsibility for the ovlarla uxp«rine‘nts, thlc.
are descrlced In uet II in tr.e prosecution's brief
against the defend..nt Rcso.

The n:.l:.rlr feXoeriaents «er carried out by Profess-:

. - 30 -


=LOe£


Clr.us Schilling free 1S42 until the end of the war In
the Dftchau O ne .ntratlon Cr^> on :• large scale, Schilling
wr * 8 :i civilian ;i nd cnnscqueAtly the Reich r.e.-dth Lender,
Conti, nr.de the necessary arrangements far 1:1a which

orwblud hie te oarry -ut the experiments In Dnehnu.
(MO-856, Pros. £x. 126, R. 386). All physicians who
wore n.t Serving in the nrriea forces or In the S3 were
subordinate t t.ie Reich*Chonour ;f Physicians in
w.iich alone w.'.e Conti's deputy (supra). It is lnposslolo
th'-t clone, who, acc.rdlng t- his awn ndalsolr.n, ■Was
fully aware thi.t experiments n hunnn beings were cn-
aucted In oonoontratl n cu;po“ (NO-471, Pros. £x. 238,

R. 952) did not now oi experiments which wore In
progress for over three years, in which approximately
1200 inmr tea wore uoea .s oXperi:iehtal subjects, and
w hlch Were promoted oy his immediate superi r uid
carried out by a number :f an : rgr.nl sat l n of which h«
w*io Manager nnd sec r.d highest authority.

re-Ver, clone wr.* connected with Dr.

Plootnor (See Pclygfd expurlncntd, supra). Pi etner was
•.n assistant .1 schilling, and w rxjd with hln tho
nrd. rl*. experiments (3546-P3, supra entries f 30 Jrnuary,
22 february, 31 l, ay, 1 June and 24 .ugur.t, 19-.-,). Bl~nc
v/r.s SeVor a tirieo 1.1 the Drchr.u Concentration Canp, whoro
tho experiments Were c nduct-d (clone, R. 4525; NO-473,
I'r.s. cPt. 237, R. 952). r.c discussed experiments n
nuam eelngs with tr.e defend, nt SieVcrs, w.-. was mis¬
ery . ft oil in Bc.au hlasolf. (alone, R. -.500). In
view :i the b- facts, t.ie-re can be no aoubt that ~l~no
was In: :rr.i_d -f achilllng's experiments and the collnhcrn-
ti n f PI■etHer and ol-v.rs with hln.

•

cl -.De nls . W..S We*ll ware f *.ti. w r experiments


- cl -


iLOilS


which wore carried -ut In concent r*ttl-:n corps. In hie
r.ffldr.vit he ndnitted that he was fully nwnre thr.t
experiments in hucuui Doings were endue ted In c ncontrn-
tlon cnnps. (J»0-47l, ?r'8. Ex. 23=, R. 952). Hinnlcr
hlnsulf tild hin ?f the cxporlnents t- test typhus vaccines
In the cuchcnwnld C nc«ntrnti n Gnu?. Rnschcr ln:'-m. d
bl;u« : o :ut his high altitude experiments (Blnno, R.4508).
dleVors discuBBod with Mr. quwStl:ns concerning v rl-ua
Bpeolnl rcBe -Tc.i . .nd exp.rl-.entnl rr.tiers. (3546-r?5, supra,
entry if 11 Oct'Dor, 164-i).

Ill 5:nciu8i2n

bi .a. was Duputy Relcr. r.-nltn Lender and
Deputy Lender -f the heich Chun-'er r Physicians r.nd
the i. tl-nnl Srolallst Physicians' nsstciutlin. Jio wr.s
u ol Ho c'Alr.c.rtX.r f Gcnti, uh. was In direct charge
r the Civilian health Services. =y VlrtUw -f theflo
pCBltlrna, bl-no held c r.nlde-r mole for and lnfluenco.

r.c :-ne v ' th* t o ncwntrntiin coup inmates wore Doing
e y3to:•.t•.tlcnll. , ufied lr. crlnlnnl n. dlcnl experiments.

«g tne reG.j nr 101- h.r.d f c\cterl-l glcnl
warfare, bl : -e p.rs nally suggested and carried *.ut
orlnln-1 uxp.-rl tents in that field. In the onno o*nnecti-n
ho had p 1 b :ns tested sn nun .n subjects r.nd r- >'rted t^
r.l uni or this matter.

bl:ae r.md full hnrwlcdgo ~l the ::urdor-us
freezing experiments cy Rnscnar, cu.-j rted his efl*rta
t; gain rdr.lesi~n .s nr. academic 1 ctur-r n that subject,
.nd, s v. u-m-er --1 the i.elch Hesearch Cuncll, pers nr.lly
issued a ros-'irc. -66lg.t eiit t r-.Ec.mr ter further
freetln t ex--.ri.mnt6. r— c ll--:r .ted with Rascr.or In
tne P.lygnl experiments, during w..ich in:- tes Were shit
nnd hiiled. j-.e :1s Issued a reSer.rc.. assignment t-


HLQHE


R,-.sch«.r In supp rt ;f these uxpvrlnents.

il-ac had fcn wludg^ ;f hire's gas experi-
uwnts in Uatzwollcr nd furtr.erud ills w rt: by issuing nn
assignment frm tfto Helen Research Council.

Deputy Holer, ncnlth Lender, rliBu w rked
with the murderer Grol6or, Gauleiter f Worthegnn, who
nu ng -ther things nssieted In the extermination of
Jews In that area f Poland. bl'cic, t gather with
Oreia-r, supported the plan t- exterminate thousands
f tuocrculnr ?*les wh~ were c nsidcrod * health nenneo
t Ooman settlers. Pursuant t this plan, nany P~lish
nati r.nls were nurder^d and there were placed in
Is Inti n canpo and left die wlthut nodical onre.

ns a pr nlne.nt :.*.i.5er f the crlalnnl l-'nzl
Leadership Crps, clone was n :»a-vr f n gr-up c nncctcd
with the executl n f the euthanasia pr gran. re knew
that this pr grdfi w.-.e illegal, y.t he actively supp-rted it.

iho Hr eoouti n su-: its that the uvidenoc pr vet
that clone was u principal in, access ry t , rdered,
abetted, t ;! a consenting put in, was c nnooted with
plans and enterprises Involving, r.d was a sunber f a
gr up -r rgnniz tl n c-nnooted with Eedlcnl experimenta¬
tion *n human subjects with ut their ensont, the
extor lnatl n f tuoerculnr P;les, and the execution if
the euthanasia prrgrno, in t:io c :urse f wr.loh nurders,
brutalities, cru-ltles, t rtures, atr cities, and thor
Inhunnnc acts were c nnlttod, and that his guilt has
seen established una^r C unts I, II, and III cf the


Indictment


MILITARY TRIBUNAL NO. I

C.v32 NO. 1


Nurnberr

16 Juno


CLOSING DRIFT r OR
THE UNITED S'lATES O- ^SERXC*.


VIKTOR PRi.CK


J. ;!• Mcllmoy
/»1* > nc» r C.. H rdy
.•moot ITorlik-UnchW’ild
lath* r J uc J 'hnaon

lo47 for:

T* lford Taylor
Hrlf-.rtl' r • 1 v 1 , U.S.i,.

Chi•.f of C i.uu.1 f .'r V r Cria-.a.


INTRODUCTION


=r. ci:


-t is alleged, in essence, under Count I of the
Indictment that Viktor crack conspired and agreed with
others, pursuant to a common design, to perform nedlcrl
exporlnents on Involuntary human subjecta; under Counts
-I and III (war Crimes and Crises Against Kunpnity,
respectively), that he was a principal In, accessory to,
ordered, abetted, took r. consenting part in, and was
connected with plana md enterprises Involving medical
experimentation on involuntary human subjects and the
execution of the ao-cnllsd "euthanasia" program; under
Count IV, that he was a r.enber, after 1 Septonber 1939,
of the as, an organization declared to be criminal by the
International military Tribunal.

The acts recognized a 0 Jar Crlneo and Crioes'Agninot
Humanity nro set forth in Paragraphs 1 (b) and (c) of
article II of Control Council L:-w Ho, 10. Uomborchip in
an organisation declared criminal by the International
Unitary Tribunal is defined as n crime In Paragraph
1 (d) of th»: Banc Article. The criteria of criminality
arc cot forth In Paragraph 2 of Article 21 of Control
Council Law :.'o. 10 The dorendrnt crock Is particularly
ohnrgcd with having participated In sterilization
experiments, as set forth In Paragraph 6 (I) of tho
indlotnent and -/ 1 th the execution of the so-called
"cuthnnnsln" program, ns sot forth In Paragraph 9.

I. POSITIONS CF H£S?0;‘3I^ILIIY

The defendant Err.ck had positions of very oonsldernblo
power and responsibility In the service of the : ft zl party
and tho SS. Ho was one of the earliest followers of
Hitler. Ac early as 1PJJ3, he Joined an artillery unit
of the S« Regiment In Uunioh. I r 1^29 he bee,one a member
of the N'SDaP and of the SS nr.d received the "Death Head


- 2 -


®r c;:


Ring", an SS decoration, In 1934. ("(>820, Pros. Ex.

34 j R. 136). His order nuaber In .the SS va? 901 and
he thus belonged to the oldest uenbers of the SS.

(Brack, R, 7443). Before the war broke out, Brack
held the rank of n Str.ndirtenfuohror (Colonel) lr. the
SS and during the r;nr was prccctcd to Oborfuehror (Senior
Colonel), (HC-820, supra).

In 1G32, even before Hitler erne Into power, he was
appointed official In the Office of the !ISBAP In Munich,
the no-called "Broun House 1 , which was then the hond-
qunrters of the party. Fron 1033 or., ho acted as
Adjutant (Staff Leader) to Eouhler, who wnc then Reich*
Business unnngor of the HSDAP. ‘./hen Eouhler wee
appointed chlof of the "Chancellery of the Fuehrer of the
I'SDii?" In 1934, Brae’: wont with air. to Berlin. Ko was
appointed Chlof of Office II of tr.c Chancellery of tho
Fuohrcr In 1936, with the tltlo of Rclchsaatcloltcr and,
lator, Obordlcnetloiter. In Cfflc II ho actod ns

bouhlor'a deputy and took cars of all of Eouhler's
special tanks. »hon Bitltfr charged the defendant Korl
Brandt and Bouhlor with tho cxcoutlon of the *uthonncla
proproa In 1939, Brack was entrusted with 1 portrait
aspects of tho a.dnlnlatrntlon of this pro-ran (K 0 - 820 ,
supra).

II. STE nlLIFHCICy Z.CPERI.IZ: IS (Incictnent, Par. C*(I))

By 1941 it was the accepted policy of the Third Reich
to externlna.to the Jewish population of Gerrnny and the
occupied countries. (Judgoent of the I.h.7., R. 1*?20,
et soq.) Brack, In his affidavit, described this no an
open secret ir. high party circles. (K>426, Pros. Ex.
160, R. 532). He also admitted having beer, infonaed by


r* C".


\

- 3 -

HUmlor of the decision to exterminate the Jews.

(.-rack, R.7506). Trained killers from the euthanasia
stations wore sent to the East to assist In the prorren.
Indocd, the program Itself was U3cd in part to exterminate
the Jews. (See ■Euthanasia* — lnfrn).

Because of the presslng need for laborers,
sterilization of Jews able to work wns considered ns nn
alternative to outright extermination. Hi -lor requested
Brack to Investigate with sono of the physicians who were
not1vc in the Euthanasia Pro,-ran the pofiflbilltlco of
sterilization which would keep the vlctlr.3 unaware of
their tcrrlblo fate. (Ernok, R. 7404). In liarch 1941,
Braok forwnraod to Klnrilor a report, signed by hln
pcroonnlly, on the results of experiments concerning X-ray
cnctrntlon. Tho experiments ostnMlohod that perna.ncnt
sterilization with X-i*nyo could only be brought about
by doses which rooultod In castration. The report stated
that aneo sterilization by no-no of X-rays could ho carried
out without difficulty and ougg otod, for reasons of
camouflage, thrt the vlotlna bo brought to r countor
whero they would bo naked to answer sonc questions and
to fill out forms, n censure which would compel them to
roraaln nt the counter for two or three minutes. Tho
official sitting behind the counter would operate an
X-ray apparatus and sterilize tho victims without tholr
knowledge. In this way Brack atlr.-ted that 150 to 200
persons could bo sterilized In or.r day an’, therefore,
with twenty suoh Installations, sterilization of 3,000
to 4,000 victims could be carried out c~lly.
out that sooner or later tho persons would realize that
they had been castrated. (1*C—203, Pros. «x. lol,

K.534-5). On 12 Hoy 1641, Hi ottledped receipt

of the report and sent a copy to hey dr 1 eh, Chief os :..e


- 4 -


3!-. CK


Security Police end SD. (NC-204, Pros. Ex. 162, R. 536).

The invasion of Russia began In the Burner of 1941
and Brack's proposal wa a not acted on. Cn 23 June 1942,
when Germany appeared to bo on tho vorge of viotory,

Brack again rroto to HiBBler suggesting the cterlllzatior.
of Jens rblc to work.

After stating that he had furnished men to Globccnlk
In his Jewish extermination action, ho pointed out that
there were about 2 to 3 million Jews, of the 10 million
In Europe, who were fit for work and who should be
preserved. Brack was of tho opinion that this could
be done only if thcoo Jews were sterilized.so they could
not propngnto. He rooocuacndcd the use of X-rays for this
purpose because it was fret "r.d relatively cheap. Eouhlcr
had agreed to nako available the aeoeosnry physicians
and personnel for this prorran and Brack was prepared
to order the necessary apparatus with the -rcatoot speed.
Brack abandoned the Idea that tno victims should retain
Ignorant of their fete, as he then considered suoh prctcn 60
as Irrelevant. (H0-206, Pros. Ex. 163, R. 536-7). This
ohnngo of nlnd resulted without doubt fret the fact that
Brack woo convlncod In 19,2 that Germany -ould win the
vmr in the near future and, therefore, criticism cf ouch
Inhuman and criminal measures could be neglected. Brack
stated in direct examination that in 1542 ho "was suro
that the ./chrmnont would win tho war". (n. 7410).

Himmler wrote Brack on 11 AUfuast 1S42 that further
experiments to ascertain the effectiveness of X-ray
sterilisation should bo carried cut on concentration ccnp
Inmates by expert physicians vno were to bo furnished by
Bouhler. In order to put this decision Into effect, he
lnformod Pohl, Chief of the JVH* (Sccnonlo nr.d Adainlrtrative
Main Office) of the SS, w.jo *.og lr, charge of concentration
canp3, and Grnvltz, the Relchsarzt SS and Police. (UC-2'>:,


ER-Ci;


- 5 -

Pros. Ex. 164, R. 553). Brack ordered hi6 deputy,
Blankenburg, to contact the Chief of the concentration
comps for this purpose. (MO-207, Pros. Ex. 165, R. 558).
Ac a result, experlnents on Inmates In the Auschwitz
Concentration Camp were carried out by Dr. Schumann
(.*10-206, Pros. Ex. 166, R. 539), who' prcvioucly wa b
head of one of the euthanasia strtlons. (Brack, R. 7733).
Thnt X-ray ctcrillzntlcne wore actually carried out In
Aucohultz lo further ortablishcd by the heart-rending
tootlnony of the young Polish Jc;, Ch> In Brlltzky, who,
after having boon subjected to c cvorc coses of X-rays In
tho genital area, was castrated b.* operation lr. order
that tho offoots of the X-ray could be studied. (3.541,
ct ooq.). Balltzky remembered the name Schumann In
connection with those ox erlacr.ts. (Balltzky, R. 543).

At least 100 involuntary experimental subjects — Poles,
Rusolons, French and prlooncrc of war — were used for
thcoo experiments. (Levy, rt. 556-7). Only young,
well-built lnnntos In the best of health ware selected
for thOso experinents. (Levy, R. 55G). Tho victims who
had been sterilized were drnacod physically and
psychologically. Physically, they cuffcrcC from tho
enornous pains of radial dermatitis. Apart from that,
they wore Irreparably damaged psychologically. (Levy,
R.559). Nearly all of the viotlc cf those experiments
wore ox tor nine ted as tho severe X-ray bums nado the.*'.

Incapable of working. (Levy, R. 557; Balltzky, R. 543).
Had they survived, U Is probable that nout cf then would
have contracted X-ray cancer as a result of the X-ray
burns. This illness, according to contemporary eolor.ee,

Is Incurable. (Lv.*y, R. 558).

Brack denies responsibility for the sterilization
experiments. He assert. 1 that, far iron fcnvlr.,- and anil-
Semitic feelings, -no was opposed to the program of


- 6 -


E?w.CK


exterminating Che Jess ns he considered this inhuman nnd
unworthy of the German nation. He said he tried to save
the Jews from their terrible fate. Together with hin
collaborators, Blanfcenburg and Kefelanrn, who were
of tho sane opinion, he claims to have conceived end
forwarded plans for n decent solution of the "Jewish question"
He supposed that after Germany would have won the war,
nany European cour.trloo could nd n pt themselves to Gorman
legislation in regard to the Jews. Thus, there could be
no future for tho Jews in central Europe. Ho nnd hie
collaborators, according to his testimony, cu?.;ontcd tho
ro-octtlcnont of approx lately ten million European
and Palootinlan Joes In -ndngnsorr ••a r new Jewish homeland
with a Jewish government under Bouhlor re Oernnn Governor.
Brack poos ever, so far as to cay tr.rt he was of the
opinion that this plan would hnvo had tho support of
world Jewry. (Brack, R. 7-;80). Jhen this plan was
rejected by Hitler nnd tho danger that the extermination
program might bo carried out bcoano noro pressing, ho
cor.tor.do that ho nnd hlo collaborators tried to deceive
Klnnlor by suggesting to him ineffective methods of
otorlllratlon in order to save the Jews. In this way ho
wanted to delay the extermination until "ftcr the end
of tho car vrhon the idea of rc-ccttlcmer.t of tho Jews in
Ladagasonr could be revived.

•

All of this Is of course no defense. Tho fact lo
that Brack did have sterilization experiments carried out
which resulted In the death and ccrzrncnt injury of numerous
helpless victims. The proof establishes, moreover, that
Brack cooperated wholeheartedly in the extermination of
the Jews and oven furnished trained killora to Globocnlk
for that purpose. It la quite irrr-tcrlal that Brack cay
have had some personal reservations. But this prepost rous
testimony of Brack is completely false. Brack was a


7


EFu cr.


follo-cr of Hitler's fron 1923 cn and a h ig h official
of the Hazi party. (supra). Racial policy, and Its
resultant ruthless anti-Semitism, was one of the hnclc
tenets of Hitler's eye ten end of th- >'azl regime.

(Judgment of the IhT, R. 15917, et seq.). The proof
has clearly shown that Brack, far fron trying to save the
Jews fron extermination, ms completely unconcerned about
the fa to of seven to eight Billion Jews who mere unable to
work and only wanted to onvc the IIvcb of two to three
million rterlllzod Jews for slave labor until victory
for Germany had been nor.. (::C-2D5, supra, sco "Euthanasia",
infra). The only conclusion ffhloh can bo drawn fren
Brack's tostinony io that he "borrowed" his lino of
dofcnce from the defendant Pokorny. (Opening address
for tho defendant Pokorny, R. 2263, cf. brack, R.7772).

III. EUThA»i*SlA PHXiuv. (Indictment, Par. 9)

hc to the description and criminal nature of tho
Euthr.naola Pro.-ran, reference is made to tho Prooocutlon'o
brlof against Karl Brandt.

Braok was one of the moot Important adnlnistr-tors
o: the Euthanasia Program. Rinmler, no Reich .lnlrtcr of th-
Interior, on receiving complaints about tho execution of
the program from Such, the highest party Judge, (H0-CG2,

Proo. Ex. 392, R. 1676), wrote Brack dlreotly roquootlng
him to clear up certain difficulties which were brought
about by the fnot that the population of Grafcncck found
out that In an . asylum in tho vlo.nlty, insane people were
killed and cremated. (KO-C16, Pros. Ex. 404, R, 1711;

Brack, R. 7462-3). Complaints from tnc high dignitaries
of the church about the killing of the Insane were
forwarded to him for handling. (616-PS, Pres. Ex. 4C3,

R. 1711). He dispatched letters with :1c personal letter¬
head to the Reichs minister of Justice concerning the


- 8 -


ETlrtCil


Euthanasia Prorran and received the pertinent files
directly fron this official. (!»'0-1328, Pres. Ex. 495,

R. 7591-2; HO-842, Pros. Ex. 405, R. 1712). He acted

no oouhler's deputy whon the latter was n'noent fron
Berlin and corresponded in this capacity with Freislcr,

State Secretary of the klnistry of Justice, on questions
concerning euthanasia. (:.'0-8i3, Pros. Ex. 405, R. 1712).

The witness Kennocke testified that 5rack uns

chnlrann of a neetlng where the doctors solected to carry

cut tho program were informed about their duties and

that he was the nan who gave then tho necessary lnfcmatlon.

(kenneoke, R. 1568). Brack '/as one of tho leading

personalities in the Euthanasia Program. (kcnnocko, R.1874

Tho v/ltnccR Schnldt testified that in 1944 Brack replaced

Brandt in the direction of tho ore.-ran. (Schnldt, R. 1825).

•

Brack admitted, during his testimony, having boon
active in the Euthanasia Prcgrnm fron ltc very beginning.

(R. 7551). Ko decided to cooperate in the program and
tcek none of his associates into hie confidence and
roquontod then to collaborate, too. (R.7558). Ho took
part in the first neetlng*; which wore held for the ourposo
of putting the program in operation. (R. 7565).
took care of cctting up tho organization of tho program.

(R. 7586). Ho had the right to issue instructions. In
many eases, he acted as Bouhlor’c representative (R. 7587)
and presided over ncetin.-c. (R. 7588). Re also
loctured at meetings on euthanasia, for cxa-plo at the
mooting cf the Gnu (Provincial) officials for public
health in kunich (R. 7535) and rt the kinietry of
Justice In Berlin. (R. 75oS). In winter 1939/1940 ho,
togother with the defendant Brandt, 3ouhlcr nr.l Co-.ti,
vma present when the first victims of the program were
killed In a geo chamber cf the Brnndcr.bur? Euthanasia
Station (R. 7645-6) and toured all other euthanasia stations


- 9 -


T'r.XK


during 1S40 and witnessed the hill Inc of aany inmates.

(R. 7547).

T:.ue by Brack's own tcstino.ny and the evidence
submitted by the Prooeoution, it is proved that he was
a roopor.Bible administrative director in the Euthanasia
Program.

Brack admits participation in the Euthanasia Program
(R. 7555), but tries to credit the program itself and his
participation in it with high moral and humanitarian
principles. Tht. Euthanasia Program dealt solely with
incurable nontal patients. (R. 7543). Ho welcomed
euthanasia because it was based on the ethical principles
of sympathy. (h. 7532). Only his helpfulness to everyone
r.nd especially tonnrds the si ok made him ndvooato tho
idea of euthanasia. (?.. 7534). For tho same high
humanitarian principles ho also welccmod euthanasia of
deformed and deficient children. (R. 7554). In tho
oaso of tho euthanasia of children, the previous consort
of the parents or guardians was nn absolute prerequisite.

(R. 7612).

«o to tho Legal b"Glo of the program, hl3 position
is thrt thoro was no limitation whatsoever upon the
authority of Hitler to sign a paper crderln.* Anything he
might happen to wish. (R. 7365). He claimed that Jews
and non-Jo rnar. nationals were exempted from the program
ns Hitler wanted outhannsin only to be granted to German
citizens because it constituted an act of ( taoo. (R. 7502,
7649'. The Euthanasia Program •.•as allegedly oto;pcd in
August 1941. (R. 4555). he tried to disresocla.to

euthana3la from "«ctlon 14 f 13", which tn 3 in fact the
extermination of concentration oesp inmates under the
Euthanasia Program. Brack said ho only knew that Himmler
intended to have the meet seriously ill concentration camp


- 10 -


ETiXK


Inmates examined for their physical and mental condition
and he, Brack, was of the opinion that this would be done
for the benefit of these inaatee. Since Himmler did
not have sufficient confidence In the abilities of the
concentration cunp doctors, he asked Ecuhler to put
such doctors at hla disposal. Souhler asked Brack to
pet in touch with the office of the Euthanasia Program
in Tlcrgartenstrasse 4 end to request the nsolgnnont of
experienced psychiatrists for this purpose. Brack*
compiled nltn this request. (?.. 7635).

Brack testified that he "never had any Intention of
exterminating the Jewish poople, but attempted to achieve
tho contrary, to protect the Jews and save then from a
terrible fate." Ko can't imagine why ho "should have
bocono a ohnapior. o: tho extermination of the Jews."

(H. 7531).

Brack's teotlnony Is completely repudiated by
his own affidavit (IJG-42S, Pres. Ex. 160, H. 625) -r.d the
ohnrt drawn by hit (HC-253, Pros. Ex. 331, a. 1532),
so h.. would now hnvo the tribunal believe th-t he somehow
n-do a alvtnko In signing then.

Brack's testimony constitutes r.c defense to the
ohargou against hln. The unoontrndlctcd evidence proves
that persons wore subjected to euthanasia by the hundreds
of thousands without proper cxr.nlnation; tivt the
patlont'r, consent or that of the relatives was not
obtained before execution; that the program had an Its
purpose the elimination of so-called useless liver,
persons who were considered a burden on the State; that
substantial numbers of non-tJorrmr. r.-tlonrie ere killed;
that healthy Jews were Included; th-t concentration carp
Inmates wore selected by cuttr-nasi- doctors -fter little
or r.o examination. Brack presents r.c evidence to rebut


’


3R. CK


-11-

theso facts. Ho merely soys that the program was supposed
to exclude foreigners rnd Jews; th«t he was motivated by
lofty nor.nl principals; that the examinations were
suppssed to be thorough, etc. The essence of his
testimony Is that he foiled to control the program of
which he was nn important administrator. Brack's
pretense of morality is entirely immaterial. It Is to be
supposed that ever, the miserable executioners In the
extermination onnps of Auschwitz and Troblinka wore told
and bolloved that they '/ore doin’ a fine thing for the
Fatherland in killing tho Jews. out < ven his focblc
testimony of moral Jurtlflcntlor. is not worthy of
credor.ee in tho l’r.oc of tho proof.

*. t »orrl and hunnr ltnr l>v. Jurtlflcatl.cn
In the brief against Krrl Irnndt the Prosecution h«c
summarized tho ovcrv/holning proof that euthanasia, far
from being "rn act of grace*, was a measure to eliminate
■us s or.tare" and ether undooirahlo persons. Brook
himself, when questioned by the Tribunal, ms unable to
explain why wa r votornno of the firs? world war ( 101 - 1 - 18 )
wore c xempted from this "act of cr* 3o". (Brook, R. 7650,
76*3-1). Contrariwise, ho could not explain why this
grace was extended to lnaanc criminals, Irrespective of
the length of time they had epc:.t In m Insane nsylun.
(NO-825, Pros. Ex. 356, si. 1577; Srnck, H. 1716-9).

Eraok personally reprimanded Jcr.r.ocko, who was nn
export in tho Euthanasia Program, on the .-round that his
oxuort opinions Kero far too Goft inf did r.ot recommend
euthanasia os often as he desired. (*£c:nookc, R. 907,
1831). The 6o-callcd "observation stations" where
the patients, according to Brack* s a tat cm r.t, were examined
for several weeks by cxp.-ct doctors, were nothing but
collecting points for the victim*. (Ucnnocke, H. 1P7S-#;
Schmidt, R. I - 22 ).


- 12 -


•


Brack admitted that tho work of Binding nnd Hochc
Is considered the standard work on euthanasia. 7G33 '•

This work leaves no doubt that the will to live of even
those -.'ho are noet seriously ill, suffer coot gravely
nnd nr n of least ucc should be fully raspcctod nnd that
any authority for the annihilation oflife ic excluded
In oases where the will to live must be broxen. C-2-J93,
Pros. Ex. 496, R. 77C0). Brack hlnnelf adr.ittod that
outhanasla is Inadmissible In cases whore the patient ‘ins
th-' will to live. (R. 77C1). Tno witness Schmidt
testified that tho vlctlcs, who obviously kr.cw or susp.-cted
their fate, hr.d to he forced to enter the buses which took
tnen to the extermination stations. (Scnnldt, R. 1651.
1056). Thin cvldcnco lr corroborated by documentary
proof. (D-90S, Pros. Ex. 375, H. 1319-21). While many
of those victims any have been Insane, they certainly did
not lack tho • 111 to live. moreover, Brack himself
adnitted, when questioned by the Tribunal, that i 0 uhier
ordered that tho arrangements for tho killing had to bo
nndo lr. suoh n vuy that the patients would not realise
whrt was bring done to them. (Brao*, R. 756C'.
chambers whore tt'.c victims • ere annihilated resembled
shower rcoras. (Brack, R. 7659). The- patients were
deceived Into thinking that they were to take a shower bath
nnd, therefore, had to ur.drocs. (Brack, R. "644, 7660).
Such precautions would certainly not have beer, nocosaary
if the vlctlno had desired the "'rlvllc.c of a mercy death".

Ir. the case of killing of ch_lurcn, n previous
consultation with parents and relatives did r.ot take
place. (3664-PS, Pros. Ex. 367, 1593). Brack's

own dcfoncc witness, Pfnnnnue?let-, testified that, after
having rcoclved authorisation from the tep experts to kill
the child, he Invited the relatives to visit tho child


B7--CJI

- 13 -

because it v.s sick. However, he never notifies the r .r-
ents or rurrc’iuns that ho was roi&r to kill tho child
because this v*s n top secret v tter. C fzan-utller, Ft.
4394). From the documents su v -;ittcd fc" the dtfcr.i’jnt
Brack, it is na.de clear that the greats urc deceived
ibout the ;ureosc of the transfer of tne children to in¬
stitutions where they were to be killed. It wes the bus¬
iness of the icdic~ 1 officers to induce the pr.rents to
send their children to such institutions by tellin*. then
that there w .a u possibility of chievi.u: certain suc-
cosee3 with treat .cat. (Br ck Doc. 52, Br-CK lx. v3,

II. 7G7B; cf. Br ok, F.. 7717). The parents v.erc t^ld that
the host c-.re w mid be t ken of the child in such institu¬
tions end everythin*' possible ia the v.y of .oder.i therapy
would b« c rried out. (:'r ck Doc. 51, r ck E r. l.

7078). Fro: these documents it la cl r th t the ' rents
were not only not _sk>.C for their consent in the case of
killing of child r* a, but were deceived in. orfer to r. kt
the transfer to outh.n'sl institution -oasitlc.

P. ..ct lor. 1 -' f 1 "

Sr ck tried to dis rooci te th- Eutfc*n.ai.i Tro-
rr a fro- action 14 f 1?. * ; .c testified th t t.:e re rson li-

tiea of Heyet, *Jlt3che, 3tein ;cycr -ad ? ltlh-uoer were
the s fefu rd th t the tx tin ti ms of the concentr tlon
cci; in..tea, which .llt-ceiy\ere oreere ’ y "ii-lcr,
would bo c rrle-: out in . roper nr.-r for the bene-
fit of these in; tea. tic concicerti it -ntirely 1 .possible
th t T.cydc, with 1L his decent 'erson.Uty v -Id h vs
p-rtlclv ted in • n ction like 1-1 f 1C. (Dr ox, f.. 7536-
9). This, of course, ia t test -ious ssariicn. - bQ
-roof hr s shown tfc * --11 these doctors n .e v y Fr: ck col-
l.boruted In th- selection of concentre* -. c v in . tes


-K-


3*. c>:


for extcrnln-tioa. (llenneckt, 16P£). Dr. yehdcdur.re-
fcoivca his orders for aucf.sclectlins fro-* r-r-ck, Htydc
’ nd Nltsche ut errly ct 1540. (Hennccke, *\ 18P2, R. 1909).
*?c v.c 3 Instructed by th. sc three persons th t it vrr.a not ne-
0133 to exc iin-_ the . T evs in co.ici.ntr ti^n cj.ipa • nd th r t
it would be sufficient if the retains f^r 'rrest were trine-
erthre on t&e usu-l odthoncsi auestldu.v ins. (ilenaccke,
i . 1691 - 7 ). These Jcvp v»cri , for the nut r r rt, nhysic- lly
ad cieat-lly f.' lthy. tfrenaeofcc, i.. If .‘3, 1931). Mtnneckc
dinoussed Ll 3 rctivitiea in the c^ncentr tlon c.-ays vith
Hr-ok, H tyCt '•nd :itschc. (ilennecke, 193*:). He never
htfi *tuUju« with Linder., (Meoncckc, R. 1571). Itnnccke's

te3tlao:.y i 3 corrobor .ted l:y his letters to .la vift. C’O-
907, Pro.-. =r. .ilf, : . l? t t -:«-».)

The • ffir. 7 it of the c-.v ph-sici- : -f the D- oh- u Con-
contr tier. C* r, Tr. ’at i , -rov. . th-1 cytc, - a lc-dor of
co*tnljalon of four uyehi trlat?, vi it-' the t ch-u Con-
contr*tIon -nr J . tv. * ;tum bf *9«1. This doctors' co:-
".isBion selected i:.i- ;..c an* blc to ror«r f r erter iln* tion by
r.G. (f.’0-P799, 7r . Ex. 197, 7710'. The -ffid vit of

Dn r-orr-83 reve lo -.*vr he ad Ur. Soh>nrjm, both of who-i
vtrc ctivc in t.Jc luth a oi- 7ro-rtn, vtoited the Buchcn-
v.rld Concentretl n C ip in .Tunc l?:i. »o r . * 3 s et-tes cxMi-
citiy th-t the -ir-r.e of t is trip * o to •couaint hinoclf
with the aolcc* «.-i of concentr.tlon e*..« in.-, tes for euthn-

ni’. The order for this visit w s tr ns-.itted to Corress
by the dsf(in< \t *‘r ch. i-S010, Pros. 2 x. 605, r. f?-.,).

If the t jtLn-ny of 2 r- ck end 9r-r.dt s to the nuibor
' f d3Ctjrs »l.o urc c *.lve in the Zuth.- q .sia rrorr.a is
correct, it ij olt:r froa the r*c;rd th t 11 doctors • ctlve
in this rro^r'i coll t-» r ted in action l*i f 13. Brandt es-
ti.a- ted the nuibcr of doctors who w. re c.i tt>ti with the ex¬
ecution of the Zuth-a cl ?rorr- a -s 1C-15 (Brandt, R. 2478),
Br ck o l*-15. . : • . tcatifi that

Cbout lb d octors fr>n t.'ic Lutr.- a- si- -rocr-were comission-

td to carry out the -ex;* Ur. tloas- in the concentration c--.ps.

( ienateke, r. l€91!.


- 15 -

Bri ck r- s un*ble to ezpl- in hov. it eras -tout th-t
conccntrr tioa cr-.ps Iteu tcs selected in ..ction 14 f 13
*ere killed in euth: n-sl st tions. (Br ok, 7.

In the lirht of this evidence end of the evidence on
. ction 1 , f 1 ? suivriztd in the rrosecution-s brief on
Kurl Br ndt, Brtek's stctcaent th't he v; s u:..v:r t . of the
connection bet\ecn the Zuthm.si. ?ro-*r..o nc. ..ction l-«
f 13 end thet he never took p; rt in the 1 * ttcr is '*ot-
ently untrue.

’ hilt it in of r.o s^tci 1 3irnific. nee, there is
-.pie proof th t the luth-n: 3i . Prvr'i <Ti ' stop in
n\ij :uat 1941 t :id th t :-.r ck did continue nis ctivltico
in • ft ie of the Trorr t. The witness 3cl.-.idt testi¬
fied th t Br ck hd been ctivo in the '’r.'r.: tvtn r rttr
19,8 (:*.. IPSe), .id th t in 1544 Br ck took over the di¬
rection of the r.uth.r.-ci. T:o;r -o fra: Brrafit. (A. IBZ 6 ) •
The vitneos Hcnnccke testified th t he corresponded with
Br- ck on tters pcrt^lniar to the rropr.—. 3 ltte •.« in
June 15 .2. (T . If97.). This ivldcncc is corroborated by
• r -roof. ("0-907, Pros. Ex. 512, 17ZZ). 'leflnccko

received the photost't co-i<3 of ex-, rt opinions *nd ex¬
ecuted ouch opinions until he left the Tro'r.n in Decen-
ttr 1942. (Ilcnneckc, T. 165?). The '.eicfcs ..ssoci: tion,
Th, Fount: tlon, nd the Tr .ns- crt Cor^or tion continued
their resrtetivo activities fter ..u.uot 19;i nd there
hqs no ch.ne in this res-cct vhen le.mcckc ce -3td to be
fcctlve in the rrr.-r . t the on >f (^tanecko, ...

1902 ). ..iso the it dershi' of the Iro-r l re- ined in
the s- ie h-nds. ( lenncckc, ibid). El nkcnNirr, when
vritinr to Kivilcr on 14 -U'uit 1942, c .11s hiisclf the
vaent CCPttty of ?z ck 06 y no M r *

-807, : S. 17. 165, ?*. . Other r 'ocuv.r.t ry I f


«


3R. CK


- 16 - .

hjs shown th* t r:s lute -3 July 1944, sl.vc 1-tor: r3 cf
Polish end Passion nctionulity were subjected to cuth.-n-
osl 3 . (NO- 1116, Pros. Ex. 415, 17P1).

C. Mon-Ccro n -tlo.*v Is r.r.d Jews

In s-'ite of the extensive proof vhich v.oa out¬
fitted by the Prosecution th-t noa-Ocn n n tion.13 '-nd
jtv/a were r oonr the vleti .3 of the Euthcn si- ProTrr.,
ouite -side froa .ction 14 f 13 (See Prosecution’s brief
on Errl Pr-ndt), Dr ck would h vc the Tri r un-.l ssaac
thrt foreirners -nd Jews were excited fron the ?ro.-r* ji.

Iiuro Suchoiel, LLP, the hirheot offici-1 ftcr the ”ini-
ater in the «ustri-n Tedcr-1 liinietry of Justice, s/.ys
in his .ffid*vit tr.'t vh-.a Fr-ck, □ lores, nt live of
the defendant Pr.ndt, r ve •- lecture or. cuth n siu in
the Ministry of Justice in 1942, he enuiur ted the >r
v.oundod -r.d persons who h-d b cco’.u in3* nc a . result of
air .tt CK8 c.d the cl: sees of rcroons who were excited
fro i the Pro r Torei.- ncra nd Jews were not untionod
the rrou' ’ if -'ursoi.s who v« re cxcluflod. (H 0 - 28 W,
Fro:*. . ). Pr ck rd-ltted

icoturf . |r«. 75F9).

Dr. rnr-rt st tes in his ffid "it. which •- n out¬
fitted h- the Defence, ‘.a f r *o I c-n rcooibcr, cert in
exceptions vere oti-ul-ted for the -erforn:ncc of I.uth-
•n sir.; for last nee , persona suffer ini* fro * injuries of
the hr in incurred Ouria* the first vorld ' r nd, I tMn K,
forei-ners were Iso exce-tcd.” (Br ck Doc. 37, ^ r ck Poe.
27, E. 7o9U. L l h* sea su lied). :>6 obviously h 3 no
recollection th.t foreirners were to be excluded nd docs
not nention Jews • t •11. Tnc ffidrvit is without proba¬
tive v lue on this point. The self-servin' st te.nents of
parties to the criac do not in • ny *. y refute the fet es¬
tablished bp documents 'nd tcatl :ony of vitneasea v:ho ctu-


BT;, CK


- 17 -

. lly die the selecting th: t n olcs, Hussions, Czechs, rnd
other aon-Cen n nation'Is were killed in euthcncsiu
stations.

Br ck denied in cross ex'ain tior. th r t he ever con¬
cerned hi .self with the tr ansfer of '’olish insane pati¬
ents. He denied ever h-vinr nede urr'.nr'tnents for such
transfer or for the funds for such transfer. (Hrnck, 71.
7720). The documents submitted to hin in tho course of
cross cxrain 1 tion prove beyond any doubt th:t in the
utuun of 1940, funds for the ev cu tion of 1556 inaates
of aent-1 institutions of I st Prussia end between 250
to 300 inseno Poles were z..de .vailoblc by Br ck, i.a ^
these transfers wore cirried out by o special »ction
rroujt (Sonderko.*a'ndo) of the inf aous 3D, there 13 no
doubt th t persons were killed. (:;0-C909, Pfo3. Ex. 500,
H. 7721; NO-2911, Pros. Ex. 501, h. 7722).

!5r ck 3Serttcd th t the questionnaires which ht.d to
be filled out on 11 non-Ccrvn n tion* Is, irrespective
of the lenrth of their stay in • icnt'i institution, ser¬
ved only as c loufl r*-. In the f ct of the ubund:nt
evidence to the contr ry, hov<vir, his testi any c nnot
be viewed 0 crcdi le. He further st'ted thrt the tr n-
sports of .Tcv a who wer* s: nt fras the Ins nc ..3yltn Erl-
fiw-Knr.r on 20 Sept- nber 19*10 did not ro to LuMin in
Pol nd, but to Chela. (Br^ck, *. 7 . 321 ). it is not only
'roved by the defense witntss ?fann.iuellcr (: . 7376), but
-Iso by a letter of ■. relative of r Jewish victla who w 0
killed there, th’t at le .st or»c of the transports of Jews
finf-Ho r went to Lulllr.. (MO-33! , .. .. i:x.

). That Jews vt.ro not excluded fr?n the Proprna is
further sr.:vr. by the first tr nsr.ort list :f the Insane

i.sylun I'lfinr-H .r, d ted 16 January 19-.0, wnich lists in


- IP -


3IL-CK


the first pl'.ec a Jewish Irr.-tc. (;:0-3356, "ras. ax. r..

). This transport list bears the name of the tr: nsaort

leader of the Transport Corporation, Vorber;, one of the
collaboritors of Brock in the procrua. (Bnck, E. 7562-4).

D. Legality

„s to the illegality of the Euthonosit Progran, re¬
ference is node to the Prosecution's brief on the defendant
Karl Erandt.

Thtt the letter of Hitler to Br rtflt end F.ouhlt-r (630-7S,
Proa. Ex. 230, F. 1516) v- o not considered a sufficient lo-
er.l t* sis in * 1 .?i Cervny is proved not only by the testimony,
of the defense witness Lvtaers, (3. ?67£, 2679), but rlso by
the letter of the ?«.ichs Ilinister of Justice, Cuertner, C
ted £•. July 1940, where he informed L»mmcrs th* t tht Fuehrer
had refused to issue *. 1'w .r.d it w: s, therefore, mccss-ry
to discontinue the secret extermination of insene persons
imnedi tely. (.:0-e32, Eros. Ix. 392, K. Iu79). copy of
this letter was aent to Bouhlcr on £7 July 19,0. (K0-E23,
Pros. Ex. 394, R. 1G79-P0). It is cert in th t Er ck obtain¬
ed knowledge of this letter as it v o one of the teaks en¬
trusted to hin by BouhUr to dell with the com-l ints from
the vrrious lef l authorities. Er-ck denied this rctivl'y of
his in cross ex;.min tion, but the documents submitted to hln
show cle rly the opposite. (NO-irif, .

2). Er ck’a ctivltics in this resocct : re Iso confined

; V •. r • v: • : • ' " - '* — • 40l> *

1712; N0-E43, Pros, :x. 406, :. 1718). ::c looturefl on
euth-n sit; et the .Ilalstry of Justice und dcctiv.d the
•erson 3 oreaent t the lecture about the extent of the
Progron. Fron t‘.< rtAtrki ;f Bx • the i rtssion
v s obt ituo th*? only very li -itid number f ersons,

ft the utmost 3ver 1 hundred, tr.rourh:ut ~ z ay,

..uctrl - -nd the Protector tc Bohi *1 ■ ■ n« - ■ i .

be subjected to euth nsi-. Th- opinion er. -ted v 3 that
only very 6 nrerous ; tients and delirious . ni C3 who

• he ioelves > oulfi t« subj t •


Biu.c::


- 19 -

(KO-2253, supra). This obviously v‘s done to quiet the
•uisfivinrs of the persons present. Brnck, when ' sked on
the st nd whether he r-ve, durinr the lecture, :n :.p roxi-
aiete nunbtr of persons who would be subjected to eutlv.nr -
si-', could or would not rive -n msver. In cor.tr diction
to the i.-ipression ere ted durinr the conference in the Min¬
istry of Justice, the defendants Br'cfc • nd Hr cdt now i:dait
th t ..bout 50 to 60 thou3*nd persona were killed in the
euth'-n-isi- -ro.-r'n in Gorarny • nd ..uctri- alone. (Brrndt
T. r.'i65; ?r-ck, 7610). F.v.n ?r ck's own documents rt-
venl th -1 he misinformed the Ur< l r.uthoritita .bout the
lcr 1 situ-tlon in res-cot to th.. r.uth* n cl Prorr-o.

The Ministcri* 1 Director in the ‘'clchs Ministry of Jus¬
tice, K r rl Dn'-crt, at ites in his .ffid'vit., which, -c-
cordinr to the defense counsel of 3r- ck, is >f rrt-1
interest because it shows the opinion of the lnfluuit .1 1
Jurists In this question’ : Tr ck's stotcocnta r asur-
cd ..ie because, coordinr tb the.-., it V. 3 to be definitely
essu jed th -1 r.eich 1 v \ ould then be .n et .d in the
custom.ry for., i.e. by ;ubiic ;tioa in the ".ichs L- w
Gazette. I o-w no re-3on vhy eny cifficultics should
arise." (Coe. Br-ok 37, Br ck Zx. 37, 7591-2).

Need less to s-.y, Br ck did not mention t ,:.t Hitler had
refused to issue such n l-w until fur the w r. (supr.).

Th-t Pr-ck w a veil z.v re of the f-ct th*t the Futh-
m-3l\ Promt v :s cri iln^l one is proved by his -.ttc-r-t
to destroy evidence prior to the occu-tion of Germany
by the „lJies. The -ffidovit of Cl'ussen proves th t he
sent the rollowinr teletype to the Cot. neer of the Con-
ccntr- tion Crap M-uthr usen:


BFutCK


* - 20 -

•to tee co::c:kt?- tiom c,:e> :t. utp^usen

SS STxUDirteTHJIHEH? ZIZEEISS
IWHEEBI MBS? BE DESTP.OVH) X MEDIATELY.
EXECUTION .rJ3T 3E PEPOETED b*' ORDER 0?

THE FUEHRER - *

SIFTED: OBEUFJEHTE?. BPJCK"

(MO-2429, Pros. Ex. 49P, 5. 7714). Br^ck ad-alt ted that
Hurtheli v.'s r Euthunoslo St’tion, where the victims of
the Euth-nosi- Prorr'-i were killed. (Br ek, 7714).


Sr cic I'caie ay y rtici-: ti^n ia the exter J.n ti a

r the Jcv.3. (fi. 7071). lie. s_ic th t 5 uhler never v. ul

* 0

h vc furnisher Tiers mnel ta Cl :b calk r r the exter :in ti a
'f the Jcv<s. (• . 75K). 3vahlcr, h *. ever, t l - 1 hi t th t

Cl t-calk hvf .ske' f r ;'rc ptrs anti f: a Tier- rtenatr-ose
, the -ffice -f the Euthrn'si: ?rvr.',. O. 1 I 7 ifter S uhl« r

h f .rrtc- t his rerucst, ''it’ ri-b'caifc t ?;e hi. int: his
c nfl’encc .nc' tcah 1 th t he h :f l cen ch» r e fcy Hi vtier
With c'll l r- ti n in the exter Ua-ti n >f the J. vf. R^uh-
ltr vs sup- asefljr ah eke • n«’ \ith<nv. iv.e<*i tsly his
c -nsrat t' furnish C-l^L caik \ ith -iVitim 1 'tra nncl .nc*
f.vcn rtourstc'* th-..t the icrr nacl 'f Vicr rt« nstr ssi
wh> ire y h'.t tin :1 cc«* -t ci:hicnik's - is s 1 , 3hiulf
he returne- . (: . 7010). r-l btcaik r vc hia sour net th.t

the -era'nail furnished by Tier rteastr>ssv -i rulfl a>t be
U36C. f-r the exter in. ti n f the Jc :?3 urn' S'unlei, >n the
tesla r thin .sour ace, r.lth’rev his 'tjecti'n 3 . 7bl6).

Breck furth-.r t«. stir led th -1 31 aken'.urr, ais t uty, enp-
tretc v*ith hi: in the 1 as t- s vc the Jo.o fr their
f^te. ( . 77£0).

In utter cntr-Oicti a t-» this ct'.te ..tut, r ck V.ittu*
in Ms -vn .ffi- 'vit th t the ruth n-.ai. Pr r re . _nf the ; tr-
3~niel vhi execute'" it v< re U3ec la the exter .in ti n if the
Jiva in the I jt f r': - ut 19-.1 until the lirer.-tim 'f the

£ stern '“err it'rics. Si te M .e In the seem* h If if 13*11 *
r rt 'f the Persian* 1 , *h: *erc until then executing the lu-
th n.aiu ’'r'frn in r e -ay, v .s 3« at t Lu l lin nf ut :.t
the r’io-?s 1 >f C3 Prir 'efuehrer ci't'cnti: ia r'er ti •.*-
3 ist ia the . 33 exterair. tim if the Jos *hich \. r s then -1-


22 -


=r-.cn


reedy cocoon kaarhCpe in the higher circles f the '3T. ?.

. ntiff the doctors vhn ussi3tcc* in the exter linr tion the
Jews were Dr. Ftcrle :nc' Schunmn, both f » h hrfi teen '.re—
vi-usly retire in the r.uth :: si ?rorr - in Cer . ny. (:.0~126,
?r-s. ;x. 160, *. t?l). BrckwonM c- vc the Tri unt 1 fct-
lievc th t he s'.u.h''? v. de r ’. 1 st- kc in his ffi vit, tut he
hrd to •.{’nit th t he aimed the ffid’vit v*lunt:r!ly »n£ vvr.s
emitted - . , \ kc, obrnres. (?r cJc, * . 7726).

He r ls-> re'U''i-tzd the ch which he h* C s- -rn to Ve e rr^ct
(NO-25?, ?ms. Zx. ?51, ?. lbie), tut tic dr it lie h C nr ft
in the rlain In the hscnce f -ay rc"jtacat.ti-c >r the
Fr-’oecutl'n cmfir .a In its al aific‘ nt "oiute. the correct¬
ness of this ch rt. (:*P-£7^e, ?r>a. ~x. .. 7727).

Drtck .d-.itted t.V t he t rev/ this d r ft. (... 77t'7). Ilia de¬
fense counsel .nnounct'* n i:i»tntl'n t> -pm, by cu-. .ittinr
n intermf: tsry .1* tht ;rie on doctor, th t Br* ck v:» in -
:ientr 1 nci .hyslc 1 at tc vnioh \.oul - h-ve rcr.de:td nLn la-
c^’fclc rf un'crsfa'l vs tat si. nific net u' his ct-tc-.ent.

He rtfuacd t - aut. 1 t the iaterr■ t-»ries ea* or-ss-interr vn -
tTies when rc'-ucatci e” the 7ri un* 1. ( . 7,; !-;•}.


.. letter ^f 2? June 1942 fro; Sr'ck th v t .l<r oroves on
its fa not mly tht the Ji 3 re re Icin' extej .in ted, 3
indeed rr ck rdnitted on the ctn< , but -Iso th-t ?r cK i a


wilfully ' ssisti.v la the *nrrv-.. ri t letter 3t tef


-Or. the instruct! >ns of ‘tich-Lcc'er F ?uhlcr
I ii-etc so ie of .ny ten - lrc cy s:.t tl c •*--».
t the dis" s l of *'rl.' 'ef • hre r 01 ’ ocnik


tsO execute his rtf i- 1 ■! ■ ’a .

nut'’ rtouests I nn. *r asfcTic'’


Or. hi» re-
c-Citi-n: 1


Olotccnik at ted his l'Ini.-n »h *


Jev - ft? e:;rul i- < . 1, •<:

» 4 * r ^ t An. 1 \M

calcKly

. t r* nr h'


in t he ..l:d .U of it
culFits shouTc


•«. •-


ntceur ry . v ou y ruitefr," :.t lens fuehrer,
live Ire dy ex rer3Ce your view, tl t v ork


»


/

- 23 «r J

BT- CE |

should -'ro'-ress cuiefcly f?r reasons of j

c. aoufl're clone. (':o- 20 p, ;ros.

lfid , wwOj.

(Eiptnsia surplice).

Brcck vent on to sur^cst th^t the Jews celt to vrork to
sterilised rnd used rs labor. Br-'Ck -'lltredly does not re-
jt-iher hcvinr written this letter hiiself. In s ite of the
f-ct tht the document Is deted Berlin, 23 June 1042, ' F,

V03S Str^sst 4, \hlch v 3 his r.d.dress, he -sserted th t
very likely he v-a • bsent fron "crli.n on tht O.tc «nd thet
the letter wr.a sent ftcr hin to the Front f'r sljn turt.

(Br-ok, 71)10). This la of no iicortrnce. He •flitted
h.vlnr sir net* the letter. .lortovtr, he rdtittf.l thrt he

•

very seld oa wrote person -1 letters to his hi-heat ean-nder
In tht *33, Hi . «ler• C . 7731). In view of the hirh posi¬
tion of the tdflrtoatc, it Is i.iorodiole th -1 he should not
h-ve re* d the ictttr c-rcfully ’.efore dl3. tohinr it, even
if he oonslftrcd the contcnto of no rrott lrcrturc.

"r ck 'r-ws very fine distinctions in the vrdiuf of the
letter, for cx-i^lc, tht tht ohr se "On this occosion’
i« * y no nc-no synon’‘lour t ith *In tnls connection , m
th t the -hr- 3 c used nt.no "In the course of this converse-
€ion". (Br-ck, ". 7522).

7 h -t the defense of Pr*ck is f'bricvtcd is -r^ved ty
rh<r evidence in the record. ” 3*udr«, Dr. * . vho In-

vestlr -ted the criiiml c ct of * irth testified before the
Intern tion- l tfilit-ry TrS-un 1 th t then * irth t>o* over
the t ss cxtcriin tion of the Jrvs, he v. 3 Ire y - »fe-
ci- list In the extemlnttion of hava tUnra. ' * -

viously curried out the t sk of anihil-tin the ina ne.

He h 1 received thi 3 cssi n.vnt fr .1 the Cfa-ncellcry of the
Fuehrer, Souhler'a Office. .. systen which * irth viae *


in his activities in th6 Euthenosic Prorrn ncte it risi¬
ble to exterlin te lr.rre nutters of -coyle with the help of
only o fe\ rssistunts. '"he sene syste:-., with a few inyro-
venents, v.a eoolOyed for the exteriir. tion of the Jews.

' Irth's o ssirorient for the exterain-tion of the Jcv3 c-u
fro-. Fouhler's office, froa the very office where p r ck v.os
teti*. e. llorren invest if ted 'irth's '. r il a' found out
th-t the courier who trourht t is v il c- *.t froo the fueh¬
rer’s Chancellery, -icr^ rtcnstr- sc*-, the -Ice where the
office of the 'ut. n..si. ?ro r ov 3 lie-tec. .. ionr the
yeoolc connected \ith this externia: tion yrvr.a, !!ow‘en
re-.onbtrs FI- nnenburf , Br .ck's deruty. (.;o-2614, Pros. Ex.
SO-i, • . 7700-7). Hr ck r.d:itted th t 1 irth v_o -ctivc in
the Euth’ nuair Pro. ran. («.. 77?3). It a-:y well be th t
Moreen at-rted hla iuventi* • tiona in July 1943 II......

Tr-nacri't, ;. 1C2P9), but by the effiduvit of corf ho, it
io proved th-t 'irth received his - 33 i-meat fro. tnc- '?oun-
d tion", one of the cunoufl.-cd societies of the Eutnen sin
Frorm, :s c..rly os the cuvicr of 1041. (.0-3010, oupr ).

This evidence Is fully corrot or-ted ty the ffidi.vit >f
Cerstein. "iohocnlk * vs in ch rrc of the txter in ti'n
c —3 nt or Luhlln, -nd • irth coll * or- ted v ith hi- in the
exteroin tlon of the Jcvs. "he a cfc'-jcra ure c -.oufl* -
red c 'b th and iah- 1 tl-n* roans •nd c lie' Foundation
Keckenholt. Poct-ra' co-’.-.irsi >:.s toured t!« toons nd vil-
1-res of Pol ad end Csechoolov ki . in order to select ’trsons
for cxter.iid.tion, (i55S-?3, roe. Ex. . lSfO-6).

cr ck t hen Questioned by the '"ribuu- 1, v ..itted tn t the r-s
ch.abera of the eu’h-nc.sia st_tions where the v let ins of the
Iuth< nr sic Prorr . n were killed v.tre c -.oufl . ed -s oLower
roona . (". 7o&9). ~ounc tion *-s one of the code n .n< s


£5 -


r:-.-CK

under which the Euthanusiu Procrun opcrcted. (Brack, E.
7077; FO-fOlO, supra). The aiailsrity betveea the cxter-
nln-tion srr-; nr cue at in the Euth» ncsin 3t..ri.ons -nd that
used by riobocnik .nd r ir*h is not coincident . 1 .

The oroof has shown th-1 Fr- ck hi asv If -fv need plana
for the auss exter-.in. tion of the Jets. In the herinninr
of October l°-;i Fr«ck had o conference with Flchaaan froo
the Ftiohs Security M-.-in Office of -he 3S a 1 * • etzel of the
Belch Ministry for the Occupied Tcrritorier v. the 'solution
of the .Tevish question*. {.TD-997, FroB. x. 10i, I . 77.;1).
Brack decl’ red hinsclf rerdy to colKhor-te i.i t: e nuf-c-
turct of the access' ry ch- ibcra -nd r B»iv • r: tun
for the exter.iim tion of 11 Jews vho were unfit to vork.
Since the . auficturt of thio r. tu.s i a •- oi-r to .cco:;-
pllsh i.i the • • st, Hr ck '-reed to send n it of hio colla¬
borators .nd tnrccl lly his chc 1 st, Kll.tycr, there for
this purpose. bx ck proposed outri ht crterii:. tion of .11
Jew8 vho vitro un-bU to work. Slace Zichn an, when Hitler
had ch-r red wl’h the solution of the Jewish nutation, v.c in
r ret lout \ 1 th Br ck’s -ro.ou .l3, no objection v- 3 voiced
un-inst the enter .in tion -»f those Jews vho vero ua bio to
work v.lrh tho "Fr ck rc »ec'y". (10-3d5, ~ro.*. ~x. £07, ..

7743-4). Xullneytr v. 3 th-. technic 1 ©x"crt on >per, ti .
of the r 3 ch--bv.ro in the cuth-nusi ct (Br-ck, *.

77',2). , ccordinr to rich, nn'8 own estt. te, rozl 1 : tcly

four Million Jcvb ven killed in t.V crtei An tion institu¬
tion:), tr. t is to e y, with the Tr c.< re y . i:‘3-£7?7,
Pros. Lx. toe, . 77-iO; I. :.:. J'icr ..at, T • e 16fl£e).


2r .ck v s -n ardent au- orter of '.i lcr s • rly -a 19C2.


?'e w.s the 9Clst . n to Join the 3. e rost in the -I-ti


- 26 -


51. CK

hierarchy to u -osition of pov.tr end influence in the Chra-
cellery of the fuehrer of the

Breolc v.iB one of the principal cdffiinlstrntors of the
euth-nusiu rro^rivu, which involved the rut hies a ourdcr of
hundreds of thous.ncs of helpless aea, Woaea, *n- children.

This »ca no eltruintic oro'r-a to c:.se the ; ins of t n in-
f'cndinp : nd unavoidable de:.th. It >'s rvther . r ' rr/i t or
the extermination of those who vtre considered - burden on
the St' tc, v.*ho v ere unable to \ ork, who conauoefi vlthout
prodttoinr. !*o l'-v r-ve it auorfici 1 le- lity. It v a
illcr l in its Inception end operation. Judr *eat v s
acc* by so-c lied experts *s to the life ^r e th of . F-1-
ient on the bt.sia of questionnaires without the crat oo
nuch * a hr tin* seen the n tient. It cncon; estd. the aurr er
or Gwr.v. no nd citizen* of occupied countries dike. It
•xtended to coacentr tion c' -.o iiu* tea of un-Gcir. n n- tlon-
rlity roroitly det-iaed in ft; : ay.

Scientific killers tr-int' 1 in the r-a ch .hero of the
euth'n sin ut tior.s vtre sent to the ’. r zt to osiot in tho
atafl .order of Jews, r r ck aer.t • uth n .-5 -ersonnel to
flooocnik, vho r* n the exterti i tion c V’a in the re: of
l Lublin. Fr ck conferred \ith Sichfnn, vho . s in clrr.-c of

the solution of the Jewish ouestloa, end • «wd to surtr-lse
the construction of r'asinr rom tus for the tarter..in tion
of r. 11 Jews uartlfi to work. Ho sent Kulloeytr, the au’-ervi-
sor of s ch: tbers in cuth*.rsit st tions, to tic in this
rojcct known ns the "3r* ck 're xdy". Srrck did not liiit
his Jewish persecution to outrirht murder. He -ro-occ-e th.i
those Jews not exter-.in ted iiaeffi tely ico use of utility to
work to sterilized. He iaiii: ted sUriliz* tion cx-erLoents
on Polish Jevs in the ..uschv.itz Concentr tion Crop v.ith X-r ys.


- ?7


ST- C”

Tho victiu3 1 :.f ter Icinr subjected to severe I-ny '.urn3 in
the fertiUl -rtf, were c stinted by oper:tion. Host of
then were 1 .ter killed.

The Prosecution subnits that the evidence rroves tnr t
Erode vra u ; ri:icioi 1 in, uccessory to, ordered , betted,
took consent Inr r-;t in, * nd xr a connected v-ith «1 no rnd

enterprises involving n-dic l tx riat- 1 ion on hua: n sub¬
jects without their concent, r«nd the execution of the I.uth-
■ n salt Promm, in the course of which •ctivitica rjurders,
brutalities, cruelties, tortures, trncltiea ad other ln-
huT ne -eta were counitted _,ad thet hia r oilt 1 . s teen <o-
t-tlinhed under Counts I, II, III rad TV of t:.e Xndiotncnt.


“IklldSI T H I BUK A t NO. I

CnSE NO. 1


CLOSING BRIEF FOR


K..RL BRuIDT


Janos H. kchnnoy
^iKxnmiur G. hardy
Arnoet hcrllk-hochvald
Esther Jane Johnson

For:

Telford Taylor
Brlfndlcr General, U.S.a.,

Cnlcf of Ccun«ul for War Crlnce


INTRODUCTION


It Is alleged, In escenoe, under Count I of the
Indietnent, that Karl Brandt oonopired and ngreed with
others, pursuant to n common design, to perform medical
experiments on Involuntary human subject*:under Counts
II rind III (Wnr Crimes and C r lncs alnst Hunnnity,
rnspeotlvely), that ho was a principal In, nccccsory to,
order* d, rbottc 1 , took a consenting part In, nnd wno
oonncCOcd with plans nnd enterprises Involving medical
experimentation on involuntary human subJoots and the
oxeoutlon of tho oo-cllcd ■euthanasia"program; under
Count IV, that he wnn n aenber, nftor 1 September 1939,
of the SS, an organization dole rod to be criminal by tho
International Military Tribunal.

The nets recognized ns Vhr Crimes nnd C r lnes ngnlnst
Humanity nrc not forth in Paragraphs 1 (b) and (c) of
Article II of Control Counotl Lao N 0 . 10. Membership In
an organization deolnrod orlnlnnl by tho International
Military Tribunal Is defined no a crlmo in P-rngraph 1(d)
of tho o:ao article.

The orltorla of criminality nro eot forth In Paragraph

2 of Artlolo II of Control Counoll Lnn No. 10, whloh roads

%

In part an follows:

■ 2 . any person without regard to nationality or tho
capacity in whloh ho rotrd, Ip deemed to have
committed n crime as defined In Paragraph 1 of thlr.
Artlolo, If ho wan (a) n principal or (b) was an
nee 08 oory to tho oonnl olon of nny such crlmo or
ordered or abotted the s me or (c) took a consenting
part therein or (d) was connected with cl-ns or on-
torprlcoE Involving lta oo~nlssion or (e) was n member
of any organization or *roup connected with tho


commission of any such crime ..
I. POSITIONS OF RESPONSIBILITY


Tho defendant Karl Brandt held positions of great
power and responsibility in tho state nedloal services
of Natl Germany.

Hu Joined the Hail party In January 1932 and the SS
In 1934, In tta latter year, at the age of 30, ho became
tho attending physician to *fl0lf Hitler and retained this
position until 1945. His close personal relationship to
tho Fuehrer explains his rapid rise to oower. On tho day
Poland was lnvndod In 1939, Hitler ordered Brnndt and
Philipp Bouhlor to o'-rry out tho oo-o- lied cuth-nasla
program. By Fuehrer decree dated 28 July 1942, he was
appointed General Co-missloner of the Hoalth and Medianl
Sorvioos and wno directly responsible to Hitler. Br-ndt
wen tho only G r rnan nedlonl officer who hnd cueh dlrcot
fooponslMllty. By dooroc of 25 august 1944 he was ap¬
pointed Rpioh Comal ttsioricr of the Health and Hodloal
8 0 rvloof , " r nk equivalent to that of n R 0 lfch Minister.

Ho attained tho rank of Gruppenfuohrcr (M»Jor G r n- rnl) In
tho SS. (110-475, Pros. Ex. 4, R. 89 ct ocq.h Brandt won
also n numb r of the Reich Research Council from 1942 un¬
til tho end of tho war.(NO-1730, Pros. Ex. 441, R. 2091).

Aeldo from hie personal Influence and lntlnnto con¬
nection with Hitler, Brandt* .r • t t pwor In the nodi-
oal sor/lc n onno froo hlr po ltion ns G 0 i'oral Co nlnolonor
rnd later Reich Oonniasloner of the Health and Medical
8 crvloc-. By the dccroo ol 20 July 1942 Kltl r established
for the first tine a nodical »nd health offlot-1 under hie
direct control. This decree also co: ~1 f -lonod the defen¬
dant Han-11 oaor ns Chief of tho Medical S. -vices of tho
W 0 hrtascht while, In the field of civilian health adminis¬
tration, D r . Leonardo Oor.tl, thu Seorctnry of St to for


Heftlth end the Reich Health Lender, node responsible

for *coordinated 9 measures■. As to Brandt, the decree stated:

■g. I empower Prof. Dr. K-rl Brmdt, subordinate only
to ae personally and receiving hlc instructions direct¬
ly froa no, to carry out npecl 1 tasks nnd negotiations
to readjust the requirements for doctors, hospitals,
medical supplies, etc., between the military nd the
civilian sectors of the Health and Medical Services.

iiy plenipotentiary for Health and Medical Services la
to be kept informed about the fundamental events In
tho Medical Service of the » r hmacht and In the civi¬
lian Health Scrvloe. Ho Is nuth orUed to_ lntorygno .in
a responsible omnnor.* (emphasis supplied) (.. 0 - 080 ,

Pros, Ex. 5, R. 9d).

Thu* Brandt was given oxtcnolve powers over both
Handloaor nnd Conti and through then over the Arny, Navy,
Luftwaffe, Waff on SS, >.nd civilian medical aervloon. He was
subordinated to no one e> ve the Fuehrer; he wan tho nnn to
.aot for tho Fuohrt r in medical matters. It In also signi¬
ficant that tho decree authorized Br-ndt "to Intervene In a
rooponolllc manner* nnd dir ctcd th -1 ho bo kept Informed
of "fundamental cv.-ntn' 1 . It la difficult to lna*lno what
could bo nor. Uundnncntnl than a policy of performing modl-
onl oxporlmontn Involving torture nnd doath on Involuntary
hunan Bubjocto.

On 5 Soptonbor 1943, Hitler loouod a second dcoroo
empowering Brandt " with oentrally ooordlm tin*: • qI 'ir.-ct-
Inr; the prot Ions and no tlv ltl^o of the entire Medical and
Healt h S ervice nooordtn g to Inst ructions *. The ordor ox'-'reao-
ly stated that tho General Commissioners authority oovorod
tho field of nodical eoler.oc and rosonreh. (110-091, Pros,

Ex. 6, R. 94). However, It ie apparent Mint this docroc
was lssuod to ol-rify rather th-n extend tho powers of the
General Commlsoloner, ne Brandt had the rlpht ("nd, lndeod,
duty) *to lntcrvono In a responsible manner" pursuant to
the decree of July, 19‘2.


Finally, on 25 August 1^44, the Fuehrer elevated
Brandt to Rpich Coir.issloner for the Health and Medical
Services one*, stated that In this cecity "his office
rnnks ns highest Reich authority*. He wns again author-
lied "to Isfuc lnstructlor.3 to the of Ices end organiza¬
tions of the State, P-rty, an.’. M 0 hmacht which arc con¬
cerned with the prohlons of the ilcdlc-'l • nd. Health
Scrvlc fl." (110*062, Pros. Zx. 7, R. 95). See also the
organization chart drawn by Brandt. (EC-645, Pros. Ex. 3, .

R. 88 ot aoq.) This decree was issued to rosolvo a
struggle for po?/er between 5r*ndt and Conti.(Brandt,

R. 2602). Cert-.Inly, the doorcc loos no uoro th"n give
Br-nit a norc august title and rostr.to his powers, powers
ho had already rooolvcd on 28 July 1912. Er.-ndt tostlfiod
that It norcly "otrengthuned* his position. (R. 2502).

In this srno connection, it Is lnportant ?o note cer¬
tain provisions of the Service R-mxl-tlon for the Chief of
the bodied S r rvidc8 cf the tfchrnncht issued to the defen¬
dant K n loser by Kvltcl on 7 August 194-:. Paragraph 2 and
3 of Soctlon II (Duties) thereof ror.Cs in part as follows:

"2. Tho Chief of tho Medlc-l Services of the Johr-
naoht will dlroct the total licdic-l Services of the
Vrhrmcht • a far ns tho spool 1 lei'- 1 ccro mod,
with regard for tho r.ilitr.ry lnr tract Ions of the Chief
of tho High Conna.nd of tho «rncd Forces "Tit. the goiVT-
nl rules _of the Fuehrer* n Oom lrslon r Gene ral for
kodlo' l“and ficolt hT eP'vr the nts.

■ 3 , T:-. ' ' of thi Efd.lc-l 8 rvlcoc 3f th< ' hr-

nroht -Til lnfora the Fuehrer 1 c Co nls • Iotk rgeneral
7'Y out h-:■ lc events In th : i id : •-•’loai .

S. r vYooo o t the . .rr^cht. " (.• X:7, Pros. Ex.11,R.103)

Thus, we see that H-ndlosir ir a ordored by this

3 c rvloo Regulation to follow the rules of Qonernl

Comics loner Brnndt and to lnfora bln of the "b^slc events"

In the field of tho Medical 8 c rvices cf tho W e hm cht. This

field covered tho nedlc'l services of the «r“F»


Luftwaffe, and Haffen BS. This repulatlon srn-, Issued on
7 Au.:ust 1244 to replace one of 28 July 1942. (R.102).

Cn tho letter Ante, Hondlos-r m3 appointed Chief of the
Uc.'.lonl Services of the Uehrr-cht by the sene Fuehrer
dcorcc which nolo Brnndt G c ncr»l Co nlealon.r: on 7 Aucuet
1944, H-.ndloscr rollnqulshod his position ns Chief of the
Ar ny Uodlcnl Xnspootoreto which ho h-d n..ld-since February
1941. (110-443, Pros. EX. 10, R. 98). It oust therefore ho
considered nhothor the Service Reltulntlon of 80 July 1942,
whloh Is not nvnllnhl , nleo required Hnndlooor to report
to Brnndt. Ho other conclusion eon be drawn. P-racrnph 5
of the Fuehrer Decree of 28 July 1948 explicitly orders
that Brnndt -Is to be Kept lnforncd about the fun-cental
events In the Uodlonl B„rvloo of tho Mahranooht and In the
Civilian Health Servloc. ho Is authorized t0 Intervene In
o rooponsltlo manner! Thuo, os orrly no 29 July 1042,

Brnndt nos the toohnlonl or podlcnl superior of K-ndloecr
and Conti who were ordered to report to Mr.. In Pnrn.tv-oh 6
of hie affidavit, tho dcfondnnt Hnndloeer expressly states
that nfter he hoenne Chief of the Kodloal Services of tho
•Johrn.oht on 28 July 1912, 'Dr. Karl Brnndt, Oen'rrl
Oonral on loner for Medial and Health ».tt.r::, and Inter
p.eloh Oonalosloner for Bedlonl and Health Hotter*, was ny
In cdl"to su -orlor In nodle-1 affaire-. (KO-443, Pros. Ex.

10, R.P9). Sec, also tho organizational oh-rt of the
Uodlonl Serviced of Km 3 0 hrnnoht drawn by Hnndlonor.

(HC-2S2, Pros. Ex. 9, H. 97).

•The extensive power and authority of l-rl Brandt Is
crovol by other evidence In the r oerd. Scbrocdcr st-ted
in Parnftrn, h 8 of his .if Id vlt that -Earl Brandt, H-n’.loser
end RostacK were Informed of the ced.lc-1 research aorK oon-
duoted l-y the Luftwaffe-. 0;C-.49,Pros.Ex.l3O, R. -.7.:!.


Her-over, the- orf nizr.tioncl civ rts of the Hediool Service
of the Luftwaffe drawn by Schroeder show that Brandt had
supervisory authority over tho Hcdlc-l 8ervlce of the
Luftwaffe both before 1344 when Hip he was In coonand and
•after 1044 when Schroeder was In comnnd. (1*0-418, Pros.

Ex. 12; :.*Oil9 l Pros. Ex. 13, H. 105).

Tho s-no fact with r spcct to tho Medical S r rvloo of
the SS 1 c proved by the or-an*.optional charts drown by
KrupowsJcy. (II0-416, Pres. Ex. 22; NO-417, Pros. Ex. 23,

R. 121). His rower was such th' t he could rcll ve all
O c rnan physicians fron th- obligations of the r.hyolclan-
prtlont rol"tlonohlp and could erdor such physicians to
report sorlous lllnosooo of hiph rcovcrnr.cnt' 1 officials
to hln. (NO-119, Pros. Ex. 4i5, R. 2586).

So much for Karl Brandt 1 a position nr. General
Connlrrlencr and R c o!h Cocaineloner of tho Health and
Lcdlerl Borvlaos. It han been established that Brandt bo-
oane a aerber of the Roioh Research Council in 1942
(N0-1730, Pros. Ex. 441, R. 2091; Brandt, R. 2598). Tho
purpose of the Reich Rcjearch Council was set forth In a
Fuehrer decree of 9 June 19 2, which reads In part as
follows:

"The nuoconlty to cr'/n’ all available forces to
hi ’host cfflclcno:* In the interest of tho state
roqulron, not only In poaoetino but also, -mil es¬
pecially, In wnrtlr.o, the oonccntr-tcd effort of
sClontlric research and It- chann 1 !lxntiou to-
a rd tho ,ro*l to bo wired.

■Therefore, I co In Ion the Rploh i£-roh'-ll Horaonn
Oo..rln • to cnt»bllHh -8 an lndc -endent entity a
Rcloh Research Cornell, which In to nerve this ' ur-
pose, to t-he over Its chair.mnship hloself "nil
to ,-Tlvu it * chart i r.

’Leadlnp non of science abovo all, are to mho
rosoarch fruitful for rfarc by wcrklnft to,tether
in th lr s.ecial fields.' (2JO-894, Pros.Ex.36,R.K4)

Brandt v/as a nenber of the Presidential Council

(Pmcldlalrnt) of tho Reich Rose-roh Council, n policy

- 6 —


making body of 21 nenbere n^de up- of cabinet Ministers,
high ranking allltnry officers, and high ranking party
members. (Brandt, R. 2505). Hlaaler, Bonannn, Conti,

Keltol, and Milch were oo-nonbcr? -;lth Brandt. «t least
from the tlno Rostock nr .suaed office under Brandt ns head
of the Office for Solenoe and R e cearch, (following the
Fuehrer Decree of 5 S 0 ptenter 10-13), the Reich R r scarch

9

Council was bubjoct to a decree of supervision by Brandt
as General Commissioner. S c e the organization chart of
Brandt's office (H0-Gd5» Pros. Ex. 3, H, OB).

The proof has shewn that the R c ioh Research Council
supported and furthered nc '.lc 1 ex rlnentatlon on involun¬
tary human subjects - concentration cop lmntcs. «s early
ns Deoemhcr 19.2, the Rolch Roocarch Council wan asked to
peso Judgment by the RelchnSiiilstcr of Flnanoc on a roquest
for rcccroh funds by Rclohsarzt SS Qrnwlts. Dr. Montzcl of
tho Reich Re oaren C .unoil np roved of this allocation of
funds on 25 March 19-.3 saying: "As f--.r -a they, to r snnllcr
part, nro meant for the extonnlon of scientific roscaroh
pos'lb 11 It 1 co they port-ln exclusively to such natters which
can bo o rrlod out only with tho rati rial (prisoners) aooono-
1 Ho to th*. flaffon 83 «nd thcivfora cannot be undertaken by
any other roocarch agency." (0>2-?S, Pros. Bx. Z'.‘, R.152).
(Traneorl't la Incorrect rt this ». Int mi' refrrenoo should
bo node to Djour.’.cnt Book Mo. l). The ?r scout Ion called
the Trll uivil 1 r, attor.tion t, th finding or th International
Military Tribunal in Cnsc N . 1 which rondo no fellows:

"In connection with th a ‘ministration of tho concen¬
tration c m a, the SS cnb rked on n srrlou f i-y erl-
nento on hunm b. Ingn which -or< perfomrd in rloom rs
cf xir r or c nocntritlon c-mp lnTvtes. These ox rl-
nentn Included Ireelin' to death and killing by poison
bulli ts. The SS wn:» -ble to obtain nn allocation of
Government funds for this Kind of rcre roh cr. the
grounds that they had access to human material not
"vollnble to thcr agendoc." (R. 153).

- 7 -


The activities of the Reich Here'rch Council in
criminal xper lnont-it Ion on involuntary hunan subjects were
not United to approving fun’.s for research by the SS.

Reset rch asu laments were commissioned iy.lt, lnvolvln;-
experiments on concentration o.-np Inmates. Thtis, In the
autunn cf 1913, Rancher wcelvnrt an nesl -nnent fron the
Roich Recenrch Counoll to conduct dry fr czlng experiments,
while Hlrt wne carrying out the mustard prfT experiments In
Hntzwoller with Its support. (::0-6S0, ?x^o. Ex. 120, h.371,
ct itoq; Doc. BO-13?., Pros. E::. 119, R. 369). An Interest
was also shown In the Mood corrulm.t developed by Richer
In D.,chnu, during uxi orlncnXn with which concentration cnnp
lnrnt. e wore oh t. (HC-613, Pros. Ex. 2-13, R. 962). *nd,
torethor with the Luftwaffe, the Roich R P scnrch Council
sronsorod ty.hun, yellow fever, and jnun’loc ex'erlurntn
Yy Hn-ron nn Lnnntoa of the I.’atzwoller Concentration Cnnp.
(jrCv-137, Pros, Ex. 109, R. 73?). Suoh were the notlvitloa
of the Roich R r i»oarch Counoll.

There can ho no doubt that Emndt was lnfomod of
those activities. Indeed, ho had personal oontact with the
,-nu roaoarch on concentration nnnn Inmat. c by Hlrt.(Infra)
There wero only two doctors on tho Presidential Council
(Brandt and C ntl) nnd only four lectors In the scientific
do, nrtnontB and xioldfl of lonlpotontinrlca (Sohrclbor,

Blono, C -uorhruoh, an Jottcn) (Br-nCt, R. O .607). C rt- lnly,
each of the .• non knew -Act tho other was doing within tho
Counoll.

Those then wore tho .oaltlons A responsibility of the

defendant Karl Brant! trr^nnl physician to Ad«lf Hltlir,

Orurrenfuohrer in SS, co-director of the euthanasia program,

General Connies loner nnd Reich Caanlcrlonor of tho Health

and Kcdlool Servl -an, end member f the Presidential Council

— 8 —


of the Reich Research Council. Branft used the for* 7*0 in c
monitionsi hir rr n'l influence, and his lntlonte connec-
tl n with the Fuehrer in r annner which involved the
commission of the war Crines and Crimes aits Inst Humanity ast
forth in the Ifadlctncnt.

IP PERSONAL P..R TIC IP..TI OW 11 1 CRI LIIPaL EX?' RIhZNTAT ION

It is not to he ex'CO'Od that h nnn In the -osltlon
of Dranlt would sto p to erf min;* crinlnal experiments
hlnaclf. This was left to willing and ambitious hands at
a lower level. The ; roof h’clearly shown, however, that
ho personally oncourapcd cx erlnontutlon on human boinpo
without their consent. what Is nore culpable, with
full knonlodpo th"t concentration twtnp inmates were bclnp
nyatonatlo"!Iy cx; crir. ;ntcd upon :y otors of the Luftwaffe
*rny, S8, and civilian health scoter, ho never used the tre~
nondoun power that wan hie to end thin crwrolon which re¬
sulted in the nur’er, t<rtuac, nnd inhunanc treatnent of
thousands of helpless nan, men, and children.

The •Tnvrncn of the chr.r/re under Paragraph 5 of Count

II (./nr Crimes) and Pararra h 11 of Count III (Crimes

/*calnot Hutianity) is that all of th< defend nto were rrin-

61 alo In, aoco . rica to, ordered, abetted, took r. oonsen-

tin.* j art In, • n.’ wore c naeoted ulth Inns and enter rises

Involvin ' I lie 1 cx -rlnents *.lthout .ho oubjccto 1 consent^

In the o'ur’c -f which nurlor , brutalities, eru.-ltl«o,

t rtun:«, tr.ol’.l.s, *nd other lnirm-nc rote wer. cornltted

In R’r.a Ta.h 6 the ex • rl.ucnt' 1 cubjoot arc rllopcd to

have been clvlll no and nenKre af the .-mcd f'rccn of

nations then at war with the Ocman H 0 lch, while in P-ra-

•ra h 11 , Herman civilians and nationals of other countries.

Th.r; in, for urporce of tills ease, ll»s th, only rl~nlfl-

o-ar.t difference In rorf of ultlnr.ee f cts. a 3ar Crime

- 9 -


in necessarily a C r ine Against Kunnnity, while n Crlne

Apnlnat Humanity is n T7nr Opine only if coralttcd against

%

n civilian fron occu: led torritory or a prisoner of war.
Under fcmtfr.'nh 6 , twelve different typer. of ex'erl-
nenta /'.re particularize*. Of these, Brandt Is charged
with f colnl responsibility for nnd participation In ton,
n/ancly, the hlph altitude, frees in’, nnlnrie, pas, sulfa¬
nilamide, 1 -onc, nuncio and nerve regeneration and hone
transplantation, seawater, c ldenic Jnundlo?, oterillza-
tion nnd typhus ex .rlncnts. In order to olrrlify tho
issues, tho Prooeoutlon has withdrawn its ohnr o of ni—
tiolpatlon in the high altitude ex crimonts.

It lo not lnouabont u on tho Prosecution to show
that Brandt was familiar with nil of the details of nil
of thono experiments, It la sufficient to .rove that he
know or should have known of tho systematic uso of invol¬
untary human subjects for nodical ex; orlncnto by n-cnclcs
over which ho oxorcliod n substantial doproo of power and
authority. (A! llontlon cf Ynmnohltw , -6 S.Ct. 340, 377
(1946).) Thin and nor tho Prooeoutlon !.as rovo'.

The • x. orlmento In which there lo direct evidence of
pirticl'ntlon by Brandt rill be ‘icousstd first.

A. fULr^:Tu::iDH ex?~ P.IIEHT8 (Indiotnont, Par, 6 (E))

Experiments with sulf -ini Inal do ~arc conducted in the
Rnvonnbruok Concentration Can, fr n fnt r.l .lie of 1042
until August 1943. For • detailed statement n the crmln-
nllty l* the c ex crlnonte ace the Prom cut lor.'r. brief on
Oobhardt. The ;.: ex c In nts w r rf^racd by tho defen¬
dants Fischer nnd Ohorheusor, nnon> others, under the
direction of tho defendant Ocbhnrdt. (KO- 22 G, Pror. Ex. 206,
R, 767). The ex: erlnontr .1 subjects w ro predominately

Polish women, sene of when wcr. active in th-: rerlctnncc

- 10 -


movement.(Brnol-Lntor, R. 767; K.nrolewsfcn, R. 816, Dzldo,

R. 880; Kusni rozuk, R. 857). They clearly did not volun¬
teer. (crncl-?l''ter, R. 789; Knrl, R.823; Dz. R.8-15; Kub.

R. 8611 Knpzfcfi, R. 1*151). The def end'nts Fischer nna
0>..-r'neuiser rdnlttod that nt least three porsons died no n
result of the ex orlncnto. (’.'0—177, ?rcs. Ex. 207, R.778;

NO-187, ?roo. Ex. 206, R. 780). Other evidence,, h -rever,
proves thet five of the mibjeote .'.led ns renult of the ex-
erln.nto end six nrre executed Inter. (Dz.R.8-15; Kuo.R.662).
* full re. ort n n the iiulfnnilonldc ox‘crlnentu wno
plven by Gobhnrdt nnd Fincher In the Third Koctlnp of tho
Connultln • Physicians of tho tfrhrnnoht, held from 2-1 to 26
Key 19-13 nt thi Ixilltnry Ue-'.lonl A 0 ndcmy In Berlin. Knrl
Brandt v»s ono of tho h norod quests nt thin meeting and ho
hoard tho lccturoo by Gcbh-rdt nn 1 Flochor. (Brandt ,R, 2368).
Gpbhnrdt tootirio’. that ho lnsl/tod on onfcinr n conploto

ro ort on th.-no ox. orlncnto nt the nectln ; thnt thor' was

•

c nnldernMe discussion nbout tho content of the leoturo
with th. 'orron In cl.- r rc of tho pro. r-n for the mooting;
th t ho renonb red this rson to h^vo been the defendant
Rostock but thnt ulnoo Rostock denied It, It nlrht have
boon Sahrolber; thnt tho rro:rnn for tho mooting llBtcd hlo
lecture under tho title *S ool- l Exrorlnonts - , thnt this In¬
dicated he wnn tryln.- t oh soar thin * ununu- 1 ; -nd thnt
the wh lo ru* .Vet Vre disoun.od 1th Rest ok or Sehrclbcr
durln • the »-rnn .-enento for the ncitln- of !!ny 19-13
(R. .105-6). There 1 n.* been c ntlnunua corr rrondenoe
canocrnln;* tho ex crl: r.te between G Q bhardt, Ornwltz, nnd
Rostock -r Bohrclb. r. Gmwitz 1..! n c^u. letc ri rt on
the cx;erlmontn nhen he ne • tint.-' with Rost ck or Schrolber.
(R. -1107). Oothardt testified quit, clcnrly to the effect

th t ho w-s of- osod tc nny on:-u fl> *c and that ho vna

- 11 -


'\nxlcu3 to brln.^ the whole subject or these experiments
Into the open. When he pave the Introduction to the lec¬
ture by Fischer, he specially stated that the experiments
h-d been c-rrled out on human beings. (R.-J109). Gobhnrdt
do 08 n«-t definitely renumber, according to his testimony,
whether ho said the experimental subjects were oonoontrn-
tlon can;* Inmates. The defendant Fischer has stated that
this was made clear. (NO-472, Pros. S y . 2-13, R. 911;of.,
Fincher R, *1365). Gcbhnrdt ntetod that the cllnlc-l de¬
tails of the experiments were cx lainod In grant detail.

The meeting wan told that 7B persons had boon experimented
on, that tho Infections had been artificially Induced, that
Various drugs had boon used In treating tho Infcotlane,
that ourploal tr< ntnont up a used, nnc*. th«t three peroono
died. (Ocbhnrdt, R. -1109-10).

Brandt wan Informed About tho sulfanilamide cx: crl-
nontn oven hofere the meeting In Ur.y 19.3. Ocbhardt testi¬
fied that >n an oooaaion prior to the martin.- ho net Rootook
and Brandt In a rallrond station, end that .ho discussed
publication >f the results of the experiments with then.

(R, 4222). Oebhurdt nfflraod that lurin'• an lnterrctatlon
of 0 November 19*lo, he ot ted that:

"I '*n ruro I nco t'ld Brnndt, without any ftr’or, that
this anonymity r the oh - la nutter Is rather nom onsl-
o-l. N v, ho ol 1 : • hi o-nnet -cn. ’or thou*h, an’. I
onci told Rostech, * D- y ,u rc"llr.c uh'-t wo are roport
lap. I do not knjw whet Oravltc .r to t you. I an
tollIn • y u Hinnlcr or cr d this, n’ that onnournod
the question of sulfanilamide that la being done* Those
ex crlnento arc tu bo j.« rf rrv ', but I lvo tho colon-
ttflo a '.vloo only bocuro Orman oolonoc can make uso
of lt.'»

Ocbhardt was «hhed durlnr the name lntcrr >.atlon whether It
was nado clear to Rostock and Brandt th"t tho cx erlnentn
were being nn'e on rlsoners and he re lied, ■Evidently".

(K. 4222).


- 12 -


Hrvinf: acquired knowledge, Brandt was not privileged
to ren^ln silent; he who 'inder a duty to net. Er-ndt did
nothin-. He Id not investigate the cx ; orinents; he .’id
not volco any bjeotion nt the ne< tln ; :; he did n t ask for
n re ort fron the SS; he did nit re.-ort to the Fuehrer. He
took a "consenting -art* in this crininnl use of holplesa
concentration coafJ lnaate 3 . In view of his personal ex-
. erionco with G 0 rnan Ju3tloc, ho now ndnlts that hun rods
of thousands of concentratIon c- np innat< o were unjustly
inoarcor' ted. (R. 2622). Concentration o r.p cnditlono
wore n-t rtrnn.'c to Brandt no ho concedes having visited
Sachaonhauson, Ornnlonbuiv, iiauthnusen, and Hatxwoilnr.

(R. 2622).

Even thou-th It be anuur.cd that tho exffrlnonts were
completed nt tho tine Brnndt obtained kno*rlcd<rv» hio in¬
activity o ruJtitutoo hln an aoooor.ory after tho fact. Eut
cuoh was not tho o-no, no late as august, 19 3, six Poliuh
women v/oro ox .orlnontnlly operated on by forco in tho l unkor
at Rnvonobruok. (HC- 86 - 1 , Pr:s. Ex. 229, R. 923). Thooo
eru'nn could have boon onvod torture and mutilation if ono
tn -n nt authority had objoot* at tho meeting la Kay, 1943.
Koroov.r, 'n investigation (f the sulf-mllanUe ox orlnonto
would have brou* 3 it to light the b r.t, nuoelc, and nervo
oxp or lints (Indictment, P-r. 6 (F) oor.duotcd by tho ono
:orror; -t thr o'nc pl«ce. Instead, f <ur C^ya 1 at or, Brandt
wan romiootlng concentration o> n inn-too for opldonlo
Jaundlco «x oriaonts. (S.o, infra.).

B. EglDEKIC J^UIi DICE EXr£hEffiHT 8 (Indictncnt, Pnr. 6 (H))

Frtlarln.- the attack on Rueslfi, .e, idinlc J^un ’ice
(hepatitis e edonica) boc^nc a llacacc of ".ajor Pro; ortions
in tho German oVhrnncht. (Gutzeit, R. 27-7). In floni ' uiu-r>,

- 13 -


casualties up to 60$ •.lore roporfed from this disease.

('*0-010, Pros. Ex. ie7, R, 735). Accordingly, /n lntcnclvo
effort wne r.ndc to discover tho causes of and inoculations
against ci ldcnlc Jaundice. Doha on "nd Gutzelt of tho Army
Medic 1 Inspectorate and Kaogon of tho Medici Service of
the Luftsrffc wore anon.: the doctors working on thin subject.

Dohnon woe one r.f the flrrt to lo'l-te a virus which
wan clalned to he tho c-ur of Jaundice. This was ace.on-
; liahod by inoculating anidn with -cran token from hunnn
■olnrc cufforln • fron the disease. (Gutzelt, R. 2695).
Howovcr, oonr.idcrnblo diver-once of opinion ntill existed
r.a to whether Jnundloo woo caused by bnotcrin ,r a virus.
(Outzeit , R. 3045). On 1 June, 19:3, Gmultz - Reich
Physician of the 85 -nskod Hinnlur'a oonoont to placing
c‘ noentrntlon om,. innnti o at tho disposal f Karl Er-ndt
for J"undloo research, He otatod in hln letter that
Er ndt was supporting tho work of Dohuen ' nfl it was thought
ncoona*ry to infect hua-n beings with a Jaundice virus cul¬
tivated in nnlmlo. Grawltz advise! that c-ooo of rto'«th
anon,-- tho ex erinontnl cul .loots wer to l e nntlol-atod.
(IJO-OIO, Pros. Ex. 187, K, 73 D). Consl 'orai lo stress by
tho dofonoc has be n ut on the contention th't Jnundloo
is n't usually • T- tnl disease. . , thin rs it r.ny, Growltz
did n't fltato whether the deaths -> re t > bo brought about
for purpose of rf min,- ut rior (ns in th o-oo rf tho
high nltitu'.o ox. orlucntn) or whether they were to bo ex¬
pected fron the disease itccLf (ns in tin- ease of tho typhus
ox; erinonts).

Kim lor consented to the use f 8 P'-llsh Jews who had

been anndennod to death in the «unchwlt^ Concentration C'.np,

(KO-'Jtl, Pr")0. Ex. 188, R. 737). The experiments were

oarrled out by Dohaen in tho Suohscnhnuscn Conccntr tl*n

- 14 -


0pn?, end sent of the vlotloa died ns a result. (NO-371,

Proa,.Ex. 106, ri. 753). Even the defense witness Gutzelt
- ndnitted that IX^hraon worked In Snehsonhnusen, but states
thrt thin wna nerely a ruse to nvoM turning over the Jaun¬
dice virus to Grnv/ltz end, In reality, no Infection cxerl-
ncnt 3 were norfomod. It w a not explained by the -ltnoso
why his collohor-tor Donnen, nho wnc net n nenber of the
S3 and In no way subordinated to Grnwlt^, should h-vc
cn v ;-ocd In r.urh rl'iculous scientific "horeo ’lay".

(Gutzelt, h, 2750).

I/.oroov r, or in .t w-.o lr3.>lio''tud In tho Jnundloo ex-
1 or Inc n to by Hrm -on nnrt Dohr.on In 1944. These arc dssorlbod
In the Pr‘ooouti n'n brief on Handlo; r. «t n nootlnp with
roprooontiitlvoa of the hr rich t and H<,lch Rpscrrch Council

on 86 nu.mct 1944, Rostock no Chief of the Office for
Science w.d R r sonroh designated .••a "urrvnt* tho ronenroh
of Ho-'ton on ho.otitis erldenlou. (N0-S92, Pros. E x . 457,

K. 3400).

0. TYPHU I UEHT8 (Indiotswnt, ?' • r. 6 (J))

The nttook against Ruaslp In 19*1 i?nvc rise to nnny
nllltnry noHorl problor.ir, nut the least cf which wrs typhus.
The disease ronchcd serious rroportions In the fall of 1941
nn»' tyuhus vncclm was o so rco that nly ‘.ootcra, nurses,
nnd other oroonncl In exposed positions could bo riven pro¬
tective lnocul-tl ns. (Schnidt, R. 3160-1 .

To nil vl* tc the ahortn.:. cf vaccine, H-n 'loSvr, nc
Arny M 0 dlc'>l Ins* rotor, rco r nncn led thet pruduotl n be
pi need In tho hands of the :• r.-c ac-lo : hnmaceutlcnl
industry. (NO-1323, Pron. Ex. 452, R. 3062). Two b-ole
types of voolne nero rreduced on e substantial sonic?
the V»oii;l vaccine fron the intestines of lice by the

- 15 -


Typhus end Virus Institute of the OKH nt Cracow(and
later Lenb< r.:) and the Cox, Glldentinter, Hn-pon vaccine
ror. cultures In chicken e *.:c by the Bchrln,' works of
1 . 0 . Parl on -it i L-r' urr and the Robert Koch Institute In
Berlin. The /e 11 vaccine hod Ion,; since proved ltc value
but tho efficiency of the c-• • vaccine war. not otabllshed.
(KC-732, Proa. Sx. 451, 3060). At n conference ^n

29 Decenbcr 1941 participated In by Handles r, Conti,
Glldenoln ter, nnd hrupowaky, it won decided to determine
tho effcotlvor.sn of the e,;.* v-cclnc by ex 'orinenta on
huunn bclnpa. (NO-865, Pros. E y . Pi 7, R. 1134; conpnro
Handlon* r* n ctntnn nt, SO-732, ru rr.) .

A n a result -f this lee In Ion, the exp rlncntol sta¬
tion In the -juohunual 1 Concentration Cbm; war established
nntl cxpc-rlnontn to test th<: ff ctlvcncn:*. f various v.aooineo
by artificially lnf.iotlnp ini"*oo, without their c<<nocnt,
were perforated fron Jfutur ry 1942 until early In 1945.

(Kofi'»n, n, 1154 ot sen.).

Tlx*• jtoMi.b of typhus v/iccinc production and alloca¬
tion was obviously a natter within the Jurisdiction bf
Brandt after hie appointment no O r ncml Conalasl »mr by
the Fuehrer Decree f 26 July 19 2. « clear r oaro of
coordination of naterlol onnot be f und. Handloser, had
rlnary control ,v>r vaccine distribution. (Kan ’los- r,

R, 3074, 3090; con > r th< ton tint ny -f 8 ohmodor, R, 3642,
3643). 9oth Han ’lorer and Conti a r« rrajulr d to re ert on
bade event to Brandt. Sine production of the c,^* vaccine
woe do i ndent n r< rch t > det- -r’lno Its effcctlvcn os,

$h« two c nn-t bo divorced.

The Buchenw Id. ex erinents eur. re rte' on by Dr.

Din —Schuler at th< -.cetln.* of the Consulting ?hyrlcl"no

of th< Jrhrn cht in Hay 19 3. (KO-323, Pros. Ex. i36, R.2063).

- 16 -


Brandt admitted his pr -'cnce at this neetin,-;. (Brandt,

R. 23G7-0). While tr-ndt nay not h vc heard the report
Itself since it was delivered to the section on hygiene,
there c°n he n. peacannMc dout t tlvt he hoard of It. Rose
rained objections to the character of the Buohonwald experi¬
ments and this was purely n natter which went heyond the
wills cf the lecture roon. Korron t vtifted that Din,* wan
fnrlous about Kona's attack. (Kopm, R. 1176). lXorcovor,
tho affiant Arthur Dt tzsch, ka^o In the cx crlnontal sta¬
tion at Buohonwald, eta ted that Din- tcld hln that -rnndt
had visited Buohonwald, (?I0—1311» Pros. ~x. 433, R.2040).

Dr. Su,* nc Hn<:on, !iy,:lonint for Air Fleet "Reich"
and n nodical officer of th" Luftwaf:-, also conducted
ty hus ex jcrln. nta on Inn-too of the Kattwcllur Concentration
CmQ .(Schmidt, R. 1368 it ocq.). Thco» experiments wore car¬
ried out for tho Luftwaffe and the R«lch Research Counoil.

(! JO-129, rroa. Ex. 306, ri. 1:03; KC-137,.Pros.Ex.160,R.737).
Ron took admit tod that tho cfflce- for Science and Rooor.roh
roooivod a copy or Hnn#cn ( s report to the Reich Roooarch
Council, which was Deo. MO-138, Pros. Ex. 300.(Rontook,

R. 3"11). The typhus r< *c-roh f Him,ton was olnsclfled ur¬
gent at a ncetln: f tho Office for Science and Research In
Au,-uitt 19-14 ntton&c* by Rostock an-’ nenh.ro of tho Reich

Re re arch Council ~n th* Wchm- oht. (MO—.'.lg, Pr r. Ex. 157,

Rostock, R. 3403). ...... , _

R. 3408;/ Brandt -as a ru .b r f th. Reich n nraroh Council

nnd chief of R-i.tcck (supra). Soo also the affidavit of

Rudolf 3r-n ;, t, (rIC-370, P r iC. Ex. 2y-l, a. 1385).


\


- 17 -


D. G-.s Ex-crl-icnts (In'‘ictaent, P-* . 6 (D))

The trcntncnt T w-unds c used tv chc-.ic 1 \arfore
crcnts vis -»f c'asi'ir tie interest in nilitcry r.cdic 1
circlv3 -f Germany. On 1 M rch 194-1, the Fuehrer r -vc
Karl J?r.n.*t broad powers in the field T chcaicel w. rf re.

{II0-012, ?r 8. Si. 270, XL. 1026). The Coerce itself is
net •v il:fclc, tut there is n dispute th t Sr.ndt's
. 1 uri 8 ( icti n extended t; *'h ri^ceutic 1 ;r Cucte to *re-t
f s vaunts. S ruich he r:ita. (I.. 2629). This neocss.rily
involve;' deternin tion ef the aast effective ct thod f
tre t..icnt. Th-1 the decree include'-’ acdic: 1 rcse: rch
• n r a v. Hinds c n .la; tc concluded fr the feet th. t
o-Tie® the dccrou vhich Brandt 3eat t? Killer (110-012,
Pros. Ex. 270, :. 1076) v.-ert forr .r«*ed to Grcwitz -.nd

oviously marked on thla problem. (::o-ol?a,
Pros. EX. 271, 1020; *j-017t, Pro®. Ex. 272, 4.. 1079).

In tiny event, >n 71 II rch 1944, Sieves reported to
Br-.ndt otout the ru«« ch activities pf Kirt. ("0-015,

Fr^a. Ex'. 275, I.. 1029). Ki-t h - been er -h ri -.entire
on inantea of the K* tsv tiler Conccntr-.tl n Clip since
Wovtabcr 1942. ('10-098, rros. Ex. 262, .. 1 2»). For :

(’et lied descripti -n of Jlirt'a cx"trlnctits, s-.e the brief
.ir .inat Sifv«.ro. Briadt .d littcd th t 3itv ra r vc hla
the \rittcn report by Hi;t, vhich w: s in 1 reduced s
Prosecution Exhibit 268 (NC-039, 1020), a- th t this

report shots ;n its f cc th t exp-, ri-.cate hur^n beinrs
^rt pvrfutafcc’ bj hin. (Sr.nct, 1.. 2626). It i 3 sifnific.nt
to note th. t the ru;oit or*: Ka cf h evy, ntdiua, -nd lirht
wounds c: used by Lost. Moreover, fcr.ndt d litted he t-.lkod
to Hi* t in Strasbourg in ..pril ..fttr the nee ting with
Sicvtra. (11.2610). Apprcxia tely 220 in- tes cf Hussion,
Polish, Czech, '.nd Goman nationality v*6re experimented on
vith •'-s, of whoa about 50 died, 'her did not volunteer
(Holl, I. 1052, 1057). Hirt continued his s experinents


;.t II tzv. tiler Curing the sumer of 1^44. (Foil, I.. 1050).

His r 3 research vea classified "urrent" by Rostock ir.

/.UfUSt 1944. (::C-692, Pros* Exi 457, R. 3408).

In oddition to his p rticip'tion in the r:.a experiru nt3
cf Hirt, K*rl Brondt rerson-lly furthered the crinini_l
cx;.erinontr:tion of Otto 3icicent~ch. Brandt testifier' th..t
the r -3 experiments of -ickcnb- ch o-5ic tc his attention in
the fell of 1943 on the occasion of visit to Str~3ibourp
to see . cyclotron; that lattr he helped hio to arrange a
laboratory; that he assisted bin in ott ininc- cx;.cri.:ent-al
uniauls; th t r»icfccnb;.ch did not conduct experiments on
human beinfs; th t he helped him in 19*4 ftcr ho had
established this laboratory. (i;. 2619, 2620).

Tho Sievera' Diary for 19*4 cont ins the following

entry under 2 Fcbru'-r* :

"'.let Prof. oickenb;ch in Kirlsruhe, nod
ho advises thut h. h .s ?u* his reso.rch
vork un-'er the control of GoBorsl
Conissior.tr Prof. Dr. 3r*ndt.

"Di cusuion ' ith S3 Hstuf. Hirt:

1. Prof. Dr. Bickenb ch, without instruc¬
tions fron Hirt and irof. Stoln, cont-ctcd
Gene ol Connies loner Prof. Dr. Br-net con¬
cerning the I'hosrene expt rinonts nd wo
in li tzv.cilcr vith tin. C<yini?3ion is tc
be vith r wn. for our p rt N.t.vcllcr is
to be closed.- (3b:6-rs, Pros. Lx. 12",

2629).

Phosrenc i3 r. ch* ;ic 1 v rf rc *rcnt. (Dranflt, 11. 2630).
Br ndt d-.its he ra in N-tr.i ilcr, but insists tb t only
eni.n :1 experiments were conducted. (I:. 263C). This is in
direct contradiction to st tements c...* intd in *.n offici.l
v. r crimes report cf the Govern:-nt of the Sethi rl:. ntfs.

(NO-1063, Pros. Ex. 320, I\. 1490, stc the statements of
N les > nd I.oessingh). Joref Sr mer, former c.v cox. n^r
at N’-tzv-eile-r, .Iso st ted thet “iokontech experimented on
prisoners. (S0-807, Pros. Ex. 165, R. 732).


Er .ndt testified th:t he 1 ter assisted Bickenbach
in establishing u laboratory in Fort Fr.nzcky, which is
ne-r 3tr-iSsbour£i and thut he sow cni:-l exjeriaents
there. (It. 2630). Bickeab-;ch uls a professor at the
Univc sity cf Strns3bourg '.ith HJrt and Houpen. (R. 2631).

The Bickenb ch roports sent to Karl or- ndt not only
nrove thrt Bickentach end his collaborators Holnut Ruhl
r.d Fritz Lctz c-.rried out phosgene experiments on 40
Russian prisoners of vr, tut that four o the subjects
ve*o killed s a result. (N0-iet2, Pros. Ex. 4B6, R. 3406).
This doounent oonplotely destroys the crcdibilit- of the
defond nt Er.ndt.

Those reports on tho phoarene experiments - re desif-
n< ted to? nillt ry secret :.nd ro nustcred 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and
7. They ro .11 addressed to Commissioner Cencrr l Br ndt.

The so reports obviously cover tho s-.-.e series cf experiments
which culminated in experiments on -;0 prisoners det iled in
tho 7th report. ’*hoy re found in the .;-.rtmcnt of
Professor Biekcnb-ch by French «uthoritios. The purpose
of those experiments r s to determine the effectiveness of
i dru* called hex-me thy lent ctr-min ar-inst phosgene
poisoninp. Certain p.climin ry studies ro detailed in
tho 4th report, dated 11 <-u uct 1944, nd . r.tion is n do
of tests c .rried out on : "nervous x.uo3i n risoner of wr r,
who could not be coined down ’‘.cuuae cf 1 - -o difficulties.

The 7th report, which 13 undated, concerns experiments
carried out shortly -fter 11 -urust 19*.-. (the d .te of the
•ith report) os 3tr- 3obourr w-3 ovtr-rur. by the ..Hies h few
months lctcr. ?h- sc experimen’s vre performed cr. "40
prisoners on the prophylactic effect of hexamethylcnUtromin
in casts of ''hosrene poisoninr. -reive of those were
protected orally, 20 in*ravenously :nd 8 • e used s
controls." On the basis of the 4th report, it can only


- 20 -


be concluded th't the 40 prisoners referred to were
Russian prisoners of v,-=r. The experimental subjects r.re
further descri-td as tei nr H r*.rscns of aid-le ere, almost
•.11 in 3 week and underfed condition. On principle, the
hefilthier were u^ed us control, only control number 39
(J. i*ci.) end the orally protected experimental subject
No. 37 (... Rei. ) h .d a localized cirrhotic productive
tuberculosis of the lu.vs. l.ith the others, no pulmonary
disease could bo found." (E. 34C1).

The experimental parsons were subjected to phogeno
poisoning with resulting dc-th to no less than four 3ubjocts.
(See Table II and III attache* to the 7th Report, 3404}.
Other subjects suffered severe lunr oedema.

Defense counsel for Knrl Brandt urged the po3 ibility
thnt this re-'oit w? 3 no» received by him. -s uni nr - r.~ uond o
thet the report v/i.s not mulled to Br.ndt, nd, if received,
not re id, the fact re . ins th? t the ex ri icnt3 were performed
by F-lckontach end his collator'tore, vhose vork war directly
controlled by Rrr.vt. (Supra), l.trt there no ether evidenco
on this point, the circumst.nco of the re oit h.vinr been
addressed to Karl Br ndt is sufficient roof of hi3 res¬
ponsibility. Uorocvtr, th reso rch of both £ick«nbaoh and
Hlrt was classified urgent by Brandt's Orfice for Science
und Rest .rch under i»03tock. (NC-C, Proa. Ex. 4L7, R. 34C0).

The continued interest of iwi adt in n sc rch on chemical
warfare agents n C his kr.o'lidr. of < z--rim. r.‘.3 on con¬
centration cam innate8 is shown b; the it -ort d: ted 31
March 1940 concerning experiments tt the Ncucof .m-.o Cor.cen-
trution C ip. (NO-154, r’ros. Ex. 446, R. ?b38). f’ater de-
con* anin tion expcrLvnts were carried out there on insrtes.
The repo* t states th-1 the third caries o r experiments r* s
curried out with n agent of the Lost rrou;, the asphyxiating


pas Lost, in accordance with the suggestion node by
0ber3tarzt Dr. irth at the conference on 4 December 1944
v.ith I!eichico.--l33ur Dr. Brandt."

B. Other Sxptrlne-cts

The proof shows that other experiments on concentration
c ap inaates were pt rf orned with the knowledge of the
defendant Karl Brandt.

(1) Sterllir- tier. Txreri-.-r.ts (Indiotnent, Per. 6 I)).
By 1941, i* was the sccc'tcd policy of the Third Reich
to exterminate the Jewish population of Gor inny r.nd the
occupied countries. (I.M.T. Judgment, It. 16920 ct seq).

The defend-.nt Brack describes this ..s sn ‘open secret" in
high party circles. (JIO-426, Fros. Lr. 160, R. 527).

Trained killers from the cuth~n,eiu at tions wore sent to the
E..st to assist in tlu. program. Indeed, the prof run itself
was uetd in port to exterminate Jev.s in Gen.any* (See infra,
under Euthi nasiu). Eecuuso of the pressing need for workers,
sterilization of Jews i nd other so-called undesirable
elements wr3 conci cred ns on alternative tc outright
extermination. X-ray steriliz- tion was -roposed to !!l.::ler
by Brack. Dr. Worst Sohunnnn, formerly of the Grefeneck
euthunsait strtion, was sent to the «*usch\ itz toncentrntion
Coup to conduct exportnen*a. -rack at tes th: t this could
not hrvo been done without he fcne-lc-.Vo cf Br-ndt, who vr.a
Jointly responsible with Bouhltr for the fcuth main "rorruQ.
(?J0-426, Pros. F.x. 160, K. 527; see lIso the affidavit of
Pudolf Srundt, 110-4 10, iron. Ex. 141, X. 507). .lorcovor,

I Brandt udnis vi3itiru Grtfoneck in 1940, although he dots

not expressly remember nocting Schumann. (Br-ndt, R. 24C0-1).
lh t X-ray 3terilizetions were actually carried out in
AUjehwitz is established by the heart-rending testimony of
the young Polish Jew, Chain Bulicki, who, -fter being


- 22 -


subjected to severe X-ray burns, vrcs castrated. (R. 541).

(2) Freezing and Ilalaria Experiments (Indictment,

fcir. 6 lE) :nd Cfitr—

The Prosecution relies primarily on the position of
the defendant Brcndt in connection with the charge of
responsibility for the freezing nnd m-.l rio experiments.

The malario experiments v.ert conducted in Dachau from
February, 1V42 until 1945 by Dr. Klaus Schilling, formerly
of the Robert Koch Institute end one of the most femous
German scientists on tropical -icdicir.e. Over 1000 prisoners
were ured in these experimen s and 3evcr::l hundred died
os o result. (MO-856, Pros. Ex. 125, K. 392). It io not
to be expected thrt such o matter went unnoticed in higher
medical circles.

The cruel >nd muiderous freezing experiments in Duehau
vere the subject of two frank reports by Holzloehner, who
conducted the oxporlnon’s with Kischtr and Finke, to large
rroups of militry physici n3. *hc first occasion wub at
o meeting in Ilurnberg on cold problems held on 26 nd £7
October 1942. '*his meeting v. s sponsored by the Luftwaffe,
but r- present tives of o her brnnehos of the *ehroacht ware
present. (K0-401, Pros. Ex. 93, h. 309). Iho report by
Holzloehnor ouuned something of a sensation s it was aide
clear that concentration c .p inmates ere ured as subjects
und some of the-, died. (Lu*z, R. 27C), Ihc second lecture
by Holzloehnor on the freezing experiments w riven :.t the
meeting of Consulting Physiol ns of the ’"ehrm.cht, called
by the defendant Kandloscr, h«Id at the Military Medical
nf>/ demy from 30 November to 3 Peceaber 1942. Ksadloser
heard Holzloehnor speak as the report submitted in evidence
shows that he comme-nted on the lectures on cold problems.
(KC-922, Pros. Ex. 4Z5, R. 2059). He v s under a dut’- to
renort such -basic events" to Brandt, (supra).


- 23 -


( Z ) Seaweter Experiments (Indictment.- Par. 6 (G)).

..3 to the seuw-ter ex;erlments conducted by the
Luftv.uffe ir. Dachau ia 1944, It is sufficient to refer to
Sohroeder'3 stoteaent thrt 5randt, Rostock, and Hundloser
\ ere inf or."led of atdicul resc_rch carried out by the
Uiftv.affe. (NO-449, Pros. Lx. 120, R. 471).

(4) Misccll- ncous .

Other docunents prove th‘ t the defcn-r.t Srandt not
only knew of the systen-tic use of concentration camp
inmates for ncdicrl exrtriier.t tior., but even eurrested
ouch experiments himself. Kis rccuect for inn: tea for
J-un-'ico cxptr!mtn a h f Mlrctdy teen discussed. Cn £G
Jnnu'ry 1912, he \ rote to 3S-0bcrrrum-cnfuchror Volff, chief
li-ison officer between Rlailer end the Fuehrer's hr d-
ru.rtiro, end asked if it v.ere not ros. itlc to carry out

nutrition experiments in concentr: tior. c :s. (NO-1419,

Pros. Ex. 447, Tv. £641).

On 30 September 1943, Gr.witz wrote to Himmler statin*-
th-1 K rl Sr-ndt h d rerucsted him to test a new ointment
for the trurtaent of -hosphorous burns. Gr-witz oskod
permission to test the cru*- by rtlfically ere tinr burns
on ex; erL’.entul inn .tea in £ chscnh .usen (Orunienburtf).
Te3tinf* the era on Germ civilit ns burned in ir raids
was considered too slow, benment for those ex • rim«.nt3 wns
ri’en cn 7 October 1913. (:»-16£0, Ires. Lx. 449, R. 264^).

It la not without sipnific"nce that the experiments
duriiir which inmates w rc burned with phosphorous from an
incendi'ry bomb v * re c-rritd out in buchen*eld beclnninf
on 19 November 1942. (NC-£65,?ros. Ex. 2B7, R. 1127;

Kopon, P.. lie7-90). There is little doubt th .t the situs
of the experiments proposed by Hr-ndt w 3 chanred fron
Sech3enh .usen to Bucher., aid. *he experimental victims
suffered excruti.tinc pain. (Lonon, supra).


- 24 -


On 4 February 1944 1 the defendant Rudolf Brandt wrote
to a center of Elmlcr's personal staff in Berlin
(3aumert) statinr th'.t Karl Brrndt had rsked for 10
prisoners nt Orsnienburg to test o certain ncdicinc.

Karl Brandt h-d discussed these experiments with
Crawltz. The prisoners verc cade available. (NO-1382,
Fros. Ex. 448, R. 2644).

Finally, the proof shows that medical experiments
on concentration camp incites tra carried out on such
i brtv.d 3 H; th’t '• v r:-.t tr> the * ro •'C reltnl,

Chief of the Hifh Co~m:nd of the 'iihraeoht. merao-
r nflun dated £3 February 19*4, sirned by Klicvo of the
•»rny Medical Inspector'te, shows that experiments on
human bein-s were proposed bp the defondent Blomo in
connection • ith biological w»rf rt. The memorandum
strtos that: "Py recuc3t of *lcld Marshal Keitel,
tho freed forces fro not to have u responsible shtro
in the cxp«rlmcnts since experiments will -Iso bo
conducted on hum. n brin-s. (N0-1309, Fros. Ex. 326,

R. 2615). It hr rdly lies in the mouth of the defendant
Br-.ndt to deny knovlodro of such experiment tlcn when
it wan known to Keitel himself, ihe sr-.c document
shows that cr ndt vs -sristin^ Blomc vith the institute
ft Posen, where the experiments v<rc c-rrled out. See
the Prosecution'3 brief on Kondloscr fer description
of th* bioloricul w :rf» re experiments.


- 25 -


Illi THE EUTHANASIA PROGHnll (Indictment Par. 9 and 14).


A. Procedur e

On 1 September 1929, Hitler charged the defendant

Karl Branot and Reiohslelter Bouhlor Tilth the execution of

tho Euthanasia Program. ihe letter of appointment stated:

"Rtlchsloltir Bouhler and Dr. 3ranlt are
char.,- d with the responsibility for cn-
lnr.'ln,; the authority or Certain physicians,
to be designated „y nnm*., In such a nunnor
that persons who, accordlnj to human Judg¬
ment, ore Incurable can, upon tho most care¬
ful ulut'nor.ls of their conultion of sickness,
he acoorued the mercy Ueuth." IC30-PS, Pros.

Ex. eoO, R. 1516).

This document in no ny llr.lt_d the application of euthana¬
sia to inrune r 60 .an cut included anyone who nl» ht be dc-

oiLnuted ae “incur-, cl. *.

Tho witness kenn-che testified that the program
was curried out In th* following ways

Every Ov-rtum uontal institution received fora
questionnaire 1 ! from the Rolchc ministry cl' tho Interior
whloh to cc, ooupleted on ach Innate of the Institu¬

tion and to On r. nt er.ck to the Rclohs Ministry of tho In¬
terior. Then _xp- rts hud to cx nine the questionnaires
aft .r tney hnu o«.n photostated. Thoy had to express tholr
medical opinion or. then and nud to r turn then, -lth th. Ir
opinion, to tr.e Roichscvre ltr, eQelnochuft (Kelohs Aopoola-
dbn). (R. 1872, 1972).

This RulchcurJcltQ t :waulnschr.ft oooperated with
tho "at ifBung", (Oharl tabic Foundation for Institutional
Care), uid the Patients Transport Ccr,,or- tlon. The "Stlf-
tun.j" war in oh :• of the finunci"! side of the proi.r.an,
while the Patients Transport Jorpcr-tlcn was used wr.^n


patients were moved from one institution to .nothcr In order


to bring then closer to the cuthnnlsla institutions ana,
finally, Into the euthnnnslc institutions themselves. These
three organisations, Rolchsaroeitesenoinsohaft, "Stlftunr , ’»
.•ind Patients Transport Corporation, were In foot camouflaged
names for the operation of the Suthrjineln Program and w.rc
under tho supervision f no management. They did not work
Independently but together. (R. 197*1).

Ac to the questionnaires, throe experts received
photostated c . leo :ina, In pendontly of each ether, they
exproBBed their e.Anion n individual ouees. Then s -oriicd
top exports cxpr.sjod thulr .Anl n. « list was made up cf
tho patients who were Judged subject to outhancsln and the
patients wore reta v«d from the institution to so-called
oolleoting points and fr a there -A.ro transferred to euthana¬
sia institutes, (R. 1977, 1679). N n-Gernan nationals
and Juws WwTw suoJeCtod to outhanr.Bln as coll as Germans.

(R. 1891, 1923).

Tha activities f tho exp* rt s were extended, In
early Summor of 1040, to lnnntoo cf concentration .can n. A
Doctors Ccmnlsol n, which o nel ted f d-'ot rs and cfflclaln
fr^n tho Euthanasia Program, filler rut the questionnaires
n inmates fx n :<m ng this*. who had been preliminarily se-
lcatocl ^y tho coup ot r. Run r uo c noentrntl-n oanps
Were visited, s:ae :f then twlc. , in the • rlod between
1940 n.. tile .n.i cf 1941. (R. 1992, 1903.) Dr. iicnnooko,

wh: visited a number of concentmtl n e-up* to s.lect in-
tir.tos, receive*! the r-ern f:r thorj .ctlvitloB fr'n tho top
exports in the Euthanasia Pro gran and rr a the utfenJont


Brack. (F.. 1382). «nncuncc-a. nts about the6e trips were made
fr'in the Berlin a cncy of the ?r-;;rivm to the Individual con¬
cent rat 1 n crops. (R. 1985). N n-Germm nati-mvls and Jews*
who were innnto3 of c naontrntl:n camps, were subjected to
thv Hut ha nasl n . Progrnn In extensive numbers. (R. 1887).

An thcr function of the Euthanasia Program was the
klllin.: of mentally and bodily dofiolont children. Thu wit¬
ness ’Valter Schmidt testified that the agency which handed
this part :f the Pr-.-r n w* « called the C*n:;lttoc for Ro-

scaroh on Hereditary and C nstltutl-nnl Diseases. (Rclchs-

• ► • • *

aucBohuss tur Erforsohun. Erb-unJ Anlftf-oEocTnrgtor Schwerer
Leiden). The questionnaires were filled cut by the Health
Departments, tn. Chief of Children's Clinics, physicians,
hooters, nidwlves u id h spltrls, etc., and reports were nado
to Dr. Lin-en's office in Berlin. Llm.cn war a mentor of the
ministry of Interior. Thuro n c mmlttco of chl.f oxports,

•:n the utr-m th of those rap-rts, decreed outhanr.sla through
n a- called authorising rders in tno f it j of n photostatlc
°W r 1 •-.•'-rt, wnlol boon r in writing.

Thv.se activities oontlnuoa until 194 . (R. 1824). Schnl.1t

hlnself was in charge -fa special department for tn,. Killing
r such a«.frmt chll rcn. (H. 1823).

Heritors :'r a the cccu led Eastern territories who
had b«o no unfit ror Inter wor executed urouant to the
Euthanr.ola 1-r- ram. Bus.-s -el n lr..- to the Patients Trans¬
port C-r,-rrtl:n, which were c .rate ' by the rr-nncl of
the Patients Trnnsp-.rt C:r t . rntin, trok those victlnB to
thu externlnr.ti r. center of hadnear, where they wero killed.

(Schni.lt, R. 1842—1B‘*5; U. 3. V. Klein, et nl., NO-1116,

Pros. Ex. 415, K. 1781).


-28-


This ovi..encu on the aethr.1 cf onrryin.* cut the
yre^aa is orrr:crated by the affidavit or the defendant
Brao>: (NO-426, Pres, Ex. IcO, R» 527), the affidavit cf Paul¬
ine KnoisElcr (HO-470, I ron. Ex, 332, K. 1054), the chart
i rawn ty Brack NO-253, Free. Ex. 331, ?.. 1525), as well as
nunerous -ther decua.-nts in the roo'-rd.

The evidence c-inoornln : the nctlvltl-O cf the top
averts on- .x erta :f the Euthanasia !r *r:a in the various
c noontratlcn e/in t .a ic c rr-.r.'.t.d ~y the affidavit of tho
* ohH^Ucotor of the Dachau C nc.ntivotl n Coup, Dr. Uuthif,
(HOr-2799, rrcs. Ex. -.97, h. 7710), *hc states that in tho
F«11 -f 1941, i'r.i . ncy-e, as leader of a cosolsslon of four
^cyohlatriot?, coue to the Dachau C.nccntratl n Chop. This
uootore' b ccttr.lscion owl-oted lnuatos una.le to work for
ex-.orninatlcn by ,.ao. hoy<W was the first top expert -f the
Euthanasia (Bran .t, R. 2-195). The affidavit :f

Dr. Gcr aso rove-Is that he »nd Dr. Sohuaann, both cf whom
were .active in tho Euthanasia Tr~.*r‘a, visited the Buchonwrld
C-nc ntratl n ©ap in Jun. 1041. Gor- aos states explicitly
that tho urpocc of this trip w; n tr acquaint .slnsaf with
the assi nnent cf c noentrati n casp inar tcr. tc euthanasia
Institutions. This visit was ua'-c ~n the orl.r cf Brandt,
which was trnnsnlltoi by the .'.ufendant 3rrc)t. (NO-^OIO,
ires. Ex. 50c, R. 7754).


2 i.n-Ger=«4i n.itln'vla -.n.. we, Whc were lnaates of
thw a -.noentrati-n cus,.s, w.re vlctlas cf tho Euthanasia
rv ran which :,.cratw> in thes. un.er the code naae

"lv f 13 11 . (NO-429, ircc. t.x. 231, R. 1003).

- 29 -


.•% few t. ounents 8UJnitted by the irosecutl-n :n one
“14 f 15" action In GrcsB-Rcscn enow hew the Euthanasia Pro-
.T.oa operated In c ncentraticn oonps. The list of c ncon-
trntion ennp innntes of the Grcss-K-scn Concent ration Camp
whe were sent to the Euthanasia Station Bern’ourv for ex¬
termination, o ntnlns many nnaos cf non-Gcraan nationals
Ml: nsn-Gormnn Jews. (KO-153, iroe. Ex. 410, h. 1724, 1725).
JeWB in protective custody, T-lee in pr*tectlve custody,

Jews who were habitual criminals, J.ws who acre "shirkers",
Jowo who Ac file.', the race, Czech "shirkers", and Czechs in
protective custdy, were •— a the inaatos selected by the
onnp physlol'418 for "exonlnatlon" >.y the experts. (1151-rS,
Pros. Ex. -ill, K. 1755).

By c a. nrln : the nneco on the lists c ntnlnoA in
Doc. :iO-15S nn- 1151-iS, it os proved that, of the 240 nnnes
llotc. for examination in the Euthanasia Station Bornbur/r,
at least 51 Were of Polish or Czech ol vokion nati nnlity.
h w nany cf the Jews listed -r^rc cf n n-U.rnr.n natl nallty
cannot tu occrtainc fr.a thi.60 u;cun.ntB, but a substantial
nur.eer it them w^rc drn in e untricc thcr than G. rr.any, as
the llrt entrinc- in Doc. :.’0-158 shows, un*. it lc thoreforo
n. parent that a further substantial nuntcr of the inmates
Goluotc-. for txUrainntln wd-c f n n-Gcrunn natl nallty.
(N0-1BB, i r-'C. Ex. 10; 1151-. 5, i-r-s. Ex. 411, R. 1755-
1759).

On 17 Huroh 1942, 70 ln;.:.t,p wore transferred to
Berneur - for cxteralmiti -a. (..0-1075, ;r:x. Ex. , R. ).

Of th«.Bt, 27 of the non-Jcwish rioners n the transport
list w. re cf Czech r .-.lie natl nallty. (Compare transport
lint with lict -f lnaatoe orl in .lly selector' in Gr sB-R-een,


ti;n:l 57 incites rarrlvd t ss.rncur.: fr a Gross-ft'scn.
(NO-158, Tree. Ex. 410, H. 1723). Of these, 15 cf the n^n-
Jowlsh rlsrmrB of the tr.--ns ~rt list sere of Czech or
iflleh nationality. Thus, cf the 5«tnl of 127 innates -roved
t h ve ooen sent to E-rncur.- In March 12*42, at least 42, or
one-ti’lrd cf the total, sere n:n«Ocrr.nn citizens forcibly
detainee’. In r.n eneay cruntry* "hat all cf thoso lnnates sore
oxtornlnatcd In 5 rn.ur.* Is o ncluslv.ly proved ty the laconJ
report fr a Gr-ea-iosc-n to the Ec male on . A-nlnlstratlve
Main Office that "special treataunt -f 127 prlsners sob
concluded -n 2 i^ril 1S42." (1234-ib, Pros. Ex. , R. )

This evl ncc as tc action 14 f 12 In naollficd by
the tcstlD ny ;f the iltn^-sses Ncfl* (R. 600-C05), Kerin (R.
1210-12), K-eahlln (R. 1624-37, 1641), find Hell (R. 1060).

N'n-Geraon nntljnnle and Jews -thvr thf-n these In
concentration can. 8 were net eXcr.pt lr:a the .-rciTon, and
many f tnca wore Tillc.. Boslrto t.u evidence cite - under
pue-soctl n A ae*ve, there Is anplo ,.roof that ncn-G«-rman
natlonaln ter. ru. J Otcd to cxtemlnatl n fr n the* c -lnnlnp
of 1940 thr u h the xri r, (;.’0-llo5, irs. Ex. 32-1, R. 1543;
NO-818, i’r c. i.x. 372, R. 1609). Ju~e f G«.rn.*m an 2-nllBh
natl nnlity in- btatduos Jews .arc aln suLJcctud t- the
r ran. (NO-1310, irs. Ex. 327, R. 15eO). T lish ami
Russian n ti .n-I p an *ther n n-Giman nati'nals wore sub¬
jects t- the rc.-ras. (N0-720, i’r . _x. 366, R. 1591-2).

Thu quosti'.nnaircs ha. r. r.,.acc rovliU . far "race",
beln^ defined: QorujJi or slcll-r *el :od (of Ge-rnan tlooA),
Jovr, Jewish alxc. croc- Grades 1 *r 2, nc. re (nlx_l Irood).
(1696-i d, ir -.s. Ex. 357, h. 1574). This qucstl ,n w ul 1 hnvo


jeen completely unneccss-ry If nr n-(k.-roans were exempted frrn
tho program. »*u. stlcnnnlros had to U filled -ut at ut nil
patients wh: w^ro n:t cf German nationality or Gorman rclnteC
blood, indicating their rr.ee and nationality. (KO-825, Pres.
Ex. 358, R. 1578). These questionnaires htul to to orooessed
ly the cx.crts. (Llennecko, R. 1861). These who were active
in euthanasia never received an order that n-n-Gvrar.n nation¬
als were to be exclude.', fra the pro .Tran. (MO-317, ires.

Ex. 3€8, R. 1595). Iho witnesses Mennccko IR. -1877, It.

1922) and 3ohnl.lt (R. 18€0-1) also testified to thin effect.
Hugo juch'Qtl, LLU» the hi lust cffloinl aft^r the Elnistor
in the Austrian Federal Ministry cf Justice, says in his
affidavit that when Brack, as representative cf the defondan*
Brandt, -avv. a lecture n euthanasia in the Ministry of
Justioe In 1912, he onuneratud, ns the classes of porn ns
who ware exempted fr:a the pro* ran, the war w,un..od *.nd per-
s nG who had -oo no insane ns a result -f air ntt-oks.

Ford -ners and J«,wc w^re n.t nentl *.ncb nr.cn • tho iToups cf
persons who w r . excluded lh'0-2253, iris. Ex. , R.

Br-ck ndr.ltB havlnr hold the lecture. (H. 7589).

txa early r.s 1939 inmates cf lnpnno asylums In ->ccu
1C Poland were kills. . (C61c-P3, ?r*.«. Ex. 370, R. 1598).

In the Autumn of 19i0, fur. o i r the ovr.cuatl n ~f 1558
Inmates of uont;.l instltuti ns of East Prussia on’, approxi¬
mately 250 1 3 300 lnr .no icles Ber- na .e available by tho
defendant Br .eh, who vr-s the administrative executive of
tho Euthanasia ir ran. .»s these transfers ix.ro carried
ut by •. special t 1( f.rtnunt (5 nU rk.nmn. :) cf the infamous
dD, which was use. l' r Sped 1 tasks, there is no ubt that


-32-


thcF Insane rclus wore fcilleo. { Ii0-2909, Ir-s. r.x. 5CO, R-
7721; KO-2911, I'res. Ex. 501, R. 7722). In September 19-11,
on order was Issue that the Incites of the Insane asyluns
in Russia, in the occupntl n sno of the Gernnn «rny Group
■Kard", were to he killed. (X0-175Q, ?ros. Ex. 444, ?*• 25-15).

Eastern :• rkers Wore ols5 dealt with. (X0-1-130,
Pros. Ex. 423, R. 19oO-l): NO-1436, Ir-s. Ex. 3C. R. 19-H).
Eastern w Acre, who lue. been fcrolbly or-u,t Inti Gc sunny,
who were no 1 :n. er r..lo t. work, am. who were c nsidoro'. a
fcur&on -n the iiw-ntnl instltutlns of Gernnny, were brought
to other in a oolleotin.: Institution anil, unless they oould
bo dieohr.r.;scl In r. ratter or 6ix weofcs, thoy were cxternlnatcu
um.cr the Euthanasia rro. mu. (NO-891, ires. Ex. *114, R.

1779; NO-1116, Bros. Ex. 415, R. 1781). Half Jewish healthy
children (XO-1487, Pros. Ex. -131, 1962) on.- adult Gypsies

(3dQ2-i'S, ir s. Ex. 371, R. 1602) were also killod.

C. I n>-.ou- to Ex n lnat! .n ;.n Lack :f Su ,i.rvlfil_in

The s..luctl-n and ox.nninr.ti n of tho persons who
wore subjected to euthanasia was crlalnally -ll.-ent and
inadequate.

Tho dofem-ant Kr.rl Brivnat tcntlflod thnt the loc-
trro in the Euthanasia ir: ra= Were Ivon cnora'us r.oronsl-
wlllty (R. 2425). He, to.-ether with B uhler, had authrrlty
over tho physicians wh. -tore participatin'* In the prorrr.ru.

(Brandt, R. fe40d). He mlBltto. horror, that ho did net
nnko observation In, cr visits t , Insane asylums. Ho was
:nly once In the Insane ..cylun Bethel and vlslte.’ a special
clinic in Kassel. He • altt. hr.vin.r no export kn-ulodro In
tho fiel> of psychiatry. (R. 2-*70). He, the .;oct r of tho


-33-


t-- rs-ns who were chor.x. by hitler with the ex-cuti-n -f
euthanasia (Boufalcr was r.-t r. octor ), authorized the ioc-
t-rs to administer euthanasia. He .1 not make Invosti.n-
tlone ns to the nodical .bllltlos of these ncr.. (R. 2 J76).
he .ices not kn-kw cne Fin le name of the total of ton to
fifteen '.octcra who, r.oeor\'.ln>; to his tostinony, woro chnrssd
with the execution of cuthnnasin. (R. 2473-9). Brandt
tustiflc that he only visited one of the extermination stn-
tiona, Grnfcnok, in 190, one tine IP.. 2*i0O) nn«. never wont
to an observation station. (R. 2431). In winter 1939/1940,
however, ho visited, together ;lth the defer, ant Brack,
B.uhlur an . Ccntl, the Euthanasia Station bran enbur.*, whoro
the first ..as chamber was But u .. The ur.cse of this visit
was tr, 0 v 8 «.rve a test ex..uriuent In whlch four lnsanu >er-
°'nn were asso... (Brack, 7e-*5-C).

Victims of euthannclu were c ndonne.i to death Vy
si-c’llod to,, ex trts who had nev«.r so much as seen tho
atient. Vhe victlcs w„rc nly ou.. rficlally exaninod cn
the asls of questionnaires. U'C-n70, Pros. £x. 332, R.
1535-C). i fannnuelltr, an ex.crt, receive ’. no less than
159 shipments of questionnaires, avorn. in.• e-twoon 200 and
300 questionnaires each, rlor t 15 j».,ril 19*1, for Jud.-nont
as to life in.', death. (;;0-1129, Pres. £x. 350, n. 1572; N0-
1130, * res. wX. 555, h. 1572). Blnoc his nnin occupation
was that rf cana or of an Insane aeylun, .in Jij .neat cf
tho questionnaires was only a see .nilary activity. In a or-
1°‘‘ of I 3 “yB# this sane «.x ert aesed Ju .-neat ;n no less
than 2,058 questionnaires. (>20-1129, ou,»rr.; cf. i'fnnnauolloi
h. 7364).

-34-


.iuosticnnalres on patients who were In an asylun
for as short a tine as one aonth were filled out and fornod
the i.asls for Ju.. aunt ns to another the particular Innate
should jo killed. (30-829, Pros. Ex. 253, R. 1577-B).
i'.any of thoBe questionnaires were Inadequately oonpleted so
that It was iapoBsli lo In any event to fora a clear nodical
opinion. Experts were also exposed to pressure to induce
then to lve positive opinions. (Mcnnccko, 1881 ). Un-
anlnous opinion of the experts was not necessary to -rlnc
about a positive Jud.-uont nhich would con'.can the patient
to -e killed, The dl88entin opinion cf one expert Aid not
suffice to save the llfo of the ,.ctlent. (hunnecko, R.
1907-8).

In a concentration caq 106 «rynno were ■oxanlnon"
ey the expert Hunnooko In nn afternoon. Tho "examination"
of 1200 Jews, whioh conclste.. in the transcription of the
reason for their arrest from the filer- to the reports, took
only a fo-' lays. In a letter to his • ifo, l'.onnccko hltuielf
.>ut the wor'. "oxunlnntion" In quotation narks. It in ln-
possl'.lo that uny kind of aor.tal oxaulnntlor. of tho mtlcnts
was oarrle.l out. (Honneoko, R. 1PS2; 30-007, Pros. Ex. '12,
K. 17-17). In fr.ct, theco Jews wero Bunt filly nnd hyclcally
healthy. CIcnnooko, R. 1898). It was lapoosl'lo for Dr.

Hcy-u an., ills doctors' coscicslo.*, which was active In the
Dachau Concentration dap, to dXanlne the --rcat nunocr of
lnaatus selectee in the ahort tir.e tr.oy 6 -ont there. The
examination consisteu solely in the cursory study of personal
recor .8 In the 4 .r. s> nee of the innate. (liO-S'.Vii, sUj.ra).
Doctors donucann -n . uor./asn screened a ..roxlnntely ICO
concentration cam.. Innates .urln * a one -vy 1 visit in the


Con.-vntration Carr.. Suchenwald. (X0-3010, supra}.

It vras not the de Tee of insanity which was the
decisive factor lr. the decision as to whether or not the
innates should .:o kllle. , tut rather their usefulness for
work. The aannor of en.loynent, the value of work, if pos-
oi-le coa..ared with average jerforcanco of healthy persons,
had to we carefully filled out in the questionnaires.
(1696-15, Pros. Ex. 357, R. 1575). Valuable workers were
not sent to euthanasia stations. (3365-PS, Pros. Ex. 365,

R. 1589). patients who had arteriosclerosis, tuUrculosls,
cancer and other disn-lln • Illnesses wore Included in the
pro ran. (3896-P8, pros. Ex. 372, K. 1608). "Useless
eaters" w 0 ro stnrvod to ueath. (3Q16-P5, Pros. Ex. 370,

R. 1699; 1600; NO-823, Pros. tx. 399, R. 1697). Persons
who no Ion -er had any value to the state wore considered
"useless eaters". It wus pointed out th-t durlr. - the war
healthy people ha to lve u,< their lives while these su-
vuroly 111 ,,eo..lu continued to live rnd would continue to
live unless euthanasia was carried out. In addition, it was
stated the lack of x’ood and nuroln personnel Justified the
ollclnntlon of those people. Ciwnnccke, R. 1906). Concentra¬
tion oanp innateo ere ocnnlnou .o to their on; »clty for work
and their political rollatillty und wore solccted accordln.-ly
for euthanasia. (NO-2799, Bu.r-i). questionnaires were cor—
pleted on concentration can., innates who were not ins- nc.

(N0-3010, supra). Prior to 27 «.,ril 19-i3, action 1-i f 13
encon,.as6ad the execution net only of insane . ersono, i ut
pel sens suffering Iron tu-orculosis, .edri don in.iivlduale,
and others unfit for annual work. (K0-1007, Pros. Ex. -il3,

K. 1763). Only lnnateB who -'er. no Ion er fit for work were


to he »rou.:ht before the examinln.- commission. (SC-1151•

Pros. Ex. -ill, R. 1?44).

In the case cr killin’ of cnllircn, a previous con¬
sultation with the parents or relatives did not tako place.
(3864-PS, Pros. Ex. 367, R. 1593). The defense witness
pfannauellor testified that, after bavin- received authori¬
zation to kill the individual child, he lnvitod the relatives
to visit the chili/ -eenuse it was sick. However, he never
notified the ..aronts or .-uardlano that he was <*clni.- to kill
the oil lid as this was a top secret natter, (pfannnucller,

R. 4394). From the documents su nlttod fcy the defendant
brack, It Is clear that tho parents wero deceived a.:out the
purpose of the transfer of the children to Institutions where
thoy were to -e killed. It was the duslnoos of the nodical
officers to induoo tho ..aronts to send their children to such
Institutions. So accomplish this, tho parents wore told thai
in tho case of Individual diseases there was a posol llity
of c.ohlevln oortaln succoosts with treatment. (Brack Doc.
b2, Brack Ex. -.3, R. 7678, cf. Bruok, R. 7717). Tho parents
wore tcld that the Vest euro would -v taken of tho child In
suoh institutions nnd uvorythin poeol-lo In the way of
nodorn therapy would -o carrlou out. (Brack Doc. 61, brack
i*. 42, n. 7678). Fron these docunonts It Is clear that the
parents and relatives were not only not asked for their
consent in the cace of kill in.- of children, out *»ra « ooived
Jn order to nako the transfer to a outhrnnstn Institution
r> lotur njn . i.«i.-hi Pur^-lttee for Reflourch
on Her*, alt ary an- Constitutionally Severe Dlscasts to tho
Elchuer.; danltoriuc shows on its face t.^xt, the cubc of
euthanasia of call dr or., tho consent of the ..iirento was not


-37-


sought. CIO-390, fros. Ex. *,-.2, R. Zc-iO-1). Shis evidence
is corroborated• 'ey the affidavit of Dr. Suohooel (NO-2253,
supra). The defendant Brack testified that the consent of
the parents to the killing of c.--lldren was an absolute pre¬
requisite. The nodical officers who nade the arran^onents
for the transfer of the children to the killing stations
wore allegedly chcr f ;eu wltn the task of Infomln.- the parents
and roqucstln.' their cement. This statement Is In contra¬
diction to Brack's own documents, welch clearly show what
Che parents roully were told, as well as thu top secret
character of the pro. ran. .he proof has further shown thnt
Vfnnnnuollor himself was onu of the doctors who had, accord¬
ing to the decroo of Che iilnistor of the Interior of 18
nu*ai8t 1933, to re ort deformed and deficient calluron.
(!I0-3305, Fros. Ex. , H. ). He hir.sclf t stifled that
ho never lnforned the ..aronts about the fate their children
,.f.d to ox,,cot. Istpra). Brandt admitted that In the caoo
of kilim of insane adults, the consent of the relatives
was not requested and their o.-lnion not heard. IR. 2-127-S).

There is n-undmt proof that the German public
wits horrified .y euthanasia and the tanner of its execution.

« polioo re .ort otated:

"The wildest sconce lea ma le are re¬
ported to have -r.kon .lace an some cf
thoso .ooplc uid not orrd the bus volun-
tax-lly and wore therefore forc-i to do
sc .y the accos./an; in * personnel. more
•7crc 4 ,o 0 .. 1 e who were lnbcc:JC6 and foe lo
nln-od and Were said to have o’h r .r r ileptic
llln.scee aa well, an*, who-o up/, cep the
State and other iu-lio Bodies Up til. now
hau to ..rovide for completely. or at least
for the renter p.o*t. Fe-opl we.it so far
a- to formulate and dlueeriia'tc /ore or
less tilt followln. assertion: '.he State
nuat .o in a .ad way now or it could not


-38-


hn,.,en that these poor people should singly
be sent to their death solely In order that
the means which untl^ now have teen used for
the upkeep of these people are nnde available
lop the ^osecutlon of the .7ar. *■ (0=906.

Pros, r.x, (576, R, 16^9^1).

D• Qen-r r. l Exterminatio n of the Jews

Personnel active in thu Euthanasia Pro.rran nlso
took part In the extermination of the Jews In the East, from
a-out 19=1 until tho liberation of the Eastern Territories,
dome time in the second half of 19-il a part of the personnel,
who were until then executing the Euthanasia Pro ran In
Germany, was sent to Lu-lln and ,>ut at tho disposal of SS
brigade fuehrer Glo-ocr.ik In order to assist in the mnc3 ex-
torninatlin of the Jews which was then conron knowlcd.-e In
tho hi,her circles of the HSSa?. n.- tho doctors who as¬
sisted in tho extermination of the Jero were Dr. EVorlo and
flohunnnn, : 0 th of whom had been previously active in the
Euthanasln Pro rt in Germany. *11 of t..ls ornoY admitted
in hla ?r —trl 1 affl avlt:

".he or.’cr to o nd th* cc men to the East
c uld have cer. Ivon only y KlrrJLer to
bv nut, possibly taroi h Bouhlcr. "

(.;9-i£6, Pros. Ex. 1» • . *31).

The connection -ctwean tho "dtlftun * (Charitable

Foundation for Institutional Cnro) and the extermination canps

In Lu .lln -,7.0 also known to the low, r employees of the

tuthnnnsln ctatlons. UI0-.7C, Pro3. PS. .'.’2, R lt*67).

The witness Gor. r.cb otnteC In nls ofJ -.Jivat th t bo'lee Cap-

tnln Wirth told hin late in the Suan.» j;* :94l that ho hna

.eci; tran.-forre -.y The i .un.at 1 :n fvt nal Core

(wjilch was one of the code nance under w..a_i. tr. Euthanasia

Pro* nun operated) to a euthanasia institute in the Lublin

«rua. (:;0-3010, aura). Tho 35 Ju c, Dr. Hor. on, who in-


vestlpated the Jewish extermination pro.-risa In Lu-lln, testi¬
fied before the International Ullitary Tribunal that "irth,
having previously currlec. out the task of removing the in-
cura-ly insane, was a specialist In ucs6 destruction of
human 3ein t s. Tho office from which Wlrth obtained his
orders tr.s B-rlln Tler-nrtenstrasso and uaonr the people
who wore connected with ti.16 operation was blank tn bur. .
(NO-2614, Pros. Ex. 50-i, K. 77o5-7737). Bx-ack admitted that
..lrth was an official of the Euthanasia Station Brandenburg,
(brack, E. 77o3). Brandt visited Brnr.donburr in the '/inter
of 1939-40. (Brack, h, 7c-.t-6). Tho central offioo for tho
Euthanasia Fro. ran was set u.. in Tl-r.-artenstrasso and
Blankon ur.* was Brack's deputy in the Euthanasia Pro'ran.
(Brack, R. 7563, R. 7707).

Thu defendant Brack reported to Hinnlor about thenc
uctlvltlos on June do, 1942, ns follows:

“On the instruct! or. a of Heioh-Lcador Bouhlor
I plaOwu '•one of oy dui - already oouo tlr.o
a o - at ie hi so cal of B* \ adnfuohror
Mo.oonlk to execute -iiG Opociiil Risslon.

On hie rune’.— real.at I a transferred addi-
tiona* ^.rconnol. C * this accucor Brl* ndo-
fuehror ais ocr.lk str.Svd n.c o.-.nlon that
the whole de , /-u«.-tlon uhouM .V OC./le’ted ns
quic/*y ns .ccei.to fc t. one wou^d not
, ut enu hi :.r. * .e -1 le o: it w.io Xttf if
some -iff.' vuitUs sr.ould ru-:t n stoppage
of the action necessary. You yourself,
hclchofuohr -.r. have •lroady ex /iMssod your
vie./, th-t work nhoul : re. • a . .fji tly for
rerc.no of cbCfrjila.a n-cn.* . - JC-206,

pros- Ex. It:., Vo*

Thu affi— vis of hurt C< ret jin "r T3h also ncntlono
W’lrth, wives r. »ivld ..-scri. ton of th» lo way in which

the Ylctimo r.i'L- killed .y t . thcuc/u. • • of Ulcboc-

nlk. (1550-PS, Pros. Ex. ^28, R. 1799-ldJ?).


-40-


In October 1941, creek, the administrative head of
the Euthanasia Program, forwarded plans whereby Jews who
were unable to work should be externinnted by pas. He
docl' red hlo r-adlncss to send none of his assistants and
especially hlo chemist, Knllaoycr, to the Erst where the
ncoccsary gassing a. , nrntus could bo cnolly manufactured.
Elohmnnn, whom Hitler had ch-r.-od with the extermination
of tho Jews, was In Agreement with these plans. Consequent¬
ly, .there wore "no objections to doing away with those Jews
who nro unable to viorfc with the I rack renedy". <NC-;>65J|

Pros. E x . 507, R. 774*i). Kallnoyer, who was chnrpod with
the manufacture of the pnsnln,: apparatus \ind equipment
(supra), had been trained for this task In tha Euthanasia
Propran. Previously he h«d boon rosponslblo for the pronor
operation of tho gas chambers of the different euthanasia
Institutions. (Brack, R. 77*13). Aooordlng to Elohnnnn'o
own estlnate, four nllllon Jaws were klllod In extermina¬
tion Institutions. (MO-2737, Pros. Ex. 505, R. 7740).

E. LEGALITY

The evldcnoo outlined above makes It oloar that tho
Buthnnnsta Propran can only bo donorlbcd as nnsa murder.
This Tribunal Is not called u on to doflnu with Juridical
nlooty what a State may lawfully loclfllato with respoot to
outhunnsla. The Prosecution asks only that this Tribunal
find, as ether trlbun-ls b vo already held, that there wan
no valid law In the Third R c lch permit tin;: euthanasia and
that the exooutlon of norsona under the guise of euthanasia
with tho oennivnneo and assist nee of ocrtnln dofondnnts
In this dock, oonstltutod tho crime of murder - a War C r lmo
nnd n C r lnc. A ( -.' Inst Humanity.

The first and foremost authority on the locality of


-41-


euthan"Bin ns . met loci under the Hnzls Is In the Jud.-nrnt

of the International Solitary Tribunal. It States:

■Reference ;h ul ‘ -l -o V. nn*o to the policy which was
In existence In Germany by the :unnor -of 19-10, under
which all *cd, Insane, and incurable people, 'useless
tutors 1 , ter tran - feme A t o colei Institutions k re
they wen killed, and their rcl-tlwn informed th-t they
h d led fron natural o^us. c. The vlotIns wore not c
fined to German citizens, lut Inclul. 1 foreign labor¬
ers , xho we re n longer nttc to work, • nd wore thrr -
fore useless to the Bern an war n chine. It nan been
cotin."ted that at loaot o nc 875,000 people were Killed
In thl nr. r In r. , ' it ’ syluOB,

which wore under tho Juplsdlotl n of the defendant
Frick, In hie o-pnclty as hlnlnt. r rf the Interior.

H w many f: re l 7' workers wer inolu \ d in this totnl it
has ho on quite in i- U t< Sotornln .■ (R.1514,1515,.

. Fnres 16910-7, Official English Tranealpt of tho I.rf.iJ.

■During the wr nurolnr hcncs, hop ltrjs, nnd asylums In
which euthanasia was rnoticcd as described oloewhcro
In thl a JuVnent, on un r Frick's Juris -Hot ion. Ho
had kn Hi.;.* a that insane, piok and n.rcd poorlo, 'uoo-
i on tors 1 , wer bolnft systematically put to A oath.
Complaints the c aurdor:’ r ached hln, Vut ho < Id
nc thini; to etc- thv n. « re. 'rt of tho Czechoslovak
V7rr Orlnea Oor.itlo. 1 n crtiiritcl Ort 276,000 nontally
•.ofioient an’ n ; :od po lc,l r »h 8( w lfnro he wan res¬
ponsible, fell vlotln to It.* (K. 1515; Pn.ro 17°07,
Ofrlolal English Trrjioorl-t »f the l::T.)

These findings draw n- distinction hotwocn German
n< tiannlo oxooutOd under tho Pro-r-n nnd non-Grrnnn na¬
tionals. Those oxcautiano are Auserlbcd with word"murders 0
end constitute War Crlnco and Crlncs *(:•'Inst Humanity under
tho Charter nnd Control Council L-w Ho. 10. Thlo was ono of
tho , rlnoljml orlncs which led to tho Judgoent of cuilty
and tho sentence -f death nr- 1 tv t Frlok.

The Review of tho Dc uty The- tor Jufl£0 Advocate In
tho oooo of the U.S. Vo, Klein, -ahlnan, ct nl, held at
Wiesbaden, Germany fron 6 throu *h lb O c toKr 1915 Is a
clear precedent th-t tho cxnoutlon of non-G.-rnnn nation¬
als pursuant to the Euthnnnein ?r . r«r> w ns a crime.

(NO—1110, Pros. Ex. 115, A. 1761). The defendants wore thore
charged with the cxccutl n of sene -iOO persons of Polish


nnd Russian nationality, nlle *ed to be suff.rim: fr >n
Incurable tuberculosis, at the Hndanar Euthanasia Station
between July 1G-M nnd April 13i5. ?hoy wore not charged
with murdering G 0 rann nationals nnd that Issue was not
considered. After takln • Judiolrd notloe of the fnot
thnt foreign laborers wore lnprcsrod for service in
Germany, thr Reviewing Authority hold that the killings
In Issue wore a violation or the Intern tlonnl laws of
war and of « r tlcle 46 of The Hague Convention. Three of
the s*von defendants wore sentenced to death.

Aooordlm: to German law, euthanasia wan nothing other
than murder. Paragraph 211 of the Gorman Criminal Code,

In lta old form read:

"VJhoov r kills a person wilfully ’.-111 ic j finished
by death for nurlur IT the kill In.- was premeditated."

In the new forn, wliloh-wns In-effect fr^n «1 September

1941 on, the ecotl n stated:

''.. 0 murderer will uc punished by d,ath.

« murVrer 1/ no who kills .■ prison out of sliror
’onlr. t nur r, f r th( satisfaction of the seaual
lnotlnotn, for oovot* unnoae or other vile riotlvoo; one
nhi> kills another a-llol u:-ly r cinnlly or by • uMlely
dam-croud re-no r to oronto the • roc on '.I tlons for
another unlohnMe action or to conceal such an action.

"Certain rxoc, tl ml canoe where capital punluiuaent lc
not npj.roprlnto will be punished by l if, sentenoo,*
(N0-70I3, Doc. : k lo, . lily .).

F ;r ex. art commont.-rlco »n the locality of euthanasia,
see HC-708,' Doe, -ook I0 t p! 134 j an! HO-706, Ibid,f.123.

Tho defense witness Hans L iui n , a Ocmnn legal cx-ort,

•

testified that the Hitler let or to ~ouhl«r nnd Brandt was
not n law und that oiflolal legislation was noocennry to
lo-'Hlse euthanasia. (R. 2672, 2670). The Relohc Minister
of Justice, Guertncr, on 24 July 19-10, wrote a letter to
L rimers Informing h*m th-t, -c the Fuehrer had refused to
ls3ue a law, It w-s nee esary to discontinue lnmcdlat ly


-•10


the secret extermination of Insane persons. (150-332, Pros.
E x . 393, R. 1079). « c<?py of this letter wac sent to

Douhlcr on 27 July 1910. (NO-633, Pros. Ex. 39*1, R. 1679,
1680 ).

During brack*s lecture in the Ministry of Justice,
referred to in sub-section 3 above , the leg"! authorities
present were completely misinformed about tho extent Of tho
program. Fron th. renatekf of tho croaker, the impression
was obtnlncd th-t only a very United circle of persons, "t
tin! u*:1or.t sev. ral hundred, throu-hott Germany, Austria and
tho Protiotorato bohemia nl Moravia woulrt bo nffoctcd. Tho
opinion oreated r. as that only very d angorouo patients "nd
delirious maniacs who night injure themselves would bo
oubjootud to tho rOi-ram. (NO-2253, su rn). This obviously
was done to qulot th. misgivingo or tho • ernons preuont.
Draok, when question. .as to whether, during tho lcoture,
ho gnvo an •• . roxiii.ato numb' r of uersonn who would be
oubjootud to outhnnaala, could or would not give any
•nnwor. Contrary, to the In. rornlon created during tho
oonforonoo In tho Ministry of Justice, the defendants
Dranrtt >*nd Brack nou adnlt th- t about 50 to 00 th.-un- nd
people wore kllijd in the Euthanasl- ?r *r n In Q P mnny
and Austria 'lone. (IranCt, R. 2165; brack, K. 7010),

Since the end of the war, Gprnan ••nd Austrian courts

have repeatedly held that the killing of persons of any

nationality under tho guise f euthanasia wan in violation

of tho German C..lminal Code and unlshablo as murder.

Tho wltnonsoa Schmidt and Monhccko who ti • tifled before

this Tribunal had thon3olves b. on convicted Vy a Gorman

court for , *-rticl nti in in the outhannsl r -r^m and sen-

•

tonced to life In. rlsonacr.t and derth, r n actively.


— 14 -


leforo the District Court for Criminal Cases In


Vienna, in July 1946, Dr. E r nat Illln t : woo sentenced to
death by hnn.'lnf and Dr. Knrianne Tuc-rk to ten years In the
penitentiary for the tutting to death of pnychopnthlo
children or children who were afflicted with hereditary
diseases (so-called euthanasia). It Is stated In the do-
Olslon th"t Di*. Ill Inf took over his Job on July 1, 19.2
with the order tc t--k* over the execution of the tnoks
put by the Relchs Comltt *c. Both defendants ndnlttod
hnvin,: art lb Inn ted In the death of about 2,000 o^nen In
the period between July 1, 1948 and «pril 1945. Defendant
Illln' testified that ho war. called u~ by Hcfrlrannn from
tho Ohanoollery f the Fuehrer and was -Ivon a typewritten
shoot cl,:nod by /v^olf Hltl r to read, "coordlng to which
tho defendant urandt had to ut Into off ot and to work
out adminlstr tlv» in :ulntlono for the . alnlcan killing
(outhnnnrln) of Incurable ldiotlo ohll’ren. After examina¬
tion rn.l deal. 1 n by n scientific ocdlonl oomlttco, D r .
Brandt or the Ac uty dool-mated ly hie would give the order
In each ln.Uvid'.al c- c. ; randt win pern rally responsible
uo Hitler. Tho ilndln.cn said tht n that such an order hy
Hitler would r.rv. r have had the orver of - law:

"It is true that n.iolf Hltl r on tho dcolol n of the
1 Or ter OeiTinn Rciohnt'.f' (Orc.isdcutnohcn Rolohstnfoo)
26 A rll 19 2 authorii to do everythin,: 1 w hich
i: ule s. rvo te »,• In the vio l r y or to urs lrt in winn ing
It* (»U*.6 cur Errin run * doii S1V."res A1 ont odor "drtfcu
Foltrno,-t); particularly ho wan riven the ri *ht to
force -1 If noeci-.s-rj, v ry Germ :r to do hlr- *uty with

-11 aenne vhioh • oc-ncd a r riato to him and In cano
i f viol at l- n of th. :c duties t) Inflict the r.yVQ riato
pon-lty v; lthaut retard to any c uiridoration that wan
merit o c’-lly to roll v« such pc If' of their office,
rank, r position with ut -kin * the x-cncrlbcd legal
proceeding ng-lnst then.

"Aside fr n the fact th t th so parers entnisted to the
Chief f • vnrnncnt In the 11 *ht *f Its entire forsuln-
tl <n wan t- r- f r t military -utternly, tho transfer
rf such a .over to thc~oiil> f ■ ' r vernnent la nothing


new in the history of the Inst dcc"' ! .es, So, the
Viennese Gen• lnuerat, f-r Instance, on 22 September
I'.^l:, err owered the ila.yor to Issue all ordinances
rnd rc ; rul"tl ns no0030try for the administration on
hlr sole resj.onslMlity , since a ro -ulnr functioning
of the Gf.nolnderat In vice of the state of war was
unthinkable (Richard Xralik, History of the City of
Vienna / Gosohictc d. r Stfidt Wien, 2nd edition,
ra,;e 524).

"Aoocrdinrr to the opinion of The c ourt such an order of
Hitler - apart fron military intters - could never hnvo
the ..ower of a. law. The problem of Euthanasia In an Id
ns nodiol science Itself. Just In the last dooadao all
nil clvllltod states h«v. been c »no mod vlth this i rob-
lcn, and >hy. lol-no and legal r-.cn have agreed that the
solution of this roblcn oust he left to loplslutl n
alone*

"Besides the first defendant scorns to have been aware
Of the' illegality of hlo ctlor.s, otherwise he could not
huv*. sworn his collaborators, including the nursing
porsonnol, toeoorooy. The snao mat bo true r the
H.leh Cj anlttoi in Sorlin, otherwise tho dlrootlvo would
not hnvo boon issued In January 19.5 t dontroy the en¬
tire correspond., noo vhtoh had b. me • rrl< d on between
Vionn" and tho Reich Ca ittoo In fcrlln,"

''An ro.:-rds tho log -1 side f this so-called order under
which Dr. 111 In r nnlnt ins to have boon, tho following
1 :: t - be e -1 : t-h "ii r'.r for

* 'the one

h"n.:, tilts 1 fr n tl. ral o 3e of othloo which is

pert of tho law and, on tin »thrr hand, from the appli¬
cation of thor lawn. So for inctnnou : nrnprn-'h 47 of
the Oomn.it Hi l itr ry i nnl Co.:.- Icorooi ns fellows 'if
iy thf ox> out 1 n of an rdtr in natter 'f duty a aennl
law lo b in,: vl elated, the ou erl r lr.-ulng th. .rdor
la s loly roopens1 lo. The beyin • subordinate will
however b«- sontonoed for nr lei; r ting i:i thcoaso of
his fcn win* that tho orde r f n su ricr Involved an
notljn which intended < r l - • Q Ttary orlac or

ft ns . 1 . Slnil'r stipuln't iuno nro oentoini ' in

para -ra. hu b35 and bGO -i thr s ool 1 regulations for
actlvo nnb r.i l the array (law f 15 July 1920,

Pon-.l Co \ GnZiJt c No. 323).

"The defendant Illln,* is therefore ftnt In a position
tu use tho Bui tnrfuf*A that ho n un« • r an order
1 h ivln : the r I law, because this rd.-r h d not
the Jbow.'r ef law, quite apart fl-n the fret that "n or-
d. r issued n net e xculpate. (?• ra-raphs 1 and 5 of
thu War Crlnin lo « Q t.)

"If, however, the two . nd-ntr. f r as a r ar.on
f .r their rctl-ns thi fact that they r h r. A Euthanasia
only when 111 children wro t be At liver*A fr n their
eufforln ( : the defendants Ir vin.: ascribed this notiv<-
elun to the Reich Conr.ltt« . tho foil >vin • Is to bo
stated:


"AcccrcHnp to the previous activities of the firrt
defendant, ec; dally with a view to his. scientific
research of hereditary dlsonccs, th,. c urt has cno
to the c.nclusln that Euthanasia of children Is to
he c hcldor A as on th, o^ne level an th. hill In:* of
rc'ult nontally 111 i i.re an and the cxtvraln-tlon of
the Jena. Here « s.ayinr* of Hitler which ref nee A
»iterlllzntion nnnu 1 *j cones to mini'.:

•Vfhnt Is not of rood rnoe In this world, Is chafl".'

“The first dorondnnt, Dr. Ill In.-, ndnlttod without
hesitation cn th> occasion of hla first lnt rropatlon
hoforo the Kuscl-<n oai-taln having euthanized the so
children only .vho re cf r.. vnluo.at rll iXr the
Germ an tx . 1 l.’YYTST, tfi t le, In other words,

tno"'v tlorinl socialist lo.*an of the 'purification "f
the O r rrmn . * o;ole'. It Is bowcv r absolutely wron r
to cup.nsc th-t tho Reich c onlttco was motivated In
•ltn doer,on l* * t?* atarnt' hy fc lin.rs f o 'w ancion,
on the contrary It will he sufficient t' oint to tho
f ct th't oonprv.slon did n t exist at ’ill In the Third
Reich."


■Summarily It la therefore to he s tat, d th t the ac¬
tions of both d fendanto did not only offond i,alnot
the aenc rnl on 1 lrw hut also  rains t tho »ron« rnl
n ral cade and tin uc< leal cthlos. The tnok of tho
.hyololcn In, f u ur" , t cur. and n t to 1 : 111 .

And la. t hut n t least no c-n point to the fact that
co o'-ll> ohll ivn, f rh n It lc n question here, arc
In any o»no artloul-rly v tooted ly th, lnw,(cnr .21
i.. r 01 v 11 c To. - (KO-317, Doe. Cookie,

The oourt if noslscn In -crlln, at tho oeoclon on

25 March 19-iO, found the dt-fen hints Hlldc J-mloke and

Helene fflootorok guilty cf nurdcr nr.'. oentonoort then to

do.ath, Loth wore active In the Meccritt-Ohrnw* ldc

sanatorium f <r the mentally ill. -oth defendants hna t

olpn certificates ntatln r tlv»t they cn v. *od thcnsdveo

n.it to rove: 1 nythin • nl ut the contents of the lcp.al

rtlriotivr and oral request tv kill nil incurnhlo nontally

111 i., re n. . The eel otl in of tho ; re ni. who wort to he

killed was o' Tried out in ouch a way that the defendant

Worn!eke read tho oacc hlrt rles and ■looked" nt tlxo

rtiorts a neerned.


- 47 -


Agouti 600 persons were killed between 19-.i and 1S4-1 by
seopolanine and norphina injections. Also sone children
were killeu. fhc Court- of *sr.lzes found further:


“-he riebt of adninlsterin.; euthanasia has
not been recc.jnlied so rar -y the lav. 3ut
even if euthanasia should not .e excluded
on >rinclple for hunar.ltar’.un reasons, suer,
nealcal 'help 1 could -c allowed only in very
exceptional cases, for lnsiancQ, if the prox¬
ies were whether on intolerably painful and
in all likelihood protraoteu illness were to
-u endec ./ a painless death, The case at
hand however diu not require a further dis¬
cussion t »ls nucJi discussed pro len. Ihc
defendant \tu rniofce, necoriln to her own
statenont, c id not cake r..r selection fron
hunanitarian notlvcs at all. Rather, the
persons indicated -y nune on the lists su -
nittud to n^r for r.er decision wuro con¬
sidered fr;a the e lnnin as inrano >cr-
nons, who r.iculd killed as a natter of
prlnoi.le." (iio-ab, Doc. 5k. 1C, 8C).

'.he Court of o.ipeuls in' tho rone case rejected

the appeals of .oth uofendunts. The following quotations

fron the Reasons nay .c of interest:

“In the n .rln* 3f 19.2, the adnlnlstrutlve
director of t..o institution, Gru.owokl, told
the dofwndants that a luw - cu -ccquontly also
ci.lloa -v ale a Fuehrer-cfehl - hud ~etn
iosuea, acjor-in to .r. lch incur: ~lu insane
Jiua to -0 .illel in order to shorten their
suffer:n. a, an- cuphaslzvd ir. z 1 c connection:
'Laws ::uet be o eyed, zou r.uct ao your duty."'


“ihu objection u a! net tho u. plication of
Lr.u nu.terlid law culnlnutes in tho assertion,
that the defen-unto nad acted without loin c
conscious of un;. illegality.

“.his o.joction also :;et ulth no pucjoes.

"No law exl. ted u loh prescribed the lillinr,
of incurably insane persons no Ion or oapa lo
of work. ihl3 is also csti. llshed .y infoi-nn-
tlon o.v'.lr.ec us a preorutlonary aeacuro fron
the <vn.-ricon prosecutor An the Nuorn-er trial,
Dr. henpner, who conduct®, the case n. ninst
Frick, - u case wr.loh was -Iso used on tho


- 45 -


killing of Insane persons. The law mentioned
to the defendants, oy the administrative direc¬
tor Gracowskl, was no law at all, if only be¬
cause It was not only not published, out the
strictest secrecy was enjoined on everyone who
knew of It, under threat of Imprisonment or
death. I.or did the c.efendants act at all ac¬
cording to this alleged law. For aocordln t c to
GraLowskl 1 3 Information this law prescrl ed
the icillin.- of nental patients In order to
shorter, their sufferings. The nsslao court,
however, has established that the decisive con¬
sideration In the killings effected jy the de¬
fendants was hy no means the shortening of the
patient's sufferings, -ut, apart from their
incurability, the Incapacity of the patients
tc perform la;or."


"In t..Is connection, the appealers use the
term 'euthanasia' In a wider senno which includoo
the destruction of life unfit to live. In the
rial neunin. of the word, euthanasia has the
sense of nol.In * someone to die. The soothing
hand or the doctor holpB the doomed, nufforln,*
patient to c 1 * 0 8the threshold of death. So far,
as tho assl:.e court has correotly pointed out,
euthanasia has not ooun accepter even In this
more restricted sense as lu t til Justification
for Xlllln , let alone in the wider sense of
the destruction of life unvorthy to live. To
destroy tr.e livec of tho Incurs ly Insane eenuso
they are no Ion or capu lu of work violates the
unlverflnlly-ackJtowlou. ou moral la' . Tho attempts
end* y a., .ef-lwrs to Justify this destruction no
tho r.suit of s^rl^us reaenren In t.ilo direction
uhlch has -eon curried on fer a com ar-vtlvely
Ion time - and therefore ns not orl lnatln.*
entirely In nation 'l-sociallst concepts - aro
futile. The thesis y bindln and Hoche In
ld£0 - the authors .ing a Juzlut and a psychia¬
trist of international re station - which tho
r.p.-ealtra also rv. ard as the standard work on
this KU.JeOt and which duals with the rl.ht to
destroy life unworthy to live, .y no none asks
for the rl ht to >111 all incura'-lu mental pa¬
tients no lor. or capu le of work-in.•, ''ut only
cu cats tho killlnj cf lncura le In cdles In
uecoz’cw’nce with some formal le al -roceduru
Implemented with every i lo unranteo;

L.-o«.u:i«- those in.ecileo have tho will neither
to live nor to die, and are una.le to .*lve any
real consent to t.olr -uliv ut to deatn, while
on the oth'.r .o»r.o, put tin.; them to death dees
not Involve ronkin down their win to live.


On the contrary, the authors say that the
will to live of even those who are nost
seriously 111 , suffer nost .ravely and are
of least use, should -e fully respected.

It is a natter of common knowled e that
e. . the lar. t .roue of ecnlzophrenic
lunatics lncluc.es many ; atlents whose ln-
cura le condition Is not always recognl-
taele a6 6uch by the layman and who most
certainly are not laciln. In the will to
live. 5ut this 8 utmost ion, evtn when res¬
tricted to incurable idiots ns ur.-ed by
Binding and Hoche has by no me* ns .ten
universally approved. ,he former «ttomey-
Gunerul (O-erreichsunwnlt) a-ornnyer, whom
the appealers also quote, raises serious
objections In the essay -.±lch ho published
In 1920 'She Physician ana the Law' ('Der
nrzz In Rocht') and concludes -vlth a re¬
mark churaoterlstlo cf the attitude exist¬
ing towards this pro 1 cm a few ye’irr before
the J-cr.lled selzuro of ;»ower viz, that the
pro l«n w r-s not of any Immediate lmport.ncu and
could hardly ecome so In the near future.

"as to destroy the life cf the incura ly In¬
sane from the point of view of their perma¬
nent complete unfitness for vork Is to vio¬
late a uni vers ally acknovlcd eU nor ’1 law,
the defendant 1 8 lUllt is not excluded , •
tr.e porr.l lllty that they were unconscious
of any lllo.ptdlty and considered their acts
us lawful."


i’ho Court elleVvc thi.t no.ody cs-n Invoke
an opinion contrary to the universally ac¬
knowledged cora-l l/.w in order to Justify
the lack of any concciounnesG cf illc allty."


"Officials or employees need not o-ey a crim¬
inal ox\ler or n criminal re wT tlon. Shcy
arc not only entitled, .ut they are also
In duty ound to examine whether order or

re.iU. tlons violate penal laws.

.hey nave 'n.,provcd, In their minds, the
measures end the requirements cf Gratovski'.
Thus they have considered ns rl r.t and luw-
ful the >111 In.- of inouraely Insane persona
w..o w-,ru no lcn.vr fit to work. Svm If this
w n t..e- contents of nn onier the fact docs


excuse then.. So subordinate can

Justify hlns If -y the plea that he considered
as 1 ful an order ImplyIn the killing of
human -elr. r, and viol:.tin. a universally ac-
icnowlidf.-t- coral law."


"In the education of art. 211 new version,
the court of assizes has s-.itenced the de¬
fendants, without Judicial error, for curder,
-ocause they have j.llleu fron unworthy co-
tives and maliciously. «s t..e court of assi¬
zes has esta-ll8:iod, t;.u defendants rave not
suwdttcd to rji order contrary to their Inner
oonvlctlon. Neither have tnoy oeen coved by
pity for the patients -ut .y the conviction,
that the latter should c destroyed as use¬
less menders of the community ov/ln.- to their
unfitness for work. Moreover, an act which
has coon committed apalnet so many people -
ana Indeed continuously - ana which violates
universally acknowledged cor.-J principles so
deeply cu.mot ut jo consider id n.\ having keen
committed out of v;se notlv.a."


"It is an r.'vusu of the power of life and death
over unconscious ...tlents or ruch •■ho cannot
he expected, o'In,- to lunacy, to -e a.le to
discuss their Illness pertinently if this
pOj r Is used In kllllnsuch patients -y
mo..ns of a sr.ct hardens to tne person adnlnis-
terin. It, cna cut of untortriy motives, as has
ceen est/v llsheu. ■


“IS..SLOBfit-*SJ. jy -I

Va£Rl°iJs_:^d ;floc59rek_are_2nly_tnoJlent—

jtlnkc cf. a ), ony_ chula A _ opu_ thvt thoy^arc—
pi‘ eoeded y y ^o rgong ,.g&QSe’li l?; t_l 3_ at 111
. i- e f ter. 1 (i.C—-«7, Dec. 5k. 16, p. 106).
tfcOphr.sl’o adaoc)

Thus, It Is established th t euthanasia was
murder according to Ooraan law.


Ir. connection / 1 th t;.ls question, it Is n.-nln
pointed out that the whole pro».i*ac was kept completely
secret, hitler's letter Of 1 dc.tcaler 19c9 (R. 1516)


was arrked lop Scoret, was never pu lished, and the Minis¬
ter or Justice- only received a copy c:' it one year after
Its issuance. (630-PS, Pros. &x. 3oO, R. 1516). Transfers
ol' lnnates of insane aeyluns to euthanasia stations were
allegedly carried out h> the oracr of the Rclchs Dufenso
CoanlsEionvr. (2«0-1133, Pros. ih(. 335, R. 1546). The
officials active In the Pro*.ran had to sl.-n a written oath
of secrecy. 010-1312, ?roc. Ex. 33 6; KO-1311, Pros. Ex.

339, R. 1551-2) ihu doctors who performed euthanasia
w w re warned that they would he Severely punished if they
sabotaged the work. (R. 1994). The whole prorrnn of
Euthanasia was to e kept secret as they v«.ro told from
tho uo. lnnln • that it was r. top secret cutter. The reason
t'lvwn WnB t0 avoid unrest m on,- tho population. Broach
of secrecy was considered sa.ov.pu, (Uonnecfcc, R. 1P23).
Others had to si n a wrlt'.u; oath _lndln.* then to scoreoy.

It was known tfc t the result of :rjach of this oath was
oonfinecent in concentration era... (dclunldt, h. 1526).

f- g&la£l.Bgaa&

cr»ox.t was put in eh r ; e of the pro.-ran, toi;other
with Bouhlcr, the a.ovc-quoted lett er of Hitler of 1
Sopten.er 1939. nis position as hi hect authority in tho
Euthanasia Pro.-ran is outlined in the affidavit of Dr.

Boeha,- one of tne oldest oua.ers of the 2 -SDm?. flicn, in
November 1940, boehn /..preached Martin Bo man n with the
request to obtain an audience with r.ltler to ccoplaln akout
thu execution of the Euthanasia Pro.Ton, to man referred
hia to Brandt as the res.ioR8l.lo authority for the execution


of euthanasia. as a result, eoor.c had a discussion with
or ndt and when he complained, anon--; other things, that the
Euthanasia Pro. ran wa 3 not regulated by law and should not
be carried out in a seorot Conner, 5rondt admitted that
the Minister of Justice, Guertner, hud also uryed lo»:isla-
tlon. rron his conversation .ii.tr. boraann and Brandt, Boohn
was sure that Brrsidt was the lendin,_ personality In the
Program. (hO-3059, pros. Ex. , R. ). Brandt nd-

oltted that it woe necessary to set up a special or :nni-
zation to carry out euthanasia. (P.. 2407).

Ho, together with Bouhlcr, had authority over
tho physicians who were jnrtlcip-itln.* In this Program,
and furthornorc he hod to Keep Hitler Informed from the
medlo' l point of view (Kn-llFh trrjiel/itlon* in ,:arbled on
this point and reference should -e nude to the German trans¬
cript, R. 2<20) nd :md to mulnt-in contnot with BouhKr.
Ibrandt, R. LuOa). nu further admitted that authorizations
for the kill in,; of children v.^re cu fitted to his and
Bouhlor. (R. 25-.-.).

Hu stated that ho rest n«d his Job sono time in

1942. (R. 2433). ihilu tain is of no uatorirl sl -nifi-

canoo, it is established Chat ho held his position na tho

leaa:n L fl uro in the proyrnn until 194*. Ur. Ludwl •

dprnuur, in t.ic affidavit, stated:

"I heard the nose of Prof. 3r. hurl brandt
for the first >lnc at a conference in the
middle of 1941 in Berlin. «t this confer¬
ence 1 learned th- t lari Brandt and Pl'lllpp
Bouhl r nr.; the 1 e-din. fl.rurcB in tho
Euthanasia pro* mm* bhe confer ace was


called :y Dr. Linden on b^hnlf of tho Deprrt-
ner.t of tho Interior and problems of institu¬
tions and a6\luas were submitted. Dr. Linden
dirco-eu the proceedings.

To the Lest of my knowledge and belief,

Phillip oouhler us well as Prof. Dr. Karl
Brandt were the leading figures in this so-
called Euthanasia Program from 1941 to tho
collapse of derjiany.

“The connection betwoen tho Department of tho
Interior ana Brcf. Karl Brandt, in the frame¬
work of the Euthanasia Pro.ror., was that Karl
Brt-ndt b avc ord.rs to Conti ur.d Llndon, whioh
were passed or. -y those persons cn -eimlf of
the Department of the Interior. Brandt was •
t..e dominatln fl-urc xithout doubt." (!,'0-318,

Proo. £x. o7o, E. Ic03).

Tho witness /csoc s 'h in his affidavit that Brandt
was in ohnrgc of the Euthanasia Pro. rut (killing rf mentally
111 adults who wor, unfit for work and killing of mentally
inferior and asocial children) at least until Kerch 1944.
(HO-1428, Pros. Ex. «2, E. 1953).

*ho witness Kennoche testified that he learned in
the -o.lnr.ln.* ox 1941 that the defendant Brandt was active
in the Euthanasia Prc r:.-. (R. 1874). Be furth r t stifled:

" «htn, in U I was treated as n patient
in the -.ray hospital ut St. Blaslen, I
four..* cut thx*cu.;h conversations with offl-
cox'S, that Pxx)i'. ci-.r.dt had an essential
,mx*t in the collection oi insane persons
y in the arcs of Lu 11.*, Poland.” IR. loCi).

he further testified, in connection with tills Lublin action,

that it must xoivo tnjtor. ,,l ;co u.* to 19.4 nr.d that it w: s

sr.lu that in oar. o pt:3cr.s n Jewn ar collected in Lu lln

ir. large num-ers. (h. 1904).

.he witness och 1.1 testified that Prof. Bl' 1 ndt had

the medical direction tie Frcpr.-m and o rfLy in 1944 was

ho told that Brandt hnd 1 ft the Pro T-m. IE. 1525). He


-lgo fcney th't Er ndt -Lyed the lc dinr n-rt in the t -sk
which h.d to be ucenplishcd (Luth-n.sie ?r *r. .), th t he
(Er ndt) v.-s to -ccon.iish thi3 t sic. (Schmidt, 1. 1S-.7).

Both witnesses, Schoidt nd rfenntckc, Is testified
th t the ch rt (SO-253, Pros. Ex. 331, R. loie). vhich
aho\ 3 ar.ndt in the, center of the Pro^r-i, is .correct.
(Sch-iict, P.. 1633, ;itnnccice, 7. 1676).

The evirtnee shewe further th t or: ndt vc orders
ir. the Euth- n si- Tiorr ~ -a 1-te .s July 1 .3. In letter
froci the Cener-i ?-tlcnts ir ns;ort Cor or ti n, d„tee £0
July 19*13, to the Uent.il Institution K-c - r — vr.ich v.s,
a floou.ient3 nd teoti-iony sicv, r. ertcrain tiro 3t tion —
the folio* inr sentences re found:

I order tr-nofer of ins nc . cr3->.ie t: ycur
Institution lao, this b* order f ?i f.
br ndt, the Caiiissi^ner Cent 1 f the
fuehrer for Iledic 1 md He 1th Service. v ou
will at, on f6 July 19<3, 150 ins nc v--.cn
frnr. the Mental Institution' ratcin if. the
Relehs'-hn till furnloh th* neceo ry c ro,

•-a recuestcd.- (110-692, Pros. Ex. -.2, R.

£536).

Er ndt vi/o the person vhe h c* to be r- chcc if one

vere to n ve child iro, euth n si .. In letter fre-t

the Reichs Co voittci frr hes- rch on Kei d it ry nc*

Con titution.lly otvere Tire Sec, d ted :*JVt 1\r 16, 1?-.",
to Dr. Scheldt's o u torlua Erchberr ( s the evi-ence sh vs,
icillinr at .tion for deficient children), t find the
sentence:

"On the b sis of r. letter direct, to
Professor Dr. Er ndt c-'ncerninr the .ve
mentioned I request -n el-tor t« • 'i "i.oois
•bout the -.ent toned «n.i G s^e •<£-' is
reported to be t y'ur instituti.n t
! resent."


and, further:


"I:* fron a medical H olnt of view such release
Is warranted, one could take into consideration
whether one should not perhaps coaply with such
request in the Interest of the good reputation
of the institution. 1 CNO-890, Pros. Ex. 443,

R. 2540-1).

That the defendant Karl Brandt was in a position
to issue instructions and assign tasks to insane asylums in
Germany is further corroborated by the affidavit of the
defendant Rose, who suld that in 1943 Brandt put an insane
asylum in Thurln, on at his disposal :md u. ue arrangements
that this Institution would not be converted into a roneral
hospital nd further that in 194-., Brandt made arrangements
for the wetter foeuln. of inmates of this Asylum in ordor
to una.lo hose to proceed with his nalaria therapy.

(R. 1717). If this statwBunt in Itself has nothin.- to
do with euthanasia, it shows the scope of influence and
pow«r Brandt still commanded over insane nsyluns In 1943
and 1944. (KO-872, Pros. Ex. -.08, R. 1716).

*ccordin.- to his own testinony, brandt was in
charge of outh .naslu until 19-.2. (R. 2433, R. 2532). There

is no proof, other than his own statement, that he recl.ncd
his commission at that tl iu. On tr.o ccntxv.ry, the- proof
hao shown that he vac active in this field until some tine
in 1944. In any event, the pro, ram was criminal In its
inception. The aurder of concentration camp inn:tes pur¬
suant to euthanasia ^ an as early as 1940. Uon-Geman
nationals were included in substantial nun ers. Healthy Jews
Kero exterminated without exoclnation. Trained killers from
euthunuGlu stations w, s-e cent to the East as early ns 1941


- 56 -


to aid In the ~&6s curder of Jews. Peisons whose only
crime was physical Inability to work were subjected to
euthanasia from the very &e e -innlnf. Indeed, the elimina¬
tion of "useless eaters* was the principal rationale of the
whole program.

Brandt stated that an order existed which exempted
non-German nationals, but he was una'le to f ivc any explana¬
tion as to how t .ls order operated, who received It, and why,
If ouch nn order existed, questionnaire? for foreign nation¬
als were filled out nl all. (B. 2499-2603). The proof has
shown that non-German nationals were never exempted and wore
hilled In lar<> numbers. There Is not In : to -o said In
mitigation for Brnndt.

iv. cc:;c:.u3io::

Kurl Er.ndt, us Conor* 1 .ad later Heich Cou-
nissioner of the He .1th and .Buie 1 Services, held the
position of highest .uthori:y 1- the neCic 1 services
of the ThlrC Reich. IUs tvsk v» s to oo.'r*:ir..tc the
•activities of 11 the ntficel a rvlcea, bo*h military

•.n<2 clvili n. I't &B diroctly r. :< nolt la to Hitler,
lit w;.s Hltl‘r'3 nt'oncHnr physician crup-'enfuehrer

(Mcjor Gcnrr .1) in the SS.


«


»


- 67 -


Brandt, together ' ith Koetock, w s informed of the
sulfmailonide experiments by Gebh.mrdt before the meeting
in liny 1943. He wes one of the honored ruests rt that
meit'ng ad the reports by GctJrrct - nd ?i eher described
the experiments in complete detail.

Kour days efter this ate-ting Br.nct naked for con¬
centration ceap inn. tes, through Gravritz, to be used in
epidemic jaundice experiments. Casts of do th were unti-
cip: ted. Eight Polish Jcv.s were experimented on, 3one of
whoa died.

*hc typhus experiments in buchenv Id v.ere Iso reported
on in the netting of Consulting Physici ns in iJuy 1943, which
Br-ndt attended. It is inconceivable th t he did not hear
of the objections r;istd to those experiments. Moreover,
Hmndloser end Conti re re informed of these experiments ~nd
both v-trt rcruired to report on "t sic t7ejit3” to Br:ndt.

\ Hr'gen's typhus experiments in t.zvcllcr vero supported by

the Lu:‘tv- ffe and the I cich Research Council. Br r ndt rs n
member of the- Etich I.escr rch Council, 'n ..uruot 1944,
Rostock's Office for Science nd he so brOh, under Brndt,
cl ajsifitd Hv 'tn’s typhus rent rch -s urgent.

Brandt recti-ed piemry powers from Hitler in the field
of chemical w rf rc ir. n.rch l?-«4. Ho met with Sieved and
Hlrt • nd received a report of the .urerous g s experiments
In tz\ ciler. -heat expert ;cnts continued ftcr :Jrrch
1944. Rirt’o r t3 rest rch v. 3 classified urgent by the
^ Office for Science • nd i.t3t:.rch.

Er;ndt personally sup orted the r 3 experiments by
aicKcno. ch. He helped hin establish - laboratory. He visited
Bickenb ,ch in the Kmtxvcilcr Concentration Camp where he
conducted e.-s experiments on inm-tes. Re;orts bv fcickenbnch
sent to Br net prove th t 40 Hussion prisoners of war vero
experimented on \ ith phosc-enc me at lerst four of them wero
killed. Br ndt v; s also connected \ ith tx^erimen’s on inmates


- 58 -


to test the decontamin tion of v ter poisoned with pes.

oterilizi tion expetincnts were performed by Schumann,
a doctor active in the euthanasia 'roprua under Brandt.

Brandt's knowlcdpe of, end porticipetion in, the
system- tic experimentalion on concentration c-mp innutes
without their consent is further rrovi-d ty his repeated
rcouests for such experiments. In Jonu ry 1943, he v.rote
to SS-Oberffru??enfuehrcr V.olff and asked if it were not
possible to carry out nutrition experiments in concentration
c mpa. In September 19*13, he -sked Griwitz to test u new
ointaent for burns, Permission wta riven by HLmaler to
conduct such experiments on inm tes who were to be :.rtifioally
burned. In February 19-14 Brandt, after n discussion with
Grawltz, recucstcd 10 ina-tes for the purpose of testing
u medicine. The prisoners >cre ra •’c av.il .ble.

SJrrndt, topether •. ith Rcichslci cr Bouhler, was in
ch'.rro of the euthm-sio prerr = which Involved the ruthlcna
r.urder of hunfirodo of thous-nds of helpless non, women, nd
children. This v s no • Itruistic prof’‘ m to c se the oains
of rn iapendiw end unavoidable death. It v s r.-ther a
TTOFTia for the extcrrln tion of those who were considered
t. burden or. the ot ;te, who were unable to work, who con-
suaed without producing. Ho lav* r-vo it r. superficial
lerulity. It wes illegel in its inception nd opcrr.tion.
Judmont w s passed by so-celled exerts as to life or
douth of a r tiont or. the basis of f uestionnr.ires without
the expert so much t.s h .viny excaintd the patient. It
oncoapussed the murder or Germans and citizens of occupied
countries -like. It extended to concentr tion cam lmutes
of non-German nationality forcibly cct ined in Germany. It
included hoolthy jews sat forced laborers from the Erst.
Scientific killers trained in the r:s ch-r.bvrs of the
euthanasia stutions tore sent to Poland to assist in the
asss murder cf Jews.


- 59 -


The Prosecution submits thnt the evidence proves
thet K 1 rl Brand t wr.s q principal in, accessory to, ordered,
obetted, took u consenting part in, -nd wee connected
v ith pi ins end enterprises involvinr ncdic::! experiment ::tion
on hunen subjects v.ithout their consent, in the course
of v<hlch cxpcriicnts nurd>rs, brut-lities, cruelties,
tortures, utrocities, and othtr inhuv.no ccts were
ccmitted, end tho execution of the so-c lied ’’euthem-aiu"
prof-rue, in the course of v.hich hundreds of thousands of
hunon beinrs were nurdored, ad th t his ,uilt his bt cn
estrtlished under Counts 1, II, III, -r.d IV of tho
Indictnent.


-CO-


HO# 1


OUUIKG JKI^r FOR
, THJ UNITED O...TJJ OF

liUDOLF SIuiiDT


Janos K. lioilar.oy
..iuxanCor G. KttrCy
.jnost Horlick-Hoohwalu
Jsthor Jcno Johnson

For:

Tolforfi Taylor
Brigadier Gonoral,

Chief cf Counsel for or


Hurnbore,

16 Juno 1947


nrrRODuenoN


It i3 allegod under Count Ono of the Indiotaoat
that tho defendant Rudolf Erandt conspired and agreed
with othors, pursuant to a connon design, to porforn
- nodical oxporinonts on involuntary hunan subjects;
under Counts Two and Throo (’or Crines and Crines
against Hunanity, respectively), that ho was a prin¬
cipal in, accessory to, ordered, abetted, tool a
consenting part in, and us connected with, plans
and enterprises involving nodical oxperinontatior. on
involuntary hurian aubjoots, the aurdor of 112 Jo wa
selected for tho purposo of coaploting a skoloton
collection for the University of Strasbourg, ex d tho
mrdcr and nistroatcor.t of ton3 of thousands of ?o-
- lloh nationals aliogodly suffering from incurable
tuberculosis; under Count Four, that ho was a nonbor,
after 1 Joptombor 1939 , of tho So, an Organization
doolarod to bo orininal by tho International mili¬
tary Tribunal.

Tho defendant Rudolf Erandt io particularly
oharged with having participated in tho high altitudo,
froozing, nalaria, Lo3t (nu3tard) 6aa, 30 a wator,
opidomio Jaundice, sterilization, aulfar.ilauido, and
typhus oxporiconts. he al30 was a principal in tho
lurder of 112 Jows solocted for tho purposo of con¬
noting a skoloton collection, and ir. the aurdor and
iiistrcatnont of tuboroulor lolos. In ordor to ain-
ilify the issues, tho prosecution withdraws tho
charso of having participated in tho bone, nuscle
and norve oxporinont3, sot forth in far. 6 (F) of
tho Indictaoat.


- 1 -


2. BRANDT


X. j-OoITION-a 0? n^arO'. voIglLITY

Rudolf Brandt Joined tho Nazi Party In 1S3B.

Xn 1933 ho joinod tho -13 and was commissioned as
Jooond Lloutonnnt (Oborloutnant). Ho ultimately at¬
tained tho rank of Colonel (Standortonfuohror).

..lthoueh his initial enploymont In 1933 with tho 3S
uas us clerk in tho Office of tho Chief of .Staff of
Illsnlor at a monthly salary of Hi: 120, Brandt rapid¬
ly advanced to tho position of Personal Referent to
Kinder. In 1943, whoa Hinder bocano Reich lllnis-
tor of tho interior, Brandt was appointed liinistorial-
rat in this Ministry. (H. Brandt, R. 4869-4671).

In this capacity, ho was chief of a department and
head of tho Ministerial Office. IToroovcr, ho retain¬
ed his position os Chief of tho Personal Roforat in

tho 3d. (H. Brandt, 3. 4988-9).

„s Ilinolor's personal roforont, Brandt ocoupiod

a position of considerable responsibility. .Ml <=°r-
rospondonoo roqulrlns Binder's attention was first
forwardod to Brandt and consequently ho had knowledge
of all of Hinaler's plans and activities. On Hinder'
express orders, questions of an official, and even
of a personal nature wore vory frequently oloarod
throush Rudolf Brandt. (R. 3randt, R. 4879-60).

7 hat a close and confidential relationship between
Hlador and Brandt oxistod is evldont fron tho defon-
dant's own tostlcony, wherein ho stated that ho was
able to contact Hinalor laaodlotoly. (R. 4880).
Uoroovor, Brandt stayed with Hinder when tho Miles
occupied Oorcany until the day of his arrest on
Whitsunday 1943, twenty-four hours before Klnalor


- z -


Hi BRrJfQT


BiasoIT was arrested by tho Allies. (R. 5randt, R.
■4CG8).

Brandt was charged \Yith responsibility for tho
ontiro nail ir. Hindi or* 3 office, which or.conpassod
approximately 3,500 letters por month. In describing
hi3 functions with rospoct to correspondence, Rudolf
Brandt stated, “MST task in this was to tell Hinnlor
v/hat lottcrs had cono for him oithor in the 30 -callod
•important' nail — namely tho nail ho read hiasolf
— or by reporting to bin what lotturs had cono for
him, or through reading tho vholo of tho lottor to
hia.n IR. Brandt, R. 4073). In connoction with tho
^ corrcopondonco, tho defendant Brandt has emphasized

' the fact that tho Prosecution has prosonted but 113

* lattors to 03tabll3h hia complicity in this caso.

rfo nooks to prove fron this fact that since tho total
number of lottors written during this period exceeded
130,000, tho tr.odical oxporir.ent3 lay out3ido of his
general sphere and that thooc nodical nattcr3 playod
a a.iall part in tho execution of his dutio3. This
argument i3 of cour30 absurd. Tho history of oriico
is ropleto with casos of porsons v.ho have lived luw-
abiding liven for many yoar3 yot havo, in a poriod
of a fovv soconds in a lifo span, committed nurdor.
Moreover tho proof has shown that Rudolf 3rundt par¬
ticipated in nan;* Other -*-> crine3. For oxanplo, ho
passed down tho notoriou Flyer Ordor, which encouraged
the lynchine of -.lliod flyers who bailed out over
Germany, (R. 4902). Ho participated in tho plan3
for tho kidnapping of Czechoslovakian children tMO-
433, rroa. Hr. 455, R. 4933), and tho issuance of tho
ordor for tho destruction of tho .arsaw Ghetto and


- 3 -


H. BiLa©T


tho transfer of its Jewish inhabitants to oxtonaina-
tion caaps. (H. 4986-7). The fact that 3randt was
connected with a groat nunber of crimes systemati¬
cally consaittod by the Jo is surely no defonso to
lii 3 participation in tho crises which aro tho subjoct
of thi3 Indietnont. If the Tribunal wore to accopt
tho mechanical ncosuro of guilt suggostod by Brandt,
tho irosocution can just as validly orguo that his
guilt is in tho ratio of 10 to 1 a3 compared with n
defendant whoso nano appears on only U documents in
tho rocord. By tho vary nature of his position,
Hudolf Brandt not only know what was happening but
also handled tho adninistrutivc details in effect¬
uating Hinder's broad orders, ’’horo a basic doci-
sion was required, ho called tho natter to Hinder*s
attention. For oxonplo, in a letter to tho defendant
jiovoro, dated 6 Juno 1944, ho said, : >I have informed
tho Roichsfuohrcr oJ as tho natter soonod important
enough'. (MO-009, fros. Jx. 305, R. 1400). Othor-
\,Uo ho oxorcisod his own initiative in Booing that
everything ran saoothly in aocordanco with & cp . q ial

directives laid down by Hinalor.

That Brandt's position wa3 an inportant and ro-
aoonsiblo ono is clearly proved by tho ovidonoo sub-
nit tod in his own dofanoo. Doris i;aohnor stated in
her affidavit, in jubst. .nco, that tho dofondar.t
Brandt was tho personal technical advisor to Kirdor
and that his position was or.o of grout confidence,
oho further stated that Brandt tried to carry out
correctly and cooprofacnsivoly tho wishes, roquosts
and proposals of Hinder and that ho certainly suc¬
ceeded in accomplishing this because of his objcc-


4 -


3. BRmNDT


tivc Eothod3. (Brandt Jx. 11, R. 4997). Dr. Helmut
Fitzner in his affidavit stated that: ^He (Brandt)
Had to report verbally to Sinaior about the lottors
and petitions addressed to Hina!or, had to preporo
'«*itton replies in accordance with Kicmlor's deci¬
sion or had to mako the reolios hi:, so If os deputy £&
jjtelQf"• (Brandt Bx. 5, R. 4997, onphosis supplied).
Crete Hinzo declared in her affidavit that: “From
occasional remarks ho (Brandt) nndo, I learned that
ho v/os one of those subordinates who wore unfortuna¬
tely but few, who had the courage to 3nouk oner.lv
to Himmler of inconveniences and unpleasant things'.

' f (Brandt 3x. 9, R. 4997, oaphesis suppliod). Tho af¬

fidavit of Dr. Horston reveals that Rudolf Brandt
v ofton opposod Himmler and thoroby placed himself in

a difficult position with Hinmlor. (3randt Bx. 5, R.
4996).

That Brandt exorcised considerable individual
initiative is proved by tho feet that iiovors,

.lasohor, Klauborg, Groiser and Koppo, among othors,
t approached him directly or. nany occasions concerning

uedioal experimentation on concentration coup in-
nato3, tho extermination of tho tuborcular Polos,
and the oreation of the skolotor. collection. 3randt
on his part contacted tho defendant Gcbhardt, C-ra-
witz, Raschor and . o’:l in conr.ootion with those cri¬
minal activities, (j.e i fra). Brandt tried to ex¬
plain tho fact that many of tho letters doaling with
those activities wore ^ddr-ssod to him by stating
that tho writors eithor did not know what position
ho hold or what cau3od Himmler to let him 3ign lottors
addressed to thor:. This is of courso ridiculous.


- 5 -


B-L-J3T


it •

Brandt had boon with Hircnlcr 3inco 1933. He grow up
with the 33.

Rudolf Brandt was also a member of tho Ahnonorbe
Society. (3oo tho Prosocution's brief against 3io-
vor3). Kicanlor was President of this Society.

3randt actod S3 liaison bctwcon HI ml or and Siovors,
Roiohs Business ilanogor of the Ahnonorbe. (1T0-5G9,
Pros. 2x. 28, R. 130).

Brandt's responsibility for crinos with which
ho is charged in tho Indiounont is proved by his own
affidavits. Brandt triod to explain, not to say rc-
:udiato, his affidavits by testifying that ho ntdo
tho stater.onts on tho basis of documents shown to
hin in pro-trial interrogations, but such is not tho
case, ,'ithout a doubt, Brandt is cs well advised on
tho crimes which aro tho subject of this trial cs
anybody in Coruony. Thcro is no reason whatovor for
refusing to givo full woight to his pro-trial stato-
nonts. Thoro has boon no proof that they woro obtain-
od by fraud or duross. On tho oontrary, 3rar.dt ad¬
mitted in cross oxa.iination that ho signed tho affi¬
davits voluntarily, that ho had opportunity to read
tho:: and nako corrections end that, cortain changes
woro in fact nado at his ro^uost. IR. Brandt, R.
•1990). Brandt's t-stimony beforo tho Tribunal can bo
sunuod up in ono sentence: 'I ronbnbor nothing.

.sido fron a description of Hinnlor's personality,
ho contontod himself v/ith giving answers to loading
questions by his atternoy which wore calculated to
reveal hin as a disembodied stenographic automaton
— so.iothing in tho nature of a proficient half-wit.
juroly his pre-trial affidavits aro entitled to more


- 0 -


3. BRaNDT


Weight than tho blatant non3on30 which was his testi¬
mony.

Brandt pleads the doctrine of superior ordors
in mitigation of his crimes. '..*hothor ho established
policy in tho first instance is not in issue, but
only whether he participated in tho preparation and
execution of tho crimes with which he is charged,
paragraph 4 (b) of Article II of Control Council Law
No. 10 provides as follows: :, Thc fact that any per¬
son noted pursuant to the ordor of his Government or
of a superior doos not freo hin from responsibility
for a crime, but nay bo considered in mitigation.•'

Thus, tho only question horo prosontod is v/hothor
the Tribunal 3hould considor superior ordors as mit¬
igating tho guilt of Rudolf Brandt. Tho Prosecution
submits that it should not. Tho ovidenoo has oloarly
shown that 3randt had knowlodgo of and participated
in numerous criminal exporinont3, tho nurdor of sono
83 Jow3 for tho purpose of a skoloton colloction, tho
extermination of thousands of Polish nationals alloged-
1 / suffering from incurable tuborculo3i3. There is
no evidence that Himmler o rdered Brandt to participate
in any crime. Brandt did 30 wilfully. Thoro ia no
ovidence that Brandt retained his position out of
fear. Ho flourished in it. There is no evidonco
that ho had tho slightest reservation in his work as
Hinnlor'o administration. If ho had, nothing would
have boon oasior than to be replaced out of request
or fuignod inefficiency.

Brandt was not a soldier on the field of battlo.
;iio activities wore far removed from tho confusion
of tho Front lines. Ho did not act in tho spontaneous


- 7 -


3. BRANDT


boat of passion; he had full tine to consider and
rofloct upon his cour30 of action. Ho stayed in his
position fron 1933 until his arrest by the .dlies in
1945, no loss than 12 years. This fact alone ronovos
any basis for nitration. Moreover, assuming Brandt
was ordered to con:'it the criminal acts which aro
tho subject of thi3 trial, when there i3 no fear of
reprisal for disobedience, obcdicr.co constitutes a
coapletoly voluntary participation in tho crino.

Juch 13 tho caso v.ith Rudolf Brandt. Finally, tho
dootrino of superior orders cannot bo considered in
mitigation whore suoh malignant and nunorous orinos
have boon consciously and ruthlc33ly connittod over
a poriod of many yoax-o.

Tho 30 then uorc the positions of responsibility
of tho defendant Rudolf Brandt: Color.ol in tho o3,
i'or3onal Referent on Kir-ilor's Staff, Hinistorial
Councillor in tho Ministry of tho Interior and
Hirialor's closest administrative collaborator, and a
..e jbor of tho .J' nonorbo. Brandt used tho foregoing
positions, his porsonal influence and hi3 intircto
connection with HI’.--dor in a manner which involved
tho commission of *ar Crimes and Crimes against
Humanity as sot forth ir. tho Xndiotnont.

II. n; crl. i::.±

Tho dofondar.t Gobhardt admitted that n tho Jo
and Himdor wore tho coanoi: element in all of these
exporinonts’'. (Gobhardt, R. 4192). .'hilo it is con¬
ceded that Rudolf Brandt nay not have nade major po¬
licy decisions in tho first instance, ho handled a
"root nur.bor of tho administrative details which per-


i. 3R-KDT


;; ittod Cho experiments to run saoothly* Ho passed
doxtn Einalor's orders. He was tho liaison between
Hiaalor end the A*nonorbe, the doctors who porfornod
tho experiments, er.d the agencies supporting thon.
His service, his dilic-nco and his novor tiring :i1 *
forts savo lifo to th0 undertaking. Although to
was not a physician, Brandt's contribution to tho
oxporinonts surpassos that of any single doctor
concerned with thon. That his participation was a
voluntary end knowing ono is proved by tho ovidcncc
submitted by tho Prosecution. Ho willingly too.:
part in criminal activities which resulted in tho
murder, torture and inhumane treatment of thousands
of helploss con, uonoa and ohildron.


• ••


A * Sterilization Experiments (Indictment, Per. 6 (I)).

By 1941 It was the accepted policy of the Third
Reich to exterminate the Jewish population of Germany and
the occupied countries. (Judgment of the I.H.T., R.

16920, et seq.) Because of the pressing need for laborers,
sterilization of Jews able to work uac considered ns an
alternative to outright extermination. (N0-205, Pros. Ex.
163, R. 536-7).

In order to asoertaln cheap and f«3t working methods
for sterilization, oxpcrlnentntlon or. concentration camp
Inmates by means of drugs (IJ0-036, Pros. Ex. 143, R. 51*2),
lnjoctlon of an irritating solution (KO-212, Pros. Ex. 173,
R. 570), and X-rays ?nd surgical operation (Levy, R. 556-9)
wore carried out on a large scaIo. Brandt not only had
full knov/lodgo of those experiments, but collaborated
aoclvoly In all of them.

Tho purposo of tho sterilization oxpcrlaonts Is well

dosorlbod by Err.ndt In hlo own affidavit:

•Hlnnler wo extremely Interested In tho
dcvolopnent of a cheap and rapid sterili¬
zation method which could bo used against
oncnlos of Germany, auoh as tho Russians,

Polos rnd Jowe. Ono hoped, thereby not
only to defeat the oneny but to exterminate
him. The capaolty for work of the steri¬
lized persons could bo exploited by Ocmany,
while tho danger of propagation would bo
eliminated. Us) This mr 8 s sterilization
was pert of Himmler's racial theory,
particular time and c^ro were devoted
to those sterlllzrtlon exoorlments.

Surgical sterilization was of course
known in G -m^ny and applied. This In¬
cluded c-s ;r"tlon. r or mass application,
however, this procedure w-e considered as
too slow and too expensive. It w-s further
desired that a procedure be found which
would result In sterilization that was not
Immediately noticeable.* (K0-440, Pros. Ex.

141, R. 501).

Sterilization experiments In order to ascertain the
efficacy of a drug known as caladlun segulnua (Schvelgrchr)
wore suggested to Hlnnler by the defendant Pokory In

October 1941. Pokorny reported that Dr. lindnus had found,

- 10 -


ns a result of his research on medical sterilization

of animals, that caladiuc sepulnun produced permanent

sterility in animals when adnlnlstered orally or by

injection. Pokorny further stated in his letter that:

*.the immense importance of this

drug in the present fight of our poople
occurred to me. If, on the basis of
this research, it were possible to pro ¬
duce a drug which after a relatively
short tine, effects an imperceptible
st erilization on human beings, 'thcn~Wc
would have a new powerful woapon at
o ur dispos al. The thought alone that
tno 3 nllllon Bolsheviks, rt present
German prisoners, could bo sterilized
so that thoy could bo used ns laborers
but bo prevented from reproduction, opens
the most far reaching perspectives.■

He therefore advocated immediate reaonroh on hunan beings

in order to determine tho dose and longth of treatnont,

tho cultivation of tho plant caladlun scgulnun in hot

houses, and chonioal research in order to produco the

drug synthetically on a l^rgo scalo. (NO-035, Pros. £x.

142, R. 510).

Hlranlor agreed to PoJcomy's suggestions -nd roquestod
Pohl on 10 March 1942 to contact Dr. Madaus nnd to "offer
him possibilities for doing rcsearoh in cooperation with
tho Rcicha Physician SS (Orawitz) on criminals who would
have to b6 sterilized in any oasc." He further ordorod
chat tho lntonded plan of research should bo submitted
to him. It was the defendant Rudolf Brandt who forwardod
a copy of this letter to Grp.’-ltz (NO-036, Pro9. Ex.

143, R. 512) and furnished him, on 20 April, with a copy
of Pokorny's roport and inform tlon on the publications of
Madaus concerning medicinal sterilization of animals.
(H0-037, Pros. Ex. 146, R. 513).

Brandt's office submitted Madaus' report on the studies


of experiments on animals to SS OberCTuppenfuehrer Hcydrlch,
Chief of the Security Police and SD. *he letter of


.. IKjJQT


trar.snlttnl, dated 23 April 1942, bears the sene file
number es Kianler's letter to Pohl (752/5) end refers
expressly to "the question of sterilization by medicine.”
(H0-047, Pros. Ex. 145, R. 513).

On 1 June 1942, Brandt requested n report fron Pohl,
Chief of the WVKA, rs to the progress of the preparation for
experiments. (NO-038, Pros. Ex. 147, R. 514). Pohl re¬
ported on 3 June 1942 that since "Schwcigrohr", fron which
calndlun segulnun was derived, grew only In North America
and oould not be exported In Adequate quantities, nttenpts
to grow the plant fron seed cultivated in hot houses had
boon mde by Dr. Koch of tho Biological Institute of tho
Madnus Works. A hcso nttenpts had been successful, but
tho process of growing the plant and developing the drug
was not spoedy enough and the ylold not sufficient to
porait oxperlnontntlon on a l~rgo scale . In order to
roaove those difficulties, he said that It would bo
nooosoary to build a l-rgor hot houso. (N0-046n, Pros.

Ex. 148, R. 515-6). On 11 Juno, Brandt ndvlsod Pohl
that he had lnfornod Hln ilcr of his lottor and that
Hint:1 or wanted Pohl to soc to It that a large hot houso
was plnood at Dr. Koch's disposal as soon as possible
as Hlnnlor considered tho experiments extroncly Important.
Brandt also asked Pohl for further reports In the natter.
(N0-046b, Proa. Ex. 149, R. 516). Only eight dayo
later, Brandt himself .ind a conferentfe with Pohl In
whloh, anong other things, he lnfomed Pohl of Hinnler 1 s
requost to have tho Ingredients of cnledlun segulnun
thoroughly Investigated to determine whether equally
effective Ingredients could be found In plants noro
easily acceslble. Brandt requested th'-t tho work of Dr.

Koch should be carried out to the fullest extent. He
Informed Pohl that experiments should bo conducted In


- 12 -


... J-uJCDT

concentration camps with the amount of the drug then
available. Pohl agreed to take the necessary steps at
onco, (NO-044, Pros. Ex. 150, R. 517). Deportment IV-B-4
of the R e lohs Main Security Office, the agency which wpb
In charge of the solution of the Jewish question (Judgment
of the I.H.T. R. 16924), was Informed by a subordinate of
Brandt about idadnus 1 research work nnd requested to
collaborate closely with Pohl In this natter. ("0-050,

Pros. Ex. 151, R. 510). A copy of this letter was forwarded
to the defendant Rudolf Brandt. ("0-051, Pros. Ex. 152,

R. 518).

Tho Deputy Gauleiter (Province loader) of the Lower
Danube (lower Austria), SS Obcrgruppenfuehrer Gerland,
informed Himmler on 24 «ugust 1942 that tho Director of the
Office for Racial Polloy In this Provlnco, Dr. Fohrlngor,
had oxanlnod tho question of naos etorlllzatlon and, In
tills connection, had cone across Dr. liadaus' studios on
nodiolnnl sterilization with caladlun sogulnun. For
roasono similar to those suggested by tho defendant Pokorny
(110-035, supra), Gerland advocated experimentation on lrr
matoo of tho gypsy camp of Lnckenbach In the Lowor Danube.
Gorland pointod out that If those experiments were success¬
ful, ns was expootod, it would bo possible to sterlllro
practically unllnltod nunbers of people In the shortest
tine and In tho simplest way conceivable. (S'0-039, Pros.

Ex. 153, R. 519).

It was the defendant Rudolf Brandt who took the
matter up and Informed Gorland or. 29 Aurust of the steps
which had already been takon In respect to experiments with
onlndlun sogulnun. From Brandt's letter, It Is apparent
that Hlmnlor was not present at th~t tine. Brandt took
care of this natter on his own initiative and Informed


- 13 -


a. BRAHDT


Gerland tfa/ t Pohl and Gr.awitz were In charge of the
experiments. He requested Information from Gerland
whether Dp. Fehrlnger had caladlun segulnua available
and what neons for the procurement cf thl6 plant the
latter would suggest. (KG-040, Pros. Ex. 154, R. 521).
Copies of Gerland* s letter were forwarded by Brandt to
Pohl and Growltz. On 7 September 1942, Pohl gave
Gerland further details and Informed him that he nnd Dr.
Lolling were personally supervising the experiments.

Pohl, In tum, sent copies of this letter to Rudolf
Brandt and Grawltz. In tho cover lettor to Srandt,

Pohl Informed hln th t he had been to the Xndcus Tories
to convlnco hlnself of the progress of the experiments
and that Dr. Lolling would cooperate In then. An agree¬
ment had been reached with -ndaus “to transfer the ex¬
periments to our concentration "amps r.s soon an possible.'
(H0-041, Pros. Ex. 156, R. 523).

On 14 Ootobor 1942, Gorlr.nd wrote to Rudolf Brandt
and Informed him of tho letter he had received from
Pohl. He stated that he considered Dr. Fohrlngcr's
suggestion to uoo lnartec of the gypsy camp of Laokcnbach
as obsolete as Pohl hrd Informed him that Lolling wan
already collaborating with the Blolo^loal Institute of
L'adnus. He further ’cvlced Brandt th»t Fchrlnccr was of
the opinion that It -ran quite osrlble to produce
caladlura c egulnun chemically or h-ve tho pl"nt cultivated
in hot houses to an extent which would be sufficient for
experimental purposes. He -loo cu. sted collaboration
between Lolling and rehrlnger. (:.'0-C43, Pros. Ex. 157,

R. 524). Brandt’s reply of 25 October reveals that he,
on his own Initiative In Himmler's absence, agreed to
Lhe collaboration between Fehrlngcr and Lolling.


3. 2R..NBT


(210-049 1 Pros. Ex. 15S, R. 525). Brandt sent copies
of Gerland's letter of 14 October (H0-043, suprn) end
his reply (N0-049, supra) to Pohl. In his cover letter
to Pohl, he expressed the conviction that In spite of
the fact that he could not consult Hlnmler, he was con¬
vinced that the latter would certainly welcone experiments
to produce colndlun seguinum synthetically. He asked
Pohl to arrange for a contact betweon Lolling and
Fehrlnger. (NO-048, Pros. Ex. 158, R. 524).

^hore Is no reasonable doubt that tho sterilization
oxperlnente with caladlun seguinum were, In faot, carried
out on concentration camp Inmates. H Irani or, who was the
hlghost authority to decide such questions, not only gavo
his consent to thooo experiments (S0-036, supra), but
considered thorn ■oxtronoly Important" (110-046b, supra)
and requostod that they should be cnrrlod out In tho oon-
contratlor. onnps In any case . (NO-044, supra). Pohl,
who was In ch-rgo of tho administration of the ooncontratlon
traps, ngrood upon the request of Brandt to take tho
nooossary stops lnncdlntoly. (H0-044, supra). Thoro can
bo no doubt that Dopartnont IV-B-4 of tho RSHA, whloh
 was chnrgod with tho solution of tho Jewish question,

was lnfornod about wsdaus' rosoarch work for tho purpose
of furnishing tho nooessary Jewish victims for tho
oxporlnonts. ®ho collaboration of Dr. Lolling, who was
tho doctor in ohnrrro of all ooncontratlon oanps, can
only bo explained In connoctlon mlth experimentation In
theoe camps. This Is also clear from Oorl"nd*s letter to
Brandt:

"SS-Obcrgru-.oenf uehrer Pohl has Informed
no th-1 the doctor of his Main Offic e Is
already collaborating with the liadaus
Biological Institute for research on
the effeats of caladlun scgulnum, so
th<*t the suggestion of ay District
Main Office Leader (G.nuhauptstellenlelter)

Dr. Fehrlnger becomes obsolete ." (NO-043,
supra — ea :hrsls supplied).


- 15 -


It can only be concluded that Pohl and Lolling carried

out the experlnents In concentration crisps as It w«6

agreed upon between then, Hlnnler, Brandt, and Madaus.

(NO-041, supra). Moreover, Brandt hlnself adnltted In

his affidavit that experlnents with onladiun sepulnun

on human beings wero porforned In concentration conns:

"As result of Pokorny's suggestion
experlnonts wero conducted uron con¬
centration onBp prisoners In order to
test the effect of the drug. Slnul-
tnneously all efforts were Bade to
cultivate the plant In large quantities.

Oswald Pohl, Chief of the Economic and
Adnlnlstrrtlve iialn Office C.7VHA), took
a personal Interest in this natter.

Hothouses wore used, with a certain anount

of oucoooo, to cultivate this plant, and

the experlnonts wore oontlnued." (H0-440, supra).

On 30 liny 1942, Dr. Klauherg wrote to Hlnnler asking
his support on o terlllxa.tlon experlnonts on fonalo con¬
centration ornp lnnntos. (110-211, Pros. Ex. 169, R.

564). On 4 Juno, the defondant Poppondlck forwarded to
Rudolf Brandt a list of dootors who were authorized to
carry out otorlllzation. Klauberg Is listed nnong those
dootors. (NO-214, Pros. Ex. 160, R. 502). On 7 and 8
July, a conforoncc took place between Hlnnler, Oobhardt,
Oluocks, and Klauberg. Tho toplo of dlsoucoion was tho
sterilization of Jowossos. Klauberg was oroaleod by
Hlnnler that the Auschwitz Concentration Canp would bo
placed at his disposal for experlnonts on huaan bolngs.

He was assigned the task of pcrforalng experlnonts to
tost a nothod of sterilizing persons without tholr
knowledge. He was ordered to report on this natter as
soon as possible so that nonsurcs could bo taken "for tho
practical realization of the sterilizations on a larger
scale." It w«s suggested tht Hohlfclder bo consulted on
the sterilization of non by X-rays. T hc nartlcln»nts In


- 16 -


the conference were admonished that these experiments
were a natter of utmost secrecy. Rudolf Brandt denied
having been present at this conference. Be that as It
may, one of the two file nenoranda which reveal complete
knowledge of all details discussed in this conference was
dictated by Brandt (.'10-215, Pros. Ex. 172, R. 568), and
the other was signed by him. (JJO-216, Pros. Ex. 170, R. 565).

On 10 July 1942, Rudolf Brandt wrote a letter to
Klaubcrg in which he Informed him of the dotalls of his
assignment and the plans for the execution of the
experiments. Klauberg was ordered to report to Himmler
on how long It would take to sterilize a thousand Jewessos
by his method. It was suggested that Klauborg should
contaot Pohl and a camp physician of the Rnvensbruok
Concentration Cnnp In order to perform there his sterili¬
zation experiments. Brandt stated further:

"Thorough experiments should bo con¬
ducted to Investigate the offect of
the sterilization largoly In a way, that
you find out after a certain tlno, whloh
you would have to fix - perhaps by
X-r-ys - wh^t kind of changes havo
taken place. In tho one or the other
enso a practical experiment night be
arranged by locking up a Jewess «nd
a Jew togothor for a cortaln period
^nd, toseo then, wh"t results are
achlovod thereby.

"I ask you t o let se know your opinion
about my letter for tho Information of
the Rr ichs fuehrer—SS .* (Kt>-2l3. Pros. Ex.

171, RT 567 - emphasis su,plied).

Copies of this letter w re sent by Brandt to Pohl .Gravies,
SS Sturrabannfuchror Koegcl of the .rVHA (Economic and
Administrative ilaln Office), and to Gru penfuehrer
olueller of the RSHA (Rclchs -Iain Security Office), On
7 June 1943, Xlnuberg was able to report, on the basis
of hi6 experiments, that It would be possible to sterilize
several hundred, If not even a thousand, per day by his
methods, stated that sterilization could be "performed


R. BxUJTDH


by a single Injection made fron the entrance of the
uterus In the course of the usual custonary gynecological
examination." (NO-212, Pros. Ex. 173, R. 570).

The sterilization experiments of Xlcuberg were, in

fact, carried out in the «uschnltz Concentration Gamp.

Brandt connunloaded with Klauberg on this nptter again

on 19 Juno and 22 July 1943. While these two letters

are not available, it is clear fron Klauberg's roply to

Brandt, dated 6 itueust, that these communications were

reminders to Klauberg to expedite his experlnentntion.

In his roply, Klauberg stated:

"I really do need the second X-ray
Installation - I car, g i ve you the
explanation only by~word of mou th -
at any rate the probability exists that
evon noro of the inst allations wi ll be
noeciod l^ter on (it depends on the kind
of a?v>llcntion or my~ro o ults tho moment
those "ro fixed .) For I can got the
installation without further difficulties,
th-t is, It is ' waiting ' for no - really
X.have KO.t A^nX.rqa^yl

■I have opportunity to ncqulro one nyself
and I quickly laid hands on It, and the
Installation 13 set up for sonc weeks.

But what I care for is the following:

■ I urgently need this Installation hero in
Ko enl.-shuettc for ny contrary (norltlve )
ros'earch. But I cannot s*->rc It In nuschr.’ltz
until I got - second Installation fron tho
w-fftT, S3. Tf I any toll you sonc thing
betv/ecn ourselvec - the fact in that I
will be able to ro lace this ny own exist ¬
ing I nstallation ..rovlcSetrthc R P ichofuehr_c_r
Sg vrlimv c ~e r.ls a roval for It, and
okays it . I would not T'other either hln
or you -• 1 th this unless it would be really
nccc3E--r” . J (.:0-2l6, ?ro6. Ex. 174, R. 572).

Brandt hlnsclf admitted In his affidavit th-t Klnuberg

did carry out sterilization experiments in the Auschv?ltz

Concentration Camp on a large scale. He stated:


H. J.LJ.uT

“Dr. Klauberg developed further a method
for the sterilization of women. This
method was based upon the Injection of
an irritating solution into the uterus.

Klauberg conducted widespread experiments
on Jewish women and gypsies in the
Auschwitz Concentration Camp. Several
thousand wonen -fere sterilized by Xlnuberg
in Auschwitz." (N0-440, supra).

Sterilization of Jews by neans of X-rays wns suggested
to HInalor by the defendant Brnok in the spring of 1941.
(NO-426, Pros. Ex. 160, R. 532). Hinder requested Brack
to lnvostlgnge, with sone of the physiclnns who were
nctlvo in tho euthanasia progran, tho possibility of
sterilization which nould keep tho vlctins unaware of their
terrible fate. (5rnck, R. 7484). On Ijirch 28, 1*41, Brack
forwr.rded to Hinnler a report on the resulto of exporlncnto
concerning X-ray castrations in which ho stated that maos
sterilisation by ncAns of X-rays oould bo carried out
without difficulty. Brack estlnnted that with twenty X-ray
installations, otorlllzatlon of 3,000 to 4,000 vlctins
could bo carried out daily. (N0-203, Pros. Ex. 161,

R. 534-5). On 12 Hay 1941 a subordinate of Brandt, S3
Sturnbannfuyhrer Tlefonbacher, acknowledged receipt of
Sraok's report and sent a oopy to tho Chlof of the Security
Police and SD, Heydrlch. (HO-204, Pros. Ex. 162, R. 536).

The invasion of Russia began in tho summer of 1941
and Brnok'a pro oonl was not acted on 1ranodlntely, but on
23 June 1942, when Jemnny a pe"red to be on the vcr*o of
victory, Brnck again -/rote to Hinder suggesting the
sterilization of Jews who were able to work. Jews unable
to work were being exterminated. (NO-205, Pros. Ex. 163,

R. 536-7). Hinnler wrote to Brack on 11 August 1942
that further experiments to ascertain the effectiveness
of X-ray sterilization should be carried out on concentration
can. inantes by expert physicians who were to be furnished


- 19 -


ti, LIi.a3ii}T

by Brack's chief, Bouhler. Rudolf Brandt st-r.t copies of
this letter to Pohl and Grawltz in order to put Kimnlor's
decision into effect. (HO-2Q6, Pros. Ex. 164, R. 536).

Brack ordered his deputy, Blankenburg, to contact the
chiefs of the concentration camps for this purpose.
Elonkenburg's letter, which communicated this fnot to
Himmler, was received by Brandt's office on 15 August
1942. (N0-207, Pros. Ex. 165, R. 538). As a result,

experiments on inmates in the Auschwitz Concentration Camp
were carried out by Dr. Schumann. ('.*0-208, Pros. Ex. 166,

R. 539). One of the victims of these atrocious experiments
was the young Polish Jew Balltzky, who, after having been
subjected to severe doses of X-ray in genital area, was
castrated by operation in order to doteralne the effects
of tho X-ray. (Balltzky, R. 541, ct. soo.). At least 100
Involuntary experimental subjeots — Polos, Russians,
Fronoh, and prisoners of war — wore used for theoe
experiments. Only young, nell-bullt inmates, in the boot
of health, wero solcctcd for thon. (Levy, R. 556-7). Nearly
all of the victims of theso oxocrlnonts wore exterminated
no tho oovoro X-ray burns made thorn incapable of working.
(Lovy, R. 557; Balltzky, R. 543). Brandt admitted in
his pre-trial affidavit th^t "sterilization experiments
wero likewise conducted with X-rays. Dr. Schunnnn applied
this rrocoduro in Auschwitz nd sterilized a number of
non." (NO-440, supra).

For a further description of tho sterilization ex¬
periments, reference is made to the Prosecution's briefs
against Pokorny, Gebhardt, and Brack.


- 20


«'• ..-LwiDT

E * altitude Experiments (Indictment, Par. 6 (a))

Rudolf Brandt ires an active participant In the high
altitude experiments. Els knowledge of and participation
In these experiments Is proved by his own affidavit. (NO-
191, Pros. Ex. 43, R. 163). The plan originated with
Rascher and was carried out by him and the defendants
./eltz, Ruff, and Romberg, ably assisted by Brandt and
Slovers. For a full description of tho crlnlnal nature
of the high altitude experiments, roforonce is made to
the Prosecution's brief against Veits, Ruff, and Romberg.

The suggestion for the high altitude experiments on
Involuntary experimental subjects was made to Himmler by
Rascher In n letter of 15 liny 1941. Rascher Informed
Himmler that nobody would volunteer for such experiments
as they wero very dnngorous. He, therefore, asked that
criminals be put at his disposal. Ho expected that sono
fatalities nmong tho experimental subjects would occur.
(lo02-PS, Pros. Ex. 44, R. 167). This letter was handod
ovor by Hlnmlor to Brandt, who Informed Rascher that
"prisoners will, of course, be gladly node available."

*t tho sane tine, Brandt informed tho Chief of tho Security
Pollco In order that the lrttor might contact Rascher
In this matter. (1582-PS, Pros. Ex. 45, R. 169). Rascher
later •; rote to Brandt to obtain permission to carry out
the high altitude experiments in the Dachau Concentration
Camp Itself (NO-217, Pros. Ex. 46, R. 171), whereas
originally he had nskec for crmlsslon to carry out his
experiments at the "permanent Luftwaffo testing station
for nltltudo research" In Munich. (1602-PS, suora). This
letter shows that Rascher and Brandt also had a close
personal relationship as he had net Brandt's wife and was
expecting a social visit in January 1942.


- 21


It.


On 21 Unrch 1942, Brandt Informed Slovers, who had

\

contacted him on 9 ilerch with an Inquiry concerning the
high altitude experlnents, that these experiments were
already in progress on concentration camp inmates In
Dachau, Hinnler had approved such experlnents on condition
that Rascher would cooperate In then. (1581a-PS, Pros.

Ex. 48, R. 175).

On 13 "prll 1942, Brandt inforned Rascher that Hinnler
had obtained his interim report on high altitude experi¬
ments. On that occasion, Brandt expressed the wish that
^esoher night continue his experlnents with the snno
success ho had had so far. (1971c-PS, Pros. Ex. 50,

R. 180). The report revoals that sovoral of tho experi¬
mental subjects had been killed after having boon exposed
to a simulated height of 12 kno for 30 nlnutcs. During
tho autopsy, the heart of one of the vlctlns started
to boat again and continued to boat for a certain tine.

Tho report also stated that: 'The extrone,fatal experi¬
ments will be oarried out on specially sclootod VP's,
other” 1 iso It would not be possible to oxereloo tho
rigid control..." (1971n-PS, Pros. Ex. 49, R. 175).

In his report of 16 Aj.ril 1942, Rascher stated that they
had repented tho experlnents by killing subjects at a
simulated height of 12 kms rnd then atton ; ting to restore
the heart activity of the four victims. (NO-218, Pros. Ex.
56, R. 186). Brandt had knowledge of this roport as,
in his letter to Rascher of 27 April, he Informed the
latter th”t Hinnler had read this report with interest
and requested nn overall re ort fron Rascher on the
experlnents carried out so far in order to -resent It
to General Field Marshal .filch. (i:0-219, Pros. Ex. 59,

R. 190). When Hinnler read Rascher's first rc ort
(I97l(a)-PS, supra), he issued the order that prisoners


- 22 -


a.

condemned to depth, who h*d been exposed to experlnents
which hud endangered their lives and who had survived
then, should be pardoned to concentration camps for life.

Ae, until 20 October 1942, only Poles and Russians had
been used for this type of experlnents, Rascher contacted
Brandt as to whether the "amnesty" applied to then.
(1971(d)-PS, Pros. Ex. 52, R. 183). Brandt lnforned the
SS office in Munich on 21 October that Himmler's amnesty
did not apply to Poles and Russians. (1971(e)-PS, Pros.

Ex. 53, R. 133).

Brandt was fully aware of the f*ct th-t fatalities
were occurring in the high altitude experlnents. In a
letter fron Mrs. Rascher to hln, dated 13 April 1942,
sho nskod permission to make colored photos of the
freshly dlcoeoted bodies since, as a rule, It was only
permitted to take Mock and white pictures within the
concentration oonj s. (l5ei(b)-PS, Pros. Ex. 54, R. 184).
Brandt obligingly lnforned Gluccks that Hlnnlcr had agreed
to anchor's making colored photographs In connection - 1 th
his ox-h rlnonts In Dachau. (1581(c)-PS, Pros. Ex. 55, R. 185).

On 20 July 1942, Rascher submitted to or-ndt the
final report, which had been prepared by hln, Ruff, and
Ronb rg, on the high altitude experiments. Klnnler had
expressly ordered that this report should be forwarded
to Br-ndt. Rascher requested Brandt to submit to Hia;lcr
an ncoonpanying letter for another copy of the report
which was to be forwarded to Elold Marshal Milch.

(1607(a)-PS, Pros. Ex. 65, R. 204). This report was, In
fact, sent to Milch by Hlooler on 25 august 1942, with
the request that Milch pern It Rascher and Romberg to
explain the experlnents to him and to show a notion
rlcture. Himmler considered the results of the experiments
so important for the Luftwa.fie that he was convinced that


- 23 -


...

Milch, having seen the picture, would inform Goerlng
about then. (1607(b)-PS, Pros. £x. 67, R. 213). As
Milch 1 s Invitation was not immediately forthcoming,

Brandt was approached on 26 August by the defendant
Slevers on behalf of Rascher and informed that Rnsoher
feared that somebody other than he and the defendant
Romberg had already reported to Milch on the high
altitude experiments. Slevers did not share this
opinion with Rascher "for who elso ’.70uld have glvon the
report except Rascher and Romberg?" (KO-221, Pros. Ex.

68, R. 213). On 29 august, Brandt sent a roply to
81evcrs, stating that Rascher 1 s assumption was not
corroct. Klnnlor had written to .'llch only a few days
before and Milch himself would issue the nccossary orders
l'or the del Ivory of tho Ra.sch or--Romberg report. Brandt
also or.cl03cd a co y of Himmler's letter to Milch.
(NO-222, Pros. Ex. 69, R. 215). ..Tien Milch Informed
Himialer on 31 /tu,ru3t 1942 th"t he lntondod to Invito
Rnschor and Romberg to deliver tho loeture and chow the
notion picture (343b-?S, Pros. Ex. 70, R. 215), Brandt
immediately Informed Rascher and Slevers of thin event.
(NO-223, Pros. Ex. 71, R. 215).

On 3 Octobor, Rascher again approached 3rar.dt
with the suggestion that ho would like to report per¬
sonally to Klnnlor on tho "Dachau experiments".

Brandt advised him, however, that that would not be
possible as Hlnnler would be absent from Headquarters
for a considerable tine. He, therefore, asked Rns¬
chor to submit his report In writing as soon as pos¬
sible. He, Brandt, would forward It to Himmler by
courier. He then went on to say:


_


■At the monent it is not possible to render
a decision on the present state of the high
altitude experiments, on which you were,
unfortunately, not able to report to
Field Marshal iaich. As soon as the
Relchsfuehrer SS cones heck from his
Journey, I will ask him what he orders
in this respect.* (N'0-293, Pros. Ex. 74,

R. 220).

That Raschor and Ronberg had not been given an
opportunity to report to Milch in person was a natter of
deep concern to the defendant Sievers. Cn 21 October
1942 he asked Brandt's advice whether he should write
to Hippie on this subject end lnforn hln that Raschor and
Romberg had been ordered by Himmler to report only to
Lillch in person. Such a measure would perouado
Roschcr and Romberg, who were highly offended, to coopernto
further in the exporlnonts. Sievers also requested
Brandt's support in again obtaining the low pressure
chamber which was nocessary for the exporlnentc. Ho
stated:


"The deep freezing experiments are tornlnatod
now, so that the continuation of the high
altitude flying exporlnonts, ns desired
by the Reichsfuohror SS, con now bogin. In
this connection, wo need once more tho
low pressure chamber, but this tine with
differential pumps, no otherwise lnrgo-
scnlo altitude tests cannot bo carriod out.

The new experiments will also serve to
conclude the habllltr.tlon thesis of Rpsohcr.

The putting at our disposal of the lo;7
pressure chamber, however, will be possible
then only, if the Relchsfuehrer SS writes
in person to Field Jarshal Hilch concerning
this." (UO-226, Pros. Ex. 75, R. 220 ).

Brandt continued to aid and abet the criminal
experiments by Rascher ond his collaborators in the Da.chau
Concentration Camp until the sunner of 1944.


t


- ^5 -


BF--J7D7


C. Freezing Dx ncri-jnts (Indictment, I ar. 3 (3))
For q description of the criminal nature of
these experiments, see .-'osecution's brief on the
defendant Jiovors.

The defendant Rudolf 3randt gavo an accurate
and detailed description of the freezing experiment
in his affidavit. (1C0-242, Pros. Jx. 60, R. 230).
jvandt3 knowledge and support of the freezing ex¬
periments is not only proved by this affidavit, but
also by many othor documents in tho record.

On 3 October 1942, Rcscher v/roto to Brandt with
a personal letter that the freezing experiments had
been concluded "with the excaption of those on warn¬
ing with body hoat u . .. report by him end holzloohnor
,/aa to bo delivered at a Luftwaffe conference on
freezing on 25 October in Nurnborg and Raschor aakod
hrandt to obtain Hinslor'a approval for thia. Raooh-
er's letter further reveals that Drandt hud paused
Co \m Himmler's reque-t of 22 3eptor;bur 1942 that tho
jx.xr.vir.onto on var.-.inc. through body boat should bo
Ct I. ..7t.,r giving so, toils on tho high
.ltitudo oxporir ents, ‘...schor oxpro3Sou his opinion
that Brandt v/a3 ‘iaformed of this whole business long
ago*' nd concluded his ljttcr by thanking Brandt v-ry
uch for hi3 ox'forts. ( V.-265, ;roc. Jx. 65, 2M).

Four days later, the co.^uinder of the Dachau
C -ncontration C. mp sent 3ranc*L a v.iro with tho ru¬
g-rest to instruct jj • ..dofuehror Gluecks of tho
i j. L. (R ichs ih.in 3-curity O'ficc) 'to send fro:

vousbruck to Dachau t.;o Tour womon wanted by jtibs-
arzt Dr. Rascher for hi3 experiments'. Brandt oom-
. lied v/ith tfci3 roqitosfc on 6 October. (lolC-FS,


2. JRiuOJT


i'roa. ax. 87, R. 247-E). The fen ale concentration
canp inmates were actually used by Raschor for ro-
warning of tho viotir.3 of tho freezing exoeri-nonts
''•>’/ anival arr.th'. (h'C-023, Pros. 3x. 94, 2. -25;
1616-Pb, Pres. -x. 103, R. 342).

On 11 Novonbor 1942, Srandt .nadc arrcnror.ur.ts
with the defendant Gobhardt for e meeting with Raschor
in which tho latter \.ould havo tho opportunity to
report to Gobhardt on tho freezing cxpori::~nt3.

Brandt infornod Gcbhardt that further freezing cx-
porir.ontn v/ould bo carried out in tho near future.

( .0-314, :-ros. Zx. 98, 2 . 331). Brandt further ap¬
proached Pohl on behalf of Rasehcr on 20 Movc::bor
and raqueatod that Raschor 3hould ‘bo assistou ac
. :uoh -s possible in his ox ; ,ori:;ontation at Dachau'-',
he further z3kod Pohl to isuuo orders that tho cloth¬
ing plant in Duchau 3hould assist Raschor by procur¬
ing the nocossary oxpori.iontal clothing for tho
freezing oxpori-ionts. (UC-287, Pros. Jx. 100,

dt a-r.t a co y of this letter to Rasohor.

On lb Docor.bcr 1942, : i.-.ler gave his por i33ion for
t;;j further execution of nigh ultitude and froozin
experiments, especially ith dry cold. This Utter
va 3 passed down by 3rando to Raschor, tho .Jinonorbe,
ar.d other U> offices cancer nod. (1612-. 3, Proa. Zx.
79, R. 229).

Or. 20 January 1943, the defendant Jicvors for-
ar 'ed to Brandt a r.oaorocduc by Raschor on his dis¬
cussion -/ith Grawitz and tho defendant Poppondick.

In tho covering 1-ttor, ^levers requested Brandt's
opinion as to what attitude ho and Raschor woro to
take in respect to their position with Grawitz.


BRaIQT


hat Siovors wanted tc achieve was or. intorvonticr. by
3randt with Hinder on his behalf as he had boon cri¬
ticized by Grav/itz for interfering in nodical natters.

The nonorondun by Reseller on tho conference with
Gra.;itz or.d Poppor.dick, which 3rar.dt received with
jioycrs' letter, drasmitsf evatoato

wfctfc dry aid xkxg to bo porf orned so that they would
have a few hundred cases. : The inportance of Brandt's
position and of tho part ho played in the freezing
oxpori-:onts is proved by the fact that Grav.itz, cur¬
ing this rathor short discussion, told Raschor tvio-
that ho would inform Brandt about his opinion con¬
cerning Ro3chor and his collaboration with bin. C*0-
jJO, *ros. -x. 103, R. 333-339).

Brandt was infer, od of tho fact that Kianlor
had giver. IUisoher per.lJ3ion to carry out additional
freezing uxpori^ont3 in tho Concentration Ca.wpa
.uschvitz and Lublin. On 9 torch 19-13, he infer, od
rrawitz to tho effect that Hicnlcr had Given such
authorization. (1615-ie, rros. Jo. 103, (. 350).

Or. 1-1 torch, Raschor sent Brandt a description
of his conference with Canoralobcrstabsarzt Kippko,
j Chief Itodical Officer of tho L tto, -

• ishod to be transferred fror. tho Luftwaffe to tho
,, and Hippko triod to porsuado hi:: to 3tay. hr.
thi3 confcronco Ra30hor discussed with Hippko, ar.ons
other things, tho possibility of contained high alti¬
tude and freezing oxperi -.onts or. hu.un beings.

(1,0-270, Pros. Jx. 110, R. 351). That Brandt sup¬
ported Reseller in his atte.-.pt to have hL:solf trans¬
ferred to the -o i3 proved by a filo not-j of clovers
dated 29 January 19*3 which lists i oonferor.co with


BksEp?

Drandt, on this natter. (KO-238, Pros. Jx. 104, 2.

3iO; SO-538, Pros. 2x. 122, R. 379).

On 4 ^pril 1943, Ha3char wrote to Brandt that

another series of dry frcozir.g exporinonts had boon

carriod out on innatc3 of tho Dachau Concentration

Camp during a poriod of very cold v.’oathor. Tho s;.-

jorinontol subjects varo oxposed to cold of -5° C. in
—

tho opon air for fourteen hours and lied readied ar.
Internal tc.meraturc cf 25° C. (hO-292, ?ro3.

Ill, R. 354). Brandt acknowledged receipt of Reseller's
letter on 16 .vpril and inroraod hi., that HinrOor r^.-
colvod his "ronort concerning tho froozing oxncri.isnto
on liunan brings exposed to tho open air-'. Ho ao'.rod
•laaoher to contact the defendant Gobhordt i.’ho had
received this report for study fro:; dinnlor. .. copy
of thi3 latter was for cjdod by tho defendant "randt
to orauitz. (HO-241 , iron. ;x. 113, R. 355). .. con-
foronco botwoon Ra3chor and tho dofoniont Gobhsrdt t
took pleco in Hohonlychen on 14 Hay in tho prosonco
of tno dofondant Fischor. Gobherdt di30U33ee with
Ro.aohor tho freezing experiments and other oxyori.or.-
tation carried out in tho Dachau Concentration C-mp
and invited Rasoher to collaborate with hiu.
f.arod to leso his inds. ondcr.cc end turned to ^i-v-rs
to settle thin affair in tactful way as Oobhc.rdt

• as a very close friund of ki.-'ler. (IJO-231, .res.

110, 3. 36Q) • JioVurs, in turn, approaohod 3rondt
in this .utter on 22 .~y -end roquostad lr.for.;ation
-•bother Hi.aO.er hod giv-n any definite dir-cciv^ to
Oebhardt in regard to Resellers sphere of action and

• ork. Ko furthor a3kod Brandt's intervention on be¬
half of Raschor by saying,


- 29 -


3H-KDT


•I entrust you vith this affair and asi:
you particularly to use i» only f-r
vaur strictly personal inforaation s»o
Sot Dr. Haschar does not encounter on/

difficulties

rrofossor Dr. Gobhordt." (,«0-2b/,
ir03. 2x. 117, R. 366).


‘.:hon Rcschcr visited Gobhordt in Hofaonlychon,
tho lector oacourosoi hi- Co onbnrk upon a oar.or of
a uSivorsity loeturor. (00-231, supra). assch-r
followed this suggestion and Brandt supported hi.
wbolohoartcdly ad collaborated with the defendant s
,iovcro and 31ono to to. Reader appointed ar. acada


.do lecturer. (R0-22S, iros. =x. 116, 367; U-

290, iros. 2*. 121, 2. 873). That Raschor's thesis
for cabilltaCion was based on cho froozlng and hich
altitude oxporloioats is proved by Raschor's ^'"raduu
on Ids nodical training whioji ho wrote for cho .-urposo


of his hubilltation (N0-230, Ires. Jx. 115, R. 356i
,11 as other avidonco. UO-ddC. iroa. Js. HZ,


354).

BradC a close ooanaotlon with Hosohar ia further
proved V the entries ia the eiovora' Diary for MM.
On 21 January, diovoro dlsouaacd with 3randt further
frsozina experiments by Rasch.r. .^tor Resohor's
arrest, Brandt had conferences with Hovers en 10 ad
20 ..pril which obviously concerned ways to assist .1-..

(3346-le, .-ros. lx. HO, 2. 362).

Tho roporta on Raaohor'a freezing experiments,
all of which passed throng Brandt's hones, show with
crystal clarity the enormity of the crimes ooonlttod.
lefenso counsel soaks refuse in tho proposition that
only a doctor co.Hd understand those reports. No¬
thing could bo further fron tho truth.


- 30 -


ti. BRolsDT


D. G-s 2xao riments (Icdictaont, Far. 6 (D))
Fron November, 1942 until tho sunnor of 1944,
experiments to dotornino the most effective treatment
for v;ounds caused by mustard (Lost) gas wore conduct-
~ in the Netzweilor doncontratior. Camp under the
s.iporvision of Professor Ilirt of the University of
Jtrassbourg. ?or a Gcjcription of the cri_:inal na¬
ture of those oxporinonts, rcfcronco may bo mado to
the brijf on tho defendant -iovers.

..3 in tho case of the froozing and hijh altitude
experiments (supra), Rudolf Grandt's pre-trial affi¬
davit on Lost gQ3 reveals his knowledge of tkcao ex¬
periments. In this affidavit, 3randt adnittod that
tho experimental subjects v:ore concentration camp
inmatos who did not voluntoer and that sono of then
diod as a result of tno oxporinonts. (ICO-372, Pros,
-x. 232, R. 1008). moreover, documentary proof in
tho rocord shows clearly hi3 collaboration with tho
defendants Karl Drandt and jiovers, with Hirt, Gra-
••/itz, 7i;*.mor and othors in these oxporinont3.
f On 7 July 1942, riimlor issued an order to tho

’ofendant Jicvers that tho ..kronerbo Society should
* establish an Institute for . ilitary Scientific re¬

search. It was :, to support in every possiblo way the
research carried out by jj Ilauptstur.-fuehrer Irof.

Or. 'irt and to pro all corresponding research
and undertakings", (i.0-422, rro3. Gx. 33, K. 136).
.'art became a department chief in the .Jinonerbo and
his criminal work was supported by 3randt and oievers
on behalf of Hinilor.

On .2 June 1942, j levers forwarded to hraxidt a
report of :iirt on his experiments in truating*gas


-1 -


3R..MDT


■./ounds with vitamins. Kirt stated that he had not
boon ablo to conduct experiments on human beings bo-
causo of the offensive against France, but ho -..anted
to porfern such experiments in order to determine
the protective offect of vitamin treatment. (3:0-097,
Iros. Bx. 260, R. 1022).

Siovers' file note to Brandt, dated 3 November
1942, concerning tho preparation of the Lost gas ex¬
periments rcvcal3 the fact that Kirt was churgod with
the oxocution of those experiments on concentration
camp inmates in Natzwoilor. In this memorandum Jio-
vors complains that tho.camp officials in Natzwoilor
had not shown tho proper spirit of cooperation in
sotting up an experimental station for Hirt. It was
even suggested that tho experimental subjects would
havo to bo paid for. Tho memorandum concluded as
follows: "To JJ 0bor3turmbannfuohror Dr. R, Brandt
to road in rofcronco to our discussion of today and
with tho roquost of holp in comradely fashion in sot¬
ting up tho nocossary conditions at Natzwoilor-'. (N0-
09Q, Pro3. OX. 263, R. 1028). On 3 December 1942,
Brandt replied that ho had talkod to Pohl and that
tho doficioncios iiovors complained of would be clear¬
ed up. Me told Jiovers that: >! If further interven¬
tion on mi' part should bo nocossary will you please
lot no know." (NC-092, Pros. Zx. 180, R. 702).

In tho experiments which wore carried out there,
doctors of tlie Luftwaffe worked with Hirt. (Roll, R.
1059, 1061). Oborarzt inner, a otaff Physician of
the Luftwaffe, was tho principal collaborator of Kirt.
'i.LMor had boon temporarily assigned to Iiirt's anatom¬
ical Instituto in the Jtrasbourg University. On 24


- 32 -


R. BRoHBT


..ugust 1942, before tho experiaonts actually started,
Iraadt requested the Chief of the 53 /lain Office to
intervene so that .'inner light renain at Hirt’9 dis¬
posal for the execution of the experinonts. (I'C-196,

. ros. 261, R. 1027). In ~?ril 1943, Wimor was
schodulod to be transferred to another unit, jievers,
therefore, turned to Brandt and requested his L-.odiato
intervention as 'the transfer of Dr. /inner neons dis¬
continuation of the gas exporinonts at Natzwoilor end
Jtrassbourg'. 3ievcrs stressed tho point that 'the
practical knov/lodgo gained by Dr. '’innor through an
oxtonsivo series of oxpori-.onts can only be used by
hLn (Hirt) 1 * and advocated temporary transfer of 'ia-
:.ior to tho ..'affon >o. Brandt oonpliod with tho re¬
quest of oiov^rs and on 27 Hay 1943, approached tho
jj '..odical Office undor tho defondont Gonzkon with
tho roquest that Wiener should bo transferred to tho
a3 soon as possible as it was doubtful whether
tho oxporinonts of iiirt could be continued without
hi:;, (h'0-194, Iron. . 265, R. 1033). Ho also ap¬

proached Goornert, tho ior3onal Consultant of Goorlng,
by telephone on tho 3rd and by letter on tho 9th of
June in ordor to ;iako arranjor.cnts that Winner 3hould
re :ain at Kirt's disposal : fcr his war-important ga3
j::p-ri.:ont3‘. (i:0-19o, *ros. -x. 266, R. 1033).

In the beginning of 1944, Hirt and Wicnor nado
a joint report on tho -'proposed treateiont of poison¬
ing caused by Lost"’. (H0-099, fros. jX. 266,

1055). This report she* .» on its fee- that oxperi-
.uats on hurian o~ir..; s r:ero p-rforaiod by Hirt and ;i.:-
ler. It is significant to note that tho report spooks
of heavy, nodiun and light wounds caused b/ Lc-st.


- 33 -


‘> • 3RJIDT


3randt received a cop;- of this report fron the defen¬
dant oievers on 11 ...ril 1944. (NO-015, Pros. Jx.

275, R. 1039).

..pproxir-atcly 220 inaatos of Russian, Polish,
Czech and Goman nationality, woro exporLaonted on
•.:i€h gg a, of whon about fifty died. They did not
volunteer. (Hell, R. 1052, 1057). See also tho
y testimony of Kales, (transcript, 30 Juno).

?urther proof of Brandt's collaboration in tho
Gas oxporir.onts is to bo found in Ciovors' Diary for
1944. (3546-P3, supra, ontry of 4 liar eh).

Typhus 3xpori. ;onts (Indictnent, Par. 6 (J))

For a description of the typhus exporinents
carried out by itabeorzt *rof. 3ugcn Kaagen in tho
Katzwcilor Concentration Corip, roforonco i3 rado to
tho lrosocution's briefs against the defendants
»ciiroudcr and Rose.

3randt's knowledge of tho typhus oxpori.x>nts
carried out by Kaagon in tho Hatzwoilor Concentration .
Car.p is apparont fro; otatoaants in his affidavit.

Cro—370, Pros. Jx. 294, R. 1305-4). iloroover, the
proof has shovm that 3randt supported tho dofondant
clovers in providing Kaasen with 400 ccncontration
ca.ip in.:atcs for this typo of oxperinontation. Brandt
ad.iittod in his affidavit that those- experimental
subjects did not volunteer. Haagon hicsolf testified
to tho saao of foot. (R. 95*11-2). Tho tv,sti;..cny of
tho witness, Georg iiirtz, proves that Kaagen bad
to3tod hi3 vaccine at jcliimock, a sub-oanp of tho
'.'afcsuoilcr Concentration Cc_.p, in tho su.ai.or of 1943.
pproximatcly 20 Polish in.--.atos were used ir. thoso
-::peri: ants and two of t..e cxporir.ontal subjects died.


R. 3R.-_n}x


(R. 1293). This testimony is corroborated by tho
r.oto3 on Haagon's experiments kept by liiss Crodcl, his
assistant. (NO-3852, Pros. Zx. 521, R. 9660). The
witness, Bdith Jehaidt, testified about ancthor series
of experiments carried out by Haakon at Natzwcilcr in
tho summer cf 1944. ..pproxi:.etcly two-hundred inmat os
wore experimented upon, with about fifty of tho ex¬
perimental subjects, including control porsons, dying.
Persons of all nationalities wore used ca experimental
sueJoots, with Gypsies predominating. (jOhriidt, R.
1370-1; Kangon, R. 9607). oce al30 tho test! .ony of
Halos (transcript, 30 Jur.o).

Brandt's collaboration in Haason'3 experiments
, io proved by documentary evidence in tho record. On

19 i.ay 1911, tho defendant .lever 3 wrote to Pohl in
. connection with tho procurement of 2C0 concentration

oar.p in-ntes for Heaton's typhus exporinonto. This
letter reveals that fohl had already transferred 100
suitable concentration camp inmates to Nutzv/oilor on
.the request of Jiovoro in ....turn 1943. .. copy of this

letter wa3 sent to Brandt for information. (»0-008,
ires. Jx. 30*1, R. 1390). Iloroovor, Brandt reported
to levers on 6 June 1944 and announced that Brandt
had informed Himmler ’as tho matter scorned important
onaQsh'. (N0-009, lros. 3x. 305, B. 1*100). Brandt
would certainly not have beer, in o position to dooido
whother tho matter was important onough or not if ho
iouIC not have boon fully acquainted 1th iiaa; jn' o
t'fphus experiments.

7. ooa ~ater h; ~r.ts (Indictment, far. 3 (G))
■drporim.unts to a!:e Soa water potable were car¬
ried out in the Oachc.-a Concentration Camp in tho sun-


- 35 -


ft. BR*j«DT


:>or of 19d4. 7or a detailed description of those
oxporinonts, reference is :!ndo to the prosecution’s
brief on the defendant Jcbrooder.

Brandt rovoals in his affidavit considerable
knowledge, why, where, and by whom those oxporimonjts
wore carried out. It is of significance that ho ad-
misted that "it was expoctod that seme of the pri¬
soners would die as a result of tho experiments- 1 .

:.‘o had no knowledge whother deaths occurred, but it

•

is proved by tho tosti-.ony of tho witness Tsohofonig
that at least ono of tho experimental subjects diod
as a rosult of the sea wator experiment3. (R. 9339-

40).


Docu.-.or.tary evidence proves the collaboration of
irondfc in tho sea \ i-cr xperimonts. Brandt roewivod
tho ..ir.utca of the sea atur conference of 20 ! ay 19id
as tils handwritten notation on tho first peg- of tho
re-sort clonrly shows, He forwarded theso minutes to
:immlor. It was pointed out at this conference:

"Tho Chief of tho l.odioul Service
(Chef doa iai:itaotswo8ons) i3
convincod that, if tho 3orka r, 0-
thod is used, donogo to health ha3
to bo oxpootod not later than 0
days after taking Borkotit, which
dam-ago will result ir. permanent
injuries to health and - according
to tho opinion of II.C.O. (hod.)

(Untorarzt) Dr. jchaoffor - will
finally result in death after not
later than 12 day3. External
symptoms ore to be oxpoctod such
as drainage, diarrhoa. convulsions,
hallucinations, and finally death.


: Binco in the opinion of the Chief
of the nodical"-orvico (Chef dcs
ocnitaetsvosons) oer-umont in¬
juries to health, that is, tho
death of the experimental subjects
has sc be ex mated, as exp^rimar.-
tal subjects 3uch persons should
be ue * . 1 ill be* put at tho iis-


- 36 -


H. 3ILJIDT

9 oosal by naichafuchrcr ». n

(NO-177, Pros. -x. 133, 3. 479).

On 28 Juno 1944, rawitz wrote to Eirslcr that
fcii- defendant Gebhardt, together with Gluocks arid
ITjbo, had agreed to the experiments and that Nobo
hail proposed the uso of Gypsies for that purpose.

X .ilor agreed to this with the proviso that three
..ambers of another race should be added to tho ox-
periaontal subjects to be u3od for control purposes
u Gypsies wero r.ot co. parablo to Gorrans. (NO-179,
-roa. Jx. 135, 2. X5). That 3randt had full know-
led3c of this decision i3 proved by his lettor of 8
• July, in which ho inforexd Grawitz accordingly. On

20 July, the dofondont Boiglbook had a proparatory
. confcronco concerning sea water oxporinonts with

f.asohor’s sucoosscr, )r. . lootnor, in Dachau, jio-
v.jr3 reported or. this conference to Grawitz and for¬
warded a copy of the letter to 3rar.dt for inf or: *-
tion. (::o-iG2, *rc3. 137, n. .;ei).

Th030 facts prove that 3randt, with full kr.ow-
led,e of thoir criminality, willingly collaborated
ir. tho sea wotor oxperi :onts.

G. Other rxocrL-.er.ts

Tho Prosecution relies primarily on tho posi¬
tion of the defendant Rudolf Brandt in connection
with the charge of responsibility for tho solaria,
ujidonfo jaundice and sulfaailaido experiments.

‘ •-■2-aria oxperi-xjr.ts v/oro carried out by Dr.

Jlaus schilling ir. tho Dachau Concentration Ca. .p
Pro.: 1942 to 1945. ..oro than 1,0C0 in.-.atc3 were

used in thoso oxporir.-r.ta and several hundred died

*

.:j a result. Hirrior ave his permission for cho


- 37 -


3 .


o:r>ari--ontation of Jchillin'. (JO-656, Pros. Jx.

123, R. 392). -.3 tiiCi axpcriixmts wont on for years

on c very large 3calo under the protection of Ki--
.-•J.or, it cannot bo concluded that Brandt wa? ignor¬
ant of them. Brandt's close connection with Haschor,
who hi.'.self carried out cxporir.onts on concentration
camp iniwitos in Dachau, (supra) and oievers, who of¬
ten visited Dachau and was collaboratinc with schil¬
ling (sea .ro30cution‘a brief on the defondant ..iu-
vers), nado his knowledge of the iuiloriu oxpcri.:onts
a certainty. For c full doscription of the jzalaria
oxporinonts, reference is node to the Prosecution's
brief on the defendant ?.oso.

Brandt'3 knov/lodco of the sulfanile. :ldo oxpuri-
’ ;;anta is provod by tho fact that Oobhardt's preli¬

minary roport on those. -x*>ori:»nt8 v/as received by
;1j office on 9 . . -2731,

,73. 5622). Tho ro art shows on its faoo that
3ulfanila;.ida export ants wore carriod out on in. ntos
of tho Bavwnsbruck C. noontration Carp. It i3 fa:do
f cl .ar that gas ;anyono '^s artificially provoked,

that wood shavings, odo:ia .tf-licnun and ^arth wor^ used
• to croato infections si. liar to battle wound ir.foc-

ti.ms, and that 3or.o of tho experimental subjects ro-
ruaihod untreated for Control purp0303. In 3hort,
this roport £ivo3 a co: plato picture of tho auifani-
li iide experiments c .rried out by Gebhordt.

hudolf Brandt's familiarity with the epid^.-i.e
.laun dioo oxporiaonts is ovidont fro:: his affidavit.

(NO-371, Pro3. Jx. 186, It. 733). In this affidavit,
Brandt aduittod knowlodgo of the fact that conc-n-
tr ition cor.p inm-atos ere used for tho3e oxp.n: oats
and that soma cf the involuntary experimental sifjooto
died as a result.

I


R. 3rL-_a^T


In a letter of 16 Juno 19-13 tc Grawitz, Himmler gave

%

his approval to the U30 of eight Jaws of tho Polish
resistance movement for epido.mic jaundice experiments
in tho iaahsonhauson Concentration Camp. Brandt sont
a copy of this latter to Pohl. (NO-011, *ros. Jx.
130, n. 737). In hi3 request for experimental ?er-
sj.is, vihioh of necessity cone to 3randt's knov/lodgo,
Grawitz had pointed out expressly that ; 'casos of
oath ust bo anticipated.“ (N0-010, Tros. 3x. 107,

.1. 735). That theso experiments woro carried out by
dohaun in tho 3. chSw.ihausor. Concentration Camp and
that some of the experimental subjects died was ad-
aittod by Brandt in his affidavit. (110-371, supra).
Jvon the dofonsa witness Gutzoit, who collaborated
•;ith johm.an, ud lttod that Dohmon worked in 3aohson-
huuson.

III. LJkmhil .-J Of . OLI-jH iL.TIpjC.Lo

(indictment, 6)

For a description of tho original naturo of tho
axtor.dnation of Polish nationals alloscdly suffer¬
ing fro:, incurable tuberculosis, reference is nado
to tho Prosecution'3 eriof on tho dofor.dant 31o e.

Brandt rcc-ivod a letter on 3 .'lay 1912 concern¬
in'; Groiser'3 su-j ;estion tc exter. .inato tubercular
ole3 fro: IJoppo, t!.-. i’i i-r -»3 and Police Leader at
-osen. Thi3 report sh.ms on it3 face that it 1 as
proposed to 3ubject .any t2iOU3ond tuborcular Polos
to Special treat, ont -. (120-237, Fro3. Bx. 197, 3.

). That ‘special tr~at:cnt >! .-er.t extermination
i3 not only apparent from tho contents of Hoppe'3
lector, but *.:as al3o ad. It tod by tho defendant Blono.
Cl. 1791). Brandt aoknot/loCfod receipt of this lot-


- 39


3. 3R.1IDT


ter on 14 Ikly end infer ed Hoppe that he had forward¬
ed Groi3or' 3 suggestion to the Chi of of the Security
. olico 30 that the letter light take the ujttor up
with Greisor hi. aelf. (iiO-248, Pros. Jx. 196, 2.
719). This 'suggestion-' of 'reiser's ’./as axplainod
.oro detail i:: a report by hi:: to Hi.uJ.or of 1
..ay 1942, in which he, togethor with tho defendant
Jlor.o, advocated tho outright oxter, inction of ae-
proxiiatoly 35,000 tubercular lolas in order to rc-
-iovo this alleged source cf contagion for tho Gor.iaa
settlors in tho 'erthogau. (!X)-246, Pro3. Jr.. 19 j,

.C. 747).

Gl*oi3er hij.3ol a. 'roachod Brandt in the oat
covdial ter. s on 23 1J42 in order to re. .ind hi-;

of tho top soor.t r- art fro:; the Reich Hair. Joourity
Officer, v.hich had been sent to Brandt, conc„rnin
the special tro. t. :nt 1 of the tubercular Polos,
freisor ussur.od that cho ’whole at ter * had been hand¬
ed ovor to Brandt ’'without furthor ado”. (KO-252,

*rou. :jc. 200, R. 750-1).

fr. 27 Juna 19<i2, Hireilor informed Greisor that
he ap;roved tho proposal that tubercular ides and
stateless persons of :cli3h oricin who lived within
t;io territory of tho . rovinoo orthogau and who wore
defected with open tuberculosis should bo fcandod ovor
for -.paci.il troatuont". Copies of this lettor of
’ii .ler'3 wore sent to I.oppo a..: tho Reiohs ain 3o-
curity Office by tho Icfor . .. ...ufclf Crar.dt. (. o-
2.4, Iros. 201, .1. 752).

Irandt ad. Jcted u ;.is affidavit that at least
a -art of tho tub_rcul_r xolcs was exterminate while
-he others wore taker, to death ca-.ps where they were


R. BH.-JCT


lpft to dio. (NO-411, -roa. Zx. 2C5, R. 760).

3rmdt tried to ex:loin, not to sc.y repudiate, this
affidavit by t03tifyinc that ho nude the statements
on the basis of documents shown to hi.: ir. pre-trial
interrogations. He stressed the point, however,
that ho insistod thot the wording of one sentence bo
elangod. This sentence original!; road: '..s a re¬
sult of the suggestions made by Blomo and Oroiscr,

C - 10 t2:ou3and P0I03 \/oro exterminatedHo changod
tho expression ‘'8 - 10 thousand 1 * to "numerous 1 *. (R.
Irandt, R. -1891, -1953, cf. R. 761), This proves in
itself that Brandt node his statonent on tho basis
of the knowledge he obt ir.eC -s a cleso collaborator
of Hinder. Tho doca.-nts do not show tho oxocution
of •'nurorous-' ?o.\-s. There is no dcounont in evi¬
dence or in possession of tho I rosocution which would
Givo tho basis for this statonent. It is, thoroforo,
clear that Brandt's pro-trial »cato::ont is founded
upon his own leiov/lodjo and i3 entitled to full weight.

*/. ^wZlZVON COLLwO.'lo,. (Indiotcont Pnr. 7)

In rospon3o to a roquost by Rudolf Brandt, on 9
February 1942 tho do fond a: it flavors sub.Jttod to hin
a roport by Dr. Kirt of the University of Jtrassbourg
on tho desirability cf securing a Jewish 3l*:oljton col¬
lection. (HO-085, rros. Zx. 175, R. 695). In this
report, Hirt udvocatod outright nurdcr of 'Jewish
3olshcvik Co.ini3sars : ' for tho procurement cf 3uch a
collection. Ho stated:

'Zy procuring the skulls of tho Jewish
Bolshevik Jo.misSnrs, who porsonify a
repulsive, yet characteristic subhuman-
ity, wo have tho opportunity of obt .in-
ing tangible, scientific evidence.

The actual obtaining or.a cclloctir.g of


...


thoso skulls w ithout difficulty could
be bc3t accomplished by a directive
issued to the ohrmacht in the future
to irrxdiatcly turn over olive ell Jewish
Bolshevik Co.-iissors to the Field .olico. •

These units v/cro te report tc e special offlo¬
ll i eh v/ould s-nd out specialists to have photographs
_nd anthropolicicui eu3urc.'-ntu t;ikcn and ascertain
tho origin, birthdate and other personal data of tho
victims. Hirt further stated:

. -Following tho s ubse u.r.tlv ind uced d. ath

of the Jo--, -.hose head must not be dunagod,
ho -./ill separate tho head from the torso
and will fer ard it to its point of
destination ir. a preservative fluid within
a vvoll-soalod tin container especially
endo for this purpose. Cn this basis of
tho photos, tho measurements and ether
data on tho head and, finally, the skull
itself, the cooperative anatomical
research, research on race membership
t (?.a3aonzuschooricJ:cit), the pathological

foaturos of tho skull form, tho for • and
size of tho brain and rainy other things
can be,;in. ir accordance with its ocapo

• end tasks, tho nt*.< otrasaburg Reich

University (leiohsunivoraitact otrassburg)
v/ould be the -at appropriate place for
tho collection of and research upon theso
skulls thus loquir (Emphasis su plied; ■

On 27 February 1012, Bra. .t informed oi vers that
i!i-mJ.or would support Hirt'o work and v/ould place
ev rything noCeJS ary at Ilia disposal, ^rui.dt requested
jiavers to infer. Hirt accordingly ar.d to report again
on Hirt's work. (N0-090, Pros. Ex. 176, R. 699).

, Hirt'3 nurdorous cmd inhaxn plan was carried out

in . wr»v -;hich differed but slightly from tho suggestion
„udo in his proli tin r . rt. l:;o-085, supra).
ru.< proof has 3he-./n tluit it was decided to preserve
t.'io -./hole skeletons of tho victims rather than merely
t ie skulls. On 2 November 19*,2 Sievers requestod
Brandt to riakc tho necessary urrangorxnts with the
Juich Lain security Office proviuiOG. 130 Jjrv.lqh tor
matos fro. ... schwitz to carry out this plan* 10-006,
Pros. Ex. 177, *99). 0n^6 November 9r

..dolf Bichnonn, the Chief cf Office IV-3—1- ( m:ish ..f-
fairs) ■£ t a Reich : sin Security Office to ut every¬
thing at Hint's


- 42 -


H. BHiJJDT


disposal which was necessary for tho conplotior. of
th^skclcton colloction. (N0-089, Pros. Sx. 179,

. 1 ; / 02 ).

Fro. Sievor's letter to hichinnn of 21 June 19:3,
it is apparent that iB Haupt3turr-fuoliror 3ogcr, a
collaborator of tno .Jmenerbo Bocioty, carried out
tho proli .inary v/ork for the assemblin': of the
skeleton collection in the ..usobwitz Concentration
Car.p on 79 Jaws, 30 Jewesses, 2 Pol-3, and 4 ..siatics.
In this letter, --levers stated that 3ogor had to
interrupt his work because of the danger of infectious
diseases in the camp, Si^voro requested that tho
t inmates on who.: 3ogcr had carried out this work

bo transferred to tho flatzv/ollcr Concentration Corip
* because further activities in ..uschx.itz wore inpossiblo

due to the anger of infection. special accomodation
for tho thirty wo.non was to be provided in tho
Natzwoilor Concentration Ca p ' for a short p-rlcd ‘.

Tho defondant Brandt r-ceivod a copy of this letter
on 22 Juno. (K0-087, Pros. 2x. 181, I?. 702).

, Tho statonont >f tte camp ca. and.r of the

llatzvveilcr Concentration Carp* 3J Kcuptoturnfuehrcr
, Jo3cf Kronor, xcvccls that approxi. ately 30 inmates

of the .»aseh itz Concentration C.^.. , a on tho::
feral . 3 , were transferred to tho Nctzwcilcr Concon-
tration Ccu.p and hilled there by gas on tho request
of Hirt in cl boginning of u*ust 19-3. •• special

gas chamber ouil ti urpose. The

corpses of the victims were sent ir. thr-o shipments
to tho ..nutoaical Institute of Hirt in tho otras3bourg
University. (NO-807, Pros. -x. 185, a. 732). This
evidence is corroborated by tho testimony of the
itnoss henryoiorro. He testified that in the


- :3 -


a. 3.W3T


boginning of August 1943, the princip^d. autopsy .
technician of the ^natoaical Instituto, Bong,
rocoivod the order fron Hirt to prepare the tanks
in the collar of the Institute for approximately
120 corpses. In intervals of a fc\: c.e/3, three
shipments of corpses, 30 fcnalo, 30 :v.lo and 26
ryalo, arrive: by truck from an unknown place. .J.1
of these victims were Jewish. Those corpses wore
preserved in the cellar of the .na to; neal Institute
in the tanks prepare' by Bong. (Henrypiorre. R.

712-4). eec ul3o tho affidavit of a;ner. ("0-681,
Pros. lly .. 260, R. 1074). Begor was ordered to pro-
pare plaster casts of th- victi a. (5546-PS, Pres.

2x. 123, R. 302, entry for 2 February 1914). 3arly in

•iptx. - ibor 1914, Yihcx ti£ ..Iliad ar.eies weru iha\rlado£: f :fcrritcui^,
Jiovers approached the defendant Brandt with the re¬
quest for instructions as to what should b- dene
with the Jewish bodies, which wore still stored in
the tanks in the Collar of tho nnatonleal Institute.

He informed 3:*anc:t that Kirt would be able to 'doflesh 1 '
the corpses and thus render the. unrccorpiizoblo, but
in this cose part of tho work would have boon done
in vein 'an: it would be u great scientific loss for
this unique collection because ho.iinit casts could
not be .ade afterwards. The skeleton c lljction is
not conspicuous. Viscora e . be declared a3 rcr:-
nonts of corpses, apparently loft in tho .jw t: . .ical
Instituto by tho French, and order-:* to be crc t
Sievers raqu-at.d a directive fro;*. Breadt whether the
collection should bo proservod, partly dissolved, or
completely dissolved. (K0-088, Fros. Ihc. 182, R. 704).


K. 3R..NDT

Frc- the ncnorandur* of SS Hauptsturnfuchror
Borg Co 3randt, ic is apparent that it was first
decided to destroy the evidence of thes«. brutal
crir.es, but *. ith a torporary irprever^nt in the
rilitrov situation, thi 2oisio: a rcscin od.
aievors inf r..od Borg on 21 October lOoi that, in
cor.pliance vith the orders ho had received pre¬
viously, tkv dissolution of the collection had beer,
completed. The ordor to dostrey the collection was
passed down by 3au.:ort, a subordinate of Brandt.
(NO-091, ires. Jx. 183, 2 . 705). But such was not
tho ease. Eirt had ordered 3ong and his assistant,

' ?.oyer, to cut up t:.w 86 corpses and have then cre¬

mated ir. tho Jtra3sbours cror^toriu;., but thcoo two
• r - on Q l° no \/oro unable tc curry out this enormous

t i3h. .. number of corpses re ninod undis3octed and
v/ore left in tho tanks, togothor with partially
dissoctod oorpses, in ordor to create tho i .prossion
that they -./oro used for normal an a to. leal research.
(Honrypiorro, P.. 715; KO-881, suprr /.
r ®*° pioturos of thoso corpses and of tho gas

chambers in the h’citzvroilor Concentration 3a :p,

, v/hcru tho victi-ni of tho Jowish skeleton collection

v/oro murdered, taken by the French authorities of tor
tho liberation of ->trassbourg, tell tho grin story
of this nass nirdor :»rc vividly than vltnussoa and
docu.-A.nt3 ever could. (20-463, Pros. :x. 16., ...

72-i; HO-807, supra).

Tho si-nificant character of Brandt's part in
the cri_-.es charged in tho Indict ent is typified by
tho proof outlined above. Kirt's original proposal
VOI3 sent by clovers to Brandt, who secured Himmler's
approval. Thereafter, all tho details, for which


- -o -


R. 3reJtDT


Kinder obviously had no tino, wore handled by Brandt
and iiovors. Indeed, if Hlnrdor v/ero in the dock, he
•would tell us that he had no notion that this collection
v/aa to involve r.urdor and that ho thought thoy were
•;oing to take doad soldiers. ouch a dofonso would bo
no .ore credible than are tno excuses of 3randt. llo
knew fron the day ho received hirt's report that this
was .*1033 murder. Ko arranged for the victims to bo
supplied in ..uschwita. o ordered that the collection
be destroyed. 3randt's guilt is -any fold greater
than the brutal and insensible kraw.or, who personally
gassed the Jews in Nctzwoilor.

I

V. Oot.'JLu’olOIi

f

Thoro i3 nothing to bo said in ..itigetion of the
guilt of itudolf Brandt. It is not disputed that ho
ccoiv-ly porticipatod in overy cri.:o charged in tho
Indictment, with tho excoption of euthanasia, rlo v/ao
a top administrative assistant to Ilia. lor. .1:110 tho
basic decisions were by iiinnolr, Brandt new to it

• they thoy wore carried out. That he was not as i -

part ant a .won as "i. -l'er in no v/ny serves to oxor.or..to

' hi. or mitigate hia guilt. *:i3 plea i3 tho so: c as

most ori Inals on trial in numbers, that Hitler and
jli.ailor v/orc tlio exclusive repository of all guilt.

If the principle of relative guilt has any pi ce in
the trial of a am directly connected with the ardor
of thousands of wore -.3, which the Prosecution submits
it has not, tliun tho significance of Erondt's position
an ' his cri Jnal activities cm.os into clear relief
->y comparison with that ef the camp comr-andor of Dachau
and mnny of hi3 subordinacy, who have long 3inco been


H. SruatDT


sentenced to loath for their participation in 30.10 of
tho sario cri--.cs charged in this Ir.dictr-.ont.

The doctrine of superior ordors does not apply
to 3randt.

The Frosocution su'j its that the evidence proves
that liudolf I3randt -was n principal in, ccconscry to,
ordered, abetted, tool. . cor seating part in, was con¬
nector’ with plans and enterprises involving, and c.3
a :o :b-r of an organization or group connected ith,
tho aori£ission of ..odical -xp^rl ;cntation on Union
subjects v/ithout their cons-nt, ir. the course of \;hioh
or porirwnts .uxrdors, brutalities, cruelties, tortures,
atrocities, and other ioliu. uio acts were co.ir.itted,
the iurdor end inhuriono troat.iont of thousands of
tubercular loins, and tho :urdcr ef no less than C6
.t for a she lot v. collection. His guilt has been
ootablishod under Counts I, II, III and IV of tho
Indiotuoat.


- 17 -


- Jnd -


»


r

MILITARY thbukl NO. I
C*SE NO. 1


CLOSING BRIEF FOR
THE UNITED ST..TLS 0? «MERICA
aGmBIST

FRITZ FISCHER aJ© HEETA OBEEHEUSEIi


I

I

Janes M. Mcllnncy
Alexander G. Hardy
Arn.jct I! >rIlk-1! chwnld
Esther J:;nc J 'hns . n

F:»r:

Telford T ylor
Bri.* idler Conor I, U.S....

Chief of Counsel for 'Vur Crlmoo


Nurnborr,

10 Juno 19-17,


niTRopocnoN


It is alleged, in essence, under Count I of the
Indictment, that the defendants Fischer and Oberheuser,
conspired end agreed with others, pursuant to a common
design, to perform medical experiments on involuntary
human subjects; under Counts II and III ( v 'ar Crimes and
Crimes Against Humanity, respectively), thet they were
principals in, accessories to, ordered, abetted, took a
consenting port in, end were connected with plena and
enterprises involving medicol experimentation on involun¬
tary human 3ubject3; under Count IV, thet Fischer was a
namber, after 1 Soptenber 1939, of the SS, en organization
declared to bo orininal by the International Military
Tribunal.

The acts recognized oo War Crimes one Crimes Against
Humanity are 3ot forth in Paragraphs 1(b) end (o) of Article
II of Control Council Luw Ho. 10. Memborship in an organi¬
sation declared criminol b; the International Military
Tribunal is doflnod os a crime in Paragraph 1(d) of tho
some article. The criteria of criminality cru set forth
in Paragraph 2 of Article II of Control Council Law Mo.10 .
i. kbitkks c? :.?.spo::si t *iu tv

The defendant Fischor Joined tho Allgomeiae SS in
February 1934, and the HSFAP in 1939. In the letter year,
he Joined tho YTaffen SS, end was assigned to tho SS unit
in the Hohenlychcn Hospital as u physician subordinated to
the defendant Gebhardt. In June 1940, ho was transferred
to the SS regiment* Lcitstunderte "/idolf Hitler", '.nd re¬
turned the some yeer to Hohenlychcn as assistant physician
to Debhcrdt whore he remained until Hay 1943. Ho then

served cs a surgeon on both the Eastern end VTestern Fronts

- 1 -


end, after having been wounded in ,»ugurt 1941, he was a
patient in Hohenlychen. In Decenbtr 19-.4, ho was assigned
to the Charity Hospital in Berlin, but returned again to
Hohenlychen as Geblxrdt's assistant in april 1945. In the
Yteffen SS he attained the rank of Stumbr.nnfuebrer (Major).
(NO-559, Pros. Ex. 26, S. 129; Fischer, H. 4267-77).

The defendent Oberheuser joined the Lcigue of German
Girls (B.D.li.) in 1935 and held the rank of "block leader."

In i»ugu3t, 1937, she became u mentor of the Nuzi pf.rty. She
v:ns also it member of the .tssoolation of National Socialist
Physicians. Sho volunteered for the position of a otnp
dootor in the vomen's deoartnent of the Hcvensbruok Con¬
centration Cahp in 1940, end renninod there until June 19 3.
She then was given c position os assistant ;hyni'clr.n in the
Hohenlychen Hoopit 1 under the defendant Gtbir rdt.(NO-683,
Prm. Ex. ?7, 129-30; Oberheuser, it. 5485).

11 . PErsoN. L ?,.ptici?.,?i:n ix c r?iN„L :.xp; Ritn r.TS

Fischer • nd Oberheuscr ore ch rgod v.ith having prrtici-
pr.ted in the uulfnnil’-aiUe end tone, nuaolo, mrvu regenera¬
tion end bone tr implantation experiments particularized in
Pt.regrophs 6(E) one (?) of the Indictment. Fi: ch» r ol30 h’ 6
kmv.led»*e of the 3ep3is experiments -n-. *'.j freezing experi¬
ments which were c rriot* out in the Dachau Crncontr 1 tion Cnnp.
The chnrmu against Oberheuser cf huvlnr prrticip'tec in otcri-
llzr.tijn experiments in Ibavensbruck (Indict .ont, P 1 rugcoph 6
(I))is hereby withdrawn.

A. Sulfr nilooido Experiments (In ictr.ont, P^rrigraph 6 (E)).

The criminal cheroctcr of and the p*rticipation cf
Fincher end Oberheuser in tht sulfanil- ni c experiments ore
described in the Prosecution’s brief against Gobhnrdt.


Fischer does not deny his participation in these experiments.

- 2 -


He performed most of the operations. He defends himself
on two grounds - first, thst the experimental subjects
had their elle^ed death sentences commuted to something
less severe if they survived the experiments -nd, second,
that he acted under superior orcers from GebhnrCt. The
first defense has been dealt with at length in the brief
on Gebhurdt and will not be repc- ted here.

Paragraph 4(b) of article II of Control Counoil Low
No. 10 provides .a follows:

"Thu fact that .ny person sotod pursuant to
the order of his government or of u superior
doe3 n >t fre j him from responsibility for a
crime, but .y be c.nsidered in mitigation."

Thus, the only oucstion hero presented la whether the
Tribuncl should consider superior orders ua nitigr.ting thu
guilt of Fischer. Thu Prosecution submits thrt it should
not.

Fischer knew at tho tine he performed these experiments
that he was committing a crime. Ko admitted th t ho would
not normally have c- rriod then out. (it. 133e-9). Hu did not
concern h! iself with the ouestl in f vhethur thu Polish
girls hrd been tried by a tribunal or consented t.o tho exp'ri-
menta. [2. 4239-40), although all ho nc» ’ h'.vu d ne was
t aak tran. Hu sold ho did not kr. w how the subjects were
Delected. ( li, 4342). ,.s a trained physicinn he did Knov

the pain, c.i3figurcmtnt, disability, and ri3k of death to
which his oxperinontul vietins would be subjeotod.

No superior stood over Fischer with loaded gun :.nd
forced hia to do an ct against his will. He wu3 not a
Soldier- on the field, ol* battle. Hohcnlychen wjs u long,
way fron the confusion of the front lints. Fischer did not
act in the spontaneous hert of possion. He had full time

t. c'noider and reflect upon his course :f action.

- 3 -


He could have refused to participate in the experi¬
ments without fear cf conseoucnces. Thi3 he admitted in
saying, "It was not c fear of e decth sentence -»r anything
like that, but the alternative was either to bo obedient or
be disobedient during war, and thereby set an example, an
exapiplo of disobedience." (3, 4374). Such an admission re¬
moves any basis for mitigation. * soldier is always faced
with the alternative of obeying vr disobeying an order.

If he knows tho order is criminal, it is surely e hjllow
oxcuso to 3ny it must be obey ad for the soke of obedienco
alone# When there i3 no fecr of reprisal f:r disobedience
and it is realized that the order is criminal, obedience
constitutes a oimplately v luntury participation in the
ciime. Such is the case with Fischer. He Just didn't want
to set o "bad example". Moreover,tho doctrine of superior
ardors eunnot be considered in mitigation where such mnlig-
nont crinoa have beer, oonccloualy and ruthlessly committed
without the slightest nllltrry necessity.

The case against Oborhcuscr is equally clour. Sho,
booftiioraiiC9noontrution ccmp-doctor at Iluvonsbnuck of her
own free will, (Oberhousor, P.5465). She assisted Gebhr.rdt
und Fischer regularly in tho experiments. She examined the
experimental subject* before tho operations nO wos in charge
of their post-operative c.re r She reported to Fischer about
tho progress of tho experiments and wrs inforned of all de¬
tails in connection with them. She reported tho throe fa¬
talities which oho cdr.itted occurred. (i;o-177, Pros. Ex.

207, Ji. 770; 110-467, Pros, Ex, 206, i.. 460-2).

Tho cxncrinent.l subjects were token c.re of only for
u few days after the oper tion. They wer-. badly neglected,
(Magzka, I;. 1436, 1443-4). Their c ro w:o entirely inadequate.
H0-C73, Pro3, Ex. 226, li. 906). IS ny of the subjects wore


fiver, neither medicine nor norphine by order of Cbcrheuser.
(NO-877, Pros. Ex. 1:28, Ii. 918)* They were eiven only
bandages fron tine to tine when the doc’ors felt like it.
Sometimes they waited three days, sonetines four duys. There
v »gb a terrible odor of pus in the roons. The girls were
f orced to help each oth^r. (iJogzka E. 1444). The witness
Brae1-Pluter testified that;

"My leg pained ne; I felt severe pain, nd
blood flowed fron ny log. ,.t night v.o v.cre
nil .-.lone without any cere. I h6nrd only the
screaming of ay fellow prisoners, ond I heard
also that they asked for water. There wns
nobody t. give U3 any water or bed puns."

(It. 790).

The witness K.r.lewsku testified that:

"I was in ay room end I nado the remark to
follow prisoners that we wire »pcr-tet'. on In
very bad conditions and left here in this r >.on,
and that wo were not given even the possibility
to recover. This renr.rk must have been heurd
by a German nurse who w«:s sitting in the corri¬
dor because tho door of our roon It .ding‘.to
tho corridor v. is open. The German nurse entered
the room end told us to ret ui and dross. Wo
answered that vre could not fellow her order
because we had great pains in >ur logs und
could not walk. Then tho Gonun nurse came
with Dr. OberhcusGr into our room. Dr.
0turheu3er told U3 to dross ond go to tho
drossiug rota. V/o put on our Crosses; and,
being unable to walk, we hud to hop on one lug
going into the operating roccu ,»ftor one hop
we- had to rest. Dr. Oberhousor did not ullow
anybody to help us. When wo arrived at tho
operating rona quite exhausted, Dr. Oberhousor
appeared ..in'. told us t; go back because a chungo
of rossing would n^t take place that day.

I could n-’t walk, but s-onobjd.y, u prisoner whoso
n-inc I <:o not remember helped me to come back
to the room." (it. Q2k).

Oberhousor also p- rticipotcd in the cuat ’asry atrocities
in ooncentrntion camps. Zofin B-.J said in her affidavit that,
"I saw Oberheuse*r beating U" .nd throwing out w aen who had
come to have their legs looked after whioli hud been badly
cut during their work. She 'id not r ivc them any treatment."
(NO-871, Pros. Ex. 227, 1.. 913). Helena Finsecka said,


In the beginning of 1942 there was -n old German woman of

- 5 -


about to years, weering the green triangle on her am, in
the passage of the l-.evier. She asked Dr. Oberheuser for
3 one pills ss she was ill end could scarcely nove. Olerheuser
asked her why she was in the oanp. as she did not reply,
Oberheuser kicked her. The woman fell to the ground crying.
Oberhtusur luurhed and told her to got up and ro away, end
gave her n' medicine. I was in the passage ul30, and
Witnessed t 1 I 3 ." (HO-664, Pros. Ex. 229, K. 923).

0berheu3or confessed in her pro-trial affidavit that
she hud killed alck innetuu by injections, *s 3ht put it,

"It wna no rarity at lievenstruck, that persons who wore
olrendy ipproaphing death, were killed by injections. I
myself gave 5 or 6 such injections." (NO-487, Pros. Ex. 208,
li. 780). With considerable reluctance, she confined this
ndniosion on tho witness stand under questioning by the
Tribunal. (R.0527-R). That any doctor should consider
nuch killings us cthlcclly permissible, not to speak of
legal, is unthinkable.

It is to be expected that Oberhousur, and pe*rhnps
Fischer, will advance thu argument tlurt they vv.ro not in u
position to hjve prevented the exporimen 3 and hence should
be exonerated. Such an argument i3 ooaplotcly without nerit.

Thu only question is whethor the defendant participated in the
crime, n’t whether it could havo been prevented by *ho defen¬
dant. Thu Jews would have been exterminated evon without tho
nonlocal r* vines f Stretcher. A cwcuntr ti *n can? guard ctn
3uy with cons id or able truth that, If he hr.tl n't oamittod a
cert: in crime, a mono el3e would h-vo. But this is rimply no
defense; n*>r is it a mitigating factor. There may well have bean
other persons os willing to c&amlt crimes os ~ischer rnd
Oborheusor, but the significant p>int i3 th.t Fischer and

Oborheuscr did in fact commit them.

- 6 -


=,. rr :r. js cl" nrc :«crvr nc.-~c.neration mr. H-nf: Tr.-nsjlrntr-

r.lon Experiments (Indictment, Paragrr ~h 6 (D)._

The crlm'nal ciurncter of rnd the o.-rVeiontlon of
?l~cher and Obrrheuscr *n these e~ocrinent8 ere set forth -n
the Prosecution's brief on Oebhrrdt.

Fircher admitted In his affidavit th-t he oreoemd the
Kurrieel plnn for these experinents rno thrt he *ir s director
by Ocbhordt to c rrv out the exnerl nentr. In cooperation v.ich
Stu-nofep er. Ke Introduced Stuanfce er, Schulte nnd Schulte-
he-ren to the c. n; doctor pt RevensbrucU. Fincher personally
ohoae for h'm.alf the p'rforaar.ee of those operations dueling:
1th nuscle rcffcnemtlor and he described the opc~ptionrl
technique In detail. ( C--28, drop. Sr. 2C6, n. 77*).

Fischer o'-aUtad t’i. t hr removed the scpculr of an
.n.n te of nrvenobruck hi oil - trrnaplentof to the petlent
Lrrltch In . ohenlyehcn. ("lecher, R. <217). re hne7 th n
• k o .-c r crime •• he crlc- no 'urt.-d 'rofero ”nnl end hunon
o’.Jecfons up until the evenin'; before the operation ^ r “
formed but OcHrdt o bored us to o-rry out the onemtions."

( 0-22B, cuprr). /lacher'o tcotlnony on thic experiment
Cho Cd rn mbellcve'lo lac* of InforUntton. He sold he did
not i no Phother the inn, tc from -.<hon hr removed the should e:
Made p«S s rrn or n on-n. He fltated in a ro-trlnl intorro
ection thnt the exnorlncnt‘1 oub.lcot's em hurt been orcv.ousl
amputated; on the si no nr testified it tr*8 only the hand Phi
hrd been snoutnt d. In any erse, he coulc not tertify from
nlr o-m uno Icccce th- t cltn -r the hand or the arm hrd been


previous y removed. ^Ithouph h- concur e rhe oiprrtir.n hlu-
sclf, ho srld tii t he nsi’e no on'n-fon o: the subject n»>d
eld not observe whether there had been rn r.oeutntton. Ho
allegedly ap • nothinr but the h-eV. of thr vlct'n. Ho did
not ’ no- whether the subject consented to the vivisection;
ri did not Irnon hether the subject nrs killed folio lnp til?
oocrr.tlon. Fischer did not see the subject op?In. (Flcclicr,

R. 4356 - 9). Fischer's reluctance to five any detrlle on this
experiment Is perhaps oxpl lned by thr fret th't the Prosecu¬
te on's proof cho.ve th 1 t Fischer hlnsclf rmutptcd the :holo
orn. (uef-zko, K. 1448).

.he vltnesc, nptkr, testified tii t Fincher end Obor-
hciio.cr prrtlclprtcc In the bone exoerlicnto lr coop potion
;th Stunpfep er. (R.14£>8). Ocbhordt admitted that Fischer
nos his llolcon u-n to Utimpfefi r. 4000).

Fischer toctiflcd font hr did not se.rtlolb'te In nny

of the orpcrlnenlr -ft^r the middle o r December, IT,.

(3. 43?J). Thin lc clearly contr-dloted bv the affidavit of

«. of Ip do.1, r/hlch prove thnt Fischer performed r bone rx-

>erir.»nt on h»r on 23 February 13<3. 3he n-.« :

■by second o >or- fon r - carried nut on 23 Feb¬
ruary 1*43. . r. I ud not pot u t'n^i ny flrr.t
o.iorr tion I nr too uenk to resist. .Inotk"

( -nraka) eeno ‘nlo thr rear. : tu Schldl^unkl
before the oncfpt'on •uv* rrked nl i hrt -u>r ,ro
to b«> done, r eno «rred that he dl not under:.t-nd
anythin* i bout twPr.r or.- r .tlonr •• • M t I ’
ot r >rovc of thus . He tocr, Jialt-d cs v ' ( r t':r)
uh*t hpo boon done Hn :ir hefor- -n -he told X
utaf't rhe led Mer. on tic ri d;o,rn hi..

•Thr rccom tVac I rf o.*er t « ci y Fincher ?qo
and cone out In tan .til to --r-> If I vt<*b the ’arson
he vented to ooor itc on hno»ure tr.n .c-': before
(6-2-43) l ha*- been sent to t operation room b
•a'.stnke •’no, nftcr rltcber r.ei nr, ie re i
•?.ns not one of tnr jt rsone •- • vs . to oocri te


on thet c. -y. . -czk- (uegthft) told nc later on

curing this second operation ly lcpr -;cre owned
uo ego in and tan t tic gaos bet.eon th» two halves
of the coroner end clorert by rhout 1 centimeter.
Dur-ag the ocerction -noth'-r loco •Jnt» r'-.ov--rt fron
the four ends of tar or rones, bit rothlny -r-s none
tn the 3 tlnbonee. After thnt ny le*-- rrs savin up
but p curved needle rnd about 2) ecntlnctrrn
of ?llk thread rrc left In the -round of ay left
leg. Shis t'j’vo no terrible oolne later on end wa
removed by Treitn In February 1945. Trelte rid not
went to do it B-ylna th t he una not allowed to
touch ny lege, but tie.i he chonttcd his wind end did
It. I and thin needle and the thread lor m die,
but I lost then hen I left iirvcnsbruccV..■ ( 0-S71,

Pros. tx. 827, a. 014).

Cberheusor ndnitted t’*v t she assisted \n the bone fyr-ierl-
nentn lr. tnc sane ay rr. In the r.ulfonilnnldr oxperinentn.

( 0-407, rros. Jr. 2>8, R. 782).


C. Oth r .xonrlnrnto

The oroof shoes thr-t » icohor had Uno ledge of crln'.nnl
experiments on concentration nnnp Inn: tee other than the
8Ulfunll<nide r.nrt bone oxporlncntu.

Cobhprilt hart at lo-.st t-o conferences "1th Rancher con¬
cerning lin ex-crl.iontr nt Dr olv u. The record of thore non-
fcroncco .rover, th-t Klcchcr t»oc present r»t both of then,
CO-231, Pros. K*. US, R. 360).

kl*;ciicr ••"r. -loo connect *d. ith the Henris rxprrlnenfcp
rt'D ehru. (Sec brief ■••“'not G bhardt). On n lott^r dated
7 3eptrnber 17-42 fro» Grr/it* to Hlmlcr, to which reports
on the sulf-r.lli -tide end serais cx^rlnantn ere attached,
Gebi rdt crote the folio in*-:

■16 Septenber 1942.

Settled, after conv rsatlon -1th dF-SS.

Ob. rctur-’fuei.rer h. Fischer h*w'. been
given nc . Instruct'onr. for K.-v nnbruok
•nd Ofchru. ^ nhrrdt.* "0-27,14, Pros.

7x7 rt. 5622). (iaohafls euopllcd).


-9-


III. CONCLUSION


Fischer ®nr Ohcrhcuncr eorsonnliy e- rt cic t-p *n the
ertuin'l nulfenilnlde end bone, nucclc, °nd nerve rftfcencre-
tlcn experiments in the RavrnrbrucX Concentration Cano.

Flochcr performed nrn/ ol' the operations. Oberhousor exeninrd
the Polish -onei before oporntion, orclst-d !n the oocrationn,
end .nc In eh- r^e of .J08t-oncrntlon*»l -are. Such cere ••ns
nell.vnt nnd In^.dequote. Five of the experimental subjects
cicd nr r direct result of the cxporli? ts nnv six others wa\j la¬
ter ococutcd. All of the victims suffered r^*cc.t on in end nnny ere
noraanently injured.

Obcrhauccr portioi™ t-:d in other atrocities In Hevons-
hruck nno admitted killing rive or cix ln-irtrc, ;ho - «tc ill,
by injectlone.

Fir.chcr -eo conn ctod ith el-ns nr., rntornrlncn involving
the hi h rltlturia rnd freezing ex. erla nto by He-.chor nnd the
iropnls •'yorrlnoto In > ch*»u.

The prosecution cu'-nit.’ th-t tnc nvifence o*x>vc8 thrt
Fischer and Ob- rhnunnr ere urlnoipelr ' , oeccrnorloo to,
order®-, shotted, took n eo irentlnr •v'rt *n, nnd -/ere connooted
'ith '.'Inna on' 1 ent'r riser involving nc.ilcnl rvrrrimmtrt'on
on u n subjects lthout their cons-nt, In the course of hlnb
cxoerinents, Murert, brutalities, cruelties, tortures, -trool-
tJcr, rnd othsr inhumane -eta -cr- committee*. The KUilt of
Fifich r h'fi boon entailirhod ur. *r Counts 1, II, III, nil IV
of the Indictment. Ihe milt of Obrrneurrr hec been cstrnlloh
unfc* Counts I, II, end III of the Indlctnrnt.


- 10 -
( EiD )


MILITARY TRIBUNAL NO. I
CASE NO. 1


CLOSING BRIEF FOR
* THE UNITED STATES OF A2IERICA
AGAINST


KARL GEBHARDT


JnncG 21. HcHonoy
Alox-ndcr 0. Hnrdy
Arnost Horllk-Hoohwnld
Esther Jnne Johnson

Nurnberp,

16 June 1947. For:

Tolford Tnylor
Brlcndlor General, U.S.A.,

Chief of Counsel for Wnr Crlraeo


INTP.OrUCTION


It 13 alleged, In essence, under Count I of the
Indictment that Karl Gebherdt conspired and agreed with
others, pursuant to a common designj to perform medical
experiments on involuntary human subjects; under Counts II
and III ('war Crimes and Crimes against Humanity, respectively),
that he was a principal in, accessory to, ordered, abetted,
took a consenting part in, nd was connected with plans and
enterprises involving medical experimentation 9 n involuntary
human subjects; under Count IV, that he was a member, after

I September 1039, of the S3, an organization declared to
be criminal by the International Military Tribunal.

The acts recognized as Var Crimes and Crimes Mgainst
Humanity are set forth in Paragraphs 1 (b) and (c) of article

II of Control Council Law Wo. 10 . Membership in an organization
declared criminal by the International Military Tribunal i 3
dofinod os 0 crime in Paragraph 1 (d) of the same article.

Iho criteria of criminality aro set forth in Tararraph 2 of
article II of Control Council Low No. 10 .

I. POSITIONS OF RESPONSIBILITY

A he defendant Gebhurdt held positions of great powor and
responsibility in the medical services of the S3 in Nazi
Germany. He Joined tho in 193? and the SS at lea 3 t as

otrly 03 1930 (MO-671, Pros. Ex. 25, R. 126-7; Gebherdt,

R. 4190, cf. MO-649, R. 4197). Ha took pert in the Nazi
Putsch of 1923, which Lined at the overthrow of the so-called
’"oimar Republic, the democratic government of Germany, being
then a member of the illecul Free Corps, "Bund Obcrlond".

(NO-671, supra., Gebhurdt, R. 3959). When, in 1933, the
hospital at Hohenlychen was founded Gebherdt was appointed
Chief Physician of this Institution (Gebhardt, R. 3943).

In 1938, he became the attending physician to Himmler. He

- 1 -


*a3 also personal physician to Himmler and his family.
(NO-671, supra; Gebhardt, R. 3962). In 1940, Gebhcrdt
was appointed Consulting Burgeon of the Vaffen SS and, in
1943, Chief Clinical Officer (Oberster Kliniker) of the
Keichsarzt SS and Police Grawitz. In tha Allgemeine SS,
G6bhardt attained th6 rank of a Cruppenfuehrer (Major .
General) and in the '..‘affen SS, the rank of a Major General
in the Reserve. (NO-671, supra).

"t the beginning of 1940, Gcbherdt suggested to Himmler
that the position of Consulting burgeon to the V'affen SS be
established. «s a result, he v.as appointed to this position,
by an order of Himnler dat'd 17 May 1940. according to
this order, the military physiciuns und physicians in the
hospital of the I7affen SS had to obey Gebhardt's clinical
orders and all military authorities wore requested to assist
him and his staff. (Gebhardt, 3971-2).

Gebhardt's p« rsonal influence and intimato connection
with HLanier wero another source of considerable power. In
order to appreciate his position of responsibility, it 13
necessary to Koop in mind Himmler'3 almost unlimited powers
in Nazi Germany in general nnd over tho concentration camps
In particular. Gebhordt'o testimony on his relationship
with Himmler is quite revealing on this point. Gebhardt's
personul coincctiona vith Himmler were intimate und long
lusting. Both ; ore born In the suae town and vent to the
same school end spont their youth together. Gobhurdt's
futher W63 the physician of Himmler's family; Himmler's
father was the director of the school which was attended
by Ocbhnrdt. (Gebhardt, R. 3956). Both Himmler and Gebhardt
took port in the Nazi Putsch in 1923. (Gebhordt, R. 3959).
Gebh.srdt consulted Himmler concerning the preparation of the
Olympic Gamc-8 in G-. rm-iny, became a membe-r of the German
Committee for these Gumes (Gebhnrdt, R. 3961), and was
promptly rewurded with the position of an Honorary Leader


of the S3. (Gehhardt, R. 3962 ). Hlanler not only visited
Kohenlychen frequently (Gephardt, R. 39c 2), his son e.nd
hln second daughter were horn there end renalncd under
Gephardt's care until the collapse of Germany* (Gehhardt, R.
39^3). Himmler lnfo-med Gehhardt "about the.ve^y personal
conflict In hln life* (lMd) and Gehhardt took C ere of
certain "n<-rso n nl affairs of Hlrr.lcr". (Gehhardt, K. 3964).
He vna Hlrr:ler f s escort ohyolclan '-hen the Gomans Invaded
Austria in 193 >, the Sudetonlnnd in the ame year. (Ge’-hnrdt,
K. 3962 ), and ?olnn* In 1939. (Gephardt, R. 3963). Ir. l?4l
ho crave up this position an* was replaced v y his former
assistant, Dr. Sturanfrror (Gc s har’t, R. 3962), obviously
on Gephardt 1 0 or-n safest Ion. Gehhardt des rrl^ed his posi¬
tion as enc r rt nfaydclan to HI rlor no n nrrsonal ono. Hp
renorted very often to Hlrrlor and .rave hln rhat ho cells rt tl
noot honest and truthful Information* on hln own Initiative
a v out en£ apodal situation (Gob hard t, R. 3930, 3962). As
tho defendant Gentkcn testified, Gephardt woo In n modal
confidential relationship with Hlr-nlcr. (R. 3773, 37*4). The
pr^of shore that Gobhnr’t play.' an Itrv^rtnnt part In the
syotmatio ex*v-rlnent-.tlon on concentration canp inmates.

Gephardt admitted that ho knew as «arly as Hay 1942
that Hitler had annwr-" of cx-orl-rntotlon on concentration
com lnnr.ter. Ho learned this lr. a -oetln—1th Hlmlcr and
Ornwltr.. (R.U 190 ). "he Individual exoerlnenters would not
have worked r n concent rat lohfear.n lnrntrs without belnr
protect O ' 1 fr^n the to-'; even Hlnrler hlnself sought cover
fro n Hitler. (Gebhnrdt, R, 4i9i„2). He knew that through
the war years such cxnrrl-irnt-tion developed Into a
systematic "ractlce. (Ge v hor a t R. 4 id 9 » 90 ).

- 3 -


Gebh-rdt participated in the systematic incre ; se of these
crimes.

Ihese then verc the positions of responsibility of the
defendant Gebhcrdt! Chief Physician of the Hohenlychen
Hospital, Personal Physician to Himmler, Grappenfuehrer
in the «llgemeine S3 and Unjor General in the \.c ffen SS,
Consulting ourgeon to the l.cffen SS, Chief Clinical Officer
of the Reichsarzt SS and Police, ..nd Hinkler's personul
advisor in medical natters. Gcbhsrat used the foregoing
positions, hi3 personal influence end his intimate connection
with Himmler in a manner which involved the commission of
k'-r Crimes and Crimes against Humanity s set forth in the
Indictment,

II. personal p^icit. tip?.' i:~ car:i::,.L giPERrsfrre
In Paragraph 6 of the Indictment, twelve different
tyoes of experiments are p rticul .rized. Gcbhrrdt is charged
with special responsibility and prrtioip. tlon in nil of thorn,
a. 3 T /L*yiLA' , I'3 r'P-nrrHrs (Indictment. Par. 6 (E)).
Experiments to test tho effectiveness of sulfunllnnide
-on Infections v>tre conducted in the P.wcnsbruck Concentration
Cuip from 20 July 1942 until Mi/rust 1943. Ihese exp- riments
were porfoimd by the defendants Gcbh rdt, Kischcr, and
0b>.rhousor. (NO-220, Pros. Ex. 206, R. 767).

Gebh.srdt personally requested Himmler's permission to
curry out the sulfanilamide experiments nd their execution
was his responsibility (Gebhcrdt, R. 4024-5). He himself
curried out the Initial operations (Gcbh'rdt, R. 4032).

*ho experimental subjects consisted of fifteen male
concentration camp inmites, who were used during the pre¬
liminary experiments In July 1942, and sixty Polish women
who v< re experimented on in five croups of twelve subjects
each (Gcbh-rdt, R. 4056).

The nuroose of the experiments v/ms strted in a preliminary
reDort by Gcbh rdt dated 29 Aucust 1942, in which he stated:


"By order of the Reichsfuehrer SS, I
started on 20 July 1942 at Rovensbruck
Concectr. tion Conn for women (FXL) on a
scries of clinical experiments vith the
'-in of analyzing the sickness known os
gas gangrene, which does not tcke a
unlfom course, .nd to test the efficiency
of the known therapeutic nediccocnts.

"In addition, the simple (banal) infections
of injuries which occur ns symptoms in the
war surgery, had cl30 to be tested; i-nd a
new cheno-ther .peutic treatment .side of the
known surgicel measures h d to be tried out".

(MO-2734, Pros. Lx. 473, R. 5622).

*he 3ulf unilur.ide experiments, os substunt lolly ell of
the exp» riments with which the cr.sc is concerned, were directly
rel ted to the German v r effort, allied propugondo ubout
the "olroole drue" 3ulfonilonide wvs having considereblo
effect on the confidence of the Gcrmtn soldiers in their
medical officers. Heavy casualties h.d been sustained from
gc.3 gangrene on the Rus3ion front in the winter of 1941-42.

The theoretical question to bo answered by those c-xpiriments
was whether the woundod should be treated 3urgicully in the
front line hospitals or should bo troot-.d by field nodical
officers vlth sulfanilamide :.nd thon sent down the long lines
of communication to a bore hospital for further treatment.
(Cobh.rdt, R. 4010-14).

*ha sfisu reoort cit'd above states th -1 the defondnnt
Fischer wrs appointed by Gtbh rdt .3 hi9 s9istont; Dr.
Blunenreutcr, 1 sulordin- te of the defendant Genzken, node
available the surgical instruments nd nedicints; the
defendant -i meow sky put his labor--tory -nd co-workers ot
the disposal of Gebhrdt; end Dr. Lolling, Chief Medical
Officer of oil concentration cujps, usslgned Dr. Schiodlousky
and the defendant ObcrheJSer os co-workers.

This pro 1 Inin ry report concerns itself with tho early
experiments on th6 15 niile subjects to determine 0 mode of
infection with gangrene. Gebh.rct w.s assisted by the
Hygiene Institute of the v.^ffon SS, which m.ct available the


bacteria and gave cdvice on the net hod of bringing about

g .ngrene infection ^rtiflcielly. The experimental tech-

nicue w s described in the report s follows:

"The point was to inpl nt the lymph
cultures on the damaged muscle tissue,
to isolate the lutter fron atmospheric
end humoral oxygen supply end to subject
it to interns1 tissue pressure. The
inooculition procedure vr.s «s follows:
a long 1 tudim.l cut of 10 centimetres
over the musculus peroneus longus; after
incision into the fusciu the muscle wns
tied up with the forceps in on tree the
size of n five Uurk piece; on anr eoic
peripheral zone was created by injection
of 3 cc:; ndrenalln end in the orea of the
damaged muscle the inocculetion arterial
(s guuze 9t:1n saturated with becterii)
was imbedded under the fesciu, subcutaneous
adipose tissue end skin sutured in lcyers."

In the first series of experiments the subjects were
infected with staphylococci, streptococci, poro otdenu
mu lignum, and b-.cteriu Fruenkel end e^rth. The resulting
infections were not considered serious enough, end a
conference wu3 hud with the Hygieno Institute of the
Vmffon SS end the bacteria used in bringing cbout the
infections wo8 changed. t»ix additional -ole subjects
were then infected, but again the results were not con¬
sidered 3._riouu enough. «fter further consultation with
the collaborators in the Hygiene Institute of the Woffen
SS, the infection material vas changed by adding wood
shavings. Luring the course of those exp rimonts the
subjects viro trusted v ith v rious type3 of s ilphonaaides,
including cutoxyn -nd narfanilorontclbin, the lutter
b-ing strongly rtcon-.i nd« d by the «my .-icdical Inspectorate,
Lfforts continu'd to n.ke the gangrene infection noro
serious, and the report concludtd with the following
puragr ph:


re now investigating the problen as
to why the gangrene in the present cases
did not fully develop, therefore the injuring
of the tissue und the exclusion of a muscle
froa the circulation of the blood were under¬
taken during .. separate oper ting session, end
the 1 -rcc-scale necrosis resulting therefrom
w s to bo Inoculated with bacteria struln
\hlch hud already had one human passage.
i_ or it is only vhea the really definite
clinical picture of the gangrene h-,3
.poecred that Conclusions any bo drawn on
therapy with chcmo-therapeutics in connection
with surgical operations." (Fmoh-sis oddGd).

'■‘his report w s certified .s o correct copy by the
defendant Poppendick.

In his zet lousr.css to protect his fellow defendants,

Gcbhrrdt testified th.t neither the Hygi'no institute of the
"effon S3 nor the defendant Mrugowsky played cny pert in
these experiments, end th t the infection ifiteriol was S6nt
to him by Gr.:v itz. (R. 4179). This is clearly contradicted
by hl3 own report cited above.

Following the conclusion of the preliminary experiments
on the m.le prisoners, experiments were continued on female
Polish in.Vitas. r *he uffidovit of tho defendant Fischer stutes
that three series of op-rations were performed, ouch involving
ten persons, one using the bacterial culture and fragments

-I

of wood, tho second using bacterial culture and fragments of
gloss, -nd the third using culture olus glass and wood
(NO-220, Proa. Lx. 206, R. 767). A hosc experiments were
undertaken during tho month of -ugust 1942. While Fischer
speaks of experimental groups of ten persons each, the
defendant Gobh-.rdt testified th~t the groups were composed
of twelve experimental subjects (R. 4056). On 3 September
1942, ftcr 36 women h .d b:en experimented on, Rcichs^rzt
SS Growltz visited Ravensbruck nd inspected tho expcrinentnl
subjects. Ke asked Gebhurdt how many deaths had occurred,
and when it wus reported that there h-.d been none, he stated
th.t the experiments did not conform to battlefield conditions


(NO-228, supra; Gebhcrdt, B. 4057). in order to tanke the
g::rwrene infections still nOre 3everc, a new series of
experiments involving 24 Polish fen-.le inn tes was carried out.
In this series the circul-tlon of blood through the muscles
v; 3 interrupted in the area of infection by tying, off the
-.u:;clos on either end. This scries of experiments resulted
in very serious infections end a number of d6eths occurred*
(NO-228, supra.)

Gebh.rdt, Fischer, ond Oberheuscr :.ll cdtiit that three
of the cxperLTcnt.nl subjects died «3 n result of the
experiments.(NO-228, auprs; Gcbh-rdt, R. 4059; Oberheusor,

E. oi92). other evidence, hovcv r, proves th; t five died os
direct result of the experiments end six wore executed by
shooting at a later d-.tc. (y gzka, 2 . 1438, 1449; Broel-Pletcr,

P. 797; Dzido, R. 845; Kuzmicrczuk, R. 863).

F.>ur of the Poll3h women who t ere subjected to these
experiments testified before the Tribunal. Most of the women
who were used ra subjects h"d been active in o resistance
movement. (BP., R. 787; Knr., R. 816; Dz., R. 840; Kuz.,

E. W7). Only houlthy inawtos vere usod. (EP., h. 786; Kr.r.,

R. 815; Dz., R. 036; Kuz., R. 656, 860-1). None of thorn
volunteered for the experiments. (5?., R. 789; Xnr., it. 819; Dz.,
R. 642, 644-5; Kuz., n. C61). On the contrary, they protested
ugciinst the ex.peri lonts both orally .nd in writing. (BP., R. 709?
Xcr., R. '23-5). They st;ted th-t they would have preferred
death to o-’ntinued experintnts, since they t.cre convinced
th:t they wero to die in any event. (BP., R. 795; Kar., R. 824;
Kuz., R. e63). They testified th t 74 Polish women, one
Gern-n, -nd one Ukrainian wore experimented upon.(!!ngzka, R.

1430: BP " R - 796 5 Kcr., r, 818; Kuz., R. 862). Since Gobherdt
plueed »he total number of Polish fcncle experimental subjects
in the sulfanilamide experiments -t 60 , the additioncl 16


women mentioned by the witnesses say well have been
subjects in the bane, muscle, and nerve regeneration
experiments. (Hcgzkn, R. 1462).

'ihc vitness Xusmierczuk v»as one of the- subjects in
the sulfanilamide experiments. Sho Is a Polish national
and orrivod in the Ravensbruck Concentration Camp in the
fill of 1941. (R. 657). She \ r. s operated on in October
1942 and a severe infection developed in her case. (R. 85e),
°ke regained in the hospital fren October 1942 until April
19-*3, but her wound was still not healed at the tine sho
\.ss cisch rged from the hospital. «er condition deteriorated
ond she v .s readmitted to the hospital on 1 September 1943.
(E. 660). ohe left the hospital the second tine in February
194*1, but her wound did not fin lly heal until Juno 1944.

(R. 661). She identified the defendants Gebhcrdt, Fischer,
ond Oberh:user s having participated in the experiment upon
her. (R. 660). Xusriiorczuk suffered pern^nent injuries as
a result of this experiment, r.d her condition was described
by *ho expert vitness Dr. Leo Alexander. (R. P64-9). Tho
post-operational c.-e of this roman w s not hondlcd by
Gobhardt and Fischer, but by tho Cnap Doctors. Or. the
ocoosion of h-:r second admission to the fcospitol in September
1943, Kusnltrozuk was operated on by Dr. Ireito in an
effort to cure the deep-se ted Infection. (Xus., R. 861).

-he expert witness Magzka, who worked s an X-ray
technician i:i the P.uvensbruck Concentration Cunp during
the course of the experiments, testified concerning deaths
of th6 five Polish experimental subjects resulting froa
the sulfanilamide experiments. ~oronica Kraska developed
typical tetanus symptoms a few days after the experimental
optr tion was performed on her. «fter a brief illness she
died under cramps caused by tetanus. (M&gzku, R. 1438).
Kaziuiiera Kurowska vr s '-rtifically infeettd with gangrene
bacillus, ohe ros n healthy Polish girl of 23 ye-rs. From
day to ccy her leg became blacker end more swollen. She


*


9 -


waa ^ ivcn c ' re only the first few deys. «ftcr that she
wss tskon to Room No. 4 in the hospital where she ley for
d °y» in unbelievable pain ..nd finally died. Megzka was
able to observe this case personally end in her opinion
iorxdiute onputrtion would have saved her life. (Mogzka,

R. 1429-40). xt is cuito clear th-t if c Gerasn soldier's
life h.d been endangered by gangrene infection, an onputrtion
would have been undertaken Linedictely. In this ezperinent,
where the very effort v.^s to develop a serious gangrene
infoctlon and to test the effects of sulphononide preparations,
it is equally clc-r why the leg of Kurowsku w s not annotated.
rt.nll.oo Ufunov.icz was infected with oedena aclignun. Her
leg kept swelling more and acre, tho blood vessels eroded,
and she died fron bleeding. Mugzka testified that the blood
vessels should have been tiid off nd cn imputation curried
out in order to save her life. She w : .s completely neglected
'Ttcr the first two or three days. (Magzku, R. 1440-1).

Zofi-i Kiccol died under sir.il r circun3tanocs. (Magzko,

R. 1441).

rtlfred>« Pruo w .s infected with oedena rwlignun the seae
day as tho witness Kuo-ile rezuk, Klecol, nd Lofnnowicz. She
was a beautiful, young 21 year old girl, and a university
student. She proved to bo stronger than Kitcol and Lefsnovicz
end for th t reason she lived a few days longer. Sho suffered
terrible ?-in ..nd finally- died of haeaorrhogo. (Hagzka,

R. 1442-3). Rusaicrczuk w..s tho only subject to survive
that series of experiments. (If&gsku, R. 1443).

It Is hardly necessary to point out that oil of the
experiaentcl subjects suffered severe ooin and torture.

(BP., R. 790-1, 802; Kar., n. 8£0; Dz., R. 842; Kus., R. 859;
HO-876, Pros. tx. £25, R. 899; NO-871, Pros. £x. 227, R. 913;
NO-877, Pros. £x. 228, R. 918). *he Tribunal was able to


- 10 -


observe for itself the mutilation to which the Polish witnesses

rere subjected, end pictures of their seers were introduced

to fore e permanent pert of the record. (N0-1079 a, b, and

c, Pros. Ex. 205, h. 798; NO-1081c • nd b, Pros. Ex. 211,

Ti. 829; '10-1082 a, b, end c, Fros. Ex. 214, R. e46; N0-

1080e-g, Pros. Ex. 219, R. 863),

The post-oper-tional core- of the experimental subjects

WjS entirely in.deou tc. (II0-673, Pres. Ex. 226, R. 906).

Many of the subjects ere given neither medicine nor

morphine by order of defendant Obcrheuser. (NO-877, Pros.

Ex. 228, «. 918). *hoy vere given bondages from time to time

when the doctors felt like it. oometimes they vnited throe

days, sometimes four deys. ‘here wes j terrible odor of pus

in the rooms, -ho rirls were forced to hclD each other.

(Mngzka, i.. 1444). Fost-oper tional caro, such es it was,

v.t.8 administered by the caup doctors. *ho witness Broel-

Plator testified that:

".‘ly leg p'ined me; I felt severe pain, -nd
blood flov.-cd from my leg. «t night v.e were
ell clone without any c-re. I heard only
the screaming rf my follow orisoners, ■ nd I
heard also tfc t they asked for voter, ' A hero
v s nobody to give us any water or bed pans".

(R. 790).

' A hc witness Kcrolerak*. testified that:

"I w p in my room end I made the remark to
fellow Prisoners th t u* were operated on
in very bad conditions nd l'ft.hero in
this room, nd *.h:t v.e iro not given
even the possibility to recover. This
remark must have been hc*rd by : German

nurse who w is sitting in the corridor
bee use the door of our room leading to the
corridor ves ron. -he Gemcn nurse entered
the room ..nc told us to get up ;nd dress. re
answered th:t v.e could not follow her order
bee .use ve h« d great p_ins in ^ur legs and
c~uld not walk, -hen the German nurse came
with Dr. Oberhouser into our rooa. Dr. Ober-
heusor told us to cress ;ad go to the dressing
room. ’ e put on our cresses; end, being
unable to walk, we had to hop >n one leg going
to the operating room. «fter one hop ve hud
t-> rest. Dr. Obcrheuser did not allow anybody


- 11 -


to help as. ».hen we arrived at the
operating rooa quite exhausted, Dr.

Obcrheuser appeared and told us to go back
bee-use a change of dressing vrould not
take piece th ;t day. I could not walk,
but soneb.dy, a prisoner whose nano I do
not roaenbtr, helped ae t*' coze back to
the rocn." (R. 822) i

«t least five bunon lives were sacrificed in the sulfa¬
nilamide expe rinent.s, whilo an additional six were shot after
having survived the operations. All the surviving victims
suffered terrible p-ins and were crippled for life. Never¬
theless, the experiments were not even scientifically
successful. Iho results, as rcnortid by Cebh;rdt and
Fischer at the Third Conference- of the Consulting Physicians
of the VTehraacht at the Military Medical academy In Berlin
in Moy 1013, were not adopted, and ntdicul directives were
issued which required tho continued use of sulfanilumide.
(Cobhordt Ex. 10, It. 1228-9). Iho sulfanilamide experiments
w.re entirely unnecossury, 3ince siail r results oould have
been achieved by the treatment of wound infections of
German soldiers normally coutrectcd during the course of the
war. (Rostock, K. 3338, 3334).

Cobh* rdt doe3 not seriously contend that the experimental
subjects vert volunteers. Ho admitted that he did not know
whether the women c~ns<nttd. ho testified he wus not
interested la th-t. He left it up to the "legal authorities".
Ho did not discuss this matter with Hit.ler. (Gebhnrdt, R.
121l). By legal uth'rlMos, Gebhnrdt meant Himmler who,

~s he 3oid, "had tho nower to execute thousands of people by
a stroke of his pen". (! . 402b). Gcbhordt, however, 3howed
no interest whatever In the moral or legal choract-r of
that power. «t one p^int in hi3 testimony, he stated that
the subjects were* non-volunteers forced to subnit to the
experiments by the ^tate. (R. 4064). nt still another


12 -


point, they were "more or less volunteers, condemned
persons"* (2021);

Gebh^rdt’s defense, if it cun be dignified with that
word, is rather that the Polish women hed been condemned
to death for participation in a resistance movement and
that by undergoing the experiments, voluntarily or other¬
wise, they were to h»ve their death sentences commuted to
aorae lesser degree of punishment whereby they would at least
not be executed. This was no bargain reached with the
experimental subjects; their wishes were not consulted in
the matter. It ws, according to Gcbh- rdt, left to the
good faith of someone unnamed to 3ce to it the death sentenco
• was not carried >ut on the survivors of the experiments.

Certainly 0.bhordt assumed no responsibility, or even interest,
in this matter.

The ?r >secution p rints out, in connection with this
alleged defense, that the proof shows thet the experimental
subjects who testified before this Tribunal were never so
muoh cs accorded a trial; thoy hud no opportunity to defend
themselves against whatever crimes they were said to have
committed, *ney vore simply arrested und interrogated by
thi Gestapo in Pol ad and sent tj a concentration comp.

They had never S'* much as bc«.n informed thet they h’.d been
r._ rkec for , not sentenced to, death. (K_r., *». 831).
article 30 of the iu.gulmtions respect ing the Laws And Customs
of V.'ar On Land rnnox.cd to the Hague Convention expressly
provides rh't even a spy "shall not bo punished without
previous trial". Ihc alleged defense of Gebhardt is
accordingly without merit.

Gebhordt would hove the Tribunal believe that but for
the experiments all these Folish girls would be dead; that
ho pres- rvc-d the cvi ’*.nce now being usee against him.


- 13 -


Nothing could be further from the truth. There is no
pr.iof in the record thet these woaen would have been
executed if they hod not undergone the experiments. The
witness Mugzka is living proof of the contrery. She wes
arrested for resistance activities on 11 September 1941,
end shipped to Kovensbruck on 13 ^September. (IfcgsJca, R.
l-i3?). ohe w..s not an experimental subject yet she lives
today. Substantially all of tho Polish experimental
subjects arrived in ltaveu3bruck in September 1941,

(B,P " “• Kar -» *'• 616, Lz., . 1 . 840). Thcso girls had
not been executed by august 1942 when the experiments began.
Indeed, it was a surprise to Cebh rdt, according to his
testimony, thut they were used ot oil since during July
1942 the experiments were conducted on non. '*horo wore
ssne ?00 Polish girls in that transport. (N0-C77, Pros.

Ex, 228, It. 918; Gebh.rdt, R. 4216). Tfaore is no ovidonce
th-.t a substantial number were ever executed even though
most of then v-ero not cxpirisint<d on.

No, thu proof has shown beyond controversy that these
PUiah women c Juld not h:.ve been U-p.-.lly executed . The
right to grant D-rdpns in ateos of death sentences was
exclusively vested in Hitler by a decroo of 1 February
1935, J.GBL I S74. (N0-3070, Pros. Ex. , R.

On 2 ;r.y 1935, Hitler delegated the right to ooJco negative
decisions on pardon applications to the i.cich Minister of
Justice. (M0-3071, Pros. Kx. , K. ). 0 n 30

January 1940, 7.C0L I S399, Hitler delegated to tho
General Governor for the Occupied Polish Territories
the authority to grant pardons and to make denying deci¬
sions in p-.rdon matters, for the occu D ied Polish territories".
(M0-3072, Pros. Ex. , R. ). By edict dated 8
Morch 1940, VOBt GG P I S99, the Governor General of


occupied


Poland ordered on the execution of the right to pardon in the
cc.se of death sentences that:


"The execution of a death sentence
pronounced by n regul r court, c
special court or c police court aertial
shall take place only when .~y decision
h;8 been issued not Vo auko U9e of oy
right to n r^on V QfO-tHWft, Pros. Ex.

TTT n rX-.phosis added) •

Assuming erruende that the exocrloental subjects had
all coa fitted substantial crlnes, thet th6y were all
properly triod by r. duly constituted court of l.-.w, that
they were legally sentenced to death, it is still clear
from the decrees set forth above thet these women could
not have bien legally executed until suoh tine os the
Governor General of occunied Pol nd h:;d decided in 6uch
c .se not to .nke uso of his p.rdon right, There h;.s been
no proof thet the Governor General h;.d ever uctid with
respect to p rdoning tho Polish w nen used in the experiaonts,
or, for th;t latter, any substantial number of thoso not
used in 'he experiments.

The only roson these 700 Polish wonon were transported
from Varouw ;m’ Lublin to F.avonsbruek was because the Governor
General h .d not a opr eve d their execution. Otherwise they
would h vo been i/_ .• di tcly executed in Poland. «t the
very least, these women were entitled to remain unmolested
on long iis the Go"oraor General took in action. Ho nay
never have acted or, when he did, he a ay have acted
favorably on the pardon.

The affidavit or Scfcicc.lnusky, the canp doctor at

*»aven3bruc!c, shows that the Governor General had not

turntd down a pardon when tho experiments started. He said

on pare four of the original:

"Polish women who hud been sentenced to
death by court martial and who wbre await-
iug execution, after their sentences had


\


been approved by the Governor General,
v re chosen is subjects". (N0-508, Fros.

Hx. 223, li. 890).

•

«t still t later point, on page 15 of the original, he

said:

"During my tour of duty et Itavensbruck, I
estimate thct -bout 25 vonen were executed
by shooting. They vere exclusively Polish
women, who were already prisoners, whose
sentences were only approved after s long
ti.-.c by the oo--.rnor Gen. ral ." (£..-,phesis added).

Sohledlcusky \ us in ..avensbruck from December 1941 until
the middle of «ueutt 1943. During that long period of time
only 25 of over 700 Polish inmates were made eligible for
execution by action of the Governor General. V.ho is to soy
that the majority of these 700 Polish women did not live
through the war even though they did not undergo the
experiments? Gertuinly it was incumbent on the defense to
prove thu contrary by u preponderance of the evidence. This
it did not do by uny evidence.

r iho dcfcncantB Gctherdt, Fischer, end Oberheuser cunnot
claim thut they believed In good faith th t the Polish women
could have been legally executed. Even thu canp doctor
Schicdluusky know thrt rhe Governor General had to approve
tho execution. -iorcover, the 1: rgc numbor of 700 women being
sentenced to ('*.nth at this o >rly 3tagu of the wer wus enough
to put uny reasonable p-rson on notice th t something was
wrong.

additionally, the uncontrs&ictcd evidence proves that
survival of the experiments was no guarantee whatever of avoid¬
ing execution in uny event. *»t K-st six of the .xp-Tlmentol
subjects were m-cutu'. I'tir having survived the experiments ,
(.'logzku, i.. 1449; B.P., It. 797; Bz., I\. 645; Kus., E. 063).

Iht names of the Polish girls who vere shot vere Pajuczkowska,
Gar,3, z.iel^nka f Kukowska, Goboltwska, and Gutok. (NO-073,

Pros. Ex. 226, a. 906; NO-061, ^ros. Ex. 232, E. 932). It wus


- 16 -


not o question of experimentation or execution but experi¬


mentation _nd execution.

Indeed, in February 1945j en effort wts mode to
execute fall of the experimental subjects. They were ordered
to reoort to one block end remain there. A hey were
informed that they would be transferred to the Gross-nosen
Concentration Crap, tut it vms common knowledge that Gross-
?.osen was already in the honds of the allies. A hey, there¬
fore, knew thtt they vero polar to be executed or.d so took
different identification numbers r.nd hid themselves. This
was possible bocousc of disorgi Dilution in the camp.

(L'-pzke, Xu l'.bO-l; Xus., it. 862-3; NO-876, Pros. Ex. 225,

K. 899; NO-877, Pros. Ex. 228, a. 918).

If one takes the case of the defense at its face
value, the Tribunal is in effect asked to rule that it is
legal for military doctors of a nation et war to experiment
>n political prisoners of on occupied country who are
condemned to death, to experiment on them in such o way
that they nay suffer death, exorutiating pain, mutilation,
and permanent disability - all this without their consont
and in direct nid of the military potential of their
oneny. Thore is no valid reason for limiting such a
decision to civilian 'risoners; the exneriment would
certainly h.ve betn no worse had it been performed on Polish
or American prisoners of vsr. It is Impossible to consider


seri 'usly the ruling being sought for by the defense.


?:0K2. IPIGCLS /dip

; v h. I iCj


r,r.“6T?T

T7~


75 iIndictment,


These experiments were curried out in the liavensbruck
Concentration Camp during the seme period of time r.nd on
the 3*i_t0 group of Polish inmates -s the sulfanilamide


experiments. (Hsgzkc, I.. 1458).


17 -


The defendant Fi3cher aade the following stctenent fbout


these experiments in his affidavit:

"«fter the arrival of doctor Stuapfegger
from general headquarters in the fall of
19-.2, Professor Gebhordt defclared before
3ono of his co-workers that he hid received
orders to continue with the tests at
r.avensbruck on e larger scale. In thi3
connection, questions of pl.stic surgery
which would be of interest fter the end
of the war should be clarified. Doctor
Stunpfcgger wes supposed to test the free
transplantation of'tones. Since Frofessor
Gcbh-rdt knev thet I h‘d worked in preparation
for ny hebilitetion r. t the university on
regeneration of tissues, he Ordered ne to
prepare a surgical pl^n for those operations,
which efter it had been approved he directed
ne to carry out ianediatoly. Moreover,

Doctor Keller .nd Doctor Hei3s-oyer were
ordered to perform thc-ir own series of
experiments. Professor Ge-bhurdt was 130
considering o pl.n to fom the besis of on
operative technique or reiiobillzation of
Joints. Besides the above, Doctors Schulze
end Schulzc-Kcgsn prrticip ted in this
conference.

"Since I knew iwvcnsbruck I was ordered to
introduce the new doctors named above to the
leap physician. I wos specially directed to
assist Doctor StunpfoGger, since ho i us
physician in the st..rr of Himmler probably
would be absent from tine to tir.e.

"I h d selected the regeneration of nuscles
for the sole reason bec .use the incision nec¬
essary for this purpose was the slightest. The
operation was carried out cs follows:

"Svipan nd oner were used n a an anesthetic,
r nd. a five centimeter longitudinal incision
vns node at the outer side of the upper leg.
Subsequent to the cutting through the foscian,
r. niece ;f the- muscle won rcacved which was
’he size of the cup of the little finger. Tho
faseiun -.nd skin were enclosed in uccorr. nco
with the normal technique of aseptic surgery.
nftK.ru rds . cost was applied. «fttr one wte-k
the skin vounr v .s split under the same narcotic
conditions, und the o rt of the .muscle -round
the area cut out v s removed, afterwards the
f.iacian r.nC tic sewed-up rart of the skin were
immobilized in a cast." (NO-228, ?ros. Ex. 206,

1%. 767).

The responsibility of tho defendant Gebhuret for these
experiments is Iso proved by the affidavit of Oberheuser.
She stated:


- 16 -


"The experiments with bone transplant tions
were carried out, s far is I can remember,
at the end of 1942 eno beginning of 1943 by
Dr. Stunpfeggcr of Hohcnlychen. I helped
and assisted Dr. Stumpfegger in the sane way,
ns I helped Dr. Fischer with the sulfonamide
experiments, and as I hove described already
in paragraph 4 of this affidavit. Befcre the
operation I had to examine, as in the other
case, the condition of the health of the
selected persons* Ihe nperctions consisted
in the removal and trnnsplr.nt3tion of o piece
of the bona fron the tibia. 15 to 20 persons
were used for these experiments*

"The persons necessary for these experiments
were requisitioned by Dr. Schiedlausky fron
the coma commander.

"Dr. K rl Gebh rdt v s in charge of the
sulfonf.mi«'.e exp; rim* nts and bone transplan¬
tations. It is not known to oe, that he
himself has performed operations of this
type, ^ut I know, ttu.t all these experiments
were performed under his direction and supervision
.nd upon his instructions. Ho w*a assisted
by the lroudy aentioned Dr. Fischer and Dr.
Stunpferffcr and also by Dr. Schiedlauoky nnd
hostnthai. nlso for th< so experiments, only
healthy Polish prisoners wore used.

"I can't remember, that u single one of the
used ox pc rime ntal subjects vr 8 p-rdoned after
the completion of tho experiments." (NO-487,

Pros. Ex. 206, i\, 780).

'±he witness ilugzka, r graduate of tho Wedicol School of
tho Unlvtrsity of Cr cow end a practising physician, testified
th..t in the course of her duties 03 X-ray technician in
the hnvcnshruck Concentration Camp oho had occasion to
observe approximately l? cases of iam tes v.hoso bone*s had
been exp. rinentally op. rat d. on. *hcro vero three kinds of
bone op'.r-tin3 - fractures, bone transplant: tions, and
bono splints. he Polish rirls wire oper ted on several
times each in some cases. In the cast of Crystyna Dabska,
Llagzka took X-ray pictures of both leg3 <n' discovered
that snail "ieccs of the fibulae hod been removed. In the
case of one leg the periosteum had .Iso bv.en taken out.

Zofiu bej was operated on in a sinii-r manner. Janine
M'-Tczowsku and Deon-rdc Bien were subjected to the bone


- 19


fracture experiments. '‘"he tibia was broken in several
places and in the c--.se of one of the girls, damps were
■pplied while in the cuse of the other they were nat»

These o-’er. tions impeded the locomotion of the girls
operrted on. Bone incision operations were performed on
Barbers Pietczyk, e Polish girl 16 years old. She was
operat'd on six times, curing the first operation incisions
were node in each tibia, during o lcter operation pieces
of the tibi. were cut out where incisions hrd been
previously rands, iingzko took an X-ray of the pieces of
tibia that were removed. «s e result of those bone
operations, Jlagzko obs»rvtd the development of two coses
of osteomyelitis, Korin Crnbov.sk. r n <* Kerin CabaJ. (Mogzka,

It. 1445-7).

n rather l rre gnup of musclo experiments were performed
Here train multiple operations wore c.rried out on the suae
subject. Glodziev/jowske w .8 opcrvtid on most frequently,
during the first operation certuin muscles were removed and
during subsocuent operations additional pieces were cut
out, alv/oys at the some pi co, so th t the* legs got thinner
nnd weuker ull the time. tUogs&a, «. 1447).

Transplantation of whole limbs from one person to
another was ■ loo carried out. licgzku tostifi6d thet ibout
ton feeble-minded inmtes were silected, taken to the
hosoit1 jni prepared for operation. She knew personally
that • t 1* • t two of these persons vers oper'ted on. One
case v/'iS ; leg input tion. Following this operation, the
experimental subject vr.s killed and placed in a speciol
room where the dead were kept. !!::g?ka wrs able to obsrrvo
the corpse and av th t th*re w s only cnc leg. In the
second cas. tn abnormal woman w-.s oper.ted on by Lr. Fischer,
‘•hen he left the operating room he carried with hin o


- 20 -


bundle trapped up in linen bout the size of an arm. Ke
took this away with hi.:. The prison nurse ^uernhein
informed Mugzka th- t the whole era v.ith shoulder blade
w.3 removed f:oa this v.caun. (Hagzka, B. 1.48) i

The amputation of the srm end shoulder blade mentioned
by Dr. Magzke obviously refers to the transplantation per¬
formed on the o' tient Ladisch at Kchtnlychen. as to this,
the defendant Fischer st ted in his affidavit ns follows:

•Vs a disciple of Lexer, Gcbherfit had
already planned long ago u freo heteroplastic
transplantationof bone. In spite cf the
feet thtt sorx- cf his co-workers did not
•free, he was resolved, to carry out such an
onerction on the patient Lncisch, whose
shoul-’er Joint w .s removed because of a
snrconc.

"I nd ny medlcul colleagues urred pro¬
fessional and human objictions up until the
evening before the oporution was performed
but Gebh r-!t ordered us to carry out the
operations, doctor Stunrfeggcr, in whose
field of rest rch this operation ws, was
supposed to p< rform the removal of thu
scapula et .'.avensbruck, ind h-*d already
n.do initial arrangements therefor. How¬
ever, because Professor Gebh-rdt required
doctor otumpfe^ger to assist him in the
iCtu.l transplantution of the shoulder to
tho patient Lad inch, I wes ordered to go
to rtavensbruck are’, perform the operation
of removal on th t evening. 1 ask Doctor
Gobhirdt end Schulze to describe exactly
the technique which they wished no to
follow, -he next morning I drove to Bcvons-
bruck after I h.ve m.co a ^revi 'us eppoint-
aent by telephone. «t Kohenlychen I hi
t.lrerc’y made the normal initial preparation
for un operution, n-mely, scrubbing, etc.,
acrsly put on my coet, -nd vent to I'—vonsbruck
nd re nved. the bone.

"*nc camp physici-n who w: s assisting me in
the operation continued, with it while I
returned to Eohenlychen r.s quickly as
possible with the bono which was to be trans¬
planted. In this manner th- period betweon
removal end transplantation w-s shortened.

«t Hchenlychen tho bone raa handed -’ver to
Professor Gebhardt, and he tronspl-nted it,
ticcther with Doctor Schulze -nd Doctor
Stumpfegger-. (110-228, Pros. Ex. 206, H. 767).


Gebhardt admitted that he, together with Sturap-
fegger, personally performed the bone transplantation
operation on LadisCfc. He testified further that Fischer
only removed the scapula, shoulder blade, from the Polish
female innate at Raven3bruck« (R.4235). It is inpossible
to raise the err. above the horizontal if the scapula has
been removed. (Gobhardt, R. 4235). Gebhardt further ud-
nitted that Stunpfegger reported to hin on the bone ex¬
periments in P.avensbruck Concentration Camp. (R.4235).

The affidavit of Gustnwu Vinkcwska corroborates
the testimony of Hogzkc concerning the. transplantation of
whole limbs and ostabiishos that the experimental subjects
were later killed. (KO-865, Proa. Ex. 231, R. 930).

The witness Kar'»lewsk. wes a subject in both the
sulfanilamide and bone experiments. (Alexander R. 833,
836-7). She was operated on u total of six times. The
first operation was conducted on 14 August 1942 by Fischer.
(R.P19). Gebhardt inspected her early in September. (R.821).
Sbo was sent bock to her block on 6 September 1942, but
was unable to wulk and rent inod in bed for o week. On 16
Septenbor 1942 she woe again taken to the hospitul and
operatod on for the second time by Fischer. (R.821-2).

She left the hospitul on 6 October 1942 and remained in
bed for several weeks. Hor log did not heel until June
1943 (R.822-3). She filed a written protest with the Comp
Compandor, together with other experimental inmates, in
Februory 1943. In «ugu3t 1943 she v.us operated on liter¬
ally by foroe in the bunker at Ravensbruck. Both her legs
were cut open. These operations were carried out on five
other Polish cirls under indescribably filthy conditions.
(R.B27). On 15 September 1943 a further operation was


- 22 -


performed on her right leg by a doctor from Hohenlychen.

Two weeks later her left leg was operated on and pieces
of the shinbone were removed. She stayed in the hospital
for six nonth3 - until the end of February 1944. (R.8E8-9).

Kurolewska identified the defendants Gebhardt, Fischer
nnd Oberhcuser es having participated in the experiments
on her, (11.616,830).

The defendant Fischer porticipcted in these experi¬
ments until at least 23 February 1943. On that date he
carried out a second operation on Zofia BoJ. (NO-871, Pros.
Ex. 227, P.913) •

The uoet disgusting series of operations were those
f carried out in August 1943 in the bunker. The Polish girls

selected had revolted and refused to report to tho hospital.
The barraok block in which they had barrioodod thoosolvos
was then surrounded by mule guards who carried these women
off forcibly to the cunp prison, known as tho Bunker, where
they wore held down by these male guards and forcibly anaes¬
thetized without any pro-operative core, and with their
bod le3 still in u filthy condition from walking around the
cump. Tho experimental subject Piosecka stated in her
affidavit as follows:

"I resisted and hit Troamcr in the face
and culled him a bandit. He called some
SS wale cuords who threw ao on the floor
and held at- down while ether was poured
over ay fuce. There wes no mask. I fought
nnd resisted until I loot consciousness.

I was completely dressed and my le^o were
filthy dirty from walking in tho camp. «s
for ns I knew my legs were not washed. I
sew my sister during this time unconscious
on u stretcher, vomittirnr mucous." (N0-
864, Pros. Ex. 229, R.923).

Piosecka stated that this operation wns carried out

by Dr. Villnonn who was an assistant doctor et Hohenlychen.

i, fow weeks later two other assistant doctors to Gebhardt


- 23 -


caae and operated on her right leg. (NO.864, supra).

In his testimony Gebhardt attempted to disassociate
himself free, these experiments. He admitted however that
he received information from Stuspfegger ebout the experi¬
ments* (R.4082, 4087-9). Stumpfcgger was a former assis¬
tant of Gebhardt'a and he stayed at Hohenlychen during
the course of these experiments* Fischer assisted Stunp-
fegger and Gebhardt. (Gebhardt R.4230, 4090). It is fur¬
ther established by Fischer'3 own affidavit that the plan
for the experiments was worked out with the knowledge and
approval of Gebhardt,

C. Other Experiments

The proof shews that Gebhardt pleyed on important
role in other criminal experiments on concentration camp
inmates.

(1) High altitude and Froozing Experiments (In¬
dictment, Par. 6 (w) and (D)."

The criminal naturo of the high altitude experiments
io set forth In the Prosecution's brief on Ruff, Romberg,
end Weltz, while the freezing experiments uro described
in the brief on Sievors.

Gebhardt wu3 informed of the details of the high alti¬
tude and freezing experiments and, indcod, offered his assis¬
tance to Rascher. On 11 November 1942 the defendant Rudolf
Brandt udvisod Gebhardt that Hsaohor would soon be trans¬
ferred fr:m the Lu-owoffe to the ..’nffer.--.‘>S and. according to
instructions from Hi t.'.er, Rascher was to /jport to Gebhardt
concerning his exp-ri. ^r.ts. The letter further stated that
Roscher had conduoted high altitude end freezing experiments
in Dachau and that further experiments wero to be conducted
with respect to freezing. (NO-314, Pros. Ex. 98, R.330).

It is important to note that Rascher was instructed


to report to Gebhardt who at that time was hlose-If ccTry¬
ing out the sulfanilamide experiments in Ravensbruck. It
is quite apparent that Gebhardt occupied a very responsible
and confidential position with Himmler in regard to human
experimentation.

On 16 «pril 1943, in o letter to Ruscher, Rudolf Brandt
acknowledged receipt of a report on dry freezing experi¬
ments and adfiaed Rascher to report to Gebhardt who had al¬
ready received a copy of his paper in the freezing experi¬
ments. (NO-241, Pros. Ex. 113, R.355). A copy of the report
itself is not available, but it is’known fron Rnscher's
letter of 4 April 1943 thet it concerned the dry freezing
experiments which he was alio to perform duo to o poriod of
exceptionally oold weather in Dachau. This letter stated
that "certain people" were in the open i ir for 14 hours ut
minus 6 degrees Centigrade and that their internal temper¬
atures dropped to 25 degrees Ccntigrcdo with resulting
freezing of the extremities. (NO-292, Pros. Ex. Ill, R.354).

On 14 May 1943 Rancher personally roportod to Gebhardt
ut Hohonlychen about his oxocriments at Dochou. Gebhardt to>
Raschcr to task for having submitted tho results of his ex¬
periments to Himmler directly ;nd 3t>ited that it was his
task "to aergo all tho groups of physiol.: ns working indepen¬
dently within the SS, since that would suit tho iicichsfuehrf
nuch hotter than individual people working on their own".
Gebhardt encouraged Rascher to obtain university training
end told him that future reports "would h vo to bo trans¬
mitted through him to the Heichsfuehrer". Gebhardt reoues-
ted Rascher to submit him data concerning hi3 personal
end scientific career. 'Then Gebhardt objected to the scion
tific character of some of Rascher’s experiments, Rascher


replied thet "ell of the physiological-chemical experiments
which could be carried out in D&chou hsd indeed been con¬
ducted". (NO-231, Pros. Ex. 116, R.360). From tnis con¬
versation Hoscher obtained the impression that he actually
was working for Gebhardt end that his approval for further
experiments hnd to be obtained.


Haschei* - impressed by Gebhardt's advice to enter upon
a university career - decided to apply for admission as an
academic lecturer cnc chose the high altitude end freezing
experiments os the theme for his treatise. The history of
his medical work which he wrote for this purpose was trans¬
cribed on the some day that he reported to Sievers on his
conversation with Gebhardt. (N0-230, Pros. Ex. 115, R.356).

On 11 June 1943 Gebhardt wrote to Rudolf Brandt stat¬
ing that he had seen Raschor and that they had "quickly
come to an ogreemeue". The lettor continued:


"he Rnschar
result.8 or-,
neod furth.;-
i3 zr.ly pous
for this tr,
ha- ox.]aiua
r.c/ t.o v.v.m
bo raker. Vv
my jo if i*j cr
issued to }.«•
exist, cun •/
pi in hod", «


/ himself emphasizes thut the
still incaa.oloto as yet and
corroboration. This, however,

Mo if the r."Ccaoury apparatus
c of work Is available. Raocher
— that in h'« latter, I beg you
no, if the ;»cej3cry steps ore to
you through t ;o • i.r»cnorbe' or by
to the n^edod npparutus
'Cher, Cnir If t»iese nr< requisites
' relent If is work bo accom-


vv


Iron. Ex. 459, R.423V).


(2) Polygal T- ■.■•riTonts


Gebhnrdt also cocmroted with lercher on the Polygol
experiments. Polygal wnj the nora rivan to a blood coagulant
developer- by Rcwrte* in Dachau. In order to test the effec-
tlvcnesc oi this cor./rulnnt he carried o-t experiments in
which concentration camp inmates were shot. (HO-438, Pros,
r.x. 240, R.95G; NO-1424, Pros. Ex. 462, R.4773; Stoehr, R.587).
Gebhnrdt wns consulted by Himmler about Rascher's research
with Polygol and Gebhardt convinced him that future experi¬
ments would be necessury under his supervision. (HO- 612 ,


- 26 -


Pros. Ex. 241, R.961). Gebhardt admitted during his testi¬
mony that he knew that Rascher had carried out blood coag¬
ulation experiments on concentration ccmp inmates who hod
been shot for that purpose# (Gebhardt, R.4240-1).

(3) Sepsis (Phlegmor.e) Experiments.

Sepsis experiments were performed in the Dachau Con¬
centration Cnnp beginning in the autumn of 1942. These ex¬
periments were carried out in order to test the effectiveness
of bio-chemical treatment of 3epsis end related diseases.

The witness Stochr testified concerning those experi¬
ments. He stated that sepsis was artifically provoked by
infecting the concentration ccnp inmates who were used as
oubjocts with pus. (P.5?e-9). Ho knew of ct least two
series of experiments. In each of these series approximate¬
ly half of the experimental innntos wore treated by bio¬
chemical means and the othor half with sulfonamide. The first
series consisted of 20 German concentration comp innatos of
whom seven died as a result. For the second sorles, 40 clergy¬
men of various nationalities wore selected and 12 died us a
rooult of tho experinents. (Stochr, R.581-2). Tho experi¬
mental subjects did not volunteer. (Stoohr, R. 590). See
also the Review of Proceedings of tho General Military Court
In U.S. v. '‘'oiss, ct ol. (NO-856, Tros. Ex.125, R.306).

It is quite clear that tho bio-chemical experiments
performed in Dachau were complementary to the sulfanilamide
experiments by Gebhardt in Rnvcnsbruck. This is shown by
the fact that in Soptomber 1942, while the sulfanilamide
experiments were still in progress, Gebhardt received a
copy of a report on th6 bio-chemical experiments in Dachau
from Grawitz. (N0-109, Fro3. Ex.249, R.979). This report
shows on its face that approximately eight cases of sepsis
were artifically provoked. Tho report dealt with the results
obtained from experiments carried out on 40 concentration


- 27 -


comp inmates in treating sopsis, phlegmone, furnucles, ab-
cesses, and nephrosis, among others. Ten of the experi¬
mental subjects died. The report also covered three sepsis
cases in Auschwitz, all of then died. It concluded with the
statement that the experiments were being continued.

The case history of one of the experimental subjects
artif ici .lly infected with pus in November 1942 shows the
horrible pain which these victia3 Suffered. (NO-994, Pros.

Ex. 251, R.985).

That the defendants Gcbhnrdt and Fischer had more than

a casual connection with the sepsis experiments in Dachau is

proved by a handwritten notation by Gebhcrdt on a letter

written by Grawitz to Hlcnler on 7 September 1942, atteching

copies of the preliminary report by Gebhcrdt on his aulfa-

f nilanidc experiments, together with the report on tho sepsis

experiments in Dachau. (NO-2734, Pros. Ex. 473, R.5622).

This note reuds us follows:

"16 September 1942.

Settled, after conversation
with hF-S3. Obor3turnfuohrer
F. Fischer has boon given new
instructions for Rcvensbruck
and pnehsu . Gebhcrdt".

Tophus is supplied)

(4) Sterilization experiments (Indictment, Pnr. 6 (I)),
t Gebhardt also participated in the criminal steriliza¬

tion experiments carried out on Jewish concentration enmp
f inmatos. By 1941 it was the accepted policy of the Third

Reich to exterminate tho Jewish population of Germany and
the occupied countries (IKT Judgment, R.16902 et. seq.).

On 30 May 1942, Dr. Claubcrg wrote to Himmler asking
his support of sterilization experiments on female concentra¬
tion camp inmates (NO-211, Pros.Ex. 169, R.554). This letter
bears a handwritten notation reeding, "'..'ednesday, 8 July".

On 7 ana 8 July a conference took pluC6 between Himmler,
Gebhardt, Gluecks, and Clauberg. Tho topic of discussion
was the sterilization of Jewesses. Clauberg was promised


- 28 -


that the Auschwitz Concentration Comp would be put at his
disposal for experiments on human beings and aninals. He
was requested to discover by means of fundamental experi¬
ments a method of sterilizing persons without their know¬
ledge. It was requested thet o report on this natter be
subnit ted as soon as possiblo so that measures could be
taken "for the practicable realization of the sterilization
on a larger scel6"* It was aiso suggested that Hohlfclder
be consulted on the sterilization of nen by X-rays. The
participants in the conference were admonished that these
experiments were a natter of utmost secrecy. The file nemor-
onda on these conferences were signed by the defendant Rudolf
Brandt. (NO-216, Pros. Ex. 170, R.565; NO-215, Pros. Ex. 172,
f R.568). In onswor to this proof the defendant Cebhardt

could only deny that ho wus present at such meetings.

' On 10 July 19*12 Clauborg wj 3 ordered to report to

Himmler on how long it would take to sterilize one thousand
Jewesses by his method. In this letter it was suggested that
the experiments be carried out in the Ravonsbruck Concentra¬
tion Comp, whore Cebhardt was Just beginning his sulfanila¬
mide experiments. (NO-213, Pros. Ex. 171, R.567). On 7 June
19-13 Cluuberg was able to report on the basis of his experi¬
ments that it would bo possible to sterilize several hundred,

* if not oven a thousand, por Ccy by his method. He stated

that sterilization could bo "performed by a single injection
made from the ontrance of the uterus in the course of the

usucl customary gynnocologic examination." (NO-212,

Pros. Ex. 173, R.570). The sterilizat; experiments of
Clauberg wore in fact carried out in the Auschwitz Concen¬
tration Camp as shown by his letter of 6 August 19*12 to the
defendant Rudolf Brandt in which he requests a second X-ray
installation for his experimental work in Auschwitz. (N0-210,
Pros. Ex. 174, R. 572).


- 29 -


Sterilization experiments on male concentration camp
inmates were nlso carried out in the Auschwitz Concentra¬
tion Camp by means of X-ray aft surgical castration on a
largo scale. (Levy, It.556-9), Sterilization by means of
drugs was also attempted. (NC-0S6, Pros. Ex. i43, R.512).

(5) Seawater Experiments.

Gebhardt's position with respect to medical experi¬
ments on concentration camp inmates became so important that
on 15 Hay 19-14 Himmler required on opinion from Gebhardt be¬
fore cny experiments could bo carried out on inmetos. This
order of Himmler's stated thet ell medical experiments to
be carried out in concentration coops had to have his per3on-
i al approval. All offices within the S3 which deemed it neces¬

sary to carry out medical experiments in the concentration
1 camps were required to submit an application to Crcwitz, the

Rcichscrzt S3 end Police. This oppliention had to state
the problem involvod, the effect of the experiments to bo
Oflrried out, the nuctoer of prisoners required, and the ap¬
proximate duration of the experiment. Crcwitz was required
to submit ouch application to Himmler after having secured
the critical opinion of the Chief Clinical Officer of the
SS (Gebhardt) concerning the technical aspects and the opin-
\ ion of Nobe and Cluecks. (MO-919, Pros. Ex. *60, R.4244).

Nebe was the head of the criminal police in the RSHA while
Gluocks WG3 in chrrgo of all concentration camp3 under Oswald
Pohl in tho Economic and administrative Hein Office of the SS.

It goes without 3oying that tho defendant Gebhardt was
informed of and gave his approval to all experiments on con¬
centration cemp inmates carried out 3fter 15 Hoy 1944. It
is apparent that he w.~s also fully advised as to experiments
which wore then in progress as otherwise he would be in no
position to mak6 an enlightened Judgment on the necessity for
new experiments.

- 20 -


The seawater experiments were the subject of a con¬
ference cf Luftwaffe medical officers on 23 May 1944. It
was decided at this conference that experiments to test the
potability of seawater processed by a new method were neces¬
sary. Since it was anticipated that deaths would occur dur¬
ing the course of th6 experiments it was resolved to request
the experimental subjects from Himmler. * report on this
conference wa3 sent to Himmler and a handwritten notation
at the end of the report shows that it was passed on to
Gethardt. This notation by Gebhcrdt stotes that "Asocial
gypsies" should be provided by the RSH« (Keich Security Mein
Office). (NO-177, Pros. Ex. 133, R.483).

On 28 June 1944 Growitz, in accordance with the order
of Hiimlor of 15 Hay 1944, wrote to Himmler giving him the
comments of Gcbhnrdt, Gluecks, and Nebo on the proposed sea¬
water experiments. Gebhnrdt's comment wes, "I deem it ab¬
solutely right to support the Luftwaffe in every way and to
pl-ce u goncrul physician of the Wcffon-SS at hi3 disposal
to oup-rvise the experiments". Nebo sponsored Gebhardt's
suggestion to uso gypsies in the experiments, to which Grow-
itz objected on the ground that they were of somewhat differ¬
ence racial composition than Germans. Himmler approved the
proposod experiments on gypsies with throe others for control.
(NO-179, Pros. Ex. 135, R.465).

For u description of the criminality of these experi¬
ments rcforer.ee nay be nedo to the Proseoution's brief on
Schroed*r.

(6) Gns Experiments (Indictment, Par. 6 (D)).

The Lost gas experiments ccrrled out by Hirt on in¬
mates of the Natzveilcr Concentration Camp continued from
November 1942 until autumn 1944. (Holl, R.1051 et scq.).
Siovers had full knov;lcdge cf the experiments by Hirt (NO-015,
Pros. Ex. 275, R.1039), and he received a copy of Himmler's


order of 15 May 1944 requiring 6ebhordt*s pemission for
experiments after that date, any new requests for prisoners
by Kirt necessarily hed to ooae to Gebhardt's attention.

For a description of the originality of these experiments,
reference nay be node to the Frosecution's brief on Sievcrs.

On 22 November 1944 Grawitz wrote to Hinnler sugfest-

ing oxperlnents on inmates to test the effect of a gas

knewn os "N substance" on and through the human skin. In

accordance with tlu> order of 15 May 1944 Gebhardt approved

tfro exporlaents in the following words:

"I on certainly in cgroor.ent with
the suggestion and request that the
directions for the supervision of
tho carrying out be issued directly
by the Roichsnrzt SS and Police".

(NO-005, Pros. Ex. 279, R.1043).

(7) Epidenlc Jaundioo (Indictment, Par. 6 (H)).

On 29 January 1945 Mrugowsky wrote to Grawitz request¬
ing approval for epidonic Jaundico experiments on 20 suit¬
able prioonors at the typhus experimental station in Buchcn-
wuld. He stated that it wa3 nocossnry to make experiments
on hu/Qun beings in order to determine whether a virus cul¬
tivated by S3 Dr. Dresel was the effective virus in hepatitis
cpidenioa. Gcnerularzt Schreiber was supporting this re¬
search. (NO-1303, Pros. Ex. 467, R. 5400).

Tho Hinnler order of 15 May 1944 required thut this
request for jaundice experiments be approved by the defend¬
ant Gebhardt.

(8) Poison Exporiaents (Indictment, Far. 6 (K)).

a description of the criminality of the poison experi¬
ments is set forth in the Prosecution's brief on Mrugcwsky.

On 11 September 1944 Mrugcwsky and Ding carried out
an experiment v-ith aconitin nitrate projectiles on five
inmates of the Sachsenhousen Concentration Cemp. The subjects


were shot in the upper part of the thigh with projectiles
which were filled with crystallized poison. Three of the
experimental subjects died after suffering horrible agony
for two hours. IN0-201, Pros. Ex. 290, R. 1303; Kogon,

R. 1186). Additional poison experiments were carried out
in October 1944 on six Russian prisoners of war in the
Bucher.wald Concentration Cenp. a11 th6 experimental sub¬
jects were killed. (Kogon, Ft. 1184-6; 110-265, Pros. Ex.287,
R. 1317, entry for 26 October 1944).

Both of these experiments occurred after the order of
15 May 1944 end Gebhnrdt's approvcl wes necessurily required.

(9) Miscellaneous.

*

4

The naluria experiments in Dachau and the typhus cx-
j pcrlmonts in Buch6nwald and ITatzwoiler wore continued well

beyond May 1944. Eonowed roquost3 for inmates used in these
experiments aftor that dote wore subject to Gebhnrdt's ap¬
proval pursuant to the ordor of 15 Muy 1944. Moreovor,
Grawitz and persons subordinated to him were closely con¬
nected with those experiments as well as the incendiary
bomb experiments in Buchenwnld in November 1943 and Gebhurdt,
os one of the chief functionaries in Grawitz' office, must
^ hnve been informed of these experiments. Even assuming that

Gebhnrdt wa3 not familiar with the details of these experi-
^ ment3, the proof has been established beyond doubt that he

was connected with plon3 und enterprises involving tho
sy3toa-:tlc experimentation on involuntary human subjects
end ho is therefore responsible for these experiments urrier
the terns of Paragraph 2 of article Two of Control Council
Law No. 10.


- 33 -


III. Conclusion .

Gebhardt personally Initiated and assumed full
responsibility for the sulfanilamide experiments. He
performed some of the operations and artificial Infections
of the Polish women used as subjects. Five of the
subjects dlod as a direct result of the experiments. His
contention that the Polish victims, who are claimed to
have boen condemned to death, were saved by undergoing
the experiments Is no defense. Those women were not
afforded a trlnl. They did not consent to the experiments.
They protested orally, physically, and In writing. There
la no ovldencc that the Governor Goncral of occupied
I Poland evor acted on their pardon applications ns roqulrod

by German law. Moreover, six of the experimental eubjeots
woro executed after having survived the experiments.

The bone, nusolc, and nervo regeneration, and bono
transplantation experiments woro conducted In the onmo
place, during the same period of tlmo, and on the anno
group of vlctlna no the sulfnnllnnido experiments. Without
tho latter, the former would never have taken place. Tho
surgical plan for those experiments was drawn up by
* Fischer, in cooperation with Stunpfegger, on orders of

f Oobh- rdt. Fincher, who was directly subordinated to

Gebhardt, actively participated In the experiments. Stump-
fogger was stationed In Hohonlychcn during these exporlmonts
and he ronortod on them to Gebhardt. Gebhardt personally
performed a bone transplantation experiment on the patient
Lndlsoh. Tho concentration camp Innate from whom the
bone was removed wa3 Inter killed.

Gebhardt was acquainted with the details of the

experiments participated In by Rn6cher In Dachau, Including

- 34 -


the high nltltude, freezing, and blood coagulation experi¬
ment . He discussed these experiments with Rasoher
personally and offered material support. Polygal, a
blood coagulant tested by shooting Inmates, was studied
by Gephardt In Hohenlychcm

Gcbhnrdt had knowlcdgo and Issued Instructions to
Fischer respecting the murderous sepsis experiments In
Dachau. They wero supplementary to the sulfanilamide
experiments In Rnvenobruck.

Ho participated In conferences concerning sterilization
experiments on Jowieh female Inmates of Auschwitz.

After 15 -lay 1944 all experiments on concentration onrap
lnrantoo h-d to bo a. proved by Gcbhardt. Ho sanctioned the
sor.water experiments In Dachau and urged the use of ■ asocial
Gypsies". Ho approved experiments on Inantos with gas. His
approval was required with respect to poison experiments which
wore conducted ftcr Uny 1S44, ns well no proposed cpldomlo
Jaundice ovrcrlaonts.

The Prosecution submits th*t the evldonco proves that
Oobhardt was a • rlnolpal In, accessory to, ordered, abetted,
took •» consenting part In, «nd was connected with pl"ns »>nd
enter rises Involving medical experimentation on human
subjects without their consent, In the course of which
experiments murders, brutalltlos, crueltios, tortures,
atrocities, *nd othor Inhumane nets wore connlttcd, and
that his *ullt has been established under Counts I, II,

III, and IV of the Indictment.

- 35 -


MILITARY TRIBUNAL NO. I
CASE NO. 1


CLOSING ERIE? FOR
THE UNITED STATES OF- AitERICA
AGAINST
ILiRL GENZKE?:


Jnnec K. HoHancy

Alexander G. Hardy
Arnost Horllck-Hochwald
Esther Jnno Johnson

For:

Telford Taylor

Brigadier General, U.S.A.,

Chief of Counsel for War Crime.


Nurnberg,

16 Juno 1947.


litfHOLUCnON


It l e r.llc ycl un-cr C-unt One of the In lctncnt
thrt the ..tfon.nnt, Genzkcn, conspire. an.. a reed with
.tr.ore, .ursuant t, a c r. . n tBi.-n t -erf rn uc.il oal
experiments ~n lnv luntnry human subjects; under C unts
Twi,nndrihroe (War Crimes rind Crimes against Humanity,
respectively), that he was a principle in, access ry t ,
rderuu, aotrttod, t.:k a ensentin.* part in, and was
c nneotud with plans ami enterprises lnv Ivin.* nodical
experiment vti :n on inv-.luntnry human subjects; and
unaer C unt v ur, th t he wan a ner.t..r, after 1 Septem¬
ber 1939, i the 33, an r anitati n declared t- bo
criminal by the International military Tribunal.

Thu defendant Genzkcn 1 b ,>artloulnrly char. od
with hnvin, participate in the typhus experiments, net
forth in Para raph 6 (J) f the In..lctncnt, and the
sulfanilauidu experiments set l* rth in Paragraph 6 (hi).

The Pr-Bocutl n, in r.._r t simplify the issues, hno
horut f re withdrawn the chnr e f hnvin. participated in
the p is n mi., incendiary t:a*J experiments cot : rth in
parr; raphe e (k) an . 6 (L), respectively. In a ltl n,
the pr oucutl II herewith with raws too char e f havin'
participate.; In the pea water experiments as Pot forth
in par:, raph 6 (0) f the In..lot unt. Ir.us, the charge
a ‘nliist vionzXen f havln p-.rtlcl >ntc. in criminal ric lcnl
experiments rests upon his c nneotl n with the typhus ex¬
periments in Puchenwsild, togoth-r with other vaccine oxptr*
und the withdrawal or blood for tynhr.3 oonvaloscense serum at
blood plasma, with the sulfanilamide experiments, ind with ti
freezing ,nd other oxperi: *nts conduotod »by Dr. Ru30hcr ’ind tl
sterilization. BXT»«rtment3 by Dr. Clouber.


- 1 -


I. Posit i ons f Res . .ns c lllty

Tnc defendant iK.-nry.cn ns Cnlof r the Lc-icnl Survlco
i the vrnffen-53 was, t -ether with Reichnrzt S3 Grawitz,
tne hi. h«et rankin.. aeulcal .rflccr in the S3.

Gunzkcn served ns a mc.ioal >filcer durln.- the first
./irld ‘.'.nr. Ho entered the ncnlool service f the Goman
Navy in Ku *ust 1912 and Serve.. :is :;n ffiocr until N ven¬
ter 1919. ho was in the private practice f nodlclno
until Oct -or 193 -j wnun he .-..v.ln was c nnlsnlnod ns n
Hosurvo Officer In tiio i.'nvy. ho J Inc ‘ the Natl Party in
1926.

On March 1, 1956 ho transferred t the SS /1th the
rank -f Sturnbnnnfuehrer (MnJ r) rjiu we an si no.’, t the
Medical fiice .f t;.e S3 Special o. rvlco fr ps (SS-Vor-
fuo un stru .io), outseiyiiontly t ao o the Waffun-SS.
ho was ale appointed Chief iiiyslclan f the S3 H spitnl
In borlin an.. .ircol .. the H* lord Service sah. .1 (Snnl-
t/iotn-ochuelo) attached tnorot >•

In t:iu sprla * t 1957, the Medical 01‘iicu (jnnltnu-
tsumt) ..1 the S3 was unlnr. ou an.: split into tw dopnrt-
Monts. Uvnzkon was un..c l:*. ct r f the department ohnr/rc'l
with the supply f no leal equlpnent an.i the su i. rvir.l n f
nodical >uru nnol In t*e c neontrati n can. u. In this
capacity h'. wap th.. lu leal adv? s r t Eloke, the- c'nnan-
ur f /ill c noonir.tl n c? . .s, fhe « nccntratl n corps
f Suohsenhuuson, Dachau, buohonw/ild, Lnuthnuson, Kl^ssen-
bur.- and liuon ■nm o, whloa Were t.-.u principal camps then
in existence, ’Toro un or hlu iu leal Juris dctl n. It was
his duty t ins ect tnooo coups. (Ccnzkon, R. 38-?3). Ho
•.etc. In that capacity until Septet e-r 1959.

ftfter havKa activate, t e ^r 1 ,. i •• 1 butr-oll n r.f
the 3rd Pnnzor Grenadier Dlvisl n, Gcnzkcn was a p lnt. d


- 2 -


Chief of the He. lcal Office -i the Vnffcn 53, which was
Office VII in the 33 Operational neuuquurtors (33 Fuehrun. 6-
hnuptnnt), with the rank cl O-erfUehror (Senl:r Colonel).
ih« 33 Op©rati:nnl Hen.;quarters wn6 subordinates: t Obcr-
ruppunfuohrer hans Juettncr an. was no if the twelve
touln . 1’llCeB f the Su^rer.o C r;:..nno -f the 33. (NO—>16,

?r',s. Ex. 22, R. 121). -ftille Jucttner wa6 GcnzJ.cn'r,
nilltary superior, his technical r radical su»iri;r was
Relchuarzt 33 Gra./itz : r wfcaz. he s- rv. ns uputy n many
-eoasins. (NO-439, Prcx. Ex. 24, R. 122). he retained
t.iia position until the- un> f tho war, .ut in 1042 his
position oeoarue kn wn as the C iluf : t.ie . iodl Service
f tho Stiffen 33, Division D of tuo SS Operational Head¬
quarters. ho was pr r. tuu t the run;: of brl.ndufuohror
un.i finally n January 30, 1943, t tne rank M Grupnen-
fuehror and Generalioutnunt f tho Waffon 33.

as Chief it tho ^o..icnl Service f the « f uflon S3,
Gonzkon was responsl lo f~r the trnlnlr. , nctlv-tl n, and
porf rcuvnoo .f □ecionl unite f t.-.e .'ciffun 33. -lion such
units wore ocur.ltted t the fr nt, t-ctlonl o ntr 1 puesod
t tho defendant nnndloser ns /*roy Muolonl Inspector,

'i'he facts not f :rth a- ve ixro pr;vod ty the affidavit
of Oenzhon (NO-439, supra), und his tepti:- ny. (R. 3774-78).

Four offices were out or. .inr.teh t Gcnzkcn in tho 33
Opomtl nttl Hea quarters, — Offloo XIII, i!e leal Service
r;r Tr pn, Office XIV, Dental Service, Office XV, Chenloal
nn«l PhamnouUtlool 5ervloo under Bluuonroutor, and Ofl'lou
XVI, Hy -iono under t.,e de-fendant llru -owsky. (HO—*16, Pros.
Ex. 22, R. 121; Oenskcn, R. 3845-6). hru wsky was attaOhcd
t: Genzken'6 iffioo as n hy lenlst in lt-40 was at the
sane title Chief -f the hy iene Institute f the Vafl'on 33
which, in turn, was su. r..innte' tz Gunzho-n. (uo.nzen, R.
5778, 3846; NO-416, supra). This su* ralnation c ntinued


- 3 -


until 31 «u U8t 19-sO.

On 1 3epteraber 1043, t o ae ileal service f the S8 was
reor* nniatd. This involve., naan - other thin6, the trans¬
fer of cluu-nreuter, Hru.:iW6ky an;’, the Hy.’lene Institute of
the- iinffon 63 t: the Office- of the Reichsarzt S3 and police,
pr.f. Dr. Ernst Grawitz. Thereafter the direct subordination
wr.s to Grawitz rather than Genzkcn. (HO—117, Pr:a. Ex. 23,

R. 121; NO-416, supra; NO-723, rr e. Ex. 2D, H. 131).

II. pers;nfvl Participa tion I n Ori gina l gyp prl mentat ion
«. T^hue .and Otpcr Vaccine E y.»url ncnt6 (In. ictnent,

pi raT e rjy

(1) Vv.<nus „x.:* rlr.en ta In bucr_m?nl_.

Ihu typhus experiments at ouohunvald were carried rut
oy officers un er the c.:unnJ t Gvnzken. The criminal
oiiaraotor -f these experiments io described in the Prose¬
cution 1 8 brier ,n lira wsky. The oxperli.cnts w«ro perftraod
with hie kn ,/O.u... e an a.»pr. val. He in the-rof r« responsible
f .r the uilf -1 . ur .era recultln.- :r a these experiments.
a Mlloatl .i, ' 1' Yariaonlt' , tt 3. Ct. 340, 36 (l'J-16).

Dr. Din -sohuler, a ..leal iflOur f the Waffon S3,
wud ulrectly in char e of the ty .hu8 oxpurlsu. nts in buohen-
wald auejoct to the jr..ero and cuporvisl.n :r tr.c defendant
;..ru ;v/Bky. Prior t. 1039, Din ha.', been the- can,* physician
in buohunwalu, (h-.-on, H. lib-*), und was thus sucsrdlnatod
to Gun then. Durin* tne Preach coronal n, Din. served as
adjutant t Guntken an they uuon&u ore nil friends. (Genz-
kon, H. 3611). In January, lJi2, Dir. - be can the typhus
ux;.eri ents in ouche-nwald. r.c was Attached t the Hy lcne
Institute -.i* the War fun S3 and the experimental and vaccine
pr . uct1 n blocks in Buchunwal.* became kn *n as the Depart¬
ment f-.r Typhus and Virus f t:.e Hy ieno In.-tltute, This
is clearly s: wn n the chart drawn by tne efen duit hru-
.-owsky. (NO-416, Pros. Ex. 22, R. 121).


Genzken adnits th t k u -sky on- tac Hy lone Institute
r the tfnffen S3 were eue.rdlnatod t. hln prior to 31 *u.-ust
19-13 and that they w c r«. subject t his orders. (R. 38-17).
no further fdnits that Din was his sue;rdlnnto up until
ho Le..nn the crlnlnal experiments In buohenwald. There¬
after, ho maintains, Din • was subordinate. t*. the dead Gru-
wltz. (H. 33-17). .vesunin.: for the u oont the truth of
ti.ls Bulf-servln testla~ny, Gonzkon went n to state:

"Fr.n that tine on ay aenay only ha., t-» take oare ol* his
e-x -ensos because he h -u toon attached t another n.-enoy
im' then when no bud.*et existed tv t u now plaoe t« which
he was attached we had t take cure i is expenses -and
that a olio-, in tkljJ caso . a (R. 3317) (&aphnol8 supplied).
Thus, -y the de fondant 1 e wn a. aissl n, his office supplied
tae fun .o necessary f r the typhus experiments. « -aln
assualn.- th-.t Din was attaohei. t Grawltz, tain could not
have been ne with ut tho kn wl - and a. r val f Genzken,

hlo c ii.njnnilln^ officer, ho had t o nr.ont to the use f
Din f>r the buonenwald experimento.

’ihe pr f chows, h WyVer, that Din. -md hru.rowoky wore
continually subordinate, t Gunz-.en until 31 nu.Tist 19-13.
iiio question is n.t whether Grawltz was tho superl .r of
Din or kru* wsky, eut rathor whether Gunthen wa6 In tho
chain of o unwind between Din ana Grawltz. no already
p'lntod ut, Oeiizi cn himself state., that Grawltz was his
nodical superl r. ihe su. stMitlnl p-.rtlclp itl-'n f Gra-
witz In theso experiments In a sense oxculpatos Genzkon.
lhu evl once establishes th. t Gonzkon was In tho chain of
ocaaand an that Din .and kru wsky were directly subordin¬
ated t- hln. fho defendant kru. *sky stated In paragraphs
-i and l> f l-.ls affidavit as f -11 ws:

"Gonzkon wa6 uy lane, late superior fr n


1S40 until Sop tenter 1, 1543. .t that tine n re-
:r. anlz* tl-n of the S3 aie-ic/il Service was carried
ut nnu I was placuu -;ir«.ctly un.er Dr. Gr.nwltz,
then Reich Physician SS and Police. In the -£.*in-
nin. f 15*12, Dr. GenrJ.cn -rdcre.i the f undr.tl n cf
the Dc.»- rtnent f r Sp:‘« tod hvar and Virus Research
rtt Gne Hy.'lciie Institute of the Waff on SS In the
csuc:.enw\ld Oneantrati:n Cnnp in. n.pintodDr. Din.'
as C-.ilcf f tnls . e.»‘irtnent. «8 I was /1 that tine

Ci:1 u 1 f j>i it XVI 'hy ione' In the S3 Operational Hnln
Office, I was ti _ inn i'-te ouporior of Dr. Din.-,
ihu nnr.e >f x:ls department was or-sen in order t-
□j.hc clear the similar purposes l ti.is Institute
for the Waffen 33 and f the Institute for o,.ottud
FoV.r and Viru6 Ro6eiirc:. of the OKh (Snprenu nrny
O.araand) In Crno-w under MaJ r Dr. Eyer.

“Dr. GensX.cn Incw, ns u matter f c:urec, that
the Institute was f:un.l«. for t.»c purp;se of pro¬
viding the Waffen o3 with an efficient vaocinu
a.r.inst sp tted fcVer. In t:ic iX.,»artnunt f-r Spotted
Fever and Virus Roseurch -.t cue: nwal ., nodical ex¬
periments n lunate b f tno buch..nwnl.i 0 nccntrutlcn
Cany were onrri* ut 'ey Dr. Dl.i In r.'cr t lotemlne
the effect f vari us 3pott. Fe-v. r Vaccines." (HC-423,
Pr -B. Ex. 262, R. 1036).

Para raphe -1 an.’, f. f the affidavit f the defendant
H:von, who ./.r e on these experiments with Din*-, roads
as follows:

"In the later part of 1541 an experimental
station was ustnollened In the cuohenw.ald Concen¬
tration Carjp In rder t lotorninc the effective¬
ness of vari us Spotted Fever vaoelnoo. This de¬
part! out was called tho 'Spotted avvr Exporlnontal
3tatl n 1 (Fleckflcuur sst tl n-Att. fuor

FlooXfleuor und Virus Fcroohun ) in. was under the
rirwet cupervlsl ri f Dr. Din , /alas 5ohuUr. This
experimental ctntl n was Set up In 31 cX 46 f the
o?uap. The Hy -lune Institute f the Jaffun 33 In
Berlin, under the c nnnnd f Dr. Joaohlu i'.ruc*woXy,
received ail the r«, rts f these activities and Dr.

Din t ./ r ore fr n liru.joweky. In the early days,
tl t is uctvfuen 1541 mw the summer if 1943, Dr.

Din h u/oay .ie- tin.o In Berlin with Dr. Furl GciizXen
c.ncernln • hla w rX at suohonwold In c nnectl-.n with
tne 3> tea teVcr ex .crl iints. Dr. Din,* t 1.1 Uu that
Dr. Uunakoii had a Gpeclnl Interest In these natters
aunt : 1 i n....!'lu ut V'll .uo tl . Dr.

Din. ' Is* O'.id th- t Dr. Kurl uenzien was ne *.f hlo
auperl-rs. Fr.n ny as: elation with Dr. Din,- 1 undor-
st" .d th t e cn-la of euanund In the KUpurvlsi.n of
the '3/'tU.. Fever Experimental 3tr.tl a' was as fal¬
lows: Relohsarrt 3S Grawits, G enz en, i;ru.-/wsXy and Dlnr.

■I can rue lloCt that Dr. Gcnzken v.Ve rders to
D r . Din • in Jnnu.-.ry 1143 t: enlar. e the experimental
station, iit t ;lr. tin, blook 50 was cleaned ut /md
Made liit- a statl-n f.r the productl-.n cf the various


- 6 -


.


vaccines t- be use- in the experiments nt Block 46.

Fj-'n this time on the experimental station was known
ns 'Department for Sonlted Fever and Virus Research
of the Hy lune Institute .i the {ittun S3.' Then in
the summer 1* 19-ib, Dr. Genzlen turned nil his duties
over to Dr. Kru -owslcy and fr a that Lino oft Genzkon
no lon»;c-r actively porticip: ted in those matters. I
cun reonll u-ctin t - Dr. Mru- .wshy, in the hamc *f Dr,

Din, , cn one cf his visits to Buchenwald." (H0-429,
Pros. £x. 281, R. 1080).

The witness Ko£'.n testified that Din.* corresponded
ilTlolally witn Genzk.cn in connection wltn the typhus
oXf-e-rlnunts in buohonwald. (R. 1187). They also carried
on a private o;rroopon<;uno«*« Kor n further stated that
Din had participated in the French Conpnl.jn as adjutant
tr Gonzken who “had u special wouknos a for Dim;" and pro¬
tected him; that fret, the exc. an u f letters between Genz-
ken and Din-: nnd fr:n statements ..y Din.-, ho knew that
Genzkun r.o Chief l* the he lical Service ?t the Yfnffon 39
was the supurl r l Uru. owck.y an*'. Din ; that in the sunuor
of 19-ib hru •■-.wofcy'fl im open lunoa increased eut Din.- rooletod
this ohr.n o und wnnte to h-cp :enzkon as his chief; that
flnully in the Into summer of 1943, Uru - WBfcy boonr.o the
Bele chief cf Din . ( Y. n, R. 1200-2). The latter part

of this testimony hue ol vl'uo reference ti tho roor. nnlza-
tl n of tho nodical service f tnu S3 in /»u,-uct 1943, when
Uru -owsky'e eutordlnati n was onam ud fr j. Gonzken to
Gr/iwltz. Kcr n testified ti. t Gunzk.n, as the chief f Dim;
was inf rnod or the typhus experiments in Block -«6 pri r
to nui nct 19-13. Din c ntinued t : c rroBpond with Genzkon
anu repeatedly invited hln t visit "his oh p" in buohen-
W'lcl, (hot n, R. 1202). Jletzsoh, the kape in Blook 46,
states in his affidavit that Din. t Id hln Gonzk.en did
visit the experimental station. (NO-1314, Pros, tx. 433,

R. 20-10).

That Din.: was su.. rdlnatod t Genzkon is c ncluslvoly


- 7 -


established by the entry f r 9 January 194o in the Din.*

Diary, which reads as follows:

“By order f the Sur. eon General f the
Waff on SS, SS-^ruppenfuehrcr ana KaJ. Gen. (Gcnorr.i-
lcutnant) of the VTaffen 33, Dr. Genzken, the hitherto
c-xistin. s »otteil fe-vor research statir-n at the c n-
centration caap Buchonwald tec ccs thu 'Department
for Spotted FoVe-r an.: Virus Res arch. 1 Thu head of
the department will oc SS-Sturn unnfuehrer Dr. Dint*.

Durln - his a-senco, the st iti n a alonl officer 'f
the v/aflcn SS Jolnor, SS-Hauptstumfuehror H-von will
BULorvioe the pr.ductl n of vncolnes. The chief 1
the Ko.nrela and nonlnistratlve Henaquartors, S3-0ber-
, ruppunfuehror and Lt. Gon. (.General) f the Wofion
33 p-.hl, orders the extcnel m of .-lock of ot-n« bulla-
ln,js.

“aS-StunaeannfuBhrer Dr. Din. is appointed at
the boibo time as chief department head f: r special
missions in aiat XVI (Hy.leno), f the ,*roup depart¬
ment (itiuts ruppe) D (lie.11 cal affairs ! the .’.affon
S3) jf the S3 Main hu.aqui.rtera (Knupvfuohruncsaat;.

Thus, Genzken issued an c.rd- ; r to Dina, he would have
the Tribunal believe tint ti.ls was an “i.ppr vol“ lv.thor than
an order. (Genzken, R. 3866), but whatever the weltfit of
the distinction the recipient -f the o nnmnlontlon rorardod
it. as an order fr.n a superi r. Genzken also testified that
tale "approval" ocnoorneJ itself nly ' 1 th the vaoolno pro¬
duction station. (R. 3864). This is otvl unly not the
case since the jrdur speaks rf tho “oxlBtin- typhus re¬
search station" at Buchonwald and the nly cuoh str.tl n
was the typhus experimental elook. The vaccine production
statl >n was still In the plnnnin stn.:e and did not begin
operation until 15 August 1943. (Genzken, R. 3865). This
proves that the nous “Department fr Typhus and Virus Re¬
search" applies t L .th the oxporlctontr .1 'in-', pr > red pro-
auction statins. iljre.vur, K on testified that the nano
applied t both bl.ck 4b alu' 50. (R. 1166). Genzken currosted

on the stand that Din.; probably was nletnfcen nt out tho date.

(R. 3864).

Dint 's BUeordlnatlon to Genzken Is further proved by tho
faot that in the same order ho was appointed as chief f the
vlepartncnt for special missions in Office XVI (Hyrlenc) of De¬
partment D of the S3 Operational headquarters. Genzken was


- 8 -


t.’-e Chief -f Lvpartment D, which w^.s the KedlCRl

Service -r tho ..'-.ffon ds.

Thu evidence shows that Gonzken was Informed about
the typhus experiments lr. Euohenwald. Genzkon admitted
that he knew that Dinp had been assigned to tout vaccines
r.t Euohenwald at least as early ns the occasion on which
he Infected himself.(R.3S05)• That occurred on 17 March
13-12, u sennt two months after the cx erlments started.

Ha testified that he know that Inmates were used In the ex¬
periments, hut that he did not know In wh"t manner.(H.3010)

It Is obvious that ho know artificial lnfcoticn cx erlmonto
wore holnt- onrrlod out from the fact that Din. lnfc oted
hlr.nel f. It 1c highly coincidental that a. Victor would
oono down with typhus CQ days after heginnlnr vaccine oxr*.rl-
nents uni os a a. virulent typhus virus was holn,- handled. There
war. no need for ouch n virus unloss artificial Infection
ox erlnonts wore '.-cine oonduotod. Morcov-r, no ovldenoo was
intraduced Yy tho dofonoo that a typhus orldcnlo was pre¬
valent in "uchenw^ld at that tine or any tlmo.

Thu contention cf Genzkon that ho th u.*ht the Inmates
wort cln. ly vaccinated >n the off ohnnoo they nlffht oomedny
oontact t> huo nuturally Is *atcntly absurd oven to laymen-
wh- kn •; no core of typhus than they have learned fron this
trial. It la completely exploded by the fact that cn 5 May
1^'*2, Genzkon received n roport.frcn Mrurorrky on tho first
experimental scries In luohenwald.(Mru,-owsky Doc. 10,
ilrufiowsky Ex. 20, R. 50<,7). tfhlle this report oaken no
mention cf artificial Infection, Dlnp, or -uchenwuld,

Genzkon certainly knew It wne the result :f Ding's work.

Thus We hove tho picture, ee Genzkon would havo uo eeo It,
of Dinp be.’ir.nln-* ills vaccine toots, In Jar.u- ry lb-2, vao-
olnatln,- h.althy lnma.t.> with four different vaccines, re-
tulnln,; an unvoccln^tcd control -rou , Insuring no typhus
olekneor in tho vaccinated tfroup f:r four to six weeks In


ordor to be sure of ir_r.ur.lty, 21n,4 and nil experimental
subjects coincident--, lly con In - down with tyhnus, 30-,? deaths
In the control group an.’. 2 deaths In the vaccinated group,
and a neatly typed ropert going to Genzkcn on 5 May ie-iz«
Surely with such n fortuitous and orderly typhus opidenlc
there was no need to resort to artificial lnrodtlon. If
Gcnzkon did not know that the Mrugowsky rooort dealt with
nrtlx'lolal Infection experiments by Ding, then ho wnn the

•

only recipient cf the report who did not know. Conti,
Grawitz, and Glldonelster were cortainly well informed}

Eyer, a typhus expert' of Hnndloser, visited the experimental
station; end Deonltj, manager of, the Behring. Works and produ¬
cer of one 01 * the tested .vaccines, participated in one of the
conferences of 29 December 1941 which pianndd the exporlmohts

(MO-1315, Pros. Ex. 454, R. 3056).

Gor.zkon'o contention that ho nov r rocclvod reports

about flings eX( «rlnents (R. 3606) In further oontradloted

\y tho toptlnor.y of Kogon, outlined above, and also of

SIruanw8ky. Hru.-owoky testified that m« hygienic export

attached t- Gcnzkon It was his duty to inform him about nil

important natters in this l'lcl'. Gcr-.ken admitted ho

usually roportod t^ him nco n Week. (R. 3253). In tho

8, rln* .f 1343, ho reported t>« Oenzkon nV. ut the typhus

experiments and vaccine produotl :n possibilities In

euohenwald. He did this for threo reasons: (1) Ding Was

banning to ,:lve a lecture at the meeting of Consulting

Phyuloiaaie >f tho Vehrnaoht and Gcnzkon ns modloal chief

of the Waffen SS liad to he informed of thnt.(2) Mrugowsky

wanted to inform Gcnzkon .-bout tho effectiveness of tho

vaccines t:*-tcd In l uchcnv.-ald, and (3) he wanted to toll hln

wnen he could oxpeot vaccine rriduotlon frr.m Euchenwnll and

In what nnounts. Mrugowsky told Gcnzkon that the vaccines

tested In Euohcnwnld had luid ifferent effects with res cot

t temperature and the numb. - of fatalities. He showed him

charts i rc -rod by Ding which gave the tern er«ture and

- 10 -


natality fi ( -urca. The heading of the chart showed the day
of Infection . (Hruvrowsky, R. 5357- ;). i r . Paragraph 5 of his
affidavit, Hru owslcy was even more emphatic. Ho stated:

“Ir. n ril 1043 I made an oral roprrt to Dr. Gcznken
' n Chc resultc cf the experiments carried tut do far.
In this report I \avc the ncccosary explanations nnd
shewed Dr. 3 e nzken sene chartn which wore sent tc no
Vy ^ln^ f n offioci nnd ^hlch Inserted tho fever
and i ulce curves, the datOG of the vaccination and
artificial lnfoctl-n, the death rates, ccnillcatlons
which arBe, etc. 0 n c of the experimental ccrlco
6hov/n In the charts was oarrled out an ceoplc who wore
only Infectod but not vaccinated In order to find out
the potenoy cf the vaccines used In other cnoes.

"I node a con- 1 etc- report t Dr. G e nzkcn an! It Id,
therefore, aboclutcly lnj.ossUlo that Oenzkcn as a
d-.otor should have been Ignorant cf the feet that
human bclnpe were ucc-d f r those cxperlnants and re¬
search". (:I0—123, Pros. Zx. 252, R. 10G5).

It Is thus olc.r that Gcnzkcn was lnfcrncd fully about
the experiments, oven to thr day tho concentration oarap in-
nates wore infected. I* in no defense oven If one assumeo
tho ini-. nolMo namely, that he did not understand what was
reported to him. Ho was under a duty to Inform hlncclf and
oontrcl th< activities of his oubordln-tos. Applicat ion of
Yana ah l^i, -.u* rn.

3cnzfcrn adalttod that ho had crconal contacts with Dlnp
aftor January 1042 but ho could:, t recall whether Din.- re¬
ported about hlo ox. erlmcnto. (R. 3 14). Ho admitted that
he had official and personal correspondence with Dint.’.
(R.3515). It lo difficult to Imagine whc.t tho official
correspondence concorned exce,t the experiments in luchon-
wnld.


The esuencc f Qcnzken's defense Is that Llcck 40,

the experimental station, ws n t subordinated to the

Ky. lono Institute cf the rtiffen SS, and t: him, but to

Drnwltz. It Is submitted that If tho wol~ht of the Prose-

cuti r.‘c >r' 'f Is entlroly • lercpnrded and If the testl-

r_ ny f Sonzken is assumed t- be true, he must Dtill be

f'-und ,-cullty cf the irlaes committed during the dcursc of

- 11 -


the typhus experlnents In Suchenwald. He n = nlta that Bing
*ma subordinated to hln with r-prect tr the vacolne produc¬
tion Mock before 31 August 1343. (Ganzkjn Dno. 11, Gcncken
Ex. 5, R. 3613). At the very ease tine he knew that Dins
wab working In the exj erlaontal Mock. Hoven -.Jar. n.. ointad
e.G deputy to Dins by Gcnzken and he was at the smso tine
assisting Dins In the experimental Mock. Mrugowksy was
constantly active in issuing directions with roapeot to
br th blcelts rnd he was subordinated to Gcnzken up until
31 nu.-uft 1 *i3.

Moreover, the activities cf Block 16 and 50 cannot be
ooncidorod separate and a: art from euch other nc two her-
ootioally oealed oonpnrtnentc. The ex erlments in Block *16
were not an end in thossolvcs. They cere conducted for the
pur coo of dotorolnlng which vacfflncs wer- effective go that
production ooul: b.> fccusofi on those vaccines. The results
of the criminal ix’orlncnts in Block 4C led directly to tho
es tablishmen t of the vaccine r-Jucticn .lnnt in Buchonwald ;
the results «erc utllUcd directly lr. tho manufooturo of
vaccines thoro; and such vaccines vcrc- later tested in Block
•18 ™ oonoentratl r. enmp lnr.at.. . These fnotn are all proved
by the Blnp Diary. Shus, the entry for l'J August 1-12 shows
that th« vaccine mado by tho process of Durond-Gircud by the
Pasteur Institute fron rabbit lungs it a t-ctod by artificial
infection experiments and was found to be effective, .-our
c ntrol ..croons wero killed in there ex,crloenta. This is
the same vaccine which the nro. luctlon, , lent nt Buchonwald was

cstabllahod b y Qcnrk..r. In J^nu-ry 1943 to produce. The entry
for 11 July 1. ‘4 states that the ■tfeinr.r* vnooine was produced
from rabbit lungs according to the process of Durand-Glr-ur.

On 10 S r teober 13*12 and again on 2.1 Fob runry and 27 April

l'i43, Ding was ordered to go to the Pasteur Institute in

Paris tr, procure laboratory owtorlal for the Department of

- 12 -


Typhus and Virus Ho search nnd th.: Hy.tlene Institute. The
"Vcla-r" vaccine was first tested In a reries -f oxaorl-
^onts n 22 Janu-ry 19-14 jhloh resulted In th* death oj* 5
•rrsono.

Should the Chief r 1 the Medical Service of tho '/fatten
SS wh'* kn-rr thet - in,r had o n^uctod experiments on Concen¬
tration Cnnp lnnntcs with tjphus, who ordered Din*: to eetnh-
llsh a plant In .uchonwnld t' prjducu ono of the vnoclnes
l* und to 'o effective In thoeo < x. criaente, who utilized the
cervices of the oo-c^r.s^lr-'t rs UruKOwnky and Hoven, should
such o win ho found innuc.mtt Tho Hrreocutlon ruhnlts that
tho rcc oncl] lllty of 88-Oruppcnfuehrer Gcnzken for tho
criminal typhus ox^rlnonte in luohonwnld Is ,-renter tlwn
that ^f hla subordinate, 85-Sturrjhnnnfuchror Dlnp.

(2) Other Ex.-crla ontg In luohenj nl

Tho typhus ox ; orients ware not the only oontnet of

tho dofondnnt Gomfccn with tho vxrorlnontnl station In

Luohonwnld. On 5 January l: 13 tho ..ehrlnWorks nt Marhurp

aont n letter to Hrugawsky stating that they had boon Inferno

hy Sohrolhor that ovory hatch of YoIIct fever vaccine had to

Vo tooted on hur m hcln.rs boforo V In;? -lven to tho A r ny.

The letter ex ressly stated that, ■Ohemtnrzt Dr. Schrclher

has t -11 us th,.t In the future the teste onhunnn holmes

will Yq nndu through y ur efflce. ‘Jo will therefore emit

oursdlvoi; to s nd you, at certain lntorv*>lo snnpl n of the

various hatches. request Inf rrmtlon no t whether wc

also have to corn* th, future hat oho s tc D r . H ven at Euohon-

w 3:1". (NO-1305, r*.o. hx. -1C., H. 6:2^). The office threuf-h

which tho t-ets or. huaan he In,76 u« rc to to -oade In th. future

us referred tj In the letter, was the Hygiene Institute of

the 7afren-S b under 2rn :owsky wh:. rns directly subordinated

to Gonsfccn p.t that tine. Th. entry In tho Din,* Diary for

-13-


lvD January 1043 cone- rns these yellow fever vacolne toots*

A live virus was used In the vaccines tested and the entry
stated that each vaccine hatch was tested on five persons.

« very large nunber cf lnnntts were vreelnatefi between
13 January ind 17 May 1343. The results rf the yellow fever
vr.eeIne testa were sent to Office XVI (Hygiene) In tho S3
Operational Headquarters, which rao one Of the wfflows sub¬
ordinated to Gertzken until tho end of the war.

Eetwcon 24 Harch and 20 April 1043 a largo conlo vac¬
cination ex-erlncnt on -!5 inant. a of the Tuchenwald Con¬
centration Cano wr.o . erforned according to the ontrloc In
tho Din# Diary. E n oh person was vaccinated on . 1~ht differ¬
ent days within four weeks chainst oTill, ox, ty h -ld,
ty^hua, paratyphoid * and oholora, and dlr-thoria. In
connection with the nratypheid /» and Z vnocincs, tho wit¬
ness Ko*on testified that prison rs wore riven paratyphoid
bnollll In potato salad. He alpo stated that the experi¬
ments In Ouchonwald with diseases other than typhus re¬
sulted In deaths, although relatively fewer. (Kogon, H.
1102-3). Tho results of these exporlnentr wer< •■Iso cent
to Office XVI.

The entries for 17 July 1044 and 13 October 1044 chow

that 1 load was withdrawn froa lnnates recovering from

typhus, between the 13th nr.c 2lGt day * fter tho fover had

subsided, for the purpose of making a typhus oor.valasocnt

sorun. This work was done by SS-Hnurtaturofuehrer Dr.

Sllenbcok who, Ocnzkon a,‘nits, was attached to the Hygiene

Institute of the Vfaffcn 3S. (H. 3G2o). The wllinssa Kog u

testified that Ellcnbeck obtained bloo! from typhus con-

valecoentc In Llock 46 froa the sumser of 10*i4 until the

S'ring of 1045. clood was taken fron tn.se experlacntcl

subdeot6 regularly, usually amounting to between 250 rnd. 350

cubic centimeters. Taking the blo:d from the convalescent

patients meant on extraordinary burden -r. then rnd. n nunber

-14-


o


cf their, die'- '.fnile the precise cau.se :f death could not re

definitely ascertained under the circumstances, there 1 g

no doubt that the withdrawal of Mood was a contributing

•

factor. Kogan testified that this typhus convalescence
serum was obtained for the SS Hospital in Berlin, among
others, which u-ae under the Jurisdiction of G*n::kcn.

(Kogon , R. 1102-3). The entries in the Ding Dl^ry show
that thl3 s.run was sent to -Office XVI of Aratsgrup o D
of the S3 Operational Headquarters. It will ho r- called
that Oensfcen mas the chief cf Antsgruppc D which was the
Medical Sorvico of the Jaffer. SS.

Ko -on furth- r tostlflo.i that Ellebbook systematically
scleotod ir.vnlldo and old persons who were in the 30~c - lied
"llttlo oarap" of wuohonwnld for the purpose of withdrawing
blood to ho uood in making Mood . lnsaa. The h >rriblc con¬
ditions ir. the "little camp" wero vividly described. Tho
blood was demanded from the victims and was taken fr n then.
Soraetlr.ee extra food nnr. -iven to thos< starving rrlsoners.
(Ko,:>n, R.1104-0). Ur-on being acked whether any of thioo
blood donors in the "little conn" in Luchenwald died fMl
1 ->tr the .taking of blood from them, Xogon replied:

■the question shows that it is very difficult to
gain a r al ccnco.-t of the little camp at Juchon-
wnld. The people died there in masses. During the
night the oorpsos wore lying in the blocks naked
because they were thrown cut of the bunks by tho
other rrioonero nc that they would havo r. little
noro npaco. Even the sn- Host nieces of clothing
were tebn nwoy from thorn by those wh. wanted to
curvlvo. It is lnros.lblo to determine If direct¬
ly and lamedlatcly as a result f th< taking of
blood anybody died because many pe-plo fell and
died while walking around the little O'-np.

"Ijut it Is beyond any doubt to anyone wha has
kn-'wn the conditions them that the taking of
V-lood, even if it gnva n small measure cf strength
to thoso poeple as far r-s food was concerned, was
a considerable contributing fact r in th- death of
so many of these people". (Ko,*o:i, 1105).


15


F. 3ulf-:nllonl’’c Experiments (Indict’.* at, ? .r:. 6 (S))

The criminal nature f the sulfenil mi - experiments per-
forned in the r.avensbruck Concentr ti'n C sap is set f rth in
the I-roseeutlon’s brief on Gephardt.

Tho sulf .nilaniCc experiments begun m 20 July 1042 hnd
c ntinucJ until «ugust L9*13. The 3ygieno Institute if the
YViffen-SS under Urug-.vrsky, which wao sub-rein-.ted to the de-
fundent Oenzkon until 31 «ugust 1943, “Wed and obotted those
criminal experiments. ^rug wsky mvf his hygienic stuff con¬
sulted with Gobhardt «»nd Fischer about the experiments and fur¬
nished the bucteriu used fir artificial infecti n if the experi¬
ment: 1 subjects. Mjrtwr, Dr. Bluaeareuter nude available the
surgical instruments on‘ medicaments f'r the experiments.
Bla-r^nrcuter was Chief if Office IV 'f Genzkcn. (Genzkon.R.3843-6;
Tho preliminary report submitted by Gcbhsrdt on these experiments,
dr.ted 29 i.ugus* 1942, states:

"SS Oberfushror Dr. Bluaenrouter put tho complete surgi¬
cal inotru lontotl- ns and co^icencnti ti is at ny disposal.

' • SS-S tend art. >nfuchrcr lirugowsky put his laboratory unn c->-
workcra nt iiy (•isr^sal."

as t.. the ounner -f .artificial infectim, the report stut.-s:

"The question was to define firstly, by way if a pre¬
liminary experiment, the nido f infection, asking use
f the kn,wn rupult3 fr m oxperii eats upon unim* Is. In
th03o ouosti ns was advised by SS-i* .’urs f the
Hygienic Institute of tho Y.affo.o 33 wh ■ had taken ivor
the culture and dosaao if the intui tion r.f.teri-1."

In the first series of experiments cultures furnished by
the Hygiene Institute of the T/uffc-n S inclunef: Stnphylicci,
Strcpt jcci, Para Oedo.ia Malignam, anr. bacteria Fraenkel uad
Sorth. The report c-uitinues:

"'"he cour3*- of the preliminary series
of experiments ho A pr >vod that wo were ai<
successful in pr-<7ucinc the same sy.upt ms us
of the clinical gas gangrene. lr. c afcr- oco
vith the Ilyrionic Institute of the v ‘affcn S3
the nature if the infect! n and the cor.: iti ms
for the norms were- n:t considered t: to equiv¬
alent ti the natural conditions in war surv-. ry
and c^nstouently the expeiiaenting arrangements
«er«- varied."


15 -


rnereaftojy the infection anteriti v.33 resile stnnrer


fnd l further experiment wes conducted. la speaking of this

experiment, the report states:

•

"Since in this experiment t o a c» finite
gangrene could b* produced clinically speaking,
yet its picture die not. in any v.ny correspond
t th 1 )r.-- k:;own in war surgery, after further
consultation v.ith the ccllaboret r;> in the
Hygienic Institute, of the Taffen SS, the
vaccine. \ as changed by adding w of-shavings. It.
la kn.’vm in becterioloriccl literature that t].e
vlrul-iucc or the bacteria in the experimental
aniroel can thereby be considerably increased."

(NO-27? , Pros. Ex. -173, It. 5022).

Substunt i Uy the sane facts are established by the
af1 avit of the defendant Fischer. Wbon no serious infections
resulted nft r the first two series of sulf:niluaide
exoeriaonta, it. was decided, in the suggest! n of Urugswsky
and after consultation with his assistants, to chung* the type
of b.ooto’rlu on* to use a stronger culture. Mrugownky's

office prepared the new culture specifically f r the
exporimonte fron separate cultures or thr«.c ir 2 'our gangrene-
cultures which were •.v.ll i le. The scrl^usne-rs of tht
lnf^otlniA which resulted ,% r r. *hlr stiritJ cf •.xperinents
wuj 3till n"*t typical >f battlefield gangrene infections.

Thu Hygiene Institute of the Y.'afftm ; S * j 8 . -aln consulted.

It wr.c n the suggastlon f this .office ’hat w d shavings
unt' » less v.-ur-. added ti the cultures in rder t-> pr uc
more aerlouj Infection. (NO-228, Pr . Ex. 200, fi. 768-9).
This evidence is further supported by the :iffl»’ovitu of the
otors at Itavcnsbruok, Rosenthal and Soheidloweky.

(NO-856, Pros. Ex. 223, If. H89; NO-508, Pr .;. Sr. .*'24, ft. 893).

In another nffldrvit Pischtr i t .tee tlmt Conz-ccn lieen
the report on the sulf on 5 1 r:l:'t experiments at the- meeting if
Conoultin r rhysiciunu in .'Jay 1C 53. (NO-472, Pros. Sr. 234,

I.. 940 /. Gcnzken denied in v present. (h.3C01).

-17-


c. Qrher Exc,-rlnent3

The proof shows that Genzken had knowledge of an*
assisted ir. other criminal experiments.

The r.jtorl^us high ultitud, and freezing oxperi-rtvnts
v.-ero not the least of these. On 13 December 19-12, Himaler
sent t: research assignment for further hi oh altitude and
freezing experiments t? Dr. Rasoher in Dachau. This order
v<se distributee to the Iter leal Office in the 5S Operc-tionul
HeoCquorters (SS Fuehrunrshuuntcmt) of whiot Genzken was Chief.
(1612-PS, Pr s. Ex. 79, 1 .229). Other copies wont to Pohl,
Chief of the S3 Economic ant' administrative Main Office aw?
of ull concentrati in camps, and the nhnoaerbe. Thus,
the offices whose cooperation was reoulrad in these experi-
menta wore inf -rne< . The cov-r lotu-r by Br ,ndt tj rimalcr 1 a
meourondun 3tutes that the recipients wor-. "to duly note and
oocorJ needed assistance to Hcuptnturcfuehrer Dr. K&aeher in
the carrying through of his ex— rinonts". In porogruph (0) jf
his nenornn'u*, Hinnler stated:

"Th*. rrocurucnt >r the arpnrotun neudud for all the
experiments should be iscussed i:. dctr.il with the Office
jf tho Keicharzt-SS, >f th, SS .‘lain Office f r Kc-n rales
end Administration and wit!; the Ahn» norbe o.v. The n_-
C iFf '. ry ch, ‘ plc 1 -r JC ucts, -edlcf.l supplies and »-Tuo. w r,
will h* "trifle VilTa b 'fche SfF si iiftol ts > t (Jit" 'M ctiTcnT
fcfficcT lit -rUnT

Genzken edaits his c-fficc received tho directive. ( I..8S01).

He excuses himself by say in/- that his subordinate Bluaonroutor
made vcliable aedioal sup- lies to ull agencies or tho SS.(i<.3882)
That Is.certainly no defense. The experiments participated in by
Raseher c*ne 83 no surpiise t Genzken. Obersturubaanfuehror
Muethum or the Hygiene Institute of the Yfurfen JS uttended the
Luftwaffe meeting in hurnborg in October 1942 -.hen ‘host ex-
pt.rir.ants wer- J-eportud on. (NO-401, Pros. >r. 93, R.309)

Genzken admits ho attended th« meeting or Consulting Physicians
in Early December 1942 when they were ay in reported on. (11.3779)


- 18 -


Moreover, on 21 October 1042, Mrhgcwsky, his sub or intt,
conferred with Slevera on cooperation betwo-a the Hygiene
Institute of the V/effen 33 • nd Bfischer, with respect to the
freezing experiments. Still e further electing took plr*oe jn
20 November 1942. (NO-647, Pros. Kx. 124, it. 3*=?).

Genzkon heeded Himmler's admnition of 13 Dcocnfcer 1942,
that his office was to give needed assistance to La so nor. On
1 Februcry 1913, Silvers met with BluuenrcutGr for the purpose
•of securing apparatus, instruaont3, tools, end chemicals for
the experiments by hasoher. (NO-655, Pr^s. ~£x. 122, H.379).

y.-^r did Gcnzken's subordinate Blunenruuter lit’it himself
t. assisting iloacher. On 7 June 1943, Cl mb erg wroto to Himmler
ob.iut his sterilization exp* rimontr an Jolish wonon in Auschwitz.
In these experiments he used an X-ruy an Oil no. /. s to this, he
nnid: "It wrs SS-Brifrodofaehrer Br. Blue Tirout< r wh-' finally
aonegod t • get me the one suitable x-ray inst illation."(NO-212,
Pras. EX. 173, U. 570).

It lr no defense for Gor.zkcn to say lie did n?t know about
these things. These original cxneriuc-nto were not sporudlc, iso¬
lated exct*3308 >f depraved individuals; they were sy; tenatio und
pl :Uued crlaou. Gcr.zkm was under o duty tc ruruirc his sub jr-
din-.tes to report to bin and » : c.n*rol their actions. ,'Qi>licatlo i
of Y'uaashltu . micro.

III. Cdnclusl

Gjnzkcn was closely connected with, the original typhus
experiments in Buchcnwold between January 1912 and September
1943. Thc3o experiments wort- c .rried ou* by medic-.1 officers
directly subordinated to him. :!o had knowledge of the details
■>r the < xperiuents. He issued orders respecting the typhus
experimentation on-’ vaccine pr uctior* blocks. The vaccine which
was produced in Pucheawtld in the block admittedly sut-'rdlnT ti.d

to him was the results of the experiments on irtiat* s.

-IS-


Gcnzfcea was connected with other experiments in Buchenwuld
including the experiments with yellow fey.r, sm.llpcx, typh iu
typhus, paratyphoid a rnd B, cholorr., nnd iiptheris vnccir.s,

'■ud the withdrawal Of blc.e from inmates far typhus convales¬
cence serum r-nd blood plasma.

^ancles under the control of Genricon furnished infaotion
material, surgical instruaants, and -sadloaments frr the brut 1
3UlfanilesiL't experiments In Ravensbruck. Hie experts pave
technicbl vice t. the doctors performing the experiments us
to the nanntr in which the infect lens coal be made mre serious.

Finally, the evidence shows thut fficars subordinated to
Ge.nzken furnished npF-r~tus for the freezing •xp«rlnonts by
Ruschor and the sterilization experiments v y Clauberg. Genzkan
racoivad th« Himmler ord.r to -hiacher on high ultitudo end
freezing experiments and was directed to cooperate with him.

There Is n-.thing to tu said in mitlgeti-n for thin daren't-nt
He stood on high level In the Hcdic 1 5-rvico r th» RS. Ho
htd »reat p-wer. He was w:ll accuointed with the 1 :wl*s3 jungle?

f Ounccatmtion camps. Th< Proseoutior submits thut tho tvidonc
proves that Oenzk is ■ principal in, cn eocessnry t >, ordered,
abetted, to.k consenting p-.rt In, nr .C w s connected with plans
Lnd enterprises involving modical experimentation on human sub-
Jocts without their consont, in the courr >f which experiments
murders, brutalities, cruelties, t rtures, atrocities, and other
inhumane ucts were committed, n<? that his guilt in3 Veen es¬
tablished under Counts One, Tv. , Throe, :na IV of the indictment.

- 20 -
{Knd)


MI L 11 2 R Y TRIBUNAL NO. 1

Cass no. i


CLOSING BRIEF FOR
THE UNITED STATES OF AFRICA
AGAINST

SIEGFRIED HaNDLOSER


Nurnbcrp,

16 June 1947.


James H. licHnnly
Alexander G. Hhrdy
Arnost Horllck-Hochwald
Esther Jnne Johnson

For:


Telford Taylor
Brigadier General, U.S.A.,

Chief of Counsel for Jar Crimes


LJTRODvJCLIQH


It is charged by the Prosecution under Count I of the
Indictment that Kandlore; conspired .r.d o^reed vith others f
pursuant tc a coraaon design, to perform medical experiments on
involuntary human beings; end under Counts II and III (War
Crimes and Crimes ugninst Humanity, respectively), that he was
a principal in, accessory to, ordered, abetted, too. 1 : u con¬
senting pert in, and vac connected with, plans ar.d enterprises
involving medicul experimentation or. lnvolunt ry human sutjootc.

I. POSITION .'X '^ILITV

Tin- defendant Hand loser held positions of great power and
responsibility in the military medical services of tl.e Third
Reich. Having already served us u nodical officer in the regu¬
lar armies under the Kaiser and thu ' oimnr Republic, after 193?,
he quickly rose from Chief Medical Officer In tlio corps urea (Wohr-
krois) uf Stuttgart, to Chief Medical Officer (Cher Sonitoots-
offlzer) of the German Forces In Austria und- r General Lint, when
that country sucouabcd to Hezi across ion in 1938. VTien war broko
out, ho bcoamo Chief Medical Officer of tf.< 14th /.nay in Poland
and lutcr of the 12th Array In Frunci. In Nov-obor 1940, ho bocarao
Deputy Array Medical Inspector. On 1 January 1941 he was appointed
Army Uedio'.l In3poctor (KrerawSanitfet ilns;-ktour) and, one north
l iter ho also beoane Array physician (Hearesurzt) who was the chief
medical officer of thu field forces, thus cr utin; u personal
union of tli- :.g two offices. (NC-443, Pro3. hr. 10, P. 97; Hand lose
R. 2818-9). As Amy Medical Inspector and /.my Physician, Hund-
loser had complete) comma* d nd control ov r the entire Array
medicul service, which v/as by fur the largest, of the medicul branc
of the ' chrmacht. He held those positions free January 1941 until
September 1944. ( .andlosor, R. 2090). For technical description

of the duties of the Array Medical Inspector ar.d Army Physician,
see Doc. H.A. 28a, Handloscr Ex. 2, ?.. 282 P, and Doc. H. A. £8,
Kundloser Kx. 1, R. S&21.


In his caducity as .-.rcy Medical Inspector, Hand loser : d
subordinated tc him t c Consulting Physicians: of the Army, the
i-Iilitary Medical «cedoay, tht Typhus ;.nd Virus Institute of the
O.J; -it Crecov* and Lemberg under Dr. Z; cr, end the medical school
for Mountain Troops at St. Johann. (110-282, Pros. Ex. 9, R. 97;
Doc. H.A. 29, Ha:idloser Sx. 4, R. 2828). He attained the rank of
O^neraloberstabaerat (Lt. General, Medical Service).

On 28 July 1942, Hitler Issued a decree which was .Iso sign
b: the Chief of the High Command of the Vehrmi.cht, Keitel, coaaisa-
1onlay the defendant Hr-ndloser, a Chief of the Medical Services
of the 1 'ehmncht (Chef d-.s Vohraachts unite.tevesens), in addition
to his duties as «rmy Medical Inspector ad Army Physician. Ho
vms charged with the coordination cf 'll teaks oocaon to tno
ihhdicul sorviofiu of ’he • ohrnecht and nrrr.nlzcti-ns nd unitr
aubordinr.tod or -itt_eh<d t the ’ chra-.oht, - nd ilco th'/aeciic: 1
service of the ’faffen SS. Kr.ndlos'.r v r to reyrenont the Y.’ohr-
nncht before thu civilian authorities in ill common medical
problems and to protect the interests of th 'Vchrmncht in .11
ntdloil measures token by the civilian ruthoritios. Per the pur¬
pose of coordinated treatment of these proolt .3 t mcdiotl officer
of the Navy cad u •u.rtieil wificor of the Luftwaffe, the latter
in th-. capacity of Chi-.f of Staff, were assigned to work under
him. Fundamental problems A ert lining to tn- rrcd’cal service of
the Wr.fl’en S3 were to be worked 'ut in c.gr' ere at vith the
Medic 1 Inspector of the V'.fftn CS, the del cad'.at Gonzkcn. (..*0-
080, Pros. Ex. 5, R. 93; XC-282, Pros. lx. 9, R. 57).

Thn Fuehrer Docroe of SS July 1942 v.rs the j wo o no which
ere .-.tod *nc. nre ncy of the General Corlissloner if thu Health a.od
Mcdloul Services under Korl Erandt to vhom Headloser, on the
military side, and Conti, on the civilion side, ware subordinated.
This decree v.ss discussed in or. tcn.se in the Prosecution brli f on
E: rl irandt. However much one may dispute be. it the- . r*. ci.--
extent of Hand loser's authority by virtue or this dccr*. e, it


cannot be denied tfcst he was the r.ost yov; -ful officer in the
entire militery medicol scrviocs.

Prior to this decree there wore four separate medical
branches of the Y.'ehrrucht - the nray, Luftwaffe, Navy, and
'‘‘.jffe.n S3, each operating ir.deytnder.tly of the other. Pursuant
t. thin decree, Fer.dloscr v..;s uy. Tinted to coordinate tr.d unify
their operations • n<? v/rs directly rosy on sit le to Keitel an Chief
cf the High Cxorumd if the V’ehrn-cht (OKW).

The Fuehrer Decree of 7 August 1944, toget* r with the
Service Regulation ettreh-'d thereto, throw c~n3idcxahlc light
-n the functions of Hsndlo3cr is Chief -f the Medical Services
< f the Vehrnncht. (NO-227, Fros. Sx. 11, it. 101). According
to the testimony •'f H. no loser two things wcr< .ioctejplishe'l by
that decree: first ho rollr.oulshed his posit! >ns s Amy Medical
Inspector er.d Arny Phyoicl* n, cad seoond, as Chief of the iiodic il
Serviota of the Vthr :uoht, he was given the power to Issue "'rdora
direotly t the Chiefs of the Medical Services of the Amy,
Luftwaffe, Navy, end VT- ffon S3. (R. 2990). Foruoriy, . ho wuo

copowored to issue instructions but no o*ucc<'.js that Kcitol, to
v.h o.i ho wv.s responsible, c^uld have hod r ers issued f;r hin.

(R. 300C; rflcr, R. 3109). Thcroforo, t t or the purely

technical .nd imsturi 1 distinction tut.v . nn rdcr : ml or.
instruction, the pwero and duties outliw "in V • Service
Regulation r.f 7 AUffU t 1944 v.or . subs*: nti lly the c-rx .s
those in the Sorvico Regulation of LP July 194?, which is un-
availrblc. (Sec Hni-Uoser cr •ss-.xariin-ti n, R. '991-3004).

The service rcrulntion f August 19:4 cctrblijlios the fact
that Hnn'*l>str w.b directly sub rdia.ted t thr Chief f the
High Ccanund *f the Vehr i-cht. He h d rutL'rity v .r tlic. Chief
ef the i«r.:y Mediccl Service, the Chi- f of the :i vy ilcdlcul Service,
the Chief •'f the Medical Service Cf the Luftw.iffo, and Chief of the
Medical Service .'f the Waffan SS, ac of .11 rg ni-ati is and
services eapldyod within the frenew rk jf the V.-hm-efct, nd
vor •.-.11 scientific nodical institute.'. ^c .oe.ni- s and :ver


medical institutions f the sen leer 2 £ the ehrmac'. t ;.od cf the
^■..ffee SS.

He was the adviser of tho Chief of th6 High Cosonnd of
the Wotumcht in'all questi;ns concerning the nedical services
of ti e V-ehrmncht end of its health guidance. H6 hed t-> diroot
the t'tel ae'icel service of the Wchraacht ns far ns the
special field was concerned with regard f:r the military instruoti:
of tho Chief of the OKW end the general iules of the defendant
Karl Brcndt in hi3 ceoucity ns General Comissi 'nor for the Health
ond Medical Services. In tn; field <f nedioel scirnoe, his
dut ios were to carry out uniforn measures in tho field of
health guidance, rooc-.rcl. a.id c ,nh- ttinc of ^pI‘ emics and all
medical rv-ttors which required u uniform ruling a-.^ng the
wehxaaoht and, further, in the v lu y 1 -»n jt leal cxp<- r lenceo .

Ho prjvif'au for a unif^rc. cart planned directi n of tho allocation
of persons nC material.

Such, vior< the powers an, duties f the defendant Hond-
looer as Ch'.uf of the Mcdlc .l Services >f the Y.chrr.acht from
tho inception of thut office in July 1942. Ho was the superior
in "toohniool" or at iiorl asttors r tlu Chiefs ->f tho mcdicul
strvicoo of tho four bronchos cf the Wchrouaht (cf. Handloser,

R. 29B3). The fct that these chiefs .icy have h:d thor military
nurcrl ~>r3 . n natter luch stressed by Hundlosor, is c aplctely
besido the point. Hmcltser’s position before Soptomb r 1944
as Chief of the Medic 1 Services af tho Y/uhrruoht vis- o-vis
the chiefs of tli*• roe .ical .crviccs *r tl. ’ :hri.cht branched
cr n bo coapored with Keitel’s posit! r. ns Chief of the High
Con and cf the w_hmucht vis -r-vls tho c.v: nfiers-ir.-chief of
the breaches of the VVhrc^cLt. Keitel v s in ffect tht chit f
of Hitler's nllitury staff. As such, Keitel 'id net hove c
authority over the ’Vehmacht branches. Eut t..is concerns only
ere conLiau 1 ' natters and is c~t to ssy that Keitel could a _ t
issue directives which were ir. every sense binding on the C iE-t- uder
in-chief of the Vrehmacht branches. (Luanere, H. 2oP7; cf.

Judgiv-at of I.M.T., "Trial of the Major V?ar Crioiuals", p.2£6).


medical institutions


the services of the -efcrmacht ->ad cf the


Waffcn SS.

Re was tfao adviser of the Chief of th6 High Command of
the Wehmacht in*all questions concerning the pedicel services
of the Vchmacht or.c if its health guidance. He had to diroot
the t-t'.l medical service cf the Wehmacht ns far as the
special field was concerned with regard for the military instruct!:
of the Chief of the OKW end the general tules of the defendant
Karl Brcr.dt in hi3 ceoucity as General Crmnissionor for the Health
and Medical Services. In the field of ricdice.l science, Ms
dut.los wore to carry cut unifora acasuroB in the field of
heal th guidance, research e.e 1 . c .ah' tt jqp >f ,ri ~e .lcs and all
medical r.'-ttors whioh required a uniform ruling among the
WehTCQCht and, further, in the v.lu tlm of 'teal ox^rienceo.

Ho prjvidoe fir n uni fora and planned ‘irteti n 5f the : llooctlon
of parsons ;nd material.

Such, vrert the pewors and duties f the defendant Hand-
loeer as Chief of the Medic.1 Services »f the V.chrr.ucht frxn
the incept L jn of that offico In July 19*£. Ho wan the superior
in "toohnloal” or n- diorl matters f the Chicro of the medical
services if the four branches -f the Wchraaolit (cf. Handlooer,

R. £983). Thu f -Ct that these chiefs any have hid 'thor military
nurcri ~>r3 . n octter luch stressed by Hn;.dl)sor, ic c apletely
beside the point. Hundltsor's position before Soptonber 1944
us Chief of the Medic 1 Services of tho tiuhnocht vis-^-via
the chiefs of th< nodical services f th “ =hroacht brunches
ora bo ooapnrcd with Keitel's positi a os Chief of th* High
Con and of the W'.hrnucht vis-r-vis tho c .r; ndera-ir.-cnief -f
the bronchos of the Whrm-ci.t. Keitel \ ■ s in ffect the chit f
Of Hitler's military st-ff. As such, Keitel 'id not have c .iv.aod
auth rity aver tii<- ' v ehmoclxt branches. Eu* t-.is concerns only
ure command natters and Is rot to say that Keitel could .rt
issue directives which rare In every sensu binding on the CicAoader
in-ciiiuf of the Wchroucht branches. (Lmmers, R. £6F7; cf.

Judgi.^r.t of I.M.T., "Trial of the Major War Criminals", p.2£6).


- 4 -


Tbo a - :c is true of Hloser ao Chief it tnu Mofiic-1 Services
Pf the V*'ohrnaOht before Scpto'Aor 1944. Wnlle he did not huve
c o."...:nd ’.uth'rity >vcr the Medical Service if the Luftwaffe,
f r wx.--.ple, in tactical dia'paaltl.n of aedlcal units anfi-
L.o-Ukc, he did have auth rity to c?:rfiinato tho activities
;• all trie _i--:!ical services .cs' tc estctliah c. --on policy.

That he hod authority to pr hibit cadicel cxerintnts on
c\*iccr.troti?n ccap ioaates, vith’-ut their consent, by •.«.:ifccrs
military aoCioel aorvicea g'«-s without c •

A3 Hern!loser poiuto out in his -ffi'V.vit, f.'-r example,
tho Aray Physician wos "-ii^t^riiy ,, an* orbin' ted to tho Chief
.r tho General 5t.ff while "prof-ajsi nHy" * the Amy Medical
Inspector. (D?c. H.A. 29, HnndlDoer Bx. 4, R.2628). By the
8j.no tv-on, the dofondent Schneder •:.* hi* proCecoasor Hippke
wore militarily sub-'rdiu.tc'’ to Goring -s C a n-’or-in Chief of
, final analysis, but in audio " '-a

they wore subordinate: to tho Chief *f the Modlcol Services of

the T/ehroseht, • •

8 f his orfidovit Schrctdcr so id: "X .rl Prunc’t, Huudl'otr,
lu<* R.’Stook were inf r *od of tho rxdlc-1 rosu :rch omul :ctod by

Chief of tho Kodioal Services of
r cht ay auptri r in mdicni "

Proa. Ex. 130, R. -.74). He affirmed th t at t< ont under or >ss-
exarxii on. (R. 3604). Bippko testified in Caao No. 2
o..r ru Militr.rj Tribunal S' • U thr.t Hnr. I'Scr c'uld give hin
'rdcre and establish o-'licy. (R. 3001). Sac, ala , the
rgonizotionul chart* or the Mediorl Service of the Luftvnffo.
(NO-418, Pros. Ex. 12; HO-419, Pr-s. Ex. 13, R. 105).

V ith rospeet t t! ;s, th« * been pr

The defendant Cc.nzkea, Chief of the Modlcc.1 Service -if the ’ ffen
ss, • • in POrapr ?h 9, f hia ffi *vit: "Thr uchout tho
v.. r, at • ic. l field unit 1 th« Haffen S3 were aut rdlnated tc
lie i Service if the Aray which was supervised by Dr.
i laser. Sy fuehrer decree of July 29, 1942, Dr. Han l^ser


wns aopolnted Chief of Che Medical Service of the Wehrrancht.

As a result of this reorganization! Hnndloser also became my
immediate superior ns frr ns nodical nattero ere concerned."

(NO-439, Pros. Ex. 24, R. 125). See also the organizational
chart8 of the Medical Service of the SS drawn by the
defendant Mrugowsky (MO-416, Pros. Ex. 22; NO-417, Pros. Ex.

23, R. 121). Indeed, the chart of the organization of the
Medical Sorvlocs of the Wchmacht drawn by the defendant
Handlosor himself shows hl3 authority over the four nodical
acrvicoo In n vory clear nanner. (NO-262, Pros. Ex. 9, R. 97).
IT ho now seeks to disdain this authority and atnto that
he was a Cnlef In name only, then It Is done for obvious
ronsonc. Tho lnportnnoo of the position of Handlosor Is
furthor 3hown on tho chart drawn by tho defendant Xarl Brandt.
(MO-645, Pros. Ex. 3, R. 86).

Tho oxtenolvo powor and authority or the defendant
Handlosor as Chlof of tho Mcdlonl Services of the 'Johrnncht,
particularly with respect to nodical research, In nlso proved
by othor evldonoc In tho rocord. Handlosor admits that tho
utilization of material and personnel was a problem common
to nil branches of the tfchrmccht and was under his Jurisdiction
as of 28 July 1942. (R. 3004). Ho nd:-lts that coordination

of scientific roscarch wan one of his tasks In nil fields
where this was rcqulrod an*. noccseni'y. (R. 3036). Ho
concedes that he was well Informed on general matters In the
field of military nodical sclonco. (R. 3005). Ho cnllod
together the chiefs of the medical services In order to avoid
duplication of research and he mentioned specifically
conferences dealing with malaria, typhoid, pera-typhus, and
cholera. (R. 30C8). In the field of combatting typhus,
coordinated measures wore taken by all tho ncdlcnl services
Insofar as delou6lng wns concerned.


-6-


He h;.c the ?vror to establish •* uaifvrs or ctico a vaccinuti>nr
ar.r rn regulations wore issued vith.-ut cinferring with the
c asultlns physicists. (F.. 3009). He issued iistructi'ns nv
1-ter tr: a February 1944 ts all the I'chm-cht .edicol bi .aches
• p the Of rice f'r Science ad Re sc rch un .r the dofenfiants
ri n - t nr Rst-cic inf arne d ebvut rcse roi. assignments*

(p.. ?coe).

One >f the principal .-jeras used by the crcafent Kandl-»sc
in eserf'acting .cichtlfic roacr.roh e the Jcir.t noting
C'litLip Phy a if t f the Vohraaoht.

Thoac .-votings were held t luxst 'aoo ;«,t j:.«* sMCtLiea .i^ro
freque vtly. Tboy were celled by th< • ;-ser n< wore

■ • 3009). The purpose

>f the noctines vis t-* establish r. bisi3 j r the issucnet cf
ic l directives t- thi field frees. (Haall aor, R. ?r»fcO).
L-.ot.ures wore riven 't .« *!c.l rose rch by y ri in C suiting
Fhynlol r.c jt suasions Mt.ri >.C by experts i:i • |.c r.rtioul. r
1 ‘iol.d, L"r cx uplo, bygituc ra.r iy. 7 . .. 3 ub-

I jo tc^ t, critio -1 cxaniii.tiw by th. ir :cll*n, ocUntistn end the
rr.ctic 1 r..suits were i ircotee, sac. risc-J, . issued in the
rr. f directives, (i’ana^or, R. 5013). Y , nr proa f r tt.cso
- tings wo. rows up under the direoti .. f Unnfll ser. ocaorul-
-.r^t Sohreibor, otti ohud t t e at. ff T t. o j,r.-,y Mulcl I.;spect-
T ‘* tu until 1 tc Jr. 1943 < rS. th6n lx. ehr.rgc f tr.e Scientific
0j?3 “P (Ufargrupjto c) »f tt Iftut r; Modloal Acadcny, insisted

r, R. 3011, 5 20). As wo shall

3cc tt u 1 .tor ?>lnt, lumber r crLain 1 xycriient3 ?erforued
on c t.cc ntr.it i n cv.p in' t :s ver relate* 't .t tics nesting
At the See n.’ Z&stinr >r Cjusultin,, Thy 'ideas fr-wn 30
‘ venbor t> 3 December 1942 .t the niitry : ic 1 ac' deny,
Hundl-vior pnintod ur f rciblj* the t-.aif f .ix C:;'.cf the Mcoi-
ccl Services ;f thf *7otr a-cht «a unifying t ic 1 scientific
reec rch. (KO-922, Fr^s. Sr. 435, R. Ce50) .


In :• Idrosslng tic full meeting, he s.id:

"Tho demands cart ertc.it cf this t'tel war, ..s
well cs the relationship between needs end uvr.il-
i.billty of personnel me*. arterial, rcouirc neesurcs,
- 13 *' in nllit rv or.? aediocl fields, which will
nerve the unification apr unified lc idership. It
la art c cucsti^n 3f "marching sepr-r tcly rad
b ttling together", but n rching • nd brttling must
be C-*ne in unison from the beginning lr. ull fields.

ix3 n r - suit , -a c >accr:.s the ailit-rv sector , the
■■ohr ii.cTTt Sfcrtlc: l^fcrvlce . r/. v.ith it the Chief f
to.c MeriC'.l Services of thc^chr .clit c :c !::t~
being . Net onl?. lr. nutters of oers ~:.ol ■ at 1
uotcrlr.l— even re _s tuls i3 evoitTu" Tn ?!■ w

if apeeiol fields av special tusks which nusl
be c’nsiddrc , --fcut also with r. view


r—___ search , -ur path In

t'-z ^ : «-hrri'.cht Uo< , ic~l r £-Jrvicc _;ujt v. wi 1 \ tZ
a u:: If leg ino . nee irmingly, the rr *up of pnrTi-
cipunts in this Second v,'o r k Cinfcrc.net East, which
I have now opened, is differently ermosed frta
the first Work Confer cnee in May f this yoer.

Then it wuq c c inference >f the . r y; t y uy the
three branched of tho V/ehraccht, the v ffer. S5 uad
P’lice, the Let >r Service j;d the Organization T dt
are participating and unified.

YwU will surely permit that I greet you with
a General wclc r.e red with tho sincere wish that
our co vion w rk ucy bo blessed witn tho h:pod for
J'ittt succoso.

I would, hwover, like t« extend n socoiul
greeting to the Reioh Chief of He 1th Servleoo,

Under Soorctory Conti, who h ids tho ocntral
leadership -f .cdicsl services in the civilian
aect )r. I see in his presence n t nly on interest
In >ur w rk themes, but the expression 'f his
c*nnccti'n with the Vchraccht Mo leal Service md
his understanding of the sped 1 iap-rtmeu .f
the ^chmaoht in the field cs well .3 ot o. I
need n't emphasize th t we ere ts -no in tho
roc vr.iti-a if the necessity t- ensure ind e. so
the ilni of the sjldltr, that he need u:t w rry
Mbout the physic -1 will boinf f tho h. -.eland :s
far as this is • ithln the r- lm f p 3Sibility
In wnrtiio." (Enphusis supplied)

nr? In, .t the ? urth Meeting 'f Consulting Physicians
from 16 ty 10 M-y 1944 .t Kohunlyci.cn, the defendant Karl Brunet
struased tho lap stance if Han- ljuer's r’siti n, s.ylnr:


"GtMer .1 burnt ba: xr.t Han loner, y'U a soldier
•and r. physician t tnc cr.au time, :ra resprnsibK fir

t he use cud tho porf me nee if >ur ...

»»»•

I believe, and this probably is the sle expect¬
'd a f ail concerned, th t this meeting which tn-
duy start*’ in Hohenlyche-n will bo hold f?r tho benefit
of ur salr.iers. The achievements t d .te of y ur
physicians, Kerr Gene-r .1 rbcrstabserzt, c nfirn this


unequivocally, ,nd their readiness t- t: 3
thoir sh-ro • Ke-c ell ->f us prtud ..-.5-1
nay els' aay— confident.


* * * *

It is gmd 8 inply t-> c”.ll these things
oy thoir nones vnf t 1 nlc -t then 3 they
:r°; This neetiar is th. visible expression
it - it is, it shell be of it nu.-t be sc
ir. ov ry respect: the c asultin-- physicians
ire • thoror- i r >und their Mediool Chief.
n . hen I lj'k et these ranks, yju Ccneral-

Jbcrstobsnrit Handler, arc- t' be envied:
ncdic-il experts, with the best _n-; - stir
highly tr; loot spooial knowledge, re et
y ur ’isposnl f'r cere r th« splclem. In
rcolpr jcr.l \cti-m between 7 mi self ytur

-loeioal ~ffleers, the pr *blon ef aur nedicol
:n wledre mo capacity -.re kept olive. "

(MO-924, Proa. Ex. 437, R. 2067)••

This w-a n > ucocludo p id t ’ e 1 : ?: v.i t* ;ut p wtr -.nd

influenoo. Afld it oh iul. bo n. ted thet this description of

Handlaser*a p'siti n was riven bcferc t..e Puthror Decree of

7 AUgUat 1944.

(landlujor old* had close c xmocti ns with the Reich
Research Council, tho purp :c3 und crininsl ectivitieo 3 f whio'
•-rc describee >n p ges 6 through 11 of the Pnsocutl'n briof
-n K rl Hr; t. Hondlisor, I (ho fell of 1942, sought nenber-
3hip In tho h ioh Rouerrch C uncll 'ilr.aif, but this wno mt
rr- nted in the gr 'ur.d that Keitel roprsaonted the Wckmooht
n tho Proni ontlnl Council. (E nfl ncr, K. ?020). Schreibcr,

wl ’ w 8 * * HoClchl 2 t > r ,

wu.t 'I 31 -.o.-.her if the Reich Rose roh Council. H< veto os

P -nip tontiory for the c mbettinr if op Ido ica which w: :3 hlo
spool 1 field In the Inoe ci >rato. .‘ichruiber w 9 reemnondtd
f.T this pisitiin by the ,.r~y nd there c-.n be a~ d'ubt thrt
he represented the iauy Uodicnl Inspect r to m the Reich
Ros-.»rch C uncil. (MO-1490, Pr^s. Sx. -50, S. 3024). His
app>intaont w«s discussed with KuivU^scr. (fi. 3026). Schreibor
* :u : cLjoo c’ll-.b ;r. t:r f II u.ljsor and v, rkod with hLu f?r
•ny years. (Htndlaser, R. 3054).


These, the.% were the positions of responsibility
of the defendant Hnndloscr: Goner’ lohcrstnhsnrzt, Chief
of the npsy liedlcnl Ins:ectornte, *ray Physician, Chief


of tho Nodical Services of the M C hrnpcht, Adviser to
Keitel, Chlof of the Bl3* Ccnrvnd of the V*,hrnncht, nnd
President of the Scientific Senate c-f the Medical Ser¬
vices of tho ’./ehrnneht. He ured tho forcjroln.r positions,
nnd hlu personal Influence, In a manner which Involved
the connli sIon of war crimes nd crineo against humanity
ns set forth In the Indictment.


- 10 -


*


II


It la not to be oxpocted that a -an In the position
and rank cf Kandloser would personally perform crlnlnal
experiments. This was left to subordinates. The proof,
however, has clearly shown that r.c, like- brundt, personally
onoouru.ea experimentation on human beings without tholr
consent, he. Ilka brandt, had full knowled -o that con¬
centration camp Inmates wer>« beln.j systcaatloally uxperlnon-
tod upon by uoctors cf the aoalcul 6ervloe6 which wero
under his ooanand. r.o newer used his tremendous power as
Chief of the Medical Servloos cf tho Armed Forces to stop
thuHO criminal acts, whloh resulted In the murder, torture
and Inhuman treatment of thousands cf i elplono nun, woacn
and ohlldrun of tuuiy different nations.

Under Pnra-Tnph 6 of Ccunt II of tho Indlotaunt,
twelve different types of experiments nru partloularlzed.

Of these hanaloGer in charged with special responsibility
for and part lclput ion In the hi h altitude, freezing,
nnlnrlu, BUlff;nllnmldo, bone, r.uscle and n«.rvc rc-

onuratlon and L ne transplantat1 .n, oca water, upidotnio
Jaundlou, and typhus experiments. Proof has also boon
Introduces on ala p'-rtlolp tl.n In tho cl 1 loal warfuro
/ui« ons odoon experiments. In order to simplify the Issues
the Prosecuti m nuB withdrawn Its charge of participation
in the hi. h nltltu .o experiments. (K. 230C) .

It If n t lncun-ent upon tho Prose-outl n to show that
non- loser was familiar with r -11 tho details -f nil these
experiments. It Is sufficient to provo that ho knew, or
should have kn wn, of tho sy6tonatlc use of Involuntary
human subjects f r the purpose of experimentation by a.ronoles
ov^r which he exercize-, r. substantial dc re. f p- wer and
authority, lie was under a duty t. c ntr 1 the arenclos
subordinated t- hlc. Failure to do s renders him crimin¬
ally resp nslule for the acts f his subordinates. AjpII -
catl-n cf Ifcoashlta , 66 d. Ct. 340, 347 (1946). This, and


- 11 -


c:ro f has boon proved by the ?r socutl'n.

A. Typhus an;'. Other Vaccine Experimente (In.lctnont,

Pnra rnph 6 J).

HanaloBer Is ch.raod In the in lctucnt with roep-n6lbl-
llty f r the typhus experiments c n..uctc. In the Buchenwnld
C ncontrntlcn C^sp, primarily by Dr. Din..--Schuler and In
the Kutzwollur Conoontr tl :n Crap by Dr. Eu one Nan, en.

«s t the vluocrljitl n nn . criminal n ture f the Buchenwdd
experiments, refci-.nico eh ul- bo an; e t the Prosecution 1 s
brief n JJru .wshy, while with reBpod t the experlnonte
In the Hntrwuller C ncentmtl n C.*.mp, t the brief cn R^so,
we ?-re Here c no-mod nly with t o o*nn otl n -f tho defen-
.nnt hnnCl Bor t those experiments.

Fillcwln^ tno lnv'.sl n f Rusnlr In 1941 typhun
boOftne r. Borl uf thre .t t the O vii/n fohrnncht. Tho ubu
f typhun v .oclnes was no f tho prluinry r.oth o In hect-
in that threat. Hr.n l Dor o ntr .llo tho lstrltutl^n -f
typhuB v/.culiieo, first In hln capacity no Army Jio’lcnl In¬
spect.r and then no Chief f the •£•...leal Sorvlcos -f tho
ffohrouoht (n-mtl ser, R. 3072, 3074; aohr R. 3642;

R.0e, R. 3690). Hnndl ser was equally c noorno. with the
problc \ r typhu6 v .colno jr .uctl n. (110-1318, Ex. 455,

R. 3090). H1b ffice r. oelvo 1 pr uctl n rep rts. (rand-
l-oer, R. 3071). In U .v w cber 1C41, he wr to to C;ntl,
deoivt .ry .r dtntu l r he.-0.th In the „lnlntry f Interl r,

6U estlnt; that pr uctl n f typhus vaccines be place 1 . In
tho hands f the Ira* - so'-le pharmabeUt Ic/il In ustrlcs (30-
1323, Pr secutl n Exhibit 4b2, K. 3082). As state-: In n
lettor f June 1943, the acfundnnt P. so rcqu.ste.' tho Luft¬
waffe Hudlcnl Inspect r t ur e the Chief -f tho i!c iJonl
dervicoG 'f the '•ohr incht t r .or the pr uctl n -'f typhus
vaccines f r all armed services In the ouptorn area (110-306,
PriBcouti,n Exhibit 296, R. 1387). hnn.ll ser, as Chief ~f


the Medical Services of the Wehrm.cht, was nl no ccopctent
ti decide upm the procurement of vaccines far the Wohr-
encht (JJO-131, Pr-eecutln Exhibit 309, R. 1404).

One of the inp;rtunt profcleus .tlth respect to typhus
vaccines was the effectiveness :t the s--called Crx-Haaren-
Qlldeaoleter vaccine, which was produced fr^o e ,r yolhe.

Th6 Typhua , nd Vlrue Institutes f the OKi r.t Crnocw and
Leader*,- were on In tho production -f the Woltf. vaccine
fr:m tho Intestines of lloe. Howevor, this process was
quite exponrlVw nmt complicated and these two Institutes
c uld by neons prouuoe sufficient quantities of the
vaccine f-r tho Wehrnacht. The Vol.a vncclno hud teen used
trr ot no yerrs unu was re.v.rajd ns quite effective. Tho
eg, yolk vnooino was produood by tho JfcUrt K:ch Institute
rmd tho Buhrln • rks, aa.-n, -thers, and its production was
nuoh simpler than in the case of tho Voi,;l vaccine. Its
pratuctlve qualities, however, were n t regarded no having
boon sufficiently proved. It was thorof.ro necessary,
before undertaking lnr.;e scale pro.luctl n, t establish Its
effloaoy. Those facts arc established -y tho affidavit of
Handleser, dated 3 October 1345. (10-732, Pres. Ex. 461,

R. eOtO).

The entry for 29 Dooenter 1941 In the Din* Diary proves
that a conference was held on that date between Handloser,
as Army Medici Inspector, C ntl, r the ministry of Interior,
Reiter ,f the Public Health Department, GU .omclstor of tho
Robert K:ch Instltuto, and Kru. wsky f the Hygiene Insti¬
tute of the r/nffen 38 UO-265, Pros. Ex. 2 Q 7 , R. 1154 ).
nt this conference It was decided that tho typhus vaccine
fr a w s ,y yolks was tc to tested on human toln.e to determine
Its efficacy. A fuW days Inter tne first expenmntal series
started In 3uchenwnld to test the iuitl-lnfectl-us character
uf offcf yelk vaocincs. ?ive oxperlmc-nv.a subjects . led as
a result of tdn.j artiflcally Infected with typhus.

ihe pro f shews that on tho sam-_ tiny an earlier con-


- 13


.


ference was hel which -lscusse-a ...« son* .;r-olen, (NC-

1»115, ?r~s, 2x. 454, R. 3066). This c.nforenot t -}: plnco

•-t Che Reich Ministry :f Inter! r rm. was nttcn.c*.; by

Seiler .f the Reich ministry -f Interl r, Glliienclstor,

ropresontatlVv.B :f the Government General in ocupie. P-.lnnc,

.f fields r the Bohrln. w.rfcs f I. G. Fnrben, am*. Obcr-

Bt.abnrzt Saholz r tnc nroy !'e-leal Inepeot rate, soh.lt

was a subordinate .i the v.efon..unt Hon ilocer. (Han.il-scr,

h. 3085), i’he alnutes if ti.le confer, nee state That:

The vacoim ahlcn lr presently -dn •
pr uoo -y the bohrln : i/orks fra
ohlckon ci *c shall oe tested for its
effectiveness in -in experiment. Ft
thi b purp'se Dr. Boiler will c ntact
Obfcrstumbannfuchrer Dr. iiru • wsfcy. *

Since Hru.cweky -was net proaent at t .is o-nforenou, it is

obvious that nri-ther onreronou t k place in whloh this

natter was Usousseii with hi; ana this, f c urne, o-m-

b or at os the untry in tho Din Dlnrj. The iiif n mnt R-sc

ninittoil, -n or 8D-©xruainati n, that with ut questl n a

c nfi roncu thcr than t;.o ne pr.aided v, r ty bclbor t ~Y

plnou an that the oerleo f experiments at buohenwal:'- were

r °*' u P' n at that tlmu (R. €468). h r. /-Is p lnt. t ut

that the buchenwnlv. uxpurliients w«re appr.v Ly the State.

(R. 6*46?). ft opy f the nlnut. c r the c nferei.oo ntton lod

by Soholz was sent t- hondl-.sur's ffloc. (MO-1321, ?r-p.

Lx. 463, R. 3084}.

hnndlcsor adults the p ssloillty that h. t prrt

In r. o nfurunou as described in the Din Diary. (R. 3061,

3066). In nis affl mvlt f 3 Oct bor 1*46 h. state.::

"4. nocirain t the etatoaunt f tho
interr . -ntin jiaurlonn ffleer, I was


BUpp: Si... t hnv„ att.
at whi oh Rel t o'rT Ociil

n r. ae- tin.- in 1941

I, yjyjj

- *>: i were

present, on 1 t hav.

!su1 t

he carry in -

out f typhus rese-.rcr. n h«; r

be-In. s.


I oann.t r.c ll.ot the ..rto, place nr.
participants, n r tho c ursu f such a
::-etln.‘ because f the ~'My years th- t
h'ivc passed an., the nu*;« r us lncl • nts
that h: v -ccurrcu.


- 14 -


"5. «s f.'o* ns the typhus pr-clcn Is
c ncernc-i, It any have -cen the- f Unw¬
in : ?r uctl n f the knwn, very effective
typhus vaccine, ncc r in • t. the method cf
?r >f. WEIGEL f Limber.-, which wns Strived
fr~ri lice, .r/evcd far behln the actual
iloaAndfl, .ic8plte an Increase. Typhus vacclno
wns also pn uo«i In the R'bert 1'OCH Insti¬
tute, thr Uf h cultures In chick en e . s ; Its
acponiinble efficiency, h.wevor, wns r. t suffi¬
ciently pr Vert. T. provide adequate pr t^ctl-n
f r the c .abut areas, as well ns f r the z no
f the lnterl r i«. ninst typhus. It become
necessary t. clarify the v.-aue f this vaccine
at the earliest m aunt, It Is theref ro quite
possible thi-.t in the c urse f a c nfurenoo
Dr. MRUGOWSKY :.i ht have been nssl.-noi. to
carry n ctu. let ab ut parallel tests, nt-ut
a sa ( ;e, c apat l'clUty an. efficiency f this
typhus vaocl.ie n the human -eln.•. The pur-
p.oe was t arrive at a final c nclusl n
whether the vaccine prepuce.. by the R-tert
KOCH Institute was adequately efficient /mil
o ul be used la the .'uhrenont aj.a in typhus
areas n the Eastern Fr.nt with a c nslherablo
pr sped f oucour.s.■ (:.’0-732, Pr o. Ex. 461,

R. aoec).

Hamlloser testified that a number f c nferenceo n
typhus an l typhus vacclmo oouireil. (R. 3061). One 't
t)io prluary pr .liens was the offlonoy -f tn, or.: ylk
vaccine. He act llrurwoky in tho su ur f 1.41 wh was
reo amunuod t : hlu by Sohrelbir i tho ..my loal In¬
spect -rate, lira woky thorc-artor was In c ntnet with the
Wuhmaont. iHamll-sor, R. 5063). He molts that he hart
pero n/CL c ntaot with Uru. wsfcy (R. 306-1). One suoh con-
ul m was a c nferonoo o.no.rnin c aeln,. vncclnntl hb
(R. 3064; see Infra.). Hnn..l Ser admits that he ha. o n-
tucto In the winter ;.f 1341 with Gil .enclstur o nci rnln.*
e :. yelk vaccines (R. 3067), and that ho .lad slnllnr o n-
tnots with C-ntl (R. 3068). Hnnrtl.soT, while mi lttln,-;
the pr.bleu In c nnectl n with the o y lk vnoclno, Ionics
knowledge vf h w that pr bloa w-.s l-us lvert alth u. h ho
minits Its res lutl n. (R. 3073).

Tile re Is no quest 1 n that tho Din Diary lc authentic
and In every respect reliable. Its c aunts have -een


- 16 -

- V


repeatedly corr eorutea -y ther . cuacnte. (See brief
n Mru. csfcy). Substantially every pri :e f the Dl'try is
si.Tied cy Din.- r, ns ho w-;s Inter fcn-wn, Schuler. That
these signatures .ire cnulno Is pr ved by o aparls- n to
unc nte-sted si nntures f Din -Sohulcr in the ruO'P’. (See
brief n Hru.r.WBky) . fc*mdl ser participated In the o n-
forenoe at whioh the. fundamental .edsl n wnn runohed to
test typhus vaccines by nrtlfioiully lnduoin typhus In
human experimental subjects. Pursuant tc that :eolBl n
typhus experiments in buohonw.-dd w«ro perf r eft*

i'he pr f hne st. wn that medical • macro unuer the
direct o nounu f hr.n .l :s«r were Inf rme.. f the details
if the typhus experiments In Buchenw-dd. « letter fr n
the defendant Mru .wc/.y, dated 5 Hay 1042, whioh was Bent
to Oburstntsarzt Dr. iiyer ;f tno Typhus and Vlrua Institute
of the K1 h Command .f the .^*-^y at Ci-no w, an m; thers,
i'.uuorlOuB tno results f the riret Series f oxperliu-ntB
oarriocl ut in Buoinnwald. (D o. ilrui wrky 10, Mru.-cwr.Vy
Kx. 20, h. 6087). This experiments Berlin o ncom. d the
toBtln.- l* the Wol 1 vaccine lr a the Typhua and Virus
Institute of L..o »ny In Onc w an th- e • y 1>; vaoolneo
produced -y Olldeaolster f t..e K bert l ch Institute and
the Behrln. rfcs. H rtallty in the unvacclmted r up
wus state, i t> be JO per cent, while tw pel’s no diet wh■
ha:, teen vuocinaty . with the Behrln * v-.cclnes. Here n.-aln
this . tounont pr: uoed by the aefe-nse c rr donates In
every detail the entries in the Din^ Diary c nccrnln the
first cxperluontal 6erlofi. Thus, Han .loser participated
In the .icclei n t c n uct tr.c typuus eXpcrlnonts at buohen-
Vale and his cue. r-ln:.t« Dyer, a typhus expert f the «ray,
was informed f the results : the experiments.

- 16 -


* 1 a


This was n t tr.c nly c ntr.ot 2 ’ the .iroy Me -leal
Inspect rate .'in nan-lesor with the typhus experiments
nt BuohenwalThe witness > • n testifl-. • that Din.-
ccmsi* n I 1 with the Military Me leal .»cn er.y In Berlin
«n tho Typhus -nJ Virus Institute *f the OKH In Crno-w
o?nocmln the typhus experiments. (R. 1157). Tho
Dln ( ; Diary shews that n a February 1343 £yor an Dr.

3ohnl t, a hy lcnlst attache 1 t the ..my Me tloal in¬
spectorate, lnnpcote- the buohunwal.l typhus experimental
stati n. This entry In the Din • DI ry was c rr - rated
by the /;r!. Report ;x* tho Typhus ?in.. Virus Institute of
tho Wnffon 33 .t cuchonwal*. fr ti c yonr 1943. (KO-671,

Proa. cht. 285, R. 1116). 30hr.l t was c .lle«. an a witness
for tho l ofen. ant Hannlosur ’inh tu-aix'l-... that ho an
Kyer uulo tho visit t auchenw-il t .on netrate to
Certain 33 . ct re, wh ho 0 ul n.t nano, awn new
container l* r yell .w l’ovur vaccine c. ul ee br ken pen.
(R. 3181). Talc ri icul u otr.t-..ont tl .t tw lap rtant
hy ’lenlsto f the .»rr:y 1!-. lc'il Inspect arntu sh ul nke
tho l<in* trip t Buchonwal r r such n perfunct ry jurp sc
Is lncroulble. £von t:.e '.cfomUmt R-.eo f uni' Dr. SohnlH's
toetlm ny ntsur-. (R. 6201-2). 3chr.l t t rko un'.tr Srn -
106ur tn Berlin fr :: 1942 Until .Au. ust • 1944. (han 1 scr,

R. 3059). 3on:i t am iyer nay very Well hnVu vlnlte.
the experimental stati n In Bucaonwnla in c nnocti*u with
the yellow rover vaccine tests -tin • c n uctod there, but
it Is entirely lncr ailblo that thoy 1 ;'. n t Inept.ot tho
typhus block --cause that Ip .* re t o vaccine experiments
wore ccn luctud. (3o«, Infra). « typhus oxpcrim.nt was In

pro.jruas t:.. v ry lay tr.ey Were there.

Pr f has »dc sh wn that typr.uc Infecte< lie- Were
furnisheu t the buchonwal oXperl ntal st -tl n -y tho


- 17


Typhus fin.. Virus Institute 1 the OKH (Kt n, H. 122C-1;
Urchhwlner, R. 1326). Schnlht henlea i&ls .in su ested
t: o lice o/irac fr::. the Behrln.- .« rks In L«.n-er<*. The fact
Is that there w*ro nly three plaoue In Gcrnnny ah ere the
lice oould have o -ic fra-the Typhus on. 1 . Virus Insti¬

tutes ?f tho OKH nt Crao w and Lentur. an the behrln. •

W rka 1 .1 Lentur,- (dohal t, R. 3171). Th so were the nly
Institutes nnnufncturln the Vel.-l vaccine an whloh,
therefore, hn.l Infvoted llcc available. (5ohrl.t, R.

3174). Tw r these Institutes were uni^r the c ntr 1 of
the Array while th«- thirl was a.sonl-prlvato institution;
tut oven the behrln-; « r> s In Lon-ur- was auop rte*l 'ey the
iwrmy ana ltn personnel was tralncu oy Dr. »«’e 1«1 'f the *rtoy.
(HO-1315, Pres. Lx. 4&4, R. 3086). alnc . the eu -hunwald
typhus experimental stall n h -.1 etr.lne.: the ..’oi l vnoolnu
i r experiment- tl n u nths tel re the behrln V rha i»l nt
was established In Letiuur •, It 16 quite Apparent that thin
material, t ether witu the lloo, w«x*e furnished -y the
Typhus an.. Virus institute f the OKH. The c nolunlvu
answer, h wuv. r, lo -•iven ty the Din.- Diary w.-.loh -i. ws
th-t the lice wer. reOelve . t-oi re 30 X v,.:,b. r 1942. The
entry l r lb DeOeii-er 1942 pr v, o th t nly then wap the
Behrln V rks in Lontur- -pened. M vor, the affl.iavit
Of Dletrcoh states timt the lice w.re tr u ht t Buohen-
wnla by a Wehroooht offioer. (Hovun Do. 1, h Ven D-o.

B 7k 1, p. 1).

Dr. Din -Schuler r«p rtud n the buch nwol . experi¬
ments f.t tiie uoetin f tnu Concultln • Physlol^ine t the
ffehmaont in lfc»y 133 nl t '*- -Hit ry lie leal *on.iany in
Berlin. [ NO-923, ?r s. _x. 436, R. 2063). Han 1 s.r was
present at this noetln.:. (hmiirs-r, R. 2943). The rep rt
itself, which huiuloser may n.t have he.or. 1 . per6 nnlly, was
umllvcroa t the Se-oti n .f hy. Ieiil6ts which was pr. sided


- 13 -


..vur Ly Generolnrzt achrdc^r f the «rcy kaiAaH In¬
spect irate, n subordinate :f Hnndloser. The defendant
P.:se heard Dln h - speak nn.: ne raised tjectl ns t the
character f the buchcnwd. experiments. (?. so, R, 6166),
a witness f r the defendant Rise Wv.nl b far -g t. testify
that fr ti what Hnse s'nlJ It was t- be cnolu.led that he
regarded these expcrlnentg as nurdcr. (Hearing, R. 6073).

He said th' t c ncentratl -n camp lnmtcs wore use.l In the
experiments. (ficorlnr, R. 6074). That Schreibor did not
Inform Han.llcser ab ut those unt far*! events in the ncet-
ln.r f the hy.-lenlots Is lnore tlolu. It shrulu be jrtod
that at the same nieetln.' ;f c nsultln, physicians, hr.nd-
loser hoar, tne rep rt n the sulfanllonl.-e oxperlnonts
conducted by GoLh .r t, Pisohcr, ami Ole-rhousir at tho
Kavenobruck Concuntrail n Oiap.

i i’hu typhus experiments were n:t tno nly c ntact of

the defendant honaloser with the cxperlai.nt.-a otntl n In
nuchenwalii. On 5 January 1943 the Bohrln« W-rks at Uarturr
sent a letter to Hru. wsky str.tln.: that they hr.: teen In¬
i’ rme .1 by Schrelbei- that every batch f yell m r^ver
▼noolne hnf t be test. n hui ;n celn o lei re beln t -
•lven t tho army. The letter expressly mate;’, that,
"Oberotarzt Dr. Schrolbor has t Id us that la the future
. the tests n human beln.-o will L u naSe thru.h y ur office.

Wo will therel’- ro perr.lt urs elves t sen : y u, at certain
, intervals, sanples f the varl us latches. We request Inf r-

matl n as t whether we als hr.Vu t sen. tr.e future bntohes
t Dr. ho van at ouohenwal.l." (NO-lbOO, Pr s. £x. 469, R.
5426). r w Is It that SohTelter was s Inf raad that ho
ciul.i aavlso the Bohrln W:rhs t have tr . yell w fever
vaccine tested :n human -win 8 Ly Hru wsky In fcuchtnwnla?

The answer Is ovl.usly that sfttelols of the «rmy llt.vlonX


- 19 -


Inspect:rnte, ^nclu-In. the .:c fondant hern 1  r » alrer. iy

know f an. hr d participated In the typhus e*p rlu.nts In

Suchonwcia pri r to 5 January 1943. Thu entry In thu Din

Dl'iry for 19 Jnnuury 1943 coneerne these /ell w fuV. r

vaccine tests. lh*. vaccines pr’ciucert y the Behrln h'-rks

nt Uarfaur.-, tho Robert K:ch Institute, ant the Institute

for Typhus nnd Virus Research i the OKH In Cmow woro ' ll
■ tested, A live virus was utilise* In t. la vr colno an? tho

entry states that each v-.coine Latch war. t ..c tented n
l’lvu p. ro n8. n very 1 * r •« nu -cr f lni.ateu Wore vncoln-
ntud cetwoon 13 January aid 17 i£.ay 1943 at whloh tine pro¬
duct 1 n I the yellow fc-vor vaccine was ne .u nod because
of the uilltnry sltuntl-n, Thu results i the yell w
l’uVi r vaccine Lusts were Bunt In i.upl lento to tho efun-
ilnnt Ururoweky an.t t Dr. Sohui t r the nruy Me/lonl In¬
spect ,ruto. (NO-265, ?r s. Dx. 267, R. 1146-7). Jehnldt
was tho hy le-nlat attached t the <%rmy He leal Incpuot rato
nmi ho w rkud un or HnnOlreor until /.u.-uot 1344. (Hand-
loser, H. 3069). He testified that he kne* n thin - n. ut
these vaccine cxporlaents :.lth u h he was In buclunwald
while they wore In pr reso. (R. 3164).

As hereinbefore nted, Hon .1 Ser .a.irltte th'-t In tho
onrly part f 1043 he ha a c nr.ronco will, tho ho 1'unJant
lira, ;wsky o ncomln c r;blne vaccines a. alnst diarrhea,
typh Id, oh -lorn, etc. (Handl Eur, R. 3064). There can
bo n- a u.t that tills c nferonoe was the n tivntl n f r
the l.ar. u scale vucclnntl n experiments n 45 Innatee f
the Buchenwald C ncontratl n Cnnp Letwoon 24 ilarci and
20 nprll 1943, ns Bet rt« In the Din.- Diary, finch p. rn n
was vaccinated n el. kt liferent ays within f ur r»o fce
o. alnst snallp x, typh in, typhuo, p-.m-typh 1 .. and B,

cholera, ni uiphtheria. In c nneotl n wit: tie para-typhoid


a and 5 vaccines. It sh ula be note.: that '.he .vitnoss
Kogon testified that prls ners w^re .Ivon pr.ra-typh-Id
bacilli In potato salad. Ho ols- stated that the ex¬
periments In buchenwald with dleoases other than typhus
resulted in deaths althtu.rh relatively fewer. (K.rn,

R. lla2-3).

Other entries In the Din.: Diary show r. close
o:nnectlrn between the Ar~y Radical Inspect rate un or
HandloBcr ai.v the experiments In Buchenwald. Several
entries fr the 21st DeOemcer 1343 t- 16th June 1944
pr:ve th t 1 . -l.cd plasua was tested n c-nccntratl-n
oarjp InnatcB In Buchenwald 'ey Din. :n orrt* r f the military
Jlodlcnl AOav.eny In Berlin, nhlch was 6ue r..lnated t Hnnd-
loeur. h*i n tustlflo.i that Inmates fr:m buoianwald wore
used In thouo experiments and s me >1 the subjects .led,
i>r bubly uuu t the c :-lnatl n »f the 6hock result In*?
fr n tho transfusion f the -l.i -1 plasma and their
p; :r phyolonl o n .ltl n. (R. 1190-1).

Typhus experiments were also c -nductod n inmntOB
f tho Natzwollur C noontrntln Camp by Dr. Bu-one Haa.-on,

C noultln, hy-:lenlnt f the Luftwaffe »lr Fleet Rtloh.

(3tie Pr Buoutlon brief n R se). The HI h 0 .xnnnd -f
tha Wehrnnoit, f whloh nun.-loScr was L’e-.lcnl Chief,
"btalned reports *n these experiments (Hyer, R. 1765).

In this c nne'ctl n reference Is a -.In node t^ tho state¬
ment f sohriuder that nft ; -l:8ur wap inf x-nod f medical
resoJ.ro carried :ut by the Luftwnffo. (MO-449, Pros.

Hx. 130, R. 471). A letter of Kfthnt, Chief f Staff tc
3chrfoder, dated 29 au uct 19-.-., and *e. kbs.. t Hansen
,>r,veo that the reseoro.. w rk f r.u cn was cr u r.t t
hanul^ser'6 nltentl n. hannen hau teen c n uctln - recearch


on on attM»u-tod avlrulent ty.^us vaccine ./ 1 th a vie’./ to
establishing a ;>iv uctl-.n plant at tf.u University of
otr/;8_ ur. . Kai.nt advised r.aa cn that, ■« uecinl n as
t tiu estnblishnent of a vacclno Eonufacturln ,l»mt
cannot be an . ’fcronuse the Chief :f tho Me .leal 3ervlcos
f the V/ohmacht who al-no Is c npetent to ; 0 cl e u,»'n
the ./r.curenent of vacclnoo has not yet token a stand
In the matter," (NO-131, ?r s. Lx. 309, R. 1-104; See
Mao N0-306, Pr o. Lx. 296, R. 13a?).

Xho ty,.huo re Boar oh of .-/in *en woo olosnlfluh
"Ur. rent * In n aeetin cf the Office f r Science and
Research under the defendant R,$t oK In «u not 194-1
which was atlonded ey awswere .f the Reloh Kcoe.-irch
C.unoll an. the Wol.noaoht. C ,.les f a letter listin'
the vuri us research nsnl-nnento wi.ich were classified
"Urgent" at this Ocutln were cent t the varl uii nedlcal
br/inchea if the .•‘ehrn.oht (NO-692, Pr o. Lx. 467, R. 3408;
Rost ok, R. 3409; dee ale; the affidavit ftu.i ir br-ov t,
N0-370, Pr:o. Lx. 294, h. 1386).

Under these clrcunst/uices It *:uct &« o nclu.di that
the defendant Kan .l:sor was in: rrieu i the crli.ln.al
experlnonts c nduct u <» oy H/uii en,


- 22 -


r. -Frjc£ln-; Zx erlncnts (In •‘.lctscnt. ? r». 5 (? )

The crlulnnl eh*meter of the freezing ox- erlncnta
conducted in the Dachau Conccntr* tlrn C np arc described
In detail In the Prosecution’e brief on Slev -re. Theeo
ox: erlcu r.ts wore the subject cf two rnl ro-. rts by
Hclzloohner, who conducted the ex. crinonto with Hngchor
end Flnke. Toth reports were dcllv.-rcd tc n lrrgo n’Ou '
of military physicians. The first occasion w»s at n meet-
lnp In Nurnberp on o Id problems htld. on 26 and 27 October
This rjootin - was sponsored by tho Luftwa.ffj, but rc~
re 80 r.tntlvos of all br nohes of tho . Jchrnocht were resent,
luclu^in,’ 8chielber, ono of H^ndloscrs closost oollaborn*-
tora in tho ...«y :i*dlool Ins.-cotcrate, Cr-oner of tho Jioun-
tuln Modlc«l Scho 1 of tho »ray at St. Johann, end sever 1
of floors attached to tho Mlllt ry -et'lcnl Acndony. The "ub-
liuhed ref ert on the :oetln,: show a that Hclrlo. hnor povn n
very dot'ilod cllnlcl 'enorlrtlon of the effects of freur-
inp on hun-.n ' oln n. (NO- lOl, ?r r. Ex. r«3, R.509). It is
obvioua x'r:n the r. rt ltoolf, n! rtleul-.rly ‘/ 1 th ron-
Poot to the cupi leru ntnry st- er.ent by Rancher, th-t ex¬
periments r V In* described rather then observations In
floe, rescue. .*vlntora in distress -re not left in tho ocean
in order to r oerd. choir to:: crnturcs the roc electrically.

Ono need net o eculato on tr.ot, however, so the witness
Lutz testified tint Holzlochncr's re; art caused a sensation
at tho meeting ns it was node clear tint concentration onnp
lnnutes were used ns cul.lccts -nd tint sene cf tho vlctlno
died. (K. 272). mso st-tod th-t this lcoturo reoolvod
no ri lnuse -.nd tirt Kolzloehncr *.c very disturbed be-
c use of his pertici;-tlon In the ox erinents. (R. 6-iTO).

Dr. Crncner of the ^ount'.ln Medical School of thr
Arny, which w'O subordinated to Handloser, wac eo enthu-


Ei-otic ab ut the freezir. • ex 'crlacr.ts thrt he nekod

- 2 a-


Haacher for , ersisslon to see the aotunl ex erloonts and to
oooporntO with hla on dry cold ox; riraentn. <suv-si 3 . Pros.
Ex. S6, R. 328; 157S-PS, Pros. Ex. 57, R. 329).

That Sohrclher lnfomcd Hnndloser about tho frojzln.-
expcrloents is proved by the fact thnt Holzloehnor VlUJ ln-
vltod to looturc nt tho Second iioetln- of the Consulting
Physicians of tho Jchmnoht on 30 N venber to 3 Doccnbcr
1912 at the iillltnry Medical Aoadeny In Berlin. (NO-322,
Pros. Ex. 435, R. 2059). Tho Qc-Uenl services of tho
Wohmnaht voro Intensely interested In frcczlnr probities
ns a result of tho cat astro hla winter of 19-11-42. (Hnnd-
lo.ter, R. 3028-30). Tho report on thlc aoetlng shown that
Kandloocr ooanented on tho cold lectures ond he ndnltn
having hoard Holzloehnor *0 talk, (R. .5033 , 3096.) Tho
nodical directives Issued provldo fir treatment of shock
due to .rolongod exposure to oold by rapid rc warnin': with
a hot hath. (Hnndlosnr, R. 3031). It la n "nront that a
dirootlvo which so deviated fron the established rnotloo
of clow row-rralnr (Handl oor, A. 3030) would not hv, boon
Issued without 0'<roful lnv stlRation of Holzlochmr* s work
by tho ren onslblo nodical efricorc oubordlnatofl to
n-nilosor.

C. Bulfanllnn llo E xnorloonta (Xndlotaont P-ra. 0 (E)
as to the description and criminal nature of thoan
uxporlnenW, roforonoe any hr aole t the 'r-nocitl n'c
br!of on Gobhnrdt.

The prelira In ry revert by Gnbhardt *.n the flrot fow
aulfanlln.nlle ex erlnents shows thi lntorc.it of tho i.rny
Medical Inn, ectorate in tho subject under lnvcstl~ntl m.

One paragraph of the report says that:

■The trl, lc—distribution was reserved for tho
2nd o-rluc 1 * cx erlnonts now In >rOfcrcas. Throe
prisoners In cnoh .tou were Jnocul'tod. On< cr~
son was left without trertnent as control, the
second was treated with Cntoxyn nc before and
with the third the Mr rfnnll.rcntalbln powder
manufacture l by I. G. Fn-ben was or. loyed, since


thin was strongly recocwndcd by th *rny
dcdlonl InGpoctornte. ■ (NO-2731, Pros.Ex. 1-73,
a. 5622).

A full report on the sulfnnllanlde ixperlncntP per¬
formed on concentration oan Inmates at the R^vcnabruoK
Concentration Can; win .riven by GoHiardt and Flachor at
tho Third Meeting of the Consulting Physicians, hold from
10 to 19 May 1913 at the llllltrry Hcdlonl Acadeny In Perl In.
It wan Hnndlooer who lroued the invitations to tho noctln^s
of the Consulting i-hynlclans, i resided at these ra.:> tln-rn,
nn>i uui ervlnod tho scloctlon of D.onhra and cubjoots.
(Hnndlooer, R. 3009). The military Hodleal Aoa.le-ny wrs
under nls connand. Gobhurdt testified th/1 ho Insisted on
ranking n coa loto rpport n these uxt orinentn at th<* meet-
lnr In Hry 19.3, that there was oonnldor/ible dlocuaelin
about the content of tho 1 « cturu with tho person In char -o
of the prorrnn for the n.a tin.*, that this won ulth r
8oh»olbor r the defondunt Rostock, that the pro.-rur. for
thu mooting listed his lecture under the title "Spool'll
E-pc rl'3< nto" , that this In lo tted he v>.u trylin* to show
nomt thin : unusual, nnd that the 'hole uubjeot ran fully
llscusse ! with clth. r 8chrdV<r or H tt ok durln r tin nr-
rnnf.'aent(7 I'or tho Be tin.: of Hay 19*:3. (K. 1103-00), Thorc
had boon continuous corros ondenoe c ncerrln* the ori'crl-
merits between Gebhardt, Grawltz, "hd Schre lbor or Roitock.
Grawltz had a com Into royort n th. <v crloents when lie
negotiated with Sclirelbttr or R-stook. (Oobhnrdt, R. -1107).
Schrelbcr 3t ted he received Ini' nation on the exnorlmentB
tbrouKh fflol-1 channela. (Oobh»rdt R. :1C3). .fhith-r
Gebhardt discussed the ex erlnento ”n : tho report t- Vo
made at the leetln.' In Hay 13-13 with 3 0 hrclber ;r Rest.'ok
noed n t bo armed at this point. .'th nen w. r< sul rdlnr-
tud to the defendant Handlocir and the nrmi’uFcnts for the
nootln * were subject to his final n r val, Gebhardt testi¬
fied quit clearly to the effect that he was p >uod to any


conoui'l'i.cc >,nd that he bub anxious to hrln. - the whole cul»-
Ject of these experiments Into the open.

Hniullopor oi'nlto that he .-na -rosent at the lecture
-Ivon by Gobhardt and Fischer. (R. 2343). Gebhardt testi¬
fied that ’.vhen he *avo the introductl -n to the lecture, he
expressly a tat ad that th. experiments hid been carried ut
nhinnn b- In,-'8. (R. 1109). Gohhardt does not definitely
ronarcher wheth. r he raid the experimental persons •«rur« c n-
c^ntrotl n oaup inant' s. The defendant Flaohor has at'.ted
that this wao made dear. (NC-472, Pros, Ex.2o , R.v.l;
cf. Fincher, R. 13G5). It la not contrav rted that the
clinical ditails of the rxporlnents tcre explained In proat
det-11. The mootln- wno told that 7: p.rions had born * x-
perlitontod on, that tho lnreotlonc had been artlilclnlly
producod, that various Jru.-o woro used In tr< tine the ln-
footlonu, that :>ur -leal treatment wao used, '>nd that three
porn no tiled. (Gohhardt, R. 1103-10). Ev« ry \otall v;no ex¬
plained.

The defendant Flncnor stated In hlo affidavit that when

tho sulfanilamide dx; • rlnrnts Started, h wan tcld that they

Wort Vein* oarrled out on or«l< r of tbt Chief of tho Me Ileal

Service of the Wohranoht an.’. the Chic-i of th. M. '.leal 9ri—

•

vice of the 8tnte, with tho Initial order fr i Hitler.
(NO-472, Proit. Ex. 23*', H. 341). Fincher repudiate d thlr
statement on the ntend, but under thL circumstances It in
clear that his .-emlerl ins prior to indictment are entitled
to connldorablo wolpht. Kls statement 1 . u rrt d by tho
very urp' •«. .if th. experiments, vhlch to find an of;ec-

tlvo remedy far battle wound Infections, .7h< In G. many
could have bo^n norn concerned vlth these experiments than
the Chief of the Medical S P rvlcci> J the Vchi*nnchtT More ver,
the r suits of th* experiments, aun.rre ac they were, wor*

row. tly utilized by the *edl<v«l S.-rvlc n f the 'Tehrnncb t.

K-ndlosrr, R.IOSO). - 2 d-


Tto results of the selfanil aside experiaents ^wsra sunarisod in the
report cf the Tliird I&eting of Consulting PlysiciaiJ arri radical
directives aaro based upon ttcse e*peri=r:nts distributed throug’j-
cut t!» cdical services of the .»-laxacht (KC-723, r’*o3. £x. -i36, R.

2063; Coblnrdt Sx. 10, R. U112-16). It should to r.oUd tr.at tills
report itsolf rakes dear trr.t the exrtriror.ta: subjects w'-ro
-Jtifical y infected.

'jobber dt insisted, during ids direct ».xani nation, that otx of
purposes of ids frank report to tlx Meeting of Coiaclti-TR Physicians
me to put the justification for (Jkm c^p^ricunta in Ij u. iu testi¬
fied, "I insisted ‘-hat a caapl ted wxr' .•?->-r.t uould oj.lv li.vc its
Justification jivsn to it if subject ?< - clc ir description of its
progress, Ox . nbedt it to i tree uj u> then not cenc rood dth
tho natter at all, ttv entire picture togottor olth Uc quostlom are
tic conclusions which T ir i*u raking, nnd is .-hat I an introducing for
th.i joands of 3S .*n — is t ..t right v r is ./at ureng? In rhich
connection, of course, I also .ad tho t rcen-.i is.: that =y na.c should
lcv„ Uic protection of exports and that 13 -t .w should b. fore d to
recognise publicly tho ororgency in widal I und y. if." (H. hr5).
Oobhnrdt uns no*, disappointed; his <..c|».rir»jn- .s rereiv-d 4 t l.-.t 1 acit
approval. Handloavr :..nrd the lecture, lui i ‘. ion, nado

no investigation arxl t. ck no action. Jhd h. j .rferoed .‘da 'uty of
lnvuaMji.'.ticn, lx would have b-un able to prevent tic las*- j ri s of ox-

led rut ac lnu as Aug 1 '.'.3.

T!at scries cf cxpcrir.;nts ans p-.rf. Rrtf or. six iolis'i v.xun -vh :.vre
opuratod on by fare, in *Jx dirty bu-.ker at t!x >.v nsbruck Cencentmticr.

- • ■ r. })•

suli’anilvoide experiments, th. tore, nueclc and nerve expvTinerts
(indictnunt Pars, 6 (F)), vUen wore ccnluctcd by th
oan. place, wiuld have b job brought to light. But Hanilrscr did notidr^.
Tlw fact i3 that he had no otjecti:.. cscporlnontation on o-ne.-ntraticn
canp innates without tfxir consent, ii. taxv and appr red f this


policy ns eorly ou the first ,-nrt f 1042, when he parti¬
cipated in the Initiation of oxr- rlnents with typhus
vaccines in the Euchenwrld Concentration Cnmp. Ami In
December 1J42 ot the Second M, tin.- of Consulting Physi¬
cians , ho heard the report of Holrloehner on thi freer In '
oxerlmonte nt Dcotviu. It con only be concluded that
Handloner, far from objectin' to r.uch experiments, active¬
ly nun orti.d th«n,

D._ rp 1 *"" 1 " Jnuniloo (Indlotnont t _imro.iBni>h_g_HL__

Following the attnek on Russia, epidemic Joun'leu
(ho atltlo onldomlo’) became n dlcor.no of nnjor proportions
for tho Co man tf 0 hrnnd»t. (Outacit, R. 270V. In aono unite,
c n unit ion up to 60 percent wore rep rtort fron thin 'lccr-.ro.
(MO-010, Proa. Ex. 167, H. 735). iiocordlnfly, an intonnlvo
of fort was uodo to discover thu onuses of and vnoolnntlono
n.rnlnct oj.idonlo Jaundice. Dohrnrn -nd Outselt f tho A r iay
Itortlonl Inspectorate md of the Medical 8 0 rvlooo f

tho Luftwi ffo wor- anon • tho dootoro working on thin bub.loot.

Dohmen nnd Outaclt wor. nttrohod to tho Mlllt -ry Mortlonl

Academy .nn<: directly subordinated to Schrclbcr (Gutzolt

h. 2752). Tho Military tfc’.lcnl *«r'coy w:m, courno, nub-

rdln- tod to Hcndloaer as *rny Medical laf.’-'Ot r.(Out: fit,

R. 2740). Outr.elt •»:«* nloo C^npultln,- Internl t to Hand-

loser. (Cutielt, R. 2700). Dohnen wun no of the first to

loolrto ft virus which wns olalnsd t; be o»«uso of Jaundice.

Thin wno neoenr llehod iy lnocul-tln.: cnln^ls with cev no

taken from human beln.M suffering fr n the dlscaso (OuUolt

R. 2605). However, considerable dlv..-ranee of opinion rtlll

existed no t whether Jnundlc* was caused by bacteria or n

virus. (Outselt, R. 3045). On 1 Juno 12.3, Grawltt, Reich

Physician of thu SS - requested Himmler to nrkc cone ntratlon

camp inmates available for Infection by Dohnen *lth hlo •
virus. He stated that c-oec r denth anon,* the

- ::6 -


expcrinontoX euljocts were to b 'i.'ttlci •’ted (PO-OIO,

?roe. Ex. 157, R. 735). It was n.t stated ihothor the
deaths wore to bo brou 'lit about f or tho . rupor.o of poi*-
f ’rnln,- autopsies (as In tho cases the hi -h altitude
exi'crinents) r whether they were tc be a ectcd fren tho
’.lncr3c ltsclr (nfl In the eases f the ty.hus ex orlnantn).

Hiunler consuntcd to the use of ol *ht ? liah Jots -vh-
hnd boon G'ndenno \ tc lenth In the »uachwitz concentration
Cud an' t Dohnen 1 ; oon’uctln.: thr ex riner.tn.( ’JO-011,
?rn’. Ex. 13-, H. 757). Th. ix^erlnentu w r- c-rrlofl out
by T hnen In tho Snchacrhr.un n C. aocntr-tlon Com , and
aoc -pdln • t th, affidavit r th Vfon’nnt Rudolf Ir^ndt,
00130 '.f the uxporlauntnl ou*. Jectu died an hrooult. (110-571»
Rrtu. Ex. 1:’5, n. 753). Sv. n the d- xenne witness Outzolt,
villa collaborated cl ;ely tilth Lchncn, a’nita th"t Dchnon
tiorkod In Saohsonhausen, but at- tod that this was n rely
n ruse tc avoid turning over tho Jaundice* virus to Grntvltz
•»nd in rc’-nty n infection ex arl »or erfor

(Outzctt, n. 2722). Gutzelt ’.Id n >t . x lain, however, nhy
Uohnon, who vino In no wry oubordlnatcd to Qrwltz, should
havo onrwed In such ridiculous scientific "h rse ley".
(Gutz..n, R. 275>J).

In vcl.rhln * tho credibility f the teatlnony f
Gutzelt, c'nnlder-tlon should V-c -Ivan to th fnot th-t ho
wao a ner.bc-r «*f the SS hlnnclf an’ th t he tan clonely rr.“
noclatcd with Ochocn In hi: r.^r/i. (Gut-tit, R, 2760).

In Juno 1 : c nforoncc ex -rip wan c-llcd by

Handler-r f r th pur o if c r'inntlin* Jaur .Ice rone arch.
This c rtf'r nee t ■>. lace t rcr.l u n v >n resided ver
by SchrclV r (Gutzolt, h. 2752). Han’.l nr, Gutzdt, and
Ha- -on, r. Ccnsultin.; Hyrlanlst f th< Air Fie. t Reich, --ore
all r nent at this c -nfcrcnco. (Gutz It, ri. 271?'.
Schrulbor aacl.-nod *r >Uj s of .hyclclnns to v. rk tCfretbor n

- 23 -


,1’un icc oroblemo. Dihm-n, Gutzoit and Kapron wuro as-
rl.ncd O one of theov croupe* (Gutzeit, K.2717). On 12 June
1 44, H°jvcQtt hlnat'lf requested Sohrelher t - nssl *n Dohnon
to w rk with him. Gencralarzt Sohreiber • t thnt tin.: woo

•

Oonmnnder of the LUlit-ry Medical noadeny. (HO- 2 * , ?r n.

Ex. 130, R.73 ). Schrclber oonpllod with thlr roqu<st.
(N0-30O, Pr-.e. Ex, 131, n. 710).

On 24 Juno 1 .4, Gutzclt wr U t Knr-cn th>t ho vna
also roqudatln,’ SohrolKr t nonl *n Dohmcn to Hn^ccn. He
wont n to ntntc th'-t ho wna mkln.: prc!:"r*>tlon f r ex; cri-
raonta n hun-n bcln-ro *nd he wrntod Han,ten to supply him
with hln vlrur. nntorini. (H0-12-., Pros. Ex. 103, R. 743).

H‘> pen replied t Outre It's letter n June 27, 11 l ntntlnc
th-'t ho anti |rind that Dohnon would Vo naol *nod ti hin no of
10 July. irthor atntod that ho wno vnrfcinp with JColk,

l'uctohnc:r and Suohoohuwort, nil Sfriooro f tho Luftwaffe,
on Jnundlc«, problems nn* that ho hnd arranged with Knlk to
o nt'.uot hum *n oxi orlaonto with hie n-ti rl' l. (N0~12b, Proa.
Ex. 1SK, ft. 744). On the anno date Hn :cn wrote to hio
oollnbornt r Knlk, who wno attached to the ot.-.ff ,T tho de¬
fendant Sohr odor, ot.- tin • r.o f liras: "In th< -noloaure I
oo y of & let n Gutzeit and ny

ount >rooood mb .n ra peoclMc with tho ox •crlttunta on
hUDnn boln.ro. Those «x crlnnntc, of course should bi o-rriotf
uf nt Strnci'lur - 'r in Its vicinity. C mid y u In ytur
Official altlrn t"ko the ncocoanry at< ? t obtain tho
require 1 or crinuntl r-u Sects. I d n*t know what rrit of
imb.looto GutLdt h«s nt hio dlor a"l, wh thcr they nro
- Id Lera or thir >c\lc".(li0-126, Pros. Ex. 135, K.7-15).

The renf-rk about " other to lc" Is an obvious r.f rcnco

t' o.nccntr''tl n cn lnrint s, uf n when Hnn.ron hr-.:’ Ion:

since been xperinontin,: with virulent typhua virus, rhllo

t-r rofemneo t "Str-sslur* c-r In It vicinity", Indicates

- 30 -


the Concentration Cam; Natzv.. 11. r. (r.i.e supra n ty;-'hun

/

experiments). Herr Xnlk and hie Chid*, the J- fondant
Sohroeder, wor<: well advised n how to ,r cure Conoentra-*
tlon C'-np lnmntua for nedlonl uxrerlaentH bfcause only u
s’cu weeks bef .re Schr.oder himself hr.d r quested inuat-n
l’r n HIrani or for the sea water exrcrlnentp.(lJ0-lG5, ?r^o«
Ex. ld-J, h. 4&5).

The rocord Ghowo that Dolinon did In fact ,;<> to
Str- eot ur- to w rk with Haairen cn the direct orders of
Sohrolbor. (Outi. It, K. 2752). Hnndlcser wun advise l if
this c Unborn tl n or Dohnon /in-'. Han.-on. (Gutzelt, H,
27537).


Still another f.orlofi f .Inuni loo experiments w» ro
planned with which HanJl n< *• wan c <nnoott On 20 January
10i5, i/.ruowaky nr>to Grnr/Ltz as fallows:

"Hauptcturrafuchrer Pr four- r Dr. Dronel, Director
of the Hy.-Ionic Institute ;i* the University of Leir.~
fcl* han cultivated a Ylrao fr n era mi sufferin,"
fr m Haprtltlu and buooocdod In transplanting It on
animals.

It lu ncooseary t rviko x. erlm nt:. n human
hclnys In islcr to dct. mint the f-ct that this Virus
in in Vli ; itltlfl OJ.ldcmloa,

The , lonl, otontiary f >r research on oildcralou In the
xlcich lujitearch C unell theref rc ad ’r- noed h'.msc If
t mo with the request t carry ut the above ox orl-
niunts,

I -in ' jkln.- you to vbt«ln auth -rlzation from the
ii r ichafuehrcr SS to o • rry ut the neo ccnry cx'orl
nento -n 20 suitable rle ncrc :h have hitherto never
suffered Iran He atltls Ej ldinloa, t the- typhus ojc»
erlmont-1 nt-tl n the C noontmti n Camp' Luahonwnld.
(UO-1303, Pr u. Ex. -1 7, H. 5*100).

Thi- rli-nl tuntlary f r roHonroh n e- ldcmlcs in the

H. I oh P.0 search C unoll wh reou.nt d those ex crln« ntrt on

Conoentrntl n C*>mp lnaatos v.-s o.-n. r larzt Schrolbor, at

the sane tine o mender f Lehr -rm. e 0 f the Military

Medical Academy under Handles or. (L'ru- wcky, K.5402).

Sehrcihcr had Icon dosl nato.' ly Handl ser f r the very ; ur-

r f, ee f co rdlnatln : Jaundice research and the rae<-tln.* in

- -


Lroslau i-a called tu that end.

In view of this evidence rutllnurt nKve, It can only
be concluded that the Jaundice experinentr were carried
out by subordinates of th« defendant Handl-.aer with his
kn wlod-’c and ap; r^vnl.

E« Other Sx purlr.onts.

(1) Gns Sx. erlnonts (Indictment, Par. 6(D))

Fr a the '/Inter -f 13a*i until the summer of 13 4 4,
ox orlnontu to determine the most effective treatment for
wounds o-used by mustard (Li3t) mo were conducted In the
Nntzwoller C nocntratl n C/inp under the ru; rvlrl n of
Professor Hlrt f the University of Strasbourg. For u doo-
orl tlon of the orlnlnnl nature of these exjorlnontu, re¬
ference nay bo made t the brief n Sloven-.

In Juno l'*:2, Hlrt *r to tx re ort on his exnorlraonto
In treatin ’ nan w unde with v&trnlno. (NO-097, Pros. Ex.
200, H, 1022). Thao* oxcrlnonts w-re o nduotrrt n or’ers
of tho J.-hmacht, Hu stated he had n t bom nblo to con¬
duct ex rrlnents on human beings beef use f the offonslvo
.vulnst Franco. Ho submitted a ror.ort on the experiments
to hlo "(Jon.-ralarzt, whu transmitted It to -orlln*. In this
ri’i rt ho su • rue tod direct ex • rlnonto on human beings with
is In nler todoturolno th rot.-ctlvo effect -<t vitamin
troatment ( lb lc*> .

In the nutec<iu«.nt gac ox. trln^ntc _n concentration
oaup innatos at Untzwcllor, doctors or tho Luftwnffo w rkod
with Hlrt. (Hull, H. 1059, 1001). 0»erarzt Winner, a Staff
rhysicl-in of tho Luftwaffe, war th* . rlnolpnl colla» orator
of Hlrt. Ho was ; ut at the ’lspoaal f Hlrt for these
"war In; rt-nt" ,;as oxTerlnonta ly the Luftwaffe Hedlcnl
Tralnln.: D.-i artnont VII. (HO-195, Pros. Ex. 266, R. 1033).


Hi-ni’l sr t.stlfi. th-t he t/ r- v ry interested In
t;c 'ic-1 rcMone In connection -rlth chnlc-1 r-rf'-rc n rente.
(?.. 303 «j) The consulting r-pccl.-Jlst to the rtr ny li. Picul
In:- eoternte on thin su' .loot -713 OVcrstnrzt Wirth whin
K n llop. r h"d knc*n for ye-rH. firth wns ntt ch d to the
Mlllt- ry Medical 4»cn*iony. (Hrndloaer, A, 30-K5) The crln-
ln-1 oxi rlncnts Vy ?r>f <i i6 r Lickcnh->ch f the Unlv rnlty
f Str-'sahour * with phcc one ,'rc , descrl v o.l In the hri< f on
K rl -rndt, were ocnducte.’. with the -aiowlcdpro of tflrth.

In the Second rio" rt cn these experiments It 1 b n: ted that
,'lrth rondo nn lno. ootlon of JlcXcnhnch'fl Institute.(110—li-52,
Proa. Sx. -i5G, A, 3iOC).

Th* t H-mdlaocr'o ouh'rJin-itc ’.Tlrth wnu ooo • r tin.- with
K.-rl ~r nit *n ,;-o r no-re:, urnurnt to the fuehrer Order
Id further cvllonoo.l *y the f-ot thit >.’lrth sue- rtod do-
c ntonln-'t!'n t atn -n wnt- r ironed with Lr t .-jnu, The
r.: rt cn thoso x crlnonto c r"le* tut on Innnt n of the
Ncuoni -r .ini Cenoontr tl-n C-n ot-tca tint: third verier,

l’ ex crlnonto wnc c-rrlcd out with *n n »-nt of the Lout
,:r u , th no hyxl tin • *ms L at, in nco r ’nncc with tho
nu. -o-’ti n .".do hy Ohorotnrst or. -irth nt the c nfor noo
n •; Docoohor 1944 with Hoichkonaleenr Jr. r
CX-1.:, Pres. £ v . -I.', R. Vi53»_}. The h 08 -cnc -c orlm nto
hj Plck’nhnoh undor tin* lrecti-ir. of Zr-n.’t • oro cinoludod
inly - few n ntlu- e rllcr. It lo nulte clunr thrt fflrth
v/oul.' not hrm ou.r • etc' ox rlnenta cn c neentr tlon c-n-
lnnnt. u unleoa It -.~e rn * r vu -lilt ry nodicrl muotloc.

(2) Iblrrln -wnd 8»n t< r Sx orlncntn (Indiotraont,

Per. (fl) 'ml (0)'

Tho Prosecution rellca rinr.rlly on the ocltlin of
the defend-.nt H -r, 1 o* r In connection ^lth the ohnr :c of
rt’Ci nelilllty fer the --1 rln -n ' sen w-tcr ex- rimentn.


The nnlrrla experiments continued from February 1942 until
the S rin-: of 1545 end over 1,0JO inmates were ex orIrantod
on. (See the brief on Rose). It is not tc ho exoootcd that
auch a lrr : ;e aeries of ex. erinente vent unnoticed in hi.-her
medical circles. as to the sea -.inter ex crlnents, r< foranco
la again made to the statement of Sohroedor that Hnndlosor
was Infcreed about nodical r< search by the Luftwaffe.

(NO—149, ou ra).

(3) glol o.-lcrl Wa r fare Ex per i ments

In 1043 Mol Of- leal warfare beoano a mnttcr of sono
interest in military circles In Goranny. The defendant
Clone wno oomalssi^nod by RclchGnaroch-'ll Ooerlnp with the
tank of research in this field. (NO-675, Pros. Ex. 37,

R. 142). a a poeial cannlttoo under the name ■riitz-rbcltor"
was founded to Investigate natters ooncornlnp blolo :lorl
warfare. Stabca.rzt Prcfeccor ullevo who w.o an officer of
tho Army tlodlonl Inc; octoratc nn; ; n subordinate of Kanrtloscr,
was n roninont member of this c; mnlttoe. (NO-1306, Pros.

Ex. 325, R. 1462; Handlos r, R. 2361). Handloscr conferred
with Ilorao oonocrnln.- biological warfare. (Hnndlosor, R.
2365).

In n noctim* of tho "Blltzarboltcr" Committee on

4 8 a) tcB)' ‘.r 1-43, which wno attended by Kllcvo anon* others,

Llono ou.nested that experiments should bo ocnductod on

human )ein-s since it v/nr. not known under uhnt conditions

inhaled acrosolec or iis;crscd droplets of certain pntho-

cnlc perns cnuccd disc .'••'s in nan. (KC—310L>, 1-roe. Ex.

325, K. 14b4)• a aln in a meeting of 23 February 1944,

Clone pointed out tho neoersity for experiments cn human

beings "nd reported that a new Molo.-lc’-l rerpon -Vas to

be 8 tudlod rnd tested. Field Marshal Keitel had riven the

permission to iulld the Institute and Hinnlcr and K rl

Era.ndt assured him of their support, clone also st-ted

-34-


that plague night constitute a serious hazard ml nocor^
dlngly It was nec scary to ex'-nlne the leguc v-cclna In
experiments on huna.n beings. The effects cf nnxlunn doses
of several poisons wore to he tested by cx orlnents on
hunnn Kings. (N0-13O0, Pros. Ex. 326, R. 1467). In Its
Judgement the International unitary Tribunal wide n find¬
ing of fact that Soviet prisoners of -7 nr were used In nodl-
oal cx r.tncnts concerning biological warfare, which noro
ofton than not proved fatal. (International Military
Tribunal, Cane No. 1, R. 16691)

Th> t .lone actually carried out the pro ceed oxporl-
raonts with olsons on hunrn beings la -.roved by a tolotypo
fron 8lovers to Rudolf -r-n.it date 4 «ugust 16, 1044.(NO-G41,
Prop. Ex. 327, R. 1103). This con.uunloa.tlon states that
:ionc wished to ro :»rt to Hlnnlor concerning prison cx erl-
nents In nnpllfloatlon of the report of Ql July.

Hnndlosor admits that it was his duty to oocuny hln-
sclf with 1 rovontlve nc sur 3 In once of biological wnrfnro.
(H. 2062). Ho o. vlously was Informed of th. lnportnnt work
of rioae and his subordinate Kllcvo In this field. Spooohos
about tho nocossary protective and defensive nensuroc were
rando at tho 4th footing of Consulting Physicians of the
'Jchrnacht at Hohenlychon. (N0-130D, Pros. Ex. 326, R.1491).
H- ndlooor was resent at this noetln*. (Hr.ndloscr, K.294C).
Itoroovor, in tho report on Kllevo’c noetln * with Slone on
23 Fobrunry 1644 referrod to above, It Is statodi

n 2y request cf Field linrnb.nl Kcltol
the nrned forces are n.t to have a res¬
ponsible share In the ex. orlnents, since
ex rrlncnts will also be conducted on
hunnn beings.’'

It np; ears tren this stntcncnt that Field karshal
Koltcl, Chief of the High Conner.' of the tfphrnncht, w-s
lnforned about the systonatlc cx orlnontatlon on concentra¬
tion oanp Inmates.


In the fo.ee of this, It cannot Tv believed that Handlooor
•nn Chief of the Medical Servide’s of the "ehraacht, and ‘on imme¬
diate subordinate of Keitel, was not even better Informed.

(•I) Gas Oelcnn Sc rum Ex erlnent s.

Further evidence that cx . rlnontation on concentration
comp lnrna.t s tr 6 nn accepted and «; proved practice In the
military medical services sul ordlnrted to Handlosor Is found
in the ror.f n the experiments In connect 1 n with caa
cedonui serun.

H'-ndlooor testified tlwit -va oedenr la r dlsc^so re¬
sulting from Infection cf n wound by bacteria. Mortality
is very hl r -h. Tho military nodical services had a ?as
oodema serun which -van used to conbat the lnfoctl-n. It
was obeervod that soldiers treated with this serun sometimes
dlod suddenly after a. nrent recuperation. This was thou-rht
to be o'uaod by tho .honol content of the norun. Thin • holo
sul .loct v;a 0 studied by Professor Kllllcn of the Arny Uodlonl
Ins ootorato, n oub'>rdln«t< of K-ndloscr. (Har.’loser, n.3053).

The affidavit of I r . Erwin *>chulor, alias Din,-, who con¬
ducted tho typhus experiments at Luohon-.nl«’ otatco that at
n confcranoc at the .illlWy Hodicnl /» 0 ndony In Dcrlln at
tho end of llai2, In which he took part, one of tho topics
cf dlccusslon was tho fatality of :na oedema scrum on
wounded soldiers. The xjctln? referred to by Scr.ul r In
this affidavit Is undoubtedly the Scccnd liactln,- of the
Consulting Physlcl-no of the */ c hranoht held between
30 November and *2 December lD i2. Thv affidavit coco on
testate tht anon? the rtlcl rnts In the discussion on
pas burn g run were Kill Ion, General Schrclber, i!ru -owsky,
and a nodical officer who -as unknown to him. Kllllon and
Mrurowsky pave rc r orts of soldiers who had received tho

scrum in hl.-h ou.antltles and hours la.tor, after a- arontly

-36-


hi vin : recovered, died suddenly without: visible ronoon.

It was ex: ected th t the henol content of the serum brou-ht
about the fatal result. In the rescnce of Kllllon nnd
Schroibcr, Mru.-ousky ordered Schuler to take pert In the
erfornnneo of euthanasia with phenol.on n concentrntlon
ojuap innate and to describe the result in dctnll. Schuler
Inter witnessed the execution of four or five ) risonorn by
the defendant Hoven in the Buehenwnld Concentration Caw*',
aodfcrdlng to orders, Schuler reported hir. finIn,a: to -orlln.
(NO-257, Pros. Ex. 2c3, R. 1001).

III . CONCLUS ION

Hindlcsor was the highest nudclnr nodical officer in
Go nanny. His ,-owcr extended to *11 the nodical o-rvioos of
the « r nod Forcec, inclu^lnR the ^nffen S 8 .

4 Hondlooor participated in the oonfcrenco of 89 Dooombcr

10*11 when it was decided the tyrhus ex crlncnts in Euchon-

• wald would bo porforr.cd. a ourlordlnato of his nttondod a
preliminary oonforor.oc on the srao subject tho saao dny,
Wodicnl officers under tho direct conn-nd of Hnndloser woro
Informed of the details of theoo ex orlnonts - Eyer, Schmidt,
and Sotarelbor. Eyor r-'colved a reoort on tho first corloc

of exrcrlncnts and later, accompanied ly Sohaidt, vlsltod
the ox orlnontnl station. Ty huo lnfcotod llco as well as
vnoolncs woro furnlrhed to tho ox, erlnont’-l station by an
? agency directly subordinated to Handlocor. 31nr roportod on

tho ty.hus cx. crlncnts at a mcctin.: of Consulting Physicians

* orllod by Hmdlosor. It was node av ».ront that tho ox-

. crlncnts hnd been conducted on concentration c*>m~ lnnatos.
An objection was raised to the ex; erlncnt6 by one of tho
dcot >rs. The ncetln.; at which the t-lk wn6 nndo was pro-
sided over by Schrelbcr, a hi,:h rankliu: anelstant to H nd-

los -r. Ho was connoctcd -1th nlnllar typhus ox crlncnts

by


performed by Hansen on Inna tea of the Nat two 11 or C >ncc<ntra-
tlon Camp.

The Medical Inspectorate under Hnndloser uood the
Luchenwald experimental station's facilities t-^ hnvo yellow
fever vaccines tested. The results .f those ex: crlnento
were sent to Dr. Schmidt. A short tine Inter, corf 1nod
vaccine ex crlnonts were conducted at Euchcnwnld cn the suit-
..•cation of Hnndloser. In 1043 ;nd 1 44, oil blood plnoraa
wan tested on Inmat *3 of the "Little Cnnp" nt Duohenvnvia
for the Military Medical .vcndemy under Hnndloser.

Tho freezing experiments conducted by R„scher and
Holzloehnor In the Dnohnu Concentration Camp were known to
Hnndloser, Crooner, a subordinate of Kandlocer, suf-roatod
coopor-tlon with R n aohor. Hnndloser hoard u roport by
4 Holtloehnor on thoso experiments os did Schrelbcr. Direc¬

tives Issued by fluencies under Handloocr utilized tho rcoulto
1 of those experiments.

Handlesvr heard n report or. tho sulfanilamide ex. tri-

I

ments by Gobhnrdt and Fischer at n mootInf prcoldod over by
him. The roport Included detail; about artificial Infection
nnf fatnlltlvs. It was made olc-r that concentration c/irip
Inmates were use'. Ex orlaentn teak lacc after this nootinp.*

Dohnon, a subordinate of Kandlocer, carried out epi¬
demic Jaundice experiments on Inmates of the Snchsenhnuson
' Concentration Camp. Hnndloser was also connected with

similar exf c-rlnento by Hi •••en In Nntzwoll«.r and Drcnol In
luch> nwnld.

..'lrtsh, a subordinate of Kandl «s«r, va Informed about

tho c ex erlnonts uf oicfcenbach rt Strossbourp on Kur.slen

I rlooncrs of war. Ho Inspected the? ox; rlnuntul station.

iVlrth also sup-rested *ns c-xr rloents to Knrl I3rondt In oon-

noctlc-n with the deoontenlnntlon of water.

do


Handloser nos connected with the "Elltzarboiter*
Committee with sponsored ex erlsents on hunnn beings with
biological warfare agents and prisons. And, finally,
Schrolter aided and abetted murderius experiments with
Phonol in connection with gas oedema rerun, together “' 1 th
another subordinate* of Hondloser.

The Prosecution submits that the evidence * roves th* t
HnnAl jser was a prlnol. al in, accessory to, ordered, rbetted,
took a consenting . art in, pnd wnc connected with plans '.nd
. ent r'-rlncB In volvlnr nedlc-'l experimentation on human r.ub-
.loots with ut their consent, ir. the course of nhloh experi¬
ments murders, brutalities, cruelties, tortures, Atrocities,
'•nd oth.ir Inhumane acts wore- committed, -nd th/it his guilt
has boon ootftMlchcd under Counts I, II, and III of the ln-
I dlotraont.


*


39 -
( ZtU)


MILITARY tribunal NO. I

CASS NO. 1


CLOSING BnIS? FOR
THE UNITED STATES C? AW91XC*
AGAINST
TALDD'AR HOVEN


4

♦


*’urnborg,

16 June 19^7.


Janes ”c v aney
rxandcr 0. «ardy
“moat Horl lk-^'ochwald
Esther jane Johnson


• ur;


v o

“elford *avlor
3 rle«Gl>r ®rn*rel, r.S.A,,

Chief of Counsel for ^ar Crlmec


It is Alleged In essence under Count One of the
Indictment that the defendant »aidemar Hover, conspired nnd
agreed vflth others, pursuant to a common design to perform
medical experiments on Involuntary human subjects; under
Counts Two and Throe (.far Crimes and Crimes against Humanity,
respectively), that he was a principal In, accessory to, or¬
dered, abetted, took a consenting part In, and was connected
with piano -and enterprises involving medical experimentation
on lnvolunt- ry human subjects, and in the execution of the
so-called "euthanasia" program; and under Count Four, that
ho was a meObor, after 1 September 1939, of the SS, an or¬
ganization declared to be criminal by the International
Military Tri Sunni.

The defendant Koven Is charged with cpoclal responsi¬
bility In connection with the typhus and other vaccine ex¬
periments no sot forth In Paragraph 6 (J) of tho Indictment,
and with participation In the so-called "outhanasla" program
as sot forth In Paragraph 9. Tho proof has also shorn that
ho participated In gas oedena scrum cxperlnontr.

i. positions or nnapowsiBiLm


i. positions of rtSspoHsiaiLm

The defendant Hovcn Joined the SS In 1934 and tho Nazi

Party In 1937. ./hen war broke out, ho Joined tho «affon-SS.

In this unit ho attained tho rank of Hauptoturmfuehrer

(Captain). After having completed his basic training in tho

Waffen-SS, Kovon became asslit nt medic 1 officer In tho SS

hospital in tho 3uchonvr.ald Concentration Camp and held this

position until 1941. (NO-429, Pros. Ex. 281, R.1078;NO-591,

Pros. Ex. 35, R. 140). In J'uxu ry of that year he became

second camp doctor of Buchenrald. (Hovcn H. 9765) and, at

least as early as Juno 194s, Chief camp physician.(Hovon

R. 9767). He remained In this position until September 1043

rhen he was arrested on tho order of the SS Police Court In
Kas6«l. (vr-UPp and VC-^91, sunm). woven -as arrr«r->d for


.having rurdM>d ,an'3S.ftc>n»oor“laai6n''d-officer -ho •'•-as- ad-anr\-

ouc witness againGt Kochj cho ennp cccnander of Buchenwald.

(Kogen, R. 1183-4). There is some evidence that Hoven nr\o

chief canp physician before June 1942 and ns early as the

spring of 1941. (Rocnhild, R. 1831). A locter of kcnnochc,

dated 25 Kovenber 1941) speaks of Hoven as the canp physician.

(N0-907, Pros. Ex. 412, R. 1746). In any event, even before

Hoven had been appointed officially cacp physician, he had

declclvo influence in tho canp hospital. The witness

Roonhlld tostlflod that from the cunnor of 1941 on, Hoven

played “tho loading part* in tho hospital. (R.1663).

When Dr. Dlng-Schulor (hereafter roferred to as Ding)

started hie criminal typhus and othor vaccine experiments In

tho Buchcnv/ald Concentration Cacp in the beginning of 1942,

Hovon supervised tho experimental station In tho aboonco of

Ding. On 9 January 1943 this experimental station bocano,

by order of tho defendant Gonzkon, tho "Department for Typhus

■nd Virus Roooarch of tho i/aff.n-SS". Ding was tho head of

thin dopartmont nnd tho dofondant Hovon rrao officially charged

•

as his doputy. (NO-265, Pros. Ex. 267, rt.1127, horonftcr ro-
forrod to as tho Ding Diary).

Those then were tho positions of responsibility of
Hovon: H'.uptcturnfuohror In tho rf-affen-SS, First Phyolclan
of tho Buchcnwald Concentration Canp, and Deputy for Dr.

Ding In the Dopartmont for Typhus and Virus Roccarch.

II. PERSONAL I-Ar.T IC I? All Q?» IN ^RHIINaL AC 11VII IDS
A * -T ^rnhus and othor vaccine experiments (Indictment, Par. 6

For a Dill description of tho criminal .n-turc of those
cxDerlracntc, rcfcrcnco should be made to the Frocccutlon
brief on the defendant Lrugowsxy.

Following tho Invasion cf Russia in 1941, typhus became
a serious threat to the German rfehrnacht. Tho use of typhus

vaccine wo one of the primary methods in neoting this throat.

. . • . - 2 -


On 29 December 1941 a conference was held between the de¬
fendant Hnjidloser* as Army Kedlcnl Inspector; Conti of the
Reich Mlnlctry of Interior; Reiter of the Public Health
Department; G-lldemeistcr of tho Robert Koch Institute; and
the defendant tfrugowsky as Chief of the Hygiene Institute
of tho Waffon-SS. At this conference It was decided that
typhus vaccines wore to bo tected on human beings to deter¬
mine their effectiveness. The concentration ennp Buchcnvrald
-'as chooon for testing the typhus vaccines. Ding was chnrgod
nth tho execution of tho exporlnonts. (Ding Diary).

Tho oxporlmcnto were originally conducted In Blochs 44
and 49 of the Buchonwald concentration ca$p. Lator tho ex¬
perimental station was transferred to Block 40 of the camp
and, In 1943 Block 50 was attached to the experimental sta¬
tion. This block rao used for production of tho typhus
vacclno. Hovon was tho deputy of Ding In both Blocks.

(Kogon, R. 1155-6, Ding Diary). Tho entry of 17 ^arch 1942
In Ding's Diary provee that Hovon doputlzcd for Ding In the
nbsonco of tho lattor. It reads: “SS Hauptcturnfuohror Dr.
Ding fell nick with spotted fever (typhus) and lies at the
hospital in Berlin. S3 Hauptaturnfuehror Hovcn, station
nodical officer of the "affon S3 jn jfolmar, rupcrvlocc In
tho meantime the stations (Block 4*. -nd 49).“ (HO-265;supra).
The -ltnocn Kogon stated that Hovcn had a double function In
the Buchonr-ld concentration camp. Ho was car.p physician and
ho was tho deputy of Dr. Dlng-Schulcr for the experimental
station 46. (R.1161). In hlc oapacity as camp physician
Hovon played the decisive part In the selection of the ex¬
perimental persons :or the typhus experiments. Ting requested
tho camp physician to make arrangements for the selection of
tho necessary number of Inmates. The camp physician forwar¬
ded thlcroquost to tho camp administration. (Kogon,R. 1156y

1179-80). Hovcn admitted as much In his affidavit.

- 3 -


Ho anId:


"The selection of Innatea to be used for the pur¬
poses of medical experiments In Block 46 by the
•Institute for Spotted Favor end Virus Research’
u*e ns follows: Whenever Dr. DI!«5 needed human
beings for his work a request was made to tho off-,
lco of the Cnnp Commandant and rcforrid to me for
action . Usually a nan Raced fcOkOBHR, an SS Hnupt-
sturaiuchrcr, notlfledne to select tho necessary
nunbor of prisoners for those purposos. In accord¬
ance with this request I selected* various lnnatos ,
at randoc , fron the roster of tho cnnp. TV.cy woro
placed on a list over cy signature and returned to
SCK039R* who often rccovcd certain nancs fron the
list for political reasons. In the event that par¬
ticular prisoners were rccovcd from tho list I wno
rcoucstcd to select substitutes In order to pro¬
vide Dr. Ding with tho desired nunber of victims.
After I returned oonpictod list to Schobcr It was
given to Dr. Ding for approval. He undo a final
chock to ascortaln, fron a nodical oolnt of view,
tho physical condition of tho selected Inmates
and to detornlnc rhothor or not they not with his
rooulrcnonts." (NC-429, supra, cophacls ouppilod).

This evidence Is corroborated by tho tectlnony of wlt-
nooo Rocmhlld (R. 1G33) and tho affidavit of tho Into Ding
hlnoolf (NO-257, Pros. tx. 283, rt. 1091).

As to hlc pool tlon ac doputy of Ding, Kovon otatod In
his affidavit:

"Inasmuch as I nas constantly associated with
Dr. Ding at Buchonwald wc bccxno vory friendly. I
froquontly discussed natters with Ding and vlsitod
hlo experimental station from lino to lino. As a
natter of fact, Dr. Ding had to go to Berlin for
discussions with Dr. .crugowsky and others, nearly
3 da^^ut of_ov^ry t wo weeks, nnd_on such occas ions
I was In charge of the spotted fever Institute. How-
over, when Ding wont to Berlin tho experiments were
discontinued until ho returned.* (:.0- : ;29, supra, cn-
phacln supplied).

Ding, on the other hand, described Kovon*s function ac
follows:

" Hover. 1 n share In block 4o.

In Feb. 1942 tho order to conduct Typhus cxpcrl-
nente cano through. I was chosen to carry out these
oxoorlnontc. Since I had r.y office In 3crlln, a de¬
puty had to bo appointed for cy absence in Buchcn-
v-aid. For this post tho Relchsorzt SS Dr. Grnwltr
in agreement with th^. leading doctor of the Concen¬
tration Cnnps Lolling n -med the SS let Dr. Hovon as
station doctor at Buchcnwald.

~y presence In Duchenwald lasting always only a few
days while the tine of the experiments ana the length
ox tho iyphua cpidoclc ln-tcd about ten weeks.

- 4 -


Dr. Hovcn hnd tho order to get the orironers (pro¬
fessional criminals sentenced to death), that have
been released for the experinents free the Reich
Security offlco and the Chief of the Concnntrr.tlon
Coops, ready for the vaccination or the Infection
after an examination of their physical fltnoss.

As deputy he often ordered Dr. Pinza to t")co over
the guard of Bloch 46. Dr. Plaza In addition con¬
tinued to worh Independently under Capo Dlctzsch.

• • • •

Hovon vrorfced as ny deputy until ny permanent en¬
trance In Buchcnr .Id In August 1943. In September
ho was arrcGted.

In tho year 19-i2 he had to work: a lot by hlnsclf
since I contracted tyuhuo and after that vvac sent to
a rocthoao. Right after that I had a detail to the
Pasteur Institution In Paris. During this tine the
Slck-rcports carried tho signature of Koven or
Plaza.“CHQ-287, Pros. Ex. 203, R. 1091).

During tho years 194- and 1S43 Ding was freoucr.tly ab-
nont fron Buchcnwald. rfhllo Hovcn was not In tho position to
start a now cerloa of cxj>orlnonts on his own initiative, ho
w-.n rosoonalblo for tho selection and supervision of the cx-
pcrlnental subjects thccnolvos, of tho reports on tho fov.;r
curves, diary noto6 and report ohovtc. Kc had to rupcrviao
tho hooping of 'ji orderly record of these experinents.

(Kogon, R. 1179-80). This ovldonco in fully corroborated by
tho tontlnony of tho witness i. lrchholncr. (R.1324-41).
Klrchhoin.r further stated th*t In the absence of Ding tho
capo or tho cxoorlnontal cttlon, Dlctzcch, received orders
for tho execution of tho experiments fron Hovcn (R.1344) and
that in tho abconco of Ting, Hovcn war considered commanding
officer of 31ocfc 46. (R.1345). Even tho dof-noo witnesses
for Hovcn admitted that In the absence of Ding, Kovon depu¬
tized for tho latter. (Plocfc, R. 4753, Dorp, R. 8631). The
witness rtoenhlld testified that Hovcn collaborated with Ting
and represented him whllo the latter was absent.(fl. 1633).

Ding rac at tho Pasteur Instltuto in Paris fron 10 Sept¬
ember to 10 October, 1942. (Ding Diary). Iho affldnvlt'of *
Ding quoted above proves that from 17 -Larch until he went to

Paris, ho was convalescing fron typhus. Thus, Ding wan absent

- 5 -


I.


from the 3uchonwold Concentration Comp iron 17 ilorch until
10 October 1942. During this tine experimental scricc I.
on 145 subjects was concluded, rrhlch resulted in 5 fatali¬
ties. (Ding Diary ontry of 19 April). 3etwoon 19 August and
4 September, 1942, Research Scrios II wag started by "execu¬
tion of vaccination for tho Immunisation from typhus" on 40
experimental oubjocts. Those subjects were artificially ln-
feoted on 15 October, Although the artificial. Infcot Ion was
carried out at a tine when Ding nay lroady have returned to
Du chon wold, tho experiment \1 scries actually was started when
tho defend-nt Hovtn wac ir. solo charge of the c>porlnontal
station. (Ding Diary, cntrlos of 19 August and 4 September
1942). Four persons died as a rosult of this experimental
oorlcs. (Ding Diary, entry of 20 Novanbor 1942).

On 9 January 1945 Hover., In addition to his duties as
deputy of Ding, In tho oxpcrlnontal Bloch 46, was officially
chargod by the dofend nt Oonzhen with acnlotlng Ding in tho
supervision of vaccine production in blocfc 50. (Ding Pl'iry).
Hoven would hr.vc tho Tribunal find that, an deputy to Ding,
he was solely conc.rncd with vaccine production. This hac
boon disproved by tho t ctlaony of hogon, Hoomhlld, Kirch-
helncr, and Flock \nd tho documentary evidence, as set forth
abovo and beion. kiorcover, vaccine production was not evon
started until 16 August 1943 and Hoven was arrested in
Soptcmb;r. (NO-571, Pros. Ex. 295, R. 1106). Ding's work
report for the year 1943 reveals that ho was absent fron the
Buchcnr/ald concentration c-amp fron 28 Ecbru '.ry to 6 iiarch,
from 29 nprll to 1 Uay, and fron 25 Juno to 15 August. Tho
sane document shows that between 18 February -nd 6 iiarcfc, two
oxnorln ;ntal s.ricc were in progrecc in tho experimental sta¬
tion, first, the experiments with ycllo 1 - fev.r vaccine carried
out on 435 experimental persons which were conducted betwoen

10 January and 17 May, and secondly, cxr_rimonto with typhus

- 6 -


vaccines (Riga '.nd Zurich) carried out on 40 experimental
subjects between 25 January and 28 April. (NO-571, supra).
During Ding's Absence fron 27 April to 1 Hay one of the no.-t
vicious experiments ever conducted In the typhus experimental
station was In full progress, the experiments to dcternlno the
ef.ect of the drugs Acrldin Granulate and Rutenol on typhus.
Thoao experiments were carried out between 24 April and 1 Juno
1943. Of tho total of 59 lnnatcs ucod, 21 died. (Ding Diary).
During tho abscnco of Ding, who was on sick leave fron 25 June
to 15 August 1945 another tno experimental eeriec wore In
progress. Experiments with the typhus vaccines "Add", "Asld
Adsorbat" and "Vfclgl" were carried out on 70 experimental
persons from 28 May to 4 September 19v3 and cxporlnonto with
tho dj*ig Othronln wor carrlod out on 40 experimental perneno.
(NC-571, supra). Tho experiments with Add, Add,Adsorbat and
Jclgl rocultod in 53 deaths out oi 70 persons experimented on.
(Ding Diary).

Hovon do ru tl?.od for Ding up until Ding's permanent pre¬
sence In the Buchcnwald concentration onp in August 1945.
(MO-257, supra). He was arrcGtcd on 12 September of that year.
(Dorn, R. 8576). Tho evidence outlined above proves that
Hovon 1 '’ .'ctlvltloc as deputy to Ding concurnod primarily
Ding's ex lorir.ontal *ork. fho testimony of the defenso wit¬
ness Dorn to tho contrary lc thus entirely Incorrect on this
point. (Dorn, R. 8632).

Tho proof has further sho< n that Koven not only super¬
vised tho cx>'orlncntal ctatlon In Ding's absence, but that
ho also actively participated In the experiments by infecting
the experimental subjects. On 30 November 1942 .’in attempt to
infect ox icrlccntal subjocts artificially with typhus infected
lice was made. (Kogon, R. io^ry-1; Klrchhclncr, R. 1326; Ding
Dl~ry). Ac tho cages In which the lico wore kept had become

leaky during the transport and constituted a danger cf a '

- 7 -


typhus .-pldcnic in the conp f t ho cages nor burned. (Ding
Dl ry). a socond shlpocnt of typhus infected ilce me brought
to Buchenwold on 3 Dececbor 1942 for the s-ac purposo by n
Vfehrnacht officer. (Ding Dl«ry) . Fifteen experimental aub*r
J;dto were infected in tho presence of tho dofnndont Kovon
and the “chrnacht officer who hod brought tho llco, (Klrch-
holncr, R. 1326 <vid Dorn R. 3578). The defense wltncoG Dorn
testified that Hoven induced the wehrnacht officer to leave
Block 46 and the camp before the experiment w^s flnlshod in
order to have tho opportunity to destroy the llco which vrero
dangorous for tho SS combers in tho camp because of posrlblo
infection. (R. 5Q78). In fact, howov r, tho infection ex¬
periments continued oven after tho rfchxmacht officer had
Left and approxlnat oly 9 of tho 15 infantc8 wore then lnfcctod.
(Kirchholnor, R. 1341). «c Klrchhelnor was n cmlo nuroo in
* tho experimental stations ~mA was p roonally prcccnt during

this experiment (Klrchhclncr, R. 1339), ;he-roao Dorn's
knowlodgo is dcrlvod from hearsay nnrt bnood on nssucptlonc,
(Dorn, R. 8577-0, 8628-30), Kirchholnor'o testimony cuot bo
regarded nc wore rollnblo. That Hoven mo in any ovont pro-
aont during the oxoorinent is proved by tho toctlcony of
both witnesses. (Kirchholnor, R. 1326 and Dorn, R. 8629).

This incident proves not only Hoven'o nctlvo participa¬
tion in tho typhus cxpcrlncntc, but also that ho had tho
power to lesue ordorc in experimental Block 46 even .at tines

( whon Ding was procent in tho oanp.

%

Hover.'s statement that ho never performed Typhus ln-

footlona (R. 9781) was proved to bo false by the testimony

of the witness Loeuwarden before the ^utch Bureau for tho

Investigation of «ar Crlr.ee in ^msterdan. Loeuwarden stated

that ho, together with other Inmates, me injected by Hoven

in Block 46 with typhus scrum. Six weeks later they rocolvod

another injection fron Hoven and hie assistant. A few days

- 8 -


lator, all experimental subjects foil very s;rlcusly 111
with typhuo. (NO-1063, Pros. £x. 328, 1498). This

stater, nt proves beyond any doubt that Koven hlnoolf per-
foroed none of the experiments. Locuw.arden also testified
on thin subject before the commissioner of tho Tribunal,
who nut interrogatories to him which were propared by
Hoven 1 n Defease Counsel. Leeuwarden stated with certainty
t hat he had boon In fected by Hovon . It was the defendant
Hovon who gave him the lnj r’Ctlon and visited the experi¬
mental subjects in Bloch 46 a few days later in order to
ascortaln vhether they had alroady contracted typhus.

(Soo also the otatonent of Vondollng, NO-1063, supra, and
his movers to Interrogatories).

In the light of the overwhelming evidence, the rclf-
sorvlng statements of Hoven that he represented Ding only
In Bloch 00 and had nothing to do with tho experiments
thonoolvos mu t bo viewed as ontlroly Incredible. During
tho poriod of Hovon 1 c activity In the experimental station,
no less than 100 Inmates wore billed as a r,suit of tho
typhuc ox:» rlnento.


- 9 -


fl. Euthanasia Precram - Action 14 f 13

F*r a detailed description of the so-called outhana6la
program, which wa6 carried out In concentration camps
under the code name "Action 14 f 13", see the Prosecution*s
brief against the defendant Karl Brandt.

On 1 September 1S39, the defendant Karl Brandt ani
Rel hsletler Bouhler, the chief of the defendant 3rack,
were charged by Hitler with the execution of the
euthanasia program, l.e., the extermination of the lnsano
and incurable. (630-PS, Pros. Ex. 330, R. 1516). The
real reason behind this order of Hitler's was to ellralnato
"useless eaters* and other undesirable persons who were
considered of no valuo to the German war effort. (See
Prosecution's brief on the defendant Kurl Brandt).

In early summer 1940, the outhanasla program was
extended to Include thousands of Inmates of concentration
camps. The camp physicians mado a preliminary selection
of lnnatoo considered ollglble for extermination and thlo
group was thon "examined* by a commission of oxperto
from the euthanasia program which toured tho various con- •
contratlon camps, nuestlonnalres wero filled out on tho
Inmatos ooleotod and they were later transferred to
euthanasia stations, whore they wero killed. Uionnecko,

R. 188*2—3). Non-German nationals und Jews, who were
Inmates of concentration camps, were subjected to this
program In extensive numbers. (Mcnnecke, R. 1887). (Dr.
Uuthlg, who was camp physician of the Dachau Concentration
Camp, and therefore in a position corresponding to that
of the de.endant noven In buchenwald, stated in hlo
affidavit that the export commission selected Inmates
who wero unable to work for extermination by gas In
autumn 1941. (NO-2799, Pros. Ex. 497, R. 7710)). *ho
Buchenwald Concentration Cn-p was visited by such a commission


-lo


'■'f experts for the same purpQeq jjjne $hi§ Y-lsit

was made for the express purpose of assigning Inmates for

killing In the so-called euthanasia stations, which were in

fact nothing else than extermination stations. (N0--301O.

.... : oCit,

Pros. Ex. 5Q3, R. 7/?34). *hj.8 statement of Dr. Gorgasz,

who was a member of this doctor's commission, is corro¬
borated by the witness Roechlld, who testified that in
summer 1941 a delegation came to the Buchenwald Con¬
centration Camp and selected inmates who were then 6ent
by transport to an unknown destination, A few hours after
their departure, the personal belongings of these inmates
were sent back to the camp so that it was obvious that these
persons had been exterminated. Roemhlld learned later that
these inmates had beon killed by gas. (R. 1634). Ko
testified further that in autumn 1941 Jewish inmates of
the buchonwald Concentration C n np were medically examined
by the comp phycloians, one of whoa was the defendant Hovon.
Those Jews who wore unfit for work were sorted out by the
camp phys?clans and sent in threo or four transports to
the Euthanasia Station buernborg and killed thero by gas.
About 600 inmates were killed on this occasion. Falsified
death reports w, re made out stating that these lnmntos
had dlod a natural death. The victims of this action wore
lnmutos of every nationality — Germans, Austrians, Polos,
and Czechs — and most of them w^re not ill at all.
(Roemhlld, R. 1636-7, 1663).

’ihe function of the camp physicians In tha euthanasia
program is sot forth in a letter iron the Inspectorate of
Concentration Camps to the concentration camps, including
buchunwald. It stated in part as follows:

"As the camp commandants of the concentration
camps Dachau, Sachsqnhausen , 3uchenwald,
hauthausen and~Auschwitz w c re informed in
the^corresponuence mentioned above (12 Nov.

1941), the Doctors'-Commission will visit
the above named concentration camps for the
Selection' of prisoners in the r.tar future.


"The first half cf January 1S42 Is
designated for this examination for
the concentration coups FIos6enburg,

Gros6-Rosen, Neuengamm, Jilederbogen.

"Since the available doctors have a
very heavy responsibility, the exanlnc.-
tlons in the concentration oaaps must
be shortened a6 much as possible.

“In the enclosure a sample of the question¬
naire will be sent ns a copy for the
preparatory work. These forms are to bo
mimeographed and to be filled out. The
answering of single questions are taken
up In this sample which are underlined
In r«d and only these questions have tc
be ftnswurod. Relative to those single
questions, the following explanation 16
glvon:

"The question 'physically incurable ailment'
is not only to be answered with yes or no
If possible, but to bo answered with a
short summary of the diagnosis.

"In addition, also the question of war
lnjurloo Is to vO determined because this
guarantees a decided alleviation In tho
examination work of the Doctors' Commission.

If tho space under tho question of 'delinquency 1
and 'previous convictions' is not sufficient,
the answer Is to bo put on the back side of
the questionnaire as Is designated In the
sample. Individual punishments are not to
be enumerated only those regarding main
convictions are to bo briefly ouam.rlsod,
the single delinquencies ire only to be
briefly mentioned. Those prisoners who
come Into question for examination are
evident from tho designated questions in
the questionnaire.

"All documents and hospital roports on hand
are to be placed at tho disposal of tho
Commission upon request lor examination".

(1151-PS, Pros. £x. 411, R. 1725).

The camp physician made up n list of the Inmates eligible
l'?>r extermination and filled out certain prellnln- ry data In
the questionnaire. This w;is the group which the doctor's
commission examined when they visited tho camp.

From a memorandum of 26 i£arch 1942 from the KV.nA, It
Is proved thut the basis of selection wn b Inability to work.

It said:


"Through the report of a camp commander
It became known that 42 of tho 51 Inmates
selected for special treatment 14 f 13
became 'fit to w^rk again' after some time


- 1 ? -


which nade their transfer for special
treatment unnecessary. This shows that
the selection of these inmates is n«t
being effected in cpcpllance with the
rules laid down. Only those lnnates
who correspond to the conditions laid
down, and, this is the nnst important
thing, who are no longer fit to work,
ore to be brought before the exanlning
connission." (1151-PS, 6upra).

A further ncnornndun of 27 April 1943 fron the WVHA

to all concentration oanps proves that before that date the

selection of lnnatos for euthanasia was not United to alleged

insane persons, but covered any one unfit for work. It said:

"The Relchafuohrer-SS and Chief of the
Gorann Police upon deaonstrntlon has
decreed that in the future only Insane
prisoners cun be selected for the action
14 f 13 by the nodical concisslonero ap¬
pointed for that purpose.

All other prisoners unfit for work (persons
suffering fron Tuberculosis, bedridden in¬
valids, oto.) are absolutely to bo excluded
fron this action. Bed-ridden prisonsn are
to be given suitable work, which can ole* bo
done in bed." (1151-P3, supra).

The witness ICennooko, who was hlcself a nenbor of a
doctors' connlsolon fclch t ouredoonc rtrntlon cnnpo in order
to ottinlno lnnatos for killing in euthanasia stations, tes¬
tified that he vlsltedtho Suohonwald Concentration Canp twice,
first in autuan 1940 and the sdoond tine in Novenbcr 1941.

(R. 1883). When the exports 1 connlsslon visitedthe concen¬
tration canps, the personal dita of the inaatus who were pre¬
sented to this oocnl6!«lon were already filled out in the
questionnaires. This had been done by the office of the cr.np
physician. The exports consulted with the canp physicians
who had drawn up the list of lnnates who were t« be uxnnlnod.
It wasneoossary that the lnaatec eligible for externinatlon
be selected in the first instance by the onnp physician n6
the doctors' connlsslon was in the canps only a few d* ye and
it was lnpossi ole for then to purfom their function except by
working on the group of lnnates prcse-ntedtc then. Not all of


the Inmates selected by the camp physician for euthanasia
were insane. Inmates who were physicAlly unable to work and
who suffered from illnesses, such as tuberculosis, .7crc inclu¬
ded. (llcnnecko, P.. 1088-9).

A special regulation existed as to tho ’examination of
Jews. Jews vrerc not medically examined. It was sufficient
to complete tho questionnaires about then by incorporating
therein tho reasons for thtlr arrest, (kcm.ockc, H. 1891-5).
Jews who were Included in the so extermination actions v:oro
mostly physically and mentally healthy. Those Jews who were
presented to tho doctors' commission had already boon sclco-
tod provioucly by the camp physicians, (kcnnccke, R. 1894).

For a list of Jovrs selected in Buchcnvrald for extermination,

’ noc the pictures of the Jews with kennccko 1 o handwritten
cocnmontc on tho back. (K0-5060, Pros. fix. 507, R. 10704/

* NO-2436, Px’os. Ex. 568, R. 10705). Monneoko remembered that
it was the defendant Hoven in tho Concentration Carp Buchcn-
wald who had tho lnmatoo presented to him for examination.
Hoven was ono of tho~londlng porsonalltloa in tho camp and,
in reality, tho camp physician, (fionnecko, 1895).
llcnnocko's tostlroony is corroborated by hlo letter of

25 Novenbor 1941 to hie rlfo, which described hie activities
in Buchcnwald:

....“The fix’ot working day at Buohonwald is over.

* At 0.50 this morning- we were out there. At first

I introduced myself to tho -.uthorltatlvc loaders.

Tho deputy cf the cusp-conr. rvdor is 5S-K uptstum-
fuehror Florctncdt, exp phy lcian li; SS-Obercturn-
fuchrcr Dr. Hoven. *t first anoth.r 40 reports of
a firet portion of aryans had to be completed by
filling then out, on which tho two other collogues
worked ’.lready yesterday. Out of these 40 I worked
up about 15. /vfter this *holc portion had boon
worked up, Schnalcnbcrg left, in order to go to
Dresden and not to return until cur work here lc
done. Following this, the "examination" of the pa¬
tients was carried out, i.c. a presentation of the
Individuals -and a comparison with the entries taken
fxon the files. »o did not finish this work until
noon, bocauso tho other two colleagues -worked only
thoorctic-ally yesterday, so that I h-'d to ■re-examine"
those, whom Schnalcnbach (and I myself, this morning)


_:u _


had propped and Lucllcr hie per cons. At 12 o'clock

n we o topped for lunch.Afterwards we continued

our examination until about 16 dclock, I myself ex¬
amined 105 patients, Huclicr 73 patients, go th-.t
finally a total of 185 reports uam ready as a flrct
portion. • As seco nd portion a total of 1200 Jews
fo llowed , all of" whop do not need to bo " cx_. nl n ;d" ,
but ' : ricre It Is sufficient, to take the reason s for
their arroct from the files Col ten very voluminous !)
and to transfer it to the reports. Therefore_ lt_ls
merely a the oretical work, which will certainly hoop
us busy until next icon day Inclusive, perhaps even
longer. From this second portion (Jews) we comple¬
ted today: I nysolf 17, Mueller i5, At 17.00 sharp¬
ly "we throw away the trowel" and wont for supper...

Exactly as the day I described above, the following

• * • •

days will pass - with exactly the samo program and
with tho sane work. After the Jews, anothor 300
aryanc followed as a third portion, who again will
have to bo *oxanlnod B . Therefore vre arc busy horo
until tho end of tho rook. Then on Saturday, the

6 Dee. we shall go hone ." (N0-907, Pros. Ex.

412, R. 1746).

Another letter of ucnnockc, dated 12 January 1942, ro-
vcals that also in other concentration canpe tho doctors*
commission worked closely togethor nth tho C'mp physician.

In tho Ravcnsbruck Concentration Canp It was tho camp phy¬
sician, Dr. Schldlauoky, who was contacted by Mcnnocko for
tho ourpoco of coliabora.lon In tho Suthanncln program.

(NO-907, Pros. Ex. 412, R. 1748).

Tho defendant Hoven tried to dissociate hlnsclf from
Action 14 f 13 by saying that tho canp conn jidcr of tho
Buchonvtald Concentration Canp, Koch, had orderedflvat all
Jcvnj should be Included in Action j. 4 f 13 so that no prolln-
inary examination on tho part of tho camp docxrs had to bo
carried out and that there was no necessity that a spocial
lint of Jews should bo nado up by those doc :oro. This is no
defense. Koven know of tho action and took an active part in
It. Moreover, from the testimony of kcr.nocko -ndfrom hie
letters, it is apparent that during the visit of the doctors*
commission in November 1941, not only Jews wero nrcccntod to
the experts, but also 483 Aryans. (NO-9Q7, supra; -cnnockc,

R. 1945.


- 1 '-


That Kovcn to oh part in the selection of the concentra¬
tion canp Innates presented to this doctors' commission Is
further proved by the tostinony of tho witness Rocnhlld.

(R. 1635). Tho testimony of the witness Kogon provos that
there ns ar. exchange of correspondence between the defen¬


dant Hovon end Dr. Bbcrlc, the Chief Physician of the Born-
burg Euthanasia Station, which clearly shows Hovon'8 connec¬
tion with Action 14 f 13. (R. 1212 ).

Uorcover, Hoven adultted his participation in tho


euthanasia progran In hlo pre-trial affidavit. He said:

°9. I bocano aware In 1941 that the so-called
"Euthanasia" program for the cxtorolnatlon of tho
mentally end physically deficient was being carried
out in Germany. At that tlno the Camp Connandor,
Koch, caLlod all the important SS officials of tho
cane together and informed then that ho had rccolvcd
a oocrct order from Hlnulor to the efxoct that all
mentally and physically deficient lnaatcc of tho
Canp should be hiliod. The Canp Connnd'r stated
that Higher Authorities fion Berlin ordored that
all Jewish lnnatos of tho Buchenuald Concentration
Canp should be included In this cxtcmln"tlon nro-
gran. In accordance with th esc orders 3C0 to 400
Jewish prisoners of different nationalities were
cont to the "Euthanasia Station" at Bemburg for
extermination, a few dayc lator I received a list
of tho names of thoso Jowo who wor: exterminated at
Bernburg from tho C np Coon ndor and was ordered to
lenuo falsified statements of death. I obeyed this
or^cr. This particular action was oxccutod under
the codo nano 14 f 1". I visited 3 rnburg on
one occasion to arrange for the cremation of two
inmates who dlod In the ••crr.lgcrodc 3ranch
(Ausocnhor.m ndo <i crr.lgcrodc) of tho Buchcnwald Con¬
centration Canp." (HO-429, Pros. Ex. 281, R. 1078).


Hovon ''Iso participated In tho largo scalo cxtcrr.inalon


cf inmates sufforlng from tuborculoslc in tho Buchcnwali Con


contrition Canp itself. Approximately 500 inmates who were
cunposodly suffering from tuberculosis were fclllofl in July
1941 In the cruap hospital by Injections with cvlpan when they
roportod for treatment. These hillings wore conducted by the
physician Dr. Bison, who Hoven’s subordinate. Host of
the victims of this action were by no means Incurably 111 , but
only undernourished and could have been saved under better
living conditions. (Roonhlld, R. 1638).


Rocnhild testified on BS-exnnmotion that Hoven
probably c-uld not have prevented the extermination of the
tubercular Inmates; (R. 16o4), This, however, is not signi¬
ficant. No core could the killers In the extermination cham¬
bers of Auschwitz have prevented the killing of Jews. Hoven 1 s
participation nonetheless cokes hln a principal in the crlnc
of curder. *nd In a inrgor Gense, it was the thousands of
"Hovens" 'll over Goraans who did in feet coke theso crlncs
possible. Rocnhlld 1 s tcstlnony concerning the extermination
of the tubercular lnnatcs is corroborated by the tcstlnony
of the witness Kogon, who stated that sono tines a whole
ward was cleared in this way to nnko roon In the overcrow¬
ded hospital. (R. 1214). Dr. Horn, witness for the defendant
Hoven, admitted th t thorc wao one block In the c-unp hospi¬
tal which ho was forbidden to enter. It was known In tho
camp that In this block Invalid Inmates were killed. Tho
lnnatoc blaaod Hoven as the person responsible for thoco
killings which wor crrlcdout in the hospital. (Horn, R.52G6).
Hovon hlrtuclf ucod the word ■outhanacla" In speaking to
Horn and mentioned In this connection that the e-amp connandor
had approved the policy of killing seriously 111 patients.
(Horn, R. &291).

In addition to hln partlcl atlon In the formal cuthnn-
acla arof.rau and tho murder of tubercular inmatcc, Hovon
person lly nurdored ill andouher inn .t s on hie o-n Initia¬
tive. This vmc a common ractlco of C'vnp doctors, (cf. ease
against O' rheuser; also affidavit of aosonthal, NO-858, Pros.
Ex. 225, . 889). Hoven admitted that approximately 60 ln-
matcG wore killed with phenol or cvlpar. Injections either by
himself or under his supervision. (R. 9851).

In hi:, affidavit he raid:

"lO. In tho Camp \rc had a gr at nany prisoners who
v.'orc y alous of the positions held by a certain few
of tho lnnatoc, that Is, cone of the political orl-
ooners h Id key-positions and were able to get better


- 17 -


1


♦


living conditions chad the ivcrng:. Hence, nany
of the prisoners envied these positions nc na<*c
every effort to discredit the nen who held the
kcy-eosltlons. Such traitors notions boc-nc
Known thru the “grapevine' 1 to the nen in the hoy-
positions and then such traitors were imnediate-
ly Killed. In each ense I ras inter notified In
order to make out the death statements of the
orisoners Killed. These statements did not Indi¬
cate the actual cause of death, but vrero made out
to indicate that the prisoner died of natural
causes.

11. In sonc lnst'mces I sup rvlscd the Killing of
those un- orthy Inmates by Injections of phenol at
the roquest of the inmates. Those killings took
place in the camp hospital and I was assisted by
cevcral lnnatos. On one occasion Dr. Clr.g cane

to tho hospital to witness such Killings with pncnol
.nd said that I was not doing It correctly, there¬
fore ho performed some of tho Injections hlnsclf.

At that tine throo lnnates were Killed rlth phenol
Injections and they died within a nlnuto.

12. Tho total number of traitors Killed was about
150, of whom oO .oro killed by phenol injections,
either by myself or under my supervision In the
cap hospital, and the rest wer Killed by various
moans, such an boatings, by the lnnatcs."(NO-429)

Ho tried to Justify these Killings by stating that
those lnnatos vforo lnforncrc, spies and stool pigeons of
tho 33 and therefore had to bo exterminated. Ho said that
If they had boon permitted to carry on with their activities,
tho illeg 1 1 camp management would have been wiped out and tho
criminal inmates In tho camp would have gained the upper hand.
Hover. 1 o attempt at Justification for the hilling of Inmates
of concentration camps Is, of course, no defonoo. It nay • ell
bo true that Hovon sympathised and even collaborated with the
illegal c-np management. It nay also bo true that sonc of his
vlctlnc nay have been Killed by hln on the basis of sugges¬
tions put forward by this Illegal c .np management. But It goes
without saying that thesu political wrlsonors, who Instigated
the murder of their opponents, woro In no position to Judge
•"hethor it was really necessary to Kill then for tho sake of
Che camp community. *hey only Judged this emergency fron
their own point of view, l.e„ fron the point of view of tho
benefit of themselves. Hoven hlnsclf had no Judgment at all


in this respect and simply made himself the rilling and
bought tool of * small cliquo in the camp, who undoubtedly
often tried to eliminate not only persons whose activities
wore considered detriment ;1 to the well being of their fellow
inmates, but also porsonal opponents and enemies. That
Kovcn was corrupted by the inmates and paid for his nurders
is proved by the testimony of several witnesses.

Kogon testified:

"I con only conclude that both motives, the poli¬
tical motive and the motive of corruption, were
active in the caso of Dr. Hovon. If Dr. Kovcn cx -
nrc3scd any desire — a nd he expressed many do-f~
sires — tn en theso wishes were always filled 1
T7t7~T2I3

"He himse lf oxorespod many wishes constantl y and
allposs l SIo advantages were give n him by s uch
people wfi o ra he~ had saved, * (rt. 121377

Klrchhclmcr tootlflod to the sane effoct, (R.1346).

The defonoo wltnoso Block paintod pictures for Hovon and
his family *nd tho defense witness Horn in his affidavit
otatod that Hovon was very corrupt. The prisoners Knew it
~.nd they corrupted him in every posslblo man nor and made
him gifts of furniture, underwear and foed. •'horo woro
periods in which conploto workshops were orcctcd for Hovon
in which thirty or moro inmates woro working. (R. 4051).
r Plotor Schalkcr testified before the Dutch Bureau for
tho Investigation of *ar Crlnes In Amsterdam that Hovon
» pi yod an xccptlonally evil role and had lnnuncrablo doatho

on his conscience owlns to completely inadequate medical
» attention. In later years, when it became obvious that

Germany would be defeated, he changed hlo nttltudo towards
tho inmates. (210-1063, Pros. £x. 328, R. 1498). Whon
Sch lker was interrogated by the commissioner rf tho Tribunal
on the otion of defense counsel, he '•mpliflcd his statement
by spying that Hoven stole the food which was furnished for
tho experiment."! subjects in Block 46 and also obtained other


- 19 -


icons such as shoos, coys, and women's clothing.


The Ccstlnony of the affiant "ckemnnn, who was an

InnaCe in tho p-atholcglcal department undor Hoven, proves

Chat Hovon participated In the customary brutal crlnes In

concentration craps. He said:

"Dr. Hoven stood once together with ne at tho win¬
dow of tho pathologic *'1 section and pointed to a
prisoner not known to no who crossed the placo
where the roll calls were held. Dr. Hoven told no:

*1 want to aoo the skull of this prisoner on ray
writing desk by tomorrow evening. The prisoner
was ordered to report to tho medical section, af¬
ter tho physician had noted down tho number of the
prisoner. A ho corpse was delivered on tho samo
day to the dissection room. The post-nortcra examin¬
ation shewed that tho prlsonor had been killed by
Injections. The 6kull was proparod as ordered and
dollvcrod to Dr. Hoven." (NO-2631, Pros. £x. 522,

H. 9955).

Hoven Iso approved the beating of concentration camp
Inmates. (NO-2313, Pros. =*. 525, R. 9961; NO-2312, Pros.

Ex. 524, R. 9961). Ono of thcoo lnraatcs died.

On 20 August 1942, Hovon suggested to tho camp comman¬
der of Buchcnwald that tho reporting of doaths of Russian
political prlconoro bo discontinued In order to savo paper.
Ho said:


"It in requested to cxaolno vhothcr it Is noccoc-
r-y to lsouo roports of the death of political
Russians, according to a direction lcsuedlaot nook,
*.dfuc of only ono form was required. This nay
ca saving of paper, but as political Russians
ror the greatest renter among the dead prisoners at
tho present, time more tine and paper could be saved
If thoao d' vn reports were droppod. Notifications
of death .xu-l ho made as before, as for tho Russian
prisonerj-' l war. (NO- 2148. Pros. Sx. 570, R. 10700 .

The proof has shown that beside tho sixty lnnatcs who

wore admittedly killed by him, H*vcn participated In the

killing of many other lnnatcs of tho Buchonwald Concentration

Camp who suffered from malnutrition and exhaustion. Ho sol-

octcd tho victims for tho transports, »ho were later killed

in tho Euthanasia Station Bornburg. Kls dofenso that all his

activities were done only for the benefit of the political

Inmates in the concentration camp Is clearly rlcidulous and

- 20 -


without foundation.

IC is interesting to noto that Koven's defense that he
killed for idealistic notives is the sane ho used in tho
proceeding against him in 1944, only then his alleged
idealistic motive was "to prevent a scandal in the interest
of the S3 and the rt chrnacht“. (NO-2380, ?ro9. Ex* 527, R.9970;

see also, 110-2366, Pros. 2x. 536, R. 9969).

C. flan Oaiona Serun Experiaents
Tho affidavit of Ting states that in a conforcnco at
the Military Medical academy in 3crlln at tho end of 1942,
in which he took part, one of the topics of discussion was
the fatality of gas oedena serun on wounded soldiers. Prof.
Killian of the Artsy Medical Inspectorate, and Mrugowsky gavo
reports of soldiers who had rocolvcd ga6 oodenn serun in
high quantities and hours later, after apparently having

• recovered, died cuddonly without vlciblo reason. It was
oxooctcd that the phbnol content of tho oorun brought about

* tho fatal result. Urugowsky in tho presonco of Killian ond
Schrolbcr, ordered Ding to take part in a euthanasia killing
with phenol on a concentration crop innate and to dcscrlbo
tho rocult in detail. Ding askod tho defendant Hovon to no¬
tify hln -hen ho would perforn another euthanasia killing
with phonol. Hoven then, on tho next ovcnlng, invited Ping
to cone to the hospital and in his presence administered
phonol injections to four or five lnnatcs who dlod Instantly.

y (NO-267, Pros. Ex. 205, R. 1091).

III. Oonoral Defenses

Hoven tried to explain the contradictions betwoon his

tostlnony before tho Tribunal and his pre-trial affidavit

regarding these killings nr.d regarding his position as deputy

to Ding; by asserting that this affidavit was cxocutod in

tho English language and he, not being fully conversant with

- 21 -


Chid language, misunderstood cor Cain word a and wag noC
aware of their real nooning* But such is not Che ease.

Hoven wns questioned by the Tribunal at great length about
tho word3 contained in Ch~ affidavit which he could not
translate Into German. He listed all the words which he
allegedly did not understand nd the affidavit Itself was
reconstructed by deleting from It tho words which he alleged¬
ly did not understand. But even with these words deleted,
tho affidavit Is perfectly understandable and Its ncanlng
Is in no way changed. (R. 9815-9820). The German additions
"Flcckflobor Vcrsuchsctatlon“ and B Fiockflcbor and Virus
Forschung", v'hlch were nado by Hoven himself, nako It cloar
that Hoven knew that tho German word "Flockflobcr" meant
typhus. (R. 9820-1).

LSorcovor, he admitted that ho Knew this affidavit con-
cornod the typhus experimental station, Many changes In tho
affidavit were made by Hoven himself an'' every chango was
marked by him by hie initial on the margin. Ho also marked
each page with hlo lnltl'*. (R. 9822-3). This proves boyond
any doubt that Hovon paid clooo attention to the wording of
the affidavit, that he considered carefully Its language and
made all corrections which he felt were necessary in order to
make tho affidavit con lotc and correct. Ho admitted that he
v/ac permit A to nako all changes and corrections which ho
desired. (R. 9823). The pre-trial Interrogations of Hoven,
during ono of which the affidavit was signed by him.

(H0-4068, Fros. Ex. 564, R. 10698; N0-4069, Pros. Ex. 565,

R. 10690) shot 1 clearly that tho affidavit was read aloud to
Hoven, that several changes v/oro nado on his request and
that all the dotalia which arc tho subject of tho affidavit
vrcrc discussed with Hover, and that the affidavit ltcoll' Is


nothing else than a summary of Hover. 1 s own admissions 'urlng

Interrogations. Moreover, Hoven had spont three years In the

- 22 -


United States (NO-591, supra) cf. Hoven, R. 9914), which. In
itself should bo sufficient for a reasonably intelligent
person to bo converset enough with the English language to
understand a written statement which was read to hln and
v/hich he r ad hlnself carefully before signing it. It is
clear that Koven certainly would not have signed a papor and
Initialed ovory change in It If ho had, at the sane tine,
not understood other parts.

It nust be concluded that the statenents In his affi¬
davit are considerably noro reliable than his testimony.
Moreover, the adnlsslono In the affidavit aro supported by
the documents and the testimony of wltnccsos.

In connection with the charge of raa/.bcrshlp in a crimin¬
al organization, as sot forth in Count IV of the Indictment,
Hovon offers the defenso that he was drafted Into the SS and

• that ho assumed his positions as camp physician In the
Buchonwald concentration camp and D 0 puty to Ding on tho

• basis of military ordors. The International Military
Tribunal declared:

"to bo criminal vrithln the meaning of tho
Charter tho grouj composed of those persons
who had been officially accepted as members
of tho S3 as enumerated in the preceding para¬
graph who becano or remained nir.bcrc of the
organization with Knowledge that It ras being
used for tho commission of acts dccl rod
criminal by article 6 of the Charter, or who
were personally Implicated as members of tho

• organization In the commission of such crlnoc,

excluding, honover, those who were drafted Into
membership by the state I n such a way as to give
then no cholco In tho mat ter, ah?, who Rad ”"

’ co mmitted n o cucn crime:6. ?(Trial of the Snjor

»ar Criminals, Page 270, enphasis supplied).

Assuming Hovon was drafted Into the ^affon-SS it was
clearly done on the basis of the fact that he volunta r ily
Joined tho Allgcncl nc- SS In 1934. (Hovon, R. 9763). Had ho
w no t been a member of the *»llgcnolnc-SS, he certainly
•"Ould have been drafted Into a unit of the ^ohrnacht. More¬
over, there lc no showing that he had ’no choice In tho

- 23-


natter". 3ut assuming arguendo that he had no choice when
draftod Into tho ./affrn-S§, ho could be found not guilty under
Count IV only if he had committed "no such crimes", namely,

Vrr Crlr.od and Crlncs against Humanity. The proof has shown
beyond any doubt that he participated In such crlncs. His
defense, therefore, has no foundation.

IV. COKCmST ON

The dofendant Koven was a member of the iillgonclno and
v/affen SS. In the latter he attained tho rank of Haupt-
sturmfuchrcr. In h-s capacity as oar.p physician of tho
9uchcn?/ald Concentration Camp and deputy to Ding in tho
Institute for Typhus and Vires Hescarch of the n’affen-SS,
ho selected experimental ubjecto for tho typhus and othor
vaccine experiments. Ho supervised these experiments during
tho frecuent absences of Ding and performed Infection experi¬
ments hluoclf. Kururous Involuntary experiments cubjocts
died as a result of those experiments.

Hoven oartlclpatod in tho euthanasia program, which was
carried out In concentration c-mpo undor tho code nano
"Action 14 f 10", by selecting lnnatcc vfio wore to bo pro-
conted to the exports' commission, by compiling tho lists of
nnnes of victims who wero to be sent to the Bernburg Euthan¬
asia Station for extermination by gas, md by making out
falsified death roporto. Additionally, ho personally mur¬
dered scores of inmates by injections of phenol. He had
knowolodgo of and supervised the macs murder of tubercular
lnnatos In Buchonwald. In ordor to ascortaln whether tho
phenol content was the reason for sudden doath resulting from
gas oeden" scrum Injections, he killed an additional 4-5
Inmates of Buchonwald by injection with phenol.

The Prosecution submits that the evidence proves that

Hoven was a principal la, an accessory to, ordered, abetted,

took a con: ntlng part in, and was connected with plans and

- 24 -


enterprises involving nodical cxccrimen cation on hunnr.
subjects without their consent, In the course of which cx-
oerlnents murders, brutalities, cruelties, tortures, Atro¬
cities, And other Inhumane Acts were committee} that ho
unrtlclpatod In the murderous euthanasia urogram, And that
his guilt has been ostAbllshcd under Counts One, Two, Three,
and Four of the Indictment.


)


t


- 25 -


CLOSING BT.IL? FOE
THE UiUTED ST/.TLS 0? IC,


Nurnbc rr,

16 June 1947


..Gi.mST

70..CFIS! JrUOC'T-T


.t. :ioii acy
..It- a tr G. : r y
„r:: ct ’! rlik-H chv. If
' sthi r J-ne J has n

f r:

Tclf'K Tv.yl'r
: rii 1-. r Geac-i 1. U.S
Chief f C tinsel f r '


I®UQ0 , "8KY


I N PRODUCTI ON

It Is alleged. In essence, under Count X of the In¬
dictment that Joachin Krugowsky conspired and a. reed with
others, pursuant to a common desl,;n, to perform medical ex¬
periments on Involuntary human subjects; under Counts II
and III (rfar Crimes and Crimes gainst Humanity, respec¬
tively), that he was a principal In, accessory to, ordered,
abetted, took a cons ntin.* part in, and was connected with
plans and enterprises involving medical experimentation on
Involuntary human subjects; under Count IV, that he was a
nombor, after 1 September 1S39, of the S3, an organization
declared to oe criminal by the International Military Trl-

%

bunal.

* The acts recomized us War Crimes and Crimes against

Humanity aro s« t forth ir. Para, raphe 1 lb) and (c) of Article
II of Control Council Law Ho. 10. Membership in an orranl-
zatlon declared criminal by the International Military
Tribunal Is dullnod as a crime In Paragraph 1 (d) of the
sumo article. The criteria of criminality arc Out forth
\ In Para, raph 2 of article II of Control Council Law No. 10.


ihe defendant „ru._owsky Joined the HSD.iP In 1930
and the S3 In'the followln, year. From 1933 to 193b, hu
was un active monger of thu SO. In 1S37, he became a
ny lenlst for S3 troops, which later cuno to be known as
the Waffon So. ^t that time he held the rank of SS-3turm-
oannfUehr«r (Major;. In tne fuffen 5s he rose ultimately
to the rank of Oberfuuhrer (3«nlcr Colonel). (NO-723,


- 1 -


•aUGO-.’SKY


Pros. Ex. 29, R. 131-2). In 1933, Mru.-owsky became a member
of the S3 Uodlcal Office lsanitaetsant) in Berlin, which
was later attached to the 33 Operational Headquarters (S3
Fuohrun,:shuuptamt) as ^ntsi/ruppe D. In this capacity, he
founded in 1939 the Hy,;iene Bacteriological lostinf Station
(Untersuchsurv atellc). In 1940, this station was enlarged
and named the Hy lone Institute of the ffnfien S3. Hrufcow-
sky was chief of this Institute and at the same time chiof
of Office XVI (hygiene) of «mts. ruppe 0 (Medical Service
of the i/affen SS) under Genckcn. (lirurowsky, R. 5002-3:
NO-416, Pros. Ex. 22, R. 121). «11 So physicians, who

had bacteriological and hygienic training, were transferred
under his connand. (Mru*;owsky, R. 5020-1). Ko was tho
military superior and commander of the hy-lcno Institute
of tho ffaffen S3 and of all affiliated institutes which
developed in the cour6o of tho «*.r, with full powers to
issue orders. Uru.:owoky, R. 5CC4). Ho was in charge of
all questions of epidemic control and hy.iuno in tho tfaffon
SS. (tfru.-oweky, R. 5C04-6). In Soptcnbor 1943, tho
Medical Service of the ft.ffen S3 wua reor. united. uu».ow-
sky <md the ny. lone Institute, which had been subordinated
to Gonzken as Chief of the Medical Service of tho "uffon
S3, was thereafter subordinated to Ornwlti ns the Reloharrt
S3 fold Police. Mru, onsky was Chief hy.jlenlst (Office III)
under Granite, he remained Chief of tho hy. lone Institute,
his duties were not char., cd by this reor. nnlzatl n.

(tiru. owsky, R. 5009; 110-723 supra; HO-417, Pros. Ex. 23,

R. 121). *he tasks cf the Chief Hy.lonlst Were procurement
of materials, transfer of personnel, technical use of per¬
sonnel, and professional instruction. (Hrui.owsky, R. 5017).


- 2 -


: g.UGO~:sKY


These, then, were the positions of responsibility
of the defendant ilru. owsky: Oberfuehrer (Senior Colonel)
in the Wafien S3, Chief of the hygiene Institute of the
tfaffen SS, Chief of Office X’/I of the liedloal Service of
the 'Mien S3 (nntstruppo D) of the S3 Operational Head¬
quarters and Chief of Office III and Chief Hy»lonlat under
the Reichsarst S3 and Police.


The proof ha6 clearly shown that kru t 'owsky per¬
sonally participated in experimentation on hurr n buln -s
without their consent as char- ed in the Indictment.

Mru.*owGky is char.'ed with special responsibility
for, and participation in, the .i.:h altitude, fruezln.-,
nolariu, sulfanilamide, sea water, sterilization, typhus,
poison, epidemic Jaundice, and incendiary benb experiments.
In order to simplify the Issue, the Prosecution withdraws
the char, o of participation in the hit'll altitude, sea water,
and sterilization experiments.

(1) ivphu s ana 0 th rjtecciner 1 (Jndl£t-

Qsi2ix-ZL‘£i-^UU

i’he attack a. ainct Kusola In 1941 .*nvu rise to
many military medical prouler.s, net the least of which was
typhus. The dlGoase reached s-.x-loua proportions In the fall
of 1941, and typhus vaccines Were so scarce that only doc¬
tors, nurses, and otner medical personnel In exposed posi¬
tions, could be . iveii lnnoculatlone. (Schmidt, R. elCO-1).

One of the most important problems with respect
to the increased production of typhus vaccines -vas the


effectiveness of Che- so-called Cox-.-aa. cn-Gildcnelstcr vac¬
cine, which was produced fre-n e.:< -yold cultures. The ef¬
fective tfel.rl vaccine, produced froa the Intestines of
lice, was available, out it's manufacture was expensive
and coupllcatcd. The e._:.:-yolk vaccine was relatively sinplo
to produce out it's protective qualities were not regarded
as having been sufficiently proved. U'0-752, Pros. Sx.

451, R. 5060).

The entry for Zj Detracer 1941 In the Dinf dlnry
proves that a conference was hold on that ante between hnnd-
lcsv-r, ns Amy ^ouici'l Inspector; Conti, of the Ministry
of Interior; Reiter, of the Public Keith Dcpnrtnent;
Olldcnelste-r, cr the Robert Koch Institute; and MruKOWsky,
of the hy. lone Institute of the faffun SS. <ICO-265, Pros,
hx. 207, R. 1154, hereinafter referred ;o as the "Dln.-
Dlary").

at the conference it t* s decided that the typhus
vaccine froc c.% -yolks wuo to be teGted cn hunt-ji beln»:s
to determine Its efficacy. On the sane day an eurliur
conforonoe was held : .. discuss,a thu anno protlon. It
tooh. place at the Rolens ...nlstry of the Interior, and wns
attended u'j oeiour of the Interior; 'jilaunelster; repre¬
sentatives of the Gov.rnner.t Gen. rtil in Occupied Poland;
officials of tr.e behrln .orks of I. G. F rbon, and Ober-
Gtabarzt Scholl, of t: v *i-, iledlcrd Insp ctor-ite. ."r.c
nlnutos of talc confer^nc. c.ute t:

"The v ccine which Is presently b,lnm
produced eV thu ber.rln.: ori:s from
chicken s s. nil be tested for Its
effectiveness in an ^'Jeri'ent. For
this purpose Dr. Beloer will contact
Ooorstumfuehrer Dr. hru owshy. ■

-4-


Since arugowsky was not present at this conference, it is
obvious that other conferences took place in which this
natter was discussed with him, which is corroborated in
the untry of the Ding Diary referred to above.

as a result of the decision reached at theso
conferences, the experimental station in the Buchenwald
concentration coop under 8S- St urn fuehrer. Inter r.auptsturm-
fuehrur Dr. Dinf-Sohuler (hereafter referred to as "Dlnr'")
was established. (Din. Diary; ko«;on, R. 1154). The charts
drawn by tho defendant iiru.owsky, anon, other proof, shows
Chat the experimental station in Buchenwald was subordinated
to the Hyt'lone Institute of the ffnffen-SS under Urufowsky
from tho Onto of its establlshnent until the end of tho
war. UO-416, Pros. Bx. 22; No-417, Pros. Sx. 23, h. 121).

In the bcflnnln of 1043, the research station
in Buchunwfdd was officially called the "Department for
typhus and Virus Research" of tno Ky iono Institute of
tho Wuffon-33. iho experiments wore carried out in Block
4c, the so-called clinical deck, with the exception of a
f 0 experiments o rly in 1942. In the »utuan of 1943 a
Vaccine Production Department w o established in dock 50.
both blocks 4b and SO Uei*e part of tho Department for
'fyphus ana Virus Research. Iho defendant Hoven was tho
deputy to Din,- in both blocks. (Dir.- Diary, koron, R.
1155-6).

Criminal experiments on concentration cop in¬
mates without their consent t^re carried cut in block 46 to
test typhus, yellor f^er, smallpox, typhoid, para-typhoid
* and B, cholera, and dlptheria vucolnos.


;..RUGCVSyY


The typhus oxperliaents in Buchenvald wore carried
out on a very larjre scale und resulted In nany deaths. The
nannur of execution and tne results of the experiments are
proved in b r«at detail by the Din.; Diary and the testimony
of Kofcjon as v.ell as other evidence. The first experiment
bu.-an on 6 January 1942 with the vacoin\tlon of 135 Inmates
with the Welb’1, Cox-haacren-Glldeneister, Sohrlnc Normal, or
Bohrlnt; Strcn. vaccines. «ll vaccinations were completed
by 1 February. On o M/.roh 1942, all of the vaccinated sub¬
jects and 10 Inmates who had not beer, vaccinated O nov/n
as tho "control .roup") were artlflcully Infected with
virulent virus of rickcttsia-prowazekl furnished oy tho
Robert Koch Institute. The experiment was concluded on
19 aprll 1942. Five deaths occurred, three In the control
, roup and two anon,- the vaccinated nubJeCts. (Din-- Diary;
Mrurowsky Doc. 10, Ururov'sky Sx. 20, R. 5087).

In later experiments the number of experimental
subjects usually varied between 40 nn a CO, cut tne propor¬
tion of control sucjecto was increusud. approximately
two-ts.lrda of tho cxperinuntcO. suejeots were vaccinated
while one-third renamed wltnout protecticn. « few Weeks
after vaccination, all «xperinent?.l subjects v re artifi¬
cially infected with typhus. The course of the disease
was then observed In the proteC-ed :aia control . roups nd
tho effectiveness of the vaccln^ was dot rnlnod. (Koron,
R. 1U8). Xherapoutio experiments wre conducted in the
same nannur with various dru/s. For e-x ample, botwoon 24
April and 1 June l'J- 3, experiments uei*u u rferaed to test
tho effect of /icrldln-Gmnuiat ijid Kutenol on typhus. Of


-6-


ft total of o9 inmates used, 21 died. (Din.: Diary; No-582,
Pros. Ex. 286, R. 1124-5).

artificial Infection was accomplished in various
ways. In the berlnr.lm* the skin wus lacerated and Infec¬
ted with a typhus culture. Contagious lice were used to
a United extent. For the most part, however. Infection
was brought about by the Intravenous cr intramuscular In¬
jection of fresh blood containing the typhus virus. For
the sole purpose of calntalnlnf a constant source of in¬
fected fresh blood, 3 to 5 Inmates per month wuro arti¬
ficially Infected with typhus, rho use of these so-called
"paasa.o persons" bo ran at least as early ns /.prll 1943
and continued until March 1946. Substantially all of them
died. Those victims were so much "a matter of course" that
their fatalities Were not Included ty Din.* in his alary.
(Koron, R. 1166-71).

tin analysis of the Din • Diary proves that a total
of 729 inmates were experimented on with typhus, of whom
164 died. To those f 1 < ures must oe added the* passare per¬
sons, of whom butwoon 90 and 120 died.

So much for tno cclu statistics of the experi¬
ments. block 46, where the experiments wure carried out,
wag a horror for avory Inmate of the Buohonw/J.d Concentra¬
tion Camp. Everyone selected for the experiments expected
to die a slow and frl.htful death. The nan-to-mon pnssa.*o
of the typhis virus created a form of "super" typhus. (Koon,
R. 1160). While typhus normally has a mortality of about
30;* In unprotected cases, In an experiment on 13 «prll
1943 five out of six persons Infected died. (Dim* Diary).


^RU&OWSKY


i^any of the experimental subjects be cane delirious. (Kogon,
R. 1172-5). In the experiments with acrldln and rutenol,
the subjects vonlted up to seven tines a cay. Bronchial
pneunonia, nephritis, intestinal blooding sub-cutaneous
phlu t nones below the larynx, parotitis, gangrene of the
shank, furunculosis, bronchitis, ana decubital sores de¬
veloped as a result of this treatment. (NO-582, Pros. Ex.
286 , R. 1124-5). Experinentnl subjects, who survived
and had a lighter course cf the disease because the vaccine
With wnlch they were vaccinated was effective, were forced
to watch the death stru.,le of their fellow inmates. Thore
was an iron discipline in block 46, the ont-of-nine-talls
ruled supreme, and the experimental subjects were completely
deprived of the last vestnge of personal freedom which
they hna in the camp. (Koran, h. 1172-5).

It lo hardly neoossary to state that the experi¬
mental subjects used in the typhus, ns well as all other
experiments in Buohenwald, were not volunteers. One docs
not nornully volunteer to ce killed. In the first series
of typhus experiments, a number of inmates wore duped into
eucaltting after being told it w*s a harmless affair and
that they would get additional food. They w c re not informed
that they would be urtirici.JIv infected with typhus nor
that they might die. (logon, R. 1162; see also the testi¬
mony of Kof-on in Case 4, military Tribunal Ho. II, R. 751-
2, .\0-56QO, Pres. Ex. , R. ). Those subjects cannot
be described as volunteers. Aftor the first few experi¬
ments, it was no Ion «r possible to deceive lnuates Into
offering themselves for the experiments. Thereafter, up


-8-


:.crugc.; SKY


until about the Fan of 1945, experimental subjects were
chosen arbitrarily from iaon; the inmates, whether crimi¬
nals, political prisoners, or homosexuals. Intrl«~uc anonfi
the prisoners themselves sometimes played a role in the
Btlectlcn. In the Fall of 19-ib, the camp administration
no Ion. er desired tc take the responsibility for the selec¬
tion of the experimental subjects. Ding no Ion,ver was
satisfied with verbal orders from h'ru..owsky to carry out
the experiments and he n6«:ed for written orders, he ap¬
proached alrui'OWBky with the request that the Relchsfuohrcr
ati should appoint the experimental subjects. nccorainr to
c directive from Himmler to Nobo of the Reich Criminal
Police, only those inmates vvre to be used who had been
confined for 10 y«.arr. or more. Thereafter, most of the
experimental subjects were hu&ltuni criminals, many of whom
were tx-ansperted tc buohonwald from oth r camps, out poli¬
tical prisoners w« re '.'.till lnoludea ouoause they wero In
disfavor with the comp udalnl strati on or because of camp
lntrl.-ues. Uono of the experimental inmates had been con¬
demned to death, except a few Russian prisoners cf wnr
who had not been tried or sentenced. They were iron f mo
9000 Russian prisoners of war who wcr. killed in Buchetiwald.
i’hc experimental subjects Were .an.rally In .-ocd physical
condition. (Ko./.-n, R. ll€b-b). The experimental subjects
Included not only Germans, -ut dso Poles, Russians, and
Fronchnon, uc well as prisoners cf w-r. The testimony of
ho on Is applicable to not nly the typhus experiments but
to tnu other experiments in auc..er.w Id as well, (lo.ron,

R. 1167).


-9-


latJGOSSSY


TrAs testimony of Ko./cn is corroborated by the

letter from hlmnl r to the Chief of the Sacurlty Police

dated 2? February 1344. He said:

"I a. ree that professional prisoners be
tvken for experiments with the typhus vacc¬
ine. but only these- professional criminals
should be chosen who have Served more than
ten years in prison; that is not with ten
prior convictions cut with a total penalty
of ten yorrs.

“dd Grujpcnfuohror Hooo is to supervise
the disposal or these inmates. 1 don't
'visr. tne physician to pick out inmates
vithout my clunter-control. n (no-1189,
rr os. & c. 4?1, R. 54-.G).

fhe sane document shows that Kru. ox/sky received a copy of
this Ueclolon on c.»on ;e in procedure and that it had boon
arrived at uft«r a conference between MrutX>'-»s3:y and lie be.

ihe testimony of !.oi?on is further corroborated
cy the witness KirchheiSur (R. 1321-i2) and the affidavit
of hov«n. U'0-489, Pros. Lx. 261, F.. 1079).

•he defense has contested the authenticity cf the
Din.* Diary. It is impossible to determine from the record
precisely whut their position is In that roirard. That tho
diary does not consist of entries made day by day is ob¬
vious from the f..cc of the- document itself. It is rather
a document which rirdlc- lly summarizes tho experiments
which ir. many cue s lasted several months. Dlnr also kopt
a daily alary and work reports, iio on, R. 1226). Those
obviously fori the basis of the alary in evidence. The
defunse lays ."eat strecs ;n the fact that pu.*e one of the
dicry ./as typed with, a oluer riooon than .n.-es two et scq.,
and hence was procazly typ d later. The Prorecutlon has no
quarrel v/ith that. Kc. on . ave the very obvious explanation


-10-


hRUirOhShY

that tne pa t :e was probably re-typed when the name of the
experimental station was designated as the "Department for
typhus ana Virus Research* 1 . (R. 1228). at best, the
re:.sons for re-typing pa.res is now a matter of sheer specu¬
lation. No valia inference can be drawn from that fact
“lone• Sh® Dine- Diary was taken by Ko B -on from 5uanenwnld r
It was in his exclusive possession until delivered to the'
Office of Chief of Counsel for Tier Crlne6. He testified
that l.o die not alter tne docuaent In any respe'et and that
the si natures of Din., j.nc. later Schuler, are- ronulno.

(n. 116i~6). r.e l.na no motive lor chan ;in.* the diary. The
document was authenticated by the Prosecution re bolnr In
tho sane condition no r.ten reooived.

The experts of the defense established that tho
deoununt v; o written on the sane typewriter with the- armo
l.lnd of paper. (Mru. . Doc. 8, ~ru... Ex. , R. ).
tiru owsky admitted that Din.-'s si. nature is on substantially
all of tne pa. os of the diary. (R. 5410). There is no
contention they h-Vo ccon forced. .. comparison cf the ad-
r.lttcdl i\nuino signature of Din- cn a vaccination chart
CJ0-&70, Pres. Ex. 284, R. 1105) rj id of Schuler cn an
affidavit cl ; -nea b;< him n ter the war IH0-257, Troo. Ex.

283, R. 1001) with the si natures of Din.-Schuler in the
diary prove reyond any deu-.t tin t the si natures arc
authentic.

Thu delen e has net established a oln.’le inac¬
curacy in tne Din Dlrry. Tr.e Prosecution, on the other
hand, h:.o proved the d.tull accuracy cf the diary tine 1
and a ain l;. the introduction of independent documents.


-11-


IIKU&O-VSKY


It will suffice Co cite a few examples. The work report
of Cho "Department for Typhus and Virus Research" for the
y^ ar 1943, Which was Sent to Hrugowsky, substantiates the
corresponding entries in the diary in every detail. (NO-
071, Pros. Ex. 285, R. 1106). The paper written by Ding
on the treatment of typhus with acrialn dorivates, approved
by Hrugowsky, checks to the last death with the experiments
reported by the entries in the diary for 24 April and 1
June 1943. (NO-502, Pros. Ex. 286, R. 1120). Uruirowsky's

letter of 5 Hay 1942 to Ccnti, Grawitz, Gonzkon, Gildcmols-
ter, Ey^r, and Domnitz reporting on a typhus vaccine ex¬
periment is in fact a description of the first experimental
. series in Buohonwold as given in the diary. This was a

document submitted oy the defense. (Mrug. Doc. 10, Urug.

. Ex. 20, R. 508?). Hrugowsky admitted ho was reporting

on that experiment. (R. 5414). The entry in the diary for
19 nu ( ust 1942 concerning the* testing of the Bucharest
vaccine made- available by Rose is corrobarated by Mrugow-
eky's letter to Rose, dated 16 )iay 1942, asking for the
vaccines. (NO-1754, Pros. Ex. 491, R. 6460). Tho entry
for 3 March 1944 concerning the experiments with the Ipsen
(Copenhagen) vaccine, which the diary shows were 8Ut vested
by Rose, ir. substantiated by Rose's letter to Hrugowsky
of 2 December 19-.3 (;.'0-1186, Pros. Ex. 492, R. 6463) and
by Lollln 's letter to Grawitz of 14 February 1944.

(NO-1188, Pros. Ex. 470, h. 5437; see also, NO-1189, Pros.
Ex. 471, R. 5440). Tho yellow fever vucclno experlnonts
reported in the diary on 10 January 1543 are dealt with in
a letter from the Behring forks to Hrugowsky dated 5 January


-12-


HRUGO'.i’SKY


1943. (N0-1305, Pros. Ex. 469, R. 5426). The phosphorus
bcnb experiments are noted In the Din,; Diary under the
dutes of 19 to 25 Novcrfcor 1943. The report on these ex¬
periments dated 2 January 1944 shows the burning of inmates
be an on 19 November and ended cn 25 November 1943. (NO-
579, Pros. Ex. 280, R. 1188). *s to the conference held
on 29 December 1941 reported in the Ding Diary, Mrugowsky
made the following statement in u pre-trial Interrogation:
"I remember that meeting and it occurred to me that there
were present Schreloor, Gildemelster, Din. and nyself."
Mrugovrsky .omitted in open court having trdo such a state¬
ment. (R. 5380).

l'hu «-0Vu ; nalyols cf the authenticity and ac¬
curacy of the Ding Diary, while not exhaustive, suffices
to show that the defense objection to this document is
completely without merit. There is scarcely a line in
thu whole diary wnlch haG not been suLotnntinted either
by documents or testimony. The diary must Cl aoceptud no
. accurate in its entirety. There is no basis whatever for

noooptlng so no entries and rejecting others. The defense
e has presented no credible evidence of nnjr Inaccuracies.

*hu living record of the deoeaooa Ding is the best evidence
of wh t actually happened.

Other vaccine experiments were carried out In the
ux.jeri iont(.l station in 3uohomr.ld. On re-que:it of the Med-
lc:-.l Inspectorate of the Amy, yellow fever vaccine con¬
taining a live vlruc was tested in a large experiment on
inmates vnio'fl be con on 10 Jnouory 1943. The arrangements
were made by Schrclber through the defendant lirugowsky.


-13-


M?.UOO«:5XY


Uvc-1305, Pres. Ex. 469, R* 5426). n very large number
cf inur.te6 were vaccinated between 13 January and 17 Hay
1943 ct which time production of the yellow fever vaccine
w 8 abandoned because of tho military situation in North
Ulrica. The results of these experiments were Sent to
iUaC XVI ln tha ss Operational Headquarters, which was the
hy;;lono Office under Mru. owsky, ana to tho Army Medical
Inspectorate. (Ding Di-.ry).

In tho first part of 1943, Mrugowsky conferred
with Hnndlowur concerning nultipic vaccinations. (Hnndlosor,
R. 3064). ihorc can be no douot that this was the activation
for tho liovo scale vncoln-.tlon experiments on 45 Inmates
of fiuohonwald between 24 March and 20 *prli 1943, no sot
forth In the Din.- Diary. Each person was vaccinated on
ei ht different day b wit.iin f:ur we.ko arnlnst smallpox,
typhoid, typhus, para-typhoid « and b, cholera, and dip-
truria. '.he report on these experiments was sent to
Mru.jowsky's office. Kc,;jn testified that tho experimental
sufcjootp were .Ivon pnra-typhoid bacilli In potato salad.

He also stated that the experiments in Buchanwold with
diseases other than typhus resulted in deaths although
relatively fewer. (Xotpn, H. 1182-3).

iiru.rowsky -ould have tho tribunal col leva that
he la In nc way res^nol^le for the experiments carried
out by Jin.- and Hoven in the Buc.ientr-Id Gene ntratlon Coop.

Hw testified in effect that Din., was directly subordinated
to Gr;.wltz. as far :.s tho e-xpc-rlments were concerned.
Ulru.owsky, 5067). ’while he die admit that Din*: was
subordinated to him for purposes of vaccine production in


-14-


isiGorrsKY


block 50 In ouch enfold, he said he had nothin.: whatever to
do with the experiments c rried out In block 46. The sane
content It. was cade by the defendant Oenzkon. Mrua'oweky
testified th t he vans cutrajod by t.:e idea of cXperlnent-
in.- on hunan be-in^s as he was of the* opinion that hunan
life is sacred. (H. 5066).

The proof, however, is overwhelming that Mrurow-
s -y erd r«u the uxk rimin', s carried out by Dlnr In Buchen-
W’tld, In ..la ovm pre-trial affidavit Urufowsky stated that
the Department for Typhus and Virus R-search of th. Hy;;leno
Iusiltu'e of the 7c.f: en 33 in Suohcwrald was established in
the ee innln, o: 19411 by Gens! en. he admitted that as Chief
of oat XVI (hyflonu) in iu do Operational Hondquartors
and as ChUf of t:i» Ky ku Institute of the n\«n ss, ho
was the innodlr.tv superior of Din.-. He stated furth. r that
expert;.eats :n inr. .tee w re oarrlec out -y Dinr in order
to determine the efiect :i various typhus vaccines. Ho
adal* tud he obtained full knowlcd e or the work of Dint:,
that he r^o-iVeii reports fr :: aim on the experiments,
lncludint tr.e eenth rates, and that he inf.rued Genskcn.
CiO-423, Pros. Ex. 232, K. 10&7). Th two charts drawn
by the def-ndnnt kru cwsky clearly shew that the experi¬
mental station in Bucr^nwrid under Din. 1 -as directly sub-
ordlnatcd to , : :ru •owcl-y frta the tine* cf its establishment
until ti:e collapse cf Germany. (KO—^16, Pr o. Ex. 22;

NO- 17, pr.R. Ex. 2D, R. 121). kru owe-y admitted Ding's
onnuotion with the Hy ie.ne In-titutc cf the t. en 53 on
cross i-xanini ticn. (R. eC?l).

file pre-trial affidavit cf the defendant Hcvcn


-15-


E:\UGO -'Si Y


who was de: uty to Dinr :»nd certainly in a position to
know the facts, states that the hygiene Institute of tho
Wnfion SS under :i*u-ow6ky received nil the reports cn the
experiments In clock 46 nnd that Dinr received orders
directly fr:n Urujcwshy. Kcven outlined tho chain of
aomnnnd ns Grnwltz, Genskcn, Erurowsky, nnd Dlnr. Dinr*
v/o-nt to Berlin for discussions with Krui;ow3ky nearly every
second week. :.ru rowsky visited In the hone of Dlnr on one
of his trips to 5uciionwnld. (NO-489, Pros. Ex. 281, R.

1070).

Keren testified tint Dlnr reported p. rsotmlly to
Urut’oweky on the ex^ rir.e.nts r.nd when he did not ro to
Berlin himself, he r. ported r. L -ularly every throe nonths
in wrltinr. (R. 1186, 1155). flic reports on tho experiments
carried out . n clod -.6 were Bent to i:ru«*owoky In Berlin.

(R. lieo). Ding's Cffioia correspondence was primarily
/lth ..m»:c-/s, y. (R. 1157). .he instructions for tho
oxecutl n of the experiments cane freo Krurotvcky. (R. 1165,
1210). In the late ounner of 19-5 hru owsky bocano tho
sole ohlef of Dlnr and Issued all orders to hlrr. (?.. 1202).
lirurowsky occupied such an important position that It would
have coon ion- erouc for Dinr to contact Gravrltz over his
head. (F.. 1241). Knurr :y visited the oxperlacntal
block In Buchcnwald or. sovornl occasions. (Fcron, R.

124-X-5: Llrchhulacr, K. 1529).

• no proof outlined above as to Eru,:ows'/y 1 s res-
ponslwlllty Is repeatedly supported by dccum- ntnry evidence.
Din, 's work report for tho year 194c, which lists tho ex¬
periments carried out In Block 46, was Sent to Erurowsky


hRUGQWSKY


and carried the letterhead y. ieno Institute of the '.7affen
bo, Department for fyphus find Virus Research, ’clranr,

Buchenwnld - . (I«0-5>1, Pros. Ex. 255, R. 1109). This
work report covers the experiments In Block *16 and the
production of vaccines m Block 50, which conclusively
proves that ...ruiowsky's Assertion that his responsibility
was United to Block 50 1? cccpl_tely false. The nano re¬
port shows that Hruoows. y inspected the Depnrtmont for
ryphus and Virus Research In suohenwold on 5 September
19-:3 and that Din • had several c nfcrenels with r.rui.-owsky.
l.ru., owcky 1 s own secretary admitted that Din 1 s reports
aeout ..is experiments on inmates went via the Hy.:iono
Institute of tne W’afien So to Gr-.wltz. (Uru owsky, Ex.
lo, R. 50-i6).

hi’u ’O'wsky received Dln : '3 report on the treatment
of typhus with aorldln derivatives. l.iO-582, Pros. Ex.

286, R. 1122). This report speJiko of clinical tests on
human eeln.jo wno wer. afflicted with typhus, ut lCrut.oweky
i.nuw that Din,- experimented by ortlficully infecting
the suujucts. Imru.-owcky, R. 5066). Vho report ohowe
cn It g face that 21 of the experimental subjectc died

and that the inmates vr o survived hftO to fl.’ht ReVero
complications of the dlso .Su. I:.Is f me experimental
surlee lr rwported in t..e Din. Diary under the untrlee for
24 /tprll and 1 Juno 1243.

iho first experimental s.rl b cn typhus carried
cut In Buohonwold butwo.n 6 January and 1* /»pril 1942
In which 145 inmates w.re used as experiment-.! subjects,
was tne oasis of a report by Mrta:ow6ky to Conti, Qrawits,


M-OGCRSKX


ttenzkun, hy c r, ana Dcmnitz, dated 5 -Jay 1942 (Hrugowsky Doc.
10, i.rurows.iy EX. 20, R. 5067) . Five of the subj-.cts
died AS A reeult of th«se experiments. (Ding Diary)*

The experiments nit:, the Cnntacutlno vaccine from
buoar.roBt, reports in thu Din.- Diary under the entry for
19 AU U8t 1942, nere ordered by Nrupcwafcy. This vaccine
was furnished by the defendant Rose who requested Uru;;ow-
si y to urr/-n.;e for the exp rin^ritB. On 16 May 1942 ;-rui*ow-
B/.y wrote to Rob, stating thi t Grrwltz had consented to
the execution of the experiments and that the v.-cclno should
be Cent to him (Jlrugovsky). r- also a. rood to conduct ex¬
periments to determine whether t:.e louse could be infected
by a vaccinated typhus patient. This of oourao necessita¬
ted t..o infection of tho oxpcrinuntjJ. subject with typhus,
(N0-17B4, Pros. Ex. 461, R. 0460)'. »e a result of thcoo
eXporlDontc, four of thu subjects died. (Ding Diary).

The typhus experimental series llo. VIII, during
Which tho Ipson vuccinc fr.m Jopenhagen war. tested, vab
also ordered by the aefendant hrugewshy. On 2 Decea'oor
1940 Rose acked ilrugowshy to havo the Ipoen vocclne toBtcd
in Dinr's experimental station in Buchenwuld. C'0-1166,
Pros. Ex. 492, h. 7473). Lru;owoky ex resnly denied, during
croosrsxanlneticn, that he w' s ever approached by R'sc to
have the . penliagett vaccine tested in bucher."nid. :-.e
stated c:;ut: "If he had come to me 1 would have sent him

.1 w uld havo said, «Ky dear man, that
does n;t have an; t (?•• 6454 - b) . On

21 February 1944 t.ru.;c s*y was n-tified that 50 "appropriate
eypsies 0 wculd usae < vaila-le for testing the Ipsen


HRUQQV.S1Y •

vaccine. (NO-1188, Pros. Ex. 470, R. 5437). Mrugowsky was
further advised on 29 February 1944 that the experimental
subjects would be design .ted by the office of Nebe of
the Reich Criminal Police. I NO-1189, Pros. Ex. 471,

R. 5440). fhe Ding Diary proves that the experiments
with the Ipsen vaccine began on 3 Marc:: 1944 with 30 ex¬
perimental subjects, of when six died as a result of the
experiments.

On 13 August 1944 the defendant Mrugowsky ordered
Ding to carry out experiments to determine the Infectious
character of blood of light cases of typhus compared with
that of serious cases. (NO-1197, Pros. Ex. 472, R.

5451).

hrurows’/y ordered a series of experiments
to determine whethor the course cf typhus could to
tempered by intravenous or intramuscular injection of
typhus vaoolno. Of the 25 experimental subjects used,

19 died. This experiment was carried out between 11
Kovomeor ar.d 22 Deccnoer 194 . (Ding Diary).

In vlow of t,:o evidence outlined aeove, it la
quite clear that all of the experiments carried out by
Ding in ouchenwald were executed pursuant to the ordero
and directions of the difon ar.t ...rugewsk.y.


-19-


.soc-owssy


(<2) ~; 1 g: r. Experiment s (Indictment, ?*r. 6 (II))

-cia- r. experiments voro carried out in tie Euchenvald »nd
bBcnnonhaucen Concentration Count by crd r cf the acfordnnt .irur'”-
o.cy. jjffcn. 11 3-6). Tho fir#*, sorl"# cf the oxoeriuor.tB •-ia
cnrriod cut in Dcco.-ier 19^3 in order tc determine the ftfcl dn«ge
of nciacno of the BlcBloid croup. "haao .irperiacrt* *vro roquontod
by tho SS C"! croon, vhc inventi.-ntod tho criminal eaoc M£»inot
-och, OKio ccncAr/ior cf the Sue ho a*-Id. -no the Aefenaant Sevan.

Seven vr.n cub octcd of bavin?* hllln - » vi*r.aaa ajnlrat Soch -r.d
hiaaolf by atar.a cf ntinen. Four H'miUb prUouora cf v* r noro ex¬
perimented uj a bj Dire. Tfco poU:n *--e administered to the oxoorl-
oonttd nuojecta in tfcolr f^*i vitheut their icr.ovled’c. All feur
aurvlvod, but vero atrn.:lod in ' crosAtcriun cf tho cor.contr-tlon
ip in order that ■ u*.option oculd bo porforaod. (Koc&n, B. 1163-41
Din.; DUrj). Sir.co Dliy; *»o tuber ir.atod to .!ru.;cvo ty, thin oxpori-
nont could not h*vo boor, oor." raed by Tin; vitcout .iru/yvalcy'n np-
prcv<*l.

Cn 11 Boptoubur It44 Aru< jv*-cy «r.l Dln<? c-rrloi out nn
exporlnont "Itfc nccnitin nitmto projectile* in tho S■•cfcoonhnunun
Ccncontrnticn Caso. "ho r /octlleo •'oro filled vith cry#t«lli*od
coin r. \r.i flvo dxtHiricwr.t*l aub.'ccta *cra rlvt in tho upper ?vrt cf
tho left third with thooo nre-octllIn t't «*#•#. r.o effect of
tho t'leon dcuid be obo*rwd. Ir. t~o otixr throe c-oco. tho Buffer¬
ing of the err- rlor.t«l subjects • »o torrlblo. .*11 throe died tf-
tor v- r*:.l -toly *.«t houra of « my. "i/> roleon bullotn UBOd in
tho excori *u ro ftliafiBdiy cf I.soIt. ^ri ir.. (SD-301, ?rcn. Ex.
3?0, 13C3-4)

-,vj exporiror.t’l #ub.QCn ‘-ore SttBtiar. rriacnoro of ««r.
(donn, 11=5: boo also Stfen't tcstlacny in Cbbo 4. .'llit-.ry Tri¬
bunal II. 733. :*0-3€e0. Pros. Ex. . -a. ). rfru^vuicy ndr.lt-


KRUGOVSZT


tod hio participation in the bo oxrerimer.ta. Eo defended himself on
tno Around trvt he van tho loyally appointed executioner in this c*eo.
Aoauiing the truth ef this absurd statement, it cannot be hold loral
to torture to death priocnors of vj> r evon if they had be->r. validly
sentenced tc doath.

On 26 October 194-i atiil another poison experiment vat car¬
ried out by Dinp ir. aucher.vald. T>o entry in tho Dins 3>l«y for that
date ntatoa: "Special experiment on 6 wrscr.a according tc irntruc-
tior.B of SS Oborfuohror Lecturer Dr. Xrugovaicy ar.d RZ?A. (Report on
thlo orally)." Sc*or. teatifl d that Din#: tola him tho Russian pri-
aonors of *nr unod in tho orperimonta dlod in • ehort timo. Thoy
wore later dianectod and burned. Dins rcpcrt.'l to Hrurowaky orally.
Tnoflo oxperioente woro connectod with tho poison bullot oxpcriocr.ta
In tho Snchoonhauaon Concentration C^ap. IZ-.rcn, R. 1185-C).


(3) iDSMI&laXX gfijft.RPWlaWtP (Indicant. p»r. 6 (D)

In yoroabor 1943, Xrurcvskjr ordered Diny tc teat tho dru#c
"R 17" or. now nhoaphorouu burr.o and "eekinacln" ointment and liquid
"ochlnncln" for tho l«-tor treatment cf auch burna. Five oxoerimental
persons, who hr.d boon prevtcuely used in tyrr.ua experiments, wero de¬
li bora tel v burned with inf1-mod phosphorous liquid, which wnc t«’<or.
from an incor.dlnry bomb. Tho resulting burna wore very aovorc, aa
c»n Oo ocon fr:n tho illustrated rooert cn tr.eoo experimenta. (DO-
57', Free. 2x. 226 , R. lUc). Tho victiai Buffered oxcrutiatinff
pain and vero permanently injured. (Sorer.. R. 1167-90; 'JO-57?, Proa.
2x. 2it, H. 11 -ci Din p Diary).

with Cld 51-:d Plae:*’ and the Production


Txporiaer.ta with cld bleed olaarw wore conducted on iiratca
in auchonwpld by erder cf Rricowo'sy »t the request cf tho Military e-
dical ^cadoay. blood tranafuaiona vore carried out in order to deter-


:?3C"s:y


alno whether this cid bl od plasna could be used without danger. co-
pccially without darker cf nhoci. Several series of exporiasnta.
ORch vlth 10 to 20 experlaontal subjects. «ore performed. Sc.^o cf
the victims diod, probably duo to cbo c-ublrad offect cf sheet and
poor physical condition. .CrugcvgKy received reoorto on thooo ex¬
periments. (logon. 1190-3; Ding Diary. entries fron 21 Decoder

1943 to 16 Juno 1944).

The entries for 26 hny and 13 Cctofc. r 1944 !r. the -\zr.
Diary ohow that bl'cd vaa withdrawn fr a iruptoa reervering fron ty¬
phus for the purpose of ;*<lng a typhus cor.' »loacent serum. “he
-Unosa logon testified that this verb v^.a done by SS Eauptstur.u-
fuohror Dr. lllor.boc-c r n ordoro fron ;-Lrx *w C .<•». silonb c/i obtained
th-i al od fron typhus convalescents ir. bloc 46 fr'a the s-xrjor :f

1944 until tbo a-ring of 1945. rl-od tsk r. frea those oxpori-
uont l subjects rogulxrly, usually in • r.ur.tn bot*oon 250 and 3fO cu¬
bic cor.ti .oters. TaslUft tho bl -4 fr the c. nvnl scent p-tior.tn
noant ar. extraordinary buraor. cn thus ar.l « cumber died. “hilo tho
y-rooiao cauoo of doc.th c;uld not be definitely •scortnlnod unror tho
cl reams tnr.coo, t}-ore is W d:uct th-t tho «ltbds»ftl f VI :d —o a
contrluutlng factor. n, 3. llKi-3).

Kcgcn further tostlflod that Sllonbocic. -r. rdcre fron
.•irugevslcy, n”oto atlcally selected invalids >.r.d r d '■ rs no. oxpocinl-
\y 7ronchacr., wh: wore in the a--called "litti, carp*' f ruchjn^ai
for tho wirpcao of withdrawing tl cd to b<» used Ir. -r«; - a
an. Tho h'rriblo conditions ir. the "little c* ' uon vividly doc-
crioed. Tho blond •-ns doa-ndod fron th* victims and v* n taken fro.:
tno.3. s- »tl::os oxtri f: i *s .-iv n • tkeso starvir.,: :tior.ts.

( ■ «cn, h. 11 '4—6). v -:r. t- inc “b : i idstbar nay -f those blood
denora in tho "little cu.uy B in 3uchcr.'-ild i«d fr*_ this Vlccd-let-


■p*?tiAvcrry


tin#*, Sogcn re lied:

"Tee quant ion above t:Jt It is vo .7
difficult *.c <?in e real c;r.c«?t cf
the little c° .p »t Tuchorr-ald. The
cortilo clou thara in -*«m. ^urinf-
tho ni^ht tha ccrceon v.»ro lvln-* ir.
the Dl-c/*-o :aw 1 tocwiBO they vere
thrcv- cut :f tho burx* by tha ether
priBcnaro nc teat they wild x.-vo "
little r.cro o* co• n tho fl-!-

luat oioceo of ciothlr..* v ere rem
nv*y fron than by t.icao *••>- var.ted
to survive. It ie i.-. ccaislo to ao-
t'-rnir.J if directly and lu-od'.-tclv an
a result cf tho t*<cin£ tf bleed any¬
body died ooc-ubo aony .e-»lc fell
and died vhllo wrlbln* around iaa
little c»

"hut it 1 b b^y-nd any d-u'ot t nny-
cr.o vho b*n *r.cvn tbo c: nil tiers
tboro tte*t the trfcinff f bleed. arm
if it rr.vQ • annll -jsaaurc of strength
to these poeolo »o f"r "fl food v. a
ccr.corr.od, vn 0 a ctnsldorablo c*ntri-
butlnr factor ir. tho death cf t --any
tf these pc*, ile". (.It -n, H. 1196).

Bllonboc* nloo conducted rcn.-rch cencrnln tho sxy*»n
content of tho bleed r.f ruirn bile,* In rnriouo eta 10 tf exhaustion
and art if ler-lly produced starvation codeia. .-rir “7 r*.va r.lo an-
prcv-l to tfcono experience. ( 2 c,*:n, ?.. 1257-66).


TU affidavit of Dr. in'in ocbulcr, alino Tir.r, otaton


that at n conference in tha illitery ‘.todlca.l .-.cadory ir. hcrlin, in


tho end cf IS .2, in vj.leh he tore cart, one of tho topic* f dlocuo-
Bl'n —o the fatality f M 'udou bo run r. v-unded c'ldi- ro.
affidavit .-cob cn to stato taat an- nr • 0 rortlel’-nta in the nloc 0 -
olon voro Xillian, Gvnorul Sohreib r, «nd a nodical f-

fic:r vhr —.8 untne'a. t hi:.. .ttllin red .frur *o<y rave rep.-rte n
B'.ldioro vho bad r c ivod tho sorua in hi.* quantities and hours 1 °-
tur -ftcr r-'nar-ntl hnvlsr r cr.vred, died suddenly ^ittrut viniblo
It ’-.B ouapoctod that tno uhonrl content f the corun


ro*oon.


I'lC:


brought p.btut tho fatal result. Ir. tue nr-s- z.cc :f miliar and
Schreiner, .Invcvahy crioraa Dlr.>: tc p a rt ir. the porfcruyr.cc of
euthanasia vlth phenol on a coceentmticn c-_rp in=-e ’.r.d tr er.cribo
the results in detail. Die<r later vUncss.'i the esecutlrn f four or
five persons -1th phenol injeotl-.ns *7 the defendant Haven ir. the
aueh'?r."’ll C xer.tratioR C*=p. Acctrd t ra rs. n< rcorrt
his findings tc - rlln. (30-357, ?r:a. Hr. 266, H. 10P1>.

Hrutovslcy denied having • -

lo quite "nrarent, hevuvor, -w.t 2!r.--6chulvr. v-v-a under arrest at
the ti.-.o r.o executed tola affidavit, v-m not o.»ve !u lic-tod hiooelf
in a cri.no v.-.ich did r-t occur. Hruir-otr's c-r.tlr.M 0 d ir.toroot In
tho effect rf the oher.-.l contained in a-run ia evidenced oy » letter
of au.'.j t 24, 1E44 fro- :-r*vltr to fclj. wits ot-ted tlv-t tfto
Kolobsfuohror SS ;.«d -i/pr'-vod ox > riu :.t» urop'.aid by iru.--.vsh;- on
tho t”icr«r.ec rf aeroa cc&Ulnlac pbbn i. (VO-11%, Woe. x. 46c.

3. 33CO).

SliliT. .-MjUL <fi&L

(6) P rovide r (Indietaont. Par. 6 ih))

rhj cruel and Jiriorsus frooslr..- oxporl .xlc In >ch-u ’-ore
tho subject of «* frnx roprrt by Eltl.chner, «'k- crnductcd no ox-
pWittBJts vith Hanchor »r.a “hia lecture v*a dellrarod In -.

conference vale.*, t-pi c- -r. t. o a-i 2?-. f Cct r 15-’- In

r , "a tho vrittsa rop-rt :r. this i ot - r . vs. ('-TM®. WBl.
lx. €3, ... 306). 2l» report by & *1 hi » i»«d * ’ f a

sensation -o It ..-do cl «r that e-nccr.tr* d. n C’-sp inmates voro
used -.a oxp rl al4 BUbJvCtO »r.d tlXt a c £ tfa K t -i.i. U>Wt«

.■i. 272,.

;,S Cb rcviruf.- nror .hrtfcvx "*a sent ? ..ru-~c:v tr re-
sunt too into Institute : v;, "affsn SS this _ S Li - ai ho


.BUbOVSZY


reported to 4ru~.cv««y cn the ^otinf. Cirugcwshy, S. 5C3E;
supra.). Moroovor, ■ few days earlier cn 21 October 1342, Urutfavafcj'
ccr-forrcd with Slevers on cooperation between *i« Eygieno Inetltuto
of the Vaffon SS ar.d Kaach r, with res-ocl to the fronting cxporl-
aonte. * further meeting toe* place or. 30 Horeiiber 1843. (30-647.

Proa. 3x. 124, . 3 3). Aru£owsky admitted that ho opcSffl with

Sievura lr. this ccnnoctl-.n. Ura f x*%'Z.-, H. 5040).


(7) SxnorlaentB (Xndlctaont. P-r. 6 (O)

Aa to tho description and criclr.nl nature 'f these oxveri-
aor.tB, roforonco lo nado tc tho Pr oocuti-r.'s brief cn tho defendant
Hcso. Atui ovoky admltt d taring boon Inferred by rawitr f icfail-
ling'o oxjvjrl.ior.to lr. 3achau. :x ale- adslttui having CT.c^r.'d .' -
self with mlarla questions rath- r oxtonslv 1 ". ( j-u.-owb.^, a. SJ43)

ho o-.ld ho uraolo to Interfere with tho cx-: rijento of .;c..lll'.r.c
M ho vu still In tho S3 operational headquarters at tnc tlno w.wn
ho wns lnf'r.icd by Gravlts. ‘'.on he bvc-j -*:c^r f Gr-'-itr's
staff and Chief Eyglonlot, U o-id no did net avow that Schilllrc
otlll continued "ith his . xvri.canto. (.u-dgt-sxy, 3. 533C). Pchil-
lln« ccntlrfflod his ox ^ri ar.ta until 11-45. ‘ vor l.'-00 irnrtoo re

oxp-^riijontod upon and tcvoral hundred died as a roault. ( -055.
Prcn. T.x. 130, F.. 3.2). It Is Imucsolblo t^t .ju- • any could have
roaained Iffv.rant for two jr.-ro of .xrori -->r.to carried rut r. such a
l°r*o scale, OBnoclallr those rln-ntc v ro c-r.c rnoi with tho
coiibattlm? f epidemics, which w. B his own sphere f -ctivlty.


(8) 5ylfar/4ar:id» Srror l. ocr.tp 'Ir.-.lct;. r.t, 5 r. 5 (S))

As to tr.u description «r.d cri-lr.-l nature of those ox.-cri-
aonts, reforor.co is m*co tc tho rrooocuticn's orief .n s..e defendant
uobhnrdt. .■Jruga"sxy assisted ir. arc er.c ura.-ei these exoerinonts. Ho


2c-


.oBwsry


placed his staff rr.d aqulxwnt for the oxccuti-n :f tic cxt.cri-or.to
»t tho disposal cf Oebbardt, «* f-ct.vhieh Gobtardt Massif sontlooa
In bis prol‘binary report rf 2S Avict 1942 -r. the aulfanilaaido ox-
porinxntc. Thin bium report proves tk«*. : furnished t.to in¬
fection up torlnl for tho expori-ortc and <-.vj *dvico -r. wp;-o to sb-<o

thJ infection 'f tho subject „;r serious. (:*C-2'\.'4 I ?r:s. 2x. 473

fr.r identification. 5622). Ths dofcr.dr.nt ilsefaor. in his affida¬

vit, slot described tho tart vfcicfc flayed by .cur.- o and tho
Jly^iono Institute. Vfcan r.c oori'uo infections r.suited "ftor the
first tvo s rico cf txw sulfanila-lcO experiments, it ‘"0 decided, rn
tho sug potion cf Xrus vo.ry, to cfcar.,-o the ty o :f b-ctori' 1 ■ rictl
culture snd tc uso a stronger t;rc 'f culture tr»r. that utod in tho
-rllcr ox orluontKl s.rlou. iiruftvs^'s office crop: rod t..o r.ow
«-n^reno cultures osracislly frr t.:o oxp-tri «>rio. Since the ir.foc-
tlend '-nlch rosuitod fre a this a rl-o xv ri* r.ts v, re r. t tyoicrl
cf bnttlofioid (Tjutcc'UB lrf«cti:r.o. tho Hy-iono Ir.etituto f tho
Vnffon SS. ru,;:"Bxy'n Office, C'nsult. 1 In rrtcr to dotcr-

air.o vhat u tops c?uld Jo t*lwn tt sinulat. 1 bat tic-caused Infect i:ns
a-ro cl noly. It cn tr.o bu- potion f .^ruecvsrcr'o -fflco that
Oobh-rdt p.nd Fischer docldod to -dl v-od ohavings -rd flnss to tho
bacterial culturoo in -rder tr n‘ wlato the crus*, f dirt cunt'arrily
found in battlefield vrunds. (.-C^22b. Fro. Sx. 20f, 3 . " -9 77 0-
This ovidor.co is supported by tho "ffluwlt* *f ti-J camp d ct'm,
HOBOnthal and Schicdl»us*y. (18-66$, ?r c. ’x. c& . H. >9: :«T-506.
Pres. Ix. 224, K. G93).


(9) Soldo lie Jaundice (Incict-nt, F-r. 6 ( !)

.Iru-rvnicy denied on the stand that he over lad cn-vlodro of,
r connect ice vith epidemic Jauucico (hepitltla cp.c. .ica) experiment*
n concentration camps. ( xu*cvismy, 3. 5062). to denied having u i


—2 c—


hbwwssy


discussions cn this subject with Schreib.r, tha ?ioniv>otonti*ry for
conbatting Spido-sica in tho Koicho He scorch Council. Ho said Seftrei-
bor never requested hia to supply oxporiaantal subjects for .fcundico
rosuorch. (Hrugevsey. K. 5396-9). rut tho urc-f era ehovu th".t ••'•ru-
g*wa^- ijpd full taewled-TO of such orporiuictati-n and — encouraged by
Sohraibor — aporevod the perforn.ar.ca 'f nuch oxporlawta in tho
buchonwo.ld Concentration C_ip. Ho write tc Holchsarit SS Gr^vi-
b9 January 1S45 is fell va:

"Hr.uotatur.v'Uofcror Prof>sa:r r.r. Droc‘1. Direct r
of the <yrl:r.lc Irotituto rf the University ’f
Loiuzij baa cultivatod a Vi me fr' . ocrocna r.uf-
fering fr.J Hepatitic and oueco jcod in tr*r.oplan-
tirv it cn nr.'—*lo.

It lo necessary tc s*M uj.-pori-T.ta on h:x>u
bJin..a in order to dct -r-lro •-«« f ft ti.»t thin
Yirio lo indeed t:.« effectlv Virus Hey-titio
opll-vlca. Tho pl-T.i '.t’ntl.ry f*r roc -arch 'n
opldoalco in the Holer, .i.’fl'.-rci C ur.cil
frro •ddroeo.’ 1 hi-a If f ao «lth t*,o requvit t
c« rry cut tho •t'.vo oxr>irlnor.ts.

I ««3 rowing :-u tc attain authorirati n fro.u tha
flelchofujhrcr CS to carry tut tv nocuctm-y cx-
oeri-jr.ts or. -!G cultable urlo n re wh* b*vo
/.itnirt- n>vcr auff rod fr-n hauatitia Svldosleo,
at t.~i t;T3hua-vx TrlJ-r.fl etfttirn f ti.e cr.e;r.-
trati-B caup-uchotr-li." (l*?-13W. Froo. 2 x.

«7. ?.. E4uO).


( lo) SaciiixA?. kl ; hri?ca

,r hon tho duf mdar.t hi* aj onbrrxod :r. r.io cri lr.nl activi¬
ties in connection with tha or.p-r«ti'r. f-r b-otorl 1 ic*l warfare
(aco Prcoocuti r. brief n the fcofunotnt S! -w). he approached Irugov-
ohy for technical »*aulotanco in iu jott .ru.. v n r erepared a
campliation of tho st i-.vrtnnt sci r.tific -it rial r. -bin oub.'uct
for 31 ,-io. u raw it r c-r.oi'..r ' . tho .•.• t i -rt-r* that .

copy to KicWilwP cn 1 input X944. (10-114. Hra. *x. 334, H. 1461).


in co.cl

^ru:owo..y artici-»tod ir. tc crr.f rcr.ce rf 2 f l.c -b r l-’-l


tSCGCSZ?


at which t.a doeioion v»a -“do t: t at tjr,a» vnccinoo cy artificial
Infection nxperi ucti :r. c*ncor.tr 0 ticn c-up lrcRtos. Tho experiaoa-
tnl station established In Irucfc^nvnld unior Din* v>c directly uub r r-
dir.ntod tc Hrugcvsfcy c Chief *f tr.e g-rfane Znstituta :f the “«ffon
SS. Tho erdcra t:r tbs export—r.t8 by -Mr_r c-no free: 'U-u?:twr<y. go
received dotnlloi r-*perts on »il tno oxfurlivor.to. Apprrxlnntely 230
locates voro hilled no n result f tl-o tychua oxp-rijonts.

•iru evney ajr;rcvod p larr. exp.-ri onto ly Dlrr In iuchonvnld
or. f nr Sussinn prio-r.ora cf v»r in - 0 » r 19-43. no Dors* wily par¬
ticipated In tho she:tin* *.? fivo g-iaeinn prls-r. ro ' v »r with p:in-r.
bvslJ^s in Sachscnhsuson In Sept.cb r 94-1. ho ' rdcrot Sir.*- tr con¬
duct poln:. o-!. nicer, to on six Huoelnn yrlsn«.rs r i nr i:. ^ct(b»r
194-4 in Suchonvnld. Cf tho 16 victims cf those sxperi Mats, 11 Aloft’.

IlrUitcvsky rdor :d tho •ixorlu-nts by 3in,- t* toot : intents
on burnn nrtlflclnlly Inflicted ?n Inn- toe with ph'oph' rue. Ha -Jen
-reiored ox-sorljonts vith r.’.d bled pins * *o well b tho vlthArwl
of bleed free ln^ntoo In c-cr pi.;-eicvl cer.lltl-n f■ r tl.o pr'-ductln
of blocd pl'B.r. HI' d v n -. 1 st t-veen fr ~ p*tl< ttts c nvaloSolM fron
the typhus uxpori-.onts In -r‘.or to ^co n eoruc.

Tho oiyjn-.l c: r.tont cf ma .ode-r. auric w n tested by Sin*,
cr. ordaro Cf Urtypvsli cy, by hillin'- tncstoa '-ith ph;r.-l ir..«octi-r.n.

ifcucrvsKy ernforrod *ltt Slor ro »t lu-st twice with respect
to c'cp.r-.tlcn bctv.un too Hyri-.nc Ino-.ivito f t.i> "-ff r S:T rr.d
KaocLor cn tho freo?ln f - experiments. .iruivvsj.y ctiv ly nrtlclmtod

In tho oulf'-.nll-.ildo experiments tv f-iri lai.l- f *ho inf- cticn ^tarinl
nud f lvin.-; rdvlcj on .vthtds :f w.-ciny tho •rtlflcslly pr v'-iced ln-
f-otlcn c;rw Boric US. He v: - istod cpido.,’..-: , —lie ' ti > nts r.
lnuitoa cf ‘iuc*,. n’-.ld. ?-i f-irr.ler.-'d hi *jo wit' scientific -.dvico cn
tho bnctoriclc^icn .1 warfare orporiaonts.


:JtOGO J..Y


Krugowaliy . - r. i.r . .

.^sida froc carrying out ear tain hygisnic a ctivitisa in
connection with the coops, ho or dor «'. the • 'or -ho
ohanboro o: --.jch-'itu, in which uz. z har.
half ci.llj.on arsons .aro e~terrinntod. The affidavit
of Eos >3, c after of Jh ita Concentration C.j . *,

proves thti fact. (KI-C3 , Proa.463, •• 5407).

The * rooocution submits that th« ovifanco troves

l in, acco-aory to, ordered,
uhottofi, tool: u conoontin' .-rt in, iC aa connected
with plans and ontor riaos involving r.ocical o::-^ ;ri.uontation
on huroin subjects ithuut thoi-* conao:.t, in the course of
• inch :x > r .onts murders, brutaliti-s, oruolties,
torturos, atro iticj, and ouh-r inhu^uno octa cro
oonmittod, and th-t hia suiit has boon esta'oli .hod under
Counts I, II, III, and IV of tho Indictment.


sLILII"5I l&IaUSiik £2*.L

CASE NO. 1


CLOSING BRIEF FOR
THE UNITED STATES OF iU'ERICn
«OaINST
hDOLF POKORNY


Janes U. UcHnnoy
Alexander C. Hardy
Arnost Horllk-Hochwald
Esther Jono Johnson

For:

Nurnburg,

16 Juno 1947. Tolford Taylor

Brigadier Gonoral, U.S.A.

Chiof of Counsel for .tar Crlnes.


INTRODUCTION

It Is alleged under Count Cne of the Indietnent that the
defendant Pokorny conspired and agreed with others, pursuant
to a common design, to perform medical experiments on
Involuntary human subjects; under Counts Two and Three
(War Crimes and Crimes against Humanity, respectively)
that he was a principal In, accessory to, ordered, abetted,
took a consenting part In, and was connected with plans
and enterprises Involving medloal experimentation on
Involuntary human subjects.

The defendant Pokorny Is charged with special
responsibility for and participation In criminal sterilis¬
ation experiments, as sot forth In Paragraph 6 (I) of the
Indictment.

I. RESPONSIBILITY FOR AND PERSONAL PARTICIPATION IN

gRIStlNAL E^KRlHSiTS

In contradistinction to all other defendants In the
dock, the defondant Pokorny never held any position of
responsibility In the Party or State hierarchy of Natl
Oormany. His past lo the very insignificant one of a
doctor In n small town. Before the Munich Agreement
(October 1930), ho had been a Ctechoslovak cltlton (Pokorny,
R. 10013) and when his home town was occupied by the Gernan
Army on the basic of this agreement, he become a cltlten
of the Greater German Reich (Ibid). During the war, ho
served as a medical officer In the German Army and attained
the rank of Captain. (Pokorny, R. 10014). The defendant
Pokorny was not a member of the Natl Party. Neither was he
a member of the SS. He cannot claim, and, as a matter of
fact, does not claim that his duty as a soldier compelled
him to participate or nsslft In any kind of criminal
experimentation on Involuntary human subjects. There Is not
a shred of Justification why he should have approached
Himmler on his own Initiative and suggested to him plans


for the sterilization and eventual extermination of non-
German nationals.

In Nazi Germany a law was In force which permitted
sterilization of German citizens under certain circumstances.
Persons afflicted with Inheritable diseases were, among
others, affected by this law. The legality of this statute
is not here In Issue as sterilizations which are the subject
of this Indictment were performed, without any semblance
of legal Justification, to find a method for mass
sterilization of so-called Inferior racos. Thus, Pokomy
Is charged with special responsibility for and participation
in medical experiments which were conducted to ascertain
inconspicuous, ohoap and fast-working methods for mass
sterilization of the enemies of the Nazi syetom. This was
tho clear purpose of tho various sterilization experiments
which were carried out In different concentration camps.

(Soo tho affidavit of R. Brandt, NO-440, Pros. Ex. 141,

R. 50l).

Sovoral methods of mass otorlllzatlon wore experimented
with. Dr. Clauborg, who carried out sterilization oxporlraonts
on fcraulo inmates In Auschwitz, by lnjeotlon made from the
ontranco of tho uterus, (110-212, Pros. Ex. 173, R. 570),
requested and obtained Himmler's support for such experimentation
and was ordorod by him to ascertain how long It would toko
to sterlllzo 1,000 Jewesses by his method. (NO-213, Pros. Ex.
171, R. 567). Himmler was also approached by tho defendant
Brack, who suggested fast-working and cheap stabilization by
moans of X-rays. In this connection, Himmler stressed
tho point that It was necessary to find a method cf
sterilization which would keep the victims unaware of their
fate. (Brack, R. 7484). These facts prove beyond a doubt
that mass sterilization of so-called inferior races was one
of the major concerns of Himmler. The defendant Pokomy
was the Instigator of the criminal experiments with medicinal


- 2 -


sterilization. In October 1941, he submitted to Himmler
a report urging the sterilization of nlllions of non-German
nationals by neans of a drug (caladlun segulnun) obtained
fron the sap of the plant ochweigro’nr. (N0-035, Pros. Ex. 142,
R. 510). This letter was forwarded by Professor Hoehn to
Himmler In order to, as Pokorny put It, "avoid the slower
procoss through channels and the possibility of an
indiscretion In regard to the eventually enormous Importance
of the ideas presented." (Emphasis supplied). The extreme
haste v/lth which Pokorny tried to have his suggestions
submitted to Himmler and the way In which ho 6trossed the
groat Importance of the matter show clearly hls ongornoss
to scouru Himmler's consent and to gain favor for hls idea
and hlmsolf. Pokorny wont on to say lr. hls letter that
ho was "lod b£ the ldoa that the enemy must not only be
conquered but dcstroyod ." (emphasis supplied). As one
of tho moans for the destruction of tho enemy, ho suggested
to Hlmmlor tho sterilization of millions of non-Gorman
nationals who wero In the power of tho Third Rolch by tho
use of the sap of tho plant oolndl-um oogulnun.- Ho Informed
Hlmmlor about the publication of liad/pe on modlclnnl
sterilization and about tho immense inportanoc of thl6 drug
"In the proeont fight of our people". Ho then wont on
to say:

"If , on the baolo of this research . It wero
possible to produce a drug - which after a
relatively short tlne .~ ^7fccts an
paperccptlblo sterilization on nunan
beings , then we would have a now powerful
woapon at our disposal^ The thought
alone that the 3 million Bolsheviks, at
present German prisoners, could bo sterilized
so that they could be used as laborers but
be prevented from reproduction, opens the
most far reaching perspectives." (Underlining
Pokorny 1 s).

Pokorny oxplalncd that caladlun segulnun, when applied
orally or by injection, would produce permanent sterility
of male and female human beings as Uadaus' research on
animals had proved. Pokorny said that If hls Ideas net
with Himmler's approval, the following should be done:


- 3 -


*1.) Dr. ifadaus nust not publish any

more such articles (The enemy listens!',

"2.) Multiplying the plant (easily cultivated
In greenhouses!)

"3.) Immediate research on human beings
(criminals!) In order to determine
the dose and length of the treatment.

"4.) Quick research of the constitutional
formula of the effective chemical
substance in order to

"5.) produce It synthetically If possible.■

In conclusion, Pokorny pledged secrecy as to the purpose of
his report.

The proof has shown that the suggestion of Pokorny
was cagorly taken up by Himmler and had his full approval.
Pokorny 1 s letter was the cause of what followed. The
hondwrltton notation on Pokorny's lottor, "Dachau" (U0-035,
supra), reveals that Hlmnlcr's lnmodlato reaction was to
have experiments on Inmates of the Dachau Concentration
Camp carried out, which would ascertain whether the drug
oalodluo sogulnun could bo used for mass ctorlllzntlon.

On 10 March 1942, Himmler sent Oswald Pohl, Chief of the
' WVHA (Economic and Administrative Main Office) of the SS
and administrative director of all concentration camps,
a copy of Pokorny 1 s monorandun and ordored him to contact
Madaus and make It possible to carry out experiments on
concentration camp Inmates In collaboration with Grav/itz,
the Reich Physician S3 and Police. Himmler's letter to
Pohl reveal8 that he found Pokorny 1 s memorandum "very
Interesting". In the snno letter, Hinnler ordered Pohl
to advise Madaus not to publish anything on the sub.lcot of
medicinal sterilization. (N^-036, Pros. Ex. 143, R. 512;
HD-038, Pros. Ex. 147, R. 514). A copy of this letter was
forwarded by the defendant Rudolf Brandt to Grnwitz (Ibid),
who also received a copy Of Pokorny 1 s report and Information
on the publication of Madaus concerning medicinal
sterilization of animals and the plant caladiun eeguinum.


- 4 -


(N0-P37, Pros. Ex. 146, R. 513). Also Kcydrlch, the Chief
of the Security Police and Security Service (SD), was
informed about the possibilities of sterilization by caladlun
scgulnum obvious in conteaplation of the nass sterilization
of Jews. (N0-047, Pros. Ex, 145, R. 513).

Pohl wrote to Kinnler on 3 June 1942 that since
caladlun eogulnun grew only in North imerlca and, during the
war, could not be exported in adequate quantities, attempts
to grow the plant from seed cultivated in hot houses had boon
made by Dr. Koch of the Biological Institute of the Madaus
Works. These attonpts had boon successful, but the process
of growing tho plant and developing the drug was not speedy
onough and the yield not sufficient to permit experimentation
"on a largo scale ." In order to renovo these differences,

It was oonsldorod necessary to build a larger hot house.

Pohl had promised that to Koch. (K0-046a, Pros. Ex. 148,

R. 515). On 11 Juno, Rudolf Brandt advised Pohl that ho
had informed Himmler of Pohl 1 3 letter and that Himmler
wanted Pohl to see to It that a largo hot house was placod
at Kooh's disposal as soon as possible ns Himmler considered
tho experiments "extremely important". Rudolf Brandt also
asked Pohl for furthor reports In the nattor. (N0-046b,

Pros. Ex. 149, R. 516). Eight days later, Brandt had a
conference with Pohl in which, among other things, he Informed
him of Himmler's roquost to have the lngrodlonts of cnladiuia
eogulnun thoroughly Investigated. Hlnnler wr.ntod to know
whether equally effective ingredients were contained In
plants which were to bo found in Germany or In any place in
Europe accessible to tho SS. Dr. Koch was to be supported
to the fullest extent. He Informed Pohl that: "The
Relchsfuchrer S3 also rcouests that with the Ingredients
of this plant on hand, sterilization experiments should nov
. in any case be carried out in the concentration camps ."


- 5 -


Pohl agreed to take the necessary steps at once. (:!0-044,

Pros. Zx. 15C, R. 517). The office IV-B-4 of the Reich
Main Security Office, the agency which was In charge of
the "solution of the Jewish question 1 (Judgment of the
IMT, R. 16924) was informed by Himmler's ad.lutant about the
research work and requested to collaborate closely with
Pohl in this matter. (N0-050, Pros. Ex. 151, R. 518).

Approximately a year after Pokorny's instigation of
sterilization experiments, the deputy Gauleiter (Province
lcador) of the Lowor Danube (lower Austria), S3 Obcrgruppcn-
fuehrer Garland, made the same suggestion to Himmler.

Gcrland advocated experimentation on inmates of the Gypsy
camp of Lnckonbach in the Lower Danube with caladlum soguinum.
Gcrland pointed out that if these experiments should be
successful, which was to be expected, It would be possible
to sterilize practically unlimited numbers of pooplo in
the shortest time and in the slnploct way <cnccivablo.

(NCH039, Pros. Ex. 153, R. 519). Brandt Informed Gorland
that this matter was already known to Hlnnlcr (as a result of
Pokorny's letter) and was being worked on. He asked Gorland
whether he had caladlun segulnun available and what moans for
the proouronont of this plant ho nould ouggost. (NO-040,

Pros. Ex. 154, R. 521). Pohl informed Oorlnnd on 7 September
1942 that ho was personally supervising tho experiments,
together with Dr. Lolling, the Chief Physician of the
concentration camps. (NO-042, Pros. Ex. 155, R. 523).

In the letter of the sane date to Brandt, Pohl said that an
agreement had been reached with iladaus "to transfer tho
cxporlnents to our concentration C"np rs soon as possible."
(h'0-041, Pros. Ex. 156, R. 523). Gcrland later advised that
hlr assistant Dr. Fohrlnger wished to attempt to produco
caladlun segulnun synthetically and suggested collaboration
between Lolling and Fehringer. (N'0-043, Pros. Ex. 157, R. 524).


>

>


Brandt agreed to the collaboration between Fohringer and
Lolling. (NO-049, Pros. Ex, 159, R. 525; NO-048, Pros. Ex.
158, R. 524). The proof ha6 shown beyond a reasonable doubt
that sterilization experiments with caladiun seguinum were,

In fact, carried out on concentration camp Inmates. Himmler,
who was the highest authority,to decide such questions, not
only gave his consent to these experiments (:.*0-036, sunrn),
but considered them "extremely Important" (N0-046b, supra)
and requested that they should be carried out In the
concentration camps In any case . (H0-044, supra). When
infomed about Himmler's request by the defendant Rudolf
Brandt, Pohl, who was In charge of the administration of
the concentration camps, agreed to take the necessary stops
immodlntoly. (N0-044, supra). The transnlttal of tho
roport of Mndaus to Hoydrlch, tho Chief of tho Security
Office and SD, with reference to "the question of steriliz¬
ation by nodlolnc" (N0-047, supra) could only hove had
tho purpose to Inform him of tho nature of this typo of
sterilization experiments. There can be no doubt that tho
Office IV-B-4, which was charged with the solution of the
Jowlsh question, was Informed about lladrus' research work
for the purpose of furnishing the necessary Jewish victims
for the oxpcrlmonto. The collaboration of Dr. Lolling, who
Y/ns the doctor In chargo of nil concentration c^mps, can
only be explained In connection with experimentation In
theso camps. This Is also clear fron Garland's lottcr to
Rudolf Brandt:

"SS-Obcrgrupponfuchrer Pohl has Informed
mo that the doctor of his .'inln Office is
already collaborating with the ^odnus
Biological Institute for research on tho
effects of caladiun seguinum, so that tho
suggestion of my District Unin Office
Leader (Oauhauptstcllcnlcltcr) Dr. Fehrlnger
becomes obsolete ." (KC—043, supra - emphasis

supplied).

It can only be concluded that Pohl and Lolling carried
out the experiments in concentration camps as it was agreed


7


upon between then, Himmler, Rudolf 5rondt end Madnus.

(NO-041, supra). Moreover, Brandt hlnself admitted In his

affidavit that experiments with caladlun sogulnum on human

beings were carried out In concentration camps.

"As result of Polcorny's suggestion
experiments were conducted upon
concentration camp prisoners In order to
test the effect of the drug. Simultaneously
all offorts wore made to cultivate the plant
In large quantities. Oswald ?ohl, Chief of
the Economic and Administrative L!nln Office
(ffVHA), took a porsonal Interest In this
matter. Hothouses were used, with a certain
amount of success, to cultivate this plant,
and the experiments wore continued."

(HO—440, Pros. Ex. 141, R. 501).

Pokorny admitted having written the memorandum to
Hlmnlcr (R. 10041-2) which brought about the sterilization
experiments with caladlun scgulnum. He etated In his
dofense that he only wanted to prevent the execution of
Himmler's intentions for mass sterilization and extermination
of the Inhabitants of tho Eastern territories and Jews.

He nllogodly lonrnod about thlo plan from a patient of his,
a ocrtaln Voigt, In July 1941, end wanted to sabotage thlo
plan of Hlmnlor. (R. 10037). Ho consldorod tho Idea to
sterlllzo human beings by onindlun scgulnum scientifically
Impossible and was of the opinion that tho conclusions of
tho articles of Undauo did not qulto correspond with tho
fnots, so he got tho Idea that this Impossibility of
execution might be a way to fructrntc Himmler's plan for
mass sterilization. (H. 1C040). He, thorcforc, ap'roached
a high-standing personality, who was a friend of Hlmnlcr'o
but whose nano was unknown to him, to forward a letter to
Hlmnlor suggesting such sterilization to Himmler. This
personality suggested that he might approach Professor
Hochn. (R. 10042)- Pokorny further stated that it la
Impossible or nearly Impossible to sterilize or castrate
a human being with caladlun scgulnum In Europe, p.b
tropical plants grown in hot houses lose their poisonous


* «•


- 8 -


effect* Moreover, a very high anodnt of drug would be
necessary to achieve castration of a human being with the
use of cnlndlun segulnun. (R. 10069). This protestation
of IdealIsa and high purpose In trying to sabotage the
sterilization and extermination of Jews and opponents of
the Nazi regime has been used by every criminal provod
to have been a party to such mass murders and persecutions.
Strclcher was all for a "decent solution of the Jewish
question" and wanted the Jews resettled on Madagascar.

(Sec closing statement of Ur. Justice Jackson). The
dofcndnnt Brafcfc uses precisely the some ridiculous "defense".
Ho can't understand how he could bo rogardod no an enemy
of the Jews. His proposals for X-ray storillzatlon woro,
as Pokorny 1 o, simply an effort to frustrato the plans for
extermination. X-ray sterilization, .lust ns nodlcinol
sterilization, was roally Impossible. Those statements
aro of oourso the last attonpts of despernto men to avoid
tho .luot penalty for their horrlblo crlnoo. They arc
obvious attempts to lnposo upon what they hope aro goncrous
and gullible opponents. Pokorny's treatment of hla own
half-Jewish wife Is cvldonco enough of his real regard
for so-called "racial inferiors".

The contention that caladlum segulnun could not
cause sterility In human beings Is no defense. It Is
quite sufficient that they thought It might bo cffectlvo
and did everything they could to make It so. Dno commits
a crime whon he attempts to murder sonoono even though
that nay be physically Impossible. Moreover, there Is
considerable proof that cnlndlun segulnun can produco
castration In human beings. The expert witness Dr.
Schelffarth came to the following conclusions on the basis
of a study of tho publication on animal experiments by


lladnus:


"According to thorough examination of
the tissue as shorn. in the mlcrophotographic
reproductions (illustrations II b, IV band V b
on page 77, 7e, 80, 82) and according to the
explanations given In the text by the authors
themselves, the reactions caused by caladlun
show 1 a striking similarity v;lth changes
caused by oastratlon In the entire mala
sexual organise (page 87 of the publication).
Nevertheless the authors do not want to draw
the conclusion that tho point of attack of
tnc caladlun Is selectively situated In the
germ-glanda ."


“The only essential result of the present
publication Is that the effect of caladlun
night correspond to a castration . As
nontloned at the beginning the main
objection to the application of this method
to human beings would be that oastratlon
docs not only mean 1 sterilization', l.c.,
prevention of breeding, but also n sorlous
Injury to the biological entirety of tho
Individual." (110-3347, Pros. Ex. 546.

R. 10368).

Dr. Tauboock In hlo affidavit stated on tho sane subjoct:

"By careful examination of 6cotlons of nico
and rats nnd of tho histological preparations,

I was convinced that tho publications of
Messrs. Madaus wore perfectly truo. By
this examination I, as a opoclallot in this
flold, gained tho conviction that sterilisation
with caladlun seguinu-i Is no Utopia, but
something which Is qulto within the bounds
of possibility. On the roturn Journey from
Dresden to Berlin, tho SS nor. rcvoaled to no
that this researchwas being carrlod out
on tho express order of Relchsfuohror SS
Hlnnler In order to supress birth nnong the
Eastorn nations. After this fact had been
rcvoalod to no I was sworn to secrecy.■


"I am convinced from a scientific point of
view that It Is possible to produce a highly
effective preparation from caladlun plants
cultivated In nld-European climates.“


"As a result of nil example and explanations
mentioned I an of the opinion that nnss
production of a castrating preparation from
caladlun scgulnun In Germany or In the German
occupied countries Is no dream, but could
easily have been put Into practice. Another
proof of the harmfulnose of the calndlum
poison Is tho fact that tho liadaus examinations
confirmed beyond doubt the castratlvc effoct
of caladlun despite all the shortcomings
already described. All thl3 made me realize
at once the criminal character of such research


- 10 -


nnd for this reason did not carry It out as
for ns .cy speolflo order was concerned.

The SS, however, took a great Interest
In this natter. I received ny orders as
nr. employeo of the I.G. Farben Industrie
from the chief of the security police, first
through the camouflaged office of the
Research Institute Qruenwald-3erlln and
later diroot. I Know, however, that tho
firm Madaus placed their orders through
SS Oborpruppcnfuehrer Pohl separately and
an not acquainted with the development of
this natter." (NO-3963, Pros. Ex. 328,

R. 10088).


The letter fron Pokorny to Himmler Is the only
ovldenco against hln, but It Is quite sufficient.

He lnstlgatod the crlno of mass sterilisation and
suppostod a way of accomplishing It. He thus became an
accessory before the fact. "An accessory before the fact
Is ono who, though absent at the commission of tho felony,
procures, counsolo, or connands another to connlt said
folony subsequently porpetrntod In consequent of such
procuring, counool, or command". (Wharton's Criminal
Law (1932) Vol. 1, Section 263). Nothing could be
clearer than that Pokorny counselled nnd Instigated tho
proolso crime which was committed. His was specific, not
goncrnl adVlco as to tho ways nnd nonns of accomplishing
tho crlno. Wharton's states that: "Under tho head of
1 oounool' nay be inoludod advice nnd Instruction as to
tho modoo of committing particular crlncs..." ( 1Md »
section 265 ). Uorcovcr, It "nakes no natter how long a
time or how great a space Intervenes between the advice
and tho consummation, provided that there Is an Immediate
causal connection between the Instigation and the act".
(Ibid). The causal connection in this case Is clear
and unequivocal. Pokorny's instigation formed the di¬
rect basis for what was done. His memorandum was read
nnd approved by Himmler and passed on to thoso who did


the work.

Not only nust Pokorny be found guilty of the oalcr


- 11 -


dlura sepulnun crimes, but also of being connected
with pinns find enterprises Involving the commission
of criminal sterilisation experlnent6 by other means
as well. His Instigation necessarily gavo Impetus
and support to the basic crime of mass sterilization
itself. Pokorny suggested medicinal sterilization.

Brack - X-ray, and Clnuberg - Injection. But thoy
all had tho sane criminal purpose and led to the
name unlawful ond. Each supported and furthered
tho other. In the sumner of 1942, Hinnlor was making
efforts In all directions to find a fast and Inconspicu¬
ous moans of mass atorlllzatlon. Pokorny was a party to
the criminal plan and his guilt Is raoasured by the sun
total of crimes committed.

The Prosecution submits that tho evidence proves
that Pokorny was a principal in, accessory to, ordorod,
abetted, took a consenting part in, was connected with
plans and enterprises Involving, and was a member of
an organization or group connected with, the commis¬
sion of medical experimentation on human subjects
without their consent, In the courso of which experi¬
ments murders, brutalities, cruelties, tortures, at¬
rocities, and other Inhumane acts were connlttcd, and
that his guilt has been ostnMlshcd under Counts I,

II and HI.


-12-


L I k l 1 t 5 I 1 ^ I 3 c ! L I

a. SB !-0. 1


CL05I> 0 3hxB? ?0K
THE TJTI?vD ST T2S 0? ..1 S-vIC.
..G-IHST

K2L' TO POPPS! DICK


J-c.oo I . LcKoncy
-lcx-ndcr G. Knrdy
.rnoat Korlik-Kochw-ld
Bath' r J-n* Johnson

Furn*ocr~. For:

16 Juno 1U7

Telford Trylor

3rl .rdlT Gen ml, O.S,...

Chi' f of Coun3C 1 for .'r Crir.ra


INTRODUCTION


It Is alleged under Count One of the Indictment that
the defendant Poppendick conspired and agreed with others,
pursuant to a common design to perform medical experiments
on Involuntary human subjects; under Counts Two and Three
(’.*ar Crimes and Crimes Against Humanity, respectively),
that he war- a principal In, accessory to, ordered, abetted,
took a consenting part in, and wa6 connected with plans
and enterprises involving medical experimentation on
Involuntary human subjecto; and under Coant Four, that
he was a member, aftor 1 September 1939, cfthe SS, an
organization declared to be criminal by the International
military Tribunal.

The defendant Popper.dlck Is particularly charged with
having participated in tho freezing experiments, set
forth In Paragraph 6(5) of the I n dlctmont, malaria
experiments (Paragraph 6(C)', sulfonllonldo oxperlnonto
(Paragraph 6 (E)), ooa unter experiments (Paragraph 6(0)),
opldemlo Jaundice experiments (Paragraph 6(H)), ctcrlllzatlor
oxperimonts (Paragraph 6(1)), typhus experiments (Paragraph
6 (J)), and Incendiary bomb experiments (Paragraph 6 (L)).

The Prosecution, lr. order to simplify the lcoueo, herewith
withdraws the charges of having participated In the high
oltltude oxperinents, set forth lr. Paragraph 6(A) and
tho poison oxperimonts, set forth in Paragraph 6 (K).

I. POSITIONS OF RESPONSIBILITY

Tho defendant Poppendick Joined tho "SDA? in 1932 and
the S3 in the 6ane year. Ir tho SS he attained the rank

0

of Obcrfuehrer (Senior Colonel). From 1935 on, he
served as physician lr. the i-aln Raoe and Settlement
Office (RuSHa) of the SS and, In 1941, was appointed
Chief Physician of this office. (Pop endick, R. 5533-40;
NO-672, ''ros. Ex. 30, R. 133). As early ns 1939 he


- 1 -


POF'E’JEICX


becasio v neaber of the steff of the Heichs rzt SS and Police
Grtv itz r-nd took core of various special ossifnnents in dd-
ition to his dutie3 in the P.uSHi.. (Poppcndick, 5612-3).
In 1943 he v .3 aide Chief of the Pcrsonel Office of Grewitz.
(Ponrendlek, F. 564 :T0-672, supro). Other office chiefs

under Gr:iitz included the defendants IlrurowsKy and Gcb-
herdt. (i.'0-417, Pros. Lx. 23, P. ). Thus three of the
laport&nt collaborators of Gr. vitz - re defend nts in this
proceeding-.

During his coll .bor-tion with Growitz, Poppcndick ob-
t >ined knovledro .nd supportec ray of ex eriicnts which
were carried out in the v .rious concentr- tion c ips. In
spite of the f'ct th t Gr witz, according to Poppcndick's
st.tenant, •. 0 very fond of secrecy (Poprcndiok, r.. 5546),
Poppeadick ro informed -tout his ctivities. Poppcndick
obtained knowiedre :f Schillinr's *: 1 riu cxperiients in
the Df chou Cone ntr- tion C*.:ap fro-. Orr.v itz. (Poprondick,

: . 5567). He knev th t Dine enr .red in experioents in the
Concentr it ion C- op Puchcnv .Id in connection with the •'re¬
duction or typhus otru-i 'r typhus vccine. (Fo;;endick,

F. 5579). Poppcndick certif 1< d Ocbh.rdfs reli'in ry re¬
port on the 3ulf-nil :-.ide tx erl:;ents. (.10-2734, Tros. Ex.
473, P,. 5622). This rt rt v..s submitted to Hi;aer -nd
Gr-witz, who endeavored to • ct with ; .inful c-refulness in
everythin* connected with Hiaoler or the ?*-rson.l Staff,
(Poppe-ndick, o5el) would cert .ini;* not h.ve remitted
the signature of o -erson who va.a not supposed to tuke cor-
nizence of its contents to u-re.-r on document which Hia-
Jiler would sec. ?c fcndick took p r rt in conference with
C-r witz ond p .scher on the free2inr experiments in January
1943. Euriar ti ls conference, Poppcndick nr.de the re.ncrk


P0PP2NDICK


tint: *'I already had to ask Sturabannfuehrer Sicvers sev¬
eral tines to cone to nt to receive infero tion. In th6
lonf run, all nedic -1 natters end up with us enyvruy." (N 0 -
320, Pros. Ex. 103, R. 378 - cophcsis supplied). Poppcn-
dick r.l30 took port in conferences which Grawitz had with
the defend 1 nt Sievcrs and ardc arr.nreaents for such aeet-
in^s. He o~.de doctors wliable for aedic: 1 experiaentn-
tion rnd took c re of the distribution of research jssipn-
sents. This scopo of his activities is clc.rly apparent
froa the entries which the dtfendent Sicvers made in hi3
diary of 10*14. (3546-PS, Pros. Ix. 123, 382, entries

of 26 end 28 n nrll, £0 rnd 23 Hay, 8 September, nnd 23 Oct¬
ober. )

% Thi3 confidential relationship between Popoendick end

Crevltz existed lonr *rlor to his ■ p-ointnent s Chief of

* the Personal St ff in 1943, Poppcndick hiasclf 'Gritted

that there wr s no ohen/rt in his -asition :ftcr he obtained
his nev. • ppointnent on 1 Septcnbcr 19-,S. ( -cndick, K.

5612-3). It is also proved by the- fact th t Gebh'rdt'o re¬
port which v :3 certified by hln is dated 7 3c te .bor 1942.

(NO-273‘1, su;r.) rnd that the conference between Poppcndick,

\ Grawltz und Roseher took plrce on the 13th Janu ry 1943.

(110-230, supra).

• Viewed in the lipht of this evidence, Poppendick's
st-toaont th-1 he v.aa . acre- "aesoenrer boy in Grawitz's
office, (It. 5613) is entirely Incredible. It should be borne
in .lind that Grew it z had n -.cjut .nt -no a secretary for
the oooonplishaent of ni:»or tasks. (Poppcndick, =. 5542).
Grawitz orooised hi a th't he would not have to bother with
ponerel office work. (Pop-endick, T. 5544). "orcover, Pop-
,, cndick was Senior Colonel in the SS and highest ranking

- 3 -


romuDicK

doctor in the Recc end Settlement Mein Office, (supra).

It roes without s-.yinF th?.t Grevitz certainly would not
h've used such i hirh r.nkinjr person .-.3 - acre !, iessenFGr
boy" nc thrt Pop-'e.idick would not hi vc per mitted enyonc to
icKe use of hin in such a way, „n eveluetlon of Poppen-’.'
dicK’3 work by Gr.witz in connection with - recorncndution
for promotion in 1044 is rcvt.linr on thi3 point. Grevitz
s-^ id:


’•?. (Poppcneick) is one of the oldest SS
doctors in 3or!in. I v.orked together with
him in the Schutzat-ffel (3S) slice 1931.

He diatinruiahea hLiaelf - ^ost of 11 by
shovinr -n unswervinr, oxccption~l strength
or ch-recttr - ad by •'rov-.n ace 'ipliahieata.

"Throurh hia l<cdin- *oniti'>n in t c -udic 1
work of the SS P.'ce • nd Settlement '-in Of¬
fice, he h'S e Ined merit for hi self by
hia Indenendcnt, orr nlr.inc • nd'devclopinr,
acientific-crc tive work.

• ..n Chief of :y ?eraon 1 Office, he h ndlca
the t-uks nd a* htrea of -ctivity pertaining
thereto with exception~l force nd ?ut3tjnd-
lnp -bility. His circle of cmr .dca h-.a
rr •test confidence in hin..." (N 0 - 1120 ,

Proa. Ex. , . ).

In order to . •reel-te Pop-endick's influence >a Chief
of the Person 1 St-ff .nd collaborator of Gr vitz, it ia
necessary to keep in »ind the position the l.tter held in
the Medical Service of the SS nd the role he *>1-yed in the
execution of the v.rlouo experimenta which re the subject
of tl ia trif 1. That the- "3S nc Hlr.iler were the coaion
clement in : 11 of these experiments" is e :ittcd by the de¬
fendant Geb.Vrdt. (Gebh*rdt, K. *«192). nr .witz, the Pclch-
arrzt 3S - he Police, xr:a the highest r- rJcir.: .-.edic‘1 officer
in the SS -nd, consequently, the direct superior of the de¬
fend nt3 Ocnzkcn, Gcbh* rdt ■ nd 'rurovrsjcy. The Chief of Of¬
fice III of Derr rt-ie.it D of the * "VP., of the SS (Econonic
nd ..diiniatr tive Mein Office), Dr. Lollin> , who vvs in


4


POPPSJDICK


charge of the nedic.-.l service in the concentration comps,
yr.a -.Iso subordin ted in technic: 1 nutters to Crswitz. (NO-
416, Pros. Ex. 22, R. 121; NO-417, Pros. Ex. 23, «. 121).
Gruwitz prrticip ted to - greeter or lesser degree in every
criminal experiment on conctntr tion comp Inmetes. Indeed,
most of the defendants seek to establish exclusive respon¬
sibility in Orewitz for these crimes, for ex nrlc, Ge.nzken
rnd Mrugowsky. Thus, Grnwitz's closest coll tor .tor, the-
defendant Poppcndick, is forced into the ridiculous "osition
of s lying th-t Or-witz v* s secretive, th -1 he didn't know
ubout these things. If there were not c si.ifle document or
shred of testimony in the record op.last him, his position
lone would rcouire his conviction. It would be i'.possible
to conclude thet u high r nkinr doctor who worked v.-ith Oro-
witz did not know of end ctively supo-rt the orimin-1 ex¬
periments in which he pi yed n essenti 1 p rt. *,11 of the
experiments were supported by nd reported to Or v.itz office
end nfny of then were ordered by hi i. If one worked with
Gruwitz, he hud to support th~t cri iin-1 research es it wus
Grewitz 'a princip 1 function. Eut we need n->t rest on Pon-
nendick's position lone. The ;roof shows th.t he knew of
end persona lly p .rticip-.ted in cri .in 1 ex criments.

II. rERSQN. L P, r.TICIP..TION IN Cl.I .LM YJ'JT.XI.W.rlO'A

. Ir.cendl-.ry Poib T x-eri-.er.ts {Ir.dict-.cnt, ?• r. 6 (L))
Sturmtrnnfuchrcr Ding-Schuler (Herein fter referred to
so Ding) curried out inc-ndi-ry bomb cx*tri ents in the Buch-
enw Id Conctntr tion C r bet; -on 19 nd 25 love .Ur 1943.
(Ding Diury). In order to scert .in the e-ffectiveness of the
Drug P 17 end echin’cin ointment -nd liouid for the tr-. tnent
of ’'hosphorou3 burns, five experiment' 1 persons were clelibcr-


?of?"iticx


-tely burned with inflamed phosphorous whi-* wes tuken from
-n incendi-ry bomb. The resulting burns were very severe,
the victims suffered excrutUtinp pein jnd peroenent injury.
The drur3 to be tested were manufactured by the Dr. IR-dcus
' orks in Rsdebtul-Drcsdon. (Ko?on, R. 1167-90).

The rerort on these experiments (..*0-579, Pros. Ex. 268,
R. nee), wo8 forwarded by Dinf to the defendants Foppendick
-nd Mrufowsky. (ICopon, R. 1156, 1168). The Research De¬
partment V (for Vonkenntl) in Lcipzie vrs Iso interested in
these experiments. C 0 rrc 3 n 0 ndcr.ce by Dinr with this depart¬
ment went through ’’onncndick. (Koron, T:. 1159, 1175, 1247,
1267). Research Deportment V w s laboratory run by >turm-
bi.nnfuthrer Vonktr.nei with funds and r.'tcri 1 furnished by
Growitz. (Popnendick Ex. 8, P. 5592). Poppcndick v\n s the
expert in C-r vitz’s office rtsponsible for the work of that
lfbontory. (Kofon, \. 1267). Thi3 t t 3ti ony of Kopon in
corroborated by letters from Vonkeruul to Poppcndick and
Din? to Poj pcndick cono. mine typhus experiments. (N*0-1182,
Fros. Ex. 477, R. 5641; *10-1164, Pros. Ex. 476, 5639;

NO-1165, Proa. Ex. u78, .*,. 36-,S). The Utter v. c .ctu.illy
typed by Ko?on for Dinr ’O c a be s«.cn fro; the file nota¬
tion.

E. Hormone Expert tints

Experiments to rscirt-in the effectiveness of artificial
rl nds were carried out in the ?uch*.nv Id Conotntr-tion C.mp
on the order of the defend'nt Foppendick. (Topon, “. 1196).
On 15 July 1944, he appro' chcc Din? with the recuest to s-
sist the Danish SS Physician  rnet, who v. s to carry out
these experiments. In his litter to Dinr, r jpearick st tes:

".The technic . 1 prep r'tirns h v* come

to such r point tlr t experiments on huasn be-


POPPEHEICX


Inrs (Huainversuche) cm be started vithin
n rcu3on-ble spece of time.

".»3 S3-SUndurtenfuehrer Dr. Lolling in¬
formed the CC roi i-r-Buchcnwald has been
directed to vke cvcliable 5 prisoners for
SS-Sturnb nnfuchrer V- rnct's experiments.

These prisoners will be a:-de evoiluble to
SS-3tub::f. Vrrnct by the comp physician ut
uny tint.

"33-Stub; f. vllrnct intends to po to Bucher.-
w;Id shortly In order to nnkc ccrtoia ne-
eessrry prclinlnrry tests on those prison¬
ers. In case there v.111 be aneci 1 1 bor-
tory tests, you • re requested to tssist
V : 'rnet v.lthln the oco-e of your -ossibili-
tlea.

"?: rticul'rs on V^rnct’a rese-rch vere sent
tod .y to the emp physicim of • cirv r-Puch-
cnwild for his inform- tlon." (N’ 0 - 1 ? 00 ,

’’’ros. Ex. £89, P.. 1199).

Vilrnct also cooperated with Tcscirch Dcp:rtntnt V in
Lei^slp, subordinate to the expe rln< nti l section "V" (for
von Kennel) in Leioslp. The pur-osc of the experiments WuO
to rsccrt'in whether it w:.s oo33lble to rcoovc honosexuelity
by oper;tlon 1 1 tr napluat tlon of ■ rtlcl-.l cl ndo. (Koran,
P. 1247). Experiicnt 1 o: er*.tions were .ctu lly ca rried out
on enproxi t tely fifteen inn tea of the 3uchen\vald Conctn-
tr tion Canp, who were selected, by the c.j; doctor or his
subordin tes. Two of the experiment-1 subjects died -a u
proximate result of the experiments. (Kcpon, R, 1197-9,
1266). This evidence is corrobor ted by the '■ffid-vit of
the cf,-lp physiol'll, Dr. Schiedl usky. (:.*0-50e, Pros. Ex.
22-i, £95). ,.s Poopcndick h -1 ordered these expirinents,

Dine-.reported to him the results of the experiments v'rnit
carried out ir. the Buohem Id Concentration C -p. (Moron,

K. 1200).


C. Ty-hus ~x-eri.:cnt 3 (Indictncnt, ? r. 6 (J))

.s to the description nd cri iin'1 n turc of these ex¬
periments, reference i3 -rdc to tie Prosecution brief on


- 7 -


pgpFircDicK


the defendant Mrugov.sky.

Poppendick rdnits that he hod knowledge of the fact
th't Ding w^s producing soae tyohus serum or typhus v:ccine
in the BuchenvrId Concentration C'ap. (Pcppcndick, R.
C579). He allegedly h d no knowledge that Dine experimen¬
ts on hua-n beings. The evidence, however, hes olctrly
shown thet Poppendick not only hud knowledge of the typhus
experiments curried out in the uchenr Id Concentration
Cvap, but requested the defend* nt .’.'rurewsky to issue in¬
structions to Ding to curry out typhus ex-drlaents with
sulfon.midos furnished by Pesc-irch Department V (Vonkcnncl),
On the 13th of June 1944, he wrote u letter to .’frugowsky's
office, which retd *s follows:

% comiunic tioa froa SS-Stub*f. -rrfessor
Dr. Von Kennel vr s tr nsoitted on 1 June
i 1944, the l*3t pr digraph of which rc ds

r s follows:

" c h* vc ulrerdy vdc cx-orincnts with
Sulfon-.ido In Ty hus casts, hmvir,
without success. KM tig, hm.evcr, h:o
synthecised t subst-nco of di.-.injdl-
'-honylaulohone which in •- iousc c rrv-
inr Streptococci, is to 3uch .r. extent
superior to ell 3ulfon* :idea th .t it
aturly re ches r. penicillin. The in¬
oculation of hum* n things however still
ere: tis very unplc s'nt secjnd r a ai-
festrtions, rcute byzaosis. Mvorthc-
lcss it i3 worth considering whether
or not 3 0ie orient* tion tests should be
fvdc on persons suffering from typhus
in order to continue the efforts’to de-
toxic to this remedy. Could you ct *s
•* WiCietor in our efforts to coo cr t«.
with so--u clinic ?'

•Yccorcinr to your co..;unic'tion of June 2.

1944, Dl-ry :io. the Chief Fy, ienist

•.greed to the r ct th t the Ty-hus ^.isc.rch
De-t. Buchenv Id should ix-tr'i ..nt *. 1th the
'P i’ “inodirhonylsu 1 -hone* coral r.r to 7o.i
Kennel nnd Kimmir on ty-hus c* s..s in or'*»r
to determine its effectiveness ad c v t*-
bility. There re inclosed norc det iled
d-.te rc the -bove remedy .nd it i3 requested
th*t they be further transmitted to SS-
Stub f. Dr. Ding, 3S-3tub'f. Professor Dr.


- 6 -


FOFPENDICK


Von Kennel furthermore rdvists thet
certmir. ou .ntlty of the rbove remedy will
rrrive here during the next few d ys.

Upon rriv 1 this remedy will likewise be
forv.r.rded there.

"Professor Dr. Von Kennel considers it
very ndvis? ble th-1 Dr. Ding should c_ll
on hid in his clinic in Leipzig for the
purpose of discussing this ruther dif¬
ferent ther py. The ucccaclty for abso ¬
lute secrecy is stressed to 11 institu ¬
tions concerned ." f O-UCr-i, Proa. Lx.

476, *• 53SI—40) (Saphcsia sup-lied).

This document shows on its fucc thrt Poppendick wes
well 1 were th-1 Ding did not only -produce .. serai or v c-
cinc iguInst typhus", but -ctu lly experimented on hunen
beings to Poppendick suggested the cx-crioents in the typhus
resc-rch depirticnt of Ding .3 n .ltcrn tive to a clinic.

The proof h'.s further shown thrt Von Kennel submitted
r. drug which v s to be used for the experiments to Poppen-
dlck. (MO-1162, Tros. Jr. -.77, 7.. 5641) who in due course
hud it f orw-rded to Din*- who cknowlcd. cd its receipt on
21 July 1944. (MO-1165, Pros. Lx. i76, 7. 5645). These

documents, submitted to Poppendick ir. cross ex .1 nation,
not only destroy the credibility of his own testimony but
r iso the probative v- luc of the vffid-vita of Ki nig end
Von Kennel, wherein they st te th- t the r vri xnt -1 de¬
partment in Leipzig never h-.d *.nything to with the hor¬
mone experiments of v’rnct (supre), with ty hus or with ex¬
periments concerning burns. (Poppendick, Lx. 7 , . 5590;

Ex. 8, 7. 5592).

The - roof h-s further shown th-1 ’’oppeadick obtained
Dinr’a report to trurowsky on the tre tient of typhus with
• criein derivatives on September 29, 1944. C’0-562, Pros.

Ex. 286, 7. 1122). This report s-t ks of clinic 1 tests
on hum n beings, but Poppendick knew th* t Dir.* - h i expert-


POPPEJ.TICK


aented on hua* a subjects by artificially inducing typhus.
This i3 proved by his letter to Hrufrowsky quoted ctove vnd
clso by the correspondence with Ding refurdiny the hor¬
mone oxpcriaent8, Moreover, no evidence w s introduced by
the Defense th t - tyrhus epidemic w- 3 prev lent in Buchen-
v' Id >z thr t tiae or t my time. The report itself shows
on its f ce th: t norc ?h.:n half of the experiment.. 1 sub¬
jects died nd thft the ortients who survived hud to fifht
severe coaplic- tions of the illness. (>J0-5E2, Pro3. Ex.

280, K. 1124-5). The entries on If, U • nd 24 ril 1943
in Ding’s Di'.ry reve .1 th t the experiment 1 subjects who
were used in this exoerinent 1 scrips were 'ctu lly trti-
fici.-.lly infected with typhus infected bloof nd thnt 21
inartca died in these ex*cri^nto. ( JO-265, Bros. Ex. 287,
r;. 1136). Moreover, it i3 est blished by the ffid&vit of
n defenso witness th't '11 of Dinr’a reports bout his tx-
periaento went vl the -y.-itne Institute t* Or wltz. (Doc.
Jrurov.sky Lx. 13, £406, ? r. 7 of the fflc*. vit, Jrufow-

sky Doc. Book, Pure bl). TOppendick thus h-d cce33 to the
det ils of the typhus ex eriments.

Dinr re;orted in the Bucher.* .Id experiments \t the
acotinr of the Consulting Physici-ns of the ’ chr :t cht in
Huy 1943. (iiO-923, Proa. Lx. -.36, .v. 2063). ..s 0r.witz’3

Chief of St .ff, Poppendick wi.a 'resent t this ic^tinr in
spite of the f.ct th t he v .3 not » consulting hysici n of
the v ’ohrT cht. (Pcpendick, '.<• 5b57). •'hile Poppendick . iy
not hove heard the report itself, since it v .3 delivered to
the Section of Hyricnc, th*.rc cm be no re-sonutlc doubt
th-1 he heard of it* "’he defend-nt Rose r ised objection
to the chi rooter of the Buchenv-.ld experiments. (Pose, R.
6166). witness for the defendant Rose went so far *.s to


- 10 -


POPFrZ-XICK


netted on huarn subjects by ertificielly inducing typhus.
This i3 proved by hi3 letter to .Irurov.sky quoted cbove and
also by the correspondence with Dinar ref-rdin? the hor-
aono experiments, Uoroover, no evidence w s introduced by
the Defense th t . typhus epidemic v.-3 prev lent in Buchen-
v id t th: t time or t any ti .e. The report itself shows
on its f ce thit more th-.n he If of the cxpertoentel sub¬
jects died nd th: t the patients who survived hud to fipht
severe coapllc- tions of the illness. (NO-562, Pros. Ex.

260, K. 112-1-5). The entries or. If, 1-i • nd 24 «oril 1943
in Dinr's Di'.ry revc .1 th't the experiment 1 subjects who
were used in this exncrincnt 1 series were r ctu- lly <rti-
fici lly infected with typhus infected blood nd thet 21
in-irtcs died in these ex- erim«.nts. ( JO-265, Pros. Fx. 267,
8 . 1130). Moreover, it is established by the ffld .vit of
r. defenso witness th-1 *11 of Dinr's reports bout his ex¬
periments went vi th< Hyricnc Institute t> Grewitz. (Doc.
rfrunovaky Lx. 13, * . £406, ? r. 7 of the .ffid vit, IJrurow-
sky Doc. Book, Here 51). ?o; “cnt’ick thus h-d ccess to the

dot ila of the typhus ex eri xnts.

Dina* re;orted on the Bucher.*-Id ex>ri ents .t the
mcotinr of the Consulting Physici ns of the ' chr ii.cht in
Hey 193. (IJ0-923, Proa. Lx. 36, lx. 20b3). ,.s Or.witz's

Chief of St.fr, ?opp*.ndick v. a ' resent •. t this mectinr in
spite of the f .ct th t he v.s not • consultinr physici-.n of
the ";ohr".ocht. (Pe-pendick, 5557). '"hile Foppendick any
not hove heord the re. ort its* If , since it v.3 delivered to
the Section of Hyritne, there c.in be no re-sonublc doubt
th-1 he heord of it* "he defend-nt Rose r iscd objection
to the ch.ircoter of the Buchenv.ld expert icnts. (Hose, R.
6166). .> witness for the defendant Hose went so f.r s to


10 -


FOFPD.TIICK

testify th't fron whet Rose said, it was to be concluded


that he rer:.rded these experiments as murder. (Hotrinp, R.
6073). He s-id that concentration camp inn_tes were used
in the experiments. (Hoerinr, R. 6074). It is incredible
that Poppendick should not hrve heard about such n sensa¬
tional lecture. Indeed, the lecture could not have been
delivered without the knowledge end r.nprov 1 of Grav.itz's
office. In connection with the denial on the prrt of Pop-
pendick th't he w: s not informed how Din*: curried out his
experiments, it is significant th -1 Bulchowsky, in his uf-
fid.vit, lists Foppendick .nd the defendants Hondloser ind
Genzkcn und the lrte Conti s the sponsors of the f-phus
experiments in Buchcnw-Id. (NO-iPi, Pros. Kx. 291, R, 1353).

Thus, the proof shows thr.t Pop-endick not only "took a
* consenting pr rt" in the Huchenv. Id typhus experiments, and

"wjs connected with 'l r ns and enter-rises involving" their
commission, und w.o member )f • n "orr niz .tion Jr r roup
connected with" their co nissijn, but • Iso was i. "prinoipr.l
in" and "rn accessory to" the coor-iasi^n of such crimes.

He must therefore bo found ruilty under the ter-.s of Section
2 of article II of Control Council Lmv No. 10.

D. Stcrlllz t i on Lx- >.ri ’■•-.ato (Indict lent, PuT. 6 (I))
i.s to the description • nd cri in 1 n turc of these tx-
perinents, reference is a e'e to the Prosecution briefs on
the defendants Gebh rdt end Fr ck.

The defend-nt Poppcr.dick defined in cross exilin'tion
the term "ner tive r* ci:.l policy" in the following way:

"The nef tivc r ci-1 po-ul:tion policy con¬
cerned nil extermination measures in contra¬
distinction to the -ositivc r ci 1 po-ul-tion

policy.stcriliz-tlon which bee me lrw

in the Third Reich v s negative -o-ul'tion
nolicy." (P. 56ie-9).


- 11 -


roppEiricK


There is no one in the dock better -ecu-iated with the
noxious doctrine of "neprtive popul tion policy' then Poppen-
dick, In Edition to hi3 duties in Gruwitz's office, he was
chief physici:n of the Hein R'ce -.nd Settlement Office. In
connection with that office, the Jur'rnent of the Internation¬
al .Military Trlbu.v-1 s id: The P.ecc * :;d 3ettlcaent Office
of the S3 together with the VoUcsdeutsche^ittclstclle were
cctivc in c.rryinr, out sc c.-.es for Cero-niz tion of occupied

territories ccordinr to the r ci 1 principles of the iJ-zi
•

?orty • nd vere involved in the deport tion of Jews end other
foreira n tionnlo, (Tri-l of the Ifsjor  r Crioin'ls, Vol.
I, •>. 270). ,.’.onr oth.r t l.vs, thi3 office v .3 conc« rned

with -.c .surca to extenin te non- rym croups, for txorjplo,
by -osistlnr in the enforce—.ent of re^al .tions f-^rbiddinr
ocxu 1 intercourse between Germs • nd 31 vie pco-lcs -nd by
•bortions carried out on I stern workers nd Poles.

Foppcndick would h-ve us believe th* t he w..s concerned
only with positive r.'.ci* 1 'olicy (I.. 561?), but it i3 -rpo-
rent th't the -olicy or h'vlnr oore onile :cn for "rood* 1 Ger-
flicns - nd no c: ildren Tor "inferior- peoples c nnot bo sep.j-
r ted, Poppcndick cert inly knew v.h t the ner tivc popula¬
tion )licy v s, -hile he ex~ressly denied durinr cross-ex-
nin'-tion th -1 he h d knowledrc >f or in .ny w y ;• rticip--
ted in cri in 1 3tiriliz tion ex cri .ents (7.. 5621), the
evidence proves the contr ry.

On *i June 19«1, Pop. endiefc for\. .re'ed list of doctors
who were oUthorizec to c .rry out steriliz tions to the de¬
fend nt Rudolf 5r n’t. Cl uh< r* is listc * —a the doctors.
The list it3eir is sirr.ed by Cr .vitr me d ted 30 'toy l?il.

(NO-21‘1, Pros. Zx. 168, 562). The cover in- letter, signed


12 -


PCPPE NT-ICK


«


%


by Pop-'tndick '-ad dc-ted -1 June 1941, re 's:


"By order of >3-Frirtdefuchrer Dr. Cr^witz
I enclose herewith the list of ^hysicUns
v;ho -re prepared to perforn the tre t-ent
of sterility, 's requested ty ricichafueh-
rtr-GI. ’ (1639-.,, Pro3. In. 475, ... bocB).


Poppendick denied thtt the list sifned by Crevitz (NO-
214 , supr-.), which refers to . conference with Ninnltr on 27
Hey 1944,.Wes the list he forwarded to Hr.ndt with his let¬
ter of June 4th, (NO-1639-^, su'ru), contending th-.t Or»-
wltz’3 list is rked Hr 'oo Secret". (Porpendick, 5629),
There v.u3 of course no occ^3i'n for Popped ick's cover Ut¬
ter to bo secret when the • tt .chnent • s bo ryrked,

..Iso the cl- ssific-t 1 on Top Secret" on the dycu-.ent is not
tyned, but in handwriting- end v.y well h’vc bce.i ndded 1' ter
in KtTiler'3 office. ;:orenv*r, both documents — covirinr
letter (HC-1639-... surr ) .nd list (NO-214, ou r ) be r the
BMC file number, JV/ 1G2/41, which proves in Itself th-1 the


letter -.r.d list bcl-onr toret ;er -nd were sent tcr-thcr. The


conference with Hi.T-.lcr on ::.y 27, reference to which ia
cwCc on the Hat (NO-2Is, su;r ), v s concerned not with
positive po'iul tion policy" veto discussed but sterilisation
cx*‘erieent3. This ia proved b; Hr vitz'a letter to Hinnler,


d .ted 29 .: y 1941, which re-da:


• t • confertncc on 27th y, ’-.l in the re-
a net of Herr Professor Cl uter? , concerning
his no. icthoc of sterilization of inferior
wo icn without .m o-er tion, re ret bit
-.iaunderat jndinr h 3 occurred.


«yor dovtlojiny his -.et hod Prof. Cl uberp ru-
ruires the wotoa furnished for this our;ose
to t, in hi3 own h:a: it 1 in K-.ni shuette
or in the vicinity, a the nethod is still
boinr i *. rpf. Cldu r needs

his own clinic:-1 r.tos, .(not -r-curec

for the -ur- ose, on the a-ot, end s h* nust
be there, • r . i:-, . r operations ia ciso
of incidents.


•••"he T ttcr Jr s 'rein teen discussed ir. ell


13 -


FOPPHILICK


Retells with Prof, Clcuber? cnc it result¬
ed thnt, under the prev-ilinf: circunst-nces,
the c-rryinr out of the cx-eriacntel work
in ?.• vcnsbruocl: is out of question.

"Tricing into r ccount the exorbitant sicnif iconce
which such n method would h: ve for a nepa-
tive population policy ad it results there-
fro-n to be of inportancc to support the cs-
t blishnent of u flew less nethod with til
Beaus; therefore, I bep to subnit the pro¬
posal, Keichsfuehrer, to furnish Frof.

Glauber? with u oroocr rest rch institute
in or -round Xoenirshuettc end to .tt:ch to
it e wonen concentr tion ouan f;r obout 10
persons.

'•Provided th-.t you consent I tee to author¬
ize as to discuss the a- ttcr further in
your nunc with S3-C-ruppcnfuehrcr ?ohl rnd
33-Brir defuehrer Glutcks." (30-1639, Pros.

Fx. 474, 2. 5625).

Thr t tl.is letter » nd Poppcndick's note to Brandt refor
to the sl.ic subject is further -roved b- the fact th-t the
file nunter these two docunents received in tfe office of
the defendant Rudolf Dr ndt re identic .1, 332/13" (K. 5635)

-nd w.rc both pi rked "Secret". (K. 5636). Moreover, Poppen-
dick's letter of 4 June 19*>1 c rrics the file au.bcr "IV/
102 /Cl" while Oruvitz letter of E9 .ley on the Cl uberr con¬
ference w-a entered in the secret diary .3 IV/9G/41’.

On 7 end 8 July 1942 mo* her conference v .a held on
thu sterilization of Jewesses -tternee by Hi.aler, Cebh rdt,
C-lutcks,. - ad Clr.ubtrr. Concentr :tion c.mp inn tea of /.U30h-
witz were r.de -vil tie to Cl uberr nd he v s urped to re¬
port a soon -s possible so that at .3urcs c'uld be taken
•Tor the -r-.cticrl re liz-.tion of the steriliz it inn on a
l rper sc-lt". CTO-216,-Pros. Lx. 170, P. 565; ■ JO-213, Tros.
Ex. 172, i. 568). On 10 July 1942 dauber* w s ordered to-
re-ort to KiTilcr on h^w loop it would t:kc t- sterilize
one thou3' nd Jewesses by his riv-thod. (*10-213,-^ros. £x. 171,
I,. 567). On 7 June 1943 Cl-uberr v -s ble to re-ort th't.


P0P7ENDICK


on the b'sis of his exnerinents, it would be possible to
sterilize several hundred, if not even c thousand, per dcy
by his method. He stated th; t steriliz*tion could be "per¬
formed by r sinrle injection aide from the entrance of the
uterus in the course of the usucl custom*ry cyneecolopic
exunin* tion..." (NO-212, Pros. Ex. 173, 570). Further

proof th-1 Clcubcrg carried out steriliz .tion experiments
on Jewessts in «uschwitz is found in his letter of 6 ,.ufust
19J3 to the defendent Rudolf Hr-ndt in which he requests e
scoond Z-ri.y instruction for his expert :ent-l work in „us-
ohwitz. (H0-210, Pros. 1.x. 17*, p. 572).

Moreover, the proof his shown thrt atcrilizrtion ex¬
periments were curried out in nr-ny concentration cur.ps on u
substinti 1 sonic. (Sco * , rosccution Iricfs on Gcbh* rdt nd
Br ck.) Tho execution mf those cx-erineats l~y in tho bonds
of SS doctors, who were nil nuhorjintod to Cr wltz, the
hirhest rjnklnr nedicul offioor in the SS. It ia Impossible,
to believe the contention of the defend*.nt Prpncndick th t
he, rs Chief of Or.witz's Person 1 3t.fr, w o i nor.nt of
these steriliz .tion cx- erincnts. Tcpj endiefc w :a Member
''f un or* 1 nlz-.tion or f*r:up connecter with” the commission
of the steriliz .tion ex; criacnts .nd he -erson ;lly supported
Cl.uberr'3 crimin'1 experiments.

L. gulf-.ni r '. idc ~xperi*.ent3 (Indict ._nt, P r. 6 (E))

..a to the t'eseri tion nd cri in-1 n turc of these tx-
petinentfl, reference is vee to the Prosccuti n'3 brief on
the defend at Cebh r t.

Ppp^cndlck denied indirect .nd cross ox-cmin tion th-t
'-e obtained knowled.-c of the sulf nil .idc crcrisents. He
dmitted, hnv.ver, h.vinr be n present t the lectures of


-15-


POPFEIIPICK


Gebfa' rdt -ad Fischer rt the Third I fee tinc Eist of the Con¬
sulting Physicians rt the Military Medical *.ccdeny, Berlin,
held on El - £6 May 1942. (Poopendick, R. 5572, :.*0-228,

Proa. Ex. 206, K. 767). He especially deftiod th»t he ever
h-d the opportunity to rend or 3ce a re-oort ~r prelinin: ry
report froa Gcbh.rdt to f-rcv.itz on these experiments (Pop-
pendick, R. 5617). The preliminary report of Gcbft:rdt flu¬
ted 29 ..wust 1942, which V'- a submitted to Poppcndick in
cross ex. min tion, shows clearly tlvt this atetenant ia un¬
true. The copy of this report was certified oorrect by Pcp-
,cndick for Gr*witz (MO-2734, Pros. Ex. 473, E. 5622, p. 6
of the document) end Poppcndick h ;fl to ..flmit th. t the signa¬
ture on thi3 docuaent vs his. (Poppcndick, 5618). This
• re-ort shows on ita f ct th't sulf nil -.id experiments v.erc

errrled out jn inn tea jf tho Bcvensbrucck C'nocntr tion C ip,
^ It Is vde clc r th* t f a r* nrr<-nc r s •rtifici lly •'r.ovokcd,

th’t wood ahevinrr, oOemi -v.liraun ad i rth verc U3ed to
ore: to Infections si til'r to t’*tlc wound infections, end
th t some of the experiment 1 subjects rc-. iiiefl untre .tefl for
oontrol purposes. In r.h-'rt, t is r« "'rt /-ives . complete
'Icturc of the oulf all. ;idc <x-eri .vntc C-rrlefl out by Oeb-
h- rdt. In viev of th*. clc r • nd unccuivoc 1 c-atr .diction
between the testimony of r • eadick one thia focuacnt oub-
^ oittefl to hi., in cr ;s3 ex uiiction, his testimony .s • whole

r nn.it bt viewed us credible.

Moreover, cvijlctt reports verc sut .itted to Or .witz's
office on these experiments nd there v.s continuous corrt3-
:-onc’icncc between Ocbh-rdt • nfl Or vitz. (GcVfc rdt, ?.. 4107).
Pcpptndick h-.d re..dy ecccss to this tcri 1. Gcth rdt ad
Fischer c .vt lectures on these experiments A the Third Meet¬
ing E- st of the Consultiar Physicians t the '.*1111 ry Medic .1


- 16 -


POPPHXICX


iCcfieny, Berlin, held froa 24 to £6 Hay 1943. Ptfppendick od-
Jtted h* vinff ettended this meeting nnd hnvinp heard Oebfcnrdt
rnd Fischer apeak. (Poprendick, R. 5572). Gebh.rdt testi¬
fied to the effect th-t he v; s opposed to 'ny conoufl-pe *nd
th't he v/rs enxious to brinr the whole subject of these a-
r 'trlner\t3 into tho open, ’"hen he rrve the introduction to
the lecture, he expressly st-ted th -1 the experiments hrd
been carried out on hum n beinra. (F.. '.109). Gebh-rdt tes¬
tified he docs not definitely renenbtr whether ho sold the
ex-crlocnt 1 persons were coaccntr tion ounp lnntes. The
defendent Fischer has 3tetcd th t t:.i3 w s u.de clear. (U0-
472, Pros. :.X. 234, R. 941; cf. Fischer, P. -*365). In any
event, Poppcndick Knew it fr >: the written report of 29 ,.umst
194£.by Gebh-rdt. The clinic 1 dot 11s of the experiments
v.ro exr l-ined in rro t dotr.il by Gcbhrrdt nC Fischer. The
•.cctinp w.a told that -roxiv tely 60 persons h-d been cx-
cri .ented or., th; t the Infections hrd been rtifici illy
produced, th t v rioua drurs vc re used in treutinp the in¬
fections, th't eurrlc 1 tre.tncnt w s used, ad th -1 threo
•crs-uis died rs result. (0«:bhr J t, *.. 1109-10). Fvcry de-
t .11 V a tx~i Intd.

Ccbh-rdt t< 3tificd tb-1 one ^f the pur 'ses of his frank
report to the lectins of C-xisultinr Physici ns * s to put the
Justification for these ex-xri-.er.ts in issue. He s.id th. t:,

I insisted th.t completed excrincnt would only h vt its
Ju-tific tion ri-cn to it if subject to < cle r description
of its prorresa. One would 3ub.it it to u sourco u- to then
not concerned witn the matter t all, the entire picture to¬
gether with the question: -re the conclusions which I xi
now .j .kinf, end is wh t I introducing for thous .nds of 33
n — is th: t rirht or is th t wronf? In which connection,


poppehpicx


of courseI i;Iso hrd the personal wish that oy none should
h ve the protection of experts ad thr-t the State should be
forced to rccornizc publicly the encrrency in which I found
oys.lf." {!?. 4115).

This evidence proves beyond e re- sonable d oubt thot
Pop^endiCfC b~d knowledge of -nd supported the sulf .nilunido
exptrlacnts carried out in the P.evensbrueck Concentration
C-np.

?• 3cosl3 (Phltr-.onc) Exrerlnents

The '• rtlculr rs or these experiments ns set f orth in the
Pros cut ion brief on the defend .at Ocbh rdt re incorporated
herein by reference.

Th’t Popptndick tu.fi knowledge of these experiments is
pr vod by the f:.ct tfaet r. r -.\.its '3 report oa theac experi-
.icnts Cl0-,09, Proa. Ex. 249, r. 979) vs .tt ohud, together
with the pro linin' ry report of Gebh'nft on the culf'.nil».r.ido
experiments which was certified correct by ? -en^ici: (::o-
H73-i, aupr? ), to r cover letter by Or v.itz to Ki'-ilor deted
7 Scrtc.ber 1042. The oover letter rc-ds s follower

"Subject: 1 . Pr- > rL >nts by PS- .-r U- :Ct fuehrer

r, .rr, r* t >n ihc toob. ttlno of

ft- s-r.-r.rr one

'y-tri .eats on the Trent nont of
Se-3i3 by blo-c!u istry.


Enel ourcs: -£-X

To tht ‘eichsfuehrtr-PS :i : Her
Periin


Ktiohsfuehrer!

..tt-ohed plc’.8L find c provlaiou.1 report
by 33 3rl< efuehrer Prof. Er. Cebh ret on his
clinic l-3ur. ic. l experiment-ti: .3 t 3- vens-
brueck Coacea'r tion C a-, further ore coa-
clufirif provision 1 report on experiacats on
the blo-c.;c*lc 1 trer taunt of seosis 3 perfor-
~d t D ch 1 concenT.tior. c_v . :I ('.JO-2734 supra-)*


fopplndick


The report on bio«chesior1 treatment of sepsis, is Anted
29 ..urust 1942, nnd carries the file number 738/IV/42, al¬
though the English tr-nslotion erroneously shows the dote s
29 ..urust 1943. Furthermore, Gcbhcrdt's hendwritten notation
on the sepsis report reads "Tt'vensbrucck 3/9/42 . Thus,
there c~n be no doubt thrt the report mentioned under No. 2
in the cover letter is Grcwitz's report on the sepsis experi¬
ments in Dcohnu, (110-409 supra). The report states that
eirht cases of sepsis were mostly irtifici lly provoked and
th-t oil of then died. Two other experimental subjects also
died. Gravdtz, by no ;c: ns discour sed by the f-t:litio3,
ordered the experiments continued. (110-409, ?ros. Lx. 2*i9, ...
981). Th-t the experiments were continued is proved by the
c;se history of c subject urtificielly infected with sepsis
in Dachau on 10 November 1942. (NO-994, ~roa. Lx. 251, R.

% 96b).

G. i'-.l’-v l Lx-erl a nts

..o to the description - nd crialn-1 n ture or the ?olyr*l
exporinento, reference Is n flo to the Prosecution brief on
the defend' nt Oebh rdt.

The dirry of the defend-nt Sic-vers for the ye-r 1944 rt-
ve lo th-t Pop-cndick took n» rt in a conference with Or wltz
'• and Dr. Tloctner >n tho 23rd May of that yc r. The el*fi ct

of this conference was th t Ploctncr took over the research
st tion of P.'S chcr. On the 8 September 1944 Poppcndick m* de
errongenents for Dr. Ploetner to rem-in -t the disposal of
the Reich ricsi.reb Council (3546-P.S, Pros. 7x. 1'3, P. 282,
entries of 23 lay and 8 September). Th-t Ploctncr was in
ch rft of the Polyf 1 experiments i3 proved by the entries
of 29 Juno fld 31st .! rch, which st.te th t T'lcctner is to


- 19 -


?C??m.XICX


toke over t;.c control of experiments since 7 scher is not in
the position to do so, .end further, of the entries of 14
4 *rril, 18 .:.y, 1st .Tune nd 6 October of Sievers' Di- rv.

On £3 October Sievers informed Fopptndick directly thnt
Plottner v.-.a to t-ke cv* r bioloricul rest rch (3546-rs

sunre).

Thus it i3 •'roved th. t Topnendick h .d knov.ledro ond
e no our’ red the Polyp -.1 ex-erl tents in the Concentration Ccn*>

D ch .u, during* the cours* of which expert ent 1 subjects
v.erc shot. (HO-438, Pros. Es. 240, S. 956; SO-1424, Pros.

Ex. 462, R. 4773; Stnehr, P.. 587; r.tbh-rdt, ... *240-1).

H. ri- -.y-eri n..its (Indictment, P r. 6 (C))

Poppcndick w.:3 .Iso connected with the cri.dn-.l aul-rli.
experiments cinducted by Dr. Scnilliap in D ch u. These ex¬
periments •re described in the Prosecution's brief r in3t
Roso.

Dr. Ploetner w: a one of the chief coll-borutors of
Schilling in his ex-iriocnts. (3546-FS, “roa. * x. 123, 7(.

3P2, entry Tor 1 June; Rose, R. 6339). "“he Sievers diery
for 1944 rrovco th t on 23 '5:y 1944 conference on Ploetner'a
work in D* chou v a held. Gravitz, Fnn^endick, Sievers, end
Ploetner took - rt. ?. scher h d recently bec-'-.t involved
in t. sc-ndal conctrninr the kldno^'inr of children which
he oloinod \s his own. Ploetner w.s ch rrc with the n -
n-foment of R scher's division in the -hnenerbe o n the s .no
dry of the conference with Or-witz • nd Pop*cndiok. (3546-PS,
supr .). On 31 iley 1944, Gr vitz s netioned the continued
coll-.bor* tion between ?loetncr • nd Schilling. (Sec las the
entries for 30 J^nu ry, 22 February, 24 . u?ust :nd e Se;-
tenber). .loruover, in 23 October 1944, Gie7ers conferred
with Poppcndick concerninf Ploetner's t-kinp over the bio-


- 20 -


POPPENDICK


logical ercncinotions inDrchru. (2546-F3, su ro).

Poppendick admitted hrving obtained knowledge of
Schillirg's experiments in Dnchou through Grawitz. (P.

5567). These exoerinents continued until the end of the
w-r und, of over 1000 involuntary subjects used, a substan¬
tial number died. (NO-856, Pros. Fx. 125, P. 386).

I. Sea •’ .tt.r Experiments (Indictment, P r. 6(0))

The sea Water experiments -re described in the Prose¬
cution's brief .-gainst Schroeder.

Poppendick was o number of an orr-niz tion or group
(Gr&witz's) connected with the commission of these experi¬
ments. Gr witz expressly proved then. (NO-179, Pros. Ex.
135, It. 485). Horoovox, Floetaer, with whoso work Poppen-
dick was closely connected (supra), made *v liable the
working sp ce where the cx;*-ri .ents were carried out. (3546
PS, Pros. Ex. 123, 382, entry for 20 July 1944).

J. Freer. 1 nr T.x -er 1 -,t nts (Indictment, F-r. 6 (B))

F^r i detailed description -'f the freezing ex-'crlaonts,
refer*.ncc ruy b. rdc to the Prosecution’s brief eruinst
Sicvers.

On 13 Janu ry 1943, K’scher conferred with Or witz • nd
the defend nt Poppcndiok concerning the froezine experiments
Hrscher e .ve : re-.ert on the freezing expert ents with water
nd loo outlined the experiments with dry freezing. Gra-
witz pointed out th't when I! scher v. a transferred to the
v .Tfen jS he v juld be subordinated to Gr.ritz nd -11 re¬
ports 8.iouId be submitted to him. He s-id th t it v-s "un
unte r. fcle situ*ti->n to h .ve non-; hysici-n, such rs St^n-
d-rt<nfuehrer Sicvers, inform ac oa aedio 1 natters...."
Foppondick stated th’t: ~ I Ire- y to sk Stand rten -


FOPPENDICK

forartion. In the long run ell.radios! nutters wind up with
us -nyw-r ." Or witz vent on to criticize • menorondua which
F'scher h*-c written on the treatment of dry freezing on the
ground t’-t H acher’s experiments with vet freezing did not
ntccsB rily rnply end thrt to^ few dry freezing exrerincnts
on htnrn subjects h 6 btin rerfornefi. (170-320, .Pros. Ex.

103, P. 338).

This document not only proves Poppcndick'a prrticipa-
tion in the freezing exyerinems, but Iso establishes thrt,
ra Cr'v/itz'8 -saiot-nt, he t s informed on .11 experiaenta
on concentration c-unp ion- ten. fcijatlf at .ted th~t ull
nedicil a-tiers ended u r -vith us- • nd thet he h-d required
Slcvora to report to hi:. The only aedic-.l iaforaotion on
which Sicvtra could possibly report were the crimin'.1 ex¬
pert :enta aupmorted by the j.hncncrbc.

Poppcndick d lifted th-t he took r rt In this confer¬
ence tnd th-t the freezinr cx-erimcats continued ftcr th t
drte. (F. 55M). On Grnwitz insist'.nee -t thia conference
th* t r- Bchcr'a theories be *»rovcd by -t It ct 100 dry frtez-
inr ixrtrlmcntn, " ocher continued his b'rb r~us work. On
17 Fcbru-ry 10:3, he reported to Himmler on fry frtezin*-
experiments on 30 lin tea who were f reed to rcmoln out-’o-ra
nuked for 0 to 1. h-'urs in fr . zinr vt ther. Their h-ndo
* no feet y r fr z n white. (1616-PS, ?r e. lx. loo, it.
348), ., ril W-53, r.'sc er v a blc to report

cddlti >n- 1 dry freezinr experiments in u thtr of -6 centi-

F r iOe.

”• : ime .ic or.mice l.x .rl.tr/s (Indictment, I r.

6 IHJ r

The epidemic j undico cx eriicnts were initi ted by
Or vitz on the request of Iti rl 3/ act. On 1 June 1943, Gr%-


- 22 -


POPPENDICX


wit/, -skcd Hl-nlcr'a consent to the use of concentration
c n; initte3 for th«.se ex''cri’icnt3. Decths were c.atioipot:d.
(N0-010, Pros. Ex. 187, 725). Eicht Polish Jews were

nr fie rv'il.ble in S'chsenteusen, (110-011, Pros. Ex. 188, P.
777). Sone of the experimental subjects died. (NO-271,
Pros. r.x. 186, R. 722). .t the tine of these criiincl ex¬
periments, Fop^cndick h d loaf since been ictivc r3 -n im-
port'at collator* tor of r.rewitz.

III. CONCLUSION

Poppcndick w*s * very early neoiber of the SS. The
iediCv.1 service of the SS w^s his cereer end he attained
the runic of Benin- Colonel. He w:s the closest nd most
oonfidentl'l coll* bor .tor >f Or v.itz. Kc participated in
. ny conferences concerning cri :in*.l expert icnta on concen-
tr tlon c: op inn tes. He supported such experiments 'nd
sever 1 1 were initiated by him.

Porrendick handled the work of p.csc-rch Department v
(Vonkenncl) Which w..a fin-need by Or witz’s office. The
incenditry bomb • nd hormone experiments in the Buchenw-ld
Conci ntr tion C-.nn were initir ted by hi.-, in cooper 1 tion
with th- t dop rtoent. He received reports on these experi¬
ments. He h'd inrv tos n*de .v- il ble for the hor zone ix-
-eri ients. Two experimental subjects died s result of
the hormone experiments.

Poppendick r de r rrr.rwu tents, throuph trurovsky, to

ht ve typhus ox erLienta conducted by tin? in Euchtnv -Id in

order to teat druf developed by Hose .rch Re.- rt :eat V.

Te -.nproved t p-per by Dinr -»n the ty-hus experiments to
*

test -cricin deriv tea durinr which 21 in: tes vere killed.
He knew th-t typhus v : s rrtifici’lly induced in these ex-


POPPHJDICX


-crimeat3.

The criminnl stcriliz-- tion t-xocrimcnts by Cl-ubcrr were
known to • nd supported b; Poopcndick. He certified - prv-
linln-ry report by Gcbhsrdt on the sulf-nil nice experiments,
lie hc-.rfi the lectures by Gebh rdt 'nd ?i3chcr on these ex¬
periments. He Iso knew of the sepsis experiments in D* chcu
ordered by Or >itz.

He participated in conferences concerning the work of
Ploctner in D-ch .u, who assisted lu scher in the .'olypr.l ex¬
pert icnts rad Schilling in the *i *V ris experiments end who
took over V: scher's rose, rch st: tion in 19-.4. He irde nrran-
F cocnts for Ploetncr to receive ssi3t .ncc from the Reich
r.cscurch Council. The se- w ter -nd epidemic y undice ex-
:crimtnts were approved by Or vitz. S-jCo for the see water
excrimcnts w s -raided by Ploctner in D~ch:u.

Fo-'pc ndick conferred torethcr with Or witz :.nd P'ochcr
on the fretzinr ex erlnonts. ,.s a result of instructions
Issued -1 th t conftrcacc, R' sc her errried out further dry
fretzinc »xocri tents. Pop-encick received reports on other
crlnin 1 experiments supported by the i.hncncr'oc.

The Prosecution sub.it3 thf t the evidence proves thet
Poppcndick w s i principal In, cc*S3ory to, ordered, bet¬
ted, took consentin'- • rt la, vs connected with ; 1 ns • nd
enterprises Involving, nc* v. 9 a umber f n orftnisatlon
or -rou. c .meet i with the commission of .ecic 1 experimen¬
tation on hui'ii subjects without their consent, in the course
of which experiments murders, brutalities, crucltiis. tor¬
tures, rtrocitica, nd vther iohu.i nc cts wore committed,
nd th t his ruilt fc-s been established under Counts I, II,
III, end TV of the Indictment.


£4 -


introduction


It is alleged, in essence, under Count I of the
Indictnont, that the defendant Rose conspired nnd agreed
v/ith othors, pursuant to a connon doetpn, to pcrfom
modlcal experiments on involuntary hunan subjects; under
Counts II and III (Wr.r Crimes and Crinos Against Hunan it y,
respectively), that he was a principal in, accessory to,
ordered, abetted, took a consenting part in, nnd was
oonnccted with pl^nn nnd enterprises involving nodioal
oxocrlnentntion on involuntary hunan subjects.

Tho defendant Rose is particularly charged with
having participated in the nalarla oxperinonts, sot forth
in Para. 6(D) of tho I n dlotnent, «nd tho typhus
cxporlaonts, set forth in Para. 8(J). In order to simplify
tho irouen, tho Proscoutlon has withdrawn tho charge of
having participated in opldomlc Jnundioo cxporlaonts,
as net forth in Pern. 6(H) of the Indictnont.

I. POSITIONS OF RESPONSIBILITY

Tho dofondant Gerhard Rose has for nnny years boon an
export in tropical nodlolno.. In 1937, ho nssuracd leadership
of the Department of Tropical Medicine of tho ftobort Kooh
Institute in Berlin. In 1943, ho became Vlcc-Prooidont
of tho Robert Kooh Institute, but as a practical nnttor ho
did not exercise any funotlon in that offloe 6inco his
ncrvlco with tho Luftwaffo ooncunod nil his tine, (R.6085).
He Joined tho National Socialist Party in 1930. (R.6087).

On 26 August 1939, ho assumed the position of

Consulting Hygienist to the Medical Inspector of tho

•

Luftwaffe, who, at that tine, was Erich Hippkc. (R.6C92).

Ko held that position until the end of the war and
ultimately rose to the rank of Gencralarzt, or Brigadier
General in the Reserve. (R.60S4). Tropical hygiene becano
very important as the war expanded to Africa, Italy, tho


Balkans, Greece, Crete nnd Russia! (R.6095). From 1941.
on, Rose Bpcnt nil his tine on Luftwaffe duties. (R.6094;
Rose Doc. 13, Rose Ex. 22, R. 6228).

Rose was the principal consultant to the Medical
Inspector of the Luftwaffe nnd to hl6 whole office. (R.6096,
ot scq.). Schrocdcr, Chief of the Medical Service of the
Luftwaffe, otntod that Rose had to be Informed of all
roaonroU work whlohConrultlng Hygienists, ouch as Happen,
conducted by order of the Luftwaffe. (NO-449, Pros. Ex. 130,
R.471). Schrocdcr confirmed thl3 statement during his
tcntlnony before tho Tribunal. (R.3609). Rosa's position,
vls-a-vls, tho'Chief of tho Medical Service of tho Luftwaffe,
lu to be distinguished fron tho position of Consulting
Hygienists attaohod to Air FI- eto, such ns that of Hangon,
who vms attaohod to tho Air Floct "Reich". Rone rocclvod
reports from Consulting Hyglonlsts attached to the Air
Fleets * (Roso Doc. 7, Rose Ex. 7, R. 6108).

Whether or not hose oould Issue orders to Consulting
Hygienists of Air Fleets, or whether he had a oonnnnd
function of any typo, Is a natter of little Importance,

It lu not disputed that Rooo was the adviser to the Chief of
the Medical Servloo or tho Luftwaffo on hyglcno questions.

Ho re, thus, tho most Important consulting hygienist
In tho Luftwaffo and was tho overall export on hyglcno
problems. Significant hygiene questions throughout tho
Luftwaffe come to hln attention. By virtue of his position,
It o all not bo dcnlod' that he had great influence with the
Chief of tho Medical Service of the Luftwaffo Insofar as
hyglonc matters were concerned.

From 1944 urtil the end of tho war, Rose was also

Medical Consultant to tho defendant Hnndloscr, as Chief of

the Medical Servioes of the tfohmncht. He was also nodical

advisor to Dr. Conti In natters pertaining to tropical

dlsensos. Conti was Under Secretary of State for Health

and Chief of the Civilian Medical Service, to which the

~ 2 -


Robert Koch Institute it ns subordlqfte. (1J0-573, Pros. Ex.

15, R. 108).

II. PERSONAL PARTICIPATION' IN CRIMINAL EXPERIMENTS .

A. Malaria

With respect to the malaria experiments, two
queetlono nro presented for consldcrntion: first, whether
the nnlnrln exporlnentn were performed in n criminal
manner, and second, whother the defendant Rose was connected
with such experiments.

That the performance of the malaria cxporlmento
In the Dachau Concentration Camp from February 1942 until
tho end of the war were criminal has not been seriously
dlsputod by any of tho defendants. In December 1941, while
working In Italy, Dr. Klaus Schilling net Conti who became
lntorootod In supporting further work by Schilling on malaria
problonr. a mooting was arrangod with Himmler who gnvo his
permission for experiments to be carried out In tho Dachau
Concentration Canp. Schilling bognn his work In Dachau in
February 1942 an,’ continued his oxporln.ntn until tho end of
tho war. He waa primarily c.nccrnod with discovering a way
of Immunizing persons against malaria. During tho course
of the qxperinonts ap roxlmatoly 1200 concentration camp
Inmates wore lnfocto’ with malaria cither by being bitten by
Infected nor.quitos cr by Injections of nninrin-infccted
blood. Aftor having boon infected, the prisoners wore
treated with various drugs, including quinine, noo-salvarsan
and pyranidon. Hoot of the experimental subjects wore
no;i-Gomnnn nationals. Of tho cxperlnontal subjects
infected, approximately thirty died as a direct result of the
experiments and an additional 3C0 to 400 died as a result of
con.)l lent Ions.


The above facts arc established by the Review of the
General Military Commission In the oase of the U.S. against
Wclns, ot nl, held at Dachau, Germany. (NO-856, Pros. Ex. 125,
H.386). Klaus Schilling was a defendant In that case and
was convicted and sentenced to death. In an affidavit
submitted In evidence before that Tribunal, dated 30 October
1915, Schilling adr.lttod that the experimental subjects
were not volunteers.

One of the assistants to Schilling In his experiments
at Dnohnu was Dr. Plootnor, who was a nenber of the
Institute for Military 8olcntlflo Rosoarch of the Ahnenorbo
undor the defondant Slavers. Slevers oonforred with Plootnor
regarding the nnlarla cxi crlnonto and rooolved reports from
hlr.. (3546-PS, Pros. Ex. 123, R. 382 *, entries for 30
January, 22 February, 23 liay, 31 hay, 1 Juno, 24 Auguot).

Rose stated that he learned that Plcetner tup n collaborator
of Schilling through an Inquiry to the Journal of Tropical
Modloino In the year 1944. Plootnor had published an
artlolo In that magazine and It had ooac to Rose’s attention.
(R. 6339).

Thu witness, August Vlcwog, tootlfled for tho
Prooooutlon and substantiated tho findings of tho Ullltnry
Oanmlnslon at Dachau. Vlcwcg was first subjected to tho
malaria cxpcrlner.to hlnsclf and thereafter served nn an
lnnnte-nsrIntent lr. tho nrlnrla war*. Vlcwog testified
that Schilling ox. erlnontcd on approxinatcly 1100 Inmates>
lncludl • 'Germans, Poles, Russians and Jugoslavs. Among
tho Russian Inna tee uood were prisoners of war. Seven
or olrht of tho subjects ".lc in the malaria station,
primarily no a result of pyrnaidnn poisoning. (R.428). Ho
also testified, that ar. additional sixty inmates died, to
hlo hnor/lcdge, after having been transferred fron the experi¬
mental stntl n. He further stated th«t none of the lnnatcs


vcluntcored, zii&z he personally did net, and that the
experimental subjocts were not freed ns a result of
undergoing the. experiment. The original infection card
from the files of Schilling in Dachau, showing the into of
infection of the witness, Vleweg, with "Strain Rose" was
introduced. (XO-S83, Pros. Ex. 128, R. 467).

8 oe also tho testlnony of Heinrich Stochr, (R. 584-5).

The defendant Rose participated in tho criminal
oxperinonta of Schilling by furnishing hln nntorlal with which
to carry out tho experiments. This material was furnished
by Rone with knowlc'ge of facts which would hnvo lod any
x'oaoonablo nan to the conclusion that Schilling wns carrying
out crinlnnl oxi*cri:.'.onte. Roso had known Schilling for
many years and ouooccdod hie ns Chief of tho Department for
Tropioal Medicine in tho RoVort Koch Institute. Moreover,
Rose, by his own admission, was an adviser to Dr. COntl who
ar ran god for Schilling to carry out hln ox. eriments in Daohau.
It la highly unlikely that such an arrangement would hnvo
been made .without consulting Rose.

Rosa furnlshod Schilling with malaria spleono for his
experiments in Italy during tho year 1941, n fact which
Roso dcnlod on the a tan until oontradlotod by his letter
to Schilling, dated 3 "obruary 1041. (NO-1756, Pros. Ex. 486,
R. 6411). Roae continue*' to furnish lnfootlon material to
Schilling after he sot up his experimental station in Dachau.
Rose and Ills witnesses admitted that nnnpholcs c;-gs wore
sent to Schilling in 1942, but R se, after that occasion,
issue’ instructions that no more material was to be sent
to Schilling because he did not agree with his research alms.
(R. 6415). On 4 A. ril 1942, Schilling wrote to Rose, asking
for the "Strain hose" to continue his experiments. This
letter bears tho dateline "Dachau, 3K, Hospital for Inmates",
an 1 , it was initialled by Rose on 17 April 1942. Schilling


stated that ho would he "very thankful.*for this new

support of -y work." (Snphaeis added)* That Rose compiled
-1th this request cf Schilling* s Is eetaMlshed because
the witness Vieweg was hinsclf Infected with "Strain Rose".

On 5 July 19*13, in a letter, also with the notation
"Dachau, K3, Malaria Station", Schilling thanked Rose for a
consignment of atroparvus eggs and accepted Rose 1 s offer to
send hin his exooss eggs. This letter nontlons the "Prisoner '
August", who obviously was the witness, August Vionog. This
letter was initialled by Rose on July 27. (NO-1753, Pros.

Ex. 108, R. 6118). On the sane data R-sc replied to
Schilling's lettor, advising hin that at the next favorable
opportunity, a shlnnont of onorholes o :.-e would be Dade to
hin. ,

It Is Impossible to believe that Rose dirt not know whnt
work Schilling w a° Aoin r with natcrlnl furnished to hin by
Rose. It cannot be disputed that Rcao know that Schilling
was carrying out nrlnrlc. experiments on human bolngs. It
oonnot be disputed that Kooo know that Schilling was working
in the Dachau Concentration Camp. R’oo wn« not a simple
brooder of anor-holcs oggs in the huclness of cu lylnr all
ccnorn. Ho had lrnr: since booomo aware of tho fact that
cxpcrl Dents wore bo In;* carried out or. concentration onnp
inmates without their c-nsont. Ho knew this early in 1942,
v/hon he virtlto 4 tho Buchcnwal * Concut.'.rati *n Cnmr and


observe* *hc typhus cx orlmonte by Dr D>r.p. Xn May of


1942 he, hi u.eir.


r: q. v..' ted llru • v. -by


to


cxp» rlnonts


performed b j ’ Ing i.: Dvyborwold wi-.h a v..-.eelno which ho had
obtained fmu Prof. Rugo In Bucharest. (Sec below).


In October 1942, Hose was -resent at the "Cold" Congress


of the Luftwoffo in Number,: and hoard the lectures by
Rolzlochncr and Raschcr on the freezing experiments in Dachau.


These lectures made it quite clear that tho experiments were


- 6 -


performed on concentration can.; Inmates and that some of
then had died as n result. He admitted that he talked to
Holzlochner after hlfl lecture In Number? and was told of
his "spiritual dlffloultleo" In participating In the
experiments at Dachau. Holzlochner said, "Never In his
life would ho want such an order again." (R.6470).

t

Vilth Ihl3 knowledge, It lo Impossible to conclude that
Rooe did not know what Schilling was doing. A nan who
himself participated In expcrlnents on concentration cann
Inmates without their oonsor.t cannot bo heard to say that
ho did not know that another nan to whom he was furnishing
Infection notorial far malaria experiments was dolr.” tho
onrao thing. Tho Prosecution 1s not required to show that
Roso conductor! a poll of the experimental subKots unod by
Schilling. Nor can a nan blindfold hiaoclf to the facto
at hlo disposal and then pock to crcapc roaponnlbillty
by ploadlng ignoranco.

B. Typhus Super lass at the Natow roller Concentra tion Cam p..

Tho documentary and testimonial proof of tho
Prosecution tells a complete story of tho ori.aee oommlttod
during tho oouroo of tho typhus oxporlnents at tho
Natzwollor Concentration Camp. The experiments themselves
wore carried out by 8tabsarzt Profossor Eugonc Haagen,
Consulting Hygienist to the Alrfloot Reich an’ Director
of the Hygiene Tr&tisute the tfr.ivorrfcmy rf Strasbourg.
The pur'ouo of thp 0 c xperlr nte was t-r. Irlly tho same
as those at ‘arhc-.wv.ld, that Is Che discovery and production
of an effective typhus -;:c*.oire. Follrwlng the attack on
Russia, typhuv became a serious threat to tho Wehrrancht.
Before tho war, typhus was a disease of no significance In
Germany. Had It not been for tho aggressive war launched
by the Third Rcloh, no occasion would have arisen for the


frantic efforts to ftcvelv. typhus vaccines an< s the
worrying out of crlnlr.nl cx^crifccnts on Involuntary hunnn
subjects In oonncctln therewith (Hose, R.6394).

*e early ns June of 1943, Rose was onrrcsrondlnp with
Haapen concernin' tho establishment of vnoclnc rr'Auction
nt the Hyplonc Institute of the University of Strasbourg

(NO-305, Pros. Ex. 295, R.1385). In his letter of 9 June,
1943, to Hoapon, Roso stated that he was requesting tho
Luftwaffe -cdlcnl Ins;cotor f urpo the Chief of the
ac’lenl Service of the Wchrnaoht, tho defendant Knndlosor,
to order the production of tyhus vaccine for all arnod
forces In tho onstorn area (110-305, Free. Ex. 296, R.1387),
Hnndloscr oon troll or’ tho distribution cf tyrhus
vaccines (Rose, R.3690).

On 4 October 1943, Hoapen wr*to to .vbc about hio
plans for vncclnc production. In the s»ine lettor ho
discussed a roport sent by Rose on tho I sen vnoclno
fren Coponhapon an* stated that ho also had studied a
similar nurlno vacclno. Ho continued*

*1 already rep'-rte' t' you tho nuncral
rooults of cx-orlncnto rn human brinps. Tho
scran titer Is considerably hlphcr, aleo
after a slnplc vaccination, In oorrarlson
with throe tines vnooln: tlor. with de¬
activated vacclnoe. I re.rrct that It was
net p BPlblo so far to orf m Infection
ox orlnonto an the vaccinated persons;

I requested the /vhr.cncrbc of the SS t ■
provl’o suitable persons for vaccination,
but did n^t receive an angler as yet. V?o
arc now porf min; n further vnoclnntlon
on hunnn beln;:o; I shall re rt later
about tho result. I rjess we will then
hnvo reached tho pair* to be able to
roc -mend our new vacclno tr bo Introduced,
f'-'r the tlr.e bolnp without lnfcotlaue
ox; erlncnts".

«ftcr ashlnp Rose to nttonr* to obtain aoro

personnel f r hln, Kaa ;on concluded:

"If wo can pet cxporlnental cubjcots fron
the SS for toot vhocinatlons, It would be
an oprortunlty to test the liver vaccine
as well on Its nr.tl-infectl^uo effect.

I w ulf then cu-Tcet that our ontcrlal
will bo used ;-rr*llcl with the lason tests.


- 8 -*


■we rill he aMc to discuss'nil these
natters In Vlonnn■. (N0-2G74, rros. Ex.
i R. ).

Thus, before Infection experiments had been
conducted. Rose was put on notice of exactly what
Hnngon planned to do. He was promised further details
in n scheduled meeting with Haagen in Vienna, A
conference of the Oemrn Society for Internal liedlolno
was hold in Vionna in October 1913. (Hnn-iloscr, R.3013).
This document completely explodes R:so 1 s fabrication
that "Infection* really means vaccinaticn with
attenuated avlrulcnt vaccine. Haakon had already
perfornod vaccinations, an' ho was proposing to
rooonnond the vaoclno wlta:ut infection cxncrlnento
bocause the SS had n’t yet fumlshod inmates for thooo
oxporlnonto. The tostlnony of the witness Ooorg Hirtz
provos that Hanger, had tested his vaccine at Schlranook,
a oub-oan of Natzwollcr, in tho Summer of 19*13.
Approximately 20 Poliah inmates ncro urod. in thooo
oxporlncnto and thu vnoolno was a; arcntly so virulent
that 2 af the oxj orlmontnl subjects d.lod (R.1293).

Hanlon hnd a 1 '; arontly further rorfeotod the vacolno by
tho tlnotfhlfl lottcr to Rose In October 1943.

That Rose know that Haagen was rlannlnc infootlon
ox criments with virulent ty'hus virus is further proved
by the refcronco in the lotW^ of 4 Ootober 1943 to tho
proposed test of the liver vaccine (I son) as to itG
nnti-lnfoctlous effect. This I .son vacclno was a dead

t

vaccine, yet it t war to bo tested by after-infection,
nnd this was the result cf R sc's own suggestion in a
report on tho Ipson vaccine sent to Hrogon in September
1943. (Rose Document 22, Rose Ex. 21, R.6216). There
can be n' talk of tclorability tests with tho Irson
vaccine as it had already been tested re to its reaction


rcoor’ing t R.se's own rep rt.

mm Ck mm


Kaacen made his request for inmates to he experimented
in to the defendant 8levers, as Business linnamcr of tho
Ahr.er.crhc, In a letter dated 16 August 1943. 81 evcrs
agreed to this request on 30 September 1943 (NO-120, Pros.
Ex. 297, R.1387), but this had obviously not yet been
reccivod when Hanlon wrote to Rose on -1 October 1943.

Ono hundred prisoners were transported to tho Nntrvrcller
Concentration Canp early In November 1943. -Of those,

18 died durlnp transport, r.nd the rennlndor wore In such
a pitiful state of health that Han ; :en found then worthless
for his experiments. He requested additional nrlsonors
In freed health through Dr. Hlrt of the University of
Straosbourf, who was a ncnlcr of the Ahncncrbe (NO-121,
Pros. Ex. 293, R.1369). Rose adnlttod on dlrcot
cxanlnatlon that thoso experimental sublets could hardly
hnvo boon voluntecro clnoo thoro obviously was n pro-
solootlon an! transport from anothor camp to Hattwollor,
whoro tho experiments wore to be rorforaod (R.6289).

No ono oould read a rcrort on this criminal transport
of 100 mon for a no'leal ox crlncnt who wore In suoh a
vronkoned condition that 18 died and only 12 oould porhapn
bo brought back t3 normal health by two to thre'o months
s ocial oarc without renllzln,: full well the horrors ef a
Gorman concentration camp. And this matter jv^s reported
by Hangon to Rose on 29 U venber 1943 (K0-1059, Frog. Ex.
490, R.6*127), although n se oxprossly donlcd kno-lod.ro
before the document was put to him or. oroes examination.

(R.6425). Only a few weeks before, Roso hod talked

to H^lzlochner (see supra). By this tine Rose had hlmsolf
already requested an: had Infection cx cr.lnentc carried out
to toot the Bucharest vaccine in Buohcr.wild. «nd only a
few days later ho was to request experiments in Buchenwald
on the sane Ipsen vaccine from Copenhagen mentioned in


- 10 -


Haagen*s letter of 4 October 1943 (see infra). In the
Haapen letter of 29 Kovcnber 1943 no suboltted n ropert
to Rose on his dehydrated typhus vaedne, md stated that
he nr\B asking the 3S for r.n additional 100 prisoners
since the first group was unsatisfactory.

On 13 Doccnbor 19-13 Rr.se wroto to Haugen In reply to

A

a lo.tter of 8 Dcfienbor, which is not in ovidenoo. Rose
soldi


■I .regard it as unnecessary to nakc renercod
special roouest to the SS L>in Offltfo in
addition to the requost you havo alroady
Dado. X rcquont that, in procuring persons
for vaccination In your expcrlnent, you
requoot a oorrespending nuntcr of persons
for vecolnatl“n with Copenhagen
vaoolno. This has the advantage, ns also
appeared In the Buchomrold ex. orlmcnto,
that tho test of various vacolnco
slaultnnoouply Ives a clearer idea of tholr
value than tho test of me v"cclno alono".
(KO-122, Proa. Ex. 290, a.1368).

This is not the letter of a ann she wr.6 exercising no

supervision of Hansen's oxp:rlnonto. Ho in fact told Haagon

what to do - toot the Copenhagen vaoclnc (Ipscn) in a

oorial experiment on prisoners. *nd that hnd to be an

lnfoctlhn experiment as thorc was no othor rooson to tost

tho I t sen vaoolno. set forth above, its tolerability

on hunnn bolngs hnd‘already boon tested.

That tho additional 100 inmates were cxporlncntod on
by Hnn.:en with virulent ty hus is clear. On 9 liny 1944,
Hnagcn wrote to Hlrt enclosing a paper on his ox>erlnents
with the dehydrated typhus vaccine (HO-123, Pros. Ex. 303,
R.13S6). He noted that this report had been sent to tho
Chief of tho tfcdioai Service of the Luftwaffe. Kaagcn
noted that:

■It has been possible to -rc'uoo r vncclno
which pr vides r. t only nn anti-toxic lmunlty,
but also a definite anti-infccti-n lnr.ur.ity
which is of particular practical significance".


- 11 -


Anti-toxic lnnunlty la that characteristic cf the
vaccine which alleviates the effects of the disense, while
anti-infection lnnunlty is thnt pr porty in the vacclno
which entirely prevents the disease. These characteristies
obviously only oould have been determined by artificially
creating typhus in the experimental subject with a
virulent virus. Hv'pan was no longer interested merely
in testlnp the tolerance of the experimental subject
to tho vaccine. By this tine he wae also testlnp for
nntl-lnfectlcn lnnunlty ns tho letter clearly states.

These experiments noro obviously can led out on the 100
concentration cam; inmates obtained by Hmpon early in
194-1. This is further evidenced by the fact that in •
this sane lettor of 9 Kay 1944 Hanpcn roquoeto Hlrt
to oui-ply him with an addlti nal 800 concentration oonp
inmates.

Further 11 :ht on what happened to those 100
ox. orincntnl subjects lr plven by the letter of July 7,

1944 to H-apcn, coaiontlnp on hlo report of 8 May 1944.

(NO-128, Pros. 2x. 307, R.1402). This letter was oipnod

•

by Luxenburpor, but rtoso admitted havlnp road-tho report
of Haopen of 8 May 1944, and he also otntod that his
oemnonts on the report wore norc voluminous th^n those
set out In tho instant lottcr (R.6291). Rose know that
tho lotter was to be sent. This letter objects to
Haapcn'o ro ort on tho ,-round "tijat tho presentation
of tho lnfootl~<n nsuits in dlnprnms 1 and 2 differs from
th< usual prosont* tlon cf vac clno results concerning
typhus and makes it cr-re difficult for tho reader to
evaluate". Here is a clear distinction between infection
and vaccination, an* it a,:-in refutes ..'re's efforts to
torture tho documents into aenninp vaccination with an
avlrulcnt vaccine. This document proves that after-
infections wore erformed on the' 100 cx"crlncntal subjects.

- 12 -


Moreover It nentlons control persons, If simple
compatibility tests with the vaccine were being performed,
there obviously would bo no need for control persons.

In such tests one Is Interested only in the ronctlon
to the particular vaccine. Hargen had conducted
compatibility tests with this vacclno at least as early
as the clddle of 1943, and no ore here dealing with the
experiments carrlod out early In 1944.

The letter of 29 «ugust 1944 from Kahnt, Chief of
Staff to the defendant Sehrocdcr, to Haagcn nlso proves
that the 100 experimental persons were subjected to
Infection*r.lth virulent typhus virus. (110-131, Pros. Ex.
309, R.14'4). This letter makes referonoo to a roport
by Hnngon of 21 Juno 1944 which obviously again refers
to the experiments carried out on tho group of 100
lnnatcs, since the roquost for 200 concentration oanp
Inmates by Hmgen on 9 May 194- had not been eonpllod with
by 27 Juno 1944. (BO-127, Proc, Ex. 306, R.1401). Kahnt

advlood Hnngon that the experiments dealing with tho
dehydrated typhus vaccine were to bo oont'nuod and
4,000 Relchanrkc wore put at hi • disposal. Ko then asked
Haagcn shothcr It oould be assumed that the typhus
opldomlo raging at Katzwollor at that tine (August 1944),
was connootod with the vaccine research. There obviously
wculd be no occasion to ask such a question unless It was
known that Knagor. was carrying out Infection experiments
with vlrulant typhus virus.

Rose attenptod t explain this Inquiry by stating
that it was his fonr that the nvlrulont typhus vacclno
bolng used by Hangen night have bcc:nc highly virulent
(R.6294). This explanation Is nore thrr ridiculous because
by Rose's own admission Haarren had already reported that
no sickness had occurrc* In his vaccinated subjects. Rose
reiterated that there were no fatalities In vaccinations


- 13 -


with the avlrulent murine vaccine or with the avlrulent
rlckettsla prownzcckl vaccine (R.53S2). It la patently
impossible for an avlrulent vaccine which has caused no
typhus elcknes6 in the vaccinated subject to somehow
brlnp about a typhus epidemic. It can only be concluded
that Haapon was carrying out infection experiments with
vlrulont typhus virus, that this fact was well known to
Rose and to the iledical Service of the Luftwaffe, and that
aftor the outbreak of a typhus opidonic in Natzwcller
wHFro the experiments wore performed, Rose was lnquirlnp
•If the opidonic had been caused by H^agcn's Infection
oxporlnonts. Xahnt'o lottor of 29 August concludes by
admonishing Haugen for havlnp failed to nark his report
on 21 Juno 1944, in which the cxpcrlmont« at N n tzwellcr
wore* detailed', as soorct.

It should bo finally notod in connection with this
oxhiblt that tho Luftwaffe was supporting Haagen's roaoarch
work on typhus ur until tho tlmo Strasbourg foil to tho
Allies in 8ertoabor 1944. It ic quito beside the point
that Henpon may also have boon cu ported financially by
tho Reich Research Council, as a. 'cars fro-, oortnln of tho
documents. Whllo tho Reich Research Counoil le clearly
implicated in Haagen's criminal cx crlncnto, this in no
way oxouipntes tho defendants Schrcedcr, Rose, and
Bockex^-Froysenp, who isruo’. research assignments to
Haapen, afforded financial su- ort to him, and rcoolvod
reports from him.

The last sorlcs of experiments by Hanpon with which

wc arc horo concerned was that carried out on 200

%

oonoentratlon camp inmates requested by Knagon on 9 May
1944, which was referred to above. In a further letter to
Hirt dated 27 Juno 1944, Haacen expressly stated that
lnfoctlon ex erimonts would bo carried cut. He soldi


■However, in the subsequent Inoculations
with virulent typhus which are to be raado
for the purpose of testing the proteotivo
vaccine, one nu6t count on sickness
prlnarlly in the control group which has
not received a protective vaccination,

These ofterrlnccuTatlons nro desirable
in order to establish unequivocally the
effectiveness of the protective vacoines.

This tldo 159 persons will be Used for
the protective vacclno and 50 for the
control Inoculations■. (KCr-ic?, Pros. Ex.*

306, R.1401).

Even the defendant Rose found this lottor vory difficult

to explain away. By his own adnlssion he could only

engage in su positious nrgunont.(R.62?5). Hlrt passed

on this roquest of Hnagon's, originally n«do on 9 Hay
\

1944, to the defendant Slevors, who in turn addressed a
letter to Oswald Pohl, Chief of the Econoalo and
Adnlnl strati vo Main Off loo of tho S8 which had Jurisdiction •.
ovor nil oor.cor.trntlon o/mpa (JJ0-008, Pros. Ex. 304, R.1398).

However, no need not rely exclusively on the
doounonto. Tho testimony cf the witness Edith Sohnldt,
an enployee cf Haagon, ecta" lichee buy run! controversy

4

that those 200 concentration on.-, liuwti* . r*rj used in

infection oxporifeonto ! y Hixagon in tho N.; t .c.lcr oonoontratlon

onnp. • She tootlflod that Hrngcn was working with a dried

vnoclno produced fron rlcfcettsla prownzooki and egg yolk

culturo; that Hragon cultivated virulent typhus virus

in his laboratory at Strassbourp in tho brains of guinea

plge; that art of tho ex; orlner.tnl prisoners in

Notzwcilcr wore vaccinated and then ir.foctod with tho

virulent virus, and that the other 'art, the control

persons, wore infected without having been previously

vaccinated; that she saw the notes on those experinor.ts

prepared by ill*s Crodel, the assistant to Hr.ngcn; that

she was able to ascertain that 150 - 200 lnnntos wero

expcrlnented upon, that approxinately 50 cf tho experimental

subjects including c ntrol .-ersons died, and that persons

of all nationalities were used as exporlnontnl subjects,

- 15 -


with Gypsies predominating (R.1370-1). To the heat cf
ills b Schmidt's reoollectlon, these experiments took
place In the Spring or Sumner of 194-1. It eecns quite
clear froa the documents that they oust have been performed
In July 1944. The defendant nose's only oonaent on
this testimony was that Miss Schmidt was n morphine
addict. Be that as it nay, It seems rather apparent that
Rase at least had a passing familiarity with this lady
In order to make such a statement.

It Is quite possible that the lettor from Kahnt to
Haagon dated 29 August 1944 referring to the opldenlc
at Nntzweller was In connection with this Inst sorlos of
experiments performed by Haagen (NO-131, Pros. Ex. 309,
R.1404). In any event at that tlno tho Luftwaffe was
still supporting the research by Haagen. Indeed, tho
doouraonto oontalnod In Prosecution Document Book No. 12
all show that Haagon was a Consulting Hygienist to tho
Alrfleot Reich froa 1942 until the end of tho war, and that
ho was continuously supportod during all of that porlod
by tho Medical Servloo of the Luftwnffo. By April 1944

Haagon*o plans were well advanood to sot up a production

%

station for typhus vnoolnc for tho Vchrmacht at tho
Hygldno Institute of the University of 8trnssbourg.

(NO-310, Pros. Ex. 318, R.141S).

The only defense offored to the evidence of tho
Proaooution on the Haagon ex; orlments was that put up by
tho defendant Roee, Reduced to Its simplest terms, Rose
asks tho Tribunal to Hold that "Infection" really amounted
to nothing more than vaccination with an avlrulent typhus
vacclno. ThlB contention Is completely refutod by tho
documentary nnd testimonial ovldcncc outlined nbove.

Moreover, Rose himself repeatedly drew a clear distinction
In his testimony between lnfeotlon and vaccination (R.6172-3)


The docun^nts themselves snell out th?t distinction
'ulte clearly. No refined nuestlon of Interpretation is
Dreoented to the tribunal, ^he testlnony of the witnesses
Mlth Schnidt and Georg Hlrtz Is convincing and Is
substantiated to a greater or lesser degree by the
testimony of Olga Eyer (H. 1755 , ot B eq), Ferdinand H oll
(R. I 05 ?—9)• HrnrWcan °rondJean (R. 1103-5), and the
affidavit of »r. v lctor Rugenc S c huh. (NO--.35, Pros. E x .

^14, R, l4l3). Thin evidence cannot bo overcone by the
testlnony of a defendant "ho was roneatcdly lnocnched
"irlnT the course of cross-examination (sunra and Infra).

C • Typhus Experiments In the ^uchenwnld Concentr a tion Cano .

The orlnlnallty of the tynhus exo^rlncnts oerfomed
In the °uchcn"*aid Concentration C^no by Dr, y lng-3 c bulcr,
nrlm-rl]y under the minorvlnlon of the defendant JJrugowsky,
no Chief of the Hygiene Institute of the *nffen S3, has
been dealt with nt length In the brief on Mruvo-nky, and
need not bo ronested. rt o are here concerned only with tho
D"rtloin >tIon of the defendant Rone In those exnerlnentn.

Rose hr. a never denied that he visited the tyohua
station In °uchenw-ad In the early mrt of 194 ?. (R, 6434).
He ate tod th t he --ent there on an lnmectlon with
Prof, nnor ^lldemeistor of the •'nbert Koch Institute. Ho
observed the l4g lnn-teo "ho had been Infected '- 1 th
virulent tynhus virus. (R. 6436). He looked at the fever
curves'of these lnn"t.n. Hr further testified th~t both
before nd t^r thin vlclt he wan morally ennonrd to the
oxnrrlments. He asserted he told Qlldrraelster In effect
th- t tho Robe rt Kodh Institute nlc-ht "a w r n PC t un a
denertnent for executions. (R. # 107 ),

T he ^lng °lnry hllnh.-a the d"te of Rose's visit
to Duphenwld ~s 17 Harsh 194?. (N0-?65, Proa. E x . ?^ 7 ) #


- 17 -


R.1127). The entry for 10 August 1542 concerns the
exyerlmentnl series He. II in which 20 persons were
vaccinated after the process of Durano and Giroud, and
20 persons after the recess of Ccablescu, Zotta and
collaborators, produced by Cantucnzlno at Bucharest.

The Cantaouzlno vaccine, the Diary stetse, was nade
available by Prf. Hose, *hc received It from Navy Dr.

Prof. Huge from Bucharest. Tho 40 persons previously
vnoelnated, together with 19 un-vnoclnated oontrol persons,
were Infected with virulent typhus virus on 15 Ootober
1942. as a result of this experimental series, 4 of
tho oontrol persons died.

Rono denied the accuracy of th? above entry In the

Ding Diary. Ho denied ever havln,:sont vr.colno to

Hrugowsky or Ding to hnvo tested'in Suchenwald. He denied

that Hrugowsky ever asked hln for vaccine to be used In

typhus experiments or that ho over negotiated with

Wrugcwuky In that regard. (R.6460). Thlo testimony of

Rooe was oonplotely contradicted by the offer of Krugowoky'o

letter to Rose of 16 May 1942 Ol'V-1754, Pros. Ex. 491, R.6460).

This letter roads ns follows I

■The Reich Physician 3S and Pollco has'
oonsonted to the execution of experiments
to tost typhus vacclnos. Hay I therefore
ask you to let mo have thevacolnes.

“The ether question which you raised, na to
whothor the louse can be Infected by n
vaccinated typhus patient, will also be
dealt with. In principle, this also has been
approved. Thore are, however, still some
difficulties at the moment about the praotloal
ex- oution, slnco wc have at present no
facilities for brooding llcc.

"Tour suggestion to use Oltscha has boon
passed on to the Personnel Department of tho
S3 Kcdlonl Office, It will be given •
consideration in due course*■

Thus the entry in tho Ding Diary Is fully substantiated.
After tho submission of this document, Rose admlttod in effect


that he did send the Bucharest vaccine to. lirugowsky for
testing in Buchenwald (R',6 463). It Is quite obvious fron

the context of this letter that Hose had previously asked
Mrugowsfcy, either by telephone or by letter, tc Include
tho Bucharest vaccine, which he had received fron Hugo,

In the original experlnents by Ding In Buchenwald. There¬
after, Urugoosky secured tho consent of Grawitz, the
Rolchsnrzt SS and Police, and In this letter to Rose asks
hln to lot hln have the vaccines. Rose further requested
Mrugowsky to determine In Buchenwald whether the louso onn
bo Infected by a raoolnatod typhus patient. This, of
course, would lnvolvo an cx.'crlnent In which tho louso In
turn would b 0 used In an attonpt to infoot an un-vacolnnted
person. Rose furthor adnlttod that the rofcronco to
Olzschn was an effort to have this nan placed In tho
Hyplene Institute of the Jaffon 8S un'or Urupowsky, Olzschn
had beon nn assistant to Rose and was about to bo draftod
Into tho Jaffon SS. (K.6463). a note typed *on tho bottom
of this lettor by Frnu Block, secretary to Rose nn* a
witnoss beforo tho Tribunal in his behalf, states that
Dr. fclrupowoky askod tp be onllcd by telephone nftor Rose's
roturn, that lirurrowsky would not bo In Berlin in June, and
that his doputy, Dr. Dlnp, was lnfomod.

This lettor proves that a few short weeks following
his visit to tho typhus station of Euchonwnld, and with
full knowledre of tho character of tho exporlnento bolnp
performed there, Rose wilfully Initiated the ex erlncnts
with the Bucharest vaoclno In Buchenwald, which rcsultod
In the death cf 4 lnnatos.

Rose testlflod and called witnesses to prove that ho
had vigorously orjocted to the typhus experiments in
Buchenwald on the ocoaslon of Ding's report to tho meeting
of Consulting Physicians of the Jehrnacht in iiny 1C43. The


- 19 -


Proseoution has conceded that Rose made an objection

of eor.c sort, whether on scientific or moral grounds.

Be that aa it nay, the proof of the Prosecution has shown

that Rose 1 a noral scruples did not detar hln from again

•

actively participating in the criminal experiments in
Buohonwald, The entry of 8 ifaroh 1944 in the Dins Diary
denle with experimental series No. VIII, whloh was
suggested by the defendant Rose. Twenty persons were
vaccinated with tho Ipaen vacclno from Copenhagen, and
subsequently infected by tho lnjootlon of typhus lnfeotcd
blood obtained from “passage persons". Ton lnnatcs were
used as controls and were infected without previous
vaccination. The entry for 13 Juno 1044 proves that six
deaths rosults from thoso experiments, threo of whom had
boen vncolnntod and threo of whoa wero controls. This entry
was put to the defendant Rose on oross examination, and
ho again donlod tho accuracy of tho ontry (R.6458, 6463),
Rose donlod that he sont tho Copenhagen vaccine to
iirugowsJcy, or Ding, for testing in Buohonwald, (R.6224).

Once again Rose was thoroughly lopeaohed by the offor of
his lottor to Mrugoweky dated 2 Deocnbcr 1943 (NO-1186,

Pros. Ex. 492, R.6463). This letter roads ns follows:

"At prosont I have at ny disposal a nunber
of sanplcs of a now nurlno virus typhus
vaccine which was prepared from alee
livers and proved in aniaa.l experiments

to bo quantitatively a 1000 tines coro
effective than the vaccine prepared from
nice lungs. To dooldo whether t:.ls first
rate nurlno vnoclnc sh uld ' o us for
protective vocclr.atlon of human beings
against lloo ty hue it would be desirable
to know if this vaccine showed in your
and Din •* s experimental arrangement at
Buchonwld an effect similar to that of
the classic virus vncclncs.

■Would you be nblo to have such an
experimental series carried out7 Un¬
fortunately I could not reach you over
the .hone. Considering the slowness


- 20 -


of nostal communications I
would rratcful for an answer
*y telephone. Hy numbers,.all of
which to through the nano switch-
hoar., arc: Berlin ?7^13*

Raw Id Exchange Berlin 09 , Zoos on 559
Luftwaffe Exchange 7? t there you
ask for R.L.::., L. In. 14."

In this letter the ''efenrtant Rose expressly
requests that Hrutnrsky have experiments carried out
hy Din* In 3 uchenwald to test the loom nurlno typhus
vaccine. This letter was later forwarded hy Krufrovroky
to Dln-v, whose si nature annpnrs on the hotton of the
p lottor. ^hls doounont corroborates the entry In tho

Dine Diary, and nays hi-h trl’-ute to tho mctlouloun
accuracy of th* test Irony of the Prosecution witness
Kn-on h^frre thin Tribunal. *ftcr reading thin lottcr.

Rone acta It tod that he aimed It and that ho did requent
Kru-owaky to trot the vaccine In -uchcnwald. (H. 6464-5).

In view of the clear and unequivocal contradiction
between thr trstlnony o' JV>eo and the documents suhnlttert
to him on croon exarlnatlon, hie tootlraony an a whole cnnnr
ho vlowed a 8 credible. It Is lnooonihle to bcllsvo that
a mnn who saw the experiments in oror rrnn at ^uehcnwald,
who state* that ho objected t« those experiments, could,
hv any ntrotch of t>*o lea lnation, fall to ronor.>-er that
ho ha-* personally Inst ire ted the carry lno out of two scries
of experiments under conditions *-hloh he knew to he cri¬
minal. There is nothin:: to v o sold In mitigation for this
man. He In an cxrert in the field of tropical medicine and
far above averarre Intelligence. He knew whnt •’as bcir. - done.
He Is a llvinr cxan-'le oo r . ran eoul'* have abstained
from participating In these crimes without threat of harm


- ?1 -


to his no reon or no a It Ion by any acency of the Nazi
Government. Ho testified that he objected to the experi¬
ments. He was not arrested an* tried by the S3. He was
not committed to a concentration conn. In onlto of that,
he voluntarily participated In these saao crimes to
which he said ho objected. With his knowledge, prestige,
and position, he Is even rore culonble than the miserable
and lnexperlenoed Din? who actually performed the oxoo-
rlnents In the murder wards of Tuchenwald.

III. CrNCLU3IC,V

•'ose was tho ConsultIn? Hyrrlcnlst to tho Chief of
the Medical Servlao of.the Luftwaffe.

Hoso aotlvoly supported tho criminal malaria
experiments hy Sohlllin:; In Dachau. Ho k;rw that Schilling
wan conducting experiments o n concentration oanp lnoatoo
In Dachau. The nroof hns ohn „ n that ho fu rnlahc<!l Schilling
with anopheles omro, atroonrvus o c- 0 , 'Strain lbao , # and
nnlnrln spleens. This lnfoctlon material was all sent

Mreotly to Schilling nt Anehau. Hose oorroeoondod with
Sohlllin.- durlno the experiments. Sahllllnr thanked
him mr suo-ort ef his work. br eo supported Schilling's
experiments at n time when he knew of systematic experi¬
mentation on concentration coop Inmates without their
consent. Ho ha- already visited tho Duchen-ald typhuo
station an'’ requested L'ru:-or S ky to have experiments
performed there. He had already *een Informed of the
murderous freoslr.- experir-ento In Dachau.

•v'se participated In the typhus experiments v y
Haakon on Involuntary subjects In the Katrwollor Con¬
centration Camp. Haaren --as Consulting Hygienist.to cn
ir •"lect and hie reports -err submitted to Jsc. Hose
r ' 18 Informed by He.ngen as early as October 1943 that


- 22 -


he planned to perform tyrhua Infection exoerlr.enta. Hobo
furnished Hnaren with the Inacn vaccine and knew of Hnarrcn'a
Intention to teat It hy tyohua Infection oxnorlmente.

This was the sane vaccine that ^ac had tested In Pu-
chenwald In 1?44« nose knew that Haakon received 100
concentration conn lnnnten fr r Infection experiments, lfi
of whom r’led durln trannport. IHrac knew that Hna ;cn there¬
after received further hunan ouhjrcta. He naked Haor;en to
request enough lnuatco to teat the I-aon (Copenhagen)
vaccine, ^oao know that Knn?on carried rut Infection ex¬
periments In 1'jh’i. He spr noer-d n letter to Kaa.ron asking
If hi a tyrhua experiments were responsible for the op Idem lo
in Natsweller. *he proof shown that Haamen'a tynhuo oxoo-
rlnentn cauoed tho 'ecth of approximately 50 human au^Jeota.

Rrae also onrtlolonted In the tynhuo experiments In
-uchenwald, He vlaltcd the experimental station In Hr.rch
19^2 and rhaerved none of the lnoatoo who had '■non artl-
flcally lnfeoted -1th tynhuo. In Slay V)k? t Enao requootcfl
Knr-oweky to nif.er exncrlr.rnts with the Suchareot vaccine,
hese ex”erln®nt3 -ere carrion cut with tho vicclno
furnlahed hy .looe and four exnorlnental ouhjocts wore
killed aa a result. In December 1943 , Hear naked Krivowaky
to have the Ipaen (Copenhagen) vaccine tooted In Budicnrald.
*hla experimental ecrl re me carried out betwoon March and
June 1941; and tlx experimental vletlno died.

There la nothlnr to said ln.rltiratlon. Hose la

a man cf extraordinary lntelllcence. He a cted -1th full

knowledge that concentration conn inmates ’••ere bcln^
oyatemit leally forced to ur*cr~o hlmhly dancemuo cxno-
rlments. he Prosecution audita that the evidence proves


- -


that Rose was a principal In, an accessory to, ordered,
abetted, took a consenting part In, and »*ao connected
rlth plans and enterprises Involving nodical exr»crl~
nontatlon on human subjects without tholr conoont,
in the courae of which experiments nurders, brutalities,
cruelties, tortures, atrocities, an- other Inhumane acts
were committed rno that his euilt has been established
under Counto I. II, and in of the Indictment.

>

I


*

<


£1“Z1±&Z T ft I 5 U N s L NO. I

CaSS NO. 1


CLOSING BRIEF FOR .

THE UNITED STATES OF AuEnlCA

aGAINST

•

PAUL ROSTOCK


Jpnct6 U. iicHaney
Aloxnnder 0. Hardy

ibbs& ^“sfSaggf 1 . 4

For:

Nurnborg,

16 Juno. 1947. Telford Taylor

brigadier General, U.S.a.

Chief of Counsel for Jar Crlncs


introduction

It Is charged under Count I of the Indlctner.t that
Rostock conspired nnd agreed with others, pursuant to n
connon design, to perfora nodical expcrlncnts on lnvol-
untary hunrn beings; and under Counts II nnd III (Unr
Crlncs nnd Crlncs against Hunnnlty, respectively), thnt
he -ms n principal in, .accessory to, ordered, nbetted,
took n consenting pr.rt in, and vn.s connected ^lth, plans
and enterprises involving nedicnl expcrinentntlon on in¬
voluntary hunnn subjects. The criteria of crlnlnallty
are set forth in Paragraph 2 of Article II of Control
Council Lrvj No. 10.

I. P06ITI0N8 OF RESPONSIBILITY

The defendant Rostock held positions of considerable
pov/or and responsibility in the nedicnl services of the
Third Rcioh. In 1933 he was r.ppolntod Senior Surgoon
(Obcrnrzt) of tho Surgical University Clinic in Berlin.

In 1936 he bocane Profccoor of Surgery of the University
of Berlin rnd Deputy Director of tho University Clinic.

In 1941 he r,no appointed to tho position of Director of
the Surgical Clinic and in 1942 ho beenne denn of the
nodical faculty of tho University of Berlin. (Rostock,

R. 3259).

Rostock Joined the NSDa? before the *:ar. In 1939 he
was assigned to the Arny a Consulting Surgeon nnd in
1942 ho bccano Consulting Sur-con to the «rny iicdlcnl In¬
spectorate. In this capacity, he trns subordinate to tho
defendant Hnndl06er. In tho «rny he »*ttr.lncd tho rank of
Brigadier General (Gcncrnlnrst) of the Reserve. (NO-676,
Pros. Ex. 8, R. 95; Rostock, R. 3259).


- 1 -


RSSTOCK


On 5 September 1943, Hitler issued the second decree
concerning the medical and health services, charging the
defendant Xr.rl Brandt "with cent rally coordinating nnd
directing the problems and activities of the entire nodi¬
cal and health service according to instructions. B This
applied " also to the field of science and research."

Brandt was authorized "to appoint and connisslon special
deputies for his spheres of action". (50-081, Pros. Ex.

6, R. 94) (cnpha8ls supplied). It was on tho basis of
this dccroe that Rostook was appointod, in the winter of
1943, Chief of tho Office for Science nnd Research under
Brandt no General Commissioner of the Health and. Lcdlonl
Services. (MO-576, supra; Rostock, R. 3259, 3278).

Tho defendant Karl Brandt was a member of tho Presi¬
dential Council of tho Rclchs Rosoarch Council from 1942
until the end of the war. (M0-1730, Pros. Ex. 441, R.
2091). From tho time of his appointment as Chief of tho
Office for Science and Research, Rostock noted no Brandt's
altornato on tho Reich Research Council. (Rostock, R.
3342). Moreover, tho Reich Research Council was subject
to nodical supervision by Brandt no General Commissioner.
Brandt oxocutod this supervision through Rostock. (MO-
1730, Pros. Ex. 441, R. 2089; see rlso the organ1ration
chart of Brandt's Office, NO-645, Pros. Ex. 3, R. 88).

Tho particulars concerning the organization, purpose and
criminal activities of tho Reich Research Council, ns set
forth on Pages 6 - 8 of tho Prosecution's brief against
Karl Brandt, arc incorporated herein by reference.

*side fron his position re Consulting Surgeon of the

A rmy and Br-ndt's Deputy in tho Reich Research Council,

•

Rostocit'o prortest influence in tho medical services do-


- 2 -


ROSTOCK


rlrod from his position as Chief of the Office for
Science and Re.seorch and from his personal influence and
intinrtc connection with 3r»ndt. In order to appreciate
his influence, it is necessary to keep in nind Brandt's
tremendous powor over the nedlcnl services, both military
and civilian, in the Third Reich. (Sec the Prosecution's
brief efcninst Karl Brandt). By virtue of the Fuohrer Do-
croo of 5 September 1943 (N0-081, supra), Rostock became
Brnndt'n "special deputy", chargod with the task of "cen¬
trally coordinating and directing the problons and acti¬
vities of tho ontlro nodical health service" in the field
of scloncc and research. In order to fulfill the task of
coordination, it was lndlsponsnblo for Rostock to have
detailed knowledge of nodical research then in progress
and plannod for the future. Tho defonso contends that
Ron tool: was provontod fron acquiring ouch knovlodgc by n
Fuehrer Decree obligating all Stnto agencies to complete
oocrooy. (Rostock, Docuncnt 3, Ex. 3, R. 3262). This
order only provided, however, that "no one is to have
knowlodgo of socrot natters which do not pertain to his
own sphere of work". Obviously, nodical research, its
manner of execution and results, pertained directly to
Rostock's sphere of work. Rostock was the nan to not for
Brandt in tho field of research and Brandt had to he kept
lnfornod about the fundamental events in the medical ser¬
vices of tho .ichrnncht (whloh included army, Navy, Luft-
rmffo and enffen SS) and tho civilian health service.
(l.'O-OBO, Pros. Ex. 5, R. 93). It is difficult to inngino
what could bo nore fundamental than tht policy of perfor¬
ming nodical experiments, involving torture and djwith for


- 3 -


HOSTOCX


Involuntary human subjects. It, therefore, was certainly
no broach of the secrocy order on the part of the ngen-
cles, which carried out or planned such research, to re¬
port to Rostock. They wore not only at liberty, but in¬
deed under the duty, to do so. Rostock made arrangements
to obtain information from the various agencies which* is¬
sued research assignments for “special" research (1*.c.
research aimed at a definite practical goal), ns, for ex¬
ample, the Luftwaffe, the army Inspectorate, the Reich
Rosonrch Council. (Rostock, R. 5358-60). Schroodcr sta¬
ted in his affidavit that Ro6took was informed of the
nodical research which t/ns conducted by the Luftwaffe.
(NO-449, Pros. Ex. 130, R. 474). Rostock testified that
he was only partly successful in obtaining information
concerning research assignments on the part of the SS
(Rostock, R. 3296/7), but he was in any event successful
onough in that respect to classify certain criminal re¬
search assisted by the S3 no “urgent". (..0-692, Pros. Ex.
457, R. 3408, Rostock, R. 34C©). It is significant in
this connection to noto that he did not approach the Ger¬
man universities for information (Rostock, R. 3360), but
only agencies which — ns the evidence has shown — car¬
ried out or pronotod criminal experiments on human beings.

j.a to the direction of research, Brandt was “authoriz¬
ed to intervene in a responsible manner" (IiO-080, Pros.

Ex. 5, R. 93) "and to issue instructions to the offices
and or "nlz^tions of the State, Party and -ehrnncht, which
(wore) concerned with the problems of the nodical and
health services". (1.0-082, Pros. Ex. 7, R. 95). These
prerogatives, of course, applied also to Rostook in the

- 4 -


ROSTOCK


field In which he acted on Brandt's behalf. In order to
direct research In linzl Gornany, Rostock hiaself Issued
requests for research assignments (Rostock, R. 3301) and
made decisions concerning the urgency of certain research
assignments. (HO-692, supra).

Rostock's testimony concerning the activities of his
Office for Science and Research Is In essence the rcductlo
ad absurdun th"t It nns no office and hpd little or no¬
thing to do with science and research. In short, Rostock
*70uld have the Tribunal find th«t he was n nan with a
pompous tltlo but completely horift of power and authority.
This is the sane plea unsuccessfully advanced by practi¬
cally all of the defendants before the International mi¬
litary Tribunal. This la tho aajao lament being sung by
Karl Brandt and Hnndloocr among othors In this caso.

Thoso defendants compete with each other In self-abasement.
The ‘'re-trial statement of Schroedcr Is considerably moro
reliable as to tho functions of tho Office for Science and
Research than Rostock's testimony. Schroedcr said:

"It was Rostock's duty to nvold duplication In
tho distribution of assignments In the sphere of
nodical research. Therefore, all distribution of
assignments had to pass through Rostock's office.

If, for instance, I assigned Xoch or Hr.ngcn oomo
research work, a copy would go to Rostock to In¬
form him of the nature of tho Job. Then Rostock
could tell whether tht -articular Job had already
been worked on by someone else or whether it could
load to worthwhile rcsultc. - (NO-449, Pros, Ex,

130, R. 471).

Schroedcr reaffirmed during crosn-cxanln-tlon th->t this
•Y"s his understanding of Rostock's position as Chief of
the Office for Scicnco and Research. (R. 3605).

Tho personal connections between Rostock and Karl
Brandt were Intimate and long lasting. They net for tho


- 5 -


ROSTOCK


first cine when Rostock was Senior Physlcirn at the Cur-
ftical Doprrtnent nt t he hospital In Socnua from 1927 to
1933. Brandt was nn assistant there. (Rostock, R, 3277).
Rostock xntB appointed Chief of the Offloo for Science and
Research on Brandt's request. (Rostock, R. 3278). Dur¬
ing his tenure of office, they net very freauontly. nt
lor8t onoo n week and sometimes aorc often. Brandt main¬
tained, throughout the period fron 1943 until the end of
the war, nn office in Rostock's clinic In the lnncdlnto
vicinity of Rostock's own office. (Rostock, R. 3349).

They both also had offices In Slcllts. (Rostock, R. 3281).
This contact and Rostock's official position with Brandt,
rnnko It entirely Inpossible that Rostock could have been

►

Ignorant of roscarch work and experiments which wore known
to nnd supported by Brandt.

\ Thooo, then, were the positions of responsibility of I

tho defendant Rostock: Consulting Physician to the Army
nnd Arny nodical Inspectorate, Chief of tho Office for
Science and Rosoarch undor tho Reich Commiesloner of tho
Health and -iodlc-'l Services, and alternate to too defen¬
dant 2orl Brandt in hlo cnpaclty as nenber of tho Presi¬
dential Council of the Reich Research Counoil, Rostock

•

used the foregoing positions, his •crsonal Influence and
hlo lntlnatc connection with the defendant K-rl Brandt In
a manner which Involved the comics Ion of war crlr.cG and
crlnos against humanity, set forth In the I n dlctr.cnt.

II. PEKSOKaL PRRTICIPnTIOr I•; CRI.aP^L EXPERIMENTS

as in tho ease of his Chief, Xarl Brandt, it Is not
to bo cxoctod that a n^n In the position of Rostock would
personally perform criminal experiments. That was left


- 5 -


ROSTOCK


to willing and onbltious hands at a lower level. The
proof, however, has clearly shown that he, like Brandt,
personally encouraged experimentation on human beings with¬
out their consent. He, like Ernndt, had full knowledge
that concentration canp inmates were being systematically
oxperinonted upon by doctors of the Luftwaffe, Army, SS,
and tho'Oivlllnn health services. He never usod his powor
and influence to end this perversion which resulted 'in
tho murder, torture and inhuman treatment of thousands of
helpless men, women and children.

Rostock is charged in the Indictment with special
responsibility for and participation in tho nnlnrla, gas,
sulfanilamide, bone, muscle and nerve regeneration and
bono transplantation, sea wnt.-r, opidonic Jaundice, and
typhus experiments. It is not incumbent upon the Prosecu¬
tion to show that Rostock was familiar with all the de¬
tails of those experiments. It is sufficient to prove
that ho knew, or should have known, of the systematic use
of Involuntary human subjects for the purpose of experi¬
ments by ngonoloo over which’ he cxcrclsod a substantial
rtegroo of power and authority, application of Ynnashita,

66 3. Ct. 340, 347 (1946). This, and norc, has been
provod by tho Proscoutlon.

A. Sulfanllanldc Ex crlni-nts (Indictment, Par. 6 (E)).

The sulfanilamide experiments were conducted at tho
Ravonsbruck Concentration Camp fron July 1942 until August
1943. For a detailed statement of the criminality of
those experiments, reference may be made to tho Prosecu¬
tion's brief against Gabbardt.

A full report on the criminal sulfnnilanldo experiments


- 7 -


was given by Oebhardt aftd Fischer at the Third Meeting of
the Consulting Physicians of the ^ehraacht held from 24 to
26 May 1943 at the Llllltary Medical Acadecy In 3crlln.
Rostock testified that he hoard about the sulfanllnnido
experiments for the first tine when Oebhnrdt and Fischer
spoko nt this meeting. (R. 3322). This Is clearly con¬
tradicted by tho testimony of Oebhardt who stated that
there was considerable discussion atout the nature of his
locturo with the person in charge of the program for the
meeting, that ho recalled this person to have been Rostock
and so stated during pro-trial Interrogations In 1945 and
1946, that tho program for tho meeting listed his lecture
under tho title "Special Experiments" which Indicated he
was trying to show something unusual, and that tho whole
subject was fully diocuoood with Rostock durfnp tho arrange¬
ments for the meeting of day 1943. (Oebhnrdt, R. 4103-06).
There had boon continuous correspondence concerning the
oxporimonto botween Oebhnrdt, Orowltz, and Rostock. Orn-
*vlt z had a oooploto report on tho experiments when he ne¬
gotiated with Rostock concerning the lccturo by Oebhnrdt.
(Oobhardt, R. 4107). During all of his pre-trial Interro¬
gations, Oebhnrdt stated that the person In charge of the
mooting in May 1943 and with whom he discussed the experi¬
ments was Rostock. On the stand he stated that Rostock
had told him that he was mistaken and that the repara¬
tions for the mooting wore handled by Schrclbcr. In view
of that fact, Oebhnrdt testified that he did not new clear¬
ly renonber whether It was Rostock or Schrclbcr 1th whom
ho discussed this matter. (R. 4144). It Is clear that
tho pre-trial statements made by Gcbhardt arc much more
reliable In this regard than hl6 professed failure of me¬
mory on the stand. Moreover, the fact that Rostock was


ROSTOCK


chairman of the meeting In May 1943 Indicates conclusively

that It was Rostock with whoa Oebhardt negotiated. (Ros-

f l

took, R. 3269).

That Rostock knew of the sulfanilamide experiments

beforo the meeting in :Iny 1943, contrary to his contention,

la also proved by the testimony of Oebhardt that prior to

the meeting ho mot Rostock and Erandt In a railroad station,

and that he discussed -publication of the results of the

experiments with then. (R. 4222). Gobhardt affirmed that,

during an Interrogation of 5 November 1946, ho stated that:

"I am sure I once told Srandt, without any
order, that this anonymity of the whole matter
Is rnthor nonsensical. Now, he claims he
cannot remember though, and once I told
Rostock, 'do you roalltc what we aro report¬
ing? I do not know what Orawltr -/rote to
you. X am tolling you Himmler ordered this,
and that concerned the question of sulfani¬
lamide, that Is being dono. These experiments
arc to be i-crformcd, but I give tho scientific
advice only because German science can nako
use of It'".

On being noked during tnc same Interrogation whether it wno
made clear to Rostock and orandt that the experiments wero
bolng mado on prisoners, Gobhardt replied, ■Evidently".

(Gobhardt, R. 4222).

Rostock admitted tna.t he . rooldcd over tho noetlng In
May 1943 and that ho heard Gobhardt and Fldchcr lecture on
their experiments. (R. 3269-70). He admitted that It was
made clear that tho experimental subjacts had boon artifi¬
cially infected. (R. 3322). He testified that Gobhardt
and Flochor did not report on the number of ex crlmental
subjects used but merely gave percentages. <R. 3323). He
testified that he was undor the lm; resslon that relatively
few experimental subjects wero Involved, p.-rhaps around 20 .
(R. 3324). He expressly denied that he knew there were ns


- 9 -


ROSTOCK


many as 50 subjects experimented on. (R. 3328).

Rostock's testimony as to the details he learned
about tho sulfanllanido ex.-erlnents by Gebhardt Is com¬
pletely false. «fter the scientific reports were given
at the Meeting of Consulting Physicians, summaries of the
lectures were made and the results lncor'orated Into no¬
dical directives. (Rostock, R. 3325). It Is obvious that
in ordor to evaluate tho results of the cx'crlncnts, it
vine nocossary for Rostock to know tho exact details, as
for oxnppio, tho number of experimental subjects used,
the typo and place of Infection, the development of the
lnfoctlon and Its dangor, the method of troatnont, number
of deaths, and tho like. But one ncod not rely upon such
reasonable deductions from the facts to ..rove that Rostock
gained complete knowledge of tho dotalls of these ex. cri-
raenta and that ho failod to make full disclosure during
his testimony although questioned on these olnts. Ocb-
hardt testified quite clcnrly to the effect th«t ho was
opposed to any camouflage and that he was anxious to bring
the v/hclo subject of these ex. crlncnts Into tho o; on.

.ihon ho :avc tho Introduction to tho lecture by Flcohcr,
ho statod that tho experiments had been carried out on hu¬
man beings. (R. *1109). Ocbhnrdt does not definitely re¬
member, according to his testimony, vhether he 6aid tho
experimental subjects wore concentration car., ir.mntca.

The defendant Fischer his stated that thl6 was made clear.
(NO-472, Pros. Ex. 243, n. 941; cf., Fischer, h. 4365).
Gebhardt testified that the clinical details of the experi¬
ments were explained In rent .detail. The meeting was told
that 75 persons had boon ex.-crlncntcd on, that tho lnfcc-


- 10 -


ROSTOCK


tlons had been artlfically Induced, that various drugs had
been used In treating the Infections together with the re¬
sults, that surgical treatment was used, and that three

%

persons died. (Gebhardt, R. 4109-10). In view of the

clear contradiction between the testimony of Gebhardt and

Rostock, the self-serving statements of Rostock cannot be
%

vlcwod as credible.

Rostock testified that It was his understanding that
the ox. erlncnt was substituted for tho death penalty which
waa sup. osed to hnvo been la. osed upon tho subjects. If
tho experimental subject survived, the death contoncc was
not carrlod out. This "substitution" Involved no element
of consent by tho experimental subject. (Rostock, R. 3376).

Having acquired knowledge, Rostock was not privileged
to remain silent; ho was under a clear duty to act. Ros-
took did nothing. Ho did not voice any objection at the
mooting although ho presided over It. Ho wns tho Consult¬
ing Surgeon to Handloser as Army Medical Inspector. He was
a scientist of high repute and an acknowledged loader of
German nodlclno. He knew that gangrene Infection was ex¬
traordinarily dangorouB. (Rostock, R. 3316). Ho Knew
that the ex. » rlmonts v/crc unnecessary and that tho sane
results could have boon achieved by clinical study of the
offoots of sulfanllanido on wound Infections of soldiers.
(Rostock, R. 3338, 3340). Of nil the ersons recent at
this mooting, Rostock was most able to ap; roclato tho hor¬
rors of tho experiments. He did not dlscusc the experi¬
ments with his Chief, Handloser. He voiced no o. position
to the cx criaents either openly or privately. Such facts
constitute Rostock an accessory after the fact to tho orl-


- 11 -


ROSTOCK


nlnnl sulfanilamide experiments, even though It be assumed
thnt they were completed At the tine Rostock obtained
knowledge. He took n "consenting part" in this criminal
use of helpless concentration camp inmates.

It is not true, however, that tho experiments had boon
completed at the tine Rostock obtained knowledge, ns late
as august 1943, six Polish wonen were experlnentally op¬
erated on by forco in the bunker at Rnvcnsbruck (KO-854,
Pros. Ex. 829, R. 923). These ('arsons night have been sa-
vod torture and mutilation if one nan of authority had ob¬
jected at the mooting in iiay 1943. Moreover, an investi¬
gation of tho sulfanilamide experiments would have brought
to light tho criminal bono, muscle, and nerve experiments
(Indlotmont, Par. 6 (F)), conducted by tho samo persons at
the samo place.

B. T yphus Ex., crime nts (Indictment, Par. 6 (J)).

«t a conference on 29 December 1941 ,artlciiatcd in

by Handlosor, Conti, Olldonolstor, and Urugdwsky, it vas

dccidod to dotornino tho effectiveness of typhus vacolno

produood fror. cultures cultivated in ogg yolks by cxpcrl-

nente on human beings. (NO-265, Pros. Ex. 267, R. 1134;

oonparo Handloser's statement, NO-732, Pros. Ex. 451, R.

%

3060). «8 a rosult of this decision, the ex. crinental

station in the Buchonwnld Concentration Cam. was establi¬
shed and experiments to test the effectiveness of various
vaccines by artificially infecting inmates, without their
consent, r/ero performed, from Janaary 19-.2 until early in
1945. (Kogon, R. 1154, ot seq.). The fact alone that

•

these experiments were going on for more than three years
on a very broad soalo would Justify a finding that Rostock
knew or should have known of these experiments.


- 12 -


4


ROSTOCK


Ji

K

♦


The problen of typhus vaccine production and alloca¬
tion was obviously a natter within the Jurisdiction of
Brandt after his nppolntnent. as General Connlssloner by
the Fuehrer Decree of 28 July 1942. clearer case of
coordination of material cannot be found. Handlosor had
primary control over vaccine distribution. (Handlosor, R.
3074, 3090; compare the tostinony of Schroedcr, R. 3642,
3643). Both Handlosor and Conti were required to report
on baslo events to Brandt. Since production of the egg
vacclno was dependent on research to dotcmlno Its effect¬
iveness, the two cannot be divorced.

The Buchomrald experiments were reported on by Dr.
Dlng-Schulcr at the meeting of the Consulting Physicians
of the Vohrancht In Way 1943. (NO-923, Pros. Sx. 436, K.

2063). Rostock admitted hlo proaonco at this raootlng.

(R. 3269). ./hllc ho any not have heard the report Itself
since It wao delivered to tho section on hygiene, thcro
can bo no reasonable doubt that ho heard of It. Rose
ralood objections to the character of tho Buchcnwald ex¬
periments nnd this was ourcly a aattcr which wont beyond
the walls of the lecture room. Kogon testified that Ding
was furious about Rose's attack. (Kogon, R. 1176). The
Bucnenwnld typhus experiments are described In detail In
tho Prosecution'6 brief against .Mrugonsky.

Dr. Eugene Haagon, Hygienist for *lr Fleet ■heich"
and a nodical officer of the Luftwaffe, also conducted
typhus experiments on lnnntes of the Nattwcller Concentra¬
tion Comp. (Schnldt, R. 1368, et scq.). These cx .rlmcnto
wero carried out for the Luftwaffe and the Reich Research
Council. (MO-129, Pros. Ex. 308, R. 1403; MO-137, Pros.


13


K08';OCK


Ex. 189, R. 737). Rostock admitted that the Office for
Sclenco and Research received a copy of Kaagen's report
to the Reich Research Council early In 1944. (Restock,

R. 3311, 3367; NO-138, Pros. Ex. 300, R. 1390). This
report expressly stated that, "Inc antl-lnfectlous effect
of dried vaccine will he further ox. erlmontod on human
beings". The typhus research of Haagon was classified
■urgent" at a meeting of the Office for Science and Re¬
search In august 1944 called by Rostock and attended by
members of the Reich Research Council and the ./ehrnacht.
<110-693, Pros. Ex. 457, R. 3406; Rostock, n. 3409). Brandt
wns a .member of the Reich Research Council and chief of
Rostook (supra). See also the affidavit of Rudolf Brandt.

(MO-370, Pros. Ex. 294, R. 1385). The typhus experiments
of Hnngen are described In dotall In tho Prcscoutlon'o
brief against Roso and Schrocdcr.

C. Oas Experiments (Indictment, Par. 6 (D)).

Tho gno experiments by Kirt are described In the Pro¬
secution's brlof against Sicvcrs while those by olekenbneh
In tho brief against Karl oran.'t.

Thorc onn be no doubt that nos took had knowledge of
and onoourngod the gas ex crlncnto of Hlrt and Bcckonbach.
On 1 -inrch 1944, l.c., long after Ho6tock had taken offlco
with Brandt, hitler gave the latter broad powers In tho
field of chemical warfare. (..’0-012, Pros. Ex. 270, R.

1038). That this commission included medical research on
gas wounds can be concluded from the statement of Brandt
that his .Jurisdiction extended to harnaceutlcal roducts
to treat gas wounds. (R. 2629). This necessarily involved
n determination of the nost effective method of treatment.


- 14 -


HOST OCX


It can also he concluded from the fact that conies of the
decree which Srnndt sent to Himmler (:.'0-J12, su. ra.) were
forwarded to Grawltr and Slevers, who hnd . rcvlously work¬
ed on this problem. (N0-013n, Pros. Sx. 271, R. 1038;
N0-013b, Pros. Ex. 272, R. 1039).

Following the issuance of this decree, Srnndt received
reports about the research activities of Hlrt, both oral
(N0-015, Pros. Ex. 275, R. 1039) and written (P0-UP9, Pros.
Ex. 268, R. 1035). He was aware of the fact that ex ;crl-
nonts on humnn beings had beer, performed by Hlrt. (Srnndt,
R. 2626). Approximately 220 inmates of Russian, Polish,
Crcch, and German nationality were exp-rinented on with
gac, of v/hon about 50 died. They did not volunteer. (Holl,
R. 1052, 1057). Hlrt continued hlo gas cx erin.-nts at
Watrwcllor during the summer of 19-i*;. (Roll, R. 1058).

That Roatook know of tho ox orlnents by Klrt is pro¬
ved by the fact that In niurust IS-;*; hlo research was clas¬
sified ns "urgent* at a noctlng of tho Office for Sclonoo
and Research. (tiO-692, Free. Ex. -15?, n. 3-111). Tho con-
forenoos which gnvo rise to these classifications were
held in Rostock's office lr. occlltt. They were attendod
by representatives of tho nodical services of the ..chmacht
and tho Rolch Research Council, crour, and .robnbly Blone,
rc. resontod the Rolch Research Council and Schrolbor tho
"my. (Rontook, R. 33-13, 3384). It is difficult to nano
men hotter Informed on crlninrl cx. • risentatlon than those
three.

The phosgene gas experiments by Slckcnbaoh were per¬
sonally sponsored by Rostook's chief, the defendant Xnrl
Brandt. Bickcnbach was a professor at the University of


- 15 -


ROSTOCK


Strassbourg along with Hirt and Haagsn. (Brandt, R. 2631).
5rnndt testified that Blckcnbnch's gas experiments cane to
his attention In the fall.-'of 1943 on the occasion of a vi¬
sit to Strassbourg to see a cyclotron; that he helped him
to arrange a laboratory; that he assisted nln in obtaining
experimental animals; that ho helped him in 1944 after ho
had eatabliehod his laboratory. (Brar.dt, K. 2619-20).
Rostock admitted that he nas with Brandt when he t nlkcd _to
°-^g)?£nbach and promised nln aid. he also ndnlttcd having
talked to Bickenbaoh in Berlin on ono occasion. (Rostock,
R. 3389). Rostook denied he knew of tho .urooo of the la¬
boratory furnishod by Brandt, although ho heard tho discus¬
sion about it. (Rostock, R. 3390-1). Thus, ho goes one
stop beyond Brandt, who merely denied that he know of ex¬
periments on human beings.

In r obruary 1944, Brandt ms in l.'atswoilcr, but ho
maintained only animal ex, crinento '/ore conducted thoro by
Blokonbach. Tho oontrary is roved by tho official war
crimoc ro. ort of the Govern ;cnt of tho Motherlands. (IJO-
1063, Proo. Ex. 328, h. 1-.98, soo t.:c statements of Nnlcc
nnd Roosslngh). Josef Kroner, former Camp Commander at
Nativroller, also stated that Bickenbaoh cx crimented on
prisoners. (150-807, Pros. Ex. 185, H. 732).

The rc. orts by olckonb«ch on his ex orlaonts rove
that 40 Russian prisoners of war wore poisoned •••ith phos-
peno gas with d.cnth resulting to no less than four of tho
suMoots. (NO-1852, Pros. Ex. 456, R. 3406, sec particu¬
larly 7th report). These cx erlnents *? re performed
after August 11, 1944, which is the date of the -1th report,
nil of these reports were addressed to Brandt ns General


- 16 -


ROSTOCK


Commissioner for the Health and Medical Services nt Zlogel-
strasse 9/5, Surgical Clinic cf the University. Rostock
and Brandt had offices four doors apart In the University
Clinic. (Rostock, R. 3349). Rostock asks the Tribunal to
believe that his Jurisdiction over sclonco and research
was United to Brandt's "special tasks", of which chemical
warfare was one, but at the sane tine he denied any know¬
ledge of Blckenbach's experiments, although ho was working
for Brandt. (Rostock, R. 3354).

As in the enso of Hlrt's ex crinonts, the research
of Blckenbach on chcnlcal warfare agents was classified
"urgont" by Rostock at the mooting of the Office for
Science and Research on 26 August 1&44. (1IO-692, supra).

Rostock's contention that he received Information*for hlo
research c«rd index file fro:: other agencies Is clearly
not truo as to Blckonbach. Hlo work was being personally
supnortod by Brandt and th^ro was no othor 1-co for Roo-
tock to, get the Information oxco/t fr n his ohlof. Elok-
cnbach's work was s onsored by Brandt's office. Thrt
crandt's office chief for science and research didn't
know anything about It cannot bo believed.

D. Epidemic Jaundice (Indictment, Par. 6 (H)).

In June 1944, n conference of ex.erts was called by
Handloscr for the , ur. osc of coordinating Jaundice re¬
search. This conference took . 1-cc at -rosl.au and was
presided over by Schreiner (Gutzclt, h. 2752). Hnndloser,
Gutzelt, and Hangen, a Consulting r.y.ricnlst of the Air
Fleet Reich, wore all present at this c nfcrcncc. (Gutzclt,
H. 2717). Haa.ron admitted ’urlr.g cr se-exanlr. tlo.a that
experiments on hum-n beings were 'isoussed. That criminal


- 17 -


ROSTOCK


experiments on concentration camp Inmates were neant Is
clear from the fact that Schrelber In January 1945, per¬
sonally requested l-lrugowsky to make a>allable Inmates for
hepatitis experiments by Dr. Drosel. ( 0-1303, Pros. Ex.
467, R. 5400). Schrelber Assigned rou s of physlolons
to work together on .laundlce problems. Dolmen, Gutzeit
and Haagen were assigned to one of those grou 6. (Gutzolt,
R. 2717). On 12 Juno 1944, Harecn hlasclf requested Schrel-
ber to assign Dohnen to work with him. Gcncrnlnrzt Schrcl-
bor at that tine was commander of tho Military iiedlcal
Academy. (NO-299, Pros. Ex. IPO, T.. 7.J9). Schrelber com¬
piled with this request. (H0-300, rrojj. £x. 191, H. 740).

On 24 Juno 1944, Gutz.»lt wrote to Haagen that he was
also requesting Sohrclb r to assl.rn Dohmon to Hnngon. Ho
wont on to state that ho was making reparation for cx-
porlmonto on human bolngo and he wanted Haagen to supply
hln with his virus material. (NO-124, ?roe. Ex. 193, R.
743). .Hnagon re.Hod to Outzolt's lottcr or. June 27, 1944
stating that ho was glad that Dohacn would kc assigned to
hln as of 15 July. He further a t-tod that he was working
with Knlk, Buochntr, nnd Zuchschwert, all officers of the
Luftwaffe, on Jaundice problems and that he had arranged
with Knlk to conduct human ox. crlr.onts with his naterlnl.
(NO-125, Pros. Ex. 194, R. 7-,-..) On the sane date Haagen
wroto to his collaborator E-lk, •>:.) was attached to tho
staff of tho defendant Sohrcodcr, stating ns follows:

"In tho onclosurc I send y u n op. > of a letter fr-^.. Gut-
zclt and my re. ly. Jo must rocccd as soon as possible
with the cx.-crlncnts on human beln;6. Those experiments,
of course, should be carried cut nt 8trassburg or In Its


- 18 -


ROSTOCK


vicinity. Could you In your official position take the ne¬
cessary steps to obtain the required experimental subjects.
I don't know what sort of subjects Gutzelt has at his dis¬
posal, whether they are soldiers or other people". (KG-
126, Pros. Ex. 195, R. 745).

The remark about "other people* Is an obvious refer¬
ence to concentration camp Inmates, upon whom Hangen had
long since been experimenting with virulent typhus virus,
while the reference to "Strassburg or In Its vicinity" In¬
dicates the Concentration Cam. Hattwellor. Herr Kalk and
his Chief, tho defendant Schrocdor, were well advised on
how to procure concentration cam. Inmates for medical ex¬
periments because only n few wooka bofore Schroortcr him¬
self had requested Inmates from Himmler for the sea water
exporlmonte. (HO-185, Pros. Ex. 13-*, R. 483).

Tho rooord shows that Dafcaon did In fact go to Straos-
burg to work with Haagon on the direct orrtors of Schrolbcr.
(Qutzoit, n. 2752). Here again Rostock's Office for
Science and Research classified Haagon 1 8 epidemic Jnundico
research ns "urgent". (110-692, Pros. Ex. 457, R. 3108).

Tho Jaundice ex; crlncntc by Dohnon In tho Snehsen-
hausen Concentration Cam; were Initiated and supported by
tho defendant Karl Brandt. (Sec the Prosecution's brief
against Brandt), ./hlle the ccnscnt for these criminal ex¬
periments was given on 16 June 1943, when Rostock was not
yet chief of the Office for Science and Rescarch, the ex¬
periments wore undoubtedly 6till being studied and analy¬
zed In the fall of 1943 when Rostock had taken office under
Brandt.


- IS -


E. Other Experiments

The Prosooutlon relies rimarlly on the position of
the defendant Rostock In connection with the charge of
responsibility for the rmlr.rln, polygal, and sen water
experiments. hs Chief of the Office for Scloncc and Ro-
aoarch and a closo collaborator of Karl Brandt, ho knew
or should have known of the systematic use of concentra¬
tion camp Inmates for experimentation without tholr oon-
sont. Rob took was no Island of virtue In the sea of cri¬
minality which surrounded him.

The malaria experiments were conducted In Dachau
from Fobruary 1942 tmtll 1945 by Dr. Klaus Schilling,
formerly of tho Robert Koch Inetltutc and one of the most
famous German scientists on tro. leal n^dlclno. Over
1,000 lnnntos v/cro usod In t icec ex . rimer, ts and mnny
dlod. (Sec tho Prosocutlin'c bri?:* against Rc.sc). It lo
clear that ouch a large series of important experiments
must hr.vc boon known to Roctook.

Experiments by Ra.sohcr wore conducted In Dnohnu to
test tho blood coagulating effect of a drug called "Poly-
gal". For this purpose, a number of inmates wero shot.
(See tho Prosecution's brief against Blonc). Early In
1944, a pa. cr by Raschcr and Hnforkamp on Polygal vr.a
published in the liunloh ucdicnl Weekly. (JJO-438, Pros.

Ex. 240, R. 956; Blomo, R. 4639). This paper draws a
clear distinction between experiments on human beings to
test tho effect of Polygal and clinical testa . It states
that: "Eeforc we tried the olir.lc-1 use of tho drug and
had It probed, It was tested on human beings by thorough
experiments ns to its Influence on the period of clotting
and bleeding." Curves ncrc included to 6how the reaction
of Polygal on clotting nnd bleeding. Later on the paper


ROST OCX


dlacucsos clinical observations during o eratlons. Both
Grawltz and Pohl raised ob.lecticns to the publication of
the article because they had not been consulted and be¬
cause Dachau 3 X and human experimental subjects wore men¬
tioned. (HO-614, Pros. Ex. 245, R. 954; NO-615, Pros. Ex.
246, R. 966). Rostock admitted having read thl6 article,
which a discerning reader would have realized concerned
experiments on Inmates at Dachau. Ho also admitted having
written to the authors of the article and requosted sam¬
ples of Polygal. (Rostock, R. 3307). This Inquiry was
handled by the defondant Slovers. (3546-PS, Pros. Ex.

123, R. 975, entry for 1 June). Rostock oertalnly must
havo Informed himself of the nature and rcsulto of these
experiments.

Tho sea water experiments were conducted by tho Luft-
wnffo In Dachau In 1944. (See tho Prosecution's brief
against Schrooder). «s to Rostock's knowledge of thoeo
experiments, It is sufficient to refer to Schrooder'o
atatomont that Rostock was Informed of tho nodical ro-
noarch carried out by the Luftwaffe. (NO-449, Pros. Ex.
130, R. 471).

In addition to Rostock's participation In the experi¬
ments outlined above, ho wno Chief of tho Office for
Solonco and Research under Brandt when Brandt was person¬
ally supporting experimentation on concentration camp In¬
mates.

On 30 September 1943, Grawltz wrote to Himmler stnt-
ing that Karl Brandt had requested him to test a new oint¬
ment for the treatment of phosphorous burns. Grawltz
asked permission to test tho drug by artificially creating
burns on experimental Inmates in Sachsenhauson (Crnnlen-


21 -


ROSTOCK


burg). Testing the drug on Gcrnan civilians burned in air
raids was considered too slow. Consent for these experi¬
ments was given on 7 October 1943. (NO-1620, Pros. Ex.

449, R. 2646).

It is not without significance tnnt the experiments
during which inmates were burned with phosphorous from an
incendiary bomb were carried out in Buchenwald beginning
on 19 November 1943. (NO-265, Pros. Ex. 287, R. 1127:

Kogon, R. 1107-90). There is little doubt that the situs
of the experiments proposed by Brandt wno chnnpod fron
Saoh8enhauscn to cuchonvmld. The experimental victims
sufforod cxerutiating pain. (Kogon, supra).

Or. 4 February 1944, tho defendant Rudolf Brandt
, wroto to a member of Himmler's personal stnff in Berlin

(Baumcrt) stating that Karl crandt had nsXcd for 10 prl-
\ ooncro at Ornnlcnburg to test a certain medicine. Karl

Brandt had discussed these experiments with Ornwltz.

Tho prisoners wuro made available. (NO-1362, Pros. Ex.
448, R. 2644).

That crandt 1 s office was connected with experiments
on concentration camp inmates is further proved by the
4 report dated 31 .larch 1945 concerning experiments at tho

Ncucnganmc Concentration Camp. (110-154, Pros. Ex. 446,

V R. 2638). ./ntor docontnnin-’tlon experiments wero carried

out there on inmates. The report states that the "Third
scries of experiments was carried out with an agent of
the Lost group, the asphyxiatine gas Lost, in accordance
with tho suggestion made by Oberstarzt Dr. wlrth at the
conference on 4 December 1944 with nelchkoralssar Dr.
Brandt."

Finally, the proof shows that medical ex. crimcnts


22 -


ROSTOCK


on concentration canp innatee was carried out on such a
broad scale that it had cone to the ears of Keitel, Chief
of the High Coanand of the 'Jehrnncht. * nenorandun dated
23 February 1944, signed by Xllove of the *roy Medical
Inspectorate, shows that experinents on hunan beings were
proposed by the defendant Slone in connection with bac¬
teriological warfare. Tho nenorandun states that: “By
request of Field Marshal Keitel, the arned forces are not
to have a responsible share in the experinents since ex¬
periments will nl30 bo conducted on hunan beings." (110-
1309, Pros. Sx. 326, R. 2615). It hardly lies in the
mouth of tho dofondant Rostock to dony knowledge of ouch
experimentation vihon it was known to Keitel, whoso inter¬
ests far transcended nodical research. Tho sane document
ohowo that Brandt was assisting Blonc with tho institute
at Pooon, where tho experiments were carried out. Ros-
took admitted having attended n ncctlng with Hnndloscr
and Blono, anong others, on baotcrlologlcal warfare. (R.
3305). Sec tho Prosecution's brief on Blonc for a des¬
cription of tho bacteriological warfare experiments.

III. CONCLUSION

Rostock was one of tho responsible loaders, of German
medicine. He was tho Dc^n of the nodical faculty of the
University of Berlin. Ho was the Consulting Surgeon to t
the army nodical Ins. ector (Hnndloscr) with tho rank of
Ocnoralarzt. Ho bocano the Chief of tho Office for
Science and Research under Karl Brandt and with hin had
the responsibility of "contrally coordinating and direct¬
ing the problens and activities of tho cntlro nodical and
health service..." This applied "to the field of science


- 23 -


ROSTOCK


and research". Brandt's office was the supreme authority
In the Third Reich on nedlcal questions. Kandloser, as
chief of the military nedlcal services, and Conti, as
chief of the civilian ocdlcal services, were required to
report to Brandt and were subject to directives fron his
office. Rostock was Erandt's closest collaborator In this
work. Rostock also was a nenber of the Presidential Coun¬
cil of tho Reich Research Council n6 alternate to Brandt.

Rostock was fully informed on tho dotails of the
criminal sulfanilamide cxpcrlnonts. As chairman of the
section on surgery, and Consulting Surgeon to Handloscr,
ho arr.angoj* tho program for and presided over tho Meotlng
of tho Consulting Physicians of the /ohrnnoht In Way 19-13
at which Gcbhnrdt and Fischer roportod on their criminal
experiments. Gcbhnrdt and Grawltz both negotiated with
Rostock beforo tho mooting concerning the lcoturc to bo
9 given. Gobhnrdt Informed Rostock and Brandt about tho

experiments. Gcbhnrdt and Fischer explained tho experi¬
ments In detail at the mooting, although Rostook denied
this on the stand. It was even reported that threo human
belngo wero killed as a result of tho artificially induced
Infection. Not by ono word or doed did nostock uso his
^ powor and influcnco to Intervene In this matter. His con¬

duct Is only consistent with knowlcd^o and approval of a
l policy to use concentration camp Inmates systematically :

for criminal experimentation. Further experiments of a
similar nature wore performed under the direction of
Gebhardt after this report.

At the very same meeting, Ding delivered a lecture
on murderous typhus experiments In Buchenwald to the sec-


- 24 -


ROSTOCK


tlon on hygiene which was presided over by Rostock's col¬
league Schrelber. It is inconceivable that Gebhardt,
Fischer, and Ding: should bo so openly reporting at the
sane meeting on their criminal experiments absent an ac¬
cepted Nazi policy approving of such practices. Holz-
lochner had reported at the previous mooting of Consulting
Physicians on his freezing experiments with Raschcr, The
o n me experiments wore dealt with at a largo meeting in
Nurnberg in October 1942 which was attondod by Schrelber
as woll as other Army nodical offlc. ro. Rostock's con¬
tention that ho never heard of thi6 criminal policy of
experimenting on helpless and unwilling human subjects,
that ho never hoard r. whisper about Ding's looturo and
the objections raised to it, that Oobhardt and Fischer
, said nothing to arouse his suspicions,- such testimony

cannot bo believed.

* Kootock doooivod a report on Hangen's typhus experi¬

ments, ho was n member of tho Reich Research Council which
supportod him together with tho Luftwaffe, and Rostock's
Offlco for Sclonce and Research, clno6lflod his research
on typhus as ur.rcnt. Han, on's opldomlo Jaundlco research,
which was . l.anncd for experiments on human beings, was
) also olaool flo d urgent.

Brandt's offico was actively supporting tho gas ex-
^ porlnents by Hirt and Eickcnbr.ch long after Rostock was

activo there. The criminal research of both of these men
was classified as urgent by tho Office for Scienco and Re¬
search. Rostock was with Brandt in Strnssbourg in 1943
when Brandt ; romised Slckcnbach the facilities to carry
out his hosgone experiments on human beings. Rostock


- 25 -


ROSTOCK


aaw Blckenbach In Berlin on at least one other occasion.

His experiments in the fall of 1944 brought death to four
Russian prisoners of war. The reports on these experi¬
ments were sent to Brandt's office In the University Cli¬
nic four doors removed frca Rostock's office In the sane
building. If the Chief of the Office for Scicr.co and Re¬
search was not dealing with theeo natters, then It is im¬
possible to lnaglno who was. Brandt said he knew nothing
about medical experimentation In general and Elckcnbaoh' s >
experiments on human beings In particular.

Brandt was also supporting other experiments on human
beings during Rostock's tenure with him. These Included
experiments to test a new ointment on artificially lnduoed
•i phosphorus burns and decontamination experiments with water

polooncd by nuotard gas.

< Tho Prosecution subnlts that the evidence proves that

Rostock wno ;o principal In, accessory to, ordorod, abottod,
took a consenting part In, was conncotod with plans and
ontorpriocs Involving, and woe a member of n .-roup or
organisation (Brandt's office and the Reich hosearoh Coun-
oll) conncctod with medical experimentation on hunnn eub-
.loots without their consent, In the courso of which ex¬
periments murders, brutnlltloo, cruelties, tortures, nt-
•*' rocltlcs, and other lnhunrne acts were connlttod, and that

his guilt has boon established under Counts I, II, and III


of tho Indlctnont.


THI3DKAL NO I
Case No. 1


CLOSING BRIE? FOR
THE UNITED STATES OF

«a.irer

KONRAD oCRnSFBR


ttlrnberg,

16 Juno 1947


Jaaos 1’.. UoHanoy
Alexander G, Hardy
Arnost Horllk-Hochwald
Esther Jane Johnson

For:


Telford Taylor
>. Brigadier General, U.S.A.
£>Chief of Counsel for Vfer Criaes


INtf.ttJUCTIOK


5 •


It le alleged under Count One of the Indictment
that the defendant Schaofcr conspired and agreed with
others, pursuant to a common design, to perform medical
experiments on Involuntary human subjects; under Counts
Iwo and Three (War Crimes und Crimes against Humanity,
respectively) that he was a principal In, accessory to,
ordered, abetted, took a consenting part in, and was
connected with plans and enterprises Involving modlcal
experimentation on Involuntary human subjects.

The defondant Schaefer Is charged with special
responsibility for and participation In the sea water
experiments, as sot forth In Paragraph 6 (G) of the
Indictment.


♦


Tho defendant Schaefer was an employee of the
Sobering Works, and worked in the laboratories of this
firm, his special field of research w^s chemical thera¬
py, (Sonaefor, R. 8549). he Joined the Luftwaffe In
1941, but after having received basic training, returned
to the Schering Works and worked there In the capacity
of assistant to the chief of the laboratory. In 1944 he
became director of this deportment. (Schaefer, R. 8550).
As ho was a research worker, the Luftwaffe used hie abi¬
lities, and ho was attached In 1942 to the Medical Ex¬
perimental and Instruction Division (Sanltaets/Versucho-
Und Lehrabteilung) in Jueterbcg, one of the departments
of the Research Institute for Aviation Medicine In Ber¬
lin. (Schaefer, R. 8551). he, however, retained his
position with the Schering Works. (Schaefer, Ex. 14. R.


- 1 -


8355). It wa6 in nls capacity as member of tho Medical
Experimental and Instruction Division which brought
Schaefer into contact with criminal experimentation on
concentration camp inmates.

On 26 and 27 October 1942, Schaefer attended the
freezing conference in Xurnberg where Holzloehner and
Rascher delivered their lecture on the freezing experi¬
ments in the Dachau Concentration Camp. (Schaefer, R.
8361, see Prosecution's brief against the defendant
Slevors). He also delivered a locture there on thirst
and measures to conbat it in sea distress. (Schaefer,

R. 8359, 8362). Schaefer denied that he heard Holz-
loehner and Rascher epeuk, but this is quite improbable
since Schaefer's talk came on tho day following the
holzloehner and Rascher reports. (N0-401, Pros. Ex.

93, R. 309, see address by Anthony). Moreover, Holz¬
loehner was also attached to tho medical Experimental
and Instruction Division. (N0-401, supra). Tho lecturo
of holzloehner and Rascher creatod something of a son-
satlon as it was made clear that concentration camp in¬
mates hud been used for tne experiments, which formed
tho basis of the lecture, and that sene of the experi¬
mental subjects died. (Lutz, h. 272). It is certain
that Schaefer, who was present ut the meeting, not in
tho capacity of u disinterested llst»awr, Out as one of
tho scientists who lectured on a rolatod subject, knew
of this sensational report.

In early summer of 1944 Schaefer participated in
the planning of the criminal sea wat er e xperiments ,
i’hese experiments were conducted on Inmates of the Dachau
Concentration Canp and was a criminal undertaking from
its very inception in Jay 1944. After two and one-half


years of nurderoue sedical experlnentatlcn on concentra¬
tion canp lnnates by doctors of the Luftwaffe Including
the high altitude, freezing, gas, and typhus experiments
at buchenwald and JJatzweller, the defendant Schroeder,
with certain knowledge that some of the subjects would
probably die, personally ordered the carrying out of the
soa water exporlnent6. His subordinates, Bocker-Freyseng,
Belglboock, and Schaefer participated in tho planning and
execution of then, anong others.

On 19 May 1944 a conference was hold at the Gorman
Air Ministry (RLU) which was attended by Christenson,
Schlckler, Becker-Freyseng, and Schaefer, anong others.
bocker-Froyoeng and Schaefor represented tho Chief of
tho Medical Servlco of tho Luftwaffe. This conference
wn6 concerned with the problem of the potability of sea
water. Two nethods of naklng soa water drinkable were
then available to the nodical services of tho Luftwaffe.
One, which had boon developed by dchnofor and boro tho
nano Vfofatlt, had been ohenlcally tested and apparently
produced potaolo seawator. It had tho disadvantage, how¬
ever, of requiring substantial quantities of silver which
wus available only in United quantities. The second
nothod, so-called Berkatlt, was a substance which changed
tho tasto of 8on water but did not remove the salt. It
had the advantage of simplicity of manufacture and use.

At tho conference on 19 .iay, tho defendant Becter-
Freysong reported on certuin clinical experiments which
had boon conducted by von Slrany to test Berkatlt. ho
came to the conclusion that the experiments had not boon
conducted under realistic enough conditions of sen dis¬
tress. ne reported that the Chief of the medical Ser¬
vice of the Luftwaffe was:


- 3 -


"convinced that, If the serka method Is
used, damage to health has to be expect¬
ed not later than 6 day6 after taking
berkatlt, which damage will result in
permanent injuries to health and - ac¬
cording to the opinion of Unterarzt Dr .

Schaefer - will finally result in death
after not later than 12 days. External
symptoms are to be expected such as de¬
hydration, diarrhea, convulsions, hal¬
lucinations, and finally death." (NO-
177, Pros. Ex. 130, R. 479).

As a result of this conference, it wa6 agreed to
conduct new experiments. They were to include a sorlos
of experiments for a naxlnun of six days during vrhlch one
group of subjects was to be glvon sea water processed
with Borkatit, another group ordinary drinking water,
another group without drinking water at all, and tho fi¬
nal group such water us was available in the onorgoncy
ooa distress kits then used. A second series of experi¬
ments wog decided upon and the report stated:

"Persons nourished with sea water and
berkatlt, and as diet also tho emergency
sea rations.

P,U r PP 1 PP. .? 9 *P?>r A°PP P g : lg-dnvs

Since in tho opinion of the Chief of tho
Medical Sorvlce permanent injuries to
health, that is, tho doath of the ex¬
perimental subject has to bo expected,
as exporlmuntal 8uoJcc r s such persons
should bo used as will bo put at the
disposal by Relchsuehrer SS.■ (NO-177,

supra).

Thus, with full knowledge that tho use of berkatlt
for porlods of six days would result in permanent in¬
juries to the experimental subjects and that doath would
result so later than the 12 th day, plans were made to con¬
duct oxperinont6 of 12 days' duration. It should be
noted that the conference report does not state that tho
duration was a maximum of 12 days as in the case of tho
first series of experiments. Sinoo it was known that
volunteers could not be expected under such conditions.


4


Che conference decided cn Che use of innaCes of coneen-
CruClon camps which would be puC aC Choir disposal by
Che 3S. AC a second neetlng on 20 May 1944, Cho reporC
8taCe8 Chat "1C wa6 decided ChaC Dachov. was to be the
placo where the experiments were (to be) conducted".

(NO-177, supra). Copies of the report on the conferen¬
ces were sent, among others, to the aedlcol Experimenta¬
tion and Instruction Division of the Air Force, Juete r -
bog, to which the defendant Schaefer and riolzloehner,
who conducted the freezing experiments with Raschcr,
wore attached; cho D.V.L., Berlin-Adierehof , to which
the defendanto Ruff /ind Banborg were attached; to the
Hedlcal Inspectorate of the Luftwaffe (L.In.14); and
the Relchcfuohrer SS. The report woe signed by Christ¬
enson of the iuchnlCAl Office of the R.L.H.

The minutes of the conference (NO-177, supra),
show cloarly that Schaofer was well aware that the plan¬
ned soa water experiments would result In death If con¬
ducted for a period of 12 days. Novurtnoless it was
decided to conduct experiments for such a period. Tho
experimental pl<m was altored to Include experiments
with dchaufer processed sea water.

Tho experiments planned and decided upon ut tho
mooting on 19 und 20 any 1944 were curried out by the
dofondant belglbocck with the assistance of tho defen¬
dants Schroodor, Sicvers, Booker-Freysong und others In
tho Dachau Concentration Comp during August and tho
first half of September 1944. Forty-four experimental
subjects, all gypsies, were used.

The charts kept by tho dofendant Belglbocck on
each of th • experimental subjects, which the defense was
finally forced to submit Into evidence, give 6ome of the

- 5 -


derails as to the experiments. (Belglboeck Ex. 34, R.
9381). Experimental subjects were given either sea

0

water processed according to tho Schaefer nothod (Schae¬
fer water - Vofatlt) or oerkatlt or plain sea water,
consisting of 500 or 1000 cc. per day. The duration
of the experimenta varied between 5 and 12 days, and
the experimental subjects were exposed to hungor up to
8$ days. (For details, see the Prosecution's brief
against belglboock). The experimental subjects did not
volunteer. (Vorllcek, R. 9398, 9392; Laublngor, R.

10200-1; Hoollcnroinor, R. 10509). The majority of
the experimental subjoots wore allied nationals, such
as Czechs, Poles and Russians. (Laublnger, R. 10208;
Hoollonrelnor, R. 10513; Vorllcek, R. 9388).

Tho testimony of the Prosecution witnesses proves
that the sea water experiments resulted In murdor and
torturo. Tho experimental subjects becamo very *11 and
gave tho impression of being unable to llvo much longor.

(Vorllcek, R. 9390). A nunbor of subjects suffered attacks
of dollrlum. Two of them wore transferred to the camp
hospital and their fellow inmates did not see thorn ogain.
(Laublnger, R. 10209). No pity or concern was shown by
tho defendant bolglboeok when the experimental subjects
become delirious from thirst <tnd hunger. (Hoellcnrclnor,

R. 10510). Tholr physical condition deteriorated con¬
siderably ns a result of the experiments. One of the
subjects had an attack of madness. (Tschofonlg, R.

9336). At the conclusion of the experiments three of the
subjects wore brought to the station for Internal diseases.
One of them died as n result of tho experiments (Tscho¬
fonlg, R. 9338-9).

the testimony of these witnesses Is corroborated by


- 6 -


the findings of the expert witness for the Prosecution.
Dr. Ivy stated that if 1000 cc. of soa water of Berka-
tlt were taken per day, it would cause death in le68
than 12 days. Death would occur betwoon the 8th and
14th day if 500 cc. were consuaed per .ay under ideal
conditions. (R. 9045). In this connection it oust be
borne in mind that the oxporinor.t6 were carried out
during the hot suanor nonths, n fact which oortnlnly
lnoroasod the dohydratlon caused by the consumption of
son water and Berkatlt.

As a result of his study of the clinical records
(bolglboeck Ex. 34, supra). Dr. Ivy testified that a nun-
bor of the oxporlaontal subjects wero ill during tho ox-
perlnonts. Ho exproosly stated that there was a possibi¬
lity that three of tho noat seriously ill subjocts da;*
have been permanently injured or died as a result of tho
experiments. (R. 9058-9). (Sec tho brlof against Beigl-
boeok for dotnils). Fron tho tootlcon: of Dr. Ivy it is
furthor proved that it was entirely urnocossary to con¬
duct experiments for 12 days as planned in tho conforonoeo
of 19 and 20 hay 19*14. (NO-177, supra). Experiments of
3 or 4 days duration would havo boon sufficient to show
that ocrkatlt was Just ns dehydrating n6 son water. (R.
9046). Dr. Ivy stated that experiments for a longer per¬
iod made sense only if it wus intended to doterslno tho
survival time of human beings on 500 or 1000 cc. of son
water per day. It is clear that the experim ental plan an¬
ticipated deaths. (R. 9046-7).

For a detailed description of the execution and
criminal nature of the seawater experiments, reference
should be tado to tho Prosecution brlofo against tho de¬
fendants Schroeder and Bolglboeck.


CONCLUSION


Sohaofer was an expert and spec la Hot on hunger and
thirst problems and had carried out experiments in this
field himself. (Schaefer 2 x. 20 - 21, h. 8370; Schaefer,

R. 0371). He fcnow that Berfca and Slrar.y, whoso methods
he ms charged with testing, wero charlatans. (Schaefer,

R. 8383; soc also ^chaofor £x. 29-30, R. 8383-4). Ho was
convinced that BcrXatlt "was entirely Ineffective, and that
this was so obvious that there was no point in experimenting
with It". Ho professed that he was the cost radical opponont
of the Borka method and was, therefore, prevented by the
chairman of tho meeting on the 20 liny 1944, from expressing
his negative opinion. Ho was ever, threatened that his
behaviour would bo oon6ldorcd as an act of sabotage.

(Schaofor, R . 6588). Ho stated that ho had no interest what¬
soever In experimento with "ofatlt being carrlnl out on human
bolngs, as ho had nothin-; to do with th’a preparation. It
would have boon a ridiculous -ambition on his part t* provo
how good tfofatlt, and how bad Bcrfcatlt wero. (Schaofor, R.
8389).

Tho proof however has shown that these assertions on
tho part of Schaofor deserve no merit and constitute no
dofonso. If Schaefer's dofenso wor true ho certainly would
not have attended the 2nd meeting of tho conference which tool:
piaco one day after ho allegedly had voiced his strenuous
ojboctlono. (Schaofor, R. 8539). He oven attendod a third
mooting on 25 Lay. Schaefer tried to explain this Inconsis¬
tency by hlo low grade In tho Luftwaffe, but it Is clear
that ho attended tho two conferences on 19 and 20 Hay as an
expert representative of tho Luftwaffe nr.d that hlo rank could
not have been doolslvc. If it was really true that he ob¬
jected as strongly as ho now wants to Imply, his participation

in the conferences on 20 and 25 May would never have been

- 8 -


requested by hla superiors. Schaefer, however, admitted his
Dreacncc In those two conferences. (R. 8392, 8541). More¬
over, ho was unable to give on explanation of the fact that
the experiments with Schaefer water were included In the
experimental plan. (Schaofor, R. S54l). That this could
not havo been dccldod upon without the advlco and pnrtlclpa-
tlon of the export -Tho developed this method Is ot.'lous.

From tho minutes of the conference of 19 May 1944 (NO-177
supra), It Is apparent that it was air. ady decided on that
day to carry out experiments with seawater and Bcrhatlt for
tho duration of 12 days. In the same confcronco Schaofor had
volood his opinion that after 12 days *oath would occur, if
seawater and Bcrkntlt wore usod. (Schaefer, R. 8534). Thus,
It Is proved that Sohaofer at tho lat st on tho 19 May was
fully aware that tho execution of tho sea wster experiments
would necessarily bo criminal. It is, norcovor, apparent
from hlo tostlnony that ho acted In this conference and In
tho subsequent confcronco by no uo ns as a non-commissioned
mcd.lcal officer, but ao tho expert for the Luftwaffe. This
is proved by tho fact that ho was ablo to continue hlo acti¬
vities In the Schcrlng *orkc ovon after having boon draftod
into tho -uftwafro, by his assignment to tho Medloal
Exporlocncation and Instruction Division, and by the fact
that he was In the position to contact the defendant Bockcr-
Froysong by telephone on the subject of the experiments, tho
latter boing at that tine research adviser to tho defendant
Schroodor. (Schaofor, R. 8389).

Schaofor never disassociated hlnsclf from the experi¬
ments. Ho attended tho confcronco In October 1944 where
Bolglboock reported on the rosults. (NO-474, Pros. Ex. 131,

R. 474). Schaefer admitted having be n Dresent at this con¬
ference. (R 8580). The fact that Schaefer was requested to

- 9 -


Attend this conference Is conclusive proof thnt ho ms
collntorating in the experiments and was fully lnforncd
About their plan And cxocutlon. His prosenco would hAVc bocn
unnecessary And even unwonted hAd he bocn considered as An
opDonent of the experiments, as he no- wonts the Tribunal
to believe. Schaefer's pre-trial AffldAvlt tovcaIb In con¬
nection '»lth this meeting thAt he knew thAt the experiments
In the Dachau Concontrotlon Cnnp hAd bocn carried cut "during
the period of 7 - 12 dnya". Dr. Bclglboock Also reported
thnt tho experiments hnd resulted In swelling of tho liver
And nervous symptoms. Delirium And mental disturbances Also
npnonrod. (NO-474, supra). In tho miner which bocAno cus¬
tomary during tho trial, SchAofer tried to cxplAln away
cortAln pAssAgos of this r.ffidnvlt which lnpllcAto him or
hlo co-defend Ants. Ho hAd to Admit, however, thAt ho more
to nnd signed this Affldnvlt without duress, and thnt ho
himself nndo a numbor of corrections In the text before
signing It. (SchAcfor, R. 8560).

The fnct thnt ooAWAtor processed by tho SchAofer method
Is hArmlcso nnd did not inpn.ir tho hoalth of the xporlnontal
oubjocts constitutes no defense for ®chaofcr, no ^o gcncrAl
experimental plan wao known to hln to be criminal, and iho
oxocutlon of the experiments rcaultod In doath and torture,
of tho cxpcrlmontAl subjects. That ho :.nd no confidence In
BcrkAtlt Is Also quit o beside tho point. He wilfully suppor¬
ted criminal oxpcrlmonts In an effort to prove thnt his pro¬
cess «tns tho better of tho two.

Tho Prosecution subnltc thnt tho evidence proves thnt
Schnofcr was a principal In, ncco6aory to, ordored, abetted,
took a consenting part in, was connected with plans and enter¬
prises involving, and ms a member of a group or organisation
connected r.lth nodical experimentatlon on human subjects with¬
out their concent, In the course of which experiments, murders,

- 10 -


brutalities, cruelties, torturos, atrocities, ant* other
Inhumane acts were committed, and that his guilt has been
established under Counts I, II, and III of the Indlctmont.


i


I


- 11


LJL'JO TOR


rluij OL*'G.J.'G RCLB-JiG


li-OuG ..UGUoT wLL?


Ja_-^a II. UeSonoy
Aloxandor G. K rt'.y
«rnoet Korlil:-:;oc:i\;olC
Author Jano Johnson

?or:

TclTnrd T ylor

BrisaGior General, U.3.—

Chiof of Counsel Tor ar Crimea


Nurnborc,

16 Juno IS47


INTRODUCTION


It is alleged, In essence, under Count I of the
Indlctnent, that the defendants conspired and agreed with
others, pursuant to a common design, to perforn net?leal
experlnenta on Involuntary hunan subjects; under Counts
II and III (ffar Crimes and Crlnes against Hunanlty,
respectively), that they were principals in, accessories
to, ordered, abetted, took a consenting part In, nnd woro
connected with plans and enterprises involving nedlcel
experimentation on involuntary human sub .loots.

The defendant Vfeltz Is particularly charged with
special responsibility for, and participation In, the
high altitude experiments, as set forth In Paragraph 6(A)
of the Indlctnent, and the freezing experiments, set forth
In Paragraph 6 (B).

The defendants Ruff.and Ronberg are particularly
chargod with special responsibility for, and participation
In, the high altitude experiments, as oot forth In
paragraph 6 (A) of the Indlotncnt.

I. POSITIONS OF RESPONSIBILITY

OSORO AUGUST .7ELTZ

Tho defendant v/oltz was, for many years, a specialist
In X-ray work. (Veits, R. 7038). In tho year 1935, he
rocolvod a leoturo assignment In the field of aviation
medicine at the University of Munich and, at the same tine,
Instituted a small experimental deportment at tho Physiology
Institute at the University of .lunlch. (*eltz, R. 7040).

Tho defendant locturod at tho Univorslty of ..unloh until
1945 nnd, at the same time, did research work In the
Institute. (NO-677, Pres. Ex. 17, R. 113).

In 1937, defendant Veltz Joined the NS DAP. (tfeltz,

R. 7158). Ho also held membership In the National
.Socialistic Physicians Association and the National
Socialistic Lecturers Association. (tfeltz, R. 7158). In


J


August 1939, he entered the Luftwaffe with the rank of
Stabsartt (Captain) and at the end of the war, he held the
rank of Oberfeldarzt (Lt. Col). (Welti, R. 7159). After
entry Into the Luftwaffe In August 1939, the defendant
operated the Pilots' Examination Post In Heublborg and
headed Test Station Wo. 4 (Bodenstaendlge Pruefetelle IV)
for high altitude research at tfunlch (R. 7042).

In the sunner of 1941, the need for further research
In high altitude became apparent as the air war was
Intensified. Therefore, Welti's division at the
Physiological Institute at Munich University was taken

■» over by the Luftwaffe and renaaed the "Institute for

Aviation Uedlolne In Uunlch" (NO-677, Pros. Ex. 17, R. 113 ).
Welti was commissioned the director of this Institute by
Oonoraloberctaboarit Erich Hlppko, Chlof of tho Sodioal
Inspectorate of the Luftwaffo, and was given tho authority
to onlargo tho Institute to a considerable degrco. (Wcltt,

R. 7044, R. 7152). The floid of rosearoh at tho Institute
lr.oludod physical roactlono of tho pilot at high altltudoo,
reciprocity of respirations, and circulation, cooling,
oollapso, and rovlval of the pilot. (R. 114, Welts, R. 7045).

* In hlo oapacity 06 Director of tho Inotltuto for
Aviation ilodlclne In Munich, Welti was subordinated to

* Luftgau 47 In Munich for disciplinary purposes, but for
scientific matters, he was subordinated directly to Anthony,
Chief of the Department for Aviation Mcdlolne In tho

Offloe of the Nodical In6poctorato of tho Luftwaffe, under
Hlppke. (Volts, R. 7159). It Is noted that tho dofondnnt
Becker-Freysong was assistant consultant under Anthony
in the Department for Aviation Medlolno, from 1941 until
early In 1944 when he succeeded Anthony as ohief of tho
department. (K0-6S9 7 Pros. Ex. 16, R. 110).


- 2 -


SIEGFRIED RUFF


The defendant Ruff specialized In the field of aviation
medicine fron the completion of his nedlcai education at
the Universities of Berlin and conn In 1932 (Ruff, R. 64 < *0).

In the oarly stages his work was mainly concerned with
ascertaining whether the cllnetic conditions that ore not
at high altitudes could he used. In any way, for
therapeutic purposes. In January 1934, the defendant was
r.e3lgncd to the German Experlsontal Institute for Aviation
(Doutsche Versuohsanstalt fuor Luftfahrt), In order to
establish a Departnont for Aviation Hodlolno. (R. 6491,

R. 114). Ruff Joined the N8DAP In 1938 and hold a roservo
commission as a Lloutonnnt In the Luftwaffe. (Ruff, R. 6493).

The Deutoohe Vcrsuchsantotalt fucr Luftfahrt, herein¬
after reforrod to as the "DVL", was a registered association
foundod by prlvato and govcrnnontnl sourooo, In ordor to
conduct research Into the scientific basis for aviation.

(Ruff, R. 6491). The association consisted of nnny
inotltutos whore tho rocoarch was oarrlod out. The DVL
rooolvod Instructions fron tho Luftnnffo, and Ruff's
lnstltuto In particular was subordinated to tho *odlonl
Inspootorato of tho Luftwaffe. Ruff rccolvod ordore
oonoornlng todhnical or oodloal nnttoro fron tho Modloal
Inspectorate and h«d to report to that office. (Ruff,

R. 6493). The dofondnnt Ruff remained In his position no
Chlof of tho lnstltuto for Aviation Uodlclne In tho DVL
until tho end of the war. 0.0-638, Pros. Ex. 18, R. 114).

The dofondant Ruff's work at tho Institute ™as
dlvldod Into three spheres: 1) Air nccldont eolonoe,.

2) Spood In air flight, 3) High altitude resenroh. Ruff's
chief assistant In tho Institute was the defendant Ronborg.


- 3 -


HAMS WOLFGANG R0K5ERS

Tho defendant Romberg was active In the sphere of
aviation medicine since 1937. During the year 1937 ho
served in the Luftwaffe fer n period of two months and in
January 1938 iolned the staff of tho DYL in Serlin as an
assistant to tho defendant Ruff in the Institute for
Aviation hodlclno. Romberg Joined tho NSDAP in 1933.

(R. 6765, MO-588, Pros. Ex. 19, R. 115).

The dofendant Romborg was employed as a solontific
oo-uorkor with tho defendant Ruff and his special assign¬
ment was the theoretical aid practical evaluation of air

- accldonto. In addition thoroto, Romberg worked in air

medical research questions. (Ronborg, R. 6765). Aftor

* tho DVL, in tho yonr 1939, rocelvod n low-pressure chamber
the defondant conoontrated his offort in tho fiold of
high nltltudo research to improve high altltudo firmness
with pharmacological moans, tho effectiveness of porvltln,
investigation of pnrnchuto desoent from high altitudes,
explosive dcoonprosslon, and many slmllnr mattors.

(Romborg, R. 6767).

Tho defondnnto tfcltz, Ruff, and Romberg used tho
forogolng positions and their oxporlcnoo in tho fiold of
aviation ncdlclno in a manner which involved tho oonnlsclon

* of War Crimes and Crlnos against Humanity as chnrgod In the
Indictment.

*

II. PERSONAL PARTICIPATION OF THE DEFENDANTS IN CRIMINAL

EXPEftIii£MT8 .

The proof has shown that the defendants with Wolts,
Ruff nnd Romborg, participated in tho planning and
oxcoutlon of the criminal high altltudo experiments on
innrtos of the Daohau Concentration Camp. It has been
further shown that the dofondant Woltr participated in «nd
T/r.s oonnooted with plans and enterprises involving tho
freezing experiments at the Dachau Concentration Camp.


- 4 -


A. HIGH ALTITUDE EXPERIMENTS

Snrly In the car It -ns deemed necessary to conauot


research In tho field of high altitudes boenuso of tho

higher ceilings reached by tho Allied fighter planes.

This orcatod n prohlon of availability of hunnn experimental

subjects, lnnsmuoh ns animal experimentation was considered

Inadequate. Tho heights Involved cere 12,000 notors to

better than 20,000 notors, hence It goes without saying

that such oxperlaont8 v/erc very dangerous and, as Indicated

by tho evidence, wolunteors wore not to be h"d. This

difficulty '.7a8 ovorcono by tho uso of concentration onnp

Innates without their consent. The first indication of

this criminal plan appears In n lottor fron Dr. Slgnund

Raschcr, a Luftwnffo piiyslolan, In a lottor to tho Rolohs-

fuohror SS dated 15 Hay 1941:

■For tho tlno bolng, I hnvo boon aoslgncd
to the Luftgau Koannndo VII, Munich, for a
i.cdloal solootlon course. During this
course, chore research on high altitude
flying plays n pronlnont part - dotomlnod
by tho eonowhnt higher colling of tho
English Fighter planes - consldernblo regrot
•7"S exprossod that no experiments on hura^n
beings have so far boon possible for us
because ouch oxpcrlncnts arc very dangerous,
and nobodv lo volunteering . I thoroforo
put the serious question: Is there any
possibility that two or threo professional
criminals can bo n«do availablo for thoso
cxporlnonto?" (1602-PS, Ex. 44, R. 167,
onphaolo supplied).

It further appoars In this Raschcr letter of 15 Kny
1941 that Raschcr had conferred with another Luftwaffe
physician and that a tentative ngroonent had boon roachcd
wherein It was dcternlnod that tho exporlnonts on tho
concentration canp lnr.'tos, in ohloh tho experimental
oubjocts core expected to dlo, would be performed at the
"Bedonstandige Prufstelle fuer Hochenforschung der
Luftwaffe" at Munich:


"The experiments ore being performed nt
the "Bodenstandlgc Prufs telle fucr
Hoehonforechung der Luftwaffe" at uunlch.

The experiments, In whloh the experimental
subject of course may die, would take place
with my collaboration. They arc- absolutely
essential for the rosonrch on high altltudo
flying and cannot, ns It has been tried
until now, be carried out on monkeys, because
monkeys offer ontlrcly different test
conditions. I had an absolutely confidential
talk with the representative of the Luftwaffe
physician who le conducting these experiments.

Kc Is also of the opinion that the problems
in question can only be solved by experiments
on human beings." (1602-PS, Ex. 44, R. 167).

Rnschor "/as taking a medical solcctlon course in Munich
at Luftgau VII whore threo Important looturcs concerning
rosoarch on high altitudes wore given by tho defendant
Volts, Buochnor, and Kottonhoff. (Volts, R. 704S). In
ordor to appreciate tho significance of these looturcs
and tho connootlon botwoon Rasohor, Volts, Kottonhoff,
and tho oxporlnents at Dachau It Is necessary to oonoldor
tho rolatlvo positions of Kottonhoff and the defendant
Veits to Rasohor, tho author of the lottor to Himmler.

Kottonhoff was an Obcrfeldarst with Luftgau ft 7.

Ho had worked with Holts from 1938 to 1939 and had
rocclved hlo specialist training at tho Physiologic"!
Inotltuto nt Munich. Kottonhoff qualified as a lcoturcr
at Volts's Inotltuto and conduotod exporinents on monkeys
in his department. (Volts, R. 7048). Volts testified
that Rrochcr approached Kottonhoff after tho completion
of the looturcs on high altltudo research and suggostod
that high altltudo experiments be oarrlod out at Dachau.

(R. 7047). This suggestion nado by Rrochcr was obviously
the direct result of tho effect made on him by tho lectures
ho had hoard. Rasohor, realising the dangers Involved In
these experiments, know that further research was next to
impossible duo to tho Inability to obtain voluntary
human experimental subjects ard, after discussing the natter
with Holts and Kottonhoff, sent the letter to Himmler.

- 6 -


Rascher was ablo to make the necessary contact with
hionlor because he, and especially his wife, knew Hlnnlor
personally. Moreover, Rascher was a nonber of the
Allgomcine SS. 3ut It should be kept In nlnd thet
throughout the course of both the high altitude and
creezlng expcrlacnto (at loa6t until May 1943), Rrsohor
was an officer In the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe
"nd on active duty with tho Luftwaffe. Thousands of non
wore Bombers of tho SS while actually serving with other
branches of tho Jchrnncht. Such, for oxaaplo, was tho
caso with the dofonse witness Outzolt. It Is a basic
mlsconcoptlon, nuoh fostered by all tho Luftwaffe
dofond*»nte, that the high altitude and freezing oxperinonts
wore noroly SS orlnoc. Kothlnp could bo furthor from the
truth. Thoy nro casontlnlly no dlfforont from tho sea
wator oxperinonts. Rasohcr wao subordinated to '.Tcltz at
lonst until May 1942 and remained on actlvo duty with
tho Luftwaffo at least until May 1943.

V7o must noto tho remark in tho Rasohor lot ter ro
tho 'Bodonotandlgo Prufotcllo fuor Hoohcnferschung dor
Luftwaffe* at Munich. This was tho name of tho lnstltuto
In Munich hoadod by the defendant Jcllz U’oltz, R. 7050),
whore ho was conoorncd mainly with the physical endurance
and reactions of pilots at high altltudos. Vcltz stated

that he was not In a position to give tho permission to
porforra theso oxporlncnts at his lnstltuto inasmuch no tho
nooossary ordors for such experimentation had to orlglnnto
with tho Luftwaffe Medical Inspectorate. (R. 7050, R. 7178).
This of courao, while bearing out the proscoutlon's
contention that all matters of this sort were always brought
homo to the Medio-*! Inspectorate, docs not rollovo '.Toltz
from responsibility boeauso, as ro shall later see, ho
planned r nd arranged tho execution of the experinonts


- 7 -


himself as well ns obtained the research assignment fron
the Luftwaffe Medical Inspectorate. Klnaler gave his
approval to the use of inmates for the proposed experiments
shortly after receipt of Rascher's letter. (1582-PS,

Pros. Ex. 45, R. 169).

It is interesting to note the affidavit of Xottonhoff,
introduced by tho defendant Volts, (Volts Ex. 4, R* 7052)
substantiates Rnschor'e letter to Himmler to the effect
that further oxperlnonts on hunan beings wore considered
necessary. Of course, Kottcnhoff states Raschcr's
proposals lnncdiatcly created a feeling of nlsgiving
within hin, but rcgardloss of that ho lntor took tho
natter up with Voltz. nt this early dato it must bo
considered that Raschor, Voltz and Xottonhoff wore all
monboro of the Luftwaffe and that Volts was tho oupcrlor
of tho othor two. Ho took no notion to halt this
proposal to cxporlnont on concentration oanp lnnntcs but
to tho oontrary, ho supported his subordinate Rancher
in tho orlninnl plan and obtained tho collaboration of
Ruff and Ronborg as well as tho rcscaroh aoolgnncnt fron
tho Department of Aviation Nedlolno undor Anthony «nd
Bcokcr-Froyscng.

Wolts testified that a ncotlng took pl«oo in tho
sunmar of 1941 on tho occasion of a visit by Ocnoral
Oborstnbsarzt Hlppko to Luftgru *7. (R. 7056). In a

discussion between Vcltz, Kottcnhoff and Hlppke, Hlppkc
gave his bnolc approval to the oxporicants if they woro
doomed necessary. (R. 7065). In the coureo of the
oummor of 1941, Raschcr wont to Vcltz and proposod tho
slow ascent experiments, but Voltz turned it down as
unnecessary (R. 7176). This testimony of the defendant
7cItz dearly indicates the Jurisdiction Seitz had over
Raschcr's activities. This refusal to permit the
performance of clow ascent experiments bears out the


contention of the prosecution that the defendant Seitz had
the power and the authority to Intervene at any tine.

Seitz's actions throughout the entire dcvclopncr.t of tho
plans for the experiments were not merely negative. Ho
w"s In full accord with the entire enterprise and ho roallzod
that Raoohor did not possess the necessary qualifications to
conduct thcao experiments without the assistance of a
specialist In this particular field of aviation medicine. -
Furthermore, Raschcr was attached to Seitz's Institute and
was Idle. (Soltz, R. 7078, R. 7187). To find a specialist
to collaborate with Seitz and Raschor proved to ho a
difficult task. 'Soltz first approached nomhors of his
own Institute, namely Lutz and Scndt, non of considerable
roputntlon In this flold, but to no avail. Solfgang Lutz
appeared hoforo this Tribunal and testified that Soltz
requested hlo assistance, as woll as tho assistance of
Sondt, but that thoy both refused on moral grounds. (R.269).
’Soltz did not dony this, but contended that hlc quootlone
to Lutz wore puroly rhotorleal. (R. 7069).

Tho Inability to Interest a specialist In the flold
of high altitude research to collaborate with Rancher
explains tho cause for the lapse of tlno between tho
dato of tho authorization by Himmler and tho actual date
of tho commencement of tho experiments, o.g., July 1941
to February 1942. Seitz was not a specialist in high
altitude rcao'Tch, Xottcnhoff was transferred to Rumania,

"nc Raschcr was comparatively a novice In this flold.

Tho next step taken by Seitz which led to the
completion of tho plans to conduct the hi*h nitltudo
experiments on human beings at the Dachau Concentration
Cone was his Invitation to the defendants Ruff and Romberg
to collaborate with Raschcr. These two non wore experts
In this field and were interested In further research In
altitudes exceeding 12,000 meters. Seitz tostlfiod that he

- 9 -


Bfadc n trip to Berlin and that Ruff accepted hie

Invitation to collaborate with Rnsohor. (R. 7188). Tho

evidence shows that Jolts approached Ruff and Ronberg

ns he needed export assistance. (NO-437, Pros. Ex. 42,

R. 161; NO-253, Pros. Ex. 47, Ri 172; NO-191, Pros. Ex.

43, R. 163). The defendant Ruff stated thnt ho first

heard of the plan to carry out research on lnnatcs of tho

Dnchnu Concentration Canp fron the defendant Volts and

that Jolts desired collaboration between Ronhcrp and

Rnsohor and between Volts's Institute and Ruff's lnstltuto.

(R. 6653). Furthoraoro, Ruff testified thnt Volts otnted:

"It Is, of course, boat If you or Ronborp
toko part In thoso oxpcriconts boonuso
, Ronborp had already carried out ouoh

parachute dcoccnt oxnorlnonts and Is, there¬
fore, tho ann who has carried out suoh
oxperinents and knows about the whole
problon of rosouo fron hlph altitudes."

(R. 6655).

Ruff furthor testified that Volts suwpested a now
cxporlnontal sorloo of oxporlnonts In parachute dcsoonts
frors preat holphto should be oarrlod out at Dachau on
prisoners. (Ruff, R. 6653).

Fron thin nonont on, tho oxpcrincntnl propran started

to novo rs a nutual undertaking. This Is bettor stated

by tho defendant Volts:
r

"This was to bo a nutual undertaking,
durlnp whloh Ruff was to detail Ronborp
.and I was to detail Rnsohor. Ruff
, naturally was to be chief of Roaborp nnd

• I, as a nattor of course, was to bo

Rnsohor's ohlef. Ruff couldn't glvo any
ordorc to Rnsohor. Rnscher was n
Cnptnln In tho Medical Coros and Ruff
was a civilian. I oouldr.' t plvc any
ordors to Ronberp because Ronborp was a
civilian while I was n soldlor. Naturally,
this is how tho distribution was. It hnd
to bo that way. Furthermore, It was oloar
that I couldn't In any way rotlro. I
couldn't Just leave Rnsohor to Ruff. It
was quite dear that I had to participate
In those cxpcrlnonts by oxerclslnp
supervision, but not by actively participating.' 1
(Veits, R. 7C79).


- 10 -


This evidence certainly rehuts Jolts's vogue
contention that he was not In search of specialists In high
altitude research to collaborate with hie and Raschor.
Without the efforts of Welts the experiments could never
have taken place» In brief, to conduct these experiments
at altltudos cxcocdlng 12,000 netcre Volts found It
nooossary to socuro tho assistance of oxnerts In the field,
as well as a low pressure chamber which would ncct his
noedo. Ruff and Ronborg possessed both, and In tho /bovo
manner Welts skillfully engineered the whole plan.

Innodiatoly aftor Jolts had coaplotod his negotiations
with Ruff, ho oallod a nootlng at his Institute In Munich,
whoroln discussions of a technical nature concerning tho
experiments were hold. At this nootlng, £uff, Ronborg,
Rnsohor and Jolts woro In attendance. This nootlng was at
Volts's Instltuto and Volts presided over tho nootlng. It
was furthor docldod that a socond meeting was to bo hold
at Drohnu a for# days lator In order to nako the necessary
arrangements with tho canp oonnandor. This trip took plaoo
in ordor to dleouss tochnloal preparations with the canp
conmmdor and to arrange details concerning tho solcotlon
of tho oxporlnontal subjocts. Again, Jolts, Ruff, Ronborg
and Rnsohor wore In attendance, in addition to Piorkowokl,
tho canp oomandcr, and Schnltslcr of tho ot«ff of tho
Rolchsfuohrung 9S. (KO-476, Pros. Ex. 40, R. 155; 1*0-437,

Pros. Ex. 42, R. 161; NO-263, Pros. Ex. 47, R. 172;

Jolts, R. 7006-7).

After tho nrrnngcaents with the ennp authorities at
Dachau had boon ooaplotod, then the shlpnont of tho low-
prcHsuro ohnnbcr fron Berlin was tho next problon to
ovorcone. As pointed out earlier, Jolts desired tho
low-pressure chamber which was possessed by Ruff and Romberg
for use lr. tho experiments at Dachau. It la Interesting
to note that Welts had had a low-prcsauro chamber available
in his own Instltuto fron 1930 on.


(WcltS, R. 7170),


-’.nd that tfcltz testified that volunteers fron his student
body or fron the Luftwaffe wore available, (tfeltz, R. 7180-
33). Despite this, it was necessary to resort to tho
concentration ennp for lnaatea and, In order tc conduct tho
oxporlnonts, a nobllo pressure chamber had to be brought
dovm fron tho Ruff Instltuto In Berlin Innasuch ns tho
low-orcaoure chanbcr In tho 7eltz Instltuto was not nobllo.
Tho raobilo low-prossuro ohosbor fron Ruffs Instltuto nt
Borlln was drlvon to -oltz's Instltuto In Munich and
arrived In the late afternoon. This chamber waa drlvon

* to liunloh by enployeoa of the DVL and turned over to 7oltz.
On tho following day, SS drivers oane fron Dachau, roooived

• the keys to the chamber and drove sone to tho concentration
camp. (7cltz, R. 7199). Tho purpeso In camouflaging
thle aotlvlty v/ne to deoelvo the cmployoos of the DVL
booauoe 7oltz and Ruff did not want thon to know that tho
low-proeauro ohnabor woo to bo used In an experimental
program at a concentration camp. This lo borno out by

tho fact that a oomplotely new oot of drlvcro enno from
tho concentration oonp to tako tho chanbor to Dachau.

Thio particular action of eoorooy la notlconblo when it lo
considered that Dnehnu is merely 12 kno from Munich and

r actually tho DVL drivers had to go out of their way to

delIvor tho chanbor to tho 7oltz Instltuto. Ruff tootlflod

1 8ocrooy In tho transfer of tho chamber to Dnohau

was for seourlty reasons. (Ruff, R. 655C-).

From tho evldcnoo thus far sunnarlzod, and lndood
from tfoltz'a own adnlselon, It Is clear that he must
bo found eullty of the high altitude crimes committed In
Dachau. This was a criminal undertaking fron its lnooptlon.
It woe known to all concerned that the proposed experiments
were ocrtaln to result In deaths and that they wore to
bo * orformed on non-volunteers. That la proved by the
very flrGt letter to Hlnnler. Jcltz au.-portod tho


- 12 -


nnbltlon of hie subordinate Rnscher to porforo the
cxperlnonts on behalf of the Jeltz Institute. He secured
the collaboration of Ruff and P.onberg. He obtained the
consent of Hippfce and ft research assignment fron tho
Rcforat for Aviation Kedlcine under Anthony nnd Bockcr-
Freyseng. He took care of the technical arrnngenents nnd
participated in conferences with Ruff, Ronberg, nnd Raschcr
which decided on the exporlnents to be performed. Veltz
did more in having tho experlaents perforned than anyone
olsc. Hlfl guilt is clearly established on this ovldoncc
alono. It la not disputed that Rnscher was subordinated
to him until Fobruary 1942. Reitz's oaln defense is that
ho had Rascher transferred fron hlo Institute Into in
Fobruary 1942 and, honoo, cannot bo hold rosponslblo
for what hnpponod thcrenftor. Even if true, this is no
dofonoc. Volts had long slnoo participated in tho crinlnnl
enterprise. He cannot bo heard co say that "Yes, I did
all of that, but I'n not responsible for tho vory
consequences rihioh ny acts woro anticipated to bring n^out".
Tho doatho v/hioh ocourrod in these oxperinents wore
forosooablo fron tho tp ginning. Voltz does not oscapo
responsibility for those deaths, oven if it woro true
that Raoohor was not subordinated to hln whon they
occurred. But that is not true, as tho ovidenco proves.

Tho actual date of tho oonracnconent of tho oxocrlnonts
at Dachau was 22 Fobruary 1942, which was recalled by the
witness ::off because it was his birthday. O’off, R. 606).
From this point on, the dofor.dant 'Jeltz takes the position
that ho had no knowlodgo of the work nnd that, in fact,
Raschcr was rollcvcd fron his connand. tfcltz adnlttcd
that it was his obligation to suporvlso Raschcr and that
tho existing nrrangenent between Ruff and ./cltz was that
this was to bo a Joint undertaking. Ruff excrclsod
supervision over Ronberg and rfoltz was to exorcize


supervision over Rascher. Welts conceded that he was
Rasohor'a disciplinary superior and was responsible for
Che scientific prograne to which he asslgnod Rnsoher.

(Welts, R. 7068). Despito this chain of occannd and
working ngreenent, Welts takes the position that Rnschcr
ondoavored to work Independently and that ho did not doslro
to report to Welts. (Wolts, R. 7088-9). It toooane
neooosnry for Welts to ordor Rascher to report to hln tilco
a wook nnd, as a result of this order, Wolts alleges that
Rcachor cano to hln In tho nld&lo of February nnd that thoy
had their first conversation wince tho ncotlng In Dachau
and on that occasion, Rascher lnforacd Welts that the
oxporlraenta had not even started yet and th^t he had
nothing to report. (Welts, R. 7089).

Welts tcstlflod that Anthony, under whom Booker-
Froyoong worked In the Luftwnffo Uodioal Inopcotomto,

In Borlln, phonod hln to Inquire how the Dachp.u oxncrlnonts
woro progrossing and that ho oould only reply that nothing
had boon roportod to hln. Rnsoher reported to him for
tho oooond tlno, wheroupon Welts lnforncd Rasohor that a
tolophono oall onne through fron Borlln nnd that ho wanted
to have oono olarlfloatlon ac to how things stood at Dachau,
Rnoohor did not want to report anything to Wolts at tho
socond conversation, and Jolts nalntalns that ho told Rasohor
that ho was going to Berlin to clear up tho situation "nd
obtain a clear dcolslon uhothor or not Rnsoher was to ronort
to hln. Thon, on tho occ"slon of the third visit fron
Rasohor, Jolts, oxpoctlng a shnr argunont, nskod Wendt
of his office to oono Into the ro*a, and on that occasion
he confronted Rasohor with the alternative, cither to report
to hln or to leave the Institute. Welts asserts that at
that tlno Rasohor showed hln a tclcgran fron Hlnnlcr, which
road: "Exorincnts arc to bo kert secret fron everyone."
(Welts, R. 7090). Thereupon, Wolts nalntalns that ho


I


ordered RnBCher fron his Institute nr.d that he then
composed ft letter, together -71th Wendt, to the Luftgnu
and askod for Raschor's Immediate transfer and that within
a fen days, Rnschcr’s asslgnnent had ended. (Wcltz, R. 7090).

Tho memorandum of Hlnl Raschor to Hlonlcr of 24 Febru-
ary 1942 shows that at that tlno Rasoher was still subordinate
to Woltz. (HO-263, Pros. Ex. 47, R. 172). She reviewed tho
history of the experiments and polntod out that on 24 July
1941 Rasoher, Kottenhoff and Jolts wore to bo In oh"rgc.
Kottenhoff was transfo-rod to Rumania In August and thereby
excluded from tho group. She stated that It was Wcltr' task
to initlato tho technical exocutlon of tho experiments.
Apparently boenuso of a foar of moral objections on tho .vxrt
of Hip ko, Jolti had postponed tho beginning of tho experi¬
ments but hnd finally secured Ruff and Romberg to collabor¬
ate \ 1th Raschor. A oonforenoo took place In Dachau botwoon
Plorkowokl, Sohnltzlcr, Wcltz, Rasoher, Romberg «nd Ruff.

Woltz had given the assuranco that ho would t~kc onra of
tho authorization for Rasoher. liro. Raochor complained
that on 18 Fobruary after Rasoher had onrriod out all tho
preparatory work, Woltz st"ted that: "How that you havo re¬
moved "11 obetaoloe from tho path of Ronber* with tho S3,
tho authorization must bo handlod differently*, lire.

Rancher ot^ted that both Romberg and Raaohor agrood that
Woltz was not noodod any more and that both opposod his
attempts to oust Rasoher In favor of himself.

Woltz oontendod that tho truth of the nnttor was that

ho wished to get rid of Rasoher, «nd that irs. Raschor had

misrepresented this to Himmler so that It would no o«r that

ho was trying to eliminate Raschor In order to keep the work

exclusively to himself. (Woltz, R. 709S). There c-n bo no

question th-t lira. Rasoher was quite correct In her analysis

of tho situation. What possible reason could Wcltz have for

- 15 -


desiring, at a time Just before the experiments began, to
eliminate Rnschor uhless he wished to partlolpnto hlnsclf
personally «nd thus seeurc n larger share of the scientific
orodlti Certainly ho had supported Raschcr fron the vory
lnoo’tion of the proposal to perform the experiments. Bo
that ns it nayi the oroof shows that Rnsoher oontlnued to
partlcinnto in the experiments as a subordinate of Welts.
This is oloarly provod by a file memorandum of Sohnltslcr
of the S3 offico in liunlch, dntod 28 April 1942. (NO-264,

Pros. Ex. 60, R. 194). This memorandum shove on its fnoo
that Rnsoher was still subordinated to Volts, and that
Jolts was insisting on notlvc participation in the experi¬
ments and full rcsDonolbllity. The RLV had cnqulrod of
tfoltz how long the experlnonte would last, *nd whether it
was justifiable to dotall a mcdlonl officer for so long.
Ranohor, who was chafing under his subordination to Jolts,
roquontod that his assl.mncnt bo ohnngod to tho DVL, Brar.oh
Daohau.

Welts 1 only reaction to this doounent was that tho
dnto two wrong -nd should read 28 February 1942 instead of
28 April 1942. (R. 7099 ot soq.). Jolts conccdod on cross-
examination that, assuming tho dnto 26 A^rll 1942 was
corrcot, then of couroc Rnsoher was still his subordinate
at that timo. (Jolts, R. 7232). Tho file nonorondun of
Slcvors dated 3 k’ay 1942 oottlcd this question beyond any
doubt. This nonorondun roads ns follows:

■SS-Untcrstunnfuohrcr Stabsarst Dr. Racchcr re¬
ported in iiunloh on 29 «.>rll 1942 about tho result
of tho oonforenoo with Obcrstrho-rzt Dr. Welts.
Jolts roquestod that Dr. Rnsoher bo withdrawn In
tho cnoo that he (Jolts) would not be Invited to
nttond tho cx'Orlnent until Friday, 1st il^y 1942.
Tho Rclchofuohror SS was Informed accordingly. Ho
ordered SS-OborcrupponfUehrcr Jolff on 30 Anrll
1942 to send n telogr-'m to Floldn-rsh-1 iCllch re¬
questing Dr. Raschcr 1 s dotall to tho German
Experimental Institute for «vl"tlon (Deutsche Vor-
suchsanst-lt fucr Luftfnhrt) Dachau branch, and
that at the disposal cf tho Rolohsfuohrer-SS.■
(NO-1359, Pros. Zx. 493, R.7S38).

- 16 -


After having teen confronted with this docunent
tfeltz In effect conceded that his previous te6tinony about
the transfer of Rascher had been, to say the least of It,
lnoorroct. He said!

"Yce, non the cntlro natter locks sonowhat dif¬
ferent. If I had this fllo note of Slevcrs In
addition to ny other docuoonts, I would have
known that the noto of Schnltzlcr was correct,
and that there nust be another possibility to
explain Mrs. Mini Rascher*s letter. This letter,
on the other hand, cannot te explained non. I
can only try to reconstruct the dates froa tho
documents which were available here, slnoo I no
longer know then today." (Veltz, R. 7239).

On ro-dlroot exmlnatlon by his dofenso counsol,

W 0 ltz was aekod ngalr. to olarlfy tho situation with respeofi

to Raschor's subordination, and ho replied:

"81noo ny first attempt to clarify this contradic¬
tion onno to naught I should like to try again.

I slnply c^n sec no way to clarify It on the tesla
of tho material beforo no". (Volts, R. 7251)

In a lottor of 20 May 1942 fron Milch to Wolff It Is
again made evident beyond any doubt that Rascher wno sub¬
ordinate to J 0 ltzI

■In refor.'nco to your tologrna of 12 May our sani¬
tary Inspector reports to no that tho altitudo cx-
pcrlnonts oarrlod out by tho S8 ->nd Air Foroo at
Dachau have boon finished. Any continuation of
those ox orlnonts coons oosentlally unreasonable.
Howover, tho carrying out of ex orlnonts of sono
other kind, In regard to perils at high sea, would
bo lnportant. Those have been arep^rod In lmno-
dlato agroonont with the proper offices; Major
Waltz fill te ohnrffod with the cxocutlon and Copt.
Raschor will bo available until further order In
addition to his duties 'lthln the nedloal cor^s of
tho air Corps.■ (343a-?S. Pros. Sx. 62, R. 200).

Thus It Is cloar that Volts nust te held rosponslblo
for tho nunorous nurdors which resulted during tho high al¬
titudo experiments In Dachau. Hot only did ho participate
In plans and enterprises Involving the commission of thcoo
experiments, but he also was the direct superior of Rascher
who, together with Ruff nnd Ronborg, actually executed tho
experiments.


- 17 -


After ./oltz h«d successfully secured the collnborntion
of Ruff nnd Romberg, he held n meeting nt his Institute In
Munich Into in Dcccabor 1941 or enrly in January 1942.

(Ruff, R» 6657; Jeltz, Ri 70e6)l Ruff* Roaberg, Jeltz, nnd
Rr.schor nttonded this meeting primarily to ley the ground¬
work for the tochnlool arrnnpcn.jr.ts nooossnry to perform tho
work nt Dnoh-u. It is '•Hoped by nil the defendants thnt tho
question regarding tho stntus of the prisoners to bo U 60 d
wna dleoussod nnd thnt Rnochor hnd nesured then thnt tho
out .lects would bo exclusively volunteers. (Jolts, R.7086;
Ruff, R. 6232; Ronborp, R. 6869). In fact, tho dofondnnts
otnto th-t Rnsohor oxhibltod n ooraunic-tlon from Hlranlor
whioh provided thnt tho subjocts oust be volunteors under
nil clroumotmoce. (Ronborp, R. 68691. Unfortunntoly, thio
lottor hns not boon produood by tho Dofonso. Uccdloss to
ony, the dofend-nts t^ko the position th-t suoh oxporlnonts
v:oro to bo perfornod on habitual nnd oondonnod orinlnnls
nnd thrt consider- tions wero to bo offered to snid "volun¬
teers" in tho event thnt they survived tho experiments. As
a mnttor of fnct, Ronbcrp oxpllcltly otntoc that ho saw tho
"Hinnlcr lottcr" nnd he nns *Mo to observo tho words
"criminal" -nd "voluntoor" therein. (Ronborp, R. 6870).

Tho nsoortlon on tho part of the dofondnnts thnt
Hiram 1 or hnd ordered thnt tho crinlnnls used bo volunteers is
ridiculous -nd lncrodlblo when it in considered thnt Klnnlor
instructed Rnschcr to pardon these unfortunnto lnmntco only
when thoy could bo rccnllod to life -ftor hnvlnp boon subjec¬
ted to tho type of ex crlncnts oultinod in Rnscher*s first
interin re ort, wherein it is shown th-t tho experincntnl
subjocts hnd stopped hro-thln; -ltopcthor nnd hnd their
chests out open, l.o. they hnd been nctu-lly -utopslcd.

(197U-PS, Pros. Ex. 49, R. 175).

-18-


In this Instance, Himmler graciously stated:

•3. Considering the long continued action of the
heart, the experiments should he s icciflo-lly ex¬
ploited in such a Banner as to detoralno whether
these men could he recalled to life. Should ouch
an ox"orlncnt succeed, thon, of course, the worson
condemned to doath shall he r-rdonod to a concen¬
tration camp for lire.* (1971b-PS, Pros*Ex.51,

n. 180 ).

It is absurd to give any weight to the allegation that
Himmler providod that the subjects wore to he volunteers.
Theso men know that volunteers could not ho secured and
that was the very reason for going to Himmler. This is
shown in tho letter from Hascher to Hinnler requesting that
criminals ho ondo availahlo due to the fact that "nobody
is volunteering." (supra).

Tho dcfendnftt Ruff ndalttod on the stand that the ex-
'•orinnnts conducted on thoaoclvoa and oolloacucs in Berlin
oxtondod up to an altitude of 12,000 aoters and that tho
quootion of what nould hppon between 12,000 and 20,000
motors wao suhsoquontly investigated at Dnohnu. (Ruff,

R. 6679). It Is obvious, thereforo, that Ruff, Romhorg,
i/oltz, and Raschor wore unwilling to porfora suoh Investi¬
gations on themselves.

The evidenoo has proved that tho suhdootc usod in tho

hltfh nitltudo oxporinonte wore not, with " fow nlnor ox-

ooptlono, volunteers. Tho inmates wore simply oeloctcd at

random in the camp *>nd forood to undorgo the experiments.

Russians, Poles, Jews of various nationalities, and Germans

v/cro usod. Russian prisoners of wnr were Included ns wore

many politlc"l prisoners. Approximately 180 to 200 Inmates

wero oxporinontod on with 'bout 70 to 80 holng killed «g a

result. Hep more than 40 of those had been "condemned to

death". Among those killed were political prisoners. (S.’eff,

R.613-18; soc also Vclwog, R. 432). This testimony of Neff,

rho was tho inmate assistant in tho experiments ”nd who

- 19 -


Identified Ruff, Romberg, and Welti Is corroborated by
Raschcr's cable asking If Himmler's amnesty rule applied
to Russians and Poles who had been extensively used In the
experiments. (1971(d)-PS, Pros t Ex. 52, R. 183). The na¬
tionality and status of inmates was easily dlscorncbio
from the badges worn on their uniform. Ruff and Honborg
could have told from these that forolgn nationals and noli-
tlonl prisoners wer bolng used. (Neff, R. 616-7).

Tho wltnosa Neff's testimony reveals that approximately
ton prisoners wore scleoted as permanent experimental sub-
.loctoi but they were not volunteers. (Neff, R. 611;622;

Vlowog, R.430). There woro however, a few "vc.untocrs"
according to Neff. Ho st"tcd that "there wore oortaln volv
untoors for those experiments, because Rnscher pronlood cer¬
tain porsona th«t they would bo released from tho oamp If
thoy underwont thoso experiments". (Neff, R. 614). Noff
cloariy polntod out that in view of the way the prlsonor-
sub,loots wore solcctod and usod, It was not posolblo to know
v;ho wore volunteers, If "ny, and who wore not voluntcors.
(Noff, R. 606-26). Thoy wore not brought In and used as a
separate group. Moreover, tho evidence shows thnt thoso
promises wore not k pt. (R.615. Tho only evidence of a ro-
lonso Is tho case of Sobota as outllnod by Noff and in that
0P.80, ho was sent to an undesirable s. cd^l SS oonnnnrtO
group. No death scntonccs were oo emoted

Tho defense elfins for Ruff and Ronborg that tho ex¬
periments at Daohau wore divided Into two .rroupo. Tho
"first froup* tho so-called Kuff-Romberg-Raschor oxporlmonts,
wore non-crlnlnal whllo tho 6ocond group, the Raschcr ex¬
periments, encompassed all tho crimes. They contend that
the Ruff-Ronbcrg-Raschcr experiments were conducted lrxloocn-
dontly of the Rascher experiments and that tho ten original

subjects mentioned by Noff and Vlowcg were used exclusively

- 20 -


for the Ruff-Romhcrc-Rnscher experiments. Despite the
testimony of the witnesses '•nd the weight of the documen¬
tary evidence, they would have the Tribunal believe that
by a wondcrouB working of fate these were nil volunteers
and no crimes occurred. This defense Is of course Inappli¬
cable to .7 0 ltt, Raschcr was subordinated to and subject to
his orders.

It should be noted that Romberg and Rnsohcr, who ascon-
ded In the altitude chamber at Dachau to 12,500 and 13,500
meters, respectively, for 30 to 40 minutes, discontinued '
those experiments on thcmsolvos beo^use of Intense pain.

(NO-402, Pros. Ex. 66, R. 213). Yet, thoso men proooodod,
ns proved by their own Joint report, to conduct experiments
on prisoners which would not perform on thomsolvcs.

The experimenters took no responsibility or even Inter¬
est In soolng to it that the nllogcd promises made to tho
sftbjooto to Induce them to volunsoer wore kept, (Romberg,
R. 6993). although Romberg said ho h-d no ch«nnol to
Himmler, ho also admitted ho vlsltod Hlmnler with Raschcr
In July 1942. (Romberg, R. 7015-6).

In this connection, wo muot consider-tho convcnlonoo
of the dofonso. By limiting tho Ruff-Rombcrg-Raschor cx-
poriraonto to tho ten eubjoots, wc find th«t they further
allogo that no deaths occurred In those experiments as
opposed to a considerable numbor of doaths In the Raschcr
work. But, tho witness Neff, in describing tho first day
of tho experiments, emphatically stated th~t tho first
ocrloo of experiments -/as not o-rrled out on volunteers .
Furthermore, tho defendant Ruff wn6 also present during
thcao experiments. (Neff, R. 622). Tho defendants’ conten¬
tion that the experiments were in two groups Is explicitly
denied by Neff. He testified that Romberg not only experi¬


mented with Raschcr on tho original ton subjeots, but also

- 21 -


on a large number of other ‘rlsoncrs. The distinction
fabricated by the defendants cannot possibly be credited In
tho light of Neff's testimony. On being asked the question
whether Romberg experimented only on tho ten original
subjects, Neff replied: " Experiments acre conducted not
only with those ten persons but , for example . In a scries
of experiments which Romberg also conducted on a large
number of other prisoners . The distinction which tho
Defense Counsel trios to make between experiments
Included In the report to the Luftgau or of death . It Is
Impossible for me to mako this distinction and to distinguish
botween those whlph foil Into ono category or the other ."

(R. 691). ./ho Is to bo bollevod, tho testimony of Neff,
plus ono'e common sonse, or tho self-serving statements
of tho defendants? This Is a quostlon tho Tribunal must
nnswor. There Is no suoh thing as half a murderer.

Thooo dofondanto aro rosponolble for thoeo murders or they
are not responsible. Thorc lo not one scintilla of evldonoo
to support tho rldloulouc contention that a group of
volunteers wao segregated for uco by Romberg, who woro
dlfforont oolorod shirts so ho could toll then apart, and
vfho woro treatod with tho greatest of dofcnonco. But that
lo .1 ust what Ruff and Romberg ask tho Tribunal to find.

It Is absolutely impossible on the faoo of the record.

This alleged dlsassoolntlon of Ruff and Romberg from
tho "crimes committed, exclusively by Rosoher" Is In comploto
contradiction to tho acts of these defendants during tho
cx crlmonts, which after all speak much louder than their
present tostlnony. Neff testified that Romberg personally
witnessed at least five deaths durl..-* the experiments, and
that he made no effort to stop then nor did he even protest
after the event. (R. 619). Romberg admitted seeing threo
deaths and that he knew that five to ten other murders took


- 22 -


place In his absence. (HO-476, Pros. Ex. 4C, R. 155).

The first death Ronbcrg saw, he said occurred in April.

He reported this to Ruff. Yet the exocrlnents were not
disc ntlnued . They went on to the end of June and still
more deaths occurred which Ronbcrg 6aw. To. 3ay the least
of it, these defendants made theaselvos a p^rty to nurdcr
by continuing the experiments . This is true no nattor
how Innocent they nay have been up until the first death.

They wore undor a duty to stop tho experiments immediately,
romovo the ohamber, and force a court martini of Rnscher.

They did none of these slnplo and obvious things. Thoy did
not for tho very reason that tho dentha were expected
from tho very beginning and wore a part of tho oxporiraontal
plan. Romberg sow thoso non dlo and did absolutely
nothing. It was within his powor to save then at the tlno.

Ho oald ho was operating the electrocardiograph. Ho Know
proolsoly when tho subjoots wore in danger of dying by
their hoart notion. Ho also Know this fron his Knowlcd^o
of ronction to high altitudoa. Ho could sec and road tho
prossuro guagoo. Ho could hove turned tho pressure down
and savod tholr lives by simply moving the guago which was
within arms reach. Ho was a bigger nan than Rnscher. Forco
could have boon used if nocossary. Not only did ho do
nothing while the helpless victims diod before his very eyes,
but ho assisted in tho bloody nutopslcs.

nftor all those murders occurred and were Knwon to
Ruff and Romberg, thoy still wont on. They lssuod a .Joint
roport on tho ox crlncnto in the nano of Ruff, Romberg, and
Rnscher in July 1942. (NO-492, Pros. Ex. 66, R. 213).

They were still collaborating uith this admitted murderer
and gave him the cover of their scientific reputation.
Bomhcrg received n nodal for his worK in the experiments on
the rooonmendatlon of Rancher. (1607(a)-PS, Pros. Ex. f'5,

R. 2 04). Romberg was still supporting Rnscher in


September 1942 and was to nuke an oral report to Milch
on the experiments with Rascher. He wrote o memorandum
on Rascher 1 8 behalf explaining that the report was not
given because Mlloh was unable to receive then at tho
scheduled tlmo. This sane memorandum, signed by Romberg,
proves that he was anxious to oontlnue high altitude
oxrerlnents with Rascher and asked for Milch 1 3 normlsslon.

Ho wrote: "Obcrstarzt Kalk stated that he was willing to
report to tho 8ocrctary of State (Milch) our wishes
concerning the fixing of distribution (of the report)
and tho continuation of tho oxporlmonto . ...Oborstarst
Kalk had transmitted, still on Soptecbor 11, our wishes
oonoornlng distribution and continuation of the experiments
to tho Secretary of State . The Secretary of State had
approvod distribution sohodule, and said that a continuation
of tho experiments was not urgent." (NO-224, Pros. Ex. 76,

R. 223). In tho meantime, tho murderous freezing
experiments had boon otnrtcd with the Luftwaffe tdam of
Holzloohncr, Flnkc, and Rascher. Ruff, Romberg, and 7oltz
all hoard tho roport of those experiments In Nurnbcrg In
Ootobcr 1942. (N0-401, Pros. Ex. 93, R. 309). Hippkc

himself wroto of his special thanks to Hlnmler on October 8,
1942, and said: "V/hon the work will need once more your
sympathetic assistance, may I be allowed to get In touoh
with you again through Stahsnrzt Dr. Rascher. (NO-289,

Pros. Ex. 72, R. 216).

If the testimony of Ruff and Romberg Is deemed credible
by tho Tribunal, then the documents of their own making
and the tostlnony set forth above must bo rejected as
untrue. Tho alleged dlsassoclntIon of Ruff and Romberg,
and Indeed of the whole Luftwaffe, from the crimes of their
collaborator Rascher cannot be reconciled with tho undisputed
acts of these defondants. The choice Is clear.


- 24 -


Of The. Jx ner inants

r .'.o oxocrinonts at Dachau in tho field of high alti¬
tude research wore conducted to determine human reactions
to cltitudos abovo 12,000 motors. The defendant Romberg
statoi' that four series or experiments were conducted: a)
3lov< descent without oxygen, b) 3lo*.v descent with oxygen,
o) foiling without oxygen and d) falling with oxygon.
(N0-d7S, iros. Jx. -iO, R. 155) Tho first two tests woro
dosi^njl to si'iulato doscont with porachuto opon whilo
tho latter two a froo fall fro., an -irplano boforo tho
parachute epona. ..a pointed out in Jr. Raschor's first
in tor 1:1 rsport on tho experiments, an additional problou
\/as to bo .iOlved, naioly, tho dotcraination whothor tho
thooroticully ostabliohod noma pertaining to tho longth
of l^fo of human boingo broathing air with only a s..ail
portion of oxygon and subjoctod to low prosouro correspond
with tho rooults obtainod by .\ictical oxpjrionco. Phia
In tor l.i roport of laacher'a at.tea ua follows:

. Jxperi.ienta tooii. e..c length of life of a
human being abovo t!u normal breathing Units
(•-» 5» ^ hn) have oot boon conductor at nil,
nlnco it has boon a orc'ono concluaion that
tho human oxpori. ur.tal aubjoct (Vorsuclicporson
- VI') would auffer death.

The oxpori ionts conductod by nysolf and Dr.
Ronbom provod tho following:

Jxporinonts or. arcchuto Jumps proved
that tho lack of ortygon and tho low
atmospheric pressure at 12 or 15 kn
ultitudo did not cause doath. .dtogo-
ther 15 oxtromo experiments of thi3
t/po woro carried but in which none
of Vi died. for 3overo bonds togo-
thor with unconsciousness ocourrod,
but coupletol no~. al functions of
tho senses returned when a hoi,.ht of
7 km ;/aa roachod on doacent. 31oc-
trocurdiograas registering during tho
ox.criaents did show certain irrogu-
luritio3, but br tho ti.ia tho experi¬
ments \.oro 07or tho curves had roturn¬
ed to normal and thoy did not indicate
any abnor.mal changes during the fol¬
lowing days. Tho extent to which de¬
terioration of the organism may occur


Thus, it is clear that the experiments were planned and
oxocutod ith tho inten tion t'.at so.:o ware to terminate
fatally. This roport cov-rcv the period up to tho fiist
wool: in aril and .'tontion of deaths and autopsios is .ndo.
Thin iuito obviously .03 tho inetanco when Roaborg says
he saw his first doath and autopsy, although ho tonds to
place the date 03 tho latter part of .w ril. (N0«;76,
supra). If tho experiments had boon stopped thajbitho
lives of many jubJoets would have boon saved.

The Cofendants ar^uo that, hilo tho oxporL-ionts
noy hov- fcillod persons, they did not involvo torture and
poin. f.ua is on tho theory that tho 3ubJocts lost con¬
sciousness boforo any aonsatior. cf puin. This anomalous
dofon-o is completely disproved by thu photographic ex¬
hibits showing tho oxproasions of pain of tho subjects
(N0-G10, .ros. Jx. -il, .1. 158) as veil as tho dofondants
own ro ort on tho experiments. U’0-102, iron. Sr, 06, ..
215). roaotiona of ubjoct -.;as do3cribod in

teri'.s uuoh as 'severe altitu*o ,ickno3S, spasmodic convul¬
sions . in a scIf-experiment - homborg and Raseher, tho
latter 1 3 reactions were CoQoribcd Z3 follows: .J’ter 10
uinutos stay at this altitude, ;ains bo van on tho ri^ht
sido r ith a spastic-paralytic condition of the ri^ht lip
which increased continually as though Sa's wfcolo ri bt
sido - ore boinc crushed bott/con i\.o orcsse3. ..t tho some
tire there woro ::ost severe headacho3 as thou3h tho skull


- 26 -


woro batre burst apart. Tho pains bccano continually
noro severe so thut at last tlio discontinuation of the
oxp-rLunt bocaeio necessary-'. There is no coso on record
„hor w on experio-nt on an inaa'w vas discontinued because
of ;cin.

.luff and Honberg toko the position that they would
be coet on - mine to kill prisoners in the couiso of an
oxreriflent. They insist * - that their oxporlnontc with

Rosohur woro concerned with tho problon of explosive de¬
compression and on parachute descent fron hi;* altitude-,
whorcau iasohor alone worked on sojourn or a r.oro pro¬
long itey at hit* altitudes, and that it -.as in da-chor'a
ox>ri-:-nt3 that prisoners ere hilled. This again is the
artificial division of the oxpori. -nts into tho criminal
and non-criminal -..hioh has air—dy >eon proved to be spur¬
ious. Jut horo a; ain , tho t..o oolf-oxporl Mttttf hi*
Ruff, .lonborc and Raachor included in their Joint final
report as nunttoned above ys£iLJ&^X. 1’^t? ° P

jjJlpy A t. -lUUil :
a c' v .ivelf. tU* Th0 onl7 r0a3 ° n ttat thi8 0Xp ° ri “

non t did not end Tutally .as t..e fact that it was inter-
ru ted in tino because of intense pain, ..oroovor, on
ll of the final report by Ruff, Roubor G , and oltz
the following is said: ‘This is worthy of special atten¬
tion bucaueo in this cuso a person has fully recovered
nontally at an altitudo of 8.3 la 127,230 ft.), aft-r
three :lauto3 of the .v>-t oevore lack of oxygon, An

^auranco oxa^ aafei this altitudo severe

altitudo sickness sets in aft- about 3 nim.tos. U-0-
402, flUpra); omphaais added*, -arc, again, it i- P i '-'~ u
fro: their own report that huff and Ronbcrg, a3 acll as
Rascher, .arc oonc-rnod with sojourn at hi.* altitudos.


.uX Jori.-iunt 3 , in which prisoners tioro killed, ire re¬
port in :{Q3ohwr's roport co nler of 11 liny 19-12.
(r! 0 - 220 , .ros 2x. 61 , H. 1‘3). -o.-.e prisoners vor a Iiillod

by lr-epin.. then at 12,000 ictv-rs • ithout oxygon for thirty
ninuteo; ono was killed at 20,000 notora when exposed
thoro for a'jout six -linutos ithout ovy^cn. Thuso prison¬
ers vero autopsiod to ascert^n if bubbles of jao, called
air onbolian in Raschor's report of Hey 11, 1942, wore pre-
sont in the blood vessels of the brain and other organs
..hen f’ljsoctcd under v/ator. -e.io -J .wish professional
crir.in 1 j -.ho hud oc -aittod ... ascnschando (race pollution) 4
wore killed for another reason:


Phyolocl off oc t f C3 iientionod undor No. 3, ora duo
to t.^ for.x ;t ion of .- ftolio:;, the follo\.i:ic was
done: ..;t..r relative rocupcrction fro; such a
.w.rachuto descend In- teat had taken place, ho ov^r
beforo regaining cousoiouancos, aoro oxperi i-ncal
subjects oro kopt undor water until they died,
lion the skull and tlio cavities of tho breast and
of t’.io cbdo.icn had boon o. onod undor wator, ar. on-
or.ious o-tount of air o^belio;* wus found in tho
vessels of tho brain, t. - ooror.ory vessels ar.d the
vosaolo of Ule livor and tho intostinos, etc. •

( 110 - 220 , au ra).

I ‘ ould bo noted that those urdera ’.ero comittod m
cor.noc'.ion :4th the dosc ondin;: t oots. . ot pro¬

longed Jtay at hi ;h altitudes, and tills was tho vary subject
bolnc; itudied by Ruff and Ro. bar, . Ror.bcro testified that
ho was >rosont at tho death of throe of tho3o .'riaonors,
ono in .pril and two in Hay 19-2, anu witnessed on autopsy
of one, in which as bubbles were present ir. the blood
10 Of tho brain. Ko roported these d-aths to Ruff.
(HO— 73, . roe. Jx. -iO, A. 133; Ronbora, H. 3903, R. 392e-
e). off tostifiod Ro::bor„ • as present in fivo casos
where fatalities occurred (huff, R. 619, o92) end Rc.-berc
ad.:ittjd that ho knew that five to ten other oxpcrlnontdl
subjects v/uro killed whilo ho was not present. (KO—■17 ,


Pro3. Jx. 40, R. 135). Keff stated that Romberg actively
pertici 'atod In the majority of the experiments. Ho ob¬
served tho experiments, tool, notes and studied the oloc-
trocardiogram and thus was ablo to dotormina when on ex¬
perimental subject in tho chamber was about to die. (2'off,
R. 651).

It is incredible that Dr. Ruff was not informed re¬
garding the rinding of bubbles in the >lood vessels of
tho brain since such observations in human brings who havo
diod following too rapid atmospheric decompression, is a
very, v-ry uniquo ovont, though bubbles had boon obsorvod
-iany times prior to 1942 in tho blood vosscls of labora¬
tory uni mis. It is inconceivable that Dr. Ruff, or any¬
one olso in tho field of aviation .i-dicine, had not h-ard
of tlie bubble theory of t..e cai' -o of joint pains, couching,
blin-ness or paralysis, or tho o/nptorai of tho pressure
drop sickness, which nay occur on exposure to high alti¬
tude, since this theory was .wll kno-n in literature and
text boohs of aviation :e‘.iclne available since 1936. How
also would Rasoher have had occasion to look for tho bub¬
bles? .'a either Lernud of the thoory during a course in
aviation medicine or wa3 told a out it by Ruff und Rom-
ber , ho know r.uoh ioro than Raachor about aviation
• •eC ic llle •

it is fantastic that luff, Ronborg and Raachor did

not hw.’e in .ilnd the observations of bubbles in tho blood

vessels of tho murdered prisoners, when, in the final

joint r- lort of July 26, 1942, thoy wroto:

•'In spite of tho relatively large number of ex¬
periments, tho actual cause of t.V severe mental
disturbances and bodily failures ( aral.-3i-,
blindness, otc.i attendant upon po3t-hypox..mic
twili ht state r- r.ins something of a riddle,
it appeared of tor. ae though tho phenomena of
pressure drop 3icl:n-s3 had combined with the re¬
sults of severe o: (?:c-402, *ro3.


- 2C -


Zs. 66, R. 213).

It l.«_a boon tho theory for sor.o tir.o that tho gynptona
associ .ted ith docor.prc3sion or ;rc3surc drop 3ickness
;ny he duo to tho a formation of gas bubbles (air onbolisn)
in tho blood vessels of the brain or in the regions of tho
Joints or in tho blood vossols of tho lungs, "'hen tho
bubbles collect in tho blood vessels of the brain, they
ore supposed to cuuso a physical or .-lental disturbance or
paralysis. hen tho ges bubbles collect in tho region of
the joints, they aro supposed to cause pain in tho region
of tho Joints. ”hen the bubbles collcot in tho blood ves¬
sels In tho lungs, they are sup.osed to cuuso the ohohes
or uttuc..j of couching. That has been c theory that has
boon hold for oor.o 15 or 20 y-ars, and on expert in tho
field of aviation »dioino could not havo boon unaware of
it. (Ivy, R, 9098-9). iirej Hasohor had observed bubbles
as is iejoribod ir. his report or 11 i-ny 19*12 and since
Ruff end ho.iburg had oonploto Imowlcd o of tho doaths, ob¬
viously these important findin ,s of Raschcr on air e^bolisa
did not escape tho attention of Ruff and Rabborg. It can
• only be concluded that.those findings, wtiioh reoultod frou

intantionod deaths, fom tho basi3 of tho paragraph quoted
. above fro.’, tho final roport. Beouuso of tho natur~ of tho

subjoct latter, and a prior knowled go of the observations
in tho autopsies in tho experiments, tho ideas expressed
in tiiu paragraph quoted above cannot bo separated fron
these in tho Rasoher report o' 11 . ay. jo testified tho
ox urt witness Dr. ... C. Ivy. (Ivy, ii. 9151). ..11 of this
proves a ain that the teati. any cf Huff end Rouber^ to the
effect they had nothing to o ith the so-called “Hasoher
oxpuri teats i3 co’jplwtoly false. Jven though deaths are
not s. eoifically untionod in tho joint report of July 28 ,


- 30 -


it ie cljar fron Dr* Ivy's tostL any that tho findings in
the death cases for:; the basis for a part of that roport.

.luff and Ro;:borc would have tho Tribunal boliovo that
the experiments wore conplotod and the chanbor removed
fro. Oaeliau by 20 May 1942. eincc Ronborc knew of end re¬
ported or. the deaths to Huff in .. ril, thcro clearly a3
no c::cuje vimtovor in lcavin^ tho ohonber in Dachau for
evwn .. jotiior ucy. But according to their ov/n story, it
stayed until 20 hay and Re..-.' o cm to x>ro :xm killed.
They attempted to .loss ov^r their crLiinal participation
in these later nurdors by suylnt, that tho ohar.ber could
not b« jved without orders fro., the Luftwaffe Medical
Ins-.ootor 3c that as it ay, such a technical violation
of ravin*, the ohoi'.bcr -.dtliout orders is hardly canparublo
to the crime of loaviac tho chamber for further experiments
by ( non they adult fcnodne to won a nurdoror. In¬
deed, any d .cont superior who '.-no not hi:self a party to
the cn tt, as they actually were, would undoubtedly havo
court- ..rtlulled Ruff and Ronborg for leaving tho chaubor
there, not to apeak of Raachor.

But it ia not true that tho ehanbor loft Dachau on
20 i uy I9d2 as they por' irouoly state 1, They seized upon
this l*u«o fror. . ilch's 1 -tt.r to olff stating that tho
jor ‘70S reeded olSdWhoro. (o.oa-ro, iros. .x. 62,

200 ). fhoro oloarly was cn • a.cation to transfor th«
chai bur, but it -.us not in .act ov-d and t .is was undoubt¬
edly dud ho Joint ..forts of .vuff, no.-berg, end Ras-
chur. .a )or m doua to eontinuo his orl nina l rfc
With teich.wr in Jopt*.ie.r IS.2 as has been .pointed out

. iny -vent, on u Juno 1912 :^lch authorized re¬
ton >1 the oharhor In Daohau for two Bfilfl. SPfithg.*
li:0-2ol, ros. . 5,3. 202). On 25 Juno this order Mas

- 21 -


pas3cc or. to .'lasc hear by Kucln.p.3 taller, adjutant to h'olff,
reference 'ooins ;iadc to a lott-r of 5 June fron Raschor.
lNG-2&i, Iros. Jx. 61, R. 303). These docunont3 prove
beyond doubt that the chamber regained in Dachuu until
July lQi2.

The testimony of Toff not only proves that tho ex¬
pel* L -nts continued until July 191-2 but also that Romberg
was presented with a re or::a j1- opportunity to discontinue
the o v ri: enta without any trouble .hatover. Noff stated
that .embers told hi., in the lott-r port of Kay that the
oho. b«r './os to be trans- .rred (undoubtedly as u result of
Ililoh'a letter of 20 Kay (hieh w.:s later countermanded)
and, un*.-r the inpreasior. that bombers night not lx. in
favor of any continuation of tho oxpv-ri.ionts, he sabotaged
the ceumbor by breaking a claoa barometer in ordor to bo
sur^ th. ’;u.'>er loft. Instead of seizins this opportunity
for eto.ni.v- tlic experiments by re .oYing tho damocod ohom-
ber,.. mber rushed to 3-rli. , obtained apar- parts, and in
a iictt„r of t\*o weeks had the chamber functioning again
for mom- murderous experiment3. (R. 623—i). Tho chamber

was used for anoth-r threo waolis after it waa ropaired and
five p-rsona woro killed on eho last day of the experi¬
ments. (Hoff, R. 62 - 1 ). Rule the dofensc attached .off
on orosa-ozamir. tior. concerning. tho sabotage of the chum¬
bo r (.".. 663 ) , by the ti e la x.rs took tho stand they ad-
:dttud the chamber v;a3 data >e but moved tho whole incident
up to the -.onth of l ay ins; .ad of June. (Romberg f '. 0005).
This was obviously done on e ^ theory that tho Tribunal
could be deceived into bclicvin. that very few oxpori.*~ht3
ooiild h.-/o buen conducted in i-ay since they contond it wa3
moved on ..o: . ?ut the doounonfes and Boff’s tost loony

clear 1*/ establish that the chamber was there until July,


Moreover, it .otters littl- -.heth^r the chaabcr was dann-
Gcfi in .my or Juno, Roab^rc in no ovont took the oppor¬
tunity to stop the experiments on tho ground of unavail¬
able pcrt3, although no such opportunity was noodod if he
really v.-antod to discontinue then. Ko need have dono no¬
thing :ore complex than to have driven tho chamber off or

left hi .eolf.

Ruff's nnd Romberg's ^uilt is beyond doubt when wo
corzifiar that they didn't tel.*, the opportunity to withdraw
aft.r the first death of an wx;erimental subject in /._ril
to lbdrg admitted his .rcse.nce at the d«.ath of this
first ju jject. (R hors, R. 6926). Ho ucs 3tudy; he
ulectrooardiocra:: ct the ti_.e of tho experiments (!20-;76;

Ro, t^rj, . 6927). H. Mould i.s.v* tho Tribunal find that
hu k.ao an innocent bystander who \.aa privileged to do no¬
thing. V.'.lo • ns Just another ->o experiment” according to
. .. :_r, admitted -'.-c i.~ was w i-

wctroc uaie'jar. md was otui yin*j the point of ll;;ht that
follows tho heart. I -n he saw tho oritical point had
ii r.-.-.ohed, he suld ho spoko to Rashcer, (Roeborg, R.
0927), but this was to no avail an Rasohor continued tho
expert .-»nt until death resulted. T hie tootl.ony cf aneun-
od i.-potenoe when a man .as slowly killed before his w’/es
is an insult to ono's intelli e.-.c*., R .b^rg was the senior
scKufcljt and /as fully a or.. of the fact t 2 »at a r.an_~r
zone had ).tn reached us he as thoroughly familiur 1 th
o uipjent boing used i: 1 th^so oxporiaants. He outlined
for t' „ ■ bunal the proxi.-i y of the electrocardiogram to

the controls of tho oh.- b_r. ( bar,;, R. 6929), and it
is inconceivable to think that liomborg oculd not have t._ken
the necessary action to hav- spared thi3 expert xntal sub-


joct's life if ho hod 30 desired. The inescapable fact is
thet these deaths wore part of tho plan and Ronborg not
only h d no desire to interfere but was Very nuch interes¬
ted in the cause of death through air onbolisu.

..asuAny that Ro;.berc was opposed to this fatal expori-
nont, it is icpossiblo to understand why he did not tafco
the appropriate action to have haschcr prosecuted for this
pronoditatod .-.uracr, ..s c atter of faot, Roeberc reported
this denoh to Ruff i. rood lately (Ronbers, R. 6932) and no
appropriate action vas ea e.. by Ruff either. ..ftcr an al-
lo w ud objection to this first fatality, Rouberc participa¬
ted in the autopsy of the unfortunate victi 1 . This autopsy
wus ono which dearly boro out tho fact that air e, boliort
was the cause of dcc.th. lien asked if ho participated in
J autopsy, Ronborc anowered, ‘Yes, I x.atchod one autopsy.
That -j y duty." (Ro. bors, H. 092*). Rotterc testifiod
tJiat .w saw t\/o other deaths and that air onbolis.. clso
0uU3ed U.iooe. (a. 6925-6).

luff and Roaborc lay <;roat stress on tho point that
deaths are not lontionod in the Joint roport of 20 July
19-2 of l\ bor , Ruff and Raschor. This, of oourse, is a
Very un.'erstandablo onission, but it lr. no way .roves that
they ora not rospon3iblo for those r.urdors. Indeed, the
Joint report cf 20 July .9*2 is identical with Rasohor'o
ro.oi't of 11 l.ay 1512 (RO-JJC) except for tho s xjcif ic

pie, paragraph e c

rt is a aunnary of lert HX-1, paces 3 to 10,
and of .art III-2, pa.os 10 -o 19 of the Joint final re¬
port. -- jreph •. of Racier*3 report contains results
Set out in iart III-., pa -a 21 to 22, of the Joint final
report. j?crccraph 5 cf .:accher'3 report i3 identical with
lart 111-3, pn;;os 19 to 21, of the joint final report,

-ere repli 6 of the Rascher report where the ervitin o”-


paSizie&ts are .eontioncd, is alludod to in the pervitin data
in tho joint final report on pose 16. Paragraph 7 of tho
Rcschor report, contains the conclusions incorporated in
the joint final report and Gives details on tho fcas bubblo
data • hich aro roforrod to on paGes 16 to 16 of the joint
final report, but fro r. w'-ich is onittod roferenoo to tho
autopsy results of the zurdorod prisoners. These various
poosc-Gee ere co. spared by tho itnoss Ivy and ho concluded
that they refer to tho sa..o subject jitter. (Ivy, n.

9097).

Ruff c.tto.iptod to explain tho o:iission of nontion of
deaths in the find report on tho Ground that they did not
ocour as u result of thdr -xpori.-»nt3 on roscuo fron
hi.h alcitudes (i.o. parachuto descending tests), but ra-
thor in taaoh-r's o-m oxperinonts with which thuy had no¬
thin: -o do (i.u. proloniwd stay at lujh altitudos). (Ruff,
1. -30;). It has (-lr^cdy bu an *»rovod that tho basio pro-
iu- to this s mrloua ar-;u.-*.nt is oaapl-toly falso, naj.~ly,
tl^.'t -uff end Roi’.bcrG wore not interested in sojourn at
hich altitudos. Tho solf-exporLonts of Ro.borG and :ia30h-
or ‘..ere Juot such tests and they arc specif ioally / -ntionod
in tl:u final report. These involved c. stay of '30 to -0
rinutub at altitudos between 12 end 13.5 kiloiters (j9,:00
to 190 feet). 3ut 30 l-o is the Inor pre.doo \r; or .
pw£&A deliberately brou. A-. about in tho course of tj^
P-C-" c;.u. j .oscur.din t. -.sj. ir. V.kjc to3ts it had bw.u
noted 6!uc tho subjects auff.vod fro.: spn3.;odic end clonic
convulsions toother ith ral. sis. Thi3 is roportod in
ior.. ranh o of ilaschur's iornrinCun of 11 Ilay 1SC2 on tho


exp-rL.mts and also on p. -e 13 throuch 16 of the final
report, in his - jorejidu.., Basohor stated:


To find oat whether the scvcro psychic.il end
Physical effects, .j entioned under Ro. 3,
aro due to the foravion of cnbolian, the fol-
lowing was done: -ffc-r r-lr.tivc recuperation
froa such o opjachube jSp.scendiasJtisi tr - ;on
piece, however b-for. aininc of couscious-
noss, sano Tr's wore Lept under water until
they died. 1. n the shiill and th«- cavitioa of
tho br-ast an- of tho abdcion had been opened
under water an onor:-ous criount of air c;:bolia-i
\taa found in tho vessela of the brain, tho
coronary Ve3s.ls, end tlie vessels of the liver
and the intestines, -tc.' J (’.10-220, iro3. ~x.
ol, I?. 195; o..phaais supplied).

Thjji. pro ves beyond any d oubt tftpt .mrders wore oo:ul.ttofl

' s * —• * ■ ^ ^

in t;.e ;ara cj. ute_dk3C^Adill J&l&L-PJLM&-*.

:\i .soli y.. .luff ayain tried to deCvivo the Tribunal by
teSoif/m.: that it was aue3v.ir.ticlly i .possible for air
e /oolis.i to for:; ir. parachute dosc-ndinr; te3ts. (R. 6677).
This is obviously disproved by the statc.^nts of Rasohor
quoted eJOVw and by the roferenoo in the final report, al¬
ready .-.entioned above, which alludes to this sa.io problon.
Out the lie was -Iso squarely a. lied b tho expert itnesa
Ivy • i.o testified that it as xosoible for air e.nbolien to
f ,r i . su^juctj who were .t Ititudes above 12,000 -t-rs
(eS,;(.C feet) only three ii.u.:3, that is to say, subj-cts
who bailed out at 13,000 wtors. 3ubbles nay for. as low
u JO,000 feat• (Ivy, ... -lo2). i'hus, the defense that
no ;u-t:.3 occurred durir. . the .x..vriients concerning res¬
cue fro. iij! altitudes is Ce pletel7 spurious.

.ore -r, it should be noted that vhila the Joint
final report does not describe any of tho death case3,,it
also 1'e.jJ not deny that daau..s occurred. On pat.e 25 of tho
ori m l it aay3: Ir. cor.clu-ion, so :’.ust .nice it particu¬
larly ol ir that, In view ox the axtruno oxperL^ntal con¬
ditions in the whole -xperi.^ntul series, no fatality end
no las tin inlurv dii_-__to ox v-en lack occurred . ’ (H0-402,

3u:rc). The deaths described in Rasoher'3 roport n.uotod
abovo w -.re n°t duo -o cay a n lack but or- doll be rate


- JO -


killings to investigate air Roller.,

'ut -7.n Chei experiments hi eh Ruff, Ronborg, ant
oltz ad .it wore planned ant perforr .d undor thoir r.s-
ponsi'.ility were highly dan;-reus to tho life and health
of tho subjects. Both Ruff and Ronberg agreed that 12,000
ttoturs was th- uop.r li_:it of safety end that experiments
of tho t.-po they p~rforncd nbov. that altitude vers hazar¬
dous • Tho closer ip t ion of tho reaction of the subjects as
set forth in tho final report .irovc that tho subjects suf-
f-iv>: s-v.re convulsions an-. prolong periods of diaorion-
tation. Vhe expert ittnoss Ivy pointed out that tho cx-
pwrir.-nts described in tho final roport of Ruff, Ronbers,
uind eltz wore hijily dangerous for tho following roasons:

•‘I consider then to bo dangerous bocauo. of tho
prolonged p.riod of unconsciousness to which
the aubjocts wer« exposed, .'or cxonple, they
wore unconscious for p.riods of around t ..nty
..inutes, and thay .-o disoriented for p.riods
of around thirty co ai ;oty ainutos. That is a
dun ercua period of ory an lack to which to .x-
PpBO the >rcin. . that slnoo those ^orlc-

ers followed tnj -leotroc. rdiogran dusonstrat.s
that the heart of th-a. subjects was not no;ien-
tarially affeotoc or significantly effected by
this prolonged exposure to oxygon lack. *3i t
the3e experi.-nts do not show, or tho results
do not show that the cells of tho brain w-rc
not injuivu. On. of tho higher faculties of the
brain is loornln , end wo know that the loarnin .
prooess is rath.r J.nsitivo to oxygen lack, and
t’lu only way to check against tho possibility
of danngc of the learning .-.ochonis.: b nrolon god
exposure to oxygen lack would have boon to have
aot-r.iinod tho I. of th.Sv. subjects or the ab¬
ility of those subjects to learn before and af¬
ter the subjects cr. ex 'osed to such a >rolonrcd
. -riod of oxygen lack. (ivy, ... 9036).

r. Ivy testified that / . QXperI*»nt8 described in
the . in.:l report had roacl -d the pJiyaiological li.it and
that erk was b.in;, done ir. a very dangerous and hazardous
zone ca far as th. w.lfarc of th. ex-.ri;*)ntal subjects was
conc.rnod. H. said that he should b. reluotaxt to porforn
ouch expcrir.unts -v^n on hinsolf and that h. would pr-for
tc dcp.nd upon that uegr.o of accuracy which could be ob-


tainod from calculations of th~ results of a ntral experi¬
ments. (Ivy, R. 9081; 3. 9112; n. 9197).

.'inally it should ho noted that the experiments were
neither nacossary nor a scientific success. 'Nocossity
of the Jtatc 1 * has been r.uch used by the defendants as if
it voro a defonso. This is clearly unfounded even thouch
neCv-ssity, ilitary or otherwise, be ca3u^-d. It is co bo
3up.:osod that «ach defendant thought th-re was 3o.-o r.ohes-
aity to hat he was doin ,. . •* is no defense. P.nsoher

thou ht the sano thine* I- - 3 dce-.od necessary to incar¬
cerate hundreds of thousands of persons in concentration
camps. It -*as doomed necessary to nurder ill ions of Jaws.
Thu slave labor policy was bottomed on necessity. If that
is c. dofonsu, thv-n these trials I 030 ell no an Inc. but, on
the oth -r hand if It is irov. d eh: t thesw ^xp^rirants woro
not n-c-asr.ry, not of sciw.-.tifio value, t 2 ;en it ~ak-a thu
Guilty oven ;ior- uilty. Tho brutal accrifico of human
life as to no avail. td ouch -as the case hero. Hippku,
Chi».f of the : cdioal -k-rvic., of tho Luftwaffe, whvn writing
his tl’.anhs to Hi..’.lor on 0 October 19-i2 said tho following:

• : It is truo that no conclusions os to tho prac-
tico of parachuting can bo dravm for the tie
being, as a very i portent factor, viz, cold,
has so far not yet b-on tukun into considera¬
tion; it places an extraordinary excess burden
on tho entire body and it3 vital to,

that tho r-sulta in actual practice ill v-ry
1 lively prove co be f..r more unfavorable than in
tho present ox >-r - is. * (.K)--69, * -'3. f..

72, 3. 21b).

r. .ah-d his opinion cone .r :i tho necessity for the ty¬
pical wXporinunt described or. - 13 of the final r^ ort
Ruff, .t erg, and R sch-r, t - • itnes3 I"7 testified:

• I ii -ot believe e.:at it was n-cossery to do
this experiment in order to doturnine tho equip¬
ment to supply avi .wars who hcv». to bail out of
an airplane at hi h altitude. : (Ivy, R . 9033).

The ien^ss Ivy stated further that tho information hich


- 36 -


was o;. ..a-u by tho3e oXp-ri-cs on concentration car.p

inntbuJ could have b--n obtained fro:: ani_nls as indica¬
ted by the results of Lutz and ' endt's oni.iol work refer¬
red to in the final report. The differences in tho react¬
ions of htrion 3Ubjoots and onL-als, cs reported by Lutz and
’•endt, ;erc not sufficient to uarrent the parfor.-.oncu of
these hazardous experi.'ijnts on hurian b-incs. (Ivy, ..
9036).

3. .'F+siZ i>ir. «foj.orl..ents (Xa. iot ~nt, iar. 6 (3))

.’or a full description of tho crL'iinolity of tile
freezing experiments, reference .-iy be .‘-ado to tho .rosecu-
tior.'i *3riof or. the defendant jiav^rs.

1 n addition to tho .li^h altitude experiments, the de¬
fendant 'oltz is churned with special responsibility for
end .iartiolection in tho freezing experiments. hilo tho
dofondants Huff and Ro;ibor v . are r. t so charged, tho .:ero
fact that the freezing expvrkjoate ‘.ore cor.duoted follow¬
ing tile criminal hijh altitudo expuri.ents in which thoy
participatod, to^othor with the knowlodje which those two
defendant? had of suoh ox.iorLi-nts, ;:ust bo censidvrcd in
connection with the basic oharso of their participation
in cri i.iel ted leal experiments. additionally, the full
riousuro of tho ^uilt of Huff, .tsmborg, and oltz can only

be appreciated by viewin'; i obvious inter-relation of
those t o oxporii.-nts.

file cold water froosin£ -i.<eri -nts be-.an on 15 rj-
md continued until the -orly part of l9-:3. 2ho
exporl ants were actually ardor, ad by Holzloehnor, Finke,
and Readier, all of whom Wore officers in the .-dicul a-r-
vico of tho Luft offc. Eolzloehner and Pinko collators Wd
with ~echor until DoCouber 19-^2. ..3 Raschor said in u


r:u. ornadiu: on his .nodical -raising:

3y order of the .i-ichsfu-hrcr and Goneral-
ober3ta'o3arzt .rot. Dr. Kippkc, I conducted
'Jxporinents for the Descuc of Frozen Persons'
(started or. 15 ..uyust 19d2) in coop-ration —
for four .ionths — with the Ur.iv-rsity Prof.

Jr. Kolzloehn~r, Kiel, and Dr. Finko of tho
i.icl University 1 '. (N0-230, Proa. 3x. 115, R.
355).

Raaoher also said:

‘Jinco Kay 1939 until today I have b-or. in
military service .ich the ..ir Force'.

The lorandun was dated 17 : a/ 19d3. It should, there¬
for-, be borne in :ind that durine all of tho hiyh alti¬
tude and subatcntiolly ell of tlu. freezing oxpori:~nts,
Rasoh-r was on active duty with the Luft off-, not the Jj.
It was not until Hay 1943 that he want on activ- duty vith
the ’ 'offon jj.

Dofor- the hi^h altitudu -x.j-rinents had actually
b«cn co-iplot-d, tho fre-zir.y experiments v.ero ordered to
he pwrfOiVied by the dofendant altz and his subordinate
Rasohwr. This cor. b- s-en fro . a 1-tt-r of 20 llay 19:2
fro: i ilnb to Karl olff. (5:3-1 Pros. Jx. 62, 200).

.. 3: ort ci. o lat-r, Hascher had a conT-rencc with Hippke,
the Luft;off- Kedioal Inapoctor, and tho oxp-ri:i-ntal
tear: aa enlarged to include Jarisch, Holzloohn-r, and
linger. 2a3cher reported these orders to HL-nlor on 13
June 1912, and passed on liippho's request to have the ex¬
periments conducted in Jachau. C'0-283, Pros. 3:.. Cc, :.
309 . The research assi n. -nt \.aa issued by tho 3ef-rat
for iation Kedicino (2 II 1) under .nthony, to who.: the
defendant 3ocfcer-Freysonc s-rv-d as deputy. (HC-2G6, iro3.
Jx. CG, .1. 2dG).

Lltz ad. itt-d on croj3-_-a inction that tho freezing
-x xri. -nts \/-rc of considerable interest to hia end that
ho had iL:3olf don- riuch work in this fi-ld. (3. 72>:0).


- *0 -


wliz .aintoinad that ho first learned of the freezinc
cn.x-rr.L-r.ts on innotes at Dachau in the summer of 1942
'..hen ho was a3kcd to carry out cny^cra examinations of
thu blood of the experimental subjects. (R. 7426). It
is quite obvious that .’cltz knew of theso oxporir.cnts
as early as I lay 1942 because bo himself was then order¬
ed b lilch to supervise the experiments. It also ap¬
pears highly probable that oltz's institute in UUuich
furnished the equipment for the experiments in Dachau,
eltz had already norfer.iod cold water experiments on
lor - animals and thus thw necessary laboratory equip¬
ment /as available. ( „ltz, 7241). *'oltz admitted
that -ndt had reported to hi. that a request was ..sdo
for w;ie of his equip jwtit to toko to Dachau, but that
he refused this request, (a. 7212). He could not,
however, state with oortcinty that some of his equipment
wo:. .iot in fact us-d at Dachau. (R. 7243).

On 26 and 27 Octob-r 19.2, a confcr-noe took place
in hurnb-rj on r m-dical .roblem* ..ricinc from Di3treS3
at .-a and enther Hardships- 1 , 3ponsorod by the Inspec¬
tor of the I.edical oervic- of the Luftvaffo, under tho
chair.einship of .uithony and -/ith the assistance of tho
def-ndont Beckor-rreysenc. Holzloehner and Raschcr
Cave a roport on the Dachau froozing ^xperl'ients at
this looting* eltz also a lecture on his froo
u;: -rx i-nt3. .eionc the .x-rtaci jant3 wero also the de¬
fendants Ruff, Ror.bx.rc, >chaoi\.r, Bootor-Freysenp, ar.d
.;o3u. It was clear fro.. t..e sir. mxry of his lecture chat
e: rim-nts on hauxn b-ings had bex.n conducted. (NO-

401, .ros. Jx. 93, R. 309). Rn30hor*s statement follow-
inc 'olzloehnor's 1-ctur- also revealed that exporio-nts
had b-wn carried out or. concentration camp inr-atc.3.


- 41 -


Thl3 report caused soncthir.c of e sensation ian c those
present. It was rx.de quite clear that deaths had occur¬
red . (Lutz, R. 272). .ue -Iso, th~ final report on the
uxp-n wnt3 which describes deaths ir. creat detail.
(K0 -j 28, *ros. Lx. 91, R. 252).

fno :oro fact that the freozinc oxperirents were
carried out by officers of the Luftwaffe and with its
full support proves conclusively that the atton >tn of
oltz, huff, and Ronberc. '-one others, to dissoci-t-
s* the salvos fro. the so-called •Raschor cri :es' ere no-

tlinc jut porjurou3 efforts to avoid their cl-ar cri 1-
nri responsibility. Tull mow led ;e that cri.-js had oc¬
curred during the cours- of the hich altitude oxperi-
.e-;.ta C3 known not only to uff, R.nborc, and oltz,
but ilio to such hi^h r.edicel officers of the Luftwaffe
as ilppko. Y-t the freezing expcri:ejnts ere ordered
to be p-rfor.-cd by Rascher, tocother with ottor Luft-
wnffu !octors, includinc the defendant ’.oltz. Rascher,
far fr or. b-ift court-, xrti 11-d by the Luftweffo, retain¬
ed his rank and continued .is mrdcroua work in coopera¬
tion lth other Luftwaffe doctors. Hot only was thoro
no dissociation 1 fro:. Rasohwr and lea3t of all by Ruff,
Roller;, and ultz, but his work rua continuously sup¬
ported by the Luftwaffe. On 19 Fobruary 19d3 Hippka
thanked Hlrnlor •* ost gratefully for the reat assistance
that the cooperation of the >o s "-ant for us ir. oon-
ductinj the -xp-riiient3 . (-X-2 eC, Pros. Jx. 10o,

346). In a conference \rl th .uisoker on 12 Ixrch 15.b, in
connection with Rusciior'a .proposed trunsfer to the ‘of-
f.n Kippke expressly r- Uestud hi;: to stay with she
Ixdical service of the Luft offo. He said that oven
though Rusch-r ni;bt transfer, he . ould still hav- his


- ,2 -


full 3upport, adding:

•I wish that oven iot^r on we coctir.uo
to work toc-thor. -or instunc^, I
i/ould like to 3v0 that you cr.rry out
together with Hor^wrs the rescue fron
iii h-st altitudes and that you c° even
hi her than 21000 .ujtors. For this cuso
30 ,e tW-3ta;o device 3hould bo procured
;o.:e way for the lovz-prcssure car.

Further I would desire that in ycur ex¬
periments on haion bc.ir.es you eould
oonbino the hish altitude expcrin-nts
with the cold experi-'-ents. (N0-270,

Pros. Jr. 110, a. 351).

It has already been poi.-.ted out hov/ ilocibors, to-

t

;>t!.r vith rinse her, made this so.x sucG^ation to : iloh
as .arly as joptor.>or 1Q:2 (supra). It is patently li-
pOLoiile to reach any r-ason-d Judsnent that Ruff,

R v' -r ,, and *Mtz are not responsible for all tile crimes
co.xiittwd during the course of tho hij.h altitude ox>ri-
. ~nts. Tho inusoapabl- corollary to this is also res¬
ponsibility for the cri os oaviittod during th- freezing
wX ri'-ata. 'or those experiments could n-vor have
b. »n oonduotod without full support of tho Jiedical -^r-
vicu of tile Luftwaffe, and fio ut a tl e when tile mani¬
fold hl^h altitude nurdorc vero •.-11 know to all con-


III. Con clusion

Tho pro locution submit 6 that the evidence "roves
that h u<f, n ombers*, and *eltt •ore nrlnclnals In, access¬
ories to, ordered, abetted, took a consenting oart In, and
wore connected - 1 th nlans and enterprises Involving, ond
«rrc members of an orranltation or croun connected - 1 th
medical rxnerlmentation on human subjects without their
consent, In the course of hich exn-rlments murders,
brutalities, cruelties, tortures, atrocities, and other
inhumane acts -ere committed, and that tttelr xrullt h. c been
established under c ounts I, II, and HI of the Indictment.


£lkl£&&£ iaift!L£Ak MS*. I

CASE NO. 1


CLOSING BRIEF FOR
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
AGAINST

OSKAR SCFROEDER


Janes M. UcHnnoy
Aloxr.ndor 0. Kni\y
Arnost horllX-Kochwold
Esther J<mo Johnson


Nurnborg,

16 Juno 1947


For:

Telford Taylor
Brlgr.dlor General, U.S.A.

Chief cf Counsel for «nr Crlnos


cr


BSPHQWeTJQii


It Is alleged, in essence, under Count I of
the Indictment, that the defendant Sonrocder con¬
spired and agreed with ethers, pursuant to a common
design, to perform nodical oxperlnents cn Involuntary
hunan subjects; under Counts II and III [War Crinc6
and Crimes ngainst Humanity, respectively), that ho
vrns a principal In, accessory to, ordered, abetted,
took n consenting part In, and was conncotod with
plans and enterprises Involving nodical experimentation
on Involuntary hunan subjects.

The defendant Schroedor Is charged with spcolal
responsibility for and participation In tho high
altltudo, frooslng, opldonlo Jaundice, typhus and
other vaccine exponents, ana the seawater experi¬
ments. In order to oinpllfy tho Issue, tho Prosocutlcn
withdraws tho charge that ho participated in tho
sulfanllanldo oxporlaunts. Tho evidence has also
shown that Schroodor was ccnneoted with gas
experiments performed In the Natxwollcr Concentration
Canp.

- 1 -


I. Posit lone of Responsibility

As Chief of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe, the
defendant s chroeder held one of the nont important positions
In the O c rnan medical hierarchy. Me made bis career In
military medicine and reached the peak of hla profession.

•^chroeder nerved as a nrdlcal officer " 1 th the
Infantry during the ? lrst "orld w ar. m the nerlod nrlor
to 1931, he was attached an medical officer to a number of
military units. on 1 January 1931, he "a6 transferred to
the A rtny Medical Inspectorate an a Consultant (referent) on
hospital matters and therapeutics " 1 th the rank of obernt-
absnrzt (Major).

in 1935, Sch"oeder became Chief of Staf*’ to G 0 neral-
arzt “lnpke In the ne"ly entabllshed ’'edlral Department of
tho ^olch Ministry for Aviation. He retained this -ooltlon
after uinnkc "as made Tneoector of the J'edlcal Service of
tho Luftwaffe (Innoekteur den Luft-nffen - ^nlto^tsreoens)
in 1937. In February *1940, s chrorder -as appointed A lr
F’loet physician for "ir n (?iottonartt dor iu r t-

flo*to II) with the rank of General stabnartt (Major General).
On 1 January 1944, he ronlaced VlonVr as ^ hief of the
Medical Service of tho Luft~ffe (Chef den SaniraotnwonenR
der Luftwaffe). s lnultnneounly he -as promoted to G on rrel-
oberstabsarzt (Lieutenant G cn rral), -hlch "as the hla-heot
mnk obtainable In the military nodlc.'l n* rviers. (j:o-666,
pros. E*. l4, R. 106 ; M0-44q, pros. ^x. 130, *. 47i).

A s Ghicf of the Medical Sen*ice of the Luftwaffe, all
medical officers of the Gorman A lr E orco were subordinated
directly or Indirectly, to Schroedrr. vis position and res¬
ponsibility are clc-r and unequivocal. (Chart of the nodl-
cal Service of the Luftwaffe, ?:<N-4lQ, prop. Ex. 13, R . I 05 ) .


It is not incumbent ur»on the prosecution to sho- that
a chroeder was familiar -1th all of the details of all of
the^e experiments. It is sufficient to orovo that hr knew
or should have known of the systematic use of involuntary
human subjects for medical experiments by agencies over
which ho cxoccl8ed a substantial degree of oower and nuthors-
lty. v c was under a duty to control his subordinates.
(Application of ynmashlta, S. Ct. 1I17 lqUfi). This
and more the prosecution has nroved.

II. Personal Particlnation in Criminal E xper iments.

A. Ty phus Experiments In B uchenwnld (indictment, ®nr.6

TtHTT"

The criminality of the tynhua experiments performed in
the B uchon-7ald Concentration Caon haa been dealt with at
length in the prosccut ior.» 0 brief on ?'ruro»-sky and need not
bo roponted hero. The charge against the defendant S c hrocdor
In this connection in based u«en the o«*rt iclnat ion of his
oubordlnato Rose In thono experiments after 2 January lqUU,
when Sohrooder became Chief of the Mcdinal Service of the
Luftwaffe. a ch*’Order In rcsnonaibl< for these criminal
activities of Rose. Aonlieatlon o' Y'n > 'nhlta, ouorn.

The entry of * i'arch WUk in vhc B lng B l->ry duals ~lth
exofrlmontol series No. VIII which -as suggests py the def¬
endant "oac. "«enty inmates -cr- vaccinated -1th the Ioscn
vacclno from Copenhagen and subsequently lnlected -1th
typhus infected blood obtained from “paonngc pi raona". Ten
Inmates were used as controls nd -ere infected -lthout
previous vaccinotlon. The entry for 1^ June proves
that 8ix cxnrrimenfl subjects -ere killed "a 1 result of
these cxnerimrnto, three of whom h n d be-^n v-'icinated and
three of -horn —ere controls.

rf hllc Pose denied that he sent the Copenhagen ipscn

vaccine to .'fnjgo«sky or ^lng 'or testing in Buchcn-nld

- 2 -


(R. 622 ^), the contrary -ap rrroved by his letter to
Mrueowsky dated 2 3 eocr.ber 1943. (NO-1136, Pros. Ex. kqo,

R. 6463) . In this letter Rose expressly recuosted
Mrugowsky to have the Iosen vaccine tested In "Ding's ex¬
perimental 'rnnrcment In ®uchem»ald". ?he letter «as In¬
ter forwarded by >rrugo-sky to Dine, -hose signature nnooors
on the bottom of the letter. *hls document corroborates
the entry in the Ding Diary and oayn high tribute to the
mctlculoua accuracy of the testimony of the nrosecutlon
witness Kogon before thlo Tribunal. rt fter being confronted
with this lettor, Rose admitted that hr signed It and that
ho rcquo8tcd Vrugo-sky to test the vaccine In 3uchcn~ald.

(R. 6464-5) •

This murderous exnerlmotJt -ns carried out at a time
-hen Sohrocdor »*fi a tho commander of Rose and -hen he wan
fully responsible for his activities. T hc fact that tho
suggestion to have tho experiments oarrled out was made 29
dnyn boforo Schrooder aasuned ccn.-ar.d o'-er the >'edlc«l
Sorvlco of the Luft-effo In no -ay served to oxculoatr him.
The nrrnnromcnts for tho experiments and their actual cxccu-
tlon all occurred after Schrooder took offled and he there¬
fore bears r soonslblllty for thc nvr- , ‘ra ’nd tortures -hlch
resulted.


B * ?y ohuo a n d gthor v ncc*- r
yatz-el l er


k£IL H'njL I indict cent. Par ,6(J)).
The tyohus experiments n-rfarred by Stobsar-t; rrofeosor
Eurcno Haagcn, Consulting vyglenint to the A lr Fleet R elch,

In tho 3 chlnnrck and l^tt-cller Concentration Camns are


described In considerable detail In the ©resccutlonin brief
against Rose. 3 uch material is not repeated herein and tho
tro briefs must be considered together to obt-ln the full
olcturc. T hc appearance of Hnegen as a defense -ltness re¬
quires consideration of his tret Irony on these experiments.

- 3 -


Htt&gen testified that In the smr.cr of 1943 the defen¬
dant Rose, as Consulting Hygienist to the Chief of the
Medical Sorvlcc of the Luftwaffe, prevailed upon him to re¬
sume active status as Consulting Hygienist to the *lr Fleet
Reich. H "gen also accented n typhus research commission
from the Luftwaffe and as a result of this commission and
his oo3ltlon In the Luftwaffe, he c n rrlcd out certain tyohua
experiments. (R. 9S^4-5)»

Haagon stated that Stftbenrzt Oraefe ’-ns asslrned to
him i\t the Hycrlene institute of the imlversity of Strasshovrg
In 194? by the Luft"ftffo and that Gracfe acted as hlo assis¬
tant. °raofc was militarily subordinated to Luftgnu
Physician 7 hut technically subordinated to vangen.(R.9‘>52).
Haagon was also militarily subordinated to Luftgnu Phyolclnn
7. (R. 9563).

Hangen had developed a murine typhus (rat typhus)
vaoclnc which cont lncd an attenuated virulent (living)
viruo. (R. 9596-7). u a«gcn tcntlflod that ho performed
coraDitnblllty tests "lth this vaccine on ?< inv\u<u of
Schlrr.ook Conocntre.tlo n Camn, -hlch -a 8 a sub-camn of
Kntnwoller. Right Inmates "ero vaccinated -1th.5 oc of
this virulent vaoclnc, ten "1th.5 cc, and ten "1th a dead
vaccine plus .5 or of the virulent vaccine. Three addi¬
tional Inmates -ere vaccinated "1th n dead vaccine for pur¬
poses of como'-rlson. He stated that no serious "-actions
occurred as n result of theso vaccines. (R. 960*). *11 of
these vaccinations were carried out In the month of ’'~y 19''3
.and no vaccinations occurred ftcr that d te, according to
Haagcn. (R. 9636). m the fall of 194* «a<gcn transferred
his activities to Natrwcller on the allrred .-round th"t he
felt a tyohus cnldenlc "as more llkclv there than In
Schlrmcck. (R. 9603). «c requested through -lrt that 100
concentration camp Inmates be nut at his disposal In


Natzmeilrr for purposes of these experiments. -hesc in-
motoa -ere transferred free rt usch-ltz to Natz-eller during
tho month of November 19^, 15 of *»hon died on the -ay.
unagon found the remainder unsuitable for bio purposes and
reouented an additional one hundred -hich -ere made avill-
ablo during December lqU^. He tostl'lcd that of thene, 4o
inmates -ere subjected to a eorlcs of t-o vnecin-tions by
injection to bring about immunity .and a third vaccinntlon
by bc rifle tlon to test the immunity, Ror purposes of
co rparison a second group of 0 inmates dcsign°tcd as "con-
trolo" wfta riven only the third scarification vacelnation.

The e.nmo vaccine -as used for all of those alleged vaccina¬
tions and *88 a nr- vaccine containing attenuated vlruloitt
riokettain nro-nzrckl virus (louse tynhus). The scarlflc'’-
tlon vneeine nnnlled to both irrou"fl of subjects contained a
b mailer quantity of vaoclno than the first t-o injection
vncclnatlono given to the rrouo immunized. In the first
grouo the injected vaccine produced -hat Vazgen described

as tho normal vaccine reaction. Substantially the 6ano ro-

• #

action ocourred in the control groun -hich rocrived only tho
third ocfarlflc tlon vncelno. The reaction -*‘8 no more ncr-
louo than in those -ho -or-* vaccinated by in Section.(R.9619-

7).

Haagcn admitted that the subjects used by him both in
s ohirmock and Natz-cilcr -ere nf cany different nationali¬
ties, among -hon -ore ryosleo nnd poles.(R. 9607). He fur¬
ther testified that thesr inmates -ere not volunteers be¬
cause, an hr s-’ld, he -as only corrylncr out protective vac¬
cinations. (R. 9941-2).

Hangen stated that the only reason hr performed these

vaccinations in Schi-meck and vntz-ollrr --.a because he -as

asked to do so by Kramer, Co nn C onr - nflrr ln yjarz-eilcr. He

and *r«KU;r -ere disturbed about the possibility of .a typhus

- 5 -


coldcmlc In the middle of 19^3 , although he tcstlflrd that.
In feet no tyohus eases actually occurred until March 1944.

(R. 9594-5.). He went to S c hlrneck only because he and
Kramer feared an eolder.lc (R. 9600).

Haagon's testimony, as outlined above, is comnletcly
Incredible dn Its face as -ell ns In vie- of the documents
which were submitted by the Prosecution and available to
Haagen at the time he testified. -^Iratly, It Is utterly
fldlculous to crodlt his statement that he went to Sohlrncck
and Mattwollor only because he feared nn coldcmlc. It la
ridiculous to buodosc that a concentration caran commander,
on his o-n Initiative, sought medical ngoietanoe from doc-
toro In the towns surrounding .a concentration c"rm. The
'TVHA, to -hlch all concentration camns, -err subordinated,
had a very olabomto medical system rnd It Is unthinkable
that n local oohd commander •'ould ask aid from nn outsldor.
s econdly, It In ridiculous t*' auooose that “angon, out of
the kindness of hla ho'rt and the fear o so '•oldomlc
spreading beyond the confines of the c-amn, -ould use hlo
nreolouo tynhus vaccine to orctect the nloerable wrotcheo
-ho wor. lriDrlnoncd In the concent rat ion cenos. Haagon him¬
self stated that ho had very little tynhus vaccine. (R. 9 ^ 13 ).
It has been r. ncstrdly testified to durlnc the course of
this trial that tynhus vaccines were critically short In
Germany during thew-'r and that there wore not even sufficient
quantities to vaccinate doctors, nurses, end other nersonnel
exnosod to soeclal dongor. ^t this v-c^lnc -ould bo used
to nrotoct concentration c*’mo Inmates Is unthinkable,
ihlrdly, !t Is rlafoulous to sucrose that any scientist
could have oosslblv thought that vaccinating Inmates In
Schlrmcck and 50 In Natz-cllrr could Have bad any oosslblc

effect on the likelihood of a tynhus cnldenlc.

- 6 -


That Hansen perjured himself with respect to what he
wag really doing In Natzwcller during the course of his
CyDhus experiments la olcnrly evident from his o«n letter
of 27 June 19^4 to Hlrt. in a letter of 9 May 19^ to Hlrt,
Haagcn requested that an additional ?00 nersons toe furnlshod
to him for hie experiments. (vo-l?t, Pro „. E x . 303 * R. 1396 ).
s upnlcmontnty to this request, he stated In his 1 -ttor of
27 Juno 1944 that, In the subsequent Inoculations "lth
vlrulont tyohua which pro to be undo for the purpose of test¬
ing tho protective vaccine, one nust count on sickness pnr-
tlcularly In the control group which has not received tho
protective vaccine. These aftor-inoculations ar* desirable
In orrtor to estnblioh unequivocally the effectiveness of
the protective vncolnes. This tine 190 persons win be uoed
for tho protective vaccine end 90 for the control Inocula¬
tions." (Jf0-1?7» Pros. Ex. 306, R. 1401).

It should be noted specifically that In the'letter
quoted above, Ha-gon pointed out to nrt th-r slckrnon was
to bo oxooctcd In the control group which hud not reoolvcd
the nrotoctlve vaccine. Hnogen testified that thin addition¬
al group of 200 Innate* requosted by hln was merely for tho
ouroooc of vaccination, Just aa he had dpne in D cccmbcr
1943 and January 194*1 on the 90 experimental subjects. «o
added that in May ho had enough vncelnc for ?00 no-r neroono
and he was meroly trying to lncrrasc the protection in tho
camo. (R. 9613). The falsity of Ha-gcn's testimony Is
clearly apparent from the statement In the letter thnt sick¬
ness wag expected In the control grou^. «e had previously
testl'lod that thcro -oe n« reason -*h%teVr r to expect any
mere oerlouo reaction to the sccrlflc*tion vncelnatlon In
the control crcuu than to the injected vaorlno In the
immunized eroup. (R. 9619). indeed, there was every reason
to cxncct that the vaccine Injected in tho Immunized rroun


would bring about o more serious reaction since more vaccino
was given by injection thsn by scarification. Haogen applied
a much larger quantity of the vaccine in the first two injec¬
tions of the immunized grou_. than in the scrrification vaccin¬
ation of both the Immunized and the control group. The saae
vocclne was used throughout. (R. S71G). The method of vaccina¬
tion, whether by injection :r scarification, hnsna effect on
reaction to the voccino. Haogen specifically t stifled that
u if vo vaccinate by scarification wo can oxpect thot the
effect of the vaccino will be the s-a as if wo inject sub¬
cutaneously or intro-ruacul^rly." (R. 9714 ).

Haagen was quite unable to reconcile his st'-tomont in his
letter to K.rt of 27 June 1944 that "one must count on sickness,
particularly in the control group" with his testimony that
thoro was no difference in the reaction to the vaccine as
botwoen the Umunlzod nd onntrol groups. Indeed, th.. only
possible interpretation of his loiter is that lnstood of
vaccinating the immunised nd control groujs by scarification,
ho, in. fact, infected them rth typhus. K. agon knt» that
the unprotected control subjects -rould become ill vith'
typhus. Hu agon also had no -xplonation for the lett-r of
Kuhnt, Chi ef of Stoff to ^chroodor. of 29 «uguat 1C■«, in
which ho was asked "whether It may bo oezumed that ths typhus
epidemic prevailing ut Nat z woilor at pros : nt is connected
with the vaccino research". (KG-131, Pros. Lx. 309, n.1404).

He testified thot ho hod collated his vice in tlons of the
GO pxpcrLaentnl subjects Curing J.-nuary 1944 nnd that til of
his serological examinations scr- finished no lutvr than -
Fobru. ry 1944 and that tha cxporixontcl subjects wore released
from confinement.’ Haogen submitted c ruport to tha Luft¬
waffe no latdr then .n.y or June 1944 to the offact that the
vaccino had been c success. (R. 5627-9). fhort - s no

reason whatever for Knhnt und ftos- to address such -an Inquiry

— 6 -


ERRATA SHEET


FOR THE CLOSING BRIEF
AGAINST

OSKAR SCHROEDER


On Page 9, line 4 should read as follows:

It lo quite Impossible that vaoclne tests which caused
no typhus In the vaccinnated persons could cause typhus
In other persons, as suggested by Rose during his
exanlnatloh.


to Hasgen Mimn ho hrd long sir.co cocplcted his ex. eriaonts,
occording to his testimony, end submitted a successrcport
to the i-uftv/offc t least two months before the inquiry.


y


It is quite Impossible that veccino tests .\hich c used nc
typhus in ohher persons, as suggested by Hose during lias
cx- in. tion. .. O roovcr, it3hould bo noted that stint's
letter clearly Indie ted an understanding on his pert that


Haven's vaccine research in lirtzwullcr was contemporaneous
with the epidemic. This, H- gen t.stifled, he could not un¬
derstand. (n. 0650). Ha a f on Iso had considerable difficul¬
ty explaining why, in his letter of 19 September 194, in
re*.ly to Kahnt'3 inquiry, he diun't st-te t.'.r-t :;e had con-
duiotcu. no vaccinations or experiments in . - tfcWwll.r since
Jonucry 19*4 i.nd that hi3 v. cclnatlons h-o caused no ill. css
In the subjects, let lone caused typhus cpid.cic. Hoa e on
simply stated in his lettor tr.-t, " .c hereby inform, you th t
no connection existed bv.tWi.en th- cases of typhus in Krtz-


wcller :nd the -xr.ilnationa ceiling with typhus vaccine thet
ia to bv tustwd. 11 (JSO-1-2, rr.a. x. olO, *•. 1406,... plusis
added). Indeed, Kt -gen hLia-lf stated in Itis reply that the
v. ocine wet still under t-et, contr ry to ftls t.stla.ony be¬
fore this tribunal.


Bo-gen would hav- the Tribunal b-llevu th-t h. had no
typhus virus strain which oas pathogenic to hur n beings,
tnot he could not n-Ve brought on e carious case of typhus
Inman oven hco ha tried to do so. (R. 9606, 9612). in fcho
very sumo breath ho to-tlfl-d th-t tn-ro was consid..r:blo
danger of infection in working -bout tco labor-tor;. :nd thet
hog. vc his soist nt3 “risk bonus 1 *. (R. 6606).

Haagen testified th t he perfci ed no voce in tions eft-r


January 1944. H I Iterated th.s t. nd -g ir. during the
course of his examlru-t ion. fR. 9614-5). -hen ak-d his r- -


sons tor nut vaccinating during th- typhus -pi-- ic In

- 9 -


Hatswollcr in tho spring and sun.:or of 1944, which offered
-n opportunity totest th. anti-inf-ctious effect of his
vaccine under n.turcl condi Iona j he lcatly answered thet he
iud to -ok- so -eer.y official cllitary trips that ho had no
tiotC. (R. 9614). Although ho had sufficient vaccino to
justify his taking for 200 additional aqxriarfcl VJctfcsjlnlfy 1^14,
'nis only effort In the typhus -pidoclc, according to hia
tostioony, was to send the- docontcslnctlon equipment.

(R. 9614). It la not readily apparent, to a-y the lost of
it, Jutt why some other doctor or tn -atlatent of Eaegen
ecu id not h-Ve p-r for-aed the vaccinations which Ha-gen wo..Id
have tho Tribunal believe he was ao .nxious to how. done
for the protection or the c ap.

All of the bovo contradictior.a and falalficctioaa

appear upon the fi.ee of Reagon* s testimony ca well aa frooi

tho douur-.nta which ho h . ao crofully studied before hia

oppoarenoo, Tho dccuaenta sdbnlttcd to hie during crcaa-

oxcdiin-tion reveal nia tustirony to have boon p-rjurous

frou' at: rt to finish. H: gen repeatedly testified th t ho

c rriod out no v ccln t Ior.a in Schir.acck fter y 194o.

Ho str.tod thet in Sohirr;ook he only p-rfar.eed single vse-

oin tlon and n-t the surl.s of vaccinations to t at “-.nti-

infeotioua immunity" bcceuao it th:t th e hia "kno>vl-dgc

hadn’t progressed ao f-r". (R. 9636). In connection with

tho Ip3on v-ccine, .bout which Rose h-d correoponuod with

hlr., ho taped lly denied th t h- cv«r proposed to Rooo th t

experiments be c rriod out ith it. H gen's 1-tt.r to

Ro 80 of 4 October 19-13 squarely ountr dicta hi: on both of

these significant points, (ire-2874, i-ros. Lx. 620, R.9651).

He st:tod in his letter that:

“I olro.dy reported to you the nu. -ral r-sulta
of experiments on httmon beings, The s-ru: Liter
la consid erably hif. lur, -I so after •- single vac¬
cina t ion .~Tn co. p ris en v. itF thr- e fcl. os v cc in: -
Elons ..ith do- ctivi-t -d"Vaccine 3 . 1 r.grat that


- 10


It was not possible so for to perform
Infectious experiments on the voceIn-ted
persons- I requested the «nn-ncrbc of
the SS to provide suitable persons lor
voce in tion, but did not receive or.
answer as yet. Wcaro non performing
a further vaccination of human beings ;

1 shall report later about the result.

I guess we will then have reached tho
point to be able to recommend our new
vacclno to be introduced, for tho tine
being . lthout infectious experiments".

(Cephasis added).

It should bo noted first that this letter proves that
Hcogon oarried out vaccination in Schirrcck eftor Bay 1943,
contrary to hlatestlmony. Be stated that "we ere now per¬
forming further vaccinations of human beings." moreover, his
oor.tantion that "subsequent infection" s used in later
l-ttors by him only leant his procoss of multiple vcccincs,
is completely dostroyed. H gcr. himself testified that ho
did not carry out rultiplo vr oclnrtlons in Schirr.eck because
his knowledge had not progressed thet far. It is, there¬
fore, obvious that his use of tho phrase "lnfcotiouo experi¬
ments" in the Utter above, . ~:nt artificial infection with
typhus. I’hc fact is, howov-r, th-t Ha. gen perjured hlnsolf
on both scores. He had c rrlcd out .ultiplo vaccinations in
Sohlmcck with his new vaccine. *hls la clearly - ijliclt in
the letter quoted bove b.cuso he st tea th*t no was even
then performing furt.ier vacoir.. tions. A *his it lncontrov-r-
tibly proved by the experimental not-3 kept by Kiss Crodcl
which will be referred to b low. Since he - s Iready per¬
forming ouch experiments, it io thus ip* r-nt tnct use of
the phrase "infectious experiments" In this letter referred
to ctu 1 .rtlficlcl infection with typhus b^c ua> he vreo
sklng tho SS, through Hirt nd the *hnen~rbo, to supply hlu
with n special group of ixu'-tes Ur the infection experi¬
ments.

In this sr.oo letter of 4 October lt-13, H- gen discusses

hose 1 s report concerning tho ipson v.ccine rror “o r .nhrgon.

-11 -


He concluded his letter by stating: “If wo can get experi¬
mental subjects from th- SS for test vaccinations, it would
be cn opportunity to test the liver vecclno as well on its
anti-infectious offoct. I would than suggest that our rec¬
torial will be used parallel with the lps»n tests", i'hus,
Heegon testified falsely when he s id thrt he did not propose
experiments with Ipser. vaccine. In his letter ho very speci¬
fic 11 . proposed performing anti-infectious experiments with
the Ics^n vaccine ns well cs his own vaccine. This again
proves that the us*, of the phrase "infectious experiments"
could not possibly r-:n "ultiple vaccinations with living
typhus vaccine. The Ipsen vaccine was c deed vaccino; it
contained no attenuated virulent virus. *hrco ticacs vcccinu-
tions with c de.d vaccine could not be designated on "infoc-
tlouo experiment" even by Ha gor.. (R. 0655). moreover tho
defonso's own proof shows thet tho ips^n vaccine h.d lrondy
boon tested for tolor bility end found conpr ruble with other
vaccines used by tho ^ohr ncht. This is clear from Roso'u
lottor to tho Behring-’Vorks and Saegon, among others, dated

29 Soptor.ber 1943. (Rose ^oc. 22, «oso Ex. 21, R. 6216). It
is quite eloer that th- only type of oxp.rln.nt l.ft open for
tho Ipotn v ccino wea precisely the kind that Ha gon proposed,
nrnely, cfter-infoctlon of the vacclntcd end control subjects
with typhus.

Haegon was further inpecchcd by the notes k pt on his
typhus experiments by his :8slstant, hiss Crodcl. (::0-3PL2,
Pros. 3x. 521, h. 9660). Hoagoo definit.ly identified these
notos cs having b-on writtor. by :.iss Crodol.(R. 96S1). hiss
Crodel had bc*-n on assistant af Hangen'# for -any joars and
he found her most tcliiblo. (E. 9701). Ho conceded that . lss
Crodoj. was very careful in her work. (R. 9697). On peg*, three
of the notebook appears a series of entries dting from

30 April 1943 to 27 January 194-'. concerning r. s.ri.s of

- 12 -


experiments in Schireock* The entry for 19 fciy 1945 shows
that two out of four rice inj-cted with his vr.eeins died.

The wntrj for 26 key reeds:

n (4 weeks) 3-6, 0.5 per cursor, and 6 nico 0.5
l.p., 5 deed, ftcr K»7 14,14days, the rest
rftcr 4 weeks. 11

This entry proves that on that deto human beings were
inoculated with Haagen's vaccine. To scy the lu~st of this
entry, five -ice who were similarly vr;cclr.-tcd died as n re¬
sult. The phrnsc "the rest -ftcr 4 weeks" can obviously re¬
fer also to de tha cong experimental p-rsons since it is
quite impossible that this phreso could be used to refer to
the one rejoining mouse. The -ntry for 6 July indicates that
on.that dr.to Haegen end his assistants appeared in Schiruock
for the purpose of withdrawing blood from ten ,-rsor.s, who
had boon previously vaccinated, for a eil-Pellx reaction
test. The entry gives the Seru. titer v lue of -lght of the
cxpcrlm-ntol subjocts. The entry is ended with the 1 conlo
note, "the other two wore not hore anymore". This entry is
conclusive corroboration of the testimony of th- witness,
Ooorgo Hjrtt, who st ted that Bergen had tested his vaccine
at Schir-.eck in the sue. -r of 1943. ApprbXi tely 20 iolish
in stos were used in these experiments : nd, following the lno
cul tions, two of the -x,-ri;ient 1 subj-cta died. Hirts tes¬
tified that he himself sewed up the bodl-s of t v .-so 1 ix tes
in paper begs and delivered thorn for cremation. Hie other
experimental SU j-cto had r. ctions such a high 'overs,
shook and impairment of speed.. <R. 1293-99). His testimony
is further corroDor'tod by Ha gen hi self, who stated that

two grou.s of ten imetes «or~ lnocelrt-d by hi. in
Schirmeck. The -ntry in th~ Crod-l notes obviously hs
reference to on- of th-s- groups of ten end upon the :vr iv-1

of Harden -nd his assistants in the camp for the purpose of

— - - “


withdrawing blood, it -a_s found thet two of th- subjects


tad di-d.

x'he -ncry for 4 October 1945 on pege three of the
Crodoi not-s re:ds:

"(six conths) inocelctod 20 p-rsor.s in
Schirz-ck, Tube -/-2 cc distill-d *etcr, 0.5
per person".

This proves not only thet Kaeg-n t-itifi-d f-lsoly when he
stated thet ho c rried out no typhusvrccin-tions in
Schir.:ock fttr ccy 1943 but -Iso ttat multiple veccine-
tiona with his v-ccin- vor- perform-d. This entry b- rs
the arcie dt- cs R :gcn*s Utter to tas-, r-ferred to rbovo,
which -lao stat-d ttat he u:s perforr ing furth-r vaccina¬
tions. rh- lost -ntry on prge three Is d ted on the origin-
r.l os 27 January 1943 nd reeds:

"(9 conths) clxed with the a cnount

(ea 21 icy) diatillod water tub-,

20 p-rsor.s 1.1 cc each".

The dnto 1943 is obviously ist-ke on th- f' rt cf iso
Crodoi In . king thetntry. This is j rov-d by th- fot ttat
th- p-rlod of tin- indio tod in r renthea-s in the notes re¬
fers to th- period of tL- e the v ccine tad b—n stored.

Hr- gen oo dcitt-d. (R. 9711). Thus th- r-f-r-noc n (9
r'ontha)" l - ns th t th- vecclne being us-d in thet seri-s
of oxp-rlnents tau bo-r. stored for nine . or.thn oxnce 30 npril
1943, the d to ofi th- first -r.tr; or. ; * go thr-e nd the tine
tho veccin- tvea first prc. red. Thet 1C43 in th- origlnrl
entry should really be 1941 -Iso is pycr-nt fro;i p'ge four
of tho notes wh-r-in tta 1 st entry is for 27 J nu ry 1°^-
It 13 - co—on _*ist-ku for one to use th- d t- of the old


j r during the first uonth of th- nev y-'r.

tticgon inocul ted - noth-r group of t-n .ersons in
Schir.^-ck on 10 Octob-r 1943 nd 20 none on 27 January 19'.'.
=3 seen froc th- entri-s on prg- four of the ^rod-1 notes.


Agrin en five of th- origin 1, th- entry for 14 October


1943 proves th't t.n persons w-rc inoculated fr the third
ti.-Q with 1.0 cc of Eatgon»s now vacclno. That this ontry
r_f^rs to the virulent murine vaccir.o end not to tho
Gilclo„ei3tcr deed vrccino cr.n be sewn fror. the precoding
entry which speaks of four control persons being inoculated
threK. times with Gildomcister vaccine. This feet is fur¬
ther apparent by comparing the quantity of the Injections
plus the amount of distilled actor usee per tube of
Hcagwn's new vaocine as s-t forth in eth-r entries.

The entry for 25 hay 194*1 on page 7 of the Crodol
notes states that 30 persons wer- inoculated in K ttwcil-i.
"Tea inoculation took pi cc during the lnaub. tion p-riod
ir transport containing Iso aick people) 13 beerno sick In
the period fma 29 y 50 9 Jure, of these two died". Haegen
lird repeatedly .testified th t he p-rlor..cd no v:ccin tiono
nft-r Jnnu r> 1644 in JiatiWeil-r. .<ot only did he perform
experiments ofter J?nu ryl94-«, but as proved by the entry
quoted above, subjects died during the course of such
per.. er.ts. By his own t>stii any K -gen proves that those
entries deal with an oxp-ri ent during which the subjects
Wwrv vrtiflcldlly infected with typhus. .Uthough tho entry
ouphonlously st tea th t the v ccin-lions "taok place iyring
the lncube tion period", Ka gen testified, a had be-n re-
potedly suggested by the *rosocutlen, t»_ t It is impossible
to know rhen p-rsona 're ir. the lr.cub tion period, Tho in¬
cub-tion p-riod is that tL e between the inlection nd the
first rr.nifost tions of the disoaao. accordingly, it is
irpossible to know th-t . v coin:tion takes pi ce during
the incubation period unl-ss the person ha3 boon artificially
infected so th- t the d-t- cf infection is known, (H* gen,

R. 9701-2).

It i3 signiflc r.t to noto also that the chart on page

14 of i iss Crodel's notes uses the .<_rd U nuchinpfnn^ 1 ',

- 15 -


coining .*fter-v= ccInation or re-inoculation, in connection
•sith multiple vaccination exporio-nts on two elec (both of
Vh0u lacid °otnlly died), rather then th- word "ncchlnfoktion",
zoning after-infection or subsequent infection, which was
repeatedly used by Haagon in his letters concerning experi¬
ments on human beings.

Hcogon testified that the defendant Schrocdor visited
hir on 25 hay 19,4, the v-ry day on which he was carrying out
experironts in Hattwcllcr. (Haagon. R. 9632). r.hile it is of
course entirely possible that Schorcdcr ray hove visited
Hnogon on 24 or 26 Kay, rather than cn 25, the fact is quite
cl.rr that in any event Haagen's very inportant e*crincnts
on typlms were discussed with Schrocder, cor.tr ry to the
testl:«n> of both t:en. The s= C o is true with respect to the
vidit of tho defend-nt Bockor-Froyoeng which took place
sliortly eft-r th-t of Schrjodcr (He gen, R. 9569), and of
Rose who visited It agon both in 1943 and 19,4. (Hoagon,

R. 9670). Horgen's st to^nt th t B.ck-r-rr-ya-ng c:.r>e all
the way froe Berlin to discuss with him tho procurement of
rabbits and mice is s incr-cibl- as th- r-st of Ho: gen's
testimony.

The defendant ^chroodcr testified that Heag-n's re-
oorrch anignr.ent was not secret ond attempted to ergue on
tluit basis that nothin*- crininrl could have happened.

(H. 3654). <ithout pausing to point out thu stupidity of such
cn ergu; ant, suffice it to s y that *ci:ro-dox-s testa ony
W“s proved to b. Ms- by a list of research cssign^nts
lssuwd bj schrood.r's office in 1944. Hahn's tyjhus work

'" a ®lr*dlfied secret. (KO-934, <ros. ix . 45G, R. 3656).

- 16 -


The testimony of tho witness Hales corroborates
the proof outlined herein above and in the brief against
Rose that h'aagcn perforaed experiments to test the
Immunity of his vaccine by artificially Infecting the
subjects with typhus. Nolos, a Dutch citizen, was ar¬
rested by tho Gestapo In 1940 for allegedly participa¬
ting In a resistance movement. Although he was tried
and aoqulttod, ho was ooanlttod to Suchonwald Concen¬
tration Cnnp In April 1941. In ICarch 1942 ho was trans¬
ferred to Natzwoilor and In Kovcnber 1942 he become a
nurse In the Ahncnorbc experimental station thcro.

(R. 10409-10). Ko stated that In the lottor part of
1943, 100 Gypslos wore sent to ilotzwollor from Auschwitz
for Haagon's typhuo cxporlncnts. Haarcn found thon
physically unsuitable and thereafter an additional 90
Gypsies vero shipped In. Thoso were dlvidod Into two
groups and oonfinod In separata rooms In tho Ahnencrbc
experimental station. Ono group was vaccinated against
typhus. Approximately 14 days later, both groups wero
artificially lnfcotod with typhus. A6 a result, about
30 of tho subjects died. Kales nuroed tho victims
himself and saw the bodies. He talked to the subjects
frequently and knows they did not voluntcor, as Indeed
Haagcn hlnsolf admitted on tho stand. Tho Gypsies
v/oro of various nationalities Including Poles, Czechs,
Hungarians, and Germans. (R. 10419-23).

Hangon's Influenza experiments on Inmates of
Schlrneck nay be briefly noted. He received an Influen¬
za vaccine research assignment from the -icdlcal Scrvloo
of tho Luftwaffe In January 1942, which was extendod In
1943 and 1944. (Hanger., R. 9570). He vaccinated 20

women In the Schlrneck Concentration Camp In 1943 with


- 17 -


hie virulent Influenza vecclnc. (R. 9571). He testi¬
fied that this was not an experlnent hut a protective
aonsure. Re nnlntalnod he was not Interested In test¬
ing the vaccine, but norcly feared an influenza epl-
donlo ns woll as a typhus epidemic. He vaccinated
those lnrmtes in the nost oxposed places. (R. 9572-3).
Although Haagon had only onough vaccine for 250 to 300
persons, ho showed this roanrkablo oonccrn for the In-
nates of Schlrncck. (R. 9571). Slnco his work In
Schlrnook had nothing to do with his rosoarch nsslgn-
nont fron tho Luftwaffe, ho tostlflod that ho did not
chargo such oxponsoo to tho Luftwaffe, (R. 9574). Hlo
account of expenditures to the Luftwnffo on lnfluonzn
rcoonroh for 1943-4 oontradlotod hln. (K0-3450, Pros.
Ex. 519, R. 9567). This doounont also provco ho nado
a trip to Sohlroook on 12 Fobruary 1944, contrary to
his tostlnony.

Haagcn'c long continued notlvlty In Sohlrnook
and Natzwollor can ho clearly seen fron hlo aocount
hook on rosoarch tasks on yollow fovor and typhus. Hlo
work In Sohlrnock began as early as 20 April 1943.

Ho was placing tolophono calls to Sohlrncok Into In
August 1944, over a year after Hnagcn'o allogod "last
vaccination" thoro. These accounts uoro charged to
tho liodlcal Sorvlco of tho Luftwaffe. (IJO-3037, Pros.
Ex. 542, R. 10365). Thoy wen- in such dotall as to
roveal on their face his activity in the concentration
oanps. (Sec also i:or3450, Pros. Ex. 519, R. 9587).

Haagon adclttcd U.at by Infection experiments ono
could cic-an only one of throe things (1) subsequent
artificial Infection with typhus ( 2 ) vaccinations of
largo groups of pooplo and then studying efficacy dur-


lng ft natural epidemic and (3) Tcll-Follx reaction
tests carried out before and after a subsequent vac¬
cination. (R. 9601). He adnlttod that the Prosecu¬
tion's Interpretation of ■infection exocrine its" and
"subsequent Infection" was equally consistent with hlo
or/n. (R. 9611). Ko ednlttcd that tho word "nachlnp-
fung" (subsequent vaccination) could have been used as
well as "nachinfolction" (subsequent lnfootlon). (R.
9611).

There arc no refined questions of docuncntnry In¬
terpretation presented to the Tribunal. Tho slnplo
Issue Is whether Haakon connlttcd crlncs during tho
oourso of hlo oxperinonts. Thore Is no dispute that
theso wore "experiments". Hnngon repoatodly usod tho
word In hlc own lottors. There is no dispute that tho
lnnatco used as subjects uoro nor.-voluntocr6, among
whom wore nationals of Ocmnn oocuplcd countries.

Han-on adnlttod as much. Tho documents and “ho tcotl-
aony provo that a substantial nunbor of oubjocts wero
killed during the course of thoeo cxporlncnts. (Sco
rlao tho Prosocutlon'6 brief against tho defendant
Roso). Against this overwhelming proof stands tho
tostlnony of Hnngon and Rose, both of whon perjured
thonsclvcd repeatedly on tho stand. Indood, their own
testimony Is tho best olrounstantlal proof as to tho
orlnlnallty of tho experiments. One does not grnti-
tuously testify falsely. Thoso who fonr tho light of
truth conr.lt perjury. These nor. rogerd their oaths as
lightly as thoy did tho lives of their hclplcso vlctlns.

The guilt of Rose and Haogen is tho nensure of tho
guilt of Schrooder. As a medical offloor of the Luft¬
waffe, Kaagen was subjoct to hi* orders. (Schrocdor,

R. 3636). The office of Schrooder Issued tho research


- 19 -


nsslpnncnts pursuant to which these experiments were
carried out. It provided the funds with which to carry
them out. It received roports on the experiments and
know they were performed on concentration camp inmates,
(supra; 2ycr, R. 1758). Schroedcr was himself in
Strr.ssbourp at tho very time the experiments wore wolnp
on. His aullt is clear and unequivocal.

C. Gas Experiments (Indictment, Par. 6 (D))

The Nodical Scrvlco of tho Luftwaffe, which was
subordinated to tho defendant Schroedcr, also partici¬
pated in the criminal pas experiments by Kirt and Haapen
in tho Hatswollcr Concentration Camp.

Hirt's pas experiments in Nntzwoilcr bopan in
November 1942. (NO-098, Pros. Ex. 263, R. 1028).

They continued through tho summer of 1944. (Roll, R.
1058). Durlnp this period approximately 220 inmates
of Rusolnn, Polish, Czech, and Gorman nationality woro
experimented on with pas, of whom about 50 filod. Thoy
did not volunteer. Their bodies were horribly burned
by tho pas and tho victims wero frequently blinded.
(Roll, R. 1052; 1057{.Halos, R. 10412-18, 10432).

Both Roll and Rales testified that a doctor of
the Luftwaffe worfcod with Hlrt on thoso experiments.
(Roll, R. 1059, 1061; Rales, R. 10448). This was
Oberarzt dimmer, a Staff Physician of the Luftwaffe.

Ho was put at tho disposal of Hlrt for theso "war Im¬
portant" pas experiments by Luftpnu VII. (::0-195,

Pros. Ex. 256, R. 1033). Hnapen testified that t/lm-
racr was one of Hirt's assistants. (R. 9581-2). Sim¬
mer worked with Hlrt on tho pas experiments from the
summer of 1942 until 1944. (KO-196, Pros. Ex. 261, R.

1027; 4S2-PS, Pros. Ex. 267, K. 1034). dimmer was co-


c:


author nth Btrt of a report In 1944 on the treatment

of Cost gas pounds. This report spooks of heavy.

nodlUh, and light gas sounds. (H0-099, Pros. Ex. 268,

1035). Schrocdor Is responsible for the orlncs of

dinner In tho eourso of his rosearoh work. Application
of Ynnashltn . aupra.

Tho proof hns shown that Haogon also perforned
.00 experiments. Although Haogon admitted that he know
and hod eontnet. nth Hlrt and Blckenhoeh, uho sore
professor, nth Haogon at Strasbourg. ho denied any
kneslodgo of their gas experiments. (H. g 58 4-5). Ho
would likewise have tho Tribunal believe that ho knew
nothing of tho skeleton collection, tho bodies for
which were In tho basement of tho Anntonlenl Institute
five minutes from Hnagen's office. (H. 9S es). The

affiant Wagner, who was a draftsman working for Hlrt,
stntod that:

byProf « h ? t 1 was onployod

of Iho nlnp untl1 th0 cnd

nLa * ? 'f 1 hrv .° ooon doounonte nnd

that Si'S l r °° Whl0h U 10 00 *'talr.

nnn 1 HW ? n > Dlokcrhof hr 70

Thnnn ^°r CXPOrl ° CntB 00 hUr -° n NllnW.
J5S!!lS h °5° ata S i plV ° th0 rOOUltB Of

othoSoi",? nado wlth poison Rfto and
other elnllar Bubstancos.


■For Prof. Hei , ^ on l I had to anfco n
chart of about 2 x 1 no tors, on which
"5S Ji®J od . thc w1 ' J o conbot Pnscc
ShKh h0lr ? h ™ lcr ' 1 fomulna, and

thit h mS2 V JnSS iCntlOM 0n th0 ^nncro
I,,*;'"J" P ould encountor. I have do-

S hitin^K f xpcr J no 5 lt8 been nndc

(i!C " 881 -«*•

Tho affiant Sohuh, who worked In tho Hedicnl Rcsoareh
Institute undor Hnngon, stated that: Troa Uoyof I
have learned, too, that Haogon together with Prof.
Hlrt nado some trials of oonbat gas (Lost) In Nats-


- 21 -


seller on Jewish prisoners. - (NO-685, Pros. Ex. 314,

R. 1413). Kaagen ndnlttcd that both Schuh And Meyer
worked under hln In the Medlcnl Research Institute.

(R. 9583). Moyer was killed In an air raid In tho
fell of 1944..

Tho statononts of Sngner and Schuh are corrobora¬
ted by tho tostlnony of 5rocre and Hales. Brocrs, a
Dutch physician, testified that ho was arrestod for
rooistanoo activities and, although twice trlod and
acquitted, ho '/as sent to Nattwellcr as a Kncht und
Hobel (Night and Fog) prisoner In July 1942. (R.

10388-90). In May or Juno of 1944 ho asalstod ar.-
othor lnraato nanod Booggarts In porfomir.g autopsies,

In tho proooncc of Klrt, on ocvoral Oypsios killed In
poison gas oxperiaents. During the autopsies, Hnagon
and a blond girl (undoubtedly Miss Crodcl) cane In'to
noo what was being dono. (R. 10392-5).

Hales testified that about May 1944 Hnagon con¬
ducted gas cxperlncnto on npproxlnatoly 8 survivors
of tho typhus oxporlr.cn*s, ocvcral of rrhon died as a
rosult. They woro not voluntocrc and wore of Crcoh,
Polish, and Hungarian nationality. (R. 10423-6).

This is corroborated by tho excerpt fror. tho nonthly
report of the Hatswcllcr canp doctor for Juno 1944,
which reads as follows:

■ IV ..lsecllancous

TT5 Experimental Station: during tho
period oovered by this report, cxncrl-
aents on 16 gypsies wore carried out
at tho experimental station. Three
deaths have been registered.* (NO-607.

Pres. Ex. 195, R. 732, see cupplenontal
translation).

TThilc this excerpt does not spoolfy tho typo of ex-
porlnont, It can only be tho ga6 or tho typb-s,-.ao ; .-
t hef word the only cxodrlsonts bdl=g performed in -liatx-
-/ellcr. Haagen admitted


thct excerpts from other reports dated 25 November
1943, 24 Docenber 1943, and 1 February 1944 probably
referred to his typhus experiments. (R. 9640-1,

9647).

D * Epldcnlo Jaundlco Experiments (Indictment, Par. 6 (K))

In Juno 1944, a conference of experts was called
x*or the purpose of coordinating Jnur.dlco research.

This conference took place at Breslau and was presided
over by Schrolbor. (Gutzclt, R, 2752). Handloocr,
Gutzclt, and Hoagcn were all present at this confcrcnoo.
(Gutzolt, R. 2717). Hangon admitted during cross-
examination that oxporlncnts on human boings wore dis¬
cussed. That criminal cxperlaor.to on concentration
orJBp lnmatoo wore discussed Is clear from tho fact
that Schrolbor In Janunry 1945 personally requestod
^rugowoky to make available lnnatc6 for hepatitis ex¬
periments by Dr. Drosol. (NO-1303, Pros. Ex. 467, R.
5400). Schrolbor aoaignod groups of physicians to work
together on Jaundice problems. Dchnon, Gutzclt and
Han,ton woro assigned to one of theso 'roups. (Gutzolt,

R. 2717). On 12 Juno 1944, Hoagcn hlnoclf requested
Schrolbor to assign Dohncn to work with hln. Gcneral-
arzt Sohrolbcr at that tine was connnnrtor of the mili¬
tary Hodlcol academy under Handloscr. (NO-299, Pros.

Ex. 190, R. 739). Schrclbcr conpllcd with this request.
(M0-300, Pros. Ex. 191, R. 740).

On 24 Juno 194-., Gutzolt wrote to Hanger that ho
was also requesting Schrclbor to assign Dohucn to
Haagcn. He went on to state that he was making prepara¬
tion for experiments on human beings and he wanted
Haogon to supply hln with his virus material. (NO-184,


Pros. Ex. 193, E. 743). Hnagcn replied to Gutzclt's
lettor on June 27, 1944 stating that he -as clad thnt
Dohnen would be assigned to hln as of 15 July. He
further stated that he was working with Xolk, Bucchncr
and Zuchschwert, all officers of the Luftvnffo, on
Jnundloo problems and that ho had arranged with Xolk
to conduct hunan experiments with his nntorlal. (NO-
125, Pros. Ex. 194, R. 744). On the snno dote Hnngcn
wrote to his collaborator Kalk, who was a consultant
to defendant Sohroodcr and a specialist on hepatitis
(Schrocdcr, R. 3632), stating as follows: "In the
onclosurc I send you a copy of a letter from Gutzolt
and ray reply. Wo must prooood as coon as poaolblo with
the experiments on huoan bolnps. These oxperinents,
of course should bo curried out at Strnsobourg or in
its vicinity. Could you in your official position take
tho nooosaary stops to obtain tho requirod experimental
sub .loots. I don't know what cert of subjects Gutzolt
has at hlo disposal, whethor they aro soldiers or other
pooplo". (HO-12S, Pros. Ex. 195, R. 745).

Tho roraark about "other people" is -n obvious rc-
foronoc to concentration ennp lr.artcs, upon whon Hnngon
had long sinco been oxporiaenting with virulent typhus
virus, ’/hllo tho reference to "Strassbour;: or in its
vicinity", indicates tho Concentration Cnnp Nnttwollor.
The witness Olga Eyor, secretary to Haagen, testified
that prisoners were requested for tho opldor.vo Jnundloo
oxporlraonts. (R. 1759). h'aagon would have the Tribu¬
nal beJiovo that he had reference to Froiburg and Hcl-
dolbcrg which are 60 and 100 klloncters, respectively,
from Strassbour*, while Hattwoilor was only a few kilo-
no tors away. (R. 9579).


- 24 -


Kerr Knl* and hie Chief, the defendant Schrocdor,
were well advised on how to procure concentration c.nnp
ir.nptee for medical experiments hooeuso only a few weeks
before Schrccdcr hlnsolf had requested Inmates from
Klnmlor for the sen water experiments. (NO-185,

Pros. Ex. 134, R. 483; sec Infra).

E - Soa.gatcr Expcrlncnts (Indictment, Par. 6 (G))

The seawater experiments conducted on lnnntos of
the Dachau Concentration Canp was a crlnlnal underta¬
king from Its very Inception In lay 1944. Aftor two
and ono-half years of nurdcrous medical oxperlnontatlon
on concentration oanp lnoatos by doctors of the Luft-
waffo Including tho hlmh altltudo, frcorlng, gas, and
tyyhus oxporlnonto at Suohonwald and Natrwollor, the
dcfondnnt Sohroodor with certain knowledge that sono
of tho subjects would probably dlo, personally ordered
tho carrying out of tho sea water experiments. His
subordinates, oockcr-Froyscng, Bolglbocok, and Schaofor
participated in tho planning and execution of them.

On 19 liny 1944 a conference was hold at tho German
Air Ministry (RLM) which was attondod by Chrlstonscn,
Schlcklor, Bcckor-Frcytcng, and Schaofcr, among others.
This conference was oonccrncd with tho problem cf tho
potability of son water. Two methods of making son
water drinkable wero then available to tho -icdlcal
Service of tho Luftwaffe. One, tho so-called Schaefer
method, had boor, chemically tested and apparently pro¬
duced potable sea wator. It had tho disadvantage,
however, of requiring substantial amounts of silver
which was available only In Halted quantities. The
second method, so-cnllcd 5orkatlt, was a substance


r«hloh changed the taste of sen water hut did not ro-
covc the anlt. It had the advantage of slaplloity of
■onufacture and use.

At the conference on 19 >.y the defendant Bockcr-

Freysong reported cn certain clinical cxpcrlner.ts which

had been conducted by von Slrnny to tost B 0 rXatlt. Ho

cpjic to the conclusion that tho oxpcrlncnts had not

bcon conducted undor realistic onough conditions of son

distress. He reported that tho Chief of tho Hodical

Scrvico of tho Luftwaffe was

■convinced th'-t, if the n r rkn nothod is
used, danago to health had to be cxpoc-
tod not later than 6 days 'ftcr taking
Bcrkatlt, '.Thick dannge -7111 result In
pornanont Injuries to health and - ac¬
cording to tho opinion of Untcrarrt Dr.
Sohaofor - trill finally rosult In doath
after not letor than 12 days. External
aynptou are to bo expected such nc de¬
hydration, diarrhea, convulsions,
hallucinations, and finally death’

(NO-117, Pros. Ex. 153, R. 479).

«b a result of this oonferonoo it *7as agreed to
conduct non oxperlnonts. They aero to includo a ser¬
ies of oxperlnonts for n anxlaun of six days during
which one group was to bo given see wator Processed
;lth Bcrkatlt, another group ordinary drinking wator,
another group no drinking water nt nil, and tho final
group ouch water os was availnhlo In tho onorgcncy
sea distress kits thon used. A second series of ox-
porinonto was dooldod upon and tho roport statod:

^Persons nourished with son water and
Bcrkatlt, and as .'.let also the oner-
gonoy oon rations.

Duration of cxpcrlner.ts: 12 days

Since In the opinion of the Chief of
tho /.cdleal Service pomnnent Injur¬
ies to health, that Is, the doath *f
the cxperlccnt"l subjects has to bo
expected, as cxperlaontnl subjects
such persons should be used as will
be put rt tno disposal by Rclchs-
fuchrer SS B . (’.'0-177, supra).


- 25 -


Thus, with full knowledge Chet the use of Berkatit
for periods of six day® would result lr. permanent In¬
juries to the experimental subjects and that death
•ould result no Inter than the 12 th day, plnns wero
nnde to conduct experiments of 6 and 12 days duration.

It should he noted th»t the conference report docs not
state that the duration was a naxlnun of 12 «* nys ~a In
tho ease of the first series of ex’ rlncr.t . The dura¬
tion wns to bo 12 days lr. any event. Since It was
known that volunteers could not bo cxpoctcd undor such
conditions, tho oonfcronco dotornlncd to uso lnnatcs of
concentration oanps which would be put at their dispo¬
sal by tho SS. Ht a second mooting on 20 ;lay 194-i,
the report states that "It was dccldod that Daohnu was
to bo tho cl^oo whore the oxperlmor.to wore (to bo)
conducted". (NO-177, supra). Copies of tho report on

the conferences wero nent, among others, to tho Nodi¬
cal Experimentation and Instruction Division of tho
Air Foroe, Juoterbog, to which tho defendant Schncfor
and Holzlohnor, who conduotcd tho freezing experiments
with Raooher, wore attached; the DVL, Berlln-Adlorshof,
to which tho defendants Ruff and Romberg wor attached;
to tho Nodical Inspectorate of tho Luftwaffe (L.In.1*1);
and tho hclchsfuohrcr SS. The rowort was signed by
Christensen of tho Tochnicnl Offlco of tho RL!!.

On 7 Juno 19»i the defendant Schrocder wrote to
Hinnlor through Grnultz askln - for concentration oanp
lnnatcs to bo used as subjects In tho son water experi¬
ments. This letter roads In part as follows:

■Earlier already you made It possible for
tho Luftwaffe to sottlo urgent nodical
matters through exporlncnte on human be¬
ings. Today again I stand before a deci¬
sion which, -ftcr numerous experiments on
animals ns well as human experiments on
voluntary experimental subjects, demands
a final solution: The Luftwaffe has si¬
multaneously developed two methods for


- 27 -


making sen water potfiMe. The ono me¬
thod, devoloood by a Jlodlcrl Officer,
reaoves the colt from the sen water
and transforms It Into real drinking
water; the second method, suggested by
an engineer, leaves the salt content
unchanged, and only removes the un¬
pleasant taste fron the sea water. Tho
latter method, In contrast to the first,
required no critical raw natcrinl.
(Engpassrohstoffc). Fron the ncdl'al
point of view this method nust be
viewed critically, as the administration
of concentrated salt solutions can pro-
duoo severe symptoms of poisoning.


* As the experiments on human tvlr.^s
could thus far only bo carried out for
a riot! ot four days, and as Practi ¬
cal demands require a remedy for tHooo
who are In distress sea up to 12
da ys, appropriate experiments aro ne ¬
c essary .


"Required aro 40 healthy test subjects,
who must be avallablo for 4 whole weeks.
as it Is kno^n from erovlouc experiments ,
that necessary laboratories cxlnt In the
concentration camp ftachnu. this camp would
be very suitable *. 016- lc5, Pros. Ex.
134,.A. 4Go, cmpfiasls added).


Sonroodcr cor.cludod his lottcr by stating that


tho experiments would bo dlroctcd by tho defendant


Selplbocck.


This letter proves that tho defondant Sabroodor
had knowludgo of the provlous criminal oxpcrlncnts con¬
ducted by doctors of the Luftwaffo on concentration
oanp Inmates. Twice he mentions Previous experiments
which wore node possible through the furnishing of
Inmates by tho SS. Tho letter further proves that tho
experimental cub .loots were not to be volunteers.
Schrocdor expressly states In tno second sentence of
the first paragraph that numerous experiments had al¬


ready been conducted on ‘voluntary experimental sub¬


jects" but that the oroblcn now demands final resolu¬


tion, since such experiments had been carried out for
a period of only four day6 while practical demands re¬
quire a remedy for those In distress at sea up to 12


days. The defense has oontestod the translation of the
second sentence In the first paragraph and has offered
an alternative translation which would have Schroeder
asking tho Roichsfuchrer for voluntary experimental
subjects. Tho translation experts of the Office of
Chief of Counsel for War Criaes havo certified to tho
translation quoted above and it is relied upon by tho
Prosecution. That this translation is correct is en¬
tirely obvious fron the conference report of 19 and 20
.'■lay 19*14 which oxprcssly stated that slnco deaths v/oro
nntlolpntod in those experiments, only such porsons
would be used ns wore made available by Klnnlcr. It
is ridiculous to speak of volunteers in oxporlmcnto
in which doath is anticipated as a foregone conclusion.
Moreover, it should be remembered that the Luftwaffo
had long slnoo been oxporlncnting on involuntary sub¬
jects in concentration comps. The son untor experi¬
ments wore only ono in n scrloo of crlmlrml experiments
lnltintod by tho Luftwaffe. Schroeder turned to tho
SS beenuso ho knew of these previous experiments.

That thoso experiments -fore carried out on in¬
voluntary subjects is also provod by Orav/ltt' let tor
to Klnnlcr on 28 Juno 1944 (HO-179, Proa. Ex. 135, R.
485). In this iottcr Grawitz reports tho opinions of
Oobhnrdt, Oluooks, and Kobe, as well as hl6 own, on
tho proposed experiments. Oluccks stated that ho had
no "objections whatsoever to tho experiments requested
by the Chief of the acdlcal Service cf the Luftwaffe
to bo conducted at tho experimental station Rasohor in
tho Concontratlon Canp Dachau. If possible. Jews or
prisoners held in quarantine arc to be used ". It is
impossible to lnnglno n Jew being asked to volunteer


- 2S -


for anything In the Third Reich when they were being
slaughtered by the 3111Ions In the concentration camps.
Kobe stated that "I proposed taking for this purpose
the asocial gypsy half-breeds. There are people among
then, who, although hellthy, are out of the question
08 regards labor committment. Regarding theso gypsies,

I shall shortly ockc a special proposal to the Roichs-
fuonror, but I think It right to select from among
these pooplo the necessary number of test subjects.
Should tho Rolchafuehror agree to this, I shall list by
name tho persons to be used *. It Is a little difficult
to Imagine how Kobo, Chlof of the Reich Criminal Po¬
lice, could "Hat by name" gypsy voluntoers for those
cxrorlnor.to. Grawltr raised tho objection to the uso
of gypsies on tho ground that they were "of somewhat
dlfforont racial composition" and he therefore wantod
experimental sub .loots racially coapr.rablo to Euro^oan
pooples. Himmler decided that gypsies plus three
others for oontrol should be used. (NO-163, Pros. Ex.
136, R. 487).

Schrocdcr testified tnat he tried to armngo for
^ carrying out tho oca water experiments at the Luftwaffo

Hospital In 5runs*’ick. Ho remembered very spcolfloally,
according to his testimony, th-t he had contacted the
connandor of th"t hospital on 1 June 1944. Ho stated
that ho also ntton* tod to obtain students ".a experi¬
mental subjects from the Luftwaffe Medical A-adeny in
tho latter onrt of Hay 1944. Both of those attempts
to obtain volunteers allegedly failed booau6C of tho
lack of clinical f"cllltlcs and the calling un of stu¬
dents to active service. Schrocder testified that he
wont to the SS only after he 1 d exhausted all other
. osGlbilitlec. He would h"Ve tho Tribunal believe


30 -


(


that there was no place to find -10 volunteers and the
necessary clinical facilities, although von Slrany had
conducted such experiments In Vienna on Wehrmncht sol¬
diers, but of course for only four days . (R. 3657, 9).

In connection with this te6tlcony of Schroedcr's,

It should bo notod that tho records of the oonforcncc
on 19 end 20 Hay 19*14 were immediately sent to the SS.

Tho deolslon to use concentration cr.np Inmates did
not await any efforts to find volunteers but was made
at tho oonforcncc of 19 Uoy. It was known that boc.ausc
of tho very nature of tho oxpcrlncnts which ore planned,
thnt volunteers could not be obtained. Contrariwise,

It Is Impossible to believe th^t tho conuandlnc offi¬
cer of the whole of tho .icdlcal Service of tho Luft¬
waffe was unable to obtain -10 volunteers for tho ex¬
periments which he clalno were so Innocuous. Tnoro
wore no regulations which forbado experiments on
monbers of tho Y/chrnacht. (Schrocdor, H. 3660). Tho
dofenoe witness Hangon, in oonneotlon with hlo propooed
epidemic .Jaundice experiments on human boln.ro, as sot
forth In his letter of 27 Juno 1944 to Kalis, who was
nttrohed to tho staff of Sohroeder, lnslntod at great
length thf't ho planned to use voluntocro from the ctu-
dcr.t companies of the tfohrnncht at Straeabourp, Frcl-
burr, or Holdolborc. (R. 9578). He was positive
that student voluntocrc would ha.vc boon made available.
Ho otatod that ho oould havo used then during their
vacations. (Kaasron, B. 9579). Knlfc wajj al60 6ure
that this could h-ve beer. dono. Kea.rcn emphasised
ropoatodly that volunteers wero available. (H. 9580).
Clinical facilities would have been easily obtained In
reserve hospitals. (Hnagen, H. 9561).


- 31 -


Schroedcr testified that he didn't know that B c i~
kctlt would cause death In not sore than 12 days. (R.
3656). Ho couldn't roocBbcr whether Schaefer hnd told
hln tha.t taking Bcrkatit for 12 days would cause death.

In a pre-trial interrowa.tlon, he specifically denied
thr.t. (R. 3668). Ko testified that while Vth Bccl'.cr-
Freyseng and Schaefer wore at the Hurnborg nesting In
October 1942 at which the report on the Greeting ex¬
periments at Dachau was given, nolthcr of then report¬
ed to hln about it, when he proposed going to Dachau
to conduct the Gon water experiments. (3. 3669).
Sohroodcr donlcd th-t he had over soon t.ac report on
tho nesting of 19 rnd 20 Jay 1944 on the sen rater ex¬
periments. (B. 3662). Although a copy of this report
was sont to Klnnlor, he would have tho Tx-lbunal bolievo
that it was a sheer ooincldcnco that ho aurnod to Hln-
nlcr for experimental subjocts without h* vlng a con the
rerort. (R. 3669). Ho tostlflod that ho told Ora-
wltt In a mooting with r.ln that ho wanted tho experi¬
ments carried out on dishonorably discharged ooldlors.

(R. 3670). Ornwltt allegedly said th"t he w ild rcs-
poct this wish. Schroodcr stated that he nado It
clear to Ornwltz that the subjects had to bo volunteers,
v/lth a llttlo food ns r reward. (R. 3672). Ho furthor
testified that he told Gr-ultr that tho experiments had
to be controlled by the L-jftnr.fo. During a pre-trial
Interrogation, he swore that he knew nothing about the
sen water experiments, that tho SS took It out of his
hands and ho had no influence. (R. 3610-1). Schroo-
dor had no Idea, according to hl6 testimony, that for¬
eigners were incarcerated in conccntr"tlon eanrs. Ho
said that ho knew that gypsies wore used as experimental


subjects only after the report by Eclglboock In Berlin
In October 1944. (R. 3675). He testified thnt ho

instructed Sciplbocck thnt Borkatit was to bo used
only until tho subjects sold t.iey oouldn't tolerate

nny noro * (R - 3677) - Ke ndnlttod having hoard tho
ronort by Soifflhoock on the experiments, together with
3cokor-Freysong and Schaefer, among others, but thnt
no didn't henr the conpletc report ns ho hnd to lenve
the meeting onrly. (R. 3679-80).

The chnrts kept by the dofondnnt Bclglbocok on
onoh of the experimental subjects, which tho defense
uno finally forced Into submitting In cvldcnoe, after
attesting to uoo then through the dofcnco "expert"
Vollhnrdt without offering the docuncnts themselves,

/"ivo sono of the dotnlls nc to tho experiments, al¬
though under tho circumstances their reliability is
doubtful. (Bclalboock Ex. 34, R. 9381). Certain
alterations In these records rr' ich will b 0 dlsouosod
at a later point, lndiontc thnt they are not entitled
to proMt weight. Tho experiments began In August
1944 and continued until the alddlo of 8 0 ptcabor.
Forty-four ex.ocrlaentri subjects wore used. Subjects
1 to 6 were deprived of nil food and water for periods
fron 5 h to 7* days. The duration of tho cxpcrlacnts
~ lvon herein Is based u on tho starting dato of tho
morning of 22 august, ns contended by the defenso,
nlthough there is soiio evldonco indicating tr. t the
starting dato was 21 August. If tho experiment tvas
Interrupted in tho forenoon, no additional day or nart
thereof Is counted. If it was Interrupted between
noon and 1700 hours, one-half day Is nddod, while lf
It was Interrupted after 1700 hours, a full day Is


nddod. Subjects 7 through 10 were riven 1000 cc. of
Schaefer water for 12, 13, and 12 days resroctivcly,
'*.nd hungered for 7, 8, and 9 days, respectively. Sub¬
ject "o. 9 was not used for reasons of health, mis
vr.s the defense witness liettbach. Subjects 11 through
18 Toro given 500 cc. of sen water plus tho emergency
son ration which contained ai proxlmntciy a total of
2 *i00 oalorios, These experiments irstod from 5 to 10
days. They hungered up to 6* days. Several of these
subJoets, for example, 11, 13, 17, and 18 voro sub¬
jected to two ocpnrato experiments of 6 ^nd 6 days,

6 and 6 days, 7$ and 5 days, and 10 and •: days, res¬
pectively. Subjects 19 through 25 were given 500 cc.
of Serhntlt plus tho cnor.rcncy sea ration. Tho dura¬
tion of tho experiments lasted from 5 to 9$ days with
periods of hunger up to 6$ days. Subjects 19 and 20
underwent two separate experiments of 7 and 5 days
each. Subjects 26 through 30 ore given 1000 oc. of
Serkatlt oluo tho oaergoncy sea ration. Duration of
tho cxrorlnonto was from 5 to 9b days with periods of
hun ror up to days. SubJoct 29 underwent two exuri-
nonts of 8 and 5 days. Subjocto 31 and 32 -zero .riven
1000 co. of sea ~atcr for 8 -ml 6 days respectively.
Subject 31 was subjected to an additional ox-orlncnt
of 5 days. Subject 33 uir -riven 500 cc. of oerkatlt
for 6 days; Subjeot 3-. 1000 cc of Schaefer for 12
days; Subjects 35 though 37, 39, 41, and 42 vero riven
500 oc. of son water for periods ranging from 4 to 6
days. Subjects 38, 40, and. 43 were given 1000 co. of
sc*’ water for 6, 5, and 6 days; and Subject 44 was
given Sohaefor water for 12 days.

The clinical oharts on tho oxicrincnts also sup¬
ply Ufl T,lch the ngos of the ex. erim.ntal subjects.


c


Subjects 17, 19, 20, 35, 37, 40, And 43 were All under
tho ngc of 21. Subject 40 was 16 years old; eubJeots
17, 19, and 37 wore 17 yenrs old; subject 35 was 18
years old; subject 43 was 19 years old; end subject 20
was 20 years old. Ucodless to scy, no offort was mado
to obtain tho consont of the paronts or guardians of
these minors..

Tho defendant 5 0 lglboock testified that he re¬
ported to Berlin at the end of Juno 194-1 where ho was
told by Beokor-Freysong th^t he was to carry out tho
soa water experiments In Dachau. Ho also saw Schrocdcr
previously In connection with the experiments. Ho said
ho nttonptod to wlthdrnw boenuso ho had a horror of
working In a concentration oanp. Ho did not refuse to
perform tho experiments boenuso he was afraid of being
callod to aooount for faliuro to otcy orders. (R. 8828-
9). Bookor-Froysong told him that tho purposo of tho
experiments woo, flrot, to find out If Berkotlt woo use¬
ful; second, to toot the Sohaefer method; and third,
to see whether It would be better to go completely
without oeu water or to drink small quantities of it.

(R. 8632). He oold he was told by the officials In
Dachau that the gypsies who were to be used In the ex¬
periments wore held as "asocial" persons. Beltflboeok
apparently considers himself as an expert on asoclals.

He testlflod that It was his understanding that a
whole family could be classified asocial, although
this "does not exclude the possibility that, In this
family, there oan be a largo number of persons who did
not commit any crime". (R. 8348).

He testified that he called the experimental sub¬
jects together end told then what the experiment was


- 35 -


about and asked then If they wanted to participate.

(R. 884S). Ke did not tell then how long the experi¬
ment would last. He did not tell then that they could
withdraw at any tine. He testified that he had to rc -
£iulre that they thirst for a certain period. The de¬
cision as to their being relieved from the experiment
lay with him. (Belglboeck, R. 8850). During the
course of the exoerlaents he testified that the sub¬
jects revolted on one occasion because they did not
get the food they had been promised. (R. 6863). They
did not get food for several days because of a dolay
in delivery. (R. 8868). The subjects were locked In
a room during the experiments. Belglboeck testified

that:

"Thoy should have been locked In a
lot bettor than they wero because
taen thoy would have had no oppor¬
tunity at all to get fresh water
on the side." (R. 8864).

Ke stated that the danger tone would be reached In
about seven days, drinking 500 oo. of sen water while,
In cases of 1000 co. of sea water, It would be 4 f days.
(R. 8876-7). Compare the ouch longer duration of the
experiments ao set out abovo.

It was roadily apparont to the Prosecution aftor
on inspection of tho clinical charts kept during the
oourco of tho experiments that a number of alterations
had boon made in them. These records wore In the ex¬
clusive possession of defense counsel Drlor to the tes¬
timony of Vollhardt, whose expert oolnlon was based In
part upon such records. In a large number of lnstancos
the names of the experimental subjects have been erased
from tho charts, obviously in an effort to cake It Im¬
possible to locate such persons for the purpose of


- 36 -


giving testimony. An examination of the charts further
reveals that the final weights of the experinental
subjects were written on the charts In a different
shade of Ink than the remainder of the records. In
8one oases these weights were written over the origi¬
nal pencil notations, for example on chart C-2 the
final weight of 62 kllograns In pencil was written
over In Ink to read 64* kllograns. Eelglboeok adnit-
ted that the red arrows purporting to lndioate the
start of the experlnonts, usually appearing under tho
date August 22, were cade by him In 1945, long after
the exporinont had been conpleted. (R. 8909). In
charts 1 to 32 a red mark under the dato August 21
appears, which would Indicate that the experiments
vory probably began on that dato. Certain notes In
German shorthand appear on the back of chart C-23.
Eolglboeck admitted that he wrote theso notes hlnoelf.
(R. 8970). Bolglboock tostlficd t ,at:

■tfo (Belglboeck and his dcfenso counsel)
wero In agreement at all tines that tho
charts and curves should be submittod In
the sane way as wo rocclved then here".

(R. 89a).

Ho repeatedly stated that he did not make any erasures

on the charts In Kumberg. (R. 8922 , 8973 , 8975-6).

Then the proof left hln no alternative, Bolglboock

finally admitted having made changes and erasures In

the notes on tho hock of chart C-23 In ‘..‘urnberg. (R.

8978). These notes give a clinical report on one of

the experinental subjects who was critically 111. The

following Is a restoration of the orlginel stenographic

notes Insofar as they could be translated:

■The thirst assumes forms difficult to
endure. The patient lies there quite
notlonle6s with half-olosed eyes. Ko


takes no notice of his surroundings!

Ke asks for water only when he awakes
fron hie senlconsclous condition.

(half a line erased).

"The appearance Is very bad and dooned.

The general condition gives cause for
alarn.

■Respiration flatter, labored, moderately
frequent.

■Respirations 25 per minute.

■Tho eyes are deeply halood, the turgor
of the skin groatly reduced.

■Skin dry, tongue completely dry, whitish
coating In tho middle fairly looso.

"The mucouB membranes of the mouth and
the lips dry, latter covered with crusts.

Lungs show slight very dry bronchitis
lower border VI-XII, sharpened vcsioular
respiration.

"Heartbeats vory low hardly audible.

Filling of the pulse weaker. Increased
thlcknoss of walls of blood vessels.

Frequency ?2, llvor 2f-3 fingers below ster¬
nal nargln, rather soft, modcratoly sensi¬
tive to presoure, spleen on percussion
slightly enlarged.

■Musculature hypotonic. Joints over-
extondoble. Calves slightly sensitive
to pressure. Indications of tranoverso
welt formation, marked longitudinal welt
formation. Romberg pluo plus. Reflexos
plus plus. Abdominal reflexes pluo plus.
Bablnskl negative. Elfe phenomenon.

Oppenholm negative. Rossollno negative.

Tonus of tho bulb of tho eye bad. Bulbuo
roflex positive. (Interruption".

Bolglboeok hod substituted tho word "somnolent" for
tho word "senlconsclous" In the last lino of tho flrot
paragraph. In this some paragraph half a lino was com¬
pletely erased and could not bo translated. Eelglboock
purported not to remember what it said, an obvious false¬
hood since It was erased out of fear of tho truth. In
tho lost sentence of the second paragraph, rclglbocok
altered the notes to read "Tho general condition gives
no cause for alarm". In the first line of the eighth
paragraph, Belglboock substituted the word "poorly"


for *hardly". The notation "Romberg plus plus" means
that the subject has an "uncertain" ability to stand*
(oelglboeck, R. 8982). He said that these notes refer
to sub.lect nunher 30 rather than subject 23. (R. 8984).

3elglboeck testified that he made no further
changos, erasures, or alterations In Number*. (R.
8992). That Bclglbocck's testimony as a whole Is com¬
pletely unrollablo Is evidenced by the fact that ho also
made orasuros In the notes on the back of chart A-29.

Those notes, lnsofnr ns they can bo trnnelnted, road ns
follows:

"Tho thirst again boconos very severe.

Patient lies down on his back and rolls

about. Also gets -.a typical

stereotyped organic rigid seizure with
sovoro tetanic symptoms such as from

h l8 ----, symptoms —..

In vlov of the fact that In the last
two days ho has been drinking n great

deal of water.quarter plus

naif liter has been, ho Is being takon
out of the experiment.

“3/0 Again taken Into the experiment.

“5/9 Again complains about v*'ry severe
thirst.

"6 Feeling of thirst vary sovoro, tonguo
dry and coatod. Fetid smell from the
nouth. Skin dry and hot, liver signifi¬
cantly onlnrgcd, reflexes very lively,
blood vessels show thickening of walls,
nu8oulaturo over excitable.

" 7 /9 Psychic state has changed. Soano-
lcnco. Tonguo dry, musculature fools stlf-
. fonod. Considerable weakness of muscula¬
ture with atoxic manifestation. Romberg

positive. Blood vessels still -

pulse poorly filled, mnrked bradycardia,
respiration accelerated. Sencral condi¬
tion (the next word erased and not legible),
liver greatly enlarged."

In tho onso of subject 25, Bolglboeck testlflod
that this man was x-rcyed several tines and apparently
had ncuto bronchitis. His fever went up to 39.8 Centi¬
grade. (R. 8998). He complained of a stomach ailment


before tho experiment began. (R* 9000), He was still
eick when 3 r lglboeck left Dnchau on 15 September. (R.
9002). Subject 39 was a nan 49 years old. He was gi¬
ven 500 cc. of Berkatlt for a period of four days,
namely, fron 1 September to 4 Septenber, when the ex¬
periment was Interrupted nt 1930 hours. Beiglboeck
usofi the truth with characteristic economy when ho
testified that tho man was under the experiment only
throe days. (R. 9010). Ke admitted having performed
numerous lumbar and liver punctures on tho subjects.

(R. 8933).

A number of experimental subjects were able to
gain access to fresh water In splto of the efforts of
Solglboock to provent them. Beiglboeck and his defeneo
counsel assumod tho anomalous position that this some¬
how mitigates his guilt. It is difficult to understand
how this solf holp on the part of tho subjects, which
undoubtedly saved tho lives of tho majority of thorn,
could be raised as / nltlgntlnp factor when B.-lglbocck
did everything In his oowor to prevont that. As a mat¬
ter of fact ho did not even know that tho excorlmontal
oubjocta In the first group, that Is to say from 1 to
32, had boon nMo to got to frosh water. Ho tcstlflod
that:

"I should llko to say that In tho second
group, when I know their dcvlco6 from my
experience with tho first group, I knew
what to do and broke off the experiments.

If I had wanted to continue tho experi¬
ments, I would have dono It in the second
group too. This I did In the first group


Thus Sol glboock says, i n effect, that although he did
not k now that tho exper imental subject s gai ned access
to fresh water and although he continued the experiments


before the experlnent began. (Ri 9000)* He was still
6 lck when B 0 lglboeck left Dachau on 15 September. (R.
9002). Subject 39 was a nan 49 years old. Ke was gl-
von 500 cc. of Berkatlt for a period of four days,
namely, from 1 September to 4 September, when the ex¬
periment was Interrupted at 1930 hours. Beiglboeok
usod the truth with characteristic economy when ho
tostlfled that the man was under the experlnent only
throe days. (R. 9010). Ke admitted having performed
numerous lumbar and liver punctures on tho subjects.

(R. 8933).

A number of experimental subJocts were able to
gain accoss to fresh water In splto of the offorts of
oolglboeck to provent them. S e l*lboeck and his defenso
counsel assunod tho anomalous position that thlo eono-
how mitigates hln guilt. It Is difficult to understand
how this solf holp on the part of tho subjects, which
undoubtedly caved tho lives of tho majority of thorn,
oould bo raised as / mitigating factor when Brlglbocok
did everything in his oowor to prevent that. As a nat-
tor of fact ho did not oven know that tho experimental
subJocts In tho flr3t group, that Is to say fron 1 to
32, had been nMo to get to frosh natcr. He testified
that:

"I should like to sr'y that In tho second
group, when I know their dcvlcos from ray
oxpcrloncc with the first group, I know
what to do and broke off the experiments.

If I had wanted to contlnuo tho experi¬
ments, I would havo done It In the second
group too. This I did In the first group


Thus Bcl glbocck says, I n ef fect, that although he di d
not k now that tho ex perlacntnl subjects gained access
to fresh water and although he continued the oxperlraonts


far beyond '.That he himself knew to he the danger point ,
nonetheless ho Is to be excused because eone of the
experimental subjects drank fresh -inter secretly In
soltc of his efforts to prevent It .

The expert witness, Dr. Ivy, testified for the
Prosecution concerning sea water experiments. Ho,
hiruelf, participated In an experiment of three days
during which ho consumed 2,400 oo. of sea water with a
calorlo Intake of 108 per day In the fora of candy. Ho
suffered markod dehydration and was at tho point of de¬
veloping hallucinations. A second volunteer In thooo
experiments took 2000 cc. In a llttlo ovor ono day and
developed vomiting and diarrhea to such an extent that
tho experiment had to bo otoppod. (R. 9038-9). Compare
tho anounta of son water takon by Belglboock'c subjects.
For scientific data concerning tho effect of sea wator
on tho human body, eoo transcript pages 9039-41. Dr.

Ivy pointed out oertaln basic inconsistencies In tho
testimony of the defonse expert witnoss, Vollhardt.

(R. 9041-43). Dr. Ivy tootlflod that It was entirely
unnecessary to perform thono oxperlncnto for tho our-
poso of establishing the potability of sea water pro¬
cessed by tho Borka method. This could hntro boon de¬
termined choralonily in n matter of one-half hour. (R.
9043-4). Ho stated that If 1000 cc. of sea water or
Borkatlt wore taken per day, It would crxuso death In
lias than 12 days. Death would occur botween tho 8th
and the 14th day If 500 cc. were consumed per day un¬
der Ideal conditions. (R. 9045). The statement In
tho report of the conferences on 19 and 20 Hay 1944
that If Eerfca water was used, damage to the health was
to be expected not later than six days and would lend


- 41 -


to death not Inter than 12 days, is essentially corrcot.
(R. 9044). This document shows that the planned dura¬
tion of the experiments was 12 days. Dr* Ivy testified
that it would be unnecessary to conduct experiments
for more than three to four days to show that Berkntlt
was Just ns dehydrating as sen water. (R. 9046). He
stated that these experiments make sense only If thoy
wero trying to determine the survival tine of human
beings on 500 oo. and 1000 cc, of oen water per day.

It Is olenr that the experimental plan anticipated
donths. (R. 9046-7).

Dr. Ivy testified that on the basis of his studies
of tho charts kept during tho courso of the exporlnonts,
that there was on insufficient observation period nftor
tho experiments to dotornlne nhothor thore woro any
dolnyod damaging offoots to tho oxperlnontal subjocts.
(R. 0049). Tho results of the oxporlnents aro not
oolcntlfioally rollablo. (R. 9051).

Dr. Ivy pointed out that the chart of subject 3
proved that ho was too weak to stand and hnvo his blood
prosouro taken on ocvornl occasions. (R. 9052). This
was ono of tho subjoots In the fasting and thirsting
group. Ho was giving an lnjcotlon of coronlno on 29
August and strychnine on 30 and 31 August. Both of
thoso drugs aro heart stimulants and tho clinical plo-
turc indicates that this subject was 111 or markedly
disabled by tho experiments. (R. 9053). Eight to
fourteen days Is the range of survival time of strong
non undor Ideal conditions for thirsting and fnoting.
(R. 9053).

As a result of his study of the clinical records,
Dr. Ivy testified that subjects 3, 14, 36, 37, 39, 31,
23 (or 30), 25, 28, and 29 were 111 during the experl-

- 42 -


ments. Subjecte 3, 23 (or 30), and 26 were especially
111 and there Is a possibility that they were permanent¬
ly Injured or died as a result of the experiments. (R.
9058-9).

The subject to whom the notes on the baok of chart
C—23 applied was very sick and In a coaa. (Ivy R.

9061). The changes made In the stenographic notes by
tho defendant Belglboeck make the subject appear to bo
In a better condition than ho actually was. (Ivy, R.
9062-3). Tho bulbous reflex reforrod to In these notes
moans tho pressing of tho eyeball to detornlno tho do-
groo of conn. "Tonus of ball of oyes Is bad' indlcntos
tho blood pressure was low and tho circulation was
quito poor. This is a bad prognostic sign and might
Indicate Impending death. (R. 9065). Those notes ln-
dloato that tho subjoct was In a dangerous condition
and roqulro lmaodlnto remedial thorapy. Tho follow-up
observation for subject 23 was four days, while on oub-
Joot 30, flvo days. This was entirely Insufficient.

This subjeot could have died If not properly carodtor.
(Ivy, R. 9065-6).

Dr. Ivy tostlflcd that of the 44 subjects, 13
wore too weak to stand on ono or moro ooonslons, had
fover, roqulrod cardiac otlnulants, or woro uncon-
solous, namely, subjects 3, 4, 14, 21, 23, 25, 26, 39,
32, 36, 37, 39, and 40. (R. 9067-8). Tho statement of

tho affiant Bauer to the effect that he observed symp¬
toms of heart weakness in the experimental subjects as
a result of certain oloctro-cardlograms he took was

corroborated by Ivy. (Ivy, R. 9069).

In Dr. Ivy*s opinion, an experimental subject who
agroos to undergo an experiment Is no longer a volunteer


If, during the course of the experiment, he Is forced
to continue after having expressed a desire to bo
relieved. (R. 9076-7).

The testimony of the defense expert, Vollhnrdt Is
ontlrely unreliable. Although Vollhardt had nothing
whntovor to do with these experiments In Dnchnu, ho
repeatedly testified In n highly partial manner concern¬
ing matters about which he could not possibly have had
any knowledge. For oxcmplo, he lnslstod that the sub¬
jects In Dnchnu woro voluntocrs. He teetifiod that
Solglboock eliminated three subjects bofore tho experi¬
ments began because of their physical condition and
that throo other porsons immediately volunteered. (R.
8457-8). Even Bolglboock mado no ouch contortion. Ho
said that he conoldorod It "quite out of tho question
that tho experimental subjocto felt It necessary to
drink viator out of mops, because there woro air raid
buckets and If thoy felt they noedod n drink, they could
drink out of them". (R. 8467). It Is pasolng strango
that Vollhardt could havo euoh Information when ho was
novor In Dachau. Ho believed It qulto Impossible that
any of the experimental subjocto had cramps although
subjoot 29 Is proved to havo had cramps and organic
seizures by tho notoe quoted nbovo. Although Vollhardt
admitted that the clinical data showed that a number
of tho experimental subjects had secretly obtained
fresh water and although Eclglbocck ndnlttod that some
of the subjects threw their urine away (R. 8865),
Vollhardt was qulto sure that tho experimental subjoots
wore all volunteers.

Vollhnrdt made no study of the clinical notes
himself but turned then over to a 25 year old assistant


44 -


to digest for hln. (R. 8432)* He admitted thnt he
rolled on descriptions of the experiments node by Becker-
Freyseng nnd Belglboeck since the trial began. (R.

8438). Vollhordt had had no previous experience with
sea water probleas nor had his assistant. (R. 8451).
Vollhardt testified that he conducted a volunteer ex¬
periment on five of his doctor assistants after ho had
been approached by defense counsel. His sub .loots
drank 500 cc. of sinulatod son water per day and rc-
colvod 1600 calories per day. (H. 8440-2). Four of
tho sub.leots continued tho experiment for five dnyo and
one for six days. Tho latter subject drank an extra
500 oo. on tho last day. Tho purposo of these experi¬
ments was to ascertain how much a person suffero under¬
going a sea wntor experiment. (R. 8443). Vollhardt's
subjects continued tholr work about the clinic although
thoy ate and slept in tho cane room. Ho doeo not know
v/hothor they wont to tho local oinonn or loft tho oll-
nlc for other purposos during tho course of tho experi¬
ments. (R. 8445). Four of tho subjects quit on tho
fifth day because of an engagement with a young lady.

(R. 8450). Ko testified thnt hlo oubjooto had no so-
voro thirst on tho first two days, it bocano unploasant
on tho third, reduced thirst on the fourth, r.nd very
strong thirst on tho fifth day; tho subject who went
six days roported th^t it made very little difference.
All continued their work during tho experiment. (R.
8453). It is obvious that this experiment in no wny
compared to those conducted in Dnchnu. Tollo some of
tho experimental subjects in Dachau wero too weak on
many occasions to hnvo tholr blood prossure taken,
Vollhardt's subjects were able to contlnuo their work.


While Vollhnrdt's subjects were trained doctors who
participated In the experiment because of lntorest,
who were permitted to wlthdraw froa the experiment nt
any tine, who were permitted to control their own act¬
ivities during the experiment, none of theso Important
factors woro present In the Dachau experiments. (R.
8479). The wretched gypsies were not permitted to
withdraw when they felt like It. Thoydld not know
how long the experiments wore to last, they had no
freedom of activity, they had no lnterost In tho ox-
porlmont. Vollhnrdt's rognrd for these gypsies Is ap¬
parent from his statement that "...pcoplo llko that
will of course find a way* to cheat. (R. 8468).

That Vollhardt know nothing of the experiments ho pur¬
ported to tostlfy about is apparent from his testimony
regarding their duration. For cxamplo, ho stated that
In tho Dorkatlt group of 500 cc., tho experiments woro


discontinued aftor six days. (R. 8462). The ollnloal
charts which Vollhardt had In his possessio n, and upon
which his toatlmony purported to


he testified


ontlnu


ur to five d


sea water w


days . Ho testlflod that thogrou


ontlnued after six da


harts show some of then to hnvo


days. In tho fasting and thlrstln


that they wo


while


days . (R. 8462-3). Ho, Vollhnrdt's testimony would

Indeed have been an unreliable substitute for the charts,
Tho testimony of the prosecution witnesses proves
that tho sen water experiments resulted in nurdor and


- 46 -


tortures. The Austrian witness, Vorllcok, who was
tried for -preparation of high treason* In 1P39 and
sentenced to four years In a penitentiary, was trans¬
ferred to Dachau In March 1944 and acted ns an assis¬
tant nurse In tho experimental station during the
course of tho sea water experiments. (R. 9383-5).

One of the lnmato guards who foil nslcop was trans¬
ferred to n penal company. (R. 9386). At least one
of the subjects suffored a violent attack of cramps.

(R. 9306). On ono occasion Vorllcck split some frosh
water on the floor and forgot the rag which ho used to
mop It up. Tho experimental ouh.lccts soiled tho dirty
rag and suoked tho water out of It. Belglhocok throat-
cnod to put him In tho experiments If It over hnpponod
again. (R. 9307). Tho experimental subjects wore not
voluntoors. Vorllook talked to somo of tho Crooh sub¬
jects who told him they had boon asked in another camp
to volunteer for a good outsldo assignment and only
when they got to Dnohnu did they find out that they
were to undorgo the experiments. (R. 9388, 9392). Ho
tootlflod that tho oubjoetc woro of Ctooh, Polloh,
Hungarian, Auotrlnn, and Gorman nationalities. (R.
9388). Bomoof tho subjects woro quite 111 and he was
under tho Impression that they would not live much
longer. About three months after the experiments, ho
mot Front, ono of tho subjects, and ho told him that
ono of the victims of tho experiments had already died.

(R. 9390).

Tho witness Laublngcr, who was subjoct number 7,
testified that he was arrested by tho Oestapo In March
1943 because he w’S a gypsy. He was sent to Auschwlt*
in the spring of 1943 without having boon tried for any


crime. (R. 10199). Ko v;aa Inter transferred to Such—
ennnld for a few weeks and while there ho, together
with other inmates, was asked to volunteer for a oler-"."
Ing up work Recall In Dachau. The inmates were under
tho lnprosolon that conditions wore hotter In Dnchnu
so they ngreed to go. Upon their arrival at Dachau
they wore glvon a physical examination and x-rnyed and
then taken to tho oxpcrlnontnl station. (R. 10200).
Bclglhoock told then that they -ore to participate In
tho son water experiment and that this *?as tho first
thoy know of It. (R. 10201). Lnuhlngor ldontlflod
Solglboock In the dook. (R. 10202). Ko told Bclglhoock
that ho had had two otonach opcr-tlons hut Bclglhoock
did not permit him to withdraw. Bolglhoock did not ask
uhothor tho subjects wished to voluntoer and they did
not volunteer. (R. 10203). Laublnger, who was In tho
Schaofor group, was given Schncfor water for 12 days
and factod for at least nlno days, (eco chart 7). Ho
got so woak ho oould hardly stand up. The cxporlnontal
subjects rocclvod spoclal food for only one day after
tho experiment. Bclglhoock had promised then extra
rations and an easy work dotnll hut those promises
wore not kept. (R. 10205). One of tho suhjocts trlod
to persuado tho others to rofu6c to drink tho son wator.
3olglboook threatened to have him hanged for sahotago.
The subject later vonlttod after drinking sea wator
whereupon Eelc-lhoook had the rater administered through
a stomach tube. (R. 10207). Another subject tno tlod
to his bod and adhesive tape was plastered ever hlo
nouth, because ho had obtained some fresh rater and
bread. Kost of the subjects were Czech, Polish^ and
Russian nationalities with approximately eight Germans.


crime, (E. 10199). Ko was later transferred to Sucfc-
cnwnld for a few weeks and while there ho, together
with other Incites, was asked to volunteer for a Olcan¬
ing up work flstnll In Dachau. The insatos wore under
tho impression that conditions wore hotter In Dnchnu
so they ngroed to go. Upon their arrival at Dachau
they wore glvon a physical exanlnatlon and x-rayed and
then taken to tho experimental station. (R. 10200 ).
Bolglboock told then that they -ere to participate in
tho son water experiment and that thl6 was tho first
thoy know of it. (R. 10201 ). Laublngor Identified
Bolglboock In the dock. (R. 10202). Ko told Eeiplboook
that ho had had two stomach operations but Belglbocck
did not pornlt hln to withdraw. Belglbocck did not ack
who tho r tho oubjootc wished to volunteer and thoy did
not volunteer. (R. 10203). Lnublnper, who was In tho
Schaofor group, v/ao glvon Schaefer water for 12 days
and factod for nt least nlno days, (boo chart 7). Ho
got so weak ho could hardly stand up. Tho cxporlnontal
aubjooto rooolvcd 6poolal food for only ono day after
tho experiment. Belglbocck had promised then oxtra
rations and an easy work detail but these promises
wo ro not kept. (R. 10205). Ono of tho sub .loots trlod
to porsuado tho others to rofuso to drink the sea wator.
Bolglboock threatened to have him hanged for sabotage.
Tho sub.loct later vosittod after drinking sea water
'/hereupon Bclcrlbocok had the rater ad-lnlsterod through
a stomach tube. (R. 10207). Another sub.leot was tied
to his bed and ndhc6lve tapo was plnctored over his
mouth, because he had obtained some fresh water and
bread, ilost of the subjects were Czech, Polish, and
Russian nationalities with approximately eight Germans.


.. 1J208). A number of subjeots suffered attacks of
dellrlun and two were transferred to the hospital and
Laublftger did not see then again. (H. 10209).

The witness Kollenrelnor corroborated the tcstlnony
of Laublngor in nil important points. He testified
thnt tho experimental subjects did not volunteer (R.
10509) nnd thnt the majority of them were non-Gornan
nationals, (R. 10513). Holienrclner testified fur¬
ther thnt Sclplboeck showed no concern for the oxpcrl-
nontnl subjoots, but, on the contrary, threatened to
shoot them when they beenno cxoltcd. (It hardly soemo
appropriate to wear n pun when experimenting on volun-
toorr). Ho had no pity for then when they beenno do-
llrlouo from thirst and hunger. (R. 10510). Tho wlt-
noss Kollenrelnor unfortunately afcnulted Belglbocck
In opon court. This Impulse net of tho witness, how-
ovi r, speaks taoro foroenbly than volunns of tcstlnony
no to tho inhuman treatment of tho experimental oub-
.loots nnd tho suffering which was Inflicted on then no
% rosult of thoso oxporlncnto. /o nay rest r.osurod
thnt Hollonrcinor was no voluntoor. tfhon explaining
his bohnvlour to tho Trlbunnl, Holienrclner chnractorl-
r.od Belplboock n "nurderor". (R. 10233-4).

Tho witness Tcchofcr.lg was connlttod to Dnchnu In
Kovcnber 1940 whero he rcnalned until April 1945. Ho
r/no n political prlsonor. (R. 9331). He Is presently
n member of tho Corinthian Land Diet In Austria. (R.
9332). Fron tho summer of 1942 until the end ho was in
charge of tho x-ray station In Dachau. (R. 9334). Ho
examined the transport of gyoslcs In the sunner of 1944
before the experiments began nnd excluded n number of
them ns being unfit. (R. 9334-5). He saw 3cl,:lbocck


- 49 -


cover'll tinea In the coop nr.d In the X-ray station.

(R. 9335). During the experiments a number of those
who got sick wore brought to the X-ray station for
examination. Their physical condition had deterior¬
ated considerably ns n result of the experiments* Ho
heard that one of the subjects had n nonlao attack*

(R. 9336). At tho conclusion of the experiments, throe
of tho subjects were brought to the station for inter¬
nal dlsonsos. Cno was on a stretcher and unable to
walk. All of then wore x-rayed by Tschofcnig (R. 9330).
It was customary to sent tho results of the x-ray ex¬
aminations to tho hospital ward where tho lnnntcs woro
kept. Tschofcnig rocolvod nn official ordor fron the
station for internal diseases that it was not necessary
to report on tho stretcher case as ho had died two days
aftor his transfer. Tho station physlolan resorted
that tho death resulted fron tho son water oxpcrlraonto.
Tuchofonlg oxnnlncd tho death rcoords hlnsolf. (R.
9339).

Even Dr. Stoinbauor, defense counsel for Bcigl-
bocck, has apparently convinced hlnsolf that thoso ex¬
periments lnvolvod torture. Ho said, In explaining
his conduct in withholding part of a docunent the Tri¬
bunal had ordsxdproduced, that: "I do not wont to say
anything about the experimental subjects, who sufferod
torrlbly". (R. 9370).

F. High Altitude and Freezing Experiments (Indictment,
Tar". 5" (A) and ToTi

Schroeder testified thnt ho heard about the Ruff,
Ronbcrg, Raschcr high altitude experlnonts only after
the war onded. (R. 3612). He said he never talked to


Ruff, Romberg, or Becker-Freyseng about those experi¬
ments. (R. 3613). He testified thnt he learned of
tho freezing experiments in February or Unrch 1943
when ho received a copy of the report on the Cold
Congress In Nurnborg in October 1942 at which Holzloch-
ncr and Rnscher spoke on the experiments. (R. 3615).

He would have tho Tribunaltollpve that he novor got a
copy of tho exhaustive final report on the frooting
experiments by Holzloehncr, Flnke, and Rnschor. (R.
3615). It Is a little difficult .lust who could havo
boon more llkoly to receive this report with Its Impor¬
tant conclusion If not tho few Air Flcot Physicians,
of which Schroodor was one at that tine. Sohrocdcr
hlraoolf llatod tho warn both nothod of treating froct-
lng as tho fourth moot Important military nodical dlo-
oovery In Oernany during tho war. (R. 3615). But his
donlal Is undorotandnblo since the final report gives
an oxhauotivo description of tho oxporlncnts, Includ¬
ing deaths. (NO-428, Pros. Ex. 91, R. 252).

Schroodor tootlfled that he did not know that
Ho'lrloohnor, Flnkc, and Raschcr collaborated on those
oxperimonts. (R. 3625). But the report on the Cold
Congress, which he admitted having recoivcd and road,
oxprossly snys so. (1*0-401, Pros. Ex. 93, R. 309).
Although ho testified th«t he didn't Xnow experiments
on human beings were Involved, tho 6nnc report makes
thnt perfectly obvious ever, to a layman. (R. 3626-9).
Tho clinical detail reported on makes It absolutely
Impossible thnt any physician would think for a moment
that these were not experiments. It's a little diffi¬
cult to boo how rectal temperature could be minutely
checked on an aviator in sea distress. Rnscher's lee-


:ure r/r.s summarized, in part, as follows!

"Supplementing the statements of Holz-
loehner there is a report on Cbservn-
tlono according to which cooling in
the region of the neck only, even if
it lasts for several hours, onuses
merely n slow sinking (up to 1° C.)
of the body temperature without
changing the blood-sugar level or the
honrt function. Checking of the rec¬
tal terapornturo was carried out by
taking the temperature in the stomach
and showed complete agreement.■ (NO-
401, supra).

Nothing could be clearer than that theso wore experi¬
ments on hunnn bolngo nnd Schrocdor know it when he
road It.

Ho admitted that 5ocker-Frcyscng told him in liny
1944 about the Holzlcohnor experiments in Dnchnu. (R.
3622). In the fall of 1944, Schroodcr talked to Holz-
lochnor about the freezing experiments and gained the
lnprossion that ho was very depressed about the wholo
affair. His sulcldo later confirmed this belief.
(8chroodor, R. 3621, 3624).

That Schroodcr know all about Raochcr and the
provlouo Luftwnffo experiments in Dachau is proved be¬
yond controversy by nio own lottor of 7 June 1944 to
Himmler concerning the oca water experiments. Ho said
in pnrt no follows:

"Earlier alre ady you have made It possible
for theLuftvnffo to settle urgent nodical
natters through experiments on hunnn bolngo

. A3 It is' known from previous expcrl -^

aentn. that necessary laboratories exist in
tho Concentration Camp frachnu, this canp ~~
would be very suitable ". (KO-185, Pros.

Ex. 134, K. 463, emphasis supplied).

Tho only previous experiments performed by the Luft¬
wnffo in Dachau were the high altitude and freezing cx-
porlnonts r«nd Raochcr participated in both. In comment¬
ing on Schroodcr 1 s request, Glucckn of tho 7VHA said


- 52 -


ho tod no ■objections whatsoever to the experi¬
ments requested by the Chief of the Uedlcnl S 0 rvlco of
the Luftwaffe to be conducted at the exocrlnentnl .sta¬
tion Rasohor In the Concentration Onnp Dachau." C'C-
179, Pros. Ex. 135, H. 465). la it to bo held that
Gluooks knew nore about the Luftwaffo experiments by
Rasohor than tho Chief of the Uodlcal S 0 rvlce of the
Luftwaffe? Hie knowledge of those crlnlnol cxpcrl-
nonto could not ho nope clearly provod.

This knowledge of tho provlou. orlneo togothor
with Sohroeder'o po.ltlon no oonnnndor of tho Luft-
'.voffo Uodlcnl Service required thnt he ho found guilty
no nn nooeooory nftor the fnot to tho high nltltudo
nnd froorlng nurdoro. An nooeooory nftor the fnot lo
ono "ho, knowing n orlno hnd boon conr.lttod, hnrbore
the orlmlnnl, or nooloto hln to eoonpc nrreot, or trial,
or execution of oontenoc. An oocooiory after tho fnot
10 oubjoot to tho oano penalty no a principal. (»hnr-
ton'o Crlnlnnl La. (1932), Vol. 1, Section 281).

Sohroedcr wao hln.clf the Inn of tho hodlonl Scrvloo
of tho Luftwaffe. Ho know thnt orlnoo hnd boon oonnlt-
tod by Rufr, Honberg, Solti, Holtloehncr, nnd Flnko.

Ho not only oondonod tholr orlr.oo nnd took no notion
agnlnot then, but with thnt knowledge continued to oup-
port elnllnr orlaco by Rooc nnd Hnngon and peroonnlly
orderod tho crlnlnnl oca water oxpcrlnonto.

III. COHCLUSICK

Of all tho nodlorl oervloeo of the Third Holoh
thnt of the Luftwaffe wae porhnpo the noot active In
crlnlnnl nedlonl oxperlnento, the SS not excepted. Ac
Chief of the iledlonl Service of the Luft-nffo, Sehroodcr


c


c

{


bc^rs primary responsibility for their commission.
Application of Yaaashltn, supra .

Rose, ns Consulting Hygienist to Schroodcr, in¬
stigated a series of typhus experiments in Buchonwald
which was performed botneen 11aroh and June 1944 to
test vncolnos furnished by hln. Six cxpcrlnental sub¬
jects wore hilled as a result. The crinlr.nl typhus
oxperlnent8 of Hangen, n subordinate of Schroodcr in
the Schlrnock and Nntzwoiler Concentration Cnnps were
supported by Schrooder, Roso, and Scokcr-Frcysong. Tho
•lodlcnl 9ervloo of the Luftwaffe wnc fully lnfornod
about tho crlnlnnl ohoraotcr of thoso experiments.

Itar.y subJoot6 woro hilled as a result. Schroodcr'o own
Chief of Staff, Knhnt, wrote to Hangen inquiring if hlo
exporinonts had enuood tho typhus opidonic in :?ntzv/ol-
lor. Schroodcr hlnaclf visited Hangen in Straosbourg
during tho oourso of tho cxperlnents. As Into as
August 1944, Hangen was still roooivlng funds fron tho
Luftwaffo to continuo his orlnlnal research. Hnagon
also porfomod other criminal experiments, including
those with gas as n result of which scvorrl oubjocto
wore hilled. Winner, n nodlonl officer of tho Luftwnffo,
collaborated with Hirt in his gas experiments lr. Nntz-
'TOiler. Kingcn, togethor with other nodical officers
of the Luftwaffe, planned to perform Jaundico experi¬
ments on lnmntos.

Schroodcr personally ordered tho execution of tho
son wator exporinonts which caused tho death of nt
least one subject and untold torture to many others.

Ho was an accessory after the fact to tho high alti¬
tude and froczlng crimes.

Thcro is nothing to be said in mitigation for

- 54 -


Sehrocdcr. His trs the knowledge and power to provent
those crimes. But his guilt Is not simply failure to
control. His office issued the research rsslgnncnts
pursuant to which tho crimes were committed. His of-
flco suppllod the money and facilities for their ex¬
ecution. Hie subordinates performed the experiments.
Reports woro rocolvcd on those experiments. He person¬
ally ordered one series of highly dnngorous experiments
on concentration camp inmates. His guilt is much
greater than that of his obedient subordinates.


*

>


- 55 -


UILIThRY TRIBUNAL NO. I


Case no. i


CLOSING BRIEF FOR
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
AGAINST

WOLFRAM SIEVERS


V


Nurnbcrg,

16 June 1947.


J. U. «±c»v»noy
Alexander 0. Hrrdy
Arnost Horl lk-Hochwild
Esther Jr.nc Johnson

For:

Telford Taylor
Bric-'icr General, U.S.A.

Chief of Counsel for «>r Crimes


DJSaOiWGTIOI?


It is charged by tho Prosecution under Count I
of tho Indictnont that oiovors conspired and onroad
with othors, pursuant to a cocoon do3ign» to porfora
nodical oxporinonts on involuntary hunan boings; and
under Counts II and III ( 'ar Crimes and Crinos
ogain3t Hunanity, rospoctivoly), that ho was a prin¬
cipal in, accessory to, ordered, abottod, took a
consenting part in, and was connected with, plans
ond enterprises involving aodicul oxporinontation on
Involuntary hunun subjocta, and tho nurd^r of 112
Jowu solootcd for tho purposo of oonplcting a akolo-
ton collection; and under Count IV, that ho hold a
rieaborship in tho Jj organization in violation cf
icrajraph 1 Id), Article II, Control Council Law Wo.
10 .

1. r O^IflOHe OW i^xeAwUILITY

Tho dofondent oiovera Joined tho It 1929

and r-rained a .-.anber of tho F.-rty until tho begin¬
ning of 1931. Ho ror.jv;od his nenborahip in tho Hazl
larty in 1933. (Jiovor3, H. 5561). Eo Joined tho

ij at tho ond of 1935 on tho suggestion of Hinnlor.
In this organization, ho attained tho rank of a
oumdurtonfuahrer (Colonol). (Jiavers, R. 574G-7).

?ron 1 July 1935 until tho war ended Jiov-rs
v.Q3 a no::bor of Hir*ilor'o ..ersonnl 3taff ard R-lch
business Manager of the ..' nonorbe .Society.

*-ros. h:. el, KO-670, Affidavit of
Jiovor3.

The -Jinonorbe •;as an organization


oL£V3Ro


founded by Hlnolor on 1 July 1935. (Tr. 5662).
..ccording to q statute oi* 1 January 1939, the pur-
;.oso of tho «hr.enerbo -./as to support scientific
r^aoarch concerning tho culture ar.d heritage of tho
Nordic race. Tho 3oard of directors v;as conposed
of -ILLdor, as president, Dr. ou3t, tho Curator,
ar.d jiovor3, as tho Bu3ino33 luxnagor. Jiovor3 was
responsible for tho businoss organization and ad-
Dinistration and tho budget of tho ..hnonerbe. Tho
place of business was Sorlin. (eiovers Jx. 7).

Jiovers supported and jorticipotod in tho
p original nodical experiments which are tho subject

of tho Indiotcont primarily through tho Institute
• of ..ilitary Jciontific rch of tho Ahnonerbo.

Jiovers testified that this Institute was attached
to .Jinunorbo against his ishos on ord^r of Hianlcr,
But a document froa his o-.m hand proves that he per¬
jured hlasolf in that record, ao indeed his whole
t.ati »ny ’/sc false. Ir. a je.iorandua dated 26 Juno
f 1942 concerning Hirt’o nustard gas research, which

, '.as sont to Hixrilor, ho said:

V* -, To colleot theo<> and similar research in

the rthnenorbe (conbatting of insects ar.d
rats, hujcl.-r'a experiments) which cer¬
tainly will occur, and thus facilitate
tho organisational a^d technical execu¬
tion , I suggest:

1) Foundation of an Institute fojr

UAU t- jr. ••ithic the

'.Jwonerbo’.

2 ) appoint :-rt of jj-Naupts turn-
fuehrer irof. r. irt C3 an active
.-.ember, and .3 a;rwintnont to Chiof oi
Doportrxmt K (ZirtJ of the Institute for
l ilitary icler.tific Research.

Rasohcr’s wori. could .ell be here in-


oLiOd


eluded, he then could bo appointed a3
Chief of Dooartnont H (Raschcr).

Necessary supplies for such or. insti¬
tute which in the first line will serve
tho needs of the troops would bo easier
to explain and noro reasonable Z3 if
applied for uxid^r tho nano of the
..hnonorba ' alor.e. ' (N0-2210, Fros.

-*x. 483, R. 5850).

..s c ro3ult of this suggestion, on 7 July 1942
Himlofr wroto to Jicvors, in the latter's capacity as
Reich hanager of tho .khnonerbe, dirooting tho follow¬
ing with ro3poct to the Jinonorbc: .

'1. to oatablisn er. Institute for
Kllitary -ciontific Rc3ecroh,

2 . to support in every possible way
the research carried out by JJ
Hauptatur.if.ohror -rof. Dr. Kirt
and no oro .otu all corres. onding
research and undertakings,

3. to ako available tho required
apparatus, equip. >.ant, accosjories
and assistants, or to procure then,

4. to :-nkc use of the facilities
available in Dachau,

3. to contact tho Chief of tho Jo
Jcononic and ..dninistrativo idain
Office ( irtochaftsvurvaltungs-
hauptant) with regards to tho
costs which can be borno by tho
i'ai'fen-JJ ! . (K0-.22, Fros. Jx.

33, R. 106).

In it3 Judgment, Tho International Military
Tribunal moAo the following finding of foot:

“..Iso attached to tho oJ ;iain offices
was a research foundation known as
tho Jxpori -nt3 .. ..nerbe. The
scientists attached to this organi¬
zation are stet-d to havo beer, .lainly
honorary - eers of tho *>3. During
tho war a:. i.:-.itute for nil 1 tary
scientific r_s_..rch be anno attached
to tho .Omohorbu which conducted ex¬
tensive oxpori-iants involving tho
U3c of living hunan beings, dn On-
ployoo of thi3 institute was a cer¬
tain Dr. Has char, *ho conducted
these experiments with the full


jLTOo


knowledge of tho Ahnonerbe, which
wero subsidized and under the
patronage of the r.eich3fuehror ->3
who was a trustee of ti;e foundation'.
(Transcript, p. 169D2-3).

Tho ovidunco has sko-.ro that Jiovers was, for all
practical purposes, tho acting hoad of tho .ihnonorbo.
In this capacity, ho was subordinated to Hinaler and
regularly roported to hir: on tho affairs of this
-iociety. (Jiovers, R. 4659). Tho top secret corres¬
pondence of Hi.-tlor concerning the .v . >.norbo was sunt
to -*iovors. (NO-422, supra), -iievors hinnolf ad¬
mitted that tho curator, u^st, was frequontly absent
fro.i 3erlin and it is obvious that ho did not play
on i iportar.t part. (R. 5659-70). Dr. eiovors was
deputy to Dr. Kontzcl, v/ho was tho hoad of tho
1 nna.,ing Board of Dircctoro of tho Reich Research
Council. (N0-670, Tros. Jx. 31, R. 135). ..t so.-.o

tLio prior to 18 November 1943, 3iovors apparently
v;ns pronotod to Chief of that Beard. (NO-3671,
iros. ox. 539, R. 10363). Tho proof has shown that
the Reich Rosoarch Council supported and furthored
medical experimentation on concentration camp in-
:.ato3. ..s oarly as Doconbor 1942, tho Roich Research

Council was asked by the Roichsrinistcr of Finanoo
to pass judgrsont on a roquost for research funds by
Roichoarzt Jo Grawitz. Dr. hentzel, Jiovers' i .-
mediate juporior, approved :f this allocation of
funds on 25 Larch 1943, m/mg: : .»s for as they, to
a 3. mller part, ara :eont for the oxt-nsion of
scientific ro3eorch possibilities they pertain wx-
cluaivoly to such natters which con be carried out
only with the material (prisoners) accos3ible to tho


3ISVER3


•offen 33 and therefore cannot be undertaken by ar.y
other research agonoy." (002-F3, Fros. 2x. 39, H.
132). (Transcript is incorrect at this point and

reference should bo auo to Document Book No. 1).

%

Tlie rrosecution called tho Tribunal'3 attention to
tho finding of tho International Military Tribunal
in Gas»- No. 1 which r^ads as follows:

"Ir. connection with tho ad.-ir.is-
tration of the concentration
cc;ip3, tho e. Jbarhwd on a
series of experi-.ur.ts on human
beings which -.ere performed on
prisoners of war or concentra¬
tion cop in.atw.3. Tho so ox-
peri. lor.ts included freezing to
death and killing by poison
bullsts. Tho jj was able to
obtain on allocation of Govern¬
ment funds for thi3 kind of re¬
search on tho grounds that they
had aocoos to hu. ^ui material
not uvailablo oo other agencies.'

(R. 153).

Tho activities of tho Reich Research Council in
cri.dncl oxporinontation on involuntary human sub¬
jects wore not li. itod to approving funds Tor rcsoarch
by the Research assignments were oomissionod
by it, involving experiments on ooncentration comp
in.uit-o. Thus, in the autu..n of 19-13, Raceher ro-
ceivod an assignment from tho Reich Reseorch Council
to conduct dry froozirg experiments, vhilo Hirt vas
carrying out tho nu3tord ga3 experiments in Natzuoi-
ler with its support. (R0-S90, Fros. 3x. 120,

371; NO-132, Fros. Jx. 119, R. 369). .\n i. i-rcst
ViU also shown in tho bleed coagulant dov-loped by
.laacher in Dachau, during orpori. er.ts with which
concentration ca p in. ite3 were shot. (10-613, lros.
x. 243, R. 962). -aid, to ether with the Luftwaffe,


oIxHTJR3


the Reich Research Council sponsored typhus, yellow
foyer, and Jaundice experiments by Kaogon on ir«-n.tos
of tho Ita&woilor Concentration Comp, (N0 r 137,
iros. Jx. 189, R. 737). iuch woro the activities of
tho Reich Rosoarch Council, -s on important ncr.bor
of this group or organization (Reich Rosoarch Council)
connectod with tho commission of such crimes, and
indeed as a porsonal participant ir. then, Jiovers
must bo found guilty under tho provisions of Jectior.

2 of .article II of Contr-.l Council Law No. 10.

Thoso thon were tho positior.3 of r-sponsibility
of tho defendant Jiov-rs: Colonel in tho 35, R-ichs
Business Manager of tho ..hnonorbo and director of
its Institute for llilit&ry eciontific Rosoarch, and
Deputy Hoad of the Menacing Doard of Diroctoro of
tho Reich Research Council.


II.


nr


u..X .L^OIielei al .Y vOR .w.e i^TICI i^lOj:


Jiuvers v/cs noithor a dootor nor a sciontist.
The .rosecution docs not contend that ilcvers per¬
sonally performed any experiments. Prosooution is
in accord with 3ievors as to the natur- of his
duties S3 Reich Manager of tho .Aronorbo.

Cra-.’itz criticized Jiovers' participation in vedi-
cal exporL:ont3, -iov-rs dvended his position as
follows in a letter to RtiCelf .irandt of 28 January
19-13:

I a- 3li jelr astonished about the
cause of tho discussion, for tho orders
of tho Reich3fUehrer 33 wore especially
to tho effect that wo - that i3 tho
-Jmcnorbc - were to take Dr. Ra3chor's


oLTVLHo


work under our cure. The argument
of oJ-Grupponfuohrer Grawitz that
it constituted an unbearable situation
to have a non-physician Give informa¬
tion on medical matters i3 not porti-
nont. I have never clainod to be a
judge of ;.oaical .letters, nor do I
consider it one of ay dutios. Ky duty
OflXQlY SflMlgtA t]io way


m one tiling - cor-


can for:- an opinion; that i3,
ono v;ho i3 doin tho quickest job.


'If things arc to gc on in tho
future as 13-f-r uppenfuohror Crawltz
desires, I a afraid that Dr. Raschor'3
work will not continue to advance as
fast and unhaiper^d as heretofore.-'
(NC-320, lro3. Jx. 103, R. 335; unf!or-
lining added).


Jievor3 was not q mere trouble shooter for


Hi -ilor. Hovers' state.mont that ho s oothed tho


way for research workers and expedited research uc-
oi&nmento involved, in fact, substantial responsibili¬
ty. Jiovors dovotod his offerts to obtaining tho
funds, materials, and equipment neodod by tho re¬
search workers. Tho ..aterials obtained by Hovers


included concentration ca .p in. mtos to be used as ex¬
perimental subjects. hen tho experiments were undor
way, Jiovors nado certain that they were being por-
for. od in a satisfactory manor. In this connection,


JieVers noco38arily ox-rcised his own independent
judg.:ent and had to familiarize hinsolf with tho de¬
tails of such assi yn. m ;s.

Undor i ra.-jraph 0 of the Indict, unt, twelve
different typos of ~nts are particularized.

0 r .so folfran Havers i3 charcod with 3nocial res¬


ponsibility for and participation in hioh altitude,


oJ-Y-Ko


froozins, malaria, Lost as, seawater and typhus’
experiments. Ko is further charged with special
rosponsibility for und participation in the murdor
and .dstroatnont of approximately 112 Jaws selected
for the purpose of completing a 3koloton collection
for tho Reich University in jtrassbourc. The proof
has also shown that jiovors participated in tho
.oly'jol oxpori onts. Ir order to simplify tho is¬
sues, tho Prosooution withdraws herewith its chares
of participation in tho epidemic jaundice experiments.

... .dtltud.i dxPeJ i.ho-Aa (Indictment, Par. 6(..))

?or u detailed doocription of tho high altitude
experiments, roferonoo uy bo mado to tho Prosocu-
tion's brief a w ainst Ruff, Re. b-rc, and -Oltz.

The proof shows that, on tho 3ido of tho dj,
tho high altitude oxporimonta woro supported pri¬
marily through the agency of tho -'din on or bo and
Jiwvors. .»s early as Hay 1939, Covers had assisted
Rasohor in his oxporir.ont3 on concentration cap
Innatoo. -t that tlr», ho arranged for Raochor to
enter Dachau for tho purpose of conducting blood
or Totalization oxpori «r.to. "ocausc of delays in
the start of the hich altitude oxpori *>nts, Kaach-r
approached Kisnlor in .ubruary 19-12, through his
viifj^ and aalc-d that ho be allOWOd to partioipato in
the experiments ,.s a . b r of tho .dinun^rbe. ( 0 -
361, iros. -fe. 47, R. 172). Roochor his-lf approaoh-

iivjvers for assistance in this matter. Jiovors
.uido an inquiry to tho defendant Rudolf Brandt on 9
Larch concerninc the participation of Rasohor in tho


- 0 -


oUVJRJ


Ui"li altitude experiments which were to be curried
out on tho innatos of the Concentration Ca.* Dachau.

This is apparent fro:: Brandt's reply of 21 Uarch in
uhiob he infor.iod Jiovers that Hinnler had approved
of such oxporinentation under tho condition that
Rp.schor would participate iu thon. (1581a-P3, rros.

48, R. 175). Jiovors ad.dttcd havinG r-coivcd
this lettor fron 3randt. - ad. itted furth-r that
he had been informed by Raschor ir. the bOGinninc ol
l.arch 1948 that his refluoroh work at Dachau was to
bo supported by the ..hnonorbe. (R. 5672).

Jiovcrs' full knowledge of and participation in
tho high altitude experiments is further proved by
tho testimony of the witness Hoff, who stated that
Covers inspected Dachau when Raschor's oxpeririontol
station was boin G prepared and the low-pressure chanbor
had just arrived. (3. M3). Raschor, in his letter,
dated 0 ..pril 1942, in vhioh ho expressed his gru-
titudo “for the sonorous realization-' of hi3 proposal
to conduct tho hiGh altitude experiments, mentioned
that jiovors actually v/atchod sone of tho experiments
and did not forgot to stress tho important of -io-


v-ro' collaboration. *.ie a id:


•'J3-Oborstur. bannfuel.ror

tores tine stLd^o^oSts and may
• *

(1971a-. J, - • • • ,,9 » “• 175 '*

Jlcvors adfiittod that ho reported to Hi.-rJ.or on

his visit in Dachau. (3. 3677, or. l®’lo-PS, Pros.
J 3 , 50. R. 180). On tho beoio of tho reports of


oI-V^HS


-iovers and Raschor, Hi: :lor authorized Raschor to
continue the high altitude ~r.p^rimont3 in Dachau.
(X971b-i3, Pros. Hx. 31, R. 180). Jiovcrs tcstlfiod
tlut Himmler informed hin that harmless experiments
\.-ould be conducted on voluntoors and dangerous oz-
porimonts would be carried out ?nly or. oondomed
cri -Inals and that political prisoners would net be
used Tor any oxporliontc. (S. 3677). Tho proof,
twwor, has shown that IcC-200 inmates wore ox-vri-
ivontod upon, that 70 to E0 of tho uxp-rir.ontal sub¬
jects died end that .many of tlu.: woro not oondo.jwd
to death. r, R. 1L3). Only a few of tho oa-
pwri.Jontal subJoct3 could possibly bo called "volun-
toors*'. Itaoso inmates oro scud to hero 'volunteered 1
because Raschor promised fch*:: that they would jo ro-
1waned if they underwent tho experiments. (Noff, R.
-11). Raschor nuv-r fulfilled his promises. (Hoff,
K. olO). Fro.. jiovoro' own testimony it is apper-nt
that ho was wall avarw that tho experimental subjects
usud by Raschor and his collaborators In tho high
cltitude and froozinm oxporl.unts joro by no m-ans
voluntoors. (3oo Freezing iixporinonta, infra),
oievwrs ad: ittod having boon told by Raschor that
several of experimental subjects died as a r-oult of
altitude nts. (R. 5Cod').

On 20 July 19-12, Rcsohcr submitted the final r--
port which had b„on .mdc o • hi and Romberg on the
hi ii altitude oxp-ri ients to tho defendant Rudolf
Brandt for the purpose that the latter light 3ub.lt
it to Himmler. (l6C7a-aJ, Iros. Hx. 65, R. 204). ..


- 10 -


oI-iV—Ko


copy of tho report \.as sent by Hinnlor to Field-
ittV- v*? Milch on 25 ..ugust 1912 with tho request that
Milch should per. lit Ra3chcr and Bonberg to locturo
before hi; on this subject and to show a notion pic-
turo which had boon vadc by Raschcr. Kinnlor con¬
sidered tho results of the oxporinonts so important
for tho Luftv/affo that ho wa3 convince? that : Iloh,
having soon tho picture, \ouId infor.: Gearing about
the... (1507b-P3, Proa. lx. 67, R. 213). 3iovers
approached tho defendant Rudolf Brandt on behalf of
Rasoher and infornod hin that Rasohcr fearod that
so.wbody other than ho and tho defendant Roeiborg had
already reported to Milch on tho high altitude ox-
njri ents. Ho, li-vors, did not share this opinion
•'for who else would have given tho report except
,U‘.ocher and Ro iberg'? Ji-vors requested Brandt'3
Information whothor ho had heard something about the
ratter and .-.okod further for cpprovel for liaschor to
publicize tho purely scientific results of tho ux-
p^ri ents. Ho, Jiovera, would ake inquiries with
Rr.dohor in v;hat for.: and to what extent he conccivod
the publication. (NO-221, Pros. Jx. 58, R. 213). On
29 May, Brandt sent a roply to Jiovors, 3tatin^. that
Racc'-ur' 3 0B8U£$tl0D \tta not corr-ct. Hinder had
written to Milch only a few da/3 before and Milch
hi..self would isoue thw n-c.ssory orders for the de¬
livery of Raschor's and Ra:b.rg's report. Brandt y
aloo aunt a copy of Hi-V-ler's letter to Milch to
vieV^r3. (NO-222, Fros. lx. 69, H. 215 . /.ion liilcl.
inforiod Hirraer on 31 -ugust 19d2 that ho intended


- 11 -


olJ72R3


to invito Rasohor and Robbers to deliver the leoturo
and show tho :wtion picture (3i3b-PJ, Pres. >0,

P.. 313), Brandt iar^diatoly informed iiovers and
Reseller of this event. (NO-223, Pro3. Ilx. "1, R.

215).

On 9 October 1942, Rc3cher wrote to Himlcr that
ho did not deliver tho r-port to Ficldr-orshal l.iloh,
which should have taken place on 11 iopte.iber, a3
Mich was not present. ..a hw, Rasohor, was char ;o0.
by "L'-V-lor to report only to I iloh hi-'.3-If, he de¬
clined to Give his report as no secretary of Ililch
had been designated to receiva it. Raochor went on
to nay: 'My report to you, nost honorable R-ichs-
fUwhrer, oo::es so late for this reason. i3-0bor-
stur.ibannfuehror iiavers wanted to report directly
to you and asked Renters — cs a noutral (neither
Luff./offo or JJ) to oivw hi:i on 11 Jopt^.ibor an oral
report at the station and invited hin to v/rito this
r-port down and to send it t« hin at once.-' he fur¬
ther pointed out that it would bo necessary that tho
lov-proosuro chamber, in which tho oxpori-nts actu¬
ally v;oro carried out, should rc ain at his disposal.
(1610-1-., Pros. -x. 73, R. 217).

On 21 Ooteber 1912, Jiovcrs a^ain intervened
With the defendant Rudclf Orandt so that Raschur and
Ro-’.borj nicht be jiv-n the possibility to report to
. iloh. He onolosod - report concomins the lecture
which was :*do by Ro.:ber;: and ^/e the reasons why
no-berc and Raschor did net deliver the lecture in
tho absence of -iloh. -.ieVw-s stated further:

- 12 -


oIJV-Ko


:, Tho docn froozino oxocri:cnts arc
tcrninotod now, so that the contin¬
uation of tho hi"h altituac ilyins
oxperi::onts, as desired by tho
RcichSfuohrcr ->3, can now
In this connection, -.c need onco .ore
tho lev/ prossur- ohanbor, but this
ti.:o with differential punpa, S3
otherwise lcrce-soclo altitude tests
cannot be carried out. The now ox-
porinonts will also aorvo to oon-
cludo the imbilitation thesis of
Rasohor. Tho puttins at our dispo¬
sal of tho low-prosauro ohtxibcr,
however, will be possible thon onlj,
if tho Rcichsfuohror writes in
person to Fiold Marshal Ililch con-
oorninc this. I includo tho draft
of such a letter. v-O- 226 , --ros.
Jx. 75, H. 220; 1X-224, ryos. ex.

76, R. 223).


Tho ;;roat interest of jievors in furthering
Rasohor 1 # and Rogers's -aperients is clearly shown
by tho fact that bo included a Craft of a latter
which ili-allor was supposed to write '.lilch in ord.r
to ake further experl -nts possible by securing tho
lm.—pressure ohoiibor for the hljh altltuio oxp.ri-
. HI lor, in fact, lraftod a lottor in Novem¬
ber 19-12 alons the lines which wore succestofl by


jlevars end requested that Rasohor ahouia o trans¬
ferred to the oo. (1617-Ie, lros. dx. 77, It. 221).
Tile letter which was to secure the proouror-ont of


the low-pressure cha-.b-r and Rasohor 1 s further coop¬
eration in hish altitude and froozlnc experiments
wc,3 actually sent by Hi:--lor's adjutant, General

olff, who wrote to VXXatx on 26 October 19-12. tr.O-

, . : a. Sx. 78 , 8. 226 - enphnais supplied). ..
copy of this lett.r was s-nt by tho defendant Brandt


to


jiovors.

On 13 Docc.-.bar 1*»» -X- ler issued dirootieiin


- 13 -


surjsta


that Raschor was to carry out hi.yh altitude uxp-ri-
.onts for rc3cuo fror. hich and , xtra, .oly. h alti¬

tudes, oxpori. vents far rowar.vins after total chilling
of the liunan body, oxpcrlvnts for the ronoval of
effects duo to freezing of parts of tho huium syater.,
osp-cially tho oxtrenitios, and oxp-rL.onts concornod
with the adaptation to freezing cold in anowhuts
(*. loos) to bo carried out on tho sito cf the Jj
. ouutain retreat, Judclfld. Hi', vlor il3o ordered
that various 13 agencies and the ..hnonorbw jocioty
should assist Rasohor in c e procurement of the ne¬
cessary apparatus, cat leal products and r.odical sup¬
plies. The Ahnonorbo r^coiv.d a oopy of the letter.
(1612-i'w, Pros. 2z. 79, R. 22C) •

That iiovers had a docisivo influence on the, o:v-
ooution of tho liiji altitude oxpori vents is proved
by Reseller' a lottor to I rofessor Pfannonstiol in
*, rbure, dated 10 Novor.bor 1913 ir. which Raschor JUf.-
tjOOtod that l‘fannon3tiel _.y apply to eiovors for
p^rti s alon to conduct luji altitude 0 X.*:rL’.ent 8 on
hu.ian b-inca. (NO-371, supra).

Jurinj the entire ti_:o covered by tho period or
tho hi^h altitudo or.perl vant3, Raschor was attached
to tho .Rinenorbo or.d porforrxd tho hi;h altitudo u>

■.rl isnts .ith its assist.-ur?o. Siovors t-3t:i'i->

• *

that Rnscher bocn_.o anjcoi ted with the .Jmonorhu at
tho jj ;inni:.,* of . arc 1 (H. 5671). On 20 duly

It;3, When tho final r. ort on .1. h altitudo ex-

>.,ri vents was sub Itt- to Hi lor, Raschor's nave
a-Mearod on tho lotter-h^ad of th« .Jmuncrbo Institute


for liilitary iciontlfic Ke.-.-arch cs shown- by th-
cov^r lotto*, end th Jlosed report bore th a aU\lo~

■ uub that the -x wri^unts iuf bo-n carried out in
conjunction with the .les-J-ch end Instruction .-.ssocia-
tion ■ -o 3 Ahnenorbo'. (1607e-P3, Pros. dx. 65, ...

20-i; :io-:o2, Pros. 3x. 66, R. 313).

diovers had actual knowlodso of the cri-dnal as-
„cta of tho Itooohor osperi - - Ho was notifiod

that Dachau Innatos - i •- in "

nta. (S. 5012). diovora admit¬
ted Out Ncachor told hi . that several persons -led
r.o a result of tho hi:h altitude oxp.ri-.~nta. In.
S5C60).

B. ffran«4nc TSx oori^mf (Indiotnont, . ( '

Before tho hi;.h altitude oxp-ri-ier.ts had actu-
111 / boon completed, the - re~zinj ox>-ri.'.er.ts
ordered to bo p-rfor oC 5; th- defendant foltz ..r.C
his subordinate Itasch-r. £his onn bo soon fro.:
lotto* of 30 Hoy 1*42 fro . ilch to Karl 'iff.

iros. Jx. 62 , 1 . 200 ). - short tlrs lata?,

Headier had c conference 1th Ki.opko and the oxpori-
..ental tea.*: was changed to include Jarisch, Holslooh-
, nd Ungor. Rancher roportod thuao orders to
i:i_Lilor on 15 Juno 19-.2, ar* poss-d on Hippko's re¬
quest to have tho oxpori ~ts conduotod in nac:u:u.

i. tod that: 'It iso d-cid-d that tho In-
c-'-coor Clippko) would issue orders to .-e ct all
tho axporifionts*. (NO-383, Pros. Jx.

2, 309). TJ - vaa i88uoe by


- 13 -


oLV_iU


tho Rcfcrat for -.viatica .':ci:e (2 II 3) under
jithony, with tho def ..ndnnt Dcchcr-Frcyscny .s :.is
uty. (IiO-266, iros. lx. SC, 3. 2i3)

The cold water freenine experiments bo "an on
15 -u'juot 1912 and continue, until the .arly port or
19-13. They '..‘ore perf nr.xu by Holzloohner, Finlx,
and leachor, ell of who., were officers ir. the . -odical
service of the Luft. iffc. !!■. lzloohncr nd Jin'eo col¬
laborated with Bos • aiwil DeO. e.r 19-12. ..a

itcachor sola I per . .*□ . .dicel trair.ir.

: jru^r of the Roiohnfuahror 33 end 0-:.«ralobor-
stabj .rzt Prof. Dr. Hippko, I conducted 'Hxyori. touts
for tho Rescue of Frozen Feracr.3' (started or. 15
.01 U3t 1942), in cooperation - for four . onths -
with the University roi. h. olsioehnor, :.'i. 1, i
Dr. flnko Of tho Uol UuiV-roity," (K0-230, Froo.

•. 11*5, 1. 356). Raaoher ..loo said that: »3iuoo
. r.y 1939 till today I i ve xen ir .".ilitary Sv-rvlce
With the ..irforc.. •. Fho l"

1'; ... It should thoroforu be borne in -ini that
Curia- all or thu hi h ltitudc and substuntially nil
of the freezing expert -ntj, Raochor vas e:. active.
<; p t y with the Luftwnffo not *3« It u .e m t
until after Ixy 19-13 that ho .:aat on active duty Kith
. ; of course supported by both

the Luftwaffo u;« t . '• ■ : :

Tho witrass Noff, who - as nn in. .ate assistout
in t:-.j expert.:ent3, testified that freezing oxp-ri-
eats in tho concentration cap Dachau star tod at tho
end of July or ir. .'oiGUflt 19-1-2. They were conducted
by Raseher, Holzloehner and Finlx. In October,

_ _


-LVjJb


Kolzlochnor and Pinko left and Hasctir proceeded
clone to conduct freezing axpcrL-.ont 3 until i:ay 19d3
-Teacher, Eblzlochner and .'ir.ke used ice-cold water
dor their froozinc oxporL^r.ts. The .ri. .octal
basin had been built two -t.re lcn .3 end two -.«ter a
hiOh in Hc3cher'a expert .ntal station, Block 5.

626-e). The oxperirents woro carri-’ out in the
following nnnnor: Tho ba 3 in was filled with water
and ico v/as added until tho vator -aaured 3°C. Tho
ox.vjrl_:ontal subjects, either drosswd ir. a flyinr
suit or nokod, woro pine

cotica Kioto frequently not u 3 od. It always tool: a
certain tino until so-called ;, freczin 3 narcosis-'

-a.de the experimental subjects uncor.soious and tho
subjects suffered torribly. Tho to.poraturc of tho
vioti -.s was teosurod rectally and through tho

AOh by Galvanometer, ?hoy lost oonsoiousness ..t
a body pernturo of approxi a; 53°c. 7

•Krl’.ents actually pro re 33 j (2 until the expert.ontal

to 25°c. body tonporafcuro.

-n ex .rl -.out on ttw Suasion officers who v/wre ex¬
posed naked to the ic^-cold water in the basin was
particularly brut..l. UxoSe two Ru33inn3 were still
c.uuci'us after two hours. SoSOhOT r^lus^to Qd-
inistor an injection. hen one of tho inr-atcc
attended tho export .ent tried to ad;ini 3 ter ;ji
anesthetic tc those two vice!- 3 , Hascr.ui* t reatonod
hi fith a pistol. Both GXporinontdl subjects diod
i’tai* bavins been exposed at least five hours to tho
terrible cold. (Noff, R. 629-631). «;mroxt -tely
2C-300 cxpcrtmcntcl subjects wore used for this typo


- 17 -


oI-.T_.Ro


or I'rcozinc oxporir.ent, but in reality, 360-<1-00
nurLur.t3 ricro conducted since .'.any oxyori-iontsl
subjects wore used t .0 or three ti--03 for expori-
roats. ..pproxi. -tvly 60 to SO experimental subjocts
tlio'.. ..br?ut 50 or 60 in. -tes wore used in tho Holz-

looiin-r-Finkc-Raschcr export ents end approximately

15 to 18 cf thor. died. Political prisoners, non-
Co r. an nationals and prisoners of war wore used Ter
those oxporiaonta, Jiany of iareatoa used had
not been •condonnod to death . Tho subjects did not
voluntoor for tho exp*.ri onts. (Koff, • 627-t )•

j 7 on though ono asouoe that prisoners condemned
to loath woro uoed in all of tho oxpori -nts, which
13 not true, tho :, dofonso : ' that they voluntucrod on
tho a'jroo.mont that thoir sentences would be oa.xt-
tofl to life i. .prison;:jnt is invalid. Durinc tho : i ;h
altitude oxpori-iohto, KL l^r had directed that In
further experiments where th- lone continue* heart
aotlvity of subjects who w.-a hilled was obaorvot ,
cri inols oon -d to death Should b- used and, if
they Wore revived, they should bo pardoned ' to oon-
001 for 3 • (1971b-P3, rroo. Jx. 51,

h. 180). Raooher apparently conotruod this order to

apply to the froozinc oxpori:.enta al3o. On 20 Octo¬
ber 19d2, Raooher advised Rudolf Brandt that up
until then only i’ol^s hiosiano had been uoed for
such oxpori. :onts and tlu.t only 30^0 of these persons
had boon oondomnad to . InqpLr fchor

Hi Liler’s ‘*asnosty a applied to Russians and Polos.

( 1C711-13, Pros. -lx. 52, R. 183). Brandt told hv
that it did not apply. (1971c-l->, iree. 3x. K,


oIJV—Rj


H. 183). ?or further discussion of this allocod
defense, 300 the Prosocution's Closi.:j ArGU-mnt.

Dry freezing exp^rL-onts wore curried out by
liasohor in January, February end Ilarch 19d3. One
experimental subject uas placed on a 3trctchor at
ni*jht and oxpo3od to tho cold outdoors. Ho v/as cov¬
ered with a linen shoot, but a bucket of cold water
•..as poured over hi-. ov~ry ::eur. Ho r-.einod out¬
doors until tho icrninc; and thou his tc..poratui'e was
taken with a th-r. e. jtcr. In tho next series ox-
pori .ontal plan was ohon 0 od, ’and experimental persons
had to ronain naked outdoors for Ions hours without
b„i.ij coy • ill. Or.o series was currie’. cut

on 10 prisoners who had to :-c.soin outdoors overni^t.
Reader hi -.self was present durinc approximately 1C -
.20 i nts of that type. .. -. -roxi -atoly 3 oxperi-

. ottt.il subjeots died as a reoult of tho dry freezing
experiments. (Njff, a. -3 -7).

On the order of re. itz and Raacher, a maos -x-
purL-.ont en 100 experimental subjects was to be cr.r-
>4 out. ..3 Hascher was not pros^ , ff wa3 in
tho position to frustrate the export :~nt by taking
the experimental subjects mdoor3, and therefore no
do a the occurred uurin this experimental series.

Thu longest period that e:: 'ori-ontal subjects were
k«.pt outdoors in ti.c cold .as from 6 p.m. to 9 a.n.
the f 11 owin , . ..rrinp. Tho lowe3t temperature Hoff
con recollect during tlio dry freezing oxporL.cr.ts wco
•aturo. -s Haschor had p:

that experiments were to be carried out ui: '.or <* -s-


jijv_ad


thotics, tho experimental subjects gufforcd root
pain and scrcar.cd to such an extent that it v as im¬
possible to carry out Tartar oxpori -nts. Ra3chor
therefore requested Himmler* a per; is3ion to carry
cut such experiments in tho future in the ..uschwitz
Concentration Ca;p. Hon-5ormn nationals and poli¬
tical prisoners wore r_~nj the experimental subjects.
Nona of thou v/oro sentenced to death. They had not
volunteered for tho om.eriu~r.ta. (duff, R. 637-9).

In connoction with tho freezing oxpori. .onts,

Hoff further testified that in eoptor.bor 1942 ho
received orders fro;: Jiovera to take the her.rt3 end
luirjs of 5 experimental subjoota who had boon hilled
in tho oxpori -.onto to Frof. Hirt in etra3sbour fer
further soiontifio study. 7ho trcvol warrant for
Neff hod boon made out by ^iovor3 and tho ..hnenorbo
society paid the oxpens-c for tho transfer of tho
bodies. Ono of the 5 oxpori 1 subjects kill
had boun a Dutch citizen. (2% *d, 3. 633). iiewrs
visltoi* tho experimental station ouiu frequently
during tho at a. Ufa ff, S. 635).

Hoff's toati-iony is corroborated by the affida¬
vits of the defendants Dud elf Dr-ndt and 9col;or-
”r j /aor~i (NO-842, ire... Jx. 60, R. 230; NC-l-iS,

.raj. Jx. 01 , . 35), tho testL.any of the wit¬
ness Lutz (R. 26.-76j, .31), and .lchrl-

owshy (R. 870-63), ar.d by .ho docu.-..tory uvid~r.co
i.i I;.:o record.

On tho loth of Jur.o 1942 Rascher informed Klie-
. ler that tho Ir.3ncctcr of tho Nodical Jorvioc of
tho Luftwaffe, Eippko, sourl.t per. issior. for cold ex-


oi-7» r _Ho


pori-ianta to b_ conducted \>y Reachor and HOlzlooh-
nor i .-.o Doolnu Concentration Car^. C'0283, l'roa.

”, 02, a, 239), On tho 10th -ioptonbcr, Rosofcor

ouV.it tod his first inter w'icp/ report an the fiiouer
in” c^x-rL.ar.ta eo Hl.l-r. In tho covering letter
Jtaochur 3tnted that Holrloohnor, vhc participated in
the execution of the oxperi.-^nts on behalf of tho
huft.;affo, intondOd to lecture r. tho subject of
»roozinc in tho ’cold ocru'ercaco 4 of tho Luftwaffe
on tho 26 - 27 Octobor in hV.rnber, . Rasoiior infer. i-
od hi..'.lor chat 'Jiovors, mUo surveyor. t.u oxporl-
.ontj in Daohcu lost uoak, bvliovod that if any re¬
port \icxa to bo . —do at i , I should bo called

upon to aub."it tho report 1 *• (H0-23&, Proa. -x. 8S,

iv. 211). Tho Intor.tod lory report itaolf about o;

Its face that fatalities oocurrod co c result of t2io
.'laoohur-rtolzloolinor-.'ir.:- oxpjri. vnto, and advocotod
r -warring of k.y roly chilled persons,
noao&or oonsidorod that r_- or. i:.;: * ith oni. el heat
vould bo too sled;, and t! .t cxparl-ents .is ro-
a .jet would bo unnoo . Ho voiced u flLH.tr

opinion ns to tho use of 'ru s f>r the purpose of ro-
yas in'. (1618-1:., . . . , ... r,

vdion ectoiowlod.,1 r;.j the receipt el* Hascher's report
on tlie 22nd eopto hr, directed covortholosa that the
&peri .nt with r~- . by ina f Iri a ly

oop7 of .this order of Rlmlor’a
Jiovcrs on the 25th £optorj>or*
(1611-P3, ires. 2s. 85, R. 2d-;).

On the basi3 ef this order Raaoher approad ad


- 21 -


_>i„vj :io


jiovers to .:aho crranj-nts for i fonnlo Gypsies co

bo irocurod at once for the purpose of re-/or. .inc
^xperLaontal subjects, (RO-285, Fros. Rx. 85, R.

211 ). It was apparently jiovors' offort in this ro-
;ord which resulted in a series of tolocro: a to
transfer those wo. .on fro., tho Rav^nsbrucl: Concentra¬
tion Carp to Daohau. Rudolf 3randt actually direct¬
ed the transfer. (1619-P.i, lros. dx. 87, R. 27^-0).
The 1 wo;:on arrived in Hc/e;.bor 1912 in Dachau.

Throe of thcr. wore used for re-war. .inc; of frozen ex¬
perimental subjects, ono being excluded 'oocauso she
\jcs 1 'nordic 1 type. That tho experimental su’ejoot3
vora not volunteers is plain fro:: a remark of ono of
those women: :l bottor half c yoar in a brothel than
half a year in tho concentration oa".p J . (NO-323,
lros. Jx. fid, R. 325). This series of oxperinonte,
which v/as not only murderous but obsoono, wen carried
out by Rascher between hev-.b-r 1912 end Fobruary
1913. His report to Hi l~r rovcal3 that ono of the
ox?oriental subj-ots died as a result of this series
of exp^ri.-ents. (151G-. j, .res. Hz. 103, R. 312).

On 8 October 1912, -tabsarzt Frof. .Jithony of
the I.udical Inspootarato ef the Luftwaffe, approached
Ki-.-lwr ith tho infer ctien that the results of the
y;et froozinc oxp-ri :~.;ts carried out by Raochor in
coop-ration with Kolzloehner and 7inke were to be
lectured upon by FolzlOwhnor during the ;, cold confer¬
ence- on 26- 27 October in Numbers. (NO-286, Fros.
Hx. 88, R. 218, compare IK)-23d supra). On 16 Octo¬
ber Rascher al30 ashed Ki-mmlcr's permission to re-


22 -


louse tho results of the freezing experiments Curin',
these * ! cold conferences-. (KG-225, Pros. Jx. EQ,

230). On tho oa:x» day .'.ns oho* suteiittod to Ki.--.lcr
his final report or. tho freozi: experiments us far
ns they had been carried out in collaboration with
Kolzloohnor and Finfco. This report did not include
experiments for ro-waminc by roans of drucs end of
ani.ml body h-at, which ct that tiro were still in
projroas. (1613-Po, iro3. Jx. K. 251). This
report on •'Coolinc hxporL -nts on Huron BoinGs'*’ by
Kolzloohnor, Rasohor and Finko, corroborates fully
the tostirony of lioff a oncoming this series of the
wet freezing oxporironts, and proves that .'■any fa¬
talities occurred. It shows that co:*> of tho oxpori-
iiontal subjeoto vroro oxposad to this torriblo ty-o
of experimentation without rcoaivinc anosthotios,
;,hioh would have alloviat;d thoir pain considerably.

sufferings of tho ox. .ri.--.ntal aubj-oto - ere
vividly described, app-cred round tho ouths

of the oxparirant.l subject., and breathing diffiorl-
tios and lunc odocn resulted. Tho coolinc of the
neck and back of tho h-ad of the experimental sub¬
jects caused especially inful sensations. Pro.jea-

si/o ricor, which dev.lop.' v-ry ctronsly ir. the am

r.uscljc, oyanoais and total irregularity <£t the heart
activity, wore the 3/.pto s observed by th- oXp-ri-
nntors. Hot baths woro adyocatofi as tho best troat-
. vlit for severely chill-d -rsona. Fatalities ro-
ar.lt j*1 from hoart failure and orain odoxa, end mea¬
sures for protection c.ainst such results were dis-


23 -


*127313


cussed at ^rcct length. (NO-428, Fro3. 3s. SI, 3.
252).

ji-Vwra denied that .anchor rcportoG to hi., on
the freezing exp-ri.-.unts, out admitted that ho ra-
c-ive! occasionally .Jasc -r'3 reports fro:: :a.-ier.
(.1. 3684-5). 3ut by tho testimony of tho Yfitno33
Loff it is not only prov-C that Rasoher submitted to
tho ‘..hnonorbo- . .onthly, quarterly, mC. sami-onnually
r« >orts describing in dotail tho nrturo anu status
of his experimental ros^urch (R. 635), but 'Iso that
tho final report of Rasch-r, Rolzloohn-r one Finko
(i: 0-;20 supra) v/aa forwnrdod to hi.*.. (R. 601 ),

On 24 October Himmler aoknowl-d ,ed tho rocoipt
of this report which ho had road with great inter¬
est and chcrgod oiov-rs with arrangements for
•tho possibility of evaluation at institutes which
are oonr.octod with us*. (1609-Fo, Pros. 3x. 92, R.
264).

On 26 and 27 Octob.r 1912, tho conference on
•1 udieal Proble.nj ..rising fro:: Distress at Jea and
in tor hardships', sponsored by tho Inspector of tho
radical iervico cf th- Luftwaffe, Kippke, under tho
chairmanship of .aithony and with tho r.ssistonoe of
becior-Froyseng, took place in Nurnborg. ..t this
conference Eolzloohaer delivered hi3 lecture on tho
freezing experiments urdor the titl- 'Prophylaxis and
Tr .atiwnt of Freozing in :tcr-.

Tlio v-ry detailed clinical obsorvati-ns des¬
cribed by him oxcludod tho possibility that only ob¬
servations on human boin; ; who •■■'ere rescued had been
£v.d., and made it clear that experiments on iummn


JlJVLRJ


bcinjs had boon conducted. (K0-401, Pros. 2x. 93,

K. 309). Moreover, Hcschor made a statoncnt fol¬
lowing Holzloohner’s lecturo, which cloarly revealed

9

that tho oxporir.ants had been carried cut on concon-
tration canp innatos. This report caused a sensa¬
tion oaonc thu officials present at tho lecture. It
'<’03 nede clear that deaths had occurred. (Lutz, R.
372). ilovors doniod havina rceeivod a report on
this conference (R. 3509), but ths. entry of 12 Janu¬
ary in his Diary for tho y-or 19d3 shows that ho
discussod with Ra3cher tho -procurement of nonoranda
on the conforonco conc-rnin^; tho effect of cold, in
ilurn’jorc 11 . (NO-538, Proa. da. 122, R. 379).

On 6 November 19<.2, Raaoher fon.-ardod a r»o..oran-
dun to Hiaalor's personal staff, tho offioo of the
defendant Rudolf Rrondt, re .ardino cooperation \/ith
Dr. Crervor of the Lodi cal Research Station for
l ountain Modloal Troops at 3t. Johann. Thi3 was a
sohool subordinated to ilandlosor as ..rny Lodical
Inspector. In this :*<o::orandun Raschor advocated
dry froozinc oxpcri;:or.ts on concentration car.p in-
nates in tho mountain ro i-»n of Byrischzell. Tho
purpose was to invest;, tj whethor injuries of tho
o::tre. iti^s duo to froezinj vould have a hotter prog¬
nosis on persons aoouato.ad to cold than on persons
unaccustomed to it. Raschor said that Cronor hacl
hoar’ tho report in Hurnbor ; and was very onthusiustic
about the experiments. lie requested to see so.;c in
pro ;rcss. (NO-319, Ires. Jx. 96, R. 328; 1579-PS,
Pro3. Lx. 97, R. 329). Himmler cave his porniasion

- 25 -


oIST-JU


for tills typo of dry froozinc experiment in on ordor
datx-d 13 December 1912, in which ho li3ts Raschor'a
aosi;nmont for the execution cf hieh altitudo and
throo different typos of freezing oxporir.onts. Copios
of this ordor wore submitted to various 33 ..ccncicu
and to tho -diner, or be iocioty. (1612-P3, Pros. Jx.

79, R. 229). Himlar's letter contained tie follov-
ir.;; directive:

;, 5. The procurement of the apparatus
needs for all tho experiments should
bo discussed in detail with the of¬
fices of tho r.eichscrzt 33, Main Of¬
fice for economics and .u'rinistration,
und with tho - l -onorbo

Tho ovidenco proves that prior to 21 Ootober
1913, Rasohor rcc-ived an assienm^nt from 31ono of
tho Reich Rcs-orch Council to conduct open air frooz-
in experiments. (NO-132, Pros. Rx. 119, R. 369).
elevens aided Rasohor in tho matter of obtaining tho
locution and personnel for -huso experiments. (3516-
.ros. Jx. 123, R. 3G2, entry for 21 Jan. *44).

0:; 13 January 1913, Rauchor had a conforonco with
Gravrltz and tho dofondent Poppondick ooncorninc tho
froozlnc oxporir.onts. In this conforonco haschor's
froozlnc experiments woro discusood in dot nil. *io
stressed tho roint that ho was worklnc with the
■ Jinonorbo-' and that ho reported to tho .dir.onarbo,

Tlio documentary note of .laschcr'3 on this conference
shows on its face that wot froozlnc experiments had
been conducted by him., and that Grawitz roquosted
him to carry out further froozlnc experiments with
dry cold until ho would - ,N ave a fow hundred cases .


oUJVjSS


This documentary note was forwardod by biovers to
tho defendant Budolf Brandt on 28 January. In his
covurinc lottor Jievers requested Brandt's opinion
ca to what attitudo ho and Daschor wore tc toko in
res poet of thoir position to Grawitz, with tho in-
pliod request that Brar.dt should strongthon his
position with Grawitz, who considered it : an unboar-
ablo situation to have a non-physician live infrr; na¬
tion on nodical ratters*. hat biovors wonted to
c.chiovo v/as an intervention of Brandt with Himmler
on his bohalf and, therefore, ho stros3ed his per¬
sonal importance by saying:

‘J-y duty moroly censi3t3 ir. smoothing
the way for tho research men and soo-
inc that tho task3 ordored by tho
rleichsfuehrer ±j arc carried out in
the quiokoat possible way. On ono
thine I Certainly can forn on opinion
- that is, on who is doine the quick¬
est job.

"If things ore to on in the futuro
as JG-Grupponfuehror Crawitz desires,

I on afraid that Dr. Kaschor’u work
will not continuo to advance as fast
and unhonporod as hitherto.•' (W0-320,

*roa. Jx. 103, D. 335-9)•

On 17 February, richer forwarded his report on
the results of tho experiment in which unL._l wernth
was used for tho re-war.nina of severely chilled por-
sons. (1616-PS, supra). In his accompanying lottor
to Himmler, ho informed hi that he v/as conduct!;*"
dry cold experiments in .'aohau. Thirty oxperi: ental
subjects had been experimented upon and had been eX-
po3od to cold out of doors fro:: 9 - 1- hours, thereby
reducinc their body temperature to 27 - 29'C. The
extra. :itios of the experimental subjects wore frozen


oiJV_;-u


will to. Raschor succostod a lar*;c 3crios or experi¬
ments In the ..uschwitz Concentration Carp. This
place would bo suitable Tor such oxpcrimuntation be¬
cause it was ooldor there, and the spacious open
country within tho cor.p W weuld .*:ahe the experiments
less conspicuous, ns tho export-mental subjects yell
when they freezo sovorely. (1516-Po, supra, or.phc-

3is supplied). Kirroler ;avc Raschor por:Jssion to
carry out additional freezing experiments in tho Con¬
centration Co:;ps ..uschwitz and Lublin. (1615-pj,
lros. Jx. 109, R. 350).

Raaohor's lottor to the dofor-dant Rudolf 3rondt,
date! d ..pril 19d3, rovenls that another sories of
dry freezing oxperLants had been carried out or. in-
itttos of tho Daohuu Concentration Car.p during a period
of heavy fro3t weather. done of the exporirental
subjects woro oxpoaod to oold of -6°C. in tho opon
air for fourtuon hours and had reached ar. internal
temperature of 25“C. (HO-292, Pros. Rx. Ill, a.

35d). The threo fatalities »<hich, acoordinc to Neff’s
testimony, resulted fro - tho dry froozlnc oxporirents,
apparently occurred during thi3 sories of oxpori. -nto.
(faff, n. G37-8).

On 11 ..pril, Hasohur submitted to Hinnler a
brief report ooncerninc ‘freozinc oxporiner.ts on hu¬
rra beinj3 exposed to the open air“. (:*0-2:C, l'roo.
-x. 112, R. 35d). Tho report itself i3 not available,
Vut tho letter cf tho defendant Rudolf Brandt of 13
..pril to Raschor proves that tho dofondznt Gobhardt
r-ceivod it fro;; Hi.rJ.-r far 3tudy. (K0-2*il, Pros.


- 2C -


dl ZKZRS


113, R. 355). confor-ncc botnoon Raschcr and
the dofondant Gobhcrdt tool: place in Hohcdiychcn on
i-u Jay in the proaoncc of the defendant Fischer.
Gebhardt discussed with doachor the froozinc oxperi-
conta and other oxperirxntation carried out in the
Drohau Concentration Caap and invited Raachor to
collaborate with hU. Raachor feared to loao hia
independonco and turned to clovers to settle this af¬
fair in a tactful r/ay aa Gob herd t was a very oloao
friend of Hinder, and Reactor, thoroforo, feared
his evontual onnity. (NO-331, Pros. 116, R. 360).
oiovera, in turn, approached Brandt in this natter
on 22 ilay and requested informtion whether hi --lor
had jiven any definite directive to Gobhnrdt in re¬
cord to Raschor's sphere of cotion and work. He
further aokod Brandt's intervention on behalf of

daaoiwr by saying

•I entrust you Ath this affair and
ask you particularly to ua. it only
for your s’.rictl; personal is.forna-
tion so that Dr. Rnsohor does not
unoountor any difficulties vithJd-
Grupnenfuehr^r ir^fossor Dr. Geo-
hardt. n (NO-267, Pros, -x. 117,

R. 366).

•hon Rnscher viaitod Oobhardt in Hohonlychon,
the Utter enooura^od hin to ar-bark upon a career of
University locturer. (KO-231, 3upra). Raaohcr fol-
loued this suc^ostion and iiovera supported hi.*:
wholeheartedly and collaborated with the dofondants
Brandt and Blouo to havo Rasohor appointod University
lecturer. (NO-229, Pres. Hx. 118, R. 367; !'0-250,

1 roa. Ux. 121, R. 373). That Rascher’s thesis for


•SI37ZR3


habilitction was based on tho freezing and high al-
ticudo experiments is proved by Rascher's no.torandum
on Uia medical training which ho wrote for the pur¬
pose of hia hcbilitation (NO-230, Pros. 2x. 115, R.
356), and other evidence in the record. (N0-240,
iroo. Jx. 112, R. 35d).

-bout Novo::bor 19-12 it soamod doslrablo to
viovers to hr.vo Raschor Transferred from tho Luftwaffe
to the '.'offon ->J. iiovora, as h-ichs Ilonagor of tho
..hn-norbe, corresponded oxtor.sivcly in connection
with Hasohor'3 transfer. (NO-268, Pros. Rx. 95, R.
326; NO-233, Pres. Jx. 101, R. 333; H0-320, Pres. Ux.
103, R. 335; NO-238, Pros. 3x. lOd, R. 3-10). This
transfer which took place of tor 2^»y 1913, was attend¬
ed v/ith considorablo difficulties, bec .uso Hippko did
not wish to roloaso l.*.schor even though ho and his
associates know of tho .-my deaths in tho oxpcriivnts.
i:ipp!:e said that Raachor .;aa their connection with
tho Ji. (N0-270, Iros. Jx. 110, R. 351).

In tho oiovers' Diary, there arc mtaorous in¬
stances of J.-vers' activities in tho aid of Rasohcr.
On 1 Fobruary 19-13 Jievers notod efforts i- obtaining
apparatus, i.:plo::onts, and che icals for Rascher's
uxp-ri.-.nts. (NO-530, Pros. Lx. 122, R. 379). On
the 3th and 21st of January 19-1-1, Severs noted tho
problem of location. (3513-1 3, Iros. Jx. 123, R.

302). Rcsofcor reported to Jiovers periodically con¬
cerning the status and details of the freezing ex¬
periments. (NO-538, 3upra, ontrio3 for 18 Fob., 12
- ar., and 6 and 7 .. ril 19-13).


- 30 -


ol _f. o


Jicvors had nur^r&ua duties ir. connection with
the Rosohor reports. It -.ras Jiover3 who rcco:_x.i.C~2
that r;a3cbor bo p-r.'iifctod to appear and ;ivc a r-port
at the Luftvaffo cold conTorenco hold at Number•; on
26-27 October 19-12. It ’.as oiovors' task to :ako tho
proli.tinary arrange, -nts concv-rnin^ tho presentation
of tho report. (KO-231, Pro3. 2x. 63, R. 2-11; 1609-
1*3, 4 ro3. 3x. 92, R. 26-1). Tho rolationahip of
clovers to Rasohcr in tho p~rf or. ur.ee of freezing
experiments required Olivers to .vake the prdL.inary
arrangements for tho performance of tho oxperi.vtnt3,
to fx.iliurizo himsolf with tho projross of tho ox-
periaonta by p-rsonal inspection, to furnish neces¬
sary oquipnont and notorial, including hunan boincs
used durinj tho fruozin;; experiments, to receive end
mice pro'jross roports concorninj Raachor, and to handlo
tho tatter of ovaluotion ar.d publication of ouch re¬
ports. Basically, auch aotivitios constituted a per¬
formance of hio duties as defined by iiovor3 in his
letter of 28 January 1913 to R. Brandt in vrhioh lio
stated that ho a toothed tho vajr for rosearch workers
end saw to it that Kir.aer's orders were carried out.
(i:0-320, Pros. 3x. 103, .7. 335).

This is further proved by tho fact that oi«v^rs
tried to obtain an -luctro-cardicpraph for Hasohor's
hijh altitudo and freozinj exporio eats in Jopto. bor
1912 (liO-3675, Pro3. Jx. 318, K. 10371), and that on
20 Octob-r 1912 ho approached the Curator of tho .Ji-
nonerbe, uost, with tho roquost for certain instru¬
ments for the use of the .Jinonorbc Instituto for Ilili—
tary ..cientifio Ro3oarch. (N0-3B74, rrc3. 3 x. 5d-9,
h. 10372).


31 -


During tfco first week of ooptcnbor 19i2 and on
savornl othor occasions oi„vors visitod tfco Dachau
uzporinontal station and itnosscd freezing oxpori-
riunta. (Naff, R, 633; 110-231, Fros. 2x. 83, R. 2dl).
flavors tostified that fco was at> Dachau on tv/o occa¬
sions when froozing oxperi \ 0 nt 3 were being conducted.
On tho first occasion, Jievors 3aw a tost person
placed in a roo.n and uatohod tho persons in chorgo
road tho apparatus. (It. 36©-*). On the socond occa¬
sion when Rascher was conducting an experiment with
tlio ..hnenorbo employee, Hirt, oievers was prosont
whon an oxporiment was conductod which v:as oxpoctcd
to arovo fatal. (K. 3603-7).

C. ; ia}arla Aperient s (In. ot_;t, 1 r. 6 (C))

2 'or a description of tho criminal nature of tho
uloria oxpori: *jnta, roferenoo ay bo nudo to tho
.rooooution's brief against the dofondont Ron .

glovers had knowlo'd a of and supported tho ori¬
gin 1 mlaria exp^ri^nta in Dachau. He testified
that in oarly 19-i2 he learned fro.- Ki..Jor that
schilling was conductir. nlaria experiments in Dn-
ohau. (It. 5092). in : - ...ril 19-i2

oonoorning a consultation botwoon oiov-rs and Dr.
t ay ?n tho locution of an ox>-ri. .ontal station for
tho . -herb*, jiuVwrs -nti nod, as a .^rwuasive
ronoon for looatin*; in Dachau, the fact that Schil¬
ling was carrying out his . alaria oxpuri. onts thcro.
(110-721, iros. Js. 126, R. dOd). although this
, *jrioranduri gives tho no: a a3 : 3chlanh' 1 , oievers testi-


oUV-Ro


fioC that tho nano ochillinc was Intended. (?.. 3693).

Tie witnoss Yiowo. testified that in late 19d3
or early 1944 aiovcr3 ..ado several visits to schil¬
ling's ixiloriq station vhore he consulted with Vloot-
nor, who v;as a collaborator of Schilling's, (R.
dd5-7, d6d). Ho stated that siovors consulted with
eOhilliny and al30 i. n^ictou tho laboratory. (R.
d23). 3iovors testifiod that tho purpose of those
visits and consultations was to arrant for tho
transfur of ilootnor to tho Institute for military
Joientific Research of tho ..rbo.

.. nu v.r of entries in tho Jr.uvora D\_ry for
19:i provo tlmt 31 .vers was connectod with and sup¬
ported tho rial aria oxp-rl^nts. Cn 30 January ho
roooivod a ..onorandun b/ Ilootnor on .:oiaria.
notation of 22 February 3tatos that -'furthor work in
tho latter of 39-Hstuf. Dr. llcetnor to bo dono
throu '.h RGF\ (Roichs ;osnndhoit3fuohror Conti),
ilootnor, in addition to hi3 work ith dohillin;;,
van al3o collaborating * ith Randier in tho blood
ooajulation oxpori. ~nt3. (-oo entries of 29 Jan.,

Id or.). On 10 Kay 19-d tho entry indioates that
.Packer's rosoarch work *.:aa transferred to Plootncr.
This '..as apparently a result of hascher's difficul¬
ties in connection with tho kidnapping of children
by hla and his ifo. On 23 l Ay 19dd Plootnor •..•as
charged with the nan a ;c.iont of tho -duv.no rbo Divi¬
sion in Dachau. Tho entry for 31 Ikiy indicates that
-»iov.ir3 and Grawitz reached on understanding concorn-
inj -.lootnor's continued collaboration with Jchilllnc


- 33 -


oI^VUHo


On 21 Juno -.levers conforrcd with 3 o hill in g about
Uniting Plootnor'a activities with hlz after his
transfer to tho .Jmanorbe. lloetncr was actually
adjoin tod department head in tho Institute for i.ili-
tory Joiontlfic Hosearoh of the ..tnonorbo on 27 Juno.
Tho entry for 2-i ..u^ust 19 Pi notes that collaboration
between 3ohi 11 in." and Ploutnor had been acrood upon.
(3536-13, Pros. Jx. 123, 2. 382).

D. [ p^^y.uatard ) fry* .ir.^oriixjnta lIn'.lot. jnt, iar.

7ron tho winter of 19.2 until tho suiter of 19-Pi
uxp-rL~nts to doterrAnu tho most effootivc troatnont
for ounds oausod by Lost (• ustord) pcs wero conduct¬
ed in tho Natwoilor Concentration Camp undor tho su¬
pervision of irofooser Hirt of tho Tvoioh Unirorsity
of Jtruusbourtj. Tho experi^ionts \#oro ordorod by
Bi.T3.or and tho Luftwaffe, and sponsorod by tho 2oich
h«oearoh Council. Tho .Jinenorbe Jocioty and tho de¬
fendant jievera supported this research cn behalf of
tho JJ. ( 192-13, i roe. 237, H. 103-i). Tho ar-
ran"icr.t for tho pcy. ~nt of tho research subsidies
cf tho ..hr.jr.erbo -as ado by -.ior-rs. (JSC-3819, -tcj.
3;:,. 350, ... 1C572).

Bio defendant -»iuv.r3 participated in those ox-
iv.rlunto by actively ooUaboratin- with the defen¬
dants Lari and Rudolf 3randt, and with hirt and ’..is

principal assistant, Dr. x.

Tho record shows that ->iovor3 was in correspon¬
dence with Hirt at least as early as January 1932,


- 3-. -


oUOi


one. that he established contact between Sinnlor and
Hirt. (KO-791, Pres. ic. 256, R. 1016; NO-792, Pres.
Hx. 257, R. 1017).

On 9 ..pril 19d-2 Siever3 wrote to Hirt that

Hirailcr wantod detailed inforrxtion fron Hirt on his

Loot experiments. Jicv-rs uent on to say:

r 7o arc sure to bo in a position to
nut at ycur '.ia-'osal for tho furthar-
co of thosw ox^ri. .ents unique
facilities in connection v/ith 3 ro-
cial secret orporLi^ts which wo aro
at presort cord.uotia;: ct Daohau.

Could 70 U not so .u day/./ritu a brlui
secret rooort for the Iwichofuekror-
;j on your Loot aperi ents?

•'3ut you should by no .-—ans j.o to
3orlin for thu ti-w boir., , os.ecially
sinco tho Reiohsfuchror-Ji is stay-
in." oorrxnenely at the I'uchror'e
Huadquarters. I, therefore, intona
to pay you a visit at Strassbeurj as
soon aa pissible. : ut perhaps it
would bo easier for you to oc:.u to
Munich, uhero I vault iuve tho oppor¬
tunity of introducing you to tho Ohio,
of our Institute for li:te:x)lc.;y anu
Would be able to jive you an insist
into our secret experiments at Dachau.-
C.0-793, Pres. ix. 258, R. 1019).

Thu wording of tho letter makos it apparent that it
v/au Jiovora Uiruiolf whu broucht hirt'a rcsecroh r.cti-
vitiofl coaoorninc Lost etto to Hinnlor'a attention.

Ti-.is is also proved by the fact that .n the 9 7ebruary
1 G. 2 , ho hud. already ju' Itted to tho defendant
Rudolf Brandt Hirt'a report ccncornia- tho oroation
of a skeleton collection (infra) and research i:i tho
field of intravital dcr >scopy. The latter experi¬
mentation involved thu uffect of Lost on the living
tissue. (HO-085, Pros. Jr. 175, R. 695). Brandt
infor:iod !Ii:eaor about liirt's report on 27 Fobruary,
and diroctod Jiovero to report a :xin on Kirt'a work.


- 35 -


oI-V-vo


(liC-090, Pros. ^c. 175, H. 599). It was thus Clo¬
vers' roport on Ilirt's ro3earch activities which
proaptud Kinnlfrr to taho an interest in Kirt's Lost
experiments.

On 27 Juno 1912 Jiovar3 for:ardod to tho dofon-
dvnt T.udolf Brandt tho information of Kirt'3 concern¬
ing tho U3C of Uuatord ecs on conbattinc rets. In
this letter ho mentioned that ho would have another
conference v/ith Kirt on this subject. ..ocordin: to
Jievers, Hirt had voic-d his export opinion that Lost
oven 'in a dilution of 1 - 1000 is dangerous for nan
if it oontaots the body in an adequate 0~3unt‘.
(i:o-79i, Pres. -r.. 259, .1. 1021). It was Clovers who
forwarded on 2 June 1912 Hirt's report cn his oxpori-
nonts in treating : s wounds by vitamins. In his
oov-rinc letter to this report, oiov^rs informed the
defendant Hudolf Brandt, that ho was to moot Hirt
•in order to discuss with him a more intensive appli¬
cation, continuation and promotion of his research
• or!: ‘ • In the report itself Hirt stated that ho hod
not been able te conduct exporL^nts with Lost c cs on
hiLian balnea because of tho effensivo ajninst Franco,
but JU;/;ested such experiments particularly in order
to determine tho protective effect of vitamin treat¬
ment. C'C-097, Pros. lx. 260, 1022).

In a rn.emorar.dur. of 20 June 19.2 concerning sup¬
port by the .Jinenorbc of the research work of ilirt on
mustard r;as, Covers propoc-d that an Institute for
! llitary .Scientific Research b. established within
the .hnenorbo to brine to>thor Hirt's and siller


- 36 -


oI-T_T;o


research and ttua facilitate tho organizational and
technical execution of the -Xpert :cnts. Ho proposod
appointing Hirt as on active of tho new in¬

stitute ca chiof of Deportment H (Hirt). Ho al30
stated that liaschor, who was then porforninc hich
altitude oxporincnts in collaboration *.dth Huff end
lio.i'ooi*::, should bo appointed as ohiof of Department
li (Hoocher). Ho stated that tho noco3sary supplies
for the now institute would bo easier to explain and
;soro roc3onablo than if appliod for under the na:o
of .hnonorbo olono. (N0-2210, Pros. 2x. £83, T.,

5830).

..o a result of this su jaotion by tho defendant
./Lovers, Hi-.lor diroct-d tho establishment of the
Institute for Military Joiontific Hos^arch within tho
-hn^norbe in July 19:2. In his lottor to Sievoro,
Kinalor requested that the new institute ‘support in
ovory possible way the rosearoh carried out by 33-
Kaup&sturnfuohror Prof. Jr. l.irt and pro vote all
corresponding research r.n«l undortakin .s; to make
available the roquirod apparatus, aquip:»ont acc-s-

sorie3 end assistants, or procure then. (H0-

£22, iros. 2x. 33, Iv. 136J •

jiev-.ro proceeded tc .mho all the necessary cr-
lontu f-r corr/ir. out the Lost ;as ox’>erinents
in tho Natzwoilor Concentration Camp. On 27 ..u ;ust
19£2 in a letter to Gluock3 of the YK.., ho stetod
that in connootion with a visit to Hirt ir. Jtraosbour'.:
ho would like to take Hirt .itli hi:: to Natzwoilor on
31 ..u';ust 19£2 anu ho r.shod -luocks to ;:ako th- necos-


37 -


oIJV—:J


•

snry arransonants with the oo::aandor of tho co.*i>.
(i:0-935. Pros. Jx. ul, 58-15) • In a file noto
dated 17 Jeptor.ber 19.2 jiov^rs stated that tho con-
•foronco rent ion od in his letter to Gluocks had been
hold in Nctzwollor on 31 .‘.u"ust 1912, and thet tho
working conditions thoro for tho proposod exporinonts
xi ore favorable. Prof. ZUrt, Jtabsarzt Dr. Winnor
and )r. Kios3olbach would roquiro cuto.aobilo trans¬
port for part of tho trip fro.a JtressbourG to Netz-
wuilor in order to porforai thoir work there, and
accordingly 20 litors of c,oaolino would havo to bo
.xdo availablo to the ca p authoritioo each :or.th.
(NO-977, Proa. 2x. 182, «. 3817). In a letter of 11
ooptenbor 19-12 to Gluocks, -iovora 3tated that tho
necessary conditions oxiie-d in Katzwollor ‘for
oarr/inc out our rlli'-ory eciontifio rcsoaroh work*'...
lie requested that OlUwCka issue tho necessary authori¬
zation for hirt, "iiwr and 1 ieaselbuoh to ontor
Natzwoilor, and that provision bo rado for thoir nc-
coaaodatian and board. le also state * that:

•‘The oxporL.unta v;hioh ore to be porfor.ood
cn prisoners arc to bo carried out in feur
roo-is of an already oxistinc nodical bar¬
rack. Only sli ht char, cs in tho construc¬
tion of tho building are roquired, in par¬
ticular tho installation of c hood which
can be produce with v*ry little : aitwrial.

In accor'.anoo ith attached plan of tho
c r.jtructien a a .0 .eat at Katzwciler, I
rai.uoot th-t nu0wS3ary orders be issued to
sa .0 to carry out tho reconstruction. .J.l
the oxpons-3 arising out of our activity
at Natzweilor will bo covered by this of¬
fice... •* (KO-978, Pros. Jx. 180, fi. 58-13).

In a .wriorandur. cn 3 Hovonb~r 1912 to tho defen¬
dant iiudolf Brandt, j.cvers co::plained about certain


difficulties which had arisen in N tzwcilor because

of the lack of cooperation free tho co.:p officials.

-.levers was particularly outraged by the fact that

tho ca. p officials v/cro asking that the expori-iontal

prisoners bo paid for. ho said that:

"Vfhon I think of our .military research
work conducted at the Concentration
Cae.p Dachau, I .:ust prai3o and call spe¬
cial attention to tnc ^onerous and under¬
standing way in which our work wa3 fur¬
thered there and to the cooperation wo
wurO ; iven. Pay. ont cf prisonor3 was
nover discussed. It SCO- is as if at Natz-
woilor they arc trying to .exko os r.uch
:x»noy a3 possible out of this ..attor.

’la are not conducting these oxpori-.ents,
as a .fitter of faot. for the sake of
sc.;o fixed soiontiflo idoa. but to bo of

S raotioal help to the ar;:od forces and
oyond that, to tho Gor.nn people in a
possible o-iorjanoy."

Drandt was requostod to civc his help in a conradcly
fashion in sottine up tho necessary conditions at
Matzv/eilor. (i.0-090, 11 * 03 . L*x. 263, R. 1028). Tho
dofendunt Rudolf Brandt replied to this nenorondun on
3 Ooco.ibor I9d2, and told >*. .vers that ho had had
occasion to spank to Pohl oonocrnln .* these difficul¬
ties, and thatlohti roportod tliat they would bo remedied.
(110-092, Pres. Jz. ieO, .. 702).

The witness Boll av^ in his te3ti >-ny an ac¬
curate and '.otailed description cf tho .innnor in which
the Lost as experir^nts were carried out. Tho ex¬
ecution of tho exporluints was supervised by ilirt, in
the experimental station -hnonefbo in tho hatzwoilcr
Concentration Ca:p. In the dddlo of October 19d2
tlio preparation for theso oxporixwnts \ras finished,
and the actual experimentation boc;an so;:o tir.o in


- 39


ectoeer or November, after the experimental subjects
'• ur - ^ vcn thc aa ^ 23 tho oS Guards for approx¬
imately Id days. Tho first series of experiments was
carried out by Hirt on 30 experimental subjects with
a liquid ecs substnneo. ( 2 . 1051). In spito of tho
feet that Hirt, before 30loctir.c those oxpcri:x>ntal
3ujject3, had pro;:!sod than that ho would intervene
v/ith IIL’ialor in order that they 3hould bo released
ca a roY-/ard if they would voluntcor for tho oxpori-
;^nt3, nono of tho experimental subjoots of all tho
exjori ants carried out by Hirt volunteered. Poli¬
tical prisoners, Russians, Poleo, Czechs and also sono
Oor.um nationals, vvoro omoncr tho experL^ntal subjoots
used. (R. 1052).

Thc first series of oxporiments wos oarriod out
by Hirt and or. officer of thc LuftYtaffe in thc follow-
inc :annor: Ono drop of t:*.c liquid was applied to
tho loYTor arm. of the ox-mri. ental subject. ..pproxi-
r lately 10 hours later burns bo con to appear and
spread ov-r the whole boC7 in ov^ry place Y.herc drops
of tho fluid contacted the skin. jomo or tho experi¬
mental subjects bcca:;o ;ortially blind. Tho viotima
of these experiments suffered terrible pain. Photo¬
graphic pictures of tho burns vrero taken daily.
t^r the fifth or 3ixth day of tho oxporim^nt, tho
•st fatality »courr^ - . Tho oarpsc of viotin
Y;aa dissected and the autopsy showed that tho boater
part3 of tho lun,;s and other organs had boon dostroyod.
Cn folloYvir.j day, i._., on tho seventh day of tho
experiment, another covon of tho oxpcrinontal subjects


died. Tho ronolninc; t\jonty-two wore sent to another
concentration comp after approximately 2 months when
they had rccovcrod suffici-ntly and become fit for
transport. ( 2 . 1052-3). Othor experiments on oon-
contration damp inmates of the Natzwcilcr Concentra¬
tion Co..p v/orc carried out in tho :as chambor ap¬
proximately 500 motors distant from the ca-:p. Tho
experimental subjects had to outer this .sas chamber
t o by two. They had to aesi; snail x.pulos which
containofl the liquid. This liquid evaporated ar.d
the axperL entcl subject then Lad to inhale the re¬
sulting vapor. Usually tho oxporinontcl subjects
b«oono unconscious and were roturnod to tho .Jxonorbo
station for further observation of tho results of tho
,xpori..ents. (II. 1053—;). Th030 results woro ap-
proxinatoly tho aaa as thoso observed in tho first
series. Tho broathin.j organs of tho experimental
subjeots wore likewise destroyed. Their lun^s had
bv«n jaton away by the as. ..bout 150 concontratien
o -.i inmmtaa were oxpun er.vOd upon in thi3 :mnnor.

( .. 105.-5). approximately tho o._;u porcentavo as
in the first series died as a result of this type of
experimentation, L\. 1055).

Othar Lost jo3 eXiiwrime^ts \/wr- carried out by
;:uans of injection. Those ox. orinonts uoro carried
out in q special roe;; adjoining the ere..atcriu.

Tho victi:is of those oxperi..ents died without excep¬
tion, (H. 1056). .mother type of experiment was
carried out on tho experimental subjects, *ho had to
take tho liquid orally. ... Holl was transferred bo-


uUYJHJ


foro Christ, .as 191-3 to an outside camp, ho v/aa not
c*olo to "ivo information on the results of this typo
of experiment. (3.' 1056). lie, however, returned
once a ::onth to tho Natzueiler Concentration Camp
end *.;a3 thoroforo able to observe that the Lost yes
expori-icnto continued until ..utu m 1944, when the
Hatzvfwilcr Concentration Ccm.p was liberated by tho
..llie3. (.1. 1057-6).

eroa Soil's testi.any it is proved that approxi¬
mately 220 in:’.atus of .Russian, Polish, Czech and
Cor man nationality wore experimented upon with yas
by Hirt and his collaborators. ..bout 5C of than
died. Hone of tho experimental subjects voluntoorod.

C oll, R, 1052, .1. 1057).

Or. 7 ..prll 19 i3 when tho Lost experiments were
w-U undor way (supra), Hlmlor ordered an intensifi¬
cation of Loot research. ..t about this tine the pro-
f ress of Hirt'a Lost research was threatened by tho
transfer of Hirt'3 assistant, Winnor, a ;edical officer
of tho Luftwaffe, Jinco personnel .mttors fell within
the aoopo of Jiovors' duties, he uroto to Hud0If
Brandt protesting the propo3od transfer of Winner and
statin;; that if finer left tho Institute for J.ili-
tary iciuntific Hesoarch, tho Lost experiments would
lm.Vu to * .1. clovers then utlined the pro. .r pro-
Cedurw for s^curin the future services of Lner at
the .Juienorbo institute. (hO-193, Fro3. 3c. 26-i, 21.
1030).

.. v .ain, on 3 November 19i3, clovers, in ardor to
further the Lost experiments and assure thoir cantin-
uatien, mndc a certificate which enabled two cf ilirt's


research assistants to obtain increased food rations,
iiovora stated that the research activities in which
these persons were onca cod with Do portent K (Hirt),
Jtras3bourG, of tho Instituto for Military Jciontific
liesearch of tho ..hnonerbe involved health doaacinc
poisons which had caused injurios to their health.
U92-e>J, Pro3. Jx. 267, 2. 103-1-).

Tho ovidonco clearly indicated that Curiae tho
entire period covcrod by the Lost experiments, Hirt
was associated with tho ..hnenorbo docloty. In oarly
1Hirt end Vi.-u-r siuanriiod their finding's fro::
tho Lost oxporiaonts in a report entitled *Proposed
Troataont of Foisonin: caused y Loot-'. The report
was described as fr\. tho institute for Military

•

.cienttifio Xtoscaroh, Dc. art.xnt H of tho /Jinonorbc,
located it the etresabour to leal Instituto.

X.i;;:it, jodiu.’., and heavy injuries duo to Lost as
are suntionod. Jiuvers received several copies of
thi3 roport. (N0-099, l’roo. Ux. 268, H. 1035). On
31 • arch 19 V, uftr i.arl Brandt had r^c-ivod a
fuehrer Docreo ivin ; hi broad powers in the field
of Che. leal warfare) IK0-012, Pros. 2x. 270, K. 1038),
eluVoro infer.'.ou Brandt about Hirt'a work and ;ave
hi: a copy of the report. This i3 proved by Jiovers'
letter to Hud elf Brandt on 11 ..pril 19-«. (.NO-015,

irerS. -x. 275, ... 1039). iuirl Brandt admitted that
the wordin;. of the report :mdo it clear that oxxri-
ronts had boon conducted on hu. an beir. s. (H. 2626).

Tho proof has al3o shown that in October 19.3
tho defendant 31o;:o, in his capacity a3 a Flenipcten-
tiary in tho lioich Hosearoh Council, issued a research


oISZmS


G33i -n .ont for Hirt in support of hi3 ^as experiments.
This i3 provod by tho filo index card on Blooo's
research ossijmont in the Hoich Bosoarch Council,
'..hero the U3si;;nr*-nt to Kirt b\ Bloao i3 listed under
priority number 0329. (NO-590, Pros. 2x. 120, a.
Z75). Jiovors ad ittod that a Boich Boscurch as3i »-
::ont to Hirt 15 on tho bohaviour of Lost ja3 in living
or-ar.is .s- ; was ;iado. Ci. 5817). Ho further ad. ittod
that at a conference in ..ril 19i2, Eimalor told hin
that Hirt should note Lest oxpcrinont3 on human boin ;s
ether than volunteer lilitary cadets. {:.. 5079).

oiovers testified that ^n 25 January 19.3 ho
w-nt to Hatzwoilor c.nc-noration co..p and consulted
with tho camp authoricivs concerninc tho arrancononts
to bo . indo for Hirt'8 L st jrpori onto. Those ar-
ran .erwnts inoludod the obtainin': of laboratories and
oxjori. *,ntal subjects. (3. 3C 2-.3J. Jiuvora toati-
fijd that xpori onta woro her ful. (a.

5C10). On tho Visit of 23 Janucry 19i3, Jiovora sow
toil persons who hud boon aubj^otod to Lest experi¬
ments and watched Hirt change tho ban’aces on ono of
the K/rsona. Jiovors said that the oxp-ri. :ontul
mi .ota told hi., that they -..\. ro volunteers and Hirt
oendir. this to jie/wis. (r.. 5732). Tho tosti.»ny
cf »iov^rs was contradictory as to his knowlod^o that
tho Lost experiments caused doath3. jiovors testi¬
fy that in Larch 1913 ho oskod Kirt whether any cf
tho experimental subjects had suffered har fro. tho
oXpori-ionts and was told by :: rt that two of the c::-
. ori lontal subjects had die due to other causes.


•iUVJT.o


(3. 3733). On tho other hand, Slavers soo.nod to bo
referring to Lost experiments when he stated that ho
laiov; of one oondoemod cri iial ’./ho had died from the
wxporL ents. (II. 5810). ... to the nationality of
tho experimental subjects, Jiovors ’./as of tho opinion,
in vioY/ of thoir mannor of spoooh, that tho test per¬
sons wore Qor::ans. (3. 5C12). Tho proof, however,
is cls-arly shown that 3icvor3 already, as oarly as
January 19:2, had knowlod"0 that non-volur.toors woro
to be used for tho Lost experiments of Hirt. In hi3
letter of 3 January 19:2, jiovers requostod Ilirt to
sub. *.it oo. prohonsivo rosoarch reports tc hi in or’.or
that ho . i ht forward the to ”i. lor. clovers as¬
sured Hirt that Hi. ler ould pOT -it Hirt to conduct
or. ;uri ujnts of any Kind -on prisoners and roal cri-
. .inala who would never ' o r-leaou.1 anyhow and on per¬
sona scheduled for execution*. (KO-3629, Pros. lix.
517, It. 10370),

iiovor3 diary ontrios indicate that his prlnry
concern was ahinrj the necessary arran >.-.onts for tho
oorr/in- out of tho Loot oxpori .ents. On 25 January
19.3 ..levers visited Hatzwciior and oonsultcd with
tho ca .p ail ini3tration; on 20 January 19:3 Jiovors
consulted with fohl concerning tho continuation of
the Lost oxpori. .ents and undoubtedly arranged fer tho
allocation of test persons, althou h ho tostifiod that
his conversation rolatcd to obtaining 3paco for ani¬
mals. (ii. 5736). On 2d and 25 January Jiovors re¬
ceived reports fro. ’dirt on Lost oxpori.ants and n
17 ..arch 19j3 eievors attended a confcronoo at tho -n-


.5


ALT-


—


stituto for military .Scientific Research whoro Lost
cxpori.-.onts woro reported. (NO-538, Pros. 2x. 122,

R. 379).

-. io a >»atcr wXPorL-.or .t3 (Indict. :ont, -or. 3 (G))

For a dotailod description of tho cri. inality
of tho soa water oxpori.:onts, 300 tho Prosecution's
brief a ainst Johroodor.

Tho function of tho . ‘ -nonorbo in tho porfor .anco
of 3oavmtor oxpcri-ionts oenduetoC at Dachau fro.: July
through oopto.-ber 191-, was ohiofly in connoction
with tho furnlshin : of space and equip, .unt for tho
ox »ori..onts. Jiovors nC .o those necessary arranyc-
i-.onts on behalf of tho .Jmonorbo.

..s a result of Jchroodcr's roquoat to Hi;v3.or
throu h Jrawitz for per. .imion to porfor.i tho soa
water experiments on in.atos in Dachau, Hi.-J.or di¬
rected on 8 July 191- that tho experiments bo :uu’o on
Gypsios and throo othor persona with ether racial
qualitios as controls. (NO-183, Pro3. 2x. 136, R.

•187).

jiovors must have boon i :o:*.iatol7 advisod by
HL.ilor's offica of tho above authorisation for ox-
_ori .onts at tho ..anchor slotion at Dachau. On tho
27th of Juno 19 m, Ilaochor huC boon roplacod by
Ploetnor 03 hood of tho .hnonorbe Instituto for mili¬
tary jciontific Research at Dachau. (35.6-P3, Pros.
.7.. 123, R. 382, ontry for 27 Juno), iiov^rs on tho


20th of July wont to Dachau and conferred with rloot-
r.ur of tho ..hnenorbo Institute and tho defendant


joaa


Boijlbooclc, who v/as to perform. tho export; .onts, con-
cornin/j tho execution of tho son water experiments
an*, availability of worldn^ spaco whoro tho experi¬
ments couli*. bo per for. o''. Siovors a mrood to supply
v/orlcin^ 3paco in the Department Plootnor and at tho
.dinonorbc Jntor.olo;iccl Institute. (3516-rJ, supra).
On tho 26th of July 191-1, eievers tado a written re¬
port to Grawitz concerning details of his conference
ct Jachau. iievors v/roto that 10 oxporimontal per¬
sons could be acconn'atud at our rosooroh station,
that the -Jmencrbo would supply a laboratory, and
that Or. Ilootnor would ivo his assistance, help,
and advice to tho Luftwaffe physicians perfor -in_
the ^xperL ont3. Jicvorn also stated tho number and
cssi. n tent of tho perooauol to bo o. ployed in tho ex¬
port -nts, ustl atin that tho experiments would cover
a period of throe weeks and deai;natod 23 July 19 >1
us tho date for startin * tho experiments, provided
the export .ontal persons wore availablo and tho oomp
com. umdor had received tho nocossary or lor from,
nimmlor. In conclusion, Jiovors oxprossed his hopo
that tho urronmoments which ho had .made would per. it
a successful conduct of the experi -onts and rcciU03tod
that aokno*. led ,e .ont be ado to Hi._J.er as u partici¬
pant in the expori ents. (.0-182, P^oa. 2x. 107, .i.
:el>. In his tcstLony iiavof tt that he had
written tho above letter .'nd had conferred with Doi.l-
boech at Dachau. (li. 5701). ..r. tho letter indicates,
Ji-vers v/as advised of tho x'ull details of tho sea
water experiments. 5icv..rs know that concentration
ca p in. .ates wero to be used, jiovors' conference


oLT-‘vo


With 3oi;lboocfc at Dachau was on 20 July, oiovors
wroto that tho oxporir.cnts would bocin on tho 23rd
of July or as soon thereafter as oxporirrontol subjects
wore available and tho ca..? ca nanior had received
Klulor's order.

Tho v/itnoss :Jay, who \:as head of a departrxnt
within tho .vhnonorbo >.to elo ical Institute at Dachau,
toatifiod thet upon the request of iievors, thot In¬
stitute furnished ono roe. which was used by tho
2oi -lboecl; roup in tho porfor;nnco of soa wator cx-
pori. rents. (S. 5080). Tho tcstLrony of Tschofcni"
proves that at least ono of tho oxport rental subjects
Clod a3 a result of tho sue. wator experi’—nts. In.
9339-40).

0 . I'v^hus Jxe^ri ento (xnv.ictn v nt, lor. 6 (J))

/or a dotailed description of tho crLinality of
these experiments, roforenco should bo :*do to tho
briefs a ainot Iloso and ichroodor.

iiov^ra participated in tho cri ical typhus ex-
porLtents conductod by Ilaa or. on concentration ca p
in. utos at Natzwoilor by .-chin; the necessary or ran o-
;:unte in connection with securin'; experimental sub¬
jects, hand line administrative problem* incident to
tho expori:ront3, and by furni3hin ; tho .Ananorbo sta¬
tion with its oquipmont in Ztatsuoilar for tho oxpori-
lents.

On 16 ..u .ust 1913, when Kancon was preparing to
transfer his typhus oxporl -eats from echirmock to
Natzwoilor, ho requested jiovers to iako aval lab lo a


oIJVJBa


hundrod concentration ca..? in.:atos for his research.
This is scon fron a letter of 30 3optorJjar 19 i3 fro::
jievors to Haayon in which ho 3tatos that ho will he
Clad to assist, and that ho is accordingly contact-
in" the propor source to havo tho "desired personnel-
placed at hi3 disposal. (ITO-120, Pros. lx. 297,

13Q7). ..s a result of aiovors' efforts, a hundrod

in-uites wore shipped fron ..uschuitz to Natzvvoilor
for 'laayon's experiments. These, however, were found
to he in an unsuitable physical condition and honco
were rejected by IIaay.cn. In a lottor of 15 Novor.bor
1913 to Hirt ho statod that oijhtoon of tho subjocts
had diod duriny transport, and ho roquostod an addi¬
tional hundrod prisoners vfhoso physical condition ',*b
comparable to that of the aoldiora. (NO-121, iroo.

Jr. 293, li. 1369). One i ht tond to fool that
Kaa *on and ..lovers •'ore in no way responsible for tho
death of those oi htcon laet-s. Tho Frosooution
aub.lt3 that this is -rroneou3. Tho transfer fron
..••sch'/itz to ih.tzweilor Tor the experiments was in
any event a part of tho causal connection in tho
deaths of thoso subjects. Their death was incident
to tho transfer.

Tho socond yroup of a hundrod exporir-ontul sub¬
jects -..-as :.udo available, and experiments wore carried
out by ilaa on between the latter part of 19i3 and tho
early summer of 19*1. They wore carried out in tho
..Imenurbo experimental station in Natzwoilor. This
is provod by oxcorpts from monthly reports of the
cam? doctor in Natzwoilor. (KC-607, i-ro3. lx. 1",

- d-9 -


duvsas


«• ? j2 , see supplemental translation). Haa^cn acL.it-
tod that the cxcorpts fro.: theso reports dated 25
November 19-13, 2-1 December 19-13 and 1 February 1944
probably referred to hi3 typhus oxperi.ent9. (R.
96.0-1), 9617). The proof outlined in tho iro3ocution
brief a jainst tho defendant ..chroodor proves that a
substantial nunber of deaths occurred durinc the
courso of thoso experiments.

On 9 Hay 1944 in a lotter to Hirt, chief of De¬
partment I! of tho military iciontific Institute of
tho Jmonorbo, Ha&ron requested 3till another tv/o
hundrod concentration ca .* ixiatos for his criminal
research. (NO-123, xros. J03, N. 1396). This
letter was passed on to jievers to take caro of the


roquest and on 19 I .ay 1944 ho wrote to Pohl asking
that tho in-ates be ..ado available* lie roforrod to
the earlier occasions on vhioh fohl had furnished


prisoners for those experiments. jievers concludod
by stating that:


teosu are in tho first placo tho Reich
.vesearch Council and secondly tho 33.

I re;u o3t ypur decision if cno of tho

to .bc_na. J ^l_a.3. 3.upppf.ti.r.^
agency of tho .o:


a) Tbo iwichfuchror Sj or

b) Tbo >j Jcono. lc .. *-istration Rain
Office

c) Tho Institute for *. ilitary Scienti¬
fic :«esx.ar;l. of the offon-ie-.

(NO-006, * .. :x. 301, R. 1398).


. aopy of this letter -a- sent to tho defendant .udolf


Crandt, who on 6 June 19.., wrote to Jievers sayic;,


- 50 -


dlJKStS


that all throo offices should bo mentioned a3 tfco
supporting agency of the (I'0-009, Pros. lx. 303,

H. 1.00). iiovers in turn passed this information
cn to Hirt, who, on 10 Ju'.y 19-id, wroto to Haa.cn
giving the appropriate instructions concerning tho
credit for tho experiments. (MO-129, Pros. 3 . 308,

Ii. 1.03).

Eton's letter of 27 Jr- e 19d-i to Hirt -roved
b^/ond any doubt that the experiments which ho us
perfor ming ir.volvod subsequent infection with viru¬
lent typhus virus Just «3 did tho oxpori ;or.ts in

enwald. (UO-127, *ro,. 5Co, *1. 1.01). lloro
a ain export mental subjects • oro killed during tho
course of those expert, ents, as ..ay bo soon from tho
proof analyzed in the brief against hose. In all of
the expert u-nte, nationals from oountrioo occupiod by
Cor any wore among tho victim.

Jiovers dofends hi .self primarily on tho ^round
that sinco he v/us not a .octor, ho -was not in a posi¬
tion to npprociato tho full si nificanco of tho ox ori¬
ents carried out, that is to suy, that he did not
know that tho subjects ore artificially infected
\lth typhus. In vie*/ of the oo.-pletoly perjurious
character of -.levers' testimony, this defense cannot
be boliovod. In any ev-nt, ir. tho face of eiovors
anticipation in tho .:ost roprchonsiblo of crimes,
ho cannot be hoard to 3ay that ho did not approciato
vhut wa3 bwing done to the cxp».ri xntal subjects he
furnished to Kaa..cn, It a3 his duty to ascertain
■rjcisoly what as to be done with the. . Tho law


- 51 -


JI3V3R3


loos not porr.it that ho blindly furnish human victims
to anyono who cared to ask, (2nd then, after a larco
number of then have boon killed, to plead that ho did
not know what was to be done with thon.

i:. ioiy t -;ai

Tho blood coagulant, loly^al, was dcvolon-d un¬
der tho auspices of the ..’•nenorbe. Its efficacy v/as
determined by experimental tests conducted on Dachau
inrutos by Raschor, dopart.iont chief in tho .Jmcnorbo.
ji-vers, as Xich 'iana^or of tho ..'nunorbe, was ros-
pon Jiblo for administrative duties connected with ..h-
nv-aorbo research projects.

. lthouch - lost of tho evidence rolatcs to tho
activities of aievers in connoction with tho production
of roly.al, it is clour that eiovors received roports
fro.i liaochor on Poly^al roseurch mado boforo l’oly^al
was perfected. Undor dote of 15 ioptimber 19.3,
hosoher submittwd u report to oiev^rs entitle*. Jx-
Ix-rLients with a now "o.ejtat Tolycal 10' •. jiav^rs
Vao requested to take preliminary stops in connoction
' ith .oly ol production. (MO-611, iros. 3x. 239,

935).

oiovor3 testified that ho v/as connected with
-oly al only in tho .utter of its production and that
in tills connection his only activity .as arrano;in^
for the transfer of Daci.au in. utes, who wore trained
in »oly^al production, to ^chlochtcrs, which v/as a
new place, of production, (it. 5725).

Undor date of 10 Dec- .bur 19 iG, Jiovors *./as ro-


- 32


oli


quested by Raschcr to enplay as an ..hnanorbc cnployoo
Raaohor's innate c he* list, who was about to bo releas¬
ed and leave Daohau. Raschcr told oiovers that tho
aucco33i*ul handling of thi3 personnel aattor was es¬
sential to tho continuance of tho t hcorotical part
of tho tolyjal research. Ji^vors, as Roich Ilana^cr
of tho -Jinonorbo, frequently handled personnel pro-
ble.is, (NO-758, Pro3. be. 2.2, R..9S2). Under date
of 3 Deco b-r 19i3 iiov^rs \;as notified by Hi. .".lor's
office that the plon3 for .olyqal production wore do-
leyed due to the do. .and of Gebhardt that 1’oly^.al bo
tujtud at his Hoh^nlychon Institute before its pro¬
duction was docidod upon definitely. ..t this ti-io
Jievwrs was also notifiod that Raschcr ..i.ht have an
opportunity to oxpcri.;ont furtuwr with Poly^al. (1!0-
*j12, *ro;j. -!x. 2.1, R. 901) . Thu3 it is apparont
that Covers was connoctod with Voly^al rcsoaroh bo-
fore the ti 10 when it3 produotion, as distinguished
fro.i research, was the only factor.

Jvidonco in the Hocord proves that Curing the
courso of Poly;;al ex>jri.^nts Rascher inflicted nil-
let oundo on oxpori :-ntal subjects for the purpose
of testing the effectiveness of iolyjal undor oonbat
conditions. (NO-1.2., .ron. -x. i62, R. 4773).

In tho latter part of 1910, Raschcr and Or.

Hof erica: o . a paper on the ioly_M. This paper
draws a clear distinction between ox-vri .^nto on
hur'.an b^in"3 to test the ^ffoct of Poly.al and clini ¬
cal tost3 . It states that: Before wo tried the
clinical uso of tho dru^; and had it probed, it was


JhX£B3


tested on inuiaa bein-.s by thorough oxporinont3 as to
its influence on tho period of clotting and blocdinG 1 '.
La tor on the paper discusses clinical observations
during operations. (N0-i38, Fro3. Zx. 2-;0, R. 956).
Tho experiments mentioned in this paper obviously aro
the ones darlnc which innate a were shot. They viora
not jo described in tho paper because it was written
for publication, Jiovera testified that ho vms told
by the l.unich Police )eoart.:ont vrhon Raschor was ar¬
rested in 19.;, that lascher shot persons in order to
test rolyjol. (R. 5726).

Durina the year 191-i Jiovors was actively con¬
cerned with tho lolyjal nttor. On 22 February 19>;
ho consulted with Raschor concerning a Polycal re¬
port to Gobhardt; on 31 Ijiroh 19>; iiov^rs roooivod
from Moff the ca3o histories of persons undor Polypal
tre-t -nt; on 1-; 19-;; clovers doclarod that tho

post 1.30 riant tash at Oaol.au was tho Foly el testinc;
on ..u, ust 19;e Jiev^rs notod that a new blood co¬
agulant had been deVwlopod and was to be tostod. Tho
19;; Jievers Diary also shows oievers' oxtensive act¬
ivities concerning tho production of roly al. (35^6-
» j, .ros. Zx, 123, .1. 3C2).

I. -»ks.le ten Co llection (Indieteont Par. 7)

In response to a r«pUeic by the defendant Rudolf
ranlt, on 9 February 1912 ,iuv^rs submitted to hi l a
re wt by dr. Hirt of the University of Jtrassbourc;
on the desirability of s.-curinG a Jewish skeleton col¬
lection. (IJO-O05, iros. Zx, 175, R. 695). In this


aisras


report, Hirt advocated outright murder of "Jewish
Bolshovik Com:•issar3 i ' for the.procurement of such a

collections. Ho stated:

'By orocurin*. tho skulls of the Jovish
Bolshevik Co;.aissar3, who personify a
repulsive, yet characteristic subhaxn-
itv. wo have the opportunity of obtain¬
ing t ar.r>ibU, scientific evidence.

The actual obtainin" and collecting of
those sh-ulls iitfcout difficulty coulfi
bo best accomplished by a directive is¬
sued to tho ’.fohrnaoht in the future to
immediately turn over alive all Jewish
Bolshovll: Co:-mi3sars to tho Field
Polico.-'

Those units woro to report to a special office
which would send out specialists to have photographs
and anthropoliGical measurements taken and ascertain
tho origin, birthdato and other personal data of tho
victims. Hirt further stated:

*J?cllowiac ",\1 ? V. r ? ?‘7fl l W ntlv

ef tho Jo-., whose h.ad must not bo dnno-
-ou. ho will separate the head fro., tho
torso and will forward it to its point
of destination in a preoervatiyo fluic.
within a well-scaled tin container es¬
pecially .ado for this purpose. On this
bests of tho photos, the meosurenonts anu
other data on tho head urn.. finally, t..w
skull itself, tho co. parutive anatomical
roSwaroh, rosuerch on race •-.ember ship

(Rassenzujehoori^koit), the patholojiccl
features of tho skull for::, the lorn and
size of the bruin and : any othor thints
can be :in. In accordance 'ith its 3co..o
nnd tasks. tho new .tra33bour;, floicu
University l leichsuniv .r si tact Jtra3soour;,)
would be tho most appropriate place for
the collection of and .research upon these
3 hulls thus ao uired. • (--.phasis sup li~U.

On 27 February 19-.2, Brandt informed Jiovers that
Uinmler would support Hirt's work and :.ould place
iverythins necessary at his disposal. Brandt requost-
w d ii-vwrs to inform Hirt accordingly and to report
a min on Hirt's work. (K0-090. Iros. 176. R. *\


- 55 -


Hlrt's :iurdorou3 and inhuman plan was carried
out in a way which differed but slightly fron tho
su^ostion nado in his preliminary report. (1:0-065,
supra). Tho proof has shown that it was decided to
preserve tho wholo skeletons of the victims rather
than .'.orely the skulls. Cn 2 tfovonbor 19-12 iievers
r«; -.uostod Brandt to nako tho necossory arrange. ents
with the. lioioh I'ain Security Office for providing 150
Jewish inmates fron ..uschvitz to carry out this plan.
(i T 0-086, Pros. -he. 177, h. 699). On 6 November Brandt
informed .4olf Jiohriann, the Chief of Offico IV-D--
(Jewish ..ffairs) of tho keich Ilain Security Office
to put everything at Hirt's disposal which was neces¬
sary for tho completion of tho skeleton collection.
(UO-089, Pros. he. 179, .1. 702).

/ron JiwV^r's letter to -ioh.4inn of 21 Juno
19 3, it is apparent that jJ Kaupt3tur:ifuohror Bojor,
a collaborator of tho .fuicnorbc .society, carried out
tho prcli; inary work for tho a38e:iblinj of the 3l:clo-
ton collection in the ..u chvits Concentration 0, p on
79 Jjws, 30 Jo\;esseo, 2 . ol c, end i .. ietico. In
this letter, ->• vers stated that Bo^cr had to incor¬
rupt his work bocauso of tho Conner of infectious
diseases in tho car’.p. iie.vrs requested that the in¬
mates on vhon Bo^or had carriod out this work bo
transferred to the Hatzwcil~r Concentration Comp be¬
cause furthor activities in ..«• chwitz ‘were inpossible
due to tho dan or of infection, j/ecial accoirioda-
tion for tho thirty onea vas to b« provided in the
Natr.vailor Concentration Camp :, or a short r>rxo>V_.


- 56 -


oi_v_aj


C'0-067, Pros. -lx. 161, 17. 702).

T j statement of tho camp commander of tho
i*atr.wii w r Concentration Oap, 33 Eauptsturnfuohror
oo3of -ramor, rovoalfl that approximately 00 inmates
of the ..u-jOhwitz Concentration Ca:p, anonc then fo-
. ulos, wero transferred to the Hatzwoilcr Concentra¬
tion Co.:p and hilled there by ^aa on the robust of
Hirt in tho bocinninc of . v„t 1913. e ocial as
oha.;ber had boon built for this purpose. Tho corpses
of tho vieti.is wore sent in three ship tents to tho
.. ..to .icul Institute of irt in the stress,our j Uri-
vor:,ity. (K0-G07, i. . _ . 365, T.. 732). T_<s
evidence is corroborated by the testimony of tho vit-
noas "unrypiorr... lie testified that in tho bocinninc
oi ..u w ust 19jo, tho principal uutopsy technician of
tho .oiuto tioal Institute, 3on , r.c.ivwd tho order
fro.i Mrt to proyaro the tanks in the o-llar of tho
Institute for upproxi atuly 120 corpses. In inter¬
vals of a few days, throo shipments of ccrpsos, 30
fo.malo, 30 .male, and 2G nolo, arrivod by truck fron
an unknot* plaoo. .dl of those victims wore Jewish.
Those corpses woro preserved in tho cellar of the
..Bata leal Inctituto in the tonka prepared by 3cn .
(lienrypiorro, f.. 71.*-.). ,oc also tho affidavit of
a nor. (K0-G81, lros. £. 2C0, H. 107-i). ..s proved
ly the .>iuv„r3 JUari; vus ordered to prepare

lajt.r casts of tho victims. (35d6-P3, lros. Jx.

If3, !{. 382, entry for 2 February 19-.-i).

-arly in Joptcab.r IS.., when tho ..lliod arnica
were tliruatoninc itras3bourj, oievers approached the


- 57 -


JL2TJ&*


defendant 3randt the. roquest for instructions
as to -.hat should be do no ith the Jowish bodies,

*. hi eh woro still stored in tho tanks in the cellar
of the .jiutonical Institute. He informed Brandt that
Kirt .ould bo able to •’dcflcsh" tho corpses and thus
render then unrcco-snizablo, but in this case part of
tho work '/ould have boon dono in vain 'and it .ould
bo a ^roat scientific loos for this ur.ieue coll ection
because hoainit cast3 could not be .-*cdo aftcr'/ords.
The skeleton collection is not conspicuous. Viscera
could be declared as re.inants of corpses, apparently
left in fete .Jiatadoal Institute b the French, and
ordered to be ore.-aitod. 1 clovers requested a direc¬
tive fro;i Brandt wbottur the collection should bo
proJervod, partly dissolved, or co.npletoly dissolved.
(110-088, Iros. Jx. 102, 70-:).

Fro., the no.^orandun of >3 Hauptatur.ifuehror
Serj and his telephone conversation with clovers on
the 13th of October 19-id, it is apparent that it was
firit decided to destroy the evidence of those bru¬
tal cri :os, but with a temporary i .provcnont in tho
nilitary situation, this decision was rosoindod.
eiovars info mod Borj on 21 October 19 Id that, in
co : 'lionce .*ith the orders he had r-c^ived previously,
the dissolution of the ccii-ction had been co.-pi„twi*.
(1*0-091, .ros. . x . ITU, 703). 3ut such was not
the ca3e. Hirt had ordered ion. und his assistant,

I oyer, to cut up the 80 oar SuD and have the.: crc.ia-
tod ir. the etrassbour;; cre.^ntoriur., but thesu t. o
r.en alone wore unable to carry out this enomous
task. .. nuntx-r of cor. s-s ru..aincd undisscctsd and


38


cjXSS


woro left in the- teaks, together with partially dis¬
sected oorpsos, in ordor to create the Impression
thae they wore used for nor ..1 anatoiiioal research.

( : enrypierre, R. 715; NO-GS1, 3upra).

The pioture3 of these corpsos and of the cos
choeuors in tho Natzwoilcr Concentration Car.p, where
the victina of the Jov/ish skoloton collection woro
aurdorod, taken by tho ?rcnoh authorities after tlic
liberation of jtrassbour;., tell tho grL'i story of this
M3o murder noro vividly than vitneaaoa and documents
e7~r could. (N0-d83, rroe. -x. 18-, S. 72d; K0-C07,
su.'rd).

-iwvers know frc. th- AUt ho received Kirt'a
report (i:o-085, .roe. 173, 005), that muss

murder woo planned for the procurement of tho skele¬
ton collection. Hov-rt.-el-aa ho collaborated in tho
projoot, sent an employee of the .Juienorbe to rako
the preparatory selections in the ..lechwitz Concen¬
tration Comp and provided ;or th^ transfer of the
victim fro . ..uachmitz to .tzweiUr. ho ..ode urran-
, e. unto that tho collection >e destroyed. Hi3 ,-juilt
und the :;uilt of the defendant Rudolf Bror.dt i3 much
...router than that of tho brutal end insensible hranor,
'•ho personally passed tho Jews in Natzttoiler. fh-so
crl -js -.0 oir.lneercd almost exclusively the tho
defendants ilovors ur.C fondt, and :'trt. [ j^o

ei-v.r a Oiury for 19.3, :‘0-33C, 1-03. S:. 122, \

379, entries for 10 X ..pr., 21 and 22 ._iy,

15 and 23 Jun-).


- SC -


oLms


Ill. Cu.CLIT.jICN

ei-vors' only answer to tho horriblo crinos in
which ho participated i3 that firstly ho wa3 a rubber
of a resistance roveaent, and secondly that ho acted
pursuant to superior orders. Both defenses aro \/ith-
out any r.erit v/hatev-r. ~s to superior ordors, tho
proof doos not show that biovers coiinittod thu3c
cri.uo pursuant to orders. He did 30 willfully and as
a .uttor of •'business routine". In any ev-,nt tho pl-a
of superior orders should not be heard in rltijction
fro.i a .;an who has participated in erLies as reprehen¬
sible as those with \/hich this Indictment i3 concerned.

hen one has boon an active participant in tho cold-
bloodod :;urdcr of 86 Jems, superior ordors could not
possibly bo ro orded as a .miti^atins factor.

The dofonso of havin” participated In a resistance
.-.oveiient is ridiculous and absurd. In tho first placo
it is utterly untrue. Ono . l w ht tend to believe a
statement that a hiji ranhin- offiocr in the ^ per-
lia >s joined an anti-Nazi clique in 1944, when it wa3
realized by all who cured to look that Gcrnany had
loot tho war. Thuo, we have tho 20 July attempt against
Hitler. But tho wretched biovors has tho tor.erity to
clai-i that he was resisting as early as 1933 and con¬
tinued his activities until tho end of the -or. -'et
in theso fourteen years, -v.n to the present da;',

-.ievurs hu3 not performed on- overt act against the
iiun ;ho ran the sy3te.- ho not? profc33e3 to havo detest¬
ed. Ke Joined the Nazi party as early a3 1929 and tho
in 1935. Ke 3tay-d with H i. t iler's until the


- 60 -


oLViS&ii


la3t days of the collapse. Hot by ono word or dcod
can ho . ivo proof to his absurd contention. -Dvon
since tho end of tho war, .,i«Ver3 has had r-narkablo
opportunities to provo that at least now ho was wil¬
ling to resist tho criminals who ran the Nazi Govern-
nent and participated in its nanifold crises, but he
did not cone to Numbers in 19d6 to :;ivo evidence of
tho horrible crinos of which ho had first-hand know-
led jo. He cane to testify in dofenso cf the U.
During hi3 tostlnoziy before the International I'.ili-
tcry Tribunal ho consistently don led any toowlod.e of
or connection with crinos car.iittad by tho ..hnenorbo
or tho JJ. Ho was in that trial proved to bo the
i.urdercr und pur Juror that he really is, but this was
left to cross-examination by the Prosecution. Nor
did ho ohow any sijna of resistance in this trial
except to the .iany cri ea ith which Jiu is oh arsed.

1 - occupiod a key position in tho cri.ninal conspiracy,
r-t not one nuv; fact did he reveal to this Tribunal,
although specifically o3l:od or. several occasions to
t-11 all hu knew. To tile oontrary, he has supplied
reny of the defendants in tho dock with ovidonco for
their dofenso. He is of tho opinion that thoro i3
not a guilty nan in tho dock, and least of all hin-
Sulf. This la3t desperate defense of ilovers, who
has been proved perhaps .»re than any non in tho dool:
to h-»vo boon an un.iiti.ated liar and a cold-blooded
imrdurcr, is disproved by a letter fron his own hand.
Tho .ghastly evidence cf his cri_:os in connection with
tho Ju'.dsh skeleton collection had b^cn found when


- 51 -


oUV-dio


*


I


tho ..Hies overran Jtrass'oourG. I" that connection

ho -./rote on 20 January 19^5 to Hirt as follows:

•Tour report on trassbourc had duly cone
to hand.* Many thanks for it. I shall be
back in aischenfcld at tho end of the
::onth and if no further notice will have
arrived there in the :icantine, I shall
see to it that all Utters -.ailed to you
rocently shall be dispatched once a-jain.

;, Porl3 us well as London is taklns quite
an active inUr-st in the ..nator-io Insti¬
tute of jtrassbourj and regret that you
have not boon 3wizcd. In tho noontino
you will probably have received, or 3hcll
in tho wry near future, or. inquiry of
the Foroijn OffiCw via tho Ministry of
Jcolosiaatical .J'fairs and Zducation re-
forrinc to this. , ay ,V.-.»ry rl<&
tllftt £&£& Ahd pa.yrs eh

iit

could not o ff jr any c oncrete state, .cats
r o far . I ' _ve already written to you,

1 3.:ould bw Very ^lad if you would :uU:o
a short trip out of your way, to ' ’aischcn-
fwld, at the opportunity of one of your
Journeys to uerzbura. ' CIO-975, Pros.

Jx. d79, R. 5837). U* phaais supplied).

Thus we havo an allowed resistance '.worker cl j0_
ful over the fact that all data and pa..-rs on that
t»r5c huve boon destroyed in ti-.a . • k* . y real resis¬


tance worker ould haw proa-rwd with .Tvat care all
the papurs and evidence conwrniiu tl.o cri.-iO of tho
inzla, and would hav- .-t the .Jliud arnica with open
or.ta and presented then with .is proof.

nut wven if one as3u.u,d tho truth of every lio


which Severs lias tosti.T .d to, his contention is no
defense whatever. It is not the law that a resistance
•. orher can co:mit no cri.;o and, Uast of all, against
the wry people he is supposed to bo protecting. It
is not tht law that an uniler-cover a^ent, ev_a an
Z. I. u.jnt, can Join a of .-.urd^rers, lay the

Iona with than, -xeout- the killings, share tho loot,


- 52 -


oleYiJto


acd -?j his n^rry way, I-^ny arc tho police officers
\.ho have boon convicted Tor confederating' with cri¬
minals and taking part in crir.es.

The Prosecution sub.-its that tho evidence proves
that jiovers was a principal in, accessory to, ordered,
abetted, took a consenting part in, -..as connected with
plana and enterprises involving, and was a nonbor of
an organization or yroup connected with, the cormis-
cion of :iedical experimentation on huian subjects
•without their consent, in the course of -which oxperi-
r.-rita, murder a, brutalities, crueltiws, torturos,
ctrocitien, and other inhv em acts were cor.-itt.d,
and the murder of no l-ss than 86 Jews for a skelo-
ton collection. Hia .uilt .has been .stablishod under
Counts I, II, III and IV of tho Indictment.


-63-
- 2nd -


KlLXTASHOSaiCHSSHOT SR. I


fall sr. 1

TzasiNioa s;^s72i rcu »kziu+ cstsa l^hl sum u.a.


SCHLUSSrUBDOfflA TOL1
DIB VKSXKXOfBI SfiuSaf 70S aKSAUCA


J.H. KcKmoy
AluxAsdor G. Knr.'.y

Dr. Loo Aloxundor Arnogl Horlik-H.chvftld

HodlCAl Oonaultnnt Bather Jane Johna-'n


For:

Telford Tnylor
••rl^Ri-lor General, U.S.a.

Chief of Counsel for War Crinoa


3ISLDITUKG


houti^on Ta-0 bc;innt dio Schlusswocho di-aos *rc-
s.aaoa, dcr an 9. ^ozodtor 191S bojonn. houtc. baton wir
133 .rozoaata .o hlntor ur.a, von danon dio .^ikla;c otwn 33
aur. Vortra Haros ?allca uni zur .ildorlo ;un * tonuotzto.

32 -oujon naobton nuondlicho ..uaaoson fuor iio «nklajo, und
30 -ou^on, auaaor dun 23 -njeklocton, fuor dio Vortoidijun>
Dio dnl:loco untorbroitoto 570 ..owoiaatuockc, dio In ihror
Uohrholt doutacho, von don allilortor. .aroon orboutoto Do-
kunonto waron. Dio Ooaontsohl dor Gowoiaatuocko dor Vor¬
toidi ;unj, dio hauptaaoohlioh aua oidoaatattlichon Krklao-
runjon boatand, botruj 855. Saobdoa daa Urtoil vorloaon
aoin wird, wird daa *ratokoll uc-or 12.000 Soiton unfaaaon.

,/onn nan don Vorlauf dioaoa Vorfahrona uoborbliokt,
iat oa an^obraoht auf dio Fairr.oaa binzuwolaon, r.lt wolchor
dor *rozoaa ;ofuohrt wcrdon iat. ./as imr.or dio .%njoklo"tor.
i'i»r a lob vorbrin;oa konnton, durftor. aio aajon. Unomuod-
lioh war dor Ooriohtahof In aoinoc .orr.uohon, diojonl^on
aoujon, jokuzsonto und Kilfadttol horboizua chaff on, dio von
dor Vortoidi jun". orboton wurdon. tfca Juatico Jack a on zu
Eitioroni "Xhnon wux\io oin aolchoa Goriohtavorfahron jo-
waohrt, wio aio oa In don Ta^on ihroa * ranks und ihror
I'AO'at nionandon ;owaohrton". x ) Vorachiodono dor «njoklaj-
ton wordon dioao Tataacho bos^ndora veil und ;anz tu
aohaotzon wisaon. Dor. rt n_;okla.;ton Karl -randt run -oia^iol
iat dio Kosi-Juatiz nlcht unbokannt. Ear. wunlo in Dyril
1S-.5 ala Dr obr.is von Schwiori r’oitor. r.lt aitlor und .-or-
nonn oin Koobvorrataprozoas von weni on Stunion jor.acht.
Diu Vorbundlun- fond vor -ir.on SS-Ohor-rufjenfuahror statt
und nur dio Vorwirrung in don lotzton ra;on doa drio^oa
aporto Drordt, dor zur Todo vorurtoilt wurdo, fuor dioaoa


1) I.ll.T. Irotokoll,
3oito 1-1533.


- 1 -


2usonacrxtroffon auf. Vor dioao:: Gorichtahof hat -rondt su-
:o-o'oon, daaa nit joncn *rozoas otwza nicht la Crdnunc war,
da, wio or aich ftuadruockto, l, d=.8 Cx-tcil ir. voraua foat-o-
lojt wordon war". 2 )

Dio iflicht, don ^nrokla-ton oln jorochtoa Vorfohron
ru jowaohron, iat orfucllt wordon, sleicheraaaon Jono, dlo
inkloGO, aojunuobor oil don Voclkom und riaaaon, auf donon
dlo * la jo dioaor Vorbrochon lo._> Daa Vorbrochon, wolohoa
dioao ^njoiaocton In Kanon dor oodiziniachen niaaonachoft
to. anjon habon, iat durch kloron ur.d uoborwaolti.ondon do-
woia, dor unaualooaohlioh in .’rotokoll dioao a Vorfohrona
oinjotra^on iat, orwioaon. tflonond kann bozwoifoln, doaa
dioao un lcutlichon Ooachohniaao Wohrholt und nicht Diohtunc,
war or.. Jio *oit, nit aoinon Urtoil zuruookzuholton, lat
mu vcrbol. Dio Stundo zur -ntaohoidun.: iat jokoroan.

2) .rotokoll, Soito 2622.

(Soito 2 doa Orijinala)

Doa Goaotr fuor dloaon xroz-aa
bovor ich dorcn cho, don Pall dor ^klo-jo zu umroia-
aon, co,; oa violloicht wuonaohonawort orachoinon, jowlaao
ilcohtafra .on vorwo~zunohnon, woloho zwolfolloa in Dozu^ ouf
Lrioja vorbrochon und Vorbrochon jojon dlo konachlichkoit,
wio aio in brtikol II doa IConcrollrat -oaotzoa ::r. 10 dofi-
nlort aind, aufjoworfon woirlon. Do3 Goaotz Sr. 10 iat
natuorlioh daa fuor dioaon *rczoaa naaa obortic 3oaotz ur.d
aoino Loaticn-.un^on aini fuor all- an dioaon Vorfohron Do-
tolli ;ton naaa obond. Dioaor Gorichtahof iat, wio wir or-
-obonat untoratollon, durch dlo rojriffab&atiaaun. on doa
Goaotzoa iir. 10 obualon, jonau ao wio dor Intomationalo
:;ilitaor oricktahof durch dio doa Lend or. or Statuta -obunuor.
In Crtoil doa I.D.T. wurdo foat^oatollt*


war.


‘'Dio Zuataondiykoit dioaoa Gorichta 1st in
Dbkonnon uni is Statut dofiniort ur.d dio
dor Zuataonii-koit doa Gurichtahofca untor-
lio ,ondon Vorbrochon, dio lndlviducllo Vor-
antwortllchkoit toyruondon aolltor., wordon
in «rtikol 6 aufgofuohrt. Daa .iocht doa
Statuta iat cr.tachoidord, und fuor don Go¬
richtahof bindand.

* * * *

"Dor Gorichtahof iat natuorlioh durch daa
Statut hlnalohtlloh doaaon Definition von
kriojavorbrochon und von Vorbrochon "o-on
dio iknachlichkcit -.obundon." 1)

V.'onn lch kurz dio „uffasaung dor ^nkla^o in eozug auf
oinijo dor yoactzlichon Grunisac;zo unroiaao, wolcho don
Krioga vorbrochon und don Vorbrochon go yon dio lonachlioh-
koit zu Grundo lioyon, dann vcrdoioh sich, ait Srlcubnia
doa Eohon Goriohtoa, on oinijo dor ?oatatollunjon in dor
Lrooffnunyarodo dor .uiklago In ?allo jo on Friedrich Fliok
und Gon. halton, dor zur 4oit vor dos Gorichtahof Nr. IV
onhaonji;; iat. Dort hot General Taylor goaaytj


x ) Vorfahron y.o^on dio l.au^tkrio. avorbrochor.
Darul 1, Soito 218, 263.


(Solto 3 doa Originals)

"Dio Do f in 111 on on von Vorbrochon in Ooaotz
l*r. 10 und dio ontayrochordor. woflnitionon
in Londoner idikomon und Statut von 8. „U£uat
lC*i5 aind oaratollunyon und iirklaorunjon
doaaon, wio daa Voolkorrocht zu Jonoa Doit-
punk t und vor Jo non Zoitpunkt war. Sio
achaffon koino “ncuon" Vorbroohen; ..rtikol 2
doa Goaotzoa ilr. 10 atollt foat, doaa yewiajo
Handlun pn Vorbrochon “daratollon". Inter¬
net ionaloa .»ocht ontayrioht nicht oinor Go-
aotz_obunc; ca i3t oir. "herkoonaliehoa 11
odor "alljosoinoa" .iocht, uolohoa aich aua
don "untor don ziviliaiorton i'ationon foat-
"ologton G-braouchcr." und dos "Diktat dos
ooffontliob.cn Gowiasona" or.twickolt. 1)

In ihror Wcitorcntvicklun^ wordon dioao
Gowohnhoiton und Gcbracuoho zur Srur.dla ;o
v«nd zus ..nlaaa fuor iiandlun-on und Verhal-
ton. und von Doit zu Zeit woraon aio in
Vortraoyon, «bkoni-.cn, -»rklc.orun -qn uni wia-
aonaohaftliohon ...hardlun_o:i anorkannt.


*) liar. :or konvontion Nr. *; von 18. Cktobor 1907.


•*Dio £ustaondljkoit diosca Gorichta 1 st Id
M bkoosson uni In Statut doflniort und dlo
dor Zuataonll-koit doa Gorichtahofca untor-
liojondon Vorbrochon, dio indlvlducllo Vor-
ontwortllchkolt bojruondon aolltor., wordon
in ^rtikol 6 aufjofuohrt. Das .{ccht doa
Statuta lat or.tachoidond, und fuor dor. Go¬
richtahof bindond.

* * • *

“Dor Gorichtahof iat natuorlich duroh daa
Statut hinaichtlich doaaon Dofinitlon von
kriojavortroohcn und von Verbrechor. 30 ;on
dio ^naohlichkoit -oburdor.." 1 )

V.’onn icli kurz dio .,uff aaaunj dor Gnklajc in b^zug auf
0 inijo dor joaotzlichon Gruniaacizo ucroiaao, woloho don
Kriojavorbroohon und don Vorbrochon jojon dlo Ibnachlioh-
koltt zu Or undo liojon, dann wcrdoich raioh, ait 2 rlaubnia
doa Kohon Goriohtoa, on oini;;o dor ?oatatollun;on in dor
fcrooffnunyarodo dor «nklo&o in Fallo jo on Frlodrich Flick
und Oon. halton, dor zur ^it vor doc Gorichtahof Hr. IV
onhaonjiG iat. Dort hot Gon-ral Taylor coaajtj


x ) Vorfahron jojcn dio Kau^tkrio avorbrochor,
.'-and 1 , Soito 218, 253.


(Soito 3 doa Orljinola)

“Dio Dofinltionon von Vorbr-chon ir. Goaotz
"r. 10 und dio ontayroobondor. ooflnitionon
in Londoner •bkonnon und Statut von 8. ..ujuot
U'-i 5 aind waratollunjon und irklaorunjon
doaaon, wlo daa Voolkorrocht zu Jenoe Joit-
junkt und vor jonon ooitpunkt war. Sio
achaffon koine “ncuon” Vorbrochon; .jtikol 2
doa Goaotzoa Jr. 10 atollt f03t, daaa ;cwiaJO
.inndlun ;cn Vorbrcchar. “daratollon". Intor-
nationaloa .iocht ontayricht nicht olnor Go¬
aotz oburv:; ca i3t cin “horkoomlichoa"
odor ,, alljoooinoa B .iocht, wolohoa aioh aua
don "untor don zivillaiorton I'ctionon foat-
jolojtcn Gobraouchcr." r.nd dor. "Diktat dos
ooffontlichen Dowlas ons u or.twlckolt. *)

In ihror .icitcrontwicklunj wordon dioao
Gowohnholton und Gcbracucho zur Grur.ala ;o
und zun ..nlaaa fuor .-landliuvon und Vcrhal-
ton, und von colt zu 3 c it wordon aio in
Vortrao;on, «bkor.-.on, drklu-run -on und wls-
aonaohaftlichon .%bhanilun ■ or. or.orkannt.


l ) Ilac. jor Xonvontion Sr. •; von 18. Cktobor 1007


Dd3 Londoner Stetut und das Gc30t2 : r» 10
nind wiohtl-.c Twilo in dicaor. Stron von Gc-
sotzon uni irkla-run^cr., durch don das
Voclkcrrocht waochat. Sic aind Larkatcino
an '..o o, vor. dor.on nan aowohl nach vor-
vraorta uni rxch rucckwaorts tlickcn learn,
sio aind abor nicht ruockwlrkcnd. Lr. henry
L. Stinaoo hat dioao irinzipion kuorzlioh
nit bowundornawortcr lllarhoit zur. ..uadruck
jo’orachtj 2 )

'Das Voolkorrocht 1 st nicht cine Sam-
lun- von Ewenjaaoraon Oder Gcactzcn;
ca 1 st dor achrittnolao «uadruck dos
Loraljoaotzoa dor ziviliaiorton .olt,
oboren von Fall zu Fall, -la sol¬
ves dockt os aich jonau nit don Comon
Law an^laaochsiaohor Tradition. Dio
.iochtaprlnzlpion von Nuorribors koonnon
wir nur voratohon, wonn wir aio ala daa
botraohton, was aio daratollon - oin
wichti or nouur .-all in don dochts-
buuohom dos Voolkorrcchta und nicht
dio forrnlo *nwondunj von waatzton
.tccht. •

Goaotz Nr. 10 iat all dioa und noch nohr. Ea
iat oin .dct dor Ooaotz^obun- dor rilitaorro-
,;iorunj uni dahor cin Toil dor fuor Doutaoho
und inncrholb Doutachlanda *<eohta-

ordnun;.31no dor Schwaochcn dor Diktatur bo-
atcht darin, daaa aio ia Fallo dor kataatro-
.ihalon und ondjuoltijon ailitaoriachon Hio-
dorla .30 aich ,;owoohnlich in -iohta auff.olooat
und die Opfor ihror Tyronnoi innitton oinca
polltiachon Chaoa fuohrorloa zuruooklaoaat.
Jaa uritto itoich hatto unbarstoorzic Jodon
Kann uni Jodo Frau in Doutachlani zur Strocko
"obraoht, dio oa vorav.chton, politiachun Go-
donkonsaoncon duadruck zu cobon odor oln«j
politi3cho Fuohrun: auaaorhalb uor boatiaii-
sohon J.azi-’.Joltar.achauun_ zu ontwickoln.

Join Zuaarreonbruch doa Dritton .volchoa
atuorzto ^outachlond pclitiach in oinon
luftleoron .lauz:. Dio Erkla-runj dor allilor-
ton l.aochtu von 5. JUni 19*15 ~ab "dio Uobor-
nahuo dor hoochaton ’/GUzu^-owr-lt" in
Doutachlani bokannt, "zur -ufrochtorhalt-on-
dor Ordnun -* 1 urxl "z'or Voi-waltun* Uoa Len-ca ,
und bcatinaatoi


Sin Larkstwin doa n-chts.


2) D-r Fuornbor or . 1*02033 t sir. .-.pr.-cs - -

i.oro’y^L. oticaon, voroor/ontlicht in ’Foroljn
.•fraii'a". Januar 19<17.


- 4 -


(Soito 4 doa Orl- lnr .l a )


•23 ;i';t koine dcr.tralro_icrunj odor
..utoritact in Doutachlrnd, die faohig
wa<-ro, die Verantuortur. 3 fuer dio
«ufroohtorhaltun;; dcr Ordnunj, fuer
dio Vcrwaltunj do3 landos Oder fuer
dio Z/Cfol.un .3 dor horde run 30:1 der
Sio~ornaochto zu uoborr.ohnon.'

In Vorfoljo dioaor drklaerunc wurdo dor Ifen-
trollrat ala Trooper dor Zor.traljcwalt in
Doutsohland -.oachoffcn. Geaotz Nr. 10 iat
oir. jeaetz obondor .»kt dioaor Koorporachaft
und iat doutachoa .icchi, ob;lcich aolno -o-
atixnunjon don Voolkorrocht ontataaxaon und
dio3oa vorkoorpern. Dio Kucrnborgor Kilitaor-
jorichto aind untor dor Vollnacht von Goaotz
hr. 10 1 ) ;;cachaffon wordon, und aie aproohen
nicht nur rtocht nach don Voolkorrocht, wio
in Goaotz hr. 10 orvaohnt, aondorr. naoh don
in Geaotz .\r. 10 vorkuondoten doutaohon
.tocht. Die Oerichtahoofo erzwinjen, kurz
goaaqt, aowohl Voclkorrocht wio auch dout-
achca nocht, uni boi ..ualogun; und .wiwondung
von Goaotz -Jr. 10 .uicaaon aie Geaotz hr. 10
nicht bloaa ala ..uadruok dca Voolkorrochta,
aondom ala -oaotz^cbondon «kt dor ^aatzunf.a-
naochto botrachtcn zur dochtapflo^o und zur
.Coclitaproohunj in Doutachlcnd. Die Srlaaaung
von Geaotz .Jr. 10 go a oh oh in Auauo'eunj dor
^oaotzgobonlon Gewalt dor vior Kaochto, vor
donon daa Dritto .toich dio Viaffon atrockto
und - wio daa von International or. Militaor-
gcriohtahof ciuasoaprochon wurdoi 2 )

1 .daa unboatrittono -locht dioaor

Kaochto zur Goaotzgotunj fu-r dio
~oaatzunjagobioto wurdo von dor zivi-
llaiortcn ^»lt onorkannt.' "

Kriogavorbrcohon wordon In Ovactz i Jr. 10 ala Grouol-


taton odor Vorgohon dofiniort, wolcho dio Qoaotzo odor
Gebraouchc doa Kriogca vorlotzon. i/ioao wogriffaboatirtr.ung
fcoruht vor allora auf don Haajor -bkorraon von 1907 uni dor
Gonfor iJonvontion v-Jn 1929, wcloho da 3 zoitgonocaaischo
Voolkorrocht In Bozug auf dio Lrndkrlojafuohrung, dio do-
handlunj von Krlogogofanyonen, dio dochto und xfllohton
oi-ior krio -fuohrondon Kacht boi dor -cactzunr doa tiebiotoa


1) hontrollratgoaotz hr. 10, -rtil:cl III, iba. 1 (d) und
2 ; .nordnung dor lilitaorr-giorunj hr. 7, ^rtlkol II.

2 ) Vorfahror. ;o on die Hauptkrio ~a vorbroch^r : ->cnd I,
aoito Sic doa Urtoila doa Intornaticnalon -ilitaer-
"orichtahofoa.


oinoa foin&lichen Star.toa und andoro Go^onatnondo vcrkucndon.
Die Qcsotzo und die G-braoucho doa Kricsoa boziohen siefc
auf I'riojfuohrondc, Jodooh nicht auf innero ^r^clojonhci-
ten oinoa Voikoa odor dio ..•oziohuncon zwiachon «lliiorton.
Vorbrochon, uolcho Doutacho 3030 x 1 ar.doro Doutachc bo^an-on
habon, aind kolno "nrio^avorbrochon", noch aind oa Handlun-
30 n von

(Solto 5 doa OriGinala)

Joutachon 30 ;;on Unjarn und au^aonon. uXo uriojavorbrochon,
woloho zun Gojonatarxi dor .mkla.joachrift goracht wordon

VX'

aind, oroijnoton aich allc nach don 1. Soptanbor 1939,und
oa iat doahalb nicht notwordis, dio ctwaa ongo -~achraon-
kun^ von hri 033 vorbrochon dux*ch don Internetionalon hili-
taorjorlchtahof auf dio nach ivrio^aauabruch tocan^onon
I'andluncon su boruookaiohtijon. 2 -an koonnto bohaupton,
dnaa dio doaotzunj von Ooatorroich und doa Suiontonlarxloa
in Jahro 1938, von Goohnon und .achron in daorz 1939 30 -
nuo^ond oinoc hriosazuatondo jloichkaorao, un dio Goa otto
doa .^riOjOa in nirkaor.koit trotor. zu laaaon - abor aolcho
rYcvjon aind fuor dio Zwocko doa vcrlio3onior. /alloa okado-
nlaoh.

It! 4 ^ 11 o cinlgor *njokla 3 tor. jodoch, inaboaorvioro
trifft dioa auf Gobhordt, r’iach r und Oborh^uaor ir. duaon-
nonhan 3 r.xit don Sulfonanid-Sxp^rinonton tu, kann orwartot
wordon, dnaa bohauptet wil'd, dio Vorbrochon 'o^on rolon
und vi-lloickt auch Tachochvn aoi-n nicht liriojavorbroohon
in Sixuio doa .ontrollrct^oaotzca -r. 10 . Dioao ^ohauptunj
v/ird auf di« Into rat ollun: ^-oatuotst, dnaa Doutachlard in
viclon dor waohrond dwO hriojea beaotzton Ootioto nicht
r.ohr durch die .tocoln uobor die Lardlrrio^afuohrunj sobundon


- 6 -


;owo30n aoi, *011 Doutachlani dioao Lender voollis untorwor-
fon und aio don Doutachon Hoich oinvcrlolbt hc.bo, und doa-
wo -on haotto Doutachlaai daa Hocht jehabt, nit don bcaotzton
Laondem zu vorfahron, ala ob alo oin Toll Doutachlonda wao-
ron. So hat die Vortoldl;,unG don doutaoh-ruaalachon Gronz-
und .-Poundachaftavortrac von 30. Dozorbor 1939 aowio auch
jowlaao doutacho Vorordnunson, botr. dlo Vorwaltun doa bo-
aetzton .-olona ala Lc^olaatuocko vorjolojt. x ) Cfcno ur.a
dealt aufzuhalton, zu arjunontioron, data


1) Gobhardt llowolaatuocko 13, 14 und 15.

^ (Solto 5 doa Orlglnala)

Jonor Toil i’olona, dor von aonononnton Gon*raljouvornor»nt
vorwaltot "nirdo, aua wolchor. dlo fuor dlo Sulfononld-lixpo-
riir.anto vorwondoton polnlsohon Vorauchaporaonon kanen, nio
don <loloh oinvorloibt wuordo, duorfto oa jonuojon dorauT
hlnzuwoiaan, daaa dor International© Ullitaorjjorlohtahol
dloaoo ;a-junont crlodist hat. In aolnon Ur to 11 wurdo doa

r’oljondo foat^oatollti

M Dor Analcht doa Oorlchtahofca naoh lat oa
in vorliogondon Fullo unnootl* zu ontaohoi-
'• don, ob dioao Lohro dor Untorworfun;, dlo

von dor r.llitaorlaohon Jroborun; abhaon t,
ir ondwio enwondbar ltc, wo dlo Untorwor¬
fun" daa Sr^obnia doa Vorbrochona dua «n-
* ;riffakrio«oa lat. h'lo hat nan dioao Lohro

fuor anwondbar ^ohalton, ao lcr.jo no oh oin
lioor 1.. Foldo atand, daa don Vorauch nach-
to, dlo boaotston Gobioto fuor lhron wahron
Ji ;ontuo..»r zuruockzucowinnon, urd in vor-
lio -onion /alio konntc doahalb die Lobro
night ansowoxalot werdon auf irjondwolcho
Gobioto, dlo naoh doa 1. Septoabor 1939
boaotzt wurden." *■)

..uf dlo tachoohiachor. Staatscn_ohocri>n trlfft daa
hry&adt r.uch nlcht zu. Dor Intomationalo UllitaoPSCrlohta-
hof aactoi


1) Vorfahron -c-on dlo SauptkrioGSVorbrochor,
-.and I, Solto 254.

- 7 -


am jozuc auf dio iriocavorbrochon, uio la
;oohnoa uni linofcron boston wurdon, joauojt
dor Einwois. class dioso Gotloto nio den
loichc oinvcrloibt wurdon, sondorn duss nur
oil- r-rotoktorat uobor sio :c a chaff on wurdo.


1) 7orfr.hr on -o^on die Hc.uptkrio;;s vorbrochor,

Zanl I, 3oito 25*;.

(Soito 7 dos Criminals)

In 2iU3arnonhan" r.it dor Joachuldisunr. von Vorbroohon
jO"on dio Itonaohlichkoit wild obonfalla an-onoiuon, daaa dio
Vortoidi^unc orjunonticren wird, daaa Vorbroohon, dio von
Doutaohon an andoron i>outachoa bojaacon wurdon, nicht Vor¬
broohon -ojon dio Konachllchkoit wio in -rtikol II dos *ton-
trollratjoaotzoa Nr. 10 dofiniort, daratollon koonnton, und
daaa aio doahalb nioht la dio -uataondijkoit dloaoa Goriohts-
hofoa fallon. das «nklajobuwc.ia./atorial dor «n)clajubohoordo
hat or^obon, daaa in praktisch allon Vorauohon lu-iioadofon-
•or.o odor Sivilister, aua von don boutschon busotzten Oobio-
ton nla Vorauohaporaonon vorwondot wurdon. Dio3or Tatoacho
iat unwidoraproohon, r.it ..uannhno von ell .o oinon .^atatol-
lu;v:on dor ~n.;okla"ton, deaa Hin*.lor odor omo nicht naohor
bosoiohnoto i’oraon ihnon .^ao^t babe, dess dio Vorauohapor-
aor.on silo doutacho Vorbrochor aoion, odor daaa aio alio
flioasond doutsoh ;oaprochon haotton. 3o 3tollon dio violator,
hior zur - ra ;o atohondon !_--rxllunjo:i llriocavorbrochon dor und
dar.it r.uoh ;;loichsoiti : Vorbrochor. jo^on dio .-cnaohliohkoit.
^A-oifollca iat kein ^ow^ia crbracht wordon, daaa Jo oin do-
fohl ortoilt wurdo, dor dio Vorauehaporaonon auf doutacho
Vorbrochor boachraonkt, ir. Ooaonaat* zu r.lcht-dout3chon
3taataxi-ohori :on. .<onr. in don oin«.n odor ondoron unwoaont-
lichon - r all daa -jcwuis.atorial nicht dio ;j«iuug '.’ationolitaot
dor un/luccklichon Opfor r.ufzoi-to, odor violloicht so:;ar


- 8 -


zoi-tc, daaa ca Doutachc waron, dean duorfon wir slchor
aoin, dr. a a oa aich nur un -ufaollo handoltc.

7io don auch aoi, dio ^nhlaco hat nicht die -baioht,
a in on ..ncrifr COGon dio aochtazuatacndi-feoit doa Gcrichta-
hofoa uriboachtot zu laaaon, obachon or von 3orin.~or -xxlou-
tunc in vorlio-onion .•’alio iat. 3ir.oa aollto von ..nfan^
an -anz l:lar ~o:.»cht wordon* Jlr bofaason ana hior nioht
nit cinor Jra^o dor duataendi^oit in Bozus auf Vorbrochon,
dio vor don 1. Soptor.bor 1939 ontwodor an Doutaohon odor
andoron borjan^on wurdon. Dioao .-raso iat auf^oworfon wor-
don und otoht oinon andoron Vorfehron zur Oobatto, daa
aujor.blicklich vorhandolt wird, abor dio Vorbrochon in vor-
liocondon Pallo oroi-noton aich alio nach Krlojatojlnn.

(S<jito Q doa Original a )

,/oitorhin bofaaaon wir una hior nicht nit dor Frarjo,
ob Vorbrochon L'o.’on dio konaohlichkoit "in ..uafuohruno cdor
in Zuaarr.onhanc mit olnon Vorbroohor. innorhalb dor ©uataon-
di~!coit dioaoa Qoriohtahofoa bojancon worden nuaaton."
Dor International© Kilita-r^orichtahof hat aoin Statut da-
hin^ohond auajolojt, doaa Vorbroohor. -ojor. dio i.onachlich-
lcolt in ..uofuohrwv von odor in ^uaatnonhan^ nit don Vor¬
brochon doa n riffakrio-oa bojanjon aoin nuaaton. Dloich-
viol, waa auoh iru-.or dor nort dioaor ^naicht aoin na£, dio
Viorto in Statut doa Intomationalon kllitaor^oriohtahofoa,
dio zu dioaor ..ualojunc fuohrton, aind nioht in dor _o-
jriffaboatinnurv dor Vorbrochon zojer. dio kor.achlichkcit
in .jjntrollrat.;o3otz Jir. 10 onthaltor.. aa knnn koin avroifol
daruobor boatohon, doaa Vorbrochon c -.on dio ..vmachlichkoit,
wio aio in Goaotz Kr. 10 dofiniort aind, auf oinor unabhaon-
;i;on orundla^o atohon und Vorbrochcn per ao aind. «.uf
Jodor. .•’all waron dio Vorbrochon, nit wolchon 3ich dor vor-


- 9 -


liojcndo .'all bofasst, tataaochlich alio *in ..uafuchrunc
odor fa Luaamonhonc nit don -ajriff akrios bo;;-njon wordon".
D-.s trifft nicht nur auf dio aorztlichon Vorsucho zu, aon-
dorn ouch auf doa Suthanaaio-i'ro^raaa, In doaaon Vorlauf
oino Groaao «nzahl von Hiohtdoutachon gotootot wurdon. Daa
Urtoll doa Intornationalon kilitaor:;orichtahofoa hat daa
auadrficklioh foatsoatollt. 1 )

Da or ;ibt sioh alao klar, daa a dio olnsigo Fra^o, trol-
cho in dioaoa Foil fa -ozuc auf dio Vorbrochon 3030 " dio
Honaohliohkoit aufscworfon wird, iat, ob dioaor Gorichtahof
zuataondiG i3t fuor Vorbrochon, dio von Doutachon gwgon
Do ut a oho bor.cnGon wurdon. Unaohliosat dio ^ofinition dor
Vorbroohon jo-jon dio i-onachlichkoit in Kontrollratroaotz
i»r. 10 auc:* Vorbrochon, dio Doutooho c«oP» BJutacho boGon-
Gon hftbon, vLo dio, nit wolohor. aioh dor vorliojordo Fall
bofaaat? Dio *-oatirx!unjon doa C. aotzoa Hr. 10 aind fuor
don Gorichtahof bindond ala doa in dioaon Folio anwondbaro
Ooaotz. 2 ) Dio Doatlmunjon doa ^baatzoa 1 (c)


1) Vorfohron ;o-;or. dio i:auptlcrio”avorbrochor,
Soiton 231, 2-i7, 252 , 25-., 301.

2) Vorfohron c«3on dio UiuptkriocavorbrGOhor,
3olton 17-1 urvd 253.


(Soito 9 doa Orijannla)

doa Drtikolo II aird klar und unxalaavor 3 taondlich. Dort
■wordon Vorbrochon *0 :on dio xonachlichkoit fol jondcmosaon
dofiniortj

"Cowalttaton und Vor^ohon winachlioaalich
dor fol.onion, don obljon Tatboatand Jodooh
nicht -rachoopfondor. Doispioloi Lord, ..ua-
rottun-,, VoraklavunG, -v/cngavoraciiloppunc,
Frolhci taborauburc, Foltorun:;, Vorgowolti-
jur. : odvr -" -lor z .1 viUoyoulborur. -

boganjono unnor.achllc'io Xandlun-on; V&rfol-
jurvG o.U3 politiachon, raaaiachon odor ro-
li ^oaon Qruoadon, ohr.o nuoclia icht darcuf,
ob'aio daa nationalo noeht doa idndoa, in
wolchor; dio H-ndlun;; bojanzon wordon iat,
vorlotzon. n


Tic V/crto ”n-. dor divilbcvocl2:crtti^ a koonncn koinoafalla
dcrart aua£ol~;t word on, dcaa sio doutacho Livilistor. aua-
cohlioaaon nuordcn. rtonr. nan annchnon aollto, ciaas Doutacho
aua roachlcnaon war on, dcnn hat ca wor.ij odor ^cr kolnon
3ir.n, don ^ojriff doa Vorbrcchor.a o^en dio Lonaohlichkoit
Oowicht zu jobon. Kriofavorbroohon unfnsaon die in dor
Dofinition dor Vcrbrochon :o^cn dio I-onachliohkoit aufjo-
fuohrton -’aton, wonn alo ;o^on hrio^a-.ofan^ono und dio
Zivilbovool!:orun_- boaotztor Gobioto bo an :on wurdon. Dio
oinzi"oa uobri blolbondcn, orwaohnor.awortcn Gruppon aind
Pout a olio und dio .ja-. 0 h 00 ri. 7 Jn dor Vaaallonstacton, wio
Unjam und ilunaonicn. 2a iat rorado olno dor ^fcsichton
dor ..'o ;*r if f a boa t iru-'.un j doa Vorbroehona jo v :on dio I'onachlioh-
koit, wio oa nioht nur in Goaotc Kr. 10 aondorn aohon lanco
in Voolkorrooht cnorkonnt iat, dio apatoaatiacho ^o;;ohun-
von Orouoltaton und atraflaror. Handlun^or. oinoa Stac.toa
30 jon aoin oijonos Volk zu orfaaaoa. uor bchluaaaotz dor
Definition doa Vorbrvohcno ga^on dio konaohlichkolt, dor
olno altorr.a tivo /aaaun- hat, nacht oa voolllj olndouti^,
daaa Vorbroohon, wolcho Doutacho ;:ojon Doutacho bo.roncon
habon, in dio duotaondi-kolt dioaoa Goriohta'.ofoa fallen.

Dr lr.utotf n Verfol-un; aua politiackor., raaaiaohon odor
rolljiooaon C-ruonaon, ohno 3uoc ‘:. ilcht dar-uf, ob alo da a
r.r.t lonr.lo .toc ht doa Londca, In wo Ichor: dio H-nulun • bo-
_an ;on wordo n l3t, vorlotzor. ". Dio a or Hinwola auf daa
n nationalo .iocht doa Landoa" kenn bloaa dlain*Ininiorondo
und bcdruockondo Goaotz-obun- ;o^on oi :ono Staotaonohoori-
;.q bodouton, wio zun Doiapiul dio "ojon dio doutachon
Judon ;oriohtoton h’uornbor-cr Goaotzo.

Dor «njblojonhoit wxrd vollonda Jodor Zwoifol ^.ononnon
duroh don -rtikol III doa Gcaotzoa .r. 10, wolchor Jodor
„ 0 a at zun^ancoht das .;ocht ibt.


(Soito 10 doa Ori_ir.ala)

L.uto su vorhaftcn, die dor iX^ohur. vor. VerbrochOn vor-
dooOhtic aind, dio ir Gcaotz ;ir. 10 dofir.iort aind, und sio
zur Vorhandlun;; "vor cin dafuor ^ooi^notoa Goricht" zu brin-
on. .Dsr.tz 1 (d) doa ~rtikola III aioht weitorhin vori

a ?uor dio -burtcilunj von Vorbrochon, dio
doutacho Stzatabuorror odor Stantaar.-choo-
ri’o ;ocon ondoro doutacho Staatabuerjor
odor o^cn otaatonloao bo-an-on haben,
koonnon die Dcaatzunjabohoordon doutacho
Oorichto fuor zuataondi;; orklaoron."

Oloa iat cino auadruoohllcho doataotijuni dafuor, daaa

Tat on, v/olcho Doutacho cojen Doutacho bojan-on habon, ala

V&rbrochon untor dor. Gcaotz dr. 10 ic 3inklane * T -it dor.

darin onthaltonon Dofinitior.on, aowoit os dio _«aatzur.j3-

maoht fuor anjobracht orachtot, zu boatrafen aind. Dioa

bozloht aioh boaondora auf Vorbroohon aojon -io ibnach-

liohlcoit, da dio .owondbarkoit dor Verbr-ohon :ojon don

/riocion und dor KriosaVorbreohon, obaohon roojlioh, doch

faat voollij thoorotiaoh iat. Joan dio doaatzun ar.tcht

oa untor laoaat, doutachon Ooriohtahoofon dio Vollracht zu

ortoilon, aoloho Verbroohon, dio von Doutaohon -o>n ondoro

Doutacho bc^anjon nurdor., abzuurtoilon (ur.d in dor arorl-

kaniachon Doaatzun^azono t;urdo oir.o aoloho Vollnacht nioht

ortoilt), dann worden dioao Paollo nur vor nichtdoutachon

Oorichtflhoofon,wio dioa'ou LiUtaor^orioht ,vorhuadolt.

Joa v/uordo aioh ciaraua or.,obon, nonn can dio dr.alcht
vortroton wolltu, '-aaa Vorbrochon, wolch© Doutacho ;o;.on
Doutacho bo:;anj,on habon, untor keinor. Urata&ndon untor dio
duataojidi-!:oit dicaoa (Xrichtahofoa fallor.t Sollto dioaor
Gorichtahof dan ^.weia i^noriorcr., daaa 4-ohr.t_usor.do von
Doutaohon auf Gruni oino3 jokciuorlaaaoa auajorottot wurdon,
woil oino Qru.jpo von Vorbrochorn aio ala “nutzloao Daaor*'


- 12 -


und oir.o unnooti-o Last totrachtotor., odor daaa doutacho
Gofanjino zu 7r.ua ondon in Zonzontfations 1 a~om hinsocoxdot
und niaahandolt wurdon, zun Toil nittola r-odiziniaohor
2 x.:ci'inontoT In Fallo 303011 Kilch hat dcr hilitaorjorlohta-
hof II ontachiodcn, daaa Vorbrochon z^Z on un^ariacho und
runaoniaoho Stcataanjohoorijo Vcrbrcchon jojor. dio lionach-
lichhoit waron. Ja v/aoro aichorlich ainnloa zu aojon, daaa
oino Zuataondijkolt fuor Vcrbrcchon boatuondo, wolcho Dout-
aoho jo zon Dhjarn bojon *on habon, abor nioht fuor dio, wol-
oho Doutacho jojon Doutacho bojanjor. habon.


- 13 -


(Seite li des Criminals)


Das Ortoil doe Intern tionrlen "iliteergericntsliofos
ei. t oine klaro Anerkennung aair.er Zueteendigkeit fuer
Ycrbrechen, begrngen von j>sut3clien je^en Deutsche. Dach
oinea Ueberblick uobor zahlreiche unaenecbliche Mandlungon
in Zua,-raaenh?ng cit -Iriegsvcrbrcchen und Yerbrechen -;ogen
die Ilenachlichkoit schlioist das Goricht cit oljor.dcn
' orter.i

n ....Seit Anfrn,; dea ICriegeo in Jefcre 1939 sind
Kriogeverbrechon in einen unceheuren Auanoss beganjnn
v. or den, die ebom'rlla Verbro chon . egos die enoch-
lichkoit wr.renj und 8owoi'; di -co unccnochlichon Hand-
lun;on,v»io cio in dor AnklagOBOhrift zur L?at select v.erdon
und noch Ilricgoautbruch b83«rvgcn wurdon, nicht pIs
K riogavorbrochor. cr.zuoehen cind, so sin! eio doch
im Yorfolg und in Vorbindurr? nit den Ar.griffokriog
besangon warden, und wcren^eEgocaoes Yorbrechen
,'ogen die llensohlichkeit *

Ite nun Xriogavorbrrchon notvendigerueise such Vcr-

broohon gogon dio ilencchlichkeit cin* , so k nn eino uoiter-

Sahunae Aueloguns dor lotzteron oich nur nuf colcbo Vor-

broohon bcziohou, dio nicht untoi* dio ercteron fallen,

nconlioh Vcrbrochon ;ogon Deutsche und ehoorigc or.doror

L. ondor, dio nioht von dor. Dcutoch-.n bcootzt wrron.Yei tor-

kin beheuptoto die Anklegovertrotun;; ir. jenen x*ila, dr.es

die unmonechliche Sokrndlung dor Judcr. und politischer*

Gognor lnr.cTha l b loutcchlo nds vor ocn Uiiege vorbrochor.

jejan dio . onschliohkoit dnr tcllton. Dei Ger.chtshof

oogt in -lio3on Zuaeauotthangi

"oazueglich dor .erbroefcau ,-e,~.n die konschlichkoit
bostoht uoborhaupt Isoin Z.oifol dr.r<n, dass uolitiacho
Gognor in Dout3cbland schon vor dot. Jricge ernordot
und dass violo ven ihnon outer furchtbaron und grau-
oacon Badingungcn ir. Sonzantrationsltgorn featge-
halton nor don sind. Dio Schrockoncuolitik i3t
unhrlich in oinon uncohouron Auanassa iurchgofuohrt
vorden und v.er in viol r. ?noiloa cyatosatisch org'-
r.isiort. Dio Politik dor Yorfolding, Untordrueckung
und ’imordun~ devtocher Zivilpcrcor.on vor doc Ilriogc
1939, die dcr P.cgierungsfoindiichkoit verdaeohti:;
war on, ist r.ufs


- 14 -


(Soito 12 doe Ori inals)


ruooksichtalonasto durchgefuchrt .:orflen. Dio Ver-
folgung der Judon uBhrend dora. lbor. 2oit 1st uobor
jdcn Zroifol foaigcotellt.’ U

Dor Gorichtahof apricht hier sueschlio33lich vor.
Vorbrochor. Doutschor gcgcn Deutsche, stelltc fcst, decs
oolcho Handlungon ic Sinnc des Statute koine Vorbrochcn
CQQon dlo .. n3chlicld:oit bodcutoten, aicht v.oil eio Vor-
broohcn gogen Douteoho waren, :-onfiorn roil sio nicht in
dor Durchfuohrung und in Verbindun^ ait dea Anjriffaliriog
bogangon v.ordcn aind. tetoaochlici; :.bcr atellte dor 3o-
richtehof dann voitor £oet, di-sc aioec oclbor. Kendlungon
Vorbr^chon gogon die :;cnachlich::oit uaron, ronn oio nach
ICriogoeuabruck bogtmjcr. nordon sind. Zv.iechon dor Jrnordung
von dcutuchcn Judon und polniochcn odor ru33iochon Judon
urdo ledn Untcrochiod gcc- it. Ebonoov.erAJ, wuvdo oin
Untcruohiod ;..mooht z iachon verbrccherischon cediziniochcr.
Experimental rrn doutschcn odor nicht-dcutechon Konzon-
tretionalngorhuoitlingor. odor \o:' Jrnordung doutachor odor
nicht-Joutochor Zivil crooner, in 3u o doc DuthonoAoprogram
Alloa dioo botrnchtotc dor Oorichtahof ?2o ^riogovorbre-
ohon bo ek. Vorbroch.n r. dij iienachlichkcit.


1 )


Vorfahron ;;j.;cn die inu? t kr i eg 8 v e r'j r e c ho r


S. 254.


(Soitc 13 doc Originals)


DI2 rrSORn D 25 P.TCZIISSJS

Tes 1 st don Angcklagton in dor Anklescschriit ror lest
gclogt? Tea ist da 3 T7cacn dicscr Vcrbrocfccn, fucr dio
sio vor Gcricht atohcn? In Anklc£OT>uakt I aind aacntlicho
Anscklascon beschuldigt dcr ToOna'cnc en ciaon scnoinarnon
Ilan odor oinor Vorachwoorung, dio lie Vornr.hno vorbrecho-
riocher racdiainischcr Hxperincntc an lobondon Uonachon
ohno..dorcn Zuetienun* cun Gogonctand hetten und die 2t-
nordungon, Greuasmkeiton ur.d r.r.dcrc unnoaachlicho Hcad-
lungon rur Poise Hatton. Ifcr Gorichtahof bet boroita oinc
Irocrtorung dcr Projc dcr aiataondigfcoit, die Anl'.lngo dcr
Voreolwocrung su orlxcbon, 01 x 30 ho or t, und ich vordc oich
da her woitor unten auf oin pear locor.’iungon uebor die 3 c-
cotzliohon Vorochriftcn hinaiolitlich dcr Voracheoorung
on aieh,die Pol-con dcr roilno.no darail, ric aio in Abor.tr.

2 doo Artikola IV doa Goaotsca Ho. 10 niodcrgolo.-t aind,
ootiIc dio An-condbarkoit von lildorn nuP don Tntbeat-nd in
dioBcm Prczoco, boochreonkcn.

Uni opunkton XX und XXX (Xrl javorbroehon,

bosK. Vorbrochcn gogon dio Uoncohlichlrcit) atohon olfilgo
dor Angoklogton unfcor dor Anaoknldi^ng dcr Poilnahne r.n
Irnordung von I'or.ochon ir. Hugo doe 3othRna8iopro3raonoa,
dor irnordung unu Hioehandlunj tutorial loco cr polon und dcr
Lrocrdunti von 112 Ju*cr. fttor oino Skolcttaunnluns. Imeh
LiPfor 6 und 11 doraolbcn Anklscojronito aind nllo Anjo-
I:lagton dor loilnc’ic: an vorbrocAcriach.n Vorouchoa en lc-
bonden Hocaohcn ohno dcrcr. fcuaticaur-;, die Horde, Greuann-
keiten ur.d andcrc unncnochlichc Lanulungcn rur Polgo Hatton


- 16 -


(Salto 13 dcs Originals, lorte.)
bcBchuldig:. 2s nuas bctont nordoa, vorauf auch dio An-
klagovortrotung in dicaca Prososa vorscbiadontlich tin ~
gcnioson hat, - dass die Grundidoo von Zii'fcr 6 und 11
dcr Anfclegeechrift dio Tcilnahne an vcrbrochorisohon Vor-
auchcn iot, uoa inner diese Voraucha auch gone son aoin

no even. Zinaolheiton ueber gouiaoo Vcrmictio 8ind in dor

*1

Ani.lagocchrii't aufgcfuohrt, und -inige dcr Angoiclagton
v.urden nomcntlich ar.vcfuchrt ale Pcrconcn, die oich on
ihnen boaondore beteotigt tv~bon odor vorantrortlioh hior-
Tucr v.prcn. Dies boechracnkt Jcdoch di: Anklagovortrctung
nun koines* ego derln, dio grundcaotslicbon Anechuldigunc.cn
durch Jodvodoa :orci .aatorial in den Afcton su bologon.

2n bodoutet -ir.o durchauo irrige Aufi’naauxv von dor Anklog
echrift, oij co anzucohon, ala ob sic dioaon odor Jonen
An.-.ohlorton dio dcilnnhce an dioaon odor Jonon 3xporinont
sui' Lost logon rollon. Dice fu-hrt du=u, den Bwoie dor
dio 3ouchuldi^-ung otv.ctzon soil nit dcr Bcochuldijung
□olbcfc c\i vorv.ee hooln.

Xemor ducri'on dio gogon cir.cn bcliobigon Angoklngton
vorliagondcaBcaoioo nioht ?uf die Tclao antorsucht worden,
dr03 ern oia in Toilo zcrlcgt 'and di- cir.zolncn ?cilo

l*i rt. Bo« Bto .oiamatcrial nu: 1; 3 "-’-3 botraohtot

uoffdon, uc zu . ir.on Irtcil uober die bchuld don Angoklagto
* golnngon. 3e 1 st unnoojlich, die : ecnffit-.irltung doa
or.ciGoo abzuochcetacn, v.onn rc-r. die Itolun-ntc gcnor.dcrt
botraohtot un>l ihnon nur dr a Scr icht von so und do viol
Ltuockon tot:n Pa.iorcc bcinio".:.


- 17 -


Ich wage die Vorausasgen, decs die cusaenenfaeocnden

Lcfcriftacetze der Vortoidi^uns eino lrx^atnige "Iac-

!:-r.dlun;; eines Jeden 3ckur sntea cr.ttelten v.erden, von

:.clch letztoren jedea eir.zelne eret erlcdijt cordon v.ird,

bevor cun naecb ton uofcor'.o njon .iru, ohne jen'*la su

dou vollen Karnpunkt dec 5e«oi3oc durcLsudrlnaen. Han

];e:in Vrohl ^elo^entlich oinrelno 3v oi^e von oinon 3aun

abbrtchcn, obor «enn diese Sr.ei.je einnc.1 ^ebUndolt aind,
nicht

Koonnen oio/.;obrochen erden. Dqog 61 jo f ilt fuer uneor
:3ov,ei neater ial.

(Soitc 14 doe Origlnrla)

Sbenaoueni^* fcoennon dioao /crouche v.io hornctioch

vc* , ochlooBono Bchoelter botrochtot . - n. Vorochiedeno

Voreuoho muoooon in ihror G08nntheit botrachtot cordon,

iu: die voile ..chuld doo Angekln ;ton cu v.uordi,;en, eolbat

v.onn una in jchuldurtcil nioht hinoichtlich Jodoo diooor

Voroucho nneh.'cimcbt cerdoi collt' . .. Boiopiol, alio

Li ;o’:lojton von der Luftr.ffe aocchton, deoo der 3cricha-

Itof run fcchlune fconoa, dnoe bei Ue.i Hoohonvorauchon der

vorotorbeno .laechor sioalich o 11cin flier rile rodoafacllo

vorantv.orclieh coceoen irt, obachon or zu der Soil im o!:-

tiven Bienot bei dor Luftwaffe stand. Ala die Angolcli

tuff und Rntabcrg nn^eblich oral : von aoinen "nueoor-

plennauociTon" Tootuntcn dodurch, i-.so ;.en. nd vor don

Augen Ronborgo getootet v.urdo, or n haben, vvrbliebon

aie oinfach in Cachcu, un ceitero 6 .'oohon cit Raachor

tot

zucamr.enzuarbaiten, und itooberjReiner Aussnje cufolgo

uchliocclich geeehon, ~ie donels nur r.och zwoi neitero
’ Porscncn jetoetet i.-urdon. vueruc era, irjond- ie fuc-r elnon

- IS -


(Seite 14 dee Originals, Torts.)

iugenblick der. Godrnken liegen, drss in den boiapielhaften
Vcrbalten dio3or beidor. Tu^endritier des luf two f f e ns an i-
'wc.etavioaens die leieoetomildernden Unstnenda su entdaclcen
uoeran, donn vcollan sir der 7oorhoit uebor ihr nnjoblicheo
fcichzuruecksiehen von Poacher ouf den Grund -ohon und
dio .w cltovorsucho botrcchton, ait denon 30 Tage, nnoh-
dcc Ruff, Romberg und R: chor ihror. genoinanaen Boricht
l r nvor8Ucha-imo8aaont8 korauagegobon hatt

bogonnon nurdo. 3at dor Xuftvaffona nltaotadionst irgond
otv,aa mi t dicoon Voruuchon on Bichouor Haoftlingon zu tun
oOlwbt, nuchdoc diooor Zunp Uaochor "onechon in dor Untor-
druoklccjaaor Ucr Luftwaffo gotootot hr.ttc? Jor.ohl, dioao
Voroucho vrnrdon von dor luftuaffo onjeord ot und cua-
achlloaalioh von Zuftnoffonaorcton cuagofttohrt. Krtto Ra-
oohor irgond otv/c\o dnnit zu tun? Jo, in dor Tot! Sr half
Ilolsloohnor und Tinko deboi noch viola ndoro Oofor oun
den ’-rationolngor su Ibdo su qucolon. Tuortcn Ruff

und Rocberc ct.oa von diooor fort onotston vorbroehorioohon
Troti ( ;k*jit? Josohl, in Soptcober bokca Sonbcrg cinon Ordon
r.'.’S Ranchora Vorochloj, und in Soptor.bor 1943 urren Ruff
und Romberg beidu hi or in Sucrnbe G und hoerten Rich Rolz-
looimorc und Seaohora oehr orbauondon Toriohto uebor die
*‘ r ItovoiiUcIlfl or.. Un drher die vollo Sckuld dor -::,jo!:lr,;tor.
nvfr und Romberg in Sttocnaenhang ;:i den ’ oohonvorouchon
.ru vuiordigon, nuos nan imbed »jt nuoh di. KocltovormiohO
betraohton, unC da ;.ird nnn finder., dnon Anchor, nicht
ii: ontforntocten von cincn ririegsgericht dcr Luftwaffo ob-
gourtoilt t.urdo, nechdon dioao vollo ITenntnia von don
Vorgofnllonon crhalton hstto, tcinc-n Rang bohiolt und v.oitcj


- 19 -


(Seitc 14 aes Originals, Ports.)

hln ooln Qoordori3ChoQ *crk in Zuonnnonarboit nit andcrcn

Luft«nffon-Dolctoror. fortsetzte.

(Soito IS dos Originals)

Aua dioaon Ueberblick uebor Sic Anklascachriit
und bub don 3o«oisnctcrial dor AnSlBgovortrotunB. 1st or-
Biohtlioh, dr.aa diooo Anscklrvjtcn aun uebcrvriegondon Soil
nogon dco Torbrcohcno doo -lordca vor "oricht Btohon. ..’io
in alien Strrfproaooson Btohon ~ol oinlo.chc Pr^on vor
uno; bind die Verbrocbon bojanGon wrdon, und v.onn jo,
etsnion diooo Angokla.tun nit dor Auofuobruns in Vorbindun
in Oinor Woioo, «io in Scocta .-:o. 10 oinnoln*w>f«ohrt
lot? Hur dio Sctoc-chc, - 4--° dioao Vorbroohon toil-

v.0ioo in AuanirkBBfi von nodi.ini.chcn Vorouobon an lobendo
ilonoobon ouBgofuohrt r.urdon. nnobt diooon Proaoeo ir 5 ond-
„io oilUi* dcutohond. Ond v.onn OUOh orhobliohos Do«oio-
nntorinl toobnioobor Art oingorcicht uurdo, bo drrdl non
dooh nicht dio up.brc Sinfacbholt dloooa ProaOBBoe nuo don
.., vorlioron. Dor Ansoklogto Hooo. dor don zougon dor
Anklngovortrctung, Dr. ...0. Ivy von dor nadialniochcn
Pr.kultr.ot dor Dnivoroitnot don Illinoio, in Zou G onotbnd
bofrrgon durfto, -.urdo gr.na auoeor alch bai docoon Btr.cn-
dijor ''iodorholung doo Orundoi-imiJB, droo nonachlicho
Vorouehoporoonon RottilMgo ocin auoOBton. Dioa ibt nr.-
tuarlich dor Orandpfoilor dioooo rroaoBBCB. 3e gibt
tatsnocblich r.ucb noob endoro Yorauosotaungen fucr dio
Vornnhoo orlauetcr nudizinlacicr 3= ? orin.nto on lobondon
■oBseben. Den Vorouch nuoo dr.B Dooultut von Tlorvorauchcn
und ItunntniB dor nr.tucrliohon ^ntotohungogoBobiobto dor
betreaffendon Krantbeit zu Orundoliogon und os nuoe oo go-
plr.m sain, dr.ss d-a vomMgosohoao ScBUltr.t dio AusSuchru


- 20 -


(Scito 15 dcs Originals, Ports.)
dor Vorauchc auoh rcchtforti^c. Ifca hoisst, docs dicso
Yoreuoho dorart soin nucason, dcas die Brgobnieao fuor
dea Yfohl der Gcacincchoft orziclon, die durch cnooro
Forcchunzencthodon nicht crroicht cordon koonnon und
dess aio nicht ihror Hntur nach vahlloe und unno-tic
sind. Pernor nucseor. die Ycrauchc von uieacnachr.ft-
lich goschulton Lout on und awor co vorgonooocn wordon,
draa jedoo unnootigo koorporlicho und ccoliachc Leiden
Oder Jodo Schn.odigu.-v; ausgcschcltot rird. Yonn von
vornhorcin Grund sur Annr.hno bcatoht, does dor Tod odor
Vorkruoppolung ointreten koonnto, co aucaaon die, die
dio Vorsucho nnctollon, oich aclbot ala Vcrauchoporoonon
zur Vorfuogung otollon, zuennnen nit dea nicht-viaaon-
oohnftlichon Pcrconal. Diuo ollca oind voaontlicho C-nmd-
aaotzo, dio ntaondig vor. don An^oUlcgton und ihron xlit-
arbuitorn vorlctzt cordon aind. Bun Eoinpiol nuoo noch
dor Angoklcgto gefunden werdon dor cioh aolbot diooon
Verouohcn, durch die ihro Opfer in don Konzontrationale-
gorn getootet odor gcrur.olt nordon oind, nuageoetzt
hr-ottc. Aber so v.ooonfclich Jcnc ondoren Brnagungon r.uch
coin noogon, dor Hauptgrundoats slier norstliehen acral
und noaachlichon Anatandoo bloibt, doas diejonigon,
die den. Vornuchen untensorfon v.crden, dice froinillig t\
nnchdcn aio uobor doron Voecti und Gofahron untorriohtet
burden. Dice bodoutet den klnrcn Trennungastricht
zv.iochcn don ^riaincllcn und dee, tsrs Nichtkrininoll
aoim nng. 7onr. oen von don Vcrmichscbjcktcn nicht oagon
krvnn, draa sio cich froir.illig gonoldot haben, dentt cr-
Ujobrigt sich Jodo ueitcrc Cnt.r sue Iron,,. So cinfnch lieg*
die Sccho in dicaon irozeso.


- 21 -


(Scita 16 dcs Originals)

7 aa ist denn nun cin Troiv.illl^or? T?or cina bluohcnfio
Phcntaaio hat, koonnte ordochtc Pr.allo nnfUwhrcn, die
cin rccht schcrfsinnijca 'ortcil 8 verr.ooson crfordern.

Dcr Gorichtahof atcht koinca solchor. Problem sasonuober.
Eo ist uoborv^iilti^ondcs 3or.oianr.torir.l vorha.ndcn, dr.a3
ac.n nicnrla auoh nur im gcringeton voreohuctzte, dose Prt
v.lllljc bonuetzt v-urdon. Gereda v.oll nicht zu or«r.rton
v;cr, dcac filch zu dicaon nooriorischcn Vorsuchon, dia
don Coronatnnd diccoa Prozoaaca bildon, Froivilligo nolui.
auordan, hioltcn alch die Angoklc^ton r.n den unorachoopf-
lichon Quail un^lucokoo-ll^or und bodruccktcr Gafrin^onor
rua den konzontrctionalogcrn. ICr.nn irccndjonnnd ornotlic:

,.lr.ubon, d-xna Polen, Judon odar Ru3acn odor oo^nr
Soutache aioh f -oluilli^ den Qur.lon uor Unterdruckkrnnor
und da.« Gofriorbockeno in Drckr.i*., dor Giftfirskanmer in
ilrtwoilcr odor dor .locntson-Storilloctions-ippnrnto in
;.uochmitz untcrr.'<rfon? lot nncunohcun, d-oo dio lolnioelu
Krodchcn in ilnvonobrut-ck ihre ur.cinjonchr'-cnkto Zuotimnu:
dezu gc.bcn, zuc Ruhne doa Dritten Reicha vcrstucmnolt un
"otoofcot zu v.ordon? 7r.r dcr benitlcidons-ccrto Zijounor,
dor den 4 .n cklagton Bcijlbocck hicr in dicacn Gorichtc-
nncl o rot lie h rnsriff, frciailli^or Pcilnohnor r.n don
ScowcoBorvorouchon? lirnn nr.n uirfellch aich oinbildon,
dmo die Hunderto von Cpfcrn dor noordoriachcn Flcck-

ficburotr.tloner, in Buchonv-ld und lir.traoilor ihro Zu-

gojobon

ctimmun- zu diooo.n Vorsuchon/habcn? D o w 0 tr.ur 3 ev.icht
dcr Bcv.oisa 1 -coat r_r koinen Zweifol cn dor Eonntv.ortun
dioaar rrejen rufkonaon. Dia .‘.ussc^on dcr Vorauchsper-
oonon, ur Au^enzoujon und di; Dekuaente dor :.n;,o!*J.ngtcr.


- 22 -


(Scitc 15 dca Origin"ic, Forts.)

oclbat bostrotigen ohno den loiacston Zweifol, dr.ss dioso
Vcrouchooorsor.on in we bra ton Sinne dca Tortes Unfroi-
villigc Keren.

Die so Tntar.chv. ::ird von dor. Anjcklajten r.uch nicht
crnatlich bcctrittcr.. Die cciatcn von iknen, die dioao
Vcrsuchc vornrhnon, Inben zujcgobGn, dese cic die L-uto
nicht oincel jo^r^.t hr.bcn, ob sio aich frci^illi.. fuel*
die Vv/raucha jcacldct hrotton. Vor dcr rcchtlichcn und nora
lischcn Erfordcrnic dcr 2 uetinnur.j ar.chcn dio Anjoklcgton
n\»or oino thcorotiochc Vcrb.ujur-j, leceon aich cbor gloich-
zoitij fuor oir.cn oilijon Rucckzuj oin Hintortuorchcn o*fcn
So v.ird gosajt, droa dor totrlitr.oro "Stent" dio Vor-
rntwortuns fucr dio AuKoinung dor Vorsuchopcrsonon uober^-
noaoon hr otto uni dr.oc unt con Ocstr.ondon dio Hr.onnor,

dip

(Soito 17 dca Orijinr.lo)

dio Vorsucho 0 cj'l-.nt, bcfohlon, vorgenonnon Oder sonar:, io

rich dnrrn bjtcilijt he.bcn, nicht strrfrochtlich bui Ver-

rntv.ortur.j jozojon • erden ko.nncn, oclbat \onn Ur.-'roiv.illi,

Gcquodt vor den und drboi unjakonren sind. Dice hr.t aich

viclloloht .a uoutlichatcn bci dcr Yomohnung doo An-

ckl^jtcr. «v-rl 5r'..ndt durch den Gorichtohof hcrr.u&jcotcllt.

Un ooinc Anoicht uober oin^n Voreuch von anje‘blich hooch-

atcr nilitn ri: chor V-dautung bcfrnjt, dcr unfrei’ illigcr

.%• r und in fodpBfnollon on do to, r.ntwortoto Brrndtj

"Hr; die son r* ilo bin ich v v ^: -hto dcr Kricgcl-.jo
dcr Anoicht, dese die e.c-tlicha Sinrichtunj,

v.c.lchc dio 'Jichtijkoit i*uer dca See tainterccsc cua-
5 c nprochcr. hrt, ruch jleic.zcitig den Arzt die
Vc rent’sortunj fucr den Fell r.onic^t, drss solchc
On tcrauchunjon oinen un_luccklichcn Ausgrnj nohman,


- 23 -


(Scite 17 das Ori^incls, Ports.)


und d?.8e die Verar.twortun-; dr.fucr von Str.c.to
o'otrcgea cordon nuBa". 1 '

‘.*oitoro Dcfrngun^on brpchtcn dio Ansicht zu Tr^o,
dr S3 der oinzijro in dioscc cnjonounonon Prll nocclichcr-
uciso vcr"nt'.ortlicho :'rnn Hincior jov.ocon wncro, dor dio
Gov:-It uobcr I-obon und Pod dor Consentrr.tionslr.sorinar.Q8on
hrtto, eclbst vvonn or Vcrsuch sun Doispicl von Chef dec
Iuftr.r.ffon-3-ni ;nota\ooons befohlcn und von iho untor-
atollton .‘.croton ruejcfuohrt cordon . Dio "chrznhl
dor -ndcron Anjoklrstcn ctollten oich r.uf oinon cohnlichon


Stnndounl-t, d:oo oio .-."cnlich fucr dio Auswahldor Vor-

auchoperflonon nicht rtlie* oson eoion,

Diooco Vorbrinson ini. in dor. Aujor. dor .'..oklajovortro-

tunj vocllij Uftp.ur'rioUtij. Dio Ycnondunj unfroivilli^or

crsuchoporaonan bci r.odiziniocUon Jnporinonton iot oin

Vcrbroahon, ict dro Vorbroohon den .tordoo, v.onn dicBo ;xpc

rinonto .od^cfrollo sur Foljo hr.oon. Jedor Tcilnolunor,

an den Vornuchon ict doo Tordoo ochuldlj, und von diooor
_ , , aioh

Schuld konn or/nicht louocn,uoiu: oi.*. Drittcr dio Cpfor
^cliofert hrt. Die dr.o Sxporinont ontv.crfondo , nnordnor
untoratuetzendo und rusfUchrcndo loroon hat dio norr. lice lie
und rcohtlicho Verpflichtunj, urfuor zu corjon, dr.so dictv
Vors*ucho auch ordnuivosenncaa durchjci’uohrt vtcrdon.

Dio$o Vcrpflichtun,; iot unuoborfir^ :brr. 3s obliogt doa


iio Vercucho verne co.ndcn Arsto r oi'clloo,cich dr.von zu
ucborz<su£on, dees tic 3otr>-ff.nucn, nrch^io uebor dio
Urtur und Gofr.hron diooor Vorouci.c untorrichtot viordon
rind, rich fr> i illij jonoldot hrbe:.. oio nicht fr

' illis jekoonen, bo iot ce coino lilicht, dios soinen


1 )


Protokoll, S. 2*>67


- 24 -


r


—


(Soite 17 doe Originals, Forts.)

Yorjesetsten zu nelden und die Yersucho absubrechen. Dio
Aa-.eklr^ton heben sich in der 7ors-)dcjelun.j ebsolutor
Uniconntnis hincichtlich der Zuctirumnj seitons ihrer Vcr-
suchsopfer jojonaeitij uebcrbotcn, Sio v.usstcn, vie daa
-cwoionr.teri-1 soijt, dnaa die un_ lucckaaolijon Keoft-
linjo sich zu ihrer Folterun; und Toetunj nicht froir.il li^
gonoldot hr.tton. Solbct v cnn crn d-u Inaoojlicho, nrcnlich,
dnaa aio os nicht wusaton, nnnr.chno, so ist dr.a dcch
ihro Schuld - und nicht ihr Froiapruch. "onntnic haotton
oio 3ich durch dr.a oinfacho Uittel, dio Jctroffor.don zu
frajon, vorach-ffcn koonr.cn. Dio Verpflichtunj ,oich zu
crkundigon, koonnto jrr nicht 3:lcrcr scin und kc.nn r.uch
nicht durch oolch lrhcc Zntachuldijunjcn rioi ”Ich jlnubto,
os vinron Froir.illico" odor ""icnlcr hrt nir vorcichort,
daoo oo Proi*. illijo urcrcr." unjrn ;en v.ordon.

(Soite 18 doo Orijinr.lc)

in dlooon Zusmncnhr'njo sollto nion-le n.uaoor Acht
golnoaon ’..erden, d.«.on diooc Yorsuchc in Konzcntrrtionclr^ ori
~n K.Z.-nr.cftlin :on durchjofuohrt nirdon. io v.onij r.uch
cinijo dor An;;cklajton von acr jcoo»zloocn •/ildnia dor
Aonzontrationslrjor mjeblioh jor.uoot hzben, t o jovrr.lt-
o-xicr Tod, Poltorunj ttnd Yerhun orn dre trcjlichc Lobon
dor Inor.iocn 'uofuolltcn, eo t:\ioi ton oic doch ruoindoot,
dras dioo jizetton dcs Terrors tnrun, t.o rllo in Oppo-
aition zur -.rtzi-Re .icrunj stehondon .oroonon ohne Vor-
fr.hrcn jefenjon johr.lton, no Judcn und lolon und r.ndero
so^onrnnto ’•rr.ssiach Aindorucrtijo 11 * ojon koines irjondr io
jeerteton Verbrcchona cinjckorkert \;crcn, oa coi donn, dras
ihro Hraac Oder Rclijion c±n YorbrocUen vnr. Die sc cinfzchor


- 25 -


(Seito 18 dcs Originals, Porte.)

Xatar.chon r.aron vrfihrond dcs Kriogcs in der gr.nscn licit

bokannt. Ulo vicl grooaser war dr.nn die Pflicht dicsor

An oklagton, die rroi.illigkoit dioacr so boquen zur

Vorfuogung atohendon Vorauchaperconon nousecret sorgfr.cl'-'

r.uefindi^ zu or.chon. Z\:?r koonnen dioao Angoklcgton nicht

dor Vornntwortlichkcit fuor don fcrbrcchcnskonplcx, dor.

dre Konzontrationolr.gornystcn cusur.chtc, bceckuldict

ncrdcr.. Abcr os kenn nicht behruptet v.ordcn, dr.os sic

•

durnh d~s Koollontor ochroitcn und donnoch sngon konnten:

"Brinjt dio Vorauchape Eonen! Icii oohe nichts Boosonj icli

hooro nichtc Do.ooo; ich cprocho nichto Booses I" 6io

otolltcn koine rrr<jon. Sio bafrnjten dio Ins"soon nicht

ncch oolehen Sinzolhoiton v.io Suntinnxuv, ITrtion-.litnct,

ob aio durch oin GorioUt nbgcurtoilt v. or don wr.ron, v.c.a

fuor cin Vorbrtchon oic bojnngon hetton und dorgloichon.

Sic tr.ton oa nicht, -.;oil sic v.usaton, dr.oc die bojrjaflorno-

norton HnoftlinoO aich nicht frair.illig fuor ihre Vor-

auchc goncldot hr.ttcn und d-.so c-n dies ruch nicht von

ihnon crv.rrtcto. Sic nnhncn dio ilrsi-Lohro und don llr.zi-

Lcbonaatll v.illij : n. T7rs dicoo An^oklrjton taton, *r.r

dro 3r;:cbnio der verde-blichcn Syr.these zviochon den

doutcchon Iiilitr.risnus und der .r:\zi-2C8Bon-Ziolo. Ala

r.nyooichto dco kritiochcn iirrcala -r. Flcckfiebcrinpfotof-

fon zun Schutso der .'chrmncht bci ihren Binf~cllon in

Ooton,H-'ndloscr und seine Gescllcn zu don Schluso kr.non,

drso dio Xiurvcr3Uchc zu kn a-n coicn, .urden dio Hr.aft-

linjc von i-uchonr.rld zu lundorton _uer die Erprobung

nouer Inpfstoffc jeopfort. Als Schroodor dio ncnech-^

%

lichc rolorcnEircnto in i:eorr.r*.3sor bcctinrion v.olltc,


(Soifio 18 dcs Crijinr.lo, Ports.)


bcschritt or don von dor £aftr.rffo bctrctcncn nr.ch
Bc.chnu und holtc sich 40 ^i^aunor. Dicso An..oklp^*ton bo-
nutzton offonon Au^es die untardruocktcn und vcrfol^tor.
0 ;>for dee no.tionnloozi-listischon He.jicca, uc olondon
und widerstrebonden Icibcrn durch Pod, Poltorunj, Ver-
Qtuoamlunj und dnuoxv.do koorocrlicha Schr.odiguns oin
Proopfehen uiaaonachr.ftlich-r irkenntnie rbzurinjcn. Puor
dioco jroifbr.ron Vorbrcchon vovl.-njt dio 3crochti 0 kcit
otron^o Suchnw.

(Soito 19 dee Orijinr.la)

n a"- c l Q'o rh-bjn odor die Ycroclroorur.:.

Sa dr\rf nieht uebereohon uorden, dnsa dio in don
vorliojondon ’ Ho orv.icaoncn Vorcuchc keinoowejs zufr.ol-
liijor N.-tur w'ron und zu don r.ndcrcn Vcrbrochcn in koincr
Sozictauv oCondon. In Gojontoil f oic bildeten oin voll-
otr.ondisoa verbrcclioriachco Irojrrna, in uolchca dio An.;c-
klj—ton untorcinr.nder und cit "ndoron Peraonon plr.nton und
zunrnacn-rboitctcn. Binoo t-ollto zu Dorian klc.rsostollt
uerdon. Jedos Experiaont 3tclltw An und fuor eich sclbot
oino vorbrochoriecho Vcrachaoorun^ d?-r. Koinoo vnxrdo von
oinen clnzclnon rro.nachon ent-.\orfcn und rua^ofuchrt. Jodoo
erfordorte die Benuotaw^on oinor Anrahl von Ljuten und
dio Zuerjaaonerboit vcrcchiedcnor Eionetctcllen. So opiiltc
in den ?lockfiobcrver3Uchon in 3uchon-.rld d-a Smitnots-
vrcecn dos Kcoroo, dor luftr.nffc und dor SS c.-cntlich cino
v.ichti^o Rollo. Deo ilr.ss dor Scbuld aolchcr An£ckl,~rtcr
v.io Hand loser, Schrocdcr, Hose, Ponaken, : ru^ov.sky, Popuon-
dick und Hovon ont3pricht dcr Goerjatsurzio dor dort voruobt


- 27 -


(Soitc 19 des Ori.~in~.ls, Ports.)


"crbrcchcn. Dieoc Vcrauckc vir.ron tctoaechXich oin fort-
jcsotsos Vcrbrcchon, zn dcncr. dlo cinon bodoutanaon An-
toil hr.ttcn. Dcr An£cklr;:tc Rose, zun Doiepiol, lcitoto
poroocnlich in August 1942 und Ifccrz 1944 in Buohonvnld
Vcroucho cin, dio don i'od von sohr. Pcrconon zur Polijo iir.t;.
Abor or iat sloiclicrnr.aoon dco ‘lords nchrcrcr hundort
nndcrorOpfor schuldij, dc or nr. den jcaoir.srnon Unlor-
nclinon toila-.hc und os i'oerdorto.

Sonit otoht unlcujbrr fast, dr.oo jeder Vcrauch par cc
cine klcinc Voreobcocrun. bildeto, und jedor Toilnohnor
drrin nueo fucs* dio Caomtsunao dor in eomar Auofuchrunc
bo.-rnjonor Vorbrochcn r.la vormcr.ortlich b-zcichnct
\:crdon. Jo iot Jodoch obonoo kl^r, d-'oo dioso vorbrochcri-
ochin Konplotto aich uobcrschnittcn und zu cinon croooon
joniino-nen i?l~n vorachnolzon. Dioao Vcrbrochon \nxrdon
oyoton-tlooh und in Vorfolc oinor lolitik vcruobt, dio
von don fuchrsndon l.-.onncrn doa doutschon S~nit~.otov;cBcnc
foot^olcjt *-r, r.clcho dio Durcttfuohrun., hoochct ,;c-
fnohrlichcr Vorsuchc cn lionschon ohna Ucron Suotinnunj
bof'hlon und billijton. Dor inncrc Zuornaenh'n,

(Scito 20 dco Orijin~lo)

und dio juiaoinsrne Grundlr^o dioecr Vorbrochcn \.ird durch
cinen oinfr.ohon chronolo^icchcn Aucckblick ochnrf bc-
louchtct. Dlo orcion Anf-enjo dos Irojrrnnc ^ohen ruf
don :.ri 1941 suruock, rlo dor Hauptarjin dor Luftv.r.ffo
r..-8chor, ait Hilfo und Untcratuotzunj doe An^cklajtcn
•*oltz und cinos Aosietenten n-nons Soitendorf, Kinnlor
Vorschlr.c^o fucr die Voraondunj von Hncftlinjon fucr Hocho


(Scitc 20 dcs Originals, Forts.)

vcrsucho untortrcitctc, die, uic or rngeb, eo gcfzchrliefc

scion, dnsB "sich nicnnnd frciuillig coldoto". In Do-

sonber 1541, r.ls nnn fucr don Jinfall dor ichrnr.cht in

baton Flcckfiebcriapfctoffe banoctigtc, kan dor Angoklngtc

ILajuiloaor, ala Inspokteur dcs Smitzctsucoons dos Hocror,

nit Conti, dcu Str.atnookrctncr fucr d-c Gesundhoits-

*..oson und Urugousky, den Uncorjcboncn dco Angcklagten

Gonckcn und Loiter doo Hygiene-Institutes dor T-.ffor.-SS

sutamaon und tr-f dio grundorctslicko Jntaclicidung fucr

dio Srprobung von Plcckfiafccr-Inpstoffcn durch Monschon-

voroucho. i>*o Srgobnia r.«r, daaa un dio Jzhroouondo

dio vorbrochorischcn ricckficbor-Yerouckc, dio nehroren

hundort J.onoohcn dr.o ■‘'ebon konten oolltcn, in Buohonu-.ld

*

in Go.ngc ;.~ron. Dr. Schilling v.urdo ir. Pobrunr 1942

duroh Contia Vornittlun^ nit “ilonochcn-IIatOrinl" fucr

llr.lnrinvcroucho in Dr.chr.u vorsorgt, und dio Angoklr.gton

Huff und Ronborg voir don in ;leichcr. l-Sonrt und cn gloichon

Ort Pretner von Racchor und /oltz in dor. Yodostrnz.

In VjX 1942 hiolt dor Angoklngto Rostock nuf dcr Trgung

dor borntondon /.crate dor 7chrnrcht cinon Vortr-g uobor

dio os ho T’other- ’outiocho Bohandlung von Vundinfoktionon,

inub ooondcro nit Sulfonanidon. lucn-Zundvierzig Tago

cprotor bogann dor An okl gto Gobbardt, angcc->ornt durch

trcii\on YorluQv. dcs "ilcnkora* loydrich, ccinc Sulfonaaid-

Vorsuehe in Ravenabrucck, untoratuotzt durch die Angc-

klcgton Piachcr und Oborhcuocr und ait tilfo dor Tund-

br.andkulturjn, die von .enzkon und I.augov.cky geliefort

vrurdon. Ontor dor Loitun. von rcoitc l'andcn zu :lcichor
2cit in D-chru bogieitende Vorsuchc zur grarobung dor bio-
choniechon Dchr.ndlun^ dor Sepals str.tt, die nittcls 3iior-
Injokttion hcrvorgoxaifoii vurdo.


- 29 -


(Scitc 21 dcs Originals)

In August 1942, cla dca Blut dor ir. don Untordruckknnnom
aoziorten Hc.oftlin-o kcun sotrocknct v.nr, ortoilte dac
Sanitnotauoaon dor Luftv.nffo ca Ilolzloohnor, Pinko und
Hcaohor don Ucfohl, ICr.oltovoreucho durchzufuchrcn, un
dio k irksrnaton Itittol fu-r die 3ohandlung langtrahrondcr
Untorkuchlunj foctzustcllon. Iu Uovonbcr 1942 bogr.nn
Aucuat Kirt, ur.tcr dov £o~io dos kurs vorhor jegruondotor
fcfilitr.cr icoonech ftlichon Forschuncitinetituts dee Ahnon-
erbos, dr.a von dou joviescnlosen Sievors golcitot v.urdc,
acino noordcricc .on “ktovormichc, nit Ailfo und Untor-
stuotzunj Wionorn, oinoo brnitactao Victors dor Luftwaffe
In Zuornnonhcnj nit diooon Vorouchon cchrlcb dor An-o-
klc.jto Sievors, dor zur jlcichcn Zoit den rcibunjaloaon
»'ort :-n; dor tr.lr.rir.- und iCr.altovcrbrochon uoborr;rchtc,
r.n Rudolf urrndt, v.io erboet or uobor die Anro,.un ooi,
die bojmcornanortoa Opfor zu bocchloa. Hilfaboroit,uio
or nun nr.l .r.r, br-.chto Rrrndt d^o Sr.cho sofort nit Obor-
Ctrupponfuchror Fohl, e'en Vom-ltun-ochof dcr Konscr.-
trrtionolrgor, in Ordnunj.

Diooc Yorbrochcr. v.urdcr. nicht in Zujc oinf-chor
r.iooonach-ftlichcr Boctrobuncon bcjr.nccn, v.io dio3 bci
oini ;cn dor "Fold-, V7'ld- und 7iOBon-CkrroJctor" trr^ondo
Spiel-rt in dor Grunpe dor Consentrationale:or-groucl-
tr.tor. dcr P'll v-J. In Oktober 1942 nrbncn die Angokln.-t
Jeekor-Proyoin,-, Ruff, Ror.ber.j, tjoo, Sch-'.ofor und 7oltz
zuj-nnon nit otr..- ICO Vortrotem uos _oamton doutechor.
Srnit.-’otav.oaona an cinen jroaaca Czcltc-Ifonjrcsa ir.
i.ucrnborj toil. Dio t.urdo von Anthony unu den Ar-

Ccklajfccn Bookor-Fr- eonj fucr die Du tvrffc v crenatr.lt e
Schroibcr f cincr der orston Untcr-cbcncn Icndlosora, uar


- 30 -


(ScitG 21 tics Originals, Ports.)

an':cBond. Holzlochnor und Rpscfcor cvstcttoton Ecricht uobcr
thro Kacltovorsuchc und os surds ^oden, dor hocrcn viollto,
!4*.r gcarcht, daas Kor.zcntrptionslcger-Inspcscn ole VcrsuchE-
porsonon vorsondot wurdon und dess Todccfrollo vorjekonner.
vrr.ron. Schrcibcr cratattcto ru^cnschoiriltfc acinon Chof
Handloacr cincn solch bogeiaterten Bcricht, daaa Holzloohr.cr
zu cinor , 7icdorho?unj'"anlac83lici' , Jcr‘B^citon Oat-Sit-unj
dor Borntondon .‘.crzto dor ~chrnncht in Dezeubor 1942 auf-
£C*ordort vrurdo. Krndlosor hoorto diconr.l don Vortrag
porcoonlich an. Bel dioaor ; lei chon Sitzunj v.urdo Din,:: von
ooinen Vorgoe^tsten lirujor.aky nuf Voranlcoaun ■ von Hond-
loooro Ir.knion Schrcibcr und Million engev.ioecn, nohroron
Inoaeecn Buchonurlda cino im.r'-vonccoo Ifcsio Phenol oin-
suspritzon und uobor dio kliniachon Sincelheitcr. dor oich
or;;cbondon Todoefcollo zu boriohton. Dioso Horren v.r.rcn
uobor Ecobrchtun;cn, nonceh cinigc ihror Sol dr. ton nr.eh Sir.*
apritzunj oinoo Gr.o-Oodoc-Scruno jeotorber. r.nron, bounruhigl
und Kuonaehton fcatzuotollcn, ob dio SJodcof~ollo durch
don Phonolijohr.lt vcrurs-.cht ;.ordon v rcn.

:.uf dor dritton Sitsunj dor borrtontlon ;.orzto in
Ilr.i 1943 borichtoto Gebherdt dor ehirurjiochon Abtoilung
uobor ooino Vor3ucho. Rostock otcllto dre Progrann zu-
sccuon und fui.hrto don Vcrcitz, v.' ircnd. JCarl Brandt und
Ken dio-or dio Bhronplaotzc oinnnhncn. 'Jas aio hoerton, vrr
fitor sio koino Kobcrrasciiun-. Gcbhrrdt und PiGchor -abon
oinon vollotpondijon E-richt uobcr die Sulfonrcid-Vcr-
suchc bie an t don lotztcn Todosf-ll. C rdt sar dcrsrt
bcnuoht, seino Schuld zu verringorn, <I-ce or don Gcricht
jegenuebor die Veils tr.ondi_:kcit ihros 3crichtc3 botontc.

Dico brr.ctito seine Vor~~oa_;cr ~uf den Zougcnst''nd, dio


- 31 -


(Seitc 22 dos Cri ;in-.ls, Ports.)
jcns sichor won, dr 30 nichts uobor knonetlicho Infection
odor Todeafr.cllo j-sn-t v.oraon tar, cinijcraas3on in Vor-
locionhoit. :&rl Trrndt hrtto dicoo Sit sun. kaun vorlr.sson,
ale or nit Gr-»itz Abnr.chunjcn tr-f, Ir.srtscn aus den Kon-
scntrctlonalc^or Sr.chaonhauscn fuor dio Bpidcclacho Solb-
aucht-Vcrsuche zu bcachnffcn, dio von Dohnen, olnon Sani-
tectaoffizi^r do 3 Hcorcs untor Eondlo 3 or, durchjcfuohrt
•urdon. Dicac Krr.nkhcit vcrurar.chtc bci don Binhoiton dor
7ohrar.cht in Ooton bis zu 60 ^ Ausi'callc.

Auf dor -loichcn Vorcrnnlunj hiclt Bin^ voji dor
Abteiluns Ilyjiono dnon Vortrp£ uober ooinc nocrdoriochcn
i’lockfiobor-Vcrmicho in Dnohon’ ^Id. Schroibcr hnttc don
Voroitz, und dio Anccklc ton Heco and llruccvsaky wr.ron ©n-
v:ooond, cbonuo • io Hnr.jou, dor Plockiisber-Spczivliut dor
Luftvaffo, dcr, niido^ozrjt^n^do^^rfirhpit aoutoorot a -
in;, - it or vo. oca Gcricht . uacrjtc. So lot
koine Prr-c, dr.oa Boso echr.rfo Bcdonken jejen dioson Bo-
rioht joltond enchto, obr.ohl ncino Prudtre ur.d opr.otoro
tlrltun.; koinon Zvoifol drruobor lr.oaot, dr.SB diooo nohr
r.ur v.ioaonoch-ftlichon -.In nomlioekon .mention beruhton.
.’.ui’ Jed. ill, p.8 Din.- rocht tar, car Sen fon billifi. in
dioaon :;loichon Konnt bojann or in Lonsontrrtionolr. or
Sohirneck ait ilfo und Un tors tact sun j ?.ooea und dea Luft-
v. r.ffen-Sr* n 1 tcotnv. 0 sor.o nit ceinon ei oner. ?leckfieber-Inpf-
otoXfver3U.chen, :.u Breebnio aeren innorhnXb von 30 Tr.-cn
hero its n*ei Inarsoer. jeotorben. In tlerbat 1943 verlo^te
•Icemen seine Tzetijkeit in dr a jxoessero le^or Hat toiler,
vro or unter der Loitiuii; doo Ar. eklrv; tor. Schroeder aein
vorbrecherischeo Vork bit sun Speetsonnor 1944 fortsotzto.


- 32 -


(Seite 23 des Originals, Ports.)

In Herb at 1943 untern^hn Horl Brandt r.la Generrikonnia-
sar fuer das S&nitnets- und Gesundheitsr.eaen die persoon-
liche Foerderung der Phosgengr.s-Yersuche 3ickenbrcha, der
i'ruohor nit Hirt r.n Haoftlingen cuo Hatzneiler gcarbeitot
he te. Die .ohrar.cht oar dieaer. Versuchon ebonfrlla
intere3Ble2*t. Brandt erhielt v.ait^chende Vollnrchten euf
don Gcbicte der cheniachon Kriogsfuehrunj durch einon Fuohror-
orlass von 1. Haora 1944. Shrzc Zoit drrzuf konferiorto or
uit den Angeklngten Siovors und Hirt uobor die Hr.tzwoiler-
Voroucho. Er vcroorgte -iokonbrch,dor bis Soptonber 1944
vicr ruooiacho Kriocsgefangeno err.ordct hat to jporoocr.lich
nit Lr.borntoriuno- inrichtunjon.

In Juni 1944 loitoto dor Angoklagto Schroodor poroocn-
lich und nit Hilfo soinor Untorgobenon Bcoker-Proysonc und
Schr.ofor $l-ono finr dio Keomcesor-Vorsttcho oin. In einon
Schroibon, Ana or durch Crroits rn Kinalor richtotc und in
den or un "40 a sun. c Vcrouchopuraonon" fuor Voroucho br.t,
von donen or wuooto, d-.oo ole vj-.hrochcinlich cit Todec-
foollon oonden i.uordon, nag to orj

(Soito 24 do8 Originaln)

"Sic h>ton co boroito fruehcr dor Luftv.rffo urnoeglicht,
drin,ondc nodiziniochc Angologonheiton nittols Voroucho rn
iIon«bchcn zu orlcdi.or.." Er ochloo3 nit don . orten: "Da von
i'Cuohcrcn Yorsuchon her bu!:-nnt lot, droa in Konzontrntiono-
Irgor Dachau dio notvondlgcn Irborntorion vorh-nden sind,
v.uordo dioooo lager ochr jeeignet a.in.* 1 ) Dor Anjoklrgto
Boiglboock nahn an der Vcrachr.ocrun; toil und fuohrtc dio
Voroucho durch.

In .3 uni 1944 war do von don Ar.gokln- ten Hcr.dlooor in
Broslru. ^inc Booprochun^ zun Zv.ccko aincr Zuocnnonfasaun- der

1) HQ-135, Anil. Bo;;. 134, B. 483.


- 33 -


(Soito 24 dcs Origlnr.lBi Torts.)
Gclbaucht-Por3chun 0 * onbcraunt. Gclbsucht-Spezialistcn
cue niien Zweiccn dor Vehrnccht, drrur.ter HP "gen, v.crcn
anuoaond, und Hrndlosors Untcrgabencr Schreibcr fuohrto
den Vorsitz. Ba t.urdcn Ycreuchc nn ucnschlichen Objokton
boeurcchcr., uni oinijo weehon spr.otor bo.-'.nnon Hr agon u .d
droi rniiero Offiaicro dor Luftv.-ffo, Tlrcno fuor Vcr¬
euchc nn Mcnschcn in “Strr.soburs odor Uajobung" - cin
offonsiohtlichor Him; - «f Hntzroilor - vorsubcrciton.
D-.ao r.uf dor Broolr.ucr Konforcns Vo roue he rn Konzen-
trrtionalnGor-Insr.scon bosprochwn vurdon, gcht nus dor
Tr.tsr.obo klcr hervor, dr.ao behroiber ainijo Zoit spr.otor
pcrooonlich nn Lrujov.ak;. dia Bivto riohtoto, Hroftlinjo
cue Buohonvir.ld fuor Oolboucht-Vcraucho vonsoiton Dr.

Drcxl zur Vorffcogunc zu etalien.

Die vorstchondo chronologi3cho Dcrlogung oinigor
dor Vorauchc, obnohl unvollotr.cn dig, -onuogt, un zu
zoigon, d-oe oin oyatooctiaohos und gcochloocanon Prosrccs
vorlcj, v. ole ho a nadiziniccho Vorauchc nn Sonzontrrt iona-
lrjor-Rhcftlin^on ohna doren duotinnunj in rich oin-
achlooa. Die Anfordcrun cn -n dl. Sc auf lioforung nonocli-
lichor "Vorouchakrnine her." h-tton oinon oolchon Unfnnj
cn.ononncn, dr 03 von liinnler in lir.i 1544 cine Zcntr-le
Auojloichsst. il. .ir jorichtot vuru., Dcr In kl&gto
Ccbhrrdt ncuosoi’tc aich uober die nedisinisoho Notv.andij-
koit dee vorgcachlajencn Vo roue bn, t.jkrcnd Gluocko und
Hobo bci Jor Aum.nhl dor '.’cihcopfer “Is Vnlkuor-n fungicr-
ton. Eo: in An just 1942 cur do dio


- 54 -


■


■


(Soito 25 doa Originals}

kripeawiasonachaftlicho forachuR^ doa Ahnonorboa ur.tor
Siovors gcachaffon, un ..uaruoatung, Gofangono and vcxval-
tungstochniacho Hilfo fucr Voraucho, an donon Hlcsslor bo-
aondora intoroaalort war, zu boachaffon und zu finanzioron.
DIoaoa vorbrcchcriacho rrogram loitoto aich aua zwoi Haupt-
quollon hor. Hlnnlor, ala Fuohror dor SS, atcllto ungo-
zaohlto Op for fuor dlo Voraucho zur Vorfuegun3 und gowann
dar.lt nouon .cuhr und ncuo Kacht fuor aoino vcrbrcchorlaoho
Organisation. Dlo fuohrondon kaonnor doa doutachon nil!-
taoriachon und zivllon Sanltaotawoaona ala zwoi to trolborxlo
Kraft, orgrlffon ruockalchtaloa dlo aich ihnon bioteixio
Gclogonhoit und untorbroitoton lhro wiaaonachaftlichon *ro-
blono zur Iooaung in don Konzontrationala^om. JCorl Drandt,
Handloaor, Schroibor, Hipplto, Sohroodor, Conti und lhro
Untorgobonon und andoro warun dlo wiaaonachaftlichon Triob-
kraofto. Rudolf Drandt und 3iovora aotzton Kirsnlora Gonoh-
ri-una zur Stollung dor Opfor in dlo Tat un, und alo lonkton
don Vorwaltungaapporat. Lio fuohrondon SS-Kodizincr
Grawltz, Gonzlcon, Gobhardt, lj*usowak;- und xoppondick sabon
ihron Untorgobonon wio Ding, hovon und Flachor dlo nootigon
Anwoiaungon urri half on bol dor usfu«,hrung dor Vorbrochon.
Brandt, Bloreo 'and Schroibor lolatoton flnanziollo Hilfo
durch don rfoichsforsohungarat, dor oinc Vorwondung von
Roiohamittoln fuor dlo -%uawoltung doa 3S-Scnitaotawoaon8
auf C-rund dor Tataacha gonohnigto, daaa oa r.onachllchoa
"Vorauchanatorlal" zur Vorfuogung hatto. doatook, ala Chof
doa -ntos fuor Wiaaonachaft und Forachung, botolchnoto dlo
vorbroohoriacho Forachungaarboit von Klrt, Eoagon uni
Dickonbach ala ‘'dringond".- Dio '..'ohrracht atoUto i^ufaichta-
poraonal und tochniaoho Hilfadttol fuor Jono Voraucho zur


- 35 -


Vorfuogung, an dor— n aio boaordora infcoroasiort war. Sino
Untordruckkarzior wuido fucr dio HoohonvGraucho, dlo Dionato
von V/oltz, .Huff, Rosborg, .laachor, holzloohnor und Pinko
fuor dio Eobhon- und Kaolto-Grouol und dlo von Sockor-
Froyaong, Scliaofor und Dciglboock fuor dio Soowaaaorvoraucho
zur Vorfuogung joatcllt. Roao jin~ in dcr Luftncffon-Flock-
floboratation in Buchonwcld cin und aua und uoborprucfto
dio ..rboiton Hoagona in Schircock und Katzwoilor. lilt Hilfo
von Schroibor, Syor und Scheldt

(Soitc 26 doa Originals)

bohlolt Ilandloaor dio ..rboiton Dinja Its .'.ugo und voraorgto
ihn mit Icpfatoffon uni flockfioborinfisicrtcn Laouaon. 2r
aorgto Uafuor, dnaa dio brauchbaron Srgobniaao dor Vorbro-
chon aoinon Boratondon ..orzton borichtot und ar. dlo Vi'otarnaoht
woitorgogobon wurdon.

Dioa xicx dio toufliacho Droioiniglcoit; dica dor gonoin-
aoeo Plan. 2a war gloich oinon ricaonhafton .lagonrad, doa-
aon Spoiohon dio Vcraucho waron, dio in dor j.onoinaajnon Habo
dor 3S zuaaixionliofon, woloho dio Opfor atollto, und alio
vorbundon duroh dlo Rich tl in ion und dio oofohlo dor fuohron-
don Ilaonnor doa doutachon Sanltaotawoaona, dio don ./agonrad-
kronz bildoton. Obachon dio -n^oklagton daa 3oatohcn oinoa
gocioinaonon Plano a und ihro Toilnehno daren lougnon, vor-
atoolcon aio aich trotzdon widoraprochondorwoiao hintor dor
ataatliohon a Gonohni3un: B dor Voraucho. Dor *ngoklagto Roao,
duroh von aoinor oigonon *.ond atomondoa Bowoianatorlal dor
Toilnahmo an don Plookfioborvorbrochon in Buchonwald uobor-
fuohrt, sang glolchacn folgondon Schwonongoaong, ala or
aagto*

’’Dioaca Inatltut wurdo von Staata wogon in
Boutachlcnd oingorichtot, gonohnlgt und von
ihn godookt. Dae ala war ieh in oincr lago,
dio non viollolcht dor oinoa Juriston vor-


- 36 _


gloichon kann, dcr violloicht in Grundc cin
grundaaGtzlichor Gogncr dcr Uinrichtung und
Todoaatrcfo 1 st. Bonn or cuf Hongrosacn
odor Veraondungon nit fuchrordon ikicnncrn
dor Rogicrung odor rr.it Juris ten zu tun hat,
wird or clloa in aoinor fcacht atohendo tun,
un aoino Uoinuns hioruobor zu vortroton um
durchzusotzon. ifonn ihn dies Jodoch nicht
gollngt, bloibt or doanoch in aoinon .*nt
und in aoinor Ungobung. Und obachon or in
Grundo oin Gognor diosor Einriohtung ist,
kann 03 vorkorr.on, daaa or aolbor oin aol-
choa Todoaurtoil auazuaprochon rozwun-xn
iat." 1)

Gobhardt hat bozougt, daaa Kitlor daa Zxporinontioron
an Ilonzontrationalagorlnaaaaon gobilligt hat. 2 r hat zugo-
gobon, daaa dioao Veraucho ohno Gonohnigung von "obon"
nioht untornomon wordon waoron. Sogor Hinclor voratockto
aioh hintor hitlor. tohr bohauptot dio Stoataonwaltachof t
nioht. Dioao x-olitlk ayatocatiachor Voraucho on unfroiwil-
Xigon Objokton wurdo von don -cigoklagton und ihron Holforn
Coplant und auacofuohrt.


1) Protokoll, Soito 6467.

(Soito 27 doa Origlnala )

So alao orboitoto dca Sanltaotawoaon in Dr it ton Itoioh.
2a kann lcoinon Zwoifol untorliogon, daaa dioa nicht vor-
aohiodon goartuto und unzuaarronhaongonio Vorbiochon
woron. Sio haongon zucarrxm ala auagoaprochono Voraohwoo-
rung. Jodoa oinzolno Exporinont bokraoftigto dio vorhor-
GOhordon und voronlaaato dio naohfolgondon. rfolcho inaicht
dor Oorichtahof auoh uobor dio Euataondigkeit hobon nag,
dio Tataacho dor Vorachwoorung atoht foat. Da in runkt I
dor «nlclagoaohrlft dio boaohuldigung dor Vorachwoorung or-
hobon wordon iat, iat oa wiohtlg zu wiaaor., waa untor
‘'Vorachwoorung' 1 zu vor3tohon usd zu boatrafon 1st. Juatico
Jackaon aagto in aoinon Schluaawort vor doc Internationalon
Hilit ao rgoricht aho 1 1


- 37 -


"->oi dor Vcrachwoorun- boatrafcn wir koinon
Kann fuor dio Vcrbrochcn oinoa andoron. V/lr
vorauchon oinon jodon fuor aoinon ciGonor.

Antoil on oir.or. £oncinsanon rlan, an don
auch ondoro botcilict v?aron, zu boatrafon.

Dor Kaaaatab fuor don vorbrcchoriachon Cha-
raktor doa rlanoa uni daait dor Schuld
jodoa Toilnohnora or^ibt aich natuorlich
aua dor Goaantaurz:o dor von allon Toil-
nohmorn tci dor ^uafuohrunc dos rlanoa
voruobton Vorbroohon. Abor dcr Kern doa
Vorbrochona lat die Toilnohno an dor ..ua-
arboltunc odor ^uafuohrunj dca rlanoa.

Daa a ini Grurdaaotzo, dio Jodo Gosollachafta-
ordnunc fuor notwondi^ bofunion hat, un
Kaonnor bolangon zu koonnon .... dio
2war thro ol^onon Soondo nio nit Blut bo-
flocktcn, wohl abor Jlaono achmiodoton,
dio zu .ilutvor^lcaaon fuohrton. Kouto
wordon in canz Doutachland. In joior 3o-
aataungazono, dio kloinon Louto, dio dloao
vorbrochorlacho folitik auf Jofohl aua-
fuohrton, vorurtollt und boatraft. 2a
wuordo oino uncohouorlicho und unverzoih-
licho Vorzorrunc dor Gorochti^lcoit bodou-
ton, wonn dio Kaonnor, dio dioao .olitlk
pianton und iioao kloinon Louto anfuohr-
ton, joior Doatrofunc; ontgohon aollton." 1 )

Da 3ohoort zun ./oaon doa Vorbrochona dor Vorachwoorunc,
daaa zv/oi odor nohr roraonon aich in dor Abaicht und zun,
Swoclc dor. uo^ohunj oinoa Dolikta durch Vornohno oinor un-
goaotzlichon -andlunj al or dirch Vornohno oinor goaotzilch
orlaubton Han-Hung auf unGoaotzlioho noiao zuaanr.ontun und
vorbuondon. Dor Dowoia hiurfucr kann durch unmlttol-
baroa Dowoianotorial orbraoht wordon, kann abor auch aua
dor Vomchno von tataaochlichon Kondlungon gofolgcrt wordon.
3a jonuogt, daaa die Oodankon dor Botoiligton aich zu3a:nnon-
findon und voroinon in Sinvorataondnla zu don r*lano, oin
Gomoinaanoa iJiol zu orroichon, was durch natoriolloa Bo-
v/olaratorial odor durch Schlusafolgorungon aua Tataachon
nachgowloaon wordon kann, aua donon natuorlich horvorgoht,
daaa dio Tathandlun-or. sur Foordorung oinca gonolnaonon
i'lanoa und Zwockoa und oln<r gonoinaonan -baicht goachahan.
Dcr gonoinaono rlan iat daa Woaontlicho dua Vorbrochona,
und or kann ala vollzogon goiter., wonn dio Botolli :ton


1) I.K.T. rrotokoll, Soito 1-.370.

- 38 -


S^ite 28 cles Ori^ir^ls

fortlaufond daaaolbo Zlol vorfol-or.. antwcdor oinzoln odor
_,o«oinaan nit 3lolchon odor vorschioionarticon Kittoln, dio
abor itcor zu doa £lolchon uncosot*11 chon Srcobnia fuchron,
./onn oinor odor rahroro dor Vorachnooror oino offono Erhlao-


rurv; ab-obor. und dio and or on daraufhln durch Worto odor
Taton sio bofoljon, so 1st ihro Vorantwortlichkoit vollhoo-
non urd ihro Schuld hiorboi orwioaon, donn sio aind od hoc


Llitschuldiro an don Vorbrochon jowordon. Dio Vorschwooror
brauchon woclor si oh coconaoitic odor dor. .mtoil dor ar.doron
a^ don i : lan nooh in dor Tat dio 3in*olhoiton dos rlonoa
'.bat zu 1 conn on. hr nac violloicht nur soinon cJc° non


.1 Iconnon. uioa ;onuoct, worm oin wisaor.tlichor ooltrac
zun Ganzon colciatot wird. Ss 1st conus, dass dor oinzolno
Konntnia von don co«Jinaancn Zwoclc hot und sloh oinfuo~t.
Jodor 1st fuor alio zua Zwock dor Pourdorunc dor Ziolo dor
Vorachwoorun;; und v/aohrond ihroa Costohons bocan.;onon licnd-
luncon vorantwortllch. Sobald aioh Jcnand oinor Voraohwoo-
runc onaohlioast, holsst or 4or.it alios ;ut, was vorhor von
Jodo.n dor andcron bo cannon wordon 1st. 1 )

Solbat wonn das Goricht ontachoidot, dass Vorschwoorun-
jon zur Voruobunc von hr ioc.a vorbrochon odor von Vorbrochon
cocon dio Lonaohllchkolt nioht aoinor Zuataondijkoit untor-
liocon, jilt aolbatvorstaondlich das uobor coaoinaano i.b-
sioht cdor l/oraohwoorunj Gosacto. Gosctz Hr. 10, ^rtikol


II, hbsatz 2 lautot tollwolac wio fol^ti

B Ohno ituocksicht ajf soino 5taatsan',ohoorijlcoit
odor dio hiconschaft, in dor cr hondolto,
wird oino a Vorbruchona nach has a ;abo von «iffor
1 dioaos ^rtikola fuor 3chuldic orachtot, wor
(a) ala Tauter, odor (b) ala ooiholfor boi dor
Z>0£Qhunc oir.c.3 aolchon Vorbrochor.a Bitgowirlct
odor oa bofohlon odor bojuonstijt odor (c)
durch a oino Zuatlnnunj dor on toilcononuon hat
cdor (d) r.it aolnor Plonua: odor .%uafuohrun.:
in -uaanrtonhonc Rostandon hat odor (o) oinor
Organisation cdor V>roini£\mg an~ohoort hat,
dio nit dloaor ^uafucfcrunc in Zusamonhanj
3tand. n


• •

1) D.S. v. -ordon, 136 ?. (2d), C.C.«.7, certiorari ao ololint#


- 39 -


'./cnn aufib dicaor ^rtikol das .ort


(Soito 29 d 03 Originals)

•'Vorachwoorunj M odor den -msdruck “soixinaaao ,.baicfct" nicht
bonuotzt, so orkonnt or doch dio atrafrochtlicho Verantwort-
lichkoit Joncr an, dio nr.aa^oblioh nit dor ^ojohiavj oinoa
Vorbrochona in Vorbindunc atandoa, wonn auch dio ci^cntlicho
vorbrochoriacho Eondlun- von oinon andoren auajofuohrt wur-
do. Jono, dio dor Verbindunr sit oinon in don ^ononnton
.>tikol auf^ofuohrton Vorbrcchon uoborfuchrt wordon aind,
raubfcaon auch an don oirontlichon Vorbroohon aolbat fuor
3clLjldij bofundor. wordon, das in dioaon Folio vorzuo^lich
w^r liord iat. Dio Uorknalc oinor atrafrochtlichon Vorar.t-
wortliohkoit oinor roraon, dio "ihro Zuatincun-: -ab zu"
odor “nit rlaonon ursd Untornohnun/on in Vcrblndun^ atond
zv/ooka“ odor “Lit.-llod irrondwolchor Or^aniaation odor
Qruppo war, dio it: Zu3at.«onhan~ atandon nit 1 dor i,o£ohun~
oinoa Vorbroohona, ur.faaaon ^anz offonbar nohr ala dio
horkmalo dor atrafrochtlichon iiaftbarkoit, dio, wio ran
onr.icar.t, boi donon vorliojt, dio aich su olnor vorbrocho-
rlachon Vorachwoorun • suaamontun. ran dahor doa vor-
brochoriacho Sxporimont ior-rro^rarn nun rr.it •’joroainaanon
x Inn 11 , “Vorachwooruxv;” odor olnfach nit “xlan und Untor-
nohnun^ 11 bozoichncn na.’, ao ruoason dio «njokla(jton, dio
an aoinor ^uafuohrunj orxinaoc. botoili^t woron, dor Go-
3antaujx;o dor voruobton Vorbroohon fue»r anhul-it.^ bof'>rvW.
wordon.


- 40 -


(Scito 30 dca Originals)


pis vaiL'j;rvc.iTLicna: ^zs ozsnp g iTScrass js^.

An;;oa ichta dca kloron und ucborwaolti jondon Dowoiana-
toriala kann nur dor Schluaa £;ozo”on worion, daaa dio Go-
wchnhoit, an I.onxontrationala^orhaoftlinjon ohno doron bu¬
st innun £ Voraucho vorzunohnon, oin or^or.iaiortoa und ayato-
natiaohoa irro^roan war. £a iat doaholb aroonoaaen, aich zu
uoborlojon, ob wir dio Loiter doa doutachor. oanitaotawoaona,
«hno dio dioao Vorbrochon nicht noo^lioh jowoaon waoron,
auk dioaor hnklac;obank habon. 3a wuondc oin unvorzoihlichor
Ju.miairrtun aoln, dio .»orzto, dio in don lionzontrationa-
ifororn an don Opfcm arboitoton, zu boatrafon, wa^hroni
ihro Vorjoootzton - dio Loiter, Orjaniaatoron and «natif-
tor - froi auasin^on. 3a iat unboatritton feat -.oatollt
v/ordon, daaa aich dioao Dinco o’.rno Dockun . ven obon nicht
haotton oroi;;non koonnon. bor waron nan dioao llnonnor an
dor Spitzo? Dio noch lobon, aitzon alio ait oinor ..uanahno
auf dioaor hnkla^obonk.

Dor rlatz Nr. 1 wlrd von don An^oklepton ->rondt
oin^onoanon. br boaaaa dio hoochato ..utoritaot uobor daa
Coaouto San it aot a wo a on in Deutschland, das r.ilitaoriacho
aowohl v/io auch da3 zivilo. 2r trat dor ..SDat ir. Jonur-r
1032 und in Jahro 153-. dor S3 boi, in dor or bia zuu 3ans
olnoa QrupponXuohrora aufatio£. la dio son Jokro - in Altor
von 30 Johron - wurdo or oolf -litlor3 bohondolnuor «rzt
-and bohiolt dioao Stollun: bl3 zun Ja’iro 1045. Solno on~o
poraoonlicho boziohun; zun F^iohror orklaort aoinon achnol-
lon ..ufatio£ zur fcneht. Ar. 7cco doa E inf alia in idon in
Jahro 1930 bofahl Hitlor Brandt und ihillpp Douhlor, don
Chof dor Fuohrorkonzloi, dr.a ao^onannto Suthanaaiopro jram
durchzufuohron.


.'.bjoaohcr. von soinon porsoonlichon Sinfluss und a o in on
vcrtrauton Vorhacltnia zu Hitlor, ruohrt -ran-1 3 -roosato
lAcht in don Sanitaotavvoaon von aoinor Stelluns als Gonoral-
korr.i3snr und apaotor Hoicfcakoaoiaaar dos Goaundhoits- ur.d
Sanitaotav/oa or.a hor. «la Er~obnia doa vcrhaon;nia vollon
.Yintorfoldzu^oa in Oaton in Jahro 1941


(Soito 31 doa Orifinala)

aotzto Hit lor zun uraton Jnlo duroh dio Vorordr.un: vor.: 23.
Juli 1042 oinon Goaundholta- und oanitautaboanton untor
aoinor diroicton Kontrollo oin. Dioao Vorordnuna :ab Brandt
dio hoochato Gowalt uobor don 30 azon Sanltaotadioaat in
Doutachland. Sic lr.utoto in Toilon wio fol;t;

"3. Fuor SondorauT^abon und Vorhondlunran zun
Aua-loioh dca Bodorfa on *orzton, Krr.n!con-
haouaom, Kodlkoaonton uaw. zvlaohcr. don
nilitaorlachon und dor. zivilon Soktor doa
Sar.itaota- ur.d Goaunuhoitatoaona bovollraoch-
tijo ioh x'rofoaaor Dr. nod* ..arl -rondt, dor
nur nir poraoonllch untoratollt 1 st und von
nir unnlttolbar V«oiaur.;on orbaolt.

•i. Moin wovollraochtijtor fuor daa Sanitaota-
und Ouaundhoitawoaon iat uobor rur.daaotzll-
cho Vor:aonjo in .lohmaohtaaaonitaotawoaon
urvl zivilon Goaundhoitawoaon laufond zu ur.-
torrichton. Sr iat boroohti-t, aioh voront-
wortlioh oinzuachalton. B 1 )

Ira aol’oon Brlaaa wurdon auoh dio Chofa fuor daa tfohr-
nachtaaonltaotawoaon urvl daa zivilo Goaundholtaroaon bo-
atollt. Dor ^n^okla^to rlandloaor wurdo dor Chof doa Viohr-
mohtaaaonitaotawoaona, waohrond Dr. Loonai\lo Conti, Stor.ta-
aokrotaor fuor Gcaundhoit und Hoicha^oaundhoitafuohror, zun
Chof doa zivilon OoaunUioita-woaona orncnnt wurdo. orandt
war dor Vor^oaotsto aowohl vor. liardloaor ala r.ucfc von Oonti,
und Iiatto durch aio uobor daa Scnitaotavoaor. dor ..moo, dor
Karino, dor Luftwaffo, dor uaffo:.-33 und daa zivilo Goaund-
holtavvoaon aua ;odobnto i'.achtbofuGniaao. -randt atand an


1) iiO-OBO, dakl.-<ow. 5, R. 93.


- 42 -


dor Spitzo dor Kachtpyranido. dr war aicaandon c .la don
Puohror untor-oorinot. ar war dor i znn, dcr fuor don Fuohror
in naiiziniachon Dln^on handolto. Dio Vorordnun- ornaooh-
ti"to Drcndt "aich vorantwortlich oinzuachalton" und ~ab ~n-
woiaun", daaa or uobor "^rundaaotzlicho Vor-aonco" 1aufend
zu untorrichtor. aoi. Sichorlich kconnto nichta ^undaaotz-
1 ichor aoin, ala olno Folitik dor Voroahno nodiziniachor
Voraucho, dio dio Poltoruiv: und don Tod unfrolwilli^.or Vor-
auchaporaonon in aich achloaaon.

an 5. Soptonbor 1943 orlioaa liitlor olnon zwoitor. Jr-
14.3a, in doa or Srandt bovollnzochtijto, "zontral dio AuT-
^ jo^jon und Intoroaaon doa 30 a ant on Sanitaota- und Go a und-
hoitawoaona zuaancor.zufcaaon und woiaun^a^oaaoaa zu atou-
orn'«. 2 )

2) U0-081, inkl.Dow. 6, .1.94.

(Soito 32 doa Ori„inala)

Dor Dofohl orklaorto auadruooklioh, daaa aioh -randta
*.utorltaot auch auf daa Gobiot rxxliziniachor wiaaonachaft
und Fora oh un,;; oratrockto. Kurz nach dor Horaua^abo dioaoa
iSrlaaaoa wurdo dor .j\ okla^to doatock von -rondt zun Chof
doa ^ntoa fuor i/iaaonaohaft und ?orachui\; nit 1-achtvollkon-
nonhoit auf dioaon Gobiot omonnt.

Sohlioaalich orhob dor Fuohror an 25. -ujuat 1944 Drandt
zun .loichakomia aar fuor daa Goaundhoit3-und Sonitaotawoaon
und orklaorto, daoa in dioaor Jisonaohaft "aoin ^nt ala
hoochato .toiciiabohoordo zu -olton habo". - randta .*ntastol-
luns war domaeh dor oinoa aoichaniniatora ^loich.joatollt.
dr war omaochti^t, "rfoiamjor. an dio «or.tor und Gr.-aniaa-
tionon doa Staatoa, dor *artoi und dor .tahmncht zu orlaa-
aon, dio aich nit don Fra-on doa 3oauniholt3- und Sanltaota-


- 43 -


v/os or .3 bofr.33on". x ) 2s 1 st klar, class dioaor Jrlasa orjinj,
un oinon Liachtkacpf zwiachon Srandt unci Conti zu boon!on.
Gowi33 jibt dioaor Brins3 Brandt nur oinon ohobonoron Titol
und boatnotijt au*a nouo aoino Vol lnach t, dio or bcroit3
in Juli 19*12 orhalton hatto. Drandt bozou^to, doss or lodi"-
lich aoino Stollun^ “ataorkto". Sinon Dicnatorlaaa, dor von
koitol fuor liandloaor ala don Chof dos Johrnachtaaanitaota-
woaona zu oinor Z*lt, ala .randt nodi Goncralkonciaaar war,
orlaaaon wurdo, boatisiuto, daaa Jiandlosor don "alljonoinon
Vorachrifton doa Oonorolkonniaaara doa Puohrors fuor das
Gotoundhoita- und Sanitaotawoaon" untorwcrfor. aoi, und daaa
( drandt von ''^rundaaotzlic.ion Vorcaonjon” auf don Gobioto
doa wohmaohtasanitaotawosona zu untorrichton aoi. In oinor
vor dor Vorhondlun: ab^o^obonon oidcaatattlichon Srklaorunc
aatJto IlartLlosor aua, daaa, nachdon or ar. 2G. Juli 19*12 Chof
doa ’./ohrmohtaaanltaotawcaona wurdo, "Brandt aoin diroktor
Vor;;oaotztor In nodi zinla chon ~n;.oloconhoiton war". 2)

,i ■ - ■ - — • ■ 1

1) 110-002, .'jil:1.2ow. 7, .1. 95.

2) HO-443, ^nld.Bow. 9, a. S9.

(3-ito 33 doa Oririntla)

3o’.iroodor aa~to aus, "Karl Brandt, ocndloaor und
Rostock truss ton uobor dio von dor Luf twoffo durch;.ofuohr-
ton nodiziniachon Fbraohun aarboiton Doaohoid". X ) i.uaaor
a oinor Stollunc ala Oonorol- und iloichakomiaaor doa Go-
aundlioita- und 3onitcotawoaoas, war 2randt r.uch nooh M.t-
<jliod doa rrao3idialratoa doa .1-ichaforaohun^aratca, oinor
Organisation, dio don vorbrochoriachon 2xporir. onton finon-
ziollo Kilfo lloh.

Don zwoifcon rlats hat dor dnr.okla^to Sand lo a or inno,
dor fuor das Sonitactacoaor. r.llor Zwol^o dor .tohrmcht
dio hocchato intsatollc war. -nfan^a 1912 wurdo or zun

l) 110-4-49, .wilcl.3ow. 130, R. 474.


- 44 -


Hcoroasanitaotalnapcktour uni .urnooarzt ornannt. 2r bokloi-
doto dioao «*or.tcr bis Soptcrbcr 1944 uni hatto in dloaon
Si^onachafton den Obortofohl uobor das joaanto Eocroaaani-
taotav/oaon, das von don .djtoilun^on dos .lOhrnachtsacni-
tc.otawoaona hoi woiton dca r.rooaato war.

(Solto 34 doa Originals)

In aoinor Ji"on3chaft ala dooroaaanitaotainapoktour hatto
Handloaor untor aich* dio ^oratondor. Kocroaaorzto, dio
nilltaor-aoratlloho .Jeodonio, dio riockfiobcr- und Vlrua-

inatituto doa OC* in Krakau und Lonborj urd dio „orzto-

\

schulo fuor Gobir-atruppon in St. Johann. Zr atio- bia
* z n: -an" oinoa Gonoraloboratcbaarztoa auf, dors hoochaton
militaor-aorztlichon .tnn~.

dn 23. Juli 1942 wurdo Kaniloaor auf dio noucoachaf-
fono Stollunj oinca Chofa dca .r’ohrnachtaannitr.otawoaona
bofoordort. Dioa coaohah durch donsolbon arlaaa, dor
Drandt, don Ilondloaor in mllitaoriaohon Solctor und Conti
im zivilon Soktor untorcoordnot waron, zur. Gon-ralkonriia-
aar ornannto. Handloaor wurdo nit dor Zuaatr;onfaaaunj dor
tiohrunchtaaonitaotaTroaon und dor dor 'rfohmacht untoratoll-
ton odor an^oachloaaonen rtorrxtionon boauftra«;t, oinachlloaa-
lioh doa Sanitaotaroacna dor W&ffon-SS. Vor dloaon Srlaaa
boatnndon vior cotronnto Sanitaotadicnatabtoiluncon dor
•.Tohrnaoht, naonlioh bci don Koor, dor Luftwoffo, dor iku-ino
und dor Yfaffon-SS, dio alio unabhaor.~i. vonoinandor orboi-
toton. Kraft dloao3 Srlaaaca wurdo -'.cndloaor bor.uftra^t,

Ihro Oporationon zuaasr.onzufasson und oinhoitlich zu atou-
orn, und or war I.oitol ala ion Ckof doa Oborkorcandoa dor
ifahrnaoht (CIC.V) dlrokt vormtwortlioh. ar hatto Gowalt
uobor dio Chofa doa Sonitaotawosona doa Kooroa, dor l-.rino.


L


dor Luftv/affo und ./affon-SS und allor in Rrim on dor oohr-
naoht oin^oactzton Or/aniaatior.cr. und Diona t3tcllcn, und
uobor “ alio pjaaonachaftlichon .-.odlzir.lachor, Institute,
.Jcadonlon und anicro cedlainlaeho Institute it. Dionato dor
./ohrnacht und dor naff on-SS ". 1 ) Hr war dor Satjobor doa
Chofa doa Oborlconaandoa dor i/ohrnanht in allor. daa ./ohr¬
nacht a a cn it aot a wo a on und ihro -oaundhoitlicho Laitunc bo-
zuo^lichon Fra^on. -uf don Gobioto dor aorrtlichon .«iaaon-
achoft boatandon aoino x'fllchton darin, oinhoitlicho Uasa-
nnhnon nuf don Qobioto dor Goaurelhoitafuahrunj, dor Souchon-
Forachun/ und -bokaomfun- und

)

-

1) MO-227, .uikl.dow. 11, .1. 101.

(Soito 35 doa Orljlnala)

in allon aorztlichcn Din. on, dio oino oinhoitlicho dojolmv;
lnnorhalb dor ..ohrr:acht orfordortor., durchzufuohron, und
woitorhin in dor ..uawortun • rodis i niaohor ^.rfahrun on.

Hinoa dor hauptaaochlichor. Kittol, dio von don *ngo-
k lac ton BftWlloaor boi dor ^uaomonfaaaun / dor wiaaonac'.oaft-
lichon Forachun; vorvrondt wurdon, war dio ^onoinaono Sit-
cunc dor Boratondon ..orzto dor vior johrnaohtazvroi/o. loi
dor Zwoiton Voraau.lunc dor dorator.don ..«rato Cat in dor
nilitaor-aorztllchon rtkodorio in Doz&bor 1942 orlaoutorto
iiandloaor oolbat dio .»uf ;abo doa Chofa doa .. ohrnacht s a oni-
taotadionatoa in dcr Voroinhoitlichunj dor nodi s ini a chon
Forachun^. Hr aa/to in oin^r .u'.a.iracho an oir.o VoJlvor-
acrrlun/j


- .6 -


1) NO-922


(Soito 35 — cs Originals)

—Port aotzm^-

"Anfordorunjon und Auawoitun_*on iloaoa tctalon Xrlo¬
gos , aowio d.\a Voitr.oltr.ia zwiaohon -o.nrf und 3o-
atrod poraoncllcr wio natoriollor «rt botiinjon
r.uch r.uf ailitaoriaohou uni acnl toot a-Iona tiler. o::i
Gobiot Kr-aanrheasn, dio dor Voroinhoitlichun, und
dor elnhoitlichen Stouorun^ dionon. 3a hoiaat
r.icht '-otronnt anrachioron und vorolnt achiujon 1 ,
aondom oa r.usa r.uf nllon Gobioton von vorohoroin
voroint r-crachiort und jreaohlogon wor on.

".'.uT den nilitr.orlschon Soktor bozo-on iat hioiv.ua
r.uf unaoron Gobiot dr.a •'uohrrsxht-Smltr.otawoaon 1
und dr.riit dor 'Ghof doa bchrnc.oht-Smit:.otawoaon 1
ont at onion. Kicht nur in poracnollon und nr.toriol-
lon Din/on - aowoit dr.a ucborhr.upt ;;oo,;lich iat
in r.inblick '.uf unboiinjt zu boruockaichtl ondo
Sor.dorjebioto urrl Scr.doruuf v.bon - aondom ouch
hinaiohtllch norxtlioh-wiaacnaohoftlichor ..uabil-
dun;* uni Forachur..*, aoll rad r.uaa dor ./Of, 1 m '.iohr-
nc.cht-Smltr.ctawoaon woit~ohcniat oin :onoinar.r.;or
aoin.

"Do^ontaprochond h.*.t rach dor Toilnohnorkroia dio-
aor hior.iit vor. r.ir oro-ffnoton 2. ..rboltat.vjiuvj
Oat oino -.n.oro 2uacr...or.aotzun;, ala iio 1. Ar-
boitatr. un • la 6.-1 '.loaoa Jnhroa. Durr.nla wrj oa
oino Ta;;unc 'doa riooroa, houto a ini die iroi ./ohr-
rv.ohttoilo, dio imffon-So urt. aoIIzoI, -.or .%r-
boitaiionat uni iio Orjmiar.tion 7o-t botoili;;t
und vcrolnijt.

alio

"Sio morion air alohorlich oatetton, i.-.aa lcli’dlo"/
uit olnor. ^oaolnanoon .lillkots onajruaa borruoaao
und r.lt don nufrichtijon t<unacho, d-.aa unaoraruo-
noinaano ..rbolt dor orhcffto, ;onoinacur.o Srfols
boachiolon aoi. Sinon boaon'.oron Gruaa r ooohto
loh r.bor cn ion aoichajoauniholtafuohror, Korrn
5tr.r.taaol:rotror Cjnti, richton, in uoaaon fcc.nd
dio sontralo Stouorunj do a S-anitaotavroaona It.
zivilon 3oktor crolojt iat. loh aoho in aoinor
..nwoaonholt nlcht nur dna Intoroaao fuor unaoro
.o , boitathor.«n, acniorn don «.uadruok aoinor Vor-
bundonhoit nit don . .’oh rao c h t - S m i t a o t a w o a on unci
aoinoa Voratr.oniniaaoa fuor dio boaondoron 3o-
l-"AJo dor Vioiimr.cht lx.. Polio wio in dor Koirct.

I eh brc-ucho nicht zu botonen, dr.aa wir olna aind
in dor Srkonntnia .or Hotwunil_koit, don lL-.orpfor
dr.ruotor voraichort ur.d borbhijfc zu hr.lton, Cnaa
or alch un dio coaundhoitiloho 3otrouung dor .ioi-
nat, In Rrhnon doa i. Lrio:- uuborhr.upt lioonli-
chon, koino Sor on zu rachoa brcuoht." 1)


, .wikl.dcw. 435, a. 2050.


(Scito 36 doB Crijiaalaj

..uf cor Vicrtcn Vcrsarclunc dor -cratcndcn ..crzto
in liai 1944 bo t onto dor nn£Ckla~to Jr cud t wiodorun dlo
7/iohtl~koit von ‘-nndloaors Stc,llunc, ixvlor. or aa"toj

":!orr Generalobcratabsarzt handloacr, Sic
aalbat, So 14at und ..rzt zucloich, tra;,on
daboi dio Vorantwortuny fuor Eir.aatz und
Lois tun: unaoror Sanitaotaoff izioro.

"Ich £laubo, uni oa iat wohl dio oinzijo 2r-
wartun3 allor Eotoill^ton, daaa dio houto
hior in H oh only oh on bojinnondon ..oaprochun-
Con zun Hutson unaoror Soliaton ^ofuchrt
word on. Dio biahori^on Ix.iatun;on Ihror
Xorron, horr Gcn.v-raloboratabaarzt, aprcchon
oindouti- dafuor, und doron Sinoatzborolt-
aohaft orfuollt una alio nit Stolz und -
ioh konr. daa wohl cuoh a a-on - nit -uvor-
aioht.


"2a iat yut, dioao Dinjo oinfach ao zu bonon-
non und zu botrachton, wio aio aind. Dioao
?a;un^ iat aichtbaror «uadruck dafuor - aio
iat oa uni soil oa uni cuss oa auch in Jodor
doziohunj aoim Dio do ratonion ..orzto fin-
don a ioh un ihron Sanltaocaohof. - Soho ioh
hior dioao Holhon, ao aind 5io, Horr Gonoral-
oboratabaorzt Kondloaor, zu bonoidon. r'ach-
caonnor dor Lodisin ait boston und coachul-
toaton Spozialwlaaon atohon Ihnon fuor dlo
dotrcuuaj dor Soldaton sur Vorfuos’in;;. In
oinor ./oohaolv/irkunj zwiachon Ihnon uni
Ihron Horr on word on dio iroblor.o unaoroa
aorztliohon Wiaaona 'and l.oonnor.3 lobon'ic
Cdhnlton." 2)

Dlca war koino Lobrodo auf oinon Uann ohno kaoht uni 3in-
fluaa. ./onn hondloaor nicht fuor dio von Sonltaotawoaon
dor tfohrnaoht und boaondora dox- -raoo uni Luftwaffo bo-
^anjonon Vorbroohon vorantwortlich iat, donn iat koinor
vo r an tv/or 11 ich.

-uf doui i'lctz Hr. 3 aohon uir con -nyokla^ton itoatool:,
dor ala Dr and t a apoziollor Vortrotor nit dor ..uf-abo bo-
traut war, "zontral dio -Uif;aben -and Intoro3aon doa ;o3a;;-
ton oanltaota- und Ooeundhoitawoaana 3 auf dor. Gobiot dor
,7iasonschaft und Forachun;; "zuaarr:onxufaaaon und woiaunja-
yoi'aoaa zu atouorn". 3chon vor ao^r.or firnonnurc zu dioaou


2) H0-924, .ink!,.Dow. 437, .1. 2057


(Soito 36 -os Originals, Porta.)

.^it in ..orbat 1843 war Rostock oinor Cor vorantoortlichon
Fuohror Coa doutachen ..orztcataixlos. In Jahro 1942 wurdo
cr zun Bokon dcr nodi zlnia chon Pokultaot an dor Unlvorai-
tc.cz Gorlin ornonnt. In aolben Jchr wurdo or ala «*rr.oo-
Sonitaetainapoktour "Joratondor Chirur " bei acnlloaor.

Sr atioc z un .tan^o oinoa Genornlarztoa auf. ..la Chof doa
.-•:toa fuor './iaaonachaft uni Porach.unc unter ^randc war
doatocka ~uf jabo die Zuaarxior.faaaun dor wiaaonachaftlichon
Poracliunr in Dautaohland. Sr onpfins von don vorachiodor.on
iataatollon in Doutachland -orichto uobor dio VortoilunG
von FOrachunksauf jabon uni boati-aute, woloho ala •drinslioh n
botrachtot vrordon aollton. 3r war auch Cranlta Vortrotor
in doiohaforaofcun~arat.

^uf don .'latz :.*r. 4 aohor. wir dor. .uijoklajton Schroo-
dor, dor von 1. Jar.uar 1944 bia zua Schluaa Chof doa Soni-
taotav;oaona dor Luftwaffo war. Von 1935 bia Pobruar 1940
war Schroodor Stabaohof aolnoa Vorjaon~ora Srich Hippko ala
Luftwaffor.aanitaotainapoktour. Von Pobruar 1940 bia Janucr
1944 war or LuftPlot toner zt dor Luftflotto II uni or aotzto
donn Hippko ala Chof doa Sanitcotawoaona dor Luftwaffo oin.

ISoito 37 doa Ori;;inala)

Zu lo ichor -oit wurdo or zur. .\Zn^o oin«a Gonoraloborataba-
nrztoa bofoordort. .Ja Chof dca Sar.itaotawoaona dor Luft-
wciffo weron ilur, alio Sanltaotaoffizioro dor doutachon Luft-
waffonatroitkraofto untoratollt. Soino Stollur, r uni Vor-
antworfclichkoit i3t klar utti unzwoidautl;.

-Uf don I-latz Y,r. 5 3itzt dor ~n_eklajto aonzkon, dor
ala Chof doa Sar.itaotawoaona dor ..affon-SS eir.or dor hooch-
aton 3anitaot3offizioro in dor 3b war. sr trat dor HSD.'J-
ir.i Jahi’o 1926 boi, und ir. Jahro 1936 wurdo or nktiv bol dor


--49--


SS in Sanitaotaant dor SS-Vorf uojur.33truppen, - lo spaotor
dio .,'affon-SS wurdo. In Frudhjahr 1937 wurdo -aa Sanitaota¬
ant dor 33 orwoitert urxl lr. zwoi Jbtoilun^on aufJ6t©ilt.
Gonzkon wurdo DIroktor dor ^btollun-, dio nit dcr Joaor^unc
von nodi z ini a chon Goraotachafton und nit dor Ooborwachu nz
doa aorztlichon roraonala in don l>cnz (nitration a lasom bo-
traut war. In dioaor 3iconachaft war or dor aorztlicho -o-
rator doa baruochti-ton 3ioko, doa Vorjaor.^ora *ohla, ala
Kotmandour allor Iljnzontrationalajor. Saohaonhauaon, Daohau,
Duchonwald, Iiauthauaon, Ploaaonbuors, ;’oucr.;amo u.a. atan-
don untor dor aorztlichon Ofcoraufaioh.t Gonzkona. Uobor dio
ayatonatiacho Bodruockunj und Vorfolcun^ dor un.3luooklioh.on
Gofan^onon in dioaon ~natalton koonnon wonij Louto boaaor
untorriohtot jowoaon aoin.

In lai 1940 wurdo Gonzkon Chof doa Son i toot a amt os dor
liaffon-SS in Fuohrun^aatab dor SS, nit don .*0x130 oinoa Obor-
fuohrora. Dor 33-Fuohrun -a a tab untoratond don Grupponfuoh-
ror *‘ana Juottnor urxl war oinoa dor zwoolf Kauntaontor doa
Oborkotmondoa dor SS. uaohrorxl Juottnor Gonzkor.a nilitoori-
achor Vorjoaotztor war, war Roioh.acrrt-S3 Grawitz, fuor don
or boi violon Gclosonhoitor. ala Vortrotor wlrkto, aoin tooh-
nioohor odor nodizlniaohcr Vor3oactztor. In Jahro 1942 wurdo
aoino .c.jt3 3tollun3 "Chof doa Sanitaotawoaona dor Waffon-SS,
..btoilun: D doa S3-Fuafcr.un/,aataboa n -or.annt.


- 30 *- “


V-


Zr crrcickte den San^. wines Gnr^onfuoircre
in dor SS und cir.es Co a. rail outn&sis dcr .affcr.-SS.

Unccr den Cession ur.tcrstohcr.dcn ..o stern *.7sr
dee ch.nischc und shcrnczcutischc ._nt untcr -luon.nror.vor
und dar Ant fucr ir ^cnc untcr den -uiooilsgtcn 'Iru^O'sel:;'.
Crv.,0 s!cy vurdo in Jehre 1940 GenBiene Ant els v^icaike:-
susetcilt und ;.:r 0 lci hzeitis Chef dee I-v^icnc-Ir. ticutca
dor oflcn-i)S,dcs .•icdcrun dciisUcn usoeretrnd. An 1. .c'ten-
bor 1943 v/urd. dor Scnitcctsdicnet c.er . rvOr^'i-ieicrt ,ur.i
neben cndcrou listen . urden flu.ruoir.ntcr, ru^o fily und dee
Hygieneinstitut dor offer.-;! don Ante doe Zcicheerztcc
fixer die o.,C-re »itz, su^et-ilc. In dcr 'olAescie . 'r oc
oher C-rcv:itz r.le onkkcn direct uni..cvcll*..


Vnd denn heten \:ir hior dcr. Anccklcgton lor.e, Crivvirn-
uohr r in d«: —, ttollv. del e. oundheitsfuahrex, Stcll-
vertr binder iuohrcr do. oicl • . sxekenner und dee ra¬
tion lcozirlictiacl'cn Aorztcbur.de., Vcrtr.t. r dor zbtcilung
ITediziniaohon otudiun, Ccncrdbevo?.?.nr.oe:.tiGtcr in Aoi.c/;c-
iorechimccrrt und Chef dor . oruciUL fv.b.-kt. riclo ,iachC
Hrlegfu.hrun£. .in .njtn itcrb.iv. 3oxri.lt: ';rnn or euf
dcr Lictc dor i4fioliti£cn nicht un.o:. ant blcibon. Conti ucr
die hooefcet: Auto.-itc t cuf dor loototo d.c zivilon leriuid-
h.itsvcscno. VWl -itl.r gOBcichnctc _ilocc vor 23.,Hill
1942 b, tr.ff.nd die . corgcnlecUor. dee .iorztc diene Cot
bccohrwibt diw -oition Contis \*iw £ol;_ :

1,1 ucr den c cich dcr zivllcr. C oundh-itcwcccnr lot fucr

.lie oinheitlich zu croxfor.den . esen h :• dor Stantoecloro-
tocr i- wiahuniniotoriun dci Ini _icl:cg..'uu.d-

h.itro-i !n . . Conti vevrntuortlioh. Ito atthen hior-

fuor di. zurtnandicc:i Abtoilun^,.:. Ob.rst.n ..ichb-
behoorden und. ihr. n.she.onlncccn Die.'Ctrtv tie: zuv Ver-
fucGung." 1

dc i;c b Ssein einziaca ncdizinic hoc .roblon, dee nlclit
cn doie cichegtc in.Jicitorr.t i.r Zeri-'crtoi ur.a :i die ..oicho-
ccrztclsEaner >lanGtv, d.r ic .crct* ir. Icut.achl nd uncer-
otrndcis r.ic Ausnrhr-w derjeni’-.n, 4x«. cktivwn Zienct t-i Zecro
und in d.r cS loict.t.r.. Als itilled dee ..tichoforsc';ur.. c-
r-tefi taette alone ncreoonlich Vcrbindtuis -At Plccncn vend

Lnternihnungcn, die v-rbrcch rieebe r.disiniEcho Yerohohe

ze.n Cor. ru? tend hrtton.

■ * • - • ^ •►*•••

1) 10-300, A ii. ov. 5, .. fj


- 1 -


a


MIL I T


ALL vp. 1


3MS.VV 'HK C V»3S5' 'D"*’ SCnK'SSBT'I" ■?
DCT •■3T*IFI' , TSF 3-A.VSST "OK AfTOXU

- o on -


"orninn B 23 E 3 R-FHaM 3 i;


Jtroo r-s-onoy
Aloxnm’ or *. "ardy
Arm's t "''rllk-"*'~. , 'r;ald

••uornborr, "st^or .Tano T^a"n

le. .Tunl l^'lV

“Mop:

'’ol Cr'ri' -'ayln r
n P - •-,<»* “onoral,

'T’ icf *>f ’'f'unsol f^r “'nr

Crimea


aZCSSR- T RgySEKO

EIKFPBiaUNG i

Dntor punkt T dor Inkla^oaohrift uird in wcscntllchcn
die Anklago orhobon, daaa der Angokiarto Horernn Bcckcr-proy-
3cn C aich mit nndoren Poraonen In Vcrfolgo elnca S cncinanncn
"nrhabona zu olncr vcrachunorun* und Uobcrclnkunft zuannnon-
gofundon hat, un modlzlniachc Experi .nente an Honaohon ohne
loron Zuatlnnunr. vnrzunohnon; unter Punkt it und m, (Krlcgs-
vorbrcchon bean. "crbrochon pQ Qn dIo ,r 0 nacbllchkclt), daaa
or uaupttnctor, Tcilnchnor, Anatlftcr, vnraohubloiatondor go-
wcaon aci, acino Zuatinrunr pc-cbcn und nit Placncn und nntcr-
nohmon in vorbindung gcatnndon hot, dlo die Durchfuchrung no-
dlzlnlachor Exporlmonto an fonachon ohne Zuatl-am;; dor bo-
troffondon zum Oogonatnnd batten. Don „n kin .'ten Bcokcr-
Proyaong wind bcacndcra Verm twortlichkd t fuor und Toilnnhao
an don Hnohon-, Kaolto-, Moorwnaaor- ur.d riockflabor-sxpori-
monton zur Lnat gologt.

Um dio Snohlngo zu vcrcinfaohon und dna verfahron zu bo-
achl unigon hnt dio Anklorobohnordo diu posohuldl~un<- dor
voilnnhno an don rolbfiobor-, Pockon-, Parafcyphui a und b, Mn-
'.aria-, Diphtcric-, und Snlfonnnid-Exporircntrr zurucokrczo-
*on, und aio zloht hiorMt die Boaohuldi mnr bczuorlioh dor
Epldoninnhon "olbauoht-t'xpoUncnto zuru ck.

I* Stcllunr und , vront-.-ortun -.

Dor Anrckla to nockcr-Proyaon.- trnt ir »»ai 1933 dor U3DAP
boi. Er vnr auch Mit r licd d a NSKT (yatimalanzinlla tiachoa
Krnftfahrer-Korpa) und d a ?r S PK (ratlon.lanzlallatlachoa Flio-
•sOr-Korpa). (Bcckur-Froyaon;, R. 7780).

Nach ^ollondmi acinor nodizlnlscten Studiun in Holdc. 1 -
borg, innabruok und Berlin rdo dor Angcldnrto Asslstonznrzt
■n dor qnivoraitnctaklinik in Berlin, m August 1938 wnrdc
r Aaslatont an Foraahun ainstitut fucr Luftfahrtnodlzln dca
• oiahaluftfahrtnlniatoriuns in nor 1 In unt-r Pr^fess^r strug-
'old. Schllosslich orhlclt er 3clncn Dr.r.cd.hnbl 1. In jahro
944 In norlln und in .Tnbra 1«45 •nirdn or ala Ty> r0 nt fuor


P5C:'SRw*’REYSSNf'.


innoro und Luftfahrtnodizln bcrufor. (5ockcr-*royacn£, ».7778).

Inj Sonnor 1940 trot cr dor

- Scltc 2 dos Originals -

Luftwnffo a la Untcrarzt bcl und crhiclt schllosalich don Pone
olnoa Stnbaarztoa. Zuorst t-at or bcl dcr Luftfahrtpruofuncs-
atollo Dlonat und In August 1941 vrurdc cr zur Sanitnotsinspek-
tion dor Luftwnffo ala r?llfsrcfcrcn6 In Hcfcrct fuor Luftfnhrt-
modlzln voraotzt. Ala Kllfsroforont von profoaaor Anthony, don
Roforonton in Roforat fuor Luftfahrtnodizln, bliob cr In dlo-
aor Stollun.r bla zun Mnl 1944. In Hal 1944 wurdo or Chof dor
Abtollun? fuor Luf tfahrtncdizin und hat to dloac Stollun.': bla
> zum 8. Moors 1945 lnno.

Im Sanitaotswoson dor Luftwaffo /rob oa 25 *>oforato. Eln
Roforat war olno \btoIlun p innorhnlb dor Luftraffonorfranlan-
ilon, dlo apczlcllo noronataondo bchnri lto; z.P. rab oa oln
' oferat fuor Luftfahrtr.rdizln, o in »cf rat fucr pyplono, oln
' ofornt fucr Intorno Modlzln uow. vyio ri r a ah on crtachnt ha-
>on, mrdo daa Reforat fucr Luftfihrt.aodizln zuorat von Pro¬
foaaor Anthony pclcit^t, nit Bcakcr-rr .yaon,* da aolnorn Stcll-
vortrotor ur.d spnot.r von Bookcr-rroyaon aolbst. (Beckor-
proyaonr, R.7779, 7009, 8087; NO-669, Ankl.Pcw.16, R.110).
f B ockor-Prcyoonf bezourte, daaa dlo stollun clnoa Ro-

foronton dlo Praj.-on dor tootaischai ur.d natorlcllon "nrbcrcl-
. tunpon bohmdolto, wnohrond dor born tendc .,rzt nur aachvcr-
ntaondlgo Urtollo fuor dan Chof ausnrbcitctc. ’’'enn dlo Inspok-
tlon ah nit oinon -4 sscnochr.ftllohon ''oraahlar zu befassen
atto, holto dan Poforat dlo voinun* «dcr dlo rinstcllun.- dos
* oratondon \rztoo oln und borlahtoto dcr rnspekteur. ..uch dor
-'foront p.ab aolnc «'olnun hinslabtllah sdeh r "rrschlacf-o
b. Urn os doutllchcr auazudruockcn, -achrond von don bornten-
on Arzt olno pcrsoonliaho Mclnun errartot njrdc, sollto dor
Roforont olno nvatcrlollo "clnur. ah oben. (Bcckcr-Prcysonc, R.
7011-2).

Es 1st notwondlg, slch r.lt dcr ..rbolt dos »cfcrats fucr
Luftfahrtnodizln zu bofasson. Dio Frn£on,fuor dlo dieses Ro-


fornt


- 2 -


vorontm rtllch war, v~rcn crstcna, d I Wirkungcn dcr Bcachlcu-
ni£ime und zwoiteno, dio Wirkungon grrsaor Hochen, Oder in
ondoron Horten dio Folgon von Sauot stoffirsnrcl* Dicso zr*oi
Gobioto war on in orator Linio dio klaaaiachon Gobloto dor
Luftfahrtmodlzln, aber in Vorlnuf doa Krjogoa ontatanden vio-
lo nouo Problcmo, d.h. allgcnoinc physl^lngiacho Frapon bozucg-
lloh Atmung und Zirkulatlon, Frauen bozuoglich nllgcnoincr und
apoziollor Patholnpio da Folg-o von Flugzoivunfacllcn in groaacn
ITnohon, pharnazoutlacho *yngcn, Auswahl und Auabi Idunp von
Pliorern, Kotfaoilo nuf hohor 30 c, in dcr rruoato und in don
perpon und dio ^r.twioklung von «ornoton, zur «?touorunr von
rlugzougcn in pinbiiok nuf phyaIolo.isc*'c ur.d paych .ologl-
acho Poal ohtapunkto. Auaacrdrr- ontatrjid vachrond dca Luft-
krlopoa auch da a Pr^bloc dcr Einrirkun- v^n Kohlcn-’onoxydcn
und vnn Hitzo, und dr.a Rofernt ruaato aioh nit dor Konstruk-
tlon und Kndornlal orun. von DHtcrdruakkon ern bef-aa n, dcr
Erzlohun t von oi u , aorzton, und nit doo-Studlun dcr spozlnl-
lltoratur. in oincm Wort Luftf’hrtnodizin uafaoato alio Go¬
bioto dor Modlzin in Zuanrr.cnhnng nit don Betrlob von Flug-
zougen (Bockor-Froyaeng, R. 7824).

In Ant fucr Luftfrh rtr.odizin batten waohrond d r Zoit von
1941 his Krlo; aondo nlcht nohr r.la 2 Pora'-nen dio Loitunr,
naonlich Profca3or Anthony und dor \n kin; ts neokor-^royaeny.

(B ookor-^oyaonr, n . 80P7). pockcr-"rryaon- hat in den ouf
dcr Anklnrobonk on;x*8timtcn Ph«r d r sclhathcrunt rsotzung
nit oinpoatlnnt und noochtc don floriohtahof -lnubon rnchcn,
daas or tataaochllah koine ;.utoritnot hntta und dnaa Anthony
aoin Arboltsgoblot b> trncchtlinh oinanhrnenkt- . Doa iat oln
roductio ad abaurdun. Fan nucastc daraua achlic3aon, dnaa,
300 ft Anthony dn8 Buoro fucr cir.o lnun oro Zeit vcrllcaa, was
or manohnal tnt, Jodc Taotigkeit aufhoorto, und daa puoro
buchataobllch abgoachlosscn war. vusa^r Anthony und Bockor-
Froyaong gab oa in Roferat


- 3 -


33CJGR-FEEYSENG


ruur adl»id mu* Buai^ancostollto und Zu kclncr Zolt

uoborstiop dio .\nzahl doa Poraannla vior Pora^ncn (Bockor-Prcy-

aonfT, R. 8088).

Dor Anpoklnpto ^chr«oA>i* anptc aua, daaa Bockcr-^royacnc
aoln Poratop in Luftfahrtnodiz in war, daaa "op an boaton wuas-
to, waa Ip allpcmoinon auf dor. ''cbict dcr Luftfahrtncdizin var
alch cine", daaa op uebop die "''rachur. on, dio auf den Uobioto
dor Luftfohrtnodizin van dor Luftwaffe durahgofuohrt wurdon,
in Blldo war, daaa or alio Borichto uober d.ioac F^rachunpon
orhlolt und atudlorto. Bockcr-Froyacng war voranttr rtlich
fuor dio Sannlun • und Auawortun;; allor Ergobnisao dcr auf den
Oobiot dcr Luftfnhrtnodizin durchgofuohrtor. rnrschun, anrboit.

?r ontaohiod, ab poldzuachucaao gowaohrt werdon aolltcn. schrac-
dor aoftc, or war aoln v* aacnachnftlichcr Pcratcr. (Schmodor,

% 3606 - 7 ).

Dna noforat fuor Luftfrhrtnodizin bofaaato alch ninht nur

It Pr^lonon auf 'on r-obiot •'or LuftfahrtnodJ sin, aandorn vor-

:ab nuch nndero v«n d r luft-rnffc voranlaaato "arachun-raauf-

traopo. Dor .nrcklar to sohraod ,r orklacrfco

"Aua buorntcohr.iaohcn a rucn ,' CR -rurdon allc ^rachun-aauf-
traopo in don Roforat v^n ncekor-' royacn, boarboltot. D^.a
lot abor nlcht a« zu veratchen, d«ao die .uftraoro, dio
nlohta nit Luftfr* rtr.odlzin zu tun hntton. ala« wlo z.B.
quo den oobiot dcr Kjrclcno ador '.<r Zahnfuora«p-o «dor
andoron Din; on nioht nuob aachlich in don Rofernt boar-
bo 1 tot wurdon, aandorn nur buorar;ao3Sl , wiolch joa torn
aohnn auafuohrto, 03 gohaorton dazu, ur a-lcho Auftrnofo
foptip zu r.achon, £owloao parnalion. Und dloao Din-o wn-
pon t’onnu bekannt in don Roforat v^n Dr. preyaonr. Und
da i.io Mnaso dcr ..uftraopo aua dor: Boroloh dor Luftfahrt-
modlzln war, hatto r.an dlcaon Roforat acfr'n zu Zoiton
noinoa Var G noneora dio buomeaoMlfo pearbeitun, nllor
Auftraogo uoborloaaon. Ea war ab r aua don Entuuorfon,
dio ir Roforat vorbliobon, Jodorzoit oralchtllch, wulcho
Dlonatatollon noinoa Antoa nun dio tntanccjilichcn poarbcl-
tor dor wlaaonachaftlichon Tn.-o wnron." (Schraodor, R.
•3618—9).

Dio Auaaa-o v«n sohr^odcr towolat ala", daaa dio .\btoi-
.mp fuor Luftfahrtnodlzin fuor dio Ploichrichtur' nllor r«p-
ichunraauftraopo Innorheah dor Luftwaffo varmtirrtlich war.

.Ho Auftraogo wurdon van dioaor- .~t auarc obon.


BSCKER-PHEYSSNG


Bockor-Frcysong war In dor Lagc, Boriahtc durchzuloson und
alch olio Kcnntnis ucbor dlo p-'rachun. snrbciton zu voraohaf-
fon, an dor dio Luftwaffo Intoroaaiort war. Tntaaodhlleh gab
Bookcr-Froyaonp dlcao Knnti*rlls in rmdcrcn ncbioton zu. Br or-
klaorto

"loh aagtc, daaa das Roforat Luftfahrtnodizin auaaor don
rund 953 luftfahrtnodlzir.laohon p^rachun aauftraoron
auch n rt ch das rein ''rpanl3at''riacho ur.d female fuor
dlo uobrigon 53 P^rachun; aauftrnogc aitcrlodifto, dio
nlcht rus dor Luftfahrtnedizin, a^ndern aua andcron
nobloton 3fcannton. n (Beckcr-Froyaonf, P. 8039).

Rockor-Proyacni? vorauchto, acino ’'orantw^rtllohkc i t

oinzuachrnonkon, inden or nussneto, daaa dio ^raohunraauf-

trnogo nur v-'r. Cbof dor snnitactsinapekti^n pcra'onlioh nua-

ro.-ohon wurden. (Bcckcr-^rcyacnr, P. 8090). Daaa dor Chof

dca ganitaotawosona lotzten Sn*ca vorant’^rtlich war, 1st

aolbatvorataondlich, ator oa lot ranz klr.r, daaa dio Hnuptnr-

boit v^n Anthony und Bookor-Froyaon,- . cloiatot wurdo. Dor

.Vnroklacto Woltz an* to, daaa aoin Inatitut fucr Luftfahrtrco-

dlzin in Mucnchon doo Luft nu 8 in dlaziplinnriachor 3!lnai cht

und don Amt v"n Anthony, und apactor Bockor-Prcyaonf- in wia-

oonachnftllchor Hinaicht untorat.llt r. "iorduroh iat

naohgowloaon, daaa dcr Roforont fucr Luf tfnfcrtrc dizln in Auf-

trag doa Chefa dca Sanitpotawosona dcr Luftwaffo die F^r-

achunrsnrbcltcn floiohruricbtcn hatto.

Un dor Taoti-koit d 0 a Beforata fuor Luftf* rtno'Usin

nnohzupohon, iat 03 n^t^omM , d^s .kt<-nzoiahcn '’Icaca ;.rtoa

klarzuatolXon. Dlo Puchata^r.-Bczoichnun fuor '•as p fernt

Luftfnhrtnodizln war bia zun ’’intor 1912/3 "2n p" . Dloao

Bozolchnun • bodoutotc "/.ttcllun 2 pr-ippc TI Peferat In

Winter 1942/3 wur'e die Buohatabenbesoiohn n !os Ref.rata

Luf tfahrtnodizin in ”2 F n un^oaon’ert un.* v licb n 2 F" bis

uni-ofnohr jmuar 1944 ala oa "2 IT A B bonannt mrlc. Dio

Arbolt doa Antoa bliob wnchron? -*Kscr anzen Zoit •’lo , lol-

cho und dio and.cro Buchstabonbozcichnun spU. cltu ledi. lich

olno intoma Bo'-rfniiIaati' , 'n <’os Snnitact awe sons dcr Luftwaffo

wiodor. (NO-448, Ankl.B0tr.81, R. 235).

- 5 -


3ECKEP.-PR2YS3T


Auaaor don ''blgon nuchatnbon <w*or Aktonaoiehon hntto f’as
Poforat fuor iAxftfnhrtnodlzln olno «oflatrnti^nanunnor,

"55". '■fir wordon apaotor In dloaoo Schriftsatz bcnorkon, daaa
dioaoa Akton- odor BuchatabohEolchcn In Zuaaencnhanr. nit don
H^ohon-, Koloto, Moorwaaaor-, opidoniaohon Golbaucht- und
Flookfioborvorauchon aohr stark In Erschoinung trcton wordon*
Man w rd voratohcn, daaa bol dor ncdizinlashcn Forschung
olno guto Glo lehr Ichtung n^twondl. war. TTaohrand doa Kriofos
war dlo Luftwnffo In olnor Info, wo die wcrwo-fclung v«n Hilfa-
nlttoln und Matorlalion, v«n Aorzton und "Tlas ir.schnftlorn,
und andorom Forachunrazubohoor arrgfnoltl- zu<o:cllt wordon

1

musato. ololchachaltun,- war n^twendi r, un iV'ppclarbclt zu
vormoldon. Auaaor don Roforat In dor Luftweffca-«?anltaota-
Tnapoktlnn fuor dlo voraohlcdenon Oobloto dor Motflzln gab
oa auoh cln Ffauohnltaroforat. Abor da dicaoa Fucr*-' nlcht nit
nllon n^rachunranuftraopon dcr Luftwnffo vortraut ?ar, war
os nlcht In dcr I/igo, dlo Zutollunr dor zur Auafuohrung dor
vorachlodonon ,;uf,~abon n rt otl,'cn O.ldnittcl vorzunctr.on. Bek-
kor-Froyaong nachto doahalb don H nu atrxl tabuoro go:onuobor
dlo nntwondigon Enpfohlun on, wonn oin ProMcn -tiftnuchto,
hlnalohtllch Ooldnittd fucr ?<rachun azwocko. Er aa-to nua:

I

"Dlo B owl 111, un olr.oa Forachur. aauftra.^oa lag nlloln
In dor Zuataondl kolt «‘oa Chof bozv*. v^rhor, dor Snnl-
taotalnapoktl^n. Dlo Auf,:nto doa Pofor-ta boatand dn-
rln, dlo notworr’l -on Untcrla on fuor dlcao Sntacholdung
zu lloforn. , ’(Bcckor-Froyoonr, 3. 8109).

Bockor-Froyaong atclltc oleh auf don Standpunkt, daaa dcr
Chof doa Luftwp.ffon-Sanlt".ot3' , lonstos, fruohor ’’lppko und
Jotzt dor AnrokLa^to sobr^'or, dlo oinzlro rora^n war, dlo
dlo Zuwolaun~ vr«n aoldnlttoln yiir worwondunr fuor p^rschunra-
zwocko ronohnlrcn k^rmte. “Viohroxv’ 'loa zwolfcllrs wahr
ocln tr.ar., a' wurdon •dnoh dlo imtorln on,cuf r-rund wolchor
or aolno Entscholdun* trnf. In Pjekor-Pregson^a puor ,> aua-
goarboltot, -do or aolfcat zu Ibt.

- 6 -

_


II• Pora^c


•-crbrcahcrlachjn ^xnorinontcn.


Dio Hoohonoxporiccnto aind In Sinzclncn in Schrif'tantz
dor Anklacoboh^ordo gogon Ruff, ronborg und 7oltz boachriobon.

Bockor-Froyaonga wiaaonachaftlichoa Wiaaon nuf den Co-
bioto dor Hoohonf^rachun iat bctraochtlich. Er nrboitoto in
Johro 1938 und 1939 an Zoitforschun a-zxporinonton in Hoohon
bia zu 9000 n und acino Arboit in jshro 1940 boachnoftifto
alch mlt Prncon bozuoglich dor Anpoasun- an rr^aso Roohon.
(Bookor-Proyaonr, 7. 7784).

Dio in Dnehnu vorpono-nonon "pehonverajoho fnllon v^ll
und panz in do3 Goblot dcr Luftfnhrtnodiz'.n, fucr daa Anthony
und Rcokor-Proyaonp vor.ant'T'>rtlich waron. Bookor-rroyaong
will nbor dna Oorlcht ; Laubon nachon, dasa or vor dcr Durch-
fuohrunf dioaor sxporinonto nlohta von lhncn wuaato. Er bo-
hauptot, or hobo zuorat von !cn von Ruff, Rrrborr und naachor
vorgonommonon Roohcnvorauchon gohoert, nla op Mittoilung or-
hlolt, dnaa oin Film uobor dioao Vcraucho in *llcha Dionat-
otollo vorgofuohrt wordon 3ollto. Dioa war in Soptonbor 1942.
(R. 8114). Za 11 opt auf dor Hmd, dnaa oin Experiment j n d.ora
in Daohou durah -cfuohrton AUsr.naa uncAOfllch ohno dio zuann-
monpofnaaton Bonuohungon oinor roagon Poraonc* ruppo durch-
gofuohrt wordon konnten und oa iat rnnz klar, dnaa dio Abtcl-
lung fuor LuftrraffonmO'’iz in fuor alio nootlron vaaannhnon
vornntw>rfclich war. Bovor dio Zxperinonto v'ryin^non wor¬
sen konnton, mu3ato oin P'-'rachun aauftra* ort lit *Tor ( 'on,
Ooldmittol mu83tcn zur Fincnzlorunp dcr Zxperinonto anrcwlo-
aon wordon. .’.Ho ..rton von Einrichtun*on wio z.p. dio Jto 0 -
honkanmor, Eloktro-Kardiorraphon und rtorpl. nusaten borolt-
gostollt wordon. Dies war ebon dio Funktior, dcr 4 »btoilung
fuor Luftwnffonnodizln, alch dioaor Problono anzunohnon. Die
H^ohonvoraucho bo annon nicht an 22. Fobruar 1942 in v«llon
Umfnngo ohne botrncchtlicho vorborcitur or. und Borcitstcllung

von Elnrichtun on fuor diese Vcraucho. y nhozu oin Jahr v«r

- 7 -


vox 4 lhrer Vornaha® wmren sic der Gogenstsnd vox. _x6ertemngen und os 1st
laochorlichi such nur in Imaegur.g zu Ziehen, dass dor stelivertretend®
L®iter

• Seite 6 d®s Originals -

dor Abtoilung fuor LoftfahrUaedizin nichi dirueber infonaiert war und dlo-
se Exp®riment® nicht tatkraeftig unterstuetzte. '.venn aan Becker-Freyseng
glauben wo lit a, wuerde das bedeutan, dass -ran run Schluss kocct, dass nie-
mand ausser Hippke, Kbits, Buff, Rostberg und Rascner ctwas in Lusaaroenhang
ait diosen l-icperiaenten wusst® odor tat.

Dio Vorbringung der Unterdruckkaaaer nach Dachau ist ein gutes Bei-

spiel fu®r dio Notwwndigkeit der Bewaoltigung betraechtlicher Aufgaben

aeitens Bockor-Froysengs Dienststell®. Er gab su, dass eine seiner er-

stan Aufgaben in seiner Zigenschaft ala Ass?stent in der Abtoilung fuor

Luftfahrt cedi tin die Erfassung aller Unterdruckkv- ..cm war. (R. 7827). *

Sie befanden sich untor dor zentralon Kontrolle diosor Dienststolle und

die deutache Luftwaffo hatto 19U nur U transportable Eac&om. Bocker-

Freysong gab zu, dass die Druckka n»ro seinor Kontrollo untorlagen, bo-

hauptot aber ia Hinblick auf die bei den kricinollon noohen-ricporiacnton

verwandto, dass Ruff die Erlaubnis zur Uoborfuohrung dor Kaoraor nach

Dachau von Hippko dirokt erhiolt. (R. 0103-Qt). *as auch lrwr an diosor

Bohauptung wahraoin —so liogt os doch auf dor Hand, dass Hippko nicht

solbst deoi Fahrer, dor die Unt’.rdruckkaar.or nach Dachau bcfdrderte, don

Bofohl dazu gab. Kichtx. kooruito eindoutiger sein, als dass Hippko an di®

Abteilung fuor Luftfahrtccdizin Instruktiom-n wcitcrgegobcn hat, dio
l

noetige Ausruostun.- fuor dio &cpurinontu in Dachau zu liofem und dass
der tatoaochliche Transport der Kaoaor zu»aar.«n ait der Licforung ando-
rer notwondigor Auaruo8tungsgc f -cnstaondo von Anthony unu B*ckor-F rcysong
gehandhabt wurdo. Die Karter haette unooeglich nach Dachau vorbracht •
und dort 6 Uonate lang ohne ihro Kenntnis verbleiben koenncn.

D«r Angoklagte ioltz sagto aus, er sei nicht in der Lago gewesen,
dio gnindsaetzlicho Erlaubnis zur Vornaha*) dor Stporicwntc in Dachau zu
„iben, da die noatigon Befehlo von dor Luftwaffcn-Sanitaotsinspektion

kotmon imssten. (o. 7051-7178).

- 3 -


3SCXER-FREYSENG


S"ll ran annehnon, deaa Ulppko poraocnlich dio Forachunr-a-
auftraogo fuor dio Koohcnoxpcrincr.to auaachrlob und. dio Tat-
aacho ihror Vornahr.o vor aolnor oigonon Abtoiluxv fctoinhiolt,
dio doch Eoachaffon wurdc^ un al ch t orado nit aolchon Ango-
logonhoitan zu bofaaaon. Elno tiato von Forachunr anuftrnogon
dor Luftwaffo in jahro 1944, von Bockor-Proyaong untorsoichnot,
zotBt auf dan Goblot dor LuftfArtnodizln aocha Fnrachunfa-
auftraogo an Ruff. (NO-934, Ankl.Bow.458, R.3655). In Jahro
1948 lacon dio Dingo nicht andora. In uobripon waron dio
Ergobnlaao dor Hoohonvoraucho Bockor-Proyaong bokannt. Dloao
Rxporlnonto wurdon nicht ala olno oinfacho nkadoniacho Studio
auapofuohrt, aon'orn dnmit aio dor Luftwaffo wlaaonachnftlloh
wortvollo infornationon licforton. Dio Abtoilunr fuor Luft-
fnhrtnodlzin war porado dio Dlanatstcllo, dio alio aolcho Bc-
rlohto orhlolfc, aio auowortoto un<* auf orund aoichor Borlch-
to dio notwondl -on Inatruktlo n0 n ortoilto. Dor zwock dor
Hoehonoxpor lronto war, dio M«o lichkoi t dor Rottung dor von
FlU£Zou'*,boaatzun ; 'on nua ^ r ^ 8a on n^ohon foatzuatollon. Dioa
brachto s^lchoFra on nit ol ch wlo z.B. dio nootigo Auaruoatung,
nit dor Flugzougboantzuncon zur Srlolchtorurg aoichor Rottun-
gon voraohon wordon a^llton, wlo z.B. nut^natiacto Fallachlrn-
ooffnunr, Sauoratoff-piaacha^, warno Kloldunr; und dorartlgoa.
Nlchta koonnto oindoutigor aoin, rile dnaa dio Diaiatstollo
von Anthony und Bockor-Froyson- vo n ion ’’oohonvorauchon aolt
lhron oraton Anfnnr ®oachold ruasto, don F^rachun-anuftraf
fuor aio ortoilto und dio zu ihror DurchTuo^run- nootlfon
Elnrlchtunron und f.oldnltt 1 zur ’forfuorun- stollto, bol dcr
Vorboroltun • dcsBorichta half un’ don Poricht zwocka apaotoror
Vorwondun, bol dor Entwicklun- v^n /.usruostun sro-onataondcn
fuor dio Luftwaffo auawarteto.

B. Knoltovoraucho (Ankla, oachrlft Ziff. 6 (5))

Dio Kaoltcvorsucho alnd 1= Slnzolnon In don schrlft-
aatz dor Ankla obohoordo go{on Slovora boachrlobon.

Dor Anroklagto Beckor-Froyaong {Tib zu, dnaa or lm Junl

- 9 -


BKCK33-FREYS2' G


1942 AJcton aah, dlo V^rachlaeco fuor olr.o lr. puornberp 1m

Okt^bor zu hnltondo Kaeltotarunr enthlelten. (R* 7849). Bol

olner apaetoren Goloronhelt aapte or:

"Ich bokon dm Auftrof nit don Akton uobor dlo roplanto
Kaoltotarun' zu Hlppko horuntor zu rohon. Natuorllch
J*' H lppko Pr< ' f * Anthony iprochon, dor abor
nlcht da wnr unrt an stollo v«n Pr^f. Anthony a^llto loh
su Prof. Hlppko horuntcrkoanon." (P. 8117).

Er aafto fornor aua, daaa or In Anth^nya Abwoaonholt v«n

Hlppko zu olnor Ta un.- rorufon wurdo und daaa "aachor bol

olnor a^ichon Tapunr '"'rkohrun^ on zur v«rnatao olnoa on Konzon-

tratlonalacor-Haoftlln on durckzufuohromlon Vorauchapr-vranna

traf. (R. 7815). Ss war bcl dloaor To^uny zri achon Hlppko,

Roachor und Bookor-Froyaor.rj in jull 1942 v^olllp klor, daaa

dlo Exporlraonto In Dachau on K^nzontratinnalaror-Hooftlinfon

vorponomnon wordon a^lltcn. Bookor-Proyaony an/to, dnaa or

bol dloaor Ooloconfcrt t Raachor zum oratcn Halo traf und daaa

or ihn orat bol dor Nuornborgor Kaoltotorunp l~ oktnbor 1942

wlodor anh. (n. 7855, R. 8116).

Bockor-Froyaonp rab on, daaa or nlchta nit den tataaooh-
llohon ^xporlraonton zu tun hot to und d a39 aolno Pctclllrun*
nach dor Paachor-'ippkc-Rcckor-Frcyaon;- - K^nforonz In jull

1942 ondoto. (p. 7884-92).

Dlo Anklnroboh^or-’o bohauptet nlcht, daaa Bockor-Froy-
aonc dlo Exporlraontc V'rr.ahn, alo untoratollt abor, daaa dor
nnotleo porochun aauftrac v^n dor Abtoiluny fuor Luftfahrt-
modlzln orlnaaon wurdc, daaa dlo Goldolttol und Auaruoatunca-
po/onatnondo von dloaor Dlonatatcllo eollofort wurdon und
daaa Bookor-Froyaonp vm dloaon Faporlraonton wusato, wlo or
ouch tataaochllch zui;ab.

Eln Brlof v*n Anthony on Hlnnlor, v«n 8. Okt^bor 1942,
botroffa dlo Nuornborpor Kaoltcta -unr und don v^ryoachla.-onon
B orlcht uobor P^lzl^ohnora und Paachora "xporlnonto bowolat,
daaa dor F''r3chun-aauftrnr vr»n dcr Abtollun- fuor Luftfahrt-
mfrdlzln auaperebon *«urdo. In d or Pockor-^royscn;- ala ”ortro-

tor Anthenya taotlr war. Dor a r i C f lnutct:

- 10 -


BECXBR-PRSSrSENG


Botrlfft: F^rachun 3 a uf trap uobcr Abkuohlunp.

P°*»C» 1. DiR.d.L. und Obid--L. Ch.diLw.L.In.14 ;.z :

55 Nr. 20058/41 (2 11 3) doticrt: 24.2.42.

2. D.RidiLi und 0bldiL.Chid<Lw.L.In.l4 At:

21 ''-r N". 10900/42 (1 II A; datlort: 6.8.42.

An don Rolchafuohror S3»

£)lo tnapokci'v. doa Sanltaotawoaona dcr Luftwaffo hat dora
Stabaarzt Pr«f. Dr. !f«lzl''ohnor nit n,a. Bozup von 24.2.
42 olnon F^rachunranuftrar zur Bonrbcltunr f^i-ondor Frn-
po ortolltt

"Dio 71rkun r dor Abkuohlunp auf don "’armbluotor."

Auf vnrschla,-: vo n Rtnbaarzt Dr. Poacher wirdon cntaproch-

ondo Untorauchun on auf don f'onachon nua'odohnt und. in
Elnvornehnon nit Rolchafuohror 38 rool'r.oto I'ntcrauchun a-
rnoopiichko lton dor S3 In Anapruch pon''nnon.

Zur Durchfuohrun*- dor Untorauchungon wurdo olno vorascha-
pruppo "soonot" zuaannon-oa tcllt, boat ohcnd aua Prof.Dr.
Holsloohnor tis Loltor und stabaarzt Dr. Raaohor und dt.

%’ Finko.

•%

Dor Loltor dloaor Vorauchagruppo hat (onoldot, daaa dlo
Untorauohun.cn nb, oachloaaon alnc*.

Ea lat boabaichtlgt, dlo "orsucha ruppo bla apaotoatona
15.10.42 aufzulf'oaon.

Dlo vorajchapr^t^k^llo unc! oln as afuohrllchor Borlcht
wordon durch Stabaarzt Dr. Rnaohor don Rolohafuohror S 3
vnrgolopt. Ea wird poboton, dlo orl lnnlo odor Abachrlf-
ton doa Borlchtoa und dor Prot^kollo dor Inapoktl^n doa
Sanltaotawoaona d.or Luftwaffo zur vorfuopun.- zu atcllon.

Ea lat bonbalchtl-t, dlo Srgobniaao nuazu awolao Sachbc-
i nrboltorn nnlnoaallch olnor Boaprochun. •, dlo an 26. und

27. 10 . 1942 In Nuornhorr atnttf lr.’ct, zucnon'-llch zu
machon. Dlo Tnpo 8 ^r'’nun dor nosprochun- wl*-' *»'la-

F 0 bolpofuopt." (NO-286, Ankl.Bor. 88 , R. 248).

/

Dlo Vorwolao In don F^rschun atuftrag auf "211 B" un-’ "ss" bo-
wolaon, daaa dor Auf trap nua '■on Inatltut fuor Luf tfahrtraodl-
zln atamnto. In don Bockor-Fro;aon,- arbcltoto. ihr Intorcaao
an Knoltopr^blomon bo. am ach^n Ip Fobrunr 1942 nit dora Auf-
trap an Hnlzlrohnor. snpar bovor dlo iN'ohon-


- 11 -


53CKER-FRSYSE1K?


vorsucho n^ch bomdet iraron, -nr<*o dlo ForaohuhRscruppo
durch dlo Elnbozlohunr vn Flnke un Raaohor vcrr^osaort.

Fan boachto auch don zwoiton Auftra-, dor an 6. Auruat 1942
auaro -obon mrdo. Dloaoa D-kuncnt borclat schluoasl.r, dnas
Bockor-Freyaon-ra Dlonatatollo v-n allart infang an dlo vor-
brochorlachon Kaoltovoraucho untoratuotzto.

Dio In Nuornborg an 26. und 87. oktobor 19-12 ab G ohaltono
Kaolto-Tacunc dor luf twaffo, bol dor Holzl-ohnor und Rascho*
uobor dlo vorbrochorlaohon Kaoltovoraucho Borlcht orstnttoton,
mn-do von Anthony und Bockor-Prcyaon c la Inatltut fuor Luft-
fahrtnodlzln olnborufon und vorboroltot. Anthony fuohrto bol
dor To cun," don Voraltz. Rlndchtllch aolnor Taoti r koit In v 0 r-
bindune rnlt oolchon Tafungon'aagto Pookor-Froyaonn ms, dnaa
"ich 0110 Tnruncon, dlo In Anthonya Roforat atnttfandon zu
orcanisloron hatto. Das 1st olno zior.llcho ArboIt,woll 80 odor
90 -»laaonachaftlor sprachon, dlo In zrol Ta.-on lhro Paploro
loaon wanton." (R. 789-:). Rr fuohrto woltor aus, dasaj "dlo
v^rboroitun.- d.or Tn-un«- lor nlloln xrnd zwar nlcht nur bol
dloaor Tn *un r , crn bol aaontllchon 12 T"-un. on, dlo dlo
Luftwaffo In dloaor Art durch ofuohrt hat, boir Roforonton,
woll or lmnor dlo Vorhnndlun on fuohron nuaato. ich war nit
orccinlantorlachcn Auf,:abon botraut, z.Toll, rl o Ich ru oh ap.ao-
tor 1944, olnon andoron Horrn nit a^lchon orraniantorlachon
Aufgabon boauftrogon lloaa. (R. 8121). Bookor-Frq, aong nuaato
natuorlloh zu. obon, dnaa or dor Tn<un ( - In Okt«bor 1942 bol-
wnhnto und dlo von Rolziochnor und Raachor .-chaltonon wrrtrao-
CO froh^ort hatto. (VO-401, Ankl.Bow. 93, R. 309). Rr atollt
aloh nbor auf don unhnltbaron stnn'punkt, dasa aua dloson Bo¬
rlcht nlcht oln'*cutl~ horv^rrln-, dnaa dlo Errobnlaao durch
Exporlnontc an Fonachon orzlolt rur’on, a^crn daas ran hnot-
to nnnohncn k^onnon, 083 dlo "oraucho an Pors^non vorfonm-
non w^rdon aolon, dlo aua Soon^t forottot irrdon waron. Dies
atollt fuor Bockor-Froysonr kaun olno v OP told! un dar, dn or,

wle sch^n ausgofuchrt, '’avon wussto

- 12 -


3 EC5ER-FREYSEMG


dass dlo KQQltovoraucho auf Grund dor Boaprocfcunr, dio or
nit Hlppko un'’ Raachor In juni 1942 hat to, an K''n 2 cntrati''na-
laror-Haoftlinron durchgofuohrt wordon s-llton. Aua don untor
dor Loitunr doa Inatituta fuor Luftfobt'tnodizin v^rboroitoton
und auf dioaor Kaoltcta ~unf gohnltoncn vrrtrar ~oht powiaa
oindoutir horv^r, daaa ftoizinotaor un* Fischer uobor ^xporlnon-
to borichtoton, nicht uobor Boobachtun. on in Foldo. 2a iat
otwaa achwioric alch vorzuatcllon, wio nan dio Roktal- und.
Magontomporatur oincs FllO(_or3 In soonot thorno-oloktriach
noaaon k^onnto. So otwaa konnto nur in vorfolgo a'Tgfnoltif,
goplnntor und durclvofuohrtor Sxporir.onto L’Otnn wordon. Im
uobricon aprlcht dio zuaaroonfnaaung von Rnachora vortrnr In
dom Boricht uobor Exporluonto, wo dor Kackon allcin nit El3-
waaaor gokuohlt wurdo. so otwaa waoro aba^lut unnooglich in
Folio von Boobachtunr.on, dio ancinoa FliOgor t. i'catollt wur-
don.dcr uobor don Ozonn zun Abaprin on rozrunron iat. Dlo
Aouaaorunron d 0 r Tn-un. a-To!lnohnor uobor dloso vortraofo
laaoon oanla vollkonnon oindoutlt* oraohoir.on, daaa Jodornann
voratand, dnoa dio Poriohto, "xporirontc an ponachon botrafon.
Dor Zouro Lutz, ddr -’icaor Ta un boi-wohnto, aa;*to am, daaa
Holsloohnora un-* Rnachora Borichto oino Ronaati^n bol dor Tn-
gung horvorricron und da3a oa nnz klnr ronacht wurr’o, daaa
dlo Vorauchc an K^nzontrati^nala. or-Haoftlln on vor.*on A nnon
wordon aoion und. T'Xioafaollo v«r okor.non aoion. (Lutz R. 272).

Kaoltoprobloroo fiolon lr. vollon Unfan, o in dio Zuatron-
dirkoit doa inatituta fuor Luftfohrtr.odizin, doason atcllvor-
trotondor Lcitor Bockor-Froyaon.- war. Sa iat klnr, daaa
dor Schluaaborioht uober Uo K^lzl-ohnor, Finko und Rnachor-
Exporlnonto


3ockcr-Prc"3cn.~.

bci ritoaom Ar.t oln. inf und dort e-’r.-fr.cltif atudiort wurro.
Dloaor Boricht boachriob dlo E^pcrtnento In don klcinaton
Elr.zolholton, und cln a^por wolt, dlo T^oafaollo nufzu-
zciohlon, dlo in dot* Folco ointrnton. (NO-428, Ankl.Bow. 91,

R. 252). Ea wur-’o vorachlo'ontllcH boaou^t, daas dlo Ent-
dockunr dor fcrnbndr.oth'Vo zur Bofcnndlunf v^n lnonsoror K.nol-
tooinwlrkun.- nla achr li chtl. nnfcaohon turdo und dnaa aerzt-
licho An^rdnunfon orlnaaon trur'’cn, dlo dloao Bohondlunfaf^rra
v^r achr lob or.. v-t dloaor Zolt nr d.na T *oupt'ottcht nuf lanf-
anno ’Tlodororwaomun. und rchrur'lim- n! t Arznoion polo ft
warden. Dloao norztlichon Arvo'aun cn k«nnton v^n kolnor nn-
dorn Dlonatatcllo nla vrn d 0 n Inatltut fucr Lu^tfnhrtr.odlzln
nu3>o.obon wor'’on und rhno v^rbor-ohon'ca a^r *anr -08 studlun
und ohno Auawcrtun. dor v»>n R^lzl^ohnor, Flnko und o nac hor
durohfofuohrton vorbrochoriaohon ^.xporlr unto, dlo dlo r-rund-
lntro fuor dlo Anwoiaun on dnratcllton, wuordon alo nlo or¬
lnaaon irrdcn aoin. , ,

Bookor-Froyaon c war nla* :?11 fare fore nt In don Ant, rtna
don F*raohun. anuftrn, ortuilto, lr. ‘.canon Vorfnl 4 die Knolto-
voraucho vr.:onmmon rnn-dou. Soh«n in Juni 1942, nla or alch
nit Rippko un-’ •’nachor boaprnch, xruaato or, dnaa dlo krinl-
nollon Exporlronto v''r,on' , 'T:on '•or-’on a-'llton un’*. or half
bol dor Orrnnlaicrur •  0 r Kaoltotn un •, nuf cr »"'lslohncr
und , 'nachor vrtrno *o uobor dlo rxporlnonto hlclton un<
w^hnto lhr bol.


- 14


Dio von Stabaarzt Pr^f. Dr* Eugon Eaagon, don Boratonden
HJCslonikor dor Luftfl^tto Reich im fcAnzontratirvialaycr Schir-
mook und Natzwollor vor£onr>nr.onm Flodkf ichorvcraucho ainf ira
Einzolnon in don Schriftaaotzon dor Ankla-oboh^ordo go,on Roao
und Schr^odor boachriobon.

Dor «n.^oklorto Bockor-Proyaonc cab on, d.naa dioso Flock-

fioboroxporimontc daa Rofornt dor Luf tfnhrtr.odizin obonfalla

nicht lntoroasiorton und dn8a or doahalb nichts dav^n wuaato,

daaa alo dupohrofuohrt wurdon. r ribt an, dnaa or orat in

Mai 1944 hornuarefundon ha be, d-xaa "an ’on olnon F^raohun a-

auftrar fuor Flookfioborinpfat''ffc hatto. (R. 7933). *7ir fin-
dnaa

den abor,/Rna») ach^n an 9. juni 1943 r.it Canyon bozuo. lich dor

Aufnnhno dor Horatollur.y v«n inprat^ffcn ira Fyyioniaohon In-

atitut dor Univoraitnot Strnaabur k^rroap^ndlorto. in dlo-

aom Brief cab Rrac on, or wordo dio Luftwnffon-Sanitaot3-

lnspokti''n orauchon, bolra Chof dca Tohrrwichta-sanitaotad.lcn-

otoa d 4 nrauf zu r’rln^ on, dnaa dio Horatcllun v^n Flockfiobor-

Impfat^ffon fuor alio stroitkrnofto ir Oat obiot bof^hlon wor-

do. i f''*- 306, Ankl.Pow. 296, R. 1385). Dloaca D^kunent

doutot dnrauf hin, dnaa dor F^rachun aauftra * fuor Typhuainpf-

at^ffo vnn In3titut fuor tuftfa'rtncdizin krnnen nuaato. R^ao

•gab an, os rmr'o "oini-o Zclt '*auorn, bla "2 T ' n aoinon nouon

F^rachun anuftr". - hcrnuo’rin'-t". Dcr "inwoia auf "2 t>" bc-

doutot Anth^nya un pcckor-Proyacn a Art. Pockor-^oyaon *3

B n^auptun , d.naa oin P^raehun sauftra. "'’or Bcfohl auf oinon
•

andorn Oobiot nl a dor d r Luftfrhrtr.odizin nicht v«n acinor

Dlonatatollo orlaaaon werdon k^nnt , l3t .-rundl^a an oaichta

d.ioaoa D^kureonta, daa vrn d.ora .;n/okla- ton P^ao, cinoa Oonoral-

arzt In dor Luftwaffe, untorzcichnot rrr .cn war.

Dor Bowola dafuor, daaa dio an IJaayon c obonon F^rachunys-

nuftrao t *o , ira Vorfrlr we Ichor or aoino krininvllon Sxporl-

monto d.urchfuohrto, aus .r.th'-nys un*’ « o eke r-Frey a on/ a Dionat-

atcllo atnmntcn, findot sich in oinon v«= 7. ckt^bor 1943 d.n-

tiorton Boricht Dr. Ran ; ona an don °ckt^r ’ <.r

K ' -


-i- «J


r ’~ r Roio'-sunlvcrs' tact «tr-3s>ur-, dcr ''o drln llnhon T^r-
aohun anuf-a-'on aufzaoMt, die seiner, matitut v-n dor Luft-
raff° uobertra on wurden. Darur.tcr bo font! on slab ^clbflobor,
Flockflobor und mfluonza-luftraojo. jodcr diosor lufttraffon-
F^raohun. sauftrao.-o vrar v~n Antfconya und Beokcr--ro;-aon s
Dlonststollo ortoilt w-'rd.on. Das bowelson dlo Pczoichnun on
"2 II A", "2 F" und "2 n p« und dor Akto.nvernork »SS“ (VO-
137/ Ankl.B on. 189, 7. 737).

Kino Liato v-n nodlzir.lsohon •'''rsahur. sauftrnoyon, dlo
v'n dor Luftvmffc In Jahro 19*24 hernua o o v on und auf dor
ncokor-^rryaon- ala P oorboltcr vorzclohnot war, aohlloaat
"aorona ’’loo'.tfioborirrfat''ff-^'ra-shun> 6 in, dio *d s ,-oholn
klaaalflziort -nr. ('’0-93!, \nkl.new. -253, 7. 3655). "ino
VAn Poekor-^royaon. a Vat hernua o oVono \ufatollun • v*n \ua-
~ ahon Toarona ir Jahro lO-'Sund 19 .;.; fucr Infinonza-T^rsabun-a-
auftrnofo, vorzoiohnot Bolnatun n ->r zuftwnffo fuor vor-
aohiodono n otaon n aoh '■on :<'*ncontrati~naln orn Sihirnoak und.
Vntz'oilor wlo auch fuor Tolofnn ospraonho Cahin. (ro-3450,
Ankl.R ow. 619, R. 9587). Bln aoknll‘>hosv'>n ;*aa on In 80 -
zlohun. ouf dlo von Bookor-Froyaon. a Dlonatatcllo atannor.don
Oolbflebor- und Plookflobarf''raOhun a-Auftrao 0 ofuohrtoa
Auala onbuih sol t Auala on “obnar 19*22 Ms V^vonbor 19-1-:.
Solno Inn andnuorndo "'r.otl kolt In' S*:hlr:;cok un'‘ VatzTOllor
1 st a'ia dloson vsfatollun on klar ori nhtlilh, boi donon dJ.o
•’"tlz atnn'’, d* a s alo pit -’or Luftwaffe vr-roohnot wurden.
('•n-333", Ankl.>o“r. *12, «. 1035). PoVor-~ro r aon"3
Dlonatatollo '’lo Aua n'-o v^n ’••'* in fuor ?~libo r*r-
anhunf or. onebrl t-, befaasto a’o a' a*- auih r’t ’on A'la -abon.

PoaVor- r *ro:-aon boabrltt, d«aa or o—S3t ha>a, daaa
"aa.^on “xrorir.or.to an *>nzor.tr“. tl-visla *r-'•%’.‘tlla or. v«r-
nahn. Dess dloa oino Luo 0 st, bowolst, rahnts ~-rlof v-n
29. AU uat 19-;-, an "aa on. (-0-131, Ankl.Bow. 309, >. 1204).

Daa Original dioscs Brlofos onthaolt don Aktoavarnark: 3 a*.:

55 vr. 6028/44 oh. (2 II A)“* Dor apief w-r also


- 15 -


v«n inatitut fuor Lu^tfa'-rtncdizin oa-.hriobon T'rdcn, dcsson
Loltor zu dicaor Zoit Bcakcr-"'rc;-aon war. Dioaor a riof lau-
tct:


"1. Dio Untorsuchun. on uobcr don “lcekfiobcr-Tr''c!;onlr.Ff-
atoff aua D^ttcraackkulturon aini roitor f^rtzuBotzon.

K iorzu wlrd do boantra: to ? A raahun a bo 1 hi If o v^n
Mk. - 1 . 000 .— zur Vorfuo, unj soatiilt."

II. Eln Sntaahold uober dlo sinrlohtun oinor l».pfat*ff-
prndukti A naataotte kann n ''.h niaht otrnffor. wordon, da
dio stollun narno doa Chofa doa ’Tohrnaa* ta-sanitaotawo-
aor.a, dor fuor dlo Boaohaffua.’ v^n Irapfat^ffon alloln
zuataondi. iat, n A ch auaatoht.

III. 23 iat nitzutoilon, nb anzunohnon iat, daaa dio
z.Zt. in }?atzwoilor horraahondo ?loakf iobor-?pitIomie mit
den Unfcorauahun. on uobor oinon Tnpfat«ff in Zusanraon-
hon~ atohon.

I'r. Dor 3orioht won 21.6.44, in don dio -ntorauahunren
In Hatzwoller oi -ofuo''rt alnd, baotto ala rcboin -o-
aohiokt wordon nuosaon. “*a iat in Zukunft donor.tapro-
chond zu vorfahron. ' (''0-131, ^Nin).

Ala Boakor-'^ro^aon. dioaor °riof bolr Krouzvorh A or vnr-o-
lo t wurdo, wo to or dio laoo’ orliotw oaSiuptun , daaa nur dcr
orato r ara rnp h ”"n I V. -oa ibriobon war. (3. 8177).. Dio Traxia,
olnzolno rara;rapbon in doraolbon Priof v«n voraohiodonon Por-
annon achroibon zu laaaon, iat aolbat in dor wundorvnllon Doa-
nr; oniaatinn doa Luftwaffon-Sanitaotadlonatoa, wio ihn dlo
An; ok la ton quo omit '.labor, otwaa zu atark, ur. laubhaft zu
ooin. findnhtllah doa oraton Abaatzoa ^ltt «ookor-^o;-aon:

an:

"Ioh nor an dor ronrdiniorun dioaor rcraahun a/oldor
ala 7oforont aol 'atvora toond lloh botoili/t; abor da
hatto nicht nur ioh oin f A rt r.itzuro'’on, arndorn r.och
voraohiodono andoro Louto, und daa ontaihoidondo ~*nrt
hntto dor Snnitaotsohof, ronw. dor Ohof doa Stobo3 zu
aaron." (B oekor-Tro. ao--, T. 3181).

If ior in dioaa- «rlof, dor v-»n noakor-T*oradn ros-.brio-
Kon un- 1 \* A n vafcnt, 9-brncdors ata'-sc^of, unt'.rzoiabnot lat,
wirr» "an-on rofra t, oY dio in '-ntzwillor horrsohondo v loak-
fiobor- 2 ridonio ir~endwio rrit d r r ^lcckfioborforaohun dort
in Torbindun atobo. Dioa beweiat, daaa noakor-~ro;*acn • wusato,


daaa "aa ~or.


- 16 -


2-sc:~-.-?iJXS3K


Exporlz^nte ar. Insasson tit virulent*. Fleckfieber vornaha. Hicr aahen
wir, daaa Beckeiw'pjyaonis dienstatell# ailfen Brief fucr dio Untcr¬
oc hri ft dea Stabachefs aufaetztc, der bewaist| daaa 3ecKer-Froyseng
davon wuaste, daaa Forachungaarbeiten la Konzentrationalager Natzweilor
vorgenoemon wurdon, daaa aolche Forachungsarbeit als gohela klaaaifiziort
war und daaa Bocker-Freyseng voollig ueber die Situation ia Bildo war
und 4000 HU fuer dio Fortaetzung dor Arbciten zor Vorfuc^ung stellto.
Haagona Antwort auf dijacn 3rief hin, datiort 19. Soptocbor 1944, vorweiat
ebvnfalla auf da a Schroiben vo_ 29. august 1944 --it deu C-iffrc-^cichcn
"2 II A". Daruoborhinaua besuchto Bcckor-froyacng Haagon in Strasaburg
buvor dor Briof aui 29. .»uguat ;otchriubon wurde ur.i «achruftd dio Sxperi-
Bontu noch iu Congo waren. (Hasgen, H. 9569). Haajan segto aua, daaa
Bockor-Proyaong ihn wagon Tioro auf.^aucht hab«j. &.ckor-r'royaeng gab zu,
daaa or vide DoKu^nte -.oaehcn habo, dio aich uuf Haagona Arboit bezo-
gon (R. 7934) und daaa or Professor Kaa £un kannta, da or ihn nit Schroodor
gotroffun und dozu noch in Straaaburg boaucht h-.bo. (P.. 7935).

E. USE# ;.*sssr-z .F : a.Tr,

Dio an Haoftlinjon doa lionzontrationalagura J^ciiau vor,;onoci.enon
kuurwiaaor-ExporL-^nt j aixul Itx einxclncn iu Schriftaatx goon don Ango-
klagton Schroodor boachriobon. Bockur-Freysen jlbt au, daaa or von don
Uoorwaaaor-Lxporioontor. wusato und dnron tcilnahs. Aua dor Bowtioorhcbung
ging horvor, daaa or dor ruohrigata Tcilaoh»*>r boi dcr Planunj und Vorbc-
roitung dor Esperlaonto war.

Ab 19. mo! find cir.o uonforuns it . ichaluftfr. irt-iniatoriun (R U? )
atatt, an dor u.a. Christensen, Schicklor, Beckon-.-ruyaong und Schaofcr
taUnxhuen. Uioeo Uoafcrunx b-iaaato sich .It don Problut. dcr Trlnkbar-
r-achung von keorwaaa-r. Lwd iuthodon,-oorwaaaor trinkbar zu uachen,
atanden


- 17 -


SiCKZr.-FIGYSZK G


zu dieaer Zeit doa Sanitaotsdienat i-r Luftwaffo car Vorfiie^Wg, Die
eine, dio sogonannte Schaefer* ache ..othode, war chs^isch gepruoft wor-
don und produzierte onachoincnd trinkbaros l^ocrwaascr. Slo hatto Jcdoch
don Htchfcoil, daaa aio betracchtlicho *.engcn von Silbcr bcnoeti :tc, das
nur in boachraenktun Longon zur Verfucgung atand. Dio zwoite Uthodo,
Borkatit genannt, war oino Subatanz dio dan Geschroiek dca Luerwasaors
veraondorte, abor daa Sals nicht ausschiod. Sio hatto den Vortoil oinfa-
cheror Horstolluns und Varwondung.

Die .infaongo dor Veraucho zur Sntdtckuns oiner .othode, ..corwosaer
trinkbar su uachon, gol.t oaf ..pril 1942 zerueck, als dor .oigoklagtu Schao-
for, auf oino .oinjgung 3ocl:cr-Frc»ysenj8 hin, den ..uftrag urhiolt, dafuar
zu aorgon, daaa daa Jurntproblc . wisaonaduiftlich beirboitot wuordo und
or zu disao..: ZwoeK zu i«i_ Ir.atitut fu.-r Luftfo.irt wdixin in Berlin go-
achickt wuurdo. (dockor-Fr.yaeng, B. 7980). Schaefer rboitutc waohrond
dor Jahro 1942 und 1943 M dies- t'roblc.i u;«l st.llto orachoopfondo Vor-
aucho an Tioron und t-chniacnon .vaaiatunt-r. on, dio sich fu*r dicao Vcr-
aucho froiwillig zur Vcrfuegugeatullt nation. Schaefer b^cndcto aoin
«ork ia Novuubor 1943 und fuohrU soinc «dthoio Bockoi'-Froyaong, Hippko
und Christenson vor. (ft. 7982). Indoasen war in dor *.wi achcnsoit oine
andoro kothodo entwidkelt wordun, dio obun ala dio sogonaante Borka-ketho-
do odor "Borkatit" urwaolint wurdo.

Auf dor Tagung au 19. IM bcrichtoto dor *ngoklajta Bccker-Froyaong
ueber gowiaao kliniseho J&periixnto, dio von Sirany zwocks -rprobung von
Borkatit durchgofuuhrt cordon *irun. Zr k-u. suu Schluaa, dasa dio Bcdin-
gungon, unter Uwncn die 2xpori.iontc vor-jooo on worsen warun, nicht ,-o-
nuogond realiatiach der &-enot wntapracn.n. r b rlchtoto, dor Chef do a
Luftwoffensanitiotadi.natca

"aoi davon ueb.rzeu -t, d-.as bei del. Borka-7orfahron nach
doe. Gonusa uea -eifcntita nach sp-.oteatv.ns 6 Tag«n


- 18 -


l-l ->F:«SrS3iG


gcaundheltlicho Schaedon zu exirartun sind, -.iolche eino dauern-
du geaundhuitliche Schaedlgdng each sich ziehen und nach .in-
sicht von Untorarzt Dr. Schaofef na#h spaetostens 12 Tagon
tdt toedlichcu «usgans endcn wird. Ausacrc Erschoinungon aind
aurch Entnnoaserung, durchfall, Kraocpfo, Halluzinationcn und
ondlichui. Todc zu onrarten." (NO-177, ankl. Bew. 133, ft. 479).

Daa haaultat dieaer .vonfoxcnz war tin 5oschluaa, nouc Exporlnento
vorzunchuen. Oioao aolitcn cine Verauchar^iho fuer die ^aucr von hocch-
atena 6 Tagun unfaaaon, waohrond wclchtr oinor Gruppo von Vcrauchaporao-
non uit Borkatit ttehinaultoc ..ccrwaaatr go-abon worsen aollto, einor on-
doron Gruppo gcwoohnlichea Yrinkwaaaor, oinor wjitoren Gruppo uoberhaupt
koin Trinkwaasor und dor lotzton Gruppo iiaaor, daa in dor. danala ge-
braeuchllchen Soonotprovinnt ontnalton war. .,an bcsciloaa dio Vornahnu
oinor zweiton Voraucharoiho und dor Boricht fuohrto aos:

"Louto -it ..torrfaaaer und Bcrkatit omiohrt, ala Proviont
ubonfalla dur. vorjuaohenen See not pro vi ant.

" Vorauchadauor 12 Tvo .

Ua nach .uialcht doa Che fa doa Sanltaotawusona boi diusor Vor¬
aucharoiho lit oauemdon gcaundhoitlichcn Schncdlgungon bozw.
dor. Todo dor Voraachapvraoncn zu rvchnon iat, aollton ala
Vorauchapcraonon Loutc gonor^ui wvrdon, wolcho aoitona doa
ftcichafuohrura-SS zu r Vorfuo.'unc xatullt woi\lcn.'' (NO-177,
obun).

Alao iiu vollon Bowuaatauin, daaa dor Gwnuaa von 3orkatit fuor uinon
Eoitraur. von 6 Ti«n uino .auemdo Sch.-wli;un • dor Vorauchapcraoncn r.it
eich bringon und dnaa spa^UsUiu \i 12. !>.;«, d„r Tod cintrotcn wuordo,
wurdon Plaonc gc.acht, .Ap.rii.cnU .urchsufu^.ron, dio 6 bia 12 T.igo
lang dlMn aolitcn. Ja iat zu Uachtun, lass d.r r.onfurvnzboricht nicht
angibt, daaa die HouCftatdcuwr 12 Tage ati, wic bci don oratun Verauchs-
rcihon; aiu aoUton ab-r uuf allw radio 12 T*..., l.«n. durchgofuohrt war¬
den. Ua uui wuaato, daaa ;.an untor aolchon U_atv.ndon nicht nit rrci-
willigon ruchncn konnto, untachied aich dio rionfertnz dafuor, Konzentra-
tionalagorhaoftlingo zu vurwenden, die von dur SS zur Vorfucrum; gcatollt
wordwn wuordon. la Bericht utUr cine zweite Tacung x 20. M 1944
hoiaat oa: ".da


- 19 -


Verauchaort wunic Jachau bvstiiit"* (»>1?7, ob.n)i ..bachriften dor 80 -
richtc ucb,r die Ttflons ?in^cn u.a. an die $anitaota-7arsucha*und Lohr-
abteilung dor Luftwaffo Juctorbog, dor die ..ngeklagtcn Schaefer and
Holzloehnor, die dio ;.aeltee;<pori~onte -it r-aachor durchfuohrten, zuge-
teilt waren; an die OVL Borlin-.,dlcrshof, Jer dio .uijeklagtan Huff and
Koubor o zugoteilt waron; an dio Luftxaffcnaanitaotainapoktion (L. In. U);
und an don Rcichafuohror-So; dcr 3ericht »*ar von Cnristonson von dca
technlachen Buoro doa HI— untorzeichnot.

• 7. Juni 19A4 achricb dor «ngoklagto Schroodor an Hi l. dor auf doa

beg uebor Grawitz and orauchto as Konzentrational&gcrhacftlingc, dio als

Verauchaporaonon b«i don -ccreaesorvorauchun vorxondet wonlon aollton.

Dioaor Brief lautot aaazu Iso:

"Sio gabon bon ita fruoh-r dor Uftvaffo dio ~o.,lichkoit,
dringondo aurztlicho Fragun ir. Vjrauch an . onachon zu klao-
ron. Icn at oho heuto riodur vor oin^r iitachoidun^, dio nach
sahlroichon Tier- unu vuch ..onschenverauchon an frciwiUlgon
Vurauchapcraonon uino una.uoltigo i^oaung vurlangt: die Luft-
waffo hat gloichxvltig zwoi Vorfehron zu;. Trinkbar nchon von
-ourwaaa-r ontwickult. dia cine, von oinui. San.Offizier ont-
wickolte Voi/ahrcn wntaalzt daa -oor^zasor und uacht oa zu
aims- wirkllchuii Trinkv-uaaur, da a z*oito, von cinot Ingoniour
angogubeno Vorfahnn laoaat den Salzgwhait unwraondert, oa
niw.it do; Sooaoaaur r.ur doa Onangonohapn ick. Jaa lotz-

to Vorfahren benooti ;t la Gagonoatz zu.. oraton koine Engpaos-
rohatoffo. .torstil choraolts uiaa dieses V.riahron nach unao-
ron houtlgon Eonntnisson ala bedonklich ing.sohon worden.
da dio dufuhr konzentriertor Salsloosun ;cn schtroro Vor .iftunga-
orscholnungon horvorrufon kann.

dio Ver aucho an . onachvr. Manor r.ur bia zu oinor Dauor
von yjjr :-n d ureft y-fuohrt Kcruor. konnton. dio praktiaahen
hopioru r. ;'-r. ab.r ^it.o V .rsor -an ir, tut dor, tenor bia zu
12 T. -n vorl.-n ait,, ^ntaprvcnoni, Voraacho orfordorlich .


"Benoctigt wordon 40 gesunde Vorsachspcraonen, die faer 4
VKschen voll zur Verfue^ung stor.cn ruesstent Da von fraehe -
ron Vorsuchcn bokannt, dass lz; Konscntrationslapcr Daohau
die notwandi.-,en Lafcoratorien sind, waora dieses La.-, or aohr
<eeignet ." (.’<0-185. «nkl. 3ew. 134, R. 463. - Untorstxvichun-
gen oingofuogt),

Schrouder schloss die son Brief ait dca Bocoriccn, dass dio Vorsucho
von den Angeklogten Boijlboock joleitot «.urdcn wuerden.

Es iat wichtlj zu bcuchton, dass der orsto Entwrf dioses Briefes
von Schrooder ait Hi~~lor von dc;_ An^eid.‘.jtcn Bocker-Froysong diktiort
wurdo. (Beckor-Freyscnj, n. 3210). Dioser Brief beweist in einor Jodan
Zweifol ausschlioasjndwn .olso, dass der ^n. , ,ddf.^c scckcr-Freyaong von
den vorher^c^an^onon krlninellon Exporlaentcn wasato, dio -v.rzto dor
Luftwaffo an Konzont rationale ;orhsoftlin-.on vor • no., -n .v.tton . Zweiual
orwauhnto or fruehoro SRpori onto, dio durch die Zirvcrfucaungstellung
von Haeftlingen sei tofts der 3S on-xacglieht warden waron. Dor Brief bo-
woist femor, dass die vorsuchspersonon Ueino Froiwilligon suin sollten.
Schrooder,der don Brief ant.rv.oichnet or. 1 Dccker-rroysong, dor ihn go-
schriobon hat, arwaoioian .luadrvccklicn swc.tun Sits ios ursten Absatzes,
dass Tiervorsucho, aorrio unscbanvurs-JOhe an "fr uiicilli,. n Vorauchsporso-
non" schon durchgofucr.rt warden scion, ab^r dass das rrobloa Jotzt oine
ondgaoltige Loosung voriange, da dieso ir poricente nor bis sa oinor Dsucr
von vior Tagon durciigofuoart word .1 scion, waehro.-.d dio jr^tischon For-
dorangon oine Hilfo fuer In Soonot Contone bis zu 12 Tigcn vorlango.

Dio Vortoidigung hat die Uoborsotztng dcs sweiten Satscs io orstoit Ab-
satz bostritton and cine andor< Ueborsctzung vorgcscltlag^n, der zafolgo
Schroodor don Aelchafaohrcr a. freiwilligc V-xlechspcrsontn ersacht haotte.
Dio Uobursetzangs-S'.chvcrstaendi^n dcs Office of Chief of Counsol for
War Crimes haben dio obon angcfuonrto UcUrsotzang bcglaubigt and dio
Anklagcbchocrdo vorlaoast sic . darauf.


- 21 -


5 SC" Fii2atS3*G


Dass diese Uebersetzung ricfctig ist, geht Yollk xren klar aus dco Sit-
;; ungap rotokoll voc 12. one 20. :.al 194A rtenror, das ausdruccklich er-
waehnt, dass, da bei diesen Versuchen Todosfaolle kii orwarten seien, nur
solcho Loute bei den Versuchen verr.endet werden sollton, die von Hiaclcr
zur Vorfuegung gcstellt wordun wuerden. Es ist laechorlich, bei Versuchen,
bei denen nit Todesfaellon als mit einer feststehenden Tatsache gorechnet
wird, von Freiwilligen su sprechon. Lan oiss sich ferner daran crinnom,
dass die Luftwaffe schon seit langet in den Xonzcntrationslagem Vcraucho
on unfroiwilligon Vcrsuchsperaonon durchgofuehrt hattc. Die hoerwasser-
versuche waren nor oin died in einer ixihe verbrocherischcr Experiments,
die von dor Luftwaffe eingeleitet warden waren. Schroedor und Bcckor-
Freyaung wandten sich an die SS, well aie von diesen fruoheron Xxporimonton
wusston.

Dass dioao Vorsuchc un onfrelwilllgcn Vorsuchsporsonen vorgenaemcn
wurdun, bowoist auc.; dor flrief, don Irawit* an Jlimlcr aa 28. Juni 1944
aenriob. (40-179, Jilt'd. flow. 135, it. 485 ). In diosen Driof borichtot
Grawitz uebor dio Anaicht von i 6 rxt, lluocka, Lobe, wio ouch uobor
soinu oigono .uisicht insichtlich dor vorgeschlagonon Ex.«riocntc. Gluccks
gab an, dass "gugon dio Jurchfu-l.rung dcr voe. Chef des Sanitactswesens
dor Luftwaffe orbetonen Vcrsuchsroiho in der Versuchsstation ttaschor In
Konsontrntionolagor D.chau von hior aus fcclr.'.rlvl Sedonkcn wrhobon worden.

Es .ipllon nach ^oeglichkoit . udtn odcr in uarantaona bofindllcho Hacft-
llngo vurwundot worsen ." Ijn kann sich unaooglid; vorstcllcn, dass cin
Judo aufgofordort wonicn naoro, sich froiwillig fuor irgondotwas in
Dritten hoich zu ncldon, zu oin^r Leit,wo sic dllion.n..vi3o in Xonzen-
trationslagorn hingi,schlichtot wurdun. Kobe fuchrtu at's:

"Ich schlug vor, hierzu die asozialen Eigeunomischlinge zu vor-
wondun. iliuruater befind_n sich Lonscncn, die swar gosund sind,
abor fuor den Arboitsuinsatz nicht ir. Frago kaacuon. Ich werdo
dioser. zigounorischon Lenschen wagon dvr-nacchst Jteichsfuohror
oinen besondarun Vcrschlug unterbreitan, teltc os abor fuer rich-
tig, die crfordorlichc Anzahl V^rsuchspersoncn aus diesen Per-
sononkreis austui.achlm. Falls f.-ichsfuehrer zustinct, wordo
ich dio Vorsuchs;--rsoncn uaah ft achon."


3XT.Sn»?E5rSBB


Es ist etwas schwierig aich vorzustellen ,>*ie Ncbe, der i-eitar der Eeichs-
kriminalpolizei, Zigeunerfroiwillige fuar dioae Exporl^ento "naahaft"
nachen konnte. Grawitz widersprach dcr Bonuttung von Zigeunern aus dea
Grand, das 3 aie "teilweisc indcra&rtig rassisch zusacaengcsetzt solon",
weahalb 03 wuenachenawert aei, Versuchsperaonen zu haben, die rassisch
dor ouropaoischon Bevoelkemng verglcichbar sind. Hinaler ontachied,
dass Zigounor and drei andere Fersonen za Xontrollzwecker. benuctzt werden
aollton. (NO-183, Ankl. 3cw. 136, h. 487).

D«r Angeklagte Bocker-Froyaung sagte ebonso wio Schroodor aus, sio
haotten veraucht, Vorkohrungen zar Durchfuehrung von -oerwaaaervorauchen
in Luftwaffenlazarett Braunschweig zu truffon and sic haotten auch vor-
sucht,Studonton der Aorztlichon LuftwaffeiT&kadeedo Sr.de Lai 1944 als Vor-
suchsporaonon zu gewinnon. Sic gobon an, sio hactten sich erst an dio SS
gowandt, nachdera sio alio andoron *ooglichkeiten orschoopft haotten.

Dor Boschlusa, Konzontrationolagcrhaoftlingc su vorwendon, hat nicht don
Krfolg dor Bereuohungon, Froiwilligu zu findun, abgowartot. !an wussto,
dass gerade in Anbotracht dos apeziullcn Charaktors dcr geplanton Versu-
cho Froiwilligu nicht orhrdtlich aoln miordun. Auf dor andoron Soito

• ,» W ♦ •

konn nan unmougllch rlaubon, dass Schroudor und iiacker-Froyacng in ihron

wichtigon Stollungan boi dcr Luftwaffo nicht 40 Frciwilligo fucr Sxpori-

raonto findon konnton, wonn sio so unschuldig worcn, wio sio bohaupton.

Es gab koine Vorac.iriftcn, dio dio Vomatoo von Versuchcn an .chrenchts-

angohoorigon vorboton hoot tun. .-'rofcsaor Kaagon botonto ic Eusasncnhang

nit don von ilua in aoincc. Brief vo~ 27. Jull an dun Schroodors Stab zugo-

toiltan Kalk vorgusclilagonun Golbauchtoxpurizwnt jii an x: schon, ganz aus-

fuohrlich, or piano, Froiwilligo von dor. Studontonkotipani on dor ohraacht

(R. 9578).

in Straasburg, Froiburg odor Hoidclbcrg zu vorwendon./Haagon war positiv,


- 23 -


3ZC:ZI -FfasSB


daw Studenten-Freiwilligo zur Vcrfuegung gestellt werden konntcn. Er
gab an, er haette sie waehrend ihrer Ferien ver^enden koennen. Kalk war
auch sicher, dass dies haette getan worden koennen. Haagen betonte nach-
druecklich, dass Freiwillige zur Verfucgung standen. (E. 9580). Becker-
Froyseng sagte aus, dass or gewusst babe, dass 3orkatit don Tod innerhalb
laengstena 12 Tagen hervorrufen wuorde. Sr betonte in der Tat. nachdruock-
lach, or sci ueborzeugt gewcson, dass enter gewissen ILzstaenden dor Tod
in viol kuerzorer Zeit als 12 Tagen eintreten wuorde, wenn dio Borka-k'o-
thodo vorwendot wuorde. (R. 8193).

Die Aussagen hinsichtlich dor Tabcllon und der Bedingungcn,enter de-
nen die Vorsuchspersonon die Experiaonto erdoldon fasten, aind fa. einzol-
nen in don Schriftsaotzen gegon Schroedor, Boiglboock und Schaefer nie-
dergelegt, und wurden hier nicht bosprochen.

Der Angoklagto Bockor-Frvysong sagte aus, or soi verantwortUch fuor
don Boginn dor UeoniassoixaporlDentc in Dachau, und dass dor Grund fuor
dio Exporioonto die Tatsache war, dass das technischo 3uore glaubto, aus
wirtschaftlichen Gruondon soi os aa boston, dio Bcrkaw.othodo zu verwen-
don. Er gab an:


aua J gufaclir€ ^ u ‘* d 2::ir 8^ ub c ich sohr ausfuohrllch.
daas dioao wirtschaftlich-rohstoffaacsaigon Gruonde la auch

S^tit ,l 'i'* S t dM t0Chni8Chc  fc'Stir-* hat, fuor das
BorKatit olnzutrotcn und was Herm Professor Schroodor auch

Ichlw I' diu Fra S° Jos Khalit auf Vor-

W^JS»Sn i Tfl.!r d ?° Cn ° ire - Jl 4UrCh ° in ° n Vorsuch

2 fSclbstvorstaondlich wenn das Boricatit in End-
ox. okt genau so gut gewoson ware, waore os natuorlich oin

£JSXZ£?<£: SStf. — “ ohno d “ £Ub " —


Die angwklagton Schroedor, Bcckcr-Fruyscng, Boiglboock und Schacfor
waron sich dor Tatsacho wohl bewusst, dass Boricatit gofachrlich war,
abor sic waron boroit os ausauprobioren, ua sich solbst und die andoren
kitgliedor dos tochnisciion AcUs zu vorgewissom, aass oine solcho Wo-
thodo koorwassor nicht Tdrkllch trinkbar ^achcn koonne. Als Bcckor-
Froysong gofragt vjurde, uaruu «r der. Befohl


- 24 -


33CKZR-?35rS5K3

au diesen Experiaenton gab, orklaerte or:

"Ich "olltc nicht die Sxporlnente, aondem ich suaate cich
an der Vorborcitung dieaor &periaente aua Dienstgruendcn
beteiligon." (E. 8192 ).

Er gab unuomnden zu, bass Siranys Exporiaonte gezclgt haotten,
daas die Berka-Kethode nichts tauge und,als or ic Krouzverhoor gefragt
wurde, "or die Vorwendung von Kacftlingen bei den Experiocntcn vorachlug,
gab Bocker-Freyacng an:

"Ich habo von dor ioeglichkoit geaprochon, falls "ir koine
andcron '/orauchaporaonon bekoeoon, una am Haoftlinge zu be-
nuchon, abor nicht aua doa Grand,«eU "ir die Vcrsuche,
fuor ait Todeagefahr vorbundon hieltcn, aondom aua reinon
Organ!sationagruondon." (R. 8206).

Boi Abfasaung doa Briefes an Hinder durch Vcrrdttlung von Grawitz
zoigto Bocker-Freyaong vollo Xenntnia doa '..egos,dor cingoachlagon wordon
muaato, urn Konzcntrationalagorhaoftlinge ala Vorsuchsporsonen zu orhalten.
Beckor-Froyaong lougnet nicht, dasa or Boiglboock dio Sefohlo und Anwoi-
sungon gab, an Konzontrationslagorhnvftllngon in Jachau zu oxporiaentio-
ron. Er gab an, daaa 3oiglboock dor Sanitootsinapcktion unterstoUt war,
und daaa or ihra oofahl.aolcho EXporiz. nto ao durchzufuohrcn, daaa "oa
boi don Vorauchon nicht zu omaten Gcsundhoitsachacdon der Verauchapcrao-
non ko«no und aolbatvorstacndlich nicht zu Todoafaollon". (B. 8050). 1st
oa nicht aohr bequon fuor cinen .uigoklagton jotzt auszusagon, dasa ur
oinoa Untorgoboncn ausdniocklich aagto, dasa die Bcporlatnt. untor koinon
Umataondon omatliehen Schadon an dor Gosundhoit der Vorsuchsporsonen
vonxrsachon duorfon, gcachwoigo donn Todosfacllo? Boiglboock sagtc aua,
or habo vorlongt, dasa dioac Bcperlaontc lrgendwo andcra durehgefuohrt
wurdon, abor Bockcr-Froyaong habo soin Brauchon abgoachlagon und dio
Fortsotzung dor Exporisento in .achau anbofohlon. (R. 0082).

Bockcr-Froysonga Boteiligung an dioson Sxperi^nton boschracnkto
aich nicht darauf, dasa or dio Vorkohrungon fuor dio Sxperiaento traf und
doa Angcklagton Boiglboock Instruktionon ortoUte. Sr boauchto auch in
Oktobor 19W, die Tagung,


- 25 -


auf der Beiglboeck einen vollcn 3ericht uefcer die Zrgebnisse soiner
Vorsuchaarbeiten in Konsentrationalager Dachau gab.

III. SCHLUSS

Die Anklagebehocrdo unterstellt, dasa daa Bcweisnaterial orgibt,
daa. Hercann Beck*r-Froysong Haupttaetor, Teilnehaor, Anstiftcr, Vorachufc-
leiatendor war, aeinc iustircung gab und in Vertindung stand nit Plaenon
und Untemohmen, die die Durchftiehrong oedisiniacher Vorsuche an lebenden
konachon ohne Zustianung der Bobroffcnen sun Gogenatand batten, und kit-
gUod einor Organisation oder Cruppo war, dio in Vorbindung stand nit
dloaon VoraucHen, in doron Verlauf kordtcten, Brotalitaotcn, Grauaaakei-
ten> Folterungen, Oroueltaten und andere dx»enschlicho Handlungon bcgan-
gen wurden,und daaa seine Schuld i* Sinne der Punkte I, II und III der
Anklagoachrift erwioaon iat.

"a»DE"


- 26 -


O.SCK2.-F sSSSESHS


Ich, Fred Lax 9 X 046207, bestaatige hiorait, dass ich durch-
aua vertraut nit der anglisehen und doutschon Spracho bin
und daaa das Voratehcnde eine wahrhcitsgacacsao und richtlgo
Uoborsetzung dos Ookuaents "Kona&nn Bccker-Freyaeng" dar-
Btcllt.


Nuamborg, 4. August 1947


?azD lu:

X 046207


- 27 -


cNo. 1 , Tribunal 1
rroeecution


Closing Brief for Wilhelm Beigltoeck
not available in Girun.,


Cover


r?.*JsuTia; or closisj 3sr ? -tjht 3La<s


£_‘ I L X T £ J R - 0 i ?. I C H T S K 0 ? j*. X
PSDh S3 So 1.


ajSCHiies Cijixsi sc--?jrrs x rz
3H ^.v’lRIX-^SCKn A«LiffV2Br?EtUTO

crasar

ICOT 3LCMS


J --0 B h. : •c»ey
«1 calender 0 . I-Vrdy
,vrr.o«t Vo rl ile-Vo chv».l d
'ether J*no Johnoon

Suornborc, Ya^r

16 Junl 1947

Telford 7».vlor
erlft^llor Gancrul, U.S.*.
Chief of Counncl for
>r Crl-ce


TSAuSLaROP C' CLOSIl-i 33L'*r KU?J aLOUC


joaite&B -unlit I der AnklNjetchrift itt dcr Angciclpgto
3L0KH lurch Tellnnha* rn einen geaeicBas.n auBg* ■rboitetoc ?l*a
Bit paduren d*hin uoberoingckoa-cn, *a Ka&adtxca, ohni down iarcr-
Btno&feU, aciliini.chv Vorcache rorawwhacn. den .-unlctcn X!

und III (Jri.giy.rbr'chcn boiv. ferbr chun gc.;en die ’.icnBChlichltcit)
vx cr E-upttnotcr, ..ltt-ctor, ^nctlftor. Yor-ehublolatondcr; S*b or
Boinc -uctlmung «u und Blend in TcrMnta* nit Plasm und Untcrnch-
mur-gon sur Vorentac von a.dixinlecfccn V- muchon »n lebenden KcnBchcn
ohno doren . lnvorstucndnlfl, iur mordung und iBoh»ndlung von
Zohr.tKUBondon von polnUchcn SwtBPngcboorlgcn. die -ngoblich *n
unfccilb^ror Tuberkuloto llttcn, bovIo »ur lurcfcfuchrung det V.uthnBlo"-

ProgrwisB.

Den ADCoklB^ton 3LOC viri in bccondcrca !»«"« die Vor*ntwor-
tuuc fuor die k«lri- and ^MTcrtuche, die -ruordlung und I'.Uphpndlung
von tubcrkaXooBcn Polon und die Yenrirklichun* do. ■ZuthBnABio--Pw««B
iur L.ot gel gt. DU 3cvoiBufnhnc ht nuBnerdca orgobon, d%B0 er in
don ltooxperiacnton, den Vcr-uchcn fuor elnon BpktoHcakrio* und
den Jlutcorinnungarorouchcn bet. illgt v»r. 4ur Ycrolnfrcfcung - 1 0
GcrichtBrorfphrcn. ilcht die AnklngcvertrcWn* die 3oBChuldlgung dor
Toilnnhnc *n dor YorBUChux ait Sulfpnilwaid xuruecic.


J 3 cr ng.kWte SLOGS ht 1= 3nlt»ct6dlenet don a»ttchen
RoichoB und dor i>xi-Prrtei St.llungcn ianog- h»bt. die nit groceor
Mp.chtfu.-llc und 7. rmtwortung verbundoc v*rcn.

r tr»t la Jnhre 1931 in die 3 cin und vurdc Gruoba*nn, d.h.
or bckloidotc den hoeefaBtea S.nlt-cUdlowtgr-d in der Sa in dcr Prorlnr
Moeklcnburg. la J-hro 1934 vuru. er sun 3>u«:tBlcltcr (Province Off1 bo
L ender) unmt. In dor S A crrcichto er don Rn cine. Qn*pcnfUohrorB
C Goner“lapJor). la J*hrt 1943 vurdc ifca tea Goldcnc


tha-jsl no.* dt cratas 3?.r ? roar 3lo»s
_-


(Solto 2dti Ori»;lr.%la)


3L0X2


Parteinbxolchcn Yorlichcn, die hooch*to AUBxcichnung dor Jfaxi-PBXtoi,
(31osc K 4465-7).

In Jahrc 1934 wurdc or Letter dco Dcutachon AorxtcbundCB, dcr
•ich apoctor zur BoicbBiwrstaklBior oxvciterto, JLO.C bckloidotc dioto
Stello bio zua >'.ricascade. In J*iiro 1935 wurdc or ruu Loiter dor "I'nt-
wickluru; do* acdlxiaiechcn Studiuaa" ora»imt. aIb aochor h»tto or dio
AUfg-bc, d-e dcutacho acdlzinlBcko iilduns«vcocn xu or««nlflicron (3lose,

R. 4458, Kr-675, Anl#«c-J«'vcioetutcJ: 3’. * 143-4). Gordc w»chrend

Boircr AatBiolt -Ib Lei ter dcr •"ntvicy.lur.,: dca nodixinlechcn StudluaB"
orfuhr dio doutache aedlxiniacho fiaacnaeh’ft ihroa . icdt rs*ns und dux
Bakonntnla xur l-Vxi-/clt»r.tchruun£ wurdc die Voraunnetzun.: fuor cir.o
viouonoch-ftlicho Lufb\hn. D*b ..cdlxinatudlua wurdc verBuchtwcloo
r.brfokuorxt, ur. den Studcaton oiaca Anreix xu aooglichot fruohor Eoir«t
«u <obcn. fccuo Lchrsc^cnetr.endc, dio clncn fruchtb*rcn Bodcn fucr dio
tf.tionftlooxiitliotiocho ?rop'»n> bildoton, wurioa in Sttaox*acn
oingefuohrt, ua Studontcn alt tjrplach Lktloa^Uoxiillatlackon Idoon su
durchdrin^on. Dm nutlOMlaoxiallatlBCbo Studontonbund wurdo f ;ogruondet.
Er diento dec. ^wcckc.iu errton J*hrc det UnlTcraltBOtaatudittDB featsu-
atcllon, ob dio Studcnton voa n«.tion».l80zi*lietl8Chcn Stindpunkt ras
zuvorUoBol* vnron. (Lcibbr-ndt, ?, 1971). Lin Stulont, dor doa SS
Studontonbund nicht wagehoerte, wurdo *1# Yord»ochtig *ngcsohon. »enn cr
Steiner PRTtoiortf'nientlon rncefcoerte, wrr ob bo hr cchwcr odor .;*r unaoog-
lich fucr lhn, xua Stot8cx»-.cn xu$olBOon xu werdon. (Lcibor-ndt, H. 198<»
hodisinBtudenten auistca Pruefusion bertefcon 1= 3osu€ *uf R».8Botheorion
und dio -uernberger GoBctxo, wolche die Judea unterschicdlich bch*ndclton.
Ent«choldond fucr die Kocglickkclt, sich »1 b Doseat pa oincr Unircrsltrct
xu ho.bilitifrca.


- 2 -


:=ATsL.-xT:or or glosiso 3Hi^r jcuar 3L0MS
_ co y7 .L 7P9 _ •

\fSoite 3 da. Original*)

3La-i

Vat die Frfjc, ob dor 3ovorbcr oik gutor Vntlo&».loiifdlt vpt. Ua
eichcrau-Ullon, de nur guto li>.tio&leoxi%liatca borufea wurilcn, vurd
cin uaf-aaende# ■Spitxcl" 'Syotca esgov<*ndt. (~Ltibr?ndt R. 1985).

5L0JG *clb<tt lcitoto dlo dcutBCbe Acrxtofdohrorechulo in
Altrcoc. (Blocc, H. 4465). Zvc. ck dic.or Tuckrcrechulc v*r die Durch-
dringung Jungor dcutichor Aorxte ait dor ne.tloneleoxiAliotlochoa
Wcltmich.uung. (Lcibbroa.t 19«3). Dio Toll&ahac *n doa Lchrg»ng in
Altro.c aag nrtu. rlich ’•froivilllg" goveron *»eln, *bcr oio war colbat-
voret-vcnilici-. dlo Voruactsung fuor oln erfolgrcichc AOrxtoleufbehn
io n-tion»lnosi*liell«cfcon Doutechl-ni.

Ib Jubrc 1339 wrdo ol/WCi Stollrertrotor do. Rcich.gc.und-
hoit.fuehrer* (Soich Health Lc*dor), Dr. Leonardo OC0T2. (31oao,

H. 4458). COITI vrr llo ttooch.tc *ntoritnct *uf doa uebioto dor alvilt
otar.tlichon GoundheitTciv».ltusg ur.i hr.tta uobcrr«g»ndo ilnchtbofugnin

K

dio uebor die dor koapotcctcn hoockntcn Scicfc.bohoordon hin*u<»glngon.

Dor vor. SXLTDH unterxv.icrxoto Lrlo voa 28. Juli 1942 boxuogllch doe

Otiiur.dkclto und 5enltectovo*on legt die no Stullung COiTI'• gonr.u feet:

•auT dca Cobietc dc* xivlUn Ocou&dkcltovoaoM let .
dor StAAta.ckretAor ia Ainletoriun dc* laaorn uad
Roichego«undhcit*fuekrer Dr. COiTI fucr cinheitlieho
Hencfcaon vomr.twortlleh. Du dicaoa iweeko etohon ika
die xuatRondigon Ahtoilungon dor obcr*ton Reichabchoordon
uad or.doro nacfcgcordnctc Stcllon xur Vorfdogung." (iio-080,
Anklngo-Doweisrtucck 5, R 93).

COiTI vr Lei tor dc ooffoatlichen Ocoundh.-lt*A=to» der
i'SDn?, dor Rcntliehon ecrufv. rbeendo, dcr abtcllung IV ia Reiche-
aislatcrlua do* Inncra Ubtollucg fyer So undhcitevcaon) und dor
Abtciiung fuor aoainlc ^ich- rheit la


- 3 -


Se&fr* 4 lea * Original)


aotch.arbclt-ninl.tcriua. (Kr. 645. Ankla*e-3cwol.atucck 3. R. 04.
Leibbrandt, 1978-9). i a aolnor • lgenachaft ala Roichagoaundhcitofuehrcr
uatorlag lha dlo Aufaicht dor SoichaAcratekaaaor ur.d aonlt war or dor
vorgo^ t»tc oiler Aerate 1= Deutackcn Reich, Masgoaoaaoa aolchor. die
in dor Wohraa.cht und dor SS dlonten. 3. gab koine cinaigo acdiainlnchc
7r ^°, 4110 lta nicl * t r °r» l‘6t vurdc und die or nicht regelto. (Lclb-
brendt, H. 1979-80.) COb?I-»a bodoutend© Sollo bol dor Plaaung und
Durchfuohrong doa I-iuthaaAeie Programs vird iirch die Ta.bollo bewleaon,

dlo dcr Anccklagt^klago-dcveiontuecJc 331 , ?. 1532 ) .

und durch die auim^o dor Aagoklagton Earl B&tflff (R. 2399. 2400) und
2iUCi: (R 7553-4).

doanbao aoincr clgoncn AUtaogo war JlOrC. OOPTZ’a Stellver-
trotor (»,) i c dcr ruehrung dor Rolchatorsfirkoaser (b) In dor ruabruag
doa Houptgoaundho 11 oanto a dcr ISa* (Rclchagcaundholtafuohror). (c)

In dor Fuchrung doa HS AoretebunJee. (Hr 675 oben. Jlot-o R 4458).

'LOCCi w.r *uch -In fuohrcndoa Wltslied doa Rr1 chef orachunga-
ratca. ’.r vurdo Bcouftr-gtor fucr dlo Kreb afore chung, alo dleao Organi-
•otlon durch 2rlaoa ro= 9. Junl 1942 OOTSUfc ur.tcratollt trjrdo. (Mono
R 4404. Kr. 894, Ankl-yv-.-cwclaatucck 39 R 144). Zb war dlo .xufgabc
Jcr 34 'uftragten au boatleaon, wolchoe rorochuagegoblct boaondcre
gofoordert und untoretuctat word-n aolltc. und die fucr dlo Durchfuehrung
dcr ForachangeArbeiton goolgnctcn /iaaoMchaftlor a.uasuwachlcn.

(31osc R 4484). Ala 3oauftr gter koanto iL0*“ Foraebunga-uftrrego la
Zuowaaonhaag clt JUSCPIR'b Encltcoaporlacntc under HIRI'a Loatgaa-
vorcucho ortollon. (Kr 690. Ankl-gc-Ikvtiootueck 120, 3. 371). ^ueh


- 4 -


(Saito -5 ilea Originnla)

untoratuetxte or lUSCHT.R'a Polyge 1-Veraucho. (31oao, R. 4527).

3-OfrS vurde auch sit der ait dec 3*ktcrionkricg v.> reunion® Forachung
betraut, dlo cr uatcr dec ^aeke-sen 3onuftr*gter fucr Ercbaforachung
-lurch fuchrto. (31or.c, R. 4458).

Die 3cvclaufnahao hat gcxuigt, .laa dor Rolchaforechungarr'
auditiniecho Veraucho an Xonachen - KD-Lagerh*eftlingo - ohne dcron
.lnvcratecndnla olnxuholen, unt. ratuctxtc und fo. rlcrto. Schon ia
Dcsccbcr 19-12 tr-t dra Eelchcfinrntilnintcriua an let Rcichaforochungi
rat nit iLa Erauch n horan, alch xu cincr .®fordcrung von Ocldaittoln
aoltcna dea Rclchaarxtoa SS GRa-'I72. xu ecuaacrn. Dr. XElTTi-'L von
Rclchaforachungorat gcncfaalgto die iurrcrfuoguagatcllung dioocr
Hittel as 35. :.acr« 1943, ledoa or crklaertoi "Sowolt ale, tun gcrln-
goron Tell, fucr di- Er*cit. ring viaacaachaftlichor Forachungaaovg-
lichkolton go da eh t eind,. duorfen ale but fuer aolcho Teollo virvrndct
verier., die lodlglich die 'faffen-S^ clt don lhr xugaongllchrn MntorK
(Gofa.ngcnc) crlcdlg a k*nn und die d»h r von keinor *ndcron ?or-
nchunga*t.'ll.- uob rr.oa.--in vorden koonn-n". (0C2-PS, «nklagc-3owato-
otuock 39. R. 153). Ubachrift iat -a dioacr Stella fchlorhnft,
wochalb dluao sv-ctaacaaigerwolac ia Dokuacntonbuch >'r. 1 nnchtuach?*
gon iat.) Dio .-uiklagorortrrturg hat i»a Goriefct mf lie Auafuchrungo.
doo Intorn>»tioa«lon ..ilit*orgorichtahofca in Froxoaa Ur. 1 verwioaen,
dio wlo folgt l*utet:

"Ia 2ua"cacBhaag it dcr Torvaltuag dor £3-L*offcr, hat dio
SS oino Rciho von Verauchen an xcnachon - Xrlcgagcfangcncn
odor EZ-Lagorhaeftllngvn - vorg noa:^n. 3ci dicson Vcreuchm
kaa ca xus Tod durch ~ retiring uni xu Toctungcn nit
Glftaur.ltion. Dcr SS gclrng ca, Roichaaittcl fucr dloao
iorachungaavcckc iu crhaltcs, da »io In dor Lego war, eu
crklncrcn, draa lhr nachcnsatcri%l xug*crv;lich aoi. daa
andcrcn St< lion nlcht aur Terfuegung atand." (S. 153).

Dea verbnekeriache “--poriaontioroB doa arichaforachungaretea


i*n Hens chon ohne dcron Einvllligung,


BLOhS


tbjll’S’^sios j: aosao 3H r.? kubt
- g2Z?l£g-2_

(Seite. 6 de* Originals)

BLOKl

boachraonkto alch nicht auf dio (k-nvhaisuE^ von 'jcldnittoln fuor

?orochun.’e».rbcitcn durch die So. Durch tic vurdcn TorBchuagBf.uftr»cgc

ortellt, dio Vcrauchc «n EZ-LBgorhaoftlingcn in aich einachlooflon.

So erhiolt la Kerbat 1943 JUSGT.R von Eoicha- orechucga-F.pt don

AUftr»g, Trodcoc-Jricr-Vcrauchc durehxufuchrcn, wpchrcr.d HI3T in

tfetxvollcr daa Sonfg«a-Sxpcrln at nit dcarcn Untcr«tucttung durch-

•

fuohrtc. (Sr. 690, Anklfgc-3cv. iaatuock 120, H. 371, ct aoq; Doc.

.Vr. 433, Ankl.-gc-Bcvclaatueck 119, 369). Intcrcano vurio Mich ica

Blutgorirxor goxolgt, wlo or von PaS&SP in Dachau cntvickolt yurdc,
wo la Lrufo dcr Vorauehc Ina-aacn dca ronzcntr-tlonelegora orachoenon
warden. (Ifr. 613, Ankl*g -ScwlaBtueck 243, R. 962).Eicao Anwcieungon
gBb 3L0*C poroo r.llch rn PaSCHBR ur.d XISS. Dad dor Reiche-yorochunge-
re.t, xUBfnr.cn ait dor -uftw-ffo, foerdorte iio Yoreucho alt riockflc-
bor, Golbflcbor uni Vlbaucht, die von ’•'aaGDH an Ina»aaon doa
Konacntr»tlonal>y{vra Vatsvcllcr vor,:raoascn wurd. n. Ur. 137, Ankl-gc-
dcvclo-.tuocle 189, S. 727). J>a w»r die "potigkeit doe Boichn-ror-
achungartoe. Ala vichtlg.a ;.it,;liod dieeor Gruppo Oder Or.;.nlo«tion
(EcichB-.orachuce;ort), vorbunicn ..it dor ' *uftrgung aolchor
Vorbrechcn, und da ir eolbat t«to»ochllch i»r*r. t-.ilgononnon hat,
nuaa 3LQ.SI. fucr achuldig b. fucd. n werden ouch don 3oatircungcn doa
Kontrollra.t-Ooactsca c'r. 10, .. r ?ar«gr-ch II, Aba*tz 3.

Dor Ang.klagto 3L0.V. d»nnle f:lgendo vorrntvortunga-
vollo Poaton inr.c: 3ruopcnfu. hr.r dor S A| Stcllvcrtr.'tor dca Reiche¬
s'' aundhcitefuchrvro: Stollvcrt-ct'r dca Initcre dcr B. lchaforxto-
kanacr und dor Yerciaigucg dca "SAtloaaleoxiallatlachon Acrttcbundoa";
Yertrotcr fuor dio “ntwicklun- dor aodixiniachcn Studluaa; 3c-uftr»gte
fuor Ercbaforachung in Pcicha-Foracbungar-t; und Fuehrer d.-r

Forachung ueb. r bp-ktcriologlacho Zrlegsfu'hruag.

- 6 -


TPitf Ua?IOH OF CL05IH0 3®r ? KURT 3L0KS


oogrirosp


(Scitc 7 dca -rlgirKiln)


ALOIS


la Jwhre 1941 gchocrto ca 1= Drittcn Vlch bcrcito aua fcotcn

Orundafts, die Jucdlachc Boroclkcrur^ ZWut»chl*ndn und dcr boaotsten

\

Loonder wuaaurotton (Urteil, Xntcrawtloawloa hilltworkerlcht, F.. 1692C

ot acq). Dicaca Gmadawt* tufol«c h-t dor Ralchrat*tth»lter fuor

don Ywrthc^.u, GKTI5SR, von KUfclSR die "rlwabala crh-ltun, dlo

Juodtachc 3cvoolkcrur.£ in dloaor Pronvlnz »ua*urotton. In olncn

Schroibcn von 1. Kwi 1943 bonachrlchtigto cr HIK L*:a, d-no dlo

"Spc«lwlbch»ndlun«" von un$of»chr 100,000 Judea in 2-3 kon-.ten boon-

dot aoln vuordo. Sr crkloorto, dwaa aobidd dleao Aufewbc aua«jcfuohrt

wordca aol, dlo vorh&adcnon uni aue^oblldotcn SondorkoanAndoa fuor

dlo Yomlchtur* von c* 36,000 polni^ctoon Stent ewv«c boo ri«on, dlo

on offonor Tubcrkulorc lltt.n. voxvendet vordon kocnntco. Pioao

Polcn aclcn tu^oataad^noraraaon cino Gcfnhr fuor dlo icutachon Boaster

und lhrc Paullion, d a al« aoc*lichcrvclao vinca Anntockungahord fuor

Lun^v ntuborkuloao dnrotclltcn. 3r3IST.3 fuhr fort:

"Dlo. ot< linden G*fahr\.a vurden -uch von
Yortrotor doa Foicha*:- aundhcltafuehrora,

Kmc rad ?rofca«or Dr. 3L0KD auerk-nnt und
iovuordl«t, obenao vio von Fuehrer Ihroa
Foont,joa-?»t a U'bna SS-Sfndartcnfuohrer
Prof. IV. H0HLiTL2->S.

"Oblclch oa nlcht aoe«llch lat. In Dcutachlwnd
aolbat dr-fconiaC-V i'^aanflm--n gegen dioao oeffent-
llcho Pla«o su untornohn. n, «l-*ub lch dlo Vermt-
vortur^ fuersrlnon Yonchl-^ uib.rn<'hurn iu
koonnen, dlo 7«dlo ait offener TBC unicr dor
polni«chon ’•arc la Vftrtbc^-u »u vernichtcn.

?Uor dloat -%ktio. aollte nwtuorllch nur .'In_?olo
u-'bor*:cbn vord.n, dcr nlcht nur an off-ncr .sC
lcldct, aondern d'-aaon 'Jnhellbwrk-.it lurch olncn
ocffcntllcho Soaatca dca 3© aundheltadlcnatca nr.ch-
g:vica.n und boatwetigt vird. In Anbetr*cht dcr
Drlngllchkolt dca Pliaoa bltt« lch Slo.nlr lhrc grnnd-
aaotsllchc luatinnung ao bwld vlo noeglich xukoracn ru
laanoa. Idea voordr air omoogliehen, sebon Jotst
Yorbcroltunsca alt alien-notvendigan Vorfichtasaeanju-nen
:u treffen - 7 -


'SLaDIOK o: CLOSliD ’3r.ua injR? BLOKS
\'3 _


(Selte 3 dee Original*)


BLOKS


ua da* Verfahrer. r^gen die Polen. dlo an offener
Tuberkulose leiden, einiuletten, vachrenl dA*

Verfahren gegen die Juien *ich den -ndo naehort."

(Sr. 246. Anklagc-3oveiBatu*ck 196, R. 474-5.}

In oinca 3rief von 27. Juni 1942 *ti=to EIK-LBR grundeactslich
dle.oz Plan *u f and vie. OSLISSH an. die oinxolnen Ka.>nahaen tunaech.t
auafuchrllch ait dor S4therheit*polixei *u boBprechen. ua die unauf-
faollige Durchfuohrung dor Aufgabo eltbcnu.tellon. Ur. 244, Anlclago-
3ovtiituock 201, R. 752). ^ 21. .'ovoabor 1942 teilto OHSISSR
HCt-ISR ait, da dio Untorauchusgen. dio vorxunchaon vncron, -on die
Kollbarcn von don -nheilbaron xu tronnen. von Prof. HOHL? L*R und
noinca Boontfon-naUtUon durchgcfuohrt vorden vuordon. Cr "chaotsto,
da die or.to .\nvcndung dor Kathode in ungofachr *cch. .-.onnton ttatt-

findon vuerdc. r orklacrto fornori

"In dleaoa Stadiua do* Vorfehr^n* orhebt Frof. Dr. BLOW.,
in tclnor uigen.dieft alt .tollvortrotcndor Loitor dot
Hnupta&toa fuor Yolktgcmmdhoit der L-SDaP vinlgo Blnvendun«on
gogon dlo Durchfuohrung do* V^rfahr n. vio or dlo in

SS 3rl,f .on 18 . Bo.oat.-r fo.tlo*t. n-'» = n

vorden or*t Jctrt m=. AUtdrack gcbrroht. obvohl Dr. 3L0..
und Dr. HOHLP HER und ich elbt Konnto dnrnuf vcrvrndt
haben. -a in vorberoitender Arbeit do* gtnso Vcrfahron xu
pruofon. klarsuBt-11* n und in Ordnung xu bringen.

"Ich fuego cino Abochrift von 3L0MB'* Brief voa 18. Kovoa-
ber xu Ihror Ronntni.nahnc bcl." (Sr. 249, Anklagc-BovciB-
otuoclt 2C2. . 752-3).

In dic.cn 3rlof orklaerto 3L0HE, -la.*-, untor dor polnUchon Bovool-
korung dor Provinx vonigten 35.000 Lcute an offonor Tubcrkulo.c
litton und ?uerdos ungefaohr 120.000 Schvind.ucchti«r Behandlung
nootig haetton. Dice bildc cine -ucrordcntlichc Ocfahr fucr dlo
doutechcn aatlcdlor in alien Ttilcn dor Provinx. UO veitcrc dcutacho
Kinvandarung xu oraooglichen, tolltcn bai (K-«cnna.«nahmcn crgrlffon
vorden. BLO-2 cntvnrf ao-acn die drol 'ego sur


- 3 -


TSaI'SLaTIOS 0? CLOSIH^ -3PI .7 ZtJST BLOK?.


CScito 9 dee Orlglnp-la)


BLOW!


praktlachon Auaachiiltung ire Infcktlonagofehr:

"l. Sonderbohendlusg d. r oraatlich orkrcr-ktca Pcrconon.

2. Strcngate .\baor.dcrur«; dcr crnatllch crkrankton
Pcraonon.

3. Srriehtung clues Sondergobietoa fuor alio Tuborku-
loac-Pi\tlcnton."


Zua Vorachlag 'Jo. 1 beaorktc cr:

"die auf ungefnahr 35.0CO alch bolrufonion Polon, wolcho
unhcilbc.r und anatcckvad elnd, verdcn "eondcrbohendolt".
Alio naderanen Lungcnochvlndaucht loldonden Polon
vordon dner •ngoaoaaoncn Beh»ndlung untorzogcn, ua elo
flier Arbcitasvcckc »u crhnlton.und *u Torscldon, de.aa
alo clnon Anatookungahcrd billon".

BLO>C wloa drrmf hln. Ini" oino dor preJctlechMer. Schviorigkoi-
ton dcr voclllgcn Auarottung allor tuborkuloac-kr»nkon Polon derln
bcntcho, d*aa oin aolchoa Vcrf»hrcn •uagozcichnotco PropngnndA--
nntorl-1 fuor dlo P. indo Dcutachlrnda llcforn koonnto, boaondore
alt Ruockalcht auf dlo atreng kathollaohoa Anachf.uungon doa Italic-
nlachcn Volkca und "aller Aorzto dcr felt". Sr uriohtoto oa d'hor
fuor noatlg, daaa HITLER aelbrt ooreoonllch dlo -ntochoidung uobor
dlonc hpnrnahr.cn treffo. Sollto HIIIi'R diet.* r«dik-lo Looaung fuor
un , \ngobr*.cht haltor., ao aollton VerbcroItungen fuor dlo Auofuehrung
doa Plano, vlo In Punkt a und 3 dergclcgt, gca-cht yorden. Dlo
.uan^haoloao xnalcdlusg *ller tuborkulono-krmken Polon, ohno
Ruockaicht -uf Kollb-rkolt odcr Unhcllb»rkclt In oinoa Sondorgoblot


wuordo dlo Anotockungagcfnhr fuor deutacho Anolcdler boacitlgon.
Dlcoo Polon aolltca fucr Arbolt rorvendot verier.. :'icht nur dlo
tuborkuloac-kr».nken rclon do# Krtfccg-uca. aondorn much dlojonlgon
In Danilf-Wootprcuaacn, la Tcrvnltungfbczlrk Zlcchcnnu und In dor
Provinz Oborachlcalcn, aolltcr. lr. doraclbcn Analedlung iooliert
gohnltcn verden. Sr crklAcrto:

"Sino anduro orvregenayert* Leo Fa eg v*oro die puacnhoaloao,
atr. rgatc laolicruag »llcr viatcckecd ~rkr>nkton und unholl-
b*r Schviadoucchtlg a In KmnkcnassUltcn.


9


C7 CLOUVG 3RG7 XURT 3LCSC3

- SQ&iTQ _

(Scite 10 doo Original*)

BLOfC

fuchroa. Uator noetlgor Hlnnulohnu^ polniachcr Aorzte
und oolaiachoa Erwikcaperaontla vucrdo dcr Chftrpkter
oiac* rcinca Todorl«ere otw» f.bgcBChv*ccht vordca."

Schlloasllch bcfuervortrto BLffl?: pla prpktlachatc Loo*ua$ dio
Srrlchtuivs clace Soadergcbictcc, wchalloh dca oiaorLicprp-Xolonio.
Ianorhelb dr.a Sondergcblctea koonr.te die atrengsto laolieruag
dor craatlich -natockend Prnnkon lcicht durchg fuchrt verden. Mt
dloao Volao vucrdo die *nat ekuagagcfp.hr bcaoltlgt und dr.a Problca
dcr doutachen Schvlniauochtlgcn la dcr Proviax geaoletor*. vordon.

(Kr. 250, Ankl-go-Bovelantucck 203, R. 753-B). 3L0HS g*.b eu, dc.ao
dcr Auodmck ,, 3oBdcrbchpndluxy;■, den cr la dec Brief gcbrp.uchtoV *.• f
die Tootung d'ir tuborfculoackr-nhon Polcn bedoutoto. (Bloao H. 4791).

KlIu'JZR bllligtc lr. oir.< a 3rlof an GKT.ISER voa 3. Doxcnbor
1942 ?LO.:.i'a Plan, cla Sonlorgcbict fucr aovohl unhollberc *ila
a.uch hclibpra tubcrkuloao Polon xu crrlcht. a. "a v-orc noogllch,
dloaCD Yorgcbcn fucr Proppgmdpxvock.' •uoxuauc'txon, v»chrend r.ndo-
rcraolta «iae voclllge Vcralchtuag dor offoaca Tuberkuloocn «u lunge
dr.uora vucrdo, da dl« HocntgeBuntortuchUBgon dor pointnchon 3cvool-
korung aindoatcaa accha Hoa*lc r.rfordora vucrdo. (Kr. 251, «akl»gc-
Bcvolnatucck 204, 3. 758).

Dpbo xua alr.deatva cla Tell ler tuborkulocacn Polca *uagO-
rottot vurdo, vrohroad dll -adorca la Todcal»gor gcbr'Cht vurdon,
la donor. n»n ale lioaa, bia ale at«rbon, vlrd durch dio cldcaotntt-
11 chc I r’rlporucg dcs Angcklpgton Rudolf 3RZE7 bowl coca. (l>r. 441,
AnklPge-3cvcia*tuock 205, R. 760). 3R.-d"JT rcrrachtc, dlooo cidco-
atpttllchc Brklpcrucg dpdurch xu oriel»crcn, ua nlcht ru opgcn xu
viderlcgan, dais or aui^tc, cr babe acino 1 rkl-crungen ea Kmd
dor Dokusontr »bgcgoboa, dio lha 1 a Tcrachau^oa la Vorrorfrhron
vorgclcgt vordta aclvn. Tr betoato Jrdoch, cr bootuondc drraaf, dr*
dor ‘ortlnut < lnca gcvlaeen Sptaca genendert voric. Bicacr Sptx


1 nut etc urspruoagllck: ’aIb Sr^'bala dcr Anrcguagon die voa

- 10 -


(Soitc 11 dca Orltflz^ls)

310..-. uad GRF.I -SB gcnncht vurdca, vurdoa"8 - 10,000" felon V;0tdotot".
2r oraotxtc dca Auadruck "8 - 10.000" durch"x-hlrcichc". (R. 3r-ndt.

H. 4891, 4953). 01c. bcvcl.t ra olch. d*ea 33USDI acino .,u.n^ c aicht
cinxl^ uni -HeIn darauSla aacfctr., du> cr aich -uif dca Inhalt dor
Bowel .8 tuo eke re rile, vclchc lha la dca Vorhocron vorg Ugt vordca
v«rca, dir ror icr 'Yrtundluns "t-ttf.adoa, (3. 3r»adt, S. 4891).
noadcra ruefc «if dcr Gruadlrgc dcr Ecnntnio, die cr tlo HXHItL'.R'o
’.ltrrbcltcr crvorb.a hrttc. We locate <rbrlnca lnlaea dowel,
fuor den Tod •■rtilrclchor" Polon. wunacrdoo glbt BHaITOT la dlo.ca
Auaer^on -a, d-a. Or. LO;; HOflOM won Zclt xu 2clt beouchto und
OSTISER'a Vor n chl.o fc v untarrtuctxto. Da lat kola 3cwolatuock rlo a,-in
vorlundoa Oder la 3c.lt» dca ^:lnog ra. dr. Ui Onudlogo dlo.cr
An^fbo chiton kocanti. Ikah*lb l«t . klrx or.lchtlich, dr.no 3JW.-OT'o
WrlogUBtf mf dor fcaatnl. dcr Dlngc bocrecadet l.t, dlo lha durch
HlK.Ie.R tu«.oB<llcl» wared. •

U' ber dlo . rbroeben, dlo don Jcg. attend dlcaor Vorh*ndlunt;
blldoa. lat Rudolf JJCT swclfolloa oo .,-ut uatorrlchtct. *lo nur
lr^ond Joa-nd la Ooutochl-ad. -a bc.toht durch-ua kola Oruad. dea
Auaar^on, die 3R 1 UJT In dcr To runt rrau Chun* L.«chto, nlcht vollca
Olouboa *u acheakoa. Ra lot kcln Bowel. d-fucr crbr-cht vordoa. d«a.
dloac Rrklaoruaion lurch Llat odor Drehuns orlw*t wurdca. Dr.o
Zou^r.la, dra 3^^ ror fr-rlcht iblrgte. kras la dca olnca S*tx suorn-
acn^fra.t vordoai "lch orinacr. aich ra nlchta". Jilt Auanrhao ciaer
BeaehrOlbua* voa ElhKUA'i Pcraocallchkelt. bcgnuc.Ttc cr aich ait «nt-
wortoa ruf &u Gj v.tlrfr-<c.'n aolaca RochtaN-lot.adea. dio drr-.uf -uoginsej
lha fl. goenxllch unbedmtendc vutoarten hlaxuatollcn, ctyr -la . lnon
•Tcachlckten Infaltaplaael. Seine, in dcr 7orrcrh*adlun,; boachvorcncn
Zousonaua.^ea Uad unb d%t acfavonrlevader * 1 . dcr duaac Ploedaina
aciccr Rrklr.cnir.joa vor G rlcht.

iL0KL lew-ute. d*ae^er J. Pl-enc odor Vorochl-.cgo dafuer


(Scitc 12 do* Origin*!.)


BLOKE


goaacht haottc. da.. Pole. die a an.tcckoadcr Tubcrkulo.o litten.
^gorottet vorden .ol'ton and die uebrigrn la Sondorgebiote gc.chafft
•and ihrea Schlep ueb«rl.,.cn bloibcn .olltan Olono, 4578 , 4790-1),

doch vidcr.pricht doav e *ia« cigcno Bevel BfueHranj.


3. .. ( ix j el , v . c , chrifti ? frvrBph 9 )

Die ATJcl. i0 boruht hupt.Rcchlich aaf dcr Stollucg do. -angoklagtcn
310:-S la ^uwawnhw* alt dor Bonchuldlguag. fuer die ftirchfuchrung dc.
SutCftaa.ie-Progrwa. ror^atvortUch *u »cln.

CC:-I .oiclte bo la .atvurf und bcl dcr ^urchfuehraafi dlo.o. Pro-
gr^aa. >'i M fu.Hr ado Polio. (Karl Bl-uJCff. E. 239?-2400 j 3r-ck, B. 7552-4-
Hr ’ 2S3> BU P"). 3’-0.'* aachtc goltond, d»«e COFTI bcl dco 'uthaaa.lo-
Progr-aa aur in .eiaor IleMchft -1. Stat«ckrct*cr la lar.orn
Mlul.toriua b. tolUgt vrr uni d-e. cr COPTI la Inrorn Uni.tcriua nlcht
vortrotca haottc. Sr bc.cugto feraer. da., dio Bolehsaontekaaacr. doron
ctollvort re tender Loiter or untor COSTI v*r, alt d» Euthan-rto-Pnigr-ao
nlchto ku tun h-tte..'


>nr die. nicht dor F-ii var. cr<lbt .lch «u BLOKS cigenon
Zou»Tenbti«ol 0 . 7oa dor doutochca Offfontlichfcolt vurdi 1940 und 1941
bol dor und den ”o,lch^rar4hcl«..=« nehrf.ch Kl^o

fiofuehrt. (i'lone, H. 4BO). ,1. aiOXI r,n dlc.cn Do.c-Kordnn eonn.nl.
orhlelt, vr or dor Kolmae, dc.. dlo. elm, -rtehtlso „nscU S onholt fucr
die Sold».cr.t.l«ucr wore und orrocMe ?0Stl, dr.h.14 olnn,rulfon.
Dr e-gto ia dlonna ^uo-aaoaLaa* folgoadc. -uai


•lch o-sto ia di .cr .-:irr..cht ctv*. su OD.ri, uad
orruchto. d-na vir ueb-r dio 3c-lch*»t.rst ‘U-hror
rt dic.or *rchc 11 a.ton .olltec. Lctrtea
-ad.-, vuerdea die -onto d-fucr cin.tcHcn auo.noa,
U*u _>n -u rdf o-tva, die aerate vova i%fucr

IT"/ 0 , f Uic \ U5 - i *< aicht. 1 *bb ... d'su

(Bloac, S. 0582).


(Scltc 13 doa Originals)


3LQK2


Dues dr.a :.uth^sle-?rognc= daa *nachea dor Hoichaaemck-flacr In
Hltlcldcaach-ft sog, vlri fcrnor durch die 7te-chc bcvlcuon, daa

C0WI 1941 Jea ls «t« ■ »U*W -ufforlcrto. don faltorn dloaor

Koorporoch^t olao VorKaung ueber SuMmimsIc ru halt on. Dloecr Vortr-g

wurdo tatwcehllch durch doa A ngokl.gtcn Ba.CE In .cratch-.ua la Muon-

chon g. Ivltcn. 3L0K1 g»b su, bnl dcr Vorloaung anvoaond govoaon su

aoln. (31oao, a, <{586). 3oi aclaca ©lgcntlichcn Vorhoor a-.;to or want

■Kach dcr Mucnchoaor Zue-’tovnkunft achlug ich Horra
Er. CO. 1 ' “I ornont vor, d—f vlr ro- «.. r , .^ratck*;.ncr
verauchon aolltcn, olnaogrtifcn. (3loac. S. 4567,
Uhtorttrolchnng voa ASgJcl-gtcn).

Mehta feiQmto !el»r»r aeln, la dlo Vor-usaetau&g, d»a dna
Suthnn-alc-Progr-aa 1-. Zcutochl-ad ohao die Rit-rbolt von aolchcn
eoratllch-n Tuohrera dcr Parte! vio 3 10K nnaocgllch govoaon w-oro.

Era iuthnnnalc-Profrmn aclbat vurde vcltgohcnd von Partolataion
untoratuctxt. Tata-ochllch word© cla groaocr Toll dcr VervUtungMMChi-
no doa Progm-ao untor 30UHMH -uifgcb^t. d.-n Chef dor Tuchrcrk^nalol
dor KSIUP. Elea v-r olno gnil-Part kola St»«t«or.’»n. 30*JHL"R,

..ltdlroktor doa Progr'a^a neben BH.u'ET und BHaCX, v«ron P*.rtci- nlcht
StMtabc ato. >a 2 i lchajlnlotorlua doa Inr-orr. opWto Ua St^taorg^n
■lohorllch olno fuehismdc Hollo la dor Butbwnalo, -bor dcr Bovcia
*olgt, d»an Wl-lVrtMatcll.n voacntlleh 3ohr d«nlt au aeh»iffch
hntten. -a grnao Aii-3ta®hr©rachftcorpe, ron dca die Puchrorknnalol
lor h-Sttu Oinen Toll blldot -, v*r aitacniUlg. *uch vena *ua kolnwa
rndoren 5rued- .l« Il 3, ocffoatUctorrltlk au uatordruockcn. Eoch
t-ten a to Tl-1 aehr rl* dra. Elc Imtenrochung In 3*chcn U.S. v.

Klein «t 1. brvclat, dsa Oulcltor 5PSX:S*S «uf die Euthwwiaic,
wli- ala la K» fen/ir •ttagefuchrt vurio. ootr-echtlichcn ' lnflui.


73UBL..TIC3 0? CLOil^O 3HTJ KURT BLCa-C*.


(Soito 14 doe 0rlgln*le)


3L0K2


•uauc otc. (ifr. 1115, Ankl“£<>-3.:vaieBtuock 415, R. 1781). Rio (MOMter
v-ron Pprtol- nicht StAtibc/jato. 3L0*C:'o aeho natllcho Vcrbinduns
alt vies G-uloitcrn 1st ereichtlich *ue Miser Yorbrcchoriechoa
Zue'aaonrrbolt ait Gauleiter GHSIS32, In Verbinduns alt dcr Auerottuns
achvir.deurchtigor Poloc. -a let gneaslich unaoo^llch, d».ee dno
Suthwuetc-Progrnaa yos dcr Purtcl •llcln hwjtto- Yorvlrkllcht vorden
icoonr.cn, ohne den tACtl^cn Relates! und dlo XiWbelt BLOr.' ' o «ln
•tollr-'rtrvtender Rolchaleltcr dee Oceundhelteenfoo dcr USDAP. aIo
eolchcr"or ola claflueerclchce klt^licd Ice Purhivrkorpa dor Pnrtol,
d*o von Intcrn-tion-lcn llltB.or^rlchtehof *le Ycrbrcchorleohc
Orfirr.lration orkl»crt vordon let. (cCT i 9 ^ _ A^ -tAAPtXl l . Cfl»y . vTbrcCh? . r .
Soitcn 257 - 262). K'n kocnr.tc nbeneo <ut «oa, dz-ae Suthwifialc,
claor Vcrordnun^ doe Pmooidcntca gcanooe, la ooffentliehou Kell*n-
oto.ltoa d< r 7erolai<ton Staton olwweelg *ueg<uebt verdon koonntc,
ohno V.< nutnlo und Unt<retuotxuns dcr vcrentvor'lickoa 3c«atcn dcr
K3orlk»nlechos A^ritcYcrcinicuni odor dcr Abtollun* doe Ocoundhclte-
ratoe. O..a*oo» den Vrrcrdnuagca doe JCor.trollr-t«uect«oo Hr. 10,
Pr«fir<\oh II. Abn-.t 2. lt rLA- ual.u^bM- ochuldl. KUfdlfld
clnor Grmypj odor Xo.-rporech^ft (Hall Tuchrcrkorpo) tfcvoecn xu eoin,
die en dor -vuefu hruc: Ice Euthnaic-Pro,crs3B 7‘ II -•

BLO.olu vlchti^o uad olnflueer.ichco /italic! dloeor Oruppo vr,
lot /mo eoIncr fruoheren -uad boet-^ndl?oa Untcretuotxun#: dor b*Mi-
psrtol, oowlo lhxvr y. rdcrblichcn Lohrcn crelchtlich. (31ono, R. 4667-
4701).

Aueecrdea lot ?xcr 3LCK r, e . invrnl, l»se C? TI in eoincr
Mgcnuch-Xt rle S.>lchB 6 -oeunaheitef'achror elch alcht as r ’.uth»nrBio-
Pro^r«aa bctcill^te. kolncevcge dor 3ovole crbr/*cht cordon. LaJC-SHS,
dor Chef dor Hoich"kntlol. il£ aae.:*bcnde droceec fuor Ycrfneeunce-
rcchtlichc Trrt;c la !<>izl-3AUtechl*Ad (

- 14 -


COKTE


(Soite 15 dea Originals^ 3L->:r*

(Danners, R*2662) , loiteto g«r oehnlioh dlo in soinon «nt ein-
gehonden Bcriohto uabcr das ’-uthannaie-ProgrTn an den ££lflh3-
.-rcgiindhoi t. n r- : b r* r welter und nloht nn den "taatssckrctnor. Dlo-
80 Tata«oho, bowloaen duroh 2 3riefo, die L an den J uatiz-

i-lnlater GUSRTNSR aandto, (621-?s, ..nllogc-Bovoisatucok 395,
R.1681, 620-P3, ..nklnffC-Bowoinstuook 396, R.1681) zcigt gnnz
kler an, da as die Untorsohledllohkeit in COIfTI's Stollungon
gar nloht bostand, wio 3L&IS zun Zwccko aciner Vorteidicunc foat-
zuatellon vorauohto.

Von .*nfing bis zun "nde dca vorbroohoriaohcn Suthnnnalo-
Progrunna war 5L0.iT dor atollvcrtrotondo i-cltcr' dor Roloha-
aerztoknncor, atollvcrtrotondor Roiohaoeaundhoitsfu -hror und
atcllvortrotcnlor -oitor doa notlonnlaozi-liatiaohon -orzto-
bundoa. Sr wuaato un d”s *roerm und w^r aloh klnr dnruobor,
daaa ea unaoactzlloh wnr. (3lo.io R.*i5'3). 'r untcrlioaa oa nloht
nur, das Program zu vorhindirr., sondoro a;lno circnon 'ohrifton
zoigon, dnao or oa untoratuctzt hat. In aolnon Buoh "Dor -rzt
in .^nnpf”, dra in Oktobor 194i v. rooffontlioht wurdo, ala dna
'uthanaalo-Program flohon z i Jahro iurchrafuohrt wordon nr,
angto or?

"' r ir hlolton oa fuor unainnir, dnsa zun Boispiol w'hnslnnlpo
^cnachcn, dio ihr clf.no8 Lob.n und das ndoror bodrohton,
odor hoohrr"di.> ohwiohainni'o, dio aich nl oht oin-.”l
saubor halton od-r ” 11 .in ar n koomv.-n, nurcizogcn und
nit violor 1’uoho un'* <*roanon - oatcTiufw-'nl n-i L<bon orhal-
ton wurdcn. In dor fro Ion - ; atur lcoonnton dio 30 Geaohoenfo
nloht bostohon und v.oiordon nnoh don Katurrcactzt nuar*o-
looaoht wordon. ir hnbon nuoh nloht vomtohcn koonnon,
dnaa ohnrnktorllch- und goistlg -.lndorvrortir;Q Peraonon,
a-aoziolc Oosohoopfo, dlo cinon -lord bcgr-ngcn hotton,
zvnr zun Tode vorurtiilt, nbor dann In .-rinzlp bognodlrtt
und auf -oston dor Ooffontliohkclt in ~uchthaouaorn an
Dcbon o~haltm wurdcn; wlr fra.’tcn una nuoh in gnnz
nndoren P-ollcn, in don m oa sioh nloht un d-s .-uslooachon
nln'crwcrt.inor Lubcn hand ltj, ob nan d.-.n irzton nloht

? osotzlioh die ~oo-lichkelt g.bcn aollto, Gin un*?lurok-
iohos L-«bon


- 15 -


73k5SU2lQ* 01* OOM.-O 3SK7 HIST 310 tG


cari.-jsr


(Sclte 16 ea Origiajda)


SLCkS


- - vorioltlg ta bo. ndon. fir donkvn diibel *a Scbvorloi-
donde, Unhcilburc Uranice, die bis cu ihrca Todo
nur angohcurc gcietlgos uni kocrpcrlichcs Lcidoa
»a crv»rtor. button, und die toc aich rua don -rat
bftten, aio von ihrea Leiden au befroion." (31oao,
bevelaatacek 1, 4764).

Dio luaea^c solgt tun cindeaton, d*aa 3LQKD nit Pluenoa and
Untoractaungca in Vcrbinducg etad, aoine Laatlanang ,;b, and .Mt .lied
olnor Aocrperachaft odor Sr up po -*r, die aich ait dor .-.uafachrung


dca ’ath«nAaiv'-Pro^rftOia bofnaaten.


?uor oino Soochrclbung doa Yerbrecheriachon la rathmi*eto-


Progr-ca viri %uf die icurxo Lua*a= afia-mag dcr ^nklsgo gegea don


Angclelngton Evl 3P-vJDT hiogsvioacn.


C. . edlilnlschc Ytrtachc.

Die aJct. ricnkrio-irfuchraa.; vurdc la Juhrc 1943 eino ABfolo n-
heit voa bodoutoadoai Into roe a' fuor ailit%crinchc Kroleo ia Doatcch-
lnd. Ia H«d Jenoa Juhrce vurdc -LC4C ron Rcichea»rch«ill C-03P.IHG
alt dor oraettung «af dloaea Geblct bc-uftr»#:t: (Bloao, ?.. 4604;
l’r. 675, ftidtiage-3ovclsstuock 37, S. 142). LOf.: fuchrto dicaon
A'lftr: ant* r don DoeVn^nt 1 aoincr Stollarg *lo 3o»aftr >gtor

fuor Krcbafa-achung ia Boichaforocbuzvgxr^t.aua. ( ‘loao, 3. 4.>9*4).

In cincr 6ohclavora^alucj, dio d»a Ob rkoujnado dor fohm».cht
in Juli 1943 oiaboriof, vario orfcl^crt, d*ae oia Xnstitat in Poocn
orrichtot vordoa oolite, ia vnlcfcoa S»tti rienkultur* n la groaaon
Mftsatp.b crscugt and vlasenschaftlicho Yersacho auagofuohrt vordoa
aollton, as dio Moegliehkaiten ihrer .\nveadung ta oraefen. Diceoa
Institat etand uator BLOUT'a «ufeicit. (Schreibor, -<loac Doc. 7,


31oao Bovolaatacck 11, R. 4621).

Uflter -lea Ecuea *3Ut«Ableiter" vurd4.cin Soadaraua'echasa


THaWtAlIOS 07 CIO.:JO 3=177 XURT ,L0:-2


(Soite 17 dca Originals)

3L0kS

lur ForaChung *uf dsn Gcbicto dor Jaktcricn-Kriogifuehning gcgruondot.
iLOi— v*r 'itgliod diases AUBBChuaaoa. In oinor Sitsung, dlo aa 24.

Soot timber 1943 etattfand, vurdan dio Tortuche auf doa Gcbioi dor ccnoch-
lischon Pnktcriologlo boaprochoc. Da ob aicht bokA&nt vat, untcr wolchcn
3cdin<;ungcn oiegoataoto AeroBolc odor verapritite klcino Tropfen gevinaor
kr.’nkhoitsorregcndcr 3ABillon i= Honsefeen inr Krankheit horvorrufen.
bofuervortoto L0JC-; die koRBChcnrorsucko. (Hr.1308. AnklAgo-3ewe 1 bp tucck
325, R. 1484). In olncr 7orBA.-i-.luag a- 23. Tcbrunr 1944.vies 3L0K5 nochaal
nuf dio Hotvcndlgkcit dor Vorauche an ..cnachon bin, und bcrlchtoto, di>sa
oinc nouo bAktoriologiocko fAffo Auage»rb>'ltot uni gepruoft werdon suobt
bc. FoldaarschAll XT.ITBL haotto selno Ouatiaaun.; bu oinoa untor soinor
Kontrollc atobondsn Rau doa InatltutB In Poaon gegobon und oowobl
SM ® a dor *ngokl«gt« K»rl D7-UOT haotten lha ihre Unteratuot-

tun.; augoBichort. <I/M. ,;*b Auch an. dnan cine Soucho oino ornato Oofrhr
bodouton kosans, und oa vaoro dnh«r notwondlg, Soucbontqptttoffo durch
VorBuebo an henachon *u orproben. *uch nuoaao dlo 'irkun-; oinor Koochot-
dOBia govlaaor Glftc durch Tcrrache *n AOBschen ausproblort wordun.

(Jr. 1309, AnklAgo-Jowoiantuock 326, R. 1487).

Ub aoino .xufgabo durchsufuchrcn, orb At JLOXD von dca Ang-ikl Ag-
ton KRDGOWSKT dio Zus«o:;onstolluiv; Jos vicht lector. vlBscnachAftllchon
kAtoriAlB ueber J»kt. rion-7ricrsf\iohruag. MRUGOVSST fortlgto hiorueber
cine .tktonnotls An, von volcher LOrf! cine Durchichrift erhiclt. (Kr.

114, Ank1Age-iewe1 bb tucck 324, R. 1491; Jlo=c H. 1620).

SC8H5I3ER bcBougtc vor den Intcre—.lonAlon Xilitiorgorlchte-
hof, dABB BLOK ihn in Ksers 1945 in dor noditinlnchcn tilitrcr-Ak«dooio
in Berlin A.ufsuchto. Zr ken von Posen und w achr nufgcrogt. Zr sr.jtc,
dor Vora-rach dor Soton atsoc h*bo ihn sir Tlucht *ua acinoa Inatltut
getungon, &r vat


- 17 -


f&iSL:iOa or clo'.Iw saisy roar xoxe

_ COTHTu^D _

(Seltc 18 dee Orl^-inAla) 3L0KT-

boaorgt, daea die Mnrichtur.£ca fUcr Aonachcnvcrsuche la Inotitut
von ion ^uaaen ala aolcho ortonnt vorJcn vucrdcn. r h<*ottc v<roucht,
ale acretooron au lpancn, jodoch crfol^loa. SCHH I3"R ,*pb an, dp.a6 or
loldor .jcavucjcn act, JLO.'J. '•inen rl*ta xur i'ortfuchrun^ aolnor Afbcl-
ton la Sacfceenbur.' *ur Vorfucsuns su atcllcn.( *LO>C, Doc. 7,31oac
aowolaatuock 11, 3. 4621). SCHHEDiSR bcsfudo vltorhln dpao: “Dio
4 *r.zz Spchc lnfolge ill dleaor Vcrxoc f ;crur«:on niespla xur Auefuchrung
ka.“ Dloac aubbp^o bcxioh: alch »uf die von Doutachlr.4 ffoolpato ah-
vondun^ olncr 2 pktorlcn-Krlc$afuohrua; und nlcht puf llo von .iLOXB
*ua»;ofuchrton eodlalnlaohcn Voraucho.

In aolnm Urtollaepruch itcllto dor Into mat lon«lo Kllltpor-
tforlchtahof puf Grund oinoa ?»ta»chonbofunlca, »uf doa alch dlo -vnklp^o
atuotxt, feat, dnaa la Intorcaao olncr pktorlon-Krlo^afuchruxvc ruanl-
achc Xrie-ia.jof anyone fucr aodlalnlr.chc 7oraucho, dlo nolat olnon toodl.-
chcn AUatfA&g n*haoB, vorvaadt vurdon. (Int. rnptlonnlor Rllitrwr-Gcrlch
hof, -all Sr. 1, H. 16891). Din /crnochn ibcn von SIEVXRS pa Rudolf
.‘HaKDT vot. 18. AU.^xat 1944 bcvelat, d-a» Jl/X:: t-ti*p.cchllch die vor go~
achl«5onon Glftvcrauche nn Aonachen puafuchrto. (i’r. 641, Anklvc-Dovola
rtueck 327, R. 1493). Lput dlcacr I.lttelluc,; h-t iLOKR «cfr«t, ob or
HZK1ZR ueber lie Olftverauefco p!b vclt.rr Aaafttchrung tun 3orleht
von 21. dull M-'llun.: cratPttcn du- rfc.

DLOrG vollto dp a Gcricht .rlpub.n a»chrn, d*oc or r.lcnpda 7or-
auche pn j.onachen *ia.?ofueiirt h- tte. Obvohl or bcntpcndl< dnvon soopro-
chon hp.be - d-vbcl Pa frclvllll H - alch xur 7.: rfuc.ru.>: St ll. r.de lonkcnd -
w'orc or doer, nle dnau -:ekoancn, die V rruehr -uesufUchren. "r boacu.'tc
dan a HIHJOT.R lhn Mlttc 1943 bvuftr-.;t hrttc, aolchc Inpfatoffe durch
Voraucho *a Kona civ a au orprobon. *a hp. ttv Ira von don Tyutua-Inpf-
atoffveraucr.cn In _uch<:nvpld befichtet und lha <lolche 111 .; Bpeunllch-


keiton und Elnrichtun^on In einea Xom :ntrptlonalp«er »r_;oboton.


~^ij(SLrt7I0ii' 0 -’ CL05ISJ ?J£? XUS? LOME

, OO.-r.I.-ISS _

(Soito 19 dot Orls-iMls)

itOKE

Dloa, ar.rte er, habo or ve.;ca Boinor "goistirfon Ablehnuag" xuruock tcviOBon.

Mw: kann olacr aolchoa Erklncrua-j vcai.j 'laubon schenken, die von oincc

k.-uuio konat, dcr bo eng ait SitSC-ZR luoKsaonrrboltotc. (Bioko uatoa).

3L0r3 B 2 .:tc, daan or dio IXirchfuehruai; lloscr .'xpcricoata ia Boincn

Institut in Voasolatodt bol Posen ^oolaat habc. (Rlono, R. 4<S10-l).

RICHE bot BaSGHSR an, nit iha in I'CBBolstodt xuo.’saonxuArbcitcn. (35-6-PS'',

AnJelafiO-. ovoinatuock 123, 3*. 978, 'laiTi^ir fucr don 20. April).

ajr An>jukU#o SUV RS crkliert in oclnor eidoDtattlichon aubbuko,

dann L0H3 oich bti vie lea Ool^nhcitcn sick alt RaSCSBR borlot und iha

auch dort bccuchto. Torncr «r.:t on

"Endc 19-.3 tr >f ich JLOIC boi HIK L-*R viodcr. Ich kaaa nioh
orlnnorn, daos JLOi". KlkilT.R la Lrufo Ilcaor Ur.torrcluns
dsrOB bat, iha "^SCcLR fuor a-iao jomchuntfBrrboit in scinca
Institut ia jcsaolatodt «uxuv.iocn..vi dicBc-r Konforonx wurdc
ontnchlodcr., d«OB R*S<55R la ca,vr -UB^aaonarbcit ait -iLOKT.
ATbaltoa Boll to. RaS<££R aollto LOCC. cbcafallfl *iuf dca
Gobletj blolOfe-iBChor /orschun* xu Krnd fichon.”

(Mr. -.73, Aaklajo-jovc iBBtuock 237, 3. 951).

-'LOiO. koa;it^ koine xufrl'icantcllondo "rklftcrur-- larucbcr Abgcben,
vio ob kra, d»s« or d«o Pcottorua ■leanla la atchcav, rauchon, wio bo-
fohlon, nunproblcrtc, obcloich or uobor xvci U-hrc lw*c -n Fr^ca dcr
b*ktoriolo,;inchcn Xrlo^ofUohnuy; nrbcitotc. Jr, =«a sussto polncr auoop^o
nnch xu ^oa Schluano koaaca, driin or nlchto ait .rktcrion-XrKytofuchrunf;
su tun hrttc.

•fear ob ruch nlcht von vasontlicher louto»akolt lot. do
bovoint dr b AktcnaAtori»l dock, Iabb die »orachun£ fuor Jnktorica-Krio,;o-
fuchrua: oich kuinrovc-.B -uf Abvchr-.'a»a«ha. a borchr-cnkto. In dcr
Xonfcrcnr dcB litx-bloitor-AUBschuasca roa 21. Scptcaber 19-13 crklncrto
olncr dor Tcilneha. r, ..iaintoriivlret SCEUL-dU,


- 19 -


TEi5LTICK Ox CLOoIiTJ J?X'J „UH7 3L0>~

-Sg£-L»fiP_

(Soito 20 dca Orl>;ia«le)


.LOJC

"fir Jcooanen nicht die Polio unboteili,’tor
Zuach*ucr aplclonj vir rucaacn »uch die
XMaonAnvv-nfain< baktcrl Her Kaapfnlttcl
▼orbereiten. -caoniora joerlk*. zucanto
.,‘lelchsoltl.T ult aonschllchcn und tlcrlaehcn
Kr*nkhclta«rro^orn ual Pfl»nsonparaaltcn
wi^ogrlffcn verdon. Iter Puchror aollto fuor
den Finn fj.-voxuva verdon. Zu die an Zvecko
aollton .He •'iaacnechaftlor lnon kunen
•ber vollat no oilmen .-crlcht uebor die fclnd-
llchon Torborcituc^en und uebor die Sabota-co-
t*oti£kolt doa i'olnioo alt ?>• let. rlcn ur.d
Olftor. Torlcgon. Mtcrfcir. aollt n ale lie
Anvendur. -asothodon «a^oboa uni die erforlerlioho
Anaahl lea ?oroor.la, aovlc dor lbor*toricn,
Inatrursontc, ?lu^-*ou.jo, Unt.-roaoboto uav. fucr
Vorberoitxuv; uni .%r.;riff." (l ? r. 1300, aiobo obon).


2.


TRaJSLaTXQS 07 CLOSXjft j2 OS KURT RL0K5
OJJTMZS _

(Soltc 21 doa Originals) SLOWS

itorl sgcrV»T,K.

UO die .’irka*;dccit dos .lut.;orissus6snittclB Polygal tu

pruofea, fuchrto RoSCrSa ~xpcrlaento lurch, in loaon XasMBoa dee Xon-

zor.tr tionol». .-ore Dchu orechoeoca vuri-m. JUSCKLR'b Oskol boachrcibt

in ouinor oidceet*ttlichon aubb».;c die cocrdcriech-n Syperisento,

vclcho eoin ot-ffc untenwhn. la AU.ruet 1943 boauchto or RaSGEBS in D-c:

und -la liOBor «lnsl nicht is ‘uero vr, ka iha oin 3oricht untcr

dio .vu-;on, den cr vie fol^t viodorgibt:

"Sr n-hs 3czu»; uf oiaoa Scrlekt uobor die ."rr chic a nun (Kin-
richtury) von ricr Aonechcn ru Vereuchesvockun sit dca
hncaoot-tlaches Pr*«.p4r«t "roly^»d 10 ". oovoit ich aich
orinnern knn, v»r«'n dioeo cin rose ichor Ko=nier und cin
Krotin, ich ftabe ver^oeecs, vor lie bviden Andoron w»iron.

Tir. SS-}>an, #.uf . laoo Stuhl "teheed, «»ehoen den Rueaon von
oben durch dio r. elite Schultor. Die Ku^cl tr*it in dcr Ullz-
s-o.>ad hor-us. Hr vurla bcBChriobon, vie dor Rutao (krivsplVr-
tig) aun«aaenzudcto, eich l-an -uf oir.on Stuhl eotzto, und
n>.ch unofchr swrr.zl.; klnutoa «t«rb. Is S.-ktionaprotokoll
wurdoa dio Vcrlotzun.a dor -ur-tontfof-oeeo und dor Aortn
boachricbcn. rfeiterhin -r boBchrie.bon, dasa dioeo Rionc
durch hrtc >lutjvrinn 1 taapor.l.rt vrcn. Dioa kocnr.tc
dio cinzigo Drkl»erun,. fu* r die v«rtacltnlea*>.ceelf; l«i«c
Spnno Lcbinazolt n-ch dee Scfcuae .;cvccn eeln." (Sr. 1424,
.\nkli>»;o- .oviioatuock 462, K. -??3-4).

Dicoj Auon-tfo vlrd durch die .\uan».-- .ice 2ou,;cr. STOKKP. (E.59?)

und doe Affidavit FOHL'b (or. 065. Aiikl*; - w. lnr tucck 12?, R. -ao)

untorotuetzt. Sclbet dor A&ckl.:to 5 Y*Ka 3I'7 gnb in o.lncr aubbb^c zu,

d».BB lhr. bokrar.t ^ovosen eoi, d»ss . : aSCtZ?. lut<erinsun*eoxpcrlaonto

1,0 Inneanon von Konzontr»tion«l*^orn *ca'cht h»bc, dio zu dlceca 2wccko

orachoeoon vurdon. (Qcbh*rdt. R. 4240-1).

D-a : ; oveiea«torinl zei^t, dse -L05v. alt HaSCHSB in dor 3oly*l-

Fornchunf; zuo«cricnwboi to. Dioec Zu8*sscr.'rbeit be.-»nr. su aindeeton

echos hit to doe J«hrcu 1943 la Zua«—osh-n.- ait dor Krobeforochuaj.

(Kr. 473. ArJel£t—.‘cvclBBtucck 237, R ; aichv -uch br l 538, atJcI

PcwoiButuock 128, R , T.intrsunca voa 19. 7cbru»r, ?. April, 14.

April and 26. Juni 1943). Dor

- 21 -


r?^. aL.,TIOa O'- CLOoIl .S JHEF >.U3T .-1L0Jffi
_ CQ-ZEfiEB _

(Solto 22 doa Originals) 3L0!C

AE^cklagtu 3U.YTRS orkl-ertc in avisur oldeaotpttllchcn AUaapgc d*.oo;
".’LOW?. gon»uc Xcnntnio von don lutgcrinnungacrpcrlncntcn la Dchu
h tto. "r orhiclt 3orichte voa RaSC?'.;? uai duorfto vohl ucbcr dlcoo
Aagolu^oaholtoa vollat®.cadig 1= 311dc gcvcoen sola. • (Ur. 437, cloho
obcr.). .TLOKC g*b *u, d-an SaSCS voa HDE023 doa Auftr g crhrlton h«bc
alt lho koI dec Gableto Jar Dlutgorln.-ungaforachung su <*rbcitcn. (R.
4642). "lnor dor Mtnrbcltor RaSO-SS'o la Ur Polygil-?ornchun.: w«r ola
Ina-.aoo '.ca Koaieatr-tloaalugora D*ch«a alt >aon Robert JBIX. Hit
aolnoc Uriefo voa 15. Soptcabor 1943 fori.:rtc HaSCEER SI a nuf, ra
3L0W2 hornnsutretoa, d*nlt dlcacr die ?r llraaur.: von TZVA bcvlrkon
aollto und or vlodor In aoinor fruckoro Z-ta.jorlc »lr Hlbrlcr aurouck-
vrootst wuordo. RaSCEER orklport* in *cinca »riof, rbuia".lLOtC ait dloot
suogltch groaao Koffnun,:* n gca-.cbt h»t". (.Ir. 611 . ijdci-go-.^oloBtuock
239, R. 955). Dion bovoiot, d«ao ''M-.' ochon la bona, r 1943 alt R.SCKSR
In dcr Pol: jrl-yorackung *uowucnr.rb©itctc. ~o lot volil oichor, d-oo
3LQHR oich nlcaida d»iu Lorgegobon h*ctto, »n dloaor Arbolt altsuholfon.
ohno vorher gcnMioatena iu vlneor., va achon <ct«n vorlon wrr, un do
Polygrl *uo5uprobloron.

In dor Ictxtcn »clfto doa J*hrca 1943 achriobon RaSCKSR und

Dr. KAi?-HKAKP .lac Arboit uobor Polygal. Dloo- untv rrck.idot kl-r iwlachc

M^nnchoncxporlnontcn . uc die ‘Irlcucg lev Polyol -unsuorobi’Ten und

vl r

kilnInchon .-raofun.:on . Si' a>.t: ■ -ovor/dic klinlack* ixnvcndung 'xo
Pr».op , Tr.tca voro'rhton ukd c*i orprobt h-tton, vurdo co kinslchtllch
a.in.T Hoclnfluaauag dcr lutgcrlnrun&a- ur.d Dlutun^atoltd’ruer in
grucallichon Sxperlac ntea "a lob. nden /icuachon ■uaprobiert." ?o warden
I.urvon beigofuegt, die dlo Repletion Poly.jol «»f d«a luten uni

<L".a 1’lutgcrlnnon naaelittoa. Tin ..j-bcit bc«nr»ch voiterhin klialacho
Scobnchtungen VAchranl Oporotionon. (Sr. 439, Anklngc-^owolaatucck 240.

936). Dio la llcacr Arbeit


- 23 -


c tjuxsiaiigs C7 6rcsiro B2is? tjst sicks


(pcee 23 of orlcinnl)

^ BIOHS

ervnehnten Exporlnente vnren off.nher aolche, bed velchen Intntttn crachoa-
■on vurdon. Sle vcrtn In der Arbeit nicht nit tolcho beechricbcn, dn dlotc
voroeffontlicht warden tollta. 3LCKS veraicherte, dnt. die alnaUen Ex-
pcriaonte, die lhn boknnnt <ewetcn talen, tolche wrren, bel denen c-ln
Kublkaontlncter 31ut ontninsen wurde, on au teben, wlo echnell dioe In
oinon Benconaclnt sornnn. (B.4643). Solcbe Proben koenr.en nleht rla Ex-
poriuontc boieichnat worden. Knn knnn tlch urn 3-lieh vcretollen, dnt

RASCK-R olncn BluWerlnnun^afnktor, dcr nuf den Schlechtfcld bcl vorvunde-
ton Soldrton T*rv«nitverden tollte. -uf tolcho Veite ruaproblcrt hnben
wuordo. Und diet wnr Biel'S d-^nl* hotter beknnnt nit e* den Oorlchtihof
heuto ltt. Sr vuaate, data RASCFER Krelteexperincnte nua.-efuchrt hntto, die
don Tod aur 7olr C batten. Sr v-r ueber die Bachcnw"14-Typhutoxporir.onto
unterrichtet. (Bib o R.4640). Uebrlcen* hnt dlete rwavcichcndc Srklrerunf
BICKES nloht* alt den Experinentcn tu tun, un die y irkunc de* Polycnl
nuf Blutun*on nuaauprobleront die Blutprobe In elnen Re~;onirln. boaloht
■ ioh nur *>uf die Blut^crlnnun.rtrerktlon, nicht Jedoch mif dlo Hcnktion
hlntlehtllch dor Bluturwon. Sc ;*iaate cr xu dieter unflrubvucrdUon 2r-
klnomtu: hlnaufuecon, drtt RASCFS3 ihn elrtrl t'vte, dnto cr Oder oln rndercr
Arit don ObortchonVel olncr Ptrton unter Snrkote .orlebcn hntto, bio tlch
Blut aei.-to, und drtt or dnnn die Vlrkar kolt dea ?ol>-.-nl nuaproblert hntto.
Abor BIC11S trfto "lch habo telne Beucrkun.- nicht fu«r Era at ctoWJUtn".

(j.463b). Dr.a, wr.a ann nicht craat ntbaec krnr., lat BSCiiES Vorrr.bo dca
Hldhtvlaaont ua 41c Experi^entc, nn denen er, vie die Sokuuonte erwolton,
oln dlrcktea oeraocnllchea Intereaae hntte.

31TKI mb aelno ZuatLiun* tur Vcroeffentlichunr der oben erv»ohnten
Arbeit In dcr !!uenchener liedlalnlachen Vochenachrift (31or.e B.4639; HC-
616, Ankln«tbevalaatueck 244, H.964(. GRAVITS aovohl ala PCHL orhoben Eln-
apruch .'ocen die Vcrceffentlichun.- dea Artlkela, veil ale nicht hinauccacren
wordtn v ran und vail Paehnu 3 7 drrln ervnehnt varde, ccvie Pln,-e,


- 23 -


(3eito 24 dea Oripinnla) BLO.’H

die nuf -Jonschenversuche schliessen lieasen. (NO-614, Anklapa-
N^eiSjAnJclncfl^eveisotueclr 246.H.966)

Jeweiastuock 24 5, 3.964 / Boido •-nennor wus3ton un dio noordo-
rl9ohon -xperinentc, die R.SCifTH nuafuehrto, un dna Polvpnl nua-
zuprobiorcn. G^Btt.HDT wusato dnrun. 3L0Jr Jodooh verlnnpto von
Geriohtahof, dnss or plnubon 3olle, or soi zu n^iv povosen, un
■’ios powusst zu bsbcn; Jq, dnaa er 03 nioht £cpl*»ubt hnbo, nla
a.'Oh’S ihn sncto, or h".bn 03 vorsnotzlioh untcrnonnon, dio Hnut
r\n don 3 0 in cinos Inanssen wogzuroibcn, un dns Plypnl nuszupro-
biorcn.

••m 23. Pobrunr 1944 crhiolt 3 Gina von Roiohiforsohun'*srnt
don ..uftr".* zur Polyff.niforaahunff. (*&-65G, -.nklnrobowoiaatuock
247,H. 967 J. »L0..~, «ob ?_»i, -In a a or cs v.?r. dcy *lcarn -uftr-g
ortcilto. (Blono 3.4634). Dfts T-.-ebuoh STT'^V zoirt, dnss dio
Polygnlproduktion nn 1. 7obrunry 1944 nla kric^swirt-

sohnftlioho Indus trio boin Rciohsforsohunramt ropistriort wordcn
wnr. -n 22. FiJbnrr hntto ?I“V -oino ^-onforonz nit R.' , 0K' , 3,
"nlnoaalioh volohor Liofarun~afr- , pon zur -orstollunr dioaos Pro-
dukt 08 , XIR 610. r. . und dor i’oly^alborioht fuor Ion

••ncokln-ton 0^': RPT oroortct cordon vnr:n. -*n 24. Kcbru n r fuohrto
"rTVSRS Oin Tolorongoannoch nit BLO.'r f in • olcho.n 3L0:r ihn nit-
toilto, dnaa KT'X‘3 oino ••nordnun^ orlnsaon hnotto botroffg
BLO,ns ^cmcinsnnor -rboit nit R..~3K“3 in DnoViu. (3546-P% -n-
klngobo-'olastuook 123, R.972). BLO.. ,~,b zu, 1ns3 HL1 L R ihn
nufpofordert h"bs, nit R "3irR nn dor Polyrnlforaohuap zus-'-.ncn-
zunrb lton. (4510). -*13 iLO 3.. 2'.. VS -rbcit nn 31. -ncrz
uobornnhn, (Ibid R.973) , orhielt 3L0. aoin Intoro330 in Polypnl
nufrooht, v.l j nus soi non Pclefjn-* sprnooh -.it C H^V ° nn 24.Jull
uob r dieses Thonn hervor.’cht. (Ibid. R.976 /.

3. kiat s°.a '-fra.rlaaatffi (--nklnceschrift Par.6 (d)). Von "Intor
do 3 J-.hroa 1942 nn bia zan 'Conor 1944 ’.vurden 'xporinonte nn Non-
zontr'tionsl-gorinsnason nuspofuehrt zun Zwooko der "•mittlunp dor
wirkscnston Bohrmdlung von ' unden, horvcr.norufon duron Lost
(Senf) Gn a .

- 24 -


:=iC -_',:ioh o- CLObisG j bis:- roar .ilohs


(Scltc 25 dee Original*)

-L0H3

Dlcac Ixporiaoatc vurdca ucborvicgcad 1 & :>tsvcilcr ~oa 2 -'atr*.tionnlftgcr
untor dcr Lclturg voa Dr. SIRE voa dor StrMaburgcr Uaivcreitvt durch-
,;ofUcL:rt. 3oiuoglich eiaer .uafuchrliO.cn I’cachr lbung diooor Bxporl-
soatc vird »uf dio AakWeachrift gcgoa SBIBHS vcrvicaon.

HI3? bcgrna oolco 3«ec*pcrl=catc la Jovcaber 19-2 la i>>.t«wcllor.
(Mr. 099, Ankl.go-Zovciaatuock 263. 3. 1029). Sic wurdcn vchrond doe
gftnsoa Soancro 1944 fortgosotat. (Soil, 3. 1059). Vwhrond dioaor
Borlodo warden -a uagcf.chr 22C Xae-aaoa ruaaiachcr, polalechcr, techo-
chlecbcr uad dcutachor ‘intioMlltMt O^acxpcrincato vorgenoonon. 50
dloeer lao-erca at.rben. Slo tv-ttca elch nlcht froivillig fuor dlcoo
Sxpcrlcoato tur V rfuc-.ung goetcllt. (roll, 3. 1C52, 1057),

la October 1943 orllcen dor ngokl«;to -LOtO la oolnor 1 Mgonoch-f
•le lJOfiuftr.;:tor fu r dlo »>• baforchung la Rcichaforechung«r*t jiao
AWOleung .-a HIST «ur Untoretucteun: *cinor O.acxp. riaontc. Dioece lot
bowicaon duroh dlo rt ikwto uober SUM '* i'orachuagaattftrnogo la
aclcheforochuc*er.t. wo ->Ltt..'a Auftr-g *n KXHT untcr dor 83-Vonuge-
itusacr 0329 vomorkt let. Dor »uftr« 6 * wurdo oingotr.gcn untor dor
Asaor 1881-15, Ur. 690. Anklvo-Liowoiaatuock 120. 3. 373). d,0W girt
iu, draa I'lntr-gungcn all dor Anaorkungenawr 15 alch *.uf von lba
orl-aaoae Auftr-cgo boaogon. (3. 4531; 31oao loc. 21. 21ooe 'ovoleatuoc
5, 3. 535). >.o Mu » dloaca ron E -a -ilHT org-ngonoa 7orschunga-
*uftr-goe tatfffl untor icaw^hao mf cine *kt«anotU von SHVBSS uobor
don as 4. Oktobcr 1943 von lOVS nn 3 aSCJ* 3 erlMOontn .»uftr«g, boauog-
llch ARultooxpo rise ate, gcn*u fooigont. Ill werdoa. Moaca X-cltocxpcriacr
trug die SS-Voraugea«oor 0329. u* dio a&veleun.; .a -I3T dlo SS-Vor-
iuganuonor 0329 trig. let ca off-aaichtlich, 1p*b die .tuftraogo run
glolchcn, Oder ungcfwbr aua glelchca ^-ltaunkt orl-aecn vurdca. (Sr.
656, Ankl«go-icwcinntuock 247, 3. 966).


(Scito 26 dca Ori.;ln*le)


10a-


Die Y-rt. l-llsua; fc»t offosalcbtltch klnc Eixaicndnngen gogon .He *uf
dicac tfeiao vorgononnonc Pcatstcllusg doa Z.'ltpuaktra vorsubrir^cn.

( lose ?.. -:6-i0-l).

Obvohl I/Xv in brcdc at. lltc, JcspI ?or3Cfcunja»uftrM*;o
bcsuo-’lich Gacxpcriacnta »n ‘IHT erl'a^cn »u hrb. a, blicb or Jodo
-ricl-.-nin: uobor die * intr-gongon ir. a la- i>rtclk*rto In Heichafor-
ochmv;ort achuldi,;. ’r boh'uotcte, l«aa ilea .la ?ihl>r tjovcecn aola
aucoato. ’ r vcrfuchtc, Ho Ycr-ntvortua. fuor Jan .»uftr -uf Profeanor
SrttBPJSUCK »b«uv»olxon, volchor aclixinlacbc ?r-gcn •llguaclnor Art la
Kclchoforachun^arnt untor alch k-ttu un- loa-xca .^uftrego untcr dor
acfc-iotriorua.-jnuanor 10 - la Oc^na-ts «tt Jua-cr 15 voa 10.X - hcmie-
gogobon vurdon. Dio i>rtoik-rto *’on SaUII-CR-CK wurdo vor- lc,;t; alo
coljtc, ilaa. or unt. r dir • o-Vorxugar.ua*.. r 0323 und lor 3c..totriarun,:a-
auc ior B-^/10 olaon d»oforrchuagB-.»uftr«.: »n -137 • rtcllt htto. ( lono
Doc. 19, loac lowolantucck 3, 3. d63l). Die Y.-.rrchlcd. aholt la don
Yorautfo- und a-; lctriirua;8Ruaairn achlicaet Jedvode ! oeglichlcoit clncn
Irrtuuc «uo.

•

LOK, vollto den Ooricht crlaubk'f. a-.choa, dw aowohl dor
0 »a»».uftrij *n MET -In *uch/£>cltTorauch«»uftr*< *n aa 3C- -S, dlo
bride -uf dor Kartolkart* untcr don Voriuganuar.crn 0328 her/. 0329
orncholnon, in Urklichkolt in S.»U XJDUC-.'a T'otlgtoltaborolch fiolea
und nlcht von lie hcrruagcgobcnc .»uftr'Ogc gevoaen veron. ( louc, -329
und folgcndo). Diene rkl-cruiv; rntbchrt jc.rllchcr Lo.:lic. «ua lea
Akton ;cht elaw»ndfrol horror, d»an aovshl LOK 5 41a *uch S^dTSIKUCr.
«uftr>CK-c *n 3121 crtoiltoB. Dlv ontapreebordon Auftrao^-. trogen
nlcht nur v. rachlcdoao Tortuga- aon.lcrn »ach vrmchicdcnc wit«trio-
rur.jBr.un.Tora. In 5cgcnntx xu -LOT.'a 5rkl»e run.:, i»e lie G-aforachung
uoborviogcci in S^EILJHDCK'a Gcblet ficl, lnt ca/offenaichtlich, dr.oa
dice cine jvn-jclcgcnfcclt *f»r, *n dcr LCtX la Hlnbllck *uf aciao elch

- 26 -


l


$I_vTIO'. ; 0? CL0SI2& 3315? KU3T -0,052


(Scitc 27 Acs 0ri.,ispl")


CXKS


nuf die bpJetcrlolo^ischo Kric.jsfuehrun.; bctlehcnden APbcitoa por-
socnlich cchr intcrc.oicrt vr. >* OoplCht vlrd rich entsinacB,
daoo diene Arbeit untor dec Dcdc-ntcl coiner Stcllua.; -In Jc-uftr.-stcr
fucr dlo Krebsforschua^ durch*'fuchrt vario. s lot fornorhln bevieson
vordon, d^s. tt^C, in de^ent-tt tu WBSLCDCB, In Verbindun* novohl

jit Ha 5CS5R -Is -uch alt HIST ot-ad.

•La-'o Tciln-hac -n don ^xpcrlacnton 8J3T 1 * nit Lont-P-o und

oolno r.onntnls d-von vlrd foraor lurch dlo ' intrx>c in 9L-V5 3'n
T.^cbuch von 2. und 28. ?-bru-r und 3.. 4. und 0. Kwr» 19d4 bowicnon.

A= 2. jobnxxr tr-.t 5 GY ?.S alt tea 2oichoforschua^r«t in Verbiadun^,
ubi tu eraittcln, ver von lhn alt dcr -Airchfu.-hrun.; von Lost-Qr.s-?or-
nchun.{n-.rbelti-n b -uftrM* vorden v-r, ua dloso Viosonsch-ftlor tu
olnor .'osproefcUE.: tuo-aaenborufen tu koennen. 3io.c .ooorcchuni: vurdc
-a 28 . ?cbru-r In ncichsforschun,;or-t «b ;ch»dtcnj sn Ihr nnhacn aLOJv ,
Ha 3CKDR, fBIK83DB uni MOTS3B tell. Jrf„- n dcr Lo.t-0*a-:-orochuns
wurtUn crocrtert. - In.) -chnllchc »apwchun.: f*r.d 3. Inert 1944
ot.tt. Ai 4. Hbcm ordnet r.I.» - 3 olnc Vorcsanlua,; tvlochcn SXRT
und SaSCHDR - noben Andcrcn - u, di 9. -rrz st^ttflndon wllto.
Auf dlo tor Voro-a-aun: voa 8. xvrt :*b KX4T in:n cricht uobor *>ino
LoBt-:or B chun.-8Mb.-ltcn. (3b-6-rS. Aakl»,:c-.c.ol.rtuadc 153, 3. 382).

KISS' n Jc rlcht u^ber sola: (Kncxpcrloonto vurdo la J.'hrc
1944 eonchri.bn und erv-chnt Scbvorc, h-lbschvore und lolchto toadcn,
ille lurch Lost-Gpis v.rure-cht vurd n. Hr « richt tel t clndouti,;,
iL-ob dlo Verouche »n Hennehor. vor-cmaacn vuricn. (Hr. 0°9, AnklB.ro-
cwoisntucck 268, 2. 1036). Slchorlich crhi.lt dor H-nn. dor dloso
Arbeiten untcretuctttc, cine Hirchscfcrlft Here. cricht r.

4. y>cltc-~xp. rlc- ata. Aiikl* chrlft, P-r-vr-pfc 6 (b).
ctucrllch olnor wfuchrllchen Jcrchroibunr ler K'dtccxpcri-
aente vlrd -uf die Ankl-^echrlft ;c,;on SEXSS vcnrio.cn.

2 s let b«rlc«on. d-ss 1(12 ainictcn. .chon 1= ?nxch,i»hr 19.3

- 27 -


(Solto 28 ic8 Originals)


EbSSLATXQy 0? CL05IP3 llREF HURT JLOXZ

.coaiasp-


liLOKE


ir. Tcrbindung nit SaSCSS stand. *s 11. April 1943 a-ndto HASCT.B an


HIMMLER olnon 3cricht ucbor .“acltcoxpcriacntc, die an .Mansion vorgonoa-
nen wurden, die dor freion Luft «usgoactst waren. In solbon Drlof
drueckto or soino -offn-on^ aus, HDC-OSS Anfaa; Mrl seino Xabilitr>tiono-
arbeit uobornitteln su koonnen und criclacrtc, datB Profeanor PFAJL^liSTITL
in Marburg boroit sol. sio ala g.hoiao Kabilltationaarboit "nsuerkoanon,
•odj'.ao RaSPSH Univerait ’otadosent vordor. koennto. (Nr. 20, Anklngo-
Bovelaatuocic 112, 3. 354). au 17. Hal 1943 lo-:tc HvSCKSH cin Xonorandua
uobor seino sodlsiniacho Vorblldung vor und ervaohnto bcaondoru lio


Hoohon- und Kacltcoxpcriccr.tc. Ir fuchrte aua, dao* veltcro Kaultooxpori-
aonto notvcndlg aolcn und echloaf nit dcr I'caerkun.:, dann or, wio vor-


oinbert, an das Univoralt-ctainatitut fucr Luftfahrtaodiain und Hygiono
(Prof^oaor Dr. PMr.SISTDL, Marburg) ivocke woitoror vlimonach-rtlichor

Auabil'.ung turuccksukchrca gedenke. Din Xorachungsprograna vaorc berrits

alt PftnB* T1SL . ,

/aufoatcllt vorden. (Kr, 230, «nkl»ge- cvoiaatuock 116, R. 3o6). D-rooa

dor Angoklr,;to IlOCC vnr. dcr lUSCrIH und PTa* lOTTL'd, susaaaonbrnohto,

vird durch bH'VlRB drlof von 27. Soptcabor 1943 an IRANDT bovioaon.

Dl.scr vr dio ^ntwort auf cinon Jrief von 12. au uot 1943 von il.SDT,


dcr aich auf dio ".rnenrun.; SdSCKirt's tun itoicntca befog. SIT.VHRS
orkl-orto, last or 1-ruebcr b.rcits oino Soaprechung ait I/O!”., KSNT2FJ<
und KaSCEER gohabt und d-ao L0.J nit P/aS.”NS 71EL in K»rburg gonprochen
hrotto. (Hr. 229, .»nklft£ 0 -D«v. isatuock 118, 367).

Aua diosen Schriftatuockcn gcht horvor, d-.aa sunindoat


schon aoit April 1943 RaSC&IS ur-tcratuctzt hat, "la dio Trocken-
E-eltocxporinor.to noch in J.-\ngo v»ron. HaSCHSR hat to achon lurch
.'-LO.Z nit PfeKKSSSm JWhlung gvsoan.n.


ra»51£I« 0? CLOSISv 3?X-? KURT -LOME

- CQLU&L? _


(Joito 29 des Originals)


3LOG


3LC.-S bohruptote, das* «r tod dlcscn fruehcn Zusaaaentroffon
R^SCHZB 1 ■ nit P?aH>'STEL nlchts gcvusst habo. und das* on oln roinor
Zufall war, dans or such auf PJa 3.S3STI£L stlcss. (H. 4516).

3MC'i Aussa*o uobcr diesc Zuannnonju'bclt let Unslnn.Sr *ab su, Jasb
or os olnrichtote, daaa RaSCHSR clco 3o«chrlnl:un$ ala 3pcxlaliat
orhlolt, die clno Vorbcdin^un^ ft:or die Habilltiorun* war und daso
dcr Vornchls<c, an P2 a££SSTX?.L ho rant ut ret on, von ihn auo^ins. (S. 4312-
3). Abor, so o«^to or, PaSCoCR hr bo lh= gotn^t, daaa or auf Orund
•olnor Arbeit on aa Poly-rel hablllticrcr. voile. £r habo die Habllltlorun
Thos- crhalten, bontrltt abor, nlo .[olooen su habon. (R. 4514). Ts
1st achvor Torataondllch, vie XOJC elnerecita bchaupton fcnnn, da. a a cr
2aSCB2B In scinon Arbolton aa ?oly<al unterntuotsto und iaran lntoroo-
olort v-r, doch andororaclts oln* ron RaSGSR dlosbosuc.:llch goochrlcbcn
vlsaonachaftllcho Schrlft nlcht lon»n habo. 310 ^'b aUBbp^o orielaort
• lol*. natuorllch dadurch, da.so die HabllltioruagB-Ifcosa nlcht Poly,;al
eondorn Kroltc-1 ^jorlncntc bvhandcltc. (*r. 240, . r. 230, supra).

Vachdea or von ?.%SCrr?.'s Knelt o-ttaperln nton^chocrt ha.tto,
v-r 3KXr. senue^end »r. d&osor A&^olctf.nkolt lntcrcsalort, uu RaSCHSR
la Oktobor 1943 olnen ?orschun*s'uftr-; su ortollon. auf dcr sloichon
Kartolkaxto ULCtC a ale A&t^lled dcs Sclchaforachur.ei'aatos, dlo don
i‘orochunks»uft r».j an HIST -ufveiat, orachcint dcr auftr an RaSCHSR
auf VlodOrcrva. rnuni nach •ll^caolnor Srfricrui-j les acnochllchon
Koorpora, K< ilbehaadlung nach Tcllcrfrlcron.: und Anoan-unfi dca
ggnpchllchca Eoorpora *n nicdrl^o T»=par»tur n. Sine bo dotallllorto
Aufgabo haattc nl sala ron andors *ls cinoa Jl«nno, dor vollkonnen

nit RaSCEBS'b Arbolton vcrtr-u» var, crtcllt v.rl a ko. anon. Me “lntra-
^untcanusner 1679/16 bovo1st, d»ao 3L0BC llosca AOftra^ ortcllto (sloho
Loot Cat T-xpcrlnento, supra). «ussordcS bcs*.-:t oln Vcrc- rk »uf dor X»rto.
daas dlo auf dcr Kartolkaxte cln»:.tr»^cncn AUftrac.jo ron 3L0XS bcarbcltol


wurdon (l'r. 690, ankla^o ScvoiaBtueck 12C, 3. 371: . r 656, Ankla^o-

- 29 -


jsi r i :car jlome:


?Ra£5Ln~ ICh 07 CLO'.ISG

__ coy: i we;?


(Scltc 30 dcB Ori.;la*la)


Uovcioetucck 120, R. 371s Sr. $56. Ankl*go-3cvelaatueek 347, R. 966).
Klcr i«"«cto riLOKB vlcdorua lua, !•« oa alch ua olacn bedp-uorlichoa


Irrtua hnadelo, d-ai SaUSRBBUCH in Virklichkolt 2USCK5R untorotuctat
h»bo. >a 3ovolaa.torl»l loi«t bcr, dps oa 3L0KT uad nicht SaIEHDKUCK
w-r, dor alt RaSCKIR aua»aaoa»rbrltoto uad von acinon frurhoron Kxporl-


nentcn vua«to. BL0k£ gab au, d*aa P-\5C-J8 lhn uebor dlo JCaoltooxporlaen-
to untorrlchtot h>bo, uad d*aa ola Toacaf-U vor-tokonaon aol. (R. 4509).
Seine Zu8raacarbclt alt RaSC-ZS vr von ?iy_.L~R bofohlon vorden uad v*r
«o ong, dpa« or bo*belchtigto, lhn la aclnea Inatitut la .^oaaolotodt su
vorvenden.

V«,Thread jIXX ifi Jedo Vorblndung nit den Xnolto-Sxpcrinonton
nbatrltt, aagt. » r voltorhla pub, d»«s r.ch Oktob«»r 1943 koino Knoltc-


oxporiacato ntp.ttgcfttndcn button. (?.. 4541). >e Srr.V’.Racho Tngobuch
fuor dpo lotito K*lbj»hr 1943 llo£t nicht ror, ua <lno ondguoltlgo Ant-
wort nuf dlooo SY-ge «u gebon. *ua dec 7 gobuch fuor 1944 lot p.ber fcpns
kl-r crolcktlich, dp.oa aichorlich Wortere lturgc n «l*fUor f;otroffon warden,
Dlo ~intr4uncn fuor den 6. uad 21. J *nu»r bowolaon lloa. (3946-PS,

AEkl ».:o-:iovc 1 aitucek 123, R. 392; ai^hc «uch die MatrpffiBg fuor len 22.
Hnori.) 'lo doa «ich aol, jLO * tr>t la 'rncholaua: «la dlo Trockonk«ol-
to-3jcporiaontc in d*r cr«tcn -olfttf den Jpjires 1943 roch la Opago v«ron,
auT Joden F'il atcapbla lhn acla. Arbcltea «la a T»tbc"t«nd nitachuldig.


Aunaordoa rt?ad or alt Finesea - 1 Dntornchaunjon la Vcr-lndun:, dlo old
alt dor IXirchfUehrung ron Earltcckporicnatcn bof-oot a, *«b ecino Zu-


ntlnaun.; U»u uad v»r cla lulled claar 3ruppo oler Xooporach«ft, dlo
dJlt in Vcrbln-lun.; atni.

5. h.".lnrl — T xgorla--ate ■ (ArJclvr ochrlft, A bts 6, (C).

Ia Zuapaooahpag alt dca «nkl»go?uakt bet ref fend dlo “crnatvortlie


h- It fuor dlo k%lrlft-£xpcrin ate, 11. i- olnselnan in dor Zue=uneafp.o-

au« dor Anklp^c gL.jon doa Angokl<gton 3Q5Z «oachild^rt verdea, ntuotit

oleh iiv ankl»^v hAaptecchllch puf die St Hung doa Ang.-kl"..tcn iI/05* .

- 30 -


CICSISG 3212? fust Bicas
.C3RXK2D


(fieite 31 dci Cririnala )


3ICKI


Dio Malaria-Sxperinente warden In pretee^ Qnfnnge ven 1942 Mb zun Ende
dca Eriecea ron Profeaacr Elaua SCHILLING la Eonzentraticnalncer Encfceu
Yorpor.orsson. SCHILLING vr.r ein Zivillat.und infolcedeaaen trof dor Roicha-
ffoiundheit a fuehrer COST I die noetUen Ancrdnuu-vn fuer lhn und orcoe^lichte
oa, dnaa or die Verauche In Dnehm rruafuefcren konnto. (JO-666, Anklacobo-
volaataoclc 125, fi.366). aIIo Aerste, dlo nicht In der Vehmocht dionton,
Oder in der SS vnren, wnren dtr Eelchanerztekp_or untoratollt, in dcr
B1C!E COiTIS Stellvertreter wnr(aujra). Is iat unuoeflioh, dna BLOIC, dor
nr.ch aeir.er ei <‘en.cn Auob'Tc *aich Yollkcn::en htvuaat wnr, dnaa Veraucho
en llonachon in Konsontr''tionalr,-orn ruoKofuehrt warden", (EO-471, Anfclrure-
towolaatueok 23*, R.952) nlakta ron Verauchen vuaate, dio uehr rla droi
Jnhro In Gone w-ron, fuvr walcho un^ofnehr 1.2C0 Inaraaen tu Vcraucha-
xwockon bor.utit warden and di« Yon a»ln«u dlrektcn Vorffeactzten rofoerdort
und Yon einen Hitaliod olnor Cr<rniantion maa^ef'jekrt wurdon, deren G»-
achneftafuohrcr uni zveltbocohate Inetnns er war.

Uo v ordi«a at and BLC’IZ j:lt Dr. PLCS3ES in VorMndan* (o.Poly^nl-
Voraucho, Supra). PLCTTCT. war oin Aaalatcnt Yan SCPILLJi© und fuehrto
t:it lhn Mnlrrinvcrauchc aoa (354G-PS, aunrr, Xlntrn.-ancon ran SO.Jnnunr ,
22.Fofcrunr, Sl.Kai, l.Juni und 34.Aumat 1944), SITIG wor nchm-lo in d*>
Konzor.tr'tlonalrurer Snchna, wo die 7craucht miarcfuchrt warden (Bloue R
4525, IP-473, ..nlel-rckcvclaatatck 237,R.952). Er croortertc Verauoho an
Monochan nit don An.’okl'vton SEVERS, der ouch Bel v at Bohr oft in Dachau
wnr (31oro K.4I0G). An>-«iBlchtz dicaor Tntaichcn knnn kiln ZWeifel d-rueVor
horrachcn, dnaa £ICueber SCHILLINGS Torauohe und aelne- ajarmonnrkelt
nit PLCSTHSE und SIEV335 untarrlchtet -nr.


BICIE wuaate nuek aekr wckl Yon noderan Verauchen. die In


- 31 -


nrr


isuiics of cirsac bsf7 kobt slcie
-- cowan)_

(Sclto 53 dee Crl.-innla)

Bias

Kontontr' t lonolarern miB*efuehrt vurden. In Beircr cidcsatnttlichen Srklnerur
fnb er iu, drso er frew.u drrueber ur.terrlchtet vrr, dnis In EonientmtionB-
Incorn Vorsuche rn :?«n«chen TUBcefbehrt vurden. (BO-471, AnklrcebcvoloatuecV:
338, E.952). HP? "LIE aelbst crsneklte lhn von den Yereuchen, Tjrphua-Inpf-
ntoffo lu lonicntmtiOMlrser Buchenvrld «u rruefen. RASCHZS ecttto BIC!!T
uober oolno Eoehenveroucho In Eenntnli. (Blcnc 3.4508). SIZYZIS croorterto
Trrron nit lhn lnbeiu* nuf rertehlod.ne Speilr.lforachurven and Vortuehe.
(3546-PS, supra, Zlntmcunr vos 11.October 1944).

B1013 vnr dor otollvertrotondo Rclch««iundheltBfuchrcr, der atollvertrotcnde
Loiter dor Relchanertvelrrv. er und deo K"tlonrl-SoilrlistlBchen Aerstobundca.
Sr vnr oln oncor Xitnrbtitor COTTXSf, der dlo Uitunc do. xlvllcn Gonund-
hcitavoBono unulttolbrr unto*- alch hntto. Infolce dlosor Stollum: uobto
BlOiffi olno butr-cchtlichu Hrcht nun und hntte olnen rroosen Slnfluso. Sr
vuBDto, lnoa Inn-ancr. von Ko&roBtrrtls&aWorn ayste.irtlaoh fuor vorbreche-
rlBeho L.odlilnlBeho Yerrache becutxl vurden.

;.1b vornntvortllcher Loiter dor brkUrlolo.-'oehcn -ricesfUchrunp
riot 31/: :: perBOorllch au ver^rcchoriachcn Vcrauahen ruf J»n*a OeMet und
fuohrto alo ruch poraoonlich nuo. In aclbvn Zfcar ., n Vr/ nchte er Olftvor-
Bucho nn Htnachon und berlchttto Hr? LS3 dnrue’er.

BIT 2 vuoBtf f.o nrm von den aocrdirlschea EfivUertrouchea, die ven
“SC 1  kooncht vurden, untoratuetaie seine 3n:cfcun.cn. cla Hnlversitncta-
Ifeaont fuor dieae 'otcrle au-olra-cn su ‘'orden uni *rtrllto HASCP1H nla Mlt-
*-llod dco Reich8forachun.-an;.teB peraooallch elr.cn rorachuncsnuftrni: fuer
voltvro Knoltoveraucho. BIO^S rrehte marux.en nit RASCSSH Polycnl-Yerauche,

In doren YarlrtUf InanBaon ancoachoaacn und ectoetet vurden. Auch tur I\:rch-
fuehrunc dloaor YerBucho ortelltr t r 3=0831 olr.cn Forac'awCTruftrnc.


(Scitc 33 dcs Orljinalo)


JLOC hnttc K.nntniB von EIFT'b 7crsuehcn nit G*a In iV.tsvcilor
und focrdcrto toinc Arbeit, laden or lka clnon «uftr<*< doa Rcichafor-
■c hO Bg N PUi ortollte.

aIb Btollvcrtrctcndcr r^ichBgceundhcltefuohror -rboitoto

3L0IB susrccca ait dcs Xoerdcr CJTISSR, dca Gwileitor dec ferthogxua,

dor unter "S-lorca »n dor Ausrottun^ dor Judon is Jean Toll von ?olon

toilwha. CXW3, BUBBsnca ait GJEIS^, untcretuotsto don ?lu», Tuacndo

von tuborkulooBon Polon sasiurotton, lie “1* elao GcsundhcitB f ;of«hr

fucr die dcutschon Slcdlor botruMet warden. Gca-oao dicncnrlrn

wurdon viola polnioche StMto-asohoori^o oroordot;. uad <*ndoro vurdon

in rbfjOBandortc L»,;. r ,,-obr>aht. wo aio kclnorlol lorstlich; Hllfo

crhlolt r. uad atorbun -uoBten. aIb pronlncntoo Klt^llod doa vorbrcchori-

Bchon l-si-ruolirorkorpa, war 3L0K" >.it<liod t-lnor Onxppc, die ait dOr

AUBfuohnuv; doa -.uthna- a ic-i 1 rouses in Verbinduac «tnnd. -r wunato,

tatkraoftl*.

d«an dloaoB Program unocactslieh v*r, unterstu ttto ob -bor trottdos
Dio AakW* lo«ct >r, dxaa da* -*<»volBi»torl"l bcotnotlgt,

(lass MOKE in Yorbindun.: ntrad ait FlMMa uni Untcrnchouatfcn. die Bich
nit nodiainiochvn Yorauchoa *n Ker.achca ohne icren inwilli .-un.;, dor
AUBrottun.: tuborkulooaor Polen unter lor lurchfuchmnrf doa .'.uthnneaio-
Pro^r-sna bf-colon, Jabb or hiorln »upt*chuldlgcr und Holforsholfor
w-r, dioae H*ndluiy,-on bof-hl, lhr.ca V ora chub lolateto, ihnoa xuBtiaato
und V«1 tilled cincr Gruppe odor Uoerporach-ft wrr, die alt ihacn in
Vorbindung otoni und Jabb in 7crlauf diccer K*ndlun/^n Horde, Drutali-
tncton, GrruB-skeiten, ”olt« nuvren, 5r.uolt».ton und -More unnon«ch¬
ild 10 Tton bccagcn warden uad Iaob acinc Sehuld unter don Punkten I,
II und III dor ABklotfotChrift fcatf-oitcllt iat.


£aSIZIfi£LdLS«£USl«

Juno 26, 1947

I, Joseph M. rr-nckenstoil, a—42342, hereby certify tb-t I as
thoroughly conversant with the '.cjli-h *nd Goman 1 .vv,-uatjob «nd that
the above is a truo pal correct translation of the Cloein-; 3rd of
Kurt i>LO;Z.

Joseph M. Franck-'netoia
go. a—442842

- 33 -


MILITi2KG2RICH7SH0F Nr. I


F.iL Nr. 1


d,S.^k22;?..SS=20Zh SCH?JfTS.T2


f’dia JI3 V2£E:iGT3C STA-.TiX VON .w*2jJK.’.


EG2»


VIKTOR BR..C&


J. k. LcHmoy
.doxanJor G. Hardy
.a-nost Horlik-HoehwalJ
Ssthor Jar.o Johnson


Nuernberg,

16. JuaI 1947


Fuor:


Tolford Taylor

Bri {idlor Gonoral, U.S....

Chief of Counsel for war CrltAja


BRACK


£::;?V£HEJ»3

Unter Punkt I der Anklageschrift wird der /ingeklagte Viktor Brack

10 weaentlichen beschuldigt, da 33 er aich ait andcren Peraonen in Verfol-
ge einca gonoinsa^er. Vorhabena zu einer Verachwoerung urvd Uebereinkunft
zuaaanengcfondor. Ut, aa ^dizinischo Sxpcriaente an lebcndon Uenachon
ohne derer. Zuatlcaung vorzunehaen; untor Punkt II and III (Krlegavorbre-
chon unu Vorbrechcn gegen die ..enachlichkeit), daaa er Haupttaeter, Teil-
nohaer, Anatifter, Vorachubleiatcnder geweacn iat, aelno Zuatiraaung gogo-
b«n and nit Plaenen and Untomchoen in Verbindung goatanden hat, die die
burchfuehrung oodlzinischcr Exporiaente an lebcndon ..unachon ohne Zu-
atimaung der Botreffenden zua Gugonatand batten, and d&a sogenannte
Euthanaaieprogram durchgcfuohrt zu habon; enter Anklagepunkt IV nach don

• 1. SofXeabor 1939 oin *dtgliod der SS geweacn zu aoln, cinor Organiaation,
die voa Intumationalon ^ilitaergorichtahof ala vorbrwchorisch crklaort

• worden iat. •.

Dio ala ariogavorbruchon und Vorbrechcn gogen dio kcnachlichkeit
anurkinnton Handlungon aind in don *baactzon I (b) und (c) doa Artikola

Nr. 10

11 doa aontrollratagcaotzoa/angefuehrt. Dio .dtgliodachaft boi oiner von
Intomationolon ^ilitaorgerichtahof ala vorbruchoriach orklaorton Orgoni-
aation wird in Abaatz 1 (d) doaaolben «rtikcla ala Vorbrochon bezoichnot.
Dio Strafbarkeitaswrknalo aind in -rtikol II .d>aatz 2 doa Kont roll rat ago-
aotzca Nr, 10 aufgufuohrt. Den Angeklagten BracK wird ihsboaondoro zur

, Uat gologt, aich on den in differ 6 (I) dor Anklageachrift aafgeruehrtcn

Storiliaioningaoxperincnton and an dor Ourchfuehruns dea in Ziffor 9 auf-

•

gofuuhrton Euthanaaioprograaaa botoiligt zu haben.

1 . grsun?.‘G UNO VEP^Vr: CKTU.\3

Der Angeklagto Brack hatto ia Dienat dor NSOAP and der SS Stcllungon
mit achr groaser kachtbofugnia ux>d Vonmtwortlichkoit . Er war uinor dor
fruehoaton Anhaongor Hitlors. Schbn ia Jahro 1923 trat or oinor artillorio-
oinhoit doa Sa-kogiixmta in ..uenchon boi. Ic Jahro 1929 wurdo or -itglied
der KSDaP und dor SS and


- 1 -


BRACK


erhiolt den "Totenkopfring", cine SS-~uszdchnung,is Jahre 1934. (NO-82),
“ n ^-* ®° w * 34, R. 138). Seine dlgliednusacr In dor SS war 901, und or gc-
tioorto also zu den acltesten «itgliedom dor SS. (Brack.R. 7443). Vor
rtUsbruch dos Kriugoa war Bracks Rang in dor SS dor oincs Standartcnfueh-
r«rs,und waohrend dcs Kriogos wurdo or zua Oberfaohror befoordert. (NO-823,
obon).


U Jahro 1932, noch bovor Hitler zur _acht kaa, erhidt or oinc loi-
tendo Stoliung iu Buoro dor .'.'SJ.tP in ..uonchon, doca aogonannt.cn Braunen
Haas, das daaols das Haupt^u-rticr dor Partei war. Von 1933 *n war or als
Bouhlers ..djutant taotig, dor zu dios-r Leit Rdchsgcschacftsfuchrcr dor
NSD.J 1 war. «ls Bouhlcr 1934 sua Loitor dcr "Kanrlei dos Fuehrers dor
NSJaP" omannt wurdo, ging Brack ait iha nach Berlin. Zr wurdo ia Jahro
1936 zua Loiter dos ..stes II dcr Kanzlei dca^Juohrors omannt, ait deo
Titol Roichsaataleiter una spader Oberdicnatloitor. 2a .act II war or ala
Bouhlers St divert n. ter t—tig und fuehrto alio Sondoraufgaben Bouhlors aus.
da Hitlor io Jahre 1939 den ..ngcklagton Karl Brandt und Bouhlcr die Durch-
fuohrung dcs Euthamsicprograccs uebertrug, wurdo Brack ait bodcutsaaon
Verwaltungsaufgabon dioaos Progro ass betraut. (NO-82), oben).


II.


ms™


iE (.uiklageschrift Ziffor 6 (I))


Io Jahro 1941 war os beroite dio offlziollo Politik dea dritton Reichos,
dlo Juodiacho Bovoolkorung Ucutachlaods und dor bosotston Cobioto auasurobten
(Urtoil dos I....T., h. 16920 und folgondo). In aoinor oidoastattllchon Aue-


oa gu boachrieb drack dios ala off^nos Gchdanis in hochoixn Partdkrciaon.
(2-3-426, «nkl. Bow. 160, R. 532). ..uch gibt or zu.


- 2 -


Bh-iCX


von Kicaler uober don Boschluaa in Kcnntnis gcaetzt xordan zu aoin, dio
Judon auezurotton. (Brack, R. 7508). In ^ordnandwork goschulto Porsonen
wurdon von don Eutnanaaieatationen noch dec Oat on goachickt, on boi don
Program mitzuhelfon. Baa Program sclbat uurdc in dor Tat tollweiao dazu
bcnuotzt, ua dio Judon auazurotton. (Sioho "Euthanasic" - untcn).

v,ugon dca dringcndcn Btdarfa an ..rbcit-m wurdc die Stcriliaicrung
von arbeitafaohigon Judon ala alternative zu ihrer voolligon Vomichtung
angoaohon. Himlor orauchto Brack ait c. ini gen dor .*urzto, dio in Euthana-
sieprogrom taetig waren, ..ocglichkclten dcr Steriliaiorung zu untcrauchcn,
dio dio Opfor in Unkonntnia uobor ihr achr-cklichoa Schlcksnl laasen wuor-
don. (Brack, R. 7404). I- -aon 192,1 achickto Brack einen von ihn poraoon-
lich untorzoichnoton Berient ueber die Srgebnisao von Rocntgonatrahlon-
kaatrlcrungaverauchen. ..ua diooon Vorauchcn ging horvor, daaa cine dauemdo
Steriliaiorung durch hoontgenatrahlun nur durch Joaicrungen erziolt w-rden
kounnte, dio Kaatriurung zur Folge babon warden. Dor Bericht atollto foat,
daaa ..aaaonatorllialcruns cdt koontgonatnhlcn ohno Schwicrigkciton durch-
gofuohrt wordon koonnten und achlug aua Tarnungagruonden vor, daaa dio
Opfor an oinen Schaltor gebr'.cht warden aollton, wo aio aufgefordcrt "ucr-
den, oinigu Frogon zu bwantworton und Foraulare auazufuollcn, cine uxaa-
nahrw, dio slo zwingcr. wuurdo, 2 bia 3 *inuton Schaltor su vcrblcibon.
Uur hintcr deo Schaltor aitZundo Be ante wuurdo einen Roontgorwppnrat bedio-
non und dio Opfor, ohno daaa aio oa wuesaton, atoriliaicrcn. Brack achaotz-
tu, daaa auf dioao .uiao 150 bia 200 Peraonen in cinoa Tago atcriliaic-rt
wurdon koonnton und deshalb nit TO aolchtn Sinrichtungon 3000 bia 40CO
Opfor t&uglich aterilisiurt wordon koennten. Er wlca darouf hin, daaa dio
Puraonon oa fruehor odor spa at or :~orxcn wuordon, daas sio k-istriort wordon
scion. (NO-203, .uikl. Bow. 161, R. 534-5). 12. Itfi 1941 bestaotigto

Himalor don Boricht und schicktc on Hoydricto


- 3 -


BRaCK


don Loiter dor M.chorh«-itspoliz«.i uoi dca S0,wioc Sopio. (K0-204, —nkl. Bow.
162, R. 536).

ucr Einfull in Kuaalcrel b_7ann is Soc^jr 1941, uni 3rccks Voraching wur-
do nicht uuagoru.nrt. .jb 23. Juni 1942, ala ucutachland dun Siog in Haonden
au habon schion, achriub Brack wiodorur an ninalor und achlug dio Storlli-
aiorung dor artooitaf .ohigcn Judcn vor.

Nach aoinor Paatatollung, daaa cr Globocnik fuur saino ..uarottungaok-
tion gogon dio Judon Leuto zur Vcrfuogung goatollt nabs, wioa or darauf hin,
daaa ungofaohr 2 bia 3 i illionen von don 10 . illionon Judcn in Suropa ar-
boitafaohig aoion uni da L~bon sclasaon warden aollt-n. Brack war dor .-.ci-
nung, dioa koonn«. nur gv-achohfin, wcm dicao Jud-n sturiliaiort wuorden, ao-
dnaa aia aich nicht fortpflonzcn kounnten. Er aapfahl dio Vorwendung von
l.oontgunatrahlon fu«.r dicaon Lwock, i-cil daa schnoll gingo und voihaoltnia-
oauaaig billig aoi. Bouhlor hatto aich dazu bcr it orklaort, dio fuor daa
Programs urfordorlicnon ..urztc und d'.a noutigo Poraon 1 zur Vorfuogung zu
atollon,und Brack war bor^it, dio notwondig„n ..pparite allorschnollatona zu
boatollun. biack KV: d .'/or. ub, uaaa dio Opfor u-bjr ihr Schlckaal in Unkonnt-
nia gulaaaon wurdwn aoilt«.n, da or oin aolchoa Vorgohcn donn ala unwoacntlich
orachtoto. (NO-205, -/-.l. Bow. 163, h. 536-7). Dicao . oinungaacndurung war
unzwcifolhuft auf dio T taachu zuruockxufuohrcn, d>aa Brack 1942 davon uobor-
zcugt war, Uoutachland wuurdo u_n krivg in dor nahcn aukunft go winner. und
man doarulb uinor Eritik solchu-r unoonschlicher uni v.rbrcchcriacher -aaa-
nahioon koine Boachtung zu achonkon brauchto. Br-c/t aagto in. dircktcn Vorhoor
aua, daaa or i»» Jahro 1942 "3ichor war, die -lohraacht wlxdo don kriog go-
winnon". (h. 7440).

Himalor achriob Brack au 11. .vuguat 1942, daaa waitujv 2x no ri.no nto zur
Foatatollung dor Wirkafcukoit dor Storiliaiorung lurch Kocntgonatrahlon on
Konzentr-tionalagorinaaastn von F cheorztcn, die van Bauhl^r zur Varfuugong
goatollt wuordon, vorgeno.-Jjn women sallton. Urn dicao Sntacheidungen in dio
Tnt uozusotzon, aotztc or Pohl, den Chef dwa i.V.H.A. dcr SS, dor die Konzon-
trationsligor untor aich fvatto,und Grawitz, den .vaichsirzt SS und Polizoi,
in Konntnia. (NO-2Q6,

- 4 -


3K..CX


..nicl. Bow. 166, R. 536). Brack be/ahl seines Stollv.rtrcter Blankonburg,
aich ait dca Loiter dor Aonzcntr&tionslager 2 u diosoa Zweck in Verblndung
zu sotzon. (NO-337, «nkl. 3ew. i65, h. 538). .Ja rolgo davon wurdon von
Jr. Schumann (nO-20o, *njd. Bow. 166, «. 539), dor froehor dor Lcitor oinor
dor Euthuiuaieatationon war, Voraucho ia Konxontrationsl.gor ..uschwitz an-
gtatollt. (Brack, R. 7733). Ovsa Stcriliaicningon durch noentgcnatrahlen
tata-iochlicti in -%uachv.itz vor 6 onoua.n wurdon, 1st woitorhin durch dio horz-
zorrwioaondo «aasaga doa jungon polnischon Juden Chaim Balitzky orwioaon,
d«r, ruchdoc or oinor intensive Roontgontx-atrahlung scinor Goachluchtatoilo
auagoaotzt wordon wir, opcrativ Kaatricrt wurdo, aod.aa die irkung dor
nocntgonbeatrahlung atudiort warden konnto. (h. 561 and folgendo). BUitzky
ontaann aich doa Nuouna Schumann la ..us^aaonhang uit dioacn Vorauchon.
(balitzky, h. 563). onigatuna 1Q3 unfreiwilligv Verauchapursonon - Polon,
Kuaaon, Frvnzoaon und ..riogagofangono - wurdon fuor dioao Voraucho vorwon-
dut. (Lovy, K. 556-7). l.ur jungo, gut gvbauto Inaiaaon in buator Goaund-
hoi*. wurdon fuor dioao Airaucho auagcaucht. (U-vy, R. 556). Die atorili-
aiortun Opfor orlitton koorpurlicho und aooliachu Sch'odtn. Xoorporlich
litton aio ungehouro Sclaorzcn infolgu von r: dialer Doraititia. ..bgoaohon
davon wnrun aio aooliach in nicht wiodor guttumchundor oiao gcachaodigt.
(Levy, h. 559). Faat .vile opfor dioaor &tpe-riconto wurdon aaa&urottot, da
dlu aenworen liountgenatruhlunvorbivnnungen aio* irboitsunfichig anohten.
(Lovy, R. 557; aulltzky, n. 563). -aoren aio ac Loben gobliobon, ao wuordon
aich dio ooiston von ihnen ala rolgo dw-r .toentgcnstrihlcnverbrennungon
hoontgon-hroba zugoxogun b.bcn. Nucn doc 6tind dor heutigon wissonachaft-
lichun Forachung 1st dioao ..ronkhuit unhoilbir. (L.vy, n. 558).

Btuck lougnute uio Vurintwortlictocoit fuor dies. Btorilisiorungavor-
aucho ab. tr bohauptatu, uasa antiao-aitisch- Gefuchlo iha voellig fom
laogon und or doa Program


- 5 -


dor «usrottung dor Juden -blchr.cad gegcnu^bor gostwden soi, da dies von
iho. als unmonschlich and dor deutschcn Nation unwuordig orachtot wurdo,

£r sagte, cuss or versuchto, die Juden vor ihreu schrecklichen Schicksal
ru bewafiren. Luaa.~.._cn ait seiner. . itarbeitero Blankenburg und h'efeloann,

die seine -einung teiltcn, bohauptete er, Plaene fuer eir.e anstaeniige Loe-

%

sung ues ^uedischen Problcos e..tworfen and weitorgeleitet zu haben. or nahm

an, class nachdeu beutschland den Jlrieg gewonnen haben wuerde, sich viele

europaelsche Laender dor deutschen lesetzgebung in bezug euf die Juden an-

passen wuorden. die Juden wuorden also in lentraleuropa „eine lukunft .«hr

haben. Er und seine ►itarbeiter schlugen nach seiner aussage die Uasiedlung

und

• von ungefaehr 10 -dllionen ouropaeischer/palaestinensischer Juden in .Vada-
gasknr als einer neuen juedischen He:>*t vor, ait einor juedischen ftegierung

• unter Bouhler als dautschecs Gouvemour. orack gent sogar so wait zu sagen,
er war dor *einung, dioser Plan wuerde dio untorstuetzung des cltjudentuas
haben. (Brack, ft. 7UB0). Sr behauptet, dass als diesor Plan von Hitler ver-
worfen wunle und die Gefahr der Verwirklichung rvieher rucckte, er und seine
•dtarbeitor Hitler dadurch zu taeuschen vorsuenten, dass sio ihn. unwirksano
ft t o rill si emngs.net hoden voiochlugon, a* die Juden zu retten. Auf dioso 'Mao
wollte or die Ausrottung bis nach dea Ende dos KriegM hinausschloben, wonn
dor Plan uer Uasiedlung der Juden rvich ..sdigaskar aufs neue vorgobr'cht wor-
don koonne.

t All dies stollt natdorlich koine Verteidigung dar. Die Tatsacho stcht

% '

Tost, dass brack Sterllisierungsvcrsuche ausfuchron liess, dio don Tod und
dio dauornde Scnuedigung zaluieicnor hiIf loser Opfor zur Kolge natten. Aus
dora oowei senate rial gent ueberdies hervor, dass Brae* rueckhaltslos an dor
xusrottung dor Juden altwirkto und sogar zu dic3ea -week Globocnik geuebto
ftordgosellen zur Vorfuogung stcllte. Dass 3rack persoenliche Vorbehalte ge-
habt haben ung, ist ganz unwesontlich. Aber dieses ongehouerliche Vorbrin-
gen von brack ist voellig falseh. Brack war ein


- 6 -


BRACK


rt/ihaenger Hltlura aeit 1923 und bexloiictc ein hohea Ant in der NSDaP.
(Oben). haaaenpolitik und ala yolge davon zuegelloaer .crt-iacaitiaais war
oino der Grundlagon dea Hltler-Syatesa und dca nat.aoz. nogiaca. (Urteil
dea Ikl, R. 16917 u. ff.). Aua dea Beweissatorial glng einwandfrai hcrvor,
uaaa Brack, twit davon entfernt.die Judon vor Ausrottung zu achuctzon,
voHxoiuaen unbekueaaort ueber doa be hick aal der aleben bia acht .dllionon
Judcn "<*r, die nicht in der Ugt waron su arbeiton,und nur daa Lobcn von
zwui Dla drui »dllion«.n at drill alerter Juden zua <.wuck der Ewangairboit
rotten wollto, bia Jcutachland d«n Slog tmutgon habon miostki. (NO-205,
obon, alone"Euthanaaio", anten). dor einzige bchluaa, den nan aua Bracka
nuaaago ziohen kann, iat, dasa or die *ethod« aeinur Vorteidigung von dem
«ngoKlagton Pokomy auaborgte. (brooffnungaerklaorang fuor don Angcklagton
Pokorrv, H. 2283, vergl. Rrack, R. 7772).

III. aJTHANASI RP.OJ.iA; .. (Ankldgeachrift,21ffor 9)

Hinaichtlich der doachrvibung und dor vorbrochoriachon Katur doa
butnanaaioprograma wird auf den Schriftaata dor Anklagcbehoordo gogon
Karl Brandt hlngewioacn.

Brack war oinor dor wichtigaton *acnnor boi dar Jurchfuchrung dea

•

Euthanaaioprogranraa. ala Hiardcr,in aolnor Eigenachaft ala holchaainiator
dea Innorn, von 8uch, div. hoochaten Pnrtoirichtur (MG-O02, «nkl. Bow. 392,
R. 1678) Klagon uebjr die Jurchfuchmng dea Prograona orhielt, achriob or
an Brack direkt, un Ihn aufzufordorn,gewisao Schwiorigkciten au borcinigcn,
die daaurch entatondon waren, daoa dio Bwoelkerung von Grafoncck horauesv-
fundon hatte, daaa in einor Pricgoanatalt in dor U.gobing Gelateakranko
gutoetet und vurbrannt wunlcn. (NO-016, <*nkl. Bow. 404, R. 1711; Brack, R.
7482-3). Beachwordon von hohon kirchlicfwn UierdontrMgcm wogon dor Too-
tung von Goiateakrnnkun wurdon lha aur ^rlodigung augeschickt. (616-PS,
mikl. Bow. 403, R. 17U). 2r schickte an don heichajuatianiniator 3riofo
mit aolnua puraoenlichon Briufkopi bosueglieh doa


- 7 -


-


3r—CK


Suthanasioprograms und crtuelt die betreffendcn «/.t on dire Jet von dicscii
Kinioter. (NO-1323, «nkl. Sew. 495, «. 7691-2; :W-642, nkl. Be. 405,
k. 1712), nenn Bouhlor von Berlin abwesend war, war er ala sain Stollvor-
trater tactig und korrusaondierte als solchur nit Froisler, den Staatssc-
kretaer La heichsjustiz-inistoriu-;, uebar Zuth&nasioproblano. (NO-843,
a xml. Bow. 406, h. 1712).

der Zouga Monnecka sa£to aua, dass Brack auf einor T&gung dan Vorsitz
fuonrto, auf dor dio fuor die Durchfuohrung das Programs ausgosuchten
aurztu von ihren Pflichtor. in Kcnntnis geactst wurdun und da as or dor i-ann
war, dor ihr.en dio notwe.vilgen Inforaationon gab. (..vnnocko, R. 1868).
bracK war olno dor fuohr«ndon .'orsocnlichkoiten it. Euthanasioprograxro.
(uunnecko, R. 1874). dcr *.ougo ScJvddt sagto aus, duss Brack ir. Jahro 1944
Brandt als Loiter dus Program-.a ersatz to. (Sciuidt, a. 1825).

Brack gab La Vurlauf seiner Aussagc zu, dass or La Euthanasioprogram
aoit soinon oraton Anf.tongon t»otig goneson war. (ri. 7551). ir entsohloss
sich dazu, boi dan Program i-ltxuwirken,und zog oinige soinor kiUrboitor
ins V-.rtmuon und ursuchte sio,*uch tlttuw.rkcn, (h. 7558). Er nahn an don
orston Tagungon toil, die abgartalUn warden, ua das Program in dio Tat
umzuaotzon. (a. 7565). Er uobornahe os, dio Organisation dcs Programs ins
Lobvn zu rufon. (h. 7586). Er hattu das nocht, cisungon zu ortoilon. In
violon Kaullon wir or als Bouhlere St all vert niter tuot.g (ii. 7587) und
fuohrto auf Tagungun dun Vorsitz. (h. 7588). Er hlclt such auf Tagungcn
uobor Euthanasio Vortrajgo, z.B. uuf dor Tagung dor Gauaatsloitor dos oof-
fontlichon Gasundhoitsdionatbo in .-uonchen (h. 7586) und 1a Justisminl-
storiun in Borlin. (n. 75»V). ^ inter 1939/1940 war or xasanoon nit don

AngokLagton Brandt und oouiilor sowia Conti zugogan, als dio orston Opfor
dcs Prograi^us in uinor Gaakx._ur dor dr .ndenburgor Zutfcanasiostation go-
to-tot warden (u. 7645-6) und reisto I- «ahxv 1940 bci alien andoivn
KutiwaMiostationcn

^ -4T. *


BRACK


hervun and san dio roetun- von viulcn Xnsasson sit an. (k. 76^7).

Bracks oigana auss^c and a-:a von dor nnklaga vorgoia^to Bcxoisrate-
rial b«*.-is«nal8o, dass cr Ruthanaaioprograao oin Vcr^altungsloit-r
alt Vurantwortong war.

Brack gibt 3ulna oot,iligung bain Zuthanasiopro grass zu (n. 7555),
ib«r voraucht,daa Frogra^ solbst and seiner 5ctoiligung daran hoho oora-
liacno and monschlichu Grundsa^tzo zuzaachroibon. 0-3 iftthaauioprograaB
bezog sicn nur oaf unhoilbar Goisteskrankc. (n. 75^.3)• 5r bcgraossto Eutha-
nasiu, da sie auX dua vthischun Grundaatz d.-a . itgofuuhls beruhto. (R.
7532). Nur aclno HilXsburcitsciuft gogunucbor jcdor-vann,und be sonde r 3 go-
gonuober dun Krankun, lioas ihr. die jithanaslo beXu-rworUn. (I.. 7534).
begun dursulbun hohun hu&inltuoren Grands .utzo bogracssto «.r auch Euthana-
sio faor liissguataltutc u:h 1 or.tur.ntwickclto Kinder, (n. 7554). la Fall
dor Euthanasiu von aindorn vir uie vorherigo ^usti uong dur Rltcm odor
dus Voruundua cine ibsolutu Voi auss.tzong. (h. 7612).

Hlnsichtlich dur ruchtlichen Grondltgu dca .'rz^rcsca st-lit ur slcn
buX don btandpurntt, c-aa diu k-fugnis Hitlura, -in ochriXtstuock za untur-
zcichnon, aurch wolchoo ui ail-'s bcfAhl* »is «r auss-Xuohrt wuwischtc,
koinurlci Buschrun.cun^-n untun-orrer. wir. (k. 7665). Jr behnaptuto, diss
Jadun uxvl nlchtdoutocno Sta.uanngohoorigu von dvU Frogra..*- nicht bctrofXcn
*urdun, da Hitler die Zuth. naalu nor dcutschon St tatsbJorgom zu gewaoh-
ron wucnachto, da sii oinen Gr. djnakt darsUlitc. (h. 7602 , 7649). Das
a uthanA8iyprogri.ua wurio ‘.ng-dileh iu August 1941 abtubrochun. (H. 1.666).
hr vorsuchtOjEuthinaai 1 ; iri die "Action k f 13 ausvlnondcr zu hilton,
diu tutsaochlich diu au slotuu, , von ..an3ontr .tion3l--rorin8assun antor duo
kuthanaslopn>gra.u! darstulltu. Brick .<u, cr wiaau nur, unss os Hiunlers
Absicht war.


- 9 -


BHaCK


dio Konz ont ratioaali^-n.iausst.n, die -as achwuraUn krank v ron, zuf ihrer.
kourporlichor. una gairtigun .usuna run unUrauchon zu Uason,und or,

Brack, glaubto, dies wurdc i~ Intonww dioaor Ins-'-aaon geschchen. V
Hionilor nicht gunuagand Vwrtraoon zu den Paehigkoiton dor uomontrations-
lugcmorztu hitte, urauento el Bouiler, solcfu -orcto zar Vurfuegung zu
»talien. Bouhlcr crauchto Brue*, sich .ait doa Buoro doa Suthan&aioprograrna
in aor Tiorgdrtenatraaao 2. in Vwrbirdung zu sa*-n md oj: die Lurvorfuo-
gungrtollung von orfahronofl Faychiotom zu dioaoc. l*»ck zu bitten. Brack

nin dioauji orauchon ittch. (r.. 7535).

Brack aagto *ua, daaa ur -nic uiu abaicht hitto,dio Jud«n auazurot-

ten, aondorn daa Gugontoil ^.oaichtigto, diu eud-n za boachuutzcn, aio
vor uinua achrocklichon Schiele.*! zu bowhr-n.- Sr koonno aich nicht vor-
atullcn, mrun or "oin Vorkaj-ofur dor vudonauarottung naette cordon

aoiiun." (h. 7531)*

Broexs .u»ao a o wlrd Sure. Join. oljono -laujsl.Ml.Ucho orklacruns
voolllg -idorlogt (M-&. .duel. *.». lhO. h. 525) ana durch die v»n ll»
ont-orton. Mdb <.0-253. M. 3.U. n. 1532 ;.and joUt 1U or
dun orient.hot gUob-n each-,., a«. or >ich irjondrtc hoi dor Untor-
zoichnung goirrt fubo.

BrucKa Auoaagu atollt r.vlno Vortoidigung gugcnuiboi den gogen ihn

• *•

urnobenun doacz.uldiiungon aor. ik* ttmddcrlugU Bevel *-MoriM *cigt,
dues Furaonon ohnu gohoerige Imturauchon* nach hunderttaoaondon dor
Rutlunaaio untorworfe.-. - uaaa diu !uatLng do. Pationtun odor

aiu auinor Vormindtun vor d-r Jurchfoetaang nicht uing.holt wurdc; diaa
dor uvuck doa Pn.gm.-a uio auaturzung •ogewnnUr nutzloaor Luben *nr
von Por.onon, die U Bglzatung do. St i .tea *r«*ML cordon; diaa oino
botrauchtUcnu anzi.il nichtdoutac.iur Stv.ts-ngcho*rigor getootot »urdo;
daaa goaundo Judon oinbuzogun *univ«; d.sa aion^ntiationalag-rinanaaon
von iuthawaouurzton nach Kurz.r od.r r-r Koiner Untursuchimg auagc-hlt
minion. Brack logt koineO —via dif-or vor, on div.o r^ta-cher. zo widur-

logun.


BRACK


Sr sagt bloas, uaaa d’-a Frosratc .uialaendar uni Judon '.n-jblich -ua-
achlioason aollto; daaa or von hohen coralischm Prinzipion jeloitot wrr;
daaa aio Untorauchungen jr^-nOlich so In 3 oil ten, oaw.. Dcr wosontlicho
Inhalt aoinor ^ou^onauaMgo iat, d.iaa or d'.a Pro;r'Jx:,in dcaacn Durchfuoh-
rung or oino wichtigc otullung bcklcidotu, nicht zu bcm.clti.jon vomochto.
oracKa an^oblicho fcoralitaot iat voollij unwoaentlich. Sa iat mzunchoon,
oaaa aogar don olendon Konkoraknechten, in don Vomichtunjal-igxrn von
..uachwitz und Trcbllnx.*. gca"jt, uni uch von ihnen jogl'.ubt wurdo, dr. 3 a
aio Jurch dna Tooton dor Juden doc. Vrtorland ctw.a Gutoa t’-oton. ..bcr dio-
aor achwncho Kochtforti J ur. a a..run*i iat n^sichta d«a Bowoian'.toriala nicht
eldab'xuorJij.

A. Moraliacho o^.huL/uilt ore Rochtfortl.jur,;.

In dot. SchriftaUz O ejon X rl Brandt h'.t *io .oikl'.jobohocrdc don uobur-
waltigondon Bowoia zuaru^onjvfaaat, d\aa die Suth»n-\aia, wo it davon entfomt,
"oln Gcudonakt" za coin, cine - .aaxvjol m.r, tr; "nutzloao Eaaor" und nndoro
"unorwuonachto" Blc-^nto naazurotton. 3r\ck aclbat konnto, ala or vou Go-
richt vorhoort wurao, nicht orielaoren, w-iruc Yotoranen dca oraton oltkrio-
goa (1914-18) von dioaot. "GniUcmkt" auagonarain mron. (Br'ck, R. 7650,
766/.). Er konntc Auch uajckchrt nicht oriclnoran, ir'ju.. dicao Gnndo aich
auf geiutoaknnko V^rbrochcr oratrockto, unibhionji j d-vor., wio lcngo aio
in oino.- Irrcnluua r^wjaon * ron. (*0-825, «nkl. Bow. 358 , d, 1577; Brack,
h. 1718-9).

Brack aolbat fc.ulclto -w.jucko, dcr 6 .chvorat'.onlijor i- Suthnnaaio-
progrAi-a w ir, well sainu ^ut .c..tun viol zu -lido waren und er dia Euthar.iaio
nicht ao oft, wio or 03 wollto, xoicpfahl. (.-ennocko, re. 1907, 1881). Dio
aogonaxuiton "ftjob .chtun jal tionen", o oi« ? tionton n'.ch Br-.cka «uaaajo
r..chroro (K>chon luig von atchvorat-...ndi j-n ..jrzton untwraucht wurdon, waron
nichta ala Swajlpunktv fuor dio Opfor. (*onnccko, A. 1878-9; Scheldt,
h. 1822).


3R--CK

Brack g'b zu, daaa das cric von Binding und Hocho -la d'-a StanJird-
v-rk uebar dio Euth'-otsio botracbtot wird. (R. 7633). Dicsua ;.ork la^sst
kclnun Zwcifel, daaa der Lubcnawillu solbat dorur, dia ncusaorat schwcr
krenk sinu, a^. haortoaten lei Jen urxl von ^oringstou Hutzer. alnd, voll und
«i»»“ zu roajwktioron a.-i, urxl daw jedo Bofu^nis tor Vcmichtung von .,on-
achunloben in Paollon, wo c«r Lobonawillo O ubrochun word on uuaa, auago-
ccftloaaon aoin aoUto. (KO-2893, ..nkl. Bow. L 96, a. 7700). Brack aelbst
gab zu, daaa die Euthanasia in Faeller., o der Patient den »lUen tun
Leben noch habe, unzulaeasig iat. (H. 7701). >»r -euge Schoidt bezeugto,
daaa die Opfer, die offenaichtlich ihr Schickaal kannton odor vernuteten,
geztmngen wenien auaaton, in die Osanibuaae, die sie nach den Vemichtunga-
atationen brachton, zu ateigon. (Schaidt, n. 1861, 1656). Dieses Beweia-
material wird durch doku-entarlscho Benelae beataetigt. (D-906, Ankl. Bew.
376, H. 1619-21). »enn auch vielo von dieaon Opfern geisteskrank gewesen
aein uoegon, so fehlto ihner. aichcrlich nicht der Lobenswille. Auaaer-
do.a gob Brack, ala er vck- Gericht befragt mirde, selbat zu, daaa Bouhlor
angeordnet habe, die VorKonrungen fuer die Toetong jueaaten so getroffen
warden, daaa die Patient er. alch nicht daruober ia idaren varan, was ait
ihnen goachan. (Brack, 7660). Die GuakaA.-jem, wo dio Opfer vemichtet
wunlen, glichon Juachrueuuer.. (Brack, h. 7659). Den Patienten wurde vorge-
isacht, ale aollten eir.o Duacho neh-en. and ruoaston sich doahalb ouaziehen.
(Brack, h.76 UU, 766D). Bolche Voraichto.waaarugaln nuorden gowiaa nicht noe-
tig gowesen aoin, haetten dio Patienten das "Privileg einoa Gnadontodca"
gumiunacht.

Bei Kindertoetujigen fund <\oine vorhorgehende 3cratung ait Sltern und
Vorwandten statt. (386/,-PS, ankl. Den. 367 , h. 1593). PfawmieUer, Bracka
eigonor Entlastungozouge, bozuugte, daaa or, naci»Jeo or von Jun Obergut-
achtom dio Srmaochtigung, daa Kind zu tooten crhalten natte, dio VerwanuUn
c-'inlud, daa Kind zu boauchen


- 12 -


*


well es krank sei. Sr toilto den Sltom Oder Vornuendern jedoch nlo nit,

dass or das Kind toeten werde, weil dies ein Staatsgeheianis war. (Pfann-

nuoller, it. 4394). aus den von den Angeklagten Brack vorgelegten Dokunenten

goht klar horvor, dass die Sltern aebar don i-week der Verlegung dcr Kinder

in dio Anstalten, wo sio gotcutet worden soilten, getaeuscht wurden. Es war

do Aurgabo dor boaateten rt orzte, die Sit am zu be -egon, ihro Kinder in

aolcho Anataltwn zu schicken, inden sio ihnen sa ton, dass durch Bohauidlung

«*in gewissor Erfolg orzielt werdon koenne. (Brack l>ok. 52, 3rack Bow. 43 ,

h. 7678 i vgl. Brack, H. 7717). Don Kit am «uno gusagt, dass das Kind in

solchen Anstalten dio beste ri'logu orhaltun werdo, und dass alios raoeglicho,

was dio modem* Xhoropio bletot, angewandt werdan wuordo. (Brack, Dok. 51,

Brack Bow. 42, R. 7678). kus dioson Dokunonton geht klar horver, dass boi

Kindortootungon uio Sltern nicht nur nicht ue ihro SinwiUigung gofragt,

sondom gotaouscht warden, urn dio Vorlogung in einu Suthanasio-Anstalt zu
,v. *V-

ormooglichon.

B. AKtion 14 f 13

Brack vorsuchto, das ^uthanasioprograas von dcr Aktion 14 f 13 tu tren-
nen. Er bozougto, dass dio Parsoonlichkoiten Hoydos, Kitschos, Stoinaoycrs
and Faltlhausors dio Gowauhr dafuor boten, dass dio Untorsuchungon dor Kon-
zontrationslagurtiavftlingo, dio angoblich von Hicrdor bofohlon worden waron,
in guhourigor nuioo und tan Vortoil diosor Haoftlingo aosgcfuuhrt worden
wuordun. Er hiolt us foot voollig lunwogllch, dass "Hoydc cdt soinca sn-
ataondigon Voson" on oin-r Aktion wio 14 f 13 tuilgonoen-on habon wuordo.
(Brack, h. 7538-9). I k- 3 . k ?allo 1st dios natuorllch cine schoinhoiligo
Anuahmu. Dio Buwulsarhjbu;. . ‘.At vjrgubon, dass alio diese von 3rack gonannton
aorzto an dor Auswahl von Konzuntratlonslagoriiaefllingua


BRACK


swecka Auatilgung edtwiricten. (kennecke, B* 1882). Jr. i enrwcke e*pfing
soixiu Bofohl9,9olcho Auawahlon su treffen, von Brack, Huydc and Kitscho
scnon in Jahro 19W. (konnocko, R. 1882, R. 19C9). Er wurde von dioscn
droi Peraonon instruicrt, da 99 dio Judon in den Konzentrationalagem nicht
untoraucht xu wrdon brauchten and daaa « 9 genuego, wonn dio Vcrhaftunga-
graondo in den ueblicnen Euthanaaie-/ragebogon aufgofuchrt warden. (• dn-
nocke, h. 1891-3). Dios® Judon wren groosatcntcila koerccrlich und goiatig
g.aund. (Mennocka, R. 1893, 1931). -onnockc beaprach aoino Arbeit in den
Konxantrationalagom nit Brack, Heydo and Kitecho. (..onnockc, R. 1934).
c-r hatto nienala otwr.a i-lt linden xa tun. (^nnocko, R. 1931). Uonnuckca
Auugonauaaago Hira dureh avino Ericfo an aoine Frau b-ateotigt. (>30-907,

Ankl. Bow. ).

Jio oidoaetattliche -rklaorung doa Jr. -uthig, doa Lagorarxtoa doa
uachauor Konxentrationalagora bewaist, daaa Hoydc ala Fuehrer cinor .-.onw
axiaaion von vior PaychiaUrr. in rierbat doa Jahroa 19U das Jachauor Kon-
xontrationalagor beauento. Ji«3- «.ntokoj«aia 9 ion waohlto arboitaunfachigo
Gcfangono xur Tootung durch Gaa aua. (W>-2799, Ankl. Bow. 497, R. 7710).

Uio oidoaatattUcho Erklaowns von Jr. Gorgasa entnuollt, daaa or und Dr.
Schunann, dio ooido in Euthftftaaioprogreae taotig wren, la Juni 1941 daa
Konxontrationalagor Buchonwald boauchtcn. Gorgaaa orklaort auadruockllch,
dnaa oa dor Kwock dica.r .wise "*r, aich alt dcr Aoaxihl von Konsontratlona-
logwrhaoftlingjn fuor dio Suthanaaio vortraut tu nehon. Dor Bofohl fuor
dieaun Boauch wurdo Gorg*« duren don Angoklagton Brack uobornittolt. (NO-
3010, Ankl. B*,w. 503, h. 7734).

nunn dio Zougonauaaagor. bracka und 5randt 9 boxuoglich dor Anxahl dor
Aorxto, dio in Euthanaaioprogrr--- taotig wren, richtig 1st, ao erglbt aich
aua don Akten nit Klarh.it, daaa alio boi dieaen Program tactigcn Aorcto
on dor Aktion 14 f 13 nitwirkten. Brandt schactxtc die Kahl der nit dcr
uurchfuohrung Oca Juthanasioprograama boauftmgton Aorxto auf 10 Ms 15,
(Brandt, K. 2478),Brack auf 12bi 9 15. (Brack, R. 7573). *cm»cko boxougtc,
dasa ctwa 15 Au«to voc Jutbanasicprogram boauftmjt wren, dio "Untorau-
chungcn" in d.n ^onzont.r-.tionsl:'gom durchzufuchrcn. (xennecko, a. 1891).


BRACK


Brack konnta nicht erklaoren, wicao ca kan, daaa die in der Aktion
14 f 13 auagowaehlton Konzontrationalagerhacftlinge in dan Suthanasio-
atationon gotoutet wurdon. (Brack, R. 7541).

Angeaichta diaaos coveisjuturials and doa B*'- eis&’.toriala aeber
idction 14 f 13, wio ea in do- Schrlftsatz dor Ankligobohoerdo gegen Karl
Jrandt zuoacnenguf-iaat iat, 1st Bracks Bohauptung, doss er von dem Zu-
sa.aimhang zwiachon doa .yithajvisioprograru uni dor -detion 14 f 13 nichts
wusato und daaa or an dor lotitcron nia toilnahn, offonaichtlich unwahr.

Obzw-.r oa nicht von b-aondcror 8-dcutung iat, bestoht jodoch nchr ala
auaroichvndor Buwuia dafucr, a-.as d'.a ^thnnaaioprogrc’-jc nicht in ..uguat
1941 aufhoorto uni daaa Brack aoinu Ta»tigkcit in hahnan dioaca ^rogrenma
fortaotzto. dor Zougo Schnidt orklaorto, daaa Brack aogar noch n»ch don
Jahro 1942 on Progn^zi tav-tig gewoaun aoi (R. 1858) und daaa Brack in Jahro
1944 dio Laitung doa Zuthanaaioprogratna von Brandt uobornata. (h. 1825).
dor £ougo uonnocko orklacrto, daaa or uobor das Programs botroffendo .«njo-
logunhoitun noch ia Juni 1942 ait drr.ck korroapondiorto. (R. 1697). Dicaoa
Bowolaraatorial wird doreh andoro Bowoiao boetaotigt. (N0-907, Ankl. Bow.

412, K. 1752). Monnocku orhiolt bla zur -oit,dla or tiaa Program in Dozom-
bor 1942 vorlioaa,dio Photokopiun von Gutaenton and faohrtc aolcho Gutachton
aua. (jicnnucko, H. 1898). dio nuichaveroinigung, dio Stiftung und dio Trana-
portgoaellachort aottton ihro /.rboiten noch nich d<: ..uguat 1941 fort, und
vo trat koin • ochaol in di.,aor Boziohung oin, ala I^nnocko -ndo 1942 nicht
mohr urn Progrxja taotig war. (-onnocko, K. 1902). Auch dio Loitung doa
Programma bliob in donsolb.n .a.ndon. ^.unn-cko, dortaolbat). Blmkonburg
riunnt sich in oinoa Bri-i n .iitalcr von 14. Auguat 1942 3r:»cka at .undigon
Vortrotor ubupkoinuowgo 8aun ..tchfoigor. (.*0-207, .mid. ix.w. 165, R.

536). noitoror doku^ittarlacuor Soxoia


- 15 -


Br^CK


hat orgobon, dass noch u Juli 1944 4 vangsarbeitcr polnischcr und russi-
achor Natiorwlitiot aor EuthanMie untcrworfon wurden. (i.'0-1116, Ankl.

Bow. 415, h. 1781).

C. .‘.’Ichtdoutacho St - .ts^yohJcrl^v or.: .dcr.

Trotz doa roichlichcn Boweiscs, dor von dor -vnklagebchoorde dafuor
boigobracht wurdo, daas nichtdeutacho Btastaangciiocrigo and Judcn — ganz
abgcaohon von dor .urtion 14 f 13 (aieho Schriftsits dcr .aiklagobehourdo
gogon Karl'Brandt) — antor don Opfcrn dos ^athanaaioprogratms waron,
raocchte Brack den GorichtahoC glauber. uachon, d*.aa -vualoondor und Judon
in daa Prograao nicht niteinb.zogcn waren. Dr. Jar. Hugo Buchaaal,
ncch den iiiniatur dcr hooc..ato Joa^to it: otatcrroichirchcn jundcajuatiz-
luiniatorimn, a.vgt in seiner -ico-aatattlichon -rklaorung, oaaa, ala Brack
ala Vurtrctor doa .vngokl^gton .lrandt in dahro 1942 in v'uatizuiniatoriun
uober die iuth-n.aio cincn Vsrtrag hiult, or die «ricgaverachrton and Louto,
die iniolgo von Luftangrii'f in goiateakrin garden .iron, ala die Puraonen-
gruppen buzuichnote, dit vur. Progra- .. luag.noj.-^n r.tvn, ..ualaundor und
Judon wiron nicht untcr d«n t’uraonongruppen orwuohnt, die auagonoamon wj-
ron. (NO-2253, *nkl. Bow. , n. ). Brack -ab zu, dnas or don Vortrag
gohnltcn habo. (it. 7589).

Dr. Engurt orklacr*. in aoinor widoastattlich^ *rklaerung, die von dor
Vortoidlgung vorgologt vordo: "Sowoit ich nieh rinn. m kann, wiren gowisao
nuanahJiion fu«r Uo .»uafuohrurig dcr Euthanaaiu featgoa-tzt; s. 5 . Foraonon,
diu an GohirnnunJon littun, .»ic ale waohren- dca oraten ffultkricgcs orhal-
ton hatton, und ich uonxo. -lalaundor »-.rvn such -.uagenoanen." (Brack, Dok.
37, Brack, «nxl. B w. 37 , n . 7591). ('Jntvrr.troicr.ar: n .i; ' fue.jt). Sr kinn
oich offcnaichtlich nicht crinnem, daoa ^aalacndor auagcochloaaon acin aoll-
ton, and er*mvhnt die Judon uoborhaupt nicht. Die oidosztattliche iiiklaorung
i3t hinaichtlich dioaos i'unr>i.ea ohno Bcwjiskr'-ft. Ji- gorenauitig sich atuut-
zondon Dohauptungon da. in dor. Vuibrochun Bcteiligton koannuj in kuinsr
••oiao die Tulaacho *i dorlugv.il, die durch Jokunentu and curch ..uasagor. von
4 ougon orwioaon iat, diu

- 16 -


BRACK


die Auawihl tatsiochlich vornahsxn, nacelich, dass Polen, Juxaaon, TaChechen
und anaero nichtdeutacho 3ta.-1aangehoerigw in den Euthinasieatationen go-
tout et wurden.

Brack buotritt is. Kroazverhoor, daaa «r sich jo sit dor 'vrachickung
polniachvr gciateagusto-rtcr f tlcnton bvfaast hibe. Sr b.atritt, daaa or
jo Vorkchrungor. fuel* aolcho Tmnaportc odor fuor Geiisittol fuc-r solch-
Tranaporto gutroffen rube. (Brack, n. 7720). die ihq ic Laufo doa krcuz-
vurhoora vorgelegton Joku.:„nt. beroiaon zweifclafrei, daaa ia Herb at doa
Jahroa 1940 Geldaittol four don .ibtr.naport von 1553 Inaaaacn von Irren-
anatalton in Qatpreuaaon mva von 250 - 300 geiatoakranken Polcn von Brack
zur Verfuugung goatelit vrnruen. 3a dicao i'ranaportj von oinen Sonderkora-
mando doa bcniuchtigton SO auagefuvhrt wurd.n, bcstcht kein Iiroifd dar*n,
daaa kenachun gutootot wurden. (KO-2909, .odd. Sow. 500, R. 7721; NO-2911,
*nkl. Bow. 501, rt. 7722).

Brack bohauptotc, daaa die Fragebogvn, die ai.ibhacn’ig von dvr L-.engc
lhroa Aufonthalta in einer Irrvnanatilt u,b;r *llc nichtdoutacho Sta-.tsrvn-
gohocrige auagofucllt '-rdon cuaaten, nur la Timung dlonton. .Jig.cichta
dor Fuollo doa gogontoills*.n Bowolaoa k'-nn aoir.j ..uaaagc Jodoch nicht da
glaubwucrdig ngoaohon wordon. or orklacrtc fem.r, draa die irnaportv
von Judon, diu \a 20. Sv.jtc*_bor 1940 von dor Irroflinatalt I '.li'ing-Hvir
abgingen, nient nach Lublin ir. Pol n aandern nach Ch Is. gingen. (Brack,
h. 7621). Ea iat nicht nur durch den dougon dvr Vortuidigung,Pfannauoller,
(h. 7376) aondom auch durch cinun Brief -inca Vcrwandton aincs juodiachen
Opfora, d»a dort gotOetot wurdc, onrioaen, daaa uinduatuna olnor d.r Trana-
portu von Judon von Sglfing-Haar nach Lublin ging. (:J0-3354, *nkl. Bvw. ,
R. ). Daaa dio Judon von do- Progrxa nicht auagoncx-acn »nrvn, wini
fomur durch die erato von 18. Januir 1940 datiorte Transportlisto dcr
Irrunrmatolt Eglfing-H' -r undesen, die in


BR..CK


orator St olio uirwn juediachon Inaasccn infUohrt. (BO- 3356 , -oik 1 . 3en. ,

R. ). Oioae Trinsportiiste traogt den Hi_ur. Vorberga, dea .ranaportl“i-
tora dor Transport go sells civ.ft, cinos dor itnrbeitor Brcka >ua frogman.
(Bracit, R. 7563-4).

1 ). LogU-lt-.ct

In bozug auf die Ungesdtzlichkcit do 3 -atn -n .sieprogr.v-.is wird auf
don Schriftsatz dor .^nkl'-gobchoerdo icgcn d-n -c; -eklagton !iarl Brandt ver-
wioaun.

daaa dor Briof Hitlora an orendt uni 5ouhlor (630-PS, .uikl. Bor. 330,

K. 1516) im nationalaozialiatischon Deutschland nicht ila gonuogendu Hochta-
grundlagy botrsentut wurdo, wird nicht nur lurch dio Zougunuasngo doa Snt-
laatungazougon Ln-uora (h. 2672, 2679) bowioaon, aondorn auch durch don
vou 24. Juli 1940 datiorton Brief doa ..eichsjustianiniatura Ouortnor, in
doo or I/nazora mittoiltc, daaa dor Puchror aich gov-igort h*bc, oin Goaetz
zu orlaaaon, und dnaa doshilb die goheiae ..uarottung 6uiatoai:r*nkor I\jrao-
non aofort ufhooron izucase. (KO-832, ..nki. B-w. 393. R. 1679). .«u 27. Juli
1940 mxrdo oino ..bachrift Jioaoa Briofoa u* Bouhl^r g_#chickt. (NO-833,

*nkl. Bow. 3 %, ti. 1679-80). B^atia-t bit Brick von dicao- Brief Xonntnia
orlungt, da oa oino <t-r ih.. von Bouhlur invertrauton ..ufgaben w.r, oiu Bo-
achwordun dor vurachiodonen i.uchtaatoll.n zu besrbwdton. Brick boatritt
in doiu Krouzvorhour cine a ole ho -otigkoit, .txr die iha vorgolcgton Ooku-
nonto buwuiaon dua xloro Jugontuil. (!»-U 2 G, .odd. Bow. 495, n. 7691-2).
BracKa Taotigkuit in dioaor Bczichung wird *ucn lurch roituroa Bcwulaaitori-
ul in dun ;Jctun bostaotigt. (;«>-G42, ukl. Bow. * 05 , &. 1712; NO-843, -*nkl.
Bow. 406, h. 1712). oh* hiolt l~ Juatiaainistorlun uiOon Vortr .g uober dio
Buthunoaio und toouachto dio bois Vortrag dXMiaundan Poraonen uober den Un-
fang dua Progruraea. ..ua dun flonurkungun Br .cka goviaa ou; den Einlruck,
dh38 nur uino aohr buachruunktu .inzahl von Persona*, hooc.iatona t.-hroro
Hundort in ganz duutachl-wi, Oosturruich und in Frot w!.*tor it Joehnen und
ituuhron, untur dio Euthanaaio fallen wuordur.. Dio ..uffassung, dio horvor-
gorufen wurdo, war, dasa nur sohr gefichrlichu tleatun und Tobaucchtige,
dio aich aclbst vorlotzen koennten, untor das Fro (ran- fallen wuoiaJon.(NO-

2253, aiuho obui).


- 18 -


BR..CK


ulcs gescftah offonaichtlich, uc dio Sedenken dur -nuosondan zu teschwich-
tigun. < 1 X 3 Brick iuf den Lcugcnstand bofregt wards, ob er waohrcnd dos
Vortraga annaoherungsweiae die jUiz-ihl dor . arsonon, die untar die Luthona-
aio fallen wuerdon, angab, konnta odor wo lit a or koine .jitwort gubun. In
Gogcnaatz zu doa wvehrena dor r.onfcronz in Jaatiudniatorlua hervorgorufo-
non Eindruck guban die .ngcklagten Brack und Brandt zu, daaa in Ucutach-
land und Ouatorruich alloin ungefaohr 50 bia 60 tauaond Louto untcr den
nuthanaaioprograaza gotoutet wrdon. (Brandt, R. 2i65; Brack, R. 7610).
Solbat Bracka oigeno Dokuaonto enthuollcn, daaa or nio Kochtaatullcn uobor
die ruchtlicho L'go In bezug oof aoa .Uit: .: aUpro*racs- falach informiorto.
Dor Miniatorialdiruktor in koichajuatizniniatoriun, Karl Zngort, orklacr-t
in aoinor oiduaatattlichun Erklaerun,;, ai, do: VwrLeidigor Bracks zufolge
"von groaaon Intoroaao iat, woil aiu dio . einun; dor cdnfluaaroichon Juri-
aton in dioacr Krago zoigt": "Br-cka nrkloorungon boruhigten nlch, wuil
lhnon zufolgo, boatinnt .anzunoh^n war, d aa cin keichageautz in dcr uob-
licnen Kona, d.h. duren Vcrx>'ffur*,lichung ii. hoichagcectzblott, orlnaaon
warden wuyrdo. Ich aah Koinon Grund dafuur, wards aich irgondnclchu Schwio-
rigkuiton orgoben aollton." (Dok. Brack 37, Brock Bow. 37, R. 7591-2). Ea
oru^brigt aich tu aagon, doaa Brack nichta davon wrw-ohnto, daao Hitler
aich guwuigort tabo, cin solchca Goaotx bia r.-ch dec. Sriog zu orlasaon.
(SUhu oben).

Bass Brack aich dor Tataacho wohl bewuant war, daaa d-.a Fnthanaalo-
prograaao verbrochorisch w-.r, win! durch aoin^n V.raucr. b-wioaen, vor dor
beautzung doutschl mda durch die ..llii.r--; •- ixa-tori -1 zu Svratoercn.

Jiu eideaatottlichu bridge rung Ciauaaena be.«dat, daos or das folgende
Kornachroibcn an don Koat-orzlintwr. i.a -uth-uaunor ..onzentratianalagcra
achicktuj


- 19 -


BRj.CK


E. .dlgc^gjr.o ..usrottung di-r Jus on

Brack Dostritt, jede Toilnahoe in dor .uiarottung dor Judon. (R. 7531)#
ar sigto, diss Boohlor Giobocnik nit-la rarsor.il fuor die .usrottung der
Judon zur Verfucgung gestollt hibcn wuerde. (h. 7514). Bouhlor Jedoch sagto
iha, daaa Giobocnik von dor Tiergortenstnssa 4, Jtr uionotstollo dos
Euthtnasioprogr—>u, uk.hr Person^ vorlangt h'bo. Rur nachdeta Bouhlor aein
Srauchen gonahaigt natto, zog ihn Giobocnik ins Vjrtrauon und onthucllto
ihJ, duas or von Hitclar uit dor -itwirkung m dor ..usrottung dor Judcn
buiuftragt moruon aoi. Bouhlor »r.r ongoblich ontsetzt unc. zog aofort acino
Einwilligung, Giobocnik zusiotzlich-a Personal zu liofern, zuruock und vor-
langto sogir, dias dia Personal von dor Uarg'rtonstr'.sao 4, das Giobocnik
boroita zur Vorfuegung gestullt wordun »ir, zuruockgoscnickt worden sollto.
(K. 7515). Giobocnik gib ihu diu Voraich-rung, lisa ds von d-r Tiorgirtorv
« atroaao 4 gostollto Personal nicht zur ^uarottun,: d*r Judon vcrwarxJt »or-

don wuerdo, und Bouhlor zog \uf Grund dios-r Voraich.'rung ocincn ninwand
zuraock. (R. 7516). Brack oozougto fomorfdn, a .as soin Stollvorlrctor
Blonkonburg ihn boi aeinon Plnonan, uio Juuun vor ihra- Schickail zu be-
wahrun, untoratuotzto. (h. 7729 )•

In acharfwn Gogons^tx zu dluaor Bohauptung gkb Bmek in aoinur oigo-
non oidoaatittlichun Erxlaurung zu, d;ae d.a luth-niaKprogrxx. und dka da-
bo! boachAoftigto Personal von ungvraohr 1%1 u bia zur Bofroiung dor
Oatgobiuto zur ..uarottung dor Judon Ls Oaten vomandt wunlo. Zu oimss go-
/ ydaaon Zoitpunkt in dor swollen H olfto dus J.Jiros 1941 mirdo cin Toil

doa poraonila, u»a bia doliin itea -uthonioioprograr^ in uoutschlond durch-
fuohrto, nach Lublin goachickt und do- SS-Bri^.-iofuonrer Giobocnik zur
Vcrfuugung goatollt, ua boi dor kias.n^uarottung dor Judon zu holfen,
dio da-ala action


- a -


3S..CX


in den hoeherun Kreiaon der allge^in bekanct tor. Untor don »orx-

ten, oio an der .wiarottung der Judea tdlnduan, bofandun aich Jr. aerie
and Schumann, did bcido vorher bcis Zuthar.iaiearojr-xi in deutach-
lana taetig wrun. (KO-426, ankl. Bow. 160, 531). 3r.'.cl: wollto don 3e-

richtahof glaubcn «achen, daaa or in aoin-.r oideastafctllchoa -irklaorung
irgundwie oinen Fohler gez^cht hautto, *bor or -ussto zusobon, daaa or
diu uidoastittlicho Erjilaerung froiwillir untorzoichncto und daaa or
..undorungon .iichen durfto and aio ouch _ichto, (Brack, h. 7726). Er or-
kannto auch die Tftbello nicht an, duron kichtigkoit .r bcscbnoren hitto,
(Itt-253j «nkl. Bow. 331, h. 1518), bor «or Ehtwurf, don or iu Gcfacngnia
in dor ..bwusonhoit irgondwulchar Vartrotor dar .ordigobohoorio gosncht
natty, buat'iotigt in aoinen wiehtigon Punktan aio Kichti^keit dioaor Ta-
bollo. (NO-2758, *nkl. Bow. 502, K. 7727). Brack gab za, daaa oi dioaon
nntwurf gozcichnot hrtto. (h. 7727). 3oin V-rtciiigor /chto aulnc ..oaicht
kund, uorch Vorl/igu ainos Vorhoora d-a ^ofaongnisarztos d.n Bowela zu or-
bringon, daaa Brack aich in cirwu goiatig-n and koorp. rlichun Laat.'oid
bofand, dor ihn unfaohig gooncht hootto, dio Bodoutung dioaor -rklacrung
zu voratohwn. ..la dor Gurichtahof ihn d*.xa auffortforto ,voigort a or alch,
dio Vorhoorc und Nruuzvorhocry vorzulc.j.n. (.;. 7421-3).

fcin Briof toa 23 . Juni 1%2 von orack « HL.-l«.r bawci3t offenaicht-
lich nicht nor, daaa dio Judon auagurattjt *ur!.n, ” jj Brack iuf dor Zcu-
g^nbank auch tataaochlich tugob, oor.lem .-ch, . ias Brack vorszotzlich
boi dor Uorchiuohrung doa rrogr. ~E-,a itwirkto. u^r Brie:* l-.utotc folgon-
dor-uaa«n:

"Ich lubo doa 3rigadufuohror ilobocni* ui .-;>oiaong von keichafuch-
ror Bouhlor fuor dio uurchfuchrung Sviixr ^■)::d'.-r.-.uf,-ibv schon vor
liongorvr Zuit cincn Toil —inor —.awr zur Vcrfoogung gcatollt.

.aif Grand oinor omouton ditto von ih.i nab- ich nun wvitorea Pcr-
aonal abgcstallt. Boi dioaor 3olo^onhcit v.rtrM 3rdjadofuehrer
Globocnik dio ,.uff isaun,:. lie ,r\nso J-; 33 achnoll wjo

■ujoglich iurchzufuohron. dvdt ... n nic.V. ojr-a lagoa dtt.r. drin
Btockjjnbliobo. wonn irgondwqcho bchviori-Jolt an oin ..betoopen^

gogonuobor aoinorzeit achon dio .xinung gc-aousaart, dnaa san


- 22 -


BR..CK


schon aua Iruondon dor Tarnung so schnall • ic uocjlicn -rbeitcn
uawsso (i;0-205, *nkl. 3ow. 163, h. 536). (Untoratrcichungen
oingofucgt).

Brack riot woiterhin in, data dio arbeitafaohigon Judcn attrill si art
und ala ^rotitskracftc vor-sadct vcrdcn aolltcn. Brack orinnurt sich an-
gtblich nlcht da ran, dieaun 3riof solbat goschriobon tu h".bon. Trota dor
Tutaacho, da as dioeoa Ookua-ant das batu=:6orlin, dun 23. Juni 1942, W 8,
Voaa-Strasao U, wtlchoa acinu ..druasu w'.r, trug, bch'-uotctu or, daaa or
wahracheinlich an die sou Tagc van 3crlln «b* -a-nd war. and diss ihc die-
sor Briof tar Untoitoichnung an dio Front n..ch,>schickt "Urdu. (Brack,
h. 7519). Dios iat unwichtig. Ir ,:;ab zu, dun 3riuf unterschrlobun tu ha-
bon. Er gab woitorhin tu, dass ur -chr oolt-n jxrsocnlich Briofo an soi-
non oboraton Vorgoautztcn in dur SS, Hi-alcr, acnriob. (K. 7731). -oigo-
aichta dor hohon Stellun*, doa ..druaautcn iat nlcht oizonclirun, daaa or
don Briof vor aoinor ..baondung nlcht sorgf -olti^ guluaon haotto, solbat
wonn or doaaun Inhclt fuur nlcht a-hr wlchtig richtotj. Brack mcht
boi dor ubTasaang dca Briofoa suhr fulo. Unturschiud-, t.Q. iat dio Phraao
"boi diuaor Gclogunhuit" -baolut nicht gluichbodoutand .-it "in dioscc
Zuaaj-oonhango", and dio gcbrauchto Fhr-iau bodoutotu "i_. Lnufo uiuaoa G%>-
apraochs". (Brack, K. 7522).

oaaa bracks Vortvidigung orfund-n iat, wiro lurch oinon andoron Bu-
vioia jjr. Frotokoll dargotan. SS-Mchtor Dr. . org->n, ulchor don Kriroin il-
fall Wirth untorauchto, gab «\ls Zoujo vor doc. Intomationdon kilitior-
gorichtahor an, daaa tu dor i.oit als drth lit - ssonauarottung dor Jodon
uobumahn, or achon oin Bpcziolist in i.r •-michtun von Lonachcnltben
guHosun wa«ro. Kr haotto vorhor di- ..ufjab. i.r /.michtung von floiatos-
achwachon durchgof aohrt. Dioau ••uivtbe c.-l In von dor K ncloi Jds Fuuhrors,
Bouhlwra .w..t, ortoilt woruun. E&a ojitoc, i a irth


- 23 -


5J-.CK


x^ehrond seinor Taetijcc-it belt. ZuthaaraicprogW orsonnon hatto, cr-
noeglichte die ..uarottung ulnar groaaen .uisahl von ..cnsefaan :-it cini.’on
wenigcn HolfWnj> l3 gleichcfiyata- uurdo adt einigon Vcrteasorun^n boi
dor -uarottung dor Judon ngetroniet. Jio Botrauung drths uit dcr ..uf-
SGbo dor «uarottung dcr Ju^on urfolgto lurch iia .jA Bouhlors, dassolbo
.ait, in d«o BracK taetdg war, i-orgcn pruofte i.irtha Aorroapondon* and
Btollto feat, diaa dcr Xuricr, Wulcnor dicae Poat bmchto, von dor Xanz-
lci doa Fuehrers, Tiorg.rtonatnsso, kau, do- Orto, mo aich die .kit doa
i^tnaniaioprogriwzca befand. orgon crinnert eich, dnaa Blmkonburg,
bracka Gtollvortrutor, aich untor den Luuton bof.ini, dio nit Jieaon ..ua-
rottungaprogracu in Vorbladun.; cUndon. (NO-2614, knkl. Bck. 504, Ji.
7735-7). Brack gab zu, u.iaa .irth i:.. £uthvialoprogr&tautig war.

(“• 77 -’-^’ *■ loicht tnoglich scin, dias -organ aoino (Jhtcrsuchun-
e cn it. JoU 1943 bogann (I.-T. Protokoll, h. 15289), abcr Gurxh die von
Gorgaas abgugcbcno oiduaatitilich. SrklSrung iat bowioaon, diaa Wirth
Uioaa uufgabo* von dor "Gruondung* (Founds ion),oir.or dcr ;etirnton Go-
solloohaftcn doa iuthunaioaro : rv —js, achon it. Go-^or 1941 urhiclt.
(hO-3010, aluho obon).

Dioaor Bowoia wiri durch dlo oidcaatattlieha Srklflorung von Goratoin
orhaortot. Globocnik hatto iio Loituiv dor ..uanittungalcgor boi Lublin,
and »irth war aoin -itarboltor boi d-r -oarottung dor Judon. Dio Goakin-
oorn warden 4a "ttulo- and Inhalatlon-"fteeu« gcUrnt uni hioaaon "Grucn-
^ong" Hockonholt. Aorttcko a ri aaio nan boroiaUn Staodto and Uoorfor I’olona
und dor Tachoehoalomkoi,ua Pvraonon fuor die Vornichtung aaaauwachlon.
(1553-PS, .0*1. Bow. 428, H. 1680-6). Bel seiner Bofragung durch ion Go-
richtahof *-.b Brick zu, diaa dio Giafcio-cm dor ^thaniaieattionen, In
donun diu Opfor doa AUthan-.8ioprogm.v-ea rotocUt warden, nla'Uluschmouae"
gotirnt wiron. (ft. 7659). "Gruooaong" war ciner dcr Jecknatun,


gTux:-;

untcr lichen i»a Euthinaaieprograo, durchgefuehrt xurda. (Brack, R.

7577; N0-30I0, siehu obcn). Die -ehnlicMcait twischen d_,- Vernichtunga-
syateu in a«n Euthan.aaicatatior.cn and » von Olohocnik uni hirth *•-
wondten System ist kciiv. safoollirfc.

Bewail bab«, goaoigt, das, Brick selbst Him fuor oio -SMdn.us-
rottung dor Judon cnt«arf. ..nrang Oktobor 1961 batto Brack ein. Bc.pre-
thung alt iicb^mn ,<* iwiehs.lchorholtrtuupt^t dor SS and tit Wetzel
vou hoiQhsQinlatorluu i.-r bio bowlaton Gobiot. uober bio -Locoun; dor
Judonfrugu". (NO-997, -nil. Be. 506, k. 7761). Brack orklnorto rich
bor.il, boi dor HorrtoUung dor not.,ml S o„ Mum end VorgMung,-
oibrichtongon foor di. .crottons ailor arb.it.unra»hi S on Judon cjt.ucr-
builon. do di. Horatollung dloa.r Sinrlchtungon lrz O.lcn i.ichlor mr,
Cti^to Brack to, olnlga .ainor -ltarb.li„r,u,n bc.ond.r. ..icon Chonik.r
Kallnayor, zu Oio.a- _»oCko dorthin a. Brack ,chl. s die voUrtOon-

digo Vomiebtung .Uor arbolUunT.oMgon Jo Ion vor. Da dich..™, don Hltl.r
Idt dor Leung dor Jud.nTr.zgo bcoftrogt halt.. Brack, Vomchl-.ogcn zu-
rtlwto, «urd. g.gun die ..uamttun,- ailor dicer .rbolcunfioblgun Jud.n
oil do,, "Brack,ebon HUTa-la.l- kcln Ha-* .rboben. (.0-365, .odd. Be..
»7, b. 7763-4). K ill..,yer *ir dor tocbnlacho Sacbrcrrtacnllg. fuor don
Botriob von Gaakaj^orn in -on dutbanaaloitatlon.-r.. (Brack, h. 7763). Bach
nichnvmn, .igunur Sebaotzong .urdon .ngula.hr 6 -Ullonen Judon in dl«on
..uarottungsbotriob.n, i.h. _lt -BmckKhc HUf^ittaX- goto.let. (;».

S737, «nkl. Bo«. 505, b. 7760; I—1. UrtoU, Suit* 16926).

SCBLBSS

Brack ...r .ebon U, Jahr, i923 .in olfrlgor .nb.e.ngcr Hltl.r,. Sr -ar
dor 911. wann, ..or dor SS boltrit. or «tlu* in d,r i.'-zl-


- 25 -


BJUCX


hierarchic zu einor ^chtvolicn and einflussroichan Stalling in dor
ruchrurkJr.zloi ior NSj.J* auf. brack war cinor Jtr Haaptoeraoncn bci dor
ourchfuohrung doa Suthanaaieprograrr-ea, olcftea Jie rueckaichtaloao Sr-
liuaruung Hundorttauaander hi i flower -aenner, Frauen and Xindor cuu Gogan-
atand hat to. ui„3 >.ir kein Fro._ra-.-i *er Kaochat-nliebo, ur dio Schnurzon
oinus bevoratohundon und un'-usroichlichon Todos zu arlolchtom. Zs tnr
violiohr oixi Program fu«r lie Vomichtung derer, dio ala 5uordo Joa
fitaatoa angoauhon warden, JU rbeitwunftiohig waron uni die vcrzchrtcn,
ohne zu urzougun. In koinea Gv-actz Konnto dafuur auch nur cin Schcin von
L*. f ;alitaut gefunion warden. Zs w .i in sc-inao Ursprun; and in 3tiner Burch-
fuohrung unguautzllcn. So, unanntc S'.chvorat'enligu urt>.llton uebor Iubcn
and Tod uinoa Pationton auf -Jrund von Fr-jobo’vn, ohna d^aa dur Sachv-.r-
atfiundlgu Jon Pationton uoborhtupt nur goaehen haottv. Zs vu-faaato dio
Kr-oruung von deutachon ur.u iuch von .Hnwohnom der buwotzten Gubietu.
ha uratrockto oich nuf Ho Inaaaaon von Konzontr >tionalagorn nichtdout-
achor liationalitiut, dio tdt Go wait in Oc-utwchlond zuruuck.ohalton wuivlcn.

tdaaunachaltlichu u-oorior, Jio in don Gos\k.ucrn d-r Suthonnaioat-w
tionun auagobildot warden w-run, wirdon ruch du daton -uaanlt, uai boi
dor *.uaaenon..oriun 0 dor Judun dtzuj.ulf un. Brack ainito iuthanaaio-Purao-
nal zu Globocnik, Jer ilo Vumichtangsla.’ar i: Gobiut vor. Lublin loitoto.
crack hatto einu aur;ruchun r.lt -ichrnn, hr four ilo Loesung J-r
Judonfra^o vorontwortllch wvr, a/,: sich boreit -rkl .^rtu, dio -rrlchtunj
von Vorgnaundauinrichtun.ron zur ..us rot tun j allor ‘rbuitaunfiohiscn JuJun
zu boaufaichtigen. or ahrettu KolLuuyor, den ..ufsvtor fucr iaak.'—.um in
dun duthaiiiaiootitioncn, ala Hulfor lour -Hobos Projokt, 'is "Br'ckschoa
Hilfoiuittcl" gontnnt «ur lo. nmek beschru-nktu solnu Juduivt ifol nicht
nuf diroktun *ord. 3r weblog vor, jobs jono o'uion, dio wojai ihror %r-
beitafiohi ( ikuit nicht sofort vua.jorottot wuorden, unfruchtor.r .>_i leht war¬
den oolltun. Sr boginn Stcrllioabionavorsucbe v. polnischon Judun ic- Kon-
zontrational.,«r ..uaenwit- dt null von hotr.tgtoatrahlun.


26 -


Die Opfor "urdon, nachd*- sic achweron fcooatgpnrerbnjnnunsen in dor Ce-
fi0nJ der Goachlechtsorgano aus_oactzt warden «r:ren, curch oine Operation
knatriert. Dio aeiatcr. vor. ihntta wvmlen spootor ^otoetot.

Oie .*nkli^behtx.rdc untoratellt, daaa daa Bowas-itorlal orsibt,
ua aa Viktor Brack Haupttaetor, Tuilnohaor, ..natifter, Vorachabloiator.ior
w.ir, aoino ^stL-amg Q ab and in Vorbirvlan^ stand -dt Plaeno.i und Unter-
nohiumgen, die die Jar chf awning axiiziniaeftor Zaperi-ento « lobondon
-cnachon, ohnu 2usttong dor Botrofr«n«,aun Gogonstand hatton, in
doron Vorlauf uordo, Brutalitaoton, Grauaadcoiton, Foltenwgen, Greuol-
taton una andoro an^nachUcho Hanilun^on bogangon >rurien,und dasa

acino Schold iu Sinno dor Punkto I, II, HI and IV dor .nkla.-obchoordo

orwioson 1 st.


i


Ich, Fred Lax Wo* X0i6 207 bestaetige kierait, dass ich
durchaus vertraut ait der tnglischcn und leutschen Sjrache
bin» und dass das Vorstehenie einc vihrheitsgeuacsse und
richtlgo Uebersotzung dcs Dokur.cnts Brack 1st.


27» Juni 1947


Fred Lax
Wot X04.6 207


- 28 -


H I L I T a £ 3 G E 2 I C5ISH0P HO. 1


FjILL HH. 1


ZUS*iaiBHP^SoEIIDLR SCHEIPSS-T2 FUEH DIE

VErfEXRXSSSH VOK


- GQ&on -
JLJIL B R i. g PT


>

7


Jcneo M. iioHanoy
..loxcndor G. Hardy
;.rnoct Horlik-Hochwald
Esther Jano Johnson

Fllr j

NUrn-borg, Tolford Tcvlor

16 June 1947 Brigadier Goneral, 0.5.....

Chiof of Counsel for War Crincs


sinpuzkf.ung


BRANDI


Unter Punkt I dor ^nklegoschrift wir4 dcr -nigeiclcgto
Kcrl Brandt in nesentlichcn beschuldigt, dr.83 er sich it
andere'n Personon in Vcriolgo cinea ^oneinsaaon Vorhabor.s
zu ainer Vcrachwoeruns ur.d Uebereinkunft zusaonongo Tendon
hat, uc acdizinischo Exporincnte an lcbondon lior.schcn ohno
dorcn Zustinunung vorzur.ohnon; untor Punkt li and IIl(iiofi8-
vcrbrochon und Vorbrochcr. ga&cn die *-onschlichkait) cnso cr
Heupttaotor, Toilnohncr, ^notiftor, Vorschubloistonder gov;c-
ocn lot, scino Zuaticuung gogobon nnd nit Ilaunen unci L'ntor-
nchmor. in Vorbindun6 gcstondcn hPt, dio die Durehftthreng
ncdiziniachcr Expori monte an lo bond on -Sor.schcn ohno Zuetin-
□un6 dor Botroffondon zuo Gcgcnatand bat ton, und das oogo-
nonnto Euthancaiopro^xcnc durchgofUlut zu habonj unter ..akla-
gopunkt IV, ncch den 1. Soptoebor 1939 oin liitgliod dor 3S
gowason zu soin, oir.cr Organisation, dio von International on
ISilitttrgorichts^of alo vorbrechorluch crklart wordon ict.

Dio ala Kriogavcrbrochon unu Vorbrechon gogou die
Uoncehlichkcit onorkonnton Handlongon eind in don ..boutzon
1 (b) und (c) dca -rtikcla II do3 EontrollrntgoactzaD Nr. 10
nngofUhrt. i>io ilitgliodschnft boi oincr von Into root lone, len
Ulllt&rgorlchtshof ala vorbrcchoricch orklttrton Organisation
vvird in ..baatz 1 (d) dcsaolbon -rtikols clo Vorbrochon bo-
zeichnot.

Dio Strefbcrkoitaaerknnlc air.d ir. ..rtikol II -bsr.ts 2
doo Kontrollratgoaotzca Kr. 10 angofuhrt:

"2. Ohno RUckoicht ruf ceir.c Stcctsnngch ri^keit odcr
die EigonschP.lt,in der or handulte, v ird oinea Yorbro-
chcn3 nech Heosgcbc von ZiYfor 1 dics-8 -rtik-lo ftir
achuldig urachtot, wor (c) als later Oder (b) ala 3ci-
holfer boi dcr Bcgokung oino3 aclchcn Vorbrechuns nit-
gowirkt odor ca befohlon odor beglinotiit odor (c) durch
aoino Zustinnung drran tcilgonoc. or. htt odcr (d) nit
ocinor Planing odcr -usfukrun^, in Zasaanonkang got tendon
hr.t odor (o) cine* Organisation odor Veroinigung r^o-
hbrt h:.t, dio nit soir.cr ^.uafuhrung in ^usonaonhang
stand,.


5.T....DI


t


i. sisll'jhg - vs ^.?yj ssi;^g

Dor -ngoklagto Seri Brandt bokleidetc St el lunger, von grossc
ilcchtbefugnis and Verantwortlicfakoit in Geaundhoitsvos-:: acs
netionelsozialistiscnon Deutscfclar.ds.

Sr trat dor SSIKP 1b Jahrc 1532 boi ur.d dcr SS in Jaliro
1934. In lotztoren Jahr, ait 30 Jahrcn, war do or -doll :.;t-
lcrs bohcndclnd.r ~rzt und bobiclt diooc Stallung bio 1 '-5
boi. Soinc or.gon porsdnlichcn Bczichan^cn zuz PUhror orklurcn
soinen schnollon -ufatiog zar 2 &cht. ~n don 2cg dos Binfcllfc
in Polcn in Jahra 1939 befehl nitl.r Brandt ur.d Philip.:
Bouhlor, daa eogonannto Euthancaioprogrrnc durchauftthron.

Durch oinon Erlaoa dos Ftthrors voa 28. Juli 1942 wurdo cr
sua Go no rc lkomuia acr flir dao Snnitiits- ur.d Go3ur.dhoitGv.eoon
crncnr.t und rar Hitlor dirokt voranCT.’ortlich. Brandt *.?er «or
oinzigo doutacho Scnitatoofiizier ait oinor eolch diroJcton
Vornntvvortlichkoit. Durch oir.cn Srlcos von 25. ~U£,uct 1944
v/urdo or zua ricichskoatisscr fUr dr.e Sanithts- ur.d Guound-
hoitoweson ernonnt, wno don Bango oinoo itoichaolniatoro
ontopraoh. Sr . iicg zun Bang oinoa GrupponfUhrurc (Gonorr.LLt)
dor SS nuf. (NO-475, imkl.Bow. 4, R. 89 ur.d folgondo). Brandt
war nuch von 1942 bio zua Krlogsando Hitgllod dcs Heichs-
forsclmncorats. (2:0-1730, «nkl.Bow. 441, -1. 2091). -

..bgoaohon von soinon p_r8dnlichor. Sir.fluoa und ocir.o i
vortrnuton Vorhultnis ait Hitler rUhrton Brandts grdoaten
riachtbofugnioso in SanitHt8v;o6on von ooinor Stollung r.lo
Gcnorclkonnisoar und spiitcr Hoichakoaaissor fir daa Sani-
tats- und Gosondhcitowceon hor. Durch don Srlr.su von 23. Juli
1942 schuf Hitler zua orste.n halo die otcllung oinoo Sani¬
tate- und Gcaundhoitsbecntcn untor seiner unaittelboran
^ontrollo. Dieaer ^rlaos setztu auch don Sngeklngton Har.d-
loaor zua Chef dos Wehraachts-Sanitatswcsons oir., wiihrond
cuf dom Gobiot dcs 3ivilon Gcaundhoitewesfcr.s Dr. Loonard
Conti, dor Strrtscekretar ia


2


BRANDS


»


<*


fioichaainisteriun do a Innern und ^eichsgeaundheitsfiifcror
nit ''Gleichricbtunga-^ssnahnen" beauftragt wurde. fiinaicht-
lich Brandt lautote dor arlaass

"3. Ftir Sondoraufgaben and Verhandlungcn pun <.uagloioh
don Bodarfa an -ersten, ^rankenhauscrn, Hudi.caucr;ton uow.
zwiachon den nilitariechen und den zivilon bok-or -os
SonitSta- und Gesundheitawesona bcvolla. cRti^e xcQ f.o-
fossor Dr. ncd. Karl Brandt, dor nur oir porsdulieh un-
teratollt iBt und von air unnittolbp.r wuieun^on orLalt.

4 . Uoin Bevolladchtigtor fur dr.a SanitSts- und geijuud-.
boitawosen i 3 t dber grundsatzlicho Vorgan^c in Hc...nacrit-
oanitcitawocon und zivilon GoBundhoitBWuSon lnuiond -u
untorrichton. Pr int bo rcchtl_t,. sic:, voruntwortlic.. cin^
zucchcltcn." (TJntoratroTcT;ungon oiagcfUgt) (.<0-083,
^l.Sww.T, H. 93).

..uf die oo Wo iso warden £rcndt cua^odchr.to Machtbofu^niapo

Ubor Hondloacr alo auch Conti, und durch aic ilbcr dna Hoor,

dio Llarino, die Luftwaffe, die Velfon-Sa und dcs zivilo

Scaitiitowoaon go 50 bon. Er war nioernden 'Is don FUhrcr ver-

antwortlichj or war dor Uann, dor fUr den Ftihror in nodizi-

niachon ..ngologonhoiton handoln oollto. £0 lot r.uoh bosoich-

nond, daao der Erlaoo Brandt borochtigto, "oich vcrnntwortlic

cinzuachalton" und cnordnoto, dao 8 or Ubor "grundaiitzlioho

Vorghngo" zu untorrichton aul. Sp fdllt ochwor, oich vorzu-

etollon, wna fundcnontclor rare ala olno Pclitik dor Vor-

an unfroiriliigcn Voraucnapor 8 onon
nahno modlziniachor Exporinonto/ dio Qur.lon und Tod nit oich

brr.chton.

Am 5. Septonbor 1943 orlioaa Hitler oinon zwoiton Sr-
lcoa,dor Breadt bevollnhchtigte, " sentml d_i_* ^ufgsbyn. und
IntorooBon doo goa satun Sanitate-; und Goewdnoi tnwoao..^
z ugnnnonzufaoaen unci w oisua afcr.aaa zu otouorn. D_r -rlaso
atcllto ouadritcklich foot, dcoa dio ..utoritat doo Gor.oral-
konnisBara aich t-uf d:io Gebiot dor aratlichon wissonschait
und Forschung oratrockto. (NO-OBI, ~nkl.3ov.6, A. 94'. ^ iat
indooBon offonoichtlich, dns3 d-occr Prlrao oher dazu bo-
otinat -war,die hiachtboiugr.iasc dos Gonorclkoanisaaro kler-
zustoHon cla sic zu erweitorn, da Brandt ncch uct Lrlrza
von juli 1942 dcs dccht (und ir. dcr Tat die Pflicht) &ntte,
n 3 ich vorentwortlich cinzuschclter.'*.


- 3 -


B5-15D2


25. ..ugust 1944 scdliesslich befdrdorte dcr Iffhrer Srendt
sue Roichskonnissar fur das Sanitate- und GesundheitsRoaen
und orkiartc, Gass in diescr 3igor.3chcft "aein ~ct die hocnatc
-utoritat in *eich darstellt". Er smrde wiedorua bevoll-
aiichtigt, "den Diunatatellcp und Organisationen des 3tnr.tc3,
dcr Partoi und dor Wobrnacht, die sich ait don -ufgaben des
Seni tilts- und Gosundhcit awe sens befasson, Soieungen zu cr-
toilon." (N0-062, jknkl.Bov. 7, •*. 95). Siohc such die von
Brcr.dt eufgOQtollto Organisations: :fel. (HC-645, £nkl.3ov». 3,

R. 88 u. ff.). Diescr LrlOss v.urdc horauagegebon, ua oinoa
Ilechtotreit zwiachen Brandt und Conti zu ontschcidon. (Brandt,
H. 2602). GowiS3 gibt dor Brlass Brandt lediglieh oinon
hochtrobendoron Titol und zshlt nur r.ochnela seine ilacbtbc-
fugnisoo ouf, Uiciitbofugni88o, die ihn ochon an 28. Juli
1942 ortcilt wordor. v/aron. Brandt aa.,t auo, dess .cr lodig-
lich oeine Stollung "utcorktu". (R. 2602 ).

In oolbon Zuucnnonhcn ft iot oo vjlctatig, von gotfi3son Bo-
Gtinaungon dor Dicnstanwoioungon fiir don Chef deo Wahrancht-
Snnitiitowuoo:j8 Konntnis zu nohnon, dio doc ..n&oklugton Htmd-
looer von rioitol uc 7. august 1944 gegebon wurden. ..bsntc 2
and 3 doo ..oochnitto II (Iflichton) dorsolbon lautot nuozugo-
weioo v/io folgt:

"2. Dor Ciiof doa WohraachtoanitfitonoBons leitot in fnoh
liohor Hinsicht dca gosaato Sani'.atawjeen dor S'ehrcacht ncc!
don nilitdrioeher. Heiaungen des Chofs doa Oborkonuandos dcr
V'elircacht und don allgoneir.en Richtlinion don Gonornlkora-
aianars d*.s ?iihrar9 fur das Sanitate- und Gcsur.diioitcvvooen.

3. Der Ch«3f des »ohrnacht8anit_t8' wS-.-no untorricht- c don
Gonornlkonniscnr dc-3 Fiihrors Ubor grundoutzlicho Vcrgango
in feehraachtaanitutanoeon." (KO-237, .uikl.Be\ .11, R.103).

;.ir oehen also, dass Kcndloser in dieson Dionatoi:-
'f.eiaungon bofohlon nurdo, non Vorschrifton des Gor.orelkoa-
nissara Brandt zu foljen und ihn von "^rundsatziichor. Vor-
gungen" auf den Gebiot des WehrncchtBanitatswc3ona in Ecnnt-
nis zu aotzon. Dioaes Goblet schloss das Sa. itatsv cson doa
Heviroo, dor Marine,


dor Luftwaff® und dor Saffon-So air.. Biese -nweisung v/u 'do
an 7. August 1944 erlessen, an er. dio Stelle dcr von 28. Juli
1942 zu treten. (R.102). Zu dieson lctzteren Zeitpunkt i/ardo
Handloser durch donaelbon ?Uhrererle3s, dor 3rar.dt zun> Oo-
noraHcoani 882 r aachte, zun Chof dos WchracchtsaaitatswoaonB
ornanntj an 7. ~uguat 1S44 gab Handloaor aoiao Stollung cla
Chef dor Heeros-Ser.itUtsinapektior., dio or soit Pebruar 1941
Inna hatto, auf. (NO-443, -.nkl.Bon. 10 R. 98). i-s nu38 also
dio Prago orwogon wordon, ot dio Bioaatanwoiaang von 26 .

Juli 1942, dio niche vorfUgbcr i 3 t, auch vor. *^cndlooer ver-
lnngto, Brandt Boricht zu orstatcon. Ecin andoror Schluss
kann gozogor. wordon. ..beatz 5 djr Piihrcrcrlcodca von 26.

Juli 1942 ordnot nutdrtlcklich on, daeo Brnndt "liber grund-
aiitzlicho Vorghngo ia '..’ohracchtsenititavoscn und zivilon
Gooundhoitawoaon lauf ea untorrlohton lot. Br iat bc-
rochtigt, aich vorcntwortlioh oinsusc .niton." Brandt rar also
aohon an 26. Juli 1942 dor uchnischo odor arztlicho Vor 0 o-
sotzto von Hendloeor und Conti, dio don Bofehl taotton, ih-i
Boricht zu orotatton. In ..bootz 6 eoi.aor cidaostcttlichon Br-
klilrung stollt dor .. .goklogwo Handloeor cuodrticklich foot,
daoo, n. chdo.n or ca 26. Juli 1942 Chof dco .'chrucciitocnitdto-
woouno ward®, "Dr. ^trl Brandt, Gonorclkocniaacr t : dna o:
tats- und Gcauhdhcitsvsoecr. und 3jXitwr “cichakon .iasnr fUr
das Sonitttta- und Gosundheitawoe n,in aodizinischon .m-. clu-
gonhoiton noin diroktor Vorgosotator var*. (NO-443, -nlil.

Bon. 10, R. 99 ). Sioho euch dio Orgar.iactionotofol don
17ohrnnchtocnitHts\.osons, die von flcndloacr angofortigt vvurdo.
(HO-282, ..nkl.Bew. 9, n. 97).

Bon oia fur dio auSbOdorniten iiechtbofugniooo Kcrl Brandts

wird auch noch durch andorea .-etoriul in dor. ideton gc_ art.

Schroodcr stollt in ..bsntz 9 seiner oifiosstattlichon Srklhrun,
fe 3 t, dcas "Karl Brandt, handlosor and «ostock liber dio von
dor Luftwaffe durchgo: .hr ten sediziaischon Fcrochungsarbeiton
Boach^id v/u 86 tcn." (NO-449, ^nkl.3ev;. 1 ^ 0 , R. 474).


- 5 -


BR..'3T


Debardies zeiger. die von ochroedor aufgoatellton Orgauications-
tafaln dee Luftwaffen-Sar.itatsdienstcs, dess Brandt sonoh-
vor 1944, ala 3ippka den Befehl fOhrta, und nach 1944, nlo
Schroeder den 3ofehl fiihrte, *ufsichtsbefugr.ir.ee Ubor don

Sanitatsdionat der Luftwaffe hatto. (NO-418, «akl.3ov. l*'i

NO-419, .»nkl.Bev;. 13, 3. 105).

DicBolbo Tatsr.cho wird hinsichtlioh des Sanititswcsuna
fior SO durch die von iirugowaky angefertigten Organisativne-
taloln bewioson. (NO-416, -nkl.Bow. 22; NO-417, lak °-

121). Seine ifaebt aoweit, deco or «Uo doutaoUon

irato von don Vorpflichtungen des iratc-Pntionton-Vtfrhttltnlaaec
©ntbindon und diocon irzton bcfonlcn konnto, ornothefto Lr-
kronkungon hohor Rcgi.rungaboantor ihn zu borietton. (i:0-U9.

ijlkl.Bow. 445, R. 2586).

Soviol Ubor Sari Brandts Stollung r.ls Gonernlko'-isisaur
and Boichakomitaer far das benitttte- und Gaeundhoitawoson.

£o wurdo footgootollt, dese Brandt 1942 Uitgliod doc Roichs-
forsohungereto wurdo. (NO-1730, -mkl.Baw. 441, h. 20?lj
Brandt, H. 2598). Dor Zwcok doe Roichaforaohungaroto ’-urdo
in cinon Puhrcrorlass vos 9. Juni 1942 dor^ologt, dor auo-
r.ugowolao wio folgt lautot*

-Dio Notwondlgkoit, dllo yorhendonon krtftj in ®toqa-
inturuosc, zu hdehoter Leiatung *u or.tfaohor., or

Ziolc.

-Ich boauftrage dahor don Horrr. Reicheoarachall ornenn
cSrine^u diooo • Zwocku cin.u Roichaforechimgarrt ait
oclbstiindigcr "ochtBiwrsttnlichkoit zu bildon, in ihn
solbot den Vor ait z zu ilbornchnca, unc iha oinu aaxzvng

zu gobon.

"FUhrcnde Ilanncr dor Ni a sen so haft ooMcn -*-uf
dorgobioton in Gere inac hr. ft err bo it $

Porschung fUr die ^ricgfUhrun^ fruchtbor guota-ton.

(NO-894, -nkl.Bow. 38, R. 14-,.

Brandt war audh Hltgliod do a •Vaaldirlrots fioa doioba-
forschungerets, eino


- 6 -


B&U'DT


richtunggobondo Koorporachatt von 21 Uitgliodern, dio ,ich
-us oebinott8ciniatorn, hihon Offizicron ur.d hochstohondon
Porteinitgliodorn suaannansotsto. (3rer. t R. 2605). - i:1 ior '
Bornana, Conti, Keitel ur.d Milch -mrcn nit Brandt .nasonon
llltgliodor. Zocindont von dor doit on, nlo ->08tock antor

Brandt ooin Ant do "oiter dos -ntca fttr Siaaonaohnft end
Forachung antr.-t (in Anschluss on don FUhrercrlaso von 5.
Sontonbor 1943).uhtcratsnd dor Roichsforschungsrct in oinon
geviason -uancaa dor -ufsicht Brandts ola Gonorolkomlaeor.
Sicho dio Orgoniaetionatcfel von Brandts Dienstatcllc. (i:0-64


«nkl. Bov;. 3, H. 88).


Boa Bowoisnotoriel hot gozeigt, dooa dor noichafor-
achungsrat nodizinlochc Vorauchc an unfroi.llligon Voroucha-
personon - Konzontrctionale jorlr.scsccn - ur.tcrstUtzto ur.d
fdrdorto. Schon in Dczorbor 1942 fordo dor Roichaforsohunga-
rnt von “oicIMtinanzuinietcr goboten, oin Sraocaon doa Roicl.a
orzt S3 Growltz, on Ooldnlttol fur loroohungawooko zu bogut-
ochton. Dr. -‘ontzol von nclchaforochurgaret gonohnlgto diooor.
Goldzuachuoa on 25. Uhrz 1943 nit ion Boaorko.o. "Sowoit Bio
zu-vfclolnoron Toil fUr don -uabs.u wiaaonachaftliokor -rooito-
nfigliollkoiton ,onncht alnd, boziohon aie aich rusac-.lioaslich
oof solcho ..ngologor.hoiton, dio lodl.Uch nit don dor dnffon
o» zur Vorfllgung atohondor. Material (BMtl ngo) diu-chf hr-
bor alnd and dcher von koinor ondoron forschondon Stollc
Ubornonnon -ardor kBnnon.' (002-P3, -nkl.3o«. 39, -'.152)-
(Bio lliodorachrift iat in dloaon Fnnkt unrichtig, und oa v.ird
cuf Boknnontonbuch Sr. 1 vorwloaon). Dio -nklogobohSrlo


1, nkto dio nufnnrkoonkcit doa Gorier, tahefs out dio Foat-
stollungon dos Intomztionclen -ilit-rgorichtshif in Foil


i<r. 1, dio folgondernassen lautan:

"In 2,usannenho.-.s nit dor Venraltung dor f ~

verUgto aich dio a S cuf Xnooaoon von

Koftgchen, die ea ^rio t sgc .-ng^e Voroucho

Konzontratioaslagem ausgefuhrt v.o- -- ; " iftet0 ... .da ei:

^2s:

I^r^ ubfdaa "andar. Bionot-llc;

nicht vurfiigcr. konaton. (H. V>?) •


BR„;T>r

Die Tatigkeit des Beichsforachungsrets auf ver-

bracherischc Vorsuche en unfreiwilligen Yersuchspcraoncn be-

echrinkte sich nicht auf Bewilligung vor. Zuschltsaon fi'r ?or-

Bohungen der SS. For8chungaauftrage wurden von ihr erto.lt,

dio Experinente an AonzoRtrstionslegorinsasaon zot Gy^ciatond

hatten. So erhielt 3eacher in Herbat 1943 von deichaforschung

rat einen Auftrag f Trockon-Sfiltevorsucho durchzufUhron, vvahronc
sen

Hirt nit doo/ Untcrctiitsung in -•atzvvcilcr Sonfgcavcrsuc.iu
vornahfl. (KO- 69 O, -nkl.Bcw. 120, 3. 371 u. ff.i Doo. 0—/3<-,
-nkl.Bow. 11S, 3. 369). Intcroaae vurdo adch don von i-schcr
in Dachau entwickoltcn clutatillun w snittol ontgegongo brae lit.
3oi don Vorsuchon dealt vurden BonEontrationalagorinaasoja

orschoeaon. (NO-613, -nkl.Bov. 243, £. 362). Und zuaa-icon
nit dur Luftwaffe forderto d r 3oichoforacr.ungo.ct ?lock-
fiobor-.Oolbfiobor- and Golbcuchtvc ouchc durch Koagon on
lncu8son des Bonzor.trcxior.al; ©ore -otzv-xilcr. 0*0-137, -nid.
now. 189, 3.737). Sole her ..rt wer die Thtigkolt doo Hoicha-
foraohungorata.

Xoin Zwoifol kenn daron bOBtohon, dacs Brrr.dt Ubcr
Uiooo Thtigkcit Boochoia wu38to. or stand in dor Tit in por-
ednlichcr Vcrbindung .tit dor vor. Hirt an Iv.Z. Insaaao! or-
gor.ornoaon Gooforechung. (Siehc unton), In Priioidiul -ct
waron nur zwoi ..orzto (Brandt ur.d Conti) und nur 4 ‘.orrto
in don wiaeon8chnftlichcn a-btoilungon und dor. i’cchgobicten
dor Eevollnhchtigtor. (°chroibor, 31 0 = 0 , Scuorbruch und Jotton.
(Brandt, it.2607). Sichs-rlich wuaoto jodor dioaer Mpoonar,
wo8 dor andcrc i- Prfioidlalrrt tat.

Dloaoc waron also dio vorantwortlichen Stelluno^a doo
^ngokloeten idr.rl Brandt* Lc.barzt .dolf i:tl_rs, Gru? on-
fuohrer in der So, ilitdiroktor dos outlienr.eioprofxcaaa, Go-
norallconoios-r und rfoichokoaniasnr Gu3 Sanitdt3- und Goound-
hoitBWoaona and ^tglicd dcs i'ruaidir.lrcta dos


- 8 -


BR.J3T


ivoichaf oracnun^arat s. urandt bcnuetzte dio obi.r-n Stellu ng cn, aeincn
peraoonlicnun Sinfluaa und aoin vertrautcs Vcrh-oltnia zu:; Fuehrer in
uiner heiao, oio dio Bcgohung von Krlagavorbrechen uni Verbrochon £e >n
die -enachlichkeit, die in dor .aikl'-jcachrift auf^efuehrt aind, .It
aicfi bruchto.


u-n kann nicht crwtrten, daaa ein kann in uer 3tollun* Brmdta aich
Uusu hcnblaaaon wuordo, aolbat vorbrochurlacho Voraucho vorzunoha/cn.

Oioa bliob willigon and ehrjoixi or. Haonlen cinur nioirl^cren iAngstuTo
uoborliaaon. . k ua do.a 3 e»-lau.torial ;eht abor ulndoutig horvor, daaa or
poraoenlich zu cbcporiaonUn an Vorauchaperaoncn ohno :oron luatifltain:
ori.nti ;to. Und waa noch achlis^er lat: obwohl -r rz . ennu wuaato, dftaa

von ..orzten dor Luft»faifo, doa live: -a, do: SS und von nicht^llltaoriacher
Soito oyatetatiaoh Voraucho vn Uonzontr tionalr.;ori..s aao:. vorxnxanon
wurion, enchto or nio -/on don uji uhouren ..ichtbofujilsacn, lie ih. zu-
otandon, Gobrauch, uz. Jioaer Vor\.ertthoit, die .*>rd, Folio run 3 und un-
~onachlich«. dohandlung vor. T uaondon ;iilfloacr 1 jxuk r, ration uni XinJor
zur Folgo ftattc, oin Zndo zu b-ruiton.

Dor Schworpuxut dcr Soachuloijunj enter differ 6 , .jAlft^ojxinkt II
(Kriognvorbrucnon), und liffor 11, .Jikli opunkt III (Vortorocuun o,:cn die
honnchlichkoit), iat, daaa alio .JJ*oklajten Ufupttnotor, Toiln-hnior, .jj-
atiftor, Vorachubloiaicndc wuon, lhru Zuati.r-or.-: r.bcn und in Verbindun.-
atandon cdt Plnonon un- Untornufc-unjan, dio die durcafuohrun- iizinlachor
Lxporii..unto *ui lebonden l»onschon ohn- djrvn luatiu.. 0 : 1.3 • or Botroffoncn
zun Gogonatand hitlun, in Uorcn Verliuf .or So, 3rutalitact.n, Griuaarkoitn,
Foltorun^on, Grouolt.aon und omun unzunachiicho HonJlur. «n beganj-n war¬
den. In Zdffor 6 wird aul^ofuchrt, daaa dio 'tLrauchajwrsonen livlluiv-
hoerigo und •ng*hoori 1 ;o d^r bcwaffcioton Straitkraoftc von .N.tionon wren,
dio df.i .Qw tit Jut* doutachen Reich in Krio^ la.vn, w. cbr.nl 03 aich In
iiifor 11 u.a deutacho -ivilp. raonen und -uyohoori v ind.r.r Laondor hondclt.
Jar in liugt fuor lie iv.ckt dieses Fallca dor oinzi^c be- uts -.-*> Unte-r-
achiod hinaicntUch d.a ^«-isoa dor Hndtatsachen. "in «rio ;svcrbrechan

- 9 -


3E;J©T


ist notwendigerweise ein Verbrechon gegen die Lenschllchkeit, waehrend
ein ^erbrechen gegen die *enschlichk6it nur dann ein Xriogaverbrochen
darstollt, wenn 03 gogen eine zivilperson ana oinca besetzton Geblot odor
an oinom Kriegagefangonor. begangen wird.

Untor Ziffar 6 worden zwoelf verschiedene Arton von ^.periaenton in
einzulnen angefuehrt. Von dioaen wird Brandt die bosonic re Vcrar.tirortlich-
keit fuer und die Botoiligung an zehn zur Last gelegt, nacalich Hoohon-,
Kuoltu-, malaria-, Gas-, Sulfonaaid-, Knochen-, 1 jjakol- und itorvenrognno-
rationa- und <0»ochunvorpfianzungsvorsuche, Seowassor-, opidoaiacho Oolb-
aucht-, Steriliaationo- und Plockfiebcrveraucho. Ua die strittigon Punkto
zu vereinTachon, hat ilio .mklugcbehoordo Hire Doschuldigung dor Toilnahae
an Hoehonvorauchon zurueckgona-iujn.

Ea obliegt nicht dor Ankiagobohoordo zu zoigon, daaa Brandt .uit alien
fciinzulhoiten allor dloaor Voraucho vortraut war. Oer Beweia gonuogt, daaa
or wuaato odor hautto wiaaen nuoasen, daaa an unfroi will! gun Vorauchapor-
aonon durch Stallcn, ueber die or botraechtlicho lachtb fugni'Jeo und Auto-
ritaot auauobto, oudialnlacho Vurauche vorguiotawn wurdon. (Sioho v .enaahitn.
66 S.Ct. 340, 347 (1946)). Fuor dioa und noch oohr ist von dor .irtilagobo-
hourde dor Bewoia uroracht wordon.


Uio Voraucho, boi Uenon oin unaitUd.barer Beweia fuer dio Toilnahae
suitena Brandt vorliogt, wordon zuorst uroertort wurdun.

A. SULFQN,UIDVX, S-'JCHn (nnklugeschrift, differ 6 (E))
Sulfonaaidvursucho wurden ic Konzuntrationslagjr Havunabruock von dor
idtto dua Jahrua l%2 bi3 zun August 1943 vorgenoaoon. HineichtUch uinur
ins eir.zelno gehondnn Doratollung do a Verfcrvchuriachon Cbanktors dicsor
Vorsucho sioho don Scro-iftsatz dor Ankl-gubchoorJo go 6 on i-bharit. Uioso
Vorsucho warden u.a. von don .«r.goklagUn Fisci. r und Ob.rin us.r untor dor
Loitung des .uigoklagton Gbbhtrdt vorgenouaon. (l*>-22o, nnki. cow. ZOb, h.
767). Ulo Vorsucnajvraonon waron uobendogond polnischc tracn, van donen
oinigo in dor ftidarstar/iabo-fosung taetig gewesun waren, (Brael-iater, H.

7B7; Karolowska, R. 816, Jzido, n. 8$0; Kusslorczu*, a. 857).


- 10 -


3 Ha:dt


£a atvht einwandfrei feat, daaa aie aich nicht fruiwilii? naldoten.

(3rael-Plater, H. 789; Karl, R. 823; Dz. H. 845; Kua. R. 861, kagtica,

K. 1451). die «ngeklagten Fiacher und Oberheuaer gabon zu, daca mindo-
atena drei Personcn an don Folgen der Vorauche atarben. (ltt-477, Ankl.

Buw. 207 , R. 778; NO-487, Ankl. 3ew. 208, R. 783). aUb anderua 3o*oia-
raterial geht jedoch hcrvor, daaa fuenf der Veraachapjraonon an den Fol¬
gen dor Vorauche atarben und aecha apaetor hingerichtet wurden. (Dz.R.

845; Kua. R. 862).

«uf dor dritten Tagung der boratonden Acrzte dor .ahrcacht, die vom
24. bia 26. uai 1943 in dor nilitucraorztlichon dtadumio in Berlin atatt-
fand, oratattoton Gobhardt und Fiachor cincn vollon Boricht uobor die
Sulfonajaidvoraucho. Karl Brandt war oinc-r dor Ehrongacste boi dioaur Tu-
gung und hoorto dio Vortroegu von Gebhardt urvi Fiachor. (Brandt, R. 2368).
Gobhardt aagto aua, daaa or darauf bostand, aof der Tagung einen vollataon-
digun Boricht uobor diuao Vorauche zu gobai; daaa or alt dua Ikrm, dor
daa Program dor Tagung untor aich hatto, aich oingohond uobor Jon Inhalt
doa Vortragoa untorhiolt; daaa aeinor Erinnorung nach dor ,jigckl:.gto Rostock
dor botroffondo Herr war, abor da nostock oa abstritt, kooruic es auch
Schroibor go wo son aoin; daaa daa Program fuor dio Tagung aoinon Vortrog
untor dor Uubcrachrift ''Uoaorvduro Exooritonto" auffuohrto; daaa dloa nn-
doutoto, daaa or utwaa beaordoroa zu zolgen Vorauchto; and daaa dio gonto
fcatorio waohrend dor Vorborvitungon fuor dio Tagung la ni 1943 -dt no-
atock odor Scnroibor bea/rochen wurdo. (h. 4103-6). ^"iachen Gobhardt,

Grawitt und hoatock odor Scliroibor hatto oin st-wndigor Briofwv-Chael bo-
zuoglich der Vuraucno staitgofundon. aIs Grrwitz .ait hoatock odor Schroibor
vorhondulte, hatto or oinon voidatnondison Bericht Jubor die Vorsucho.(R.4107).
Gobhardt brachtc in aoirxr Aussago ganz klar zuc ..usdiMck, dass or gogon
jodo Tarnung war und


- 11 -


BftnKDT


De=u«nt war, diu ganzs .kngolegenheit dieaor Vorsuche an dan Tag zu brin-
6*m. In spinor Einloitoog zu de= Vortrag von Fiacr.ar erkleerte or aua-
druecklich, daaa (lie V«rauchc an lebondon kenschen auagefuchrt warden
fl«i«n. (Ft. 4109). Gobhardt kaoo sich aoinor AUaaagu nach nicht bestiozt
orinnom, ob or oagto, daaa die Vorauchaperaonen Konsantrationalagerin-
aasaun waron. Dor Anguklagto Fiacher hat erklaert, daaa dioa klar gocncht
wurdu. (NO-472, ankl. Bo*. 243, R. 941; vgl. Fiacher R. 4365). Gebhardt
erklaorto, daaa die kliniach-n Zinzelheiton dor 2xporis»nto aohr oingtfiend

oa von

orlauutcrt wurden. Dio Veiaanulang wurde/in Kcnntnia goactat, daaa Vor-
aucho an 75 Poraoncn vorgcnoai*n wonicn aoien, daaa die Infektionen kuenst-
lich horvorgorui'wn worden aoioo, daaa boi dor Bchandlung dor Infektionen
vorachieduno Praojnrato verwendot worden auien, d-aa chirurgiache Bohind-
lung angowandt wordon ao* und daaa drei Foraonon gostorben aoion. (Coblmdt,

H. 4109-10).

3rondt war von don Sulforvutidvorsuchon aog-.r achon vor dcr T.vgung lie
>.ai 1943 unturrichtot. Ovbh .rdt a.gto aua, daaa ooi olnor Gologcnhoit vor
dcr Tagung, or Hoatock und Brandt auf uinca Bahnhof getroffen und or die
Vurooffcntlichung dor no suit -.to dor Vorauche ait ihnon boaprocnon ha bo.

(h. 4222). Gobhurdt bakrouftigte dioa wc.,.arond oinoa Verhowra am 5. Novca-
bor 1946. Sr aogtu aua, daaa:

"... oa iat doch oin Unainn dioao Anony-dtnct dor ganton Slcho. Ich
Inbo puraoonlich ohno Jcdun ..of trig oinaal g.inz sichor dua Brandt
goaigt - dor Jotzt zwr.r aagt, or kmn aich nicht orinnom - und
oinoul Kootock goa;.gt: .iaat Inr auch ms >rir borichton? Ich t.eiss
nicht wua .Such Gra.it s g^achriobor. hat, ich aago Such: Himlor hat
zu dicaor Gulfon-uidfrago daa and das bofohlon, daa laouft, dioao
Hjiporiiuento aind auazufuohron; abor ich habe don wiaaonschaftlichen
kncrct' U " gOfi0b<m, " oil ' J8 der ’'isaonachaft zur Vorfuogung

naohrond doasolbun Vorhoora wuniv Gobhirut gofr'-gt, ob oa Rostock
und Brandt klar gua.cht wordon sei, daaa die V*raucho in Gofanger.cn vor-
goivoim.».n wuurdcn,und or urwidorto "Selbatverstlenilich". (ft. 4222).


- 12 -


BRaHDT


Nachdea Brandt 6'onntnia erlangt hatto, hatto er nicht das hocht,
sich Wbitwr acn>.eigend zu verbal ten; er hatto die Pflicht zu hnndoln.
Brandt tat nichts. Zr loitutc kei.-K Untorsuchuna ueber die Experiiaontc
oinj or orhob bei dor Tagung keinon ..iderspruch; or forderte keinen Bo-
rlcht von dor SS ein; or erst .ttotc .-coinen 3ericht m den Fuehrer. Er
gab aoino tuatim-ung zu oiesor vorbrechoriachan Venrondung hilfloser Kon-
zontrationsl-gorinsaaeon. .uigesients soinor p-rsoonlichen Erfahrung nit
dor deutachon Juatiz gibt or Jotzt zu, daaa Hunderttnua^ndo vor. Konztn-
tratinnslagorinaaaaon ungorjehtorroiae cingoaporrt worden waron. (R. 2622 ).
biu buataondo in don i.on-cnt rational .gem waron 3rar*lt nicht unbokannt,
da or zugibt, Sachaor.hiuaon, Oraxiicnburs, Mauthausen und Natweilor bo-

aucht zu habon. (R. 2622 ).

Solbat Konn imn anruchoo, iUaa di- Zxpuriccnto beendut guweaon aeion,
ala Brandt Konntnia Javon orhiolt, ao wuordc ihn aoino Untaotigkoit zu
oinem Toilnohaur men bogangonor Tat e»ch<.n. ..bor dioa var gar nicht dor
Fall. Noch in auguat 1963 *n.rdcn in Bunkor in havenabruock alt Co wait
oxporiowntollo Opunitionen on aocha polnischon Frauon vorgonoarnon. (NC V -
866, A/ikl. Bow. 229, K. 923). biuaon Poraonrn haott-.n vealon und Vor-
atuomolungon urapart w rdun koonnon, wonn oin -inn cdt «utoritaot auf
dor Tagung im «oi 1963 .-d.-apruch ernobon naotto. Ucboriios hicttu vine
Untorauchung dor i>ulfonu.ddvo;oucho aio anoenvn-, -iskvl-. und b^rv-.n-
vursuchu (.uiKl-gesciirift oUfor 6 (F)) ina licht gubracht, dio von don-
aolbon Foraonon ua gleichon Ort vorgvnouaun wurdon. 3t..tt dc3zon fonl. rto
Brandt vior Tago apaetor tonzuntr tioi^ligorinsisacn fucr Kpiderdachc-
Golboucht-Vorsucn« an. (Sich unten).

B. ZPlDWISCKZ-'ZEll'Zl CFi -T^3ZC-li. (gnkla'uschrift, differ 6 (H))

La «nachlusa an dor. «r.griff a of nuaaland wucha sich diu opidcoischo
Golbsucht (hopatitia opidcoica) zu oir.ur rtmnkhclt batraochtlichen .«ua-
uaasua in dor deutachon ehraacht iua. (Gutzeit, fi. 2707). Von mznehon
Sinheiten


- 13 -


BR&HDT


warden bin zu to * Varluste als Folge diesor Krankheit berichtet. (NO-
010, Ankl. Bow. 1S7, B. 735). Infolgodossen warden Intensive anatrengun-
gen gocucht, die Ursachen der opidecischen Gelbsacht and Inpfstoffe da-
gogcn zu untdecken. Oohaen and Gatsoit von der heoressanitcetslnspektion
and Haagen vom Luftwafrensanitaetswason befanden sich unter den *orztcn,
dia an dicser *atori«> arbeitoten.

Dohiajn isoliorte ala einor der omen einen Virus, der ala Ursacho
der Gelbsacht angesprochon wurde. Dies wurde dadurch orreicht, dass man
Tiero nit Krankheitskcinon von Poraonon, die an dor Krankheit litten,
inpfte. (Gutzeit, K. 2695). Indossen glngen rv>ch isracr die kninungon woit
ftuseinandor darubber, ob Gelbsacht darch Sakterien Oder durch einun Virus
verursacht wuerde. (Gutxoit, R. 3 ^ 5 ). «a 1. Joni 1%3 orbat Grawitz,
*'eichaarzt dor S3, HLarlors Erlaubnis, Konzontrationsligorinsarsen Karl
°r*ndt fuor Celbsuchtsforschung zor Vorfuogung zu stellcn. In seincsn Brief
orklaorto er, dass Brandt die «rboit von Doh^n unterstuctzto and ufl faer
noetig oruchtot werdo, ..anschon ait cinca in Tiwxxn gozuechtetcn Golb-
auchtsvirus zu infiziorun. Gnwltc tOlto uit. das. nan nit Todusfaollon
unter den Vorsuch 0pJ rsocwn rachnen suosse. («K)io, flew. 18 ?, R.

735). Die Vortoidigung h.t u rossos Gewicht auf die Bchnuptung gulcgt,
dass uelbsucht gwoohnlich koine toodliche Krankheit i Bl . d ca aach
sain moego, Grawitz orkldurto nicht, ob dio Todesfiollo too Zwock dor
Vomahme von U>ichenoeffnung un h.rbeigofuohrt warden waonicn - wie in
FQU U ° r Hoohonox P°rlaunto - odor ob ^n Bit ihnen ala Folgo dor krankheit
solbst za rochnon haato - wiu in Pall der Fleckfioberversucho - .

HW °r * b aoilu ^"tinzumg zur Veraundong von 8 polniochen Juden,
die in Konzontrationaleg*r -uschwitz son Todo verurteUt wordon *rm, n .
(*>-011, «nkl. Bow. IBB, 737). die Vcrsacho wuruen von Dohnon in Kon-
sontrationslagor S ichscnfriuson .usgcfu^hrt.


- U -


BfiAKDT


der

und einigo/Opfer starber. an den Folgen. (NO-371, -u\kl. Bew. 166, R. 733).
Solbst Gutzoit, ein Zougu fuer die Vcrteidigung, g^b zu, dass Dohncn in
Sachsonhausen arbeiteto, bohaupteto iber,, dass dies nor cine Fintc war,
uo don Gelbauchtvirus nicht Grawitz ueborlassen zu oaoasen.and d os in
•»irklichk«it koine Infektionsvursuchc vorgonois-on wurdon. Dor -cage gab
keino ^rulaerung aafuur ib, waru_: sein ..itarbeitor bohaen, dor kein i.it-
gliod dor SS war uxvi in koim-r -cis e Grawitz untorstand, sich cdt solch
laochurlichoc. wissonsen itlichoa "Schabcrnack" abgogoben habon solltc..
(Gutzoit, h. 2?58).

Uubordius war dr -ndt in die von Haagon und Johann 1944 vorgonanrcenon
Gelbsuchtox.oorLonto vorwickdt. dies sind ia Schriftsatz dor «n'<:lngobo-
hooruo gugen *iandlosor bcschrioben. 3ci einon -.usasaantreffon oit Vortre-


tum dur i.ohrr.icht and doa .^icheTorsc.angsrats aa 26 . ..ugust 1944 bo-
zuichnoto Hostock als Chur dcs «sts fuer .issensenaft und Forschung die
torschungen Haugens m hepatitis opidc-dca als "dringlich". (IJO-692, Ankl.
Bvh. 457, U. 3406).


C.


Zix'for 6 (J))


dor .cagriff gug«n .uisslend 1941 warf viole ailitooraorztliche Problcao
auf, von donon Flockttobor nlcht das unwichtignto w-.r. Dio Krinkhoit nahe
in. Hwrbst 1941 uruotnaftu .tUsnnaso in,und Flocktyphusiopfstoff wir so


kmpp, dans nur nunton, Pflogopcrso.-val und lodorea Personal in uxponlur-
ton Stull ungan Sc hut ziepf ungun gugobun warden konnten. (Scheldt, n. 31^0-1).
Ui.. dor hnapphoit an L-pfstoffen zu begogrmn, a^finl handles or als


HoorussanitJutoinspoSaor, d-ss die Production in dio Kaondo dur phamaztu-


tiochun Grossindustrii geiugt wordwn collu. (’#0-1323, .»nkl. 3ow. 152, n.
3062). Zwoi Grundtypun von L-pfatoff wurdon in oino- but r.» chtUchen ..us-


tadas hurguatulltt i)«r ..uigl-Iupfotoif ius den idngowbidcn von Laouicn von


- 15 -


Flcckfieber- and Virusinstitut aes OKH in Krakau (una apactor Letfeerg)
una dor Cox-, dilde^eistur-, H-’xger.-Iupfstoff -as Haahr.uroiorKultar;.*.
von don Benringwerken dor I.G. Farbon in kirburg uxvl vex- Kobert-.loch-
Institut in Berlin, die UrksftzJceit dos eigl-lcpfstoffs w-r achon suit
langou endosen, ib«r aLo dcs Si-L-pfatoffa iror noeft nicht urprobt. (N0-
732, *nkl. 3ew. 451, R. 30oO). -aif eirwr Konferent ar 29. Dczcebor 1941,
an dor Hnndlosur, Conti, Gildeueiater urd ..rugowsky teilnahuon, trurdo
boacnloaaon, uio .drkso^toit dca Si-I=pfstoffa durch Varauche an *cnachen
fcatzddtvllon. (NO-265, -Jwl. 3ew. 237, 1134; vgl. Hnndloaura .tusaige,

KO-732, obun).

.da Foige diaaar J^tacnuiuun* »urdu die ^ursuchait .tlon lit .ion-on-
trationslagor uucnonw Id cingorichtot,uiw von Janu.r 1942 bia .oirang
1945 warden Vorauchc zur rruofur.g dor irkackuit der vurrcldodunun In,pT-
atol'fo durch dio kuniatiicnu Infoktion von Insxaaon ohno duron 2ustir, -m*
vorgonomuun. (Kogon, 1 .. 1154 uni It.).

Da a Probloi. d«r ..oratullung von Plackfioboritpfatorf and euino iu-

Luilung lag nach Jrwdta Snunnung xur- Ccnorvlkocsaiaanr durch don Fuohror-

urlasa voct 28. Juli 1942 offunsichtlich iruxrhxlb auin-r iluat ondigkoit.

Ur. klarurur Fall von ^torifdkontroll- kann nicht s- funded * rdun. Hand-

loaor huttu dio grundatutslicho Kootrolle ueb-r lio Vortuilun.; von inpf-

atoffon. (H.wvdloaor, K. 3074 , 3090; vgl. dio ..uaaigo von Schro^dor, h.

3642, 3643). Boido, lianiloaor ur.d Co..ti, e-ucaUn uoour grui^a oitlich,

bugobunhuit-.n urandt Boricht oratatlcn. Da dio Korstullung dcs Si-Lipf-

soinor

stoffa von dor Forachung xur ruatstoilune Wirksirkoit abhing, koennon
dio zwoi nicht gotrennt »crdun.

Uobur die Bxpu rli-onto in Bacharonld b richtotu ur. i/intj-Gchal r bei
dor Tagung dor bor&tundun .*-rzU dcr ..ohranebt i.. i.vi 1943. (>0-923,

•«nkl. bow. 43b, rt. 2k>3).


B7uJ.'0T


br.'Uklt gab zu, boi dicsor Ti.gung omwaend gaweaan zu soin. (3ror.cit, E.
2367-8). baohroni oa sein kann, d ASS Branat dan 3ericht aolbat nicht * i-
nourt hat, da or in dor Kjgionoabtoilung vorgotr-gon wurdo, kann koin bc-
gruondotor iwaifol d.ran bcstehen, daaa or davon gehourt hct. Iu>co >:rhab
gogon dio «rt dor Sxporinentu in wchenwald Einwmviungen, uni dios rr .r
aichorlich oino .jigolegor.heit,aio uebor don Vortrogsaaul hinaus l.reiso
zog. Kogon oagto aua, a.aa wing uobor Roaea ~ngriff ructond war. (Kogon,
h. 1176). UoboraioB g'b ..rthur Oictzach, i.-.po in acr »orauchaat ltlon in
Duchonwald,untor l-iid dio -rkLujrung »b, daaa ding ihc s-^u, r.as Brandt
buchonwald boaucnt tootto. (KO-1314, .uvd. Bow. 433, K. 2040).

ur. Eugon Haagon, d;gionikoi- four vi- Laftflottc "Roich" and oin
Sanitautsoffizlor dor Luftwvffo, fuohrto auch Plwckfiobtrvcraucho an In-
season doa Sonzontratlonelfigors Katz'iuilw iua. (Sch~idt, 1366 a. £ 1 .).
uioau Vuraucho wurdon fuor dio Luftw-ffo ur.d four don ..oichsforachungarU
vorgono^n. (NO-129, .uud. d«». 308, ru 1403; i»-137, -nkl. Bow. 189, R.
737). Eoatock gab zu, dui daa .*-t fuor ..iaoonacJ.aft um Forachung oino
ftopio von Haaguna Boricht an don ..cichaforachungar-it arhiolt, daa Uokucont
NO-138, «iwl. Bow. 300. (.,0 stock, R. 33U). H^gona riockfioborrorschung
wurdo boi oixwr Tagung dos *ats fuor daaunschift and forschunc i... »u;.uat
1V44, boi dor noatock and .dtgllouor doa huichsforschungsrnta und lor
Viehruaoht mwoaonrt w.ron, -la dringlich b«ichnct. (N0-692, «n3d. Bow.
457, h. 3408 ; Roatock, n. 3409). or r.dt war kltgUbd ica .ajicharorachanga-
ruta und hoatocka Chof (oiuhu obon). Si oho vucn did oidcsstattlicha -r-
klaurung Rudolf Brarxita. (‘,0-370, .add. Bow. 294, a. 1385;.


- 17 -


BP-JOT


D. G^S-VajSUCHS (dnldxgeschrift, Ziffor 6 (D))

uLo dohandlung -ler clurch cheaiacho Kitpfstoffo vorurszchten '..undon

war four Jio cdlitaoraurztlichen kreiae OeutschlanJa von bctr lechtlichua

Intorosas. AQ 1. _i,rt 1944 gab dor Fuehrer Karl Brandt wcitgohondo 3o-

•

fugniaau oaf Jo-. Gablet der che-iachc:. Kriogafuuhrung. (!30-012, .»nkl. Bow.
2?0, H. 1036). *>or 2rlaaa aolbat atoht nicht zur Vorfuegung, abor unatrci-
tig «ratr«ckto aich Brandts -uataendigkuit auf phirtazoutiacho Frodukto
fuor oio Bohandlung von Suawundon. Soviel gibt or zu. (R. 2629). Ji«s
iuchrto notwur.aigurmdae a-vzu, dasa dio wirka-'-zato uothode dor Bohunilung
fu at go at ell t wwrdon tu-aato. uaaa dor iirlaaa ..cdiziniacho Forachuns uobor
Gaawundon ialt oinbozog, kunn nua dor latazcho goschloasen warden, daaa
..burucke dua Erlaaaea,dio Brandt an HUz-lcr aanJtu, (KO-C12, «nkl. Bow.

270, R. 1038), an Grr.wits uni an SiuVura, .Jo wjrhor an Jicaoj- Froblou
gourboltot button, welter.>acidckt wur.cn. (!i>-013-u, «nkl. Bow. 271, R.

1036j fJO-013b, .odd. Bow. 272, R. 1039).

auf Jcdon Poll borlchtotu Siovora Brandt aa 31. *iierx 1944 uobor dlo
Forachungat ietigkolt von Hirt. (10-015, ..nkl. b~w. 273, R. 1039). Hirt
hatto aoit Kovu-bor 1942 m Inaaason Job honzcntr .tional joro Katu ollor
Vcraucbu vorgvno.--un. (.2>-09d, .nkl. ?«-w. 263, •'*. 1023). SI ho lor. Schrift-
• gogon Sluvora fuor tins ciagthondo ikachrvibong von Blrts Varsuohon.
orandt g»b zu, d»aa Slovora ilu. Hlrta achrlftlichon Borieht f ;ib, J«r ala
..nkl. Dow. 268 vorgologt words (10-099, ft. 1035), uod daca \us Jo. Borlcht
ohno woitoros h«rvor«*ht, Jaoa Vorauchc an -or.achc:. von ih.- vorgonocxjon
wordon waxen. (Brandt, h. 2626). 4o iat bcz.icnnonl, daaa dor kxicht von
achwuron, -dttelschnuron and l-dchtun, lurch Last vorurazchten '.undon
apricht. Uobordioa y.b Brandt xu, dasa vr in Striasborg .It Hirt ir ..pril
n-ch do... Zuaaixiontroffon -dt Movers goaprochen bubo. (R. 2610). Vuraucho
i.dt Gae wurden an ungcf'.chr 220 Xnsaascn ruarischor, polrdscn.r, tschoehi-
achor und doutacr.or Hationalitiot vorgonoerxn, von don an fuunfeig stnrboA.
Sic button aich nicht frdwllllg gcasldot. (Holl, h. 1052, 1057). Hirt
Gut-tu seinu Giavorauchc


B&JOT


in J.atzwoilor waehrenc. lea Socz*n 1944 fort. (Holl, n. 1053). Seino G-s-
forachung viurdu von .icatoc.t i z. <*uguat 1944 ala "iringlich" bozoichnot.
(.\0-692, «nkl. Bow. 2.57, n. 3403).

Heben aeiner 3otuiligung or. Hirta Gascxperi^nton fooniorto Karl
Brandt poraoonlich lie vor'orechoriachen Vcrauche von Otto Bickcnbach.
Brandt angto -ma, daaa or von den Oiaexperitdnton Bickonbacha L. Horbst
1943 onlaoaalich oinca fleaucha in Straaaborg zwceka Boaichtijung einea
^Klotrona Kunritnis erhielt, dnaa jr ihc. apaotor half, ein Laboratories
uinzurichten, uaaa or ihn b«i dor Boachaffung von Vorauchatiorcn untor-
atuotzto, daaa Bickonb.vch koino lixjxsri-jont*. an lobondon .onad.cn voroahn,
dnaa or ilui i_. Jahre 1944 half, nachdc.. or dioaos Lnboratoriuru uiaga-

riohtot hatte. (H. 2619, 2620).

Siovora' Tagebuch -ua dea Jahro 1944 unthoolt untvr dcu:, 2. Kcbni r
die folgundu edntragung; —

"IyKarlaruho Prof. BiCkcaMeh gutrolfcn, d.r dttoilt, daaa or
aoino Forachun l( 8 arbaiton Gcnwralko.'~i§aar Prof. Dr. Brvtdt un-
torotullt iv.be.

"Boaprwchung sit ;’..uptntursfuohnjr dirt:

1. Prof. Dr. Bickcnbach hat ohne Unterrichtun,: von Hirt uni Prof.
Stain oich uugwn scinor Phoagwn-Unteraudiungon -n dcnoralko... daaar
Prof. Dr. Brandt gewondt, war sit ih. in Mr.tawoilor. ..aftrag irt
zaruockzuziohcn, unawruraoits i.atswoilor zu sporron."

Pnongvn iat win clior-iachor Xonpfatoff. (Brandt, H. 2630). or in It
gibt zu, daaa or in Kataweilor war, boatoht abor darauf, oa soicn nur
iiorveroucho vorgono.—cn Jorolon. (?.. 2630). Dios stoht in iirckte:: d u >
apruch zu Fuatatollungun in cinw offiziullon Boricht dcr xwficnw,: dcr
NiuJurlandu ueber Xric gavurbrochun. (NO-1G63, .«nkl. Sow. 323, h. 12.93,
aiuho die AUasagon von Nal r 3 uni hocsalngh). Joaof ru^r, Jc-r fruohoxv
LagocfcoUDondeur von K-atswcilor, aud; '.ua, daaa bickenbach :i Ou-
fangonon Voraucnu vornitau (.X>-307, -ud. Be*. 1P5, h. 732).


- 19 -


BRAKDT


Brmlt aagte aus, daaa or sp&ater Bickenbach half, ein Laboratoriun
 Port Pranzeky boi Strcsaburg eiruurlchtcn and daaa or dort Tiorvor-
aueho aah. (H. 2630). Bicker.b-ch war, wie auch Hlrt und Haagen, Profeaaor
an dor Univoraitiot straaaburg. (R. 2631).

uio von Rickonbftch an Karl Brandt gcaondten 3crichte bcweiaon nicht
nur, daaa bickentwcn und aoino -Itvrboitcr Beirut Buhl and Fritz Lot* an
40 ruaslacken ariogagtfj-.-onon Phosgenvcraucho anatollten, aondorn daaa
auch vior dor Voraucha;»raor.on ala Polgc davon •* Alton. (NO-1852, *nkl.

Bow. 456, R. 3406). Oiocoa 4yoku.--4.-nt t-icht dio Glaubwuordigkoit doa .jigo-
klagtun Brandt vooliig zunichto.

Dioau florichto uob-r dio Phoavcnuxporironto aind ala gohoit,o horxan-
doaacno bozoichnot and at 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 und 7 nuaoriort. Sic aind olio
tn O»noralko£*daaar 3ruiUt addroaaiort. Diaao Bcricntc botluhon aich offon-
aichtlich ouf diuaolbu Voraucharoihc, ii« in don Vorauchcn .an 40 Gofan S onun
gipfolto, dio i« 7, Soricht it. oinzolnon buochricbon aind. Sia wurdon von
don frunzovaiachon Bohoor-un in dvr Kohnung von Profeaaor Bickenbach
fundon. dor 4wuck dioaor Kx^rinonU w^r, dio Klricaaakoit oinoa Pmoparatoa
no^ona Hoxaaaothylcntatnuln „agoh ffcoagonvorgiflung fvatzuaUllun. Co-
wiaao vorlavufigu Stuaon aind ir. 4. Boricht vor. 11. ..u t cuat 1944 ia oin-
zolnon aufgofuohrt»ond ^3 r-Wun Vvrsucho orwochxtt, a*1 an oinon "a^ngat-
lichon ruoaiachon .,ri,',a,ef.w^non aaagvfuehrt wurden, dor wogen r-angolndar

Vorataonligungacooglichkoit nicht boruhigt warden konnto ..."

Oor 7. Boricht, dor koin d^tu. tmogt, bvtrifft Voraucne, dio kurz
nach do r. 11. ..uguat 1944 —c. u tu- —s 4. Sorichtoa - -.uajofuehrt wurden,
da Straaabur.’ von : ..rate «Hi nt wurdo.

Dloau Voroucho war-on -n"40 ii-.dilii.,^ uober prophyloktiacho Klrkung
uua Hwxacathylontutr~ in ba ftioagwnvor^iftung Jurch ofuchrt. Davon wur¬
don 12 or.l goscnuvtzt, 20 intr-Vonoea und 8 dlonUn -la Aor.trollperaonon".
.4uf Grund doa 4. Borichta fcann r.ur


- 20 -


BRANDT


der Scftluas gezogen Korean, daaa die 40 onrsehnten Gtfangenen ruaaiache
hriugagofangene waren. Dio Verauchsparaonen warden woitortin beachrioben
ala -.^nachon cdttlcren Labonaaltora, fast allc in achlochtea arnaehrunga-

I

und Kraortoxuatand. Grundaaazlich wurdcn die Jcracftigeren ala Kontrollon
verwenaet, nor dio Kontrolle Nr. 39 (J.Reii und die oral goachuotzto Ver-
auchaporaon Nr. 37 (... Soi.) hattun oina hordfoerulge cirrhotiachc prodik-
tive Lungontuberkuloae. die uebrigen waren nicht nachwoiabar lungonkrank."
(R.,3401).

Die Verauchapjraorwn uuaaton aich Phaagenvorgiftungon untorziohon,
ala deren Folgo dor Tou von rtir.ioatena vior Poraonen ointrzt. (Sieho Tafol
II und III, die d*. ?. Boricht boigulegt iat, k. 3404). ..ndoiu Veraucha-
puraonon orlitten ochiwru Lungonoodvao.

Dor Vortoidigur von lari Brandt botonto nachdruocklichat die <;ooglich-
koit, daaa dioaor don Boricht nicht urhalton tobo. Sj tscr. nlr oia-nl don
Fall, daaa dioaor 3oricht an Drandt nicht abgoachlckt und, falla dioaor
ihn orliiolt, von ihu nicht seloaon wurdo, ao vorbloibt doch di« Tatancho,
daaa dloao Voraucho von dickunbacn uni aeinon *itarbcitom vorgono&aon
"urdon, dorun .*rboit mvdttelbir von Brandt kontrolilcrt wurde. (Sioho obon).
*»onn hinalchtllch dloawa Pun-tea koin woitcror Bowuia vorlaogo, ao waoro
doch dor Uf-iotand, d:v 8a d*r Boricht an Karl Brandt addrvaaiort war, gonuo-
gondor fiowuia fuor aoino ?urontwortlichJroit. Uobordlea wunlo dio Forcchunga-
arbeit sowohl Bickenbachs wlo auch Hirta von Brmdta .ist fuor -..iascnachaft,
und Foracnung enter noatock fuor dringlich bexoichnet. (NO-692, *nkl. Bcw.

457, H. 34«6).

Daa fortgoaetzto Interease Brar/Jta an lor Forschun- uobor Kv^fatoffo
und aein niaaen uober Verauchu an Konzontrationalagorimaaaon wind aurch
don dorient v«x. 31. 1945 ;oiuijt, der aich auf Voraucho in Konton-

trotionalagor Nouong*^. oeZiuht. (KO-154, .jik1. Bow. 446, H. 2638). Dort
warden N&MorontMuchungavorauchb .it Insasacn varganot-m.' Dor Bcricht be-
sagt, daaa dio "Jritte rferauchaxvihe uit einer, iiittol der Loat-Oruppe, du=
Stickgjo Lo3t,' msgufuohrt ^r,.,


- 21 -


BBuXDT


6 ccaoas oir-ur anre^unj,, dio von Oberst&rat Jr. -.irth aaf der Konfercnz
ait ncicnsko^Ldssar os . Br&nit 4. u-jz«-ab«r 1944 -figubcn trardo.

E. rtXJSSS VAiSUgg

tea bowuiacntorial zcigt, dasa ouch andcro Veraucho an Konzcntrationa-
laf-orinauaaen i-it uiaaon doi .oi^oklasten Karl Brandt vorsonoroen wurdon.

(1) Storiliaidrun.,’3vcraucho (..nxlasuachrift, Ziffor 6 (I))

la Jahro 1961 w^r oa boruita die offitiolle Politik doa Dritten Roichoa,
diu jueoiache Bovoulkorun^ Ooutachlanda und der boaatzton bonder auazu-
rotten. (Urteil doa Ltf, K. 16920 uni fol a <nde). Dor .oigaklagU Brack bc-
achriob die a ala"offonoa Gchci~nia w in hoeherun Parteikreiaon. (NO-426,

.Mkl. B«w. 160, R. 527).

Ia -ordhandwork geachulto Poraonon aua don Suthanaaiuatatlonon wurdon
inch do.- Onton untaandt, u._ bui der Pro^raa- za hclfon. In der Tot wurdo
daa Pro & r*usj aolbat toilwuiao data b’.nuotzt, ua lie Judcn in Ooutachlanl
auazurottwn. (Sivhv unten untcr Lathanaaio). . o^un doa drineendon ..rbcitor-
itfingela wurdo lie Stwrilialorung von Juden and andoron aofurwnnton onor-
wuunachton EXaaemton ala oine .utemativo go^nuobor dor dirokton ..uarot-
tungi b'itracntot. Storiliaiorun^ lurch hoent^onatr-hlon -*urdj Hikular von
Brack vor^oaaUa^on. ur. Horat Schu-.ann, fruohor boi dor &i*.hanaaiuatntion
Graf one ck, wurdo ina .vonzuiitration.il --gar ..uaenwitz ;oschickt, ur. Vorauchc
vorzunob-in. Brack aa ;to aua, daaa dica nicht ohnu • iaaen Brandts .j.-acho-
hon haottu koonnun, dor •awiinaai- ait Bouhler fuor daa Zuthanaeiopro.-Tacc
vorantwortlich war. (NO-626, «nkl. B w. 160, h. 527; alchc uch diu oidoa-
atattlicho trkioonuv. von Rudolf Brandt, KO-UO, .odd. Bow. 141, R. 507).
Uoboriioa $ibt Brandt zu, Srafencck ir Jnhru 1940 bv-sucht zu habon, obwohl
or cich nicht auadruucklich damn urinnort, Schxnnn rotroffon zu habon.
(orandt, h. 2430-1). j*aa Stcriliai.runjen lurch Roont junstmhlon tataaech-
lich in .‘uachwitz vor .unoi.- -n wax den, beweiat die hui-zzarroiscondu Zougon-
auaaafco doa Jungon polniachen Judon Chain Bilicki, der, nachdou or


- 22 -


schKorcn Verbrwwangon Gurch iloent^nstrahlen ausgesctzt worden war, ka-
striort wuruo. (H. 541).

( 2 ) -Saelte- an d . alariavorsucr.e (•nklageachrii't, Ziffor 6 (B) und (C)).

Ji« xtnklagebahoordo stuetzt sich in orator Linio ?.cf dij Stollunj
uos «ngekla^t«n Brandt ii. Zuaa-^ntong uit dor i,t. zur last qolo ton Vcr-
antwortlichkeit fuer ao kaoltc- uni Lalariavorsuche. Dio . nlirfaversucho
wurdun in Dactea voa Pobrair 1942 bis zun Janro 1945 von Dr. Kl'.us Schil-

II

lin^, frnhur boin Robort-Iioch-Institut and einor dor boruohrtcston ioutschon
bissensciuftlur auf do;.. Gobiot dor Troponavdizin, vor«?anocr. on. Ucber 1000
Gc/angwie imiMon boi dioscn Vorsuchor. vcrwundut, and i-chroro huniert otar-
b«n ala Pol C e dovon. (B>-856, «nkl. 3cw. 125, R. 392). Zs ist nicht nnzu-
nohrjon, daaa oino eolchu .ai^olojjoriwit in 'on hoohoron :.erztlichcn ..ruison
unbomorkt bliob.

,dt don grouaa^m and tioordoriachon Kaoltcvorauchon in d chr.u bofia-
aon aich z*ui iruii -ioti 0 a dorichtu Holtlo«hno:a, dor diu 1/s.rsacho :ait
iuiacttor and Fink vomaha, jogonucbor srooaaorun Gruppon vor. .dlitacraorz-
ton. Diu urotu Oclogonhait .r uinu Tajur.; in kuor.bur uobur Kioltoprob-
la'-x, diu au 26. uni 27. Cktobur 1942 suticd. Dios- t. , ; ux. atani untur
dor Patonachaft Our Luftwafro, oa warun abor auch Vurtivtor von uvlvrun
Zvtuijun dur tiolmcaeht onnoaund. (NO-401, .odd. Bow. 93, R. 309). Dor 3u-
richt von Holzloonnor vururaichtu oino .at SonsUion, la ,dir u 8 ilv.
hurvorging, oaaa Konzuntratlonalvwrinaasaur. ala Vorauchaptrsonon banuotst
*Amion Uitd uinigo von ilmon atnrban. (Latz, R. 2?2). Dor z> cite Vortraq
von Holzlooimur uobor Gaoltunroblccw wardo zuf clnor •: an - dor Bar-.tundon
nurztu dor i.ehmicht gohalton, die voa .a^cklnjton Han Honor .inborufuo
nordon war und in dor .dlitaoraonstlichan .Jcaiuilo vac 30. "ovo n«r bis
3. OotaaboT 1942 stottfanJ. Handlosor hoortu Holzloohner aprochun, la ma
du “ ala Bovroia-aturial vorjolcjton ioricht hurvorgoht, d'.ss i rich zu *on
Vortroojon uobor Saltoproblc^ o.aoussort hit. (’W-922, ..nicl. S.n. 435,

R. -0)59). Zr hatto diu PfUcht, solcht '’c^nJsi-t^Uchor. i'or-'en: " Br.’ndt
zu borichton. (SLohu ob-n).


- 23 -


BRANDT


(3) Secw.iS3orex>jri~.ntc (nkl^’eschrlft, .vbsatz 6 (G))

Hinsichtlich ucr Suauaaaerexojrii^nte, -lie von der Luftwaffe in Jachau

iu Jahru 1944 vorgenosoon warden, ganuogt os, auf Schroodors Ausaage zu
vorwoieen, 3 ass Brandt, Rostock and Handloaor uobor die von dor Luftwaffe
vorgdnoj—ena n^diziniacna Forochunjsarbuit unterrichtot warm. (.'.’0-449,

Ankl. Bow. 130, R. 471).

(4) Vuracnicjer.oa

AiJdero Dokunente lioferr. den newels dafuer, daaa der *ngokiagte Brandt
nicht nur von uer ayate-utiachen Vtr.<ondung von Konsentrationslagerinsaaaen
fuer nodiziniache Verauche waste, sonder.i aolche Verauche selbst aogar
vorachlug. Sein orauchen u:u H«eftlinge fuer Gelbauchtavoraucho iat achon
eroortert worder.. Ao 26. Januar 1943 achrleb er an SS-Cborgrupporfuehrer
V.olff, den orslen Vorbindungaoifizier xwiachen Himler and den Hauptquar-
tier doa fuehrers, und fragte, ob ea nicht aoeglich aei, Ernaohrungaver-
auche in Komontratlonalagom vortunohaen. (fD-1419, Ankl. Bew. 447, R.
2641).

aru 30. Septe-nber 1943 schrieb Grawitz an Hinalor, daaa ihn Karl Brandt
oraucht habo, eino nouo Salbo fuor -ie Bohandlung von Phoaphorverbrennungon
zu pruofon. Grawita orauchte un Arlaubnia, daa .^ittol dadurch au pruofen,
Onoa on Inaaaaen doa konzontrotiunslagera Sachacnhauaen (Oranienburg)
kuonatlicho Vorbrennungcn arzougt wuerdon. Ran orachtoto die Lrprobung
doa ulttcla an doutschen Uvilpvraonon, di« boi Laftaniriffon Vorbronnongon
orlitton hatter., ala au langaa.a. Die -aatisoong zu diesen Vorauchen wurdo
an 7. Oktobor 1943 gogcoor.. (K0-1620, . 0 * 2 . 5ew. 449, n. 2646).

Ba iat nicht onne jououtung, dasa die »oraucho,in doren Vorlauf In-
aasson nit Pnoaphor aua oinor orandooJbo Brandwundur. augofucgt wuruon,
voci 19. .Joveicbor 1943 an in auchonwald auagefuohrt warden. (NO-265, Ankl.

Bow. 287, h. 1127; Kogan, R. 1187-93). Ss bestoht -anig Zwoifal daran,
dasa an Stollo doa von Brandt vorgoachlagen«n Vorsuchaortoa - Stchsonhauaen -
°uchenwald gowa.ihlt urdu. Die Opfor der Voraocho urduldoten die poinigend-
aten Schcurzen. (Kogon, ai-shu oben).


- 24 -


BRAKDT


Au U. fobruar 19 U. achrieb der Angcklagte uudolf Brandt an ein Lit-
gliea von Kitlora persocnlichen Stab in Beilin (3au.»rt) and beiasrkte,
dess Karl Brandt oa 10 Oefangene in Oranicnburg eraucht hatto, ua ein
geidsaes rraoparat zu pi-seion. Karl Brandt hatte dieao Veraucho nit Gra-
witz oroertert. Jic Gofangcnen wurdon zar Verfuogung geatullt. {NO-1382,
at.^ 1. Bew. IJ. 8, n. 26U.).

iidlich geht aua ae_ BeKeiaj*t«rial ftervor, daas .todiziniache Vor-
aucno an Konzentrationalagorinaaaaen ir. cinen der.*rtig groaacr. 1’r.fang
auagefUehrt wurdon, daaa aie Koitel, den Chef dea OK-/, zu Ohrcn kaaen.
fiin von Klieve von dvr duoreaaanituutainapoktion unterzeichnetoa ..omo-
randun voui 23. Fobruar 19U icigt, daas Veraucho in V erb i„dung nit dor
Wologiachon Kriogafuohrung an lobenden xonachun von dea Angcklagtcn
olone vorgcacftlagon warden waron. Oaa -.o-orandua atollt foal, daaa "dio
Wohrnacnt auf t-unach von Ooneralfoldaarachall Koitel boi den Vorauchon
nicht vorantuortlich botoiligt wurdon aoilo, da aach Voraucho nit Ken-
achon guaacht wuordon". (.'.0-1309, Ankl. Bow. 326, R. 2615). Sa ntcht don
“ngJKlagton Brandt kaua an, dio Kcnntnia '/on aolchon Vorauchon abtuloug-
nen, wonn awlbat aoitol dtvon wusat*. Aua doisolban Jokanent goht her-
vor, daaa Brandt Blonc boi do;, Inatitut in Poson untoratuotzto, wo die
Voroachu vorgvno^jn wurdon. ^gen dor ^achreibung dor biologiachun
••riegafuohrung*voraucho aiohu don Schriftaatx dot Anklagobohoordo gogun
llandloaur.


- 25 -


BRAKDT


f


4


III. JAS


(Anklagosehxift, iiffar 9 und 14)


ahrt;n.


Aa 1. September 1939 u*bortrug Hitler dec Angeklagten Karl Brandt
and doc neichaloitor coohler dio Jurchfuchrong daa ^athanaaioprocraoma.
dur Bcatallungaoriof iauteto:


"hoiehaleitor Bouhler and Dr. nod. Brandt aind untor Verantwortung
fcoauftragt, u.e ^fugniaae nacontlieh zu baatic./jndfcr Aorzto ao
za ervoitorn, uaaa ru-c.l t-machUchea ^reeaaen onhoilbur Krankun
b«i KTitiachater oourtoilung ihres Krankheitazuatandoa der
Gnadwntod famohrt -ordon kann." (630-PS, «nkl. Bew. 330, h. 1516).

Liuaoa Dokucont buachraenkto die VomaM* von Zuthanaaic in koincr Woiao

aui goiateakranko Peraonen, aondorr. schlosa Jeden oin, dar ala "unheilbar"

bu*uichn«t wordon konnte.


Our 4eug« Monnucko aagto aua, daae daa Program io folgt durchgc-
fuwhrt wurdu:


Judo deutachu .ciatalt fuor floiatuakranko crhiult voa ••oichainnunmini-
atoriuc Fragobogun, dio fuor jcdon Inaaaaun dor Anatolt auagufuullt ur.d
an daa nuichainnunainiatoriaa zuruockgcachickt wordon auaatcn. Nachdom
dio Fragobogcn pnotokooUrt wordan «ron, cuaaUn aio von Sachvcrataondigon
auborpruoft iro-rdon. bio hattun ihru aurztlictiu kulnung daruubor obzugobon
or.a uit ihror Dogutachtung dor ..oichaarbuitagoooinachaft suruockzuachickon.
(k. 1872, 1873).

Oioao r-jichaarboitagocoinscftaft arbeituto alt dur "Stiftung" and der
Krenkuntranaportgoaollacivu’t suaaazon. Dio "Stiftung" hatte die finanziollo
boitu dua Prograaca untor aich, wiohrcnd die Krankontranaportgoaollachaft
dcnn bonuotzt wurdo, Venn


- 26 -


BRAND?


Pitiunton von oinur Anstalt tor nr.deran gebracht warden, ua tic in dio
Nauhu der Euthanaaiear.st -lten und onaiic. in die suthanaaieonataltun
a dost zu bringcn. Diesu drei 0r c -ni3ationen, .^ichsarooitagoaeinachoft,
"Stiftung" uni Krankentranaportgoaollachaft waren ir. dor Tat Tamnaaon
fuer dio jurcnfuohrung dca -uth-r.asioprograrca and ar.teratanden der «uf-
sicnt oiner leitenden Stolio. Sio arboitoten nicht unabhaongig vonuinan-
dor^aondom zuaauaaon. (I-.. 1874).

«aa dio Fragobogun -nbdangt, ao erhioltcn drei Sochvjratacndigo
Photokopiun and gaben ihr Gutachten uubcr oinzolno Fadlo unabhaongig
vonoinandur ab. dann brachtcn aogenannto Oborgutachtor ihr. joinung zura
• nuadruck. Lino Liato dorjenigon Pationtor. wurdv aufguatcllt, doron Bo-

fund lautoto, ocas aio untcr daa ^otr.anaaioprogram fiolon,or.d dio Pa-
tionton "ardor. von dor A/iStalt in sogvnannto Sarralstollcn gobr-.cht unci
von dort za nuthanaaioanatalton goachickt. (h. 1377, 1878). Nichtdoutacho
Stantaoiigohoarigo ur.d Judcn unt^rlag-n dor rlothanasio wio dio doutachon.

(h. 1881, 1923).

la Fruahsoutzer 1%D wurdo dia .actigkuit d«r Outechtor auf Konton-
trationalAgorinsOMcn aaagedchnt. -ino Aorztokoi^iasion, diu aas Aorzton
und loiturdon Poraoonlichkoiton doa vujthwaaioprograuaa bo at aj«i, fuollton
^ dio rragubogon dor Insaaa«n aua, dla vorlaoafig vor. don Lagoraorzton nua-

r ,oaucht wordon wiron. In der -oit zwiachen 19U> oj.j Jndc 1%1 wurdon zahl-
roicho Konzontratlonalogor boaucht, ^ncho davon zwjioal. (R. 1682, 1883).
i>r. ...onnocku, dor oin- rtoihe von Konzontrationalagern boauchto, an Inaasaon
ouazuwaohlon, crhiult dio ovfehlo Tuer dieao iaotigkeit von don Oborgut-
achtorr. in. outhaniaioprogri-x. aid voa .cigoklagton


- 27 -


3I'j*?3T


BracK. (R. 1862)* jon cinzelr.on ..onzentntionslagem wurden dieso Kelson
von dor Berliner St ell o do 3 ‘'rogri^s angekuondigt. (R. 1885). .’lichtdout-
scha Staatsangohoori^o und Judea, dio Insasson van .ionz-nt rotionslagom
warun, warden in grosser -zhl dec authaaasioprogra-c untorrorfen. (F».

1887).

Eir.o andero Function dos Zuth-naaieprograa-s war die loctung von
goiatig u:id koorporlich zoruockgcblicbcnon Kindom. dor lougo -alter
Scheldt sagte aua, dass aio Stollo, dio dosur. "oil dos Programs unter
sich hat to, dor noichsi'-sschuss zur £j*forschung Irb- ur.d Anlagebodingter
Sc.iwuror loiden nicss. dio Fragobogen wurdon von Gesundheitalectern, don
Koiturn von XindorkUnikon, Acrzton, Goburtanelforn^cbaiyx'n, Hospitaolom
uow. auagofuollt,und lorichtc wurdun an dr. Lindons 3aoro in Borlin cr-
stattot. Under, gohoorto zuz. Inncncijdsturiua. dort vorfuogto win Kocnittoo
von fuohrcndon S»chverst -ondigon auf Grund diosor Borichto dio Buth-uwaio
duren sogonanntu Er.aaocrttiguagsworJnungen in dor Forn oinur Photokopio
doa florientos, dor schriftllch gcnohalgt wonlon war. dioso Taotigkoit dnu-
ortu bis zua Jahro 1944. 1834). Scheldt solbst totto dio Loitung

oinor bosonderon xbtoilung Poor di« ?oetung eolchor . dasgostoltotor Kinder.

(h. 1833).

Arboitor aua don boaetzton Ostgobioton, dio arbuitsunfachig gowordon
warnn, wurdon nach -a3a[,0bo dos ^othanaslcprogra:.As an.;cbracht. Qsinibusau,
die dor K r anko nt ranapo rt go a«11s ch~.f t geho: rton ur.d vor. Personal dos Kmn-
kontranaports botriubon cordon, brachten dicso Opfor zur Auarottungazontralo
HadacAT, wo can sio toototo. (Scheldt, a. 1842-1845; U. S. v. Kl-in und
^onoason, NO-1116, nid. Aw. U5, n. 1781).


- 23 -


BBAKDT


;


»


*


Diosfls Boweisoitcrial hinsichtlich der Art dor Durchfuehrung dos
Programs wird orhaertot durch dio cidosatattlichu Zrklacnmg dos uige-
klagton Brack (JO-426, Ankl. Bow; 160, R. 527), die oidesstattlichc Sr-
kl::vrun 6 von Pauline Kneisslor 00-470, Ankl. Bow. 332, F.. 1534), dio von
Brack gezeichncto Tafol (10-253, Ankl. Bew. 331, F.. 1523), wio mch durch
sohlroiche andoro Doko^r.tu in den Akton.

Boa Bowoisnnterlal ainsichtlich dor Taetigkoit der C’oergutachtor und
Sachvoratacndigen dos Euthanasioprograms in den vcrschiodenon Konzcntri-
Lionalogom winl duren uic uidcsatattlicho *rklaorung dos Jr. Uuthig, dca
Lagorarztoa dos 4onz«ntr >tionalarora Dachau, bokroeftigt (.0-2799, Ankl.
Bow. 497, n. 7710), dor ussagto, dass Professor Huydo ils Loiter einor
ftoerdsaion von vior Psychi-turn in H-rbst 1941 ins J.onxontrationalager
Jaohau kan. Jiosu Aoralo.oc. Isaion wiohlte irbcitsunfaohigo Insass-.n four
diu Vornichtung durch Or.a aua. Hoyu-j war dor vrsto Oborgutachtor doa Eutho-
ncaioprograma. (Brandt, 2495). Aua dor cidosstattlichon Zrklaorung von
Br. Gorguss goht hervor, disc or und Jr. Schumann - beido wnren in Euthv-
naaiuprograjiiu tvitig - <i\s honzuntrationslagor B UC hunw\ld in Juni 1941 be-
nuchton. Gorgasa stollt ausdruocklich fast, diss os dor Zwock dKsor toisc
war, sich nit dor Uobcrwoisung von Sonzcntrotionslngorinsnssan an Euthana-
oi'ianstalton vertraut zu cnchon. Jor Eksuch far>i auf Brandts Bcfelil hin
atatt, dor uurch don .uigcklagten Brack uaboroitt.lt imrdo. (,*0-3010, Ankl.
Bow. 503, R. 7734).

Nichtdoitsche Stiatsangchoorigt und Judcn, dio Inssssen von Konzentra-
tionalagorn w»ron, w-ron Opfur dos EaUmnasioprogrx..is, das in dicocr. Lngorn
untor doa Jockninon »U f 13" orboltdto, CO-429, .cold. Bow. 2C1, K. 1083 ).


- 29 -


BfiAKDT


EljiiS® iMcaaaat':, -ie oio .m-lagebohoerde uebcr dio "li, f 13"-.J'tion
ir. Groas-ooaun vorlo^j, *eig«r«, =.io das iithanasiGprosraat in Nonzcntra-
tionalugem vor aich ging. Die llato dor Jnsaason loa Kon 2 entrationalagors
Groaa-hoaon, die an dio Zuthanaaieatation Bembur^ zwccka -uisrottung fco-
acnickt wurden, onthaolt die ;at*r. vidcr nichtdoutacner Staataangehoorigor
and aicntduatachur Judon. (NO-158, -«nkl. Bow. 410, 1724, 1725). Judon

in Schutzhaft, Polon in Scnutzhaft, Judon, die Barufavorbrochor uaron,
juodiacho "urucckoborgor", Jueuiacho iwaaaoachaondar, tachcchischo "Druockc-
borgor" and lachachon in Schutzluft bufanden aich untcr dor. von don Lagcr-
Qorzton zor "Untorauchung" dur-ch dio Sichvoratacndl^on auagoauchton In-
aaaaon. (1151-PS, Ankl. Bow. 411, K. 1733).

Eln Vcrgloich dor Kuwt *uf don Liston, dio in don Jokuaonton Hr. NO-
158 und 1151-PS onthalton aind, bo-.oiat, iasa von don 240 Naoon, die zur
rtuarottung in dor Buthanaaloat tion Bcmburg aur o -cfuchrt aix>J, wonigatena
51 polniachor cdor tachochosiovakiochor K&tlonalitut wrvron. ioviolo dor
aufgofuohrton Judon nichtdoutachur Nation vlit .ot wiron, kann us dicaor.
OokuawnUn nicht ur.-lttolt torvlon, abor oino bctreoc.itliche .Jizahl von lhnon
iat in Laondorn OUM Lb ouutschlanda guboron, wlc ;ua dor in Jok. HO-158
onthaltunon Llato horvorgcht, uni uo iat d-ahor au-onachuinlich, daao oino
weitoru but r:\ochtlichu .*nzihl dor zur ..uarattung ausorsohonun Inaaanon
nichtdoutachur Staataanguhoorigkoit w.ron, (NO-158, .»nkl. Bcw. 410; 1151-
PS, .uikl. Bow. 411, u. 1735-1739).

.*iu 17. -a-rz 1942 wuiden 70 Inaaaaon zur .uisrottung nach Bcmbun;
gobr-cht. (NO-1873, .tnkl. Be*. , R. ). javon wiron 27 dor nichtjuo-
diDchon Goiangunun auf d.r ir.raportllato tachochischcr odor polniachcr
Nationalitaot. (Vorgl. dio Ir.-.nai'ortlletu :lt dor Liatc dor Insasaon, dio
urapruonglich in Groas-tosun uag^ouent vurden.


5RAKDT


1151-PS, Ankl. Be*. 411, h. 1725). *a 19, oaerz 1942 ki-oen witore 57
H&oftlingo von Groaa-Kosc-n in Bomburg an. (.i3-153, Ankl. 3ew. 410, R.

1723). Von dieson wren 15 der nicntjuediachen Gefangencn auf der Trana-
portliatu.tachochiacher and polniachor #»tionalita«t. So waren von der
iai *aerz 1942 naclweiaaiich mch Bcrnburg guachickten Geaodzahl von 127
Hauftlingon nvindeatona 42 odor ein Drittel der Jcsaatzahl nichtdoutscho
Staataangehoorigo, dio zwangavoiae in einen feindlichcn Lando fostgohalton
uurden. li&aa alio dieae Haoftlin^ in Jemburg vemichtot Kurden, wird
ueborzougend darch don lakonitchon Bcrlcht von Gro3a-;u>san an daa irt-
schufta- und Vomaltungsfcauptajfc nachgovioaon: "Sonderbchandlung von 127
Gofangenon wurdo aa 2. A .-*rU 1942 ..b cachlosson." (1234-PS, ankl. 3ow. ,

R. ).

lliuaor dehcia Dozuojlich Action 14 f 13 wird durch die ..cugonaua-
auge der beogun /.’off (... c*X>-oC5), Kogon <h. 1210-13), noe^llu (h. 1634-37,
1641) urn Roll (n. 1060) ooch v.ratuorAt.

Nichtdoutacho St alMngahoorigo and Judun auaaurhalb der konfcntrations-
iager vurdon von dun Program nicht tuagwnoaaen, und vide von ihnen nmlen
gotoetut. Auaaur’dou. obon ontor Abachnitt a angofuohrtun Bouoiaaaturial iat
reicnllchoa Buwuiaanturiul J.»fuor vorhnndan, uasa aach nichtdoutscho Staato-
angettoerigo von Aiifong 1940 an don ganzor. ..riug hindurch dor V«michtur.g
auaguootzt w iron. (.*>-1135, ankl. Sow. 334, K. 1543; NO-618, Ankl. Bow. 373,
h. 1609). Judun doutachur and polniachor Stantabuorgorschafl und ataatun-
loaa Judun wurder. gluichfAlls duo Programs ur.tcrworfcn. (f.0-1310, Ankl. Bow.
337, H. 1550). Polniachu and ruaai3Chv. Stt. .taanguhoorlga und andare nicht-
duutschu Staataangonocrigu wurd-.n doo Prograac. untvn orron. (NO-72D, Ankl.
Buw. 366, K. 1591-2).

Oiu PrAgubogOn unthiulton oinc Spolto iue. die ■hasse”, die ajvszifi-
zlurt wurdus deutachen odor artv r-indtcr. jlutuo (von -.ulcchoo Blut),

Judo, jucdiacnor ^scaling era ton odur twuitcn Grides, Nugor (-dschrasso).
(lo96-FS, Ankl. Be*. 357, ... 1574). dio Png® wuordc


BrtANDT


voulllg uanootig gewoaon soin, :.cnn Hichtdoutacha von doa Prog race «uagc-
n occur. gewoaun Woren. Ueber allu Pat lent an, die nicht doutachor Nationa-
litAut odor artvonandtea Biutoa »iron, nuaaten Fragebogon ausgcfuollt
and a.nre ibiMd and StAitaingchoorigkcit xngugobvn werdon. (NO-825, Ankl.
Bcw. 358, ft. 1578). Die Frago'oogcn cuaaten von don Sachvcrat?endigon bo-
arbolt»>t tturdon. (i^nnocko, n. 1631). Die in dcr Suthanaaio Ib.etigcn or-
hiolton nieaila uino .xr.voiaung, daaa nichtdoutachu Staatabuergor von doa
Program auageno-um weraon aolltcn. (NO-817, «nkl. 3«*. 36e, h. 1595).

Liu 4«ugun konnccko (it. 1677, n. 1922) and Scheldt (h. 1860-1) ststen
gloichfulla in dica.jSinrw .;ua. Hugo Sueboe*!, Jr. Jur., dor hocchatc
buot-tu noch den Uniatur ia oeaturroichiachen Bundcsainistcriuc; fuor
Juatiz, aigt in 3-inot wiidoastittlich-n Zrkldcrung, dnas, ala Brack ala
Vurtrutor d-a Angc.da^t.n ut ndt in .iihre 1942 ia Juatizniniatcriun cir.cn
Vortrag ueber Euthanta^ »Uolt, -r die .vricgav-rl-tzt.n and .lio Persantn,
aiu ala Folge dcr Uiitan ; .riifc goiatoagestoert wortien wtren, 'la dio Por-
aon-ngruppo aufziohltc, die von djz Program \u8gcnomon VAiron. nualicndor
and auaon wuxxl-n unto: don Peraonangruppen, dio -.uagcachloaBcn war.n,
nient orwaunnt. (NO-2253, unkl. o.w. , ). Brick gibt zu, dun Vor¬

trag gohaltun zu Mbun. (h. 7>b9).

ourviita in Johre 1939 murder. Insaaacn von Irrcnanataltun in bca-tstun
Polun getoutut. (3616-PS, Ankl. Be*. 370, n. 1596). Ia Horbat dca Jahroa
1940 wurd«n Goidmittui i*u v r die Evakuiorung von 1558 Inaasaun von Imn-
onataltun in Oatpr-uaaun una uns>fuchr 250 bia 300 guiatoageatocrtenPolun
von du« <\nguKl&gtcn Brack, dcr dcr v.nralt unga^o a aigo loiter doa Euthruv.-
aiuprograma war, sur Verfuegung gvatcllt. Da diuao Vorachickungen von
oinua Sorulorkomando dca b.ruochti-t.n SD, uar fucr caondcru Aufgsbon
oingcautzt wurdc, .ina^ef-edrt rardc, b atoht kein -vcifcl, daaa


3RAKDT


geistuagostouxtcr. Pblcn g„toatot warden. (KO-2909, -inkl. Bow. 50 ?,
ii. 7721; MO-2911, Ankl, Sew. 5C1, hi 7722). Ia Soptcabcr 1941 wurdc cin
Bs-fwhl orlaaaui, dasa die Inaassor. dor Irronanatolton in “ussland in dor
flosatzungstonc d ' ,r ^outacncn .uo-ogruppo "Nord" za tocten scion. (NO-1758,
Anid. Bow. 444, h. 2545).

Oic Ostarbeitor warun &uch divon botroffon. (KO-143G, *tnkl. Bew, 429 ,
h. 1950-1; NO-1430, . 0 * 1 . 3uw. 430, R. 1941). Ostarboitcr, die zwnngswuiae
nach Ueutachlend gobricht vorden -ixn, nicht laongor r-rbeiton konntun und
ala oino Bolaatung d-r Irrcnonatalt.n in ^utschland .-.ngcachwn wurdon, wur-
don in oinwr Sdtf-olanstoit v.rcinigt,und »cnn sic nicht innorh'.lb 6 'fcch-n
cntlassen *-rdon konnUn, wurden slo unt^r doa Suthanasioprogman vemich-
tot. (NO-891, An.d. Bew. 414, n. 1779; KO-1116, Ankl. S.w. 415, K. 1781).
Coaundo hdbJuedischL Kinder (..0-1427, .inkl. B^w. 431, R. 1952) und cr-
wachauno Zigeuner (3682-.-S, .cud. Bo*. 371, h. 1 * 02 ) wurdon glcichfalla ge-

tOotut.

C. ur.K-na^g.nd^ onUrauchung and aingclndu Aufsicht

Jio Auswr.hl and Pruofung dor Porsenon, die dor Jfcthannaio unterworfon
wurdon, war in vorbruchuriachor .ois.. nacftlaussig und unsuroichond.

Our AnguKligto Karl Brandt bezougte, dass don xorzton ia Euthonasio-
program ung.houru tfcrantwortlicnkoit auforlcgt wurd- (h. 2425 ). E r hattu
tuaoioaun oit Bouhlur ..ichtvollxozo-nhoit uebur dio Aorzto, dio an doa
Program butoiligt waran. (Brandt, n. 2406). Sr gib Jodoch za, dass er in
dun Irrunanstalton xoinu Bcob. chtung«.n anstolltc odwr Sosuen- tachtw. Sr
war nur cinanl in d».r Irrvnanctalt Bethel und b.sachta oino Speri.alklinik
in Kassol. Er gab zu, <1*38 -r koine fichaurztlichan I.onntniaou cuf doa Oc-
bioto dor Psychiatnh> hah-. (n. 2470). Sr, dor «rzt untor den


- 33 -


BMHDT


beidun Porsononj dio von Hitler .-it dor ..esfuehrung dor Suthan&sio be-
duftragt waron - Bouhlor wvr kein .*rzt - erawchtigto die «orrtc,dio
Euthinasio anzuwondon. Uobor di^ ivrztlichen Faehigkoiton dicsor .-aenncr
Btoilto or koine Untorsachungen an. (H. 2476). Von dor Gosaatzahl dor
10 bio 15 Aorzto, dio nich seiner ^ougonuussAge ait der .uisfuehrung dor
Euthanasia beauftragt w.ron, kennt or nicht oin«n oinzison Haoon. (h.
2478-9). Brandt bezeagte, uass or nur oino dor Vjrnichtangsstitionon,
GrifonoCK, oinavl ia Jahro 1940 busuchto (h. 24t») and nioails in oino
Boob .chtunjsst itior. kaa. (h. 2481). Er besuchto Jodoch ia .inter 1939/1940
zusacacn ait aon kngoklvgten Jr..cx, Bouhlur und Conti dio Zuthonasiostation
Brandenburg, wo dio orsto 3 skxaujr oing-richtot vurd«. i>or tweek dieses
oosuenus w«r,vinon Probov*rsuch ait ansfisohen, in d-a vior geistosgostoorto
Porsonon vorgist wurdon. (orack, n. 7645-6).

Oij Opfor dor Suth nasio wurdon toe lodo vorartoilt von sogonannten
Oborgutuchtum, die nocr. nicht olnul din Pntionton geschon hatten. Dio
Opfor wurdon nur oborfl-vudilich luf Jruni von Fra^obogon gopruoft. (N0-
470, «n*l. Bow. 332 , n. 1535-6). Pfannsuollcr, oin Gutzchtor, copfing
vor dom 15. *pril 1941 nicht wenig^r \ls 159 Sendungon von rragebogon,
urn oin Urtuil uobor Lo'o-n ai»d i’od zu faalion, von d*n-n Jod« ia Jurch-
schnitt 2wischon 200 aid 3«» Frag-bogen er.thieltcn. (NO-1129, *nkl. Bow.
355, H. 1572; NO-1130, mkl. dew. 355, K. 1572). Seine Hauptbwschaof-
tigung uio oinos Loitors cinor XrrunanstAlt war, war soino Pruefung der
FrogoDogvn nur oino Kvb-nbeSChaoUigung. In .ir.va -oitrnua von 1G Tagen
l'oolltd diosor sulb*. kitacheor urteilw uub~r nicht wenigor als 2.056
Frags.bogon. (NO-1129, sioho oo-n, vgl. Pfannouvllcr, R. 7384).


- 34 -


BfeKDT


Pragubogwn uob-r Pationtcn, die nur fuer die kurzo ^it van oinco
*.oiut in cin<.r .uistalt gewcaoa ^ ron, warden ausgofucllt und bildoton
die Untorlago fuor ein Urtcil daruvbjr* ob dor betxvffendo Inaaasc gc-
tootot Monica sollto. (NO-825, «nkl« 3o*. 35 s, .u 1577-8). Violc diesur
Frugubogen w-ron in anzuL-.englicner oia- ausgefudit, sodiaa cs xuf
Kvinun Fall oouglich v r, uino klare iorztlicho -uinang za bilden. Ea
wardu uuen auf dio Gutachtor win jruck uuageuebt, un aio zu Vennlaaacn,
poaitivu Gutachten nbzu^ebcn. (-err.-eke, i.. 1881). -in uinatimigua Gut-
achton w-r niclit nootig zur Faeliung olnca poaitivon Urteila, daa den
P-tionton zu® Todo rorurtoiltc. Die bwoicftondo *oinung oinea Gutnehtora
gunuegto nicht, uia daa Lubbn dca ratienten zu retton. (.-enneeku, R. 1907-8).

In oinoa Konzentrational .gor wurdon wsn dua Gutachtor ^cnnocko in
oinoa. hachaittig 105 Arior "untoraucht". Die "Untorauchung" von 1200 Judon,
aio dirin beatand, ihru VeriiaftunsagrJoraio -ua den .veton in dio Sarichto
zu uubvrtngun, nah-i nor win piar I'.go in .uiopruch. . uonocko aolbat aotztu
in oinua nriof in avina Frui us ort "Unterauchung" in .eifuchrungazeichtn.
Unmooglich konnto irgtndoAn- «rt iJnterauchuns \uf don Gciatoazustmd in
acn Paticnton auaga'uohrt wordun. (. ennocko, H. 1892; iW-907, Ankl. Bow.

U12, R. 1747). Dioao Judon wircn in i-.r Tit >iatig und kourpurlich goaund.
(-ennecke, H. 1893). "-r fuel Jr. Kcyde uni aeine .ierztekoi-iia.>ion,

die iiu Konzontrationalagor iMchau rbeitotu, uivaxglich, in dcr kurxen -oit,
dio aio dart zubrachten, dio groaae Lahl dvr auageincftltcn Inaaaaen zu un-
torauchun. Jio Untorauchung bootnnd Udiglich in fluachtigea Studiua dvr
Peraonolkirton in Gugont-'.rt d-r Hieftlingo, {)X>-2799, aioho oben). Dio
nurzto Schumann und Gor.aaa deberprueften nachrvnd oinoa ointaogigun Bo-
aucha la honzontrational ;gor buchcnwald


BRANDT


ungefaohr 100 Sonant retionalagorfciuftlinge. (« 0 - 3010 , aichc ob.n).

Jur Grad dor Gciatoagoatoerthoit nr nicht dor antachcidondu F<*tor
b-i der Entac hcidung,ob dio Inaiaaon getoatot wurden »lltcn odor nicht,
oom^m viuliiiwhr ihre 3r'.ochb.irkeit tor «rboit. Oiu ..rt ihr.r Bcschicfti-
S^‘g, ihr Arbeitawort, Venn ^ocglich in Vorglcich ait dor ^urchschnitts-
Iciatung geaundcr Poraor.cn, cuasten in dun Fragobogcn aorgfadtig auage-
fdolit warden. (1696-PS, -nkl. 3c*. 357, R. 1575). -.ortvollo Arbeitor
burden nicht zu don 3uthaniaicstatlooon g-schickt. (3865-P3, .oikl. Be*.
365, h. 1589). P-tienten,diu .o-t-rioacl-roac, Tuberkuloac, Kruba and
anduro arboiteunfaohigacchondo Arankhaiten hotton, warden in daa Progr-c®
uinbuzogon. (3896-PS, -nkl. dew. 372, ii. 1*08). "Nutzloac Eaaor- warden
don Hungortoao proiagogob^n. (3616-P3, .uikl. Be*. 370, R. 1599; 1600;
NO-823, Ankl, d-w. 3S9, n. 1697). Peraonon, die fuor den Staat koinon
,n>rt ,tKhr hatton ' »'» "u.muetze Faacr" r^acher.. Ca wurdc horvor-
gehoben, ocaa wwhrend do* .vriegua gcaunde Puraonen ihr Ubon hurgebon
nauBBtan, Kauhrond dieac achworkr-nlcoo Lcuto L-ben bleib*n und, w.rui
nicht die Buthanaaio nuagefuchTt wuerdo, noch 1-cngor a. Leben bloib.n
Wburdon. Auaacrden mmlc noch gua gt, d-.aa do* -ingel » fczhrungaaittolx.
und Pfleguporaor.al die -uarottun* di„aor L-ute xvchtfcrtigc. (;-emv,ckc,
i». 1906). Dio Konzontr*tionalagcrh»oftllngo mirdon -wf ihr- Arbeitafachig-
keit and politiacho Zuvcrlooaaigkeit hin gepnieft und warden doaontapro-
chond four die Euth-maaio luagewchlt. (NO-2799, aichu obon). Fragebogun
uobor Konzontrationolagerinaaaacn, dio nicht goiatcagoatoert w;ren, warden
auagefucllt. (NO-3010, aioho obon). Vor do. 27. April 1%3 unf^aato dio
Aktion U f 13 die Toutong niche nur von goiatosgertoerten Persons, aon-
dem ouch von Poraouen, die nn Taborxolo*. litten. von Bottlnogerigcn and
von nnduren four koerpurUche .Tbait ant uglicfc.n Peroonen. (10-1007, Ankl.
Bow. U3, h. 1753). Kar ZnsMMC, <ii- nicht as hr ubaitsT chig wnren.


BR.JCDT -

aollton ror dio Pruufongakaaoiaaion gubracht uerdcn. (KO-1151, Ankl. Bow.
/.U, R. 1744).

la rillo dor Kindortoetungon find koine vorhurgchonde B-r-rtung nit
dun Elturn odor .uigohoorigjn atatt. (3864-PS, Ankl. Bow. 367 , H. 1593).

Uor Entlaatungazouge Pfannaicllcr aigto aua, dasa cr, nachdca or die B.-
ruchtigung orlulton hattc, das botr.ffeado Kind zu tooten, dio Vcnrxirftcn
uinlud, oaa Kind zu boauchon,woil ca kr'-nk aoi. 2r au a to d«.n atom odor
Voramdon jodoch nicht, uaaa or d-a Kind tooten ;verdc, dn dioa *in Starts-
goheiania war. (PXannaucllor, K. 4394). ..ua don von doa Angolclngtcn Brack
vorgclogton Ookuiaonton guht kl^r hwrvor, diaa dio Sltom uobor don dweek
uor Vorbringung dor andcr In .jiataltun, wo aio g.toot-t w^rdon aollton,
gutacuaoht "union. Ba oblag don wrztlictfcn 3v .-ton, dio atom zu v u r:.n-
i’vaaun, ihro Kindor in aolcho .oiat-ilton zu schickon. Ua daa fortig zu brin-
gon, wurdo don SUom g-a-gt, doss bci uinzolnon Kwnhoiten oino -ooglich-
kuit boatuondo, durch Bohmdlung gowieau Srfolgo zu orziolon. (Brack Dok.

52, Brack Bow. 43 , h. 7678, vgl. Brack, R. 7717). don atom wurdo goaagt,
dnaa dxa Kind in aoich.n Anativlton die boat- Pfloge -cpf.-j, gjn wuerdc and
da®alios ordonklicho in buzug ouf .axiurno Heilnuthodcn getan warden wuerdo.
(Brack dok. 51, Brack B-w. 42, h. 7678). ..ua dioaon dokuaenWn gvht kl.tr
horror, dasa dio atom UiW .aigohourigon in FaUu dor Toctung von Kindom
nicht nur nicht a. ihro Linwilligung gaXmgt wunlon, aondem das. ale nuch
noch got-‘.ouscnt "union, u> dio Vorlcgung in oino Zuth-jiaaio~«natalt zu or-
nooglichon. Ein Briof vot- Roichauaachuaa zur wiaacnschiftlicncn Srforachung
von orb- und anlagobodington aenworun Loiuon an die X-anlcahoILuwtalt
fiichbarg zoigt oXXonaichtlich, daas in Fdullun von Euthanasi- an Kindom
dio Einwilligung dor atom • 1


- 37 -


BRANDT


nicht nachgeaucht urd®. (XC-890, .Jl. Beu. 443, «. 2540-1). Dieaea
seweisauterial wird durch iie eiacsstattlicho -r.claenmg von Dr. Sochoool n
erhaertet. (KO-2253, siehe oben). Dor .mgeklagte orack aagte auo, daaa
die ivinwilligung dor -item bei der Toetung von Xlndem eine unbcdingte
Vorauaaetzung war. Jio bea^tecon ..erzte, die die Vorkcnrungen fuer die
Veracnickong dor aixuer nach aen Toetungastationen traTen, hatten angeb-
iicft die .uuigabo, die -itom -a benacfuicntigen and ihre ^nwilligung
einzuholon. uiose -r.iaerang ateht iu iaerapruch zu Bracka eigenon Doku-
raonten, die klar zoigen, was den litem in irklichkeit geaagt wurde.und
auch die oehandlung dea Programs ala ein Staatagehoionia aufzeigen.

Dio Beweisaafnahiso hat fonier jozeigt, dasa Pfana-uoller aolbst oiner dor
nerzte war, die zufolgc d-r Verordnung des Innenainistors voa 1G. ..u-uat •
1939 niaagoataltete aid -indoncrtige ..inder aolden auaaton.( NO-3355,

«nkl. Bew. , R. ). 2i aelbat bozeugto, daaa or dio iltcrn ueber daa
Scnickaal, daa ihre .dador on^rtete, nlo^ils unterrichtot habo. (Siehe
oben). Brandt gab zu, daaa bo* der Tootung erwachacncr Geitrtoakranker,
dio Einwilligung dor Angohoorlgen nicht orrorderlich vur, and lhrc .nnicht
nicht gohoert wurdo. (n. 2427-8).

£a iat olno Unzohl von dezoiaen dafucr vorhandon, daoa die deutacho
Ouffcntlic.'ikelt uubor die Jutftanaaio ujkI lie ..rt ihrer «uafuohrang enU
aotzt >»ar. Eln Polisoiboricht or.Jacrte:

"iia aoU hioibei za don wUJeaten Szer.cn gekotr-cn aoin, *voil eir. Toil
aioaor ..cnachen merit froiwimg in den Ocnibua oir.stiogon und Jahor
ait Ge»alt uo 3 .'ogleitperoonala dorthm v^rbracht warden! &s handolt
aich hior u._ ;.outu, -ii« bloed- and cchwacnainnig aind and conat
noCh wjitore opiloptiache ..rankhoiten nubon solion. - and fuor deren
Unterhait biahor :.-m z odor zaa groascr. Toil uoberwiogend der Staat
und die sonatigon Koorporacnofton dea ocXfontlichen lobena aufkomion
auaatun. ... ia aoll aog-r ein Toil iioaor L;uto ^it oiner Behaup-
tung aovivit geg^sgen aoin, and dio otwa rolgondoraasaon vorbroitet
»mido: "Der hcutige Staat auaa nun ein-al achlocht bcstollt aoin.
aonst koonnto «a nicht


- 33 -


BR4KDT


vorkaaacn, daaa lu n dieat arocn i^nactten einfach xun Tod bofourdort,
aa/dit cun dio *dttel, die biaher fuer dc-n Untnrhalt dieoer . enaction
zur Verfucgung atandon, noo-ahr zur /.riogafuehrmw froi i.acht" "

(a- 906, aiuI. 3cw. 376, fa. 1619-21).


"• .-UrtP.icino Vornichtung dor rudon

•jo Sucrunaaieprograa- betoiligt® Peraonen nahaen auch on dor Ver-
nichtung dir Judon ia Catcn vor. ungofaehr 1941 bis zur 3efroiun3 dor Ost-
gebiote toil. uinor gowiaaon zdl. in dcr Button liaelfte dca Jnhros
1941 vurde oin Toil d«r rtroooon, dio bia damn daa ^uthanaaieprograra
in uuutschland auafaofcrton,r.ach *~blin goachickt uxxi dua SS-Brigadoi’uohror
Globocnik zur Vorfuogun^ g.stullt, u- boi dcr waaonvornichtung dcr Judon,
dio daoala in don hoehoxua . roiacn dor NSJaP allgoauin betcannt war, zu
halfen. Unter don .»oretor., uio t»oi der Vomlchtung dor .Judon uithalfon,
wi» n dr. iborlo and Sehuxxnr., dio boido vorher boi dca SuUunaaieprosrar.ua
in Juutachland aitgaarbeitut nation, .ai dioa gab irack in aoinor oidon-
atattlichen -ntlaorung in dor Voruntvrauchung zu:


"Uer ijcfohl, dioau Luuto nach dc= Oaten abzuatollcn, konnto nur
von Himalor an dr. orandt wrtwilt wordon aoin, ovontuoll durch
douhlor." (NO-426, .-wl. Bcw. 160. h. 531).


Oie Vorbirvdung zwiachun dor ■Stiflung- (goMiimuottigv Stirtung fuor
.*nataltapflogo) und u«. Vorruchtungalagor in Lublin war men Jon niedorun


"canton dor outhanasiuatationen bokannt. (NQfcTO, .*n.d. Bow. 332, H. 1S37).
dor Lougo Gorgaao oiklou.to in Minor vidcaatattliehon "r-laorung, d.i 3 o
Polizoihauptoann virth iivi Sfn ataaontr 1941 crzoohlto, or aoi von dcr
btiftung Xuur .Jiataltapflcjo - das w-r elix-r dor ^JCknanon,untor donen daa
fcuthanaoioprogria. arbuiteto - an cine oUUv\naaio-.jisLalt in Bcxirk Lublin


vursctzt wordun. (HO-jOlO, aloha obuo). Osr SS-Aichtor, Or. fcttgdfi, ior


- 39 -


SP.JtOT


aa s juodiocho Vemichtungsprograjn in Lublin unt-rsuchto, beZeugto vor
don. Intcmationaion .-ilitaorgorichtshof, daas drth,dor vorh.r dio .uf-
gab« auagofuchzl batco, dio unhoilbar Irrsinnigon aua den ego zu raeuaon,
cin Speaialiat in d^r .^asonverniefttung von -onachan war. Dio Oicnststollo,
von dor .drth soixw 3*f-hl« orhiolt, war Berlin, 'iorgartonstrasso, und
untur dun *«ub«n, dio udt dicaor .Jction in Vcrbindung standen, war Blankcn-
ourg. (NO-2614, .jwl. Bow. 504 , n. 7735-7737). Brack gab zu, da 33 .irih
ooa-tor dor Eutbanaaiostation Brandenburg war. (Brack, R. 7733). Brarxit
besuchto orandonburg iia .intor d.s aahnis 1939-40. (Brack, h. 7645-6).

^ontralatollo fuer daa Euthanaaicprogrmm vunlo in dcr Uurgartenatran-
00 4 oingorichtut,und Blonkonburg war Bracks St divert rot or in dee Euthana-
aioprogrmnn. (6rack, R. 75o3, R. 7707).


Ucr .uigoRlugtu BracK berichtoto an Hiaalar uober uioao .-rbeiton an

23. Juni 1942 wio folgt:

\

"Ich babe aon Brigade fuotir or Globocnlk auf .uiweiaung von noiehalcltcr
Bouidur fuer dio .-m emuobrung avlmir Sorxivraufgabo cchon vor laon-
gurvr ~olt oinon '.oil culnor aunn^r xur <erfu».;ung c.atellt. .uf
urund oiiwr arnoutun ditto von ihc tube ich nunaohr toiler.. Pe-rao-
r.ol abguatullt. .led dies.i Jolcgonnuit vortr-t -.rig.-dufuehror
.lobocnik dio ..uffasaung, dio ga.Uo Juoonaktion ao acbnoll wio r.ur
irgond nooglieb durc.kzofujhron, daait inn nicht cinca TagvB nitton
Tin atoCKonoliubu, uuim irgendwdcho Schwicrl^iton cin ..batoppon
dor .Jetion notwonoig ach.n. Sio aulbat, .o;ich3fuohivr, haben cir
gogunuobur aoinorzoit schon die oinong g^acuasort, daaa win sebon

hiS unJun , dl,r * ar ? ax > 80 ac ’“? ai “i- =oogUch arb.lton naio.se. "
(NO-205, and. t*.u. I03, , u 536;.


dio oidoaatattlieno ardaorung von Kurt Goratdn, dio each .irth
orwauhnt, gibt 01 no lobnafto owacbroibung dor scfaiMCklicben .at,in dcr dio
Opfor auf Uofobl GlobocniKa iu lauacnuor. gotoetat wurdon. (1553-PS, .aikl.
dew. 428, h. 1799-1607).


BRANDT


Im Gktober 1941 ucbcraittelto or ck, dor dor vorwsltunga«ies3igo Loi¬
ter doa Euthanaaioprognoaa war, Flaono, mnach Judon, dio nicht arbeiten
konntan, durch Gas vomichtot word on sollton. Er orklaorto aoinu Beroit-
willlgKuit, einigo solncr Gchil f on,und inabuaandcro scinon Choraikor Kall-
moyor, nacii dom Oaten au schicken, wo die nootigo Vergisungsapparatur
loicht fobriziort warden koenne. .iichnann, don Hitlor alt dor Vornichtung
dor Judon boauitragt batto, war ait dioaui Plauncn cinvcrstandcn. Dungo-
rnaoaa boatanden "Koine Bedjrucn Juden, die nicht ar'ociton konnton, nach
dor Brackachon Hoilootliodo aua du, jg zu raounon". ( .10-365, «nkl. Bow.
507, ft. 774). aallooyor, dor ait dor Horatcllung dcr Vergaaungaappiratur
und -oinrichtung boauTtragt war (eiobu obcn),w.»r four dioao .tufgabo in
tuthanaaioprograjn auagobildot wordon. Er war vorhor fuor daa richtigo
Kunktionioren dor G-.aka...cm in den vcrschicdcnon Euthanaaic-.Jiatalton
vorontmrtlich gewoaon. (Brack, K. 7743). Hach Sichaanna cigonor Schnotzung
wurdon vior xillionon Jaden in V’umichtungaanataltcn g^tootot. (NO-2737,
.oikl. Bow. 505, ft. 7740).


Oaa obvn angofuohrto Bcwoiamtvrial lacaat klar orkennon, doss daa
Buthonaaioprograifia nur ala ..aeaonaard bezoichnet wordon kann. Dieaur Go-
ricJitaiior iat nicht dozu borufcn,nit Juristlacher Spitzfindi gkeit su bo-
atiiu^un, ms uin Stoat ia bozug auf Sutha/viaic durch Guautz rochtnnosaig
rogoln kann. Dio .tnrtl .gobuhoorde craucht lediglieh, dass dioaor Gorichta-

i

hof, wio andoru Gorichtahoofo bttwits gotan haben, featatollon rouge, daaa
ia orittun Ivolch kuin guoltigoa Gowetz bestand, daa dio Euthanaaio goat at-
tutu und daws dio Hlnrichtung von Pursanun untor dua uockaantol dcr Suthona-
aiu ait du* atillochwuigondun Einverstacninia und dur Hllfo buotinater .»ngo-
klagtor auf diusor .tnklagubcnk daa Vorbruchon doa . ordeo daratclltc - oin
Kriegavorbrechon und ein V-.rbrccr.un ga^on die *-machlichkoit.

uio urate und horvorrogendste ..u.^rituot uober den ruchtlichon Charakter
dor.


- 41 -


BH&KDT


Euthanasia, w±c sio untor don Kationalsoziolisten gcnandhabt wurdo, ist
in duo vJrtoil dcs Intomationalon _ilitaergorichtshofos enthaitcn. Es
htic3t hior:

"ncitorhin sind .ach dio -^ssnahnon zu crwzohncn, dio schon in Soraik.r
doo Jahres 19W In Doutachlind oingofuchrt warun and auf Grunl dor_r
allc alton, gciatoagwatoorton und alio ait unhoilbarcn Xrankheiton
bohaftotun fconschon, "nutzloso Eaaor", in be 30 ndore -outaltcn eingc-
liuf«.rt und gotootot xurdon, usohrond uan Varwandten uittciltc, da a a
aio oino3 rvituvrlich-n Vodos gcatoroon soiun. Opfor warcn nicht nur
doutachu Staatabuorge-r, sondern auch aualacndiache .^rbeitcr, die nicht
mohr inatando waxxin, ihro ..rboit zu rerrichton und infolgodoaacn fuor
dio doutacno kriegauaachino ur.brauchbar gewordon *nron. Es wurdo go-
achaotzt, daas^hindoatona 275.WC wenachen auf dicsta .logo in Erholunga-
holoon, kruakonhaeua .m und Irrenar.ataitcn, die doe /.ngoklagten Frick
in acinor Eigunachaft '.Is Inncncdniatsr untoratanden, gotootet wxrdcn.
Ea war vocllig urwaoylich fcatzustollcn, wiovidc- r’roniarbeiter in
dioaer Goasttzahl uj.tholtor. aixxi." (h. 1514, 1515; Soiton 16916-7.
offiziollor oneliachor Text doa Vcrhindlungaprotokolla doa I.k.T.).


"Waohrond doa ..riogoa unto rat andon Frick Privntklinikon, Krnnkonhneunor
und Irrvnhaouaer, in wglchcn d-r Gnadentod zur .nwendung kora, dor an
oinor andoron Stella diuses Urtuila boachriobcn iat. Ea war iha bo-
kannt, daaa guiatig Jufokto, kranko und slturaach* cho Forsoncn,
"nutaloao Saaor", ayjrt.oc.atlach ungobmcht warden. Boachworden uober
diuso ^ordu orroichten ihn, .'odach tat or nichta un lhnun Elnhnlt zu
gobioton. In uinoo doricht dur tschechoslowoklachon Koa-iaoion fu„r
Kriogavorbreclvon wird geachurtzt, aaae 275.000 goictca- und r.ltora-
achwachu Poraonen, fuor doxvn .ohl -r versntwoxtlich war, don »ordin
zura Opfor fiolon." (h. 1515; Soil 17007, offiziollor •ngliechor
Toxt doa /orhe-ndlungaprotokolla doa I.w.T.).

Oicao Urtoilafindung ..achto kuinen UntorachLod zvischon den unter dio-

•ct. Program* hingorlchtet-n doutaefun und nichtdoutachon StaAlnangihoerlgun.

Uioao Hinrichtungon wvrdun ait den «orto "fcordtiton" bezoichnot un .1 atollcn

f.riogaverbrochon una tforbroeix-n gejen dio -nschlichkeit nhch dee St atat

una duu. KontrollrAtsguautz ,.r. 10 dar. Dios war olnoa dor H'ujAvorbivchen,

dua zu doa schuldapruch und Todeourtoil gegen Frick fuonrto.

dio .tuafueihrujigon doa St olive rt rot jna.n uorlchtahcrm fuor dio aeori-

Kmdachen doaatzungagobictv in dec Prozoas dor Vorviidgton Star.ton c.ogi-n

kloin, kuiiLanxin und Gonoaaon, dox In d..sbiden in ^outschlanJ voo 8. bin

15. OKtober 1965 abgo.ialten wurdo, ist in klax-er Prauzodcnafall dafuer,

uaaa dio Hinrichtung nichtdcutschor Staatsangetouriger ^onaoas doa Euthma-

aioprograix: oin Vorbroefcen war. (SO-1116, .j. kl. 3ow. 615, K. 1781). Die An-

Personor.

goklagton dori. naron beachuldigt, -lnige 600 /polniacher


3HAJDT


und ruaaiacher Staataaagohoerigkeit, die «goblich an unhoilbarar Tuber-
kuloao litten, zwiachcn Juni 1964 and ..pril 1945 in dor Euthsnasie-An-
atalt K&daoar hingorichtct zu habun. Sic waren nicht dor Eraordung det¬
acher Staataangohoerlger angoklagt,and dioae Frago wurdu nicht oroertort.
Nachdoo di« Tatsacho, daaa eualacndlache Arbeiter zur -rboit in Deutsch¬
land zwangawoiau rokrutiort wurdon, cinor gorichtlichon i.uerdigung untox^-
zogen wordon war, boachlosa die noviaionabehoordo, daaa dio in Prage
koxoiaondon Toetungon oino Vorlotzung dcr IntomatioaUon kriogageaetzo und
dua .Nikola 46 dor Haagor Convention waron. Droi von den aiuben .uigoklag-
ton wurdon zua Todo vorurtoilt.


Nach doutaclvjti itocht war dio Futhanaaio nichta vxdoroa ala nord.
paragraph 211 doa duutachcn Strafgoaotzbechoa in seiner niton Foasung
lautotoi


"V.or voraaotzlich oinon .xnachon toctct,wird, wenn or dio Tootung
ait Uoburlogung auagoXbehrt hat, ait dca Texio bestroft."

In dor notion Paaaung, die vom 4. Sopt. bor 1941 an in Krrft war, lnutoto

dor butreffondo .»bachnitt:


"Dor uoordor wird ait den Todo bvatrift.

MOordwr iat, wor

cua -onllust, zur fr.friedigung dca Gcachlcchtstrieboa, aus Hnbgicr
ou^r aonst cu* niedrigon B^voggruonden,

hoiotuucklcch odor grauaui odcr :uit gracing, faohrlic hen Litteln
odor u>a oino andoro StrafUt zu oraocgllch.n odcr su v.rdockcn,
oinon uonacnon toutot. '

Iat in boaondoron ..uenfthocfaollon dio Todcaatrafo nicht angucca-


oon.


an i ■ u r. V , .-.-mem ongork;i

i. U lub ral ^ a Zuchthaus." (KO-705, Dok. Buch


16, Suite 122).


Sotroffa f ichlichon .Coeaontars uober dio Bochtlichkoit dor Euthanaaio
sioho NO-708, Dok. ouch 16, Soito 134 unJ M0-706, ibid. Suite 123 .

Dor Entlastungaieugu Hans Lamm, oin Uootschor jurlstiachor Sachver-
ataondigor, bozougto, daaa dor Hitleroriof .an Bouhlor und Brarcit kuin Co-

” r ““ '“■ ^sueo not-end!* »r, u= dlu EmhMMio

““ iggdlirio™. (H. 2672, 2679). Jor ndich.ju.U.rdalKur Guertnor ichrlcb
“ 24. •'“U I960 Utaurs -lnon BrUt uni toUU ihu iit, dm, a. dor Fuah-
ror oich geweigurt h»bo, oin Isoti orlaaaon, dio


BRANDT

gonoiuc ’/oniichtung goiateakr^nkor Personen sofort aufnoeron nueaso. (TJO-
832, «nkl. Be*. 393, K. 1679). Eine Abachrift dioaoa Briefea wurdo -a 27.
Juli 1940 an Bouhlor guachickt. (*10-833, 1. &^w. 394, R. 1679, 1680).

.iehrund Bracks Vortrag ic Juatizsdniat^riua, dor obui in Untcrab-
achnitt B orweohnt ist, vurden dlo anweaend-n juriatiachon AUtoritaoten
uebor don Uufong dca Pro^ra.-xj volikocs&jn filach untorrichtet. «ua den
oeoorkungun dea Vortrcgenden —jpfingen aio don nixxlruck, daaa nur tin
aehr beachraonkter Poraor-nkrcia, hoochatena ajhrcro hondort in ganz
uoutachland, O-aterroich and d-. Prot •tetorat 3oo\ajn and - ohrun dsvon
butroffon wuorden. Die Gort horvorgorufene ..oinung irr, daaa nur aehr gc-
feohrUcho Pationten and Tobauechtigo, dio aich aelbst verlottun koonnton,
deia Prognmc untorworfon wuorden. (NO-2253, oben). Jioa guachah offer.-
aichtlich, u- dio Jodo.vwn dor nwca.'ndon Peraonon zu b-schwichtigcn.

Brack Konnto odor wolltu, ala or bofragt wurdo, ob or wr.chrond doa Jor- .
triga oino ungefaohro tdil von Peraonon angogoben rvibo, dio untor dio
nuthunaaiu fallen wuorden, koine Antwort gobon. Iu Gugcnaatz tu doa waoh-
rond dor Konforonz ia Juatlzniniatoriu* goachoffencn Sindruck geben die
.mgcklagtcn Brandt and Brack jotzt zu, das a alloln in Deutschland und
Oeaterroich untor deal authonaaioprogra-s 50 - 60.COO Loute gotootot war¬
den. (Brandt, h. 2A65; Brick, h. 7610).

Suit do&i Kriegaor.do hflben deutacha and ocsttrroichisclw '•erichtu
wiedorholt fa«r »echt oric^nt, d.aa dio Tootung von Peraonon ir^cncl.. letter
Natlonalitr.ot untor dea lAjckmntel dvr lilt hamate untor Veratoas gogon
daa deutacn* Strvfguaotzbuch erfolgtc urd tla -ord au bcatrafen aoi. Die
ieugun Schmidt und .tonnacko, diu vor dioaca Iribunal ala Eougon iussagten,
w-roii auibat von oin-m deutschen Goricht wogon Toilnahuo aa .iithamsiu-
progruan achuldig befunuen und au 1 bvnsloenglichei- iuciithaus bzw. cun
Tode verurtcilt wordun.


- 44 -


B& 8 DT


Von d*. Lenisskricar.Algoricnt in .ion vurdo in Juli 1946 Or. Ernst
Illing zurn Todc durch dan Strong urd Or. *arlannu Tuerk zu 10 Johron
tuchthaua vorurtoilt, woii sic psychopathischj Kinder odor Kinder, die
an -rbkrankhuitcn Litton, gutoctet batten (diu sogenannte Euthanasio).

In dor Entschoidung wird cusgoluonrt, das 3 Or. Illing au 1 . Juli 1942
soinon Pootun uobamahn ait dor .owoiaung, di« Aeafuehrung dor voa Keichs-
ausschuss gostellton ..ufg'bon zu ueburnohaen. Bside ..ngcklagto gabon zu,
daaa sic an Todc von ungcf ohr 2.0C0 Porsonun in doa noitraua zwischon
dor- 1. Juli 1942 und ..prJl 1945 toil batten. Jer .uigoklagto Illing bozoug-
to, das a or von HofaLaann, von dor Xanzloi dcs Fuchrors bcstollt wurdc
und das 3 ih.. oln von .ulolf Hitler untcrzcichnctor,ait Schroituaschiao go-
schriubonor Bogun zuo loacn gogobon wurdo, datg«*noaa dor ..ngcklagtc
13rnndt vurwrvltungar-toasigo .inwuiaongon fuor das schcorzlose Tooten
(Euthanasio) unhollb. ror goistesgestoortor :andor in Ur-ft zu sotzon
und auszu-arboiton hitton. Kftch Pruefun und Entschoidung durch oinon wio-
sunocbiftlichon oorztiichen .oisachuas wuerdo jr. Brandt odur dvr von ibn
bc-oichnuto Stollvcrtrutor in Jodocu llnzulfall den Bofohl ortoilcn, Brandt
war Hitler porsocnllch verv.twortlich. Diu Fostatcllunson bosigt.n danala,
daso solch uin Bufohl Hitlers niu-ala GoaotZcskr»ft haben wuordaj

"os 1st zw;r richtig, dass ..uolf Hitler durch Boscnlusa dus "gross-
doutschen Huichatagea" voa 26.6.1942 oreaochtigt wurdo, aUoa zu
’' un ' "was zur Errlngung dc a Sieges dlcnt odor d~.zu boltracgt " ins-
buamUuro wunio lhr. TT 3 hocht crtailt, noutigcnfMls Joden Jcut-
schun ait alien ih u goMignot orachoinenaor. Mttoln sur Erfuollun*
auinor Pflichton mzuhalten uivd boi Vorlctzung dieaor Pflichton,
ohno nuocksicht auf sojonannto wohlcm>rbcr.o hochto, ait dor iha
gobu-.hrondon Suehne zu bul«,gon, ihn in bosondorun onno Einloitung
vorguachriobunur Vorfv.ron ius aoin^a .octu, ius soir.cn hang ur.d
aoinor Stollung zu ontfemon.

".ibgoaohon iLivon, anas sich dioso Eraacchtigung in den Kogierungs-
chuf n»ch dor ganzo.i Fornulioxung nur auf allif.^rischo D ir.ro bc-
ziohen aolito, ist dio Uebortr-gung cin^r der'.rtircn Bofchlsgo-
lt an don Chof dor negiorung


"in aor GoscivLcht- dur lotzten J -hrzehnto nichts Kcocs. So h‘t
boiapielawoiao dcr -ienor Xi-oinderet aa 22.9.1914 dcz. Buorgor-
cwiotcr dio ir-Ajchtigung ertcilt, -lie in her Vcrw'.ltung not-
*unligen -uaordr.jr.g-r. ur.d Verfuogungon untcr eigenor Vcrantwortung
zu troffen, d-i anfolga acs Kriogsrust'r.a j s in oino regulMJosaigo
Tcutigkeit doa Jc-.-dodaratea nicht godacht wofdon konnte. (Richard
tirolik, Gcachicntc ucr St-dt ’ iun, zwoite -.aflame, Scito 524).

"Kach .Jiaicht aoa G.racntahofos konnto dahor tin dcrartigor Bcfohl
rtdolf Kitlcra - c.usaor in nilitccrischon Bolangon - nionals Go-
sotzkraft h’.bon. J'-a Problem dcr Sethznaaio iat eben ao ilt, wic
dio tiodiziniacho -iasunachaft uoberhaupt. Garado in don letzton
Jahrzuhntan hit aiosaa Problem, nuicza sacrctlicho Kulturstnaton
boachaoftigt, Kobe! ..-rzte urvd Juriston d'.rin uobcrcinstiiria.cn,
d/vaa die Louaung dicaoa i rcbl_e nur dcr Gcaetzgcbung uobcrlassun
werdon kann.

"In uobrigon achoint aich dcr Eratangoklagto dcr Rcchtawidrig-
koit aoinor Handlungawoiso bcwuaat gewcaen zu s~in, aonat hnotto
or bci Uobemah-o dcr Loitung dor alinik aclno . it rboitcr oin-
achlioaalicn dos Pflogoporaonals nicht zur Geholahaltung vor-
pflichtot. d a gloichc toiss fuor den dai.aligon Koichaauaachuaa
in Berlin gait on, aonat wauro in J-mu;r 1945 nicht dio Woisung
orgingan, dla goav.to Korroaixjndcnz, die zwiachcn 'ion und den
nuichaauaacnuaa in Berlin gufuohrt warden rr, zu vemichton."


"Was abor dio rochtliche Scitc dicaca sogon'inntun Bofohla, untor
welchc..* or. IHin„ g-at^den a.in will, anlangt, ao iot folgondoa
zu bccaarkon: 6a ,-ibt .eel.ion tkfchl zur ^.ruebang ulnur atr’.fbircr.
iiundlung . i)aa orgibt aich clnuraoits aua den ailgcucinon sitton-
goautz, welchoa uin Toil dcr J-echtsordnung iat, *.ndur.raclta aua
dor Hor -nziohung oadoror ^aetzbostL^-ungon. So bcatirs.»t boiapiela-
weiso Paragraph 47 dca dcutachcr. .-ilitioratrvfgosctzoa folgondoa:
"Urd durch die ..uifuvhrung cinoa bufchla in Jicnata-'.chon uin
Str:dgoootz Toriotzt, ao iat dafuor dor bcfohlondo Vorgoactzta
alluin vorontwortlich. 6a trifft Jodoch don gchorchondon Unturgo-
benen dio Strife dus rcilnuhnors, wenn iha bck.annt gtwoaon 1 iat,
diaa aor Bufotil doa Vorgegwtttcn line Hmdlung botraf, wolcho uin
:Hgui-cinca Oder -dlitaeriachua Vorbruchon odor Vorguhon boswock-
tu..." .tohnllchu Bjatirc-ungon sind in den p-.r»jriphcn 535 und 5^0
aor Sonijrbj3tij.%ung fuor uctivo Houruavigohoorigo (Goaotz von
15.7.1923 StGBl. Nr. 323) cnthalton.

"Dor .oiguklagto Tiling k&nn aich lac nicht dirauf -.usrodon, diaa
or untur duo. 4w jig«. oir.es "-It ^-Swtzoakr'.ft" \usgostnttutcn Bo-
fohloa goatuidcr. aci, ^oil iicaer Bjfchl eben kuino Goaetzcskmft
hittu, ganx bgoaur.cn davon, dTss cin ergnngoncr Bofehl nicht
cntschuldigt (Poragraphen 1 und 5 KVG).

"•icnn ibor ale b-.iden jigokligten ihre Handlungawciao dwait bo-
gruendut ha ben, d'.aa aiu di^ Buthanaaicrung Lxiir nur dmn ango-
ordnot haben, uz. krinkon Kinder von ihren Leiden zu crlouson,
wobwi (lie .cige il .gtcn dieses otiv auch fuor den i-oichsauaschusa
in .uicprucii gena-jr. haben, ao ist folgcndos zu bouorkon:


BRJST


"K'vch doc* Vorlobon dos Krst angcki- gtcn, insbesonduro in Hinblick
auf acino wiasonsch&ftlicho Erforschung dcr Ertkrxnkheiton ist
uor uurlcdtsnof zur Leborzeusung gol-agt, dass die Euthinasicrun;
dor Kinder auf glcicho Linio zu stullcn ist nit dor Tootong -l'-
>r.cn3cn«r Goistoskrsnkor and dor .»usrottung dor Judcn. Hiurbui
sol an oinea ..usspruch Hitlers erinnort, v}er don Lohrbuochom
uobor Stcrilisiorung vorangostollt war:

""Was rvicht gutor ftaaao ist auf diosor alt, ist Sprcu". Dor Erst-
angekl-gto Dr. Illing h-t boi soinor orston Einvomahme vor den
russischun Kapitaon auch ohne weitores zugegebon, nur jono Kinder
uathmasiort zu habon, lie "uob:.rhaupt koinan Hatton fuor das
doutscho Volk hatton." (Bl. 21 15), das ist ait wdoron .orten
oas nationnlsozialistiacho Schlagwort van dor "Roinerhsltung eos
doutschon Volkcs". Dass sich .bor dor hoichsausschusa boi scinon
..nordnungen aur"Bch r \rdlun 0 -'’ von Gofuehlen dos .dtloidos hntto
leiton lasson, ist ebsolut abwogig, vicLahr gonuogt dor Hinwois
darauf, dass -itloid i_ drittcr. Reich uoborhaupt fres^i war. /


"Zusaoxujnfassoivi ist dahor fcstzustollon, dass dio T*t dor boidon
.jiguklagton nicht nur O ogcn i*.s Ugfeuinc Strafgosctx vurstoason
tv\t, sondom ,uach go gen d .a Olgo-^ino Sittongosut* und dio aorr.t-
licho ahik. .iUTgibo dos .vrztos ist os naodich zu hoilen, dngo-
gon nicht ( ^zu tooton. Kicht zul-tzt soi such darauf hingowiosun,
dass goradc dicso Kinder,ut. dio os sich hi or handolt, schon an
und fuor sich untor da. besond-,rcn Schutz dor Gosotzo stohon
(paragraph 21 abG3)." (KO-317, Dok. Buch 16, S. bk).

Das Schwurgoricnt in Berlin fand in d«r Mtzung voi. 25. kacrz l%b
dio .oigoklagtcn Hilda .omicko und Holono deezorok dos -ordus schuldig
und vorurtuilto sio s*. Todo. Soldo mibsitoton va S'oVitoriun fuor Goi-
atoskranko in uoaorltz-Cbmwaldo. Boido «ngokHigfccn usston Bcschoini-Tun-
gon untorschroibvr., in donon slo orkloortcn, dass slo sich vorpflichtoton,
nichts uobur don Inhalt dos Erlaasos und dio nuonilichon «nwoisungon,alla
unhoilbar goistoakr -nkon Porsonon zu tooton, vcrlauton zu lasscn. Dio
ouswahl dor Porsonun, Ho gotootot warden sollton, wurdo in dor oisu aus-
gofuohrt, dass dio ungokligto omicko dio Krankanguachichton durchlas
und die bet ref l'endon Pntionton “mslh".


BRANDT


Ur^ofacttr 600 Personal aarden zwischcn den Jahren 1943 und 1944 uurch
Sccpolaain und ».orphiuao;nspritzang gctootet. ~uch ainigo Kinder wurioi
gutoetut. Dos Schwur-ioricht befend woiteriiin:

"tin hecht zor Storbcnilfo 1st biahur gosctzlich nicht vnerkannt.
Abor sulbat, wenn dio ..ulcaasigkoit dor Sterbahilfa ous Grucndcn
dor Aunachlichkeit in Eir.zoiF.ili nicht grundsaetzlich aollto •'ls-
goschlosscr. warden dusrfen, so koenntc cino solcho acrztlicho
"Hilfo" nur ganz auanafcnswuisc zugol-sscn warden, so atwa zur.
Boispielo dann, wunn es aich d-.ru:: handolt, ob eino unurtnuglicho
sch^orzh^fto, aichcrlicn noch 1longer ind-iuurndo Krmkhoit durch
oinv ach^orxloao Todcsors.chu vorar-.ongt wardon soil. Einar inoho-
r«n Eroortorung dioaor vicl uustrittenen Frngo bodurfta os Jodoch
‘ in diu vorliogandur. F.-.ll nicht. Dorm oic .ui/ckln .tu omicko hat

nach ihrw. oigenen Vorbringan ihro ..usw-hl uoborhaupt nicht .ua
uwiachlichon Buwcggruoolco juiroffon. Dio .’oraonon, die in dor ihr
zur Entachoidung vorgdegten listen Jcw-ils naaontlich bezoichnot
' wiron, gait on vlalmhr von vomhoruin via Qolstoakranko, dio

grundaaotzlich zur Vumichtang jobricht warden sollten." (UO-445,
Uok. Bach 16, S. 86).

Una BuruTungsgurient vonrarf in dor glcichon Str d'sicho die Berufun-
gen boidor .Jigakligtcn. Di» folgerwian Zit&to ma don Urteilagruor.don
duorftun von Intoroaac aoin:

"la Fruohjalir 1943 oroaffnutc dor ^enrxltungadirw.tor dur ••natilt,
Grnbowaki, don «njcklagtui, os sol Jotzt oin n-chtraoglich von ihai
vuch ala Fuohrurborahl buzoichnotcs ^esat* urlasson wordon, in
. \ wolchou angoordnot s-i, data vllo unhailbir Goiatoskr-nkon zur Vor-

kuorzung ihror Loidon zu tooton scion, and hob daboi hurvori "Go-
sotzo nuoason befolgt warden. Sio .-usacn ihro Pflicht tun."


"Dio gagun diu .uiwendur.g dca zivtoricllcn heChta g-richtotc .';uogo
glpfolt d;rin, diaa dio ..ngokl'.gten nicht _it do.- Duwusstauin
dovKochtswidrigkeit bchvndolt hvutton.

"Dioao hue go konnto obanf.vlla koinon irfolg haben.

"Ein Goaotz, dis dio Tootun; dor unhailb .rcr. und niclit «uuhr -rboita-
faohigon Geiatoakrink..n nordnuto, tot nicht bostmdon. Die orjlbt
aich auch aus dor von da-. Sunvt voraorglichon elngcholtcn U3kunft
doa OBorlkonischun .uuaaegara 1. !.u_rnborgcr Process, Dr. Kczpar,
dor dort diu wch c\uf div tcotung Gui3t03kr.v>:or jostuot&ti. iinklngo
gogon Frick vertrutan hat.


- 48 -


33 L:n>2


Ites Go act 2 , von don cier Verwcltun^adlrckt jr Grnbcweki
zu con -nfiokln^tor. cceprochon h t, • cr acton doahrlb
kcin Gw set z, '.oil ts nicht r.ur nicht verkuend-t, ^I-r;
soino SohoiahsltunG donen, die von ihc ncr.:;t:.is
hie 1 ton, soger ur.tcr Androfcuns von Zuckthaus -dr
2odo6atrofo r.uforlo^t warden 1st. Dio ..n^okla-to :
h"bcn abor auch gcrnicht nech dieten p.ngablichon
Go sets gohnndclt. Do nr. -a ordnoto ncc! Xittoilun., von
-rebowaki cn, dr.68 Goisteakrcnko zur VorkUrziu: il rcr
L-idcn zu tocten acicn. Hack don FoatotGlluu^on d-s
Schwurgorichts war ebor FUr die von don 4.n,_cklagton
orwirkten Xbtun^.on nicht die Vorktlrzunc d-r Lcid-n
KrEr.kor, aonderr. ch^cshci; vor. d-r Unhcilbarkc.it dor
3rkrankur.g,dio ~rboitsunfahi£k-it dor Erankon ont-
ochoidond.


-a dic3or. F-etstollungc-n sohoitort r.uch dor ^nrriif
dor Rcviai-n, Gees d~.8 Schv*ur 0 -richt don *.n_cl;ln 0 *tor.
nicht cir. Handoln cus Gru-nden dcr 3uthr.np.aic rla
•wchtforti; ungstyrund nioObiUijt habc. Dio .iovioi n
vorwondot dr.boi don 3c^riff dor -uthaneeic in cine:.?
woitcron, euch dio Y-rnichtun^ lobonounwertcn £obcna
unfo.aaondcn Sinno. In oi^ontliohor, 3in.io bodout .t
Suthnnr.aio Stcrbo.-.ilfc. Don c : I - vor fa lion, ochwor
lcidcndon Kronkcn *. ird von -rzt nit an.nft-r Hand llbor
die Schwollo dos I-d-s hii mo bo r job -1 f - n. nicht oinnnl
in dio8on on^cror. Sinno iat, wic dr.s bchv.'urgorich t
zutroffond ausfuchrt, dio £ut!inncaio -la Rochttforti-
guncoc.rund fuor oinc Toctunj biohor goaotslich on-
orkennt, gcachtToigo dcr.n in dev. vcitoro:. Si ; :c dor
Vornichtun^ lobonaxnwerton Loboco. Dio Yornichtun^
doo Lob-no unhoilbcrcr Goietoskreakor, \ cil bJ - nicht
aohr arboitofachlc' oir.d, vorstoecut jv fc .on dr.a alljo-
noir. anorkeimtu Sittongoaot*. Dor Vorauoh d r Rovioion,
dioao Vorniohtun^ ela x.r : ,obr.i8 ach n lr.on c er boatchcn-
dor ornnthr.ftor 3ostrobxi t .on in Giosoi* Kiohlun*, und
dahor nicht crot ous nctlonnlaoziclictiechon Godnn-
konGcongur. or. . rochtforti Lot vorfohlt.

In dor cuch von dor Hoviai-n als r.uf dicaon Gebiot
grundlogor.d ongofuchrton, 1920 orachiononon Schrift
von Binding und Kocho, oincs Juris ten und oij.es
Psychiaters von internetionslea Ruf, uobor dio Froi-
gabo d-r Vcrnichtun^ lobe r.aunwor ton Lcbor.a ur.d nicht
otwo dio Yoralchtun-, Ges Lobons ellcr unhoilbr.ron,
nicht no hr crbcitafaohi_.cn Gcie ;c shrank on -f.rdort,
dor.dcrn nur die doo Lebone dor c&hoilbaron 31ocd-
ai/migon ir. oinc.: goactzlich goordr.. ten, ..;it rllon
donkberon Carnation ruogoatcttot-n Yerfahren r.:i£oro u t,
well diuSo 31ood8inr.i 0 on wed-r den ‘illon, zu lobon,
nch zu a ter bo:: h*bon, and oc ooi lhr.cn koino bo cht-
liche £inwllli_un_ in di-s.r nicht go bon kc-nno,

dicao andonrsoiti r.uf kolr.cn Lobonsv/illon slo6ao,
dcr icbrochcr. rorden cucasto.


- 49 -


31LJED2

Die Vorfasscr sprechen dagogor von dor voiler. dentun
dos Lebcr.cwillcns allar, auch dor kraenkaton ur.d o-
qucoltcsten und nutsloacaten lienschen. -=*a iet alljc-.oin
bokannt, dcs3 s.3. die t.roS3c Gruppe dcr schis- 1 phrar.cn
Goisteskrenkon saalriiche Kranko tuofccot, boi dona.:
fuor dor. Kichtaedizinor dcr Zuatend unhcilbnrcr Xrenk-
heit grrnioht iuccr zu erkonnen ist und von oin.or fohlcn-
don Lobonawillon keino Hade scin kenn. dbor nicht cinnel
in dcr van Binding und Hocho vortrotonen Binachracnkun^
cui uhhoilbarc Idicton iat ihr Vorcchleg ctvra ell.jCr.cin
gobilligt v;or don. Lor auch van dor Rovisiun ongofuchrtc
fruohoro Oborroichscnwclt Bboraavor a>.-u3scrt z.3. in
seiner 1020 crachicnonon Schriit "Lor -vzt in ilocht"
achwcrwicgcndc Bedenkon und 3chli-sst nit dor fu-r den
daixli^on Stand aioacr Frn^o, •.vani.'O Jahre vor dor
oat,, liachtorercifung, btzcichnondcn ..uafuchruv, dess
cic jc nicht aktucll aci and c3 vorcrat kr.ur werIon
koenno.

Dc die Vornichtuno dca Lcbc.no dor unhoilbcron Geiatue-
krnnkun untcr don Gu3ichtspunkt ltanr deuernden
voolligen -rbaitsunfachi.kcit go^on dro nll^onoin : n-
orkennto Sitton^eaotz vcratocoot and r.uch der.nle vor-
ati083, wird dio Schuld dcr -n^c'clr to: nicht dc ’.r-ah
nuu^oochlocaen, dees aic nicht dr.u Bowu utaoin d-r
flochtewidri w koit gobbbt und ifcr 2un fuor crlaubt jo-
hclton hebon koennton."


Dcr bennt iat dcr ^uffp.aaun , dr’ua oich nl-cnnd zur
Bogruendung dnfiur, dc3* ih.- dco BcTmsatocin cor
iiochtewidriikoit ^cfchlt ha bo, uf cine Binetollun.
berufen kenn, dio i- Gu c on3otc sun rll onoin r.nor-
kanntur. Sittor.goaotz ctoht."


"Sinon vor'orcchoriachon Befehl oJ^r >.inor v^rbruchori-
ochon -.nweiaung brouchon Boanto Oder jm ( ,oatollto nicht
su fol_on. Sio ai.nd nicht nur borcchti.t, condom
nuch vcrpfliohtot, zu piucfon, o'o Befehl odor ^nwciDimg

don o 1 oaetzen cuwidcr laufon.

SLo 'hr.bc.n"dno Vcrlcncon und dio Usosnchnon doa Gre-
bowuki innurlic.: cbilli t". Sio ur.bon oleo dio loctung
Uiihoilbarer Gois-ockrr.nks.r, dio nicht richr rrboita-
fnchi^. weren, fu.r richtic und rochtcaca3i^ ^ohnltor,.
Or.oc kann sio, auch wonn diose -mordr.ini dcr Inhclt
oinoa Bofohla w r, nicht


- 50 -


3 H..KST

ontachuldirfon. llcia Untor~cber.er kenn eich dcrauf

bcrufon, da^s or oincn ^.o^en dea rllgc^c-in cnerkanntc
Sittongesotz voratossendcr. Bofohl zur A octun v v:n
fuor rcchtaeossi_ -oheltor. hat."


"In ~nwondun,j doa Par. 211 n.?. hat tlr3 ochwur b wrio :t
die -n^oklagton ohno Rochtairriun els wo-rd^r vcrurtcjlt,
woil oio cus niodrigen Bcweggrund und hcintecckisch
gotoetot habon. TTic das Schwurgorieh*- fcstgostollt i t,

S pbon die -ingaklcgtcn aich nicht r> on lore innoro
oborzeugunj oinea Be to hi ^.cbou^t. -is het sio cuch ...eht
l!itloid ait don Kranken, son-ern die Uoterccugun. cl-it^t,
dr. a a dicso els inf;lgo -rboitaunfrohi. :cit nutzloo- Gliodor
dur Goacllachai’t zu vcrnichtcn scion. Sana teann cbor olno
Trt, die an ao zcnlrioichon Pcre-ncn, ecwisseinaoson zn
lr.ufcndor. Bond, bejangor. ist and so echwer u et,or. nil u-
noin nnorkcnnto oittliche Grun&oettzc veratoesst, cine
let, die unaenochlicl. i~t, mu* .'It as r.iedcrca 3owc v -
orend bogangon enaosohen wordon."


"-a iot oin Ilioabrauch dor Gowalt uebor Mi ben und 3 C
geredo bewu33tloaor Oder inf.ljo Goiutcckrankhcit oinor
saohlichon liroortorunt. ihroo Ioidonc mch- zuc-on..lich:r
ICrr.nker., wonn dioao Gowalt tonutzt wird, ua seiche Krcnkon
nuo, wio foatgcotollt, nioderoa Bo-ve^rund doroh oir.c
in dor ccuaaorcn Hcndhabung hcralcsc i-inspritzung zu
tooton."


" do lot nicht su vorkennon, dasa di-


.ornicku


rule r.ar die lo tzto n ~£tT31fTr einor Te enTeren


una -iuezor u^ nip
tTottc ”a:m!, in dor ‘‘it
^.r^nejiV" r.^4Tf, t:
oTroTcliangon aingofuogt).


tone*, -iw .
). (U.ntor-


«.n


Soait iat fcotgoatoilt, daao dio Suthennaic naefc doutochun
Rociit Hard wcr.

In Vurbindun 0 oit diosor ?ra w o tird urnout darsui’
hitt£jowjioeon f dcau -Ira gosaato Pro c miv; villatoondic


KOhula ^ohalton '*urCo. r.itlcrs 3riol von 1. ooptonbor 1939
(R.1516)


- 51 -


Hli_ X


-.7-1* r.ls Gchciao Roichsecche bezeichr.^t, v.u rle nionnls vcr-
oofrontlicht, and dcs Justizainistcriun crai^lt urst ein Onfar

nrch scinon Srlass oint- ^bschrift drvor.. (630-IS,_>. J'JO,

1516). Dio Vorlogung von Insa3scn von Irronh&uBora ch
Juthannalcetctioncn wurdo ancoblich cuf Bafciil dor- Hoicks-
vortoidigungakonciacrs vorgonocucr.. (NO-1153, Z.3. 335,

R. 1546). Die an Pro^praca taoti on Scnnton aus3tc.n cincn
achriftlichcn Sid zur Cohoinhclton. loiaton. (KO-1312, *..B.
338; NO-1311, L.Z. 339, R.l$51-2). Dio Aorito, dio dio
Suthonoaio auauebtcn.wurdon vexvernt, doss sie ochwer be-
otroft werden wuerden, wenn 3ie dio Arbeit sabotiozte.
(H.1Q94). Das gauze But har.a~ _ eprogrr.m sollte ge.iein ge-
hulton worden, da ihnen von Anfang cn ^esc^t wurdo, oo uoi
ein Staatageheianis. Der dafuor angegebeno Grund war, Jn-
ruhAn untor der Devoolkerung zu verseiden. -ir. druch doa Ge-
heinuioooo wurdo al3 Sabotage anjoaohor.. (Mennecco, .1.1923).
Andero hatton eir.en ochriftiichon Bid, der nio zur Gohoia-
haltung vorpflichteio, zu ur.torschriibon. Za war bokannt,
daos die Folge eineo Brucheo dieous Sidoo Vorochickuns in
ein xConzentrationalcgor war. (Schnidt R.1826).

• ‘^TBoa rtntwortl iohke i t von Karl Brand t.

Brandt wurde zuuemnen ait Bouhlor durch den oben zi-
tierten Brief Hitlero vom 1. 3eptoaber 1939 dio Auaiwhrung
dco Prograrcno Ubertrz. en. Sei..e otollunt, als hoechste Ce-
vmlt in dem Suthanasieprogrenn iat in der oideaotattlichen
-rklaeirung Dr. Boehns, oinos dcr aoltooter. Ilitgliedor dor
NSDAP. -okizziert. Als in Koveaber 1940 Aoehc sich an nertir
Bornnnn nit der Bitte wandto, boi hitler Audi on s zu orlari.cn,
Dich uobor die Ausfueiirung des 3uthar.a8iepro 0 rui--s zu
boklagen, verwies ihn Eoraann an Brandt als den fuer lie
Auefuehrung des Buthanasleprogxanns


- 53 -


brahdt


Verantwortlichen. Infc lgeaessen hatte Boehn eine Besprechuni
nit Brandt and , als er sich unter anderea darubcr beklagte,
dasa das Euthanasieprogranc nicht durcfc Gesetz geregelt sei
und nicht in Geheine_i ausgefuehrt werder. so 11 to, gab Brandt
zu, daus dor Justi 2 oinister Gacrtner auf den Srlass einea
Gooetzes godraongt habe. Auf Grund seiner Unterhaltung nit
Bornann und Brandt war Eoehn sicher, das6 Brandt die
fuehrende Porsoenlichkeit des Programs war. (210-3059r
I R. ). Brandt gat zu, daos oino besondere Organisation fuer

die Suthanaale eiagerichtet warden ausate. (R. 2407).
i Sr nntorzeichnete geaeinsaa ait Bouhlor die Srnaochti-

gung fuor dio botroffenden an Program botoiligton Aerzte,

V auBserdon mu&oto or faohlioh don Fuehrer selbot infornioren,

und ochliooslich 'oino gewiose Vorbindung ait Bouhler untor-
halton. (Brandt, R. 2408). Sr gab forncr su, daos ihn und
Bouhlor Ermaechtigungen zuc Tooton vor. Klndorn vorgelogt
wurden. (R.2544).

£r orklaortc, dose or aolnon Poster, in Loufo doo Johro
1942 aufgab. (3.2433). Vaohrond dios vor. keinor wosontliehen
, Bodouting iot, steht feet, daps or soino otcllung alo dio

fuohrondo Porsoonlichk.it in r-uthonasieprogramn bio zun
Jnhro 1944 boibohielt. Dr. Ludwig Sprauor orklaorto in
ooinor ^idcsstattlichon irltla ru .g:

"Eton Ramon Pit f. Ur. Karl 33 a DI hoorte ich zun
crstennal ditto 1941 liner Konforcnz in Berlin.
Sei dioscr wmfcrunz orx’uhr ich, duos *crl BRA
und Philipp B0UHL&3 dio loitonden PorBoonlich-
kceiton doo Suthanacio-Progranmo oind. Dio nonforenz
wurde


- 53 -


«


BRANDT

von Dr. LINDEN, in Nanen des *nnennini3teriuns oin-
bo rufen und Anataltafragen warden dort vor 0 ebracht.

Dr, LI.«D2Ii loitete dio Besprechun^,

"Nach meinom beaten "iaaen und Glauben waren Philipp
BOULLoR sonio Prof. Dr. Karl BRAi.'DT von 1941 bia zua
Zusarunonbruch Doutachlanda, dio fuohrenden Porsocr.-
lichkoiten in dieaon 3ogena:mten Suthonasio-
Programc.

"Per Zuaaomanhang zwischon des Innonniniateriun und
Prof. Karl BRA.'DT, in Hahnon des Suthanaaie-Progrunns,
war der, daaa *^arl BRANDT Anordnungen an CONTI und
LINDEN ertoilto, welche in Jfanon des Innonminiatc-
riuna von dor.selbon woitergcgebor. wurdon. 3RA:iDT
war zwoifolloa der Spiritus Rector." (NO-618, Ankl.
Bow. 373, A. 1608).

Bor Zougc Wosso oa L te in soinor oidoootattlichen Sr-
klaorung, dass Brandt Qindooton3 bia Haorz 1944 on dor Spitz
dos Suthanasioprogr^una stand. (Toctun c von Soisteokrankcn,
orboitaunfaohi^on Sxvachsonon und die Tootung von goiotig
zuruoclcgobliobonon und oaozlaler. ^indoro). (No-1428,

A.B. 432. R. 1953).

Dor Zougo “onnocio bozou^to, daos or ia Infang 1941

orfuhr, does der Angoklogto Brandt ia Buthonaaieprogrann

tactig ooi. (R.1874). Dr bozou&to fornor:

"Als ioh dann 1944 ala Patient in Roservolazarctt
in 3t. Blaoior. bohandolt rurdc, orfuhr ich durch
Untcrhnliung ..it Ofiisioron, dac3 Brandt cncogcbllch
botcillgt aol boi dor Zuoanr.onslchu:^, von Goiatos-
krankon in ftnun von Lublin ir. Polor.." (A.1903).

i’ornor bozougte or in Vorbindung b it dieoor Lublinor A3;tion,

daaa dico bio zun *>ai-.ro 1944 otattgofundon hnbon nUaao,

und duao ca hioos, daaa geiateskranke Judon in Lublin in

grosoor Zulu fi ooaanult vrtlrtlen. (R.19O4)

Der Zuuge Sckai:t bczougte, does r rofes8or Brandt

dio lirztliche Deitunj. dco x rOcrsnns hatte, ur.d erst ia

Jahru 1944 wurac iiin gesa t, duos Brandt das Programs vor-

laoaen » lU bo. (R. 18257. Sr


- 54 -


BRAIfDT


v/usete auch, d£3S Brandt die Juehror.de “*0110 an dor zu tr-
I'uellonden Auf£;abe (Sathanasioprogrann) spiclte, dass er
(Brandt) diose Aafgabo auafuehren aollte. (ochniat, K.184?

Dio bailie:, Zeager. Schmidt und Bennocke bozeugton aur
daoo die Ueh ereichtatafol (HO-253, A.B. 331, R. 1518), di«
Brandt la tfittolpunkt ces Prograaaoa zeijt, ridhtig iat.
(Schmidt , H.1833, Honnecke, a.1876).

• *io 3owoiaaufnarjac zeigt fomor, da38 Brandt noch
-o zur. v'uli 1945 Bo Jo hi o betr. dcs Euthanaaieprograans
°*7teiltc. In einon Brief vom 20. Juni 1943 dcr Allgomcinor
Kranken-Tranaport-Voreinibung an die Irronanatalton Hadnmu
dio vrio "okunonto und Zougonousoagca zeigen, bine Vcr-
nichtunguatatlur. war - findon oich in don fol u ondcn Shtz

"Auf Anord.unt oo Gonoralkocaiacaro do a Fuohrors
fuor due Sanitaeta- und Goaiuidhcixowcaon, Profcseoj
Brandt, halo ich Yorlogung von Gcietcakranken auch
in Ihre Anst^lt durchzufuohron. Untor dor Voraus-
ootzung, dc s dio .ioichsbahn air dio i/oggona, ont-
aprochond aoincr Ar.fordorun a zur Vorfucgung otcllt.
orhulton 3io en 20. Juli 1943 150 gciatcokronko
Frauon uuo dcr hoilanstalt tforatoin." (KO-892,
Ankl.Bow. 442, fc.2536).

Brandt war dorjonlgo, on den mar. aich wendon nuosto.
v/onn man Gin Kind von dcr -uthanacio rotten wollto. In
oinu.i Briof von don doichaauaochuoo zur wiasonachaftlicho
Erfoaoun von or'o- und anlagobodingtcn ochweren Leidon,
datiert von 16. IfQvembcr 1943,and die Landoahoilanstalt
Bichborg doa Dr. Schmidt (vrio doa Bovroieoaterial aei ( t,
oinc Tootungsanatalt fucr zuruockgcbliobcne Kinder) fir.de
nan den Satz:

"Auf Grund einoa an Harm Professor Dr. Brandt
gerlchtcton 3chrcibon9 in Scchon der Obcnge-
nannton biUc lch un oiner. ausfuehrliehen 3e-
fundbericht uober die erwaohntc Anna Gasso, dio
aich ango'olich zurnoit boi Ihnen bofinden soli.


SHA JD2

and fernerhinx

"Falls aerztlichcrseits eine solche Antleasung. ver-
antwortet warden kanr., waere os zu ueberlegon, ob
niohft in Hinblick auf don Auf der Anstalt violleicnt
doch diesen Antra w ontaprochen werden sollte.

(NO-890» Ankl.Bon.443, R.2540-1).

Daee der Angeklagte Karl Brandt in dor lego war,

AnwcisunfcOn zu erlasoor. and Irronanstaltcn in Bout sc.'.lend

Aufgabon zuzuwoison, irlrd forncr bcstactigt, durch dio

oidos3tattlicho Erklaorung dcs Angcklagtdn Soso, der sagte

daso iha Brandt in Jahro 1943 eino Irrcnar.stalt in Ihuonn-

gon zur Vorfuogung atolltc ur.d Vorkohrungen tref, daso

dicso Anstalt nicht in vin ullgo^oinoa Krenkonhaus umgc-

wondolt werdo und di3& woitcrhm in Jahre 1944 Brandt Vor-

kchrungon fuer dio oossorc Ernaonrung von Inanssen dioetr

Anotalt trcf.un Aono zu urnoeglichon, ait soiner Ilalaria-

Thormio fortzufahre;. (R.1717). «onn auch dioso orklao-

rung nn oich nichto ait dor Euthancoio zu tuen net, so

zeigt aio doch don Binfluos und die I^ccht, dio 3rnr.dt

in Johru 1943/44 noch uobor Irronanotaltor. ausuobto.

(NO-872, .wiki.Bow. 408, R. 1716).

Noch uoinor oigonen Zougonauooago lcitoto Brandt dio
Buthunaoio bio zun Jahro 1942. (R.2433, R.2532). ..uuoor
oolnor oigonun Ainlasoung, daso or soinon <.uftri g su
Jonov Zolt zuraockgab, ist koin Bov/oia vorhandon. Im Go-
gontoil, dio 3owoi3aufr.cheo hat orgobon, dess ozr bis zu
oinon Zcitpunkt in Jahro 1944 cuf dicsea Gcbiot tactig
war. Auf jodon Fell war dec Progrocn in soinon £.ntstohen
vorbrocharisch. Bio Jrairdung von Konzer.trationsrlagor-
hdftl ingen auf doc tfo fc der Suthanasie begann bsreito
i« Jahro 1940. Nichtdoutsche otaatsang.ohbrige wuirden in
bocoutendor Zahl oinbezugon. Gosunde Judon wurdffn ohne
untersuchung vernichtet. ?iir den Mord ausgobildet'os
Personal vrurde boreitc in Jahre 1941 ven den Suthai^asie-
otetionen r.sch dc-a Oston gesandt,


BRANDI


un boi dor Kaaseneraordung der Judcr. zu helfen. Personen,
deren einziges Vc-rbrecher. ihre korperliche -rbcitsun-
fShigkoit war, wurden von -nfang ar. dor Buthanaaie
untorworfen. Dio' ^usaorzung "nutzloser *ssor" war in der
let dor loitendo Godanka dee ganzon Prograans.

Brandt aagto au3, dass ein Bafohl beatand, dor
nlchtdoutacho Stoataangohorigo ausnahe, cber er konnte
nicht erkldron, wio dioaor Eofohl aich cuawirkte, wor
ihn ompfing und worun, wenn solch oin Bofohl vorhandon
war, tibarheupt Frcgebogen fUr frendo Steataar.gehdrigo
ouagofUllt wurden. (R.2499-2503). Dio Bowciaeufnahno
hot gezoigt, daoo nichtdoutachc Stoct8engohbri t o nioraala
auagononaon waron ur.d in ^rosaor Zahl ^otootet wurdon.
ICoin mildorr.dor Unctcnd kenn fUr ^rondt ino Fold gofUhrt
wordon.

IV. Schluoa

Knrl Brandt nls Gonorol und spiitorer Hoichokonnioor
fUr daa Gooundhoito- und Snnitatar/oacn, bokloidoto dio
hiichoto Macht8tollung in don Gcoundhcitoweaon aoa
drittun noichoa. So.no «ufgnbo war, die “rboit ollor Gc-
oundhoitadionato, aowool der ailit£iri8Chon ala der
sivilon, zuoannonzufaseun. £r war Hitler dirokt vorant-
wortlich. £r wor Hitlora bchandolndcr -rzt und Oruppon-
fi hrer (Ooncralma or) ir. dor So.


- 57 -


BfcdHJT


Brandt wurdo -it instock von den Sulfoneeidcxjwriaonton Geblvirdts
vor aor Vv,raa-alung ii Oi 19*0 antorrichtot. Er war oinor dor Ehrcn-
gaoatu dlcacr Vorg -r.ilung,und aio B-ricflto Gebtaarata and Fischers bo-
achrlobon die Vorauche in -lion Kinzolheiten,

Vier Tago inch dioscr Voraozclung fordorto Brwdt ’.uf doa ».ogo
uobor Griwits Konzcntr'.tionalagcrinaaaacn fuor Vorsucho -.It opidcr-ischer
Gelbaucht m. uit Todoefaollon wurdo gorochrv;t. Vcraucho wuxdcn an acht
polnlachen Judun unumou.cn, von don«n einige at irben.

Uob^r die Flcckfiobcrvoraucho in Buchcnw'-ld wurdo auch in dor Ver¬
sa, alung dor boratonion *orzto iu kai 1%3, dor Brandt bciuohnto, B^richt
oratattet. Ea iat anvorstollbnr, dass or von den Eimorvdungun, die gogon
dioao Expjriuonto ornobon Airdun, aichta ho-it-. Uubordioa nurdon Hand-
loaor und Conti von uioa-r. Jxporii*nt«n untcrricntot,und boido i.uaatwn
orandt uobor "grundlogor.de. .irolgnlaao" be rich tin. Hvgons ilockfiubcr-
cjcporiijnto in NatzooiUr -.nadun von dor Luftw.ffe und dca i,cichaforBchun.-,a-
rat untoratuutzt. Brandt w r ..itgliid dea noichaforachungarita. I:- ‘Uguat
I'M bezoichnoto Koatocka .oJt fuor laacnschaft und Forachung.dna untor
Brandt stand, Hugona Fleckfiobcrforschungca ala dringllch.

Branlt o..pfing von Hitlur ouT da- Gebioto doa chc:4achun kriogua ic
M.iorz 19/A VoU—ichton. Sr tmf ait Sievers und Hirt saaoc. on und orhiilt
oinon Borient uobor die u>ordoriachon Gaauxporixjonto in K'.tzwuilor. Dioao
Vorauchi wurden rwch dee . »orz 19U. fortposetzt. Hirta G'aforachun 4 wurdo
von doa .u-t fuor .dsainachaTt ur*i Forachung --la dringlich bezoichnot.

Brandt untorstaotzto p.rso.niich Bickenbachs Gaavoraucho. .4* half
ihu oin Laboratoriua oinrichton. Er boauchti Bickenbsch la Kitzwoilor
Konzontritionalngor, wo or G-.aoxperis*nta -n Inaaaa-n loltotu. Borichto
Bickunbichn in Brmit bewdison, disc .n UO lusslachn nrlogag'-fingcncn
Voraucho at Phoagu. ^oatollt und d»aa ■iakstona vier von ihnon go-
tootot wurdon. orondt atina uch in V.rbinlung ait Vorsuchon *n H-oftlingon,


Br-uMJT


ui.. die Zntgi ftun g ^ ;avariif t-*tun -’.sacra zu pruofcn.

Sturilis-tionavcrsucho iiurdcn von Schutnnn, oinon untor Brandt iu
Luthaiv-aioprogr—i.. taotigcn .a-zt^.us^cfu uhrt.

Brindta Xunntnia von d*.r ayatccatischon Vom’-tv-o vcn Vorsuchon in
jvonzuntr-itionalngorhcoftlingen ohnu dorcn Einwilligong,und soino Tcilnohric
daran, “ini femor enriuson durch aoin wiodcrholtoa Lrauchen un Durch-
l'uuhrung aolchur Expori. unto. I~- Jmuar 1943 achriub or m SS-Oborgruppcn-
fuohror M>lff und frigto, ob nicht in Konzcntrationsl ^orinaisscn

arn .uttnuigavuraucho zuafuuhrcn kocnne. I - Septutbor 1943 -r Griwitz,
cino nuuo Br.indwurvionailbe nuszuprobiuren. La wurdo ihn von KlMolor Er-
laubnia urteilt,on Hroftlingun, dcnun xuonatlich Brimlwundon zugufuogt
Kurdon aolltun, aolcho Vcraucho '.uazufuuhron. It. Fcbrunr 1944 fordurtu
brmdt. n.ch oinur Bua.'r-chung nit Griwitz zohn Haoftlinjo zur Srprobung
oiiwa Hu iL It tela in. Jiu Gofnngtinan "urdnn zur Vorfuogun,, gostullt.

Brandt w*r zuatnun ait dun Uichaloitor Boohlcr nit dur Durchfuoh-
rung doa Eutlumsioprogri t j buiuftr'-gt, dzs die ruuckaichtaloao ErzxinJung
von Hundurtt ;uaor>Jun hilfloacr . onner, t men und Kinder beduUtutu. Za
wvr diua k«dn -enacuunfruundlxchoa Progrnn_, u- diu Setaorzun uinoa Urohen-
don und unvoiwiiulicnun Todoa zu lindum. La wir dia vloltihr «in Progritr.
fuel- diu nuanurzung dorjonlgen, diu mn Ua cine Boliatung dua Stiitua
anoah, diu aibuitaunfoohig worun, diu v-rzuhrtun ohno zu ortougon. ftoin
Gooetz gob ih.- men nor oinun Schoin von Logilitiut. La *r»r un, , <-actzlicli
in auinue. Uraprung und sol nor uorchfuuhrung. Von aogcnannton Oit'ichtorn
rnmle uebur Lut.n und Tod oinus Pitienten iuf dur Urundlftgo von Prigubogon
uin brtoil gufiullt, ohnu Giaa dur Gutichtor iach nur dun Patienton untor-
sucht hautto. Daa Pro^rit. - .. unfaaatu dio Erroriung von Duutachon und St.iita-
mguhoorigun dur busutztun L .urxlor in glcichor tuiau. Sa urstrockte aich
auf in Uoutachluid ZKar^sv-isw fustgoh.lt one Konzontmtionalagorhiuftlingo
nichtduutachur U .tionaUtiut. La achloss goaundo Judun und Lwang»™rboitor
ma don Oatun uin. In den Z akuurn dur *-uthin.iaiust-.tionen ausgubildctu
■isBunacbaftlicbo hourdjr fcurdcr. n cn Polun gosettiekt, on bui dun Lissun-
crwxrilungon dor Juden zu -.clfun.

- 59 -


BRANDT

Die .aiklagubehiwrdo unteratollt, dass das Bewoisaatcrlal crgibt,
dass Karl Brandt Haupttaeter, Toilnehcer, ..nstiftor, VorschubloistcMor
••var, seine ZaatLaaing gib and in Verbindang stand ait Plaonon und Unter-
nahuuigen, die die Durchf ue.hr ong -x-diziniacher fixperinanto an lobondon
kenschun, ohne Zustii^ung der Botroffonea xur. Gegensta^i hatter., in
doren Vorlauf korde, BruMUUcter., Graus'-rkoitcn, Foltorungcn, Grcuel-
taten and andoro unconscivlichu Handlungen began gen wurdon, and an der
Uurchfuuhrung dus sogerunnt«.n ‘^Uianacieprogrx-.aa nitwiricto and dans

9

aoine Schuld is. Sinna dor Punkte 1, II, III and IV dr .mklngoschrift


ondesen 1st.


Jch, Pwd Lax X 046 207 beatretige hiernit, dnaa icb
durcnoua yertrnut nit der englischer und deutnchon
bprucne blr. und doss dug /orstehonae eino wnhrhcitn-
genutcsse und richtigc Uehorsetzung dea Bokuoer.ts Brandt
dai-atellt.


Uuorntcrg, l.Juli 1947


Fred Lax
X 046 207


V


•>


FALL ra. 1


-X oAL) ZKF^SSENDLil SCKilFTSrtTZ FULR
DE VJ.HLUnGTS. Sr.wiTEN VCW A3.OX,.
GSGBN

RUDOLF BRANDT


Jr-SwS i.. I.oIAiioy
iwlux indcr G. Lurdy
.^raost licrlick-Hcchwoia
Ssth-r Jruiu Jchnscn

Nucrnbcra, Fuar:

uon 16. .Tiini 1947

Telford Tayltr
LrijauUr Genera, U.—

Chief cf Counsel for ..nr jriuos


3 Ill U3HRUH G


Unter Ponkt I der Anklegescdrift vird aer -angeklegte
Hudolf =r :::dt boschuldigt, dess or sich nit andoron Perao-
nen in Vorfolgo einoa geneinsenon Vo r do bens zu oir.or Vor-
achwocrung und Ueborcinkunft zuoonncagefundon het, un modici-
niacho Bzyorinento en lebonder. Uonschor. ohno dcron Zuctin-
nung vorzunoiiaonj unter xunkt II und III (Aricgcvcrbrecdon
und Vorbrochon gogoa die Ilenochlichkoifc), dess cr Hr.upt-
tactor, Toilnohm^r, Anatiftor, Vorac:iublci3to?.dor govoaon

•

1st, eoino -luotienuno .,c 0 cbon und nit Plncnon und Untor-
nchmon in Vorbindung goctendon het, dio die Durchfuchrung
nodiziniachcr Axpcriaentc cn looondon Ilcnschon ohno Zuatin-
nung dor Potroffondon sum Gu 0 onotcnd button, die Srnordung
von 112 Judc.n, wcloho aur Vorvollatcordigung cincr Skelott-
ocmnlung fuor dio Univcrsitcot Str-.onburg cuo 0 oeucht warden
weron, und die -Sroordun.^ und lliaohandlur.g von Zchntcuaendon
polniochor Stc..toangehoori 0 or, dio cn 0 oblich cn unhcilbnror
Tubcrkulwoo litton; unter Pur.kt IV, dans or ncch den 1. bep-
tonbor 1939 uin Mitgliod der S5 i.-r, oir.or Organic;.tion, dio
von Intornctionrlon lliliti cr b cricht3hof fuor verbrcchoriuch
orklr.ort v:urdo.

Don An&oklcgton Rudolf Brandt uird ina'>onondorc dio
Botoili^ung an don Hoohcr.-, Rrfriorungs-, l>.lnrir.-, Loat-
oonfgno-, Soownanor-, Spidoniochc-Gclbcucht-, Sterilioio-
runga-, Sulfonr.aid- und Ilcckficborvorfcuchon cur Lr.at golegt.
Auch war cr oln Haupttaotcr bci der Broordung vor. 112
Judon, dio zur VorvoUse: er.di 0 u:^ oincr SkclcttGr.n.luaj
nuageoucht wordon weron, ur.d bci dor Irn:rdung und 11180 -
hnndlung tuborkuleoaor Polon. Un dio Srchl gc zu veroin-
fnchon, cioht dio ^-nkl ^cbcaccrdo dio i.caehuldi 0 ur. to dor
Icilnuhno an den EHocfaon-, lluskol- und llorvoaoxporincntoa,

\/io aie in Ziffor 6 (?) dcr Anklr.gaschrlft boachriobcn
cind, zurueck.


- 1 -


Rudolf Brandt trat dor HSMP in Jafcrc 1932 boi. 1933

trr.t cr dor SS boi und v/urdc Otcrloutnent. Zun Sc hi use curdo

or Stendcrtonfuohror. Obvrohl s.*ao enfaontjlicho Stollun b *

bci dor SS in Johro 1933 die oinca An&ostollton in Buoro

dca Chofa dos Str.boo von Kinnlcr wcr.nit oinoc nonr.tlichen

•

Gchc.lt von RM 120. — , atiog Brendt repido zun pcrooor.licnon
Roforonton Himmlers cui. In Johro 1943, r.lo Kinnlor fioicho-
innonministor wurdc, '.;urdo Brendt sue Iliniatoriclrr.t in
dioaon Iliniotorium Qmonnt. (5. Brendt, R.4369-4871). In
diooor Bigcnschcft tier or Bbtcilun.cloitor und Vorotrnd
dco oiniotcriollon Buorca. Uobcrdic a bohiclt or aoino Stcl-
lun{, r.lo Loitor doo poraoonliohon Roforeta in dor SS boi.

(R. 3rmdt, R. 4988-9).

jilo Hinnlors pcrcoonlichor Roforont bokloidcto -rendt
oino Stollun c nit botrcoohtlichor Vorsntuortlichkoit. ..llo
Aorroopondons, dio iiicclor vor 0 Glc 0 -t cordon nuostc, D in^
suorat r.n Brendt. Infol u ador.aor -run iha dio O oarctcn
Plr.ono H l m ml ore und ell ocin Tun bokennt. ..of Hinnlora r.uo-
druocklichc «mfOlotili£ hin v.urdcn ?r-.gon offiziullcr und
oo b -cr poroocnlichor tfr.tur uo'oer Rudolf Brendt golcitot.

(R. Brandt, R.4879-80). Br.oo cir.o ur.go und Yortrr.ulioho
Boziuhuns sv/ioohon Kinolor und Brendt boo tend, or c ibt eioh
nuo dor olgoncn ..uac"^ doa ^, 01 O ton, in dor or angab,
dr.BQ or eich nit Kinnlcr anaittol bar in Yerbindung setson
konuto. ( 2 . 4880). Ifarucbor hinouo bliob Brendt boi Hinder,
ala dio Alliiorton Deutschland bccotstea, bia sun Tr o *0 soir.cr
Footnehno, Magstoonat 05 1943, 24 Stur.don bevor -linnlur


AHAinc


solbst von don Alliicrtcn vorhcftot vmrdo. (3. brrndt,

3. 4888).

Brrndt hrtt*. die Vormtwortunj fuor die b esrnte Post
in Sinnlors bucro, die sich r.uf unjefeehr 3500 Brio fa pro
lionet belief. Bci dor 3cechrcibun 0 seiner ?r.oti b kcit hin-
sichtlich dcr KorrcsiJondonz b r.b Eudolf Brrndt ms "IJoino
Aufjr.be in dicccr Stollunj v/c.r, Hicnlor die an ihr. jcrich-
toto Post zur Xonntnis su brin^cn, ont*./odor in dcr so 0 onrnn-
ton Lcsopost, die cr solbst lro odor durck Vortrr.j doe
Inhclto bzv;. duroh Ycrloson von To lion odor doc jrnzon
Briofos, dcr r.n ihr. O orichtct wr.r. M (A. Srendt, H.4873).

Ic Zuonmaonhrnj nit dor ITorrcopondonz betonto dor .n'.jokl'.jto
Brrndt dio Trto-cho, dr.ss die •usklnjobohocrdo nur 113 Briofc
vorjclo to t hc.bo, un ooinc Ilittr.otorschr.ft in diocon ?r.ll
derzutun. *.un diocor Ir.tsr.cfco voraucht or don Schluos zu
siohon, dr.ss, dr. dio 3oor.atzr.hl dor in diooor 25cit „oschrio-
bonon 3riofc 160 COO uoborstioj, die cvdizinischon bxpori-
oonto r.uoBorhrlb s.inoo nil ^eco ir.cn 3©roicho lr., on, und
diooo nodiziniochon -noOlcjcnhoittn oinc klolno 3ollo boi
dor ..uofuohrun 0 aoincr Pflichton npioltcn. Sicsos ..r^uaent
1 st nr.tuerlich r.bsurd. Bio Lriclnr.ljosohicht* iot veil
vor. Trollor., in donon xcrnor.cn, dio vide Jr.hro hindorch
nr.oh doa Goeotz jolobt hr.bon, doch ic Verlruf von wor.i^on
Sokundon innorhclb oincr _ r.zcr. Lobenszoit cir.or. .lord bo-
SPX&n hobon. -ussord;. i.snrtcrir .1 josoi*t, dr.ss

Eudolf Brrndt oioh rn violon endoron SS-Verbrochcr. »oteili.t
2.B. loitoto or dio bcruochtigto bli. .ervorordj
.•oitor, dio zun Totoc .l- lliiertor, uober Boutschl nd
rbjoopruntonor Pliejor arautigta. (2. 4982). Br botoili t t^
sich r.n den Plr.onen zur Jbxtfuohrunj tschochoslownkischer
^indor (KO-435, Ar.kl.B_v/. 465, 2. 4983) und doc irlr.ss
doe Jofchls zur Zorstoorur^, ias Ghettos in Unrschcu und


- 3 -


5. 33^I.DT

dor Uobor?uehrun u aoir.er juedischor. Bewohnor in ^uarottun 0 s-
lf-o'-r. (F.. 49S6-7). Die Tr.tacche, dess Brcndt nit ciner
groason ^nzohl von Verbrochen in Vorbindung stand, die
o^atomr.tiacfc vor. dor S3 be^r.n^cn rcurden, 1st gevTiaa l:eine
V ortc 1 q 1,un^ fuor 60inc Toilnehao ~n don Yorbrochen, dio
don Gogenatmd dioaor -nklrgoachrift bildon. Tonn dr.a
Goricnt dio von 3rmdt vor, oac-lrgeno nochcnischo Schuld-
zumoasune sich zu ©igon nrchon wuerdo, koonntc dio ..nklrgo-
bohoordo nit gonna doaaclbcn .locht gel tend nrchon, dr.aa
80in0 Schuld * 112 Vorglcich zu dor cinta ^cklngton, dooacn
lfcB0 Qlch nur cuf clf SoJcuacnton in don Jctcn befindot, aich
wio zohn zu oina vorhnolt. Gcrr.do infolgo dor „rt aoinor
Stoliung v/uaato Rudolf 3rmdt nicht nur, wra vor aich ging,
oondorn or orlodigto each dio vcrwr.ltungotoohniachon -inzol-
hoiton boi dor Inkrr.ftactaung von Hianlcra uafr.aaondon 3o-
fchion. r onn cino O rundor.otziicho Sntachoidong bonocti^t
vurdc, broohto or dio -noologcnhoit Kianlor cur Sonntni.8,

3.J. sr.gto or in oinon Brief von 6. Juni 1944 m don ..ngo-
hlrgton diovcroi "Ich hr.be don Rcichafuohror SS in ionntnin
goootzt, dr. dio Sccho wichtl* gonug zu ooin sohien."

(NO-009, -nkl.flow. 306, R. 1400). Sonat nr.chto or von coiner
oigonon Initintivo Gobrr.uch, indon or drrr.uf rchtoto, dr.aa
rile a in Sinklcng nit r.lj ;onoincr.. von Himalor orlraoonon
.Inwoiaun^on roibw^oloc vor aich 0 ing.

Er.oo Brcndt. StoUun u cine *ichti i0 end vorontvvortlioho
nnr. Bird durch dr.o in «oir..r oisenen Tortoldi b an,- vcr u o-
■ iMo Bonoiaoctorlcl fclnr buBioacn. ft>rla -fcohnara uidoa-
Btn.ttlloho -Margo boar.gt in roaontlinhon, desa dor _n_.o-
UBst0 Brcndt Hlnnlcra poraaonUchor tochniachcr Borctor

uad dc * 8 " cino BTObbo Vortrcuoneatallung bokloidoto.

Sio grb fomor rn, dcao Brcndt aich buouchtc, die Buonaoho,
voricagon und VorschlSgo iinnlerc korrdrt and vottetnondig
ruezufuohrori, und d.-.aa ihn dies sichorlioh infold aoinor


- 4 -


3. BRANDT


objcktivon Hcthodor. golong. (Brandt 3c;.. 11 , R.4997). Dr.
Hclaut Fitzncr gibt in soinor cidosstnttlichon -uasCbO r.n,
d;.ssi "Sr (Bmndt) dio cn Hinder gorichtotcr. Schrcibon und
Singr.bcn dicacn vorzutrngon und dor orgcngonon Entschoidung
ficnr.oaa dio ilntwortso roiben vorzuboroiton bozw. ir. aoinon
^ftr: go oolbat z u bccntworton hctto." (Brcndt 3 cw. 8 ,

Untcratrcichun^on cingofuogt). Crete Hinzo geb in
ihror oidooBtettliehon Drklrorung cn* "..uo aoinon gologont-
lichor. ..ouoaorungon or.t.nekn ich, desa cr cincr dor woni^on
Untorgobonon war, dio ruefc don Hut hetton, Hianlor go^onuebor
Hiuatrondo und unengonohne Scch-r. offer. ruasuairochcn."
(3rrndt 3ow. 9 , a. 4997, Unterstroichun^cn cingofoogt). ..uc
dor cidlichon .luaacgo von Dr. "erstun c .ofct horvor, dees

* Rudolf Brandt oich oft in 5c 0 vnor.tz zu Hinder atollto und
deduroh in Sobwiorigkoiton nit Kinder ken. (Srandt Bow. 5 ,

* H. 4996). 1

Dr.oa Brandt botrcoohtlioho cig.no Initiative ontwickolto,

b oht cue dor Tc.tor.eho horvor, dr.aa of over a, rfr.ochcr, :cicu-

b°r»» Oroiocr und Soppo u.r. ihn bci violon Golugenhuiton

botroffa dor Vornchno von aediziniaohon Vcrouchon cn Konzon-

trr.tionaln 0 orineno 8 on f dor -uorottung tubcrkulooaor Polon

und dor -nlogung von Skolotterndung dirokt engingon. Sr.-.adt

tr:.t aoinoracita nit don -n 0 oklegton Ocbhcrdt^schor und

?ohl in Zuarmnonhnng nit dioeon kriainollcn Botaotigui^on

(oiuho unton) in Vorblndung. ir-ndt vcrauchto dio Tctsacho,

daaa viclo/^ricfc, dio cich ruf dioao Betaocigung bozogen,

^ lhn nd rceoiort weron, dndurch zu orJclcorcn, dr.aa dio

Schroibor ontwodcr uicht wuast_n, wr.s fuor cine Stella or

boklcidoto, odor, wno Hinder bowo*, cn aic go:icfctfcto

3riQf0 durch ihn untorzoichnon zu lcsacn. D-.s iat nntucrlich
lrxchcrlich.


- 5 -


R. B3ASDT


Brandt 1st nit Hinalor s-it 1935 zoscnnon gcwoscn. Lr
v/urcc zuai.ancn ait dcr 3S ^rcss.

Rudolf Brcadt ir.r r.uch Lit 0 licd dcs ..hnoncrbea (sioho
uchriftocts dor .jiklc^obohocrdo ^cgcn Sicvcra). Kinnlcr wr.r
Prr.coidont dioeor Gcacllachrft. Brcmdt fun iortc do Vorbin-
dun^cnnnn zv.ischcn Kinder ur.d Sicvcr3, den RcichOooachr.cfta-
fuohror dos ^hnen^rbes. (HO-58?. ..nkl.Bov, 28, R.130).

Brmdts Vornntviortlichkcit fu^r Vcrbrochcn, dio ihn in
dor 4.nklr b coehrift zur Lr.ct ^.lcGt • erden, wlrd diuch acino
cioonon oidoaat-'.ttlichon Rrklr.orun^on bcvicocn. 3rmdt ver-
auohto, scino oidli;hcn ..uatk^on dcdurch zu crklr.orcn, un
nicht zu orison, von ihnen r.bzuruockcn, inden or bezou^to,
dr.ao cr dio ..uoor to cr. r.uf Grund von Rokunenton e cnncht hrbe,
die ihn bci Vorhooror. vor dcr Vorhrndlun b vorgclogt vrordon
aoion, v/r.o r.bcr nicht dor ?r.ll ict. Zvoifclloc iot Brr.ndt
oo oUt uobor dio Vorbrooher., dio dor. Go&cnstmd dcr Vcrhrr.d-
lun to bilden, oriontiert, wic ir 0 cr.d oonct jjccr.d in Boutcch-
l-.nd. Za boctoht nicht die , .rin t cto Vror.chu dr.fucr, ooinon
vor dor Vorhr.ndluno bcnachtoc ..uaar.jcn nicht voiles Gov/icht
boizunooacn. ^o iat nicht bovicsen* droa ole durch 3ctru&
odor Zwdng orlcngt wurdoa. In Go on toil, Brrndt to ;b bcin
"reuzvorhoor zu, dio oidlioho.n „uaoa t ;cn froivvilli^ untcr-
zolehnot ur.d r,do$cnfcoit ^chnbt zu hr.bcn, olo zu looor. und
zu vorboaoorn, und decs t;ov.iooo -ondorun^on trtoccchlich r.uf
ooin Rrsuchon hin vorgonocnon wurdon. (R. 3rmdt, fi.4990).
Rrnndtc -uoar.^o vor don Gorichtehof kanr. ir. oinon Sets

Buornaon 0 oft’8ot vordor.i "Ich -rinnoro cl eh cn nicht a.”

0

..bocsohon von oinor Scachroibunt; von Hinders P-rcoonlichkoit
bc^nuett cr oich do.nit, surest ivc e’l-^cn scir.oa Rcohtom-
wclta zu bomtworton, die desu engotna vrxen, ihr, r.ls oinen
koorporloacn, otono^rr.phicchun -utoactcr, dcrzuatcllon - etrr.
in dcr -rt vinca solohri£c» Hr.lbidiotcn. Gewiealich hr.bcn
aoino -us3r to on vor dor Vcrhcndlunj _r.apruch d-.rcuf, hoohor


ETwjrDI

bov.-crtot zu wordcn r.ls dor hic--clschreicndo Uncsinn soin-r
..ussngo.

2rcndt nr.cht dc.3 Iitnzip dos hochcroa Dofckia els nil-
doradoa Dustr.ad fucr acino Vcrbrcchon gcltcr.d. Ob cr dio
Ricktlinior. in dcr orsten Iastrnc festlcgto, otoht nicht zur
Dobr.ttc, eor.dorn nur, o'o cr ca dcr Vorborcitung uad ..usfuch-
rung dcr ihn zur Lr.ot gclc 0 -tc:; Vorbroobca toilnr.hn. ..bsr.tc
4 (b) doo -rtikwls II dca Control lrr.tgcaotsos Nr. 10 lr.utct
wio fol tt ti "Die Trtar.chx,, dros jcurnd untcr den oofehl ooincr
..ogicrung odor coin-s Vor 0 ^sctztca O ohnad-lt hrt, bciroit
ilia nicht von dcr Vcrr.ntwortlichkcit fucr oin Vorbrcchui;
aic krnn r.bor r.l8 strafnildcrnd bcruccksichtigt wordon."

Die cir.zigo ?r- c o f dio hior rufgcworfon vrerden soil, iot
r.lao, ob dcr G^richtahof in Fr.ll von Rudolf 3rr.ndt hoohoro
Sjfohlo r.la aohuldcildorr.d maohen ooll. Die ..nklr.gcbohoordo
iat dcr ..r.aicht, dr.ao dies nicht goachohon ooll. ..uo dor
Bo\/oiorufnrhno ging oinromdfroi horvor, dr.oa Brandt von
ar.hlroiohon vorbroohoriaohon Exporicontcn Sonntnio hr.tto
und oich dr.rnn botoiligto, dor Ernorduno von otvm 86 Judor. .
fuor cino Skclottanmlung, uio ..uorottun^ Tr.uecndor polni-
ochor Str.ntamgchocri u cr, dio nngoblloh m unhoilbnror Tuber-
kulooo lit ten. loin Jcv.ois lio c t dr. fuor vor, dr.ao HinrOiOr
Brandt bc.-fr.hl, rn irgondoir.ee Vorbrochon tcilzunohncn. jrmdt
tr.t dno cue froion ‘..'illon. Kola 3cwoic liogt dr.fuor vor, dr.ao
Brandt ouino Stollung nuo rurc.it boibchiolt. -r fuchlto oioh
wo hi in ihr. Mein Bouoio liogt dr.fuor vor, ores er die go-
ringsten Bedonken bai coiner Tcetigkoit in Higglers Vorwrl-
tun^ hettu. ~onn or aolcho b o 2 ;cbt hr otto, vccro nichta
loichter gwoson, c o ruf ocir. -rsuohcn bin odor :o L on fln-
giortor ntuachtigkoit vorsetzt bu vrordon.

3rr.ndt \t nr koin Soldr.t r.uf don Schlrchtfold. Seine
Tr.otigfcoit • r.r wait ontfornt von ucr Ver i-.*rung dor Front.

Er handalto nicht


- 7 -


2. 33-KDT


in spontcner leiaenscnaftiichcr Srregangi or factto cus-
roichena 3oit, sich soine HenaluncST.cisc su ueberlc c on und
3atrr.chtungen d ruebor enzuetellen. £r verbliob in seiner
Stsllong von 1933 bis zu scinor Vorhcftung durch dio ..lliicr-
ton in Jehre 1945, nicht wonigor els 12 Jrhro. Diose Tctsccho
cilloin ontrioht jodor Grundlcgc fuor nildorr.do Unstconac dcr.
Bodon. Uobordies, worm nan ennohnon wollto, dr.ss Brandt don
Boi’ohl crhelton hr.be, dio vorbrcchoriochcr. KcndluncOn zu
bogohon, dio dor. G.gonstcnd diosor Vorhcndlungen deratollon,
so otollt doch, fells koino Purcht vor Vcr 0 oltun tl ocr.asnnhnon
in Fall dos Un^ohorsma vorhnndon ist, Gofcoroan oino voll-
konuen froiwilligo Botciligung an don Torbrcchon dcr. Dc.a
trifft ouf Hudolf Brandt zu. Pcmcr kanr. dcs Prinzip doo
hoohoron Bofohlo nicht aildorad in Bctracht 0 ozo 0 cr. x.-ordon,
wo oolch uoblo und solch zchlrcichc Vorbrochun box-unfit und
ruockaiohtoloe wcohrond clncs Zoltrr.unca von viclon Jr. hr on
bogr.ngcn v/ordon aind. •

Dioo wr.ron r.loo dio vorcntw.rtlichon Stcllun 0 on Rudolf
Brrndtoi Str.ndr.rtonfuohr-r ir. dor S3, poraoonllchcr .loforont
in Hinnlora Str.b, Hlniotcrir.lrrt in Innonninistoriun, Hioolora
ongotcr vorr.rltun 0 atochniochcr Litrrboitor und Hitgliod doo
ihnonorboe. Brnndt nr.chto von dicoon otollur^on, oolnon por-
ooonlichon Binfluoo und ooir.or. vortrr.utor. Boziohun^on nit
Hinnlor in oinor oioo Gobrauoh, die dio jcgchun to von :>iogs-
vorbroc.ion und Yorbroohon gogon die Hcneohlichkoit, wic oio in
dcr Inklagocchrift gonchildort oind, nit sich brcchto.


Bcr dlngcklagto Gobhrrdt geb zu, dr.se "dio 3S und Hinalor


dr.s oncinsr.no -lonont bv.i ell div-jen Ycrcuchon wares."
(Gobhrrdt R. 4192). Vnohrond oo 2U£c u obor, -.ird, dess Rudolf
Brandt koine bodcutondorcn L,rurdsr.ctzlichcr. 2ntsehcidun t> on
in dor orotcr. Instcnz getroffen hr.bon rang, bofr.sstc or sich
jcdoch nit oinor grosson _nzrhl dcr vorvrrltur^etochnischon


- 8 -


2inzolhcitcn, dio don tjir.ttca Ycrlcuf dor Expcrisonto
nocglich aachton. 2 r 0 -p.b Kicnlcrs Bcfohlo roitcr. 3 r vmr
dcr Vorbindungocann zwiacfaoa Hinolcr und dec ^hr.cncrbo, don
-erston, die die Exporiccnte vo.anhncn und dan Stcllon, dio
sio untoratuetzton. Seine Dicnatc, soino 8orgfr.lt und aoino
nic orcuodor.don .aist ontoUn^cn weron die Socle dee Untornoh-
ncn3. Obv/ohl or niofat ..rzt v.cr, so uobcrtrr.f doch 3rr.ndt8
Beitrr.g zu don Sxpcriconton don oi rob jo don cinzolncn dr.rnn
botoiligton ..rztoa. Dr.aa seine Sotoili^un^ d treat frolwiUig
und bo; uast v/r.r, O oht cua doa von dor -jihlcgcbchoordo vorje-
logtcn Bowoianctorir.l hervor. Er bctolllgto sich wllUg cn
krlninollon Hr.ndlun D cn, die dio Eraordun, roltorun und
unaonsohlioho Bohcndlune S'.uacndor hilfloaor Conner, Frnuon
und binder eur Pol^o nr.ttcn.


a. 33fJ«DT


Sterilisicrun;:svc-rsucho Unklagoschrift Ziff or o (-!•))•
Ia jr.hro 1941 war die ^uarottu“s dor juedisekon Sovool-
korung Deutschlnnds ur.d dcr bosetzten Gobiotc die offiziollc
Bolitik doo Dritton Holeho3 (Urtoil des EIG H. 1692C u.:.).

Da ^rbeitar dringend benooti^t Trurden, vmfflo die Storilioic-
rung arbeitsfaehigur Judea c.ls ..ltornntivo zu ciacr ro Q ol-
rochton ..uarottun to angceohon. (30-205, ^nklv3ov* 163» 53o-

37 ). Un billi^o und schr.ollo Stcriliaiorun^cr.otkoden zu or-
nittcln, wurdon cm IConzontrrtionolc^orinar.sscn Vorsuoho in
grooacn ..uaar.os nit pharnazeutiochcr. Dro 0 on vorgonomon
(MO-036, .mkl.aer, 143, 2. 512), nit ilinspritzun* oincr 2oiz-
looaune (KO-212, .mkl.Dov. 163, 2.570), nit Roontgonetrahlor.
und chirurgiaohon Sin^Tiffcn (Levy a. 556-9). SrcAdt hr.tto
niolit nur vollo Konntnia von dioacn -xyorinenton condom


r.rboitoto r.uoh aktiv an ihnor. alien ait.

Dor Zv;ock dor Storilioiorur. D ovoreucho *?ird vor. Brandt ir.

ooincr oi 0 onon oidoootattlichen -uoongo U ux bcochri.bom

"Hinclor war hoochat ir.torccuiort an dcr •mt-.-icklung
oincr billion und sckr.cllon Storilieationanotnodo,
v/oloho g««on die Poir.do doo Doutcctor. Soichoe, wie
liuooon, Polen und Judon,an c uv.rr.dt v.ordon itor.r.to. .. n
hoffto, da nit don Poind nicht nur zu
dorn cuch zu vcrnichten. Dio ..rboit3..ralt c«.ezili-
oiorter Porsonor. koonnto von Doutochlr.no r.usgenuetzt
warden, vaohrond die Portpflrnzunc.a^oi nr •
tet wuorde. Dioao llasoonatorilieetion otollto oinoj
Toil von Hinnlora Raacenthoorio dcr. -.r. aioao Stor-ii-
saticnovor3ucho v.-urdo dehor booor.aoro Zcit und Kuoho
gowrndt. Chirurgiacho Storilio tier, v r.r nr.tuorlioh in
Deutschland bekemnt und vurdo prcktioch an^e. Fn<.t, dloa
ooiilosa iCfiatrierunt ein. Dioao Hothodo wurdo jedooh
fuer eino Mssaonanwondung c.ls zu lr.a ; ..3nn und zu «a.-
apiolig orachtot. ho -..urdo fornerhir. eo'-uonocht, oir.o
Hot ho do zu .rfindon, wcloho dr.o nicht dirokt benork-
br.re Sterilisation ornoogliohto."

Storiliciorungovcraucho, un die '.irksnnkoit oincr ala ealediun

eoguinun bokannton Drogo (Sch? oigrohr) fostzuatcllon, wurdon

Hinnlor von don Angoklr.gton Pokorny ia Oktobor 1941 vorcooo.ilc.-


gon. xokorny borichtoto, dr.as Dr. !1- -us


- 10 -


2. B2.20T


it. Vorlnuf seiner Porschung sober uedikmontoeso Sterili-
eierung von Tieren fiflfundon hr.ette, dess colr.diun 3Gjuinua \ui
lioron poraoner.to Sterilitr.et 6rzeu£to, ;:enn es durch dou
Mund oinjononnon Oder durch Injoktion vorr.broicht nurda.
Pokoroy gr.b ierncr in soinor: Brioi eni

".dio ungohouro 'ichtigkoit diosoo ’Jcdiknaonts fuor

den un b ohouron limpf unseres Voikos ist nir oin 0 *oi>llon.
V.onr. os .;olc.en, ; o, r.uf Crund die3or ror so hun.^on sobr.ld
rl3 noo&Ilch oin .fcdlk'racnt faerzustc'.r Ur.. d~s r.ech
roleCiv kurzor 3.. It olnc unboncrjcto Seerillsicrung boi: .
Ilonoohon erzougt, so ttrondo ur . s _ cine ncuc v.lrknngsvoll-
C't'o' ^cifo zur . erfuc, u:. . ..irTIh dor itocrnko, dr.s3 die
droi I’iilionor. aoacr.ten ir. doutoc..oi* Gvfrngonaohrft bc-
findlichcn Bolsohowiston stcrilioivi-t verden koennten,
sodr.ss oio r.ie ^rboitor zur Yorf uogunj stuor.don, cbor
von dor Portpflr-nzung rusgcschloaecn vr.oron, orooffnot
v/oitgehondsto Porsjoktivon."

Er onpfr.hl doshr.lb unvorzuofclichc Yoroucho r.r. Hcnschon, ua
dio Dooiorung und dio Eruor dor Bchcr.dlur.^ zu bostiaacn, die
Zuochtung t’oo cr.lr.diua so,.uir.un in Troibhr.oucorn und chc::..ccho
Porechung, ua die Drogo synthotlsch ir. ..roosen JJnSrx^o hurzu-
atollon. (NO-035, ~nkl.3ow. 142, 2.510).

Hinalor billigto Pokornys Voruohlr.ogo und orouchto Polil
an 10. .’Ir.orz 1942, oich ait Br. End' uo ir.o r.cnohccn zu outzon
und "ihn p.nzubioton, dries or boi uns - in Zuscanonr.rboit nit
doa RoichBrrzt SS (v>ra\;itz) - dio Eooglichkoit zu Vorouoher.
an vorbrochorischor. Poraor.cn, die fin und fuor oich otcrill-
siort ivordon nuosstor., bokonat." Er boir.hl .-oitor, dess iha
dor vorguoohono drboitsplcn fuor die V-roucho voredegt
■./ordon oollo. Bor ^ngoklzgto ..udolf irrr.it gob oinu ..beehriit
dioaoo Briofco an Orcwitz vciter ("C-036, .a-.kl.3w' . 143,

R. 512) und ljgto iha r.a 20. .._>ril oino -bscurift von Pokornys
Boricht und Inforaatiun ac or dio Yorooifontliohung von Ur.
Jiadcus hinsichtlich dcr aodiknaontoeson Stcrilisicrung v
lioron vor. (2TO-037, -nkl.Bcw. 146, 2. 513).

Brandta Buoro logto den Boricht von Ilr.dr.us uobur Boir.c
Forschun^ocrboit an lioron SS-Oborgropyanfuchr-r Ecydric..,
don Loiter dcr oicherhoitspolisoi uni dos SB, vor.

- 11 -


C. 3FJJOT


Dcs von 23. ..pril 1942 datiorte Uebernittlungsachroiben
traagt dassolbe .Jcter.zeichen wle Hinnlors 2riof or. Pohl (752/
5) Uild apricht euadruocklich vor. "der Prngo dcr codikanon-
toosor. Sterili3iorung."(2:0-047, -nkl.Scrr. 145, R. 515).

..a 1. ouni 1942 orsuchto Brandt Pohl, dor. Loitor do a
'7YH/., an oinon Soricht hinsichtlicii dc3 “ortschritts dor
7orbcroitur.gen ;'uor dio 7cr3ucho. (2T0-038, ^nkl.Pow. 147,

R. 514). Pofcl borichtotc an 3. Juni 1942, dc.30 Dr. loch
von 3iologi3chon Ir.3titut dor Kr-.dc. r-T.'crko Vorsuoho or.go-
stollt habo, dlo Pfl&nzo r.us ir. Troibhnou8crn kultiviorton
Sanon zu ziohor., dr. "Schvseigrohr" ,cus ;?olohoa cc.lcdiun
eoguinua govronnon v.urdo, nur in Sordanorikc waohso und r.icht
In hinroichondon irongon exporticrt vrcrden koonno. Diooc Vor-
aucho soion crfolgroich gov.oson, cbor dio Kothodo dcr Zuoah-
tuns dor Pflcnzo and Horatollung dcr Progo sol nicht ochn.ll
gonug, und die ..uobouto rcicho nicht aus, un Lxporinonto 1 :.
,--ro>ioon Unicn,;o zu gestattor.. Jn dioso Schwicrigkoiton zu
bohoben, or.gto or, waoro oo noctig, oin orooaooros Troib-
hcuu zu bcuon. (K0-O46C, -Inkl.Bow. 146 , 515-16). ..n

11. Juni toilto 3rcndt Pohl nit, or hr. bo Hitt'.lor von aoinua
Briul' in Acnntnio gcootzt ui-.l Hinder wollo, dc.oo Pohl daiuor
Sorgo trr.go, dc30 Dr. Hoch oin oTossob Ircibhcus bo schr.oll
wio nooglich zur Vorfucgung gcstollt wuordo, dc Hinnlor dio
7orouoho fuor couascret •. ichtig ene&oho. lornor orsuchto
Brattdt Pohl un woito 0 2-richto in dioacr ^Jigologcnhoit.
(N0-046b, •Jikl.Bav. 149, R. 516). Bur 8 Icgc opaotor hntto
Brandt aolbst oino Sonforer.a nit Pohl, in Vorlr.uf dor or u.a.
Pohl vor. H i cnl ore Brsuchcn in ^onntni a sotzto, dio 3ostand-
t«ilo von crlndiun aoguinun „rucndlich untcrsuchon zu lr.asor.,
un fcotzuBtcllon, ob obenso wirksano 2o3tcndtoilo in rndcror.,
lOichtor zugconglichon Pflcnzon gofundon border* kouar.ton.
3rcndt orsuchto, dr.3s Dr. Ikochs ..rbcit in vollston ^usnesa
durchgcfuahrt v.-ordon aolla. 2r sotstc Pohl tL-.von in Zonntnir ,


3. BR^KDT


dr.s3 Yorsucha in Ilonzontrc.tionslcgcrn nit don drntls vor-
hrndonon Vorrrt dor Drogc vorgcnonncn vcrdcn soil ter., ^ohl
orklrnrto sich dasu boroit, sofort die notwendigon Sohrittc
zu unternohnon. (N0-044, -nkl.Bew. 150, R. 517). -otoiluns
IV-3-4 do8Hoioh88ichcrhoit3hauptnntos, die Stello, dio nit
lor Icosunj dor Judcr.frr.go botrc.ut war (Urtcil dos J..1 ,

3 . 16924 ), vmrdo von oir.on Untorgoboncr* Brendts uc'-or ::r,d’'.uo'

Forochungsarboit in Kenntnis gcaotzt und n-.uc -, ong nit
?-.hl in dioscr Sacho zuornnen zu erboiton. (l.'0-C50, -nkl.

Bow. 151, H. 518). Sir.o ..bschrift diusoc irioioo rurdo don
^igoklr.jtcn 3udolf 3r“adt u-oororxdt. (H0-O51, -nikl.Bcv;. 152,

R. 518).

Dcr otollvortrotor.do Cruloitor dcs Je'-iote ::iudordor.au,
33-Oborjrupponfuohror Gorland, ootzto Kinnicr m 24. ..uguat
1942 dr.von in Senntnio, d-.so d.r Diroktor dos -nts fuor
Rr.nocnpolitik in diooon Gnu, Dr. Fchringor, oioh nit dor =r O o
von !:r.cocr.ctorili8iorun 0 boochr.oftigt habo ur.u in Zusr.nncr.-
hnnj dealt nuf Dr. Kr.Ccua* -rboiten uobor nodiknnontooBO
Storiliaioruno durch cr.lc.diun soguiaun gcotocucn coi. -us
r.chnlichor. Gruundon, vric sic vor. den -ngoklngton 2okomy vor-
gotrngen wurdon (NO-035 obor.), befuorwortoto Corlrnd Sxpori-
nontc rn Inoasoon dos Zigoui.crl'.g^ o Leckonbooh, aiodordoncu.
Gorlcnd wico darc.uf bin, dr.eo in Fell dos erwertoton Srfol.^ce
diooor Experiaonte oa aocglich scir. wuordo, oin«J prr.ktiooii
unbogronzte :.nsnhl von £or3onon in kuorz. stor Zoit ur.d r.uf
dio dcnJdr.r oinfr.chBto ~oice zu atorilieioron. 0:0-039, «nkl.
Bow. 153, R. 519).

Es war dor .jibeklngtc r.udolf 3rnndt, dor sich dor SneLo
nnnnhn und Gorlr.nd nn 29. -ugust von don Schrittcn in 3om:t-
nia ootzto, dio hineichtlioli dor Exporinento ait cnlcdiun
soguinun achon gotroffen wordon weron. -us Brandts Brief gokt
horvor, dr.sa Hinnler zu dioccr Z-it nicht mwocend war. Br ndt
orlodigto die so ^ngalob'cnkolt cuf seine oigono Initiative kin


2 . lzusde


and tcilte Gcrlcr.d ait, dnsa Poiil ur.d C-rr.vitz dio Lcitunj
dor Hxporinento ur.ter sich hcetter.. 2r crsuchto Gcrlcnd uc
.'.uakunft, ob Dr. Fchringor cr.ladiun sojuir.ua vcrfucgbcr hr.bo
ur.d wolchon Vcg dcr lotztoro zur 3cschrifun u diosor Fflansa
vorachlr.gen wuordc. (IIC-040, -lnicl.3ow. 154, 2. 521). 2rnn«t
ucbcruittolto -bschrifton von Gorlr.nds 3riof cr. lohl und
drawitz. -a 7. Soptonbcr 1942 gr.b 2ohl Gcrlcnd vroitoro Sinzcl-
hoiton nn und sotstc ihr. dr.von in Hcnr.tnis, decs cr ur.d Dr.
lolling dio Exyoriaonto porsocnlich bor.nfaichtijton. lohl
wiodorun achickto ..bschrii’ton dieses ..riefoo cr. Rudolf Brendt
und Grewitz. Ia Bogloitoohroibon cr. 'Brendt ootzto ihr. ?ohl
dr.von in iConntnia, dree or in don Uc.dr.uo-Corkon gowoacn ooi,
ua sich oolbat von Portschritt dor Sxporinontc zu ueborzougen,
und dr.aa Dr. Lolling bci ihnon nitr-irkor. vuordo. ::it Uc.Cji uo vrer
oin Uoborcinkoaaon gotroffen wordon, "dio VoraucUo aobcl‘.
wio uoojlich ncch unooror. nonaontrctionolegorr. zu vorlo 0 on."
(H0-C41, ^nkl.Sov. 156, 2. 523). 14. Oktober 1942 ackriob

Gorlr.nd cr. Rudolf Br~ndt und octzto ihn vor. don von lohl
orhcltonon Brief in .Jonntnio. 3r aegto, or botrcchtoto Poh-
ringora Voraohl g, Inereson dco Zi^ounorlccorc Lr.okonbcoh zu
vorv/ondon, c.la uoborholt, dr ?ohl ihn d von boncohrichtijt
hr/oo, dr.aa Lolling achor. nit don biolo c ioohon Ir.atitut KBCr.a8 f
suocnnonc.rboitc. 2r teilto ~rrndt forncr nit, dc8a Pohringor
gleubo, os Doi durchr.ue r.ocglich, c-lcdiun aoiuinua ohoaiach
horzustullon, odor dio rflrr.zo in Troibhr.ousorn in oinoa fucr
Vorauchsznocko cuaroichor.ion Unfrngo zu suochton. Sr achlug
such Zuarnconr.rboit zrcischcn Lolling ur.d Pohringor vor.

(2:0-043, ..nkl.Bow. 157, H. 524). -as Prrndts -r .twort von
25. Oktobor goht horror, draa or wcohrcr.d Hi.nJ.oro ..bvrason-
hoit r.us oigonor Initiative acir.e Zustinnur.g zur Zusmeon-
r.rboit s' ioehon Fohrin.cr und Lolling gcb.


- 14


2. 23DS35?


(170-049, -nkl.Sov. 159, R. 525). Drr.ndt aohicfcto lohl -b-
uchriftcn von Gerinnds 3ricf von 14. October (.70-043 o'ocr.)
und von 30iner ^ntvrcrt '170-049 oben). In scir.cn Dc/-i«it-
schroibon i\n Bohl druockto cr cic Uobcrzoudunn nuc, dr.3s
or, obwohl cr Einrler nicht bofrc^on konnto, sichur aci,
drss dcr lctztcro Toroucho, cclcdiun ae£ttlnua oynthotiaoh
hcrzuaiollen, bestinnt uillkonnen hoicson vuordo. 3 r or-
suchtc 1 ’ohl, Vorkehrunjor. fuor cir.o FuofclunDnehae zwiochor.
Dolling und ?ohrin 0 er zu treffon. ("0-059, ~rJcl.Bot<* 150,

R. 524).

Eo konn kein bc^aoadctor Zvreifol darucber baatohor.,
duos dio .' 3 toriliaiorun-jQo:.-porinontfl nit cnlcdiun ee^uinun
tr.toc.ocnlich on Eonaontrc.tioaslrbGrinacason vor^cnonnen
ourdon. Kinnlor, dor dio hcochote Stollo fucr dio Dntochoi-
duni; oolohcr ?rn£on ..cr, t .rb r.icht nur ocir.o Zuatinnunc zu
dicoon Sxporinonton (XO -036 aioho obon) oondorn botrcchtot-
oio buoI. c.lo "pruaajrot wichtic" (l'0-046b oioho obon) und
ordnoto ea, dcao aio cur lodor. ?r.U in XonaontrntionalQuorn

durchzui'uohror. ooiou. (170-C44 obon). lohl, dor dio Vorv 1-
tung dor Konzontrctionalcjor untor oich hr.t-o, orklr.orto oiolx
ruf Brandt 3 Erouchon hin boroit, unvorsttofilioh dio notwcn-
di^on 8 chrit:o zu untornoin.cn. ( 210 - 0 ',4 aioho obon). Jo hear,
koir. Zwoifol dcruobor bootohen, dcso Ebtoilung 17-3-4 doo
RSHE, dio nit dor Looauas dor Judonfrn^o botrrut ver, von
Ur/.ruo 1 ?or3ehun.,8rurk in IConntnia sosotzt wordon war, un
dio fuor dio Sxporinonto nctwondifeon jnodischon Opfor zur
Vorfuogunfc zu atollon. Die Uitnrboit vor. Dr. lolling, dor dor
fuor r.llo Eonzontr*tionslc L or zurtc.ondi,.c .n-zt war, lcooct
oioli nur in Vorbindunc nit dcr Vornchno von Exporinwr.tcn
in diccon Laflcrn orklr.cron. Dr.s 0 cht caoh oils cndJroi aua
Gorlends 3riof nr. 3r-ndt hcrvori

"SS-Obor^upFonfuohror lohl hr.t air aitootuilt, dr.s3 cr
Erst ooincs Sauotcmtas nit den 3iclo 0 ischor. Inst it ut
'icdrus' zur jirroraehahd -or Tirkunj von crladiuc sc. -
nun beroite cusannonnrbcitot, cod cos dor Vorscnlc.g
noinos Czahaaptotcllcnloitors, Dr. Tc-irin^cr, hir.fc.o- 1 .^:
*.:ir (270-043 obon - Ur.t-rstrcichur._cn nacntrr.O£llc ’) •

- 15 -


SfcJuJT


£b *cann r.ur der Schlass resogen werden, dass Pohl kind Lollin3 die Ver-
suche in den Konzentrationslagern so durchfaehrten, %ie Hinder, Brandt
ana .daus 03 ontereinander bcschlossen hatten. (N0-C41, siene oben).
Ausseraeiu hat wanat selbst in seiner aidesstattlichen Erklaerunn zaee-
goben, dass Ex <orioento ait Cal-diaa Se f -ainu- in lebenden . enschen in
honzentrationslagem vorgenoio^en v-orden:

”.ds ein irgebnis van Foicorq/* vorschlag wuiMen Vorsuche an
AoniO.itrc-tionslagcrinsassen dorchs^fuehrt, uc die irkung
der aroge za . ruox'cn. uleichxeitig be-aehte ..An sich, die
Pfianzo in mason . engen onzubauen. Oswald rohl, Chef dea
../HA, nan., cisoonlichea interesse an die so r Angeiegenheit.
'fieibhaeuaor iux\ien ait go wi a sea Brfolg benutzt, un die
Pflanse anzab*aen,und die Vers ache warden fortgesetzt."

(N0-440, siene ober.).

An 30. Aai 194^ uchxieb ar. Glauber- an Hi-der and fc'.t an seine
Unterotuetzung ooi Sterilis-.tionsvoi sachen «;i -reioiicr.cn honzentrations-
lagox-tvaeftlingon. (X>-211, x.l. Bfl«. 169, fi. 564). a.. 4. Juni sar.dto
dor Angeklagte Popponiick an iuxoolf 3randt eir.o Liate von .. . rzten, die
bevolimaechtigt wren, sterilioatior.en auszufuohren. Glaubers 1st unter
dieaen «orzton aofgofucnrt. (f.O-214, Anal. Bow. 16d, : . 562). An 7. and
8. Juli fana olna i.onferonz xwischen Hi dor, Jobrvirdt, Gluecks and
Glaaberg statt. das Trtooa dor boaprechung war dio Sterilisation von .’uo-

e

dinnun. Hinralor voraprach Gl.uborg, dass das Auschidtzer Aonrentrationa-
lagor lhiu fuer ixporinorte an lebendon a ns c her. zar /orfao.^ung ,'sstellt
worden waordo. 6 a -urde ihn die Aixfgabo aabertmgcn, -2tfric*nto durchzu-
fuehron, un a me rtuthodo dor bt.uriils-.tl on 0:0x0 asoon dor Botroffenen
auszaprobicr anbofohlen, sobald ala -oegiich uober diose

rtngologenh-it su boric.tt-:n, ssxlass assna-Van "2or pmktischon durehfuoh-
rung und Sterilisation in emc— groess^rer. Asstabe-' orgidlfen warden
koonnten. 6 a warue vorgosciilagen, Hohlivldor labor dio Sterilisation von
Wiinnom nit hoontgunstrahlon »u bofragen. *wn 7eilneh./om an


liar


dwr taaforom mirdu uin^osc^rft., dass diesu tfe-raucho string gcfaoin
scion, hudolf Brandt lou^nott, b^i diesor /cnfcronz torcsend . ..am
iu a«.in. »io oi«s aucn soin * 0030 , uine dor bolder. .d.teanotisun, die
oxno gcnauo uonntnia alier in dioser ..onfervrx busprochenun idnzelhui-
ton oi'fonbaron, wurde van -randt diktlcrt (1.0-215, ankl. Bow. 172, I..
568), und dio andorc wurdo van in_ untorachriobcn. (: 0-216, *nkl. Bun.

170, it. 565).

an 10. uali 1942 rc -rlub i-idolf Brandt an Olnubtrg cinon Brief, in

viulchun or ihn uobor uiw -dnxvihoiton a.-inur .»uf~aba und die Plavno sur

Uurchfuohrung d«r Voraucic ontorrichtcta. Glaubers vurdu -nbufohlcn, an

hitedur zu berichton, wic lung- -s dauorr. nuerde, taurend ,'uodinr.on mch

aoinom Vorfahron iu ateriliaicron. da -uruo vorguachlago.., dasa Glauborg

sicn nit rohl und elno.a 1 -gv.rcrst d-a Jcrouabruocaur :.oru.crrt rational* gcra

in Vurbindung aotzen aol.to, o_ dort aoino St-rUiaatioMVerauchc derch-

zufuohron. bramt fuoUrto ...iter uua:

"Uub.r dio . irba«kuit dor -riol^n 3torilioiem>; : Uosscn
o«nn *uch lendo ^oraucho dazchf fu ;rt .-rdj,, sraoaa-

tontoila lx. do. .at, data men oinor b atL.-ton *oit, die
oio cunn -noaaton, viulloig.A urc:. I-o-ntr n aaf-

^“°t u o 3 ttllt wird, u-lc.no V^ra-ndorinrun -lnsutxxton
aina. *n den ein... aiui ndoitn Kail duurft- ub.r ouch oin
prorttiacn-j »».: auch in d_j .clao durcn^fmdirt w.rdun, diso
.-an vin. wujdin tit vinca ooa-n four oinu %wica. ...it zu-
MOAtfMporrb ml dan., ai-ht, fcolcher £rfol« label auftrttt.

"Ich aarf Si- bitt.it, -dr car Uni rrlchtun.- da l.-ichaf u hr.ra
SS_lhro wiae-ron,-. z u =~litun grief xutzutuUun." (.v£2l7l
AjikI. rcM. l?l, h. 5b7 - Unt«rstrolchU(.£jA oingefuegt).

Brault aanits. Jorcnaciiiaego ai-aos Bri-f.s an Fanl, Gravita, 5 S-
Stumbannfuohr .r * 0 u*.l b-lc * VHa und m Irup^nfuohrtr .uollor bole
hSH«. Am 7. Juni 194j kOORtt llauborg borlchton, dtaa -s rjouzlich aci,
muhroro huni-rt, wonn niche .;ar tauaorvi, taugUch mch b-Iiw. Verrahr-n
xu at-orilisiorcn. -r onclcoitu, .ana di« Storilial-rang


- 17 -


R. BRANDT


r r.ur uiundlich ,r:--l »-r-n - .'-dui -
-.hrschuinllc ucltV Vao sector noch


stunt soinr


-aiaoj


v-nj Jnt-r^-chun Ji
It.n <\o>i u, ,^a c
.vvM.lt .ri a;~\ von a
jtv»A 8 untor oao aagun


‘toss ich i'u^r aiusun ct,


"aurch -inu uinzig,. 3 ins.srltzung vor ^lr.;;ang dor 3 cba»r~uttur her und
b^l dur u^blichon gynackolo^acncn Intcrsuchung irfol.cn kann." (ltt-
212, Ankl. 3cw, 173, ft. 570).

^ic Stcrlliaationavcrauchc Glauborga vmnlcn tatsa^chlich ia .uach-
v.itzor Konzontrationslagoz .usgufuuhrt. Brandt koriMspondiortc -dt 11 a u-
bcrg in dics^r Ang.log«nn-it *iw4uj 19. Joni und 22 . .uli 1943 . ioh-
rcnd dis»ac buidon Jriufw meat vorhx-sdon aind, :*t aus Uauborgs
Kntwort an Brandt vo.j 6. .,u :uat kl;r h-rvor, atss di a. Schriftstu-cko
Glaubi-rg dnrcn urinn-m aollu-r., a^in- V^rauch. zu o-sclilounigcn. In
a^in^r Aiitwort ecnriub ..aubwr^:

"Ovii ttwitjMi .par.'.t buno-ti*. lc.. -..irklicn urin.vnd


- u su.t . Ich .. ihn urvl s.- ii-lt nicht b.h.lligcn,
r,;, 1 .iloht 1 l r,:lich i^>-*«jnllr 1 ,■( - 210 , «n 1 . - W,
17h, li. 572).


urandt r.-lbat g:b in a.in r eldest ittlich.n Jd'.-rur su, tl?.as
Glcubjrg im ,.usc;Ki«z .1 ..o.^-nti .tionsl^ r St rlllaS r'lr^jav. rauchc in


^,roaau..i ’laat-iou Su. c..i .ijart-. j ..t-:


- 18 -


... 3RAKDT


-■■‘-icijultc forawrhin cir., _u« s«r iurlU-
s-tion von .r-ucn. Dies*- *othod« bariorto aof dor Injekt'on

^ f°£! U0 * 1x5 ^ ■«■». Gleaber* faohrte

1 'T an Juodliu ‘ c ” ^ .:onzcntr;tionsi: E , r

h Vf! U ' Cr ~ tau f unJ Fr - u - n von Gl;ab-r-

in Auscimitz st.rilisiort." (:X>-440, ai«l,o ob.n).


Stormaiorun^ von Judon -ittela Ko^t^nstr^^ ,,urdc von Ango-
kl4«too Brack njahr 1*1 »: .chi (JXW.26, Ankl.

160, K. 532). HL^lwr loNcrt* Brack auf, -it ^ni^n dor ^
dio La -utfc-WuprogrUot ifc v uxai, ale Oeglich’teit dne, Storili-
aiuru:^ *u proof an, dio oio Opfor acbor ihr .chnocklichca Schickel la
Unxlin-n la.*v„ wuoWc. (3mck, a. 7484). aa 28. „ « 1941 anndto
Brack an Hi-wlor oinon -tlcht u-oer die ^brdao. von Voiauchon buzueR-
ilch iioontgonstrahlen-Koct riorux. fan, in aea „r r.aafuehrtc, d-.aa - 8 aon-


atoriliaicrungcn -lit u>o»t>natrahlun ohne Schwi.rijkuit uagcfuchrt

" k0 ° nnt *"“ "», «4. adt 20 nt>r..inrichtungcn

3CKW bia 40-0 Opfor U-Uci; ateriliai^t ««« KOonnt-n. (*>-203,

nn ’ a * ^ W * 161 ' 534 “ 5 >* - «• * ‘A 1941 b.at atljtj uS-itorabannfuoh-


f vr Tiofchbwher, uin Ua.rgobenvr areata, den 3 ^ von Brncka flo-
richt ond a^ndto -in- «b:>corlfL davon -n Huydrlch, dor. Cn.f Jer Slcher-


holtapolixul ur/j dua 50. Ck-ari.,


•°1. dov. 162, i u 536).


Oor fiinfall in nuwhrl La 5o^r 1941, and B-acka Vorachlng

wurao nichb aofort in An^rlff 6 enoum. „ber . 23. -aid 1942, ilo
uuutochland an dor oclmdla dea Siego. =u .tohon achlen, rchricb Br-ck
wledor on HiflMLor ono acnluj oiu Steriliaiarung irboitafa^-r Judun
vor. NichUrbeitaf-or.^- . Mitten oa jwotut. (U0-205, .1. flwr.

i63> h * 536 " 7J - - 11. * 1944 nr. Qrm*, dui Mci-

lcro topurAa,nt,J m -onuentr bionolagerL-.uftllngun ser F atstaliung dur
•lrkaoiOKuit dor hount^onct.rllial-nins corch gJ fuohrt w.rien sollt-n.um


zwar von aachvorat -.vli-,ex. ..-rsten, Ho


-15-


ft. Luo-ii/T


von Breaks CheT, dounlcr, zur .\-rru_gung g-stwllt ttv-rdon aolltcn. ..udolf
Brandt sindtc .»bscnrift_n tttesus Briofoa in Jbhl and Gnatz, uu Hl.-u-
lora intachoiUung in dio l drkliclv:oit u.j:usetZon. (20-206, Ankl. Dew.

16/., h. 536). Brick b_I hi aoinua St_Hv_r*_r-t^r Hl'-nkcnburg, aich zu
ili-aen Zwock cit dun Leitem dor Konz.ntrationaligcr in Vcrbindur.r zu
aatzon. Blankonburga Brluf, acr dies- ?*ts ich- Hi uslor rdttcilto, trr-f
am 15. august 1942 in bt 4 Wta Buoro ..in. (30-207, -Jikl. l*.w. 165, K. 538).
i.la Folge davon wurion /on or. Schumnn Vorauctu -n Haoftlinjcn io ..uach-
witzor Konto j it rational , w x uurcngor*-hrt. 0O-20G, aikl. Bow. 166, It.

539). tinua dor Opi’or dloewr 7_. orL»niu war dor Jongs, polniach- Jude
Balitzky, dor, nachdoa -r atirkun Joavr. von kount^netrihl<_n .uf auinu
tkiocnluchtatoilo xuagoauL.it mrdon w~.r, durch 0 . x-tion k atriort wurdu,
uai oiu iiirkung dor uoontgunatr-Uor. ruatzuat-ll (3*Utsky, I.. 541,
u. f£). Mindoatena li>: u..frvi»iUigc Vurauchapuraonun — I'olun, nuaaon,
rrunzoaon unu krloga;, l uiguno — wunkn ftk r diuao .'uiauc.i b-nutzt. 2 tur
jungu, got gubiuto lir..riling 'x.i o.atur Uuaundholt uunkn disu lur.ua-
goaucht. (Lovy, n. 556-7). . fc ai illv Opfor ciwaor tforaucbc. .urdon luagu-
rott..t, drv die aoflmjrun .,o v«rbrunnungon ai. . tsunfiohig rnchUn.
(Lwy, h. 557; taty, . . ndt gib in s-in^r -idoast tt:

trklourung vor do;., /orlndrui; z-, -jd -Storiliaitionavurcucho otunf - 11 a
mit Koontgonatr*.nl.n durchjofuohrt wordon. jr. Schuainn bunch -ftigto
aich mit dioaor :>tiiodo in uach*its und at-rilialortu oi u anzolil von
k’-unnum." (N0-n40, aiohu oboo).

Vug-n tdnor fruiterer. Sci.iltkrun^ i.r Slu-rilia tionovurauchu Vur*ai-
a°n nix auf don Schrii'tn'.tz u«.x .uv-1 :gv-bol;o^ruo -_gun Pohomy, O-ibhnrdt
und Brack.


- 20 -


a. UHaH>T


von bracks Chof, Bouhlor, zer Vvrfoogung g-st-llt notion solitcn. l.udolf
br\ndt sandtc ^bschrift-n dieses Briofos on Pohl and Srcwits, ua Hii^a-
lura .intachoidung in dio irklichkeit a_aua«tzvn. (.’JO-206, Anld. Bcw.

164, h. 536). Brack bofAhl aoi».vas Stollv-rtreter HI\nkcnburg, aich zu
dioacn Zweck ait dun Lcitcm dor Konz.ntrational'.gcr in Vcrbindung -a
autzon. Blankcnburga Brief, dor diuao T-.ta.ch_ Hi jilor aittciltu, trcf
an 15. nuguat 1*42 in or ndta 3uoro win. (..'0-207, ~nkl. Law. 165, h. 538).
i>la Folgo davor. wurdun von or. Schuairui Vorauche m Haoftlingan in ..uach-
witzor lionzoi,trational ■.-x uurchgefuehrt. (iO-20G, uikl. Bcw. 166, It.

539). Einua du: Opfor dieser 2L. »rL»nto wr dcr Jung- poiniache Judo
Balitsky, dor, luehtteu -r atarfcon Ooscn von Kocntgenatrihlen *uf aiino
Guacnlochtatuila ’xuageautzt warden w.r, lurch O.-.r'tion Jcstriort wurdo,
un die uirkung dor «u>ant^nstr hlun fcstxoat.il..'’. (3ilitzl*y, U, 541,
u. CL ). taindeatena IOC o..froiirilllgo Ve-rsuchaperaor.-n — I’ol.n, tuiaaon,
Franzoaun unu kriuga;, f-ngeno — warden fu.r diose .'j;3uc.i b-nutzt. Nur
jungo, gut gab '.uta Kf- .ftlingo ‘>vi huatar d-aor.dhait uurtivn dizu her .ua-
goaucht. (Levy, H. 55o-7). ± at die Opfer oi^aur .’orauche uurdon auage-
rottet, da «lio acn:«»ron ..oentgonv«rbronnung-n ai .r oitaunf .ohi; o’chten.
(Livy, h. 557; dvLitzky, n. 5^*3). nruidt gib in a_lncr -idoast ttlichon
Lrklaurung vor Juu Vurftihrur. au, laaa "Steriliaxtionavarouctw ebnf lla
nvit Hountgenatranlen durcl..ijfu_i,rt marten. dr. Schuarvnn beaclr.oftigto
sich nit diuaor .wtftodo in “uachwitx und at-riliaiorto oinu -u\zaJd von
kaonnom." (HD-440, oiuiic obon).

to gen oin^r woituruu Scl.ilderun? d.r St a rilia %t lonavurs u cho vurwui-
aon wir auf dun Schriltaatx dur Ankl^gobohOerCo j;-gun Pokomy, Gubhnrdt
und Br'.ck.


- 20 -


B. BB.JTOT


B. Hoohurvjxpjfi—r.to («nkl-gc3Chrift, Ziff-r 6 (a))

ivudolf Brindt t whs: aktiv an den Koobcnaxjxrijaonton toil. Soino
Konntnia dioaor Vuraucho und e-inc TeilnUno ir. ihnen isl uurch seine
eigona oidoastittiiche <ir.elaorung bowioacn. (.’>3-191, «nkl. Bcw. 43,
n. 163). ikr Plan cabstand boi B.achur and mirdo «rit tafckreftigor Un¬
to* atuetzung aarcii Brandt uix. Siuv-ra von ilsi and d«m mg kl'jtcn .alts,
huff und Roaborg durchgai'uolut. agon -in-r v oil at andiron Boachreibung
dur vorbrucheriaohen .. tai der houhuiKXjxritiait.- Vor-uiecn wir -af den
Bcnrifta.tz der .u» X.^-o boards -alts, nuff una tooburg.

dor Vorsehldg fu«.r uic Hoehonvcraucho n unfiviwilldg.n ^rauchaob-
Joktan wurdj Hi.—1-r von . ac.ter in uince. Brief voc 15. . i 1941 gu.:.\cht.
huachor tuilto Hi-aalor -dt, d..aa nionuni aich foor aoldio Vursucho frui-
willig fturguben HUordy, ..oil aie achr gof-ohrlich scion. Kr b-.t doahMb,
dnea lan Vwrbrochjr aur Vor foe gang g«.&tollt w-rd,n eolltet.. Zr r-chnote.
duuit, duao unter dun tfu.euchaobj-Kton aich oinig- iodeaf olio oroignen
auordon. (ltt)2-PS, .m.d. Bor. 44, h. 167). Mo.-u* Brier wurdo von Hiaalur
an “r-ndt woit«r©^bun, dor a ach.r due lit., dais "Qofnnganc nUucr-
lich go mo sur Vwrfuygung gostollt Worden <aeroen." Gloicheoitig infor-
wiorto M-indt den Chef dor -ich-rneitepolitei, durlt d-r lots ter aich
tit anchor in diuao* .ui .-1-geniKit in Vcrbindung ootto. (1582-PS, .mkl.
ouw. 45, h. 169). Raachor achriub spv.tor m Brandt, uu ui<. -rliubnla
zur durchfuyhrung do* Koohunveraacho ia w.chau.r ..onsantrati-jnelngor
ailbat zu orholton (.IO-.X7, «rJd. m>. to, i.. 171), » -luvnd'or ur-
apraonglich u.o -rl-aO.da -obet-n tte, e-in- V. rsucfei “-n der "boa* n-
atuvixligon rruoi'stollv fuor Koehonforscaiinren d r Loft* -fo" in u«nchon
durcluiufuohrun. (loOd-lS, «iuw oben). diua.r .uiuf iai., d.as n achor
und orundt lucn/fxiraooniic.iu ooziuhongen hit ten, l~ or Brandts Gatlin
kuiuien galornt natte Odd i— J-nu>r 1942 oii^.n ....


- 21 -


„n 21. _'.urz 1942 inlowdcrto Brandt Siov^rs, dor sich \a 9. ^rz
adt oinor «nfrogc bezuegUcn dor .lochcnvarsocho ait ih- in Vorblndung
goabtzt hatto, daaa diuao Voreucbo bc.oite an Jioniuotr tionaLiecrlna-’-aaon
in Dachau vor aicn gingon. iii—lcr lutte solch. Voraucue untar dor Bw-
uingung gubilligt, daae Ic-achur aiboi mitwirko . (1581WS, <Uikl. 3 jw.

48, R. 175).

rtB 13. ..pril 1942 teilto Brandt iuachor iit, daaa Hitler aainun
ivriachunburlcht uobor uio iioch-nveraucho urhalton habo. Boi dicaor Golo-
gunhoit apmch Brandt d-r. .unach »ua, daaa ruachjr aoinc Veraucho ait
du&aolbon Erfolg wio aaith-r forti'uchrcn aoogo. (1971c-PS, «nkl. Bow.

50, R. 180). IXir dorlcht cntnucllt, isas a^iiroro d-r Vorauchajwraonon
gotootut norvion wvron, nncndva- aio oinor kaonstlich ar;ougt*.n Hooho von
12 km 30 -inutan 1 -ng uagoaotat woruan war-n. .-hr-nd dor Uichonooff-
nung began:, dia Kurz uinua dor Opfor xu achlij*n und achluj oin- toitlang
waiter, ^cr ooricht a gto ;ch, dvaa "dio -xtn..i.n toedllchen v -r»ucho
an bcaondora iagutilton VP a vor*unoci>.r »< xal^n, d. oonat oini dor-rtigo
Kontrolla nicht uoogl cn w.-.-rc ...." (1971WS, odd. 3- v. 49, R. 175).
m aoinom Boricht vo* 16. ..^rU 1942 orkLzortu author, d*aa aia dio
Veraucho wioaorholt haotto.i, indon cio Vvrauchajxjisor.-n ir. -in^r 'ngo-
no.a-.non Houho von 12 L~ tooUtun uni doxm Veroucht-n, uiu H-rxtvtig-
koit dor vior Opfur vdcdor herzusu lion. (.#>-216, u&. 1. - •• 56, K. 136).
orandt wuaato von dioa- Orient, d‘- or in aoir.^a Briof ..\#cb-r voa
27. April don lutstarui ' ^it Into-

roaao goloson u*.d oinon aoa -tboricht ivec.wra -obor uio biahor auago-
fuahrten Voraucho ingeforeart, u_: inn fionurair-liaarsc.vOl . Uch vorau-
lagcn. (i.0-219, nul. bow. 59, lu 1W). .d» Hirol.r Kaach-ra -raton Bo-
richt goluaa .1 h.tto (1971 a-PS, si-.ho oban), orliasa or don Bofohl, -teas
zuu Todo vorurtoilt-. Ck-T-ngu;-,


ET-JiDT


dio lobenagefaohrlichun Vcrauchen ur.torwcrfcn rordon oivd cdt dcs Lebcn
d.von guk&ajon wiron, *u lobvnsla-nglichcr Konzcnti-.tionsl g-r bogn'-digt
ordun aallton. Da bia toa 20. Oktobor 1942 fuer dioao -rt Export twnt
nor Pol^n and huas-r. bcnutzt wordon nrea, actzto slch i.'schcr wogcn d».r
Prago, ob dio iioabio" '.ui aic ..nrf-fxlung findo, -iit 3rnnat in Vcrbin-
dung. (1971d-PS, «nkl. -'J*. 52, h. 1£3). Brandt toilto duw G-T-Ba^ro in
i,uonach«n a-i 21. Oktobor ;-it, dzaa HUdcrs .ia.catio if Polon and i-usson
koine ..nwandung findo. (397ic-FS, *»flkl. bow. 53• R» 183)•

Brandt *uaata aohr ^arvui, aaaa boi dun Hachonvoraachun Todoafnolle
vork.-en. In oinua Brl'-f e r a j-achora r. ihn, ditiox* vo.i 13. ..pril
1 % 2 , oraachto ale au die dtlaubnla, F'.rb*apfcotosrxphion von den frlach
aeziorten Loichon zu M\cnon, d- it. llgo-olncn iunurh-db der i.onzantri-
tionaligor nur ach>. .x-z- -iase ..afn A-en zu —cnon orlaubt ». :r. (1581b-P3,
.jikl. Be. 54, h. 134). cuvor.. ~*ndurwoiae toilto br-\ndt lluocka uit.

Hii..-lor hxbu aiett dx-it vinvorsLu>J-n orxlxcrt, d'-aa n.schvr in Vorbln-
duxig —it soinon Vorauchen in aaefou F rbonphoto^riphion cho. (1581(c)-

PS, .aucl. Bow. 55, tf. 1B5).

,>u 2o. Jail 19X.2 aniorbr-it-to n.acher Br'.ndt don Schluantxrlcht
uobor diu Hoohonvoraocho, del von lr.~, huff uni noi-bor*: luaganrtttitot
wordan wor. RLxalor hatto .uadruecxlich bcfohlcn, ixao dioa r Uricht
Brandt zugoloitat w-rdon aolltc. Kucher eroochto drandt, Hizal,r ein.n
Begloitbriof zu ainor Noituron ..bsenrift 1-a Eorichtoa, dio \n Kclduir-
achiill Milch Noit-r/.oachickt x\,rdcn aollto, z-ruaonden. (1607(~)-PS,
.»nkl. Bow. 65, h. 204). Ui-s.i dericht ^irdo uch f.ts -chlich von
Hiwolor ac 2*. MUguat 1%2 -n .ilch ges nit, sit dcr Bittc in iilch,
h-acher und koeborg zu eiluben, iit. die Vorauche s jrklr.ar n or.J oinun
PiLu vorzufuchren. Hi i i ox ehtoto die Ergobnisoa dor Versache fuer ao
wlchtig fuel dio ItfftKiffo, oraa -r uoborzoogt »r.r, d*.sa


n. Efeiflg


ullch n-.ch dor Boaichti^ung dca Filns Gocring d -rucbcr borlchtcn mior-
du. (16C7(b)-PS, -nkl. Bcw. 67, R. 213). ^ i*ilchs TAnlcdung nicht
oofort orfolgto, wurdo Sr .ndt a*- 26. -uguat v<xi .ngokl igU.it Siovora
h/.achoro wagon -ngog-ngon u*>d lit. _itg..toilt, diar ..nachor bofucrchto,
jo-nnd cvndora .ila «r dox .ngoklcigtc Ro-i>crg h'bu .dlch bereita uebvr
Qio Houhonvoraucho untorrichtot. Siovora toilto dioao .Jiaicht hxachcra
nicht, "donn w^r aonat luasor iv^achor and .ue-ib-rg koonntc don boricht
gc.~icnt habun?" (B3-221, .ji!: 1. Bov. oS, K. 213). ..a 29. ..uguat amdto
Brandt oj Siovora oin- .oituort, dio bca'-gto, d-.sa luachors .nnnhoo nicht
richtig aoi. Hiu.dor luoo .dlch nur w-nigo Ttgo vorhor guachricb-n, und
*.ilch aolbat wuoriu dio nootigen ..nordnung..n fuor dlu ..bg .bo dca Ivvachor-
homborg-Borichts urlaaacn. or *;?it logtc. oine -bachrift von Fl-Tilora
Briof in kilch boi. (MO-222, ..nrl. Bov. 69, >•. 215). .As I ilch na 31.
..uguat 1942 Hi-*.lor aittollto, or be ibsichtigo, ,-iachor und dooborg oin-
xuludcn, ihron Vortr .g tu n iton und dor. Pil: =u xoi?on, ht or vndt dioa
unvorzuoglich Rdachor one Siovora aitgotoilt. (K0-22J, ..nkl. Bow. 71, R.
215).

. 0 - 3. OKtobor iat 1 - achor riodoru_ an Brmdt .It dor. Vornchlag
horongatroton, «naa or gum HL-f-lcr ^-rooonllch uobur dio "l-.cb\u >hc-
porL-wnto'' borichton toochto. 3r-r.ut t-llto iiu jodoch rlt, dr.ta uioa
nicht i.-ouglich aoi, d--. RUolcr 1—ngcro -oit voo. ilu^urt-ior 'bwoacnd
coin wvrdu. Er iordortc doah lb *-nch.r of, acinon aorioht sobold trio
f-ouglich achriftlich oi.izuroic;.on. ir, Brandt, *jru.' ihn •'r. .iinal«r
durch uinon .turlor nacnacniekun. ir fuhr imn tort:


- 22 . -


R. BE.JOT


"Sino aitschoidung, wlu die Jinge hinaichtlich dor Hoohen-
veraucho liogon, dio Si<- lcidcr do.. G-nur Of olclvirachill
idlch niche vortrcgen .<onnX.cn, iat in ..ugenblick nicht
>-*)uglich. Ich *-rdc de_ i^icftsfuohrup-SS, sobrid or von
swinor noise zurueckkcK-.t, fr .gen, rj or ni.r bcfiohlt."

(NO-293, ..nkl. 5cv. 74, R. 22o).

ikiso r-.achor and no. Jx.rg koine Gc-lcgunft.-it gegobon trurdo, . ilcfi por-
soonllch Boricht zu erstutten, h t d«*_ .ji geklftgtan Siovors achwur. Sorgo
gtwftcht. .uz 21. October 1942 frigt or Brandt un a3t, ob or in liippkc

—s

uobwr <lio3o ..ngologonhoit achroib«n and ihu ritteilen aollo, dias Ra-
schor and Kouborg von Ki.-4.er den Bof-hl orhilten h'-ottun, nur an kilch
peraoonlich zu borientun. Sino aolcho -'.asnahau wuerdo ivachor and itoo-
berg, die 3ehr bolaidigt wiuron, vor.nlasson, woitor boi den Vorsuchcn
-dtzuwirkun. Siovors orbit lach firsts Hilfo, aa wied.ru;- die Untor-
druckka...jor za bokov-aon, dio fucr die Vorsaciw not -ndig w.r. nr fauhrto
a as:


"die OntarkuuilungaYursuchu aind jottt b;u3cnloa:.on, ao diaa
dio vex; iwicnsiUwhror-SS gowavnachte KortsoUung dor Hoohoiv-
riugversuciie beginnon kann. oiz- g.br achen vir xiodorvu.. dio
Untordruc,... ;n., Jien. 4 jtdoc . -it St afonrggrugitpujupsjn,
»oil aonat . rocssere Hoehonveraucho nient durchgefauhrt *ar-
don koeiaun. Uia nouerlichan Vureuche warden dann r.uch dizu
aiunen, u. dio H'bilit aions .rbcit von rtiacdvr zuu ..bachluas
zu bringen. dio Uub^rlaasang dor UntoiMruckka.-ior wird Jedoch
nur -.oofclich aoin, *enn d-r luiichafuenror-SG dePVugon »i'-
aoenlic.j u, Gwnur liwld- .racnull *ilch scijroibt." (NO-226,
••nkl. B-w. 75, n. 220).


Brmdt untcratuutzto dio vorbrecftoriscner. Veraucha Rnschers and
Bounor kltarboit .r . tJ lohduor Kbasdatr .tionalngor bis suj_ Son.or 1944.


- 25 -


R. BRANDT


c» arfricruiKscxxr^nto (..nkligusctarlftj Ziff or 6 (S))

..ogcn einur Bosch:oibung dor vorbrucnoriscr.cn h'.'.tur dicsur Ex-
poriuonte siolio don i>cnrifts\tz cicr .inkl'.gcbchoordo bc2ucglicn dos .ji-
gokl-vgton Siovor3.

Dor .aiguKlagto .aidolf Br.ndt gib ir. seiner jidwsstottllchcn Srklic-
rung oino gen-iuo und dutiillicrte Bcschrcibang dor Erfrierungsexpcriaontc.
(NO-242, lOikl. Bu». 60, it. 230). Brmdts .Vnntnis and Unterstuotzung
dor Srfriorungsoxpori-xntt wird nicht nar durch di.su oidcsst'.ttlicho
arklaurung bewioson sondom '.uch darett violo andero Doku-ento boi don
•Jeton.

.•n 3. Oktobor 1942 schriob twischor in arindt in oinut. pursoonlichon
Briuf, d-»ss die £rfriurungauxpori—mto nbgeachlosson scion ".dt ..usnatou
jenor auber dio Srwiorcung r,it koor?vnnwr.io". ^ln -/on ihn uid Holzlooh-
nor abgofusntor Boricht sollto bel oinor Luftwiffonkanferaw uebor Sr-
friorung u. t 25. Oktobor In huomborg crat-ttut rervlcn,und x.'seher bit
Brandt, Hi.ndurn Elm illi^ung hierza ainsuholun. iwiscbors Brief onthaollt
woitorhin, dtaa or .ndt lUud.rs ilrauchan vd~ 22. Boptu-abor 1942, dnss
dio Vorsucho uebor dr.Mun.JUng ~lt »oorpurwion-o durchgofuchrt warden
soilton, Huiturgoluitut n ttu. KaeMuu or oinigt dinzoliiuitun uober dio
Hoohunvorauche -dtgotoilt h.tto, brochto haachor soino uoinang zua
..usdrucK, diss Braj»dt "achon L-ngo uobur dlaao g\n*o Guachichto infor-
uiurt wurdo" und aciiloas aoinun Brief, indue: or Brandt achr fucr soino
Doujohungon danktu. (J.O-2C5, «nkl. B.w. 36, it. 244).

Vior Tage nacbher schickte der Uit^r dos utchauor .Nonzontntions-
l^gurs an Brandt oin Telegram. ait der Bitto, SS-drig. dofuehrer Gluocka
vou RSH.. mzunuison, "von ...vuiabrueck die vior von ^tibs.rzt Dr. iviachcr
fuor seine Expjri.ento vorlmgten frauen n'.ch Dachiu zu schicken". Brcndt
entapr.ich dieaor Bitte u. 6. Cktobur. (1619-FS,


R. Bi'.l.'DT


.jikl. Bow. 87, h. 247-8). Die w.iblichon Konzuntr .tionsl-gertncftlingc
wurdun tata-'.echlicn von Knscber dazu benutzt, diu Opfur dor " rfric rungs-
•xpoiinBato wieder "dure. naotao" zu vzMMnMO. 0-0-323, nnkl. Bow.
94, n. 325; 1616-PS, -nkl, Bow. 105, R. 342):

-ua 11. Noveubor 1542 trvf Brindt uit doa «ngoJdxvgton Gobhirdt Vor-
burwitungen zu oinor ..onforenz -lit Kaachor, in welchor der lotztoro Co¬
lo genheit haben wuordo, Gobh ‘.rdt uobor dio -rfriorongsvoraucho zu bc-
richton. Brandt toilto Gob...rdt ;-dt, dasa uoituro Irfriorungavorsucho
in ftuorzo auagofuohrt -ordun wuonion. (.*.0-314, ..nkl. 3cw. 90, ii. 331).
hoachurs Wigon sutztc alto Brandt aussonkwi a 20. November ait Pohl in
Vcrbindung and bit d;ru>., u~.as ..-achor "in aolr.on /orsuchcn in Dachau
boatuxjoglichat uacorslueUL : ur-un sollo". ..uasorde.- orsuchto or Pohl,
oofohlo zu orluaaon, d-.aa dio ;.loiderfabrik in DicJ.au n&scher dftboi hol-
fon aollto, dio notwondigo Vox-.uchakloldung fuor dio Jrfriorungoexpori-
f..onto zu boacnr.rfon. (.0-287, ..nkl. Bow. Ktf, h. 333). Brmdt a\ndtu
hnachor oinu ..baciirilt diosca Brlofoa. ... 13. Ooa-ibor 1942 gab Hirallor
aoino Brliubnla *ur "uito.-on DerchfuJirong von Houhun- und Brfriorungs-
exp«rl~»intun, apoziuil :dt trockonor Radio. Dioaor Brief wurdc von
brondt an haachor, «iaa .jinonurb. und wdorc botoiligtu SS-..o«tor weitor-
goloitot. (1612-PS, -util. Bow. 79, n. 229).

iua 28. Januar 1943 scnickto der .eigcklagtc Siovora -41 3randt uin l.o-
oorondua naachoro botroffond seine Untomxtang .dt Grawitz und dor. .41-
guKlagton Poppundick. Ii ao^leitacnxviben orbit Siovora Brandts i inung
daruobvr, v«ulche JUltung oi urd ..voch-r b.zueglich ihror Stt-llung Cnwitz
gogunuobor einnote*.-n aoIlUn.


- 27 -


.


A. BiuJPT

;.da Silvers erreichcn .■ol-.tc, w r eino Intervention Brandts bci Hiiualor
zu aeinon uunstun, d ,r von dr watz Wegon Ziitdschung in aorztlichc
uingo Krltiaiort worden war*

das ue-onnduj.; jv sch-rs ueb-.r dio Zonfur.nz it Gr.'.witz and Poppe-n-
dick, das Brandt -it Silvers' briefon orhiolt, zeigt offonsichtllch, dass
woitoro Srfriorungaversuche -it Trockcnkaclto vorgonx* >en werden aollton,
da-dt sio "oinige hundort F-.olle haben". Die .ichtigkoit von firmdta Stol-
lang una der hollo, dio o» boi den brfriurungsuxpori-^unton spicltu, wird
darch dio Tatoacho bewicser., dr.ss erawitz wiohrund diosor rocht kurzen
Diskussion teacher zwoiivxl SQgtc, dnss or Brandt uobor aoino -einung hin-
sichtlich naschers and seiner Zusa-t-mirbeit nit iha untcrrlchton wordo.
(NO-320, .Jikl. Bow. 103, K. 335-339).

Brandt wordu von dor Tats.cf.j untorrlchtwt, daaa Hl—alor i-aschor dio
“rlaubnis gegeb-n hette, .oit-ro ..rfriorunssoxperi^ntG in don Konzontra-
tionolagom von •‘uach Lt- it’.- iablin durchsufuohren. .jj 9. hor» 19/.3 un-
torrichtoto or GrauiU .ilj^ohond, das a idi-ior oino aolcho irluubnla on¬
to lit nautto. (1615-PS, .-ikl. i>-»>. 109, K. 350).

14. itderz serdektu iv. scaur m orindt cino duschruibung seiner
Konforons .-it Conor iloborstabs .rst Hippko, <1 «.j Cnuf dca Smitaotswescns
dur Luftwaffe, naochtr wolltu von dor Luftwaffe zur SS voraotzt werdon,
und Hippko vorsuchtu,ihn zu... bleibcn sa uoberredon. Auf diosor konforenz
beoprach teacher nit Hippku untcr --ndercu die io.glichkoit konbiniortor
Hoohon- und Erfrierungsv-raucho an Idbondoa . enaction. (ND-270, .uikl. Bow.
HO, h. 351). Daas Brandt nesetur b.i aolnua Vorsuch sich zur SS vursot-
zen zu lassun, unturstuotzte, wird darch cine .detennotiz von Sicvers vom
29. Januar 1943 bowicson, die eine Konfcrenz nit


S. BK-NDT


0ranclt to Qio8or Sichu info-tot. (iS-233, ..nkl. Sow. loi., R. 340 ; NO-
538, ..nkl. Bor. 122 , R, 379 ),

<ju U. ..prll 1943 achricb hiachor on mndt, doss olnc woitoro
6eriu von Trockcnkaolto-VcrBuchon in Haeftlingcn d«s .techauer konzcn-
trationaligora wvchrcnd cin-r Pvriodo achr kiltcn ottcra durchgofuohx-t
•Urdu. i)lo Vorsuchapcrsonon Harden ia mien U, Stundun ling ciner Kiolto
von - 6 '* C. luageautzt uni hit ten cinu Innontcapwatur von 25° C. erroicht.
(NO-292, ..nkl. Boh. Ill, 354). Brandt bo 8 tiv.-ti.gtj don Eryfang von
“oachcra oriof au 16. ..pril u rA Uilto iha .At, diaa HLulcr aoinon
"Boricht Ofebur dio .Jiakuonlungaveraucho in -onachon cn dor loft" orhal-
ton h-ibu. Sr bat Kiachor, aich -it dou ..ngckligton GobhanJt, dor dioaon
Boricht zuu Studiuc von Hio-lor crhelUn tU, in V orblndun{ . Bu 8ottcn .
Lino ..bachrift dloaoa driufos nurdo von den ..ngoklagtun Brandt an Gra-
-ita goaandt. <>-241, ..nkl. Bo. 113 , 355). line «onforcns zwiachon

naachor und doc ..ngukligtan Gcbhudt find a* 14. ;a 1 in ^gunnert due
..ngokligton r iaclior i., Mononl^chcn atitt. Gobhardt boa^ich ait Knachor
dio Jirfrleiungaux^i rl< untu Oixi -ndoru L~ -achauor Aonzontrationaligcr
durchgofuonrto Vorauchc una lad niochcr oin, ait iha 8dMii—ntuarbolion.
haachor bofuorchtoto, avino Unibhiongigkoit zu vcrlioron und nandtu aich
an J>iovura,diuit or dioao «ngulogcnheit in taktvoUor oiac orladiga,
dft Goblunit oin aohr ongor /round hiualora Mr. (NO-231, *nkl. Buh. H6 ,

K. 3*0). Siovora aoinorsuita aotztc aich aa 22 . kii in dicacr «ngologon-
heit ait orondt in Varbindang am urt»t -uaknnft, ob HUnlor in bezug nuf
Machura botiotigung« 0 obiot und ..rbeiten Gcbhirdt irgendnolcho boatlantu
"Giaungon gogoben habo. -uaaurdu- ortut ur mndta Intervention zu Gun¬
men machers, induu or a.gto;


- 29 -


a. aiwj.'DT


"Icn logo dies*. •Jigulogonh'-it v-rtraucnavoll in iJiro Hoendo,
unJ bittc 5*c vor allZo., don Brief von Jr. iv^achur genz
:-lluin, nor su Ihrer pcraocnlicboo Untorrichtung su vcrtrcn-
non, Au»it Jx. .w.sch-r koinarloi Schtdorigkoitun vor. SS-
Gruf. frofu3aor or. Jcbh-.rdt go:-\chL wordon." (1-0-267. .jikl.
duh. 117, ... 366).

.da .-xachur dobhordt in hohcnlychcn b-auchto, er.sitigto ihn dor lutz-
tcro dazu, oio Lxufbahn oinca Univorsitietadozwnt.n su orgiviftn, (N0-
231, axehu obon). uaac.Kr folgtu diosux- n t, und Brandt unteratuctztc
ihn rowckteltaloa und rboiteto -it don -ngokligton Sievora ur.d Bloao
zuauu-on, un naachor -ino wnunnung sue. Univorsifuxtadoiontcn zu vor-
achaffon. (NO-229, .tfikl. oow. 118, h. 367; NO-290, ^nkl. Bow. 121, R.

373). Jaaa iwachora liobilitatiociaaohrift auf d-n Jrfriorungal- und Hoohon-
oxporiiaunton bogruundot * .r, »dxd lurch n-schers ..ororanduc uobor auino
iwdiziniacho ..uabildun.;, nolchoa or toa zwcek auinor Habilitation achricb
(NO-230, «nkl. But«. 115, h. 336), und auch lurch \nd-rua BcwOiamtori'O.
buwioaon. (NO-2/.o, .Jikl. Jon. 112, K. 354).

Brandts ungu tfor&inJung cit twiachor oird xoiterhin lurch dio Ein-
trau «° in i»iuvora' Tag-bo eh iuor 1944 bewlcsen. 21 . J?n utr booprach
Siovura cdt Brandt iitit.rj .rlriorungav-rejchu ..aach-ra. K-.ch imachcra
VuriViXtung hattw u rnixit Jca..':\.chunscn cit Siovora u 18. und 28. .,pril,
wulchu offunaicntlich aich ndt -ittuln u.td -ogon, ihoi zu holfon, bef-.aa-
tun. (3546-PS, «nkl. 3cti. 123, «. 382).

Uio Borichto uobur hi.achera -rfriorungaoxpori.uintc, dio alio (lurch
er.-ndta huendu gingon, Zuigen krist-dlkl-ir diu Unsehoucrlichkoit dor bo-
gengenun *orbruchun. Jiu Vortuidigung aucht Zuflucht in dor Bohauptung,
daas nur uin ..rzt lie*.. uvrichU vorstuhun koonno. Nlchta koennto von
dor athrhoit w^itor ontfomt aoin.


- 30 -


a. ijiu irj?


D. Gaaoxp^rinonto (.j'drlaj.oachrif t, Ziffer 6 (D)).

Von Novonfcor 19d2 tia 3or=oor 19-id wurdon in don Hon-
zontrationala’or l.atzwoilor untor dor Lcitun^ von *rofoaaor
Hirt von dor Univcraitaot Straaaburs 2 xpurinx>nto zur Doatin-
r.ainij dor wirkaanaton oohandlunj von durch Sonf-(Loat)-Gc.a
voruraachton i/undon durch,-ofuchrt. In Bozus auf don vorbro-
ohorlachon Choraktor dloaor Voraucho aol auf don Schriftaatz
^ogon don i*ncoklacton Siovora vorwioaon.

7/io boi den had to- und Hoh on voraucho n (aioho obon)
offontart Rudolf orondta oidoaatattllcho Krklaoruns vor dor
Vorhandlunj uotor daa Loat-Gaa aoin daaon von dioaon 2 xpo-
rirtonton. In dioaor cidoaatattlichon Srklr.orunc c^b Ri'cndt
zu, daaa dio Vorauchaporaonon Konzontrr.tionalr.^orinaaaaon
v/oron, dio aich niolit froiwilli~ noldoton, und daaa oini .30
von ihnon infol -o dor Hxporinonto atorbon. (NO-372, inkl.
Bon.262, d. 1008). Dokurontariachor 3owoia in don .Jeton
zoigt uobordioa klcr aoino -uao.x-.onarboit nit don .uacoklac-
ton luxrl ..randt und 3iovora, nit Hirt, Grawitz, Y/innor and
ondoron in .(ahnon dioaor Hx^orinonto.

in 7. Juli 19-.2 orlioaa Hinnlor oinon bofohl on don
incol:lnc,ton Siovora, daaa dio Goaollachoft *hncnorbo oin
Inatitut fuor wohrwiaaonachaftlicho Zwookforachunv orrichton
aollto. ia aollto "dio Fbrachuncon doa SS-Kauptaturnfuoh-
rors *rofoaaor br. Hirt in Jodor nur i-oo'jlichon .ioiao untor-
atuotzon und c.llo oinachlaoci£on Poraohun^on und -rboiton in
£loiohor Vioiao foordorn." (dC—i 22 , Ankl.Bow. 33, .1.136).

Hirt wurdo In ihnonorbo .«btoilun : -.aloitor, und aoino vorbre-
choriacho Taotijkoit wurdo von brandt und Siovora nanona
Hinmlora untoratuotzt.

in 2 . Juni 19 <2 aondto Siovora oinon Boricht iiirta
uobor aoino Voraucho totreffend dio Gaarundonbohandlunc nit

- 31 -


a. 3R.JOT


Vitoninon an 3ronit. dirt orkiocrto, doss cr * 030:1 dor
Offonaivo j 03011 rrcnkrolch -j^porinontc on lcbcndon konachcn
nicht faabo vomohrxn koonnon, abor or wollc aolcho -xpori-
oonto zur Poatatollunc dor Schutzwirkun?, dor Vitnnlntohond-
lunc auafuuhron. (NO-097, .jdcl.3ow.260, d. 1022 ).

Slovora *dctonvcrr.crk an broivlt von 3. Kovonbor 19-12
botroffond dio Vorboroitunj dor Loat-Gaa-Vcraucho cnthuollt
dio Tataacho, dasa dirt nit dor ^.uafuohrunj dioaor -xpcri-
nonto an lvonzontrr.tionalo 30 rinap.aacn in Kotzwoilor boauf-
troct war. In dioaor Ulttoiluns bokla^t aich Siovora, daaa
dio I<X 3 orboar.iton in Natzwoilor nicht daa rochtc Voratacndnia
boi dor brrlchtunc oincr Vorauchaatation fuor Kirt ^ozoi^t
haotton. ~a aoi ao-^ar vorgoaohlagon wordun, daaa dio Vor-
auchaporaonon boztdilt wordon uuoaaton. Jaa Konorandun
aohloaa wio fol^t; "«*n S3-0boratun.bannfuohrcr jt, rt.Brandt
zur ivonntnianahno untor bczujiahno auf unaoro houtiQO bo-
aprochunc mit dor bit to, aich kar.oradachaftlich dafuor zu
vorwondon, dcaa dio orfordorllchon Vorr.uaaotzun^on in Katz-
woilor coachaffon wcrdon." (H0-098, takl.Bow. 263, .1.1028)*
.jt 3. Dczonbcr 1948 orwldorto Brarit, daaa or nit *chl 30 -
aprochon hobo und daa 3 dio Uaon 30 I, uobor dio Slovora 30 -
klact habo, bohobon wuordon. dr infomlorto Siovora:

"Sollto oin noohncli .303 Sinaohalton oolnoraoita notwondi 3
aoin, 30 bon Sic mlr bitto ^achricht 0 . (NC-092, .uikl.Bow.
180, R.702).

Doi dun dort auasofuohrton -ixp^riaonton orboitoton
Aorzto dor Luftwoffo nit dirt. (Roll, rt.1059, 1061). Obor-
arzt V/ianor, oin Stabaorzt dor iAiftwaffo, war illrta Haupt-
nitorboitor. Wlmmor wro* zcitwoiao Lirts iuiatouiachon Inati-
tut an dor Univoraitaot Straaabur; zu^otoilt gowoaon.


- 32 -


3. IjRjJCT


«■. 21. -ujuat 19-.2 - vor do- tatarxchlich-n Do^inn dor Sxpc-
rinontc - -rauchti Drnndt don Chof doa SS-Hr.uptcxitua un In¬
ter volition, danit .iii.sr.cr sweeks ..uafuohrunj dor Exporinonto
woiterhin dirt zur Vorfucr^ai- atoho. (NO-196, «nkl.Dow.261,
a. 1027). In ..pril 19-i3 aolltc ./insor zu cinor andoren Sin-
holt voraotzt wordon. Siovera wendte aI eh nn Brandt und bat
un aoin aofortl oa Jinjrcifon, dr. ;, ^r. »»lonora Voraetzunj doa
..ufhooron dor Grav^raucho In .* r.tzvoilor und Strzaaburj bedou-
tct". Siovora tetonto, daaa “dio von Dr. ilrs or infol^o aoi-
nor jroaaon Vcr3ucharuihon ;oarau,olton praktiachon iConntniaao
nur von ihn (Eirt) ververtot wordun koennon", und bofuorvror-
toto dio zcltwoillfO Veraotzunj iii-iora zur iir.ffon-SS. Brandt
ontaprach don Lrauohon Siovora' und tret an 27. Kai 19-13 on
daa Sonittevotaont dor SS untor dor. .jv.oklajton Qonzkon r.iit
dor: Jrauchon her nn, .ilzzr.Gr aotnld wio r^ojlich zur noffon-SS
zu voraotzon, dr. oa zwoifolhaft aoi, ob ohno Lhn Hirta Expo-
rlacnto fortjoactzt wordon koonnton. (NO-19-;, nklJow.265,
.{.1033). Jr trot -uch nr 3. Juni colofoniaoh und an 9. Juni
brioflioh on Goomort, Gocrin a porsoonllchon Dorator, horon,
un dofuor zu a or jo n, dr.aa Tiirmor “fuor aolno kriojawiohti.ion
Gc.a -Exporinonto* woltorhin Hlrt zur Vorfuojun,j atohon aollto.
(NO-195, inkl.Bow. 266, K. 1033).

&u Do;;inn doa Johroa 19-.-. uratattotor. Hirt und tfiaaor
oinon conoinaanon Doricht uobor Ion "^ohondlun.javorachlaj
fuor Kanpfatoff vorlo tzun.er. tdt Irat n . (NO-099, «Jikl.3ow.
268, R.1035). Dioaor Boricht bowoiat cindoutl^, daaa von
Hirt und .iltixjor Experironto an looondor. Kwnachon aua&ofuohrt
wurdon. da iat wichti^ foatzuatollon, daaa dor Doricht von
3chworon, nittluron und loichton dundon duroh Loat aprlcht.

- 33 -


H. LiUNDT


Brandt cr’iiolt or. 11. ..pril 1944 von don ^r.^cklepton Siovera
oino dbschrift dloao3 Dorichtoa. (::0-015, Lnkl.5ow.275,d.

1039).

Ln un^ofGohr 220 ruaai30hon, polniachcn, tachcchischon
und doutachon Hr.oftllnjon wurdon Gaavorauchc on"C3tollt, und
unjofaohr fuonfzir atarbon davon. Slo ncldoton aicb nicht
froiv/illlG. (Soil, a. 1052, 1057). Sloho r.uch dlo Zeujon-
auaaa^o von aaloa. (Hiodcrachrlft vor. 30. JUnl).

..oltoi’wr Eow«la fuor Brandts Toilnchcc an don Gaa-Bxpo-
rlnonton findot alch in don Ta^obuch Siovora 1 iuur Gas Jahr
1944. (3546-.S, aiuho oton, Sintra^ von 4. Kcorz).

2. Fluckfloboroxpcrlnonto (^nkla^oachrift, Ziffer 6

In Bezuc auf dlo von don 3tabaarzt *rofjaaor £u-on
Hoajjon in Konzontrationala^or Jatswoilcr aua jcfuohrton Flock-
flobcroxporinontc wird auf dio Sohriftaaotzo dor .-jiklajobo-
hoordo go jon die .aiGOlrlngton Schrocdcr vcxl aoso dozu,, jonor.-
ncn.

Brandta tfonntnia dor von !laajon ln i'onzontrntionalo^or
Ilatzv/oilor aua-;ofuohrton Plockfioboroxporlnonto joht lclar
aua ..uaaaGon in soinor oidoaatattlichon 3rklacrun;j horvor.
(N0-370, dnkl.Bow. 294, i(. 13C3-4). Dio bowoianufnohno hat
woitorhin vozoict, daaa Drorvlt don dn.;oklaGton Siovora boi
dor .-olioforunc Haajona nit 400 konzontmtlonalaGorhaoftlin-
Con fuor dioao «rt Vorauohc bohllflich war. Brandt ^ab in
30inor oidoaatattlichon Erklaorunc zu, daas dioao Voraucha-
poraonon 3ich nicht fr-lwllllG noldoton. Haakon aolbat bo-
zou^to daa ^lciohc. (H.9541-2). Dio ouaaR£o doa Zou^on
GoorG «-irtz bow^iat, dr.aa Kcc.Gon aoinon Lipfatoff in Sennor
1943 in Sckirnock, olnon ZwciGlr-Gor »ios N’atzwoilor Konzon-
trationaloGora, ^opruoft hatto. Unjofaohr 20 pclnlacho
Haoftlinco wurdon boi dioacn dxpcrl.ronton vonrandt, und
zwol von don Vorauchapcr3onon atarbon.


- 3*; -


R. BRANDT


(R. 1293). Dicac ZcusGnauaaaco wird bolcrr.ofti&t durch die
Notizon uobor Haa^ona Expcrincr.to, die von ?rl. Crodol, aoi-
nor A33i3tontin, joriooht wurdon. (NC-3852, *»nkl.Ecw. 521,

R. 9660). Dio Zeu^in &lith Scheldt losto uobor oino ondoro
von naavon in Somnor 194-1 in Katzwoilor aus^wfuohrto Vor-
aucharoiho Zeuenia ab. un un^cfachr 200 Haoftlinson wurdon
Vorauchc cn^catollt, und un^ofeohr fucnfzig dor Vorauchapor-
aonon - oinaohlioaalich IControllporaoncn - atarben. An^o-
hoori^o allor Naticnalltaoton, obor vorwiocond Zi^ounor, wur-
don ala Vorauchoporaonon vorwandt. (Scheldt, ...1370-1; Kaa-
Con, R. 9607). Sioho auch dio Zcujonnuaaado von Naloa.

(Niodorachrift von 30. Juni).

Brandt a dltwlrkun; an Ean;;ona Zxporii.onton orhollt aua
dokunontariochon Jewo la notorial in don .Jeton. 19. J.ni
19-id achriob dor ..njiklajto Sievora in Vorbindun * nit dor
Bcaohoffurvj von 200 Kon*cntrntlonalac.orhaoftlln ;on fuor Haa-
Rona Flockfloborc.xporir.onto an *ohl. Dloaor ^riof zol^t,
daaa Bohl achon in Herbat 19-13 auf Siovora Srauchon 100 30 -
ui t *,noto lionzontratlonalajorhaoftlin^o nach Hatzwoilor 30 -
aohickt hatto. Zino Abschrift dioaoa 3riafoa wurdo Brandt
zur Konntnianahno zur.oachlckt. (i!0-008, .»nkl.3ew. 304, R.
1398). Brandt bcrichtcta ausaordoii or. 6 . Juni 194-1 Siovora
und tollto r:it, dnoa Brandt Hinnlor untorrlchtot habo, "da
ihndio 3acho wlchtic :onut’ orachlon". (N0-009, Ankl. 3 ow.

305, ft. 1400). Brandt haotto aichorllch nicht cntachoidon
koonnon, ob dio Sacho wichtlj 301013 aol odor nicht, wonn or
nioht uobor Haai*,ona Folckfioborvoraucho vollkonnon orientiort
Cov/oaon naoro.

SoQwaaaorvoraucho (Anklacoachrift, differ 6 (Q)).

Sxporimonto zur Trlnkbarcachunj von Soowaaaor warden in
Sonner 194-1 in Dachauor konxontrationslajor anjoatollt.


-i. B.WJDT


Eino Ecachroibur.j dioaor Voraucho wire! in Schriftsatz dor
An!clc.jo*oohoordo 30 >n don dnjGklczton Schroodor ^orjobon.

Brandt lojt in aoinor oidoaatcttliohon Brklaorunj bo-
tra^chtlicho honntniaao dnruobcr an dan Tog warun, wo und
von wor.i dioao Sxporirento auajofudhrt wurdon. 3a iat bo¬
zo iohnond, daas cr zu^ab, dcaa u *u craarton aoi, doaa oinise
dor Haoftlinco infold dor Sxperi »nto atorbon wuordon".
dr v/uaatc nioht, ob Todaafr.ollo vorlcanon, abor oa int durch
die duaaeGO doa £ou;on Tachofcni: bewloaon, doaa nindoatona
oino dor Vorauohapcraoncn infoX 30 dor Soowosaorexporinonto
atorb. (a. 9339-40).

Dio liitwirkunn 3rnndta an don Scownaaoi\.xpori:’.Gnton
wlrd fiuroh dolcui.iontr.ria ohoa Jowwlaixitorlnl bol*. jt. Drnndt
orhiolt dna .'rotokoll dor Soewnaaor-fconfer-nz von 20 . Uai
19 / -'i, wio oino hnndaohriftliohc Borxrkunc r.uf dor «raton
Solto do a Boriohtoa klnr zoijt. ..uf dioaor tonforona wur-
dc orklaortt

"Ohof doa Scnitaotarcaona iat da von uoborzoujt,
dr.aa boi don Jo rkr.-Vorfr.hr on nr.oh dor. Genua a
doa Dorkatita nr.ch apaotoatona 6 Tajon ^oaund-
holtlioho Sohaodon zu orwr.rton aind, woloho
oino dcuomlo ^caunlhoitlicho Sohaodijunj nnoh
aloh zichon und nnoh ..naioht von Untornrzt
Dr. Sohaofor nnoh apaotoatona 12 Tajon nit
tootliohon Auajanj ondon wire’.. ..cuasorc *r-
aohoinuncon aind lurch iiitwaoaaorunc, Durch-
fall, iCraonpfo, Halluzir.ationon und ondliohon
Todo zu orwnrton.

"Da naoh «naicht Ghof doa Sanitaotaroacna bol
dioaor Vorauoharoiho nit dauorndor. roaund-
hoitliohon Schaodirundon bzr. don Todo dor
Vorauehaporaon zu rochnon iat, aollon ala
Vorauohajoraunon Louto Qonorvion wordon.


- 36 -


wolcho acitcna -os .-b-ichs fuehrers-S3 zur
Vorfuojiuv Qostollt warden. n
(NO-177, Ankl.Bow. 133, R. '179).

Au 28. Junl 19-1- achriot Grawitz an Hl.ir.lor, daaa dor
.Ji^olclcv'.to Gobhcrdt, zusorr:on nit Gluccka und Hobo, don iSx-
porinonton zu^oatinnt und daaa Nobo dio Vcrwondunj von Zi-
•our.crr. fuor dloaon Zwock vorrjoaoklacon hnto. Einnlor goto
don aoino -uatin. .unj nit dor 3oatisx:iunc, daaa droi ..n ( ;ohoo-
ri.*,o olnor andoron .tr.sao don Vv.rauohaporsjnon zu .Controll-
zvvookon hlnzugofucct wordon aollton, da dio zijounor nit
don Doutaohon nicht zu vorrfc iehon aoion. (NO-179, «nkl.

Dow. 135, 2. 185). Daaa Ararvlt von dioaor -ntaohoidung
Konntnia hr.tto, wlrd durch acinon Driof von 8. Juli orwio-
aon, in dou or Orawitz ontaprcohcndon Lcachoid cab. An
20. Juli hat to d«r Ancoklr.jto coiclboock nit Dr. .lootnor,
.'laaohoro Naohfoljor, in Daohau oino Vorkonforonz uobor dio
Socwnaaorvorauohe. Slovora borichtoto Grnwltz uobor diooo
Ilonfcronz und acuidto .-r.uuit oino Abaohrift doa Driofoa zur
Kcnntnianalu-.o. (NO-182, Ankl.Doj. 137, 2. 181).

Dioao Tatanchon Lowoiaon, daaa Drcndt in vollor Sr-
lconntnia dor vorbrcchorlachon Natur willi % ; an don Soownaaor-
oxpori 'onton i-itwlrkto.

0 . .jvdoro Ax,:ori:cnto.

*7onn dio ..nklacotohjordo dio Vorontwortunj fuor dio
iialaria-, opidor.iacho Oolbaucht- und Sulfonanidvoraucho don
••n joklftgton dudolf Irondt zur Lnat lo^t, ao stuotzt alo aich
hauptaacohlioh auf loa 3 on .ur.taatollur. •.

rolaria-Axpori .onto wurdon voa -r. Claua Sohillinc von
1942 tia 19-15 ir, dnehauor Ivonsontrationalacor auacofuohrt.
l.chr ala tausonrl linoftlinjo wurdon boi dioaor. 3xporinonton
vorv/ardt, und v.ohroro hundort atarbon inf-lcoicaaon. i. ir.nl or
Cab dor Vo main :o


R. diUltDT


dio3or Sxporizicr.to lurch Schilling aoino Erlaubnia* (K0-
e55, dn!cl.3cw. 125, R. 392). La. dio 2xpcri_:anto ur.tor don
ochutzo Eitolors lr. jroaaon Ucfon.j Johrolanc vcr alch gin-
jon, Iccnn non nicht folsoro, daaa Irnndt niohta von lhnon
wuaato. Jrandta on«;o Doziohun^on zu Haachor, dor aoltat in
Daohau dxpori-ionto on Konaoatrationslajorinaaaaoa auafuohr-
to (aioho oton), und zu oiovora, dor L»aohau oft bosuchto
und nit Schilling zuaarEonarboitoto (aioho don Sohrlftaatz
dor /.nt:lr. ;obohoordo :c>n don xuigolclagtcn Siovora), nachon
oa aiohor, daaa or dovon Xonntnia hatto. In oczus auf dio
Lalnria-Exporincnto wird auf don Schriftaatc dor «nklagobo-
hoordo "ojon don dn ;o!:lacton .toao vorwicaon.

^randta Aonntnia von don oulfono: id -Sx; orl cnton -./ii\l
durch dio lf.tar.oho orwioaon, daaa aoin Duoro an 9. 3optorj-
lior 19e2 Gobhordta vcrlaoufi-joa Eoricht uobcr dioao Bxpcri-
nonto ox'hiolt. (NO-273-., *nlcl. ow. -;73, .1. 5622). Lav Eo-
rlolit soi.jt klor, daaa Sulfonaaidvorauchc on j.aoftlin J on
c.oa dc.vor.olruockor Konzontrntlonala ora r.ua _;of uchr t wurdon.
* 3 wird klar -uadruok jobraoht, daaa Oaa.jan^aon kuo.iat-
lioh horvorjorufon wurdo, daaa dobolapaono, Odona lualijiun
und 3rio vorwandt wurdon, ur don Schlachtwur.dinfcktionon
aolinlioho Infolctionon horvorsurufon, und daaa oini:;o dor
Voraucha^craonon zu Kontrollzr/ockon unbohondolt bliobon.
..urzu:;i, dioaor Eoricht jilt oin volikorr-.onoa Slid von don
durch Gcthordt auacofuohrton Sulfonanid-Sxporinonton.

Itudclf Ernndta Vortrauthoit nit don Vorauohon uobor
opldo.-.iaoho Gollaucht ~oht aua aoincr oldoaatcttlichon Er-
kloorung horvor. (HO-371, ^nkl.L'o". 136, a. 733). In dio¬
aor o idoa at at t lichen Srklaorun- gob drandt zu, laaa or von
dor rat a echo, daaa Kbrxaontrati-nalagorlnaaason fuor dioao
dx^orinonto vorwandt und oini.i.o dor unfrciwilli on Voraucha-
peraonon infol^odosaon 3tarbon, Sbnntaia johobt hate.

. - 38 -


a. 3iUM>T


In oinon liriof von 16. Junl 1943 gob Hinnlor soino Zuatin-
nung zu dor Vorwondung von 8 Judon aua dor polniachon ..'idor-
atandatowogung boi don Vorauchon uobor opidomiacho Golbauoht
in a-onzontrc.tiona lager Sachaonhauaon. 3randt achlolcto *ohl
oino ..bachrift dloaoa Briofoa. (NC-011, «nkl.3ow. 188, -t.
737). Sol aoinon Brauchon un Vorauchaporaonon, dna notwon-
di"or?;oiao zu Brendta Konntnia golangtc, hat to Grawitz r.ua-
druocldioh botent, daaa "nit Todoafaollon zu roohnon aol".
(JIO-OlO, wd:l.Bow. 187, a. 735). Daaa dio8o Vorauoho von
Dohnon la Aonzcntrationala or 3achaonhauaon auagofuohrt wur-
den und daaa oinigo dor Vorauchaporaonvn atnrbon, wurdo von
Brandt In aoinor oidoaat .ttlichon Brhlaorinv zugogobon.
(NO-371, aioho oben). 3ogar dor ^tlaatunjazou^ Outzoit,
dor nit ^ohnon zuaonronarboits.to, gat zu, daaa Dobnon in
Sao'naonhauacn taoti^ war.

HI. r.o.m ltu) : «-on:isc:-sa ST.,.TS,j:3B:-:03aiaa.i.

(.uiklagoachrift, Ziffor 8).

t/ogor. oinor Boaohroibung doa vorbroohorlaohon Char alrt ora
dor ..uarottung polniachcr Stoc-taongohorigor, dio ongoblioh
an unkoilboror Tuborkulvio litton, wird auf ion Sohriftaatz
dor gnl:lac:obohoordo gogon don -ngolrlrjton Sloao vorwioaon.

Drandt or^fing or: 3. llni 1912 von Boppo, oinon hoohoron
S3- und rolizoifuohror in .oacn, oinon Brief, oinon Vorachlng
Groiaora uobor dio ..uarottung tuborkulooaor .olon botroffond.
Dioaor Boricht zoigt klar, daaa boabaiohtigt war, violo Tau-
aondo tuborltulooaor «olon oinor 11 Sonde rb oh and lung" zu untcr-
worfor.. C'C-2i7, -nkl.Low.197, d.748). Baaa untor •'Sondor-
bchandlung 0 /.uarottung zu vorat-.on war, goht aioht nur aua
don Inhalt van Ivoppoa -rlof horvor, aondorn wurdo auch von
don dngoklagton Slone zugagobon. (3,4791). Zrandt boataotig-
to don 3npfcn; dioaoa Briofoa


- 39 -


3. 33..KDT

cuu 14. .'r.i uni bonr.chric’ntl jtc Soppo, daas or Grolaora Vor-
schlr-3 on don Chef dor Sichcrbclta;jolii.oi woitorgogebon hobo,
a odes a dor lotztcro dio .-njcl-jonhcit nit Groiaor aclbat in
.•n;riXT ndhron koonno. (NO-248, dnkl.Dcw. 198, a. 749).
Dioaor "Vorachlag" Groiaora wurdo von ihn nit weitoron 3in-
zolhoiton in cinon Joricht von Hlrclcr von 1. dal 1942 aua-
oinnndorgoaotzt, in don or, zuaonnon nit don «n_.oklajton
Blor.o, dio dirokto ..uarottun- von onnadbornd 35.000 tuborku-
looaon i-olon - un diaao nngoblicho ..natockun^aquollo fuor
dio doutaohon Siodlcr in -arthojau aua dor dolt zu achaffon -
bofuorwortoto. (KO-246, .*nkl.jovu 196. R. 747).

Groiaor aolbat trr.t nr. 25. Juni 1942 in don horzlich-
aton ..uadruockon an Grendt horan, un ihn an don hoohvortrnu-
liohon Jorioht doa Chofa ioa Rolchaaichorhoitahauptantoa bo-
troffond dio "Sonlorbchnnllung" dor tuborkulooaon color., dor
Brandt "oonndt worlon war, zu orinnorn. Groiaor nohn on,
daoa dor ''janzo Vorjonc" drondt "kurzhoondij" uotor^obon wor¬
sen sola (KO-252, dnkl.dow. 200, 2. 750-1).

27. Juni 1942 toilto Himlor Groiaor nit, dnaa or
don Vorachlaj, billijo tuborkulooao .olon und Star.tonloao
polniaohcr I'orkunft, dio in dor irovins .ir.rthojnu wohnton
und nn ofroncr Tuborkuloao lltton, zwooka "Sondorbohandlunc;"
zu uoborj50bon. ..bachrlfton dioaoa Briofoa von Hlnulor wur-
don von dnjoklagton ..udolf Brandt on Koppo m*l an daa Roioha-
8 ichorhoitahauptont ,-osohlokt. (720-244, .'uikl.Bow. 201,

R. 752).

Brandt gab in aoinor oidoaatattlichon Krklacrunc zu,

•laaa Mlndoatons oin Toll dor tutorkulocaon rolcn cuagorottot
wurdo, woohrond dio nndoren in Todcalc or vorbrccht wurdon,
wo non


- 40 -


R» DR-HDT


alo atorbon lioaa. (NO-4-11, ^nlcl.Dcw. 205, R. 760). 3rrjnlt
vcrouohto, dioac oidcaatattlicho In-klacrun;: endors euszulo-
jon, ::cnn nicht ao~ar zuruockzunohnon, indon or bozou.jto,

dr.aa or dio ..uaaa3on euf Grund lhn in dor Voruntcrauohuni;

das a or dernuf bo a tendon b^tto,
^ozoi^tor Dokunonto nachto. 3r otonto Jodoch,/c.a3a aio ka¬
lian j oinoa 3atzoa ^oeendert v/ordo. Dlcaor Satz lautoto ur-

apruonjliohi n .wurdon ala Rcaultat dor von Dlonc und

Orolaor untorbroiteton Vorachlao^o zwlaohon 6.000-10.000
4 oloxx aua iorottot". 3r aondurto don ..uadruok "0.000-10.000"
In "zahlroicho". (a. Ircwlt, a. 4891, 4953, vorjl. a. 761).
Dios iat on aich aolbat oln Jowoia, daas Brandt aoino ..uaaa-
•;o euf Grund aoinor ala on^or Kitarboitor Hinders orworbo-
non Honntniaao naohto. Dio Dolcunonto zoiron koino Tootunc
"zchlro ichor 11 .olon. Za lio^t koin Jokunent vor,bozw. oa
iat koinoa in -oaitzo dor ^kla^oboboordo, daa cine Oriuy 1 .-
la,;o fuor dioao Dohauptunr; liofom wuordo. &a iat dohor
lclar, daa a ^rmdta ..uaoajo vor dor Vorhandlunj nuf aoinor
ol^onon Lonntnia dor Din^c boruht uni ihr vclloa Gowloht
boi^olo^-t v/ordon r.usa.

IV. SI^L^TTS.Jd’.LUNG (..nklasoaohrift, *iffor 7).

..uf .orauchon .tulolf Lrundta lo^to dor .j^oklaiito Sio-
vox*a an 9. Fobruar 1942 ihn oinon Dorlcht Jr. -irta von dor
Univoraltaot Straaaburs uobor daa Snruonachtaoin oinor Sam-
lunj juodiachor Skolotto vor. (110-^85, <*nkl.5ow. 175, R.
695). In di-aon Horicht bofuorwortoto x.irt dio dirokto Sr-
nordun^ "Juoll3ch-bol3chcwlatiaohor ICotElaaaro" zwocks Sr-
lonjunj oinor aolchon Sordini^. Jr crklaortoj

"In don Juodisch-bolachOYiiatiac’ion Koruisaeron,
dio oin Yridorlichcs afcor charaktoriatiachoo
Untornonachontun vurkoorporn, habon *lr dio
lloo :lichkoit, -in ^roifbarca wiaaonachoftlicboa
Dokunent zu errorton, indor, =ir una ihro
ochaodcl aichorn.

Dio praktiacko Durchfucbrunr dor roltuncaloacn
DcachaTfuna


R. B3-HDT


und Sichoratcllunj dioao3 Schc.~dolriatorlr.ls
joaohioht as zw-cknc.^aai^aton In Pors oinor
..nwciaunj nr. dio ..ohr., r.c'r.z, an-ntlicho juo-
dlsoh-bolaoliowlatiachcn Xorxoiasarc in ^ukunft
lobond aofort dor F'-ld-Polizoi zu ucborjcbon. n

bi^ao t'orsntionon aolltor. oincrboaondora»StollG doricht

oratafcton, wclcho. Spozialiaton r.uaaondcn wuoric, um photo-

rr.jhiao.ic ..ufnriinon uol onthrcpolojiacho hoaaur.jon vornoh-

scn zu laaaon und dio Eorkunft, daa Goburtadatus uni endoro

torsonolan.;abon f-atzuatollcn. dirt orklaorto fernor*

"ifech dos danr.ch horbolrofuciorton lode dv.a
.Tudon, do a 3 on kopf nicht voriotzt werdon
dorr, tpcnnt or cion Kopf von Ruupf und sen-
dot Ihn, ir. cino AonaGrviorunjafluoaaijkoit
gobottot, in clcona zu dioacc A^ccko ju-
achaffoncn und jut vorachlioaa'or.rGn dloch-
bohaoltorn zus ^oatirsiur. jaort. bn i.and dor
Idchfcbildc.ufnahnon, dor lx.aac und abnati-
jon .Ji„abon doa Kopfoa und achli&aallch doa
Schaodola koennon dort nun dio vorjloichon-
don an at j si a eh on Porachun ;on, die Porachun-
jon uobor .iasaonzujGhoorijkGit, uobor p.ntho-
lo^iaoho brachoinunjon dor Sohaodolf or.-:,
uobor Qohlraforr. und -jrooaac. und uobor vlo-
loa anicro cohr Jorinnon. Puor dio ..ufbo-
v/ahrung und dio Srforachunj doa ao jowonno-
non Schacdolretoriala waoro dio nouo .loloha-
univoraitaot Straaaburj id-ror ooatlcr.unj
und ihror ..ufgato b ocaoaa dio jooijnotatc
3taottc. ” (Untoratrciohmjon hinzujofucst).

— • 27. Pobruar 1942 lnforsiorto ^randt Siovora, daaa
Eitaalor dirta ..rboit untcratuotzon und alloa orionklicho
ihr zur Vorfu: unj atollon wuordo. Lron'.t orauohto Siovora,
Hirt don.ontaproohonzu untorrichton uni vlo'.or uobor dirts
brboiton Eoldunj zu oratatton. (;'0-090,..nkl.S-w.l76,.!.699).

Hirta tjoor’.oriachor und unr^na chi ichor .Ian wurdo in
olnor ’./oiao auajofuohrt, dio nur wonij von dor bnrogunG in
aoinon vorlaoufigon xoricht abwich. (I.0-O65, aioho obon).

Dor boweia wurdo orbracht, daaa boachloaaon aurdo, -io ,an-
zon Slcolotto anatatt .or tloaaon Schr.oiol zu konaurvioron.
dri 2. Hovosbor 1942 -rauohto Siovora -ran t, boi -v,n rtsicha-
aiohorhoitahouptcuat die nootijon Vorkohrun ;on zur Livforunj
v^n 150 juediachon haoftlinjon zwocks ..usfuohrunj iioaoa rla-
noa zu treffon. (HO-086, «nkl. lew. 177, .1.699). An 6. Ho von-
ber inforsierto brandt <*dolf Eiobaenn, don Chof doa ..ntoa


ft. aa^ui


IV-B-4 ( Juodiachc. -nccl^-cnhoiton) dca LGicbasichorhoita-
hr.uptnntoa, r.lloa wr.s fucr dlo Vorvollatr.ondiguns -or Sko-
lottaaraalunG notwow-i;; aol, Hirt zur Vcrfuo^un.;* zu atollon.
U’0-089, ^nlcl.wOW. 179, ft. 702).

..ua don ^rlofc Slovora' an Slohcrjm vor. 21 . Junl 1943
iat ora lohtlich, dr.aa dor SS-hr.uptaturnfuohror So^or, Lltrj-
boitor dor Goaollachc-ft ..hnonorbo, dlo Vorrjbclton zur 2u-
aoznionbrln dor Skolottaormlun;; Ir- Konzont rationale. jor
..uaohwltz nn 79 Judon, 30 Juodlnnon, 2 rolon und 4 ..alc.ton
r.uafuohrto. In dioaon ^rlcf orklnorto Slovora, ur.aa Dof.or
v/o^on Souc hon 30 fr.hr 1 u Lc.^ov aoir.o .a-bolc untorbreohon nuaa-
to. Slovora orauchto un dlo Ooborfuohrun:; -or Ir.aaaacn, on
don on Do;jor dioao .arbolt -ua ofuahrt hattc, lna .lonzontra-
tionalc."or Kc.tzv;ollor, well In Luaohwitz vcitoro Uboiton
v/o"on dor Infoktlona 30 fr.hr untjoojlic' aolon. Loaondoro Un-
torbrln.-un :a:.wo;-lloh!colt aollto fuor dlo 30 /rauon " voruobor-
-.ohond 11 lrj iijnzontrr.tljnala.-^r Latzwoilor boachafft wordon.
Dor ^n^oklcx^.'to Urnndt onpflnc olno -baofarift dioaoa driofoa
ou 22. Junl. (MO-087, Inkl.bow. 181, A . 702).

Dlo ..uaan’o doa La^orieorcondonton dca Kcnzontrr.tiona-
la;;ora Hntznollor, doa SS-Uauptaturnfuohrora J^aof Kronor,
onthuollt, ur.aa annaohomd 80 haoftlinco doa ..uaohwltzor
itonzontrc.tl->nala ;ora, dcruntor ouch Frnuon, nach dor. Konzon-
trrxtlonalo'jor Natzwoilcr ;oachafft und Jort *»nfane uujuat
1943 auf dr 3 vchon Lirta nit fiaa 3 otootot wurdon. 2*u -lo¬
gon Zv/ook war olno boaondoro Gaako^r-.cr obaut wordon. Dlo
Lolohon dor Opfor wurdon in drol Ladun;or. on Lirta .uvatonl-
aohoa Inatitut an dor Vnlvoraitaot Strocabur , joaohickt.
(H0-8O7, inkl.uow. 135, ft. 732). Dioaoa Lcwciarar.tcrlal
v/ird Lurch dlo .vuaaa^o doa Zouron Lonrppicrro boatacti;t»

£r bozou^to, doaa


- 43 -


a. 2£d3) T


nn£m”a -ujuat 19’.3 ^or. -or crsto «n-“.tonlaIiwn-p -os
dnr.touiachon Institutes, von hirt don liofokl orhiolt, _io
Lwhncltojj Izi L-llor dos Inatltutos fuor un^of-ohr 120 I*i-
ohon vorzuboroiton. In Ziulaohonraoucoc. von cin pe r Tc."on
kanon droi Lcdnnjon Lc ichor. - 30 woiblicho, 30 naonnlioho,

26 ur.onnlioho - in Icvat-jr^on von oinen unbokonnton Orto on.
..llo dioao Opffcr wnron Judea. Dioao Iolohon wurdon in Sol-
lor do a dnatoaiaohon Inatltutos in don v n Son- vorborcito-
ten Dohr.oltora cin3olaort. (::onr;niorro, a. 712-0). Si oho
c.uoh dio oidoaatc.tcliche -rklr.orun* v n nor. (HC-881,
Anld.Low. 200, a. 1071). _c:cr wurdo nncc-aioaan, Oipaab-
uoaao dor Opi’or vorzuboroiton. (35-.S-.S, ^nkl.bow. 123,
a. 382, 21ntr &c to ci 2. .*obrunr 1€44). .nfrn: Septenbor
lQ-id, c.la dio. nlliiorbon -r;«on Strr.aabur: bolrohton, trot
Siovora an don «njofclc tor. -rrndt -lit oinon drsuohcn un
..nwoiounjon hornn, was it don Juodiachon loich-n ;oachohon
a olio, dio no da in don -cho.oltcm in luillor doa Anntoniaohon
Inatitutoa oinjol.vjort waron. dr toilto alt, or Uoonno dio
Xoiohon ;, c*ntfloiachon" uni da le uni:cantlioh nr.ohcn, abor in
diosou injlo vuordo oin ioll dor -rbcit vor.oblioh or/caon
a cin, und u oa aaoro oin grosser wiaionachof tlichor Vorluat
fuor dioao o -nsl-cjti~.o 3r.rz.lur. . v^il den .oh 2 ninitrdrjuoa-
ao nioht LOhr roe -lioh wr.oro;:. Skolottaaualun .la sole.a
nioht auffaollij. woiohtoilo wuordon dohlariort r.la boi
tJoboxhedroo Snatonio duroh - rnnxoaon hintorlnssono alto I^i-
ohanl'oato und zur /orbronnun ojobon." Siovora -rauohto
un 5_no dnt/oiaun~ an -r;c t, o' lie Snrzzlunj zu orhnlton,
toJ.lv/oiso aufzulo-aon vd-r in anxen aufzul oaon aoi.

(WO-OSC, dnhl.dow. 162, .1. 70-i).


H. LH-HDT


dus dor Lcnochr lc h11 jun^ dos SS-HcuptaturnfuGhrors _ or~
on ->rcnlt iat oraicfatlich, doaa zuorat boachlosson rurdo, lea
oowoiar-.atorial fuor dloac brutelor. Vorbrochcr. zu zcr3tocroru
.»bor infol“o olncr zoitwoili jor. Vcrbcaaorur.- dor nilitr.ori-
achon Lr.jo v/urdo dioaor boachluaa wledor ruock „c.on ;i- ;o-
nc.cht. oiovora toilto dor- an 21. Cktobor 19>i alt, daaa in
drfuollun.; oinoa dofohla, don or vorhor orhrvltor. hetto, dlo
«uTlooaunc dor Sr.nrJ.unj durchcofuohrt cordon aol. Dor -o-
fohl zur Zoratocrun„ dor Srmlunj ..urdo von Jnur.-rt, oinoa
Untorjobonon Drnndta, r.uajo :cbon. (::c-091, .uv'cl.^w. 163,

R. 705). dr.a war c.bor r.loht joaohohon. Kirt hatto Don-
und aoinou Gohilfon bofohlon, dlo 66 I^lohcn zu aozio-

ron und aio la Stroaatur -or Ilronntoriur. vorbronnen zu loaaon,
c.bor dloao zv/oi Mnennor clloin Uonnton dioao unjehouro ».uT-
-abo nioht c.uafuchron. kino «n*ohl Loichon bllob unaozlort
und v/urdo In don -ohaoltcrn zuautnor. r.lt tollwolso aozior-
ton Loiohon bolr.aaon, ur. don Slrxlruok zu orwooken, r.la ob aio
fuor norac.lo nnator.laoho i'oraohun/aarbolton benutzt vroxrdon
waoron. (3>nryp*orro, it. 715 • H0-061, aiofco obon).

Lobhc.ftcr r.la D.u -on und Joi:unor.to aohildom dlo von
don frc.nzoo3iachon -choondon nnoh dor -cfrolun^ Strnaaburja
auf jonoraionon Jildor uni dlo »ildor dor 3r.akai..orn i;i donzon-
t rat Iona lc.jor Ec.tzwoilor, wo dlo 0; Tor dor Juodiachon Skolott-
anrulun;; orrtordot wimlo.., dioaon jro.uaijon Uaaaonnord. (i: 0 -
dS3, -nlcl.dov/. 18-i, R. 72-;? K0-Q07, aioho obon).

Dlo bodoutactao tfntur von _rr.ndta ..ntoll on den in dor
..nklajoaohrlft Ihn zur Lr.at olojton Vorbroohon i3t In don
obon okizzlorton ..©wc.13 in typiachor u«lao dar_:ol,jt. r.irta
urapruonjliohor Vorachlc.: wundo von Slovora on jrnndt ;:o-
aohickt, dor Hireelcra Zuatitriunj oinholto. Dornoch wundon
tvllo dinzolhoiton, fuor dlo


- 45


3. zadSDT

Kiralor au^onachoinlich kelr.c, u*~z hatto, von -rundt uni
3icvora orlodist. In dor let, worm Slimier c.uf dor .mklajo-
bunk aaoaao, wuordo or una aaron, daaa or koino -hnun" da-
von hat to, daas dioao Samlun- Eordtaton lr. Gofol~o habor.
wuordo, und da3a or dr.chto, nen wuordo toto Sold-.ton nohnon.
31 no aolcho Snfcaohuldi-junj wr.oro nichfc ;lc.ubkcft-r ala
drondta -uarodon. 3r v/uasto von don Ta^o an, wo or Eirta
Borioht onpflns, daaa dloa linaaonnord war. Sr voranlaaato
dlo Lloforun- dor Cpfor von ^uaohwitz. Sr ordnoto dio *or-
atoorunj dor Soralun: an. -randta Schuld iat un oln Violfa-
ohos jrooaaor ala dlo doa brutdlon und tofuohllcacr. .tremor,
dor poraoonlioh dlo Judon In i.atzuoilor ver aato.

v. sg::lus3.

..'lohta l:ann zu Gunaton doa .m oklo-ton Rudolf -rardt
an;ofuohrt wordon. -a wird nioht boatrltton, daaa or cn
Jodor dor In dor «n!cla"oaohrlft orhobonon ^nklajcn - auaaor
dor .uthanaalo - taotlj nitwlrlctc. Sr war operator vorwal-
tun.;aiiaoaalcor Kolfor Riralora. •..aahrorxl dlo -rundlojondon
Sntaohoidun.-on von Kiralor -ctroffor. wurdon, aor^tc ^remdt
dafuor, daaa aio auajofuchrt wurdon. woaa or koln ao wick-
tlcor iionn wio Klmlor war, kenn in kolncr aoiao lhn von
dor Schuld froiaproohen odor dioao r.lldwrn. Soln 7 or'r in on
lat daaaolbo wio daa dor cciatcn Vorbrochor, dio in .tuoro-
lor ; vor Gcricht stokon, nr.c lich daaa Hitler und HIit lor
dio auaaohllooaliohon Tr-o;or allor Schuld waron. .*onn daa
irinzip dor rolativon Schuld irjandoino Stollo hat in don .-ro-
zoaa ”o~on oinon innn, dor it dor brrxirdun * vor. Tauaondor.
von Konachon in Vorbindun: atoht - und dlo Ankla^obohoordo
an ;t f oa hat lcoino Stollo - danr. holt aich die dodoutaa^-
kolt von Sr and t a Stollun; und aoinot: vorbroohoriaohon norl:
dou-lioh ab vor. dor doa La-®rkoraandantor. von Dachau und
violor aoinor Untor ;obonon, dio schon lan c


- u6 -


R. L»ILJu)T


v;ejen Hirer Teilnahne an olr.I -or. dor jloicher. wlo In diosor
.jiklajeachrift zur Last jelo-ten Vorbrechen zur. Toue vorur-
teilt wordon sind.

Dio Lehro vcr defohl einca Vorjoaotzton trifft auf
drandt nicht zu.

Dio jilcla obohoordo untoratollt, daaa das Dowoisnato-
rial orjibt, dasa ..udolf drandt Hau?ttaotor, Teilnohrer,
..natiftor, Vorschublolatcndor war, aolno 7i uatira-.un jab und
in Vorblndunc at and rit i laonon ur.d Uatornohr.cn, dio dio
Durclifuohrunj nedizlnlaohor Vcrauc.'.o ohno Lustir'nun*: dor
Dotroffonon zur. Oo-onstond hatton, und Lit -liod clnor
Organisation odor Oruijpo war, dio in Vortindun ; stand r:lt
dioaon Vorauchon, in doron Vcrlauf Kordtaton, Lrutalitaoton,
Qrauaor.ikoiton, Foltorun_on, Grou^ltcton und andc.ro un-
rnonachlioho liandlun -on, dio Srr.ordunj und unnonaohlloho
Bohondlunc von Tauaondon von tubor'culooaon t'olon und dio
Err.-ordunj von nloht wonijor ala 86 Judon zur owooko oinor
Skolottna;.ulun~ bocan_;on wurdon. Soino Schuld in Slnno
dor .unlcto I, II, III und IV dor -nkla/oaohrlft iat orwioaon.

"Endo"

Ioh, .’’rod Lax, > X 0i6207, toataotl o hior.dt, daaa
ioh uurc.’mua vortraut r.it dor or.^liachon und doutac.’ion
Spraoho bin, und daaa dca Voratohondo oino wohrhoita jo-
nuvooao und riohtijc Uoboraotzun.; dca Doku-iontca "Rudolf
jiranclt" doratollt.

iJuornborc, 11- Juli 1947

?rod lax
w X 046207


47


KILITASSOSSICSrSEOr So. I

r*n io. 1

ZUSAJOGK7ASS21ER SCHHIFTSATZ

rsa ysksisigtzs staatzs yob akehiza

CEjZK

rRlTZ FI3CKZH JKD ESC A 03EBHZUSZR


Jnaoo X. HcHw.cy
Alexander 0. Hardy
/.most KorlUc-Hochvald
mother Jnno Johnoor.

Huorabor#:,

don 16. Junl 1947 Fttor*

Tolford Taylor
Dripadlor General, U.o.A.

Chief Of Counsel for Vnr Crinco


ilSFUSaHUSO


Untor Punkt I der AnSclo*osch.-ift -order. die An«kln^ton "ischcr
und Oborhcu.or in vooontlichor. beschuldifft, dr.«G eic cich nit undercr.
Poroonen in Yerfol* el no. ffenoiemea Yorhaben. xu cincr Torch-ocrux
und Uoboroinkunft zu«waaonffcfundon habon, uaaodi.ini.chc Yerouche nr.
YorEUChoporaonon ohne dcron Zuati^unr vorzunohnon; untor Punkt II
und III (Kricfiovorbrochen und Ycrbrechcn ffCffcn dio KoneChlichkcit) .
dnoa ole Kouptteotor, Teilnotaor. Anotiftcr. Yor.chublol.tondo Rouo.on
oind, lhro Zu.tinnun fi «.-obon und nit Plrcnor. und Untornctaem in Vcr-
bindun* ffoetondor. hnben. bol denon c. oich u= dio Yornnhne von nodizi-
niochor. Vornuchon nn Vcreuch.por.onen *offca doren Villcr. hwidoltoj
untor Punkt IV, dn.o PlBchor nnch den 1. Soptenber 1339 Kltdlod dor
S3 vnr. oinor von Intcmatlonalcn Hllltncrfforicht.hof nlc vcrbrcchori.ch

orklrertor. Orrnnlartlon.

Dio id* KrioffBvorbrochon und Vorbrochcn scsen dio Konschllchkolt
rnorkmntcn Handlunror. oind in don Absnetzon 1 (b) und (c) doo Arti¬
cle II dco KontrollrAtffC.otso* Sr.lO ru.oim.ndorffo.ottt. Pio Mltffllod-
nchrft boi oinor Into rational on Kilitrcr«richthof id* vcrbroche-

rloch orklncrton OrKonlertior. -ird in About. 1 (d) deMOlbon Artikol.
plo Vorbrochcn bo.oichnot. Dio Kcnntoichca dor Straff «-clll.*cit oind
in Artlkol II. Ab.ntz 2 do. Hont rollratcceotzee Sr. 10 drrffdc-t.

I. STSLLWi'O USD 7ZRALT■'OgrUirO

Bor Anffoklivto Pi.chor trat der Allgcaoinon SS in Fobrunr 1934 und
dor KSDA? in Jnhre 1939 boi. 1= lcUtcron Jnhr trnt or dor Vaff«a-SS
boi und vurdo doo SS-7orbrnd in Errnkenhrus Kohealyehen nlo ein den
An.-oklwrton Gcbhrrdt untorotolltor Ar.t ruffcteilt. Ia Junl 1940 vurdc
or zun SS-Eertaent Lolb.tondartc -Adolf Hitler- ror.otxt und kohrtc ia
.olbon Jn.hr «d. ABBi.ton.nrzt von Cebhardt m-ch Hohonlychon turaock.
vo or bin run Hr1 1943 bliob. Sr diontc dnnn ovohl ra dor O.t- id
en der Voatfror.t *ls Arst


- 1 -


(Soito 2 dc« Orifrtnnii)

und vf*r, nachdcn or In infant 1944 vorvondot word on vnr, Patient in
Hohonlychon. In Dotmbor 1944 vardo or dor Choxitb in 3orlin rugotcilt,
kohrto r.bcr wiodoma in April 1945 nit Gobhnrdtt Aitittont n/*ch Hohcn-
lychon aurucek. In dor Vnffoo-SS ttlc« or bit run Sturr.bnnnfuohrcr
(Knjor) ruf. (SO-559. An3a.3ow.26. B.129; Fitter. B.4267-77).

Die Ar.-Toklrptc Oborhoutor trr.t den 3und Deuttchcr Kocdol (33i) in
Jnhro 1935 boi und bcfclcidoto don Ri*n« cinor "Blockloitcrin". In August
1937 wurdo oio Hitgllod dor KSDAP. Slo vrr ruch Mitrllod dot Hnticnrl-
ooziplittitchon Aentobundet. Sio noldoto tieh in Jrhro 1940 froivilli#r
fuor dio Stollun* oinor Ln*orrorrtir. tn dor Frracnnbtoilunfl dco Rnvone-
bruocltor Konaontrotlontln/rcre und blicb dort bit tun Juni 1943. Sio
boJera dnnn untor den An^cklcvfton Ocbhaxdt oino Stollun,-: nit Attitlont-
noratin na Krnnkenhmie Hohonlychon. (SC-683. Ania.3ov.27, R. 129-30;
Oborhoutor, R.5485).

II. PBBS.3SLICHL T5IL.HAH3C AS VSS2BSCKai8CHg: Z&StUSSlW

Finchor und Oborhoutor tind boochuldi^t, nn den Sulfonnuid- und
Xnochon-. Kuckol-. Horronroronomtiont- und Knochcnvorpflnnrun.teverou-
chon, vlo tio in don Abtnotion 6 (S) und (F) dor Anklorotchrift ia cin-
tolnon nuoolnnndorpotottt tind, toilccnonnon «u hnboo. Fitchor hntto
nuch 'r'n don Soptle-Exporlncnton und r-'n dor. E*clte-Xxporlncr.ton Konnt-
nio, dio in Kor.acntrrtiontliyrer Dnehau duxchrcfuchrt vurdon. Tio 3otohul-
41«ua<g copor. Oborhoutor. drtt tio nn Urtfruchtbarvchunesrcrcuchon in
Rnvontbruock (Ankliv?oechrift, Abtatr 6 (1)) toil.ronomen hr bo, wird
hi omit zuruodGrcsoecn.

A. Sulfononid-Voroucho (Anklr^otchrift, Abtnta 6 (£)).

Dor vorbrochericcho Chorriter dor &ilfon*=ld-Sjcpcri»onta und die
Toilnahao Fitchcrt und Cborhcutort on dcntolbon. tind la Schrlfttnta dor
Anklfy-obehoordc frozen Oobhprdt botchrlobon. Fitchor itroitet toino loil-
nrtao nn dioton Sxporlnonton sicht nb.


- 2 -


(Seito 3 dcs Originnla)

Er fuohrto dlo aalaton Oporrtlonoa eua. Er vortoidlgt alch alt zvoi Argu-
ncnton: Sratona, draa den Vorauchsporaonon lhrc ongcbllchcn Todosurtoilo,
wonr. nlo die Veraucho uoborlobten, In nlldoro Urtollo ungcvnndelt wurdor.,
ur.d svoitene, draa or ruf 3ofohl olaoa Yorgoeotctcn - Qobhnrdt - hrndolto.
Dor orate Slmrrnd lat borolta la Schriftantz gegon Gobhnrdt nuafuohrllch
behAndolt vorden imd vlrd hlcr nlcht vlodorholt vordon.

Artlkol IX, Abartz 4 (b) dea Kontrollrrtficaotaoa Sr.IO achrolbt vori

■Dlo Tntsrcho, draa Joaend untor dco 3ofohl aeinor
Roplorung odor aelnoa Vorgeaotzten gohnndelt hnt,
bofroit lhn nlcht von dor Vow-tvertllchkoit fuor
•In Vorbrochon; alo knar- nber nla atrr/aildornd
boruockslchtlgt vordon.*

Dlo clnzlgo hlor zorllogor.do Frrgo lat dcnnnch, ob dor Oorlohtahof
dlo Sofohlo olnoa Yorgooctztca rla atrrf-ildornd fuor Fiachcr boruock-
■lchtlgon aollto. Die Anklrgoboheordo untoratollt, dnaa dloa nlcht dor
Ml aoln aollto. * *

Floohcr vuoato aur Zolt, rla or dlcao Yoraucho ruafuohrto, dnaa or
oln Vorbrochon bo.ring. Er mb zu. draa or ale nonvdorvelao nloht nue-
gofuohrt hnbon vuordo. (R.033&-9). Er kuccaorto alch nloht ua dlo Frngo.
ob dlo polnlachon Kr.odchon wa olnoa Oorlohtahof nbgourtoilt vordon vnron
odor In dlo Exporlaonto olrurcvilllgt hrtton (H.4339-40), obfcloich or alo
nur hnotto zu frnron brnuchon. Er ancto, or vuoato nlcht,vlo dlo Vor-
auchaporocnon rucgcvnehlt vurdon. (3.43*12). Ala r.uagobildotor Artt
knnr.to or dlo Schnorzon, Verunatrltung, “crkruopplunjvund Todoagofnhr,
donon nolno Voreuchaobjokto naogoeotxt aoln voordon.

Ea atrnd koln Yorcoeotzter alt gclrdoner Platolo hlntor Flachor
und svrng lhn, etvna gegen aolnon Villon *u bogchon. Sr v«r koln Soldnt
ruf dec Schlrchtfold. Sohcnlychcn v*r volt ontfornt von Duroholnrndcr
dor Front. Flachor hnndclto nlcht In olncr loldonachnftllchen Aufvnllung.
Er hntte gomiogcud Zelt, alch aolnc Srrdlungon zu botrrehton und zu
uoborlogon.


(Soitc 4 dor Original*)

Sr hrctto ohno ISircht vor den rclgcn dio Tollnntao na don “orauchor.
vonroigorn kooanoa. I>iee gnb or su, rl* or m,ic: "S» vnr nicht dio
I\ircht vor olnca Todoeurtoil odor etvra dorrxtlgea, eocdorn dio Altox^-
nptlvo vnr, wochror.d doo Zrloee* .^ehorarc odor uagchorcra ru coin und
dndnrch oin Boiopiol doe Ungohcranne ru goben.■ (S.4374). Solch oin
Gootnondnlo ontaioht jodor nlldoroa 3curtollung dio Grundlngo. Sin
Soldat atoht L-rior vor dor Altomr.tlve, oinoa Bcfohl *u geborehon odor
nicht su gohrrckon. Voice or, dree dor BoTohl vorbrocheriech iet, so
let oe oichor dno looro Auarodo tu engcn, or mie* r.ur doe Oohorsnns
vogon bofolgt vordcn. Boetoht koiao Fureht vor Vergcltuag vogon doe
Ungohcronno und wlrd orkrant, dree dor Bcfohl vorbrecherlech let, drnn
otollt Gohorera oino vollkcmor. frolvilllgo Toilnrtao na Vorbrcchon drr.
So otcht dor IVU nit Fiaehar. Sr vollto oboa kola "booooo Boiepiol"
gobon. Aueoordcn knar. dre Frinzlp doe Bofohle oinoe Yorgoeotaton nicht
nln atrnfnildornd hornn.-caogon vordon, vo eolch booenrtiro Vorbrochon
ohno dio goring*to nilitncriechc Eotvcndigkolt bcvueet und ruockeichto-
loe bogo&goa vordon eind.

3*;r Fnll Oborhoueor iet in dolohor Voice klrr. Sio vurdo r.uo froi-
on Stuockon Ln.~orror*tln in Rrvcaebruock. (Oborhaueor, R.5485). Sio
rneietiorto Ocbhrrdt und Flechor rogolnnceeig boi don 7orcuchon. Sio
untoreuchto dio Voreucheporeonon vor doa Oporntloaon, und lhr untoretmvd
ihro nnchoporntivo 3otrcuur,r. Sio aoldoto Flechor dca Fortechrltt dcr
Vorcucho und vnr v.n nlien dr-it auer--r-.onhrcagor.don Sinaclhoiton untcr-
rlchtot. Sio aoldoto dio drol Todcefrallo, velcho, vio elo olacoatnnd,
voriernon. (!R>-477, inkl.3ov.a07, R.779; VO-487, ickl.2cv.209. 3.480-2).

Dor. Voreucheporaoaon vurdo nur fuor olsi.-o ?rg o arch dor Oporntioa
Pflogo zutoil. Sio vurdon ir. cchlimetor Voleo vornnchlaeeelgt. (Kr,-akr,
R.1*136, 1443-4). Ihro 3chnndlung vnr vollJormcn uaaurclchcnd. (230—873,
Ankl.3cw.226. 3.906). Tlola dor Voraucheporeonon


(Scito 5 dee Criglnrla)

bekrnen ruf 3cfohl dor Oborheuser voder Kcdirlr. arch Karphius. (HO- 877.

ArJcl.3ow.228, 3.918). Nur von Zoit zu Zelt, vena oe dcr. Aorrtcr. £orndo

proato, bokanon elo 3indca. Xituntcr vnrtcton aio drol Tn^e, nituntor

vior Tr^o. Ea hcrrachte cin schrocklichcr Eitorccruch ir. doa Zinaorn.

r>io KnodebOD vnroa <ozvun£On, oiarndor ru heifer.. (Kn^zkr., 3.144-1).

Eio Zou.~in Hrool-Plrtor bozeu-Tte:

"Mein 3ala tnt nlr woh; lch hntto hcftl.7C Schscrzon,

UDd 31ut floos voa aoincs 3eln. Nrchta vnroa wlr ^rnz
rllola ohno lr^endvclchc Pflero. Ich hoerto nur dne
• Schrolcr. nolnor Kit,rofraconor., UBd lch hoorto m oh,

dnen eio ua Vraicr bnten. Za wrr nlooand dr. ur.o
Vftisor odor Pottschucescln ru sober.. *

(3.790).

Bio Zaucln Knrolcvokn bezeu^to:

"*ch wnr ir. noinon Zimer ur.d sr.chto Hitrofnagonon
tW»r.uobor dio Boserkua,-:, drsa wlr uatcr oohr eehloch-
tor. Vorhr.oltnlsocn oporlcrt ur.d ir. dloecn Zinnor
£olno3on vurden und draa urn aoch aicht oinrml dlo
Kocnlichkcit .sccoboa vurdo. wiedor ^oeur.d zu word on.

Dloao Benorkun,- nuaa vor. oinor dcutzchon Zrrakcr-
pflogorin, dlo Is Flur cneo, .-^hoort wordor. ooln,
dona dlo in don Flur fuchrondo Tuero ur.aeroo Zin¬
aorn vrr offon. Die doutecho Krrnkoapf1 ofiorl a km
lno Zinnor ur.d hloaa una ruf stoker. und ur.c razichor..

'fir rntvortcton, wlr koonr.ton Ihrcs 3cfohl aicht
folptm, voil vlr .*ro««o Schscrzcn in dor. 3cir.on hnot-
ton und aicht rchon koonr.ton. Dana km dio doutecho
Krnnkonpflo,rorir. alt 2>r. Oborheuser In fro Zinnor.

Dr. Oberheueor hioea una. use mruzlohon und in*
Vorbrr.dBziTnor' zu cohcn. Vlr xoffm unsoro Odder
. nn, ur.d dr vlr aicht rchcr. koantor., mxeaton vlr nuT
olnon 3oln lna Oporatloasrinnor huepfon. Hr eh Joden
olnzolnon Jixpf nuootor. vlr una nuzruhea. I*r. Obor-
haueor lioee nlcht tu, dr.eo Jerutad ur.e hrlf. Ale
vlr #:rnz orechocpft in Operrtlonoclaaor nnkmon, or-
o chi on Dr. Obcrhcuaor und bofrhl uae zuruockzu.:ohcn,
voll dor Vorbrnd rn dca 7»v? nlcht ^ovcchcelt vordon
wuordo. Ich kennto nlcht cchon, r.bor Josrnd -
oino Gofna,Tono, nn doron Nmon lch si eh nlcht or-
lnr.oro - hrlf sir ine Zisaor zumcck. *

(3.822).

Oborh.cuoor nnha ruoh nn den in Zcr.rcr.trnticaelr/rcrr. uobllchon
Grouoltntcn toll. Zofln *nj wrto ir. lhror cidosstrttllchen Srklncrun,-:
"Ich orh, vlo dio Oborheuser Frruon eo'iltu; ur.d hinrucvnrf. dlo ru ihr
cokoanon vpren, ua lhro Bolno nrctoehea cu lrsecn, dio eio eich Vaohrond
dor Arboit bocno vorlotzt hrtton. Sio bohnndclto sic .-rr nlcht."
(NO-871, Ar.kl.3cv.227, 3.913). Helena Pi AM dcr. sr.te: "Zu 3o,rinn
doo Jrhroo 1942 vrr else rite doutecho Frru v:n


- 5 -


(Scito 6 dca Originals)


ungofnehr 80 Jehron, die dr a pxuoao Droloefc m *m true, lr. olncr. Gra-7
In Sovior. Slo brt Dr. ObcrhouBcr an oln piutr Plllon, dr tlo krrnk rrr
und alch krun bcvccoa konato. CborhcuBor frngto Bio, wrrua elo In Lngor
eal. Dr. alo nlcht mtvertoto, trr.t dlo Oborhcueer aio. Dio rru flol
voiaond zu 3odon. Dlo Oberhcuscr lr.chto und hic 1 ■ elo rufatchcr. und we,>
pohen uad pnb ihr kolno Kcdlzln. Ich wrr reach In Qrng und wrr Zougo
drvon.* (KG-864, iakl.3ow.229, R.923).

Oborhouaor poatnnd la lhror oldoastrttllchca Erklncrunp vor dan
Prezcos, draa alo krrakc Inaraaon durch Slnaprltzunpon potootot hnbe.

Vlo elo Bich ruadruocktoi 1i war In SrrcnBbruock kolao Soltonholt,
drne Porscnon, dlo dec Tod nrho wrron, lurch SlnBorltzunpon potootot
wurdon. Ich rb selbst 5 odor 6 aolchor Sinsprltiungcn. (BO-487,
Ankl.3ov.208, R.780). Slo bcatr.otigto dloaei Xlnpostrendnla von Zou-

ponfltrnd rua, ruf 3ofrrpon durch dr« Gorieht, nit betwochtllchon Vito*.

.(R.6627-8).

otrobon./ Bros lrpondoln Arzt clno solcho D-:otunp von othlschon Stmd-
punkt - vrn rcchtllchcn p/\r nlcht cu Bproehon - tIb orlmbt botrnchtor.
ocllto, 1 b t undonkbrr.

Eb lat zu orwrrton, drst Oborhouzor und rlollolcht mi oh Fischer
dna Arpunont vorbrlnpen vordoa, draB slo nlcht In dor Lnpc vrron, dlo
Expcrlnonto xu rorhlndora und doshnlb froipctprcchon verdon toll ton.

Eln nolohos Ar.runont lot vtllBtrondlg bodoutunrslos. Dlo Err^o 1st
lodl.-llch, ob dlo Anpoklrpto m Vorbrochon tollnrhn, nlcht ob os von
Anpoklrgton hrotto rorhlr.dort wordon koonnon. Dlo Judor. vuordon r.uch
ohno dlo tcbauechtl.-cn iusbruocho Strclchora miBPorettot wordon aoln.

Eln “nchnnnn In Eomontmtl^nslnpor krna nit olnon povlsaon Rooht argon,
droB, vonn or nlcht oln povisoos Vorbrochoa boprnpen hrotto, oln rndoror
ob gotrx. hrotto. ibor dro lot dnf-ch kola Yarteldlpunpoprund; no eh
lot oa oln Str'tfr.lldorun.'Brrund. Es no egos ruch no eh *nderc PorBonon
rUBBOr ElBchor und Oborhouaor pcwillt rcwoBon'aoln, Toxbrochon zu bo-
pohen, nbor ontaoholdond 1st, frtt FlBChcr und Oberhouser slo In dor
Trt bopinxon.


Dor vorbroofc_ri3ohc Charaktor dicaor Exporinonto und dio
Toilnnhno von Fiacher und Oborhouaor an dor.a<-lbon 3ind In don
Sohrlftsatz dor Anklo t obohoordo gogcn Gobhardt nusoir.ondrr-
goootzt•

Fiaohcr gab In seiner oidcaatattlichcn Srklacrung zu, daaa
or don ohirurgiachcn Plan fuor dieao Fxpcrir.cntc vorboroltoto un
daaa c r "on ocbhnr-'t angcwloacn mirdo, In Zusanner.ar'-clt rr.lt
Stunpfogpor dlo '^xporln.-.ntc auszufuchrcn. Fr fuchrtc stunpf-
ogpor, sohulzo un'* Fohulzo-wn * n bol '•on Lnr*rnrzt in Fa^ena-
bruck oin. T 'lae v 'cr unhto aloh noraocrllcb dlo Durchfuohrung
dor Huakclrogcnorntlona , 'orauohc nua, und or bcsohricb die
OporatlAr.atoohnlk in Ihron Eirzclhciton. (FO-228,Ankl.Bow.

206, R. 774).

Flachor gab zu, daaa or olnoc Haoftllng von Pnvonabruck
doa Soholtorgolor.k ontf-rnto, dao nuf don Patlcr.tcn Ladlaoh In
H^honlyohon vorpflonzt irure’e. (Flaoher, ». 4317). rr wuaato,
daan dioo oin vorbrochcn nor, da or an£toj "loh orhob profoaalo-
nollo und ncnaohllcho EinFondurron bla zur. Ab< nd, an den die
Operation duroheofuebrt mirdo, abor Gobhardt bofahl ur.a, dio
Oporatlon durchzufuchron." (?fO-228, a.obon). Fiachora Zougon-
ouaango uober dlcaoa Fxp-rlnont cnthuollto einon unglnubliohon
Mongol an TTr.torrlchtctacin. Fr aa~to, cr missto nioht, oh d -r
Pnoftllnp, dcaaon Fchultorgelonk or entfornte, oin ?*"nn «v’er
oino Frau -»ar. ~r orklaortc in olncn ’'erhoer in '•or "nruntcr-
suchung, doaa d r "orsuchaporaon dcr Am vnrhor anputiort t*«rdon
aol; auf don Zougcnstnnd sogto cr aua, ca sol r.ur dlo Hand an-
putiort wortfen. Auf Jodon Fall krrrntc or aua oigenon 71ascjn
nioht bezeugen, doaa entwed-r dio Hand odor dtr Am


vnrhor abgon‘'rran tor''on waran. Obgloich cr d.lc operation a 1. st
nuafuohrtc, angto cr, dess or dlo vorauchapcr 3 or. nlcht ur.tcr-
auohto und nlcht Njobaohtcto, ob cir.o Amputation atattgofur.don
hnbe. Er aah angcbllch r.ur den Ruockon dca opfers. Er miastc
nlcht, ob 1 c "crauohspCT-aon In d.lo vivisection oingc^llllpt hat
^•r ’‘oaato nlcht, ob *lc, vorauehsperson nach dcr operation go-
toe t-t tur^c. Plaohor aah 1 vcrauchapcraon nlcht tloflor.
(Plaehor, R. 4356-9). vl3chcra ^l^r.ratrr.bon, Rlnsolholtcn dicsci
verauchoa -/lodcrzufcbcn, crklaort slch -lollolcht aus 'lor Tot-
aachc, daa3 das ocwclanntcrlel dcr Anklngcbohoor’c zolgt,
dnaa Flaohcr aolbat den gansen Am anputlcrtc. (Magzka, R.1448).

Dio Zougln Ka zkr. ac to eua, dnaa riachor und oborhcuaor
In Zuaor.ncnarbe11 nit stunpf. cr nn don Knochcnc-xporlicntcn
tollnchnon. (R.1458). Ocbhnrd.t gab zu, dn 8 a Flaohcr acln ver-
blr.Cungannnn zu stunpfegger tar. (R. 4090).

Flachor aogto cua, dnaa or r.aoh Wit to Dostmbor 194’ cn kclrn
dor Expcrlr.cr.tc tfllnahn. (R. 4370). Deo ~ird klnr dureh dlo
oldoaatattllcho Erklccrung dor Zofla BeJ tldrrlogt, dlo bowel at,
dnaa *i3ch:r cn 23. P.-brirr 1943 olr. Knochcnoxocrimcnt an ihr au
fuohrtol Rio septet

"Maine zclto Opomtl^n fend cn 23.^obruer 1943 atett.

Do leh sc it r.clnor orator. Onoretl^r. nlcht r.ohr cufrc-
otenden t-er, tar leh zu a*ht«eh, ur. W rstend zu 101 -
aton. ’Mar*'® ken -or d. r Operation nIt Rohidlauski In dee
Zlnror ur.-' fr~ tc lhn. ~aa gcracht torden -nicrda. ^
ontwortoto, daaa or nlchts v'T. d.on Oporr.tloncn vor-
atoho und dagegen sol. Dr.nn fregtc or Magzka, ’-as nan
nit olr gor.echt hnbe, und alo crzechltc lhn, vrsa slo
auf rt*r. Radlnfraphl-n gosohon hattc.

" leh tor 'c dlc8^3 swoltc Mel von Flaohar oporlort, dor
fcatat-llon kac, ob leh nuch die Pora«n scl, dlo or
opcrloron wollto, d.cnn vr.chrond dcr vorhcrgchond.on
'T°cho (16.2.43) war loh lrrtuonlichorwoiao Ins Opuretlor.a-
zlr.nor gosohlckt vordon ur.d ala Flaohcr tnlch aeh, a.ifto
or, leh ac 1 nlcht dloj'-nlo, clo cr nn d.loacn Tn.a
oporlcron wolltc.


Spnotcr sag to nfr Maorkn(Hn£skn), desa bcl dlos r
zwoltcn Operatic r.cinc Pcino -^lodcr co«cffnct ’“ur^on
un* r*lo Flnachr.ittc zwlachcr. dor. zwoi ^nolfton
dcr ” T a(VnbGino un unpcf-'chr 1 cr. goachleaacn - , arcn.
"’nobrcpd d-r Operation tup' , o olr. noucs Stucck  r
^ndonbclnc r.bgcrr'-r-cn, ran nporlcrta Jo'd*h dlo
Schlcnbcino ntokt. DMinih ’-ur-’cr. r.oinc Paine "lodcr zu-
f;o one bt, •'bor olr.o gcbAgcno Nadcl und ungcfeohr
20 cn s ldonfndon wurdcn In d-r 'Tundo f'cs llnkon
^oinia gclaaacn. Dies voruranebte heftlcc schntrzon
und 'mr^r apactor lr. Fcbrur.r 1945 v*n Tr -ltc hcraua-
gon^rren. Tr.'ite relltc ca nlcht -achon, donn or
aarto, ca aol lhr. nlobt crl.a-ibt, ur.acrc Pelr.o nnzu-
faaacn, zulctzt tr.t cr ca dennneh. Ich bchiolt dio
Nod. cl ur.d den Fad on vmohrend eirlpcr Zclt, verier alo
txbcr, ala Ich Revonabru .ck vorlloas."

(NO-871, Ar.kl.n-o. 227, R• 914).

Ob.rhouacr grb zu, daa? ale bcl dor. Kneehcncxporlncnten

In dcraulbcn *70130 nltwlrkto wio bcl dan sulf^nnidvorauahon.

(NO-487, Ankl.BOw. 208, P. 782).


C. Afdoro Exporlncntc .

Daa Rcwol3notcrlrl ergibt, dnaa nlocher von nndortn
vorbrcch-rloohon "orauchon nuaaor ’cr. sulf^nanld.- und. Kn*>ohon-
vorauchor. Kcnntnla hnttc.

ocbhardt bet to rlr'V.atcna zol K^fererzen nit Raaoher
uobor alna Txpcrlnont> In Dnilvu. Dca Br^t^k^H uobor diooo
K^nforonzen bc"cl"t, d^aa rlnc^cr bcl bold.- n nnr*cacnd
(NO-231, Ankl.Bon. 116, R.360).

Flaohcr war nueb an don Scpalaoxpcrlr.ontcn In Dachau
botulll, t. (Sl~ho 3ohr If teats go^ cn GebharCt). Auf clnon von
7 .Septonbor 1942 datlortcn Brief Orawltzona an Himlor, don
Borlchto uob^r dio Sulfmonld- und. Scpalacxpcrlnontc btlgclo^t
v'arcn, aohrlob Ocbhardt Cr.a fnlgcnc' :

"l6.Saptcnbor 1942.

Nnch Rueckspracho rIt RF*SS orlodl, t.-
Obornturnfuabror *lschcr rj t r.eu.n ..nwolsunfun
fucr Ravonabrucok und pnohnu veraher.. Ocbhnrdt.®
NO-2734, Ar’cl.BOf. 4 4s, = . 5622). (tfntoratrolchunccn

clngofu gt.)


117• "nhluaa .

TTioFTF und Obcrhouacr mh-cr. pcrsocr.llnh nn ' rsi vcr-
bp-ohorlachon Sulfmwnid- und Kn^ch-r.-, Huakcl- und Forvon-
rcgcncrctior.avcrauchon lr *?avcr.abrucck:r Krnrontratl«nalai or
toil, rise hop fuchrtc vide C^r Opcrntl^ncn nus. Oberheuaer
untorauoht- die pdlnncn v*r dop opc.rr.tlon, r.33iatlwrtc bcl don
Opopntlnnon, und ibr untopatand die p^at-opemtivo pflogc.

Die ac Pflogo ~>~r nnohlncasls ur.d un.-enuo,; nd. Fuonf dop ,f or-
auohap raonon 3tnrbcn nla dlpckto Polgc *cr zxpepinente, und
acoha nndopo nur’on apneter hlngoplchtct• socntllohc Opfor littoj
groaac Snhrorzon und violc orl'tten d-iucrndcn S"hndcn.

Oberheueer nnhn nr. '.r.d ren rrcuclt-'t n In ®nvonabruor.k

t il und gcatnnd do Tootunr "<'n fucr.f • r scobs Hncftllr.rcn,

dlo ’Tank •woren, dupoh Plnapr!tzun-cr. zu.

wlaohop otnnd nuoh ^it Plncnon ur.-* ”nt m hnunrrn In
vorblr/ung, dc Fnarbera pochcr.- ur.d ncfr!orcxpfrincr.to ur.d
die flcpalacxpcrinontc In Danh-.u rur. pc -onatnr.d hn tt.cn.

Dio ..nklagobehror-'c unt ratcllt, dnat daa Bosrolanntorlal
orglbt, daea Plachar und Ob rboua.r Hnupttnctor, Bclhclfop,
’.natlftcr und vnrachublo latond.c worca, lhrc Zuatlnnung gnbon
zu und In Zuannronhr.n* atnndcn nit Plr.oncn ur.d Ur.t. rnoh* une cn,
dlo dlo vrrnnlir.c noditlnlachor Vcrauchc nn nonachllohon v„r-
nucharbjokton nhno lhro Zuatinrur.s tlnaohl^aaor., In dcron Vjr-
lnuf ?'ordtf\tor., prutnlltnctvn, Grnusr.rko't n, 7v>itorun£ on,
Orouoltnton und and ro ur.r cnachllcbr ?ntcn bog-ngon -mrd.cn.
“laoh^ra Snhuld 1- Slnno d 0 r Pur.Vto T, IT, Jtt und r* dor An-
kln;:c3'hrift 1st cr^ioacn. Dlo «?chul'* v«r. Oborhcuaor lat r-
'"loarn In Slnnc* dor Punktc t, 17 und III d _ r AnVln oaohrlft.

"vndo".


_1A_


I oh, Pr-.fi Iax, T046 2©7 boatcOtico hlcrnit, finss ich fiurch-
nua vcrtr^ut It fir cn^llaohcn unc* ''cuta^hcn spraoho bin,
ur.fi finsa fias v^ratchonfio cine vahrhclt8(.or.Qvsnc ur.fi richti^c
Obtractzun<. flea Dokun-nta Piaohep unfi Ob.rhouaor finratcllt.


2. juli 1947


«

l


*rc' Lex
X 046 207


»


- ii -


Docuaeat Sari Gab herd t


Kill TA SS S:,Si C H fSHOT to. I


TALL .c. 1


ffX+uLJI .ASSTfSS SOSITT^aTZ
BiS VAA.I-IOa:* SLixIT. TO. AXLftlXA


-Su b oa-


Jo=e« X. Kcaancy
Aicxr«Edor G. Hardy
<»rncfc. .-orllk-Hoch' eld
Sather Jer.o Johnson

^eri

“olfori Taylor
Brigadier Goasral, U.S.A.,

Chi if of Counsoi for !far Criaoa


Ifuornbor*:,

16. Junl 1947


Docuaect £arl Tobl^riz


Hi


Bator .nil gopnnit 1 d.r -ilo.: .chrlft vlri lirl Gebhnrdt In
vo.oatUtf.rn vorjworfoa, .Ich alt nad u r.a Porwndn 1 = Vorfol s .i „ 01
6 a-cla.ar.oa Vorhabon. n olnor Vorocirccraag and Uoborolniuart n-
.aanoaGofaadcn .u taboo, «or.tUoho Vcr.ucho aa Vor.uoh.por.onoa ohno
doroa Zu.tlrnung vor.ancteoa, oator 6 -ilng.pankt II uad III (Krlo^
vorbrcchon. botv. Vorbrochoa gog a dlo Xrn.chllch.clt) Haupttaotor,
Tollaohaor. hn.tlft.r, Yorochu lel.toador 60 -o.oa to .ola. oolac Za-
.tln.nua 6 jj 6 .bon and alt Macao. and Oatoraoacoa bol doaoa o. .lob
an aodlxlalecho Var.aoho on Vor.uch.por.onoa gorcn Ihroa Villon
hrndolto, m Yjrblndung *'.f.ndoa h,boa| untor iaiU : ,«puatt IV
aaah d« 1 . Sopt =b«r 193 » do Xlt .llol dor SS cuvo.on r. ..in, olnor
Orgnnl.ntloa, dlo »oa Iatora.tloa.loa hllUrorgorlcht.hof ruor Tor-
broohorlooh orJclr„rt worsen lot.

Dlo adlua.r.a. dlo .1. Irloj.Torbroohoa and Vorbroohon gogca dlo
Hoa.ohllob.olt ooltoa, .lad la 1 (b) and (o) do. ArUkol. II

do. hoatrollratgo.otto. aagduchrt. Xtt„Uod.oh.f, la olnor von Intcr-
nntloaaloa Kill ».r t rich,.ho, far torbr,ch ; rl.ob orU.ortoa Organl-
■atloa gilt an oh db.„. 1 (4) deal*. .rtliol. .1. Vorbroohon. 1,0
Strafb0r.0lt.a0rlc3.l0 vordon la 01..,. Z, do. artliol. II do. Zoatroll-
raloOBotioB 'j r . 10 BU f< fuohrt.

i. nSd. ir:<xiLtCK. szcmjs-jH'

Bor dh60.la.to Oobtardt hot,. SUhR. In Stall..,dor
SS.ln notlonal.o.lnll.tl.chcn Boaunhlaal tana. dlo Kachtb»-

fusnlo.o and Vcroatvortllchiol, la .loh .chlo...o. 3r trat dor P. 5 .P.I.P.
1 = Bnhro MW, dor SS dad atau .ohoa o,l. ( *Wm.iatt.Ii„.ss,

• “®" 7 ' "»• *•• *«. --197). zr bo,olll,,o .loh

a- aatloaalioil.llBtl.ehra Put.oh do. Brhra. 1P33. dor dor. Ba.tar. dor

.O^aaaatoa -tdaaror HopubU. * Mol. ha, to. dor daemon doner,.-
tlnchcn fiogicnm* iz Oout-chlaad.


- 1 -


1

Xtocuncct Sari Gobhardt

3r war dnaalz Kltjliod d;. Illation Frolkorpt "Sued Ob orland-.

(J.0-571, oboe Gobhardt, H. 395S). 1 b la Jshro 1933 da ZraakonhnuB
In Hohonlychon jrooffcot imrdo, vurdo Gobhardt tea Chofartt dcr „n-
etalt oroaaat. (Gobhardt, a. 39,3). 1= Jearo 1939 vurdo cr Hlaalora
bcha dolader *rzt. hr »rr auch Lelbcrst Elmlorz und eoincr ?a-
all 1 o.(«0-671, oben; OebUrdt, 2. 3952). 1= Jahre 1940 vurdo Gobhnrd»
sua bora tender. rzt dcr VeF:o:>-S$ nd 1= Jfhrc 1943 »u= Ofccr»to.:

Xliallcor dcs Holch.arzt SS ved dor Pollzcl (Gravltz) orannnt. la
dor lll^.aolaca SS ttlo$ Gobhardt zuu Eang cine# Gruppoafuohrcrz
(Gcnorolloutannt) uad la dor ''afon-SS JU doa clr.cz Goncrallcut-
nmstz dor Beaenro auf. (KO-671,obcc).

Aa:Vx#cz 1540 acl lu,; Gebhardt Hlaalor vor, dlo S tellur.^ olr.oa
borntoadca *ratca dor Varfon-SS 3 u acVlfoa. Xafol^odcaaon vurdo or
durch olnon Bofohl Hlaalrra, voa 17. Kr\ 1940, xu dlozor Stolluaj;
ornr. mt. G. aaczz *1 oon 3 fchl halloa dlo XllUnorr.ortto uad dlo
Aorato la Lazor^tt dor Vn foa-SS Oubharfitz kllnlaohon Anordaun.ton
roA *° -u Ida tea uad alio alUvorlachon Behoerdoa vor lor. /u^ovloacn,
lhn uni zolnoa Stabo nn dlo Hand zu gchca. (Gebhardt K. 3971-2).

Goblin r* ta pv rzooallohor Elnflusi uad adae cn^on 3orlohua..cn
alt Killer vnroa olno acdoro Quelle botrlohtllohor Xr.cht. U-.

■clr.c Torcatwortllcho Stdlut zu vuarll -ca, auaa uaa zlch iiiaclora
fnzt uabofronato Aochtbofu^alz«o 1 . artlonnlaozlnllztlachaa Doutacb-
lnud lr. nllgoodoon ur.d u-b r dlo Zonzcntratloaalrgor la boaondoren
Torcofpja*- ortl^ca. It '1, Boa Fuaxt lot Gabh«rdtz auzzo^o uober tola©
Bozlohua t xn zu Eitolor zohr aufzc. luzi rclch. Oobhardtz porzoonllcho
Bczlchunson zu hinder 'rrcr. v rtrnutor -~.tur uad Ton lna^.or Zhuor.

- oldo Blni l “ dorzelboa Sind rcboroa, la;on tur ^lolcooa Seoul© ur.d
vorbrachton lhrc Juccai xua^-. Gobbr: tz 7 c ur vnr dor -irst von
Hlaalorz Fanlliei Kin dor a Voter \^r Blroictor dcr Sohulo, die GobhnrdJ
bozuchto. (Gobh«rit 2, 395S). .


Eocuaaat S-rl Gcbhar&t


Sisal r BOV) hi Kin Gcbterdt botcili ;;an oich nu nr.ticnr.lco=lnll-
■ tliichor. Putsch in Jahr 1523. (Srohr.rdt, 5. 3955). Jcbhnrdt
borctochl".. to -it Hind r w.;< ^ dcr 7orbcrdtuas d, r OlyspiBckon
Spiol ir. SoatcchlT.A, vur - da Ait ilci doc douti-ohcr Eo-lttcon
fiu-r dlJBO (w-mr-t, 3a6l), uni wordo prot.pt -ait d«xi litol
oir.-ti iihrouiUcar rs 1„ Ur SS boisaati (J.c.-rrdt 2. 39G2). HUnlor
bucuchto Eohjalyohaa r.icht nur hnoufic, (S.bixrdt, 3*3962) condom
coin Soh.’. uni e,ir... svcit> locr.tcr h'icr. ou r. dort but Volt und
vorbliob n bin xun Zuanaaonbrucb Dcutuchlnndo unt r Job crito Cb-
hut. (2.3963). Hlnali.r infer lcrto Job.r.rdt "uob r ion hoochot-
porBOonlichca XorJlltt in r u ir..= L b a" (daodbet) ur.d Gcbhnrlt or-
l .di.;to ^oviBBt "p rno.-lichc -carol -h.it. a Hi —1. re" (3.396d).

Sr vrr Hl-al re Sclclt'rxt '1 b dio d.utochon in Ooet .rrolch la
J".«iro 1938 oinfiwl n, in Su tcnlrr.:' i Bolden Jnfcro (Ooihnrdt 2.35'.
ur.i ia Polon ia -'hre 1935 (0. h*r:t -.3963). In Jnhro 19a sr.b or
iiooo Stollu-'.q 'Uf. *r. coin St 11 tr~t coin fruohoror ASolBtont
Dr. Stuipf'..\tr (Oobhor*t 2. 3562), offcnoiohtlich nuf Oobhnrlto
oi:;ono AarcKuai? hia. Gubhor t bvBohriab coin St.-llus,: qIb Slsalor*
So<floltr.rt nl» oin p«.rBOoallcho.-r nrctettu Hl-ul.r tohr oft 3o-
richt uni sob lha, via or cloh out rucchto, *"ue ol-ron-r luintivo
dio ohrll note u..i wthrhaltB,ua*voBBviBtu Infor-rtlon" uob r ir,~cad-
oino bosondur oltuntlon (Gj&irdt .i,39oO,35C2). "io dor *J.;akla-tt
Gonxfcen oueBnsto, Btr«nd Gobn'.rdt 1.. oia.r vBon-crun 7ov.fi once tel-
lun$ tu KLanlor (...3778,3?' <•). II BjvolBtufaobno sol t, It.cb Oobhnr
oi:io bodout.ndo Hollo bol i n syctunrt inches Sxpcrlacntun on Eon-
BcntrrtionBln t .rlsBriBf .a Bpldtv,

Gofchordt t* xu, doBi r tchoa la Mai 1S«£ vus*to, 4t.bb Hitlor
■olnc ZoBtlnnuan xu Hxpcriaoatcs on or.xcatrotionflo- orhcoftlin } ;on
t'O-^ob a hattc, Sr -rfuhr -io* b?l la r Zuinaatnsuaft alt Himlor mi
Gmvitx. (H.4151). Di cinxcln n 7 rauohBloltor vu.*rdcc nu S. Z.
Kaoftlin on ohco D< e-cun. vor. K'ocfJt r Stella «ino ixpcrlnonto ror-


scno.aaon hrbea;


3 -


Document Horl Gebhardt


->


eolbot Hlrrcl-r suchto Declcunc durch Hitler. (Gebbrrdt H.4191/92). Sr
wuoato, dnse ia Vorlruf fur Krlc^sjohro :lo Ycrnohac von eolchoa Sxpori-
acntcn oich su cln. r tyitom-tlochca Praxis cntvickelt kattc. (Gobhnrdt
R. * 1189 - 80 ) • Gobkr.rdt fcctt ca d or systeuatlechoa Voxaekrung diooor
Vorbrv.chcn *r.toil.

Dio vcrratvortltohoa Strllun.cn ice Aagokla.tcn Ocbhrrdto wnroa
also: Chofarit dos Sr*R>ialj?usas ia Hehonlychcn, Leibrrxt von Hlaalor,
Grupponfuohr -r ia dor *11 ? - inoa-SS uni Gcner'lleuta/xt in dor Vaffoa-S
boratendor rxt dor Vnffca-SS, Ob rot.r Slinikor do Roiahonrztos SS
und Polisoi und HiuaXcrs p rsoonlIcier Pcr-.tor iu ao’.liinischoa Dic/on.
Gobhorit boautatc die ool^ua StellunTca, ooiaoa por»oor.lichon Slufluss
uad noino vortr.-ut.a io.lohua ,ca iu Hlualcr la oin?r Volso, .'ia :’io
Bo^olxur,; von aric..svor6rcc:ica und Vorbrochcn gc^e die Moase.'illchlcoit
ait slch brre .te.vlo la dor Aaklrc-'schrift nussofuohrt 1 st.


In *bsnts 6 dor *nklaocschrlft slnd 12 rorschlodcao irtca von
Kxporisontoa la clnxolncx auf ofuchrt. Oobh.-rdt vir* dlo bosondoro Vor-
ontvortllchfcoit fuor, und P.t«lUf«rv; rx alien tur Last golc,;t.


Vorouebo sur ^rprcbuac d.r Vtries not t von Sulfoanald t .-c.:cnuobor
Infoktlonon mir'cc ia 2.2. H/vo .sbrueck von 2J. Jull 19-1 d bio *ur.»t 19«1
vnr.xnccsan. Ei, sr Ixp-rlaoatr vur\a v n *xn *n> il -tan Gv.bhr.rdt,
fisch. r und Oborke-isor vor : -.oa a. (i"0-^29,*nkl. ov.SO'i, H.7G7).

Gcbhnrdt ornucht ' praicrlieh tr- ’iail ra Srlrubnln, dio Sulfonnnid-
Vornucko vomchjna *u 'uorfon un <-r vnr fuor ihr 7orr.-.h.jo ver ntvortliol
(Gobhnrdt It. *02 ./35 . Lr lbst a- j 'lc nnf -mvllcfc n Opcmtionur. ver.
^Gobhrrdt i.-^32),

Dla Vorauci.sp rc non best.-a -us 15 a-vaalicken .<Jl.HaoftHn:on, c
la Jull 19<i, v whrou ~.r vore.r. it...’.rc -st.. .-ri ..onto v.rv: v’t wur oa, und
60 polnlacher. Preucn, ra *ca a la b Gruupcn vra Jo 12 Voraucaspornonon Voi
■uuho vor o:.c -cn vur en. (Gob..«r*.t *.-1056),


- i -


Doouaent Krxl Gebhrxit


Dor Zt'oek dcr Versucho vsr'c y-s GcihrxAt is oisas vorlpoufison

Boricbt vcs 25. August 1S42 irrgeloct, is ias cs hioaas

■*af Bofokl Asa a- ichafuahr. ro-SS h?bo icr. bs 20.Juli 1943
in F....L.-.r.voaa rucck sit eisor klinlacbs Ycrauchsr:-iko bogonnon, 4io
4~.b Ziol hat, iio ust-r 'us Zcson l-i'.r.ii ick^sntrm, kliniaehon nlckt
cisl'oitlich vorlcufonica -rk-'skua ;co an rmnlyaicroa uni iio biahor
bckcnntrn thorcpoutiaches Hlttjl auf ihro Yirka-akoit au pruofon.

'AUnoor:.ca acllton ’lo bps-1 on Yu.41nf kti'.n n, il> rle Bcr'loit-
OTBctu3l:iun..o|i lr. A., r tlrio achlruria f.uftrctoE, obusfclla ;oprucft
wor’on us’, lor Y rruch cinor : ucn cko cth.:r?p-utl»ciirc Hoilusf nob.n
don bol: sntor. chi rurda chon ApaaciLsca untorrosson wr'.on. 3
CS0-27.V-, Anbl.“cv. -'73, B. K22).

Dio Self enrr.l *-Voreucho , vis la v.aontllehon nllc '.'orruchj, .'lo
Ou.- natond ’ioar YcrhnnUun* •in 1 ., at radon in iioktor Doalobun* bus
ioutochos Hrio<aoin»«ta. Dio pllll rto Propr.^enin hlneichtlioh dca
■Vvm.'oralttola" Sulf'.n _*ii bo.- an oiao botr.'cchtlioho Virlrua.; nuf Ana
Vortr. 'ioa ior loutacbon S 1’ ton au ihroa Sr.'.itrotaoffiaioroa nuasu-
uobon. SchxoTu V rluato wires l Victor IV41/ 2 an ior ruaaiachon Fr<
infol o von Geatrani cotatcu* .ca. 2t -a t;.ocrotiacho Prr-blos, Ana dioao
Yoreucho boor.tvrrtja a llton, v r, '<b 'lo Vorvuniotcn chlrux,riech in
FrontloaarolWn e’er ven Saaitnotacfflalorea sit Sulf oonli bcbecAolt
uni Arnn r.u t ".on lor-sca 7i rSin'ur.-alUl^n av^cka wit rcr Sohrisilun^
in ola rol41fiar.rott e .brscht Vor'an a-lltos. (Ov hi rit -1.4010/14).

mib Aouaolbon obos Bn..’ofxiu , irtcn - oric. t cuLt herv r, iraa ior An.
kln,;tc Fiachor v'n Gobhfir'.t au aolr. .-. abbIbi t o» sst -ur o; Pr.
Blusonrouthor, cla UntJVobo .r ca *= -cl- tc Gcr.akcn, atcllto ilo
chirur.laohja Isatruacctc uni Annciolttcl bor.lt} icr «r. oklr.rto
Mru./owaky otolltc aoin Ln‘. r^frlus us aolno Alt rbolt.r but Ycrfuosu
von GobharAt; ur.' Yr. Drlllr.*, Choforat fujr -llo Sonaontrotionalogor,
vioo Dr. Sc'»lcl”uaky us it* Ar^okln tc Oberb uaor rla Kitrrbcitor t\
rtcarr v'rl-cufl o r rlcht b?faaat ale's It icr. frm-h.s Yorauchcr.
cn ion 13 anonnllchea Yoraushap^'rass r., us .lsc Jiath" ‘o sur Isfoktion
sit O-abr-ni au ‘ atis-;s. Cebbar’.t wurio r's Ky^lono Isatitut ior
Vaffen-SS unt-ratuotat, ir.a iio

- 5 -


D-cu-,ct £?rl Gcbhardt


BoktorlcaKulturcu iur Yerruc a uas et. Uto tad -atechlae^ t ;nb, vie -100

jr.':i_iufJctl 2 a kucnitlich a^rr. r^crufoa vcr'on icroaaa. Dio Vcroucho-

tochalk vur -.0 la .on Versuch vi<* f"lrt boec-rlaVc:

■So ,;nl6 ilo Lrjrfkulturos ta ^-'-ci.nu'l.taa Mu»kol^owobo
muTsuictaoa, Ic.-ca vra lor otcoiphnorischon uai httaorrloa
Saucrst-ffiufuiir alsuichll.'iBcn ua* doa inneron Sovobodruck
nunxuiotsca. D?o Inpfvcrfn: rx; vrr f 1 cnd'-i: 10 ca lor :or
Loca-^oohaltt ueJ.r drn Xuekulua paroaoui loacui, ncch
Spcltunc ’or Vnslo vur'... la dava xu-af.mrlo.tueckroiioo
-oiirk dur .-.uu:ol -iv or kl.^c .*cquot®cht un. J . el :o nnno^locho
andscnc r.urch *latpritiu» r-n 3 ccz ilr ^lin £o»chrffon,
■ubfnisll wr'o la dca : rolch doi boocfc.-ci^tca Muikoli
da« Inpfantorlol (alt 3ektrlec gotrajnktcr Goiotupfor) vor-
■oaJet, Paula, luhkutaaci ?*ttgev„bo uni Kent .chichi, nvol.o
vor.chlo.oea."

In don cr.tcn "orfuchtroihca vur'.on 'lo Verouchiporecnon alt
Stnphylococcua, Str^pt-coccu., P«m Ooivjan Kall^nxa ua* i-aJctorln
IraonJcol ua' ~r*o lnflslort. Dio horr r^orufencn Inf. ktlonaa t.urion
nl« olcht orr.it <oau* an -oioh n. -• foal olao Koaforoai nit don
HyrTloao Iaitltut itr Yoffon-SS it-»tt ua* lo l -ktcrlonkultur sur Kor-
vorrufun* dor Infcktionon vur .'a nt>.chiolt. Sochi voltcro naoxmllcho
Vor.uch.pcr.ono.: warden an lafisUrt, nbcr Ho Seiultnto vurdoa
vlodorua fuor aicat omitfcnft „.>u; on \jachcn. Xcch voitoror r-orntun,;
alt ion Mitarboitorn 1- -ygloac Iaitltut dor Yaffoa-SS vur.'.o dan In-
foktloniantorlol !urch 2uirts v a Kobclcpnuaca tfradovt. Yrohrond
do. Vorlnufoi dialer Axp,rlaoata vur'.ca Ho Ver.ucnoporonaoa Ht vor-

•chlodonon irton tco Sulfcnraliro ahrndolt, dnickll inlloh . .

Ontcayn und Knrfnallpr atrlbla. lotstoro vur 0 r n dor Koor.-i-
Soaltnctilaipoktlca .ohr oapf-hlon. Ycltorc ai ;ron,,-uam vur'.on
eouaoht, ua dlo 8 rm’infektloa , r..itt f tor iu anchor., uad lor 1‘oricht
•ohloBt ult dec fol oadan - ar.tit


Docurent Karl Gcbfcardt


"Es rurdo nunrofcr die Frago untcrsucht, woahilb In «orllo¬
go nden Paollcn dor Gasbrnnd nleht veil zur E&twtcklung knn.
Dcahalb wurde dio Gcreboaehaodlgung und dlo Auaschnltung olnoa
Fuakola aua dor Blutkroialauf in olnor goaondorton oporatlvon
Sitsung vorgenorren, auf die


_ Dcnn orat, wonn die wirklioh olndoutlg

kiln Iache Bild doa Guobrandca orzougt 1st, koonnon endguoltigo
F.uockschlucaso auf dio Thornplo nit chorothornpoutlachon Mlttoln
In Vcrbinlung nit chirurglachon Eiagriffcn gozogon wordon."
(Untoratroiehungon cingefuogt).

Dicaor Buricht imrdo ala wahrhoitagetrouo Abechrlft von doin ..ngo*
klngton Popjcndick boglaubigt.

In aolnen Eifor, aoino kitangeklngton »u achuotzon, angto Gobhnr-
aua, dnaa wodor das Hygiene Iaatltut dor *uffon-SS iwch dor Angoklflgti
Hrugowaky lrgcndolncn intoil in dloaon Exporloentin hatto, und daaa
lhn dna Infoktlonsnotorlftl von Grnultz uoboranndt wordon wnr (R.4179)
Dub wldoraprioht offonalchtllch aoln olgenor, obon ongofuchrtor Riri«
It. Anochluflo in dna Endu dor vorboroltondon Voraucho nn monn-
liohon Gofongonon, wurdon dlo Vurnuch© nn woibllchon polnlaohon In-
anaeon fortgoaotzt, Dio oidoaatattllch© frklnorung don Angoklagton
Pinohor bosngt, dnaa droi Roihon von Oporntlonon vwrgonorwn wurdon,
in Jowo 11 a 10 Poraonuni dio orato untor Banuttung von Bnktorlonkul-
turon und Holzapilttorn, dio iwoito untor Bonutzung von Biktorlonkul-
turon und Glaaapllttora, und dio dritto untor Vorwondung von Kulturon
und Glae und Hoi* (NO-23, Ankl.Buw.206, R.767). Dioao Rxporioonto
wurdon In Vorlnuf doa August 1942 vorgonoonon. Wsohrend Pischor von
Vornuohagmppon von Jowoila 10 Poraonon aprlcht, aagto dor Anf.oklngU
GobhnHt iua, dies aioh dio Gruppon nua 12 Vorauchopernonon miaasrwn-
aotiton (R.4056). An 3. Soptorborl942, nnohden Vorouoho nn 36 Frauo
vorgonomron wordon -aron, bosuchto Roichenrzt-SS Growlt* Ravonabruoc
und untorauchto dio Vorsuchorcrncnoa. Er frogt® G*bhnrdt, wio violo
Todoafocllo aioh oroignot hnotton, und nla mn ihr borlchtoto, dnaa
alch koino oroignot haetton, engto or, dnaa dlo Voraucho nleht. don
nuf don Sohlnohtfold horraahondon Bodlngungon ontaoraochon (NO-23,
oboni)

- 7 -


Do euro nt Korl Gebhardt


Gebhardt, R.4057). 3: dio Braadlnfoktion ncch emator zu mchen, mrd
oino none Voraucbnrolbo rlt 24 rclniachon eoibliehon In&aason auage
fuohrt, Io dioeon Roihan wurde dio Blutsirkulation in don y’uckoln
in den Infokticnogobicton dureh dio 4bbindung dor Vuskoln nn boidon
ExvJon untorbroobon, Dicao Roiho von Fxporircnten hatto sohr ornst-
hnfto InfoSctionen nr Polgo and oino Rlh von Todoafaollon trot oin
(NO-228, obon).

Gobhanlt, Fiiichor und Oborhoucor gobon alio zu, daoa droi Vor-
auohaporaonon an don Folgon dor Voraueho atarbon (’JO-228, obonj
Gobhardt, R.4059j Oborhousor, R.5492). Aua nndoron Boroiarotorial
goht Jodoch horvor, dnaa fbonf nn don unrittclboron Poison dor Vorauc
atnrbon und sects durch Erochicaaon hlngorichtot rordon (Va&to a,
R.1438, 1449) Brool-Platcr, R.7<>7j Dsido, R.845) Xiur-iorosuk, R.863).

Viur dor polnlr.chon Frouon, die aich dioson Vorauchon untorsiohr
nuaaton, eagton vor den Gerich'ahof nua. Pi* piston dor Frauon, dio
ala Vursucha poreonan bemitat wurdon, mron In dor ~ idorstandobovegun.
tflotig goroson (BP„ R.787; Kar„ R.tt6| P»., R.840, Kus., R.857).

Nut goeundo Inaooson rurdon vor*-ondot (BT., R,786j Kar., R.02 f '}

Pa., R.836, Xus., R.856, 860-1). Koine von lhnon atollto aich froi-
rillig fucr dio Voraueho aur V-rrfuogum* (BF., R.78°) Knr., R.^l 0 ;
D«„ R.842, 844-5) Kus., R. 86l). IsGcgonteil, nio protentlorton, so-
irohl ruondlich wic aehriftlioh gogon dio Voraueho (BP., R.789/794)
Kar., R.823-5)• Sio sagton nus, aio -uordon don 7od oinor Koitorfuoh-
rung dor Vursuoho vorgoaopon habon, tell olo uoborxougt won, dnaa
aio r.uf Jodon Poll sterben nierdon (TP., R.795) Kar., R.824; <«us.,
P.,863). Sic sneton ana, dnaa Vorcucho an 74 yolniachcn Pmuon, «inor
Poutachon und oin:r Ukminorln rorgonorDon wor'on aoion.

(Hagakn, R.143S) BP., R.7*>| far., R.C18) Xus., R.862). Da Gobhardt
dio GcsABtMhl dor boi don Sulfonanid-Vnrcuchen vorronioton jalnlscY
wolbliobon VnraMchanorsonen rlt 60 -i-vibt,


Docuront Sari Gobhardt


koonnen die 36 suanotzlich von den Zouglnnen gonannten Fmuon aohr
nohl Vorsuehstx rronon bei cion taoohra-, T.'uc' oi- und Norvon-Rogono-
rationa-Exnerironton geoosen acin (ifagcka, R.I462).

Die Zougln Kuaniorcauk vnr cino dor Yerauchaporaonon boi don
: ulfonadd-Exp»>rlconton, Sio 1st polnlaoho Stantaancohoorlgo und tan
In Horbat 1<V,1 nacb dan S.Z. Ravrna ruock (R.857), lr. Oktobor 1942
rurdo alo oporlert, und In ifcroc Fall blldoto aidh oino achiroro Infok
tion horaua (R, 85$), Sio vcrbllob von Oktobrr 1942 bia April 1943 in
laznrott, olwr ihm "undo rar noch iraor nloht gehollt, nla alo auM
don Liznrott ontlaaaon vurdo. Ihr Zustand vrachlitrorto aloh und alo
mirdo an l.Suptocbor 1943 *iodor In daa Larirott nufgonotwon (R.860).
Sio vorlloaa dna Loznrott daa swolta Ifcl lr Fcbrunr 1944 , nbor ihro
Wundo hollto orat lr, Juni 19V. ondguoltiff.(?..86l), Sio idontlflziorto
dlo Angoklagton Gobhardt, w lsehor und Ob.rh.ninor nla dlo Poroonon, dlo
aloh bol dor an ihr vorgonon-oaon laporlncnt botolllgt hatton (R.860),
Dlo Zougln trug infolgc dloaor Voraucho dauomdo Schaodon dnvon und lh?
Zuatond mirdo von dor archvorotiorvMgon Zougon Dr. Loo Aloxnndor bo-
aohrlobcn (P.,864-9). Dlo Bohan-lung dloaor Frau naoh dor Operation
wurdo nloht ven Oobhardt und Flrch^r rondom von don Ugoraorston
vorgonotron. Zur Zolt ihror axolton Einlloforunr lna Lazarott In
Soptonbor 1943 mirda alo bcir Vurauch dlo tlofnurrolndo Infoktlon nua*
auhollon von Dr. Trvlto oporiert (Run., R.,61).

Dio nachvorataondigo Zougin r.agzta, dlo xaohrond dor Varnuoha nla

Roontgonologln lr K.Z.Ravonatruock nrboitoto, naohto Aueaagon, dlo alo'

nuf don Tod dor 5 polniachon Yorsuchaporaonon ala Folgo dor Sulfonarid-

Voraucho bosogon. Boi i.’oronlon Kracta traton oin paar Togo naoh ihror

oxporlrontollon Opomtlon iypiaeho Starrkrarpfajrrptono nuf. Naoh

kursor Kmnkholt vorrtarb sio on dureh Starr knr.pf voruraachton
Kracrpfon (ttigaka, R.1433). Kaairdcm KuromTn mirdo kucnatlloh
nit Brindbaxlllon lnflr'ort. Sio tar oln gosundca 23 Jaohrigca, pol-
nlachoa -hodchon. Von Tag zu T -g mirdo Ihr B In acbxneraor und achwol*
irohr an. Sio


9 -


Eccuront llarl Goblwrdt


wurdo nur aoohrond dor ersten poor T.-go gopflogt. Dornoch mrdo aio
lna Zinror 4 Cob Lnatrctt* gobrooht, r.o sio 4 Togo lnng in unaagbtron
Schnorson log u»l achlioaslich starb, Dio Zcugin "aazkn *ar in dor
Ingo, dioaon ?,U paraconlich an boobno2)ton Tire! ihror Hoinung nach
wuordo oino unvoraucglioho Operation ihr lobon gorottot ha bon
Ofagikn, R. 1439-40), 2a let gen* klnr, daao ronn das Lobcn oinoa
doutachcn Soldaton durch Brandiafoktion bodroht gozoaon woro, oino
Amputation ximrjrauoglich vorgonctxcn vord.on more, Bol dioaon Vorauoh,
boi dor gorado cino Aaatronsun- gorecht '-orden tot, oino ornathafto
Brand inf ?kt ion horvorzuruf n, up dlo ’’irkungen dor Sulfoaunid-Pmopn-
roto nuaauprobi'Ton, lot ca obonao ofronaichtlioh, ranir dna Boln
dor Kurooakn nioht aryutiort rurdo. Acilno Loffmonlca trnrdo nit
Oodort tfalignun inflaiort, Ihr Boir. aohrell nohr und nohr an, dlo
Blutgoftoaao irurdon serfr aaon und alo roratarb dureh Vurbluton.
fbgzko aogto nua, d-aa dlo mutc-ofaoaao haotton tbgobundon irordon
munaaon urei oiru Operation vcr;:cnorecn, ur ihr Lobon tu rotton. Hnoh
don oraton rrol odor droi Tngon turdo aio voollig rornaohlnoaaigt
(Magikn, R.1440-J). Zofio Kicool atarb untor aohnlichon Uratacndon

(Magtkn, H.1441).

Alfroda Prua mxrdo nc aolbon Togo trio dlo Zouglncnon Kuarlorozuk
Kiocol und LcfnnoTlca rlt Oodom follenuB infimiort. Sio mr oin
aohoonoa 21 Johro titan Mnodohon und Vnivoraitnotsatudontin. Sio
orwloa aioh ala ntiorkor tin d.to Kioool und dio Lefmetrioz und lobto
dooKtlb oin j*ar T'go ltotecr. Sio attnd rohroaklicho Schroraon
nua uni voratnrb no EoJo nn Rlutung (teigsln, R.1442-3). Dio Zougin
Kuaniorcauk unr dio oinaigo Verauchapcrcon, dio dicao Veraucharoihon

uoborlobto (Mtgakn, 2,1443) •

Ea iat knur notaowSig dtrauf hinauroison, dtae tllo Voraucha-
poraonon attrko Schnoraon und Qunlon littm. (BP, ,R.7°0-1,80? ;Knr.,
R.ftfiOjDz., R.842; Kua., R.85°| HCWS76, Ankl.Bor. 225, R.R99, S0-P71,
Ankl.Bou.227, R.913; J»-8'/7,.a*l.Bor.228,P.^18).Dor Gorichtahof mr


Document Karl Gobhnrdt


In dor La*c selbot dlo Vorstuorrolunc su beobachtcn, die dio polni-
schon Zouginncn orduldcn marten uni Abblldungon ihrer Harben vurdon
stir dnuorndon Einvorleibung ir. dio *kton vorgologt (B0-1079a, b uni
c, .'nJd.Bor. 209, R.789* KKLOPla uni b, Ankl.Bcr. 211, R.829j


H0-1C62Q, b uni c, Anfcl.Bcra.2U, R.846* KO-lOSOa-g, Ankl.Bor. 219,


R. 863).

Dio Bohuvllunr dcr Vcreucfcrpcrronon rwch dor Operation rnr
pnonalich unauroichcnd (K0-S73, .’.riel.3orr,226, R.906). Violon dor
V<irauohaporoonon mmlcn auf VomrJnspunp dor Aiyoklngton Oborhouaor
wodor Arrnoinittcl no oh Lbrphiur v-rabrolcht (.WP77, Ankl.Bow. 228,
R,°18). Toun cs don Aoratca ^orodo pnaato, mrdon ihnon von Zoit
*u Zoit Vorteondo gosobor, Knnohznl rmrtotcn sio drol Togo, mnchml
vior Togo, Sin achrook3icfc.r Sitorgoruch horraohto in don Rooumin,
Dio Maodohon ruaaton oimnior holfcn (!A*ga'<n, R.1444). Sowoit oino
Bohnndlun*. rwch dor Oporntion orfol ^-, nurdo aio von den Licorocrst<
vorf/onorrvn. Dio Zougin ffrorl-I Inter nag to -.uc, dnaa:

"!toin Bo in aciirorato rich, ich hntto cr°ano Schrorr.on un!

Blut floiifl von rwinon Boino, Kiohto ruron rir gnne nlloin
ohno Jodo Pflcjo, ich teerto mu- die Schroio roinor Mitgo-
fr\n;*onon un! ich hoerte, unnn eio u- 'iBrnr biton, niornnd
gnb una Wan cor odor KaohVcochlrro." (P.,790).

Dio Zougin Knrolovato angto cub, dnom

"AIb ich in coin-- Zirr r ^r, bororkt-' ioh *u mgofangonon,
diBB rir untor rocht ochTochton BixMngvngon operiort rurdon
un! dnoB ran una nicht oinrr.l *io Moa.-llchkoit re^chrto, una
au orholon. Dloao Betorkun: mr'c nnaohoin nd lurch oino
doutacho Kmnkonpflcgcrin poheort, dio ir C-ng nan, dn dio
Tuoro aun Com; eff<n -ar. Die dcutocho Krankonpflcgo-in
tor heroin un! horraefcto unn an -nifau-itcbcn uni unn nnaus'.o-
hon. ^ir ant-ortotxn, daas -ir ihror Bofehl nicht folgon koenn-
ton, dn unaoro Bolno f'Tchticr nchroraton und rir auoserntnnde
vnaron au gohen. Dann tor dio dmtncho Kmr.konoflcgorin uni
Dr. Oborhous'-r in unoor Zirrer herein. TV. Oborheunor bcfahl
unn ansuaiohen und in den Vurb-ndrmur au Vrrr n. r ir zogon
unaoro lQoldor in, uni da ir nicht fchon tonnten, hueoften
rir nuf oinor Boin in dor. Vortnndanal. Rich Jed or fprun.:

Euaaton rir auaruhon. Dr. Cbcrhcuaur gcstottoti nionindon,


- 11 -


mi 3 ir,:end».olcho Hili'c zu ,owae,ire.-.. Ala Kir i~ Gperationa-
oaal In vocilig crac.-.oupftci Lust arse anicauen, erschien Ur.
Obarhduuser und sagta una, wir eollcn in unaer ru-

rueckxehren, da dio Vorcaorxio louta doch nicht gevochselt
wuordon. Ich vorsochte nicht zu geisen, a'oer uinc Gefanger.e,
an ieren J.auorn ich aich nicht -ear erir-we, half rir ins
iidwor zurucck." (H. 822).

uj s Lobcn von ~ir.de at ens fuenf Lcnachcn wurdo ir. den Sul/onooid-
Versuchon geopfort, *uchrvnd weitero acchs ersc'.oaser. >urdon, nachica
oio die Opor-tionen uooorlebt !»attcn. xilo uubwrlobenden Opfcr oriltt.-n
achrocklicho Sc.'-uerzun und warder, zu ..ruu.;p«.ln fuor Lcbcnozoit. 7rota¬
tions Karen dioao Vorauci.e nient uin_»l voa nisa; sc...-Tt 11 char. Standjxmkt
aua erfolgroicn. kan hat von don .. gobr.tr . on, -.*1 ale von •T.bhardt
und fiacher bei du: driUor. d.;x- Soi .tondon «crztc dor ohrzacht

in dor uiiitaerv.ox ttlichcn .Jiwiardc ia Jahrv 1*3 vorretri-gor. t.urdon,
koinun Gobrauch v.o--cht, und uudiziniecho Vorsc..riften warden erlflaaon,
wolcho don Oobrauch von ; U'onooid woitorhin vorscnrlobcn. (Gvbhardt
bovr. 10 , n. t*22c-9). di«- «u.foMeid-< ora-cna »uron vollkon j on unnnotig,
da oohnliche or^ubniano xurch ale Bohandlung von undinfekiionm, di«
aich deutaoho oold.ton iu Uofo d-a Kriegao no;-^lorsmiac zuzogen,
hautton erztelt wordou koennun. (.vo stock, a. 3333, 333k).

Gebhardt bcoauptet nicht ornatllch, .aaa diu Vorauohsobjckte
aich froiwillig zur Vorfuegung rtullton. i:r gab zu, i»aa r nicht
wuaato, ob die Frauan vln^willigt ivwttun. -r irvl^r. ,, hr cr d. .an
nicht intoroaaiort gutuaun >ir, uir haettc dioa d-;i " cjtzllchcn Stall on"
uuborloaaot.. tr ha otto dloco Angelogonhwlt ilt iiLzaler nicht b- a.irochen.

rut, M. fr»la)» Untar gusotslichon Station vorstand Gcbhardt
Hiixuler, aer, rdo or sa.;to;, "dio .*cf,t h»tto, Tau-.nio von 1 ansohen

uLt olneia Foduratricn hinsorichton". (l». UO-b}» i-bhardt Jidoch zeigto

%

uoberlinupt koLi Inter-sou hinaichtlich dcr acnli char, ouur gesetalichan
f.atur uioaer «ucht. In vinma Punkt : . rta or,

t.aaa die Objukto kuino F rei will Igor, wuron, sac rr. vroa dt..*t i"-su te-
zwungon -urdon, aich don Vorauchen u untarziu ..n, (h. UO(J*). An in.r


andurun


Stellu waron sio "-ohr o<ler weniger Frciwilli^o, verurtoiltc Fcrsor.en".

(R. 2oa).

Gobhardta Vertoxdigung, wean aie incs aolchen ortos fuer
wuerdig orachtct herder. tenn, beateht viel^ahr dirin, liss die Polirmon
wogun ihror Xellnahae -n oinv. •J.doratAndabjvjjun* eu> Todo varurtoi.lt
waron und baas dsdurc.., baat sio aich freiulllig odor unfrciwllllg
dlooun 3xperi~unton unovrzagon, lhro lodosstrcfta in oino gorln^are
Strafe uge»ndalt >.uru«, »nbei sio -nmlgetona nicht hingorlchtot vuordon.
uiuae Vcrolnburung wurdo nicht alt den Versacnaperaonun gotroffon; ale
wurdon nicht ou Lu*. nunache in <lica«r Aniolujondelt bcfragt. Hach
Gobhardtu Ang&b~n uiiob os dor GewisscAhoftigkeit o'nor ungonanntun
Person uebvrlaa^on oarauf zu achton, dass iio iod-satrafo *n don Uobur-
lobunden dioaer Vorauoho nicht vollzagcn nuru ; . 'kbhcrit hat «owion
in dioaui Angelogonhoit koine Vo;artoort oog unborn oa..it\ and nicht
oinmal Intorunao damn gos i.^t.

Dio an-d.1 gcVortrut ung wuiat is &uaas-aahang ait dioaor vcrao-
brachtcn Vorteidl,iung aarauf hin, oiae tua .weiavvrfOi.r zeigt, aaaa
dun Verauchnjx> r n onun, die vor dies— GorichUbofo iua£<j»agt babon,
nicht oirwal oln G.richtavurluhrun xugeblUigt »*ardcn war; oiv hattun
koine Gulogonhoit, alch gogun . oi . ; : chon,

die aiu bogutjen h-bon colltwn, zu vurtoidl^n. Sio »;ur.: n i.daefc vcr-
haXtet, Oureli die Jeotr.po In folen v<rr.a . i, a\,i . an. mtmtiooa-
lagor verochict. Me harden nicht alncal divan us rrichtet, laan
■iu >U*fit--r b.n ...j-rninen. nicht dvtu v.r lit rvr...n .1 ... (nr.,

K. Bjl). ATtikel jo der — stiAJun,;er., die sich auf daa Landkri-jsrac
und -gubrauucfca Ouzi. hr. und u. in-H. r »o:.7^itlon -iu glit l rt
sind, nicht .uuhruec. lei: vjj, .:us nlcnt >1 uin SpXoa "onn- vor-
harlgoo drt oiiavo rf ajiran boatraft -,.*uuc d-^r:"’. :/L. von Gobharat vor-
georachto Vortuldigufuj -nt b.nrt cuhw jcdi.r Gr -naLf

Gebhardt wolit. c«n Jorichtahof ^1-iubon .*chan, d&sa allc ii_ao
polniacrten *iodehon tot waervn, soon ii-ea Vo ranch u nicht arc ,:.fu^hrt
woriun Kueren; ticro cr fuer oiu orhaltung l-a Jim, 1 sal rials, dia jot:!
go gen ihn verwendet >ird, gosorgt Metto.


lichLi Icann weiter von dcr ahrheit entTornt scan. ~r. don .dct.-r. xk.-^.
koifl pu"viB dafacr vor, daas diese rrauon ninsorichtct word an vtse ren,
vwrw) dieac Versuchu nicht ait ihnon angoatollt woracn warren. Dio Dougin
lagska ist oin le'oender dewoia fuer das Gv gent oil. Si- wurdu wagon ihror
laotigrtuit in dor .iaeratandsoow.gung a~ 11. Soofci..eb-r 1911 vorhaftot
und aia 13. Scffcoiobor nach javonabruck gcbracht. ( .j*grka, K. 1133). Sio
war koiito Vorauchaporaor. und doch lubt sic r.outw noch. 1^ wuscntlichon
kaj&jn alio polniachon Vorauchapcrsonor. i— Soptv.-bor 1911 in i-ivonabruck
an. (B.P., n. 7o8; Kar., h. 816, Dz., h. 810). Dioa« .Jcdcn-n waron bis
zuo August 1912,ala diu Vcrsucho begann-n, nicht hingorlchtut wordcn.

Ea war aogar - nach eoinor Auasago - oin- Ueborraschung fuor G-bhardt,
daaa aiu uobornaupt v-rvicndot wurdun, da l:. Juli 1912 uio V-rsuchc an
uaonnorn vox*gonO(..~on wuraon. In uiosua Iranaport waron un^ofacixr 700
polniochu «aodchon. (;XWi77, Add. Bow. 228, R. 918; Ocbhardt, 1216 ).

Ka liogt Kcin dowoia dafuor vor, daaa cine tros-’o .uxsahl .»j hingorichtot
wurdun, obwonl an ddj .stun van ihnon k .cho vorgjnoaiMn wurdon.

Nuln, Jaa Jovolaorgubnia hat unstroiti^ ^v- ig*», daaa diosu
Polinnun ruchtl ..-.cat butt-.; ..1,; ..rl-f.t • .,c .^,.n . Hi-

uinur Bugnadigung la Polio oixwa xodoaurUila *ar durch jino Vyrfuogung

vom 1. Pcbruar 1935, AOBL 1, S. 71 (H3-3070, aiu:1. Pow.. K.)

auaacliliosalich Hitlor vorbohaltun. Aa 2. ..U 1935 u,.bortrug Hitler dun
huiehsjuatiuoinlator daa hocht, rw.-jtlvw intac:. jidar.g* •' >eb.. P-'»nsdipi»nga-

goaucho iu raollon. (MO-3071, «kl. &-. . i. .). An 30. Januar

1910, KOUL I, 3. 399, Uuburtrug Hitler duo. Ooncralgouvemour dor buautztun
polniachon Gobiuto Oio Volijaacht/&.>gnadigung-.n auszuaprochun und abwuiaond:
Kntschoidungon an Bo gnadigungsang lugonbuitan :a,r aio buactston polni-

achun Gobioto zu faolion. (NO-3072, Aflkl. Bcw.. h.). Durch

diu Vorl’uogung vaa 3. . a-rz 19l0, vqbi -00 P T, 99, onlncto dor Gonoxtil-
gouvormmr fu->i due b-astit..


polniacha Gubiot folgondes butraffund di» Ausacbung des Sognadigungsrochtes
iiu Fallu von Todoaurteilon an:


"Jio Vo-lstrockung vinos Voacaurtviiva, das von einec all gene inen
Gurient, e-inon So.—-rg'jrlc.tt oder tinea polizciLich.-n Si, nd-
gurient gal’icUt wurdo, dari -rat a.s. .rfoie--.. Kune .-.liv.
Kt.tachllessun,:. von lea s« zna-'ll.-uncarjcr.t x.-ln.n \."i ~ .cl

.,-chjn au Kollcn. «.r;ar.*-n irt ." C.’Q-J073. Ankl. 2.x. K.).

(Univrsti'oichungon oingtiuegt).

Setz -n wir einaal den Fall, class dio ^.rauchap-r^onen alia
achwuru Vorbrechon begengen hautton, daaa sio alio vor cinon rocht .tea Big
oingoeutzton Goricht abgourtcilt worden moron, dasa sic alle oof goaeiz-
unoaaigo fcoiao zun Todo v_rurtuilt wordan »r.iercn, so iat ea doch nach den
obon orwaohnton Vo rfuc ganger. kl^r, daas <ii.so Fraucr. nicht auf gos-tt-
oaoasigo *iuiae hauteon hingorichtut warden kooroun, bever dor Gonarol-
gouvornour fuor daa cx-a-taLo polniacho Cvblot in M vd-u lintelfallo oleh
untschloaacn hatte, von auine® Bognadigungorveht- itoir.vn Gobnach aochun
»u wollen. da wurde nioht bvwiuaon, daas dor Gcnoralgouv r hinaicht-
lich dor B-gnadi^ng dor polniachen Frou-n, dio fuor dio Voraueho vorxjndct
wurdon, jaaala cine :%ntschoidung getroffen bat, nocb ' aa daa anb-trlfft,
bizueglich vino: grooseeren Anaahl oolchcr Frauen, die nicht fuor dio
Veraucho verwondat warden.

Dor ulnsigu GrunJ, mrua iloao 700 polniach-n Frauen von '.arschau
und Lublin nach i.vvonabruck gebracht warden, war, lias dor C-r> rolgouvor-
nour ihre Hinricntung nicht gcnaholgt hattc. Sor.tt moron cie sofort in
Polon hingurichtot worden. lu.n adnJ-aten wa-run die3' Frauen d»zu beivch-
tigt guweaun, ao lango unbohulllgt zu bluiben, ala dor lonemlgouv ornoar
nichta unbumooun lutto. '/iclleicht hoettu .r r.i- t*r.s anturnoantn
odor, falls doch, haetto or vioUuicfct ir.e 3.- •.di.tung uaaproohon koonnen.

dio ciileaotuttlichu LrklAtiung von Sehicdlauakjr, dca Lagurarxt
von havonabruck, zoigt, class Lr Gonerclgauvurne r zur - it, nlo iie Ver¬
aucho bugannun, oino 3e,7-digur.g nicht abguluhnb h ttc,. Auf Seito U dca
Originals oriel'orto or:

"aIs Vorouchsperaonon vurden Polinncn gco»—cn, die vor. Gtand-
g«ric!it*„n sujc Tod© v.rurtvilt word on warm und ihre Scukutioa
nach BvBta^tigung dea Urtoila


durch den Gcneralgodvarncur urw-rtct-n. a (l.G-508, Ankl. Do*.

223, 8v0>.


An uinor opaetoron Stella auf Saitc 15 d-.s Originals sagfce or:

"In nuvanabruck -r;n os rvic:i s.inor Schaotsung ctwa 25 Frauen,
ole in oeincr ,c.tsseit durch arse denser. don. vxekutiert yrir-
den, ijior h.*ndcltvi cs aich aussenliesslich ua Foiinn.r., uie
buroits H*eTHinge w:ren, ac-~cn Jrtoil o:~; .rst r.-c.i I~:-or
Aclt lurch dun G^nu^igoovcn.ior bwstoJtl^t horde ."

(Unt j. stro.chuiv^af.

Scliiodlaushy war voa doze-fcer 19! bis idtte eg-st 1943 In lisvons-
bruck. .idolirond dios^s langen ..oitraujios war-n r.-r 25 von uebor 700 pol-
nischwn Gofanguuon durch «ino djtscheiaung d.-s Scnonlgouvornoura fuer


oine Hinrichtung aua^trcjhlt wordon. _r kanr bchutpton, lass di.. kehr-
lahl dlosur 700 Polinnun den i-.riog nicht ujborat it-ji habun, obwohl sic
cich diwsun Vorauenon nicht ont-rzogor. hiber.? Is oblag bvsti:.^t dor V«_r-


tuioigung,das 1 durch ueborwiugondja hovnluntarlttl nachtuwoiaon.


Dios goachah nicht, kwinorlwi icKoiao wuruon dr-iu^r vorg.lcgt.


die AngoKlagtun O^bhr-rdt, Fiach r und Obvrhacuacr .-lociujon nicht b —
haupton, dxaa aio i.. ’eton Jlaubon w.ren, d-ss Lio pointed: «n Frauen
hsetton xvcftt noaaig Uingorlchtet 'vrden :ca-w»wn. SclbSt dcr La^rawfc
Schiedluuoky wuaat-, dnoa d-j Gvncrolgouv..nKur dio hi nri cut ung su bo-
atuotigon hatto. i)aaa hUm eolch grease luhl vie "A>j Fnuoo in dloswi
fruehon Stadia:. d.a I riegoa sou Todo v rurt lit worv.n "»ren, r .r ueb^r-
dioa uuoruiohonu, u*. j-i. v muonftig- P»ra:>n ttanef auf-oriuuun cu .iclun,


daae otw.a nicht atic~.tv.


Auoo-rioa xui ,t d-a ohn- .idcra/iruch ^biiobvno iouoiaaitorial, daaa
doa Uoborleben dl_a_r V-raucho abaolut kuinu i.r-ntio dafuor n «r, uinor
Hinrichtung uul' alio F-oll« zu entg-hon. .di.i -t • i - c. a ■ .r: uchar- rr-oi.-n.
dio dluso Vorauen^ u.bcrl«.Dt h.<t«rurd.*. L - rl c t-t . (lageka, R. 144
B/P., K. 797; Oa., rt. 843; Pus., K. 863). Oi.- Kttn dor 1-

nioclwn .-.icdciiur. w..rur. Pajiczkoirrki, Gvu, '-i_loi-<-, i-oco-'ska, SobolvKgka
urai Gutwk. (NO-v73 , .u.ki. B t.. 226, h. 906; KO-861, .odd. S232, P.. 932).
Es war


- 16 -


*0


nicht eine Frag. von ^raueh cdvr Hinrichtung sondc-m von Vorsuch und
Hinrichtung.


te Pofcrunr 1945 wordcn tatswchUch dnotrunsungon *^cht, alio Vor-
sochspox sonon him Crichton. E. mxido ihnon bafohlon, Bich in olnon Block
BO c-ldon und dort ,u ttwibon. a wurdo ihnon nitgrtcilt, do,. slo in.
KonrontrxtionsT.gar Gro.B-Sooan wrbnxcht wordon Boll tun, obor jadoraonn
■UBBto, doss Groas-nosen scixon in den Koonder. Xr ^llii. rt.n war. Dardus
orsahon aio, daao Bio hiixgerlchtot warden aoliton, und bo nohxo-n slo on-
dora Konn-hontom und vurstockten »ich. x)lc. w.r inTolgo dor Vorwirrung
1«. Lgor nooGlich. (kogBta, H. 1450-1; !.u... ... 553-3; NO-F76, 4,Jd. Bow.
225, R. 899] NO-877, »n*l. Bow. 22B, K. 918).

konn coin dio dorstoilang dor Vort.ldigung woortlich nohxxn woilto,
bo wuordo non tot... .ddich von ferichtshoT vurlongxn, or «,Uo .ntsohoiden,
do., nilitaoroorttu -in. krtogfiiohrmlon Notion gusuttlich borochtlgt
•olon, m politisckcn.iua Todo vorurteiltoo Ovfsngcnun oinc. buo,t=tcn
Londo. in .oleh -ih.r ..rt ond ..oioo VurBMhc onnust alien, da,a Bio don
Tod, unB.'igboro Scluo.no;,, Voiotoa-colung ox>a dauumie InnUditiat iu ir -
duldon hobon - all do, ohno inro -urtlanonj und in dir.ktor Untor.tuot.un*
do. nUitlori.chon Fotontlols Ihro, Folndcs. 4, o.stoht k„in Btlchhaltigor
Grxxnd dolour, ooloh Jno int.ch.idung -of UvilkrivSBgoftngenu b.-
Bchrdonkon; dio Vur.ocho wurden b-.lixxx „icht orgar s ,,oi„,

Bid on polniocn-n od.r xurikoniKh.n GrlagBgofonffxncn ooBg.fuohn warden
wioron, xx. i.t on-deglich, dio von dor Vortaidlgung nach*o.u«hio Fnt.chui-
dung orr.8th.ft in unv^guju zu ziciv.r..


B.


.^-■aug.Bchrift,


Oic .0 Vonucno Bdidon in KonBontr.tlonriag.r na,„n,brcck waohnxnd ior.
solbon Lit und on dor gledchon Groppe von FClMscVn r.. f .,ng.n,n wio die

SdUonocxid-Varnocho uoag.ruohrt. (....g2Kfi, H. 1458).


- 17 -


D*r. Angeklagtc Fischer aacht in seiner cidesatattUchon Erklaorung
diu folgundo Auaaage aob-r dies*. Voraucho:

"Nach dur xnkunft von Or. Stucpfeggor voa Oberkocnando des
Hoorve in Horbst 1 % 2 , orklaorU Professor Gebhsidt wr
ainigon aoincr . it&rbciter, dsss -r den Bcfohl orhslton
habe, die Voraucho in havonsbruck in oin-o groeaaoron ..nss-
stab- fortsaaetaen. In ^usancwnhcuig dardt sollton Fragcn
dor pLiatiach.jn Chirargiu, die nach den Krlcfj von Interoaso
aoin Worden, goklaurt v.rdon. dr. Stui^foggor httte die
fruio VcrofIanseng von Snochen vorsuch n sollcn. ua Professor
Gobhardt ivussto, dnaa ich infolg- o-ir.-r Srn&Aong an dcr
Univ-.rsits.ot an dor .icdurhoratcllon: von Gcwtben 6 -arN.itot
hatto, befuhl or ..dr einen chirurgischan Flan fu,r dioso Ope¬
ration vorsuboroiton, sa dosaon Ourchfuehnmg ich nach -o-
nuuai^ung boauftragt wurao. .oit-rhin wurdon dr. Kollor und
ur. Hoisaaoy«r angowicaon, ihre * lgonun Experiment 33 erion
auaaufuohxvn. Professor Gcbhardt dachto auch an oinon .Ian,
u;a die Grundlngo fuor «ina operative Tochnik fo«r die .iod^r-
instonasetsung von Oe-lwnkon so fonsan. Nvben eon obens-nvuitun
natvuor. doktoren Schulso ux» Schalzo-Ha&gcn an dlcsor Sitsung
toil.

"Di ich ivivonabrvck kanntc, wudu >s air befehion, die ncu-n
obengon mnt'.n doktoren doa Ugwrsrst vortuatollon. Ich wurdo
boso.vl-.ro .tng‘.HioBcn, dr. 3 tus*fogg r su assistioron, da or
ala «rzt in Hitlers St tb wshrschoinlich von -eit su 4c.it ab-
wosond Svin wuerdo.

'•Ich hatt*. dio '.icdorhorstollung von ..uek.ln ninaig end alloin
darum orw'-ohnt, d\ dlu fucr dlu 0 *.n Cwock notir-ndlgon Ein-
schnittu dio leichtustcn waron. dio Oporationcn burden folgon-
dornaaacn darchgoi’aohrt:

"Evipan und mith-r wurd-.n als Anausttuslo ,'ng-“-r.oot und 5 co
ling- .linachnitto wurd»n ar. dor ^uss-nsoito dos Oborsehenkcia
gotsicht. Kuch den durchschnitt durch dio Fassio wusdu -in
Stuock don ..uakels, *_lch-a die droosso d~s lelstoa GUodoa
vinos .d-.lr.on ringers hattc, h.r .osg^noto n. Oie F\ssio und
Haut warden dor normlen Tuchnik dor snoptischen Chirurgio
folgend cingeschloaacn. Ntchher ward- -in Gipavorband angoiogt.
Hach cdiur ..ocnc wurdo dio Kauptwundv ant r !;:.rkoio goOdin t
und dor Toil d.s ..uskcls ua dl- herxus asclodtt Cogonl
wurdu antfomt. li-ehhor wurdo dio Fr.sxio and dor sagor*ao!ito
Toll dor Kc-it in Gips i-vtoblUsi.rt." (K-0-223, B*.w. 206,

R. 767).

Di*. Vo rant sort lichkoit do 0 *ag.klagtor. Gobhardt faor dioso Expori-
monto wil'd .uch durch alo oidooatattlic-io ^x-kla.rur.g von Oborheuser
buwloBun. Sie orkl“-jrto:


"Die dxperin^nto tit XnochontnRsplantationon burden, sowoit
ich udeh orinnarn kann, 2ndo 1%2 Anfang 1943 durch Jr.
Stuapfeggor aus Hohenlychoo durchgcfuohrt. Ich half and
assistierto Dr. Stucpfogger in gl-dchor Forc, wio ich Dr.
Fischer bc-i don Sulfona-zia-ixpjriio-nten half and wio ich
as bo reit 3 in F-nkt 4 dieses Affidavits boachrieb-n habc.
rtuch in dioseu fall hatte ich die auagewaehltan Person:n
vor der Operation auf ihren Gesundheitszastand zu unt.rsu-
chun. Dio Oporationon bestand.n dirin, daas -in Stuock
Knochen aus der Schi.nbcinkantu uitfernt and an ani.ren
btellen eir.geaotzt wurde. 15 bis 20 Pcrsonen wunlon faer
dieso Experimento ve.-woiflet.

"Die fucr dlose jcjx.rii-.nta notwendigen Porsor.on warden von
Jr. Schiodlauaky bcia Lagurkozjandir.ten ongvfordert.

"Dr. » -rl Gebhaixlt loitoU die fiulfor.Jald-ay.poriKnte and
dLo KnocJw ntr anspi natation,n. as jot .Jr jJcht b.k annt,
d.^o er selbst Oporationcn dies^r .»rt durohgdfaohrt hat.

Ich tfeiad jeloch, aus a alio di*e. .SxporlBonto cnUr seiner
Loitung and ..afsicht and . of s.inc .a.wjisung durchgefaelTt

wuraun. Er «-rd. dnbal aussor d-ren. is geninntun Jr.

Fischer and Jr. Stuspfeggor duren Jr. Schiudloctky ui.d
Rosenthal unterstaotut. A uch zu dies n Verruchen wumcn
loaivjlioh Yaunde polniocho Gefangju v.r.*.ndet.

"Ich knnn *aich nicht .rinnert., dass nur eine -inzigo von don
vemendeten Versachspersoncn nach darci.fuohrang der Expcrlnunto
bognuiigt wonlen 1st." (KO-437, .inU. c-k. 2M, h. 730).

Jio teugin uio ihixn Doktortitel an d.r .odlzinischen Pa-

kultaet der Univorsitoot Krakau orhl -It end .ino praktizivrondu Aorztin
lot, gab a Is iaugin an, dass ole ic Lftofu ihr.r '.aotigkoit al 9 Rocntpono-
login In Konzentrntionslager .vavensbr^ck Ovlvgeahoit h-.tto, ung.fachr
13 Faullo za beobachtcr., bei d.non an den :.nochan von inoa-s.n zu V r-
oachszMvjckon 0 .ix.ritionen vorg.noa-.n warden Karen, nc v r n Irul ArUn
von Knochonoperationen - 3ru.cho, hnooheotrwopltsntaticvian a.-vl Knoch.n-
schionon. An den polnischun e-.odenon ward-n lr. —ncl.« n Padlun cx.hrore
Operations vorg.no -an. Ie Pall-' Crystyna Dabcka chte er.gzkn icoent-
genaufnahcni von b.id n Deir.vn and bei..rkt,, dasa kleine Stu.cko d:a
^adunbeines entf.rr.t wardon wiron. bi einjs lioin v.-. r iueh die Knochen-
haut herausg.fo^>jn Borden, .ai iofia &aj ^ura ein^ cehnlicho Op- ration
vorgonouaen. Janina .arez-vska ana Leon iMi diun r-asst ji aich den


- 19 -


Knochenbruchversucr.cn uatoraiehon. 0 -is Schiunboin ward; an nahrcron
StoUon gebrochon,und bdi uineo: Lied chon warden Xlixcrn ’ngclogt, wnch-
rcnd diui beic nndercn nicht goschah. Dioac Operacioncn vorhindcrton die
Fortbowugungaaaxglichkeit dor operierton ^lodchcn. Knochenoinschnitt-
operationun wurdon an Barbara Piotezyk. vinca polnischen kicdchen von 16
Jahrun vorgonaa^n. Sic wurdo aochaaal cporlcrt. uflir-nd d.r «,raten
Operation wurdon flinachnittc in Jodea Schionbeir. -uencht. Bel einor
apautoron Operation nurden Stuerito dea Schienbuinvs, «w vorher Iflnschnitto
genacht worden waren, horauagoaennitten. ..gxtoi a.chto uine Koentgon-
aufnahmu dor heiau3gvno.u^.nen SchionbiinaUocko. aIo Folgo dios.r Kncchon-
operationen bodb.'.ehtoto gzka die Sntwic. lung a-, i^x* Faulle von
Oatuo-nyelitla .in . ar. a Grabowoki unu an *_iria CnbaJ. («igzka, K.

1A45-7).

bine ziealich grocao .cuahl wn kuakclverauehen wirdw durchgcfuchrt.
aanh hior warden viclo Op«r\tionun wi i-r in Or. und deraolb-n Voraucha-
poroon auagvi'uwhrt. lV n Glodticwjowakn warden dli- suiaU-n Opcritionon
vorgcnocfflon. - vhrond O.r oraUr. Op-mlon wurdon .•-wiast -uakeln knaj-
gonouirxn,und wichr-nd d.x folgundun Cpcrationon wurd.n rcitvru Stu ck*)
h.ruuogcochnitten, ixaour an d.raclben Stelle, aoaraa die ikinu fort-
wauhrond duunn-r and achwaacher wurden. (l.igxka, ... 1447),

«uch irmaplantntionen gnnxor Gllodcaaacn vor. .irur F< raon iuf die
andero wurden durch^iu hrt. uigzki agte r.us, dr.as on. fn.hr 10
achwnchsinnigj Intraaer. tuag.,wuhlt , ins !. :-.-at g^brecht and
fuor oino Operation vorboiuitot wurd.r.. Si f.rao»nl-h nuast.., diaa
wenigatons swei oiea.r Loot- op*.rivrt wox\kn vr n. B.i vinca rill
handulto oa aich u» vino^^naaputation. li .cn ci.s r Operation wurd. dio
Verauchapuraon ( ,etoetut und in cir.on b-aonu r c .viua gebmeht, wo dio
lotun aufbewoiirt wuru-n. ...gcka konntc den Leichnac aflien und bet-erkto,
daaa nur ein Boir. vorhciden »-r. It zwwiten f illo wurJ el/u sbncnoalo
Frau von Dr. Fiach.r op^riert. «la .r dwn Cp-r~.tioxi3s:-a v,rliesa, trug


ein in Leinun elngbkickcltoa Bucndel, ungo'aohr ir. dcr Grooasa cdnea

anoua, tea or mit aich noiun. Die iXfacngniskrank-nachKc-ster Qdornhein
teiltu fcagzka ait, dasa dica-r Frau dor game .%r= nit dca Schulturblatt
abganociaon warden wr.r. (; agzka, R. 1A49).

Dio von Dr. :.-gzka urwaohntu .imputation doo «r-*;B u«d d-a Schult-r-
blattoa bozioht aich offunaichtlich auf dio Transplantation, wolche an
d'in Pationton L diach in Kohonlychcr. vorgtr.oaoon wurdo. dazu buxrkto
dor nngoklagto Pischor in acin-r uldoaatattlich-:: 2rll&onug folgondca:

"nla Juungor von Lox>r hattc G-bhrdt cchon langc goplant,«inc
fruiu tatoroplftstlM) rpflnnacng von onoch n vorsunetosn.

1 roti.«io..i oinigo 8oin-r -itarbuit-r Jauit nicht einvvratntdcn
wirun, wor or entaciiloaaon, ao «ino Gyration -r. ci«-n Pationton
Ltdlgci; vorzuncltu-n, d-as-n Schult .rg-le.u: w.g-n oir.cc sacona
cntf-int Kora- n war.

"Ich uivl uxiro OorstUcdon Kollog-n -rt.jb-r. profoeaior.ilo und
nonaclilicho ^inwcxrtw^on bis sun «bir.d, an don diu Operation
durch^ efuohrt i.urdo. «bor Gebi^nit b-fnftl urn die Operation
durchsufuilirun. Dr. Stiuupfoggor, in doaaor. Forachungsgebict
dio Op-ration lag, aollt- diu Entf-r..urg d-r scapula
(Rcholt-rblrtt) in ncvunsoruck vom.i^n uj.J hattv dahor
achon apuzlolc Vorburuitungun patroiTen. J* Jodoch Professor
Qubh -rdt Ur. Stunpiogg-r bvno«tigtu, ua iha in d<.r tatnftoch-
iicnon VcrpHanzung dor ScnulUr ar. d-s. Pationton Ludisch su
h;lfun, xurdo oa nir au/gutragen, inch l:\venabruck su gohen,
un dio Xntf-mungooperxt ion noch an <li aer. ..bond vortunohraon.
Ich bat D:. Ckbhardt and ur. tchidso sir ana g-nauu Vorgehen
zu boachreibun, den ich folg..n solltu. a= ns-chat or. -orgen
fuhr ich nr.ch huvonabruck, n.chiec ich winu vorh->rgeh<.r.do
tolophoniacho Vorabrvdung gutroiTun hatto. In !bh-nlychen
hattu ich nch-n die fu-r uir.o Op-ration notw.ndig.n Vorboroi-
tungon ,-trcffen, rr.ealich Schou m ur.d go x-.it-r, sog nur
aninon mantel an und ging nach j. vuuabrudc, xr. Jon i.noch.n
zu ontfursicn.

"Dor L-g.rarzt, d-r nir bji d-r Opir.tior. saaioti-rtv, fuhr
nit dors-lben fort, trwhnnd ich ao ocinoll xio EOeglich
islt dcj- hnocher., x. Ichor v-rpflnnzt xerdvn aollto, nach
Hohonlyeh-n zuruockk-hrto. ^uf dios- • ise w-rd- d-r Lcit-
untor-chiod striae hen d-r Knt femur.* und i-r V^rpflanzung
voMU-rst. Dor nnochen trnrd- frofessor J rh-irdt in Hoh.n-
lycnon u-birrUcht und er, suatexn sit ^r. Schulsu und
Dr. Jtu~pf-jgor Verpflvurt, ihn." (NO-223, .«nkl. B ". 206,

R. 767).


Gobhardt gab zu, dias or zusaaton ^it Stuzpfcggcr pcrsoonlich dio
Knochontrinapl'Uitiition-Op^ration an Ladiac.'i vorgenoc^n hi-tto. 2r
sagtu femur -uis, dess Fischer nur uos Scnultcrblatt von dor palnischun
Gofangonen in jf&vensbruck ontfeint tube. (Gobhardt, ... 4235). Es ist
uxu.ooglich, >lun Uob.r dio Kori.ontalc sa heb.n, wenn das Schultcr-
blatt untfomt notden ist. (Gebharit, n. 4235). Swbhardt gab woit-rhin
zu, daaa 3tunpfoggor ihc uobor dio Knochonversucho iu .. jr.zcntrations-
lagor navonsbiuck berichtet hat. (i.. 4235).

Dio oidosst'.ttliciio 2ri;laorung dor Guaf.wi inkowska bokxMcftigt
dio Zougumusaigu dor kagzka b-troffond dio Vetpflcnzung ganz.-r Gllod-
ludsson. uni b-v. ist, dies die V rauchsp-r.' . n op .ot r ..toctot wurion.
(MO-865, Ankl. Bov. 231, I.. 930).

Dio Zougin Karolownka war eir.j Vorauchsperaon acwohl boi Jon Sul-
fonruntd-ola auch boi d-n Idiocn-nvorauciicn. (Al *-x ndor ii. 833, 836-7!.

Siu mirdo iu ginson sochawftl op-ri-rt. jio onto Oporation wurde am 14.
August 1942 von Fischer durchgofuehrt. (R. 819). Bobh-^dt unt-rauchto aio
.infang September. (h. 821). Si- wirdu in 8. Sopt abor 1942 tu ihreo Block
zuruockgoBchicKt, -.b-r konnt- nieht gehen und blicb cir.o ocho ling ia
Butt. ,Ua 16. Sept- bor 1%2 »*ard nle wiedor ir.a L r n-tt gobracht and
von Fischer oin zvtiUo . il oporlert. (?.. C21-2). Si vorlioao aa 6.
OKtobor 1942 Jis Li ral una bliob &uhruru >.och.n in Butt. Ihr Boir.
noilto orst im Juul 194j. (iu 622-3). Iu Februar 1/4; r.lento aio . inu
schriftlieho Beschw-rde £ua.:z/*n ait indtrvn 'lUoitlin^-Vursachspcraonen
agorkosaundon in. Ir. t 1943 vurdo a! t lich nit

Go wilt in Dunk.r von .. v-nabruek opoTi.rt. I .r b.id.r. Seine uru-n luf-
schnittOn. rulion nf inderun polnisch.n Laod-

ohon untor unbuschroiblich schoutzig-n boiingwng-n durchgufuohrt. (Iu 827).
An 15. Supteuliur 1943 wurdu in- w-it-r. Op .—.tie®


- 22 -


*.«


an ihnja rechton 3-in von oinon Doktor aus Hoaanlychon durchgofoohrt.
L»a k.ochon spatter "urdo sie an ibrM linker. 3 in o^«4«rt f und Stuecko
dca Schienboir.es burden cntfemt. Sie blieb 6 Lonnte la n - bis Znde Fe-
bruar 1944 1* Uzorett. (ft. 622-9). Karolewska idedtmzioxte dio Ango-
kiigten Oobhardt, rlschor ana Obortuusor. ala .ltbatoiligto an den in

ihr durchgofuehrten V rsuchen. (K. 818 , 630 ).

uer angokla’te Kiscner bis cindestens 23. I cbruar 1943 an dio-
son Experimonten tail. ^ dieaan Tag Xuelirt* or eine z-.roito Operation an
iofia Baj dorch. (ND-S71, *ma. Bow. 227, ... 93J).

Dio widorlichato .u>ihe von Oper<.tionen w-zvn Jeno, dio in August
1943 in Banker durchgoXuchrt ..urden. Dio ausgou-ohlfcon polniachon i »od-
chon hatton revoltiert and sich gowoigert, s « C h i_. latarett za nslden.
Dor Barackonblac.:, in veichun sio sich verbarrikadiort hatton, vrardo
dann von naonnUchon icnporsonal uuringolt, mlcha dicso Frsuon goimlt-
oom in das Ugorgofaeniinia schafftvn, das ala dor 3ankor bokannt war.
und wo sio von di„s«, naonnllchon ochper.on .1 nlcdorg.kalfn warden
and goualtMUB anaostfloaiort warden, oluw JoJo vorop-.rativo Bohan Jiang,
Wiiuhrond ihr Aoorpr noch von Kcrusgohcn in lAgor in verschmUtoa Zu-
■tand war. Dio Vorsucnsparaon Piaaadca omxohnt folgaaiaa i„ lhror
oidusotattlichin aMclaerung:


.ch widorat.vid w»d achlug Iro.--:or in . 9 > 3 icht ujkI nannt®

• «inor. t riton. £r riof olnlgo d5- c, . loht aich
aul Jen Bo. an <-rion und sich aiodtrhi altar., ».-• Author

toSnfZf&Si, vu ^°- *>« bokank-inv : u.ko. Ich

kaorapfto ana laiatote ^daialand.bia id. rain Dci.asstsoln vor-

“° r * if" ^°«* n “»» -*loo Dcino naron

iAgor. sovid ich

-oiss, riiu v Bains nicht pnMch u! , -.non, aohroixi die-

lv >‘,Z i“? in ? V C lWuatcr » Nwusstlon aof oincr

 und 6c. do in ororach." (HD-364, add. Bow. 229,


Piasocka g«b an, daaa uioa* Operation to. ar. villcann, dor
Aaoistonsam in aohenlychun nar, a-os. .-Xudirt >ord_r. war. Ein pear
»*ochen npaotur kaawn tw«l andero asaiatunaaento Dr. *,b..arft a


- 23 -


Uivl operiortan aia ac. rcchtcc Bein. (NO-S64j aloha ebon).

In aoiner -cugcncaasage vorsachte Gebhardt,aich von diesun Vurwchon
•«iu diatanziorcn, Jr ,ab jedoch su, dasa or won dtucpfc/gor ucbex die


Vcraucnc gctocrt hatto. (« r 4082, 4087-9). Stu^pfoggor wr oln clieralijor
Aaalatent Oablurats und hielt sich wohrand dieser Vorsucho in Hohunlyctan
aur. Piachor assist icru bei otuopr. . and Gobh&rdt, (bcbhardt fi. 4230,
4090). Aua Fiachora cigunsr oidosatattlichon -rxl; jnuxg gvflt femur harvor,
uaaa dor Plan fucr aio Vcraucnc .ait .loacn ur.d Ccnehcdcung Gebhardta aua-


gu.irbultct ..ur4>-.


C. .mdux\> '/wraucho.


Oaa acMuiai^tvrial aoigt, ossa Sobharit oino bodoutondo toll.. in
anderdn vorbrochorioch-u Verauchon an •.i-atianslagorlnasaaon apioltc,
(1) Houhon- and ilaoltcv.rsucho (.mklagcschrift liiffor 6 (..) and (3).
Our vcrbrucboriacho Character dcr Hoohcnvcrsuch* 1st in dcs Schrlft-
afttz dor anKl-.'.ob .hxr i uubor i-uff, iuaobcrg und ilte susoinandorgoastxt,
vaohrond dlu Meltcvoraucnc in doc. Schrifta.tz oub.r Siovura boachricbcn


Gcbhar.lt *urdu ucbor die idnxdholten Jor ioohon- uni F.ault voraucbu
auf do* Lau fonder, 'o volt on uni bot in lur Tat lUsci.^r aulr. Hllfo nn.

11 . /iovoobox ior ang^tlAfta Budoli Brandt :

daaa toschor bold von <i.*r luftwaifu xur iff n-SS vox sc tit w^rie, und
auf Grand von InatruMionan Hi-alora sollto factor Gol.'.ardt uobur aoino
Vorouchu buricht jx a Lateen. *>or .«rl.f aossorduj, .Uaa haecbor

In dochaa Kouhcr.- uiu .»i«ltcvcroacbo golcita hobo ur.J cxea vatexv
Kaultcvorsuchu auagefuuhrt warden aolitvr.. (.:0-314, .cud. be*. 93,

K. 330).

ta iat von ..ichtijktit so ver.jr<cn, Jaaa .-schtr die Inatruktion
hatto,


- 24 -


Gebhaxdt boricht zu eratatten, der zu Joner 4«it selbs*. die Sulfonazdd-
versuche in havenabruck auafuefirte. Ginz offensichtlich bekleidote Gcb-
hardt bei Hinkler ia bezug auf Versuche an -icnschcn cine aohr vcrant-
wort, ungavoilo und vertrauliche Stollung.

Ac 16. April 1943 beataetigte fiudolf Brandt in ejnon Briof an
haachor don Rnpfang cines BerlChios ucber Trocken-Kaoltovcrsucho und
inatruiorto Kaachur, Gobhanit einen Boricftt zu erstatten, dor b«reito
uino Abschrift aoinut *bnandlung uebor die Kaoltevarauchc ornaltun hatto.
(NO-241, AnKl. Bow. 113, F.. 355). £ino Abachrift doa Berichtea selbst
iat nicht vo tit anion, abei oa iat aua naachora Briof vo.-a 4. April 1943
bokunnt, daaa or dio Trockcn-Kaolteveraucho botr-f, dio or inTolgo oiner
ausoorguwoohclich Kalt^n ottorperiodo in itachau snatollen konntu. Dioaor
Brief boaagtu, daaa "gowisae Louto" boi elnor 7o._pvrotur von -6 Grad
Colaiua 14 Gtundon lang iu rreion waron urd daaa ihro innorc Tonporatur
auf 25 Grad Coialua abaank, ilt duz i-rfolg, daaa ihro louaacron Giied-
maaaon orfroron,. (.,0-292, .Jikl. Bow. Ill, H. 354).

wn 14. uai 1943 b richtoto i-aachor poraocnlich Gobhar.lt in liohon-
lyohsn uobor aoino i/achauor V«raucno. Gobhardt tadoltc teacher, well or
dio hoaultaio ooinor Voraucho Hiaalor diroxt vorgologt habo, und urklaur-
to, oa aoi aoinu I’flicht, "alio .Wrztogruopon, dio unabhaengig innornalb
dor SS arbwitoton, zuoa-'^ntufaaaen, da diwa d. \ teichafuohror viol bca-
a.>r paaao, %la fuor alch arb-Hondo Einz-.iporar*n< n". Gobhardt ornuntarto
Haachor, alch an 4nur bniveraitaot auabild.n su lara-.n, und oagto ihn,
•iaaa in eukunft dio Borlchto "-lurch ihn an dor. . ichafu-hror ffusandt
Wordon ouq satun". Gobhardt urauchto naach.r, i'-: .ngaben ucbvr aoLna
porsoonlicho und vissonachaftlicne Laufbahn vorsolegen. .4a Gubhardt
Bodunkon uobor don wio3ur.acrtafilichcn Charaxt .r von oinigen icr
haschorachcn 2 xpariB»*_ntij aeuasarto.


unriaorta hascber, -lass "die gesacten pi^aiolo^isch-chotuschen Vorsuche,
dia in Dachau auagefueftrt Jordan konnten, auch in aer Tat f.urchgaTUohrt
..ordcn rarcn". (NO-231, Ankl. 5c*. 116, h. 360). Rancher enpfing von
dioaor Untorhaltur.3 den hioiruck, lass or in der ??t fuor Gcbhardt ijv
boituto urw daas fuor weitere Veraucho seine Gemini -eng eingoholt
warden uroesso.

haachor - von Gcbhardta hat, dio Gnivoraitaatolaufbahn ru ergroifen,
buoindreckt - boschlcsa, ua ^uiassung ala Privatdosont einxukbRJwn uni
waohlte dia Kochcn- und i.aolteVvrsuchc iis Theaa fuer seine Hr.bilitations-
schrlft. jio Goachichto aoiner aerztlichen Taotigxeit, dio er xa diosoa
dwock achriob, i.urdo ua selbcr. Tag, an den or Si vora uebor aoino Untoi^-
haltung ait Gcbhardt 3urieht erstattoto, nlcdoj-gejchriobcn. (!.0-20,

.a\kl. Dow. 115, h. 356 ).

An 11. Junl 1%3 acnxieb Gobharlt xn nucolf dramt, lass «>r .-ait
uaschcr genprochen babe u:*! dass ale "alch rasch goeini.jt haetton".

Dcr driof fuhr fort:

"Er (Raodhor) betont ."ulbst, d&ss die bishuri^n !.os;atato
J®cn unvollk . n snd und *. It : r au avert uiu >. ... . .

Dica lot -bor erst ian;. .-o.-glich, wona -lie notwandlgon
Appai itc fuer dio .irbeit r.r VorfueTun; otoho. .anchor
rut diou in Seine... drier audoinandorj:a<*trt. Teh bitto
nan xu uoborpruofen, ob von Ihnon aus u.bor das *.%hn<.n-
uroo" oder von idr xas Schrittc ru unU-rnohn n si.*rf,
daos UBChor dio noctigon .ipparaturon xugoui:- art.

-rot r-uan diuso Vora.issetz-ng.n sog-b-n 3ini, fcann
" Ld wlssenachaftlich'- .vrtxlt gol lot t wtrlon."

(rtO-232, ovd. Iki*. 459, h. 4237).

(2) PolygAl-Veroucho.

Gebhnrat axduUeto aucli xcit .anchor on doti Poly.-xi-Vcrauchai.

Polygal war der Na .-y.er oinoe voa <- sciur in >-c. au ontwickclton Dlut-
gcrinnungaalttel iogobaa wuido. U lie irks-aKoit iIcb-s Gorinnunga-
ndttolo su pruafun, fu^ute =r Voxsucho cus, hi ulchoa Lagorinsassen
orochosson warden. (i<0-43a, ankl. 3ow. 240, H. V5i; ::o-1424, AOkl. Bow.

462, ft. 4773; 8tochr, x.. 587). i.b/'aivit ■ -n. v ; r-.ir^Iur uebur haschars
Forachungon .Lt Polygad bfn»gt,u»l Gobhardt u.b.rreugto ihn. dass w,l-
toro Voroucha untcr aein-.r Obortufsicfct no.-ti.r solan. (UO-612,


- 26 -


niiKl. Be w. 241, fa. 961). Gebhardt gab waahrend seiner ioug^na-ssago zu,
class or wussto, da3a hascher olutgcrinnungsversucho an Xonzentrationa-
lagorinsasaon, die zu die sen 2araok erschossen wordon waren, ausgefuehrt
babe. (Geblurdt, R. 4240-1).

(3) Sepsis - (Pldogion) - '/orsucho.

Sepaiavoraucrtu warden von Hcrbst dws oahres 1912 an in itachauor Kon-
zcntratioualagor ousftefuchrt. dioso Vcrsucne warden angostellt, on die
..irksamkoit dor bioc;.eU.aciion Behandlung d>r Sepsis uni v»n andtor Krank-
nyitor. zu proofon.

Uer fcougo Stoehr i-achto „uaaagcn bozuuglich diesir Vvraucho. Er ur-
Klaorte, daas dio Sepsis kuvnatlich horvor,- rafvn wurde, indon nan die
Konzuntrationslagorinauosen, die *ln Yorauohaixraoncn ^cbraucht warden,
nit &Lter infiziorto. (.>. 578-9). nr wuoat- von cdj.lv stens z*vi Voraucha-
roihen. In judtr uioaer Vcraucliareihun wurdc ungefachr die Haolfto dcr
Vorauchap-.rsonon dt Wochccdtchon .dtteln bohandolt, ui.d ulv andore
Hzelftu mit Sulioruudd. die vrsio i.elhv bvstand aua 20 dcutschun Konzun-
tratienslegurinsiaa-in, von danon 7 an den ?ol atart>*in. Filer die swolto
noiho warden 40 ieiatUchv vorachiod.no r ISationalitaot aaagownohlt, and
12 atarben infolgv dv« Vernuche. (Stouir, i.. 581-2). *>io Verauchaovraonen
oaldoten aich nlcht fndwUlig. (Stoehr, I-.. 5*». Siohc raich die V bor-
aient dor V.rliar.dl m^on d«.s liaupt-^illtn«r,~.richtaliol .a in .-*ciKn -'.r-
winigto Staaun contra elan and Genooaen. (NO-856, .n> l. B. w. 125, n.
386).

Ea 1st genz klar, oaaa dio in oichau angoatollton biocluaiacncn V r-
suoho oinu nrgaer.zong c*vi (k-bhardtsciv.n Sulfonanii-Vvraucho in jJVona-
bruck warun. Jio« .r r ,lbt aich aua dor lataacho, Joss Jubhardt in Scpten-
bor 1942, mohrvud dio duironaald-Vor >uch- noch vor aich *lr. - n, von
Grawitz ..buclu-U't oinoa u-.rlchtoa u-b.x li- blocnv-rdacri.n •erauchc in
uachau oridolt. (liO-409, «nid. bow. >49, h. 979). OUsor b.richt zolgt
Klar, doss ungufauhr <1 Gepeiafaollv ku nrtllcri h«rvor { ;urufen warden.

Our Ovricht bohundwlt^ die *u.ault«te von V'ersuchan an 40 Sonsentratior.s-


lagorlnaaaaen.


- 27 -


f


di« untor andora- wogon &>psis, Phlogsonon, Furunkoln, .ibszossun und
NoKroaia bohaodclt warden. fcehn dor Versuchsporsonen starben. Dor Bc-
riedt bohandolte auch aroi Sopsisfaeliu In .mschwits, von dor.en alio
starboo. jja* achlosa cit dor P^atstellung, dass dio V^rsucteo fortgoaetst
wuerdon.

Dio Kranxengcachichtv oinor dor in November 1942 kuonatllch alt
Eit^r infisierton Vorauchsporsonen aoigt diu graosnlichon Scha-rzen, dio
dioao Opfor litten. (NO-994, «nkl. Bow. 251, E. 935).

Daaa dio iagcklagton Gebhardt und Fischer uelir ala oino obcrflaoch-
licho Vorbindung udt den Scpaiavex-aucl.cr. in -*uc;.a. fc.it ton, ird orwicaen,
durch oine handachriltUcho .ut,nx*<ung &-b...iMts in oir.oa au 7. Scptctibor
1942 von Gravies an Hustler g..3Chriob-x.en Brief, do^ .»bachriftwn doa
vorlawufigon Buriehtea Gebhardto aebor di« Sulfona_id-Vcrs-chu zuoxejv-n
,uit dom Boricht aubor dio Jachauor Sopaioversacho beigufaogt aixvl. (IJO-
2734, «nkl. Dow. 473, h. 5622). DU so Bor^ncUn; laut.t folgvndcnzaasen:

"16. Soptux.bor 1942.

Krlodigt, xyich Unterholtung
ait RP-38. Oborataiufoehror
F. Piochur hat nouu
Inatruktionun fucr iv-vuiabruok
u nd .i^chau urhalt-in. Gobtnrdt".

(Untoratroichung olngofuegt)

(4) Uia'ruchtU'n.uchungsvuroacho („nkl%ge 3 chrift, 4iff. r 6 (I)).

an.

Gebhardt ncifia auch .in don, Juvdi 3 Chun ilonzoctrationcl. ^rinsapaon
auoK'-l'uohrt.,n vorbrechuriachon Onfruchtbaraocnungavorauchcn t.il. Ls
Jnlirc 1941 war die Auarottung dor Juediachcn duvo.lkvrung Jtutschlanda
und dor bosutztun L mdor zur mrk&nnt n Politi* due Jritten Koichoa
guvrordon. (Urtull d .a Intcrmtiowlon-ilitaor^ xicJitohofca, it. 16902
u. ff.).

,u- 30. ~ii 1942 LC.’o-i.jb Jr. Claaborg an Jioaler und bat ua soino
Untor«tuotzung bvl Uniruchtbaxvnchungavcraoch-.n m Reihlichn Konz.r.tra-
tionalagorinaasajn. 0-211, mkl. o.w. 169, fc. 5U). Hoaer Brief ont-
haolt oino handacIvriftlichu anaxi.kung vio folgt, "alttwach, d»n 8 . Joli".
<im 7. and 8 . Jui 1 ndaehaa Hi««lor, G . ._cka und Clauborg
>.inu Koni’oronz itatt, Vurhandl engage .ns'.anu *-r oi-. Unfruchtbaxmachung
von Juodinnon, Sa wurdo Clauborg voraproefc-jn.


dass ihm das Rons eat rutiooslagcr Auschwitz *u Versuchen an . unscb^n uni
Tior^n zur /orfitogung g-atollt wordo. £r solltc .lurch grunilogcr.dc V„r-
auchu oino i.etnodo zur Unfruchtbamuchung von rcrsor.en ohne doron lssun
outdockon. Sin Borlcht uobur oieao .cigdogcnhoil solito sobald nio

uocglich vorgolcgt warden, aooass ►asarogcln "fu«.r dio praktische Ausfuoh-
rung dor Unfnichtburuachung La grooaaoron -isatabe" or griffon werdon Icoenn-
ton. Dio Befragun,: Hohlfclacrs acber die Unfruchtbaroachung von -aunnern
aurch hoontganstrohlun *urd« ouch angoxvgt. Don Toilnohaam an dor Xon-
furenz wurde uinr.achaoift, da sa di-ao Voraucho auf das strongsto genoim
zu halt on a don. Dio .N'otiten fuor die Akt&n uebur dio3c Konforonron mr-
don von don. .ui.,uklai*t-n hudolf Brandt ant.rz.iiCijict. (2:0-216, ijjkl. Bow.
170, it. 565; 110-215, .ukl. B-w. 172, ... 566). Jas Slnzlgu, ras dor .uigo-
klogto Gebhardt diosoa B-weis gugonuober tun konntc, war, abtuloufhon,
dasa or hil oolchon Vora uunlungm aro: send wnr.

wa 10. Juli 19/.2 wurde Glauber* bvfo il-n zu boricht on, nio l.ango
cs dauorn wuordu, 1000 Juedinnon nach seiner kethoiu unfruchtbar zj 1 .*-
chon. In dloauu iOtUf r-rdu zngorcgt, uio Kxporinentu ita Konz.-ntrotions-
lagor havonabruck vorz notu. n, wo Oebharit gemdo acino Oulfonaaid-Vcr-
oucho bogann. (. o-iO.3, «ni:l. Bus. 171, R. 5o7). .v 7. Juni 19A3 konnto
Clauberg uof Grand auinor Veraucho b-richtoo, dasa r.an inch seiner -diiodo
taoglich mohrorc huniort, «cnn nicht g r 1000 feraonen trw.-lich storili-
nioron KOonno. or oriel iurte, lio i r if rucht barm chung koonr.c ".lurch oino
•ilnzigc vo.a dngang dos Uturua is Laufc der ^ewoohnlicJ.un flmackologischun

(Jntorauchung auag-fushrtc 4insprittung.vorgonom.n rdcn".(h' 0 -£ 12 ,

.un i. Dew. 173 , R, 570 ). 02 ;s linfruchtb :i in

dor Tat iia -uachwltzor Konzontiatlonslagcr auagdu, hrt, wic aus soinon
Brief an dan angakligton hudolf Brir.it vcc 6. -ui ust 1%2 horvor.; hi,
in d»ci or oino aweitv houitgcmilnrlchtung fu.r s.iro Vor oeft*. in ..uschwltz
anfordurto. (IJ0-210, -uikl. Bow. 17/., h. 572).


- 29 -


Vorsuchc uebor Unfruchtbarsachung caennliehcr ionz ant rot i onal agor-
insassvn wurlun auch iu ..uachwitzer Lonz.^ntrstionsiegc-r in grosses -ies-
atabo .uit Hilx'o von fiocntgenatrahlon uni chirurgiacfcer Sntnannong aua-
gefuchrt. (iA-vy, u. 556-9). Dio Unfruchtbarrncnung cittols phircasouti-
acnor Fraoparatu wurde auch veraucht. (X0-036, ankl. ben. 143, R. 512).

(5) -uorwaaBux’-Vuraucho.

Gobharita Stuilung in bozug auf acrztlict..; /-.raucho an Kontontrations-
lagyrinaaaaon wurdu ao bodoutaan, daaa at 15. ai 1944 Hlcaler oin Outach-
tun v->n Gabhardt vorlangtc, bovor irg^ndvelche Exporio nto in Inaaaacn vao-
gofuvhrt worden konntciu Dioaor S-lohl i’.it l r S b.-a: -la, d".aa alio in
Konzuntrationsiagorn auag^fuohrtun Voraucha a,Ino p-ratx-nliebo GcnoSunigung
habvn muoaatan. .die Stollun innorhalb dor 3S, die -a fu-r r.otw rxllg fan-
don, aorztlicho V^raucbj in den Kooz art rationali g<m auazufochron, auss-
lon Grawlta, dam i.oichsorzt SS und Pollsal, oin laach torlogon. Dieses
Uoauch nuoato das bat r.ff undo Frobloc buschivib- r., lie irkOng dor -wa-
zuTuohrundon Vorsuchc, die ahTdor vrfordarlicbon (Xfr^igonon und lio
ungofaohro Jaucr don Vorauchoo. Grantta mastc oin irolchoo 5 such !IJr.\ler
vorlogon, ncchd un or bozuugltch dor tuchniscnon Soito das Gutachton doa
nboraton Sanitictso.Tixiwra dor S3 (GobhurJt) una dio Gut .ehton von Kobo
und Gluccko uinguholt hatto. (f»- 919, .u*Jd. 3 u. *6C, H. 4244). Kubo
war dor Loilor dor ..rL-iinalpoliZoi ir. uo= .hroni Quocks unter

Oowdd Fold i.i lirtbChalxs- und Vox wait ungaft. apt ist d r 5S for alio
Xonzuntrational.pur v .rantwortlich wir.

Eo lot aolbiifcvotataoixilieh, i.ss uor .wig iciagtt. G.oftai\it von alien
inch dut. 15. Uai 1944 n i onuintrationrlagorina iaaon -uag. fuehrton V.-r-
cuchon Kcnntnla hatto uni aoinu ..isti ..un>; n. i :-b. So iat orjichtlich,
uaao or auch ueb-.r Vurzochc, dio lasals it Gnn,-. ivn, vollataondlg
unlyrrichtot w«r, ua r aonat nicht In .or L..•> • « ( n r., u.-b.r dio
l otwundl^uit noaur Vursucho jin fac.dlch. r. 'Jrtuil abi_;jbj.-..


- 30 -


Jie Uuarwaascrvcrs-che *or«n Gcgonatani air.gr Konfaronz von Sanitaets-
offiziuren der Luftwaffe M 23 . Lai 19U. AuT diosc-r Konferenz wunlo bo-
aciiiopown, daaa Vorauche noatig aoien, aa die Trinkbarkoit von koexvtsaer
zu pniofor., das rttch ointr ncuon -othode bohaaklt woxdon war. Da exit
• Todoafaollun ««hrend doa Uuf«a acr Veraucha gorochnct wuiMa, wurio b*-
aciiloaaen, dio Vorauchaparaoncn von Hinder za varlangon. .ax Hinder wurdo
ain Bericht uobor dicae uonfoxvnz gaachlckt,und *inc handachrlTtUcho No-
tiz run End* d«8 Ikrichcaa z«igt, caaa „r an Ojbdtrdt wuitergogubvn -urdo.
Dioau Oobhardtsche i.otiz boaagt, dasa -Aaoziolo idgeunor" von do. RSHA
(hgicha-^icnurhata-Hauptm^) golivfori warden eoliten. (XO-177, Ankl.

Bow. 133 , h. 4d3).

m Z8, Jard 194/ * 3d ‘ ri0t> Omwliz geoao»8 ii- lora Bcfchl von 15 .

1944 an Hladur and gab lhn oU noo -jxtaro O.bhardta, Sluvcka'und
| Nuboa uober dio torgoachUgowm nccrwa.a^araueho. Ocbbardt. Katntar

j, * arx fIch h4lto °« «• ‘■baolut rlchtlg, die I iv. ffc m jodor eiao

*“ UWt ° ratUkjtl ' 3 *' u,v4 ‘• in * n Conaralorat dvr affcn-SS aw.cko d,.bvrwxchung
(lor Voraucho car /orfu.gun 6 su at lien". Kabc bofuenrortate Gebh-.nita ..n-
r^ung,Ug«anor zu Vvr-.tr.dcn; dca widerapxach Gr 4t:, well sic von uincr
von den Deutac-^n vurachiedenon raaaiaeh.n 3eachiffoxhoit aoion. Hirrlcr
biliigtu dlu vorgoechligci.cn Vcrauehfl in £igounem und 3 mdcrvn su
Konbrollzwiokon. ( 1 , 0 - 179 , .add. 3^w. JJ 5 , ... I&).

Fxxor ulnu flvnchrelbung dv 0 v.rbrc chert.cr.vn Ch'n.tcra JUaar Vcr-

auohc wil'd auf dan SchriftaLtz dor .^dr.g.b.hovrie ovb.r ochroodor vor-

I wlooen.

, Qaa-Vuraaelku (.j-d^gcacl*riXt, ilff.r 6 ( 0 )).

I I

i>iu von Hirt .an ZnMMon a.a Koiuontr .tioiudigera Katnadlor imagc-
luohrtcn Loat-Gaa-V.rmichc aaaertun von have ,r l%2 bis iua Hvrbat 19U.
(HoU, it. 1051 a. ff.). sievera hatto voll. Konatnla von den Hirtscncn
Voraachun (!«M)15, .add. B.w. 275, ft. 1039), and .r cino Ab-

ochrii't von HL-nlvra


- 31 -


Bufcihl voe 15. Ifci I944, acr Gebhardts Srl&ohnis fuer Vorsucho nach jo-
non ^vitpunkt verlangte. Keuu .uifgrdcrungen von Sefangcn-.-n dureh Hirfc
musaten notwondig«r..ciso zur Kcnntnis Gcbterdts polnngan. Fucr cino Bc-
schroibung dua verbrochorischen Charaktora diosor Vcrsuchc wirJ aof don
Scnriftsatz dor Anklej.bohoordo uebor Siovvra v.rwioacn.

An 22. Nov-tnbor 19V. schriob Gxawitz an Hitler uni schlug Vorsucho
on Inaasnon vor, urn ale l.lrkung oir.es alu "X-Sioff" bekonnten Gases auf
und dureh dio nwnsclillcho Bout za pruofen, Gesnoss aoo Befehl von 15.
taai 1944 billigto Gebhardt die- Vorsucho ait a..n folgendan 'fortunx

"Bin solbstvcrctcunilich ait VorseJUsg einvi rstanlcn und dxrf
bittun, dasa dio Anoxvinungon lex* JurcliTa_hruxgsuobcrfl>chung
unnitLulbnr voa hoichssrxt SS und l . n worden",

(WJ-005, AnXX. Bow. 279, k. 1043).

(7) Epidoraischo Golbsucht (taklagtschrlft, Eiffor 6, (H)).

rtn 29. Janu&r 1945 achriob krugo.-sky an Grrwitz und bat un s„ino Go-
nohxnigung zu Vorsuchon Uobor o.oidooischo Golbsucht an 25 gooignotun Gc-
l'ongunon in dor Flockfiobvr-Vorauchsstation in buchoinold. £r orklacrto,
dasa Vuraucho an Uunaohon notvondig coion, us f-stauatollon, ob oin von
as Dr. Dread g-zuochLctor Virus dtr boi dvr Hepatitis -pidosica wirk-
aaino Virus soi. G©nordar*t Schxxlbor unUrstuotstu uios Forschungon.
(N0-1JO3, Ankl. Dow. i.67, R. 5400).

Dor Hiza.lor-BufciJ vos 15. d 1944 mxchto os urfoxdwlicli, d3fl dioso
Eingabo us 4iu Vomahsio von Oolbauchtvursuchen von d.:. „r %kln,;tan Gobhnrdt
gonohialgt wordo.

(8) Gift vorsucho (Anklogoscnrift, ZifXor 6 (X)),

£inc Bonchruibung d.s vcrbrvchoriachon Chirtfctorc dvr Girtv-rsucho
iot in doa Sohriftsat; gdbahoaxd* uobor Irugowsky onth-.lt on.

* JQ Sojfconbcr 1944 ruohrtocx Lrugowsky ind Ding in 5 Insas3on dvs
Kontontrationslagors Saclioonhiusun oin 3\pcrin.nt :it ..coxutliudtrat-
Goaohosson aua. Don V-xSuchspjrsobin


Kurd-../ mit Gjschosson, die ait kriatallisiortoc. Gift gcfucllt waren, in
den obopon Toil do 3 Sch.nkols geschoaacn. urei dor Vcrauchaporaonon
atarboo nach oinoa 2 Stunden Jauepnaen, schrecklichon lodoslcaspf, (NO-
201, itnkl. Bow. 290, R. 1303; Kogon, R. li86). uoitore Giftvcrsache
wurdon im Konr.entrationslagor Buchenicld in Oktobor 1944 an 6 rjaaischon
Kriogogofangonon auagofuehrt. .vile Yerauchaprsonn vorc-n gotootet.

(Kogon, H. Ua',-6j NO-265, Ariel. Bow. 287, R. 1317, Hint rag fuor don 26.
Oktobor 1944).

Oioao beiuun Vc-raucho aurd.-n nach wen 3cf«d.. vuo 15. -i 1944 nus-
gofuohrt,und G-bhardta "lor.ohmiguns vnr tin notJ.jiiigoaZrforiemia.

(9) Vorachlodonca,

Dio 4alari'.-Sxporir«ntu in Dachau ur.d die Gvlbflabor -Zaporioanto Li
Buclwnwald and NaUwoilcr wurden woit uobor den ! ai 1944 hinaua durchgo-
fuohrt, hrnouto ..nfordorung-n von b.l ill ..sen Verauclwn n;ch Jonoa Zoit-
punkt VOTWODdbon InoaoBan iu« gooaoaa dcu Bufold voo 15. Jtti 1944 von
Gobhardta Ganobilgung abhaongig, .»uoa.rMc~ cta.-U n Gra^lta and ihn unt.r-
atollto Poraonon aLt dloaon Yorauchon ouch ait dtn nroi4bo-b-.»vornu-
chon in ouchonwald im November 1943 in engor V v.roLi'iung,ui>J Gubterdt, ala
uin«r dor loitendun Bo--ctun la Buoro von Grawltr, ouaa von dicaon Vorsuchcn
untorrichtot goKouon aoin. 3oloot angono-a-n, dv : G. bl.r.nlt ilt den Einzol-
hujtun dioaor Vorauchu nicht vortraut war, co hat da? Bi *. Ito.-ttrial doch
uobor alien Zwoiful hinaua fu at go at jilt, d.aa .r mil Pi .j-.tr. and UnUrnulv-
mungon in Vorblnduiig stand, dio diu ayatf.aalj.-n- fomahao von Verauchon
an unfroiwilligon Vorauchap. raon n jinoclloas, -:.d or 1st dcahalb in Sinno
doa Abaohnitta 2 dea Paragraphvn II dto Kor.trollr.ta-G-sobzoa Nr. 10 futr
diooo Voraucho vurant»ortHch,


Ill* Schluss .

GebhirUt bog.inn p rsoenlich die Sulf onvsi d-Vo rsucho uni nahn dig
vollo Vorantiwrtiichkoit fucr oio auf aich. fuohrtu oiniga dor m don
ala Vorsuchaobjektu gobrauchten, polaischor. Fraoan vorgcnoBDooon Opera-
tionon und KUonatlichcn InTisierungon aus. Fuenf dor Vorauchaporaonon
atarbon ala diruktu Folgu dor Veraucho. Seine Bchuuptung, daaa dio polni-
aehon Opfor, von (When bohaufXot -ird, cL-.sa ale r.«m Toio vorurtoilt goiro-
aon wnoron, durch dio Vomafaaa dor 2xpori-an,u gorotu* wurQon, iat koin
Vurtoidigungegrund. idnu Vorh-.r*ilung gogui dioau Frauan fond nicht atr.tt.
Sio willigton nlrht in ulo v oraucbc oin. Sio prot.atiorten c.uendlich,
pJiyaiach und ochriftlich. Za lat koin .uih-ltapunkt daTuor vorhnnden, does
dor Gonortlgouvorncur doa baaotsten Tolcna, wio o» 4r 3 dcutacho Goads
vox'langto, Jo : Uver GMdoogoM .in, ..uoaorduo

wurdon 6 dor Yorauchojwroorwn, nachdoa ale -ic V raucho uobirct a;*lcn

batten, hingoricht-t,.

Dio Knocbeii-, i.uakol- und Norvunrog»neratloaavurauoho und dia Kno-
ohunvarptflansungavoraaebu ma*don an doraulbon Stollo, mchrvnd d.nsolUn
Zoitabcohnitta und an dcracibon Grappa von OpT m xlu dio Sulfonaadd-
Voraucho vorgonocjgor.. O'inc dio lotstorvn wurnlon dio uratoron ni« atattgo-
fundon hab ... J clururgi^ foar 4U«> Vorauciw mudu van Fiaphor

in oiaonmonarboit uit 8tuKpf*ggor auT Bofuhl Oobbartba oaffoaUllt. Pitcher,
dor Uobhardt dirukt unturatallt mr, nihr. . n don Vcioudiun clnon tioligoji
.uitoU. Stumpfogg. I t r-chroni .lienor . . ,c in Hohonfrehon atationloit
und bwriehtoto Oobhardt uob.r alo. Gobhardt fuchrto jx.r3>::ilich na poti«r>-
ton Lidioch uLwn Knocbonvorpfliusungsvoioucn u-a. D. r ftoiucnt rational agor-
inaaaao, von don d r Knochon onti'omt wurlj, wurJo gpnj tor -vtootot,

Gubnarlt wnr nit don Elnsalhciton dor Vur»a bo v rtr-.ut, *nn d^r.on
KiBChor in Dachau t-Jln*hn, o inrtchli.cBlicii


- 34 -


dor Hoehen-, Kaeltc- and BliAgexinoungavcrsuche. Sr beaorach diaao Voiv
aucho alt haachor poraooniicn uni bot mtericUe Ur.turstu-tzung in.

Polygolj On ^lu^gofinnungaalttol ; daa durch arachioascn von Xnsasaon
nuaprobiort wurdo, Kurde von Gobhardt In Hohonlychon atudicrt.

G-bhnrdt hut to konr.tnia von don uocrdoriachon Sopaisvoraucl -'n in
Unchau and gab Fiachor Inatruktionen daruebor, Sio vr«D oino Ergacnsung
dor SflJCoiv. ald-/erauci;u in Lvjnabnxck.

Kf nahn an Konforeni-n botroTfo StoriliBlorungav-rsuchon «n Juodiachon
wwiblicnon Ins toaon von ..uact.witx Uil,

Nccii dua 15. ;.ui 19/,/, uuactun allc V-raucho an j/uvuuitrationalagor-
insasaon von GubhuMt go'oilligt wordun. Hr oanktionicrtj die Hcorwnaabr-
vuraucho In *>:ohau uni rlct Jlo V w n»jftlung "..u >?iai,r 7.:,- uncr" drlngund
.■m. Lr gor.oundgto Giavoraucha in Inanaa-n. S in- Uonohuigung war -rfordor-
lich fuor Giltvurauchu, dio men don 15, kii . a A fu-hrt warden, soitohl
ala ftuoh l’u-r die vorgcachlngt . icho ait opldaslocb 1 ibsucht.

Dio .oixlagcbohoord* untaratollt, dioa d&a nowula-iturirl bowuiat,
d38a Gobhor-tt Haupttaotor, Tollnolvwr, «.’ioLlftcr und VorcchubloiataiKior
gowuaon lot, a -inj /.ustir/_ung gugabon und Jt fl'civm und Untomotaun,
boi donon oa aich ua audlsini acho V rsuchu ui Vorouchapcreonun ohn> duren
iuctlruumg hooitolto, in »erblndun. : : g-3twi«n nu, In duren V .1 luf iord,
brutnlltuotun, tirauadukoituii, Foil--rung, Gr-uolt'ton und ndcr- un mscl>-
llcho Tut on b-gangon >. union, and dm a seine Sohuld outer d< n .'inklig.! punk-
ton I, II, IU und IV d-r unkl .gojehriXt f-stguatollt vrjrd,n iat.

SKOK


- 35 -


Ich, FroU Lax, X Q/.6207, bsta«tie hiarait, class ich
Uorchaus vartraut ait aor en£l.sahon ui>d deutschen
Spracha bin, ana dass das Vorsteheodo eine irahri.cits-
g^aauaae and rientigj Ueborsetxung dias.-s Doku^ents
daroteUt.

Nuernberg, 10. Juni 19 m7


FTvD UX
X 0.65)7


-36 -


H_I_L_I_T_T_a_I_ 3JJ_NJ._L_ KC t I _

p:.ix no. i


«.3SCELZ2SSBSLB D-..J-EOUNG 7UK<
DIE V^tEINIGTEN ST....7EN V"N


G2GEN


K..:iL GENZKEN


Kuornber-,

16. Junl 1047


Jrr.es ”• KcHnncy
•‘•l'’xcnr’<'r G. !>rdy
.'•rnr'at *« rllek-KAchinld
Esther J^ne Johnson

Fucr*

Triford To'-l-^r
>rl ndl r G A ncml # U.3....,

Cvirf Counsel for tfnr Crlnoa


/f


In Anklageponkt eina der Ankle;escfcrifi wird behauptet, dess dcr
Aivjoklegte GSPffCE'. In Terfolgung einca geneirseuen Planex, xaiemen
ait rndorcn, aich vorachworer. hat und uebereingekoa.-.on lat, aedirinlocho
Exrcrinente an unfreivilllgon "crauchsperaoncn vorrunohaon; in Anklage-
punkt svei und drei (Ericjaverbrechen, reapektivo "erbrechon gogon dio
henochllchkeit) wird behauptet, iaae er ein Teeter und Kitholfcr war.
daoo or angeordnct. unteratuctst und toilgenoa.en hat uni in Zuoanaon-
hong atand nit Placnen und Untcrnehsu^en die aich ait aedlalniochcn
Exporinenter. an unfrelwllli*en Verauchapereoncn bcfaseton; achlicaelich
wird er is Anklagepunkt vier boxichtigt, nach dea 1. September 1939,
oin kitgllcd dor SS gevoeen su coin, vtlcho lurch den Intcrnationnlon
Kllitaorgorichtahcf sur vcrbrcchcriachcn Organiaation orklanrt vurdo.

Eor Argoklagto GIKZE# wird inabceondere der toilnahuo an den
Flock-

£1.0be c -Exporlaenton beachuldigt, wie oio ia Abechnitt 6 (JJ dcr An-
kliNSoachrift niodcrgelcgt Bind, aewie der Ccilnnhno an don Sulfnnllnnido
Exporlnonten. wio lie dcr Abtchnitt 6 (2) fcatatellt. Sua Zwocko dor Vor-
oinfachurv dor xur “orhandlung at'hcr.dcn Problem hat dio Ankl/y;cbo-
hoordo vordoa don Soachuldigun Bpur.kt aoincr Teilnnh-o an don Oiftgna-
und Drnndboabon-Sxpcriaentcn. wl. Bio lnoboaoniore in Abachnltt 6 (K)
und 6 (L) nicdorgelcgt olnd, fpllen clr.oacn. Zue-otrlich hiotu sioht
dio Anklagcbohoordc hicnlt dio Anklogc aciner TBilnahao an dor. Scownaoor-
Zxporinonton, wio aio dcr Abachnitt 6 (G) dor Anklvoschrift footatcllt,
surueck. Dccxufolf-c boruht Ala ArJclrgc von GESiZZS vegan ccincr ~oil-
nnh-ic an vcrbrcchcriachon acdisinlachon Exporlnonten auf oclncr "er-
bindung ait den Fleckficber Exporlnonten in 3uchcnv*ld, dio suasion
nit andcrcn lapfetoffExperiacntcn uni Acr alutontnrha,: xua Zwocko dor
Go winning von riockfiober-Soilacrua uni 31utpl«e. j». aowio don Sulfnnlla-
aido Sxpcriconten und den Einfricrun-;*- uni andoren "crauchcn, durch-
gofuchrt von Dr. hASCESk uni don UnfruchtbarcachungaverGUchon von
Dr. CLAU3S, nuagofuchrt wurdon.


Alt Chef doe Saai’.petsvcBcr.o dcr ’’affen SS war ier Angokla^ta
G2TZXEM. su«Ki.»n ait Ecichtarxt SS GPX'ITZ dcr rangh:echitc Sanitaoto-
offlxier in dor SS.

GE'ZilEF dionte alt Sanitactsoffixier i- ersten 'cltkrioge. Ia
August det Jahrct 1912 trot or in den Sanitectodionot dcr Eeuttchon
Kriogtaarine ein uni dionte alt Cfflxior bit xua Movoabor dot Johrct
1919. Er hntto oino eorztllchc Privetpraxio bit zua Ofctobor 1934, nnch
wolchcn Zoitpunkt cr vieder alt F.etcrvc of filler in die Marine cintrat.
la Jphre 1926 tchloet cr tich der nrtionnltoxinlittitchon Partoi an.

Aa 1.Maori 1936 trot or xur SS alt dcu -arg oinct Sturabar.n-
fuuhrort (Major) uebor und vurdo dou Sanitaottrv- dcr SS-Vorfuogun t-
truppo, wclcho in dor FoUexolt xur Vaffcn-SS wurdc, xa\otoilt. Er
wurdo glolchxoltlg xu:. Chcfarxt lot SS-KrnrJcenheuoot in Berlin omannt
und leitcto dlo daran angctchloteene Sar.ltactttchulo.

Ia rruohjahr dot Jahroo 1937 vurdo dao Sar.itaettaat dor SS vor-
grootoort und in 2 Abtollun. on ruf-o,-licdort. OZKZKEH wurdo xuu Loltor
Jonor Abtcilun. ornannt. die oleh ait dcr 3ctofc*ffung von aorxtlichon
Auoruottuiu:material und dor Uobervachun* dot SanltaoUportonnlt in
don Konsontrntionoi-gcrn xu befnsen hattc. In diotcr Ei?:. ntchaft
vnr er aerxtllohtr IJerntcr futr EICKS. vclchar oborttor Hofehlthnbcr
von allon K'-nxcntrationtlt^ern war. !Me Eor.xentrntiontlager Snchton-
hauton, Drehau, Buchonwald, hauthruten, Flotecnbuor.; und Kouongamt,
dio xu diotor Zoit dio bettohendon Hauptlagtr won, flelon untor toino
aorxtl.chc Zustrondi-Jceit. Ft oblr* ite. dioto Lager xu inopixloron.
(GaiZXIK, 3843). Er war in diotcr Biecntchrft bit xuu Soptoabor
d«o Jahret 1939 tactig.

lfach dor Aufttclluc.; dor Sealtectcabtcl lung 3 dor 3.?anxor-
gronadicr-Divltion lurch ihn.


- 3 -


(Seltc 3 des Original*)


vurde GSffZKET sun Chef dcs Sanit?et*antcs dcr Yaffen-SS. wclchos
do* A_:t "II in SS Fuehruagshaupt ant dartt'lltc, nit deu Knag cir.o*
Oborfuchrer ernrnnt. Ee* SS-Fuehrung*hnuptant at and under dcr Loitung
von Cber, ruppenfuehrer Han* JUZmiH und wax cine* dor 13 Hauptaonter
dcr oboratoc SS-Fuchrung. (FC-ilS, Proe.lx.22, R.121). Vaehrcnd
JUi:?rIr- G&tZKSi uiiitaerlfchcr Torgt-setrter war, war eoir. Torge-
setxtor in techniaeher und a-orttlichcr Hincicht dcr Kclchenrst dor
SS GRA’flTZ, don or boi viaIon Golcgcnheiton offlsioll vortrnt.

(2?0—139, Fro.lx. 2d, £.122). Oioc Stcllun; hatte or hi* tun rrioge-
ondo inne, In Jahre 19d2 Joloch wurde seine Stcllun; Vokannt untcr
doii Haaon do* Chef* de* Sanitot«vcen* dcr Veffcn-SS, Abteilunc D
doo SS-I\ichrun shauptR-toa. lr wurde »un Dr i,-ado fuehrer bofoordort
und wurde ochlioccllch r.; 3o.Janur dco Jahre 19*53 Grup penfuehrer
und Goncr-llcutnpnt dor Vaffon-SS.

In acin.r SI cnechrft 1 Chef doe Srr.itactewoeon* dor Yaffcn-SS.
wnr OQTZXZK wrnnt~ rtllch fuor dio Au*V.lAune, Jufatcllung und
Einnat* oeoutUehor Senlteetaelaheltce -cr •-'•fen-SS. Ton Augon''lick
an, wo aolcho EinheUon aur Front .ciillt wurdan, - in ihro tnktUcho
Fuchrung an don An «:<l-„;tcn SJAJIC'.IR -U Korror-Srnitac-.oinopektour
ueber.

3owci* fuor dio vorathend mg.fuehrton Tattachcn wird gcllcfort
durch Ho oidceetettlicho Xrklarran. OHZFJ 1 * (Ko-539, uupra) bowIo
lurch acino Auaaagen ( H. 377 V-78).

Vicr Aoziter waron GE'Z~1> : inr.crhnlb (ce SS-Faohrungahaaptanto
ur.tertcllt,— da ;xt XIII, rruppcciaaitrctsvcscn. dr* Aat XIV,
Z--hnr.errtlicho 3ctrcuung, da* /nt XT, ChenUeho und Phoruateutlrchc
Bctrcuun. untcr dor Lei tun von 3LIMHRI’J72F., und da* Ant XVI.

Hygiene unter dor Lcitung do* An : cklagten rtPtJQ03T. fHO-16, pro.

Ex.22, F. 121; Gonxkcn, ?..38~5-6). krurovsky wurde GEHZXEH'■ art iu
Jrhrt 19 0 al* Kyrierikcr xugeteilt und war rar gleichon Zolt Chef do*
Institute* dor >'affon-SS fucr Hygiene, welches wielerun GSKJKE* untcr-
strnd. ( GCntkcn, R.3776 , 3846; »- 16, supra). Ditscs Untcrstollun, a-
vcrhaoltni* douerte fort bi tun 31.Au.nst 1943.


(Soitc 4 do Originals)

JU: 1.September 1943 words dps Saniteetsveeen dcr Yaffor.-SS
uogoglicdort. Dlcscr Torgang brrehte. under pndoren die Ueborotoliung
von BLUhlSRHnSR, KPUJGWTr und do* Institute dcr Yaffen-SS fucr
Hygionc xu dcr A-t des Zeichsar:tcs der SS und Polirei Prof.Dr.Srnet
GRAVITY. Baxnach konntc nan ehor ran einer dirokten .'ntorstellung an
GRA’.'ITZ ale an GZTZJX* sprechcn (SO--17, Pros.Sx.23, S.121; 80-416,
supra; PO-723, Pros.lot 29, R.131).


(Anklpgeechrift


Dio Flockflobor-Erporlcente in Bachenvrid vurdsn durch Offislero nuo-
gcfuchrt, dio untar Genxkeas 2ofchl strnlcn. Dcr vorbrechorischo
Chcrnktor diooor Ftperir'nto %-ird lr. dcr Dart tel lung dcr Auklng©-
bchoerdo ueber : k rUG0"3ZY rofgoualgt. Die Txperiacntc wrdon uit soinor
Konntnic und blliigung durcb/cfuflhrt. lr ‘rt dchcr verantnortlich fuor
dio nnnnigfpahon ho.do. die Ins E/f cis dle:r Sopcrinonto wnron.
Ar.wcndung von '.Yyp v.Un. 5fi S.C.. ‘ U9*-o)

Dio uxaittolt--c I l»ur. d... I * t>:fl.b?r- Rxpcrlacr.to in Buchon-
wnld lag in Hrcndon vor. Dr. . Sunita.tsoffisl.r dcr V'affen-

5S, dcr soinorscito den 3o for. 1st and !*r Vcbcrwachung dco Aiy.-cklagton
.‘ihUGOffSTT untorstcllt vrr. Vo: dca Jalirs 1935 vor DI« Lngornrst in

Buchonwrld (Kogon, R.1154) und irt ocriit cin Untcrjsbcncr von GZSZK2*.

gowccon. Yaohrend des Irrrkrcichfoldsagcs, funglcrtc DliC als GZHSiZZ's

Adjutant und sie vurden porsocnlicho Treunde (Gtnxkcn R.3811). In

Jrninr dos Jahr.c 1942 bcgpnn DIK die Zlcckflebcr-Sxpcrl^entc in 3uchei

void. Er var do*. Institut der Yaffcn-SS fucr Hygiene angoglicdort und

dio Gebauodeblocks fucr ftxpcri-cntelle Tcrsuchc und I^pfstoffber-

stollung 1*'. Lager Buchcnveld warden bde.-ant -Is Unterr.btcilun. fuor

Plcckfiober und Tirus des Instltuts fucr Hygiene. Dias wird doutlich

durch die Skizxo voranschaulicht, die dcr Anrekl-gtc .SUGCVSCY ruf-

gexoichnet hat. (VO-'-lS, Pros.Zx.22, R.131).


(Setto 5 des Ori^in*la)


G2I2XEK gibt tu. dais KHGGO'-'SXY uni das I ns tl tat dor Veffen-SS
fucr Hygiene ihzi ror den 31.August dcs Jr.hr es 1943 unter8t?r.dcn and
di-sa ale seiner. Bcfehlcn unterworfen varon (3.3847). 2r gibt ferncr-
hln xu, dr.ss BI!C sein Untcrgebiner war bis ru Jeaoa Zcitpunkt, In
doa cr die vcrbrcchcrischen Sxperlccnte in Buchcnwald begmn. Banach,
so behauptot or, wrr or den nlcht aehr an Leben befindllchcn GRAWITZ
unterstcllt.(R.38-'.7), laden er fuer elaen Autenbllck dio Yahrhelt
dleser nur fuer lha solbst rortellhaften Aussie annahn, fuhr GEKZKEH
i^t oolnen roststelloagcn vie foL?t fortj v

■Von dlossa Zcitpunkt nn hnttc seine Dlcnststollo slch nur noch
ult dor Dcekung seiner Auslrfien su bcfrssen, dean or wrr an olne nnders
Dlcnststollo mgerliedcrt worden uad da dio neuc Stelle. dor or rngo-
gliodort vordon war, noch nlcht in H sos h a l tsplan vorrosohcn wrr, so
hattcn wir uns on solae Aosgrben su kueir*rn uad drs trn/ In dlosan
FHi." (K.3817) (Unterstroichun^ vorgclegt). So ltofcrtc - vio
dor Aiwrcklrgte solbst tufflbt - soln Ant dio fuer dio Plodcflobor-
Expcrlneato notwondlgcn Goldnlttel. Untor dcr ncucrlichen Annnhno
dass DIN} GRAVITZ rng. gliedcrt wrr, koantc dies nlcht ohne dio Kennt-
nlo und Jllll.-ung iron GSHZJ2F gcschehon. dor Jr soln Eoatr-ndour wrr.

Sr uuosto solno Zustluamg su DISG's 3cnutzun ; - fuer dio Buchenwrld-
Exporlucnto goben.

Drs Bowclsartorlnl Jedoch seigt, dass DISG und hHOOOVSKT unnu*-

gosetst bis sun 3l.Auust 1943 GSFZEIK untorstcllt wrron. Dio irrge

lot dahor nlcht ob GRAYITZ dor Vorfssetsto von DIUG odor .iHUGC’ SKT

in

war, oonrtor riolnchr ob O0ZKZ3 eln Glicd/dcr 3cfchlskcttc twi.chon
DIJC und ORAVITZ wrr. VIo beroitr dnr t olcet wurde, htt 02JZKUT solbst
fostgostollt, dass GRAVITZ in -orrtllchcr Hincicht soln "orgosotstcr »v

Dio woscntllcho BotciUguag GRAVIES' s an dlosea Zxpcrincnton ent-
lnstct OEHim in koiner KilN. Dcs Jewel sartorial sclgt, drss GESZXET
oln Gliad in dcr Befehlskcttc war uad drss ccwohl D1:G nls nuch
JJlGOvsn seine unoittclbaroa Unterrobenon waren. Der Ai^ohle^te
hKUGO'VSKY aoussert sich la don Abschaittca 4 uad 5 seinor eldcsstntt-
lichon Erklaorung wie foL;t:

■GBiaaa wrr nein dirokter Vorgesctrter tob.


- 5 -


(Seite 6 dos Cririnr.ls)

GEH3CSI wftr acln director Torgesetzter voa Jahrc 1940 bis rua
1. September 1943. D»u*ls wirfic cine Fouge still tong inncrh.“.lb dcs
Smitpotsdionetes dcr SS durchgefuchTt und ich vorde unaittelbcr
Dr.GHAVITZ, dca deaaligen Selcfcsprst dcr SS and Pollzoi, untarstollt.
Anfpngs 1942 befnhl Dr.GZSZOT die Gruendung der Abtoilung fucr
Flsckfiobcr und “irusforechang lnnsrhalb dot hyfcianischen Inctitut^.
dcr Vsffen-SS In Xonzentrntisnslpger 3uehenv*.ld und ornnnnto Dr. #
DIMS run Lei ter dieser Abteiiung. m ich su dicser Zeit dor Loiter*
dos Antes XVI "Hygiene" inncrhnlb dot SS-Futhnuu-shnuptnates ver.V
wpx ich Sr.CIIO 1 a dlrektsr Vorcesetzter. Dsr Siciorseiner Abtoilui^
wurdc gevachlt ua dio Oleiehheit dcr 2ielc dioscaslnstitutcs fuar
dio Vaffcn-SS ait denen dot Institutes fuer Fleckfiober- uni Vina'
ferschung doi CZH's in Erpkpu under Hnjor Dr.ITS 3 , klrxsuop.chon. 1

"Br.GSHZKZK vusstc nntuerlieh, dpss dr.t Institut gegruondot wuq
ua dcr Vnffen-SS einea vlrkspacn Ir.pfstoff gagen Flockficber su
bober.. In dor Abteiluag fuor Fleckfieber- und "irusforschung in
-uchcnvnld wurdon von Br.DIKG aodizinischc Vcrcache nn Kncftlingcn
doe Xcnzantratlonslpgers D achan wnld durehgcfuchrt ua dio Virkena-
koit dcr verschlcdenon Fleckflabor Xajfatofft fostiuctollon.

(Kc—133. Anklngc 3«veisstuock 232 F..1C85).

Abschnitt 4 und 5 dor oidosstMtUchen Erk lne rung dos Ant’eklngter.

HOTHW, dcr uit Dr.DIJG ruspa. or. pn dicsen "ersuchcn nxbciteto,

orklnoron folgcndesi

•Gogon Zado doa Jphrcs 19'1 vurdo eir.c Vsrsuchsstption la Konzcn-
trationslager 3uehcnvrli orrichtot uu dio VirkspiJcalt vorschiedoner
Iapfstoffe gag:n Flcckflobcr fcatsustcllon. Close Abtollung vurdo
c.ls dio"Fleckfi«bor Varsuchs atationa-Abtollung fucr Flockficber
and "irusforschurv;* bazcichnct and v«r untar dor unaittclbrron Auf-
r.lcht von Ir.Dl!D t nliPt SCEULEt. Diose VcrsaehBstrtion wurdo ia
Dlock 46 das Lagers crichtct. D*a Institute dcr *>ffcn SS fucr
Hy. lent in 3crlin untcr doa 3ofchl von Dr.Jorchia KFUGC W 3CY orhiolt
sru) itliche Scrichto uebor dissc Tnctigkoit und. Dr.DIFG orhiclt
sclno 3cfchlo von Dr.Xr.UGC 5KT. t. Anfrng, d"s heisst svischon 19-1
und Sosncr 1943, trpf slch Dr. DIFS oft ait Dr.Krrl GISZKSF vogon
ooinur Arbeit in iuchenvp.ld in Vcrbindung alt den Fleckfloborvor-
ouchon. Lr.DIIC ers*chlts air, dees Zr. GIFJ.SF sich besondors fuor
dloso Sechcn intorcssicrt und. dust cr iha su verschlcdenon Zciten
3orichto srndto. Er.Ding spgto each, d*ss Dr.Epxl GEFZX2H oincr
soin.r ’'orgesetsten v*r. Heine Vcrbindung ait Dr.DIHG sci to ait
die foL_cndo Dcfehlskattc in dor 3emf siehtlgua; dicscr •Flock-
fioborvcrsachBotnti ;?.■ i Scichspxzt SS 0&AVIT2, OSfZXSX. ISIGOVSKY
und DIH}.

■Ich konn aich orinn.rn, dnse rr.GD-’drX' ia Jrhunr 1943 Dr.DISG
don Scfchl arteiltc, dl 4 ‘.’orsuchsstPtion sa vcrgrocssorn. Di dloscr
Zoit vurdc 3lock 50 gcrroaat and sa cincr Abteilun,. fucr dio Eor*
otollung vcrschiodor.cr


(Scite 7 des Originals)

Iupfstoffc, die fuer die "ersuche ia Block 46 vervendet warden,
genecht. Von dieaer Zeit pa wirde die Tersuchsotntion "Abt©iluag
fuer Plockficber and ''irusforschunc des Hygienischon Institutes
dor Vaffon-SS" geneurt. In Senior 1943 ueberg- Aann Dt.GIjSZ'.S
tile seine Aufgabea Dr. >J.USCVSTf and von dio«cn Zditpunkt na
npha OZSZKSK nicht =ehr ektlv pa der Sache tell. Ich or inn ere nich,
Dr.hRWJOVSXY in Hpu«o Dr.DIBG's weehrend einor seiner Bcsuchc in
Luchcnwald getreffon xu habon. (99-439, Anklage Bewciootuock 281,

R 1080).

Dor Zeuge Xogon spgte pus, dess DIUG nit GS32K2V offisicll uebor die
T lockficborvorsucho in Bachcnwcld korrespondiorte. (E.U57). Sio hntten
poxch privaten 3ricfwochsel. Kagzn sngtc weiterhin pud. dros DI2B nn
Trrakrelchfoldxu. als Adjutrat GdaSHa dor ihn bcachuotzto and ■ dor
oinc besondcro Schwnechc fuer DISC hat to" tciLifhn; dass or pub den
Briofwcchsel xwischon 0Z9ZQBI und DI2C uad von Auesp.rcn DISC*s vueotc,
dr.as OZHZHiT ala Chef des Spnitpotcvoscr. der Hnffon-SS dor Vorgeaotxto
von hRUG0‘/SZY uad ZIXj war; drse 1J.UG0V5ZY' s Unnbhpjmgigkoi t in Souucr

1940 greeaser wurde on*, dnss DIHJ dieses Vechsel entgogentrnt and
0S2C& nlo Chef bchniton wollto, deso Is Spretsosnor 1943 JOIUOOWSKY
ondiuoltig dor einzigo Chef Clip’s warde. (Kogon R 12CO-2). Dor
lctxtoro Toll dor Auesagc btsicht etch offeneiehtllch nuf dlo Kcugo-
stnltunc doo S*altnetedienitco dor SS is Auguat 1943. els WUCOVSKY
GRAVITZ na Stcllc von G£1’ZKJ2? untorstollt wurde. Krgon sngto nun,
dnos OEPZK&t pie DIUO' s Chef von don Tlcckfliborvcreuchon in Block 46
ver Au-.uct 1943 untorrichtct wpr. Zi'.'-Z ootsto ooinon 3riofwcchscl sit
GEJiaUa fort, und lud ihn wiodorholt oin, "oclncn Laden" in luchcnwnld
a bosachen. (logon, R.1302) Dictxach, dor Kppo do jlockos 46, engt
in soincr eidecotnttllchcn Zrkiperoag, dees SI 2 C ihn sagto, date
GD*2XEiT dlo Vorsuchsstntioa besucht hsbe. (HG-131-., Anklpgobcvolostuock
433, R 2040).

Dnss DUG G&QZZS antoratcllt wp r, 1st rbsehllcsscnd pus dca
Ilntriy: in DIKG'a Tpgcbuch vos 9 Jpr.upr 1943 fesWestcllt. Dor lintrpgt
sivtt fol-rondoa:


- 7 _


(Seite 8 des Origiselt)


3 fefcl des Gcneralstebaarxies der Vjffto-SS, SS-3ruppen-
fuehrer and Genernlleutnant der %ffen-SS, Dr.0EKZnZ5, vird die
bisher bcsteher.de Jleckfieberforachungastetion Is Xonxentrr.tiono-
Ipgor 3ucher.void ror ■ Ub tel lung Flcckficber -and "irueforechung*
uagevmdclt. Der Lcitor dioaor Abtcilung wird SS Stursbannfuohrer
Dr.Dire. VaBhrcnd seiner Abveeenheit wird der Strndortaanltaota-
offisier Dr.H0V3S die Aufsicht aeber die Eerstellung von Iapf-
otoffon uebernchscn. Der Loiter des Wirtechnfta-Torvaltungohaupt-
estoQ, SS-Obcrgruppcnfuehrer und General der VBffen-SS POEL, ordnete
die Vergroeaseruag doa 31ocJta von Stoinbaaten an.

■SS-Sturabennfuehrer Er.BISJ wlrd gleichxcitig run Oberatcn
Letter der Abtciluc.; fuert bcoondcrc Anfgaben is Ant T1 (Hygicno)
der Aatagruppe D (Se.nl teets An.-olegenhei ter. der Vaffon-SS) doa
SS Enuptfuohrungsestea ernrnnt".

Soait gab G2aCIS einon 5ef;‘hl an El. IT vollte dleaea Gerichts-
hof jlauben aachcn, deaa dice aehr oino ■Zuatia.ung - da ein Dofchl
wer. (Gonxken R 3865) aber vie sehverviegcnd dieao Untcracholdung
ftuch aoin ar*;, 4or Jfcpfeonger 'ieaer Kachricht botrrehtote aio ale
Dcfohl oinoa "orgeactxtcR. GIS'ZXZP aagte auch, dnaa oich dioao
"Zua Unsung" nur ruf die Hcrsteliu^estation fuer lapfatoffo bo-
echrnonkto (R 3864). Die* lat offaaeichtlich nlcht dor Fell, da
d«r jofehl von dor "boatebonden Flockflcbcrvorauchaatatlon” in luchen-
wnld apricht, uni dn dio einxigo Station dioaor Art der Flockflobor-
vorauchablcck wax. Bio X.ipfatoffbcratcllun^eatation wrr vorlnouflg
nur replant und bogw. nicht ror doa 15. August 194* ru arboiton.
(G:nxkon R.3865). Dioa boveiat data der Ifenc "Abtellung fuor Fleck-
fiobor und VXruBfo^BchuIv:■ alch atv;hl auf dlo Voraucho- aovio auf
die vorgcechlrgcnon HoratclluryTaxt.-ti .non bexo-j. Wcitorhin sngtc
Kogon rue. deaa aich dor Kkjo aovohl ruf 3lock 46 ela euch euf Slock
50 boxog. ( R.11S5) 0292XB> sag to la Zoogonatend. deaa rich DI1C
nooglicbcrvolae iu >tua geirrt hrbe. ( R.3864).

Deaa DISG G*K5!ET unteratrnd, lot vcitorhln durch dio Intaacho

bovieaon. deaa DIKJ in doaaclben :ofohl aua Ultor der Abtoiluiv fuor

SS

beaondore Aufgeben In Aat X71 (Hyaline) dor Aate.-ruppe D doa/Haupt-
fuchrunganutea ernannt vurdo.


(Seito 9 des Originals)

GZKZKSH war inner der Lei tor der Jatagroppe 3, die das Ser.itactsvesor.
dor Vaffoa-SS war.

Dio 3cvcisfuefcrung seigt daaa GR*ZEHI ueber die Flackflcbcrvor-
aucho in Luchenvald onterrichtot war. GZTffiS*' gab ru, daaa cr vunste,
daaa DIX Inpfatoffe in Suchonvald su erprobcn hntte and dioo cindooteno
aoit do- Tago an den er aich oclbtt infiasicrte. (H.3805) Doa war an
17 Kaorx 1942,nur 2 Kona.to naob don dio Voraucho bogpnnen. Er aogto *
aua, daaa or wuscto. data Kaeftlirgs fuer dio Voreuche vorwondot
wurdon, abor or wusate nicht in wolchcr Art and Woiso. ( R.3810).

2o i»t offentichtlich, dees or vaaato. daaa Voraucho nit kucnotlichor
Infection durchgcfuchrt warden, dioa alloin von dor Tatarcho daaa
DIJTJ ajch aelbet lnflxicrtc. 2a iat hoechat xofaolUg daaa oin Arr.t
60 Tac« nach den or Inpfotoffvorauchc begonnon h-tto, an Flockfiobor
orkrrnkon aollto, vonn nicht nit cinea virulenten Flockfiobororrogor
flonrboitot wlrd. Solch cin Errogor wuordo nicht bcnootlst, auooor
vonn Voraucho nit kuoaatUchor Xnfektlon durch-cfuohrt vordon. Woltor-
hin wurdo von der Tortoidigung kcin.rlci 3ewolo orbrncht, dnoo zu
dloocr order lrgondoir.cr Zoit olno Flockficbcrcpcdcalo in 3uchcn-
vnld horrechto.

'G9ZQM Bohauptun. . daaa er dachto, da no Hacftlingo ganz
olnfrch nuf die vorachwindond klolnc Koeglichkcit, Flockfiobo: nuf
nr.tucrlichc Art «u bekooaon, fclnpft warden, crachcint aogar Lai on
nbrurd, dio von Flockfiobor nicht -ehr viaaon ala dee, was alo in
dioaon Proxcea gchoort haben. Dicao iohaaptung iat durch dio Tntoacho,
daaa GEKZKZZr an S.kai 1943 von :3D30VSI? oinon 3erlcht uobor dio
creto Voraucho tor io in 3uchcnv?ld orhrltcn hat to (Krucovaky Dtfcunont
10, Hrogovaky :»cvoisetu«ck 2C E 5087) volltt.-.adig vidorlojt. Obwohl
diocor Borieht wodor kucnotlicho Infektion, DITG Oder Buchonvald or-
wnohnt, waaato Gll'ZKIS bnatisat data diet daa Srgcbnie von OXK'a
Arbeit wnr. Daa "ild.d-a GE«‘3iy ana gerno go ben coochto, lot
folgcndoa: DIFG boginnt seine Inpfatoffpruefungen in Jrnuar 1942,
inpft gosundo Hacftlinge nit 4 verschiodcnen lapfatoffer., bohnolt
oino nicht goinpfte Gruppc rur Kcntrolle, infiziert die -rciapfton
Gruppon woehrend 4 bis 6 Vochen nicht r-i: lieckfiober


(Scite 10 des Originals)

ua eicher xu sein, dass sle drain sind, SIKG nnd alie Tersuchspcr-
sor.on crkrankcn zufaollie an Flock:ieber, 30> Todcsfeello in dor
Zontrollgruppo 2 Todcafaelle in dor gclspftec Gruppc, and ein saucer
Coochrioboner 3cricht goht as 5.kai an GFF3FK. Dei eincr solchon
xufaolllgon and nornplcr. Flcckfieber epidenio war gs nrtuorlich nicht
notwondlg tuf kucnstllcho Infcktion zuruecktucreifcn. Vonn GSRBZV
nicht wuesto, doss KBOOOSKT'a 3orlcht BUG'a Versucho ait kacnotlichcr
Infoktion bohrndolto, dann war er dor cIncite S^pfenngor dot Borichts
dor dios nicht wusstc. Conti, Gravits and Gildcncistcr waron bostlaut
tahr gut unterrlchtot; Eyor, ein Flockfiebor-SschvcrstaendiGor von
Kandlosor bcsuchte dio Terauchaatation; und Dcsnits dor Ooachncfto-
fuohrar dor Bohrlng *.rko und Herstcllcr licea dor ccprucftcn Iqpf-
stoffo, nahe an olncr dor Eor.fcrcnxcn in denen dio Voraucho goplrat

wurdon, m dor JConforenx r~ 29.Dcsoabcr 1941, toil. (KO-1315,
Anklngobowoisstuock -104, R 3056.)

ftBTZXBPs johmiptung, drat or nitsals 3orlchto uober DISG'n 7cr-
aucho orhalten hnt ( R 3e06) wlrd veitcrhln durch Kogon*! obon or-
vnehnto Aubopjio viderloct, and -uch durch KRUOOVSKT's Ausongo.

Kr.XOWSXY sagto aus, dass o« seine Pflicht ala hyEleniaehor Snchvcr-
otpondi.'or bol GZEZX5H war. dioson uober alio wichtigcn Sachon p.uf
diotoc Goblot zu untcrrichtcn. OEHZKZK gab xu, dass HRUGO'/STf iha ungc-
faohr oinoal woochontlich Forlcht orstrttoto ( K.3856). In Fruchjohr
1943 borichtoto or GSHZKBI uobor dio Tlcckfiobcrvorsucho in Puchon-
weld und dio Koogllchkoiten, dort Ispfstoffo hcraustellon. Er tat dios
auo 3 Gruondont (1) DISG planto wr bread dos Troffcns dor beratendon
Aorzto dor tfohraacht oinon Vortrr* zu halton und 0SOT1? als Chof dos
SanitaotBwcBonB dor Vaffen-SS susoto davon wlsscn. (2) KRl£0 ,? 5KY
wollto GENS'. E' uober dio Virksarkeit dor in Buchonwald goprueften
Irjpfstoffo untorrichton und (3) wollto er ihs siyen wann und in wolchon
Hcngon er Icpfatoffo, dor in Buchcnwald horeostcllt vird, erwarten
koonnto. MP.UjCVSKY ert white GIF ZZ : , dass die in 3achcnv;ld gepruofton
Itpfstoffo vorschiodeno Virkungcn in 3cxug auf die Ceaper-tur und dio
Anzahl von Todosfaollen haotton. & xoiftc ihn Dlagr-aao dio von DDE
vorboroitot worden waron und dio die leaperatur zeigton und.


(Soitc 11 do8 Originc. 13 )

Sterblichkeitssrhlen. Dor Titcl dor Tr.bcllc gr.b den Try- dor
Infoktion on. (Krugot^aky, R. 5*67-8). In 6. Absrtz seiner
oidooatnttlichcn Erklrcrung war Krugowaky sogrr noch
nachdrucksvollor. 3r orklr.ertei

"In April 1943 bcrichtotc ich Dr. Genzkon nuendlieh
uobor dio 2 rgcbnisoc dcr bia dr.hin vorgononacnon
Vorauchc. In dioaon Berichtc gab ich die nootigon
Erklrcrungcn und zeigto Dr. Ccnzkcn oinigo cir von
Anto doa Dr. Ding zugokonnenen Tabcllcn, auc welchon
dio Picbor- und Pulo-Kurvon, dio Inpfdaton und dio
Orton dcr kuonotliehen Infoktion, dio Storblichkoite-
ziffern, dio cntstar.doncn Eonplikr.tionon u.o.v«.
oroichtlich wnron. Eino dcr in den Trbollon onthr.ltonon
Vorouch3rcihcn wurdo an Loutor. vorgonoaaon, dio nur
infiziort r.bor nicht goinpft wurden, danit aan die
Wirkonnkoit dcr in cndcrcn Pacllon nngownndton Inpf-
atoffo foatatollon kann.

"Ich borichtcto Dr. Gcnzken r.uofuchrlich und ca iat
dehor vocllig auagcachlooaon, daoo Dr. Genzkon ala
Arzt von dou Unotando, dnaa nonachlioho Y.'o8cn fuor
diooo Voroucho und ?or8chung benutzt wurden, nichto
gowuoot haottc. (Ko-423, Proc.Sx. 282, R.1085)."

Ea iat dr.hor oinwondfrei orwioson, dr.oa Genzkon von
dioaon Vcrouchon cingohcnd untcrrichtot war, aogar bia
nuf don Tag, an wolchon dio Hiift lingo dco Xonzontrntiono-
lcgoro infiziort wurden. Auch wonn n~n dr.a Dnnocglichc an-
ninnt, naonlich, dean or nicht voretand, wna ihn borichtot
wurdo, kann dios nicht ala Vertoidigung angcochcn wordon.

Eo v.ar ooino Pflicht und Scbuldigkoit, oioh aolbat zu in-
fornioren und dio Tactigkeit soinor Untergobonon zu ueber-
wachon. Die Anwmdung von Yaa-nhit:-., oupra.

Oonzkon gab zu, daco or nach Jnonner 1942 nit Ding in
porooonlieher Puchlung war, dr.oa or aich r.bor nicht or Lin or n
kocnno,ob Ding ihn uebor ocino Vorauchc borichtot hat.
(R.3814). Er gr.b zu, dr.oa or nit Dinj offisicll und privet
korrc8pondiorto. Man kann sich ochr.or vorGtollon, was dio
offiniollt. Korroepondons, nuosor don Vorauchon in 3uchon-
wr.ld, onthr.lton konnto.

Dor Kernpunkt dor Vcrtcidigung Oonzkon'a ist dcr Un-
otand, drsc Block 46, dio Vorouchaotrtion, nicht don Hy-
gioniachon In3titut dcr Waffen-SS und d-durch ihn, oondern
Grr.witz untor8tcllt war. Eo wird bohruptot, daos aslbat
wonn non die Kraft dor Bcwoicfuchrung dcr Anklr.gcbohocrdo
voollig unbor.chtot lr.osst und die Zcugonruo8rgc Gonsken'a
r.lo wahr annirnt, or doch dcr Vorbrcchcn, die in Vcrlr.ufo
dcr Plockficborvcrsuchc in 3uchen"rld veruebt wurden,
schuldig bofunden werden nuss.

- 11 -


(Scitc 12 dos Originals)

Er gibt zu, dass Ding ihn vor August 1943, was die Inpf-
Btofferzougungsatstte anbolangt, untergeordnet war. (Gonzkcn
Doc. 11, Genzkon Ex. 5, R. 3819). Gcrr.do glcichzeitig wusotc
cr, dues Ding in Vcrcuchsblock tatig war. Hoven wurdo von
Gonzkcn zu Ding's Vertroter ernannt und half Ding gloich-
zoitig in Vorsuohsblock. Mrugowsky war 3tfindig nit dor
Hornusgabo von Weioungon fucr boido Blocks bcschSfti ;t und
«cr bis zun 31. August 1943 dor Untorgoordnoto Gonzkon's.

Uobcrdics kann die TStigkcit dor Blocks Nr. 46 und 50
nicht gotronnt bohandolt und diooo v»io zuoi horr.otioch von
oinandcr rbgoschloosono Abteilungen r^gcschon v.ordon. Dio
Vo rouehe in Block Nr. 46 waren koin Solbotswoofc. Sio wurdon
su den Zwocko vorgononnon, un fostzustellcn, nolcho Inpf-
otoffo *irkonn nturon, sodsss die Erzougung nuf diooo Inpf-
otoffo konzontriort warden konntc. Dio Ergobnioso dor
vcrbrcchoriochon Voroucho in Block No. 46 fuohrton dirokt
zur Br richtun^ dor Ir.pfotoff-Erzcugungsanlngo in Suchcimeld,
die Ergebniose v.urdcn dort dirokt boi dor Erzougung von Inof-
otoffen nuogowortot| und diooo Inpfstoffo wurdon opnotox¬
in Block No. 46 an SonsontrntionolngorhXftlingon r.uoprobiort.

Alio dioso T’.-.tonchcn sind duroh dro Tngobuoh Ding's urniosen.
So bosngt dio Eintrrgun.- an 19. August 1942, dnoo dor nach
don Vorfahron IXirnnd-Giroud von Fr.stcurinotitut nuo Knnin-
chonlungcn orzougto Icpfstoff durch kuonr.tlicho Infcktiono-
vorouoho nuoprobiort und nlo wirksnn bofundon wurdo. Yior
Vorouchopcroonon vrnrdon boi diooon Vorouchon gotootut.
h andoit oich hior un _dcn gloich c n Innfstoff. f uor dosnon
Er zougung Gonzkcn in Jnnu nr 1943 dio Anlr.go in Buchonwald
or richtetc. Dio Sintrngung von 11. Juli 1944 fuohrt sub,
dr.co dor "\7cinr.r"-Iu P fstoff r.uo Xr.ninchonlungon mch don
Vorfnhron Durand-Giroud orzougt nurdc. An 10. Soptonbor 1942
und dann an 28. Pebruar und 27. April 1943 nurdo Ding
boauftragt, in Pastcucrinstitut in Paris Lnboratoriuns-
oinrichtungcn fucr Abtoilung fuor


- 12 -


(Scitc 13 des Originals)

Flcckficber und Virus-Porachung aonio fuor dr.s Uyg ionise ho
Institut zu bcachnffon. Bretnnlig nurds dor "Tfoimr-" Inpf-
steff in oinor Rcihc von Vorsuchcn m 22. Jnnunr 1944
nuaprobiert, die nit don Tode von 5 Porsonen endoten.

Soil dor Chofarzt dor Wnffon-SS, dor nuastc, daas Ding
Fleckficbcrvorsuchc an Eonzcntrztiojiolagcrbpcftlingcn vor-
gononnon hntto, dcr Ding bofohlcn hatto, in Buchenwaia
cino Anlpgo zur Srzougung cince dcr in dicecn Vorsuchon cla
v.irkarn bofundonen Lnpfatoffc zu crrichton, dor aich dor
Dionsto dcr Kitvcrochnocror i*rugovvohy und Kov-n bodiento,
soil 8 c£ch cin Konsch uncchuldig gopundon norden? Dio
Anklngobchbrdo bohauptet, daaa die Yoro.ntnortung dos i.S-
Grupponfuohrora Gonzkon in Bezug nuf dio vorbrccho iochon
Plcckfiobor-Voraucho in Buchonv-rld grKaoor lot ala dio
ooinoo Untorgobonon, doa SS-Sturcbrr-nfuohrcrs Ding.

( 2 ) Andoro Voraucho in Puchonv.sld.

Die Flockfiobcr-Voraucho v.rron nicht dor oinzigo Do-
ruohrungapunJct doo Angokl-gton Gonzkon ait dcr Vorsucho-
Station in Buchonnald. An 5. Janunr 1943 onndton dio
Behring ”?crkc in Marburg ilrugonaky oin Schroibcn dco In-
hnltoc, daas oio von Schroibcr untorrichtot nordon nhron,
da.ca Jodo Partic von Colbficborinpfatoff vor Lieforung
an dio 7ohmr*cht an ncnschlichcn -Tceen auoprobiert nordon
ntlooo. In Schroibon hioaa cs ausdruccklicbi "Oberotabo-
arzt Dr. Schroibcr hat un 3 gosr\;t, daas in Zukunft Vcrsucho
an nonochlichcn ffcocn von Ihror Dicnststcllo vorgononuon
u or don. Fir nordon uno dahor o laubon, Ihnon in bestinnton
EoitabotJindon ; luster von vorschiodcncn lotion zu oondon.

V.ir bitten un Uittoilung, ob nir auch dio .rukucnftigon
P-.rtion zu Dr. Hovon in Buchora.rld sondon oollon". (Ho. 1305,
Proa./.x. 469, R 5426). Das Ant, .olehos in iukunft dio
in don Schroibon omehntor. Vcrsucho rn nonschlichcn ffcoon
vornohnen oolite, war dns untcr dcr Loitung L'rugov.sky'o
atohondo Hygionischc Inatitut dcr 'affon-SS. Zu jonor
Zeit «->r nrugowaky oin dircktcr Ontergobener Gonzkorfs. Dio
Sintragung in Ding'a Tsgcbuch von


- 13 -


(Soito 14 des Originals)

19. jr-nuar 1943 bctrifft dio Iruofung dicscr Gclbficbor-
inpfatoffo. Bci dor Pruofung dcr Ir.pfstoffc wurdo oin
lcbondor Virus vorwcndct und die Sinimgung fuchrt r.n,
dr.oa jede Inpfatoffpr.rtio r.n 5 Peraonen nusprobiort v.urdo.
Einc achr groaso Anzchl von Hilftlingcn wurdo zwischon
dcr. 13. Jnnur.r und 17. Mci 1943 goin ft. Dio Srgcbniaoo
dor Vorauchc nit den Icpfstoffcn gogen Gelbfiobcr wurdon
den Ante XVI (Hygiene) in SS-Fuchrunga-Hcuptqur.rtior nit-
got oilt, dc8 cinca dor bis zun Xriegaendo Gonzkon untor-
otollton Aor.tor war.

Nnch den Aufzcichnungon in Ding'a Tagobuch wurdo
in dor Zoit von 24. Knovz bio 20, April 1943 oin Inpfvor-
ouch in groroon K-sotibc cn 45 Kaoftlingon do8 Konzon-
trrtionalngcre Buchonw Id vorgenonnon. Inncrh-lb von 4
T'oohon v.urdo Jodo Peroon rn 0 Tngen gogen Blr-ttorn, Typhua
Plockfiobor, Pr\rrvtyphu3 A und B, Cholera und Diphtorio
goinpft. In Zuernnonhang nit don Pnrr.typhua A und 3. Inpf-
ntoffen wurdon den K/ift lingor. - wio dor Zougo Xogon tut-
ar.gto - die Pnrntyphua-Bazillcn in Xrrtoffolorlrt vornb-
roioht. 3r orklr.ortc nuoh, dr-os dio in Buchcnnr-.ld nit
rnd.-.rtn Krankhoiton nuoaor Typhuo vorgononnenon Vorouoho,
-.llordinga in wonigen Pee lion tocdlioh v- rliofon. (Xogon,

R.1182-3). Auch dio Ergobnisao dioaor Vt-roucho wurdon den
Anto XVI aitgetoilt.

Dio Eintregungen vor. 17. Juli 1944 un~ von 13. Oktobo
1944 fuohrcn cm, dnoa don oich von Plockfiobor orholcndon
Inar.aoen zwischen don 13. und 21. Togo - nnohden dr.o Fin bos
nachgolsaaon h^tte - Hint ontzogen v.urdo,dnnit oin Sorun
zur Erholung nroh Fleckficoorerkrankung orzougt wordon kr-ni
Di.ao Arboiton wurdon von SS-r'nupt8tursbr.nnfuohror Dr.
Ellonbock auagofuehrt, dcr - v.io Gonzkon zugibt - don
Hygioni8chcn Institut dor »affon-SS zug-tcilt wrr. (R 3826
Dor Zeugo Xogon segto ?.us, dr.as Ellor.bock in Block No. 46
Blut von Pclckfiobcrrckonvolcczonton von Sonner 1944
bio in don Fruohling 1945 ontnahn. Dioaon V.rsuchaporaonon
wurdo rcgclnaoaBig Blut ontzogen und zw-r gonochnlich in
Hengon von 250 und 350 Kubikeentinotem. Dio Bntnahno von
Blut von den sich crholondcn Pr.tionton bcdcutctc fuor diosc
jin rxu39crgowochnlicho Belootung und cine Ansa hi von
ihnen otnrb dr.hor.


- 14 -


(Scito 15 dc*3 Originals)

Obzwor nen untcr dicscn Unstnendcn die wirklichc Todcs-
ursnche nicht gcnnu foststollon konnto, so bcstohfc doch
kcin Zwcifcl, dnss die Blutontnahne viol dazu boitrug.
Kogon bezougta, da s dieses Scrun zur Br ho lung nnch
Fl3ckfieborkrnnkheit u.n. nuch fuor dn3 SS-Kr^nkonhau:
in Berlin, dna GenzJ:en untcrstnnd, gowonnon wurdo. (Kogan,
R. 1192-3). Dio Aufzcichnungon in Ding's Tngobuch bo-
sng/en, daos dicsoo Sorun don Anto XVI dor Antsgruppo D
doo SS-Fuehrungs-Hnuptqunrticra uobcrccndt wurdo. tfir
nucsson damn orinnern, dnos Gonnkon Chef dor .'.ntogrupne
D war, wolchc der Snnitaotsdionst dor Waffon-SS war.

Kogon orklr.erto woitcr, dr.so £ lonbock fuor die

Blutontnahne «ur Blutplnsnnorzeugun^; systonntiooh Invclidon

und nlto Porsonon cua don sogoimnnton "Kloinon Lngor" in

Buchonwnld nuoeuchto. Dio 3chrocklichcn Zuotnondo in

"Kloinon I<\gor£ wurdon nnnchnulich boochriobon. D\u Blut

wurdo von den Opforn vorlrngt und ihn n nuch entnonnon.

Mnnohnal wurdordicoon verbungornden Hncftlingon Extrnzu-

toilungon n n Nnhrung gowHhrt (Kogon, R. 1194-6). Auf dio

Fr-go, ob annobo dioocr Blutcpondor dca "Kloinon Lngoro"
in Buchonwnld infolgo dor Blutcntnnhno stnrbon, nnt-

wortotc Kogon:

"aus dor Frngo urooho ioh, dnss o;i oohr ochv.or lot,
oich von don "Kloinon Lager" in Buchonwnld oin wirk-
liehco Bild zu nnobon. Dio Louto ntnrbon dort in
Masson. WJihrond dor Nncht Ingen die Lcichon nnekt
in don Blocks, v.oil sic ven don • micron Haoftlingon
von don Bet ton goworfon warden, dnrit diooo nohr
Plntz gewinnon. Cclbot dio klcinotcn Xloidungofotccn
wurdo ihnon von jenen, dio uobcrlcbon wollton,
hcruntergorianon. Es iot unnocglich footzuotollon,
ob jonnnd airckt wegon und c.lc unr.ittolbaro Polga
dor Blutontnnhno otnrb, donn v*olo Louto fiolon
un und otnrbon wKhrond sio in don kloinon Lsgor
horuegingen.

"Abor nionnnd, dor dio Vorhrultnisso dort konnto,
wird in goringston dnrnn zwoifaln, dnss die Blut¬
ontnnhno, nuch v.onn sio dicso Louto durch Zutcilung
von zusrot lichen Lcbcnsni ttoln otwn.s staorktc, oin
wocontlichor F~ktor war, dcr sun Todo von so violon
dioBor Louto bcitrug. (Kogon, R. 1196)."


- 15 -


MiLi-r^iffissaichTgHJF :a . i

F^LL NR. 1


iucaia-G 2 uh

ZU5-J:L--T..SSi:'D3:. schritts~cz
D-R vzr3i::igt 3N si_rj:; vor


SSGEII

Tw^t g^.:z:3:*


Jnnoj 'Icli'Jli','

..lcr'adcr G. : rdy
~rno«t Horlife-Hochnnld
Hstr.er Jrn® Johnson

?uor *

Telford Tr.”lor

.

Caicf of Counsel for " r Crincs


;ruornbor6,

16. Juiii 3947


Dr.a folgendo 1st in 2cil II (A), (2) Jea zusuamen-
f'.eaonden &chrifts.-.tze8 dor Voroir.igten St r-ter. von .. ‘.erik:
gogon Conzkon oinzufucgen.

Qr.3ocdcn3orun-Ycrsucho .

Dio cido38tr.ttlichc -^rklc.orung von Dr. £r. in ochulor,
rliro Dir.g, boa gt, dr.so boi uir.or Louforcr.z in dor lili-
trorr.orztlichcn ..kr.dcrr.io in iev lir. in Jr. hr a 1942, c.n dor
or tcilr.rhn, die Toodlichkeit dc3 Gr.aocdonsoruns bui vor-
wundoton Soldrtcn oin Diekuaeions, t . -ic 2r-

klrorung boar.gt woiterhin, dr88 Hill inn, General Schroiborj
;irugov:sky ur.d oin S.-yiitcotooffiaior , dor ihc unbokrnnt vr.r,
untor don 2oiinuhnurn v/rren. iillic.n and :irugo\ sky cratr.t-
toton Borioht uebor Soldr.ton, dio d-s Sorun in groboor.
Ilongcn bokonnon button ur.d otundcr. ayret-r, nr.chdcu tio
oich cnoohoinond orholt hr.tton, ohr.o eichtbr.ron Gravid
atrrbon. IXCn vornutoto, dr.oa dor Phcnolgohr.lt doo ooruna
nm toodlichor. ..uegmg achuld v -r. Ir. Gogon;. rt lillima
ur.d ichroibcre bofr.hl rjugoraky Ding, r.n dor Morboifuohrung
von But hr nr aio nit tola Phonol r.n oinoa lonsontrrtionclr.fior-
hr.oftliug toilzunohnon ur.d die “joultcto in oii.zolncn zu
boaebreibon. Ding beobrehtoto spr.ctor dio hinriortung von
vicr odor fuenf Por3onon durch don «jisoklr ston Hovon in
iConzontratlonolrgor BuohonvTr.ld. Jcfchlogonrccu bcrici.toti.
Di^.g ocinon Bofund nreb Borlin. (irO-257, ~nkl. Bow. 283,

R. 1031). Zur 4oit diooor noordcriaohon ifcooriaonto vrron
aov;Qhl Ilrugowoky ri Q Dir.g Gcrckon untorotollt.

" 2 ndo ■


Ich, Srnoat Oottingor, ..GO .. 444 ?6S, boot' otige
hioroit, dr.as ich du.-chr.ua vcrtrr.ut nit dcr ong-
li8chcn und doutcchon Spr cho bin, ur.d d gb d .3
Voratohondo oino ;• irhoitogcancacc ur.d richtige
Uebereotsung doc Dokunento mrstclit.


."uornborg, 16. Juni 1947


zlv-st osiri. GBR
-GO - 444369


(Seitc 16 dcs Originals)

. B> Sul^"-nil^r-idc Vc-rsucho. (Anklngcschrift, Absrvtz 6 (S))

Dor vorbr-chorischo Cbarnktcr dor Sulf'-nilanidvor-
eiichc in Konzontrationalcgcr Br.vonsbruock ist in dor Kl^gc-
schrift dor Anklngo gegan Oobhcrdt dargelcgt wordon.

Dio Versuchc nit Sulfnnil-nid bogannon an 20. Juli
1942 und vturdcn bis run August 1943 fortgosotzt. Dcs
Hygionoinstitut dor Waffen-33 untor 'irugovssky, wolcfaoa bio
zun 31. August 1943 don Angoklrgten Gonzken untorstcllt
w-r, untoratuotrto diooo vcrbrochorischon Vcrsucho und
loiatoto ihncn Vorschub. Mrugoaalcy und ooin Scnitaotastab
borioton dicao Versuchc nit Oobhnrdt und Fiachor und lio-
forton dio Boktorion, dio zur kuonstlichon Infoktion dor
Vorouohaporsonon dionton. Auoaordon stollto Dr. Blunon-
routor dio chirurgischon Inmrunonto und Uodikrnonto fuor
dio Vcrauchc zur Vcrfuogung.

Blunonroutcr vs nr dor Chof von Gcnzkorfo Act ..V (Oonakon,

R.3845-6). Dor von Gcbh-rdt uobor dioao Vorouoho vorgologto
vorlroufigo Boricht von 29. August 1942 *>tollt fostj

"SS-Obcrfuohror Dr. Blunonroutcr hnt nir dio
vollutttndigon chirurgicchon Inotruncnto und Ucdikn-
nonto zur Vcrfuogung gootollt. 88-Stnndnrtonfuohror
trugov.sky hat nir sc in Lrborrtoriun und ooino Mit-
nrboitor soar Vcrfuogung g<-atollt."

In Bozug ruf dio Art und Voiso lor kuonctlichon
Infoktion bos-gt dor Baricht:

n Bo hnndolto aich cuorut dnrun, lurch oinon Vor-
vcrsuch untor Vcmartung dor bckrmnton .r/rcbniaao
von Vorsuchon nn Tiorcn dio Art und 7ciso dos I-yfi-
“ u bostirpon. Ich *urdo in dioaon ?r-gon von

* Srgi 5 n S * n ? titut8 dor ^'.ffoa-SS born ton,
wolcho dio Xultur und Doaiorung dor Inpfatofs uobor-
nonnon hrtton."

In den orston Voroucfcaaorion unfr.BBton dio von Uygiono-
institut dor Wrvffon-SS go lie far ton Sulturcm Strphylokokkon,
Stroptokokkcn, Para Oodonn Mr.ligmm und B^ctori" Frr.onkcl
und Zrde. Ik-r Borioht faohrt forti

"Dor VorlrAxf dor oinlcitondcn Vorsucharcihon hrtto

SSJJtJSS’.f; 8 ? !?? ? ic v ht lung on anr, dio glcichon
" io boic klini ®° hon Gasgcngrocn horvorzurufon,
in oinor Bosprocteing nit doa Kygioncinstitut dor
Tjnffon-SS v.urdcn die Hr.tur dor Infoktion und dio
Lebenabodingungen dor „'oino nicht fuor gloichwortig
nit don nntuorliehen 3odingun.;.n in dcr Kriogsehirurgio
engoaohon, una folglich wurdon dio Vcrsuchsoinrich- °
tungon nbgcr.cndort

- 16 -


(Seite 17 dea Originals)


Larauf wurde der Inpfstoff vcratr'erkt und cin woitorcr

Versuch wurdo angeatollt. in der 3ohcndlung diesoa Vcr-

sucha atellt der Boricht fest:

” 1)0 such bei diesen Ycrsuch kliniahh goaprochon oin
euagoaprochcner Brand hervorgorufon worden konnto,
drs Bild jodoch in kcinor 77ciac den in der Kriogs-
chirurgio bokannton cntaprrch, wurdo n-’ch vroitoror
Borntung nit don L'itarboitcrn in Hygicneinotitut der
Waffen-SS der Inpfstoff durch Zusatz von Holzapnonen
vorpondcrt. In dor brktcriologiochen Literr.tur iat e8
bcknnnt, de.as die Virulonz dcr Brkterien ia Vor-
auchatior dadurch orheblich {osteigort werden konn.“
(NOt 2734, Proa.Ix. 473, R. 5622).

Dio oido83t''ttlichc 2rkl?.crung doa Angoklagten Fischer
stollt in woaontlichon dioacibon T-tarchcn fost. Ala nr.ch
* den ora ton zwoi Sorion von Sulfanilacid-Vorauchon koino

• ochwcron Infoktionon eintrnton, wurdo ouf Vorachlag von

llrugouaky und nach Bcrntung ait aoinen Aoaiatonton bo-
achloaaon, dio Art der Brktcrion zu wochaoln und oino
otp.orkoro uultur anzuwondon. .Irugov.aky'o Ant prttporiorto
. <*iu ncuo Kultur epczioll fuor dio Vcrouche nuo gotronnton

Kulturon von droi odor vior vorrdtigon Gnngrcnkulturon.

, Die Schs\oro dor n n ch dioocr Verouchsroiho eintrotonden

Infoktionon war noch inner nicht tyoisch fuor dio Brrnd-
infoktionen doa Schlrchtfoldua. Viodor v.urdo dp.o Hygiono-
inotitut dor t7r\ffon-SS zu Hr to gozogon. Auf Anrr.ton dioaer
Stollo v.urdon Holzapiino und Gl-a don Kulturon bcfcefuogt,
un cino ornotcro Infoktion hervorzurufon. (NO-228, Pros.Ex.
206, R. 768-9). Dioser Bowoi8 \:ird voitor durch die oidco-
atpttlichon Erklncrungon dor Lrgcrarsto in Rrvoncbrueck
Rosa at hr. 1 und Scheidlcwsky boatrotijt (KO-858, Proa.Ex. 223,
R.889j NO-508, Proa.Ix. 224, R. 893).

In oincr ~.ndorcn cidesatr.ttlichon Erklporung S'-gt
Fiachcr "uc, dneo Gonzkon den Boricht uobor dio Sulfr.ni-
lrnidvcrauche in dor Vorsnnnlung der borntendon Aersto
in Hri 1943 gehoort het. (HO-472, rroa.Sx. 234, 3. 940).
Gonsken lougnot seine Anuosonhoit dr.boi. (R. 3801).


- 17 -


V


(Soite 18 des Originals)

C. Andcre Vorsuche.

Der Beueis zoigt, dasa Genzken von enceren ver-

brecheri3chen Verauchen Kenntnis hatte und daran teilnahn.

Die beruechtigten Hoehen- und -leelteversuche v.nren

darunter nicht die geringaten. An 13. Dezenbor 1912 schicktt

Kionler eine PorachungS8r...oij:ur.j ueber veitero Hoehen-

und Kaoltevorauche an Dr. Haacher ir. Dachr.u. Diose 7er-

fuegung rcurde den Sanitaetaznt in SS-Fuehrungshauptriit,

dcaaon Chef Genzkcr. v.ar, trteilt. (1612-PS, Proa.Sx. 79,

H. 229). eitere IXirchschlnego gingen an Pohl, Leitor doa

SS-'7irtachJ?fta- und Vezr.altungohru trustee und oiler

Konzontrationslager, und an Ahnenerbe. Sonit mirdon

die Stellen, deron yitorbei. bei diesen Versuchon er-

forderlich r.ar, bennchrichtigt. Der Begleitbrief Brnndta

zu Himmlers Niederschrift orklaort, doae die Sopfocngor

"dom leu £ a tui*n fuehrer Dr. P.rochor die zur Auofuehrung

seiner Verauche bonooti-to Untorocuetzung rechtzoiti bench-

ton und govitthren collten. 3 In Abe tz 5 seiner Aiodov-

schrift orklaert innlor:

"Die Beachrffunj der su «llon Versuchon orforder-
lichon Ap.iarr to oolite cm Ant deo Heichearzteo-SS.

doa SB inujtratea fuer Virtacheft und Yorwaltung
und nit Gera Ahner.orbc e.V. oir.. ohend besprochon
r.ordon. Die orford or lichen Chc aikalion. aer ztli c: or
B°dp .vf^unT , G~ln3 mt~ v.crAor. j-l’-TrVh (TVs' jo-SVnlta cVhfipt

Senzken gibt zu, dcs6 coin let Gio Anweisung orkalton
hat. (R. 3881). 3r gibt zu aoiner Zn .schuldi.-^mg an, daao
ooin Untergobonor Blunenreute. alien SS-bteller. don
aerztlichen Bedsrf zur Verfuogung costellt hat. (H. 3882).
Dro 181 oicher koine Verteidigim-. Die Vorsuche, an
donon Hoacher teilnnhn, Karen fuer 'Jencken koine Ucber-
roochung. Oberoturabannfuehrer Huethum von Hygionolnetitut
dor V/offen SS nahm an der Duft^cffenverennnlung in
Nuernberg in Oktober 1942 toil, ala ueber dieso Vernucho
berichtet v.urde. (KC—:01. Ptod.3x. 93, R. 309). Genzken
gibt zu, an der Versnnmlun der boratonden Aorte Anfang
December 19'2 teilgenomsen zu heber., nlo dprueber uiedor
berichtat mirde. (S. 3779).


- 18 -


(Suite 19 des Originals)

Auaeerden verhandelte seir. Unteroebcner Mrugowaky
an 21. Oktobar 1942 nit Sievers ueber ci.no Zuoannonarbeit
snieohon dec Hygicnoinatitut dor taffen-SS u.nd Haocher
in Bezug ouf dio Saolt vi . . Hooh eine weitere Zu-
Bwaaankunft fand ol: 20. November 1942 ctatt. (NO-647, Pros^
3x. 124, R. 383).

Gonzken beachteto Himmlers Annoioung voo 13. Pezeraber
19/;2, dres aoin Ant Raochor die benoetigte Unterstuotzung
goboa oolite. An 1. Pebrur.r 1943 trnfer. Siovero und
Bluncnreuter oioh r.ua Zr.ccko dor Boschaffung von Appa-
vaton, Imurunor.ten, 7 r’trougon und Chooikalien fucr

i Raochoro Vereuobe (::C-5J3, «ros. Lx. 122, R. 379).

• Gonzkonn Untorgob nor Slunonroutcr hat oich auch

nicht dnrou*: bcoohrHonkt, Rnachor ru hclfcn. Am 7. Juni
1943 oo‘ rL«b Clnuborg an !! Inal or ueber sein? Storilioatiom
vorsucho an Jvodinncn . Bei dieson Vorouchon •

. bonutete • in- lini . ; =u 8 agio eri "Eo

war SS-Eri * '• Aiohrer It-. Bluncnreutor . don cs ondlich

* c'clon , r.Lr sIno pncoondo Roontgon-Sinrichtuns zu vor-
ochcffen”. (NO-212, Pros. Ex. 1??, a. 570).

^ 1 ’ r Gonzken keino V'rteidigung, sonn or

ar t, or hr l.o von (iioeoh Dinsen nichts gamiest. Dieoe
vc• bre 4 rischen Vorsucho v.aren nicht 3porndiocho, ver-
oinsoltc Auoochroitungon von noralisch ninderrortigon
Binsolporsoneni sic siercn syr*-onc inch .:e-lrr.ee Vcr-
brechon. 7 a war lenskens : 1 icfct von ocinon Untorgobonon
Berichtc eu v ;\n\ on und ihr Handlungen zu uobomachon.

r:pra .

III. __ .

Gonzkon a-and in eager Vcrbindung nit don vor-
breahoriachon Plockfioborvernuchen in Buchonwald zwischon
vrnuor 1942 und Soptenber 1943. Biese Vorsucho «urden
von ihr. unnittolbar unterstcllton Rilitacraorzton ausgo- 1
fuohrfc. Er hrtto von den Einsolheitcn dor Vorsucho Kennt-
nir. Sr crlieo3 Befohle ir. Bcsug aui“ dio Fleckfiobervor-
si'che und lie Inpfstofforzeu;rungoblocka. Dor Iapfstoff,

WO Ichor in Buchcnwnld in den Block, dor zugestendener-
nreaon ihn untorstellt v.ar, hcrgoctcllt wurde, v.ar das
L’rgobnis vcr. Verouchon 3n Hai’tlinden.


- 19 -


(Seite 20 des Originals)

Gonzken atand in Verbindung nit anderen Versuchon
in Buchemald oinaohlieealich dor Veraucho nit Selbfiebor,

TyPhUS ’ F100mebcr -' -nraty hue A ur.d S> Cholera
und Diphterie-Impfptoffen und nit der -ntnahno von Blut
von Inensaen fuerSyphuaboilaorun und Blutplaann.

Dienatatelleri untor Genzkens Aufaicbt lioferton

J;::"rr t01 ' la1 ’ QhiTaT eisc^ und liodiknnonte

fuor die brutelen Sulfanila»idvorauoho in Ravonabruook.

Seine Feohleutc ertoilton don Aerator., r.olchc die Vornuoho

cuafuehrten, tochnischc Hatechlaogo hinaichtlieh dor

^d“V ; ° la0 ' in ’’ 0l0h0r di0 Inioktionon aohaoror gemaoht
wordon koennton.

Sndlich zeigen die Bouoiee, daaa Gcnzkon untorstollto
Offizicro Apparato fuor Snooker'a Kaoltoverauohe und die
Clauborg a Storiliaotionavaraucho lioferton. Gonzkon
orhlclt Hinnlora Bofebl an Haaebor uobor Koohon- und Kaolto-
voreuoho und -urdo boauftragt, nit ihn zueonnonzuorbclton.

rord.! i0 v“ h k T SUr l,ili ® rUnS , '" 0r don sooojt

i.ordon. .r hntto oino hoho Stollung la Sanitaotadionot

dor SS. Sr vorfuogto uobor grooao liicht. Sr nor

0 it don goootzloaon Daohungoln dor .\onzont rot ions l„ s or

vortraut. Dio Anklngo logt dar, daaa doa Bo.oleratorlal

beat otigt, dnea Gonzkon oino i,u : poreon und oin Hitbo-

to ligtor nor, daaa or in Vorbindung atnnd nit Plaonon

und bntornohnon die nodiziniaoho Vorauohc an noneohliehon

Objoktion ohno ihre BinziUigunj in eich aohloaaon, daaa

or ale bofahl, untoratuotzto und ihnon snot in,to und daaa

^t“, diC r r V ° r£UCh0 !: ° rdQ ’ ^ ‘“^ton, Grauaan-
keiton, Qudloroien, Grouol und andc-ro unnonaohliche i.ard-

r: gof r ohrt iuirdon unj da ° a °° inc ^^om

.ordon let unter Punkt Dina, 2*oi Droi und IV dor An-
klagoschrift.


(3adc)


- 20 -


bag i_‘.o b i gukg 3z.-< ujbj.issizuhs


29. Hai 1947

Ich, Gorte KABHOVA, Ho. 20 181, bestaetigc
hiornit, dooa ich vollkosacn vcrtraut Bit dor
cngliachon und dcutachon Spracho b n, und da8o das
Vorstohondo oino v.ahrhoitsgoa'icsao und richtigc
Ucbcrsotzung darstcllt.


Gorta QLZraOYA.
Ho. 20 101.


- 21 -

(Ando)


“ILIliES I 2 I 2 2 a _l_ k <* I

FALL HO. 1


/*

7 ? ■


AFSCHLIESSENDE D^^L33UN3 FVER
DIF VEF.EINIOTEN 3TAATEH VCH aHEF.IXA

oeoen

31 EG? KI FT HliJCLOSEH


/


/


Nucrnberr,
l6.Jun1 I 9 J 17 .


Jones K« UcHnncj*

Alexander 0 . Hanly
nro'-at K'lrllok-HoohiraM
Esther Jane Johnson

Fucr:

Telfnrrt Taylor
"rl'atllrr Jenerol, U.3.A.,

Chief nf Counsel for "nr Crineo.


STATE^KT OF HAKJIOSEE


si:.TuSt=uxj

' Unter Anklagepunkt I wird von dcr Ankla^ebehoerde Handloser zur
Laat 6®legt, da 33 er sich zu cinor Verachwoerung und Ueboreinkunft sit
anderon Poraonon zusa-izer.gefmvdon ha be, uc io Verfolge oinca gemelnsa-
non Vorhabena aorztliche Exporioente an lebendon konschen ohne dercn
Zuatimung vorzunch.-on; und unter Funkt II und III (Kriogavorbrcchen
und Verbrecnen gagon dio -enachlichkelt), daao or ilauottactcr, Teil-
nohxner, Anatifter, Vorachubleiatondor war, seino Sustizcung gab und in
Verbindung atand uit plaenon und Unternchaungon, dio dio Durchfuchrung
nodiziniacher Experiment*; ohne Zurtitaung der Betroffenen an lobenJon
Monachen rum Oogonatand hatle.


Dor Angoklagte Haniloaor hatto Stollungcn uit grosses Einfluaa und
Verantwortung im militaoriachen Sanitactawoaon doa Jritton w-ichcs inno.
Nachdom er achon *la Sanitacteoffizlor is rogulaoron Hcore untor dcs
Kaiaor und in aer >.oi~arer Upublik gediont latto, atiog or nnch 1933
raach von Chef-Sauitaotaoffizlcr in .ehrkrcie Stuttgart tun Chof-Sani-
taotaoffizior dor doutachor. Strvitkraofto in Ooatorroich unter GonorAl
Uat auf, ala dioaus Und im Jahro 193d doa nationaleozialiatiachon
Angriff untnrlag .via dor Kriog auabrach wurdo or Chof-Sanitiotaoffi-

*i«r der Ar^.iv in Polon und apaotor dor IP. Art.jj in F.arkroich.

*

Iny Mov«ra,:or l?x-.0 wurdo cr otollvortrotunder Hcorvs-Sanit:' innpckteur,

/ 1. Joniwr 1941 wurdo or zua Hoores-Sanltauteiniipo'ctour emannt und

I

olnon monat apaator wurdo or auaacrdc-a Hooxessrst, dor dor Obcrato
Sanitaetsorfizior dor Foldstroitkraoftu war, und brachte auf dieso teiao
diuao boldon Aontar in oinc Poraanaianion. (;>-443, Ankl.Bow.10,
h.97; Handle aor h.281u~9). «la Hcorva-Sanitmotainspckteur uni Hfcoroa-
arzt hatto Handloaor vollataendigo Bofahlagcwalt and Kent rollo ueber
dm gesamten Heeren&anitaetadicnst, dcr bci waiter; dor grooaste Sam-
taetadinnat dor uehnnacht war. Er hatto dioao Stollungen von Januar
1941 bia September 1944 inno. (Handlcacr K.299C). 3osuoglich uiner
teohruacher. Boachreibung dor Pflichten doa Kceroa-Sanitactsinspcktoura
und Heereaantes siehe Dok. H.A.28a, Hurviloser Bow.2, R.2322, und Dok.
H.a. 28, HanoloSer Bow.l, H.2321.


la seiner Eigenschaft als Heeres-Sanitactsinspefcteor won Hand-
loser die beratcndcn Acrzte dcr Areee, die ailitaer-aorxtliche Akadeoic,
dio Typhus and Virus Institute dos OKK in Krakau und Lccborg unter
Dr. E>-or, und die asdizlnische Schule fuer Gobirgstruppen in St. Johann
untorsteUt. (H0^2, Ankl.Bow.9, K.97; Dok. H.A.29, Kandloser Bew.4,
ft . 2828 ). Er stieg his zilz Gcneraloborstabcarzt auf.

Am 23. Juii 1942 orliess Hitler eino such von Keitel, dea Chef
des Oberkomraandos dor ..ehnuacht, untorzoichnoto Vorordnung, die don
angoklagten Handloser zun Chef des Uhmachtssanitaotswesens ornann^o,
ausser soinen Pflichtcn als Hecres-SanlUetainspokteur uiri Heeresarzt.

Er *urdo mil dor (Jleichrichtung ullor, dea Sanitaotsdicnst dor ITohr-
macht und don der ^hruicht untcrgc-ox\lneton odor beigeordnoton Organi-
sationon und Vorbaend«und auch do* Sanitaotsdicnst dor -.affen-SS ob-
liogonden Aufgabon bet rout. Handloser sollto die .'ohnaacht in alien
allgomoinon modiainl .chon Fragon don Zivilbohoordcn gogenueber v„r-
troton und die Intorecoon dor Whmacht in ollon aorstUchen, von den
Zivilbohoordon orgrlffcnen Uassnahaan wahrnohnwn. Ua olno gloich-
goriehtete Bohandlung diosor Problcco su erroichsn) wurdo iha oin
Sunitautsoff^xier dor -arino und oin Sanitactsorfizior dor Luftwaffe,
dor letslur/u in dor Sigenochaft als SUbschof, zur Arbeit zugowiosun.
Grundsaotr-lieho Problcos bozuoglich Jos Sanituot owe sons dor ..aff.-n-SS
soliten ia Benohnon ait do* canit&etsinspoktour dor .'affon-SS, doa An-
«uklaa|Un Cenzkon, ausgosrboitut wuruon. (to-030, Ankl.Bew. 5, R.93;
N'0^2, Ankl.Bow.9, H.97).

- Uer Fuchrororlnss voa 23. Juli 1942 war der gloicho, dor das Amt
des Ganer&lkotniss trs fuor das Gesuxxihcits- mvJ Soni tact sw* sen untur
Karl Brandt schuf, d«m Har.dlosor auf dor militaeriechon Soito und
Conti auf dor zivilon Soitc untergoordnot warvn. diosor irlass wurdo
ausfuohrlich im Schriftsatz dor Anklagebchoordo betroffs Karl Branit
bohandult. So viol Jo,.and auch don gvnauen Uafang van Handlosors «uto-
ritaot auf Crund dieses Srlassos disputicron rag, so


- 2 -


kann nicht geleugnet warden, da»3 or d=r sacehtigste Offizier in re-
aam,,m Hceressanitaotawesen war.

Vor diosea Erlaas gab es vior gesondcrte Ssnitaetszweige der
nehraacht - das Hoer, dio Luftwaffe, ^arino and die iaffcn-SS, von
donen Jeder einzoln und unaohaengig voneinsnder handelto. la 'crfolgo
dieses Erlaases wurde Hsniloaer daza cmannt, ihre Operalionen zu ko-
ordinleren und zu voroinhoitlichen und or war Koitel, ala dei,. Chef
dea Oborkoramnd js dor .ohraacht (OKU), unaitu-ibar verantwortlich.

dor Fuohrerurluaa ven 7. August 1944 sosa-^n ait den angchoftu-
ten dienatvorachn ften idrft botra chtlichea Liclit auf dio Funktionon
Handloaera, ala Chof doa Hoervsaanitaotawvavna aor •ehxr^cht. (.'#>-227,
Ankl.flow.il, h.101). Nach Handloaera Auasago wuri^n Kit dioaum Er-
laaa zwoi dingo arroicht: Zratcna gab or soino Stcllungon ala Hoeros-
Sanitaotsinapoktour und Hcoroaarzt auf, und zwitena orhiult or ala
Chof doa Sanitaotowasona d.-r ’..ahmacht die Vollnacht, dirvkt Befehlo
an Oio Chof a doa SaniUotaweaena doa He ores, dor Luftwaffe, Mrino
und fcnffon-SS zu orlaaaen. (R.2999). Fruoftor war or emacchtigt ,
lnatruktlonon zu artoilun, abor or glbt zu, daaa Koitul, don or ontcr-
atollt war, Bwfahlo fuer ihn orlaaaon haben konnto. (R.3000; i.uorfler,
R.3109). doahalb aind, nit Auanahae doa rein tocnniaciion und un*M-
aontlichon Untorachiodea zwiachen cinoa Bofohl und oincr lnatruktion,
dio in der Dionatvorachrift von 7. August 1944 niedorgclcgtun Iwchtu

und Pfl lchton In wooentlichon dioaolben wi> in dor Dionatvorachrift

J

von 2 ft. juli l9/*2, dio nicht vorhondon 1st. (Sioho Kandloaer Kreuzwr-
hjziir R.2992-30J4).

Dio Dionatvorachrift vet. August 1944 legt die Tataacho feat, daaa
Handlonor dirvkt daw Chef doa Oberkoccnndoa dvr '..vhraacht unturstullt
war. Er war Vorgeaotzter doa Chvfa doa Heorvasanitactawosuna, Chof
d«»a Marineaanitaotawoaena und Chof dea Luftfanrto-initaetawoaena und
Chof doa i.affon-SS-Sanitautawvaona und allor Organiaationen und Dionat-
atollen, die in nato.on dor Uohr-acht taetig wirvn upd allor wiaavn-
achaftlich on nudlzinischon Institute. Ak„lv.-don and dor


aodizinlachcn ~nstitut.ic.".en der uaX:'er.;attun:rcr. dor chrr.icht und dor

Waffen-SS.

Er war Berater des Chefs des Oberko^andos der ; >ehnsacht in alien
Fragen, die das Sanitaetswosen der ehrsacht ood ihrcn Gesundheitszu-
atand betrafen. Er ausste das gesazte Sanitaetswesen uer ichraacht

leiten, aoweit das Sondorgebiet in Frage <can ur.ter kueckaichtr.ahae auf

%

die nilitaeriachon Instruktionen do3 Chefs dea OS', und auf die allge-
aeinen Vorschriften dea Angeklagten Karl Brandt in aeir.er Eigenschaft
ala Generalkoaaissar fuor daa Geaundheita- und Sanitaotsweson. Auf dec
Gebiet der modiziniachen ’..laaenschai't war ea aeine .»ufgabe, einhoitliche
•.aaanah^en auf deu Gebiet dea Gesundheits^eaons, Foi-schun - en bozueglich
Kpldenien und lhrer B ekac: ..pfung uni all e :icdiziniachen .ingelegonheitun
durchzufuehren, die cine oinheitlicho Kogu3lerung in der .ehrnacht erfor-
dorten, und femur hln aichtllch dor Aua^rtung aodlziniaeher Frfahrung.

Er aorgto fu*r eine oinheitlicho und plancaeaalge Luitung der Euteilung
von Personal und Material.

dies nun waron die necr.to und r'flichten des Angeklagton Handloaer

ala Chef den Houroaoanitaotawoaena der ..ehrcacht von Boginn dloaea Aa-

tea La Juii 19^ an. Er wur dor Vorgeaotste in "tochniechen" odor

aodizinlechen Fragen, die die Chofa doa SanltactoKunono dor vier affon-

gattungen dor ..ehr.i-icht betrufon. (Sidhe Kandlosor K.2983). Dio Tat-

aach«, daa a dioae Chofa ncch tndere n liltaoilacho Vor.?«rutst» gchabt

hab’en Boo gen, me von tianiloaor aehr at irk botont wuidc, geht vnilntnen-
»lig an der Hauptaachc vorbei. riandloaor* Stollung vor Sojlurbor 19U»
ala Chef doa Sanitaotswooens der .chr icht g-gonuebor dun Chofs dee Sani-
taetaweaana dor Uaffongattungen dor .ehracht, konn vor.;llchcn wurdon
mit Keitels Stellun ala Chef des Oborkoaundos der ohruocht gogonuebor
don Oborbofehlahabern der .ofrongattungon dor iehr-icht. Koitel mr in
Wirklichkoit dor Chef von Hitlers ailitaorischen Stub. Als aolchcr
hattu Keitol koine 3ofei-.la gcw.ilt uober die -iffcng3ttun r -on der .ehnracht.
Aber 'lies betrifft c*nzig und uliein reine Befchlaangelogenheiten und
bedeutet nicht, daaa Keitel nicht Birektiven erliascn konnte, die in Jodor
Hinaicht fucr Oberbcfohlahaber dor .affengattungen der -ehrnacht bindend
waren. (Lasers K.2637, siehe Urtoil dea IkT, "Prozess gogen dio Haupt-
kriegaverbrechor'’, Seite 288).


- U -


*


baaselba gilt fuer Handlosor als Chef des Sanitactawesens dor Lohr-
oacht vor September 1944. i.aehreni or koine Bcfohlagcwalt uabor daa
Sanitaetswoaon dcr Luftwaffe hatte, z.B. ir. taktiachen 3eslitsmngon
uebor Sanitaetsverbaende und dorgioicnen, hatte er die Vollnacht, die
Tautigkolt allor Sanitaetsverbaende zu vcroinheitlichen and gencinsaco
Grundaaotze aufzustcllon. Dasa or die xutoritaot hatto, ccdiziniache
Exporlconto durch witgliodor doa Heoroasanitaotaweacns an Konzcntm-
tionslagorinauaaen ohno ihru Einwiliigung zu vorbioton, verateht aich
von aolbat.

Ido Hantilbsor in seiner eidc3stattlichon Zrklacrung onmohnt, war
z.B. dor Heeroaarzt "oilitaoriach" do^ Chef doa Gonoralbstakauntor-
atollt, und boruflich doa Hcorca-Sanitaoteinspcktour. (dok. H.A. 29,
Handlosor Bow.,, R.2820). .mf dioaolbo *i> waron dor Angoklagto
Schroodor und aoln Vorgaunger Hippko uilitaoriach in dor lttzton Instant
Goering ol« dam Oborbofchlshnbcr dor Luftwaffo untoratc.lt, nbor in
oediziniachon Jingon untoratandon aio doc Chof doa Sonitautawusons dor
Wohmacht, und bcido ha bon dies such ausgosagt. In Abachnitt 8 aoinor
oidoaatAttlichon Erklaorung aagt Schroodor: "Karl Brandt, Handlosor
und Rostock waron uober die von dor Luftwaffe durchgefuohrton aodizi-
niachon forachungaarbeiton untorrichut. Handlosor war dor Chof doa
SonitOfjtawoauna dor i.ohraacht und coin Vorgoaotztcr in nodiziniachon
Angola go nho it en, (NO-449, Ankl.Bow.130, k.174). Hr bflatootigto dioau
Auriaago im Krcuavorhoor. (h.3604). Hippko aagto i.r. rail Nr.31, vor
ydon kiUtaorgorlchtahof II aua, daaa Handlosor ihn Bofohlu ertollon
und KichtHnian foatlogon konnte. (R.3001). Siuhc auch lie Organiaa-

tionatabollon doa Sonitautawuaona dor Luftwaffo. (.’K>-41R, Ankl.Bow.12,
NO-419, Ankl.Bow.13, R.105).

Bozuoglich dor S5 aind divaolbon Tatsachon nachgvKloacn woiden.

Oor Angoklugtu Gunakon, Chef doa Sanitactswos.-na dor 'affen-SS, aagt
im Abaatz 9 Minor cidosatattlichon Erklaorung: "Uauhruod doa ganton
Kriogoa waron Sanit autafeldvorbaowic dor fiaffon-SS dca Sanitaotsweson
do a Hoorua untorstollt, das von dr. Handlosor goloitot wunio. Durch
Fuohrurorlaas von 29. Juli 1942 wurdo Dr. Handloacr


zua Chef des Sanitacts'-soser.s dvr -chrnacht emannt. Als rolge dieser
Unstellung wurdo H ndloser rein dipcktep Vorgesctztor, soweit nedizi-
niache Angologenheiten in Frage kaaen," (N0r439, Ankl.Bew,^, H,125).
Siohe auctj dio OpganiaationstabcUen de« Sanitactsdicnstos der SS, dlo
von dom Angoklaglw kpugawsky gezc-ichnut wurden. (JO-416, Ankl.Bcir.22;
NO-41?, Ankl.Boif.23, .-..121). Tatsaochlich zoigt die Tabello dcr Orga¬
nisation dua Sanitaotswesens dor vhraacht, die von dacu Angcklagten
Handloaor selbat gozoichnet wurdo, soinc Bofohlsguwalt uobor dio vier
Sonitaotswuson in einor sehr J£aren ..else. (110-282, .uikl.Bcw.9, R.97).
'•onn or nun voraucht dicso Bcfohlsguiralt abzuatreite-n uni zu bohaupten,
daas or Chuf nur den Hu-on «ch gcwesoii aci, dann goachieht dies aua
ganz offenaichtlichen Gruenlon. die .ichtigkoit dor Stellung Handloaora
wird welter in dor von do- Ango^lagten Karl Brandt guzoichnetcn Tabollo
aufgozoigt. (MO-645, Ankl.Bww.3, B.86).

Uiu magudohntv. .acht undBofohlagcwalt doa Angeklagton Handloaor
ala Chef doa Sa/iitaetawwscna dor ..ohroacht, boaonJtra in Hinblick auf
aorztlicho Forochung, wird aucii durch andoroa Bowuiaaatorial in don
kton nachguwioaon. Handloaor gibt zu, dasa dcr Sinsatz von tutorial
und i orsonol oin Problem war, das alien orreigon dor nbhrcacht goncin-

aara *>ar, »md dasa doraclbo vac 28 . Juli 1942 ab ilia untoratand.

J

(U.3004)/'. Er gibt zu, diaa dio Kooniination dor wiesunschaftlichon
Forocl^ong cine ouinor Aufgabon auf alien Cebioten nr, wo 13 vcrlangt
•mrd.j und nutwondie war. (I..3038). or gibt ru, lass or in allgcrnoinen
y~ nuf don Gobiut dor «ilitaoroodizin zienlicn gut lnfonuiori war.
.y (R.3005). Er. riuf dio CiKfs duo Sunitaotswcscns zu sermon, un Doppol-
arboit boi dor Foraclumg zu vomuiden, und or unruhntc busondors Kan-
forenzon, dio aich niit . ilaria, Typhus, Fara-T>.-hu5 und Qiolcra bc-
ra«at.Mn. (R.3O30). *uf den Gebict d.r Flcckfiobvrbokdci^jfung wurdon,
nowoit cntlauaung in Fivigc k.ii_, von alien Sanitaa sw. son ^eichgorich-
totu kasBnahnj..n orgriffnn.


Er hatto die -ucht cine oirnoitlichu kathode faer ISpfungan cinzufuch-
run uni koine ^orfuagungen imiaien orlassen, ohne dass cit dor. beraten-
don Aerztea verftandelt wunio. (H.3005). Spaotcstcn# in Fcbruar 19W»
orliuaa or Instrukfcionun an alle Sa nitaots»-5on dor ann:- j .chtj daa Ant
fuor 'idsaonsohoTt und Forschung, da# untor den An^cklagtcn Karl Brandt
and hostock atana, uebor Fq rschungsauXgaben auf den lauXonden zu haltcn.
(K.3008).

Einca dor hauptaacchlichsten kittel, die dor AngeJclagto Hand loser

%

anwandto, ua wiasonschaftliche Forschung zu kocrdinicron, war die gc-
meinsanw EuaaiOTenkunXt von boratunden «crzton dor viur Eweige dor -tohr-
macht. Uiuac Zusaa»acnkuonfto fand>.n ainlostusa oin-.al io Jahr statt
und Rvmctuool paoufigor. Sie mirdon von don nng-klagtun Hindloaer
oinborufon und von ihn goloitwt. (Handlosor F..3O09). Dcr -rook d. r
ZusainKonkuonfto war, oino Basis zun Erlass von audiziniachon .deist-
linlon an die Fe&trultkraufU zu finden. (Haolloaor R.302O). In
don Sitzungon, donon twrvon y».nd>. Fachpaorav-r auX don Spozinlgobiet,
z.B. Hygiene od..r ^hirurgio baiwohnton, wurdon VortrOoge uober nedizi-
niacho Forachung von verachl.d«ioon *wr-» *vdnn *.<«-»«-« cohil-' !'*•.
Vortraogo urden von ihr-n wiaa..nachXtlic!.-n Koilogcn einor kriti-
achon PruoXung untorxog^n und die pr-aktisehon Huaultato klaaalfizlurt,
zunuiwwngofaaat und in dor Fore von nichtUnion hercuagegoben. (Hand-
loaor.'h.3013). i>oa Progrojja-fu«r dioso ZoB.vtaankucnftu unk urXor
dor.'Loitung vor. Hanllosor culgeatcllt. ^n.ralarzt Scheiber, dor bis
i/L Spaotjahr 1*.3 duo Stab dor Hooixao anitaetslnapwktion zugeteilt
S war und dann die Loitung dor l/jhrgru: C dor ■dlitaeracratlichon

Akadoodg hatto, half Handlosor bei di.sor Arbeit. (Handlosor H.3011),
3020 ). bio wir spaotor sehen mirden, wurdo bvi dlosen EusanzvjntaKiif-
tun uuber cine snxahl von verbrech-riachtn Exporlasntun an Konz< ntr ■-
ti-.nslagorinsasaon bcrichtot.

Boi dor zwoiton ..us uxxnkunft dor boratendur. *»oratc roa 30. Ko-
voebor bis 3. Dezonb^r 19k3 in dor aiiittiorodztHchon Akadeeio wioa
Handlosor oindringlich auf die AuTg-bo des Chefs das Srnit.aot owe sons
dur Muhnaacht hin, die u.-iiziniach«. wissenschaftlicho Forschung zu
' voruinluitlictien. (K\>922, Ankl.Bow. ...2J50).


.Us or cine aupmchb an die VdllversaaBlung niult, sxjte or:

j_ ^ -“^tongon dieses totalon Krieges, sowie

Verhaeltnis wrtschen B-darf and Beatand person oiler, wio
aatorielaer ait bodingen ouch oaf nilitaerischea und saiitauts-
dienstlicnua ^obiot -assnaheon, die dor Voruinheitlichung und
dor oinhoiclichen Steuening dionen. £ B hoisst nicht "gotrennt
o^raciuoron una verx.nt sciilagen-, soodom oa cuss auf alien Gc-
bioten von vomhorom v.reint »*rschiert una gaschlagon woricn.


auI don ci lit rise non Scktor be so
roc Gobict das " .uhr-acht-S-.nl t.-i .t
llqh raacnt-Sanitaj’warf oscn.;" ont
oatoriullon Si


iathioruus au


Oonwntaprechond hat such dor Tcilnohaorkrcis diosor hiorait
von oir orocifnoten 2. Arbeitstagung Oat cine andero -uaawaonaot-
zung ala die 1. Arboitatagung ia „ai dieses Jchros. Danals war
oa eino Tsgung das Hour*a, rtcuto sind die droi .ohnuaclitsteilc,

^ lolitti » d-r Arbvitadienat unJ die Organisation

*odt botoiligt unu vorvinigt.

H°rr»n, Si« woman cir aicherlich gcatatton, 'daas ich
a ih.° ln ^‘ S^suinaicon '.iillxamensgrass begrucsso und
oit den aurrichtigcn unscho, daaa unaor- TcaoinsXTu Arbeit dur
erhoffte, groin: c; Erfoig boacliiodan aei. Einon buaondoren
uruaa aacchto lch :bor anden Rolchagoaunahwitsfuehror, Hurm
Staatas-krotaor Conti, richtan, in desaen lUni die zentrole SUu-
erung dea Sonltaot.woacna la zivilen Sofctor golugt 1st. Ich seho
in aeiner Anvn,aonheit nlcht r.ur das Interns; fuer uns.ro .r-
Doitsthooen. aondem don Auairuck aein-r Vorbund.nhcit rit d.u
•.ohrmaciit-drmitaetawvjBen and Mines Verstacndniaous fucr die bo-
aondoren Bolango d«r Hihrcucht ia rcldo wie in dor Ho lent. Jch
braucho nicht zu betonon, daas wir cina sind in dor Erkenntnla
dor fiotwendigkvit, dor. Kaoupfer diruebor veraichort unJ b.ruhigt
*u bftlton, diaa or sich uc die gesumheitllche Botxvuung dor Hul-
yi, in kahoen dea la Kriege uuberhoupt -oeglichon, koir.o Gorgon
zu rnchon braucht." (Untarstrtlchangen olngufuogt).

Und wiodorua bvi der i,. Tigung dor beratondon A«rzto voc 16. bia

lfl. Mai 19W, in Hobonlychcn, botonto (Wr Angeklagte Karl Brandt die

••ichtigkoit von Handloaera Stollung, indue or sagtc:

"Herr Goneroioboratabsarzt Handloaer, Sie aolbnt, Soldat
und Arat sugleich, tragen dabei die VervXwortung fuor Einsitz
und LUstung unser>-r Sanitaotsofficieru.


. .ff 1 siaubo » ur " 1 ‘ 5 ist wofii dio «inzigo Erwr.rtung nllcr
Botciligton, dasa die dus ven V^rantwortungsb-wucstsein gotrn-
gonon, huuto hior in Hobonlychcn beginnonian Boapruchungon sue
Nutson unnor,r Soldat on gofuehrt nviM- n. Jii biaherigon Uistun-
gun Inror Herron, Herr Generaioberstabsarzt, aprochon oinitutig


- 3 -


J


dafuor, und deren Einaatzbereitachaft erfuelit una alio ndt
Stolz und - ich kann das wahl ouch sagcn - roit Luversicht.

HU

Ea lot gut, die 30 Dingo oinfach sc zu bcnonncn und zu be—
trachtcn, wie aio sind. Dioso Tagong iat alchtbarur Auadruck
dofuor - aio ist oa und soil oa und cuss os such in Jodor Bozie-
hung sein: Dio borutenden Ac-rzte finden sieh ua ihron Sanitauta-
chof. - Soho ich hior dicao Eeiho, so sind Sic, Hurr Senorulbbor-
stabsarzt Handlosor, zu txneidun. Paetaoennor dor -edizin ait
boston und gcsChultoston Spczialwisaon station Ihnon fuur die Bo-
trowing dor Soldatcn zur Vorfuegung. In uinor ochaelwirkung
zwischon Ihnon und Ihron Herron worden die FrobLuao unacros aurzt-
lichon kissoRs and Koonnens lobendig gohaltun."

(NO-924, Ankl.Bow. 437, H.2067).

Dios war koine Lobrudo, dio einen Lann ohne -acht und Zinfluaa go-

zollt wurde. Und ^an luusa 'Sich vr*r Augvn n-It on, dasa dicsu 3c3Chrei-

bung von Hundloaors Stullung vor Jc:_ Fuohn-rorlasa voa 7. -ojguat 1944

•

gegebon wurdu.

Handiossr atund ouch in ungvr Vorbindung ait deu hoichaforschunga-
rat, dosson 2wockc und vorbxvchorischo Tautigkoit :uf S«ito 8 bio 11
dcs .inklagoschrifteaotzoa botroffs Karl Brandt bcachriuben ist. In
Horbst 1942 vorsuchte H.nlloaor aulbst oitgli-d dos ricichcforschunrs-
rnta zu wordon, abor dioa nude nicht bowilligt ait dor Angubo, diss
Koitol dio kchmacht U. 1 ruaidialr'.t vcrtrvto. (Huxiloaor H.3020).
Schroibor, dor Hindlosor ala Keeiva-Sviitictaincpcktuur untorr.tiillt
war, war ouch .dtglied dos iwichaforachungar ts. Sr wirkto als 3«.auf-
trogtar fuor Epldu donbokao.upfung, dio rein Spc-zial.'obiot bui dor In-

4

•poktion wir. Schreiber wurd. von dor mu. fuor iioso ^tollung ud-
pfohlon.'Jnd os kann kein Iwoifd Uaruobcr bostohon, dass or dio Hooros-
•anitootsinspektion in noichaforschungarit vertrit. (HD-1490, Ankl.Bow.
450, h.3024). Seine Err.onnung wuxdc ait Hunlloaor boaprochen. (K.3026).
Schroibor wir oin ongor lit rboitor Handloacrs und irbeitcto ait iha
violo Jahn- l mg. (Hanilosor n.3054).


- 9 -


Dios nun warcn die gchobencr. Stellungen ces Angoklagtcn Handloaers:

^Kjneral^ofstabaarxt, Chef dor Hecressanitaetsinapektion, Hceresiret,

•

Chef 4os Sanitactswosons dec i-ehnaachtj Sorater von Koitel, don Chef
do* Oberkoccvandoa dor ‘..ehrnacht und ?racsi<k-nt des wiasenschaftlichen
Sonata doa Sanitaotawesens dor .-ehmadht. £r bonuetzto dio vnrgomnn-
ton Stellungen und aoinon poraoonlichen Einflusa in einvr <«ji sv, die
daa Bogehon von Kriogsvorbrochcn und von Vorbixchon gogon dio *onsch-
lichkeit, wie aio in dor Anklagoachrift aufgcfuchrt sir.d, nit aich
braehte.


- 10 -


II. Pcrsonlichc Zoiln~ha- -n vcrbrcchoris c hon ^xp<-rin >nt_on.

Han kann nicht erwerten, dass ein Ha nr. in der Stellung
und ira *tang von Handloaer persdnlich verbrecheri3ch9 3x-
periraente vornehmen vrtlrde, Dies war Untergebenen tiberlasaen.

Die Bev/ei8orhebung hat indessen klar ergo bon, dapa er, wie
Brandt, perednlich zu Bxperinenten an Personen ohne ihre
Zuatimaung ernutigt hat. i-r, -vie 3randt, war vollig ia
Bilde darlibor, da3s an Insaaaen von Konzentrationsla ,ern
eyatematiach durch iha unteratellte Sanithtsoifiziero
■bxpericente vorgononnen wurder.. -r r.achte nie von aeinen
enornen Mochtbefugr.iaaen ala Chef deo V ehra-acnt-Sanit-ts-
woaono Gobrauch, un diooen verorochorischen Handlungon
Sinhalt zu gebioten, dio dio Draordung, * J oltorung und
unmonachliche Bohandlung tauaendor hilflosor l'Anner,

Frauen ur.d iCindor der verochiedenaton Hationen zur
Folgo hatter..

Unter Ziffer 6 dca Anklagepunkts II dor AnUlago-
ochrift aind 12 vorachiedene Arte.: von -xnerinonton ira
einzolnen aufgeflthrt. Davon wlrd Har.dlooor die boaondero
Verantwortlichkeit filr und die Teilnahao an don folger.don
zur Laot golegti K&lto, H^Lnria, Gae, Sulfanilanid,

Knochen, Muakol-und a’orvengenoration ui'.d Knoohonvor-
pflanzung, Seowaaaer, opidociacho Gelbsucht und Typhusox-
porimenton. Ha wurde auch 3ovrel8 hinaichtlioh aoiner
leilnahme an *-xperir.er.ten in bakteriologicchor Kriog-
fUhrung und Gao-Qodor. vorgelegt. Zwoc'.o Veroinfachung
hat die Anklagobohttrdo die Anklago der Toilnanno an
Kohenvorouchon fallen lesson (R.c3C0).

Ss iot nicht dio Aufgabc dor Anklagcbohdrdo, dnrzutun,
daso Handlooor ait alien aincelhoiten diooer -xperinor.to
vertraut war. Der Eev:oia gonligt, d030 er Kenntnls hatto von dor
oyatomntiochon Vorwendung unfrciwilliger aonschlicher Ver-
ouchoporaonen fur ox oricontolle Zwecl.o durch Stellon,

Ubor dio or oin botr-achtliohes Hass von Befohlogemilt und
Autoritat auaUbto. *r hatte dio Pflicht, dio ihc ur.tor-
otohondon Dien8tatollen zu kontrollioron, dasa or os
untorlio3B, oio zu orfttllon, aecht ilui str. frechtlich
vorantwortlich fiir dio iiandlung seiner Gntorgebonen
Siehc Yaoaahita 66 b. Ct. 3*0, 347 (1946). Air dies und
noch aehr ' .


- 11 -


ic* von dcr Anklagebehbrde der 3eweis erbracht worden.

A. Typhus und ar.dere Inpfstoffversuche (Anklageschrift

Abschnitt 6 J : )

In der Anklageschrlft wird Handloser die Verantwortung
fiir Typhusaxporinente zur i-ast gelegt, die ia Konzentrations-
lager Buchonwald haupteSchlich von Dr. Ding-Schulor und
in Sonzentrationslagor *‘atzweilor von Dr. 2ugene Haagcn
vorgenomnen worden waren. a.nsichtlich der Beachreibung
und des vorbrechcriochcn Charakter3 der Sxporisente
in Buchonwald wird auf den Schriftsatz dor Anklagovcr-
trotung botroffs Hrugoweky verwieoon und hinaichtlich
der Axperinonto in Xonzontretion3lager Katzwoiler aui dor.
Schriftoats botroffs Rose. Hicr intores3icrt uno oinzig
und alloin,in welches Zusassonhang der Angoklagte
Handloser nit dicson Sxpcrinonton stand.

In Anschluss an don Einfall in Hu3cland in Jahro
1941 bogann Xyphus zu oiner crnstlichcr. Bedrohung dcr
doutschon •fehrnooht zu worden. Dio Anrondung von Iopf-
stoffon fUr Typhus war cine dor hauptcuchlichotcn “iethoden
zur Bokhapfunf., diosor Gcfohr. Handloocr kontrolliorto die
Vertoilung dor Irapf3toffc, zuorot in seiner Eigoncchnft
ala “ooroaoanitdtoinspoktour und dann olo Chef doa T/ohr-
mooht-Sanitiitu.woocns(Iiandloser d. 3072 - 3074, Schrbdcr
R. 3642/ Rose, R. 3690). In glolchcr Woiso bofocsto sioh
Handloeor ait don Problec dcr rioretollung von Typhus-
impfatoff. (N0-131Q, Ex.54, R.3090). Soinom Bdro gingon
Broduktionsborichto zu. (Handlosor R.3071). In Hovonbor
1941 aohriob or an Conti, Untoratastoafckrotar fur <Jo-
oundholt in Innonninistoriua, und schlug vor, dacs die
Erzougung von Typhusicpfotoffon in dio Hondo dor phor-
mnzoutiachcn Grosoindustrion gologt wordon oollo (50 -
1323, BowJiaatUck C.-r Anklofobohbrdo 452, H. 3082).

Wio bug oinun 3riof von Juni 1943 hervargoht, orsuchtc
dcr Angoklagto Roso don Inspoktour dco Luftweffcncanitats-
weaona^boi don Chof dos J7ohrnecht-oanitut3'os... s durouf
zu drangon, daos cr die *rzcugung von Typlmsiapfstaffon
fiir olio Zv/oigo dor bowaffneton Hncht is Ootgobiot an-
ordno (N0-306, Bowoisatuck d r Anklegcbchtfrdc 296,R.

1387). Kandloaor als Chof


- 12 -


des Wehrmacht-^anitatswcscns war allcin ftir die Beschaffung
von Impfstoffen an die Vohroecht zustandig (NO-131, 3o-
woi3stUck dor Anklago 309,R. 140<).

Einc3 dor wichtigsten Problene ia Zusannonhang ait

Typhusiapfatoffen w.r die Wirksackeit des sogonannton

Cox-Haagen-Gildecciatcr Icpfstoffs, das aus Eigolb horge-

otollt wurdo. Dio Typhus-und Virus-Institute des 0X1: in

Krakau und Loaborg waron ait dor Srzougung des Woigl-

Impfstoffs aus Lauso-Darckanhlcn bec -igt. Dioae Kothodo

war indesson viol zu kostapiclig und fconplisiort, und die

•

zv;oi Institute konr.tcn koineswogs goniigende Kengon Impf-
stoff fUr dio lohraacht poratollcn. Dcr oigl-Iapfstoff
war ooit cin paar Jahron in Gcbrauch govroson und wurdo fv>r
siomlich wirksac gohaltcn. Dor Impfstof; aus Eigolb wurdo
von Rcboit-Koch-Institut und in den 3ehringv:crkon u.a. hcr-
gootollt 1 und aoino Hcrstellun,; wsr viol oir.facfccr alo die
doo T/cigl-Inpfatoffa. Man war jodoch dor Anoicht, doss cine
imnunioicrcndo Wirlcung noch nicht goniigond bowieoon wordon
soi. £s war dcshnlb ndtig, die Wirkeankcit footzustollon,
bovor dio Erzougur-j in grosocn Uafan. aufgonomnun v/urdc.
Dioao i'otsoohon gohon aus dor oidlichon Au3sogo von Hand-
looer untcr den Datum 3. Oktobor 1945 horvor. (NO-732,
Anklagc-DowoiaotUck 451 - R.3060).

Sin Eintrog in DinoO Tagobuch ur.tcr d^n 29. Dezanbor
1941 bowoiot, duos un diooen Tag eino Xonforonz 3tattgo-
fundon hot zwiuchon Handloocr alo Chef dco *‘eorco-Sanitato-
wosons, Conti von Ir.nonninistoriun, Hoitor von dor Abtoi-
lung fill- Volkogocundhoit, Gildcnoiotcr von R bur-Toeh-
Inatitut und Urugowoky von hygionifichon Inotitut dcr
V/affon-SS (NO-265, Ankl. 287, H. 1134). *uf dios^r Konforcnz
wurde dor Beschluoo gofao3t, don lypi'Uainpfstoff aus
Eigolb an Mon3chcn auozuprobieron, un seine i'irk3ankoit
fcotzuotcllon. Sin paar Tagc sputcr bogannon dio or3ton
Yurauch3roihcn in Buchonwold, die die mnunisic rondo Eigon-
ochoft von Inpfstoff cue Eigolb auf die ^robo ctollen
collton. 5 Vorcuchaporaoncn atarb.r. ala Folgc dcr
kilnstlichen Infizicrim^, nit Typhus.

Das Boweiouiatcrial zeigt, das* an eolben Tag cine
frlihorc


- 13 -


Konferenz stattfand, auf welch®*deasclbo Problem bcsprcchcn
wurdo. (h'0-1315, Ahkl.Bew. 454, 3.3086). Dicso Konferorz
far.d in Roichsinnonsiniatpriua statt, untor Tc_lnakno von
Boibcr vom 3oich3iunenninisteri.ua, Glldoacistor, 'ortrotor
dos Goneralgouvornonents ia bosotzten Polon, leitondo: ror-
aonliohkoiton der 3ehring;erke,der I.:>. Parben ur.d Obor-
atabsarzt Sc hoi z von der Hecros-^anitiitsinspektion. Scholz
untorotand dam AngoLlagton Handloaox. (nandlvscr, H. 3085).
Dio Auizcichnungcn liber dicac Konforonz besagen, dassi

"Dor Inpfatoff, d»r zur Zoit von con BehringworUcn
aus HUhnoroiern hcrgostcllt vrird, soil oxporimratoll
auf aoino ^irkeankeit hin untoroucht rordon. Zu
dieaoc Zwock v/ird Dr. Boibcr ait obcrsturabannfUhrar
Dr. Idrugor/aky in Vcrbindu-io trot oh."

Da Mru. ov:oky bci dicaer Konforonz nioht mwooend vrer, liogt

oo auf dv r Hoad, dans einc ur.dcre Konforonz stnttfor.d, boi

dor dieao Angolegonhcit ait iha orbrtert wurdo,und dao

boatatlgt natdrliohdon Sintrag in Dr:ng's lagc touch. Dor

Angoklagto Soso gab ia Krcuzvorhtor zu, dass zwcifollos

auoaor dor Konforonz, boi dor Doibor don Voroitz filhrto,

oino andoro etatt L ofundoh habo ur.d d.'no da sal 8 dlo Hoino

dor Buohonwald— . o b--. eaon wurdo (R. 64’--'). 3oso

wioa auch dornuf hin, daea dio -xcoriaonto in Buchomvald

otartlioh gonohnigt warden (3. c467). Sir. D-rohoohlag doe

Protokolla dor Konforonz, dor Boholz boi*.vo.:nto, wurdo an

il nndloaora BUro goochickt. (K w -1321# AxJel. Bow. 453, R«

3084).

Uandlosor gibt zu, oo aoi ESglioh, daoo or an oi:.or
Konforonz, wio aio in Ling'a Tagobuch boechriobon lot, toil-
gonomaon habo. (3. 3061 3. 3066). In ooincr oidliohon
Auoaogo vom 3. Oktobor 1945 gab or an:

"4.1ch aoll - noch Angabo doa aich v hmondon amori-
kaniachon Off id or 8 - in oinor Sitsjui^ l°41j_pjs. der
Si olio 3oitur, Conti ud Ilrugo'-. o* :y to.a > cr.JSL: on l y^iu-fi^dio
Kr.10 Purer, ftthru.n,. von iiuckriebc rvo raucuon an ...onccuon

vor.-.-achir- '■ * kobdn.- *cit, ^5r., loilnofcaer und Yer-
lauf oinor oolchor. Bcsprcchung aii.d air naoh dor
jnhrolar.gen Zvriachonzeit and all ihrou Sroignisoon

nieht in groifberor firinnorung.


"5. Hinsichtlich der Pleckfieberfrage kann es sich
p.ber un folgeudes gehandelt haben: Jie iroduktion dca
bokannten, oehr ^,ut wirksanen, von Lausen atanaondon
Fleckfiebor-Iapfstoffes nech Prof. T7eigGl/Lemborg bliob
trotz zunehncnder Steigerung noch wait hintcr don
Bodarf zurUck. - In Robert-Soch-Institut wurao duxch
Ztiohtung aaf Kuhnereiern ebenfclls ein Pleckfiobor-
impf8toff hergestellt, uKr dosson zuverlfiaaige
Wirksankeit cbor noch koine gcnti-enden Erfohrungcn
and Beweiso vorlagen. In Intcreese des 5chutzes doa
Kriegagebietes ur.d dor Rcinat gogon Fleckfitfbar muaoto
cbor baldigat tlbor dioaon Inpfstoff JQerhcit gcochaf-
fen wordon. Sa 1st dcher wohl nbglich, doos in Yor-
lQuf oiner Boaprochung vcroinbart wordon ict, Dr.
Mrugowoky eollo vcrgleichendo Parallelorprobun^on
Ubor Do8iorung, Vortraglichkeit und Wirkaankeit der
Plockfioborinofstoffo an Peraonon in gofiihrdctor
Ungcbung durchfUhren. Dr.boi war vor alien cin
Urtoil dcrUber zu gowinnen, ob dor von Robort-«k>ch-
Inetitut horgectcllte Inpfatoff ala gonUgend wirk-
8 om nnzuaohcn aoi und in dor tfohrnr.cht auch in
Plockfioborboreichon dor Oatfront nit Auucicht r.uf
Erfolg ungewendt wordon kttnno.” (170—752, Ankl.-
Bow. 451, H. 3060).

Hnndlooor bozougto, dco3 oino Roiho von Xonferonzon Ubor
Ploukfiebor und Flockficbericpfatoffo otattgufundon hiitton.
(R.3061). Since dor HruptproblCQa war die ffirkaankoit doa
Inpfatoffa aua HUhnorolorn. In Connor 1941 trof or
fdrugowf.lcy, dor ihn von ochroibor von der Hoorca-Sani-
ttttainopoktion oapfohlcn wordon war. Mrugowoky atano
d nr nech rait der Wohruccht in Vorbindung. (Hnndloaor,

R. 3063). Er’gibt zu, daa3 or mil Mrugowoky pcradnlich
FUhlung gononnon hat (R.3054, aioho unton). Hr.ndloucr
gibt zu, dceo cr in ointor 1941 nit Gildoaoiotor bu-
troffo lapfatof-on cue Olhnoroiorn in FUhlung goatar.don
hat. (R.3067), und duoo or nit Conti tthnliotao FUhlung
hatto (u.3068). Hendlooor gibt zwar dco Vorliogon
doo Froblcna in Zuonnncnhang nit Inpfctoffon aua Ktlknar-
oiorn zu, boatroitot cbor zu wioaon, wio daa Problem
goldst v/urdo, obgloich or oolnc Lb8un,; oinrttunt (R. 079).

Ea ateht aeoor Prrgo, dcaa Ding'c Togobuch authontiach
und in jed^r Boziohmg vorlacalich -at. Scin Ihhnlt
wurdo


vcrachiadcntlich dutch uvlero Jokuaer.te bekraeftigt. (Siehe Schriftsatz
betroffs urugowsky). la groaaen and grnzcn wurde Jede Soitc dcs Tige-
buchea von Ding odei von Schuler, unter welchea Naaon er spaeter be-
kannt wurde, unterzeichr.et. Die Echtheit der Unterachriften ist durch
Vergloich ait unbeatrittenen Unterachriften von Ding-Scholer in don
GerlchteaKten nachgewieaen warden. (Siehe Schriftaatx bet reffa
urugowaky;. HAndloaor naha an der konforcnz toil, bei der dio grund-
saetzliche Entacheidang jetroffwn wurdo, die .irks^rJccit von Typhua-
impfotoffen dadurch foatiuatcllen, daaa lyphua xuenatlich in mensch-
Uchon Vorauchapora&nen hervorgorufon wird. Ia Verfolre dieaea Bo-
achluasea wurdon Typhuaexporiownte in Buchon-ild vorgcnoar<cn.

Daa deweisaatorial hit gezeigt, daas Sinitaetaoffiziere, die
Handloaer diregt unteratollt wiren, ucbor Einzelbciten der Typhua-
oxperlraonte in Buchenwulu in Scnntnia goactzt wurden. Ein Brief, den
dor nngeklagte , rugovraky unter doa Datum voa 5. kai 1942 an Oberataba-
arzt ur. E^or voo Typhus-und Virus-Irwtitut dea Oberkosaandoa der Arises
in Krakau achickto, beachroibt unter todorcn dio Ergcbnisao dor oraton
in Buchonwald durchgcfuohrtcn expor inen talien Vorauchareihen. (Dok.
.trugowoxy 10, urugowaky bow. 20, h. 5087). Dicae £xoeriiwntonreiho war
zur Erprobung das oiglachon Inpfatoffa voa Tynhus-snd Virua-Inatitut
dea Haeroa in Krakau und doa von Gildoaalator voa hobort—Voch-Inatitut
und den Bohringworkon .iua .Ci dot tor h- rgeatulltoa Izofatoff. Sa ~urdo
borichtot, diao die St-’iblichKcitatlffcr in dor nichtgoinnfton Iruono
30 % botrug, wiohrond x puraor.er. atirbon, lie ait dom Bohringschon Ltpf-
atol'f gulnpft word on ^mcn. *uch hier boat *uti ;t dica-a von ior Vortei-
Qigung vorgelegto uol.u^ur.t in uliur. dinzolhoit-.n die Eintraoge in Ding-
schon Tagobucn bctr.xfa d«r oraton Versucharuihcn. Handlos<r betoiligte
aich alao bei do«.. ooachluca, die Typhoaexporiaentu in ouchenwald vorzu-
nohjivon und gyor, min Untorgebenor, ein Typhua-S*.chvcrat icr.digar dea
Huurea, wurde uobor die Krgobniaae dor Exporirunte untorrichtot.


Dies war nicht der cinzige Zusaa^diang dcr fteeres-S*nitaetBin-
ape Ktion and H-.rxiloaors idt dan Typhuaexperirfcnten in dachunvald, i>or
z.cug« Kogon aagte aua, oaaa ding tit dcr Uiiitaamerztlich-an Akadeade
in Berlin und dcu Typluo-und Virua-Iustitut dea OKH in Krikau hinsicht-

a

lich dor Typnua«ap*-ri—jitc kor roa poodle rte. (i:. 1157). «-a dua Ding-
Tugobuch goOt hoivor, dasa ^ycr und Jt. Sch-d«-t, a in dor Heorva-Sani-
tuotaiiiapuKtion zugeteiltor Kygieniker, die iypnua-*ersuchsstition in
ouchun*ald <ua 6. Fvor-ar 1943 Uazchtigten. Jiosor Eintrag id Jingachon
lagubucn wurdo dur«h den ..rboitabericht dua Typhua-und Virua-Ir.stituta
dur kaffen-53 in ottcnenwald four d’ia Jahr 1943 bcat&Oti?t. (JfO-571,

Ankl. Bew. 285, R. 1115). Scnaiit wurdo ala Ecugo fuur den Angokllgtun
nundloaer vorgoLidcn and aagte iua, daaa or uni ^r den 3 auch in
oucnanwald rnchton, on gewiaaen SS-Aerzton, doren Hoaon or nicht 'mgo-
b<-n konnto, vorWudiivn, wio «in nouar bvhaeltor fuor Gclbfiobor-
Inpfatoff ftufgwbrochen warden aollc. (n. 3181). Oioao laechorlicho Bc-
hauptung, d»aa zwui fcedoutondu Hygienik-r d.r T croa-Snnitiotainaocktion
die l'tngw Fahrt n.ch euchonv .Id i_a oinoa aolch unwlchtigon Irani un-
tertMhBM lolltui., iat ungliubhift. d-’lbat dvr Angoklaplu Kobo fand
Jr. Jcholuta ^-ugeniuaaago widorrinnig. (». 6^1-2). Schddt >rtxdtuto
untor nundloaer in rvrlin von 1942 bia *ugaat 1944. (Har.dloaor, R. 3059).
no «dg auhr gut ooin, Uaaa Sch-ddt ui>J Rycr ill . Verauchnol .tion in
ouclionwild ita unhang ait don dort vorgeno.-; -non Golbricber-

Impfotoffaxpori.nten bcaucht n.ben, abor oa ist gr»r uni gar an-
glaubwuordlg, cUbo aiv aeii Typhaablock nicht buaichtlgt h-ibun, o-nn
die lakpfatoffvXiMriOK'nto i.uxdcn dort vorgeno-.-jn. (Sioho untun). An
gloichun Tugv, Uidiu ai . iort war*.-n, fond :in Tyjjhuacxporinont atitt.

Ea wurdo vuch Bowels difuer orbracht, jxaa d r Experic. nticr-


otation in dachvnwild voa.


Typhus-und Virus-Institut des OKH -=it Typhus infizierto Lasuso go-
liofert wuraan. (Kogon, R. 1220-1; Kirchheinur, R. 1326). Scheldt
lougnute das und sproch von dor »ocglichkc it, aass die Laeuso von
den BuhringwerKon in L-.abcrg waren. Tatsacho ist, dass os nur droi
Stollcn in Ueutschland gab, wo die Laeuso haetten horkooaon koennon

- dio Typhus-und Virus-Instituto dos 0101 in Krakau and Lenborg und

die Bohringworke in lo^borg (Sch-ddt, K. 3171). Dies varan dio oinzigen
Institute, die don '.eiglschcn IcpTstoff orzuugtcn und die deshalb in-
fiziorto Laeuso zur Vcifuogung batten. (Sch-ddt, S. 3174). Zw«.i diosor
Institute unturatandun dor Kontrollu dos rioorea, wdohrund das drltto
oin halbprivatca Instltut war; abor solbst dio Behring*orfcc in Lenborg
wurdon von dor *r-«u unturstuotst und ihr Personal wurdc von Dr. '‘<vigl,
voiulluor, ousgebildot. (NO-1315, Ankl. Bow. 154, h. 3036). Da dio
Typhus-^ersuchastation in Buchunwald sich dun -oiglscnun lspfetoff
four Expuriioento _onoto vorhur boschafft hatte, oho dio B<ihringworko
in Lenborg aroofftiot wurdon, ist os ganz offunsichtlich, dass dioscr
Impfstoff zusiicmon ait don Lieusun voo Typhus-uod Virus-Institut dos
OKH goliofurt wurdo. Indosson wird dio schluussigo -ntwort in Dingschcn
Togvbuch gagubun, aus doa h*-rvorgoht, dass die Laouso vor den 30.
hovouber 1942 orhaltcn warden. Dor Eintrtg untor doc 15. Dczucbor 1942
bowoist, dass die Behrlngwcrka in L-uburg erst zu di.sor tuit uroeff-
not wurdon. Uubordics umiuhnt die eidcsstattlicho -rklmrung von
Diotzsch, daso dio Uuuso von oine-i Olfizlor d^r .ehr.^cht n»ch Buchon-
wuld gobraoht wordun w.ren. (iioven Dok. 1, Hovu. Jok.Such 1, Suite 1).

Ur. Uing-Schulcr urstottuto iuf dur Ingung dor boritondon Aorzto
du tiohrtucnt lui ai 1943 in d:r ilit.v rterstlichen,.\kideado in Berlin
uinun uoricht ueb-r dio Szpurl^nte in yucbonwild. (1.0-92}, Ankl. Bow.
436, ft. 2063). Hendlos-. r w .r bei dies^r T ’.gang anwcs.nd. (Handloser,
n. 2943). Uor dcricht solbst, dun H’.ndloser .oegllchirwoise nicht per-
sounlich gahourt hat, wurdo vor dor Abtwilung dur Hygionikor gegobon,
dorun Vorsitz


G-sneralarzt 5ohp-dbor von dcr Huarca-Sanltncti riny o k tlon fuohrto, cin
Unt-rgobener ftgndloaera. dor Angekl 2 gto nose loorto Ding3 Vortrag und
cr crhob iinwond.jigun gegen die .»rt dur Zxpjrf^onto in 3ucho.n*ald.

(hoso, h. 6166). Bin fc ougo faor don Angtiklagten Rose glng sowcil, dnaa
or auasagto, inuoaato aua doa, wa» Roan sagto, don Schluaa aichen,
doas or Oiuao iixporlmonto .Is ..o d ansah. (Mooring, R. 6073). Er s’-g^ 0 *
daa3 Inaaaacn von Xo nscntr'.tionalagc ro »i diosao iScpcriacnten v.,n*cn-
dot warden. (Mooring, R. c074). :-s 1st tort nnzunchscn, daaa Kandloaor
nicht von Sohroib-r ueb.r dioac inliebaraan Vorgnongo boi dor Hygicni-
kor-Tagung untorrlcht it wurdo. -an cuaa sich vor -»ugjn halton, daaa
Handloaor b«i doraulbor. Tagung dcr borit ndon »crxto den ferleht uobor
uio von Gobtvirdt, PiacUr und Obcrhacuacr in Koiwcntr .tionalagor
havonabruock vorgono—» non Sulfon inid-Sxp- ri^r.to hoerto.

ui« Typtiaaox.wri.ixnU w »xn nicht die -in’.igo Bcruohrung, die d*r
Angoklagto H'Uidlosur -it dor Vuraichaatuion in 3uchen>nld hnttc. An
5. Januar 1%3 aandton die BohriAgr-rko in .nrburg oin-n 3xiof an
nrugowaky, in do-; aio crwnohntur, es*oci ihnon vor. Schroibor dtgetuilt
wordm, daaa jedo li-C.-runs von i >.ibfiob^r-Icpfntoff an o-nachlichcn
VorauchafXiraonon auajiobi.rt warden oolite, be vor sic on d-.a H-ior
ubgolieiort wird. u^r drlol atulltc tundra..ckUeh feat, "Oberat baarst
ur. Sehroibor avgto .na, .m in -ukunft V«rsoehc in ..enaction durch Ihr
Bu*ro vorgunou- Mn uo .\Jjh. ir w;nlon una d. ah'lb orlrtubon, Ihnen in
guwibaon .tbstnendon Froben d. r vcrachloder.cn Kcratollungtrulhon su
nchickun. uir bittoi: Sic un ..u&iunTt, ob vdr di xuku nftig*.n Huratel-
lungaruihon auch an ur. Kovun in Buchonwild -chicken aollcn." (f."0-1305,
iUiKl. Bow. /.69, U. 5^6). l.io ko:^=t co, daas Schruibvr ao untorriehtet
wurdo, daaa ur die Bchringwurku uialim ..onnU, den CclMiobor-I-?f-
atoff durch orugowaky in Ruction* -Id on acnachlichon Vorauchaperaonon
auaprobioixn su Uaaun? Di* offonsichtlichu .uitwort dirauf iat, dasa
lultendu Porsoonlichkoiten dor Hocrva-


SaniUetainapektion «ii.schliesslich dcs .vngeki ;gten Kandlosjra achon
yor den 5, Jixtua r 1943 von aen Typhusexp eritientan in ouchoamld wuss-
t«n und sich damn betoiligton. Dcr Eintmg in den Dingschen Tagebuch
untor dem Datua 19. Jamar 1943 besiuht sich a of dioae Gclbfiobcr-
Iiopfstoffvorsucho. Dio von don Bchringworicon in kerburg, von Robort-
Koch-Institut und den Institut fuor Typhus- und Viniaforschung dea OXH
in Krakau ortougtun lopfstoffo, warden «Uc lusprobiurt. Ein lobunder
Virus wurdu bet cUoauu lupfstoff vonr-ndt una d.r Zintrxg beaagt, dxss
Jcdo Iiapfstoff-Heratollungsr.inu an 5 Peraonon ausprobi.rt wjrdc. Eine
grosao Hnzahi vor. Insisacn wurdo svischaa dea 13. Januar und 17. xi
19^.3 goicipft. Dio trzougung von Golbfieber-I-pfstoff *urde dann eit
loiucksicht auf die ailitaerischo Ugo cingcatollt. Dio Ho suit’.to dcr
Golbriobor-Iupfatoffvorsuche wurdon in doppcltor .uiai.r tigung an dun -
nngoklugtvn ^rugovsi:y und an Jr. Schaidt von d.r Kccrea-S-.nit.-.ots-
inapoKtion gescidckt. (10-265, aUcI. 3o». 2J7, R. 1146-7). Schmidt *ar
dor, dor Huoruaaenit etsinspektion buigogub-nc Kygl.nikor und xrboitoto
untor lUndloaur bia August 19U. (Hmdlosor, H. 3059). Zr aagto aus, daaa
or nichta von dicson Ii^fatoffvwrsuchon w..sato, otmonl or wxdirond ihror
Vonuhiau in Duchem/ulJ w.r. (K. 31d4).

Wl« fruoher -rw/.uhnt, gab H‘.ndlos,r au, daas cr fru.h ia Jihro 1943
Bdt duei .oigj.clxgt.jn . ru f>0 K 3 ky uinu u sprechung hftttc, b.t ruffs Konbini-
tionaUiprstoffc geg.n Diarrhoo, Uat.rleibatyphus. Cholom usw. (Hmrtlosor,
h. 3064). ^ atcht auaser 2m.iful, dass dicso Bcaonjchuag d.r Grand fuor
dio in gro3Bo.il Umf .ng an 45 Ir.sisson dea Kontor.tr .tionalig rs Buchenwald
tiriachun doa 24. i.aorz und 20. April 1943 vorgonocuaanen ZxporianU war,
wio aiu ia oingsehon ligobuch boschrieb-.n sind, Jcde Person wurio an 8
vorachiodononlagon innorh.lb 4 -ocher, g.gon Pockwn, Typhus. Pntyphus
.» und B, Cholora uni Diphthorio goiapft. In Vorbindung nit Joi P m-
typhua-


- 20 -


Iicpfatoli'vn -v und B m%a beiuorkt warden, daaa dor Lcugo Kogon aussagto,
diss Cofnngenon PirutyphustexilTon in .Cvrt 0 ffcl 5 -a.it gogcbcn word on.

£r aagto nucn . 1113 , d'.aa Sipcriacnt. In 3uchorr* Id _dt nicrcn Xmnk-
hoiton ala Typhaa Todoaf.acllo zur Folgo htttcn, obglcich vcrh'c.ltnis-
rxivissig wcnigor. (Xogoa, K. 1182-3).

•utuor. lint 1 . ego i— Jir_;ach.r. V g-tx-ch aoigcn <_incn - r.g-n lusazjr.vr.-
hong xwiachun d*r Hooroa-^ jiitactainapjktion untor H-.ndloawr and don
Exp«riounton in :ucha.wzld. Voraohlcdono Eintr.iogw vcd 21. Oczotbcr 1943
bia 16. Junl 1944 boWciaen, a-.aa altoa Blutpl'.aa-. von Ding in -.uftrag
dur *iUtaor-\orztlichcn *k~dooio in Berlin, oio n'.niloacr untcratnnd,
an rionzcr.tritional»g-rhtoftlingcn in Buchcr.v.ad 'uaprobiort *airdo.

Kogon aegto aua, d-.aa Buehonwald-InaaMon hi di^s.r. Fjio.rirxnton vor-
w.ndt warden una mlgu aor Vorauchaperaoncn at rb.n, w-.hrachoinlich
iila Folga dor uo.zbin.tion <k.a Schocka, durch :i. rr'oafuaaior. d.a

A

olt-n Blutplaau. uni ihx.r achlcchtun ;ov-rp^rlich n Verf-vanung. (R.

1190-1) •

lyphuacxftariiixnta wurden uich »n Inaaoson d«i konzo.atmionalagcrs
Nntiwuilor durch Dr. ;ii>nu Hi gen, beratendor Kygioniictir d^r Tuftwaffc,
Lunflottv uuich, auagofuohrt. (Sivhe SchriftsUa dvr .u; 1 t^b.ho-rdu
botraifa noau). D*«a Otwjrkor-n.uio dcr .vhrxcht, boi dor H-ndloacr Chef
dua Sanitiwtaw^acna \ .r, ^rhlclt Burichte aub-r ul»:a. .a.>.rl ent, (Kyor,

K. 1765). In diuBu~ lua .-ajnh.urg wird ».mvut *uf SchrxiJra F.atsUilun?
vomicaon, diaa .«.nuloaar u-b-r Bodiziniachj Vurauohc, die von dcr Luft¬
waffe auagofuohrt ••urdvn, anTonalvrt * r. (NO-449, Ankl. B-v. 13 c, R. 471)
Ein Brief von hahnt, It t.achef von Senro d,i, vx 29. ..a.TJBt 1944 datiert
und an Hargen gorlchtot, c-weiat, d-aa Hirzaloa.r - if die von Ha-gen aua-
gofudirton Forachungaarfc.itun lofx.rxav. g.xiacht word.. Ha agon ha* to


- 21 -


hinaichtllch oinua vorduonntcn, nicht vlrulont.cn Typhusispfstoffoa
Forschungoarbeit golwiatet cit dca Zdel, dcr ‘Jnlvorsit-.at Strtas-
burg vine Fftbrikatlon ina Lee r, zu rufen. K'imt t elite H'ngui ait,
a-as "vine untachoidung hinaichtllch dor Lrriehtung ci:,.,r Iapfatoff-
F-ibrik nicht goftdlt warden k -nr., da J^r Chef doa ’ uhra.chta'-nitauia-
wcacna, dcr allwin iuur die 3cachnffung von lapfstoffcn zuat-._r.dig
iat, aich zu dioaor .oijwlcgcnhoit no eh nicht g'-ocaaflert ht."

(NO-131, .uwi; nevr. 309 , i.. 1404; si who ach NO-306, JJ&l. Dww. 296,
h. 1387).

K agona lyphus-Forschunga rbwit sunk bci .1 n_r ’.jung dwa .o_ta
fuor Wiaaenach -ft and :oiac.\ur.s unUr d.m .mg ..-d st-n i.oatock la
august 1744, die von .It li_d_rr. d«.a .--ichafcrachnnganta and dcr
ttohnucht boaucht wurdo, .la "drliigllch" klvaal!iti-:t. Ju; chachltogo
oinca ariefoa, dor dio Veradiiodwncr. Forcehungatuftr ogu -ufzvehlto,
Qiu bol dloa.r 1 .gung la "Iringlich" klanaifialert wuiolcn, wurdon
an dlu vcrochicduion (-.diziniachon Ln.igw dor ohravcht gcachlckt
(NO-692, .mkl. flow. 457, h. 340C; F.oatock, h. 3409; aioh ouch dio
oldooatattUcho ;*uaa hudolf Brandt, :.’0-370, -mkl. B-w. 294,

K. 1385).

Unt-r dioacn U.ate. nden .*iaa d r Schluaa • zor n r .rden, dnss
dor .mgokltgto Ktndloa.r von den vorbrochorlacbon l*rcrirxnten, dio
von Haagun vor£>nou&jft tiurdon, unUrrlchtet r.r.


rincnto


sehrift, Liffor 6 (3


Ucr vorbrochorische Charaktor dor ioi honzcntntior.slzgor Dachau
vorgononwcn^n KaoltoOcperii^ntc iat in oinizdnoa in Schriflaotz dor
-uul .gcb.ihoorda bctroffs Siovors geschildort. Dioao Hjcp^rincntc. bil-
dcton dun G c gonat.»nd zwoior .iUondlichcr Sjrichto Halzloohnora, dcr die
Sxporioento nit R'.achvr und Finko durchfochrtc. 2oide Borichto warden
vor oinur groaacn Gruppo van iilitacrowrttun vorlcaon. Dor orsto Anlaaa
"ir bci uinor Tagung in Kuernborg uebor .;oolt«problo=*j, dio un 26. end
27. ORtobor 1942 aWttfand. uiu T gung mirdo van dor Luftwaffe cinberu-
fen, abur von V art re turn nller Lw«igo dor r.ohrnacht boaucht* oinschliuaa-
lich Schruibor, oin<-r d-x uneaten kltvirbciUr mndloacra in dor liuuroa-
Sa.dtactsinspwktion, Criot-ji von Our gvbirga ...rztlxchen Schulo dca
Huoroa in St. Johann, und t*jhr«:rcn Offiiioi\.n d-r .ilit'.uriorttlichcn
.dcadui-ia. Aua dt* vwroaffai.tliohUn i~richt dies r 1 gang goht horvor,
daaa Holslovhnor oinu aUir ulna oinxuljic gvfenda 3.cdu -ibunR von
Kaultcwirkungur. .ul .onochon gab. (1.0-401, «a, Bow. 93, I.. 309).

»-* »»ridit & -ht uin- nJfxoi lurvor, or- buaondora in Hlr.blick >uf
dio nachtr-oglichw Feststullung von haschur, d'.aa aeporianto beschriubon
•wrdun and nient U-jooachtangon, die bji j.uttung us Su^not guaacht wurdon.
Fliofor in Not w-rJen nient in Osuin boldason, duiit ihro Tcaport-
turwn turup-oluKtriach 4ifs«.icbrun k-inn. an br.ucht sich J.doch nicht
in flpukulationon daruubor zu orjuhun, «ia dvr .-ago lutz ausa.gtc, d;sa
Holzlouhnora Boricht vinw Svnsition be l d-.r Y gung horvorri-f, da klir
au “‘ ..uauruck k-w, d .133 KoniuntrU-ionsligortneftllngu da Vorwuchap-raonun
bonuttt wurdon unu -inige dor Opfer atarlxn. (j.. i72). Koso rtollt. f.st,
u -“» dioauju Vortrag kein Bsif -11 go spend d mirdo und Holsloohnur w„gon
suinvr TtilnshLa .n don SkpurinunUn s.hr b-unruhigt w r. (r.. 6470).

Dr. Crauuor von vior gubirgs-iU-Z&lichvn Schul dvs Hoorea, dio
riandioaor untratnd, w x uob^r die kaalto-atporiauntu eo bogeisUrt,
daaa or


- 23 -


hascher ua nrlaubnis bat, die tatsaecblichen Yersuche so scbon und
ait iha an Trocken-Xaelte-Veraachan xtwmarnr.mrboitcn. (NO-319, Ankl.
Bow. 96, k. 328; 1579-PS, Ankl. 3ew. 97, h. 329).

Oass Schroiber tUndloser von den Kaelte-axperiaentan in Kenntnia
sutzte, wird durch die Tatsacho bcwieson, das? Holzlothner eingoladcn
wurdo, bei dor zwulton Tagung dor boratcndcn Aorztu dor .ehmicht, die
in dor -ilitieraerzt lichen Akadecio in Berlin voo 30. Korcabcr bis aura
3. dozomber 1942 stattfand, cincn Vortrag zu halt on. (110-922, Ankl.

By". 435, h. 3159). das »clumc»its-Sanitaets»oaon wsr infolgc dcs k-i-

taatrophalon .inters 1941/42 stark in frelttprohlooen intcrossiort.
(Handloaor, R. 3028-30). Aus dca Bericnt aobor dieso Tagung goht hor-
vor, dass liandloacr sich zu don Vortnegen aobor Kiolto aeusaorU und
or gibt zu, Holzlochners Yortrog gohoort zu haben. (R. 3033, 3096).

Bio hemuagegobonon n-dizirdseben Wchtlinien rehen rapido Enr'.onxng
durch oin hoissoa &.d vor als dch.indlungs.-x.tftodu fuor Sch.ock infolgu
luongorwn doi JUolto lusgosotztseins. (Hardlosor, K. 3031). Es lot

offenaichtlich, dass oino /ichtlinie, die so sohr von don ucblichon
Brmch do a lnngsa.-jn amiernuns Abwcicht (Hanlloser, R. 3030), nicht
ohno sorgfaeltlgu Untorsuchang von Holzlojhncrs erk durch dlo vorwt-
"ortlichun Sinltaotsoifizleru, wdche Hvndlosar untorstandon, nusgcge-

ben wurdc.

C,..§ulfonicicl-.-jc vri.. < . nto (.aikl g.scnrlft -jff^r 6 (D)

Hinsichtlich dcr Beschrcibun* und dus vjrbrcehcrischon Chr.r-ikUrs
dio.or Rxporinxjnte knnn auf den Schriftsitz dor AolOngcbchoardo bet ref fs
Gebhcrdt vorwicson warden.

Ber vorlioufige °cricht uubhardts aotxr die .rsten Sulfonmid-Ex-

poriaonto bozuugt dns Litorosso d.r He rcs-Sinit vetsinspoktion an den

Forochungagegenstard. H n Absatz des ikrichtos s-.gt, dass:

*°£ r ’^ n ftnlAufend ® c s«vifrtn Vorsuchsreiho wurde die
drei-ioUung beibohalton. In Jod.r Gruppo wurden droi
Hieftlingu gaiapft. ednw Person blieb is Kontrollo un-
buhandult, die await0 -arde wic basher nit Catoxyn v.r-
setzt, boi d.r dritton wurda dvr .^rfanilprontUbin-
pudor dor I.G.-Firbcn varwandt, dn


- 24 -


dioser von dor Koeros-Sanitaetsinspoktion
dringond onpfohloc wjrdo.

(SO-2734, Ankl.3o*. 473, R.S622),


"in vollataendigor 3«richt uobor cio an Xonzontra .ioncla crircccccn

i »

in ifaver.obruckor Koniontratior.zIa or auagofuohrten SulfonoalO-Yoreueho

wurdo boi dor, van 16. bia 1? !bi 1943 In dor ltllltaoraorztllehon Ata-

^aria in Borlin abgohaltonon 3. ?tnmg dor boratondon Aorzio onstattot.

“nndlcaor war oa, dor dio Jialadur.{-en zu don Iugungan dor bor-tcrdon

Aorato orgohon lloas, don’Vcraitz boi dioaon V 0 raaaalungon fuohrto,

dio Auawahl dor Rodnor und T .on uj bona eh to (Hondloaor H.S0C9). lio

Billtaoraorltlicho Akadonio stand untor soinco Sofohl. Cobh^rdt bozougto,

dnaa or daruuf boatand, ouf dor -.-.-un- in f *i 1943 oinon vollkcsaounon Bo-

rlcht uobor dioao Ezporizsjnto zu oratatton, da as nit dor, fuor d:.a rrogran»

dor Taping vorantwortllohon ?or-an dor Inh-lt doa Vortrapo l..bhnft die-

kuticrt wurdo, daaa dioa ontwod-r Schroibor, odor dor Angokla-to Roatook

var, daaa daa Program fuor dio Taping aclnon VoTtrep untor d«.p Tltcl

"Sondorvorauoho" auffuohrto, d..sc dioa andoutoto or wordo v rouobon, otvna

Aiiaaorgcwoohnliohoa zu zolgon, und dr. a a dor r.s-.rstc Go-jostam, rtsodor

nit Schroibor odor nit Roatook waohrcnd dor Vorbor ;ltun- a fu^r die Taping

in J'oi 1743 auaglobig boaproohon uurdo (R. 4103-06). Sfeuornd wuroo uobor

dio V 0 raucho zwiachon Oobhardt, 'loritz und Schroibor odor Rostock korroepon-

•JUrt. r^wltz hatto oinon voiletcondigon Baricht uobor dio Vorsucho, ala

or nit Cchrcibor odor Rostock rie--.dolto. (Oobhardt, R.4107), Sohroibor

«n : to, or orhiolt dio infontttion uobor dio V 0 riucho auf don Dienotwog.

(fobterdt R. 4106). Ob Oobhardt dio V c raucho und don auf dor lofung in

lial 1743 zu orotattondon Borlo't cit Sohnibor odar Roatook boapraeh,

braueht an diaaor S^dIIo nicht oroortert zu w.rdon. 3jldo Vaonrormron
dom Ang-sklngtcn Hendlooor untjret lit und dio Taping b^durftj a^inor Go-
no Iwl ping. Gobhnrdt bazougto in vollkw an kin re r tt&laa, daaa or pog-.n
Jodo Thrnung , und

-L5-


beetrebt gcwosun sei, das gRsasto Thcna die sor Vorsuchr axis Tagoalicht
zu bringen.


Handloaor gibt zu, class or boi den von Gcbh-.rdt .und Fischer gahol-
tenen Vortr&g annosund war. (R. 2943). Gcbh&rdt b-zougte, dnss or in
oeinur Sinleitung zu den Vortrag ouadruccklich orfclaorto, dass dio
Vorsucho an Ucnschon auagefuchrt mrden suicn. (?.. /.109). Gcbhardt cr-
innort oich nient daron, ob or orwaohnto, ut. s die Versuchs-

poroonon Konzcntmtionslagorinsasscn aolcn. Dor -ngcklagto Fiochor hat
orkiaort, da 8B dies klar gesneht -urde. (JO-472, Ankl. Ikw. 234, R. 941J
vgl. Fischor, h. 4365). is wlrd nicht bc’trittun, dnss die Ulinischon
Einaolhoiton dor Vorsucho in grosser .lusfu.hrlichkoit cnrgolcgt wurdon.

Dor Vcrsnaclung wurdo gosagt, dass an 75 Persons Vcraucho vorgenoown
wurdon, dam* dio Anstockun^un ku<nstlich orlicujt word on waron, diso
vurachiodono Hodikaajnty b*i dor Doh-ndiun;; dor Infoktionon gobraucht
wurdon, da a a chirurgischo Bohsndlong .wgow'.ndt wurdo, und dnss 3 for-
sonon ata.rtwin. (GebMrdt, R. U09-10). Jc-1 sJnzolhclt wurdo .irklaort.

DmV Ang.'klagto Fischor o-.gtu in oeln-r uidcs^Uttl ichor Krklsonmg

ausy das® ina boi Bcginn dor Sulfoamid-Vorsucho got^gt wunio, sio wuordan

oaf / «nordnung dus L-itors do® kehr&ichts-S'.nit vtsw-scnj und den Loiters
/ -

d^B Star.tiichun Gcaundhoitswoaens ouf dircktun Bofohl Hitlers auagcfuohrt.
'(Jto-472, .oikl. Bow. 234, R. 941). Flsch r widerriof dieso BoMuptunr nuf
auui Zougonct .nd, abor untor den vorllogandon Uustaendu*. iat ob kl'r,
daaa soino Gostaendnione vor dvr Ankl ago. rhobur.g betr-.cchtlich ino Go-
wicht fullon. Schon dur Aw«Ck, «* ; dio Zxporlunty divnoii aolltvn,
nacodicli wirksaoj HoiL-Jttel gegon '.rundinfolction zu finlcn, bukrioftigt
ssino rtU3aagon. «on in i*,jt .chlrnd hvti.n 11. s. V. .-such -».hr Viguhon
koonnon al® don Loiter d*s Sanitvtawes ins dor vfahrmcr.t? Aussvrdon
wurdon *llo iwsultato dor Vorsucho - so goring sio *.uch winn - vou
Sanituutswc3un dor nehmacht oro^pt.in ..nwondung tj.br*>cht. (Handlosor,

R. 3050).


Uic Erf01 «® dor SalfoiKuald-Veraucha wurdcn In den Borichto dor dritton
Tagung aor txm.tendon Aorzto zusBawngafisat und aorztlicho Richtlinion
Kurdun *uf diosen V.rauclten begrucodet and in gosict.n S-.nit'-otswos,n
dor rtvhrmcht vcrtoilt. <>-923, *nkl. Eow. 436, n. 2063; SohJr.nit Bor.
10, rt. 012-18). uan oi 3 s sicn vor ..ugen hOUn, doss dloscr floricht
oolbat klir ausdruockt, aoss die V6rsuchaperson«n kucnatlich infiziert
"union.


(Jobh’inlt bo at and waonrond aoinos uir^ktun Verhoo-ra d.irutf, d: 30
oinor dor Zwocku avir.va Inji-^otlgon Borichtoa ».uf dor T 1 ^ung dor bc-
ratonden «orto war, dlo Fn, dor Bewhti^ng zu dieaon Expo ronton
tur Eroortorung su atullon. Er bezeugt : -Ich bcatand dinuf, daaa oln
ftbgoacnioaaenor Veraveh nur dann dlo ihn zugoachriobeno Bur chticung
habon wuurdo, worn or von oinur klnxxn r* chn-lbun S uob r aolnun Vorlnuf
bogloitet wu.ro. fen wuonM uB cinor bis d'Mn a!- elogonhcit

uob.rhnupt noch nlcht b-fiaatcn Stelle vorlogon, d-a Ocaictbild zunannon
*ult dor Frigo, Sind oi. Schluaamgorungon, dlo ich joist zKhu, and iat
doa, was ich four t-naendo von SS-i^onnom uJnfuwhro - iat dan richtig
odor iat dna falach? In dlcoou Uanioonlnng h*ttu ich mtuorllch auch
don purao- nlichon *unach, u-.aa r^in von S‘.chv.rstvndi G on godeekt
"uorUu, und diaa dor St a > swung*, n wucrlo, den Jlotstind, in dora ich
edch bd-:nd, ouffontlich aniuorkenn-n." (i.. 4115). C b»nit rlobto koino
Knttaouachung; soin. V. rcucho eaplingon sua aindwUn Btillochwlgcirfo
Billigu/ig. H vndloo. r -.oertu d.n Vortrtg, ernob b- r koin Simumdungoh,
atolito koinu Untersuchung on and griff nicht uin. H-.ctU er auino Pflicht
aur Unturauchung orfucllt, ao h^tto or die letztu Vurauchox^ihc in


Knvcnsbniuck, die noch ..uguat 1943 ousgofu.nrt wurdo, verhimkrn


koonnen. dioao Voraucharoihu wurJo •« 6 folniachen Fr-.u.n tuagofuchrt,
Clio zw.ingawuiao in BChnutzigon Bunk, r d s KonsontxrUoftalagura R'vona-


bxuock oporlort wuru,.,. (KO-664, ai* 1. ik«r. 229, K. 923). t.aorc er don

so moron di Knoclv 40 k 1- und Norvoi
Voraucho (.oud -.gesenrift Uffor 6 (F)), di. von dena^ben Por-.,ncn -as
gloichonOrt lasg rt warduj, ins Ingoslicht gcbr^cht k

auchcn^an ist » r hatto di Vom-.h^ von V. r-

^ KonjMfcretionrtflfiorlnsMaan ohne dor n EinwUUgun? nlchta
winzuwendon. Er k-Minto und billigte diusa *

- 27 -


Politik achon in dcr crsten Haolfte des Jihroa 1942 , nls er in der
EinTuchrung von Versuchcn idt Fleckfiobcr-I^pfatoffen ia Koneontrations-
ligor Buchonmld teilnihn. Und i_> Deza=b.-r 1942 hoorte cr boi dcr zweitun
Tagung dor bor.itondon .iorzte Ucn Bcricht Holzlochnurs uobvr Kaoltovorsucho
in uaohau. Ea knnn nur dcr Sclduss gotogen wordun, Casa Handloaer, welt
d. von untfornt gOgoi)6olch« Vorauchc etwia einzuwenden, sic iktiv untcr-
ntuotzte.

—_Epldcalacho Gclbaucht (.jikligcachrift. Ziii\r 6 H)

Iu “ n30hluna d *n -nsriff auf HusaLmd wardo die opidendsche Gclb-
8Ucht (Hepatitis epidemics) oino in dor doutachon ».ohroicht wuitvorbroi-
totc Krankhoit. (Gutzoit, K. 2707). In uinigon Elnhcitvn wurden Auaf soils
bis zu to * durcli dioao Krankhoit borichtot. (NO-OIO, «nkl. Bow. 187,
h. 735). Oahor wmlon intensive ..nstrongungon goaacht, un dio Ursichon
dor opidsalaohoii Golbaucht und L-pfatoffo digogen zu nntdsckon. Dohaon
und Gutzoit von dor Sinitsotainopcktion d«a Ifcurua und HSng«n,voa Sini-
t tetadiunat dur Luftmifo, gchoorton zu den uerzton, die nn dloaor Sicho
urboitoton.

Oohacn und Gutzoit wwvn dor kilita«norztlichon jikaduaU mgo,
achloaacn und Schroibur unmittolbir untoratvllt. (Gutzoit, ft. 2752).

Dio *iilitasraurztlicho .dcndcuio nr nntuorlich Hindloaor, ala dom Sini-
tsotoinupoktour dor *hn»cht,untoratullt. (Gutzoit, F.. 2740), Gutzoit
•or auch bor vtondor Intomlat b»i "indlooor. (Gutzoit, R. 2700). Doliaon
war oinor dor uratub, dor einen Vlma, dor dor Errogor dor Golbcucht
aoin aollto, iaaliorto. Erroicht wurdo dica durch lepftm von Ticrcn nit
Xoicion, dio von an dloaor Kr nkhoit loldcndon kensch.:n poonon warden.
(Gutzoit, ft. 2695). £a boatond Judoch noch^cin betmochtliehs UeinungB-
vorBchloaonlK.it, ob Golbaacht durch B ki>. rien odor durch cimn Virus
voruraacht »erd„. (Gutzoit, K. 3045). .-a 1. Juni 1%3 bat hoichairzt dor
SS, Grawltz, Himmler, dias cr dohajn KonzontrUiooalsgorinsiaacn zweeks
Infoktion uit aoinun Virus zur Verfuegung atollo. Er crklacrtu, dies -
Tod.jor.icUo untur don


i»«-ouchporsoncn zu erwartcn scion. (N0-010, ..nkl. 5ew. 1£7, H. 735).

2s war nicht uigogobon, ob dio Todesf-acllo hurbaiscfuehrt wcrden sollten,
uu Obduktioncn ouszufuehrcn (wio lr. aa= Fall d.r Hoehonvorsucho), odor
ob sio durch die Krankhoit soljjst za or* -rt ,n solan (wic bci don Flock-
fiobcrvorsucluin).

Hlti&lar gab sdr.c ^lnwiliigung rur Vonr-jslung von 6 polnischen
Judan, dio in Konzentrotionslag&r ..uachwitz zuu Todc v^rurtoilt worden
w'.ron, und dazu, doss Johtx’n dio Vorsuch-- lwita. (NO-Oll, Ankl. &-w.

183, H. 737). Dio Vorsucho wurdon von Dohnon in Kor.zantiaatlonsldgor
Sachsonhauson ausgafuohrt, und n“.cn dcr eidosstattlichen Erkls-. rung dos
Angokl&gtcn Rudolf Brandt, st'rben oinl^u ler V^rsuchsporsoncn an don
Folgon. (NO-371, «nKl. 3uw. 186, h. 733). Sogar dor Entlastungozvugo
Gutzoit, dor nilt Dohnon eng zusauu-narboitoto, glbt tu, dass Dohn- n In
Saohaonhauson arbuiteto, bch' uptote abor, dans dies Udigllch vino List
wur, ura dio nb-abv dos Gelbsuchtvirus an Gr'vlta zu vcmoldcn, uj.d dass
in Wirkiichkuit koinu Infiziorungsvorsucho n,:-.atcllt wurden. (Gutzoit,

R. 2^29), Gutzoit vrklaurtu Jcdoch nlcht, tnrua Dohnon, dvr in kuinor
noisu Grnwltz untcratullt w:r, sich aof oino so lioch*rlicho wisaon-
BOhuftlicho "DiuurJi.it" hautto vlnlacnon aollon. (QutZvlt, R. 2753).

Boi uor ..bwu-gung dor Glaufcwuordigkcit dvr Zougvnaussigo von Gutzoit
sollto dio Tutsacho in Krwaogung g.zog' n »wrd*.n, daas or ralbst kitgliod
dor SS und lilt Doh-«.na «rboit ong vorbunden rr, (Gutzoit, il. 2760).

I® Junl 19U» wurdu von “andlooor run ..wteko dor Gloichrlchtung dor
Golbnuchtforachung oino S".chVvrstacnuic-r.-<<>«^«->ronz inbvrufon. Dicso
Konforvr.z fond in Breslau statt, und Schroibr fu hrto d n Vorsitz.
(Gutzoit, H. 2752). Handloaor, Gutzoit ur*. H . r, in bratundor Hy-
glonikor dor Luftflottv heich, w.ixn all'- bii dicscr Konfotonc \nm.5cnd.
(Gutzoit, R. 2717). Schxviber crnrnnU ..vrzt grain .r. fu.r di- -<.rr inaarau
Arbeit


- 29 -


n clbai'chproblarcn. Do>r;on, utzclt und fan res ^rurdea alnor otoaor
Cruppca sugOTrioson. ( utsoit, '*.2717). -»= 12.Jur1 1944 crave to
i' c ;.r Q - solbst, Schroiocr Dr. lehr^n sur Zuaamrnarboit -_t i\r su-
zvv-ia n. Goncralarst fchrclbcr unr dzxala Acerar.dsur dcr "ilitr.cr-
aorztllchon Afcadonio. (SC-29C, Ankl*Bovr. 190,2.739). Schroilwr :r-
fuollto aoino 31tto. (SO-SOC, iakl.Bow. 191, 5.740).

An 24,Jur.i 1944 lohriob u tsoit an HaQ-cn, da-- auch or ichroi-

bor bitton werdo, Dohoon, raaj^a susuroiaor.. Sr fuert: hi ju, ca or

Verbaroitungon fuor Bxpori onto an Ifacsbhon traofo, .r.d r wccccho,

class ftmgon lhn nit aoi on ' rusmtorial bolioforo. (:'0-l24,An‘ 1.

\

flow. 193,5. 743). Aaf Cutsoltc Eriof antrrorbot • ni

1944, or fmuo si eh da rubber, desa Dohnon lhn ab 15.Jail su otcilt
vrerdo. 2 r orklaorto f.-raur, dess or nit Kalk, Buotchnor i -d Lvch-
■ o'wort, alloo Iu tvQffonoi'risioro,an olbsacMsproblcn m ,rb Ite
und daaa or nit V«lk tal n -ctroffcn habo, un nl*. solr.o: Ir.U.rial
! onchonvoroucha auaiu^icbr;; ;JV-125, i'cSI.D .’J.IM, 1.744).

• w %

UnUr donaolbon It tun aohrlob i'acron an aclnon llltnrbol Jr Falk,
dcr don Stabo doo Angokla .n Sehroador sufcstcilt rar, dao- .olfondoi
" Iu dor Arlng- uoborsor.do ich Ihnon dlo Absohrift olnoa rlofoa,
von (utsolt und aoino Antrrort, •.,*ir nuoason also ^otit bald x llchat
damn gohon, dio Humnvcrsucho durchsuffcohron. Dioao -.jo soon allor-
dlnpa an boston hlor In 8traao'*urg cdor in dcr noho stattfindon.
Xoonnton 3io von Ihrur Dlo. --‘.s' .llo auo, dlo nootlgon Sc Vr if to untor-
nolzwn, dnss wir dlo orfo^orllchon V;rsuchiporscsion bokavon T
Ich woiss nloht, wao fuor ! aonnor C-utsoit «ur .'orfuc^uac ■*- t *

Spldaton odor ondoros Volk ? ■ (F0-126,Ankl. ow. 15. 1.7::).

»o Tcncrkung uobsr ’’a.tdcrce Volk* 1 st oln offonalchtlichcr inweio
t.uf ronzontratlonslttgorinsaaacn, an Uonon Eoagon •’'.03 *olt Inrpan
nit vlrulonton Flockfioborv:rus osporinon lort ha*to, 1 :. ! rvnd d r
Binwoia auf "Strassburr a’or in dor Kioho", auf


dcfl XoMontnxtlooflagor Sxttwcilcr hindoutot. (Siohc obon uobcr ncck-

ficbcrvoraucho). H Q rr Kalk und acin Chof, dor Angokla S to Sohro^dcr,
TAieatcn gomu, trio «na aich ;.onsontn:tioaslngorln*aa 5 on iiior ccrstlicho
• :rsucho vcrachaffo, donn nur oinigc Hochon vorhor tatto Sohroodcr
aolbflt von Hlsnlor I*scrinsaeacn fuor dio Moomi.aowaporinonto vcr-
largt. (TO- 105, Ankl. Bo*. 134 il. 483).

Dio Afcton toigon, daaa Dol'aan in dor Tat nuf dirukton Bof-hl
^ohnibora mch Strr.asburg ging, m fit liaagcn tuaorcon su arbciton.

( ut«oit, R. 2762). Hand lea r wurdo vor. dioaor 2uanaRcnarb.it Dolnona
urd Hangona untorriohtot. (3utto.it R. 2757).

“1°° "° itoro v -raucharoiho fuor Gcibsuchtoxporiaontc, nit denon
Ko.ndloacr in Vorbindung a ,-.r.d» tc.r gcpl.nt. An 29,J a nu-.r IMS achriob
: rugoiraky an Cmwitr wio fol ti

"Dor Dlroktor doa Hygioniachon Inotltutoa dor Ur.i-
veraitaot Ioipslg, $S !'^uptaturai\iohror Profoaabr Dr.Jroaol,
hat auo Hopatitia-Kronkon oSn Virua goiuochtot urxi kennto oa
in sahlruicton Tiorpaasajpn uobirtrngon.

Zun Bow la, data oa aich un daa wirkaoao Virua dor
I’cpatitia cpidcnica hnndolt, aind Vorauoho nn lijna hon or-
forricrlioh. Dor fevollwxcchtlft i’uor Souchonforochu’ig in
Ifciohoforaeliunpernt wundot dJeh dahor nit dor Sitto un A; -
■tollung dioaor Vorauoho on cich.

Ioh bitto bjin XcichaAjohror SS dlo Gonohai-un- su or-
wirkon, dio notwndlgon UibortrcruroTcraucho on 20 gooi-noten
Kaoftlingon, woloho biahor r.rch nicht an Kojntitie opidoralon
urkrankt wron in dor Flockfiobor-Vcrouohaatatlon doa KI- Duohon-
ald durchfuohron tu koonnon

(NO-1303, Ankl.Bow. 467, B.54CO).


Dor Bovollsn.chtigto fu.r Scuchonforachung in ^lohaforao’ung 3 mt,
dor dlooo Exporinonto an Konxcntratienalngorlnaaac n vorlanjto, tmr Gono
rr.lnrst Sohrolbor, cloiohx-itlg Kervardour dor Iohrrrup,>o C dor
mit-ornorafclichon Atodenio unt r Kandloaor. [Vn> on'^r, .:.5C02).
Schidber imr von F^ndloaor •;ondo dnsu auacraohon wordon. dio Cclbaucht-
forachung si koordinioron und dio Vcrsttaaltmg in


- 31 -


Brcelr.u tuirdo ru dloaon Zircck oicbcrufcr..

In Hinblick auf dca oboa -.ngofuol.rto Bovrcianatorial k-nr ®r dor
Schluaa gotogon wordon, daa- dio G 0 lb*uchtvoraucho von Tfetorgcbonon
doa Anpoklngton Kondloaor nit a Inca Tfiecon u»5 acinor -Jimrilligung
au8eofuohrt wurdon.

B> .jidoro Sxporlnont o

U Or.aoxporloor .to (.Jiklaroaohrift, Ziffor 6 (D)

V ® Wlnt0r I9-I2 Ma run Scrrcr 1W4 vurdbn In Scnzontrr.tionalagor
Katnrnilor untor dor ..ufaioht ycr. IVofoasor Hirt r on dor Unlvoraiteot
StJT.B^burg,Vorauoho angoatollt rur P-atatoUunr dor wirkanaaton Bchrndlune
r,or d ' :!-ch So^fpva (Loat) voruranohton ; .u'x*or. Zun Zff--o'-o o‘r.or Zhratollung
dca v rbrochorleohon Charaktora dioaor V ( ,reucho knnn auf don SchrS/'t-
er.tr dor -nklagobohoordo boiror.a Sicvcre hlcgorloaan a .rdon.

Jn Ami 1942 achriob Hirt oirxn Boricht uobor aoina Vorouoho dor
Bohr.ndlung von (havomindungcn edt Vitonlnon (W-097, 260,

n. 1022). Dioao Vorouoho -uruon r.uf I^fohl dor TTohrcnoht durohco-
fuchrt. Er orklcorto, or habe at; on dor Oif^nalvo fo,pn lr n’rcloh,

\\rauoho nn Monaohon nioht vor..h on koonn-n. Sinon »orIoht u.bcr dlo
ixporlnonto logto or aoinon ":.r.orr.lar*t, dor lhn naoh JorlJn veltorgnb".
Tor. In dloaon ^richt oohlug or dirckto Sxporiconto nib Caa an Konaohoa
vor, ioi dlo Sohutruirhung dor V tonlnboIv.nJlu •*Voctcuat.i;on loioho
dcowlbat).

«orrto dor luftwnfro arlxltotcn nit Hirt In uoa dr.r.uffol^ndcn

V 0 rcuel.on an Konrontratlonal.-ir^rlnoaocon in Ifeta^ilor tua-umon. (loll,

•

R. 1CSD, 1C61)• Ob rarrt Tlx ir, In ..ret lr. St.b dor Inftimffo, nr dor
Kpuptnitarbolfcor Hlrta. 3r urdo "irt fuor dlca •krlogawiohtlron*

Ccnvorouoho von dor aortUichon iuhrebtHung VII. d r tui'tr.r-ffo rur Vor-
fucfning pjatollt. (W3-155. ^u:1.3cn. 266, R. 1M3).


Kandlo3or bozcugto, class or an don r.odizir.ischcn rroblonon ir.
Zuaannonhons nit chonlschcn Kanpfstoffon sohr intorcasiort war.
(R.3038). Dor boratondo Facharzt dor Hoorossanitaotsinspoktion In
dioson Dinj~on war Oboratarzt Wirth ? dcr. I-lnndlcaor 30it Jahron konnto.
Wirth war dor HilitaoraorztHchaa i'Jcodor.io z^otoilt. (Ecndloaor
R.3040). Dio vorbrochorlschon Vorauoho von rrofoaaor Biokonbaoh von
dor Univoraitaot Btraaabur,; nit ?hoa jon^aa , dio in don Schrlftaatz
botroffa Karl Brandt hoaohriobon sind, wurdon r.it birtha Wiaaon aua-
dofuohrt. In zwolton Boricht uobor dioao Vorauohu wird foatgoatollt,
dnaa Wirth oino Inapoktion doa Biokonboohachon Inatitutoa vornahn.
.iO-1852, .jikl.Bow.456, R.3406).

Dnaa Wirth, Handloaora Ontorfiobon-^r, ic Vorfolc doa ?uohrororla3-
joa relt Hurl Brandt an dor Gaaforachur..; zuaonnonorboitoto, wird woitor
hin durch dio Tataacho orwioaon, dcaa Wirth Sit^iftun;3voraucho an nit
Loatgaa vorjiftotorr. Waaaor onro^to. Dor Boricht uobor dioao an Inaaa-
aon doa Jlouon^armor Konzontraticnalajora cuajofuohrtor. Vorauoho atollt
foati "Eir.o dritto Vorauoharolho aurdo ontsprochoal dor.j boi dor Konfo-
ronz nit Roiohakornlaaar Dr. Brandt or., 4. Dozo^bor 1944 von Oboratarzt
Dr. Wirth joaaohton Voraohlaj .it o! .o; Kanpffltoff dor Loatjruppo, dor
Bratiokun. a :aa Lost, aua jofuohrt.■ (210-154, .jikl.Buw.446, R.2638).

Dio Biokonbaohaohon rhoo^on-Vorauoho untor dor Loitun.- Brandta woron
nur woni(*o Monato fruohar. ab^oachlcaaon worion. Sa iat ons klar,

<loaa Wirth koino Vorauoho an Konzontmti jnala,-orInar.aao:i vor oaohla :o*:

lotto, worm oa nicht oino ollgoaoino rnilitaoraorxtlloho i raxia ^owoac
waoro.

(2) Kal urvl I’oorwaaaorvoraucr.o. (.jiklc.;jachrift, Ziffor S
(C) und (G).

Dio ijilcla -obohooruo boruft aich boi dor Boaohuldl^ing dor Vor-
antwortlichkcit fuor dio Kalaria- uni Xoorwaa a or vorauoho In dor iiaupt-
aacho auf dio Stollun*; doa ;ji oklajtan Kcndliaor.


Dio Malar iaoxporinor.to dcuorten von Fo-rucr 1942 bis zur. Fruofajohr
dos Jahroa 1945, und Sxporlnento wurdon cr. uobor 1000 Ir.aaaaon vorgo-
noraraen. (Siohe den Schriftaatz botrof fa Roso). Daaa oino aolch groa-
ao Voraucharelho in hoohoron troiaon dor Kodizin unteachtot goblioben
waoro, iat nicht anzunohnon. iiaa dio Mocrwaaaervoraucho onlongt, ao
v/ird wiodorura auf dio .*baaa 30 Schroodera hin:owIoaen, daaa liandloaor
obor aorztlioho For3ohun;-, durch die Luftwaffe unturrichtot war.
(NO-449, obon).

(3) V oraucho uobor blolo.~lacho Ijio -afuohr un

Ira Jahro 1943 wondto aich daa jntoroaao rjilitaoriaohor Kroiao in
Doutaohland dor biologiachon Ariosafuohrung zu. Dor dngekloGte Blorao
wurde vora Reiaharaarachall Ooering nit dor -uf ;abo botraut, Forachungon
auf diouom Qobioto anzuatellon. C:0-675, dzakl.Bov.37, R. 142). Sin
boaondoror x.uaachuaa zur Srforachung dor uio biologiaoho .iriogafueh-
rung botroffondon Dingo wurdo untor don Hon on "Blitzarboitor 11 go.;ruon-
dot. Stabaorzt xrofoaaor Kliovo, dor Offizior in dor Sanitaotainapek-
tion dor Wohrmacht und thtorgobonor Mondloaora war, war oln proninon-
t03 Kltgliod dioaoo ..uaaohuaaoa. (NO-1308, *nkl.5ow.325, It. 1482; Kand-
loaor n.2961). liandloaor konforiorto rait Blorao uobor biologlaoho
riogafuohruno (liandloaor R.2965).

In oinor Voraannlun.j doa u Blitzarboitor n -..usaohuaaoa on 4. Sop-
tombor 1943; dor u.a. Kliovo boi»:hnto, aohla; Blono vor, dona Vorouov
an Monoohon vor ;ononznon wordon aollton, da nioht bokrnnt noi, untor
wolchon Boding ungin olngoatmoto ..oroaola odor zor-tx-outo Troopfohon
geviaaor patho;:. niuolior Koioo .rankhoiton boi . jr.zo .on orrogton.
(N0-3108, ;jilcl,3ov.320, R.1484). In oir.or Voraanmlunc cn,23. Pobruar
1944 botonto Blomj •.»! odimm diu Notvorcll koi , Sxporxxsonto on 1-or.aohoJ:
vorzunohmon, ur.d bor.'.oV.C-ito, daaa oino r.ouu biolc ;iaoho i/affo atixliort
und gopruoft v/ordon .iollo. Foldmaraah'.ll • oi jI .itto dio donohnlgun •
zum Bau dou Inotitutu .ojobon und linnlor und .vurl 3randt vorsiohorton
ihn lhror Untox*atuotzun> Blorao orklaortc auoh.


?.33 rost eino achworo Gofohr bedouton koenno uni daaa oa doahalb
lootig sol, don reat-Inpfatoff In lk)nschon vorauchon zu orprobon. Dio
•irkung maxlmclor Doaon voraohiodonor Gifto aollton in iJonachonvorau-
chon orprobt werdon, (Hp.1309, AnklfBew.SSB, R.14G7). Dor Intornatio-
nalo illlitaorgorichtahof traf in aoinon Drtoil dlo Catsauohlicho Foat-
atollung, daaa SowJot-Krlogsgofanyone in aorztlicho.n Sxporinonton uobo
biologlsoho -Criogafuohrung vorwondot wurdon, dio in dor Uohrzohl dor
?qo 11 o toodlioh vorliofon. (Intornationalor Milltaorgoriohtahof, fro-
zoaa Hr.I, R.16891).

Daaa Blomo dlo vorgoachlagonon Sxporiconto nit Gift an Monaohon
wlrkllch auafuohrto, wlrd durch oin Pornachroibon von Slovora on RuJol.
Brandt vom 18. August 1944 bowloaon. (rO-641, .uokl.Bow.327, R.1493).
Dioa Schriftatuoclc basalt, daaa BIobv) wojcn dor Giftoxpori.-.»onto in 2r-
ltorung dor Koldung von 21. Juli Hinder Bo richt zu ora tat ton wuonaol
o.

Handloaor gibt zu, daaa oa aoino Pflicht war, aioh nit Vorbougungu
maaarogoln Ian Pr.Uo olnoa biologiaohon la*,logos zu bofaaaon. (R.2962).

2 r war auoh offonaiohtlioh von don boc'.outondon ..rboiton Blerooa und aoi-
noa Ihtorgobonon Ullovo auf dioaon Gobiot untorrlchtot. Redon uobor
dio nootlgon Sohutz- und Abwohrmaaanahnon wurdon auf dor 4. Tagung dor
boratondon ..orzto dor i/ohrmaoht in Hohonlyohon gohalton. (N0-1309,
Ankl.Bow.326, R.1491), Handloaor wohnto dioaor Tagung boi. (Handloaor
R.2940). In don Borlcht uobor daa oboa orwaohnto Ausanrcontroffon
Kliovoa mlt Blomo am 23. Fobmor 1944 wird woltur orklaorti

"••uf V/unaoh doa Poldrmraohalla Soitol soil dio .u*noo koinon
vornntwortllohon .uitoll an don Vorauchon nohmon, da nuch Voraucho
an Konaohon auagofuohrt wordon."

2a lot aua dioaor Erklaorung oraichtlioh, daa3 Foldnaraohall
Itol, dor Chof doa Oborkoranondoa dor oohrmcht, von don syatonati-
ohon Vorauchon on Konzontratlonalncorinaaaaon imtorrichtot war.


- 35 - •


.•n^oaichta doason 1st oa nicht glaubhoft, daaa Handloaor ala Chof

\

'oa Sanitaotawoaona dor Wehrnacht und ala unaittolboror uhtorgebonor
itola nicht aogar noch boaaor untorrichtot war.

(4) Vorauohe rr.lt Gaa-Oodem-Sorun.

Sin fomoror Bewaia dafuor, daaa die .jiatollung von Vorsuchon an
iConzontrationalaoorinaaaaon oino in don Handloaor untoratollton Kili-
taoraanitaotawcaon uoblicho und gobllllgto Proxia war, wird in don Bo-
woiamatorial uo'oor dio Voraucho in Verbindung rnit don Gaa-Oodon-Sorun
gofundon.

Handloaor bozougto, daaa dr.3 Gaa-Oodon oino duroh Infoktion oinor
Wundo duroh Bnktorion orzougto Kronkholt iat. Dio Storbllohkoit iat
aohr hooh. Daa Killtaoraenltaot3woaon hatto oin Gaa-Ooion-Sorum, daa
zur Bokaompfung dor Infoktion vorwandt wurdo. Sa wurdo boobaohtot,
la3a mlt dloaom Sorum bohondolto Soldaton nanohnol nach onaohoinondor
Wlodorhoratollung plootzlloh atorbon. Dor Phonolgohnlt Joa Soruraa
rdo fuor dio Uraaoho gohalton. Dloaor -cnzo Konplox wurdo von rro-
oaaor iCilllon von dor Sonltaotainapoktion dor .lOhrnnoht, oinon Untor-
obonon Bondloaora, atuilort. (Handloaor R.30S3).

Dio oldoaatattlloho Srklaorung von -r. Srwin Sohulor, aliaa Ding,
dor dio Typhuaoxporlmonto In 3uchonwald loitoto, orklaort, daaa auf
oinor Kcnforonz In dor Kilitaoracrztliohon .Uccdonio 3ndo 1942 in Borlin
an dor or toilnahri, dio Tcdotfaollo boi dor .uiwondung doa Oaa-Oodon-
Sorum/j boi vorwundoton Soldaton oinor dor Dlakutaiona o^onataondo war.
Dio von Sohulor in dloaor oldoaatattliohon -rklaorun-; crwaohnto Vor-
oammlung iat zv/olfolloa dio 2. Tagung dor boratondon ..orzto dor Wohr-
macht zwiaohon don 30. Novorrbor und 2. Dozonbor 1942. Dio oldonatatt-
Lloho Erklaorung atollt woitor foat, daa3 untor don Toilnohmorn an
ior Dlalcuaaion uobor daa Gaabrandaorui. Killlor., Control Sohroibor,
^rugowaky und oin ihn unbokanntor Sanitaotaoffizlor waron. Killion
i Mrugowaky oratattoton Boriohto uobor Soldaton, dio dca Sarua in
.’ooaon Mon go n orhalton hatton uxl dio Stundon apaotor, nachdon aio
ich anachoinond


-rholt hatton, pln«t:*lich ohno «i«htbaron Grund starbon. Don ihonol-

«hn3h So runs wurdo dio toodlicho Virkung zugoachrlobon. In Go-

-.onwart Killiona und Schrolbora bofchl Krugowaky Schuler, on dor M ua-

fuohrung dor Suthanaalo on oinoa Konzontratlonalagorlnaaaaon nit Hilfo

von rhonol toilzunohmon und daa Rcaultat in alien Elnzolhoiton zu bo-

.

achrolbon. Schulor war a poo tor Bongo boi dor Sinrichtung von •; odor
5 Oofongonon durch don ^ngoklcston Hovon in Konzontrntionalagor Buchon-
wtxll• 3orohl8Gomao3 3 borlchtoto Schulor aolno Boobachtungon r.aoh 3or-
Un. (NO-257, 4nkl.Bow.283, R.1091).

I_I1. Schlnaafol<;orun,~.

Handloaor war dor hoochato Sanltaotaomzior In Doutaohlond. Sol-
Waoht oratrockto aich uebor daa goaonto Sanitaotaweaon dor V/ohr-
icht oinachllo3alloh dor Waffon-SS.

Handloaor nahm an dor Konforonz von 29. Dozonbor 1911 toll, ala
jntaohlodon wurdo, daaa Plookfioborexporlaonto in Buohonwald atattfin-
ion aollton. Elnor aolnor tiitorgobonon boauohto an aolbon Tog olno
Vorkonforonz uobor donaolbon Gogonatond. Sanltaotaofflzloro, dlo
Handloaor dlrolrt untoratandon, woron von don Elnzolhoiton dloaor Vor-
auoho untorrichtot - Syor, Sohnldt und Schroibor. Eyor ompfing olnon
Horicht uobor dio orato Vorauohorolho und boauohto apnotor, von Sohnidt
bogloitot, dlo Vorauohaatatlon. Hit Plockfiobor infixlorto Laouao und
xuoh Inpfotoffo wurdon dor Vorauohaatatlon von olnor Hcndloaor dirokt
ntorotollton Stollo gollofort. Dine borlchtoto In olnor von Handloaor
inborufonon Voraomnlung dor boratondon ..orzto uobor dio Flocltflobor-
xporlmonto. Ea wurdo zun ..uadruck gobraoht, daaa dlo Exporinonto an
zontratlonalagorlnansaon auagofuohrt wordon woron. Von olnon dor
czto wurdo gogon dio Exporir.onto oin Elnwond orhobon. Sohroibor,

. hochgo3tolltor Oohllfo Knndloaor3, fuohrto Con Voraitz boi dor Vor-

•unmluog, In wolohor dor Vortra r. gohalton wurdo. Sr atarei In Vorbindung
'.t aohnllohon


von Ha^on on Inaaaaon doa Konzontratibnalagora Natswollor auagofuohr-
ten Flockfioboroxporinonton.

Dio Hoor03-S~»*taotalnapoktion untor Handloaor bonutzto dio 2in-
riohtusv-^- 3uchonwaldor Vorauchsatation, ua Golbfiobor-Inpfatoffo
p^ofon zu lcaaon. Dio Roaultato dioaor Voraucho wurdon cn Dr.Schmidt
•oaohiclct. Kurzo So it apaotor wurdon auf Snrdgung Handloaora in Bu-
ohonwnld koaibiniorto Impfatoffvoraucho auagofuohrt. In dor. Jahron

1943 und 194-i wuuio altoa Blutploana fuor dio iillitaoraorztlicho

\

Akadomlo untor Kondloaor an Inaaaaon doa "ICLoinon logora" in 3uohon-
Ud auaprobiort.

Dio von Raaohor und Holzloohnor in iConzontratlonalagor Dachau go-
loitoton Kaoltooxporinonto waron Handloaor pokannt; Craooor, oln Untor-
Gobonor handloaora, achlug oino Zuaarr.onorboit alt Raaohor vor. Hand¬
loaor, obonao wio Schroibor, hoorto oinon Boricht Holzloohnora uobor
dioao Exporinonto. In don Loltaaotzon, dio von Handloaor untorotohin-
don Stoll on orlaaaon wurdon, wurdo von don Srjobnlaaon dioaor Vorauoho
Oobrauoh gomaoht.

Handloaor hoorto auf oinor Voraacnlung, bol dor or don Voraitz
fuohrto, oinon Borioht uobor Oobhardta und Piaohora Sulfonould-Vorau-
oho. Dor Boricht onthlolt quch naohoro Einzelhoiton uobor kuonotlioho
aiflziorung und Todoafaollo. 2a wuxdo klar run ..uadruck gobraoht,
laaa Konzontrntionalogorlnaaaaon vorwondt wurdon. Vorauoho fandon
'"•oh dioaor Voraaranlung atatt.

Dohnon, oin Untorgobonor Handloaora, fuohrto Golbauchtoxporimanto
n Inaaaaon doa Konzontrationalogora Saohaonhauaon aus. Handloaor
.tand auoh mlt aohnlichon Kxporiaonton Haagona in Natzwollor und Dro-‘
uola in Buohonwald in Vorblndung.

Wirth, oin Untorgobonor Handloaora, war uobor dio Gaaoxporinonto
an ruaalaohon Kriogagofai^onon in Biokonbach bol Straaaburg untorrich-
tot. Er boaichtigto dio Vorauohaatation. Wirth achlug auch Karl
Brandt Gaaoxporironto In Vorbindung nit dor 3ntaouchung von Waaaor vor.


- 38 -


>

V


Handloser stand auc.h nit don u 31itzarbGitor n -..uascfauaQ in Vur-
blndung, dor Ibroorlironto an k'onachon nit Kilrrobon und Gift fuor dio
biologischo iiriogafuohruns bofuorwortoto. thd achlioaalich loiatoto
Schroibor, zuaaranon nit oinon andoron Untorgobonon Handles ora, Eoi-
hilfo boi Mordoxporirxmton nit Ihonol in Vorblndung nit don Gaa-Oodan-
Sorum.

Dio ..nklogobohoerdo bohauptot, dass das Bowolsraatorial orgibt,
ojas Kandlosor Gin Haupttaotor, Boiholfor, ..natiftor und Vorachub-
lo'istondor war, soino Zuatinnung cab zu und in Zuaaroonhong stand nit
* lionon und Uhtomehnungon, dio dio Vomohno aorztliohor Voraucho an
monaohlichon Vorauchaobjokton ohno ihro Zuztlrming olnachloaaon, in
doron VorlauT Kordtaton, Brutalitaoton, Grauaardcoiton, Folterungon,
Grouoltaton und ondoro unmonachlicho Taton bogangon wurdon, und daao
aoino Sohuld im Sinno dor /.nklagopunlcto I, u und III dor ;jdclaco-
aohrlft foatgoatollt lat.


Ich, Prod Lqx Hr. X046 207 bortiitigo hioroit, dass ich
durchouo vertraut nit dor ongliuchun und ^eutachon Spracho
bin, und Juaa daa Vorotehendo cino wahrheitegennbBO und
richtigo UberooUung doa obigon Dokunonta daratcllt.


4 Juni 1947


Prod Lax
Dr. X04G 207


- 39 -
"aido*


SDHBECUHG.


Unter Punkt I dor Anklagoachrift wird dar Angeklagte ,/aldonar
Hovon Jn tresentlichon beschuldigt, daaa er sich nit anderen Porsonen
fcn Vorfol^Q einos gonoinaiam Vcrhabona zu einor Verschnoorung und
Uebeminkunft zusanrajng-fiajden hat, ua nediziniachu Bxporinonto an
Monachal chn '* ' loren Zuaoinaung vorzunehnenj unter Punkt II und HI
(jCrior.avorbrochon uni Vorbrochen cegon die Ifienschlichkoit), da 3 s er
Haupttaoter, Teilnohner, Anatiftor, -'orachubleiatondor gewoaon ist,
aoino Zuatir-ung eogoben und ait plaervm und Uhtornehaen in Vorbindung
goatandan hat, dlo dlo Durclifuohrun- ittdiziniacher Sxpoxinentc an JSor>-
achon ohno Zuatirr.ung dor Detroffondon und daa aoeenannta EutJianaaio-
Prograua zun Gegonatand hattenj und unter punkt IV, das 3 er nach don
1. September 1939 oin >«ltgliod dor SS war, cioir von Intornationnlen
’tilltnorgorichtahof fujr krininsll orklaorton Organization.

Don Angoklagton Hovon irird beaondoro Vcrantwcrtllchkoit fuor dlo
Flookfiobor- und nndoro Inpfatoffvoraucho, wio slo in Ziffor 6 (j) dor
Anklagoochrift bunchrlobon aind, sur Laat gologt und dio Tcilnahno on
aogonanntun Euthanaaio-pro 6 rarza, daa in Ziffor 9 beachriebon iat. Ea
iat auch dor ^woia dafuur orbracht wordon, daaa or an don Oaa-CWdon-
Soruij-Sxporinujnton toilgono-s*n hat.

I* bTKLL’JMj UND Vr2U:T.iCfJLICriKEIT

Dor Angoklagto Hovon trat in Jahro 193ii dor SS und 1937 dor JBDAP
boi. Qoi Auabruch doa Krlogoa trnt or in die 3aff«m-SS oin. In dieaen
Vorband at log or zun Rang oinoa Hauptatumfuehrora auf. ?fcchdon or
aoino Grundauabildung in dor .afforvSS erhalton hattc, mirde Hovon
Hilfaaanitaotaoffizior in SS-Laxarott in Konzontrationalager ^hxchoxsrald
und bohiolt dioao StoUung bia 19U1 boi. (JKMx29, Ankl.Rew. 281, R.1073)
NO-591, Ankl.Bow. 35» R. lixO). In januar diosoa Jahma wurdo or zwoitor
Lagorarzt in Ugerlazarott (Hovon R. 9765) und ninicatona achon in junl
19U2 Chofarzt (Hovon R. 9767). Sr vorbliob in dlo 5 or Stcllung bia Supteo-
bor 19U3, ala or auf Anordnung doa SS-Poliaoigorichtoa Kassel verhaftot
wurdo (NO-li29 und NO-591 oben). Hovon wurdo w«gon doa Herds an eireaa


SS-Scharfuohrcr varhaftet, dor ein fuer Koch, den Lagorkccmndanton von
Buchorcfald, schr gofaehrllchor Zou^e var.(Kcgon R. 1183-1.). Es 1st Bo-
wcla dafuor vorhandon, das a Hoven schon vcr Junl 19U2 Chefarzt war, und
twar schon ia Fruehjahr 19U1. (RoeeUld R. 1631). Ein Brief von Fonnocko,
datiort von 25. Jtovonbor 19U1, spricht von Hoven als don Lagorarst.
(NO-9^7, Ankl.Bow. 1*12, R. 1716). In jodon Fallc hatto Hovun schon vor
sqLtjji offlalollon Ernonnuns zua Lasorarzt entacheideivicn F.lnfluss in
Lnjorlazarott gohabt. Der Zouge Rocnhild sagte aus, dass Hoven ven
Sccner 191.1 an "dio ontschoidondo Kollo" in Lazarctt spiolto. (R» 1653).

/Js Dr. Ding-Schulor (in dor Folgc Ding gonannt) ait solnon krini-
nollon Flcckfiobor- und andcron Inpfatoff-Experinonten in Konaantrations-
lagor Euchorarald anfangs 191.2 b>-- .ann, hatto Hoven iraohxund dor Abweson-
hoit von Ding dio Aufsicht uobor dio 2cpcrir>jnti«rstation. An 9. Januar
19L3 \rordo dioso Exporinontiorstation auf Anorunung doa Angekla^ten Gor.z-
kon hin zur "Abtollung fuer Flcckfiobor- und 71rus-?orschung dor ’.affon-
33". Ding war dor Loiter dioaor Abtollung und dor Angoklagto Kevon war
offizioll mit seiner Stellvortrotung botraut. (NO-265, Ankl.3«w. 287,

R. 1127, in dor Folgo als Dingschos Tagcbuch bozoichn.t).

Dios waron also dio vurontwortlichr. Stollungen Horens 1 "Hnupt-
oturmfuehror in dor Uaffer>^S", Chofarzt doa Konxentratlonslagcrs Buchon-
wald und Stollvortrotcr Dr. Dings in dor"abt.ilung fuer Flockfiobor-und
Vlrus-I'orschung' 1 .

II* H3tS0SKLICHE TEILVAKfli AN KRTHIKEIXS?; HkKDL’JN'3EN.

A* Flockflobor- und andcrc Ic.'fstjff-Ex.orLner,te (Anklagcschrif t,

Ziffer 6 (J))

Fuor uiivi elngohonlo Buchrelbung doa krininollen Charaktors dioaor
SxporiTonte wird auf don Schriftsata dor Anklagobohoorde gogen don
Angoklagtgn Mrugowsky vonrloson.

Jfach don Elnfall in Russland Jn Jahro 19U1 wurdo Flcckfiobor zu
cinur ornaton Gofahr fuor dio doutscho fohnacht. Die Vcr. ondung von
Flockfiobcriryfatoff war eino dor hauptsaochlichcn Ifethodon, ihr
zu bogognon.


Ara 29. Dozenber 19lxl fand einc 3osprechung zwischen den Angeklagton
Kandlosor ala Hcerea-Sanitaetsinapcktor, Conti von aelchfirnominiatoriw:,
Roitor vcg lieichagoaundhoitsa-rt, Gildcnoiater vcc Rcbert-Xoch-Inatitut
und don Angoklagten lirugowaky ala Loiter des Hygicne-Inatituta dor Haffon-
SS atatt. Boi dioaer KorXareas wurde boschicsson, daas Fleckfiobor-Irjpf-
atoffo an Honschon auap-vbiart worden aollten, in ihro Wirkaankoit foat-
auatoil Lin. Buj Konzontrationalagor 3uchernrald wurdo xi» Pruofungaort dca
Fleckfioboriapx'atoffoa boatinst. Ding wurdo die Ausfuchrung dor Experi-
nonto uobortragon. (pingachos Tagobuch).

Dio Vorauchc wurdon urspruon S lich in Block BB und B9 doa Xonzontra-
tionalagora Suchorarald durchgofuohrt. Spaotor irurdo dio Vorauchaatation
nach Block B6 doa Lagora vorlogt und In Jahro 19B3 wu-do Block 50 zur
Vorauchaatation hlnzugonoenon. Diosor Block wurdo fucr die Horatcllung
doa Plock/iobor-lnpfatoffoa vorandot. Hovon -nr dor Stvllvurtrotor Dinga
J in boidon Bloockon (Kogon R. 1155-56, Dlngachoa Tagobuch), Bir Sintrag
im Dingaohon Tagcbuch von 17. Haora 19B2 bowolat, doaa Hovon Dinga Stcll-
vortrotor In aoiror Abwoaonhoit war. Br lauteti "SS-Hauptatumfuohror Dr.
Ding iat an Flockficbcr orkrankt und liogt in Laaarctt in Borlin. SS-
Hauptaturafuohror Hovon, Standortarzt dor affon-SS, Woimr, uobor.acht
in dor Zwiachonzuit dio Stationon (Block BB und B9)". (!K>-265 obon).

Dor Zougy X gon gibt on, daaa Hovon in Kenzontrationalagor Bucboiarald
' oino doppolto Funktion hotto. Er war Lagorarzt und dor Stcllvurtrotar
Dr. Ding-Schulora fuor dio Vorauchostation B6. (R. U6l). In aoinor
‘ Elgonachoft ala Ugararit opiulta Hovon b«i dor Auawahl dor Versuchapor^
aonan fuor dio Flockfloboroxporin»nto dio ontschoidoraJo Rollo. Ding or-
auchto don Lagorarzt,Vorkohrungon fuor die Auawahl dor nctwonligon Aneahl
von Haoftlingon zu troffen. Dor Logtrarzt luitoto dloaoa Erauchon an dio
Lagorvorvraltun* welter (Xogon K. 1166 , H&9-60). Hovon gab dies in aoinor
oidoastattlichon Erklaorung au.


- 3 -


2 r ecgtei


"Dio Auawahl dor Hao ft lingo, dio tots Institut fuor Flockfiaber
ur.d Virusforschung fuor aedizinischo Vorsuche is Block h6 vor.ren-
dot wcrdon a oil ton, ging fol^ondomaason vor sichj Judesnal wonn
Dr. DIM} fuor a cine Arboiton Honachon brauebto, wurdo uinj Anfon-
uorung an daa Duero des Ugorkaruindantcn gerichtct und an cich
sur Durchfuohrur..-; ^eito rgoleltct. (krwoehnlich bonachrlc K t liU
aich oin }ann, no:'-.ns SCHOliR, olii SS Hauptstumfuehrer, daas ich
dio erfordorlicho Anzahl von Kaoftlin-en fuor dioso Zwocko aus-
•raohlun accchto. I ch waoht to cntsprochend dor Anfordonuv aufs
p .vatow'hl vorsch. 1 J£lno i. I7?tll:u c nach dor Naaensliatc des
Labors aus. Sio wurden auf oir.o von nir untcrzoichnitc Lista
jesotzt und an SCH03ER zurucckgogoben, dor oft b-stimte Hanon
aus politischon Gruondon von dor Listo ontfornto. Falls boatimto
jefangono von dor Listo abgesotzt wurion, hatte ich die Aufcabc,
Irsatzlouto auszuwaohlon, us Dr. DIM} dio vorlangt* Anzahl von
Opforn sur Vorfueguni *u stollon. Sachdon ich dio Listo vervoll-
otaondigt an SCHODSl zuruuckjogslxm hat to, wurdo sic Dr. DIM}
zur Gor>.'h-il-.un- vorgologt. 3r unterzog sio oinor abschliusscndon
Doborpruofung, un sich v<r. -iisinischan Stondpunki aus v<*s
Koorporlichon Zustnnd dor o rachlton Kauftlingc zu uobc.r*cu.:< n

ob 8ij Sjinon Anfcrdortmcon untsprachen'cdor
nicht.' (NO-U29 obon, Untorstrcichungon oixvofuejt).

Mosoa Howoisstuock irird durch dio Aus saga dcs Zougon Roenhild^H.

und dio oidosotattlicho Auss&go dos vorstorbonon Ding solbst bokraoftigt.

(NO-257, Ankl.Dow. 283, R. 1091).

Dozuoglich solnor Stcllung als Dings Stollvortrotur gab Hoven in

soimr oidoostnttlichon firklaoruiv, an:


"Da ich in Buchunwald staondig nit Or. Ding tusaaxm war, wurdon
wir gut Freund. Ich hobo ait Ding haouflg dio problem bosprochon
und von Zoit zu Zolt aoino Torsuchsstation bosucht. Ding nussto
tatsaochllch alio swul 'cohon fu«ir nahezu Orel Taco zu Do-
aproohungon nit Dr. irru.;owsky und anAjron nach Berlin fahren,
^n.'-boi dio son Gelo^--nholtjn hatto ich dio Lcitung dos Flockficbor-
lnsti-utos inno. jadoch wurdon, uonn Ding nach Berlin fuhr, dio
Voroucho nicht ohor fortjofuohrt ala bis or zuruockkchrtc.

Di^ "iodorun boschriob Hovons Funktionan wio folgt,

" Hnvous Antoil an Plock L6

Ir. Fobruar 19U2 wurdo dio Durchfachrung dor Szporlsonto uobor dio
firksankoit dor Flockfioborinpfstoffo bofcfclon. Ich sclbst wurdo
zur nbwlckiun^j dor Vorsuoho bostimt. Do ich rv-irw Bionststollo
in Borlin hntto, susstc fuor dio Zoit cuinor Abwesonhoit oin
Stcllvortrotor in uchorarald ornannt wordon. Als dioson bostimlo
-or doichsnrzt S3 Dr. Orawitz in Einvorstaundnis sit don leitcn-
*Jat dor Kona. Laogor Lolling don danaligcn SS-Oberstumfuehror
Dr* Hovon # als Standortarat Duchonrald*

Koino Ab»/osonhoit In Ifuchorwald bcschraonkto sich nur auf wonigo
Ta -.o, dio Bluer oincs ganzon Vorsuchos von dor SchutzLnpfung
uobor die infektion bis zun Ablauf dor Flockfiobcrorkrankung
Jodoch auf utwa 10 Tochon.


- li -


!


>


«•'


Dr4 Hoven hatto die Aufgabe, die vea Reiehssicherheitshauptant
und von Chef dor Xonzentraticnslager fuer die Vorsuche freigego-
bonen Haoftlinge (Borufsschrrorverbrochor, zua Todo vorurtcilte)
nach Pruofung Hirer koorporlichon Tauglichkoit fuer die Schutz-
inpfung Oder dio Infektion tereitzustollcn.

Er hattc in seiner oigenen Vortrotung haeufig den Dr. Platza ait
dor Uebenrachwig des Block 1*6 bcauftract, dor in uebrigen untor
don Kapo Dietzsch weitgohenri selbataondig arboitoto.

 H

Hovon hat ala coin Stellvortrotor bis zu noinoa dauorndon Ein-
troffon in Buchorrwald, in August 191*3 gearboitot, in Scptenbor 1st
or dann vorhaftot wordon.


In Jahro 191*2 hat or woitgehond solbstaondig arboiton nuosson,
da ich solbat fleckficborkrank wurdc und anschliossond in cin
Gonosungshoin kan. In Anschluss daran hatto ich ein Kcrcando an
das Institut Pastour in Paris. Wo Krankcngcschlchton tragon
durchirog dio Untorschrift Hovon odor Platza." (NO-257, Ankl.Bow.

2o3, R. 1091).

Waohrond dor Jahro 1912 und 1913 war Ding haoufig von Buchonwald

nbwosond, Hovon war zwar nicht in dor Lago, cine ncuc Versuchsroiho aus

oigonor Initiativo zu beginnon, war abor fuor dio Auswahl und dio Auf-

sioht uobor dio Vorsuchsporsonon solbst, dio Berichto uobor dio Fiobor-

kurvon, Tngobuchcintraego und Borichto vurantwcrtlich. Er boaufsichtigto

dio ordontlicho Fuchrung von Aufzoichnun .on uobor dioso Exporinonto.

(Kogon H. 1179-60). Dioso Zougonaussago wird lurch lio Aussago dos

Zougon Ktfchhoinor voll und gana bostaotigt. (R. 132l-Jl). Kirchhoiaor

gab woitor an, dass dor Kapo dor Sxporia. ntiorstation, Dietzsch, in

Dings Abwosonhcit von Hovur. Anordnungor. zur Durchfuehrunc dor Exocri-

(R .1311)

aonto orhiolt und Hovon/ln Dings Abwosonhoit als bofohlshabondor Qffizicr

(R .131*5).

dos Blocks 1*6 angosohon wurdo./Solbst dio Sntlastungszougon von Hovon
gabon zu, dass Hovon in Dings Abwosonhcit scin Stollvortrotor war.

(Piock, R. 1*753, Dorn R. 3631). Ifcr Zouge Rccohild sagte aus, class Hovon
ait Ding zusarrwnnrboiteta und ihn in soinor Abwosonhcit vcrtrat.(r.,l633).

Ding war vea 10. Scotenbor bis 10. Cktcbor 191*2 in Pastcur-Institut
in Paris. (Dingsches Tagcbuch). Dio obonangcfuehrU- cidosstattlicho
kloorung^wcist, dass or ven 17. Haorz bis cr viedor nach Paris ging,
oin Flockfiobcr-Rokonvalustont war. Dins war also


- 5 -


pc £0 6 of ori; incl

v0a 17 . t’aorz bis zua lol Oktober 1942 voa Xoazcntrntions-
1 Buchonvrald abvrnoanU. ' rchrcnd diesor Zcit v/urdo dio
Vcrsuehereihe I an 145 Versuebspe.sjnan zu Dado gofucfcrt,

di, 5 Todes ’ 0 * 10 zur ? ol 6 ‘ hett-. (Bir.trzc in I»incach-n
Tngobu* f * untcr dca 19. -pril) ZwiechcnB. -ucust und 4.
Sostor.bcx 1942 v;urdo V- suchareihc II bejonnea cit "dor
Vornc  30 vm SchutEinpfungon sweeks Icaunisicrunc gogon
pijckficbor ’ 1 1 und zr:cr ,n 4o Vc/suchep-xonon. J icsc V.r-
auciispjnwncn wurden en 15. Ok to be kucnetlich infizi-rt.

Obwohl di- ki-netlich- Infiuicrunf zu -incr Z-it r.usccfuohrt
v.urdo, fie ^lng no- u lich-r iac afar. nr.cli -uchcnvrnld zu-
ritckcckclirt vwr, v-urdo ait den V rouchorcifc-n trtor.cchlich
boconnon, r.lo dor Angakl. £to Ho von lloin di- V.rouckoatr-
tim unt-r sich hrtto (Din. sc he 8 - .chuck itrro -
19. oncost und 4. Jeptoabor 1942). 4 .ere non ctr.rb-n rlo
Folgo diuO-r Vs»rauchercihon. (Din echos 2 r~cbuoh -intrr.c
Vo--: 2o. liovonber 1942).

iun 9 . Jena r 1943 wardo .oven von d-a t-n Genzkon

nobon ocinon ..ufgrb-n els Din. a Stcllb,rtrct-r in V-rouchs-
bloclc 46 offizicll druit botrrut, Din., b-i d.r Uoborweehung
dor Iapfotoff-rroduktion in Block 5o zu rDLieti-r-n (Dir. -
och-o Tre-buch). liovcu :oochtc,d. ao d-r Scrichtahof bo-
ochliceeo, ox hr bo rls *»tcllvertr-t r Di.: t o nur ...t d.r
iiorotollun;. von Inpfotofion -u tun gob bt. Dios i 8 t durch
dio -.uaorv n ven tCogon, ..oouhlld, ICirohh-inor und ?look
und di- »bwii und waiter unt.n boschriobvnon ockrifistUck-
v;idvrlo ; t word-n. uob-.dice v.urdo dio croto lur. v.n Iapf-
stoff crct rn 16. ;»u..uot 1,43 begonnen ua h'ev-n wurdo in
Soptcakr vo:h'ftot. (NO-571, *nkl. 3aw. i85, ... llo 6 )...uo
Din; a -xb-itcboricht fuor d*s *> 'nr 1943 flcht h rvor, droe
or vo.i 28. Fc brur. r bis zua 6 . IIco.z, vj 29. -pril bio zu.:

1 . ai und von 25. ‘'uni bis zu:. 15. «u uot vo.. i nzontrr.ti .ic T
loger Buchcnv/eld rbwosond v r. -ua doneolb-n Dekun-nt joht
hurvor, dess zriochon don Je.F-bruor und d-c 6 . Lr.-rz 2
V-rsuc oreihon in dor Vorauchaatction in Cange weren, ero-
tonOf,dd4uVersuche nit Gelbficbe.-Inpfstoff, die an 435
Vorsuchapersonen vorgenonnen und zwischen den lo. ijanuar
und 17. Hoi durchgefuehrt v.uxgxn und sweitens die Vereucho
mit Fleckfieber-


schutzinpfatoffcn (-“vice und iucricj), die ;a 4 o v crsuc:is-
porsonen zv.’ischcn den 25. ^enurr und den 3. -pril vorge-
nonnen \ urd.n. ( 2 iO 571 ebon). r p.chrond L_ngs -brosonheit
wnr von 27. -pril bia zun 1 . Kni -inc d-r uebclst^n, jo in
dcr -Icckficbei-Ve.such 8 tr.tien vorgononnonen, Versuche in
vollcn Grnco, die v oraucho, dio “irkaEnkoit dcr Dromon ..cri-
dln, Grcnul to und -‘utonol gegon Plcckficbor zu orprobon.
Dioso Verouchc wurdon zvisclicn d^n 24. ..pril und 1 . Juni
1943 vergonoonon. v >n den inseoannt 39 Kiftlingon, die dr-
fucr v.rwcndct wurd^n, stnrbcn 21. (Lin. ach~a Trgobuch).
Tnohrend Liog 8 -.bv/caonhuit, d«.r aich von 25. "uni bia zun
15. "ugust 1943 cuf ^rmh^uitourl ub bcfrnd, weren zuci
v/oitcro V-raucLi 8 roihon in S'njc. Voa 23. “r.i bia 4. Lezen-
bor 1943 v/urd^n Vo audio nit d~n .«lockfi-b-rirpfateffon
"..aid", "..aid ..d 8 orb''t ! ' und ’•'-oicjl 1 ' n 7o Verouchapwraon^n
vorgonocaon und Veroucho nit dvr Lrogo "Otl.ronin" xvurdwn r.n
4o Vo: ouch 8 pv.raon.n vergenoncon. (NO 571 oben). Li_ V^rauchc
nit ..aid, -aid ..d 8 ji*b t und Tci 1 voruraaoliton den Tod von
53 do 7o *orooncn, r.n d^nen V.raucho vorgenonnen worden
wr.ron (Lin ; ,ochoo Treobuch).

HoVen wrr ^i a otollv.rtrot.r, bia Li ^ atnondig
v 3 .i fcuguot 1943 cb in lljnzontrcti n 8 l gs.r -uchonw.'ld wcr.
(NO-357 obon) Lr nurdo on 12 . ooptenb-r 1943 v-rhrftvt.

(Lorn 8576) ..uo don ben rnfiefuohrt.n Suwoiaon gcht hor-
vor, dr.se Hovona Trotigkoit : 1 s Lxn-e otcllv rtrct.r 8 ich
hr.uptecoohlich rui ^i.igs Vereuchorrbeitcn bozo . ^io gwgn-
toiligc “uaur,c doo -ntlcatiuu ozougen Lorn iat rloo in
dtooon runlet gncnzlich unzutreifond. (L rn •*. 8632),

..uo dcr Loweisurh-bung toht fernor hervor, droa "oven
nicht nur dio Verouchaotrtion in L .130 ~iroBcnhoit beruf-
oichtigto, sond^rn, d aa cr colbst ruch -a den V.rsuchen
durch Infizicrunc dcr V auci ap.rsoncn toilnr.hn. ~u 3o.
Novouber 194o wurdo oin Vercuch go relit, V_raucl. 8 por 8 on^n
kuonatlich nit durch Plockfic e. infiziert.n Lneuaon zu
infi. icron. * ..la die Bchncltcr, in denen die Lncuso gohnl-
ton \7urdcn, wr.chrond doa Trmapvrtos undicht gowordon woren,
und die Gofrhr einer

x (Kogon, R. 122o-l; Kirchhoinor, H. 1326 ;Ling Liary)


Fleckfieberepidenie in Icger drohte, warden die Beheelter
verbrnnnt (Dingsch03 T-gebuch). ,.n 3. Dezonber 1942 wardo
eino zweito Sonduns von ait Fleckfieber infiziorten -^ceusen
von einen rohrardrteoffi-ier fuor denselbcn Zweck nrch Buchcn-
wald gebracht (Dingsches ? R gobuch). 15 Versachspcrsonen war¬
den in Gegonwcrt des -ngoklogten Hovon und dc3 tVehraacht-
offiziers, dcr die Leeuse gebracht taatte, infiziort. (Kirch-
hoinor R. 1326 und Lorn 3. 8578). Dor -ntlr.stunoszcugo Dorn
sngto cub, dess Hevcn don Vchraachtoffizior verenleasto,
vor Bcondigung dos Vcrsuchs Tlock 46 ur.d das ^gcr zu ver-
lr.sson, un Gclogcnhoit zu he ben, die Lcouso, die wogon do.
LTooglichkcit oincr Infoktion fuor die SS-Louto in ^. u c. oinc
Gofahr dnrstclltcn, zu vcrnichtcn. Tctocochlich warden in-
dcoson die Infoktionsvcrouchc woitcrgofuchrt, sclbst ncch-
don doi* rohmr.chtoffizior v.-cg wer und un^efc.chr 9 von den
15 Haftlingon wurden dmn infiziort (iirchhcinor ... 1341).

D n Kirchhcincr oin “rr.nkcnpflog.r in d-r V.rsuchootction
wrr, und porsoonlich weehrond dieses V.rsuchs r.nwcecnd
war (ICirchhcinor R. 1339)# wogegen Lome -is on ruf riooron-
segen boruht und oich ruf ..nnrhaon otuctzt, (Dorn 8577-3,
8628-3o), naco -‘irchhcincrs ..ussego els die zuv-rlr.ooigcro
nngO 80 hen v.-erden. Dess Hovon ruf jod..n P ll v;nchrcnddeo
Exporincnto nwosend war, wird durch die -.uooego boidor
Zougor. bowiooon. (iiirohhcincr R. 1326 und Dorn R. 8629).

Licsc^^^^bowoist, nicht nur ni veno trotigo
Botoilifung an don Ploclcfio 'j. rvorsuchon, sonde in uch dess ,
oolbst warm Ling in i :- cr r.nwceond war, -r die ijrcht hr.tto,
in Vcrouchoblock 46 Bofohlc zu ortcilan.

Die ^nrichtigkoit von jlovcns ^ngabo^ dr.ss or uio Flock-
fieborinfizicrung^n vorgonennen hrtto (2. 9761) wurdo duch
die -ussogo dos Zougor. Locuwirdcr. vor don Kollaendischon
Buoro in -nsturden zur w ntv.rruchung von :Zric t .8v. rbrochon
bowiooon. Locuw rd.n sc to uo, d S3 or zusennon nit rnd.rcn
Hcoftlingon von Hovon in Block 46 ait Plookfiebori^pfitoffon
infiziort warden sci. 6 *~ochen 3p.it.r orhioltcn sie von

Hovon und soinon ..sei stent on eino nouc injekti n.-inigo T go

•%


dnrauf erkrcnktcn alio Vcrsuchspcrson^n schwcr cn Fleckfic-
bor. (K0-lo63, ~nkl. Bcw. 326, H. 1498). Di08c -usbegc bc-
woiat unzwdifclhcft, dr.sa Hovon sclbst cinigc dor Vcrsucho
vornehn. loouwcrdon sc&to r.uch ucbcr dioacn Dunkt vor oincn
3cr.uftrrgtcn do8 Gcrichtahofcs r.us, ds,r ihn FrcGen vorlcgtc,
dio von Hovcn8 Vcrtoidigor cufgoectzt \ 70 rdon wrron. Loou-
wr.rdon gr*b rn, or acl gnnz sichor, dr .30 or von Hovon infi-
zlo rt word^r. acl. Dor -ngckl: gto Hovon habo ihn die Injek-
tijn coeeben und oin pc.r.r Tgo epr.otcr die Vcrsuchsporsoncn
in Block 46 bcsucht, un sich zu v^reowissern, ob sic schon
von Plockfiobwr befallen soicn. (Sichc r.uch die -ngebo von
Vr.ndolinG HO lo 63 oben un seine -ntworton r.uf gcstollto
Prncon.)

.'•ngosichtB doa uob.rwnoltiGondcn 3cv.vl8r.ct eric. Is nucs-
aon die zu soinon cigoncn “unsten coarchtcn ~ngrbcn Kovono,
or hebe Dine nur io Block 5o vortroton und nicht i-it den
Vorauchcn aelbat zu tun gchr.bt, r.la voting ungl ubwucrdig
rncoochen warden, V.'r.ohrcnd H vono Tretigkeit in d*.r Ver-
ouchaotr.tion v or don nicht v:cni w »r r.la loo Kcuftllngo r.la
Folco dor Plcckfieb-rvv auchc gotootot.


B. Suthanaslo-Progra.—. - Aktior. Ik f 13.

VTegon oineratagehendan leschroibung des scgenannton Euthanasie-
PrograCTa, das in den Konzontrationslagom unter d ca Decknancn "Aktion
11* f 13" durchgefuohrt wurdo, siehe don Schriftsatz dor Anklagcbehoorde
gegon dan Angoklagton Karl Brandt.

An 1. September 1939 uobortrug Kitlor den «ngoklagton Karl Branat
und Reichsleitex Bouhlor, den Chof dos Angoklagton Brack, dio Durclw
fuehrung dos Euthanasic-Progra-T*, d.h. dio ^usrottung Goistcskrankor
und unhoilbar Kranker. (630-PS, Ankl.Qcw. 330, R/ l£L6). Dor wahro Qrund,
dor diosor Anordnung Hitlers zugrundo lag, war "nutzloso Essor" und
andoro unorwuonschto Porsonon, dio ala nutzloa fujr don doutschon
Kriogseinsatz orochtot wurdon, aua dca Wo go zu raounen. (Sicho Schrift- ,
satz dor Anklagobohocrdo go.-on don Angoklagton Karl Brandt).

Anfanga Scenor 19U0 wurdo das Euthanaaio-Program ausgodehnt, un
Tausondo von Konzontrationslagorhaoftlingo nitoinzuschliosson. Dio Lagor-
aorzto trafon oino vorlatuflgo Auswahl dor Haoftlingo, dio fuor Ausrottung
in Frago konon, und dioso Gruppo wurdo donn von oinor Sachvurstaondigorv*
Komission des Euthsnasic-Progrncna, dio dio vorschiodonon Konzcntratlons-
lagor boroisto, "untorsucht". Oobor dio ausgosuchton Haoftlingo wurdon
Fragobogon ausgostollt und sio wurdon spaotor zur Euthanasiostntion
verbracht, wo sio gotootot wurdon. (lonnccko R. 1682-3). Nichtdoutscho
Staat3angohcorigo und judan, dio Konzcntratlonslagorhaeftlingo waron,
wurdon in grosser Ansahl Cfcfor diosos Prograscs. (Uemecke R. 1667).

(Dr. 'luthig, dor Lagorarzt in Konzontrationslager Dachau war, und dos-
halb in oinor Stollung, dio dor dos Angoklagton Hovon in Buchenwald
ontsprach, gab in soinor oidosstattlichon Aussago an, daaa dio Sachvor-
stoondigon-Kotaaission in Horbst 19kl Haoftlingo zur Ausrottung durch Qss
auswaohlto, dio arboitsunfaohig waron. (NO-2799, Ankl.Bow. U97, R.7710)).
Das Konzontrationslagor Due ho rural d wurdo von oiror aelchon Sachvor-
staondigon-Kotmission


- 10 -


1r. junl 19U1 sun sclben 2<eck beaucht. Dloser Bosuch fand sun ausdruock-
lichen Zwock statt, Haoftlingo xur Tooting In sogenaraton Euthanaaio-
atationen auasuauchon, dio fcatsaochlich nichta anderea ala Auarottunga-
stationon warcn. (NO-3010, Ankl.Bew. 503, R.773U). Dlosa ass ago yen Dr.
Goreaas, dor oin Kitglied diesor «ersto-Kccoiaaion war, wird durch don
Zcugen p.oenhild boataetigt,c!er angab, das a in Sorrier 19U1 ciM Aerste-
Kemission ins Lagor Buchenwald kan und Kaoftlingo auawahlte, dio dann
ait oinoa Transport on i inon unbokannton Bostimungsort vorschickt
wurdon. Bin paar Gtuwion nach ihror Ahfahrt wurdo die porsoonlicho Habo
dioaor Haoftlinr.o sun Lagor zurucckgoachickt, aocaaa oa offenaichtlich
war, daas dio no Poraonon got octet w or don waron. f.oonhild erfuhr apaotor,
daaa dioao Inaaaaon nit Qas us’obracht worden waron. (R. 163U). Er aagto
fornor aua, daaa ia Horbct 19U1 Juodlacho Insasson doa Konsontrationa-
lagors Buchoratald von dan Lagoraorston, untor down dor Angoklagto Hovon
war, aorztlich untoraucht wurdon. Diojoniron .Mdcn, dio arboitauntauglloh
waron, wurdon von don Ugoraorston auagoaucht und in droi bis vior Trana-
porten in dio Buthanaaioatation Barnburg goaandt und dert durch Gaa go-
too tot. Ungofaohr 600 Haoftlingo wurdon boi diosur Gologonhoit uma
Loton gabracht. Oofaolschio Todoaurkunion wurdon auagestollt, dio bo-
aogton, daaa dioao Kaoftlingo oinoa natuorllchon Todoa geatorbon scion.
Dio Opfor dinar Aktion waron HaoftliA.® allcr Nationon, attache,
Oa3torroichor, Polon und Tachechon, und dio noiaten von ihnon waron gar
nicht krank. (noonhild R. 1636-37, 1683).

Dio Funktion dor Lagoraorsto bci don Euthanaaioprogram wird in

olnom Brlof dor Xoruontraticnslarorinsp) ktion an dio Ronscntrationalagor

oinachlioaalich Uuchcrwald boschriofcon. Er Leutot ausiugsweiac wio folgti

w n ’io den Ugorkccnruviar.ten 'lor Konsentrationslagor Dachau , Sachao n-
hauaon. Buchonwald. Kauthauson und Auschrlt* sit don Bcsugsachrolbon
nll'soioilt wurdo (12. Nov. l$Ul), wird in ier nacchatcn Zcit dio
Aorsto-Rccrdaaion dio vorgenannten Xonientraticnalagor sur Aus-
nusterung von Hacftlingon aufsuchon.


"Fuor dio Konzcntrationslagor Flossenburg, Gross-Rosen, Neuon-
SOjrce und HJedorhagen 1st dio 1. januarhaelft© 19U2 fuor dies©
Uaberpruefung vorgesehcn.

"Da dio zur Veffucgung stchcix'cn Aon to sohr stark in Anspruch
gonocron sind, nuossen dio Uoborpruofungsarboitch in den Kon-
zontrationslagorn, sowoit os irgond gcht, abgekuorzt wordon.

"In dor Anlage wird Kustor oines Xoldobogons als Vorlago zur Vor-
orboit ucborsandt. Dioso Fomblaottor sind in Abxu^sverfahron
hortustollon und auszufuollon. Auf licson Vustor ist dio Bcant-
wortung einzolner Fragon vorganoccon, diesolbon sind aussordon
rot untorstrichon, nur diose Fragon brauchon bcantwortot worden.
Bozuoglich oinzolnor Fragon wordon noch folgcnde Erlaoutorungon
gogobon*

"Dio Frago "Koorpjrl. unhoilb. Loidon" ist nach Moeglichkoit nicht
nur nit Ja odor Miin, sondorn nii. kurzer ^ngabo dor Dlagnoso zu
boantworton. Ausoirden ist ouch dio Frago dor Kriogsbcschaodi-
gung fcstzustollon, woil dioso oine wosontliche Erleichtorung
boi dor Uoborpruefun.jsartolt dor ..crstokcooission gcwaohrloistot.
Honn «!or Raumboi don Fra»on "Dolikt" und "Fruohcro Straftaton"
nicht ausroicht, 1st dio 3cantwortung auf dor Ruocksolto dos
ltoldobogons vorzunohnon, wic os auf den I'ustor voroorkt 1st,
Einzolno Vorstrafon sind nicht aufsuzaohlon, os ist nur uobor
dio hauptaaochlichston Vorstrafon kur* zu burichton, dio oinzolnon
Dolikto sind nur kurx aufcufuohron. Tolcho Haoftlingo fuor dio
Vorfuohrung in Frago kcrxxjn, ist aus don in Fragobogon gostolltcn
Fragon orslchtllch.

"Sacmtlicho vorhandonon .Jcton und Krankonblacttor sind dor Koo-
ni3sion auf Vorlangon zur Sinsichtnahno xur Vorfuegung tu stollon.
(1151-PS, Ankl.Puw. Ull, R. 1725).

Dor Lagararzt stollto oino List© dor Haoftlingo auf, dio fuor

Tootung in Frago karwn und fuollto go^lsso vcrlaoufigo Datcn auf don

Fragubogon aus. Dios war die Gruppo, dio dia Aorxtckcraission untor-

suchto, ala slo -las Lagor bcsuchtc.

Ein Xonorandun von 26. Haorz 19U2 von don WVHA bewoist, dass

Arboltsunfaohigkoit dio Grundlaso fuor dio Auewahl bildote. Es bosagtoi

"Durch dio Holdung oinos Lascrkccriandanton wur.'o .bokannt* dass
von 51 fuor dio Sorelorbohanilung 1U f 13 ausgenustorbo Haoftlingo
1(2 dio our Haoftlingo nach oini.^r Zeit "wiodor aoboitsfaohig"
wurdon


und b celt der Sonderbehandlung nicht
Hicraua 1st crslchtllch, dasa boi der
nicht nach den gegobcncn 3osti^-.uncon
dor Untorauchungakcmission nur 3 ole ho
wordon, die don gegebonen Doatirnungon
Dingon nicht :»hr arboitsfoohig sirvi,"


Ein woitorea Moaorandun ven 27* April 19U3 von WVKA an alio


Konzcntrationalagor bewoiat, daas sich vor Jonen I»tun dio Auswahl von
Haoftlingon fuor dio Euthanaaio nicht auf angeblicho Ooietoakranko
boachraonkto aondorn sich auf alio ArboitsunTaohigun erstrcckto. Ea hioaa


dor in:


nftach Vortroc hat dor Rolehofuehrer SS und Chof dor Doutachon
Polixoi ango^rdnot, daas in Zukunft r.ur goiareskrankc Oofantono
fuor dio Aktien III f 13 ven don hiorxu ernan-.-an aorztlichon
Koaaiasaron auagowaohlt wordon duorfon.

Alio arboltaonfaohigon arxloron Gofan;onon (Peraonon nit Tuborku-
loais, bottlaogorl a Kr.nke uunr.J .ini absolut von^"JrtST
auazuschliesoon. Oottloo^cr^cn Gofarv'.onon iat passondo
xu KOben, dio auch in Dott vorrichtot werdon kann." (U51-PS,
oban)•

Dor Zoogo Hocmeko, dor sslbst litfcllod olnor Aor.tokoml.slon


W) dio .sock. Aosnostorong ven Hooftllngon focr llo Tootonc In don
Eothanaslostatlonon dio Rondo Surch dio Koowntratlonslagor nochto,


bo row,to , doss or do. Ko««ntratlonsla.:or Dochonsnld s-otoal boouohM,
dos orsto Hal In ttorbst 1980 nv! das wolto Hoi to SovonHor 1981-


(H. 1883). Als dio Sachvcrstsandlgonk emission die Ecnsontrotlonslsgor
bosoohto, woron 4. Porsonalangabon dor Hsoftllngo, dio dlo.or Keonds-
olon vorgofuohrt radon. In don Erngobogon boro Us otojetrogon. Dios
gosohnh ven Doom do. Ugororstos. Dio saohrastaondlgon borloton oloh
nit don tosoroorston, dio dio UsU lor so ontorsoohondon Itaoftltoio
sutgostollt hotton. Dio Cuor dio ..osrottonz In frago komondon H.cft-
llngo aosston In orotor Instons no Losororst aosgcoohlt -srdon, dn
Jo dio Aor.tokomls.lon nor oin poor In*, to Lo.;or bliob ond cs lhr
our dann noogUch ra, lbro FonWlonon oos.ooobon, «nn slo sloh nit
dor Hae ft lingsgroppo bofossto, dio lhr vorgofuohrt radc. Nicht alio


von cion Logerarwt fuor dio Suthanasie auagcwShlton Haeftlingo waron
golatoakrank. Arbcitsunfaohigc Raaftlingo und andcrc, dio an Krank-
hoiton, wio Tuborkulosc littcn, wurdon dazu r«ncmen. (Hcnnocko
R. 1888-9).

SFcsicllc Dcstimungon bcatandcn tczuo-jlioh dcr Untorauchung von

judon, judcn wurdon nicht aorztlich untoraucht. Ea gcnuegtc, ihro Frago-

bogon durch Eintrag dor Qruondo fuor ihro Vorhoftun,- auszufuollon.

(•tonnocko, R. 1891-3). Dio Judon, dio in dio sen /.uarottunganktionon

oinbogriffon wurdon, waron aoiatona solatia und koorperlich goaund.

Dio dor Aorztokorrvlsaion vcrgcfuohrtcn judon waren bercita vorhor von

don Lag&raorzten luagoaucht warden. (Monnocko, R. 1891*) • '.fegon tinor

Liato dcr in Ruche nwnld zur Auarottung auagcwahlten Judon aioho dio

Rildor dor Judon nit JJonrvjckca handaebriftliehon Boncrkungcn auf dor

Ruockaoito. ( 00 - 3060 , «nkl.3crw. 567, R. 1070U; NO-2U36, *nkl.Bcw. 568,

R. 10705). Hcnnocko orinxwrto aich daran, daaaoa dor Angoklagto Hovon

in Konzontrntionalacor uchonwald war, dor ihr. die Haoftlingo vor-

fuohron lloaa. Hovon war oino dor loitonden Pcraoonllchkoiton in lagor

und wur in IrirkllcWcoit dor La-jrarzt. ('tonnccko, R. 1895)* ’tonnockoa

Zougenauasago wird durch sainen rriof veza 25* Novo-bor 191*1 an aoino

Frau boataotlgt, in don or acino Arbeit in Fuchcnwald boachroibti

."Dor orato Arboitatag in Ruchcnwnld 1st bcondot. i’ir waren un

8.30 Uhr houto fruoh drausson. Ich stclltc nich zunaochst boi don
nasagoblichon Fuohrorn vor. Dor' stollvortr. Lagerkomandant iot
SS-Kauptatumfuohxvr Florataodt, Lagorarzfrt SS-Cbcrsturnfuohror
Dr. Hovon. Zunaochst gab os noch ea. IX) Dogon fortlg luazufuollcn
von oinor oraton portion Aricr, an dor achon dio beiden nnluron
Kollogon go atom goarboitot hatten. Von die son 1*0 bearboiteto ich
otwa 15, /.Is dioao ganzo portion donn fortig bearboitet war, haute
Schnalcnbach ab, un nach Dreadon zu fahren, un bis zur- EnJc unaoror
hiooie-jn ,o*bc it nicht tvhr wio iorzukcrzvn. AnachlioaaonJ orfolgto
dam die "Untcrauchun.:" dor Patienten, d.h. elnc Voratcllung dor
Binzclnon und Vorgloich dor au3 don «kten ontneertnen ElntragUn-
Gon. Hiornit wurden wir bis llittag noch nicht fertig, dom dio
bolxkn Kollvgon haben goaUm nur the-retiach goarboitet, 3odaaa
ich diojunigon "nachuntcrsuchto", dio Schnalcnbach (und ich aolbet
houto oorgon)


VAJ1W* UXO VXii-J WiJ ,«VUVU5 t.w •• ••■

apruch nimt, viellcicht sogar noch lacngor. Von diosor zwoiton
portion (juion) habon wir houto dann noch gcnachti ich 17, IMollor
15, Punkt 17 ■warfen wir die Kollo wov" und «jingen sun Abondosaon

.So wio ich obon nun den houtigen Tag geschildert haba,

wordon auch die naochatcn Tago vcrlaufen - nit genau denaolbon
Program und derselbon Arbeit. Sach don judon folgon noch otwa
300 Arier ala clritto portion, die wiodcr "untoraucht" wordon
nucB3on. i/ir habon alao bia otwa Er*lo naochator '.ocho hior tu
tun. Dann fahron wir or. Sonnabond, don 6.12. nach Hauso.•"

(MO-907, Aitid.Dow. U12, n. 171*6).

Ein woitoror Brief 'fermcckOB nit den Datun vcc 12. Januar 191*2
zaitft, daaa auch in anioron r.on*ontrationala,;orn dio Aorztokomiaaion
□it don iAiorarzt one xuaarranarboitoto. In don Konzontratlonslatjor
Ravonabruock war os dor Lagorartt Dr. Schidlauaky, an don Monnocko
zwocks fti. tar bolt on Suthanaaioprosram horantrat. (NO-SO 7, Ankl.

Dow, 1*12, R. 17U8).

Dor Ancoklagto Hovon vorouchto, aich von dor Aktion 11* f 13 tu
diatanzioron, inion or sa$to, dasa Koch, dor La^rkanandant von
Buchomnld, an^oordnut haotto, alio Judon in dor Aktion ll* f 13 oinzu-
ochlioaoon, sodaas koino vorbori*o Ihtorauchun dor Judon voreonocnon
zu wordon brauchto und auch keino Soniorliato dor Judon von don Aorzton
aufcoatollt wordon mi33to. Dios ist koin Entschuldi^un^-^und. Hovon
wuosto von dor Aktion und nahn taoti . daran toil. Ss ergibt aich
auaaordon aua Monrockoa Auaa.v 1 un< l auj scix»n Triefon, dass nauhrend
dos Bosuchoa dor Aorztokcccission in Norenbor 191*1 nicht nur judon
aoniorn auch 1*83 Arier don Sachvorotaoradi<,on vorsafuuhrt wurdon,
(NO-907, sioho obenj Hermocko ft, 19l*5)«


- 15 -


Daaa Kovon an dor Auawahl der. dor Aorztckocniasion vorgefuchrtcn Koi>-
sontrationsla..vrh:i6i'tlin*e teilnaha, wird weiterhin durch die Auaaage do3
Zeu^on Rconhild bcwioaen. (R. I636). Dio Aussagc des Zeugon Kogon bo-
woiat, daaa zwiachen don ,jigokla.,tun Horan und ’•. Eberlc, doc Chofarat
dor Bornburgor SuthanaaieatatioiT, oin Driofwachsol stattfAnd, der Hovana
3oalohuncon zur .Jction li* I 13 klar zoigt. (a. 1212).

Auasordoa gab Hovon in aoincr vor der Hauptvorharxilung abgogobonon
oidoaatattlichcn Erklaorung aoiiw Toilaatoo an Suthanaaioprogrann su.

Er aogti

”9. 191*1 orfuhr ich, das3 daa aoconannto "Euthanaaieprogram" zur
Auarottung dor Schmchainni ,on und Xruoppol in Djutachland durch’o-
fuohrt (furdc. Der Lagorkccnandant KOCH riof danals alio naaacob^
lichen SS-Fuchror doa U ora zuaarrcn urvJ gab ihncn bokannt, daaa
or von HD<!fLHt oincn Oohcinbofohl or halter, ha be, daaa alio Schwach-
ainnl.on und vorkruoppolton Hacftlin^o doa Lafiora gotootet wordon
aollton. Itor Lagorkorr-ju>c.ant orklaortc, daaa auf Pefohl vorgo-
aotater Dionatatollon in Berlin allc Juodiachcn Haoftlingo doa
Konzontrationalabors Iiuchonwald ait in dioson Auarottungaprogrann
cinbo^riffon wordon aolltor., Otnaoaa die3or Dofchlo wurdon 300
bia 1*00 Juodiacho Gofanyone vorachlodonor Nationalitaoton zur
Auarottuns au dor "Suthanaaioatation" in 3ornbuirg goachlckt. Ein
P vr Ta -° opaator orhiolt ich ven La 0 orkcmar»d.intcn oino Naiaona-
liote dor in Bornbur- aua'jorottotcn Judon nit don Auftrag, go-
faolachto Todoaurkunion auaxualollon. Ich h-.bo dioaon 9ofohl bo-
folgt. Dioac Sondoraktion wurdo untor doa Dooknaaon "11* f 13"
durchgofuohrt1 Ich habo PorOburg oinaal goluiontlich oinor Vor-
bronnung boaucht, dio ich fuor 2 Haoftlingo, Jlo bo In Auaaon-
kozmndo i.ernijorodo doa Xonaontration3lasora i'uchonwald go-
atorben waron, voranloaat habo. (NO-i*29, .tnkl.&m. 281, R.1078).

Hovon rviha auch on dor IViaaontootung von Tubcrkuloaokrankon in

Duchonwaldor Konzontrationsla or aclbat toil. Ungcfaohr 500 aixoblich

an Tuborkuloac loidondo Haoftlingo wurdon in juli 191*1 durch Evipan-

Elnapritsungon In La-^irlatarott, trcnn aio zur hchandlung k.mon, go too tot.

Dioao Tootungon wurdon von den Arat Dr. Siacn, oinen Untorgobonon Hovena,

goloitot.Dio naiaton Opfer dioaer Aktion waron koinoawoga unhoilbar

krnnk. aondern nur untorernaohrt und hr-otten untor boaseren Lobonabo-

dinjungon gorottot wordon kocnxvjn. (Rooahild, R. 1638).


Rbemhlld aapto in Kreuzverhoer aus, daas vnven die
Auar^ttung der tuborkubesen Haoftllngo wahrscheinlich nicht
haette verhindern koennen (R. 1664). Daa iat jedf'ch von
kelner Bedeutung. Sbenso wenig haetter. die poerder in den
Auarottungakammern von Auachwitz die Toetung dor Juden ver¬
hindern kcennen. Hovena Mltwirkung raacht ihn nichtadoatowe-
nigor zu olnem Haupttaeter an dors verbrochon dea Mordea. in
olnem wolteren Sinno aind ea dio Tauaendo von "Hovens"in
ganz Deutschland, die dieae verbrochon orat moeglloh mach-
ten. RoemhiIda Auaaago uober die Auarcttung der tuborkuloe-
aen Haoftllngo wurde durch die Aua3nge dea Zeugen K«gon be-
ataotigt. Dioaer orkloerto, dasa manchaal oino ganze Station
ouf dieae "'elso goraount wurde, un auf dioae ^oiao in dom
ueborfuollton Krankenbau Platz zu a chaff on (R.1214). Dr.

Horn, Rntlaatungazouge fuor don Angoklngten Hcvon,gab zu,
dnaa im Lagorlazarott oin nlock war, don zu botroton lhn
vorbnton war. Ea war in Lager bokannt, daaa in dleaom Block
involido Haoftllngo gotootot wurdon. Dio Haoftllngo logton
die Schuld fuor dlo In Lazarott auagofuohrton Toetungon
Hovon zur Luat (Horn, R.5286). Hovon gobrauchto aolbat
daa tort "Suthanaalo" gogonuobor Horn und orwaohnto In
dloaom zuaomr.rnhang, dor Lagorkonnnndnnt habo dlo politlk
dor Tootung achworkrankor Patlonton gobllllgt (Horn, p.5291)
Auoaor aolnor Mltwirkung an offlzlollon Buthonaalo-
Programm und an dor Srmordung tuborkulcoaor Haoftllngo, or-
mordoto Hovon ncoh peraoenlieh Kranko und andoro Heoftlin-
go von rf oh oua. Dloa war olr.e bol don Lagoraorzton go-
braouchllcho Uobung. (-'orgl. Pmross gogon Oborhouaor; obon-
30 dio Eidoaatattlicho Rrklaorung von Rosenthal, NO-858,
Ankl.pow.223, R.889). H"von gab zu, dasa ontwedor von ihm
odor untor aolnor Oborauraicht 60 Haoftllngo durch phennl-

odor Bvlpon-Elnaprltzungen gotootot wurden.(R. 9851).
in aolnor sldoastattllchon Erklaorung sagto or:

”10. I® tug or gab oa olno gross o Sahl von T-ofangonon,
dio auf dio stollungon oiforauochtig waren, dio oinlgo
wonigo Haoftlinge innohatton. Daa hoiaat, oinlgo dor
politlachon C-ofangonen hatton s^hlueaaolstollungon in
no und konnton aich bossoro

- 17 -


HOVZN


Leber.sbc._l;i ur .or. verscnaffer., als der Durchsc'nnitt. daher
wurden sie van vieler. Gefanger-en us diese Stellungen ber.ei-
dec unu dicsc ---ben sich Jede erdenkliche ..ucho, die -acnner,
die diese Schluosselstellungen inns batten, anzuschwaerzen.
Solche vorroeterische Handlungsweise wurde durch den "Lager-
klatsch" den lasmem in den Schluessolstcllungen bckannt,
und solche Vorrater wurden dann sofort getoctet. In Jcdea
Falla iairde ich spaeter davcn bonachrichtigt, us die Todos-
orklaerun.'en dor getoeteten Gefangenen auszustollon. Dieso
Erlclacmngen gabon nicht die wahre Todesursachc an, sondorn
si« wurden so'ausgestellt, dess daraus dor Tod des Gefangenen
auf Grand natucrlichor Ursachon hervorging.

11. In einigen Faellen habe ich die Toetung diescr unwuerdi-
gon Hauftlingo geleitet, die auf Junsch dcr Kaeftlinge durch
PhonoUnJcktionon voli2ogen wurden. Dioao Tootungon fanden
in lAgorlazarott statt und vcrschiedcno Haoftlingo haben nir
dabai assistiert. In eincc Fall kan i)r. DING if. das Lazarett .
ua solchon Tootungcn nit Phenol bciruwohnen und sagte, ich
fuehrte daa nicht rlchtig aus, weswegen or sclbst einige In-
Jektioncn vornahsu Duals wurden 3 Haoftlingo nit Phenol go-
toot et und starben innorhalb einor -inutc.

12. Dio Gosa.tzahl dcr gotoototen Vorraetor war otwa 150, von

* donon otwa 60 nit Fhonolinjoktionen gotoctot wuni.'n, entweder

von ndr sulbut odor untoyfaincr Leitung, und dcr Host wurdo
auf vorschiodono .else von don Hacftlingon osgobracht s.B.
durch ochlacgo.' 1 (TO-A29).

Er v.rauchtu,diaso .'ootungon durch die Erklaorung cu rochtfsrtlgcn,
diuso Haoftlingo noicn Jcnunsiar.Un, Spione und Gpitzol dcr SS geweaon
und haotton dosn—b aus^orottot werien mossen. Er sagta, wo.in sio ihr
'•ork haotton fortsotson duorfon, waoro dlo illsgalo Lcgorfuuhrung aus-
gumrst wordun und das krl -incllo Sleccnt haotta die Oborhand gowonnon.
Hovuna richtferti.jingav^rsuch fuor die Tootling von Kontcntratlonalacer-
haoftlingun ist natuerlidi nicht stichhaltlg. Za ksnn wohi wahr soin,
doss Hovon ait lor illogaion lagorfuchrung ayepathisiort und no gar nit

f v

ihr goarboitet hat. Zlnigc seiner Opfcr aoegwn so gar von ihn auf Grand
von Anrogungon getoutet ifordon acin, diu ihc von dor illogalon Lagorlal-
tunj gu. .‘icnt wur.lun. ..s ist aber aelbstvorstaondlich, -lass dioao politi-
schon fangonon nicht bcurteilon konnten, ob dorun Toetung ia Intorcaso
dor Lag. r r '- .inschnCt wirklich nocti.- wir. Sic kartell tun diosen lot-
stand von ihreit cijjsnon -^aichtspunkt .uia, l.h. von Standpunkt ihr. s
eigunon Nuttons. Horen -lost hatto uoberhaupt


- 18 -


ivirchhoimor aa^to ^oicbun Sinno aus. (H. 1346). Dor Sitlaatun,;*-
Zou «° Piuck oalto fuur ;iovon and soinu Fasilio Blldor, und dor lintla-
atun^ezougu Horn sa^to in spinor oldosatattllchon Erklaorun£, Hovon aoi
durchaua verdorUm ftfrosan. 0i« Gofangonon *uaat«n oa,u..d aio vcrdarbon
ihn noch nujhr auf Jodo uoo^Ucho ..oiao okl snchton iha Goachonkc an
i.oobcln, Kloidun,; und Hdwwittoln.B® >b *.oiton, in dunon fuor Hovon
vooIU^j ..orkataotton orrichtat mutton, in dcnon 30 odor noch aohr Hru fL-
lin^o artxdtoton. (a. U>51j. Hater Sohallc*r aarto vor doe Hollaundischon
Buoro fuor di« Unturcuciian j fuor »zio£sverbrochun in austordiui aus, dana
Hovon oii.c ftuanolunu uoblv j.ollu apiolto unJ infold vollctacndi unsu-
rolchondor uorztlichor Sor^iilt onxoohligo „nachcnlcb..n auf don Gowiaaon
iiattu. Ala oa in don lolzton Jtnrun off-nbar marvle, dasa lAjutachland bo-
oio^-t Gordon micrdo, ic..dorto it aoino rioltuiv; O *o .;onuaber a^n Haoftlingcn.
(KO-lX)63, Ankl. Bow. 3<G, ... 1*96). Ala ochalkor vor. d-ja Ko.:..d.osar doa
Ourlchtahof .18 auf Anu-.\; d,s Vortoidi^ora bofn.,t mirdo, urwcitcrto or
aoino Arklnuruns und sa.to, daaa Hovcn din dor. Vorauchapursonon in Block
Ub toliof.irt.on Lobtnanlttol atahl und sich auch -niorx


HOO l


Dinga, wie Schuho, Suiclsoage und Fraucnkloidung vorschaf fto.

Dio eidosatattlichc ..ussage Ackemanns, dcr oir. Kaefcling in der
Pathologischcr. Station untcr iha war, bowuist, dass Hovcn an den go-
braouchiichon brutal or. /crbrcchon in den konzentrationsLagorn teilnahm.
Er sagte:


"Eirex-il stand Dr. HOVJi ait air aa Funster dor Pathologio und
deutoto auf oint-n uober don Appellplatz gehendon Haeftling,
dun ich nicht kanntc und orklaerto air, den Tote.-ischcedol
diusos Haeftlin-a aoechtc ich bis corgen ..bond auf ncinoa
Schxvibtiach sohon. Oor Haeftlir.g wux'io ins Revior bostellt,
nachc... sich dvr .irzt die Jhisacr dcs Hacftlir.gs notiort hatto.
Dij L-ichu kaa noch an duasclben Tag in don Scktionsraum.

Auf Grund dos “cichenbefmvios w r zu schen, doss dor Haoft-
ling lurch Spritzjn gctoctot wordon war. Dcr Schaodel wurdo
bofchlagor.-iucs praupariurt und an Jr. HOV 11 abgoliofort."
(NO-2631, ankl. Bow. 522, R. 9955).


Hovon billigto auch das Pruojoln von Aonzcntrationslagorhaoftlln-
gon. (NO-2313, Ankl. 3cw. 523, R. 9961; NO-2312, Ankl. Bow. 52/., R.9961).
Einur diosur Haeftliago stirb.

«a a). August 19V achlug Hovun do; Lag.-rkosr.anlantcn von Buchon-
wald vor, urn Papior zu sparen, dio Totcnborichto von russischon politi-
• schen Gofnngonun oinzuatollon.

fuor

M Es wlrd j.buton zu pru. fun, ob/uio vorstorbenon poUtischen
husson dio -rstelluxig dor Totonburichto notuondig ist. Laut
uinor in vorigor .ocho gugobonon Anwoisung war dio Erstol-
lung nur noch oinos Fonsulars wgoordnut. Jas bodoutot wohl
Papiorursparnia, abur boi doc hohun Kontingont, das dio
politischen iluosun i» i*ihcon dor verstorbonen Haoftlingo
z.^t. otu.lun, liusso sich woitorhin Papior und auch 2cit
omparun, falls diese Totcnborichto in .ojfall konnon koonn-
tun. Dio Zustellun . dcr Totonaoldung wierdo wio bish. r, hie
das a-eh l>vi dor. russischon Krlogsgofangcnon dcr Fall ist,
urfolgun." (JC-2K8, Ankl. Bow. 5??, R. 10708).

Dio bewoisaufnahcu hut urgtbcn, dass nobun don £0 Oufangonon, dio
von ihn zugestandenorveiso gotootet wurden, Hovon noch an dor Tootung
vor. '•‘•jIup andoron an I'ntoronaohrung uni Erschovpfung loidendon Hnoft-
1 ingun do a Buchun*oldor honzontrationalajers toilnahn. Er wauhlto dio
OpTor fuur die Tronoporte nach dcr Bomburgur Euthanasicstation a us.

Scin Vorgobon, dass alio seine Handlungcn nur zun Boston dcr politischen
Gufangonon im Konzontrationslagor crfolgt seivn, ist offonsichtlich lao-
cherlich und


- 20 -


H073M

ohne Jegliche Basis.

Es 1st von Intcrosso f.stzustcllcn, dass Hovcna Vorbringcn, or habc
aus id-jolen Bewoggrucndcn jctootet, das jloicho ist, das cr in dam Pro-
seas go gen ihr. it Jahro 1944 ..ebra-chte; nor war das.il s scin angcblichor
idoalor Bowoggrund: "L- Interessc d^r SS and d-r .chnacht oinon Skandal
zu veruoiaun." (U0-23X, «n*l. 3ew. 527, d. 9970; sioho auch NO-2366,
ajucI. Bow. 526, R. 9969).

C. Vcrsuche »dt Gas-Oodc-j-Scrun

Dio oiducstitclicho ^rklaerung Dings bosagt, dais auf cinor Konfo-
runz in dor ..ilitaamo.'stlichon .dead-ado in Berlin su Endo dos Jahres
1942, on dor or tuilnahe., die Todosfacllo dos Gss-Oodua-Soruns boi vor-
wundoton Soldaton einor dor Vortiandlungsgogcnsloendo woren. Prof.Killian
von dor Hourossanitaotsinspextion and .xugowsky borichtoten von Soldaton,
die das Gas-Oodea-Serus; in betroochtlichon Ooscn urhaltcn hatten and
Stundon danach, nachdcn sio sich anschoincnd erholt hatten, plootzlich
ohno sichtbaron Grund st arbon. . an nahn in, dass dor Phcnolgohalt dos
Scrubs dio Todesursicho gowesvn soi. ..ru;owsky bcfahl Ding in Killians
und Schroibora Go >nvirt, an oincr Juthnnasie oirvoa Xonsontrationslagur-
houftlings cdttelo Phenol tolleunchoon uni das fc sult.it jenau su be-
sciuviben. Din,; bat don .s oklagton Hoven, ihn davon in Kenntnis su sot-
son, wonn or wilier ..In. Juthanisio tit ihsool vomuhao. Kovon bat dann
Din.’ u.. nauchston Abend in don Xrankonbau su koexaen und gab vior odor
fuunf Haoftlingun - dio sox'ort starben - ir. s>inor Juguomrt Fhenolcin-
spritzungon. (NO-257, Ankl. Bow. 283, R. 1091).

Tit, *ll>;eauinc V. rt.idl -an.;

Hoven vorsuchto, dio ..iderspruoche zwiachon acinar Aussage vor Joa
Oerlchtohof und aoinor cldosstattlichon irklaorung vor dor Hauptvorhand-
lung iji Bozug auf Ueac iout ungen and in Desug auf seine Stellung als
Dings Vtrtretor zu crfclaoron, indet «.r bohauptote, dass dicso eides-
stattlicho Erklaorung ungliach abgcfasst war urvi dass ur, da cr tit dic-
aer Spracho nicht voollig vortraut war.


- 21 -


gowlsao _, orfc nlasvorstr.r.d und sich Ihrer richtigon ^cdoutung
nlcht bewuaat war. jjna i3t abor nlcht dor Fall. Hovon wurdo
von dcm Ocrlchtshof uobor die “forte In dor Eldosstattlichon
Erklaorung, die or nicht lna Deutsche uobcrsotzon konr.to,
ausfuohrllch bofragt. Er zaohlto alio 7orto, dlo or angob-
llch nlcht voratand, auf, und die Eidcsatattllcho Erklaorung
wurdo untor 'Voglaaaung dor Ihn angobllch unvorstnondllchon
Vforto abgoaondort. Abor dlo Eidcsatattllcho Srkluorung 1st
scibat nnch dom Woglr.ason dloaor Worto vnllkor-jnon vorstnond-
llch und Ihro Bodoutung 1st In kolnor Wolso goaondcrt. (R.
9815-9820). Dlo von Hovon aolbst gonachton doutschon zuaaetzo
"Flookflobor v Q rauchsatatior w und "Plockflobor und *'lrua
n'orachung" lnaoon klar orkonnon, dasa Hovon miss to, daaa
rlockflobor "typhus" bodoutoto. (R. 9820-1).

Auoaordcm gab or zu, gowusat zu hnbon, d^aa dloao Eldoa-
atattllcho Erklaorung dlo t, lockficbor-* , orauchs3tatlnn botrnf.
Hovon aolbst nnhn vlolo Aondorungcn in dor Eldosatattllchon
Erklaorung vor und zolchnoto Jodo Aondorung an Rando nit aol-
non Anfangabuchotabon ab. Hr voraoh auch Jodc Sclto nit aol-
non An f ongebuchatabon• (R. 9822-3). Dos bcwolat zwolfolafrol,
daaa Hovon dom ’Jortlaut dor Eldoaatattlichon Erklaorung groaao
Aufnorkstm kcl t auwandto, daaa or aolno Worto oorgfaoltlg ab-
wog und alio Vorbo38orungon vornahn, dlo or In Intorosso dor
Voll3toor.digkolt und Rlchtigkolt dor Sidosstattllchon Er-
klnorung fuor r.^otlg lilolt. Er gab zu, dasa or alio gowuor.-
°'*''tin "oraondcrungon und ’'orboasorunron mohon durfto. (R.
982"" • Dt” ,r omohmunfon o\*cna vrr dor Rauptvorhardlung -
bol olnor dloscr vornohnunror wurdo dlo Eidcsatattllcho Er¬
klaorung v«n untorzolchnot - (1*0-4068, Ankl.pow.664, R.
10698; NO- 4069, Ankl.Row. 565, R. 10698), zolgon klar, do3s
dlo Erkinorung Hovon laut vorgcloa.'n wurdo, dasa auf acinon
Vfunsch vorachlodcno Acndorungcn vorgjnomr.on wardon, dasa
alio Elnzolhoiton, dlo don Gotonstand dor Srklncrung blldo n,

mit Hovon boaprochon vrurdon und da3S dlo sidosatattlicho
^rklaorung nichts andoroa da oino Zuaanr.onfasaung von Ho-
vons olganon Zugoataondnisson waohrond dor vornehnunr.on 1st.
Hovon hatto nu33ordern 3 Johro


- 22 -


in den Vereinigten Steaten zugebracht (110-591. Eiohe obon;
vergl. Hoven, A. 9910, was an sich schon fax einen halo-
»ogs intelligenten Ilensohen cuareicher.d aein sollte, um
nit der ongliabon Spractae soweit vertraut *u t order, un
eine ibn vorgeleaene and von ihn selbst vor de. ttnterzeioh-
nun6 sorgfaltig durchgeloaene Bohriftllche -.klirung zu vor-
atohon. Es iat klsr, dzaa "even bcotinnt kcin Bokunent u»~
terzeichnet und Jede -ondorung darin nit aeinon Anfangebuoh-
atoben abgezoichnet ditto, wenn or gleichxoltig nndore
Ion drrin nic.it verstenden hUttz.

Dor Bchluso ausa gezogon w-rdon, dr.as die dJigabor. in
seiner Sidcaotattlichen SrkUrung betr chtlich zuverlaaaigor
cla seine iougcnruaaego iat. Ho hugest 'jidmaco in 3 <^ er
Jidesstattlichon xlrklUrung w rden ausa.rdcn durch Do/.umor.tq

and d.ougonruaaagcn bc’:rr.ftigt.

Zur -nklngo rui ZugcbHrigkeit za cincr vcrbrocborlechon
^rganlortion, v.lo aia in funkt IV dor Anklrgoochrift nusoin-
ondorgoaotzt iat, bringt "oven vor, deaa or zur SS oinborn-
fon vvurdo and dcas or ooine otollungon r.la ogorr.rzt lm
^uchonwaldor -onzcnf.ctionolrger und V, r trctor von _

oaf Grand nilitarinchcr 3 0 fohle Ubornrha. Dcr intern* tion..lo

Uilitttr(^iohtehof^orklurt^ ^ Stctat- dio GrupPJ,
,u„ nV , caa lon.n Peraonon Buoonaonsttzt, aic

Soito 3o7, Wntcratrclchungcn cin^ofugt.).

Angonommon, daaa ^ovon zur v;z«on-SS oinboruion

ao goachah das offonazcbtlioh auf Oxund do. Irt-roh*.
or in flnbre 1934 ^ zllgc.clnon SS iroiwil . U g -

wrr. (-von 9763 ). 7 ro or nicht acbon oin Uitgliod do.
Allgoncinon SS govoaon, koto or aiohorlioh zu
dor T-ohrn cht uinborufon wrden. Auaaordcn doutot nlchtJ

dcroufhin, dasa or


-23-


"koine andcre 77ehl" hatte. iber solbat wonn vrir -nnchmon,
dass cr bci seiner Sinbcrufung in die !7affcn-SS koine a:i-
doro T7ahl hatte, kdnnte er in °inno d03 Anklagepunktcs r.'
nur dann nicht fur schuldig bofunden urden, v/enn or "keino
solchcn Vcrbrcchcn", nUnlich ^riogsvcrbrcchon and V^rbrochon
gegon die ucn3chlichkcit, begengen hatte. I>io 3ewoi3aufnah-
mc hat zwoifolsfrci ergeben, dcs3 cr cr. aolchen V_rbrechon
toilnehn. Seine Sntschuldigung findet dahor in don Tat3n-
chon kein Eogr ndung.

IV. Schlusa

Dor Angoklagto Hovcn war Hitgliod d.r .-.llgcncincn und
T7affon-SS. £r atiog in dor lotzteron zun Range oincu Hnuj)t-
oturnfU. rora auf. In soicer -igonschcft els Xegorerst doa
Duchcnv/aldcr “or.zur.tratior.8l gcxound V.-rtreter Din^a in
Inotitut fttr Plockficbcr und Virus- Forachung dor “affon-SS
wi.hlto or fur dio Plockfiotor und dio andcrcn Inpfatoff-
vcraucho dio Vorauchsp.r3onon cue. Sr Ub-.wr.cht o wAhrend
dor hliufigcn Abwoaonhoit iings dioao Vcroucho and ftihrto
solbat Infcktionovor3uc!ic oua. Zchlrcicho unfroiwilligo
V rouchspcrooncn oterbon infolgc dioscr 'orsuchc.

Hovcn nc.hn an den, in don “onzontrntional. gem untor
dun Kcniwort "Aktion 14 f 13 durehgofdhrton Euthenaeio-
progrr.ro dadurch toil, daoa or die dcr SaohvcratMndigon -
koranioaion vorzufUhror.don Hdftlingo nuewShlto, daso or dio
{j’cnonaliotc dor nooh do. 3crr.butcr SuthrnasioetGtion zur
Tbtung durch Ora zu sendondon °pfor auf3tollto und daao or
gofUlochto Totonachoino aus3t llto. Auaacrden aordoto or
pcroocnlich Dutzondo von ILftlingcn duroh Ihonolinjoktionon.
Sr hetto von don gaooonnord on tuborkulttaon Hiftlingor. in
3uchcnw£ld honntnio und Ubemachto ihn *

Un fcatzuatollcn, ob on den auf dio nopritzungon
nit Gro-Odcr.-Sorun folgcndon TodcsfSllon dor Phonolgohclt
achuld ooi, ttiteto or woitoro 4-5 ;*dftlingo von *uchomrald,
indon er ihnen Phor.ol injizierto.

i/io Anklc.gcbohJrdo unterstcllt, daoa das Bowoismeto-
rinl or 6 ibt, deal “ovon «aupttfitor, Tcilnchnor, Anatiftor,
Vorachabl.iatender war, acino Zustinnuns vnA in Ver-
bindung atcr.d mit PlAnon und


' Untemehran, die die -Airchfuehrung sedizinischer Zxperioente an le-
benden *ensch«m ohne «Ast issuing der Betrsffenen run Gogenstand hat-
ten, in deren Vorlauf ^orde, ar-talitaeten, Grausaskeiton, Foltorun-
gen, Groueltaten and andere ans^nschlicho Handlungen begangen wurden,
daaa er an dtuu moerderischen ^uthanasioprograrn teilnahn, and daas
seine Schuld im Sinne dcr Funkte I, II, HI und IV der .xJrlageschrift
erwiesen 1st.


"DOE"


1


- 25 -


Ich, Fred Lax X 046207, bstaetigo fcierait, dass ich durchaua
vertraut nit der onglischen and aeutschen Sjracho bin and da 3 3
das Vorstehande einc v&ftrhoitagenaesse und richtige beberaattung
des Dokuner.t3 H073J" darstellt.

Nuombarg, 18. August 1947


FRED LAX
X 046207


JJuornborg, don
16. Juni 1947


XI LITAZKGI3I CHI SHOF L'o. I


FILL So.l


2USA»iZNFA3S2IDZIi SCHBIITSASZ
DSH VZSnSIOTXH STARTS*-' VOb - azxiea
OSCE!.’

joachik Karocisrr


J. K. HcKrnoy
Aloxnndor 0. Hurd*

Arnost Horllk-Kochvpld
Esther Jenc Johnson

fuor:

Telford Tnylor
Brlcrdler General, U.^.A.

Chief of Counsel for Var Crises


9


I'.auoo <skv


SIiFPU3HRUH&

Unter Punkt I der Anklageschrift wird Joachin Urugowsky
ira v/esontlichen zur Last gologt.sich nit anderon Porsonon in
Vorfolg eines geneinsareen Vorhabena zu einer Vorschwoerung
und Uobereinkunft z us amen go fund en zu haben, aerztllohe Ver-
aucho an Vorsuchsporsonen ohne daren Zustiimung vorzunehmon;
unter Anklagepunkt II und III (Kriegsverbrechen, bezw. Ver-
brochen gegen die Kenachllchkeit) Haupttaetor, Teilnehmor,
Anatiftor, Vorsokubleiatender gewesen zu sain, seino Zustin-
mung gegeben und nit Plaenon und Itatarnobaon, bel denen os
slch urn rcedizlnlscho Varsuche an Versuchspersonen gegen lhren
7/illon hondolto, In Vorbinduns gastanden zu haben; untar An-
klagopunlct IV,nach dam 1. Soptanber 1939 ein kltglied dor SS
goweaon zu soin, olnor Organisation, dio von Intomationalon
Jlilitaorgorlohtshof fuor vorbrachorlach orklaort wordon 1 st.

Dio i-andlungon, die als itrlogs vorbrochon und Vorbrochon
gogon dio Konschlichkoit golton, 3ind in Absatz 1 (b) und (c)
doa Artikols II dos Kontrollratgoaotzoa i.'r.lO ongofuohrt.
Kltgliodschaft in olnor von Intomationalon killtaorgorichts-
hof fuor vorbrochorlsch orklaorton Organisation gilt naoh
Ab3atz 1 (d) doasolbon Artikols als Vorbrochon. Dio Strafbar-
koitsmorknalo wordon in Absatz 2 dos Artikols II dos itontroll-
rataosotsos Nr.10 aufgofuohrt.

i. 3 tsllu;;o und V3iu..r,.csiv:;G

Dor Angoklagto Krugowsky trat dor N3DAP in Jahro 1930 und
dor 33 im folgondon Jahro boi. Sr war von Jahro 1933 bis 35
oin aktivos Mitgliod dos SD. In Jahro 1937 wurdo or Hygioni-
kor fuor dio SS-Truppon, dio spaotor untor don Nanon iVaffon-
SS bolcannt wurdon. Sr hat to danals don Sang oinos 3S-Sturn-
bannfuohrors (Kajor). In dor ..affon-SS stiog or schliosslioh
zun Oborfuohror (Sonior Colonol) auf. (NO-723,


- 1 -


KRUGOWSKY


Axikl.3ow.29, R. 131-2). In Jobro 1938 wurdo Hrugowaky Ult-
gliod dos SS-Sanltaot3Qato3 In 3orlin, wolchoa apaetorhi n
don 33-Fuahrungahauptant ala Antagruppo D angoachlosaor. wur¬
do. In dloaor Slgonachaft gruondoto or In Jahro 1939 dlo
Kygloniach-Baktorlologiacho Untorauchungastollo. In Jahro
194o wurdo dloao Stollo vorgrooaaort ur.d orhlolt don Noraon
liygiono-Inatltut dor Waffon-SS. lrugowaky war dor Loltor
dioaos Institutoa und gloichzoitlg dor Loltor doa Antoa XVI
(Kyglono) dor Antagruppo D (Sanltootadionat dor ..affon-S3)
untor Gonzkon. (Ilrugowaky, R.5002-3; HO-416, Ankl.Bow.22,
R.121). Alio S3-Aorzto nit baktorlologlachor und hygioniaohor
Srfohrung v/urdon aoinor Loitung untoratollt. (Hrugowaky,

R.5020-1). fir war dor r.llltaorlacho Vorgoaotzto und IComar.-
dant doa Hyglono-lnatltutoa dor n'affon-SS und allor ango-
aohloaaonon Inatltuto, dlo In Laufo doa Kriogos goblldot wur-
don, und hatto vollo Rochtbofugnla, Bofohlo zu orlaaaon.
(Hrugowaky, R.5004). Ihn untoratondon alio Pragor. dor Sou-
chonkontrollo und Hygiono in dor iaffon-SS. (Hrugowaky,

R.5004-6). In Soptorabor 1943 wurdodbr Sanltaotadlonat dor
.;affon-SS roorganlaiort. Hrugowaky und daa Kyglono-Inatitut,
woloho Gonzkon ala dom Chof doa Sanltaotadlonatoa dor Waffon-
S3 untoratandon, waron hlomaoh Grawltz ala don Rolchiorzt
dor S3 und follzol untoratollt. rrugowaky war Loltorelor
Eygionikor (Ant III) untor Grawltz. Sr vorbllob Loltor dos
Kygiono-Inatitutoa. Suin Aufgabonkroia wurdo bol dloaor Ro-
organialorung nicht goaondort. (Krugowaky, R.5009; XO-723
obon; NO-417, Ankl.3ow.23, R.121). Dlo Aufgabon doa Chof-
hyglonlkora boatandon In dor 3oachaffung von Katorlal, Vor-
30tzung von Poraonal, dor tochr.iachon Vorwondung doa Porao-
r.al3 und borufllchor Untorwolaung. (Xrugowaky, R.5017).


- 2 -


ICHUGOWSKY


Dio folgoaion waron also dio vorantwortliohon Stollungon
doa Angoklagton Krugpwakyx Oborfuohror dor Aoffon-SS, Chof
doa Ilygiono-Inatitutoa dor uaffon-SS, Chof doa Into a XVI doa
Sonitaotadionatca dor Jaffon-SS l^ntagruppo D) doa SS-Tuoh-
rungahauptamtoa und Chof doa Antoa III und Chofhygionikor
un-or don Roichaarzt dor SS und Polizol.

II. P3RS03HLICH5 BSTSILIGUdG AI' Vr-.S.IiSKZHISCHS'.: 3X? jn igKTB^

Daa Bowoiamatorial hat klar gozoigt, daaa Krugowaky por-
aoonlloh an Vorauehon an ionschon ohno doror. Sinwilligung,
v/io aio ihm In dor Anklogoachrift zur Laat gologt wordon,
toilgononmon hat.

Krugov/aky wird dio bosondoro Vorantvortliohkoit fuor und
dio Toilnahno on don Hoohon-, Xaolto-, Kaloria-, Sulfonanid-,
Koorwaaaor-, Unfruohtbarmaohunga-, Plcokfiobor-, Gift-, opi-
doniaohon Golbaucht-und Pouorbonbon-Vorauchon zur Laat gologt.
Urn dio Angologonhoit zu vorolnfachon ,zi*ht dio Anklogobohoordo
dio Anklogo wogon Toilnahno ar. Hoohon-, Mjorwaaaor- und Un-
fruohtbarnachunga-Vcrauchon zurucck.

A. VD3SUCPB II K0rZ3»’TaATICrSL.,QZR SUCH SI?. .’AID
(1) plookflobor-und andoro Ir.pfatoff vorauoho
(Anklasoachrlft, Abaatz 5 (J )).

Dor Angriff auf Hus 3 land in Jahro 1941 worf violo nilitaor-
nodizinlnoho i'roblorco auf, von donor. Plockfiobor nicht daa go-
ring3to war. Dio Zrankhoit orroiohto in horbat 1941 ornatll-
chon Umfang,und dio Plookfioboriapfatoffo woron ao knapp,
daaa nur aorzto, hrm konpflogorlnnon und andoroa Sanitaota-
poraonal in oxponiorton Stollungon Irpfungon orhalton lconn-
ton. (Schmidt, 3.3160-1).

Jinoa dor wichtigaton iroblono in 3ua ana unhang nit dor
goatoigorton Arzougung von Tlockfioborinpfatoffon war dio


LRUGOWS"Y


•ilrksaakoit doa aogor.annton Cox-Enngcn-Gildcnciator-Iiipfstof-
To3, wolchor c.ua Kuohnoroikulturon crzougt wurdo. Dor wirk-
aano Woigl-Impfatoff, dor aua don Eingowoidon von Laouaon go-
nacht wurdo, war orhacltlich, abor acino Erzougung war touor
und koMpliziort. Dor Huohr.oroi-Inpfatoff war vorhaoltnia-
naoaalg oinfach hcrzuatollcn, abor acino Vorbcugungaoigon-
achafton wurdon ala nloht gonuogond bcwloadn angcaohon.
(no-732, Ankl.Bow. 451, R.3060).

Dor Eintrog In dC3 Dlng-Tagobuch vo:;29. Dczocbor 1941
bowoiat, daaa an dioaon Togo oino Boaprochung zwiachon Kand-
losor, ala Hooroaaanitaotainapoktour, Conti von Innonnini-
atorium, iltl tor vorr. Ar.t fuor Goaundhoita^oaon, Glldonciator
voin Robort-Koch-Ir.atitut und krugowaky von Hygiono-Inatitut
dor 7affon-S3 atattfond. (NC-265, Ankl.Bow.2S7, R.1134, auT
daa apaotorhin ala "Ding-ragobuch" Bozug gonomon vrird).

Boi dor Boaprochung wurdc boachloaaon, daaa dor FlockPio-
borlmpfatoff aua Huohnoroiorn an Konaohon auaprobiort wordon
aollto, un aoino .iirkaankc.it fostzuatollon. An aolbon Togo
fond oino fruohMro Konforonz atatt, in wolchor da33olbo Prob-
lora boaproohon wurdo. Sio fond In Roichainnonnlniatoriura
atatt,und dio folgordon Horron waron anwoaondi Boibor vorn
Innonminiatorlun, Glldonoiator, Vortrotor doa Oon-ralgouvor-
nononta in bo3otzton Polon, Vortrotor dor Bohring-V/orko dor
I.G. Forbon uni Oburatabaarzt Scholz dor Kooroaaanitaotain-
apoktlon. Da3 a'rotokoll dioaor 3oaproohung aogt*

"Dio .Virkaorkoit doa Ir.pfatoffoa, dor zur Doit von
don Bohring-.iorkon aua ..uchnoruijrn orzougt wlrd,
aoll in oinou Voraueh gopruoft wordon. Zu diosoi.i
Zwook aoll Dr. Boibor rlt Oboraturnfuohror
Dr. Urugowaky in Vorbindung tr^ttn."


KOTGpViSKY


Da tlrugowaky bol dlosor Boaprochung r.icht anwoacnd war, iat
ca offonaichtlich, daaa andoro 5osprochungon atattfandon,
boi donor, dloao Angolagonhoit ait ihr. boaprochon wurdo, waa
durch oino Sintragung in don obon orwaohnton Ding-Tagobuoh
boataorkt wird.

Ala Srgobnia dor Lntachoidung, dio boi dicaon Boapro-
chungon gotroffon wurdo, wurdo dio Vorauchaatation doa Kon-
zontrationslagora Buchonwold untor 33-Sturr.J*uohror, \ apaotor
i Kauptaturnfuohror Dr. Ding-Schulor, lapootor ala'Ding w or-

waohnt) orrichtot. (Ding-Tagobuoh; Kogon, R. 1154). Auaaor
} andoron Bcvfoianatorial zoigon dio Tabcllon, dio von don An-
goklagton Jirugowaky gonacht wurdon, daaa dio Vorauchaatation
in Buchom/ald don Hygiono-Inatitut dor .j'affon-SS untor Mru-
gov/aky von Togo ihror Drrichtung bia sum Xriogsondo untor-
atond. (N0416, Ankl.Bow. 22; ilO-417, Ankl.Bow. 23, R. 121).

• Zu Boginn doa Johroa 1943 wurdo dio Forachungaatation
in Buchonv/ald offlzioll "..btoilur.g fuar Plookfiobor- und

• Giftatoff-Porachung" doa Hygiono-Inatitutoa dor Y/offon-SS
gonannt. Dio Vcraucho wurdon in Block 46, don aogononnton

• Iclini3ohon Blook, durchgofuohrt, nit Auanahro oinigor woni-
gor Bxporinonto. Anfang 1942. In Horbat 1943 wurdo oino
Inpfatofforzougungoabtoilung in Block 50 orrichtot. Boido
Blocks, 4G und 50, waron oin Toil dor Abtollung fucr Flook-
fio'oor- und Oiftatoff-Foraohung# Dor Angoklagto Hovon war
Dings Vortrotor in boldon Blocks. (Dir.g-Tagobuch; Kogon,

R.1158-6).

Vorbrochorischo Voraucho an haoftlingon doa Konzontra-
tionalagora ohno ihro Sinwilligung wurdon in Block 46 zur
Pruofung von Plookfiobor-, Golbfiobor-, Blattorr.-, Typhus-,
Paratyphua-A und 3, Cholora- und Diphthorio-Ir^fstoffon
durohgofuohrt.


- 5 -


KHCGC'.iSKY


Dio Flockfiubcrachutzinpfunga-Voraucho in Buchonwold
wurdon in olnor. aohr groaaon Haaaatabo durchgofuohrt und hat-
ton violo Todoafaollo zur Folgo. Dio at dor Durchfuohrung
und dio 3r30fcniaao dioaor Voraucho aind in gcnauon Sinzol-
hoiton duroh das Dlng-Tagobuch und dio Zougonauaaago von
Kogon aovrio durch ondoroa Bowoianatorial nachgcwioaon. Dor
orato Vorauoh bogonn on 6. Jonuar 1942 r.it dor Schutzir.tpfung
von 135 Gofangonon nit don Y/oigl-j Cox-Hcagon-Gildoroiator-,
"Iiohring norncl" und "Bohring at ark” Inpfatoffon. Alio
Schutzinpfungon woron on 1. Pobruar boondot. An 3. ICaorz

\ 1942 wurdon alio goinpfton foraonon und 10 Haoftlingo, dio

I

nioht goinpft v/ordon woron {bokannt ala "Kontrollgruppo"),
kuonatlioh r.:it olnon Giftatoff von Rlckottaia-x'rowazoki,
dor von Robort-Kooh-Inatitut zur Vorfuogung goatollt wordon
war, infiziort. Dioaor Vorauoh wurdo on 19. «pril 1942
boondot. Puonf Todoafaollo woron dio Polgo, droi in dor
l^ntrollgruppo und zwol untcr don golrpfton Poraonon.

. (Ding-Togobuoh; Mrugowalcy Dok. 10, hrugowaky oowoiaatuoolc 20,

R.5087).

3oi apaotcron Vorauohon woohaolto dio Anzohl dor Vor-
auchaporaonon gowoohnlloh zwiachon 40 und 60, abor dor ?ro-
zontaatz dor Kontrollporaonon wurdo orhooht. Ungofaohr zwoi
Drittol dor Vorauchaporacnon wurdon goirpft, waohror.d oinon
Drlttol koin Schutzr.lttol gogobon wurdo. Sinigo VToohon nooh
dor Schutzinpfung wurdo:: alio Vorauohaporaonon kuonatlioh
nit Plookflobor infiziort. Dor Vorlauf dor Xrankkoit wurdo
dann or. don goinpfton Poraonon und boi dor Kontrollgruppo
boobochtot und dio ..irksonkoit dor Inpfung wurdo fcatgo-
atollt. (Kogon, R.1168). Ihorapoutiacho Voraucho wurdon
in doraolbon «rt nit vorachiodonon Prooparaton vorgonot-r.on.
Zun Bciapiol wurdon zwiachon don 24. ipril und 1. Juni 1943
Voraucho vorgonotcon, un dio .ilrkung von *kridin-Grcnulat
und Rutonol auf Plookflobor zu pruofOn. Von


- 5 -


!3cgo:tsxy


oir.or Goaantzahl von 39 vorwondoton Haoftlingon atarbon 21*
(Ding-Tagobuch, NO-582, Ankl.Bow.286, 3.1124-5).

Slno kuonstlicho Infiziorung wurdo r.uf vcr3chlodono ~rt
orzlolt. iuorat wurdo oin Sohnitb in dio haut gcnacht und
:*it oinor Flockfioborkultur ir.fiziort. Voraouchbo Lcouao
wurdon in oinon bogronzton Auanaaa vorwondot. Grcoaaton-
toila jodoch wurdo dio Infiziorun- durch ir.travonooao md
inbrarcuakulaoro Injoktionor. von Frisohblut, dio Flockfiobor-
giftatoff onthiolton, horvorgorufon. Sinzig und alloin un
oinon dauorndon Vorrat von infiziorton Frlachblut zu habon,
wurdon 3 bis 5 Kcoftllngo ir. Konat kuonatllch nit Flookfio-
bor infiziorb. Dio Vorwondung dicaor aogonanr.bon Paaaago-
poraonon bogonn nindoatona aohon in ..pril 1943 und wurdo -
bla Kaorz 1945 forbgoaobzt. Ir: groaaon und gonzon atorbon
3io alio. Dor Tod dioaor Opfor wurdo ala ao aolbatvorataond-
lioh angoaohon, dr.oa or nioht oinnal von Ding in aoinon Tago-
buch oingotrngon wurdo. (Xogon, 3.1168-71).

Slno Pruofung doa Ding*aohon Tagobuchoa zoigt, daaa an
inagoaant 729 haoftlingon Vorauoho r.lt Flockfiobor gonacht
wurdon, von dcnon 154 atarbon. Su dioaon Zahlon muoaaon dio
Paaaagoporaonon hinzugofuogt wordor., von donon zwiachon 90
und 120 atarbon.

Dioa gonuogo uobor dio nackton «xhlon dioaor Voraucho.
Bloolc 46, wo dioao Vorauoho durchgofuohrt wurdon, war oin
Schrookgoaponab fuor Jolon Inaaaaor. doa konz ont rat Iona logo ra
Buohonwald. Jcdor, dor fuor dioao Vorauoho auagowaohlt wur¬
do, orwartoto oinon Ians a aeon achrocklichon Tod. Dio

Uobortragung do3 Flockfioborbazillua von i*mach zu Mcnach
crzougto oino art "Super"-Flockfiobor. (Nogon, 3.1166).
Waohrond /lockfiober gowoohnlioh oino Sterbliehkoit von ungo-
faohr 30^j in ungoinpfton Fr.ollon zur Folro hat, atarbon naoh
oinon Vorauch an 13. .vpril 1943 fuonf von don aocha infizior¬
ton Peraonon. (Ding-Tagobuoh).


- 7 -


KHUQOTJSmr


Violo dor V0r3uchspcr30r.cn fiolcn in oin Delirium. (..ogon,

H. 1172-3). Boi don Vorauchon“ait dkridin und Rutonol orbra-
chon dio Vorauchaporaonon bia zu aiobon Hal an Togo. Broncho-
pnounonio, Hioror.ontzuondung, Derr&lufcungon, Untorhautphlog-
nono untor don Kohlkopf, Pcrititia, Untorachonkolgancraono,
Purunkuloao, Brcnchlti* ur.d Dokubitolgcachwuorc ontatandon
ala Pol go dioaor Bo hand lung. (110-582, ioikl.Sow.286, R.1124-
5 ). Vorauchapcraonon, woloho dioa uoborlobton und boi wolchon
dio Kronkhoit loiohtor vorliof, da dio Irpfatoffo, nit donon
aio goinpft wordcn waron, wirkaac waron, wurdon dazu gozwun-

| gon, don Todoakampf lhrcr Kitgofangor.on nit anzuaohon. In
Block 46 horrachto oiaorr.o Diaziplin, dio nounaohwaor.zigo
Ikitzo rogiorto und dio Vorauchaporaonon wurdon doa lotzton
Hoatoa poraoonliohor Proihoit, dio aio in Lagor gohabt hat-
ton, boraubt. (ICogon, R. 1172-3).

3a iat kaur: nootig foatzuatollon, daaa dio Vorauchaporao-
non, dio fuor dio Flookfioborvorauoho aowohl ala auoh wio fuor
alio andoron Vorauoho in Buchonwald vcrwondot wurdon, aioh
nioht frolwillig dazu gonoldot hattcn. Gowoohnllch noldot
rxm aioh nioht frolwillig,un gotootot zu wordon. Boi dor or-

ft

aton Sorio dor Flookfioborvorauoho wurdon oino *cizahl von
Haoftlingon durch Irrofuohrung dazu gobraoht, aioh dafuor hor-
zugobon, da nan ihnon aagto, daaa dioa oino hcrnloao dngolo-
gonhoit aol und daaa 3io zuaaotzlicho Hohrung bokornon wuor-
do.n. 3a wurdo lhnon nioht nitgotoilt, daaa aio kuonatlioh
nit Tlookfiobor infiziort wordon wuordon odor das a aio doran
atorbon koonnton. (Kogon, 3.1152; vorgl. auch dio iuaaago
von Kogon in Pall 4, ’^ilitaorgorichtahof lir.il, R.731-2,
K0-3C3O, onkl.Dow. , R. ). Dloao Poraonon lroonnon
nicht ala Proiwllligo bczcichnot wordon. .«'ach Boondigung dor
oraton wonigon Voraucho war oa nioht r.ohr nooglioh, dio naoft-
lingo ao zu ta^uachon, daaa aio aioh frciwillig fuor dioao
Voraucho horgabon. Von da or. bia

- 8 -


un^ofaohr Horbat 1943 wurdon dlo Vorauchapcmcnon willkuor-
lich untor don Enoftlingon cuagosucht, sol oa, daaa ca aioh
un Vorbrochor, polltlacho Gcfongonc odor Honoaoxuollo han-
dolto. Intrigon zwiachon don Gofnngonon aclbat apiolton
ranchnal oino Rollo bol dor Auawohl. In Korbat 1943 wollto
dlo Logorvorwoltung nlcht nohr laongor dio Vorontwartung fuor
dlo i.uawohl dor Vorauchaporaonon uobornohrcn. Ding goto aioh
nlohb laongor r.lt nuondllchon Bofohlon Mrugwoakya zur Durch-
fuohrung dor Vorauoho zufriodon und vorlongto aohrlftlioho
BofOhio, -r trot cn lirugowa!:;- nit don Sraucfcon horon, dnaa
dor Roichafuchror-33 dio Vcrauchaporaonon boatimon aollto.
Gonaoa a oinor Vorfuogung von Hirr.lor an :tobo von dor Roicha-
lcriainolpolizoi, aolltor. nur aolcho Eaoftllngo vorwondot Gor¬
don, dio 10 Johro odor laongor oingoaporrt wnron. Von da ab
bootandon dio noiston Vorauchapcraoncn aua Govohnhoitavortoro-
choro, von donon violo von ondoron Uigorn naoh Buohonwald
uoboratollt wurdon. ..bor politiaoho Gofongono worcn nooh
inaor daboi, da 3io in Un^ado boi dor ^ujorvorwaltung atan-
don,odor auch wogon Lagorintrigon. Eclr.o dor Vorauohaporao-
non war zun Todo vorurtollt gorroaan, auaaor oin pnnr ruaai-
aohon ArioeaGOfonganon, wolcho rodor vor Gorlcht goatollt
nooh abgourtoilt vrordon wnron. Sio wnron olnigo von don
9500 ruaalaohon Kriogagofongonon, dio in Buohor.wold gotootot
wordon wnron. Dio Vorauohaobjokto woron gowoohnlich in guton
Icoorporlichon Zuatand. (Kogon, R. 1162-3). Dio Vorauchapor-
aonon boatarxion nlcht nur aua Doutachon aondom nuoh nua Fe¬
lon, Ruaaon und Prnnzoaon, aowohl nla nuoh aua :\riogagofcn~
^onon. Dio uuaaago von Ltogon bozioht 3ioh nicht mu* auf dio
Tlookfioborvui’aucho aondom auch cuf dio ondoron Vcraucho in
Buohonwald. (Kogon, R.1167).


MRUGO'fSKY


Dio ..'033ago von Kogon wird durch don Brief Hinr.lors nr.
don Chof dor Sichorhcitapolizoi von 27. Februar 19-i-i boatao-
tigt. Er lautoto;

,r Ich bin oinvoratendon, daaa Borufsvorbrcchor
fucr dio Vorauoho doa Flockfioborinpf3toffca
gononnon wordon. Aua don Borufsvorbroohorn
aind cbor nur 3 ole ho. dio nindo3tor.a 10 Jehro
ilaft gohabt habon, also nicht 10 Voratrafon,
aondorn 10 Jahro Haft, cuazusuchon. SS-Grup-
ponfuohror N o b o soil dio Zurverfuogung-
atollung diosor Haoftlingo uoborwaohon. Ich
wuonaoho nicht, daaa dor Arzt nur von aich
aua ohno Oogonkantroilo auaaucht."

(HO-1189, ;»nkl.Bow..;71, 3.5640).

Daaaolbo Dokunont zoigt, doaa hrugowaky oino -bachrift dio-

aor Entachoidung uobor dio Aondcrung doa Vorfahrona orhalton

hatto und daaa dioao 2ntachoidung nach oincr Boaprochung

zwiaohon Brugowaky und Hobo gotroffon wurdo.

Dio ..uaaago Kogona wird woitor durch don Zougon iiiroh-
hoinor (R.1321-32) und durch dio oidoaatattllchc Rrklaorung
von Hovon boataotlgt. (H0-;29, «nkl.Bow.281, R.1078).

Dio Vortoidigun 3 hat dio Schthoit doa Ding*aohon Togo-
buchoa boatrltton. Ba i3t unnooglich, r.ua don Frotokoll gonau
zu oraohon, wolcho Stollung aio in dioaor Hinaicht oinni:mt.
Au3 don Dokunont cn aich konn nan aohon klar oraohon, doaa
oa nioht aua Bintragungon boatoht, dio Tag fuor Tag gonaoht
wurdon. 2a lat vioL.ohr oin Dokunont, wclchoa poriodiach
dio Voraucho zuaarr-.onfoaat, dio in r.or.chon Fee lion nohroro
Jtonato d quo rton. Ding fuohrto auch oin Tagobuoh nit taog-
liclion Sintragungon und nochto Arbo i tabor ioh to. (Kogon,
R.1226). Dioao blldon offonaichtlich dio Grundlago fuor
daa al3 dowoianittol vorliogondo fogobuch. Dio Vortoidigung
lo.jto groo3on Hnchdruck auf dio Totaacho, doaa dio Soito 1
doa Tagobuohoa nit oinon aoltoron Farbband ala dio Sciton 2
ur.d folgondo goachriobor. wurdon und doshalb wahrschoinlich
apaotor goachriobon wurdon. Dio Anklogobohoordo will daruo-
bor nicht atroiton. Kogon gob dio durchaua oinlouchtoixio
drklaorung.


u


: —


class lie Seitc wahracheinlioh neu geso'nritiben wurde, vis dlo
Verauchsataticn den Nanen "itbtcilung fuer Fleckfieber - und
Viruafornchung " irhiult.(H.1228). Bostonfalla sind die Gruondo
fuer das Mcuachreiben von Soiten Jotzt oino Sncho roiner Ver-
r„utung. .ais UcBtr Tutaachc allein laaa^n sioh koine bcwoia-
kraeftigon Schlitoase ziohen. Dos Dlng-Tagebuch wurdo von
Kogon aua Buohonwall ontrerat uni war bis zur Ausliofcrung an
on Hnuptonlclu.gor fuor Kriogsvortr chon ausschliosslich in
stinom Booitz. :.r bozvugto, duos or ."3 Dokunent in koinor Hin-
Qicht go a on dor t hat, un « d .33 dio Unta*3chriftcn vcn Ding und
upoctor von Schuler ocht 3in«l. (A. 115^-6). -r hatto koin».n -»n-
ln8a zur rung dee Togobuohos. :>lo .inklftgcbehoer ic bourkundo-

to, da an das DoJcutwnt nich in denaelton Zuatand wic bci soiiuaa
i^rhalt bofand.

Die Sachverataondiaun oor Vortoidigunc Dtullton f«ot, no
dns DokiLvait nit lor glolchtn lacohino und auf duroolbcn Sort
Papier guochrKbcn war. (lirug. Dok.8, Mrug.Bow. » “• ^'

Urugowoky hat zugvobun, 1333 3ich Din ;a Untoroohrlft auf
pruktiaoh alluu Scitui ucs fag. buchoa b fUi. A. (U.541C). ~s
wlrd nloht bohr.ur-tot, (lass ale eofuolsoht alrnl. Kin Vorclololi -or
ala oaht nnarXnnnton Untoraehrirt von line -inor toFftortv
(NO-576, .JiKl.Kow. 281., H.1105) un-: vcn Sohulor ..uf oln.r von
Ihn .rich don Krlogo Bbficr-atcnon olfloostnttllohon Erkla.runa
(KO-257, Ankl.Buw. 283. a.W91) nit Jen Untorsohrirt-n von
Ulns-Sohulor In *«obuoh b.«olaon. iaan ilo Kntorachrlftun ohno

alien Zwuif-1 authontiach Bind.

Ulc VortGliisung let k.ln.. clmlso Un« nr.ulGkclt In :on

Oine-Tneobuoh fcati.stollt. .j» orotnolt. >»t 11< ■■
wluo^rliolt lurch Vorla e o unabhaonglGor Ockuuonto. *1» bin l-.o
ulnielno 8ohondt a.nuuiRkvlt d»a Tnscbuota nichgc.iouon.


-11-


fciOQC. S3.Y


Es luorffcc gcnucgon, t-inige sv-ispieie anzufu-hrcn. Jor j'-
boitsb<-richt Icr "..bteilung fu:r FKckfieber- uni Virusforschung'
fucr das Jnhr 1943, Ur i-rugowsky zugvson-t war e, bcwei3t in
Jodor Einzolheit lie Lintrnguogcn in lea Tegebuch (NO-571,
.mkl.Bow. 285, n.llC6). )cr iUtfaafcz.len Ding uebor Flcokfitbor-
bo han a lung uit Gridin iorivaton sohriob uni Uu von lirugowsky
zugoatiu.t wor.cn 1st, sti.i;t bis -uf .vn l«.tztcn Podcsf'-ll ..it
don ~xpurla*.ntcn uetervin, lie in Ua Tagobuch untor ion 24.Ajri.'
und l.Juni 1943 oingetragon sin^. (NC-582, <mkl.Bt.vr. 286, R.112C;
Mrugowskya Schrdbcn vo.s 5.-U1 1942 n Conti, Irawitz, Gonz-
ken, Glldoa, later., *.yer uni Donnitz uobur inun Flookfiobor^Jchut
Inprvorsuch 1st tatsovchlich oin*- Boschruibun,: -or orstun
Vorauoh3rwih* in -uohonmld, wio si. in Tapcbuch vorzeiohnet iot.
Dios war ein Dckunjnt, '.ns von Ur Vartoidi -ung vorgologt vrurdo.
(Mrug. Jok.10, .sue. B.w. 2C, it.5087). Krugewsky hat zuseg^bon,
da8s or uobur -lcsen Vorsuch bcricht.t lr.t. (R.5414). Jiu .in-
tragun.; la rn ^buoh von 19...ugust 1942 ueber .ie rprobunrc loo
Buk.irustor L>pf3toffee, cn rtos«- zur Yorfuogung gcstdlt hntte,
wir l duroh ilrugowskya Sohrtibon nn Rose vex:. l6.Knl 1942, in
ion or un on Icpfotoff blttut, bo8tn.,tl£t, (IK3-1754, .jikl.Bew.
491, n. 6460). Dl« tintr'gung von 8.1 -orz 1944 uobur Vorsuoho r.it
ion Ipnon-(Koy-nh-ven) Injfstofr, .ic.wic -re fr.y-buch z^-igt,
von .v08o vorjv 3ohlc.-en wur «,n, wlrl lurch Hosoa ^chroib-n an
Mrugowsky von 2. .«.u hr 1943 (NO-1186, Ankl.Bow. 492, R.6463)
uni lurch Lollin :3 Senreiber. in Grawltz von 14.Fobrunr 1944 bo-
stnotigt. (NO-1188, .mkl.Bcw. 470, n. 5437; ver-sl. nuch
NO-1189, Ankl.Bcw. 471, ;i. 5440). Die Gtlbfi* r- lL,pfstoff-
vorsuchc, ,io ui.tvr .tu lG.Jnnuor 1943 i- Tagotuch elngi.tr- ~n
3lni , werien in .inec. Schrcibcn j^r BchrinG-'.’v-rkv. an . rur.owsky
von 5.J mur.r

-12-


lovUGO'iiJKY


193. (KO-1305, ..nfcl.Bc. 1*69, R.5426). Die Hicsjhorbonbon-
V< raiicho sinl In Ding-Tagobuch unter don Dat-n von 19. bio 25.
Hovonber 190 vcrzoichnct. Dor Boricht ucbor dicso Versucho von
2. Januar 1944 zeigt, doss die Vorbronnung dor Insosscn «u
19. November bogann and an 25. Novcabor 1943 beondigt war.

(NO-579, ankl.&m. 238, R. 1188). Hinsichtllch dcr.iu Ding-fn G o-
buoh orwnchnbon Bosprechung voa 29. Dczcnbcr 1941 Mrugows-

ky in oinon Vorhoor in dor Vcruntersuchung folgenic Angabon:

"Ioh ontoinno nioh llcscr Zusaanonkunft, und os faollt nir --in,
doss Schrcibor, Gildcncist^r, Ding und ich onwosond woren".

Wachrond dor ocffwntlichon Vcrhandlung hat llrugowsky zuGCgubon,
olno dorortico Auasrgc gcoaoht zu hr.bon (.<. 5380 ).

Dio obigo Untorsunhung uobor Ecbth.it and Genouigkeit dos
Ding-ragebucho ducrfto, obwohl sic nicht oreohoopfonl 1st,
gonuogor, on za bonuiacn. doss die Einwaondo dor VertoUigung

gogon dlose8 Dokuntnt voollig gogonst:ndslos sind. Es gibt knun
cino Zoilo in dot. ginxcn fcgobuoh, Jio nicht on two dor duren
Dokunento odor -lurch Zougonr.uss-v.cn bcstoctigt worden 1st. Das
Tngobuch mass in seiner Gaonze ale zutrorfond -ngenounen wcricn.
Eo 1st voolllg unbogruendot, die i.ichti/kelt cinigor Kintragungon
anzunohnen uni iio Richtigkcit nndcr.r cbzulchncn. Dio Vortoidi-
gung hat keinen glcubwuerdigon Bowels fu.r irgenfloino Ungonaulg-
kolt boigobrocht. E*r vorhandono B.richt ics vorstorbonen Ding
1 st dor bosto Bgw. 13 fuor das, was tctsnochlich goschehon ist.

•*n (lore Inpfstoffvorsuchc wurden in icr Vorsuo he station in
Buohonwald durchgofuchrt. ..uf ursuchcn dcr Kccrcs-SanJtaots-
inspektion wurdo Golbficbor-Inpfetoff, dor oinon virulonton
Virus onthiolt, in oinon Grossvcrsuch an Lisasson, dcr an 10.
Januar^bogann, orprobt. Dio crfordcrlichcn Verboroitungen warlon
von Sohrclbor nit Hilfo dcs ^eklngton Lrugowsky gotroffon.


-13-


KHUGOWS.Y


(NO-1305, iuikl t Bewi 469, 3.5426). Sine sc-hr c ros3c Znhl von
IlQoftHnson wurdo zwischcn den 13. Jonuor und den 17. Hnl 1943
geiiapft, zu wolchcr Zclt clc Erzeu un-z von Gel bficfcor-Innfs toff
auf Grund der nilitnoriachcn La^e In Norlarrik*' oingGstcllt
wurdc. Die- Zrgehniosc licsc-r Iupfunr^n wurlcn an iwr.t XVI dea
SS-Fuchrun*33tabes, welches dns Gosun.holtsant untcr l^u-owaky
war, unan lie Heoros-Snnitaetslnspoktion oaandt (Din.-
Taecbuoli).

-vnranc 1943 hattc Lru;owsky Bc 3 pru 0 l.un.un nit hnnllos-r
uebor Lnasoninpfun >n (HaaClcaor, n.3064). La konn keln -wcifol
aoln, daoa JI 03 dor Grunl war fuor die unfnn rolchcn Inpfunjs-
vorsucho nn 45 :incftlin on von Buchenw-ld zwischcn den 24. Macrz
und Jcu 20. ncorz 1943, wiu sic in fosobuch Dings vorzeiohnet
sind. .Todo teroon wurlo on icht v -rnchidcncn fagon insurhalb
vior n'oohon gogon Pcokon, Typhus, rlocktyjhu3, Pari typhus A und
B, Cholera und Diphturie gclnpft. Dio -r,:o'.ni330 Closer Inpfun-
3on wurlon nn Mrur.owakyo Ant gcoar.lt. ,.o ;cn h t auoaooact, '.ao.s
don Verouchoporsonur. Piratyphusbozlllcn in Knrtoffclsalat s«J-
fliobon wurd< . i;r hat welter auogosnct, lias lit Versucho nit
andoron Kronkliulton als Flcoktyphua in Buohonwald, wenn iuch
in gerlngorcu U. fanio, 7odo3fnello zur Fol ;o hr.tton. (Kogun,

R.1182-3).

Mrugowoky wcllto das Goricht glaubcn -achen, dess or fucr
die in Konzontraticnola. cr Buc hen wild von Ding und Kovon :uroh-
gofuchrton Vorsuchc kolnoswogo v.r intwortlich aci. Zr hat hler-
zu uus;,oor- t, iusa oin., SG*oit cs sich ua ie Vo r sue ho hmdulto,
Gruwitz unnit to 1 j r untc-rntellt war. (Ilru cwsky .4.5067). V.'achronC
or zugib, \z33 Jin.- I he tinslchtlich ler Inpfstofforzuucunc in


M»JGG'.,3KY


Bl0Ck 50 ^ Buchenwold unterstellt war, aogto or, or habc ait
den in Dlcck 46 durchgefuehrton Versuchcn nicht das geringste
zu tun gohabt. Dioaelbe Behcuptung wurie von dea ,Ji S 6kla G ten
Gcnzkcn nufgostellt. llrugowsky hat auagoaogt, doss or cntsotzt
wx bol doa Gedanken, Versuche on Lenschen vorzunchaon, da or
dor Ancioht war, dass das Uonschonlcbon hoilig sol . {.<.5066).

Es lie«t cbcr uebonmcltijondos Beweisuntorinl defuer vor,
dasa Hrugowsky die Voisungen zu don von Ding in Buchonwaid
Jurohgefuohrton Vcrauchon gec®ben hat. In solner oigonon oiloa-
atattlichcn Krklaerung in dor Voruntorsuchung hat ITugowsky r.ua-
ecaagt, dasa lea Act fuor Flcokfiebcr- unci Virusforsohung doa
Hygionc-Inatituta dor Vfnffcn-33 an fangs 1942 von Gcnzkon in
Buohonwald oln ;orichtv.t wurdo. ir hat zu G o G uben, dasa tr ala
Chof dco «uitos XVI (Hygiene) dco SS-r*uohrun.aatr.boa und ala
Chof doa Kygiouc-Inatituta dor A’nffon-SS dor unuittolbora vor-
goaotzto von Din c »"J. hr hat forncr nusasagt, dasa Versuol\o
nn nacrtllneon von Ding durohgofuohrt worlon sind, ur. dio Wir-
kungon dor versohiedonon rlookficbor-Iapfetcrfo zu boatinnon.

Er hat zugagoban, luas or vollkocrum uubor iio .o-loitcn Dings
unterrlohtot war, dr.a3 or ven ihn Dcrlchto uobor die Vorsucho
orhiolt, oinachliosslioh dor dahl Jur rclusfaolic, und dass or
Gonzken unterriohtet hat.(2,0-423, Ankl.Baw.282, R.1087). Dio
zwol von doa Angcklactcn fcrusowaky /;ozciohnaton Tafcln z-igon
dcirtlioh, leas Ciu Versuchatation in Buchen»nid untor Jin/ von
ihrer Ein rich tun/ bis zun iuaxaonbruch Juutaohlonda ixucewsky
dirckt untoratollt wnr. (NO-4I0, .Jikl.Bow.22; NU-417, Ankl.Bew.
23, K.121). Li hrouzvorhoor hat J£ru>wsky „lo Verb indung zwisoh,
uing und don Ky ionc-Institut dor Anffcn-SS zugogobon. (k.5371).

Dio in dor Voruntorsuchung abgvjcbone oidcsstattliclu. Jr-
klaorun* dea .ai.>kl-gtou Kovon.


-15-


HHUGOifSKY


<Ur Dings Stellvertreter und sicherlioh in *er Logo war, dio
flatsachen zu konncn, besaot, lass ins Hygiene-Institub ler
haffen-S3 unter Mrugcwsky nllc Borichte aeber lie Versucho
in Block 46 orhielt, und lass Ding Befohle lirekt vcn Mrugowsky
orhielt. M.ioh Hovens jingaben war lie .hjihenfolge dor Dofohls-
gowalt: Drawl tz,Gunzkon .Krugowsky, Jin . fast alio 14 Togo
l'uhr Dirg zu Bcojrcchungcn nit Lrugcwsky naoh Berlin. Auf
oincr seiner rtelsen nnch Buchonwnld mchto i rurewsky einon
Boauok in lor ,/ohnun.s Dings (NG-429, -nkl.Ecv;. 281, K.107S).

Kogon htt bezeugt, -ass ^ing uobor seine Vcrsuche
Mrugcwsky pjrsoenlioh fcorichtoto, uni .nos or, wenn or nicht
sulbst naoh Berlin fuhr, rejclnoocslg nllo drei idonate uohrift-
liche Burichto sanitc.(«.1186,1155). Dio Beriohte uobor lie
Vorsuche in Block 46 wuricn J-rugowsky naoh Berlin uoborcandt.
R.1160). Din 8 dlonstlichor Sohrirtwochsel fond hauptsaeohlioh
alt Lrugowsky statt la. 1157). Dio .owe i sun gen fuer die ,.uo-
fuahrunt lor Vorauoho knnui von i-rugewoky. (it. 1163,1219).

In Spactsoauor 1943 wurdo Urugowsky dor allelnicc Verge sot.xtc
von Dins, und cllo .jiweisun/cn an dlos.n wurion von ihn
urtoilt. (Ii.1202). I'jurfowoky bokldlcte cino so wlohtlgc
Stollun lass cs 1 ‘uor Jing gefaohrlich gowoson wnerc, .ober
losscr. Kopf hinwe,- sioh an Orawitz zu wenion (ri,1241). Vcr-
schiodono Halo hat iirugowaky Ion Vor 3 uchstlcck in Buohonwald
besucht. (Kogcn, n.1244-5; Kirchhoinor, X.1329),

Dio obon angefuctrton Be a l3«. fuer i-rugowskys Verant-
wortliclikcit sin: wiclcrholt .lurch lckunv>nt .risokos bewois-
nntorial erhnertet wcricn. Din.-s .jbeitaberioht fuer d'.s J-.hr
1943, do- dio in Block 46 durohGefuuhrten Vcrsuchc llstun-
naos3ic larBtullt, wurlc :^ugowsky zu.>3nndt


-16-


MRUGOWSKY


und trug den Briefkopf* "Hygiene-Institut der Waffen-SS,
Abteilung fuer Fleckfieber-und Virusforschung, Weimar,
Buchenwald". (No-571, Ankl.Bew. 235, . R.' 1109). Dieoor

Arbeitobericht umfasst eowohl die Versucho in Block 46
ulo auch die Impfstoffherstellung in 31ock 50, was dor.
endguoltigen Bowels liefert, doss Mrugowskys Behauptung,
oeino Vorantwortlichkoit erstrecko sich nur auf Block 50,
faloch 1st, Derselbe Bcricht zeigt auff'daes Mrugowsky
am 3. September 1943 die Abtoilung fuor ?leckfiobor-und
Viruoforochung in Buchonwald beaichtigtc, und dcs3 Ding
vorsohlodono Untorrodungen ait Mrugowsky gohabt hat.
Mrugowskys eigenor Sokrotacr hat zugogobon, doso Dings
Boriahto ucbor soino Versucho an Haoftlin t cn ueber das
Kygiono-Institut dor Wnffon-SS an Grawitz gogangon sind.
(Mrugowsky, Ankl.Bow. 13, R. 5046).

Mrugowsky hat Dir^ s Boricht ucbor dio Be hand lung von
Plookfiobor ait Akridindorivntcn trhalton.(.NO-582, Ankl.

Bow. 286, R. 1122). Diesor Berioht opricht von klinischon
Vorsuchon an Monsohen, dio an Fkockfiobor orkrenkt ^aron,
ubor Mrugowsky wuosto, dnos Ding mit kuensiliehor Infi-
ziorung seiner Vorouchsobjckto. experiaontiorte. (Mugrowsky,
R. 5066). Dor Bcricht zeigt auf, daso 21 der Versuchsper-
aonon 3torbon und daso dio uoberlebcadon Hacftlingc mit
schworon Kooplikationcn dor Krankhoit zu kaeapfon hr.tten.
Diooelbo Versuchoroihe let in Dings Tagobuch untcr don
Do ton vom 24. April und 1. Juni 1943 v^rzcichr.ct.

Dio orsto ir. Bochcnwald zwiocher. doc 6. Jnnuur und
19. April 194durchgofuohrto Vorsuehfiroiho, in der 145
Inaaoson als V 0 rsuchspor3oncn gcbrcucht wurder., war die Grund
logo oinos Borichtes von Mrugowsky an Conti, Grcwitz,


- 17 -


MRUGOWSZY


Gcnzken, Eyer und Dennitz.datiert voc 5.Mci 1942 (Urug.Dok.

10, Krug. Bow. 20, R. 5087). Puenf Versuehspersonen atarbon
cla Ergobnia dieacr Vorsucho (Ding-2ogcbuch).

Dio in Ding 3 Tegobuch unter den 19.August 1942 aufgo-

zeichnetcn Vorsucho nit dec Cantacuzino-Inpfatoff nua 3uka-

rcst . wnron von Mrugowsky angcordnct wordon. Diescr Irapfotoi

war von don Angoklagton Rose zur Vorfuogung gcatollL wordon,

dor Hrugoweky goboten hatte, diese Vcraucho in die Wogo zu

1942

loiton. An l6.MaiAoilto Krugowaky Rose schriftlich nit,
doss Grnwitz dor Durchfuchrung dor Vcroucho zugostinct habe,
und dcos dor Inpfotoff ihn (Mrugowsky) ueberoandt wordon
bo lie• Er war auch donit cinvorctendon, durch Vorouchc foat-
zuotollon, ob dio Laus durch goinpftc Plockfioborpotionton
infiziert wordon kooime. Sclbstvcrstoondlich nachto dioo
dio Infiziorung dor Vorouchopcroonon nit Flockficbor or-
fordorlich.(N0-17P4, Ankl.Bew. 491, R.6460). Ala Roaul-
tot dioaor Voroucho atarbon vior dor Vorauchsporaonon.
(Ding-Tagobuch).

Dio i'lockficborvcroucharciho Nr. VIII, in dor Ipaon-
Impfatoff cue Xoponhagon orprobt wurdo, iat obonfalla von
don Angoklogton Mrugrov.sky arw.oordnot wordon. An 2. Dozonbor
1945 wurdo Mrugowok.v von Hooo ua dio Durchfuohrung von
Ipoon-Inpfstofforprobungon in Din v 3 Buchonwcldor Vor-
ouchaatation gobeton. (N0-11B6, Ankl.Bow, 492, R.7475).

Im Krouzverhour hat ilrugor/oky eusdruccklich in Abredo gc-
atollt, dasa or jonnls von Roao un dio Erprobung dos ICopon-
hagonor Inpfotoff3 r.ngogangon wordon sci. Er hat auogooagti
"Wnoro or zu nir gckosncn, wu.rdc ich ihn an jocund andoren
verwioaon hr.ben. Ich wuorde ihn gcaagt habom Mein Bootor,d-.
hr bo ich garnichts zu tun." (R.5434-5). An 21.Fcbruar 1944
wurdo Mrugow3ky davon in Konntni3 gosetzt, daas 30 "go-
cigneto Zigeunor" fucr die Erprobung dea Ipson Inpfstoffa vo‘
fuogbar gonacht wuerdon.

-18-


13UG0WSNY


(NO-1188, -nkl.Bor:. 470, L.5437 ). -Ja 29.?cbruar 1944 wurde
I-!rugowsky waiter benachrichtigt, dess dio Vorauchspersonon
durch die Dienststdlo von Hebe von dor Roichakrininalpoli-
zei bostinat werden vmerden. (NO-1185, .Lnkl.Bcw. 471, R.5440)
Lao Tcgebuch Dingo bov/eist, dasa die 7or3uche ait dea Ipscn-
Iapfatoff am 8.?Ieorz 1944 an 30 personen begenr^”von donen
6 c.n don Polgen dor Vor3ueho aterbon.

12.4.ugust 1944 v/ica dor a^igeklcgto Krugoweky Ding an,
Vorsuche durchzufuohrcn, us foatzuatollon, in *.7ic wait aich
dor lnfizicrondo Chr.rr.kter dea Blutca loichtorer Plockfiobor-
foollo ia Vorgleich zu don cchworcn Pfiollon unterach-idot.
(NO-1197, Lnkl.Uow. 472, R. 5451).

Jlru^owoky ordnotc jino Vorauc oroiho rn zur Foatatolluug
ob dor Vo r In of dcr riockfi^burorkrnnkung durch lntravinoo3o
odor intrcnuakulaoro ilinopritzungon von Flockfiobariapfotof/
booinflu. ot v/orden kocmc. Vo;; don v-rwondoion 25 Voroucha-
poraonon otrrbon 19. Dioecr Vcrauoh rcurdo zwiachon don
11. Novoabor und 22. Dozer ber 1'44 durch ofuohrt. (^ingo
Tcgobuch).

In ..botracht dea obon nr. v ,ofuo:irtor. Dcv.-oianrtcrials
iat oo vollkonncn klcr, dcao allc v^n Din 0 in 3uchcm ald
durchgo-ruonrtoa Vcrsuchc gcncose den Rcfchlon und ..r.ord-
nungon doe -ngoicla^ton :irucowo.<y durch^ofuohrt cordon si.nd.


IQUGOWSSY


(2) Vorsu che alt Gift on (Anllr.ocschrift, Zil'fer 6 (II)).

Vcroucho nit Giftst.'ficn vardor in den a nzontrati. ns-
legern Bochenv.T.ld and Sechaenhcuscn cat Znorcnung dec
An 0 o'.cls tt ton ilru,. --sky durchgefucfcrt. (Ko^.n, 3.1133-6).

Die orate Vorsuch8roihe rurdo in Dozcnbor 1943 durcL^o-
fuohrt, un die t ctlicho GiftCosis dcr Alkr.l3ld-Srup;>c
fostzustcllon. Dio Durcbfuoiiranj dioser Vorsuchc nc r v n
doa Si-Richtcr Itorgen c-rboton rerdon, dcr in der otrr.f-
er.cho go&on .1 >ch, don lagork .onr.ndrnton v r. 3ac.icnwr.ld,
und £Oc,on don -n u o!:lr. L tcn M von ie Untcrauchun. fuohrto.
Hjven strnd untor don Vcrd-.cht, oinon Zou.cn K.ch

and ihn solbsl t nilf* v.r. Gift gotoctot zu n. Vior
raocioc.io Kriogo&ofcnoono wurdon v n Din_ zu d«.,-. Vorsachon
v-rvondot. Deo ^iXt \ urdo dor H&hrur.g Cor Vorauchs^orsonon
ohno deron t.isocn boi t ocen„t. -lie vler kiuaon nit dcr. Lo-
bon dev n, war cr Jed cii in erne : V-rbronnungarrau dca ...Z.
ordi'oaBolt, d:nit Obduktionoa m i.inca virgonjoacn wordon
kjnnton. (Zo 0 )n, 1183-4i ln 0 obuoh Dir..). Dr. Dmj Uru-

gjwaky untoratend, Irennte closer Vo reach nicht hn- I vu-
j-jwa ya Zuetia.iung v n Dm, diu-£ofuchrt worden o-’in.

An 11. ooptcubcr 194*. futfurton In-u^rwoky und Dm. oinor
Voreuch ait Acor.itir-Kier t-Goac:. osen in oncheonhcueen
dure!.. Die Gooch.sac Keren ait kryetalliaiorton Gift ;,o-
fuollt, und fuonf Vorouchapors >nor. -•’urdon diosc Au^oln in
don linlcon Oborec.ionkel gcachooaon. In zwoi Pccllo konnto
koino tirkong dcs Giftoa be bach.ct wordon. In den uobrigon
drei Fallon lit con die Vorauckapv - cer.cn in acarccklichcr
Woie. . -lie drOi atarbon naoh oinca otwa 2 stuondi^cn IP-
doskiLipf. Die in do: Verouc. vo—endotor. vorgiftotcr. Aa^cln
waren cngoblioh ruaciac.icr no. ;anit.(30-201, Ankl.flc*. .250,

»- 1303 - 4 )

Dio Vorsucks >craoncn ’- area rusaisebe i!rio w s^cfr.i c cno.
(Kigon,r..ll86j aiol'.c each X. b ans ieucCr.r.uasr^o ir. Sxrr.feccho
4, lUl.itcur^crick; II, a. 733. £0-3680 ,idikl.3o...


■3UG0V.gg r

l^ugowsky gab seine 2eteiligun_ an dioson Vcrsueh-a zu. -r
rec :tfcrti_te sich danit, dess cr in dioson x lie dor _o-
sotzlich bcatimte Schcrfrichtor gevosen ware, oelbst -»ona
at*n dio './a hr he it dioc.tr absurder. -rklacru a unterstcllt, 3t
ken:; oc doch nicht alo ges-tznccssii, cn^eeclion wordon,
lCriosa u ofengono zu T do zu anrtern, sclbst wenr. sic rochto-
gttltig zu.-. T^dc verurteilt v; rdon a. Iren.

26. okt oor lA* wurdo v r. Dir.. cin woiteror C-iit-
vorsuoh in Buchonreld durchoCftthrt. D_c Dintr0cUn o in Din-s
xcgobuch untor dieson & tun becn-t: "S.ndorvorouohc nn occhs
Pors.nen ,onao8 »cisun 0 v.n So Oborf direr Dozont Dr. .Iru-
goffeky und R ?... (Boricht dnrhbor nundlich). 4 lo^on bezougte,
daos Din w , ihn soa'r.j; hctc, dr.so die boi don Vorouch vomm-
doton ruoaischcn ..ric^cfcn<_cnon neck kurzer Zeit oterbon.

Sio veurdon cpitor seziort und vorbrr..int. Ding bcrichtcto rn
UrugoiHricy nttndlich. Dioco Vorauchc. atn..don nit don in ...S.
bccheonhcueon durchgoflihrtcr. Vorouchon ait vorgiftuto.i Cu-
echoosen in Vorblndung. (d u .n, R. 1135-6).

(3) Vcraucho alt 3randb ebon, (-.lklegeochrift, Zil’fcr 6 t
In Novoubor 1943 ortoilto Uruooraky Din c don 3ofohl,
dco Pr&perct "R 17" boi Jrischon 2h: sph -rvorbronnun^on und
dio "Schinacinoalbo 1 * und "Schinacin entorn" zur HnchboRondlur.
Btlchcr Brandwundon zu crproben. 3uonf Vorouchoporoono.i, die
fruohor zu Plcckfiobcrvorauchcn vorwondot r^rdor. ^ver-n,
wurden tbsichtlich nit oincr brc.nendon, phoaphorhalti 0 on
Pluossigkoit uoborooeoor., dio oinor -u'endbenbe entnorinen
v/urde. Die sich orgobondon Brr.r.drr.:r.don v.ercr. o.;:r schwcrcr
Art, wio cue don Bildbtrtcht uobor dioec Vorsucho oroohen
wordo.: ken.;. (110-579,-2 -1.3017.283,... 1138). Die Opfor/littoll
ouolv llsto Schnorzon und dnuaradon oc kedon. (ilc 0 on .1.1137-90.
nO-579, Ankl. Bow. 233, 2. 1188i Dir^a Ta w cbuch).

(4) Vcrauc ho nit alt- 31utrlcs n g und cio Hgr g^jpap
v jr. Blutplcsue un. Flee :fiober -Scrun.

Vorsucl’X ait -lt-Blutplrsae wurdea r.uf «rauchcn dor ”i itar-
arztlichcn -kado lie an L.ftli:._on in ^uchonrcld r.uf Dci’ohl
‘*i-u._ us ys durcngofdhrt. Bluttrer.zfusi :non wurdor. eus .cftlhrt

- 21 -


MHUGOTrSKY


ua fostzustellen, ob dieses Alt-Blutplesaa onr.e Gofahr vcr-

v/ondet wordon kbnnc, insbesjndoro ohno Schockgefehr. Mohrere

Vcrauchsrcihen wurden durchgefuohrt, jcde cit 10 bis 20

Vorauciioporaonen. Binlge dor Opfer etarten, wahrachoinlich

infolgo dor voreinton tfirkung von Sohock und schwacher, kdr-

pcriicher Verfassung. Mrugowaky orhiclt Bcricht uobor dioso

Vorouchc. (Kogjn, R.1190-2j Dings Tagobuch, Eintragungcn

swiachon 21. Dozoabor 1943 und 16. Juni 1944).

on

Die Eintragung/vDn 26. Me- und 13. Oktober 1944 in
Dinga Tagobuch zoigon, daaa von yiockiicber genoaondon Hkft-
lir.gon Blut ontr.occon v.urde. zur Horstollung oinoc Flock-
fiobcr-Gonoaungo-Sorunc. Dor Zougo Kogor. gibt an, daao dicoo
Arboit durch SS-HauptoturafUhror Dr. Ellonbock nuf Bofahl
Mrugowckya ausgoftyhrt wurdo. Ellonbock cntnahn dns Blut von
Somnor 1944 bio Pr’dhjnhr 1945 von Flockfiebcr-Rckonvaloa-
acnton in Block 46. Dra Blut wurdc dioaon Vorouchsporauncn
r/ogolmaooig ontnocav.n, govdhnlich in Kengon zwiachon 250
and '350 con. Dio Blutentnahno bodoutctc fUr dlo Gonoaondon
oino auooorgowbhnlichc Bolcatung.und oinc ..nzahl von ihnon
uturb. Venn ouch dio gonnuo Todoouraachc untor dioaon Un-
otttndon nicht nit Sichurtacit footzu9tollon war, bootoht doch
koin Zv/cifol, decs die Blutontnchnc dnzu boitrug. (Kogon,

R.1192-3)

Kogon bozougto woitorlxin, dcoa Ellonbock auf Llrugowo-

kyo Anordnungon hin filr dio zur Horotollung dos Blutplae-

noe dionondon Blutontn::linon ayatonctioch Invalid on und alto

Poroonon ouovrahlto, boeendcro Franz.'eon, dio sich in don

aogonannton "Kloinon Legor" von Buchonvrald bofendon. Dio

ochrocklichen ZustAndo in "Kloinon lager" wurdon ansohnulich
goochildcrt. Das Blut c/urdo ven den Opforn gefordert und go-
nonnon. Manchntl wurdo diosen.don Hungcrtodo auagolioferton
Putiontcn,zu8iitzliche Hahrung go go bon. (Kogon, R. 1194-6). *uf
dio Frcgo, ob irgcndwelcho dieaor Blutapondcr in don ‘‘Kloinon
Lager" von Buchonwcld ~uf Grund dioaer Blutabnahno


MRUGOTTSKY


Starben, gab Kogon zur jlntwort:

"Die ?ragc zoigt, daas os aehr schwer ist, sich einen
richtigen Bogriff von Klcinen Lager in Buchenwald sa
ncchen* Die Lcuto sind dort in Kasson gostorben. Dio
Leichon lag.n in dcr Nacht neckt vor den Blocks, well
sle von don uebrigon Insaason cus den Kojon herauage-
zerrt wurden, un sich nohr Platz zu vcrachcffen. J.dcs
kloinato Klcidungsstueck wurue ihnen woggeriesen von
don uobrigon, die ucberlobe: wollten. Ea ist unnooglich,
festzuetollon, ob an dor Blutontnahnu dirckt und un-
nittolbar jenand g 06 torbon iet, donn dio Leute fic.on
viclfach untorwega in Klcinon Lager un und waron tot*

-ber ca otoht fuor ie&on, dor die Vcrhaeltnisao dort
gokannt hat, auascr jedon Zweifol, dasa die Blutor.t-
nahnon, wenn oio r.uch cinon nonentanon goringiucgioor.
S3aonsvortcil don Lcutcn bracht<r, bei vielon zuc.Todo
weaentlich bcigctrrgon habon." (Kogon, H.1196).

Ellonbock boachocftigte aich auch nit Forschungaarboitcn

uebor don Souoratoffgohalt doa Blutca von Monachon in vor-

3chiodonon Stadion dcr Erachoopfung und uebor kuenotlich

horvorgerufono Hungcroodoao. Mru a oweky gab scino Zuotinnung

zu dioaon Vorouchcn. (Kogon, R.1257-66).

(5) Die Voroucho ait Gao-Oodon-Serun.

Dio oidooatattlicho Erklaorung von Dr. Erwin Schulor,
aliao Ding, booogt, daao oinoo dor bohcndolton Thoncn in
oinor Konforonz in dor Hilitdrfirstlichon ^kndonio in Berlin
Endo 1942 dio toodlich- Sirkung von Gr.a-Ocdcn-Sorun boi vor-
wundoten Soldaton war. Dio oidoaatattlichc Erklaoruhg gibt
v;oitor on, daoo aich untor don Toilnohncrn on dioacr Bc-
oprcchung Killian, General Schroibor, Ih-ugowaky und oin ihn
unbokanntor SanitStooffizior bofanden. Killian und ilrugowaky
beriohtoton liber Soldaton, dio daa Scrua in sterkon Doaon
vcrnbreicht orhnlton hettor. und cinigc Stur.dcn spUtcr nach
augcnochoinlichor Bcsscrung pltitzlich ohne oreicht.lichon
Grand stcrboi-.. Ea beatend dcr Vordacht, doss der Fhenol-
Gchclt de8 Soruna


MRUGOSSKY


don Tod herbeigefuchrt hatto. In Gegenwert v;n Killian und
Schrciber geb Mrugowsky an Ding den Bcfehl, an dcr aittola
Phenol durchGofttbrten Suthaneaio an oinen K.Z. Inaaason teil-
zunohacn und dr.a Brgebnis in Einzelnon zu boachreibcn. Ding
war spnoter in K.Z. Buohenwold Zeuge der Hinrichtung von
vior odor fuenf Poraoncn durch Phonol-Sinspritzungon, die
von don ^kngcklr.gten Hoven vorgonoaaon wurden. Eofohlagcn&aa
borichtotc Din/j uebor acinon Bofund ncch Berlin. (HO-257,
Ankl.Bow. 283, R. 1091)

Mrugov/sfcy boatritt, Jo einon solcher. 3efchl an Ding
gogebon zu hebon. da iat jodoch offonaichtlich, daao Bing-
Schulor, dor aich sur Zcit dor Abgcbc dcr cidcaatattlichcn
Erkltirung in Haft bofnnd, aich nicht 3olbat wc 0 cn einoo Vor-
brochor.o bolaotot habon wtirdc, daa nicht stottgefundon hat.
Krugowo’cya fortgoootztoo Intorcoao an dcr tflrkur.g dca phenol-
haltigen Scruna wird durch oin Schrcibon bowioson, dao Grnwitz
on 24. Auguot 1944 on ihn gorichtct hotto. Grnwitz fUhrto
nua, dooa dor RoichafUhrcr SS die von Krugcwoky vorgoochla-
gunon Voroucho Ubor dio Vertraglichkoit doe phenolhaltijon
Soruna gonohnigt httttc. (N0-119G, -nkl.Bcw. 466, R.5300).

B. Woltoro Exooriucnto

(6) Knlto-Voraucho (Anklagoschrift, Ziffcr 6 (B) )

Dio grauaanon und njordoriachon Kulte-Vcreucho in

Dachnu bildoton don Go. cnatcnd cinoa froinlltigon Bcrichts

von Holzloohnor, der nit Raschor und Pinkc dieso Vorsucho

durchftihrto. Dioscr Vortrag wurdo anlaaalich oincr Konforenz

gohclton, die on 2':, und 27. Cktobcr 1942 in Niirnbcrg otatt-
fand, wio auo don achriftlichcn Bcricht tibor dio8c Tagung
havorgoht. (NO-401, Ankl. Bov..93,R.309). Kolslcehnera Boricht
vorurecchto oir.o Art Sensation, do deutlich aua ihn horv r-
ging, doaa nan K.Z. Haftlingo ala Vorsuchaporeonen vorwondot
hatto unideas oinigo von ihnen goatorben weren (Lutz,H.272).

SS OberaturnfUhrLr Murthun wurdo von Krugow3ky sic Ver-
trotcr dC3 Hygionirchen In3tituta dor ffeffor.-SS zu dioscr
TngunG ontsandt,


- 24 -


MRUGOwSXY

und or borichtcto Krugowsky Ubor die Sitzung. (Mrugowsky,

R.5038 i H0-401, sicho oben). Ut rdioa vcrhendolto Hrugowoky

einige Tegc vorhcr, an 21. Okt .'bor 1942, nit Sicvers Ubor die

Zueannonnrboit zwischcn don Hygicnieohon Institut dor tfaffen-

SS und Rcschor beziiglich dor KSltc—Vorsuchc. Bin weitorcs

Zu8Dnuontroffon fand an 20. Novonbcr 1942 otatt. (H0-647,

Ankl.Bow. 124, R. 383). Mrugowsky gab zu, nit Siovcra

in diooon Zuoaaaenhang gosprochcn r.u haben. (Mrugow8ky,R.504'>

(7) Mclnria-Versucho (Anklagoochrift, Ziffor 6 (C))

VO0 dio Bouchrcibung und den vorbrochcrischon Chnrnktcr

dioiior Vcrauchc anbotrifft, 01 v<ird nuf dor. Schrifteats dor

Anklogovcrtrutung gogon do:, *. 5:1' -on Bobo vurwicaun.

Mrugowsky gab zu, durch Grnwitz Ubor Schillingo Vor3ucho in

Dachau untcrrichtct worden zu coin. Sr gab nuch zu, oich

zionlich oingohond ait M.' 1 : ria-Fra on boschttftigt zu lttbon.

(Mrugowoky, R.5043J. Sr sngte, doss or r.ichl in dor Lugo go-

woaon ware, oich In dio Voroucho Schillin ,a oinzuniochon, da

or aich zu dor Zoit, nlo or durch Crawitz inforaiort wurdo,

noch in SS-PUhrungaatab befunden licbu. ulo or zu Grr.witz'o

Stab kan und Oborotcr Hygionikor wurlo, hnbo cr, wio or

oagto, nlcht gowuoot, daoo Schilling nur noch ait oulnon Vcr~

ouchon boachaftigt war. (Hrugowoky, K. >396). Schilling fUhrt.

uoino Voroucho bie 1945 fort. Obur 1.000 Inoncocn wurdon

diC8on Voreuchon untorzegon,und nchroro hundert otarbon an

1U1

don Polgon. (NO-856, Ankl.S;v/. 1?S, R.:“2). Eu ict/ntiglich,

dnon Mrugowsky zwoi Jahre r;g in • n:. nntnic Ubor Voroucho

bloibon konnto, die in oi:io4 a lc" , roaoon Urouutr.be durch-
gofUhrt wurdon, inebcaonucrc da di- Voroucho dor Souchon-
bokfinpfung gait.;n, ooinen ci ;or.on ~rboitsb-roich.

(8) Sulfonanld-Vorauc ho (Ankla^oochrift, Ziffer G (E) )
Wafl dio Eocchrcibung una den v rbreoheriootton Charakter
dicsor Versuchc botrifft, oj wird nuf don Schriftorts der
Anklagovortrotung gogen don Aiu.okl cten ’5_biirrct v rwicson.
Mrugowoky half boi diesen Verauchon und crcutigtc dnzu. Er


- 25 -


IQUGCwSKY

stellte Gebhardt seinen Stab ur.d seine Apparate fur die
DurchfUhrung der Versucbe zur Ve eine Tatceche, die

Gebhardt in soinec vorlaufigen 3oricht von 29. August 1942
Uber die Sulfonanidvorsuche selbst erwShnt. Berselbe Bericht
bowoist, da33 ilrugowsky das Infoktior.onateriel f-ltr die Ver-
sucho zur VorfUgur.^ stellte ur.d Ratsckl&gc darilber ortoilto,
wie nan die Infoktion dor Veracchspersonen virkoarter costsl-
ton koenne. (HO-2734, Ankl.Bow. 473 olo ionnzoichnungcnunnor,
R.5622). Dor Angckla^tc Fisciior bcccnroibt in ecinor oidos-
stattlicher. Srkldrung ebcnfallc die Kollo, die lirugovvsky wid
das Hygiene-Inatitut cpiclton. ~lc -^ch den ersten boidon
Sulfonaaid-Vorsucharoihu:: kvir.c cewtrioiton Infoktionor. auf-
traton, ontachicd nan cich cuf Voraculn 0 lirugorakys drfUr,
dio Art dor Bakcricnkuitur zu Indent ur.d cine oturkorc
Kuitur alo ooi dc.i frtfhoroa Vorouchoroihon anzinrondon. Mru-
gewokyo Inotitut otc-llte die neuen 3rand;ulturon extra fUr
dio Voroucho her. Dn die clo Argobnis di^s-r Vor3uchorcihcn
orziolton InOcktlonon nieht der. VTunc.bradinfo!ctlonen on dor
Front ontBprcchon, wurdo d o Hygionc*inrticut dcr .afion-SS,
Hrugowckyo Ant, emout su R: to gcajgon, an su bootinaon,
woloho Masonohcon zu orgreifen a.is ., un Vundinfoktionen hor-
boizuftihron, dio aohr den Bedirv ungo: or. d*r ?r «nt entspro-
ohon. e>c war auf Vorsclila* ven ^rugowekya ^t, du33 aich
'.cbhcrc’t und Fincher dezu onteci.l.: den Edierion-..ulturc;

Holzoplittor und Glos belaon,.-, c. , o dio eui don Kcapffoldc
Ublicho Scimutskruoto dcr Wur.c . ol zuo... (NO-228, Ankl.

Bow. 206, R. 768-9,771). Dios-c flofaicantorial wird durch
dio oidoestattlichon Krklarn._cr. :r I^jordrzto Rosenthal
und Schiodlrusky ertuirtet (K0-658,Aikl.Bo».223, R. 889*
80-508, Ankl.Bo . , B. 895).

(9) L jidcnl3chc Gclboucht (-nklr.. :eochrif t, Ziff>.r 6 (K)
Uru c .ow3ky bestritt auf slon Zou_ or.ctar.d, .iennls Kcnntnis
von Spidoni8ChvR-GolbEi*rht Versuckon (Hepatitis opedoaica)
ir. Konzcntrctior.slcgern gofcntt od.r ‘cr.it in Vorbindur.g
gcataidon zu heben. (Urugows.y, R.3^52).3r ocstritt,


- 26 -


MRUGCTSSY

ttbcr dioscn Gogonstand ait Schrciber, Con BovollnSchtigtOn
fiir Seuchenbekanpfung in Scichaforschun^srat, Bcsprechungcn
gcfuhrt zu habcn. £r se^te, dess Schroibcr ihr. nieocla or-
sucht habc, Vor3uchspcraonon fUr Gclbsucht-xjrschuntcn zur
Vflrfttgung zu stollcn. (^rugov/sky, R . 5393-9). -bor dio Bowoiz

aufnahno hat orgcbon, daBs-Krugowaky voile Zonntnie von
dioscn Vcrauchon hattc -nd dees .r - orautigt durch Schrci-
bur - dcr Durchftlhrung a Ichor Voroacho in K.Z. Buchenv/ald
zuatinnto. Br schricb ec 29. Jonuiu* 1945 an don Roich3crzt


SS Grawitz rlo folgt:

"Dor Diroktor doe Hy«ioniseten Institutes d^r dniversi-
tdt Leipzig, So-Heuptoturm ihrer Professor Dr. Dread,
hot cud Hepatitic - Xronkor. oin Varus gczUchtot und
konnto os in zohlroichon lUrpnasajon iibortrngon. Aun
Boweis, does c3 oich un dr.s v;irko«no Virus dcr riopatiti
opidoaiCQ hondolt, sind Vorsuc.no an .*onachon orrordorli

Dcr Bovollniichtigto £Ur douchonforachung in Rcichofor-
cchungBrrt wondet aicli dehor ait d_r Bitto un .motol-
lun. dio8or Vorouchu cn aioh .

Ich bitto boin RoichefUhror - *>b dio Go ohnigung zu
orwirkon, die njtvrcndigon Obcrtrngun;,ovor8uchc cn .u
Gooignoton Hhftlin^on, oloho bislur :.-ch nicht cn^
Hopatltio opidoaico erkrenkt rarer.,in dcr -■'lcc.-fiobc. -
Voroach3otction dcs Kl. Duehem:eld durchl hron zu
kttnnon." (MO-1313, Ankl.Bcw. '.67, rw5400).


(10) Baktorion-Krie^ofdhrun ■

Ala dor Angeklcetc 31 one soino verfcrochoriacho Ititig-
keit in Zusnnnonhnng nit dor Vorboroituu doo Baktoricn-
Kriogos nufnehn, (aiohe Sehriftaetz dcr -uiklngovortrotung
r.ogon don Angoklc 0 ton Bl.v:o>, tr t r snooks tachniachcr Un-
terstutzung in dioa^r bre .u cn ‘. sky horen. lirugowaky

ucchto oino Zuncn.icnatc.Mu;.; uc. ichti stem wisc«.n8C.i: ft-
llchon l^ntorials Uber diuaon -i : .cr.sT'ad Mr Bloru. Grmvitz
bctrr.chtoto dio An^elcgo.huit ala o ricuti,;., dace or an
lr August 1944 cine Abochiift cn Kinder anndto. (NO-114,
Ankl.Bow. 324, R. 1481)

III. Schluss

Mrugowsky nahn an dor Zonferenz von 2 9- Dosoaber 1941


toil,


- 27 -


X3UG07SSY


bci v/elchor die Snt sc ho idur.i darlibor _□ troffen wurce, Flcck-
ficbcr-Iapfatoffo dorca kiinstlicho Infokticnsvcrsucho or.
iionzontrF.tionslagerhafcXir^oa zu erprobcn. Dio in 3ucucn-
wald unter Dir.f errichtetc Vcrauahsstetion vrcr Ui'ii^owsky
els don L.itor dos Hygiene-Institat8 dir "cficn-dS dirokt
unterstollt. Die Bcfohlc fdr die von Din*, durch 0 ufahrtcn
Vorsuchc kaaon von Hru^owsky. Ir orhieIt uebor cllo diesc
Vorsuchc ins Einzclno ^ohondo Boric.: to. ittvr. 250 H&ftlingo
v/urdon r.ls Irgcbnis dor Flccfcficbor-Vcrcuch. g.totct.

Hrugowsky £onohni_t«. in Dozes :or 1943 Vcrouch. nit
Gif jstoffen, dio von Din r ; r.n vior russiBci’.cn Eric^sgofan^o-
non in Buchcnv/cld durch*,oftihrt wurdon. Is Septonbor 1944
nnhn or poroonlich r.n dcr -;it ver^ifteter L'unitirn vorfio-
nonnonor. Erschicsoun,. von fuor.f rusoiocher. .\rij w & 0 ofanconon
in Srchoonhr.uoon toil. In Oktobor 1944 ££b or Din., don 3cfoL
GiXtvoroucho r.n s.cbc raooiochor. .Crio w o^cl: n^cncn in 3uchon-
vrald durchzuftibron. Von dor. 15 Op fern il.z.i* Vcrsuchu otorbe
11 . •

Hrugowoky befnhl Dir.., Vorauclu zur irproban u von Sal-
bon gogon Vorbronnun c .on durchzuflihron, dio sen KZ Insascon
kUnotlich nit Phosphor boibrr.chtc. dr bofrhl such Voroucho
nit Alt-Blutplcsoe, sowio die ^bnr.lmc von Blut zur Hor-
utollun* von Blut plr.scr von Hof timber., Gi. oich in echloch-
ton lcdrporlichon ZuetanCo bcfnnden. Ebens vurdo Plock-
ficbor-lickonvr.loszontcn-31ut zur Ho.atwllun. oincs Seruns
cb^onoonen.

Dio Erprobun 0 dos Phonol-Gohclta v.n Gr s-0o do a-dcr uc
wui’do von Din^. auf B.ichl :-rugow8k.vL in ..,r -isc cuo,\c-
fifhrt, dess nen Inscsson sit Phenol--inspritzun^on tdteto.

^vTugowsky sprech ait diov-ro in'.', cc tens zwoincl vc L on
Cor ^H;scnjacnnrboit zwiachwH^Hygiono-Inictitut ccr Ueffon-SS
und 'RQ3chcr in dor Frage dor -volt.—7cr8ucho. Uruc-'wsky hatto
a: vtivon An toil an den dulfonanid-Versuchcn, indoa or dr.s
Infoktloners t.rial zur VerfOcun, stollto and Hctochlajo Ubor
Mittel and '£© o gab, ^ die kUnatlicr. h-rvorgerufonc Ir.-
foktizn wirksancr su nnc-ien. -r r~t,tc Dpidcaiscne-Gclbsucht-

- 26 -


HROGO~S£Y

Vorsucho an Haftlin^cn in Bucher.-to Id an. ir cb Sloao
wiaeonschaitliohon Hat in dcr Frc_,e dor Sekcrienkriog-
Vcrsachc.

Hru^owaky ua on die iConBontrcti r.ola. er nicht freed.
Ab u oaohon v:>n dor Durchfuhrun 0 ^ewiaser hycicniacher Auf-
er.bon in Vorbindun^ nit don Le«_-crn, bootoUte or dcs Gcs
flir dio ..uachwitzcr Gaakecnorn, in denen cchr rls zwei-
und-cinc-hclbe Llillion Hcnachoa v.-rni htot wurden. Die
oidosatattlicho Arklariuv von Eooos, don Konnandonten doa
^onzcntrati-.nalnooro ..uachritz, bouoisc dicso Tetsacho.
(H0-O34, Ankl.Bcw.468, R. 5407).

Dio Anklagcbohocrde untoratelit, daos doc Buwoio-
nctoricl or^ibt, dr.sa Uru^ovaky Krupttatcr, Toilnehnor,
inatiftcr, Vorachubleiotcndcr war, 3.ii*.c Zu tin un£ jcb
und in Vorbindun^, stand nit .lUnon and Unts-mo nun^on, die
dio DurchfUhrunc nodizini^cfcwr Bxporinonto cn lobondon
lioncchon, ohnu 8ustinnun£, dcr 3otr*ffonan,zua Gc^onotand
hntton, in doron Vorlauf Z!ord»., Brutnlitiiton, Sreuannkeiton,
Foltcrun i( on, Grouoltctcn und r. adore uro:or.3chlicho Hnnd-
lunoon bofc-enfion wurdon,und dcoa aoinc Schuld in Slnno
dor Punkto I, II, III und IV dor ~:iklr oboh^ordo or-
v/iooun lot.


}


HHDG0I7S2Y


Ich» Fred Lax, Nr. 1046207 bestaetige hiernit, dass
ich durchaua vertraut ait der ont.liscfcon und deutschen
Sprache bin, and dass des Voratohcnde eine wahrheits-
geaoasGe und richtige Ueberaetzunf; des Itokuasnts
Urugow8«cy darstellt.


27 June 1947


Fred Lax
Kr. X046207


" 2121 "


- 30 -


UILIT .. SRGERICHTSHOF NR. I


FnLL NR. 1


ZUS.--2iF.^S3;DER SCKRIFTS..TZ DZR
V£t£lKXGXai ST.u.TBi VON .u-SUK.'.


- gogen -

•J»LF POXOtttt


Jaooa k. kcHanoy
.dexmdor G. Hardy
.a-nost Horlik-Hochwald
Esthor Jam Johnson

Nuernberg, Fucr:

16. Juni 1%7.

Telford Taylor
Erlgadior General, U.S.«.

Chief of Counsel for -ar Criaws.


POKORNT


EDIFlJ-SiEUNG

Unter Punkt I dor Anklageachrift wird der «ngeklagte Pokomy
achuldigt, aich nit andoren Peraonon is Vorfolge einca geneinaaccn Vor-
habona zu einor Verschuoorung und Oaboreinkonft zuaannengefunden zu ha-
bgn> us nodiziniacho jbcporiaento ar. lobondon Henschen ohno doron Zustio-
nung vorzunohncn; untor Punkt II und III (Kriegaverbrechon und Vorbrcchen
gegan dio kenachlichkoit) daaa er Haupttactcr, Toilnchsor, Anatifter,
Vorachubleiatondor gowoson iat, aoina 2u3ti=ajng gegobon und sit Plaoncn
und Untornchr.un in Vorbindung goatandon hat, die dio Durchfuehrung nodi-
ziniachur Exporioante an lobenden kenachon ohne doron Zugticrsung zun Go-
gonotand hatton.

Dcm Angoklagtun Pokomy wird die poraoonlicho Vorant*ortlichkeit fuor
und dio Toilnahmo an verbrochoriachon Stcriliaiorunga-Zxporiaonton zur
/.ant gologt, wio aio in Ziffor 6 (I) dor Anklagoschrift boschricbon aind.


A


I.


Ifu Gogonaatz zu alien andoron -ujgoklagtcn auf dor Anklagobank hatto
dor Angcklagte Pokorny nieoala oino vorantwortlicho Stollung in dor Par-
toi odor in dor ataatlichcn Hierarchic Nazi-Ocutachlanda inno. Seine V 0 r-
gangonhoit iat die vollkoor-jr. unbedoutondo cinoa Doktora in oinor Kloin-
stadt. Vor don. nuonchonor Abkorccn (OSctobor 1938) war or tschochoslowaki-
achor Staataangohoorigor (Pokorny, R. 10013) und ala 3oin« Hoisatatadt auf
Grund dioaca .ibkonsona von dcutachon Hooru bcaotst wurdo, wurdo or oin
Buurgor Groaadoutachlanda. (Zbwnda). .aohro-.d dos ariogoa dionto or ola
Sanitaotnoffizior ic doutachon Hocr und wurdo Hauptmnn. (Pokorny, R. 10014).
Dor Angoklagto Pokomy w.’.r koin kitgliod dor KSi)AP und auch nicht dor SS.

Er kann nicht bchaupton, und buhauptet auch nicht, Jaas ihn aoino Pflicht
ala Soldat dazu zwang an irgendwolchcn verbrecherischen Vorsuchun an lcbcn-
den Monschon ohne dcron Zinwilligung toilzunohaon odor daboi zu holfcn.

Ea bcateht fuor ihn nicht die cindoatc Hochtfortigung dafuor, daaa or sich
aua oigenor Initiative cit Hinslor in Vcrbixxiung gosetzt und ihn Vorachlae-
8 e


- 1 -


POXORNY


fuer die Sterilisiorur.g end schliessliche .uiarottung nichtdoutschcr
Staatsbuorger geaacht hat.

Im N.S. Deutschland gab os ein Gesetz, das die Stcrilisiorung dcut-
scher Buorgor untor gewisson Ucstaenden erlaubto. Diesos Gosotz bezog
sich onter andcren auf Fcrsonon, die ait vcrorblichen Krankhoitcn be-
haftet waron. Dio Gcactznacssigkoit dieror Verordnung stoht hior nicht
zur Dobatto, da die Storilisierungen, die den Gogenstand diosor Anklago-
schrift bildoton, ohno Joden Schein gesttzlichcr Rechtfortigung vorge-
noesnon wurdon, ua oinc ..othodo zur uassonstorilisierung sogcrvmntor
mindorwurtigor Rasson zu finden. Pokomy wird deshalb der besonderon Vor-
antwortlichkoit fu«r und dor Tcilnahco an t«dizinischcn Vcrsuchon boschul-
digt, die durchgofuchrt wurdon, uz. unauffaolligo, billigc und schnollo
Uothodon zur uasaonstorilisiorung dur Foindo dcs Nazisystor-s auafindig
zu :.iachon. Dios war dor oindcutigo z.wock dor vorschiodonon Storilisiorungs-
vorauchc, dio in vorachicdcnon Konzentrationslagom durchgofuchrt wur-
den. (Siuho oidoastattliche Erklaorung von R. Brandt, NO-440, Ankl. Bow.

141, R. 501).

Es wurdo rdt vorschiodcnen Vorfnhrcn dor kasscnstorilisiorun oxpuri-
ciontiort. Dr. Clnubcrg, dor Stcrilislorungsvorsucho an woiblichon Hnoft-
1 ingen In ..uachwitz, durch Einspritzung voz. Eingang doa Uterus durch-
fuehrto, (NO-212, Ankl. Bow. 173, R. 570), erbat und orhiolt Hiraolurs
Untoratuotzung fuor aolcho Vorsucho und orhiolt von ihc den Auftrag
fostzustollon, wio lango ea dau«m wuordc 1000 Juodinncn, nittcls soinor
kethodo zu aterilisioren. (DO-213, Ankl. &-w. 171, R. 567). Auch der An-
goklagto Brack, dor oino achnello und billigc Stcrilisiorung laittola
hoontgunstrahlen vorschlug, sctzte sich nit Hither in Vorbindung. In
diosoo. Ausanxwnhang botonto Kiinlcr, dass cs notwondig soi, oino Storili-
aiorungsewthode zu finden, dio ohno tdsaon dor Botroffonon angewnndt war¬
den koenno. Diosc Tatsachun bowoison, ganz zwcifollos, dass ttassensteri-
lisiorung sogonanntor aindcrwcrtlgor Rasaen cine dor Hauptsorgcn Himlurs
war. Dor ..ngoklagta Pokomy war dcr Urhcbor d6r vorbrcchorischon Sxperi-
monto cdt nedizinischcr

- 2 -


PQKOHNY


v


4


Steriliaierung. 1c. pktobor 19a untorbreitete or Kicalcr oinon Boricht,
dar zur Storiliaierung von killioncn Kichtdoutschor nittola oiner Drogo
(Caladiun Soguinua) auffordorte, die aua den Sift, dor Pflcnzo Schwcig-
rohr gowonnon wird. (MJ-035, inkl. Bow. 142, R. 510). Oicser Brief wurdo
von Profoaaor Hoohn an Hicalor weitergoloitct, on, wio Pokomy aich aua-
drueckto, "den langaanen Inatanzongang und dio tocglichkeit einor India-
krotion at Bozug auf dio zccglichorwciac cnome .ichtirkuit dor auago-
fuohrton Godankon zu voxrxidcn." (Untoratroichungon oingofuogt). Dio
auaaorordontlichc Eilo, at dor Pokomy vorauchto acina Vorachliogo Hinrv-
lor unterbreiten za laaacn und dio ..rt und '.oiso, in tfolchor or dio groaao
bichtigkoit dor «ngolegonhoit botontc, xeigon klar aoincn .-.ifor, Hiralora
Kinwilligung zu ortulton und aich und aoino Iduo in guonstigoa Licht zu
aotzon. In aoinou Briof fuohrto Pokomy woitor aua, daaa or " von don Go¬
dankon gotragon aei, dass dor Poind nicht r.ur bo 5 lc<t, aor.dcm vomlchtot
wordon kuoaao." (Untoratreichungon oingvfuogt). .da oin attul zur Zon-
atoorung doa Foindoa achlug or Hiixdcr dio Storiliaiorung von killionon
Nichtdeutacher durch den Saft dor Pflanto Caladlun Soguinun vor, dio in
dio Haondo dua Jritton nclchoa gcfollon waron. Er untorrichtoto HiKnilor
uobor dio Schrift von .Jidiua uebor todlkanontocao Stcriliaierung und uobor
dio unpohouro i.ichtigkcit dioaoa ^odikaaenta "fucr den Jctzigcn Kanpf un-
aoroa Volkoa". Er fuhr dann fort:

" Wonn 03 golrur.Ku, iuf Grund dloaor Forschun.y.n oin .-dlk’uaont
hymuatullun, daa nach rdativ kurzor Zclt cinj unbunorkto
Stci iilaierung txi torcchen erruu,;t. so atZvnde u na .jjne n._uj
yirkun ; ;avclIato .affo~zur Verfuc^r.^ . „llein Jor'Jcdmko, diaa
dio J*-oi killioncn ao&ontan in cTutacher Gofangonachaft bo-
findllchen Bolachowiaten atoriliaiirt worsen koennttn, aodaaa
aie ala ..rbeiUr zur Vorfuegung atuorJon, abor von dcr Fort-
pflanzung auagoachloaacn wicren, orooffnet weitgehondato
Perapoktivon." (Untcratixichungcn von pokomy).

Pokorny orklaorto, daaa Caladiuu Soguinua durch d.n . und eir.gcnoct.icn odor

ala Injoktion vorabreicht daujrndv. Storilitaot von juanorn und Frauen

orzougun wuordo, was durch kadaus' Forachung kit Huron bcwiuaen wurdo.

Pokomy augtc, daaa, wenn auiou Gudankon Hin-lcra Bolfall finden wuordon,

daa folgondo got in wordon aolltc:

- 3 -


POXORHY


"1.) Dr. Kttdaus duerfte keina Publikation dieacr -o-ten verocf-
fontlichen (Foind hoort cit!)

"2.) Voroohrung dor Pflanzo (in Glaahaouaom loicht zuechtbarj)

"3.) Sofortigo Voraucho an -enachon (Vorbrochcri) ua die Doaia
und Dauor dor Bchandlung festzustallen.

"4.) Rnachaato argrucndung dor Xonatitutionsforaol dca wirkaoren
choaischen Koerpera, un

"5.) oioaen wcaouglich aynthotiach herzuatollcn."

Zun Schluaa vorpfiichtoto aich Pokomy zur Vorschwiogenhcit uobor den
Zwock aoinea Borichtoa.

Daa Bowoiaaitorial hat getoigt, daaa dor Vorachlas Pokomya von Hium-
lor begiorig aufgcnotzojn *urdo and aoin-n vollon Boifoll fond. Pokomys
Briof war diu Uraacho fuor all daa waa folgto. Dor handachriftlicho Vor-
uerk auf Pokornya Brief, "Dachau" (K>-035, aloho obcn) zolgt, daaa ca
Hiiudora unaittolbaro itoaktion war, Voraucho an Haoftlingen doa Xonzon-
trationalagora oachau ausfuohrun zu laaaon, dio d'.ruobcr Cowiaahoit vor-
achaffon wuordon, ob dio Drogo Coladiua Soguinua zur .aaconatoriliaiorung
bcnutzt wordon koonntu. .a- 10. uacrz 1 942 aandto Hia-lcr an Oswald Pohl,
don Chof doa Hirtachaftavorwaltungahiupt^toa dor SS und Vorwaltungadirok-
tor ollor Konzontrationalrgor, cino ..bachrift von Pokomys -ctorandun and
bofahl ih», aich ait Jndaus in Vcrbindung tu action, ua oa iu on-ooglichon,
daaa Voraucho on Koniontrationalagorhaoftlingcn in Zuaaixwnarbolt ait
Crawitz, doa hoichsarzt SS und Polizoi, durchgofuohrt wordtn koonnton.
Hito-lors Briof an Pohl zcigt, daaa cr Pokomya *oa>randuu "aohr intorcs-
sant find", la glaichon 3riof orhiclt Pohl von HLulor don B-fchl l-idaua
anzuwoiaon, nichta uobor doa Thorn dor acdikoaentooaon Steriliaiorung zu
vorooffontlichon. (WD-036, .rid. Bow. 143, H. 512; H0-038, «nkl. Bow. 147,
h. 514). £ino ..bachrift dioaoa Sriofos wurdo vor «ngoklagtcn R. Brandt
an Grawitz woiturgoloitut (obwnda), dor gloichfalla oino ..bachrift von
Pokomya Boricht und Infor—ation uob^r ^adaua' Schrift uobor -u.dikar<ntooao
Steriliaiorung von Ticrxn durch die Pfl-nzo Caladiur. Soguinun orhiolt.


FOKCa.T


(NO-037, -nkl. Bow. 3M, 513). Ho.vdrich, 3 >.- <W a=.

lizei und dos SD wurdo cb.-nfalls -~b_ r di« koogUchkoit dor Storilisie-
rung -Attols Caladiun Soguinuu untcrrichtot, '.ffonniphtlich in Hin-
blick auf dio ^issonotorilisicrung von Jaden. (f»-047. .ni-.l. B-w. ^*5,

R. 513).

,ja 3. Juni 1942 achricb Pohl an Hiialor, dws, nachdcn Caladiun
Soguinuu nur in Nordcncrika wachso, and wachrond das Xricges nicht in
hinroichandon uengon exportiort werdcn kocnno, Or. Koch vou Biologlschon
Inatitut dor uadius-..crkc Vorsucho angostoUt h-abe, die Ffl*nzc aus in
TroibhacuBcm kultivicrtcn S-u«n za ziehen. 0io»o Vorsucho soicn crfols-
roich goweaen, aber die kathode dor 2uochtung dor Pflanzo und Hcrstollung
don UodlkancntB sol nicht achnoU gonug und dio ..usbouto rcicho nicht «*.,
Ufi. EXporiuonto "in zrosacu Unfnngo " xu gestation. Uu dioao Schwiorigkoi-
ton zu bohoben, wunlo oa fuer notwcndi S orachtot, oin grooBBorcs Troib-
hauB zu bouen. Pohl hatto dies Koch versprochen. (H0-046a, .add. Bow.

148, R. 515). Aft U. Juni tcilto Rudolf Brandt Pohl *t, cr habo Hiualor
von Pohle Briof in Konntnis gvsetzt und Hiul-r -olio, daas Pohl dafuor
Sorgo tr-ago, dnsa Jr. Koch oin rrossoa Troibhaue »o achnoU wio nooeUch
sur Vorfuegung go at oilt wuvrdo, da Hiudor die Vorsucho fuor "ncuoBorBt
wichtig" Antiuho. Brandt .rauchto Pohl fonwr on woituro Borlchto in
dioaor rtngolugonhoit. (MW*6b, -nkl. Bow. 149, H. 516). «cht Tago spao-
tor hatto Brandt oino Xo.ifcronz nit Pohl, in dcron Vorlauf or untor m-
doren Pohl von Kiaalcrs Jrauchon in Kenntnia sotzto, dio Boatandtoilo
von Calndiut. Soguinun gruondlich untereuchon zu lasson. Hiznlor wollto
wisaon, ob obonao wirkaano ikatandtoilc in Pfl*nzon onthaltcn wa«ron,
dio in Deutschland odor 'n irgendoinen andoron dor S3 zugacnglichon Orto
EuropaB gofundon warden koonnen. Dr. Koch sollto in vollstcc ..use, ass
untoratuotzt werdcn. Zr Uilto Pohl nit: "Roichafochrcr SS orsucht such,
doss Bit den vorhandunen Vorrat dicser pfl&nxc aaf j-dtr. Fall sofort
Storilisiorungsoxporlnonto in dvr. KcnzontratloRslxpom yor-on oc--.-i.cn wc_r-


den aolltcn."


POhOHNY


Pohi erklaerte sich boreit, sofort die notwendigen Schritto zu unter-
neh^n. (N0-044, nnkl. Bow. 150 , E. 517). Ant IV-B-4 des ^ichssicho^-
heitshauptantcs, dio Stello, dio rdt dor "Locaung dcr Judcnfrago" bo-
traut war, (Urteil dca L.T, R. 16924) wurdo von Kinder a ..djutanten
ueber dio Forachungsarb-it in Xonntnis gesetzt ana ^rsucht, ong nit
Pohl in dioser Sicho zuaa^nzuarboiton. (ND-050, ^nkl. Bow. 151, R. 518).

Ungufaehr ein Jahr nach Pokornya ..nrugung zu den Storiliaiurungacx-
porinenten uichta dor atullv^rtrctende Gauleiter dos Gobictoa Niodonio-
nau, SS-Obergruppenfuonrer Gcrland, Hinder denaolbcn Vorachlag. Ccrland
bofuerwortoto Exporinnto <-it Caladiuc Soguinun an Inaaaacn dea Zigou-
norlagora Lackenbach/Uicdordonau. Garland wica darauf hin, daaa in Fall©
doa erwartoten Erfolgoa di^aor Sxporizxnto cs cotglich aoin wuerdo, oino
praktiach unbegrenzte .oaahl von Foraonon in kuerzostor Zoit and auf dio
donkbar oinfachato .oiao zu atorilisioron. (NO-039, «nkl. Bcw. 153 , R.
519). Brandt aetzte Gcrland d-avon in Konr.tnis, daaa dieso “ngologonhcit
Hindor achon bokannt aui, (ala Result \t von Pokornya Brief) und daaa
daran gearbeitot wuordo. ir fr-.gte Gerland, ob or Caladiun Soguinun vorv.
fuogbar habo und welchcn ..eg or zur Boschaffung dieaor Pflanzo vorachla-
gen wuordo. (N0-040, ..nkl. Bow. 154 , h. 521). .u. 7. Soptwbor 1942 toil-
to Pohl Gcrland nit, daaa er zusazo-'n nit Jr. Lolling, don Chcfnrzt dor
Konzontr.itionalager, die ixpcrit-jnto f^rsoenlich b-.oufaichtigo. (?J0-042,
«nkl. B«k. 155 , R. 5?3). in ulnuc. Brief von gleichon data-, an Brandt
fuohrto Pohl aua, d.\ai nit L.adaus cin U^boroinkonjn getroffon w.ar, "dio

V’orauche aobeld wlo uooglich nach unaom. Konzontratlonalagor zu vorle-

1 ^ 041, .j jkl., 156. K. 523)./

gen ./Spaoter achriob Garland, daaa aoin ..ssistent, Dr. Fuhringor, vor-
auchon wollto, Caladiu- Scguinu... Kuonatlich horzuatellon, und or schlug
oine Zuaiu^narboit zwiachen Lolling und Fchringor vor. (NO-G43, «u*l.

Bow. 157 , h. 524).


FOKORHY


Brandt atiru-to ajr Zua&uiujwrboit zwisehcn Fchringor and Lolling zu.

(K0-049, .add. Bow. 159, R. 525; N0-048, .uikl. Bow. 158, R. 524). Dm

Bowoisaatorial hat in winv-r uobur Jodon Iwolful orh.abor.cn oiac .'ozcigt,

daaa Storiliaionmgaoxp-rL.^.tt. ait Cal a di u a S_guir.ua tataacchlich an

Konzontrationalagorhacftlin^.n vorg-no.*.-an wuraon. Hirrlcr, dor die hooch-

oto ..utoritact in dor entachoidung »lchor Fragen war, gab nicht nur aci-

nc Sinwilligung zu dicaon ixperioenton (JO-036, oben), aondern orachtoto

(;xxv.6b, ofc-T.)/

aiu auch ala "acuaaorat trichtig",/und ordn-tc an, daaa aic auf Jo den

!• all in don Konzontrationalagorn durchzufuehrcn acion./il3~Pohi, dcr^dio

Vorwaltung dor lOnzontrationalagor untcr aich hatto, voa ..ngoklagtcn R.

Br.andt von HUulora V-rlan-,n in Konntnia gosetzt wurdo, orklaerto or

aich berott, unvorzuoglich di- notwendigon Schritto zu untcmchricn. (M>

044, oben). Dio ..-itorlcitung dca Borlchta von -adaua an ILpdrich, don

Chof dca Sichorhoitsc-iUa und SJ, b-zucglich "dor Fr.ajo dor uodikauintoc-

(lfc-047. obv.n)/

eon Stcriliaiorauig n /!rnanuruuT^wcck gohabt habon, ihn uebor don Chrv-

rakter dioaor .Jt von StcriliaKrungavcraachcn in Konntnia zu sotzen.

Fa kann k^in Zwolfol uuruobor bjatutwn, daaa daa .u-d, IV-3-4, wolchoa

exit dor Looaung dor Judonfr y botr.ut w\r, von idaua Forachunga^ork

in Konntnia goa-tzt women *'Jr, u_. iio fuor dio Voraucho nootigon Juodi-

achon Opfor zur Vorfu^gung zu atollon. Diu zusv..or.*rbcit ait Ur. Lolling,

dor dor ..rzt fuor alio Consentratlonslngcr war, kann nur lx. Zuav^nhang

ait don Vorauchon in diosen l . ;om orklaort word on. Das goht auch cin-

wandfroi aua Gcrlanda Brief an Br r.dt horvor:

"SS-Oborgrupponfuchrcr Pohl h*t air ritgotoilt, daaa dcr .»rzt
acinus Haupfu-tca ait dca Biologiach.n Inatitut .-adaua* zur
Srforachung dor ..irkung von Caladiuz. 3oguin.ua boroita zu-
afuuaunirboitot, aodaaa dor Voraclilag uiinos Gauhauptatollun-
loitura. Dr. Fchring.r, hlnfaOli.-. *ird ." (NO-C43, oben -
Untorstroichungon oinjefuegt).

Ea kann nur dor Schlusa g^xogen worden, daaa Pohl und lolling dio
Voraucho in uon Konzcntrutional ijcm ao durchfu-_hrtun, wio


- 7 -


POKORNT


Hii-tolor, Rudolf Brindt ur.d -adAua ca untcroinandur boachloascn button.
)K0-04l, obcn). ..uasordoc. hat Brindt aolbat in aoinor oidoaatittlichen
Erklaorung zugogobon, diaa Experir^nte dt Caldiun Soguinua in lebendon
kenachon in Konzontrntionslagorn vorgenou-^n warden .

"da oin £r_obnia von Pokornya Vorachlag Gordon Veraucho in
Konzontntionsl.igorlnaiaaon durchgofuchrt, ua dio irkung
dcr Drogo zu pruofen. Glcichzoltig bouiohto tnn aich, dio
Pflanzo in rroaaon London inzubiuon. Oswald Pohl, Chef dos
nihn pcraoonlichoa Intcrcaao in dicaor .jijclo^onhoit.
Troibhacuaor warden dt govlaaot. Erfolg benutzt, ua dio
Pflanzo mzubauen, und dio Vorauchc wurdon fortsoaotzt."
(H0-440, ..nkl. Bcw. 141, h. 501).

Pokorny gib zu, daa ..aormdua in Wider jcachricbcn tu hibon (R.
10041-2), daa dio Sturiliaiorungaoxpcriaontc dt Cil.'diu;.. So .ulnor. zur
Folgo hitto. cu acinor V^rtcidi^ing gib or in, diaa or nur dio Durch-
fuohrung von Hitdura Flncnon fucr i-iaaenatoriliaiorung and ..uarottung
dor Einwohner dor 0at>biotu und dor Judon vcrhindom wollto. Sr orfuhr
angoblich von dioao-; Plan it. Juli 1941 ven oinoa aoincr Pationten, oinon
gowiaaun Voijt, und wollu diuacn Plan Kisclara azbotioren. (ii. 10037).

Er hlolt don Gedankon, ..cnschon dt Cilidiun Soguinu.. tu atoriliaioron,
fuor wiaaonachoftlich unujogllch und wvr dor wclnung, diaa die Schlusa-
folgorungon dor .utikul von ..idaua nicht .*.anz dun Iitaichcn ontaprichon,
ao kaa or ouf dio Idoo, d.iaa dioac Urvjouglichkoit dcr i»urchfuchrung tin
hog aoi, Hitdora Plan tur .^ascnatcriliaiorun.; su hintortroibon. (R.
10040). Sr aotzto aich doah-ilb dt oinor hochatchondon Pcrsocnlichkoit,
oinou Fround Hitdora, duasen N.incn or aber nicht kmnto, in -'orbindun?,
un oinon Brief dt den Vorachlag dnor aolchun Storiliaiorung an Hinder
noitorzuloiton. Oioao Foraocnlichkcit ir^pfihl ihn aich dt Profoaaor
Houhn in Verbinduxv zu aetzon. (h. 1CC42). Pokorny sagto woiturhln aua,
da3a oa unr.ooglich odor fiat un^ooglich aoi, -onacher. ait Cilr.diim Segui-
nua in Suropa zu atoriliaioron od-r zu kiatriorcn, da tropiache Pflinzun,
dio in Troibhaouaom -.zuochtot werden, ihro Giftwirkung vorlicron.


FOKOHiY


..ussordua waore -jIt. grossos Cjuantufi der Droge diza notwondig, uu Ka*brio~
rung ainos kunscbon -ittols Calndiu- Saguinuu zu orzielcn. (h. 10069).

Dio 30 Bozeugung von Idoalis~us and cines hochstohondcn Zwockcs bci doti
Versuch, die St-3rili3icrun r ur.d .-usrotLung dcr Jadon ursd Gognor des N.S.-
Kagiaus zu saboticron, nurd- ven Jcdca. ainzolnan dzr Vorbrcch-r vor,-^-
bracht, danen TeilnAhu nr. aolchcn ..nssorz-orian and Vorfoigungan nach-
gowicsen vmrdcn. Strcichcr w-\r voll and cans fuor oino ".anstacndlgo Loo-
sung dor Judenfrtgo" and wollto die Jadon in nadagwkar angosiodult so-
hon. (Sioho den ibschlicsswnuen Schriftsat* von Oborrichtcr Jackson).

Dcr nngoklagto Brack bonautsto gunsu diu gloichc lauchcrlicho "Vortoidi-
gung". Er kann nicht voratohen, w/iniu -an ihn ala uinon Judonfeind bc-
trachtot. Seinu Vorschlnugo zur Rocntgenstorilisicraing waron, wio dio
Pokornys, oinf&eh cir. Vursuch, diu ..asrottungsplaono tu hinturtrolbcn.
hoontgonstorilisiuruni w r >nnu so, wio r«dikci^ntooso Storilisiorung
in i.irklichkoit un.x>c^lich. Solcho ^ustaron slnd natucrlich die lotzton
Vorsucho vurzwelfoltur . .aennor, dor (k crochten Stnfu fuor ihro fuorchtor-
lichon Vorbruchun za entgohon. Es sind vans offonsichtlicho Vorsucho,
Gognor, dio, wio sio hoffen, grossiAiotig and loichtglaoubig slnd, hintors
Licht zu fuohron. Pokomys Bohrutdlung seiner oigonon hnlbjuodischon Frau
ist gunuugund Bowols scin-r wirklichon Gofuohlo gurunuebor sogonannten
"rassisch Mindorwortigon".

Dio Bohauptung, uaaa Cal .dim SoguinuL. boi Aonschon koino Storlli-
taot horvorrufen koonno, 1 st koin Vortoidigungsgrund. -3 ;jcnuogt voll-
korauM), daea olo dor .oisicht waran, dass us wirksaz. scin koennte und daaa
aiu .alloo tatun, ua 03 wirksni. su uachen. Es ist oln Vorbrechen, wunn
Jot-and versucht, oinen Lord zu begohon, obgloich (lio 3 viollcicht tat-
aauchlich unoooglich scin uig. ..uaserdou liugon betrncchtlicho Bowuiso
dafuor vor, dass CaLadiuz. Soguinua Kastriorung boi ixinachcn horvorrufon
korrn. Dor Sachverstaondi.ru Zougo, Dr. Seneiffarth, kan auf Grund aoinca
Studiui-s dor Vurooffentlichong von wid&us uob-r Tioroxpcrlujnte, su fol-
gunden Schluossen:


- 9 -


POXORNY


"Mach don fcln^en-blichen Untersuchungcn, trie sic die ci-
k co photographi 3 chen heprodoktionen in (.ib. lib, IVb uni
V 3 auf S. 77, 78, 80, 82) darstollen, and nach don toxt-
lichon Srlaoutorungon, wolche die -Uitoren sclbst dasu
gobon, zoigon die durch Culadiiu- hervorgorufenon ; 5 rkunje n
an gosiAon naonnlichcn Gcachlechtoapparat "clno auffall.-n-
do .^hnlichk'iit uit Kaatr-tionsyuracndarungen 11 (S. 87 d.
Voroeff.). Dvnnoch toiler, dio Vcrf-isaer "aua dioaer Tnt-
oacho nicht ohne woitorea achlieaaon, daas dcr .n-riffs-
punkt d03 Caladiu:-s soloktiv in dcr. .aci.-iirucs.-r. n

iat."


" Ala wuaontllch kann dcr vorliogondcn ..rboit nur ontnone-un
worden, daas \uch dor IS f:kt dca Calailuc. ilmr Kaatration
entaprochon duorfto. Einor Uobortragunj auf den uenachon
atuonden dahor vor alien dio einganja goauaaerten Bodonkon
gogonuobor, daaa Ksatration nicht nur "Sterilisation" d.h.
Fortpflanzungavcrhuctung, aorvlom oino schworo Schacdlgung
dor biologiachon Gosaethuit doa Inlividiaaa bodoutot."

(NO-3347, 4nkl. Bow. 546, K. 10363).

Dr. Tauboock oritlcorto in scinur oidosatattlichon Duasago zur.
solbun Thcna:

"Durch goiiauo Uobcrpruefunr doa Soktionar.atcrida von i.aouacn
und Ratton, aowio dor hlatologiachcn Praoparato gowann ich
dio foatu Uebcrzcu^ung, daaa dio Vcrocffentlichungon dcr
Firm _J..US auf vollcr ..ahrhoit boruhon. Durch Doino Uobcr-
pruofung gownnn ich ala Fachaann auf dioacn Gobictu dio
foato doborzou 0 un^. daaa oino Sterilisation nit Schwoigrohr
(Caladiun So.uinui.) koine Utopio iat, sondom oinc .*ngolo-
genhoit, dio durchaua -ooglich iat. *uf don Ruockwog von
Dresden nach Berlin croeffr.otcn sir dio Horron dor SS, daaa
dioao Forachung durch^ofuchrt wordon wuerde auf dircktoiz
.tuftrag von heichafuahror SS HL..LZR zat Zwocko dor Untor-
druockung dor Goburten bci Oatvoolk^m. Mach Erooffnung dio-
aor Tataacho wurdo ich von dor SS auf Vorschwiogcnhoit vor-
oidigt."


",iua in nittolouropaciachon Klim kultiviorton Coladiunv-
Pflanzon laoaat aich miner wiaaonachaftlichen Uoborzuugung
nach oin hochtrirkaa.’wa Praeparat hcratollon."


"Nach alien boroita angofuchrtcn Boiapiolon und Erklacrungon
bin ich dor «naicht, daaa dio Laaaenfabrikation oinos ka-
atriorondon Praoparctea aua dor Schwcigrohrpflanso (Caladiuc.
Soguinun) in Dcutachland, bozw. in d.n danala von Deutschland
bosotzten Gobioten keino Utopio iat, aondoro durchaua in dio
Praxis haotto unj .sotat wordon koonnen. *-in weitcrcr Bowoia
fucr dio Gofaohriichkcit doa Caladiun-Oiftca iat dio Tatsache,
dasa bci don Untcrauchunjcn ven k.tD.»US trotz allor P-rv-ita
boachriobcnon mr.dlcjondon kacngel dio k'.atricrcndo drkung
von Calidiut it. Frinzip vinwandfrei beatauti.-t wurdo. ..ua
alien dioaen Irwao^ungcn h&bo ich dio Xrlsinalitftot oinor sol-
chon Forachung aofort orkannt


- 10


FOKOBXr


und hibe sic doshalb, sowoit sie coinen spoziollen ^uftrag
botraf, nicht durchgefuehrt. Die SS Jedoch hat sich fuer
dieses Gobiet sohr stark intoressiert. kein Auftrag als An-
gostolltor dor I.G.-Forbeaindcstrie kaa voa Chof cor 'iichcr-
hoitspolizei, zuerst durch dio got amt o Dicnststollo aos
Forschungsinstitutos Gruncwald/Sorlin und spaotor dirckt.

Ich noiss jedoch, dass die -.uftragcrtoilung dor Fima kADAUS
durch SS-Obcrgruppenfuchror POHL separat gelaufon ist und
bin uober die Jntwicklung dic3cr Anjelog.-nhcit nicht orion-
tiort." (NO-3963, .mkl. Bow. 528, hi 10035).

Pokomys Brief an Hiixlcr ist das cinzige Bcweisstuock gogun ihn,
abor os gonuojt volikoes-en. Zr hat zu doc Vorbrochcn dor kasscnstorili-
sierung angcatiftat und uin«-n ..eg zu seinor Jurchfuchrung vorgoschlagon.
£r wurdo dadurch zu,.i Boihclfor vor Begchung dor Tat. "Sin Boihclfor vor
Bogehung der Tat ist, w.r mar boiu Bogohen dor Tat tbwosend auf oinon
andoron oinwirkt, iha Rat gibt odor iha bofiohlt, das crwachnto Verbro-
chon zu bogohen, wolche3 als Folgo diosor Sinwirkung, diusos Rntschlags
odor des Bofohls bogangen wurdo". ( .bartons Criminal Law (1932) Band 1,
«bschnitt 263). Nichts koennte klarer soin, *ls die Tatsacho, dass Po-
korny gorado zu dea Verb rechon, das bogan^on wurdo, sdnon Rat -ab und
dazu anstifteto. Dor flat, den «r >-.b, bozueglich dor .dttcl und ’.ego
zur Durchfuohrung dos Vurbrochcns war nicht gins allgoucin gohnltcn son-
dorn gonnu opozifiziort. barton fuohrt suss "Dio Bozuichnung 'Rat go bon 1
unfasst hatschlag und .eiloitung bczuuglich dcr ..ri and .oiso dor Bogo¬
hung bosondoror Vorbrechon ..." (Sbcnia, ..bschnitt 265). ..ussordcti
"CACht os nichts nus, wolchu -vit vorflosscn odor wic ross dor Zwischen-
raum ist, zwischon dot. P.atschli- und der Durchfuohrun-, vorzuagcsetzt,
dass oin unuittolbarcr kausalcr Zusztz-anhzng zwischon dor .oistiftung und
dor Bogohung bo3toht". (Abends). i>or Kzusalzus-v.. e^nhang in iioser Sachs
ist klar und oindoutij. Pokomys .instiftung war dvr dirckto .uilass four
das, »aa got an wurdo. S-in -ot^oranduc. wurdo von Hi., lor jeleson und go-
billigt und an dio Persons wcitorgclcitct, dio dio ..rbait taton.

Pokorny mas nicht nur dos Caladiun Soguinu^-Vcrbrcchcns fucr schul-
dig bofundor. wordon


- 11 -


POKORHT


aondern auch des In-Vc rbindung-St ehens zSt Plaenon und Untomahmen, die
die Durchfuchrung vorbrochoriachor Sterilisiorungsoxpcrinente auch cit-
tcls andorer nvothodon sua Gogcnstard batten. Seine Anstiftung gab not-
wundigorwoiso doc ciger.tlichon Vcrbrochen dcr Lnssunstcrilisicrung .*n-
triob und untarstuotzto oa. Pokorny achlu., -edikiccntocao Stcrilisiurung
vor, Brack juaontgen und Claubcr,- Injoktionon. Sic alio abor hatton don-
aolben verbrechcriachcn Zwack und fuahrton zuc aclbon rcchtswidrigon
Ziol. Joder untorstuotsto und foerdortu don andoren. Ii- Socuor 19W bo-
uuehto alch Hit-lor n-.ch alien aichtungen oin schnolles und unr-crkliches
»ittol dcr *-aaacnatoriliaicrung su finden. Pokorny r.ahc an den vcrbrochu-
rischon Plan tell und seine Schuld wird nach dor Goaartsahl dor bogan-
6onon Vorbrochon bouoaacn.

Dio nnklagobohocrdo untoratollt, daaa das Bowoisnntoriol orgibt,
daas Pokorny Haupttaotcr, Teilnohaor, .matiftor, Vorschubloistonier
war, acino ZustU^ung gab, und in Verbindung at .and cit Plaenon und Un-
tornobMn, dio die Durchfuuhrung nedizinischor Vorsucho an honschon ohno
derun Zuatiw-ung zu;.. Gogonstand hattun und kitglicd oinor Organisation
odor Gruppo war, dio in Vorbindung stand nit diosun Vursuchen, in doron
Vorlauf ^oiaitaton, Brutnlitaoten, GrousvAciton, Poltorungvn, Grcuul-
taton und .andoro un*..onschlichc Hindlungcn bogangen wurden und daas oolm>
Schuld ic. Sinne dor «niaa„.punkto I, II und III erwiosen iat.


PCKOHNY


Ich, Fred Lax 3 1 C46207, bostaoticc hiorcit, dass ich dureh-
auo vortraut it dcr cnrlischon und dcutschcn Spracho bin
unci u\33 dr .3 Yorstuhendo uinc wTihrhoits^ooAusso und richtijo
U^borsotzunc rtoa Dokutonts "ADOLF POBMBff" dorstollt.

JIuomborj, 15. August 1947

FiCT LAX
X 046207


?


- 13 -


\


MILITkSRGSRICHTSHO? Hr. I


?^LL !fr. 1

ZU3«i:KSNP.^3SI.*DSa 3CH.1IFT3«TZ
fuor

DI3 VBRSXKIOTSK ST^TBN VON ^JOaiKi
• -Gdgbn-

H2LKTJT F0?r3HDICK


Jorwa K. KcHar.oy
Aloxondor 0. Hardy
~moat Horlik-Eochwald
Sathor Jano Johnson
n

Purj


Nuornborg,

16. JVrni 1947


Tolford Taylor
3rlrallor Gonoral, U.3..\.

Chiof of Counsol Ibr Jar Crluoa


3ZHFU2ERGKG


Untor Punkt 31na dor Anklageachrift wird dor ..ngoklagto
Foppondick bo3chuldigt, daaa or aich nit andoror. Foracr.on
in Vorfolg olnoa ger.oinaaron Vorhabons zu oinor Vor3chwoo-
rung und Uoboroinkunft zuaannongofundon hat, un rodizlni-
aoho dxporimonto an lobondon Ucnachon ohno doron Zuatinnung
vorzunohnon; untor Funkt Zwoi und Drci (Kriogavorbrochor. und
Vorbrochon gogor. dio Konachlichkoit), daaa or Haupttaotor,
TOilnohnor, ..natiftor, Vorachubloiatondor gowcaon iat, aoino
ZuatiEtnung gogobon hot und nit flaonon und Untomohnon in
Vorbindung goatandon hot, dio dio Durchfuohrung nodlziniaohor
Exporinonto on lobondon Mona chon ohno Zuatlrrzung dor Botrof-
fondon zun Gogonatond hatton; und untor Punkt Vior, daaa or
naoh don 1. Soptorbor 1939 Kitgliod dor SS war, oinor von
Intornationalon Milltacrgorichtahof ala vorbrochoriach or-
klaorton Organiaation.

Dor Angoklngto Eoppondiok wird lnaboaondorc. boachuldigt,

an don in Ziffor 6 (B) dor Anklagoachrift boachrioboncn Ilaol-

tovorauchon, an kalariavorauchon (Ziffor 6 (C)), on Sulfona-

nidvorauohon (Ziffor 6 (2)), on Soowaaaorvorauchon (Ziffor 6,

(G), an “opidoniacho Golbauoht D -Vorauchon (Ziffor 6 (H)), an

3toriliaatlonavorauohon (Ziffor 6 (I)), on Plookfioborvorau-

chon (Ziffor 6 (J)) und Brondborbonvorauohon (Ziffor 6 (L))
zu

toilgonomon habon.Utn dio Saohlago zu voroinfachon, zioht
dio Anlclagobohoordo hiorrit dio Boachuldlgung dor Toilnohro
on don in Ziffor 5 (A) boachriobonon Hoohonvorauchon und on
don in Ziffor 6 (K) boachriobonon Giftvorauchon zuruock.

I. STdLLUUO UKD YSAJiCTORTUKO.

Dor .vn-oklagto foppondick trat dor NSDA2 1.:. Jahro 1932,
dor 33 in aolbon Jahro boi. In dor SS atlog or bla zun Rang
olnoa Oborfuohrora auf. Von Jahro 1935 on arboitoto ov ala
y^zt an SS-Raaao- und Siodlungahauptant, und In Jahro 1941
wurdo or zun Chofarzt boi dioaon Ant ornannt. (Foppondick
R. 5533-40; NO-672, Znkl.Eow.3C, R.133). Boroita in Jahro


r OPrSiDICK

1939 vfurdo er Hitglicd do3 Stabs doa Rolchaarztos SS und ?o-
llzol Grawitz und orlodigto nobon soinoa Jior.at in don RuSEA
vorachicdono Sondercufgabon. (Poppondick, R.5612-3). Ia Jah-
ro 1943 wurdo or zua Loitor doa Poraonalantoa von Grawitz or-
nannt. (Poppondick, R. 5544, HO-672, aioho obon). Andoro
untor Grawitz stohondo ^ntaloitor waron dio ^ngoklagton
Kru30W3ky und Gobhardt. (NO-417, Ankl.3ow.23, R. ). So
aind droi dor wiohtigaton kltorboitor von Grawitz «ngoklagto
in dioson xrozoaa.

Poppondick orhiolt waohrond aolr.or Auaanrtonorboit mit
Grawitz Konntnla von violon Bxporiconton, dio in don vor-
aohiodonon Konzontratlonalagom auagofuohrt wurdon und untor-
atuotzto alo. Trotzdow Grawitz - gonaoaa poppondlcks -uaaa-
go - Gohoirniatuoroi aohr liobto (ioppondick, R.5546), v;or
Poppondiclc doch uobor aoino Arboiton untorrichtot. .oppon-
diolc orhiolt von Grawitz Konntnis von Schillings Lc.lariao:cpo-
rimonton lr.i Konzontrntionalagor Dachau, (Popporallok, R.5567).
Er wuaato, daaa Ding aioh izi luaarrxjnhang nit dor Erzougung
oinoa Flockfiobor3oruna odor Flcckfioborinpfatoffoa nit Ezpo-
rinonton in Konzontrationalagor Buchonwold boachaoftigto.
(Poppondiclc, R.5579). Poppondick boataotigto Gobhardta Vor-
borioht uobor dio Sulf ononidvoraucho. (N02734, Ankl.Bow. 173,
R.5622). Dioaor Eoricht wurdo Klznlor vorgologt, und Grawitz,
dor in allow, wa3 nit Hiirslor odor don Poraonolant in Vorbin-
dung stand, sich poinlichor Sorgfalt b&floiaaigto, (Poppor.-
dlck, R.5541), wuordo aichorlich nionandon oin Dokunont habon
untorschroibon la3aon, von don dioao Person nichta wiaaon
aollto und da3 Hit ml or zu Goaicht bokorxton wuordo. P'op. on-
diclc nohn nit Grawitz und Raachor an oinor konforonz uobor
dio ICaoltovoraucho doa Januara 1943 toil. ..’aahrond dioaor
Konforonz wachto roppondick dio Boaorkungi

" 2 "


rO IraSDICK

»ja, ich habo Standartonfuohror Siovora achcn nohrmals zu
:.:ir bitton uueaaon, un «uakuonfto au orhalton, lotztor.ondoa
lartlon ja doch alio aodiziniachon Dln o -0 bol uns/" (iIO-320,
..nkl.3ow.103, 3.338) (Ihtoratroichunsor. oinsofuost). roppon-
dlck nahn auch an Konforonaon toil, dio Grawitz nit don An-
Goklacton Siovora hatto, und trof dio Vorboroitungor. fuor
aolcho Zuaaranonkuonfto. 2r atollto ..orato fuor dio Vornahno
von nodiziniachon Vorauchon zur VorfuosunG und sorgto fuor
dio Vortoiluns von Forachuncaaufgabon. Aua don Slntraeungon,
dio dor Ancolclcgto Siovora in aoin To^obuch von Jahro 1944
mchto, dor Unfanc aoinor Taotigkoit klor horvor.
(3546-fS, Ankl.3ow.123, K.362, Sintragungon von 26. und 20.
April, 20. und 23. Hal, 8. Soptonbor und 23. Oktobor).

Dioaoa Vortrauonavorhaoltnia zwiachon roppondiclc und Gra¬
witz boatond achon Icingo vor aoinor Srnonnung run Ixiitor doa
foraonalar.itoa lr. Jahro 1943. roppondlck aolbat gab zu, daaa
naoh aoinor Emonnung an 1. Soptonbor 1943 koln ./oohaol in
nolnor Stollung ointrat. (Poppondlck, H.5612-3). Dioa wird
auch durch dio Tataacho bowioaon, daaa dor von ihn boataotig-
to Boricht Oobhardta daa Datur doa 7. Soptonbor 1942 traost
(1J0-2734, obon), und daaa dio Konforonz zwi achon roppondiok,
Grawitz und Raochor on 13. Januar 1943 atattfond. (JiO-230,
obon).

In Liohto dioaoa 3o;voianatorial3 orachoint Poppondicka
Dohauptung, or aoi in Grcwitzona Buoro nur oin "BotonJunGO 11
gov;oaon (R.5613), vollkonaon unslaubwuordig. !^an darf nicht
vorgoaaon, daaa Grawitz fuor unbodoutondo «ufgabon oinor. «dju-
tanton und oinon 3okrotaor hatto. (P opportlick, 2.5542).
Grawitz voraprach ihn, daaa or a ich nicht ait allgoaoinon
Buoroarboiton abzugobon habon wuordo. (loppondick, 2.5544).
Auaaordom war Popponiick Oborfuohror dor S3 und dor hoochat-
G03tolltc


- 3 -


x Or r 21.3 ICE


,a*zt in Saaao-und Siodlungaliauptant. (aioho obon). 2a 1st
aolbatvorataondlich, dasa Grawits olr.o ao hochgeatollto For-
aoonlichkoit nicht ala blo33on "Botonjur.gon" bonuotzt habon
wuordo und doaa ?oppondick aich von nionandon in Uioaor '..'oi-
ao haotto bonutzon l-iaaon. Slno ..'uordigung von Foppondicka
Loiatungon Uurch Gravritz in Vorbindung nit oinon Gofoordo-
rungevoraohlag in Ja.aro 19;; atollt dicaon Punkt durchaua
lclar. Orav/itz aagto:

"r • (roppondick) 1st oinor dor aoltoaton SS-..v»rzto
Gorlina. Ich a.-boito nit ihn aoit 1931 in dor
3chutzutaffol zuaanson. Sr zoichnoto aich ina-
boaondoro durch oino atota ^laichbloibondo hor-
vorragondo charaktorlicho Ilaltung und lelatunga-
tuxoaaigo Bowaohrung aua.

"Sr hat aich duroh aoino loitondo Stollung in dor
norztlichon *rboit doa Raaao- uivi Slodlungahaupt-
antca-SS Vordl jnato durch aolbataor.dig aufbauondo
vuk! organlaatoriacho, achoopforlach-wiaaonachoft-
lioho urboit orworbon.

".‘.la Loitor noinoa poraoonliohon 3uoroa bowaoltigt
or dio hior anfallondon :.uTgabon und .jboitaGO-
bioto nit boaonduror Tatkroft und cuagozoichnotor.:
Ooachiok. Sr boaitzt In Konoradonkroia oin woit-

gohondoa Vortrauon."

(110-1120, ..nkl.bow. , R. ).

Ur.i roppondicka Slnfluaa ala Icitor doa x oracnalanto3 und
Mitorboitor von Grawitz zu wuoiUigon, nuaa nan aich dio Stol-
lung, dio Uioaor In don Sonitaot3woaon dor SS bokloluoto, und
dio Rollo, dio or boi dcr Auafuohrung dor vorachiodonon dor.
Goijonatand dioaoa rrozoaaoa bildordon Sxpori:. on ton apioltu,
vor .»u~on halton. Daaa dio n SS und P.iar.lor daa gomoinoano
Slonont in all dioacn bxporinontor. vraron", wind vcn don «ngo-
klngton Gobhardt zugogobon. (Gobhordt, R.-.192). Jrawits,
dor rtoichaarzt SS und Folizoi, war dor hoochatatohonio Soni-
taotaoffizior in dor SS und ir.folgodoaaon dor dirokto Vorgo-
aotzto dor .'jvoklagtci Gonzkor., Gobhardt und l.ru ;ow3ky.

Dr. Lolling,dor Loitor doa «. toa III dcr ^btoilung D doa TfVI-L.
dor SS, don dor Sar.ltaot3dionat in dor. Kcnzontrationalogom
untoratand, war cuch in tochniachon «ngelogonhoiton Grawitz

- 4 -


tOKSKDlCK


untoratollt. (NO-416, Ankl.Bow.22, 3.121; NO-417, Ankl.

Bow.23, H. 121). Grawitz nahn cohr odor wonigor an Jodoa
vorbr ochoriaohon Exporir.ent or. Konzentrationalagerinaaaaon
toll. Dio r.oiaton dor ^nsoklajtor.,wlo z.3. Gonzkon und Hru-
gowaky, vorauchon in dor Tat,dlo auaachlioaalicho Vorar.twor-
tung fuor dioao Vorbrochon Grawitz aufzuorlogon. So 1st
Grawltzona ongatcr kitorboitor, dor .vngcklogto Poppondick,
in dio laochorlicho Logo gcdraongt, aogon zu muoaaon, daaa
Grawitz gohoimlatuoriach war und daaa or von dioaon Dingor.
niohta wuaato. ..uoh wonn nloht oin oinzl*oa Dokuront odor
oin Jota von Bowoia £^>gon ihn in don *Jcton vorlaogo, wuordo
aoino Stollung alloln aoino Vorurtoilung orfordorn. 3a wurdo
unnooglioh aoin anzunohnon, daaa oin hoohatohondor ^rzt, dor
r.it Grawitz arboitoto, von don vorbrochoriachon Exporinonton,
in donon or oino woaontlicho .tollo apiolto, nichta wuaato und
aio nicht taotic untoratuotzto. Saor.tlioho Expori.ior.to wur-
don von Grawltzona ae t untor3tuotzt und doi aolbon gocoldot,
und violo davon wurdon von lhr.i angoordnot. ..omi Jo’_)onI uit
Grawitz arboitoto, nuaato or jono vorbrochoriaoho Forachunga-
taotiglcoit untoratuotzon, da aio Ja Grawltzona Hauptboachaof-
tigiing war. Wir brcuchon una abor nloht alloln auf foppon-
dloka Stollunc zu atuotzon. Daa Bowolocaterial zolgt, daaa
or von vorbrochoriachon Exporinonton wuaato und poraoonlich
an ihnon toilnahn.


ii. isn30^lic:;e TdiLN.diii: .d; vddgaECHsaiscKz;;

A. Brandbonbonvoraucho (dnklogoschrlft, Zlffor G (L))
Sturntannfuohror Dinj-Schulor - hiomach ala Din. bozoich-
not - fuohrto zwiachon don 19. und 25. Kovonbor 1943 in --on-
zontro.tionalagor Buchonwald Brandbonbonvoraucho duroh. (Ding-
Tagobuch). Urn dio .UrkaarJcoit doa rraoparatoa R 17 und dor
Echinacinaalbo und Pluoaaigjcoit boi dor Bohondlung von Phos¬
phor vorbronnunjor. foatzuatollon, wurdon fuor.f Vorauchaporaonon

- 5 -


rOriSlI lCK

aba icti tllcti a-.lt bronnondon aoaphor, dor oinor Srardbonbo
ontnonaon war, Brondwundon zu£afuo S t. Dlo ont.tondonon
Brand wund on wuron aohr aohwcr, dio Opfor lltton q uaolondo
Schnorzon und dauorndon Sohadon. Dio *u pruofondon Praopa-
raco woron von don Dr. Hodaua-orkcn In aodoboul-Droadon

horsoatollt. (Ko^on, .1.1187-90).

Dor Boricht uobcr dioac 2xporirxmto (30-579, .^cl.Bow.

208, 3 . 1188 ) wurdo von Din 3 an dlo ^-oklapton .oppondlok
und li'vcowsk;- ooachlokt. C.Co 3 on, it. 1158, 1188). Dlo Por-
achunsaabtollun: V (ploloh Vonkonnol) In LolpalS *ar auoh
on dloaon nxporinonton Intoroaalort. Dln C . Sohrlftwoohaol
nit dloaor ..btollung S lns uobor roppoivilck. IKojon, 3.1158,
1175, 12d7, 1287). Dlo Porsekun^aobtolluno V war oln voa
Sturmbannfuuhror Vonkonnol nit von Orn.lt* *ur Vorfuo-on G
so.tollton Ooldmlttcln und Katorlol botrlcbono. laborntorlun.
(Poppondlok Sow. 8, .1. 5592). ioppondiok war In dra.ltzona
U.t dor fuor dlo ~rbolt Joncz taboratorluaa vorant.ortlioho
.'.oforont. (Ko C on, .1.1267). Dlo.o ocusonaua.aso l.o 3 ona olrd
boo toot 1st duroh Brlofo vonkonnol* an foppondlck und Dln.-a
an .oppondlok, dlo dlo Ft okfloborox* rlnonto botroffon.
(iiO-1132, .Jlkl.3ow.d77, it.5801; iiO-1130, ijlkl.3o»./.76, 3.

5639; .iO-1185, ^lkl.aow.478, .1.5605). Dor lotztoro SrlOf
vnirdo tataaochllch von Koron fuor Din: ouf dor Sohroibnaoohl-
no poaohrlobon, wlo aua dor tatonnoti* uralohtlioh lat.

B. Ho rr.onoxp orl r.on to

2 xporir.onto, un dio uirkaockoit kuonatliobor Druoaon
foatsuatollon, vrnrion auf Borohl doa «n«3klasten roppondick
IConzontrati ona 1 agor Buoiwr.wold auacofu-hrt. (&>£<» R.
1196). .o 15. Jull 1944 trat or an Ding «r.it dor 3itto h-ron,
dou daoniaohon SS-drzt Va...rnot, dor dioao Lxporinonto auafv.oh-
rcn aollto, bohilflioh ru aoin. In aoinon Brivf an Din 5 or¬
iel aort loppcndickj

a.Dio toch-niachon Vorbori-itunscn aind aowoit -o-

dichon, doaa


t Ox *23ICE


in abaohtarcr Zoit nit Hunonvorauchcn bo 3 crmon wordon
lcann.

SS-Standortonfuchrcr Dr. Lolling nittoilt,^iat
daa KL Vfoinar-Buchonwald onrowioaon wordon, 5 ..aort-
linjo fvcr dio Voraucho doa SS-Sturrbannfuohrora
Vaornot zur Vorfucgung zu atcllon. Dloao Hacftlin~o
v/ordon duroh don La?orarzt SS-Stubof. Vaomot jodcr-
zoit zur Vcrfuo 5 un£''s- 3tollfc *

"S3-Stubaf. Vaomot boabaichtigt domaochat naoh Sv.-
ohonwold zu konr.on, un an dioaon Haoftlingon oir.ico
notwondigo Voruntorauchun^or. vorzunohnon. Falla oa
aioh un boaondoro Ixxbor-Untcrauchungcn hondolt, v/or¬
don Sio goboton, Vaomot boi dor DurohfuohrunG in
llchnon Ihror iooglichkoiton bohilflich zu aoln.

"Dor. iogororzt von ,»olrcr-3uohcnwald wurdon houto
olnigo naohoro Untorlajcn uobor dio OntcrauohunG
Vac mot a zur dinaiohtnohso zugoaandt."

(::0-1300, Mil. BOW.289, Tv. 1199).

Vaornot orbaitoto auch nit dor Forachuniaabtoiluns V in
LoiyziG zuaarn-.on, dio dor Vorauohaabtolluns "V" (Vonlconnol)
in Loipzi 3 untoratollt war. J>:cck dor Sxporioor.to war
foatzuatollon, ob oa nooglioh aoi, Sonoaoxualitr.ot duroh
oporativo Vcrpflanzung kuor.atliohor Druoaon zu boaoltigon.
(\ 030 n, It. 1247) . In dor Tat ;urdcn an ungofaohr 15 Haoft-
lincor. dca KonzcntrationalcGOra Suohor.wald, dio von Lagor-
arzt odor aoinon Untorgobcnon auagoauoht wurdon, aoloho
Cporationon auagofuohrt. 2 woi dor Vorauchaporacnon atarbon
ala unmittoltarc ?ol 0 o dor Jxporinonto. liio-on, R.1197-9,
1256). Dioaca Sowcianatorial wird durch dio -idoaatattli-
oho Erklaorunj do 3 lagcrarztoa Dr. Schlodlcuaky bcataotict.
(H0-508, unkl.3ow.224, F..895). Da .oppandick dioao Dxpo-
rinonto ansoordnot hatto, coldotc Ding ihn dio itoaultato
dor von Vaomot ic Konaontrationalogor 3uchonwald auarc-
fuobrton Voraucho. (Kogor., It. 1200 ).

C. Flcckfioborvoraucho («nklcgoachrift, Ziffor 5 (J))
ii‘o_on dor Doachroibur.j und doa vorbroohoriachon Zh a-
ra!ctcr3 dioaor Voraucho wird r.uf lor. Schriftaatz dor ..nkla-
gobohoordo •ogcn


- 7 -


rO2a)ICK


don dncolclactoa ilrugowaky 3 czug sononncn.

joppondiolc gibt zu » dnaa cr von dor Tatancho, daaa
Dine cla Plcckficbor-Scrun odor -Schutzinpfatoff in ’Jor.sor.-
trationalocor 3uchonwald horatollto, Ilonntnla hf.tto. (*op-
pondlclc, 3.5579). Sr hatto cngobllch kolno abnntnla davon,
daaa Dlnj r.lt lobcndon Ifcnachon oxporlnontiorto. Dio ?o-
woiaQufnoht» Jodoch hat klrr orgobon, daaa *oppondick nioht
nur von don in i^onzontrationa lager Buchonwold angoatollton
Floclcfioborcxpcrir.cnton Iwcnntnia hat to, aondorn uon
klagton Urugowaky crauohtc, Ding anzuwoiacn, nit Sulfonani-
don, dio ihr.; von dor Fora chungaabtoi lung Y (Vonkonnol) solio-
fort wurdon, Tlockfioborvorauoho anzuatollon. .on 13. Juni
19 -id aohriob or an Kru^owakyi «ct olnor. Briof, dor folson-
doraaaaon lnutct*

"Ar 1.6.-id -urdo cin Schroibon doa 33-3tubo£. jfrof.

Dr. Vonkonnol uoberaendt, dcaaon lotztor ..baatz
f ol gorvio rrxa a on lautets

»3cin Tlcckfiobor habon ~ir achon oinncl Vcrauoho
nit Sulfonauidcn sccacht, «^o p dmo SrfolS* *‘«n
hat KinaiR in don Dloninodiphon-.-laulfon oino
Subatan* aynthetiaiort, dio in uor Stroptokok-
konraaua allon Sulfonanidon ao hauahcch uooor-
logon iat. daaa aio aohon boinoho daa *onioil-
lin orroioht. Dio Vorbindun3 boic Uonachon
hat a Hording a noch 3ohr unengonohno liobonor-
acholnun^cn latarko Cyanoao), abor oa waoro
zu uoborlogon, ob nan nlcht dooh o ini 30 orion-
tiororxlo Vorausho boi Flockfiob-rkrankon nachon
aoll, un dio woitoro -rboit an dor I^itgiftung
dor Vorbinduns zu bcrochtigon. feonnon Sio
una dio Muaonnonorboit nit olnor allr.lk vor-
mittolnf 1

"Mlt dortigon Schroibon von 2.6.44, Tgb.Kr. 370/44
war dor Oborato Hysionikor donit 0 in vu rat and or., daaa

_—. . * m.... limn ;^Snnwr If


•Forachun


Xinrig boi Flcckfiobor auf airkung und Vortraoslich-
koit voraucht wild.

"In dor .‘oilago wordon naohoro -ngaben uobor dicaoa
uittol uoboraendt nit dor Bitto un .icitorl-itung
an SS-Stubaf. Dr. Ding. SS-StubaT. rrof. Dr.


rOi-xSNDICK


Vonkonnol toilt woitorhin nit, daaa oino gowiaao
Kongo doa iraoporatca in dor. naochaton Tagon hicr
ointroffon wird. Dca rraoparat wird dann obon-
falla nach dort woitorgoloitot wordon.

n j*rof. Dr. Vonkonnol haolt oa fuar unbodingt zwock-
caoasig, worm Stubaf. Dr. Ding zu oinor oriontio-
rondon Auaapracho ucbor dioao rooht diffcronto
Thorapio lhn in aoinor Icipzigor Klinik aufauchon
wird. Auf dip Notwcr.dl-kolt abaolutor Goholnhal-
tury; durch alio otwa zu botoiilgtcr. Stollon wlrd~
hingowioaon."

(NO-1184, .UTkl.Bow.476, R.5639-40) (Untoratroi-
chungon oingofuogt).

Dioaoa Dokuraont zoigt offonaichtlich, daaa loppondiclc
aohr wohl wuaato, daaa Ding nicht nur “oir. Sorur. odor oinon
Schutzinpfatoff gogcn Plooktyphua hcratollto 11 , aondoro tat-
aacchlioh an loborclor. Isonaohon Vcraucho anatollto, da ja
i’oppondiclc dio Voraucho in Dinga Plockfiobcrforachunga-
abtoilung ala ..ltcmctivo zu oinor '.Ilinik vorachlug.

Dio Bowoiac.ufnahno hot fornor or go bon, daaa Vonkonnol
ioppondlck oin xraopcrat gab, daa boi don Sxporinontcn vor-
wandt wordon aollto (NO-1182, ikikl.Bcw.477, R.5641), dor
aoinoraoita ca zur gogobonon dolt cn Ding achicktc, dor don
aapfong on 21. Juli 1944 boataotigto. (NO-1185, dnkl.Bow.
478, R.5345). Dioao, roppondick in ivrouzvorhoor vorgolog-
ton Doku.oonto, machton nicht nur dio Glaubwucrdirkoit aoi¬
nor oigonon oougonauaaago sunichto aondorn auoh don Bowoia-
wort dor oidoaatattlichen Srklaorung von Kimig und von
Vonkonnol, worin aio orklaoron, daaa dio Vorauchaabtoilung
in Leipzig nionala otwaa alt den Hornonvorauchon Vac mot a
(aioho obon) und nit don .■ lockriobor- odor nit Vorbronnunga-
vorauchon zu tun hatto. (poppondlck, Bow.7, a.5590; 3ow.8,
21. 5592).

Dio Bowolaaufnohno hat forr.or orgobon, daaa poppondiok
Dings Boricht an Krugowaky uobor lio 5c hand lung doa Flook-
fiobora nit iJeridin-Dorivaton an 29. 3optonbcr 1944 orhlolt.
(HO-582, iuilcl.Bow.286, H. 1122). Dioacr Boricht apricht von
kliniaohon Vor3uchon an leboaion Lonachon, aber xoppondick

- 9 -


x 01 e 231CK


wu33to, daaa Ding lr. dor Joiao an Monachon oxporinontiort
hattc, daaa or Flockfiobcr kuonatllch horvorricf. Dioa wind
durch 30inon obon zitiorton Briof an i-ragowsky orwioaon und
auch durch dlo Xorroapondonz dt Dins botroffond dio Horrxrn-
oxporinor.to. Auaaondoc wurdo vcn dor Vortcidisun,j koln Bo-
v/ola boicobracht, daaa zu Jonor bolt, odor zu irsondoinor
doit, oir.o Flcckfioboropidonio in Buchonwald horrschto. Dor
ljOP ioht aolbat zoist rocht klar, daaa r.ohr ala dio Kaolfto
dor Vorauchaporaonon 3 barb und dc.aa dio uoborlobcndon Nation-
ton nit achworon Korplllcatior.on zu kaor^fon hatton. (110-582,
.‘.nkl.aow.28G, R.1124-5). Dio Eintrarunjon in Ding-T og obuoh
von 13., 14. und 24. April 1943 onthuollon, daaa dio in dio-
aon Voraucharoihon vcrwandton Vorauchaporaonon tataaoohlioh
nit flockfioborinfizlcrtor. Slut kuonatllch lnfizlort wurdon
und daaa 21 Hcoftlinso bci dioaon Sxpcrl onton atcrbon.
{>'0-265, Ankl.Bow.287, R.1136). Sa iat uobordloa durch dio
oidoaatattllcho Srklaorunc oinoa Entlaatun-sazoucon foatco-
atcllt, daaa oaor.tllcho Borlchto Din-.a uobor aoino Expori-
nonto durch daa Kysiono-Inatltut ar. Qrawltz flingon. (Jok.
ilrucowaky Bow. 13, .1.5406, Ziff or 7 dor oidoaatattliohon 3r-
klaoruns, Krusownky-Dok.Buch, Soito 51). r'oppondick hatto
auf dioao .•oiao Zusanc zu dor. Dinzolhoitor. dor Flockfiobor-
oxporir.ionto.

Din" bcrichtoto uobor dio Suchonwaldor Voraucho boi dor
7 or 3 ai.r.luns dor Bcrzuir-on ..orzto dor .I'ohrnacht in Mai 1943.
(110-923, Ankl.Bow.436, R.2063). *la Stabachof von Qrawitz
war .oppondick, trotzdon or koin Boratondor ~rzt dor Vfohr-
nacht war, boi dioaor Vor3arr:lun£ anwoaond. (Poppondick,
.1.5557), Worm auch Nopponlick don Bcricht aolbat nicht 30 -
hoort habon nas, da or in dor iiysiono-ttbtoiluns oratattot
wurdo, 30 kann doch daran, daaa or von ihn sohoort hat, lcoln
bocruondotor Zwoifol boatohon. Dor .m.joklasto loao aouaaor-
to 3odonlccn soscnucbor dcr Charaktor dor 3uchcr.waldcr Sxpori-
iionto. (R 030 , .1.6166). Din Entlastun^azouco fuor don dnso-

- 1C -


r Ox i BHDICK


klagton Rose ging aogor 3 0 woit, daaa or bozougtc, nach don
zu achliosaon waa Roso aogto, botrachtoto cr dicao 3xpori-
nonto ala Lord, (Booring, R.6073). Sr a a "to, daaa Kcnzon-
trationalagorinaaaaon boi don Exporinonton vorwandt wurdon.
(flooring, R. 6074} . Han kcnn nicht glaubcn, daaa rOppondick
von oinon aolch aonaationollon Vortrag nicht gohoort habon
aollto. Dor Vortrog haotto In dor Tat cfcno wiaaon und Go-
nofanicung dca Grawltz'achcn -kites gar nicht gchalton trordon
koonnon. In Vorbindunj rdt dor ..tlcu^ung * oppondicka, daaa
or nicht daruober inforniort wurdo, vie Ding aoino Sxpori-
nonto auafuohrtc, lat ca bozcichnond, daaa Balchowaky in
aoincr cidcaatattllchcn Srklaorung Poppondick und dio .Jigo-
lclagton Harvdloaor und Gonzkon und don veratorbenen Conti
ala dio Toerdorer dor ?lcckfioboroxpcri--.cnto in Buchonv/ald
onfuohrt. (NO-484, ,-nl:1.3cn.291, R.1353).

So zoigt dio Bcwolaaufnahno, daaa xoppcndlck nicht nur
"aoino Zuatitsnung sogobon hat" zu don Buchonwaldor Flock-
floboroxporinontor. und "nit xlaonon und Untornohnon vorbun-
don war", dio ihro oogohung zun Gogonstand hatton, und daaa
or oin Uitgliod war oinor "Organiaation odor Gruppo vorbun-
don nit 11 ihror Bogohung, oondom auch, daaa or "Haupttaotor"
und "Tollnohnor" boi dor Bogohung solchor Vorbrochon war.

Er nuaa doahalb gonaoaa ^baatz 2 doa ^rtikola II doa Xon-
trollratgoaotzoa Kr .10 fuor achuldig bofundon wordon.

D. 3torill3atio:iaoxporii..onto /Anklagoachrif t,

Ziffor 6 (I))

V/ogon dor 3cachroibung doa vorbrochorlachon Ch aroktera
dloaor Exporinontc wlrd auf dio Schriftaaotzo dor -ndclago-
bohoordo gogon dio *aigoklaston Gebhardt und Brack vor^wio-
a on.

Dor .-n3oklagto ioppondlck dofiniorto ir .rouzvorho or
don -uadruok "negative Rasaonpolitik" folgoniomaaaoni

"Dio nogativo Bcvoclkorungapolitik bofo33to 3ich rdt
allon auanerzondon Dingon in Gogonaatz zur poaitivon

Bovoolkorungapolitik.dio Storiliaation, dio

gcaotznacaalg in Dr it ton Reich durchgcfuchrt s/urdo,
war nogativo Bovoolkorungapolitik.(R.S618-9).


i 0??2SDICK


Niorxind cuf dcr ~Jikla 3 cba.nl: 1 st nit dor vordorblichor.
Iohro von dcr "nocativon Bovoclkorungspolitik" bossor vor-
traut al 3 ioppondick. Nobon aoinon Dicnat in Grawitzona
-jnt v/ar cr Chofarzt dca .laaso-uixl Siodlunsahauptontos. In
Bczug auf dieses „nt sajto daa Ortoil doa Internationalon
.ilitaorgcrichtahofca j “Daa .iaaso- und Siodlunsaant dor 3S
zuaorraon nit dcr Vollcadoutachon Mittolatcllo botactistc
sich boi dcr ..usfuchrun .3 von rlacncn fuor dio Gerneniaio-
rung bcaotztcr Gcbicto nach don Rnsaoprinzipion dor NS-
. artoi und waron boi dcr Doportation von Judon und andoron
StaataangchocriGon botciligt." (.rozcaa dcr HauptUrioga-
vorbrochon, Band I, Soitc 270). Uhtcr andoron bctoilicto
aich dicaoa .jnt an Knaarccoln zur ..uarottung nlchtariachor
Gruppon, indou ^a z.B. boi dor Durchfuohrung von Vorordnun-
Gon zur Untordruockun~ dca Gcachlochtavorkchra zwiaohon
Doutachon und Slawon und boi dor Herb cifuoh rung von Fohlgo-
burton boi Oatarboltorinnon und iclinnon half.

roppondick noochto una glaubon cachon, daaa or aich
nur uit poaitivor daaacnpolitik bcfaaato (*1.5619), abor
oa 1 st klar, daaa dio rolltik, die r.chr lender fuor n Guto n
Doutacho und kolno Kinder fuor "nlndorwcrti 30 " Voolkor vor-
lnngt, olno untronnbaro 3inhoit iat. .oppcndlck wuaato
aichorlich, wao dio nogativo 3ovoolkoruns*politik war. '.jonn
or auch waohrond doa Krouzvorhoora auadruccklich boatritt,
daaa or von don vorbrcchoriachon StoriliaiorunGaoxporinon-
ton wuaato odor irgondwio dor on toilaohn (R.5621), ao
zoi^t dio Bo wo i a aufn ahr.o daa Oogcntoil.

/on 4. Juni 1941 aondto *oppandick dor. ^njoklr-Gton
Rudolf Brandt oino Llato ven .jjrzton, die ornacchtlgt waron,
dio Unfruohtbarnachung vorzunohnon. dauber^ iat untor don
-'.orzton aufgofuohrt. Dio Llato aolbat 1 st von Grawitz un-
torzoichnot und treogt daa Datu:~ doa 30. Kai 1941. (K0-214,
.jild.oow. 168, ri.562). Dor von *oppcr>dick untcrzoichncto


rOriZNDICK


und von 4. Junl 1941 datiorto Bosloittricf lautot folgcn-
dorr.aa3on*

“In .’.uftrogo von SS-Bri.godofuahror Dr. Grawltz
uoborrcicho lch Ihnon in dor .inlego dio .»uf-
stolluns dorjoniG&n «orzto, dio borcitatohon,
dio von 3oichsfuohror-SS gowuonachto Bohand-
lun” dor Storilifcaot durchzufuohron. n
(1639-4., Ankl.Bov.475, H.5328).

.oppcndick boatritt, doaa dio von Grawltz untorzoich-

acto Liato (NO-214, aioho obon), dio auf oino Nonforonz

•lit Hinnlor cn 27. Mai 1944 Bczug nirat, dio Liato war, dio

or nit aoinon Brlof von 4. Junl an jrcndt achickto, (NO-

1639-;., aioho obcn), indon or bohauptoto, dcvaa dio Grawitz-

aoho Liato nit 'Staatagohoi-taia* 1 bczoichr.ot iat. (I-oppon-

dlclc, R. 5629). 2a bcatard natuorlich koin Grund, .oppon-

dioka Bogloitbriof ala "Gohoin 11 zu bozoichncn, wonn dio Ln-

loG^ auf dloao .ioiao bozoichnot war. „uch iat dor Vornork

auf don Dokunont "Staatasohcinnia 1 ' nicht nit dor l.aaohlno

aorxlom nit dor Hand goacloricbcn und kann aohr wohl apao-

tor in Hiir.lcra .»nt hinzugofuogt wordon aoin. Ucbcrdioa

tragon boido Ookunonto - Bogloitbricf (NO-1639-.., a ioiao

obon) und Liato (NO-214, aioho obon) - daaaolbo .dctcnzol-

ohon - I V/ 102/41 - waa achon an und fuor aich zoigt, dc83

driof und Liato zuaaitr*.on<}Ohooron und zuaarr-.on voraandt

wurdon. Dio .Ibnforcnz nit Hlidor an 27. kci auf dor in

dor Liato Bozug gono-wn wlrd, (NO-214,aioho obon), toofnaa-

to aich nicht rIt “pcaitivor 3ovoolkorun£3politik", aondorn

dlakutiorto Storiliaioruncaonporinonto. Dicaoa iat orwio-

aon durch oinon on 29. Lai 1941 datiorton Brief von Gra-

witz cn Hianlor, dor folgondornaaaon lautot:

“Boi dor an 27.5.41 in Soiaoin von Horrn *rofoaaor
Clauborg atnttgofundoncn Boaprochung uobor doaaon
nouo J.othodo zur opcrationaloaon Ihfnxhtboroachung
nindorwortigor Frauon iat lcidor oln Liasvor3tacnd-
nia untorlr.ufon.

“rrof. Clauborg borwotigt zur ..uaarbeitunj dor Ibthodo
dio hiorfuor bois-itzaatcllondor. Frauen boi aich in
aoinor oigenon llllnlk in Ivocnigahuotto odor in dor
Heoho, da dio Ifcthodo aich noch in dcr ..uanrboitung
bofindot, da mof. Clauborg hiorfuor aoinon oi-ooa
dazu bcachaff ton k Uni a chon ^pparat an Ort uvi"’

Stcllc bonoctigt und boi Laiachcnfaoilon Jodorzoit
zu Oporatlonon poraoonlich zur Vorfuogung atohon nuaa.


iOrZSHDICK


n 3ino nochnalijo oinrchcndo «uaaprachG "it *rof.

Clcuborg hat cr. 30 bcn, dcaa untor dioaon Dnataondoa
oino DurcbfUchrung dor Vorauchaarboitcn in .^avona-
bruock nicht in Prr^jo kotcon kann.

“Boi dor unorhacrtcn Bodoutuns, dio oin aolchoa
Vorfr.hrcn in Sinno cinor nosctivon Bovoclkorunrs-
politik hr.bcn wuordc und dor daraua sich crsobon-
don '.ilahtlQkblt, oino cinwandfrcio AuaerboitunG
dor Lcthodo nit r.llon !littoln zu focrdcrn, orlau-
bo ich nir dehor, doichafuchrcr, den Vorachlas,

*rof. Claubcrr oin cntaprcchcndoa Porachungainati-
tut in odor bci KoonlGahuotto oinzurichton und
dioaon oin Frauankonzontrationalagor fuor otwa
10 ioraonon nnzuGliodom.

“Zuatimondonfalla bitto ioh ur.: Arnr.ccfctlGun;;, nit
SS-Orupponfuohror *ohl und SS-^ri^rdofuchror
Gluccka dr.a ..oitoro in Ihrcn ..uftr'ajo vcrhandoln
zu duorfen."

(NO-1639, .jdcl.Bcw.d7d, .1.5625).

Daaa dioaor Driof und ropporeiicka ooilon on Brandt
a ioh r.uf donaolbon Oo^onatand boziofc.cn, wlrd welter durch
dio Tctaacho bowioacn, dr.33 dio .detonnunaorn dioaor boidon
ira Buoro doa .xn^ckla ;ton dudolf Brandt oin^o 3 anjcnon Doku-
ronto idontiaoh 1 st, "233/13“ (.{.5635), und boido ala
“sohoin" bozoiohnot alnd. (1.5636). Daruobor hlnr.ua traogt
.oppondioka Briof von 4. Juni 1941 dio .Jetonnuroor "IV/ 102 /
41“, wr.ohrond Orawltz' Briof von 29. Ini uctor dio Innfo-
rons nit Claubors in don Goheintasobuoh ala "1V/98/41" oin-
C 0 tra;;cn iat.

An 7. und 8 . Juli 1942 wurdo oino ondoro Konforenz
uobor dio Storiliaionm; von Juodlnnon abgohalton, bci dor
Klsr.ilor, Oobhardt, Gluocka und ClauborG anwcaoal vroron*
itonzontrationalaGorincaaaon von *uaohwitz wurdon Clauborg
zur VorfuosunG Goatcllt, und nan draongto ihn, ao achnoll
wio mooGlich oinon Boricht zu cratatton, ao daaa Kaaaiohnon zur
praktiaolun Vcrvrlrkllchuns dor StariliaiorunG in Grooaaoron
-.uanaaa gotroffon wordon koonnton. (NO-216, Ankl.3ow.170, H.
565; iiO-215, .jikl.3ow.172, d.568). 10 . Juli 1942 orhiolt

ClauborG don Bofohl, Kite lor daruobor Bcricht zu eratatten,
wio Ian#) 03 dauorn wuordo, tauaorel Juedinnon auf dicao ffoiao
zu atoriliaioron. (NO-213, .Jikl.Sow. 171, B.567). An 7.J\xni
19-i3 war Clnuboro in dcr La^o zu borichtcn, da as ca


- 14 -


FOx.ZISICK


auf Grund seiner Vcrsuchc acojlieh scir. v/uerdc, nehrere hund-rt,
wenn nicht ..ar teusend, tac^ich auf diese else zu stcrilisicren.
Lr 3 tcllto fese, d r.3s Stcrilisiorunj "durch cine einzi o _in-
sjritzun, voc Sin. on u dcr Gebaemutter her unci bei dor ueblichcn

,ynaekolo^ischcn Untersuchun crfol.cn knnn." ( 1 , 0 - 212 , .jikl.

-cw. 173, R.570J. iin Wwitcr^r Bew^is dafucr, dess Clauberj
-tcriliaicrun svcrsuchc or. Juedinnon in .uschwitz vernahu,
findot sioh in scincc Brief von 6. xm„ust 1943 an don An w o-
kln..tcn kudclf Brandt, in dou cr u;. wln^ zweito kocnt,.cnanlajo
fucr aoine Vcrauchaarbcitcn in .uischwitz crsuchtc. (H0-210, .jjkl.
Bew.174, H.572).

;vua don Bewcianatoriol ^in. forncr herver, dnss in viclon
k.Z.-La. ern 3tcrlli3lorun 3vcrsuchc in be troecht lichen Unfrji t ;o
vor -cncar^n wur-lon. (Sichc Sohriftaaetzo dcr ^nklnoO'oohoor .c
c c on Gebhnrdt und Brack). Dio Vornahne iicsor Versuoho la,i
in don .lacndon von 3S-..crztcn, die nllc Grawitz, don hooohot.n
Sanitaotsoffiziur in dor SS, untcrstnndcn. ..a iat unnoo L( lloh,
ler Bohaujtun.j d03 ,ai.;ckln,_ton Poppendiok Glaubui zu achonkcn,
daaa cr al3 Chef ven -rawitr pcraoonliohan 3tab nich»3 von
die sen 3tcrili3icrun avcrauchon wusatc. Pcjpondick war "oin
i-it jliod cinor or anisntlcn Oder .'ruppe, die in Vorbindunj
stand nit" ler Vera Jino dcr iterilisicrun oversuohe, und cr
untcratuetzte Cl. uber 3 Vcrbrcohcriaohe .'orsuchc pcrsoonlioh.

S. S ulflunaaidver o uchc: {^nklr^cschrift Ziffer 6 (H)).

Hinsichtllch dcr Boaohreibun., und dos vorbrcchcriaohon
Charaktcr3 dic3cr Versuoho wird nuf den Schriftsatz dcr .jiklajc-
bchotrdo O ojen cion xln V/ ckl&'jtca Gebhardt verwiestn.

Popjoidick loujxcte boln d Irek ten und bclc idreuzvorhccr,
du33 cr l.cnntnia von den Sulfcnnnidvc-rsuchcn crhielt. _r ,nb
indcsson zu, dr.ss cr bei don Vortrac ;cn

- 15 -


: U: ; .-IhilCK

Gebharitgund Fischers auf der Dritten 7a 0 unc Cat der 3cratondon
A crztc in der Kilitaeraorztlichen Akadcaio in -.crlir. tciljc-
nonnen habc, dio von 24. bis 26. iiai 1943 stettfand. (Pcppcnuick,
.<.5572, NO-228, Ankl.Sow. 206, R.767). -r lcujnctc insbosondcre,
Cass cr Je Gclo enheit hatto, cinen Bcrieht odc-r Yorbcricht von
Gobhardt an -rawitz ucter dioso Vorsuche zu loscn odor zu sohen.
(ioppcndiok R.5617). Der Yorbcricht Jcbhnrdts vea 29.Au.jU8t
1942, der .oppenliek bcia Lrouzvcrhocr vor olc^t wurde, zei ,t
hlar, das3 dicso Fe3tstellun unvt'r.hr ist. -ie ..ichti keit dor
Abschrift dieses Eerichtes wurdc von Fopjcndick fu^r Grawitz
bcataotijt (NO-2734, Ankl.Sow. 473, 3.5622, Soitc 6 d..uck.),
und Foppondick nusstc zu.jcbon, dass die 'Fntorschrirt cuf Closer.
Dokununt dio acini o soi. (Poppendick 3.5618), Diosor Boricht
zoi .t klar, dass Sulfonanidvcrsucho an don Insassen dcs ;..o.
.tavonsbrucck vor.cnor.nan wurden. -3 wurdc klar zun .usdruck
•ebraoht, lass Geabrand kucnstlioh hervorjerufen wureo, das.i
Hobolapncnc,0alonai.ialijnun und Erie verwendot warden, un
schlnahtfeldnohnlichc Infektionen horvorzurufon, and dass oinijc
dor Vorsuohopersonen zwocks ..ont relic unbohnndolt blKbcn.
l.urz, diosor Bcricht 0 *ibt oin vollstaen’ijos Eild der von
Oobhnrdt vor,.ononaonon Sulfon&nidv.rsuohc. jvosiohts dieses
offenun und elndouti cn ..idorsjruchs zwioohon dor «usscv;o ven
Poppondiok und iiosos, ihn boiu Kreuzverhoor vor,.clc t tcn D ku-
nont®kann soin oou.nis iu ..anzen nicht als jlnubwuordi an_.c-
schon worden.

Fernor wurden voll3tnon-i> Jcrlchte uobtr dieso Vorsuche
Grawitz*-. Duoro vor elect, unu Gobhardt und Grawitz korrespen-
dierton f ort.jcactzt. (Gobhardt, fl.4107). Pcppendick hatto frclon
-u^an.; zu dicsoa k&tcrial. Gobhardt und Fischer hiolton cuf ler
Dritten Tajunj Ost der Bern tendon , k crztc, lie ven 24. bis 2o.
Kai 1943 in der hilitacrnorztlichen «kadoaic, -crlin, stattf -jiu,

- 16 -


jOxiZNDICK


Vortracgo uobor dicao Voraucho. *oppordlck £Gb zu,dicscr
Tagung boigcwohnt und Gofchcrdt und Fischer aprochon gohoort
zu habon. (x oppcncllck, .1.5572). Gcbhardta Sougnis liof
dorauf hinaus, daaa cr aich Jodor Tcroung wldcraotzt habo
und bonuoht gowoson aci, dio ^anzc .jvgolcgonhoit dicaor
-xporir-onto ana Licht zu bringon. Ir. dor Elnloitung zu aoi-
non Vortra?, gab cr cuadrucoklich on, daaa dioao Voraucho
on lobondon Lcnachon vorgonomon wordon aoion. (3.4109).
Gobhardt aagto aua, cr orlnacro aich nlcht clt Sichorhoit
dc.rcn, ob or gcsagt habo, daaa die Vcrauchaporaoncn Sonzon-
trr.tionalagcrinacaaon waren. Dor ..nroklcgto Fiachor aagto,
dioa aol klc.r zun *uadruck jobracht wordon. (NO-472, Ankl.
Bow. 234, R.941; vorgl. Flachor, 3.4365). In Jodca Fall
v/uaato ca .oppondlck aua dor. von Gobhardt ac 29. *»u;;uat
1942 goachricbonon Boricht. Dio kllnlsohon Elnzolhoiton
dor Voraucho wurdon oingohend von Gobhardt und Flachor or-
klaort. In dor To gun g wurdo daruebor bcrlchtot, daaa vor¬
aucho an ungofachr 60 .oraonon vorgononnon wordon aoion,
daaa dio Infoktlonon kuonatllch horvorgorufon wordon scion,
do.aa vorachlcdcno .jznolnittol bol dcr Bohan! lung dor Ir.fok-
tlonon vorv;ondot wordon aoion, daaa vzn chirurgiachor Bo-
hand lung Ovbrauch gonacht wordon aoi und droi Feraonon ola
Fol'jo da von ..^ostorbon aoion. I Gobhardt, 3.4109-10). Jodo
Einzolhoit wurdo orklacrt.

Gobhordt aaj.to cua, daaa oinor dor Gruondo fuor aoinon
froimuotigon Borlcht auf dor Ib-guns dor Doratonion Aorzto
war, dio Beroohtigung zu dioaon Vorauchon zur Dobatto zu
atollon. Sr aagtos "Ich boatand dorauf, daaa oin c.bgo-
schloaaonor Vorauch mu* dann aoino Eochtfortigung ueborhaupt
bokomt, wonn nan untor kloror Dora to Hung dca gonzon Ablcu-
- 03 cinor Inatenz, dio bia d eh in nichta dealt zu tun hatto,
dr.a Ganzo vorlcgt und fragt, iat dca, was ich Jotzt daraus
folgorc, und fuor dio violon Tauaenden dcr SS oinfuohrc,
richtig odor faljch, wotoi


- 17 -


rOrxSNDICK


ich natucrlich auch don pcraocnlichon Viunach hattG, don
ilanon von nlr untor don 3chutz von Pachloutcn zu bogoyion
und don Stent zu zvingon, noino Gntcrlagcn auch ooffontlich
onzuorkonnon." (R.4115).

ua dicacn Bcwoianatoriol goht uebor Jodon bogruendo-
ton Z..oifol hlnaua horvor, daaa xoppondiok von don in *bn-
zcntrationalogor itovonabruock vorgonomonon Sulfononidvor.iu-
cho.n wuaato und ale untcratuotzto.

?. ihlc;r.:on-Vo rancho*

Dio Binzolhoitor. dioaor Voraucho, wio aio in Schrift-
aatz dor .uiklagobohoordo gogon don .uigoklogton Gobhardt
onthalton aind, wordon durch Bezugnahno darouf zun Boatand-
toil dioaoa Schriftaatzoa gonacht.

Daa roppondick von dioaon Vorauchon wuaato, wird duroh
dio Tataaoho bowioaon, daaa Grawitz'a Borichto uobor dioao
Voraucho (NO-409, ;.nkl.Bcw.249, R.979), zuaorr;on nit Gob-
hordta Vorborlcht uobor dio Sulfonanidvoraucho, dor von
ioppondick boglaubigt wordon war, oinor. 3cgloitbriof von
Gre.v/itz an Kinnlor von 7. Soptonbor 1942 ongohoftot woron.
Dor Bogloitbriof lautot wio folgtj

"Botr.j 1. Voraucho von SS-3rlgadofuohrcr Gobhardt
zur Bokaonpfunr, doaOaabrenloa ~

2. Vur3uoho ziu* 3ohandlun : ; von Sopaia nit
Biochor.ic.


Anlg.i -2-X
.'in don

Bo lcha C'u. hr or-S3 H. Hlcclor,
B o r 1 1 n


RoichafuohrorJ

In dor .ullage orlaubo ich r.lr oinon owiachan-
boricht von S3-3rigadofuohror Irof. Dr. Gobhardt
uobor dio von ihn in XL.-Ravonabruock oir.goloitoton
klinlach-chlrurglachon Voraucho, fernor oinon zu-
3orr.onfaa3endor. Zwiachcnboricht uobor dio in IX.-
Dachau durchgofuchrton 3oharxllunG3 voraucho von
Sopaia uaw. nit biochoniachon Kittcln vorzulogon. n
(HO-2734, aioho obon).


- 18 -


POPFUOICL


Dcr Borioht u.ior die biochaoischc- Bohandlun. vcn Sepsis
1st datiert 29. ~u 0 ust 1942 und traejt ass .Jctonzeiohan 738/1.
42; ob^leich die on,, lische Ucbcrsctzunj irrtuuilich drs Datua
29. <*u ,ust 1943 zoi t. Weiterhin leutet Gebhardts haneschrift-
llchor Veruork auf dca Scpslsbe-richt "Havcnsbruock 3.9.42."

La konr. also koln Lv/cifol darueber bcstchcn, dess der outer
Ir. 2 in Bcjloitbricf en<-.ohnte Bericht Grnwitz's Borioht uebt
die Scpsisvcrauoho in D-.ohau 1st. (120-409 oben). Dcr Bericht
fuehrt nos, dnas noht /nolle von Sopsls ads tens kuonstlloh
, horvor erufon wur Ion und d.ss nllo von ihnen starben. Zwei
andorc Verauchsj-orsenen st'.rbcn ubenfalls. Grawitz, keinoswo i
Ouroh den tcedlichcr. «us onj cntautljt, crdnctc die Fortsetzu;
dor Vorsuoho an. (1.0-409, -tnkl.Bew. 249, B.9C1). Dass die Ver-
, suohv. fert_,c8wtzt v.urdon, wird luroh dio Lrankhoit8,/C30hiohtc
Vcrauoharerocn be iosui, die in Dachau oa 10. Kovonbor 1942
kuunstlioh .tt o~ sis lnflzicrt vurdo. (KO-994, Anfcl.Bcw. 231,
H.985).

G. Poly sl-VeisucU.

HlnsiohtlicJi dcr Besohrei un v . und yurbrochorischen Kntur
dcr Poly,.alvcrsuohc wirl .*.uf .'en Schriftsatz dcr .j \kla obehoci
, e en den .ai eklajton Gebhsr t verwlcson. .vus dc.-. da ;obuoh dci
AneOkla^tcn Sicvors fuer lz3 Jahr 1944 jeht herver, dass Popp*,
diok an cincr Lonfcrcr.z _dt rawitz und Dr. Ploctnor an 23 .Mai
Jono3 Jahrcs toilnahr.. D~a r. ^bnis dicscr Lenferenz war, dass
IlQctnor '.ic r rsol.un sstntion von rfasoher uebernoha. .%a 8.So
1944 traf Pc;;onilok V.rkchrunjen, Janit Dr. Ploctnor w.itcrh
zur Verfuu un .cs Boiohsf rsohunosrats stehen wucrue. (3546-
Ankl.Bcw. 123, 3.3-2, 4lntrvunscn vea 23. Lai und 6. Scpt<.ril
Dass i lcctner die Icly^alvcrsucht untor sieh hattc.wird lurch
die Lintra ;ur._ vc.l 29. Juni und 31. kfi^rz erwioson, eic bc-
sr.,.wn, lass rlootacr


- 19 -


POPKNDICK


dio Lei tun,.; dor Vorsuchc uobvrnoh^n sollc, da Raschcr nicht
in ior Lajo sol, ’ns zu tun und wcitcrhin durch dio Eintrn^un-
u cn vca U. -*ril, 16. 2ial. 1. Juni und 6. October in Siovors
Tajobuch. 23. Oktobor infcraicrto Siovors Poijondlok
dr.as Plootnor die biclc^ischo FerscUun^ ueberaohnen aolltc.

( 3546 -PS obon).

Dor Bo'.Vwis ist also jefuchrt, dnss Poppendick ven don
Polyjalvcrsuch-n ia X.Z. Daohnu^crcn Vcrlauf Vcrsuohsicrsen*
crsohocson warden, vmsstc und dazu oruutijto. (MO-433, Ankl.
Bow. 240, H.956; MO-1424, .*nkl. Bow. 462, A.4773; Stcohr,

R.587; Gebhardt, a.4240-1).

H. ?inir».rin—Voraucl'.c. (.j;kla_,oschrif6 Uffer 6 (C).

Pojpondiok stand nuoh rAl dcu ven Dr. Sohillinj in D-iohm
vor...onotio.ncn vorbrcchorisoh n .xlcriavorsuchon in Vorbindun .
DUoc Voraudio sind la Sohriftsntz dor «nklft ;cbohocrio jtjen
itooo boflohriobon.

Dr. *1 otn-r war cincr dor Haurtaltorboitcr ven Sohillin
bci so in on Versuohea. (3546-PS, «nkl.Bow. 123, R.382, Lln-
tra.jun, - on 1. Juni; Rcso R.6339). Das To^obuob von Siovors
von Jahro 1944 bo-.oist, dass on 23. i-ai 1944 ojno konferonz
uober Plootnuro .artel t nb.jubnltcn wurdc. Grawitz, poppendiok,
Siovors und Plootn.r ndu*n tell. Raschcr war kuorzlich in
cinen Skanial von/ickolt word on we^cn dor -ntfuohrun«j ven
kindern, nuf die or -.Is soinu oi,onen ^nspruoh orhob. An
dcnsclbcn Tas, an Sen die Aenferunz iuit Grawitz und Poppcniicl
stnttfand, wurdo Ploctaur dio Lei tun., ven ..asefcers ^btcilun,;
iti .Jmenorbo uebertr'^cn. (3546-PS ebon). *n 31. * ’ u 19/4/4
sonkticniorto Grawitz dio Fcrtswtzunj dor Lusomcnarbeit
zwlschcn Picotnor und Schilling. (Siohe auch dio Eintraoun^cn
untor Jui 30. Januar, 22. Fobruor, 24. .tu ust und 8. Sept vo¬
ter). Weitorhin konferierte Sievors an 23. Oktobor 1944 nit
Popjon.iick bczuejlioh dcr Ucbcrnahoc dor biolajischcn


POPPSKDICK


Unter3uchungor. in Dachau durca Ploetner. (3546-PS, obon).

Poppondick O ao zu, durcfc Grawitz vca Schillings Vcroue he
in Dachau Kenntnio erhalton zu habon. (H.5567). Dioso '.orauc
dauortcn bis &riogsondo fjrt, and cino botrecchtlichc Anzohl
dcr Ubor Tausond unfroivilligon Versuchspcrsonen otarbcn.
(HO-856, Ankl.Sov:. 125, H.386).

I. So c v.T. 8 3 J r VO r sue he (^.iklagcschrift, Ziff or 6 (6) )

Dio Soovra38orvoi'Quche sind in Schriftsctz d.r Ankla .o
gogon Schroodor boachricbo:i.

Poppondick • mx* ..it 0 licd cinor Organisation odor Gruppo
(Grawitz), cio it dor Vornahnc dioacr Vorsucho in Vorbindu*
otand. Grcvitz billigte sio eusdrUcklich. (KO-179, Ankl.Bcw.
135, R.485). Fornerhin 3tcllto Plootnor, ait dt-ssen ~rbcit
Poppondick cn t ; yurbunden war, (sioho ob.n), den Arbcitsrc.ua
zur Vo fUguiVj, wo die Vcrouche durchgofUhrt wurdon. (3546-i<*
Ankl.Bow. 123, it, 302, Slntr" ur.tcr dee 20. Juli 1944).

J. Kaltuv orsuch- (Ankle csohrift, Zificr 6 (3) )

'7o^or. uinor cincohondon uoochrcibung d^r -altcveraucho
darf nuf don Scliriftsatz d-r Ar.klcgobchbrdo gogon Slovens
vorwioo-n wordon.

An 13. Jamicr 194; konferiorto Knochor nit Grcvitz und
den Anjoklc .ton Poppondick bozliglich dcr Kaltcvcruucta-. Rcec
borichtcto Ubor die A^ltovurauchc nit 17r.88.r und unrloo cu<*
die Vorauchu .it Srookonkalto. Grav.itz wios dcr oaf hin, dec
Rancher nech aolncr Vcrootaun c sur 7cffon-S3 Grewitz untfcr-
otcllt coir. vvUrdo und rile ocrichtc dicaon vorzuloton 3Cic:
£r oagto, dnsa on jin unhr.ltbcror Zu3.rnd ooi, dras oin
Hichtr.rzt, otwe. otnndrrtonfUhror Slovens ,nir AuskUnfto ubor

arztlicho Din^o gobca cell. H Poppondick sngtcJ "ich

he be Str.r.dart o: ufdhr .r_ S ieve, c oefren nu .ju-.ls zu uir bitt en
aUaaen, un


P0PP2HDICK


Unter3uchungon in DBchan durob Ploetner. (5546-PS, obon).

Poppondick gab zu, dureh Grawitz von Schillihgs Vcraucho
in Dachau Konntnia orhElten zu haben. (R.5567). Dicso Vorsuc
dauerton bia 4riog8ondc fort, und cino botraochtlichc Anznh'
dcr Ubor Tauseud unfroirilligon Verauchspersoncn starbvn.
(NO-856, Ankl.Sov. 125, H.386).

I. So owe s 3 orvc r sue he. (^wiklagoschrift, Ziffor 6 (G) )

Dio Soowasacrvci'ouchc sind in Schriftontz d-r Ankla ,o
gogor. Sciirocdor bcochricbon.

Poppondick war --itglicd cinor Organisation od^-r Gruppo
(Grawitz), dio it dor Vornahnc dicscr Vcrsuchc in Verbindur
atar.d. Grawitz billigto aio ausdrUcklich. (NO-179. Ankl.Bow.
135, R.485). Pornerhir. otcllto Ploctnor, ait dtsacn Arboit
Poppondick one yorbur.Gon war, (oioho obon), don Arboitarcun
zur Vo fUgiuv. , wo dio Vo roue he durchgcfUhrt wurdon. (3546- x s
Ankl.Bow. 123, a. 382, Sintrr untcr elec 20. Juli 1944).

J. Kttltovor suchc (Ankle oochrift, Ziffer 6 (3) )

7o. or. oinor cingohondcz acochrcibung dur ..altcvcrsucho
darf nui don Schriftsatz dor Anklagcbchbrdo gogen Siovers
vorwloo-n word or..

An 13. Joaunr 194; konferiorte Hnschor nit Grawitz und
den An ;oklp. ton Poppondick bezUglieh dor Kaltcvoruuchc. Reno
borichtoto Ubor dio .v.ltovcrouchc nit Ctss~r und unrios nv<
dio Vorsucho .it iroc-onkdlto. Grawitz wios drrauf hin, dac
Rcochcr ncch ooLr.ar Vcrootsun t zur 7afjfon-S3 Grawitz untfcr-
otcllt ooin wtirdo und rile Barichta dicson vorzulogon ocio:
Br sagto, da us cs ,: oin unhr.ltbcrcr Zuotrr.d sci , dr. as cin
Nichtcrst, ctwr. Stand rtonfUfcrcr Siovers,nir Auskilnfto Ubor

firztlicho Dingo go bon eoll." Poppondick ecgtc: "Ich

hr.bo Str.r.dart cr.f'.ihx’^r S iovo.e oohon nchrcnlo zu air bitten
nUoaon, un


?opps:tdick

AnskthifSo za orh- lton, J.^ztongndogJjy, 1a doch . al lo
nodizinisoho n Din^o bol uns." Creditz ginc dnzu Ubor, oln vo:.

flcschor Ubor dio Schaniluai vor. Xrockcncrfrierun&sfall-n u c-
schriobcncB liaaornr.dun r.us dca Grund zu kritisiorcn, draa '
schors Voroucho ait SoMcruntorkiihlung nicht unbcdinjt darcn
Anwcnduru, findcn kdrntcn ur.d zu «cni 0 Trockcncrfricrun^vcr-
aucho cn conaclilichcn Vcrauchaporsonon vor 0 onooacn cordon

soion. (NO-320, Ankl.Bov. 103, H.33Q).

DicsoQ Ddcuncnt bowoist n-cht nur Poppcr.dic'.co 3otoiligun

cn don Kaltovorouchor., y -ndcrn co i^oht cuch dcrcua horvor*
dc.ss or els Gohilfo von Grewitz Ubor alio Voroucho on IConzcn-
trctionBlftgorinoaaoon inforniort v.'urdo. Sr solbot angto, dec
c.ilo nodizlniochon Angologonhoiton ■b pi.u ne" ondoton, und dr.,
or von Siovora vorlcngt fcebo, ihn 3oricht zu oratatton. 3V.o
oinsijo ilrztlicho Gebiot, Ubor dco Sievoro ir^ondwio Boricht
crotntton konnto, ■ area die von A hr. oner bo untorotUtzton
vorbrochorinch-n Voroucho.

Poppondick cob »u. d=s» or cn dio.or Konforon. tollnnhn
mid dnie dio Sttltovorouoho.nob dicoon Zoitpunkt fortdcuoltu
(R.5564). Ale Gravits ool dioeor Konferenz Cc.rauf bostand,
dnso Sesohoro Thcorion Cured wonlgston* 100 Irockonorfriorur.
voroucho bonioson oUrden, ootzto Eaoohor coin borborlschos
l,crk f.rt. ;.n’l7. Pobrucr 1943 borlehtoto or Hidnlor Ubor
lrookonorfrlorun.ovor.uoho an 30 HUftlinuotflo soznunuon wur
nnhozu 14 StunCan ool Gofrlortooporotur neckt In Proion zu
blclbon. Ihro Hindu und PiUco ur.ron wolBojofroron. (1616-PS,
Ankl.Bow. 105, 3 . 3421 . ^ 4. April 1943 -or Bc.chor wiederm.

m d.r Lr^o. her zuo.Uzlictto Irookonorfrioruncsvoruuol.o bio

6° I^ilto 3cricht zu oratnttun.

K. E vi^cuischc-Gcl b sucht-Vorsucho (Anklcgoschrift,

6 (H) ).

IDio Spidoaischon-Gelbeuchtvarauchc vurclon von tosaif.’
r.uf Bofefcl von Karl 3rmut cinsdoitct. An 1. Juni 1943


- 22 -


P0PP3KDICS

AusfcClnftc zu orlv lt-n, lotztcn ondas le nder, in doch r.llo

ncdizinischon Dir. o b-i uns." Grnwitz ^in^ dezu Ubor, oin vc:.

1 " ' L 1 1

Rcachor liber die 3oha:r:iua_, vor. rrockencrfrlerunfiafiill-:: go-
schriobonca iloaornndua cus den Grund su kritisioren, drac Rl ■*
achor3 Vcrauchc ait -'asa-'inntorktihlung nicht unbudin^t darn.
Anwendun^ finden konnten und zu wcni 0 Trockcnerfriorungavcx--
oucho an aonsclilichon Vcrsuchaporaoncn vor 40 noar.cn wore’-;:
Bcion. (N0-320, Ankl.Bow. 103, H.333).

Diesao Dokunont bowoiot n.cht r.ur Poppondicke 3ctoili£uni
on den Kaltovorouckor. , p -nd-rr. co c>oht nuch drrr.ua hervor,
dr. 00 or els Gohilfo von Grew its Uber olio Vcrauchc an Konzen-
tratijnalagorinoaoocn ir.frcicrt wurdo. Sr 3 olbat angto, do 10
c.llo n-dizinicchon Angoiogon .01 ton "bol_una" ondeton, und dr.;
or von Siovora vorlcn^ -r-bo, ihn 3ericht zu oratetton. Bra
oin 2 i^o Urztiicho Gobiot, Ubor dr.o Siovera irgondwio Boricht
cratntton konntc, varan die von Ahr.onorbo untoratiitzton
vorbrochorinchvn Yorouoho.

Poppondick gnb zu, dnao or on dicaor Konfcrons toilnr.hn
und dr. a a die K&ltovoraucko.n eh diccon Zeitpunkt fortdr.ucrtw
(R.5564). ..la Grcidts oci dicaor Konforenz dnrcuf boatand,
dnea Rnaohero Thcorion durch wonigatona 100 Trockonorfriorui
voraucho bov-iosor. ;rtird-n, aotzto Rcachcr ocin berbariaohta
T.crk f.rt. An 17. Februrr 1943 bcrichtcto or Binalor Ubor
Trockonorfricrur. ,svcrsuc:.u a.-: 30 Haftlinc;tn,dla goawungon wur
nahozu 14 Stunden oci Gofricrtonporctar cackt in Froion su
blcibon. Ihro Hhndo und FtUea vr: ron woiasjofroron. ( 1616 -PS,
Ankl.Bow. 105, R.342). ac 4. ~>ril 1943 wer Hcachor wiodorou

in dur Lc.vu, bor ausutzlicnc TrockonorfriorunGavcraucho bia
6 ° Xalto Boricht zu cratntton.

K. E ?i 2 o.,i 3 Cho-Go lb sucht-Vorsuche (Anklrgcschrift, 'Ziffo:

6 (K) ).

XDio Spidoolschon-Golbauohtvorauchc warden von Grewit:*
r.uf So ic. hi von Rerl Brandt oingblcitot. An 1. duni 194,-


22 -


erbat Grawitz Hi.jalera Zuatii x iing zur Voruendung van Xontontrationalagcr-
haoftlingfa fuer dioao Vorauchw* .,-n rochnoto zlt Todeafaullen. (HO-OlO,
'•nkl. bow. 117, r.. 735). -cht polnische Judon *urden in Sachsonhauson rur
Vorfuugung gxatollt. (.,'0-011, «nkl. 3ow. 188, K, 737). Sinigo Vorauchapor-
aoncn at,arb«n. (fJO-371, .J^i. b-w. 186, R. 733). Zur -*it,ala dioao vcr-
brochcrischun '/oraache atatti -nden,wr Popptndick achon langu ala wichtigur
*itarovit,or von Orawltz taotig ^j’.caor..

III. sc muss

Poppondick wvr oil. au.ir alica ^it^liod dor SS. Er mchto don Sinitaota-
ilionat dor SS zu acinos. 5-ruT uni aticj zuu R-vn* cinoa Obcrfuvhrora a of. Er
war dor wngoto and Vertr'atwat- . it'. r :>oitor von Grarltz. nahia an violon
Konfuronton uobor vurbrncx-riacho • rauchc an Consentrationalagcrhauftlingon
toil. Er untoratuctzto aolcaw »-rl.-cntc,und uuhreru wurden von ihn vor'vn-

laaat.

Poppundick b^f .33i,w aicU -It a,.n ..rboitun dor Forachungaabtoilung V
(Vonkonnol), die von Gr wltt'a buuro finansiert wurdo. Dio drandbouben- and
Hon-wnvoraacho i~ .vjnzontralonalagvr ouchcnwald warden ven iho in Zuaamnon-
arboit .uit dioaor ..btoilunx in dio ogo goloitjt. 2r orhiolt Berichto uuber
dioao Voraucho. Er vur nlaaato, daaa Inaiazon facr dio Honoonvoraacho zur
Vorfaogung gostollt wurdor.. ixvi Voxsueftapuraonon vorstirtoon ala Folgc dio-
aur Hon-jnoxpuri-onto.

_ , Plcck-

Poppondick voronlaaatw durch . rugowaky, dnaa /Ocboravrsucho durch Ding
in oicbcnwald vorficnau-cn wurden, un oin von dor rorachungaabtoilung V ont-
wickoltoa ..x'znoiuittul zu proofon. Er billigto eino ..bhandlung Dinga ueber
Hockficborv.raacho zar Fruofung von ~kridin-*Xirivntcn, in doren Vorlauf 21
Inaasaen getootut wurdon. Er wuastv, .ws Flockfiobcr boi diosen Verauchon
kuonatlich horvorgoruTuxi uuurdu.


- 23 -


PCPPrLDICK


Dio von Clauborg vorjuasaiAan vorbrecheri3cher. Stcrilisiorungsvor-
suchu war«n Poppundick bekannt yhd warden von ih~ anterstuotzt. Er bo-
glaubigto air.on Ewiscnonbericht saltans Gebharat hinsichtlich dor Sulfo-
nai.ddvorsucho. Er hoorto die Vorfcraegu von Gebhardt and Fischer ueber die sc
Vorsachu uit an. Er mxsat- uxch von den in Dachau von Gr.nwitz nngcordnoton
Sopsisvorsuchun,

Sr butolligtc sicn rn horforuns uubor die .afeoit von Ploctnor in
uachau, dor haacher boi ion t >ly_ lv.rsuchon and Schilling bci den wslaria-
versuchcn untorstuutzto and -«i .uschors Forschungasf.tion 1%U uebumahm.

Er trof .uiatoltcn, d-ss Plo--n^r voa .wichsforschunssr't unterstuotzt wurdo.
Diu Seewasser- und Spideciachon-Gulbsuchtvorsucho warden ven Grawitz gebil-
Ligt. Plootncr atollte don ilats iuor diu acurwosiorvoraucho in Dachau zur
Vorfuogung.

Poppondick konferiertu -it Grawitz uni ha sc her uubor Erf rio rungs vor-
sucho. .*uf Grujwl von .ui rolaungon, die b«i dioser aonforenz ergingon, fuuhrtv
haschur woitor*j Trockunurfriurungavcrsucho aus. Poppondick gingvn Burichto
uobur anduro verbruchurisclw Voraucho *u, dio voa .dinonorbu ontoratuotzt

warden.

Diu irfiklagubohocrdo unterstullt, dass das Btwois-atwriol erglbt, daoa
Poppundick Haupttaotur, Teilnohaor, j.stiftur, Vorschubloistunder war,
nuinu <*uati.o_ung gab and In Veibindan. stand ait Flumon und Untumchcungen,
diu die Durchfuonrun; u.dizamsc.Kr —porir.er.to an lebonden ikmachon ohno
MistLa-Amg dur Batroffunun • o- Suror.slvnd hatten, uni cin -it,-lied oinc-r in
rbindung daait atohmidexi Jr a ' nis tion odur Gruppe war, in doren Vorlauf
hordo, BrutalitaoLun, -raus.-. Aeitui, Faliening cn, Grcuolt ton und indoro un-
luunachlicho Handl-ngon be;.-.- -n wurdon and dass seine Schald ij. Sinnc dor
Punktu 1, II, in unu IV dei .u.iA* t %icnrift erwiesen 1st.

"23E"

- 2L -


i Oi l 3HDX0K


Ioh, Prod Lax, /f X 046207, boatootigo hiornlt,
daaa ioh durchaua vortraut r^t dor ongliachen und
doutachon Spraoho bin und daaa daa Voratohonde oine
vrahrheitajonaoaac urxi richtigo Uoboraotsung doa
Dokunontoa ".oppondick" daratollt,

iluornborg, 3. Juli 19*7

Prod Lax
if X 046207


PROZiSS HR. 1


oCiiUS JPLAYDOY l. R


FlTcR DIE VEHLINIGTLN STAAIEN VON AMS RIKA


GEGKN


GLEH'uiJ HOS•:


Jai.oo Ifl. KoHnney
Alexander G. Ilordy
Arnost Korlli.-Hoofcwald
^3thor Jano Johnson

Puor:

Muornberc,

don 16. Juni 1947 folford Taylor

Brl.-.-idl- r G ucral U.d.A.
Hnuj t-uikluugcr fuer hrior:i-

vorbroohon


-HILr-ITUNG

Es wiri In wesentlichen behauptet, dass der Angeklagte
Rose untor den Anklagcpunkt I der ^nklageachrift mlt. indorcn
nach einora goneinsunen Flan sich ver-ibrc-ote and einwilllgte,
nodlzinisahe Versache an unfr* lwllligen Versuchaporaonoii
auazufaohron; und untor Funkt II und III (kricgsverbruehon
and Vorbrtchcn gegon die kcnsohliohkoit), dasa or Ki.upt-
taotcr, Poilnohmcr, ,m3tlftfcr, Vorachubltlatender wur, aolnc
Zuatlnmung gab und in Vcrblndung stand nit Ilacntn und Untor-
nchmungon, dio dit iJurchfuuhrung cudlzlnlooker I.xiorlmonto
ohno Zuatinnung dor Betroffonon an lc bonder, Monachen zun
Gogonotund butto.

Dor Angoklagtc Rono wlrd in boaondoren dor Toilnuhno an
don im Absohnltt 6 (U) dtr Anklagoaohrlft auTgofuohrton Mnln-
riavorauchon und d» n In j.b.tohnltt 6 (J) riufgcfuohrton i'look-
fioborvorauchon bosohuldigt. Un dlo Saohlago zu vorcinfachon,
hot dio Anklngobohoorlo dl. B. johul llgung der Tcllnnhno an
Hopatltlu-Lpidoraicu-Vcrouchtn, wlo olo in Abuolmitt 6(H) dtr
Anklugoochrlft aufgoruobrt olnd, zuruookgczog.n.

i. s r a.mi»o ui.d v. iu\x:.L'i. MiiG

Dor Angcklngtu Gerhard Roau 1st suit vlolcn Jnhrcn Fnoh-
arzt fuel* rropennodizin. In Jahro 1937 uebernahm or lit La-
tuns dir Abtollung fuor Tropuntvdizln <lcs Hoi rt-.ooh-Inoti-
tuta in Berlin. In Jalire J943 wu.-do .r Viz jranaldont dta
Ilobor t-Loch-Inutituta, ubtr in dor iraxic uebto or In Jonom
.unt koine Tat tig no it aus, la stin .*Knat t«-i der Iuftwiffo
soino Zoit veil In Anspruch nahn. (R.6085). r tr t dor
nationalsozialistluchcn FartCri In J liro 1930 bii. (R.60B7).

Am 26. nugust 1939 orhl.lt cr ilc -twlluu uinos bora-
tendon Hygicnikors bo In Sanitactsinsp-ktour dor Luft-

- 2 -


waffe. zu Jener Zelt Erich Hijrpke. (R.6092). £r bckloUcte
die Stellung bis zua Kricg3cnlo and stiog schliesslich bis
zuB Range einos Gcncralarztes der Reserve,glcich Brigadier
General, euf. (R.6094). .ds 3ich der Krieg auf ^frika,

Italian, dca

3eite 2 dcs Originals

Balkan, Gricchonlond, hruta und Ru33land ausbreitote, wurcc
dio Propcnhygione von grosser Bcdcutung. (R.6095)* Von
Jnhro 1941 an vorbruchto Rose seine ganzo c it la Dlon3to
dor Luftwaffe (ft.6094; Hooo DoL.13, Rose Bow.22, R.6228).

. Roao war dor Haujtb^ruter dca Snnltnotainopcktoura der
Luftwaffe und scin^a gnnzun .u'.tca. (a.6096 u.ff.). Schrocdor,
dor Chef des Sanitaetuwoaona dvr Luftwaffe, crklr.ortc, dnos
Rose von alien Jforschunga' rbvltun, dio die Boratenden
Hyglonikor,wio lie. igon, auf -aiwcioung der Luft.vaffo ausfuchrton,
In Renritnis geavtzt werden auoate. (HO-449, -Jikl.Bow.130,
R.471)• Sohrooder besta^tlgta dlv.Ou Lrklaorur.waehrond
seiner ZcugcnausBogc v, r dcu Gwriohtchof. Cuj609). RoOob
Stellung gugwiuebor do... Ch^-f doa LuftwaffenaanltaotGwoaun8
nuao c.uat-lnandergehilten werden von der Stellung dvr ion
* Luf tflotton zu;‘oteilt> n Borutendun tlygicnlker, wlc z. . der

von Hangeii, Jcr dor Luftflotto "Roich" zu':ctvilt war. -loot
i» onpfing Herlohce dvr dun Luftflott_n xugetollton Beratondcn

Hygicnikcr (Kooe Dok. 7, Rose ! ..7, R.6108).

Ob nun Hobo don Beratenden Hy^enikcpn der Luftflcttcn
Anwoiaungon crtcllua konnto, odor ob er eine Bofchlogovrlt
irgundwoloher .trt hattc, 1st von goriugvr Bcdcutung. Ea wlrd
nioht bostritten, daos Rose Burster dea .eitera dcs J^ni-
taotsweaona der Luftwaffe in Kragon dvr Hygiene war. r war
scait dvr wiohtigstc beratendo Hygioniker dor Luftwaffe ur.d
der Hauptsachverstoondigc fuer hy..icnische Probleuo. Bcdottt-


- 3 -


sane Fragcn dcr Hygiene inncrhalb dor gcsacten Luftwoffu
kor.cn ihn zur Kenntnis. ..uf Grund soincr Stollung kenn nicht
bestritten wordon, dess cr boin Chef dcs Sonitcctswescns dcr
Luftwaffe einen grossen Einflus3 hatte, soweit cs sich ur:
Sachcn dor Hygiene hcndclto.

Voa Jahro 1944 bis zun Kriegsondo war ..oso auch nclizi-
nlaohcr Borator dcs «ngcklagtcn Handlosor, als ion Ch^f dcs
Sanitaot3woscr.8 dcr Wchmaoht. -r war nodizlninchcr Eorator
von Dr. Conti fuor nit rropenkronkheiten zusannenhaongendo
Angologcnhoiton. Conti war Staatssokretaer fucr Gesundhoits-
weson und Loiter dcs zivilon Sanitaotsdicn3tcs, dca das

Scito 3 dc3 Originals

Roburt-Koch-Instltut untcretcllt war. (NO-673, Jikl.Bcw.15,
*.108),

II. Pl’.RSOLNLICHrl f^lUwJIME AN VIBKZC HL RI SCHAN EXPERT

A. Malaria

In Bozug auf die kalarlavorsueho 3ind zwui Fragen in
Krwcogung zu ziehen: erstens, ob dio *.'alariavorsuoho in v«.r-
brcchcrisohor We lac ausgofuohrt wurlon und rweitona, ob dor
Angoklngtc Rose ait oclohon V.rouchen in Vtrbindung otand.

Dqso die Vornahnu von Malarlnvcrsuchen in Konzentrationo-
lngcr Dachau von Februar 1942 bis zun hric^sendc verbrochorisch
war, 1st von koines dor «n«%klcgten ornstlich beutritten
wordon. Dr. Klaus Schilling traf in Dcz^. bor 1941, waohrend
cr in Italien arbcitotc, Conti, dcr daran intcrc3sicrt war,
woltcro iirbeiten Schillings ueber d-3 lialariajrublcn zu
unterstuetzen. Kin -uoanuentrefron nit BL-.l.r wurde nrran-
giert, dcr seine Zusticaung zu /«.r3uchen in -onzentrations-
lagor Daohau gab. Schilling be inn 3cino .a-buit in Februar
1942 und fuohrtc seine Vur3uchc bis zun Arlc<.:86nio fort, .r
boschaeftigte 3ich in ersUr Linic Ic. it, cln Vorfuhren zu


- 4 -


ontdeckon, un Person on gegen Malaria icaun zu aschon. La
Laufc dor Versuche warden otira 1200 Konzentmtionslagcrlnoft-
llngo ait Malaria infiziert, indec can 3ic ontwodcr von in-
flziortcn Moskitos stechon lioss odor lurch Einspritzuns
von oalariainfiziortcn Blue, Nnchder* die Gof :>ng< non infiziert
wordon woron, wurdon sic nit Vv-raohiedenen .rvparaten, cin-
schlicsolich Chinin, Koosslverson und Pyranidon bohnnJolt.

Dio aoiston dor Vi.rsuchapcr3ontn warua nichtdcutschc Stant3-
angchoerigc, Von don infizierton Vorsuchspersoncn starben
ungefaohr 30 dirokt infolgo der Vorsuaho, und wcitc.ro 300 bio

400 otarbon infolgc von koaplikutionon.

Soitw 4 c*t-s Origin-13

Dio obigai fatsachon 3ind lurch lv-r. B-richt d.r Allgo-
neinen Militacrieohon Koor.isalon in dc irozess dor Voroinie-
tun Staaten c». :>n ’..c iso und Genooscr., dor in unohnu, Ooutaoh-
l'ind,stattfnnd, fi-stgostollt. (N0-856, -inkl.B w.i25, R.386J.
Klaun Schilling war in J<.ncu Frozen Mngoklagtcr, wurdo uebor-
fuuhrt und zur. Podc v^rurtoilt. In cL’ur, Ji-nor. Gorichtahof
r.lo Bov/cinar.torl .1 vor.>logt n cidesotattliohon -rklacrun :,
Jatlort vou 30. Oktober 1945, .ab Schilling zu, d.uo die Vi.r-
suchojc raor.« n kolno Kreiwlllircn warcc.

Diner von Schillings -ioalsUntw:. b 1 • n Vw.ryuohen
in Dachau w .r Dr. Fleotn«.r, i.r t Itgli. d dee un ter ion Ango-
klogton Slovers stohonion Inotituts fu-r tfo-hrwlsscaaohaftllohc
Zwcckforuchun ; d. s -Ou^rbo b w r, uiuVors boajr eh oich ilt
Plootnor wegen dor ilelnricVi-rouoho uni enpfing von ilu. -u-
richtu. ( 3546 -iS, -uikl.3cw. 123, x.,362; . intrugun :en fucr
don 30. Janunr, 22. Fobruar, 23. 2 i, 31. ui, 1. Juni,

24. .aiguot). i<oso orklaorto, liss or von d».r *'at;i'loho, daoa
Plo-tnur oln fcit'irbi.itcr Schillings war, lurch cine -Jifr ..:i
be! dor Zt-itschrirt fucr frop ro . Jlzin i:.. . ~.hrc 1944 *:fuhr.
Plextner hatto in Jener <-«.itschrif t ein^n ^rtikol vorcoffcnt-
licht,und dloour » ir Root zur ucnatnis >kor-_ca (.:.6339).


- 5 -


Dor Zeuge August Viewer lcjtc fuer die ..cklaGcbehocrdc
Zougnis ab und erheortote die Pcst3tellun£on der Kilitaori-
achcn Konnission in Dachau. Vioweg wurde zuerat sclbsc den
Mnlariavorauchon untorworfen und arbcltcte apaet^r al3 Gchil-
fo in der ilalariastncion. Vioweg bozcugte, -3S Schilling
on ungofaehr 1100 Inaasscn, deri • ter Deutsche, folcn,

Rusaon und Jugoalnwon, Vcroucho vornohn. Ur.ter den verwondeton
rusaiachon Kaoftlingon befonden sich Kriegagefongonc. :-i b_r.
odor aoht dor Vcrauohapciconon atorben in der l'alariastation,
in dor Heuptaaoh© ala Folgo dor Pyra.:ddonvorglftuns (R.4 20,

Zr bozougto r.uoh, daea weitoro 60 Haoftlingo seines Y/isaona
naoh otarben, nachdou aio von der Vcrauchoatution vcrlegt
wordon wnron. &T crklaorte forncr, daaa keinor dor Hacftlinge

Solto 5 doa Originals

aioh frciwillig noldoto, daaa or aolbat on nicht tat, und d'.aa
die Vorauohaporacncn auf Grund ihrer Tcilr.ihno on den Ver-
auchon nicht froigcl :aooa warden. Dio Infcktiouatabollo auo
don .Jeton Schillings in Dachau, die. das Datutt or Infizicrunc
doa Zougen Vieweg nit "hultur ..oso" zeigt, v iirdo in Ori ginal

voretlogt. (NO-983, .'nkl.3cw.12fl, R.^67).

Si oh*, ouch die Zc ugenausaago von Heinrich Sfcoohr ui.58Z,-

5 ).

Dor Angoklagtu Rose nohn on den vcrbrochoriachcn Exp.rl-
nonten Schilling* toil, indon or ihn Material zur ..uafuobrunc
oeinor Experiment® zur Verfuegun,: atollto. Dioaus Hitorlal
wurdo von Rose zur Vorruegung guatellt in Kenntnis dor Tr.t-
oaohe, auo donon Jodor verauonftige LYonsoh gofolgort haben
wuorde, daaa Schilling vorbreohwriacho Voraucho t.usfuehrt*.

Rose k ana to Schilling aoit violen Jafcrcn und war sdn Nach-
folger als Chef der ^btoilung fuer Tropcnr.odizin in Rob rt-
ooh-lnatitut. AUaaordon war Rose naoh aoincc oigone-n Gunt.iend-


- 6 -


Berator Dr. Contis, der Vorkchrungen trnf, dnait Schilling
scino ExporiaGnto in Dachau ausfuehren konnto. Ba 1st hoochst
unwihrochoinlich, dass cino solcho Vorkchrung ohno Bcfragcn
Rosoo gotrcffon wordcn wacre*

Rose at^l 1 to Schilling Hnlcric-liilz fuer soino Vcr3uoho
in Italian waohrend dcs Jahrc-s 1941 zur Verfuegung, cino Tnt-
sachc, die Rose r.uf dec Zougenstnnd bostritt, bis or durch se
non voa 3. Kobruor 1941 latierton Brier an Schilling widor-
legt wurdc. (NO-1756, .mkl.Bew. 486, R.6411). Roso stcllto

Schilling weiterhin Infektion3:.atorIal zur Verfuegung, naoh-

*

dou or soino Vorauchooteticn in Daohau cingcrichtot hattc.
Rose und scino Zou«;on < ebon zu, dnso Ancphcloocicr la Jahro
1942 an Schilling gosohickt wurlcn; Rose abor erlicss naoh
Jonuu Vorfall .vnwolsun,,:n, lass kein !.tatorlnl achr an
Schilling goochickt wordcn aolJt, well or nit Seinen For-
3chungszlolcn nicht ucbcroinstincto. (R.6415). ad 4. April
1942^achrlcb Schilling an Hoso und bat un fiio "Rosc-Kultur"
zur Fort3ctzun.; seiner Experlr.onto. Diosor Brief traogt dio
Datiuiszoilc "Dachau 3 t, Hacftlingskronkonhaus" und wurdo
von Rooo an 17. ..pril 1942 abgozc ichnv. t. Schilling

Scitc 6 dos Originals

erklnortc, doss cr fuer "dieso n>uc Untcr3tuctzung coiner

.o’bolt.o».hr :ankbar"Soln wuoric. (Unturstroichung

hlnzugefuogt). Dass Roso licso Bltto Schillings crfuollto,

1st orwiesun, da der Zeuge Viowog ja oelb3t nit dor Roso-
Kultur infiziort wurdo.

Ac 5. Juli 1943 dankto Schilling in cincn Brief obon-
falls cit dor Notiz "Dachau K 3, Malariaataticn" Roso fuor
eino Sondung Atroparvusoior und nahn Roses Anerbieten, ihc
scino uoborflucssigen Eier zu lieforn, an. jiosor 3riof cr-
wnehnt den "Haeftling .'.urust", dor offonslchtlich der Zougc


BepQtor Dr. Contis, der Vorkchrun gen traf, danit Schilling
soino rlxporiaonto in Dachau ausfuehren konnto. Es 1st hooohst
unw-ihrochoinllch, dass cine solcho Vorkehrung ohno Bcfragcn
Roses gotreffon worden waere.

Rose stelite Schilling Maleria-Milz fuor aoinc Vorsuch*.
in Itallcn wachrend dcs Jahrcs 1941 zur Verfuegung, olno Tat-
saohe, die Rose r.uf den Zeugenstnnd bestritt, bis or durch sc.
non vou 3« Februar 1941 datierton Brief an Schilling; widor-
lcgt wurdc. (NO-1756, nnkl.Bow. 486 , R. 64 H). Roso stollto
Schilling woitorhin Infcktionsnatoricl zur Verfuegung, nach-
du. or seine Vorsuchsstaticn in Dachau cingcrichtot hattc.
Roso und seine Zeugon (-ebon zu, dass /uicphcloaoicr in Jahro
1942 an Schilling gosohlokt wurden; Rose abor erlio3s naoh
Jonon Vorfall Antraisuncan, ass kein Material nchr an
Schilling go so hick t worden sol*, well or alt selncn For-
schungsziolcn nlcht ueberoinstinnto. (R.6415). & 4. April
1942 3Chrleb Schilling an Rose und bat un die "Rosc-Kultur"
zur Fortsetzun : oelnur '^xpcrlr.cnto. Dlosor Brief traogt die
Dntunszollo "Dachau 3 k, Hacftlln -okrankenhaus" und wurdo
von R 030 on 17. ..pril 1942 abgozt lohnut. Schilling

Scitc 6 dcs Originals

erklaortc, dass er fucr "dieso neuo Unterstuetzung ncin^r

.a*bolt.sehr :ankbar"Suin wuoric. (Unterstroichung

hlnzujefuogt). Dass Roso lioso 3itto Sohilllncs crfuollto,

1st orwioBon, da der Zeuge Viowug Ja solbst ait dor Roso-
Kultur lnflziort wurdo.

An 5. Juli 1943 dankto Schilling in cincn Brief obon-
falls ait dor Hotiz "Dachau X 3, Malariaatation" Rose fucr
eino Sendung AtroparvuseKr und nahn Roses Anerbieten, ihn
3cino uebcrflucs3igen Eicr zu liofern, an. closer 3riof cr-
waehnt den "Haoftling August", dor offensiohtlich der Zougc


August Viewed war. Dic3cr Briof wurdo von Rose on 27. Juli
abgozoichnot (NO-1753, «nkl.Bew. 488, R*6418). Untcr don-
solbon Dr.turi antworteto Rose auf schillings Brief und toiltc
ihn nit, dass ihn bci dor naechston guenstigon Gologenhoit
cino Sendung Anephelcseicr zugcschiokt wuorde.

Es ist unnoeglioh zu glaubcn, dass Rose nicht wuasto,
was Schilling nit dcr. ihn von Rose zur Vorfuegung gostolltcn
Material anting. £a kann nicht bostritten warden, dass :.oso
wusstc, dass Schilling Mnlariavcrsucho an Monschcn vornahn.
Lb kann nicht bestritton warden, dass Rose wuosto, dass
Schilling la konzcntrationslnger Dac.'.au arboitotc. Roso war
keJn slnpler Zucohtor von «nopholisoiorn, dcr Judon,dor lean,
seine El«r verkouTtc. dr war oleh sohon lange dor Tatsaoho
bowusst gowerdon, dass an Kcnzentraticnslascrhaeftlingun,
ohno loron Einwilligung, Vtrouoho vorgonoonon wurdon. Er
orfuhr lies an fangs 1942, .Is cr das Konzontrationalngor
Buohonwald bcsuchtc uni die Klcckfioborvorouoho Dr. Jings
sah. In Js .i 1942 orsuohtc cr solbst Mrugowsky, in Buchon-
wnld nit oinon lapfat. ff, en tr von Prefcosor Rugc in 3ukn-
rost orhaltcn hatto, Versuoho durch Ding anatollcn zu
laosen (Sicho unton).

In Oktuber 1942 wolinto Rose dcr "Kaoltctagung" dor Luft
waffc in Nuernberg bei und hoorte die Vortr.acgo Hclzloohnori.
und Rasohero UCbor die Knoltovcfsuoho in Dachau. Dioso Vor-
traogo lios3on klar erkennen, dass 'la Versuoho an

Scito 7 dcs Dri inal3

Konzv-ntrationslaGorinsasaen vorgononaen wurdon,und dess
e Inigo lavon infolgodosscn go s tor bon waren. Er gab zu, dast'
or mi eh seiner. Vortrag in Nuornbarg nit Holzlochncr go-
sproohon babe und dioscr lhc ven seinen "soclischcn Hennun-
gen" wegon der rcilnahx.o an den DachaucT Lxporlnenten crzaul


- 8 -


hubc. HolzloehjKr sagtc: "N locals in soinan Lobon coochtc or
nooli clnaal .,ln^n solchon Bv.fthl bokOEnon". (tf.6470),

B» 1 di-aor Konntnis lnt ls unnotglich, die Schluasfol-
ffcrunf' 7 . u zlchon, dnsa Rose nloht wusste, w :s Schilling tat.
-In fauna, dor solbst :n V^rsuclKn an Konzuntrationslugor-
liuoftllngon, ohn«. dcron klnwilllgung, tcilnuhr , k.inn nloht
ongon, lasa or nicht wuast»., dass cin andoror Mann, dan 0?'
Infuktionnnntcrl.’.l fuor iialariavcrsucho zur Vcrfucgunft
atcllt. , i it i ioho tat. Di» /•nklagvb^ho-rdc br uoht nicht
ZU b> -iacn, Jaaa *toa<- cine Z.vlilunr lor von Schilling go-
bruucht«.n Vorsuohaporsoncn vornahn. Dooh knim oln Lunn luch
nicht nngoslchta d«,r ihn zu;’.oncllah* n Tata' chm ilo nugon
achlieaatn und d an vcrauoh.n, dor Vurcntwortuns duduroh zu
Ontr.ohen, d *nu r slch luf Unwlaacnholt boruft.

B, KlookrKbcrv-.rauoho ir: r.onz^ntr tlonslogor Natzw* lUr,

Dna Lowolncv.t-.rlal d._ r .Jiklagcbchocrdc In Dokuuonton
und Zcugonnuaaur'-n .nthaclt dl%- vollkoncnn« 0 -achichtc lor
waohrond Ion V rlnurs dor Fluokflobcrv^rsuchc in honzontra-
tlonslugcr Nntzw J1 r bognnpon n V rbr.ohv-n* Dio Vorsuchu
uolbot wurdui von Stobsarzt ProToaOcr Sugon Haagon, Bcrnvur.-
dun llygitnikor dor Luitriotto noioh und iiiroktcr dea Hyglcn< •
Inotituts dor Uulvcrultuot Struusbur,.*, uuogcfuuhrt. Dor Zv»>.c
diusoi* V«-r3uch«- war in wesontlicho'n lcrsolbt wio dor in
Buohcnwuld, r.atnlich die kntdookun; und Hirst-llung olnoa
wirkf ' . n /l-.ckflol'or-t-.tlrotr >1 . ' hOgfitt uuT

Itusal-ind wurdo Klockflcbvr ino ornathnftu Gcfnhr fuor 3io
WchroQcht. Vor ion Kriog war Flcckxlobor in Joutsohlanl clnt
Krankhoit, die koine Bedoutung hatto. Haetto cs kolncr. ven
Dritton rioich c-fuobrton Angrirrskrio.- gugebun, sc ha«.tto
sich k-i:ie GolcgoRhcit fuor

Sc it.- 8 do 8 Originals

dies- fl-borhafton Benuohungon ur. lio :jitwicklung UuS rlo£
f labor-leu f: toffez, und in Verbindung in. it,, lie Aus-uohrun.


von vorbreoherischen Exporiconten an unXroiwilligcn nenscb—
liohen Versuchsobjokten orgeben, (Rose R4639A)*

Sohon la Juni 1943 stand Rose in Sohriftwechsol uit
Hnagen doruobor, die Her 3 tollung von Inpfstoff an Hygie-
nioohon Institut dor Stra33burger Univcraitaet aufzunohnon.
(NO-305, AnklBew295* R.1385U In selnen Brief von 9. Junl
1943 nn Haagon achroibt Rose, dass or don Sanitaotsinspok-
tour dor Luftwaffe geboton habo, boln Chef des 3anitr.etswc-
sons dor Wehraacht, don Angoklagton Hcndloser, dorauf zu
drlogon, den B6fohl zur IIor 3 tollung dc 3 Fleckficbor-Inpf-
stoffco fuor ilo gosanto Mohrcaoht In dor ceatlichon wono
zu-gobon, (NO-306, Ankl.Bovr. 2964 R.1387K Handloaor uebor-
wnohto die Vortoilung dor Flookfiobor-Inpfatoffo. Uoso
R'.3690).

An 4 . Cktobor 1943 sohricb ;:aagon an ..oao ueber aoino
Plnono hinslohtlioh dor Inpf 3 toff her a to Hung. In don gloiohc
Brief boaprloht or einon Borioht, don Rose uober dio Ipoon-
Inpfstoffo quo Loponhogon gooohiokt hatto,und aogt darin, do
cr oioh oolbat ouch nit oinen aohnlichen curlnon Inpfatoff
boochaoftigt haetto. Er fr.chrt fort:

"Dio .oraten Erfolgo dor Inpfung an Mcnschon habo ich
Ihnon boroita zahloncaossir, oitgeteilt. Dor Sorun-
titcr liogt Ja ganz orhoblich hoohor, auoh nach oin-
naligcr Inpfung in Vergloioh zu 3 -aallgon Inpfungon
oit don abgotoetoton Inpfatoffen, Leidor 1st oa air
nicht aooelich gowoson, bishcr nooh Infcktlonsvar-
oucho an den Coin*fton vorzunohuen; loh hatto nich
an das Ahnenorbc lor SS eewandt, un von dort gooig-
nete Inpflingc zu bekoanon, bin aber nooh ohno Naoh-
rioht goblloben. Wir nohaon Jotzt noch clno woltoro
Inpfung an Monsohon vor; ich werde Ihnon dann uobor
don Aysfall beriohton, Ich glaubo, dasa wlr dann
3 owolt 3 ind, zunacch 3 t auoh ohno Infcktionsvorsucho
unaoron nouon Inpfatoff zur Einfuchrung vorschlagen
zu koennen."

Nachdon er Rose goboton hatto zu vcr3uchcn, nehr Louto fuer
ihn zu bosorgon, faehrt Haagon fort:


- 10


'Venn wir iionschen zur Probeirpfung duroh die SS
bukorcen, waere dies eine Gelegenholt. auoh den Lebor-
inpfstoff auf seine antiinfektiooso Wirkung zu
pruefon. Ioh wuerde dann vorschlngen. dass parallel
nit den Ipsonproben auoh unser Material vorwandt
wird.

Suite 9 dos Originals

"f/ir koennen uns ueber alle iicse Dingo ja noch in

rfion untorhalton." (NO-2874, Ankl.Bew. ,R. ).

nuT dieso Wolse orhiclt Hose, noch buvor die Infoktions-
vorauohc vorgononuen wurdon, genau Uittcilung von dor., was
Haagon plan to. Wei tore r.inzolhclton wurden ihn golegcntlich
dco vorabredctvn Zusoncentreffona nit Haugen in Wion zugo-
angt. Eino Zusannonkuaft dcr Deutsohon Coaollschaft fuor
Inncro hiodizln wurdo in Oktober 1943 in Wien abgchalten.
(Handloner H, 3043). Dicaos dokunent lacast Hoaoo Luogc,
dass "Infoktion" in Wlrkliohkuit oino Inpfung nit abgo-
sohwacchten avlrulcntou Inpfstoff bodeuteto, vollkocnon
zuoan.v nbroohen. Hmv.cn hattc beroits Inpf>ingcn vorgenonuon,
und ir boaboichtigte, den Lnfstoff ohm, Inroktlonnvursuoho
zu ofiprchlon, well dio SS ihn nooh keino Hnurtlingo fuor
dieso Vorauoho zur Vcrfucgung g'.ntcllt hatto. Dio Auaoago
den Zougun Gi.org Hirtz bewoist, dauo Haagcn soinen Inpf-
stoff in Gchiranook, olmn ..usscnlngor von Natzwoilor, in
Somur 1943 ausprcblort hattc. .nnaehcrnd 20 polnisohe haoft—
lingo wurdon fuor dicat V-.rsuchu verwendut, und dcr Inpf-
otofr w:vr unooliulnund so virulent, d ijs zrfei dcr Versucho-
porsonon atarben (u,1293). *oischoinund hatto haagon dun
Inpfatoff zur Zolt seines Ericfus in Hose von Cktobcr 1943
noch woitcr Vurbccscrt.

Daaa Hose gewusst hat, da33 Haagcn Infuktionsvorsucho

nit virulontcn Flocktypbuo-^rrcgorn vorhatto, l3t cb-nfalls
dndurch

dadurch bowioson/, dass or in dec Brier von 4. Oktober 1943


auf dio vorgcsohlagcncn Yoraucho ..it don Lcborlr.pfstoff


(Ipaen) fyinsichtlich 3olner antiinfektiooson Wirkung Bezus
nlnnt. Dicocr Ipsen-Inpfstoff war cin totor Inpfstoff, und
dooh oolite nuch cr durch liachinfektlon ausprobiort wcrdon.

j-

Dic-3 war auf Roses olgcnen Vorsohlag zurucckzufuchron, den
or In clncn Bericht uobor don Ipsen-Iupfstoff ia Scpteubor
1943 nn Kaagcn genacht hatte. (Rose Dokuncr.t 22, Rose Bew.

21, R.6216). Von Ertrnogllchkeitavorsuohon nit don Ipson-
Inpfstoff kann keino ..odu soin, da er, nach I.osoo cigonon
Berloht, borclts auf scino Renktion hln ausprobiort war.

Sclto 10 dos Oricinals

Haa3cn riohteto soino Bltto un liaoftlingc fucr Vorsuchs-

zwocko In olnon Briof von 16. /\uguat 1943 on don iinc.cklastoi

clovers ala don Gooohacftafuuhrer dos ,Jincncrboa. Siovcra

otin.tc dioscr ..ittc an 30. Dcptcubcr 1943 zu, (N0-120, Ankl.

Bow, 297, ii.1387) abor augonaoheinllch war diouo Llttollung

nooh nloht eingogancan/Hs Haagon m 4. Oktobcr an Rose

achrlob, Eiribundert Haoftlingo warden .-nfung Hovombor 1943

In das Natzwollor Konzcntratlonslcgor uoborfuohrt. Von dlcacn

oturben 18 wcuhrond dos Tranaportcs, und dcr Roat war in

olnon dorortig bedauornawerten Gcaundholt3zuotand, dno3

•

Haag<n ole ala fucr acino Veroucho wcrtlo3 bofand. Lr bat
un woitcrc wirkllch gosundo Haoftlln.jo durch Vornittlung
von Dr. Hlrt von dcr Strassburger Unlvorsltact, dor Litglltd
dos Ahr.onorbus war. (NO-121, ^nkl.Bcw. 293, R.1369). -toso gal
In dirokten Vorhoor zu, dass dlose Vorsuchaobjektc kaun
Frclwilllgt geweson 3oin konr.tun, ia 03 slch augcnaohcinllo
un olno vorhergesangeno .vuawahl und clr.u Uobcri'uohrung von
lrr.endeincn andoren Lager nach Natzwollor handclto, wo ilo
Vorouchc durohgcfuohrt werdon sclltcn. (K.6289).

Nionand konntc einon Bericht ueber dicson verbryohcrl-
schen Transport von 100 -ersonen fuor nedlzlnischo Vcrsucho,
dio in oinen dcrartig gosctwaochton Zustand waron, dess 18


• 12 -


starben and nur 12 durch zwoi- bis Ire inon a Client* b. set . .re


Pfl66C vielleicht lhrc Gesundheit xiclcr erlnn.jen Konnten,
losen, ohne sich uobur div Schreoknlsso oil os icutsohon
Kon2oncrntion3ln<;cr3 klar zu wrden. Uni li.se •- il¬

licit 1st von ..ai-ten an Rose an 29. l.'ovontcr 194.3 b.rlc iit t
yorJ.n . Cv'0-1059, «nkl.tew, 4,90, ii.64,27) obwolil ..ose ".ua-
drucoklloh die ^cnntnls invon -.bleu, tne be, Ms ih.i dan Dol.u-
.;ont L. Ivrcuzvovhoor vor let \»urdc (.t,64,25). Ncoh wenl o
n’oohcn vorher hnttc uouo .It Holzloou. r , cj roois^n (siohe
ohon). Inzv.-lsoh n i.itt .,00c schon solbat d'.ru.. >botcn, Ion
bukarost-L.jrstoff in Luolienw la auszufroblcrui,and Infec¬
tion; vorouche zu dioa»u i» .oko luro.'. vrueijt. Mur tun l :o
T . c oj inter /-in - .r dirrm, V« roucln In Buohcnvriia nit lon-
sclben Ii«aun-rnrfotorf uus ..ononh-* -..r, wl.• In Hn r tins Brief
von 4,. Cktobor 19/.3 erwaolint, zu ford m (1 It .

Scito 11 doo Orlglmilo

it 1 inon Driof von 29. Movcr.bor 194,3 sandte He • ton oln n
Boricht on Mono u. ber aolncn :ctr» ckn ten 12 •'* ,’lcberl. '.pr¬
ater? uni oohrlob, daso «.r t». I » r :>S *-li i 100 Hnoft-
linro ui;o fordo rt hcetto, It xi erste Grupje tin I l’rlc 11 • nd
xwoaon wicro,

.u. 13. D. zc.:bir 19/i3 00. rl- b .V \ n • 1 a .ji wort

. , r n * oh - Ola BoWolauatcrl

ve'i’l ic :t, He go u . rir:

a

"Ceh It It. .1 x’uer unzweok. .cud , ns n^t . n
vou Ilmen Ler« Its - stiJlt 1; .-uicr* ; In < rnout r

. ..

bitt Sic, bei ler rcoohiffun , .r i .ifliu.-e Tier
I hr on Versuoh von vorahercin nine c ntnjrooh^n'c
Acznhl veil Tifriln on fu r don ..cj nhr -oner I 1f-
stoi'f Itelnzunota-n. u-is :r.t ohr. t in len v rt.ll,
dcr sich nuoh In den Versuoheiii ven luchonwald ,;o-
zei t bat, dnsa die iruei’i^n v r.ohiedvii r I i f-
stoi'fo nsbon*.loan.er rocsscro . i-.l.uit u. l r lie
bcaaoro oi. r ocl.ltcntore- Wirkun ies I.;j rntctfe a
Fruofunk clnca Xr.'fet
(NO-122, «nkl.^ w,19c*, ...13^--).


- 13 -


Dies 1st niclit Icr Brief eincs . Jsne-3, der koir.c .ufslchto-
t fujnis uefccr Heatons Verauchc fc-ttc. rnta'ie* lich hat cr
H i- -ten 5csr<:t vena cr tun sell to: "_ri robin Sic Jen Kojon-
hnjencr (Ipson)-Icpf3toff in Aoihenvoruuohan m Il’eftl in-
on" . Uni das konnton nur Infektlc»navoi*auche 8bin, in sonfit
keinorlci Grund vorlag, ion Ipsen-Inpf a to Ct auazuprobioren.
..ic* boreits obon erwaehnt, var Jio ..rtr c- llchkclt bcrulta
un iionsohon nusprobiort v»t>rdi' .

D:iss die wc iter on 100 Hneftlin, o v. a ./ami zu Yerauuha-
zwcokcn fu^r virulent*n KLooktyrhuo vorweindt worlan sind, 1st
jans kl.r. 1 < , i i 1944 aohrlcb Zrvx^au oinon -riof on ::irt

uni Puerto eino Abhnndluu.: uebor soinc V rnuohe :.it *otreck-
noton FlookfioborLipfaeoff bol (NO-123* .aikl,-« w.303*
ii, 1396). Zr orwaohnto, dnaa dieaor Berlcht on don Cliof Jos
Gnnlt .oaona dor luftwnffo cegnacun - r.« “

bu.aerkt Ilnajcn:

"rfu 1st :clun*;cn, .At Uuoor. liipfntoff nloht nur
clno intltoxiooho, aondern, w.o von booenders
prnktiaoher Bodoutun * . tin duurfi* , ■'uoh clno
niu.’coj rochon nntiinroktioofl< La unit tut zu
«rziolcc."


>


- 14 -


fSeite 12 dec Orlgirclc)

Actitc: ische Isnunlteet let dra Cherrkterlstlkin elnes Xaofc' ffes, das
dlu Krenkheltsrusvlrkung vorelniert. vaekrend die entl-lnfektloeoo I=cunl-
tcet dio Sirenscheft elnes Ianfatoffea 1st, die die Krvnkkolt gronzllch
rerhlndort. Dicao tyolaehcn Slgentuenllckkeiten hear.ten ealbotverr.tpond-
Uch nur durck kuenstllcke Flecktrphuaerrefung bei Vereuckaobjekten ver-
nlttclnt elnes vlrulenten Srregera featgeatellt verdon. Sragon wer nicht
Behr dnrsn intcrcoelert reir die Zrtree .ichkcltagrentc dor Vercuckaoh-
Jckto gogon den Inofetoff raxezucroMorec. Tenrls eck:n stollte er Vorou-
cho ait entl-lnfelctloeaer Isnunitjat ra, «ie dor Brief gana dcutlich
solgt. Be 1st ganz hi nr, dasa dleae Vcreucko nr. don 100 Consent retlone-
lngerhaoftllngon, dlo Hoegcn rnfargi 1944 bekoaaen hrtte, durchgofuchrt
vurdon. Diet lot veitcrhln bc^loter. durck die Tetsacko. d*aa Hangon in
gloichen Brief voa 9. Xal 1544 Hlrt Mttot, lta veltcre ?C0 lonzentrrtlone-
lngorkneftlingo zu voraittoln.

•och «°hr Woht nuf dee v ea ait dlosoa SCO VorcuckaobJ k’.on goochokon
1st, virft dor Brief voa 7. Jail 1944 an Hrrgon. dor alch ait d a « Berlckt
von 9. Hni 1944 befroot. (SW*. Ankl.>ev.307. S.1402). Weaer 3rlcf
vnr von Luronturgor unterzelchr.ct, Hose hat aber xugegeben, dean or
onagons ^rrlrht voa 8 . Kri 1944 geleaen het. und er hot puck nuegoepgt,
dr ao eclr.o SMsntrri zu dloaea Berlckt uaf eagre Ichor ela die in dca vor-
llogendon Brief varan. (?..$791). Soso -loato, does dleeer 3rief obge-
■chlckt verdon toll to. Tlcacr Brief bc-retrcdot Herroca Berlcht rua den
Orur.de, "dnoa dlo Tcretcliung dor Infcktlonacraabnltai In don dildorn 1
und 2 von dor uobllchon Teratollung dor Iizofatoffwgebnl—a fuor Flock-
flebor nhvoicht und die Auacrtun.- fucr don Lcaer crackvert". Hier hrbon
vtr olno klp.ro Ontorackoldung rvicehon Infcktion und Iapfung, und die no
vidorlegt *'iodorua Hoece ‘oaicbungen, don Inkrlt dcr Tokuaenta so cu vor-
drshon, eln ob or I=-;fung nit n virulent at lapfstoff bedeutot. Dlcaca
-oVuacnt bc*'.:iat, dnsa -.’nchlnfektionen *c don 100 Tersudunrraonon durck-
rofuchrt vorden aind.


- 15 -


(Seito 13 dec CrlRinrls)

Aunoerdoa ervachnt t-a Zoatrollpersonen. Venn nur einfrchc “ertreegli cV
kcitaveraucho ait dec Inpfstoff nnfrestellt vorden veorea, warden sich
Kontrollpersonen offenaichtlich eruebrifccn. 3ei aolchca Yorsuehen 1st
nnn lodlgllch an dor Seaktlon auf don besondcren Xspfxtoff interesBicrt.
Harmon hatto YortraogllckkeltsvorBUeho ait dieses Ispfstoff nindestons
uchor. us die Mltte dos Jphrca 1S43 ac^extellt, und vir baton hior sit don
Vcrsuehen, die xu Aafar.#; 1944 aua«ofuehrt vurdcr., =u tun.

Dor 3rief voa 29. August 1944 von tfhnt, dos.Chef dos Stabee dos
Ac^elclaston Schroeder, an sunken bevolst ebeaf“llo, dpss die 100 Vcrsuchs-
poroonon eincr Infektlon sit eincs virulcntcn 71;ckt'phu8orre<or unter-
worfon vurdon. (SO-131, Ankl.3ov.309, 3.1404). Tieser 3riof ninat 3ozu£
ruf oinon Borloht Beacons von 21. Juni 1944, dor viederoa r * deutJich
ruf dio Vorsucho 3cxu<r nlsnt.dlo ait dor Orujno von 100 Heeftllngon rnga-
otollt vordon vnron, do HaAfpna n ltto voo 9. Krl 1944 us 200 Zonecntro-
tionslofforhpcftlln^o as 27. Juni 1944 coch nicht erfucllt '*ordor. ''nr.
(20-137, Ankl. ‘ov.306, F..1401). Xchr.t oapfahl Hrncon dio Yersuoho alt
don cotrockncton Flocktyphue-Inpfstoff voltor fortxueotxcn, wru lhn
RK 4.000,- rur Ttrfuogun* costollt vurd..:. Sr fracto dr an r.och bti Hrnfxa
on, ob nr.xunohaon sol, dj*«o dio drarls ia Aurust 1944 in Votxvoilor herr-
oohondo riocktynhuscjldoalo alt dcr. Isnfstoff-Jbrockuncon xusoasonhluco.

Et »^uordo notuorllch koin Grur.d vorgologec hoben, oino colcho 7rn«-o =u
•tollon, vonn os nicht bekraut revosen vaorc, dnts Barren Inf oktionsvoiv
sucho nit vlrulontoc Flccfctyphuscrrcgorn nrohto.

Soso hnt vorsucht, dlcso Anfrrro deal*. xu erklrcron, drsc or befuoroh-
toto, drsn dio von Harmon vorvnndton avirulofetoa Tlecy.typbus-Isnfotoffo
noofTllchorvoiso hochrrpdl/r virulent ravordor. vr ron. '). Dlooo

Srkluorunc lot achr als lacchcrllch. dn nrch Rosas ol pen an Zu-estiendnls
3*>«ron boroits borlchtot hrtto, doss fcclnerlel Zrmkh.'ltcn boi solnon
Xqpfllngtn aufgotrct in solcr.. Soso vlodorfaolto laser vieder, dese koino
TodosfRollo durch dio Ispfur.^cr.


ISelte 14 dc8 Ori^irale)


-.it don rvirulcntcn Hurln-tepfatoff Oder nit den pvirul enter. Blkottsia-
Prowr aidd-Ionfatoff einfietreten VEoros. (2.5X2). 2a let offcnalcht-
lich (W« ucaoo*-llch. ir.te ein avirulontcr Icpfstoff, dor koino Irankhoit
bol don Inpflingan korvorg’rufen hetto, lrrordwle dcr Urhcber oir.cr Tlcck-
typhuaopidenio haottc loin leoomen. Zb krrn rur angonoason word on, does
Knagcn alch nit Infektionaverauchcn durch virulente Flccietyphutarrc^cr
boBChreftlgtcj draa dl380 rntaacbo eowokl Soac ala auch dec SenlteotswoBon
dor Luftwaffe fconau bekannt war ucd dr as each dee Auabruch 'or Fleck-
typhuaopidenio in Satawoilor, wo dlo Vcraucho darchgcfuehrt wurion, So a a
enfrocto, ob dio Zpidoaic durch Harcena lafcictlcnavoraucho voruraacht
wordon waoro. Kahnt achlloeat tolr.on 3riof ro a X. Aur«iat alt einea Vor-
woU fuor Hoagon, dr bo or ea untorlaaacn habo, acinen 3oricht von 21. Junl
1944, in den or Sinaclholton dor Xetsvoilor Voreuche rcfuchrt, nlcht ala
Qoholn eu-bctolcKr.W.' .

SchUoaallch suaa noch Ir. Vcrbir.duc* ait dloaos 3o*'olBatuock darruf
hingcwicBon wordon, draa dla Luftvaffo Sa-roca Flcckf lcbciwor B chun/;enr-
boitor. untorctuotet hrt, bla Strraaburff la Scrtcebor 1944 in die Kaondo
dor Alii tort on fiol. Zb korzit hlcr nlcht drrruf ar., drea Harron nur.acr-
,lpm vicllelcht r.och von Rolchaforachuccarnt fiarnaloll untcratuotrt wor¬
don lot, wlo ca rua don rokuaonten ala nlchcr hervorau/vhm achoint.

Vonn ruch dor Roichaforachungernt alchor in Eugeni vcrbrcchcrlacho- Yoiu
auoho vorwidcolt iat, oo entaohuldl f :t diea doch in ke ner V-ina dio An^o-
klngtcn Cchroudor, Robo und 3ookor-Troj*aon<:, dla Harmon ?orechur.,:enuf-vben
atolltor., iha finrr.xiollo Untoratuotrucg aegedaihon lioaaon ur.d Serichto
von iha in Zc tpfrr.e nahnon.

Hangcno lottto Yorcucheaorio, dio ur.a hicr rngeht, wrr dio, dio an
don 200 KonaontrPtionalo»:arhraftHr.#:cn durch.-cfuchrt *urde, dio Kr/fcn kz
9. Mai 1944,vie oben anvrofuehrt, ergofordert hattc. In oicca woitoroa
r'riaf ar. Hlrt vna 27. Junl 1944, achriob Hrr.-cn nasdruedrlloh, dr an Infck-
tionavorBUcho durchcofuahrt warden vuerden. Sr cchriobs


- 17 -


{Soite 15 dea Gricinrle)


"3oi don nachfolgondea sur Pruefung cos orslcltoa IapfFChutrce
vorsunchaender. Inf ektieoen alt virulcntca Flcckflobererrcgor
1 st drgogen alt SrkrenkunRcn ru rochccn, lnabcaondaro boi dor
Prrrllelpruope vca nicht Geiaoften. Dleao Srchinfcktlonan
clnd orfordorllch, us die ectiinfoktloeao Vlrksnakolt der
TrecJcoalapfatoffo olndeutlg fcatsuatcllen. Puor die Schut*-
inpfung worden dioeaal 150 PorBonon, fucr die Eontr -Tlinfok-
tionen 50 Pcraonon ungeBatst.* (UO-127, ArJcl.3ev.3C •,3.140').

Solbat dor Aagoklegte Sooe fund oa achr sehver, diccoc 3riof vog-
sudlakutlcror.. In aolr.oa olgcncn Zugeatneadnla koaatc or alch nur In
Kutnroauagcn orgehen. (2.6255). Hlrt loltcto dlcao Anforderung Hnrgona,
die urepruonglich ra 9. Xftl 154-1 gcaacht vordon var, on dor. Angeklcgtcn
Slovcro voltor, dor oolnoraoita oinon 3rief ra Covrld ?ohl richtote, don
Chof doa 3S-’.'lrtochnfta- ucd Vcrvrltus-o-Kruptaatoo, doa rllo Kor.rcatra-
tionnlegcr untoratcllt ”aron. (80-00% Aakl.3ov.5C-4, 3.1395).

Isjorhin brruchm vlr uni nicht euf dlo lotarsoato rlloln tu ver-
laeoon. Die Auaaagc dor Zcugln Sdith Schaldt. olnor An*eatollton von
Hrngon, a toll % unvidorlcgbrr foat, dnaa dlcao 2C0 Xor.tcr.trrt lend rgor-
hnoftllngo vor. Haugen fuor Infoktlonavcroucha la Xoasontratlonslagor
’.•ntrvollor bonutzt vorden alnd. Sic er^te not, dree Kragcn alt olnca
Trookonlapfotoff nrbcltoto, dor nx a rldcof.ale Frovrarrckl und Huchnoi^
clkulturor. horgoatellt v pr ; drat Hrrgon virulcnto Hodefle' -rorrofior In
oolnea Streoaburgcr -rboretorlua lr. den Oehlrncn von Kocraohvoinchon
ruochtoto; taaa oln Till d:r Yoreuchahraf tllngo In Xptsvollor rcinpft
und dnnn alt dora V.rulcntor. -rreger laflrlcrt vurdo, urd dread'r padcre
Dell, die Xontrollocraoncn, chno vorhorlgo lapsing lsfltlert wdo; data
alo dlo Totlaon uobor dloeo Vorauehe, die vor. JVl. Crcdol, dcr Aarloten-
tln KprRosa, imfgotolohnot vpren, gcaok a krta; drat elo foetatollcn
konntc, dron p.n 150 - POO Sacftllngcn Voreuche angoatellt vurden, dnaa
ungofnohr 50 dor Ycraucheooraoncn, clnachlloacllch d.'r llcntrollporeoncn ,
ntnrbor., und dr on Peraonon Jcdcr -rtlonalitnot fucr dloac Vereucho vor-
vnndt vurdon,


(Seite 16 do* Cri^aali)

In oratcr Zrtnio Zigeuner. (H. 1370-1). Soviel aich 7rl. Sc..uldt orlnnert,

fondon dloso 7orauche la Fruchjphr odar Soaeer 1944 etett. Sr achclnt

pub don EoJcuacr.ten g«ns Jelnr hervorcugoken, draa ale in Juli 1944 atett-

gofundon hobon nuaaten. He ciuslge HcocrJcung dcs An-'ekln^tcn Hoac ru

or

dicier ZougcnouBeRgo v«r, daea/Frl. Schnidt rl« Xorphinlatin bcxclchncte.
Vilo laacr doa nuch aeln nog, co echeint tioallch offenaichtlich tu aoin,
dnaa, ua cine aolche Foetatcllung *u tr.'ffen, Hoao vcnlgatona voruebor-
ffohor.d nit dicaor Erao boksnnt vnr.

Sa 1st durchaua socglich, dree d-^r ms 29. Aueuet 1S44 drtlorto, von
Knhr.t on Hpogon gorlchtctc ur.d nuf dlo Scucko In Sftt«ellor betumohuende
Brief alt dlcacr lotetcn von Hrogon durchrtfuckrton 7erauckerclho In Zu-
Bftmonhanfi stand. (BO-131, Aakl.3ov.309, H.14C4). Auf Jodon Fell hut
die Irtiftwrffo dpa«la nock Hapgons Foracbungenrbolten untoretuotst. Secat-
llcho in Dokuacatonbuoh Sr. 12 dor ArJcliwobchoordc onthrltenon IVikuacnto
aelgor. lr. dor Tat, draa Hnagor. voa Jrhro 1942 bla «u= Krte, ndo 3cr«toz>-
dor Jtygionlkor dor Iuftf lotto Belch vrr und d*aa or vackrcnd dieter »n-
aon Zcit durch don SnnltaotsdlOBBt der Luftvp/fo fortliufend untoratuctrt
vurdo. In April 1944 vnren Knrgcna Plnonc but Srrlchtung olnor Stntlon
rn Kyglcnlachon Icatl tut dcr Unlvoraltoot Ctraaeburg fuor dlo Hcretollung
von rioclcfloberlnpfatoff fucr die Vohrnncht a ebon welt fortgoechritton.
(BO-310, AnJcl.Bow.318, H.1419).

Tie olnelgo Vorteldigung gegenuober doa von dcr ^rJcWobchoerdc
uebor dlo Kon gene chon Veraucho rorgoi gten 3cvolsnatorl*»l, vurdo rc.i doa
Angoklogton Hobo vorgobrreht. Auf lhrcn oinfrekaton Benner gebrnekt, vrr
alo, d/>ao Boao don Oorlchtabof blttct, iu glrubon, draa ■Infection* lr.
b’lrkllchkolt nlcht aohr bodcutote rla Inpfung nit olnca arlrulenton FlccJc-
flobcrlanfatoff. Eloau L'ntcretollung >'lrd durch dre obon png fochrto
dokuoontnrlach.? Bowelanptcrlrl und durch dlo Zcugcnauatr.'vn volltoaaon
vidcrlogt. Uobordloe hrt Hobo eelbat In eolnor Zeugenr.uaa' - olnor Mo¬
ron Untorochlod avlechor. InfcJctlon uni Inpfung geanckt. (B.>5173-3).


- 19 -


(Scltc 17 dee Criminals)

Me Dokusentc sclbst laoaen die sen Unt or scaled gpxx Hrt crkennani Pec
Gcrichtihof vird kotno epitxfindigo Frnre dcr Aaelcgang gestalt. Dio
Zcugcnrusoiu^n von Edith Schnidt und Score Elrtx eir.d ueberxeugend und
werdor. achr odor vendor durch d«a Zcugnl* dor Olgn Eyor (R.1755, u.ff.),
doo Ferdinand Soil (S. 1055-9), dee Henri-Jean Greodjeat (?..1103-5) und
durch die cldoontnttllchc Erklnenine von Dr. Victor Sugeno Schuh bolcgt.
(■0-865, Anhl.3cv.314. E.1413). rioace icvolsnatoriel tana nlcht durch
Aio Aunange clnca Angeklagtcn vidcrlcgt vordoo, Aoaecn Glaubvucrdigicoit
in Ycrlrufo doe Xrcuxvcrhocra vicdcrholt In Zvoifol goxogen vorden suoatc
(aicho ober. und unten) .


Dcr vcrbrochorlach.- Charrktor dcr in EonxcntrrtionalBgcr Buchcnvnld
durch Hr. Ding-Schulor, hnuptancchlich untcr dor Aufnlcht dca Angofclngtcn
Xrugovaky In doaeon Slgcnschoft ala Letter dca ftrgleniaohcn Inatitutoa
dor "nffon-SG, durehftcfuchrton Flockfloborversuche vurdc nuafuehrlich
in den Schr if tacts gogen Krugova*? bohrr.dclt und brrucht hi or nlcht vio-
dorholt *u vordon. Yir hoben una hlor ledi.-lich nit dcr Toilnnhao doa
Angcklrgtcn Koec an dioeon Vorauchcn *u boacfcocftlgcn.

Rone hnt nicnnla beatritten, dona or dlo Jlcckflobcratntlon in
luchonvnld p nfrr.ge 1942 bcauchtc. (H.6434). Er hat ancegoten, dnaa or
, nit Profoecor Olldcacloter von Kobert-Xocb-Inatitut sur Inapcktlon dorthin

ken. Er hnt dlo 145 Inenaaen *oachcn, dlo ait dca virulenton Jlcckficbcr-
f » orrogor inflslcrt vorden varan. (H.6436). Er hot eich dlo Floborkurvcn

dlcaor Kpcftlingc angoachen. Er hot fernor bcxcugt, doaa er aovohl vor
vlo np.ch dloacn 3oauch pub aortillschcn Oruonden go gen die V*raucho vnr.

Er bchnuptctoplldcnolator gcangt ru hoben, doaa doa Robert-Koch-Ir.stitut
gonr.u no gut cino Kinrlchtungaabtcilung oinrlchtcn koenne. (3.64C7).

Tna Ding'ache Tagebuch atdlt doa Prtua vor. Koaca Beau eh in ?uchcn-
vrld ola den 17. Ktcrx 1942 feat. (SO-365, Ankl.3cv.2F7)


- 20 -


(Scltc 12 dca Original■)

a, 1127). ric Zictraeocg voa IS. Au.rust 1542 bet riff* die Yorsuchsrclhc
-’r. II, In dor 20 Pcraoncn nock dca Yerf'-hren von TUrreo und Giroud
ur.d 20 Peraonen neck dca Ycrfphrcc von Coablcecu, Zottp und lkrcn Xltpx-
be It i- it., alt den toa Cpntreurlnc In -iufcorcat herecstolltec Inofatoff «e-
lnrft vurden. Ter Contocuzlnc-Iapfatoff vurdc, vie dp* To^c-buck fcat-
ntcllt, von Profooaor Sono zur VorfttCfSffi* rcatcllt, dor lkn aclncraoite
von Korlncprzt Professor Hu-tc eua Jukrrcat crhlclt. Ho vorhor *clnrfton
*10 Foraoner. i^irdor. ua 15. Cktobcr 1542 zuar.-rxT. alt 19 ur^vlnpftcr. n-
trollpcrBOnen alt virulcr.tcc FleckflebororTCf:ra icfizlcrt. Ala Srgobnla
dinner Voraucfcnrolhc ntorbon vior dor ctontrollporaonon.

Hone hot die Richtlekolt dor oblgcn Elntrp/ucf- In dca Hr* 1 achon
ToKebuch bcatrltton. Sr hat boatrlttcn, Jennie lapfetoff pc Hru^ovalQ*
odor rin#c zu Fruofungaxvcckon nock 3uckcnvold ri«chlclct ru koboc. Sr h. t
bontrlttcr., daoo Knvovaky lkn Jennie ua Isrfetcff ear Ycrvccdur.*- bcl
PlccJcf lcbcrcxporlnontcr. gebeten Oder draa cr Jcaol• alt llru.^ovakj 'la
dloacr Klnaloht vorhnndolt kobo. (R.*4£f). ricaca Zau.T.io dca Eoeo
vurdo lurch dfrn Anorbictor. In Schrclbon ..ru.-jvalo'a pc Roan vaa If. Kpi
1942 vollotaondlff vidorlort. (B&-1754, Ackl.3ov.461, R.6460). "leaoo
r.chrolbon hot don folrondcc bortluts

"Ter Roicharrzt 33 ur.d Follacl hot die rurokfuebrueg dor
Vorauche zur i’rucfun,: v© r. Flockf lobe r-Luc/vr.i-ipf atoff or.
/ronehalrt. I eh dorf 31o dnhor ua Uobcrr.lttlucr dor
Iorfatoffo bitten.

Auchdlo pcdcro von Ihnor. oufgovorfor.o Err^c. ob cich die
. Lnua rn nines achutz.vin* f tor. FlecJeficbjricraclcon Infield

ron Jrrnn, -lrd ruf ( :ccriffcn vordor.. Grucdsootalich
llcgt puck hlorfuor dlo Gor.chalur. vor. In *uocr.blicl:
obor orccbec aich r-cck olftl«>o Fch*'lcrl-:kcltor. Ir. dor
prrktlackcn lurckfuchnuy. do wir nr 3elt nock 'Inc
Lpcuoczuchtcn boaltsec.

I

Ihra Ar.ro<mnc »*cgoc olner Ycrvcr.duce toc Clrpckr. lat ec
die PorBOCrlpbtellun^ dca S&*Soclt«otapatoi vsltorc'-'-
lnltot wordoc. Zur eegebenor. Ecit vlrd lhr acckcucr
gntrpgen verden.*

Panlt lat dlo Elr.trmin,- Ir. dca le/rebuch Tin.-o roll bcatroti.-t.

Kpck Yorlngc dloaca Tokuaentea grb Rose In dor 2pt su.


- 21 -


(Scitc 19 dcs Crlgisals)

Ire 3 or dor. Bukarcatcr Iaafatoff an Krugovsky sar Frucfung - 3aChcsvrld
gusc'r.itict htbc. (R.6463). Aua dcs Text dcs 3rlcfca 1st klnr crsicht-
11 Chl do as Soae vorhcr er.tvclcr tclcrksniack Oder brieflick Mrugovstlty
fiehotoa hat to, dor. Bufcarestcr Iapfstoff, den cr ron Sacc crkaltcn kattc,
Ir. die vcrbroekoriacker. Ycrrucho lings in uehcnvrld nitclniuboeickcn.
?nrr.nch aichorto aich Kmgovsky dlo Zustl rran g ror. Grw«*iti, dca Roicho-
rrct S3 ur.d Polltei, und in diosca Brief as S&ao bittot cr dlooon ua
dun lapfotoff. Rose bat Krogovoto' voit-rhin.ir. uchcr.vald fostrustol-
lor., oh die Leua durch elncn gols^fton FlccfcfiohcricrwdeoB infisiert vor-
dor. knr.n, Baa vuerdo nntuorllck cir.cn Ycriuck oinackllcaacn, hoi tclchra
die Lous idcdorun fuor don Ycraucfc.oinc uagolnpftc Feraon :u infisioron,
vorvondot vuordo. Roao *nb fornor su, daec dor Sinvoia auf Gltsckn ir.
ruacnnonhj-r.g nit oiner iccaabung stand, dioacn Kann ia Hrslcnischcr.
Ir.otitut dor ’.'affon-33 ur.tor Urugovsky untcrrubringor.. Clsackr var oin
AasiPtent Roooo o>vcoon und atrnd ror aoinor Xir.bonifung nr uffon-33.
(R.64A3). Eir.o an Fuoa dioaoa 3ricfc« nit Sohroibaraeklno gceekriobcno
Kotix von 7rru Block, dor Sokrrotaorln von Rote uni Entlretunrrswu,*in
fuor lhn vor dloaon Oorlektohof, beoegt, laae Tr. arugovslcy darua hot.
nr eh Ruocickohr F^xoa tolcphcnlach atuterufor. eu «crdor., draa Hrurwaky
In Juni nicht in Berlin aoln vuordo und Iras acin Yertrotcr. ?r. Xdng.
Bocchcld viooo.

riocor Brief bcvciat, drao Eooo vor.igc Vector, nach. aelr.t-t ’cruet
in dor Floclcfioboroti tian in Buckcr.vald ur.d ir. roller Xcantnia dcr Art
dor dort durchgofuohrton Yoraucho vorra.ctxlich den Acstoaa ru den "or-
auchon nit den ukaroator lapfotoff in “-udiomrald cab, dlo dacu fuchiv-
ton, dans 4 dor Hacftllngo xtrrbor..

Peso opgtc aua und borlof Zrugen, ua su b^volaon, daae or aich
eolegcntllch doa Bcrichtoa Binga bci dor ZuaroDcnlcunf t dor Bora tendon
Aorrto dor Vckrancht in Kcl 1945 nit Erchdruck jt.-.r. die Fl- ckficbor-
vornuci.o in Buckenvald ruo-ra^rochcn hrbo. Bic


- 22 -


(ooitc 20 do a Ori.-irj'lB'

Anklegobcheordo h/*t ein.-crr.cuat. dras Bose fc-l«w Binvrocdo vorbrrcktc.
pci oo :*u3 wlssoeschaftllohfln odor aorrliackcr. Grueaicn. Vic Ivor drs
wick aolr. or*. die ArJclrgebekoorde krt den 3eircis crbrackt. drat. Hueoa
sorrlische 3cdonkon ihn nickt derrn kinderten.vcn ncuca rictlv an den
vo rbre cho rl a chon Verauchen In 3ucfcawild tolleur.ckr.cn. lie Eintrasun*
von G. Krorr 1044 In rir.*a Tcgcbach hrnlclt *» dor Ycrauck.rclhc Br.
HI!, dlo v n dco Ancokliwctor. Bote rxgcrcgt vordon v*r. Zv^ntlg Feroo-
not Kurdan nit dco Ir.acn-Iajfotoff nua Xopocho«oa gclo^ft ur.d In dor
Folgo duroh Slr.arritsungon nit flcckfioborvcrscuchtca 31ut. dca nan
"Zviaohontrnogorn" ontnata, laflelort. Seta. Hnoftllngo vurder. ale Kcr«-
troUporomon ver*cndot und ohno vorhorfiOhonde Inpfung infisiort. Fie
Eintrrgung vo» 13. Juai 1944 bevel.t. draa dice Veraueko dor. Tod vor.
bo cho Foreonon tur Tolcc hntton, vor. denun drei rolnpft vor 1 n vnren
und drcl Hontrollporaonon vrren. Fiesc Bintragan* ^urde dee J*e»kUe»en
Kooo bula KrcuivcrMer ontgogcngchrltor., und or beatrltt -loderan Jlo
Blchtlrkoit dor Eintrrgung. (8.6458, 6463). Soso bo.tritt, don Eojor^
hpjconor Xsofotoff on Kru.^vsky odor Fin eur Fruefung In 3uchor.vald [?-
cni.dt tu kabon. (S.6224). Vlodorua vurdo Bose durch Vorlngc oolnoo
Brlofoo en Krugovaky no 2. toacabor IOC-"' (8&-11B6, Ar>-l.-cv.

R.6463) volltaaBen dor flnvahrheit uborfaohrt. Tioaor 3rl:f hnt folgc^-
dor. Vortlrut:

•Ich verfuoro legcnbllckllch uebor cine Anerhl
von 1 roben olnoa neuon Flockflobcrinrfstof.tfa
ruo aur lr.es Virus, dor nua kaouaelobor burclt.t
1st und In Ilorvorauek aurntltrtlv clnclOCCfrch
uobcrlogcno Uirkung gc.onxobcr IapfstOff c.us
Kseusolungon ervios. Fucr lie Xntscholdnnj,
ob nnn dioacr. tackvcrtlgcn aurlnon Isyfato..
fecln Konochon tur r.chut.lnpfUl* ,-o.rcn LaeusO-
flockfiober rervendon soil, were cs vuen-
ochenavort «u viaaon, ob In dcr Versucharn-
ordnung von Ihnor. und Flng In Auchonvrld alch
olr.o ochnlicho SchutavlrkuEg scirt vie bol *r.

Iayf atoffen hub klraalackc:. Ylrua. Vacron S.

In dor Logo, elno derrrtlgc Vcrsuchsrcihc
lurchfuchrcn au laaaor.T

Ich konntc 8le s.St. lcldcr nlcht tdcfonlaCh
orroichon. Sol dor lrngsnaca


(Scito 21 dcs CrlMarls)

Fcatvorbindarg vrcro Ich fucr cir.cn tclcfonisehcn
3aBeheld drnhVr. Koine '.aners, die nlle ru
dcr gloichon Zor.trrlc fuehrer, air.i: Berlin 2? =3 13
Schr.cllrnt Berlin 05, Zosaor 550
Luftvpffer.vorzittlung n 2, dort *u verlrspcn
&Z., L.L. In.14. ■

Ir. dioaan Schroibon orsucht dor Angcklrgtn 2to«0 ruodruecklich
Krugovoky, Voraucho rur Prucfur.e dco surlnon.ipaon-Fleckficbor-Ir.pfatof-
fna durch Tin,* in Bucher.vnld durrhfuohrcn ru Iraaor.. Xlesor 3rlof vurdc
specter \*r. h'rugovaky on Xing voitorgclcitet uni trnept doafcn Untor-
■chrift an Fuaeor.do. Diotoa Xokuaent bcstpotlgt iio Eintrr \g in Singe
Tngebuch ucd op rich t in hohea Kr.aac fucr die poinllcho Ccr.pui.-hc.it dor
vor dioaoo Gorichtahof r.bgclcgtoa Auitr-’C dea Belpatungasoupor. "ogon.
l.'*ch "cacr. dlooca Brlofea gnb 3oao zu, dr as or lha untcrxoichaot hrta
ur.d llrug-vak;- trterachllch orancht hnbe, ien Xnpfat ff in Buchcnwrld
ru err-rober.. (E.646^.6).

In Ar.be trrcht dca kirron ur.d olndeullgcn -ldorapruchoa avloohcc
Kasoo Zougor.nuaar.-o ur.d ion Ir.hrlt dcr lha vrehrerd dor Xrcurvorhocrn
vergolcgtor. Zokuaonto krnn aoinc AueangO i*la Contoa r.icht nla .tlruV-uor-
dig rngoeehor. vordon. Et 1st uraooglieh onruEohnon, selbot vonn non ooi-
nor Elr.bl 1 dungBkrrft froica S.iri lncaat, draa cin .'.rrx, dor den Ablruf
dcr Vorauoho in -‘hichcnwrld sit rnoi*h, dcr Mgagoben hrt, draa or alch
gopon dioao Vorauchc ruogooproehjr. hrt, rich r.icht drrrr. orinnorr. krnn,
iron or die Purchfuckrucg e-vlcr Toraucharclhen ur.tor "eiirgungcn, die
ihm rla vorbrochoriach bckrnr.t v^ren, poraoonlich rorenUw.o. Jlcht
oin oir.zlgor Kildcruno-cgrur.d krnn ru Gur.otcn dloeoa Krnnoa it. pofuchrt
vordor.. Er in*, clr. Sneharnn ruf dca Oobioto dor Ir-. -.onacdltir., und aaino
Intelligent otoht volt uobor doa Ihrohachnitt. Er vuacto, vr.a vorging.

Er Int dro lobor.de 3cia->icl oir.ee Kannoa, dor nich ohne Ccfrhr fucr aolco
Porn^n odor Stcllung ooitona lrgcndvelckor Orgrno dor nntlonrloosipllstl-
iiohon Regierung. ’/or. cl nor loilnnhac u> dioecc Verb ro eh or. h^ettc fornhal-
ton koonnon. Er hat nuageec't, dran or -*ioh don Vorauchcn vidorsotzto#

Er vurdo r.icht von dor SS varhnftot ur.d vor Goricht gcstollt. Er vurdo
in koin Eonscntmtionolngcr elngcliofcrt. Zrotrdea naha or froiviilig
gerndo nr. dioaon Vcrbrochcn toil, iccon or sich, Wo er angibt, vidor-


?etrtc. Bci ocir.cn c 3 c r., 3 einca Anscfccn ur.i ocir.or Stellnc^ 1 st toinc
"chaiid nock ^rooBBor ale die 4cs erbr.omliekcn and uncrTthrcnen Dine, dor
die Voraucho Ir. den Koristatior.cn BuckomraldB tataacchliek dnrehfuchrtc.

III. SUCUS8.

P- ao vnr dor 3cratondo Sjrfiicslleor dee Chefe dca Spnitaotr-ooonn dor
Luft-affo.

F.-io unterstuotsto nktlv Schillings vorbrochorlscke Ealaria.vcraueho

Ir. r c chau. Er vuaato, dais Schilling Vorauchc an Z-'niortrationalaror-

hacftllr.gcn lr. Dachau durchfuckrto. 3lo Bc-oiBaufnakaa hr? orreben,

dnoB or 3chlllir.r olt Anopktloo-Slorx, Atrcparvua-Eiom, ■Stim-Koso"

und Malaria-Kilt voreor^to. Dloacs re 0 ate Infcktionsaatcrinl vurde

uncittolbnr an Schllllne ir. Erchau uokeraaedt. Soso Jcorroscondlcrto ait

Schilling wnohrcr.4 lor Tcreuchc. Schilling dmJcto iha fuor ilo Ur.tor-

stuotsun* BOir.ar Arb.lt. Hoso unterctuctste Schilling Vortucho *u

oinor Eoit, all or von don eyatcaatl reken Vorouchor. an Zoneentratieno-

•

f ln^orknoftlin^or., chne dorcr. Elavil 11 gun*, Xor.r.tr.l« katte. Er kotto

boroita

(3oito 22 doi Original*)

dlo FI okfiobo rotation in Buchor.vali boiuckt und Xru,-ov*Jcy bo ton,

Yorsuoko dort durchfuchrcr. su lassos. Er v P r borolts uobor dlo noer-
doriochcn Krcltcvoreucho in Saekoa untcrrichtat verier..

Bobo nshn on don von Herron or. unfrcivilli.ros Yoreuaksporsonon la
* Konaontretior.ilaror Hotivoilor durchfcfuokrton neckf ieben-croaohor.

toil. Haaron var Doratondor Kyrfcnlker oinor Laftflotto, und ioino
,* 3orickto vurdon Koco roreolcet. Kobo vjdo von Haakon borclt® in

Oktober 1943 lnv>r. untorrlchtot, dan or FIockfiabort afcktionivorsucko
durchcufuokron bcabnlchtlrto. Kobo vereor.-te Haaron ait do= Ijion-I npf-
itoff und vossto vor. Kaaions Absiekt, dioicn lapfstoff nlttcls Flcck-
fioborlnfoktlor.BvorBUchon iu orprobor.. ?ioa var dcr glcicho lapfotoff,
don Kouo ia J ahre 1944 ir. Buchonvnll orprobt krtto. Soeo vusstc, dass
Haa,wn ICO XonsAntratlonolaeorhaaftllseo fUcr Infckti'nsversucho tu,po-
vieBor. orhnlton katto, vor. donon 16 vaekrend dcs TracsrortoB stru-ben.


- 25 -


H-?oo -uaatc. drss in dor T'lco -oitorc aoccekliokc Yereuofcaokjcleto

suse-'lcaen orfciolt. Sr crauchtc Srrgcn. oinc frcsnogend rr >csc Ac=.«kl
Epoffellajp nMUfordern, us den IpBOn-(Kopcukrpcc)-I=pfatoff ru orpr&kcc.
S- 8C wuaatc, <Jpbb Krrvec 1= Jrtire 1944 Infeictl' csvoreucko durckfuchrte.

2 r rorrnlrwto elnen Sricf rc Hm, in dca Mgcfrrct vird, ok aoino
Flcc^iokorvorauchc fucr die Scuckc ia Sfrtsveller -ronmtv'.rtllch aaian.
Dio 3ovoiarufni*hac orgikt. date Hrrgcr.a Flo clef lckorveraucke dor. led von
unrefruhr fO Kenackon vcrurorckton.

F. oo erka ruch *c dot zlcckflckorvcrBUckea ir. luohon-rld toll. In

Moors 194? kccuckte or dia Yorouckaatpti a utd oak ainlgo dor Hroftlin-

ec, dio kuenatiick ait Fleckfiokar inflslcrt vcrdcr. wren. Is Ki*l 154?

orcuokto it oo l.rur*'»'oJty, Voraucko nit dca "ukiroctcr laofatoff aaauord-

not. Dlcau Yorsucko v'irdoc ait dea vrn Soao .-ellcf orton larfatoff durck-

gofuohrt. wukoi rla F-rroknia vicr Yerouckaparoor.on ,?otoetct v*r&on. In

Iosoakor 15-;3 orflUChto Boao ICrurovakr. ton Ipecn-(royenki'.'cn^-Inpfatoff

in 3u«honvrld uruefen su lonoo. Tloeo Ycreuckarcihc vurdo aM acker.

Ur era utd Jur.i 1044 darchgofuckrt, wckoi a echo Yoroackaoufor atrrkon.

'olnorloi nildorndo Tr.Btroado kconcoa *u eoinoa Gunaton pngcfuokrt

vordon. Rooo lot oln Hrnc von puosarordoctlickcr Intolligens. Sr kon-

dolto In vdllor Konctnta doa T&atendaa, draa r.-.cBontrrtlonalP.-crkf oft-

lln#ro ayrtoortlaek drtu gos^u^-eu vurdo:.. aick bcochrt fcfrohrlichaB

Vorcuchcn *u ur.tarslekcr.. Tic Anklogokohoorde untarat.'llt, drao dro

Erunttoot 'r,

3ovolKai»torlpl don IVokvoia drfuor orkrlngt. draa lioo/ToiU -.nor. A&-
otlfter, Vcrockuklol at under ^r. aolnc Zuatl-sur-* n»k utd in Ycrkindua*
otml r.lt Plroncn ur.i 7r.tcrrolrmc.Tun, dio dio Durchfuofcrung •ncJlsir.i-
ochor Syporinonto.okno Zuatlawng d.r lctrcffcnec. rt lokenden Jtur.achon
tua OcRonatPni hrtton. vekoi la Yorlrufo aolchur Sx~criaonto Kordu,
3n;trlitrcton, Orauanakolton, Foltorucgoa. OrouoltMon and or.doro un-
aor.ockllcho Hrtdlun*en kerrivor. •‘urdon, -and draa aolnc Cckuld rjaooaa
Aoklrr.r-mrJrt I, II utd III dor Acklr f rcackrift en-iocan lit.


■Stdo*


I eh, ?rod Lex. t X 046207, boataetlee hi emit, iru lefc durchnua
vertrent ait dcr co-Jiocher, und doatachcn Spircho Ms, usd dsco daa
Yorntehondo oine vwhrhoitafcaaeaae usd richtlge Uebcreotzus? dioaea
Sokuacntce daratellt.

Jfuornborf;, 15. Jusl 1947


Jrcd Lex

T X 046207


KILHASdOSaiCETSSOP No. I
PALL ITo. 1


ZUSAJMWPASSEKDD SCH3IFTSAK5
VS.12I.’I0T2K ST.-.7JH VO UGRIIIA


- GEOS'-
tAUL aOSTOOK


Janoa K. hcKanoy
Aloxandor G. Hardy
Arnoat Horl lk-Hoctawald
Hathor Jono Johnson

Puor*

Tolford Taylor

Hr l£ad lor Genoral, U.3.^.

Chlof of Counaol for war Crlraoa


Nuornborg,

13. JUni 1047


EINFU2HRUNG


Untor iunkt I dor .uiklagoschrlf t wiri dor -ngoklogto
Roatook In: woaantlichon boachuldigt, daaa or aich nit ando-
ron toraonon In Vorfolgo olr.oa gonoinaanon Vorhabona zu oinor
Vorachwoorung und Ueboreinkunft zuaanrsongofundcn hat, un
nodizlniacho ixporinonto on lobondon konachon ohno doron
Zuatir.munc vorzunohnon; untor runkt II und III (Ilriogavor-
brochon und Vorbroohon gogoi; dio Konachlichkoit), doaa or
Haupttaotor, Toilnohmor, Anatiftor, Vorachubloiatondor go-
woaon lat, aoino Zuatinnung gogobon und nit rlaonon und Un-
tomohnon In Vorblndung goatondon hat, dio dio Durohfuohrunc
nodlzlnlachor Exporinonto an lobondoh Honaohon ohno Zuatin-
r.iun3 dor Botroffondon zun Gogonatond hat ton. Dlo Vorbro-
ohonamorkraalo alnd In «ba. 2 doa «i*tlkola II doa Kontroll-
i'atagoaotzoa Nr. 10 nlodorgologt.

I. 8TRLIPN0 UND VERAMT.jQftTUXO

Dor :ngoklogto Roatock hatto Stollungon nit aohr cxoa-
aor llaohtbofusxia und Vorontwortlichkolt in Sanitaotadionat
doa Dritton Rclohoa inno. In Jahro 1933 wurdo or zun Obor-
arzt dor Chlrurgiaohon Univoraitaotaklinik in 3orlin or-
nonnt. In JoJiro 1936 wurdo or irofoaaor dor Chlrurgio an
dor Univoraitaot Dorlin und atollvortrctondor Dlroktor dor
Uhivoraitaotaklinik. In Jahro 19*11 wurdo or zun Dlroktor
dor Chirurg la chon Klinik ornonnt, und 1942 wurdo or Dokan
dor llodiziniaohon Fakultaot dor Univoraitaot Borlin.

(Roatock, R.3259).

Roatook trat dor USDA? vor don nrlogo boi. In Jahro
1939 wurdo or dor «rnoo ala Boratondor Chirurg zugotoilt
und wurdo 1942 Boratondor Chirurg dor Hoorcaaonitaotalnapok-
tion. I n dioaor Sigonachaft war or don dngcklagton Hoalloacr
untoratollt. In dor «raM ruockto or zun Rango olnoa GOnorol-
orzta dor Roaorvo auf. (KO-676, ^nkl.Bow.8, R.95; Roatock,
u.3259)•


ROSTOCK


-c 5. Soptorubor 1943 gab Hltlor don Zselton Erlaas
uobor daa Scnitaots- und Gosmdhoitswoson horaus, dor don
.‘•ngoklogton Karl Brandt don luftrag gab, "zontral dlo *»uf-
gabon und Intorosson doa go a ar. ton Sanltaota- und Go a und-
hoitawosons zuaaroonzufoaaon und woisungsgor.ao33 iu atou-
om". Dio a bo cog aich " auch auf daa Goblot nodlzlnl3chor
V.*l3aonachaft urel Forachung 11 . 3randt war boroohtigt, n bo-
aondoro Boauftragto in aolaon.iufgabengobiot zu omonnon
und zu bovollnaochtigon". (H0-O81, .inkl.Bow.6, R. 94).
(Untoratrolchungon eingofuogt). «uf Orund dioaos Srlaaaoa
wurdo Roatook in Winter 1943 untor Brandt ala Gonoralkon-
nia3ar fuor daa Sanltaota- und Goaundhoitawoaon sun Loitor
/ doa junta fuor tflaaonachaft und Foraohung ornannt. (HO- 676,

. aioho obon; Rostock, R.3259, 3278).

, Dor .tngoklagte Karl Brardt war Kitgliod doa I raoai-

dialrata dos ROichaforachungsratoa von 1942 bia Kriogaondo.
(K0-1730, .ink 1. Bow. 441, .1.2091). Von aolner -*monnung sun
loitor doa .'untoa fflr T/iaaonschaft uni ?or3chung an, war
Roatoolc Brandt3 Stollvortrotor boir. Roichsforachunsarat.
(Roatook, R.3342). Daruobor hinaus untoratond dor Roicha-
foraohungarat brondta aorztlichor Rufaioht In aoinor Eigon-
aohoft ala Oonoralkonr.iaaor. Brandt uobto dloso ^ufaicht
durch Rostock aua. (NO-1730, dnkl.Bow.441, R.2089; aioho
auoh dio Orgonlaationstafol von Brandts Buoro, NO-645,
Ankl.Bow.3, R.88). Dio Sinzolhoiton hlnaichtllch dor Orga¬
nisation, dos Zwockos und dor krinir.ollor. Botaotigung dos
Roichsforachungarnta, wio sio auf Soito 6 bis 8 dos Schrift-
satzos dor Anklagebohoordo gogon Karl Brandt boschriobon
sind, wordon durch Vorwoisung su clnoc Bostanitoil dos vor-
liogondon Schriftsatzos gonaoht.

.'.bgcsohon von soinor Stollung ala Boratcndor Eooros-
ohirurg und cl3 Stollvortrotor 3randts boin Roichsforachungs-
rat ruohrto Rostocks groosstor Sinflusa auf don Scnitaota-
dion3t _ o _


ROSTOCK

von aoinor Stolluns al3 Lcitor doa -.ntca fuor ./iasonachaft
ur.d Forachung und von aoinor: poraoonlichon Slnfluaa auf
Brandt und aoinon ongon 3cziohungor. zu ihn hor. Un dioaon
Jinfluaa richtig oinzuacbaotzcn, rrusa nan aich Brondta un-
gohouoro Kachtbofugnlaao uobor don Sanitaotadionat aowohl
auf nilitaorisohor. ala auch auf zivilon Gob lot Ir. Dritton
.toich vorgogonwacrtigon. (Sioho Schriftaatz dor Acklago-
bohoordo gogon Karl 3ranit). Kraft doa Fuohrororlaasoa
von 5. Soptonbor 1943 (NO-481, aicho obon) wurdo Roatock
Bra»dt3 "boaondoror 3oauftractor", don dio Auf goto uobor-
tragon wurdo, auf dor: Gobioto dor ..iaaonachaft ur.d For-
acliung "control dlo ..ufgabon und Intorcaaon doa goaanton
Sonitaota- ur.d Goaurdhoitarroaona zuaannonzufaaaon und woi-
aungagornoaa zu atouom n . Ur. dio ^ufgabo dor Zuaarnonfaa-
aung 2^ orfuollon, war oa fuor Roatock unbodingt nootig,
oino ina oir.zolno gohondo Konntnia von dor. Stand und do::
Zukunftaplaoncn dor acrztliohon Y/iaaonaohaft zu habon.

Dio Vcrtoidlgujig bohauptot, da.ta Roatock infolgo oir.oa
Fuohrororlaaaoa, dor allon ataatlichon Stollon die 3trong-
ato Schwoigopflioht auforlogto, dloso Konntnia nloht or./or-
bon konnto. (Roatock, Dokunont 3, Dow. 3, R.3262). Dioaor
Srla33 a ah abor nur vor, doaa "nionond von goholnon Ango-
logonhoiton Konntnia orhalton aoll, dio r.icht zu 30inon
oigonon Arboit3gobiot gohooror.". Offonaichtllch gohoorton
nodiziniacho Forachung, dio Art und Wolao ihror Vomahno
und dio Roaultato unrlttolbar zu Rooteda #*rboitagobiot.
Roatock war dor Kann , dor fuor Brandt auf don Gobioto dor
Fora eh mg tactlg war, und Brandt ru33to uobor jrundaaotz-
licho Vorgaango in Sanitaotadionat dor ..ohrnacht - dor
Hoor, Marino, Luftwaffe und V/affon-SS oir.aohloaa - und in
zivilon Go3undhoit3woaon in Konntnia goaotzt wordor..

(HO-OCO, Ankl.3ow.5, R.93). S3 3t achwiorig, aich otv.a3
Grundsaotzlichoro3 vorzuatollon ala oino iolitik nodizini-
achor Vor3ucho, dio Poltorunj und Ted


- 3 -


ROSTOCK


fuor unfroiv/illigo Vcrsuchapcraonon in alch schloaa. Stollon,
dio solcho Porachurls arto it on vomchr»n odor planton, vor-
atioaaon alao aichorlich nicht gogon don Gahoitfcaltungsbofohl,
v/onn aio Roatock Boricht oratattoton. Sa war lhnon nicht nur
orlaubt, aio hatton gcrodozu dio iflicht, dca zu tun. Roatock
trof Vorkohrungon, un von don vorachiodonon Stollon, dio Auf-
traogo fuor 1, Sondor ,1 -For3chun;;3r.uf gabon - d.h. Forachungon,
nit oinon bcatinnton praktlschon Ziol - vortollton, wio z.3.
dio Luftwaffo, dio Hboroainapoktion, dor Ac lcha foraohungarat,
Inforcr.tion zu orhalton. (Roatock, R.3358-60). Sohroodor
aagto in aoinor oidoaatattlichon ..uaaago aua, daaa Roatook
uobor dio von dor Luftwaffo vorgonorroono aorztlicho Foraohung
untorriohtot war. (HO-449, dnkl.Bow.130, R.474). Roatook
aogto aua, daaa or von dor Zuwoiaung von Porachuncaauftraogon7
nur toilwoiao KOnntnia zu orlongon iiatando war (Roatock,

R.3296/7), auf Jodon Pall abor war or iratanlo,ln dioaor Bo-
ziohung boatinnto vorbrochoriacho, von dor SS untoratuotzto
Foraohungaorboiton ala "drlnglioh 1 * zu lclaaaifisioron. (HO-
69 2, Anlcl.3ow.457, R.3408, Roatock, R.3409). In dioaor Kin-
aioht iat dio Tataaoho bozoichnond, daaa or nloht dio dout-
achon Univoraitaoton un Lnforration anglng (Roatock, R. 3360),
flondorn nur Stollon, dio, wio aua don 3owolanatorial horvor-
G'—t, krininollo Voraucho an Lonachon vomahnon odor foordor-
ton.

•Vaa dio Auarichtung dor Porachung nnlangto, ao war
Brandt "orinaochtigfc, aioh vorantwortlich olr.zuachalton",

(N0-080, inkl.Bow.5, .1.95) "und don Dlon.tat.llon und Or G ani-
aatlonon do. Stoatoa, dor .’artoi und dor Wohrnacht, dio .ioh
nlt don ‘'• ufGabon d °» Sanltaota- und a 0 aundhoita.oaona tofaaa-
ton, Boi.unson su ortoilon". (H0-088, inkl.Bow.7, a. 95).

Dloao Vorrochto atondon natuorllch auoh Roatock auf doa

- 4 -


ROSTOCK


Gobioto zu, auf don or fu-r Brandt taotig war. Ifc dio Por-
schungaarboit in nationolaozialiatiachon Deutschland zu loi-
ton, lioaa Roatook aolbat Srauchon un wisaonachaftlicho Auf-
trao^o orgohon (aoatock, R. 3301), und traf Sntachoidungon
hinaichtlich dor Dringlichkoit gowia3or Forachungaauftmogo.
(NO-692, aioho obon).

Roatocka Auaaogo hinaichtlich dcr itotl^coit aoinoa

juntos fuor w'iaaor.acha ft und Forachung laouft in groason und

gonzon auf dio abaurdo 3ohauptun~ hir.aua, oa aci kein Ant -o-

v/oaon und habo wonig odor nichta nit ..'iaaonachaft odor Porachung

zu tun gohabt. Kurz goaogt, Roatock nocchto, dasa daa Goricht

orkonno, or aoi oln konn nit oir.os porpooacn Tltol abor gcionz-

lioh ohno L'achtbofugnia und Autoritaot gowoaon. Daa iat dio-

aolbo Sinrodo, dio prcktiach alio *rfigoklagton vor don Intor-

nationalo.n Ililitaorgorichtahof o'.-io irfolg vorgobrncht habon.

Daa iat dr.33olbo Klagoliod, daa von Karl Drandt und Kandloaor

und ondoron in dioaon Fall goaunron wird. Dioao «nf;cklaston

wottoifom nitoinondcr, aich aolbat horuntcrzuaotzon. Schroo-

dora 3rklaorung vor dor YorhandliciG hinaiohtlioh dor PUnktionor

dca Antoa fuor ./iaaonachaft und I-brachung iat orhcblich zuvox’-

laoaaigor ala Roatocka oigono -usaage. Schrocdor aagto*

"Roatocka 1 'flicht war oa, doppolto /.ufgnbonortoilun-
gon auf don Ooblot dor nodiziniachon Forachung su
voiT»idon. Dehor nuaaton alio ..afgabonortoilungon
duroh Roatocka Ant laufon. Sc nr. ich zun Eoiapiol
Kooh odor Haogen oino Forachungaarbcit ortoilto,
dann glng oiji Durchaolilar an Roatock, un ihn von
dor ..rt dor *ufgabo in j&nntnis zu aotzon. Roatook
konnto donn ontachoidon, ob dio botroffondo ..uf-
gabo boroita von cr.doror Stoilo boarboitot wordon
v/cr, odor ob dioao ^ufgabo otwo lohnondo rtosultato
zoitigon koonno. Burchschlaogo von B-fohlon fuor
Forachungaarboiton ginjon obonfalla on Handloaor. u
(NO-149, Ankl.oow.130, R.471).

Sohroodor boataoti.*to dc.o; in Krouzvorhoor, daaa dioa
3oino Auffaaaung von Roatocka Stcllung -la Loitor doa .untoa
fuor ./iaaonachaft und Forachung gowoaon aoi. (R.3605).

Dio poraoonlichon Boziohun^or. zwi 3 ch.cn Rostock und
Ic*.rl Drnndt v/aron intin und dauorfaaft. Sio traf on 3ick zun
o ra ton I hi.


- 5 -


ROSTOCK


al3 Rostock von 1927 bi3 1933 Ob g raret an dor chirur^ischcn

..btoilunj dos 3ochurnr Krankonhauscs war. Srardt war dort

..33l3tont, (Rostock, R.3277). Rostock wurdo r.uf Brandts 2r-

suchon hin zur. Loltor dos ~r.tos fuor wisaonschaft und Porschunc

omannt. (Rostock, R.3276). ..sohroni soinor ..ntszoit trafon

3io sick hocuTl^, zur. nindostor. oinral In dor V/ocho und nonoh-

nal oof tor. Brandt hat to wachrond dor ooit von 1943 bis sun

dndo dos KrioROs oin Sprochzimor in Rostocka Klinlk in dor

' unrdttolbaron' Naoho* von Rostock3 oir^non Sprochzi: :,cr.

%

(Roatook, R.3349). Sio hatton auch boido Sprochzinror in
Biolits. (Rostock, R.3281). Jioao on^o Soruohrun^ and
Rostocka offiziollo Stollun * boi Brandt nachon os zur voolli-
<jon Uhr.oo^lichkoit, drss Rostock uobor dio Porschun^sarboit
und dio Vorsucho, dio Brandt bokarnt war on ur.d von ihn untor-
stuotst wurdon, in Unkonntnia ;owoson soin koonnto.

Dios waron rise dio vorantwortlichon $tollun::on dos
.njo!:lajton Rostock t -oratondor ..rzt fu>r das koor unci dio
llooroasaniUaotsinspoktion, Icitor dos ..ntos fucr ./iasonschaft.
und Porsohunj untor don Gonoralkoryxissar fuor das Sanitaots-
und Goaundhoitswoson ur.d Vortrotor dos .ncoklacton Brandt in
soinor Jiconachaft al3 Hit -liod dos ,raosidialrats dos Roiohs-
forschun:;srats. Rostock bonuotzto dio obon;.onannton Stollun-
3 0n und soinon porsoonlichon Slnfluas ur.d soino vortrauton
Boziohunson zu dor. Ancokla^ton Karl Brorxlt in oinor tfuiao,
dio dio BoGOhun^ von .IrloGsvorbrochon und Vorbrochon do^on
dio Konachliohkoit, wio sio in dor «nklo..;oschrift boschriobon
sind, nit sioh brachto.

11 • rdRSOil.’LICKS TRILWdiilS dR 7ZR3R5CH5RISCK3N SXr3,ttK2NTE?».

Wio in Pall solnos Vorecsotzton *>arl Brandt 1st nicht
zu orwarton, dass oin Kann in Rostocks StcllunG porsoonlich
vorbrochori3cho Vorsucho vomohnen wuordo.


Dc .3 bliob will ly or. und ohrgoizi^cr. Hoondon auf oir.or niodoron

Stufo uoborlaaaon. ..ua don Bowoisraitorial ^oht jodoch oin-

doutij horvor, daaa or wio Brandt zur Vornahr.o von Vorauchon

an onachon ohno down Einwilli^un;; ornuti^to. Sr, wio Brandt,

hatton vollo Konntnla da von, daaa von ..orzton dor Lufttraffo,

doa Hooroa, dor SS und doa zivilon Goaundhoitawoaonaayatona-

tiach Voraucho an Konzontrationala^orinaaaaon vor£ono:.z:on

wurdon. -r bonuotzto nlo aoino hachtbofujiiaao und 3oinon

Elnfluaa, ur.s dioaor Vorkonnonhoit oln «vlo zu aotton, dio

dio Srrsordun^, Foltorunj und dio unr.onachlicho 3ohcndlunj von

kuonnor,

Tauaondon hilfloaor .Prauon und Elndor zur Pol-o hatto.

Reatook wird in dor ^nklasoschrift dio toaondoro
Vorantwortlichkoit fuor und dio Toilnahr.o an Kalaria-, Oaa-,
Sulfononid-, Ilnochon-, I'uakol- und llorvon-.to/onorationa- \md
“nochontransplantationavorauchon, an Soowaaaor-, Spidoniaohon-
Golbaucht- und Flockfioborvoraucl.on zur Inat jolo^t. Sa iat
nicht dio ..uf. 3 r.b 0 dor .uikla ;obohoordo darzutun, daaa Roatock
nit allor. Sinzolhoiton dioaor Voraucho vortraut war. Dor
Bowoia "onuost, daaa or von dor ayatonatiaohon Vornondunc
unfroiwllli-or nonachllchor Vor3uchaporaonon zun Zvroclc dor
Vomohnunc von Vorauchon lurch otollon, hinaiohtlioh
doror or oin botraochtllchoa 11 a a a vor. liachtbofudnia und j.uto-
rltaot auauobto, wuaato odor haotto wiaaon nuoaaon. (Sioho
Yonaahita, 66 S. Ct. 3-10, 347 (1946)). Puor dioa und nobr
wurdo v n dor Anklocobohoorio dor Bowoia orbracht.

A. Sulfonanidvoraucho (Ankla^oachrift, Zlffor 6 (E)).

Dio Sulfononid voraucho wurdon ir .lonz on trot Iona la-
r f or Rovonabruock von Juni 1942 bis ..a~uat 1943 vorconoixion.
Puor oino ir.a oinzolno .rohando Dario jur._- doa vorbrochorisohon
Charaktora dioacr Exporinonto kann cuf don Schriftsatz dor
Ankla^obohoordo £ojon Oct&ordt vc..:ioaon wordon.

Ein vollor Dcricht uobor dio vorbwchoriachdn


Sul f onanid vor a ucho


uostosi:


. vurdo von Gobhardt und Piachor boi dcr Drittcr. Tajunc dor
Boratondcn i.orzto dor ..ohrnacht, die von 24. bia 26. ISai
1943 in dor llilltacracrztlichon ..kcdonlo in Borlin 3tatt-
fond, -ogobon. itoatock aa~tc aua, daas or sun oraton Ilal
uobor dio Sulfononi£vor 3 ucho hoortc, ala Gobhardt und
Piachor boi dioaor Tojunj aprachon. (3.3322). Don widor-
apricht oindoutij daa Zoujnis von Gobhardt, dor auaaa^to,
dr.33 uobor don Charaktor dioaoa Vortraja olno laonjoro
Diakuaaion vSt dor fuor daa Ta^uncaprojrann vorontwortli-
chon ioraon atattjofunion haotto, und daaa or 3ich orinno-
ro, daaa dioa doatook jowoaor. aoi, und daa^?uch in don
Johron 1945 und 1946 waohrond dor Vorhocro vor jrooffnunc
doa Vorfahrona auajoa . jt habo, dcaa daa * ; rorrann fuor dio
Ta~ung aoinon Vortrad untor doa Titol a 3ondoroxporluanto M
anijofuohrt habo, nca endoutoto, daaa or vorauahto, otuna
Unnov/oohnlichoa zu brinjon, und daaa daa _anzo Gobiot waoh¬
rond dor Vorboruitunjon fuor dio Tojun; in Kal 1943 i..it
aoatock oin ohond boaproohor. worsen aoi. (Gvbhaidt, 3.
4103-00). Oobhordt, Grawlts und .ioatocl: aoion fortwaoh-
rond nitoinandor wogon dor Voraucho ir. Schriftvor!:ohr go-
otandon. Grawitz hr.tto oinon vollatcondi£on lioricht uobor
dioao .Snpori.ionto, als or nit .toatock #03011 Gobhardta Vor-
trr/; vorhandolto. (Gobhardt, 3.4107). ooi allon Vomoh-
nunjon vor dor irooffnun^ loa Yorfehrona aa;to Oobhnrdt
aua, daaa oa Goatock rowoaon coi, dor dio Loitunj dor Ta-
Cunc ‘Gi 1943 untor aich johabt und nit dor. or t-io Vor¬
aucho boaprochon habo. ..uf don -oujonatand 3a.'to or r.ua,
itoatock hc.bo ihu coaa.^t, or babo aich jotaouacht und dio
d'acuncavorboroitunjon 3oior. von ochroibor -otroffOn wordon.
.ai<303icht3 dioaor Tat 3 ache- jab Gobhonlt on, or orinnoro
aich Jotzt nicht klar, ob 03 .loatook odor Schroibor jowoaon
aoi, nit dor or dioao ..njolojonkolt boaprochon habo. (a,
4144). _3 lat klnr, dr.as dio von Gebhardt vor -rooffnunj

doa Vorfahrona gcntchton ..uaaejan In dioaor Hir.aicht viol
suvorlr. 033 l»or ar.d ola daa anpblicho Voraajon aoincs Go-


- 6 -


ROSTOCK


daochtr.isaoa auf don ooujonstond. Uobordica woiat dio Tat-

3QCho, class Rostock rraosidor.t dor Tarunr von kai 19-13 v/or,

3chluo3si2 darauf hin, dca3 dio person, nit dor Gobhardt

vcrhondoltc, Roiitock war. (Rostock, R.3269).

Dr.33 Rostock entco-on soinor 5ohcuptunc von dan Sul-

fonanld vora uchon vor dor Tajun3 in Jiai 19-13 mis a to, wird

auch duroh dio Ruaaajo von Gobhardt bowioson, dass or vor

dor Ta^ims Rostock und Brandt auf oino:.: Bahnhof r.otroiTon

und dio Vorooffcntlichunj dor Rcsultato dcr Vcraucho nit

Ihnon oroortort habo. (R.-1222). Gobhardt bostaotijto da3

waohror.d oir.os Vorhoors an 5. Hevorbor 19-16, als or aajtoj

11 3a 1st doch oin Una inn dioso .uionyr.itaot dor jan-
zon Sacho, lch habo poraoonlich Ohno Jodon ..uftraj
oincal -anz aIchor don Brandt joaojt - ^or Jotzt
zwar sa jt, or l:onn a ich nicht orlnncm - und oir.-
nal Roatoclc ;oaagt: ./last Ihr aooh, wna wlr borich-
ton? Ich woiaa nioht was Such Grawitz roachrlobon
hat, ich aajo Such: Kiar.lor hat zu dioaor Sulfo-
natildfrago dca und daa bcfohlon, das laouft, dioao
Sxporiconto alnd auazufuohron; abor lch habo don
wlaacnaohof tlichon Rat :ur jojebon, woll cs dor
doutachon ..iaaonachaft sur Vorfuojung lcoi.nt."

.J.3 or waohrond doasolbon Vorheora ;ofra :t wurdo, ob 03

Roatoclc und Brandt klar gocaaht cordon aoi, daa a dio Vor-

aucho or, Haoftlingon jorzacht wuordon, antwertoto Gobhardt:

"a olb31 vor a fcaondl ich ". (Gobhardt, R. .222).

Roatocl: -ab su, daaa or auf dor Tajun- in Uai 19d3
don Voraitz fuohrto und dio Vertrao^o von Gobhardt und
Piachor uobor ihro Voraucho hoorto. (R.3269-70). Sr jab
su, daaa olndoutij daraua horvor in:, daaa dio Voraucha-
poraonon kuonatlich inflziort wordon woron. (R.3322).

3r sajto aua, daaa Gobhardt und Piachor kolno -ngabon uobor
dio i*nzahl dor Vorauchaporaonon nachton, aondorn blosao
irozontaaotzo jabon. (R.3323). Sr a or to aua, or habo don
Eindruck ;ahabt, daaa o 3 a ich ur verhaoltnianaoasij. wonijo
Yorauohaporaonon johnndolt habo, violloicht un unjofaohr 20 .
(R.332‘1). Sr atolltc auadruocklich la alrodo ;owuaat zu
habon, dr.33


ROSTOCK

an bin zu 50 rora. non VcrauchQ vor^nomcn wordon aoion.
(R.3328).

Roatocka ..uaaago MnaiohtUch dor Einzolhoiton, dio
or uobor Gobhordta Sulfonanidvorauoho erfuhr, iat voolliG
falach. Hach dor Sratattunc dor wiaaonachoftlichon Doric/.-
to auf dor Ta.jmz dor Loratondon .*orzto, wurdon dio Vortrao-
-o lcurz zuaannontofaaat und dio itosultato in nodiziniachon
..nwoiaunjon zura Auadruck gobraoht. (Roatcck, R.3325). da
igt offonaichtlioh, daaa .loatock dio f.onauon Einzolhoiton,
wio z.D. dio «nzftfcl dor vorwondoton Vorauchapera snon, dio
drt und dio Stollo dor Infoktion, ihro 3itwicklun3, 1h*o
Gofnohrlichkoit, dio 2ohandlun:anothodo, dio .snzahl dor
Todoafaollo uav/. vrlaaon nuaato, ura dio Roaultato dor Vor-
aucho zu wuordijon. /.tor non iat nioht auf aolcho rr.tiona-
lon Sohluaafoljorunjon aua Tataaohon cn*owlo3on, un zu bo-
woiaon, dc.aa Rostock oino :onauo Uonntnia dor Einzolhoiton
dioaor Vorauoho orlan-to und daaa or waohronl aoinor Zou-
jonauaaaco oa untorlicaa, vollataondico Ancabon dcruobor zu
raaohon, obwohl or uobor dioao runkto borragt wurdo. Gob-
hardt aajto ganz klcr und doutlich cua, daaa or oin Gognor
Jodor Tarnuno war und bouuoht war, dio sonzo *n>;olo conhoit
dioaor Vorauoho ana Ta^alioht zu brln;cn. In aoinor Elr.-
loitung zun Vortrag von Piaohor orklaorto or, dcaa dio Vor¬
auoho an l onaohon vcrgonor-on wordon waron. (It. -109). Gob-
hordt kann alch nach aoinor ^uaaago nicht rnit Sifcorhoit or-
innorn, ob or c^aa t habo, daaa dio Vurauchaporsonon Ko.nzon-
trationsla^orinaaaaon waron. dor «ngoklc£: to Plsohor or¬
klaorto, daaa dioa klar somacht wordon aoi. (NO-472, Znkl.
Bow.243, a.941; vorgl. Piaofcor, It. 4365). Gothardt aagto
aua, dio kllniachon Einzolhoiton dor Vorauoho aoion bia ina
oinzolno orlaoutort wcrdon. ~uf dor Tajung vmrdc Hittoi-
lun^ davon gor.acht, daaa Vorauoho an 75 *cracnon vorconon-
con wordon aoion, daaa dio


- 10 -


ROSTOCK


Infiziorungon kuor.stlich hervorgorufan wordon salon, doss

voracliiodor.o Arznolnittol fcoi dor Behandlung von Infizio-

rungon vorwondet wordon solan - ouch uobor die Re suit at a

wurde 3orlcht orstattat - doss non von chlrurglscher 3o-

hnndlungsmothoda Gebrauch gonacht habo und dass droi i ? or-

sonon gostorbon solon. (Gobhardt, R.‘il09-10). Angosichts

dos offonboron .iidoraoruchs z\ laohon dor rtuasage von Gob-

Rostocks

hardt und von Rostock koonnor. dio Roinwaschungsvorsucho /
nicht ala glaubhcft ongosohon wordon.

Rostock sag to aus, soino «uf fas sung sol gowoson, dass
dlo Kxporimonto oln Srsatz fuor dio Todosstrafo gowoson
solon, dlo angobllch uobcr dlo Vorauchsporsonon vorhaongt
v/ordon war. Wonn dlo Vorauchsporsonon nit doc Loton davon
kanon, waoro dlo Todosstrafo nloht vollzogon wordon. Doi
diosor "/»us woo ha lung” splolto das Vorl logon oinos Sinvor-
staondnissos soltona dor Vorauchsporsonon kolno Rollo.
(Roatoolc, R.3376).

Nachdon Rostock Konntnis orlangt hattc, durfto or
aloh nicht schwolgcnd vorhalton; or hatto olnwarelfroi dio
rflioht zu horeloln. Rostock untornahn r.ichts. Obwohl or
dio loltung dor Tagung hatto, orhob or kolnon flldorspruch.
Rr dlonto Handloaor, don Howroaaanlta^talnspoktor, als Do-
ratondor Chirurg. Sr war Ala sonsahaftlor von guton Ruf und
oln anorkanntor Puohror dor doutsohon Lodlzln. 3r wussto,
daso Gasbrandinfoktlon acussox-at -ofaohrllch war. (Rostock,
R.3316), i.r wussto, dass dio Vorsucho unnootlg waron urel
dlosolbon Rosultato durch kllnlscho Stulion uobor dio Wlr-
kung von Sulfonanid auf .Tundinfoktlonon von Soldaton haot-
ton orziolt wordon koonnon. (Rostock, R.3338, 33-R)). Von
allon boi dor Tagung anwoaondon xoraonon war Rostook an oho-
aton In dor Logo, don Schrockon dor Vcrsucho zu orfaason.

Sr oroortorto dlo Vcrsucho nloht nit soinon Vorgosotzton
Handlcaor. Sr aprach aich vrodor in dor Ooffontlichkoifc noch
prlvat go gen dlo Vorsucho aus. Dlcso Tat sac ho n nschon


11 -


30S70CU


Soatool: au oinon miehtrao -lichon Toilnohwr on don vopopo-
ohorlachon Sulfonooidvorauchon, aolbat «onn onjono^on wil'd,
daaa alo su dop Zoit, ala .loatock Konntnla davon orhiolt,
a oh on hoondot «oron. Sr J = ob aolr.o Zuacijiuns" au dloaor
vorbroohorlaohon Vor»ondua 2 hilfloaor Itoaontpatlon.laeor-
inar.aaon.

lia atirnt ator nloht, daaa dio Vorauchc, als Hoatoolc
Konntnla von ihnon orhlolt, booniot waron. Koch ir. -ujuat
19-i3 vr.’rdon aocha polnlacho Prauon In Bunkor in .iavcnabruock
gowaltaon zu Vorauchazwockon oporlorc. (XO-864, ^nl:l.-ov/.

229, a.923). Dioaon *oraonon haotton Foltorun,; und Voratuon-
noluni, orapart bloibon koonnon, wonn olno ruraon nit ..utori-
taot *oo 1 dor Tagun S In kai 1943 alch dcjo-on aua^.oaprochon
•| haotto. Uobordloa haotto olno Untorauchun^ dor Sulfonanid-

vorauoho dlo vorbroohorlaohon idiochon-, Huakoln- und *torvon-
• oxporldonto ana Lloht ^obraoht (^nkla^oaohrift, Zlffor 6.

(F)), dio von donaolbon *craonon on donaolbon Ort vor .onoa-

non v/urdon.

B. Klookflc’jorvoraucho. (^nkla^achrift, Zlffor 6 (J)).

Bol oinor Konforonz an 29. ^ozorhor 1941, an dor Mond-
loaor, Conti, Oildoaoiator und .Tu.owaky tollnohnon, wurdo
boaohloaaon, dio wirkaonkoit von .-'lockfioboriripfatoff, dor
*) nun In iiidottom ^ozucchtoton Kulturon gowonnun wurdo, duroh

Vorauoho an loboivlon konaohon foatzuatollon. (N0-2S5, dJi-'-l•

•' flow. 207, R.1134) vorgl. hondloaora auaaogo, K0-732, «nkl.

flow.451, fl.3060). Daa Zrgobnia dioaoa ^achluaaoa war, daaa
dio Vor3uch33tation im Konzontrationalayor 5uchonwald lna
Lobon gorufon wurdo, und 03 wurdon Vorauoho zur Brprobung
dor .Vlrkaaidtc.it voraohiodonor lapfstoffo durch kuonstlioho
Infiziorung von Hacftllnccn ohno dcron Ziatinnuns Jonuor

1942 bia iuifans 1945 vorf.ononncn. (Kogon, R.1154 ff.). fllo
Tataaoho aliein, daaa dioao Vcrauchc nchr ala droi Johro long
in oinor .1 gor.z groaaon Koaaatab vor 3ich gingon, wuordo dio
FoatatGllunj rochtfortigon, daaa .loatock von dioaon Vorauohon
v/uaato odor haotto wl33on nuoaaor..


- 12 -


aosopcs

iaa Iroblcn dor Eeratollun- von Flcckfiobor-Inpfatoi*
und aoino Vortollunc gohccrto offonsichtUch nr.ch aoinor Jr-
nonnunc zun Gonoralkonniasar durch don Fuchrororlaaa von
23. JUli 1942 zur ZmatnottUgkoit Drandts. Ea lat uay-Gg-
llch,oinon klaroron Fell von atoffllchcr OlolchaoholtunG
au fircion. Eondloaor hatto dio prtaaoro Kontrollo uobor
dio Inpratoffvortollunc. (Kandloaor, H.3074, 3090; vor;,l.
dio Zouconauaaage von Schroodor, 3.3642, 3643). randies or
sowohl ala Conti nuaatoa Drardt ueber G rundaaotzlicho Vor-
Gaon G o untcrrichton. Da dio Eoratollun-j doa Ei-lxpfatoffoa
von Forachungon uobor aoino BirkaoLkolt obhing, koonnen
dio boidon nloht vonolnandor gotronnt woidon.

• Uobor dio Voraucho in Duchcnwald wurdo von Dr. Dinj-
’| Sohulor boi dor Tacun^ dor Doratonion i.orrto dor .johrnacht

in i:ai 1943 Boricht oratattot. (KC-923, inkl.3oir.436, 3.

• 2063). Itoafcook gob *u. *>i dioaor Tagung anwoaond Cowcoon

zu ooin. (.1.3269). 2a iat swar nooglich, da a a or don *>-
richt aalbat nicht gohoort hat, da or in dor Hygiene-ibtoi-
lung vorjotragon wurdo, oa kenn abor koin bogruondotcr ovoi-
fol doran boatohen, doaa or davon gohoort hat. Roao orhob
Einnondungon gogon dio Natur dor Voraucho in Buohonwald,
und dioa war alohorlich oino .jvjologcnhuit. dio uobor dio
..aondo doa Vortragrauna hinaua uroiao zog. Kogon aagto aus,
daaa Ding uobor Soaoa <%ngriff wuotond war. (Kogan, 3.1176).
Dio Plookfioboroxporlnonto in 3uchonwald aind 1 i oinzolnon
in 3 ohrif taetz dor ^klagobohoordo 3 o 5 on Urugowaky boaohrio-

bon.

Dr. Sugon Hoc-on, Kygionikor fuor dio Luftflotto n 3cioh fl
uni oonitaotaoffizior dor Luftwaffe, fuohrto auoh Floolcfio-
borvoraudio an Eaoftlincon doa Donzontrationslagora :.ztz-
woilor aua. (Schnidt, 3.1362, ff.). Dioao Voraucho wurdon
Tuor dio Luftwaffe und fuor dor. hcichaforachun^arat vorgo-
nonnon. (NC-129, inkl.Bow.303, 3.1403; KO-137, Ankl.Bow.


- 13 -


ROSTOCK


189, R. 737). Roatock sab zu, daaa daa Act fuor ‘.Via a on -
aohaft und Forachung anfonja 1944 olno Koplo von Hansons
Borloht on don Roicha fora chunks rat „rhiclt. (Roatock, li.

3311, 3367; 110-138, unkl.3on.300, R.1390). Dicaor Boricht
boaa^to auadruookllch, daaa “hinaichtlich uor ontiinfok-
tlooaon .Yirkuns von -otrocknotor. Inpfatoff woltor Voraucho
cn lobondon Lon3chon vor. 30 noar.on wor\lon". Haa^ona Flook-
floborforaohunr wurdo bol olnor Ta^unj doa uctoa fuor .;i3-
aonaohaft unci Forachur.j In August 1944, iio Roatock oinbo-
rufon hat to und bol dor Hitcliodor doa Roichaforachun jarata
und dor ..'ohrnacht anwoaond woron, ala "dr^Hch" bosoioh-
not. (130- 692, «nkl.Bow.<57, 11.3408; Rostock, R.3409).

3rondt v/ar oln Ritsllod doa Roichaforaohunsarata Vor-
GOnotztor von Roatock. (obon). Sloho cuch dio oidoaatatt-
licho ..uoaaco von Rudolf Drondt. (NO-370, Ankl.Eow.294,
R.1335). Dio Flockfloborvoraucho von Kaa ;on aind in oinsol-
non In Schrlftaatz dor -jBclasobohoorlo ^or. Roao und Schroo-
dor boaohrlobon.

C. Oc.avorauoho. (*rJ:lasoachrift, Ziffor 6 (D))•

Klrta Goavcraucho aind in Schrlftaatz dor ..nklajobo-
hoordo 30 ;on Siovora, dio Dlckontacha in dor. Schrlftaatz
130 jon Karl Drondt boachriobon.

da kann l:oin Zwoifol daron bostohon, daaa Roatock von
Hlrt 3 und Dickonbacha Gnavorauchon Konntnia hatto und dazu
orrmtiGto. An 1 . Kaorz 194-4, also lan^o nachdou Roatool:
aoin Ant boi Brandt an^otroton hatto, jab Kltlor don lutz-
tar on auaGOdohnto nchtbofu-jniaao auf don Gobiot dor chonl-
aohon Krio;jsfuohrun£. (N 0 - 012 , Ankl.Bow.270, R.103; ). Daaa
dioaor ..uftra -3 nodlzinlacho Forachunjon uobor Gaawundon uit-
oinachloaa, kann au 3 Brandta Foatstollunj, daaa aoir.o Zu-
ataondiGkoit aich auf phor;r.sjutiacho iirzcujniaso zur Do-
handlun;; von Gaawundon orstrocko, ontnorcon woxxion. (33.2629).
Dio3 achloaa notwondisorwoiao dio 3oatlrr:un; dor wirkaxiaton
Bohandlunsancthodo oin.


- 14


aOSTOCK


Daa kcnn zuch cua dor Tztazcfco cntnoreon warden, oaaa —~
aohriTton doa Brloaaoa, don Brandt an Hinder anndto (K0-
012, oton), on Grzwitx und Siovcra gcaccickt wurdon, dio
vorhor on dioacn r roblcc goorboitot hat ton. (:10-G13a,

Dow.271, .1.103e; i:0-O13b, -nkl.Dow.272, 3.1032).

Ir.; dnschluaa an die Horauagabo dlosoa Srlr.asoa or^i-
fing Brandt aowohl nuendliefc (HO-015, «nlcl.Dow.275, 3.1039)
ala auoh achriftlioh (K0-O99, ^nltl.Bow. 268, 3.1035) Jo-
r loll to uobor Hirta Forachungatcotickoit. 3r war sioh dor
Tataaoho bowuaat, daaa von Dirt Sxporlconto an ISor.achon
vorgonouaon wurdon. (Brandt, a.2626). Voraucho mlt Oaa
wurdon an ungcfachr 220 Ecoftlincon ruaalachor, polnlaohor,
taohociilachor und doutachor Kationalitaot vor jonorxon, von
donon ur.gofaohr 50 atarbon. Sic hat ton aioh nicht froiwil-
lig -ocsldot. (Holl, a. 1052, 1057). Hlrt achloaa aoir.o
Oaao;cporinonto In ».atzwoilor waohrond doa Sorr_ora 194-1 ab.
(Holl, 5.1050).

Dc.aa r.oatook von don Vorauckon .llrta uuaatc, bcuolat
dlo Tatsaoho, dnaa aoino Porachung toi clnor Tr.gung doa *nta
Tuor '..laaonochaTt u»l Forachung fucr n drln;lich n boxoiohnot
WUTdo. (H0-692, .jikl.Dow.-157, .1.3-111). Dlo honforonxon,dlo
dloao Klaaaifilcatlon nit aich brcchton, wurdon in aoatcckn
Duoro in Boolitx abgohaltor.. Vortrotor dor i.ohrnuc’itaani-
taotadionato und doa Roichaforaohungarztoa wohnton lhr.on boi.
Drour und wohrachclnlich 31c: o vortrator. don itolchafor-
nchungarat und 3chroibor daa Hoor. (Roatock, R.33-13,338-1).

Sa iat achwor, Louto nachaTt su mohon, dlo boaaor uobor dlo
Vornohmo von kriciinollon Vorauckon oriontiort aind, ala
dloao droi.

Eickonbacha ihoatfongaavorauoho wurdon von Rcatooka Vor-
goaotzton, doai ijigoklajton Dari Brandt, pcraoonlich gofoor-
dort. Dickonbach war Frofcaaor an dor Onivoraitaot


ROSTOCK


3tra33'oui*3 v;io auch HIrt und aoogcn. (Brandt, a. 253.:).

Brandt aa^to aua, daaa or von don Gasoxporinonton Bickon-
bacha In "orbat 1943 onlaoaalich oinoa Boauohoa in Straaa-
burj swocka Eoaichtlcung oinoa Zyklotrona Konntnia orhiolt;
daaa or lha half, oin Latoratcriun oir.zurichton; daaa or 12UB
bol dor Boachaffuns von Vorauchatioron untoratuetzto; uaaa
or Kir. in Jahro 1944 half, naohdon or, aoln I/iboratoriu:: oin-
jorichtot hat to. (Brandt, R.2619-20). Roatock rcb zu^daaa,
or boi Brandt war. ala or ni t Elcka r.bach -iprr.ch und Hi.: :.il^
f o zuaa>-to. £r 3 C.b auch »u, in Borlin boi oinor Golo^oniioit
lit Bickonbach 6 <> a prochon su habon. (Roatook, R. 3389).
Rootoo!: lou^noto, otwaa uobor don &»ock do a von Brandt oin-
sorichtoton Laboratoriuna covmaat zu habon, obwohl or dio
Dialcuaaion doruobor hoorto. (Roatock, 3*3590-1). dr QOht
r.lao oincn Sohritt woitcr ala Brandt, dor bloaa abloujnoto,
daaa or uobor Voraucho an lobondon konachon Boachoid v/uaato.

lu .obruar 1944 war Brandt in Katzwoilor, bohauotot
abor, oa aoion dort nur Tiorcxporirxnto von Bickonbach vcrjo-
norujon v/ordon. Jaa Oo;;ontoil £joht aua oinor. ontliohon Bo-
richt dor Roslorunc dor Niodorlondo uobor .u , ioG*vorbrochon
horvor. (ifO-1063, jikl.Bow.328, R.1498, aioho dio ..uaaa;^n
von Raloa ’and Rooaain^.). Joaof Kronor, dor fruohoro Ux.;;or-
komandant in Katzwoilor, aa^to auch aua, daaa Bickonbach
an GofanoOnon Vorauoho vomohn. (K0-807,Bnkl.Eow.l85,R.732).

Bickonbacha 3orlchto uobor aoino Voraucho bowoiaon,
uaaa 40 ruaaiaoho hr Iogsgo fan 30.10 nit 4 ho3 3 cr.,.-ca vorciftot

vmrdon, v/oboi nicht woni^or ala vior dor Vorouchaporaor.on
ihr Lob on oinbuoaaton. (NO-1852, jikl.Bow.456, P..3.06, oioho
boaondora don 7. Eoricht). Dioao Vorauoho wurdon naoh don
11. Bujuat 1944, dor. Dctur doa 4. Borichtoa, vor 30 r.or.non.
.Olo dioao Dorichtc it arc n an Brandt ala Gonoralkorr:isaar


)


ROSTOCK

fuor daa Sanltoots- uni Gooavmoitawoaon. Zio S olatP.9/5.
GndPur-l.oho Gnlvopaitaotaklinlk, aiiroaaicnt. Hostoo,,
und DPcaadta Euoroa in ion BnivoPalfotaklinlk
vIop ZlznoP auaoinoniop. Uoatook. *»«). Soatock will
Can Go-iohtahof C loubon nachon. do.. aoir.o Zuataondidcoi*

iuop ..'iaaonachaft ^ «* Brondt,

•abon" boackraonkt wop, von da-on oino die choniacho KPioza

wap. Chop OP loucr.oto tun aolhon »» ^ «*-
nis von Diokonhooha Vopauchon oh, ohwohl op fuoP Brnnlt or-

boitoto. Ctoatoc!:, .1.335-1).

010 in Pall von hint. Vopauohcp. -urion Biokonbocha

Popaohun';on uobor ohouiaoho Xa^tttotto von HoatocK hoi

dop «e»c do. into, fuoP Vilaaonaohoft and FoPachuns on

26 . ;.ujuat IHt ola ■drin.lioh" kloaaimlopt. (ZO-692,

obon). doatocka Bohnuptunc. ™ “ 4 "°“ St ° U ° n

infoprntion fuor aolno For.ohunsakoptol ophlolt, lat, ao-
„.it uio aloh aur Zlohonhaoh boaloht. crronaiohtlloh -ohP.
some ^holt fordo popaoonlloh von 3Pcndt, untoPatv.otot,
and aoatock konnto dlo Infopnatlon von nlo^nd ardoror. oo-
ho-non ala von aoinon Chef. Biokonhaoh. -rhoit wurdo von
Brandts i»t sofoordort. Doss Brondta int.loltoP fuop -la-
.onaohrxt und For.chuns nlchta davon -uaato, lat nioht


laubhaft.

D. vT.doP.iaoho ool-oaucht (Lklocoaohrlrt. »»«,.*.

In Junl 19.1 wurdo von -.-hndlosor oino Tozunc vor.
Faohlouton olnborufon aun Look dop ZuaataaonfaaaunB dor
Golbauohtfopaohunj. Dioao -.nnfoPonz fond in Bro.lou atatt,
und Sohrolfcor fuohcto don Vopaita. (Outtolt, d.2752). Hond-
loaor, dutaolt ant Haa a on, oin Doratondor Hyglonikop dor
lALftriotto "notch", woron olio hoi dioaop Tasunc onuoat.ad.
(Gutzoit, 3 . 2117 ). Hanoon sah «ohrond doa Kroutvorhoor. au
daaa Vor»uoh.o an lobondon Ihnaohon boappochon wurdon. Daaa


- 17 -


ROSTOCK


vorbrochori3cho Voraucho an Lor-zoutrationalaccrinsasaon
;or.oint waron, goht klar aua dor tataacho faorvor, daaa
Sohroitoor la Januar 1945 l^*ugow 3 lc 7 poraoonlich crauchto,
Inaaaaon fuor Hopatitiavoraucho durch Dr. Droaol zur v or-
fuficung zu atolion. (H0-1303, dnkl.Dow.467, 3.5400).
Schroibor boatinr.to Gruppon von i^rzton, dlo zuaarnon an
Golbauchtaproblonon zu arboiton button. Dohnon, Gutzoit
und Kaadon wurdon olnor dioaor Gruppon zu 30 toi.lt. (Gut¬
zoit, 3.2717). .»n 12 . Juni 1944 orauchto Koason aolbat

Sohroibor, lhn Dohnon zur ..rboit nit ihu zuzuwoloon. Zu
dioaor Zoit war Gonoralorzt Schroibor loitor dor :llitaor-
aorztliohon <Jcadonlo. (30-299, dnkl.Dow.190, R. 739).

* Schroibor kan dioaon ca*auchon nach. (30-300,.jikl.-ow. 1-1,

R. 740).

• .bn 24. Juni 1944 aohriob Gutzoit on Haakon, or wordo
obonfalla Schroibor orauchon, Dohnon Haakon zuzuwoiaon. 2r
aoliriob dann woltor, dc.aa or Vorboroltuncon fuor Voraucho
an lobondon Konaohon troffo, und or wuonaohto, daaa lhn
”ae- 3 on aoin Virua-Hatoriol zur Vorfuojun;: atollo. (NO-124,
.jil:l.Dow, 193, 1.743). Haakon boantwortoto Gutzoita rlof
au 27. Juni 1944. 2r orklaorto, or aoi froh, da3a Lhn
Dohnon nit blrkunc von 15. Juli zugowioaon sol. 3r orhlaor-
to v/oitor, daaa or nit Kail:, liuochnor .und 2 uohachwort, alloo

% Luftwoffonoffizioro, or. Golbauchtproblonon arboito und or

nit ICall: Vorboroitun 3 on ~otroffor. habo, alt aolnorr. .atoriol
Vorauoho on fonachon vorzunofcnon. (NO-125, Ankl.Eow.194,

R. 744). dm aolbon Datum achriob Kea ;on aoinon Mitorboltor
Kalk, dor zum Stab doa -ngokltxjton Schroodor pohoorto, wio
' folgt* "In dor ibilago uoborsondo ioh Ihnon die -bachrift

oinoa oriofoa von Gutzoit und ::olno -ntwort. .<ir nuoaaon
alao Jotzt taldaooslichat daran cohon, dio Kunanvoraucho
durchzufuohron. Dicao nuoaaon allordin:a an bcaton hior in


- 18 -


ROSTOCK


Straaaburg odor In dcr Kaoho stattfindon. Kbonnton Sio von
Siror Dionatatclio aua clio noot^on Schritto untomohnon,
ua3a \iir dio orfordorlichcn Vcrsuchaporaonon bokoanon? Ich
woisa nicht, was fuor Haonnor Gutzoit zur Vorfuogung hat,
3oidaton odor a nd ore a Volk." (NO-126, Ankl.Bow.195, R.745).

Dio Donor!: wig "andorca Volk- iat oin offonaichtliohor
Hinwoia auf Konzontrationalagorinaaaaon, an donon Haagon
ochon aoit longon Vorauoho nit virulonton Flockflobor-
Virua vorconornon hatto, waohrond dor Dinwoia auf "Straaa-
burc °^or in dor Kaoho" auf dea Consentrationalogor Hatz-
woilor hindoutot. Horr KaU: und aoin Chof, dor Angoklagto
Sohroodor, wuaaton gut Boachoid daruobor, wio can aich Con-

zontrationalagorinaaaaon fuor nodlzinlacho Vcraucho bo-

achofft, donn orat wonigo .fcchon vorhor hatto Sohroodor
aolbat Cirr.jlor un Inaaaaon fuor dlo Soowaaaor-Voraucho or-
auoht. (NO-185, dnkl.Cow. 13d, R.483).

Dio .Jeton zoigon, doaa Dohnon tataaochlioh auf don
cllr ok ton Dofohl Schroibora naota Straaaburg ging, un nit
Ilaagon zu arboiton. (Outzoit, .1.2752). Hior wiodorun bo-
zolchnoto Roatooks «nt fuor V/iaaonachaf t urxl Forachung
Hoagona Spidomiaoho-Oolbaucht-Forachuag ala "drlnglioh".

(NO-602, Ankl.Dow.457, ft.3408).

Dohnona Oolbauchtvoraucho in Kontontrationalogor
Soohaonhauaon wurdon von don'ineoklagton -Carl Brandt in dio
•logo goloitot und untoratuotzt. (Sioho Schriftaatz dor
Anklogobohoordo gogon Brandt). Waohrond dio ouatinnung zu
dioaon vorbrochoriachon Vcrauchon an IS. juni 1943 gogobon
wurdo, ala Roatock ncch nicht Ioitor doa ^ntoa fuor V/iaaon-
aohaft und Forachung ucr, rurdon dio Vorauoho unzwoifolhaft
nooh ia Iforbat 1943, ala Soatock aoin wat untor Drandt ongo-
troton hatto, nooh lnnor atudiort und analyaiort.

- 19 -


ROSTOCK


V


■


S. Andoro Zxporinonto.

V/onn dio dnklagobohoordo don ..ngoklacton Rostock
dor Vorantwortung fucr dio Ualci*la-j *olygal- und Soo-
waaaor-Vorsucho boachuldlgt, so stuotzt aio aich daboi in
orator Lir.lo auf aoino Stollung. .0.3 loitor doa .*ntoa fuor
'./laaonaohoft und Forachung und ala ongor Uitarboitor ‘.Carl
Drandt3 v/uaato or von dor ayatonatiachon Vorwondunis von ICon-
zontrationalcgorhcoftlin-on zu Rxporir.or.ton ohno doron Ein-
v/illijunG odor haotto or davon wiaaon nuoaaon. Roatock war
koino Inaol dor Tugond in don k'oor doa Vorbrochona, daa lim
ur.v;ab,

Dio Ikxlarlavorauoho wurdo i in Dachau von Pobruar 1942
bia 1015 von Dr. Klaus Schilling vorgonorx:on, fruohcr boin
Robort-Kooh-Inatitut und oinor dor boruohntoaton doutachon
.Viaaonachaftlor auf don Gobiot uor troplachon Dodizin. Uobor
tauaond Inaaaaon surdon boi dio sen Vorauchon vorwandt und
violo atorbon. (Sloho don 3ohriftaatz dor ..nklagobohoonlo
SOGOn Roao). 3a iat klor, daaa olno aoloh lango Roiho wioh-
tigor Voraucho Rostock bokannt gowoaon aoin nuaa.

Raochor nahn Voraucho in Dachau ver, un dio Dlutgorin-

nungawirkung olnoa Idttola nn.»na "iolygal" zu orprobon. Zu

dloaon Dvook wurdon olno Roiho von Inaasaon oraohosaon.

(Sioho don 3chrift3atz dor ^nklajobohoordo gogon Blor:o)*

Rnfongo 1944 wurdo von Raachor und Haforkaq? oino ..ohandlung

uobor .olygal in dor iiuonc’.xnor ilodisiniachon .Yochonachrift

vorooffontlioht. (N0-i38, «.nkl.:’ow.2-:0, R.95G; 51ono,R.

dG39). Dioao ..bhondlung zioht oino kloro Schoidolinio sr/i-

J

achon Vorauchon on lobondor. !.onachon zur Drprobung dor iYir-
kung von rolygal und zwiachon klinlachor. >ruofur. -on . Slo
orklaort: "She wir daa Lodikanont klir.iach orprobton und
ausprobon lioaaon, wurdo oa in oingohondon Vorauchon auf aoi-
non Elnfluaa auf dio Blutgorinnunga- und Dlutungazoit an
lionaohon orforscht. n Kurvon wurdon boigofuogt, un dio


- 2C -


ROSTOCK


Tfirkung von iolygol nuf Blutgorinnung uni Dlutung zu zoigon.
Dio dbhondlung oroortort dann klinlscho Boobachtungon vraoh-
rcmd Oporationon. Grawitz Jowohl wio ^ohl orkobon wogon dor
Voroaffontllchung doa ..rtikbla Voratollungon, da aio nicht
bofrogt wordon waron und Dachau 3 K und lobondo Voraucha-
poraonon orwaohnt wurdon. (NO-614, .4nkl.Bow.245, R.964;

HO-615, inkl.Bow. 246, R.966). Rostock gab zu, dioaon Ar-
tlkol golooon zu habon, dor aich, wio oin kritiachor Loaor
bonorkt habon wuordo, ait Vorauchon an Haoftlingon in
Dachau boachaoftigto. -r gab auoh zu,don Vcrfaaaorr. doa
drtikola goachriobon und un .-robon von .olygcl orauoht zu
habon. (Rostock, R.3307). Dioao Drkur.digung wurdo von don
..ngolclagton Sicvora oingozogon. (3546-* S, .»nkl.3o\*. 123, R.
975, Bintragung v. 1. Juni). Gowiaa nuaa aich .lea took
aolbat uober don Charaktor und dio Roaultato dioaor Vorau-
cho infomlort habon.

Dio Soowaaaorvoraucho wurdon von dor Luftwaffo in
Dachuu in Jahro 1944 vorgonorr-on. (Sioho don Schrlftaatz
dor .jaklagobohoordo gogon Schroodor). uaa Roatooka ’./iaaon
>un dioao Voraucho onlanrt, gonuogt oa, cuf Schrocdora Aua-
aago zu vorwoiaon, dr.aa Rostock uobor dio von dor luftwaffo
vorgonorr:ono nodizinl3cho Forachung Boachoid wuaato.

(1.0-449, Ankl.Bow. 130, R. 471).

..uaaor Roatocka Antoil an don obon ongofuohrton Vor-
3uchon, war or Loitor doa ..ntoa fuor .Uaaonachaft und For-
achung untor Brandt, ala Drondt poraoonlich dio Vomahno
von Vorauohon an Xonzontrationslagorhaoftllngon untoratuotzto.

An: 30. Soptonbor 1943 aohriob Grawitz an Hirnlor, daaa
Kai’l Brandt ihn oraucht habo, oino nouo Salbo zur Bchanulung
von Fhoapliorbrondwundon auazuprobioron. Grawitz orauohto un
drlaubnia, das Bitto1 durch kuonatlich an Inaoa3on von Sach-
3onliauaon (Oranienburg) horvorgorufor.o VOrbrcnr.ungon zu


ROSTOCK


pruofon. Dio Rrprobung do3 Kit cols an doutschon 2iviliaton,
dio boi Luftangriffor. Vcrbronnungon erlltton hatton, wurdo
fuor zu longwiorlg c°h alfcor ‘* Zustinnung zu dioson Vor-

auohon wurdo on 7. Cktobor 19*13 g ogobor.. (N0-1620, .jikl.Bow.
449, R.2G46).

2a iat aicht ohno Sodoutune, daaa die Vorauoho, in
doi*on Vorlauf Insaaaon mit rhoaphor aus cir.or Drandboebo
Prandwundor. zugofuogt wurdon, von 19. Kovonibor 1943 an in
Buchonwald ciuasOfuohrt wurdon. (NO-865, .udtl.Dow.2C7, .1.1127;
Kojon, 1187-90). 2a boatoht wonig Zwoifol damn, daaa an
Stollo doa von Brandt vorgoaohlc onor. Vorauchaorta Sachaon-
hc.ua on Duohonwald gowaOhlt wurdo. ole Op for dor Vorauoho or-
duldoton dio po inland a ton 3ohrx>rzon. (Kogon, obon).

jj .. .•tbruar 194*. aohrlob dor ..n;oklagto Rudolf Brandt
an oin Kitgliod von Hicnlora poraoonlichon -Stab in Borlin

0

(Baunort) und aagto, Karl Brandt habo ui: zohn Gofanjono in
Or anion!) ur,: goboton, u. cin boati at os ^rznoinittol auszu-
probioron. Knrl Brandt hat to dioao Vorauoho rait Grawitz bo-
aprochor.. bio Gofan:onon wurdon cur Vorfuo;un • gootollt.
C.T0-13C2, .uikl.uow. .18, 1.26:-).

Dana Drandta 3uoro nit Vorauchon on .vonccntrntionala-
;orlnac.aaon in Vorbindun,: stand, wird doa noitoron durch don
voi.i 31. l.aorz 1945 datiorton .-orlcht bowioaon, bocuojlioh
Vorauoho iw wonzontrationaiagor i:ouGnganrx». (NO-154, .jilcl.
Dow.446, i:.2638). Dort wurdon .. aaorontaouchun. a vorauoho
fciit Insaaaon vorgenonmon. ^or Boricht bcangt, daaa dio
“dr it to Voraucharolho nit oinoa Stoff dor Loatjruppo, don
l3tiokgaa lost, aua.jofuohrt wurdo, goxauaa olnon Voraohlog
doa Oboratcrztoa Dr. birth in dor .anferenz i-it .toiohskont*
niaaor Dr. Brandt an Dazonbor 1944".

Bodlich goht cus ion Bowoianr.torir .1 horror, daaa izodi-
ziniacho -.xporlnonto


- 22 -


ROSTOCK


an consent rat ions lasorinaas eon in clnoa dorarti E ^oason
Urifcns ftuasofuchrt wurdon, doaa aio Koitol, don Chef doa
Oborkoaaondoa dor KchmMbt, zu Giron -okonror. waror.. 3in
von Kliovo, von dor Hooroaaanitaotainapcktion, untorzoich-
notoa Konorandun voiu 23. Pobrucr 1944 aolgt, dcaa Vor.ucho
In Vorbinduns nit don DokterionkrioG r-n lobonden licnachon
von don un ? :oklccton Blorx vorgoachlcgon warden. Oaa llonorcn-
dun atollt feat, daaa "dlo Johrcacht auf Vorlangon doa Gono-
ralfoldnarachalla Koitol tol don Vcrauchon nlcht vormtwort-
lloh botollist werdon aollo, da ouch Voraucho nit lobonden
Ilona chon jonacht wuerton". (110-1309, .udcl.bow.326, .t.2615 1 ).

2 a atoht don pokiest™ .loatock kaur. an, Kcnntnla von aol-
chon Vorauohcn abzulougnon, wonn aolbat Koitol davon v/uaato,
doaaon Intorcaaongoblot woit uober nodlzlnlacho Poraohunc
hlnr.ua^Ing. ..ua donaolbon Dokusont coht horvor, dc.aa Srondt
jjlono bol dor Inatltut In roaon untorataotzto, wo dio Vor-
a echo vorgononcon wurdon. P.oatocl: :r.t zu, u.a. nit Randle a or
urvd 3 lono oinor Taguns uobor boktcrlologlacho Krio£afuohrun z
boigov/ohnt zu baton. (.1.3305). Sioho don Schriftaatz dor
Anlcla-.okohoordo sogon Blouo wogon oinor Scackroibun;; dor
Jrpori-.ionto uotor baktorlologiacho Hriogfuohxwv..

III. S0HLU33.

.loatook war oinor dor vorantw^rtiichon Puohror dor
d out a chon l.odizin. Hr war Dokai. dor nodUiniaohon Fakultaot
dor Borlinor Unlvoraltaot. 3:- war Doratondor Chirurg doa
Ko-rcaaonitootalnapoktoura - l-lnndloaor - nit don .long oinoa
Gonoralarztoa. ir wuruo Loiter doa ^ntoa fu^r biaaonaohaft
und Porachung untor Karl Brandt und hatto rlt ihn dio Vorant-
wortunj “zantral dlo ^ufgabon und intoroaaon doa 50 aanton
Sanitaota- und Ooaundhoitawoaor.a zuaaiconzufaaacn und woi-
3ungaconr.oaa zu atouom ...". Dioa bozos alch “:;uch auf
dao QObiot dor Tfiasonachnft und For a chuns n .


- 23 -


ROSTOCK


Drandt3 .'jat war In Dritfccn .ioioh dlo hoachate Autoritaot
fucr wiaaonachoftlicho Proton. Handles or ala Chef doa wahr-
aacHtannitaotawoaona und Conti ala Chof doa Hivilaar.itaota-
vjoaor.a r.iuaaton Dranlt 3oricht oratatton und woron an ,/oiaun-
_,on aolnoa *otos ^obundon. Roatook war Srnndta onyator Lit-
orboltor bol dloaor Taotl 3 koit. .toatock war cuch Kitcllod
doa ^rftoaidialratoa doa Rciohaforachun^aratoa ala arcndta
Vortrotor*

'.toatock war uobor dlo Sinzolholton dor vorbroohori-
aohon Sulfonanld vorauoho vollataomll ; ©rionticrt. -la /or-
altzondor dor ohirurslachon Soktlan und ala Hrndloaora do-
ratondor Chlrurs boroltoto or daa xrosronn dor Ta_unc dor
Loratondon x»orzto dor ’./ohrueeht in Mai 19d3 vor, bol don
Gobhardt und Piaohor uobor ihro vorbrochoriaohon Vorauoho
Uorlcht ora t at to ton und fuohrto dcbol don Voraltz. Gobhardt
aowohl ala Qr&wltz vorhondolton rdt Roatook vor dor Ta^un-;
uobor don zu hnltondon Vortroc. Gobhardt infornlorto
Roatook und ^randt uobor dlo Vorauoho. Oobhardt und Fiaohor
orlaoutorton auf dor Ta^-urv* dlo Vorauoho In «inzolnon, ob-
wohl dio3 Roatook bol aolnor 3ofrnrun£ vor Gorlcht ablouc-
noto. -a wurdo aocar borichtot, daaa drol V.onaohon In Fol-
jo dor kuonatllch horvor^orufonon Infltlorun.- jotootot wur-
don. iriobt duroh oln oinzijca .iort odor durch oino oinziRO
Tat brochto Roatook aolno haohtbofu.jilaao odor aolr.on 3in-
fluaa fuor olno Intcrvontlon^Jicaor Saoho zur Goltunj. Soin
Vorhalton konn folgorichtl- nur ao auf ;ofaaat wordon, daaa
or van dor .olitik, Konzontratior.ala^orlnaaaaon ayatona-
tiach zu- vorbrochoriaohon Vorauchon zu bonuctzcn, wuaato und
aio blllljto. Woltcro Vorauoho aohnlichor Hatur wurdon un-
tor dor Loitunj Gotbardts In dor x^it r.ach dioaon Dorlcht
Vorjononnon.

..uf jonau dor ^lolchon Ta*juns hiolt Din 3 vor dor
Kyjionoaoktion olnon Vortrag uobor Doordoriacho Plookfiobor-


- 2 d -


UCSTOCK


voraucho in Buchonvold, -obol Retook. KoUo S o Schroibor^
dor. 7 or.lt. fuahi-to. S. l.t unvor.tollbar, duaa Oohhcrdt,
Plachor and Din 3 auf dcrsolton Tcsuns ao offcn uotor i*ro
vorbrochorlachon Voraucho Sarlcht oratctton haotton hoonr.cn,
«onn nicht olno foatatohondo natloaol.oalall.tl.oho IdltB
vorsolo^on haottd, dlo dloao iroktlton SUthioaa. Bolclcoh-
ncr hr.tto tol dor vorhorcohondon Tajun S -or Sorctondon Cors-
to uobor dlo yon lhm nit toaohor durchfofuohrton Srrrlc-
runjavoravuho borichtot. Dloaolbon Voraucho mu-don uol
olnor ^roaaon Tn c unc In Huomborc In Oktotor W -2 boai.ro-
ohon, dlo von 3 ohrolbor wlo cuch von andoron Hooroaaonl-
taotaofflaloron boauoht mu-do. Ro.tooka &»«»tuna, dMa
or nlo von dloaor vorbroohorlaol.cn tolltlk Cor Sxporlnonto
on hllf.loaon Vorauohaporaonon ohr.o loron Zuatlraunc johoort
hc.bo, dc.aa or nlo olnon lout von Din;* Vortro; ur.d von don
doco,jon orhobonon filnwondunjon cohoorc hobo, lc-aa OoKinrlt
und Plaohor nlohta a* 5 ton, da. Ihn aUatrnulach doncoht h&-
to, olnor aolohon oohcuptun,; l:nnn koln Olr.uton eoaohonkt
word on.

Ho a took orhiolt olnon Soricht uotor Banana ttookfio-
t or voraucho. 2 r war Kit C lioU don nolobafor.chunj-ratoa,
dor ihn zuaoimon nit dor Luftwaffo untoratuotzto, und .toctcdca
.^rt; fvor T/laaonachaft und Foraohuns kloaaifizicrto coi-.o
Fornohun-on uotor Plockfiotor ala drinj.llch. :Uva;oua For-
aohun^on auf dom Ootiot dor opldodachon Qoltoucht, uoron
Flaming Voraucho on loboreion Konaohun vorsoh. wurdon ouch

ala dringlloh kloaoifizlort.

3 randta Kmt untoratuotzto nktiv Hirta und Biclconbaoha
Qoa voraucho, land® nachdo--. -.©stock dort tcotlg war. Sio
vortroohor 1 achon Foraohungon dloaor boidon Kaonnor wurdon
von .jat fuor /iaaonachnft und Forachung da drinjlich h.lr.a-
aifizlort. .toatock war dt d-raadt In Jnhro l»dS In Straaa-
burc, c.la brandt Dickonbach voraprach, -a ih- zu orr-oo ^lichen,

- 25 -


aOSTOCK


►


aoinc ihoajcnvorauoho cn Konaohon vorzun<Sfaom. .toatoclc
aril Jlckonb&ch In Berlin toi nindcacona oinor awloron Gc-
lojonhoit. Soinc Voraucho in I-ortat 1944 voruracchton don
x’od von vior ruasiachon Kriojasofonjonon. Bio Jcrichto
uebor dloao Vorauoho wurdon cn Jr end t a In dcr linivcral-

tftotsklinilc Goachickt, vior Ziccor entfornt von doatocka
juoro In donaol’;on Oobaoudo. ..orn dor Liitor doa ^-toa *uor
;iaaonachr.ft und Joraohunj alch nlcht nit dioacn .^jolojon-
holton bofaaatc, dnnn kenn non aich nicht verstollon, wor
aonat. Jrnndt aa^to, or wuaato nlohta uebor corttlicho
Voraucho in c.lljorxinon und Bickonbcoha Voraucho on lobondon
..onachon lti boaondoron.

bro.alt untoratuotzto auch andoro Voraucho cn lobondon

lions okon,waohrond .(oatcck hoi lhc in *nt wcr. uicao ui-Tcaa-

ton Voraucho zur arprobunj oinor nouon Snlbo cn kuonatlioh

horbol;;ofuohrton ihoaphorverbronnun on, und intaouchunjavor-
nit

aucho It/Sonfaa vor/ifteto: ,/aaaor.

Lio .nklft-otohoordo ur.toratollt, de.aa leva Bowoianatoricl
or ;lbt, dcaa Itoatock -ie.uptte.otor, loilnohcwr, ^r.atlftor, Vor-
ackublolatondor wen, aclno iuitiruamc jaw und in Verbindunj
atcuxl tilt i lc.or.on und Untomohrion, dio dio durohfuol.rurvj
i.iodiziniachor S.xporironto on lobondon Konachon ohno -uatlr.-
nunj dor Botroffonon zuri Qojonatand hattor., und oin kitjliod
oinor In Vorbindunj dac.lt atenondor. Crjanlaaticn odor QrUipo
(Brejvita Juoro und dor R»ichaforachuncaret) *ar, in doron
Vorlauf Hordo, Jrutclitaoton, Qrauaankoitcn, t'olturun on,
Grouoltnton und andoro unnon3chlicho Hanilunjon bojenjon
wurdon, und daaa aoino Schuld in Sinno dcr .unkto I, 11 und
III dor Anlcla^oachrif t orwioaon iat.

J 2 rx lo n


- 26 -


ROSTOCK


Ich, t'r cd lex, # X 046207, bcatr.cti^o her it, leas
loh durchr.ua vcrtro.ut pit dor cn~li3chon ur.d -outachon
S'rc.cho bin, ur.d -»c.3s daa Voratohondo cino vahrhoita-o-
rtr.oaao und richtl;;o Uoboraotzunj dicac3 Dekurontoa u^r-
atollt.

Ifuornborc, 8. Juli 1947

T’roi lax
f X 046207


- 27 -


MILITAERGBRICHTSHOP NR. I


Pall % 'r• 1


ZUSAMHBNFA3S RD*R SCHRIFTSATZ DBR
VSR-tiHOlSH S~AATES VON AMERICA


-gc gon—


KOHPAD SC HASP HR


Janos y.'/oFoncy
Alexander r.. Hardy

Arnost Horlik-Foohwald
Bather jano Johnson

Poor*

Tolford "’ay lor
Brlgadl r Conor*1, ''•S»A»
Chief of Cour.s< 1 for
•far Crlt os


Huornborg,

16. juni 1947


EINFU2HRUNG


Untcr punkt I dop .mklagoachrift wird dor Angoklagto Schae¬
fer boaohuldigt, daaa or olch pit andtron pcraonon in Vor -
fnlc.c oinca gcmoinaonon Vorhabona su cinor vuraohwoerung
und Uoborcinkunft ruaancongofxind n hat, urn modizlniacho Ex-
porincnto on Monachcn ohno dcrcn Zuatimnunr vorzunohmon;

TJntcr Punkt IT und ITI (Krlo^avorbr:. -hon und Vorbror.hon
go gen dio Mcnachllchkolt), daaa or Hoxipttaotor, Tcilnofainor,
..natlftor, v^rnchublciatondor gowoacn iat, aoino zuatimnung
gog.-bon und mlt pLnenon und TJntcrnohraon in Vorbindung go-
atandon hat, dio dio Durohfnohrung nodiziniachor Sxpori-
monto an lo 'vndon Vonnohen ohne ■y.uatiranung drr Botroffondai
aum oogonatnnd hatton.

Dom \ngoklagton Saba for wird die bonnndoro «oront-
wortllohkcit fucr und dio TcllnahnJ '.n lioorwnasor-JSxporl-
nontOB zur Loot golcgt, wio ai< In Ziffor 6 (0) dor An-
klafoaohrif t boachrlob-n oind.

VCT-.NIV/CRTLICHKEIT^FU ESj ^..HKS .vN y_KR«

Dor /.ngoklogtv) sohaofor war .ngoatolltor dcr Schorlng-
Workc und arboituto in den I/iboratnrlon dloaor Firmn. Soln
Spuzlall'oraohungagoblot wnr ohemisoho Thornpio.(Schaefer
r. 8349). in Jnhro 1941 trat «r in dio L'xftwaffo oin, kohl* to
nb r, nn^hdOB or aoino r-rundnusbildung orhnltcn hntto, au
don schoring-^orkim zxirucek und arbeitotr dort nla AoaisUrt
do o Lei torn dor i/xbnrntnrion . 1944 wurdo or Dir '<t*r dic8or
Abtollung.(Sohaofor p. RSVx). Da a* oioh nit Forsehxmganr-
bcit m b^aoha- rtigtc, machtc dio Lnftwof*\: von aulnon p aohig -
koltrn 0<branch und cr wurd- 1942 dar Snnitact-vornucha-
»md Lohrab tel lung in ju« t* rbog zmtotcilt, Ino dor Abtilurgen
doa Forachur.gaina11 tutoa fuor Luftfnhrtoodizin in porlin.
(Sohaofor P. 8351). 5r bchlolt indcaaon aoinc stcllung boi
den Sehcring-7orkcn boi. (Seboefor Bow. 14, R. 835. r 0.


- 1 -


Tn dioaor "lg-jnaehaft ala Ml tilled dor SanltQ0t3- "('raucho-
und Lohrabt' Hung taa or ralt vcrbrcchcrlschcn voraudhon
an jronzontratlonalagcr-Tnaasson In Beruohrung.

Am 26.und 27.0ktobor 1942 bcauchtc Sc hr. o for dlo
Kaoltotagung In Nu :rnborg wo Holzlo-hnor und Rnaohor lhrcn
Vortrrg uobor dio Kaeltcvcraucho Ira Xrnzcntrctionalngor
Doohnu hlolton. (schnefor R.83G1, aloho schrirtaatz d^r .;n-
klagob«.hoordo gegon d-n ;,ngukla 0 ton Siovora.)Er hlolt dort
auoh olnon Vnrtrng Uuber Durst und Kassnahnen zu 3«.inor no-
knompfung In Socnot. (sohrufor R. 0309,8362). Sohnofer bo-
atrltt, dana or Holzlochncr und Raanh r apro -hen hoorto,
abor dlru lot a. hr unimhrsoholnllch, da schncforo vnr¬
trng nra Tog nnch JTolzlochn >ra und Rnach.ra Borlohton go-
hnlt.m wurdo. (»0-40l, Ankl.Rcw.93, R.309, aloho .ntbonyn
Anaprnoho). TT bordloo -nr Holsloohn^r auch dor Rnnltnoto-
voraucha-und L hrabtollung zugotollt. (vo-401 obonl. Dor
vnrtrng von Holzloohmr ur.d Roach r wav cine Art sensation ,
dn dnrln klar zura Auadruck kan, dnai Konzontrntlonolngor-
Inonnacn fuur dlo bol don Vortrug bccprochonon Exporlrconto
v-rwand.,t vnrdon wnrcn,und daoa clnlgc dcr v».rouchnporaonon
a tar ban. (Lutz R.272). Ea lot alchr, daan sohnafor, dor hi
dor Tngung anwooond war, nlcht ala cln unlnUrtsal rtor 2u-
hn ror, u ondirn ala olnor dor 'Yiaaonsohnftlor, dor uob r
oln vorwnndfc03 Th-nn aprcioh, von dloaon 3 naatlonollon Ro¬
pe- t wussto«

In Pru ihonnunor 194-5 nnhn Schacfor an dor planung dcr
vjrbr oh rl chon " cr-rna -orver. ichc t 11 , Dloso vornucho
wurdrin an Hcoftllngon d «o Ronzontr^tlonnlngoro Dachau vru—
gononmen und waron von lbr^Tz erst.n A'nl’-ng In «al 1944 an
oln vcrbroch ri :chco Untorn hron. Vsoh zwol-oln-halb


Jahron raoordmlschor nc.dizlnl acbor v rauchc on Knnzon-
tratlonalogor-lnsasscn durch Aerzto d r Luftwnffo, oin-
achlioaalich Hnchon- Kaclto- Gua- und Flcckficborvor-
auoho In Puchonwald und KatswoUor, nrdnctc dcr Angoklngto
Sohrnod.r im sicboron Bowuaataoln, daas oinlgo dor Vor-
suchaporannon wahrachoinllch atcrbon wucrdcn, porancnllch
dlo Vnrnnhnc dm Moorwaaaorvoraucho on. untor ondoram nnhmm
Bockor-pruyaong, Bolglboock und Schaofcr, dio ac.ino "ntor-

gibonon w-ron, in dcr Planting und iyirchfuohrung doraolbon
toll.

An 10 ."al 19*14 fand elno ynnfcrcrz lrv/Luftf''hrtnilnl • to-
rlum (9D ? )otntt, an ^cr unt r and-r* n rhriat "am, Snhlck-
1'r, Bonkm-Pr y a nr und Schn-.for tollmhr.cn. n on kor-
Frcyncng und flohao'for vmtraton don Chof d a Luftwaffcn-
aanltioiodionotca. Muao K«nf ronz bofrtaato aloh nit dun
problem dm Trlnkbnrnnohung vnj, Mooiiroaaur. Zwol Motbndon,

Mo .rwnanwr trlnkbnr zu oaohon, -tan don zu dlooor Zolt den
Sonltactadlunot dir Luftveffo zur Vurfuogung. Dio olno,
dlo vnn Schaefer ontwlckolt wordm war und d n Nnmen
l ?ofatlt trtg, v nr cheniuoh gopruoft v»nr<'..n und pmduzlcrto
nnaaholnond trlni-barca Mcorwaa-or. sio hat.u Jedneh don Nntft -
toll, daaa alo betr oahtlloho Mon on vnn alibi r bmootlgto,
dna nur In boachraonktcn Vong.n zur verfuegung atnnd. Dlo
zwrltc Method. Borkntlt genannt, war olno subotnnz, dlo don
poaohmnok 6 to Moor^naaoro vmnund rto, nbor daa anlz nlcht
ouaoahlod. sio hatto dm "nrtcll olnfnrhoror "orato 1 lung
und vorwendunga

..uf dcr Tatung am 19.Mnl bcrlchtotu d r /.ngtklngtc
Puckor-Fr, yacng uebur g:wl g30 chcnlacho Exp rinu nto, dlo
vnn slrany r. focka Erprobung vnn Porkatlt I’urchgefu hrt wnr-
don waren. Er kne run Schluaa, caaa :ic B.dlngungun, untor
denon dlo sxporimonto vn r gono-_.on wnrdon warm, nlcht go-
nuogcnd rooliatlach dor Suonnt cntaprachm. 3r bcrlchtoto,

d,r Chof doa Luftwaffon^Srnltcctsdicnatoa:

-3-


"Sol dnvon uob, rz. ;t, das? bcl den Berka-vor-
fr.hr on naah dun Gcnusc doa Borkatita nach opaotc-
atenn 6 Tagon gegundfc itllcho Sohaodun zu cr-
tmrtcn aind, welcho cino douerndo geaundh.ltllcho
Schacdlgung nn^h a!ch s.'uhan und nnch Ansleht von
Untornrzt Dr. sohnefer nr.ch apaotcat.n3 12 r, ngon
mlt tootllohon Auagnng enden wlrd."(BO-177,Ankl.
BO*’. 133, R.479).

Doa Booultat dlcacr Konforonr. war oln o^achluaa, nouo
Dxp rlnontc vorzunohnon. Dloso anllton olnc vorauoharolho
fucr dlo Daucr von hooahstcn3 6 Tagen unfnaacn.waohrond do*
ulnor ftruppo v«n ’rcrauchaporannon nit Borkr.tlt bohandoltoa
Moorwaoaor gegobon werdon aollo, < inor and cron oruppu go-
woohnllchca Trlnkwnaaor, ulnor woltoren cruppo uoborhoupt
kolp Trlnkwnaaor und dor letzton Cruppo Waaaor, dao In dem
dnmla gobruuuchllohcn Soor.rtprwlnnt onth-ltcn war. Mon
br.aohloo3 dlo v^rnahao ulnor z«olt n vorauoharolho und dor
Borlcht fuolirto cum

"L uto nit Hoorwr.naor und Borkatlt oraaohrt, "la
fr«vi nt obonfnlla den vrrgoaohonon Soonotpr^vlant.

voraunhodauori 12 Togo.


D- naah Analoht dca Chofa drn SnnJtnotawenona bol
.’loaor uora-'ohar lh( nit dnuerndon goaundholtllotcn
oalir : 'lgungon bosw, d n T<x!o kr voraucbrpcrsnnon
zu roahnon let, anllon -la ’* -rnualiapornAncn Lou to
gonrrw n •* rrten, w< lah acl* :na dca Rolohs fuehrer a
38 *ur ”orCuogung goat lit nor'on." (BO-177, nbon).

'.lor lm vnllcn Sowusatacln, daoa die ”< rwcn«‘ung vnn
Dorkntlfc fucr inen Zol tr ain van 6 Tagon nlno dnuorndo
Sohnudlgung dcr vorauehaporar-non rlt alch brlngcn und daoa
apaotootina on 12 . Tag dor *pnd >Introton wu-rd , wurdon
Pin j no gemaoht, Kxp r inen to durnhzufuobrun, dlo 12 Togo
lnnv dnuorn oollton. Efl 1st zu boochton, *aoa dor K"«i-
f rwnsborlaht nicht anglht, daaa die ahct ’auor 12 Togo
ool, vie bcl dun ora ten Vorauoharulhfen. Do ran wua. to,
daaa non untur aojc hon Dnataonden nloht nit Prolwilligon
rochnon k^nntu.


- 4 -


ontachiod slch dlo K^nforonz dnfuor, Ronz -ntratlonslagor-
Tn3aa3cn z« vor*'cndcn, r *ic Ihr von dor SS zur vorfuogung
g 3t< lit warden •ma"' , cn. in ^cricht ueber cino zwoltc Taping
am 20,V'i 1944 hc!s3t cs, "ala vorauebaort wurd-. Daohnu bo-
atlnr.fc." flwf-177, "ben), Abschrlftcn dcr P.criehto uobor « , lc
Tajmng gingen unt:r an'*cron an -’lo S'’nltnot8-vcrn’Joha- und

X

L hrabt llung dcr Luftwaffe In Juoterbog, dor die Ango-
klagtcn SOhaOfer und Kalzlo hn< r, dlo <*lc XQcltooxparlaunto
nit Pouch r durohfuohrton, zu'utcllt warenj an rlo D U L
Berlln-Adlurshaf, d.r dl ; Angekln ten Ruff und Romberg
zugotulIt war on; an dlo Luftwr.ffon-sanltnctalnapoktlon
(L.ln.l ); und on don Rolchsfuohr-r SS. J>:r porlcht war vm
Chrlotcnoon von tcchrlachon Pu ro doe RUf untersoiahnot.

Daa Protoleoll C r Xonfer nz (KO-177, obon) zolgt oln-
wondfrol, rtnoa schoofor Rich -‘aruobor vnolllg klar war,
daoa dlo goplanton Mtorwaaecr-voraucho, wonn ulo 12 Togo
Inn/’ ondnuor.ton, ^/locr-inllo zur h-bon *»uo rd on . Tr"tz-

don ntnchJ nan nlah '’«ruor, *3cp .rIr.c ntc fui r elncm nMohon
ZoltrouBi •"'rs»mobrr n. Dor vcrmichnpl-n -"irdc p. • n'*ort, urn
R7p rlnObl nit, n-nh dr Schnof* ;•» eh n "othr-’c bohnndclten
Vc rwoon' r olnjtuuohllcaacn*

Dlo ouf r Tajiing an 19,und 2C.!’al 1944 goplanton und
b>.oahl' noonon ?.xp .rliaonto, wur cn von d..n .‘.ngokln. t. n Bolpl-
bouck nit Hlir. dor Anjolclu, ton schrnodor, Clovoro, Bockor-
Fruyaong und and r n lr K^nzentraclonalagcr Dacha In Monnt
August und dor oral'n Hacilftu d» a September 1944 v^rgunomnon .
44 "urauahap. r.:on:n, alien Zlgounor, wur n verwondot.

Dlo v-m An;:oklagt n Bclflbo ak u bor Jod.o dor ’’orauahs-
pornonon . ofu.lirt n Tabolion, -*lo die ’'crtcldgung achllcaa-
llch ala r«o»-olcnotor< al v«rzulc: on gozwungcn wurdo, rnhon
Flnzelhc It n


u bcr  lo Sxp.Tlnanto. (9Glflb"cck -c-. S', *• 93 3 1'. TKn "cr~
suc l, spcra''non ~ur«*c cnt-c^cr w»ah -’cr 'x-.haofor • anhon vcth^'o
prases a lor tea J'cor^cascr (R abac for-7ascr-W» tit ) ^or Ber¬
ks tit '-•or Infnboa xfcorwnaao^ pegoben, cine !'cnpc v~n 5on
<v*cr lew ccn tecgllch. Dio Daucr ''cr t-peri-onto ashnankto
zvriaahon 5 und 12 Tagen um’ -'ic vorau^hapers-nen nuasten bia
zu 8i Tagen hungern. (7ogon sinz-lhcltcn aioho Cr.n Sohrlfta«tz
C-r :.nklagcbch''cr'’o go 6 cn Bo4.1b<H>-.k). Dio Vcrauchapora^ncn
*7aron lee 1 no Froiwllllron. (wll-.ok,R.9388,9392; 1/mblngor,

R. 10200-1; H^Hcnrolnor, R. 10509). Die Kc hr ho It dor V'rainha-
pora^nen raron Stnatann, clv'orlgo Uliiortcr Kntl-ncn -io Taohonhii)
p-'lon und ouaaon. (Laublngor, R.1'208; K^clUnrcin^r, R. 10513;
w*rliook # 9388).

.;ua Cor Zeu cnnuaaaro >:r Z uron fucr '’io ..nklaecbch* n'c
p. ht herv^r, C.aaa «’lc r-naacr-craushc ‘"'rd un* qurvlt.n nit
alah brn-bt.n. Die ’'oravcbaTKra«non orkrc.nktrn aob^or un«» mn
bntto Ccn "InCruok, Casa ala nirht viol laongor lobon "uordon.
(•"•rllock, 0.9390). "Inc .nzahl Pora^nen batten .nfacllo v^n
Dollrlun. Z-oi ihnon 'tir^on in 'aa Lncorlr.zarott uobor-

fuohrt un<l ihro yl tgol*nngoncn aahen alo nlcht wlortor. (Lnublngor,
R.10209). Dor ^nficklagto Polclb'xsck bokundoto koln Zoiohon
v«n Kltlold odor Bca^rgnia, nonn dlo ’'urauahapora^non vor
Dnrat r«dor Hun Ll or irro roCoten. (H*ssllcnrolnor,R .10510) • Ibro
k^crpcrlicho "arfaasung vcraohloahtcrto aich nla F rt lgo Cloaor
^xporlncnto botrnochtllch. Sine Cor pora^nen hatto clnon lahn-
ainnaanfall. (Tach^fonig, R.9336). :.n ^v’o Cor Rxporlnonto
rurdon drei Ccr pora»*nen zur static fuor innero jrrankheiton
vorbrasht• rinor Cav^ atarb lnf^lgo dr "xporinento.

("■a'xh' % fonig, ° .9339-9).

Me pokundimpon dlcaor Zeupen rrorCen '‘•arch •'So


Featst. llungcn '’cr aachvcra taendipen e'er -.nklagobch^crdo
bekrneftigt. Dr. Ivy crklncrtc, d*ss, wenn nar. loan can Ber-
katit Mooruaascr tacglich zu aicta nchnon ™uerd.o dios in
wcnifccr ala 12 Tagon den Tod hcrboifuchron wuordc. ^onn 500's en
tao^lich untop idoalcn vorhacltnlason oingen^nnen wuerden,
wuerdo dor T'xi zwisohen don 8.und 14 .Taj ointreton. (R.9045).

In diosen Zuamncnhnng nuss nan bC'*onkcn, dasa dio rxperinento
waohrond dor ho is son S''tnn-rnonato vorgononr.cn wurden, olno Tot-
aaoho, die aichor die duroh din Finnahno von yoorwasacr und
Borkatlt voruraaafcto Fntwr.oaaorung noch vorataorkto.

4 \uf drund aclnoa stutfiuna dor klinis^hon .‘.ufsoiehnungon
(RoI;'lb"C ok no-134, oben) f»b Dr. Ivy ala Zougo an, dnaa olno
oolho dor vorauihaporaoncn vnehrond dcr vorsuoho 'Tank waron.
rr gab nuadruoakli-h an, dio Mnogli-.hkolt bratohe, d.aaa drnl
dor on ornathaft'.at orkranlctcn poraonon Dr.uoraahaodon rtevon-
gotragon odor an/pol cn '’loaor "xpcrlnunto atarbon. (n.9050-9).
(Sleho don Sahriftaatz gogen Potglbncok wo w cn Dlnzclhoiton).

Die Zou ; tnauaao > von Dr. Ivy bowolat forncr, daaa ca faonz-
lich unno<,tig war, dio vorauaho 12 Togo lnnc- durohzufuohron, wl
oo auf dor Tatung an 19.und 2o.Kai 1944 goplnnt -rurdo.

("0-177, «bon). Drei bi3 vi r Togo dauorndo vorauahe }\aotton
gonuogt an su zolgcn, dnao Borkatlt gonau so ontvrnoaaornd
wlrkto, wio Moorwaaaor. (R.9C46). Dr. Ivy sogto aua, dna3
laengor andnuorndo •^eperinonte nur cincn Sinn hntten, -onn
feotgcatollt worsen aollto, -lo 1 -ngc Mcnaahcn nit Son ~''or
lnon eon Moorwasacr tac 11 eh an L ben bl lbon ko.nnton. Fa iat
klar, da33 d.-.r "xpcrln ntlorplan nit Todcafn.llm r- ahneto.
(R.9046-7).

"'ofon oinor clngchund.-n ^caehroibung dor Durshfuchrung
und. doa verbre ^Krlaohcn Charnkt.rs dp' >"’aa or-^x-
porlnonto -rlrd. auf die Sahriftsaotze dor ..n'olaj obch^ordc
gegen dio .ngoklagtcn schroeder und Bcilboeok vorwioaon.


SCELUSS


Sohacfc? war Sachvcratacndlgcr und spozinliat fucr Kungor-
und Duratprrblcno und hatto auf dloaco ^obiot aclbat 'Mrauchc
durohgofuo’rot. (schacfor >o~. 20-21, w.837o> Schaefer,>.8371).
Er wuaatf, asa Borkn und slrany, '•oron "oth'v'.on cr auspr-
' loron s^lltn, S-.hnrlatano -nron. (Schaofor, o.9382; alobo
amb Scbiofor ®ow. 29-30, 8383-1). Hr war ucborzouc-t, daaa

’’orient l'; "gaonzlich unwirkanc war un*" -'aaa dlos a'' ^ffonkun-
dlg rmi , daaa oa keinen Sinn hatto, dealt *u cxporlncntloron".
Er pat an, daa^r dor cntachlodcnatc ''ognor dor Berka-Hcth-'do
war uii' dcahalb v-'n doc Loiter dcr Togung ar. 20. I'ai 1944
''.arar gohindert wurdo, acinc ablohnondo jrclnung zura Auadruck
zyfcrlngon. 5a ool lhn a«£ar godr^ht warden, daaa aoln Vorbal-
ton ala Sab^togo botraohtot wuordo. (schaofor, 9. 8308). Er
gab an, daaa or nJoht daa gorlngatc mtcroaao damn gohabt
ha otto, daaa "craucho r.lt ’T "fat it an ’’cnaohon v«rgon^nnon
wnordon, d.a or nlohta nit dloaoo prncjnrnt zu tun hit to. 5 a
wioro la ocher 11 <*.her Ehrrolz aolnoraolta ro-oaon, ~onn or hnotto
bow Ison Her., rlo gut ""fctlt und -»io aohlooht Borkatlt
rc"»oaon ao 1. (o, schaofor 8339).

Ea lat Jed^-h hewloaen warden, daaa dlcac “ohAuptunfon

ooltons Qchaofcr nlcbt achluoaslg alntf und koine ”crtcidlgung

daratollon. ’7o nr. Schacfora ""rbrlnscn to hr wnorc, -tuordc or

alchorliah nioht dlo z-rcltc K"nfcronz dor Tatung boaucht hn-

bon, dlo olnon Tag neohden or ongcbllch aclno naobdruc okll-

chon Elnwndungon vnrgobraoht hatto, atattfand. (schnofor,

9. 8539). Br tmhnto o^er olnor dritton Vcraataalune an 25.

Hal bol. Schaofor vcrauohtc dloaon ^idorapruch durch aolnon

nlodorcn Dionatcrad In dor Luftwaffe su crklacrcn, aber o a

lat klar, daaa or dlo zrrei Tngungen ar. 19. und 20. Val ala

aashvoratp.ondlgor -'ortrotor d.or Luftwaffe bo such to und aoln

“ nnG nlcht ontsoholdcnd gowaon aoln k«nnte. Tonn oa rirklloh

o?^aln?zt Syl£Z. f A ?J; rkon ™«Wu«h erh^bon baotte, wlo
„, n * jnhPhabcn rill, a- -uerden aolno '^rroaotEton lhn

nchnon! M ' ™ dCa T * ?un « on “ 2 * 25. val tclUu-

- 8 -


nbaofor nb lndoascr. zu, daaa or boldcn Ta.cungon bcipcw-hnt
habo. (w. 8392, 9541). Tjobordlca Sc'wito cr koine Brklaojtting
^ r -obon, daaa die Pxrcrlrcntc nit SO'aofcr-’-rnaaor In den
"xpcrlnonticrplnn ointcz-cron -nirdon. (S'-haofor, p. 8541). Daaa
dl0B0 Sntsobc Idling nloht -hno don Sat und dlo Botoillping doa
Saohvorataindlgon, dor dloao Moth-do ontwlokolt hatto, haotto
gotr-ffen word on k-onnon, llojt auf dr Hand. Aua don Aufzoioh-
nungen dcr K-nforonz an 19. Mai 1944 (NO-177, -bon) goht hcr-
v^r, Cixaa anh-n an dlcaon Tag dlo Entaohcldung , otr-ffon w*r-
r’on wnr, dlo ixpoi*! onto nit Koorvaaacr und Bcrkntlt fuor dlo
Dnuer v-n 12 Tqgon v-rzunchncn. Auf dor sclbon Tagung hatto
'Johnofor aolnor roinung dohln .luadruok t -c oben. data, wonn
Noorwnaaor und Pcrk«tit vor-end ,t -erdo, nnoh 12 Tapen d r T-1
olntrcton truerdo. (Pohnofer, P. 8534). Pa lot ala- bc-loaon,
daaa obnoror apnotcatona nr lo. *-,i a!nh v *llkwm dr 03 o n
bOTuaat war, dnaa din *'-mahnc dor ''orr-naacr-Txporlnonto n-t-
"ondirer-oiac oln ,r cahon daratollcn r-uerdo. Dnruobcr hlnaua
E.cht oua aulnor Auaaago hcrv«r, daaa cr an dioaor Tnrun? und
don darauffnlgonden kolnoawoga ala oln nlnht don Offlzlorarnng
’ °' <lclt1 cnd.or ..rzt tollnahn, a-ndorn ala Luft-nf fon-'laohvor-
atnondl<;or. Dios wird duroh dlo Tataaohe bowlcaon, dnaa or
aolno Taotlgkclt bol den Sohcrlng-Zcrkon aalbat nooh aolnor
Sinzlohung zur Luftwaffe f-rtaotzen k-nnto; durnh aclno zutcl-
lung zur Sonltaota-Vcrauoha- »md ^chrnbtollunf und d.aduroh,
dnoa cr In der Ln. o war, nit den Angoklngtcn 3 cckcr-F*o 7 acng
t,loph-nlaoh wogon dcr r*pcrIncnto in v cr bindunf zu troton;
dor lotztcro wrr -u dloacr 3oit — raohungsborntor dco Angcklag-
ten Sohr-eder. (Snhaofor, 8359).

PnMofer slab nlo ,, cn ^ ? -p rrlnoatcn dlstmzicrt.

"r nahrn nn dcr "-nferenz !« nkt-ber 1944 tell, — ^olglb-ook
uobor d lc Snaultnto Porlnbt cratattcto. (v 0 -474, Ankl. »ow.

131, P. 474). Sohaefer gab die Tntaaohe seiner .in^oacnhclt
be! dioaor K-nferenz zu. (P. 9560). Dlo Tr.taacv.o, daaa Sohnofer
aufgof-rd^rt wurd.c


N


diaaor Xmfercnz beizuwnfcnen, 1st ©In schluesai^er Po-»ois da-
fuor, daas or boi dioson Szpor I r.en ten nitorboiteto und v«ll-
atoondig uobor ifcre Planung und Vr>rnafcmo inf^miert trar. Soino
Cogcnwart -raoro unn-'ctlg und s-gar unorTjor.aoht gowoaon, *Tonn
or ala Cogicr dor Sxpcrlnento angoaohon wordon vraoro, trio or
jotzt don Torlihtahnf glaubon mohen trill. Aua Schaofor3 cidoa-
aftattlloh t Aussago v«r dcr ’'orhandlung gcht Ik Zusannonhnng
nit r’ioacr Tacung horvor, daaa cr -ruaato, daaa dio Dxpcrinonto
In X^nzor.trati^nal?pcr Dachau "raohrend oir.oa ZcS traunoa v«n
7 zu 12 Tagon" v^rgononron -r-'rdcn turcn. Dr. Poiglb''ook borich-
toto avch, *033 die T 'xoorInor.to Lcbcrach-ollunpon •uir’ norv^oao
Symptoms zur P^lgo "chaht haottcn. Dcliriun und golatigo ’U^o-
runron atolltcn si ah r.uoh oln. (vo-474, ''bon). Auf dio ’’olao,
wio slo in "orlaufr dm Gorlnhtavorhandlunfnn obraouchlich
nurdc, v. rauahtc Sahacfor .-.tlaac dtollon aoinor oldcaatnttll-
ohcn .kuaarv.o, dio ihn 'tier aoino HI tango klut ton bolaataton,
vrcgzuorklaoron. 3r nusatu indcaacn zugoben, daaa or d.lcao
cidcaotnttllaho Zrklaorung «hno N^otigurv, bcaahwrr und aio
untcrzoichnoto und aolbat clno jtnzahl v^n Porlohtlgungon in
Toxt v^r dor Pntcrzolahnung \ rnahn. (Snhncfcr, p. 0560 ).

Die Tntaaoh©, daaa das nit dor Sahaofor• achon ’’othodo
pr^zooaiorto J'o.trwnaaor hrrnl^a 1st ur.d dio Ocaundholt d.»r Vor-
auchapora^cn niaht aaha dlpto, atollt keino "crtoidlcung fuor
Sahncfor ^nr, da rr miaato, daaa dor "xporinontiorplon in ,\ 11 -
renoinon oin * f crbroabon dnratolltc ur.d dio Durahfuchrung dor
"xpcri-icnto T r d und Qua Ion fucr dio * f crauchapers''non z-;r pclgo
hatto. Dr. a a or koin ’'ortnuon zu norkatit batto, lot obonfalla
frnz nobonaacehllch. *> unfcorstuotzto voraaotzliah vcrbrochorl-
mho 5xporir-.or.to u r. zu bowoiaon, daaa 3olno ’cthoro dio boaao-
ro v«n dm bcidon w.

Dio Anklogobohncrdo untoratollt, daas da3 Boroianatorlal
or.ibt, 'a3s Konrad Sohaofor Haupttaotor, Tcllnohncr, Anatiftor,
•'orachubl^atcnd-.r :mr, 3cinc Zustinnung t ab und in 'orbindung
stand nit planner, und rntomohnon, dio dio Durchfuohrung nodi-


- 10 -


(Scit j lo cos Originals - F^rta.)
ziniaohcr Vcrsuohc ''hnc Zuatlraaua© dor Potrnffoncn zun C-e&on-
atand hattcn, und. ifit^liod cinor Or£anisnti'*n 'xicr Oruppo rror,
dlo In Verblndun^ stand nit dicson Vorauohcn,in doron Vorlnuf
•"'rdtatan,

(Scitc lie. a Originals)

Rrutalitac ton, Grauaaaikoiton, "-Itcrunpon, '•'rouoltator. und
nndora unmononhlinho ffendlunron Njfan.Ton *mrdcn und dnas acino
•rhulr in Sinno dor Pvrnkto r t tt nru j ttt ?-. v ankln ~os~.hr i ft
orrloaon lot .

*SSDS«


Tnh, ^rcd Lax » 7. 046207, V.stactifc Mcrnit, dass inh
duruh&ua v;rtrnvt *J.t dcr n-llaohcn ”nd ’-utsohon Sprnoho
bln, und dr.as dr.a •*~rstobondc oino nahrhoita onaocao und
rioVlpc "cbcraotzonf: dco ^kuajcntoa ■•^nrad ^rhncfor"
daratollt.

Nucrnbor , 25. full 19-47

FH.ID UX
X 046207


11 -


Hj, 1


ZUS^ZSSI^ouJ'JSIm 5C2MPX &LIZ ZC2
vshsikig'tlk sr-.r-:: VOE ^jRJS^

- &o£Qn -
SI2GPHILD HUP?

h-js '..oi*?c —:g hoissho

G20HG -UGUSI ' LLTZ


Huoraborg,

16. Juai 1947


Jccos i:. ’JcKcuioy
Alcxmdor G. Hrrdy
^rr.jot iorlik-Kochrnld
Hcfchor Jeno Johnson

Pori

Tolfjrd Icylor
Brigadier Gonorcl, U.5....

Chief of Counsel f.r -cr Criuce-


HurT. RO.uaiJxG. T7LLIZ


Untor Punkt I der ^nklageachrift werden die Angeklagton
in v/esentlichen beschuldlgt, dess aia sich nit andoron
Peraonen in Yorfolge eines geueinsaner. Vornabona zu einor
Vcrschwoerung und Ueboreinkunft zusanacngefundon hobcn,
un aodiziniacho ixporlncr.te an lebonde.n Honachen ohno
doren Zuati—:ung vorzunohneni untor Punlct II und III
(Kriogavorbrcchen und Vcrbrochon gegen die llonachlichkeit),
dcaa aio Haupttaotor, Toilnohcor, ^natiftcr, Vorachub-
loiatondo gewoacn aind, ihrc Zuatiar.ung gogobon und nit
Plaonon und Untcrnohncn in Vcrbindur.^ goatandon habon,
dio dio Durchfuohrung aodirinischor onoriaonto an
lobondoa Hor.schon ohnc Zuotinr.ung der Dctroffendon zua
Gogonatond liatton.

Don ^ngoklcgton ttcltz wird ia bcsoneern aoino bo-
aondoro Vorantwortunc und ioilnahno an ::oohon-Vor8uohon,
wlo in Ziffor 6 (A) der ^nklabooofcrift cuagofuchrt, und
an Kaolto-Vorouchcn, vie in Ziffor 6 (3) cuogofuchrt, zur

lent golc w t.

Don Ijigoklcgton Ruff und Roabcrg wird vor clloa di-
booondoro Vorantwortung und Tollnohao an der. Koohon-Vor-
auchon, T io in Ziffor 6 (;.) der Anklc^oachrift auagofuo.'.rt,
aur Loot gologt.

X. STDLIUKG Uirp VDRANrfOKTUKG.

GEORG i-UG UoX rjDIZ

Dor Angoklagto !oltz war aolt lcn^on Jchrcn Paoharzt
fuor 2oontgonolo a io. (’.*olts, 2. 7033). I-- J ‘.ro 1955 or “
iiiclt or oi non 3uf,en der Univcraitcot Huonchcn a of den
Gcbict der Luftfehrt-IIodlzin Vorlcoun^cn zu hrltoni gloic. -
zoitig richtotc er in pnysiologischen Inotitut dor
lluonc honor Univcrcitcct cine klcino Vcrsuchaabtoilung oin.
(T7olts f 2. 7040). D-r Augoklcgto hiolt cn dor Muonchcnor
Onivoroitaot YorlC6un~cr., weehrend or gloichzoitig oich
ait Forochungsnrbeiton in In8titut bofr.aato. (NO-677,
.Ankl.Bor. 17, 2. 113)

In Jr.lire 1337 trr.t dor ingoklagto Toltz dor .CSDnc
boi.(*.:oltc, R. 7156). -ueaordor. war cr Ritgliud dor ~S
Aorzto Vorolnigung und der HS 3esor.tcr. Ycreinigung (Tolte,
3. 7158).

• - 1 -


Ia August 1939 tret cr els Steb3nrzt in die Luft\vcf::o ein
and bokloldoto ea Andc dca Kriegoa den Bang cinea Obor-
iolderztoa. (Tcltz, 2, 7159), Kaohdoa er ia August 1939
in die Luitvyeffo cingctrotcr. r.rr, lcitetc dor Angcklcjto
die Pluegzcuofuclirer-Pruofatcllo in Houbibers und
lcitoto die fcodoaBtc.-3di£o Prucfstcllo 17 facr nouhenfor-

echung in Hucnckon. (R. 7042).

Ia Soar.or 1941 rurdo die :.*otreadi_koit v:eitorcr
Hochonf or sc bunion r.ugcnschcinlicli, da dcr Luftkriog

inacr grooc3cro Bcdcut.n^ gcrann. -olts'o -btoilung in
?;.yoiDlo 6 iecl'.cn Inatitut dor Dnivoraitest Iluonchon rurdo
dehor von dcr Luftveffo uebornoaaon end in "Inatitut
facr Luftfehrtuodiaia in I.ucnchen* un&otr.uft. (110-611,
Ankl.Bon. 17, R. 113). Toltz rurdo von Gcncrclobcr .
oteboorzt Srioh Hippko, Chef dcr Luftwr.ffon Sanitaota-
inapektion, nit dor Loitung dioaos Inotitutco bocuftrr.jt
und orhieIt Vellar.ohton, dra Inatitut gnnz woacntlioh
zu vorgrocoa.rn. (Volta, 2. 7044. 2. 7152). 2aa Porac bun's
gobiot dee Ir.atitutos uafr.aoto die kocrporlicho Rocktion
doa FlugzougfuctirorE in groason Eoohon, aeziprositnot
dor -.taung, Slutairkulstion, -bkuohlung, Zollcpa und
Tiodorbolobunc doa flugzcugfuohroro. (2. 114, Volta
2. 7045).

In ooinor 2i_onaolicft r.la Loitor dco Inotitutoo
f tt or Luftfeiirtnodizin in Hucnchoa unto rat cad Volta in
dioziplinrriaohor Hinalcht Ion Luitgcu 7 in ilucnofcon,
in niaaonaobcftliohon Dirgon dc«OoO- untcratand or
dirckt doa Chof dor _btoilon. iucr Luftfehrtnodizin,
Anthony, ic dor Luihvnffcn Sanitcotainapcktion untor
Hi; ko. ("cltz, R. 7155). -s suae crrcctat cordon, dcso
dor AnoaMcgto 3oci;or-?r-yo.ng vr. 1941 bis -A;fnng 1944
Hilfabor ter untar Anthony in dor lufttrartr-odiainieoboa
-btoilunc gore8on i t, end dr eg -i i-i Ancchluea dornn.
Letter dor -btc lung c.lo ^nthony'a iir.cblolgor rurdo.
(;!0-669, Ankl.Bor. IS, 2. 110)


- 2 -


*


hupp, roislrg. '..sL?a


Dcr ^ngo’.clegtc -tuff apcziclisicrto aloh ncch do:.
-bochluss ooinor Studion cuf don univcraitaotcn 3orlin
und 3onn in Jnhro 1932 auf dcs Gobict dcr Luftfchrtr.odizin.
(Huff, 3. 6490). In don Anfcngstcdion seiner ..rboitor.
boschcoftigto or oich fccupt 3 aoc;-.lich denit, zu crforachcn,
ob nan die kliactiachon Vcrhcoltnisso, vric sio in grosoen
Hoehon ongotroffon cordon, in irgead omcr Forn fuor
thorapoutischo Zwoohe nutzbr.r neehen koennto. In Janur.r
1934 crhiolt dcr Hngo':lcgtc oinor. ?.uf en die dcutsoho
Vorouchor.n3tr.lt fuor Luftfahrt, uc Cort cine -btcilung
fuor Luftfahrtnodiztn oinzurichton. (3. 6491» 3. 114).

Huff tret dor IISD..F in Jehre 1938 bci und vrx Roccrvo-
lcutncnt in dor Luftvr.-fic. (Huff, 3. 6493).

Die doutaphe Vcrouchocnstalt fuer luftfnhrt, in
f: lgondon "DVL" gonennt, wrr oino cingotrcgono Gosollachr.ft,
von priveton und Hogioruagokraicon gogruendot nit don
Zv/ooX dor luftfchrtforcohung cuf risooncdhaftlichcr Grued-
lngo. (Ruff, 3. 6491). Die Gcaollschaft bcst.nd c.uo vor-
aobiodonon Instituton, no dio Forachungon durchgofuohrt
vmrdcn. Dio DVL crhiolt ihro Voisun^on von dor Luftvvcffo,
und Ruff'o dJiatr.lt in boaondoroa untoratrnd dcr Senitaoto-
incpwktion dor Luftweffo. drift orhiolt ocinc .Jiuoiaun«on in
toohnischon und nodiziniachon ~ngelogor.hoiton von dor
3cnitr.otainapckticn,und hatto dorthin aomo l.oldun^cn zu
orotetton. (3ff 6493). Dor ^ngoklc^o Huff vorblieb in
ac.nor Stollung r.lc ioitor dor ;.notr.lt fuer Luftfahrt-
nodizin in dor DVL bia ’••riogoende. (BO-638, -nkl.Bov:.

19, 3. 114).

Die Lrboitcr. dcr «lr.,,c Irgtcn Ruff in dicaen Inatitut
logon r.uf drei gotronuton Gcbicton: 1) Luftunfcll-~icoon-
aohr.ft, 2) Floggocc r.’indlgkoitv.n, 3) Hot lie nforec hung.

Ruff'o orot„r ..ssieeont ir. seine . Institut tier dor Hn-
goklngta Koaberg.


angg. B0I3 SH G. —£L? Z

Hull’s "QLPC- ^G ro::^g

Dor ^ngolcl&ctc Hoaborg bocchGOftigte eioh toit
1937 sit dca Gobiot dor Luftfahrtnodizin. Ia Jr.bro 1937
dicnto or zv;oi !lone.to boi dcr Luftveiio, und in Jenuar
19>8 Icon cr in Con Stab dcr DVL in Berlin ur.d vurdo
..aoiatent doe Ingcklagtdh Huff in Inotitut fucr Luftfnbrt-
nodizin. aoaber^ tret dcr KSD-P ic Jehro 1933 bci.

(a. 6765, KO-583, ^nScl.3cn. 19, H. 115).

Dor -ngoklngtc aorberg vrurdo cle wisaonechcftlicbcr
Hiterboitor dcs iingoklcgton a oil oingcatollt, unC scino
Spozie.lcufgnbe lc^ ir. dot tbcorotiochon ur.d prr.ktisclion
Auov.-crtung von Luftun£collen. -ucaor ea boerbeitote RrxSt
luftnediziniocbo For8c:.un t afrr w or.. (Pnnbor,, a. 6765).
ifnchdon die DVL in Jr.bro 1939 oir.c Untcrdruck-Zanaor bc-
konuon hetto, riebtote dor Angofcln^tc ooir.o Bo.nuobunion
cuf don Gobiot dor Hoohonforachung cuf die -rhoohung dor
Koohon-~idcrotcndofc.e;:iokcit duroh phcraceoutiooho I'S ttol,
die ''irkaca-c.it von J?.rvitin, Untorouchun,. on ueber Fnll-
ochirn.boprucn^o r.ua irooaon Hoohon, ploctzlichca Drue'.:-
nrchie db on und viclo cclxnlicho Diego. (Hoaborg, R. 6757).

Die gngoklcgton * oltz, Huff und Honborg r.utzton
ihro obonoonnniiton Stollun^cn und ibre Lrfchrun.on cu£
do.: Gobiot dor luftfr.hrtn-dizln in oincr "ole., -olc io
die Bogohung von uriogovorbreeben und Vcrbrccecn gcGca
die Uonachlic .lccit, • io aio iunon in dor jLnklr.goacbrift
aur Lcat _ologt rordon, alt aich breckto.

II. ESH80B1ILI0HL 33g3ILIG01K IX .

ciaaiscsa::

.’.ua dcr Dovroia-rhobunc ging bervor, dcac dio •lago-
klr.gton “olta, Sufi' und donborg aich sn dcr Plrnung und
..uofuohruag dor vorbroeboriooben Hookcnvoraucho r.n
Inscascr. dc6 Dcchauor b.;nacntrctional:£Orc botolligt hnbon.
“oitorhin b t aicb ergo bon, dens dcr -n^c’.rle.; to "cite cn
Blcnungcn und tfatornohnungon, die aich ..it UntorkuahlunoB-
vcrauchen ia Dcchnuor ^cnzontrrtional' tor bofccaton,
tcil 0 cnocn:ur. und dealt in Verbindunj gestendon bet.


R'JF?. ac:3fiBG, dSLTZ


KQ3HE::vaasjc;g

So lion fruohzoitic vurdo cs weohrcnd des -xio u cs
fuor r.ctvcndig orechtot, Porschun^cr. cuf don Sochoneooiot
tuizuotollon, veil die divertor. ZcnpfflugecuGO .^roossorc
Hochon orre ichor. konnten. Hicr ontstend dr.6 Probloc dor
Vcrfuo-barkoit^cnschlichcE Vorsuchaobjokton, de ?ior-
vcrauchc els ungenuogend en£C8oacn vurden. Dio Hochon,

die in Prr u o keson, lc:on bci 12.000 I^tcr bis ueber
20.000 Motor hinsus, end oa vorstoht sich dehor von
scl'o8t, dr.es dioao ~rt von Torouchon ccucocrct gefnohr-
lich vvrr, end dcao Proirillico, vie r.ue don 3onoi8nctoriel
oreichtlich, nicht au findon rcrcr.. Dior.o Schviorigkcit
\7urdo durch dio Yoroendung von ^onzontr.'ticnolr.dorheoxt-
lin^on ohno doron Sin\TiHi 0 ung uoborviindon. Dr.s ersto
.inzoichon fuor diese vorbrachori8oho hbaicht oraohoint
in oinon Briof dos Dr. Siognund ilr.achcr, oinc3 Luftveffon-
Arztoo, an don Roic.iofuchror SS, datiert v.a 15. ifci 19^1:

"Zur Zoit bir. ich arch Huonchcr. sun Iuft^rukonnr.nd.
VII konerndiort fuor oinor. r.crzClichcn -uovjrhl-
kurz. eccbread diotce ICurocs, -Oi den die Hochoa-
flunzouxf rschung cino echr grococ Eollc opiolt, -
bodin t durch die otvea orcocoorc Gipfolhocho dor
ongliachon Jocdf.lugzou^o - vrurdc nit crootcc 3o-
dr.uorn orvr.chnt, dcao lcidor noch kcincrlci Vor-
cucho alt Uonschoncrtoricl bci uns engoetoHt
v/erdon konnton, dr dio Vorsucho cohr ^ofcohrlicu
oind und oici: fro iwilli kcir,v.r dazu fiorgi bt. lea
otollo d-run orr.a’thcft do --rr.^e: bcetoht dio
Hooglichkoit, dr.oe zvoi odor drei Borufovcrbroc.ior
zu diooor. Vorcuchcn von Ihnca zur Vorfuogun^, G^*;
u\cllt vordoa koonnon? n (160?-Pb, Bow. *.4, rt. lw,
Untorutroickua^on oingofuegt).

Boiterhin goat cue dicaoa Rr.echor-Bricf van 15.

kervor, dr.oe dioaor oich nit oinon nndoroa Luftneffonerzt

ino Ecnohnou gesotzt und oln varlaufigco -bkonnon C^“

treffon hr.t, tunnel: die Vor3ucho an ^onzontratlonclr.£or-

Encftlincon, boi done rnzunchncn nr, dnoa dio Voraucha-

poroonon otorboa vuordon, la dor •Bodonoteaadij.on Pruef-

otcllo fuor Hpohonforachuag d.r Luftv.vfdo" in Huonchcr.

durchgofuohrt nor don 3 liter.:


- 5 -


3tgg. 3QQ23G, rz zzz

"Die Vor6uche v.qrden engestqllt in pe? H 3oden- ^
ataendi, on ^ruefstollo fucr Eoc&cnfoFSQhunc <-
Luftwaffe* in Jiucr.chcn, Dio Versuchc, bai d-ncn
Bolbatvcratcondlich die Vorsaohspcrecnca atorbon
ltooanon, vruordoc cntor corner ..itcroeit vor sk,.

G ohor.. Slo a lad cbsolut richti r fuor cjc
flu^forschiui^. und lcaooa sich nicht, wi° biohu-
vcrsucht, nr. if fen dure if uo .iron, dr c.cr _*io val-

otnrndi^ endoro Yorsuchyrorhcol-aiBjo biotet. icn
he bo nit doc Vorfcrotor dcs Luftilottcncr-TwB, do*
diosc Vo r sue he durchfu'ohrt, ebsolut r

in dicsbczuoGllchcr Richtung jesprocnonund dioacr
1 st obonfclls dor -oinung, daso in ^

condor. Probloat nur cuf dor. -eac coo/,*?«? ps 3q\•
vorsuchoo nklcort wordon koonson." (1602-PS, .

44, R. 167).

ilcachcr war Cuilnchnor cn einoc aedizinicchon -us-
lcco’cui'auo ic Luftgru VII in Uuonchcn, ruf dee droi
v:lchti_o Vorlooun-en uebor Hoofconforochunc - on •*“
GoklCttton '.oltz, lUchncr and Kottonheff goUciton vrurdon.
(b’cltz, R. 7049). Uc dio Sodeutung diosor Vorloaun£;on
und dio Vorbindungon swiachon Rcachcr, '.cits und ^otton-
ho If voll zu vmordigon, r.uao era unbcdlngt die wochoci-
ooitigo otollun^ .ottenhoffo und doc ingohlcgtan "Oltz
su Raochor, doe ochroibcr dec Briofos cn Hinder, in -a--
trccht zlohon.

Hottonhof wr.r Obcrfoldarst ic Luftgeu VII. Dr hetto
von 1938 bio 1939 nit Toltz suae icongocrboitot und oaino
Pcchcucbildung ic Pliyoiclo;iachon Inetitut in Luo no ho.:
orhc.lton. Sottonhoff wer els irivctdozcr.t cn alts'o
Institut tactic un; cr.ckto in soinor -btoiiun,;. Vorauchc
cniffon. (Seitz, 3. 7048). ’alts het bezougt, dete Hesohor
arch Soondigungon dor Vorlceur.gon uober Koohonforschung cn
cottcnhoff herengetroton iot cit don Versoning, dcoc
Hoohcr.vcroucho in Dachau durchgofuokrt uordon solltcn.
Rcochors Vorccklc^ we.r cffcneichtlich dcs dirokto -r w ob-
nia do3 Dindruckoa, don die ebon goaoerton .Vorlosungon
cuf ihn w 0 cr.cht hetton. Rrsch.r wer cich uebor die Co-
fehren, dio in dioaen Vcr3u eh.r. lc^on, hlrr one. vubste,
dees dor Fortgens dor Perse hunger, r.chczu undurchfuchrbcr
v?cr no G on dor Uncccglichkoit, lobondo Vorauchoporo.non
els Prciwilli^o zu bokaic.cn, und art dnhor, nr.ch oinor
Bosprochung dor -ngclogcnh.it cit cits und Sottonhoff,
don Brief an Killer goschriobon.


- 6 -


RU ?r t R O: 3THG, \.Z L2Z

.eschor teonnto die nooti^o Puohlunfe nit Hinnl~r cuf-
nohacn, denn or, besondcre nber seine ?rru, kennten
Hinr.lcr pcraocnlich. -ussorden vrer ar.schcr oin VAt^lloC.
dor ..llicncir.on SS. iicr. derf Jodoch nicht nussor -cht
loosen, daoe naehrond doo senzon Vcrlaufcs so^ohl dor
HoohOn- und ouch dor Untcrkuchlungsvcrsucho (nindestons
bis zun Hoi 1943) RQBchor Qffizior in Srnitcotsdionot
dor Luftvmffo v/cr, und in aktiVen Dienst boi dor Luft-
v/effo otend. Tausondo von ^ersonen sind .IitGl icdor dur
SS Goweson, rcaohrond oio abor tctsaochlich in andcron
Zv/oison dor ITohraacht diontea.Dics ror c.B. dor ?all box
don Sntlastun^ozouoon Gutzeit. Js ist oino Grundscotzlich
folsclio ^nnahac, die von don iafiO-cla£tcn ous dor Luftv/affo
viclfach Gohogt v;ird, dess dio Hoohon- und ^ntorkuohlun^a-
vorsucho lodiglich Vorbrochon dor SS vraren. Ilichta koonntc
irriGor soin. 2s boatoht koin uosontlichor Untcrschicd
zvischon lhncn und den Soovcsacrvorsuchon. a aocho r . un t cr-
nta nd ^oltz g infiontcna bis zun 2ai__l&& und blacb in
aletivon Dionot dor lufttmffo bis nindostonc zun *ai 1943.

r ir nuosoon dio 3.nerkunG in Rcochors 2ricf uobor
dio "BodonttfiondiGO *ruofetollo fucr Hochcnforschunc dcr
Lultwrffo"in Huonchon bocchton. Dioo v»ar dor “cnc -os
liucnchonor Inatituts, das untor dor I*oitun C von '•oltz
stand (Voltz, H. 7050) und ro or sich hauptsaochlich ait
dcr koerporlichon -usdauor und don dcaktionon cor FIug-
zcugfuohror in G^oson Hoohon befasbto. '..'ells hat aus 0 e-
ocGt, dasu cr nicht in dcr Itfgo v.-ar, dio Srlaubnio .fuor
dio DurchfuehrunG dioacr Vorsucho in soinor. Institut
ortoilon, vor alloa noil die Xuor dicoo Vorsucho orf orc.or-

lichon Bo fohlo von dcr LuXtvfaffon-^nitcotalnapoktion auo-

/ohun nucoton. (?.. 7050, 3. 7178). -aohrend dies dio
hauptunc der ~nklr w .o, drss alio -r. :( olc^onhcitcn dios-r
_rt atoto v.»r dio Sr.nitcotsinspoktion ^cbrr.clxt «urdcn,
.rhdrtot, bofroit co natuorlich Voltz nicht von dor Vor-
antrcortung, da dioacr, vrio x:ir specter noch sober. :orc._ .,
dioso Vorsucho solbst alanto, dio Vork=hrun L .on daXuor
trr.f


- 7 -


an??. acinsBG.

und auch don PorachungsauftrcG von dor Scnitect8insj''lcti n
dor Loftvr.ffo eraiclt. -icclor gab aoinc Zustiacung fuor
die Vorwendun^; von Heoftlingen fUvi; die yor.£osolionon
Yoraucho kurz neck Drhclt v~a .^cschors 3ricf. (1582-P3,
-jikl.3ov;. 45, 3. 162).

2o 1st intoroeaent fostzustollon, dase dio Didos-
stettlieho Drlclacrung Zottonhoff's, dio vor. doc -ngoklcg-
ton Voltz vorgologt _ cordon iet (-cltz I ms. 4,

B. 7052) Rcachcro Brief cn Riccior noch in dor Soziehung
orgoonzt, dees woitoro Veraucho en lcbor.dcn Lcnachon alo
aotnondig oraefctot wurdon. Sctucrlich ac_t Eottoahoff r.us,
do88 Raachora Vor chlcg in ihc ^leici: 3odonkon hervorriofon,
eber trotzdea hat cr dann speotor dio Sr.chc cit Doltz auf-
jononnon. Jotzt case hior schon in Botwcht O ezogcn vor-
don, dcaa Reachor, I'oltz und Sottoahoff sc.octlich Dn-
gohouri^o dor luftt/effo war on, und dcoa cltz dor Vorjo-
aotzto dor boidon r>tr. Lr hrt nichta untorooccon, dicacn
Voracales, Vorauclio nit Eonzontrctionnlcgor-Hiiftlingon
vorzundicon, zu untorbindcr., sondorn in Go&ontoil, or
iict aoinon Untorgobonon Bnachor in dioeon vcrbrochoriackon
PI cn noch untoratuetzt und euch dio Ilitcrboit Ruff's und
Rocbcrg'c wio euch don rorachun^seuftrce von dor -btoilung
fuor Luftfehrtr.odizin untor ~nthor.y und 3ocltor--royeong
orwirkt.

r/oltz het bocoujt, does la Sexier 1^41 oin Iroffoa
gologontlich oinoc Scauchoo doa Qoaur: lrborstEbanrztuo I-ippko
boia Lufgnu VII otettfend. (R. 7056). In oir.cr flosprocliuno
zuiachon *.oltz, Rottoiihoff und Ki?;>l:c, „rb dicaor scir.
Grundaaotzlichoa ^invort-tcondnia su don Vorauchon, vroxui
dies- fuor notv/ondig _,c’.ialton wuordon. (R. 7065). la Lrufo
doo Sonaoro 1941 gin w Rcechcr su citc und schlu.. Vor3uchc
cit lcngnoaon -ufotio* vor, eber -cltz lohnto dro r.la
unnoatig cb. (R. 7176). Dioao -ubbcjc dca -n u o.:lc 0 tor. -cits
zoigt oindouti. dio ^.uteritcot cits hinsichtlich Rnockoro
Tcotigkoit. Dio Venvoigerun^ dor Brlaubnia cur Vornehac
von Vorauchon nit lcngoracn ..ufctioj orhe^rtot dio


- 8 -


5j?r. hoitsshg. ~~2i rz

Boheuptunfi dcr .aiklc c, dess dor iodor -cit £ic

licit und die ..uToriteet ^eiabt hattc, cinzuccaroiton.
"cltz'c HcndluziLsr.-oisi r.echrcnd dcr _cnzen -evtridklun.
dor Placnc fucr die Vcrsuchc rcr nicht nur no^ctiv. -r
-cr dureIicus oinvcrstcr.i cn nic dee cr.zen Dntcrnchaon,
uad or sell oin, dr.o^ 5escicr nicht die n otice.-, Hennt-
nisoj besets, diceo Yoreuchc cine die -.ltiilfo oines
Fcchncnnca cuf dics.r Spczirloobiet dcr Luftfchrtocdizia
durcizufuohron. -lusacrdoc c ohoorto Hr.acier zu oltz'o
Institut und iette nicht3 su tun. (7oltz, a . 7078, .a.
7187). Einen Pccharnn els I.itrrbc ter fucr Voltz und
Hnschor zu find on, stcllt- oici els inc schricric
d.uf 0 ebc horr.us. .cltz er.dtc oici elo .rttos rn i:it u liodcr
seines ci^onon Institucs, nnoalieh cu lutz und ‘ondt,
die ’.’aide einen _r-ose;i .luf cuf dicooa dcbict ictton,
r.bor bhnu lrfjl_. 7oli La oroc . ver doe Goricltc-
iei und oe^t cuo, dess '.oltz ue seine Jntorotuotzun u
w oboton hr.bo, wio r.uci die v n -onC., decs si. ebor boidc
cuo r.erc.liscion Gruenden cbsoloint fccotton. (A. 26S).

’•oltz het dioo cuch .:icit bestritten, buir.uptot rb.r,
d'.to ooino Frozen cr. Lutz rein rhetoricch O owcacn soion.

(a. 7069).

Dio Ohsocalicikoit, oinon Spozielietcr. cuf dot;

Cobict dor Hoohonforoc run^. fuor die Huscnacnorbeit uit
-iaocior zu intor-o3iorcn, orhlaort die lenco *eit zwiocnon
dot Dr.tun nn doe Him lor seine Zuatlm ;un^ ^eb und doo
tctoauchlichon Boginne dor VorsucttSj/ftlbo vor. Juli 1941
bio zu.. fcbrur.r 1942. 7cltz vvrr koin Spczirlist fuor
Hoohonforachun^, Hettohhoff i urdo •4.' c. l!mx.or*lcn ver-
oetzt, und itc ocher r noefc vorir.cltr.isncccoic nou cuf
diooca Gobict.

Dor nnociato Sciu-itt, den ' cltz uaternnhn und dor
zua •.baciluES Cor Ple.-r.c fuohrto, Eeohomrcraueho it;
Aonzontrctlor.alc_.cr Dr.c.cu , n noncealiohei Voroucispwr-
sonen v.rzune.;_jen, Tier* c.no «ufXordcrcr._ e Huff und
-^.ebure, Hc.echcrs ISiterbciter zu verde;:. Diesc bolder
lionnor rc.ro.-. ?r.c..loutc cuf di.e. . dcbict und rcren cn
v/oit^ron Forscfcun_errbjiton bczucjlich Hoehonlc^on ueber
12.000 Totcr intcrc.si.it. "cltz hit bezeu^t,


HU??, Ro;3d?.S , rSLJZ

dr.33 or cine Roiso arch Berlin untornonsen hrt, and deer
Ruff soine ^.uffordcrun, zar liitarbcit nit Rrscher an_c-
noanon bet. (H. 7186). -us dcr Bonoiserhobung t.obt horvor,
dees Volte cn Ruff und Eonberc heren^otreter. iet, dr. or
fcchlicho Hilfo brcuchtc. (Kp-437, . 42, 3. 161*

r’0-263, -knkl.Bow.* 47, R.'l72j 30-151, -r.kl.3ov. 43, 3. 1©).
Dor -ncoklr^tc ^uff he; r.usccca^t, dess or zu-rst von doe
ilnijoklEotca Toltz otwes acbcr don Plcn, die Porschun.cn
r.n Inscsscn doe Dr.chcu Lonzcntr-ticnsl^or v .rzunohnen,
cohoort hr.t, und dr.se cltz den Vunsch nncfc oincr Zuecn-
nonarboit swischon P.onbcrc and Rcschor und zv.icchon
Volte's and Ruff's Institut hr.ttc. (.-'. 6653). -asoorden

bc.t Ruff r.u6ocor.£t, dc.ss '.oltz cor-ousoert het:

"5s let solbstvorotaondlich ds3 richti k sto, wean Sic,
boew. Ronborc, rn dicson Vcrsuchcn toilnohnon, denn
Ronborc hrt Jr bore its in ciaor. crcton foil s.lchc
/.baprun^ovcrouclio durchcofuchrt, or ist r.lso prr.;:-
tisch in Doutschlrnd dcr Sima, dcr c.lcho Vorsuebe
schon r.us^cfuchrt bet, dcr Sposiclist euf dioso..
Oobioto dor Vorsuebe zur .lwttun: cus w roo&cn Koobon."
(... 6655).

Ruff Urt wo i torn in cus 0 ocr.^t, dess dolts vorcocclllc-
..on brt, nouo Vorsuchoroihon fuur Pr.llsckimcbspru.n^o rue
croason Hoohon in Dr.chcu ..it Oofcaccnca r.uozufuohron.

(Ruff, R. 6653).

Von diocoa -u 0 onblick ken dee Vorsuchsprocrccn r.ls
cin gonoinoncoo Untornohnen in Gr.a_, Dios lot cn beater,
von don -n oklccton oltz ouofodruoc’ct vrordor.:

“Do oollto oin conoinsrr.os 'Jnternohnon coin, boi on
Ruff Ronborc ebstcllto, und boi den icb Resohor
cbstollte, und boi den Ruff sclbstvorstror.dllcbor-
woiso inner Chof von flaabor. oar, und icb obonoo
eclbotvcrstcondllcb dcr Chof von Rr.sehor wcr. Dona
Ruff konatc jr Rcschor nichto b-fohlca, Rcschor
v/c.r Str.becrzt, r Sold-t, Ruff vr Zivilist, Icb
konnto Ronborc aichto bofchlen, Honberc wer Zivil-
an„.octolltor, und ich war Soldct. -iso diooc Vor-
tcilun x v;r.r v llh.nr.un birr. Jc *. r forr.cr klcr,
dess ich nich dena nicht ctvc suruocksiohe, das
ich nicht ctv.c Ruff d- . Rcschor c.lo Uuckuoksui
hintorlr.soo, oonbrn os r is hi r, d-.so icb boi
diosen Vorsuchon bctolli x t bloibc in dor Porn dor
Aufsicht, eber licht in dcr Pern dcr c.ktivon Lit-

crboit. J (Volts, S. 7079).


aU??» 30S3RRG. -XLT Z

Dioso -.U38a_c widcrlejt ucborzcuccnd ..cits's vcjc
2oheuntune, duss or nicht ncqh Spoziclisto.n fu.r Hoohoa-
£ rschim. zur Hitcrboit ait iha und Heechor 6 esucht hr.ct oc.
Ohnc '..oltz's Bcnuchunjon hr.ctten diosc Vcrsucho niccr.la
atcttfindon kocnncn. Kurz £G8C t t, '-oltz hct cs fucr die
Durchfuokrunj dies r Vcrcuche in Hochon uebor 12.000 Motor
fuor notwondic crnchtct, cich dio Bilfc von Spozialistcn
cuf diococ Gcblot zu eichorn, ebenoo vie cine ^ntordrucl:-
kc.-v.cr zu bokoar.cn, die aoinc Joduerfniusc bofricdijto.

Ruff und nanberj orfuclltcn sic in bolder Binsicht, unc: c.v£
die ebon fcoachildortc cito het cltz dor. c^nzen Plr.n
goachickt ocnoovriort.

Unnittclbar neohdon cits dio Vorhmdlun 0 on nit Ruff
cbccBChlosBon Uotto, boriof or cine Vcrcruvlunj in scinon
llucnchnor Institut, boi dcr dio toehnioolien Soiton dioocr
Voroucho bo 8 pro chon rurdon. 3oi dioscr Vcrsr.nalunc weron
Ruff, Ronbord, Rroc.ior und »-ltz su.c^on. Die Vorscunlunj
fend in * oltz'o Inotitut stett, und .oltz hat to dcr. Voroits
daboi. Ja vurdc woitcr.iin bcschloss-n, in cinijon Is. cn
oino zv.’oito Vorocanlunj in fieehau abauhclton, un dio
nooti. on ..bncchun^on ait den Lc_ork .dnntcn zu troffon.
Diceo Roisc wurdo unto mormon, un dio tochnischon Vorbo-
raitun^on nit dou leiorkocnondonton zu bcaprochon und
Uinzolhoitcn wo £ on dor Rucwchl dor Yorouchoobjokto foot-
suloLon. TToltz, Ruff, a -abort un. Raachor weron wiodor
cmuooond und cuoaordon Biorkowoki, dcr Lc;.crkacmndont und
Schnitalor von Stabo dor Rcichbfuohrunj-SS (HO-476,

Bov. 40, R. 155* 110-437, Rr.kl.3cv. 42, 2. 161* RO-263,
inkl.Bow. 47, R. 172* Volt*, R. 7036-7).

Haohdoa die Vorberoitun^on nit den Ic orbohoordon
jotroffon weron, war alo ncochotco dio lxc(fi doo Trens-
portoo dor Untordruck-Xr-'-^r uus Berlin zu klr.oron. -i°
borcito weibor obon cn&ofuohrt, wolito ~cltc orn die Un-
tordruck-Kaai-cr, die Ruff und Re .bore jeh^orto, zur Vor-
v/ondun, fuor seine Yornuchc in Dr.chr.u hebon. -o iet intar-
osoent footzuotollon, dr. a a loltz cine *Jntordruck-Sr.;v.or in
ooinc.i oioonon Inotitut coit 1938 zur Vorfuo C un6 «-tund,
(Tcltz, R. 7178),


- 11 -


Dioso -ussa_c widcrlpgt uebcrzeu£cnd -cits's vc.jc
3oh?uptun£, dosa or nlcht nr.ch Spozicllston fu-r Hochca-
fjrschun_ zuj; *iitcrboit ait ihn and Raschcr ^asucht hr.cttc.
Ohnc V.oltz's Bcauchun^on hcetten diosc Vcrsucho nicncls
atcttfindcn koenncn. Kara 2 cse t t, ‘Jolts hat cs fucr dio
Durchfuohrun^. dios r Vcrsucho in Eochcn ueber 12.000 •*otcr
fuel* notv.’ondic crcchtct, sich dio Silfo von Soosiclistcn
caf diosoc Gobiot zu sichorn, cbcr.se vie eina ^ntordruc!:-
ken.cr zu bokoar.on, dio seine ->oduerfni~s- bciriedi. to.

Ruff und nonbcr u orfucllton ai« in bolder Hinsicht, und r.uf
die (.bon ccschildortc oito het eltz don tenson Plan
goocklckt nnnoovriort.

Unnittelbcr nee lido a eltz die Verhmdlun^on nit Huff
cb^ccchloeson hotto, boriof or cine Yorcacalun_ in aeinen
Ilucnchnor Institut, boi dcr dio tochnitchcn Soiton dioeer
Voroucho bosprechon v-urdon. 3ci dioacr Ycroscnlunc weron
Ruff, Itonbor:, Rcachor and ..eltz zu,c^cn. Dio Vcrseunlunc
fr.nd in oltz'o Inotitut otett, end -Its hetto dcr. Voroitz
daboi. Ja vurdc woitor in boochloasen, in eini^cr. re.on
oino zv;oito Vor8£ia J.un^ in Dr.chan absuhclton, ua die
nootijon -.bar.chun„on ait don 1c jjrkocncr.dar.ton zu troffon.
Diceo Hoiao v.urdo untonuraon, ua dio tochnischon Vorbo-
roitun^on nit dou Lc 0 orkscnrndcntan zu booprochen und
Dinzolhoiten wagon dor -uewohl dcr Vorcuchaebjokto foot-
sulogon. Volts, Ruff, R aborg ur.: Seachor varan vriodor
r.nv/ooond und cusaerdon 2 iorkawskl, dcr Ic. orkaaaendent und
Sclmitzlor von Stnbc dor Roichoiuohrun--SS (i:0-476, «nl:l.
Bov. 40, B. 135 1 110-437, -inkl.Bm . 42, 3. 161* HO-263,
ilnkl.aon. 47, K. 172* Volts, R. 7086-7).

Mcchdon die Vorbcrcitun t .cn ait don Dc orbohoordon
£ 0 troffon weron, war ala naochatoo die 7r:'0'> Xrr.no-
portco dor Untordruok-K: oner cue Berlin zu klooron. »io
borcita noitor obon cn u afuobrt, vcllto ".cits _orn die Un-
tcrdruck-Kn^-.cr, die Ruff und Renber; ..ch.crto, sur Vor-
v/ondun w fuor soino Vorouclio in Jtechr.u he ben. -a iet intor-
oooent footzuotollon, dr.oa Volts cine ontordruck-Knoaor in
ooinca oiconon Inatitut ccit 1938 zur Vorfuocang ctand,
C-cltz, R. 7178),


- 11 -


HUFF. HC'xBERG. '.ELT3


und uao .eltz iu3;es«-,t hat Frelwilli-o von seinen St ode nt on odor .ius
dor luftwaffe ataondon zur Verfuejinj. (i.oltz, iu 7180-83), 7ret Id oc
loussta Lin auf Konzentrationalajrerinaaaacn sufucckjreifcn und zur Durch-
fuehrung dor Voraucho oine tranapsrtablo Druckkarr.ir ana den Kuff-Insti-
tut in Berlin herboischaffen, well die Untcrdruckka„.ur in oltz^Inati-
tut nicht tranaportabel war. Dio bewoglichc Unterdruckka.'i.cr wurxlo aua
den Berliner huff-Inatitut nach kuenchon in dae Ailtz-Inatitut -ofahron
and kai- dort spaet an Hachaitta on. .Ji_cstclltc doa DYL nah.*:n don Trana-
port vor und uebor_;abon die Kozxcr an oltz. .x. naechaton 7a-o kanen 3S-
Kahror von Dachau, nahe-jn dio Schluoaaol dor Kan-or in &.pfan’ und fuh-
ren aio in daa Konzentrationale ter. (Molts, R. 7199).Dor 4wock dieaor
Vorachloierung war dio Tacuachun; dor DVL-.ji-oatollton, da >.oltz und
huff nicht wuonachten, daaa aie Scnntnia von dor Vorwcndunj dor Untor-
druckka.’u.ior fuer Kxporiuonto in oinea Konsontrationale ^r urhiolten.

Dor Bowoia dafuor iat die Vorworaiun; voolli--. ncuor Fahror fuor den
Transport dor Kauaor in daa Konzontrationala.-or Jachau. Dioao Vorachloi-
orung wird boaondora auffaollij, wenn nan bodonkt, daaa Dachau nur 12 ki
von uuonchon ontfomt iat, und daaa dio DVL oinon aua-oaprochencn Unwog
zur .tblioferun; dor aannor in ..ultz-Inatitut zu .-achon hatton. huff hat
aua^oangt, daaa dio Gchcizhaltun* doa Transports dor ..atnor nach Jachau
aua Sichorhoitagruondon orfoM aol. (Ruff, R. 6550).

Daa biahor zuaaznon .ofaaatc Bowc iar.it ^ rial and auch daa oitfona Ein-
guataondnin von <oltz, ..aciion ca klir, daaa or wo-.cn dor tdt don Hoohon-
vorauchon in Dachau voibunuoncn Verbrochon fuer achaldi; befunden wordon
nuas. Dios war von oifan . on oin vtrbrcchcriachaa Untemchruen. ..lion Bo-
toili,;tcn war ca bokannt, daaa lie oplintun Voraucho Todoafaello zur
Fol^o habon und on Nicht-Fruiwilli cn aoa;ofuchrt worden wuerden. Bewoia
dafuor iat daa all-srorato Schroibon an HU—lor. -cits unturatuctztu don


- 12


.--Urr , .-nLR-.HG. ,717Z


Khr^eiz aeinua Unter-.cbenen raacher, die Veraucho fu*r das .eltz-Inatitut
durchzufuehren. Sr veraichorte sich der -dtarbeit Ruffa und Ronber’s. Sr
orwirkto die Zustiuwng von Rippke und die -uiaatellun.; einea Forachun.:s-
auftra^ea aeituna doa Koferatoa fuer Fluryedizin onter ..nthony und
occker-Frcyacng. 2 r traf dio techniachcn ..noninun^en und botoilisto aich
an Beaprechun .on ait Ruff, Rczdjorj: und Raacher, wolche uobor die durch-
zufuohronden Vorauche ontschioden. ..oltz hat zur Jurchfuehi-.m- dor Vor-
auchO aehr bei,;otra^en ala irreni ein anderer. Schon auf Grand dieaoa
newel aj-ateri ala iat seine Schuld klar enrieaen. Ss wird nicht beatritton,
daaa Raacher ihr- bia Februar 1942 ontorstellt war. In dor Kauptaache
gruendot aich die Vorteidi ung von .oltz darauf, daaa or Raacher Endo
Fobruar 1942 aua^aeinof. Inatitut verxetzen liesa und daaa er Jeaholb
fuor aphotere Vor-aenjo nicht vorantwortlich ;cnacht .rexxSon koonno. ..uch
wonn uioaoa wahr aoin aollto, iat daa noch koine Sntachuldi -un. . Schon lan-
go vorher hatto .eltz an don verbrochoriachon Untemohuun L cn teil ;onoajon.
-an darf aeino .orto " ut, ich habe daa twar alloa ,;otan, abor ich bin
uoch nicht fuor die Fol..on, dio uoiru Handlun, on varnusaichtlich habon
wordon, vorantwortllch" nicht ala ,onue ; ;ondo Entachuldinui.c- innohrwn.

Uio boi dieaon Vurauchon auf trutonion Todcafeello waron von .oifan-; an
vorauazuaohon. ..oltz kann aich dor Vorantwjrturu; fuor dioao Todoafaollo
nicht entziohen, aolbat wonn oa zutrifft, daaa Raacher 1. .oi.;onbllck doa
..uftrotona dioaor Todoafaollo nicht ih.. untarstullt wrj. .bor oa lio,:on
Bowoiao dafuor vor, daaa dioa nicht wnhr iat.

Tataaochlich tarnion dio daohauor Voraucho ic: 22. Fobruar 1942 bo-
(.onnun und der *lou..o Noff entainnt aich dieaoa T» ys, T.oil oa aoin Go-
burtata.- war. (Neff, n. 60b). oltz atollt aich auf don Standpunkt, daaa
or von diosci. ..u^onblick an koine Kcnntnia von den ^r. acxv'on ohabt habo
uni aasa Raacher tataaochlich aoincr- BefcMaborcich ontzo ( *on wurMo. ultz
hat zu ,-ecobon, daaa ca coin* .uifrabe war, Raachor zu uobennehon und daaa
nach dor zwiachen Huff und .oltz bostehendon Veivinbarun dioa cine •enein-
sai.*» Untomohiuin.; war. nuff uoborwachte Eocber-, uni ,-ltz


hatto Raachor zu uoborwachcn. cltz hat •ujoflobea, daaa er Raachora Dia-
ziplinarvorjeeetzter and fuer die wiaaenachaftUchon .oif ;abcn, nit denen
er haachor betraute, vcrantwortlich war, (-.oltz, R. 7088). Trotz dieaoa
Vorjcsetztonvorhaeltniaaos and ..rboitsabkoaoena orklaort cltz Jetzt,
daaa Raachor aich bostrobte,unabh*en;ij ta arboiton und daaa or koine
-oldun^on an '..oltz zu oratatton wuenachte. ( cltz, R. 7088-9). ’ oltz
i-uaate Raachor anbofehlen, zwolnal in dor oche Borichto au oratatton,
unu auf Grand dioaoa Befohla, boh&uptet ..oltz, daaa Raachor ihn uitto
Februar auf_eaucht habo, daaa uiea ihro orato Untorrodun* aoit dor Da-
chauor Zuaao-onkunft jewoaon aci and daaa Raachor ihn, oltz, untorrich-
tot habo, daaa dio Voraucho nach -ar nicht bc;onnon haetten und daaa or
nichta zu borichton habo. ( .oltz, R. 7089).

I.oltz hat auajoaajt, daaa ..nthany, untor d*. Bcckor-Froyaonj in dor
Luftwaffonaanitaotainapoktion \rbaitotc, ihn forrz-uondlich uobor don Fort-
gang dor dachauor Voraucho bofra.t habo und daaa or nor habo erwidom
koonnen, daaa ihn nichta ^ot^ldot warden aci. haachor noldoto aich boi
iho tun zwoiton -alo und ..oltz jab haachor von dm Borliner .juaf Konnt-
nia und orklaorto, or wuonacho ..ofklaorunj daruobor, wio dio Dingo in
uachau laogon. Boi dioaer zwoiton Untorhaltun*: woi ;orto aich Raachor,
i.oltz oinon Boricht zu ;obon und >.oltz bohauftet, or habo Raachor orklaort,
or wordo nach Borlin fahron, uu dio La ^ au klaoron und cino Aitachoidung
daraobor horbcizufuchren, ob Raachor ihn 3oricht zu oratatton habo odor
nicht. Boi Raachora drittc- B^such bat -oltz, dor oino acharfo ..uaoinan-
doraotzunj orwartoto, ondt, oin Rit,;liod aoinor ..btftilUflj, in aoin
Zlr/jor zu kocoon und <>nn atollto or naachcr vor dio ahl, ihn ontwodcr
Borichto zu oratatton odor d.ia Inatitut xu vorlaaacn. oltz bohauptot,
daaa Raachor ihn dauvla oin lolo r*u. Hixilora habo, daa lautctc:

"Voraucho aind vor Jodoroann ;ohein zu halton". ( oltz, F.. 7090). Darauf-
hin, aa Q t i.oltz, habo oi raachor aus aeinca


huff, aft-aras. .zltz

hatte Raacher zu uebomachen. eltz ha% fa^oben, dais or Raachers Dis-
ziplinarvorjesetzter und fuor dia w^aaenachaftlichon .aif-abon, nit donsn
or haachor botj-aut*, yorantwartlich war, ( oltz. H. 7038), Trotz diesoa
Vorjeaotztonverhaeltniaaca and .irboitsabkonaona orklaort eltz Jotzt,
daaa haachor aich boatrobtc,unzbhaon;l5 zu arboiton and dass or koino
j-eldun-ren an ..oltz zu oratatton wuenachtcl ( oltz, R. 7088-9)* ' oltz
nuasto haachor anbofehlon, zwoinal in der ocho Borichtc au oratatton,
and aul Crund dioaea Befohla, bohauptet .*oltz, daaa Raachor ihn uitto
Fobruar auf„oaucht habo, dass uiea ihro ersto Ufltorrodunj soit dor Da¬
chau or 4uaa£iuenkunft -owoson aoi and daaa Raachor ihn, oltz, untcrrich-
tot habo, daaa dio Voraucho nach -ar nicht bo.-onnon haottcn und daaa or
nichta zu borichton habo. (.oltz, R. 7089).

l.oltz hat aua .osa.^t, daaa .uithony, ur.tor do- Bcckor-Froyaun.j in dor
Luftwaffonsanitaotainapuktion arboitoto, ihn fonr-uondlich uubor don Fort-
6*n^ dor dochauur Voraucho bofra;t habo und daaa or nur habo crwidom
koonnon, daaa ihn nichta „«s-aldot wordan aoi. haachor neldoto aich boi
ihn zua zwoiton ualo und ..oltz jab haachor von dot* Borlinor ..nruf Konnt-
nia und orklaorto, or nuonacho .uifklaomnj daruobor, wio dio Din^o in
wachau lao^on. Boi dioaor zwoitcn Untcrhaltun.; voi ;orto aich Raachor,
uoltz oinon Buricht zu jobon und >.cltz bohauptot, or habc Raachor orklaort,
or wordo nach Borlin fohron, un dio La;c su klaoron und cino Untachoiduns
daruobor horboizuTuohrcn, ob Raachor ihn Boricht zu oratatton habo odor
nicht. Boi Raochora dritton Buauch bat -oltz, dor oino echarfo ..ueoinan-
doraotzunj orwartoto, .cndt, oin iitjlioi aoinor ..btcilun ., in aoin
2 ictus r zu kccnon und dann atollto or haachor vor dio ahl, ihn cntwodor
borichtc zu oratatton odor dia Inatitut zu vorlaaacn. 'oltz bchauptot,
daaa Haachor ihn danala ain Xolo r.vv. Kin=lora -.ozoi habc, daa lautcto:
"Voraucho aind vor Jodomann ;oheic zu haltcn". ( oltz, h. 7090). Darauf-
hin, aa 0 t ..oltz, habo or >u*3ch«.r aua aeinan


- U -


Inatitut verwieson onG -ann zus-u—an nit ondt oin Schmiben an Ucn Luft-
fe«u auf.oactzt und un naach^ra aafortijo Vorsctzun - araucht, waraufhin
haachura kot^anio mch veni ,en Ta w en boendot owosen aei. (. oltz, R.

7090).

Daa Schroibcn Nini naachera an Ilii^lcr vjc- 24. Fobruar 1942 bewoiat,
daaa niacher zu dioaor -oit .oltz noch unteratollt war. (KO-263, ..nkl*

Bow. 47, n.172). Si a ;ab eino Jaratollun; uobor die Goachichto dcr Vor-
aucho ana wioa iarouf .iin, daaa haacher, Kottcnhoff and -oltz an 24. Juli
1941 uLt dor Durchfuchrun^ boauftra-jt -ordon worcn. Kottonhoff wurda in
..u D uat nach hunaonion voraotzt und achio-i danit aua dor Gruppe aua. Koch
ihror .oi 0 abo hatto ..oltz fuor dio tochniachor. Vorboreitun on dor Voraucho
zu aar^on. .ahrachoinlich infol to d«r ooaor tnia vor nur.-'liachon Sinwcn-
Uun.;on Hippkoa hatto .oltz don Bo ;inn dor Voraucho hinaua,>)achobon und
achliuaalich nuff one: .ianbor fuor .lie tusazixnirbuit rlt Raachor -o-
wonnon. Ea fol.jto oinu Boaprochun . in Dachau twiachon Piorkowaki,
Schnitzlor, .oltz, naachor, hcabor und huff, .oltz hatto zu,:eaichort,
fuor dio hmaochtl .on.; naachcra a or on zu wollon. .oj 18. Fobruar bokla^to
aich Frau haachor ..aruotcr, daaa oltz -oac ;t hibu, nachdoa haacher alio
Vorrrboiton auaiufuohrt hattos "Kan h*-bon Sic Ja hj.d>or; boi dor SS olio
>.c,jo -toobnot, nit dot. Kou-aaic .uaa oa Jotzt ondors o.jacht worden".

Frau Baachor ,ab an, daaa aowohl hxzfcorj ala auch haachor dirin uobcrcin-
stii.td.on, aaaa -.oltz nicht -ohr nootl; aoi und daaa boiuo aich alien Vcn-
auchon von aoiton .oltz, .aacher zu aolnon oi onen i^maten cuazuacholton,
widoraotzt haottun.

'•oltz bohauptot, dio ohrhoit boi dor Sacho war, daaa or imachor laa

■

aoin wjlltw, mvl or hat oohauptot, Frau haachor habo fal-chlich dio <«n-
O olo.>inhoit Hinnl.r ;u, onuobor so Garrcatollt, ala ob cr ha&ttc Raachor
auaachalton wjilon, ui. di« unzen ..rooitor. fuor aich alloin zu roaervioron.
(>.oltz, n. 7099). Ohno Jccc Fra e hatto Frau naacher i-it ihror Daratellun,-,
dor Sachla,jo »wcht. .aa four einen andoren Grund konnte donn -oltz

- 15 -


RUFF. R01321G. ZLTZ


gorauo vor den Bo^inn dor Vorauche fuc.- seinen .unsch nach ..usachaltun'-
Kaachora ha bon, wean nicht, un aolbat daran teilxunehoon-und aich auf
Uiuao ..oise oinen jrooaacron ..ntoil an dot. visaenachaftlichon Saha zu
sichcrn? iichorUch hatto er .*achor jleich nach ..nrejunc zur .aisfuchrun-
dor Vorauchu untoratuotzt. Sol den wie ihu wollo, daa Bowciarterial

daaa naachor auch feroorhin ala ..eltzcna Untor,ebenor an don Vun-
auchon toilnahn. Dies wixtS klar darch einen «ktenvonaerk Schnitslora
von .uonchener SS-.^t von 28. ..pril 1942 ondoacn. (NO-264, .jikl. Bow.

60 , fv. 194). Dioaor Vomerk rod* offunaichtlich, daaa Raschor irsjor
noch ..olta untcratollt war and dasa oltz auf aktiver Toilnahno nn
don Vorauchon und voller Vorantwortlichkcit bust and. Das RUi hatto boi
..oltz an^efra^t, wlo lan ,o dlo Voraucho dauom wuonlon und ob oa zu
rochtforti f ;on aoi, oinon Sanltavtaoffizior fuor so lan,o Zoit abzuatcl-
lon. Raschor, dor untor dor Untoratollun: enter -oltz litt, bat ur. aoino
Voraotzunj zur JVL, Zvoi atollo Dachau.

Zu dicaon Schriftstuock hatto .oltz lodi^lch zu bonorkon, daaa daa
0atm “ 'MichtH aoi uni atatt 28. ..pril richtir, 28. Fobruar 1942 lauton
nuoaao. (r. 7099 und ff.). In ;,rcuzvorbocr ab ..oltz zu, daaa, wonn uan
daa Oatun von 28. ..pril 1942 ala riehti. annaohno, naschwr nztuorlich zu
dioaor Zoit noch aoin Untor obonor war. ( oltz, R. 7232). Dioao Fra o
wird lurch J«n .Jctonvor^rk von Siuvora vou 3. ai 1942 ;ant oin'euti •
boantw^rtot. Dioaor 7or.^rk lautot:

"Uebor dun ..us an, : dor Bcaprochun; nit Ob.ratabaarzt Dr.

..oltz bjrichtcto SS-Untcrstumfuohrur Stabaarst Dr. Raachor
au 29.4.42 in iuiunchon. .oltz vurlanjto, *?enn or nicht bis
zu.- c'roita;, do:- 1.5.42, zu den Vcrauchon him.u-.oao ;cn
wuonio, Ruockziohen; von Dr. r.aachor. Dor .-wichafuehrcr-SS
wunlo davon untorrachtct. Lr boviftrvtte SS-Obor sruppon-
fuohror .'olff an 30.4.42 oin Fomschrelbon an Gcnorrl-
foldcnrachall -Uch zu richtcn, in don -cboton warden
aoUto, Jr. .inachor zur -• utachon Vorauchanstalt fucr
Luftfahrt, ..uaaonatolic Dachau, und zwar zur Verfuo£un£
doa twichafuohr^rs-SS zu kccnandiarao." (NO- 1359 , .nkl.

Bow. 493, K. 7238).


- 16 -


.da iht. dieses Schriftatueck vorjshslten wurde, hat eltz tataauch-
Uch tu^e.oben, seine fmohoro ..uaaaje uebor Saachora Veraetzunc ad*


05


aollndo auazudruecken, unzutreffend -ewoaen. Zr hat jeaa’t:

"Jawohl. jotzt sioht die Sacho natuerlich ,snz andors jus.

,.onn ich dioaon .Jrtcnvorueric von Siovors dazu ohabt haette,
haotte ich Ja ewuaat, daaa dio idetennoti* Schnitzler rich-
STSt and diss es cine aniore ^c-Aichkoit dor Erklac-
niX-- faor den Brief Jer Frau Kini Raachor ;obon cuss, dio
jotzt wioder nicht zu erklaoren 1st. Ich kann Ja nur hicr
vcrsuchcn. aus den ^ir vorselegten ttokunonten dio Zoiton,
dio ich houte den iatuu nach selbatverstacndlich nicht cehr
weias, zu rokonatruiorvn." (nelts, B. 7239).

Boi dor zweiton Bo fra ;un; durch aoinon Vortoidi t or wurdc V«ltt noch-

tl als auf^ofordort, uobor das Dionatvorhaoltnia Raachars zu ihc klare us-

kunft zu <;ob«n, worauf or orwidorto:

"Nachdoa dor Vorauch, die .idorsfruecho a ^ £ ^ laoron ' J"

Form, wio ich ea ^euacht babe, -eschoitort ist, uoochto ich
koinon nouon Vorauch untomchiwn. Ich woias os nicht. Icn
kann oa nicht aufklaorcn nach den vorUe^ondon ..atorial.

(i.cltz, H. 7251).

ELn Schroibon -ilcha an .olff von 20. Ui 1%2 orhoUt :anz undaa-
vorataendlich dio Tetaacho dor Untoratella-- haachors untor oltz:

-Zu Ihror. Tolo_rxju voc. 12.5. toilt Ur uiwer Sanitnots-Jn-
apoktour tit, dass dio von dor SS uni lor luftwalfo in achau
durch .-ofuohrton Hoohonvoraucho ib-cschlosavn sind. «J«ioFort-
aotzun- dioaor Voisucho oracuoinu aaohlich nicht bc.ruondjt.
oa o on soi die Ourchfuchrun^ von Vorsuchon andoror ..rt, dio
Secnotfra^n botruffond, "ichti,, dioae sind
baron Benohnun dor dlcnstatollun vorboroitot; <o r £ a J’ s **;
.iiiltz wLrd uit ihror durchfuuhrun.; boauftra.i. und Stabaarst
haschor bio auf -oitursa auch hiorfuor zur Vcrfuo ^un, •:«>-
atoUt untor BciUhaltun; aoincr ..uf/aben innorhalb ios Sa-
nitootsiicnatos dcr Luftwaffo." (3J.3*-FS, ..nkl. Bow. 62, R.
200 ).

iftidt wix\l es anz klor, daas .«jltz fuor dio viulon wachrend dor
nachauor Hoohonvorsucho vor.;ekcttonsn *ordo fuor verantwortlich or- #
klaort wordon nuas. Er nahu nicht nur an PlMOtn und Handlun on lc Zu-
ssinonhan,; uit diosen Vorsuchon teil,aond«rn war auch dor unnittolbare
Vor^oactitc Raachora, dor zusau^n sit huff und Raabor-. do Vorsucho
tataaochlich auafuohrto.


- 17 -


Status dcr bal den Verauchen vc mandat or. Gof&n ;jnen
Nacftdeu sich .oltz idt Erfolr dcr witarbeit uffs und Koaber vor-
aichart hatte, hlolt or End© Jezezber 1941 odor ..nfan- Januar 1942 in
auineci wionchenor Inatitut cino Konfuronz ab. (Ruff, n. 6657; .©Its,
h. 7086). huff, hoiJjcr .-,Uolts und haachor naheen daran toil, hauptaaoch-
lich ut_ die ,;run«ilo ,«ndon techniachon Vor&oroitun^cn fuor dio .uisfuoh-
run., dor dachauer -rboiton zu troffen. -llo ..n;okla ;ton bchauffcon, daaa
die Statuaf ra,;o dor boi don -rbeiten zu venrendondon Vorauchaparaonon
oroortort wuruo und daaa i-aachor oriclaort habo, oa wuordon auaachlloaalich
PrelwiHi^o vorwandot wordon. ( .olts, Iv. 7086; huff, h. 6232; Roobor?,
h. 6869). Yataaochlich aa.;un dlo -n^okli-ton aua, Raschor habe ihnon uino
ikittoiluno Hiw-dors vor .ozoijt, l*ut wclchor untor alien Uuotaondon Froi-
wiHi t ;o zur Vomundmv; ko>i«n aollton. (Roabor-, R. 6869). Luidor hat
dio Vortoidi run-; diuaon Briof nicht beibrin;on koonnon. 2s iat uobor-
fluoaaitf zu orwaohnon, daaa dio -n ;ckla ;tcn aich auf dnn Standpunkt atol-
lon, daaa aolcho Voraucho nur an . cwohnholtaracsai on und vorurtcllton
Vorbrochom vorrono-xwn Worden aollton, und daaa dioao "Frclwilli ^jn"
it. Fallo doa Uoborlobuna dor Voraucho bclohnt wordon wuordon. Ronber-j
hat tataaochlich auadruocklich erklaort, or habe dcn"Kinnlor-9riof" ;c-
auhon und diu worto "Vorbrvehur" und "Freiwilli ,o" darin oaohon. (Hoo-
bor 0 , h. 6870).

Dio dohauptunj dor ..n Nkla >vn, Himlor habo verfuo ,-t, iio tu vor-
wondondon Vorbrochor ouoastun Frciwilli ;o sain, 1st laochcrlich und un-
f ,laubwuordi ,, wenn onn budonkt, daaa Hiselor haachor anwioa, diosc un-
Cluecklichon Gufan^vmon nur dnnn zu bo nadijon, "unn sio, nachdcc. aio
von hnschor in aoinct. craton ^riachonburicht ^jschUdcrton Vorauchon
untunrjrfon wordon waren, wiod«r zur Lobon zuruock erufon wordon konnten.
Nach dioaou Boricht hatto die -tcur.; dcr Vorsuchsperjcnan voelli; auf.^o-
hoort und dio Brunt war ihnon ©oof foot wordon, d.h. san hatto aio bo¬
re it a soziert. (197U-PS, «nkl. Bow. i.9, h. 175).


hUFF. i£i3'£.G. ^LIZ


In diescr Hinsicht hat Killer ;xvaedi; eridacrt:

"3.) Dia Voraucho seller. vcr allo^ In dor Richtun,; oinaal
aus.^ewertot wordon, ab ea nicht coojlich iat, bci dioaen
lin^on .vrloiten dos Herzens dorarti;*® *.onachcn wioder
ina Lobon zurueckzurufen. Solito oln aolchor Verauch dea
Zuruockrufona in daa Lobon -olin^on, 30 iat aolbstver-
ataonalich dor zua Todo Vorurtoilto zu lobenslaun vlichaa
Konzontrationalajer bo-jiadi,^." (1971t~P3, -cikl. Bow. 51,
ft. 180).

ca iat liuchorlich, dor bchauptun *, Hinder habo dio Vorwendun:
von ausachlioaalich froiwillijen Vorauchaporaonon verfu#,~t, ir,-cndwol-
ch«a Gowicht boizacosaon. Oioao Laonnor wuaaton cnau, dtss Froiwilli ;o
nicht zu findon waron, und das war dor wahro Grund, woahalb aio aich
an HizJilor wandton. Dios wlrd durch haachors Schreibon an Hinmlor cr-
hollt, in dou or oj dio Vvrfue^b&rLachun von Vorbrochom nachauchto,
da "nioiuand aich froiwilli „ddo". (obon).

lu Zau^onatand hat dor .j\ ;okla ;tc huff tu-o 'obon, dnaa dio an aoi-

ncij6i/onon Poraon und on Borlinor hollo, on vor,»onociaoncn Voraucho aich

bia zu Hoohon von 12.000 ..otcm oratrvckton und daaa dio rrajo, waa

zwiachen 12.000 and 20.000 otor Haoho vor aich cohen wuordo, in dor

klar

Foljc in Dachau untoraucht wurdo. (huff, n. 6679). laraua yht/harvor,
daaa Ruff, hocborj, .oltx und toachor koine Luat hatton, dioao Untor-
auchun 0 on on aich aolbat vorzunoJvj^n.

Dio Ikwuiaaufnahcio hat crjolon, dt.ss *it cin pur :erin ;fuo ^.-on
..uanahi.kcn dio Hoohunvuraucho nicht an Froiwilli ;on durch;cfuehrt wurdon.
Dio La^orinaaaaon wurdon oinfach nach Gutducnkcn aua ;owaohlt und .-o-
zwun (1 on, aich don Vorauchon zu untorzichcn. Sa wurdon ftuascn, Polon,

Judon vorachiodonor N .tion&litact und Deutsche vontondot, dea -.lcichon
ruaaiacho Krio ,8rfofanyone und violo politischo Cofan «no. Rund 180 bia
200 Haoftlin^e wurdon den Vorauchon ant .-rworfen, und 70 bis 80 atnrbon
infol,-u dor Voraucho. Nicht cohr ala LO von ihr.on waren "zuc Tode vor-
urteilt" wordon. Untor den Gctoctctcn bofaaion aich auch politiaCho Ge-
fanyone. (Noff, R. 613-18; aicho auch Viewe •, h. 432). Dieses Zeugnia
von Noff, dor rla Lajorinaoaae b«i don Versuchcn zu hclfen hatte, und dor


- 19 -


HLTF. rSlSZP.G. LLTZ


huff, Rocberj und .eltz iduntifiziert hat, wird durch riascher. tclo-
£raphiacho .uifra^e bei Hit-der beataeti to t, ab die .^nestio sich auch
auf die bei don Vorauchen auasiebij verwendeten Ruaaen und Polcn or-
atrocke. (1971d-PS, .jikl. 3ew. 52, R. 183). Nationalist und Statua
der Inaaaaen waren aua den auf ihrcr Uniform befindUchon ..bzeichon
klar eraichtlich. Ruff und Hot-ber; haetten daraua erachen tueaacn, dnaa
aualaendiacho und politiache GefangeM vorwendot wurden. (Noff, R. 616-7).

Die ..uasa.e doa -ouron Hoff onthueilt die Tataache, daaa unjofaehr
10 Gofonjono ala Dauorvurauchaperaoncn aua.;owachit warden, ca waren
dioa abor koine FroiwUUjen. (Neff, «. 611; 622; Viewer., fi. 430 ). Ea
Eflb indeaaen auch oinijo "Preiwilli.;o" wio Neff aa.^t. Sr hat aua^aajt,
daaa "ea fuer dioae Voraucho eini.je Froiwilliro jab, woil Kaacher bo-
•tinaten Poraonen ihro Froilaaaunj aua doc U^or voraprochon hatto fuor
don Fall, daaa aio aich fuor die Voraucho zur Vorfuejun^ atollton".

(Noff, h. 61/,). Noff hat doutlich auaoinandcrjoaotzt, daaa oa in «nbo-
tracht dor .at dor .uiai/ahl und Verwendunj der Vorsuchep.. aonon uncoo r -
lich war zu wiaaon, wor oin Froiwilli.or und wer koin Froiwillisor war.
(Noff, h. 606-26). Sio wurdon nicht *>la boaondere Gruppo horoinrofuohrt
odor vorwendut. uuaaordoc er^lbt aich aua dor 3cwoiafuohrunr, diaa dioao
Voraprochun^on nicht .oholton wurdon. (R. 615). Dor oinziro 9«woia fu u r
oino Freilaaaun,; iat dor Fall Sobota, wio Neff ihn daratollt, und dieaur
wurdo zu oinur woni c wuonachonawerton SS-SonJori<ofc*iTndo-Gruppc oaandt.
Todcaatrafon aind nicht ua;cwandolt wurdon.

Dio Vortoidi.^mj nacht zu Omaton Ruffa und Rocubur^a jeltond, daaa
dio Dachaucr Voraucho in zwei Gruppen cin,;ctoilt warun. Dio "orato Grup-
po", dio ao,;unanntcn ^iuff-hocbor -rjiachor-Versucho,vioren nicht vcrbro-
choriachor Natur jct/oeon, wauhrend dio zwoite Gruppe, die Raachorachcn
Voraucho, allu Vorbrcchon uafaaat hab*. Sio bohaupton, daaa dio Ruff-
houbor^Raacher-Vorauchc unabhaonji • von don Raacborachon Vorauchen
durchgofuehrt wurdon und daaa dio von Noff und Viowo; onchnton zchn
urapru«n fc -lichon Vorauchapcraonon auaschlieaalich


:-m. JP.3SKG. .3-TZ


ruoc dio Ruff-ho.-berc-kaachor-VoraucHe verwundet warden seienl Trott
der Zeu^enaussa^en und doa vorlie;enden ,-ewichti 5 en Dokusontennatoriala
wollon sio den; Gorlchtahof ^laubhaft .when, daas,durch eine wundorbare
Schickaalafuc^un^, dloa allea PreiwilU^ jewcacn and Vorbrochon nicht
vor^ekoa^n waorcn. Dieaoa Vorbrinjen kann aich natuarlich nicht auf
iieltz erstreckon. Raachor war aein Unter^eboner u*I untorstand aeinen .
flefohlen.

uan beachte, daaa aotber^ und haacher, dio in dor Dachaucr Hoehon-
kai.if.wr 30 bia 40 -iinuton Ian bia auf 12.500 bezw. 13.500 Kotor auf-
atio^un, dieau Voraucho wojen atarker Schusrzon einatollton. (NO-402,
«nkl. Bow. 66, n. 213). Und doch Jnj»n dieao -aonner, Hio ihr ;«aoin-
aaner Uoricht zoict, dazu uobor, Voraucho an Gefan,_*onon zu untornchnwn,
dio oio nicht am oijenon loibo vomohnen walltcn.

Dio Exporiccntotoron uobomah-en koinorlei Vurantwortunnoch bo-
zoUfiton aio ir.;ondoin Intoroaao difuor, daaa dio an^oblich .orachton
Voroprochun.;on, dio dio Vorauchaporaonon dazu vorloiton oollton, aich
froiwillig zu iaoldon, auch .o halt on wurxlon. (bonbon, R. 6993). Ob (: loich
hoi.ibor«; bohauptot hat, or habo an Hiu^lor nicht horankoerwn koonnon,
hat or andororaoita zu.;c 3 obon, HUnlor in Juli 1942 zuaan^n nit Raachor
auf,,oaucht zu haben. (Rombor ; , h. 7015 - 6 ).

In dieaor Vorbindun,; muoaaon wir dio Zweckbchiuptun- dcr Vurtoidi-
fiun.: naohor botrachton. Durch dio Bcachraonkunj dor Huff-Rocbor>haachor-
Voraucho auf dio zohn Poraoncn bohauptet dio Vcrtoidi.^ns fomor, boi dio-
aon Vorauchon habo oa, :o.jcnuobor dcr botracchtlichon .jizahl von Todoa-
faollon bci don ioachorachon Vorauchon.kuino ToJoafaollc .«a 3 ebon. Da.nj-
gen hat dor iou.;o Noff boi aoincr Boachroibun : 4oa oraten VorsuchsUgM
nuchdruocklich «rklr.ort, daaa dio crato Voraucharolhe nicht m rreiwilli-
^o n vor f ;onju,.wn wurdc . ..uaaordem war dor ..njcklajto Ruff boi dioaen Vor¬
auchon obcnfalla zu ;o w on. (Noff, «. 622 ). Di« 3ehauptun 5 dor -nseklagton
uobor dio Eintoilunu dor Voraucho in zwoi Gruppon wird von Noff auadmeck-
li ch in uorodo . . eatollt . £r hat aua^oaa.jt, tixbcrr, habc nicht nur rdt'

Raachor an dun urapruon^lichon zchn Vorauchaporaonon oxperinontiert, son-
dem auch


- 21 -


'


RUFF. 332351S. ■iSLTZ

an oinor ;rossen .Jizahl andorer Gefan-ahor. Der von tlon .jv^ekla-ton kon¬
st ruiorttnEintoilun^ kann also in den LlChtc der Zeujcnausaaje Hoffs
koin Glaubon boi^e-^sscn warden. ..uf dio Fra-o, ob Iiotborj nur an don
zohn urspruonjlichon rorsoncn Versucho vor_cncci*>n habo, orwidorto Neff:

" Ea wurdon nlcht nur sit diosen 10 Porsoncn Vorsucho ;c nacht, sondorn,

•

boiaplolswolse, in Scrlcnvorsuchen.dlc ja auch durch :«onbcT? durchrc-
fuohrt wurdon. an einor aehr yoaacn .'.nzahl andorer Hao ftlin ;o. Dio Un-
tcracholdun.-. dio dor Vortoidi,-or zu nachen versucht zwiachon Vorauchon,
die non in dor -oldun an den Luft au ecacht Kurdcn, bcz*. dor Todos -
faollo, iat uir unaoc-ilch, dieso Untoracheldun-: zu i^chcn und dlojonl-
R on zu bozolchnon, dio in Jeno Aato^orio fallen bozw . in dio andoro Kato-
,iorio .» (R. 691). -km- aoU la n ;laub«n, don Zca^iia Hoffa und do* oigonon
uenachonvorstand, odor don zwockbodinjten «njabon dor .ji<>cl<la.^on? Dios
ist eino Frajo, dio dor Gorichtshof au boantworton hat. Ea jifct koinon
holbon Hoarder. Sntwodor sind dio .jvioklajtcn fuor dioso kordo vorant-
wortlich odor aio sind nlcht verantwortlieh. Ea lio*-t koine Spur oinos
Bowoiaos fuor dio laochorllcho Bohauptunr vor, os soi fuor den Gobrauch
durch Rooborg oino Gruppo von Froiwilll -on abjozwoijt wordon, die andors-
farbigo Houlon trujon, dauit or oio ousoinandorhalton koennto und dio
nit dor jroosaton Hochachtun; bohandolt wonlon waoron. ..bcr ; :onau das
wollon huffbnd Ronbor.; dot* Goricht oinroden. .ji-osichts dor Unterlajcn
ist das oino Unt.oo.;lichkoit.

Gioso an. oblicho Nichtbotcili ynz Huffs und Roi-borjs an "auaschliosa-

in

lich von nascher bo ,an. onen Vorbrochon n stoht/vollkivx«ncn .ddorapruch
zu don Handlunjon diosor ..njokla, *cn wachrond dor Vorsucho, dio lotston
Endes doch doutlichor sprcchcn ala ihru Jctzi on ..ussa-on. Hoff hat bo-
toujt, dans rtoobor; jwraoenlich boi nindeatens fuenf Todcsfaollon in
Vorlauf dor Versucho anwoaend war und :asa or nichts untomahu, sic zu
unterbindon und nicht «-al n-chhor protestiorte. («. 619). Rouborq hat
oinjostandon, droi Todosfaollo boobachtot und van fuenf bis zohn


- 22 -


nUFF, i£>j33£. ,SLTZ


in aoiner ..bwosenheit vcr.-okoccur.en kordeii Xonntnia -ohabt to habon* (?X>-
*»76, «nKl. 3ew. LO, It. 155). Nach uoabor^S .inrabe, croi,7ieto sich dcr
orato Todeafall, den or sah, ic ..pril. £r hat ihn Huff .-cooldot. Trotz-
du-. wurdon dio Voiaucho nicht abeebrochen . Sio -in<en bis Ende Juni woi-
tor und woitoro Todeafaelle ereirneten aich, dio Hooborg t ;eaehen hat.
lua allomindcatcn aind dio .juckla- 3 .cn infolTC der Fortsetzun • dcr Vor-
aucho aitachuldi.; an don 2rcordun-on gcwjrdon . dioa iat eino Tataache,
noogon aio auch bis zuc Eintroton dcs erston Todoafalles noch ao unachul-
tlid dowoaon aoin. 2a waoro ihro Fflicht geweaon, dio Vcraucho aofort oin-
zuatollen, dio Kanjor zu ontfomen und ©in Xri©-agorichtavorfahron cegen
Haachor durchzuaetzon. Von all dioaon einfachon und offonaichtlichon Din-
gon taton aio nichta. Sio tatcn oa nicht, woil nit don Todcafacllon von
alloc .infan,; an gorochnct wurdc und aio cin Toil doa Vorauchaplanoa waron.
houibor-; aah dioao ^onachon atorbon und hat abaolut nichta untomoccwn.

La la., danala in aoinor ka£ht, aio zu rotten. £r ac^t, or habo don Elok-
trokarlio.;raph«n bodiont. Sr wueatc ,cnau, auf Grand ihror Hontaotigkoit,
Honn dio Vurauchaporaoncn in Lobona ( ;ofahr achwobton. Sr nuaato dioa auch
aua aoinor Konntnia dor .drkun : ; ..rozaur Hoohon. £r konnto dio Druckucaa-
apparato aohon und abloaon. Sr haotto don Jruck eindom und ihnon daa
Lobon rotton koennon, indoc or oinfach don in hoichwelto bofindlichon
Hobol botacti c ;to. Sr war -rooaaor ala haachor. In Hotfall haotto or Gowalt
(j obrauch#n koonnon. ..bor o» tat nicht nur nichta, wchrond dio hilfloaon
Opfor vor aoinon oi ;onon ..ujon atarben, sondem wirkto auch noch bci don
bluti^en Soziorun .on uit.

Nachdec aich all dicao korde orci ;nct hat ton und Huff und Hoc-bora
bokannt goworden waron, arbeitoten aio donnoch welter. Sio <pbun in Juli
oinon ,;cnoinaanon Boricht uobor dio Veraucho untor den Nacon Huff, iloo-
bor,; und haachor horaua. (Ii0-i02, .oikl. Bcw. 66, R. 213). Sie setzten
ihro Zuaatoenarboit cit dieaec. erwieacnc.. -*oordor fort und lichen ihn don
kantel ihrea wiaaenachaftlichen hufoa. .,uf cc-pfchlun; naachora wurdo
Romberg oino kcdaille fuor seine ..rboit bei den Versuchon vcrliehon.
(lf07a-PS, .j>kl. 9ew. 65, h. 20t).


FUFF. RO.iBJRG. 'ZLTZ


Rouborg untoratuotztc Raachor noch la September 1942 und sollto kilch
ueber die Versu cho cit Raacher oiendlich bcrichten. Er verfasato in
Roachera Nanen oin Schriftatueck nit dor Erklaerunj, daaa dor Boricht
deahalb nicht abgcjebon wurde, wail kilch ihn nicht sur boatirrten Zoit
onpfangcn kcnnte. Dieaoa gleiche Schriftatueck, daa von Romberg
unturz^yichnot war, bewciat, daaa or beat re bt war, dio Hochenversucho
nit Raachor fartzuaotzcn und dlo Conchai-gm? ^ilcha dafaor erbat. Er
achriob: "Obcratarzt Kalk erklaerto aich beroit, don Staataaekrotaor
(*dlch) unaoro Wuonache be2uo,,lich Aufatollung doa Vortcilora (doa Be-
richta) und dor Fortaotzun- lor Verauche vorzutragen. ... Oberat-
arzt Kalk hat rvoch ar. 11. Soptonbor dot- Sta vtaackrotaer unaoro mcn-
acho bozuoglich Vortoilor und Fortaotzun.; dor Veraucho uobomittelt.

Dor Staataaekrotaor hat don vorgvachlagenon Vortoilor gonohnigt und
goaagt, daaa oa nit oinor Portaetxung dor Voraucho nicht oillg aoi."
(NO-224, iUikl. Bow. 76 , R.223, Din 271). In dor Zwiachcnzoit wnrcn
dio noonioriachon Kaolto-Voroucho ait don Luftwaffo-Toan Holzloohnor,
Finko und Raachor bogonnon wordon. Sowohl Ruff *do Ronborg und Waltz
hoorton don Boricht uobor dioao Voraucho in Nuornbcrg In Oktobor
1942. (NO-401, .»nkl. Bow.93,R.309). Hippko achriob solbat an 8.
Oktobor 1942 oinon boaorvioron Dankoabriof an Hir-clor, in dun or aa.--
fco: "Sobald dio ,»rboiton auch woit«r Ihro juotigc Unteratuotzung
bonootigon, bitto ich, nich durch Stabaarzt Dr. Raachor emcut an
Sio vtondon iu Juorfcn." (KO—289, ^nkl. Bow.72, R.216).

Wonn iio ausaa/.on von ifciff und Ronbvrg von den Goricht ala
glaubwuordig bofundon wonlcn, dnnn nuoaaon dio von ihnan aolbat
vorfcrtigten Schriftatuucko und dio obn angufuohrtcn .tuaaagon ala
unwahr vorworfon werdon. Ruffa uni l.o her. a unJ uobcrhaupt dor gc-
8anton Luftwaffu angublichoa Nichts-*ia~‘t-zu-tun-Habon nit don Vor-
brochon ihro a Mitarboitcrs Raachor k^nr. nicht -it ior. unbcstrittin'n
Hondlungon uieaor „r. oklr. ter, in Slnklan- ybracht werden, Dio
Wahl iat oindoutig.


- 24 -


huff. araasRC. wltz


.inalyse


Die Dachauor Verauche auf de~ Gobieto der Hochonforachung wur-
den *u de~ Zwecko durchgofuohrt dio Roalccioncn doa ccnschlichen Or-
ganisL.ua boi Hoehen ueber 12.000 aoter zu bcatiu-on. Dor Angeldag-
to Ro._berg hat auageaagt, dasa vior Vorsuchsroiben durchgofuohrt »ur-
dont a) Sinkvoraucho ohno Sauerstoff-^toing, b) Sinkverauch© nit
Sauoratoff-.ttoung, c) Fallvcrsucho ohne Sauerstoff-.itnuv' und d)Fall-
Yoraucho nit Saucratoff-.*U.ung. (NO-476, «nkl. Bow.40, E. 155). Dio
oraton boidon Voraucho waron darauf abgoatcllt, oin Sinkon nit ont-
faltoton Fallschir. nachxualuen, wachrend dio beidcn lotztoren oin
froioa Fallon aua olnoc. Flujzeuo vor Sntfaltun- doa Fallschima an-
• douton aollton. Wio in Dr. Easchora oraton Zwischonboricht uobor

dio Voraucho nuagofuohrt, war oin s uaaotzlichoa Problon -u loosen,

. naalich zu bestianen, ob dio thoorotisch cmittolton rorto uob«r

dio Lobonadauor doa uonschun in aauorstoffan-or Luft und boi nic-
drigoc. Druck i-it den in praktischon Vorauch gewonnonon Koaultaton
uoboroinatiu-ton. Dicaor Zwischonboricht haachura fuohrt folgondoa
aua:

"Voraucno uobor dio Lobenadauor oinca iwnschcr. oborhalb dor
nonunion Voraucho uobor dio Lobonsdaucr oinca .ionachon obor-
halb dor norr-alcn ..tu>n.;r«nzo (&,5-6ku) wurdon ueberhaupt
nicht angoatollt, da nit Sichorhoit foa:tstand, daaa dio
Vorauchaporaon (Vp) dor. Tod orl.idon nueaso.
t Dio von nir uni Dr. Ronborg angoatcllton Voraucho zaig-

ton daa folgondo: 1. Dor Sauorstoffnan*ol bzw. dor niodoro
atnoaphaoriacho Druck habon in rallschirrjinkvorsucho wo-
dor aua 12 k;.: noch aua 13 kn Hooho toedlieh :owirkt. Ea
wurdon insgosant 15 actrenrersuchc dioaor .j-t angoatcllt,
woboi koine dor Vp uen Tod orlitt. Sa trat schwerato Hoc-
honkrankhoit nit Bowuastlosijkoit auf, jodoch ateta vool-
ligo nktionafaohi *koit, wenn etwa 7 kn Hooho izi ..bstieg
orroicht war. Dio hiorboi aur ;-jfuohrton SUktrokardio-
grauiuo zoigon wahl wachrvnd d*.s Varsuches gowiaao Unrcrol-
uausaigkoiten, jodoch bis Vortoobaeode waron die Kurven
■ur Non- zurucck v -okohrt und z«.i don such an don darauf-
folgcndon Ta;cn kcinerloi kr.nkr^fto Vcraunderun -on an.
Inwicwoit cino ..bnuutzung doa Or miaous


- ^5 -


?:CF?. :C.3SRG. ZLT2


durch sich iicer wiederholcfcde Versuche eintritt, laesst
sich erst ao Schlaas icr v crsuchsr<jihen foststellen. Dio
Qjftrot^n.. tocddichen Versuche werJen an bcsonders su- otoll-
tco Vp vor^onoc^en, da so nst eine Jerarti-c Kontrollc, niche
fuer die Praxis ausserorientlicho dchtl -jccit besltr-t .

SSit_^^ch3^TMi97ii-Fs7~r3na7^rT97^rT75;.

(Unter3troichan,;on oin-ofuort).

Soait ist as klar, dass die Vorsuche tdt dor ..bsicht oplant and aus^e-
fuchrt wurdon, dass oini;e davon einon toodlichon ..us-an;; nohton sollten.
Diesor Boricht uofasst don Zoitabschnitt bis zur crstcn ..pril-i.ocho and
oa ist uarin von Toiosfaollen and Leichenooffnun^cn dio ncdo. Dies hntto
notibor^ ^anz offonsichtlich it. ..ujo ols ur von ooinen orsten Todcsfall
und Luichcnooffnon^ sprach, die or gosohen hitto, obzwnr or dazu ncigt
das Datu... aaf don spaoten ..pril za vorlo ;cn. (NO-476, oben). >fenn dio
Vorsucho doi-ils oin ;cstullt wordon waoron, ■'..ru violon Pcrsonon das
Lobon gorottot warden. Dio .Ji^ckla.^on tachon , oltonJ, d-ss zwrvr in
Vorlauf dor Veraucho Peraon«n ;ctaotot wordon soin i-oo^on, diosc abor
nicht wualon and Schccrzcn .-it sich brnchtcn. Do- lie,.! dio Thoorio
zu ( ;rundo, dass dio Vorsuchsporsoncn vor Jo^lichor Schaorzanpfindung
, das flowuastaoin vorloron. Dioao hlnkcndo Vortoidi -unj win! vollkou^n

durch dio photo-;raphischon Bowoiastuocko widorlo ;t, wolcho iic von don
Vorauchaporsonon orlittonon ualcn doatlich .inchon (TO-610, Mdd. Bcw.

^ 41, h. 158), obanso wio durch dio ai ;enon Bcrichtu Uar .ji okla*ton

uobor dio Vorouche. (NO-402, ,j*l. Bow. 66, R. 213). Dio iwaktionon
. • olnor dor Vorsachsporsoncn Mirdo in solchcn wonduh^on wio "schworo

Hoohonkrmkhoit, krupfhafto Zuckun-«-n* boschricbcn. 3ci oincji Vorsuch
Roxaborjs und Raschors cn uor oi. onon Person wurdon das lotztorun Koak-
tionon wio foljt boscnrloben: "iiach ca. 10 .dnuUn jifenthalt in Jioscr
Houho botfumcn Schttcrzcn auf dor anzm rechtun Suita x-it oinor. spisti-
schon Lichtam^szusLand d^.s rechtun B: lie sich iuxr oehr steifer-

ton, ala ob dio nsa rochto Salto h rs zwischen zw*i Prosaen zer-
quotscht wuario. Za doich bastanJcn staurkstc Xopfsch^rzen, als ob
der Schaedul auseiivanderjvsprenjt wuer\.o.


- 26 -


RUFF. aSiBrSG. ’SLT2


Die Sch;-ersen stei «rtcn sich iu-er Lehr, iodaas schliesslich der ..b-
bruch u«a Verauchcs notvendi-j wuxde." Es licet kein Boricht bci den
-Jcton, *wn&ch in einen/ein Versuch an eincc Haeftlin s we-cn Schnorzcn
ab,/ubrochon wurde.

huff und Hojbor- atullen sich auf den Standpunkt, das a sio d«~
Geuaniten, Gofanjono waehrwnd oines Versuchos su touten, aeussorat nb-
lohncnd e a d«nueberatohon wuerden. Sic bcharren darauf, daaa ihro nit
Rascher durch°efuchrtcn Vorsucho sich at dor. Problem dos Drucksturzes
und dea Sinkens at Fallschin. aus ersssen Hoehon befassten, wo.;oren •
haachor alloin an oinct; Vorharron ader la^njeren ..ufcnthalt in reason
Hoehon arbeitoto, und daas oa j-aachors Vorsucho waren, boi dunon Go-
l’anrono ^otootot wurdon. Hior sohen wir idodcrun die kuonstlichu Tron-
nun« dor Vorsucho in aolcho krirdneller ui»i nichtkriOncllor ..rt,
doren Polschhoit beroits nachfowiosen wurde. ..bcr hior wiodoruu waron
dio boidon an dor oieonon iorsan durch^ofuchrtcn Voraucho, die in don
obon an^efuchrton , von Ruff, forbore uni Raschor oaoinsar. aufflostoll-
ton Endboricht auf gnomon wurden. Vorsucho uobor den laen.-rron .ufont-
halt in Tjsaon Hoeh on, elnu .ji- olc.-cra. .it, van dor sio nun behaunton.
daas sio auaachliossllch in Raschors ft/rvlch la- . Dor cinti 5 o Grund,

, warufu diosor Vorauch nicht oinon toodlichcn .anc^n-: natva, la5 in dur

Tatoacho, daas or infolf.o aussorordentlieher Sch-crscn rochttoiti; ab-
, ftobrochan wordon war. ..ussenien wird auf Soito 11 dos von huff, Rorbcr r

und iioltz verfasston ibdborichtos folrondcs eoaa^t: "Dios vor^licnt bo-
aondorw Bcachtun ; ;, "oil in diesvn Folio oinc Vurauchaporaon in ciner
Hooho von 8.3 kn (27.230 Fuss), ruch 3 . inuten lan; arbaltondor ataork-
aten Sauorstjff..nn ;el aich jciati,; Wiudor vollko.x*m crholto, waohrend
boi Uauerv ursuchon in diosor Hooho r •..-jf\jhr 3 .dnu.on schworc
Hoohonkrankhoit oinsotzt." (NO-402. . ; (Untaratroichuncon cin;c-

fuogt). Hior :oht niodomt aus ihrer d cnon 3oricht horvor, da33 Ruff
und hocbor.i, cbonso wic Raschor, sich at ^ufcnthalt in -rossen Hoehon
bofasston.

- 27 -


• %


HJF?. 2D.-33iG. * ZLT2


Verauche, bei donen Gcfanrona utoctot wurdon, sind in naschera
Boricht an Hlr.xJ.or vo._ 11. : ai 1942 urwaehnt. (JO-220, .«nkl. 3ow. 6lj
K. 195). Eini y Gofnn eno wurden dadurch -ctoetet, daaa :ah sio in
12.000 u Hoeho 30 .dnutcn lan- chno Sauoratoff atom.. liesa; oincr word®
in 20.000 u Hoaho ^otootct, ala tnn ihn doit 6 -dnutcn Ian,; ohno Sauer-
atoffati am,; lioaa. Jiaao Gofan^cnon warden soziort an festzuatcllon, ob
boi der SoKtion antor .oaaor in uen aiut ;efacascn doa Gohima und anJ 0 -
ror Or^anu Gaablaaon, in Enachers 3oricht vx. 11. :.*i 1942 Lufticbolion
Conannt, vorhondon aeion. Eini;c "Jucdiachc raasonachaondoriacho Borafa-
vur'orechor" wurdon '.ua oinoc andcren Grumo ctoetet:

"Ut. zu orklaorun, ob dia antor tiff.3 orchildurton achwcron
paychiachd und phyaiachan Zrachoinur. jn auf dor Bildun *.
von Luftc~balien boruhon, warden oinzcLiu V?n nuch oinoc
dorartiton Fallachiri-ainkv rauch nach rolativor Erholun;;,
Jodocn vor iodcr-intruton doa Bawuaataoins antor -aaaor zun
vollatacndi.cn adtua cbracht. Die auch hior untor daaaor
durcn^ufuohrto .^ooffnan- doa Schools, bozw. dor Druat-
anu B-iuchhoohla, -r sb ala Befund ixisaonhoft Luftonbollcn
in dun Kirn-, Ccrunor-, Lobcr-, Oan.jofa.aacn etc." (NO-

220, obon).

Ea aollto boachtot uonion, d'-aa diuao or'.u in Vorbinuunj nit don Fall-
achin-jinkvorauchon, und nicht «-it Vorauchon botroffa lfttn^oroi. ..uf-
onth&lt in jroaaon Koohon bc:ftn on wur.cn and dies atcllto -orado daa
Problu.. dar, uit doaaor. Studiuz aich toif f and noubor • befnaaton. Rox>-
bor^; bozoUijto, Jaaa or boi dot. To-do von dx\ii -iloaor Gefan.-cnon -nwoaond
war, von donen oinor it. ..pril und zwoi i^ Uai 1942 orfol-ton, and d*aa
or /.Ma y bui dor ..utopalu doa oinen war, boi dor Gnablaacn in don Blut-
^craoaaon doa Gohima vorhanden *r.ren. Er burichteto uober dioau Todoa-
faollo an huff. (HO- 476, .Jikl. Bow. 40, h. 155; hnobor^ iu 6903, R.
6926-B). Noff bezou to, ^aa Kxbor : boi fuenf Fvillon rit tocdlichou
..aa C an f ; anwoaorti war (Hoff, H. 619, o and hoober- hat zu.a^bcn,
uaaa or iavon wuaato, daaa fuenf bis -e Kitoro Verauchaporaonon
patootut wurdon ala or nicht zu.v. :-r ‘ .;;?-476,


BJFF. BD13ZHS. SLTZ


<mkl. Bow. 40, fi. 155). Neff hat an^ereben, dass Rosfcar^ an dor liehn-
zahl dor Verauche taetijen .oiteil nahn. Zt beobachtete dio Versuche,
uachto Notlzcn and studiorto die Elcktrokardioa-aa-c und war ao in dor
La^e fcstzuatollen, wonn oino Verauchapurson in dor Untcrdruckkamor
kurz vor d<u_ Todo stand. (Hoff, R. 651)l

Ea iat unolaublich, dasa Or. Raff nicht ueber das .aiftroton von
Blasen in don Blutjofaeasen dos Gchims untorrichtct wurdo, da er dor-
artlfjo Boobachtun^en an -enschon, dio ala F^l^o oines zu ploctzlichon
urucksturzas atorbon, oin janz ausscrjowoahnliches Voricooania sind,
wonn auch zu violen l.alcn vor 1942 Blascn in don Blut'efaoason von Ver-
auchatioron boobachtot cordon sind. Sa iat anvorstollbar, daaa Dr. Ruff
odor aonst J stand auf don Gobieto dor Luftt»dizin nichta von dor Blascn-
Thoorlo ala dor Uraacho dor Gclenkachrwrzcn, des Hastens, dor Blindhoit
odor Laohiiin^aorschoinun >n, odor von don Synpto^n dor Druckfall-
krankhoit, dio boi ..ufonthalt in jrosson Hoohcn auftreten kann, ?ohoort
haotto, da dicso Thcorio doch in dor soit 1938 vorfuosbaren Litoratur
und don Lohrbuochom dor LufUadiftln wohlbokannt war. .io haotto aonst
Raaehor Voranlassun- ;ohabt nach den Blasen zu forschon? Er hat ent-
wodor waohrond oinua Xursoa in Luftnodiain von dor Thoorio orfahron,
odor hoorto durch Ruff uxvl jlocbor: daroober, dio woit r-ohr uobor Luft-
ciodizin ala haachor wuasten.

Eo ist phantaatisch anzunchuon, -ass huff, Jbeborc und Raschor
nicht dio Beobachtuxv; von luftblasun in den Blut.^jfaosson dor erzordo-
ton Gofanf.onon ir. ..u^o hatton, als aic in dor. sc^insarjon Endbcricht
von 28. Juli 1942 achrioben:

"Boi don schworon .oistiion Stoorun.>>n uni koorporlichon .«ua-
faollun (L-.vhaunjen, Blindhoit usw.) ioa posthypoxaooischon
Daofxorzustandoa iat trots dor voxtoaaltnistaossis ;rosson
onxahl dor Vorsucho dar oi:entlicho Grand dicser Stoorun^on
otwaa ractsolhaft ^oblicb.n. Es schicn eft, als ob aich Er-
schoinunoun dcr DruckfallKrankhoit nit den Fol^on dos schwo-
ron Sauoratoff ran-els konbiRiortcn." (HO-402, «nkl.


.S.31iG. .rlTZ


Bow. 66, K. 213).

Sc it eini : ;or Zcit hctte eine Theoric bestanden, da as die ait der
Drucksturz- odor Druckl’alUcrinkhcit zuaacccnhaen.;enden Sycptone nuf die
Bildun^ von Gaablasen (Luftecbalion) ih den Blut^ef.lessen doe Cehims
Oder in dor Golonk.o 7?nd odor in den Blut^ofaesson der Lungo zuniockzu-
fuohren aoien. >.onn sich die Luftblison in don Blut-ufaesaon dos Gohirna
ansauuoln , vorurs ichon sie, dioser ..nnahoo nach, oino koorpcrlicho
odor gelatine Stoonuv; odor Lachaur..-. ..'cnn sich dio Giablaacn in don
Gelonktiovoalon onsa—oln, wlr1 cjv onot-aon, -ass sic in don Gelcnkregen-
don $ch_erzon veruraachon. ..onn s.ch die dlas~n in Jen Blut ;ofaosson
dor Lun,;o aax^oln, ni- -1 . n on, lass sic -ratickun -s- odor Huatcnan-
faollo vomrsichon. Dios war oino Tnc-rio, iio soit 15 odor 20 Jahxvn
bostnndon hatto and o n Fnch.-urn .uf lea Gubiwto der Luft:.odizin konnto
Uaruobor nicht in Unkonatnia soin. (Ivy, a. 9093-9). Da Basohor, wio in
soinoa Borlcht vac. 11. . &i 1%2 doschricbon, Blaaon boobachtot hette
uni da huff uuvl Roubor voile Xonntnia von don ToJcafadlon hetton, ent-
glngcn dio so wic.itl.cn Foatatollun on hsschors uober Luftcabalicn affon-
sichtlich nicht dor ..of rka-kuit duffs uni ioab^r s. £s kann nur dor
Schluas O o3j t en *-.■ ,n, as iosor Befunl, .or sich ous don boabaich-
tijton Tootun ;on or -nb, dio Grain'll x loa oben zitlorton ..baatzua aua
don Endboricht billot. In .uilxtracht lor l.atur lor ..atorio und do*
vorhorijon disaona von ..on Lc .chtun on b,i :,r ,axtopsio,i:i Vcrlauf
dor Vorauchc, kounnon dio ir. 1:. ben altiurton Is ts aus-.olmockton
Gcdankcn nicht von den in inachers Bericht va. 11. . ni onthiltcncn o-
tronnt wordon. So hat aich der a.chv,ration! :o Zou-o. Dr. ... C. Ivy,
goaouaoort. (Ivy, K. 9151). .11 diea buveist aufa Houo, ir.sa dio ..u»-
aa^on von huff uni .toi-o-r ;, die iarauf hinauslaufen, iasa eie tilt don
ao^onanntun "Haschor-VLrauchon" nichta zu tun ohabt haetten, vSllig
folach aind. Obzwar in -o_ _c.--lns-u.cn Boricht voz; 28. Juli Tsdcafaallo
nicht auadruccklich orwachnt ainl.


- 30 -


KLYf, .-.Q.35.G. 27.77.


s«ht .a. Or. Ivj, Zou^uam,. kUr hrtwr, iu, dor Refund in dan T a-
d.af.allan die Grmdlnj. fuer .in« Tail dims B.rf cht „ blldet.

four und Rosier C noechten du Go rich t jlaubon swhM, du. die
Vorsucho lMnsaten. «. 20 . Lai 1942 bo on let and die Jruckka.ca.r eu dia-
•on Zaltpankt au. Oachau ontfernt onnd.n „r. Jo Berber- vo „ dm T ,, os .

lUUm * U ” t ° '^' b « r -P^ » Ruff borlchtcto, to,tan- aichor-

Uch nicht dor fi .rtn®*o Grand, dla Druckkacccr ouch nur oinon .oitaren

* ^ ‘“ Cn3U “ b<,1 "“* n - -Uob Joiuch nach ihron oilman .a,jab«,
bi. ran 20. aai dort and ..unbar ooh mi ..item FaoUo TJn Tootun3OT .

Sie voraachton Ihro wrfcrach.rf.ch. But.llljan - an Jioacn apaoteren
iiorl.n darch die ~n.--.be .a Yorta.chon, daaa dio Jruckka.-.uar ohna Rafehl
da. LufMaffonaanltaotainapoktara nicht haatta variant wrdon koennon.
Sal dau W. oau, oln dorortl -ar lachnl=ch.r Vam.ua., ,rto dio Znt-
rarnanc dar druckkn... ar uhn. Befehl, iat kaun wr-laichbar nit dan Ver-
brachan dar Baincaan dor ta=or aar Jumor.ahrun. .altarar Varaucha
darch alnan -ann, van ..an aio au.-e auenannaaan -aaatan, la., ar ain
MO.iolar -ar. In dar Vat, .nlar onata.nii N Vor.-caetrte, dar nicht aalbat
am kittaatar on ta VbrWoan war, rfo .,0 a. in .IrkUchkait -aran,
-aard. ahna alien iwifel naff an. harbor.,-, -a an .ar Bol..,un c dar
Dmckkainor, wr oin ;:rfa a orient . atcUt haban, wn Raachar -,„= «„
flchwiifron,

..bor a. iat nicht rahr, daaa die Untorlrackkoooor ar. 20. !.ai 1%2
aa. Dachaa WdG.br.cht aarda, »lo ,1a a. axinaldl nor ciac an;»bon. Sia
haban dia.o. Data,., olnur Schwibon nllcha an :.ulff antnotruan. da. boa, t,
daaa dia Kotxnr under,*.- banucti t .undo. (343U-PS, .nkl. Bo.. 62, R.
200). E. boatand afrcnalchtlich die ..baicht, -da Racer «a vcrl.gan, ala
-nrda .bar tat.aachUch nicht obrucht anl dia, lat ahna Zwifal o»f
dio wruinten Bouiahan.-on duff., Rurbor;, and F.uachara rawockaufuchran.
Ranbarj .nor beatrabt, aoin rortrachorioehoa art nit .sachar in Sopteo-
bar 1942 fortaaaotaon, »ic motor uben aua.-eraohrt auric. ..at Jedan Fall
R.nahtd :! ta hilch an 6. Jani 1942 icn Vcrblaib dar uwckkaznor in Dachaa
fa ar waiter, awl „r.-.t„ . (JO-261, .040. Bow. 63, R. 202). .00 2 5 . Jani
wurio diesur Bofuhl


- 31 -


HIT?. ;£L<S-ji 3. ~,ZLTZ


durch Hockenatoiler, den ..djutaaten "olffsi an Raschor Jwitor^eseben and
dabei auf cinon Brief Raschors von 51 Juni 3czu- ^enoexjen. (’10-284, .jikl,
B«w* 64, R. 203). Dieso Ookunentc boweisen ohne Zveifel, dass die Untei*-
druckkanner bis JoU 1942 in Dachau vcrbliob.

Dio «usaa$o Noffs bewoist niebt nur, dass die Vorsuehc bis Juli 1942
fertgesotzt wrdon, sondom auch, dass sich fuor Roabor ; oino bcncrfccns-
worto Gelo^enhoit bot, dio Vorsucho ahne Jedo Schwiarijcoit abzubrochon.
Noff hat aryogobon, dass h;nborj ihn in den letzten Jjilta'on nit-otoilt
habo, dass dio Kaaacr vorlo;* wordon sollto (ohne Zwoifcl als Folgo dos
Schroibona von -ilch von 20. .ai, das^xaotor wiiorrufen wurdc) und dass
or, antor Jot. ninlruck, dass Sonbcr^ nicht fuor oino Fortsctzung der Vur-
sueho aoi, durch Zorbrcchcn oinos Olas-Baronotcra oir.en Sabatagoakt an
dor Xwatr ausfuohrtc, un aichcr su soin, dass dio Ratter wo Jean. An-
statt diosu Golojcnholt tu oinen .dfazuch Jor Vursucho durch .fc^schaffen
dor boachaodi-'ton Kauur zu or-roifun, cilto Ronborj nach Borlin, bo-
■chaffto dio Ersitstoilo und sutzto dio Untor:n*ckkat;>or innorhalb zm?i
Uochon wiodor fuor woitcru naerdorieeK Vorsucho instand. (R. 623-4).

Dio Karr*>r Murdo nach ihror Reporntur weitoro ixvi bchon r.roondot und
an lotzton Tago dor Vorrucho wurJen noch fuonf Pursonon ;ct octet. (Noff,

R. 624). Uohrond dio Virtuidinin.; Noff in Xrcuzvorhocr in 3otu ( -, auf dio
Sabotage an dor Karnor anflrlff (R. 663), ab sio boin Zcugcnvorhoor Ron-
bor.-a dio Boschaudl. un dor Karter tu, Jaticrto abor don anzen Vorfall
von Juni auf don uonnt ai zuruuck. (Runbor-, R. 6905). Dios ^oschah
offonsichtlich aus Jcr thoorotischon Int x -un; horaus, lass don Coricht
vorjonacht wurd-n koennu, dass in ..ai nur senr wonijo Vorrucho haetton ‘
durchjofuohrt werdon koonnon, da sio bohanpt.t, dass die Katj.;or an 20.

«al veriest mardo. Jodcch dio Joku^nto and Koffs Zou renzussa-o boweisen
oindouti-j, dass dio lntci\lruckkat_»or bis Juli J.rt war.


- 32 -


ift.:-. S0:3igG. SLTZ


Uobordioa cacht 03 wenig aua, ob die Keener ic .iai Oder Junl boschao-
digt wurdo. Rocberg erriff Joicnfailo niebt dio Oelo^onhcit, die Vor-
sucho auf Grand dor nicht verfuegbaron Sraatzteile abtubrochon, obzwar
or oine solche Gologonheit gar nicht brauchto, mnn or wirklich g*-
wuonscht haetto, aio nicht welter fortzasotzen. Sr haotto nichta woitcr
tun brauchen, als dio Kaxgar abtranaportioren zu lasson odor selbst
wogzugehen.

Ruffs uxvi Ronborja Schuld stcht ohne Zwcifcl feat, worn nan bedenkt,
daao aie die Gelojonhoit, iu ..pril 1542 aich nach dea orston Todoafall
oinor Vorauchaporaon zuru-xckzuziuhun, nicht wr.riffon haben. Rocborg
hat aoino .nwosenhoit boi doc. lode dioaor orston Verauchapcraon zu : o-
gobon. (Ro&bor.j, ii. 6924). Sr hat daa Sloktrokaxvlio^rarci zur Zeit
dor Voraucho atudiort (NO-476; Rocher;, h. 6927). Sr CDechto, claaa daa
Goricht zu doc Schluaa kotee, daaa or uin unachuldijor Zuachauor war,
dor daa Vorrocht hatto, nicht a tun zu caosaon. Rich Rooborg war dloa
obon wiodor so oln "SS-Vcrauch". ..bor fetter,' ab zu, daaa or don Elok-
trokardiograph bedionto, und doc LlchtpurJct fol -to, dor die Horztautig-
kuit anzoigto. boon or sah, daaa dor kritiacho Punkt orroicht war, will
or Raachur auf;..orkaa:i ;otacht habon (Ronbcr-:, R. 6927), abor dioa habo
nichto gonutzt, da .iaachor don Vorauch Ms z«» Eintritt dca Todoa
fortautzte. Dio 30 Bohauptun an .oblichor Sachtloai jeeit, wonn oin I.onach
longaam vor aoinon aU .on ot.'utct wurdo, 1 st ulna 9oloidi -un<r unaorcr
Intolligonz. Ror-bor war d.r OOltcro dasonschaftler und war aich vool-
llg dor Tataacho bomj38t, !aaa uinc Gofahivnzono orroicht war, da or nit
•ler boi dioson Vorauchon vonnmJoton ..uanioatun* -nicndlich vertraut
war. £r hat dor- Goricht dio or.' ittolbaro Haoho dos SlokttvkarJio Tacxna
zu don Scholthoboln dor Kaerxr boschrioKn (Runbor , R. 6929) und oa
iot unvorstollbar, zu laubon, <iaaa kxfc.r nicht in dor La:o owoson
waore, dioaun Vorsuchap.raoncx, daa Ltbcn za rotten.


HifT^gQ:3SS. :.aLTZ


wonn er dies sewallt haotto. Die unadsweHhUcho Tatscchc ist, dass dio-
so TodesfaoUe einen Toil des Planes darstelltcn und dass Rocberg nicht
nur nicht den Wunsch hatta, elnsuschrelten, sondcm vielcehr an der
durch LuftecbcU.cn horvor.;erufencn Todesursache sehr interessiort war.

Wenn nan annisct, class Kocberj cin Conner dicser tocJUchen Vor-
suche war, ist os uncoo^ch =u vorstehen, wane. or nicht roeijncte
Uassnahoen traf, Raschor fuor dioson tit Ucberlejunj ba;janrenon ^ord
zu belangon. TatsaochUch borichteto Hocfcerj uebor dicsen Todosfall
sofort on huff (itonbor , K. 6932) und auch soitcns huff erfol.^ton koine
ontsprochendon Schritto. Nach oinoc atvjebllchen Sinspmch : o : on die son
oraton Todosfall nahe twnber; an dor Sektion dos unsluockUchcn Opfors
tell. <tus diosor Sektion .^in- die Tatsacho olnwsxvifroi horvor, dass
Luftou.t>oiio diu Todosursucho bildoto . Us or uebor soino Toilnahoo
an dor Soktion bofro.t wurdo, antsortato Kocbor; nit "Ja, ich boobachto-
to oino Soktion. Das war t*ino PfUcht". (Botiwrj, R. 6924). Roubor C
sa h -to aua, dass or zwoi weitoru Todesfaollo osohen habo und dass auch
dioso durch Lufto-iwlion vurursacht word on waron. (fl. 6925-6).

Ruff und toobor.- lc.tun rosson ert aof don lUatand, dass in don
von Hombcr;-, Ruff und Raschor ecoinaoc ab ojobenon ikricht voc 28. Juli
1942 koinorloi Todosfaollo urwaok.it sind. Dies ist natuorllch oinu sohr
vorstaondlicho Untcrlassun , bewuist Jodoch in koinor oiao, dass slo
fuor dioso -ordo nicht vorantwartlich sind. Dcr ^sr-oinsoao Boricht von
28. JuU 1942 ist in dor lat tit naschcrs Boricht voa 11 . Uai 1942
(NO- 220 ) iduntisch, .it -usnaht-o dor bes^odcron irwaohnun,; dor Todos¬
faollo. Zun Boispiol ..boats 3 von Buchan Boricht ist oinc Zusamon-
faasun.; dos TeUs III-l, Soito 3-18 und dos Tells III- 2 , Soito 18-19,
dos ,r.ou»insaiuin EndWichtos. Usats 4 von iiaschors Boricht onthaolt
Ergobnisso, dio in Toil IU-4, Suite 21-22, dcs ;«rainsat*jn Sndborich-
tos uar^ostollt sited, .isatz 5 vjn Easchwn B.richt lot identisch sit
TeU IU-3, Soito 19-21, dos uinsa:«n Ervib^rlchtoa. ..uf .»bsats 6 von
Raschors Boricht, in da., dio i -rvitin-Versucho


- 34 -


crwaehnt sind, boziohcn sich die Pervitin Data auf Seito 18 dos ,:onoin-
saten Endberichtea. ..tsatz 7 du« naBthcr-S-richtos onthaolt die Sc hi us s-
fol^orunjon, die in den ;-c-cinaa_en Endbericht oinbezo ; ;en sind and ^ibt
Einzelhoitcn uobor die Oasblasen Data, auf die auf Seite 16 bis 18 dcs
gocflinsatxijfindberichtos Bczu-j ,;onocr-in wind, in welchei. Jodech oino Bo-
zu^nah&e auf don Soktionabefund dor on-ordetec Cyfan:oncn Ke^elaaaen
iat. Diese vurschiedonon Stellen wurden lurch den Zou^on Ivy rdteinan-
der vor^lichcn, der zu deu Schlusse k«L_, dass aie sich auf dcnsolbon
Ce r ;onatand boziohen. (Ivy, H. *397).

huff vorauchto die .ojluaaun der Enraohnunj von Todoafaellon in
dou Enubericht dx-it zu orklaoren, dass dioso nicht ala Fol ; c ihrer
Voraucho uobor hottun a^oe lichkoltcn aua ^reason Hoehon (d.a. Fall-
achin^-Sinkvorsuche), seniorn riuluohr boi Rnachoro oi^onon Verauchon
vorgelcoccien ai/vl, cdt donon aio aolbat nichta zu tun ;ohabt haotton
(d.a. laon,.orwr ..ufenthalt in roaaea Hoohvn). (.tuff, R. 6592). Ea iat
boroits nachjowiuaon wonlon, lias dio rundsactzliche Vorauosetzun.;
diosor unwahron 3o*oiofu^hrun; voclli falach 1st, ruoOich, iaaa huff
und IwuJjor,, an Hoehcndauorvvrauchwn nicht lntv.rusaiort Karen. Die
Selbat-Voraucho ftxdwr a und iaschura waron *orado a»lcho Voraucho uxvJ
aio aind in duu Endboricht boa.«vJora vrwohnt. Sio achloason oinon ..uf-
onthalt von 30 bia 40 ►inuten in Hoohon ZKiachon 12 und 13.5 (59.400
bia 44.290 Fuaa) oin. .Mr «benso falach 1st die Xobenthoao. Il Verlaufo
_dor Fallac hin^lnkvorsuchc warier. T^lcsfaello -it ..balcht horboi-ofuohrt .
Boi dioaon Verauchon wurdu feat oatcllt, dass die Vorauchsporaonon apna-
udscho und Klonischy ..rie. .ofa rorbundon tdt Laahuunjen orlittcn. Dios
wird in ..bsatz 3 doa .uiachcr-Borichtoa v*- 11. _ii 1942 uebor die Vor-
aucho uni obenao auf Soito 13 bia 18 lea Sr.iborichtes borichtet. Raschor
fiibt in aeinou Be rich t an:


- 35 -


"lb zu orklaoren,ob die unter 2iffer 3 *eachilderten
schweren peychiachen ur.d pfcyaiscnen Ersfeheinun^en auf der
Bildung von Luftesbclien bertthMlt mrfden einzelne Versucha-
peraonen nach einen dcrarti^en rlllachimsinl<ver3uch nach
relativer Srholur.o, jedoch vor fiedore intro ton dos romisst-
seins, untor iaaser tun vollataoadi^on Sxitua *ebracht.

Die auch hier unter .i'aaaer durch^efuehrte Srooffnun^ dea
Schacdela, be*, der Ixuat- und Tauchhoehlo er^ab ala Tofund
saaaenhaft Luftenbolien in den Hirn-, Corcnar-, Leber-, Darn-
gefaosaen etc." (NO-220, Ariel- -«. 6l, R.19$). Vnterstrei-
chun^on hinxu^efuest)-

Dies be«eiat auaaerhalb *eden 2weifela, daas in den Fall sc hixns ink-
verauchen von Ruff, Rccberg und Raacher Horde veruebt wurden. Ruff
vorauchto den Qerichtahof zu hintor b ehen, indea or auaaa^te, class
die Pildun von Lufter.olien boi Fallachiraalnkversuchen faktiach
unnoo„lich aoi. (a- 6677). bios irird durch Raacher a obon an^efuohrto
Srklaorun 0 und durch Rinreis auf don boruits obon onraohnton Sc hi us a-,
boricht, dor auf diesoa .loiche Froblea ana^iolt, offensichtlich
widerlogt. Abor dioao ; .u> ,u wur e auch d rch don sachvorataondi^on
Zou^on Ivy uns-uidoutl, fost^ona^wlt, dor auaaa^to, daas dia
'llldun^ von Lufteubolion noc .lich aoi bci 7orauchaporaonon, dio
oich In Hoohun von uober I2.0CO n (3?.1 jOO Fuaa) nur 3 Kinuten auf-
hlolton, da.h. boi Vorauohapcrsonon, lio boi 15*<XX> □ abapranoon.
Dlaoachon koonnin aich achon boi 30.000 Fuaa bildon. (Ivy !(• 9102).

So iat also dio Dohaupiuno, daas aich wauhrond dor Voraucho tur
Rottun,, aua joeaon Roohan koino Todssfaollu oroisnoton, vollkcrown
falsch.

Auaaordoo nuan buochtot Mirdon, daas, w-.ohrond dor ^onoinaame
Schluaaboricht koinon dor Todoafoollo boachreibt, er auch nicht
lcu^njt , daas Toclosfaollo otatraton. Auf Seitu 25 dcs Orijinala
hoiost oa: "Anachlioaa^nd cuea in Hlnblick auf lio oxtronon Vor-
suchabodin^un^on boeoixlor* foat^cst.llt w.rdcn, lass boi diesor
janzon Vorauchsrwihc kein Todoafoll und obonso kvin bljjb.ndcr
Saucratoffnan^olachadon pintrat." (NO-U02, obon). Die Todcsfaollo,
dio in Raschora ebon an,jfu-.artcc laricht *jschrieban sin-, varon
nicht durch Sauara toff r-aiy.-l rerursacht cordon, aond-anwaron wohl


- 36 -


oebevlegte Toetur.jen tor Untcrsuchung von Dift«bollenblldung.

Aber sogar die Versuche, von d.rten Ruff, Rtaberg und Waits
zxyeben, class sio auf ihro YerantwortWl.* geplant and ausgefuchrt
warden, waren aeussorst gefeehrlich fuer Lebon und Qesundhcit dor
Vorsuchaobjokcto. Sowohl Huff ale auch Roraberfi stianton darin ueber-
ein, lass 12.000 a dio aoussorsto Gro.nae fuar dio Sicherheit
blldaton und dass solche Vorsuche, wia sia sio Jonsoits dioser
Hoahen^ronxo ausfuehrtan, gejsehrlich waren. We Soschreibung der
Reaktion dor Vcrsuchsobjokta In Schlussboricht boweist, dass die
Vorsuchsporsonun an schworon Eraooofon und langen anhaltondor
Oriontierun .sunfaahiikoit Utten. Der sachvorataendio-o Zeu^o Ivy
wios rtarauf hin,daas die in Schlussboricht von Ruff, Hanborg und
TTolts boschrlobenon Vorsucho aus folgonden anwnlon aeussorst ge-
fnohrlloh waroni

"Ich halUi sio fuor O ofa.hrlich w-gan l\»p lan;on Zoitspanno,
waohrorxl dor die Vorauchsporsonon bt*usstlos waron. Z.~. waren
sio oiwofoohr 20 ••lnutun towusatlos un fuor oir» Zuitapanno
von 3090 Kinuton oiwo CB-iontiorur. svtraoegen. "as 1st oil*
gofaohrlioh lan;e Zoit, das G-ihirn Uos«a Saujrstofinangol
ausxusotzon. Ich ...be xu, dass das dor* diasor Lou-.c, nach-
don can das Eloktrolcar lio^raun bcobachuto ui. aran xoino
Aorvlorunc wahrrtahn, uroh dioson eua^ocohnUn Saueratoff-
Bongo 1 nicht bosondors an.o^iffon wurio. Abor diosu Sxpori-
rwnto aoigon nicht, odor iio a^obnisso wigon nicht, -ass
die G-zhirnscllon aboi nicht verlotxt virion. Einc der
hoohoron Funktiooon dos Ochirns 1st das iort*n,und «ir «ij»on,
dass dor lAjrnprcxoss 0 t» 0 on Sau^rstoffnangol sohr ocpflnrtlich
1st. Uni dio olnxijO Xooglichkoit, Sehaodon dos Lornnocha-
rvisaua durch fort r ,osotaton Sauorstoff&angol tu vonaoiden,
vmor lc go-.fuaon soin, don Intolligenssrsd uiosor Iou«o odor
iiir Lornvomeagoa vor und :uch dioson laangoron Sauerstoff-
rvangol festxustollon»"(Ivy, ' . a>36).

Or. Ivy beMUgte, ass dio in Schlussbericht beschriobeivan Vcrsuche

die physiolo ;ischj drenzo orrcicht nation ui»! dass dio Arbeit fuor

dan Kohlbuflivton dor Torsuchspersonen in inor Zone aua^ofuohrt

wurdo, dio sohr gofaohrlich un: adagt «ar. Sr sa-^o, or waoro nicht

oirvml goneigt, solcho Vorsucho an rich s-lbst vorzunchaon, und dass

or os vorzlohon wu;rio, a ich auf den Grad der CknauUcoit xu vor-

lasson, dor


- 37 -


durch 3arechnun^jn nit don Zr^conissen von "iervoraucfcn orsiolt

warden koonno. (Ivy, R.90olj 3. 9112; 3* 9197)1

Schlieaslich nuss beacrkt wordar., dais die Vorsueho wodor or-

forderlieh noch ein wissonschaftlic'ner Erfol^ waren. Dor ..usdruck

"Staatanotwandizkoit" 1st von den An^ekla^ten viol ,;obraucht wor-

don, ala ob daa oin Vertoidijun .strand wacre. Dios ist voollio un-

bOQruondot, aolbat wenn oino nilitaerlsche odor sonative ’totnendi^-

kuit voraus^esetst wird. 2a ist anzimotoen, daaa Jcdor Anvoklagte

dnehto , os bestuondo ir,ondoino ?Jotx nil .koit fuor das, was or tat.

Daa 1st koin Vorteidl .un j xur. !. anchor dachto das jloicho. Es

wurde als notwondi, an^eschon, hundorttausendo von Konschon in Kon-

zontrationsla,crn o ins us orron. 2 s wurde als notxcndl. anjoschon,

Uillionon von Judcn hinzun'. r -a. Die i’olltik dor 2 «ran..sarbclt itar

auf NotKondi,kuit auf .obaut. .onn d.^a >in Vertoidi,,un_cjrund ist,

donn vorliuron dioso Gorichtsvarhai. -lun ;.n Jo,lichen Sian. Andoror-

solts Jodoch, wonn bowioson wird, 'asa luso Vorsucho nicht not-

wondij waron und koinon irissonschaftlichon .ort hatton, dann wird

dor Schuldi .o noch rjhr achul.’i . las brutalo CVfor von r'enschon-

lobon brachto koinor; Hutson. Und dies *zr hicr dor Fall. Ala Hippko,

dor Chof ios 3anitaotswc3ons dor Luftwaffo, Hltnl^r an 6. Oktobor

19ii2 oin Oankschroibon schlcktu, sa^to or fol .niusi

"Schlussfol ..run >n fuor dio iraxls do a Fallachimabsprun ,s
laasen slch dlorZln s vrrlaoufi S ' noch nicht siohan, da oin
sohr wosontllciwr yaktor noch nicht nit b.ruocksichtijt 1 st,
naonlich dio foeltc; aio st lit oino auscorcr’antlicho ’••ohr-
bo Lis tun,. fikir dor. Koar.vr und s.lr* ..inson Ljbonavor^aonv.e
dar, so lass .iio Zr^obnlssc in dor Iraxis »ahrsch_inlich or-
hoblich un^uonsti .r coin w en ils in den vorlic ;cndon
Vorauchon." (NO-2o9, Ankl. 72, ...216).

Als dor Zou,jc Ivy in c oino inun uobor liu Hat^-ndi^kuit dca auf

Seito 13 dos Schluasborichts von 2uff, . v odvr und i’.ascher besclyie-

benon iypischon Versucha ^ofr? t nr aa ;t. or aus:

n Ich ijlaubo nicht, lass os notwondi, war, oin solclc^s Sx-
porioent durchzufuohron, ua fostsustollen, wolcho .viiaruastunj
Flioger brauchon, die ihr Flu^tou in wesson Hoohon vor-
laaacn nuossen. 0 (Ivy, n. 9035)-

Dor Zeujo Ivy orklaorto fornor, lass dio Erkonntnis, dio durch


diase Vcrauche an Xonzor.trationala erhaeftlin con jOWUMn worden
war, auch durch Tiorrorsuche haette orlan-jt warden koemen, wie
durch die ErceDnisse der von Lutz uni Tertdt aus^efuehrten Tiorver-
eucho -jezei^t worden iat, auf die ia Schluaabericht hinjewieson
wird. Die Unterachiede in den Roaktionen von -fcnschon und Tieren,
wie aie von Lutz und u'endt .aceldet warden, waren nicht hinreichend,
un die Auafuehrunj dieaor G*fae hrlichen Veraucho an Uonachon zu
rochtferti.en. (Ivy, iU 9036).

3. Kaoltoveraucho (Ankla.oachrift Aba. 6 (n).

Fuor eine auafuehrlicho feachrcibun,; 4os Verbrochariachon dor
Kaoltoveraucho aloho don Schriftsatx dor .jjjcla .ejohoordo .;o,;on don

N Anjokla^on Siovora •

Den .»n .cklepton Volt* wird auaaor don 'loohonvorauchon oinc bo-
4 ooix'.oro Verantwortur.. und Toilnahne an Ion Kaoltovorouclion zur Uu >t

eelojt. daohronrt die .^Iclaiton Ruff und Rcobor’ dioaorhalb nicht •.
boachuliiot 3l«J» u*»8 dl® bloaso Tntaacho, daaa dio Kaoltoveraucho
' onachlioaoork! an die vorbrechoriachon Hoohonvoraucho, an donon ale

toilnahnon, nuojofuohrt wur on, zuaaaam nit dor Konntnia, die dioao
boidon Angela .ton von aolchon Vorucb»n hatten, 1= ZuaMronhan alt
V dor fundaoon talon Ankla.-o in joxu auf lhrc Teilntshoe an vorbrcchu-

riachon aorztlichon oia-x;an v-tracl.tot worden. ..uasardon !ann daa
vollo rtUanaaa dor Schulz von .uff, \<xiero und *,oltz nur orfaaat
wordon, indon nan ia anionfaolli.cn ibclwolbeaiehua.on twischen
diosen beiden Vorauchon bocraci-Ujt.

Dio Kaltwaa3jrvoraucho jo araxn aa 15. ^uat 19U2 und dauorton
bio zur oraton Haolfto dos Jahros 19U3- !-lo Vcrsucho tmrdon tat-
anachlich von Holslcohnar, Finko uni Raachur ausjofuuhrt, dio alla
Sanitaotaoffizicro der Luftwaffe waren. Holsloehixr und Finko
erbaitoton nit Tlaschcr bis Duicnbor 1«U2 zuaarrfcn. ie l.asctor in


- 39 -


I


y*

i


circa Dericht ucber bo ire ^ocisiniscbe nus'oildim^ sa_te:

"; v uf 3efchl -loa .Rcic'isfuuhrers-SS and dos Oensraloborstabs-
arztos Prof. Dr. Sipplee h 73rsucha tur .lotton* aus^okuehlter
Menschen" (De&inn aa 15.8.U2)j U donate ir. Zusa-rjonarboit
nit Univorsitaotsprof. Dr. Kolaloehner, Kiel, und Dr. Finite,
Univorsitaot Kiel." (SO-230, Ankl.Dew. 115, R. 356).

Raschor sa^to aucht

"lfai 1939 bis houtc lilit asr die ns t boi der Luftwaffo,"

Dioser Boricht 1st von 1?. irai 19U3 datiert. Deahalb russ nan in
AUi,e bchaltcn, dass Roachor waohrond all or Hot-henvorsuc .o unc' In
wosentlichon waehrond Idler Kaoltovorsucha Ln aktiver. .-ttenst boi
dor Luftwaffo staivl und nicht bei dor SS. Brat in 7ai 19)i3 trat or
boi dor Waffon-SS in ton alctivcn Dienst oin.

Eho dio Hcohenvorsucha wirklieh »u Endc ofuohrt warden waron,
wurde dor Dtfohl ortoilc, lass dor An^okla^t-. ..olts und soin Unter-
^ebenor Raaoiur lio Kaeltcvtrsucho ausfuohron solitun. Dios kann
aus oirfc.i riejf ran l ilch an .'arl 7clff vju 20. !i.i 191,2 oraehan
wordon. (3U3-PS, «nkl. £ 2 , a. 200). Kura iarauf hatto rtaachor
oiiw Dosprochun, dt iip^to, to- Sonltocteinspoktor tor Luftwaffe,
und dio Vorsuchs ,rup?o vmr o ver^roos-ert uni Jarisch, Holilochnor
urd Sin .-or kaion oinau. raacbor acliott Hinder dio so ofohlv an
15* Juni 19U2 uni uo' jr.lt lto Hippicoa jitt., ’lo Vorsuaho in
Dachau ausfuolirun su las: CO-2C-3, *n!el. ... 2, .. 30?). Dor

Forschur. sauftra, war Jo vn ..,f rat fucr Luftfahrt-l^iizin ( 2 II D)
untcr Anthony ortcilt, 'esron Stollvortretur dor .^ciaajtc lockcr-
Proyson: war. (jro-236, Ankl.: ow. 89, ,. 21,5).

In Kruuavornoor _,ab Volt* su, das? or ar. don Kaoltovorsuchon
oin boiouton'os Int rosso hatto und dass tr s«.lbflt viol auf dioacn
jebiot urboiWt hatto. ( . 72hO).


- dO -


•,'oltz bohauptctc, lass or von don Kaeltcrorsuchon an Haoftlin^en in
Dachau er3t in Socnar 192*2 crfuhr, ala or cobeton wurde, Sauorstoff-
untorauchun^on dcs Dlufcos dor Vorauchapcraonon zu nachcn. (::• 7k26).

2a iat „anz klar, c’aaa cltz schon in ’"ai 1?1*2 vcn dicson Vcrauchan
Konntnia hatto, da or daanla soilat von !lilch bcauftrajt wurda, dlo
Verauche zu uoberwachon. 2a aobolnt auch ho.-chat wahrachoinlich, daas
.,'oltz' Inatitut in '.‘uonchcn dio Qoraotc fuor dio Sxporinento in
Dachau lioferto. toltz hatto achcn Kaltwaasorvcraucho an ^rosaon
Tioron untorrxmon, woahalo ’io urfcr orlicno Labcroinrichtun^ vor-
hanlon war. ( .cltz, 722*1). cltz zu, daas ervit ihn ..oncldot
hatto,-doss oln Goauch J ocn c ht wardon war, ua oinon Toil aoinor Sin-
richtun J nnch Dachau zu orin .on, daao or abor dioao ditto ab"oachla..cn
hatto. (... 721*2). 2r komto jodoch nicht alt .atL-i^lwit orklaorcn,
daaa oin Toll aoinor Jinrlchtun nicht tata ochlieh in ‘aclsau jobraucht
wordon war. (,;. 722*3).

An 26 . uni 27. Okto’oor 192*2 fond in Nucrnbor. unt«r dor Schlra-
horrachaft !oa Sanltaotainapoktora 'or Luftwaffe dna Konforonz uobor
"Modizinlacho 4 >roblu.» ’or Doonot uni .lntornot" atatt, untor doa
Voraitz .jit loni-a, i 'or t. jckor- v ro;'3 nj zur Soito atand.

,.'iT ios.r Ta.un, abon 'olzloohaar u: .aacnor clnon :jricht ucbor
dio Dnchiuur Kao ltooxjK'rluonto• ^lta hlolt auch cino Vorloaun^ uobor
ooino KuolUuxporL-t nt.. ilntor ‘on .il»K.!rwm waror. auch .‘io .in.,e-
kla^ton huff, itcnbcr', Gchr. 'or, 'ockcr- r.yaon.. und r.oao. hua dor
kurzon Zua,»rajnfaaoun_ soi'or /orlosun. .-. it ;<lar horvor, daaa Vor-
aucho an loborv’on Nonachon aua ofuohrt »,r lu wiran. (NO-201, Arid.

7ow. 93, ,1. 309). P.aschors _r’<lo^rur. i ^nschluaa -n lolzlochncra
Vortraj zolgto auch, aas 'orsusho an Konzontrations la crhaaftlinjon
vor.;onomon wordon waron.


Closer "ioricht vorursachto oino jewiaao Sensation untor eon „nwe-
seadon. Ea war 0 anz lclar _o-aacht warden, dass Toeesfacllo oin^o-
troten waron, (Lutz, ... 272). Vor^lcicbe auch don Schluaabericht
uober die Vcrsucho, dor dio Todosfaollc schr auafuehrlich bcschroibt.
(NO-Jj 23, .uikl. ow» 91, (k , 252).

Die Tataache alloin, dose dio "ooltoversucho von Of fielor© n der
Luftwaffe aus^ofuohrt wurden uni dio voile Cntoratuctzun; dor
lotztcron fanien, bowoiat aohlaoaaisj iaaa die Tcrauche von
.oltz, duff uni .ttaborj u.a.,aich selbat von don so^.onimnton
"liaachor-Vorbrcchon" zu iiatanzioron, nichta tnicroa aind ala
ruinoidi 0 c .jiatron_®xjon, ihror klaron atrafreaotzlichcn Vorant-
wortunj zu ontjohon. Nicht nur ,uff, lontor,; uni .oltz hatton voll
und .;onz Konntnia, Vaaa la 7orlnuf dcr Hooh. mroraucho Vorbrochcn
vor .okorrxm waron, aonorn auch oolchj hchan Sanitaotaoffirioro
dor Luftwaffe wio Hippto. Lonnocb wur h Ufchlun, lass .aachor ,
zuanrexm nit anduron ..orzton or Luftwaffe, elnachlioaslich doa
An,okla;t.n ^ltz, io St ll-v.r.nwho -.uafu hr«»n a.llte, '.aachor,
wit daven ontfurnt,von Jor Luftxaffo vera Crlo^richt joatallt
zu wurdon, behiolt viclrohr ooinon un_ actztu auino aoorde-
riocho xboifc in zua.vt wnarboit it unJorvn .. rzt n !or Luftwaffo
fort. Sa ial nicht nur koiuo *^iatanzicrun J " von .iaachor uni ®
allarwonijaton caitono nuff, Hoa^rd und .eltz, aoniarn aoino
/.rboit wurdo fortlaufond lurch Jio Luftwaffo untorstuetzt. .‘a
19. Fobruar 1PU3 aa^to Hipploo Stator ■fuor dio ^roaso Hilfo, die
dio ZucBronarboit nit dor SS bui «r •>rchfujhrun: icr Unu. -
auchun • fiur uis itot hat,.^inon r u cbon*Vott Dartc."

(NO-26j, .mkl. ow. 106, ... 3!,6). ir. oinor 'esprechur^ ait .iaachor
on 12. J a_rz 1?U3 ia Zua ..anhan rit oachcra vorjaaobonor Vor-
ootzun, zur ..affen-SS bat liippko ihn ausirucklich, beta Sanitaota-
dionat dor Luftwaffo zu bloiben. Jr sa.,tc, aclbst w^nn .aachor
vorsotzt wuordc, wuerdo or waiter


aoino voile Unterstuetaun, ^oniessen uni fuo s tc hinau:

"Ich wuonscho, class wir dam auch spaotcr weitorhin tuaa.-nonar-
beiton koennen. Zus .'-oispicl wuerde ich cs echr be^ruossan, wenn
Sie nit r.cnber . ausarxaan die ..ottun j a us ^rocsstcn Hochen wo i tor
durchfuehron wuerdon, unci zr«ar noch hoohar ^ohen «rucrdon r.ls
21.000 n. £a moss to fucr dicscn Fall ir^endwie cin Zwoistufon-
flti ro-;at fuor den Untordruckwacun bcschafft warden. !>o3 woiteren
waoru os neln Unsch, wonn Sio an Vonschonvorsuchon die lloehen-
vorsucho nit Kaolto kaabinioron wuordon." (!S>-270, Ankl. an, 110,

R. 351).

Es ist schon darauf hirvjowioson war ion, wio r.cobarj ausaciacn nit
Uaschor schon in Septcaoor 19U2 (siehe ebon) rilch ion jlcichon Vor-
schla^ jcnacht hat to. "3 ist of'cn3ichtlich a mooilich, zu irjond-
oinoa begruondoton Urtoil au olanjon, class .cuff, ..aebar^ und Vclta
nicht fucr alio iio Vcrbrocfton vcrantwortlich sind, dlo in Vorlcuf
dor Hochonvcrsucho voruobt wurclon. lo unausvoichlichj Foljsrun^ davon
iat auch dlo Vorantvrortun, fucr dio waohrorvi dor Kaoltovorsucha vor-
uobton Vcrbr action. f >snr. lioso Vo r sue ho haott.n nit mis ohna dio vollo
Ontorstuetaun^r ijs Scrltaota iio notes ior Luftwaffo aus_.ofuohrt wordon
koonnon un 1 das au oimr T_it, als dlo riolfachcn Hoohcrcaordo alien
Dotsill^ton wohl Is’lrannt wrjxn.

III. Schluss

Dio .jikL".,obehoordo untorstoUt, ass -as rfolanatorial orgibt,
doss Ruff. ilenbar und iltz JiaupttooWr, -ullii*h vr, ..netiftor, Vor-
sohublolotcnde taron, ihro Zostincun^ on un' in r’-in'un, standon
mit l'laonur. utk! Unt mohaon, dlo <*lo *'urc.ifujhrun„ -iodisinischjr Vor-
■uohs ohrv Zurtimun. or etroffonon run 3v,jnstani hat ton, und Kit-
gliodor oinor Organisation ’or Gruppo waron, dio in Var binding stare!
rait diooort Vusuhn, in doron Verlauf ’'orituton, Vrutalitaotcn, Orau-
sankolton. Pc torun.an, Qrouoltaton un' an‘ ru inaenschlichs Hanilun^on
bo-anE . ;nru. ass ii-rc Schuld in Slow ’.or Punkto I, II und
III dor ,jikla_oschrift orrlascn ist.


Ich, Fred Lax X 02*6 207 bestaetige hierait> das3 ich
durchaus varfcraut nit dor on^llscben und deutachen Sprache
bln und dasa daa Vorstehende eino wahrhaitageaacaso und
richtige Uebersettung dea xuaaacscnfasaeixJen Schriftsatres
der Voreinlgton Staaton von /xerilta gegen Siogfried Ruff,
Hans Wolfgang Soaberg, Goorg «uguat Salt*, daratellt.


1 August 19U7 Frod Lax

X 01*6 207


- Ul* -


r


mi:.t-,5: a ICHTSHCF Kn. I

FALL Hr. 1

ZUSA—aiFASSHIDSh SCHLUSSBIhICHT
02h VffiHMIGTSH STAATEi VCH Ak-PJXA
- g«gon -

OSKAK SCHfOrDES


i


Nuernberg,

16. Juni 1947


Jaaoa U. acHaney
Alexander G% Hardy
Arnoat Horlik-Hochwald
■aether Jano Johnson

Fuor:

Tolford Taylor
Brigadier General, U.S.A.

Chiof of Counsel for ar Crimes


SCHRJZDEn


snguaiRfXG

Unter Punkt I der .uiklageachrlft wird dor tngeklagte Schrooder
in wosentlichen boachuldigt, aich nit andoron Peraonen in Verfolgo
einoa gemeinaaaen Vorhabcna zu einor Vorachwoorung and Uebewinkunft
zuaajaaengofundon zu habon, ue aediziniacho Sxperioento an uonschon
ohne deron Zuatiatung vorzuncham; untor Punkt II and HI (Kricgavor-
brechon und Vortorochcn gogcn dio -onacftlichkoit), daaa er Kaupttaoter,
Toilnehnwr, Anatiftor, ala Beguenatigter gchandelt, aeino Zuatinnung
gogobor. and nit Placnon und Untomchcon in Verbiiviung go at and on hat,
dio dio Durchfuohrung acdiziniachor Sxporlacnto an lobcndon Uonachon
ohno Zuatinmung dor Botroffondcn zua Cogonatand hatten.

Do* .tngoklagton Schrooder wurdo boaondoro Vorantwortlichkoit fuor
und dio Toilnahna an Hoohon-, X*«lto-, Kpidcniachor-Oolbaucht-, Flcck-
fiobor- und andorailnpiotoff-Vorauchen und don ooonmaaorverauchon zur
Laat gologt. Urn dio Sachlago zu voroinfachen, zloht dio Anklagobohoordo
dio Boachuldigung aoinor Toilnahso an Sulfooanidvorauchon tuwock. Aua
dor Bowolaurhobung ging&uch horror, daaa Schroedor ait dcr. la Konton-
trationalagor Natzwoilor vorgenoozjnon 5aaoxpori=onten in Vorbindung
atand.


SCHROEDES


I« Stollung und Verar.twortuna

^13 Chef doa Luftwaffan-Sanitaotsdienatoa hatte dor «r.geklagto
Schroedor cine dor vichtigatcn Stellungen in d*r deutschcn Aorzto-
hiorarchie. Er achlug erne liilitaer-ccdiziniacha Laofbahn oin und
atiog in aoinem Boruf zur hocchaton Stellung auf.

Iai oraten ..eltkrieg diente Schroedor ala Sanitaotaoffizior bei dor
Infantorio. In dor Zoit vor 1931 war or ala Sanitaetaoffizier oiner
Hoihe von ailitaeriachon Einhoiten zugcteilt. Ac 1. Januar 1931 wurdo or
ala Kuforont fuer Lizarottangelogenheiten und Hoilnittel nvit doa Rang
einea Obaratabaarztoa zur Heeroaaanitaetainapoktion vorsatzt.

Ln Johre 1935 wurdo Schroedor Stabachef von Gcnoralarzt Hippke in
dor nou orrichtoten SanitaotaabtoUung doa hoichaluftfahrtndniatoriuna.
Kr bohiolt diuae StoUung boi, nachdoc Hippke zua Inapoktour doa Luft-
waffon-Sanitaotawoaona in -ahro 1937 crnannt wurdo. In Fobruar 19*0
wurdo Schroedor zua Flotlonirzt dor Luftflotto II ait doa Kang oinoa
General at ibaarztoa omannt. An 1. Januar 1944 trat or an Hippkos Stollo
ala Chof doa Sanitaotswoaona dor Luftwaffe. Glcichzoltig wurdo or zua
Gonoralobcratabaarzt bofoerdort, dca hoochaton Kang in Sanitaotadionat.
(NO-666, Ankl. Bow. 14, R. 106; NO-449, Ankl. 3ow. 130 , h. 471).

*1.3 Chof doa Sanitaotawoaona dor Luftwaffe waron alio Sanitaotaoffi-
zioru dor Luftwaffo dirokt odor indirokt Schroedor untorotollt. Soino
Stollung und Voruntwortlichkuit aind klar und eindoutig. (Uoboraichta-
korto doa Luftwaffonsanitaotad.vnatea, NO-419, *nkl. Sow. 13, R. 105).


scKjpaJSR


Ss 1st nicht rtUfgabe dcr Anklagebehoorde, darzutcn, da S3 Schroodor
ait alien Einzelhoiten aller dioser Vorsuche vortraut war. Dor Nachweia
genuogt, daaa er Konntnia hatto odor haban nusate von dor ayatomatiachon
Verwondung nonachlichor Verauchapora<«cn fuor cediziniache Verauche ohno
ihre Zuatimuhg durch fltollcn, ucbor die er ein botraechUichoa kaa. von
hachtbufugnia und *utoritaet auauebte. Sr hatto die Pfllcht, aoino Unter-
gcbenen zu kontrollioren. (Sicho Yanaahita, 66 S. Ct. 340, 347 1946).

Dies und nohr wurdc von dor -nklagebchocrte bcwieacn.

II# P£r«o«»^licho Toilnahoe an vorbrcchcrlachon Verauehon

A._Flcckfloborvorauche in Buchcnwald (*nklagoachrift, Ziffor 6

(J)).

Dor vorbrocheriacho Charaktor dcr in Xonzcntrationalagor Buehunwald
durchgofuehrtun Flockfioborvoraucho wurdo auafuchrlich in Schriftaatz dor
Anklagobehoerdo gvgen krugowaky boachrloben und braucht hicr nicht wlodor-
hoit zu wordon. Jio Bcschuldigung, die gcgon don .mgoklsgtcn Schroodcr in
Zusanocnhang dooit orhobon wird, groondet aich auf dio BotoUigung aoinoa
Untorgoboncn Roao an dioaon Vorairhon nach doa 1. Januar 1944, dun Togo,
don Schroodor Chof doa Luft> affonaanitactadicnatoa wurdo.. Schroodor
iat fuar dioao vorbrochoriachon Kandlungon Roaoa vorantwortlich. (Sioho
Yamaahita obon).

Dor Eintrag in Ding'achon Tagobuch vox 8. kaort 1944 bcfaaat aich
oit don Voraucharoihcn VIII, dio von doc «ngokUgUn fioae vorgeachlagon
wordon waron. 2) Inaaaacn wurdon ait doa Ipaon-Ispfstoff von Koponhagcn
goinpft und danach wurdo ihnon ait Flockfiobor infiziortoa Blut cingo-
apritzt, daa von "Durchgangaperaonen" horruehrto. Zohn Hao ft lingo wurdon
ala Kor.trollporaonon bcnuotzt und ohno vorhorgohendo Inpfung infillort.

Dor Bintrag an 13. Juni 1944 be wo iat, daaa aocha Vorauchaporaonon an dor
Folgo dio.or V.raucho atarbon, von danan drei goicpft wordon -aren und
droi Kont rollpo raonon waron.

oaehrend Hoae ablougnote, daaa er da* Kopenhagcnor Ipaen-Icpfatoff
an -rugowaky odor Ding zwocka Srprooung in 3ucbonwald


gosandt hatto.


SCHEOSDER


(R. 6224), ging aus seinen Brief an 4rugowsky, der das Datua 2. Dozcabor
1943 traegt, das Gogontoil hervor. (NO-1186, Add. 3cw. 492, R. 6463 ).

In dieseci Brief erauchto hose »-rugowsky ausdruocklich, don Ipsen-Iepf-
stoff in "dor Versuchsanordnung Dings in Buchonwald" auszuprobioren.

Der Brief wurde spaotor Yon i rugowsky an ding weitorgeloitet, dosson
Unterachrift sich as untcren Zndo dos Briofos befindot. Dieses Dokument
bestaetigt den Sintrag in dec ding'sehen Tagebuch and stollt dor pcinli-
chon Genauigkeit dor ..ougenaussage dos Bolastungszougon Kogon vor diesom
Oerichtshof ein gates ieugnis aas. Nachdoo dioser Brief Roso vorgclogt
wordon war, gab oijtu, dass er ihn unterzeichnot habc and Lragowsky gobo-
ton habo, den Icpfstoff in Buchenwald aasprobiwrun za lassun. (R. 6464-5).

Oiosos ooorderiacho Experiment wurde sa oincr 4oit darchgufuehrt,
als Schroodor hosos Vorgosotztor war und die vollo Vorantwortlichkoit
fuor ooino Taetigkoit trug. Die Tatsacho, dass dio Anrcgung, dio Expori-
mento vornchmon za lessen, 29 T’.go vor dca Zoitpunkt gtriacht wurdo, an
dom Schroodor den Oborbofuhl aeb< r den Laftwaffcn-Sanitaotsdionst uobor-
nahm, kann ihra in kolner .oisc zur Sntschuldigung dionon, Die Vorbon-i-
tungen faor die Exporinv-nte warden getroffon and tatsaochlich aasgofuohrt,
nachduu. Schroodor scin .uat angotruton hattu und or treugt doshalb dio
Voiontwortlichkoit fuer dio Kordo and ^isoloroiun, dio dio Folgo davon
warun.

B. Fleckficbor and an-Jcro Ispfstoffexpcrlaonto ia Konteiitra-
Uon3la-or iiattK.-llor. (.aiklageschrift. Zlffor 6 (jj) .

Stabsarzt

Dio von/Profossor Eugono Haagon, Boratondor Hjgioniker dor Luft-
flotto l.oich, iia Konzuntrationslager Schinaek und Natzwoilor durchgo-
fuehrton Flockfioboroxporiconte sind eingchcndst in Schriftsatz dor An-
klagobehourdo gogon Rose bcschricben. Dioee .tatorio w-rd hior nicht wio-
dorholt and die boidun Schriftsa jt2-> nwossen zusaraaen botrachtet wordon,
uc das Gesantbild zu orhalt.cn. Das *uftreten Haagens als Entlastungszou-
gon taacht os notwondig, seine nussage acts,r diesc Vorsucho za wuerdigen.


- 3 -


Koa, on sa^to aua, daas dor An._okla;ta Rrsa ala Rornton-
dcr CT y~ionlkcr d-aa Loiters dcs Sonitastsvoaona dor Luftaffo
lhn la s n «n-T»cr 1943 dazu bc’T'vror. habo, sich ala Poratondcr ,J y-
Cicnikor dor Luftflnttc Reich rcaktivioron zu laason. Raaf.on
uobornahr. ax eh olncn Auftrajr dcr Luft-affc zur ^lo-kf icborfor-
sohunf und fuchrtc ir Z>K'o dieses .\uftra;oa und auf Crur.d aoi-
nor Stollunr in dcr Luftwaffe .-o-risac s*lcckfiobor-Expcrir.onto
dureh; (R. 9564-5).

Ran-on orkloort-, daas ihr. Stabsarzt r-rnefo v^n dcr Luft-
v'affo lrr Jahro 194 2 in •’R'-lonla-.hon Tnstitut drr I’nivorsltnot
Strnagbur" boi^c obon -nxrdo, und dnaa r mcfc ala sclr. Asalstont
tnctlr wnr. '••rnofo »*ar nllitnoriaoh don Luftrrxuarzt 7, aber
tcchniach *'aa;on untcrstollt. (R. 958J2). "an or. war nllitnc-
rlach obonfalla den Luft auorzt 7 ur.tcratcllt. (?. 9563).

Kan. on hattc oinon Rattenflcckf icbcrlnpfat^ff cnttrlokolt,
dor oinon at; oaohvaochton virulcntcn (lcfcondor.) virus cr.t-
hlolt. (R. 9596/7). Haa. on an to aua, or habo r.lt dioacn
inpfat^ff ur. 28 ”aoftlin on dea K^nzentratimain: ora Schir-
nook, oinon .\uascnla. er vor. vatz-'oiler, vorauohc an catollt,
un dcaaan "ortrno lichkcit fcatzuatcllcn. .yxht M acftlln-o
wurdon nit 0,5 car. dlcaaa virulor.tcn Inpfstnff 3 cimpft,
zohn rr.lt 0,5 con und zchn nit oincr. avirulontor. ’r-pfaWf
plus 0,5 non doa virulcnton Tnefat^ffas. Droi -roitoro *' Q cft-
linpo wurdon zu 'cr-lci'>az'oe , <on rt olr.cn avirulenton T-pf-
stoff -olrnprt. v r sa-ta aua, daaa di 3 T rpfur. "n k ino crr.stcn
“oaktionon ozoiti t K nctt:n ( e . 9606). ?:acb v-.r\;cr.a /.uaaa.-o
wurden nllo dioaa Inpfun -cn in Kai 1943 Ynr-cnor-cn und os
hnottor naah dioacr, Zcitpur.kt k?ir.c - .Itrren Inpfur. cn ntutt-
-efundon (R. 9636). Ir. Rerbst 1943 vcrlo; tc vaa. cn sclno
Taotl/kolt naoh '-atz* ;ilc.r, da or ar. oblich dor Ar.aloht vnr,
daas oino Rlcokficbcropldanla dort •’a'xrschcir.lichcr sci nls
in sohirnook (R. 9603). Sr f'vd-rt durefc ?irt 100 Ror.zcr.-
tratlm.ala;or-"acftlln. 0 fuer dio ’'crsucho noah vatz 'cilor un.

- 4 -


DIO 30 Kao ft lingo wurdon 1= v^ronbor 1943 v«a Auschwitz nach
Natzw '"’ *«r»raoht; aohtsohn fiov-r. starben nuf dor Rolso.

Dio uobrlgon orachtote Kangen nls fuor aolno Zwocko ungooignet
und fnrdorto woltoro hundort an, dlo lhn In Laufo doa Dozonbor
1943 zur Vorfuogung goatollt wirdon. Br sagto aua, daas vior-
zlg dav^n nnchoinnndor zwoi inpfungon durch injoktl^n untorzn-
gon wurdon, urn Tnraunltaot t u orzougon, olno drltto Inpfung aol
mlttola Skarlflkatl^n orf^lgt, un dlo Tnmxnltaot nnchpupruofon.
Zu vorglolchazwockon orhlolt olno zwolto Oruppo v^n vlorzlg
Hnoftllngon, dlo als T, K''ntr''llpors'r\cn n bozolchnct wurdcn, nur
dlo drltto Impfung durch Skarlflkntl-'n. pol all dloaon angob-

llchon Irnpfungon wurdo oln und daraolbo Impfat^ff vorwondot; oo
wor oln nouor impfat^ff, dor olnon nbgcachwnocht vlrulonton vi¬
rus rlokottala prnwazockl (Laouaoflockflobor) onthlolt. Zu don
nn boidon Vorauohagruppon v''rgon'*crtonon Inpfungon durch Sknrl-
flkatlr'n mrdo wonlgor Inpfst^ff vorwondot ala zu don bcidon
oraton Injfungon durch Injokti^n, donon dlo irounlalorto Orup¬
po untoxw^rfon wurdo. Bol dor oraton Oruppo rlof dor lnjlzior-
to Impfatoff dlo v^n Haagon ala nnraol bozolchnoto Inpf-Ronk-
tl«n horv^r. Ir. gr^aaon und gonzon orf^lgto dlo glcicha °oak-
tl^n bol dor "Kontr^llgruppo", wolcho lodlglloh dlo drltto
Tnpfung durch Hautrltzung orhlclt. Dlo Rode tion war nloht hof-
tlgor als bol donon, dlo dlo rinsprltr-lrpfun or*'niton hntton
(R 9615-7).

Hangon gab zu, daaa dlo vr-rl lhr. s'-r^hl In Schlrnock ala
auch In Natzwollor vorwondeton vcrsuchapora^ncn don vorachlo-


donaton Nation alltaoton nngchf'crton; oa waren Zlgounor und
p^lon dnruntcr (R 9607). Er sagto fornor aua, dr.oa dloao Haeft-
llngo alch nlcht frolwllllg gcnoldot hnetton, donn or hnbo, vdo
or aagto, lodlglloh schutzInpfungon v^rgen^non (R 9541-2).

Hangon bohauptoto, dnas or nur doahalb dloao Inpfungon In
Sohlrmock und Natzwollor v^rgon^nnon habo, woll Kronor, dor
Lngorknmnmdant von Natzwollor, lhn dorun oraacht hn&tto.Dlo

Moogllchkolt doa Auabrucha olnor Flockflobcr-Epldonlo Mltfco

- 5 -


1943 haotto ihn vmd Kronor bounruhlgt; or orklaort jodnch,
daaa tataaochllch v^r Maorz 1944 koin Poll von Flockfiobor-
orkrankung aufgotroton sol. (R 9594-5). Sr sol nur nach Schlr-
nock gogangon, wo 11 or und Kronor den Auabruch olnor Spldonlo
bofuorchtoton (R 9600).

Haagon'a vnrstohondo Auaaago oracholnt on al oh ao'oohl

nuch m godchta dor D^kunen to,dio dlo Anklagovortrotung vor-

logto, und dlo Hnagon bol aolnor Auasago r^r Vorfuogung atan-

don, vollkonmon unglaubwuordlg. £a lat zur.aochat vnllkomnon

laoohorlloh zu glauban, daaa or, 4o or bohtuptoto, nur doa-

holb naoh 3ohlrmock und Ratzwollor glng, wo 11 or don Auabruoh

olnor Spldonlo bofuorchtoto. ?.a lat laochorllch nnzunohnon,

daaa oln Ron zontratlanalagor-—Xonnandant nuf clgono Fauat

aoztlloho Hi lfo bol Aorzton aua don un daa K^nzontratlona-

lagor horunllogcndon staodton auchto. Daa vr/HA, don alio

K^nzontratlonalagor ur.toratondon, hatto oln aohr groaazuoglg

angologtoa Snnltaotawoaon, 'md oa lat undenkbar, daaa oln Ron*

zontratlonalagorfuohror dlo Hilfo olnoa Auaaonaoltora In An-

apruoh gononnon haotto. Zwoitona lat oa laoohorlloh anzunoh-

mon, daaa Haagon aua lautcr Horzonaguoto und Angat, daaa olno

Spldonlo alch uobor den Lagorbozlrk hlnrwa vorbrolton koonnto ,

aolnon k«atbaron FlockfioborlnpfsWf dazu vorwonden wuordo,
or mon

dl«/bodruornaworton Ronzontratl^nalagor-Hnoftllngo aohutzzu-

lnpfan. Haagon hat aolbat auagc30gt, daaa or aohr wonlp Flo*

floborlmpfa t^ff boaaaa. (R 9613). Sa lat In Lnufo dloaoa

pr^zoaooa wdodorh^lt bozougt trrdon, daaa Flockfioborinpf-

8tnff in Doutschlnnd waohrend dca Rrlogoa bodonkllch knapp

war, und dasa dlo v^rbcd'orion Hongon r.lcht olnnal dazu au8-

rolchton, un Aorzto, Pflogor un'* md.eros boaandora gofaohrdo-

toa pora^nalz-u lmpfon. Dasa nan dloaon I^fat^ff zur Schutz-

lrapfung von Ronzontratlonalagor-Kaoftllngon vorwondot hat, 1^:

undonkbar. Drlttons lat oa laochorllch anzunohaon, dras oln

Wlaaonachnftlor Jonala haotto auf don Godankon k^nnon koonnon,

daaa dlo Impfung von 28 Haoftllngon In schirnock und 80 In

HatzTfollor lrgondolnon Binfluaa auf dlo Moogllchkolt olnor

- 6 -


FlockflGborepftdonlo habon koonnte. AuS solnon olgonon Brlof
vorn 27. juni 1944 an Hirt 1st klar erslchtllch, dess Hatton
boauoglich solnor wirklichon ?ao tlgkelt In Natzwoilor waoh-
rond solnor Flockfioboroxporinonto olnon Holnold gololatot
hat. in olnon Brief voa 9. Mai 1944 an Hirt bat Kaagon urn oi-
no woltoro Zutollung von 200 poraonon fuor aolno Exporlnento
(N®-123, Anklagobowolastueck 3C3, R. 1396). Im Anachluaa an
dloao Anfordorung’aagte or in aolnon Brlof voa 27. juni 1944,
flaas bol spaotoron Inpfungon nit virulonton Flockfiobor, wol-
cho zur Foatatollung dor Tfirkung doa Schutzinpfatoffoa durch-
gofuohrt wordon aollton, nit Xrnnkholtafaollon gorochnot wor-
don muaao, boaondora in dor K^ntro llgruppo, wolcho don schut* "•
lmpf at off nlcht orhalton hat. Dloao tfachlnpfungon 3olon wuon-
achonawort, un rtio rrlrkung dor schutzinpfatof f 0 unzvoifolhnft
foatwuatollo n. ploannl aolon 150 poraonon fuor dlo schutz-
lmpfung und 50 ^Poraonon fuor dlo Kontrolllnpfunf vorgoaohon.
(MO•“127, Anklngobowolaatuock 306, R.1401).

Man bo nchto boaor.dcra, dnaa in den obon orwnohnton
Brlof Hoogon Hirt Anrnuf hinwloa, dnaa Erkrankungon In dor
Kontrollgruppo, dlo nlcht nit don Schutzlnpfatoff golnpft wor-
don war, *u orwarton solon. Knngon angtc oia, dna8 dloao zu-
aaotzllcho oruppo von 200 Rnoftlingon vrn ihn nur zu inpfzwok-
kon boantragt *^rdon aol, gonau ao 4 o la Dozonbor 1943 und
janunr 1944 dlo 80 yorauchaporsonon. Er fuogto hlnzu, dnaa rr
In Mol gonuogond Iapfat^ff fuor woltoro 200 poraonon zur vor-
fuogung hatto und dnaa or lodlglich don schutz in Lngor zu
orhoohon vorauchto. (R.9613). Dlo tTnwnhrhoit dor Auaaapo Hnn-
gon a 1st aua dor Erklnorung in don Brlof, daas Erkrankungon
in dor Kontrollrruppo zu orwnrton scion, .klar oral chtlloh.

Er hatto vorhor ouagoangt, daaa uoborhaupt koin orund boatoho
mlt ornatoron Monk ti^non auf dlo inpfun *on durch sknriflka-
tion bol dor Kontrollgruppo «u rochnon nla cuf dlo injizlor-
ton Inpfungon bol dor innunlalorton Gruppo (R.9618). Viol-
mohr habo nan nllon Grund gohnbt z/u orwarton, dnaa dor dor

lmnunlaiorton Gruppo injlziorto Inpfstoff

- 7 -


olno hoftigcro Rcaktlcn zur F^Ito habon rucr-*c, d-. rr.chr Irnpf-

at-'ff durch Finaprltzung a Is durch Skariflkati^n vcrabrcieht

wurdo. Raa^on vorwnndto o ino viol £r'*oaaoro impfat^ffrcngo

zu don oratcn zwol Elnaprltzungon boi der lnnunlalorton orup-

po ala zu dor Xnpfung durch Eautrltzung bol dor innunislorton

a-'W^'h! nla auch bol dcr K^ntr^ll.^uppo. Woo hr end dor ganzon

Zolt wurdo oln und dcrsolbo inpfatcff vorwondot. _((R. 9710).

Dio Impfmothndo, gonz gloich ob durch Elnapritzunf nfior Skori-

flkatlon, ha^kolnn Elnflusa auf dlo Roaktlon doa Iropfac^ffa.

Haagon aagto nusdruockllch nuat

"Worm wlr durch Sknriflkatl^n inpfor., dann k«onncn vdr
orvrarton, daaa dor Erf^lg dor schutr.lnpfunr durch Skarl-
flkatl^n dorsolbo 1st, nla wonn *rir aubkutnn ''dor intrn-
nuakulaor olnaprltzon.”

Haagon war nlcht lnatando, •’as, tras or In aolnon nrlof

an plrt v«is 27, junl 1944 schrlob, noomlich, "daaa mlt Er-

krnnkunfon, boa^ndora In dor K^ntr^llpruppo, porochnot wor-

don muoaao" mlt aolnor Auaaafo, • naa ot kolnon Untorachlcd

zvlachon dor Immunlslorton urd K^ntr^ll ruppo In Bozug nuf dlo

Roaktlon nuf don Irapfatoff gnobo, In Einklnng zu brlngon. Ja,

man knnn aolnon Brlof nur dnhingohond nualogon, daaa or onatrfc t

dlo Impfung dor Immunlslorton bzw. Kontr-'llgruppo durch Haut-

rltzung v^rzunohncn, or aio tatoacohllch mlt Flookflobor ln-

flzlorto. Haagon wuaato, doas dlo nlcht lnnunl3lortcn Kcntroll-

vorsuchaporacnon an FlookfJ.obor jrkrankon wuordon. Auch hntto

Haagon kolno Erklaorur.g fucr lun ?rl >f v«n Knhnt, sc'-r^odorn

Stnbaohof, v^m 29. Auguat 1944, tr. wolchon or gofrngt wur-»o,

"cb anzunohmon 1st, daaa dlo zur Zolt In Katzwollor
horrsc>*ondo Flockflobor-Hpldcnlo -It dcr. TTntor3uohunfon
uobor olnon Tnpfat*'ff In Zusnnnonhm atohon."

(NO-131, Anklagoborrolaatuock 309 , R. 1404). Er angto oua,

dns3 or aolno Schutzirr.pfungor. an den 80 vorsuchspors''non In

Lnufo dca Jnnuar 1944 abgoachl''ascn haotto, dr.aa alio aolno

aorclnglschon Untorsuchxxn^on sch-n In Februar 1944 boondot

gowo8on und daaa dlo Vorauchap orsrnon nus dor iscllorung onb-

lnason vrrdon solon. Haagon habc apactoatona In Mai <>dcr junl

1944 cinon Borlcht an dlo Luftwaffo goaandt, In don or aagto.


daas dor Inpfatnff eir. vollor BPPdlg gewcaen aei. (R. 9627-9).

Kahnt und Rnao hatten gar koino veranlaaaung, olno snlche A n-

frage an Kaagen zu piohten, ^achdon or achon lange vnrher, wio

'Joito 9 dos OrlglnaHa

er auasagte, aelne Exporlr-Snre al)g6achIosaen und nindoff ors
zwol f'nnato vn r dor Anfrago oinon Rrf"lgaborlcht an die Luft¬
waffe goaandt hatto. Ra iat ganz unroogllch, daaa dio irapf-
at^ffvoraucho, dio bol don goinpfton Poramon koin neckfiobcr
horvnrriofon, oa boi an doron perannon horvnrrufon knonnton,
wio oa Rnao boi aoinon Vorhner hlnatollto. Man boachto auaacr
don, daaa aua Kahnta Briof klar horvnrgoht, daaa nach arinor
Moinung Haagona Inpfatnffnrachung in Natzwoilor und dio Bpldo-
mlo zoitlich zuamrxmfiolon. Haagon aaguo aua, daaa or dloa
nioht voratohon knonno. (r. 9603). Haagon k.nnta a: ch nur
aohwor orklaoron, waruc or in ?Boantwn r tung dor Anfrago Kahnta
in aoinon Briof v«n 19. soptonbor 1944 nicht orwaohnto, daaa
or aolt Janunr 1944 in Fatzwollor to ino Inpfungon odor Vor-
ajoho dumhgofuohrt hah* un* daaa acino Inpfungon koino Rr-
krankungon boi don Vorsuohapcra>aun horvnrgorufon haotton,
ganz zu aohwoigon vnn oinor '•lookflobor-Rpldonio. :»aaron
aagto in aoinon Briof nur: * ^lordurch wit- nitgotollt, daaa
oln Zuamnonhong zwiaokon d-.n in vatzroilor hcrraohondcn plock-
fiobororkrankun ; ;on und don Untorcuchun* on uobor don zu pruoftn-
don_Plockfiobor iapfozrff nicht boa tendon hat." (NO-132, A n-
klogobowoi3atuock 310. R.14C5, ihito.'.troiohungon oingofuo C t).
Tataaoohllch boriohtoto Ran .‘n coibat in aolnor Antnnrt, daaa
dor Inpfatnff nnch innor maeprnbswt ruordo, in Oo.onaatz zu
aoinor Auaaago vnr dioa on Ooricbtsbrf.

Haagon vorauohto don Corlchtahnf davnn zu uoborzougon,
dnas or koino lobondc Plockfioborviruakultur boacaaon habc,
wolcho dio ’Crankholt in monachlichon Lebowoaon haotto horvnr-
rufon koonnon,und daaa or kolnon a^hworon ^11 vnn Flockficbur
boi Monaohon haotto voruraachon knonnor., aclbat vonn or dloa
gownllt haotto. (R .9608, 9612). m gonau glcichon Atonzugo aag-
to or aua, daaa olno botraochtllcho Infcktinnagofahr boi dor
Arboit ir Labnratnriun boatandor. habo und daaa or aoinon A aal-

3tonton olno "Gofahronzulngo" gowaohrt habc. (R.9609).

- 9 -


Haagon sagta aua, daaa or nach Janoar 1944 mine Schutzi-pfungen vorge-
nou^on ha bo. aohrend aoinca Vcrftoers wiederholtc cr di;a iu_er wieder

(h. 9614-5). Nach da* Grunde gefragt, weaftalb or nlcht raehrond dor
Flwckfieber-fipidoiiic in

- Soito 10 des Originals -

Natzweiler is. Fruahlln J un_ r 1944 galapft ruettc, «^a cine Jelo-
genheit bot, dio anateckun^avorhindemdo irkur^ aei.ua Zr^fatoffoa
untor natuorllchon 3odir^un_on zu arproben, gab er die lahce .jitwort,
or habe ao vide uilitioriackc denatreiaon zu aicho.. gohabt, dass or
koine bolt gehabt nabo v .-„ 9614,. obglaich or gonucjoad
hatte, iu s^<* jifaii.otu.-ij von 2 w zuaaetziic.jo.» /u.auchao-fern in
±Ai 194*. tu rechcfoixi^an, beatand nach ecinor oi y?i:o.j ..uaaajo aeine
oinzlgo Bo-uehunj boi dor iloc.Jleboi-Jpidocda darin, ihnvn oino Jntwe-
aungaanla 0 e tu ae.uc.voa (... 9614, . da iat golin-o jaa^t nicnt loicnt
ve.ataenalich, wesha.«.b nicht ouch oin anderor ..rzt odor oinor von Ha--
gona .vaaiatonten dio Z-. iun_... hiotto vorr.ox-._en koonnea, die auu. Schutzo
dea Ugura vomoh-en zu luaaoa, ilaagen, wio or dia Sorxcht glaubon ..achen
will, ao oifrig beaorgc war.

.die dieae obi^on .iue.a/ruccng und Vorfaclachun... trote.i aowoh.'.
durch ..aagona ..uaaugo vie auc.. durch dio Jokwxnto zu Vc.go, die or vor
aoinou irachoinon vor Ooricht ao aorgfaoltig etudiort hit. lie ihi.
waohrond uoa .\ruuzvo.hoora vorgol«j;.ten joku—into bo siiaon, daaa aeine
Auaaago von .uifang bia -►!<> -oinoidig war. Haakon n t 'fiodorholt aua-
goaagt, daaa or nach do., .ax 1943 in Schir^ock koine IapfUnjcn aua^ofuenxt
haotto. Zr hat orkiuort, c.aa or in Schin-ock nur oi.jj ointige Inpfung
auagofuonrt habe, abut „ai.io .alhen-Lapfungen, u z ‘matec kun'e-vcr-

hindorndo L-_wutu«t ; ' XoatscatOlun, ^il or da-ila -in dioaor »laaen-
achaftlichon 4rkt»a.u*iia :~>ch .dch- ao wait %ar." (... ?o3o.. 1_ aasuuaen-
har.g «it go- ipao-W- l'atoff, uebor uolcncn noae -it iha .xorroapon-
diert hatto, leu^-wt- .r lnabosooiar*, c.aa or ^ejals ..oao vorgeac.ila-
gen habe, da.-it Vo:auc..o auazofiMhr&n. haagana 3rxef an ..cao von 4.
Oktobcr 1943 wideric^t ihr. ,anz kl»r in dieaan boiler, bodoutsarren .huiv-
ton (KO- 2874, .utxU^obgvoiaatuecx Sir. 520, 9651,. ir orklaerto in

aeinou Brief, daaa

"Oie eraten Jrfolgo dar Ibgtfuog a_ -onacr.aa habe ich Zhnen boroits
zohlen-aeaaig _at .ou.ilt. J or Sexve titor Uort . a aftt.eriwUi*
noohe Tj auc h nac.. oi n - xi i ^cr feoftt g- iS Vorgla ieh zu -rjlral i-cn
lug f ungun -it ’ " ..


Solto 11 dor. abret^ateter. mpfet-ffon. Lelder 1st os nlr nlcht

« m'-ogiich gowcson, bishor noch infoktionsvorsuche on don
<7rlglc«il®:pfton vorzunahnon; lch hatto mlch rr. das Ahnonorbo
naia dor S3 gowondt, un von dort goal gneto inpfllngo su bo-

knmnon, bln abor noch ohno jrachrlcht gobllobon. Tlr noh-
non lotzt n r ch olno woltoro I.-nfunr an ?>cr.schon yor: lch
vror-'o Ihncn dann uobor don Auafall borlchton. Ich glau-
bo, doss itr dann srwolt slnd, zunaochst ouch ohno Infok -
tlonsvorsucho ur.sorn noucn Tmpfstoff zur Elnfuohrung vor-
achlngon zu k'-onno.n." (Untoratrolchungon hinzupofuopt.)

Mon booohto zunaochst, dnss dloaor Brief bewoist, doss Hanlon
ontgogon aolnor Ausaago noch don Mai 1943 In schrlmock impfun-
gon durchfuohrto. Er orklaorto dnrln, "wlr nchnon Jotzt noch
olno woltoro Inpfunc an Monschon v«r." Fornor lat solno Bohaup-
tung, daaa dor In apnotoron Brlofon gobralihto Auadruck "naoh-
folgondo Infoktlon” nur aoln Vorfrhron dor Mohrfnch-InpfunG
bozolohnot, voolllg itf dorlogt. Kaogon sagto aolbat ous, daaa
or kolno Mohrfach-InpAingon In sohlrcock ausrafuohrt habo,
woll solno Konntnlaao nloht ao woit vorgoachrltton gowoaon
solon. Ea 1st dahor klor, doss dor von Itan In oblgom SOhroi-
bon gobrauchto Auadruck "infoktlnr.svoraucho" olno kuonstlloho
Infoktlon mlt c-lookflobor bozolchnoto. Ea 1st also olno Tnt-
saoho, doss Hnagon In Bozug auf boldo Punkto olnon Molnold
gololatot hat. Er hatto In schlr-.ock «ohrfachvoraucho mlt
aolnon nouon Impfatoff auagofuchrt. Dios poht panz klnr aua
dom obon mgofuohrton Brlof horvor, donn or sogt, dnss or
domain f.orado woltoro Inpfungon v«rnnhn. Dloa lat unwldorlog-
bar duroh dlo von Prl. Crodol gar. a chton Aufzolohnunfon uobor
dio vorsuoho bowloaon, auf wolcho woltor unton Bozug gonommon
wlrd. r» or so bon dorartlgo voraucho nuafuohrto, 1 st os 30 -
mlt klnr, dasa dor In dloson Brlof gobrauchto Auadruck "In¬
fok tions-vor a uoho" d oh auf tntaaochlicho kuonstllcho Flook-
flobor-lnfoktlon bozloht, woll or dlo SS uobor Hlrt und daa
• Ahnonorbo bat, lhn olno bosondoro Pruppo von Haoftllnfon fuor
dloao Infoktlonavorsucho zur vorfuogun," zu stollon.

In dloson glolchon Vlof von 4. Oktobor 1943 boiprlcht
Kaapon “nsoo Borlcht uobor Vn Tpaon-Impfstoff nua Kopanhagon.

- 11 -


ET achl^aa 3cinon Brlof r.lt I’cr Bonorkur.g:

"Wonn id r Monschcn air Pr^oimpfunf durch dio SS bokormon,
waoro dl 03 oino Golegonholt, ouch den Loborir.pfatoff auf
aolne antiinfoktiooao Wlrkunc zu pruofon. ich wuordo dnnn
vorachlogcn, daaa parallel nit den ipacnprobon auch unsor
Motor ini vorwtndt wird."

Haagon hnt also oino falacho Auaaogo gonacht, ala or orklnor-
to, or hnotto koino vorauobo nit den Ipaon-Inpfstoff v^rgo-
achlagon. In aclnon Briof hat or ganr doutlich don vorschlag
ganaoht, anatockunga-vorhlndornde veraucho a^wohl nit don Ip-
aon-ImpfaWf ala aioh nit aoinon oigonon Inpfatoff voraunoh-
mon. Dios bowoiat *4 odor, daaa dor Ausdruck "infoktinna-vor-
sucho" unnoogllch Mohrfach-vorauoho nit virulonton plockflobor-
Impfatoff boroiohnon konn. Dor ipacn-lnpfat"ff war oin aviru-
lontor inpfat-ff; or onthiolt tolnon abgoachracohton virulon¬
ton virus. Droimalipo Impfung nit oinon avlrulonton Impfatoff
konn to nicht olnnal von Hangon ala "Infoktlonavorauch" bo-
aoichnot wordon (R. 9655). A«aaordcn crclbt daa Bowoianntcri-
nl dor vortoidlgunf aolbot, daaa dor Ipaon-Impfat«ff boroits
auf vortraoglichkolt untoraucht und ala andoren von dcr TTohr-
nacht eobrauchton lapfstoffon vorgloichbar bofundon wordon
war. Dloo orgibt aich u.a. klar oaa don Briof Roaon an dio
Bohrinc-^orko und Haagon von 29. soptonbor 1943 (Dokunont Ro-
ao Nr. 22, Roao Bowoiaatuock 21, R. 6216). Es iat gana klnr,
daao dlo oinaico Voraucha-Kooclichkolt, dlo fuor don Ipaon-
Impfa toff uobrlp bilob, gonau dio von Haagon vorgcochlnfono
war, noonlich dio Nach-lnfck tie* dor goinjtfton und dor Kon-
tmll-poraonon nit plockfiobor.

V. an fan wurdo woi tor (\irch dio vo n sulnor As3lstontln,
prl. Cror'ol, gofuohrton Aufzoichnungon uobor acino rlockflo-
bor-voraucho bolaatot. (NO-3852, Anklaro-Bowolsatuook Nr. 521,
R. 9660). R aapon hat dloao Aufzoichnungon nit Boatinntholt
ala von Frl. Cro-’ol goachrlobon morknnnt (R. 9691). Prl.

Crodol war violo Jahro lan c Haagona Aaaiatontin un ' or hnt slo
ala un boding t auvorlaoaaig bofunden (R. 9701). Er C 2U »
daaa Prl. croddl in ihror Arbeit sohr sfwgfaoltlg war (R.9G97)


- 12 -


*uf SeitQ oryji des kotizbuchcs eischeint ein= rioiha von Jintragangen
vo-: 30. April 1943 bis 27. Jar.uar 1944 bet ref fend eiiw .toiho

- Scite 13 les Originals -

von Vorauchen in Sefaixuacic. lie SLntragong fuor den 19. -ai 1943 zaigt,
dass zwsi von vior uit sein^ Ijpfstoff injitiorten ..aouson at arbor..

Oie Eintragung fuor dou 2o. . ai laututs

"(4 ..och«n) 3 - 6 . flchirtock 0,5 fier Peroon und 6 .acuso 0,5 i.o.

5 tot, 10, 14, 14 Ta^e dio boiden rcstlichon nach 4 ..ochen."

Jaea« Eintragun 0 bowoiat, Guaa an dies-- Tags -easehen jit Kaagans
L-pfatolf geijpft vurla... ;.ach dioaen lintra^n^on uar daa -indcatcr-
gobnia, disa fueni . aouao, lie in glcichjr ..cisc gal-pft wordon aaron,
atarbo... d»r madmen "d_a oaidaa restUcfton xuen vior ochon" kann
aich offonbar auch auf den Tod von Varsuchaperaoncn bos anon, da dio-
aor AuadruCK -It Bezug auf lie Einziga uebrlgo _aua ^anz un-jooglich
angowenuot m»rdon kuna. Dor lintrug vo_ 6 . Jail zeigt, daas an dieaou
Tago Haagon und aoino ..aaiater.to,. in Schiroeck orachionon, uj von 10
Poraonon, dio vornor worten waren,, aiutprobon fuor oino icil-

FoUx-neaktionspruufung. lie Eintragun.. gibt dan Sonuititor- ort Axor
acht dor Voraucnaporaonon an. lie Untru.un, achlloaat -It don lakoni-
aohon Kortan: "lie under.; sw«i slnd nicht -*hr voriuodao." Jieao lin-
tragung iat oino achluoaaigc boataotigung d»;r .*jasugo dus -ougon Gaorgo
Hirtz, dor urklaorto, d_aa Haugen L. Soa-er 1943 soinon tapfatoff in
Schiniock auaprobiort .laon.. Unjofaohr 20 polniacho i.aoftlinso vunlon
dieaon Vorauchon untorworfan, und zwoi dieaor Voraac :a joraonon star bon
infolgo dor Iiapfun^. i.^rts surto aua, uuaa or soibat die ..oorper lio-
aor Haoftlinjo in tapioiauoc..t oin^enuoht uni aio zur /oxbrvnnun, *b-
goHefort h-otou. Jic adn. V«rauc.ia>iraooon roa^ertun durch hohos
Kiobor, Anfuelie un. J&tuC.atocnn^o IK. 1293-1299;. Some aubm 5 «
wir<i forjjor von Haagon o-ibat bostaetigt, dar ortciurtc., dasa or zwoi
Gruppon vr,n 10 Huelclm in Sc.iir.-sck gei^ft bubo. Jio Sintr^.jung
in aon Crodolschon ..ufuaichnun.cn D_zioht aich offonbar auf oino dio-
aor Gruppon von lu Maoiwn r~ nuen dor


Ankunft "na-ens ur.'* selnor Assiatonten 1- l/ror zur. Z*'ock

- So5.to 14 dca nrl-Jnols -

dor Rlutontnahno atollto os s! ch horaua, das3 zwoi de. Por-
a r non r oat^rben naron*

Dio Elntra.~un. • fuor don 4. Ckt^her 1943 auf Sol to drel
dcr Cr^dol'achon Aufzolchnun on lautot:

"(6 J'^r.ato) In schlrnock 20 pors^non /olnpft, Roehrchon

/ 2 com aq. dost., davon jr* pors^n C, 5."

Dloa bomi at nlcht nur, daaa '’aa.an olno falsche Auaaare
rcaoht hat, ala or orklaor.tc, daaa or In schirmeck nach don Hal
1943 kolno rlockflober-lnpfunren vor. on^nnon haotte, s^dorn
auoh, class tnlt solnon icyfaWf Hohrfaeh-Inpfun on vor;*on'vir.on
wurc’on. Dloao Sintra *un trao; t daa -leicho Datun wlo dor
obonervmohnte n rlof von Vnaron an R^so, in wolohon or o v en-
fnlls aa.-to, ''naa or woltoro Inpfun-on dur'hfUohrto. Dio
lotzto "Intro nn- auf solto drol 1st 1~. Orlrlnal r.lt d on 27.
Jnnunr 1943 datlort un* lautotr

"(9 r^nato) -onisaht r.lt -loJohor von o ".21.5. pro

qoohrahon 2 ion aq.'Vat. 20 pension Jo l,Oern."

Dos Datur. 1943 lot «ffonal^htlloh oln Trrtun v"n *rl. Orodol,
aln alo d!o Sintra nn machto. Dios er;;ibt alch daraua, dnao
dlo In Klonmorn -oaotzto Zoltar. *abo In don :»ufzolchnun(ron alch
auf don Zoltrnum bozloht, don dor mpfat^ff ola-ort war. |*no-
oon rnb dies zu (R. 9711). flc bed«*itot dlo An. obo "(9 J'onalo ) n
dass dor In dlosor vorsuchsrolho bonutzto inpfaWf 9 r^nato
lan;;, oolt dom 30. April 1943, r«0.a ort war, don Tft£ dor or-
nton Slntrarun auf sal to drol und dor Zolt, zu wolchor dor
Impfo t n ff zun or3ton ''al hor catollt wurdo. Doaa da 3943 ln"d.
Oil -lnal-"intra un- In dor "at 1944 luut <s\ a'11, ,:oht a> ch
nus solto vi or dor Aufzolchnun- on h erv*r, w> rln dlo lotzto
Sintra pin * dlo fuor den 27. jarxsar 1944 lat. r a l8t o*r. uob-
llohor Irrtu-, In orston ••‘'r.nt dea nouon Ja’-roa r.^ob <'na alto
Jabr zu brauc^on.

«aa-or lnpfto olno S"o!te "rup-o v«n 10 pora^on In Sohir-
r.ock an 10. Okt^bor 1943 und 20 woltoro ara 27. Januar 1944,
wlo aua don Slntrarun. on auf Solte vlor der Smdelschen Auf-
zeichnurron horv^r. oht. 'Veitor bowoist dlo “lntra un fuor den


14. Oktffcer 1943 auf solto fuenf dos Criminals, dass 1C pers"-
non zun dr it to n Hale mlt 1,0 c-Sci dos neuan F aa <r. soben Inpf-
staffs c*lnpft vurden. Dass A oh dleso sintrarunauf vlxu len¬
ten Faouao-lnpfatnff urd nicbt auf den C-ildenel sterscben avl-
rulOTton Tnpfst«ff beziebt, feht ais dor VArherfebenden Dln-
trarunr hervnr, wolohe v'T. vlor F.nntr''ll-Pera'’non a^rloht,
die drolrnl nit dora rllda-oIstersohen inpfsWf -elrpft
don solan. Dleae fataaobe 1st weiterhin klar, -onn nan die
Von-e dor Flnaprltzunren plus der "on-e des pr rt \npulle dos
nouen '•oat’onsc v en ImpfatAffea r e^rai chten doatilliorten "as-
sors wlo In and .von Rlntra un. on an. a cbcn, ver;loicht.

Dio •%lntro > un. fuor don 25. Hal 1944 auf Solto 7 dor
Crodolaohon Aufsolohnunjon zol’t, dasa 30 pors^non In Katz-
wollor £olopft wurdon. "Dio Impfunj orf•'1. to waohrond dcr
InkubatlAn (cln TranapArt, In don auoh Eranlco waron), 13 or-
krankton In dor Zolt von 29. Hal Ms 9. juni, davon atarbon
swol." "aajon hatto voraohiodor.tlloh auatcaast, daaa or In
Natz-'ollcr naoh don januar 1944 kclno Inpfun on VAr.-onAruoon
haotto. Fr hat nlcht nur Torauoho naoh den januar 1944 dunh-
-ofuohrt, oAndorn, tfio nus d^r nblfon Aufzoiohnun horvAr-
•soht, alnd poraAnon lr Lnufo dloaor vorauobo -ostArbon. Duroh
aolno olL’ono * k uaan~o hoataotlrt "an.'on, daas dlo ~lntra*un-on
aloh auf oinor "orauob bazlobon, waohrond dcsson dlo pora^non
kuonatlloh nit rlookflchor lnflzlort wwdor. Ob loloh dlo
Sintra-un ‘ sa wAhltA^nond bonorkt, dass dlo Inpfun.cn ’waoh-*
rond dor InkubatlAn erfAl.tcni? boataoti tc “aa/on.wlo aohAn
vor achioCont lich von dor AnkUgobohAordc VAr/obraoht, dass oa
urnAO-jll'.h 1st zu wla3rn, wanr. el .o PorsAn A oh In dcr tnku^a-
tl^n befinrtot. Die inkubatiAnszoit lat dio 3cit swisohon dor
Xnfoktinn und den craton Krankholtaorsohclnun. on. Doncnt-
spreohond l3t cs aua osohlAascn fostsust lion, dass olnc
Impfunr ^aohrend dcr InkubatlAn stattflndot, aussor wonn dio
botreffonde poraAn kuonstlloh lnflzlort nurds^dess daa Da¬
tum dcr InfoktlAn v ckar.nt 1st. (-aacon, 9701-2).

•n«n 1st bazo5 chnond festzus toll: n, dass dlo --’ olio auf

- 15 -


SOito 14 dor Crodolsohon Aufzolohnunron das "’ort n, *aohinrfunn B
FCbroUcht,

flcito 16 doa J>rl_J.na la_.

das hol3st s-'vlol wio "lodor-icpfun In vorblndun. nit don "»lo-
dorholun. a-lnpfvorauohon an znol !!aouaon (von donun nobonboi -
honorkt boldo atarbon), und nioht so aohr dor Auadruck "Nach-
lrifoktlon a , was olno anschllossond.o Infcktion bodouton wuordo,
nlo or haouflr vnn Faajon In aolnon Briofon uobor yonachrnvor-
auoho an ov/andt wlrd.

Maaron bat ausfeaa.-t, dasa dor An.'okla. to Schroodor lhn
an 25. Mol 1944 boaicht hat, an ^loichor. To. o, an don or Vor-
aucho In Fotz *oilor rnaohto. (” aa on 1. 9632). *7aohrond os
notuorlioh fans fut moorlloh 1 st, doss sohr^odor "oaron viol-
loloht an 24. odor 26. ?'nl v csuoht hat, anatatt an 25., lat
dlo Totaacho ~anz offonalobtlloh, dnaa auf alio ^oollo ’*oa-ona
so •••dchtl^o Floekflo‘ > orvorauoo nit S'shr'-'od or bospr'-’ohon wor-
don alnd, ontpc on dor Auaan on dor boldon. Oonau doaaolho
trlfft auf don Rosuch dcs An okla gt on Bookor-proyaonf zu, oln
paar To^o nooh S-.hroadcrs Boauoh ("aa;;on R. 9569) a^lo auoh
auf Bono, dor Has on a-w/ohl in Jahro 1943 ala auoh In 1944 bo-
auoht hot. (H no. on R. 9570) !!aa ons Auaaotfo, dasa Bockor-
Froyaon- oxtra von B orlln okon-on waoro, nur un nit lhn uobor
dlo B oaohaffur von Kanlnchon und J’aouson zu aprcchon, lat
obonao un^laubrruordlG wlo Kao-ons uobrl,~o Auasa an.

Dor An -oklocto Bohroodor hat ouar-oaovt, daaa ?aa ona v or-
aohunrroauftraT r.loht ;oholr war, und or hat vorsuaht, auf
orund doaaon zu borroiacn, daaa kcln rlol Vorbrochon vop^okom-
non aoln koonntcn. (R. 3654). “’Ir'brauohen -nit den "in-T-ls
auf dlo Dumrh.lt dl-.sor Ar.-uraonto kr Inc Zclt zu vorlloron, oa
Conuoyt zu aa-on, ^nsa s^'TO'tl rs A’-iaaa;' n 3i oh auf ^rund
olnrr Lis to uob cr di e v^n g hr orders Pu~ro lr .Tahre 1944 cr-
tcllton ^’orschun.'’aauftrac“o, ala falaoh erri cacn hfchon. ’loa¬
ders Flccktyphuo-Arbciton waron ala ’'ochoi-." bezeiohnot.
(MO-934, Ankl.pow.458, R.3655)


- 16 -


Dio Aussaro doa Zcugen Halos hoataotigt don Bewola, dor wri-
tor nbon und auch In dor. Sohrlftdatz go. on Rose unrisson 1 st,
naonllch, dass F aagon ”orauoho anroatollt hat, un dio iranunl-
taat solnos Iapfst^ffos duroh kuonstllcho Flccktyphus-infok-
tl^n solnor ’'orauohapora«nen zu orpr^or.. ?:alca, oln W^llao n-
dor, war 1940 von dor roatapn woron nn-ehllohor "ollna'mo an
dor "idoratanda^owo^am'- vorhaftot wordon. Trotzdcn or In
olncm Fmzoss froigoaproehon wordon war, kon or In \prll 1941
In dna K^nzontrotionalaror Buchor.wald. in Maori 1942 wurdo
or naoh Hatzwollor uchorfuohrt und mrdo da lr. povonhor 1942
Pflogor auf dor Ahnonorba Vorsuohastation. (r. 10409-10). 3 r
hat aus;e 3 art, daaa go. on Bndo doa Jahroa 1943 100 Zigeunor
fuor Han.-ona •’lccktyphua Voraucho von Auaohwl tz nach Matewol-
lor gosohlokt m rdon alnd. Haagon fand alo koorporlloh un-o-
olfnot, woraufhin 90 woltoro Zljounor "oaohiokt wurdon. Dio-
so wurdon In zwol r*rupp«; o!n;otollt u id In gotrcnnton Raourcon
nuf dor Ahnonorbo vorauohastotion .-d* alt on. Fin© Oruppo r>ur-
do -o'on ''looktyphua Folnpft. TTn;*ofaohr 14 To o apaotor wur¬
don boldo nruppon kuonstlloh nit "looktynhua lnflrlort, nlt
dom ^r-'ohnia, doaa oo. 30 dor •' ergxw ha''bJoktc atarbon. "aloa
hat dloao Opfor nol w at -opflo/rt und lb ro lolohcn scaohon. Rr
hat haoufl.- nlt lhnon poaproohon und wuaato, daaa d o ri oh
nloht frolwllll g.moldot hatton, wlr Kaagcn ucbrl. ana ouoh
solbat in Zcu-.onstand zujo. cfccn hot. Dicac Zl£.cunor eohoor-
ton voraohlodcnon Toti^nalltaotor. an, c lnaohli^aallch r^lcn,

Ta oho oh on, Un. am und auoh Doutaoho (R. 10419-23).

Kurorts influenza Sxpori icntc an rofan-onen In So hi r mo ok
brouohcn hi or r.ur kurz gcatrclft zu verden. im januar 1942
orhlolt or von Luft-raffcn sanltaot3dlcnat ulnon Auftro. fucr
Tnfluonza-Tnpfat'>ff-FAraohun^:, dor In jalrc 1943 u d 1944 vor-
loonrort wurdo. (Fao : *on, R. 9570). In jahro 1943 hat or 20
Frauon in Ronzcr.trntlonala or Sohlraook


- 17 -


nit aolnon virulcnton Inf lucnza-TnpfstM'f valnpft. (r. 9571).

55* hat as agoaa.-t, dass dios kelp 7oruoh snndorn clno Schutz-
nassnahne goncacn sol. Er hat bohaufctot, dass or nicht dara n
lntorossiort genesan rraoro, den inffat^ff ausaupr^bloron, aon-
dern dass or nur olnc Influonza-Epldcnlo und olno Flocktyphua-
Spldunlo hofuorehtot haotto. "r lnpfto dlcao pcfan t cn<m an
don oxponlortoaton Stollon. (R. 9572-3). Tmtzdcn Faagon nur
gonu? Impf 3toff lUor 250 bla 300 pors«ncn zur vorfuo,ns.of hatto,
hat or doeh dloao benorkonarorto Boa^rgnls^fuor die Sohlnnockor
«ofarvonon gozolrt. (R. 9571). Er hat oj aroaart, daaa or, da
aolno Arboiten In Schlrnook nlchta nit d-:n •’''rsohun-sauftra;?
dor Luft-nffo zu tun hatto, dlo danit zuaan-.onhnonrcndon nn-
knaton auoh nloht dor Luftwaffe bolaatot haotto. (*>. 957-1).

Sol no t'nkoatonabroihnun nit dor Luftwaffe uc v ar dlo influonza
P^raohuncon fucr 1943-1944 ridoraprloht don abor. (vo-3450
Ankl.Bow. 519, R9537). Dlosoa D^kunont baralat nuaaordon, daaa
or. In 'Vldorapruoh zu aolnor Auaaa o, on 12. pohruar 1944
olnon Ab8toohor naoh Sohlrnook j.orr.aoht hat.

Haa,"on8 lrrs^o und fort:.oaotzto Taoti. kolt In S^hlmock
lat doutllch oua aolnon Ahroohnun abuoohorn uoh r dlo Ff'r-
aohungnaufyabon fuor nol' flohor und "lookfiohor oral ohtllch.
Solno Arbalton In Rohirnaok ha’ or. rlndoatona aoh«n an 20.

April 1943 bogonnon. Er hat Endo Auuat 1944 nooh Tolophnn-
anrufo naoh sohlrnook ^obuoht, al oln Jo hr naoh aolnon an-
pohllohon "lotzton Tnpfun on" dnrt. Dloao Aualn-on r-urdon
dom Luft-affon sn^itaotadlanst v 0 laatot. ('’0-3^37, Ankl.Pow.
542, R. 10365). slo naron a« srozlflrlort, daaa alo auf den
oraton Q llok seine ^aotl kolt lr den Srozor.tr a tl«nalaos<»rn
vorraton. (Sloho auoh "0-345C, Ar.kl.0cn. 519, R. 9587).

"aa/eon hat zucc.chon, daaa r.on jnLr lnfo-:tl«navorauohon
nur drolorlol vorstohon kann: ( 1 ) naohtrao~lioho kuonatlloho
inflation nit Flookflabor, (2) inpfur._jn an oinor :-msaon
r-ruppo von Monsohon nit anschlicaaendci Studlun dcr •Vlrkun; a-
kraft

- 18 -


raohr:nd olnor natucrllchon Spldor.io, und (3) 7cIl-Folix-*cok-
ticns-rntorauchunron v«r und nnch Bap anaeSllcsscnd'n Inpfun'r.
(R. 9601)* Sr ~ab zti, dasa dlo AtxBlorun* dcr Ankla -obchcordo
dor Bc.Tlffo "lnfoktl«ra- , 'cr3'*':hQ n und "anaehlloaaondo infok-
tl^n" nit aoincr oironcn ucbcrolnatins to. (R. 9611). Sr hat
zu'-o ofcon, dass dor Ausdruck "Kmhi pfunr" £onau s« cut w lo
dcr .\uadruck "yach-lnfcktion" haotto an; orrnndt rcrdon kconnon.
(R. 9611).

Dor ooriohtahcf braucht alch r.ieht r.lt aplt-.flndl-~r. Trn-
Con uobor vorschlodono Aualocun,r dor D°kur.onto zu bofasaon.

Dio "onz olnfaoho Prafo iat: H at Hanlon In vorlaufc aclnor
Sxporlnonto •'cr'TOohcn pc-"nrcn. Daaa ca ai oh tataacehlioh
ur. "Sxpcrlncntc" hmd ltc, -d rd nicht beatritten. Han on hat
dioacn Auadruck dos orftcren in acinon d ~:ncn wrlcfcn nn^o-
wandt. Sa iat :wch kclno Rtroitfrn-o, dnaa die *» aoftlln-o,
dlo nla •'cranahanbJcktT vcrnndt nurdm, a lob nloht froi*"ll-
11 r •'orcldot hntton urd dnaa alch ouote Anrch«crl'*o dcr v«n
don Dcutsohsn hoaetzten laondern dnruntor bcfnndcn. aaron
hat dna zu-O' cn. Die Unt^rlo. on und dlo Auaaa ’cn botoiacn,
dnoa clno orhcbllihc Anzahl von vorauohacbjokton In laufc
dloaor verau-.ho ctnotot warden aind. (S- auoh Sohrlftsntz dcr
Ankln ohoheorde c. cn c*:n An okla ton Rnao). Dios or. uoborwaol-
tl endon « otroia atohen Han ons ur.d ’’csoa A'»asn. :n C. inuabor,
die albb *'oido ir. Zcu. onatand vcrsohiodentllch nolnoldlc co¬
nn oht habon. Ihro 31/o non Auasn^on slnd sohlloaalloh dor
boato lndlzlonbov»ola fuor dna Vcrbrcohorlao!c lhrcr '*xpcrl-
monto. Han lc t nlcbt rundlrs clr. falaches Sou-nla nb. Hur
dlo, die dna Lioht dcr " T ahr'"lt achouon, nnebon si oh nolnoidlr.
Dloao vaonner noVen Ihrcn "Id or.-iu sc 1 Te'-t, wlo alo dna
Lo s on lhror Min^son Opf-r ”on«-r:n ' n v cn.

onaca »inc' "an'-ona Rohuld 1st dns '’aaa ruor cchr^ndora
Schuld. Ala •3an!tnot3cf f- !zlor d r Luft-nf r c untcr3tand -an¬
on acinon “ofohlon. (sohrecdor, R. 3636). sohroodcra Ruorc

crtoilto die ^c-ac>^. sauftrnc-c,

- 19 -


ouf ''rund wo labor die so ,f c ran e ho Truest oil t warden. Es stcll-
to die Mlttel fucr die D’ordbfudVun;* zur ,r crfu orunf. Ea nabra
dlo Rcrlebto uo v cr dlo ~:cpori rente entr-'on und wusste, dnsa
sic an Kcr.zontrationalaror "ncftlln~on dureh-cfuohrt vrurden.
(Siohe obon Eycr, R. 1758). schr^cdcr war pcra^cnliah in


Strr\3sbur ; ", forado zu dcr Zeit ala die "xperinente in r-nn-
waron* 3oinc 3ohuld 1st klar und clndcuti •.


C. c-es-vorsuchc (Ankla^osohrift, Abaatz 6 (d))

Dor sanitaotadionat dcr Luftwaffe, dor don .in oklafton
Sohroodor untorstand, nahn obonfalla on don v«n Virt und Faa-
rorx in Katzwollcr Konzontratinnala or v«r; onnmcnon vorbreoho-
rlaohon ena-verauahon toll.

V irt fin: nit aolnon raa-Exporir.cntcn in V atzr/cilor in
vovorn'or 1942 an. (''0-098, Ankl.oow. 263, R. 1028). Sio dau-
orton duroh den S'vr-sr 1944 un. ( u *ll. R. 1058). In diosom
Zeitraun m rdon an un.-efnobr 220 " ncftlin'-en, Ruaaon, p^lon,
Taohoebon und Peutaohon verauebe nit Raa an-oatcllt, bel doaon
unf ofochr 50 daven atar^on. Rio v atton aioh r.ieht froirilll.-
zur Vorfuorun: coatollt. Ihro K«orpor -ii»n -racaaliohc vor-
brennun on dureh daa raa ouf und dio Opf:r orbllndeton haoufif.
(Hftll, R. 1052:/Vale a R. 10412-18, 10432).

Foil und Maioo hnbon boldo aua oaa t, dass cin Luftwaffen
Arzt zuannnon nit Flrt ai oh nit dlcaon vorsuehen bcaehaofti-t
hat. (Holl» R• 1059, 10611 Volos, R. 10448). Es war dlos dor
Oborarzt “Tianor, Stabaarzt hoi dor Luftwaffo. Er war vnn
Luftfau vil zu ’'irt• a Vcrfuojun fuor dicao "krt ajar* chtl-on-’’
naa-Vorsuoho o'* catcllt. (’*0-195, .\nkl.8ow. 266, R. 1033).
FoH'-on hat aus'esa't, doss “’inner oincr vm "irts .isniatonton
War. (R. 9581-2). -’lrr.or hat oo! t drr S^tanor 1942 Ms 1944
nit "irt zuanr-on an dioaor "ns-T-suehon foorboitet. (" 0 -
196, \nkl.Row. 261, . 1027; Ar’<l.«cr. 267, •. 1#34) .

7lnnor war

- 20 -


-enoinaan rr.it Hirt yorfasscr das 1944or Boriahta uohor dio

Pohnndlun- von L^3t-^aa-* , cr*nind\in."cm. Diosor Boriaht bohan-

dolt sab.woro, rr.ittolaah'roro und loiab.to Gaa-Vojvundunron.

(> T 0 - 099, \nWl.n on. 268j »i 1035). Sabroodor iat fuor die-

so nopbroobon Tinnora ip Zu~o dor r-as-Txporir.ontn vorant-ort-

llah. Dio Anw pnflun- yon yacaaMta aiobo o'-on.

Dio pono ianittol hn v on or3 v cn, daaa *'na; on obonfnlla

'’ns-Exporirontc an~oatcllt hat. "an on ribfc zwnr tu, daaa

or v irt und ?i'3 , fon v aeh, die nit ihr. zuaanricn profos3orcn an

dor straaabur, or unlvorsitaot naron, kanntc und yuohlun'- mit

ihnon hatto, atroitot abor Jodc "onntnia hinsl ahtllah lhror

naa-’'orauaho ab. (. 9534-5). rr noochto auoh 30 m don roriahta-

hof j-loubon macbon, daaa or r.iahts von dcr Skolcttsannlunf

wunato, wo do^h dio Zoiahon hiorfuor im Kollcr doa Anatonl-

oohon Inatltuta, 5 yinuton von v a r»pona Euoro ontfornt lft'on.

(•*. 9596). linear, dor ala Zoichnor boi Y irt orboltoto,

bat in soinor oidoastottliahon 3 rl:laorun auapoaa't:

'"^aohrond dor Zolt, *r lab fuor Pr^foaB-r virt taotir
wnr, bia zun "ndo doa KriO'-oa, hn s o lab nokuT.onto und
A ri* lnalpboto-raphlon cao v on, naah donon oa aia*>or
iat, daaa virt, ”nn~on und oiakorhof vxporiraonto an
nonanhlin^on Lo'-owcson v-'r-onorr-on , 'o v cn. Dioao pbo-
to-raphion zol -ton dio “rfa’uuin* sor-cbnlaao m* t '•lft-
r*»a und no^nl'.ahon 8 toffon.


”lah muasto fuor Prof. v aQ on 0 ino ^fol anfortion,
von aa. 1 x 2 r, auf nolohor dio vorsohiodonon *'anpf-
rnao mit ihren abcr.lso v cn “or.-.oln unc -lnzolhoitcn
uobor ibro '‘ofaohrliahkolt fuor ’ onaahon auf ozoieh-
not waren. Doraua aahloaa ioh, daaa dorarti o *'ox—
aueho mit j enaa’-on ;ccaaht -rrdon ~aron. , ' (WO-831,
Prof.^x. 280, 1074).

Sabuh, dcr in I'odiziniaahon roraahur. alnatitut untor ’oofon
arb-ltoto, hat in soinor oidoastattliahon 3 rklaorun. auaro-
ao-t: "‘'on ’"oyer habo lab auasorden or oh ran, daaa "an cn
zuawareon nit ProfoaSor J lrt vorauaho nit • arpf; aa (lost) in
Vntzwoilor


- 21 -


on juodiaeHon <~afan cnon v^r-cn''xr.cn hnt.* (vft-385, Ankl.Po*.
31., p. 1413). •aa;on hit zu rq^on, daaa «5-hub und ?<ayor
untcr Ihn In 'odlzinlaahcn Porai^un slnatitut roaroitot ha-
h 0 n. ( D . 9583). J'ey or l3t bol olnon E'xabo nanrrlff in «orbat
194*1 “otf'otot rrrdon.

7njnora und S=huha Auaan on wordon durch Brnora und Na-
loa Ausan. on n^ch orbaortot. Broora, oin h^llaendlaoher .\rzt,
hat a us oaart, daaa or on Botaotlcu.-\ In dcr “’idoratanda-
bous'-ur.;- foot ^onronon und trotz zwolcoli'or Trelsprcchun.• ala
n>r acht und , iobol"-f ofanrcnor In juli 1942 na~h Jtatzr'cilor jo-
aohickt rurdo. (9. 10383-90). In ?'al ivior Junl 1944 bat or
olnon andorn "aoftlin- ns-wna Pv>r arts. In w lrta Po cnart,
bol dor Rozlorur.' nobroror zl-ounor, dlo bol den '"lft-aa-Txpo-
rlncnton ura'-oknrnen naron, aaslatlort. "’achrond dor Eotlorunr
aolcn v Qnr o n und oln hl^ndoa >’aedohon (r-oifcllna ''roouloln
or*dol) horoln-okor.ncn, urn zu ao bon, -na da -cnnnht *-urdc.

(n. 103°2-5).

”aloa bat aua.-canrt, daaa un don ‘'cl 1944 ''orun "aa on
'"aa-Vorau'iho an unrefoehr 9 roborlcbondon dor rlookfiobor-
Exporlnonto an;catollt hat, v«n diner, nohr.ro an den p^I. on
atarbon. Daa rraron kolno ~rolnllli; on; oa hardolto al ob un
ffaoboohon, P^lon und tJn. arn. (R. 10423). Dloa 1st oitorhln
boataotl. t duroh olnon AUizur aua don ronatnborloht doa Katz-
wcllor Lajorarztoa fuor den jxml 1944, dcr ’»lo f*l t lautot:

" y ' ^pnatlroa

(TT 'rffauarsitatlpn: In dor •'arauabsatatien mird n Ir.
dor norlabtasoJt Vora* aho nit IP ^1 ounorn v»r-on«rron.
Trol "Atfoafa3llo *»aron zu vorzolchnon." ("0-307, Pr->i.
-x. 1*5, »>. *’32, '

^onn os ->b dloacr \uaau~ knlno ^Intclboltcn ua"cr dlo \rt
dor ^xperlrcntc rl v t, a« kann ca a'.ata d-o»- n-jr un r w- "dor
plcnkflebor ’'endcln, da dies die alnzl“or. "xporlnont- xaren,
dlo In "atz'Tuilor dur•>' ofu - v rt -urdon. a» on ' at zu^c ebon


dass die Auszuora aue cortorcn e cri*.htor., ditlcrt v«r. 25. v«-
vcp.bor 19-13, 24. Dozerbep 1-43 und 1. "ebb-aar l r '' s'-.S -rnhr-
aaholnlich nuf seine "lcakf io*'3r-»vorauaho boz^-an haottan.

(«l. 7640-1, 9647).

D. gpldomlsabc Cclbauoht-vora uaho (Ai.kla.'.oaohrlft Ziff. 6 (”))
In junl 1944 mirdo olno Ror.foronz von Spozlaliston ralt
r’em Znaek dor riolohaabn ltun. dor ‘‘olbsuaht-^’oraahur. olnbo-
rufon. DJ-cao Ronforonz fond In ^rcalnu atatt, untor den vrr-
altz vnn Sahralbcr, (Outzolt, R. 2752), ’•ar.dl''aor, putzolt und
”aa.-cn nahnon darnn toll, (r-utzolt ?. 2717). r aa;or. hat in
:crouzvor‘'''or zu~cro‘ on, daaa * r opauoho an lohondon "cna-'hon
dialcutiort nurdon. Doaa vor' , rcnboriaa'-o ^xporlronta on Knr.zcn-
trntl«nala~or-Inonaacn 'oa’'r'abon t p<*cn sin' 1 , ,-cbt klar oua
dor "otaaobo ‘’crv'>r, da-a Sn'-rolbor lr Jnnuar 1945 •'ru- onakl
pora^cnllah '-ahoten hat, fucr prT-^rcaola ,r cr»:-.ho nit *’opntl-
tla ’’aeftlin c zur ’'erruorun zu at:lion, (m-1303, Ankl.noxr.
467, R. 5400). Sahralbor boa’’ftra tc olno oruppo v*>n Aorzton,
^•anolnaan an dotn oolbaua’*t-?r''blcn zu arboiton. Dohnon, fut-
zolt um ?*aa on tiurdon olnor dloaor pru-pon zu.ctollt. (Put-
zolt, R. 2717). An 12. Jur.l 1944 hat Zac on aolbat gabrclbcr
pobotan, ih.T. Dchmon fucr dlo Zuaannunarbolt zuzutollcn. ( ono-
rnlnrzt mhroibor rar drctala roar-jci dcur dor ''1 lit 'cr-Aorztll-
Oi'on Akodcnlo untor ’'andl^aor. ('’0-299, Ar.kl.BcTf. 190, R.739).
gohrol bor hat dlaacr nitto ontapr^obon. ('’0-300, ink 1.non. 191,

D .740) •

*

A"i 24. junl l 0/ 4 ''at '"utzclt an "nr. ~r. asihrlcbon, daaa
or gn’-rc'^or o s onfnlls ''Itten »ucr<*o, n^hnon lhr, raa'-on, zu-
zu to lien, hann aa< t. or vc'tr-, doaa or * T era’nhc an lebondon
'’cnaV'Cr In "''rbcr.-Itun u n~tto, und d.aa cr v«n "na on roro
deaaan "Irua-Vaterlal hn‘er. snc-.'-tc. ( v ’0-124)


- 23 -


Ankl.Bcn. 193, 743). "a-i on ten t="rtcto “utzeits Rrlof

an 27. junl 1944, In den or aohricb, does or fr-'h waorc, doss

Dfthrnon lhn ab 15. Jull eu^otoilt -rorden wuorcc. Tcltcr aohroibt

cr, daaa or zuaar.non nit Calk, puochncr und Zuohaohwort, alio

droi Luftunffon''fficloro, an don C-olbauabt-probl-m arboltoto,

und daaa or mit "a Ik uobcroln jok'vnncn aoi, nit aoinora ?'nto-

rial Monacho nvor auoho v^rzunohnon. ( V 0-125, Ankl.^o-. 194,

T. 744). .vm aolbon Ta; o a-fbrlcb -an.cn an acincn !'itarboltcr

Kalk, dor V/ar^adcra B orator und Spozinllat fuor «opatltla

nnr, (37hr''odor 3652), wio f^l t:

"Tn dor ,\nla o uo^craondc lob ihncn dlo Abaohrlft olnca
nrlofoa von ^utzoit und a*. Inc \ntnrrt. -»lr nucaacn also
.1 ctz t bnldBoo-rllabat dnrar -chcn, dlo njnanvcrau-jho duroh-
zufuohrcn. Oicac nuoaaon nllcrdln a an boston hlor In
gtraaaburf odcr in dcr ’’nc>c atnttflndon. v'oonnton 3lc
von T^r;r Dlonatatollc aua dlo r.octi'cn Scbrltta untcr-
nobnon, dnaa "lr dl - orfordorllo’-on ’'craunhaporaonon bo-
kntrr.o n. lob nolaa nlcht, taa fuor ’'nonnor rutzolt zur
uorfuo-un hrt, s^ldaton odor and rca voik?

Fner cino baldl o Uanhr'ohfc *»aoro Ion Thnen dankbnr."
(yO-126, Ankl.nor*. 195, 3. 745).

•

Dcr Auadruok "nndorea vnlk" iat oln offona oh til oh or pin-rcla

auf Kanzontrotlonala; or ;*ncftlln. o, an denon "na cn aohon aolt

ulrua

lin.-on nit vlrulontcn ~loikfIcbor/oxporinontlort hatto, uaoh-
rond dcr Auadruok "Straaabur. od>r unnlttcl' nro ’*achc" auf das
Konecntrotlonala or ratz-oilor hin'»elat. Die Zou.. In Ol;a Byer,
Prm-ona gckrctnorlr., hot aus-oanct, dnaa rofiuvono fuor die
Kp'd'mlaohon Polb ax cht-^crauiho ar.cof-'rdort rdon wnron.

(•;. 175°). -na-on moocbtc dor r ' lobtahof -1 nub an m-. s cn,
dnaa or ^olbur odor 'c < dcl':r“ ocn.lnt baottc, dlo 60 bcz’-.
100 yllonotcr '*on gtroaabur- ontfornt aind, -rac''rond '\atz«cl-
lor nur oln pnar ’’Ilo-otcr "»c!t "Of. 1st. (°. 95 nC) )


- 24 -


Herr aalx und aein Choi', dor ongckla._to Schroeder wuaaten gut Bcschoid,
wie ivm aich Konwntriifcior^-c^oftling® fucr ^diziniscno Vorsucho
buachaffon konnto, da Sc.Joocer arst cin pair ochvn vorhor solbst aol-
cho Kaeftlingo von Ki~-lcr Xu*r die ..ocrwaaacr-Voraucno orbutan hatto.
(..0-185, .inkl.Bcw.134, .* 443; aiche unten).

E. ^oorwaaa or-Varaucno (.Jiklagoachrift, Aba. 6 (0)).

Dio an HaoftUnjor. dea 'Aonzentrationalagcr a jachau vorgonu—*non
^oorwaaaorvoraucho ware.; von ihru- orator. %nfang i- Ai lSU-an oin vor-
brocnuriacr.oa OntoTOOh—n. Uch 2 Jahron soordoriachor uidiziniachor
E: xporUontu an „onzo.-wr..tionalagor- aoftlingon durch .vortto dor Luft-
waffo, oinachliuaal-c.. cor loohon-, l.aolto-, 0 a.- uni fl. ekficborver-
aucho in Buchcnwald u:u . atz^ilar ordnoio dor .jVioklagtu bchroodcr iu
aichorvn Bowuaataoin, i-vra oiwgo dor Voxaucnsporaonon i«hrachoinlich
atorbon wuurd.n, poraoo.ii.cn dao Yomalv-o dor ^orvaaaorv.raucho an.
boino Untorgubonon B^ckor-^; acn 6 , Boiglbocck und Schaofor, nafux-n
an dor Planun* und ju.chTc.hrur. doraolbon toil.

.u 19. oai 1944 fand oino Sonforonz i- .^icljaluftfahrtrainiatoriun.
(nU) atatt, an dor u.a. Cnriat.naon, Scnicklor, S-ci.or-Pruysons und
Schaofor toilnah^n. JUao ..onUxvnz bjfaaato aich ait c'oa Probloa dor
Yrinkbar-achuni von norifaaaor. -"oi -othodon ..oorwzaacr trinlibar zu
mcrior., abandon zu dUaor *.cit do- Sanitaetsdionat dor luftwaffo zur
Vorfaugung. DU eino, dio ao^nannt- Schaoforacho .othodo, war cho-
tdach gopruoi't wordon uai produziorU macncinoni tri.dtb.roa oorwasaor
Sic hatto „odoch do.. ..acatwii, . .aa aU bctraochllicho .r. C on von Sil-
bor bonootigU, (Lie ;;ur i.. bcachr^nkton . ngon zor Vorfogong atand.
Dio zwoito -•.-thodu, Bii.:itit gonanct, *»r oine Subs tana


dlo don Gos-4uaaok dca Koeifns.cra vcracndcrtc, abcr das Salz
nloht auss-shiod. Sic hatto den ’rrrtoll oinfa-.hcrcr *erstcl-
lun; und "orwondun; .

.\uf dor Tacun- an 19. Mai berinhtote dor Anrokla; to Bc-.kcr-
Toysenr uobor foidaao klinia*ibo Bxporlnento, die von Sirany
zwonka yrrnr^un" v«n Bcrkatlt durtf^efuohrt «wdon -trron. n*
ka n zun scMuas, dnaa dlo Pcdln-un-cn, untcr denon die ^xr.orl-
monto v-'rrononnon wrrrtcn -raren, nl-.ht '*onuo-and ra.ll.tl.tf'
drr sccnot cntapr.tf'on. ?r barltfitatc, dcr tf'cf dra


fonganitactsdlonstos

"arl dnvon uobcrzou't, dnaa bol den worka-worTabren naob
dom nenuas dca Bcrkatlta nnnh apaotcatcna 6 Tafon resunnd-
boltll-.ho s^haodon zu ornarten slnd, wain' s olr.c dauurn-
dc f,oaundbelt 11 nl*o 3V.'aadl;un natfi alnh slohon wnc non'
\nalnht von ’Tntcrarzt Dr. S-.baefer nanh apaotcat^na 1*

"a on ralt tocdllnhor. ,\us an. ondcr. vird. Acussoro Sra-.hcl-
nun: on alnd dur'.h ^ntwacssorun: , Dur'hfall, Kraormfo.
■'nliuzlnntioncn und ondlitfwn T'mJo *u ornarten." ( 0-177,
Ankl.W. 133, R• 479).


Daa Boaultat dlcaor K^nferonz war oln poanhluaa, nouo . x-
porlmnto v«raunchnon. Dloao a-llton clno Vcrauabarolfh fuor
dlo Dnuar v«n hoenhatona 6 T*»con unfnaaon, waohrond -olahcr
•nor rruppe von voraun^aporaonon nit Berkotit bc'nndoltca
Moorwoaaor -e o*cn *orden aollto, olnor cmdoron 'ruppo pc-
voohnll^ca TrlnWaaor, olnor ^ltoron -ruppo uc^crhaupt
ko In TrlnWsacr und dor lotzton -ruppe -oaaor, daa in don
drtrvi la fobraouobllohco <?oon''tpr''vlont antbalton w. "an ‘-: -
aV'loaa dio "-mahne olnor chiton *r 0 rsutf>srclN> und d :r «e-


rioht fuobrtc aua-

11 Lou to nit Kocrroaaor und ?or’:atlt omaofcrt, ols Fro-
vlnnt cbonfalla dor. vor esebonen Sten"tpr-Mant.

"Voravnbadauor 12 Tr c. ... ...

’TSnffiVAn»l'KC VJTViatt <?« Sonlt n ot. r .«n.^-^41c:

3 ,r ’’orauV.aroi'.c nit dauornccn ,oaurdN-.tU^on S-nao
ei , ,n boot. den Tod: d:r Vorau'.haporannen w r -wn
l-t a'llton ala wcrauohsporaonen Louto -no non ord-n,
iol'.bS sol tons doa -citf.fuefcror.-SS *ur "erfuc^n: C c-
atcllt r.rdrn. 1 ('-0-177, oben).


- 26 -


A lgo in Villen Eciusstacin, dess dio Wor-endun; vnn Serkatit
fuor cinen Zoitraun v^n 6 Tn.cn clno dnuerndo sebaodi.-un dcr
wo rsuchspors^non nit sich trin. cn und dasa spactcstsns an 12.

Ta;'c d-.r "od cintrctcn nuerde, nurdon Flacnc fronaeht, *'xpori-
nent' durchzufuohron, dio 6 bis 12 "a- a lan dnuern s^llton.
wajlat. 31\ bam.'tcn. da a a dor Itnnf oronzbor i-ht .nlph_t on;;ibjt^
das a dio ^onb»tdancr_.12 ^a'a ad, Mo, A=n craton ”orA™ s «Z
roibpn.. Da man -maatc, dnss nan untrr s^l-bcn ’’natnend-n ni-'-t
nit t> rolwilll“on renhnon k^nntc, cmtsViicd si die '’ n nfr.r nx
dafuor, KenzontratiAnal'\cr-“aoftlIn'c zu ver-ond n, dio l s r
vn n dcr n .9 zur *'crfuo.'un .catelit nerden wnerden. In Boriaht
uober ulna zwalto Ta un an 20. )'al 1944 heiaat os: :, Als ,f or-
au-.banrt nurdo DaV'ou boatimt." (’.*-177, oben). Abaolirifton
dor Boriebto uober dio Ta un ; inren u.a. an die Senitaots-
•'orau-.:*- und L-hrabtollun. dcr Luftwaffe juctcrbA , dcr die
\n akin; ten ^acror und •'/'lzlnohner, dio die Kaoltocxpcrincn-
tc nit ooa-.-or durchfuohrfcsn, zu-otcilt waren; an dio D'L n cr-
lin-Adlorabf'f, d r dio .\n -kla t n uff un' "«bor: zu.-ctollt
•wren; an dio Luftwnffanannitactalnarakti^n (I. in. 14); und
an d.cn n iabafuo v ror-S°5 dor n-r!.bt war v^n P’^rTstensor v^n
den feoobnlsV'on Q ucr^ d a n T•• unfcorzoinhnct.

\n 7 . Junl 1°44 a^r'ob drr An okla tc BiV'vr-lcr an v inn-
lor au' den *“of uebor ‘rawits und crauch o un -Ancontrat!nr.s-
lar :rbaaftlin. d’c ala "orauchapcraencn b:i den "corwaaao;-
vc ranch on vervrcnd:t nerdm a~llt.n. Dicaor 'r: ol lout, t oua-
ZU; sneiao:

>t 3i - a^cn b:r-xta frv ‘•or dcr luft-aff dl j ll-.bkoit.
drln ando norztliV’e rrr. .n in *araxrh an * t ■ ' on tu kl •
r n. I'.h a tube koutc * o-fjr vor clnor -.-nsec duw d ~
nacb sn'-.lroI V*.cn Tier- und ouch -ense env rauc’-cn an froi-
vriili on ,f orauV speraAnon -in. ^nd.u^lti o 1 a aun. vor-
lan t: dio tuftwaff. b t 1 iihacltl; zxt.i vorfahron.


- 27


:, rlnkbaraa'?cn v«n r zv^aazt -nt~i~’-lt» Das oino,
vAn cincn San .-nffitior ont n'-olt: ••-.rfabrnn ontaalzt
das r-*naacr rind ~a~^t .a zu cI n:- -d rkiinhen ?rink-
•••asscr, daa zwci to, v«r cincr In colcr ar c~obcnc ,r cr-
fahrcn lacaat den Snlz^c’ alt unveraend ,rt,' . a nlnc-t d»n
Sco-rmssor nur dor. unar cnchncn r-eanjuaaok. Das latztc
Varfofcron bcn^cti^t In Gc~cnaatz zun crat;n koine Tng-
paaarohatoffc. Acrztliohoracita cuaa dicaca verfahren
nnoh unacrcn hcutl. cn Konntnisacn als bcdcnklioh an:o-
sahon warden, da dlo Zufuhr konzcntrlcrtcr Sr.lzlocaun-
on aohwcpc vorcif tun; acraohcinun. cn hcrvnrrufon kann.

"Da. dl c_ ^cr a uohc an ycnao hon blahcr nur b la zu clnc r
a?u-P v °n ylc.r Ta. or, dunh ofuchr t ward en ko nnt en. die
proktlaohc n Fordc run/cn abop cine woraor-un .in Sec not
r-cratcncr bia zu 12 Tn ~ cn vc rl an*c n. aind or.tspreeh ende

yorA?.^jg/igd.cr.ua^» *

"R cnoct! t wopden 40 £*oaundc ,f ;rau-.hapcraoncn, die fucr


gn^poodcr aehloan d*n Prief nit den oenerken, dr.aa dio Vor-
auoba untop Pci'lhoccka L'itun atc’-cn a«lltm.

Dtp Prief beweiat, daaa dor \r.. ckl*. to S-.hrood-T von don
fruchcran verbronheriaohen *^cpcriB;ntcn aoitena d r luftwaffon-
Aorato ar K^nzcntrationaln or-rtacftlin or. "onntnia hatto. Zwoi-
nal crwachnt 'or fruohcrc Dxpcrln.nto, die dureh die zurverfuo-
; un atcllun von :/aoftlin;.on aoitens d j 3 P ercoc; li-.ht cor¬
don wren. 'citophin bcrrclat d .r Prief, da a a die '’oraunbaoor-
aonen koine ProMlll. ;n acin aolltcn. Sthroedsr an t aua*
drucnkllnh 1 • z^oiten Satz dca crater. Abar.tzca, d^aa zahlroi-
nhc *»:raunho borci ta an "froinilli-or. •'orauV'apcraAncn 1 ' duroh-
-ofuohrt wopden aclcn, ahor dasa d-a Problotn ictzt cine ond-
.'•uoltl*-c I" aunr orfordorc, dn dioac ''crau-.ho nur fuor oino
Donor vior "-a-n dura*- ofu/'rt •v'rdcn aoi:n, -’no v rnd fuor
dlo rrr.xia oln ’-lttil fuor naen^t bis zu 12 *~. m en jyv or or'op-
d*rlloh 3 .i.

- 2 * -


SCHnOiDir.


Die Verteidigung hit dio hichtlgjceit der uebersetzung des zweiten Satzes
im ersten Absatz bestritten und cine andere Uebersetzung vorgelegt, dor
zufolge Schroedor den ..eichsfaehrer a a SteHung von freiwilllgen Ver-
suchspersonen eraucnt habc. Die Uebersetzungssachverstaondigen des
OCCrtC haben dio dichtigkeit der obigon Uebersetzung bezeugt, und die An-
klagebohoerde verlaesst sich darauT. Dass diose Uebersetzung richtig 1st,
geht vollKocrcen Alar aus den Sitzungsprotokoll vox 19. und 20. !.ai 1944
horvor, das ausdruecklich er.'.laorte, dass, da bei dieson Vorsuchon Todes-
faelle zu orwarten seion, nor solcho Lcute bei don Vorsuchon vorwendot
werdon sollten, die von hitler zur Vorfuegung gestelit cordon wuerden.

Es ist laecherlich, bei VeiBOChun, bei donen nit Todosfaellon ala ait
einer Xestatohenden Tatsache g.xvchnct wird, von r'rciwilligon zu spro-
chon. uan muss sich forn :r daran orixmorn, Jass Mo Luftwaffe schon seit
langoiu in don Xonzontratlonalagem i/orsuchu an unf rol will i gun Vorauchs-
personon durchgofuohrt hatte. Dio •vorwasstrversuche waren nur oin Gliod
in elnor Roiho vurbrocherischer 2»perinonto, dio von dor Luftwaffe oin-
goloitet worden waren. Schxoodur wandtc sich an dio SS, '.ell or von dle-
aon fruehoren Venuctwn Attjxtnis hatte.

%

Dio fatoacho, dasa dies-. Vctsuchc An unfrciwilligon Verouchspcrsonon
durchgofuehrt warden, .-Ixm auch durch Grawitzons Schroibon an Himmler
vom 28. Juni 1944 bczougt. (KO-179, Ankl. Bow. 135. ... 485). In dioson
Schroibon logt Grawits ouas-r seiner oiguuin Ansic::t uobor dio goplantcn
Vorauche auch die von ; bn-rdt,. Glucks und IIA dar. uluccka orklaortc,
dass "gegon die ihxrchfuohrung der voc. Chef iua Sanitaotswusons dor Luft¬
waffe orbotonon /orsuchsrolhc in dor /ersuchsstation vsehor io Konzon-
trationslagur Dachau von hicr ius koine rid cedvnken erhobon werden.

Es so lien nach ,oegIic..kvit ..-a on olor in 'uxrantaonw bofindlichu Haoft-
lingo vurwondet werd-.-n ." ,an kann sich unaooglich vorstollen,


- 29


SCROED&a


dW 3 a in Jude auTgefordurt word an waere, sich freiwillig fuor irgorxi-
otwaa im written neich zu oeldan, zu eintr ^oit wo sio aillionenwelsc
in Konzentrationalagorn hingeachlachtot wurden. Nuba fuchrto aua: "Ich
schlug vor, hiorzu dio asozialon Zigeuneraiachlinga zu vcrwcndon. Hior-
unter bafinden aich honachen, dio zwar gosund aind, abor fuor den nrbeita-
oinaatz nicht in Frago konoen. Ich wcrde dioaon zigcuneriachon konachen
wogon demnaochat itaichafuahrer cinon boaondoren 'orachlag untorbroitcn,
halto oa ab«r fuor richtig, die orforaorlicha Anzahl Vcrauchap*rson«.n
aua dioacffl Pcraon^nkroia auazuwaehlsn. Falls Kcichsfuohror zusticxat,
words ich die Vcrauchstx.rsoiv.n fu-^naft :-icf,cn ." ±3 ist ctvaa achwiorig
aich vorzuatollun wio ..cb_, d^r uoitor dor ••oichakrieinalpolizoi, Zi-
gounerfrolwillige fuor uioao axporWtto "nachaft" aachon konnto.

Grawitz widuraprach dor o*.nutzu..$ von Uguunem aua d«n Grund, daaa aio
"toUwoiao andcraarti,; raoaiach zuso^ng.setzt aolon", wosiwlb oa wuon-
achonawort soi, ^orauchapcraon zu ru»b-n, dio raasisch dor curopaoi-
achon Bovoal«orung Vvrglulchbar siiri. UU-lor untachiod, daaa Zigounor
und droi ondoro P.raonon zu ..ontroUz- .cr.-n bcnucttt *ordon aoUti-n.

(NO-183, Ankl, do*. 136 , i87).

Schrood-r h.t aua^oaagt, daaa -J v^raacftt h\b-, dio ucurwaasorvor-

aucho in Luftwiffonlazarv- 1 t in 3r.v:nachwvip uurchfuchrtn zu laaaon. Nach

auinur aougwwuaaogo orinnorlo or aich d^utlich diran, nit dom Laxarutt-

lvitor on 1 . Juni 1%/. in Vorbindung gwtrUun zu aoin. Sr hat auch bo-

kundot, daaa tr v-raucht habo, ndo *ai StuJcntun dor koditiniachon Aka-

demio dor Luftwxffo ala Verauchaporsanon zu g-winnon. Boido Veraucho

dos

achoitorton angublich wojur/^ongola an klinirchen Sinricjjtungcn and
wogon Slnberufun, d.r Studanton zut. hr dchrocder hat auagosogt,

daaa or aich orat nacr. -rac.iocpfung Ulcr anitron -ouglichkciton an dio
SS gowundut habo. Sr 111


- 30 -


sj


don Buricftt cinreden, mn habc unaoeglieh 40 Freiwillige und die noeti-
gen kliniachcn ainrichtungen an eines Ort fladen koennen, trotzdoc von
Sirany in ..ion an .ehrnachtangehcerigen dcrartige Versucho, abcr natucr-
lich nur fuor die Pacer von vicr Tv?on. dorchgefuehrt hatto. (R. 3657, 9).

In Zuaaaoonhang ait dieaar passage Schrooders au s aian boachtcn,
daaa dio Sitzungaprotokoliu voa 19. und 20. Lai 1944 aefort dor SS ueber-
aandt wurdon. dor Beachluas zur Vonrcndung von Sonzontrationalagorhaoft-
llngon hing nicht ab vcu Srfolg dor Beruohungcn, Froiwilligo zu findon,
aondom wurdo oa 19. -ai g^f-aat. ia war bekannt, daaa wogen der boaon-
doron Lagorung dor geplanton Yurauche Frcltdlligo nicht zu finden aein
wuordon. Uogokohrt kann -.on uraooglich glaubcn, dor oborste Loitor doa
goaaaton Sanitaotawosona dcr luftwaffo haotto fuor Voraucho, dio aolnor
Angabo nach ao unachuldigur Hatur warun, nicht 40 Froiwilligo findon
koennon. aa gab koinu Torachriftun, dio dio Vorwondung von ohmachtan-
gohoorigon zu Vorauchon unUraagton. (Schroodor, R. 3660). In Uuaajaswn-
hung ait don in a-lr. Sehruiban voc 27. Juni 1944 an <*alk, oinen Ango-
hoorigon doa Staboa von oc..ro-dvr, boachriobonon Kpidaai*chcn-Golbaucht-
Vorauchon an konacnon, het aid* lor dntlaatungazou,;a Haagon auafuohrlich
daruobor auagolaaaon, daaa or Froiwilligo dor Strissburgor, Froiburgor
odor Hoidulborgor otcdur.ton-tonpmion dor ohroacht nabo vorwunden wollon.
(h. 9578). Sr »ar uubcrzcugt, daaa froiwilligo Studonton haotten gofunden
wordon koonnon. Hacn aoin^r Aussago haottc cr aio waohrond ihror Furion
vorwendon koonnon. (Haagon, tU 957£). *uch kalk war aichor, daaa dioa
mooglich guwurvn wauro. Haagon hat aehrfach botont, daaa Froiwilligo da
waren. (R. 9580). Xliniachc Ainrlchtungon wacren loicht in Rcacrvolata-
rotton zu findon guwoacn. (Haagon, R. 9581).


SCKKEDER


Schroodor hat fcokundet, ar habe nicht gcncusst, das 3 Berks tit in

• • a

laongatuns 12 Tagen don Tod zur Folgo habon *merdo. (R. 3666). Er konnte
oich nicht entainnen, ob Schaefer iha goaagt hatte, daaa 12-taegigvr
Genuaa von Berkatit den Tod voruraache. In dor Voruntcrauchung hat or
dioa auadruecklich in abredc gosteUt. (R. 3668). Er hat auageaagt,
wodor Bockor-Freyaeng noch Schaefer, die beido bei dor Nuembcrger Tagung
in. Oktobor 1942, auf dor dor Boricht oobor die Dachaucr Xaeltoveraucho
oratattot wurdo, zugogun waron, haottbn iha ctwaa daruebor goaagt, ala
er vorachlug, zar Auafuohrang dor ..eerwaaaervuraucho nach Dachau zu gc-
hon. (R. 3669). Schroodor bostrltt, don Boricht aof dor Tagung am 19.
und 20. Mai 1944 iMbor die -coraa«rv.r*acho Jcsala goaohon zu habon.

(h. 3662). Trotzdon oino Abachrift dioaao Bcrichtoa an Hlnlor uober-
aondt wurdo, noochto or Jza Goiicht glaubon -achon, oa sd oin bloaaur
Zufall gowuaon, daaa or ohnu don Boricht goaohen za habon, aich an Him*-
lor ua Vorauchaporaonon gowondat lube. (h. 3669). Sr hat auagosagt, or
habo Grawitz goluguntlich einor Rusaaaoidcunft goaagt, or wuonacho, die
Vuraucho on wogon ohr«nruohrigcr handlungun cntlaaacnon Soldaton voll-
ziohon tu loaaon. (n. 3670). Angoblich habo Grawitz orwidort, or wollo
dioaon bunach boruackaichtiion. Mach aoinor AUaaago hat Schroodor Grawitz
klar gomacht, die iL.ouchop raor.cn nucast^n Frulwllllgo aoin, nit otwaa
Zuaatznahrung ala Bolohnung. (R. 3672). Naeh aoinor Zcugcnauaaago hat or
Grawitz fornor orklaort, dio Vuraucho auesaten uater /aifaicht dor Luft¬
waffe atuhun. In dcr Vo runtcrsuchung hat «.r besehworon, nichta uobor dio
koorwMoorvoraucho zu Kiss^n, dass oic 5S sic iha aas 4ur H<\nd go
und or keinen Einfluas darauf gehabt habo. (h. 36I0-I). Nach coiner Aus-
aago hatte Schroodor koine Ahnung, dass Aualacoder in den honzontrations-
lagorn gofangen goholton warden. Sr hnt orklaort, von dor Vorwendung von
Zigounern ala V«rauchapcrsonun


SCffi03)EB


* rst 10 ° rU * 10 ° kl ° bor ^ ">l> “« Baldcht m Seiglboeck Kanntnl.
crhalten zn hsban.(R. 3676). or hat Balglbaack sngcWc.cn «u

hahan, Barkatit nur so langa su vcrabfalgan, bis die Varsachsparsor.an ar-
kiaortan, as nicht ochr vartragan za koannan. <R. 3677 ). Er hat sagaga-
ban, das, ar Balglbaacks flaricht uabar di. Varsacha zastasscn alt Beckon.
Froysang and Schaefer a.a. gahaart haba, ar baba ihn abar nicht gsnz ga-
haart da ar dla Tagang vorsoitlg haba vorlasson wesson. (It. 3677-80).

01 . van dan .atgaklagton Balglbaack aabar Jedo dor Varsach.parsanon
garaahrton labelled, dla dla Vorteidigang schliesslich 1 , Basolanaterlal
varsalagan gasman hard., nnchdcat sla v.rsacht hatta, ala darch Ihran
"Sachverstoendlgon 1 ', Vallhardt, « von~ndan, ohnc dlasa Dekancnta salbrt
ala Basal, varsalagan, „ub.n crfnlgn ansclhoit.n aabar dla Exponent a
wlodar, obsonl Ihra VarlaaMUchk.lt antar dan vorUagandan Uestaandon
twair.lhart 1st. (Balglbaack, Baa. 34 , R. 7381). 2cW.no ..ondorangcn In
dloson jtafzoichnangen, dla so ainar spMtenon bait bosprechan widen,
daatan daraaf hin, das. ihnon nicht za gross. Bade at any zagcn-nscn ..Won
dwf. Dla Zxporlcanta bagsnnan lz august 17 a and Uaaortan bl. kltta
September an. «. Voroachaptrsonun widen wrwndst. Don Vo. such.por.enan
1 bl. 6 surdo JagUcha Kahrang and JagUchas oass.r fuor alno caltdaa.r
von 5i bis 7J Tagon onUogan. Dla dsrln varz.ichn.to Osaar dar Exporl-
.anto baslaht slch auf dan ..organ da. 22. .-gust sis .-nfangstag, Wo van
dar Vartaldlgang bohzuptut surda, obsohl alnlga. Bowisnatorial daraaf
hlndautat, dzsn lhr BogUm - 21...-.ust ssr. denn ds. zbporlwnt vor-
nlttags antorbrachan .mruo, surda kcln =ass.tsllchar Tag odor aln Tall
dsvon gezaohlt. aonn .s sWsc..an -Ittsg aid 17~ Uhr antorbrachan o-arda,
m.Mo aln halbar Tag ddzagas..a: lt, woiuvnd .in voll.r Tag sugoMohlt
«urdo, wunn « 3 nach 17°° Uhr unterbrach.n «urdv.


VersuchsperBonen 7 bis 10 warden 1000 cct Schaefer- lessor auf die Dauer
von 12, 13 bezw. 12 Tagon verabrcicht and aio hungcrtcn fu.-r eine Zeit-
dauer von 9, 8 bezw. 9 Tagon. Vcrauchsporaon 9 wurde aua Gesundheits-
gruondcn nicht vorwcndct. Dies* Person war dor Zntlastungazouge -ettbach.
Don Vursuchaporaonon 11 bis 16 einschlicsslich warden 500 cca koerwasser
und die Seonotverpflogung vurabroicht, die ungofiehr 21<» Kalorien ins-
goaajx enthielt. dioao »orauchc dauorton von 5 bis zu 10 Tagan. Sio hun-
gerten bis zu Tagcn. ».ohrcr« dicser Vorsucha'x.-r»non, z.B. 11. 13,

17 und 18 uiusston sich zwoi vorachiedenon Versachon von 8 und 6 Tagan,

6 und 5 Tagon, 7i und 5 Tagon und 10 und 1 Tagan untcrzichon. Don Vor-
suchsporsonon 19 bis 25 oinschlicsslich wurden 500 ccn Borkatit und dio
Soonotvorpflcgung gogeboa. Di«so axpori/ anto dauorton von 5 bis 9$ Tago
niit Hungerporiodun bis zu 6* Tagon. Vuraachsporsonon 19 und 20 rwsston
aich 2 vorschiodonon Kxpuriuonten von Jo 7 und 5 Tagon untorziohon. Don
Vorauchspuraonun 26 bis X cardan 1000 cc-*. Boricatit und die Scunotvur-
pflogung v,rabroicht. Dion, .xpuri. nto dau^rt-n von 5 bis zu 9i Tagon
nit Hungorperiodan bis zu 6J Tagen. Dio Vorauchsp-rson 29 tuasto aich 2
Exporiis*int«n von 8 und 5 Tagun untorzlchcn. D-n ^rauchaporsonon 31 und
32 wurdon 1000 cca -oorwassur four 8 bisw. 6 \u.y v*.r braicht. Die Vor-
suchaporson 31 auaato a cn oim:- voitcixn Varsuch von 5 Tagon untorzio-
hon. liar Vorsucnsporson 33 wurdon 500 cc- Borkatit 6 Tago long vorab-
reicht, dor Vursuehsporaon 31 lOCO cc^- Schaofun- Aascr auf dio ^aucr
von 12 Tagun, dun Voitmehsporaancn 35 bis 37 einschlicsslich , 39, U
und 12 wurdun 500 ccz. .an iss^r auf cine Zuitdauor von I, bia 6 Tagon
vorabroicht; don Vors .chsporsonon 3', 10 und 13 wurdon 1000 ccn i-con-
wAssor our oinu Jauor von 6, 5 und 6 Tagon vurabroicht and dor Verauchs-
porson 11 wurdo Sehftofcr-.itss r 12 Tag 1-ng vorabrvicht.

Dio klinischon Tabullcn uotar iio ^xpori^.nte geben uns auch das
<»ltur dor Vorsuchsporsonon an.


- 31 -


Verauchapersonen 17, 19, 20, 35, 37, 40 ur>l 43 waren alle unter Einund-
zwanaig. Veraucheperson 40 war 16 Jahr* alt; Berauchaperaonen 17, 19
und 37 waren 17 Jahro; Vcrsuchapcraon 35 war 18, Verauchaperaon 43 war
19 und Vorauchaporaon 20 t.ar 20 Jahro alt. Za iat ueberflucaaig zu or-
waohnon, da a a koin Vorauch gcucht wurde, die Zuatirnamg der Eltem odor
Vorouendor diuaer Zinderjaehrigen cinzuholen.

Der .uigeklagto aoiglboeck aagte aua, Jaaa or sich aide Juni 1944 in
Berlin c-eldete, wo iha Becker-Freyaeng fcitteiltc, dasa or die koorwaaaor-
verauche in Dachau tachen aolle. Zr aprach auch ait Schrocdor in Vorbin-
dung .'.dt dioaen Vorauchon. Zr aagte, or habe veraucht, davon wegzukornon,
da or oino «bachou davor hatte, in oinoc Konzontrotionalagcr zu arboiton.
Er woigcrto aich nicht, dioao Vorauchc vorzunoh.-cn, da or fuorchtoto,
wogon Bofohlavorwoigorun,-. zur Verantwortung gctugon zu werdon. (R. 8828-9).
Bcckor-Freyacng haotto iht. goaagt, daaa ua dor Zwuck dor Expcrlmonte aoi,
eratena foatzuatollon, ob Borkatit brauchbar iat, zwcitcna die Schaufox—
MOthodu zu orprobun und drittena fostzuatellon, ob aan liebur ganz ohno
koorwaaaur uuako..i*<n odor kluinoru Qj.intitautun davon trinken sollto.

(R. 8832J. Zr gab on, daaa ihu die loitonden Pcraocnlichkoitcn in Dachau
goaagt hatton, daaa dio Zi^ounor, dio bci don Vorauchon vorwondet wurdon
aollton, ala "aaozial" .. f :n gohaltcn wurdon. Boiglbocck betrachtoto
aich anachoinond ala S-.chvorataondi,;on hinsici.tlich aaozialor Poraonon.

Zr aagtu aua, oa aoi aoino nOffaaaung gowoaon, lino ganze Fa^ilio koenntc
ala aaozial klcaaifiziurt werden, obwolil dioa "niciX auaachlioaoc, daaa
in diaaun Fa&ilion oino ganzo ..ongo von . it.-,li.-d>:m aind, wolcho aich ihr
ganzoa Lobon nio&ola duren oino ges-itzwidrigc Kanilung auffaeliig ;.achon".
(R. 8848).

Sr sagto aua, or habo die Verauchsperaooen zuaaaaengarufen und ihnon
gesagt, ur.i waa oa aich bai dor: Vorauch handolte


35


und aie gofragt, ob aio ciaran teilnehaan wollten. (R. 36Z.9). Sr sagtc
ihnon nicht, wio lange die l£cporlncnte dauom wuerden. Zr sagte ihnen
auch nicht, daaa aie sic jedorzoit abbrcchcn koomten. Zr sajto aua,
daas er verlangen -uicaatc . dasa sic olnc gowiase Zeit duraton. Dio Ent-
schoidung, ob aie von dc_ .ieperinent bofreit werden wuorden, lag bei iha.
(Beiglboock, R. 8350). Zr s&glv aua, daas die Vorauchaporaonon in Verlauf
dor Experiments bei oinor Gclogonhoit rovoltierten, da sic dio ihnon ver-
aprochono Vorpflogung nicht urtialtcn hatten. Sio orhiolton r-ehrero Tago
long koine Vorpflogung wogwn Vcrzocgorung in der 3eliofcrung. Die Veraucha-
puraonon wurdon mehrond dor Voraucho in oinoe Sane oir.goachloaaon. Beigl-
boock aagto aua:

"Ea waoro aogar notwundig goveaon, dasa aie noch viol inten¬
sive r oingosciiloaaon worion waorer., donn d~nn haotton sio
nicht dio Gologenhoit gchabt, aich daxtobon .aaaor zu vor-
achaffen." (K. 8864,).

2r gab an, dasa dio Gofahronsono boi Genuaa von 500 cca ..oorwasaor

in ungofachr siuben Tagon orreicht wuordo, wachrond boi taoglichon Gonuaa
von 1000 ccra kuor.Tassor doa ;n /,} Yagun dcr Fall aoin wuordo. (H. 8876-7).
kan vorgluicho die viol lc^ngero tcitdauor dor wuitor obun bcachriobenon
Exporii-onto.

Dor ^nklagcbeiioerdo .fir -a nach oinor Proofung dor iia Vorlauf dor
Exporir«mto gufuohrton Libel!cn aofort klur, dasa oine ifcihw von .*.>ndo-
rungon on ihnon vorgono yen vfordun waron. Dicaw ..-jfzoichnungcn waron vor
dor rtuaaago von Vollhardt, duasen Sichvoratioadigcngutachtcn aich toil-
woiao auf diwao ufuichnungwn stuutzto, in ausschliossllchaa Gawahrsau
doa Vortoidigera. In cin-r groaacn .uizahl von Fa oil on waron dio lUuaan dor
Vorauchaperaonon aua don Tabellcn ausrsd.ort orton, offenaichtlieh in
Bostrobon, us uaaoeglich zu nachon, diosc Fwrsoncn ausfindig zu oachon,
daj.dt sio ala Zougcn cusscjon koennton.


SCnl-PSl-a


Sino Pruefung der Tabollon orgibt weitorhir.j dass das Schlussgcwicht dor

Versuchspursonon aof don Tabollon in oiner von den Sintragungcn der uobri-

gon .mlzeichnungon verschiedenen Tintonschattierung eingetragen wordcn war.

In einigon Faollon war dieses Gowicht uebor dio ursprucnglichon Blcistift-

noiizon goschriobon, s.B. auf Tabclle C-2 wurdu uobsr das in Bleistlft ein-.

gotrageno Schlussgowicht von 62 kg kg nit Tinto darueborgeschriebon.

Boiglbouck gab zu, dasa die roten Pfoilo, dio angoblich den Boginn der

Vorsucho ondouton sollten and dio gawoehnlich untor den itetun 22. August

orschoinon, von ihn in Jahrv l?/,5 gaencht wurden, lango nachdoe. die Ex-
porinento bevndet wtron. (R. 8909). In d«n Tabollon 1-32 befindet sich oin
Rotzoichon untor den Datun des 21. .jigust, was mdoaten ifuordo, dass dio
Exporiuonto wahrschoinlich an dies, datur. b^ann.n. Jcrisso liotiirungon
in doutschor aurzochrift oefinJcn sich iuf dor nuyckseito dor Tabolle C-23.
Boiglbouck gab zu, dass or solbst dioeo Notizen nchto. (R. 8970). Boigl-
boock sagto .uia, dass

"Wir (Bui lbooc-i un i soin Vorteldigor) aind zu Jedor Eoit
daruobuj/inlg se»usuii, dass ulosw Tafoln and Kurvon so
vorgelogt wo. .on sollten, *io wlr aio urhalton habon."

(h. 8921,.

Er gab wiwdorholt an, dasr or auf diuson Vafeln in riuernborg koine Ra-

diorungun vorgwvxaoci. habo. (... 39-2 2 , 6973, e975-6) • «ls dio Bcwoiso ihn

koine andoru rtahl <-uhr lioaaon, Boiglbouck sciiliosalich zu, an don

Notizon auf dor nuocksolto der i .belle C-23 in ..uemberg ..onderungen

und Rndicrungon vor,;onoc. ..a zu habun. (R. 897) Oi -o ..ufzeichnungen gobon

oinon klinischon Boricht uebor cine der V.rsuchsp.; senon, dio gcfaohrlich

kron* war. Folgundes ist die iadoriKiratalien-' iur urapruun.lichen stuno-

graphischon Notizon, aewoit sio entziffurt wordon konnten:

"Dor Durst niii.t sch'-or urtraegliche Fomcn an. patient
liegt apathisch, ganz bowogungsarr, It halbgosehlossoncn
*ugun da. Er


- 37 -


SCH-OS3ER

* nixxit keinen .viitoil .in seiner UEgebung. 2r bittel nor, wenn

er aua seiner; bono.xcn*n Zustand aufwacht, ue ..asser, (Halbe
Zeilo auar&diort)*

"i>3s rtuasehon iat schr schlccht and vorfalien, dor .'ill£cocin-
zuatand 1st bcaorgniaorrcgend.

"Dio rt t-amg iat flacher, cuohaaz., c-aoaaig frequent.

''ntcezuego 25 in dor xinuto.

"Dio *ugen aind tiof halonicrt, dor Hautturgor etark horab-
gosetzt.

"Dio naut trockon, die 2uns« ganz trockon, woiaslichor Belag,
in dor uitto zieulich frei.

"Dio Scnioichaut doa wundoa and die Lippon trockon, lctztero
borkig bclojt. Lunge goringo schr trockeno Bronchitis
Gronzo u/VI-XU, vorschaorft, vosikulaor .ituon.

"Horztocno ac-.r loiac, icaus hoorbar. Pula achwachor gofuollt.
Gofaeaae ataorkcr wandvordickt, Frequent 72, Lobcr 2 \ - 3 OF
. eher woicn, taoasig druckcxpfinllich ^ilz porkutoriach, goring-

gradig vor (> rooa: ort.

"uuakol hypotoniach, Golenko uolxratruckbnr. -.den loicht
druckei-pfindlich, .w>doutoto u^rwulatung, atarko Laonsat-
wulstung. Boaburg — .^fluxo — BJn Babinski nogativ, Eifo'
achoa pl»aono.->. Opj <-nh. nog, Loss. "mlbuatonua achlocht,

Bulbua neflex - (Untorbrvchang)".

Boiglboeck hatto in dor lotztun *.oil«. d^a oratun ..boatzoa daa »>ort
"nchlacfrlg" fuor das .ort "bonocr-.n" oingoeetzt. Ir; aolbon .*baatz
war olno iialbo Loilo voli.:o.z.*.n auaradiort uj>J konnto nlcht ontziffort
wordon. Boiglfcoock gab vor, or koenno aich nicht orinnom wio aio lnu-
toto, olno offensichtlithe iuegu, da slo Ja aua Furcht vor dor Uahrtwlt

%

auaradiort wurdo. L- lotzt-jn Sitz doa zwaiten ..baatzo aondorte Bcigl-
boock die l.otizon, sodaaa ale Jotzt lautow ".dlgor-cinzuatond iat, nicht

*

boaorgniaorr« r ,o.d". Auf der -raton Zoilv doa achtoo .bsatzoa aotzto
boiglboock das .iort ".ax." fu.r "achlocht" oin.


- 38 -


SCKiCZDZH


Die Notiz "Romberg plus plan" bodeutet, daos die "erauchspersonen "un-
aichor" atehon konnte. (Boiglboock, H. 8982). Hr aagto, daaa sich dicse
Notizen eher auf die Vorauchaperaon Up. 30 ala auf Vcrauchapcrson Nr. 23
bezoogen. (R. 8984).

Boiglboock aagte aua, daaa or koine woiteren ..ondorungen odor Ra¬
dio rungen in Nuomborg voroahc. (R. 8992). Dasa Beiglboocka Zcugenaua-
aogen ala Ganzca vollkotcen unzuverlaeasig aind, wirddirch die Tataacho
bewiosen, daaa or auch auf dor Ruockaeite dor Tabollc ..-29 itadierungen
in don Notizen vomahi.. Soweit aiu entziffcrt warden koonnon lauton dio-
ae Notizen I'olgondon^atcn:

"jer Durat rtclit aich wi-dor heftig oin. P. logt aich auf

den nuockcn and vaolst aicn horuL.. ochoad, auch-

oinun typiach atroct. or;, rigidvn .jifall ... achwor. teta-

niachou S>c..pto ., wio ea aich aua soliwr - Jy;.ptoao.

- £r xdrd i- Kinblick dariuf, uaaa or vor 2 Tagcn

zloulich Viol • aaaor gotrunkvr. hat-} plua $ 1 gowoaon

aoin, aua do- Vox auch -cnot/jon.

"3.9. -'iodur in Vo.auch gen.

"5.9. Klogt beroits uebur aohr at. Durat.

"6. Durat ,.uf. aohr heftig. -ungo trockon und bclog^. Foctor
ox oro. iiaut trockon und hoiaa. Ub.r doutlich vorgr. Rofl.
lobhaft, Gof. windvo.dickt. ..usk, uubororregb.

"7.9. Paych. iatond nat aich goaendort. Sornolonz. Zungo
trockon. . uak. fuohlt aich ateif an. botr. iuiak. achw. uit

atokt. -u'ach.-Hbg. pos. GoT. noch-Pula

achlocht wruollt. Sehr br-dyc.ird. ..t.ung boach. .llgen.

Zuat. (ur.uchatua .ort auar jiicrt) U-bor stark vorgr."

In Buzug auf die Vcraucltaptraon Nr. 25 sagtc Boiglboock aua, daaa
diuacr uann nohn-ala goroent t und ajgunacheinlich akutc Bronchitio
hatto. Soin Fiobur atieg bia zu 39,8 Colaiua. (R. 8996). Er klagto uobor
Magenboachwurdon vor do. -..-inr. doa Jxperir^nts. (i.. 5000).


nla Boiglboeck au 15; Scpter.ber Dachau rerliess, war cr noch krank. (R.
9002). Vorauchaperson Nr. 39 war ein 45 »ahrc alter kann. Ihc wurden
vior Tag© lang, naeolich von 1. September bia zun 4. Sojrt-cnber, an dec
daa Expericent u a 193° uhr abgobrochen wurde, 500 edn Berkatit gogoben.
iUs Beiglboock auaaagto, daaa dor kann nur drol Tago an Experiment teil-
nahe, ging or cdt dor .ahrhoit silt typiachcr Spara&rkeit cr.. (R. 9310).
Er gab zu, daaa or zahlreicho Lunbir- ur.d Leberpunktioncn an don Vcr-
auchaporaonon vornahn. (R. 8933).

Trot* Beiglboocka Bo-uehungcn oa za vor.-uoton, konnto oino -oizahl
der Vorauchaperaonon slch Trinkinaaor vorachaffon. Boiglboeck und aoin
Vortaidigor atollton aich nuf den unainnison Standpunkt, daaa dloa®ino
Schuld In gowiaaon Grade ;.dndere. Za iat schwur za voratohen, wio dioao
Solbathilfo der Vorauchaperaonon, die den nwiaton von ihnon znoifclloa
daa Lebon rottctu, ala atrafnildomdcr ii^atand vorgebracht wordor. kann,
wo Boiglboeck .loch illoa tnt, u.. os ,erad« tu vorhindom. Yntaacchlich
wuaato or noch nicht oinr.nl, daaa dio Vjrauchaper»ncn dor oraten Grupjw,


d.h. von 1-32, in dor L. > v-maon wiron, aich Trinkwar;aor *u vorachaffon.
Er angto aua:


"Ich uoochto uoburhaapt bocorkon, daaa ich gorado in dor
zwuitun Voi aucha ’.ruppo, wo ich ;dch sohon lnfolgc dor Er-
fahrungon aua dor orston Vornucha ruppo ait den vorachio-
donon 3chlichon aua.;innto, —ich dementaprochond vorhalton
konnto and dahor dojWor^ach nicht «•. iter_;ofuchrt habo.
-ionn ich don 7orau£^^P®>d fuvr aich wvitorfuohrun haetto
wollon, haottu ich oa auch in dvr swoiton Vorsuch^ruppo
tun raioasun. Ich habc das nur in der oraton Verauchagruppo
gotan, well z.lr ulo Lraiche dca Gowichtaatillatandea zu -
naochat nici


Jfcnach aa,-t Boi,-.lbcjck L- Grunie :>,-no;..-n. das3, obpdcich ot
wuaato, daaa dio Vvrnjchsperaoncn s ch 1 rinkftis z-.r boachaffton und ob -


lolch or auino Exp;rimento


 in verhueto n, .beirllch Trlnk«o,.cr tnu.Wn .

Dor Sochvor.toondigo, Jr. Ivy .a, Ung, tuor dlo -nkln S obohoerdc in
Bozug out die u.onra..oro*porincntc. Sr nobn oclbrt on oinou droltocgi-
gen Scperinunt tuU, -oohrond do- or 2.400 ecu -oorm.oor oinnohn and
doou 108 Kolorion Uo.jUcn in dor For- von aucl-koltcn. Er UU untor
ouagoaprochonor Snti-oo.ocrun; und -or „obo doron, KoUuolnotlonon * u b*.
kooo»n. din twoltor Frolwilligor bol dlooon :*p.rW« „.hu on »nig
uobor oinou Tog 2.000 =0- oln uni bokor d.rirtl;o. Srbrvchcn Ind Diorrhoo,
80.. do. Bcp«in.nt •«, «M«, (JU 9038-9). «on vorglolcb.

douit dio -ong. dv. von Boiglbocci. 9cr.uch*.„r.oncn getrunkonon boor-
wosaors. Wogon »i..on.cnrftUcnor Unt.rt.gon u„t-r U. irkun, do. koor-
....or. out uvn uonachlicbon noorpor .loho Froiokoll S. S039-41. Dr. Ivy
-lo. out bo.tiur.to idor.pruc.cn. in dor 2ou S cnou... S o VoUhonlt., do.
S«ch.ur«.o„ulgon tuor dio /ortoidigung, bin. Or. Ivy booougto, d,„
dlu.o bporlud. our F.rt.toUung dor Trinkborkolt do. n.ch dor florko-
kotbodo buhondolton ..u«wm«. vooUig unnootlg wn. m olnor holbon
Stundo boottu do. out «bcU«hu. -..go footgo.tollt Gordon koonnon. (8.
9043-4). Er crkWu. do., l.ax, cdu .„n™.r odor Berkotit toogli.h
in Munigur ol. 12 logon .on Tod borbuituobron morion. 3ol 500 ccn toog-
lich und untor lduolon a-dln„-ur. a -on word. Toi o-.rl.chon dor 8. end 14.
Tog ointrotun. (h. 5045). Die urlcloorung in Borlcbt uobor dio T.guneon
vou. 1,. und 20. -ol 1944, do., bol 3unu„ von boHto-. M . r *, d t .u„d_
holt..choodigu„-on innortolb .pout.*™, .ucb. T.gun, und nit don Tod.
innorbolb .po..tv rt «,. tvoolt Togun .u rvchnon ,oi. lot m
richtig. (K. <jOUU).


- a -


SC330ZDER


Dieses Dokuaent zaigt, dass das Experi¬
ment fuor eine Dauor von 12 Tagen geplant war. Dr. Ivy sagte aus,
os sol unnoetig, laengor als drei bis vier Tage &:periaonto auszu-
fuohron, ua zu zoigon, dass Dorkatit genau so ontwaessornd wio
Uoorwasser ist. (R. 90U6). Er orklaorto, diese Experioante haotton
nur dann Sinn, wam festgostollt wordon solltf wio lango Honschon
nit 500 cca odor 1000 cen Hoorwassor taoglich an Lobon bloibon
koonnton. Rs ist klar, dass dor Vorsuchsplan ait Todosfoollon
rochneto. (R. 90U6-7).

Dr. Ivy sagto aus, dass nach scinoa Studiua dor waohrond dca
Vorloufos dor Dcporiaonto angoforti^Un Tabjllon zu schliosson, dio
Boobaohtungsporiodo ruoh Ion Sxporlnonten xu kurz war, ua fostzu-
stollon, ob sich boi don Vorsuchapjr3on_ijfcpactcr auftrotando
Schaodon zoigon wuordon. (R. 90li9)« Dio Ergobnissu dor Vorsucho
■ind wlssonscJiaftlich niciit zuvurlaossi.,. (3. 9051).

Dr. Ivy wius darnuf hin, dass dio Tabollo dor Vorsuchspurson
3 bowios, dass sio boi mohroron Qelogonhslton vor Schwaocho nicht
stohon und lhr Blutiruck nicht (.ctwsson wordon konnUi. (R. 9052).
Das war oino dor Vorsuciuporsonen ir. dor Hunger- und Durstgruppo.

An 29. August orhiolt sio oino Coronirv- ind an 30. und 31. August
oino fitrychnin-Sinspritxunr,. Dioso boiden Drogon sirvd Horzstiaulan-
tion und das klinischo dild aoi^.t, ^.ass dio 7crsuch»pv.rson krank
odor durch die Bcperlzunto -xr'tlich ontkraeftot war. (R. 9053).
Acht bis vlorzohn Tago ist boi starken ’’aonnom dl^ Zolt , dio sic
untor Hunger und Durst boi i.'oalon !ln;ur > n aa Lobun bleibon.

(R. 9053).

Dr. Ivy bczcujto, dass nach don Er^ebnis soines Studiuas dor
klinischon Aufzoichmrv.cn, die Vcrsuchsp-rsonon 3, 1U, 36, 37, 39,
31, 23 (odor 30), 25, 28 und 29 wauhroni der Erporioento krank


waren.


S3K.CSD5R

Dio Vorauchaperaonon 3, 23 (odor 30) uni 25 waron be seniors krank
und oa bestoht die Jfoeglichkcit, daas sie infolgo der Expcrinontc
dauorndun Sc hade n davontrugen odor star bon. (R. 9053-9).

Dio Vorauchaporaon, duf die sich dio 7eraerko auf dor Ruock-
eoito der Tabello C—23 bozogen, war so hr krank und lag lc Xcca.

(Ivy, R. 9061). Dio vor. dea Anseklagton Beiglbocck vorgonoanorcn
Aondorungen in don atonographiachon Kotizcn lasaon die Veraucha-
poraon in einea beaaoron Zuatani orschoinen, ala aio tatsaochlich
war. (Ivy, R. 9062-3). -tor in diesen Kotizon onraehnto Bulbuaroflex
bedeutot daa Prusaon Jos Augapfols, ua dio Schwere doa Konaa feat-
zuatollon. "Tonus lor Augaopfol ist schbcht" zeigt, dass dor Blut-
druck niodrig und dio Zirkulation acnlocht war. Daa iat oin achloch-
toa Prognoatikon und koonnfco buvoratononion Tod bodouUn. (R. 9065).
Dioao Notizon zuigon, daaa ;or Zuatarxl Jor Vorauchapcraon gofaohrlich
w.or und sofortigo Ararondung oli»r Hoilthurapio orfordorto. aio Nach-
bcobachtun,,ap«.'riolo boi dor Vorauchaporaon 23 daoerto vior Togo und
boi dor Vorauchaporaon 30 fuonf Togo. Ora war voollig ungonuo,;ond.
Dioao Vorauchaporaon haotto atorben koonnen, wonn aio nicht richtig
gopflogt wordon waoro. (Ivy, r. 9065-6).

Dr. Ivy aogtc aua, daaa von don UU Vcrsuchaporaoncm 13 boi
oinor odor oohroron Oal-gonhoiten nicht atohen konnton, Fiobor
hatton, Horzataorkcnittol fcrauchton odor bowuastlos waren, und zwar die
Vorauchaperaonun 3, U, Hi, 21, 23, 25, 28, 29, 32, 36, 37, 39 und 1*0.
(R. 9067-8). Dio uiJesatattlichc Srklnorung Sauers, daaa or durch
gowiaae Bloktrokardiograar-o, die or von don V«rsuchaperaonon nachtc,
SynptOM von Horzachwaocho entJockto, wird von Ivy boataetigt. (Ivy,

R. 9069).

ftach Dr. Ivys Ansicht iat Jcnand, dor aich oinen Szporioent
freiwillig untorsioht koin Frotwilli^er aohr,

- 1*3 -


SCHR03DSR


worm or waohrend dea Verlaufs dcs ricperimentea, nachden or un Ent—
laasung gebeton hat, danit fortxufahrcn gezwungen wird. (R. 9076-7)•

Daa Zeugnis dea Sachverstaendigon fuer dio Vertcidigung,Voll-
hardt, 1 st vollkcrcen unzuvorlaoasig. Obglaich Vollhardt nit dieaon
Verauchen In Dachau nicht daa Goringate zu tun hatto, aprach or ala
Zeut-e verachiedontlich in stark parteiischur 'Toiao uober Dingo, von
da non or umoojlich Kenntnia gehabt haben kana. Sr bostand s.B. da-
rauf, daa a die Verauchaperaonen in Dachau aich fro i will ig geneldet
haotten. Er bezougte, daaa Beiglbocck vor doa Boginn dor Experiment®
droi Person#n wogon ihroa koorporlichen Zuatandea auaachied und dasa
aioh aofort droi andare freiwillig noldoton. (R. 81i57-8). Sogar
Boiglboock ato11to koine solcho 3ohauptung auf. Sr sagte, er halt®
oa fuor "ganz ausgoachloaaon, daaa die Vorauchapcrsonon daa nootig
hatten, rfaasor aua den Schouorlappon zu trinkon, derm oa atandon Ja
imor Luftachutxoimor cait Passer da. .?onn aio also trinkon wollton,
brauchten aio nur don Kopf hinoinzuatockon." (R. 8Jj67). Sa iat zaohr
ala oondorbor, daaa Vollhardt dio a wlaaen aollto, wo or doch nio
in Dachau war. Er hielt oa fuor ganz unaooglich, daaa irgondoino dor
Vorauchaporaonon Krnenpfo hatto, obgloich Vcrauchsporson 29 nach don
obun angofuohrton Notizon nacfwoislich Kraocpfe und organiacho An-
faollo hatto. Obgloich Vollhardt xugab, daaa die kliniachon Notizon
zoigten, oino Anzahl dor Vorauchaporaonon hatto aich heinlich Trink-
waaaor boachafft und obgloich Boiglboock xugab, daaa oinigo dor Vor¬
auchaporaonon ihren Ur in wogsehuottetor. (R. 8865), war Vollhardt ganz
8 ichor, daaa die Vorauchaporaonon alios FTeiwilligo waren.

Vollhardt atudiorto dio kliniachon Nctizen nicht aolbst, sondorn
uobergab aio zur Auswertung oinon 25jaohrigon Assiatenton.


SCHRCEDER


(R. 8132). Er gab *u, daaa er sich auf 3eachreibunscn dor Expori-
aonto atuetzto, die seit doa Prozesabeginn Ton 3©ckcr-Freyaong und
Boiglboock gecacht werden waror.. (R, 81*38). ICoder Vollhardt noch
aoin Aaaiatont hatton fruohoro Srfahrungen uober Hcerwaaaerproblcne.
(8^51). Vollhardt fcereugtc, daaa or auf Anrogung doa Vcrtoidisora an
fuonf soiner aorztlichcn Aaaiatenton oin froiwilligoa Exporinont
auafuehrto. Soino Verauchaperaonen trankon taeglich 500 ccn nachgo-
machtoa yeorwaaaer und orhiolten 1600 Kalorion pro Tag. (R. 8WiO-2).
Vior dor Vorauchaperaonon aetxton d&a Exporinont 5 Tago und oinor
6 Tago lang fort. Dio lotztore Vorauchspcraon trunk an lotzton Tag
woitoro 500 ccn. Iter Z*eck dioaor =3cporinonto war, foatzustollon, waa
Jonand, dor aich oinea Uoorwaaaorsixperiiwnt untortioht, lcidot.

(R. 8U*3). Vollhardta Vcrsuchaporaorwn arboitoten in dor Klinik
woitor, wonn aio ouch in aelbon Z i a n or aaaon und achliefon. Er
woiaa nicht, ob alo ina oortlicho Kino gingon odor waohrond doa Vor-
laufa dor Bxporinonto dio Klinik au andoron Z-ocken vorlioaaon.

(R. 8115). Vior dor Vorauchaporaonon brachon an 5» Tago ab, noil
aio oino Vorabrodung nit oinor Jungen Dan* hatton. (R. 81*50). Sr
aagto aua, daaa aoino Vorauchaperaonon an don oraton twoi Togon
koinon atarken Durst litton, daaa dor “urat an dritton Tag unai>-
gonohn wurdo, an vlorton Tag aich vominderto und an fuonf ton Tag
aohr atark wurdo. Dio Vcrauchaporson, dio accha Tago long aua-
hiolt, aagto, daaa aio aohr wonig unborachiod apuorto. Alio
arboitoton waohrond doa Sxporisonta woitor. (R. 81*53). Ea iat
offonaichtlich, daaa sich diesos Exporinont auf keino Woiae nit
donon in Dachau Torgloichon laosat. Waohrond oinigo dor Dachauor
Vorauchaporaonon boi vielon Oolcgonhoiten zu schwach waron, un
ihron Blutdruck genes sen tu bokccrwn, koenton Vollhardta Voraucha-
poraonon ihro Arbeit fortsotron.


SCIT-tOEDSE


Waohrond Vollhardta Versuchapcraonon geschulto Aerttc waron, dio
dos Intorcsses halbor an don Experlr»nton teilnahaon,’ Jodorseit
auaacheidon konnton und waehrend dea Exporlaenta ihran oisenen
Dingon nachgohon durfton, fehlto boi dan Dachauer Expcrlaonton
Joder olnzolna dloaer wichtigen Faktcron. (R. 8b79). Dio arren
Zigeunor durfton nlcht auaacheidon, wo nr, os ihnen gerade paasto.

Sio wuaaton nlcht, wlo lango dio Sxporiix-nto dauarn aollton, aio


hatten koine Bataotigunisfroiheit, ale hatton koin Intoroaso an
don Experlnonton. Vollhardta Achtung fuor dioao Zigouncr gcht
klar aua aoiner Erk lie rung hcrvori "Solcho Lcuto fin dan ja inner
lrgondwo olno Uooglichkoit tun Botruogen.* (R. 8U68). Daaa Voll-
hardt von don ExporLnonton, uobor dio or Zougnla absulogon vorgab,
nichta wuaato, goht aua aolnor Auaaago bctuoglich ihror Dauor
horvor. Er orklaortc a.B., daaa in dor 500 ccn Borkatlt-Qruppo
dio Voraucho nach aocha Tagon abgobrochon wurdon. (R. 8 U 62 ).

Dio kllnlachon Tabolion, dio Yollhardt In Boaltt hatto und auf dio
aolno Zougonauaaago alch aiyobllch atuctato, tolypn, daaa dio Dauor
dor Voraucho In dloaor Gruppo alch bla auf ncunolnhalb Tago or-
atrockto und nit Auanahao von 1*0! Faullon atota sccha Ta 6 o uobor-
achrltt. Er aagto aua, daaa die Heorwasacrgruppo auch nach aocha
Tagon aufhoorto, waohrond die kllnlachan Tabolion tolgen, daaa
oinlgo von lhnon bla tu sohn Tagon dauorton. In der Hungop- und
Duratgruppq hoorton alo, nach solnor Auaaago, nach vlor bla fuonf
Tat,on auf, waahrorxi dio Tabollo doch tol^, daaa aio fuonfolnhalb
bla aiobonolnhalb Tago dauorton. (R . 8162-3). Noin, Vollhardta
Zougonauaaago waoro in dor Tat oln unzuvorlacaaiger Ersatz fuor
dio Krankontabellon gowoaon.

Dio Auaaago dor BJlastungatougon bow.iat, dass dio ••oorwassor-
exporinonte Word und


- U6 -


SCHRCEDrR


Qualon zeitigten. Dor ocaterroichiacho Zeuge Vorlicok, den in
Jahro 1939 wagon "Vorbereitung zun ifechverrat" dcr Protcaa go-
nacht und der zu vier Jahren Zuchthaua verurteilt wordon war,
wurdo in Maori 19UU nach Dachau uobcrate lit und arboiteto waehrond
dor Jtoorwaaaorexporinonte auf der Verauchaataticn ala HilTapflogor.
(R. 9383-5). Einer dor Nachtpflegor, dor oinachliof, wurdo in oino
Strafkoapanio veraotzt. (R. 9386). Zunindcat cine der Verauchapcr-
aonon hatte uinon heftigon XranpfanfaU. (R. 9386). Bei oinor Go-
logonhoit verachuctteto VorUcok otwaa Trinkwaaaor auf don Bodon
und licaa don Lappen licgon, don or boin Aufwiachcn bonutzt hatte.
Dio Vorauchaporaonen orgriffon don achnutzigcr. Lappen, ua das
Kaaaor auazuaaugen. Boiglboock drohto, er wordo, wonn daa wiodor
vorkccxno, lhn in daa Sxporiaont atocken. (R. 9387). Dio Voraucha-
poraonon hat ton alch nicht froiwUlig gore ldo t. VorUcok aprach
nit oinigon dor tochechiachon Vorauchaporaonen, die iha orzaohltcn,
aio aoion In oinen andoron Lagor aufgofordort wordon, aich zu olnon
guton Auaaonkocnanio frolwillig zu ooldon, und orat ala aio nach
Dachau kaaon, fanion sio horaua, daaa aio aich den Sxperinontcn
untorziohon aollton. (R. 9388, 9392). Er boxougto, daaa dio Vor-
auchaporaonon tachechiacho, polniacho, ungarlacho, ocaterroichiacho
und doutacho Staataangohoorigo waren. (R. 9388). Einlgo dor Vor-
auchaporaonon waren zionlich krank, und or hatte don Eindruck, aio
wuordon nicht anhr lango Id bon. Dngofaohr droi Monatc nach don
Exporinwnton traf er oino dor Vorauchaporaonen naaona Franz; dor
crzaohlto lhn, daaa oinos der Optor dor Eeporinonto boroita go-
storbon aol. (R. 9390).

Dor Zougo Laublngor, dor dio Vcrauchaporson Nr. 7 war, aagto
aua, daaa er in Maori 19U3, woil or Zigeuncr war, von der Ooatnpo
rorhaftet wurdo. & wurdo in Fruehjahr 19U3» ohne daas or wegen
irgendeinea Vorbrochens


SCHP.OZDER


vor oinar. Richter gostellt worden war, nach Auschwitz gebraoht.

(R. 10199). Spaeter wurdc er auf oini^a ‘oehan nach 3uchenwald
ueberstellt und, waehrend er dert war, zusarcan nit andoren Hacft-
lingon gofragt, ob or sich fucr oin Saeuberungskorcando in Dachau
froiwillig neldon wollo. Die Haoftlinge hatter, den Eindruck, dass
dio Vorhaeltnisse in Dachau bessor soien, und so willigten sio oin
zu gehen. Nach ihrer ^nkunft in Dachau wurdon sio aerztlich unter-
sucht, geroontgt und in die Vorsuchsstation gobracht. (R. 10200).
Beiglboeck sagto ihnen, sie sollten an den HeerwasacrexporiJMnt
toilnohren und das war das orsto Hal, dass sie davon hoerton.

(R. 10201). Laubin^er idontifiaiorte Boiglboeck auf der Anklago-
bank. (R. 10202). Er sagto Boislboock, or habo awoi Magcnopora-
tionen gehabt, abor Beiglboeck crlaubto ihc nicht, sich auszu-
schllosoon. Beiglboeck fragte die Vorsuchspersoncn nicht, ob sio
sich froiwillig noldon wollton, und sio noldoten sich auch nicht
froiwillig. (R. 10203). Laublngcr, dor in der Schaofor-Onippo war,
bokan 12 Tago lang Schaofor-.assar und fastoto aindostons noun
Togo lang. (Siohe Tabolle 7). Sr wurdo so schwach, dass or kaun
aufstohon konnto ■ Dio Vorsuchsporsonon bekaaon nur waohrond dos
orston Togos nach don Versuch bosondoro Kost. Beiglboeck hatto
ihnon Extrarationon und leichto Arboit vorsprcchon, aber dioso Vor-
sprochun^on minion nicht gohalton. (R. 10205). Eino dor Voranchs-
porsononicrouchto dio andoron xu uoborredon, das Trinkon des Itoor-
wassors zu verwci.jcm. Beiglboeck drohte, ihn wo gen Sabotage auf-
haongon zu lasson. Dio Vorsuchspcrson orbrach spaotor nach dor Sin-
nahno von Hoorwasser, worauf Beiglboeck iha das Ueorwasscr durch
olno Magonroohrc beibringan lioss. (R. 10207). Eine andcrc Vorsuchs-
poroon wurdo a ns Bott gobundon und ihr Hoftpflaster uebor don Mund
goklobt, well sio sich otwaa Trinkwasser und Brot verschafft hatto.
Dio noiston dor Versuchspcrsonen waron tschochische, pointsche und
russische Staatsangehoerlge und ungefachr acht waren Deutsche.


SCHR02DER


(R. 10208). Elne Anzahl dor Vorauehspcrsonen hatten Anfaello von
Doliriua, zwei wurden in das Hospital geschafft und Laubingor 3ah
sio nicht oohr wiedcr. (R. 10209).

Dor Zouge Hollenreiner beatootigto in alien wichtigon punkten
Laubingors Auaaage. Sr bexeugte, dass die Versuchsporsonen sich
nicht frciwilli- goswldot hatten. (R. 10509), und dass die neisten
davon fttchtdoutscho waren. (R. 10513). Hollenroiner sagto forncr
aus, dass Boiglboock koinorloi Sorgo fuer die Vorsuchsporsonon an
don Tag logto, sondorn in Gegontoil, sio xu orschicsson Jrohte,
wonn aio sich orrogton. (Bs duorftc wohl kaun notwonrtig soin, toi
Vorauchcn an Frciwilligon oinon Rovolvor xu tragcn). Sr hatto koin
Uitloid ait ihncn, ala sie vor Hungor ur.d Durst doliriorten.

(R. 10510). Dor Zeugc Hollonrciiwr griff Boiglboock loldor vor
Goricht taotlich an. Dioso icpulaivc Tot dos Zougon spricht Jodoch
staorkor ala Baondo von Aussagon fuor dio unoonschlicho Bchandlung
dor Vorsuchsporsonon und dio Leiden, dio sio infolgo dor Voraucho
orduldoton. Wir koennon vcrsichort soin, dass Hollonroirwr sich
nicht froiwlllig genoldot hatto. Ala Hollonroiner soin Bcnohnon don
Goricht orklaorto, bcxoichnoto or Boiglboock ala "Hoordcr".

(R. 10233—U).

Dor Zouge Tschofonig wurdo in Novanbor 19U0 nach Dachau go-
bracht und bliob dort bis zun April 19U5. Er war politlschor Oo-
fangonor. (R. 9331). Er ist gojonwSrtig Hit .lied dcs Kacrntnor
Landtags in Oostorroich. (R. 9332). Von Sorc«r 19U2 bis xun Snde
war or Loitor dor Roontgonstation in Dachau. (R. 933k). Er
untorsuchto den Zigeurwrtranaport in Scmcr 19UU vor don Boginn
dor Bxporinonto und achiad cino Anzahl ala ungcoignct a us. (R. 933h-
5). Er sah Boiglbocck


SCHR03DSR


schrmla in Lager und In dor Roentgonstation. (R. 9335). Wachrond
dor Expcrir*nte wurden eino Ansahl kranker Vorsuchsporsonen zur
Untorauchung nach dor Roentionatation gebracht. Ihr koerpcrlichor
Zuatand hafcto aich infol^e dor Experinonto bedeutond vorachlechtert.
Er hoorto, daaa cine dor Verauchaporaonan einon Wahnsinnaanfall
hatto. (R. 9336). Hach der Becndigung dor Experio&nte wurden droi
dor Vorauchspcraonen nach dor Station fuer innoro Krankhoiton go-
bracht. Einor lag auf oinor Bahro und konnto nicht gohen. Alio wurden
von Tachofonig goroentgt. (r. 9338). Es war uoblich, daaa die Roaul-
tnto dor Roontgenuntorauchungon an die Krankonhauaatationon goachickt
wurdon, wo aich dio Haoftlingo bofandon. Tachofenig orhiolt oinon
ofilzlollon Bofohl von dor Station fuor innoro Krankhoiton, daaa or
uobor don Pationton auf dor Bahro keinon Boricht ru oratatton
braucho, da or zwoi Tago nach acinor EinUoforung goatorbon aoi.

Dor Statlonaarst no Idoto, daaa dor Tod infold dor Moorwaaaoroxpori-
monto olngotroton aoi. Tachofonig proof to dio ToUnachoino aolbat.

(R. 9339).

Sogar nr. Stoinbauor, dor Vortoidigor Boiglboocka, hat aich
augonachoinlich uoborzougon laaaon nuoaaon, daaa dioao Sxporlnonto
Qualon boroitoton. Er aagto boi acinor Erklaorung, warua or oinon
Toil oirvoa Dokuoontoa zuruockgchalton ha bo, doron Vorlago daa Qo-
richt angoordnot hatto i "Ich noochto uobor dio Vorauchaporaonon,
dio Schrccklichoa orlitton, nichta Schlechtoa aagon." (R. 9378).

F * Hoohon- un d Kaoltovorauche (Anklageachrift, Ziffor 6 (A) und (B).

Schroodor hat auageaagt, daaa or orat nach Kriogaondo von don
Hoohonvcrauchen Ruff a, Ronborga urvd Raachora gehoert habo. (R. 3612).
Sr hat goaagt, daaa or uobor dioao


- 50 -


SCHR0TO2!


Versuche niecals alt Ruff, Roafcerg Oder Becker-Froyseng gosprcchen
halx:. (R, 3613). Er hat ausgesagt, dass er von don Kaeltevorsuchon
im Februar odor Maerz 19U3 erfahron babe, als er eine Abschrlft des
Berichtes uober die Huornber-jcr Kacltetagung la October 19U2 orhielt,
auf dor Holaloehner uni Rase.tor veber dlo Versuche gesprochen hatton.
(ii. 3615). Er mcechto das Goricht glaubon nachcn, das 3 or nlemala
oino Abschrlft des von Holsloehner, Finke und Raschor vorfassten,
orsohoopfondon Schlussberichtoa ueber dlo Kaeltovorsucho orhalton
habo. (R. 3615), Man kann sich nur achwer Joaandon vorstellon, dor
nit groosseror Wahrscholnllchkelt dlesen Borlcht alt solnen wichtigen
Schlussfolgorur.^on orhalton haotto, «onn nicht dlo wonigon Lul't-
flottenaorsto, xu do non Schroodor dawls gohoorto. Schroodor solbst
hat dlo Warnbadaothodo xur Bohanilunj von Srfriorungen als die vlort-
wichtlgsto oilltacrxedlxlniacho Entdcckung waehrorx! des Krioges in
Deutschland boxuichnot. (R. 3616). Abor scln Lougnen 1st verstaond-
lich, da dor Schlus 3 borlcht olno orschbcpfcndo Bcschroibung dor Vor-
sucho, olnschliosslich dor Todosfaollo, gibt. (NO-Ji28, Ankl.Bow. 91,
R. 252).

Schroodor hat uvagosagt, dasn cr nicht gewusst ha bo, daso Holx-
loohnor, Finko und Raschor boi diosen Vcrpuchen xusaaacnarboitoton.
( l( . 3625). Abor do* Bcrlcht uobor die Kacltotagung, don er xugibt
orhalton und goloson xu haben, bosngt diop ausdruockllch. (NO-liOl,
Ankl.Bow. 93 , r. 309). Ctowohl or bozougtc, dass or nicht davon go-
wusst habe, dass Mensehen-Versuche daalt verbundon waren, nacht
dlosor Borlcht .lies solbst fuor den Laien vidlkoenon klar. (R. 3626-
9)« Dio borlchtoton kllnlschen Fdntelhclten lachon es absolut un-
mooglich, dass lrgondein Arxt auch nur oi mn i.ugenblick dor Hoinung
aoin konnte, dass es sich hior nicht ua Vorsudho hanJelte. Es waere
doch schwlorlg xu verstohon, wic roktale Tenperaturen boi olnoa Flio-
ger in Soenot genau gopruoft wordon konnte. Ranchers


- 51


SCffiOEZHR


war

Vortrag/teilwoiso wie folgt zusaeservgcfassti

"Ergaonzerxl su don Hitteilungen Holrloehners wird uebor
Beobachtungen berichtet, wonach alleinige Abkuehlung dor
Nackengegond auch bei aehrstuendigcr I»uer nur geringor
(bis zu 1° C) Senkungen dor Koorpertenperatur ohrv* Ver-
aendenmg des Blutzuckorspiegels odor dor Herzfunktion
beirirkt. Kontrollen dor roktalen .Traperatur warden durch
fkissungen in Hagon durchgefuohrt, wobei sich voallice
Ue bore ins t ironing orgab." (NO-WJl oben).

Nichta kconnto einieutigcr soin,als dasa dies Exporinonte an

Konschon waren and Schroedor wussto es als or es las.

Er gab zu, dass ihn Bocker-Freyseng In )fai 19UU von don

Holzloohnorvorsuchon in Dachau oraaohlte. (R. 3622). In Horbat

19UU sprach Schroeder nit Holxloehnor uober dio Kaellovorsucho und

gewann don Einiruck, dass diocor aohr depriaiort uebor dio ganzo

Angolagonhoit war. Dor Solbataord dos lotztoron bostaetigto

spaotor dioso Aiinahco. (Schroodor, R. 3621, 362U).

Dass Schroodor alios uober Raachcr und dio frueher durchgo-

fuohrton Exporinonto dor Luftwaffe in Dachau wussto, wird durch

soinon Brief von 7. Juni 19Ui an Himlor botroffs dor Moorwassor-

oxporinonto unbostroltbar bowioson. Er lautet ausxugswoiso wio

folgtt


. Dio oinzigon frueheren Exporinonto, dio durch dio Luftwaffe in
Dachau vorgonoemon wurden, waron Hoohcn- und Kaoltcvor3ucho und
Raschor nahn an boidon toil. Gluocks ven 1VHA sagto, ala or sich
zu Schroodors Bitto aoussorto.


SCHRCZDrH


da 3 a "gogen die Durchfuchrur.g der voa Chef dea Sanitaetswesans
der Luftwaffe crboterven Versuchsreihe in der Versuchsstation
Raacher in Konsontration3lager Dachau von hier aua keinerlei
Bodenken orhoben werden." (NO-179, Ankl.Bew. 135* R- UB5). Soil
man annehaon, dasa Oluccks sehr ueber die Luftwaffonvcraucho
Raschora wussto ala der Chef des Luftwaffon-Sanitaetswesons 7
Ein eindeutigerer Boweis fuer seine Kenntnis diosor verbrecherischen
Exporinwnte koennte nicht erbracht werden.

In Hinblick auf 6chroedors Konntnis von don vorhergegangenen
Vorbrochon, zusasnengonoccon nit seiner Stellung als Kccaandour dos
Luftwoffen-Sanitaetsdienstes 1st os unuagaenglich, dass or der Bc-
guenatigung dor Hoehon- und KaolUaordo fuer achuldig bofundcn
wird. Dor Beguenetlgung aacht aich schuldig, wer, ofrrohl or woiso,
dass ein Vorbrochon begangcn w or don 1st, doa Vcrbrochcr Schutz
gowaohrt odor ihn hilft, aich der Verhaftung, dor Vorurtoilung odor
dor Urteilsvollstrockung zu entziehon. err dor Beguenstigung
schuldig 1st, unterliogt dersolbon Strafo wio dor Haupttaotor.
(Whartoma Criminal Law (1932), Bufl 1, Abachnitt 281). Schroedor
vorkoorperto solbst dos Gosots dos Luftwaffon-Sanltaotsdionstcs.

Er wussto, dass Vorbrochon von Huff, Roaberg, suits, Holzloohnor
und Finko bogangon wordon warcn. Er uoborsah nicht nur dicso Vcr-
brochon und untemahn nichts gogon sic, sondern untorstuotztc auch
trots seiner Konntnis davon woiterhin aohnlicho Vorbrochon soitons
Roao3 und Haagons und befahl porsoonlich die Vornahno dor vcr-
brochoriachon Mccr*assorver5ucho«

III. Schluso.

Von alien Sanitaetsdienstcn doa Dritton Roichos war dor dor
Luftwaffe vielleicht der aktivsto auf dea Gebict vorbrechcrischer
Experiment*, die SS nicht ausgencmen. Ala Cfcof dos Luftwaffen-
Sanitaetsdienstes traogt Schroedcr


SCHROEDrS


“1° kauptaaechliche Verantwortlichkeit fuer ihre Begehung. siehe
Taaaahita, oben.

Roao, ala Schrcoiera Bcratervder tygieniker, lei to to eine
Reiho von Fleckfieberverauchen in Euchenwald in die Kege, die
twigchon Kaerz und Juni 19U« von zur Pruefung von ihn zur Ver-
fuegung geatollton Pruofimpfstoffen durchgefuohrt wurdon. Secha
Varauchaporaonen atarbon ala Folge davon. Die verbrecheriachen
Flockfioborveraucho von Haagon, einea Ihtorgebenen Schroedera, in
don Konzontratlonalagern Schiraock und Natzwoilor wurdon von
Sc hrcoder, Roao und Bocker-Freyaeng unteratuotzt. Dor Luftwaffe rv-
Sanitaetsdionat war uobor den verbrechoriachon Charaktor dieaer
Experinonto voollig in Jildo. Viole Vorauchaperaonon wurdon ala
Folgo davon gotoetet. Schroedora oigonor Stabachof, Kahnt, achriob
an Haagon und fragto an, ob aoino Exporinente die Typhuacpcdomio
in Natzwoilor voruraacht haotton. Schroodor aolbat boauchto Haagon
in Straaaburg In Vorlauf dor Sxpiriacnto. Noeh in August 19 Wj or-
hiolt Haagon woitoro Ooldzuwondungun von dor Luftwaffo zwocks Fort-
aotzung aolnor kriminollcn Forachung. Haagon nahn auch andoro
vorbrochoriacho Experinonto vor, oinachl. solchor nit Oaa, dio
don Tod von nohroron Vorauchaporaoncn voruraachton. Wlacr, oin
Luftwaffon-SanitMtsoffizior, orbeitoto nit Hirt boi dor Durch-
fuohrung von doaaon Qoavorauchon in Natzwoilor zuaarcon. Haagon
planto dio Vornahno von Oolbauchtvorauchon an Hacftlingor. zuaanmcn
ait andoren Sanitaotaomzioror. dor Luftwaffo.

Schroeder ordnoto porsoonlich die Vornahno dor Moerwaasor-
voraucho an, die don Tod zunindoat einor Verauchsporaon vorur-
aachton und unau3aprochlicho Qualon fuer violo andere. Sr aachto
aich dor Boguenatigung dor Kooher>- und Kaolteveraucho achuldig.

Kcinorlol Mllderungagruonde koennen fuor Schr 00 dor vorgo-
bracht worden.


SC HR CEDES


Er hatte Kenntnia davon und auch die JCacht, diese Verbreohon au
vorhindorn. Aber aelne Schuld liegt nicht onr darin, daaa or ca
untorlieaa, kontrollierond oinaugroifen. Seine Dlonstatello or-
toilte die Forachungaauftraege, in Vcrfolg deron die Verbrochen
bogangen wurden. Seine Dienatatelle ate 11 to daa Gold und die 3in-
richtungsr. foor ihre Vornahaa zur Vorfucgung. seine thtergebenon
fuehrton dio Exporiaento durch. Berichto uebor dloso Scporiaento
gingon oin, er peraoenlich ordnete die Vornahs» einor Roiho
hoochat gofaahrlicher ExpAriaonte an KonzentrationalagerkaeftUn<;en
an* Ihn trifft eine viol ^ 003 acre schuld ala aoine gohoraaaon
Untorgabonon*

"Endo"


Ich, prod Lax x 01*6 207 boataotigo hiornit, daaa ich durchaua
vortroub ait dor ungliachon und doutachon Sprache bin und da 33
daa Voratehonde oino wahrheitagcoaoaac und richtigo Uoboractaung doa
Eusta’azabTaeacndon SChluaaborichtoa dor Voroinigton Staaton von
Anorilca gogcn Cekar Schroodor.


1 Auguat 19U7


Fred Lax
X 9L6 207


SEVERS


■sngusKapsG

Uhtcr Punkt I dcr AnlOa^schrift uixd Siarera beschuldist, dasa er
c!t nit andoren Fersomn in Verfolge einea geoainsaaon Vcrhabens: *U ciner
Verschroorung und Uebereir.kunft zuaamjngefindon hat, un mdisinischo Ex-
rorimnto an Ifenachon ohm doron lustin-ung voraunahaan; untar Punkt II
\r.d III (Kriegaverbrochon und Voxbruchon goien dio Honachlichkeit), dasa
or Ilaupttnotor, Toilnehmr, .\n3tiftcr,Vorschubleistondor geuoaon iat,
eolno Zustinroung ga£,ebon und nit Fl«Di»n und Untomchrcn in Verbindung
gostarxlon hat, dio die Durchfuahnn* aouisiniachor Exporiaonto an Itorv-
achon ohm Zuatianung dor Botrcffondcn sun Oojonstand hat ton, dio Sraor-
duns von 112 Judon, wolcho sur VorvoUataondiguig oinor Skolottaannlung
auscoaucht nordon wnrcn, untor Punkt IV, dasa or dor SS angohoort hat,
oino strrvfcbaro Hdlung mch .\rtitol n,.schnitt 1(d), doa Kontrollrata-

jusotsoa hr. 10.

I. ;r::ti.u::o mu VER^raRTiiML

Dor .'.ngakltlflto Slovors tr.t tor BSMP 1929 »ol «* ■» bl ”

1931 ■llcll-d. Sr omouorto ool"> mtsU.dwh.ft 1 " dl0 “ r P * rtoi “

Joh w 1933. (Siovoro, R. 5661). a. 1935 tr.t or dor 33 .of oino Anro-
jvuve llln lor. hln bol. 2r .tlo G in dio»or Or G »ni».tlon mn Rons oino.

3‘^mdortonTuchror. out. (Slovora, R. 5766-7.)

Von 1. Juil 1935 ab hi. ua X r io S Knd. »«■ Slovor. oln MltGlUd von

Hia’loro po^mnlichc. Stab uM Roicha E c 3 chno f t.nfmhror doa -Ahnonorbo",
(.•uikl. Dow. 31, HO-670, Siovora oido««tnttlicho Auaaago.)

1fcn Ahmnurbo war oino SS-Organisation,


*


9

*


s-iu hiomlor ux 1. uli 1955 gsgruendot natte. (*r. 5662). Iiach ihrea
otatut vo-. 1. Janvu: 1931 -.olltc ias iincnjrbo wisscnschaftlicfto forschun-
£cn uinsichtlicji a^r ..citur u..u dos -rbos Jcr nordischon uisso untor-
Btuot-cni uor Vorsta.'.- i:titc sicn ius HU-iler als ?ri03idont, Dr. Vuest
tlua .Curator and Siovors, -a. JoBcJwoftafuehrer s-s&-.xn. Siovers war fuer
aiu gcscnaeftlicho Organisation, dio Vorriltung and don naushait des
/imunoroos vorantwortiach. Sits dor uusollachaft war “erlin. (Siovors
uow. 7).

Siowra loistoto liauptsaochlicb EoihilXc zu und ntlia toil an don
votbrccnuriscitcn -wdizinischon 3-cpori-ajntun, dio dioso jiklajoachrift zum
''o u onataxid nat. dare., aus i./stitut fuor wehnartschaftlicho iwocktor-
Bcrnmg dos .Juvjn-rboB. Si-vorfl sigto o.us, ous iiusos ir.stltut dom «hnon-
^rbo ont Q og«.n suin^n .uonachor, auf Hisalors dofehl bin angogliodort wor-
u«. sol. ,.b«r oin von ilia scloat luogofortigtos -oka.ait bovuiot, daos
ur in dioso * hinsicht oinoa . oinoid goloastot Jut, -.lo auch soino ganzo
..UBoxgo unwonr - ir. in uo 26. .«n 1943 datiorton 3oricht butroffa

hirtn Sunf t ..isXoraCiiai i i, a. Hzw-lor ging, sigto or:

"Ui dioao ai*~ lo.uilicho (L.auktun and iiattonbokaoupfung, na-
dChors V.-rsucho) oich siefi-r auch noch orgebenden Korachun-
b ^r. i~ '.JiMAt.bii oinncitlicii Susoa-jnzafaBoon und dadurch
aio orgi.a8atori3Cl.-tac.'inisciK -Aircnfaclirung za urloicntom,
tcnligo ich vors

1) Jio 3-^rajnuang oinos lnstituts faor woiirwissunschaftlicho
iwoc.cforacnung ..nnonorbo.

2) dio dorofung von SS-HiuptstuntTaohr-r Frofcosor Dr. Itirt
zu-i tc^tigon -it^lioJ and 3-inc -rn-mnang zua Loitor dor
..btuilong K (Hart) 1-; Xr.stitut faor wohrwisscnschaftlicho
l » c c.tf o r scl iung.


Dio .o-o-jit^n vor. o-sclior «u s iJon ^uch hiur gut


SlSV'inS


untorzubnn- *n st in, sod&ss san lhn zua Loitor der ..btoilung
h (nacchar) ornennen koennte. ruer ein solches don iwocken
u^i Iruppo in orator Linie dionendes Inatitut Kaeren z.B.
diu rotMa.vagen oescruffungen lcichtor *.u begruonien und
v«Mt-jrL ic. s .',r, _la Mann sia unter das Haacn doa , -hncnerbo l
iil-in -n^iordvrt *cracn." (N0-2210, oul. Bow. 483, a.


„ui dioaon Vorachl-.j hir. achriub Hi^lor m Siovcra as 7. Juli 1942
in doaatn Klgunacho-ft ala :iwicha.«?cnA Ji'tsfuchrcr doa nhncnorbo und traf
alt, folgonao .uiordnung hinaichtlich dca .ihnvmrbo:


"1. Eir. inatitut fuor Hjnrviaaonachoftlicno 4vcckforachung zu
orrichtwn.

2. dio Forachung doa SS-Hiuptstunafuahrora Profosaor Ur. Hirt
m ..odir r.ur a^j^lichun .ola. tu untoratuetzcn und allc
oinacnlao c igon roracftungun und ..rboitun In cloicher oiao
zu foordom.

3. Jlu notvcnuigon ..pirate, Cfer&ctc, riilfaslttol und .Itar-
buitwr buruitzuatullon, b^zw. zu bcachiffon.

4. Ji, In •'-chau gcgvbcnon .-ooglichkoiton alt cinzuaotzon.

5. .*sig'jr. dor ..oaUn, ila oua .dttvln dcr .ofrcn-SS bervitgo-
otuUt wurden koonnun, alt doa Chuf dca SB- .irtachafta-
von-al'vungan^-ptx-ta .orbinJung aufzunchncn." (NO-422.
nllKl. Bu»f. 33 # ft. 136).


In aoinob. drtull troT dor Intvrnotioiulc .dlitacrgorichtahof dlo fol-
gunuo Fuatatullungi

"a«. Forschungainatitut, daa untcr doa X*aun -dinonorbo bokannt

d?V r if? SS i^ Up if UU ‘« tngugliodort. Za hoiast, daaa
dlo ..laaunocn-xftU.r, oic dioaor Orguiiaation wguhoortun,
hauptaiochxich shrcmitgllador dor SS Moron. la Voilauf doa
*ri„gua uurda Juwntrbu oin Inatitut four wohrcisscnschift-

ittT*' t das auagodohnto Bxperinonto

vornaiw, boi o-r.«n o«-b.ndo -umachon v«nrandot 1 cordon. Ein

Kiasur or. .Mtiur w.j- von dioaca Inatitut ingoatallt und nans
diuau Sxp:rluonto udt vollor nunntnla


SI2V3S


uea Ahnonorbo vor. closes wurdo von dec .yjichafoehror-SS,
aor cin '/orst-^ndsuitglied war, untorstuotzt und stand unter
seiner ScAir_-lorrschoft." (Transcript, 3. 16952-3).

..us dor ooxoisorhubur.g £ing horvor, aass Sievars ir. praktischcr
hinaicht das Hauptvolizugsorgan des .Jinonorbo war. In diestr tligenschaft
war or Himoler untsrstollt und eistattete dieseu rogelu-ossig ueber die
„ng*legennciton dor Goseilschzft Baricht. (Sievers, ... 4oo9;. Kicdurs
strong gehoi.no Korros»j*Iun- bezueglieh aos ahnonorbo ^ing an Sievora.
(KO-422, obon). Slovors soibst gab zu, dass dor Xurstor uost haeufig
von Berlin abwosend war u..d cs ist offenslchtlleh, dasa or Koino bodeu-
tonuo Iloilo spiwlto. (... >o6V-70). or. Siovors *ar Stallvortroter Jr.
i.ontzols, duo Loitors uoe O oscniortafuehrondon ©oirutos dos .*)ich3for-
rchungsratus. (IiO-670, .Jikl. 3cw. 31, h. 135). Irgondwann vor doa 18. Ko-
Voiubor 1943 "Urdu Siovors anachoir.end 2ua Loiter ditaos Vorstands bofoor-
dort. (,'0-3671, .uucl. Sow. 539, fc. 10363). d«r Bowels ist dafuor or-
bracht wordon, lass ttoi .tsiensiorschungsrat die /oroafun von --odizinischon
hxiwriirwnton an Konztmtratlonslsgarinsoasen untorstuutzto und foorderto.
Schon ira jozeuibur 1942 •..■u:d«. dor i^ichsforschungsrst vox ..eichsfinanz-
uiinistor u.a uin Gutftcnton uoboi oin arsuchon ua Joldslttol soitons doa
Koichsarztus bd Urawitz angegingcn. Jr. kentzel, Siovers un-zittolbaror
Vorgosetztor, gcnohiaigto -io *.crvorfuogungstullun£ von Gold-dttoln aa
25. ~aorz 1943 ndt duo BoaoriMn: "Sow,it sio zu^ Idoinoren loll fuur
den .vuabou wissunschaftlichor .j-boitaaooi.lichk^it-n gaivicht sind, bc-
ziohon sie sxch auascidiosalicu auf soicn*. .ngulogenhiitun, dir l.vMq.
lich nit doa dor ..offon-SS


: -r Vorfuagung stahendon -aerial (Hi.eftli.igc) durchfuohrb.tr sind, end
a&hor von kolnor sndar—» foracnanden Stella uebornasujn warden koennon."
(002-PS, aiutl. So. 39, ... 152). (-as Protokoli 1 st hior anrichtis and
soilto cine Vorwoisung aul ->o..u.Jontonbuch Hr. 1 ontnaltcn). -do .jxklago-
bahooraa lanktu die ..ufiorko—.kuit dca Gorichtshofs cof die Fuststullung
dus IuG lift Fall Hr. 1 lur., die wle folgt lautut:

"Lt -ua-i—euniung udt dor Vorwaltung dor Konzentrationslagcr
lwitetu die SS cine i-jlha von axparizanton an 1 abendon -on-
senun in dio .wiho, uio an Kriegsgofanganen odor' .Conzontra-
tionslagorinsassun rorgenon. en warden. Oiuse schlosson oin:
Kaultutod -vi ioutung darch vorgifteta Xuguln. Dio SS war
in dur Lago, .wgiarungsgoldar faor diaso .»rt Forschung ndt
dor 6 ogruondung bowllllgt su orhalton, dass ihr ..inschonnn-
torial zugaonglich soi, das andurun Stcllcn nicht zur Vor-
fuugung stona." (I.. 153).

•

Jia Vautigkait dos ..oichaforachungsarztos boi dur Vomahac von vor-
bruchonocnen iixporiJ&unton an.nonschliehua Vurauchspcrsonon ohno doren
ZastiMBung buschraonxto oich nicht cuf dio Gonchzigung von Geldom
cwucks Vonwhao von Po.schangsarboiton suituns dar SS. Forschungsaaftraugu
wurdoi. von in»- artoiit, diu Ole Vornahue von Zxporin-nton an Konzcntr.v-
tion3laguriiisassan cui.. Gugunstand batten. So orhielt ..locher in norbst
1%} uinun .ou'tra^ von ->ic.'.sforschungar..t, Trockonl:iulto-Ib:parii*!ntc
vorzanahiuan, waahrond 'L.rt tat Ur .lilfc iss Lot fit a ran sulbst Senfgas-
oxporijikintu in Natzwuilor durchfuuhrto. (;»- 690, «nkl. 2 ow. 120 , R. 371;
NO-432, .jikl. Buw. 119, ... 369). ..uch doc. von .uiachor in DaeJum im Vur-
laafa von Expuriiiwntan, b-i dunun Konzuntrationsla^orinsassun urschoas*n
warden, untwickalton aiutgorinnangntdttel wurto Inturustc untgegungo-
hraent. (NO-613, .oikl. Guv. 243 , ... 962). Und nuaaiaaon iit dor Laftwnffo


S'-T^S


«


t


t

i


loitotu Ocr xwichsforachunsarfit ?lockfiebar-,Oelbfiobox> und Gclbsucht-
fiXporliiwnte aoitona .a^cn an Insaaacn doa Xorucnt.aticnala S ors Iiatx-
wuilor in dio —so- (: 0-137, «nkl. Bow. 139, R. 737). So boataotigto
aich dor .wichaforschuAoSrat. ..la -in Kichtigea -itgliod diea-r Oruppc
odor Organisation (..oichaforachungarat) der -it d-r Sogohung dicaor
;-rbr-cnon in aaaauMnhang stand und titaiuchlich pcrso-nlich an ihnon
tuilr.duu, uuiaa oiovora unu: d-n i.atii.-ongun doa ..rtikols II ..occnnitt
i d-a hontrollr \ta.{os-tsca . r. 10 acliuldig bofundo.: rnrdcn. Dioa "iron
also diu voraobwortlxchon StOlungcn d-a .Jigaitlagtan Siovora: 3tanu\r-
tunluuhror in dor S3, .wicisa. cacluuftafuohror doa -Anonorbo und Jiroktor
aolnoa Inatitutoa iuor t*oAndaacnachartlich.i ^uckforaci.ung und V-rtro-
tur doa xiit-ra u-o a-acu&vft a:u^iroodon ^uirata doa .usieliaforachunga-
ratoa.


II.


Siuvcra war ifcd-r .s-l noch -ioacnschaftlur. 3i- .Jiklagvbohojrdu
b-iuuptot nicnt, d£cr oi v vora poraocnlichu 3cpori~Jfito vomahn. 3io
..nxlagubjho-rdu bwiind-t veil i~it Si-v-ra in OoboroinatiEwng hinalcht-
licu duo Cnaructora t-in^r fflicht.n -la .^icha>r.ch.\oftafuuhror doa
..»nv.norbo. Js Gra*..iU die b-toiligung vor. 3iov-rs :-diziniacb-n
axpuriuunton kritioi-rtc, v.rt-tdigt- SKv-ra a-inc Stcilurtg in oinu--n
oriaf m hudolf Brandt voo: 23. Januar 1%3 «i-


»Icii bin u-t-4 dun 7-:lauI i-a Ocapr.^as *.t% a or a taunt, ^
d-nn du; o-f-hl o-a .-.icnafuchr'jra-So -^ng . ' 3 crad “ d *“ lin »
aaaa Kir, d.h. Jj .An^-rbo, li- Jbuitnn Ur. »aeh n


.«n—£a K*um
irooitct.


zu


ch achnellor


r >onn dio Din^o in Lukunft so lhufc, eollcn, vie SS-Qruppon-
Xaoaror Sravits das nuaeMi> eo htittieb - -a
d«'aa dinn di« .u .-iton .aschore nic ;t 3o reach end ar.-
&oh*«t vox..io;xa (:K>-32o, .akl. . 10... 335;

Uniuratroicnon^wa noc.itru-.Jlici).


Slovcrs wat nicht nox V-rtreuvna^nn, Sohideriskoiton

four inn oaruini’tu. Sieve re' -us *,r f orcc ...--si -r-oit..m dio

oonoto and Foracnunia.' dtxv- > o-achlooni^t j, 3r:.c.Ao In do: Tit
win bjtreuc.ttlic 103 .33 V-r ...t* .'it... —it aic ;. Sl-vers tuic to —

8 tron,jungon, u_*. Jul-dit. L, ..M.rid and ..p 4 :entj, dia die Forac onge-
ar'^uitur oui,o«»ti A ew.., ; .r it,... -a . -at orieiion, dio Sievors aich

vorachaffto, t :ohoort r. ch ; am ...tr vtior.al ?»ri. oxsa.o, dio -la Vor-
uuchaporsonon vorvondot v-r-.n a alitor.. car. die .rxr-ento ic Jen go
waron, vor^-wiaaorto nich oiovura, d-.sa ai- i:. oi. r znfriodunstoUondon
••uiao dorchovfuolirt -raun. In Vorbindimg lardt *. raackt. Si-vora
notfcondigonreleo join ^ - o.ioa cnabh&t.n.cigua art uilevor i*. *-n und suxaato
aich uit dun ainZwL'viltor. dieswr .oxftrwgo vtrtraut action.

Untor iiffor 6 do: .»n.^i.:-8cnriXt aind z*o.lf vcrachiodoiw .eton
von tforeuchun ulna -ala *n£ofbchrt. .vor. viro wohl vor. Sionta die h -
aondoro Vonxntwortur.£ fu„r and ootclU an.* o. filju.riox- cur i at
lo^t: Hoahun-,


- 7 -


sxrvzis


kaoltc-, ^ost £ a3-,Sccuasscr- und Flockfiobarvcrsucho. .,it.r

wird ih- ale basondoro Vurantiiortane fu.-r and ilia 7eiln?Jieo on dor Sr-
uordune ui. 1 uisshanJlu... von ungofoahr 112 Judon tor Last gcle^,, dia
z ' x ~ ZwecX Voi-vollataondi^an- aincr Srcolatts _^1 ujv fuor die i'eichs-
univorsitaut ir. Stria a bar-: ausjosuefat wor-ca wrr. -s 1st such bowieson
«ord«n, class Siovurs :'ch -n dai Polyol--., rinentea botoili.^c.
i.wocKs Voroi.iTichu.ie stricter PonU. si.ht die -ailcls wbehoerde iilor-
.4it ihru Doschuldi^ins doi Toilnate* an Solbsuchtvorsachan uiruock.

HQononvoiaaci.c ( -da..e_achrift, -iffor 6 (..))

Fuer oin« oinfiohon&i Scsehroihmg dor a^hv.-.vcrs-.eho ::aan auf don
Jchriftaata dor bohoonlc O ogc.. Ruff, Ro.or? a.d aiVt vorioson

wordon.

i)«r Boi'ois lie :t -if, or vat, airs scitoi.s dor S3 dia Hoohonvor-
sucho hsuptasochUcfi vo*. -aaK.:.ort»s art Sic vox s . . Mist 'ardon.

schon 1 l . jail 1939 hall Siev-rs .Jscher'boi oolnon .‘Sx.'wi.r.onton an
Kon«ntrUonslae«ri..s4sflen. -a dieser -cit or-Oujliehto or os lusclior
nach Jichau sun Zwocfco aoi 'omanso von 31utkristanioicrun.:3or.Tori-
nonton su ko.s.on. o & an :<-i Vo:soagarung dca 3 ,inns dor .ioohonvar-
nucho trat luscnor a I .braar 1%2 an Blralui inr-n lurch V.r.-lttlun"
aolnor Frau unJ ersuchte u.. ixlaubnis, in don Vorsucbon il# dtgliod
dos .Jinvn -rbu toilnoh.cn t- amrf.n. (KO-263, ankl. Bow. U7, K. 172).
naochor oalbst ftng £tam w. saino Hllfo in diosor ..e , lo S anhelt an.
biovors fragto bui a*, -n-oida£t.co Badolf Srart an 5. . ion wipon Ha-
ocnor3 botoili^un:. un a •.»


- S -


svyzrs


Hoohenvorauchea an, die an den Insaaaen dos Kontontrational-.gara 3a-
ehaa vorgonaui*n ir.rdoc aollUn. Jio 3 ,eht 1-5 Unndts .j.trort as
21 . ;Jurs hervar, in d-r or Silvers -ItLcilur.^ davon achto, dfiaa
Hii-der dor VornahJo solch-i Zxpori^nta untar dor oedingung zugoatlaat
haetto, dusa haachor an ihnon toilnohnon wuordo. (15Sla-?S, ..nkl. 2ow.
LA, n. 175). stove;c --.a su, dioaen Sriof van Srandt orhalton zu habon.
Er gab forner su, daaa ihn haachor .uiTnng aor* 1942 davon in Konntnia
goaotat iabe, daaa daa -rni-r.urbe aoin Forachongawork in dsehau untcr-
atuotzon aollto. (it. 5672).

SUvera vollo ..oiintnio van and Toilnahr . mi I'oehcnvorauchcn xird
wait or durch die dua -ougen L’off bcxrieaor., d.r angab, dan

Siovors dnehau boaichtigto, -la dio Vortx.roitun:^; four .nachora Ex¬
po rir-untiorotation , ;trofr.., -rdon u..i di- tntoxiiruckkciaer gorado
oingotrofica Mr. (... t 3,. ._ ach r wrwaohnte in solnoa oriof va., 8.
aprll 1942, in do ur culler "Jankbirkoit fa.r dio groaazoogigo Vur-
wirklichung" aainoa .’oracnlugoa, hooiiunveraucho vorz-nehton, ..uadruck
gab, daaa Siovors tats achlich bei 0 ini .ten acr £c.uari, onto zaaah und
vorgaaa niertt die ichtigkoit dor .itirboit van Slovora nachdruocklich
zu botonan. Zr Mgbox

"SS-Oboratuxno utiifuuhror Slovora nah~ aioh eir.cn fa.- no it
u, “ dor intervaainton St indordvorauchc anr.uaohor.

uxvi xird violl-icht a chon kupz darjeb-r bcrichtet habun.

.... SS-Cboratcr.ixinnfu^hror Si-v.ra bin ich su graaaot-
dank v-rpTlichtut, di cr in Jedor f^ziuhung eohr'taotigva
Znt.wroaoo raor -*ino .rb.it zoigt." (1971z-7S, .nkl. Bex.

Uy, ft. 17^ /.

SiuVora gab su, a.aa .r Hi*-dor ueb-r aeiacn 3eauch in Dachau
bvrient erat.ittut babe. (... 5o?7, alehc 1971c-fS, .nkl. & n. », R.
lft}). rtuf Jrun-i do.- 3oricht» von


- 9 -


SI-TVl uxS


SioViirs unu nascher -i-^schtigte KJ—lor n..sci.,r dia .oehonvorruc.V in
ydC-ldu fortzusatxo... (Iv71b-?S, ~nkl. ««. 51, 1*3). Movers aa.^to

aua, Hl*~lor haottc an~ Mt 3 etoilt, -ass handoae orl onto an
r ruiwiUirfvn vor^no ^o • e,r_c\ jcfioiirUchc l\porL*nt<. vuonton
nur on vorurtoiitci Vcr;recnum vorgenoa^n aid fwlitisci.o Jvf-n T or.u
nicht jTuor irgunditolche ^xpori^ntc vor-endut ‘cordon. (; k . 3677 ). Our
dowoIb 1st judoch orbiac.at -oraon, doss V-raucho an 120 Ms 200 In-
aasaon vorgonouw. wur<;cn, ^.sa 70 bis 80 dwr Vwrauchaporaonon at irbon
imd Viele von i/uwn nicht zu_ Tod vorartoilt .or- . ran. (Kelt, .
163 ). ..ur ttlnl Vorsucnspersonan koemujn aou£licher»oiao

ala "Frolnilllgo" boftc c:jkI .-onion. Zs mdsst, u-ss iie 5 o 2n«U»en
sich "frolwllli^ zar Vorfuogur. 5 .-stunt" haottan. o. ...achtr ihnun
voraprcich, aiu wucruoi. -ntleaaun ..cr-u, , Venn aiw aach d-n -'.purl, ontun
unterzoogen. (Huff, ... cl. 1 . . .sc., i lo.sle a«i..o Vurs.;rcchon ni- oln.

Owff, i.. ol5;. .uo MvV.ra -1 oitor .-u^.i-aaigo abt hurvor, d.ioa ur
, aion Uusson wonl o-t.uaaw \r, -.ts oiu vsr. ..-sc;..r end auinun Itnrbui-

torn Oui doii .iooho. 1 - u ui ...vltuvoraachen v u r unoot-n Vcfeuchapuraonun
koimwraga Fr^nix a ..... (81 Jm iltovartdcbo, ont-n). si-v..r»

* t6 «u, ...aciiur nab- ill ,,«o *«,, data --Inigo J.i /wrsuchax>raonui \n

uon Folgor. dor Hoohonvorauch. g.storber. avion, (h. 5866).

. 20. Juli i%2 lu t_ sc nor dun endgacltigon 3-rlcht vor, den

'.r und hotljorg uob-i dio riao.,-nv>rauch<. n den ji^ulr^tun iuidolf
brindt orstattot n.tton, dacit d-r l.tztun ihn .ii. Jur vorlogun soll-
to. (loo7-»-?S, .otd. oo>. o5, i.. 3 > ,,.


- 10 -


3I3V3.-S


Slr.o Abachrift doa Boriohtoc vurdo von Hiisilor an 25. Au. uat 1D42
an Folduarcchft 11 llilch -ocaidt :it dor Bitto, Milch aollo ftac' r
und Rbtiborr orlnubon, ihn uobor dioaoa Thom oir.on Vortra- zu laltcr.
und oir.on von ffa aohor hor roatollton Filn vorzufuohron. HlrrAor
orachtctc dio 3rfobr.iaao dor Yorauoho fuor ao wiehtl.* fuor dlo Inft-
wiffo, daaa or uoborzcu.-t mr, I-ilch vuordo, m ah doa or don Filu
-o a oh on haotto, Coorinc daruobor toriehton. (I607b-P3, Ankl.tew.

67, R. 213). Siovor* aotzto sich i:- Auftraro Jfeaohora ;dt dor. An(o-
!:la|-ton Rudolf Brand t in Vorbindunp und toil to ilia nit, daaa
axaohor bofuorohto, achon Jo: find and ora ala or und dor An -ohlarto
Ronborc habo Mil oh uobor dio Hoohor.-&poriaonto boriohtot. Er,
Biovora, toilo dioao Anaioht nioht, "donn wor oor.at auoaor
ffaaohor und Ra.borc kconr.to dor. oricht pr.c loht ha bon "T Jiovora
bat flror.dt un SUttoilur. •, ob or otvan in dor An^-olofonhoit ohoort
lir.bo ur.d fcnt auaoordo:: un dio Sr la uta:in fuor ibochor zur V.r-
oafrontllohunr dor r in via onar’ -.ftliahon -r-OiXilaao dor 'crouohc,
Sr, biovora, vniordo aioh boi .Anchor orinuidi,Mr., in volohor “or
und in rolohou Or.fhn.-o or dio .orooffbntlichunr piano. ( >0-221,

Ankl* Dev. C8, R. 213). ..r. 29. .. u -uet antwortoto Brar.dt Jiovora,
dt c» ifcaohoro Vorautu:: .ioi.t zutreffo. ML-.ljr hatto woai o
Ta,-o vorhor Milch Boaohriabon,und Klloh aoloat vuordc dio : ooti : -on
Anordrur.cor. fuor Ab.jxbo doa .■bccJ.or-ftx.born-Borichtoi orli.anun.
Brandt aandto auoh oino Abaohri^t ^ca Ten KJ__:lor an Hiloh ~o-
richtoton Briofoa on Siovora. (X-222, Ankl.Bov. 69, R.215).

Ala r.llch an 31, Auruat 1942 vi:- 1. r daver. lr. Komtnio aotztc,
daaa or bocbaichti^o.


3I3V-.-3


lixachcr und Eonbcrg data oinxuladen, dcr. Vortror zu ha Iron und dor.

Filn vorxufuohrcn. (343b-PJ, .cikl.Dov. 70, R. 215), hat 3mndt
nofort Siovora und feaahor da von vorctaondigt. (JJ0-223, Anhl#Bow.

71, R. 216).

9. Oktobor 19-12 achrlob ft.achor an I!1 ii lor, or habo don fucr
don 11. Soptcabor vorfioaohonon Borioht on Fold:arachall Milch nioht
abnogobon, da Milch nioht anwoaond ftjwoson ooi. Kxohddfe or, Saaohor,

•

von Hii: lor boadftragt wordon mr, lodi G lich Uiloh aolbet Boricht
tu oratatton, lohnto or oino Borichtorstattunr oh, da *u>in Vortrotor
Miloha zur $itgQ£Oamh;io doa dorichtoa boat! i;t mr. Roachor fuhr
forti "Jtoino Iferichtoratattunc on bio, hochvorohrtor Jbiehcfuohror,
ko. - t darwi ao apaot. 33-0b.ratur. bar. fuohror Giovora wollto dirckt
an bio Borioht ore tat ton und II on cich von toiborr - ala Houtro len -
(w-dor luftuaffo nooh Go) u. hh'hof an 11. Soptenbor nuondlioh !fc-
rloht orotatton und voronlasatc c:.b;r-, dioaor. borioht nioiortulojon und
iha aofort zutuaondon." 3r wi-a fomor darauf hln, oa noi nctuondir,
dan a dio Untordruokknr.wrr., in wolchen dio Vorauoho tataaoohlioh
auflgofuohrt wurdor., ihn woitorhin zur Vorfuorung atuanden. (1910-PG,
Anfcl.Bow. 73, R. 217).

A xi 21. Oktobor 19-12 trat Siovora wiodorun on don Anrokln ten
Rulolf Brandt horan, da:kit i'as hor und Jkdbor,- dio lloorli^' V i it .r-
hiolton, llloh Borioht zu oratntton. Sr lo f ;to oinon ijrioht uo’. jr
don Vortrng boi, dor von Res*.borr cix.ltor. vurdo und ab die Gruandc
an, w\rlri Rouborf? und •* achor .Ion Vortrr.r in -bwonorhoit ilihe
r.lcht folialton hatton. Jiovara fuclirtc itr-.or an*


- 12 -


3IZ73iS


"Dio Untorkuohlun-avert uoho 3l»J jotit ab -oachlessor.,
aodaas dio va. ^oicl;sfuohrcr SS gowuanschto Fbrtsotrurg
dor Soohonvoro uoho boginnon kann. Etotu gobrauchon vdr
wiodorun dio Ur.torJruckhairyirn, dioxial jodooh :dt
Stufean cprotatpttipon, mil const -rcoaaoro llcchai.or-
«uoho nioht durch.ofuahrt wordon koonnon. Dio r.ouorlichon
Vorauchc wordon dans auch data dlonon, mi dio 'nbilita-
tionaarboit von Hi echor xuu Abaahluar tu brinfen. Die
Uoborlaaaun,- dor Ur.tcrdruokkaisxr, wird Jodoch r.ur uccr-
11 oh aoin, won: 1 , dor re ieh s fuehrer *>s doawo-on purcocnlioh
on don Gonomlfoldin rsclall kilch achroibt, Ich fuoro
don Zntwurf oinoa diosbotuo.-lichon Schroibona b-i.
(NC-22C, ^Bkl«aiw. 75, B. 220| !l>-22d, Ankl.&jw. 7C,

H* 22J).


Etta grocao Intoroaao Slovora 1 an dor Poon'.orur.r von fticchore und
Itoiborca Vorauohon iat klar uuc ocr lataaoho oraiohtlioh, daaa or oinon
Bntwurf olnoe Briofoa boifuo.jto, dun Hiixilor or. "lloh aohroibun
oollto, uu woitoro Exporinonto dureh dio ZurvurfUo -ur.'-atollun • von
Untordruokfcamom fuor dio Hoohonvorcucho tu omoofliohon. IHuilor

hat auch wirklloh in Hovoubor 1942 oinon ifclor in dor von Siovero
vorconohlaconon «rt ontworfon und damn roboton, daaa ‘Saaohor dor

wjitoro Xitarboit in Hoohon- und Kaoltovorauchon aiohom aollto,

*urdo tataaoohlioh von ^imlors Mijutonton, 5 0 norol TfoltV, ab ceohiokt,
dor an 28, Oktobor 1942 a n Hileh aohriob. (18-269, Inkl.Bow. 78,

B, 22C - Untoratruiohun.tin oi : cfbo 1;). Sine Abaohrift dioaoa iriofoa
vurdo vm n,-oklafton nrandt on biovera roachiokt.


n 13. Doaonbor L -Z urlloea Hlmlor *.vjiaun; on.


- 13 -


Brass


dass Raachor Hoehenverauche sur Ret tun,: a us grossen und groaaston
Hoohon durchfuehron aollto, Vorauche ucber Kiodorer-aernung bei
allgoaeinar Abkuohlung dca aanachliche.n Kocrpers, Veroucho uobor die
Heilung boi toilwoisen Srfriorungen, inabosondore dor Extronitaetcn,
und Kaoltcanpasaun 33 vorsucho In Schneohaeusern, (igloos), 'lie in Qo-
iaondo doa SS-Borghauses SudolTold durchaufuchren sind. Hirnlur Ufahl
auch, doss vorachiodono SS-Stoll«n und das Ahi»norbo Raachor boi dor
nosohaffung dor not^ondiyon Apparaturon, Chonikalicn und Modikanonta
bointoho n aollton. Dm Ahnonorbo erhielt oli* Abschrift dioeos Brief os.
(1612-PS, Ankl.Bo*. ?9, r. 229 ).

Daao Siuvora boi dor Durchfuehrung dor Hoohomruraucho entacholdon-
don Einfluaa hatto, wird .lurch Ronchora Brief vee 18. Movoahor 1910
an Profoaaor Pfannonatiol in Marburg tv-ioson, in wolchon Raachor vor-
ochlug, daaa pfannonatiol boi Sicvoro ur. Krlaubrda nachauchon aollo,
Hoahuiioxporinonto an loUndon Kunachun durcluufuchron. (NO- 3671 , obon).

Wauhrond dor ganxon Zoit, in dor die Hooho.wxpurlojnto atatt-
fandon, war Raachor don Ahnuivu-bo sugutoilt and vollxog dio Hoohon-
vuraucho nit uolnor Hilfo. Siovora hat auegcaagt, daaa Raacl>or Anfan,:
" aor * 191*2 fuor dna Ahiwnurbo iu orboiton bagaivu (r. 5671). Ah
20 . juli 191*2, ala dor ondguoltigu Boricht uobor Hoohonvorsuchc
Himlor untorbruitot -urdo, crachion Paachors ?*ano auf lo= Priofkopf

doa Ahnonurbo-Ijiatituto


fuor wahnriaoonBobnftUcho Zrockforschiru, wio aus dor Betfaittriuf
oraichtlich, und der bnigologto Buricht unthi.lt dio Srklaerun,, da«a
dio Voraucha luumon nit dor Forschui^s- und Lehr.aoainschaft "dan
Ahncnurbo" durchjufuohrt wurdon. (l607a-PS, Ariel.!. 65, II. 201., •
110-102, Aukl.B'.w. 66, r. 213),

Slavora hatto tataaochlich Konntnia Uubor dio vurfcrocbcriacho
Natur dor Rnachur-Voraucho. r 0 mmk ihn nitgotoilt, daas Oachau-
Haoftlin;u bo nutst -ordon aollt.m. Er aolbat bcaichtljto dio V.raucho,’
(H. 5612). Siovora gab su, daaa Roachor ihn ,/mjt hatto, doss
uohroru Puraorvon ala Fol^o dor Hoohonrorauch.. aturbon. (Ji. 5868 ).

B * Hrfrlorun ■;a oxporl'>.i,U (Ankla uachrift, Ziffcr 6 (D)).

Bovor <Uo Hoohanvormioiki t*to.,chlich boondot wordon waron,
wurdo do., wvioklajton delta and ooi,^ Ihtorgubunon Raachor bofohlon,
mlt don Brfrlarun*8aJ^orfc:uiitcn au bo Innon. Dioa kann nuo oincn
Brief oraohon wordon, do :h an 2 . i 19W an Karl „olff ochriob,
(3!.'-P3, Ankl.l'cw. 62 , R. 200). Kura da:»ach hatto Kucher oitw Konfc-
r-ns nit Hippko,ural lie Grui:|>o aur nurchfuohrur.: dor Exjorinonto
"urdo oo <ooorrlort, laoo aio Jarlach, nolaloehi W r und Sin or oinachloaa.
Kauch..r boric htoto di.ro P -falOu an Iti-mlar an 15. Juni l?l,2 ui,d
loitoto Hlppkoa dmuchun a*. tarchfuchrun,; dor F^orironto in Dachau
woltor. Hr funlirto nuai »Ea wurdc auch feat _>li -X , daaa nich d.r
Inapokteur (llippko) su di ron Vursuchon J^doraoit koaumdieren wird."
('<0-263, Ariel .Bow, 82, 309). r*.r Forachmicauuftr-i. wurcl voc


SISVHtfi


Roforat fuor Luftfehrt nodizin ( 2 n 3) untor Antho^, nit den
AngeJclafiton Bockar-Froysor*: ala soinen Stcllvertrotor, ortoilt.

(!fO-286, Ankl.ifcnr. 86, It. 22yJ).

Dio altwaascr-2rrricran;:aoxpcrir.-ntc bojanr.on an 15 . i.u,iiat
191*2 und dauorton bis Inf an,: 19U3. Sio wurden von Holzloohncr, ?inko
und dosoliur vorjOiKWon, a^ioa Offisioro vee Sanitnotsuoson dor
Luftwoffo. Hoi Bloc hi wr und >Unko arboitoton bis DMonbor 19h2 ait
Raaohor suoanrun. Wio iiaacher oich in oinor Dario:ioin=r
nodiziniachon Auobildun; ausdruocktoi Dofohl ka h^ichafuohrora
33 aordo doa Gonoralobcrata&rstoa Prof. Dr. Hippke « 7 ^rauoho sur
kuitun-; ouab-okttohltor ibnschon' (Bc-;inn an 15. 3.1 i2)j U donate in
ZuaarmonarboiV ait tfniv.^aitaotjprof. Dr. L’olxloohnor, Kiel, und
Dr. Pinko, Univorai&aot Kiol." (.30-230, JjkUBm, 115, 356).

Raaohor ao .to auch» »-ai 1939 bis j^uto JOlitaordionat boi dor Luft-
wiU’fo". Daa gchrlTtatuock tru drjj Oatm 17. lai 19U3. ‘/An darf
alao nicht vur ooaon, -tosa waohrond dor joaanton Hochonvuroucho und
to rfoaontlichun wnohroud fast oiler KaultovorsucJw, Raaohor to
aktlv.n Pionnt boi <kr LuftimffO, nicht boi dor 3S at anti. &rt nach
ini lylO bonann or ;dt nolnuri nienot boi dor haffon-33. Solbatv-r-
otaundlich vmrdo or von ooi lor., dor biftwaffa ur.d dor 53 ,boi diosun
Vorauchon unUratuotat.

Dor Zou^o '[off, dor oin Hooftlin aass latent boi tkn 2 xj' rtocoton
v*nr, oa to aua, ao-: BriViorw^ov-jrancho to Kona ntritiona-
iat.-or Dachau Jnk Juli o.-r to August 15U2 bocannon. Sio wurdon
von Ro3Chur, Holzloohnor unri Pinko (lurch ,ofuohrt. In Cfctobj-


- 16 -


siLvats


iinrfon Holzloohner und Finko we,: und Raseher sotato seine Erfrio-
runtiaoxperlaonto all.ln bis zun Kai 19U3 fort. Roscher, Holzloohner
und Finko bonutzton oislcaltos Wassor fu^r ihro Eri'riorun .scocperi-
rv,-ite. Daa Vorsuchsoockon wurdo swei 'fetor lan und cwui ' otur hoch
auf Raschora Vorauchsstation in -lock V orrichtot. (R626-8). Dio
Exporirunt*. wurdon auf die Col otylo sciso durch -ofuohrt. Das Deckon
wurdu nit tfussor jofucllt und dmm wurlc Ha hinzu^ojobon bis das
Hoasor 3° C hatto. Dio Vorsuchspersonon, eirtwodor nit jirwn Fliu.ior-
onzu. bukloidot odor nackt, wurdon in las Idiswaaccr jost^ilt.
tacubun^snittol wurdon haoufi;: nicht bonutzt, Es dau-.rt<. iuwr oino
^owiaao Zoit,bis dio so-ononnto -Erfriorun snurkose" lie Voraucha-
puraonon bowusstlos nachto uni aio lltUn fuurchterlich. Dio Tenpo-
ratur dor C*>for wurd.. roktol und durch don Ka„on nittolo Galvanooutur
tpaoflson. Eoi uinor Kourj-ortv or itur von un-^foohr 33° C vorlcron
oio das Bowusataoiiu Dio BxporL- onto wurdon tatsaochllch fort,>sotzt
bio dio Vorauchaporr.oncn auf Kourportenparatur von 25° C al>-

^okuohlt waron. Sin Vorsuch an zwol rusaiachon Offisioron, lio
nackt doa dskalt r, ,/aasor au. tit wurdon, war twaondoru Tcusaa.
Dioso zwol ftuasun Kiirvn noch ncch tw-i Stunion boi Dcwiuiotaoin.
Uaachor wui orto oich, oino Injoktion au fiubon. Ala oiiv.r !or
HaoftUr^o, dor don BxporL^nt boiwohntc, vurauchU, Ion ‘xddon
Upturn oin Anaos&tikun au vorobruichaa, bedrohto ihn ,iasch,:r
nit oirwn Revolver. Soldo yursuchsp.roonon starbun, nachi u ale
niiviostons fuonf Stiai Ion dor fuurchtorlicton Kaulto aus.;e3otzt

wordon waron. (Muff, :i. 629-631). Un^foohr 260 bis 300 Vorr.uchs-
personon wurdon fu-»r lloso ..rt


- 17 -


SXE7£-;S


von Erfricrun.;svorsuchcn vonrondet, abor In 7'irklichkoit mvrckn
360 bia UOQ Vcpsuche vor.jcrurrson, da viclo Yerauchspcr3onan z-..ei-
odor droinal boi don Exporixunten bonutst warden. Un ofachr 60 bia
90 Vorauchapuraonan atarbon. On ofaohr 50 bia 60 Haortlingo wurdon
bcl don Holxlo,:hnor-Finke-RaachLr-£xporinontun benutzt uni un. ofaohr
15 bia 18 <lavon atarbon, Politiacho Ocfangono, Jttchtdoutachc und
Krio u s iofijj'ono wurdon fucr dioao Sxporlaento Unutat. Yiolo dor
dalujl vurwojyJotun Hooftlin^ waron nicht "sun Todo vorurtoilt"
wordon. Dio Vorauchaporaonun hftbon alch fi*,r die atporinonto nicht
froiwilli*, i-cBwldot. Otoof, a. 627-8).

Solbat wenn non annohewn wuerdo, daaa boi alien 7*rcuch.n xun
Todo vururtoilto ufan.;oik, v n. iivkt wordon wa. ren, wa .a nicht atimt,
ao iat die "VortoiJi ;un,;", loaa sic oich frciwilli auf Grind oinor
Voroinbarun : nuldoton, d.aa ihro Urtuilo auf lobonalacn lich-a Oo-
fauru iila horab joaotxt wuerton, nicht atiobhalti > Hiohrond dor
Koohonvurouctic hat Hirrlur on;oordnut, dosa 1 i\.iturn Sxpurl-
monton, boi wolchon dio laun or and.auorn.lo ljurxt ooti. koit von o-
tootutun Vurauchaporaomn boobachtet wurd;, tun 7oJo virurtollto
Vorbrochor bonutat wortlon aollton uiyl, fall* aio wivior ino l.bon
auruook.jorufou wuor'n., aollton aic su lobonalacn, licho- K.Z.
"Uj^nadi,* wordon*. (1971l^PS, ..nkl.^w. 51, a. 180). Raschor hit
onachuinuivl diuaon Jefohl '.ahin aus ,:ol< t, vsa j auch auf dio
Srl'riurun.ovuraucho an,.-jwondt wordon sollto. &B 20. Cfcto \>r l r b2
t lilt.. Rasoher Rudolf Dx-anlt dt, bias bia dihln mr Polcn und
uuaaon fuor aolcho Sxr ri^nto bcnafcxt wurion, aid daaa nur .inL o
dioaur Poroonon xun 7<xlo vorurt ilt wordon *irc:u J fra.-tu, ob
Hirnlora ■i^nnootiu" fuor uaiun un i Polcn ; 1W. (1971d-PS,

.jikl.Iitw. 52, R. 183). ’Tan l >-ilt. ihr. -.it, iur Ji a nicht icr
Fall aui. (1971C-PS, Zjikl. cw. 53,


S3Z7SIS


R. 163). Bezuo jlich dor wcitoron 3rocrtorun t : liosor aryeblichen
Vortoidi t .ui c 5 slate don Schlussvortra^ ior ..nkla-jobohoordo*

Trockonkaoltovorsuci'o wurden von Raschor In Januar, Fobruor
und ‘faort 19U3 durch ;ofuohrt. 21 no 7orsuc»,sporson wurdo nachta auf
olno Tra-ibahro gelojt und dor Kaultc in Froion auagosotst. Sio
mirdo alt oiiwn Irtntach zu«lcckt, aber Judo Stun do wurdo oin
Elcor kaltos vjoasor uol»r sio rfcachuottot. Sio verbliob in Froion
bis sun Morion, dann wurdo lhru Tenpcratur nit oinoa Thera tor
Konosaon. 3oi don naochston Vorsuchsrolten wurda dor Plan ,;oaondort
und dio Vorsuchsporsonon nusaton la Fxvion waohrun. riolur Stundon
vorbloibon, ohno uoborhaupt su*>dcckt su wcrdon. SiftJ Vorsucte-
rcihu wurdo nit 10 Oofanjonon ofuohrt, dio uoter tocht in
Froion vorbloiten Bosato. Puwchor aolbat war boi liuson 18 Ms
20 Vorsucten diosur «rt da’>ji. Un^faohr Iroi Vorsuchaporsonon
at-irbon nls Fol» .lor Tfootaniraaltovorauchs. (toff, R. 636 - 7 ),

Auf ikjfohl von Grawits und Mochur soil to oin Kaasomwporinont
nit 100 Vorsuchsporsors.j; durch.jofuohrt war don. Da ..cschor nicht
anwusond war, war Hoff in dor La*,, da. ftcporirwnt su voroitcln,
indon or dio Vorauchs^rsonon aus don Froion horolnnofc., und auo
dicsoa Gruiklo oroi,ruton sich waoiiroir! lies r Vcrauchweihon koit*
Todwsfaollo. Dio laor\;nto Zoit, die Vurcucbsi>crso wn in ion
in dor KOelto bolasson wur’on, war ven 6 mu- aloirds Us 9 ’Jhr
'ior ;ons. Dio nioclrVato Terpuratur, JotMn sich *toff waohrond dor
Trockonkaoltovjrsuchj entrinnon kann, sir 25° Koorportonporatur.

Da anchor vorboton tetto, SaaVorauebo untor fcaowttetikun Jurch-
/-fuohrt ..aiordun, orlitUn


smHvS


dio Vera ucha pora onen ^rossc Qualon u ni schricn ao laut,, das5 es
unracojllch mr, woitore Sxparinento durchzufuohren. Raschor erauchtc
dohor un Hisalera Erlaubnia, solcho Sxp<ri=*nto zukuunftis in K.Z.
Auschwitz durchzufi*;hren• Nichtdoutacho und politischc Gofansona
waron untcr don Verauchaperaonon, koiner war zur. Todo vorurtoilt
wordon. Sio hatton alch nloh*. freiwUH • fuor dioao Vorauche £q_

neldot. (itoff, r. 637-9).

In Zuaarrwnhan,; nit don ttfriuruntfavorauchon hut jjoff r;oitor-
hin auaKoa^-t, doaa or in Soptonbor 191 von Siovora Bofolil urhiclt,
Hor» und Lun r ;u von fucnf Varauchsporaonen, dio •-*! ’.on Vorauchen
tootot wurdon, su Profoaeor Hirt in StruslMov z.>cka wuiturur
wiaoonachaftlichor Stikiion au bric^on. Dor r'ahrauawoia fuor Hoff
wurdo von Slorora aua .-at. lit, uni -jio -hnoinrbo .osollachaft bczahlto
dio Koaton fuor dio Ucburccudun. -or l^ichon. Einur dor fuonf *c-
tctct-.n Vurouchoporcor.jn war oin HollauaJor. (Hoff, R, 633).
diovora boauchto dio VorauohaaUtionon ■uohr«-nd dcr Irfriorun .;o-
uxporinonto zionlich haoufLc. (Boff, R. 635).

N«ffa .vuaaa-jo wlrd .lurch die uLSoaatattlicbon Srkloorun^cn dcr
AJMoklagton Rudolf Brandt und Dockor-Froyao.-^ (f >0-21*2, Ankl.Buw. 60,

... 301 NO-U6, Ankl. J.w, 31, 235 ) und lie „uaaa.w lor Zcu,;cn

Lutz (r. 266-76), Tlowog (R« 1*31) und »iichilowBfcy (R. 676-63) und
durch daa dokununtariachu Bewolm* rial bed dun Jcton bosUoti,^.

15. Juxvi 191*2 to 11 to ...ischor Hiriilor nit, .t aas dor inspck-
tour rloa SanitaUnwoaoru dor Luftwmffj, Hipyko, ur. ^laubnla nach-
ouchu, daoa KQoltcoxporlnonto


- 20 -


SIZTZ;S


von Raschur und Kolaloehnor K.Z. Dachau durchfc-ofUohrt werden
koenntun. (R0283, Ankl.&ow. 82, R. 230 ). 10 . Siptcritor untorbroi.

toto Raachor *’-i«nlo r soinon or stun Zwischonbericht uohor diu Krw
friururvavorauchu. in den Dogloithriof erklacrtc factor, daaa
Holeloohnar, dor an dor Durchfuohrun.j dor Exporlry-nto in Aaftra u o
dor Luftwaffo toilnahn, auf dor "Kaoltota^un^" dor Luftwaffe an
26. und 27 . October in NUeraber? oinan Yortrag uobor daa fhuna
SrfriorunE *u halton boabsichtlja. ;-laac.or toil to Hlnaler nit, daaa
"Siovora, dor die Sxpcrlamto in dor lotaton Sochu in Dachau
bogutachtoto, dor Ansicht aoi, daas, falla ir^nUin Boricht auf
oiiwr Tanning *mooht wordon aollto, ich dm it teauftr&gt werdon
oolltu, don Poricht au untorbroiton.- (NC^3h, Arid.:. S3, K.2l*l).
Aua don Zwiachunboricht aolbct >ht auf don orston ^nblick hin
hurvor, loss Todoofaoll. -.la "ol -., r Haachor-Holsloohiior-r'inko-
Voraucho vorkonen, urvl in ihn mutfo schnoll. fi> U-ronmonran,; von
a ihr nb.;akuohlt«n Pt: n bofusrvartct. Usschsr jlaubtc, lass

Wiudorurwiiomun*.: nit an l gsllao hf Woorsw au langsaa aoln miordc
und daaa Vorauch* in dioacr lllnaicht annooti.; soion. 3r aouaaorto
olno aohnlicho Anoicht boauo,aich doa Oobr.iucha /on Prohor, txs,

Zwccku dor m iodor umu< rnua..• (1618-ps, Ankl.Ivnr. ttl*, .U 21 * 1 ). ,Oa
Kimlor don Bjxfang von . aaolwra orici t uj 22. Ssptenhor t -
sttvotl't.', ord»K.to or idchtodostOKoni.vr an, dass lie Vorsuch*. nit
Wiodororwoornung durch nro,»n und Koerpsnmarns durch ;ofu .hrt wvr.Usn
3 ollton. Sine Afeechrift diocoa Kirnlurbofchla wurdo Slows an
25 . September r.u oachickt. (1611-PS, Ankl.Bow. 65, ». 211).

Auf Orund lioj-ia Pofohla trat Aasehor

- 21 -


simas


Siovora boron, un Aboachun-on wrecks sofcrti,*er Beschaffunr
von h Zirfouneriimon zu troffon, die ala Vorsuchaporsonen aua J.iuJor-
-rwauroon dionen sollton. (NO-285, Ankl.Bew. 66 , a. 2 hh). Dio An-
atroaTun^on Siovora in dioaor Deziohun, hatU-n anachoiiund oino
doiho Tolo^rarsu zur Fol ;o, doaa dieao Frauen von Jea Ravonatruocker
Konzontrationala-er nach ftichau uoUrzuatollon aoion. Rudolf PranJt
loiteto dieao Ueberatollun,. (1619-PS, Ankl.Dcw. 87, a. 27li-8).

Dio vlor Frauon Jtaaon in Jtovant^r 19U2 in Dachau an. Drci dcr
Prauon wurdon zun V/iodcrurwnornun urfreronor Torauchaparaoaon ver- „
•nuvlfc, oino "urdo mia.-;oncram, well aio oin -ncriiacher" 7 : 7 . war.

Daaa dlo Vorauchapuracnon koine FrciwilU^on oio-un . : ohfc aur einor
Dororkun.: horvor, dlo von oinor dieaer Frauen urncht mirdoi
■Doaaor oin hilboa jahr in oinon crdoll ala oin halloa Jahr in
Konzentrationaln or." (^ 323 , /jikl. *». 9 U, R. 325). Dicco Vor-
aucharoiho, dio nicht r.ur .ioordariacn acnlurn auch obasoon war,
wurdo von Raachor zwiochon Jtov«nl^r 19L2 und Fobruar 19 U 3 Jurch-
gofuohrt. So in Boricht an Hlmlor toi t t, daaa oii« Jor Vcraucha-
puraonon lnfol^o dioaor Voraucha atarb. (I 6 l 6 ~ps, dnkl.iknr. 103,

U. 3U2).

/Ji il. Oktobor 19U2 toilto StaUarat Prof, Anthay von lor
Sanltautainapoktion dor Luftwaffe Hirnlor nit, daaa uubor die
Koaulfcato dor von .icachor suaa^ujr. ait Bolzloehnor und Finkc
Quajofuohrton Naaakaoltovoraucho von Hrlxloehittr auf dor "Kaulto-
konforonz" an 26. - 27. Oktol^r in NUornUrr Vcrtraejo gahalton
wordon aollton. (NC^ 66 , Ankl.Bo«. 36, a. 21,8, vor-1. !k v23i* ebon).

/kr l6 * Oktober ouch Rosohar Himlor in 2 rlautnia,


- 22 -


SETrLvS


zur Froi ,abu dor hcsultato dor KaclUexTxrircxito auf dicser
"Kaoltetagung". (NO-225, £nkl f Bow. 89, ft. 250). in aolr^n Tag
lQj,to itaacter Hlntilor soinon Schlusstoricht uober dio Eaolto-
•ocporinonto vcrr, acwoit aic zusarr^n clt Holzlochnor und Finkc
durch..>'fuuhrt wordon waror., Dioaoi joricht schloss dio '.fiodor-
orwaornungaveraucho aitt-la Dromon uni Kocrpcnraorr*) nicht oin,
dio zu Jo nor Zoit noch nicht abecachlosson worcn. (1613-PS, «nkl,
bow, 90, it, 251). Dioaor Doricht uubor "Untorkuehlunjarorsaoho
labonden J'onachon" durch Holzloohnor, rtaaclfcr ind Finko bo-
ataoti t t lurchaua dio iuasa^o Neffs uobor 'io r. iaaka .lW-Vorauchs-
roihon und bewuiat, daas violo To-ioafaollo ointraton. ’dr zoi :t,
daaa oini,jo dor Vorauchaporscnon lioson fuorchtorlichon Vorsuchon
ohno Annoathoaiorung - Ho ihro 3ch.-v-r=un bodoutonl goaildort
haotton - untorworfon wurion, jio Luidon ior Verauchajx-raonon
wurdon in luboreli,;ur '.'uiao boachrlobon* Schaun biliotc aich ur;
don Mund dor Vorauchap raonon, AtcuuvMchwiorigkelton und Lun- ui>-
oodonu traton nuf. Dio Abkoohlun ver, B-.la un Hintorkepf dor Vor-
auchaporaonun riof boaondura schr..rslicho ifcpfinlun on horvor.
Tortachroitorxlo Rrstarrun., lio so hr stark In ion irasuakoln auf-
trat, Zyanoau und voU^taonii.io Unro.:oliauaal, > k>:it dor Horatzsti,;-
koit warun Ho von Ion :;cporinontatoror» boobichtoton fiyap 1 teas.
Hoioat* Boodor wurdon ala dio ’.onto Dohondlun*: von schwvr ’inter-
kuohlton Pursonon ocpfohlon* DLu Todoafaollu crfcL.ton durc^
Horsachln,: und lurch OohlrnoodeoL, uni Vassnahnon sur . T orhu:tung
aolchor Folgun


- 23 -


vruricn ausfuohrlich bojprochen. (KO-^23, 91, R. 252).

Siuvera bestritt, das? ihn Hnschar ueber die Kaoltecxpericento
Boricht erstattete, j,ab abor zu, dass or ^aschers Berichto julc^nt-
lich von Hiaralcr erhiolt. (it. 5681*-5). Abor durch die /.ussaje doa
Zou^on Hoff ist nicht nur toiriescn, daas i.aschcr doa “/dinersrbo"
nvonatlich, viortolj!ihrlich und halbjaohrlich Bcrichto vorlugto, dio
Ion Chnraktor und don Stand seiner Versuchaarboiten oJngchund
Icachriobon (It. 635), aondern daan ihn nuch dor Sehlussbericht
itaachors, Holzloohr^rs und Finkca (HO-lt2S obon) zu/oaanlt wurdc.

(R. 661).

An 211. October tvstaeti :to Hirclor don ftrpfan^ iioaoa !3urich-
t*j5 1 don or "alt ^tosjoc inturcaao" ieloaon habo un-J Iniauftragte
Siovora, iha diu"llc«„lichkeit boi Inatituton, dio una nahoatohon,
dio Auanortun* zu omooKlichun", zy vorachoffon. (1609-PS, Aivkl.Bcw.

92, R. 26U).

Ab 26, und 27. October 19L2 fand in Nuornl-cr,; untcr don Voraitz
Anthonyo ur*l nit dor Aaaiatons Dockcx^-Froyaurva dio Konfuront uolwr
"nua Soonot und .fintornnot horruohxxndo problurc", dio von doa
Sanitaotainapckteur dor Luft-aTfo, Vi\tfko, ,:ofoordort »ordon war, atfttt.
Auf dlooor Konf-.rona hiolt Holaloohrar aolnon Vortrag uebor don
Titol "Prophylnxo und Uohanilui.; dor 'Jnt'irKuohlon; in ..aacor."

Dio von iha ait?) toil ton, aohr oiru-ohondon klininch-n Boobach-
tun. on achlojaon dio .oo^lichkolt aua, lias Ulosa toobachtun.jen an
,‘orottoton Porsonon geoachl rferdon waron, und aio aachton ca kl;ir,


das a vorsuche an tonaciwn


SIEVStS


au3;jol'uohrt worden wnren. (WO-ijOl, AnkUlfew. 53, R. 309). AuasOTden
cachto Pinscher nach Holsloohi.ers Vortrag eii>. Feststellir.:;, die- kl-ir
soi;jt, lass die /ersuche an Konsentrationsla^orhaeftlingon vor^u-
nornon warden waron. Diesor .^richt verurscehte unter Son bo in V«»r-
tra,; .'irwuoenion Boaxton cir>: Sonsaticr.. Ss wurdo dr-r^etan, dnsa
Todoefaolle sich erci^not hetton. (Luts, R. 272). Silvers b«3tritt,
daaa or uobor iioso Konforons oinen boricht orhaltan habc (It. 5639),
nbor dor Taaobucheintro*; von 12. Janiuir 19U3 tol t, da3S or nit
daachor die "3c3chnffunc von Tajun,.sfc^richU-n uober Xaoltota^wv; in
fluurnbor^ botroffs lor irkun.; von Xaolto 3 oroortorto. (b’O-536, /Jikl.

Dow. 122, R. 379).

An 6. Jbvwnbor 19U2 aandto Roachor an Hiix^ora porcccnlichcn
Stab, dna ,\nt doa .'jx;cklc,-^on Rudolf Mranlt, --in I'jr.oranlur: betrof-
fond Zuaaavinarboit lit Dr. Crorwr von lor aorstliehen Voraucha-
atation fuor Gobirri33anitaot3‘..nijipcn in St. Johann. Dioo war oino,
Kandloaor in auinor Rl,jutiacliai*t ala .xraiuaanitautainapoktuur untor-
atoll to Schulu. In 'lleaon Jkjocrandua cnpfahl .iaaclwr Trockcnkaolto-
voroucho an Konsontrr.tionaln^orinccioaon in lor Ootir.^a .OLonJ ven
Dayriachsol'*. Dor Zwock war, featxuatollon, ob Sohaodon an Jon
Qctrenvitaotcn inCol^v ^friorena boi i\,raorjn, die an Xajlto t- s_
woohnt loion, oino ;uorvsti,.cro Projncau nv.tion ala boi Ibraoncn,
die nicht lar in rfowoahnt soion. ischor 8--;to, Crcrwr hobo don '3c~
richt in NUornbor^ ^oh ert uni aoi von Ion Vorsuchon oohr bo.:oi3t>.rt
rowuaon. Hr tint, uini ( ’on Kiwohtwn su doorfan. (NO-319, AnJdL.Dow.

’JC, ... 328; 1579-P3, An 1.3 ». 97, It. 329). Uic-lor ib -cine KrLaab-


- 25 -


SIEVSiS


nia fuor dicae Art Trcckenkaelteexperinente in einaa vcn 13.

Doser.ber 19U2 riatiarten Bofchl, in don or -via .iaschors Aui\ .

<iic Au3fuohrunj von Hoohonvor;mahon von '*roi vurschicdenen .j-ten
von Kaoltcvorauchon am'uehrt. Aboclriften diascs ^fchla wurdon
vorachiodonen SS-Stollon und don 7cro-.a ■Ahnurcr’x*' su;eochickt.
(1612-PS, /.nkl.L'ew. 7?, u. 229). Ilimlora Brief enthJolt dio
fol.ondo Arweiaun^i

"5. Dio noachaffuTy dor fvor alio V^rsuch. notwondi.jen
Apprirnturon iat in uinsoli*.n nit !ar Dicnatstollu dog
Rclch3TrzW3-SS, (loo SS-i;irtschaft3-Vonrxltun^3hnunta=to3
uni nit den Ahnonorbo o.V. so boarrochon."

D.48 DowoionatorUl Z3i,%, less i3Chjr v t den 21 . fktoler
19 'j 3 von Blone van doicho fore chunks rat Ue Auf ;a-e tujowioson
orhiolt, Proiluftkaoltcvoraucho durchsufuohran* (NO-^ 32 , Ankl.row.
U9, I\. 369). siuvora half .nachor boi dor Beschaffunf, doa Flntzoa
und doa Puroonala fuor dicao Vuraucha. (3&&-rS, ..nkl.Buw. 123,

It* 383, Eintragun^ fuor don 21. Januor Ul*).

An 13* Januor 192*3 Iwtto daachor nit Gr.wits uni don Aj\.y~
klngton poppondick uobor diu Kaoltov.'raucho tint Konforons. Auf
dioaor Konfurons wurdon daachora Rial, .vrcoche ,in dioni Kjoprochon.
Er lxtonto, dnaa or rdt '.on ■Umoni.rb-■ rt-uito und ihn isoricht
orstatto. Dor Aktunvoracrk . aachur3 ucnor 'ioao Xcnforona aoii t
offoriDichtllch, daoc vcn ihn V/asaor-Sr-oltovoraucho auagofUuhrt
wordon woron und daoa Grrmits ihn aufforderte, iroitoro Srfricrun ta-
vuraucho r.it trock-.n<.r Kr.clto auasuf'juhren, Mo .r "oini :o 100
Faolle habo."


- 26 -


SIBVS-S


Die3or Aktonvernerk wurdo as 28. Januar don An^eklagten ttO- ld l f

Hrandt von Sievora sugeschickt. Is Begloitbrief bat Sievers Fran it

un aoine Meinung daruobor, wolche Baltung or uni ilaschor in lozu,’

auf ihro Stellung Grawits gogonuober oinnohsor. aollto, nit dor

unauagcaprcchcnon Sittc, daaa Brandt boIi-j Stoll in; boi Grawita

otaorkun aollo, dor os ala "cine imfcragbare Situation" botrachtcto,

"nonn ein Nichtarat uober oeratliche Din.;e Auskunft geben aoll."

Vftia Sievera ferti -brinjon wolltc, war oin Ein,;roifon "randto bei

Hiaaler aoinotwocon, und or betento loahalb aolne pcrsoanlichc

Nodoutung, lniea or aagtoi

"V.oino Aufgabo iat Ja r.ur, den Fcrachcrn dlu ..’oge ~u
obnon mvl Arbeiton, dio dor neichofuohrur-SS ‘ -'fiohlt,
auf achnolisten .u«;o -vr Dorchfuchrur.i au bringun. Das
allerdinga kann ich bourtoilon - wor nac-iich acJmeUor
arboltut.

"„om die Bingo in Sukunft ao laufon aolio n, irlu SS-
Oruppvnfuohror Ora«itc daa wuenacht, o habo ich daa vim
Dodunkon, Jaan dann die Arbelton .oachora nicht aihr ao
raach uni un.'ohomt vorwaarta-gohon." (NO-320* Ankl.Doiw

103, iU 335-9).

An 17. Kobruar anivlto ..nachor aoinon boricht uobor die
i(vaultato cion Beporironto, in doe Koori«jrwa«n» xur Stwaoroung
* achffar untorkuohltor Doraonon bonutxt irurdo. (161&-PS, obon). In
aoinon nogloitbriof an Hicnlor toilto . r .-*-j nit, iaaa or in Dachau
Trockonkaoltovoraucho auafuolvrc. An dr. '.^cl: Vvrauchapcrooiwn aoi
oxporinontiort wordonj oio ooion 9 - ll JStundon lang is Froion lor
Kaolto uuagosotet werdon, wobci ihre Kojrporto^x»ratur auf 27 - 2 9
Colaiua gofallcn aoi.'Bio Betrositauton dor Vorauchaporpcnon scion-
woiasgofroron gotrosou.


- 27 -


SIZVSlS


Itaschor sehlug eine grease fteibe von -ScperinenUsn i. Ausahwitaor
Konsentrationslager vor. niosor Grt wuerie fucr die Vornahru aolchur
Sxperinonto geoignot soin, woil es Jort kaeltor sei un i woil .'arch die
Or ou89d do a Golaontlo3 in Lager selbst •wunigur Aufsatan orrogt
wird (die Vorauchapcraonan eruollcn , wonn aio aohr frioren).

(1616-P3, oben, Untorotrcichun^en oingofuogt). Hlmler gab «aRcb>r
die Srlaubnis, zusaotliche Kaoltoocperinonte in 'en Kori 2 ontrations-
lagorn Auschwitz und Lublin auszufuehrcn. (1615-PS, AnkliBow. 109»

a. 393).

.Inachora iriof an don Angoklagtcn .ludolf Brandt vcc U. April
19U3 onthuolli, iaaa noch «iiv.- t.oiho von Trockonkaoltcvcrauchon
wnohrund oinur Poriodo aclacoror Kaclte an Haoftlln. on lea Konzon-
trationalabors Dachau nuagofuchrt wurdon. »ni;o .!«r Vorauchopor-
sonon wurdon lit Stundon lan._, in Froicn vinor Kaelto ven ninua 6° c
auageaotzt, uni iliro KoorporUnporatur war bio auT 25° C gonunkon.
(NO-292, Ariel..km* 11, ;j. 3&). Dio diui Tolosfaollo, lie nach
Nuffa Zougonausoago von don Trockonkaoltovorauchcn voruraachi
wurdon, ornicnoton aich augonachoinllch wauhrend llua«r Vorauohs-

ruito. (Noff a. 637-8)*

,jn 11. April lo.jto i iachor Hlrr. • L n kurton IXnricht Ufibor
"Auakuuhlungavorauchj au 1 .macho n on Luft YLr. M (’F‘-2JiO, Ankl.

Don. 112, R. 35U). Dur orioht solb.it lot nicht vorhandan, abor
dor Driof Jos An... kin, -on ..ulolf lirnnJt an Aaochur v.n 16 . April
huwoiat, .us lor Aa.- icl-v^o lothardt lhn ron Hinder zur Purch-
oicht orhlolt. (NO-2.'il, Ankl.


- 28 -


3 ISVS.5


3cw, 113, 355)• Bins Confercnz zwiscban .aschcr ur.d don Anjr-

kla^ten Gcbhardt fan*, an Uj. yai In Gp.;onrart !us .jijelOagton Piachur

in Hohenlycten atatfc. 'i-bfcjit besprach nit anchor li. in Uach.iuor

» \ •

Konzontraticnsla.^r au. c.'uohrton K’oltc- un‘ miorc V-.rauchc uni

lu' 1 .anchor -«in, r.lt ilr. susacuttnsuarboitcn. anchor fuerchttrt^,

tsoinc Urubh: m.,i.;koit au vurlioron uni w-indto 3ich an Siovors, un

liosu .jv.elu junhiit in taktvollcr .oisc au orlo .i^on, ia Gubhordt

oin sohr ^aitor Freund Himlora war uni anchor bih-r noino otwaijo

G-i tnornchaft fuorchtuto. (KO-231, £nkl. ». 116, ;t. 360), SiuVurn

aoinerscita trnfc ar. 22. 'ai in diun.r :n..ole ,nhoit an Yanrtt

horan un;: orauchto un /.ufnchlvwn ’iruo‘ r, ob Himlur in aau_

auf faachora Zu-ohoori .kuit ur £r a wit Golhirl Ir pn*u >Icha bontL-rv-

tc iclnun an ,;o*ubn hobo. bat w, it..Thin un ran Its "In roifon

au^unuton .anchors mi 1 , nnjtot

"Ich lu£o c'ioac .ovjoLa :unhcit v.rtrau- navcll in Ihru
Itaowlo und bitto Sio var nllca, do: r von Dr. ..anchor

(ana nlloin, nur au ihror pornoonllch n Untorrlchtunj
au vomonlun, halt Dr. anchor koin rl-.i Schwiori koitcn
von SS-flruf. .ror. i*. G bhardt acht w r ’cn."

(fiO-267, ..nkl. or. 117, 366).

/Jn anchor Gobhardt in llohcnlychcn V-jaochto, ur uti t-. ilm
dor lotatoro, lio ttniv -raita jtslauT.oiir -a or Tulfun. (NO-231 oV>n).
^anchor fol^to Sioaor .jo\j ur.. , uni Si v rs unturntuatato ihn veil
un 1 -.ana uni artuitot. - It on .,'i.ckli > u ran t uni 1 cm
auoarinun, un i.onchuro m raiur. aun prlvitd:ronton au uric.. :lic*hun.
(NO-22y, /aikl. lid, . 367; VO-290, ;jikl.’ 121, .. 373).

Ikisn -.uacuurr. Hibilitatioiajaclu-ift


- z; -


kl


SISVSiS

axil* don JCaelte- und Hoohorr/crsocrt-n Vasiurto, wird lurch .uircncrs
oricht U'-ter soine aontllcho Vorbilain-, '‘on or run Zuocko adn r
Ha'jilitation (NO-230, Ankl.IXw. 115, :i. 356)schrieb und auch andorea
')<Moi8cv-torlnl In don .Jctcn enricaon. (*50— 21 j 0 , Anklj -i. 112 , >.• 35U) •

Un,.ofnoltr ir. HoYoebor 19lv2 schion oa Sievcrs ermionscht, lach^r
von lor Luftwaffe zur Jaffcn-SS ver3«.t*on zu laascn. Sicvora ala
rieichaloltor lea Ahnunorb s hatto in Zusonronhan nit .-jehers Vor-
autzun,. uin- unfan roicho Korrcspcivkma. (NO-288, Ankl.ow. 9; , .'<•
326} 110-236, ijikl.Doir. 101, 333; NO-320, .jikl. ow. 103; .t. 335j

NO-236, Ankl.Buw. 10U, ... 3W). BUs* /oraotzun;, lie nach don
Konat '*M 19U3 otottfonrt, voniraachU, 'vtr;<.chtlicho Sctwioritk:itoT,
well Hippko ilnachor nicht froi,e'-an «allt,, obw hi or uni ooino
yltar. e. ; t- r v n :n vioL.n Tolosfaellcn oi don VOTflUO
Hippko angto, uisohur aoi ihr Vorbin .n t .smnn zur SS. (IW-270,
.jikl«,y<w* 110, in 351)*

In Stovers'acton Tr^obuch slid sahlrwichc ,'k.iapiolo fuor
Stovers Hilfu au^unoton .utactora. AB 1- Fibruo* 19U3 oprach or von
saloon Duauohun,;on, ..jvarv.a, Gornot*.’ un i Chcnikxlion fu^r .aachur3
ESipcrlnonto zu boketron. (10-533, lk nkl122, ti. 379)* 6. uni

21. Junuar 19U* orwaohntu r io M'.tifra^o. (35U6-i5, Ankl.'cw. 123,
.c 362). .lector borichtoU Silvers von Zoit su Zoit u-bor i» Staid
uixi lio Kinzalhoitun lor Kaoltoveraocbu. (;X>-533, oben, Sintra^unjon
von 16, 701 ir,, 12. \aorr. un: 6. and 7. April 19U3)«


SISTERS


Sievers hattc zahlrciche Vorpflichtan ;cn la Vurbiniun,: rit
itaachors Dorichtcn. Z 3 war Siovors, dor vor3chlu,j, daso ascbjr
auf dor an 26.-27. Oktobor 19U2 in ftierriborg ob v ohaltcnon
KaoltoKonferonz dor Luftsiaffe orschoinen uni clnon Itericht er-
3 Litton oolite. lia war Sicvcrsij.af abe, dio nuti^n Varbo-
roitun;;on b-troffa Bratattun;; ,ca IWrichtaa zu troffos.(UO-
23U, Ankl. "'iK. 83, It* 2ilj 1609-FS, -nkl.ifcw. 92, ... 261).

Dji 3 Vorhaoltnis Siovcr3' zu ..zschor dor 7ornahr-j 'ar Xaoltu-
vur3ucho mchto es Silvers zur iflicht, 'i : vorbcrwiton’.n
raaonnhewn fucr dio fornohr*» Jor ‘Xporl^.ntw zu troffon, sich
•urch poraoonllcho Inapoktion nit don FcrtuchrJ tt lor ixpori-
nento vertraut zu ijaahcn, die not*, r. ii.;o Auast'.tt'in; uni 4-a
Material oinachliusclich or waohr ,n J . dor X xlto ixporiaontc
„o rauchUn Funachcn zur VWfuo & 'un£ su atcllui, Uurichta unbar
don Fortachritt dor Voraucho su anj-ran/un on 5 »u orstatCon un!
dio Fr.'.;« lor ..uairortun, uni /orooff:ntllchun£ solchor Airichtu
su 'ohandoln. Ja Onndo .on-rr.n Jar dio*'- I L ;kolt lib :x~
fuollun.; aclnor . flichton, vio air. veu Gievora in aoinos^ riuf
an.'. - von 28, januru -r . in

diooon Griof orklaort«- or, -inas or '.on -orachcrn io ..<j v u obn.

UI. ' ■: I' •#

(Niv-320, .jikl* -.i. 103, . 335).

Dioa let fornur nurch i.* Tats .ehu .rdos n, lu;; Gi- visro
in Stytonbor 17l*2 four joK ra Hvhon- ur. 1 Knultoczporir-nU
-inun BloktroItordJ r...h r.u - :<v~ n Yorsucht*. . (:.'035/5,
i'Jikl* uw. 51*8, it 10371), un aaj r an 20. Okt ->r 19li2 an
. uost, Ion Kurator o:- uhn : .r -;3 It ’ r itto u - . tec.tiu.tc
loot rune nto aun Gobrnuch in Ahnonerbeinatitut fucr .Tolirwi33on-
schaftlichu r'orschun ho rant rat. (W>3o7l, .Jdd er. 5U9,

ii. 10372).


31 -


smsis


In dcr or3tcn Scptonberaocha Acs .Tahrcs 191*2 sowio Aoi vtr-
3chi.,donon anloron Golsjonhciton tcsuchtc - icvors die Vcraucha-
atatlon In Dachau uni wohnto asallst Xaoltcvoraucher. -_i. (Hoff,

,U 635; MO-231., Ariel, cw. o3, A. 211). Glovers hit aus^osa-, dass
or boi '-or ..uufuohrun , von asroi Xfiv/ltevcrsuchon In Tcchau anwosenl
^ortoson sol. I'oin orston fSnl ash Siovors, *io cine •orsuchspcraon In
oliwn Aaun ^obracht wurdo, un.- or boobachtute die Aufaichtsporsonon
bol dor Able suns, dor Xnstrununtc* (A. 56o!*). ’cl sr awoiton Ocle :oi>-
hoit, ala .voschor tuaajr-.on ait dun .Jm^nor' -^n.jcstollton lilrt o so¬
por inontiorto, war Giovora au;c --n, ala uin Vorauch untoriwonon wurdo,
bol don nan ait toodlieheM ..u3 G aj*; rechnotc. (... 5605-7).

C. yaLirlnvorjuclwi (Ariel* o:ic drift, ‘differ 6 'C)).

dor jocohrolbun, !cr vortrcchcrlsch-.n atur dor :nlurla-
acporirv-mto wird auf don Schriftsat* '.or ;.nkla ;obohoordo oojun don
An okln ;ton Hoo j vorwiooon.

Siovors hat to von don vurbrochorlaotadn ValAria-TftrJUchon in Dachau
Konntnls und lloh ihnon noli Untoratuotsun,;. In solnor Zou ;onnus*m»
hat or urkloort, dioa .Jtfa..,: 191.2 von JUbOot urfnhron hnbo, lass
Jchillln. in Dachau » nlarlavorauctu 'urchfu-hrto. (-• 5692)# In oiiwr
Donkachrlft van 3. April 191*2 unbar ciivj • jratun., swischon Siovors uni
Dr. May uubor le llatsfra .o fuor ulna /ursuchsstition las *JwenorN»S
wur.io von Siovors als uo’-orsou .oivkir Grand fuor die irrichtun dor
Anln^ in Dachau an,ofuohrt, Cass Schillin dart scire 'i&lariavorsuche
ausfuohrto. (MO-721, Arid# utf* 126, .(• 101). Cb.-J^ich io Denk-
achrift don ftt-cn "Schlonk" cm .ohnt, so hat 'levers


SISTSbS


uus.jcoa^t, class dor Hoes haotto "Schilling lauten sollon.

(It. 5693).

Dor Zeu^o Viciro ; hat bukwdoty lass Siovors SnJe 19h3 odor
Anfanj 19Ui laohmala Schillin. s Falariastation .< sucht un-' -l«rt
nfchroro Desprochun ,-n uit PL-utrvor, oincn litor'cltor Schillin .x,
;oAabt hobo. IiU5-7, U&i). 2r hat orklaort, dnss Siovurs nit
Schilling Doratun^on ahldol£xn*l auch das LaKratoriun bocich-
ti to. (H. U23). Siovor3 hat hokun ‘ .t, ass liciso 'usucho und
Doratun ;on dio Versotsun ; i'lootiv.ra zu- n Jmrisjanschaftlichon
Pcrschun^slnstitut loc .Jmon rbos sue Zb 1- hat ton.

Dine ,*iiho von iiini.rn.jun,on In Sluvors' Tn.jobuch fu.r 19Ui
txmolst, das a Glovers rdt don ' -.lnria-Vorouchon In Vorlir.'.uni
stand uni oio untoratvwtsto. .ja 30. Jonuar crhl It or von plootn r
oinon Aufft'ts ojbur haliiria. lino Rintra unj ven 22. Pebruar bo-
nn ti "In Sachon Haui>tstur:ifuohr<>r Dr^lootncr nuns durch Vornttt-
lua; do a itOF (uoichs :osiuvdhcit3fuchrors Conti) nchr untorncoson
warden." Melon aciiwr Taoti, kuit nit Schillin arboitoto Plootnc r
auch it .Uschor an Jon Lut urimun jvorsuchon sur -awn. (cioho
lio Mntra.iun.;on von 29. Janunr ur.l lh. April). I&° iintra^un, vcaa
lo. !' ii sel,.t, ns .uujehora Forschur. surfeit Ploatnur uebartro^on
wurdo. Offonolchtlich r ties uirv; Fol .e von Sch fieri ;koitcn, 'io
i.noohor ous lor Bntfuohiun , von KinJorn lurch ihn und soino Frau
urwachson ..rvrot. n 23 . IMi 19Ub *ur-'o ilootn-r ait dcr Loitun
hr iihnunor Mat tollun in Dachau txauftr -t. tout iintra mj von
31. J'ai karxm Siovors und ira.-its hinslchtlieh lor woiteren
Zuoamonarl cit Plootnjrs nit Schillin; zu olrv.r Varatoon iigunrf.

- 33 -


SIETStS


/jn 21. Junl untorhlolt sich Sic vers alt Schlllln; laruobar, -333

rloetnur3 Toutickeit Lei doa lotateren wecun dor Vorsotaunt, zun

.Juvj.'^rbit eln^oschracnkt werclcn mieasto. lataauchlich irur^lo Ilootnor

•

an 27. Juni aun ;.bt:ilun sloit^-r '.as :» iaTrissonschaftlich-n '.'or-
achun .ainatituta lua .’.hnonorlcs orrvuint. Lut Elntraijun.. n vor. 2h*
/.iL>uat 19Ui imrdc dio Zuianooiurbcit nriachon Schl lll n.; und Ilootnur
vorclnVort. (35U6-1S, Ankl.^w. 123, .<• 362).

D# Loatvor3ucho (Sonf,;Q3vorauchu) Anfcln achrlft, Ziff or 6 (D)).

Untor dor Leltun ; von rroiVaacr Hlrt von >!or Straaabur or Unl-
voraitaot mirlun ven /.inter 19h2 -Is am Sarn-.r 19Mi /orsuem. uoUr
diu bosto ' ehon llun .jwo la : von birch S- ixT as vorurauchton Vorlotaun-
i.nn In K.Z. Nata«roil.,r ’uroh^ofuohrt. do /arauche wurden von Hlrtilur
und dor Luftwaffe an . >rdnot und vc*; ichaferschuz.?irnt unUratuotzt.

Von Soiton uor SS wurlon duoo V>rsuch-j durch do Oosoll nohaft Ahnun-
orbo un : Siovora unUratuotzt. (Ii92-I3, ..nld.Ik/w, 267, it. 103U).
I/jtturor ro.'olte ouch 1 Zahlur. <-r Pcrachun,abuihilfon auiturui
ilea Ahnunorboo. (NO-3819, .jikl. or. 550, ,v.l0372).

1 .n d'.son Vursuchon hatt-o Si* v«.ra taoti ;on Antoll infolio

aolnor ZuaLrunarboit alt don , jv.oklA,.-ton Karl uni .u'olf Hrandt

uml rdt Hlrt un\ Jooaon oratori Aaaiatont.n far, ;li-ir.

%

Ea 1st nua don Akton .,r ;lchtllch, Loss Siovora nit Hlrt nl«►-
doatona a-.it Januor 19 U2 in Sctirlft.iucha*-1 stand. Unc! bias cr oa
war, dor Ulcimlor


SXBVEttS


ait Hirt in "joruehrun r . tarachto• (NO-791, ^nkl«r^*. 256, ... 1016 )
N0792, AnfcUbow. 257, v* 1017).


,ju 9. ,.pril lvU2 toilto Silvers Hirt schriftlich nit, doss

Himlor uin^uhon’i von :iirt u* or ooiiK Scnf,;a8Toraocho urt-.-rrichtut

zu wur'on wu^nsch.. 5* fuhr '"-nr. fort*

"In Zuar.m-intvuv. nit be con lor-n Gv-hoisv-rsuch>-n, die wir
z.Zt. in Dachau Jurchfu*'hron,nin- wir sichcr in lor
zur gourde run. uiosor Vorsucho Ihnen dm ill •• '!oe,:lich-
kuiton zur Vcrfuojun xu stdlon. Vi- Uolcht koonnun Die
doch. uinna] aiaon *l«inon fl-nei- -richt fu r Jon ueiens-
fuohror-SS ttblor Thru Lortvoraucho ufsctx ’i;.

."Kino .*oisu nach ..rlin sullen 3io nun »'.~r vorlocuTi. nuf
kuiivin Fall nnoi on, sund ’-or acichoruohr sr-33 oich Ja auch
dauorr.i in Kuohror-.'fcuptquartiur luftiault. Ich hubo Ahcr
in iw u. nicht 'cnccwon, Sic so bait do n>,. lich in Stracsi urj
zu boauchun. dclloicht laoasfc aich nbor h-r fuor ~io «lno
liulao nach hiwnchan ''urchfuohr-n, «o ioh *nn nuch tklo un-
’ holt baton wuerlo, Sio sit ua i/jlt r unsuroa Inatdtutoa fuor
EntoQolo,,i-i bukaruitaurochcn un' Ihnon auch uinun Uubliw in
unaoro Ouhi/ix.vursucb. in Dachau tor. k'onnto." \!K>-7?3, Ankl.
Dow. 25<1, ,1. 1019)#

,.ua don Yfortlaut doo 'xi.for fiuht fervor, dass oa Siovora stltor
«;.r, -tor Hiaalore ,.urflrfc>d»ii auT Hlrto Foraohui^snrhoit uubor
I,o 3 t,;.;a lunkto. "Aoa wirl auch lurch din Tataicho .wioaon, dnaa
or boroits on 9. februnr 19b2 Jlrta *rlcht uoh r din Anlo W
oinur Skolottaamlun,: ur. uo'-or ti • Varochun .cn auf :or ‘Vdti lor
Intrnvitalnikroak-.pio dtn „njofcla t n ul If r -nit v nol.- .t
hatto. I/jtaturo •/■jr.iucho betrnfer. .tio .lrkua on von Lost auf
lubonloB thiwobo (HO-O05, -nkl. 175, 6V5). oriuntiurV;

Uiunlor uobor Hirta : rioht an 27. Fotrumr un-i wloa Sievoro an,
woitor uu'.- r dc ^uit-.i tu borichtun.


- 35 -


SIF/rliS


(NO-090, Ankl.'tova 176, R* 699)• is war also lor Sl ov ar aao bo
Tlericht, dor M ita l e r voranlaaato, sich fu j Hlrts Lostvorauchu
»u intoreasioron.

An 27. Juni 19U2 uotumlttolte Siuvurs don anjoklurften \udolf
Iraiklt Ho Mitteilun^on Hirta uolor diu Vur*unian_ von Sonf, .is
loi lor i.attonl'okaerqifun^, In lius 1 Zoricht onraohnt or, daas
or iwch olno *oitoru "•uanrcchun . nit Hlrt ualx.r Hoaon punkt
hal-.;n words. Siovora aufol k .o tut lUrt soliw aachvorataoniL;u
Analcht ahtn;ohrtl nbju.uton, 'aas Sunf a "soilat in oinar
VorSuonnun von 1 su 1000 fuor * nactvon ;-fi-hrllch aoin koaniu,
wonn os nit uinor ^xmao^ont: r.>acon Koor;»orfl.-.jchj In '.jruch-
run,: kocco." (NO-79U, /J*l. low. 259, ...1021). Siovora *ar os,
dor am 2. Junl 1912 Rlrta : orlcht uobor aolno Vwrauchc uo'or diu
Oaawun»loni)ohan'!lun; nit Vitanincn wolWr.jib. In aoinon 0 loit-
achroibon au li'aoa i'orlcht tollto Siovora ion .j»ocklxjton
Rudolf Unndt nit, taps or nit Hlrt uino Zuasn-i-nkunft baton
uollo, an nit :ioaon "oiiw intonaivoru uoroniun;, Portfuohruud
uni poaohlounl .uii, ooinor orschun a.ir‘ jit in 'jcoprochon." In
Ion ^orlcht a»lhat urklnorto Hlrt, taoc or wc on ok Frankn-ich-
orrunjlvo noch koix>« Voraucto nit \* »t. 1 a *u» tonachon habo
luaf'i.jhron koonnuu.a'.r .ioIcIki Vereuchu * *jfuor« -rto, toaoivtoro
ujj llo Schut-wirkun lor Vitoaintotan.'lun fuatauatoUcn.

(N0-0?7, Ankl. ui». 260, . 1022),

rn oiiKr • nknchrlft vcn 26, ,Tuni 19U2 uotor io Untur-
Btuotzua; von Hirta 3onf -.sf< rachun, < n 'urch \ia Ahi» r rt*>
ochlu Si* v<-r3 »lo ^nrichtun irv.a ohmiss j nsctoftllchon
Forachun ainstltut^ toin /Jin ourto vor, in *i^ -orschun jjt-
bolton Hlrta un an ’oror «las <j 10 chaftier


36


SISV&iS


zusarxionzufassen uni so die Cr.;anisiurun.: and techni3Cho ,.ua—
fuohrun.{ ier Vorouchc zu orloichtorn. Sr 3chlu._; vcr, Uirt cun
aktlvon Klt^Uod dca nouon Instituts tu ernonnon ala Chof dor
Abttilun,; fl (Hirt). Sr orklnorto loichTalls, .’.aschor, dor danala
zuaa-mon nit ,tuff un. 1 .tonlor; I'oehonvurauchci lurchfuuhrto, sollto
cuir. Loiter lur .ibtoilun^ (.casch r) urnannt norion. Er erklr.orto,
lie notwondl^en Lleforun»;en fuor las noue Inatitut wucr '-on lolchter
au orklaeron ur.d vorstaonilicher so in, -1 a wunn aio nur untcr ion
Ninon ies ohnonerboa an^forlort «uur on* (NO-2210, Ankl. jw. 1i83,

a. 5^50).

Ala Er,;obnifl dlosar Vorachlnejo das An okl. ton Siovors vur-
fusio-to Hlmlur In Juli 19i|2 diO Schaffur. <'os Instituts fuor
tfohrwlaaoraichaftlicho ZsockTtirschun . in .Cilnon 'os Ahnunorbcs. In
soinon Schrei^on an Slevors for'urto Hirr-.l.r,dis nouo Institut
"aollu 'lie Forschun.;on <.os SW!auptstur=fu.;hr<;ro Prof. Dr. Hirt
In Jodor nur nooiliohon n'oioo untorotuotzen uni alio oinachlau.;l<,on
Porachun ;on ui>! ,jlolton in loichor fuiso foor’orn, dio Appiroto,
Goraoto, Hllfanlttul and itarl«oit:r Niro it s toll on odor boachaffon."
(NO-J»22, Ankl.Bow. 33, 336).

Siuvora :in. daran, die notucnii .on Vorbtroitun on fiwr die
Durchl'uohrur. ; dor I*>st .navorsoobi in K.Z. Natzuoilor zu treffon,
in 27. Au uat 191*-: toilto . r Oluocks van .iVIL. nit, dnss or , or no
Hirt, worm or ihn in Str-su-ur . Usuch‘, in 31. August nit nach
Natzrruilor nahnon *-i>iohU on ©rauchto aluocka, :io crfordorllchen


SIS73i£


Voroin l 'ar«uen nit iec Iajorkor T a nd a n ton au troffun* (NO?35>
Ankl.Dew. Ul, li. J23U5)* In uinon Aktenverr.crk vce 17- Soptc-n' or
19h2 a to 11 to Siovars Tost, dass die in acinun an awcka juricnto-
ten Schroibon cnraahnto uaprochun. an 31. ..aaiat 19U2 in Ncta-
woilor statt .« fun Ion hate un-' dnsa dlo ..r'oitabedin.unjun fuor ia
vor ;oachla 0 0 I > j n Vcrauclb. dort juunstL; scion, ur Auuuobun,
ihror Taoti kuit in Katswallor wuar Ion professor Hirt, Stabsarat
Dr. /incur und Dr, Kicssullach zur "ahrt von Strasstur; nach
MatswoiLjr zun Toil oin Auto tur.utzun wtSHi, und loahalb
nuoaatun don LajorbohcorJon -lonstllch 20 Li ur -cnzin su atcilt
nordon. (NO-977, Ankl. Ii82, 8.581*7) • In oiuon Schrei'uu an
Qluocka von 11. Sopto:iler 19U2 rklaotcSicvura, •. s in "itzHoiKr
din notwondi^on 7orbcdr\iun^cn"fuor ic ..usfushrun ; unauror krlu^n-
irisfloikachaftlichon rorachun.jsarloH^Ustucn on. Er rsuchto Qluocka
uo «uaatullunj 'ur or^ordorllchun Vollnachtcn zuc Totrot^n von
Nntzwoilor fuur Hirt, ..'L’i-r und Kisaolbach un.’ bat, Voraor, o fuor
ihro Unturbrin un ur. /crpflo un zu trcffon. Er fulir forti

"Dio on Haoftlln;un durchxufuohron'un Foraohun ;on aollun in
vior daoaion oincr vorhart'xnon Sr.nitr.utsboracku auc .ofuclu-t
wur'on. Es ain.’. dafuor nur orln .o liulicho 7«jr:\ondorur un,
inaboaonluro lint m oims nit olnfnchon Jlittoln h.'irau-
atoilundon AbtUrfB» urford.rllch. ,.uf Orund Isa ula «n3^;o
boi.Tufuo ;tun Flanoa dor -lauloltvn 'iitawellur bitto ich,
lio Dauloltun.. au bosuftr ..on, iio t .or. onin an urchxufuuhrvn.
Alio irch unaor*' Tr.oti kuit in !(«tsmilar ontotohundon KoaUn
wurlon von hlor aun ClratattJtJ , (UO-97d t ..nkl .' <*, li&Q,

R. 56U3).

In uinur Oonkschrlft an -Ion t j\ •uklajtun r.udolf “randt kli..;t.


snr/sis


Siovurs uobor jcwisso Scbwiori^koiton, die In Hatswoilor infoL.a

merejelnder Zusa^narboit dor La-arboa:-.tcn Mjf^utroton scion.

'oson'jrs entruoatot war Siuvcrs uc or ilo Tatsccho, lass dio

Lojorluitun; 'esahlunj fuor dio Gofan;orv.n rorlan.-to, an donen

axjwrirvjntlort wurio# Sr ca,;toi

"»«®nn ich an unsvro aohrwissonschaftlichon Forschun.cn, dio
nir in *CL Dachau durch .efuchrt ha bon, lenkc, so nusa ich
ilc'iio.’onnebor loNmd hurverhobon, in wolch .rosssuo-’i .or
un! vorstaondnisYollor Vciso unsore .-.rbciton d^rt . c-
fourdurt wurdon and uns Jodos gnt c uiikcrrv.n osoi,t
wur lc« Von oincr rosahlun. lor Haoftllno war nio iio
lioJe. In Jbvtaxoilor schoint ran cus ior i.r. •elojonhoit
noo^ichst viol Gold horausschlv on su wolLn. ,.ir
nriclv.n iio Vorsuchc Ja rdcht, un ir. „ni oinor fixon
iriasenschnftlichon Ic'oo w«. on, son -rn, un Jasdt
pr iktiwch dor Truppo uni !cruo:x)r niiv.us in obenen
Krnsti’iill don Doutsefcon Volk au nuetsan."

lirandt wurio ua koaoradschaftlichu Hllfo bui ior Schaffun.; dor

or for lor lichen .'jrlxiltc' J-iin. un on in Katwroilor .•oboUn. (i>-0y3,

..nkl. ow. 263, :.. 102 o). ;.uf diOBos Kocoran'un antwortoto ior

An.Mkla .^0 Ku'olf Tr-u.’t in 3. Du»oa‘*r 19U2 uni toiltc Siovurs

nit, 'ass or < 3 uio \>nhoit .uhabt h 0 , nit pohl uobor diosu

Schwiorl^kolton au sprochon, urv! 'ass or umldot halo, Oabb sio

a. ostollt w.jrlon wuordon. (JK>-092, Ankl.tMr. 180 . .. 702 ).


, In BOinor Anssaju jab dor Zou.;« Hell oiiw jonauo und oiiv-
dehon'.la oschrolbin. .’.or .a-t, wi«; !lc Lost risvuroucho durchjo-
fu. Iirt «r ion. ;ttu Ausfuohrun dor Vorouebo in lor Vorsuchsetation
dos Ahnonorbod in iVxtawoilor mirio ’urcr dirt uo' orwacht. pltto
Oktol^r 19li2 w;iron dio Vor' vroitun n fuor lose Vorsucho Nh-
un'ot, uni ur cfachr in fktolor ,r KcvuVjot Ujennon dio
*i # ontliohon Vor-iucho,


- 3 ? -


SIEVStS

nachdor die Vorauchacorsoncn m:;ofaohr lh Te^o lan., diesullc £r-
ncwhrui!; crhalton hat ton wio Ho S3-^achrannachafton. Dio orsto
Vorauchsr^ihu wurdo von Hirt an 30 Versncbsperscoon ait vorfluosaig-
ton Goa vor„onaran. (R. 1051). Trotadon Hirt vor d_ - Auswahl
liosor Vorsuchaporaonon vorsprochen hntto, or wuorio sich boi
Himlur als Lohn fuur froiwillijo •tlJun 0 fucr dio Vorsuchu fuor
lhru Froilaaaun [ uinaotson, noldoto 3ich Lyi alien von Hirt durcb-
;ofuohrton 7orauchon IcoIjw Versuc ha person fr-iwilli Qatar don
Vorauchapyraorwn bofandon aich poUtlach 7-irfoljtc, ..usaon, rolon,
Tachochon uni such oini Juutacho Staataanjchoorirfo. (A. 1052).

Dio crate Vorauch3r.;il»c wur-Jn von Hirt und uinen Qffizior dur
Luftwaffe nuf dio fol>nIo -rt vor 0 onornor.i Ein Tropfon dor
I'luosoi koit wurlo nuf inn I’ntcram dor V-rsuchaporaon „utraeufolt.
»ach un.’jfajhr 10 Stunten *oijton aich Vurbrorawngon, ‘die sich
uu! ur !on . nnxun Kcur.xir vorbruitoton, uol urall iort, wo Trupfon
dor Fluoasi 'koit nit dor Haut in -■ora.hrun ,;ukorr on wares. Elnijo
dor Vcrouchoi^rconun ur.lin«uton toilwuiso. nio Opfor .liosor Vor-
oucltu hatton Turchtbarc Schsorx,n auosustebon. Too^lich wurlon
photo.^opldaclu Aufnnh^n dor VerLrunnun .cn .-•fvneht. Hach fueiif
olor oocloTa .un orfol;U; dur jrsto Hxloaf dl. Di« i/>iche .luu
O.fura wurlo sosijit, uni dor ofurxl Las a io Luojon und

nndoro Oriono r^satontoila rjrstuort warm. An luochstvn Ta^c,
nlau an aiobtoa Tc,: rvich doa V,r3u<-. stnrvn woitcro slobcn dor
Vorsuchaporaonon.

- IjO -


SIE7S;S


Dio uobri.;on 22 warden nach unjofaahr swei (omton in oin arelcros
Konzcr.trationsla^ar uoborfuchrt, naehdOR sio in ;onuo ;cnicn fcasso
i- .Iurhor .astollt un- transportfaohi, r.ewcrdon waran. (n. 1052-53).
AnJoru Vursncho an Insasson do s YZ Natsweilor wurlun in dor G:is-
knmor, uaiofaehr 500 Kotor vm iajor cntfornt, durch jfujhrt.

Zu Jo twoion hctton dio Vorauchsporoonan dioso OcsJcarr.cr tu lo-
trotyn unmission kloino, das Oas onthaltondo .jipollon ror’irochjn.
Dio Fluessi kcit vcrdonpfto, uni iio Verauchsfxu-3onon nus3ton :lio
aich ontwickelnden aunpf.; o in a to a n . fk»o-.hnlich wurdon io Ver-
auchaixjrflonijn ohxrviochti . un’ «»ar‘on zur .v.itcrcn :eoUaehtun£

>tor Vursuchsor.jol'nicsu in lie Jwcnurbo-Vcrsuchsstction zuruock-
b , obracht. (It. 1053-^0 • l>lo Jr ,o' mo3o tntsprachen annaahornJ don
In tor croton Vuraucharciho Doobechtotcn. Dio ..tnun isor r ;onu dor
Vorauchspors >rwn waron o' onfall* lerstoort. Dio L'in;or. war on von
do?j Gas Borfrcsson* An runl 150 Ins as son ta KZ wur n Yaroucho
1 oor .»rt vurjuncracn. (... 105U-5). .'.Is Er.obnis solehor aepori-
nonto vurstarb un-jfaohr dor , loich> Prosontsats iriu bol dor erstun
Vurflucharuihu. (i« 1056),

rfeitoro L =t.- uivarsuchc --mrion lurch linspritaun m vor 'j-
nt.-»»on. lin.io Voroucho tfur’en in ulix« bn tutor n nun, or on
‘ton Vur 1 ronnun .sraus stiura, aus ,,efuohrt. "do Opfur ‘ioaor Ver-
nuch- ctorbon ohno ..unnahro. (Is. 1056). v ir. <roit.ro *rt Vorauoho
wurlo in Varauehsporsen.r. vcroncccton, .io lio Flu^sai.-.koit durcb
.‘on unI ulnnoiiur. rruaotan*

- ul -


SIEVSiS


Do Holl vor .,'eihnachtcr. 19U3 nach diner. Auaaenla^or versotzt wurdo,
wnr or nicht in dor La^o, uotor 'io ^rjebniaso dioaor Varaucho
iaiakunft zu ’ibon. (u. 1056). Sr kaa Jodoch Jedcn Konat tiiwl in
■ (iis K.Z. jratzw?ilor zuruock uni konnto laher boobochten, dass dio
Lout oaveraucho bia zun Hc-rbat 191xlx, ala die /.lliiorten claa K.Z.
JCatzwoilur Lofroiton, fort-joaotzt wurdtn. (it. 1057-6)•

lurch Holla Zeu .onauaaa;o iat orwioaon, duaa Gu'vorauol* an
otwa 220 Insaason ruasischur, polniscacr, tschochlacnor u jxI
loutachor Hotionalitnct lurch iiirt und a_inc Mitarboitcr .lurch.,o-
fu-hrt wur'lon. Un><faahr 50 von ihnun atnrbcn. Koirw <lor Voruucha-
poraon hatto alch froiwilli ol ct. (Holl, ...1052, >(• 1057).

An 7. i.prll 191x3» fJa die Loat.-oranclw in vollon Oan,-o wtu-on
(obon), ordnoto Rlrrlor oino Intonaifiurun dor Loatforuchun;; an.

Un ;ufr.ohr zu Hoa.ir fc.lt wnrdo lor Portachritt dor Hirtcclun Loat-
forachir. un rfurch Ho V-rnotzun. von Hirta AssiaUnton .liaaor, dor
SmvLtiotaoffizior dor Luftwaffe war, in Prt»,.o ..oatollt. Da I-.-raorvil-
tui :olo .unholton in Siovora' .oasert fiolen, richtotu lioaor on
ilulnlf urmrlt oin protoatschroilon woven dor boabulchti^ton Vor-
aotzun , 1 -ncra ui» orkl-korto, 'us die L atvoroucho aufhooron
tuv.naton, w-jnn ir*ior na Vohrwiasonschrtftlicho Peraohun uinatitut
vorliuaao. Sluvoru fcoschriui '.-Lnn, waa zu tun war, u lio woitorun
Diunato il^rwrs m lor. Jicunur’.o-Inatitut aichorzuotolloti. (f.'0-193,
,.nkl. jy». 261x, ...1030).

An 3. tt.vunbor 19U3 Bt-.lltu Slavers wiodorun sweeka Poor lurun,*,
lor Loatvoraucho urd In Inturoaao ihre3 Fort tin,;«u fuor swui on
don Poraohun. sarfolton Hirta botoill to Aralatcnton Zou niaac uus,


- 1x2


„I3.T£.S


uc lhiun ian Doauj arhoohtar Lobcnsuittolr-aticnan zu ormxijlichan.
ittuvora an, daaa iu Fcrschun^sarluitcn '«! lor Strasabur or
i.l toilun K (Hirt) Jus .ohnrirs-nschaftlich-n Forsclnci ^ainatituts
Jus .Jmcrwr’ as, an denon 'iosy reraonon toilnahnun, ,s \#itun nit
M oaun iljcit33Chaoilichen Giftatoffou ulnachloeaaun, tUo ihror

Outiun holt Schaion zu^ol‘uo 0 t haof.cn. (b72-?S, -nkl. jx. 267, H.103U).

Oaa towaiamtorial hat Sclar or .ubon, loss Hirt w.aohronl <’.ur
Gi.suntduuar «!or Loatvoraucho nit Jur Gcsdlochaft Jmunarbo var-
bun ton war. ..nfaix, 19 Wj atollton Hirt und incur die Zr.jobninao
Jor Iyjatvuraur.hu in oinua .uricht suaorcon, -or an Titol "Itohand-
lun.avorachla . fucr Koniifatoffvurlcttun on ait Lcat" tru • iJa
Horaua ;o* ur wurdo d~.a Institvt fuur wiaa nachaftlicho Zn-ckfor-
oohun , ..btullvin , I! .toa idmonorbo*, iitrasa! ur.j, .'jutouiachoa
Irmtitut, joaolchnot* Z»lcbtu, nittluro uni ach^uru Loatvor-
lotsun ;an a in' Larin on. nolint. Sitv.ra orliiolt raohroru Koplon
liosua orlchto. (NO-099, AnJd.TV. 26fl, 1035). «J» 31. Wwrt

rvach !un Karl 'ran’t oinan Fuohrorcrln*a, "or Ihn woltjohunto
VollmHChtun aui* ton 0 Q bioto dor ch.aiochun Kriojafuohrun uolor-
tm ,, urhulton hatiu (NO-012, .mkl. 270, ... 103d), infomiartu
Slover* ran’t uobor Hirto .j'citun un! outer ab ihn uirvj Koplo
on urichtna. \r luwoia dafuor licet in Siuvors* riuf von
11. April 19Ui .an :.utoir ran It. (K0-015, n«V. a. 275, ...1039).
Karl ran.’t .ab au, :.-i3* lor .crtlaut toa urlchtus Klar *oi| to,
iJaso '/or such* on ! to ns chon atatt. cfunlon batun. (... 2626 ).

Dowiaaun wurto for nor, loan 'or un reklAotu 33x» in oulnur
'■A onachaft ala -JvoUnnochti^tor in ..uichafurschun ;arat in
(ktoter 19U3 Hirt oinon -uftr i zu Purachun -aorboil n


SISVSS


In Intorcaao lor Poerderun.. aoinor Gasvorsucho ortoiltc. Der
Deweia dafuor »ir J durch 'do Kartoikarto in Ion Aktoi. uabor ~lonoa
F.rschujva lUftra^ ic . .oicha forschun. ar '.t orrracht, wo .lor von
lcrao an Hirt or toil to ..uftrr. untor S3 7 or ran&mer 0329 vcr-
tuichnct iat. (NO-690, ;.nJcl.jew. 120, ...373)- Siovora ,,ab mu, ioas
an Hirt oin noichaforachunrsauTtra^ "uobor nlrkunj von Loot
oof loboivio Or ,anisa;n“ ortoilt wcr-don war* (il> 5017)* dr hat
fornur au .o^o' on, daaa Hdelor iha of ulnur Konforuna in ..pril
19U2 aa_t babo, Hirt aollo Vorsucbo an inioivn Honmchan uni
nicht on froiwllli on Offisl raanwnortorn clurchfuahron. ( .. 5679).

Siuvera bosuu.;to, daaa or an 25* Januar 191*3 in ilaa K.Z.
Ifatswellar tjo^on.;on aoi u:x! ait don La crbeh *.n!on uo'cor ’ioVcr-
boroltun,;on fuor Hirta Lc-'tvoraucho vurh-ivlult ha'x . !*Iodo Vor-
lor-jitun ;on achloaaon !io oochnffwi.; von Laboratcrion und Vorauchs-
poraorvjn in aich oin. (... 561 j 2-1*3). Siovora buaoujto, dams die Loat-
vcrauohu achnudlich waron. (».. 5610). ..nl; oralioh aoi .a loouohoa
un 25. Januar i;l*3 onh Siovora mohn porsonon, an lonon Lontvcrsuahu
.urch, ;of uohrt wordon waron uni boolachtoto lllrt Loin ./ochaol doa Vor-
baivi >o an oinor dor puraonon. Siovorato, _aaa lio Verouohaj;or-
eonnn ihn uracuhXton, daaa alo aich fruiwilli. ^unoldot hootton,
uik’ Hirt lx.jt".uti ;to doa Siovora „c jnoubor. 5732). Siovora'
ZsiVihauasa-fu bosuo llch aoinor Konntnis iruubor, lams -io Loatvor-
auoho au TodoefooUon fuohrton, war wilcropruchavoll. Siovora bo-
aou. tc, lass or in V'ura 19'3 Hirt ., fr.v;t h.otto, oV ir^undoina dor
Vorsuoha orsonnn lurch dio Voroucho Scha'on .rllttuu hr.So, un'
liirt hal-i ihr ir-.uf ;oant«orttt, !aas swoi r 7 rrachsporaonon
a»u5 ruvloron im. n'on -osbrbon solan.


SIBVfilS


(iU 5733) • .'jidarorsoits ochioa Siovors Loctversucho In u;» ru
hn’Ajn als or nn^ab, loss or von olnen vorurtjllton Y'-rJirochar
Wttotc, '-'or als ?ol„o dor Versuch uatorbon soi. (U* 5810). ...as
Ho Matlonalitoet dor Vorsuchspcreoncn z nVolarv/t, ir.tr Siovors lor
Helmut.;, Visa rvich ihror Spracho au achl*. sson, ic Vc-rauchsj cr~
soncm Deutscho warcn. (... 5812). 'iio 'u».' lac orjoton Jodoch an*
klnr, 133 Siovors bcrcits In Januar 19a? 'onntnis devon bat to,
luas unfroiwilll .o '/orsuchaj-jraonon fuor lirta L- stvorsucho vor-
nuiiiot warden a oil tun. In olive Schr. 1 > n v n 3* Jar.uar 191*2
rlchtoto siovors an Hlrt dio itto, lha utfaseon ’o * srichto
uotor soino Forschun ;on zu uobor dttaln* nit or sic :*n JJlnalur
woltor.,o. on koonno. Siovors voralchurta Virt, daa& lnlor Hlrt
liu Go no hul un : zur urchfuchrun Jo dor .rt v n Yorsuchon an
"Gofun .onon art 1 , wlrklichon Vor’rcchorn, < io ohnahin niorala Iml-
iolanson -morion, un_ on zur :ilnrlchtun,\ 'oatlr.iton Poraonon* or-
tollon vuorto. ( KV-362,, ..nk 1. nr. 9*7, i;.10370).

Slovuro* To ubucJnintro-«m -d an iwaf hln, asa or slch

hauptuauchlich rlt ’or. notwondi/on VorkO trun/.un fa r dio urch-
I'unhrun, ar Lostv. rrucho bofoaato. .x 2*J. .r-muar 19U3 ‘ v suchto
Siovors liatzwtUor un ’ orlot rich dt or la* crvurwaltua ; an
20. Janur 191*3 vorhanlolto Siovors cdt ofj uob r 'ic -jrtfuohrun,,
'or Loatron ucho un . traf uni.odrcUvtft /irkohrun on fu.,r die Zu-
woisun v>,n /or<”icUs,xir. .-non, obrohl -r ua ■ to, as a aioh colnn
Untoriv iua -uf lio ZumlooD, v<’n .lutz .Hir .loro -o*o on L a,

(it. 573»>). .jo 2it. an' 2% Januar crhltlt Sf. vors von Hlrt l-urlchU
uubor L'Jtvorsucho un . a:. 17* Haora l'l3 «I. *t 3i r.- «inor a—

I

3iracbun lri


- 1*5


SIBVSIS


nVihrwlssfcnschaftlichon Farachun slnstitut boi, in ler uober Lost-
voraucho borichfcot wur.Ic. (NO-538, Ariel, low. 122, 3??).

E. ?'>.cr»H3g.»rvi:rsucho (AriOa^oschrift, Ziffer 6 (0))

Doaue.jlich olner ina Einzolno johaivlon '.cschrcibun ioa vur-
trochoriachon Cluxraktora 'or "oorinaaorvoraucho wird auf don
Sohriftaatx 'or Anklo^obehour to .;o,.on Schroodor vurwiuson.

'i° Auf,:obo lua Ahnonorbos boi !or urchfuehrur.. von !«ocr-
wAssorvoraueton, dio von Juli Sia Soptor. ;r 19Uli in iaclvnu statt-
fnn 'on, boatnnl huuptsaochlich in dor -r-ltsUUun, von ,uun und
Oornvit fuor dio V< rauch^. Siovura trif in Ninon '*a .^o^norboa dio
duau (Kitwoixli .on .'.nor nun .on.

Ala Pol, o lor von Schroj .Ur uoUr GriwitB an Hlralur jerich-
tufcon itto w Jo on Oonoh :l >4 un dor urcafu -hrun von licorwaaoorvor-
auchon an Haoftliium in Dachau, ordnoto Uimlor on 8. ,tuli I9kh
mi, .’. loa Jio Vorjucho an Zi .ounurn uxv! >oi an Voron raoalnoh
an'oro. oortoton Paraorna ala Xontr Ijxiraonun durch, ofuchrt war'on
a >llton. (N0-U3, ijikl. JJ6, U87).

Siovoro iituju von Rlaolure uorc v n lor cbljon Qonchrii,un.,
zur urclifttnhrun; von Vor.^uchon auf uaachors Vurjuchontation in
Dachau aoforfc untcrrichUt wordun acin. «= 27. .Tuni 19l*l» war ..aachor
duroh .'lo-)ti>ir, Via Ch f ’ .c ..hnonorbo-4.uhnrisaunachoftliciun^inj^r-
iuta in QChau,ab 0 *olooat nvun. (35W-U, .jdd. jr. 123, ft. 332,
Elntra ;un rtm 27. JUni). Siovurc u ib oich aa 20. Juli nnch
jnchrm un 5 vorhanlolto ait Flootner Tea Atakjnurbo-Iiu'Mtut ui>! lea


3IS72.S


Boi^Voocck, dor die 7er3ucho durcfcfuchren solltc, uobor die
Kuafuchrun,; dor ' corra jarvurauche und die Oostallunt; des
Ramos, «ro lie Vorsucho ®terncrra*n werdon koonnten. Siovers
stimte au, den notwendi 0 on Flata in dor Abtoilun,; ploetar
une In iiitccolu^acnon Irmtitut do 3 Ahnencrbos ear Vortva&xnz
xu stollon. (35U6-PS obon). zn 26. Juli 19U* Siovors an
Grawitz oinon schriftlichnn '-*richt ueber die 'vinzolhuiton soinor
Dosprechunc; in Dachau. Sinvur scirlob, dasa auf "unsurcr" Vur-
suchastation liO Vorjuchap’-'reoi-m unt ur b 'obracht wurdon toannton,
d«a AluKuarbo in Laboratoriun stollon und dans 'jr. ilootnur
don dia Voraucho durchfuchrondon Luftanff inaoraton Hilfo und
Hat und Untoratujtaun 0 loihen wuerdu. Si-vora <ab auch dio Zahl
ux^S don Rinsati i-;s Purconal* an, das U.1 -ion Vorouchon vor-
wondot werdon aolito, borochn-t-i die Dou-r dor /uroucho auf
oinon Zltr.un von droi Yochon und boxclchnjto dan 23 , juli I'M
alo -las l»tua fuor dun uglm d r Vorsucho, untor dor Vornus-
ootaun,;, doss dio Vorsuehsparaoixin v.rruo it ua! r lJn;or-
koriiiabint von Kiml-.r !iu notwoali...n I^fchlo orhalton hobs.
Schli^solich droockte* stivers tlo Roffnunj uia, doss die von
ihi.i rfotrofforun Vurkulunuyron oiam urfol^xvicton Vorlauf ler
Vorauch vulvrlointon wuordon und orsuohto, class Hin^lurs
Untcratu taun . dor Vorsucho orkunj -lich n^rlon soli. (NO-162,
i.nkl. on, 137, ... Udl), in soi&cr 2'HV.unaur>sa 1 p liat Sic vox's
zu;o b olxm, <laoa ur obi.;, n riof oosofariobua und nit ui(;L-
bouck in Dach.au ^Msprochon hobo. *(R. 570b). ,.io !cr riof
ftuTxul, , *ar vure uebar all- UnaelhoiWn d ir Hjcnraaaor-
vorsuchu untorrlchtat, Jia7oro kusoW, !ass .Z. IanoSson (Jab.l
vamondat nurlor. sollt u Siovers' .espruchui.^


SliV^iS


ait ~ci 0 lboock in nchau fand as 20. Juli statt. Siovers achriub,
daaa die Vorauche an 23. Juli cxler sobald nachdcs Yorauchapor-
sonen zur Vorfue.-un, atchen und dor La«,orkoaiandar.t :!iml«rs
Lofohl orhalten habo, ba^innon wuerdon.

ner Zou,;o ay, dor Abtoilur^alaitor in Bntonolojiachen

Inatitut doa .'Juwnerboa in "Dachau war, hat an^OaObcn, daaa cloaca

\

Inatitut auf Brauchen von Siovors einon Raun boroitatollte, dor
von dor jruppo oijlbocck zur "•arc ..fuohrun^ von ’’.corwaaacrvorauchen

* verwarviot wurdo. (R. 5330). 'la Zou^onaussaje von Tachofoni^
bowoiat, daaa rdndestens oine dor Vorauchapuraonun ala Fol 3 o

• ior •'oorwaaa-jrwraucho atarb. (R. 933WiO) •

0. Flockfioborvcraucho (.j-Jclnjcachrift, Ziff or 6 (j))

Cozuo..lich oinar ins jLnrolnc ^ohonion roschroibun ( ; doa
vorbruchoriacixm Charoktora loser Vorauche wird auf dio Cchrlfb-
aaetzo „o 0 en tioee und Schroo-'.or verwioaon.

Siovora nahn an don von "aat.on an Inaaaaor. doa l\.Z« Natzeoilor
durci^ofuohr^'in verbrechoriachon Flcckfioburvorsuclwn toil, inion
or dio notwondi^on .JruchunjOn tezuo,;lich Jer Jestollun., von Vor-
auohaporaonon traf, vorsraltun„3.-iio8si l( e Frauen in Zuaa.'rsonhang
nit llcaon Vorauchon orlodiolo uni inion or die Yonmchaatation
doa «hnonorbea in Rottweiler nit i-rar ..uaruoatun J fuor dio Vor-
aucho zur Vorfuo a air.,; atollto.

An 16. ,.u _>ust 19U3, rla Haakon lie Vorbcrcitun^on fuor ilio
Vorlo^un^ seiner I'lockfiotcrversuche von Schirncck nach Hatzwollor
traf, r.'.chVjto or an Siovers daa Brsuchon,


SIS73S


huivlort K.Z. Insassan fuer seine Forschunjsarto ite n sur yerfuncung
au stellen. ales ,;e'nt aus eine= Schreibsr. vco 30. September 191*3
horror, das Slavers an Haajen richtote uni in den er anjibt, dass
or 8ich freuo, bohilflich soin au kocnnen,uni das3 or daa.oasoss
ait don b oui^notun Stollen in Verbindang troton worde, un ihn
das "oowuenschto personal" awaisun zu las sen. (*J°_120, .jilcl. '«w.

297, R. 1387). Als Srgobnis von Silvers' ncauohun^or. wurden fuor
Hastens Vorsuche 103 Koeftlin^e von ..uschwitz nach JJatzwe^^^
transporticrt. Mose nurdon indessen von Baagen in unjeoijietcr
koorperltchor -/orfassun. bcfundon and labor saruock l> < cmieson. in
oinon Schroiben v<n 15. :tovoabor 1 «a3 an Kirt orklaerto or, doss
10 dor Louto waohrorvl dos Transports ^ostorbcn waoron und bat un
Hoitoro 100 Oofar^wn-j, doron Icoorp^rlicho Yurfassun., dor von Soldaton
,;loichkaono. (NG-121, Anlcl.bew. 293, d.1369). i!an koonnto gonul^t
soin onzunohaan, dasa Haa .on un 1 Siovars in koinor '.else fuor don
Tod diosor 18 I ns as son Torantwortlich varen. nio Aztidogobahoordo
untoratollt dies als irri.,. -or Transport von ..uscbritc nach
Natc./bilor au Vorsuchsreckon stand auf Jodon Fall in toilwoison
Kausnlzuoasnonhan,, ait dor. Tod diosor !.outc. I hr Tad .ror nit don
Transport vurknuopft.

mo z-ruito Oruppo von hur.^ort vorsuchapursontn irurdc xur
Verfuogun., gostollt, and lie Yorsuche aurdon von Hasten zrdschen
Snt'u 19U3 und Fruohsa=..or 19Ui dUTchgjfuehrt. Sie l'andon in dor
Vorouchsstation dos .Juxnerbos in Hatnoilcr statt. dos vird
lurch ..usauo b o aus Jon : onetsberieaten Jer Ls^eraorsto in Satc-
Woilur berriosun. 0*3-807, ..nkl.Jeir. 16$,


SI2731S


R. 732 aloha sus&otxlicho Bebersetxur,*). Haakon hat xugCf,ebenj
class die f .U3zu.'^e a us diosen Uerichton von 25. “’oveaber 19U3, 21*.
Dexenbor 19U3 und 1, Fcbruar 1911 sich wahrscheinlich auf soirw
?leckfiobonrorauchu boao^cn. (H. 9610-1, 5617). bi3 in Jen
Schriftsatx der ..nkla.abehoordo b c s en den Ai^ukla^-ton Schroedor
uarissexu :j<*oisaatorial sei„t, dass in Laufu diesor Vorsuehe uirv.
orhebllcho nnsohl von Todcsfaollon varkaaon.

9. '..ai 1911 bat Haakon in oirxa Schreiban an Kirt, dun

Chuf dor AbVjilun^, H i;i dohr«ia».Mchaftlichen Forschun^ainstitut

das Ahnonurboa un woitoro 200 K.Z. Inaaaaan fuur soinc vorbrocho-

rischon •orachun.sarboiton. ('0-123, ^nkl.baw, 303, :t. 1396).

'ilusor . : rlof mrde an Siovors aur woitoron Voranlasaun woitcr-

.jojubon, und aa 19. ii 19li ricltoto diesur an .©hi die ittu,*

die Insoaaon aur VorfUojun^ =u stollon. Sr boxog sich auf

fruuhoro Gvlo lonhoiton, boi wolchon . ohl Oofandonu fucr lioso

Vorsucho abaustollt hattu. Siovors aChioss ait cfen .ortoni

■ >3n justlaauiXjOn >naoaa euaa Haa,.on uobar aaina
„rb olton dun Chef doa S-u-itacta*., sun s *or Luftwaffe
ITirlcht jrst.:ti.cn , Wvi zu orwaohnJn 1st, ait wes son
L’nVirstuotaun . dio .jbelt^TTlurcnufu»,hrt ..orljiT TTis
sin-', uratens ^or Ucichslorschui;,srat un! =iuns die
S3* Ich bit to Sio ua dntachvldun.., oh als u ntjr-
sSuuUur; 1 .. cor S3 ,;cimnn\*cr Ton’s oil :

a) dor Ruiclisfuohror-SS odor

b) .las SS- .irtschafts-Vonral%un..s-Hauptart lor

d) iao Institut fuur vehnrissjnsehaftliche Zwock-
forschun^ lor I’offon-ss."

(»>0oe, inkl.Dow. 301*, R. 1398).

Sine ,.bschrlft dioaos riofos nurb an den .j\ -k la-,tun .u. olf

jran.lt eson-t, tier eu 6. Juni 1911 an Siovors achriab.


SIE72RS

iasa alle drei rt aator ala !io foerdernder. Stollon der S3 unrcehnt
cordon solltcn. (K£H»9, Artel... 303, R. 11,00). Siovora ;ab
-ioa« KittoUuxv, wlodarm an Eirt woitcr, dor as 10. Juli 1JU1,
an^Haa^n achriob und ihr. die 0 -ooL,not«,n ..nweiaun^:. botreflh do a

• l ■

Kroditoa fuar dio Voraucho ertoiltc. (:.'0-129, Artcl.3au. 303, R.lb03).


Haa b ons Schreibon voa 27. Jttrd 19U1, an Hirt baweiat uobor
Jodon 2*oifol, daaa lie von ihs durch u ofuuhrtcn Voraucho -'it In-
foktlon nit virulenton nccJCioborvirua ir. aich oinachloaaon,
.jonnu ao wio oa boi don Vorauchon in uchenwald dor Fall war.
CJO-127, rv.nkl. Tow. 306, ::.lh01). .ieiorun wurden hicr is Laufo
dioaor Vorauche VcrauchTMraonon ^tootot, wio aua Jea is Schrift-


flatz .o.;on loao is oinzelnon dAr*olo u t©n Jcwoiasctorial oraohon
' ,ur lun k!ltm ‘ ji 11100 Vorauchon bofandon aich untor don eyfern
An^ohcwrL* dor von houtachlnnd U.»ottton Usndor..

Siovora vortoidl^t aich vor alius Unit, dasa or ala ;richt-
Modiairv.r rdcht in dor L &.0 war, :io vollo Dodoutun.r dor durch-
.ol'uohrton Voraucho xu iwborsohon, daa huiaat, daaa r Icoino
Konntnla davon „ohabt habo, daaa dio raraom*n kuenatllch sit
r’lookfiobor infixiort wor;‘on wsr.ii. In *nbotracht dor noinaidAjon
Nntur dor & J u.,*onau33vo Siovoro' knnn 'ioaor Vcrtoidljun., k.in
Glaubjn .oachortct wordon. .A,usicht3 Siovora' Tcilnto an dicaon
aouasorat voraorflichon -or'a-echon :<anr. or auf Jtoiivn Fall M; . u n,
daaa or daa, waa an ion von ihs \r. Hazjcn aua v olicf orton Vcr-
auchapjraoi^n bo rn.on WttrJoJ 1 oKamW. Ea war aoiivj .flicht ,_>nau
fostzuatullon, rfna nit ih; m oscholfii aollU.


- 51 -


snvzss


Oas deset* e eatattet nicht, u„ss ex blondlinga irgand .«andaa, der
8 ® r - Ue &ictot ' -*.-«chlicne Opfer vwachaTfte, und dann, nachdem
ejae groaae Anaanl von ifaiwn getoetet tertian war, vorachuetato, dasa
©r nicht waste, «aa -it ihaon geacboh*. sollte.

H. Poli^il

Uaa dlutgerinnar. .adUel Fol^gU wurde untar dor Ultur.g dea .Anen-
eroes entwicxelt. Seine -irkaorj<elt wurdo dutch ^pori.ente bostLv-A,
die von teacher, de- Abteilungoleitor U ^hnenerba, an haaftlingen von
uacnau vorgencxnoen ..aruen. ttmn vir ala .^lohage-c ueftsfuehrer dea
Ahnenorbe fuor die /en,oltun £ aarbeiten, die Ait den Porachunjaplaonen
dos .uinunvrbe in tferbindung atuxien, vorar.t ortlich.

Obgleicn aor groeaate .oil «os -vteia-itoriila aicJ; iuf iio Tactig-
koit von Sievera.i.-. Var^cn* nit dor Po^gUhoratallung betlcht, 1 st
•a klar, v.103 Siovora von .~acher nerichte ub< die -.lXorachunga-
arbeitun erniolt, oie aua 0 cfuohrt fcorfon -aicn, «h« das Joly 3 H vervoll-
Kownnut ter. untor da .Mtoa. to* 15 . Sept^ber 1543 unUrbroiteto teacher
Sievors ainen darleht it tier tlabwachrift "•X'orioentu at eino . 5 nouon
Blutatilluncaattel -ro^-I 10-. Siov.x-a wrdu „oboten, in Vorbindung
at dor Polygalertoogonj. vortex oit,w>ie ociiritto ou ant,n>ch!v,n. (HO-oll,

ankl. bow. 239 , «. 9 $ 5 y.

Siovora orklao.to, daca *oino VcrbinJung :^t olygal nor in dor
irago auinor iirseugung boatand and tera in iieaer .*orbinlun S a nine oin-
zigo Taotigkeit darin o.acand, Oio dobcrfuohrung von Jachauor Haeftlingon,
dio in dor Poljrgalorsoagung au 85 u bild^t naran, me.; Schlachtora, woleho.
oin nouor ireougungsort nor, vomboraltun. (i.. 5725 ).

dntor do— Jatai. va. Id. 1943 *urd« ai^vura von


- 52 -


SEVERS


naachur gulwten, naac.tors Ch^-dker-Hacftling, dor Lr isgriff • ar, antlaa-
oan zu fcvnion und oach&u :-i vorlassen, ; Js Anvjstolltsn dog -thflonarbos
oijuuatollcn. naachur teilte Siovors sdt, dass die rfolgroichc 3ohand-
lung diesor roraon-lar.jolago.jolt fuor die rortfuunrung doo theorotischon
I oils uor Polygalforachung vea«ntlich s«i. .ds roichagi.«ch«oftsfuehrcr
dus .Umoncrbc bebmdolte iiovera huufig Peraonalfragan. (1-0-758, ankl.
out*. 242, n. 962). Ac 3. joaonbor 1943 *»urdo Siovera durch Hiaalurs *at
bonachricntigt, lass uio ilao m lu^r die Polygalorzcugung aufgorchobon
worueii v^ron auf Inuu. von -r-ohardta Verlangen, -ass dua Polygal in aoi-
no« iiohonlychenor Inatitut .epiuuft waroen aolito, ahs soino .vrzeugung
ondguoltig boschloaijn -cido. »u diaaur nolt v^rto Siavora auch .altgo-
teilt, class naschar Mu lic.i.r.\Jiac eine oologonhuit habon wuordo, alt
cion Polygalvorauc ;en fortsuTanron. (.%0-612, *n Kl. 3 ow. 241, n. 961).

Ea iat olao klar, dass SiuVura :dt der Poly galforachung vor dor ~oit in
V«rbirdung stand, ala souw -rzeugung i- «ugon>atz car loracrtung dor
oinzigo i'aKtor war.

uoa o*woi® unto rial boi non .-.ton b.atautigt, daaa naachup la ^orlauf
dor Polygalvoraucho den *«r aucftapcraor.cn Schusswundjn bcibrachto, ua dio
••irkaarakoit aoa Poly gala cutox na-.pTbo dingur, ^ or. zu proof on. (0-142/,,
Ai.nl. dow. i.62, ft. 4773/.

In dor zwuiten haalft. dea -ahroa 1943 achrivbon ncach.r und Dr.
.laforkaap onu- ..onandl-n* uober Poly gal. Jiva<. ..biiandlung nacht ointn
dautllchon ontorac/uou zwxachen /ersuenvn an lob-nien *.oncchon, uk dio
irKung von Polygal Ze rajicr., and rwllnlscn.n .:;t.^r3uc;.un,:on . Sio jr-


waehnt: "Ehu wir don nlinzachon uelrauci. d»s ..cdix*.,ants vorauenton und
oa auaprobiorvn lioasan, -.urto ea


SEOiS


durch ei,igununda V-naacne an iebcnder, .enachen in wsu& aoS aeinon Sin-
iluaa auf die ^.citdauer tier Gerinnung and dea Slatons joprueit". Spaetar
eroortert aio Abtundlcng klinischo Doobacbtungun bei «. o«raCion-r.. (i« 0 -
43d, AiUl. dmw. 240, it. 95o). uie in dioser Abhaadlun erxaohntur. Vcrsucho
ainu augonacnoinlicn oiojenigan, in doren 7®rlaof Haoftlin^a erschosaan
Norton. oo •luraon au tiilcrdlnga nicht in dor '.ondlung boachrlabon,
bd aie zwwCits verouiici.tiiciiung geschriebe.i vordon '-ir. Siovora sigtw
aua, uaaa il'—, ala i-aacher 1944 v-rhiXtut furto, vo.i uenchanor Polizai-
tuut g-aagt worde.i */-r, --aa naschcr -enachon -rachoaa, c~ Polygal austu-
probieren. (n. 572o).

wuehrend dea JalUtta 1>« b-ac.-.aolti£to Siovora aich ai.tiv -it dcr
Poiygalunguiegonneit. .ea 2k. Fobruar 1944 bospr&ch or aich uit naachor
wogun oinoa rolygalborichtas u. -.blurdtj aa. 31. ..aorz 194i. erhiolt
bio Vera von ..off dio . raaitongeachichton del in Folygalbohaadlong be find-
lichen Peraonan; a- 14. -pr.l 1944 orklaorto ^iovara, daaa dio wichtig-
ate AUfgabo in aachtu C_e Polyg.ipruefong aei; v. 24. auguat 1944 vor-
zoichnoto 3i-.Vv.ra, daas oin rwuca jlutgorinnongaaittcl cntwickult wordun
"or and gepruuft word&A soilto. baa iC :-bach von Si-vora aua don ahro
1V44 zolgt uucn Sioveia' coagodojuxto laotigkoit in ©-zug iof dio Polygal-
orzougung. (J546-PS, .nuA. L23, 3S2).

I. bkolettaa. ~lun-. (.ullageacnrift, -iffer 7)

Ala Antwort auf oi..o ditto dea /-ngckligtun i-uJolf Brandt ur.torbroi-
tetu ih-i Siovora aai 9. Pobruir 194- -.in-n doricfct von Jr. hirt von der
bnlvoreit-ut Straaaourg, daas -.s -.nru-ivacht Svi, »inu _,aodiache Skolett-
au-alung zu orlongon. (;:v-C<S5, -Jcl. £a*. 175, r.. 695). Ir. iacaoc


S’”~S


Byricnt bwfuor..ortcu art -la dirorttv Zrsoruung van M J iscuisrh-bolach.i-
vastiscnon Ko^isstrW iar jo achiffon* ainor solchon Bi -lung. Ir b^-

murKtu:


“In dun jucdiac .-bolacnc aatiachon kou-isaarcn, die ein
widerlichwi nbor ch&riktoriatiichos Cr.t oii*nachuntus v.r-
Koor.osirn, ;--ibcn ir die . oo^lichk-it, jin ;rc-ii'bircs -lss^n-
schaftUchas do.tur^nt za orworb-n, xnda. ir a?is ihro
Schaod-i sic.xm.

uiu pra-tiacho -urchfu-hreng dor nlbanAaloacA a-achAffimg
und oicn-rav-la.c.i^ closes ichaedel-itorials 3csc:vicht -ui
i»-cki.:uo;i s-wii in .on- -incr onxisuns in die ohroacht,
8.1-iLtlicnj u.diach-bjlac.iusiatiacn-n ,o.-iioajrc ir. -ukunft
lobond sniort Q-r roldpoUici -- ctb-r jb^n.'*


uijao i-Luivitjn h-ct-r. oinoo 5oal«r.u& o.ricnt au -rat .tten, *ol-
chua Bpoaixliaton laaaio&te, ou pnotograp.-iache .»ufnan-on und enthropo-
logiocn*. -.uaaungjn au -aciw.. uuu ..er:onlt, Geburtalaicn and .rndwro Por-
aonalangubvn u«r upfer ; -stauaUilon. Kiri ba^rxt "uitor:


"Jlacn d«~. danac.i haO,igjlu.hrtu:> Tod- d.a • udon, Joaacn
Kopf nichtT vorluttt *ordon darf, tronnt jr -cn Kopf von
jwu-pf Uiid a-.-dot xhn ir. vine rt oi.a-ivivrar. 38 flUva.iigkeit
gubottet in cii>ns it di«.aa. tvucko goaerfiffonon und gut
v«racnlioeobc.r j.i dl-chbohaoltorn *ua r««tlu ungaort. An
Hand ;«r iacntbildiufivhi«:n, d^r ~.so. und acnatigon An-
g'xben doa IvO fca and achlioaslich doa 3chi«dula koonner.
dort nan die v-i leichvndon witouischon forachu .jon, dio
fora Chungs uobvr i-iaavniugvhovrigkoit, oobur p-vtholop.iach.
Erachulnungon dor Schaudvlfona, u-b.r Ochimiora und -^roeaao
und uobor vlulao uvdoro .whr begliuion. »u.r dio Aafbox-throng
und uio bi foracfiu.ig jus so go«onnenun ochs-*doL .-\t«ri.\l»
more ate nouo ixlchseniVvraitaot Strieabar,; ihror 3oatir--
wing und ihror 4Ut£f sa dio geoignototo Stafltta.”

(Untoretruiciiun ;jh hinsugufuc ;t).


Am 27. rubra.r 1?.',2 toilte Bxv.at biov.rs -it, due !liuler lirto
..rbeit untorstuotiun und ih~ lloa .b fordvrlicno tor Vorfuogung at-Uon
wu«rdo. orandt ox SUyort, lit .x.- : .—.d la Me U3 .richtigon und

wiodur aob-r iixrxs x-cwit v.'icht za wrstutton. ('\>-090, Ankl.

176, h. 699).


Kirta noerd«risc.;or and unscnschlicher ?lzn wurdo aaf* liM oieo
-uiagofaehrt, die aich nor geringiaegig van dez. in seiner -wischcnbc-
riertt gecuenten /orachlag onterachiad. CJO- 065 , ebon). Jar so we is -a-


toriol hat gozeigt, taa* tnn baschlosson hatto, diu ?anzon Skclottc
dor Opfar and nicht bloos dio Scha--dcl aufzubemnrcn. Ac 2. ^ovoabor
1942 bat Sievera orandt cat deci .-eicftasichorhtitsh'.uptact dio not*ron-
digun .ituuchungon zu troffen, u-j zar .aisfcuhrung dieses clones 150
jaodiacho Haeftlin^c zua .uachwitx xu baachnffon. (.0-036, Aiucl. 3ew.
1?7, h. 699). Ax 6 . ; ovo b.r tjiltu --r*ndt -»-oir Zichuann, Jo- Chef
aea ^utoa IV-3-i. (Jucuiache ingolegonheiten), iu .-.ic..33ich.rhoits-
hauptajut, tdt, Uiaa alius Hirt zer Vorfuoguj.g atulloa sollo, was
xur Vervoliataendigung doi okeii>tts&.ulung orlordurlicn vearc. (HQ-
069, nl. Bow. 179, h. 702;.

aus Siovurs* Iriof an Jich-onn vou 21. Jajii 1943 goht hervor,

daaa SS-HauptstuxrXuoJu ar Bugcr, oin .itarbaitar in dor ^uienorbo-

0o Bella cnaft, dio Vorarboiton fun dia 4-*na=»natjllung dur SAolatt-

natmlung iiu lonzuntration l\..-f ..U3C..*itt m 79 Jaden, i0 Jaudinnon,

2 Polun and i« aslitcn vorgonoa^n hatto. In cioao.. Briof vrkinorto

Siuvera, doss aogor aj-ue a rboit wegon dux Otf\hr dor aistockcndon

KranklwAtun ir- Lxgor untororveh n -.usstu. Silvers oa u.z diu (Jvb r-

•

fuohning der rl*oftlin.,o, m do.iun i>-ger dioso .rbeit .U3 : ;efuahrt hatta,
nach duxr. hoiuentrationol...,-ji ..r.ttwviior, dn -i.;u wait ra To-tigkoit in
Auachwitx w-gun do.- .zistockungagofAhr axv.o. .;lic;i sci. Sin. ;uson-lertu
untorbrin,-,angBu^„. I lic.u.-it soiltw fu r diu droissig rrr.jon " four ujn.
kurzc_^£it" it, hootant rations! -gvr l.itzvuilur boschnfft :\rdon.


- 5b -


snsvsas


(80-0o7, *nkl. Bov. 151, 702).

jiu rklauruns dcs Lftgurlcitera dos Konxontritionaligora Hr.tx-
wcilcr, SS-Hiuptator-fuahrur Josef Kramer, cnthaollt, diss .of Ilirts
-nauchun Anfang august 1943 ungefaohr 80 Haoftlingo des ..uschwitzor
uoniuntrationalAgoro, oorunter rrauon, ins A octant rationaliser KAts-
veilor ueoorwioaun and Sort durch G\a uagobrccht worden aind. -u dio-
s«.a ihuck wsr olno boaondorv OcsXi.tr crbiut vordon. Dio Loichon dor
Opfor wurdon in drti Sondunjen an Ilirts ..nitordachea Institut an dor
itrusaburgor UkLfOraltMt voxaondt. (.'10-807, -nil. 3o . 185, *. 732).
Jioaca Bo voia.-ituriol iiti durch dio .uiasagu des looser. Haiuyjdorro
bostuutigt. Er ouiourto, aaas .jifong *uguat 1943.dvi urato ..utopaio-
tochnikur dca .uiata dac on Inatituta Bor.3 vor. Uirt den ooiohl orhiolt,
dio oohaoltur ia» Sollov Inatituta fuor uns-raohr 120 loichon vor-
tuboraiten. «lt lviac:ianrr.ouuon von uini on 1 a gun ki.on droi Uichon-
aondungon, 30 muon, 30 . ornor, und 26 . icnner, in Guotvrr-gon von
oinoia unbokannten Ort on. .Ole dioao Opror varan Judan. Divao Loichon
v.urdon 1a Kollor doa .inatouischon Inatituta in ion von Bong vorboroi-
toton uohuoltom konaerviort. (Honrypiorre, h. 712-4). Sioho luch
ognoro uidoaattttlicho irklrvorung. (K0-8P1, .*rJd. b ■ . 280, h. 1074).
io durch oluvora' r loboch orwiuacn iat, t .r Ixgar bufohlon "ordor.,
Gipaabdruucko von dan cpfom horzuatolloo. (3546-PS, --U. Bow. 123,
h. 392, Bintrngung fuor don 2. rebruar 1944).

.jifong Soptaukjar 1944, da dio illiiorton .o-^oor. o-.risBburg bo-


drohtun, vandte Siovera oich


SlPfejS


an don angeklagton Brandt -at dor J itt« uu .ev-oisangan, was ait dan
juodiacnon Loichen guacho h o n sollto, dio nocr. in den -'ehaeltorn in
Kollor aoB «nato_dachon Instituts Ugorton. ar teilto Brandt ait, dnsa
Hirt ioatando aoin wuordo, die 1-lehan zu "entfloiachon" and aio so
unkenntlich zu uacnon, ebor in dioao^. Fall-, -r.oro oin Toil dor -rboit
vurgobUch gotan wordon und -a waero oin "grosser vlaaenschaftlichor
Vorlust four diose oi.-J i^-vrtigc Sazcalung, woil d an ao h Honinit.ibguesae
nieflt (uohr -oeglich wooron. Ao Skolottaa*mlang ist ala aolcho nicht
aurfoolUg. lioichtoilo wdoidon dwOaricrt ala bol e.bernahieo Anatonio
durch Franzoaon hint.rlaaaone alto loicJwntoilo und zar Vortronnung go-
gubon." Slyvera bat Brandt ou oino anwoisung doniobor, ob dio Sa.tmlung
aufbowanrt, toilwoiao auTgeloeat odor vooilig aui'geloeat warden aollto.


(N0-086, .odd. Buw. 132, h. 704/.

mi a dor i.iedorachrlft d.s SS-Kauptatontfuahrera Borg end acinem
Tulophongoapra.cU .At Si.v.ra an 15. October 1944 iat tu orauhon, daaa


aunaochot uoachloaa.n warden u.r, dio Untorlagen f-er diuau grausanwn
Vorbrochon za vomichten, aber nach uinor zeitwoiaun Boaaorung dor
oilitaoriachen i^ige wurdt dieaor B-achluaa aufgenobon. 4m 21. Oktobor
1944 toilte Sievers terg ait, uui die -ufloosung dor &-.-lung in
Oeboroinstiuoung 'it don iruoher orhaltonwn oufchlun, W“Snde gefuohrt
warden aoi. (NO-091, -m*. W3, 705). -bar dies war nicht dor

Full. Hirt hatto Bong and aoinen -ssiatenten koyer b-aoftragt, dio 86
Loichcn zu zurgUodern und aid it St rasa burger kreoatoriua verbrannen
zu laaaonj iber diuae b-iden i_acnn-r wtwn dlein nicht inaUndo, diuau
ungohouru .uifgabe zu bowlltigcn. ^in- -nzahi von lichen bUeben un-


zorlugt und


vuitlicbon la dun ->o.;_oltorn sus a . --..i zst toii»casa zaralicdortcn
Laichun, un don -iindruc ; au orvockoa, Js sic za novation untaai-
Bonun Foracbungsirb-itan -braucnt »onl_n \nran, (Horuypijrra, h.

715; 80-881, oban).

i)iu von don fro.izojsisc.bjn dohoerdun atch Ji a.froiung fitrass-
borga gootchton .uifrulwor. von dicson Luichon -nd von don Goskfir.aorn
i« ftonzontrotionsiogor liAtzwoilor, &o die Opfur dai .uodischon Skolott-
sc^jAlung oivonlot .uruen, unoohlan die gr'.-s-ic uuschlchto iioscs uao-
sancordos lobondigor .Is tougon and Jokaaonto cs jo tun koenntun. (NO-
483, .awl. Dow. 184, ... 724 ; ;;v-807, obon).

Von doa. *ugonbliak n, no Siavaro arts 3oricht (K0-065, «nkl. Bow.
175, ft. 695) urhiolt, \ns«to or, dass facr dl* dasehr.ffun, ior atolott-
odjaulung oin —-.ssoajord -plant v r. ..ichtsJ^atoHonigor nVua jr an dor
Auafuohrung dioajs i’lzito* ‘.oil, s jylto olr.on ..r..;jat allton d-o -wnorboo
in o*.a Kormantratlonsl. or -..uscr.witz, ou die vorooroitundo .»uswnhl r.a
truifen und oor ;tu fuor di« UabarTuahrong dvr Opfur *.us .-ucchwitz noch
Nitzv.cilwr. £r trvf Vor>;oftrun;an fu^r dio 7orr.lcfttang dcr &ujuluns.
S«ino dchuld m.a dio Scli-ld das xgtan .tudolf -r -nit ist vial
groosner als dio dos brutjlan end gofej.Oloscr. \rv jr, d-: lio Judon
iu l.Atzwoil«r parooonlicl. vor .,stj. ferbruchan *»bron lost auo-

schliusslieh von dan -n^aklagtan SiwV^rs and buioll ndt uni Hirt
in 5 zcn« gvsutut wordan. (Sier.a » a-obuck sicv.rs fu.,r 1?43, W-538,
Midi dan. 122, 379, . j id. FabraV, 28. • : -1,

21 . and 22 . »ai, lo. uni 23. Juni).


SI~"1S


HI. SCHLUSS

Si<jvara' oinzigc -nt’-ort auf dio furchtbiron /crbrochon, an <l?r.cn
or butoiligt fcir, iat aratona, iaaa cr .itglicd oincr idoratandabcwo-
j.ui.ji K-kr ant z» nitons, <Iasa or auT boahoroa Bcfuhl hand alto. Baidu
uochtfortigungon hab-.i .vcinorlei ort. U-.a den ho-‘.;oron bcfehl -Jiba-
triift, zolgt Q-.a Bo raia^torial nicht, dasa Siovcra dioao V u rbrochcn
naf dofohlu hin auafu«irto. lx t^t doa voraautzlich and aca "Soachaofta-
etjwohnhoiv 1 '. Jodonfalla sollto ain hoehorer Bcfuhl nicht ala .Jld&runga-
grand von uinon. -.’.nnu .r.gufujhxt uordon, dor aich •.« ao atrafwuordigon
Vurbrochon botoiligt hat, io diojonigun, alt donon each diu Jtklago-
achrlft boacBaoftigt. can ju*wd an dor Raltbluutlgon -n-ordans von 86
Judun aktiv toilgunoi..on hat, kann oin nochorvr 5«fohl or.iooslich ala
mildorndor Ihuat and .in„ooohon voruon.

i>io Vartoidigung, dzaa ox an oir.«r ..idoratindabifcsunp teilgonoaw

uon lubo, iat laucharlich and cbsurd. Vox 01<* iat aio is hoochaton

(Jrado anwahr. Min koonnta >uvUst aoln, olr.ur Ir.dacrang sa jlaabon,

duaa oir. hohar Offiaior in dox SS viclloicht ia * Uuv 1 C M •inox' anti-

Nazi Cliquo boitrAt, la oa alien, dio aich dio uoho . %cnton, die

„ugon zu ooffnen, dnr ;<oi*ordon war, d-uta uoutachl nd don ..riog vorlo-

ron Uattu. So moon *dr daa ..ttont.'.t dca 20. wall uif Kitlor. rtber dor

olundo Siovora hat dio UnvorfroNadiuit ta blviuptcn, tiase or schon

1933 hiduratand loiatcto urd acino Taotigkoit cis Hndu d^a arioso®

\

fortaotzto. Duxmocn hat Sluvara in ditacn visrzohn .ar.ron bia cun. hou-
tigon logo nicht uino o»f onk t indigo .Svmldiig ;ugon dio . wnner voruebt,
v.ulcho aas aystou o .nfachrtcn, d-.a or jotst vcx gibt v.rcbscheat cu
habon. Sr trit achon 1929 in dio KosWartei oia and 1935 ia die SS.
at bliob alt Hijualora ;*indo bia in


sisvats


ulo lutzten Tagc dea dusa-dnanbrucha. Kacht ait oinea orto odor finer
Vat kann «r auine abaurdo oo.iauptung beneiaen. So lost nach ..riojaende
natto Silvers Do.-oniona.ertc Gelogenheiten -u bewsisan, dsaa or weni;-
stens Jetzt beroit '/ar, den /oibrechem ^iierstund so loiat.n, die dio
Ndzirwgicrung leitatun und an ihron aannigfaltigen Vorbrechon tcilnoh-
non, abur or tou. lVd- niche n-cn huoroborg, ufi. zu -on furchtbarun Vor-
brechon, uobor aio or .ua o.at-r Hand untorrichtjt .r, ..usstgen zu
-lachen. ir kim, an fuji dio Vcrtvidi 0 un ; . do: So ta twugcn. In auinor
i.oagenaaaaagu vor au.-. Inturnation»lcn ..ilitaorgorlchtahof laugnoto or
Konaoqaunt jufalachu .\ennt.iia von olor Vorbindunj ait don durch daa
•dmon.-rbu odor dio S6 a uigonon Vorbrucncn. In dca ?orhoor ondcs or
aich ala dor »ourdor und oir.vidigu, dvr or in irJdichkoit iat, abor
dioaua .rat durch das hrouzvorhour dor -jikligu. ..uch zd\a cr in dio-
sue. Vorhour kuino uu-ichvn von idoratmd auasur jjgon Oiu vision
Vorbrochun, oiu ihu tar *. -at golcgt wordun. -r ailu oina Schlucaaol-
otwilung in dur v»rbi chonochun Vorsch'oorung uan, donnoch offonbnrto
o: dioaoie Oericntahof nicht oiiui nuua T\taach«, objloich r bci v.*r-
achiodonon Gulegunhoiton \usdruucklich ?*. tutor. M>ruon ar, alios *u
aigun, was «r wuaato. i. o.junt.il, or h i vi.lon d.r j. .oklagton af
dor .mklogebank Untorln^un luer ihr- «Lrt.ldigung ror chifft. ~r iat
dor ..oinung, daao nicht uln ochuldigor auf d.: jfcdag.bank saoaso,
und oa wonigstui or aolfcat. JiuSo l.t-tc Varztoifoltu '.rtoidigunj von
Siuvoro, due. violluichl e-uhr J.a ir^citioinuc and.run aof d.r knUlago-
bank n&ehguwiusua .-onion 1st, dass jr .in Kraluogn-r und kaltbluotigor
. ourdur gu*u3un 1st, vird durcr. .in.n irioi von suluor oigvnun Hand
widurlogt. dur grausigu Bureia fuor s-in. Vorbrochon in V.rbindung nit
dur Juudiachon Skulotts-vzdeni war go funder warden, ala


S2EV35


Uio ,11 H orton Straaaburg oinr.ahiMn. In dei LueaaBuahang schricb or
ftb. 20. Januar 1945 an Hirt via foIgt:


"Inr Boricht uebor Straaaburg iat richtig oing.gongon. Viulon
^nx r. .-nr. ich ^ndo dca -onata viodor in liach-nfoli.
bin and in*viachen d^in aort Wain- •. -i’.oro ..ittuilung von
Uuwn vorllcgt, vorco ich v*raniissun, daas di- in lotstor
ioit an Si-- ob 0 o3indter. jri-fe gagubonc nf aila noeh oinaal
hinauagohen.

Sovohl rana vi« London boachivftigon »i«. inzwiscr.on
gant -ointor -it do: Straaaburgor ..r.ito&io, oobei bedauort
nird, die nicht 6 -liaat zu habon. llobor d-.s i.ultusidr.iatoriua
woroun Si- wo hi inzviacnon oino dioabezuoglicho -nfrago d-a
.»us*ajrtigcn .iXaa zar 3toUungnahne acnon crft&ltor. habon
odor doauochat boko— n. S-lcr. -ir iron, i^.as wlr alio .>r-
boitsont.rl'.g-r. rocntz-ltij vornicht-t h't .r., .it ;:onkr-t.-n
„n*abjn konnto di- o-.e: ,acita bian.r nic.-.t -T. .rton. do
4 ich Inn-n a chon schriob, wucrdc ich -dch aohr fr-u-n, w-nn

Sio golcg-ntlich ein.; Fahrt o-ch u-rxbors oln«n ..batochor
mch aiaciwnfaid .-ichan." (N -975, -*nkl. Sow. 479, h. 5337).
| (untoratruichun^on hii-xugofuogt).


So aohon >dr aiaa oinon mgvblichoo -rb-it-r dor idurstandab-wu-
gung aich uobor die Vataachu ireuon, daaa "all- vrboit aunt -rlagon rocht-
aoitig vorrdchtot" wurviuo. Jodor vahro .a-bcit-r d.r idorst maabevogung
houtta -it groaa-r oorp/iit alio di« Papi-ro and ent-rlag-n uobor die
l.uzivorbrochun aufbowohrt u.;U ha-tt- -io nllii-it n j. oon oupfangun
^ „dt offunon «rnun and ihnor. diueva bov.i*-atorial o-od-gobuu

,d>or *>onn -an aogir uio ahrtwit -.nor Jodon La-go, die Si-vora
^ i.uaguaugt ivat, annoiuan vuordc, iat aoino Sohauptung koin-rloi Vuitoi-

digung. Jib Cfoaotz aio.it nicht vor, d_aa -in .xboitor dor idoratanda-
bowugung koin Verbroch-n t*. c oh-n kann and ^ alloivoni ,at.n gorad- an
a«n -aJiiBChun, di- or b-reliant-on oolite. Daa d.r w t* sioht nicht vor,
ds.8a oin dcheiwigent, nicht -mal cin F. 3. 1. -g-nt, aich oincr <oir-
dorfc-ndo inachUesa-n, -io ihn-n Pl-v.rw .aahock-n, die j ~. ordun ; -on tus-
fuohron, die i-ut- toil on,


- 62 -


3 HA —


urvJ oaur. froohlicn au-r.cs ..gus A «hon kann* Viulc iVLizoibouAd
aiita four ccnulaig boXundvn -..-oraon, woil sla -At Vcrbrochurn gc-ovin-
sa-- Sicbo goeacht ut:d on Vjrbi\.cnon tcilgc n o. - ex n habon.

Dio .juclagvbohoordo entoiatollt, dess das &r?oiaixat oriel orgibt,
oxaa ’.olfrat liovora Kauptt&ctor, Toilnuhuir, ..nstiftor, Vorachub-
loiatondor w-r, so in- Zustt *,aflng jab und in Vorbindung stand nit riao-
non und.untornch^on, die duo lAirchfuchniig teciziniachor V a raucho ohno
Luati-uung dor Botrolf-non zat -jcgonsttnd hatten, und .Atglied oinor
Organisation ou-r Oru...x war, die. In 7-rbindung stand -it dioa^n Voi-
^ auenwn, in doron Vul'loaf .ordteten, Jratalitvitcn, Jr*-uaPx-::aitcn, Fol-

torungvn, Grouoltotur. und :-nd. r. aio-unschlichon Hardlungcn and die
4 t.n.x>raans von -Ana.atona 86 ,.»acn zu^ iMickc cii._r Seolottax-slung bo-

gangon wurion. doinu dcbuld it oinno a«r rit><t- I, II, III uni IV dor
.julagoscftrift iat or-os-n.

• •

"xKJE*

a %

f

I


Icn, Fred Lax, rf X CN.6207, boativtigo ni ir.it, - aa ich Jurcliaua
vortraut .-it dor onjliachon and doJtschen dprac.io bin, and dr.aa
das Vorstohunio a in- ■ inr.-.cit3g.-ao8S.i o..l richtigi U iboraotzung
Qua Jokucnntia " olfru- Si.vcrs’ -xratwllt.

;.u«niborg, 2>. dui* 19-7

Fad i~x
X 0i6207


- 63 -


ROLL
