How To © 
KNOW = 
HIGHER

WORLDS

RUDOLF STEINER

CLASSICS

How To KNow 
HIGHER WORLDS

CLASSICS IN ANTHROPOSOPHY

The Spiritual Guidance of the Individual and Humanity

Theosophy

How To KNOW 
HIGHER WORLDS

RUDOLF STEINER

A Modern Path of Initiation

Translated by CHRISTOPHER BAMFORD

(@ ANTHROPOSOPHIC PRESS

This volume is a translation of Wie erlangt man Erkenntnisse der 
héheren Welten? (Vol. 10 in the Bibliographic Survey, 1961) published 
by Rudolf Steiner Verlag, Dornach, Switzerland. The previous transla- 
tion of this text in English was published as Knowledge of the Higher 
Worlds and Its Attainment by Anthroposophic Press, Hudson, N.Y.

The translator gratefully acknowledges the work of both Sabine H. Seiler 
whose earlier translation provided the basis for the present version and 
Eva Knausenberger, who helped check the translation.

This translation copyright © Anthroposophic Press, 1994. 
Afterword copyright © Arthur Zajonc, 1994.

Published by Anthroposophic Press, Inc. 
RR 4, Box 94 A-1, Hudson, N.Y. 12534

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Steiner, Rudolf, 1861-1925. 
[Wie erlangt man Erkenntnisse der h6heren Welten? English] 
How to know higher worlds : a modern path of initiation / 
Rudolf Steiner : translated by Christopher Bamford and Sabine Seiler. 
p. cm — (Classics in anthroposophy) 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 0-88010-372-8 
1. Anthroposophy. I. Bamford, Christopher. II. Seiler, Sabine H. 
Ill. Title. IV. Series. 
BP595. S894W45813 1994 
299’ .935—dc20 93-38966 
CIP

Cover painting and design: Barbara Richey 
10987654321 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form

without the written permission of the publisher, except for brief quota- 
tions in critical reviews and articles.

Printed in the United States of America

CONTENTS

Foreword by Arthur Zajonc

Preface to the Third Edition 
Preface to the Fifth Edition 
Preface to the Eighth EditionPrinted in the United States of America

CONTENTS

Foreword by Arthur Zajonc

Preface to the Third Edition 
Preface to the Fifth Edition 
Preface to the Eighth Edition

CHAPTER 1 
How To Know Higher Worlds

CHAPTER 2

The Stages of Initiation 
CHAPTER 3

Initiation 69 
CHAPTER 4

Practical Considerations

CHAPTER 5

Requirements for 
Esoteric Training 95

38

&3

Il

13

CHAPTER 6 
Some Effects of Initiation 108

CHAPTER 7

Changes in the Dream Life 
of the Esoteric Student 151

CHAPTER 8

Achieving Continuity of Consciousness 162

CHAPTER 9

The Splitting of the Personality 
in Esoteric Training 172

CHAPTER 10 
The Guardian of the Threshold 184

CHAPTER 11

Life and Death:

The Great Guardian of the Threshold 195 
Epilogue 209

Afterword by Arthur Zajonc 217

Index 237

FOREWORD

by Arthur G. Zajonc

We live and act within a world whose deeper aspects are 
hidden from our physical senses. Yet each of us possesses 
other faculties which, when cultivated, can lift the veil 
that separates us from spiritual knowledge. In this book, 
Rudolf Steiner charts a meditative path that leads both to 
inner peace and to enhanced powers of soul, and finally to 
the lifting of that veil. The road is long but secure, and is 
open to everyone. Its fruits of inner serenity, strength, and 
wisdom benefit not only the seeker but others as well, and 
certainly the world stands more than ever in need of in- 
sights and actions that are born of the spirit. How to Know 
Higher Worlds is, therefore, not only a personal guide to 
the spirit, but also a path through self-knowledge to com- 
passionate action in the world.

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION

(The first publication in book form)PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION

(The first publication in book form)

This book contains the first part of what originally ap- 
peared as a series of articles under the title, “How To 
Know Higher Worlds.”! The second part will be pub- 
lished separately later.” A work of this kind, however, 
dealing with the human inner development necessary to 
perceive supersensible worlds should not come before the 
public in a new form without some introductory remarks.

What is communicated in this book concerning the de- 
velopment of the human soul is meant to fulfill several 
different needs. First of all, it is intended to help a person 
who, though feeling drawn to the findings of spiritual 
science, is compelled to ask where those who claim to 
have something to say about the deeper riddles of life get 
their knowledge. Spiritual science certainly has some- 
thing to say about such riddles. But if we wish to confirm 
for ourselves the facts on which its claims are based we 
must ourselves attain supersensible cognition. That is,

1. Wie er langt man Erkenntnisse der héheren Welten? (literally, How 
can a person attain insights [cognitions] into higher worlds?), in the 
journal Lucifer-Gnosis, 13-28, Berlin, 1904-5. In German the present 
work bears the same title as the series of articles.

2. The Stages of Higher Knowledge, Anthroposophic Press, 1967.

2 HowTo KNOW HIGHER WORLDS

we must follow the path of knowledge this book tries to 
describe.2. The Stages of Higher Knowledge, Anthroposophic Press, 1967.

2 HowTo KNOW HIGHER WORLDS

we must follow the path of knowledge this book tries to 
describe.

Yet it would be wrong to think that the communications 
of spiritual science are worthless for a person with neither 
the inclination nor the opportunity to follow this path. 
Naturally, to research these facts one must possess the 
faculty necessary to enter supersensible worlds. But once 
these worlds have been researched and the findings com- 
municated, even those who have not themselves per- 
ceived the facts can form an adequate judgment of them. 
Much of what spiritual science presents can, in fact, be 
easily verified simply by the application of healthy judg- 
ment in a completely unbiased way.

Only we must not allow our impartiality to be disturbed 
by any of the numerous preconceptions so common in hu- 
man life today. For example, we may easily object that 
some spiritual scientific observations do not agree with 
certain modern scientific findings. But in truth there is no 
scientific finding that contradicts spiritual research. It is 
easy to think this or that piece of scientific evidence con- 
tradicts what spiritual science tells us about higher 
worlds, but only if we have not considered the scientific 
findings impartially and from every point of view. In fact, 
we shall find that the more open-mindedly we compare 
spiritual science with the positive accomplishments of 
science, the more beautiful we recognize the complete 
agreement between the two to be.

Admittedly, certain aspects of spiritual science will al- 
ways more or less escape purely intellectual judgment. 
Even so, we can easily achieve a right relationship to these

Preface 3Admittedly, certain aspects of spiritual science will al- 
ways more or less escape purely intellectual judgment. 
Even so, we can easily achieve a right relationship to these

Preface 3

aspects too, once we realize that not only reason but also 
healthy feeling can be the judge of truth. If we do not let 
sympathy or antipathy toward some particular opinion 
drive our feeling, but instead allow spiritual scientific in- 
sight into supersensible worlds to work upon it in a com- 
pletely unbiased way, then we will find that an appropriate 
feeling-judgment of the truth results.

Besides healthy feeling of this kind, there are still other 
ways by which those who cannot, or do not wish to, walk 
the path to supersensible knowledge can verify spiritual 
scientific insights. Such people can feel the value of these 
insights for their lives, even if they experience them only 
secondhand in the communications of spiritual research- 
ers. While we cannot all instantly become “seers,” the 
cognitive insights of a person who has such vision can 
nevertheless provide healthy food for all. All of us can ap- 
ply these insights to our lives; and if we do so, we shall 
soon realize not only the possibilities of life in every area 
but also what life lacks when we exclude these insights. 
Indeed, rightly applied to our lives, insight into the super- 
sensible worlds proves to be far from impractical but 
rather practical in the highest degree.

Those who do not wish to walk this cognitive path to 
higher knowledge themselves may well ask, if they are in- 
terested in the insights it offers, “How does a seer arrive 
at these facts?” This book seeks to provide such people 
with a picture of what must be done if one wishes to know 
the supersensible worlds. It tries to describe the spiritual 
path so that even those who do not undertake it them- 
selves can have confidence in what is said by those who

4 HowTo KNOW HIGHER WORLDS4 HowTo KNOW HIGHER WORLDS

do. Once we become aware of what spiritual researchers 
do, we may find that it makes sense. The description of 
their path to the higher worlds may impress us in such a 
way that we understand why the reports of their findings 
seem enlightening to us. Thus this book may serve those 
readers who want to strengthen and confirm their sense of 
truth, and their feeling for the truth, with regard to the su- 
persensible world.

But this book also offers guidance to those seeking a 
path to supersensible knowledge. Such people will be 
best able to test the truth of what the book contains by re- 
alizing it in themselves. If this is the intention, one 
should never forget that reading a description of soul de- 
velopment demands more than just knowing the contents 
of a book—which is often all we strive for when reading 
other works. Instead, one must live one’s way into such 
a description, and form a close, intimate relationship 
with it. We should begin by assuming that no single 
thing will be understood solely on the basis of what is 
said explicitly about it; rather we will have to come to 
understand this thing through many other statements 
concerning quite different topics. In this way we will re- 
alize that what is essential does not lie in any single truth, 
but in the agreement between all.

This process must be taken especially seriously by any- 
one carrying out the exercises. Although we may under- 
stand and practice an exercise correctly, this may yet 
have the wrong effect unless another exercise is added to 
it to resolve the one-sidedness of the first into harmony 
in the soul.

Preface 5Preface 5

If we read this book closely, so that reading it becomes 
an inner experience, we will not only come to know its 
contents, but different passages will also evoke different 
feelings. These feelings indicate the significance of these 
different passages for our own soul development and help 
us to discover how to adapt the various exercises to our 
own individual natures.

Reading a book like this, in which processes are de- 
scribed that have to be experienced to be understood, a 
reader will often find it necessary to return repeatedly to 
the text in order to reread the descriptions. If we do this, 
we will soon become convinced that we can reach a satis- 
factory understanding only when we have actually tried 
something for ourselves—for, having done so, we will 
notice certain subtleties in the description that escaped 
our notice on first reading.

Readers who do not intend to follow the path described 
here will nevertheless find much that is useful for their in- 
ner life—precepts for the conduct of life, explanations of 
what has always seemed mysterious, and so on. Those, on 
the other hand, who already have certain experiences be- 
hind them and have in many respects been initiated by life 
itself, will find a certain satisfaction in seeing things co- 
herently explained that they had already thought about 
separately—things they already knew, without perhaps 
having brought this knowledge into full understanding.

Rudolf Steiner 
Berlin, 1909

PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITIONRudolf Steiner 
Berlin, 1909

PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION

How To Know Higher Worlds: A Modern Path of Initia- 
tion Was written more than ten years ago, and it has been 
thoroughly reworked in every detail for this new edition. 
The need for such reworking arises naturally enough in 
the case of information concerning experiences and 
paths of the soul such as those given in this book. Every 
aspect of a work of this kind remains inwardly bound to 
its author’s soul and contains something that continues 
to work on within it. It could hardly be otherwise, then, 
that this continuing soul work should be accompanied 
by a striving to make the descriptions originally pre- 
sented many years ago clearer and more accessible. In- 
deed, it was out of this striving that the work on this new 
edition arose.

All essential elements of the exposition, all the major 
points have been left as they were. Nevertheless, impor- 
tant changes have been made. I have been able to 
achieve a more precise characterization of details in 
many places. This seemed important to me, for if one 
wants to apply what is communicated in this book to 
one’s own spiritual life it is important that the paths of 
the soul that are described should be envisaged by the 
reader as exactly as possible.

8 HOw TO KNOW HIGHER WORLDS

Descriptions of inner, spiritual processes are much more 
liable to misunderstanding than descriptions of events in 
the physical world. Such misunderstandings arise easily 
because the life of the soul is in constant movement and be- 
cause we fail to bear in mind that the life of the soul is very 
different from life in the physical world. Therefore, in pre- 
paring this new edition I have focused on those parts of this 
book that may give rise to such misunderstandings and 
have made every effort in my reworking to prevent them.When I first wrote the articles gathered in this volume, 
much of the material had to be presented differently, be- 
cause many of the insights into the spiritual worlds that I 
have published in the last decade were not yet made public 
and could only be hinted at. For example, ten years ago I 
had to refer to the spiritual processes described in my 
books Occult Science, The Spiritual Guidance of the Indi- 
vidual and Humanity, A Road to Self-Knowledge, and par- 
ticularly The Threshold of the Spiritual World differently 
than seems appropriate now that these works have been 
made available.! At the time of the articles, I could not 
speak of many things that have since been made public; in- 
stead, I had to refer to “oral communication” for more in- 
formation about these things. Today, much of what was 
referred to in this way has been published.

1. Rudolf Steiner, An Outline of Occult Science (Hudson, NY: 
Anthroposophic Press, 1989); The Spiritual Guidance of the Individ- 
ual and Humanity (Hudson, NY: Anthroposophic Press, 1992); A 
Road to Self-Knowledge & The Threshold of the Spiritual World 
(London: Rudolf Steiner Press, 1975).

Preface 9

Unfortunately, these comments may have led some 
readers to a misunderstanding: they may have been led to 
believe that the personal relationship to a teacher was 
more essential for those seeking spiritual schooling than 
it really is. I hope that my emphasis on certain details in 
this new edition will make quite clear that for people 
seeking spiritual schooling under the current spiritual 
conditions a totally direct relationship to the objective 
spiritual world is more important than a relationship with 
the personality of a teacher. Indeed, in spiritual training, 
the spiritual teacher today increasingly takes on a merely 
helping role, just as in accordance with contemporary ed- 
ucational philosophy ordinary teachers in other fields of 
knowledge are expected to do.I hope I have sufficiently stressed that neither the au- 
thority of the teacher nor the students’ trust in the teacher 
should be any more important in spiritual schooling than 
in any other area of knowledge or life. It seems to me im- 
portant that we get a better understanding of this relation- 
ship between spiritual researchers and those who develop 
an interest in their findings. Thus, I trust I have improved 
this book in all areas where it seemed to me after ten years 
to need improvement.

This first volume will be followed by a second one that 
will offer additional discussions of the soul state that en- 
ables us to experience the higher worlds.”

The new edition of this book was printed and ready

2. Such a volume never appeared. The only "continuation" remains 
The Stages of Higher Knowledge.

10 How TO KNOW HIGHER WORLDS

for sale when the great war, now being experienced by 
humanity broke out. Writing this preface, my soul is 
deeply stirred by this fateful event.

Rudolf Steiner 
Berlin

---
*[continued text truncated]*