543 Epistle 00 Prelims 1 21/12/06 12:25 PM Page i
Al-Qushayri’s
Epistle
on
Sufism

This page intentionally left blank

543 Epistle 00 Prelims 1 21/12/06 12:25 PM Page iii
The Center for Muslim Contribution to Civilization
Al-Qushayri’s
Epistle
on
Sufism
Al-Risala al-qushayriyya
fi ∏ilm al-tasawwuf
Abu πl-Qasim al-Qushayri
Translated by Professor Alexander D.Knysh
Reviewed by Dr Muhammad Eissa
(cid:1)
a r n e t
P U B L I S H I N G

543 Epistle 00 Prelims 1 21/12/06 12:25 PM Page iv
AL-QUSHAYRI’SEPISTLEONSUFISM
Published by
Garnet Publishing Limited
8 Southern Court
South Street
Reading
RG1 4QS
UK
Copyright ©2007 The Center for Muslim
Contribution to Civilization
All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by
any electronic or mechanical means, including information
storage and retrieval systems, without permission in writing
from the publisher, except by a reviewer who may quote
brief passages in a review.
First Edition
ISBN-13: 978-1-85964-185-9
ISBN-10: 1-85964-185-7
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Jacket design byGarnet Publishing
Typeset bySamantha Barden
Printed in Lebanon543 Epistle 00 Prelims 1 21/12/06 12:25 PM Page v
CONTENTS
Foreword xi
About this Series xiii
Center for Muslim Contribution to Civilization: Board of Trustees xv
Center for Muslim Contribution to Civilization: Board xvi
Acknowledgements xvii
The Translator’s Note xix
Translator’s Introduction: Al-Qushayri’s “Epistle on Sufism”: The author
and his book xxi
Author’s Introduction 1
A chapter explaining the beliefs of the Sufis concerning the fundamentals
of religion 4
Section [on divine oneness] 14
Chapter 1 On the masters of this path and their deeds and sayings
that show how they uphold the Divine Law 17
Abu Ishaq Ibrahim b. Adham b. Mansur 18
Abu πl-Fayd Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri 19
Abu ∏Ali al-Fudayl b. ∏Iyad 20
Abu Mahfuz Ma∏ruf b. Fayruz al-Karkhi 21
Abu πl-Hasan [al-]Sari b. al-Mughallis al-Saqati 23
Abu Nasr Bishr b. al-Harith al-Hafi (the Barefoot) 25
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Harith al-Muhasibi 27
Abu Sulayman Dawud b. Nusayr al-Taπi 29
Abu ∏Ali Shaqiq b. Ibrahim al-Balkhi 30
Abu Yazid b. Tayfur b. ∏Isa al-Bastami 32
Abu Muhammad Sahl b. ∏Abdallah al-Tustari 33
Abu Sulayman ∏Abd al-Rahman b. ∏Atiyya al-Darani 35
Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman Hatim b. ∏Unwan 36
Abu Zakariya Yahya b. Mu∏adh al-Razi, the Preacher 37
Abu Hamid Ahmad b. Khadrawayh (Khidruya) al-Balkhi 38
Abu πl-Hasan Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari 39
Abu Hafs ∏Umar b. Maslama al-Haddad 39
Abu Turab ∏Askar b. Husayn al-Nakhshabi 40
Abu Muhammad ∏Abdallah b. Khubayq 41
Abu ∏Ali Ahmad b. ∏Asim al-Antaki 41
Abu πl-Sari Mansur b. ∏Ammar 42
Abu Salih Hamdun b. Ahmad b. ∏Umara al-Qassar 42
Abu πl-Qasim al-Junayd b. Muhammad 43
Abu ∏Uthman Sa∏id b. Isma∏il al-Hiri 45
Abu πl-Husayn Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Nuri 46
Abu ∏Abdallah Ahmad b. Yahya al-Jallaπ 47543 Epistle 00 Prelims 1 21/12/06 12:25 PM Page vi
vi AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Abu Muhammad Ruwaym b. Ahmad 48
Abu ∏Abdallah Muhammad b. al-Fadl al-Balkhi 48
Abu Bakr Ahmad b. Nasr al-Zaqqaq al-Kabir 49
Abu ∏Abdallah ‘Amr b. ∏Uthman al-Makki 50
Samnun b. Hamza 50
Abu ∏Ubayd al-Busri 51
Abu πl-Fawaris Shah b. Shuja∏ al-Kirmani 52
Yusuf b. al-Husayn 52
Abu ∏Abdallah Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Tirmidhi 52
Abu Bakr Muhammad b. ∏Umar al-Warraq al-Tirmidhi 53
Abu Sa∏id Ahmad b. ∏Isa al-Kharraz 53
Abu ∏Abdallah Muhammad b. Isma∏il al-Maghribi 54
Abu πl-∏Abbas Ahmad b. Muhammad Masruq 54
Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Sahl al-Isbahani 54
Abu Muhammad Ahmad b. Muhammad b. al-Husayn al-Jurayri 55
Abu πl-∏Abbas Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Sahl b. ∏Ataπ al-Adami 56
Abu Ishaq Ibrahim b. Ahmad al-Khawwas 56
Abu Muhammad ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad al-Kharraz 57
Abu πl-Hasan Bunan b. Muhammad al-Hammal 57
Abu Hamza al-Baghdadi al-Bazzaz 57
Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Musa al-Wasiti 58
Abu πl-Hasan b. al-Saπigh 59
Abu Ishaq Ibrahim b. Dawud al-Raqqi 59
Mimshadh al-Dinawari 59
Khayr al-Nassaj 60
Abu Hamza al-Khurasani 60
Abu Bakr Dulaf b. Jahdar al-Shibli 61
Abu Muhammad ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad al-Murta∏ish 62
Abu ∏Ali Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Rudhbari 62
Abu Muhammad ∏Abdallah b. Munazil 63
Abu ∏Ali Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-Wahhab al-Thaqafi 63
Abu πl-Khayr al-Aqta∏ 64
Abu Bakr Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Kattani 64
Abu Ya∏qub Ishaq b. Muhammad al-Nahrajuri 64
Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Muhammad al-Muzayyin 65
Abu ∏Ali b. al-Katib 65
Muzaffar al-Qirmisini 65
Abu Bakr ∏Abdallah b. Tahir al-Abhari 66
Abu πl-Husayn b. Bunan 66
Abu Ishaq Ibrahim b. Shayban al-Qirmisini 66
Abu Bakr al-Husayn b. ∏Ali b. Yazdanyar 67
Abu Sa∏id b. al-A∏rabi 67
Abu ∏Amr Muhammad b. Ibrahim al-Zajjaji al-Naysaburi 67
Abu Muhammad Ja∏far b. Muhammad b. Nusayr 68
Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Sayyari 68
Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Dawud al-Dinawari 68
Abu Muhammad ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad al-Razi 69543 Epistle 00 Prelims 1 21/12/06 12:25 PM Page vii
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI vii
Abu ∏Amr Isma∏il b. Nujayd 69
Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Ahmad b. Sahl al-Bushanji 69
Abu ∏Abdallah Muhammad b. Khafif al-Shirazi 70
Abu πl-Husayn Bundar b. al-Husayn al-Shirazi 71
Abu Bakr al-Tamastani 71
Abu πl-∏Abbas Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Dinawari 71
Abu ∏Uthman Sa∏id b. Sallam al-Maghribi 72
Abu πl-Qasim Ibrahim b. Muhammad al-Nasrabadhi 72
Abu πl-Hasan ‘Ali b. Ibrahim al-Husri al-Basri 73
Abu ∏Abdallah Ahmad b. ∏Ataπ al-Rudhbari 73
Conclusion 74
Chapter 2 An explanation of the expressions used by this [Sufi]
community and of their difficulties 75
The [mystical] moment (waqt) 75
The [mystical] station (maqam) 77
The [mystical] state (hal) 78
Contraction (qabd) and expansion (bast) 79
Awe (hayba) and intimacy (uns) 81
[The states of] ecstatic behavior (tawajud), ecstatic rapture (wajd),
and ecstatic finding (wujud) 83
Unification (jam∏) and separation (farq) 87
The unification of unification (jam∏ al-jam∏) 88
Annihilation (fanaπ) and subsistence (baqaπ) [in God] 89
Absence (ghayba) and presence (hudur) 91
Sobriety (sahw) and drunkenness (sukr) 93
Tasting (dhawq) and drinking (shurb) 95
Erasure (mahw) and affirmation (ithbat) 96
Concealment (satr) and [self-]manifestation (tajalli) 96
Presence (muhadara), unveiling (mukashafa) and witnessing (mushahada) 97
Glimmers (lawaπih), dawnings (tawali∏) and flashes (lawami∏) 99
[Unexpected] raids (bawadih) and attacks (hujum) 100
Inconstancy (talwin) and stability (tamkin) 100
Proximity (qurb) and distance (bu∏d) 103
The [Divine] Law (shari∏a) and the True Reality (haqiqa) 105
Breath (nafas) 105
Thoughts (khawatir) 106
Certain knowledge (∏ilm al-yaqin), the essence of certainty (∏ayn al-yaqin)
and the truth of certainty (haqq al-yaqin) 107
Occurrence (warid) 108
Witness (shahid) 108
The soul (nafs) 109
The spirit (ruh) 110
The innermost self (sirr) 110543 Epistle 00 Prelims 1 21/12/06 12:25 PM Page viii
viii AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Chapter 3 The [mystical] stations (maqamat) 111
Repentance (tawba) 111
Striving (mujahada) 118
Retreat (khalwa) and seclusion (∏uzla) 122
Fear of God (taqwa) 125
Scrupulousness (wara∏) 129
Renunciation (zuhd) 134
Silence (samt) 138
Fear (khawf) 142
Hope (rajaπ) 148
Sadness (huzn) 155
Hunger (ju∏) and the abandonment of [carnal] desire (shahwa) 157
Humility (khushu∏) and modesty (tawadu∏) 161
Opposing the soul (mukhalafat al-nafs) and remembering its faults (dhikr ∏uyubiha) 167
Envy (hasad) 170
Backbiting (ghiba) 172
Contentment (qana∏a) 175
Trust in God (tawakkul) 178
Gratitude (shukr) 188
Certainty (yaqin) 193
Patience (sabr) 196
Awareness [of God] (muraqaba) 202
Satisfaction (rida) 205
Servanthood (∏ubudiyya) 210
Desire (irada) 213
Uprightness (istiqama) 217
Sincerity (ikhlas) 220
Truthfulness (sidq) 222
Shame (haya) 226
Freedom (hurriyya) 229
Remembrance (dhikr) 232
Chivalry (futuwwa) 237
Spiritual insight (firasa) 242
Moral character (khuluq) 252
Munificence (jud) and generosity (sakhaπ) 257
Jealousy (ghayra) 264
Friendship with God (wilaya) 268
Supplicatory prayer (du∏aπ) 273
Poverty (faqr) 280
Sufism (tasawwuf) 288
Good manners (adab) 292
The rules of travel (safar) 297
Companionship (suhba) 302
The Oneness of God (tawhid) 306
How some Sufis [of old] behaved at the time of their departure
from this world (ahwaluhum ∏inda πl-khuruj min al-dunya) 312543 Epistle 00 Prelims 1 21/12/06 12:25 PM Page ix
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI ix
Divine gnosis (al-ma∏rifa [bi-llah]) 319
Love (mahabba) 325
Passionate longing (shawq) 335
On how [God] protects the hearts of Sufi masters and on [the necessity of]
not opposing them [in anything they do] 339
Listening to music (sama∏) 342
Miracles of God’s friends (karamat al-awliyaπ) 357
The vision of the Sufis (ruπyat al-qawm) 392
Spiritual advice for Sufi novices (wasaya li πl-muridin) 403
Glossary 417
Bibliography 427
Index of proper names, toponyms, and concepts 429

This page intentionally left blankThis page intentionally left blank

543 Epistle 00 Prelims 1 21/12/06 12:25 PM Page xi
In the Name of God, the Beneficent, the Merciful
FOREWORD
THE interrelationship and interaction of human cultures and civilizations has
made the contributions of each the common heritage of men in all ages and all
places. Early Muslim scholars were able to communicate with their Western
counterparts through contacts made during the Crusades; at Muslim universities
and centres of learning in Muslim Spain (al-Andalus, or Andalusia) and Sicily to
which many European students went for education; and at the universities and
centres of learning in Europe itself (such as Salerno, Padua, Montpellier, Paris,
and Oxford), where Islamic works were taught in Latin translations. Among the
Muslim scholars well-known in the centres of learning throughout the world
were al-R\z# (Rhazes), Ibn S#n\ (Avicenna), Ibn Rushd (Averroes), al-Khw\rizm#
and Ibn Khaldßn. Muslim scholars such as these and others produced original
works in many fields. Many of them possessed encyclopaedic knowledge and
distinguished themselves in many disparate fields of knowledge.
The Center for Muslim Contribution to Civilization was established in
order to acquaint non-Muslims with the contributions Islam has made to human
civilization as a whole. The Great Books of Islamic Civilization Project attempts
to cover the first 800 years of Islam, or what may be called Islam’s Classical
Period. This project aims at making available in English and other European
languages a wide selection of works representative of Islamic civilization in all
its diversity. It is made up of translations of original Arabic works that were
produced in the formative centuries of Islam, and is meant to serve the needs
of a potentially large readership. Not only the specialist and scholar, but the
non-specialist with an interest in Islam and its cultural heritage will be able to
benefit from the series. Together, the works should serve as a rich source for the
study of the early periods of Islamic thought.
In selecting the books for the series, the Center took into account all
major areas of Islamic intellectual pursuit that could be represented. Thus the
series includes works not only on better-known subjects such as law, theology,
jurisprudence, history and politics, but also on subjects such as literature,
medicine, astronomy, optics and geography. The specific criteria used to select
individual books were these: that a book should give a faithful and comprehensive
account of its field; and that it should be an authoritative source. The reader thus
has at his disposal virtually a whole library of informative and enlightening
works.
Each book in the series has been translated by a qualified scholar and
reviewed by another expert. While the style of one translation will naturally differ
from another as do the styles of the authors, the translators have endeavoured, to543 Epistle 00 Prelims 1 21/12/06 12:25 PM Page xii
xii AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
the extent it was possible, to make the works accessible to the common reader. As
a rule, the use of footnotes hasbeen kept to a minimum, though a more extensive
use of them was necessitated in some cases.
This series is presented in the hope that it will contribute to a greater under-
standing in the West of the cultural and intellectual heritage of Islam and will
therefore provide an important means towards greater understanding of today’s
world.
May God Help Us!
Muhammad bin Hamad Al-Thani
Chairman of the Board of Trustees543 Epistle 00 Prelims 1 21/12/06 12:25 PM Page xiii
ABOUT THIS SERIES
THISseries of Arabic works, made available in English translation, represents an
outstanding selection of important Islamic studies in a variety of fields of know-
ledge. The works selected for inclusion in this series meet specific criteria. They
are recognized by Muslim scholars as being early and important in their fields, as
works whose importance is broadly recognized by international scholars, and as
having had a genuinely significant impact on the development of human culture.
Readers will therefore see that this series includes a variety of works in the
purely Islamic sciences, such as Qurπ\n, ©ad#th, theology, prophetic traditions
(sunna), and jurisprudence (fiqh). Also represented will be books by Muslim
scientists on medicine, astronomy, geography, physics, chemistry, horticulture,
and other fields.
The work of translating these texts has been entrusted to a group of
professors in the Islamic and Western worlds who are recognized authorities in
their fields. It has been deemed appropriate, in order to ensure accuracy and
fluency, that two persons, one with Arabic as his mother tongue and another
with English as his mother tongue, should participate together in the translation
and revision of each text.
This series is distinguished from other similar intercultural projects by its
distinctive objectives and methodology. These works will fill a genuine gap in the
library of human thought. They will prove extremely useful to all those with an
interest in Islamic culture, its interaction with Western thought, and its impact
on culture throughout the world. They will, it is hoped, fulfil an important rôle
in enhancing world understanding at a time when there is such evident and
urgent need for the development of peaceful coexistence.
This series is published by the Center for Muslim Contribution to
Civilization, which serves as a research centre under the patronage of H.H.
Sheikh Muhammad bin Hamad al-Thani, the former Minister of Education of
Qatar who also chairs the Board of Trustees. The Board is comprised of a group
of prominent scholars. These include His Eminence Sheikh Al-Azhar, Arab
Republic of Egypt, and Dr Yousef al-Qaradhawi, Director of the Sira and Sunna
Research Center. At its inception the Center was directed by the late Dr
Muhammad Ibrahim Kazim, former Rector of Qatar University, who established
its initial objectives.
The Center was until recently directed by Dr Kamal Naji, the Foreign
Cultural Relations Advisor of the Ministry of Education of Qatar. He was
assisted by a Board comprising a number of academicians of Qatar University, in
addition to a consultative committee chaired by Dr Ezzeddin Ibrahim, former
Rector of the University of the United Arab Emirates. A further committee543 Epistle 00 Prelims 1 21/12/06 12:25 PM Page xiv
xiv AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
acting on behalf of the Center has been the prominent university professors
who act under the chairmanship of Dr Raji Rammuny, Professor of Arabic at
the University of Michigan. This committee is charged with making known,
in Europe and in America, the books selected for translation, and in selecting
and enlisting properly qualified university professors, orientalists and students
of Islamic studies to undertake the work of translation and revision, as well as
overseeing the publication process.543 Epistle 00 Prelims 1 21/12/06 12:25 PM Page xv
CENTER FOR MUSLIM
CONTRIBUTION TO CIVILIZATION
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
H.E. Sheikh Muhammad bin Hamad al-Thani
Chairman
MEMBERS
1. H.Eminence Sheikh al-Azhar, Cairo, Arab Republic of Egypt.
2. Director-General of the Islamic Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(ISESCO).
3. Director-General of the Arab League Educational, Cultural and Scientific Organization
(ALECSO).
4. H.E. the Minister of Education, State of Qatar.
5. H.E. the Minister of Education, Kuwait.
6. H.E. the Minister of Education, Oman.
7. H.E. the Secretary-General of the Muslim World Association, Saudi Arabia.
8. H.E. Dr Ezzeddin Ibrahim, Cultural Advisor to H.H. the President of the U.A.E.
9. Professor Yousef al-Qaradhawi, Director, Sira and Sunna Research Centre, University of
Qatar.
10. Chairman, Arab Historians Union.
11. Professor Cesar Adib Majul, Professor at the American Universities.
Following are the names of the late prominent Muslim figures who (may All\h have mercy upon
them) passed away after they had taken vital roles in the preliminary discussions of the Center’s
goals, work plan and activities. They are:
1. Dr Kamal Naji, former General Supervisor, Center for Muslim Contribution to
Civilization, Qatar (7 October 1997).
2. Sheikh Jad al-Haq Ali Jad al-Haq, Sheikh al-Azhar, Cairo, Arab Republic of Egypt.
3. Dr Muhammad Ibrahim Kazim, former Rector, University of Qatar.
4. Sheikh Abdullah bin Ibrahim al-Ansari, former Chairman, Department for the Revival of
Islamic Cultural Heritage, State of Qatar.
5. Muhammad al-Fasi, former Honorary Chairman, Islamic University Rabat,
Kingdom of Morocco.
6. Dr Abul-Wafa al-Taftazani, former Deputy Rector, University of Cairo,
Arab Republic of Egypt.
7. Senator Mamimatal Tamano, former member of the Philippino Congress and
Muslim leader in the Philippines.543 Epistle 00 Prelims 1 21/12/06 12:25 PM Page xvi
CENTER FOR MUSLIM
CONTRIBUTION TO CIVILIZATION
BOARD
H.E. Sheikh Muhammad bin Hamad al-Thani
Chairman of the Board of Trustees
Professor Osman Sid-Ahmad Ismail al-Bili
General Supervisor, Professor of Middle Eastern and Islamic History, University of Qatar
MEMBERS
1. H.E. Shaykha Ahmad Almahmud, Minister of Education, State of Qatar.
2. Professor Ibrahim Saleh al-Nuaimi, former Rector, University of Qatar.
3. Professor Yousef al-Qaradhawi, Director, Sira and Sunna Research Centre, University of
Qatar.
4. Professor Husam al-Khateeb, Professor of Arabic, Cultural Expert, National Council for
Culture, Arts and Heritage, State of Qatar.
5. Professor Abd al-Hamid Ismail al-Ansari, College of Sharia, Law and Islamic Studies.
6. H.E. Dr Hasanal-Nimi, Ambassador, State of Qatar.
7. Dr Hasan al-Ansari, Amiri Diwan, College of Arts and Science, University of Qatar.
8. Dr Ahmad Muhammad Ubaidan (Treasurer) Observer, Advisory Council
and Director-General, Trans-Orient Establishment (Doha, Qatar).
CENTER’SADVISORS
H.E. Dr Ezzeddin Ibrahim
Cultural Advisor to H.H. the President of the U.A.E.
Professor Raji Mahmoud Rammuny
Director of the Center’s Translation Committee in the U.S.A.
Professor of Arabic Studies, Department of Near Eastern Studies,
University of Michigan, U.S.A.543 Epistle 00 Prelims 1 21/12/06 12:25 PM Page xvii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the individuals and institutions
who have helped me to realize this translation project. My heartfelt gratitude goes
to my colleague Professor Raji Rammuny, who commissioned me to translate
al-Qushayri’s masterpiece on behalf of the Center for Research on the Muslim
Contribution to Civilization located in the city of Doha, Qatar. My translation
has benefited significantly from the comments and corrections of the reviewer,
Dr. Muhammad Eissa, whose meticulous attention to detail deserves the highest
praise. My English text was carefully proof-read and edited by my research
assistant Victoria (Vika) Gardner, an expert on Central Asian Sufism. Vika’s
help was absolutely invaluable in improving my English style and rectifying my
thinking about Sufism in general and that of al-Qushayri in particular. Last but
not least, I would like to thank my wife Anya Knysh for her help in compiling
the index and the glossary. I take full responsibility for any mistakes that may
have crept into my translation.
Alexander Knysh
University of Michigan

This page intentionally left blankThis page intentionally left blank

543 Epistle 00 Prelims 1 21/12/06 12:25 PM Page xix
THE TRANSLATOR’S NOTE
In this translation I followed certain conventions that require a brief explanation.
First, I have retained all chains of transmission of the pious dicta quoted by
al-Qushayri as well as the traditional formulas that are commonly attached to
the names of God and the prophets in pre-modern Islamic texts. I have also
reproduced the usual Islamic formulas mentioned after the names of deceased
individuals, such as “may God be pleased with him” and “may God have mercy
on him”.
Second, I have included both the traditional Islamic (or Hijri) dates and the
dates according to the Common Era calendar – for example, 165/781, 406/1016,
420/1029 and so on. I have retained the Arabic definite article al-in all personal
names, but omitted it in most Arabic terms cited in parentheses – for example,
“contentment” (rida), instead of (al-rida) and “trust in God” (tawakkul), instead
of (al-tawakkul).
Third, I have left all the pronominal references to God (Allah) in the
masculine spelled with the upper case. This reflects the usage current in the
pre-modern epoch before the rise of gender-inclusive language. Although in
principle the frequently used word “servant of God” may apply to both males
and females, I have opted for the masculine pronoun that is used consistently in
medieval Arabic texts in such cases.
Fourth, quotations from the Qurπan are placed into the footnotes with
the number of the chapter (sura) followed by a colon and the number of the
verse (aya). Since I have used Arthur J. Arberry’s The Koran Interpreted as my
primary source of Qurπanic quotations, I provide the numbering he adopted in
his translation, which occasionally departs from the standard numbering used in
the majority of editions and translations of the Qurπan. Despite its archaic
Victorian English, I still prefer Arberry’s translation to all later renditions of
the Qurπan into English. Occasionally, I modify Arberry’s translation to fit the
overall context of al-Qushayri’s exposition.
Fifth, square brackets [] serve to indicate my addition of words and phrases
to the original Arabic text where I think they are implied, but not explicitly
mentioned. Occasionally, brackets (along with footnotes) may be used to clarify
obscure passages in the Arabic original. Slash signs // mark the beginning of
a new page of the Arabic original – namely, Muhammad ∏Abd al-Rahman
al-Mar∏ashali’s edition of al-Qushayri’s text (see my Introduction).
The system of transliteration of Arabic names and words is based on a
simplified version of the transliteration adopted by the editorial board of the
International Journal of Middle Eastern Studies, as stipulated in the “Guidelines
for Translators and Reviewers of Great Books of Islamic Civilization”.543 Epistle 00 Prelims 1 21/12/06 12:25 PM Page xx
xx AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
“Simplified” means that I do not use macroned letters to convey long Arabic
vowels, nor do I use dots under certain letters of the Latin alphabet, which in
academic literature represent velarized, or “emphatic”, Arabic consonants. In
a limited number of cases, when it is absolutely unavoidable, I use letters á, í,
and ú to convey the long Arabic vowels. Their significance is explained in the
footnotes. I mark the Arabic letter ∏ayn with the inverted ∏ in every position
and the hamzawith π only when it appears in the middle or at the end of a word
or name.
Finally, I make use of several abbreviations, namely: EI, which stands for
The Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2nd edition; IM, which stands for my book Islamic
Mysticism: A Short History; and “b.”, which stands for the Arabic word “ibn”,
meaning “son”.
The translation is supplied with an Index of proper names, toponyms, and
concepts and a Glossary of Sufi technical terms (see pages 417–425). Since
al-Qushayri often quotes only an abbreviated name of his source and since
many such names are identical, the individual in question is not always easy to
identify. In such cases, I refer the reader to two or several possible individuals
with similar names in the Index. I apologize for any inconvenience this might
cause, but things that were obvious for al-Qushayri and his contemporaries are,
unfortunately, no longer obvious for us.543 Epistle 01 Translator Intro 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page xxi
TRANSLATOR’S INTRODUCTION
Al-Qushayri’s “Epistle on Sufism”: The author and his book
The author of the Epistle on Sufism, Abu πl-Qasim ∏Abd al-Karim b. Hawazin
al-Qushayri, was born in 376/986 in the region of Ustuwa (or Ustawa), a district
in northern Khurasan that was famous for the fertility of its soil and abundant
grain production.1His parents were Arab settlers whose ancestors had arrived in
Iran with the conquering Arab armies and were allotted substantial tracts of land
in compensation for their military service. By the time of al-Qushayri’s birth, his
family must have been speaking Persian at home, but as a son of a country squire
he was educated in the intricacies of Arabic language, poetry and polite letters
(adab). As was common for young men of his social standing he was also trained
in martial arts, horsemanship and archery. As a youth al-Qushayri traveled to
Nishapur (Naysabur), the political and administrative center of Khurasan and a
major center of Islamic scholarship and culture in the eastern part of the Muslim
world up to the Mongol conquest of the seventh/thirteenth century.2 There
he attended the lectures and sermons of the renowned Sufi master (shaykh)
Abu ∏Ali al-Hasan al-Daqqaq (d. around 405/1015 or somewhat later), who
headed a popular religious school (madrasa).3A student of Ibrahim b. Muhammad
al-Nasrabadhi (d. 367/977), the foremost Sufi master of Khurasan in his age,
al-Daqqaq belonged to the spiritual tradition that stretched back to the celebrated
Sufis of the Baghdad school, including [al-]Sari al-Saqati (d. 251/865 or somewhat
later),4al-Junayd al-Baghdadi (d. 297/910), and Abu Bakr al-Shibli (d. 334/946). Al-Qushayri soon became al-Daqqaq’s foremost disciple, married his daughter
Fatima and eventually succeeded his father-in-law as the head of his religious
school. Al-Qushayri repeatedly acknowledges his debt to, and admirationfor, his
Sufi master throughout his Epistle.543 Epistle 00 Prelims 1 21/12/06 12:25 PM Page xx
xx AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
“Simplified” means that I do not use macroned letters to convey long Arabic
vowels, nor do I use dots under certain letters of the Latin alphabet, which in
academic literature represent velarized, or “emphatic”, Arabic consonants. In
a limited number of cases, when it is absolutely unavoidable, I use letters á, í,
and ú to convey the long Arabic vowels. Their significance is explained in the
footnotes. I mark the Arabic letter ∏ayn with the inverted ∏ in every position
and the hamzawith π only when it appears in the middle or at the end of a word
or name.
Finally, I make use of several abbreviations, namely: EI, which stands for
The Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2nd edition; IM, which stands for my book Islamic
Mysticism: A Short History; and “b.”, which stands for the Arabic word “ibn”,
meaning “son”.
The translation is supplied with an Index of proper names, toponyms, and
concepts and a Glossary of Sufi technical terms (see pages 417–425). Since
al-Qushayri often quotes only an abbreviated name of his source and since
many such names are identical, the individual in question is not always easy to
identify. In such cases, I refer the reader to two or several possible individuals
with similar names in the Index. I apologize for any inconvenience this might
cause, but things that were obvious for al-Qushayri and his contemporaries are,
unfortunately, no longer obvious for us.

Al-Qushayri soon became al-Daqqaq’s foremost disciple, married his daughter
Fatima and eventually succeeded his father-in-law as the head of his religious
school. Al-Qushayri repeatedly acknowledges his debt to, and admirationfor, his
Sufi master throughout his Epistle. Al-Daqqaq was instrumental in introducing
al-Qushayri to another outstanding Sufi authority of Khurasan, Abu ∏Abd
al-Rahman al-Sulami (412/1021), who is quoted on almost every page of the Epistle. A prolific writer and accomplished religious scholar, al-Sulami is rightly
considered to be one of the master architects of the classical Sufi tradition along
1 It presently belongs to the district of Quchan (Iran). 2 Some sources say that he was fifteen years old at the time of his arrival in Nishapur, but this
information is impossible to verify. It is also related that the object of his trip to Nishapur was
to reduce the taxes on a village he owned. 3 While this term presupposes a more-or-less structured institution and a set curriculum, one
should rather think of an informal circle of students attending the daily lectures and sermons
of a popular teacher (ustadh), which usually took place at his house. 4 See Alexander Knysh, Islamic Mysticism: A Short History (henceforth abbreviated as IM),
pp. 48-66.543 Epistle 01 Translator Intro 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page xxii
xxii AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
with Abu Nasr al-Sarraj al-Tusi (d. 378/988),5 Abu Bakr al-Kalabadhi (d. ca
380/990), Abu Talib al-Makki (d. 386/996), ∏Ali b. ∏Uthman al-Jullabi
al-Hujwiri (d. between 465/1072 and 469/1077), and ∏Abdallah al-Ansari
al-Harawi (d. 481/1089).6 Despite his preoccupation with the Sufi lore and
literature, al-Qushayri’s studies at Nishapur were not limited to Sufism. He studied Shafi∏i jurisprudence under the guidance of Muhammad b. Bakr
al-Tusi (d. 420/1029) and speculative theology with some leading Ash∏arite
scholars of the age, such as Abu Bakr b. Furak (d. 406/1015) and Abu Ishaq
al-Isfaraini (d. 418/1027). Somewhat later he went on a pilgrimage in the
company of the famous exegetes and hadith-collectors Abu Muhammad
al-Juwayni (d. 438/1047) and Ahmad al-Bayhaqi (d. 458/1066). A diligent student
of the Prophet’s Sunna, al-Qushayri “studied hadith with at least seventeen
different authorities, and in turn transmitted hadith to as many as sixty-six
students.”7While his master al-Daqqaq was still alive, al-Qushayri did not seem to
undertake any travels outside of Khurasan. After the city fell under the control
of the powerful Saljuq dynasty in 429/1038 al-Qushayri was embroiled in the
struggle between the rival scholarly factions of Hanafites and Shafi∏ites which
competed with one another for ideological ascendancy. In 436/1045 al-Qushayri
asserted his position as the leading spokesman of the Shafi∏i-Ash∏arite party
of Nishapur by issuing a manifesto in defense of its orthodoxy. His advocacy of
the Ash∏arite theological tenets aroused the ire of its Hanafite opponents. When
the powerful Saljuq vizier ∏Amid al-Mulk al-Kunduri threw in his lot with
al-Qushayri’s Hanafite-Mu∏tazilite opponents, he was arrested and spent a week
in the citadel of Nishapur only to be released after his followers threatened an
all-out rebellion of the city’s Shafi∏ites in 446/1054.Al-Qushayri soon became al-Daqqaq’s foremost disciple, married his daughter
Fatima and eventually succeeded his father-in-law as the head of his religious
school. Al-Qushayri repeatedly acknowledges his debt to, and admirationfor, his
Sufi master throughout his Epistle. Al-Daqqaq was instrumental in introducing
al-Qushayri to another outstanding Sufi authority of Khurasan, Abu ∏Abd
al-Rahman al-Sulami (412/1021), who is quoted on almost every page of the Epistle. A prolific writer and accomplished religious scholar, al-Sulami is rightly
considered to be one of the master architects of the classical Sufi tradition along
1 It presently belongs to the district of Quchan (Iran). 2 Some sources say that he was fifteen years old at the time of his arrival in Nishapur, but this
information is impossible to verify. It is also related that the object of his trip to Nishapur was
to reduce the taxes on a village he owned. 3 While this term presupposes a more-or-less structured institution and a set curriculum, one
should rather think of an informal circle of students attending the daily lectures and sermons
of a popular teacher (ustadh), which usually took place at his house. 4 See Alexander Knysh, Islamic Mysticism: A Short History (henceforth abbreviated as IM),
pp. 48-66.

His advocacy of
the Ash∏arite theological tenets aroused the ire of its Hanafite opponents. When
the powerful Saljuq vizier ∏Amid al-Mulk al-Kunduri threw in his lot with
al-Qushayri’s Hanafite-Mu∏tazilite opponents, he was arrested and spent a week
in the citadel of Nishapur only to be released after his followers threatened an
all-out rebellion of the city’s Shafi∏ites in 446/1054. In 448/1056 he accepted the
invitation of the caliph al-Qaπim to hold hadith sessions at the caliphal palace
in Baghdad. Upon his return to Khurasan al-Qushayri had to settle down in
Tus,8 since Nishapur was still controlled by his Hanafite adversaries. When, in
455/1063, Nizam al-Mulk, the new Saljuq vizier, reversed al-Kunduri’s policies
and endeavored to reestablish the balance of power between the Shafi∏ite and
Hanafite parties, al-Qushayri, by then seventy-nine (lunar) years old, was able to
return to his native city where he remained until his death in 465/1072. His six
sons by his first wife Fatima became respected scholars in their own right and
spread the fame of the al-Qushayri family far and wide.9 Despite his great
renown and the interest he took in Sufi pedagogy,10al-Qushayri left surprisingly
few disciples. Of these Abu ∏Ali Fadl b. Muhammad al-Farmadhi (d. 477/1084),
5 This author is also frequently quoted by al-Qushayri. 6 For these writers and their works see IM, pp. 116–135. 7 Hamid Algar, “Introduction,” in Principles of Sufism, translated from the Arabic by B. R. von
Schlegell, Mizan Press, Berkeley, 1990, p. iii. 8 A medieval city near present-day Meshhed/Mashhad (Iran). 9 He also had three sons by his second wife. 10 He maintained a Sufi lodge in Nishapur, where he trained his disciples.543 Epistle 01 Translator Intro 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page xxiii
TRANSLATOR’S INTRODUCTION xxiii
a teacher of the great Muslim thinker Abu Hamid Muhammad al-Ghazali (d. 505/1111), was by far the most famous. This paucity of spiritual successors may
be attributed in part to al-Qushayri’s persona which was academic and methodical
rather than charismatic and inspirational. Al-Qushayri’s written legacy includes a long Qurπanic commentary entitled
Lataπif al-isharat, which deserves a special mention.11Here, as in the Epistle, the
author pursues a clear apologetic agenda: the advocacy of the teachings, values
and practices of “moderate”, “Junayd-style” Sufism with a view to demonstrating
its full compliance with the precepts of Ash∏arite theology, which al-Qushayri
regarded as the only “orthodox” creed. Written in 410/1019, this work consistently
draws a parallel between the gradual exegetical progress from the literal to the
subtlest meanings (lataπif) of the Qurπanic revelation and the stages of the Sufi’s
spiritual and experiential journey to God. The success of the exegetical progress
and that of the Sufi journey depends on the wayfarer’s ability to combine the
performance of pious works and feats of spirit with sound doctrinal premises. Giving preference to one over the other will result in failure. Even when this
delicate balance is successfully struck, the exegete is still in need of divine
assistance in grasping the subtleties of the divine revelation. The same is true of
the Sufi seeker’s striving toward God – here too one cannot succeed without
God’s constant guidance and assistance. Prominent in al-Qushayri’s intellectual universe is the notion of a privileged,
intuitive knowledge of both God and his word that God grants only to his most
intimate, elect “friends”, the awliyaπ.His advocacy of
the Ash∏arite theological tenets aroused the ire of its Hanafite opponents. When
the powerful Saljuq vizier ∏Amid al-Mulk al-Kunduri threw in his lot with
al-Qushayri’s Hanafite-Mu∏tazilite opponents, he was arrested and spent a week
in the citadel of Nishapur only to be released after his followers threatened an
all-out rebellion of the city’s Shafi∏ites in 446/1054. In 448/1056 he accepted the
invitation of the caliph al-Qaπim to hold hadith sessions at the caliphal palace
in Baghdad. Upon his return to Khurasan al-Qushayri had to settle down in
Tus,8 since Nishapur was still controlled by his Hanafite adversaries. When, in
455/1063, Nizam al-Mulk, the new Saljuq vizier, reversed al-Kunduri’s policies
and endeavored to reestablish the balance of power between the Shafi∏ite and
Hanafite parties, al-Qushayri, by then seventy-nine (lunar) years old, was able to
return to his native city where he remained until his death in 465/1072. His six
sons by his first wife Fatima became respected scholars in their own right and
spread the fame of the al-Qushayri family far and wide.9 Despite his great
renown and the interest he took in Sufi pedagogy,10al-Qushayri left surprisingly
few disciples. Of these Abu ∏Ali Fadl b. Muhammad al-Farmadhi (d. 477/1084),
5 This author is also frequently quoted by al-Qushayri. 6 For these writers and their works see IM, pp. 116–135. 7 Hamid Algar, “Introduction,” in Principles of Sufism, translated from the Arabic by B. R. von
Schlegell, Mizan Press, Berkeley, 1990, p. iii. 8 A medieval city near present-day Meshhed/Mashhad (Iran). 9 He also had three sons by his second wife. 10 He maintained a Sufi lodge in Nishapur, where he trained his disciples.

The same is true of
the Sufi seeker’s striving toward God – here too one cannot succeed without
God’s constant guidance and assistance. Prominent in al-Qushayri’s intellectual universe is the notion of a privileged,
intuitive knowledge of both God and his word that God grants only to his most
intimate, elect “friends”, the awliyaπ. This idea is stated clearly in the introduction
to the Lataπif al-isharat: “[God] has honored the elect (asfiyaπ) among His servants
by [granting them] the understanding of His subtle secrets (lataπif asrarih) and
His lights so that they can see the secret allusions and hidden signs contained
therein [in the Qurπan]. He has shown their innermost souls hidden things so
that by the emanations of the unseen which He has imparted solely to them they
can become aware of that which is concealed from all others. Then they have
started to speak according to their degrees [of spiritual attainment] and capabilities
and God – praise be to Him – inspired in them things by which He has honored
them [to the exclusion of other people]. So, they now speak on behalf of Him,
inform about the subtle truths that He has imparted them, and point to Him …”
The exegete’s progress toward the innermost meaning of the scripture is
described by al-Qushayri as a movement from the intellect to the heart (al-qalb),
then to the spirit (al-ruh), then to the innermost secret (al-sirr) and, finally, to
the secret of secrets (sirr al-sirr) of the Qurπanic revelation. As one may expect of
a Sufi master, al-Qushayri showed little interest in the historical and legal
aspects of the Qurπanic text. For him, they serve as mere windows onto the all-
important spiritual and mystical ideas and values of Sufism. Thus, in discussing
the spoils of war mentioned in Q. 8:41 al-Qushayri argues: “Jihadcan be of two
11 Ed. Ibrahim Basyuni, 4 vols., Dar al-kitab al-∏arabi, Cairo, 1968.543 Epistle 01 Translator Intro 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page xxiv
xxiv AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
types: the external one [waged] against the infidels and the internal one [waged]
against [one’s] soul and Satan. In the same way as the lesser jihad involves [the
seizure of] spoils of war after victory, the greater jihad too has the spoils of war
of its own, which involves taking possession of his soul by the servant of God
after it has been held by his two enemies – [his] passions and Satan.” A similar
parallel is drawn between ordinary fasting which involves abstention from food,
sex, and drink and the spiritual abstention of the Sufi from the allure of
this world and from seeking the approval of its inhabitants. Despite its overall
“moderate” nature, the Lataπif al-isharat is not devoid of the monistic and
visionary elements that characterize what is usually described as the more “bold”
and “esoteric” trend in Sufi literature. This aspect of al-Qushayri’s exegesis
comes to the fore in his interpretation of Q. 7:143, in which Moses comes to God
at an appointed time and requests that He appear to him only to be humbled
by the sight of a mountain crumbling to dust, when God shows Himself to it. Al-Qushayri comments: “Moses came to God as [only] those passionately longing
and madly in love could. Moses came without Moses. Moses came, yet nothing
of Moses was left to Moses.Moses came without Moses. Moses came, yet nothing
of Moses was left to Moses. Thousands of men have traversed great distances,
yet no one remembers them, while that Moses made [only] a few steps and
[school]children will be reciting until the Day of Judgment: ‘When Moses
came…’” Despite such deeply esoteric passages, al-Qushayri’s commentary
remains a typical sample of “moderate” Sufi literature due to its author’s over-
riding desire to achieve a delicate balance between the mystical, esoteric aspects
of the Scripture and his deep respect for its letter, or, in the Sufi parlance,
between the shari∏a and the haqiqa.One should point out that al-Qushayri is also
the author of a conventional historical-philological and legal tafsir entitled
al-Taysir fi πl-tafsir, which is said to have been written before 410/1019. This is
an eloquent testimony to his dual credentials as both a Sufi and a conventional
Sunni scholar (∏alim). Although in his works al-Qushayri addressed a wide variety of subjects,12his
fame rests primarily on his Epistle on Sufism – probably the most popular Sufi
manual ever. Written in 437/1045, it has served as a primary text-book for many
generations of Sufis down to the present and is considered to be essential reading
for any serious Muslim mystic. Al-Qushayri’s Epistle carries a clear apologetic
message – to portray Sufism as a legitimate and respectable Islamic “science” in
complete harmony with the letter and spirit of Islamic Law, the shari∏a. The
author is careful to differentiate between the genuine Sufis and their imitators,
whose irresponsible escapades and statements, in his view, have tainted its image
in the eyes of outsiders, especially authoritative Sunni scholars.The same is true of
the Sufi seeker’s striving toward God – here too one cannot succeed without
God’s constant guidance and assistance. Prominent in al-Qushayri’s intellectual universe is the notion of a privileged,
intuitive knowledge of both God and his word that God grants only to his most
intimate, elect “friends”, the awliyaπ. This idea is stated clearly in the introduction
to the Lataπif al-isharat: “[God] has honored the elect (asfiyaπ) among His servants
by [granting them] the understanding of His subtle secrets (lataπif asrarih) and
His lights so that they can see the secret allusions and hidden signs contained
therein [in the Qurπan]. He has shown their innermost souls hidden things so
that by the emanations of the unseen which He has imparted solely to them they
can become aware of that which is concealed from all others. Then they have
started to speak according to their degrees [of spiritual attainment] and capabilities
and God – praise be to Him – inspired in them things by which He has honored
them [to the exclusion of other people]. So, they now speak on behalf of Him,
inform about the subtle truths that He has imparted them, and point to Him …”
The exegete’s progress toward the innermost meaning of the scripture is
described by al-Qushayri as a movement from the intellect to the heart (al-qalb),
then to the spirit (al-ruh), then to the innermost secret (al-sirr) and, finally, to
the secret of secrets (sirr al-sirr) of the Qurπanic revelation. As one may expect of
a Sufi master, al-Qushayri showed little interest in the historical and legal
aspects of the Qurπanic text. For him, they serve as mere windows onto the all-
important spiritual and mystical ideas and values of Sufism. Thus, in discussing
the spoils of war mentioned in Q. 8:41 al-Qushayri argues: “Jihadcan be of two
11 Ed. Ibrahim Basyuni, 4 vols., Dar al-kitab al-∏arabi, Cairo, 1968.

Al-Qushayri’s Epistle carries a clear apologetic
message – to portray Sufism as a legitimate and respectable Islamic “science” in
complete harmony with the letter and spirit of Islamic Law, the shari∏a. The
author is careful to differentiate between the genuine Sufis and their imitators,
whose irresponsible escapades and statements, in his view, have tainted its image
in the eyes of outsiders, especially authoritative Sunni scholars. Throughout his
book, al-Qushayri consistently seeks to cleanse Sufism of what he perceives as
“unbecoming” beliefs and practices, to expose its unscrupulous imitators, and to
12 For a list of al-Qushayri’s published works see Richard Gramlich, “Introduction (Einleitung),”
in his Das Sendschreiben al-Qu˘sayri’s über das Sufitum, Franz Steiner Verlag, Wiesbaden, 1989,
p. 17.543 Epistle 01 Translator Intro 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page xxv
TRANSLATOR’S INTRODUCTION xxv
instruct its followers in the exemplary ways of the movement’s founding fathers. At the same time, he does not try to conceal from his readers disagreements
among Sufi masters over various doctrinal and practical issues. The Epistle consists of several sections. It opens with a relatively short chapter
that describes the doctrines of “this [Sufi] community (taπifa)”. It unequivocally
demonstrates al-Qushayri’s unshakable allegiance to the Ash∏arite creed and seeks
to assert Sufism’s close links to this influential theological school in Sunni Islam. The second section includes 83 biographies of earlier Sufi masters beginning
with the semi-legendary figure of Ibrahim b. Adham (d. 162/778) and ending
with Ahmad al-Rudhbari (d. 369/960) who had died some six years before
the author was born. The biographies are arranged in a roughly chronological
order and correspond closely to those found in al-Sulami’s “The Generations of
Sufis” (Tabaqat al-sufiyya), which contains 103 Sufi biographies. Like al-Sulami,
al-Qushayri provides a brief summary of biographical data pertaining to each
Sufi master, followed by a selection of their statements on various aspects of “Sufi
science”. In the introduction to the biographical section al-Qushayri takes pains
to present the Sufis as the rightful heirs to the Prophet and his pious Companions. Simultaneously, the author bemoans the decline of the originally high moral and
ethical standards of the earlier Sufi movement among the author’s contemporaries
– a leitmotifthat reappears repeatedly throughout the subsequent narrative. The
biographical section is followed by a detailed essay on Sufi terminology. It provides
detailed explanations of twenty-seven Sufi terms (complete with etymology and
philological analysis) current among al-Qushayri’s generation of Sufis.Al-Qushayri’s Epistle carries a clear apologetic
message – to portray Sufism as a legitimate and respectable Islamic “science” in
complete harmony with the letter and spirit of Islamic Law, the shari∏a. The
author is careful to differentiate between the genuine Sufis and their imitators,
whose irresponsible escapades and statements, in his view, have tainted its image
in the eyes of outsiders, especially authoritative Sunni scholars. Throughout his
book, al-Qushayri consistently seeks to cleanse Sufism of what he perceives as
“unbecoming” beliefs and practices, to expose its unscrupulous imitators, and to
12 For a list of al-Qushayri’s published works see Richard Gramlich, “Introduction (Einleitung),”
in his Das Sendschreiben al-Qu˘sayri’s über das Sufitum, Franz Steiner Verlag, Wiesbaden, 1989,
p. 17.

The
biographical section is followed by a detailed essay on Sufi terminology. It provides
detailed explanations of twenty-seven Sufi terms (complete with etymology and
philological analysis) current among al-Qushayri’s generation of Sufis. Here
quotations of authoritative statements of Sufi masters (both living and dead) are
combined with al-Qushayri’s own interpretative interventions as well as frequent
references to the Qurπan and the Prophet’s custom, or Sunna. The terminological section leads to the systematic one, which describes the
major “stations” (maqamat) and “states” (ahwal) of the mystical path. This part
of the Epistleexhibits the author’s penchant for a fine psychological analysis and
his profound understanding of the experiences of mystical wayfarers, from the
novice (murid) to the accomplished Sufi master (shaykh). The concluding chapters
discuss the moral and ethical dilemmas that the Sufis face in the course of their
progress along the Sufi path as well as the rules of proper behavior, or “good
manners” that they must observe in order to succeed in their spiritual undertaking. In particular, the author examines Sufi attitudes toward “spiritual concerts”
(sama∏), travel, death, saintly miracles, visions and dreams, etc. The book is
concluded with the author’s advice to Sufi novices, which recapitulates and brings
into sharp relief the principal themes and rules of proper behavior elucidated in
the previous sections. Generally speaking, al-Qushayri’s Epistle can be viewed as falling into two
distinct sections: the biographical, which attests to the exemplary piety of
Sufism’s early heroes and their complete religious orthodoxy, and the didactic,
which summarizes their teachings, customs and attitudes. According to the apt
observation of a contemporary Western student of al-Qushayri’s masterpiece,543 Epistle 01 Translator Intro 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page xxvi
xxvi AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
the former serves as the authoritative “support” (isnad) of the latter, which
presents the main body (matn) of Sufi doctrine and practice, in the same way as
the chain of authoritative transmitters validates the content of a prophetic report
(hadith).13 To push this parallel even further one can say that the numerous
quotations from the Qurπan and the Sunna that richly punctuate al-Qushayri’s
narrative fulfill the same “supporting” function by validating Sufi concepts,
terminology, life-style, and behavior. The author’s extensive knowledge of Sufi
lore allows him to put it to a wide variety of different uses. One and the same
anecdote reappears in different contexts and is deployed to fulfill different
didactic functions. Yet, the author’s overall strategy remains the same: to
educate his readers by the pious precedent, to instill in them admiration for the
exemplary ethos of the Sufi masters of old and to encourage them to implement
it in their own lives. The continuing relevance of the Epistle to the spiritual
aspirations of modern Muslims, Sufis and non-Sufis alike, serves as the best
evidence of al-Qushayri’s remarkable success in achieving his goals. Despite its obvious normative and didactic agenda and formulaic presentation,
the Epistledoes give the modern reader an illuminating insight into the everyday
lives of Sufi devotees and the moral dilemmas and challenges they faced in trying
to strike a delicate balance between their ascetic and mystical values and the
exigencies of life in a society governed by rank, wealth, and political power. In
al-Qushayri’s narrative the indigent, downtrodden but righteous always triumph
over the wealthy, powerful but impious. God always comes to the rescue of the
former and abandons or humbles the latter.The
biographical section is followed by a detailed essay on Sufi terminology. It provides
detailed explanations of twenty-seven Sufi terms (complete with etymology and
philological analysis) current among al-Qushayri’s generation of Sufis. Here
quotations of authoritative statements of Sufi masters (both living and dead) are
combined with al-Qushayri’s own interpretative interventions as well as frequent
references to the Qurπan and the Prophet’s custom, or Sunna. The terminological section leads to the systematic one, which describes the
major “stations” (maqamat) and “states” (ahwal) of the mystical path. This part
of the Epistleexhibits the author’s penchant for a fine psychological analysis and
his profound understanding of the experiences of mystical wayfarers, from the
novice (murid) to the accomplished Sufi master (shaykh). The concluding chapters
discuss the moral and ethical dilemmas that the Sufis face in the course of their
progress along the Sufi path as well as the rules of proper behavior, or “good
manners” that they must observe in order to succeed in their spiritual undertaking. In particular, the author examines Sufi attitudes toward “spiritual concerts”
(sama∏), travel, death, saintly miracles, visions and dreams, etc. The book is
concluded with the author’s advice to Sufi novices, which recapitulates and brings
into sharp relief the principal themes and rules of proper behavior elucidated in
the previous sections. Generally speaking, al-Qushayri’s Epistle can be viewed as falling into two
distinct sections: the biographical, which attests to the exemplary piety of
Sufism’s early heroes and their complete religious orthodoxy, and the didactic,
which summarizes their teachings, customs and attitudes. According to the apt
observation of a contemporary Western student of al-Qushayri’s masterpiece,

In
al-Qushayri’s narrative the indigent, downtrodden but righteous always triumph
over the wealthy, powerful but impious. God always comes to the rescue of the
former and abandons or humbles the latter. In a sense, the Sufi devotees are
the true, if uncrowned, “kings” of this world,14 not those worldly rulers who
may appear to be lording it over the common herd of believers. Yet, whenever
God’s righteous “friends” (awliyaπ Allah) abandon or compromise their pious
convictions in the expectation of mundane benefits or comforts, they are swiftly
punished by God for their “perfidy”. This theme runs like a red thread across
the entire texture of al-Qushayri’s momentous work. It is intimately linked to
another critical theme, that of salvation, which, according to the author of the
Epistle, even the most advanced Sufi masters and “friends of God” should not
take for granted until they die and face God’s judgement in the Hereafter. Only
after that may they be allowed by God to appear to their former peers and
disciples in dreams to inform them of their condition in the afterlife. Even
miracle-working, no matter how spectacular, cannot guarantee one a “favorable
outcome” in the afterlife, for it may be nothing but a ruse on the part of
God aimed at testing the integrity and faith of His servant. These themes are
illustrated over and over throughout the entire text of the Epistleby the anecdotes
13 Jawid Mojaddedi, The Biographical Tradition in Sufism, Curzon Press, Richmond, Surrey,
2001, p. 123. 14 As explicitly stated in an anonymous Sufi treatise from the fourth/tenth century; see Adab
al-muluk: Ein Handbuch zur islamischen Mystik aus dem 4./10. Jahrhundert, ed. Bernd Radtke,
Franz Steiner, Beirut, 1991.543 Epistle 01 Translator Intro 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page xxvii
TRANSLATOR’S INTRODUCTION xxvii
and parables that show al-Qushayri’s fellow Sufis in a wide variety of contexts:
suffering from hunger and thirst in the desert, performing pilgrimage to Mecca,
participating in “spiritual concerts”, reciting the Qurπan, waging war against the
“infidel” Christian enemy in the marches of Iberia and Anatolia, earning their
livelihood, studying under the guidance of a Sufi master, meditating in a retreat,
praying and supplicating, working miracles, interacting with the “people of the
market-place”, their family members and peers, dreaming, and dying. The reader
is invited to explore the fascinating world of Islamic ascetic and mystical piety
carefully assembled for us by the author. * * *
In my translation I have relied on several editions of al-Qushayri’s Epistle,
namely, that by ∏Abd al-Halim Mahmud and Mahmud b. al-Sharaf15 and that
by Muhammad ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Mar∏ashali.16 I have also used two uncritical
editions of al-Qushayri’s text, one from Cairo and another from Damascus.17The
quality of all these editions, including both “critical” ones, leave much to be
desired. Furthermore, these “critical” editions are practically identical and do
not complement each other. I have also made use of the comments provided by
the German translator of the Risala,Richard Gramlich,18who had in his possession
two manuscript copies of the text. I take this opportunity to acknowledge my
indebtedness to Gramlich’s translation, which I used extensively throughout
my own work on this difficult text. I have also collated my translation with two
available English ones – a partial one by Barbara von Schlegell that omits all
chains of transmission of the pious logia, the biographical section and the latter
chapters pertaining to Sufi etiquette, practices, morals and ethics;19and a complete
one20by Rabia Harris, which relegates the chains of transmission to the appendix.In
al-Qushayri’s narrative the indigent, downtrodden but righteous always triumph
over the wealthy, powerful but impious. God always comes to the rescue of the
former and abandons or humbles the latter. In a sense, the Sufi devotees are
the true, if uncrowned, “kings” of this world,14 not those worldly rulers who
may appear to be lording it over the common herd of believers. Yet, whenever
God’s righteous “friends” (awliyaπ Allah) abandon or compromise their pious
convictions in the expectation of mundane benefits or comforts, they are swiftly
punished by God for their “perfidy”. This theme runs like a red thread across
the entire texture of al-Qushayri’s momentous work. It is intimately linked to
another critical theme, that of salvation, which, according to the author of the
Epistle, even the most advanced Sufi masters and “friends of God” should not
take for granted until they die and face God’s judgement in the Hereafter. Only
after that may they be allowed by God to appear to their former peers and
disciples in dreams to inform them of their condition in the afterlife. Even
miracle-working, no matter how spectacular, cannot guarantee one a “favorable
outcome” in the afterlife, for it may be nothing but a ruse on the part of
God aimed at testing the integrity and faith of His servant. These themes are
illustrated over and over throughout the entire text of the Epistleby the anecdotes
13 Jawid Mojaddedi, The Biographical Tradition in Sufism, Curzon Press, Richmond, Surrey,
2001, p. 123. 14 As explicitly stated in an anonymous Sufi treatise from the fourth/tenth century; see Adab
al-muluk: Ein Handbuch zur islamischen Mystik aus dem 4./10. Jahrhundert, ed. Bernd Radtke,
Franz Steiner, Beirut, 1991.

I take this opportunity to acknowledge my
indebtedness to Gramlich’s translation, which I used extensively throughout
my own work on this difficult text. I have also collated my translation with two
available English ones – a partial one by Barbara von Schlegell that omits all
chains of transmission of the pious logia, the biographical section and the latter
chapters pertaining to Sufi etiquette, practices, morals and ethics;19and a complete
one20by Rabia Harris, which relegates the chains of transmission to the appendix. While the former is quite readable and relatively accurate (albeit practically
devoid of commentary), the latter is but a free paraphrase of the Arabic text,
which is frequently misconstrued and, consequently, mistranslated. Harris’s
translation, too, has no commentary. Alexander D. Knysh
15 Al-Risala al-qushayriyya, Dar al-kutub al-haditha, Cairo, 2 vols., 1966. 16 Al-Risala al-qushayriyya fi ∏ilm al-tasawwuf, Dar ihyaπ al-turath al-∏arabi, Beirut, 1998; I used this
later edition to indicate page correspondences between the Arabic text and its English translation. 17 Al-Risala al-qushayriyya fi ∏ilm al-tasawwuf, with commentaries by Zakariya al-Ansari, Dar
al-kutub al-∏arabiyya al-kubra, Mustafa al-Babi al-Halabi, Cairo, 1276 A.H. (1859 C.E.) and
Al-Risala al-qushayriyya, with commentaries by Mustafa al-∏Arusi and Zakariya al-Ansari,
∏Abd al-Wakil al-Darubi and Tasin ∏Arafa, Jami∏ al-Darwishiyya, 2 vols., Damascus, no date. 18 Das Sendschreiben al-Qu˘sayris über das Sufitum, Franz Steiner Verlag, Wiesbaden, 1989. 19 Principles of Sufism by al-Qushayri; translated from the Arabic by B. R. von Schlegell with an
introduction by Hamid Algar, Mizan Press, Berkeley, CA, 1990. 20 The Risalah: Principles of Sufism, translated by Rabia Harris, edited by Laleh Bakhtiar, Kazi
Publications, Chicago, IL, 2002. It has several minor omissions toward the end of the text, but
can be considered complete for practical purposes.This page intentionally left blankThis page intentionally left blank

543 Epistle 02 Author Intro 21/12/06 12:11 PM Page 1
AUTHOR’S INTRODUCTION
In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
Praise be to God Who has no rival in the greatness of His sovereignty, Who
is unique in the splendor of His might, Who is dignified in the supremacy of
His oneness, Who is made holy by the exaltation of His eternity, to Whose
Magnitude of Essence there is no likeness or challenger, and Who is elevated
in His attributes above any limitation or deficiency! His are the attributes that
pertain to none but Him alone and His are the signs that testify that He is not
similar to His creatures. Blessed is He, the possessor of the highest dignity!
There is no boundary1 to encircle him, no device to entrap Him, no time to
confine Him! No one can be His helper, there can be no offspring next to Him,
no number to count Him, no place to contain Him, no time period to embrace
Him, no understanding to measure him, and no imagination to picture Him.
Far removed is He from such questions as “How is He?”, “Where is He?’’,
or statements such as “Through His creation He has acquired beauty”, or
“Through His actions He removed from Himself imperfection and deficiency”.
For “Nothing is like onto Him, He is the Hearing, the Seeing.”2No living thing
can overcome Him, omniscient is He and omnipotent! I praise Him for what He
possesses and what He produces. I thank Him for what He withholds and what
He bestows. I place my trust in Him and am satisfied with Him. I am content
with what He gives and what He does not give.
I testify that that there is no deity but God and that He has no partners.
This is the testimony of the one who has absolute confidence in His uniqueness
and the one who seeks to secure His assistance. I also testify that our lord
Muhammad is His elected servant and his handpicked trustee and that he is
God’s messenger to all His creatures. May God bless him and his family, [who
shine like] lights in the darkness. May God bless his Companions, [who are]
the keys to the True Guidance.3 And may God greet them all with numerous
greetings!//12
This is an epistle that the poor one in need of God Most High, ∏Abd
al-Karim b. Hawazin al-Qushayri, has addressed to all the Sufi community in
the lands of Islam in the year 437.4
1 The Arabic word hadd used here may also mean “definition’’.
2 Qurπan (hereafter Q.) 42:11. Unless stated otherwise, translations of the Qurπan quoted in the
text are from Arthur J. Arberry (trans.), The Koran Interpreted, Simon and Schuster, New
York, 1996.
3 That is, the religion of Islam.
4 1045 C.E.543 Epistle 02 Author Intro 21/12/06 12:11 PM Page 2
2 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
And now to the main topic – may God be pleased with you! God has
made this community5 His friends of choice6 and placed them above the rest
of His servants and immediately after His messengers and prophets, may
God bless and greet them! He has rendered the hearts of the Sufis repositories
of His mysteries and marked them off from the other members of His
Community by His resplendent light. They are the saviors of all other
creatures, who in each and every state of theirs remain with God and through
God. He has cleansed them of the turbidity of human nature and elevated them,
through the realities of His oneness that were revealed to them, to the vantages
from which they contemplate God. And He has granted them success in
acquiring the good manners in serving their God and He has given them
insights into the working of the decrees dispensed by their Lord. In this
way they have become capable of fulfilling all the obligations imposed upon
them by God and realized in the most perfect manner all His dispensations in
their regard.
Then they returned to God, may He be glorified and exalted, through
the sincerity of their need [of God] and in the state of humility; they refused
to rely on the good works they had done or on the pure spiritual states
that had been bestowed upon them. For they knew that God, may He be
great and elevated, does what He wishes and selects any one of His servants
He wants, while His creatures cannot pass judgements on Him, nor can
any creature have any right against Him. His award is the beginning of all
beneficence, His punishment is the just verdict, and His command is the final
judgement.//13
Know – may God show mercy to you! – that the majority of those true Sufis
have become extinct and, in our age, nothing is left of them but their traces. As
a poet put it,
As for the tents, they look like their tents
And yet I see that the women of the tribe are not the ones who used to
live in them.
This [Sufi] path7 has been overcome by weakness, nay the path has in fact
completely disappeared. Gone are the [Sufi] elders,8 in whom one could find
guidance; few are the young men, whose [exemplary] deeds and customs deserve
5 Hadhihi πl-taπifa, i.e., the Sufis.
6 Awliyaπ, sing. wali. This term, which in Arabic means “close friend” or “protégé”, is usually
translated into Western languages as “saints”; in what follows we shall translate this word as
“friend(s) of God”.
7 Tariqa (lit. “way” or “path”); this term denotes both the spiritual method peculiar to a given
Sufi master and the Sufi institution founded upon it. In the latter meaning, it is similar to a
monastic order in Christianity or Buddhism. See IM, pp. 301–303.
8 Shuyukh; sing. shaykh.In what follows this term will be translated as either “elder” or “[Sufi]
master”.543 Epistle 02 Author Intro 21/12/06 12:11 PM Page 3
AUTHOR’S INTRODUCTION 3
to be emulated. Scrupulosity has disappeared from this world and rolled up its
prayer rug, whereas greed has gained strength and tightened its stranglehold. Respect for the Divine Law has departed from the hearts of men and they have
chosen the neglect of religion as their support and rejected the difference between
the permissible and the forbidden. They have made disrespect and shamelessness
their religion. They have set no store in the devotional acts and become remiss
in fasting and praying; they have galloped around in the field of neglectfulness
and leaned toward those who blindly follow their lusts. They have thought little
about committing sinful deeds. At the same time, they have availed themselves
freely of the things they borrow from the commoners, women and rulers. However, they are not satisfied with indulging in all these evil deeds. They
have begun to refer to the highest [divine] mysteries and [mystical] states and to
claim that they have freed themselves from the bondage of servility and attained
the realities of divine union. They also claim that they reside in God, Who rules
over them with His decrees, and that they have become completely obliterated
in Him. Therefore, God cannot condemn or blame them for what they do and
what they do not do. They have also claimed that the mysteries of divine oneness
are unveiled to them, that their souls are taken away from them completely
[unto God] and that they have lost the properties of their human natures. After
having been completely annihilated [in God], they have found themselves in the
presence of God’s eternal light.They have also claimed that the mysteries of divine oneness
are unveiled to them, that their souls are taken away from them completely
[unto God] and that they have lost the properties of their human natures. After
having been completely annihilated [in God], they have found themselves in the
presence of God’s eternal light. Therefore, when they speak, it is someone else
who speaks on their behalf and when they act, it is someone else who performs
their acts for them, or rather, they are caused to act by someone else.14//
Although in this age of ours we have suffered a lot from this affliction, some of
which I have just shown, I have restrained my tongue from lengthy condemnations. I have done this out of concern for this [Sufi] path, for one should not speak ill
of its people.9 One should not give their opponents a cause to condemn them,
since in this country, the suffering of this path at the hands of its opponents and
accusers has been particularly severe. I do hope that the cause of this weakness
will be removed and God, glory be to Him, in His graciousness, will warn those
who have strayed from the [Prophet’s] exemplary custom by abandoning the
good manners of this path. Since our age keeps bringing only more and more
difficulties and the majority of our compatriots continue to stubbornly adhere
to their [corrupt] ways and to blindly persist in their delusions, I have begun to
fear that the hearts of men might think that this whole affair10 from the very
beginning rested upon all those [faulty] foundations and that its early adherents
followed the same [corrupt] habits. So I have composed this epistle for you, may
God generously reward you!543 Epistle 02 Author Intro 21/12/06 12:11 PM Page 2
2 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
And now to the main topic – may God be pleased with you! God has
made this community5 His friends of choice6 and placed them above the rest
of His servants and immediately after His messengers and prophets, may
God bless and greet them! He has rendered the hearts of the Sufis repositories
of His mysteries and marked them off from the other members of His
Community by His resplendent light. They are the saviors of all other
creatures, who in each and every state of theirs remain with God and through
God. He has cleansed them of the turbidity of human nature and elevated them,
through the realities of His oneness that were revealed to them, to the vantages
from which they contemplate God. And He has granted them success in
acquiring the good manners in serving their God and He has given them
insights into the working of the decrees dispensed by their Lord. In this
way they have become capable of fulfilling all the obligations imposed upon
them by God and realized in the most perfect manner all His dispensations in
their regard.
Then they returned to God, may He be glorified and exalted, through
the sincerity of their need [of God] and in the state of humility; they refused
to rely on the good works they had done or on the pure spiritual states
that had been bestowed upon them. For they knew that God, may He be
great and elevated, does what He wishes and selects any one of His servants
He wants, while His creatures cannot pass judgements on Him, nor can
any creature have any right against Him. His award is the beginning of all
beneficence, His punishment is the just verdict, and His command is the final
judgement.//13
Know – may God show mercy to you! – that the majority of those true Sufis
have become extinct and, in our age, nothing is left of them but their traces. As
a poet put it,
As for the tents, they look like their tents
And yet I see that the women of the tribe are not the ones who used to
live in them.
This [Sufi] path7 has been overcome by weakness, nay the path has in fact
completely disappeared. Gone are the [Sufi] elders,8 in whom one could find
guidance; few are the young men, whose [exemplary] deeds and customs deserve
5 Hadhihi πl-taπifa, i.e., the Sufis.
6 Awliyaπ, sing. wali. This term, which in Arabic means “close friend” or “protégé”, is usually
translated into Western languages as “saints”; in what follows we shall translate this word as
“friend(s) of God”.
7 Tariqa (lit. “way” or “path”); this term denotes both the spiritual method peculiar to a given
Sufi master and the Sufi institution founded upon it. In the latter meaning, it is similar to a
monastic order in Christianity or Buddhism. See IM, pp. 301–303.
8 Shuyukh; sing. shaykh.In what follows this term will be translated as either “elder” or “[Sufi]
master”.

Since our age keeps bringing only more and more
difficulties and the majority of our compatriots continue to stubbornly adhere
to their [corrupt] ways and to blindly persist in their delusions, I have begun to
fear that the hearts of men might think that this whole affair10 from the very
beginning rested upon all those [faulty] foundations and that its early adherents
followed the same [corrupt] habits. So I have composed this epistle for you, may
God generously reward you! In it I have mentioned the lives of the masters of this
path, their good manners, their high morals, their relationships with one another,
their beliefs that they hold in their hearts as well as their ecstatic states they
allude to and the characteristics of their spiritual ascent from the beginning to the
9 That is, the Sufis. 10 That is, Sufism.543 Epistle 02 Author Intro 21/12/06 12:11 PM Page 4
4 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
end. In this way, this epistle would give strength to the followers11 of this path
and make you testify that my presentation is correct. As for me, in spreading these
laments12I shall have a diversion and from the generous God a favor and reward.
So I seek God’s help in what I am about to mention and ask Him to protect
and defend me from error in this undertaking. I plea to God for forgiveness and
pardon. He alone deserves praise and He alone is capable of everything!//15
A chapter explaining the beliefs of the Sufis concerning
the fundamentals of religion
Know, may God have mercy on you, that the elders of this path built the
foundations of their affair upon the sound fundamental principles of God’s
oneness. In this way they protected their beliefs from [reprehensible] innovations
and tried to bring themselves closer to the ways of the pious forefathers13 and
the followers of the Prophet’s Sunna,14 namely the doctrine of God’s oneness
that contained neither likening15nor stripping.16They knew well the true nature
of God’s eternity and realized fully how an existent entity emerges from non-
existence.//16
It is this issue that the great master of this path al-Junayd,17 may God have
mercy on him, mentioned when he said: “The [true] doctrine of oneness consists
in separating the eternal from the originated.” Thus, they strengthened the
fundamentals of the religious belief by clear proofs and irrefutable evidence. Abu
Muhammad al-Jurayri,18 may God have mercy on him, said: “He who does not
learn the science of God’s oneness by one of its evidential proofs, will place the
foot of deception into the chasm of perdition.” By this he meant that he who
relies exclusively on blind imitation and is unable to contemplate directly the
proofs of God’s oneness, will stray from the path of salvation and enter the realm
of destruction.
Upon looking into their words and examining their statements one will find
out that their entire teachings and the quotations thereof confirm that this folk19
have not failed to realize their goal, nor have they diverged in their quest through
any shortcoming.
11 Muridun; sing. murid. Lit. “seeker” or “aspirant”, followers of a Sufi master.
12 That is, the author’s complaints about the decline of contemporary Sufism from the originally
high standards.
13 That is, the members of the first Muslim community in Medina and their immediate
successors.
14 The code of exemplary behavior established by the Prophet and his Companions to be
emulated by subsequent generations of the Muslims.
15 That is, ascribing to God the attributes of His creatures.
16 That is, declaring God to be devoid of any attributes.
17 The leader of the Baghdad school of Sufism, who died in 298/910. See IM, pp. 52–56.
18 A disciple of al-Junayd who succeeded him as the head of the Baghdad school of Sufism after
his death. See IM, p. 66.
19 Al-qawm– that is, the Sufis.543 Epistle 02 Author Intro 21/12/06 12:11 PM Page 5
AUTHOR’S INTRODUCTION 5
In this section we shall mention a summary of their statements in which they
deal with the problems of the fundamentals of religion. Then, God willing, we
shall proceed to lay down in proper order a synopsis of necessary doctrines in a
concise and brief manner. I heard Shaykh ∏Abd al-Rahman Muhammad b.20al-Husayn al-Sulami21say:
I heard ∏Abdallah b.//17 Musa al-Salami say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Shibli22
say: “The One23 is known before any definition and before any letters”.24 This
is an unequivocal statement from al-Shibli that the Essence of the Eternal
– praise be to Him – has no definition, nor does His speech consist of letters. I
heard that Abu Hatim al-Sufi said: I heard Abu Nasr al-Tusi25 say: Someone
asked Ruwaym26 about the first duty that God – may He be great and exalted
– imposed upon His creatures. Ruwaym answered: “Knowledge, because God –
may His name be exalted – said: ‘I have not created jinn and mankind except to
worship Me.’’’27Ibn ∏Abbas28explained: “[That is,] except to know [God].”
Al-Junayd said: “The first act of wisdom required of the servant of God is
that each work of art should know its artisan and that each originated thing
should know how it came to be. This allows one to distinguish the Creator from
His creatures and the Eternal from the originated thing. As a result, the servant
of God submits to His call and acknowledges the necessity of obedience toward
Him. If, however, one does not know one’s owner, one cannot attribute ownership
to whom it rightfully belongs.”
Muhammad b. al-Husayn told me: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Razi
say: I heard Abu πl-Tayyib al-Maraghi say: “To the intellect belongs argumentative
proof, to wisdom allegorical allusion and to mystical gnosis29 direct witnessing.543 Epistle 02 Author Intro 21/12/06 12:11 PM Page 4
4 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
end. In this way, this epistle would give strength to the followers11 of this path
and make you testify that my presentation is correct. As for me, in spreading these
laments12I shall have a diversion and from the generous God a favor and reward.
So I seek God’s help in what I am about to mention and ask Him to protect
and defend me from error in this undertaking. I plea to God for forgiveness and
pardon. He alone deserves praise and He alone is capable of everything!//15
A chapter explaining the beliefs of the Sufis concerning
the fundamentals of religion
Know, may God have mercy on you, that the elders of this path built the
foundations of their affair upon the sound fundamental principles of God’s
oneness. In this way they protected their beliefs from [reprehensible] innovations
and tried to bring themselves closer to the ways of the pious forefathers13 and
the followers of the Prophet’s Sunna,14 namely the doctrine of God’s oneness
that contained neither likening15nor stripping.16They knew well the true nature
of God’s eternity and realized fully how an existent entity emerges from non-
existence.//16
It is this issue that the great master of this path al-Junayd,17 may God have
mercy on him, mentioned when he said: “The [true] doctrine of oneness consists
in separating the eternal from the originated.” Thus, they strengthened the
fundamentals of the religious belief by clear proofs and irrefutable evidence. Abu
Muhammad al-Jurayri,18 may God have mercy on him, said: “He who does not
learn the science of God’s oneness by one of its evidential proofs, will place the
foot of deception into the chasm of perdition.” By this he meant that he who
relies exclusively on blind imitation and is unable to contemplate directly the
proofs of God’s oneness, will stray from the path of salvation and enter the realm
of destruction.
Upon looking into their words and examining their statements one will find
out that their entire teachings and the quotations thereof confirm that this folk19
have not failed to realize their goal, nor have they diverged in their quest through
any shortcoming.
11 Muridun; sing. murid. Lit. “seeker” or “aspirant”, followers of a Sufi master.
12 That is, the author’s complaints about the decline of contemporary Sufism from the originally
high standards.
13 That is, the members of the first Muslim community in Medina and their immediate
successors.
14 The code of exemplary behavior established by the Prophet and his Companions to be
emulated by subsequent generations of the Muslims.
15 That is, ascribing to God the attributes of His creatures.
16 That is, declaring God to be devoid of any attributes.
17 The leader of the Baghdad school of Sufism, who died in 298/910. See IM, pp. 52–56.
18 A disciple of al-Junayd who succeeded him as the head of the Baghdad school of Sufism after
his death. See IM, p. 66.
19 Al-qawm– that is, the Sufis.

al-Husayn told me: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Razi
say: I heard Abu πl-Tayyib al-Maraghi say: “To the intellect belongs argumentative
proof, to wisdom allegorical allusion and to mystical gnosis29 direct witnessing. The intellect demonstrates, wisdom alludes, and gnosis witnesses directly the
fact that the purest acts of worship can only be obtained by the purest belief in
God’s oneness.”
Someone asked al-Junayd about God’s oneness. He answered: “Rendering
God one by realizing fully His uniqueness through the perfection of His
20 Here and henceforth the letter “b.” stands for the Arabic “ibn” (son). 21 A major exponent of Sufism in Khurasan and a teacher of al-Qushayri, who died in 412/1021. See IM, pp. 125–127. 22 A famous Sufi of the Baghdad school who studied Sufism under al-Junayd; he died in
334/946. See IM, pp. 64–66. 23 That is, God. 24 Huruf, sing. harf. In Arabic, this word can mean both “letters” and “sounds”. 25 Abu Nasr al-Sarraj al-Tusi (d. 378/988), a Khurasani exponent of Sufism who wrote the
famous Sufi manual “The Book of the Essentials of Sufism” (Kitab al-luma∏ fi πl-tasawwuf). For details see IM, pp. 118–120. 26 A famous Sufi master associated with the circle of al-Junayd. He died in 303/915. 27 Q. 51:56. 28 A cousin of the prophet Muhammad by his uncle al-∏Abbas, Ibn [al-]∏Abbas distinguished
himself as a collector of stories about the Prophet; he was also one of the first Muslim
exegetes. He died around 68/686–7. See EI, “∏Abdallah b. al-∏Abbas”. 29 Ma∏rifa, a Sufi term for divinely inspired, intuitive knowledge of God and the world.543 Epistle 02 Author Intro 21/12/06 12:11 PM Page 6
6 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
solitude, that is, that He is one and only, ‘Who has not begotten and has not
been begotten’,30who has no opponents, rivals or likes, without likening Him [to
created things], without asking ‘how [He is]’, without representing Him as an
image or form, in accordance with [the verse] ‘Like Him there is naught; He is
the Hearing, the Seeing.’’’31
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Yahya the Sufi told me: ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali al-Tamimi
the Sufi told me: It was said that [Abu] al-Husayn b. ∏Ali al-Damaghani
said: Someone asked Abu Bakr al-Zahirabadhi about [divine] gnosis.//18 He
answered: “Gnosis is a name. Its meaning consists in elevating [God] in the heart
in such a way as to prevent you from either stripping [Him] of [His] attributes
or likening [Him] to [His] creatures.”
Abu πl-Hasan al-Bushanji, may God have mercy on him, said: “God’s oneness
is to know that He is not similar to created essences, yet [at the same time] not
devoid of His attributes.”
Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on Him
– told us: I heard Muhammad b. Muhammad b. Ghalib say: I heard Abu Nasr
Ahmad b. Sa∏id al-Isfanjani say: al-Husayn b. Mansur [al-Hallaj]32said: “Consider
everything to be originated in time (i.e., created), for eternity pertains to Him
alone. Everything that has appeared [in this world] as a corporal being is bound
with accidents. Everything that is assembled by means of an intermediary33 is
held together by its powers. Everything that is affiliated with a moment of time
is [one day] abandoned by it.34 Everything that is sustained by someone else
is by necessity dependent on it. Everything that is subject to the imagination
can be represented as an image. Everything that is contained by a place can be
confined by a space. And everything that belongs to a certain category can
be grasped by a qualifier.al-Husayn told me: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Razi
say: I heard Abu πl-Tayyib al-Maraghi say: “To the intellect belongs argumentative
proof, to wisdom allegorical allusion and to mystical gnosis29 direct witnessing. The intellect demonstrates, wisdom alludes, and gnosis witnesses directly the
fact that the purest acts of worship can only be obtained by the purest belief in
God’s oneness.”
Someone asked al-Junayd about God’s oneness. He answered: “Rendering
God one by realizing fully His uniqueness through the perfection of His
20 Here and henceforth the letter “b.” stands for the Arabic “ibn” (son). 21 A major exponent of Sufism in Khurasan and a teacher of al-Qushayri, who died in 412/1021. See IM, pp. 125–127. 22 A famous Sufi of the Baghdad school who studied Sufism under al-Junayd; he died in
334/946. See IM, pp. 64–66. 23 That is, God. 24 Huruf, sing. harf. In Arabic, this word can mean both “letters” and “sounds”. 25 Abu Nasr al-Sarraj al-Tusi (d. 378/988), a Khurasani exponent of Sufism who wrote the
famous Sufi manual “The Book of the Essentials of Sufism” (Kitab al-luma∏ fi πl-tasawwuf). For details see IM, pp. 118–120. 26 A famous Sufi master associated with the circle of al-Junayd. He died in 303/915. 27 Q. 51:56. 28 A cousin of the prophet Muhammad by his uncle al-∏Abbas, Ibn [al-]∏Abbas distinguished
himself as a collector of stories about the Prophet; he was also one of the first Muslim
exegetes. He died around 68/686–7. See EI, “∏Abdallah b. al-∏Abbas”. 29 Ma∏rifa, a Sufi term for divinely inspired, intuitive knowledge of God and the world.

Everything that is contained by a place can be
confined by a space. And everything that belongs to a certain category can
be grasped by a qualifier. As for God – praise be upon Him – He cannot be
protected by something above Him nor supported by something below Him.35
He cannot be defined by something that preceded Him, no togetherness can
appear next to Him, no behindness can follow Him, no in-frontness can grasp
Him, no beforeness can prevail over Him, no afterness can annihilate Him. No
term can comprehensively define Him, no becoming can add existence onto
Him, no absence can cause Him to disappear.//19 There is no description of
Him whatsoever; His actions have no cause; His existence has no end. He is far
removed from the characteristics of His creatures, nor does He mix with them;
His actions require no intermediary. He is distinct from His creatures through
His eternity, while they are distinct from His through their origination in time. 30 Q. 112:3. 31 Q. 42:11. 32 A famous (and highly controversial) mystic of al-Junayd’s circle, who was tried and executed
as a heretic and troublemaker in Baghdad in 309/922. See IM, pp. 72–82. 33 That is, any body that was originated through something other than it and is possessed of
various sensory and physical faculties. 34 That is, it dies. 35 That is, He cannot be subject to spatial descriptions.543 Epistle 02 Author Intro 21/12/06 12:11 PM Page 7
AUTHOR’S INTRODUCTION 7
If you ask “When?”, His being preceded all time. If you say huwa,36 the
[letters] ha and waw were created by Him. If you ask “Where?”, His existence
was there before any place. The letters are but His signs; His existence is the
confirmation of Him; His knowledge is the knowledge of His oneness; and the
knowledge of His oneness is what makes Him distinct from His creatures. Whatever the imagination might fathom regarding Him, He will be different
from it. How can anything that originated from Him dwell in Him? How can
anything that He produced try to join Him? The eyes cannot contemplate Him
nor can thought grasp Him. Closeness to Him is [a sign of] His beneficence;
remoteness from Him is [a sign of] His neglect; His elevation takes place without
climbing up;37His descent occurs without stepping down.38He is “the First and
the Last, the Manifest and the Hidden”,39the Close and the Remote, “like Him
there is naught; He is the Hearing, the Seeing”.40
I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj al-Tusi41
narrating on the authority of Yusuf b. al-Husayn42 who said: “A certain man
came to Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri43and said://20 ‘Tell me, what is God’s oneness?’
He [al-Misri] answered: ‘To understand that God’s power in all things [exists]
without mixing, that He crafted them without any implements, that His act [of
creation] is the cause of everything that He has crafted, that His act [of creation]
had no cause; that neither in the skies above nor on the Earth below is there any
planner but God and that whatever you may imagine by your fantasy, God is
different from it.’” Al-Junayd said: “The doctrine of God’s oneness is your
knowledge and confirmation that God was alone in His pre-eternity, with Whom
there was no one, and that nothing can do what He does.”
Abu ∏Abdallah b.Closeness to Him is [a sign of] His beneficence;
remoteness from Him is [a sign of] His neglect; His elevation takes place without
climbing up;37His descent occurs without stepping down.38He is “the First and
the Last, the Manifest and the Hidden”,39the Close and the Remote, “like Him
there is naught; He is the Hearing, the Seeing”.40
I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj al-Tusi41
narrating on the authority of Yusuf b. al-Husayn42 who said: “A certain man
came to Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri43and said://20 ‘Tell me, what is God’s oneness?’
He [al-Misri] answered: ‘To understand that God’s power in all things [exists]
without mixing, that He crafted them without any implements, that His act [of
creation] is the cause of everything that He has crafted, that His act [of creation]
had no cause; that neither in the skies above nor on the Earth below is there any
planner but God and that whatever you may imagine by your fantasy, God is
different from it.’” Al-Junayd said: “The doctrine of God’s oneness is your
knowledge and confirmation that God was alone in His pre-eternity, with Whom
there was no one, and that nothing can do what He does.”
Abu ∏Abdallah b. Khafif44 said: “Faith consists in the heart’s acceptance of
[the mysteries of] the Unknown that God communicates to it.” Abu πl-∏Abbas
al-Sayyari45 said: “God’s gifts are of two types: graces and afflictions. What He
bestows upon you is a grace, while what He takes away from you is an affliction. Therefore, say: ‘I am a believer, God willing.’” Abu πl-∏Abbas was the [greatest
Sufi] master of his time. I heard [my] teacher Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God
have mercy on him – say: “A man squeezed the leg of Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Sayyari. 36 That is, “He” (God). 37 That is, His elevation does not occur in a physical space. 38 A reference to the tradition according to which God descends to the lower heaven in order to
communicate with His creatures. 39 Q. 57:3. 40 Q. 42:11. 41 On him see note 000. 42 Yusuf b.Everything that is contained by a place can be
confined by a space. And everything that belongs to a certain category can
be grasped by a qualifier. As for God – praise be upon Him – He cannot be
protected by something above Him nor supported by something below Him.35
He cannot be defined by something that preceded Him, no togetherness can
appear next to Him, no behindness can follow Him, no in-frontness can grasp
Him, no beforeness can prevail over Him, no afterness can annihilate Him. No
term can comprehensively define Him, no becoming can add existence onto
Him, no absence can cause Him to disappear.//19 There is no description of
Him whatsoever; His actions have no cause; His existence has no end. He is far
removed from the characteristics of His creatures, nor does He mix with them;
His actions require no intermediary. He is distinct from His creatures through
His eternity, while they are distinct from His through their origination in time. 30 Q. 112:3. 31 Q. 42:11. 32 A famous (and highly controversial) mystic of al-Junayd’s circle, who was tried and executed
as a heretic and troublemaker in Baghdad in 309/922. See IM, pp. 72–82. 33 That is, any body that was originated through something other than it and is possessed of
various sensory and physical faculties. 34 That is, it dies. 35 That is, He cannot be subject to spatial descriptions.

41 On him see note 000. 42 Yusuf b. al-Husayn al-Razi (d. 304/916), a renowned Sufi from Rayy, Iran. See al-Sulami,
Tabaqat, pp. 151–156. 43 A famous Sufi master from Upper Egypt, who died in 245/860. See IM, pp. 40–42. 44 A famous Sufi from Shiraz, who died in 371/982. See IM, pp. 79, 87, 118, and Schimmel,
Mystical Dimensions of Islam, “index”. 45 For his biography see later (p. 68).543 Epistle 02 Author Intro 21/12/06 12:11 PM Page 8
8 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
He said: ‘You are squeezing a leg that has never made a single step toward
disobedience of God – may He be great and exalted!’” Abu Bakr al-Wasiti46said:
“When someone says: ‘I am a believer in God in truth’, one should tell him: ‘The
true faith implies scrutiny, understanding and comprehension. If someone loses
this, his claim to true faith is invalidated.’”47 By this he meant the teaching
of the people of the [Prophet’s] Sunna, according to which the true believer is
destined to enter Paradise. If one has not known directly from the mystery of
God’s wisdom that he is a believer in truth, then his claim is false. I heard Shaykh ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard that Mansur b. ∏Abdallah said://21 I heard Abu πl-Husayn al-∏Anbari say: I heard Sahl b. ∏Abdallah al-Tustari48 say: “Believers contemplate God with their eyes without
comprehension and without ever reaching the limit of their understanding.”
Abu πl-Husayn al-Nuri49 said: “The Real50 looked at the hearts of men and did
not find a heart that had more passion for Him than the heart of Muhammad –
may God bless and greet him. Therefore He bestowed upon him the Ascension51
in order to hasten the vision [of God by Muhammad] and [their] conversation.”
I heard imam52 Abu Bakr Muhammad b. al-Hasan Ibn Furak53 – may God
have mercy upon him – say: I heard Muhammad b.Therefore He bestowed upon him the Ascension51
in order to hasten the vision [of God by Muhammad] and [their] conversation.”
I heard imam52 Abu Bakr Muhammad b. al-Hasan Ibn Furak53 – may God
have mercy upon him – say: I heard Muhammad b. al-Mahbub, a servant of Abu
∏Uthman al-Maghribi,54 say: “One day Abu ∏Uthman told me: ‘If someone
said to you: “Muhammad, where is your God”, what would you tell him?’ [The
servant] said: I answered: ‘Where He has always been.’ [Then Abu ∏Uthman]
said: ‘And if this person asks, where God was in eternity, what would you say?’
[The servant] said: I answered: ‘[He was] where He is now.’ That is, as He was
in no particular place before, so He is now.’ [The servant] said: ‘He was satisfied
with my response and he took off his shirt and gave it to me.’”
I heard the imam Abu Bakr b. Furak – may God have mercy on him – say:
I heard Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi say: “I used to believe in the teaching [that
46 A Sufi of al-Junayd’s circle, who emigrated to Central Asia (Marw) following the execution
of al-Hallaj. He died around 320/932. See IM, pp. 100–101. 47 A mere oral proclamation that is not supported by personal conviction, experience and insight
is not sufficient to become a true believer. 48 On this famous Sufi of Basra, who died in 283/896, see IM, pp. 83–88 and Böwering,
Mystical Vision. 49 A famous Sufi of al-Junayd’s circle who represents the erotic trend in Baghdad mysticism. He
died in 295/907. See IM, pp. 60–63. 50 That is, God. 51 On Muhammad’s Night Journey (al-israπ) and subsequent Ascension (al-mi∏raj) to Heaven,
see the article “al-Mi∏radj” in EI. 52 Literally “prayer leader”, a term that is often applied to any distinguished religious scholar. 53 This individual, who died in 406/1015 at Nishapur, was known primarily as a Shafi∏i jurist
and Ash∏ari theologian. He was a teacher of al-Qushayri. For details, see the article “Ibn
Furak” in EI. 54 On this Sufi master, who died in Nishapur in 373/983, see al-Sulami, Tabaqat, pp.41 On him see note 000. 42 Yusuf b. al-Husayn al-Razi (d. 304/916), a renowned Sufi from Rayy, Iran. See al-Sulami,
Tabaqat, pp. 151–156. 43 A famous Sufi master from Upper Egypt, who died in 245/860. See IM, pp. 40–42. 44 A famous Sufi from Shiraz, who died in 371/982. See IM, pp. 79, 87, 118, and Schimmel,
Mystical Dimensions of Islam, “index”. 45 For his biography see later (p. 68).

For details, see the article “Ibn
Furak” in EI. 54 On this Sufi master, who died in Nishapur in 373/983, see al-Sulami, Tabaqat, pp. 358–362
and the sources cited therein. His biography will be mentioned later (see p. 72).543 Epistle 02 Author Intro 21/12/06 12:11 PM Page 9
AUTHOR’S INTRODUCTION 9
postulated] that God is located in a certain direction.55However, when I arrived
in Baghdad, this [idea] disappeared from my heart. I then wrote to my companions
in Mecca, saying: ‘I have become Muslim once again.’”56
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn al-Sulami say: I heard Abu ∏Uthman
al-Maghribi say, when he was asked about creatures: “[They are but] carcasses
and ghosts who are governed by the rulings of Divine Power.” Al-Wasiti said:
“When the spirits and the bodies [of men] were brought forth by God, they
came into being through Him and not through their own essences. Likewise,
their thoughts and movements also appeared through God.” He meant that the
movements and the thoughts are but the ramifications57 of the bodies and the
spirits.//22 In saying so he explained that the acquisitions of the creatures
are created by God Most High;58likewise, God Most High is the only one Who
creates all essences and their accidents.59
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard Abu Ja∏far al-Saydalani
say: I heard Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz60 say: “He who thinks that he can achieve his
goal by exerting himself is only wearying himself in vain, while he who thinks
that he can attain his goal without effort, is but a wishful thinker.” Al-Wasiti
said: “The stations [of the Sufi path] are but portions apportioned and attributes
predetermined [by God’s will]. Therefore, how can one strive to attain [something]
through one’s own actions and how can one seek to achieve [one’s goal] through
one’s own effort?”61
Someone asked al-Wasiti whether unbelief [occurs] through God or belongs
to Him. He answered: “Unbelief and faith, this world and the next, are all from
God, to God, through God and belong to Him.For details, see the article “Ibn
Furak” in EI. 54 On this Sufi master, who died in Nishapur in 373/983, see al-Sulami, Tabaqat, pp. 358–362
and the sources cited therein. His biography will be mentioned later (see p. 72).

Therefore, how can one strive to attain [something]
through one’s own actions and how can one seek to achieve [one’s goal] through
one’s own effort?”61
Someone asked al-Wasiti whether unbelief [occurs] through God or belongs
to Him. He answered: “Unbelief and faith, this world and the next, are all from
God, to God, through God and belong to Him. That is, [they] originate from
God, then [they] return to Him; [they] subsist and disappear through God and
belong to Him as His domain and His creatures.”
Al-Junayd said: Someone asked one of the scholars about the doctrine of
oneness [of God]. He [the scholar] replied: “This is certitude.” Then the inquirer
asked: “Explain to me what it is?” [The scholar] answered: “It is when you know
that the movement or immobility of creatures are the work of God alone – may
55 That is, that God has spatial characteristics and is seated on a physical throne in a concrete
location. This teaching was attributed to some Islamic schools of thought, namely the
Karramiyya and the Hanbalites. 56 That is, “I have converted to the true Islam.”
57 Furu∏; lit. “branches”. 58 That is, they receive their acts and thoughts from God, whereupon they appropriate them. 59 This is a reference to the polemic between the Ash∏arite theologians, whose position is upheld
by the author, and their opponents, the Mu∏tazilites, who treated the essences of things as
being self-sufficient carriers of accidents. For details see Frank, Beings and Their Attributes,
pp. 10–13 et passim. 60 On this controversial Sufi master of the Baghdad school, who was repeatedly exiled for his
bold mystical ideas (he died around 286/899 or earlier), see IM, pp. 56–60. 61 That is, the success or failure of one’s striving was predetermined by God from eternity.543 Epistle 02 Author Intro 21/12/06 12:11 PM Page 10
10 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
He be great and exalted – and that He has no partners. If you have done this, you
have already declared His oneness.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard ∏Abd al-Wahid b. ∏Ali say: I heard Muhammad b. Musa al-Wasiti say:
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn al-Jawhari say: I heard that Dhu πl-Nun
al-Misri said that a man had come to him and said: “Pray to God on my behalf!//23
Since you are assisted in your knowledge of the Unseen62 by your realization
of the doctrine of God’s oneness, God has answered many of your prayers in
the past. However, a cry for help does not necessarily save a drowning man.”63
Al-Wasiti said: “Pharaoh claimed lordship openly,64while the Mu∏tazilites do so
covertly, when they say: ‘You do what you will.’”65Abu πl-Husayn al-Nuri said:
“God’s oneness is when every thought points to God Most High, without being
mixed with the thoughts that imply that God is similar [to His creatures].”
Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him –
said: I heard ∏Abd al-Wahid b. Bakr say: I heard that Hilal b. Ahmad said that
someone asked Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari66about God’s oneness. He answered: “God’s
oneness is to keep the heart upright by avoiding the teaching that strips [God
of His attributes]67 and by rejecting His similarity [with His creatures].68 In one
phrase, God’s oneness is asserted as follows: Whatever [human] imagination
and thoughts might ascribe to God, He is the opposite of it, as stated by the Most
High: “Like Him there is naught, He is the Hearing and the Seeing.”69 Abu
πl-Qasim al-Nasrabadhi70said: “Paradise subsists because He allows it to subsist. However, His thought of you, His mercy toward you and His love for you subsist
as long as He Himself subsists.He answered: “God’s
oneness is to keep the heart upright by avoiding the teaching that strips [God
of His attributes]67 and by rejecting His similarity [with His creatures].68 In one
phrase, God’s oneness is asserted as follows: Whatever [human] imagination
and thoughts might ascribe to God, He is the opposite of it, as stated by the Most
High: “Like Him there is naught, He is the Hearing and the Seeing.”69 Abu
πl-Qasim al-Nasrabadhi70said: “Paradise subsists because He allows it to subsist. However, His thought of you, His mercy toward you and His love for you subsist
as long as He Himself subsists. How different is that which subsists through His
own subsistence from that which subsists because He allows it to subsist.” The
words of Shaykh Abu πl-Qasim al-Nasrabadhi are the utmost goal of realization. The People of the Truth71 say that the attributes of the Essence of the
Eternal – glory be to Him – subsist through His own subsistence. He drew
attention to this issue and clarified that the Subsistent//24 subsists through His
own subsistence, which is contrary to what is claimed by the opponents of the
62 That is, the world of the mystery of divine predestination that ordinary mortals cannot access. 63 That is, despite God’s predetermination of man’s fate, he is still responsible for his actions. 64 When he said [in the Qurπan 79:24]: “I am your Lord Most High!”
65 That is, they claim that they are the creators of their own actions. 66 A Sufi associated with al-Junayd’s circle. His biography is given later (see pp. 62–63), in the
biographical section of the “Epistle”. 67 The doctrine of the “stripping” of God of His attributes (ta∏til) was attributed to the
Mu∏tazilites, who insisted that God’s attributes do not have independent existence and are but
modes of His eternal essence. 68 The doctrine of the “likening” of God to His creatures (tashbih) was ascribed to a number of
Islamic schools of thought, including the Karramiyya and some radical Hanbalites. 69 Q.Therefore, how can one strive to attain [something]
through one’s own actions and how can one seek to achieve [one’s goal] through
one’s own effort?”61
Someone asked al-Wasiti whether unbelief [occurs] through God or belongs
to Him. He answered: “Unbelief and faith, this world and the next, are all from
God, to God, through God and belong to Him. That is, [they] originate from
God, then [they] return to Him; [they] subsist and disappear through God and
belong to Him as His domain and His creatures.”
Al-Junayd said: Someone asked one of the scholars about the doctrine of
oneness [of God]. He [the scholar] replied: “This is certitude.” Then the inquirer
asked: “Explain to me what it is?” [The scholar] answered: “It is when you know
that the movement or immobility of creatures are the work of God alone – may
55 That is, that God has spatial characteristics and is seated on a physical throne in a concrete
location. This teaching was attributed to some Islamic schools of thought, namely the
Karramiyya and the Hanbalites. 56 That is, “I have converted to the true Islam.”
57 Furu∏; lit. “branches”. 58 That is, they receive their acts and thoughts from God, whereupon they appropriate them. 59 This is a reference to the polemic between the Ash∏arite theologians, whose position is upheld
by the author, and their opponents, the Mu∏tazilites, who treated the essences of things as
being self-sufficient carriers of accidents. For details see Frank, Beings and Their Attributes,
pp. 10–13 et passim. 60 On this controversial Sufi master of the Baghdad school, who was repeatedly exiled for his
bold mystical ideas (he died around 286/899 or earlier), see IM, pp. 56–60. 61 That is, the success or failure of one’s striving was predetermined by God from eternity.

68 The doctrine of the “likening” of God to His creatures (tashbih) was ascribed to a number of
Islamic schools of thought, including the Karramiyya and some radical Hanbalites. 69 Q. 42:11. 70 A student of al-Shibli, who sympathized with al-Hallaj’s teaching. He died in 367/977. 71 That is, the accomplished Sufi masters.543 Epistle 02 Author Intro 21/12/06 12:11 PM Page 11
AUTHOR’S INTRODUCTION 11
People of the Truth. Muhammad b. al-Husayn said: I heard that al-Nasrabadhi
said: “You vacillate between [God’s] attributes of action and attributes of the
essence.72 Both are His – may He be exalted – attributes in truth. When He
throws you into confusion by placing you in the station of separation, He binds
you with the attributes of His action. When He delivers you to the station of
unity, He binds you with the attributes of His essence.”
Abu πl-Qasim al-Nasrabadhi was the master of his age. I heard imam Abu
πl-Ishaq al-Isfaraini73– may God have mercy on him – say: “When I arrived from
Baghdad [to Nishapur]74 I began to teach at the Friday mosque of Nishapur
the doctrine of the human spirit, arguing that it was created. Abu πl-Qasim
al-Nasrabadhi used to sit at some distance from us and to listen to my speech. After several days he approached us and said to Muhammad al-Farraπ: ‘I testify that
I was convertedto Islam anew at the hands of this man!’ And he pointed at me.”75
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn al-Sulami say: I heard Abu πl-Husayn
al-Farisi say: I heard Ibrahim b. Fatik say: I heard al-Junayd say: “When would He
Who has neither a like nor an equal join the one who has both a like and an equal? Is this at all possible? This strange idea can only come true through the kindness
of the [All-]Kind in which there can be no grasping, imagining or comprehension,
but only the allusion [springing from] certitude and the realization [that comes
with] the genuine faith.”76Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on
him – informed us: I heard ∏Abd al-Wahid b. Bakr say: Ahmad b. Muhammad
b. ∏Ali al-Barda∏i told me: Tahir b. Isma∏il al-Razi told me: someone asked Yahya
b.68 The doctrine of the “likening” of God to His creatures (tashbih) was ascribed to a number of
Islamic schools of thought, including the Karramiyya and some radical Hanbalites. 69 Q. 42:11. 70 A student of al-Shibli, who sympathized with al-Hallaj’s teaching. He died in 367/977. 71 That is, the accomplished Sufi masters.

∏Ali al-Barda∏i told me: Tahir b. Isma∏il al-Razi told me: someone asked Yahya
b. Mu∏adh:77“Tell me about God – may He be great and exalted!” He answered:
“[Your God] is one God.”78He was then asked: “How is He?”79 [Yahya] answered:
“[He is] the [All-]Powerful Ruler.” He was then asked: “Where is He?” [Yahya]
said: “[Thy Lord] is ever watching you.”80The inquirer said to him: “I did not ask
72 According to Ash∏arite theologians, God’s attributes are divided into two categories. The
first are the attributes that pertain to the essence and are co-eternal with it – e.g., life, will,
knowledge, power and so on. The second category comprises the attributes that describe
God’s acts in the created world, namely His sustenance of His creatures, His determining the
death and birth of human beings, His wrath at human disobedience, and His contentment
with mankind’s good deeds. In theological works, the borderline between these two categories
remained blurred and was disputed by various theological factions. See the article “Sifa”
in EI. 73 On this famous theologian see article “al-Isfaraπini” in EI. 74 A major cultural and religious center in Khurasan, Iran. 75 That is, he embraced the Ash∏arite doctrine of the created spirit. 76 That is, a cognitive union between man and God can only occur through a pure act of
faith and certitude. It cannot be achieved through sense perception, intellectual process or the
imagination. 77 A famous mystic from Nishapur, who distinguished himself as an eloquent preacher; he died
in 258/872. See IM, pp. 92–94. 78 Q. 2:163. 79 That is, what is His mode of existence? 80 Q. 89:14.543 Epistle 02 Author Intro 21/12/06 12:11 PM Page 12
12 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
you about that!” [Yahya] replied: “All other attributes belong to [His] creatures. As for His [genuine] attribute, it is as I have just told you.”
Muhammad b. al-Husayn told us: He said I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I
heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say: “Whatever one imagines [about] God in his
ignorance, the intellect shows [Him] to be different from that.”//25
Ibn Shahin asked al-Junayd about the meaning of the [word] “with”. He
responded: “‘With’ has two meanings: the ‘with’ of the Prophets, which is
[God’s] assistance and protection, as in the words of God: ‘I shall be with you,
hearing and seeing.’81The ‘with’ of the commoners, which is [God’s] knowledge
and understanding, as in the words of God: ‘Three men conspire not secretly
with one another, but He is the fourth of them.82’” To this Ibn Shahin responded:
“People like you should be leading this community to God.”
Someone asked Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri about God’s words: “The All-
Compassionate sat Himself (istawa) upon the Throne.”83 He answered: “The
All-Compassionate asserted His essence, while denying [His location] in a
specific place. He exists through His own essence, whereas all other things exist
through His command, as He wished [them to be].”84 Someone asked al-Shibli
about the words of God: “The All-Compassionate sat Himself on the Throne.”
He answered: “The All-Compassionate has existed forever, while the Throne is an
originated thing. Therefore, the Throne was firmly installed (istawa) by the All-
Compassionate.”85Someone asked Ja∏far b. Nusayr about the words of God: “The
All-Compassionate sat Himself upon the Throne.” He answered: “His knowledge
of all things became equal,86in that no one thing is closer to Him than the other.”
Ja∏far al-Sadiq87said: “Whoever believes that God is [located] in something,
[that originated] from something or [rests] upon something, has become//26 a
polytheist.∏Ali al-Barda∏i told me: Tahir b. Isma∏il al-Razi told me: someone asked Yahya
b. Mu∏adh:77“Tell me about God – may He be great and exalted!” He answered:
“[Your God] is one God.”78He was then asked: “How is He?”79 [Yahya] answered:
“[He is] the [All-]Powerful Ruler.” He was then asked: “Where is He?” [Yahya]
said: “[Thy Lord] is ever watching you.”80The inquirer said to him: “I did not ask
72 According to Ash∏arite theologians, God’s attributes are divided into two categories. The
first are the attributes that pertain to the essence and are co-eternal with it – e.g., life, will,
knowledge, power and so on. The second category comprises the attributes that describe
God’s acts in the created world, namely His sustenance of His creatures, His determining the
death and birth of human beings, His wrath at human disobedience, and His contentment
with mankind’s good deeds. In theological works, the borderline between these two categories
remained blurred and was disputed by various theological factions. See the article “Sifa”
in EI. 73 On this famous theologian see article “al-Isfaraπini” in EI. 74 A major cultural and religious center in Khurasan, Iran. 75 That is, he embraced the Ash∏arite doctrine of the created spirit. 76 That is, a cognitive union between man and God can only occur through a pure act of
faith and certitude. It cannot be achieved through sense perception, intellectual process or the
imagination. 77 A famous mystic from Nishapur, who distinguished himself as an eloquent preacher; he died
in 258/872. See IM, pp. 92–94. 78 Q. 2:163. 79 That is, what is His mode of existence? 80 Q. 89:14.

Therefore, the Throne was firmly installed (istawa) by the All-
Compassionate.”85Someone asked Ja∏far b. Nusayr about the words of God: “The
All-Compassionate sat Himself upon the Throne.” He answered: “His knowledge
of all things became equal,86in that no one thing is closer to Him than the other.”
Ja∏far al-Sadiq87said: “Whoever believes that God is [located] in something,
[that originated] from something or [rests] upon something, has become//26 a
polytheist. In other words, had He been upon something, He would have been
carried by it; had He been in something, He would have been confined [by it]; and had
He been from something, He would have been an originated being.” Ja∏far al-Sadiq
also said about God’s words: “Then [He] drew near and hung suspended.”88
81 Q. 20:46. 82 Q. 58:7. 83 Q. 20:5. 84 Meaning God’s creative command “Be!”
85 In some contexts, the verb istawamay mean either “to [firmly] install [oneself]” or “to raise”. As in the next example, various meanings of this Arabic root are brought into play in the
sayings of the Sufi masters. 86 A word play on the meaning of the Arabic verb istawa, which may mean either “to sit firmly”
or “to be equal”. 87 The sixth Shi∏i leader (imam), to whom many esoteric teachings are ascribed by later Sufi
authors. See Böwering, Mystical Vision, pp. 140–142. 88 Q. 53:8. The identity of the being seen by Muhammad in this Qurπanic episode was disputed
by Muslim scholars. While some early authorities believed that the Prophet saw God Himself,
later exegesis almost uniformly insisted that he saw the angel of Revelation Gabriel; see Josef
van Ess, “Vision and Ascension: Surat al-Najmand Its Relationship with Muhammad’s mi∏raj”
in Journal of Qurπanic Studies, vol. 1/1 (1999), pp. 47–62.543 Epistle 02 Author Intro 21/12/06 12:11 PM Page 13
AUTHOR’S INTRODUCTION 13
“Whoever imagines that God Himself drew near [to Muhammad] implies that
there was a distance [between them]. In reality, ‘drawing near’ means only that
each time [Muhammad] came closer to God, He removed him further from
[conventional] knowledge, until there was neither ‘nearness’ nor ‘distance’.”
I found in the handwriting of [my] master Abu ∏Ali [al-Daqqaq] that someone
asked a Sufi where is God? He answered: “May God banish you [from good]! How can you seek the ‘where’ of witnessing [the divine Essence]?!” Shaykh
Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami told us: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Khashshab
al-Baghdadi say: I heard Abu πl-Qasim b. Musa say: I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad say: I heard al-Ansari say: I heard al-Kharraz89say: “The true essence of
closeness [to God] is when the heart loses the perception of all things and the
soul finds rest in God Most High.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Hafiz
say: I heard Abu Mu∏adh al-Qazwini say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Dallal say: I heard
Abu ∏Abdallah b. Qahraman say: I heard Ibrahim al-Khawwas90 say: “I came to
a man who was possessed by Satan. I began to utter the call to prayer in his ear. Then Satan called me from the man’s belly, saying: ‘Let me kill him, for he says
that the Qurπan is created!’”
Ibn ∏Ataπ91said: “When God Most High created the letters,92He made them
one of His mysteries. When He created Adam, He infused this mystery93 into
him, without however giving it to His angels. The letters94 streamed from
the tongue of Adam – upon him be peace – in different manners and in different
languages, and God made them the [outward] forms.” By saying this Ibn
∏Ataπ clearly affirmed that the letters are created.//27 Sahl b.Therefore, the Throne was firmly installed (istawa) by the All-
Compassionate.”85Someone asked Ja∏far b. Nusayr about the words of God: “The
All-Compassionate sat Himself upon the Throne.” He answered: “His knowledge
of all things became equal,86in that no one thing is closer to Him than the other.”
Ja∏far al-Sadiq87said: “Whoever believes that God is [located] in something,
[that originated] from something or [rests] upon something, has become//26 a
polytheist. In other words, had He been upon something, He would have been
carried by it; had He been in something, He would have been confined [by it]; and had
He been from something, He would have been an originated being.” Ja∏far al-Sadiq
also said about God’s words: “Then [He] drew near and hung suspended.”88
81 Q. 20:46. 82 Q. 58:7. 83 Q. 20:5. 84 Meaning God’s creative command “Be!”
85 In some contexts, the verb istawamay mean either “to [firmly] install [oneself]” or “to raise”. As in the next example, various meanings of this Arabic root are brought into play in the
sayings of the Sufi masters. 86 A word play on the meaning of the Arabic verb istawa, which may mean either “to sit firmly”
or “to be equal”. 87 The sixth Shi∏i leader (imam), to whom many esoteric teachings are ascribed by later Sufi
authors. See Böwering, Mystical Vision, pp. 140–142. 88 Q. 53:8. The identity of the being seen by Muhammad in this Qurπanic episode was disputed
by Muslim scholars. While some early authorities believed that the Prophet saw God Himself,
later exegesis almost uniformly insisted that he saw the angel of Revelation Gabriel; see Josef
van Ess, “Vision and Ascension: Surat al-Najmand Its Relationship with Muhammad’s mi∏raj”
in Journal of Qurπanic Studies, vol. 1/1 (1999), pp. 47–62.

When He created Adam, He infused this mystery93 into
him, without however giving it to His angels. The letters94 streamed from
the tongue of Adam – upon him be peace – in different manners and in different
languages, and God made them the [outward] forms.” By saying this Ibn
∏Ataπ clearly affirmed that the letters are created.//27 Sahl b. ∏Abdallah95 said:
“The letters are the tongue of action and not the tongue of the essence,96 for
they themselves are an action in that which is acted upon.”97 This too is a clear
statement that the letters are created. In his “Replies to the Questions of the Syrians” al-Junayd said: “Trust in
God is an action of the heart; the oneness of God is a word of the heart.” This is the
teaching of the people of the fundamental principles [of religion], that is, speech
89 Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz. See note 60 on page 9. 90 A Sufi of al-Junayd’s circle who died in 291/904. See al-Sulami, Tabaqat, pp. 220–222 and
the biographical chapter of the “Epistle” on page 56. 91 Ahmad b. ∏Ataπ al-Rudhbari (d. 369/980). 92 Huruf, sing. harf. In Arabic this word denotes both letters and sounds. Here al-Qushayri
refutes the thesis, upheld by some Hanbali scholars, that the letters or sounds of the Qurπan
are uncreated. 93 That is, the knowledge of God. 94 Or the sounds, see note 92. 95 Sahl b. ∏Abdallah al-Tustari (d. 283/896), an early Sufi theorist and exegete from Basra,
who exerted a profound influence on the subsequent development of Sufi thought. See IM,
“Index” and Böwering, Mystical Vision. 96 That is, they express God’s actions, but not His hidden essence. 97 That is, they are created and take place in the created – that is, in language.543 Epistle 02 Author Intro 21/12/06 12:11 PM Page 14
14 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
is the entity that resides in the heart; it comes from command and prohibition,
from the [prophetic] tradition and search for this tradition. Al-Junayd also said in
his “Replies to the Questions of the Syrians”: “Only God possesses the knowledge
of the Unseen.98He knows what was, what will be, what will not be and how this
would be, were it to be.” Al-Husayn b. al-Mansur [al-Hallaj] said: “He who has
realized fully the truth of God’s oneness, sheds [such questions as] ‘why?’ and
‘how?’” Muhammad b. al-Husayn related to us: I heard that Mansur b. ∏Abdallah
said: I heard Ja∏far b. Muhammad say: I heard al-Junayd say: “The most noble and
exalted counsel is to allow your thought to roam in the arena of God’s oneness.”
Al-Wasiti said: “God has brought forth nothing more noble than the human
spirit.” He thus stated clearly that the spirit is created. The master and imam
Zayn al-Islam Abu πl-Qasim99 said: “All these stories prove that the beliefs of
Sufi masters agree with the teachings of the People of the Truth,100as far as the
fundamentals of religion are concerned. We stop here in order to avoid going
beyond the concision and brevity, which we have pledged to follow [in this work].”
Section [on divine oneness]
The master, the Adornment of Islam, Abu πl-Qasim – may God make his glory
eternal – said:
The following sections contain their beliefs concerning God’s oneness,
which we shall present in proper order.The master and imam
Zayn al-Islam Abu πl-Qasim99 said: “All these stories prove that the beliefs of
Sufi masters agree with the teachings of the People of the Truth,100as far as the
fundamentals of religion are concerned. We stop here in order to avoid going
beyond the concision and brevity, which we have pledged to follow [in this work].”
Section [on divine oneness]
The master, the Adornment of Islam, Abu πl-Qasim – may God make his glory
eternal – said:
The following sections contain their beliefs concerning God’s oneness,
which we shall present in proper order. The dispersed and collected sayings
of the masters of this path, as well as their books, teach about God’s oneness
as follows://28 God Most High – praise be to Him – is existent, eternal, one,
wise, powerful, knowing, overpowering, compassionate, willing, hearing, glorious,
exalted, speaking, seeing, proud, strong, living, one, everlasting, and everlasting
refuge.101
He knows by [His] knowledge;102he is powerful by [His] power; he wills by
[His] will; he sees by [His] sight; He speaks by [His] speech; He lives by [His]
life; He is everlasting by [His] everlastingness. He has two hands, which are His
attributes and with which He creates what He wishes and gives it a specific form. He has a face. The attributes of His essence are unique to it. One must not say
that they are He or that they are not He. They are [His] eternal attributes and
[His] everlasting properties. He is unique in His essence. He is not similar to any
originated thing, nor is any created being similar to Him. He is neither a body,
98 That is, the world of divine mystery that contains the true realities of all existing things and
the knowledge of things to come until the end of time. 99 That is, al-Qushayri. 100 That is, the Sunnites who adhered to al-Ash∏ari’s theological doctrine. 101 Al-Samad; the exact meaning of this epithet of God mentioned in Q. 112:2 remains a matter
of dispute. I follow A. J. Arberry’s translation.When He created Adam, He infused this mystery93 into
him, without however giving it to His angels. The letters94 streamed from
the tongue of Adam – upon him be peace – in different manners and in different
languages, and God made them the [outward] forms.” By saying this Ibn
∏Ataπ clearly affirmed that the letters are created.//27 Sahl b. ∏Abdallah95 said:
“The letters are the tongue of action and not the tongue of the essence,96 for
they themselves are an action in that which is acted upon.”97 This too is a clear
statement that the letters are created. In his “Replies to the Questions of the Syrians” al-Junayd said: “Trust in
God is an action of the heart; the oneness of God is a word of the heart.” This is the
teaching of the people of the fundamental principles [of religion], that is, speech
89 Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz. See note 60 on page 9. 90 A Sufi of al-Junayd’s circle who died in 291/904. See al-Sulami, Tabaqat, pp. 220–222 and
the biographical chapter of the “Epistle” on page 56. 91 Ahmad b. ∏Ataπ al-Rudhbari (d. 369/980). 92 Huruf, sing. harf. In Arabic this word denotes both letters and sounds. Here al-Qushayri
refutes the thesis, upheld by some Hanbali scholars, that the letters or sounds of the Qurπan
are uncreated. 93 That is, the knowledge of God. 94 Or the sounds, see note 92. 95 Sahl b. ∏Abdallah al-Tustari (d. 283/896), an early Sufi theorist and exegete from Basra,
who exerted a profound influence on the subsequent development of Sufi thought. See IM,
“Index” and Böwering, Mystical Vision. 96 That is, they express God’s actions, but not His hidden essence. 97 That is, they are created and take place in the created – that is, in language.

J. Arberry’s translation. 102 These statements are directed against the Mu∏tazilite theologians who considered God’s
attributes to be mere modes of His being and who tended to allegorize the anthropomorphic
features ascribed to God in the Muslim scripture.543 Epistle 02 Author Intro 21/12/06 12:11 PM Page 15
AUTHOR’S INTRODUCTION 15
nor a substance, nor an accident. His attributes are not accidents and He can
be neither fancied by the imagination nor represented by the intellect. He has
neither direction nor place and He is not subject to the flow of time or age. His
properties neither increase nor decrease. He has neither shape nor corpus and
cannot be limited by an end or a limit. No originated thing can dwell in Him, and
no cause can move Him to action. He is subject to neither color nor coming-to-be
and is in no need of help or assistance. No essence endowed with power can
escape His power nor can any creature disengage itself from//29 His command. No known thing eludes His knowledge and no one can reprimand Him for what
and how He does what He does. About Him one ought not ask “where?”, “in what way?” or “how?”. His
existence has no beginning, therefore, one should not ask: “When did He come to
be?” His duration has no end and one cannot say [about Him]: “[His] age and time
have ended.” One cannot say why He did what He did, since His actions have no
cause. Nor can one say: “What is He?”, for He belongs to no category [of beings]
and therefore cannot have any special mark setting Him aside from the other
[similar beings]. He will be seen [on the Judgement Day], but not by positioning
Himself in front of the viewers, while He will see others without applying [His]
eyesight. He fashions [creatures] without touching them directly or handling. His are the most beautiful names103and the most exalted attributes. He “does
whatsoever he desires”,104and [all] creatures obey His verdict. Nothing can happen
in His realm unless He so willed, and no event can take place in His kingdom,
unless He has predetermined it. When he knows that something should happen,
He wills it and it happens indeed. And when He knows that something should
not happen, although [in principle] possible, He wills that it should not happen.J. Arberry’s translation. 102 These statements are directed against the Mu∏tazilite theologians who considered God’s
attributes to be mere modes of His being and who tended to allegorize the anthropomorphic
features ascribed to God in the Muslim scripture.

When he knows that something should happen,
He wills it and it happens indeed. And when He knows that something should
not happen, although [in principle] possible, He wills that it should not happen. He is the creator of men’s deeds, both good and bad; He is the originator of
all the entities and events in this world, rare or numerous. He sends [His]
messengers to mankind, although He is under no obligation to do so. It is He Who causes men to worship Him by communicating with them
through the prophets in such a way that no one can either censure or oppose
[Him]. It is He Who helped our prophet Muhammad – may God’s prayer and
blessing be upon him – by evidential miracles and resplendent signs, depriving
[his deniers] of an excuse [not to embrace his message] and making clear through
him [the distinction between] certain knowledge105 and denial. It is He Who, at
first, protected the sanctity of Islam after the death of His Prophet – may God’s
prayer and blessing be upon him – through the Rightly-Guided Caliphs,106then
proceeded to protect and aid the truth by revealing the irrefutable proofs of
the religion through lips of His friends.107 He has since been safeguarding His
103 Q. 7:180 and 17:110. 104 Q. 2:253. 105 That is, true faith. 106 That is, the first four successors of the Prophet. 107 Meaning probably both Sufi masters and religious scholars (∏ulamaπ).543 Epistle 02 Author Intro 21/12/06 12:11 PM Page 16
16 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
monotheistic Community from agreeing upon error.108 He has cut the root of
falsehood by presenting irrefutable evidence and fulfilled His promise to support
His religion, in accordance with His words: “That he [the prophet Muhammad]
may uplift it above every religion, though the unbelievers be averse.”109
These are the passages that present in brief the principles of the Sufi masters.
May God grant us success!//30
108 According to a famous hadithof the Prophet, his community will never agree on an error.
109 Q. 9:33.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 17
Chapter 1
ON THE MASTERS OF THIS PATH AND THEIR DEEDS
AND SAYINGS THAT SHOW HOW THEY
UPHOLD THE DIVINE LAW1
Know – may God Most High have mercy on you – that after the death of the
Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – the best Muslims of the
epoch chose to be named by a word that pointed to their companionship with
the Messenger of God, for no virtue was superior to it. So, they were called
“Companions [of the Prophet]” (sahaba). When the people of the next generation
succeeded them, those who kept company with the Companions came to be
named “Successors” (tabi∏un). The Successors considered this name to be the
noblest of all characteristics. As for those who came after them, they were called
“the Successors of the Successors” (tabi∏u al-tabi∏in). After that the people became
more and more diverse, and their ranks became distinct from one another. The
elect people, who had strong attachment to the affairs of faith, came to be known
as “World-renouncers”2 and “Worshippers”.3 Then there appeared innovations
[in religion] and strife among various factions. [Members] of each group
claimed that the [true] World-renouncers were among them. As for those
elect adherents of the Prophet’s custom4who kept every breath they made with
God5 and who protected their hearts from the onslaughts of forgetfulness, they
were distinguished from the rest by the name “Sufism”.6 This name became
widely applied to the greatest among them before the second century of the
Hijra.7
In this chapter we shall mention the names of the masters of this [Sufi] path
from the first generation up until those who live today. We shall also mention
some of their biographies and sayings in order to demonstrate their principles
and good manners, if God Most High so wills.
1 Al-shari∏a; in what follows this Arabic term will either be translated as the “Divine Law” or
left untranslated.
2 Zuhhad, sing. zahid; in what follows this term may occasionally also be translated as “ascetics”.
3 ∏Ubbad, sing. ∏abid.
4 Sunna, the exemplary behavior of the Prophet and his closest Companions to be emulated by
every righteous Muslim. Occasionally this term is left untranslated.
5 That is, those who examine their actions carefully in order to determine their compliance with
God’s will as expressed in the shari∏a.
6 The Western equivalent of the Arabic word tasawwuf.
7 The prophet Muhammad’s emigration from Mecca to Medina in 622, which became the first
year of the Muslim sacred calendar.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 18
18 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Abu Ishaq Ibrahim b. Adham b. Mansur8
He – may God be pleased with him – came from the region of Balkh.9He was a
son of a king. Once he set out on a hunting trip. As he stirred up a fox or a rabbit
and set out to chase it, he heard a voice//31: “O Ibrahim, were you created for
this or commanded to do this?” Then he heard the voice again, from behind the
saddle bow, saying: “By God, you were not created for this and you were not
commanded to do this!” He dismounted from his horse. He then came across a
shepherd of his father’s, took his woolen shirt and put it on and gave away all his
belongings and the horse to the shepherd. Then he began wandering in the desert
until he arrived in Mecca, where he attached himself to Sufyan al-Thawri10and
al-Fudayl b. ∏Iyad.11After that he journeyed to Syria and died there. He lived by
the toil of his hands, such as harvesting, guarding the orchards and so on. [Once]
in the desert he met a man who taught him the greatest name of God.12After [the
man] left, he called upon God by this name and saw al-Khadir,13 who told him:
“My brother [the prophet] David has just taught you God’s greatest name.”
This story was related to us by Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may
God have mercy on him. He said: Muhammad b. al-Husayn Ibn al-Khashshab
said: Abu al-Hasan ∏Ali b. Muhammad al-Misri said: Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz said:
Ibrahim b. Bashshar said: “I was accompanying Ibrahim b. Adham. Once I told
him: ‘Tell me about the beginning of your affair.’ He then recounted this [story]
to me.”//32
Ibrahim b. Adham was particularly famous for his pious scrupulosity.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 17
Chapter 1
ON THE MASTERS OF THIS PATH AND THEIR DEEDS
AND SAYINGS THAT SHOW HOW THEY
UPHOLD THE DIVINE LAW1
Know – may God Most High have mercy on you – that after the death of the
Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – the best Muslims of the
epoch chose to be named by a word that pointed to their companionship with
the Messenger of God, for no virtue was superior to it. So, they were called
“Companions [of the Prophet]” (sahaba). When the people of the next generation
succeeded them, those who kept company with the Companions came to be
named “Successors” (tabi∏un). The Successors considered this name to be the
noblest of all characteristics. As for those who came after them, they were called
“the Successors of the Successors” (tabi∏u al-tabi∏in). After that the people became
more and more diverse, and their ranks became distinct from one another. The
elect people, who had strong attachment to the affairs of faith, came to be known
as “World-renouncers”2 and “Worshippers”.3 Then there appeared innovations
[in religion] and strife among various factions. [Members] of each group
claimed that the [true] World-renouncers were among them. As for those
elect adherents of the Prophet’s custom4who kept every breath they made with
God5 and who protected their hearts from the onslaughts of forgetfulness, they
were distinguished from the rest by the name “Sufism”.6 This name became
widely applied to the greatest among them before the second century of the
Hijra.7
In this chapter we shall mention the names of the masters of this [Sufi] path
from the first generation up until those who live today. We shall also mention
some of their biographies and sayings in order to demonstrate their principles
and good manners, if God Most High so wills.
1 Al-shari∏a; in what follows this Arabic term will either be translated as the “Divine Law” or
left untranslated.
2 Zuhhad, sing. zahid; in what follows this term may occasionally also be translated as “ascetics”.
3 ∏Ubbad, sing. ∏abid.
4 Sunna, the exemplary behavior of the Prophet and his closest Companions to be emulated by
every righteous Muslim. Occasionally this term is left untranslated.
5 That is, those who examine their actions carefully in order to determine their compliance with
God’s will as expressed in the shari∏a.
6 The Western equivalent of the Arabic word tasawwuf.
7 The prophet Muhammad’s emigration from Mecca to Medina in 622, which became the first
year of the Muslim sacred calendar.

Once I told
him: ‘Tell me about the beginning of your affair.’ He then recounted this [story]
to me.”//32
Ibrahim b. Adham was particularly famous for his pious scrupulosity. It is
told that he said: “Watch carefully what you eat,14and then there will be no harm
for you in not staying awake during the night or fasting during the day!” His most
common prayer was: “O God, remove me from the disgrace of disobedience
to You to the glory of obedience to You!” Someone said to Ibrahim b. Adham:
“Meat has become expensive!” He answered: “Make it cheaper”, that is, “Do not
buy it.” He then recited the following verse:
When something becomes too expensive for me, I abandon it. Therefore the more expensive it becomes, the cheaper it is [for me]. 8 On him, see IM, pp. 18–20. 9 Presently in northern Afghanistan. 10 On this renowned early scholar and jurist see the article “Sufyan al-Thawri” in EI.He died
in 161/777. 11 A famous early ascetic, whom a pious legend portrays as a repented highway robber. See his
biography on pages 20–21 and IM, pp. 23–24. 12 According to the Islamic tradition, God has ninety-nine “most beautiful names”. His
hundredth name is hidden from the common people, but may sometimes be revealed by God
to His elect friends (awliyaπ). For details see Daniel Gimaret, Les noms divins en Islam. 13 On this legendary person, who is usually identified with the unnamed companion of Moses
in Q. 59:81, see the article “al-Khadir” in EI. Although some Muslim scholars consider
him to be a prophet, he is more commonly seen as a friend of God and paragon of the Sufi
gnostic. 14 That is, eat only the food that is properly obtained.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 19
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 19
Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – said: I heard
Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard Muhammad b. Hamid say: I heard Ahmad
b. Khadrawayh (Khidruya) say: Ibrahim b. Adham said to a man who was
performing a circumambulation [of the Ka∏ba]: “Know that you will not attain
the rank of the righteous until you have climbed six mountain peaks. First, you
must shut the door of pleasant life and open the door of hardship. Second, you
must shut the door of [self-]glorification and open the door of humility. Third,
you must shut the door of quiet and open the door of self-exertion. Fourth, you
must shut the door of sleep and open the door of vigil. Fifth, you must shut the
door of wealth and open the door of poverty. Sixth, you must shut the door of
hope and open the door of readiness for death.”
[Once] Ibrahim b. Adham was guarding a vineyard. A soldier who was
passing by told him: “Give me some of those grapes!” Ibrahim b. Adham replied:
“The owner forbade me [to do this].” The soldier began to lash him with
his whip. Ibrahim b. Adham lowered his head and said: “Beat this head, for it
disobeys God often!” On hearing this the soldier was unable to continue the
beating and departed.
Sahl b. Ibrahim said: “I was a companion of Ibrahim b. Adham. When I
became ill, he spent all his wages on me. When I felt craving for some food, he
sold his donkey and spent all of its cost on me. When I began to recover, I asked
him: ‘Ibrahim, where is the donkey?’ He answered: ‘I sold it.’ I told him: ‘What
shall I be riding on?’ He said: ‘On my neck, my brother!’ And he carried me for
three way-stations.”//33
Abu πl-Fayd Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri15
His name is Thawban b. Ibrahim. He was also called Abu πl-Fayd b. Ibrahim.
His father was a Nubian.16 He [Dhu πl-Nun] died in 245.17 He excelled in this
affair18 and was unique in his age in respect of knowledge, pious scrupulosity,
[spiritual] state, and good manners. Some people denounced him [as a heretic]
to [the caliph] al-Mutawakkil19 and the latter commanded that he be brought
before him from Egypt. When [Dhu πl-Nun] appeared before him and admonished
him, al-Mutawakkil began to cry and [ordered] that he be taken back to Egypt
with honor. [Since then] each time someone mentioned pious people to
al-Mutawakkil, he would cry and say: “Whenever one speaks of the pious, let
them first mention Dhu πl-Nun!” He was a slim man with a light skin, whose
beard was not white.
I heard Ahmad b. Muhammad say: I heard Sa∏id b. ∏Uthman say: I heard that
Dhu πl-Nun said: “Everything hinges on four things: the love of the Glorious
15 On this renowned early mystic, see IM, pp. 39–42.
16 That is, he came from Nubia, Upper Egypt.
17 That is in 859 or 860 C.E.
18 That is, in Sufism.
19 A caliph of the ∏Abbasid dynasty from 232/847 to 247/861.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 20
20 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
One, the hatred of the insufficient,20the observance of the revealed21and the fear
of changing from one state to another.”22
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard Sa∏id b. Ahmad b. Ja∏far say: I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Sahl say:
I heard Sa∏id b. ∏Uthman say: I heard Dhu πl-Nun say: “One of the signs of
the lover of God is his following in the footsteps of God’s beloved23– may God
bless and greet him – in his character traits, his deeds, his precepts and his
customs.”//34
Someone asked Dhu πl-Nun about ignoble people. He answered: “Those
who neither know the way to God, nor try to know it.” I heard Abu ∏Abd
al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard Abu Bakr b.
Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. Shadhan say: I heard Yusuf b. al-Husayn say: “One
day I was at Dhu πl-Nun’s teaching session. There came to him Salim al-Maghribi
and asked him: ∏Abu πl-Fayd, what was the cause of your repentance?’24 He
answered: ‘It was something really wonderful that you cannot imitate.’ [Salim]
said: ‘For the sake of God, tell me about it!’ Dhu πl-Nun said: ‘I wanted to go
from [old] Cairo25 to a village in the countryside. I fell asleep in the desert, and
when I opened my eyes I saw a small blind fledgling that fell from its nest onto
the ground. [Suddenly] the earth cleft and there appeared [from the crack] two
food bowls, one silver and the other gold. In one there were sesame seeds, in the
other water. The fledgling ate from one bowl and drank from the other. I cried
out: “This is enough for me. I have repented!” And I was waiting at God’s door
until He [agreed to] receive me.’”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Ali b. al-Hafiz say: I heard
Ibn Rashiq say: I heard Abu Dujana say: I heard Dhu πl-Nun say: “Wisdom
does not live in a stomach filled with food.” Someone asked Dhu πl-Nun about
repentance. He answered: “The common people repent from [their] sins, whereas
[God’s] elect people repent from neglectfulness.”//35
Abu ∏Ali al-Fudayl b. ∏Iyad26
He came from Khurasan, from the region of Marw.27It is said that he was born
in Samarkand and grew up at Abiward. He died in Mecca in the month of
Muharram, in the year 187.28 I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: Abu Bakr
20 According to some commentators, the insufficient here refers to “this life and its attractions’’.
21 That is, the Divine Law.
22 According to commentators, this means change from a virtuous state to a less perfect one.
23 That is, the prophet Muhammad.
24 The Sufi path usually begins with repentance.
25 At that time the city of Cairo did not yet exist. It was founded in 359/970 by the Fatimid ruler
al-Mu∏izz. In Dhu πl-Nun’s time the capital of Egypt was located at Fustat (old Cairo).
26 A famous early ascetic. See IM, pp. 23–24.
27 In the present day Republic of Turkmenistan.
28 That is, in 803 C.E.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 21
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 21
Muhammad b. Ja∏far told us: al-Hasan b. ∏Abdallah al-∏Askari told us: the son of
Abu Zur∏a’s brother told us: Muhammad b. Ishaq b. Rahuya (Rahawayh) told
us: Abu ∏Ammar told us on the authority of al-Fudayl b. Musa that al-Fudayl
[b. ∏Iyad] was a dangerous young lad, who robbed caravans between Abiward and
Sarakhs.29 The reason for his repentance was the following. He fell in love with
a slave girl and, as he was climbing up the wall in order to meet her, he heard a
Qurπan reader reciting “Isn’t it time that the hearts of those who believe should
be humbled to the remembrance of God?”30 And he said: “O my Lord, it is
indeed the time!” and turned back. The night brought him to some ruins. There
was a group of people there. Some of them said: “Let’s go.” Others said: “Let’s
wait until dawn, for al-Fudayl is on the road and may rob us.” [On hearing this]
al-Fudayl repented and took them under his protection. [Later] he settled down
in the Holy City31and died there.
Al-Fudayl said: “When God loves [His] servant, he bestows on him
much grief, and when He hates [His] servant, He grants him abundance in this
world.” Ibn al-Mubarak32 said: “When al-Fudayl died, sorrow departed [with
him].”//36 Al-Fudayl said: “If this world with all that is in it were offered to me
and I were not held responsible for enjoying it, I would still turn away from it in
disgust, as you would turn away from a decaying corpse, while passing it by, in
order not to smear your clothes with it.” Al-Fudayl said: “I would rather swear
that I am a hypocrite than that I am not a hypocrite.” Al-Fudayl said: “Not
to act for the sake of others is hypocrisy, while to act for the sake of others is
polytheism.”
Abu ∏Ali al-Razi said: “I accompanied al-Fudayl for thirty years without ever
seeing him laughing or smiling, except for the day when his son ∏Ali died. I asked
him about this. He said: ‘If God loves something, I love it too.” Al-Fudayl said:
“Whenever I disobey God, I know this from the behavior of my donkey and my
servant.”33
Abu Mahfuz Ma∏ruf b. Fayruz al-Karkhi34
He was a great master whose prayers were answered [by God] and whose grave
was [a source] of healing. The inhabitants of Baghdad say that the grave of
Ma∏ruf is a proven panacea.//37 He was a client of [the imam] ∏Ali b. Musa
al-Rida35and died in the year 200, though some say that he died in 201.36He was
29 Cities in Khurasan, Iran.
30 Q. 57:16.
31 That is, Mecca.
32 A famous warrior ascetic from the Arab–Byzantine frontier. He died in 181/797; see IM,
pp. 21–22.
33 That is, God protects him by sending him a warning through them.
34 An early ascetic of Baghdad who died in 200/815. See IM, pp. 48–49.
35 The eighth imam of the Shi∏ites who died in 203/818.
36 816 C.E.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 22
22 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
a teacher of Sari al-Saqati.37 One day he told [al-Saqati]: “When you need
something from God, call upon Him by my name!”
I heard my teacher Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say
that Ma∏ruf’s parents were Christians. While still a child, they entrusted Ma∏ruf
to their teacher, who used to tell him: “He [God] is the third of the three”, to
which Ma∏ruf always replied: “No, He is one.” One day the teacher gave him a
severe beating and Ma‘ruf ran away. His parents said: “Should he return to us
with any religion he wants, we would then join him in it!” Later, he embraced
Islam at the hands of [the imam] ∏Ali b. Musa al-Rida38and returned to his house. He knocked on the door. [His parents] asked: “Who is at the door?” He answered:
“Ma∏ruf.” They asked him: “What is your religion?” He said: “[This is] a
monotheistic (hanafi) religion.” So his parents became Muslims too. I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard
Abu Bakr al-Harbi say: I heard Sari al-Saqati39say: “I saw in a dream that Ma∏ruf
was standing under [God’s] throne. God – may He be great and exalted – said to
His angels: ‘Who is this?’ They answered: ‘You know best, O Lord!’ God then
said: “This is Ma∏ruf al-Karkhi. He is drunk with the love of Me and will regain
his full consciousness only after meeting Me!’”
Ma∏ruf said: “One of the companions of Dawud al-Taπi40told me: ‘Beware of
abandoning [good] works, for they bring you near to your Lord’s satisfaction.’”
I asked: “What are these works?” Dawud al-Taπi answered: “Obedience to your
Lord, rendering service to the Muslims and advising them.” I heard Muhammad
b. al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Razi say//38: I heard ∏Ali
b. Muhammad al-Dallal say: I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard that
my father said: “I saw Ma∏ruf in a dream after his death.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 21
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 21
Muhammad b. Ja∏far told us: al-Hasan b. ∏Abdallah al-∏Askari told us: the son of
Abu Zur∏a’s brother told us: Muhammad b. Ishaq b. Rahuya (Rahawayh) told
us: Abu ∏Ammar told us on the authority of al-Fudayl b. Musa that al-Fudayl
[b. ∏Iyad] was a dangerous young lad, who robbed caravans between Abiward and
Sarakhs.29 The reason for his repentance was the following. He fell in love with
a slave girl and, as he was climbing up the wall in order to meet her, he heard a
Qurπan reader reciting “Isn’t it time that the hearts of those who believe should
be humbled to the remembrance of God?”30 And he said: “O my Lord, it is
indeed the time!” and turned back. The night brought him to some ruins. There
was a group of people there. Some of them said: “Let’s go.” Others said: “Let’s
wait until dawn, for al-Fudayl is on the road and may rob us.” [On hearing this]
al-Fudayl repented and took them under his protection. [Later] he settled down
in the Holy City31and died there.
Al-Fudayl said: “When God loves [His] servant, he bestows on him
much grief, and when He hates [His] servant, He grants him abundance in this
world.” Ibn al-Mubarak32 said: “When al-Fudayl died, sorrow departed [with
him].”//36 Al-Fudayl said: “If this world with all that is in it were offered to me
and I were not held responsible for enjoying it, I would still turn away from it in
disgust, as you would turn away from a decaying corpse, while passing it by, in
order not to smear your clothes with it.” Al-Fudayl said: “I would rather swear
that I am a hypocrite than that I am not a hypocrite.” Al-Fudayl said: “Not
to act for the sake of others is hypocrisy, while to act for the sake of others is
polytheism.”
Abu ∏Ali al-Razi said: “I accompanied al-Fudayl for thirty years without ever
seeing him laughing or smiling, except for the day when his son ∏Ali died. I asked
him about this. He said: ‘If God loves something, I love it too.” Al-Fudayl said:
“Whenever I disobey God, I know this from the behavior of my donkey and my
servant.”33
Abu Mahfuz Ma∏ruf b. Fayruz al-Karkhi34
He was a great master whose prayers were answered [by God] and whose grave
was [a source] of healing. The inhabitants of Baghdad say that the grave of
Ma∏ruf is a proven panacea.//37 He was a client of [the imam] ∏Ali b. Musa
al-Rida35and died in the year 200, though some say that he died in 201.36He was
29 Cities in Khurasan, Iran.
30 Q. 57:16.
31 That is, Mecca.
32 A famous warrior ascetic from the Arab–Byzantine frontier. He died in 181/797; see IM,
pp. 21–22.
33 That is, God protects him by sending him a warning through them.
34 An early ascetic of Baghdad who died in 200/815. See IM, pp. 48–49.
35 The eighth imam of the Shi∏ites who died in 203/818.
36 816 C.E.

Muhammad al-Dallal say: I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard that
my father said: “I saw Ma∏ruf in a dream after his death. I asked him: ‘What did
God do to you?’ He answered: ‘He pardoned me.’ I asked him: ‘Was this due
to your self-renunciation and fear of God?’ He said: ‘No, this was due to my
following the admonition of Ibn al-Sammak41: to practice poverty and to love
the poor.’”42 Regarding the admonition of Ibn al-Sammak, Ma∏ruf recounted
the following: “Once I came to Kufa.43 There I met a man by the name Ibn
al-Sammak, who was preaching to the people. He said in his speech: ‘He who
turns away from God completely, God too will turn away from him once and for
all. And he who will turn to God with his heart, God will turn to him with His
mercy and make the faces of all creatures turn toward him. As for him who at
one time turns to God and at another forgets Him, God will still show mercy to
him at some point in time.’ His words sank deeply into my heart. I turned to God
37 A famous Baghdad Sufi and uncle of al-Junayd, who died in 253/867. See IM, pp. 50–52. 38 The eighth imam (spiritual leader) of the Twelver Shi∏ites; died in 203/818. 39 For him, see the next entry. 40 On him see pages 29–30. 41 A popular ascetic and preacher of Kufa who died around 183/800. 42 That is, ascetics and Sufis. 43 A city in Iraq that was famous as a major center of Islamic learning.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 23
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 23
– may He be exalted – and abandoned everything I had been doing, except my
service of my master ∏Ali b. Musa al-Rida.44 I mentioned these words45 to
my master. He responded: ‘This admonition is sufficient for you, should you
decide to preach on your own.’” This story was related to me by Muhammad b.
al-Husayn, who said: I heard ∏Abd al-Rahim b. ∏Ali al-Hafiz say in Baghdad: I
heard Muhammad b. ∏Umar b. al-Fadl say: I heard ∏Ali b. ∏Isa say: I heard Sari
al-Saqati say: I heard how Ma∏ruf recounted this [story].
On his death bed Ma∏ruf was asked for a final piece of advice. He said: ‘When
I die, give away my shirt as alms, for I want to leave this world naked as I came
into it.”
One day Ma∏ruf was passing by a water-carrier, who was saying: “May God
have mercy on him who drinks.” Although Ma∏ruf was fasting at that time, he
came up to the water-carrier and drank.” Someone asked him: “Weren’t you
fasting?” He answered: “Yes, but I hoped to obtain His blessing.”//39
Abu πl-Hasan [al-]Sari b. al-Mughallis al-Saqati46
He was al-Junayd’s maternal uncle and teacher and a disciple of Ma∏ruf
al-Karkhi. He was unique in his age as regards pious scrupulosity and the
knowledge of the Prophet’s custom and divine oneness. I heard Muhammad
b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali al-Tusi say: I heard Abu ∏Amr b.
∏Alwan say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas b. Masruq47 say: “I heard that Sari al-Saqati
was plying his trade at the bazaar, while he was a companion of Ma∏ruf
al-Karkhi. Once Ma∏ruf came to him with an orphan boy. He said [to Sari]:
‘Clothe this orphan!’ Sari said: ‘I clothed him.’ Ma∏ruf rejoiced at this and said:
‘May God make this world hateful to you and relieve you of your trade!’ So I left
my shop and [since that time] there is nothing more hateful to me than this world
and all that I have now comes to me through Ma∏ruf’s blessings.” I heard Shaykh
Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard
Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard Abu ∏Umar al-Anmati say: I heard al-Junayd
say: “I have never seen anyone more devoted to God than al-Sari. I visited him
for ninety-eight years without ever seeing him lying down, except when he
was on his death bed.” It is told that al-Sari said: “Sufism is a name for three
things://40 [The Sufi] is the one in whom the light of knowledge does not
extinguish the light of scrupulosity. In his inner self he does not speak of any
knowledge contradicting the external meaning of the [Holy] Book or the
Prophet’s custom. [His] miracles do not cause him to violate the sacredness of
the divine prohibitions.”
44 See note 35.
45 That is, those of Ibn al-Sammak.
46 See IM, pp. 50–52.
47 On him see page 54.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 24
24 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Al-Sari died in the year 257.48 I heard that the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq
recounted the following on the authority of al-Junayd – may God have mercy
on him. [Al-Junayd] said: “Once al-Sari asked me about the love of God. I
answered: ‘Some people say that it is compliance [with God’s commands]; others
that it is giving preference to others over yourself; still others says that it is so
and so …’ Al-Sari pinched the skin of his elbow and tried to stretch it, but it
would not stretch. He then said: ‘By God’s greatness, if I say that this skin has
dried up on the bone due to [my] love of Him, that would be the truth.’ He then
swooned and his face became round as if it were a radiant moon, though al-Sari
was of a pale complexion.”
It is related that al-Sari once said: “For thirty years I have regretted that I
once said: ‘Praise be to God!’ Someone asked him how this could be. He
answered: ‘Once there was a fire in Baghdad. I came across a man who told me
that my shop had survived the fire, to which I said: ‘Praise be to God!’ For thirty
years now I have had regrets about having said this, because I wished for myself
a better lot than that which had befallen my fellow Muslims.” ∏Abdallah b. Yusuf
told me: I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Harbi say: I heard
al-Sari say that. It is related about al-Sari that he said: “I am squinting at my nose so many
times during the day, because I am afraid that [my face] has become black – that
is, that God has blackened my complexion [as a punishment] for what I have
done.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard
Muhammad b. al-Hasan b. al-Khashshab say: I heard Ja∏far b. Muhammad b. Nusayr49 say: I heard al-Junayd say: I heard al-Sari say: “I know the shortest
path leading to Paradise.”//41 I asked him what it was.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 23
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 23
– may He be exalted – and abandoned everything I had been doing, except my
service of my master ∏Ali b. Musa al-Rida.44 I mentioned these words45 to
my master. He responded: ‘This admonition is sufficient for you, should you
decide to preach on your own.’” This story was related to me by Muhammad b.
al-Husayn, who said: I heard ∏Abd al-Rahim b. ∏Ali al-Hafiz say in Baghdad: I
heard Muhammad b. ∏Umar b. al-Fadl say: I heard ∏Ali b. ∏Isa say: I heard Sari
al-Saqati say: I heard how Ma∏ruf recounted this [story].
On his death bed Ma∏ruf was asked for a final piece of advice. He said: ‘When
I die, give away my shirt as alms, for I want to leave this world naked as I came
into it.”
One day Ma∏ruf was passing by a water-carrier, who was saying: “May God
have mercy on him who drinks.” Although Ma∏ruf was fasting at that time, he
came up to the water-carrier and drank.” Someone asked him: “Weren’t you
fasting?” He answered: “Yes, but I hoped to obtain His blessing.”//39
Abu πl-Hasan [al-]Sari b. al-Mughallis al-Saqati46
He was al-Junayd’s maternal uncle and teacher and a disciple of Ma∏ruf
al-Karkhi. He was unique in his age as regards pious scrupulosity and the
knowledge of the Prophet’s custom and divine oneness. I heard Muhammad
b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali al-Tusi say: I heard Abu ∏Amr b.
∏Alwan say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas b. Masruq47 say: “I heard that Sari al-Saqati
was plying his trade at the bazaar, while he was a companion of Ma∏ruf
al-Karkhi. Once Ma∏ruf came to him with an orphan boy. He said [to Sari]:
‘Clothe this orphan!’ Sari said: ‘I clothed him.’ Ma∏ruf rejoiced at this and said:
‘May God make this world hateful to you and relieve you of your trade!’ So I left
my shop and [since that time] there is nothing more hateful to me than this world
and all that I have now comes to me through Ma∏ruf’s blessings.” I heard Shaykh
Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard
Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard Abu ∏Umar al-Anmati say: I heard al-Junayd
say: “I have never seen anyone more devoted to God than al-Sari. I visited him
for ninety-eight years without ever seeing him lying down, except when he
was on his death bed.” It is told that al-Sari said: “Sufism is a name for three
things://40 [The Sufi] is the one in whom the light of knowledge does not
extinguish the light of scrupulosity. In his inner self he does not speak of any
knowledge contradicting the external meaning of the [Holy] Book or the
Prophet’s custom. [His] miracles do not cause him to violate the sacredness of
the divine prohibitions.”
44 See note 35.
45 That is, those of Ibn al-Sammak.
46 See IM, pp. 50–52.
47 On him see page 54.

Muhammad b. Nusayr49 say: I heard al-Junayd say: I heard al-Sari say: “I know the shortest
path leading to Paradise.”//41 I asked him what it was. He answered: “Don’t
take anything from anyone, don’t seek anything from anyone and don’t possess
anything which you would give to anyone.”
I heard ∏Abdallah b. Yusuf al-Isbahani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj
al-Tusi50say: I heard Ja∏far b. Muhammad b. Nusayr51say: I heard al-Junayd b. Muhammad say: I heard al-Sari say: “I wish I could die in a land other than
Baghdad.” Someone asked him why. He answered: “I am afraid that my grave
would not accept me and I would thus be disgraced.” I heard ∏Abdallah b. Yusuf
al-Isfahani say: I heard Abu πl-Hasan b. ∏Abdallah al-Fuwati al-Tarsusi say: I
heard al-Junayd say: I heard al-Sari say: “O my God, punish me with whatever
as You wish, but do not punish me with the humiliation of the veil!”52
48 His date of death varies from one source to another, but most authors agree that he died
between 251/865 and 258/871. 49 That is, Ja∏far al-Khuldi (348/959), a famous Sufi biographer of the Baghdad school. 50 A famous Sufi writer, who died in 378/988. See IM, pp. 118–120. 51 See note 49. 52 According to a popular Sufi hadith, God’s face is hidden behind numerous veils, which He
removes one by one as His mystical lover draws ever near Him. See Chittick,Self-Disclosure
of God, pp. 104–163 and “Index” under “veil’.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 25
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 25
I heard ∏Abdallah b. Yusuf al-Isfahani say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say:
I heard al-Jurayri say: I heard al-Junayd say: “Once I came to visit al-Sari
al-Saqati and found him crying. I asked him: ‘What made you cry?’ He answered:
‘Yesterday, my daughter came to me and said: This is a hot night, therefore I will
hang this [water-cooling] pitcher here. Then I closed my eyes and fell asleep. In
my dream I saw a most beautiful slave girl who had descended from heaven. I
asked to whom she belonged. She said that she would belong to whoever did not
drink the water that was cooled in a pitcher. I then grabbed the pitcher and
smashed it to pieces against the ground.’”
Al-Junayd said: “I [indeed] saw pieces of broken earthenware that he never
picked up or touched, until it was completely covered with dust.”//42
Abu Nasr Bishr b. al-Harith al-Hafi (the Barefoot)53
He came from [the city of] Marw.54He lived in Baghdad, where he died. He was
a son of ∏Ali b. Khashram’s sister. He died in the year 227 [842]. He was a man
of great stature. The following [episode] became the reason for his repentance.55
He found on the road a small piece of paper upon which was written the name
of God – may He be great and exalted. This sheet was trampled upon [by
passers-by]. He picked it up, purchased a dirham-worth of perfume, sprinkled
the sheet with it and put it in the crack of a wall. Then he saw in a dream as if
someone told him: “O Bishr, you perfumed My name and I will perfume yours
in this world and the next one!”
I heard Master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“Bishr was passing by a group of people who said: ‘This man does not sleep all
night and he breaks his fast only once in three days.’ On hearing this, Bishr
began to cry. When someone asked him why, he said: ‘Verily, I do not remember
ever saying that I keep vigil during the whole night. Nor have I said that after
fasting during the day I do not break my fast at night. However, God, in His
kindness and graciousness, has revealed to the hearts [of the people] more than
His servant actually does – may He be blessed!’ He then proceeded to describe
the beginning of the affair,56as we have just mentioned.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Muhammad b.
∏Abdallah al-Razi say: I heard ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Abi Hatim say: I came to know
that Bishr b. al-Harith al-Hafi said: “In a dream I saw the Prophet – may peace
and blessings be upon him! He asked me: ‘Bishr, do you know why God has
raised you above your contemporaries?’ I said: ‘I do not, Messenger of God.’ He
said: ‘[It is due to] your following of my custom, your service to the righteous,
your admonition of your brothers [in faith] and your love of my Companions
53 On him see IM, pp. 49–50.
54 An ancient city in present-day Turkmenistan.
55 The journey on the mystical path usually begins with repentance.
56 That is, his conversion to Sufism.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 26
26 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
and my family. This is what brought you to the stations of the most pious
men!’”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Razi say: I heard Bilal al-Khawwas say: “As I
was traveling across the desert of the Israelites,57 I suddenly saw a man walking
by my side. At first I was surprised, but then I came to realize that that was
al-Khadir58 – peace be upon him. I asked him: ‘By God, who are you?’ He
answered: ‘Your brother al-Khadir!’ I told him that I had a question for him. He
said: ‘Ask!’ ‘What do you say about al-Shafi∏i59– may God have mercy on him?’
He answered: ‘He was a [spiritual] peg.’60I then asked him: ‘What would you say
about Ahmad b. Hanbal?’61He answered: ‘He was a veracious man.’62‘And what
would you say about Bishr al-Hafi?’ He answered: ‘After him there was no one
like him.’63 I asked him: ‘Owing to what was I able to see you?’ He answered:
‘Owing to your pious behavior toward your mother.’”
I heard Master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“Once Bishr al-Hafi came to Mu∏afa b. ∏Imran64 and knocked on his door. He
was asked who it was and he said: ‘Bishr al-Hafi (the Barefoot).’ Then a young
girl told him from behind the door: ‘If you were to buy yourself a pair of sandals
for a couple of daniqs,65 you would lose your name.’” Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah
al-Shirazi reported this story to me. He said: ∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. al-Fadl told me:
Muhammad b. Sa∏id told me: Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah told me: He said that he
heard ∏Abdallah al-Maghazili say that he heard Bishr al-Hafi mention this story. I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu πl-Husayn al-Hajjaji//44 say:
I heard al-Mahamili say: I heard al-Hasan al-Masuhi say: I heard Bishr al-Harith
telling this story. I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu πl-Fadl al-∏Attar say: I
heard Ahmad b. ∏Ali al-Dimashqi say: Abu ∏Abdallah b.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 25
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 25
I heard ∏Abdallah b. Yusuf al-Isfahani say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say:
I heard al-Jurayri say: I heard al-Junayd say: “Once I came to visit al-Sari
al-Saqati and found him crying. I asked him: ‘What made you cry?’ He answered:
‘Yesterday, my daughter came to me and said: This is a hot night, therefore I will
hang this [water-cooling] pitcher here. Then I closed my eyes and fell asleep. In
my dream I saw a most beautiful slave girl who had descended from heaven. I
asked to whom she belonged. She said that she would belong to whoever did not
drink the water that was cooled in a pitcher. I then grabbed the pitcher and
smashed it to pieces against the ground.’”
Al-Junayd said: “I [indeed] saw pieces of broken earthenware that he never
picked up or touched, until it was completely covered with dust.”//42
Abu Nasr Bishr b. al-Harith al-Hafi (the Barefoot)53
He came from [the city of] Marw.54He lived in Baghdad, where he died. He was
a son of ∏Ali b. Khashram’s sister. He died in the year 227 [842]. He was a man
of great stature. The following [episode] became the reason for his repentance.55
He found on the road a small piece of paper upon which was written the name
of God – may He be great and exalted. This sheet was trampled upon [by
passers-by]. He picked it up, purchased a dirham-worth of perfume, sprinkled
the sheet with it and put it in the crack of a wall. Then he saw in a dream as if
someone told him: “O Bishr, you perfumed My name and I will perfume yours
in this world and the next one!”
I heard Master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“Bishr was passing by a group of people who said: ‘This man does not sleep all
night and he breaks his fast only once in three days.’ On hearing this, Bishr
began to cry. When someone asked him why, he said: ‘Verily, I do not remember
ever saying that I keep vigil during the whole night. Nor have I said that after
fasting during the day I do not break my fast at night. However, God, in His
kindness and graciousness, has revealed to the hearts [of the people] more than
His servant actually does – may He be blessed!’ He then proceeded to describe
the beginning of the affair,56as we have just mentioned.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Muhammad b.
∏Abdallah al-Razi say: I heard ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Abi Hatim say: I came to know
that Bishr b. al-Harith al-Hafi said: “In a dream I saw the Prophet – may peace
and blessings be upon him! He asked me: ‘Bishr, do you know why God has
raised you above your contemporaries?’ I said: ‘I do not, Messenger of God.’ He
said: ‘[It is due to] your following of my custom, your service to the righteous,
your admonition of your brothers [in faith] and your love of my Companions
53 On him see IM, pp. 49–50.
54 An ancient city in present-day Turkmenistan.
55 The journey on the mystical path usually begins with repentance.
56 That is, his conversion to Sufism.

al-Husayn say: I heard Abu πl-Fadl al-∏Attar say: I
heard Ahmad b. ∏Ali al-Dimashqi say: Abu ∏Abdallah b. al-Jallaπ66told me: “I saw
57 Probably the Sinai desert. 58 On this legendary personage (usually identified with Moses’ mysterious companion in Q. 18:59–81), whom the Sufis consider their holy patron, see the article “al-Khadir” in EI. 59 A great jurist and the founder of one of the four Sunni legal schools. See the article
“al-Shafi∏i” in EI. 60 That is, a member of the invisible hierarchy of the saints who are the real rulers of the
universe. The peg (watad) is a high, although not the highest, rank in this saintly hierarchy. His name indicates that his function is to keep the universe stable. 61 Another great Sunni scholar, the founder of the Hanbali school of jurisprudence. On him see
the article “Ahmad b. Hanbal”in EI. 62 Siddiq(lit. “faithful”, “truthful” or “just”); in the Sufi tradition this Qurπanic term (Q. 4:71)
denotes an advanced rank of sainthood. Cf. Al-Sarraj, Al-luma∏, p. 72. 63 That is, no one better than him. 64 Al-Mu∏afa b. ∏Imran b. Nufayl al-Azdi al-Mawsili (d. between 184 and 186/800–802), a
famous ascetic of Baghdad. 65 Also danaq, a small copper coin worth one-sixth of a dirham. 66 On him see page 47.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 27
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 27
Dhu πl-Nun,67 who was famous for his clear expression.68 I saw Sahl,69 who was
famous for his allegorical allusion. I saw Bishr al-Hafi, who was famous for
his scrupulousness.70 Someone asked him: ‘To whom of them are you more
inclined?’ He said: ‘To my teacher, Bishr b. al-Harith.’” It is said that for many
years he craved beans, but he [never permitted himself to] eat them. Someone
saw him in a dream after he71had died and asked him how God treated him. He
[Bishr] answered: “[God] pardoned me and said: ‘Eat, O you who have not
eaten! Drink, O you who have not drunk!’”
Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him –
told me: ∏Ubaydallah b. ∏Uthman b. Yahya told me: Abu ∏Amr b. al-Sammak told
me: Muhammad b. al-∏Abbas told me: Abu Bakr b. Bint Mu∏awiyya said: I heard
that Abu Bakr b. ∏Affan said: I heard Bishr b. al-Harith say: “For forty years I
was craving roasted meat, yet I never could afford its price due to the lack of
untainted money.”72
Someone asked Bishr what he was eating his bread with. He answered:
“I think of salvation73 and make it my seasoning.”74 I was told about this by
Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him. He said ∏Ubaydallah
b. ∏Uthman told: Abu ∏Amr b. al-Sammak related to us: ∏Umar b. Sa∏id said: Ibn
Abi al-Dunya related to us that a certain man said that this famous story [is
indeed] about Bishr.
Bishr said: “That which is permitted tolerates no wastefulness.”75
Someone saw Bishr in a dream and asked him: “What did God do to you?”
He answered: “He pardoned me and gave me a half of Paradise, then said: ‘Bishr,
even if you were to perform your [ritual] prostrations before Me on the burning
coals, you would still be unable to repay Me for the [exalted] place that I allotted
you in the hearts of My servants.’”
Bishr said: “A man who loves to be known to people will not taste the
sweetness of the Hereafter.”//45
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Harith al-Muhasibi76
He was unique in his age in regard to [religious] knowledge, pious scrupulosity,
acts of devotion and mystical states. He came from Basra and died in Baghdad in
67 A famous Sufi of Egypt; on him see pages 19–20.
68 ∏Ibara, a clear, unambiguous expression or speech – as opposed to ishara, a mystical allusion,
which is often ambiguous in order to conceal its true meaning from the uninitiated.
69 Sahl al-Tustari (d. 283/896), a famous Sufi of Basra; on him see Böwering, Mystical Vision, passim.
70 Wara∏; a Sufi term denoting scrupulous discernment between what is permitted (under the
shari∏a law) and what is prohibited.
71 Meaning Bishr.
72 That is, the money that he would consider to have been earned in a proper way.
73 Literally, “health” (al-∏afiya), but here it probably means “health in the Hereafter”.
74 That is, spices that enhance the taste of food.
75 That is, the permitted is rare and hard to come by.
76 On him see IM, pp. 43–48.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 28
28 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
243.77It is said that he inherited from his father the sum of 70 thousand dirhams,
but he did not take anything from it. It is said that this was because his father was
an adherent of [the doctrine of] human free will78and he considered that it would
be unscrupulous to take anything from his legacy. A sound report from the
Prophet – may God bless and greet him – says: “People of two different religions
do not inherit anything from one another.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: al-Husayn b. Yahya said: Ja∏far b. Muhammad b. Nusayr [al-Khuldi] said: I heard Muhammad b. Masruq say:
“When al-Harith b. Asad al-Muhasibi died, he had not a single dirham. His
father left him land and real estate, but he did not take anything from it.” I heard
that our master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – said:
“Whenever al-Harith al-Muhasibi extended his hand to a suspicious food,79 a
vein in his finger would begin to move and he would abstain from it.”
Abu ∏Abdallah b. Khafif80said: “Follow the example of five of our masters and
think well of the rest. They are: al-Harith al-Muhasibi, al-Junayd b. Muhammad,
Abu Muhammad Ruwaym, Abu πl-∏Abbas b. ∏Ataπ and ∏Amr b. ∏Uthman al-Makki. They combined knowledge81with [mystical] truths.”
I heard Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him – say:
I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali al-Tusi say: I heard Ja∏far al-Khuldi say: I heard Abu
∏Uthman al-Baladi say: al-Harith al-Muhasibi said: “He who has cleansed his
inner self with self-observation and sincerity, God will embellish his external
form with pious self-exertion and the following of [the Prophet’s] Sunna.”
It is related that al-Junayd said: “Once I saw al-Harith al-Muhasibi passing
by. I noticed traces of hunger on his face.//46 I told him: ‘Uncle, come into the
house and have something to eat.’ He agreed. I entered the house and searched
for something to feed him with.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 27
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 27
Dhu πl-Nun,67 who was famous for his clear expression.68 I saw Sahl,69 who was
famous for his allegorical allusion. I saw Bishr al-Hafi, who was famous for
his scrupulousness.70 Someone asked him: ‘To whom of them are you more
inclined?’ He said: ‘To my teacher, Bishr b. al-Harith.’” It is said that for many
years he craved beans, but he [never permitted himself to] eat them. Someone
saw him in a dream after he71had died and asked him how God treated him. He
[Bishr] answered: “[God] pardoned me and said: ‘Eat, O you who have not
eaten! Drink, O you who have not drunk!’”
Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him –
told me: ∏Ubaydallah b. ∏Uthman b. Yahya told me: Abu ∏Amr b. al-Sammak told
me: Muhammad b. al-∏Abbas told me: Abu Bakr b. Bint Mu∏awiyya said: I heard
that Abu Bakr b. ∏Affan said: I heard Bishr b. al-Harith say: “For forty years I
was craving roasted meat, yet I never could afford its price due to the lack of
untainted money.”72
Someone asked Bishr what he was eating his bread with. He answered:
“I think of salvation73 and make it my seasoning.”74 I was told about this by
Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him. He said ∏Ubaydallah
b. ∏Uthman told: Abu ∏Amr b. al-Sammak related to us: ∏Umar b. Sa∏id said: Ibn
Abi al-Dunya related to us that a certain man said that this famous story [is
indeed] about Bishr.
Bishr said: “That which is permitted tolerates no wastefulness.”75
Someone saw Bishr in a dream and asked him: “What did God do to you?”
He answered: “He pardoned me and gave me a half of Paradise, then said: ‘Bishr,
even if you were to perform your [ritual] prostrations before Me on the burning
coals, you would still be unable to repay Me for the [exalted] place that I allotted
you in the hearts of My servants.’”
Bishr said: “A man who loves to be known to people will not taste the
sweetness of the Hereafter.”//45
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Harith al-Muhasibi76
He was unique in his age in regard to [religious] knowledge, pious scrupulosity,
acts of devotion and mystical states. He came from Basra and died in Baghdad in
67 A famous Sufi of Egypt; on him see pages 19–20.
68 ∏Ibara, a clear, unambiguous expression or speech – as opposed to ishara, a mystical allusion,
which is often ambiguous in order to conceal its true meaning from the uninitiated.
69 Sahl al-Tustari (d. 283/896), a famous Sufi of Basra; on him see Böwering, Mystical Vision, passim.
70 Wara∏; a Sufi term denoting scrupulous discernment between what is permitted (under the
shari∏a law) and what is prohibited.
71 Meaning Bishr.
72 That is, the money that he would consider to have been earned in a proper way.
73 Literally, “health” (al-∏afiya), but here it probably means “health in the Hereafter”.
74 That is, spices that enhance the taste of food.
75 That is, the permitted is rare and hard to come by.
76 On him see IM, pp. 43–48.

I noticed traces of hunger on his face.//46 I told him: ‘Uncle, come into the
house and have something to eat.’ He agreed. I entered the house and searched
for something to feed him with. At that time, there was in the house some food
that was brought to me from a wedding party. So, I took this food and gave it to
him. He took a morsel of the food and rolled it in his mouth [with the tongue]
several times, then he stood up, threw it into the corridor, and left. When I saw
him a few days later, I inquired about this. He answered: ‘I was hungry and
wanted to make you happy by eating your food. However, there is between me
and God a [special] sign. He does not permit me to eat any suspicious food.82
Therefore He did not allow me to swallow that food. Where did it come to
you from?’ I said that it was brought to the house of a relative of mine from a
wedding party. I asked him whether he would come in today. He said that he
77 857 C.E. 78 That is, he taught that men, and not God, are the creators and performers of their acts. This
was a thesis later advocated by the religious group known as the Mu∏tazilites. See the article
“Mu∏tazila” in EI. 79 That is, the food that was considered to have been improperly obtained – e.g., provided by an
unjust ruler. 80 A famous Sufi of Shiraz, who died in 371/982; on him see IM, “Index”, under “Ibn Khafif”. 81 Of the Divine Law. 82 That is, one that was improperly obtained.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 29
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 29
would. I gave him a piece of dry bread that we happened to have. He ate it and
said: ‘If you want to give something to the poor one,83it should be something like
this [piece of bread].’”
Abu Sulayman Dawud b. Nusayr al-Taπi
He was a person of great importance. Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami –
may God have mercy on him – told me: Abu ∏Amr [b.] Matar told me: Muhammad
b. Musayyib told me: Ibn Khubayq told me: Yusuf b. Sibat told me: “Dawud
al-Taπi inherited twenty dinars and he ate from them for twenty years.” I heard
our master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say: “The cause
of Dawud’s conversion to asceticism was as follows. He used to wander the
streets of Baghdad. Once he was passing through a street, when a group of the
bodyguards [of Humayd al-Tusi] pushed him away from Humayd al-Tusi.
When Dawud noticed Humayd, he said: ‘Fie to the world in which Humayd
takes precedence over you!’//47 So, he secluded himself in his house and began
to practice ascetic austerities and perform acts of devotion.”
Once I heard one of the poor84say in Baghdad that the cause of his conversion
to asceticism was that he heard a bereft woman whining: “On which of your two
cheeks have appeared the traces of decay? And which of your eyes has flowed
out?”
It is also said that the reason for his conversion to asceticism was that he
attended the circle of Abu Hanifa,85who told him once: “Abu Sulayman, we have
already prepared the [required] equipment.”86 To which Dawud replied: “So
what else is left?” Abu Hanifa answered: “[Only] works in accordance with it.”
So Dawud said: “My soul prompted me toward seclusion. I told her: ‘As long as
you sit with them,87you should not speak about any issue at all!’ So for a whole
year I was sitting with them, but I never spoke about any issue.” Sometimes
issues would dawn upon me and I would be as eager to discuss them as the
thirsty man is eager to drink cold water, yet I would not talk.” Thus he achieved
what he achieved.
[Once] Junayd al-Hajjam (the Cupper) cupped Dawud al-Taπi. The latter
gave him a dinar. Someone told him that this was too much. He answered: “He
who has no manliness88 has no devotion [to God].” Also he used to say during
his night [vigils]: “O my God, my concern for You has annihilated all other
mundane concerns and now stands between me and [my] sleep.”
83 That is, a Sufi.
84 That is, a Sufi.
85 Abu Hanifa al-Nu∏man (d. 150/767), a renowned scholar of Iraq who founded the Hanafi
school of law.
86 That is, theoretical knowledge.
87 That is, Abu Hanifa and his followers.
88 Muruπa; on this rather vague moral virtue see EIunder “Muruπa”.One of its most important
aspects is generosity.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 30
30 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: Muhammad b. Yusuf told me:
Sa∏id b. ∏Amr told: ∏Ali b. Harb al-Mawsili told me: Isma∏il b. Ziyad al-Taπi told
me: “Dawud al-Taπi’s wetnurse told him: ‘Don’t you want to eat some bread?’
He answered: ‘Between the chewing of bread and eating a mess of crumbled
bread lies the reading of fifty verses [from the Qurπan].’”
On the day Dawud died, one of the righteous89 saw him in a dream as he
was running by. He asked him what happened to him. He answered: “I was just
released from prison.” When the man woke up from his dream, he heard people
crying [in the street]: “Dawud al-Taπi has died!”
Someone asked him for an admonition. He answered: “A soldier of death90
awaits you!”//48.
Someone came to visit him in his house and saw a jug of water standing right
under the sun. He asked him why he did not want to put it in the shade. He
answered: “When I put it there, there was no sun, and [later] I was ashamed to
show God that I want to walk for the sake of my soul’s satisfaction.”
Someone came to visit him in his house and started to stare at him. Dawud
told him: “Don’t you know that they91used to refrain from staring [at one another]
as much as they refrained from excessive talk?”
∏Abdallah b. Yusuf al-Isbahani told me: Abu Ishaq Ibrahim b. Muhammad
b. Yahya al-Mazakki told me: Qasim b. Ahmad told me: I heard Maymun
al-Ghazzal92 say: I heard Abu πl-Rabi∏ al-Wasiti say: I asked Dawud al-Taπi to
admonish me. He said: “Fast in this world, break your fast on death and flee
from people as if you are fleeing from wild beasts!”
Abu ∏Ali Shaqiq b. Ibrahim al-Balkhi93
He was a Sufi master of Khurasan. He spoke a lot about trust in God (tawakkul)
and was a teacher of Hatim al-Asamm.94It is said that the cause of his repentance
was as follows. He was an offspring of a wealthy family. As a young man he set
out on a journey to the land of Turks.95 Once he entered a sanctuary of idols,
where he saw a custodian of the idols. His head and beard were shaved and he
was dressed in a purple robe. Shaqiq al-Balkhi told him: “You have the Creator
who is living, All-Knowing and All-Powerful. Worship Him and not those idols
who neither help nor harm you!” The custodian answered: “If this were so,
then [the Creator] would be able to provide you with sustenance in your own
country. Why then did you take pains to come here for trade?”//49 Shaqiq took
heed and embarked on the path of world-renunciation.
89 That is, a Sufi.
90 In another reading, “the army of the dead”.
91 Meaning the first Muslims.
92 In another reading, al-Ghazzali.
93 On him see IM, pp. 32–33.
94 See IM, pp. 33–34 and pages 36–37 in this book.
95 Probably Central Asia.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 31
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 31
Some said that the cause of his conversion to asceticism was as follows. He
saw a slave boy who was playing around and rejoicing during a famine, whereas
all other people were afraid of it [famine]. Shaqiq asked him: “Where does your
liveliness come from? Don’t you see that people are suffering from dearth and
hunger?” The slave boy said: “What is this to me? My master has a rich village
that produces all that we need.” Shaqiq took heed and said: “So, his master has
a village, and his master is but a poor creature. And yet he [the slave boy] is not
concerned about his livelihood. How then can a Muslim be concerned about his
livelihood, when his master is so rich?!”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Abu πl-Husayn b. Ahmad al-∏Attar al-Balkhi say: I heard Ahmad
b. Muhammad al-Bukhari say: Hatim al-Asamm said: “Shaqiq b. Ibrahim was a
wealthy man, who adhered to the ways of urban young men and kept company
with them.96At that time, ∏Ali b. ∏Isa b. Mahan was the ruler of Balkh.97He was
fond of hunting dogs. One of his dogs got lost and it was reported that it was
taken by Shaqiq’s neighbor. [The ruler] demanded that the man be brought to
him. The neighbor ran away, took refuge with Shaqiq and asked for his protection. Shaqiq came to the ruler and said: ‘Let him go! The dog is with me and I will
return it to you in three days.’ They let the man go and Shaqiq went away worried
by what he had done. On the third day, one of Shaqiq’s friends who was away
from Balkh returned there. On the way home he found a dog with a collar and took
it with him. He said [to himself]: ‘I shall give it to Shaqiq, because he engages in
chivalrous behavior.’ So he brought the dog to Shaqiq, who recognized in it the
ruler’s dog. He rejoiced at this and took the dog to the ruler and thus was freed
of his obligation.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 30
30 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: Muhammad b. Yusuf told me:
Sa∏id b. ∏Amr told: ∏Ali b. Harb al-Mawsili told me: Isma∏il b. Ziyad al-Taπi told
me: “Dawud al-Taπi’s wetnurse told him: ‘Don’t you want to eat some bread?’
He answered: ‘Between the chewing of bread and eating a mess of crumbled
bread lies the reading of fifty verses [from the Qurπan].’”
On the day Dawud died, one of the righteous89 saw him in a dream as he
was running by. He asked him what happened to him. He answered: “I was just
released from prison.” When the man woke up from his dream, he heard people
crying [in the street]: “Dawud al-Taπi has died!”
Someone asked him for an admonition. He answered: “A soldier of death90
awaits you!”//48.
Someone came to visit him in his house and saw a jug of water standing right
under the sun. He asked him why he did not want to put it in the shade. He
answered: “When I put it there, there was no sun, and [later] I was ashamed to
show God that I want to walk for the sake of my soul’s satisfaction.”
Someone came to visit him in his house and started to stare at him. Dawud
told him: “Don’t you know that they91used to refrain from staring [at one another]
as much as they refrained from excessive talk?”
∏Abdallah b. Yusuf al-Isbahani told me: Abu Ishaq Ibrahim b. Muhammad
b. Yahya al-Mazakki told me: Qasim b. Ahmad told me: I heard Maymun
al-Ghazzal92 say: I heard Abu πl-Rabi∏ al-Wasiti say: I asked Dawud al-Taπi to
admonish me. He said: “Fast in this world, break your fast on death and flee
from people as if you are fleeing from wild beasts!”
Abu ∏Ali Shaqiq b. Ibrahim al-Balkhi93
He was a Sufi master of Khurasan. He spoke a lot about trust in God (tawakkul)
and was a teacher of Hatim al-Asamm.94It is said that the cause of his repentance
was as follows. He was an offspring of a wealthy family. As a young man he set
out on a journey to the land of Turks.95 Once he entered a sanctuary of idols,
where he saw a custodian of the idols. His head and beard were shaved and he
was dressed in a purple robe. Shaqiq al-Balkhi told him: “You have the Creator
who is living, All-Knowing and All-Powerful. Worship Him and not those idols
who neither help nor harm you!” The custodian answered: “If this were so,
then [the Creator] would be able to provide you with sustenance in your own
country. Why then did you take pains to come here for trade?”//49 Shaqiq took
heed and embarked on the path of world-renunciation.
89 That is, a Sufi.
90 In another reading, “the army of the dead”.
91 Meaning the first Muslims.
92 In another reading, al-Ghazzali.
93 On him see IM, pp. 32–33.
94 See IM, pp. 33–34 and pages 36–37 in this book.
95 Probably Central Asia.

He said [to himself]: ‘I shall give it to Shaqiq, because he engages in
chivalrous behavior.’ So he brought the dog to Shaqiq, who recognized in it the
ruler’s dog. He rejoiced at this and took the dog to the ruler and thus was freed
of his obligation. [As a result,] he came to realize [his sinful condition], repented
of it and embarked on the path of asceticism.”
It is said that Hatim al-Asamm said: “I was fighting Turks side by side with
Shaqiq on a day when one could see nothing but falling heads, broken spears
and shattered swords. Shaqiq asked me: ‘Hatim, how do you feel yourself on a
day like this? Don’t you feel as if it were the night on which you brought your
newlywed wife to your house?’//50 I said: ‘By God, no!’ He said: ‘And I do
feel myself today as I did that night!’ He then fell asleep in the middle of the
battlefield, putting his shield under his head, and I even could hear him snore.’”
Shaqiq said: “If you want to know a man, consider what God has promised
to him and what men have promised to him. Then consider to which of these
promises his heart is more attached.” Shaqiq also said: “Man’s fear of God can
be known from three things: from what he accepts, from what he rejects and
from what he says.”
96 Apparently, he belonged to the circle of the sons of the local urban elite, who cultivated a sort
of camaraderie and chivalrous behavior, known as futuwwa. Sometimes such groups served as
local militia. 97 A province in present-day Afghanistan.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 32
32 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Abu Yazid b. Tayfur b. ∏Isa al-Bastami98
His grandfather was a Zoroastrian who converted to Islam. He had three sons:
Adam, Tayfur and ∏Ali. All of them were devotees and ascetics. He [Abu Yazid]
died in 261 [875], although some say 234 [848]. I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard Abu πl-Hasan al-Farisi say: I heard al-Hasan b. ∏Ali say: Someone asked
Abu Yazid how he acquired his knowledge [of God]. He answered: “By a hungry
stomach and by a naked body.” I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God
have mercy on him – say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard ∏Ammi
al-Bastami99say: I heard my father100say: I heard Abu Yazid say: “I have engaged
in spiritual struggle and ascetic exercises for thirty years and found that there is
nothing harder for me than the knowledge [of the Divine Law] and adherence
to it. And were it not for the disagreement of religious scholars, I would have
remained where I was [at the beginning], for the disagreement of scholars is a
[divine] blessing, except in one issue – that is, the understanding of God’s
uniqueness.”//51 It is said that Abu Yazid did not depart from this world until
he had committed to memory the whole of the Qurπan. Abu Hatim al-Sijistani informed me: Abu Nasr al-Sarraj told me: He said: I
heard Tayfur al-Bastami say: I heard the person nicknamed ∏Ammi al-Bastami
say: I heard my father say: Abu Yazid told me: “Let’s go and see a man who is
famous for his sainthood.” And that person was indeed one who was often visited
[on account of his sainthood] and was renowned for his asceticism. So we came
to visit him. When that man left his house and entered the mosque, he spat in
the direction of the qibla.101 [On seeing this] Abu Yazid turned and went away
without even greeting the man.He said [to himself]: ‘I shall give it to Shaqiq, because he engages in
chivalrous behavior.’ So he brought the dog to Shaqiq, who recognized in it the
ruler’s dog. He rejoiced at this and took the dog to the ruler and thus was freed
of his obligation. [As a result,] he came to realize [his sinful condition], repented
of it and embarked on the path of asceticism.”
It is said that Hatim al-Asamm said: “I was fighting Turks side by side with
Shaqiq on a day when one could see nothing but falling heads, broken spears
and shattered swords. Shaqiq asked me: ‘Hatim, how do you feel yourself on a
day like this? Don’t you feel as if it were the night on which you brought your
newlywed wife to your house?’//50 I said: ‘By God, no!’ He said: ‘And I do
feel myself today as I did that night!’ He then fell asleep in the middle of the
battlefield, putting his shield under his head, and I even could hear him snore.’”
Shaqiq said: “If you want to know a man, consider what God has promised
to him and what men have promised to him. Then consider to which of these
promises his heart is more attached.” Shaqiq also said: “Man’s fear of God can
be known from three things: from what he accepts, from what he rejects and
from what he says.”
96 Apparently, he belonged to the circle of the sons of the local urban elite, who cultivated a sort
of camaraderie and chivalrous behavior, known as futuwwa. Sometimes such groups served as
local militia. 97 A province in present-day Afghanistan.

So we came
to visit him. When that man left his house and entered the mosque, he spat in
the direction of the qibla.101 [On seeing this] Abu Yazid turned and went away
without even greeting the man. He said: “This man cannot be trusted even as far
as [the observance of] the manners of the Messenger of God – may God bless
and greet him – are concerned! How can one trust his other claims?”
On the same authority as above it is told that Abu Yazid said: “Once I
intended to ask God to save me the trouble of caring about food and women. Then I said [to myself] how can I ask God what the Messenger of God – may
God bless and greet him – never [dared] to ask? So, I did not ask God [for that]. Then God – may He be blessed and exalted – protected me from the desire of
women in such way that I no longer cared whether there was before me a woman
or a wall.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard al-Hasan b. ∏Ali say: I heard ∏Ammi al-Bastami say: I heard
my father say: “I asked Abu Yazid about his beginnings [as a Sufi] and about his
asceticism. He answered: ‘Asceticism has no rank.’ I asked him how this could
be. He answered: ‘Because I was in the state of asceticism for three days and left
98 Or “al-Bistami” (both pronunciations are possible). On him see IM, pp. 68–72. 99 This is a nickname of a famous ascetic Abu ∏Imran Musa b. ∏Isa b. Adam. 100 That is, ∏Isa b. Adam al-Bastami (al-Bistami). 101 That is, in the direction of Mecca, toward which the Muslims face during the prayer.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 33
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 33
it on the fourth. On the first day I renounced this world and everything in it. On
the second day I renounced the Hereafter and everything in it. On the third day
I renounced everything other than God. And on the fourth day there was left
nothing for me but God alone. So I fell into an ecstasy and I heard a voice telling
me: “[When you are] with me, you have no power [of your own].” I cried: “This
is exactly what I want!” Then I heard someone say: “You have found [it], you
have found [it]!”’”
Someone asked Abu Yazid: “What is the most difficult thing you have ever
encountered on your way to God?” He answered: “It is impossible to describe
it.” Someone then asked him: “What, then, was the easiest thing that you
subjected your soul to?” He said: “As for this, yes. I called upon her [the soul]
to obey God and she refused. Then I denied her water for one year.”
Abu Yazid said: “For thirty years I have been praying. And each time
I prayed I felt in my inner self as if I was a Zoroastrian who sought to cut his
girdle.”102 I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him
– say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali say: I heard Musa b. ∏Isa say: My father told me
that Abu Yazid once said: “When you see a man who is endowed with miracles
to such an extent that he can sit on the air, do not be deluded by him until you
have tested his [attitude toward] what is permitted and what is prohibited, his
observance of the legal rules and of the Divine Law.”
∏Ammi al-Bastami (al-Bistami) said on the authority of his father: “One
night, Abu Yazid went to a hospice103in order to recollect God’s name104on one
of the walls of that hospice. He stayed there until dawn without uttering a word.So we came
to visit him. When that man left his house and entered the mosque, he spat in
the direction of the qibla.101 [On seeing this] Abu Yazid turned and went away
without even greeting the man. He said: “This man cannot be trusted even as far
as [the observance of] the manners of the Messenger of God – may God bless
and greet him – are concerned! How can one trust his other claims?”
On the same authority as above it is told that Abu Yazid said: “Once I
intended to ask God to save me the trouble of caring about food and women. Then I said [to myself] how can I ask God what the Messenger of God – may
God bless and greet him – never [dared] to ask? So, I did not ask God [for that]. Then God – may He be blessed and exalted – protected me from the desire of
women in such way that I no longer cared whether there was before me a woman
or a wall.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard al-Hasan b. ∏Ali say: I heard ∏Ammi al-Bastami say: I heard
my father say: “I asked Abu Yazid about his beginnings [as a Sufi] and about his
asceticism. He answered: ‘Asceticism has no rank.’ I asked him how this could
be. He answered: ‘Because I was in the state of asceticism for three days and left
98 Or “al-Bistami” (both pronunciations are possible). On him see IM, pp. 68–72. 99 This is a nickname of a famous ascetic Abu ∏Imran Musa b. ∏Isa b. Adam. 100 That is, ∏Isa b. Adam al-Bastami (al-Bistami). 101 That is, in the direction of Mecca, toward which the Muslims face during the prayer.

∏Isa say: My father told me
that Abu Yazid once said: “When you see a man who is endowed with miracles
to such an extent that he can sit on the air, do not be deluded by him until you
have tested his [attitude toward] what is permitted and what is prohibited, his
observance of the legal rules and of the Divine Law.”
∏Ammi al-Bastami (al-Bistami) said on the authority of his father: “One
night, Abu Yazid went to a hospice103in order to recollect God’s name104on one
of the walls of that hospice. He stayed there until dawn without uttering a word. I asked him about this and he answered: “[While there], there had passed
through my mind a [rude] word that I once uttered in my childhood, and I was
ashamed to mention God – may He be blessed and exalted.”
Abu Muhammad Sahl b. ∏Abdallah al-Tustari105
He was one of the greatest Sufi masters. He had no peers in his age in regard
to devotional acts and pious scrupulosity. He performed many miracles. He met
Dhu πl-Nun [al-Misri] during the year when he came [to Mecca] on a pilgrimage. It is said that he died in the year 283, although some say that it was in 273.106
Sahl said: “When I was three years old, I used to stay awake during the night
watching my uncle Muhammad b. Sawwar perform his prayers. He kept vigil
during the night. He used to tell me: ‘Go away, Sahl, and have a sleep. You are
distracting me!’”
102 Non-Muslims living under Muslim jurisdiction were required to wear “a girdle of unbelief”
as sign of their affiliation with a non-Muslim community. 103 Ribat. This term may also denote a Sufi retreat. 104 Dhikr, literally “remembrance” or “recollection” [of God], a common spiritual practice among
the Sufis. See IM, pp. 317–322. 105 On him see IM, pp. 83–87 and Böwering,Mystical Vision. 106 That is, 896 and 886 C.E.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 34
34 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard that Abu πl-Fath Yusuf b. ∏Umar the Ascetic said: I heard that ∏Abdallah
b. ∏Abd al-Hamid said: I heard that ∏Ubaydallah b. Luπluπ said: I heard that
∏Umar b. Wasil al-Basri recounted about Sahl b. ∏Abdallah that he told him:
“One day my uncle asked me: ‘Don’t you remember God, Who created you?’ I
asked him: ‘How can I remember Him?’ He said: ‘Say by your heart as you move
around in your clothes, without however moving your tongue: “God is my
watcher.”’ I said this for three nights, then I told him about this and he said to
me: ‘Say this seven times during the night.’ I said this, then told him about this. He said to me: ‘Say this eleven times during the night.’ I said this and I felt the
sweetness of this in my heart.//53 After one year my uncle told me: ‘Keep on
[doing] what I taught you and continue to do this until you enter your grave, for
this will benefit you in this world and in the Hereafter.’ I kept doing this for
many years and I felt the sweetness of this in my innermost heart. One day
my uncle told me: ‘Sahl, how can a man with whom God is always present and
whom He always watches and observes commit a sin? So, stay away from sin!’
“I used to seclude myself [from people]. Then [my parents] sent me to a
Qurπanic school. I told [them]: ‘I fear that my internal concentration [on God]
might dissipate. Make arrangements with the teacher so that I would come to
him for a short while, study with him, and then come back.’ So I began to go to
the school. I learned the Qurπan by heart when I was six or seven years old. I was
fasting constantly and ate nothing but barley bread until I turned twelve years of
age. When I turned thirteen, I came across a problem and asked my family to
send me to Basra, so that I could inquire about it. I arrived in Basra and began
to ask local scholars about it.∏Isa say: My father told me
that Abu Yazid once said: “When you see a man who is endowed with miracles
to such an extent that he can sit on the air, do not be deluded by him until you
have tested his [attitude toward] what is permitted and what is prohibited, his
observance of the legal rules and of the Divine Law.”
∏Ammi al-Bastami (al-Bistami) said on the authority of his father: “One
night, Abu Yazid went to a hospice103in order to recollect God’s name104on one
of the walls of that hospice. He stayed there until dawn without uttering a word. I asked him about this and he answered: “[While there], there had passed
through my mind a [rude] word that I once uttered in my childhood, and I was
ashamed to mention God – may He be blessed and exalted.”
Abu Muhammad Sahl b. ∏Abdallah al-Tustari105
He was one of the greatest Sufi masters. He had no peers in his age in regard
to devotional acts and pious scrupulosity. He performed many miracles. He met
Dhu πl-Nun [al-Misri] during the year when he came [to Mecca] on a pilgrimage. It is said that he died in the year 283, although some say that it was in 273.106
Sahl said: “When I was three years old, I used to stay awake during the night
watching my uncle Muhammad b. Sawwar perform his prayers. He kept vigil
during the night. He used to tell me: ‘Go away, Sahl, and have a sleep. You are
distracting me!’”
102 Non-Muslims living under Muslim jurisdiction were required to wear “a girdle of unbelief”
as sign of their affiliation with a non-Muslim community. 103 Ribat. This term may also denote a Sufi retreat. 104 Dhikr, literally “remembrance” or “recollection” [of God], a common spiritual practice among
the Sufis. See IM, pp. 317–322. 105 On him see IM, pp. 83–87 and Böwering,Mystical Vision. 106 That is, 896 and 886 C.E.

When I turned thirteen, I came across a problem and asked my family to
send me to Basra, so that I could inquire about it. I arrived in Basra and began
to ask local scholars about it. However, none of them was able to satisfy me. Then I left for ∏Abbadan107in order to meet a man known as Abu Habib Hamza
b. ∏Abdallah al-∏Abbadani. I asked him about this problem and he answered me. I stayed with him for a while benefiting from his teaching and imitating his good
manners. Then I returned to Tustar.108 There my only meal consisted of a sack
of barley that one could buy for one dirham, which I ground and from which I
made bread for myself. Every night, before dawn, I ate of this just one ounce109
without salt or seasoning. Thus one dirham was enough for me for a whole year. I decided to fast for three nights and to break my fast on the fourth, then on the
fifth, then on the seventh, then on the fifteenth. In this way I spent twenty years,
whereupon I began to roam the land until I again returned to Tustar. There I
used to stay awake all night.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Baghdadi
say: I heard Ibrahim b. Firas say: I heard Nasr b. Ahmad say: Sahl b. ∏Abdallah
[al-Tustari] said: “Every deed that the servant [of God] performs without
107 An island in the mouth of Shatt al-∏Arab that was frequented by early Sufis and ascetics. See
IM, pp. 17–18. 108 That is, his native town in Iran. 109 That is, around 33 grams.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 35
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 35
imitation,110 be it obedience [to God] or disobedience, is done to please his own
self, whereas every deed//54 that he performs in imitation [of the Prophet or his
companions] is painful to the soul.”
Abu Sulayman ∏Abd al-Rahman b. ∏Atiyya al-Darani111
Daran is a village near Damascus. He died in the year 215.112
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad
al-Razi say: Ishaq b. Ibrahim b. Abi Hassan told me: I heard Ahmad b. Abi
πl-Hawari say: I heard Abu Sulayman say: “He who is doing good during the day,
will be rewarded during the night; and he who is doing good during the night,
will be rewarded during the day. He who has relinquished his [carnal] desire, God
will remove it from his heart, for God – Most High – is too noble to torment the
heart with [carnal] desire after it has relinquished it for His sake.” According to
the same chain of transmission, he also said: “When [desire for] this life settles
down in the heart, [desire for] the Hereafter departs from it.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy
on him – say: I heard al-Husayn b. Yahya say: I heard Ja∏far b. Muhammad b.
Nusayr [al-Khuldi] say: I heard al-Junayd say: Abu Sulayman al-Darani said:
“Whenever a word of spiritual wisdom enters my heart, I would not accept it
unless it [is confirmed] by two just witnesses, the [Holy] Book and the [Prophet’s]
Custom.” Abu Sulayman said: “The noblest of all deeds is to oppose the lusts of
the soul.” He said: “Each thing has its sign; the sign of forgetfulness [of God] is
when one stops crying.” He said: “Each thing has its own rust; the rust on the
heart’s light is when one’s belly is full.’’
He said: “Whatever distracts you from God Most High – be it wealth or a
child – brings you misfortune.”
Abu Sulayman also said: “One cold night I was praying in front of a
mihrab.113 Cold began to bother me, and I hid one hand//55 from cold, while
leaving the other one exposed. Then sleep overcame me and I heard a voice:
∏Abu Sulayman, we have already bestowed upon this one what it deserves. If
only there were the other one, so that we could do the same to it!’ I then swore
to myself that I would never pray without exposing both hands, whether it is
cold or warm.”
Abu Sulayman said: “Once I overslept my personal prayer.114 All of sudden
I saw a maiden of paradise who said to me: ‘You sleep, while I am being prepared
for you in the female chamber for five hundred years!’”
110 That is, without imitating the actions of the Prophet or an earlier Muslim authority.
111 On him see IM, pp. 36–38.
112 That is, 830 C.E.
113 A recess in the wall of the mosque that points toward Mecca, indicating the direction of the
prayer.
114 That is, a private, non-canonical prayer.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 36
36 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
∏Abdallah b. Yusuf al-Isbahani told me: Abu ∏Amr al-Jawlasti told me:
Muhammad b. Isma∏il told me: Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari told me: “Once I came
to visit Abu Sulayman and saw him crying. I asked him why he was crying. He
said: ‘Ahmad, how can I not cry? When the night comes, and the eyes close [for
sleep], and each lover secludes himself with his beloved, and the lovers of God
sit on their feet [in prayer?], and their tears begin to run from their cheeks down
onto the floor of the mosque, the Glorious One – may He be blessed and exalted
– looks down and calls out: “Gabriel, before My eyes are those who take delight
in my words115 and who find consolation in My remembrance. I am watching
them in their seclusion, I am hearing their sighs, and I am seeing their tears. Why
don’t you, Gabriel, call upon them and say: ‘What is with all this crying?’ Have
you ever seen a beloved who torments his lovers? Or would it be proper for me
to punish people who are full of humble adoration for me? I swear by Myself,
when they come before Me on the Day of Resurrection, I will unveil before them
My Noble Face, so that they would look at Me and I at them!”’”
Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman Hatim b. ∏Unwan116
Some say that his name was Hatim b. Yusuf al-Asamm.117 He was a great Sufi
master of Khurasan.//56 He was a disciple of Shaqiq [al-Balkhi] and a teacher
of Ahmad b. Khadrawayh.118 People say that he was not deaf and that he only
feigned deafness once. Hence this nickname. I heard that my master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him
– said that [once] a woman came to Hatim and asked him a question. It so
happened that as she was with him there came from her an [indecent] noise. She
was ashamed of this. Hatim then told her: “Speak louder!” and put on a show of
deafness. The woman was very relieved and said [to herself] that he must have
not heard the noise. Since then, he came to be known as “The Deaf”.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 35
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 35
imitation,110 be it obedience [to God] or disobedience, is done to please his own
self, whereas every deed//54 that he performs in imitation [of the Prophet or his
companions] is painful to the soul.”
Abu Sulayman ∏Abd al-Rahman b. ∏Atiyya al-Darani111
Daran is a village near Damascus. He died in the year 215.112
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad
al-Razi say: Ishaq b. Ibrahim b. Abi Hassan told me: I heard Ahmad b. Abi
πl-Hawari say: I heard Abu Sulayman say: “He who is doing good during the day,
will be rewarded during the night; and he who is doing good during the night,
will be rewarded during the day. He who has relinquished his [carnal] desire, God
will remove it from his heart, for God – Most High – is too noble to torment the
heart with [carnal] desire after it has relinquished it for His sake.” According to
the same chain of transmission, he also said: “When [desire for] this life settles
down in the heart, [desire for] the Hereafter departs from it.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy
on him – say: I heard al-Husayn b. Yahya say: I heard Ja∏far b. Muhammad b.
Nusayr [al-Khuldi] say: I heard al-Junayd say: Abu Sulayman al-Darani said:
“Whenever a word of spiritual wisdom enters my heart, I would not accept it
unless it [is confirmed] by two just witnesses, the [Holy] Book and the [Prophet’s]
Custom.” Abu Sulayman said: “The noblest of all deeds is to oppose the lusts of
the soul.” He said: “Each thing has its sign; the sign of forgetfulness [of God] is
when one stops crying.” He said: “Each thing has its own rust; the rust on the
heart’s light is when one’s belly is full.’’
He said: “Whatever distracts you from God Most High – be it wealth or a
child – brings you misfortune.”
Abu Sulayman also said: “One cold night I was praying in front of a
mihrab.113 Cold began to bother me, and I hid one hand//55 from cold, while
leaving the other one exposed. Then sleep overcame me and I heard a voice:
∏Abu Sulayman, we have already bestowed upon this one what it deserves. If
only there were the other one, so that we could do the same to it!’ I then swore
to myself that I would never pray without exposing both hands, whether it is
cold or warm.”
Abu Sulayman said: “Once I overslept my personal prayer.114 All of sudden
I saw a maiden of paradise who said to me: ‘You sleep, while I am being prepared
for you in the female chamber for five hundred years!’”
110 That is, without imitating the actions of the Prophet or an earlier Muslim authority.
111 On him see IM, pp. 36–38.
112 That is, 830 C.E.
113 A recess in the wall of the mosque that points toward Mecca, indicating the direction of the
prayer.
114 That is, a private, non-canonical prayer.

The woman was very relieved and said [to herself] that he must have
not heard the noise. Since then, he came to be known as “The Deaf”. Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him – said:
I heard Abu ∏Ali Sa∏id b. Ahmad say: I heard my father say: I heard my uncle
Muhammad b. al-Layth say: I heard Hamid al-Laffaf say: I heard Hatim
al-Asamm say: “Not a single morning passes without Satan asking me: ‘What
will you eat [today]?’, ‘What will you wear?’, and ‘Where will you live?’ I answer
him: ‘I shall eat death; I shall wear a shroud; and I shall live in a grave.’”
According to the same chain of transmission, he was once asked: “Don’t you
desire [anything]?” He answered: “All I desire is that I live from morning to
evening in good health.” Someone asked him: “[Does this mean] that not all of
your days are healthy?” He answered: “My day is healthy, when I do not disobey
God during it.”
115 That is, by reciting the Qurπan. 116 According to an alternative reading, his father’s name was ∏Ulwan. 117 His last name means “the Deaf”. For him see IM, p. 33. 118 Or Khidruya; his biography is mentioned on page 38.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 37
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 37
It is told that Hatim al-Asamm said: “When I took part in a military expedition,
a Turk seized me, threw me on the ground and was about to slaughter me.
However, I had no concern for him. I was lying there and waiting for what God
Most High had in store for me. As he was groping for his knife, he was hit by a
stray arrow that killed him. I pushed him off and stood up.”
I heard ∏Abdallah b. Yusuf al-Isbahani say: I heard that Abu Nasr Mansur
b. Muhammad b. Ibrahim the Jurist said: I heard Abu Muhammad Ja∏far b.
Muhammad b. Nusayr say: It is told that Hatim said: “Whoever wants to follow
our path must adopt four types of death: a white death, that is hunger; a black
death, that is to tolerate torments from people; a red death, that is to oppose the
urges of the soul in full sincerity; a green death, that is to put one patch upon the
other over and over again.”
Abu Zakariya Yahya b. Mu∏adh al-Razi, the Preacher119
He was unique in his time. He was particularly known for his teaching about
hope120and his doctrine of [mystical] gnosis. He arrived in Balkh, stayed there for
some time, then returned to Nishapur,121where he died in 258.122
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Ubaydallah b. Muhammad b.
Ahmad b. Hamdan al-∏Ukbari say: I heard Ahmad b. Muhammad b. al-Sari say: I
heard Ahmad b. ∏Isa say: I heard Yahya b. Mu∏adh say: “How can one be an ascetic,
if one has no scrupulosity? At first you must reject [out of scrupulousness] that
which is not yours, then renounce [out of asceticism] what is yours.” According
to the same chain of transmission, he also said: “The hunger of the penitents is
a test; the hunger of the ascetics is [self-]restraint; the hunger of the veracious
ones is a gift [from God].”123
Yahya said: “Forgetfulness124 is worse than death, because neglectfulness
cuts one off from God, while death cuts one off from creatures.” Yahya said:
“Asceticism [consists of] three things: need, seclusion, and hunger.” Yahya said:
“The best thing that you can do to your soul is to keep it busy in every moment
by that which is better for her.”
It is related that, in Balkh, Yahya b. Mu∏adh preached that wealth is better
[for man] than poverty. Someone gave him thirty thousand dirhams. One of the
[Sufi] masters said: “May God bless not this money for him.” Then Yahya left
for Nishapur. [En route] he was stopped by a thief, who robbed him of all his
money.
∏Abdallah b. Yusuf al-Isbahani informed me: Abu πl-Qasim ∏Abdallah b.
al-Husayn b. Baluya the Sufi related to me: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah
119 On him see IM, pp. 92–94.
120 On this Sufi concept see the section on Sufi terminology (pp. 148–155).
121 A city in Khurasan, Iran.
122 That is, 872 C.E.
123 That is, it comes to them without effort through God’s grace.
124 That is, neglect of God’s commands and prescriptions.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 38
38 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
al-Razi say: I heard al-Husayn b. ∏Aluya say://58 I heard Yahya b. Mu∏adh
al-Razi say: “When someone betrays God in secret, God will expose his true self
to everyone.”
I heard that ∏Abdallah b. Yusuf said: I heard that Muhammad b. ∏Abd
al-∏Aziz the Muezzin said: I heard that Muhammad b. Muhammad al-Jurjani
said: I heard that ∏Ali b. Muhammad said: I heard that Yahya b. Mu∏adh said:
“When the evildoers honor you, this is [in fact] your dishonor; when they love
you, this is nothing but shame for you; and whoever is in need of you, deserves
your contempt.”
Abu Hamid Ahmad b. Khadrawayh (Khidruya) al-Balkhi
He was a great Sufi master of Khurasan who kept the company of Abu Turab
al-Nakhshabi.125He arrived in Nishapur, where he visited Abu Hafs [al-Haddad].126
He then set out to Bastam in order to meet Abu Yazid al-Bastami. He was famous
for his attachment to futuwwa.127
Abu Hafs said [about him]: “I have seen no one as strongly concentrated [on
God] and as sincere in his spiritual state as Ahmad b. Khadrawayh.” Abu Yazid
[al-Bastami] said: “Ahmad is our teacher.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard Muhammad b. Hamid say: “I was with
Ahmad b. Khadrawayh during his agony of death. He had just turned ninety-five.
One of his disciples asked him a question. His eyes filled with tears and he
answered: ‘My son, the door at which I have been knocking for ninety-five years
is about to open before me and I have no inkling whether it will lead me to
felicity or infelicity.128Do I have the time to answer [such questions]?’”
He had a debt of seven hundred dinars. His lenders gathered around him. He
looked at them and said://59 “O my Lord, You have determined that pledges
serve as a guaranty for money-lenders, and now You are taking from them their
guaranty.129 So settle my accounts!” Then there was a knock on the door and
someone asked: “Where are Ahmad’s creditors?” His debts were paid and then
his spirit departed. He – may God have mercy on him – died in 240.130
Ahmad b. Khadrawayh said: “No sleep is heavier than neglectfulness; no
slavery is stronger than your carnal desires. Therefore, were neglectfulness not
to weigh heavily upon you, you would never succumb to your desire.”
125 On him see pages 40–41.
126 A leader of the so-called “path of blame” (al-malamatiyya) that flourished in Khurasan in
the second half of the third/ninth century; he died between 265/874 and 270/879. See IM,
pp. 94–99.
127 A code of altruistic and self-denying behavior and selfless generosity that was practiced by
some Iranian ascetics and Sufis of the age.
128 That is, to Paradise or Hell.
129 That is, God is about to take his soul, leaving his creditors empty-handed.
130 That is, 855 C.E.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 39
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 39
Abu πl-Hasan Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari131
He came from Damascus and studied under Abu Sulayman al-Darani and others.
He died in the year 230.132Al-Junayd used to say: “Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari is the
sweet basil of Syria.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Abu Ahmad
al-Hafiz say: I heard Sa∏id b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz al-Halabi say: I heard Ahmad b. Abi
πl-Hawari say: “Whoever looks at this world with longing and affection, God will
remove the light of certitude and renunciation from his heart.” According to the
same chain of transmission, he said: “Whoever performs a [good] deed without
following the custom of the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – his deed
is worthless. On the same chain of authorities Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari said:
“The best weeping is when the servant [of God] weeps over the moments of
negligence [of God’s commands].” Ahmad also said: “God’s greatest temptation
for His servant is neglectfulness and the hardness of the heart.”//60
Abu Hafs ∏Umar b. Maslama133al-Haddad134
He came from the village called Kuradabadh, near the gate of the city of Nishapur
toward the direction of Bukhara. He was a great [Sufi] master and leader. He
died around 260.135
Abu Hafs said: “Sins are messengers of unbelief in the same way as fever
is a messenger of death.” Abu Hafs said: “When you see a disciple who likes
[spiritual] concerts,136 know that there is in him a residue of vanity.” He said:
“Good manners on the outside is the sign of good manners inside.” He said:
“Chivalry consists in being fair [to others], while not demanding fairness [from
others].”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad b. Musa say: I
heard Abu ∏Ali al-Thaqafi say: Abu Hafs used to say: “Whoever does not weigh
his spiritual states and deeds at every moment against the Book and the [Prophet’s]
custom, while at the same time being suspicious of his true motives, should not
be counted among the [true] men.’’137
131 See IM, pp. 37–38.
132 That is, 845 C.E.
133 Also ∏Amr b. Salm or ∏Amr b. Aslam.
134 See note 126.
135 That is, 873 C.E.
136 Sama∏, lit. “hearing” [of music and poetry]; a spiritual concert practiced by many Sufis. See
IM, pp. 322–325.
137 Abu Hafs may be referring to the adherents of the malamatiyya movement of Khurasan,
whom he and his followers considered to be superior to any other ascetic or mystical group in
the area.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 40
40 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Abu Turab ∏Askar b. Husayn al-Nakhshabi138
He was a companion of Hatim al-Asamm and Abu Hatim al-∏Attar al-Basri. He
died in the year 245.139 They say that he died in the desert torn to pieces by
the wild beasts.//61 Ibn al-Jallaπ said: “I have kept the company of six hundred
masters, yet have never met anyone equal to four of them. Of these, the first one
was Abu Turab.”
Abu Turab said: “The poor man’s140food is whatever he can find; his clothes
are whatever covers him; and his home is wherever he ends up staying.” Abu
Turab said: “When the servant [of God] is sincere in his deeds, he will taste their
sweetness before actually performing them; and if he strives to make them perfect,
he will taste their sweetness and pleasantness in the process of performing them.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy
on him – say: I heard my grandfather Isma∏il b. Nujayd say: “When Abu Turab
al-Nakhshabi saw some of his companions doing something he did not like, he
would exert himself even more thoroughly and would make his repentance even
more stringent. He would say: ‘It is my misfortune that these [unfortunates]
were reduced to doing what they do, for God – may He be great and exalted –
said: “Verily never will God change the condition of a people until they change
it themselves.”’141 He also said to his companions: ‘He who wears patched rags,
is begging [for alms]; he who sits in the [Sufi] hostel142 or in the mosque, is
begging; and he who reads aloud the Qurπanic text from the book for people to
hear is also a beggar.’”
I also heard [Isma∏il b. Nujayd] say that Abu Turab used to say: “There is a
pact between me and God that whenever I extend my hand to a prohibited thing,
it does not reach it.” Once Abu Turab saw a Sufi disciple of his extending his
hand to a [discarded] melon rind after he had been starving for three days. Abu
Turab told him: “You are stretching your hand to a melon rind? Then Sufism is
not for you. Stick to the bazaar!”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Baghdadi
say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah al-Farisi say: I heard Abu πl-Husayn al-Razi say:
I heard Yusuf b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu Turab al-Nakhshabi say: “My
[animal] soul was never able to obtain anything from me except once. When I
was on a trip, it craved bread and eggs. So I turned away from my path and came
to a village. Suddenly a man fell upon me and grabbed me, crying: ‘This one was
together with the thieves!’ [The people of the village] threw me to the ground
and beat me with a stick seventy times. [As they were doing this], there came
upon us a Sufi who shouted: ‘Woe unto you! This is Abu Turab al-Nakhshabi!’
138 On him see IM, pp. 33–34.
139 859 C.E.
140 That is, the Sufi.
141 Q. 13:11.
142 Khanqah; a Sufi hostel or lodge; later on, these institutions became the headquarters of Sufi
brotherhoods.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 41
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 41
So they set me free//62 and apologized before me. The man [who declared me
to be a thief] brought me to his house and put in front of me bread and eggs. So
I said [to myself]: ‘Eat this after seventy lashes!’”
Ibn al-Jallaπ narrated: “Abu Turab arrived in Mecca in good spirits. I asked
him: ‘Where did you eat, master?’ He answered: ‘I ate one meal in Basra, another
one in Nibaj and one meal here.’”
Abu Muhammad ∏Abdallah b. Khubayq
He was one of those Sufis who stressed asceticism. A companion of Yusuf b.
Asbat, he hailed from Kufa, although he lived in Antioch.
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu πl-Faraj al-Warathani say:
I heard Abu πl-Azhar al-Mayyafariqini say: I heard Fath b. Shakhraf say: When
I met ∏Abdallah b. Khubayq for the first time, he told me: “Khurasanian, there
are only four things, no more and no less. [They are]: your eye, your tongue,
your heart, and your desire. Watch your eye so that it would not see that which
is not permitted; watch your tongue so that you would not say with it the things
that God knows you do not mean in your heart; watch your heart so that it would
contain neither malice nor envy toward any Muslim; and watch your desire so
that you would not wish any evil. If you do not have these qualities, then cover
your head with ashes, for you will be among the evildoers.”143
Ibn Khubayq said: “Worry only about things that may harm you tomorrow.
And be happy only about things that may make you happy tomorrow!” Ibn
Khubayq said: “When servants [of God] alienate themselves from God, He will
alienate from them the hearts [of people]. And when they open their hearts to
God, He will make everyone open his heart to them.” He said: “The best kind
of fear is one that shields you from [committing] sins, that which fills you with
sorrow over [the good works] that you missed and that which makes you think
about the rest of your life. The best kind of hope is one that renders good works
easy for you.” He also said: “Listening to falsehood for a long time dulls the
sweetness of obedience to God in your heart.”
Abu ∏Ali Ahmad b. ∏Asim al-Antaki144
He was a contemporary of Bishr b. al-Harith, al-Sari al-Saqati and al-Harith
al-Muhasibi. Abu Sulayman al-Darani used to call him “The Spy of the Hearts”
due to his sharp perspicacity.//63
Ahmad b. ∏Asim said: “If you want your heart to be serene, help it by
protecting your tongue [from unbecoming statements].” Ahmad b. ∏Asim said:
“God Most High said: ‘Your riches and your children are but a trial’145 and we
want this trial to increase ever more.”
143 That is, on the Day of Judgement.
144 On him see IM, pp. 38–39. He died in 220/853.
145 Q. 64:15.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 42
42 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Abu πl-Sari Mansur b. ∏Ammar146
He came from the region of Marw from a village named Dandanaqan, although
some say that he came from Bushanj. He later settled in Basra and became a great
preacher. Mansur b. ∏Ammar said: “Whoever falls into despair because of the
afflictions of this world, exposes his faith to affliction.” Mansur b. ∏Ammar said:
“The best dress of the servants [of God] is humility and contrition, while the
best dress of the gnostics is righteousness, for God Most High said: ‘The dress
of righteousness, that is the best.’”147They say that the reason for his repentance
was that he found on the road a piece of paper on which it was written: “In the
name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.” He picked it up, and when he
could not find a place for it, he ate it. Then, in a dream, he heard a voice telling
him: “The gate of wisdom has opened for you, because of your respect for this
piece of paper.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Abu Bakr
al-Razi//64 say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Qass say: I heard Abu πl-Hasan
al-Sha∏rani say: I saw Mansur b. ∏Ammar in a dream and asked what God had
done to him. He answered: “[God] asked me: ‘Are you Mansur b. ∏Ammar?’ I
answered: ‘Yes, my Lord.’ He said: ‘Are you the one who encouraged people
to renounce this world, while at the same time desiring it yourself?’ I answered:
‘Yes, this was so indeed, but I did not begin any of my preaching sessions
without first praising You, then Your Prophet, and only after that did I begin to
admonish people.’ God said: ‘This is true, so bring him a chair so that he sing
My glory in heaven among My angels, as he sang My glory on earth among My
servants.’”
Abu Salih Hamdun b. Ahmad b. ∏Umara al-Qassar148
He came from Nishapur. It is through him that the malamatiyya teaching149
spread [among the people of] Nishapur. He was a companion of Salim150al-Barusi
and Abu Turab al-Nakhshabi. He died in the year 271.151
Someone asked Hamdun: “When can a man speak to people?”//65 He
answered: “When it becomes known to him that he should fulfill an obligation
imposed on him by God Most High. Or when he knows that someone is destined
to perish by [adhering to] a reprehensible innovation152 and he hopes that God
would save that person from it.” He said: “Whoever thinks that his soul is better
than the soul of Pharaoh has shown pride.” He also said: “Since I have learned
146 He died in Baghdad in 225/839.
147 Q. 7:26.
148 On this representative of the malamatiyyamovement in Nishapur, see IM, pp. 94–96.
149 On this ascetic-mystical movement see IM,pp. 94–99.
150 According to some readings, his name was Salm or Salman. See IM, p. 95.
151 880 C.E.
152 Bid∏a; that is, something that was not practiced by the Prophet, his Companions and the
Muslims of the next two generations.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 43
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 43
that the Ruler153 can see through the evildoers, the fear of the Ruler has never
departed from my heart.” He said: “Whenever you see a drunk man, stagger
like him so that you would not elevate yourself above him, thereby calling upon
yourself a similar [affliction].”
∏Abdallah b. Munazil said: I asked Abu Salih to admonish me: “If you can
keep yourself from being angry about anything in this life, then do so!”
[Once] a friend of his was dying, as he kept vigil at his bed. When he died,
Hamdun put down the fire in the lamp. They told him: “In such circumstances
one adds oil to the lamp!” He answered: “Until this moment the oil has belonged
to him, but now it belongs to his heirs.”
Hamdun said: “He who looks into the ways of the pious ancestors154 will
realize his shortcomings and his inability to attain the rank of the true men.” He
also said: “Do not disclose to anyone things that you would like to be hidden
from you.”
Abu πl-Qasim al-Junayd b. Muhammad155
He was the leader and master of this [Sufi] community.//66 His family originally
came from Nihawand, but he was born and raised in Iraq. His father was a
glassware merchant. Because of this he was called “the Bottler”.156He was a jurist
who adhered to the school of Abu Thawr.157When he was just twenty years old
he was already issuing legal opinions in the sessions [that were presided over]
by Abu Thawr. He studied under his uncle al-Sari [al-Saqati], under al-Harith
al-Muhasibi and under Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Qassab. He died in the year 297.158
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn al-Baghdadi say: I heard [Abu Bakr] al-Farghani
say: I heard someone asked al-Junayd about the [Sufi] gnostic. He answered:
“He who speaks of your secret, even though you yourself remain silent.” I heard
Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Razi say: I heard Abu Muhammad al-Jurayri
say: I heard al-Junayd say: “We learned Sufism not through words but through
hunger, the renunciation of this world, and through depriving ourselves from
the things which we are accustomed to and in which we take delight.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard Muhammad al-Jurayri say: I heard Abu
Nasr al-Isbahani say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say: I heard al-Junayd say to
a man who discoursed upon [divine] gnosis and said: “The possessors of gnosis
153 According to an alternative reading, Satan (al-shaytan).
154 That is, the Prophet and the first Muslims.
155 On him see IM, pp. 52–56.
156 Al-Qawariri.
157 Abu Thawr al-Kalbi (d. 240/854), a renowned jurisprudent and a founder of a school of law
that, however, disappeared shortly after his death. See the article “Abu Thawr” in EI.
158 910 C.E.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 44
44 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
arrive at the state of abandoning any movements159 through the gates of their
devotion and intimate proximity to God – may He be great and exalted.” To this
al-Junayd replied: “This is the teaching of those who preach the abandonment of
pious works. This, in my view, is nothing but a deadly sin. Even those people who
steal and fornicate are better than those who teach this. The gnostics, who know
God Most High, took their works from God Most High and through them they will
return to Him. Were I to live a thousand years, I would not miss a single minor
act of devotion unless I were prevented from it [by forces beyond my control].”
Al-Junayd said: “If it were possible for you to have nothing at your home but
a few pottery utensils, so be it!” Al-Junayd said: “All paths are closed for God’s
creatures except for those who follow in the footsteps of the Prophet – may peace
and blessings be upon him.”//67
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard
Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard Abu ∏Umar al-Anmati say: I heard al-Junayd
say: “If a righteous man who has spent thousands of years contemplating God
would turn away from Him for just one moment, his loss would be greater than
his gain.” I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Isbahani
say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say on the authority of al-Junayd: al-Junayd
said: “In this affair [of ours]160 one must not follow anyone who has not learned
by heart the Qurπan and written down the reports of the Prophet, because
our knowledge is bound by the [Holy] Book and by the [Prophet’s] custom.”
Al-Junayd said: “This teaching of ours is bound by the foundations of the
[Sacred] Book and the custom [of the Prophet].” Al-Junayd also said: “This
knowledge of ours is reinforced by the reports of the Messenger of God – may
God bless and greet him.”
Muhammad b.∏Abdallah say: I heard Abu ∏Umar al-Anmati say: I heard al-Junayd
say: “If a righteous man who has spent thousands of years contemplating God
would turn away from Him for just one moment, his loss would be greater than
his gain.” I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Isbahani
say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say on the authority of al-Junayd: al-Junayd
said: “In this affair [of ours]160 one must not follow anyone who has not learned
by heart the Qurπan and written down the reports of the Prophet, because
our knowledge is bound by the [Holy] Book and by the [Prophet’s] custom.”
Al-Junayd said: “This teaching of ours is bound by the foundations of the
[Sacred] Book and the custom [of the Prophet].” Al-Junayd also said: “This
knowledge of ours is reinforced by the reports of the Messenger of God – may
God bless and greet him.”
Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – informed me:
I heard Abu πl-Husayn b. Faris say: I heard Abu πl-Husayn ∏Ali b. Ibrahim
al-Haddad say: I attended a lecture of the judge Abu πl-∏Abbas b. Surayj.161 He
discoursed on the subject of the roots and the branches [of jurisprudence], and
I liked that. When he saw that I liked that, he asked: “Do you know where all
this comes from?” I answered: “[Only] the judge [can] say this.” He said: “This
[came to me] due to my keeping the company of Abu πl-Qasim al-Junayd.”
Someone asked al-Junayd: “Where did you obtain your knowledge from?”
He answered: “Through sitting before God for thirty years under that staircase.”
And he pointed to the staircase of his house. I heard the master Abu ∏Ali [al-Daqqaq] recount this story. I also heard him
say: “Someone saw a rosary in his [al-Junayd’s] hand and said to him: ‘In spite
of your high [spiritual] rank you still hold a rosary in your hand?’ He answered:
‘I will not abandon the way which has brought me to my Lord.’”
159 That is, the performance of the canonical acts of piety, such as prayer or pilgrimage. 160 That is, Sufism.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 43
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 43
that the Ruler153 can see through the evildoers, the fear of the Ruler has never
departed from my heart.” He said: “Whenever you see a drunk man, stagger
like him so that you would not elevate yourself above him, thereby calling upon
yourself a similar [affliction].”
∏Abdallah b. Munazil said: I asked Abu Salih to admonish me: “If you can
keep yourself from being angry about anything in this life, then do so!”
[Once] a friend of his was dying, as he kept vigil at his bed. When he died,
Hamdun put down the fire in the lamp. They told him: “In such circumstances
one adds oil to the lamp!” He answered: “Until this moment the oil has belonged
to him, but now it belongs to his heirs.”
Hamdun said: “He who looks into the ways of the pious ancestors154 will
realize his shortcomings and his inability to attain the rank of the true men.” He
also said: “Do not disclose to anyone things that you would like to be hidden
from you.”
Abu πl-Qasim al-Junayd b. Muhammad155
He was the leader and master of this [Sufi] community.//66 His family originally
came from Nihawand, but he was born and raised in Iraq. His father was a
glassware merchant. Because of this he was called “the Bottler”.156He was a jurist
who adhered to the school of Abu Thawr.157When he was just twenty years old
he was already issuing legal opinions in the sessions [that were presided over]
by Abu Thawr. He studied under his uncle al-Sari [al-Saqati], under al-Harith
al-Muhasibi and under Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Qassab. He died in the year 297.158
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn al-Baghdadi say: I heard [Abu Bakr] al-Farghani
say: I heard someone asked al-Junayd about the [Sufi] gnostic. He answered:
“He who speaks of your secret, even though you yourself remain silent.” I heard
Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Razi say: I heard Abu Muhammad al-Jurayri
say: I heard al-Junayd say: “We learned Sufism not through words but through
hunger, the renunciation of this world, and through depriving ourselves from
the things which we are accustomed to and in which we take delight.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard Muhammad al-Jurayri say: I heard Abu
Nasr al-Isbahani say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say: I heard al-Junayd say to
a man who discoursed upon [divine] gnosis and said: “The possessors of gnosis
153 According to an alternative reading, Satan (al-shaytan).
154 That is, the Prophet and the first Muslims.
155 On him see IM, pp. 52–56.
156 Al-Qawariri.
157 Abu Thawr al-Kalbi (d. 240/854), a renowned jurisprudent and a founder of a school of law
that, however, disappeared shortly after his death. See the article “Abu Thawr” in EI.
158 910 C.E.

I also heard him
say: “Someone saw a rosary in his [al-Junayd’s] hand and said to him: ‘In spite
of your high [spiritual] rank you still hold a rosary in your hand?’ He answered:
‘I will not abandon the way which has brought me to my Lord.’”
159 That is, the performance of the canonical acts of piety, such as prayer or pilgrimage. 160 That is, Sufism. 161 A famous scholar of Baghdad (d. 308/918), who is sometimes considered to be the real
founder of the Shafi∏i school of law.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 45
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 45
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“Every day al-Junayd came to his store, closed its door and performed four
hundred prayer prostrations. He then returned to his house.”//68
Abu Bakr al-∏Atawi said: “I was with al-Junayd, when he died. He read the
entire text of the Qurπan and began to recite it anew from ‘The Cow’.162 He
reached the seventieth verse, then died – may God have mercy on him!”
Abu ∏Uthman Sa∏id b. Isma‘il al-Hiri163
He resided in Nishapur. He originally came from the city of Rayy, where he
studied with Shah al-Kirmani164 and Yahya b. Mu∏adh al-Razi. He then arrived
in Nishapur together with Shah al-Kirmani and came to Abu Hafs al-Haddad.
He stayed with him for a while until he completed his studies with him. Abu
Hafs gave him his daughter in marriage. He died in the year 298.165He lived more
than thirty years after Abu Hafs’s death.
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard Abu ∏Amr b. Hamdan say: I heard Abu ∏Uthman say: “Man’s faith is not
complete until four things have become equal for him in his heart: denial, giving,
glory, and humiliation.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard ∏Abd al-Rahman b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard a companion of Abu ∏Uthman
say: I heard Abu ∏Uthman say: “As a young man I studied with Abu Hafs for
a while. Once he drove me away from his assembly and told me not to sit with
him any longer. So I stood up, and began to withdraw without turning my back
on him, so that my face would be facing his. I proceeded in this manner until I
disappeared from his sight. Then I made a vow to dig a hole next to his door and
not leave it until he ordered me to do so. When he saw that, he brought me close
to himself and made me one of his foremost companions.”
They say that there are only three [people] in this world, to whom there
is no equal://69 Abu ∏Uthman at Nishapur, al-Junayd at Baghdad, and Abu
∏Abdallah b. al-Jallaπ in Syria.
Abu ∏Uthman said: “For forty years God Most High has not put me in a
spiritual state that I would not like, nor did He transfer me to a state that I would
resent.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy
on him – say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad al-Sha∏rani say: I heard Abu
∏Uthman say that.
When Abu ∏Uthman fell into unconsciousness [on his death bed], his son
Abu Bakr tore up the shirt he was wearing. [Suddenly] Abu ∏Uthman opened his
162 The name of the second (and the longest) chapter of the Qurπan.
163 A leader of the malamatiyyamovement in Khurasan who died in 298/910. See IM, “Index”,
under “Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri”.
164 For his biography see page 52.
165 910 C.E.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 46
46 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
eyes and said: “My son, breaking the Prophet’s custom on the outside is a sign
of hypocrisy inside!”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad
al-Malamati say: I heard Abu πl-Husayn al-Warraq say: I heard Abu ∏Uthman
say: “Companionship with God [requires man] to be courteous, to be constantly
in awe [of God] and to exercise self-scrutiny. Companionship with the Messenger
of God – may God bless and greet him and his family – [requires man] to follow
the custom of the Prophet and to adhere to the explicit knowledge.166
Companionship with the friends of God Most High [requires man] to exercise
reverence and to serve [them]. Companionship with the family [requires] proper
conduct. Companionship with the brothers167 [requires] cheerfulness, as long as
there is no sin in it. Companionship with ignoramuses [requires man] to pray for
them and be kind to them.”
I heard ∏Abdallah b. Yusuf al-Isbahani – may God have mercy on him – say:
“I heard that Abu ∏Amr b. Nujayd say: I heard Abu ∏Uthman say: ‘Whoever has
appointed the Prophet’s custom, in word and in deed, as his commander, will
speak [words of] wisdom; and whoever has appointed his passions, in word and
deed, as his commander, will speak about [reprehensible] innovation. For God
Most High said: “If you obey him [the Prophet], you shall be on the right
guidance.”’”168//70
Abu πl-Husayn Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Nuri169
He was born and raised in Baghdad, but his family originally came from
Baghshur.170He studied with al-Sari al-Saqati and Ibn Abi πl-Hawari, and was a
contemporary of al-Junayd – may God have mercy on him. He died in the year
295 (907). He was a person of great stature, who was well-spoken and amicable.
Al-Nuri – may God have mercy on him – said: “Sufism is the abandonment
of everything that pleases the soul.” He said: “There are two greatest things in
this age of ours: a scholar who acts according to his knowledge, and a [divine]
gnostic who speaks according to his [true] reality.”
I heard Abu ∏Abdallah al-Sufi – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard
Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Barda∏i say: I heard al-Murta∏ish171say: I heard al-Nuri
say: “Whenever you see someone boasting that he has achieved a spiritual state
that places him outside the limits of the Divine Law, do not come near him!”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Baghdadi say: I heard al-Farghani say: I
heard al-Junayd say: “Since al-Nuri died no one has spoken about the true
166 That is, to the letter of the Divine Law (al-shari∏a).
167 That is, fellow Sufis.
168 Q. 24:54.
169 On him see IM, pp. 60–63.
170 A village near the city of Herat, Afghanistan.
171 On him see page 62.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 47
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 47
nature of sincerity.” Abu Ahmad al-Maghazili said: “I have not seen anyone more
devoted to God than al-Nuri.” Someone said to him: “Not even al-Junayd?” He
answered: “Yes, not even al-Junayd.”
Al-Nuri said: “Patched frocks [of the Sufis] used to hide pearls. Today,
however, they have become a heap of dung upon corpses.”172 They say that
he used to leave his house every day carrying some bread with him. He would
give out this bread as alms on the way, then, around noon, he would enter the
mosque. He would then leave the mosque, open his store and fast. His family
thought that he ate at the bazaar, while the people of the bazaar thought that he
ate at home. He maintained this practice for twenty years.//71
Abu ∏Abdallah Ahmad b. Yahya al-Jallaπ
He came from Baghdad, but lived in Ramla173 and Damascus. He was a great
Sufi master of Syria. He studied with Abu Turab [al-Nakhshabi], Dhu πl-Nun
al-Misri, Abu ∏Ubayd al-Busri and his father Yahya al-Jallaπ.
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz al-Tabari say: I heard Abu ∏Umar al-Dimashqi
say: I heard Ibn al-Jallaπ say: “I told my father and mother: ‘I want you to give
me to God – may He be great and exalted!’ They said: ‘Yes, we give you to God
– may He be great and exalted.’ I then left them for a while. I returned to them
on a rainy night and knocked on the door. My father asked who was there. I
answered: ‘I am your son Ahmad.’ He said: ‘We had a son, but we gave him to
God Most High. We are Arabs and therefore do not take our gifts back.’ He did
not open the door.”
Ibn al-Jallaπ said: “He for whom blame and praise are equal is an ascetic. He
who fulfills religious duties in their proper times is a worshipper. He who
sees that all actions and works come from God is a true monotheist. For he sees
nothing but the One.”
When Ibn al-Jallaπ died, people looked at him [and saw] that he was laughing.
The physician said: “He is alive!” He then felt his pulse and said: “No, he is
dead.” He removed the cover from his face and said: “I do not know whether he
is dead or alive!”
Under his skin was a vein in the shape of [the word] “God”. Ibn al-Jallaπ
– may God have mercy on him – said: “Once I was walking alongside my [Sufi]
master and saw a handsome youth. I asked: ‘Master, do you think that God will
punish such a [beautiful] form?’ He answered: ‘So, you looked at him, didn’t
you? You will soon suffer the consequence [of it]!’//72. And indeed, twenty
years later, I forgot the Qurπan.”
172 A hint at the deterioration of the original Sufi values at the hands of al-Nuri’s contemporaries.
173 A town in Syria/Palestine.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 48
48 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Abu Muhammad Ruwaym b. Ahmad
He was born in Baghdad. A great Sufi master, he died in the year 303.174He was a
teacher of the Qurπan and jurist, who adhered to the school of Dawud [al-Zahiri].175
Ruwaym said: “The wisdom of the wise man consists of dispensing freely
pious admonitions to his [Sufi] brethren, while at the same time imposing them
stringently upon himself. His dispensation [of the admonitions] to others means
adherence to [religious] knowledge, while his stringent imposition of them upon
himself is evidence of pious scrupulosity.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard ∏Abd al-Wahid b. Bakr say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah b. Khafif
say: “I asked Ruwaym to give me a piece of advice. He answered: ‘This affair176
is achieved only by exerting one’s spirit. If you enter it through this, fine. If not,
then you should not engage in the follies of the Sufis.’”177
Ruwaym said: “When you keep company with any group of people, this is
better for you than keeping company with the Sufis. This is because all people
study the externals [of religion], whereas this [Sufi] community studies the true
realities [of things]. While all people seek to impose upon themselves the outward
rulings of the Divine Law, the Sufis impose upon themselves the True Reality
of pious scrupulosity and continuous sincerity. Therefore if anyone deviates
from them in something that they have achieved, God will remove the light of
faith from his heart.”
Ruwaym said: “I was walking in a street of Baghdad during a hot afternoon.
I was thirsty. I came to a house and asked for water. A girl with a pitcher opened
the door. When she saw me, she said: ‘[This is] a Sufi who drinks during
the day!’ Since then I have never broken my fast [during the day].” Ruwaym
said://73 “God has bestowed upon you word and deed.178If He takes away from
you the word and leaves you with the deed, this is a blessing. If He takes away
from you the deed and leaves you with the word, this is an affliction. However,
if He takes away both from you, this is a terrible punishment.”
Abu ∏Abdallah Muhammad b. al-Fadl al-Balkhi
He was a resident of Samarqand, originally from Balkh. He was expelled from
Balkh and settled in Samarqand, where he died. He studied with Ahmad
Khadrawayh [Khidruya] and others. Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri liked him a lot. He
died in the year 319.179
174 915 C.E.
175 A school of law founded by Dawud al-Zahiri (d. 270/884), a scholar with a literalist turn of
mind. Closely affiliated with the Hanbali legal school, the Zahiri school gradually disappeared.
176 That is, the mystical path to God.
177 This phrase indicates that Ruwaym represented a strand of piety that did not necessarily
endorse the practices and values of the Sufi tradition of Iraq. See IM, pp. 99–101.
178 That is, the gift of speech and the ability to act.
179 931 C.E.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 49
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 49
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him
– say: I heard Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Farraπ say: I heard Abu Bakr b. ∏Uthman
say: Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri wrote [a letter] to Muhammad b. al-Fadl asking him
about the signs of wretchedness [in the Hereafter]. He answered: “Three things.
When a man is endowed with knowledge but deprived of deeds; when he is
endowed with deeds but deprived of sincerity [in performing them]; when he is
endowed with the company of the righteous, yet he has no respect for them.”
Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri used to say: Muhammad b. al-Fadl is a broker of men.180
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Abdallah al-Razi say: I heard
Muhammad b. al-Fadl say: “Rest in the prison181 is something that the soul
should desire.” I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi
say: I heard Muhammad b. al-Fadl say: “There are four reasons for Islam’s
departure: [Muslims] do not act in accordance with what they know; they act in
accordance with what they do not know; they do not learn what they do not know;
they prevent others from learning.” According to the same chain of transmission
he said://74 “How strange are those people who cross the deserts in order to
arrive at His House182 and to see the traces of prophecy. Why don’t they cross
their [lower] souls and their passions in order to arrive at their hearts and to see
the signs of their Lord – may He be great and exalted!?”
He said: “When you see a [Sufi] novice, who aspires to good things of
this world, this means that he turned his back [on God].” Someone asked him
about asceticism. He answered: “When one looks at this world and sees only its
imperfection and when one turns away from it with pride, dignity and contempt.”
Abu Bakr Ahmad b. Nasr al-Zaqqaq al-Kabir
He was a contemporary of al-Junayd and a great [Sufi] master of Egypt. I heard
Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard al-Husayn
b. Ahmad say: I heard al-Kattani say: “When al-Zaqqaq died, the poor183no longer
had reason to visit Egypt.”
Al-Zaqqaq said: “Whosoever does not combine [his] poverty with piety is
eating prohibited food.”
Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him –
said: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz say: I heard al-Zaqqaq say:
“I wandered in the desert of the children of Israel184 for fifteen days. However,
when I had finally found the road, I met a soldier, who gave me some water to
drink. Its harshness tormented my heart for the next thirty years.”185
180 That is, he can see their true intentions.
181 That is, in this life.
182 That is, the Ka∏ba in Mecca, which is the principal sanctuary of Islam.
183 That is, the Sufis.
184 That is, in the Sinai.
185 Soldiers, like all state officials, were seen by the Sufis as instruments of oppression. Therefore,
the water received from a soldier’s hands was deemed to be impure.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 50
50 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Abu ∏Abdallah ∏Amr b. ∏Uthman al-Makki
He met Abu ∏Abdallah al-Nabaji and studied with Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz186 and
others.//75 He was a [great] master of the Sufis and their leader in the science
of the fundamentals [of the Divine Law] and the [mystical] path. He died in
Baghdad in 291.187
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. Shadhan say: I heard Abu Bakr Muhammad
b. Ahmad say: I heard ∏Amr b. ∏Uthman al-Makki say: “Whatever good thing,
splendor, intimacy, beauty, radiance, form, light, person or image which your
heart may fancy, which may occur to you in your thoughts or which may appear
in the passing whims of your heart – God Most High is far removed from all of
this. Have not you heard the words of God Most High: ‘Like Him there is
naught, He is the Hearing, the Seeing.’188He [also] said: ‘[He] has not begotten,
and has not been begotten, and equal to Him there is not any one.’”189
According to the same chain of transmission, he said: “Knowledge is a guide
and fear [of God] is a [caravan] driver. The soul, which is [caught] between
them, is obstinate, recalcitrant, deceitful and devious. If you keep warning her by
the guidance of knowledge and driving her by the threat of fear, you will achieve
your goal.” He also said: “No [clear] expression can be applied to ecstasy,190
because it is God’s mystery among the believers.”
Samnun b. Hamza191
His kunya192was Abu πl-Hasan, though some say it was Abu πl-Qasim. He studied
with al-Sari [al-Saqati], Abu Ahmad al-Qalanisi, Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Qassab
and others. It is said that he recited [the following lines]:
I find no delight in anyone but You
So test me as you wish!
As soon as he said that, he was afflicted by urine retention. He then began to
go around [religious] schools saying [to the students]:193“Pray for your uncle the
Liar!”//76. As he was reciting these lines, one of his companions said to the
other: “I heard, the other day, when I was in the countryside, the voice of our
master Samnun that begged and humbly entreated God to cure him.” The other
man also said: “I too heard that yesterday, when I was in such-and-such place.”
186 On him see pages 53–54 of this book and IM, pp. 56–60.
187 903 C.E.
188 Q. 42:11.
189 Q. 112:3–4.
190 According to an alternative reading, “to the ecstatic [person]”.
191 On him see IM, pp.63–64.
192 That is, the name of a man’s eldest son (filionymic) that usually precedes the given name.
193 This phrase is missing from some versions of the text.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 51
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 51
Others confirmed this also. Samnun was told about this. However, when he
was afflicted by urine retention, he tolerated it patiently and never complained.
When he heard them saying this, while in fact he never had uttered that prayer
or said anything [of this], he realized that God wanted him to show his anguish
out of respect for the code of God’s servant and in order to conceal his true
state.194 [It was then] that he began to walk around the schools, telling [the
school-children]: “Pray for your uncle the Liar!”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say:
I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Baghdadi say: I heard Ja∏far
al-Khuldi say: Ahmad al-Maghazili told me: “There was a man in Baghdad who
distributed forty thousand dinars among the poor. Samnun said to me: ‘Abu
Ahmad, don’t you see what this [man] has expended and done, while we have
nothing to give as charity? Let’s go some place and perform there one ritual
bending and prostration for each dirham he has donated.’ So we came to
al-Madaπin195and performed forty thousand bending and prostrations.”
Samnun had a pleasant character and most of his sayings are about divine
love. He was a person of great stature. They say that he died before al-Junayd.
Abu ∏Ubayd al-Busri
He belonged to [the generation of] the old Sufi masters and studied with Abu
Turab al-Nakhshabi.
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali say: I heard al-Duqqi say: I heard Ibn al-Jallaπ say: “I have
met six hundred Sufi masters. Of them no one was equal to the [following]
four://77 Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri, my father,196 Abu Turab and Abu ∏Ubayd
al-Busri.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Baghawi197say: I heard Muhammad
b. Mu∏ammar say: I heard Abu Zur∏a al-Hasani198say: “One day Abu ∏Ubayd was
threshing his wheat on a threshing machine. It was just three days before the
Pilgrimage season. Two men came up to him and asked: ‘Abu ∏Ubayd, do you
desire to perform a pilgrimage?’ He said: ‘No.’ He then turned to me and said:
‘This master of yours is more capable of doing this than these men!’199He meant
himself.”
194 That is, his ability to tolerate God’s affliction without complaint.
195 The ruins of Ctesiphon, the ancient capital of Sasanian Iran.
196 Yahya al-Jallaπ, a famous ascetic and Sufi.
197 In a different reading, “al-Thaghri”.
198 In a different reading, “al-Janbi.”
199 It is not quite clear what he was referring to, but some later Sufi commentators suggested that
Abu ∏Ubayd hinted at his ability to traverse great distances within minutes (tayy al-ard). This
explanationseems far-fetched. It is more likely that he implied that staying at home during the
pilgrimageand concentrating one’s thoughts on God is better than taking part in the noisy and
ostentatiouscollective pilgrimage.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 52
52 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Abu πl-Fawaris Shah b. Shuja∏ al-Kirmani
He came from a family of kings. He studied with Abu Turab al-Nakhshabi, Abu
∏Ubayd al-Busri and those who belonged to this generation. He was a man of
futuwwa200and of great importance. He died before the year 300.201
Shah said: “Pious scrupulosity is a sign of fear of God and avoidance of
suspicious things.”202He also used to say to his companions: “Avoid lies, treachery
and backbiting, then do as you see fit.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard my grandfather
Ibn Nujayd say: Shah al-Kirmani said: “Whoever turns his sight away from the
prohibited, restrains himself from passions, fills//78 his interior with constant
self-scrutiny and his exterior with the observance of the Prophet’s custom, and
forces himself to eat only properly obtained [food], will never be failed in his
clairvoyance.”
Yusuf b. al-Husayn
He was a [Sufi] master of Rayy and [the province of] Jibal.203 He was unique
in his avoidance of pretension. He was knowledgeable and well educated. He
studied with Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri and Abu Turab al-Nakhshabi and a friend of
Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz. He died in the year 304.204
Yusuf b. al-Husayn said: “I would rather meet God burdened with all
possible sins than with one grain of pretence.” Yusuf b. al-Husayn said:
“When you see a novice having recourse to dispensations [from an obligatory
requirement],205 you must know that nothing good will come out of him.” He
wrote to al-Junayd: “May God not allow you to taste the temptation of your soul.
For once you have tasted it, you will never taste any good forthwith.” Yusuf b.
al-Husayn said: “I see afflictions of the Sufis in the following things: seeking
friendship with adolescents, keeping company with adversaries, and befriending
women.”
Abu ∏Abdallah Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Tirmidhi
He was a great Sufi master, who wrote many works on Sufi science.//79 He
studied with Abu Turab al-Nakhshabi, Ahmad b. Khadrawayh [Khidruya], Ibn
al-Jallaπ and others. Someone asked Muhammad b. ∏Ali about the characteristic
feature of mankind. He answered: “Outward weakness, yet unlimited pretensions.”
200 See note 96.
201 912 C.E.
202 That is, the things that may be improper from the viewpoint of the Divine Law (al-shari∏a).
203 A province in Iran.
204 916 C.E.
205 On the notion of dispensation in Sufism see IM, p. 195. Although legitimate from the viewpoint
of the Divine Law, many Sufis considered dispensations to be a sign of one’s inability to perform
one’s duties to the full.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 53
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 53
Muhammad b. ∏Ali said: “I have not written a single letter about the [Divine]
Providence in relation to my own condition. However, whenever my personal
circumstances have become strained, I found consolation in it.”
Abu Bakr Muhammad b. ∏Umar al-Warraq al-Tirmidhi
He resided in Balkh. He studied with Ahmad b. Khadrawayh [Khidruya] and
others, and wrote books on [spiritual] self-discipline.
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Muhammad b.
al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Warraq say:
“Whosoever [seeks to] satisfy his members’ passions, has planted in his heart the
tree of repentance.” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard
Abu Bakr al-Balkhi say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Warraq say: “If someone is to
ask greed about its father, it would answer that it is doubt in that which has been
predetermined [by God]. And if it is asked about its occupation, it would answer
that it is the acquisition of ignominy. And if it is asked about its goal, it would
answer that it is the exclusion [from God’s favor].”
Abu Bakr al-Warraq used to prohibit his companions from travels and
journeys. He said: “The key to blessing is to remain patiently in the location of
your volition until your volition has come to fruition. And when it has come to
fruition, the first traces of blessing will appear upon you.”
Abu Sa∏id Ahmad b. ∏Isa al-Kharraz206
He came from Baghdad.//80 He studied with Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri, al-Nibaji,
Abu ∏Ubayd al-Busri, al-Sari [al-Saqati], Bishr [al-Hafi] and others. He died in
the year 277.207
Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz said: “Any interior that is at odds with [its] exterior
is mistaken.” I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah
al-Razi say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Sayyad say: I heard Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz
say: “In a dream I saw the Devil. He kept away from me. I said to him: ‘Come
closer! What’s the matter with you?’ He answered: ‘What can I do to you
[folks]?208 You have divested yourselves of things by which I beguile people!’
I asked: ‘What is it?’ He answered: ‘This worldly life!’ As he was about to
leave, he turned to me and said: ‘And yet I have one subtle [ruse] against you.’
I asked him what it was. He answered: ‘Keeping the company of adolescent
boys!’”209
Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz said: “I have kept the company of the Sufis for God
knows how long and never had any disagreement with them.” Someone asked
206 On him see IM, pp. 56–60.
207 890 C.E.
208 That is, the Sufis.
209 On the practice of mixing with and gazing at beardless boys and adolescents, see Baldick, Mystical
Islam, pp. 20, 134, 173. It was condemned by some Sufi masters.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 54
54 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
him why. He answered: “Because both they and I are fighting our common
enemy, our souls.”
Abu ∏Abdallah Muhammad b. Isma∏il al-Maghribi
He was a teacher of Ibrahim b. Shayban and a disciple of ∏Ali b. Razin. He lived
one hundred and twenty years and died in 299.210 He was a unique person. For
many years he ate nothing that had been touched by the human hand. Instead he
ate the roots of some plants, to which he had grown accustomed.
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Maghribi said: “The best of all [pious] works is when you
fill the moments [of your life] with acts of obedience [to God].” He also said:
“The most despised of all creatures is the poor man who fawns upon a rich man
or abases himself before him. And the greatest of all creatures is the rich man
who humbles himself before//81 the poor and holds them in high regard.”
Abu πl-∏Abbas Ahmad b. Muhammad Masruq
His came from Tus,211 but he resided in Baghdad. He studied with al-Harith
al-Muhasibi and al-Sari al-Saqati, and died in Baghdad in the year 298 or 299.212
Ibn Masruq said: “When one watches God Most High in the movements of
his heart, God will protect the movements of his limbs.” He said: “Holding in
high esteem the sacredness of the believers means holding in high esteem the
sacredness of God Most High. Through this the servant [of God] will arrive at
the station of the true piety.”213 He said: “The tree of [divine] gnosis is watered
by contemplation; the tree of negligence [of God] is watered by ignorance; the
tree of repentance is watered by remorse. The tree of love [of God] is watered by
the water of agreement and compliance [with God’s will].”
He also said: “If you aspire to obtain [divine] knowledge without first
establishing yourself firmly in the stages of spiritual striving,214you will languish in
ignorance forever; and if you try to attain spiritual striving without first realizing
fully the station of repentance,215 you will be unaware of what you are trying to
achieve.”
Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Sahl al-Isbahani
He was a contemporary of al-Junayd. When ∏Amr b. ∏Uthman al-Makki came
to him about a debt that he had incurred, [∏Ali b. Sahl] settled it for him. It was
210 That is, in 911 C.E.; according to other sources, he died in 291/904.
211 A city in Iran that was located near present-day Meshhed.
212 That is, 910 or 911 C.E.
213 That is, one should respect the rights of other people as much as one respects the rights of
God.
214 That is, the Sufi path.
215 That is, the first station of the Sufi path.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 55
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 55
thirty thousand dirhams. He met Abu Turab al-Nakhshabi and [the Sufis of] his
generation.
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu Bakr Muhammad b.
∏Abdallah al-Tabari say://82 I heard ∏Ali b. Sahl say: “When you hurry to do acts
of piety, this is a sign of Godspeed. When you abstain from acts of disobedience
[to God] this is a sign of vigilance. When you keep the secret of your heart
of hearts, this is a sign of [spiritual] wakefulness. An ostentatious display of
presumptions is [an evidence of] human foolishness. He who does not rest the
beginnings of his spiritual striving on a sound foundation, will never achieve
sound results.”
Abu Muhammad Ahmad b. Muhammad b. al-Husayn al-Jurayri216
He was one of the greatest companions of al-Junayd. He studied with Sahl b.
∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] and was appointed as successor to al-Junayd [after his
death]. He was knowledgeable in the sciences of this community217and possessed
an [advanced] spiritual state. He died in 311.218
I heard Abu ∏Abdallah al-Shirazi [Ibn Khafif] say: I heard Ahmad b. ∏Ataπ
al-Rudhbari say: “Al-Jurayri died in the year of al-Habir.219One year later I was
passing by that place and saw him sitting there leaning [on something], his knee
to his breast and finger pointing to God.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say:
I heard Abu πl-Husayn al-Farisi say: I heard Abu Muhammad al-Jurayri say:
“When the [animal] soul prevails over someone, he will become a captive of
his lustful urges, imprisoned in the jail of passions. God will then deprive his
heart of spiritual knowledge and he will be able neither to enjoy the words of
God Most High nor to find pleasure in them, even though he may repeat them
constantly with his tongue. For God Most High said: ‘I shall turn away from My
signs those who wax proud in the earth unjustly.’”220
Al-Jurayri said: “One observes the fundamentals [of the Divine Law]221 by
implementing [its] branches222 and one tests the soundness of the branches by
comparing them to the fundamentals. One will never//83 attain to the station of
the contemplation of the fundamentals unless one holds in high regard the means
216 On him see IM, p. 66.
217 That is, the Sufis.
218 924 C.E.
219 A dune region in Arabia that was the site of an attack on the Muslim pilgrims by the Qarmati
sect led by a ruthless rebel leader, Abu Tahir al-Jannabi. It resulted in the capture and massacre
of hundreds of pilgrims. See Halm, The Empire of the Mahdi, pp. 252–253. From the context
of the story it appears that al-Jurayri was among those massacred by the Qarmatis in the
desert.
220 Q. 7:146. In the Qurπan the word “signs” may also refer to the verses of the Muslim Holy
Book.
221 As laid down in the Qurπan and the Prophet’s custom (al-sunna).
222 That is, the particular cases to which the fundamentals are applied in everyday legal practice.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 56
56 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
and the branches [of the Divine Law]. For God Himself has elevated the latter
to a high position.”
Abu πl-∏Abbas Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Sahl b. ∏Ataπ al-Adami223
He was a great Sufi master and scholar. [Abu Sa∏id] al-Kharraz used to praise
him highly. He belonged to the generation of al-Junayd and was a companion of
Ibrahim al-Maristani. He died in the year 309.224
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu Sa∏id al-Qurashi say: I
heard Ibn ∏Ataπ say: “He who obeys the rulings of the Divine Law, God will
enlighten his heart with the light of [divine] gnosis, and there is no better station
than following in the footsteps of the Beloved225– may God bless and greet him
– in his commands, his deeds and his moral character traits.” Ibn ∏Ataπ said:
“The greatest negligence is when the servant [of God] neglects God – may
He be great and exalted – His commands and prohibitions as well as the proper
manners due to Him.”
I heard Abu ∏Abdallah al-Shirazi [Ibn Khafif] – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard ∏Abd al-Rahman Ahmad al-Sufi say: I heard Ibn ∏Ataπ say:
“Whenever you seek something, you should seek it in the arena of [religious]
science. If you do not find it [there], [look for it] in the field of wisdom. If you
do not find it [there either] weigh it [on the scale] of God’s oneness. And if you
do not find it in any of these three places, then strike with it the face of Satan.”
Abu Ishaq Ibrahim b. Ahmad al-Khawwas
He was a friend of al-Junayd and al-Nuri. He had vast knowledge of trust
in God226 and spiritual self-discipline. He died at Rayy in the year 291.227 He
suffered from a stomach disease.228 Therefore each time he had to stand up, he
had to perform a major ablution. Once he entered water229and died there – may
God have mercy on him.
I heard that Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – said:
I heard that Ahmad b. ∏Ali b. Ja∏far said: I heard that al-Azdi said: I heard that
al-Khawwas said: “Five things serve as a cure for the heart: a thoughtful reading
of the Qurπan, an empty stomach, night vigils, supplications in the early morning,
and keeping the company of the righteous.”
223 On this famous Sufi theorist and a close friend of al-Hallaj, see IM, ‘Index” under “Ibn ‘Ata’”.
224 922 C.E.
225 That is, the prophet Muhammad.
226 On this concept see IM, “Index of terms” under “tawakkul”.
227 903 C.E.
228 It appears that he had chronic diarrhea.
229 Perhaps it was a shallow pool attached to the mosque.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 57
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 57
Abu Muhammad ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad al-Kharraz
He came from [the city of] Rayy and resided in Mecca. He studied with Abu
Hafs [al-Haddad] and Abu ∏Imran al-Kabir. He was one of those who practiced
scrupulous discernment. He died before the year 310.230
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Abu Nasr
al-Tusi say: I heard al-Duqqi say: “I came to Abdallah al-Kharraz after I had
fasted for four days. He said: ‘One of you has fasted for four days and hunger has
begun to call upon him.’ He then said: ‘If every living soul were to perish for the
sake of what it expects from God, do you think that would be a lot?’” Abu
Muhammad ∏Abdallah al-Kharraz said: “Hunger is the food of the ascetics and
remembrance of God is the food of the gnostics.”//85
Abu πl-Hasan Bunan b. Muhammad al-Hammal
He came from Wasit,231but lived in Egypt where he died in 318.232He was a great
man, who [was known for his] miracles.
Someone asked Bunan about the most exalted spiritual state of the Sufis. He
answered: “Trust in what is predetermined [by God], the fulfillment of [God’s]
commands, the protection of the heart [from temptations] and withdrawal from
both worlds.”
I heard that Muhammad b. al-Husayn said: I heard that al-Husayn b. Ahmad
al-Razi said: I heard that Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari said: Bunan al-Hammal was
thrown to a lion.233 The lion sniffed him, but did him no harm. When he was
brought back, someone asked him: “What did you feel when the lion was sniffing
you?” He said: “I was thinking about the disagreement of the scholars regarding
the saliva of wild animals.”234
Abu Hamza al-Baghdadi al-Bazzaz
He died before al-Junayd. He was a friend of al-Junayd’s and studied with al-Sari
[al-Saqati] and al-Hasan al-Musuhi. He was an expert on Qurπan recitation and
a jurist. He was a descendant of ∏Isa b. Aban. Ahmad b. Hanbal used to ask him
about various [legal] issues: “What do you say about this, Sufi?”
They say that he was speaking [to students] at his assembly on Friday, when
suddenly his condition changed [for the worse] and he fell from his chair. He
died on the next Friday. They say that he died in the year 289.235//86
230 923 C.E.
231 A city in Lower Iraq.
232 928 C.E.
233 This was done on the orders of Egypt’s ruler Ahmad b. Tulun (r. 254–270/868–884), who
was angered by al-Hammal’s criticism of his edicts.
234 That is, whether the saliva of the wild beasts is ritually pure or impure.
235 901 C.E.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 58
58 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Abu Hamza said: “Whosoever knows the path of God Most High will travel
on it easily and there is no better guide on the path to God than to follow in
the footsteps of the Messenger – may God bless and greet him – as regards his
spiritual conditions, actions and words.” Abu Hamza also said: “Any man can
stay away from evil deeds if [God] has endowed him with three things: an empty
stomach with a content heart, continual poverty with constant asceticism, and
continual patience with constant recollection [of God].”
Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Musa al-Wasiti236
He originally came from Khurasan, from the region of Farghana.237 He studied
with al-Junayd and al-Nuri. He was a great scholar. He resided in Marw, where
he died after 320.238
Al-Wasiti said: “Fear and hope are two reins that restrain the servant [of
God] from behaving improperly.” He said: “The quest of compensation for the
acts of obedience [to God] springs from the forgetfulness of [God’s] beneficence.”
Al-Wasiti said: “When God wants to disgrace His servant, He throws him into
this perversity and rotting corpses.” He meant the companionship of the youth.
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz al-Marwazi say: I heard al-Wasiti say: “They
have presented bad manners as sincerity, the greed of their souls as freedom
of action and their lowly aspirations as firmness of character. Through this they
have lost the true path and found themselves in a narrow spot. There is no life
in their [spiritual] visions, there is no piety in their speeches. Whenever they
utter a word, they reveal anger; when they make a public address, they show van-
ity. The impetuosity of their souls speaks about the perfidy of their inner selves,
and their voracious appetite for food testifies to the darkness of their hearts. God
assail them! How perverted they are!”239
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“A man from Marw once heard a pharmacist saying://87 ‘[One Friday] al-Wasiti
was passing by my store on the way to the cathedral mosque. Suddenly a strap
of his sandal broke. I told him: “Shaykh, would you allow me to repair your
sandal?” He said: “Go ahead, repair!” After I repaired the strap, he asked me:
“Do you know why the strap of my sandal was broken?” I said: “[No,] tell me!”
He said: “Because I did not wash myself for [the sake of] Friday.” I told him:
“My lord, here’s a bath. Do you want to use it?” He said yes. So I took him to
the bath and he washed himself.’”
236 On him see IM, pp. 100–101.
237 In present-day Uzbekistan.
238 932 C.E.
239 Q. 63:4 and 9:30.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 59
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 59
Abu πl-Hasan b. al-Saπigh
His name is ∏Ali b. Muhammad b. Sahl al-Dinawari. He resided in Egypt, where
he died. He was a great Sufi master. Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi said: “I have not
seen any Sufi master who was more enlightened than Abu Ya∏qub al-Nahrajuri;
nor did I see a Sufi master who was so full of awe of God as Abu πl-Hasan b.
al-Saπigh.” He died in the year 330.240
Someone asked Ibn al-Saπigh about providing a proof of an absent thing by
using a thing that is in evidence. He said: “How can one provide proof of Him
Who has no semblance or equal by using the attributes of those who have both
semblance and equals?!” Someone asked him about the characteristics of the Sufi
[novice]. He answered by quoting the words of God: “When the earth became
strait for them, for all its breadth, and their souls became strait for them.”241//88
He also said: “The spiritual states are like lightning. When they last, this is
nothing but self-deception and the prompting of one’s lower nature.”
Abu Ishaq Ibrahim b. Dawud al-Raqqi
He was a great Sufi master of Syria, who was a friend of al-Junayd and Ibn al-Jallaπ.
He lived a long life and died 326.242 Ibrahim al-Raqqi said: “Divine knowledge
is the assertion of God as He is and placing Him beyond whatever one might
imagine about Him.” He said: “[God’s] power is evident and the eyes of men
are open, yet the light of spiritual sights has grown dimmer.” He said: “The
weakest of people is he who cannot repel his passions and the strongest of people
is he who is capable of repelling them.” He also said: “A sign of love of God is
when you choose to obey Him and to follow in the footsteps of His Prophet – may
God bless and greet him.”
Mimshadh al-Dinawari
He was a great Sufi master. He died in 299.243 Mimshadh said: “The good
manners of the novice consist of obeying the commands of Sufi masters, serving
his brethren, abandoning everything except the essentials, and observing the
good manners prescribed by the Divine Law.” Mimshadh said://89 “I have
never entered into the presence of any of my Sufi masters without first divesting
myself of everything that is mine in order to partake of the blessings that are
imparted to me by seeing them and [listening to] their instructions. When
anyone enters into the presence of the master with something that is his own, he
will be cut off from the blessings of [the master’s] vision, admonition and
instruction.”
240 941 C.E.
241 Q. 9:118.
242 937 C.E.
243 911 C.E.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 60
60 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Khayr al-Nassaj
He studied with Abu Hamza al-Baghdadi, met al-Sari [al-Saqati] and was a
friend of Abu πl-Husayn al-Nuri. He lived a very long life. They say that he lived
one hundred and twenty years. Al-Shibli and [Ibrahim] al-Khawwas repented
during his preaching244 and he was the teacher of many others. They say that
his name was Muhammad b. Isma∏il. He came from Samarra.245 He was named
“Khayr al-Nassaj”246 after the following episode: He set out on a pilgrimage [to
Mecca]. [When he reached] the gate of Kufa, a man seized him and said: “You
are my slave! Your name is Khayr!” Khayr had a dark complexion. He did not
object to the man and the latter employed him as a weaver of silk. Whenever the
man called: “Khayr!”, he would respond: “At your service!” After a while, the man
told him: “I was mistaken. You are not my slave and your name is not Khayr!”
So he went away and left the man. He said: “I will not change the name that was
given to me by a Muslim.”
He said: “Fear is the whip of God by which he straightens the souls that have
grown accustomed to bad manners.” I heard Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami
– may God have mercy on him – say: I heard Abu πl-Hasan al-Qazwini say: I
heard Abu πl-Husayn al-Maliki say: I asked one of those who were present at
Khayr al-Nassaj’s deathbed about what happened to him. He answered: “When
it was the time for the sunset prayer, he lost consciousness. A few moments later
he opened his eyes and pointed toward the door of the house saying:247//90
‘Wait, may God protect you! Both you and I are servants, who take their orders
[from God]. What you are ordered to do will not elude you, whereas I shall miss
what I am ordered to do.’ So he called for water and performed an ablution for
the prayer. He then stretched himself [on the bed], closed his eyes, uttered the
shahada,248and passed away.”
Someone saw him in a dream and asked him: “What did God do to you?” He
answered: “Don’t ask me about this. [All I can say is that] I have finally found
rest from this filthy world of yours!”
Abu Hamza al-Khurasani
He was from Nishapur, from the quarter called Mulqabadh. He was a friend
of al-Junayd, [Abu Sa∏id] al-Kharraz and Abu Turab al-Nakhshabi. He was a
scrupulous and righteous man.
Abu Hamza said: “When someone is frightened by the reminder about
[approaching] death, he begins to love everything that is permanent and hate
everything that is transitory.” He said: “The [divine] gnostic strives to maintain
244 That is, they embraced the Sufi path.
245 A town on the east bank of the river Tigris in Iraq, approximately 80 miles north of Baghdad.
246 That is, “Khayr the Weaver”.
247 The context indicates that he was talking to the angel of death, ∏Izraπil.
248 That is, the ritual phrase “There is no deity but God and Muhammad is His messenger”.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 61
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 61
his life day by day, and he receives his livelihood day by day.”249A man asked him
for a piece of advice. [He answered]: “Prepare provisions for the journey that lies
before you.”250
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard Abu πl-Tayyib al-∏Akki say: I heard Abu πl-Hasan al-Misri say: I heard Abu
Hamza al-Khurasani say: “I wore a woolen cloak in a consecrated state. Thus,
year after year I travel a thousand farsakhs,251while the sun was rising and setting
on me. As soon as I left my consecrated state, I hurried to re-enter it again.”252
He died in the year 290.253
Abu Bakr Dulaf b. Jahdar al-Shibli254
He was born and raised in Baghdad, though his ancestors hailed from
Usrushana255//91. He studied with al-Junayd and his contemporaries, and was
[himself] a great master of his time in his spiritual state, acumen and knowledge. He adhered to the Maliki school of law. He lived eighty-seven years and died in
the year 334.256His grave is located in Baghdad. After al-Shibli had repented during a teaching assembly of Khayr al-Nassaj,
he came to Demavend257 and said: “I have been the ruler of your land. Now
discharge me [from my duties]!” At the beginning, his self-exertion [on the path
of God] had no limit. I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have
mercy on him – say: “I was told that he rubbed a lot of salt into his eyes to
prepare himself for night vigils. Therefore sleep never overtook him. The great
respect for the Divine Law that he showed on his death bed, as reported by
Bakran al-Dinawari, is an ample example [of his great piety]!”258
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy
on him – say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Baghdadi say: “At the end of his days
al-Shibli – may God have mercy on him – used to say:
249 A pun on the dual meaning of the Arabic word ∏aysh, which means both “life” and “livelihood”
(or “subsistence”).543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 60
60 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Khayr al-Nassaj
He studied with Abu Hamza al-Baghdadi, met al-Sari [al-Saqati] and was a
friend of Abu πl-Husayn al-Nuri. He lived a very long life. They say that he lived
one hundred and twenty years. Al-Shibli and [Ibrahim] al-Khawwas repented
during his preaching244 and he was the teacher of many others. They say that
his name was Muhammad b. Isma∏il. He came from Samarra.245 He was named
“Khayr al-Nassaj”246 after the following episode: He set out on a pilgrimage [to
Mecca]. [When he reached] the gate of Kufa, a man seized him and said: “You
are my slave! Your name is Khayr!” Khayr had a dark complexion. He did not
object to the man and the latter employed him as a weaver of silk. Whenever the
man called: “Khayr!”, he would respond: “At your service!” After a while, the man
told him: “I was mistaken. You are not my slave and your name is not Khayr!”
So he went away and left the man. He said: “I will not change the name that was
given to me by a Muslim.”
He said: “Fear is the whip of God by which he straightens the souls that have
grown accustomed to bad manners.” I heard Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami
– may God have mercy on him – say: I heard Abu πl-Hasan al-Qazwini say: I
heard Abu πl-Husayn al-Maliki say: I asked one of those who were present at
Khayr al-Nassaj’s deathbed about what happened to him. He answered: “When
it was the time for the sunset prayer, he lost consciousness. A few moments later
he opened his eyes and pointed toward the door of the house saying:247//90
‘Wait, may God protect you! Both you and I are servants, who take their orders
[from God]. What you are ordered to do will not elude you, whereas I shall miss
what I am ordered to do.’ So he called for water and performed an ablution for
the prayer. He then stretched himself [on the bed], closed his eyes, uttered the
shahada,248and passed away.”
Someone saw him in a dream and asked him: “What did God do to you?” He
answered: “Don’t ask me about this. [All I can say is that] I have finally found
rest from this filthy world of yours!”
Abu Hamza al-Khurasani
He was from Nishapur, from the quarter called Mulqabadh. He was a friend
of al-Junayd, [Abu Sa∏id] al-Kharraz and Abu Turab al-Nakhshabi. He was a
scrupulous and righteous man.
Abu Hamza said: “When someone is frightened by the reminder about
[approaching] death, he begins to love everything that is permanent and hate
everything that is transitory.” He said: “The [divine] gnostic strives to maintain
244 That is, they embraced the Sufi path.
245 A town on the east bank of the river Tigris in Iraq, approximately 80 miles north of Baghdad.
246 That is, “Khayr the Weaver”.
247 The context indicates that he was talking to the angel of death, ∏Izraπil.
248 That is, the ritual phrase “There is no deity but God and Muhammad is His messenger”.

Therefore sleep never overtook him. The great
respect for the Divine Law that he showed on his death bed, as reported by
Bakran al-Dinawari, is an ample example [of his great piety]!”258
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy
on him – say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Baghdadi say: “At the end of his days
al-Shibli – may God have mercy on him – used to say:
249 A pun on the dual meaning of the Arabic word ∏aysh, which means both “life” and “livelihood”
(or “subsistence”). Many Sufi masters insisted that a Sufi should earn enough for one day
only and set nothing aside for tomorrow. 250 That is, get ready for the inevitable death and the last judgement. 251 The distance that is covered by a mounted traveler within an hour of journey at a regular pace
(approximately three miles). 252 This saying refers to the practice of consecrating oneself before setting out on a pilgrimage
to Mecca (ihram). Whereas ordinary pilgrims enter the ihram only for the duration of the
pilgrimage, Abu Hamza claims to have maintained it continuously. 253 902 C.E. 254 On him see IM, pp. 64–66. 255 A province in Transoxiana. 256 946 C.E. 257 A province in Iran. 258 The story in question describes the last minutes of al-Shibli’s life. Before he died, he confessed
that he had once given as alms a dirhamthat he had found in the market, which was his only sin. When Bakran, who performed the last rites on him, neglected to wash his beard al-Shibli, already
in coma, grabbed him by the hand and guided it to the beard. See al-Sarraj, al-Luma∏, p. 210.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 62
62 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
There are so many [dangerous] places [in this life] that were I to perish
in any of them,
I would be a stern warning for the rest of the family.”259
During the month of Ramadan, al-Shibli used to exert himself more than any
of his contemporaries. He said: “My Lord has revered this month and I am the
first [of my fellow human beings] to glorify it!”//92 I heard the master Abu ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq recount this story.
Abu Muhammad ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad al-Murta∏ish
He came from Nishapur, from the quarter called al-Hira, although some say
that he came from Mulqabadh. He studied with Abu Hafs [al-Haddad] and Abu
∏Uthman [al-Hiri].260 He was a great man. He used to stay at the Shuniziyya
mosque.261He died in Baghdad in the year 328.262
Al-Murta∏ish said: “Desire [of God] is restraining [your] soul from what
it desires, turning [your] full attention to the commands of God Most High,
and satisfaction with what [God] has predetermined for you.” He was told that
someone can walk on water. He answered: “For me, the person whom God has
enabled to resist his passions is far greater than the one who can walk on air.”
Abu ∏Ali Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Rudhbari
He was born in Baghdad and lived in Egypt, where he died in 322.263He studied
with al-Junayd, al-Nuri, Ibn al-Jallaπ and [the Sufis of that] generation. He was
one of the cleverest [Sufi] masters who had profound knowledge of the Sufi path.
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy
on him – say: I heard Abu πl-Qasim al-Dimashqi say: Someone asked Abu ∏Ali
al-Rudhbari about a man who liked listening to music and who used to say://93
“This is permitted for me, because I have attained such a degree [of perfection]
that any change in my internal state no longer has any influence on me.”
[Al-Rudhbari] answered: “Yes, he has attained. But he has attained hellfire!”
Someone asked him about Sufism. He answered: “This teaching is serious
through and through. Do not mix it up with any amusement!”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say: “One sign of
delusion is that God treats you well, although you commit sins. You then begin
to forsake repentance and remorse as you fancy that [God] will pardon your
transgressions and consider this to be God’s lenience toward you.” He said: “My
259 That is, for the rest of mankind.
260 On them see notes 126 and 163.
261 That is, a mosque located near the al-Shuniziyya cemetery of Baghdad.
262 939 C.E.
263 933 C.E.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 63
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 63
teacher of Sufism was al-Junayd; my teacher of jurisprudence was Abu πl-∏Abbas b.
Surayj,264my teacher of polite literature was Tha∏lab265and my teacher of prophetic
reports was Ibrahim al-Harbi.”266
Abu Muhammad ∏Abdallah b. Munazil
He was a master of the malamatiyya,267who was unique in his age. He studied with
Hamdun al-Qassar. He was a [great] scholar, who wrote down many prophetic
reports. He died at Nishapur in the year 329 or 330.268
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard ∏Abdallah al-Mu∏allim say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Munazil say: “He who
neglects a religious duty will inevitably be tested by God Most High, who will
cause him to neglect the Prophet’s custom; and as soon as one has been tested
by neglecting the Prophet’s custom, he will also be tested by a [reprehensible]
innovation.”269
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Abu Ahmad b.
∏Isa say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Munazil say: “Your best moments are when you are
safe from the promptings of your [lower] soul and when [your] neighbors are safe
from your thinking ill [of them].”//94
Abu ∏Ali Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-Wahhab al-Thaqafi
He was a great religious leader of his age. He studied with Abu Hafs [al-Haddad]
and Hamdun al-Qassar. It was during his lifetime that Sufism appeared in
Nishapur. He died in 328.270
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I
heard Abu ∏Ali al-Thaqafi say: “If someone could absorb all the sciences and
keep the company of many different people, he would still be unable to attain the
rank of the real men271unless he engages in [ascetic] exercises under the supervision
of a [Sufi] master, a religious leader or a sincere preacher. If someone has not
learned his manners from a teacher who has shown him the faults of his works
and the flippancy of his soul, you must not follow his example in rectifying [your
own] works.”
Abu ∏Ali – may God have mercy on him – said: “There will come a time
when life will not be happy for any man in this community unless he seeks the
264 A famous legal scholar of Baghdad, who was the head of the Shafi∏i school of law in his age;
he died 306/918. See “Ibn Suraydj” in EI.
265 A famous grammarian of Kufa, who died in 291/904.
266 A famous traditionalist and man of letters, who died in 285/898. See “Ibrahim al-Harbi” in EI.
267 See above note 126.
268 940 or 941 C.E.
269 Many Muslim scholars saw any innovation that was not attested by the Prophet’s custom as
a grave sin.
270 939 C.E.
271 That is, educated Sufi masters.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 64
64 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
support of a hypocrite.” He also said: “Say fie to the good things of this life,
when it treats you well and fie to the losses [that you suffer] in it, when it turns
its back on you. An intelligent man will never put his trust in something that
treats you well one moment and turns its back on you the next.”
Abu πl-Khayr al-Aqta∏
He was of Maghribi background and resided at Taynat.272He had many miracles
and possessed [the gift of] clairvoyance.//95 He was a man of great stature. He
died around the year 340.273
Abu πl-Khayr said: “No-one can achieve a noble [spiritual] state unless he
always complies [with God’s will],274 embraces good manners, fulfills all the
religious duties and keeps the company of the righteous.”
Abu Bakr Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Kattani
He came from Baghdad and studied with al-Junayd, al-Kharraz and al-Nuri. He
resided in Mecca until he died in the year 322.275
I heard that Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy
on him – said: I heard that Abu Bakr al-Razi said: “Al-Kattani saw an old man
with white hair and white beard begging among people. He said: ‘This is a man
who neglected the rights of God in his youth, therefore God neglected him in his
old age.’ Al-Kattani said: ‘Passion is the rein of Satan. Whosoever takes Satan’s
rein in his hand, inevitably becomes his slave.’”
Abu Ya∏qub Ishaq b. Muhammad al-Nahrajuri
He studied with ∏Amr al-Makki, Abu Ya∏qub al-Susi, al-Junayd and others.//96
He died in Mecca, where he resided for some time, in the year 300.276
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu πl-Husayn Ahmad b. ∏Ali
say: I heard al-Nahrajuri say: “This world is a sea and the next world is a coast.
The ship is fear of God, and all people are a party of seafarers.”
I heard that Muhammad b. al-Husayn said: I heard that Abu Bakr al-Razi said:
I heard that al-Nahrajuri said: “Once I saw a one-eyed man circumambulating
the Ka∏ba. He was saying: ‘I take refuge from you by you!’ I asked him what kind
of prayer that was. He answered: ‘One day I looked at a [handsome] person and
took a liking to him. All of a sudden, there was a blow on my eye and it popped
out. I heard a voice saying: ‘A blow for each look; if you do it again, I’ll do it to
you again too!’”
272 A village in Syria.
273 951 C.E.
274 As expressed in the Qurπan and the Prophet’s custom.
275 933 C.E.
276 912 C.E.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 65
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 65
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Ahmad b. ∏Ali say: I heard
al-Nahrajuri say: “The best of all [spiritual] states is one that agrees with the
knowledge [of the Divine Law].”
Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Muhammad al-Muzayyin
He came from Baghdad. He studied with Sahl b. ∏Abdallah al-Tustari, al-Junayd
and [the Sufis of their] generation. He died in Mecca, where he resided, in the
year 328.277He was famous for his scrupulous piety.//97
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Abu Bakr
al-Razi say: I heard al-Muzayyin say: “A sin that follows an [earlier] sin is the
punishment for the previous sin. A good deed that follows an [earlier] good deed
is the reward for the previous good deed.” Someone asked al-Muzayyin about
God’s oneness. He answered: “When you know that the attributes of the Most
High are distinct from the attributes of His creatures. He is different from them
in His attributes due to [His] eternity, whereas they differ from Him in their
attributes due to their creaturely nature.” He also said: “If someone is not fully
satisfied with God, God will make him dependent on His creatures; and if someone
is fully satisfied with God, God will make His creatures dependent on him.”
Abu ∏Ali b. al-Katib
His name is al-Hasan b. Ahmad. He studied with Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari, Abu Bakr
al-Misri and others. He was a person of great stature. He died around the year
340.278Ibn al-Katib said: “When fear [of God] settles down in the heart, the tongue
begins to utter only things that it really means.” Ibn al-Katib said://98 “The
Mu∏tazilites279 have stripped God of creaturely attributes with the help of the
intellect and erred. The Sufis, on the other hand, have stripped God of creaturely
attributes with the help of the knowledge [of the Divine Law] and hit the mark.”
Muzaffar al-Qirmisini
He was a [Sufi] master from the mountain.280 He studied with Abu Sa∏id
al-Kharraz and others.
Muzaffar al-Qirmisini said: “There are three types of fasting. The fasting of
the spirit, which is to curtail one’s hope; the fasting of the intellect, which is to
resist one’s passions; and the fasting of the soul, which is to restrain oneself from
food and prohibited things.” Muzaffar said: “The worst kind of attachment is
277 939 C.E.
278 950 C.E.
279 A school of Islamic theology that stressed a rational approach to the Muslim Revelation. They
presented God as an absolutely transcendent entity of which no positive judgement can be
made, because that would result in likening Him to His creatures. See “Mu∏tazila” in EI.
280 According to some commentators, this is Mount Qasyun at the outskirts of Damascus
(presently within the city limit).543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 66
66 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
attachment to women in whatever form!” He said: “When hunger is supported
by contentment, it becomes a [fertile] field for [pious] thoughts, a spring of
wisdom, the revival of prudence, and the lamp of the heart.” He said: “The best
of the servants’ deeds is when [they] protect their moments – that is, they do
not fall short in anything, nor do they go beyond a set limit.” He also said: “If
someone has not learned his good manners from a wise man, then a novice
should not study with him.”
Abu Bakr ∏Abdallah b. Tahir al-Abhari
He was a friend of al-Shibli and one of the [Sufi] masters of the mountain.281He
was learned and pious. He studied with Yusuf b. al-Husayn and others.//99 He
died around the year 330.282
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Mansur b.
∏Abdallah say: I heard Abu Bakr b. Tahir say: “The poor283must have no desire.
If, however, it is unavoidable, then his desire should not exceed his [minimal]
subsistence” – that is, what he requires to live. According to the same chain of
transmission, he also said: “When I love a brother in God, I try to deal with him
as little as possible in this world.”
Abu πl-Husayn b. Bunan
He studied with Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz. He was a great [Sufi] master of Egypt.
Ibn Bunan said: “If concern for livelihood has settled down in a Sufi’s heart, he
should preoccupy himself with [pious] works, for this would bring him closer to
God. A sign of his heart’s reliance on God is that he is more sure about what is
in the hands of God than about what is in his own hands.” He also said: “Keep
away from base morals as you keep away from the things that are prohibited [by
the Divine Law].”
Abu Ishaq Ibrahim b. Shayban al-Qirmisini
He was the greatest [Sufi] master of his age. He studied with Abu ∏Abdallah
al-Maghribi, [Ibrahim] al-Khawwas and others. I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn
say: I heard Abu Zayd al-Marwazi al-Faqih say: I heard Ibrahim b. Shayban say:
“If someone aspires to laziness and idleness, he should practice dispensations.”284
According to the same chain of transmitters, he said: “The knowledge of self-
annihilation [in God] and subsistence [in God]285turns on the sincere profession
281 See the previous note.
282 941 C.E.
283 That is, the Sufi master.
284 That is, dispensations from some of the severer Sufi requirements that were seen as legitimate
by some Sufi masters, yet were looked down upon by the more stern Sufi shaykhs. For details
see IM, pp. 194–195.
285 On these notions see “Bakaπ wa-fanaπ” in EI.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 67
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 67
of [the doctrine of] Divine oneness and a true worship of God. The rest is
[Devil’s] snares and heresy.”
Ibrahim also said: “The lowly rabble are those who disobey God – may He
be great and exalted.”
Abu Bakr al-Husayn b. ∏Ali b. Yazdanyar
He came from Urmiya.286 He practiced a method of Sufism that was peculiar
to him and he was learned and pious. He reproached some gnostics287 for the
pronouncements and statements that they had made.
Ibn Yazdanyar said: “Don’t try to achieve intimacy with God if you love
intimacy with people. Don’t try to love God if you like to concern yourself with
things that should not concern you. Don’t strive to obtain a [high] rank in the
eyes of God if you love a [high] rank in the eyes of people.”
Abu Sa∏id b. al-A∏rabi
His name is Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Ziyad b. Bishr. He resided at the Holy
Sanctuary,288 where he died in the year 341.289 He studied with al-Junayd, ∏Amr
b. ∏Uthman al-Makki, al-Nuri and others.
Ibn al-A∏rabi said: “The greatest losers are those who show only their good
works to people, for He Who is ‘nearer to him [man] than the jugular vein’290will
expose evil deeds [anyway].”
Abu ∏Amr Muhammad b. Ibrahim al-Zajjaji al-Naysaburi
He resided in Mecca for a long time and died there. He studied with al-Junayd,
Abu ∏Uthman [al-Hiri], al-Nuri, [Ibrahim] al-Khawwas and Ruwaym [b. Ahmad].
He died in the year 348.291
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard my grandfather Abu ∏Amr b. Nujayd say: “Someone asked
Abu ∏Amr al-Zajjaji: ‘How come that you lose control each time you utter [the
phrase] “God is the greatest” at the time of the ritual prayer?’ He answered:
‘Because I fear that I may open my ritual prayer with something other than
sincerity. When someone says: “God is the greatest”, whereas in his heart there
is something that he considers to be greater than God or when, at some point in
time, he held something to be greater than God, then he has declared himself to
be a liar by his own tongue.’” He said: “When someone speaks about a [spiritual]
state that he has not yet attained, his words are a temptation for those who listen
286 According to an alternative reading, he was a native of Armenia.
287 Some manuscripts have “Iraqis” instead of “gnostics”.
288 That is, in Mecca.
289 952 C.E.
290 Q. 50:16.
291 939 C.E.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 68
68 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
to him and an empty claim. [Furthermore,] God will not allow him to attain this
state.”
He lived in Mecca for many years, yet he never performed his ritual ablutions
in the sanctuary. Rather he would go to some place [outside the sanctuary] and
perform his ablutions there.292
Abu Muhammad Ja∏far b. Muhammad b. Nusayr
He was born and raised in Baghdad. He studied with al-Junayd and associated
himself with his circle. He also studied with al-Nuri, Ruwaym, Samnun and
other [Sufis] of that generation. He died in Baghdad in the year 348.293
Ja∏far said: “The servant [of God] cannot mix the pleasure of dealing with
God with the pleasure of his animal soul. That is why the men of the true realities
cut all mundane ties which cut them from God, before these ties can cut them
from God.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b.
Shadhan say: I heard that Ja∏far said: “Before the servant [of God] can attain
[the state of] direct encounter with God, the fear of God must install itself in his
heart. When the fear of God has installed itself in his heart, the blessing of the
knowledge [of the Divine Law] will descend upon it and the desire of this world
will disappear from it.”
Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Sayyari
His name is al-Qasim b. al-Qasim. He came from Marw. He studied with [Abu
Bakr] al-Wasiti and followed [his method] in regard to the sciences of this [Sufi]
community. He was a [famous] scholar. He died in the year 342.294
Someone asked Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Sayyari how the [Sufi] novice should control
himself. He answered: “By patiently fulfilling [God’s] commands, avoiding
that which [God] prohibited, keeping the company of the righteous and serving
the poor.” He also said: “The intelligent man finds no pleasure whatsoever
in contemplating God, because the contemplation of God leads to [his] self-
annihilation295[in God], and there is no pleasure in this.”
Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Dawud al-Dinawari
He was known as “al-Duqqi”. He resided in Syria and he lived more than one
hundred years. He died in Damascus after 350.296 He studied with Ibn al-Jallaπ
and al-Zaqqaq.
292 He did so out of reverence for the holiness of the Meccan sanctuary.
293 959 C.E.
294 953 C.E.
295 See note 285.
296 961 C.E.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 69
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 69
Abu Bakr al-Duqqi said: “The stomach is where [all kinds of] food are
gathered. If you put there a pure food, your members will engage only in pious
deeds. If you put there a [food of] uncertain origin, your progress along the path
to God will become uncertain. When you put there an unlawfully obtained food,
a veil will appear between you and God’s command.”
Abu Muhammad ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad al-Razi
He was born and raised in Nishapur. He studied with Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri,
al-Junayd, Yusuf b. al-Husayn, Ruwaym [b. Ahmad], Samnun [al-Muhibb] and
others. He died in the year 353.297
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard ∏Abdallah al-Razi say: Someone asked [∏Abdallah al-Razi] why people
know their faults, yet do not correct them. He answered: “Because they busy
themselves with competing with one another in [the superiority of their] knowledge
[of the Divine Law] and yet they do not put their knowledge to use. They busy
themselves with the externals, instead of busying themselves with improving
their internal natures. Therefore God has made their hearts blind and prevented
their limbs from performing the acts of worship.”
Abu ∏Amr Isma∏il b. Nujayd
He studied with Abu ∏Uthman [al-Hiri] and met al-Junayd. He was a man of
great stature and the last of Abu ∏Uthman’s disciples to die. He died at Mecca in
the year 366.298
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy
on him – say: I heard my grandfather Abu ∏Amr b. Nujayd say: “If a spiritual
state does not spring from the knowledge [of the Divine Law], it brings harm
rather than benefit to its possessor.” [Al-Sulami] said: I also heard that he said:
“If someone has neglected to perform a religious duty imposed upon him by
God, he will be deprived of the pleasure of [performing] this duty at some
point.”
Someone asked him what Sufism is. He answered: “Patience under [God’s]
commands and prohibitions.” [Al-Sulami] said: [Ibn Nujayd] said: “One of the
servant’s worst afflictions is his satisfaction with what he has achieved.”
Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Ahmad b. Sahl al-Bushanji
He was one of those men of Khurasan who practiced chivalry. He met Abu
∏Uthman [al-Hiri], Ibn ∏Ataπ [al-Adami], al-Jurayri and Abu ∏Amr al-Dimashqi.
He died in 348.299
297 964 C.E.
298 976 C.E.
299 959 C.E.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 70
70 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Someone asked al-Bushanji what [true] manliness is.300 He answered//106:
“When you relinquish things that [God] prohibited to you in the presence of
the noble writing angels.”301 Someone asked him: “Pray to God on my behalf.”
He said: “May God protect you from your [own] temptation!” He also said:
“The beginning of faith is linked to its end.”302
Abu ∏Abdallah Muhammad b. Khafif al-Shirazi303
He studied with Ruwaym [b. Ahmad], al-Jurayri, Ibn ∏Ataπ [al-Adami] and others.
He died in the year 371.304 He was a great [Sufi] master who was unique in his
epoch.
Ibn Khafif said: “[Spiritual] aspiration [to God]305 is constant toil and the
forsaking of rest.” He said: “Nothing is more dangerous for the [Sufi] novice than
to allow himself to rely on dispensations306and to accept allegorical interpretations
[of the Scripture].” Someone asked him about nearness to God. He answered:
“It is when you are getting near to Him by complying [with His will], whereas He
is getting near to you by constantly granting you success [in your undertakings].”
I heard Abu ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah b. Khafif
say: “During my early days [as a Sufi] I used to recite the phrase ‘He is God,
One’307 ten thousand times [as I was performing] any one part of the ritual
prayer. Sometimes I recited the entire Qurπan during each part of the prayer, and
sometimes I performed one thousand prayers between the early morning and the
late afternoon.”
I heard Abu ∏Abdallah b. Bakuya al-Shirazi – may God have mercy on him
– say: I heard Abu Ahmad the Junior (al-Saghir) say: “Once a beggar came up
[to us] and said to the master Abu ∏Abdallah b. Khafif: ‘I hear [Satan’s] whisper!’
The master told him: ‘I am accustomed to the Sufis making mockery of Satan.
However, this time Satan is making mockery of them!’”
I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Karkhi say: I heard that Abu ∏Abdallah b. Khafif
said: “When I became too frail to perform my supererogatory prayers standing
upright, I began to perform each part of the prayer twice in the sitting position.
For a report from the Prophet says: ‘The prayer of the sitting one is a half of the
prayer of the standing one.’”
300 Manliness was part of the chivalry code practiced by some young men in Khurasan.
301 That is, the angels who record all of man’s deeds; cf. Q. 82:11 “There are over you watchers
noble, writers who know whatever you do.”
302 For a longer version of this statement that links it to Q. 98:5, see al-Sulami, Tabaqat, p. 484.
The idea is to emphasize that a declaration of faith must be subsequently supported by the
meticulous fulfillment of the requirements of the Divine Law.
303 On him see IM, “Index” under “Ibn Khafif”.
304 982 C.E.
305 Ibn Khafif is referring here to the progress of the novice along the Sufi path.
306 See note 205.
307 Q. 112:1.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 71
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 71
Abu πl-Husayn Bundar b. al-Husayn al-Shirazi
He was an expert on the fundamentals [of jurisprudence] and possessor of a great
[spiritual] state. He studied with al-Shibli and died in Arrajan308in the year 353.309
Bundar b. al-Husayn said: “Do not oppose your soul. Leave it to its
[true] Master and He will do with it what He wants!” Bundar said: “Keeping the
company of the innovators leads to turning one’s back on God.” Bundar said://108
“Abandon the dictates of your passions for the sake of your hopes.”310
Abu Bakr al-Tamastani
He studied with Ibrahim al-Dabbagh and others. He was unique in his age in his
knowledge and [spiritual] state. He died in Nishapur after the year 340.311
Abu Bakr al-Tamastani said: “The greatest bliss is when you leave behind
your soul, for the soul is the thickest veil between you and God.” I heard Abu
∏Abdallah al-Shirazi – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard Mansur b.
∏Abdallah al-Isbahani say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Tamastani say: “As soon as the
heart has become preoccupied [with something other than God], it is punished.”
He also said: “The path is clear and the [Holy] Book and the Prophet’s custom
are among us. The merit of the Companions [of the Prophet] is well known due
to the fact that they emigrated [with the Prophet]312 and accompanied him.
Those of us who have chosen as their companions the [Holy] Book and the
Prophet’s custom, and who have emigrated with their hearts from their souls and
from the creatures to God’s presence, are the veracious ones who have thereby
achieved their goals.”
Abu πl-∏Abbas Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Dinawari
He studied with Yusuf b. al-Husayn, Ibn ∏Ataπ and al-Jurayri. He was a great and
distinguished scholar. He came to Nishapur and stayed there for a while. He was
preaching to its people and spoke to them in the language of [divine] gnosis.
Thereupon he left for Samarqand, where he died after the year 340.313
Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Dinawari said: “The most simple [type of] recollection
[of God] is when you forget everything but Him and the ultimate recollection
is when the one who recollects [God] forgets his recollection in the process of
recollection.”//109 Abu πl-∏Abbas said: “The tongue of one’s outward state does
not change what is inside [one’s heart].”314 Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Dinawari also said:
“They have demolished the pillars of Sufism and destroyed its path. They have
308 A town in the province of Fars in Iran.
309 964 C.E.
310 That is, salvation.
311 951 C.E.
312 From Mecca to Medina, where the Prophet established the first Muslim community.
313 951 C.E.
314 That is, one’s outward state reflects one’s inward state.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 72
72 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
changed its meanings by giving them new names. They dub desire ‘increase’, bad
manners ‘sincerity’, the abandoning of truth ‘ecstatic utterance’,315the enjoyment
of what is blameworthy ‘bliss’, the following of one’s passions ‘temptation’, the
embrace of this world ‘arrival’, amorality ‘determination’, stinginess ‘perseverance’,
begging ‘good works’, and idle talk ‘incurring blame [upon oneself]’. However,
this was not the way of the folk316[in the past].”
Abu ∏Uthman Sa∏id b. Sallam al-Maghribi
He was the only one of his kind in his epoch. No one before him had similar
qualities. He studied with Ibn al-Katib, Habib al-Maghribi, Abu ∏Amr al-Zajjaji,
Ibn al-Saπigh and others. He died in Nishapur in the year 373.317[Before he died,]
he asked that the imam Abu Bakr b. Furak318pray over his body.
I heard the teacher Abu Bakr b. Furak say: “I was in Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi’s
house before he died. ∏Ali al-Qawwal the Junior was reciting something. When
his [Abu ∏Uthman’s] condition changed for the worse, we told ∏Ali to keep
silence. At this point, Shaykh Abu ∏Uthman opened his eyes and asked why ∏Ali
was not reciting anything. I told one of those who were there, ‘Ask him, what
does he hear?’ For I myself was ashamed of asking him about this while he was
in such a state. They asked him and he answered://110 ‘He hears only what
[God] allows him to hear.’”319
He distinguished himself as a practitioner of strict self-discipline. Abu ∏Uthman
said: “Fear of God is when one stops at the limits [set by God] without either
falling short [keeping back] or overstepping them.” He also said: “If you prefer
the company of the rich to the company of the poor, God will punish you by the
death of the heart.”
Abu πl-Qasim Ibrahim b. Muhammad al-Nasrabadhi320
He was the [greatest Sufi] master of Khurasan in his age. He studied with
al-Shibli, Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari and al-Murta∏ish. He settled in Mecca in the year
366321and died there in 367.322He was an expert on hadithand transmitted many
[of them].
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard al-Nasrabadhi say: “When you catch a glimpse of the Divine
Truth, allow neither Paradise nor the hellfire to distract you from it. And when
315 For this notion see Ernst, Words of Ecstasy.
316 Al-qawm; that is, the Sufis.
317 983 C.E.
318 On him see article “Ibn Furak”in EI.
319 That is, he hears only what his overall spiritual condition in the eyes of God permits him to
hear.
320 On him see IM, pp. 130 and 138.
321 976 C.E.
322 977 C.E.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 73
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 73
you have returned from this state, honor that which God has [commanded] to
honor!”//111 I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: Someone told al-Nasrabadhi
that there was a [certain] man, who keeps company with women, saying: “I am
protected by God from sinful thought whenever I watch them.” He answered:
“As long as there is at least a semblance of the human body, there remains
[God’s] command and prohibition, and man is told to comply with what was
commanded and what was prohibited to him. And he who encourages the
ambiguous, will eventually be exposed to the prohibited.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say:
al-Nasrabadhi said: “The root of Sufism is to hold onto the [Holy] Book and the
custom [of the Prophet], to abandon passions and innovations, to show respect
for the [Sufi] masters, to seek excuses for [God’s] creatures, to constantly repeat
prayers, and to avoid dispensations from obligatory requirements and allegorical
interpretations.”
Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Ibrahim al-Husri al-Basri323
He resided in Baghdad. Renowned for his [exalted] spiritual state and eloquence,
he was the Sufi master of his age. He belonged to the circle of al-Shibli. He died
in Baghdad in the year 371.324
Al-Husri said: “Some people say that al-Husri makes no mention of
supererogatory acts. Yet, I have been reciting [supererogatory] litanies since my
youth, so that whenever I neglect just one bow during the prayer, I am punished.”
He also said: “If someone lays false claims to the [mystical] reality, his lie will be
exposed when the irrefutable divine proofs are revealed.”325
Abu ∏Abdallah Ahmad b. ∏Ataπ al-Rudhbari
He was a son of Shaykh Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari’s sister. He was the greatest master
of Syria in his age. He died in Tyre326in 369.327//112
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Ali b. Sa∏id al-Massisi say: I
heard Ahmad b. ∏Ataπ al-Rudhbari say: “As I was riding a camel, its foot sank
into the sand. I said: ‘God is great!’ Then the camel also said: ‘God is great!’”
Whenever Abu ∏Abdallah al-Rudhbari and his companions were invited to a
house of the common people or non-Sufi folk, he would not tell the poor328about
this. He would first host them in his house and feed them. After they had
eaten, he would tell them about the invitation and they would go together to that
place. By that time they would be so well fed that they would not touch the food
323 In some editions of the Epistlehis name is spelled “al-Baqri”.
324 981 C.E.
325 That is, on the Day of Judgement.
326 A city in southern Lebanon.
327 980 C.E.
328 That is, his Sufi companions.543 Epistle 03 Chapter 1 21/12/06 12:13 PM Page 74
74 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
prepared for them except a little. He did this so that the common people would
not think ill of this [Sufi] community nor commit sins because of them.
It is said that once Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari walked behind the poor, because
it was his wont to do so. As they were on their way to a dinner at somebody’s
house, a grocer shouted at them: “Look at these transgressors!” And he started
to berate them, saying among other things the following: “One of them borrowed
one hundred dirhams from me and never returned them to me. Where can I
find him now?” When they entered the house to which they were invited Abu
∏Abdallah al-Rudhbari said to the host, who was an admirer of the Sufi folk: “If
you want my heart to be at ease, lend me one hundred dirhams.” The host gave
them to him immediately. [Abu ∏Abdallah] then said to one of his companions:
“Take this hundred [dirhams] to such-and-such grocer and tell him that this is
the money that one of us borrowed from him. There was an excuse for his not
returning it on time, but he has finally sent it to you, so accept his apology!” The
man went away and did [as Abu ∏Abdallah told him]. As they were returning
from the dinner, they passed by the grocer’s store. On seeing them the grocer
began to praise them, saying: “They are trustworthy people who keep their
promises, they are the righteous!” and suchlike things.//113
Abu ∏Abdallah once said: “The most repugnant creature is a greedy Sufi.”
Conclusion
The imam and master Abu πl-Qasim – may God be pleased with him – said: Here
I have mentioned some of the masters of this [Sufi] community in order to
show that all of them have a great respect for the Divine Law, that they are
committed to the paths of spiritual [self-]discipline, that they follow unswervingly
the Prophet’s custom and that they never neglect a single religious rule. They
all agree that whoever is remiss in the rules of proper conduct or in striving for
perfection and does not build his life on scrupulous piety and fear of God lies
before God in whatever he claims. Such a person is deluded. Not only has he
perished himself, but also he has caused to perish those who were deluded by his
lies.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 75
Chapter 2
AN EXPLANATION OF THE EXPRESSIONS USED BY THIS
[SUFI] COMMUNITY AND OF THEIR DIFFICULTIES
It is well known that each group of scholars has its own terms which it employs
within itself. These terms are unique to each group, which has agreed on them
for its purposes, namely (1) to bring these terms closer to the understanding of
those to whom they are addressed, and (2) by articulating them, to help the people
of this art to better comprehend their meaning.
The people of this community1 use these terms among themselves with the
goal of unveiling their meaning to one another, achieving concision and concealing
them from those who disagree with their method, so that the meaning of their
words would be hidden from outsiders. They have done so to protect their
mysteries from being spread among those to whom they do not belong. For
their realities cannot be assembled by self-exertion or acquired by any deliberate
action. They are nothing but [subtle] meanings that God deposits directly into
the hearts of [His] folk,2 [after He has] prepared their innermost selves for [the
reception of] these realities.
By this explanation we intend to facilitate the understanding of the meaning
of these terms by those who want to follow their [Sufi] path and their custom.
The [mystical] moment (waqt)3
According to those who have fully realized the true meaning of things,4 the
moment is an expected event whose occurrence depends on a real event. [In
other words,] the real event is a moment for the expected event. When you say:
“I shall come at the beginning of the month”, [your act of] coming is expected,5
whereas the beginning of the month is real.6 Thus, the beginning of the month
is the moment for [your] coming.
I heard that the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him
– said: “The moment is what you are in [now]. If you are in this world, then your
moment is this world. If you are in the Hereafter, then your moment is the
Hereafter. If you are in joy, then your moment is joy. If you are in sorrow, then
your moment is sorrow.” By this he meant that a moment is a state that dominates
a person.
1 That is, the Sufis.
2 That is, the Sufis.
3 The usual meaning of this word is “time”. Our translation of the term is determined by its
usage in Sufi discourses.
4 Ahl al-tahqiq, lit. “truth-realizers”, or “verifiers”.
5 Because it exists only in your plans.
6 Because it exists independent of your volition.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 76
76 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Sometimes by the moment one means the time in which one finds oneself.
Others say that the moment is something that lies between two times – that is,
the past and the future.
The Sufis say: “The Sufi is the son of his moment.” They mean that he
engages in the worship//115 that is most appropriate for his current situation
and performs what is required of him at this moment in time. It is said that
the poor man7does not care about his past or future. All that matters for him is
the moment in which he is now. Therefore, they say: “Anyone who preoccupies
himself with the past moment wastes another moment.”
Sometimes, by the moment the Sufis mean the fulfillment of God’s will with
regard to them, when they cannot choose any action for themselves [of their free
will]. They say: “Someone is under the command of the moment”, meaning that
he has surrendered to the workings of the unseen,8 exercising no free choice of
his own. This applies only to those things that are not imposed on believers by
God or which He requires of them in accordance with the Divine Law. For when
you neglect a divine command, or abandon what is prescribed for you by [God],
or pay no attention to your shortcomings [in complying with God’s will], then
you have simply departed from your religion.
They say: “The moment is a sword”, meaning that in the same way as the
sword cuts [through things], the moment is the [unavoidable] fulfillment of what
God has determined and brought to pass. It is also said that the sword is gentle
to the touch, yet its edge cuts. He who treats it gently survives, whereas he who
resists it will be destroyed. The same is true of the moment. Whosoever surrenders
to its command survives, and whosoever resists it is thrown down and falls on his
face. They recite the following verse about this:
As if it were a sword, when you treat it gently, it is gentle to your touch,
While its edges are harsh, when you treat it harshly.
If someone is assisted by the moment, then this moment becomes [his] moment,
but if one is at odds with the moment, then this moment becomes [his] affliction.
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “The moment is like a file: it
grinds you down, yet it does not erase you completely.” He meant the following:
If it obliterates and annihilates you, you would be saved at the very moment you
have become annihilated [from yourself]. However, it takes just a part of you,
without erasing you completely. To this effect he recited the following verse:
Each passing day takes some part of me
It bestows regrets upon my heart, then goes away.
He also recited:
7 That is, the Sufi.
8 That is, divine predestination.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 77
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 77
As with the inhabitants of Hell: when their skin has been burned
completely,
New skins are given to them [to renew] their torments.//116
And to a similar effect:
Dead he is not, who, in his death, has found repose.
But dead is he, who is dead among the living.
Clever is he who has come under the command of his moment. If his moment is
sobriety, he follows closely the Divine Law; but if his moment is annihilation [in
God], he comes under the command of the True Reality.9
The [mystical] station (maqam)10
The station is the good manners which the servant of God realizes after he
has entered it.11 He can arrive at it by means of his own actions, by fulfilling its
requirements through [concerted] effort and self-imposed strictures in worshiping
[God]. A person’s station is where he stands in terms of all of this as well as in
terms of [acts of] self-discipline he is practicing to obtain it.
A precondition of the station is that you cannot advance from one station to
the next unless you have fulfilled the requirements of the former. [For instance,]
if you have not mastered [the station of] contentment (qana∏a), you cannot
achieve [the station of] true trust in God (tawakkul); if you have not mastered
trust in God, then you cannot earn [the station of] true submission [to the divine
will]. Likewise, he who has not mastered [the station of] repentance (tawba)
cannot obtain [the station of] turning [to God] in repentance (inaba); one who
has not mastered [the station of] scrupulous discernment [between the licit
and the illicit] (wara∏) is not ready for [the station of] renunciation [of this
world].
As for [the word] muqam,12 it means [the act of] “being placed”,13 in the
same way as the word mudkhal (“entry”) may mean the act of being entered
or the word mukhraj (“exit”) may mean the act of being driven out. For one
cannot enter a station unless one witnesses God – Most High – placing him into
that station. Then and only then can one build one’s affair on a sound foundation.14
9 That is, he becomes witness to God’s sublime mysteries that are hidden from the common
believers.
10 On this Sufi concept see IM, pp. 303–309.
11 That is, the station.
12 A variant reading of the term “station” (maqam/muqam). The latter carries slightly different
connotations, especially those of passivity, which the author tries to highlight.
13 That is, being placed by God into a certain station.
14 That is, the progress from station to station implies both the wayfarer’s personal effort and
God’s continual assistance without which the goal cannot be achieved.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 78
78 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“When al-Wasiti15 arrived in Nishapur, he asked the disciples of Abu ∏Uthman
[al-Hiri]16: ‘What did your master usually command you to do?’ They answered:
‘He used to command us to practice acts of obedience [toward God], while keeping
in sight our shortcomings [in performing them].’ Al-Wasiti responded: ‘Then
he taught you nothing but pure Zoroastrianism (al-majusiyya al-mahda).17 He
should have commanded you to forget about them18 and contemplate the One
Who is their true originator and performer!’”19In saying so, al-Wasiti only wanted
to warn them against self-conceit, not to push them toward the path//117 of
negligence or to give them license to transgress any of the good manners.
The [mystical] state (hal)20
According to the Sufis, the mystical state is something that descends upon the
hearts [of the mystics] regardless of their intentions, their [attempts to] attract
it, or their [desire to] earn it. This can be [the states of] joy, grief, expansion,
contraction, passionate longing, vexation, awe or need.
States are [divine] gifts, whereas stations are earnings. States come without
asking, whereas stations are acquired by the sweat of one’s brow. The possessor
of a station is firmly established in it, whereas the possessor of a state can be
taken up out of his state [at any moment].
Someone asked Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri21 about the [divine] gnostic. He
answered: “He was here [a moment ago], but left.” One Sufi master said: “States
are like [flashes of] lightning. If they persist, they are but self-deception.” The
Sufis say: “States are like their name”22– that is, they alight upon the heart only
to leave it instantaneously. They recite the following poetic lines:
If it [the state] were not changing constantly, it would not be named hal.
Everything that changes, passes
Look at the shadow: as soon as it has reached its full size
And become long, it begins to wane!
Some Sufis have pointed out that the states can last and endure. They say
that the states that do not last and continue are but flashes of light (lawaπih) and
15 On Abu Bakr al-Wasiti (d. 320/932) see IM, pp. 100–101.
16 On this famous ascetic from Nishapur see IM, “Index”.
17 Because this approach presupposes that human beings have control over their own acts,
whereas, in al-Wasiti’s view, the only true actor and doer is God. Therefore, he accused Abu
∏Uthman and his disciples of practicing “Zoroastrianism” (namely, dualism).
18 That is, the acts of obedience.
19 This anecdote refers to the debates between the supporters of human free will and those who
saw all human acts as being predestined and created by God.
20 See IM, pp. 303–309.
21 See Chapter 1, pages 19–20.
22 The Arabic root HWL, from which the word halis derived, connotes inconstancy, transition,
and change.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 79
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 79
unexpected appearances (bawadih). Those who experience them have not yet
arrived at true states. Only when this experience lasts can it be called “state”.
Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri said: “For forty years God has not placed me in a state
that I disliked.//118 He was referring to the permanence of [his] contentment,23
and contentment is counted among the states. On this issue one must say the
following: Those who say that the states perdure are correct. A certain experience
may become a man’s personal portion in which he will grow. The person who
has an enduring state also has other states, [named] the “night visitors”. They do
not persist in the same way as the states that have become part of his persona.
When the “night visitors” perdure with him, as were the previous states, he can
advance to new states that are more lofty and subtle than the ones before them.
Thus he never ceases to advance further and further.
I heard that the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him
– commented on the words of the Prophet – may God bless and greet him: “My
heart was covered with a veil until I began to ask God’s pardon seventy times a
day.”24He [Abu ∏Ali] said: “The Prophet – may God bless and greet him – was
constantly advancing in his states. Whenever he had advanced from a lower state to
a loftier one, he would take notice of the one he had just left behind and consider
that state to be a veil in relation to the one in which he now found himself. His
states were thus becoming ever more intense.”
The favors that God – may He be blessed – has predetermined [for His
creatures] are infinite. Since the True Reality of God – Most High – is [supreme]
majesty and therefore one can never truly attain Him, then the servant of
God has to be constantly advancing in his states. Whenever he has attained an
experience, God – may He be blessed – has already predetermined that there is
a higher one and that he is bound to attain it. It is in this sense that one should
understand their [Sufi] saying: “The good deeds of the righteous are the evil
deeds of the ones who are brought nigh [to God].”25 When someone asked
al-Junayd about this [phrase], he recited the following:
Flashes of light that shine, when they appear,
Reveal the secret and announce the unification
[with the Divine].
Contraction (qabd) and expansion (bast)
These two states come after the servant has advanced above the state of fear
and hope. For the divine gnostic contraction is the same as the state of fear is for
the beginner. [Likewise,] for the gnostic expansion is the same as the state of
hope is for the beginner.//119 The difference between contraction and fear, on
the one hand, and between expansion and hope on the other, is this: fear is when
23 That is, his contentment with the portion allotted to him by God.
24 Wensinck, Concordance, vol. 5, p. 38b.
25 Q. 56:11.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 80
80 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
someone fears something in the future – for instance, the loss of something
pleasant or the occurrence of something dangerous. Likewise, hope is when one
expects something pleasant [to happen] in the future, or anticipates that something
unpleasant will go away or that something undesired will come to an end. As for
contraction and expansion, they spring from something that is already there. When someone fears or hopes, his heart in both these states is attached to the
future. The moment of the person in the state of contraction or expansion is
determined by the experience that dominates him in his immediate present. The characteristics of [the Sufis] in contraction and expansion differ to the
extent they differ in their states. One experience may cause a contraction that
leaves room in its possessor for other things since he has not perfected it. At
the same time, in another person it may leave no room for anything other than
this experience, because it consumes him entirely. One Sufi said [about this
experience]: “I am crammed full!” – that is, there is no room at all in me [for
anything else]. The same is true of a person in the state of expansion. He may experience
an expansion that encompasses [at least] some creatures and does not estrange
him from most things. At the same time, one may become expanded so much as
not to be affected by anything under any condition. I hear that Shaykh Abu ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – said: “One Sufi entered the house
of Abu Bakr al-Qahtabi.26The latter had a son who engaged in [unseemly] pastimes
that are common among the youth of his age. It so happened that the visitor
chanced upon that son while he and his friends were preoccupied with their
follies. The visitor felt a great pity for al-Qahtabi and said: ‘O poor master!543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 79
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 79
unexpected appearances (bawadih). Those who experience them have not yet
arrived at true states. Only when this experience lasts can it be called “state”.
Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri said: “For forty years God has not placed me in a state
that I disliked.//118 He was referring to the permanence of [his] contentment,23
and contentment is counted among the states. On this issue one must say the
following: Those who say that the states perdure are correct. A certain experience
may become a man’s personal portion in which he will grow. The person who
has an enduring state also has other states, [named] the “night visitors”. They do
not persist in the same way as the states that have become part of his persona.
When the “night visitors” perdure with him, as were the previous states, he can
advance to new states that are more lofty and subtle than the ones before them.
Thus he never ceases to advance further and further.
I heard that the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him
– commented on the words of the Prophet – may God bless and greet him: “My
heart was covered with a veil until I began to ask God’s pardon seventy times a
day.”24He [Abu ∏Ali] said: “The Prophet – may God bless and greet him – was
constantly advancing in his states. Whenever he had advanced from a lower state to
a loftier one, he would take notice of the one he had just left behind and consider
that state to be a veil in relation to the one in which he now found himself. His
states were thus becoming ever more intense.”
The favors that God – may He be blessed – has predetermined [for His
creatures] are infinite. Since the True Reality of God – Most High – is [supreme]
majesty and therefore one can never truly attain Him, then the servant of
God has to be constantly advancing in his states. Whenever he has attained an
experience, God – may He be blessed – has already predetermined that there is
a higher one and that he is bound to attain it. It is in this sense that one should
understand their [Sufi] saying: “The good deeds of the righteous are the evil
deeds of the ones who are brought nigh [to God].”25 When someone asked
al-Junayd about this [phrase], he recited the following:
Flashes of light that shine, when they appear,
Reveal the secret and announce the unification
[with the Divine].
Contraction (qabd) and expansion (bast)
These two states come after the servant has advanced above the state of fear
and hope. For the divine gnostic contraction is the same as the state of fear is for
the beginner. [Likewise,] for the gnostic expansion is the same as the state of
hope is for the beginner.//119 The difference between contraction and fear, on
the one hand, and between expansion and hope on the other, is this: fear is when
23 That is, his contentment with the portion allotted to him by God.
24 Wensinck, Concordance, vol. 5, p. 38b.
25 Q. 56:11.

It so happened that the visitor
chanced upon that son while he and his friends were preoccupied with their
follies. The visitor felt a great pity for al-Qahtabi and said: ‘O poor master! What a terrible affliction this son must be for him!’ When the visitor entered
al-Qahtabi’s room he saw him behave as if he was not aware of [his son’s]
unseemly entertainment. He was surprised by this and said: ‘May I be the ransom
of him who cannot be moved even by the steadfast mountains!’ Al-Qahtabi replied:
‘We have been liberated from the bondage of the things [of this world] since
pre-eternity!’”//120
Contraction is caused by an experience that descends upon one’s heart. It may imply censure27 or indicate that one is liable for chastisement. As
a result, contraction enters the heart and it contracts. When, however, an
experience is caused by closeness28 or by [God’s] turning [to the servant] with
gentleness and hospitality, then what enters the heart is expansion. In general,
one’s contraction corresponds to one’s expansion and one’s expansion to one’s
contraction. There may be a contraction whose cause and motive elude the person who
experiences it. He feels contraction in his heart, yet he does not know its cause. 26 In some variants of the text his name is spelled “al-Qahti”. 27 That is, God’s dissatisfaction with His servant. 28 Between God and man.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 81
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 81
Such a person should surrender [to his state], until its time has come.29For if he
contrives to expel it or tries to anticipate its attack beforehand on his own accord,
his contraction will only become worse. This may be seen [by God] as improper
behavior on his part. If, on the other hand, he surrenders himself completely
to the rule of time, contraction will soon go away, for God – may He be blessed
– said: “[It is] God [who] grasps and outspreads.”
Expansion may come suddenly. It strikes a man unexpectedly as he is unaware
of its motive; it shakes and startles him. This man should try to remain quiet and
to observe the rules of proper behavior, since in such a moment he is exposedto
a grave danger. May this man then beware of [God’s] hidden ruse!30 One of the
Sufis said about this: “The door of expansion was open to me, but I slipped and
was veiled from my [mystical] station.”31Some Sufis have said about this: “Stand
on the [outstretched] carpets [of closeness to God], but beware of familiarity!”
The people of true realization consider the states of contraction and expansion
to be among the things that one should avoid, because in relation to the states
above them, such as the servant’s annihilation and dissolution in the True Reality,32
they are but poverty and need. I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard al-Husayn b. Yahya say: I heard Ja∏far b. Muhammad say: I heard al-Junayd say: “My fear of
God contracts me; my hope [for His mercy] expands me; the True Reality makes
me one [with Him]; the Divine Truth33 separates me [from Him]. When He
grasps me with fear, He detaches34 me from myself; when He outstretches me
with hope, He returns me to myself; when He makes me one by the True
Reality, He places me in His presence; when He separates me from the Divine
Truth,35 He makes me witness other things and veils me from Himself.It so happened that the visitor
chanced upon that son while he and his friends were preoccupied with their
follies. The visitor felt a great pity for al-Qahtabi and said: ‘O poor master! What a terrible affliction this son must be for him!’ When the visitor entered
al-Qahtabi’s room he saw him behave as if he was not aware of [his son’s]
unseemly entertainment. He was surprised by this and said: ‘May I be the ransom
of him who cannot be moved even by the steadfast mountains!’ Al-Qahtabi replied:
‘We have been liberated from the bondage of the things [of this world] since
pre-eternity!’”//120
Contraction is caused by an experience that descends upon one’s heart. It may imply censure27 or indicate that one is liable for chastisement. As
a result, contraction enters the heart and it contracts. When, however, an
experience is caused by closeness28 or by [God’s] turning [to the servant] with
gentleness and hospitality, then what enters the heart is expansion. In general,
one’s contraction corresponds to one’s expansion and one’s expansion to one’s
contraction. There may be a contraction whose cause and motive elude the person who
experiences it. He feels contraction in his heart, yet he does not know its cause. 26 In some variants of the text his name is spelled “al-Qahti”. 27 That is, God’s dissatisfaction with His servant. 28 Between God and man.

Muhammad say: I heard al-Junayd say: “My fear of
God contracts me; my hope [for His mercy] expands me; the True Reality makes
me one [with Him]; the Divine Truth33 separates me [from Him]. When He
grasps me with fear, He detaches34 me from myself; when He outstretches me
with hope, He returns me to myself; when He makes me one by the True
Reality, He places me in His presence; when He separates me from the Divine
Truth,35 He makes me witness other things and veils me from Himself. And in
all this God Most High is my sole mover, not my restrainer; He is the one who
abandons me, not the one who shows intimacy to me. In His presence I taste
the food of my existence. O would that He annihilated me from myself, then
endowed me with [a new] existence! O would that He took me from myself, then
breathed [a new] life into me!”//121
Awe (hayba) and intimacy (uns)
Both of these are above contraction and expansion, in the same way as contraction
is above fear [of God] and expansion is above the station of hope. [Likewise,] awe
29 That is, until it leaves the mystic by itself. 30 That is, God can send expansion, which brings excessive joy and exaltation, to him as a
temptation. 31 That is, his prior efforts to achieve an advanced station on the path to God were annulled as
a result of his slippage. 32 That is, the Godhead. 33 That is, the Divine Law that lays out the rights of God (huquq Allah); hence another possible
translation: “the Right of God”, instead of “the Divine Truth”. 34 Lit. “annihilates”. 35 See note 33.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 82
82 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
is higher than contraction and intimacy is more perfect than expansion. The
True Reality of awe is absence.36Each awestricken person is absent [from himself].
The awestricken vary in their awe to the extent that they vary in their absence.
Some of them [are higher] than others.
Intimacy requires true sobriety, for each intimate [friend] is sober. They too
differ from one another according to their personal share.37 This is why they
say: “The minimal requirement for intimacy is when you throw someone into a
blazing fire and this does not perturb his intimacy.” Al-Junayd – may God have
mercy on him – said: “I used to hear al-Sari38say: ‘The servant of God reaches a
point when he can be struck on the face with the sword without taking notice of
it.’ [At first], my heart refused to believe in it, but gradually it has become clear
to me that this was indeed the case.”
It is recounted that Abu Muqatil al-∏Aqqi said: “I came to al-Shibli’s place
and found him plucking out the hair of his eyebrows with a pair of tweezers. I
told him: ‘O my master, you do this to yourself, but your pain strikes me right
in the heart!’ He answered: ‘Woe to you! The Truth has shown Itself to me and
I cannot bear It. And here it is: I inflict pain upon myself in the hope that when
I finallyfeel it, this39will be veiled from me. However, I feel no pain, so it is not
veiled from me and I cannot bear it any more.’”
When the states of awe and intimacy appear, the people of the Truth40
consider it to be a deficiency, because they entail a change in the servant of
God.//122 The spiritual states of the people of constancy41 are above such
change. They are completely effaced42 by their encounter with the [Divine]
Essence. Therefore they can experience neither awe nor intimacy and have
neither knowledge nor sense.
There is a famous story about Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz.43He recounted: “Once
I was lost in the desert and began to recite [the following verses]:
I have lost my way and because of my loss I know not who I am
Except what people say about me and my ilk.
I raise myself above the jinn and men of this land
And when I can no longer find anyone, I raise myself above myself!
Suddenly, I heard a voice addressing me:
36 From anything other than God.
37 That is, their individuality.
38 Al-Junayd’s uncle, a famous mystic of Baghdad. See IM,pp. 51–52.
39 The referent of this pronoun is obscure. It may refer to the Truth, in which case it should be
in the feminine, which it is not. The editors suggest “the pain (alam; masc.) of the Truth”,
but this seems far-fetched. We may be dealing with a textual corruption.
40 That is, the accomplished Sufi masters and gnostics.
41 Ahl al-tamkin–that is, those advanced mystics who are firmly established in their states.
42 Lit. “erased”.
43 A Sufi teacher of Baghdad. See IM, pp. 56–60.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 83
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 83
O you who see [secondary] causes as the pinnacle of your being
And who delight in a contemptible loss44and in intimacy
Were you truly one of the people who have found God45
You would become absent from all existent beings as well as from
the Divine Throne and the Footstool.
You would stand in the presence of God without any mystical state
And you would be protected [by God] from taking notice of both
men and jinn!”
The servant of God rises above this state through [the state of] finding God.
[The states of] ecstatic behavior (tawajud), ecstatic rapture (wajd),
and ecstatic finding (wujud)
Ecstatic behavior is [an attempt] to deliberately stimulate ecstatic rapture. The
person in this state does not experience a complete ecstasy, for if he did, he
would be an ecstatic [in the full meaning of this word]. The verbal form tafa∏ul46
usually presupposes a [deliberate] display of a certain feature, which does not
belong [to the person displaying it]. A poet said [about this]:
I deliberately tried to narrow my eye (takharaztu),47although my eye is not
narrow by its nature
Then I shut my eye tightly, although I am not a one-eyed man.
Some [Sufis] said that ecstatic behavior is inappropriate for the one who seeks to
bring it about, because it involves a deliberate effort and thus distances him from
true realization. Others [disagreed], saying that it is appropriate for the poor who
have divested themselves of everything and who are watching out for such things
to happen. Their argument rests on the report from the Messenger of God – may
God bless and greet him – that says: “Cry, and if you do not cry, then [at least]
pretend that you are crying!”
In a famous story about Abu Muhammad al-Jurayri48– may God have mercy
on him – he says: “I was in al-Junayd’s house together with Ibn Masruq and
other [Sufis]. Among us there was a singer. Ibn Masruq rose [in order to dance]
and others followed him. Only al-Junayd remained in his place. I asked him: ‘O
44 Or “pride”. A pun based on the two meanings of the word tih– namely, “to be lost” and “to
be proud”.
45 Ahl al-wujud. This term carries several connotations, which makes it rather difficult to render
into English. One can translate it both as “people who have found [God]” or “people of divine
being”.
46 That is, the verbal form upon which the word tawajudis patterned.
47 This phrase is supposed to highlight the meaning of the verbal form mentioned in the previous
note.
48 A Sufi of al-Junayd’s circle, who succeeded him as head of the movement. He died in 312/924.
See IM, p. 66.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 84
84 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
my lord, what do you think about [Sufi] concerts?’49//123 He answered: ‘Thou
shalt see the mountains that thou supposest fixed, passing by like clouds.’50 He
then said: ‘And you, Abu Muhammad, what do you think about the concerts?’ I
answered: ‘My lord, when I come to a place where there is a Sufi concert and
[see] there a person for whom I have respect, I restrain myself from ecstasy. But
when I am alone, I give free rein to my ecstasy and behave ecstatically.’” In this
story al-Jurayri explicitly approved ecstatic behavior, and al-Junayd did not
object to him. I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say: “As long
as he [al-Jurayri] observed good manners [in the presence of] respectable people
in his state of listening to the concert, God preserved his moment for him, due
to the blessings that accrue from observing good manners. He then said: ‘I
restrain myself from ecstasy, but when I am alone I give free rein to my ecstasy
and behave ecstatically.’ However, one cannot give free rein to ecstasy, as one
pleases, after the ecstatic moment and its overwhelming powers are gone. This
means that as long as he was sincere in his concern for the dignity of the Sufi
master, God prolonged his ecstatic moment, so that he could give free rein to his
ecstasy when he was alone.”
Ecstatic behavior, according to the description just presented, is the beginning
of ecstasy, which is followed by ecstasy proper. As for ecstasy, it is something that
encounters your heart and descends upon you without any intention or effort on
your part. This is why Sufi masters say: “Ecstasy is an encounter [with the mystical
moment] and ecstatic acts are the fruits of [supererogatory] prayers.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 83
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 83
O you who see [secondary] causes as the pinnacle of your being
And who delight in a contemptible loss44and in intimacy
Were you truly one of the people who have found God45
You would become absent from all existent beings as well as from
the Divine Throne and the Footstool.
You would stand in the presence of God without any mystical state
And you would be protected [by God] from taking notice of both
men and jinn!”
The servant of God rises above this state through [the state of] finding God.
[The states of] ecstatic behavior (tawajud), ecstatic rapture (wajd),
and ecstatic finding (wujud)
Ecstatic behavior is [an attempt] to deliberately stimulate ecstatic rapture. The
person in this state does not experience a complete ecstasy, for if he did, he
would be an ecstatic [in the full meaning of this word]. The verbal form tafa∏ul46
usually presupposes a [deliberate] display of a certain feature, which does not
belong [to the person displaying it]. A poet said [about this]:
I deliberately tried to narrow my eye (takharaztu),47although my eye is not
narrow by its nature
Then I shut my eye tightly, although I am not a one-eyed man.
Some [Sufis] said that ecstatic behavior is inappropriate for the one who seeks to
bring it about, because it involves a deliberate effort and thus distances him from
true realization. Others [disagreed], saying that it is appropriate for the poor who
have divested themselves of everything and who are watching out for such things
to happen. Their argument rests on the report from the Messenger of God – may
God bless and greet him – that says: “Cry, and if you do not cry, then [at least]
pretend that you are crying!”
In a famous story about Abu Muhammad al-Jurayri48– may God have mercy
on him – he says: “I was in al-Junayd’s house together with Ibn Masruq and
other [Sufis]. Among us there was a singer. Ibn Masruq rose [in order to dance]
and others followed him. Only al-Junayd remained in his place. I asked him: ‘O
44 Or “pride”. A pun based on the two meanings of the word tih– namely, “to be lost” and “to
be proud”.
45 Ahl al-wujud. This term carries several connotations, which makes it rather difficult to render
into English. One can translate it both as “people who have found [God]” or “people of divine
being”.
46 That is, the verbal form upon which the word tawajudis patterned.
47 This phrase is supposed to highlight the meaning of the verbal form mentioned in the previous
note.
48 A Sufi of al-Junayd’s circle, who succeeded him as head of the movement. He died in 312/924.
See IM, p. 66.

As for ecstasy, it is something that
encounters your heart and descends upon you without any intention or effort on
your part. This is why Sufi masters say: “Ecstasy is an encounter [with the mystical
moment] and ecstatic acts are the fruits of [supererogatory] prayers. The more
one engages in acts of worship, the more divine graces come to one from God.”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“Divine visitations (waridat) come from prayers (awrad). If one does not engage
in the prayers on the outside, one will have no divine visitation inside. Every
ecstasy that retains some part of the one who experiences it, is not [a true]
ecstasy.//124 In the same way as outward pious acts bestow upon the servant
of God the sweetness of obedience, his inward experiences bestow ecstatic
moments upon him. Therefore, sweetness is the fruit of pious acts, and ecstatic
moments are the products of internal experiences.”
As for the finding [of God] (wujud), it comes after one has raised oneself
above ecstasy. The finding of the True Reality51can happen only after one’s human
nature is completely extinguished, for there is no place for it in the presence
of the Master of Reality. Abu πl-Husayn al-Nuri said about this: “For twenty years
I have remained between finding and losing. That is, when I found my Lord, I
lost my heart, and when I found my heart, I lost my Lord.” Al-Junayd’s words
49 Sama∏, lit. “listening [to music]”, a Sufi “concert” at which mystical poetry is recited and
listened to to the accompaniment of musical instruments. It may sometimes involve ecstatic
dances or frantic bodily movements. See IM, pp. 322–325. 50 Q. 27:90. 51 That is, God.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 85
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 85
point to the same meaning: “The knowledge of God’s oneness is different from
finding Him, and finding Him is different from knowing Him.” Some Sufis
recited the following verse to this effect:
My finding [of God] is when I am absent from my finding52
Due to the sight that has been revealed to me.
Thus, ecstatic behavior is the beginning; finding is the end, and ecstasy is between
the beginning and the end.
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “Ecstatic behavior engrosses the
servant; ecstasy consumes him; and finding annihilates him completely. It is
as if one first watches the sea; then plunges into it; then drowns in it. Here is
the sequence of this state: aspiration, arrival, witnessing, finding, and extinction.
[One’s] extinction is commensurate with [one’s] finding. The person who
experiences finding may have two states: sobriety and annihilation.//125 In the
state of sobriety he subsists in God; in the state of annihilation he perishes in God.
These two states always follow one upon the other in the mystic’s [experience].
When he is overtaken by sobriety in God, he begins to move and speak by and
through God.53The Prophet – peace be upon him – said: “He [man] hears through
Me [God] and sees through Me.”54
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Mansur b.
∏Abdallah say: “A man came to the teaching assembly of al-Shibli and asked him:
‘Do the signs of true finding appear on those who experience it?’ He answered:
‘Yes, there is a light that shines through together with the lights of ardent passion
[for God]. These lights leave their traces on men’s complexions, in accordance
with the verses of Ibn al-Mu∏tazz55:
Water flowed like rain into the cup from a pitcher
And pearls sprang up from the golden floor
All those present sang praise to God, when they saw this wonder:
The light of water in the fire of grapes
A vintage wine that [the people of] ∏Ad56had inherited from
[the inhabitants of] Iram57
It was a treasure that the Persian kings passed on from father to son.’”
52 Or from “my existence”.
53 A reference to the hadithquoted in Ahmad b. Hanbal, Al-Musnad, vol. 1, pp. 150–151.
54 A reference to the famous hadith qudsi– that is, a statement transmitted from the Prophet in
which God is the speaker: “When I love him [man], I become his hearing through which he
hears, his eyesight through which he sees, his hand through which he holds, and his foot
through which he walks.” For details, see Chittick, The Sufi Path of Knowledge, pp. 325–331.
55 A famous poet and literary critic of the ∏Abbasid period, who was murdered in 296/908 as a
result of a coup at the ∏Abbasid court.
56 An ancient Arabian tribe that, according to the Qurπan, was destroyed for its sins and
disobedience of God’s commands.
57 An ancient Arabian city that is believed to have been destroyed by God as a punishment for
the transgressions of its inhabitants.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 86
86 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Someone once said to Abu Bakr al-Duqqi58that Jahm al-Raqqi had fallen into a
trance during a mystical concert. In his excitement, he seized a tree and pulled it
up by its roots. Later, both came to the same party. Al-Duqqi was blind. [During
the party] Jahm al-Raqqi rose and began to whirl due to the ecstatic state he
experienced. Al-Duqqi said: “When he approaches me, give me a sign!” Al-Duqqi
was a weak man. In the meantime, al-Raqqi was passing by him. When he drew
near, someone said to al-Duqqi: “Here he is!” At that moment al-Duqqi seized
al-Raqqi by the ankle and stopped him, so that the man could not move. Jahm cried:
“O master, I repent, I repent!” After that [al-Duqqi] let him go. The master
and teacher [al-Qushayri] – may God prolong his goodness – said: “Jahm’s
excitement was right. However, when al-Duqqi seized him by the ankle, he was
right too. When al-Raqqi realized that al-Duqqi’s state was higher than his own,
he returned to the proper conduct and submitted himself [to his superior]. For
him who is right, everything is possible.”//126
As for the person in whom the state of annihilation prevails, he has neither
intellect, nor understanding, nor sensation. I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman
al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him – say, on the authority of his transmitters,
that Abu ∏Iqal al-Maghribi lived in Mecca for four years without eating or drinking
anything until he passed away. Once, a poor man59 came to Abu ∏Iqal and said:
“Peace be upon you!” He answered: “And upon you be peace!” The man then
said: “I am so-and-so.” Abu ∏Iqal told him: “You are so-and-so. How are you
doing? What is happening to you?” And then he fell into unconsciousness.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 85
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 85
point to the same meaning: “The knowledge of God’s oneness is different from
finding Him, and finding Him is different from knowing Him.” Some Sufis
recited the following verse to this effect:
My finding [of God] is when I am absent from my finding52
Due to the sight that has been revealed to me.
Thus, ecstatic behavior is the beginning; finding is the end, and ecstasy is between
the beginning and the end.
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “Ecstatic behavior engrosses the
servant; ecstasy consumes him; and finding annihilates him completely. It is
as if one first watches the sea; then plunges into it; then drowns in it. Here is
the sequence of this state: aspiration, arrival, witnessing, finding, and extinction.
[One’s] extinction is commensurate with [one’s] finding. The person who
experiences finding may have two states: sobriety and annihilation.//125 In the
state of sobriety he subsists in God; in the state of annihilation he perishes in God.
These two states always follow one upon the other in the mystic’s [experience].
When he is overtaken by sobriety in God, he begins to move and speak by and
through God.53The Prophet – peace be upon him – said: “He [man] hears through
Me [God] and sees through Me.”54
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Mansur b.
∏Abdallah say: “A man came to the teaching assembly of al-Shibli and asked him:
‘Do the signs of true finding appear on those who experience it?’ He answered:
‘Yes, there is a light that shines through together with the lights of ardent passion
[for God]. These lights leave their traces on men’s complexions, in accordance
with the verses of Ibn al-Mu∏tazz55:
Water flowed like rain into the cup from a pitcher
And pearls sprang up from the golden floor
All those present sang praise to God, when they saw this wonder:
The light of water in the fire of grapes
A vintage wine that [the people of] ∏Ad56had inherited from
[the inhabitants of] Iram57
It was a treasure that the Persian kings passed on from father to son.’”
52 Or from “my existence”.
53 A reference to the hadithquoted in Ahmad b. Hanbal, Al-Musnad, vol. 1, pp. 150–151.
54 A reference to the famous hadith qudsi– that is, a statement transmitted from the Prophet in
which God is the speaker: “When I love him [man], I become his hearing through which he
hears, his eyesight through which he sees, his hand through which he holds, and his foot
through which he walks.” For details, see Chittick, The Sufi Path of Knowledge, pp. 325–331.
55 A famous poet and literary critic of the ∏Abbasid period, who was murdered in 296/908 as a
result of a coup at the ∏Abbasid court.
56 An ancient Arabian tribe that, according to the Qurπan, was destroyed for its sins and
disobedience of God’s commands.
57 An ancient Arabian city that is believed to have been destroyed by God as a punishment for
the transgressions of its inhabitants.

How are you
doing? What is happening to you?” And then he fell into unconsciousness. The
man related: “I would tell him again: ‘Peace be upon you!’ and Abu ∏Iqal would
reply: ‘And upon you be peace!’ as if he had not just seen me.” The man said: “I
did this several times, whereupon I realized that this person was unconscious. I
then left him alone and departed from his house.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard that ∏Umar b. Muhammad b. Ahmad said: I heard the wife of Abu ∏Abdallah al-Tarwaghandi say: “In the days
of hunger, when people were dying of starvation, Abu ∏Abdallah al-Tarwaghandi
entered his house and saw there two manns60of wheat. He screamed: ‘People are
starving, while I have wheat in my house!’ As a result, he lost his mind and did
not come to his senses except during the times of the prayer. He would pray the
obligatory prayer and then return to his [disorderly] mental state. He remained
in this state until his death.”
This story shows that the requirements of the Divine Law were preserved
for this man regardless of his being under the sway of the commands pertaining
to the True Reality.61 This is a sign of the people of the True Reality.62 The
reason for his absence from mental discernment was his compassion for fellow
58 A Sufi of Baghdad, who died around 366/977. 59 That is, a Sufi. 60 A measure of weight equal to two pounds. 61 Al-haqiqa, that is the Divine Absolute. 62 That is, the accomplished Sufi gnostics.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 87
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 87
Muslims, which is the best sign that he had achieved perfection in his mystical
state.
Unification (jam∏) and separation (farq)
The expressions “unification” and “separation” are often mentioned in their
[Sufi] discourses. Our master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq used to say: “Separation is
something that is attributed to you; unification, on the other hand, is something
that is taken from you.”//127 He meant that whatever the servant of God
acquires by means of fulfilling the requirements of his servitude and by means of
his status as a human being is separation. As for unification, it is everything that
comes from the Real, such as the bringing forth of new entities and the bestowal
of grace and favor [upon humans]. These are the minimal requirements for the
states of unity and separation, because they63 continue to take notice of their
deeds. When God – may He be exalted – allows a person to continue to take
notice of his acts of obedience and disobedience, this person finds himself in a
state of separation. When, on the other hand, God – may He be blessed – allows
a person to see His own deeds, this person acquires the attribute of unification.
Thus the assertion of the created world belongs to separation, whereas the
assertion of the Real is an attribute of unification.
There is no escape for the servant of God from both unification and separation,
for he who does not have separation cannot achieve perfect servitude and he
who does not have unification has no knowledge [of God]. God’s words [in the
Qurπan] “Thee only we serve”64point to separation, while His words “To Thee
alone we have recourse”65point to unification. When the servant of God addresses
Him – may He be exalted – in his intimate conversation with Him as a beggar, a
supplicant, a lauder, a giver of thanks, a renouncer [of evil deeds], or a humble
beseecher, he places himself in the position of separation. And when he listens in
his inner self to what his Lord tells him and hears in his heart what God imparts
to him by calling upon him, admonishing him, instructing him, or intimating
[something] to his heart and willing him to follow [this intimation], he finds
himself under the sign of unification.
I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say: “A singer
recited the following verses before Master Abu Sahl al-Su∏luki – may God have
mercy on him:
I have made my vision of You my [greatest] pleasure!
Abu πl-Qasim al-Nasrabadhi – may God have mercy on him – was there at
that time. Master Abu Sahl said: ‘“Made” should be read in the second person.’66
63 That is, those who experience these states.
64 Q. 1:4.
65 Q. 1:4.
66 That is, “You [God] have made my vision of You my greatest pleasure.”543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 88
88 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Al-Nasrabadhi said: ‘No, it should be read in the first person!’ Master Abu Sahl
then asked: ‘Isn’t the essence of unification more complete?’67Al-Nasrabadhi fell
silent.”
I heard that Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami interpreted this story
in the same way [as Abu Sahl].//128 The meaning of this is as follows. When
someone says “made” in the first person, it means that the speaker speaks about
the state of his own self, as if the servant of God implies that this action comes
from him. As for the one who says that “made” should be in the second person,
he absolves himself from any deliberate action and says to his Lord: “It is You
Who have distinguished me with this [quality], and not I by means of my own
deliberate action!” The first [interpretation] contains the danger of [an egoistic]
claim, whereas the second implies the denial of one’s free power [to act] and the
assertion of [God’s] beneficence and generosity. There is a great difference
between the one who says: “I worship You through my own [free] effort” and
the one who says: “I witness You through Your beneficence and kindness.”
The unification of unification (jam∏al-jam∏)
The unification of unification is higher than this. People differ on this issue
according to the differences in their spiritual states and in their ranks [of spiritual
attainment]. When someone reasserts both himself and the created world, yet
sees everything [in this world] as being dependent on God, this is unification. When, on the other hand, through the appearance and under the complete
domination of the power of the Divine Reality one is rendered incapable of
contemplating the created world, barred from one’s own self, and taken in one’s
entirety from sensing anything else, this is the unification of unification.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 87
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 87
Muslims, which is the best sign that he had achieved perfection in his mystical
state.
Unification (jam∏) and separation (farq)
The expressions “unification” and “separation” are often mentioned in their
[Sufi] discourses. Our master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq used to say: “Separation is
something that is attributed to you; unification, on the other hand, is something
that is taken from you.”//127 He meant that whatever the servant of God
acquires by means of fulfilling the requirements of his servitude and by means of
his status as a human being is separation. As for unification, it is everything that
comes from the Real, such as the bringing forth of new entities and the bestowal
of grace and favor [upon humans]. These are the minimal requirements for the
states of unity and separation, because they63 continue to take notice of their
deeds. When God – may He be exalted – allows a person to continue to take
notice of his acts of obedience and disobedience, this person finds himself in a
state of separation. When, on the other hand, God – may He be blessed – allows
a person to see His own deeds, this person acquires the attribute of unification.
Thus the assertion of the created world belongs to separation, whereas the
assertion of the Real is an attribute of unification.
There is no escape for the servant of God from both unification and separation,
for he who does not have separation cannot achieve perfect servitude and he
who does not have unification has no knowledge [of God]. God’s words [in the
Qurπan] “Thee only we serve”64point to separation, while His words “To Thee
alone we have recourse”65point to unification. When the servant of God addresses
Him – may He be exalted – in his intimate conversation with Him as a beggar, a
supplicant, a lauder, a giver of thanks, a renouncer [of evil deeds], or a humble
beseecher, he places himself in the position of separation. And when he listens in
his inner self to what his Lord tells him and hears in his heart what God imparts
to him by calling upon him, admonishing him, instructing him, or intimating
[something] to his heart and willing him to follow [this intimation], he finds
himself under the sign of unification.
I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say: “A singer
recited the following verses before Master Abu Sahl al-Su∏luki – may God have
mercy on him:
I have made my vision of You my [greatest] pleasure!
Abu πl-Qasim al-Nasrabadhi – may God have mercy on him – was there at
that time. Master Abu Sahl said: ‘“Made” should be read in the second person.’66
63 That is, those who experience these states.
64 Q. 1:4.
65 Q. 1:4.
66 That is, “You [God] have made my vision of You my greatest pleasure.”

When someone reasserts both himself and the created world, yet
sees everything [in this world] as being dependent on God, this is unification. When, on the other hand, through the appearance and under the complete
domination of the power of the Divine Reality one is rendered incapable of
contemplating the created world, barred from one’s own self, and taken in one’s
entirety from sensing anything else, this is the unification of unification. Thus, separation is seeing something other than God – may He be great
and exalted; unification is seeing everything through [the eyes of] God; and
the unification of unification is total self-dissolution [in God] and the loss of
perception of anything other than God – may He be great and exalted – as a
result of the onslaught of the irresistible powers of the Divine Reality. After this comes the lofty state that the Sufis call “second separation” (farq
thani). In this state, the servant of God returns to sobriety whenever he must
perform any of his religious duties so that he can fulfill his religious obligations in
their proper times. This is a return to God – the most high – through God, not
to the servant through the servant. In this state, the servant sees himself being
driven by God’s will – may He be exalted. He sees God’s power as the ultimate
source of his essence and his self; he sees God’s knowledge and will as the true
performer of his actions and the originator of his spiritual states. By the phrase
“unification and separation” some Sufis imply that creatures are subject to the
dispositions of the Divine Reality.//129 He has united everything under His
67 Abu Sahl’s interpretation shows God to be the ultimate agent, whereas al-Nasrabadhi’s
interpretation leaves room for the human agent to exercise his free will.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 89
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 89
power and disposal, since He is the Originator of their essences and the Determiner
of their attributes. He has then divided them into several classes. Some of them
[are destined] to be among the blessed, others [are destined] to be far removed
from Him and to be among the wretched; some of them He will guide aright,
others He will lead astray and make blind; some of them He will veil from Himself,
others He will draw near; some of them He will make His intimates by allowing
them to join Him, others He will make despair of His mercy; some of them He
will grant His assistance, others He will frustrate in their aspirations to realize
His true essence; some of them He will keep sober, others He will obliterate;68
some of them He will draw nigh, others He will make absent [from themselves];
some of them He brings into His presence, makes them drink and intoxicates
them, others He renders miserable and rejects, then banishes and expels. One
cannot count all the varieties of His actions, nor can they be exhausted by
any explanation and enumeration. They [Sufis] recite the following verses by
al-Junayd – may God have mercy on him – about the meaning of unification and
separation:
I have attained a true realization of You in my innermost
Heart and I conversed with You with my own tongue.
We were united in one sense and separated in the other.
At one moment my awe [of You] makes me absent from
Seeing You directly,
Yet at the next moment my ecstasy makes You close to my very core!
They [Sufis] also recite the following:
When He appears to me, nothing seems greater to me than He
Then I return to the original state as if I never left it.
I become unified and dispersed from myself through Him,
For two numbers can join to become a singular one.
Annihilation (fanaπ) and subsistence (baqaπ) [in God]
By “annihilation” the Sufis refer to the disappearance of blameworthy qualities,
whereas by “subsistence” they refer to the persistence of praiseworthy qualities.
The servant of God cannot but have one of these two types [of qualities], for it
is well known that if he does not have one type, he will inevitably have the other.
When his blameworthy qualities are annihilated, he will possess praiseworthy
ones. Likewise, when he is dominated by blameworthy characteristics, he will be
deprived of praiseworthy ones.
Know that the servant of God is characterized by deeds, morals and spiritual
states. Deeds are what he undertakes of his own free will.//130 Morals are his
inherent predispositions, which, however, can be changed through continual
68 That is, He will deprive them of their self-consciousness by having them contemplate His
majesty.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 90
90 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
exercises. Spiritual states come to the servant from the outset. However, their
subsequent purity is determined only by the cleanness of his actions. In this
respect they are similar to morals. God allows the person whose heart preoccupies
itself with morals through its own [concerted] effort and banishes from it any
reprehensible qualities to improve his morals. Likewise, God will allow the
person who strives to purify his deeds of his own accord to purify and protect
his spiritual states. When someone abandons the evil deeds denounced by the Divine Law, it
is said that he is annihilated from his passions. And when he is annihilated from
his passions, he subsists in the service of God through his determination and
sincerity. When someone renounces this world, it is said that he is annihilated
from his desire [of it]. And when he is annihilated from his desire of it, he
subsists in the sincerity of his repentance. When someone has refined his morals
by cleansing his heart of envy, malice, avarice, greed, anger, and pride, as well as
any other impurities that adhere to the soul, it is said: “He has been annihilated
from the base character traits.” And when one is annihilated from bad morals,
one subsists in chivalry and truthfulness. When one observes the workings of divine power in the vicissitudes of divine
decrees, it is said that one has been annihilated from seeing events as emanating
from creatures. And when one is annihilated from perceiving events as products
of secondary causes,69one subsists in the attributes of the Real. When the power of the True Reality takes possession of someone, he no
longer notices the essences, effects, traces or vestiges of anything other than God.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 89
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 89
power and disposal, since He is the Originator of their essences and the Determiner
of their attributes. He has then divided them into several classes. Some of them
[are destined] to be among the blessed, others [are destined] to be far removed
from Him and to be among the wretched; some of them He will guide aright,
others He will lead astray and make blind; some of them He will veil from Himself,
others He will draw near; some of them He will make His intimates by allowing
them to join Him, others He will make despair of His mercy; some of them He
will grant His assistance, others He will frustrate in their aspirations to realize
His true essence; some of them He will keep sober, others He will obliterate;68
some of them He will draw nigh, others He will make absent [from themselves];
some of them He brings into His presence, makes them drink and intoxicates
them, others He renders miserable and rejects, then banishes and expels. One
cannot count all the varieties of His actions, nor can they be exhausted by
any explanation and enumeration. They [Sufis] recite the following verses by
al-Junayd – may God have mercy on him – about the meaning of unification and
separation:
I have attained a true realization of You in my innermost
Heart and I conversed with You with my own tongue.
We were united in one sense and separated in the other.
At one moment my awe [of You] makes me absent from
Seeing You directly,
Yet at the next moment my ecstasy makes You close to my very core!
They [Sufis] also recite the following:
When He appears to me, nothing seems greater to me than He
Then I return to the original state as if I never left it.
I become unified and dispersed from myself through Him,
For two numbers can join to become a singular one.
Annihilation (fanaπ) and subsistence (baqaπ) [in God]
By “annihilation” the Sufis refer to the disappearance of blameworthy qualities,
whereas by “subsistence” they refer to the persistence of praiseworthy qualities.
The servant of God cannot but have one of these two types [of qualities], for it
is well known that if he does not have one type, he will inevitably have the other.
When his blameworthy qualities are annihilated, he will possess praiseworthy
ones. Likewise, when he is dominated by blameworthy characteristics, he will be
deprived of praiseworthy ones.
Know that the servant of God is characterized by deeds, morals and spiritual
states. Deeds are what he undertakes of his own free will.//130 Morals are his
inherent predispositions, which, however, can be changed through continual
68 That is, He will deprive them of their self-consciousness by having them contemplate His
majesty.

And when one is annihilated from perceiving events as products
of secondary causes,69one subsists in the attributes of the Real. When the power of the True Reality takes possession of someone, he no
longer notices the essences, effects, traces or vestiges of anything other than God. They say of such a person: “He has been annihilated from [God’s] creatures and
now subsists in God.”
The servant of God is annihilated from his blameworthy deeds and base
states when he does not perform them, and he is annihilated from his own self
and from all creatures when he ceases to perceive both them and himself. When
he is annihilated from deeds, morals, and spiritual states, all this no longer exists
for him. One can say that someone has been annihilated from himself and from
all creatures, yet [in reality] his self and the creatures continue to exist. However,
he has no knowledge, perception or sign of them. His self exists and the creatures
continue to exist [objectively]. However, he is oblivious of them and is capable
of perceiving neither his self nor the creatures. Imagine, for example, that a man enters into the presence of a mighty ruler
or a highly revered person and becomes so self-effaced in his reverence that he
forgets about both himself and the other people//131 in the assembly, including the
revered individual himself. When he would emerge from the assembly and be
asked about the people there and the behavior of the revered individual and about
his own behavior, he would not be able to say anything about that. God said: “And
when they saw him [Joseph], they so admired him that they cut their hands.”70
69 That is, one begins to see God as the sole cause of all created things. 70 Q. 12:31.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 91
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 91
When they71met Joseph – upon him be peace – they took no notice at all of the
pain from cutting their hands, although they were more feeble than men. They said:
“This is no mortal”,72 while he [in fact] was mortal. They said: “He is none other
than a noble angel”,73while he [in fact] was not an angel. And this is the state of [one
group of] creatures meeting another creature. You can only imagine the man to
whom the sight of God – glory be to Him – were disclosed! If he were to lose the
sense of himself and his fellow human beings, would there be any surprise in that?
When a man is annihilated from his ignorance, he subsists in his knowledge
and when he is annihilated from his passions, he subsists in his repentance. When
he is annihilated from his desire [of this world], he persists in its renunciation.
When he is annihilated from his passionate drive, he subsists in his longing
for God. This is true of all human characteristics. After the servant of God is
annihilated from his characteristics, as we have just described, he advances from
this stage [to the next one] at which he loses sight of his annihilation. This is
describedby a Sufi poet, who said:
Some people wander across the land by the desert
While others wander in the arena of His love
Annihilate yourselves thrice,
Then subsist close to the Lord!
The first annihilation is from one’s self and one’s attributes through subsistence
in the attributes of God. Then comes the annihilation from the attributes of God
in the contemplation of God. Then one is annihilated from the vision of one’s
own annihilation by being subsumed in the existence of God Himself.//132
Absence (ghayba) and presence (hudur)
Absence is when the heart is absent from knowing the circumstances of creatures
due to the complete absorption of the senses by what has appeared to it [from
God]. One may also become absent from oneself and others through remembering
[God’s] promise of reward and thinking of [God’s] punishment. It is said that
Rabi∏ b. Khuthaym74used to visit Ibn Mas∏ud75– may God be pleased with him.
As he was passing by a blacksmith’s shop, he saw a red-hot iron in the oven and
fainted, and did not come to until the next morning. When he woke up, he was
asked about what had happened. He answered: “I remembered how the people
of hellfire will sojourn in the fire!” This was an absence that went beyond its limit
and turned into a swoon.
71 That is, the female guests of Potiphar’s wife.
72 Q. 12:32.
73 Q. 12:32.
74 An early Muslim (d. 61/680 or somewhat later), who belonged to the generation of those who
came after the Companions of the Prophet.
75 ∏Abdallah b. Mas∏ud (d. 32/652), an early convert to Islam who was renowned for his expertise
on the Qurπan, which he was writing down directly from the Prophet. He resided in Kufa.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 92
92 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
It is recounted of ∏Ali b. al-Husayn76 that he was performing a ritual prayer
when suddenly his house caught fire. However, he did not interrupt his prayer. When asked about that, he said: “The Greatest Fire77 made me oblivious of that
fire.” Occasionally, a man can be rendered absent from his [self-]perception by
somethingthat God – may He be blessed and exalted – reveals to him. Those who experience absence differ from one another according to their
spiritual states. It is well known that the spiritual state78of Abu Hafs al-Nisaburi
al-Haddad (The “Blacksmith”) began when he gave up his profession. He was
in his smithy when he heard someone reciting a verse from the Qurπan. At that
moment, he had an experience that made him oblivious of his senses. He put
his hand into the fire and took out a piece of red-hot iron. His apprentice saw
this and cried: “What is this, master?!” When Abu Hafs realized what had just
happened, he gave up his trade and left his smithy [for good]. Once, as al-Junayd was sitting together with his wife, al-Shibli entered the
room.79 The wife hurried to cover herself, but al-Junayd said to her: “Sit still,
for al-Shibli is unaware of you!” Al-Junayd conversed with al-Shibli for a while,
until the latter broke into tears. When he began to cry, al-Junayd said to his wife:
“Cover yourself now, for al-Shibli has come to!”
I heard Abu Nasr the Muezzin (al-Muπadhdhin) of Nishapur, who was a
pious man, say: “I was reading the Qurπan at the session of Master Abu ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq at Nishapur, when he was residing there. He used to talk a lot
about the hajj, and his words left a deep imprint in my heart. When I went on
a hajj that year, I abandoned my store//133 and my trade. Master Abu ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – also went on a hajj that same year. When he was living in Nishapur I used to serve him and to attend study sessions
at his house.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 91
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 91
When they71met Joseph – upon him be peace – they took no notice at all of the
pain from cutting their hands, although they were more feeble than men. They said:
“This is no mortal”,72 while he [in fact] was mortal. They said: “He is none other
than a noble angel”,73while he [in fact] was not an angel. And this is the state of [one
group of] creatures meeting another creature. You can only imagine the man to
whom the sight of God – glory be to Him – were disclosed! If he were to lose the
sense of himself and his fellow human beings, would there be any surprise in that?
When a man is annihilated from his ignorance, he subsists in his knowledge
and when he is annihilated from his passions, he subsists in his repentance. When
he is annihilated from his desire [of this world], he persists in its renunciation.
When he is annihilated from his passionate drive, he subsists in his longing
for God. This is true of all human characteristics. After the servant of God is
annihilated from his characteristics, as we have just described, he advances from
this stage [to the next one] at which he loses sight of his annihilation. This is
describedby a Sufi poet, who said:
Some people wander across the land by the desert
While others wander in the arena of His love
Annihilate yourselves thrice,
Then subsist close to the Lord!
The first annihilation is from one’s self and one’s attributes through subsistence
in the attributes of God. Then comes the annihilation from the attributes of God
in the contemplation of God. Then one is annihilated from the vision of one’s
own annihilation by being subsumed in the existence of God Himself.//132
Absence (ghayba) and presence (hudur)
Absence is when the heart is absent from knowing the circumstances of creatures
due to the complete absorption of the senses by what has appeared to it [from
God]. One may also become absent from oneself and others through remembering
[God’s] promise of reward and thinking of [God’s] punishment. It is said that
Rabi∏ b. Khuthaym74used to visit Ibn Mas∏ud75– may God be pleased with him.
As he was passing by a blacksmith’s shop, he saw a red-hot iron in the oven and
fainted, and did not come to until the next morning. When he woke up, he was
asked about what had happened. He answered: “I remembered how the people
of hellfire will sojourn in the fire!” This was an absence that went beyond its limit
and turned into a swoon.
71 That is, the female guests of Potiphar’s wife.
72 Q. 12:32.
73 Q. 12:32.
74 An early Muslim (d. 61/680 or somewhat later), who belonged to the generation of those who
came after the Companions of the Prophet.
75 ∏Abdallah b. Mas∏ud (d. 32/652), an early convert to Islam who was renowned for his expertise
on the Qurπan, which he was writing down directly from the Prophet. He resided in Kufa.

Master Abu ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – also went on a hajj that same year. When he was living in Nishapur I used to serve him and to attend study sessions
at his house. [As I was on my way to Mecca], I saw him in the desert. After he
had performed his ablution, he forgot the bottle he used to carry with him. I
picked it up and carried it with me. When he resumed his journey, I gave it to
him. He said: ‘May God reward you for bringing it!’ He looked at me for a while,
as if he had not seen me before, then said: ‘I have seen you once. Who are you?’
I answered: ‘May God be my helper! I was your companion for many years. I left
my home and my possessions because of you, and journeyed in the barren desert
together with you, and now you tell that you have seen me once!’”
As for presence, it is when someone is present with God, for when he is
absent from creatures, he enters into the presence of God, in the sense that he is
present with Him. This is due to the fact that the recollection of God takes full
possession of his heart and he finds his heart to be present with God Most High. 76 ∏Ali b. al-Husayn b. ∏Ali b. Abi Talib (d. around 92/710), nicknamed “Zayn al-∏Abididn”, a
grandson of the Prophet through the line of his daughter Fatima and his cousin ∏Ali; the
fourth imam of the Shi∏ites. 77 That is, the fire of Hell. 78 That is, conversion to the path of asceticism and mysticism. 79 See above, pp. 61–62.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 93
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 93
Someone’s presence with God corresponds to the level of his absence from
creatures. When he is completely absent [from creatures] his presence is complete. When they say that someone is present, this means that his heart is present with
God, without being neglectful or forgetful [of Him], and constantly remembering
Him. In his presence, God – may He be blessed and exalted – will unveil to him
things that He has prepared for him and for him only. Sometimes Sufis describe the servant’s return to self-awareness and to
awareness of other creatures as his “presence”, meaning that he has returned from
his absence [from creatures] to his presence with creatures, after he was present
with God. Their states in absence may vary. The absence of some does not last, whereas
the absence of others may last for a while. It is said that Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri
sent one of his companions to Abu Yazid al-Bistami, so that he [the companion]
would give him a description of Abu Yazid. When the companion reached the
city of Bistam, he asked about the house of Abu Yazid. When he entered the
house, Abu Yazid asked him what he wanted. He answered: “I am looking for
Abu Yazid al-Bistami.” Abu Yazid answered: “Who is Abu Yazid? Where is Abu
Yazid? I myself am in search of Abu Yazid.” The companion left [Abu Yazid’s
house], saying: “This is a madman!” He returned to Dhu πl-Nun and told him
about what he had seen. [On hearing this] Dhu πl-Nun began to cry and said:
“My brother Abu Yazid has joined those who travel to God.”//134
Sobriety (sahw) and drunkenness (sukr)
Sobriety is returning to self-consciousness after absence [in God]. Drunkenness
is absence [from one’s self] through a strong experience [of God]. In a sense,
drunkenness is a complement to absence in that the drunken person may be relaxed
as long as he is not fully immersed in his drunken state.Master Abu ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – also went on a hajj that same year. When he was living in Nishapur I used to serve him and to attend study sessions
at his house. [As I was on my way to Mecca], I saw him in the desert. After he
had performed his ablution, he forgot the bottle he used to carry with him. I
picked it up and carried it with me. When he resumed his journey, I gave it to
him. He said: ‘May God reward you for bringing it!’ He looked at me for a while,
as if he had not seen me before, then said: ‘I have seen you once. Who are you?’
I answered: ‘May God be my helper! I was your companion for many years. I left
my home and my possessions because of you, and journeyed in the barren desert
together with you, and now you tell that you have seen me once!’”
As for presence, it is when someone is present with God, for when he is
absent from creatures, he enters into the presence of God, in the sense that he is
present with Him. This is due to the fact that the recollection of God takes full
possession of his heart and he finds his heart to be present with God Most High. 76 ∏Ali b. al-Husayn b. ∏Ali b. Abi Talib (d. around 92/710), nicknamed “Zayn al-∏Abididn”, a
grandson of the Prophet through the line of his daughter Fatima and his cousin ∏Ali; the
fourth imam of the Shi∏ites. 77 That is, the fire of Hell. 78 That is, conversion to the path of asceticism and mysticism. 79 See above, pp. 61–62.

Drunkenness
is absence [from one’s self] through a strong experience [of God]. In a sense,
drunkenness is a complement to absence in that the drunken person may be relaxed
as long as he is not fully immersed in his drunken state. On the other hand, in
this state, any perception of outward things may completely disappear from his
heart. This is the state of one who behaves like a drunk, because his drunkenness
has not yet taken full control of him and he is still capable of perceiving outward
things. At some point, his drunkenness may become so strong that it surpasses
[the state of] absence. When the drunkenness of a drunk becomes really strong,
his absence may surpass the absence experienced by someone in the state of
absence. At the same time, the absence of someone in the state of absence may
be more complete than the absence of a drunk, especially when he behaves like a
drunk without actually having achieved the state of drunkenness. The state of absence may visit devotees whose hearts have become preoccupied
by the influence of passionate longing [for God] and awe [before Him] as well as
by the dictates of fear [of God] and hope [for His mercy]. On the contrary,
drunkenness is experienced only by those wont to experience ecstatic states. When the attributes of [God’s] beauty are revealed to someone, he experiences
the state of drunkenness: his spirit rejoices and his heart becomes intoxicated. Of
this state the following poetic verses are recited:543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 94
94 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Your sobriety from my words is a complete reunion,
Whereas your drunkenness when you contemplate me permits
you to indulge in drinking.
Neither the cup-bearer nor the drunkard get tired of the wine of
contemplation, each cup of which makes your heart drunk.
They [Sufis] also recite the following verse:
The circling of the cup makes some people drunk,
While I get drunk from the one who passes it around.
They also recite:
I have two states of intoxication, while my boon companions have only
one.
This is what makes me different from them.
They also recite:
There are two kinds of drunkenness: the drunkenness of passion
and the drunkenness of wine.
How can a man who has tasted either of them ever come to his senses
Know that one’s sobriety corresponds to one’s drunkenness. He who experiences
true drunkenness, enjoys true sobriety.//135 And he whose drunkenness is
mixed with good fortune, experiences a sobriety that is also mixed with good
fortune. He who has been truthful in his state [of sobriety] is protected in his
drunkenness. Both drunkenness and sobriety imply distinction.80However, when
one becomes witness to the Power of the Real, one loses one’s personal attributes
and becomes fully consumed and overwhelmed by it. Of this state it is said:
When the morning appears to the star of old wine
The drunk and the sober will become equal.
God Most High said: “And when his Lord revealed Himself to the mountain,
He made it crumble to dust; and Moses fell down swooning.”81 He “fell down
swooning” in spite of his prophethood and his great stature [as a messenger of God],
while the mountain “crumbled to dust” in spite of its superior firmness and strength.
In his state of drunkenness the servant of God finds himself under the mark
of a [mystical] state, whereas in his state of sobriety he is under the mark of
knowledge. In his state of drunkenness he is protected by God without applying
his own effort, while in his state of sobriety he protects himself [from error]
through his own actions.
Sobriety and drunkenness come after tasting and drinking.
80 That is, in these states one remains aware of the diversity of the surrounding world.
81 Q. 7:139.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 95
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 95
Tasting (dhawq) and drinking (shurb)
Among the words that they82 use are “tasting” and “drinking”. They use these
words to describe the fruits of God’s self-manifestation, the results of God’s
self-unveiling and God’s unexpected visitations, which they experience. The
first of these is tasting, then comes drinking and, finally, the quenching of thirst
(riyy).//136
They attain the taste of [true] meanings through the purity of their pious deeds;
they attain the drinking [of true meanings] through fulfilling the requirements
of their spiritual stations; and they quench their thirst [for true meanings] through
their constant search for God’s presence. The person in the state of tasting is
behaving like a drunk; the person in the state of drinking is drunk; the person
who has quenched his thirst is sober.
When someone’s love [of God] is strong, his state of drinking becomes
permanent. And when it becomes permanent, his drinking does not make him
drunk. He then becomes sober in God and oblivious of all his [mundane] concerns;
he is neither influenced by anything that comes to him [in the empirical world],
nor is he changed from the state in which he is now. When one’s innermost heart
is pure, one’s drinking is safe from any taint; and when one’s drinking becomes
one’s nourishment, one can neither abstain from it, nor survive without it.
They recite:
The cup [of wine] is like the mother’s milk to us
If we cannot taste it, we cannot survive.
They also recite:
I am surprised when someone says: “I have remembered God.”
How can I forget, so that I have to remember what I have forgotten?
I have drunk love one cup after another
But although wine does not run out, I cannot quench my thirst for it.
It is said that Yahya b. Mu∏adh wrote to Abu Yazid al-Bistami: “Here’s the one83
who has drunk from the cup of love and will never feel thirst again.” Abu Yazid
responded to him: “I am surprised at the weakness of your [spiritual] state!
Here’s a man who has gulped down all the seas of existence, yet his mouth is
agape, wanting more.”
Know that the cups of closeness [to God] appear from the Unseen and are
bestowed only upon those whose hearts are emancipated and whose spirits are
free from attachment to the things [of this world].
82 That is, the Sufis.
83 That is, himself.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 96
96 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Erasure (mahw) and affirmation (ithbat)
Erasure is the removal of habitual attributes and affirmation is the fulfillment of
the commands of servanthood.//137 When someone has removed blameworthy
qualities from his internal states and replaced them with praiseworthy states and
actions, he becomes a man of erasure and affirmation. I heard that master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – said
that one Sufi shaykh asked someone [who was discussing erasure and affirmation]:
“What do you erase and what do you assert?” The speaker fell silent. [Abu
∏Ali] then said: “Don’t you know that the mystical moment is both erasure and
affirmation? He who has neither erasure nor affirmation is idle and abandoned.”
Erasure can be of several types: the erasure of faults from one’s externals; the
removal of forgetfulness from one’s internal self; the removal of deficiency from
one’s innermost heart. The erasure of faults is the affirmation of good deeds; the
erasure of forgetfulness is the affirmation of spiritual stations [with God]; and
the erasure of deficiency is the affirmation of joining [God]. This is erasure and
affirmationin the meaning of servitude. As regards the true erasure and affirmation,
they comefrom [God’s] power – that is, erasure is that which God conceals and
denies, whereas affirmation is that which He shows and makes manifest. Erasure
and affirmation are determined by the divine will, because God Most High
said: “God erases and affirms what He wills.”84 It is said that God erases from
the hearts of the gnostics any thought of other than Himself and He affirms the
remembrance of Himself on His servants’ tongues. God erases and affirms for
each one in accordance with his internal state. When God – may He be exalted
– erases someone’s self-perception, He affirms him through His own True Self.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 95
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 95
Tasting (dhawq) and drinking (shurb)
Among the words that they82 use are “tasting” and “drinking”. They use these
words to describe the fruits of God’s self-manifestation, the results of God’s
self-unveiling and God’s unexpected visitations, which they experience. The
first of these is tasting, then comes drinking and, finally, the quenching of thirst
(riyy).//136
They attain the taste of [true] meanings through the purity of their pious deeds;
they attain the drinking [of true meanings] through fulfilling the requirements
of their spiritual stations; and they quench their thirst [for true meanings] through
their constant search for God’s presence. The person in the state of tasting is
behaving like a drunk; the person in the state of drinking is drunk; the person
who has quenched his thirst is sober.
When someone’s love [of God] is strong, his state of drinking becomes
permanent. And when it becomes permanent, his drinking does not make him
drunk. He then becomes sober in God and oblivious of all his [mundane] concerns;
he is neither influenced by anything that comes to him [in the empirical world],
nor is he changed from the state in which he is now. When one’s innermost heart
is pure, one’s drinking is safe from any taint; and when one’s drinking becomes
one’s nourishment, one can neither abstain from it, nor survive without it.
They recite:
The cup [of wine] is like the mother’s milk to us
If we cannot taste it, we cannot survive.
They also recite:
I am surprised when someone says: “I have remembered God.”
How can I forget, so that I have to remember what I have forgotten?
I have drunk love one cup after another
But although wine does not run out, I cannot quench my thirst for it.
It is said that Yahya b. Mu∏adh wrote to Abu Yazid al-Bistami: “Here’s the one83
who has drunk from the cup of love and will never feel thirst again.” Abu Yazid
responded to him: “I am surprised at the weakness of your [spiritual] state!
Here’s a man who has gulped down all the seas of existence, yet his mouth is
agape, wanting more.”
Know that the cups of closeness [to God] appear from the Unseen and are
bestowed only upon those whose hearts are emancipated and whose spirits are
free from attachment to the things [of this world].
82 That is, the Sufis.
83 That is, himself.

God erases and affirms for
each one in accordance with his internal state. When God – may He be exalted
– erases someone’s self-perception, He affirms him through His own True Self. When He erases someone’s affirmation [through His True Self], He returns him
to the vision of other things and settles him in the plains of differentiation.85
Someone asked al-Shibli – may God have mercy on him: “Why do I always
see you being restless? Isn’t He with you and aren’t you with Him?” Al-Shibli
answered://138 “When I am with Him, I am. However, I am erased in Him!”
Obliteration is above erasure, because erasure leaves a trace, while obliteration
leaves no trace whatsoever. The ultimate goal of the folk86is when God obliterates
their self-perception completely, never to return them to themselves. Concealment (satr) and [self-]manifestation (tajalli)
The ordinary folk are covered by concealment, whereas the elect are witnessing
the permanent self-manifestation [of God]. A report from the Prophet says:
“When God manifests Himself to something, it submits to Him.” If someone
experiences concealment, his self-perception is determined by it, while a person
in the state of manifestation is always characterized by submission. Concealment
84 Q. 13:39. 85 That is, things other than God. 86 That is, the Sufis.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 97
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 97
is a punishment for the ordinary folk and a blessing for the elect. If He did not
protect from them what He unveils to them, they would have been completely
annihilated by the power of the True Reality. However, He manifests Himself to
them, while at the same time concealing Himself from them. I heard that al-Mansur
al-Maghribi said: “A poor man came to the camp of a Bedouin tribe. A youth [of
the tribe] invited him to his tent. As the youth was serving him [some food], he
suddenly fainted. The poor man asked about that. The Bedouin told him: He has
a female cousin, whom he loves. As she was entering her tent, the youth saw the
dust stirred by the hem of her robe and fell unconscious. The poor man came to
the door of the cousin’s tent and said: ‘[I know] that a stranger among you is
under your protection. Thus [as a stranger] I have come to speak to you on behalf
of this youth, because I feel pity for him being in such a state on account of you.’
She answered: ‘Good Lord! What a naïve man you are! He cannot endure the
sight of the dust raised by my clothes! How can he endure my company?!’”
The ordinary Sufis experience happiness at [divine] self-manifestation and
suffer when they experience [divine] self-concealment. As for the elect ones,
they vacillate between recklessness and happiness, because when God appears to
them they become reckless. However, when He conceals Himself from them, they
come to and feel happy.//139
They say that God Most High told Moses – peace be upon him: “What is
that, Moses, that thou hast in thy right hand?”,87 thereby distracting him with
something that pleased him [in order to lessen] the impact of [divine] unveiling,
when God spoke to him.God erases and affirms for
each one in accordance with his internal state. When God – may He be exalted
– erases someone’s self-perception, He affirms him through His own True Self. When He erases someone’s affirmation [through His True Self], He returns him
to the vision of other things and settles him in the plains of differentiation.85
Someone asked al-Shibli – may God have mercy on him: “Why do I always
see you being restless? Isn’t He with you and aren’t you with Him?” Al-Shibli
answered://138 “When I am with Him, I am. However, I am erased in Him!”
Obliteration is above erasure, because erasure leaves a trace, while obliteration
leaves no trace whatsoever. The ultimate goal of the folk86is when God obliterates
their self-perception completely, never to return them to themselves. Concealment (satr) and [self-]manifestation (tajalli)
The ordinary folk are covered by concealment, whereas the elect are witnessing
the permanent self-manifestation [of God]. A report from the Prophet says:
“When God manifests Himself to something, it submits to Him.” If someone
experiences concealment, his self-perception is determined by it, while a person
in the state of manifestation is always characterized by submission. Concealment
84 Q. 13:39. 85 That is, things other than God. 86 That is, the Sufis.

As for the elect ones,
they vacillate between recklessness and happiness, because when God appears to
them they become reckless. However, when He conceals Himself from them, they
come to and feel happy.//139
They say that God Most High told Moses – peace be upon him: “What is
that, Moses, that thou hast in thy right hand?”,87 thereby distracting him with
something that pleased him [in order to lessen] the impact of [divine] unveiling,
when God spoke to him. The Prophet – may God bless and greet him – said:
“My heart remains covered by a veil as long as I have asked God’s pardon
seventy times a day.” Asking for God’s pardon (istighfar) means asking God to
veil Himself, because the word ghafr also means “veil”. This is similar to such
expressions as “to cover [oneself] with clothing” (ghafr al-thawb) and “protective
covering” (mighfar).88 It seems that the Prophet was saying that he sought to
cover his heart against the onslaught of the True Reality, because creatures
cannot survive in the presence of the Real. According to the prophetic report,
“Should God unveil His face, the splendor of His countenance would burn
everything within the range of His sight.”
Presence (muhadara), unveiling (mukashafa) and
witnessing (mushahada)
Presence comes first, then unveiling, then witnessing. Presence is the presence
of the heart [with God]. It can be achieved through a continuous manifestation
of the [divine] proof, during which a person finds himself in [God’s] presence
through the power of recollection [of God]. This [state] is followed by unveiling,
which is presence through clear evidence. In this state one need not see the
87 Q. 20:17. 88 This word may also mean “helmet”.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 98
98 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
[divine] proof or seek the path. One is neither subject to the promptings of
doubt, nor veiled from the realm of the Unseen.89 This [state] is followed by
witnessing. This means to be in the presence of the Absolute Truth,90 where
there is no room for doubt.//140 When the sky of the innermost heart is
free from the clouds of veiling, the sun of witnessing begins to shine from
the zodiacal sign of nobility. The True Reality of witnessing was captured by
al-Junayd – may God have mercy on him – when he said: “God’s existence
appears when you lose yours.”
The person in the state of presence is bound by its signs; the person in
the state of unveiling rejoices in its attributes. As for the person in the state of
witnessing, his self is erased by his knowledge [of God].
No one has expressed the essence of witnessing better than ∏Amr b. ∏Uthman
al-Makki – may God have mercy on him – when he said that the lights of God’s
self-manifestation appear to the heart clearly and without interruption. It is like
an uninterrupted sequence of lightning in the middle of a dark night: when it
occurs, the lightning turns the night into day. The same happens to the heart,
when divine self-manifestation descends upon it continuously: it lives in the
light of day with no night. Sufis recite the following poetry:
My night is lit by your face, whereas its darkness encompasses other people
Therefore the people wander in the darkness, whereas we bask in the light
of day.
Al-Nuri said: “One cannot attain true witnessing as long as a single living91
vein remains in one’s body.” He also said: “When dawn breaks, one no longer
needs a lamp.”
Some Sufis argue that witnessing implies some sort of separation, because the
form of the verbal noun upon which it is patterned – that is, mufa∏ala –implies
[an action that involves] two subjects. These people are in error, because when
the Creator appears, His creatures cease to exist. Besides, not every verbal noun
patterned on mufa∏ala necessarily implies [the presence of] two subjects – for
instance, “he traveled” (safar) or “he sewed another sole upon the sole” (taraqa
al-na∏l), and so on.
Sufis recite the following poetry:
When the dawn breaks, the light of its glow eliminates the light of the
stars above.
It forces them to swill yet another cup [of wine] the strength of which is
such that were it to be swallowed by a raging flame it would disappear
momentarily.
89 That is, the realm of divine mystery that contains the knowledge of the future.
90 Al-haqq.This word often designates God.
91 Lit. “standing”.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 99
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 99
What a marvelous cup this is! It removes them from their own selves, it annihilates
them, it steals them from themselves and makes them disappear without any
trace! What a cup! “It spares not, neither leaves alone.”92 It obliterated them
completely, leaving in them not a sliver of human nature, as in a poem:
They departed, leaving behind neither a sign nor trace.
Glimmers (lawaπih), dawnings (tawali∏) and flashes (lawami∏)
The master93 – may God be pleased with him – said that these words have a
similar meaning. They differ very little from one another. They are characteristic
of beginners who strive to ascend by their hearts. For them, these rays of the
suns of divine knowledge do not last long. God provides nourishment for their
hearts at every moment, according to His words: “They shall have their provision
at dawn and evening.”94 Each time the firmament of their hearts is obscured by
the clouds of selfishness, the glimmers of unveiling and the flashes of closeness
[to God] begin to shine in them; and amidst veiling they suddenly begin to see
the glimmers [of divine grace]. A poet said:
O blazing lightning! What quarter of the sky will you shine from?
At first there are glimmers, then dawnings, then flashes. The glimmers are like
lightning in that they disappear as soon as they appear. A poet said:
We have not seen each other for a long time, but when
we finally met his greeting was like saying “farewell”.
Sufis also recite the following verse:
O you, who have come to visit and yet have not visited,
Like a man seeking to take some fire,
Who passed by the door of the house in a hurry.
What it was that prevented him from coming in?
Flashes are brighter than glimmers and they last longer. Flashes can persist for
more than one moment, however, as they say://142
The eye is weeping because seeing cannot satisfy it.
They also say:
The eye is hardly able to reach the water of his face
without first choking on its guardian before its thirst is quenched.
92 Q. 74:28.
93 That is, al-Qushayri, whose words were probably recorded by his disciples, who later integrated
them into the final version of his book.
94 Q. 19:63.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 100
100 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
When it appears to you in a flash, it severs you from yourself and unites you with
Him. However, no sooner than the light of its day has shone, it is attacked by
the warriors of night. The people [in this state] are [oscillating] between joy and
sorrow, because they [find themselves] between veiling and unveiling. They say
[about this state]:
The night has enveloped us with its noblest cloak,
While the morning clad us with its golden gown.
Dawnings are longer in duration, are stronger [in their effect], and last longer.
They are better in lifting darkness and banishing doubts, yet they are also
susceptible to the danger of setting, lower in apogee and of shorter duration.
They are quick to depart and take longer to reappear after they have set.
The characteristics of all these experiences – that is, glimmers, dawnings,
and flashes – vary. Some of them leave no trace after their disappearance, like some
bright stars, which eclipse, while the night stays on. Others, on the contrary, leave
traces behind them. While their signs may disappear, their pain persists. Their
light may be gone, while their traces remain. A person who has experienced
their onslaught continues to live in the shade of their blessings. He is living in
anticipation of their return, making do with what he has.
[Unexpected] raids (bawadih) and attacks (hujum)
Raids are things that descend instantaneously upon your heart from [the realm
of] the unknown. They may cause either joy or sadness.//143
As for attacks, they are things that enter your heart due to the power of the
moment,95 without any effort on your part. They vary in their nature according
to the strength or weakness of the experience [that precipitates it].
There are those who are changed by [their] raids and act according to the
dictates of [their] attacks. And there are those whose spiritual state and power
put them above anything that may befall to them. Such people are the masters of
the moment. Of them it is said:
The vicissitudes of time cannot find their way to them
For they are the ones who hold the reins of every great affair.
Inconstancy (talwin) and stability (tamkin)
Inconstancy is an attribute of those [who have] spiritual states, whereas stability
is a characteristic of those who have attained true realities.
As long as a man travels along the [mystical] path, he experiences inconstancy,
because he continues to rise from one state to another and move from one
attribute to another; he leaves one place for another, but once he has arrived, he
becomes stable.
95 See Chapter 2, pp. 75–77.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 101
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 101
They say:
I have settled down in my love of you at a station
Which bewilders the hearts of those who have not yet attained it.
The person in the state of inconstancy is continually on the increase, while the
one in the state of stability has arrived at his goal and become united [with it].
The sign of his becoming united is that his entire self no longer takes account
of itself.
One of the Sufi masters said: “The journey of those who have sought to
conquer their egos has ended. When they have conquered their egos, they have
arrived [at their goal].”
The master96 – may God have mercy on him – said: “He meant that [they]
leave behind [their] human characteristics and enter the realm of the True Reality.
If this state persists in someone, he has achieved stability.”
The master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – used to
say: “Moses – may God bless him – was characterized by inconstancy. When he
returned after hearing the words of God, he had to cover his face,//144 because
he was so strongly affected by [his] spiritual state. As for our Prophet – may God
bless and greet him – he was characterized by stability. When he returned [from
his journey],97he was the same as when he had left, because he was not affected
by anything he had seen during that night. Other evidence of this is the story
of Joseph – peace be upon him. The women who saw Joseph – peace be upon
him – cut their hands when he came out to them because his appearance was so
sudden. As for the wife of al-∏Aziz,98she turned out to be more perfect than them
when tested by Joseph. On that day not a single hair of hers was unsettled [by his
presence], because she had attained stability through her [earlier] encounter with
Joseph – peace be upon him.
The master [al-Qushayri] said: “Know that a person undergoes change as a
result of an experience that visits him for two different reasons – namely, the
strength of the experience or the weakness of the person. [Likewise,] a person’s
stability is due to two reasons – namely, the person’s strength or the weakness of
the experience that visits him.”
I heard that the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him
– said: Sufis take two principal approaches to the possibility of the persistence of
stability [in a person]. First, it is absolutely unattainable, because the Prophet – may
God bless and greet him – said: “Had you always remained in the same condition
in which you were when I was with you, the angels would surely greet you.”99He
96 That is, al-Qushayri.
97 Probably from the Prophet’s night journey and ascension to heaven (al-israπ wa πl-mi∏raj),
during which he contemplated God from the distance of “two bows’-lengths or nearer”. See
Q. 53:1–12.
98 The name of Biblical Potiphar in the Muslim tradition.
99 Ahmad b. Hanbal, Al-Musnad, vol. 4, p. 346.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 102
102 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
– may God greet and bless him – said to the same effect: “I have a moment in
which only God finds any room in me.” He thus mentioned only a specific point
[not a constant condition]. According to the second view, in the people of true
realities states can persist for a long while because they have advanced beyond
the condition in which they are affected by unexpected experiences. [The
Prophet] said in his report, “The angels would surely greet you.” He thereby
did not predicate [his statement] on an impossible condition, for the greeting of
angels is inferior to that which he – peace be upon him – ascribed to beginners
in the following report: “Verily, the angels lower//145 their wings for [every]
seeker of knowledge out of contentment with what he is doing.”100
As for his saying “I have a moment”, its meaning differs according to the
understanding of each listener. For the Prophet maintained the truth in all his
states.
It is more appropriate to say that a man is subject to inconstancy as long
as he progresses toward his goal; his states may increase or decrease. And when
he has finally arrived at the True Reality by leaving behind the properties of
humanity, God – may He be exalted – makes him stable and prevents him from
retreating to the weakness of his self. He thus becomes stable in his state
in accordance with his position and with that which he has deserved. Then God
– may He be exalted – begins to bestow upon him gifts incessantly, for His
possibilities are unlimited. Thus, a mystic whose states are on the increase, is
inconstant, or rather he is rendered inconstant [by God], while at its core his
spiritual state remains stable. He is continually becoming stable in a state that is
higher than the one he has occupied before. He then rises above it to a new state,
for God’s possibilities have no limit in all respects.
Finally, there are those who have lost awareness of themselves and whose
senses have been taken from them in their entirety, for human nature of necessity
has a limit. If such a person has abandoned his body, soul and self-perception, as
well as his perception of the created world around him, and if his self-oblivion
becomes permanent, he becomes erased – that is, for him, there exists neither
stability nor inconstancy, neither a [mystical] stage, nor a [mystical] state. And
as long as he remains in this condition, he is exempt from worship and [religious]
obligations. O Lord, may he be ascribed the things that seem to be done by him,
without him actually doing them. In people’s minds, such a person is acting on
his own, while in fact he is acted upon [by God].
God – may He be exalted – said: “Thou wouldst have thought them awake,
as they lay sleeping, while We turned them now to the right, now to the left.”101
May God grant success!
100 Ahmad b. Hanbal, Al-Musnad, vol. 4, p. 239.
101 Q. 18:18; 18:17, according to Arberry’s translation.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 103
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 103
Proximity (qurb) and distance (bu∏d)
The first degree of proximity is the proximity to obedience toward God and the
state of being always engaged in His worship. As for distance, this means to be
sullied by the violation of His will and to be removed from obeying Him.//146
The first degree of distance is distance from Godspeed, which is followed by
the distance from attainment. In other words, distance from Godspeed means
distance from attainment. The Prophet – may God bless and greet him – said
that God – blessings be upon Him – said: “[My servant] draws near Me through
nothing more than that which I have made obligatory for him. My servant never
ceases drawing nearer to Me through supererogatory works until he loves Me
and I love him. Then, when I love him, I become his sight and hearing through
which he hears and sees …”102
The proximity of the servant [to God] begins with [his] proximity to the
faith in God and the attestation of His veracity. This is followed by the proximity
to good deeds and the realization [of the Divine Truth]. As for God’s proximity
[to His servant], it is the divine knowledge that God bestows upon him today and
the contemplation and witnessing [of Himself] that He will grant him in the
world to come. It is also various expressions of kindness and beneficence that
God will bestow [upon the servant] between now and then.
The servant’s proximity to God is impossible unless he distances himself
from His creatures. This applies to the conditions of hearts, not to outward
phenomena and [empirical] existence. God’s proximity through knowledge and
power encompasses the entire human race.103God’s proximity through kindness
and help is limited to the believers. God’s proximity through special intimacy is
restricted to His friends. God – may He be exalted – said: “We are nearer to him
[man] than the jugular vein.”104God – may He be exalted – said: “We are nigher
him than you”.105God – may He be exalted – also said: “He is with you wherever
you are.”106 He also said: “Three men conspire not secretly together, but He is
the fourth of them.”107
He who has fully realized proximity to God, observes every single thing that
comes to him from God, because watching over him is the guardian of the fear
[of God], over whom is the guardian of reverence, over whom is the guardian of
humility. They [Sufis] recite the following poetry:
102 For a full version of this “sacred hadith” (hadith qudsi) and its implications for Sufi theory and
practice, see Chittick, The Sufi Path of Knowledge, pp. 325–331; cf. idem., The Self-Disclosure
of God,pp. 290–291.
103 That is, God’s knowledge and power apply to all humans (in the act of creation) regardless of
their faith or unbelief.
104 Q. 50:16.
105 Q. 56:85; 56:84, according to Arberry’s translation.
106 Q. 57:4.
107 Q. 58:7; 58:8, according to Arberry’s translation.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 104
104 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
As if a watchmen stands guard over my [innermost] thoughts,
While another one is watching over my sight and my tongue.
Since I saw you [for the first time], whenever my eyes see
something that displeases you, I say [to myself]: “They
[the watchmen] must have spotted me.”//147
Not a single word addressed to someone other than you
Has come out of my mouth
Without my saying to myself: “They must have overheard me.”
And not a single thought about someone apart from you has occurred to me
Without them restraining me away from [from it].
The speeches of sincere friends have made me sick,
And I have withheld from them my sight and my tongue.108
It is not renunciation that turns [me] away from them,
Rather, I see only you wherever I turn.
One Sufi shaykh was showing his preference for one of his disciples by his placing
him close to himself. When the other disciples asked him about it, the shaykh
gave each disciple a bird and asked him to slaughter it, so that no one would
observe him [doing this]. Each disciple withdrew to a deserted place in order
to slaughter his bird. Only the [favorite] disciple came back with his bird still
alive. The shaykh asked him about that. The disciple said: “You commanded me
to slaughter the bird, so that no one would see me. However, there is no place
where you are not watched by God – glory to Him!” The shaykh said: “This is
why I have given him preference over you. You are still governed by the talk of
creatures, whereas he is never negligent of God.”
When anyone notices [his] proximity, this becomes a veil that separates him
from proximity.109Whoever sees any place or any breath as belonging to him, is
deceived thereby. They say about this: “May God expel you from His proximity!”
This means “[expel you] from your vision of His proximity [to you]”. The feeling
of intimacy in His proximity is a sign of being governed by His power, because
God – glory to Him – is behind all intimacy and the sites of [the manifestation
of] the True Reality bring about bewilderment and erasure. They recite the
following poetic verses to this effect:
You are an affliction for me, because I do not consider my love
to be worthwhile:
Your proximity is the same as your distance.
Shall I ever find my rest?
The master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – often recited
the following verse:
108 That is, “I wanted neither to see them, nor to talk to them.”
109 That is, he continues to see something else alongside God.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 105
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 105
Your longing is departure and your love is hate,
Your proximity is distance and your peace is war.
Abu πl-Husayn al-Nuri once saw a disciple of Abu Hamza110and asked him: “Are
you a student of Abu Hamza, who discourses on proximity? When you meet
him, tell him: ‘Abu πl-Husayn al-Nuri sends you his greetings and tells you that,
from where he stands, the greatest proximity is the greatest distance.’”
As for the proximity to the [divine] Essence, “High exalted be God, the
true King”111from any such thing. For He is far removed from any boundaries,
sites,//148 limit or measure. No creature can unite with Him, no previously
engendered entity can become separated from Him, because His eternal nature
rejects both unification and separation.
There is thus a proximity that is impossible – namely, a co-existence of
[other] essences [alongside God’s Essence]. There is, however, a proximity that
is possible and necessary – namely, a proximity through knowledge and vision.
There is also a proximity that is possible. God bestows it upon any of His
creatures, as He pleases. This is the proximity of [divine] grace through His
kindness [toward His servants].
The [Divine] Law (shari∏a) and the True Reality (haqiqa)
The Law is [God’s] command to always comply with [the requirements of]
servitude. The True Reality is the contemplation of [divine] Lordship. Any law
that is not supported by the True Reality is not accepted [by God]. Likewise, any
True Reality that is not bound by the Law is not accepted either.
The Law brings the creatures’ obligations [toward God], while the True
Reality brings news of God’s disposition [of world affairs]. The Law exists so
that you would worship Him, while the True Reality exists so that you would see
Him. The Law is the fulfillment of what He has commanded, while the True
Reality is that which He has executed and predetermined, hidden and manifested.
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“God’s phrase ‘Thee do we serve’ means the observance of the Law, and ‘To
Thee alone we pray for succor’112 means the affirmation of the True Reality.”
Know, that the Law is True Reality, in so far as it has come into being through
His command, while the True Reality is Law, in so far as the knowledge of God
– glory to Him – has come into being through His command.
Breath (nafas)
Breath is the perfuming of hearts by the subtle entities emanating from the
Unseen. The person who has experienced breaths is more delicate and pure than
110 A Sufi of Baghdad who died in 289/902.
111 Q. 20:114; 20:112, according to Arberry’s translation.
112 Q. 1:5.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 106
106 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
the one who has experienced mystical states. The possessor of the mystical
moment is a beginner, the possessor of breaths is one who has reached the
goal, while the possessor of mystical states falls in between these two. States are
intermediaries, while breaths are the final destination of advancement [toward
God].//149
Mystical moments belong to the possessors of hearts, the mystical states
belong to the lords of spirits, whereas breaths pertain to the people of innermost
secrets.113
They say that the noblest of all acts of worship is to count one’s breaths with
God – glory and blessings to Him. They also say that God created hearts and
made them the repositories of knowledge. He then created the innermost secrets,
hid them behind hearts, and made them the repositories of the profession of
God’s unity. Thus, each breath that has not stepped on the carpet of necessity
without the guidance of knowledge and the direction of God’s unity is dead, and
the person who has breathed it will be held responsible for it.
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“The gnostic cannot have a breath, because [God] grants him no concession
whatsoever. The lover, on the other hand, cannot do without a breath, because if
he does not have one, he will inevitably perish, for he has no capacity [to withstand
the pressure].”
Thoughts (khawatir)
Thoughts are speeches that enter the soul. They may be dictated by an angel or
by Satan; sometimes they are the soul’s self-suggestions, at other times they
come from God – glory to Him. When a thought comes from an angel, it is an
inspiration; when it comes from the soul, it is a prompting; when it comes from
Satan, it is a [devilish] whispering; when it comes from God – praise be to Him,
Who casts it into the heart – it is a real thought. All these are different types of
communication.
When a thought comes from an angel, its authenticity is affirmed by [religious]
knowledge.114 Therefore, they say that any thought whose authenticity is not
attested by outward [evidence] is false. When, on the other hand, it comes from
Satan, it usually incites to disobedience [of God]. Finally, when it comes from
the soul, it usually prompts [man] to follow [his] passions and imbues [him] with a
feeling of pride. Sufi shaykhs say that if a man partakes of a forbidden food, he is no
longer able to discern between angelic inspiration and devilish whispering.//150
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say: “He
whose sustenance is known115 cannot discern between [divine] inspiration and
[devilish] whispering. And the heart of him, who through his sincere self-exertion
113 That is, the secret recesses of hearts.
114 That is, the Revelation.
115 That is, guaranteed.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 107
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 107
has silenced the prompting of his soul, will speak according to the strength of his
endeavor.”
Sufi masters have agreed that your soul never speaks truth, while your heart
never lies. One master said: “Your soul never speaks truth, while your heart
never lies. And when you exert yourself to the utmost degree to force your spirit
to speak to you, it will never speak to you.”116
Al-Junayd differentiated between the prompting of the soul and the whispering
of Satan. [He said]: “When the soul wants something from you, it persists and
keeps reminding you, time and again, until such moment as she has achieved her
goal and obtained what she has wanted. O God, may the sincere struggle [against
your passions] never stop! For it will keep inciting you over and over again! As for Satan, he may prompt you to commit a foul act and once you have refused
to obey him, he will begin inciting you to another foul act. This is because all acts
of disobedience are equal for him; therefore he will always be inciting you to
commit some foul act, for he does not care what act this may be.”
They say that when somebody’s thought comes from an angel, it may either
agree or disagree with him. However, when someone receives his thought from
God, it cannot disagree with him. Sufi masters have discoursed on the issue of a second thought – namely, if
both thoughts come from God, is the second stronger than the first? Al-Junayd
said that the first thought is stronger, because when it stays, one returns to
contemplation, as required by knowledge. Therefore the passing of the first thought
weakens the one that comes next. However, Ibn ∏Ataπ [al-Adami] said that the second is stronger than the
first, because its power has been increased by the one before it. Abu ∏Abdallah b. Khafif,117one of the recent [Sufi] masters, said that they are equal, because both
come from God and thus one cannot be better than the other.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 106
106 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
the one who has experienced mystical states. The possessor of the mystical
moment is a beginner, the possessor of breaths is one who has reached the
goal, while the possessor of mystical states falls in between these two. States are
intermediaries, while breaths are the final destination of advancement [toward
God].//149
Mystical moments belong to the possessors of hearts, the mystical states
belong to the lords of spirits, whereas breaths pertain to the people of innermost
secrets.113
They say that the noblest of all acts of worship is to count one’s breaths with
God – glory and blessings to Him. They also say that God created hearts and
made them the repositories of knowledge. He then created the innermost secrets,
hid them behind hearts, and made them the repositories of the profession of
God’s unity. Thus, each breath that has not stepped on the carpet of necessity
without the guidance of knowledge and the direction of God’s unity is dead, and
the person who has breathed it will be held responsible for it.
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“The gnostic cannot have a breath, because [God] grants him no concession
whatsoever. The lover, on the other hand, cannot do without a breath, because if
he does not have one, he will inevitably perish, for he has no capacity [to withstand
the pressure].”
Thoughts (khawatir)
Thoughts are speeches that enter the soul. They may be dictated by an angel or
by Satan; sometimes they are the soul’s self-suggestions, at other times they
come from God – glory to Him. When a thought comes from an angel, it is an
inspiration; when it comes from the soul, it is a prompting; when it comes from
Satan, it is a [devilish] whispering; when it comes from God – praise be to Him,
Who casts it into the heart – it is a real thought. All these are different types of
communication.
When a thought comes from an angel, its authenticity is affirmed by [religious]
knowledge.114 Therefore, they say that any thought whose authenticity is not
attested by outward [evidence] is false. When, on the other hand, it comes from
Satan, it usually incites to disobedience [of God]. Finally, when it comes from
the soul, it usually prompts [man] to follow [his] passions and imbues [him] with a
feeling of pride. Sufi shaykhs say that if a man partakes of a forbidden food, he is no
longer able to discern between angelic inspiration and devilish whispering.//150
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say: “He
whose sustenance is known115 cannot discern between [divine] inspiration and
[devilish] whispering. And the heart of him, who through his sincere self-exertion
113 That is, the secret recesses of hearts.
114 That is, the Revelation.
115 That is, guaranteed.

Abu ∏Abdallah b. Khafif,117one of the recent [Sufi] masters, said that they are equal, because both
come from God and thus one cannot be better than the other. [In any event], the first does not stay once the second has arrived, because
the traces [of divine grace] cannot last.//151
Certain knowledge (∏ilm al-yaqin), the essence of certainty (∏ayn al-yaqin)
and the truth of certainty (haqq al-yaqin)
These words pertain to high [levels] of knowledge. Certainty, according to the
common usage, means a knowledge that raises no doubt at all in the person who
has it. This word is not applied to God – glory to Him – because [His knowledge]
is not subject to any interpretation. Certain knowledge is certainty; likewise, the
essence of certainty is the same as certainty and the truth of certainty is the same
as certainty. In their [Sufi] parlance, certain knowledge is possible through a
proof; the essence of certainty is possible through clear evidence; the truth of
certainty is possible through direct witnessing. 116 That is, unlike the soul, the spirit is incapable of prompting. 117 A famous Sufi master of Shiraz (d. 371/982). See IM, “Index” under “Ibn Khafif”.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 108
108 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Certainty belongs to the people of intellect; the essence of certainty belongs
to the people of knowledge;118 the truth of certainty belongs to the people of
divine gnosis. Speaking about this depends on the level of one’s realization; it
goes back to what we have already mentioned, therefore we limit ourselves to this
measure in order to bring this [notion] to [your] attention.
Occurrence (warid)
They [Sufis] frequently speak about occurrences. Occurrence is a praiseworthy
thought that enters the servant’s heart without his invitation. Even if something
does not belong to the category of thoughts, it can still be considered an occurrence.
An occurrence may come from God or from knowledge.//152 Occurrences are
broader than thoughts, because thoughts are characterized by a speech of sorts
or something similar to speech. Occurrences can be of the following types: an
occurrence of joy, an occurrence of sadness, an occurrence of contraction, an
occurrence of expansion and so on.
Witness (shahid)119
They [Sufis] frequently mention the word “witness”. One may be a witness of
knowledge, or a witness of ecstasy, or a witness of a mystical state. By the word
“witness” they mean that which is present in the heart of a man – that is, what
he constantly recollects to the extent that he continues to see and watch it, even
though he is [physically] absent from it. Any recollection that takes possession
of a man’s heart is his sign. If his heart is dominated by knowledge, then he is a
witness of knowledge; if it is ecstasy, then he is a witness of ecstasy.
The meaning of “witness” is presence. That which is present in your
heart is your witness. Someone asked al-Shibli120about witnessing. He answered:
“How can we attribute the witnessing of God to ourselves?! It is He Who is our
witness.”121By saying that “God is our witness” he implied that the recollection
of God has taken full possession of his heart, has become predominant over it
and is ever present in it. When someone’s heart becomes attached to a created
thing, they say that this thing is his witness – namely, it is ever present in his
heart. For love requires a constant recollection of the beloved and takes full
possession of [the lover’s] heart.
Some Sufis have contrived to etymologize this word in the following manner.
They say that the word “witness” is derived from [the act of] witnessing. This is
like contemplating a person who is characterized by [great] beauty. When the
contemplator’s human nature falls away from him, and when his witnessing of
that person does not distract him from the spiritual state he is in, nor does the
118 That is, those who have already attained knowledge through the intellect.
119 This term can also be translated as “sign”.
120 See pp. 61–62.
121 Or sign.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 109
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 109
company of that person have any impact on him, that person becomes a witness
of the contemplator being annihilated from his ego.//153 On the contrary, when
all these things influence him, they become a witness of the persistence of his ego
and the preservation of the characteristics of his human nature. And this may be
either to his benefit or to his detriment. The Prophet’s words “On the night of ascension I witnessed my Lord in the
most beautiful image” are sometimes interpreted in this sense – namely, “The
most beautiful image which I witnessed on that night did not prevent me from
seeing God Most High [Himself]. On the contrary, I saw the maker of [all]
images in a [certain] image and the fashioner of [all] things in a [certain] fashion.”
By this he meant the vision pertaining to knowledge, not the vision of the eye. The soul (nafs)
In the Arabic language, a thing’s “soul” is its being. However, when the Sufis
utter the word “soul” they imply neither being nor a [physical] body. Rather,
they imply the deficiencies of one’s character traits as well as one’s reprehensible
morals and deeds. The deficiencies of one’s character traits fall into two categories:
first, those which one acquires by oneself – namely, one’s acts of disobedience
and one’s sins; second, one’s [inherent] base morals. They are blameworthy in and
of themselves. However, when a man seeks to treat them and fight them, these
bad morals are extinguished in him through a strenuous and uninterrupted effort. The first group of the soul’s characteristics is anything that is absolutely
prohibited or declared dubious [by the Divine Law]. The second group is the
soul’s imperfections and baseness in general. As for concrete characteristics, they
are pride, wrath, spite, envy, bad temper, lack of tolerance, and similar character
traits.543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 108
108 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Certainty belongs to the people of intellect; the essence of certainty belongs
to the people of knowledge;118 the truth of certainty belongs to the people of
divine gnosis. Speaking about this depends on the level of one’s realization; it
goes back to what we have already mentioned, therefore we limit ourselves to this
measure in order to bring this [notion] to [your] attention.
Occurrence (warid)
They [Sufis] frequently speak about occurrences. Occurrence is a praiseworthy
thought that enters the servant’s heart without his invitation. Even if something
does not belong to the category of thoughts, it can still be considered an occurrence.
An occurrence may come from God or from knowledge.//152 Occurrences are
broader than thoughts, because thoughts are characterized by a speech of sorts
or something similar to speech. Occurrences can be of the following types: an
occurrence of joy, an occurrence of sadness, an occurrence of contraction, an
occurrence of expansion and so on.
Witness (shahid)119
They [Sufis] frequently mention the word “witness”. One may be a witness of
knowledge, or a witness of ecstasy, or a witness of a mystical state. By the word
“witness” they mean that which is present in the heart of a man – that is, what
he constantly recollects to the extent that he continues to see and watch it, even
though he is [physically] absent from it. Any recollection that takes possession
of a man’s heart is his sign. If his heart is dominated by knowledge, then he is a
witness of knowledge; if it is ecstasy, then he is a witness of ecstasy.
The meaning of “witness” is presence. That which is present in your
heart is your witness. Someone asked al-Shibli120about witnessing. He answered:
“How can we attribute the witnessing of God to ourselves?! It is He Who is our
witness.”121By saying that “God is our witness” he implied that the recollection
of God has taken full possession of his heart, has become predominant over it
and is ever present in it. When someone’s heart becomes attached to a created
thing, they say that this thing is his witness – namely, it is ever present in his
heart. For love requires a constant recollection of the beloved and takes full
possession of [the lover’s] heart.
Some Sufis have contrived to etymologize this word in the following manner.
They say that the word “witness” is derived from [the act of] witnessing. This is
like contemplating a person who is characterized by [great] beauty. When the
contemplator’s human nature falls away from him, and when his witnessing of
that person does not distract him from the spiritual state he is in, nor does the
118 That is, those who have already attained knowledge through the intellect.
119 This term can also be translated as “sign”.
120 See pp. 61–62.
121 Or sign.

The second group is the
soul’s imperfections and baseness in general. As for concrete characteristics, they
are pride, wrath, spite, envy, bad temper, lack of tolerance, and similar character
traits. However, the most difficult and objectionable characteristic of the soul is
that it imagines there is something good about it and that it deserves respect. Therefore these [features] are sometimes considered to be hidden polytheism.//154
To improve one’s moral character one has to abandon the soul and try to break
it. The best way to do this is to have recourse to the strictures of hunger, thirst,
night vigil and other types of self-exertion that lead to the weakening of [the
soul’s] power. All these practices are part of the abandonment of the soul. However, the soul may also mean a subtle substance placed in the [human]
body, which is the repository of blameworthy character traits in the same way as
the spirit is a subtle substance placed in the [human] body, which is the repository
of praiseworthy character traits. All these elements are subjugated to one another
and their sum total constitutes a human being. The spirit and the soul are subtle
substances residing in a certain form in the same way as the angels and demons
are characterized by subtlety. This is also the case with vision being the repository
of seeing, the ear being the repository of hearing, the nose being the repository
of smelling, and the mouth being the repository of tasting. The entity that hears,
sees, smells, or tastes constitutes a whole, which is a human being. Likewise, the
heart and the spirit are the repositories of praiseworthy characteristics, whereas543 Epistle 04 Chapter 2 21/12/06 12:12 PM Page 110
110 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
the soul is the repository of blameworthy ones. At the same time, the soul is part
of the whole, and the heart is part of the same whole. Therefore the name and
property go back to this same whole.
The spirit (ruh)
Those of the people of the Prophet’s Sunna who have attained true realization
hold different opinions regarding the spirits. Some of them say that they are
nothing other than life, while others argue that they are the essences placed
into the [human] bodies. Here is a subtle point: God is wont to create life in a
[human] body. As long as the spirit resides in the body, a human being remains
alive. The spirits, while they reside in bodies, may rise and depart from them at
the time of sleep, whereafter they return to the body.
Man is a combination of the spirit and the body, because God Most High,
may He be blessed, subjugated parts of this whole to one another. Resurrection
will happen to this whole, and so will reward and punishment. The souls are
created and those who insist that they are eternal commit a grave mistake.//155
And the Scriptures confirm that they are subtle essences.
The innermost self (sirr)
It seems that, like the spirits, the innermost selves are a subtle entity placed in
the [human] body. According to Sufi principles, [the innermost self] serves as
a repository of direct vision [of God], in the same way as the spirits are the
repository of love and the hearts are the repository of knowledge.
They say that the innermost self is something that allows you to catch a
glimpse [of God], while the innermost of the innermost self is that which is
known to no one but God alone. According to the terminology and principles of
the Sufis, the innermost self is more subtle than the spirit, while the spirit is
more noble than the heart. They say that the innermost selves are free from the
bondage of all things [other than God], from traces and remains. The words
“innermost self” denote the [mystical] states that are kept secret between
God – glory to Him – and His servant. This meaning is expressed in their saying:
“Our innermost selves are virgins, which cannot be deflowered by anyone’s
imagination.” They also say: “The breasts of noble men are the graveyards of
innermost secrets.” They also say: “If the bone next to my heart learns the secret
of my heart, I will surely cast it away.”
This is but a small part of the explanation of their terms and of the clarification
of the phrases by which they [Sufis] have distinguished themselves from all
others. We shall now mention a number of chapters explaining [the meaning of]
way-stations, which are the stages of the [mystical] travelers.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 111
Chapter 3
THE [MYSTICAL] STATIONS (MAQAMAT)
Repentance (tawba)
God Most High says: “And turn all together to God, O you believers; haply so
you will prosper.”1 Abu Bakr Muhammad b. al-Husayn b. Furak2 – may God
have mercy on him – related to us: Ahmad b. Mahmud b. Khurrazadh related to
us: Muhammad b. Fadl b. Jabir told us: Sa∏id b. ∏Abdallah said: Ahmad b.
Zakariya said: my father said: I heard Anas b. Malik say: I heard the Messenger
of God – may God bless and greet him – say: “One who repents from sin is like
one who has never sinned. When God loves a servant, sin will never afflict him.”
Then he recited [the following verse]: “Truly, God loves those who repent, and
He loves those who cleanse themselves.”3 Someone asked: “Messenger of God,
what is the sign of repentance?” He answered: “Remorse”.
∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Adnan al-Ahwazi related to us that Abu πl-Husayn Ahmad
b. ∏Ubayd al-Saffar said: Muhammad b. al-Fadl b. Jabir related to us that
al-Hakam b. Musa related to us that Ghassan b. ∏Ubayd b. Abi ∏Atika Tarif b.
Salman told us on the authority of Anas b. Malik that the Prophet – may God
bless and greet him and his family – said: “There is nothing dearer to God than
a repentant youth.”
Repentance is the first stage of the [mystical] wayfarers and the first station
of the seekers [of God]. In the Arabic language, the true meaning of repentance
is “return”; they say: “taba[he repented]” in the sense “He returned”. Repentance
thus is to return from what is blameworthy, according to the Divine Law, to
what is praiseworthy.//157 The Prophet – may God bless and greet him – said:
“Remorse is repentance.” The scholars of the Prophet’s Sunna, who specialize in
the fundamentals of religion, have said that the three conditions of repentance are
as follows: remorse for acts contradicting the Divine Law, immediate abandon-
ment of the sin, and resolve never to commit similar acts of disobedience. These
conditions are essential for repentance to be valid.
The scholars have said that the Prophet’s statement that remorse is repentance
emphasizes its most important aspect, in the same way as the Prophet’s saying
that the “Pilgrimage is ∏Arafat”4 points out the cornerstone of [the rite of]
pilgrimage – namely, to stand and pray there. However, this does not mean that
apart from the standing at ∏Arafat there are no other important elements of the
pilgrimage. Rather, this means that standing there is the cornerstone of the
1 Q. 24:31.
2 See Chapter 1 note 53.
3 Q. 2:222.
4 The standing of the pilgrims on the plain of ∏Arafat is considered the culmination and the
central element of the Muslim pilgrimage, or hajj.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 112
112 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Pilgrimage. Likewise, the Prophet’s saying that remorse is repentance means
that repentance is the cornerstone of remorse. Some of those who have attained
true realization have argued that remorse is sufficient to achieve repentance,
because it entails the two other conditions, since it is inconceivable that one
persists in doing something one regrets or that one regrets something one has
resolved to commit in the future. This is a general and summary definition of the
meaning of repentance. From the perspective of a more detailed elucidation and explanation,
repentance has its causes, sequence and divisions. At first, the heart awakens
from the slumber of heedlessness and the servant becomes aware of his evil
condition. He arrives at this through God’s help, as, in his mind, he begins to
listen to the exhortations of God – glory to Him – by the hearing of his heart. This is mentioned in a prophetic tradition which says: “God’s exhorter resides
in the heart of every Muslim man.” According to another tradition, “There is a
piece of flesh in every [human] body. If it is healthy, the whole body is healthy,
and if it is sick, the whole body is sick too. This is nothing but the heart.” If the
servant considers the evil he has done and sees the ugly deeds he has committed,
the desire for repentance will enter his heart along with the wish to abstain from
wrongdoing. Then God – glory to Him – will help him to strengthen his resolve,
to return [to God] in the best manner possible, and to prepare himself for the
demands of repentance.//158
The first of these demands is to part company with sinful friends – that is,
those who would try to entice him into rejecting his goal and would seek to under-
mine his sound resolve.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 111
Chapter 3
THE [MYSTICAL] STATIONS (MAQAMAT)
Repentance (tawba)
God Most High says: “And turn all together to God, O you believers; haply so
you will prosper.”1 Abu Bakr Muhammad b. al-Husayn b. Furak2 – may God
have mercy on him – related to us: Ahmad b. Mahmud b. Khurrazadh related to
us: Muhammad b. Fadl b. Jabir told us: Sa∏id b. ∏Abdallah said: Ahmad b.
Zakariya said: my father said: I heard Anas b. Malik say: I heard the Messenger
of God – may God bless and greet him – say: “One who repents from sin is like
one who has never sinned. When God loves a servant, sin will never afflict him.”
Then he recited [the following verse]: “Truly, God loves those who repent, and
He loves those who cleanse themselves.”3 Someone asked: “Messenger of God,
what is the sign of repentance?” He answered: “Remorse”.
∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Adnan al-Ahwazi related to us that Abu πl-Husayn Ahmad
b. ∏Ubayd al-Saffar said: Muhammad b. al-Fadl b. Jabir related to us that
al-Hakam b. Musa related to us that Ghassan b. ∏Ubayd b. Abi ∏Atika Tarif b.
Salman told us on the authority of Anas b. Malik that the Prophet – may God
bless and greet him and his family – said: “There is nothing dearer to God than
a repentant youth.”
Repentance is the first stage of the [mystical] wayfarers and the first station
of the seekers [of God]. In the Arabic language, the true meaning of repentance
is “return”; they say: “taba[he repented]” in the sense “He returned”. Repentance
thus is to return from what is blameworthy, according to the Divine Law, to
what is praiseworthy.//157 The Prophet – may God bless and greet him – said:
“Remorse is repentance.” The scholars of the Prophet’s Sunna, who specialize in
the fundamentals of religion, have said that the three conditions of repentance are
as follows: remorse for acts contradicting the Divine Law, immediate abandon-
ment of the sin, and resolve never to commit similar acts of disobedience. These
conditions are essential for repentance to be valid.
The scholars have said that the Prophet’s statement that remorse is repentance
emphasizes its most important aspect, in the same way as the Prophet’s saying
that the “Pilgrimage is ∏Arafat”4 points out the cornerstone of [the rite of]
pilgrimage – namely, to stand and pray there. However, this does not mean that
apart from the standing at ∏Arafat there are no other important elements of the
pilgrimage. Rather, this means that standing there is the cornerstone of the
1 Q. 24:31.
2 See Chapter 1 note 53.
3 Q. 2:222.
4 The standing of the pilgrims on the plain of ∏Arafat is considered the culmination and the
central element of the Muslim pilgrimage, or hajj.

This is nothing but the heart.” If the
servant considers the evil he has done and sees the ugly deeds he has committed,
the desire for repentance will enter his heart along with the wish to abstain from
wrongdoing. Then God – glory to Him – will help him to strengthen his resolve,
to return [to God] in the best manner possible, and to prepare himself for the
demands of repentance.//158
The first of these demands is to part company with sinful friends – that is,
those who would try to entice him into rejecting his goal and would seek to under-
mine his sound resolve. This can only be accomplished through perseverance in
contemplation, which will increase his desire for repentance and multiply the
motives that impel him to fulfill his resolve by strengthening in him fear [of God]
and hope [for His mercy]. Then the knot of his persistence in evildoing around
his heart will be loosened, as a result of which he will refrain from prohibited
things and rein in his ego from pursuing its passions. At that point, he will
abandon his sin once and for all and resolve to commit no sinful deeds ever again. If he has proceeded to live in accordance with his goal and act in accordance with
his resolve, this means that he has achieved true success in his undertaking. However, should he violate [the demands] of repentance once or twice, his
determination would require renewal. This thing may happen many times. However, one should not despair of repentance of such people, for “To each
period is a decree established.”5
It is related that Abu Sulayman al-Darani6said: “I attended the assembly of
a preacher. While I was there, his words left a deep impression on my heart. However, when I was about to depart, nothing of it remained in my heart. I
returned a second time. This time, the effect of his words stayed in my heart
5 Q. 13:38. 6 See IM, pp. 36–39.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 113
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 113
until I returned to my house. I then broke the means of disobedience and
embarked on the [Sufi] path.” It is related that [on hearing this story] Yahya b. Mu∏adh exclaimed: “A sparrow captured a crane!”7By the sparrow he meant that
preacher, and by the crane Abu Sulayman al-Darani. It is related that Abu Hafs al-Haddad8 said: “I abandoned a certain
reprehensible action, then returned to it. Then the action abandoned me, and I
did not return to it again after that.”
It is related that at the beginning of his affair9Abu ∏Amr b. Nujayd attended
the sessions of Abu ∏Uthman [al-Hiri].10 His speeches affected his heart so that
he repented. Then he experienced a relapse and began to hide from Abu ∏Uthman
whenever he saw him and stopped attending his sessions. One day, Abu ∏Uthman
met him [on the street]. Abu ∏Amr turned away and went down another path. Abu ∏Uthman followed and pursued him until he caught up with him, and
exclaimed://159 “My son, don’t keep company with anyone who only loves
you when you are sinless. In this situation, Abu ∏Uthman can be of help to you!”
Abu ∏Amr b. Nujayd repented, returned to his intention [to become a Sufi] and
achieved success in it. I heard the shaykh Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say
that one seeker (murid) repented, then experienced a relapse. One day, he was
wondering whether to return [to his repentance] and what would happen if he
did. Suddenly he heard a voice: “O so-and-so! You obeyed Us, and We thanked
you; you abandoned Us, and We granted you a respite; if you return to Us, We
shall accept you!” The young man returned to his intention and succeeded in it. When the servant abandons acts of disobedience, when the knot of persistence
[in sinful deeds] is loosened from his heart, when he resolves never to commit
any of them, while at the same time experiencing pangs of sincere remorse in
his heart, he will regret his behavior.This is nothing but the heart.” If the
servant considers the evil he has done and sees the ugly deeds he has committed,
the desire for repentance will enter his heart along with the wish to abstain from
wrongdoing. Then God – glory to Him – will help him to strengthen his resolve,
to return [to God] in the best manner possible, and to prepare himself for the
demands of repentance.//158
The first of these demands is to part company with sinful friends – that is,
those who would try to entice him into rejecting his goal and would seek to under-
mine his sound resolve. This can only be accomplished through perseverance in
contemplation, which will increase his desire for repentance and multiply the
motives that impel him to fulfill his resolve by strengthening in him fear [of God]
and hope [for His mercy]. Then the knot of his persistence in evildoing around
his heart will be loosened, as a result of which he will refrain from prohibited
things and rein in his ego from pursuing its passions. At that point, he will
abandon his sin once and for all and resolve to commit no sinful deeds ever again. If he has proceeded to live in accordance with his goal and act in accordance with
his resolve, this means that he has achieved true success in his undertaking. However, should he violate [the demands] of repentance once or twice, his
determination would require renewal. This thing may happen many times. However, one should not despair of repentance of such people, for “To each
period is a decree established.”5
It is related that Abu Sulayman al-Darani6said: “I attended the assembly of
a preacher. While I was there, his words left a deep impression on my heart. However, when I was about to depart, nothing of it remained in my heart. I
returned a second time. This time, the effect of his words stayed in my heart
5 Q. 13:38. 6 See IM, pp. 36–39.

You obeyed Us, and We thanked
you; you abandoned Us, and We granted you a respite; if you return to Us, We
shall accept you!” The young man returned to his intention and succeeded in it. When the servant abandons acts of disobedience, when the knot of persistence
[in sinful deeds] is loosened from his heart, when he resolves never to commit
any of them, while at the same time experiencing pangs of sincere remorse in
his heart, he will regret his behavior. He then begins to blame himself for his
evil states and ugly deeds. All this makes his repentance complete: his striving
is now sincere; he has substituted solitude for the company of evil friends by
withdrawing from them and has chosen a solitary retreat on account of them; he
spends his days and nights in lamenting [his former evil ways] and is showing
sincere regret in all of his states; by the rain of his tears he erases the traces of his
stumbling; by the beauty of his repentance he treats the wounds of his failings;
he is distinguished from his peers by his emaciated look, which points to the
authenticity of his state. No one can fulfill all this without first satisfying the demands of his
adversaries and abandoning acts of injustice he has been guilty of perpetrating. For the first stage of repentance is to satisfy his adversaries to the fullest extent
7 These images are apparently taken from the famous Arab proverb according to which “one
thousand cranes flying in the air cannot substitute one sparrow that you hold in your hand”. 8 See IM, “Index” under “Abu Hafs al-Haddad”. 9 That is, his entering the Sufi path. 10 See Chapter 1, pp. 45–46.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 114
114 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
possible. When he has enough means to meet their claims or when they decide
to declare him free from their claims, so be it. If not, then he must firmly resolve
in his heart to fulfill their claims, as soon as an opportunity presents itself and to
turn to God with sincere prayers and supplications on their behalf.//160
Those who repent have [special] features and states, which characterize
them. They are considered to be part and parcel of repentance, insofar as they
are characteristic of those who possess them. However, they are not necessarily
a precondition for the soundness of one’s repentance. Statements of Sufi masters
about the meaning of repentance point in this direction. I heard the master Abu
∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say: “Repentance consists of
three parts. Its beginning is tawba[repentance], its middle part is inaba [turning
to God], and its end is awba [return to God].” Thus he placed repentance at
the beginning, return [to God] at the end and turning to God in the middle. Whoever repents out of fear of [divine] punishment acquires repentance. Whoever repents out of desire of [divine] reward acquires turning to God. And
whoever repents out of compliance with [divine] command not out of desire of
reward, nor out of fear of punishment, acquires return to God. They also say that repentance is the characteristic of the believers, because
God Most High said: “And turn all together to God [in repentance], O you
believers.”11 As for turning to God, this is the characteristic of [God’s] friends
and those brought nigh, for God Most High says: “[Whosoever] … turns with a
penitent heart.”12As for return to God, this is the characteristic of the prophets
and messengers, for God Most High said: “How excellent a servant [of God] he
[Solomon] was.You obeyed Us, and We thanked
you; you abandoned Us, and We granted you a respite; if you return to Us, We
shall accept you!” The young man returned to his intention and succeeded in it. When the servant abandons acts of disobedience, when the knot of persistence
[in sinful deeds] is loosened from his heart, when he resolves never to commit
any of them, while at the same time experiencing pangs of sincere remorse in
his heart, he will regret his behavior. He then begins to blame himself for his
evil states and ugly deeds. All this makes his repentance complete: his striving
is now sincere; he has substituted solitude for the company of evil friends by
withdrawing from them and has chosen a solitary retreat on account of them; he
spends his days and nights in lamenting [his former evil ways] and is showing
sincere regret in all of his states; by the rain of his tears he erases the traces of his
stumbling; by the beauty of his repentance he treats the wounds of his failings;
he is distinguished from his peers by his emaciated look, which points to the
authenticity of his state. No one can fulfill all this without first satisfying the demands of his
adversaries and abandoning acts of injustice he has been guilty of perpetrating. For the first stage of repentance is to satisfy his adversaries to the fullest extent
7 These images are apparently taken from the famous Arab proverb according to which “one
thousand cranes flying in the air cannot substitute one sparrow that you hold in your hand”. 8 See IM, “Index” under “Abu Hafs al-Haddad”. 9 That is, his entering the Sufi path. 10 See Chapter 1, pp. 45–46.

And
whoever repents out of compliance with [divine] command not out of desire of
reward, nor out of fear of punishment, acquires return to God. They also say that repentance is the characteristic of the believers, because
God Most High said: “And turn all together to God [in repentance], O you
believers.”11 As for turning to God, this is the characteristic of [God’s] friends
and those brought nigh, for God Most High says: “[Whosoever] … turns with a
penitent heart.”12As for return to God, this is the characteristic of the prophets
and messengers, for God Most High said: “How excellent a servant [of God] he
[Solomon] was. He was ever returning to God in penitence.”13
I heard that Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami said: I heard that
Mansur b. ∏Abdallah said: I heard Ja∏far b. Nusayr say: I heard al-Junayd say:
“Repentance has three meanings. The first is regret; the second is the resolve not
to revert to what God has forbidden; the third is the striving to right the wrongs
done [to other people].”
Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] said: “Repentance is to refrain from procras-
tination.”//161
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say:
I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah al-Qurashi say: I heard
al-Junayd say: I heard al-Harith [al-Muhasibi] say: “I have never said: ‘My God, I
ask You for repentance.’ Instead, I have said: ‘I ask You for the desire to repent.’”
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Shirazi – may God have mercy on him – reported to us:
I heard Abu ∏Abdallah b. Muslih at Ahwaz say: I heard Ibn Ziri14 say: I heard
al-Junayd say: “One day I came to al-Sari [al-Saqati]. When I saw that he was
distraught, I asked him what had happened. He said: ‘A young man came to me
11 Q. 24:31. 12 Q. 50:33; according to Arberry’s translation, 50:32. 13 Q. 38:30 (according to Arberry’s translation, 38:29) and 38:44. 14 Or “Ibn Zizi”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 115
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 115
and asked about repentance. I told him: “Repentance is that you not forget your
sins.” He contradicted me saying: “On the contrary, repentance is that you do
forget your sins!”’ I [al-Junayd] told him [al-Sari] that, in my opinion, the young
man was right. He asked me why. I said that if I were to find myself in the state
of estrangement [from God], then to be transported to the state of proximity [to
Him], then my remembrance of estrangement in the state of purity is nothing
but estrangement. On hearing this, al-Sari fell silent.”
I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard
Abu Nasr al-Sarraj15 say: someone asked Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] about
repentance. He answered: “It is when you don’t forget your sins.” When al-Junayd
was asked about repentance, he answered that this is when you forget your
sins. Abu Nasr al-Sarraj said: “Sahl was referring to the state of beginners
and novices, which is constantly changing. As for al-Junayd, he referred to the
repentance of those who have attained the truth; for they do not remember their
sins, because the majesty of God Most High and the remembrance of Him have
gained complete mastery over their hearts.” He [Abu Nasr] then argued that this
was similar to Ruwaym’s response to a question about repentance, according to
which one should repent from one’s repentance. When someone asked Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri about repentance he answered that
the common people repent from sins, whereas the elect repent from forgetfulness. Abu πl-Husayn al-Nuri said that repentance means to repent from everything
other than God – may He be exalted and glorified. I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Abdallah
b. ∏Ali b.And
whoever repents out of compliance with [divine] command not out of desire of
reward, nor out of fear of punishment, acquires return to God. They also say that repentance is the characteristic of the believers, because
God Most High said: “And turn all together to God [in repentance], O you
believers.”11 As for turning to God, this is the characteristic of [God’s] friends
and those brought nigh, for God Most High says: “[Whosoever] … turns with a
penitent heart.”12As for return to God, this is the characteristic of the prophets
and messengers, for God Most High said: “How excellent a servant [of God] he
[Solomon] was. He was ever returning to God in penitence.”13
I heard that Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami said: I heard that
Mansur b. ∏Abdallah said: I heard Ja∏far b. Nusayr say: I heard al-Junayd say:
“Repentance has three meanings. The first is regret; the second is the resolve not
to revert to what God has forbidden; the third is the striving to right the wrongs
done [to other people].”
Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] said: “Repentance is to refrain from procras-
tination.”//161
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say:
I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah al-Qurashi say: I heard
al-Junayd say: I heard al-Harith [al-Muhasibi] say: “I have never said: ‘My God, I
ask You for repentance.’ Instead, I have said: ‘I ask You for the desire to repent.’”
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Shirazi – may God have mercy on him – reported to us:
I heard Abu ∏Abdallah b. Muslih at Ahwaz say: I heard Ibn Ziri14 say: I heard
al-Junayd say: “One day I came to al-Sari [al-Saqati]. When I saw that he was
distraught, I asked him what had happened. He said: ‘A young man came to me
11 Q. 24:31. 12 Q. 50:33; according to Arberry’s translation, 50:32. 13 Q. 38:30 (according to Arberry’s translation, 38:29) and 38:44. 14 Or “Ibn Zizi”.

Muhammad al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Abdallah
b. ∏Ali b. Muhammad al-Tamimi say: “What a great difference is between
someone who repents from his sins, someone who repents from his forgetfulness
and someone who repents from the awareness of his own good works.” Al-Wasiti
said://162 “The sincere repentance16 leaves no trace of disobedience on the
penitent, be it hidden or manifest. If someone’s repentance is pure he does not
care where he spends the night or where he spends the day.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Muhammad b. Ibrahim b. al-Fadl al-Hashimi say: I heard Muhammad b. al-Rumi say: I heard
Yahya b. Mu∏adh say: “My God, I do not say, ‘I have repented and will not go
back [on my repentance], because I know my true nature. Nor do I pledge to
abandon any and all sins, because I know well how weak I am.’ I say: ‘Perhaps I will
not go back to my old ways, because I might die before that!’” Dhu πl-Nun said:
“To ask for [God’s] forgiveness without abandoning the sin is the repentance
of liars.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard al-Nasrabadhi say: I heard Ibn
Yazdaniyar say that he was asked: “If God’s servant departs to meet God, with
what principle should he comply?” He said: “He should not return to that which
15 The author of a famous Sufi manual entitled “The Book of the Essentials of Sufism”. See IM,
pp. 118–120. 16 Q. 66:8.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 116
116 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
he abandoned; nor should he pay any heed to anything save the One for the
sake of Whom he has departed this world.17He should then guard his innermost
heart from noticing that which he has just left behind him.” It was said to him:
“This is the property of someone who has departed from existence. What about
someone who has departed from non-existence?” He answered: “Sweetness in
the future substitutes for the bitterness in the past.”
Someone asked al-Bushanji about repentance. He answered: “If you remember
a sin without taking delight in its recollection, it is repentance.” Dhu πl-Nun said:
“The true essence of repentance is that ‘the land for all its breadth [is] narrowfor
you’18 so that you find no rest for you in it; then your own self becomes narrow
for you, as God Most High has mentioned in His Book: ‘When the earth became
narrow for them … and their souls became narrow for them, and they thought
there was no shelter from God except in Him, then He turned towards them,19
so that they might also turn.’”20
Ibn ∏Ataπ [al-Adami] said: “There are two kinds of repentance: the repentance
of return and the repentance of obedience. The repentance of return [to God] is
that someone repents out of fear of God’s punishment, whereas the repentance
of obedience is that someone repents out of a feeling of shame for God’s
generosity [toward him].” Abu Hafs was asked: “Why does a repentant person
loathe this world?”//163 He answered: “Because it is the place in which he
commits his sins.” He was then asked: “Isn’t it also the place in which God
has honored him with repentance?” He answered: “One can have no doubt
about one’s sins, whereas one can never be certain that one’s repentance has been
accepted.”
Al-Wasiti said: “David – peace be upon him – rejoiced at first, then the
sweetness of his obedience [toward God] caused him to breathe a deep sigh. His
second spiritual state was more complete than the time when his [true] condition
was hidden from him.” A Sufi master said: “The repentance of liars is on the
tips of their tongues.” He meant that they constantly repeat [the phrase]: “May
God forgive me.” Someone asked Abu Hafs about repentance. He answered:
“The servant has nothing to do with repentance, because it comes to him, not
from him.”
It is said that God – glory to Him – revealed to Adam the following words:
“Adam, you have bequeathed to your progeny hardship and affliction, whereas
I have bequeathed to them repentance. Whoever among them calls to Me, as
you have done, I will answer his prayer as I have answered yours. Adam, I will
resurrect the repentant from their graves delighted and laughing. Their prayers
will be answered!”
17 That is, God.
18 Q. 9:25.
19 That is, repented on their behalf.
20 Q. 9:118.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 117
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 117
A man said to Rabi∏a:21“I have committed many sins and acts of disobedience.
If I decide to turn to God, would He turn to me?” She answered: “No. Only if
He were to turn to you, then you would be able to turn to Him.”
Know that God Most High said: “Truly, God loves those who repent, and
He loves those who cleanse themselves.”22A man who has succumbed to an error
can be certain of his sin. However, if he decides to repent, he can never be certain
that God accepts his repentance, especially if he considers himself to be naturally
entitled to God’s love. In order for the sinner to reach the stage at which he
will discover signs of God’s love toward him, he must travel a great distance.
Therefore it is incumbent upon everyone who knows that he has committed a sin
that requires repentance to embrace humility, to renounce all his faults and to
ask for God’s forgiveness, as in the saying: “Persevere in the dread [of divine
punishment] until the appointed time!”23 The Greatest of All Speakers24 said:
“Say: ‘If you love God, follow me, and God will love you.’”25It was part of the
Prophet’s custom to ask constantly for God’s forgiveness. He – may God bless
and greet him – said: “My heart is covered by a cloud. Therefore I ask for God’s
forgiveness//164 seventy times a day.”
I heard Abu ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard al-Husayn b. ∏Ali say: I heard
Muhammad b. Ahmad say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Sahl say: I heard Yahya b.
Mu∏adh say: “One slip after repentance is uglier than seventy before it.” I heard
Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah al-Razi say: I heard Abu
∏Uthman [al-Hiri] say commenting on the words of God Almighty and Glorious:
“‘Truly, unto Us is their return.’26 It means, ‘Unto Us is their return, even
though they have persisted in acts of disobedience for a long time.’”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Abu Bakr
al-Razi say: I heard Abu ∏Umar al-Anmati say: “∏Ali b. ∏Isa the vizier27rode in a
great procession. Some strangers among the onlookers began to inquire: ‘Who is
this? Who is this?’ A woman standing by the side of the road said: ‘How long will
you keep asking, “Who is this? Who is this?” This is a servant of God, who has
fallen from God’s grace, so He has afflicted him with what you see.’ When ∏Ali
b. ∏Isa heard this, he returned to his house and resigned from the vizirate. He
then departed for Mecca and never left it again.”
21 Rabi∏a al-∏Adawiyya (d. 185/801), a legendary female ascetic from Basra. See IM, pp. 26–32.
22 Q. 2:222.
23 That is, the day of your death.
24 That is, God.
25 Q. 3:31; 3:29, according to Arberry’s translation.
26 Q. 88:25.
27 A famous ∏Abbasid statesman, who was known for his piety and asceticism. He died in
334/946.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 118
118 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Striving (mujahada)
God Most High said: “And those who strive for Our sake, surely We shall guide
them in Our ways; God is with the good-doers.”28
Abu πl-Husayn ∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi related to us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd
al-Saffar related to us: al-∏Abbas b. al-Fadl al-Isqati related to us: Ibn Kasib
related to us: Ibn ∏Uyayna related to us from ∏Ali b. Zayd from Abu Nadra from
Abu Sa∏id al-Khudri, who said that the Messenger of God was asked about
the most noble kind of spiritual self-exertion (jihad).29He answered: “A word of
justice spoken before a despotic ruler.” On hearing this tears started to flow from
Abu Sa∏id’s eyes.
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“If someone adorns his externals with striving, God will beautify his internal self
with the vision of Him.” God Most High said: “And those who strive for Our
sake, surely We shall guide them in Our ways.”30//165
Know that anyone who does not strive [for God’s sake] from the beginning,
will find no trace of this [Sufi] path. I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman
al-Sulami say: I heard Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi say: “Anyone who thinks that
anything of the path will be revealed or unveiled for him without him exerting
himself constantly is in error.” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may
God have mercy on him – say: “Whoever does not stand up at the beginning of
his journey will not be allowed to sit down at its end.” I also heard him say:
“When people say, ‘Movement is a blessing’, they imply that bestirring oneself
externally brings blessings internally.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Ahmad b. ∏Ali b. Ja∏far say: I
heard al-Husayn b. ∏Alluya say: Abu Yazid said: “For twelve years I was the
blacksmith of my soul; then for five years I was the mirror of my heart; then for
one year I was looking at that which lay between the two, and lo, around the waist
of my external being was an infidel’s girdle.31 I then labored for twelve more
years to cut it. I then looked, and lo, I saw an infidel’s belt wrapped around my
inner self. So I spent five more years trying to cut it. As I was wondering how I
could cut it, [the truth] was revealed to me. I looked at God’s creatures and saw
them to be dead. So I uttered ‘God is great’ over them four times.”32
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas
al-Baghdadi say: I heard Ja∏far say: I heard al-Junayd say: I heard al-Sari
[al-Saqati] say: “O young men! Exert yourselves to the fullest, before you have
28 Q. 29:69.
29 The Arabic words “striving” (mujahada) and “self-exertion [on the path of God]” (jihad)
are derived from the Arabic verb jahada, which means to “exert oneself”, “to take pains”, “to
strive”.
30 Q. 29:69.
31 Protected minorities under Muslim rule were required to wear outward signs of their
non-Muslim status, including a girdle.
32 Part of the funeral prayer.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 119
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 119
reached my age and become decrepit and incapable, as I have.” [He said this],
although at that time the young men were nowhere near him in regard to the
worship of God. I also heard him say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard ∏Abd
al-∏Aziz al-Najrani say: I heard al-Hasan al-Qazzaz say: “This matter33 is based
on three things://166 that you don’t eat unless you are starving; that you don’t
sleep unless you are overpowered [by slumber]; and that you don’t speak unless
this is absolutely necessary.” I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard Muhammad b. Hamid say: I heard Ahmad b. Khadrawayh
say: I heard Ibrahim b. Adham say: “No one will ever attain the degree of the
righteous until he has overcome six obstacles: first, that he shut the door of
bounty and open the door of hardship; second, that he shut the door of vainglory
and open the door of humility; third, that he shut the door of repose and open
the door of earnest striving; fourth, that he shut the door of sleep and open the
door of night vigil; fifth, that he shut the door of wealth and open the door of
poverty; sixth, that he shut the door of hope [for a better future] and open the
door of readiness for death.”
Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami said: I heard my grandfather Abu
∏Amr b. Nujayd say: “When your soul is honored, your faith is debased.” I heard
Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say: “If a Sufi says after
five days [of fasting] that he is hungry, then send him to the bazaar and tell him
to earn his livelihood!”
Know that the root and foundation of striving is to wean one’s soul from its
habits and to accustom it to resist its passions at all times. The soul has two traits
that prevent it from doing good. It is totally engrossed in pursuing its desires
and refusal to perform acts of obedience.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 118
118 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Striving (mujahada)
God Most High said: “And those who strive for Our sake, surely We shall guide
them in Our ways; God is with the good-doers.”28
Abu πl-Husayn ∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi related to us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd
al-Saffar related to us: al-∏Abbas b. al-Fadl al-Isqati related to us: Ibn Kasib
related to us: Ibn ∏Uyayna related to us from ∏Ali b. Zayd from Abu Nadra from
Abu Sa∏id al-Khudri, who said that the Messenger of God was asked about
the most noble kind of spiritual self-exertion (jihad).29He answered: “A word of
justice spoken before a despotic ruler.” On hearing this tears started to flow from
Abu Sa∏id’s eyes.
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“If someone adorns his externals with striving, God will beautify his internal self
with the vision of Him.” God Most High said: “And those who strive for Our
sake, surely We shall guide them in Our ways.”30//165
Know that anyone who does not strive [for God’s sake] from the beginning,
will find no trace of this [Sufi] path. I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman
al-Sulami say: I heard Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi say: “Anyone who thinks that
anything of the path will be revealed or unveiled for him without him exerting
himself constantly is in error.” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may
God have mercy on him – say: “Whoever does not stand up at the beginning of
his journey will not be allowed to sit down at its end.” I also heard him say:
“When people say, ‘Movement is a blessing’, they imply that bestirring oneself
externally brings blessings internally.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Ahmad b. ∏Ali b. Ja∏far say: I
heard al-Husayn b. ∏Alluya say: Abu Yazid said: “For twelve years I was the
blacksmith of my soul; then for five years I was the mirror of my heart; then for
one year I was looking at that which lay between the two, and lo, around the waist
of my external being was an infidel’s girdle.31 I then labored for twelve more
years to cut it. I then looked, and lo, I saw an infidel’s belt wrapped around my
inner self. So I spent five more years trying to cut it. As I was wondering how I
could cut it, [the truth] was revealed to me. I looked at God’s creatures and saw
them to be dead. So I uttered ‘God is great’ over them four times.”32
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas
al-Baghdadi say: I heard Ja∏far say: I heard al-Junayd say: I heard al-Sari
[al-Saqati] say: “O young men! Exert yourselves to the fullest, before you have
28 Q. 29:69.
29 The Arabic words “striving” (mujahada) and “self-exertion [on the path of God]” (jihad)
are derived from the Arabic verb jahada, which means to “exert oneself”, “to take pains”, “to
strive”.
30 Q. 29:69.
31 Protected minorities under Muslim rule were required to wear outward signs of their
non-Muslim status, including a girdle.
32 Part of the funeral prayer.

The soul has two traits
that prevent it from doing good. It is totally engrossed in pursuing its desires
and refusal to perform acts of obedience. When the soul tries to break loose
[from the rider] in pursuit of its passion, he must curb it with the reins of piety. When it becomes refractory in complying with God’s will, he should steer it
toward opposing its desires. When it rebels and flies into rage, he must bring it
under control, for no struggle has a better outcome than one in which anger
is conquered by good moral character and its embers are extinguished by [a
display] of gentleness. And when the soul discovers the sweet wine of relaxation
and finds comfort only in displaying her fine traits and in preening herself before
anyone who cares to look at her and takes notice of her, it is necessary to break
her of her habit and to make her stop at the abode of humiliation by reminding
her of her small worth, her lowly origins and the turpitude of her deeds. The common folk strive to protect their actions [from sin], while the
elect endeavor to purify their [internal] states. For the strictures of hunger and
night vigils are simple and easy, whereas the improvement of a man’s morals and
cleansing//167 them of evil traits is much more difficult. One of the soul’s most sinister traits is its tendency to take delight in fulsome
praise. Anyone who partakes of this cup will carry the weight of heaven and earth
33 That is, Sufism.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 120
120 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
on his eyelids! A sign of this [condition] is that when this drink [of praise] is
withheld from him, his spiritual state reverts to indolence and ineptitude. For many years a certain Sufi master used to pray in the front row of the
mosque which he frequented. One day something prevented him from arriving
early at the mosque, so he prayed in the last row. After that he was not seen there
for a while. When someone asked him about the reason for that, he answered:
“I prayed in the front row for so many years. As I was performing my daily
prayers, I thought that I was dedicating them to God only. The day I was late I
was overcome with a shame of sorts, because the people in the mosque saw me
in the last row. I thus came to realize that all my zeal all these years had derived
from my desire to be seen doing my prayers.”
It is related that Abu Muhammad al-Murta∏ish once said: “I used to go on the
pilgrimage without any provisions or riding animal. I then realized that all of my
effort was tarnished by my taking pleasure in doing that. One day my mother
asked me to bring a jar of water for her. When I found that request burdensome,
I suddenly realized that my eagerness to perform the pilgrimages sprang from
my soul’s taking pleasure in that and from a blemish that still remained in it. For if my soul had been annihilated [by ascetic rigors], it wouldn’t have found it
burdensome to do something that is prescribed by the Divine Law.”34
There was a woman who had reached a very old age. Someone asked her
about her condition. She answered: “When I was young, I found in my soul the
powers and drives that I regarded as coming from the strength of my [spiritual]
state. But when I grew older, they disappeared.The soul has two traits
that prevent it from doing good. It is totally engrossed in pursuing its desires
and refusal to perform acts of obedience. When the soul tries to break loose
[from the rider] in pursuit of its passion, he must curb it with the reins of piety. When it becomes refractory in complying with God’s will, he should steer it
toward opposing its desires. When it rebels and flies into rage, he must bring it
under control, for no struggle has a better outcome than one in which anger
is conquered by good moral character and its embers are extinguished by [a
display] of gentleness. And when the soul discovers the sweet wine of relaxation
and finds comfort only in displaying her fine traits and in preening herself before
anyone who cares to look at her and takes notice of her, it is necessary to break
her of her habit and to make her stop at the abode of humiliation by reminding
her of her small worth, her lowly origins and the turpitude of her deeds. The common folk strive to protect their actions [from sin], while the
elect endeavor to purify their [internal] states. For the strictures of hunger and
night vigils are simple and easy, whereas the improvement of a man’s morals and
cleansing//167 them of evil traits is much more difficult. One of the soul’s most sinister traits is its tendency to take delight in fulsome
praise. Anyone who partakes of this cup will carry the weight of heaven and earth
33 That is, Sufism.

She answered: “When I was young, I found in my soul the
powers and drives that I regarded as coming from the strength of my [spiritual]
state. But when I grew older, they disappeared. It was then that I realized that these
powers and drives came from the strength of my youth, not from the strength
of my spiritual states, as I had imagined.” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq
say: “Every Sufi master who has heard this story, could not help feeling great
compassion for this old lady and would say that she was absolutely right.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. Shadhan say: I heard Yusuf b. al-Husayn say: I heard Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri say:
“God graces His servant with no greater honor than to show him the depravity
of his soul. At the same time, God subjects His servant to no greater humiliation
than to conceal from him the depravity of his soul.”//168 I also heard him
[Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard
Ibrahim al-Khawwas say: “There has not been a single frightful thing upon
which I would not embark.”35I also heard him say: I heard ∏Abdallah al-Razi say:
I heard Muhammad b. al-Fadl say: “Rest is to be free from the aspirations of
one’s soul.”
I heard Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman [al-Sulami] say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah
say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say: “Misfortunes come upon mankind from
three things: disease in natural disposition, clinging to [evil] habits, and bad
34 The Qurπan enjoins Muslims to treat their parents kindly. See, e.g., 17:24. 35 According to one commentary, al-Khawwas refers here to the rigorous ascetic and self-
abnegating practices to which he has subjected himself in his search for God’s pleasure.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 121
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 121
company.”I [Mansur b. ∏Abdallah] asked him about disease of natural disposition. He answered that it was eating forbidden food. I asked him about clinging to
[evil] habits. He answered that it was looking at and listening to forbidden things
and slander. I asked him about bad company. He answered that it was to follow
any passion that arises in your soul. I also heard him say: I heard al-Nasrabadhi say: “Your soul is your prison. When you have escaped from it, you will find yourself in eternal ease.” I also heard
him say: I heard Muhammad al-Farraπ say: I heard Abu πl-Husayn al-Warraq
say: “In the beginning of this affair of ours36 at the mosque of Abu ∏Uthman
al-Hiri, our finest practice was to give away everything that was given to us [as
pious donation], to spend the night without knowing what our sustenance would
be the next day, and when any of us encountered anything disagreeable we took
no revenge [on those responsible for it]. Instead, we excused the offenders and
showed humility toward them. And when disdain for someone entered our hearts,
we placed ourselves at his service and treated him with kindness until [this feeling]
ceased.” Abu Hafs [al-Haddad] said: “The soul is nothing but darkness; its
secret [heart] is its lamp; and the light of this lamp is Godspeed. Whoever is not
accompanied by God’s assistance in his secret [heart], lingers in total darkness.”
The imam and master al-Qushayri said that the meaning of his words “[the
soul’s] lamp is its secret [heart]” is the secret that exists between the servant and
God Most High. This is the site of his sincerity by means of which the servant
becomes aware that everything originates from God and not from him or by him. As a result, he frees himself from pretensions to any power and ability [to act
on his own] at any time.She answered: “When I was young, I found in my soul the
powers and drives that I regarded as coming from the strength of my [spiritual]
state. But when I grew older, they disappeared. It was then that I realized that these
powers and drives came from the strength of my youth, not from the strength
of my spiritual states, as I had imagined.” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq
say: “Every Sufi master who has heard this story, could not help feeling great
compassion for this old lady and would say that she was absolutely right.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. Shadhan say: I heard Yusuf b. al-Husayn say: I heard Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri say:
“God graces His servant with no greater honor than to show him the depravity
of his soul. At the same time, God subjects His servant to no greater humiliation
than to conceal from him the depravity of his soul.”//168 I also heard him
[Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard
Ibrahim al-Khawwas say: “There has not been a single frightful thing upon
which I would not embark.”35I also heard him say: I heard ∏Abdallah al-Razi say:
I heard Muhammad b. al-Fadl say: “Rest is to be free from the aspirations of
one’s soul.”
I heard Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman [al-Sulami] say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah
say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say: “Misfortunes come upon mankind from
three things: disease in natural disposition, clinging to [evil] habits, and bad
34 The Qurπan enjoins Muslims to treat their parents kindly. See, e.g., 17:24. 35 According to one commentary, al-Khawwas refers here to the rigorous ascetic and self-
abnegating practices to which he has subjected himself in his search for God’s pleasure.

This is the site of his sincerity by means of which the servant
becomes aware that everything originates from God and not from him or by him. As a result, he frees himself from pretensions to any power and ability [to act
on his own] at any time. He then becomes protected from the evil of his soul
through God’s assistance, for if this assistance is not extended to him,//169 his
knowledge of his self and of God will be of no use to him. Therefore, the Sufi
masters have said: “He who has no secret [heart] is doomed to persist [in sin].”
Abu ∏Uthman [al-Hiri] said: “A man cannot see the faults of his soul, if
he keeps finding anything good in it. Only he who blames his soul at all times
will be able to see its faults.” Abu Hafs [al-Haddad] said: “How swift is the
destruction of one who is unable to recognize his faults, for disobedience is the
messenger of unbelief.” Abu Sulayman [al-Darani] said: “I do not consider a
single action of my soul to be good and do not expect it to be counted in my
favor.” Al-Sari [al-Saqati] said: “Beware of those who frequent the rich, those
who recite the Qurπan in the marketplace and those learned who serve worldly
rulers.” Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri said: “Corruption afflicts men due to the following
six things. First, when their desire to work for the sake of the Hereafter is weak;
second, when men’s bodies become hostages to their lusts; third, when they hold
high hopes for the future, while their life is so short; fourth, when they strive to
please creatures instead of pleasing their Creator; fifth, when they pursue their
passions, while turning their backs on the Prophet’s custom (sunna); sixth, when
36 That is, the Sufi path.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 122
122 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
they justify their failings by mentioning the minor slips committed by the noble
forbears,37while burying their many virtues.
Retreat (khalwa) and seclusion (∏uzla)
Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan related to us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Basri
related to us: ∏Abd al-‘Aziz b. Mu∏awiyya told us: al-Qa∏nabi told us: ∏Abd al-∏Aziz
b. Abi Hazim related to us on the authority of his father, who related to him on
the authority of Ba∏ja b. ∏Abdallah b. Badr al-Juhani on the authority of Abu
Hurayra, who said: “The Messenger of God – may God’s peace and blessing be
upon him – said: ‘The best of all possible ways of living is for a man to take the
reins of his horse [to fight] in the way of God; if he hears sounds of alarm and
panic, he is on his horse’s back seeking death or martyrdom in the right place.
Or this38 is the life of a man who tends his sheep and goats on a mountain peak
or at the bottom of a valley; he performs his prayers, gives alms and worships his
Lord until “there comes to him the Certainty [of death]”.39 People see nothing
but good from him.’”//170
Retreat belongs to the elect, while seclusion is a sign of the people of union
[with God]. It is incumbent on the seeker, who embarks on the path [to God],
to seclude himself from his own kind. Then, at the end of his path, he should
practice seclusion in order to achieve intimacy with God.
When a man chooses seclusion he must be sure that he practices it in order
to protect other people from his evil, not in order to be safe from their evil. The
former comes from his thinking little of himself, while the latter comes from
seeing himself to be better than others. A man who thinks little of himself is
humble, whereas a man who considers himself to be more worthy than others
is vain.
Someone saw a monk and asked him: “You are a monk, aren’t you?” He
answered: “No, I am guarding a dog. My soul is a dog that bites people. I therefore
have removed it from them, so that they be safe from it.”
Once someone passed by a righteous man, who, on seeing him, pulled his
garment away from him. The passer-by said: “Why are you pulling your garments
away from me? My clothes are not impure!” The righteous man answered: “I
assumed that you would think that my clothes were impure, so I removed them
from your way lest they soil your clothes, not the other way around!”
One of the rules of seclusion is that the man who goes into seclusion must
acquire enough knowledge to solidify his faith in the oneness of God in order not
to be seduced by Satan’s whisperings. Then he should acquire enough knowledge
of the Divine Law to be able to fulfill his religious duties, so that his undertaking
would rest on a solid foundation. In essence, seclusion is but separation from
37 That is, the members of the first Muslim community.
38 That is, the best possible way to live one’s life.
39 Q. 15:99.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 123
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 123
reprehensible character traits. Its purpose is to turn [bad] qualities into [good]
ones, not to withdraw from familiar places [into the desert]. Thus, when someone
asks [Sufis] about the gnostic (∏arif), they answer, “One who is here and not here”,
meaning that he is [outwardly] with creatures, while in his heart he is separate
from them. I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“Wear with people what they wear and eat what they eat, but separate yourself
from them in your heart of hearts!” I also heard him say: “A man came to me and
said: ‘I have come to you from far away.’ I told him: ‘This matter40 is obtained
neither by crossing great distances nor by subjecting oneself to the strictures of
travel. Separate from your soul even by a single step, and you will achieve your
goal!’”
It is related that Abu Yazid said: “In a dream, I saw my Lord – may He be
glorified and exalted. I asked Him: ‘How shall I find You?’ He answered: ‘Leave
your soul behind and come!’” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami
say: I heard Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi say: “Whoever chooses retreat over the
company of men must be free from all recollections except the recollection of
his Lord; he must be free from all desires except the desire of God’s satisfaction;
he must also be free from all demands of his soul. If he does not meet this
condition, his retreat will plunge him into temptation or calamity.” It is said that
separation from one’s self in retreat is the most perfect way to solace.//171
Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “Consider whether your intimacy is your intimacy with
retreat, or with Him in retreat. If your intimacy is with retreat, it will disappear
when you abandon your retreat. However, if your intimacy is with Him, it will
persist regardless of the place you are in, be it in the desert or in the steppe.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Mansur b.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 122
122 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
they justify their failings by mentioning the minor slips committed by the noble
forbears,37while burying their many virtues.
Retreat (khalwa) and seclusion (∏uzla)
Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan related to us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Basri
related to us: ∏Abd al-‘Aziz b. Mu∏awiyya told us: al-Qa∏nabi told us: ∏Abd al-∏Aziz
b. Abi Hazim related to us on the authority of his father, who related to him on
the authority of Ba∏ja b. ∏Abdallah b. Badr al-Juhani on the authority of Abu
Hurayra, who said: “The Messenger of God – may God’s peace and blessing be
upon him – said: ‘The best of all possible ways of living is for a man to take the
reins of his horse [to fight] in the way of God; if he hears sounds of alarm and
panic, he is on his horse’s back seeking death or martyrdom in the right place.
Or this38 is the life of a man who tends his sheep and goats on a mountain peak
or at the bottom of a valley; he performs his prayers, gives alms and worships his
Lord until “there comes to him the Certainty [of death]”.39 People see nothing
but good from him.’”//170
Retreat belongs to the elect, while seclusion is a sign of the people of union
[with God]. It is incumbent on the seeker, who embarks on the path [to God],
to seclude himself from his own kind. Then, at the end of his path, he should
practice seclusion in order to achieve intimacy with God.
When a man chooses seclusion he must be sure that he practices it in order
to protect other people from his evil, not in order to be safe from their evil. The
former comes from his thinking little of himself, while the latter comes from
seeing himself to be better than others. A man who thinks little of himself is
humble, whereas a man who considers himself to be more worthy than others
is vain.
Someone saw a monk and asked him: “You are a monk, aren’t you?” He
answered: “No, I am guarding a dog. My soul is a dog that bites people. I therefore
have removed it from them, so that they be safe from it.”
Once someone passed by a righteous man, who, on seeing him, pulled his
garment away from him. The passer-by said: “Why are you pulling your garments
away from me? My clothes are not impure!” The righteous man answered: “I
assumed that you would think that my clothes were impure, so I removed them
from your way lest they soil your clothes, not the other way around!”
One of the rules of seclusion is that the man who goes into seclusion must
acquire enough knowledge to solidify his faith in the oneness of God in order not
to be seduced by Satan’s whisperings. Then he should acquire enough knowledge
of the Divine Law to be able to fulfill his religious duties, so that his undertaking
would rest on a solid foundation. In essence, seclusion is but separation from
37 That is, the members of the first Muslim community.
38 That is, the best possible way to live one’s life.
39 Q. 15:99.

However, if your intimacy is with Him, it will
persist regardless of the place you are in, be it in the desert or in the steppe.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I
heard Muhammad b. Hamid say: “A man came to visit Abu Bakr al-Warraq. As
he was about to depart, he asked [al-Warraq] to counsel him. He said: ‘I have
found the best of this world and the next in retreat and frugality, while I have
found the worst of the two worlds in abundance and mixing with people.’” I also
heard him say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard al-Jurayri say, when
asked about seclusion: “It is when you enter into the crowd, while guarding your
innermost self from being crowded by the crowd and secluding it from sins. In
this way your innermost self will be bound to God.” They also say: “Whoever
chooses seclusion, attains seclusion.”41
Sahl [al-Tustari] said: “[Your] seclusion is not sound unless you eat what is
lawful [under the Divine Law]. And your eating of lawful food is not sound
unless you render to God His due.” Dhu πl-Nun said: “I have seen nothing more
conducive to sincerity than retreat.” Abu ∏Abdallah al-Ramli said: “Let your true
companion be solitude, your food be hunger, your speech be intimate prayers. 40 That is, the knowledge of the Sufi path. 41 According to another reading, “Whoever chooses seclusion, attains greatness” (al-∏izzu lahu).543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 124
124 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Then and only then, will you join God after you die.” Dhu πl-Nun said: “Someone
who hides from mankind in retreat is not like one who hides from mankind in God.”
I heard Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I
heard Ja∏far b. Nusayr say: I heard al-Junayd say: “The hardship of seclusion is
easier to bear than the enticement of [human] company.” Mak’hul said: “While
there is some good in mixing with people, safety lies in seclusion.” Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “Solitude is the companion of the truthful.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: I heard al-Shibli say: “Ruin, ruin,
O people!” Someone asked him: “What is the sign of ruin?” He answered: “One
of the signs of ruin is intimacy with people!” Yahya b. Abu Kathir said: “Whoever
mixes with people seeks to wheedle them, and whoever wheedles them, behaves
hypocritically toward them.” Shu∏ayb b. Harb said: “I came to see Malik b. Mas∏ud in Kufa, when he was alone in his house. I asked him whether he felt
lonely. He responded: ‘I don’t think that one can be alone with God!’”
I heard Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say:
I heard Abu ∏Umar al-Anmati say: I heard al-Junayd say: “Whoever wants his
religion to be sound and his body and heart to be relieved should isolate himself
from people. This is a desolate time and wise is he who chooses seclusion!” I also
heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard Abu Bakr//172 al-Razi say: Abu Ya∏qub
al-Susi said: “Only the strong are capable of withdrawing themselves from people. For the likes of us living in a community is more beneficial, because some of us
imitate others [in good works].”
I heard Abu ∏Uthman Sa∏id b. Abu Sa∏id say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas
al-Damaghani say: “Al-Shibli gave me the following advice: ‘Stick to solitude,
erase your name from [the list of] living people and face the wall42until you die!’”
A man came to Shu∏ayb b. Harb.However, if your intimacy is with Him, it will
persist regardless of the place you are in, be it in the desert or in the steppe.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I
heard Muhammad b. Hamid say: “A man came to visit Abu Bakr al-Warraq. As
he was about to depart, he asked [al-Warraq] to counsel him. He said: ‘I have
found the best of this world and the next in retreat and frugality, while I have
found the worst of the two worlds in abundance and mixing with people.’” I also
heard him say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard al-Jurayri say, when
asked about seclusion: “It is when you enter into the crowd, while guarding your
innermost self from being crowded by the crowd and secluding it from sins. In
this way your innermost self will be bound to God.” They also say: “Whoever
chooses seclusion, attains seclusion.”41
Sahl [al-Tustari] said: “[Your] seclusion is not sound unless you eat what is
lawful [under the Divine Law]. And your eating of lawful food is not sound
unless you render to God His due.” Dhu πl-Nun said: “I have seen nothing more
conducive to sincerity than retreat.” Abu ∏Abdallah al-Ramli said: “Let your true
companion be solitude, your food be hunger, your speech be intimate prayers. 40 That is, the knowledge of the Sufi path. 41 According to another reading, “Whoever chooses seclusion, attains greatness” (al-∏izzu lahu).

Abu Sa∏id say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas
al-Damaghani say: “Al-Shibli gave me the following advice: ‘Stick to solitude,
erase your name from [the list of] living people and face the wall42until you die!’”
A man came to Shu∏ayb b. Harb. The latter asked him: “What brings you here?”
He answered: “I want to be with you.” Shu∏ayb replied: “O my brother! Worship
of God cannot be achieved in the company [of men]. He who is not intimate with
God, cannot be intimate with anything!” Some people asked a Sufi: “What is the
most remarkable thing you have encountered in your travels?” He replied: “Once
I met al-Khidr.43He sought my company, but I declined out of fear that it might
interfere with my reliance on God.” Another Sufi was asked if there was anyone
with whom he would feel intimate. He answered “Yes!”, whereupon he stretched
his hand toward his copy of the Qurπan and pressed it to his heart saying, “This!”
They had this meaning in mind when they recited the following verse:
Your books44are always with me; they do not leave my bed for a single
moment. And in them there is a cure for the sickness I conceal. 42 That is, the prayer niche. 43 A popular person in Sufi literature and Middle Eastern folklore, who is sometimes identified
with the prophet Elijah (Ilyas). Al-Khidr is believed to be immortal; he travels freely across
land and sea, helping those in need. Sufis consider him to be the model friend of God (wali). 44 Or “letters”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 125
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 125
A man asked Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri: “When will seclusion become right for me?”
He answered: “When you are able to seclude yourself from your own self!”
Ibn al-Mubarak45was asked about the cure of the heart. He answered: “[It is] to
avoid mixing with people!” It is said that when God wants to take his servant
from the ignominy of disobedience to the glory of obedience, He graces him with
the intimacy of solitude, enriches him with contentment, and allows him to see
his faults. Whoever has been given all this, has been given the best of the two
worlds!”
Fear of God (taqwa)
God Most High said: “Surely the noblest among you in the sight of God is the
most Godfearing of you.”46Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan informed us:
Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Saffar informed us: Muhammad b. al-Fadl b. Jabir informed
us: ∏Abd al-A∏la al-Qurashi47 related to us: Ya∏qub al-∏Ammi told us on the
authority of Layth, on the authority of Mujahid, on the authority of Abu
Sa∏id al-Khudri, who said that a man came to the Prophet – may God bless
and greet him – and said: “O Prophet of God, advise me!” He answered: “Hold
onto fear of God, for it is the quintessence of all good! Perform jihad; it is the
monasticism//173 of the Muslim! Practice the remembrance of God, for it is a
light for you!”
∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan said: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd said: ∏Abbas b. al-Fadl
al-Asqati related to us: Ahmad b. Yunus related to us: Abu Hurmuz Nafi∏
b. Hurmuz related to us: I heard Anas [b. Malik] say that someone asked [the
Prophet]: “Prophet of God, who are the family of Muhammad?” He answered:
“Everyone who fears God!”
Fear of God is the quintessence of all good things. The True Reality of fear
of God consists of protecting oneself from God’s punishment through obedience
to Him. It is said: “So-and-so protected himself with his shield.” The root of fear
of God is to protect oneself from associating anything or anyone with God; this
is to be followed by protecting oneself from acts of disobedience and offenses;
this is followed by protecting oneself from dubious things; this is followed by
protecting oneself from unnecessary things.
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him –
say: “For each of these divisions there is a special chapter.” Some [scholars]
have interpreted the Qurπanic phrase “[O believers,] fear God as He should be
feared”48 as meaning that God is to be obeyed and not disobeyed, remembered
and not forgotten, thanked and not unrequited.
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Ahmad b. ∏Ali
b. Ja∏far say: I heard Ahmad b. ‘Asim say: I heard Sahl b. ∏Abdallah say: “There
45 An early Muslim ascetic and fighter for religion, who died in 181/797. See IM, pp. 21–22.
46 Q. 49:13.
47 In another reading “al-Narsi”.
48 Q. 3:102; 3:97 according to Arberry’s translation.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 126
126 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
is no helper but God, no guide but the Messenger of God, no provisions but fear
of God, no deed but one that is graced by patience [in worship].”
I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard al-Kattani say: “This world is
apportioned according to affliction and the next according to fear of God.” I also
heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard al-Jurayri say:
“No one who has not appointed fear of God as an arbiter between himself
and God will ever attain unveiling and contemplation [of divine mysteries].”
Al-Nasrabadhi said: “Fear of God means that the servant of God fears everything
except God may He be great and exalted!” Sahl [al-Tustari] said: “Whoever desires
to achieve perfection in fear of God must abandon all sins.” Al-Nasrabadhi said:
“He who practices fear of God aspires to separate himself from this world,
because God – glory to Him – said: ‘The next world is better for those who are
Godfearing. Will you not understand?’”49A Sufi said: “When someone’s fear of
God is perfect, God makes turning away from this world easy for him.”
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Rudhbari said: “Fear of God is to shun anything that
distances you from God.”//174 Dhu πl-Nun said: “The Godfearing person is
one who does not defile his exterior with acts of opposition [to God’s will] nor
his interior with diversions [from God] and occupies the station of complete
agreement with God.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say:
“I heard Abu πl-Husayn al-Farisi say: I heard Ibn ∏Ataπ say: “Fear of God has
two sides: outward and inward. Its outward side is the observance of [God’s]
boundaries. Its inward side is [pure] intention and sincerity.”
Dhu πl-Nun [al-Misri] said:
There is no living except with men whose hearts long for fear of God and
Whose repose is in the remembrance [of God’s name]
[Their] contentment is in the spirit of certainty and its sweetness
As the nursing infant is content with [its mother’s] lap.
They say that a man’s fear of God is evident in three things: full trust in God
with respect to what has not been granted to him; full satisfaction with what has
been granted to him; and full patience with respect to what has eluded him. Talq
b. Habib said: “Fear of God is to act in obedience to God, illuminated by His
light, and to fear His punishment.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Muhammad
al-Farraπ relate from Abu Hafs the following saying: “Fear of God can only be
achieved by [eating] that which is lawful. There is no other way.” I also heard
him say; I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard Abu πl-Husayn al-Zanjani
say: “He whose capital is fear of God gains a profit that tongues are unable to
describe.” Al-Wasiti said: “Fear of God is to be wary of one’s fear of God”,
meaning to take no notice of it.
49 Q. 6:32.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 127
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 127
The one who fears God [should be] like Ibn Sirin.50 Once he bought forty
jars of butter. His servant found a [dead] mouse in one of them. Ibn Sirin asked
him: “What jar did you find it in?”51The servant said that he did not remember,
whereupon Ibn Sirin dumped all of the jars onto the ground. Or one should
be like Abu Yazid [al-Bistami], who once purchased a measure of saffron in
Hamadan.52A little of it was left over and when he returned to Bistam53he found
two ants in it. He then returned to Hamadan and laid down these two ants. It is related that Abu Hanifa54 used to avoid sitting in the shade of his
neighbor’s tree. He would explain this [behavior] by referring to a report from
the Prophet that says: “Any loan that brings interest is usury.” It is told that Abu
Yazid was washing his robe in the desert [outside the city] with a companion
of his. The companion said to him: “Let’s hang our robes on the wall of this
vineyard.” Abu Yazid responded: “No, one cannot drive a nail into other people’s
wall.” The companion said: “Let’s hang them on this tree.” He answered: “No,
for they may break the branches.” “Then let’s spread them out on the grass!”
“No,” responded Abu Yazid. “No, the grass is fodder for the animals. We cannot
block them off from it!” He turned his back to the sun, with his robe on his back,
and waited until one side was dry. He then turned it around and waited until the
other side was dry.//175
It is told that once Abu Yazid went to the congregational mosque and drove
his staff into the ground. It fell upon the staff of an old man next to it and
knocked it down. The old man had to lean over in order to pick up his staff. Abu
Yazid followed the old man to his house and asked for his forgiveness.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 126
126 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
is no helper but God, no guide but the Messenger of God, no provisions but fear
of God, no deed but one that is graced by patience [in worship].”
I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard al-Kattani say: “This world is
apportioned according to affliction and the next according to fear of God.” I also
heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard al-Jurayri say:
“No one who has not appointed fear of God as an arbiter between himself
and God will ever attain unveiling and contemplation [of divine mysteries].”
Al-Nasrabadhi said: “Fear of God means that the servant of God fears everything
except God may He be great and exalted!” Sahl [al-Tustari] said: “Whoever desires
to achieve perfection in fear of God must abandon all sins.” Al-Nasrabadhi said:
“He who practices fear of God aspires to separate himself from this world,
because God – glory to Him – said: ‘The next world is better for those who are
Godfearing. Will you not understand?’”49A Sufi said: “When someone’s fear of
God is perfect, God makes turning away from this world easy for him.”
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Rudhbari said: “Fear of God is to shun anything that
distances you from God.”//174 Dhu πl-Nun said: “The Godfearing person is
one who does not defile his exterior with acts of opposition [to God’s will] nor
his interior with diversions [from God] and occupies the station of complete
agreement with God.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say:
“I heard Abu πl-Husayn al-Farisi say: I heard Ibn ∏Ataπ say: “Fear of God has
two sides: outward and inward. Its outward side is the observance of [God’s]
boundaries. Its inward side is [pure] intention and sincerity.”
Dhu πl-Nun [al-Misri] said:
There is no living except with men whose hearts long for fear of God and
Whose repose is in the remembrance [of God’s name]
[Their] contentment is in the spirit of certainty and its sweetness
As the nursing infant is content with [its mother’s] lap.
They say that a man’s fear of God is evident in three things: full trust in God
with respect to what has not been granted to him; full satisfaction with what has
been granted to him; and full patience with respect to what has eluded him. Talq
b. Habib said: “Fear of God is to act in obedience to God, illuminated by His
light, and to fear His punishment.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Muhammad
al-Farraπ relate from Abu Hafs the following saying: “Fear of God can only be
achieved by [eating] that which is lawful. There is no other way.” I also heard
him say; I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard Abu πl-Husayn al-Zanjani
say: “He whose capital is fear of God gains a profit that tongues are unable to
describe.” Al-Wasiti said: “Fear of God is to be wary of one’s fear of God”,
meaning to take no notice of it.
49 Q. 6:32.

The old man had to lean over in order to pick up his staff. Abu
Yazid followed the old man to his house and asked for his forgiveness. He said:
“The reason for your leaning over was my negligence in driving my staff into the
ground, for this caused you to do so.”
Once ∏Utba al-Ghulam was seen breaking into a sweat in wintertime. When
asked why, he responded: “This is the place where I disobeyed my Lord!” On
being asked for an explanation, he said: “I scraped off a chunk of clay from this
wall and had a guest of mine cleanse his hands with it. However, I neglected to
ask the owner of the wall for permission.”
Ibrahim b. Adham said: “Once I was spending the night in the desert near
Jerusalem. After some time two angels descended. One of them asked the other:
“Who is this?” He answered: “Ibrahim b. Adham.” “That is the one whom God
– glory to Him – lowered by one degree!” “Why?” inquired the other angel. “Because he bought some dates in Basra and one of the dates belonging to
the grocer fell in among his dates and he did not return it to its owner.” Ibrahim
50 An early Muslim scholar who was renowned for his piety and scrupulousness. He died in
110/728. 51 According to the shari∏a, any food that came in contact with a dead animal was considered
impure. 52 A city in Iran. 53 His native city. 54 A renowned jurist, who founded a school of law named after him. He died in150/767.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 128
128 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
continued: “I returned to Basra and purchased dates from that man, and [while
doing this] dropped one date into his dates. I then returned to Jerusalem and
spent the night in the desert [again]. After some time, I saw two angels descend
from the sky. One said to the other: “Who is here?” He answered: “Ibrahim b. Adham.” He then added: “His rank is raised.”
It is said that fear of God has several degrees: the common people shun
associating anything with God (shirk); the elect shun sins; the prophets shun
attributing acts [to anyone other than Him] – in other words, their fear comes to
them from Him and is [directed] to Him. The Commander of the Faithful, ∏Ali – may God be pleased with him – said:
“The most noble of mankind in this world are the generous and the best of
mankind in the Hereafter are those who fear God.”
∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi informed us: Abu πl-Husayn al-Basri informed us:
Bishr b. Musa informed us: Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. al-Mubarak related to
us on the authority of Yahya b. Ayyub, on the authority of ∏Ubaydallah b. Zuhr,
on the authority of ∏Ali b. Yazid, on the authority of al-Qasim, on the authority
of Abu Umama from the Prophet – may God’s peace and blessing be upon him
– that he said: “If someone has looked at the beauty of a woman and lowered
his sight with the first look, God will make for him an act of worship whose
sweetness will reside in his heart [forever].”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Farghani say: “Once al-Junayd
was sitting with Ruwaym [b.The old man had to lean over in order to pick up his staff. Abu
Yazid followed the old man to his house and asked for his forgiveness. He said:
“The reason for your leaning over was my negligence in driving my staff into the
ground, for this caused you to do so.”
Once ∏Utba al-Ghulam was seen breaking into a sweat in wintertime. When
asked why, he responded: “This is the place where I disobeyed my Lord!” On
being asked for an explanation, he said: “I scraped off a chunk of clay from this
wall and had a guest of mine cleanse his hands with it. However, I neglected to
ask the owner of the wall for permission.”
Ibrahim b. Adham said: “Once I was spending the night in the desert near
Jerusalem. After some time two angels descended. One of them asked the other:
“Who is this?” He answered: “Ibrahim b. Adham.” “That is the one whom God
– glory to Him – lowered by one degree!” “Why?” inquired the other angel. “Because he bought some dates in Basra and one of the dates belonging to
the grocer fell in among his dates and he did not return it to its owner.” Ibrahim
50 An early Muslim scholar who was renowned for his piety and scrupulousness. He died in
110/728. 51 According to the shari∏a, any food that came in contact with a dead animal was considered
impure. 52 A city in Iran. 53 His native city. 54 A renowned jurist, who founded a school of law named after him. He died in150/767.

al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Farghani say: “Once al-Junayd
was sitting with Ruwaym [b. Ahmad], al-Jurayri, and Ibn ∏Ataπ [al-Adami].55//176
Al-Junayd said: ‘One cannot be saved unless one is sincere in taking refuge with
God, for God Most High said: “And to the three who were left behind, until the
earth, for all its breadth, became narrow for them.”’56Ruwaym – may God have
mercy upon him – said: ‘One cannot be saved unless one is sincere in the fear of
God, for God Most High said: “But God shall deliver those who were Godfearing
to their security.”’ Al-Jurayri said: ‘One cannot be saved unless one keeps
trust, for God Most High said: “Those who fulfill God’s covenant and break not
the compact.”’57 Ibn ∏Ataπ said: ‘One cannot be saved unless one has become
ashamed of oneself in truth, for God Most High said: “Does not he know that
God sees [everything]?”’”58
The master and imam59 said: “One can be saved only by divine order and
decree, for God Most High said: ‘As for those unto whom the ample reward has
55 They were members of al-Junayd’s inner circle; the last named was also a partisan of al-Hallaj. 56 Q. 9:118; according to most exegetes, this verse refers to three Companions of the Prophet,
who refused to participate in his military campaign. Later on they repented and were tormented
by the feeling of uncertainty as to their status in the eyes of God – namely, whether He had
pardoned them. 57 Q. 13:20. 58 Q. 96:4. 59 That is, al-Qushayri.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 129
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 129
gone forth from us, [they shall be kept far from it60].’”61 He also said: “One can
be saved only by pre-determined choice [of God], for God Most High said: ‘We
chose them and guided them to a straight path.’”62
Scrupulousness (wara∏)
Abu πl-Husayn63 ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Ibrahim b. Muhammad b. Yahya al-
Muzakki informed us: Muhammad b. Dawud b. Sulayman al-Zahid informed
us: Muhammad b. al-Hasan b. Qutayba informed us: Ahmad b. Abu Tahir
al-Khurasani told us: Yahya b. al-∏Ayzar said: Muhammad b. Yusuf al-Firyabi
told us on the authority of Sufyan on the authority of al-Ajlah on the authority
of ∏Abdallah b. Burayda on the authority of Abu πl-Aswad al-Duπali on the
authority of Abu Dharr that the Messenger of God – may God’s blessing and
peace be upon him – said: “One of the best features of a man’s Islam is his giving
up that which does not concern him.”
The imam and master [al-Qushayri] – may God be pleased with him – said:
“Scrupulousness is giving up dubious things.” Likewise, Ibrahim b. Adham
said: “Scrupulousness is giving up whatever is dubious and whatever does not
concern you”, which means giving up that which is superfluous.//177
Abu Bakr al-Siddiq64 – may God be pleased with him – said: “We used to
abandon seventy kinds of permitted things out of fear of stepping into only one
thing that is forbidden.” The Prophet – may God’s peace and blessing be upon
him – told Abu Hurayra: “Be scrupulous and you will be among God’s greatest
servants!”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas
al-Baghdadi say: I heard Ja∏far b. Muhammad say: I heard al-Junayd say: I heard
al-Sari [al-Saqati] say: “The most scrupulous men of their times were: Hudhayfa
b. al-Mar∏ashi,65Yusuf b. Asbat, Ibrahim b. Adham and Sulayman al-Khawwas.
They stuck to scrupulousness under any circumstances, and when acquisition of
that which is lawful became difficult to them, they took recourse in the absolute
minimum.” I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard Abu πl-Qasim al-Dimashqi
say: I heard al-Shibli say: “Scrupulousness is to refrain from everything other
than God Most High.” I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: Abu Ja∏far al-Razi
informed us: al-∏Abbas b. Hamza told us: Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari told us: Ishaq
b. Khalaf told us: “To be scrupulous in speech is harder than being scrupulous
in [dealing] with gold and silver. Likewise, to abstain from worldly authority
(riπasa) is harder than to abstain from gold and silver, since one expends them
freely in one’s quest for worldly authority.
60 That is, the hellfire.
61 Q. 21:101.
62 Q. 6:87.
63 An alternative reading has “Abu πl-Hasan”.
64 The first successor of the prophet Muhammad (caliph), who died in 11/634.
65 According to an alternative reading, “al-Murta∏ish”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 130
130 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Abu Sulayman al-Darani said: “Scrupulousness is the beginning of abstention,
just as contentment is an [essential] part of satisfaction.” Abu ∏Uthman [al-Hiri]
said: “The reward for being scrupulous is the lightness of reckoning [on the Day
of Judgement].” Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “Scrupulousness consists of embracing
the provisions of [religious] knowledge without [delving into] interpretation of it.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard al-Husayn b. Ahmad b. Ja∏far
say: I heard Muhammad b. Dawud al-Dinawari say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. al-Jallaπ
say: “I know someone who lived in Mecca for thirty years. During that time he
drank nothing of the water of the Zamzam well66 except that which he would
draw with his own leather pitcher and his own rope. Furthermore, [throughout
these years] he would never eat any food imported from Egypt.”67//178
I also heard him say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard ∏Ali b. Musa
al-Taharti say: “Once a small coin belonging to ∏Abdallah b. Marwan fell into a
filthy well. He spent thirteen dinarsin wages to pay for retrieving it. When asked
about that, he responded: “The name of God Most High was inscribed on it!” I
also heard him say: I heard Abu πl-Hasan al-Farisi say: I heard Ibn ∏Alluya say:
I heard Yahya b. Mu∏adh say: “There are two kinds of scrupulousness: the
scrupulousness of the externals, which means that one moves only for the sake
of God Most High; and the scrupulousness of the interior, which means that
only God and God alone can enter your heart.”
Yahya b. Mu∏adh also said: “One who is neglectful of the fine points of
scrupulousness will not receive a sublime gift [from God].” Likewise, it is said:
“He who observes his religion meticulously will see his rank raised in importance
at the Resurrection.” Ibn al-Jallaπ also said: “He whose poverty is not accompanied
by fear of God consumes that which is manifestly forbidden.” Yunus b.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 129
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 129
gone forth from us, [they shall be kept far from it60].’”61 He also said: “One can
be saved only by pre-determined choice [of God], for God Most High said: ‘We
chose them and guided them to a straight path.’”62
Scrupulousness (wara∏)
Abu πl-Husayn63 ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Ibrahim b. Muhammad b. Yahya al-
Muzakki informed us: Muhammad b. Dawud b. Sulayman al-Zahid informed
us: Muhammad b. al-Hasan b. Qutayba informed us: Ahmad b. Abu Tahir
al-Khurasani told us: Yahya b. al-∏Ayzar said: Muhammad b. Yusuf al-Firyabi
told us on the authority of Sufyan on the authority of al-Ajlah on the authority
of ∏Abdallah b. Burayda on the authority of Abu πl-Aswad al-Duπali on the
authority of Abu Dharr that the Messenger of God – may God’s blessing and
peace be upon him – said: “One of the best features of a man’s Islam is his giving
up that which does not concern him.”
The imam and master [al-Qushayri] – may God be pleased with him – said:
“Scrupulousness is giving up dubious things.” Likewise, Ibrahim b. Adham
said: “Scrupulousness is giving up whatever is dubious and whatever does not
concern you”, which means giving up that which is superfluous.//177
Abu Bakr al-Siddiq64 – may God be pleased with him – said: “We used to
abandon seventy kinds of permitted things out of fear of stepping into only one
thing that is forbidden.” The Prophet – may God’s peace and blessing be upon
him – told Abu Hurayra: “Be scrupulous and you will be among God’s greatest
servants!”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas
al-Baghdadi say: I heard Ja∏far b. Muhammad say: I heard al-Junayd say: I heard
al-Sari [al-Saqati] say: “The most scrupulous men of their times were: Hudhayfa
b. al-Mar∏ashi,65Yusuf b. Asbat, Ibrahim b. Adham and Sulayman al-Khawwas.
They stuck to scrupulousness under any circumstances, and when acquisition of
that which is lawful became difficult to them, they took recourse in the absolute
minimum.” I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard Abu πl-Qasim al-Dimashqi
say: I heard al-Shibli say: “Scrupulousness is to refrain from everything other
than God Most High.” I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: Abu Ja∏far al-Razi
informed us: al-∏Abbas b. Hamza told us: Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari told us: Ishaq
b. Khalaf told us: “To be scrupulous in speech is harder than being scrupulous
in [dealing] with gold and silver. Likewise, to abstain from worldly authority
(riπasa) is harder than to abstain from gold and silver, since one expends them
freely in one’s quest for worldly authority.
60 That is, the hellfire.
61 Q. 21:101.
62 Q. 6:87.
63 An alternative reading has “Abu πl-Hasan”.
64 The first successor of the prophet Muhammad (caliph), who died in 11/634.
65 According to an alternative reading, “al-Murta∏ish”.

Mu∏adh say: “There are two kinds of scrupulousness: the
scrupulousness of the externals, which means that one moves only for the sake
of God Most High; and the scrupulousness of the interior, which means that
only God and God alone can enter your heart.”
Yahya b. Mu∏adh also said: “One who is neglectful of the fine points of
scrupulousness will not receive a sublime gift [from God].” Likewise, it is said:
“He who observes his religion meticulously will see his rank raised in importance
at the Resurrection.” Ibn al-Jallaπ also said: “He whose poverty is not accompanied
by fear of God consumes that which is manifestly forbidden.” Yunus b. ∏Ubayd
said: “Scrupulousness is to abandon every dubious thing and to call your ego to
account with every moment.”
Sufyan al-Thawri said: “I have not seen anything easier than scrupulousness. Whenever something leaves a mark on your soul, abandon it!” Ma∏ruf al-Karkhi
said: “Guard your tongue from praise as you guard it from censure.” Bishr b. al-Harith said: “The three hardest things are: to be generous in penury; to be
scrupulous in seclusion; and to tell the truth to someone whom you fear or
expect some benefit from.”
It is said that the sister of Bishr al-Hafi came to Ahmad b. Hanbal68and said:
“We were spinning on the roof of our house, when a group of the Zahiri guard69
66 The sacred well located in the Meccan sanctuary. 67 That is, the food of which provenance he was not sure. 68 A famous scholar of Baghdad (d.241/855), who founded a school of law named after him. He
was famous for his piety. 69 That is, representatives of the state government, who were seen by many of the righteous as
corrupt and despotic. The implications of this story in the context of the ambivalent relations
between Ibn Hanbal (a model traditionalist scholar) and Bishr (a model ascetic) are discussed
in Michael Cooperson, “Ahmad Ibn Hanbal and Bishr al-Hafi”, Studia Islamica, 86/2 (1997),
pp. 71–101.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 131
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 131
passed us by with their torches. The light [of their torches] fell upon us. Was
it permissible for us to spin by their light?” Ahmad [b. Hanbal] asked her:
“Who are you? May God keep you in good health!” She said: “I am Bishr
al-Hafi’s sister.”//179 Ahmad wept and said: “Your house is [the seat] of true
scrupulousness. Therefore, do not spin in the light [of their torches]!”
∏Ali al-∏Attar said: “[One day] I was walking through the streets of Basra. [I
saw] a few old men sitting there, while some young boys played nearby. I asked
[them]: ‘Aren’t you ashamed of [playing in the presence of] these elders?’ One of
the boys answered: ‘These elders have very little in the way of scrupulousness,
so they command little respect!’”
It is said that Malik b. Dinar resided in Basra for forty years. However, he
did not consider it proper to eat the dates of that city, be they fresh or dried. He
died without tasting any of them even once. Each time the season for ripe dates
had passed he would say: “O people of Basra, this stomach of mine has missed
nothing of this,70nor has anything been added to you.” Someone asked Ibrahim
b. Adham: “Why don’t you drink water from the Zamzam well?” He answered:
“If I had a bucket [of my own], I would drink it!”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “Whenever al-Harith al-Muhasibi
stretched his hand toward any food of suspicious origin, a vein in his fingertip
would begin to throb and he would know that it was not permissible for him.
[Likewise,] once Bishr al-Hafi was invited to a meal and some food was placed
in front of him. He tried to reach out his hand for the food, but his hand would
not stretch. He repeated this three times, until a man who knew him said: ‘His
hand cannot reach out to touch dubious food. Why did the host bother to invite
a man like this to his party?’”
Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Yahya al-Sufi informed us: I heard ∏Abdallah
b. ∏Ali b. Yahya al-Tamimi say: I heard Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Salim at
Basra say: Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] was asked about that which is absolutely
lawful. He answered: “This is something with which one cannot disobey
God Most High.” Sahl also said: “This is something with which God is not
forgotten.”
Once al-Hasan al-Basri entered Mecca and saw one of the children of ∏Ali b.
Abi Talib – may God be pleased with him – resting his back against a wall of the
Ka∏ba and preaching to people. Al-Hasan rushed to him and said: “What is the
foundation of religion?” He answered: “Scrupulousness!” [Al-Hasan] then asked:
“What is the ruin of religion?” He answered: “Greed!” Al-Hasan marveled at
him. Al-Hasan said: “One tiny measure (mithqal) of true scrupulousness is better
than a thousand measures of fasting and prayer.”//180 God Most High revealed
to Moses – peace and blessings be upon him: “The ones nearest to Me have
reached their position only through scrupulousness and abstention.”
70 That is, dates.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 132
132 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Abu Hurayra71 said: “Those who are scrupulous and abstain [from the
delights of this world] today will be God’s closest friends tomorrow.” Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] said: “A person who does not adhere to scrupulousness
would eat an elephant’s head, yet would remain hungry.” It is related that someone
brought to ∏Umar b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz72 some musk that was taken as spoils of war. He held his nose closed, saying: “Its only merit is its scent and I would hate to
discover its scent without the rest of the Muslims being able to partake of it.”
Someone asked Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri about scrupulousness. He responded:
“Abu Salih Hamdun [al-Qassar] was attending to his friend at his last moment. When the man died, Abu Salih blew out the oil lamp. Someone asked him about
this. He answered: ‘Until this moment the oil has belonged to him, but now it
belongs to his heirs. Go look for some other oil!’”
Kahmas said: “I committed a sin over which I have wept for forty years. Once a brother of mine came to visit me. I bought a piece of fried fish for him. When he had finished [eating it], I took a piece of clay from my neighbor’s wall
so that he could wash his hands with it. However, I forgot to ask the neighbor’s
permission!”
It is related that a certain man wrote a note, while residing in a rented house. He wanted to blot what he had written with some dust from the wall of the
house. It occurred to him that the house was rented, but he thought that this was
of little importance. So he blotted his writing with dust. He then heard a voice
say: “He who thinks little of dust [today] will learn that he has a long accounting
to do tomorrow!”
Ahmad b. Hanbal pawned a bucket with a grocer at Mecca – may God
Most High protect it. When he wanted to redeem it, the grocer brought out two
buckets saying: “Take whichever of the two is yours!” Ahmad said: “I am not
sure which bucket is mine.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 131
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 131
passed us by with their torches. The light [of their torches] fell upon us. Was
it permissible for us to spin by their light?” Ahmad [b. Hanbal] asked her:
“Who are you? May God keep you in good health!” She said: “I am Bishr
al-Hafi’s sister.”//179 Ahmad wept and said: “Your house is [the seat] of true
scrupulousness. Therefore, do not spin in the light [of their torches]!”
∏Ali al-∏Attar said: “[One day] I was walking through the streets of Basra. [I
saw] a few old men sitting there, while some young boys played nearby. I asked
[them]: ‘Aren’t you ashamed of [playing in the presence of] these elders?’ One of
the boys answered: ‘These elders have very little in the way of scrupulousness,
so they command little respect!’”
It is said that Malik b. Dinar resided in Basra for forty years. However, he
did not consider it proper to eat the dates of that city, be they fresh or dried. He
died without tasting any of them even once. Each time the season for ripe dates
had passed he would say: “O people of Basra, this stomach of mine has missed
nothing of this,70nor has anything been added to you.” Someone asked Ibrahim
b. Adham: “Why don’t you drink water from the Zamzam well?” He answered:
“If I had a bucket [of my own], I would drink it!”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “Whenever al-Harith al-Muhasibi
stretched his hand toward any food of suspicious origin, a vein in his fingertip
would begin to throb and he would know that it was not permissible for him.
[Likewise,] once Bishr al-Hafi was invited to a meal and some food was placed
in front of him. He tried to reach out his hand for the food, but his hand would
not stretch. He repeated this three times, until a man who knew him said: ‘His
hand cannot reach out to touch dubious food. Why did the host bother to invite
a man like this to his party?’”
Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Yahya al-Sufi informed us: I heard ∏Abdallah
b. ∏Ali b. Yahya al-Tamimi say: I heard Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Salim at
Basra say: Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] was asked about that which is absolutely
lawful. He answered: “This is something with which one cannot disobey
God Most High.” Sahl also said: “This is something with which God is not
forgotten.”
Once al-Hasan al-Basri entered Mecca and saw one of the children of ∏Ali b.
Abi Talib – may God be pleased with him – resting his back against a wall of the
Ka∏ba and preaching to people. Al-Hasan rushed to him and said: “What is the
foundation of religion?” He answered: “Scrupulousness!” [Al-Hasan] then asked:
“What is the ruin of religion?” He answered: “Greed!” Al-Hasan marveled at
him. Al-Hasan said: “One tiny measure (mithqal) of true scrupulousness is better
than a thousand measures of fasting and prayer.”//180 God Most High revealed
to Moses – peace and blessings be upon him: “The ones nearest to Me have
reached their position only through scrupulousness and abstention.”
70 That is, dates.

Hanbal pawned a bucket with a grocer at Mecca – may God
Most High protect it. When he wanted to redeem it, the grocer brought out two
buckets saying: “Take whichever of the two is yours!” Ahmad said: “I am not
sure which bucket is mine. So it is yours and my money is also yours!” The
grocer said: “This is your bucket! I just wanted to test you.” “No, I will not take
it!” said Ibn Hanbal. He then walked away, leaving the bucket with the grocer. Once Ibn al-Mubarak let his expensive horse roam free, while he was
performing his noon prayer. The horse grazed in the field of a village that belonged
to a [local] ruler. So Ibn al-Mubarak abandoned the horse and [refused to] ever
ride it again.//181 It is related that Ibn al-Mubarak once traveled all the way
from Merv73 to Damascus because of a pen that he borrowed from someone in
order to return it to its owner. Al-Nakha∏i rented a riding animal. When his whip dropped from his hand,
he descended, tied the animal, returned and picked up the whip. Someone told
him: “It would have been easier for you if you had directed your mount to the
71 A close companion of the Prophet (d. 58/678), who was renowned for his prodigious memory. He is credited with narrating some 3,500 traditions from the Prophet. 72 An Umayyad caliph, who was renowned for his piety; he ruled from 99/717 through
101/720. 73 A city in Central Asia.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 133
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 133
place where the whip had fallen to pick it up!” He answered: “No, I hired it to
go to that place, not this!”
Abu Bakr al-Zaqqaq said: “I wondered about in the wilderness of the
Children of Israel for fifteen days. When I finally found the way, I met a soldier,
who gave me a drink of water. Its harshness entered my heart and tormented me
for thirty years!” It is said that Rabi∏a al-∏Adawiyya mended a tear in her shirt in the
light cast by a ruler’s lamp. She lost her heart for a while until she remembered
[that episode]. She then ripped her shirt and rediscovered her heart. Sufyan al-Thawri was seen in a dream. He had a pair of wings with which he
was flying from tree to tree in the garden of Paradise. Someone asked him: “By
what means did you obtain them?” He answered: “By scrupulousness!” Hassan
b. Abu Sinan once came upon some companions of al-Hasan [al-Basri]. He asked
“What is the most thing difficult for you?” They answered: “Scrupulousness.”
He said: “There is nothing easier for me than that.” They asked him how that
could be. He responded: “For forty years I have not quenched my thirst by
drinking from that stream of yours!” Hassan b. Abu Sinan did not sleep on his
side, eat cooked food or drink cold water for sixty years. Someone saw him in a
dream after his death and asked him: “How has God treated you?” He answered:
“Quite well. However, I am barred from entering Paradise on account of a needle
I borrowed and never returned.”
∏Abd al-Wahid b. Zayd74had a slave who served him for many years. He spent
forty years in worship. Before that he had been a grain-measurer. After he died,
someone saw him in a dream and asked him: “How has God treated you?” He
answered: “Well. However, I am barred from Paradise, because [God held against
me] the dust of the grain measure with which I dispensed forty measures.”75//182
Jesus, son of Mary – peace be upon both of them – passed by a cemetery.Hanbal pawned a bucket with a grocer at Mecca – may God
Most High protect it. When he wanted to redeem it, the grocer brought out two
buckets saying: “Take whichever of the two is yours!” Ahmad said: “I am not
sure which bucket is mine. So it is yours and my money is also yours!” The
grocer said: “This is your bucket! I just wanted to test you.” “No, I will not take
it!” said Ibn Hanbal. He then walked away, leaving the bucket with the grocer. Once Ibn al-Mubarak let his expensive horse roam free, while he was
performing his noon prayer. The horse grazed in the field of a village that belonged
to a [local] ruler. So Ibn al-Mubarak abandoned the horse and [refused to] ever
ride it again.//181 It is related that Ibn al-Mubarak once traveled all the way
from Merv73 to Damascus because of a pen that he borrowed from someone in
order to return it to its owner. Al-Nakha∏i rented a riding animal. When his whip dropped from his hand,
he descended, tied the animal, returned and picked up the whip. Someone told
him: “It would have been easier for you if you had directed your mount to the
71 A close companion of the Prophet (d. 58/678), who was renowned for his prodigious memory. He is credited with narrating some 3,500 traditions from the Prophet. 72 An Umayyad caliph, who was renowned for his piety; he ruled from 99/717 through
101/720. 73 A city in Central Asia.

After he died,
someone saw him in a dream and asked him: “How has God treated you?” He
answered: “Well. However, I am barred from Paradise, because [God held against
me] the dust of the grain measure with which I dispensed forty measures.”75//182
Jesus, son of Mary – peace be upon both of them – passed by a cemetery. He
called upon one of the dead lying there, and God Most High restored him to life. Jesus asked him who he was. He answered: “I was a porter. I carried things about
for people. One day, I was carrying firewood for someone. I broke off a splinter
from that firewood and I have been accountable for that since I died.”
Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz was speaking on scrupulousness, when ∏Abbas b. al-Muhtadi passed by. He said: “Abu Sa∏id, aren’t you ashamed?! You sit under
the roof of Abu πl-Dawaniq,76drink from Zubayda’s77pool, do business with false
coins, and yet you talk about scrupulousness?!”
74 A follower of al-Hasan al-Basri, who died around 133/750. See IM, pp. 16–18. 75 According to some commentators, his transgression consisted of not having cleaned the bottom
of his measure, resulting in him selling his customers short. 76 “Father of Small Change”, a derogatory nickname of the ∏Abbasid caliph Abu Ja∏far al-Mansur
(d. 158/775), who was famous for his stinginess. 77 A granddaughter of the caliph al-Mansur, who was married to the “good caliph” Harun
al-Rashid. She died in 216/831.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 134
134 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Renunciation (zuhd)
Hamza b. Yusuf al-Sahmi al-Jurjani informed us: Abu πl-Husayn ∏Ubaydallah b. Ahmad b. Ya∏qub al-Muqri informed us at Baghdad: Ja∏far b. Mujashi∏ told us:
Zayd b. Isma∏il said: Kathir b. Hisham told us: al-Hakam b. Hisham told us on
the authority of Yahya b. Sa∏id, on the authority of Abu Farwa, on the authority
of Abu Khallad, who was one of the Prophet’s Companions, that the Prophet
– may God’s blessings and peace be upon him – said: “If you see a man who has
been graced with renunciation of this world and an eloquent speech, seek his
company, for wisdom has been taught to him.”
The master and imam Abu πl-Qasim [al-Qushayri] – may God have mercy
on him – said: “The folk’s opinions differ regarding renunciation. Some of
them argue that one should only renounce that which is prohibited [by the
Divine Law], because that which is lawful has been made permissible by God
Most High. If God bestows upon his servant licit property and the servant
devotes himself to worshiping God out of gratitude for His generosity, then his
abandoning this property is no better than keeping it by God’s leave. Others say that the renunciation of that which is prohibited is an obligation,
whereas renouncing that which is lawful is a virtue.If God bestows upon his servant licit property and the servant
devotes himself to worshiping God out of gratitude for His generosity, then his
abandoning this property is no better than keeping it by God’s leave. Others say that the renunciation of that which is prohibited is an obligation,
whereas renouncing that which is lawful is a virtue. They also say that having
little property – provided that the servant of God endures his condition patiently,
satisfied with whatever God has apportioned for him and content with what God
bestows upon him – is better than living comfortably and lavishly in this world,
for God Most High urged His creatures to abstain from this world, when He
said: “The enjoyment of this world is little; the world to come is better for him
who fears God.”78 There are many other verses [in the Qurπan] that disparage
this world and enjoin men to renounce it.//183
Others argue that if the servant spends his property in obedience to God, is
known for his patience, and does not have recourse to what the Law forbids in
times of adversity, then renouncing that which is permitted is better for him. Still others say that he must not abandon that which is permitted to him [by
God] on his own accord, nor must he seek that which exceeds his needs. Instead,
he must preserve that which has been apportioned for him by God. If God
Most High and Exalted bestows upon him some legal [property], he should be
grateful to Him. If God Most High’s provision for him is sufficient for his needs,
then he should not strive to obtain surplus. Patience is best suited for the poor
man, while gratitude is more appropriate for one who has licit property. They recite [the following verse] concerning the meaning of renunciation:
Each speaks about his own moment
And each refers to his own appointed limit. I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: Ahmad b. Isma∏il al-Azdi told us: ∏Imran b. Musa al-Isfanji told us:
78 Q.After he died,
someone saw him in a dream and asked him: “How has God treated you?” He
answered: “Well. However, I am barred from Paradise, because [God held against
me] the dust of the grain measure with which I dispensed forty measures.”75//182
Jesus, son of Mary – peace be upon both of them – passed by a cemetery. He
called upon one of the dead lying there, and God Most High restored him to life. Jesus asked him who he was. He answered: “I was a porter. I carried things about
for people. One day, I was carrying firewood for someone. I broke off a splinter
from that firewood and I have been accountable for that since I died.”
Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz was speaking on scrupulousness, when ∏Abbas b. al-Muhtadi passed by. He said: “Abu Sa∏id, aren’t you ashamed?! You sit under
the roof of Abu πl-Dawaniq,76drink from Zubayda’s77pool, do business with false
coins, and yet you talk about scrupulousness?!”
74 A follower of al-Hasan al-Basri, who died around 133/750. See IM, pp. 16–18. 75 According to some commentators, his transgression consisted of not having cleaned the bottom
of his measure, resulting in him selling his customers short. 76 “Father of Small Change”, a derogatory nickname of the ∏Abbasid caliph Abu Ja∏far al-Mansur
(d. 158/775), who was famous for his stinginess. 77 A granddaughter of the caliph al-Mansur, who was married to the “good caliph” Harun
al-Rashid. She died in 216/831.

Isma∏il al-Azdi told us: ∏Imran b. Musa al-Isfanji told us:
78 Q. 4:77; 4:49, according to Arberry’s translation.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 135
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 135
al-Dawraqi told us: Waki∏ [b. al-Jarrah]79said: “Renunciation of this world means
cutting short one’s hopes rather than eating coarse food or wearing a woolen
cloak.”
I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard Sa∏id b. Ahmad say: I heard ∏Abbas
b. ∏Isam say: I heard al-Junayd say: I heard al-Sari al-Saqati say: “God – praise
be upon Him – withdraws this world from His friends and protects it from His
elect ones; He removes it from the hearts of those He loves,80 for He would not
be pleased with them [enjoying] it.”
They say that renunciation is derived from God’s words [in the Qurπan],
“That you may not grieve for what escapes you, nor rejoice in what has come
to you”,81 because the renouncer does not delight in anything he has of this
world, nor is he sorry about losing something of it. Abu ∏Uthman [al-Hiri] said:
“Renunciation is that you give up this world, then not care about whoever picks
it up.”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “Renunciation is that you give
up this world as it is and not say: ‘I will build a [Sufi] lodge (ribat) or construct
a mosque in it.’” Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “Renunciation instills the habit of
being generous with [worldly] possessions, while love instills the habit of being
generous with one’s [own] spirit.” Ibn al-Jallaπ said: “Renunciation is to look at
this world with a view to its transience so as to see its total insignificance. Then
turning away from it becomes easy for you.”//184
Ibn Khafif said: “The mark of renunciation is to preserve equanimity
while losing [your] property.” He also said: “Renunciation is keeping your
heart oblivious of [secondary] means82 and your hands free from any [worldly]
possessions.” They also say that renunciation is to restrain oneself from this
world without exerting any effort.Isma∏il al-Azdi told us: ∏Imran b. Musa al-Isfanji told us:
78 Q. 4:77; 4:49, according to Arberry’s translation.

Mu∏adh said: “Renunciation instills the habit of
being generous with [worldly] possessions, while love instills the habit of being
generous with one’s [own] spirit.” Ibn al-Jallaπ said: “Renunciation is to look at
this world with a view to its transience so as to see its total insignificance. Then
turning away from it becomes easy for you.”//184
Ibn Khafif said: “The mark of renunciation is to preserve equanimity
while losing [your] property.” He also said: “Renunciation is keeping your
heart oblivious of [secondary] means82 and your hands free from any [worldly]
possessions.” They also say that renunciation is to restrain oneself from this
world without exerting any effort. I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard al-Nasrabadhi say: “The renouncer is a stranger in this world,
while the [divine] gnostic is a stranger in the Hereafter.” It is also said that to him
whose renunciation is sincere, this world will present itself in utter humility. That’s why [a proverb] says: “If a hat were to fall from the sky, it would land on
the head of someone who does not want it!”
Al-Junayd said: “Renunciation is to free one’s heart of whatever one’s hands are
[already] free of.” Abu Sulayman al-Darani said: “Wool is a mark of renunciation. Therefore, one must never wear a woolen garment that costs three dirhams, if
one’s heart is longing for five dirhams.”
The Muslims of old have held different opinions regarding renunciation. Sufyan al-Thawri, Ahmad b. Hanbal, ∏Isa b. Yunus and a few others have argued
79 A famous transmitter of “ascetic” lore, author of a collection of hadith dealing with renunciation,
titled Kitab al-zuhd;he died in 197/812. 80 Or “those who love Him”. 81 Q. 57:23. 82 That is, when a man sees God as the ultimate cause of everything in this world.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 136
136 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
that renunciation is cutting short one’s hopes [for things of this world]. Their
sayings seem to indicate that cutting short hopes is one of the signs of renunciation,
one of its causes and a reason that necessitates it. ∏Abdallah b. al-Mubarak said: “Renunciation is to keep trust in God Most
High and to love poverty.” This was also the opinion of Shaqiq al-Balkhi and
Yusuf b. Asbat. Keeping trust in God is also one of the signs of renunciation, for
one is capable of renunciation only when one puts one’s trust in God Most High. ∏Abd al-Wahid b. Zayd said: “Renunciation is to give up both the dinar
and the dirham.”83 Abu Sulayman al-Darani said: “Renunciation is to abandon
anything that distracts you from God Most High – may He be praised.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say:
I heard Ahmad b. ∏Ali say: I heard Ibrahim b. Fatik say: I heard al-Junayd
say that Ruwaym [b. Ahmad] once asked him about renunciation. Al-Junayd
answered://185 “It is thinking little of this world and erasing its traces from
your heart.” Sari [al-Saqati] said: “The renouncer’s way is lacking as long as he
is not preoccupied with himself,84whereas the gnostic’s way is lacking as long as
he is preoccupied with himself.”85Someone asked al-Junayd about renunciation. He answered: “It is keeping your hands free from possessions and your heart
from attachment [to this world].” Someone asked al-Shibli about renunciation. He answered: “It is to renounce anything other than God Most High.”
Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “One cannot attain true renunciation until one has
acquired three qualities: works without [any] attachment,86speech without greedy
intention,87 and power without overlordship. Abu Hafs said: “One can only
renounce that which is lawful.Mu∏adh said: “Renunciation instills the habit of
being generous with [worldly] possessions, while love instills the habit of being
generous with one’s [own] spirit.” Ibn al-Jallaπ said: “Renunciation is to look at
this world with a view to its transience so as to see its total insignificance. Then
turning away from it becomes easy for you.”//184
Ibn Khafif said: “The mark of renunciation is to preserve equanimity
while losing [your] property.” He also said: “Renunciation is keeping your
heart oblivious of [secondary] means82 and your hands free from any [worldly]
possessions.” They also say that renunciation is to restrain oneself from this
world without exerting any effort. I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard al-Nasrabadhi say: “The renouncer is a stranger in this world,
while the [divine] gnostic is a stranger in the Hereafter.” It is also said that to him
whose renunciation is sincere, this world will present itself in utter humility. That’s why [a proverb] says: “If a hat were to fall from the sky, it would land on
the head of someone who does not want it!”
Al-Junayd said: “Renunciation is to free one’s heart of whatever one’s hands are
[already] free of.” Abu Sulayman al-Darani said: “Wool is a mark of renunciation. Therefore, one must never wear a woolen garment that costs three dirhams, if
one’s heart is longing for five dirhams.”
The Muslims of old have held different opinions regarding renunciation. Sufyan al-Thawri, Ahmad b. Hanbal, ∏Isa b. Yunus and a few others have argued
79 A famous transmitter of “ascetic” lore, author of a collection of hadith dealing with renunciation,
titled Kitab al-zuhd;he died in 197/812. 80 Or “those who love Him”. 81 Q. 57:23. 82 That is, when a man sees God as the ultimate cause of everything in this world.

Mu∏adh said: “One cannot attain true renunciation until one has
acquired three qualities: works without [any] attachment,86speech without greedy
intention,87 and power without overlordship. Abu Hafs said: “One can only
renounce that which is lawful. Since there is nothing in this world that is lawful,
there can be no renunciation.” Abu ∏Uthman [al-Hiri] said: “God Most High
gives the renouncer more than he desires; He gives the one who desires less than
what he desires; and he gives the upright one exactly what he desires.”
Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “The renouncer pours vinegar and mustard into your
nose, while the gnostic treats you to the scent of musk and ambergris.” Al-Hasan
al-Basri said: “Renunciation of this world is that you loathe its inhabitants and
everything that it contains.” One of the Sufis was asked about renunciation of
this world. He responded: “To relinquish whatever is in it to whoever is in it.”
A man asked Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri: “When will I renounce the world?” He
answered: “Only when you have renounced your own self.”
Muhammad b. al-Fadl said: “The ascetics prefer others to themselves when
they themselves have enough, while the gallant ones (fityan) prefer others to
83 That is, everything that has any value, no matter how small. 84 That is, as long as he is distracted by the trappings of the world. 85 That is, as long as he is not fully focused on God. This saying exhibits a typical Sufi
preference for knowing God intimately as opposed to simply serving him, albeit in an exemplary
manner. 86 That is, acting for the sake of God alone, not for some mundane end. 87 That is, preaching without expecting a recompense.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 137
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 137
themselves, even if they are [themselves] in need.” God Most High said: “They
prefer others above themselves, even though poverty is their lot.”88
Al-Kattani said: “There is one thing over which the Kufans, the Medinise,
the Iraqis and the Syrians have no disagreement: renunciation of this world,
generosity of the soul, and [giving] good advice to people.” He meant that no one
can say that these things are not laudable.//186
A man asked Yahya b. Mu∏adh: “When shall I enter the tavern of trust in
God, put on the cloak of renunciation and be seated with renouncers?” He
answered: “When, in your secret training of your soul, you attain such a degree
that were God to withhold your sustenance for three days you would not become
any weaker than you were [before]. As long as you have not attained this degree,
your sitting on the same carpet with the [genuine] renouncers is sheer ignorance. For I cannot guarantee to you that you will not find yourself disgraced among
them!” Bishr al-Hafi said: “Renunciation is like a king who resides only in a heart
that is cleansed [of worldly attachments].”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard
Muhammad b. Muhammad b. al-Ash∏ath al-Bikandi say: “If someone discourses
on renunciation and preaches it to other people, while longing after what they
own, then God Most High will remove the love of the next world from his heart.”
It is also said that when a servant of God renounces this world, God appoints for
him an angel who plants wisdom into his heart.” Someone asked a Sufi: “Why
have you renounced this world?” He answered: “Because it has renounced me!”
Ahmad b. Hanbal said: “Renunciation can be of three different kinds.Mu∏adh said: “One cannot attain true renunciation until one has
acquired three qualities: works without [any] attachment,86speech without greedy
intention,87 and power without overlordship. Abu Hafs said: “One can only
renounce that which is lawful. Since there is nothing in this world that is lawful,
there can be no renunciation.” Abu ∏Uthman [al-Hiri] said: “God Most High
gives the renouncer more than he desires; He gives the one who desires less than
what he desires; and he gives the upright one exactly what he desires.”
Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “The renouncer pours vinegar and mustard into your
nose, while the gnostic treats you to the scent of musk and ambergris.” Al-Hasan
al-Basri said: “Renunciation of this world is that you loathe its inhabitants and
everything that it contains.” One of the Sufis was asked about renunciation of
this world. He responded: “To relinquish whatever is in it to whoever is in it.”
A man asked Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri: “When will I renounce the world?” He
answered: “Only when you have renounced your own self.”
Muhammad b. al-Fadl said: “The ascetics prefer others to themselves when
they themselves have enough, while the gallant ones (fityan) prefer others to
83 That is, everything that has any value, no matter how small. 84 That is, as long as he is distracted by the trappings of the world. 85 That is, as long as he is not fully focused on God. This saying exhibits a typical Sufi
preference for knowing God intimately as opposed to simply serving him, albeit in an exemplary
manner. 86 That is, acting for the sake of God alone, not for some mundane end. 87 That is, preaching without expecting a recompense.

al-Ash∏ath al-Bikandi say: “If someone discourses
on renunciation and preaches it to other people, while longing after what they
own, then God Most High will remove the love of the next world from his heart.”
It is also said that when a servant of God renounces this world, God appoints for
him an angel who plants wisdom into his heart.” Someone asked a Sufi: “Why
have you renounced this world?” He answered: “Because it has renounced me!”
Ahmad b. Hanbal said: “Renunciation can be of three different kinds. First,
abandoning that which is prohibited by the Divine Law, which is the renunciation
of the commoners; second, abandoning excess in that which is lawful, which is
the renunciation of the elect; third, abandoning that which distracts God’s
servant from God Most High, which is the renunciation of the gnostics.” I heard
master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “Someone asked a Sufi why he had renounced
the world. He answered: ‘After I have renounced most of it, so I no longer have
any desire for what little has remained out of it.’”
Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “This world is like an unveiled bride. The one who
seeks her becomes her cosmetician, while the one who renounces her blackens
her face, tears out her hair, rends her dress. As for the gnostic, he is preoccupied
with God alone and pays no attention to her.” I heard Abu ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say:
I heard Abu al-Tayyib al-Samarri say: I heard al-Junayd say: I heard al-Sari
say://187 “I have tried all manner of renunciation and obtained from it all I
wished, except for renunciation of people. I have not attained it, nor am I capable
[of ever attaining it].” It is said that renouncers have not departed toward [any
destination] except their own selves, for they have given up [this world’s]
transitory bounty for the sake of one that never ends.”
Al-Nasrabadhi said: “Renunciation spares the blood of the ascetics and spills
the blood of the gnostics.” Hatim al-Asamm said: “The renouncer expends his
88 Q. 59:9.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 138
138 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
purse before he expends his soul, whereas one who pretends to be a renouncer
expends his soul before he expends his purse.”
I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard ∏Ali b. al-Husayn say: Ahmad
b. al-Husayn informed us: Muhammad b. al-Hasan told us: Muhammad b. Ja∏far
told us: al-Fudayl b. ∏Iyad said: “God placed all evil in one house and made its
key love of this world. He placed all good in another house and made its key
renunciation.”
Silence (samt)
∏Abdallah b.Yusuf al-Isbahani informed us: Abu Bakr Muhammad b. al-Husayn
al-Qattan told us: Ahmad b. Yusuf al-Sulami told us: ∏Abd al-Razzaq told us:
Ma∏mar informed us on the authority of al-Zuhri, on the authority of Abu
Salama, on the authority of Abu Hurayra that the Messenger of God – may God
bless and greet him – said: “Whoever believes in God and the Last Day, let him
do no harm to his neighbor; whoever believes in God and the Last Day, let
him be generous to his guest; whoever believes in God and the Last Day, let him
speak good or be silent!”
∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd told us: Bishr b.
Musa al-Asadi told us: Muhammad b. Sa∏id al-Isbahani told us on the authority
of Ibn al-Mubarak, on the authority of Yahya b. Ayyub, on the authority of
∏Ubaydallah b. Zuhr, on the authority of ∏Ali b. Yazid, on the authority of
al-Qasim, on the authority of Abu Umama: on the authority of ∏Uqba b. ∏Amir,
who said that he asked: “Messenger of God, what is salvation?” He answered:
“Guard your tongue; may your home be spacious enough for you; and weep over
your sins!”
The master [al-Qushayri] said: “Silence is safety; this is the root of the
matter; if one has allowed oneself//188 to reprimand [another person], then one
must repent; in any event, one should always be respectful of the Divine Law,
the Commanding of the Right, and the Forbidding of the Wrong.” Silence at
the right time is an attribute of true men89 in the same way as speaking when
appropriate is one of the noblest of qualities.
I heard master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “Whoever remains silent instead of
speaking truth is a mute devil.”
Silence belongs to the good manners of [Sufi] gatherings, for God Most High
said: “And when the Qurπan is recited, give your ear to it and be silent that you
may receive mercy.”90God also said regarding a meeting of the Messenger of God
– may God bless and greet him – and the jinn: “And when they were present
with him they said, ‘Be silent!’”91 God Most High also said: “Voices will be
hushed to the All-Merciful, so that you will hear nothing but murmuring.”92
89 That is, the Sufis.
90 Q. 7:204; 7:203, according to Arberry’s translation.
91 Q. 46:29; 46:28, according to Arberry’s translation.
92 Q. 20:108.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 139
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 139
How great a difference there is between a servant who is silent in order to
protect himself from lies and backbiting and a servant who is silent because he is
overwhelmed by the awe of God! They recite the following verses to that effect:
When we are apart, I keep thinking what I shall say [to you]
I perfect doggedly the arguments that I will utter
And when we meet I [suddenly] forget them
And when I speak, I speak nothing but absurdities.
They also recite the following lines:
O Layla, how many an urgent need I have
Why, then, O Layla, when I come to you I no longer know
what they are?!
They also recite the following:
How many stories I have to tell you; however,
When I am given a chance to meet you, I forget them all!
They also recite the following:
I have seen how words may adorn a young man;
However, silence is better for one who chose to be silent
How many written words have brought death [upon the writer]
And how many speakers have wished they had remained silent!
There are two types of silence: outer silence and silence of the heart and
mind.//189 The heart of one who puts his trust in God restrains itself from
asking God for sustenance. The heart of the gnostic remains silent vis-à-vis
God’s decree because it is endowed by the attribute of compliance. The former is
confident of God’s good deeds. The latter is satisfied with whatever God decrees
[for him]. It is with this meaning in mind that they say:
God’s decisions rule over you
But the worries of your innermost heart are allayed.
Sometimes silence is caused by the bewilderment of an insight, for when some
idea is suddenly unveiled [to you], words fall silent and you can neither explain
nor articulate [what you have realized]. In such a state, all evidence is obliterated
and there’s neither knowledge nor sensation. God Most High said: “On the day
when God shall gather the Messengers, and say: ‘What answer are you given?’
they say, ‘We have no knowledge.’”
Those who are exerting themselves [on the path of God] choose silence,
because they are aware of the dangers that are present in speech. They are also
aware of the pleasures that their egos take in talking and in praising as well as in
using eloquent speech to elevate oneself above their peers and suchlike pitfalls543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 140
140 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
that are common among mankind. That’s why the practitioners of ascetic self-
discipline choose silence, which is one of the major pillars of self-exertion and a
chief prerequisite for perfecting one’s character. It is said that when Dawud
al-Taπi resolved to stay in his house, he [first] decided to attend the sessions
of Abu Hanifa,93 since he was one of his disciples, and to sit among his fellow
scholars without ever speaking about any legal issue that arose. When his soul
grew strong in that trait after an entire year of practice, he confined himself to
his house and chose seclusion. Likewise, [the caliph] ∏Umar b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz – may God have mercy on
him – whenever he would write something and find pleasure in his wording, he
would tear up his writing and change it. I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad al-Razi informed us: Abu πl-∏Abbas b. Ishaq
al-Sarraj told us: I heard Ahmad b. al-Fath say: I heard Bishr b. al-Harith say:
“If speech gives you pleasure, then remain silent; and if silence pleases you, then
talk!”
Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] said: “Nobody’s silence is complete until he
has accustomed himself to retreat, and nobody’s repentance is complete//190
until he has accustomed himself to silence.”
Abu Bakr al-Farisi said: “If a man has not made silence his homeland, he is
talkative even though he is silent. Silence is not limited to the tongue; it should
be applied to the heart and all of the limbs.” Someone said that he who does not
know the true worth of silence will always speak nonsense. I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. Shadhan
said: Mimshadh al-Dinawari said: “The wise have acquired their wisdom by
silence and contemplation.” Someone asked Abu Bakr al-Farisi about silence.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 139
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 139
How great a difference there is between a servant who is silent in order to
protect himself from lies and backbiting and a servant who is silent because he is
overwhelmed by the awe of God! They recite the following verses to that effect:
When we are apart, I keep thinking what I shall say [to you]
I perfect doggedly the arguments that I will utter
And when we meet I [suddenly] forget them
And when I speak, I speak nothing but absurdities.
They also recite the following lines:
O Layla, how many an urgent need I have
Why, then, O Layla, when I come to you I no longer know
what they are?!
They also recite the following:
How many stories I have to tell you; however,
When I am given a chance to meet you, I forget them all!
They also recite the following:
I have seen how words may adorn a young man;
However, silence is better for one who chose to be silent
How many written words have brought death [upon the writer]
And how many speakers have wished they had remained silent!
There are two types of silence: outer silence and silence of the heart and
mind.//189 The heart of one who puts his trust in God restrains itself from
asking God for sustenance. The heart of the gnostic remains silent vis-à-vis
God’s decree because it is endowed by the attribute of compliance. The former is
confident of God’s good deeds. The latter is satisfied with whatever God decrees
[for him]. It is with this meaning in mind that they say:
God’s decisions rule over you
But the worries of your innermost heart are allayed.
Sometimes silence is caused by the bewilderment of an insight, for when some
idea is suddenly unveiled [to you], words fall silent and you can neither explain
nor articulate [what you have realized]. In such a state, all evidence is obliterated
and there’s neither knowledge nor sensation. God Most High said: “On the day
when God shall gather the Messengers, and say: ‘What answer are you given?’
they say, ‘We have no knowledge.’”
Those who are exerting themselves [on the path of God] choose silence,
because they are aware of the dangers that are present in speech. They are also
aware of the pleasures that their egos take in talking and in praising as well as in
using eloquent speech to elevate oneself above their peers and suchlike pitfalls

∏Abdallah b. Shadhan
said: Mimshadh al-Dinawari said: “The wise have acquired their wisdom by
silence and contemplation.” Someone asked Abu Bakr al-Farisi about silence. He answered: “Silence is to abandon concern with past and future.” Abu
Bakr al-Farisi also said: “If a man speaks about what concerns him and what is
unavoidable, than he remains within the domain of silence.” It is said that
Mu∏adh b. Jabal – may God be pleased with him – once said: “Speak little with
people and speak a lot with God; perhaps your heart will see God Most High.”
Someone asked Dhu πl-Nun: “Who among mankind is the best protector of
his heart?” He answered: “The one who controls his tongue best.” Ibn Mas∏ud
said: “Nothing is more deserving of a long imprisonment than the tongue.” ∏Ali
b. Bakkar said: “God Most High made two doors for everything. However, he
made four doors for the tongue – the two lips and the teeth!”
It is related about Abu Bakr al-Siddiq – may God be pleased with him – that
for many years he used to hold a stone in his mouth in order to speak less. It
is said that Abu Hamza al-Baghdadi – may God have mercy on him – was an
eloquent speaker. Once he heard a voice that said to him: “You spoke and your
speech was wonderful. Now it remains to you to fall silent and excel in it!” So he
93 The famous Iraqi scholar, who is considered to be the founder of the Hanafi school of law.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 141
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 141
did not speak until he died about a week or so later. Sometimes silence befalls
someone as a chastisement, because he has infringed good manners in some way. Al-Shibli used to sit with the circle of his disciples. When they would not
question him, he would say: “And the word shall fall upon them because of the
evil they committed, while they speak naught.”94 Sometimes silence falls upon
a speaker, because there is in the audience someone who is more deserving of
speech.//191
I heard Ibn al-Sammak say that Shah al-Kirmani and Yahya b. Mu∏adh were
friends. Although they lived in the same city, Shah would never attend his
[friend’s] sessions. When someone asked him about that, he answered: “This is
the [only] proper [behavior]!” People kept pursuing him until he decided to
attend Yahya’s session. He sat so that Yahya b. Mu∏adh would not observe him. Yahya was about to begin to speak, when he suddenly fell silent. He then said:
“There’s someone here who deserves to speak more than me.” And he was
unable to articulate anything coherent after that. Shah then said: “Did not I tell
you that it was not appropriate for me to come to his session?”
Sometimes silence falls upon the speaker for a reason that has something
to do with his audience – for instance, when there is among them someone who
is not fit to hear his speech and therefore God Most High protects the tongue
of the speaker out of jealousy to keep that speech from someone who is not
supposed to hear it. It might be that silence falls upon the speaker, when God
Most High knows that the spiritual state of someone in the audience is such that
should he hear this speech, he may become tempted by it.Shah then said: “Did not I tell
you that it was not appropriate for me to come to his session?”
Sometimes silence falls upon the speaker for a reason that has something
to do with his audience – for instance, when there is among them someone who
is not fit to hear his speech and therefore God Most High protects the tongue
of the speaker out of jealousy to keep that speech from someone who is not
supposed to hear it. It might be that silence falls upon the speaker, when God
Most High knows that the spiritual state of someone in the audience is such that
should he hear this speech, he may become tempted by it. This person may fancy
that it corresponds to his own mystical moment, which it is not, or he may [as a
result of this speech] be tempted to undertake something that he cannot endure
In both cases, God – may He be great and exalted – decides to prevent him from
hearing that speech, either protecting him or guarding him from committing an
error. The masters of this [Sufi] path say that sometimes the reason for the
speaker’s silence is the presence in the audience of a jinn who is not fit to hear
this speech. For the sessions of the Sufi masters are not necessarily free from the
presence of hosts of jinn. I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on
him – say: “Once I fell ill in Merv and desired to return to Nishapur. In my
dream I heard a voice saying: ‘You cannot leave this city, because a group of jinn
have taken a liking to your speeches and are eager to attend your sessions. For
their sake, you will be kept in this place!’”
One wise man said: “Man was created with only one tongue, but with two
eyes and two ears so that he may listen and see rather than speak!” Once Ibrahim
b. Adham was invited to a banquet. When he sat down, they began to gossip
about other people.∏Abdallah b. Shadhan
said: Mimshadh al-Dinawari said: “The wise have acquired their wisdom by
silence and contemplation.” Someone asked Abu Bakr al-Farisi about silence. He answered: “Silence is to abandon concern with past and future.” Abu
Bakr al-Farisi also said: “If a man speaks about what concerns him and what is
unavoidable, than he remains within the domain of silence.” It is said that
Mu∏adh b. Jabal – may God be pleased with him – once said: “Speak little with
people and speak a lot with God; perhaps your heart will see God Most High.”
Someone asked Dhu πl-Nun: “Who among mankind is the best protector of
his heart?” He answered: “The one who controls his tongue best.” Ibn Mas∏ud
said: “Nothing is more deserving of a long imprisonment than the tongue.” ∏Ali
b. Bakkar said: “God Most High made two doors for everything. However, he
made four doors for the tongue – the two lips and the teeth!”
It is related about Abu Bakr al-Siddiq – may God be pleased with him – that
for many years he used to hold a stone in his mouth in order to speak less. It
is said that Abu Hamza al-Baghdadi – may God have mercy on him – was an
eloquent speaker. Once he heard a voice that said to him: “You spoke and your
speech was wonderful. Now it remains to you to fall silent and excel in it!” So he
93 The famous Iraqi scholar, who is considered to be the founder of the Hanafi school of law.

Adham was invited to a banquet. When he sat down, they began to gossip
about other people. He told them: “We are used to eating the meat after the
bread, whereas you have begun by eating the meat!” He alluded to the words of
God Most High: “Would any of you//192 like to eat the flesh of his brother
94 Q. 27:85.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 142
142 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
dead? You would abominate it.”95 One Sufi said: “Silence is the tongue of
humility.” Another said: “Learn silence just as you learn speech. For while
speech will guide you, silence will guard you.” It is also said that silence is the
tongue’s virtue. They also say that the tongue is like wild beast: if you do not
restrain it, it will fall upon you.”
Someone asked Abu Hafs [al-Haddad]: “Which quality is preferable for the
friend of God: silence or speech?” He answered: “Were the one who speaks to
know of all the dangers inherent in speech, he would keep silent, if he could, as
long as Noah’s lifespan. However, were the silent one to know of all the dangers
inherent in silence he would ask God Most High for a life double that of Noah’s,
so that he could [learn to] speak.” It is said that the common people keep
silence with their tongues; the gnostics keep silence with their hearts; and God’s
lovers keep silence by protecting their innermost selves from any [distracting]
thought.”
It was said to one of them: “Speak!” He answered: “I do not have a tongue
with which to speak!” “Then listen!” He responded: “There is no room in me in
which I could listen!” One of them said: “I spent thirty years with my tongue
hearing nothing but my heart; then I spent another thirty years with my heart
hearing nothing but my tongue.” Another Sufi said: “Even though your tongue
may be silent, you are still not safe from the words that occur in your heart; even
though you may become a pile of decaying bones you are still not delivered from
the insinuations of your soul; and even though you may exert yourself to the
utmost extent, your spirit will still not speak to you, because it conceals the [divine]
mystery.” They say: “The tongue of the ignorant is the key to his destruction.”
They also say: “If the lover keeps silent, he perishes; and if the divine gnostic
keeps silent, he rules supreme.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad
al-Razi say: I heard Muhammad b. Nasr al-Saπigh say: I heard Mardawayh
al-Saπigh say: I heard al-Fudayl b. ∏Iyad say: “He who counts his words among
his deeds speaks very little and only about things that concern him.”//193
Fear (khawf)
God Most High said: “They call on their Lord in fear and hope.”96 Abu Bakr
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdus al-Hiri al-∏Adl informed us: Abu Bakr
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Dalluya al-Daqqaq informed us: Muhammad b. Yazid
said: ∏Amir b. Abi πl-Furat told us: al-Mas∏udi told us on the authority of
Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-Rahman, on the authority of ∏Isa b. Talha, on the authority
of Abu Hurayra, who said: “The Messenger of God – may God bless and greet
him – said: ‘One who weeps out of fear of God Most High will not enter the
hellfire as long as milk cannot re-enter the udder. Nor will the dust of [striving]
95 Q. 49:12.
96 Q. 32:16.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 143
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 143
on the path to God and the smoke of Gehenna ever be mingled in the nostrils of
one and the same servant of God.’”
Abu Nu∏aym Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Ibrahim al-Mahrajani informed
us: Abu Muhammad ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Sharafi told us:
∏Abdallah b. Hashim told us: Yahya b. Sa∏id al-Qattan told us: Shu∏ba told us:
Qatada told us on the authority of Anas, who said: “The Messenger of God –
may God bless and greet him – said: ‘If only you knew what I know you would
laugh little and weep much.’”
Fear is a sentiment that has to do with the future, for a man fears that some-
thing undesirable might befall him or that something pleasant might elude him.
This can only occur to something or someone in the future. As for something
that exists here and now, fear does not pertain to it.
Fear of God Most High means that one fears His punishment either in this
life or in the Hereafter. God – may He be praised – decreed that His servant
should be afraid of Him. He said: “Fear Me, if you are believers.”97He also said:
“So stand in awe of Me.”98God praised the believers by attributing fear to them,
saying: “They fear their Lord above them.”99
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“Fear has different stages: fear, dread, and awe.//194 Fear is a precondition and
demand of [true] faith, for God said: ‘Fear Me, if you are believers.’100Dread is a
precondition of religious knowledge, for God Most High said: ‘His servants dread
God, if they have knowledge.’101As for awe, it is a precondition of divine gnosis,
for God Most High said: ‘God warns you that you stand in awe of Him [only].’”102
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Hiri say: I heard Mahfuz say: I heard
Abu Hafs [al-Haddad] say: “Fear is the whip of God with which He straightens
up those who try to flee from His threshold.”
Abu πl-Qasim al-Hakim said: “Fear can be of two kinds: terror and dread. A
person in the state of terror (rahab) takes refuge in flight (harab) when he is
afraid, whereas a person in the state of dread takes refuge in his Lord.” He also
said: “The verbs ‘he is terrorized’ (rahib) and ‘he fled’ (harab) may be said to
have the same meaning as the verbs jadhabaand jabadha (‘he drew’), which have
the same meaning.103The one who flees (haraba) is drawn by the dictates of his own
passion, in the same way as those monks (ruhban)104 who [slavishly] follow their
97 Q. 3:175.
98 Q. 16:51; 16:53, according to Arberry’s translation.
99 Q. 16:50; 16:52, according to Arberry’s translation.
100 Q. 3:175.
101 Q. 35:28; 35:27, according to Arberry’s translation.
102 Q. 3:28.
103 That is in both cases, the root consonants of the words are the same, although they are arranged
in different combinations.
104 This word is derived from the same Arabic root (RHB) as “terror”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 144
144 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
passions. However, if they are restrained by the rein of [religious] knowledge and
if they fulfill the commands of the Divine Law, then this is dread [not terror].”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad al-Razi:
I heard Abu ∏Uthman [al-Hiri] say: I heard Abu Hafs [al-Haddad] say: “Fear is
the lamp of the heart by which God’s servant can distinguish good from evil that
reside in it.”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“Fear is that your soul is no longer capable of finding excuses for itself by [saying]
‘if only’ (∏asa) or ‘may be’ (sawfa).” I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I
heard Abu πl-Qasim al-Dimashqi say: I heard Abu ∏Umar al-Dimashqi say: “The
fearful one is he who is afraid of his own self more than he is afraid of Satan.”
Ibn al-Jallaπ said: “The one who has fear [of God] is protected from things
that frighten [other people].”//195 It is said that the one who has fear [of God]
is not he who weeps and wipes his eyes. Rather, he is one who abandons anything
that he fears might bring [God’s] punishment upon him.”
Someone told al-Fudayl [b. Iyad]: “Why is it that we do not see any fearful
ones?” He answered: “If you yourselves were to have fear, you would see them,
for only he who has fear can see the fearful ones, for only the mother who has
lost her child likes to see another bereaved mother.”
Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “Poor children of Adam!Iyad]: “Why is it that we do not see any fearful
ones?” He answered: “If you yourselves were to have fear, you would see them,
for only he who has fear can see the fearful ones, for only the mother who has
lost her child likes to see another bereaved mother.”
Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “Poor children of Adam! If only they would fear the
hellfire as much as they fear poverty, they would no doubt enter Paradise.” Shah
al-Kirmani said: “One of the signs of fear is constant sadness.” Abu πl-Qasim
al-Hakim said: “The one who is afraid of something runs away from it, whereas
the one who fears God – may He be great and exalted – runs to Him.”
Someone asked Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri – may God have mercy on him: “When
will one enter the path of fear?” He responded: “When he will put himself in the
position of a sick man, who guards himself from everything out of fear that his
illness may be prolonged.” Mu∏adh b. Jabal – may God be pleased with him – said:
“The believer’s heart will not be at peace, nor will his heart rest until he has left
the bridge of Gehenna behind him.” Bishr al-Hafi said: “Fear of God is a king
who can reside only in the pious heart.” Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri said: “The fearful
one is exposed to one deficiency: his reliance on his fear, for this is something
of which one cannot be sure.” Al-Wasiti said: “Fear is [like] a veil between
God Most High and his servant.” This statement is problematic. It implies that
the one who fears is looking toward a future moment, whereas the children of the
[present] moment105 have no expectation of the future, for [according to a Sufi
saying] “the virtues of the pious are the failings of those brought near [God]”. I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say:
I heard Muhammad b.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 143
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 143
on the path to God and the smoke of Gehenna ever be mingled in the nostrils of
one and the same servant of God.’”
Abu Nu∏aym Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Ibrahim al-Mahrajani informed
us: Abu Muhammad ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Sharafi told us:
∏Abdallah b. Hashim told us: Yahya b. Sa∏id al-Qattan told us: Shu∏ba told us:
Qatada told us on the authority of Anas, who said: “The Messenger of God –
may God bless and greet him – said: ‘If only you knew what I know you would
laugh little and weep much.’”
Fear is a sentiment that has to do with the future, for a man fears that some-
thing undesirable might befall him or that something pleasant might elude him.
This can only occur to something or someone in the future. As for something
that exists here and now, fear does not pertain to it.
Fear of God Most High means that one fears His punishment either in this
life or in the Hereafter. God – may He be praised – decreed that His servant
should be afraid of Him. He said: “Fear Me, if you are believers.”97He also said:
“So stand in awe of Me.”98God praised the believers by attributing fear to them,
saying: “They fear their Lord above them.”99
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“Fear has different stages: fear, dread, and awe.//194 Fear is a precondition and
demand of [true] faith, for God said: ‘Fear Me, if you are believers.’100Dread is a
precondition of religious knowledge, for God Most High said: ‘His servants dread
God, if they have knowledge.’101As for awe, it is a precondition of divine gnosis,
for God Most High said: ‘God warns you that you stand in awe of Him [only].’”102
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Hiri say: I heard Mahfuz say: I heard
Abu Hafs [al-Haddad] say: “Fear is the whip of God with which He straightens
up those who try to flee from His threshold.”
Abu πl-Qasim al-Hakim said: “Fear can be of two kinds: terror and dread. A
person in the state of terror (rahab) takes refuge in flight (harab) when he is
afraid, whereas a person in the state of dread takes refuge in his Lord.” He also
said: “The verbs ‘he is terrorized’ (rahib) and ‘he fled’ (harab) may be said to
have the same meaning as the verbs jadhabaand jabadha (‘he drew’), which have
the same meaning.103The one who flees (haraba) is drawn by the dictates of his own
passion, in the same way as those monks (ruhban)104 who [slavishly] follow their
97 Q. 3:175.
98 Q. 16:51; 16:53, according to Arberry’s translation.
99 Q. 16:50; 16:52, according to Arberry’s translation.
100 Q. 3:175.
101 Q. 35:28; 35:27, according to Arberry’s translation.
102 Q. 3:28.
103 That is in both cases, the root consonants of the words are the same, although they are arranged
in different combinations.
104 This word is derived from the same Arabic root (RHB) as “terror”.

I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say:
I heard Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Nahawandi say: I heard Ibn Fatik say: I heard
al-Nuri say: “The fearful one runs from his Lord to his Lord.”//196 One of
them said: “One of the signs of fear is bewilderment at the gate of the unseen.”106
105 Namely, the Sufis; see above, pp. 75–77. 106 That is, no person, no matter how perfect, can foresee his destiny in the Hereafter.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 145
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 145
I heard Abu ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Ali b. Ibrahim al-∏Ukbari say: I
heard al-Junayd say, when asked about fear: “It is when you anticipate [divine]
punishment with each passing breath.” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman
al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard al-Husayn b. Ahmad
al-Saffar say: Muhammad b. al-Musayyib said: I heard Hashim b. Khalid say: I
heard Sulayman al-Darani say: “Whenever fear leaves the heart, it is ruined.”
I also heard him say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-Rahman
say: I heard Abu ∏Uthman [al-Hiri] say: “The true fear is to abstain from sins
inwardly and outwardly.” Dhu πl-Nun said: “People are on the [right] path as
long as fear remains with them. When fear leaves them, they stray from the
path.” Hatim al-Asamm said: “Everything has its adornment; the adornment
of worship is fear; and one of the signs of fear is cutting short one’s hope for
this world.” A man told Bishr al-Hafi: “I see that you are afraid of death.” He
answered: “Entering into the presence of God is a hard thing!”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “I went to visit Abu Bakr b. Furak, when he was ill. When he saw me, tears started to drip from his eyes. I
told him: ‘God Most High may have wished for your recovery and good health!’
He said to me: ‘Do you think I am afraid of death? No, I am afraid of what will
be after death!’”
∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahawzi informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd informed us:
Muhammad b. ∏Uthman related to us: al-Qasim b. Muhammad told us: Yahya
b. Yaman told us on the authority of Malik b. Mighwal, on the authority of ∏Abd
al-Rahman b. Sa∏id b. Mawhab, on the authority of ∏Aπisha – may God be pleased
with her: who said: “I asked: ‘Messenger of God, “Those who give what they give,
their hearts quaking,”107 are they capable of stealing, committing adultery and
drinking wine?’//197 He answered: ‘No.I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say:
I heard Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Nahawandi say: I heard Ibn Fatik say: I heard
al-Nuri say: “The fearful one runs from his Lord to his Lord.”//196 One of
them said: “One of the signs of fear is bewilderment at the gate of the unseen.”106
105 Namely, the Sufis; see above, pp. 75–77. 106 That is, no person, no matter how perfect, can foresee his destiny in the Hereafter.

Sa∏id b. Mawhab, on the authority of ∏Aπisha – may God be pleased
with her: who said: “I asked: ‘Messenger of God, “Those who give what they give,
their hearts quaking,”107 are they capable of stealing, committing adultery and
drinking wine?’//197 He answered: ‘No. However, a man may fast, pray, give alms,
and still be afraid that [his worship] may not be accepted from him [by God].’”
Ibn al-Mubarak – may God have mercy on him – said: “The thing that
excites fear so that it settles in the heart is continual self-scrutiny both inwardly
and outwardly.” I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad b. al-Hasan say: I heard Abu πl-Qasim b. Abi Musa say: ∏Ali al-Razi told us: I heard
Ibn al-Mubarak – may God have mercy on him – say that. I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard
Ibrahim b. Shayban say: “When fear settles in the heart it burns out of it objects
of carnal desires and banishes from it the desire of this world.” It is said that fear
is “the strength of knowledge of how God’s decrees come into effect”. It is also
said that fear is “the movement and trepidation of the heart before the [over-
whelming] majesty of the Lord”. Abu Sulayman al-Darani said: “Nothing
should dominate your heart except fear, for should hope become predominant
over it, it becomes spoiled.” He then added: “Ahmad,108they [Sufis] rise [to the
pinnacle of worship of God] thanks to fear. When they lose it, they fall down.”
107 Q. 23:60. 108 Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari (d. 230/845 or 246/860), al-Darani’s foremost disciple.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 146
146 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Al-Wasiti said: “Fear and hope are the two reins of the human soul that
prevent it from following blindly its foolish drives.” He also said: “When the
Truth (al-haqq)109manifests itself to the innermost souls, it leaves there no room
for either hope or fear.”
The master Abu πl-Qasim [al-Qushayri] said: “There is a difficulty in this
statement. It means that God’s signs have totally devastated the innermost souls
and taken possession of them, leaving in them no room for any temporal things,
whereas fear and hope are but residual traces of one’s perception of one’s own
human condition.”
Al-Husayn b. al-Mansur [al-Hallaj] said: “When a man fears something other
than God – may He be great and exalted – or pins his hopes on something other
than Him, God will close for him the doors of every [good] deed and make fear
rule over him. God will veil him with seventy veils, the least of which is doubt.”
There are several things most conducive to fear, such as the contemplation of the
final punishment and the dread of having their states changed [by God]. Thus
God Most High said: “Yet there would appear to them from God that which
they never reckoned with”110and “Say: ‘Shall We tell you who will be the greatest
losers in their works? Those whose striving goes astray//198 in the present life,
while they think that they are working good deeds.”111
How many a man with enviable states has seen his states turned into their
opposite and tested by becoming associated with evil deeds. Then their intimacy
[with God] is changed to estrangement [from Him] and their presence [with
God] is changed to absence [from Him].
I often heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him
– recite the following verses:
You used to think well of [your] days when they were good [to you]
You were not afraid of the evil things that destiny may bring
The nights used to be friendly with you and you were deceived by them
For dimness may sometimes creep into the clarity of the night.
I heard Mansur b. Khalaf al-Maghribi say: “Two men were following the [Sufi]
path (irada) together for some time. Then one of them left and abandoned his
friend. A long time passed with no news to be heard from him. In the meantime,
his friend joined the Muslim army fighting the Byzantine troops.112 Once the
Muslims were confronted by a man clad in armor who challenged one of them
to fight him in a duel. One of the Muslim champions came out to fight him and
was killed; another one followed in his stead and was also killed; then the third
one, who was also killed. Then that Sufi came out to confront him and they
109 In Sufi discourses the word al-haqq(the Truth) often denotes God.
110 Q. 39:47; 39:49, according to Arberry’s translation.
111 Q. 18:103–104.
112 For the “warrior monks”, who volunteered to fight against the Byzantine “infidels”, see IM,
pp. 18–22.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 147
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 147
exchanged blows. The Byzantine soldier revealed his face and it turned out that
he was the friend of the Sufi, who spent many years with him in following the
Sufi path and in worship. The Sufi asked: ‘What is your story?’ The man replied
that he had apostatized and married into this people [Byzantines], and that many
children had been born to him and that he had amassed a great fortune. The Sufi
said to him: ‘But you used to read the Qurπan by many modes of recitation!’ He
answered that he did not remember a single word of it now. The Sufi told him:
‘Do not do this! Return [to Islam]!’ He answered: ‘No, I will not do this, for I
have a high rank and great wealth among them. Go away or I will do to you
what I have done to those [three]!’ The Sufi responded to him saying: ‘You have
already killed three Muslims, so there will be no blame on you if you depart
and I will give you some time to retreat.’ As the man began to retreat turning
his back, the Sufi rushed after him and stabbed him to death.//199 Thus after
all those acts of self-exertion, strictures and ascetic exercises, that man died a
Christian!”
They say that when what happened to Iblis happened, Gabriel and Michael
– peace be upon them – started to cry and wept for a long time. God Most High
asked then: “Why do you cry so profusely?” They answered: “Our Lord, we do
not feel safe from your ruse!” God then said: “Be like this! You indeed are not
safe from My ruse.”
It is related that Sari al-Saqati once said: “I squint at my nose so-and-so
many times a day out of fear that my face may have turned black due to my dread
of [divine] punishment!” Abu Hafs [al-Haddad] said: “For forty years I believed
that God Most High looks at me with displeasure, and my works demonstrate
this!” Hatim al-Asamm said: “Don’t be deceived by good places, for there
never was a better place than Paradise, yet Adam encountered there what he
encountered.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 146
146 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Al-Wasiti said: “Fear and hope are the two reins of the human soul that
prevent it from following blindly its foolish drives.” He also said: “When the
Truth (al-haqq)109manifests itself to the innermost souls, it leaves there no room
for either hope or fear.”
The master Abu πl-Qasim [al-Qushayri] said: “There is a difficulty in this
statement. It means that God’s signs have totally devastated the innermost souls
and taken possession of them, leaving in them no room for any temporal things,
whereas fear and hope are but residual traces of one’s perception of one’s own
human condition.”
Al-Husayn b. al-Mansur [al-Hallaj] said: “When a man fears something other
than God – may He be great and exalted – or pins his hopes on something other
than Him, God will close for him the doors of every [good] deed and make fear
rule over him. God will veil him with seventy veils, the least of which is doubt.”
There are several things most conducive to fear, such as the contemplation of the
final punishment and the dread of having their states changed [by God]. Thus
God Most High said: “Yet there would appear to them from God that which
they never reckoned with”110and “Say: ‘Shall We tell you who will be the greatest
losers in their works? Those whose striving goes astray//198 in the present life,
while they think that they are working good deeds.”111
How many a man with enviable states has seen his states turned into their
opposite and tested by becoming associated with evil deeds. Then their intimacy
[with God] is changed to estrangement [from Him] and their presence [with
God] is changed to absence [from Him].
I often heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him
– recite the following verses:
You used to think well of [your] days when they were good [to you]
You were not afraid of the evil things that destiny may bring
The nights used to be friendly with you and you were deceived by them
For dimness may sometimes creep into the clarity of the night.
I heard Mansur b. Khalaf al-Maghribi say: “Two men were following the [Sufi]
path (irada) together for some time. Then one of them left and abandoned his
friend. A long time passed with no news to be heard from him. In the meantime,
his friend joined the Muslim army fighting the Byzantine troops.112 Once the
Muslims were confronted by a man clad in armor who challenged one of them
to fight him in a duel. One of the Muslim champions came out to fight him and
was killed; another one followed in his stead and was also killed; then the third
one, who was also killed. Then that Sufi came out to confront him and they
109 In Sufi discourses the word al-haqq(the Truth) often denotes God.
110 Q. 39:47; 39:49, according to Arberry’s translation.
111 Q. 18:103–104.
112 For the “warrior monks”, who volunteered to fight against the Byzantine “infidels”, see IM,
pp. 18–22.

God Most High
asked then: “Why do you cry so profusely?” They answered: “Our Lord, we do
not feel safe from your ruse!” God then said: “Be like this! You indeed are not
safe from My ruse.”
It is related that Sari al-Saqati once said: “I squint at my nose so-and-so
many times a day out of fear that my face may have turned black due to my dread
of [divine] punishment!” Abu Hafs [al-Haddad] said: “For forty years I believed
that God Most High looks at me with displeasure, and my works demonstrate
this!” Hatim al-Asamm said: “Don’t be deceived by good places, for there
never was a better place than Paradise, yet Adam encountered there what he
encountered. Don’t be deceived by abundant worship, for Iblis encountered
what he encountered despite his long worship. Don’t be deceived by abundance
of knowledge, for Balaam113 knew God’s greatest name, and yet look what has
happened to him! Don’t be deceived when you see the righteous, for there is no
one more righteous than the Chosen One114– may God bless and greet him – yet
meeting him did not benefit his friends and relatives.”
One day, Ibn al-Mubarak came upon his friends and said: “Yesterday, I
behaved recklessly with God – may He be great and exalted – for I asked Him
for Paradise.” It is related that Jesus went on a journey with a righteous man
from among the Children of Israel. A sinner who was notorious among the Jews
for his turpitude followed them. He sat at a distance from them full of remorse
and called upon God – glory be to Him – saying: “O my God, forgive me!” The
righteous [Jew], in his turn, called upon God, saying: “O my God, spare me the
company of this man tomorrow!” At that moment God revealed to Jesus – peace
113 According to some Sufi authors, the figure of Biblical Balaam serves as the prototype of a
righteous man, who was led astray by lust and greed. 114 That is, the prophet Muhammad.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 148
148 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
be upon him – the following words: “I have responded to both prayers. I have
rejected [the prayer] of the righteous one, but I have pardoned the sinner!”
Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri said: “I asked ∏Ulaym why he was nicknamed ‘the
mad’.//200 He answered: ‘After God had kept me away from Himself for a
long time, I went mad out of fear of our separation in the future life!’” With this
meaning in mind they recite the following [verses]:
If [the pain] that resides in me were to be placed on a rock, it
would wear it down!
How, on earth, can a lump of clay115tolerate this?!
Someone said: “I have seen no man who had greater hope for this [Muslim]
community and no greater fear for himself than Ibn Sirin.”116 It is related that
Sufyan al-Thawri became ill. When the symptoms of his illness were described
to a doctor, he said: “This man’s liver was ruptured by his fear.” He then came
to [Sufyan], felt his pulse and said: “I did not know that there was the like of him
[in this religion]!”
Someone asked al-Shibli why the sun turns pale at the sunset. He answered:
“Because it was removed from [its] position of perfection. So it turned pale out
of fear of standing [before God]. This is similar to [the condition of] the believer.
When the term of his departure from this world draws near, his face becomes
pale, because he is afraid of standing before God. And when the sun rises again,
it looks radiant. So does the believer: when he is risen from his grave, his face
radiates light.”
It is related that Ahmad b. Hanbal – may God have mercy on him – said: “I
asked God – be He great and exalted – to open the door of fear for me. When he
opened it, I began to fear that I might lose my mind. So I said: ‘O my Lord, give
me as much [fear] as I can withstand!’ After that I felt relief.”
Hope (rajaπ)
God Most High said: “Whosoever hopes to meet with God, God’s term is
coming.”117Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd
al-Saffar told us: ∏Amr118 b. Muslim al-Thaqafi told us: al-Hasan b. Khalid told
us: al-∏Alaπ b. Zayd said: “I entered the house of Malik b. Dinar and found that
Shahr b. Hawshab was with him. When we were leaving his [Malik’s] house, I
told Shahr: ‘May God Most High have mercy on you! Give me some [good
advice as] provision for the road, so that God, too, would do the same for you!’
He answered: ‘Yes, my aunt Umm al-Dardaπ related to me from Abu πl-Dardaπ,119
115 That is, a human being whose body is made of clay.
116 On him see note 50 above.
117 Q. 29:5; 29:4, according to Arberry’s translation.
118 In another reading, “∏Umar”.
119 These pious individuals in the entourage of the Prophet are often seen by later Sufi authors
as archetypal Sufis. See IM, pp. 5–6.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 149
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 149
who related from the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – that he related
from Gabriel – peace be upon him – that he said: “Your Lord – may He be great
and exalted – said: ‘My servant, as long as you worship Me, have hope in Me
and do not give partners to Me,//201 I will pardon you for whatever you have
done. Even if you meet Me with [a load of] sins and transgressions big enough
to fill the entire earth I will meet you with that much forgiveness. I will forgive
you and not care!’”’”
∏Ali b. Ahmad informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd informed us: Bishr b. Musa
told us: Khalaf b. al-Walid told us: Marwan b. Mu∏awiyya al-Fazawi120 told us:
Abu Sufyan Tarif told us on the authority of ∏Abdallah b. al-Harith, on the
authority of Anas b. Malik, on the authority of the Messenger of God – may God
bless and greet him – who said: “God Most High will say on the Day of
Judgement: ‘Bring out of the fire anyone in whose heart is the amount of faith
equal to a grain of barley.’ Then He will declare: ‘Bring out of the fire anyone in
whose heart is the amount of faith equal to a mustard seed.’ Then He will say:
‘By My majesty and greatness, I will not treat the one who has believed in Me
even one moment, night or day, like someone who has not believed in Me at
all.’” Hope is the heart’s attachment to something it loves that is expected to take
place in the future. Just as fear occurs in regard to something that may take place
in the future, so does hope occur in regard to something that is anticipated in the
future. Hope, therefore, is but the sustenance and freedom of the heart. There is a difference between hope and longing for something. Longing
produces indolence in the person who experiences it, for he does not follow the
path of self-exertion and serious determination. The opposite is true of the person
who feels hope. Therefore, hope is commendable, while longing is blameworthy.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 148
148 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
be upon him – the following words: “I have responded to both prayers. I have
rejected [the prayer] of the righteous one, but I have pardoned the sinner!”
Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri said: “I asked ∏Ulaym why he was nicknamed ‘the
mad’.//200 He answered: ‘After God had kept me away from Himself for a
long time, I went mad out of fear of our separation in the future life!’” With this
meaning in mind they recite the following [verses]:
If [the pain] that resides in me were to be placed on a rock, it
would wear it down!
How, on earth, can a lump of clay115tolerate this?!
Someone said: “I have seen no man who had greater hope for this [Muslim]
community and no greater fear for himself than Ibn Sirin.”116 It is related that
Sufyan al-Thawri became ill. When the symptoms of his illness were described
to a doctor, he said: “This man’s liver was ruptured by his fear.” He then came
to [Sufyan], felt his pulse and said: “I did not know that there was the like of him
[in this religion]!”
Someone asked al-Shibli why the sun turns pale at the sunset. He answered:
“Because it was removed from [its] position of perfection. So it turned pale out
of fear of standing [before God]. This is similar to [the condition of] the believer.
When the term of his departure from this world draws near, his face becomes
pale, because he is afraid of standing before God. And when the sun rises again,
it looks radiant. So does the believer: when he is risen from his grave, his face
radiates light.”
It is related that Ahmad b. Hanbal – may God have mercy on him – said: “I
asked God – be He great and exalted – to open the door of fear for me. When he
opened it, I began to fear that I might lose my mind. So I said: ‘O my Lord, give
me as much [fear] as I can withstand!’ After that I felt relief.”
Hope (rajaπ)
God Most High said: “Whosoever hopes to meet with God, God’s term is
coming.”117Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd
al-Saffar told us: ∏Amr118 b. Muslim al-Thaqafi told us: al-Hasan b. Khalid told
us: al-∏Alaπ b. Zayd said: “I entered the house of Malik b. Dinar and found that
Shahr b. Hawshab was with him. When we were leaving his [Malik’s] house, I
told Shahr: ‘May God Most High have mercy on you! Give me some [good
advice as] provision for the road, so that God, too, would do the same for you!’
He answered: ‘Yes, my aunt Umm al-Dardaπ related to me from Abu πl-Dardaπ,119
115 That is, a human being whose body is made of clay.
116 On him see note 50 above.
117 Q. 29:5; 29:4, according to Arberry’s translation.
118 In another reading, “∏Umar”.
119 These pious individuals in the entourage of the Prophet are often seen by later Sufi authors
as archetypal Sufis. See IM, pp. 5–6.

The opposite is true of the person
who feels hope. Therefore, hope is commendable, while longing is blameworthy. Sufis have discoursed extensively about hope. Thus Shah al-Kirmani said:
“One of the signs of hope is complete obedience [to God].” Ibn Khubayq said:
“There are three types of hope. First, when one does good things and hopes that
one’s actions will be accepted from one [by God]. Second, when one does evil
things, then repents and begins to hope that one will be pardoned. Finally, there
is the liar, who engages in sinful acts, while saying: ‘I hope for forgiveness.’ If
someone knows he is doing evil, then his fear must dominate over his hope.”
It is said that hope is trust in the bounty of the Generous and Loving One. It is also said: “Hope is the vision of God’s majesty (jalal) with the eye of God’s
beauty (jamal).”121 They also say: “Hope is the heart’s proximity to its Lord’s
benevolence.”//202 It is also said: “[Hope is] the innermost heart’s delight at
the thought of returning to God among the blessed.”122It is also said: “[Hope is]
seeing God’s All-Embracing mercy.”
120 Or, in another reading, “al-Fazari”. 121 In the Sufi tradition, God is seen as having two aspects: majesty and beauty. The former
makes God’s servants tremble out of fear of His punishment; the latter allows them to see God
as a benevolent and forgiving friend. 122 That is, achieving salvation.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 150
150 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say:
“Fear and hope are like two wings of a bird. When they are balanced, the bird’s
flight is straight and balanced, whereas if one of them is deficient, the flight
becomes deficient, too. And when both are missing, the bird enters the precinct
of death.”
I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard al-Nasrabadhi say: I heard Abu
Hatim say: I heard ∏Ali b. Shahmardhan say: I heard Ahmad b. ∏Asim al-Antaki
say, when asked about signs of hope in the servant: “When God’s beneficence
encompasses him, he is inspired to gratitude, as he hopes that God will perfect
His munificence toward him and His pardon toward him in the Hereafter.”
Abu ∏Abdallah b. Khafif said: “Hope means to rejoice in anticipation of God’s
favor [in the Hereafter].” He also said: “[Hope is] the consolation of the heart
in anticipation of seeing the generosity of the Beloved One in Whom hope is
placed.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy
on him – say: I heard Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi say: “He who incites himself
to hope [alone] becomes idle, while he who incites himself to fear becomes
despondent. There is a time for each of them.”
I heard him [al-Sulami] say: Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Baghdadi said: al-Hasan b. Safwan told us: Ibn Abi πl-Dunya told us: someone told me on the authority
of Bakr b. Sulaym al-Sawwaf, who said: “I came to visit Malik b. Anas on the
evening of the day he died. I asked him: ‘Abu ∏Abdallah, how do you feel?’ He
answered: ‘I do not know what to tell you except that you will witness forgiveness
from God in a measure that you cannot even fathom.’ We stayed with him until
[he died] and we closed his eyes.”
Yahya b.The opposite is true of the person
who feels hope. Therefore, hope is commendable, while longing is blameworthy. Sufis have discoursed extensively about hope. Thus Shah al-Kirmani said:
“One of the signs of hope is complete obedience [to God].” Ibn Khubayq said:
“There are three types of hope. First, when one does good things and hopes that
one’s actions will be accepted from one [by God]. Second, when one does evil
things, then repents and begins to hope that one will be pardoned. Finally, there
is the liar, who engages in sinful acts, while saying: ‘I hope for forgiveness.’ If
someone knows he is doing evil, then his fear must dominate over his hope.”
It is said that hope is trust in the bounty of the Generous and Loving One. It is also said: “Hope is the vision of God’s majesty (jalal) with the eye of God’s
beauty (jamal).”121 They also say: “Hope is the heart’s proximity to its Lord’s
benevolence.”//202 It is also said: “[Hope is] the innermost heart’s delight at
the thought of returning to God among the blessed.”122It is also said: “[Hope is]
seeing God’s All-Embracing mercy.”
120 Or, in another reading, “al-Fazari”. 121 In the Sufi tradition, God is seen as having two aspects: majesty and beauty. The former
makes God’s servants tremble out of fear of His punishment; the latter allows them to see God
as a benevolent and forgiving friend. 122 That is, achieving salvation.

Anas on the
evening of the day he died. I asked him: ‘Abu ∏Abdallah, how do you feel?’ He
answered: ‘I do not know what to tell you except that you will witness forgiveness
from God in a measure that you cannot even fathom.’ We stayed with him until
[he died] and we closed his eyes.”
Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “The hope that I place in You when I sin is almost
greater than the hope I place in You when I do good works, for, in my good
works, I have to rely on sincerity. However, how can I keep them sincere when
I am infamous for my imperfection? On the contrary, in my sins I rely on Your
pardon, for how can You not pardon me when beneficence is Your [essential]
attribute?”
Some people were conversing with Dhu πl-Nun when he was on his death
bed. He said: “Do not worry about me, for I am surprised at the vastness of
God’s loving care toward me!”//203 Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “O my God, the
sweetest gift in my heart is hope for You; the best words of my tongue are praise
for You; and the moment that I shall love most of all is the moment when I shall
meet You [in the Hereafter].”
According to one of the commentaries on the Qurπan, the Messenger of
God – may God bless and greet him – once came upon his Companions [while
passing] through the gate of Banu Shayba and saw them laughing. He told them:
“Are you laughing? If only you knew what I know, you would laugh little and
weep much!” He left, but then returned and said: “Gabriel has just descended543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 151
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 151
to me with the words of God Most High, “I am the All-Forgiving, the All-
Compassionate.”123
Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi said: Abu πl-Hasan al-Saffar told us:
∏Abbas b. Tamim said: Yahya b. Ayyub told us: Muslim b. Salim told us: Kharija
b. Mus∏ab told us on the authority of Zayd b. Aslam, on the authority of ∏Ataπ b.
Yasar, on the authority of ∏Aπisha, who said: “I heard the Messenger of God –
may God bless and greet him – say: ‘God Most High laughs at the desperation
and despondency of His servants, for [divine] mercy is so close to them.’ I asked:
‘O Messenger of God, by my father and mother, how can our Lord – may He be
great and exalted – laugh?’ He answered: ‘By the One in Whose hand is my soul,
of course He laughs!’” [∏Aπisha] then said: “As long as He laughs, good things
will continue to come to us!”
Know that laughter is an attribute that pertains to His action,124for it manifests
His beneficence in the same way as does the saying “The earth ‘laughs’ through
[its] plants.”125 He laughs at their lack of confidence in manifestations of His
grace, which will turn out to be far greater than what they have expected from
Him.
It is recounted that a Magian126sought the hospitality of Abraham the Friend
of God – peace be upon him. Abraham told him: “I’ll be your host, only if you
embrace Islam!”127 To which the Magian replied: “If I were to embrace Islam,
there would be no benefit for you in [hosting] me.”128 When the Magian went
away, God Most High revealed to Abraham: “Abraham, you will not feed him
unless he changes his religion, whereas We have fed him for seventy years
despite his unbelief?! If you were to be his host for just one night, what would
it be to you?” Abraham – peace be upon him – rushed after the Magian and
invited him to stay with him. The Magian asked him what caused him to change
his mind. Abraham told him what had happened to him. The Magian said:
“So that’s how He treats me!” He then said: “Present [your] Islam to me!” and
became a Muslim.
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“The master Abu Sahl al-Su∏luki saw Abu Sahl al-Zajjaji in a dream. [During his
lifetime] Abu Sahl used to teach the doctrine of eternal punishment. [Al-Su∏luki]
asked him about his condition. He responded: ‘I have discovered that things here
are easier than I thought.’”
I heard Abu Bakr b. Ishkib say: “I saw the master Abu Sahl al-Su∏luki in
a dream. His condition was excellent beyond any description. I asked him: ‘O
123 Q. 15:49.
124 According to Islamic theology, God is possessed of two types of attributes: those of His
essence and those of His acts.
125 That is, it sprouts up vegetation.
126 That is, a follower of the Zoroastrian religion.
127 According to the Qurπan, Abraham’s religion was pure Islam. See Q. 37:100–104.
128 Because it would be Abraham’s duty to host a fellow believer.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 152
152 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
master, how did you manage to attain this?’ He answered: ‘Because I was thinking
well of my Lord.’”
When Malik b. Dinar was seen in a dream, he was asked: “What has God
done to you?” He responded: “I came to my Lord – may He be great and exalted
– [burdened] by many sins. However, all of them were erased by virtue of my
having always thought well of Him Most High!”
It is related that the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – said: “God –
may He be great and exalted – said: ‘I am with My servant when he thinks of Me. I am with him when he remembers Me. If he remembers Me in himself, I will
remember him in Myself. If he remembers Me in company, I will remember him
in a company better than his. If he draws nearer to Me by one inch, I will draw
nearer to him by one cubit. If he draws nearer to Me by one cubit, I will draw
nearer to him by one fathom, and when he comes to Me walking, I come to him
running.’”129 This hadith was related to us by Abu Nu∏aym ∏Abd al-Malik b. al-Hasan al-Isfaraini, who related it on the authority of Ya∏qub b. Ishaq, on the
authority of ∏Ali b. Harb, on the authority of Abu Mu∏awiyya, on the authority
of Muhammad b. ∏Ubayd, on the authority of al-Am∏ash, on the authority of Abu
Salih, on the authority of Abu Hurayra – may God be pleased with him – who
related it from the Prophet – may God bless and greet him. It is said that once Ibn al-Mubarak was fighting an infidel. When the time
of the infidel’s prayer came, the latter asked Ibn al-Mubarak for a respite, and
he granted his request. When the infidel kneeled to perform his prayer, Ibn
al-Mubarak wanted to strike him with his sword, but he heard a voice speak to
him in the air: “And keep the promise, for every promise will be scrutinized.”130
So he desisted [from killing him].543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 151
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 151
to me with the words of God Most High, “I am the All-Forgiving, the All-
Compassionate.”123
Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi said: Abu πl-Hasan al-Saffar told us:
∏Abbas b. Tamim said: Yahya b. Ayyub told us: Muslim b. Salim told us: Kharija
b. Mus∏ab told us on the authority of Zayd b. Aslam, on the authority of ∏Ataπ b.
Yasar, on the authority of ∏Aπisha, who said: “I heard the Messenger of God –
may God bless and greet him – say: ‘God Most High laughs at the desperation
and despondency of His servants, for [divine] mercy is so close to them.’ I asked:
‘O Messenger of God, by my father and mother, how can our Lord – may He be
great and exalted – laugh?’ He answered: ‘By the One in Whose hand is my soul,
of course He laughs!’” [∏Aπisha] then said: “As long as He laughs, good things
will continue to come to us!”
Know that laughter is an attribute that pertains to His action,124for it manifests
His beneficence in the same way as does the saying “The earth ‘laughs’ through
[its] plants.”125 He laughs at their lack of confidence in manifestations of His
grace, which will turn out to be far greater than what they have expected from
Him.
It is recounted that a Magian126sought the hospitality of Abraham the Friend
of God – peace be upon him. Abraham told him: “I’ll be your host, only if you
embrace Islam!”127 To which the Magian replied: “If I were to embrace Islam,
there would be no benefit for you in [hosting] me.”128 When the Magian went
away, God Most High revealed to Abraham: “Abraham, you will not feed him
unless he changes his religion, whereas We have fed him for seventy years
despite his unbelief?! If you were to be his host for just one night, what would
it be to you?” Abraham – peace be upon him – rushed after the Magian and
invited him to stay with him. The Magian asked him what caused him to change
his mind. Abraham told him what had happened to him. The Magian said:
“So that’s how He treats me!” He then said: “Present [your] Islam to me!” and
became a Muslim.
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“The master Abu Sahl al-Su∏luki saw Abu Sahl al-Zajjaji in a dream. [During his
lifetime] Abu Sahl used to teach the doctrine of eternal punishment. [Al-Su∏luki]
asked him about his condition. He responded: ‘I have discovered that things here
are easier than I thought.’”
I heard Abu Bakr b. Ishkib say: “I saw the master Abu Sahl al-Su∏luki in
a dream. His condition was excellent beyond any description. I asked him: ‘O
123 Q. 15:49.
124 According to Islamic theology, God is possessed of two types of attributes: those of His
essence and those of His acts.
125 That is, it sprouts up vegetation.
126 That is, a follower of the Zoroastrian religion.
127 According to the Qurπan, Abraham’s religion was pure Islam. See Q. 37:100–104.
128 Because it would be Abraham’s duty to host a fellow believer.

When the time
of the infidel’s prayer came, the latter asked Ibn al-Mubarak for a respite, and
he granted his request. When the infidel kneeled to perform his prayer, Ibn
al-Mubarak wanted to strike him with his sword, but he heard a voice speak to
him in the air: “And keep the promise, for every promise will be scrutinized.”130
So he desisted [from killing him]. When the infidel had finished his prayer,
he asked: “What prevented you from doing what you intended to do?” Ibn
al-Mubarak told him about what he had heard. On hearing that, the infidel
exclaimed: “Blessed be the Lord, who censures His friend for the sake of His
enemy!” So he embraced Islam and became a good Muslim. It is said that God prompted men to commit sin when He named Himself
“the Forgiver”. “For were He to say: ‘I will forgive no sins’, no Muslim would
ever commit a sin.” In the same way, He said: “God will not forgive anyone who
associates partners with Him,”131 and indeed no Muslim can ever give partners
to Him. However, when He said “He forgives any lesser sin to whomever He
wills”,132they [His servants] began to long for His forgiveness [in lesser matters]. It is related about Ibrahim b. Adham – may God be pleased with him – that
he said: “One night I was waiting for a long time for the court around the Ka∏ba
to become free of people [so that I could perform] my circumambulations. It was
129 A famous sacred hadith report (hadithqudsi) – that is, one of those in which God is the speaker. It is cited in the major Sunni collections of hadith. 130 Q. 17:34; 17:36, according to Arberry’s translation. 131 Q. 4:116. 132 Q. 4:116.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 153
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 153
a dark and rainy night; [the pilgrims] left the sacred precinct and I began walking
around the Ka∏ba. As I was doing that,//205 I kept repeating: ‘O my God, guard
me from sin! O my God, guard me from sin!’ Suddenly I heard a voice saying to
me: ‘O Ibn Adham, you ask Me to guard you from sin, and so do the rest of
mankind. But if I were to guard you all from sin, to whom, then, should I show
My mercy?’”
It is said that while on his death bed Abu πl-∏Abbas b. Surayj133had a dream
as if the Day of Judgement had already occurred and the All-Powerful was
inquiring: “Where are the learned?” When they came, He asked: “What have
you done with what you have learned?” [Abu πl-∏Abbas said:] “We answered: ‘O
Lord, we have fallen short and committed acts of evil!’ He repeated his question,
as if He were not satisfied with our answer and wanted another one. So I said:
‘As for me, my record includes no sin of giving partners to You, and You have
promised that You will pardon anything that is less than that.’ God said: ‘Go
forth, I have pardoned all of you.’” Abu πl-∏Abbas died three nights later. They say that there once was a drunkard. [One day] he gathered together
some of his boon companions and gave a slave of his four dirhams so that he
could buy some fruit for his party. As the slave passed by the door of Mansur
b. ∏Ammar’s house, where the latter had his teaching session, he heard him
[Mansur] asking people to give something to a certain poor man. He was saying:
“Whoever gives this man four dirhams, I will pray for him four prayers!” So the
slave gave the man four dirhams.When the time
of the infidel’s prayer came, the latter asked Ibn al-Mubarak for a respite, and
he granted his request. When the infidel kneeled to perform his prayer, Ibn
al-Mubarak wanted to strike him with his sword, but he heard a voice speak to
him in the air: “And keep the promise, for every promise will be scrutinized.”130
So he desisted [from killing him]. When the infidel had finished his prayer,
he asked: “What prevented you from doing what you intended to do?” Ibn
al-Mubarak told him about what he had heard. On hearing that, the infidel
exclaimed: “Blessed be the Lord, who censures His friend for the sake of His
enemy!” So he embraced Islam and became a good Muslim. It is said that God prompted men to commit sin when He named Himself
“the Forgiver”. “For were He to say: ‘I will forgive no sins’, no Muslim would
ever commit a sin.” In the same way, He said: “God will not forgive anyone who
associates partners with Him,”131 and indeed no Muslim can ever give partners
to Him. However, when He said “He forgives any lesser sin to whomever He
wills”,132they [His servants] began to long for His forgiveness [in lesser matters]. It is related about Ibrahim b. Adham – may God be pleased with him – that
he said: “One night I was waiting for a long time for the court around the Ka∏ba
to become free of people [so that I could perform] my circumambulations. It was
129 A famous sacred hadith report (hadithqudsi) – that is, one of those in which God is the speaker. It is cited in the major Sunni collections of hadith. 130 Q. 17:34; 17:36, according to Arberry’s translation. 131 Q. 4:116. 132 Q. 4:116.

∏Ammar’s house, where the latter had his teaching session, he heard him
[Mansur] asking people to give something to a certain poor man. He was saying:
“Whoever gives this man four dirhams, I will pray for him four prayers!” So the
slave gave the man four dirhams. Mansur asked him: “What do you want me
to pray for on your behalf?” The slave answered: “I want to be free from my
master.” Mansur prayed for that and asked: “What else?” He answered: “I want
God Most High to recompense me for my four dirhams.” Mansur prayed for
that and asked: “What else?” He answered: “That God grant repentance to my
master.” Mansur prayed for that and asked: “What else?” He answered: “[Pray]
that God pardon me, my master, you and all this folk [at your session]!” Mansur
prayed for that. The slave returned to his master, who asked him: “Why are
you so late?” The slave told him the story. The master asked: “So, what did he
[Mansur] pray for?” He answered: “I asked to be set free.” The master said:
“Go, you are free now! And what was the second prayer?” He answered: “That
God recompense me for those dirhams.” The master said: “Here are four thousand
dirhams for you! And what was the third prayer?” He answered: “That God
grant you repentance.” The master said: “I have already repented. And what was
the fourth prayer?” He answered: “That God pardon you, me, the folk [at the
session] and the one who said these prayers.” The master exclaimed: “This is
the only thing I cannot do!” When the master went to sleep that night, he had a
dream in which he heard a voice saying: “You have done what it was in your
power to do. Now you will see what is in My power to do. I have pardoned you,
the slave, Mansur b. ∏Ammar, and the folk who attended his session!”//206
133 A famous jurist and theologian of the Shafi∏i school, who was famous for his moral rectitude
and piety; he died in Baghdad in 306/918.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 154
154 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
It is related that Riyah [b. ∏Amr] al-Qaysi134performed pilgrimages [to Mecca]
many times. One day, as he was standing under the rainspout [of the Ka∏ba],
he said: “My God, give such-and-such a number of my pilgrimages to the
Messenger – may God greet and bless him; ten of them to his ten Companions;
two of them to my parents, and the remainder to all the Muslims!” He kept not
a single one for himself. Suddenly he heard a voice that said: “O you, who shows
Us his generosity! We pardon you, your parents, and all those who profess the
true faith!”
It is related on the authority of ∏Abd al-Wahhab b. ∏Abd al-Majid al-Thaqafi
that he said: “Once I saw a funeral bier [pass by] that was carried by three men
and one woman. So I took the place of the woman and we headed toward the
cemetery. We prayed over it [the bier] and buried it. Then I asked the woman:
‘What relation was he to you?’ She answered: ‘He was my son.’ I asked: ‘Don’t you
have any neighbors [to help you]?’ She answered: ‘I do have neighbors, but they
despised him.’ I asked: ‘Who was he then?’ She answered: ‘He was effeminate.’135
I felt pity for her, so I took her to my house and gave her some money, grain and
clothing. I went to sleep that night and, in my dream, I saw a visitor, who shone
like a full moon. He was dressed in a white garment. He began to thank me. I
asked him: ‘Who are you?’ He answered: ‘I am that effeminate man, whom you
buried today. My Lord has bestowed mercy on me because of people’s contempt
for me.’”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“As Abu ∏Amr136al-Bikandi was going down the street one day he saw a group of
men who wanted to expel a young man from their neighborhood on account of
his dissolute behavior. A woman was there, crying. Al-Bikandi was told that that
was the mother. Abu ∏Amr had pity for her and interceded with the men on
behalf of the youth.∏Ammar’s house, where the latter had his teaching session, he heard him
[Mansur] asking people to give something to a certain poor man. He was saying:
“Whoever gives this man four dirhams, I will pray for him four prayers!” So the
slave gave the man four dirhams. Mansur asked him: “What do you want me
to pray for on your behalf?” The slave answered: “I want to be free from my
master.” Mansur prayed for that and asked: “What else?” He answered: “I want
God Most High to recompense me for my four dirhams.” Mansur prayed for
that and asked: “What else?” He answered: “That God grant repentance to my
master.” Mansur prayed for that and asked: “What else?” He answered: “[Pray]
that God pardon me, my master, you and all this folk [at your session]!” Mansur
prayed for that. The slave returned to his master, who asked him: “Why are
you so late?” The slave told him the story. The master asked: “So, what did he
[Mansur] pray for?” He answered: “I asked to be set free.” The master said:
“Go, you are free now! And what was the second prayer?” He answered: “That
God recompense me for those dirhams.” The master said: “Here are four thousand
dirhams for you! And what was the third prayer?” He answered: “That God
grant you repentance.” The master said: “I have already repented. And what was
the fourth prayer?” He answered: “That God pardon you, me, the folk [at the
session] and the one who said these prayers.” The master exclaimed: “This is
the only thing I cannot do!” When the master went to sleep that night, he had a
dream in which he heard a voice saying: “You have done what it was in your
power to do. Now you will see what is in My power to do. I have pardoned you,
the slave, Mansur b. ∏Ammar, and the folk who attended his session!”//206
133 A famous jurist and theologian of the Shafi∏i school, who was famous for his moral rectitude
and piety; he died in Baghdad in 306/918.

Al-Bikandi was told that that
was the mother. Abu ∏Amr had pity for her and interceded with the men on
behalf of the youth. He told them: ‘Let him go this time for my sake. If he
returns to his evil ways, then do with him as you please!’ So they let him go, and
Abu ∏Amr departed. A few days later he was passing through that neighborhood. Suddenly he heard the old woman137 crying behind the door [of the youth’s
house]. He said to himself: ‘Perhaps the young man returned to his evil ways
and they expelled him from the neighborhood.’ He knocked on the old woman’s
door and asked her about her son. She came out and said that he had died. He
asked her how this happened. She said: ‘When the time of his death approached,
he said to me: “Do not tell our neighbors about my death. They have suffered a
great deal because of me, so they will rejoice at my misfortune and will not attend
my funeral. When you bury me, bury with me this ring upon which is engraved
the word ‘In the name of God’. And when you have buried me, ask for God’s
intercession on my behalf.”’ She said: ‘I fulfilled his last wish, and as I was about
134 An early ascetic from Basra, who died in 195/810. 135 This term may also denote a young male prostitute. 136 Or “∏Umar”. 137 That is, the young man’s mother.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 155
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 155
to depart from his grave, I heard his voice say: “Go now, mother! I have come
before [my] Lord the Generous!”’”
It is said that God Most High revealed to [the prophet] David – peace be
upon him – //207 [the following words]: “Tell them138that I did not create them
to profit by them; on the contrary, I created them so that they could profit by
Me!” I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b.
Shadhan say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Harbi say: I heard Ibrahim al-Utrush say:
“One day we were sitting with Ma∏ruf al-Karkhi139 on the banks of the Tigris.
[Suddenly] we saw a group of young men pass by in a boat. They were beating
tambourines, drinking [wine] and enjoying themselves frivolously. We said to
Ma∏ruf: ‘Do you not see how they flaunt their disobedience of God Most High
in public?! Ask God to punish them!’ Ma∏ruf raised up his hand and prayed: ‘My
God make them as merry in the Hereafter as you make them merry in this
world!’ [Ma∏ruf’s companions] told him: ‘Did we not ask you to pray to God to
punish them?!’ Ma∏ruf answered: ‘If He makes them merry in the Hereafter,
then He will have granted them His pardon!’”
I heard Abu πl-Hasan ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Muzakki say: I heard Abu Zakariya
Yahya b. Muhammad al-Adib say: al-Fadl b. Sadaqa told us: Abu ∏Abdallah
al-Husayn b. ∏Abdallah b. Sa∏id said: “Yahya b. Aktham the Judge was a friend
of mine. I loved him and he loved me. After he died, I longed to see him in a
dream, so that I could ask him how God Most High had treated him. One night
I saw him in a dream and asked him: ‘How has God Most High treated you?’ He
answered: ‘God has forgiven me. However, He reprimanded me, saying: “Yahya,
you confused things regarding Me in your earthly life!” I answered: “Yes, My
Lord, but I relied on the hadiththat was communicated to me by Abu Mu∏awiyya
on the authority of al-∏Amash, on the authority of Abu Salih, on the authority
of Abu Hurayra, who said: ‘The Messenger of God – may God bless and greet
him – said that You said: “I am ashamed to punish a person with white hair by
the [hell]fire.”’” God said: “I have forgiven you, Yahya! My Prophet spoke the
truth. However, you still confused things regarding Me in your earthly life!”’”
Sadness (huzn)
God Most High said: “They said: ‘Praise belongs to God Who has put away all
sorrow from us.’”140 ∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd
informed us: ∏Ali b. Hubaysh informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Isa informed us: Ibn Wahb
told us: Usama b. Zayd al-Laythi//208 told us on the authority of Muhammad
b. ∏Amr b. ∏Ataπ, who said: I heard ∏Ataπ b. Yasar say: I heard Abu Sa∏id
al-Khudri say: I heard the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him –
say: “Whenever the faithful servant of God is afflicted by an ailment, suffering,
138 That is, your people.
139 On him, see IM, pp. 48–49.
140 Q. 35:34; 35:31, according to Arberry’s translation.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 156
156 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
sadness or pain that troubles him, God always pardons him for some of his evil
deeds.”
Sadness is a state that prevents the heart from roaming in the valleys of
forgetfulness [of God]. It is one of the characteristic features of the wayfarers on
the Sufi path. I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on
him – say: “The person in the state of sadness travels along the path of God in
just one month a greater distance than one without sadness travels in many years.”
One hadith says: “God loves every sad heart.” In the Torah, it is said:
“Whenever God loves someone, He places a mourner into his heart, whereas
whenever God hates someone, He places a flute into his heart.” It is related that
the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – was constantly in the
state of sadness and endless reflection. Bishr b. al-Harith said: “Sadness is a king. When he resides in a certain
place, he refuses to share it with anyone.” It is said that the heart that is empty
of sadness dilapidates like a house that is empty of tenants. Abu Sa∏id al-Qurashi
said: “Tears of sadness make one blind, whereas tears of passionate desire only
dim one’s sight without blinding it altogether. God Most High said: ‘And his
eyes141 turned white because of the sorrow that he choked within him.’”142 Ibn
Khafif said: “Sadness is restraining one’s ego from plunging into [frivolous]
merriment.”
Rabi∏a al-∏Adawiyya heard a man say: “O sadness!” She said to him: “You
[should rather] say: ‘O how little sadness!’ If you were truly sad, you would be
unable to breathe!”//209 Sufyan b.Abu Sa∏id al-Qurashi
said: “Tears of sadness make one blind, whereas tears of passionate desire only
dim one’s sight without blinding it altogether. God Most High said: ‘And his
eyes141 turned white because of the sorrow that he choked within him.’”142 Ibn
Khafif said: “Sadness is restraining one’s ego from plunging into [frivolous]
merriment.”
Rabi∏a al-∏Adawiyya heard a man say: “O sadness!” She said to him: “You
[should rather] say: ‘O how little sadness!’ If you were truly sad, you would be
unable to breathe!”//209 Sufyan b. ∏Uyayna said: “If a person in this [Muslim]
community who is overcome with sadness weeps, God Most High will pardon the
entire community because of his tears.” Dawud al-Taπi, who was often overcome
with sadness, used to repeat during the night: “My God, my preoccupation with
You has annihilated my other preoccupations and has deprived me of any sleep.”
He also used to repeat: “How can one whose afflictions are renewed with every
new moment seek comfort from his sadness?!” It is said that sadness deprives
one of food, while fear deprives one of sins. A Sufi was asked about evidence
of sadness. He answered: “Much sighing.” Al-Sari al-Saqati said: “I wish the
sadness of all mankind be placed on my shoulders!”
People have discoursed at length about sadness. All of them say that only the
sadness that is inspired by [the thoughts of] the Hereafter deserves praise. As for
the sadness in this world, it is to be discouraged. The only person to disagree
with this is Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri, who said: “Sadness is a virtue in all respects
and an advantage for the believer, as long as it was not caused by a sin. Even if
it does not raise one to the status of the elect [people of God], it still causes
one to purify oneself.” One of the Sufi masters said that whenever one of his
companions was about to embark on a journey, he would tell him: “If you see a
person overcome with sadness, give him my regards!”
141 That is, the eyes of Jacob, father of Joseph.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 155
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 155
to depart from his grave, I heard his voice say: “Go now, mother! I have come
before [my] Lord the Generous!”’”
It is said that God Most High revealed to [the prophet] David – peace be
upon him – //207 [the following words]: “Tell them138that I did not create them
to profit by them; on the contrary, I created them so that they could profit by
Me!” I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b.
Shadhan say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Harbi say: I heard Ibrahim al-Utrush say:
“One day we were sitting with Ma∏ruf al-Karkhi139 on the banks of the Tigris.
[Suddenly] we saw a group of young men pass by in a boat. They were beating
tambourines, drinking [wine] and enjoying themselves frivolously. We said to
Ma∏ruf: ‘Do you not see how they flaunt their disobedience of God Most High
in public?! Ask God to punish them!’ Ma∏ruf raised up his hand and prayed: ‘My
God make them as merry in the Hereafter as you make them merry in this
world!’ [Ma∏ruf’s companions] told him: ‘Did we not ask you to pray to God to
punish them?!’ Ma∏ruf answered: ‘If He makes them merry in the Hereafter,
then He will have granted them His pardon!’”
I heard Abu πl-Hasan ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Muzakki say: I heard Abu Zakariya
Yahya b. Muhammad al-Adib say: al-Fadl b. Sadaqa told us: Abu ∏Abdallah
al-Husayn b. ∏Abdallah b. Sa∏id said: “Yahya b. Aktham the Judge was a friend
of mine. I loved him and he loved me. After he died, I longed to see him in a
dream, so that I could ask him how God Most High had treated him. One night
I saw him in a dream and asked him: ‘How has God Most High treated you?’ He
answered: ‘God has forgiven me. However, He reprimanded me, saying: “Yahya,
you confused things regarding Me in your earthly life!” I answered: “Yes, My
Lord, but I relied on the hadiththat was communicated to me by Abu Mu∏awiyya
on the authority of al-∏Amash, on the authority of Abu Salih, on the authority
of Abu Hurayra, who said: ‘The Messenger of God – may God bless and greet
him – said that You said: “I am ashamed to punish a person with white hair by
the [hell]fire.”’” God said: “I have forgiven you, Yahya! My Prophet spoke the
truth. However, you still confused things regarding Me in your earthly life!”’”
Sadness (huzn)
God Most High said: “They said: ‘Praise belongs to God Who has put away all
sorrow from us.’”140 ∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd
informed us: ∏Ali b. Hubaysh informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Isa informed us: Ibn Wahb
told us: Usama b. Zayd al-Laythi//208 told us on the authority of Muhammad
b. ∏Amr b. ∏Ataπ, who said: I heard ∏Ataπ b. Yasar say: I heard Abu Sa∏id
al-Khudri say: I heard the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him –
say: “Whenever the faithful servant of God is afflicted by an ailment, suffering,
138 That is, your people.
139 On him, see IM, pp. 48–49.
140 Q. 35:34; 35:31, according to Arberry’s translation.

The only person to disagree
with this is Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri, who said: “Sadness is a virtue in all respects
and an advantage for the believer, as long as it was not caused by a sin. Even if
it does not raise one to the status of the elect [people of God], it still causes
one to purify oneself.” One of the Sufi masters said that whenever one of his
companions was about to embark on a journey, he would tell him: “If you see a
person overcome with sadness, give him my regards!”
141 That is, the eyes of Jacob, father of Joseph. 142 Q. 12:84.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 157
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 157
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say to the sun when it was about to
set: “Did you rise today on someone who is overcome with sadness?” One would
never see al-Hasan al-Basri without thinking that he had just been afflicted with
a terrible tragedy. Waki∏ [b. al-Jarrah]143said: “When al-Fudayl [b. ∏Iyad] passed
away, sadness departed this world [with him].” One of our [pious ancestors] said:
“Most of the things that the faithful will find [on the Day of Judgement] in their
ledger of good deeds will be related to sadness and sorrow.”
I heard Abu ∏Abdallah al-Shirazi say: I heard ∏Ali b. Bakran say: I heard
Muhammad b. Marwazi say: I heard Ahmad b. Abi Rawh say: I heard my
father say: I heard al-Fudayl b. ∏Iyad say: “Our pious ancestors used to say that
everything must be taxed and the tax of the mind is constant sadness.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy
on him – say: I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Farraπ say: I heard Abu πl-Husayn
al-Warraq say: “One day I asked Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri about sadness. He answered:
‘The sad person has no time for questions about sadness. Seek sadness, then ask
questions.’”//210
Hunger (ju∏) and the abandonment of [carnal] desire (shahwa)
God Most High said: “Surely, We shall try you with something of fear and
hunger.”144 He also said, at the end of the same verse, promising to reward
generously those who patiently endure the hardship of hunger: “But give good
tidings unto the patient.”145 He also said: “And give preference to others above
yourselves, even though poverty is your portion.”146
∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Saffar told us:
∏Abdallah b. Ayyub told us: Abu πl-Walid al-Tayalisi told us: Abu Hashim Sahib
al-Za∏farani told us: Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah told us on the authority of Anas b.
Malik, who said: “Fatima147 – may God be pleased with her – brought a small
piece of bread to the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him. He
asked her: ‘Fatima, what is this?’ She answered: ‘This is a piece of bread that I
baked. My heart would not be at peace until I brought you a slice of it.’ He told
her: ‘This is the first piece of food to enter your father’s mouth for three days.’”
According to a different version [of this story], Fatima brought him a piece of
barley bread.
This is why hunger is one of the characteristics of this tribe [the Sufis] and
one of the pillars of their striving. The wayfarers [on the mystic path] differ in
the extent of their adherence to hunger and abstention from food. They have
found the wellsprings of wisdom in hunger. Many tales are told about this.
143 An early ascetic and collector of hadith, who died in 197/812. See IM, p. 21.
144 Q. 2:155; 2:150 in Arberry’s translation.
145 Q. 2:155.
146 Q. 59:9.
147 The Prophet’s daughter by his first wife Khadija.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 158
158 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Abdallah al-Tamimi
say: I heard Ibn Salim say: “The proper rule [of one who practices] hunger is to
limit one’s [daily] meal to the size of a cat’s ear.” It is said that Sahl b. ∏Abdallah
[al-Tustari] ate only one meal for fifteen days and that during the month of
Ramadan148he would not eat until he saw the new moon and that every night he
would break his fast with nothing but water. Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “If hunger
were sold in the marketplace, then the seekers of the Hereafter would not need
to buy anything else there.”
Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ubaydallah informed us: ∏Ali b. al-Husayn
al-Arrajani//211 told us: Abu Muhammad ∏Abdallah b. Ahmad al-Istakhri told
us in Mecca – may God protect it – that Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] said: “When
God Most High created this world, He placed disobedience and ignorance in
satiation and He placed wisdom and knowledge in hunger.” Yahya b. Mu∏adh said:
“Hunger is an exercise for aspirants (muridun), a trial for the repentant, a discipline
for the world renouncers (zuhhad) and a blessing for the gnostics (∏arifun).”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“A disciple came to a Sufi master and found him weeping. He asked him: ‘Why
are you weeping?’ He answered: ‘I am hungry.’ The other exclaimed: ‘How can
a man like you cry from hunger?’ He answered: ‘Be silent! Don’t you know that
He wants me to weep from my hunger?!’”
I heard Abu ∏Abdallah al-Shirazi – may God have mercy on him – say:
Muhammad b. Bishr told us: al-Husayn b. Mansur [al-Hallaj] told us: Dawud b. Mu∏adh told us: I heard Makhlad say: “Al-Hajjaj b. Furafisa was with us in Syria. He stayed fifty days without drinking water or taking his fill from anything he
ate.” I heard him [Makhlad] say: Abu Bakr al-Ghazzal149said: I heard Muhammad
b. ∏Ali say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah Ahmad b.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 157
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 157
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say to the sun when it was about to
set: “Did you rise today on someone who is overcome with sadness?” One would
never see al-Hasan al-Basri without thinking that he had just been afflicted with
a terrible tragedy. Waki∏ [b. al-Jarrah]143said: “When al-Fudayl [b. ∏Iyad] passed
away, sadness departed this world [with him].” One of our [pious ancestors] said:
“Most of the things that the faithful will find [on the Day of Judgement] in their
ledger of good deeds will be related to sadness and sorrow.”
I heard Abu ∏Abdallah al-Shirazi say: I heard ∏Ali b. Bakran say: I heard
Muhammad b. Marwazi say: I heard Ahmad b. Abi Rawh say: I heard my
father say: I heard al-Fudayl b. ∏Iyad say: “Our pious ancestors used to say that
everything must be taxed and the tax of the mind is constant sadness.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy
on him – say: I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Farraπ say: I heard Abu πl-Husayn
al-Warraq say: “One day I asked Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri about sadness. He answered:
‘The sad person has no time for questions about sadness. Seek sadness, then ask
questions.’”//210
Hunger (ju∏) and the abandonment of [carnal] desire (shahwa)
God Most High said: “Surely, We shall try you with something of fear and
hunger.”144 He also said, at the end of the same verse, promising to reward
generously those who patiently endure the hardship of hunger: “But give good
tidings unto the patient.”145 He also said: “And give preference to others above
yourselves, even though poverty is your portion.”146
∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Saffar told us:
∏Abdallah b. Ayyub told us: Abu πl-Walid al-Tayalisi told us: Abu Hashim Sahib
al-Za∏farani told us: Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah told us on the authority of Anas b.
Malik, who said: “Fatima147 – may God be pleased with her – brought a small
piece of bread to the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him. He
asked her: ‘Fatima, what is this?’ She answered: ‘This is a piece of bread that I
baked. My heart would not be at peace until I brought you a slice of it.’ He told
her: ‘This is the first piece of food to enter your father’s mouth for three days.’”
According to a different version [of this story], Fatima brought him a piece of
barley bread.
This is why hunger is one of the characteristics of this tribe [the Sufis] and
one of the pillars of their striving. The wayfarers [on the mystic path] differ in
the extent of their adherence to hunger and abstention from food. They have
found the wellsprings of wisdom in hunger. Many tales are told about this.
143 An early ascetic and collector of hadith, who died in 197/812. See IM, p. 21.
144 Q. 2:155; 2:150 in Arberry’s translation.
145 Q. 2:155.
146 Q. 59:9.
147 The Prophet’s daughter by his first wife Khadija.

He stayed fifty days without drinking water or taking his fill from anything he
ate.” I heard him [Makhlad] say: Abu Bakr al-Ghazzal149said: I heard Muhammad
b. ∏Ali say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah Ahmad b. Yahya al-Jallaπ say: “When Abu
Turab al-Nakhshabi150came to Mecca – may God protect it – through the desert
of Basra, we asked him about what he had eaten [during his journey]. He
answered that since he left Basra he had eaten twice: first at Nibaj, then at Dhat
∏Irq, whereupon he had come to them.151 Thus he had crossed the desert eating
only two times.” I also heard him [Makhlad] say: ∏Ali b. al-Nahhas al-Misri said:
Harun b. Muhammad al-Daqqaq said: Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Dirfash152 told
us: Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari said: I heard ∏Abd al-∏Aziz ∏Umayr say: “A flock of
birds was starving for forty days. When they finally flew off and returned after
some days, they emanated the smell of musk.”
Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] grew stronger as he fasted and weaker as soon
as he ate something.//212 Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi said: “Al-Rabbani did not
eat for forty days, whereas al-Samadani did not eat for eighty days.”
148 The month of the Muslim fast. 149 Or “Ghazzali”. 150 On him see IM, pp. 33–34. 151 That is, to Mecca. 152 Or “al-Dirqash”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 159
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 159
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-∏Alawi say: I heard ∏Ali b. Ibrahim
al-Qadi in Damascus say: Muhammad b. ∏Ali b. Khalaf said: I heard Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari say: I heard Sulayman al-Darani say: “The key to this world is
satiation and the key to the next world is hunger.”
I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ubaydallah say: I heard ∏Ali b. Husayn
al-Arrajani say: I heard Abu Muhammad al-Istakhri say: I heard Sahl b. ∏Abdallah
[al-Tustari] say that he was asked about someone who eats only one meal during
the day. He answered: “This is the meal of the truthful.” He was then asked
about someone who eats two meals during the day. He answered: “This is the
meal of the faithful.” Finally, he was asked about someone who eats three meals
during the day. He answered: “Tell his family to build a trough for him!” I also
heard him [Muhammad b. ∏Ubaydallah] say: ∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. al-Fadl told us: Abu
Bakr al-Saπih told us: I heard Yahya b. Mu∏adh say: “Hunger is a light, while
satiation is a fire. Appetite is like firewood, by which fire is kindled. It won’t be
extinguished until it consumes the one who has it.”
I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj al-Tusi say:
“One day a Sufi came to visit a [Sufi] master who gave him some food and asked
him: ‘How long has it been since you have eaten?’ The Sufi answered: ‘Five days.’
The master told him: ‘Your hunger is the hunger of the greedy! You still have
your garments on, while you go hungry. This is not the hunger of the poor!’”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Sa∏id
al-Razi say: I heard al-∏Abbas b. Hamza say: I heard Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari say:
Abu Sulayman al-Darani said: “I love not eating one bite of my supper better
than staying awake all night in vigil!”
I heard Abu πl-Qasim Ja∏far b.He stayed fifty days without drinking water or taking his fill from anything he
ate.” I heard him [Makhlad] say: Abu Bakr al-Ghazzal149said: I heard Muhammad
b. ∏Ali say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah Ahmad b. Yahya al-Jallaπ say: “When Abu
Turab al-Nakhshabi150came to Mecca – may God protect it – through the desert
of Basra, we asked him about what he had eaten [during his journey]. He
answered that since he left Basra he had eaten twice: first at Nibaj, then at Dhat
∏Irq, whereupon he had come to them.151 Thus he had crossed the desert eating
only two times.” I also heard him [Makhlad] say: ∏Ali b. al-Nahhas al-Misri said:
Harun b. Muhammad al-Daqqaq said: Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Dirfash152 told
us: Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari said: I heard ∏Abd al-∏Aziz ∏Umayr say: “A flock of
birds was starving for forty days. When they finally flew off and returned after
some days, they emanated the smell of musk.”
Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] grew stronger as he fasted and weaker as soon
as he ate something.//212 Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi said: “Al-Rabbani did not
eat for forty days, whereas al-Samadani did not eat for eighty days.”
148 The month of the Muslim fast. 149 Or “Ghazzali”. 150 On him see IM, pp. 33–34. 151 That is, to Mecca. 152 Or “al-Dirqash”.

Hamza say: I heard Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari say:
Abu Sulayman al-Darani said: “I love not eating one bite of my supper better
than staying awake all night in vigil!”
I heard Abu πl-Qasim Ja∏far b. Ahmad al-Razi say: “Abu πl-Khayr craved fish
for many years. Then some of it came to him from a lawful source. When he
stretched his hand toward it in order to eat it, a spike from its bone pricked
his finger. Because of this he lost his hand. He exclaimed: ‘O Lord, this is what
happens to someone who stretches his hand in his desire for a licit thing! What then
happens to someone who stretches his hand desiring that which is prohibited?!’”
I heard the master Abu Bakr b. Furak say://213 “Following one’s desire
for what is licit results in worries about one’s family. Imagine what happens
to the one who seeks to satisfy his desire for something illicit!” I heard Rustam
al-Shirazi al-Sufi say that [the master] Abu ∏Abdallah b. Khafif was attending a
dinner party when one of his companions stretched his hand toward food before
the master because of his extreme hunger [and poverty]. One of the master’s
other companions wanted to reprimand the hungry man for his poor manners
– namely, for his stretching his hand to food before the master. So he [the
companion] put some food in front of the hungry man. The latter realized that
he was being reprimanded for his poor manners, so he resolved to keep a fast
for fifteen days to punish and discipline himself [for his transgression] and to
demonstrate his repentance for his misdemeanor. And he did this despite the
poverty he had suffered before that incident.”543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 160
160 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: Abu πl-Faraj al-Warathani
told us: ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. Ja∏far told us: Ibrahim b. Muhammad b. al-Harith told us: Sulayman b. Dawud told us: Ja∏far b. Sulayman told us: I
heard Malik b. Dinar say: “When someone has conquered his mundane desires,
Satan is scared of his shadow!” I also heard him [Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah
al-Sufi] say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say: “If the Sufi says after five days [of
fasting] that he is hungry, send him to the marketplace and tell him to earn
something!” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq relate on the authority of
a Sufi master who said: “In those who are destined to the hellfire, mundane
passions have prevailed over caution. That is why they commit sins.” I also heard
him say that someone asked a Sufi: “Do you not have desire?” He answered:
“Yes, I do, but I guard myself [against it].” He also said that someone asked
another Sufi: “Do you not have desire?” He answered: “I have the desire not to
desire.” And this is more perfect [than the first answer]. I heard Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: Ahmad b. Mansur informed
us: Ibn Makhlad informed us: Abu πl-Husayn b. ∏Amr b. al-Jahm told us: I
heard Abu Nasr al-Tammar say: “Bishr [al-Hafi] came to me one night. I told
him: ‘Praise be to God Who brought you here. We received some cotton from
Khurasan. [My] daughter has spun it, sold it and bought us some meat, so that
you might eat with us!’ [Bishr] said: ‘If I were to eat with someone, I would eat
with you.’ He then added: ‘For many years I have craved eggplant,//214 but not
had a chance to eat it.’ I told him: ‘Surely, over all these years there must have
been at least one eggplant that was licit for you!’ He answered: ‘[I will only eat
it] when my love of eggplant has become pure!’”
I heard ∏Abdallah b.Hamza say: I heard Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari say:
Abu Sulayman al-Darani said: “I love not eating one bite of my supper better
than staying awake all night in vigil!”
I heard Abu πl-Qasim Ja∏far b. Ahmad al-Razi say: “Abu πl-Khayr craved fish
for many years. Then some of it came to him from a lawful source. When he
stretched his hand toward it in order to eat it, a spike from its bone pricked
his finger. Because of this he lost his hand. He exclaimed: ‘O Lord, this is what
happens to someone who stretches his hand in his desire for a licit thing! What then
happens to someone who stretches his hand desiring that which is prohibited?!’”
I heard the master Abu Bakr b. Furak say://213 “Following one’s desire
for what is licit results in worries about one’s family. Imagine what happens
to the one who seeks to satisfy his desire for something illicit!” I heard Rustam
al-Shirazi al-Sufi say that [the master] Abu ∏Abdallah b. Khafif was attending a
dinner party when one of his companions stretched his hand toward food before
the master because of his extreme hunger [and poverty]. One of the master’s
other companions wanted to reprimand the hungry man for his poor manners
– namely, for his stretching his hand to food before the master. So he [the
companion] put some food in front of the hungry man. The latter realized that
he was being reprimanded for his poor manners, so he resolved to keep a fast
for fifteen days to punish and discipline himself [for his transgression] and to
demonstrate his repentance for his misdemeanor. And he did this despite the
poverty he had suffered before that incident.”

We received some cotton from
Khurasan. [My] daughter has spun it, sold it and bought us some meat, so that
you might eat with us!’ [Bishr] said: ‘If I were to eat with someone, I would eat
with you.’ He then added: ‘For many years I have craved eggplant,//214 but not
had a chance to eat it.’ I told him: ‘Surely, over all these years there must have
been at least one eggplant that was licit for you!’ He answered: ‘[I will only eat
it] when my love of eggplant has become pure!’”
I heard ∏Abdallah b. Bakuya al-Sufi – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard Abu Ahmad al-Saghir say: “Abu ∏Abdallah b. Khafif ordered that I bring
him ten raisins every evening so that he could break his fast on them. One night
I felt pity for him, so I served him fifteen raisins. He looked at me and asked:
‘Who told you to do this?’ He ate ten raisins and left the rest untouched.” I heard
Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ubaydallah say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. al-Farghani say: I heard Abu πl-Husayn al-Razi say:
I heard Yusuf b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu Turab al-Nakhshabi say: “Only
once in my life did my soul prevail over me in its craving. When I was on a
journey, it desired bread and eggs. I turned to a village nearby. Someone rose up
and followed me saying: ‘This one was with the thieves!’ They beat me seventy
lashes until one of them recognized me and exclaimed: ‘This is Abu Turab
al-Nakhshabi!’ They apologized to me and one of them invited me to his house
out of respect and compassion for me. He served me bread and eggs. I said to my
soul: ‘Eat them after seventy lashes!’”543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 161
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 161
Humility (khushu∏) and modesty (tawadu∏)
God Most High said: “Prosperous are the believers who in their prayers are
humble.”153 Abu πl-Hasan b. ∏Abd al-Rahim154 b. Ibrahim b. Muhammad Yahya
al-Muzakki informed us: Abu πl-Fadl Sufyan b. Muhammad al-Jawhari told
us: ∏Ali b. al-Husayn told us: Yahya b. Hammad told us: Shu∏ba told us on
the authority of Aban b. Tha∏lab,155 on the authority of Fadl b. al-Fuqaymi, on
the authority of Ibrahim al-Nakha∏i, on the authority of ∏Alqama b. Qays, on the
authority of ∏Abdallah b. Mas∏ud, who said: “The Prophet – may God bless and
greet him – said: ‘No one in whose heart there is a grain of pride will ever enter
Paradise; and no one in whose heart there is a grain of faith will ever enter the
hellfire.’ Someone asked: ‘Messenger of God, what of a man who wishes his
clothes to be beautiful?’ The Messenger responded: ‘God Most High is beautiful
and He loves beauty. As for pride, it is the opposite of truth and disdain to other
people!’”//215
∏Ali b. Ahmad a-Awhazi informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Basri informed
us: Muhammad b. Fadl b. Jabir told us: Abu Ibrahim told us: ∏Ali b. Mushir told
us on the authority of Muslim al-∏Awar, on the authority of Anas b. Malik: “The
Messenger of God used to visit the sick, accompany funeral processions, ride
a donkey and accept invitations from slaves. On the day [the Jewish tribes] of
Qurayza and al-Nadir were conquered, he rode a donkey bridled with a rope of
palm fiber and saddled with a saddle of palm fiber.”
Humility means submission to [the will of] God, while submissiveness is
surrender to [the will of] God and abandoning resistance to God’s decree. Hudhayfa said: “Humility is the first thing you lose of your religion.” When
someone asked a Sufi about humility, he answered: “Humility is when the heart
stands before God – praise be to Him – with total concentration.” Sahl b.We received some cotton from
Khurasan. [My] daughter has spun it, sold it and bought us some meat, so that
you might eat with us!’ [Bishr] said: ‘If I were to eat with someone, I would eat
with you.’ He then added: ‘For many years I have craved eggplant,//214 but not
had a chance to eat it.’ I told him: ‘Surely, over all these years there must have
been at least one eggplant that was licit for you!’ He answered: ‘[I will only eat
it] when my love of eggplant has become pure!’”
I heard ∏Abdallah b. Bakuya al-Sufi – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard Abu Ahmad al-Saghir say: “Abu ∏Abdallah b. Khafif ordered that I bring
him ten raisins every evening so that he could break his fast on them. One night
I felt pity for him, so I served him fifteen raisins. He looked at me and asked:
‘Who told you to do this?’ He ate ten raisins and left the rest untouched.” I heard
Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ubaydallah say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. al-Farghani say: I heard Abu πl-Husayn al-Razi say:
I heard Yusuf b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu Turab al-Nakhshabi say: “Only
once in my life did my soul prevail over me in its craving. When I was on a
journey, it desired bread and eggs. I turned to a village nearby. Someone rose up
and followed me saying: ‘This one was with the thieves!’ They beat me seventy
lashes until one of them recognized me and exclaimed: ‘This is Abu Turab
al-Nakhshabi!’ They apologized to me and one of them invited me to his house
out of respect and compassion for me. He served me bread and eggs. I said to my
soul: ‘Eat them after seventy lashes!’”

On the day [the Jewish tribes] of
Qurayza and al-Nadir were conquered, he rode a donkey bridled with a rope of
palm fiber and saddled with a saddle of palm fiber.”
Humility means submission to [the will of] God, while submissiveness is
surrender to [the will of] God and abandoning resistance to God’s decree. Hudhayfa said: “Humility is the first thing you lose of your religion.” When
someone asked a Sufi about humility, he answered: “Humility is when the heart
stands before God – praise be to Him – with total concentration.” Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] said: “Satan cannot come near one whose heart is humble.”
It is said that one of the signs of humility in the servant of God is that when he is
prompted to anger, contradicted or rejected, he accepts all that [with equanimity]. [Another] Sufi said: “Humility of the heart is to restrain [your] eyes from looking.”
Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Tirmidhi said: “Being humble means that the flames
of your passion have been extinguished and the vapors of your breast have
subsided, while the light of glorification of God has come to shine in your heart. [At this point,] a man’s passion dies, his heart is given [a new] life, and his limbs
surrender themselves to humility.” Al-Hasan al-Basri said: “Humility is when
fear settles in your heart permanently.”
Someone asked al-Junayd about humility. He answered: “It is the abasement
of your heart before the One Who knows that which is hidden.”156
153 Q. 23:1–2. 154 Or “∏Abd al-Rahman”, according to another reading. 155 Or “Taghlab”. 156 That is, the destiny of [His] creation from beginning to end.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 162
162 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
God Most High said: “The servants of the All-Merciful are those who walk
the earth modestly.”157 I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have
mercy on him – say: “This means ‘[they walk] in submissiveness and humility’.”
I also heard him say: “[They are humble] those who do not consider the thongs
of their sandals to be beautiful as they walk.”
[The Sufis] have agreed that humility resides in the heart.//216 Once, a Sufi
saw a man with a downcast appearance, lowered gaze and slumped shoulders. He told him: “O so-and-so, humility is here!” and he pointed to his chest, “Not
there!” and he pointed to the [man’s slumping] shoulders. It is related that the
Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – saw a man playing with his
beard during his prayer. He said: “If his heart were humble, his limbs would be
humble too.” They say that one of the conditions of humility is that one does not
notice who is standing to one’s left or right during the prayer. One can say that
humility is abasing one’s innermost self in the presence of God – may He be
blessed and exalted – in accordance with the rules of proper behavior (adab). Or it
is said that humility is a feebleness that enters one’s heart when one contemplates
[one’s] Lord. Or it is said that humility is the dissolution and shrinking of the heart
before the power of the True Reality (al-haqiqa). Or it is said that humility is a
prelude to the onset of the conquering powers of awe [of God]. It is also said that
humility is a shudder that suddenly attacks one’s heart, when the True Reality
unveils itself before one. Al-Fudayl b.On the day [the Jewish tribes] of
Qurayza and al-Nadir were conquered, he rode a donkey bridled with a rope of
palm fiber and saddled with a saddle of palm fiber.”
Humility means submission to [the will of] God, while submissiveness is
surrender to [the will of] God and abandoning resistance to God’s decree. Hudhayfa said: “Humility is the first thing you lose of your religion.” When
someone asked a Sufi about humility, he answered: “Humility is when the heart
stands before God – praise be to Him – with total concentration.” Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] said: “Satan cannot come near one whose heart is humble.”
It is said that one of the signs of humility in the servant of God is that when he is
prompted to anger, contradicted or rejected, he accepts all that [with equanimity]. [Another] Sufi said: “Humility of the heart is to restrain [your] eyes from looking.”
Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Tirmidhi said: “Being humble means that the flames
of your passion have been extinguished and the vapors of your breast have
subsided, while the light of glorification of God has come to shine in your heart. [At this point,] a man’s passion dies, his heart is given [a new] life, and his limbs
surrender themselves to humility.” Al-Hasan al-Basri said: “Humility is when
fear settles in your heart permanently.”
Someone asked al-Junayd about humility. He answered: “It is the abasement
of your heart before the One Who knows that which is hidden.”156
153 Q. 23:1–2. 154 Or “∏Abd al-Rahman”, according to another reading. 155 Or “Taghlab”. 156 That is, the destiny of [His] creation from beginning to end.

It is also said that
humility is a shudder that suddenly attacks one’s heart, when the True Reality
unveils itself before one. Al-Fudayl b. ∏Iyad said: “One hates to see in a man’s outward appearance
more humility than in his heart.” Abu Sulayman al-Darani said: “If all mankind
would join forces to humiliate me as I humiliate myself they would not be able
to do this!” They also say: “He who does not abase himself before himself, cannot
abase himself before others.” ∏Umar b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz158 would only prostrate
himself [in prayer] upon the dust of the earth. ∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubaydallah al-Basri told
us: Ibrahim b. ∏Abdallah told us: Abu πl-Hasan b. ∏Ali b. Yazid al-Faraπidi told
us: Muhammad b. Kathir – that is, al-Massisi – told us on the authority of Harun
b. Hayyan b. Husayf, on the authority of Sa∏id b. Jubayr, on the authority of
Ibn ∏Abbas – may God be pleased with both of them,159 that the Messenger of
God – may God bless and greet him – said: “A person who has as much as a
mustard seed of pride in his heart will never enter Paradise.” Mujahid – may
God have mercy on him – said: “When God – may He be exalted – drowned the
people of Noah, all mountains loomed up proudly. Only al-Judi160 abased//217
itself. That is why God – may He be exalted – made it the resting place of Noah’s
[ark]. ∏Umar b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz – may God be pleased with him – used to walk at
157 Q. 25:63; 25:64, according to Arberry’s translation. 158 A pious caliph of the Umayyad dynasty. 159 That is, him and his father. 160 A mountain in ancient Mesopotamia (present-day Iraqi Kurdistan) mentioned in the Qurπan
as the destination and docking place of Noah’s ark. See Q. 11:44.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 163
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 163
brisk pace. [He explained that] saying: “This brings [me] swiftly to my goal and
keeps [me] away from vanity.”
∏Umar b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz – may God be pleased with him – was writing
something one night, when a guest came to visit him. [His] lamp had almost gone
out. The guest said: “I will go to the lamp and fix it.” [∏Umar] replied: “No,
availing oneself of the guest’s help is against [the rules of] hospitality.” “Then,
I will wake up the slave,” suggested the guest. [∏Umar] answered: “No, he has
just fallen asleep.” He [∏Umar] then went to the oil container and put oil into
the lamp [himself]. The guest exclaimed: “You went and did it yourself, O
Commander of the Faithful?!” ∏Umar answered: “I went [to do it] as ∏Umar and
I came back [after doing it] as ∏Umar.”
Abu Sa∏id al-Khudri – may God be pleased with him – related that the
Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – used to feed [his] camel,
sweep [his] house, mend [his] sandals, patch [his] clothes, milk [his] sheep, eat
with [his] servant and help him grind, when he [the servant] got tired. He was
not embarrassed to carry his goods from the bazaar to his family. He would shake
hands with both the rich and the poor; he was the first to greet people; he would
not scorn any meal of which he was invited to partake, even if this was unripe
and dry dates. He made do with free supplies [of provision], he was gentle
of character, generous of nature, pleasant of company; his face was cheerful, he
smiled much, without laughing and showed [his] sadness without frowning; he
was humble without being self-effacing, generous without being extravagant; his
heart was gentle, he was compassionate to every Muslim; he would never eat his
fill and he would never stretch his hand to a thing that he desired. I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad al-Razi say: I heard Muhammad b.It is also said that
humility is a shudder that suddenly attacks one’s heart, when the True Reality
unveils itself before one. Al-Fudayl b. ∏Iyad said: “One hates to see in a man’s outward appearance
more humility than in his heart.” Abu Sulayman al-Darani said: “If all mankind
would join forces to humiliate me as I humiliate myself they would not be able
to do this!” They also say: “He who does not abase himself before himself, cannot
abase himself before others.” ∏Umar b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz158 would only prostrate
himself [in prayer] upon the dust of the earth. ∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubaydallah al-Basri told
us: Ibrahim b. ∏Abdallah told us: Abu πl-Hasan b. ∏Ali b. Yazid al-Faraπidi told
us: Muhammad b. Kathir – that is, al-Massisi – told us on the authority of Harun
b. Hayyan b. Husayf, on the authority of Sa∏id b. Jubayr, on the authority of
Ibn ∏Abbas – may God be pleased with both of them,159 that the Messenger of
God – may God bless and greet him – said: “A person who has as much as a
mustard seed of pride in his heart will never enter Paradise.” Mujahid – may
God have mercy on him – said: “When God – may He be exalted – drowned the
people of Noah, all mountains loomed up proudly. Only al-Judi160 abased//217
itself. That is why God – may He be exalted – made it the resting place of Noah’s
[ark]. ∏Umar b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz – may God be pleased with him – used to walk at
157 Q. 25:63; 25:64, according to Arberry’s translation. 158 A pious caliph of the Umayyad dynasty. 159 That is, him and his father. 160 A mountain in ancient Mesopotamia (present-day Iraqi Kurdistan) mentioned in the Qurπan
as the destination and docking place of Noah’s ark. See Q. 11:44.

I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad al-Razi say: I heard Muhammad b. Nasr al-Saπigh say: I heard Mardawayah al-Saπigh say: I heard al-Fudayl b. ∏Iyad
say: “The Qurπan-reciters (qurraπ)161 of the Merciful are characterized by their
humility and modesty, whereas the Qurπan-reciters//218 of the courts are
characterized by their haughtiness and pride.” Al-Fudayl b. ∏Iyad also said:
“Whosoever considers himself to be important has no share of modesty.”
Someone asked al-Fudayl about modesty. He responded: “You should submit
yourself to the Truth, let yourself be guided to it, and accept it from whoever
speaks it.” Al-Fudayl said: “God – Most High, may He be exalted – revealed to
the mountains: ‘I will speak to a prophet upon one of you!’ The mountains raised
themselves high in their pride. Only Mount Sinai remained modest. Therefore
God – may He be great and exalted – spoke to Moses – peace be upon him –
upon it due to its modesty.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard ∏Ali b. Ahmad b. Ja∏far say: I heard Ibrahim b. Fatik say: “Someone asked
161 The internally diverse class of early Islamic religious specialists who fulfilled various functions
in the early caliphal state, ranging from public Qurπan recitation to adjudication. They can be
seen as the forerunners of the ∏ulamaπclass.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 164
164 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
al-Junayd about modesty. He answered: ‘Being compassionate and gentle toward
your [fellow] creatures.’” Wahb said: “It is written in one of the books that God
has revealed [to mankind]: ‘I brought forth the particles162 from the loins of
Adam and did not find among them a heart more modest than that of Moses –
peace be upon him. Therefore, I chose him [from among them all] and spoke to
him.’” Ibn al-Mubarak said: “Being proud towards the rich and being modest
towards the poor are [two essential] parts of modesty.” Someone asked Abu
Yazid [al-Bistami]: “When can a man attain modesty?” He answered: “When
he sees neither a state nor a station for himself [in this world] and when he
cannot find among mankind anyone who is worse than himself.” They say:
“Modesty is a blessing no one envies, while pride is a temptation that has no
excuse. Greatness lies in modesty, and whoever seeks it in pride will never find
it.” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Abu Bakr
Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard Ibrahim b. Shayban say: “Nobility lies in
modesty; greatness lies in fear of God; and freedom lies in contentment.” I also
heard him say: I heard al-Hasan al-Sawi say: I heard Ibn al-A∏rabi say: I have
heard a report from Sufyan al-Thawri in which he said: “The greatest souls
among all creatures are five in number. They are: an ascetic scholar, a Sufi jurist
(faqih sufi), a modest rich man, a grateful poor man, and a member of the
Prophet’s house who belongs to the Sunni community.”163
Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “Modesty is excellent for everyone. However, it is
especially good for the rich. As for pride, it is repugnant for everyone, but is
particularly repugnant for the poor.” Ibn ∏Ataπ said: “Modesty is to accept the
Truth from anyone [who speaks it].” It is said that [once] Zayd b. Thabit164was
riding his horse.I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad al-Razi say: I heard Muhammad b. Nasr al-Saπigh say: I heard Mardawayah al-Saπigh say: I heard al-Fudayl b. ∏Iyad
say: “The Qurπan-reciters (qurraπ)161 of the Merciful are characterized by their
humility and modesty, whereas the Qurπan-reciters//218 of the courts are
characterized by their haughtiness and pride.” Al-Fudayl b. ∏Iyad also said:
“Whosoever considers himself to be important has no share of modesty.”
Someone asked al-Fudayl about modesty. He responded: “You should submit
yourself to the Truth, let yourself be guided to it, and accept it from whoever
speaks it.” Al-Fudayl said: “God – Most High, may He be exalted – revealed to
the mountains: ‘I will speak to a prophet upon one of you!’ The mountains raised
themselves high in their pride. Only Mount Sinai remained modest. Therefore
God – may He be great and exalted – spoke to Moses – peace be upon him –
upon it due to its modesty.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard ∏Ali b. Ahmad b. Ja∏far say: I heard Ibrahim b. Fatik say: “Someone asked
161 The internally diverse class of early Islamic religious specialists who fulfilled various functions
in the early caliphal state, ranging from public Qurπan recitation to adjudication. They can be
seen as the forerunners of the ∏ulamaπclass.

As for pride, it is repugnant for everyone, but is
particularly repugnant for the poor.” Ibn ∏Ataπ said: “Modesty is to accept the
Truth from anyone [who speaks it].” It is said that [once] Zayd b. Thabit164was
riding his horse. Ibn ∏Abbas165approached him in order to take hold of the stirrup
of his horse. “Stop it, O son of the uncle of the Messenger of God!” said Zayd. “But that’s how we were commanded to treat our learned men!” responded Ibn
∏Abbas. Zayd then took Ibn ∏Abbas’s hand and kissed it, saying: “And this is
how we were commanded to treat the family of the Messenger of God – may
God bless and greet him!” ∏Urwa b. al-Zubayr related: “[Once] I saw ∏Umar
b. al-Khattab – may God be pleased with him – carrying a waterskin on his
shoulder. I told him: ‘O Commander of the Faithful, this is not suitable for you!’
He answered: ‘When the deputations [of the Arabian tribes] came to me in
obedience, arrogance entered my soul and I decided to break it!’ He proceeded with
his waterskin to the house of a woman from among the Helpers166and emptied it
into her cistern.” I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj
162 That is, disembodied human souls. This is a reference to the primordial covenant (mithaq)
between God and mankind alluded to in the Q. 7:172. 163 Many members of the Prophet’s family (ahl al-bayt) belonged to the Shi∏ite (pro-∏Alid) party,
which advocated their right to lead the community of the faithful. 164 A secretary to the prophet Muhammad, who was entrusted with the task of collecting and
editing the text of the Qurπan after the latter’s death. 165 A cousin of the Prophet, who was famous for his piety and proficiency in the Qurπan. 166 The Prophet’s early followers at Medina.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 165
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 165
al-Tusi167 say: “When Abu Hurayra168 was governor of Medina he was seen
carrying a bundle of firewood on his back, saying: ‘Make way for the governor!’”
∏Abdallah al-Razi said: “Modesty is to refuse to make distinctions in service.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say:
I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Harun say: I heard Muhammad b. al-∏Abbas
al-Dimashqi say: I heard Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari say: I heard Abu Sulayman
al-Darani say: “Whoever sees any value in himself will never taste the sweetness
of service.” Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “Being arrogant toward one who is arrogant
to you because of his wealth is [nothing but] modesty.” Al-Shibli – may God
have mercy on him – said: “My modesty has rendered the modesty of the Jews
a mere trifle.” A man came to al-Shibli, who asked him: “What are you?”//220
He answered: “My master, I am the dot under the letter baπ.”169 Al-Shibli told
him: “Stay with me as long as you do not give yourself an [independent] station!”
Ibn ∏Abbas – may God be pleased with both of them170 – said: “Modesty is that
a man drinks the water left behind by his brother.” Bishr [al-Hafi] said: “Greet
worldly people by neglecting to greet them!” Shu∏yab b. Harb related: “As I was
circling around the Ka∏ba, someone shoved me with his elbow. When I turned
to him, [I saw that] it was al-Fudayl b. ∏Iyad, who said: ‘Abu Salih, if you [for
a moment] thought that among those who had came here for the [pilgrimage]
season was someone worse than you and me, your thought was bad indeed!’”
Someone said: “As I was circumambulating the Ka∏ba, I saw a man
surrounded by [a crowd of people] who thanked and praised him. Because of
him they obstructed other pilgrims from circling the Ka∏ba. I saw him again
sometime after that on a bridge in Baghdad, begging people for handouts. I was
[greatly] surprised [by his condition].As for pride, it is repugnant for everyone, but is
particularly repugnant for the poor.” Ibn ∏Ataπ said: “Modesty is to accept the
Truth from anyone [who speaks it].” It is said that [once] Zayd b. Thabit164was
riding his horse. Ibn ∏Abbas165approached him in order to take hold of the stirrup
of his horse. “Stop it, O son of the uncle of the Messenger of God!” said Zayd. “But that’s how we were commanded to treat our learned men!” responded Ibn
∏Abbas. Zayd then took Ibn ∏Abbas’s hand and kissed it, saying: “And this is
how we were commanded to treat the family of the Messenger of God – may
God bless and greet him!” ∏Urwa b. al-Zubayr related: “[Once] I saw ∏Umar
b. al-Khattab – may God be pleased with him – carrying a waterskin on his
shoulder. I told him: ‘O Commander of the Faithful, this is not suitable for you!’
He answered: ‘When the deputations [of the Arabian tribes] came to me in
obedience, arrogance entered my soul and I decided to break it!’ He proceeded with
his waterskin to the house of a woman from among the Helpers166and emptied it
into her cistern.” I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj
162 That is, disembodied human souls. This is a reference to the primordial covenant (mithaq)
between God and mankind alluded to in the Q. 7:172. 163 Many members of the Prophet’s family (ahl al-bayt) belonged to the Shi∏ite (pro-∏Alid) party,
which advocated their right to lead the community of the faithful. 164 A secretary to the prophet Muhammad, who was entrusted with the task of collecting and
editing the text of the Qurπan after the latter’s death. 165 A cousin of the Prophet, who was famous for his piety and proficiency in the Qurπan. 166 The Prophet’s early followers at Medina.

I saw him again
sometime after that on a bridge in Baghdad, begging people for handouts. I was
[greatly] surprised [by his condition]. He told me: ‘I elevated myself in a place,
where other people show modesty, so God – may He be blessed – afflicted me
with humiliation in a place where others elevate themselves!’” ∏Umar b. ∏Abd
al-∏Aziz171 learned that one of his sons had bought [a signet ring] with a jewel
worth one thousand dirhams. He wrote to him saying: “I have learned that you
have bought a jewel worth one thousand dirhams. When you receive this letter,
sell [your] ring and fill one thousand stomachs. Then get yourself a ring worth
two dirhams,make its signet of Chinese iron, and inscribe on it: ‘May God have
mercy on a man who knows his true worth!’”
It is related that someone offered a slave to a prince to purchase for a
thousand dirhams. However, when the money was brought to him, he considered
the price excessive and he [ordered] the money returned to his coffer. The slave
167 The author of an influential early Sufi manual entitled “Essentials of Sufism”; he died in
378/988. 168 A famous Companion of the Prophet, who transmitted many reports about his sayings and
deeds. 169 That is, the dot that serves to distinguish one letter of the Arabic alphabet from another, but
has no independent status of its own. 170 See note 165; the blessings refer to him and his father. 171 See note 158.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 166
166 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
pleaded with him, saying: “My lord, buy me, for I have, for each of these
dirhams, a quality [the overall value of which] is worth more than a thousand
dirhams.” [The Prince] asked him what that might be. He answered: “The very
least of it is that if you were to buy me and elevate me above all the rest of your
slaves, I would still not become rude [toward you] and would know that I am but
a slave of yours!” So the prince purchased him. Someone related on the authority of Rajaπ b. Haya that he said: “As ∏Umar
b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz was delivering a public speech I estimated his garment to be
worth twelve dirhams. He had a mantel, a turban, a shirt, a pair of trousers and
slippers, and a hood.”//221 It is said that ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. Wasi∏
strutted along with a gait that called for disapproval.172His father told him: “Do
you know how much I paid for your mother? Three hundred dirhams! As for
your father, may God not increase the likes of him among the Muslims! And yet
you walk like that?!”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Farraπ
say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Munazil say: I heard Hamdun al-Qassar say: “Modesty
is that you consider no one to be in need of you, either in this world or in the
Hereafter.” Ibrahim b. Adham said: “Since I embraced Islam I have rejoiced
only three times. First, when I was on board a ship where there was a man who
was fond of joking. He would say: ‘In the land of the [infidel] Turks we used
to grab [captive] infidels like this’, and he would grab me by my hair and shake
me back and forth. That pleased me, because there was no one on that ship
whom he would consider more contemptible. Another time I rested in a mosque
overcome with sickness. The [mosque’s] muezzin came in and ordered me to get
out. However, I was unable [to leave], so he grabbed me by my foot and dragged
me out of the mosque. The third time, I was in Syria.I saw him again
sometime after that on a bridge in Baghdad, begging people for handouts. I was
[greatly] surprised [by his condition]. He told me: ‘I elevated myself in a place,
where other people show modesty, so God – may He be blessed – afflicted me
with humiliation in a place where others elevate themselves!’” ∏Umar b. ∏Abd
al-∏Aziz171 learned that one of his sons had bought [a signet ring] with a jewel
worth one thousand dirhams. He wrote to him saying: “I have learned that you
have bought a jewel worth one thousand dirhams. When you receive this letter,
sell [your] ring and fill one thousand stomachs. Then get yourself a ring worth
two dirhams,make its signet of Chinese iron, and inscribe on it: ‘May God have
mercy on a man who knows his true worth!’”
It is related that someone offered a slave to a prince to purchase for a
thousand dirhams. However, when the money was brought to him, he considered
the price excessive and he [ordered] the money returned to his coffer. The slave
167 The author of an influential early Sufi manual entitled “Essentials of Sufism”; he died in
378/988. 168 A famous Companion of the Prophet, who transmitted many reports about his sayings and
deeds. 169 That is, the dot that serves to distinguish one letter of the Arabic alphabet from another, but
has no independent status of its own. 170 See note 165; the blessings refer to him and his father. 171 See note 158.

However, I was unable [to leave], so he grabbed me by my foot and dragged
me out of the mosque. The third time, I was in Syria. I was wearing a fur. When
I took a close look at it I could not distinguish between the hair of that fur and
the lice [hiding in it], because there were so many of them. I rejoiced at that.” In
another tale he reported: “I have never experienced a greater joy than when I was
sitting one day and a passer-by approached me and urinated on me.”
It is reported that Abu Dharr and Bilal173 were having an argument during
which Abu Dharr reproached Bilal for his black skin. The latter complained
about that to the Messenger of God – may God’s blessing and peace be upon him
– who said: “Abu Dharr, something of the pride of the Age of Ignorance174 still
remains in your heart!” [On hearing that,] Abu Dharr threw himself on the
ground and vowed that he would not raise his head until Bilal had stepped on his
cheek with his foot. He did not get up until Bilal did so. 172 That is, his gait exhibited self-conceit and pride. 173 Two Companions of the Prophet, who were renowned for their piety. Bilal was an Ethiopian
slave emancipated by the Prophet. He had a beautiful voice and served as the Muslim
community’s first muezzin. 174 That is, the period of Arab paganism that preceded Islam.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 167
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 167
Al-Hasan b. ∏Ali – may God be pleased with him – passed by a group of
boys who had a few pieces of bread. They invited him to be their guest. He
dismounted and ate with them, whereupon he took them to his house, where he
fed and clothed them. He commented: “They are better [than me], because they
fed me the only thing that they had, whereas I have more than that!”//222 It is
said that ∏Umar b. al-Khattab175 was distributing some clothing taken as spoils
of war among the Companions [of the Prophet]. He sent a [precious] Yemeni
garment to Mu∏adh. The latter sold it, purchased six slaves, then set them free. ∏Umar learned about this. When he was dividing clothes the next time, he sent
Mu∏adh a less valuable garment. When Mu∏adh reproached him for that, ∏Umar
answered: “Don’t reproach me, for you sold the first one!” “What’s the matter
with you?” exclaimed Mu∏adh, “Give me my share, for I have vowed to hit you
over your head with this!”176 ∏Umar responded: “Here’s my head! Old men
should treat each other gently.”
Opposing the soul177(mukhalafat al-nafs) and remembering
its faults (dhikr ∏uyubiha)
God Most High has said: “But for him who feared standing before His Lord178
and forbade the soul its caprice, surely Paradise will be the refuge.”179
∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd told us: Tammam
told us: Muhammad b. Mu∏awiyya al-Naysaburi told us: ∏Ali b. Abi ∏Ali b. ∏Utba
b. Abi Lahab told us on the authority of Muhammad al-Munkadir, on the
authority of Jabir – may God have mercy on him – who said that the Prophet
– may God bless and greet him – said: “The things that I fear most for my
community are: following [one’s] passion and expecting too much [of this world]. Following one’s passion turns one away from the Truth, whereas expecting too
much [of this world] renders one forgetful of the Hereafter.However, I was unable [to leave], so he grabbed me by my foot and dragged
me out of the mosque. The third time, I was in Syria. I was wearing a fur. When
I took a close look at it I could not distinguish between the hair of that fur and
the lice [hiding in it], because there were so many of them. I rejoiced at that.” In
another tale he reported: “I have never experienced a greater joy than when I was
sitting one day and a passer-by approached me and urinated on me.”
It is reported that Abu Dharr and Bilal173 were having an argument during
which Abu Dharr reproached Bilal for his black skin. The latter complained
about that to the Messenger of God – may God’s blessing and peace be upon him
– who said: “Abu Dharr, something of the pride of the Age of Ignorance174 still
remains in your heart!” [On hearing that,] Abu Dharr threw himself on the
ground and vowed that he would not raise his head until Bilal had stepped on his
cheek with his foot. He did not get up until Bilal did so. 172 That is, his gait exhibited self-conceit and pride. 173 Two Companions of the Prophet, who were renowned for their piety. Bilal was an Ethiopian
slave emancipated by the Prophet. He had a beautiful voice and served as the Muslim
community’s first muezzin. 174 That is, the period of Arab paganism that preceded Islam.

Abi Lahab told us on the authority of Muhammad al-Munkadir, on the
authority of Jabir – may God have mercy on him – who said that the Prophet
– may God bless and greet him – said: “The things that I fear most for my
community are: following [one’s] passion and expecting too much [of this world]. Following one’s passion turns one away from the Truth, whereas expecting too
much [of this world] renders one forgetful of the Hereafter. Know, therefore,
that struggling against the soul is the beginning of worship.”
When [some] Sufi masters were asked about [the meaning of] Islam, they
answered: “[It is] slaughtering the soul by the swords of opposition [to it].”
“Know that for someone in whom the vagaries of the soul rise, the splendors of
intimacy [with God] become extinct.” Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri said: “Reflection is
the key to worship, while the sign of anyone’s attaining his goal is his [ability to]
oppose his soul and his passions. Opposing them is the abandonment of the
desires [associated with them].” Ibn ∏Ataπ [al-Adami] said: “The soul is naturally
175 The second successor (caliph) of the Prophet after Abu Bakr. 176 There are several possible readings of this passage. According to one, Mu∏adh promised to hit
∏Umar over his head with the less valuable garment allocated to him. The other possibility is
that he wanted to hit ∏Umar with something (“this”) that he was holding in his hand. 177 This word can also be translated as “self”. In the text that follows I will use both words
interchangeably. 178 On the Day of Judgement. 179 Q. 79:40–41.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 168
168 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
predisposed to bad behavior. Yet, the servant of God is commanded to observe
[the rules of] proper behavior. By its nature the soul [is prone to] wallow in the field
of disobedience, while the servant exerts himself in preventing it from engaging
in evil pursuits. Whoever gives his soul free rein becomes an accomplice in its
depredations.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say://223 I heard Abu ∏Umar al-Anmati
say: I heard al-Junayd say: “The soul that commands evil180 pushes [you] to
perdition, assists [your] enemies, follows [your] passions, and is suspected of all
manner of evil deeds.” Abu Hafs said: “Whoever does not constantly suspect his
soul, oppose it under all conditions, and force it to do things that it dislikes
throughout his lifetime will be deluded. And when one looks with approval
at something it has done, one has caused its ruin.” For how can an intelligent
person be satisfied with his soul? The noble son of the son of the noble son of
the noble Joseph, son of Jacob, son of Isaac, son of Abraham the Friend of God,
said: “I claim not that my soul was innocent – surely the soul of man commands
evil.”181
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Ibrahim b. Miqsam182 say in
Baghdad: I heard Ibn ∏Ataπ say: I heard al-Junayd say: “One sleepless night I rose
up to recite a supererogatory prayer. However, I did not find the sweetness and
delight I usually feel when I converse with my Lord. I was bewildered. I tried to
go to sleep, but I couldn’t. I tried to sit down, but I couldn’t. Then I opened the
door and went out. [Outside] I came upon a man wrapped in a cloak who was
lying on the road. He felt my presence and raised his head saying: ‘At last [you
have come] Abu πl-Qasim!’ ‘But, sir, did we have an appointment?’ I asked.Abi Lahab told us on the authority of Muhammad al-Munkadir, on the
authority of Jabir – may God have mercy on him – who said that the Prophet
– may God bless and greet him – said: “The things that I fear most for my
community are: following [one’s] passion and expecting too much [of this world]. Following one’s passion turns one away from the Truth, whereas expecting too
much [of this world] renders one forgetful of the Hereafter. Know, therefore,
that struggling against the soul is the beginning of worship.”
When [some] Sufi masters were asked about [the meaning of] Islam, they
answered: “[It is] slaughtering the soul by the swords of opposition [to it].”
“Know that for someone in whom the vagaries of the soul rise, the splendors of
intimacy [with God] become extinct.” Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri said: “Reflection is
the key to worship, while the sign of anyone’s attaining his goal is his [ability to]
oppose his soul and his passions. Opposing them is the abandonment of the
desires [associated with them].” Ibn ∏Ataπ [al-Adami] said: “The soul is naturally
175 The second successor (caliph) of the Prophet after Abu Bakr. 176 There are several possible readings of this passage. According to one, Mu∏adh promised to hit
∏Umar over his head with the less valuable garment allocated to him. The other possibility is
that he wanted to hit ∏Umar with something (“this”) that he was holding in his hand. 177 This word can also be translated as “self”. In the text that follows I will use both words
interchangeably. 178 On the Day of Judgement. 179 Q. 79:40–41.

[Outside] I came upon a man wrapped in a cloak who was
lying on the road. He felt my presence and raised his head saying: ‘At last [you
have come] Abu πl-Qasim!’ ‘But, sir, did we have an appointment?’ I asked. He
answered: ‘No, but I had asked the Mover of the Hearts to move your heart in
my direction.’ ‘Indeed, he has done so! What is your need?’ I asked him. He
inquired: ‘When does the soul’s disease become its cure?’ ‘When you deny your
soul its drives, its disease becomes its cure,’ I answered. He then addressed his
own soul, saying: ‘Listen, I have given you this same answer seven times, yet you
refused to hear it from anyone but al-Junayd! So you now you have heard [it
from him]!’ Then he departed. I did not know who he was and I never met him
again after that.”
Abu Bakr al-Tamastani said: “To escape from one’s soul is the greatest of all
blessings, for the soul is the thickest veil between you and God – may He be great
and glorious!” Sahl [al-Tustari] said: “There’s no better way of worshipingGod
than to oppose one’s soul and passions. I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may
God have mercy on him – say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say://224 I heard
Abu ∏Umar al-Anmati say: I heard someone ask Ibn ∏Ataπ: “What is the main
cause of God’s wrath?” He responded: “Paying attention to one’s soul and its
180 See the next note. 181 Q. 12:53. 182 Or “al-Muqassim”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 169
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 169
conditions. However, expecting [divine] rewards for its actions is even worse
than that!” I also heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard al-Husayn
b. Yahya say: I heard Ja∏far b. Nusayr say: I heard Ibrahim al-Khawwas183 say:
“When I was on the mountain al-Lukam184I saw some pomegranates and craved
them. So I came up [to the tree] and picked one of them. When I split it open, I
found it to be sour. I went away and left the pomegranate behind. Suddenly I saw
a man lying on the ground with many wasps flying around him. I greeted him
and he returned my greetings saying: ‘And upon you be peace, Ibrahim!’ I asked
him: ‘How do you know me?’ He answered: ‘Nothing is hidden from one who
knows God Most High.’ I asked him: ‘I see that you have a special status [in the
eyes of] God Most High! Why, then, can’t you ask Him to protect and shield you
from the torment of these wasps?’ He answered: ‘I, too, can see that you have
a special status [in the eyes of] God Most High! Why, then, can’t you ask Him
to protect you from craving those pomegranates? For the pain caused by the
sting of the pomegranates will afflict you in the afterlife [in the same way as] the
pain caused by the sting of the wasps afflicts [me] in this world!’ I left him and
walked away.”
It is related that Ibrahim b. Shayban said: “For forty years I did not sleep
under my roof nor in a place that had a lock on it. I occasionally desired to
eat my fill of lentils. However, it never happened. Once, when I was in Syria,
someone brought me a large bowl full of lentils. So I ate some of it and left. [Suddenly] I saw glass bottles with samples of some liquid, which I assumed
to be vinegar. However, someone in the crowd told me: ‘What are you looking
at? These are samples of wine and those jugs there are [full of] wine!’ I said to
myself: ‘This is my duty!’ So I entered the wineseller’s store and started to
empty those jugs.[Outside] I came upon a man wrapped in a cloak who was
lying on the road. He felt my presence and raised his head saying: ‘At last [you
have come] Abu πl-Qasim!’ ‘But, sir, did we have an appointment?’ I asked. He
answered: ‘No, but I had asked the Mover of the Hearts to move your heart in
my direction.’ ‘Indeed, he has done so! What is your need?’ I asked him. He
inquired: ‘When does the soul’s disease become its cure?’ ‘When you deny your
soul its drives, its disease becomes its cure,’ I answered. He then addressed his
own soul, saying: ‘Listen, I have given you this same answer seven times, yet you
refused to hear it from anyone but al-Junayd! So you now you have heard [it
from him]!’ Then he departed. I did not know who he was and I never met him
again after that.”
Abu Bakr al-Tamastani said: “To escape from one’s soul is the greatest of all
blessings, for the soul is the thickest veil between you and God – may He be great
and glorious!” Sahl [al-Tustari] said: “There’s no better way of worshipingGod
than to oppose one’s soul and passions. I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may
God have mercy on him – say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say://224 I heard
Abu ∏Umar al-Anmati say: I heard someone ask Ibn ∏Ataπ: “What is the main
cause of God’s wrath?” He responded: “Paying attention to one’s soul and its
180 See the next note. 181 Q. 12:53. 182 Or “al-Muqassim”.

However, someone in the crowd told me: ‘What are you looking
at? These are samples of wine and those jugs there are [full of] wine!’ I said to
myself: ‘This is my duty!’ So I entered the wineseller’s store and started to
empty those jugs. At first, he thought that I was doing it by order of the Sultan. However, when he realized that [it was not so], he took me to Ibn Tulun185who
commanded that I be given two hundred stick blows, then threw me into prison. I stayed there for some time, until my teacher Abu ∏Abdallah al-Maghribi entered
the country and interceded on my behalf. When he saw me, he asked: ‘What did
you do?’ I answered: ‘I got my fill of lentils and two hundred stick blows!’ He
told me: ‘Then you got off lightly!’”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Abu al-∏Abbas al-Baghdadi say: I heard Ja∏far b. Nusayr say:
I heard al-Junayd say: I heard al-Sari al-Saqati say: “For thirty or forty years my
soul urged me to dip a carrot into date syrup. However, I did not feed it to it.” I
also heard him [al-Sulami] say: “My grandfather said: ‘The servant’s affliction
lies in his contentment with his soul as it is.’” I also heard him say: I heard
Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Razi say: I heard al-Husayn b. ∏Ali al-Qirmisini say:
183 A famous Sufi. See pages 56–57. 184 A mountain in Syria. 185 A powerful and fearsome governor of Egypt (d. 270/884), who made himself independent of
the ∏Abbasid caliph in Baghdad.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 170
170 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
∏Isam b. Yusuf al-Balkhi sent something to Hatim al-Asamm, who accepted it.
Someone asked him why he accepted that. He answered: “When I took it I felt
my humiliation and his pride. If I were to reject it, I would have felt my pride
and his humiliation. Therefore, I chose his pride over my humiliation and my
humiliation over his.”
Someone told a Sufi [master]: “I want to go on the hajj stripped of any
provisions.” He said: “First you must strip your heart of forgetfulness, your soul
of flippancy, your tongue of prattle and then travel however you wish!” Abu
Sulayman al-Darani said: “Whoever does good during the night is rewarded
during the day and whoever does good during the day is rewarded during the
night; whoever is sincere in renouncing his passion will be spared [the trouble of]
feeding it. For God is too noble to punish a heart that has abandoned [its] passion
for His sake!” God – may He be exalted – revealed the following [words] to
[the prophet] David – peace be upon him: “David, caution and warn your
companions against [pursuing their] passions, for when hearts are attached to
the passions of this world, their intelligence is veiled from Me!” Someone saw
a man sitting suspended in the air. He asked how he had achieved this. The
man answered: “I renounced my desire (hawa) and God made the air (hawaπ)
subservient to me!” It is said that if [the gratification of] one thousand passions
were offered to the [true] believer, he would banish them with [his fear] of God.
However, if the gratification of just one desire were to be offered to the sinner,
it would banish the fear of God from his heart. It is said: “Do not put your reins
into the hands of desire, for it will drive you into darkness.”//226 Yusuf b.
Asbat said: “Nothing eliminates passions from the heart better than a disquieting
fear [of God] and a tireless striving [to please Him].” Al-Khawwas said: “Whoever
renounces one passion without immediately discovering in it another one is not
sincere in his renunciation.”
Ja∏far b. Nusayr related: “Al-Junayd gave me one dirham and asked me to
buy him Waziri figs. I bought him some. When he broke his fast, he took one of
them, put it into his mouth, then spat it out and broke into tears saying, ‘Take
them away [from me]!’ When I asked him about this, he answered: ‘A voice in
my heart cried out: “Aren’t you ashamed? At first you renounced a desire for My
sake, but now you are returning to it once again!”’”
They recite:
The letter nunof [the word] hawan(“humiliation”) is stolen from [the
word] hawa(“desire”)
Therefore he who succumbs to every passion is subject to humiliation!
Know that the soul has many wicked traits. One of them is envy.
Envy (hasad)
God Most High said: “Say: ‘I take refuge with the Lord of the Daybreak from
the evil of what He has created.” He also said: “[I take refuge] from the evil of543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 171
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 171
an envier when he envies.”186Thus God concluded this chapter, which He revealed
as a plea for protection [against evil forces] (∏awdha), with a mention of envy. Abu πl-Husayn al-Ahwazi informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Basri informed
us: Isma∏il b. al-Fadl told us: Yahya b. Makhlad said: Mu∏afa b. ∏Imran told us on
the authority of al-Harith b. Shihab, on the authority of Ma∏bad on the authority
of Abu Qilaba, on the authority of Ibn Mas∏ud, who said that the Prophet – may
God bless and greet him – said: “Three things are the root of every sin, so shield
and protect yourselves from them. Beware of pride, for pride made Iblis187refuse
to prostrate himself before Adam; beware of greed, for greed made Adam eat
from the Tree [of Knowledge];//227 beware of envy, for one of Adam’s sons
killed his brother because of it.” A Sufi said: “The envier is an infidel, because
he is not content with the decree of the One and Only.” It is also said: “The
envier will never prevail.” They say about the words of God Most High, “Say,
My Lord has only forbidden indecencies, those that are apparent and those that
are hidden”, that the words “those that are hidden” refer to envy. And in another
[holy] book it is said: “The envier is the denier of My beneficence.” It is also
said: “Envy becomes evident in you before it becomes evident in your enemy.”
Al-Asma∏i188said: “I saw a Bedouin who was one hundred and twenty years old. I exclaimed: ‘Your life has been long indeed!’ He told me: ‘I renounced envy, so
I endured!’”
Ibn al-Mubarak189said: “Praise be to God Who has not placed in the heart of
my master that which He has placed into the heart of a man who envies me.”
According to one tradition, there is an angel who resides in the fifth heaven. When the deed of a [deceased] servant passes by him which glows like the glow
of the sun, he would say: “Stop! I am the angel of envy.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 170
170 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
∏Isam b. Yusuf al-Balkhi sent something to Hatim al-Asamm, who accepted it.
Someone asked him why he accepted that. He answered: “When I took it I felt
my humiliation and his pride. If I were to reject it, I would have felt my pride
and his humiliation. Therefore, I chose his pride over my humiliation and my
humiliation over his.”
Someone told a Sufi [master]: “I want to go on the hajj stripped of any
provisions.” He said: “First you must strip your heart of forgetfulness, your soul
of flippancy, your tongue of prattle and then travel however you wish!” Abu
Sulayman al-Darani said: “Whoever does good during the night is rewarded
during the day and whoever does good during the day is rewarded during the
night; whoever is sincere in renouncing his passion will be spared [the trouble of]
feeding it. For God is too noble to punish a heart that has abandoned [its] passion
for His sake!” God – may He be exalted – revealed the following [words] to
[the prophet] David – peace be upon him: “David, caution and warn your
companions against [pursuing their] passions, for when hearts are attached to
the passions of this world, their intelligence is veiled from Me!” Someone saw
a man sitting suspended in the air. He asked how he had achieved this. The
man answered: “I renounced my desire (hawa) and God made the air (hawaπ)
subservient to me!” It is said that if [the gratification of] one thousand passions
were offered to the [true] believer, he would banish them with [his fear] of God.
However, if the gratification of just one desire were to be offered to the sinner,
it would banish the fear of God from his heart. It is said: “Do not put your reins
into the hands of desire, for it will drive you into darkness.”//226 Yusuf b.
Asbat said: “Nothing eliminates passions from the heart better than a disquieting
fear [of God] and a tireless striving [to please Him].” Al-Khawwas said: “Whoever
renounces one passion without immediately discovering in it another one is not
sincere in his renunciation.”
Ja∏far b. Nusayr related: “Al-Junayd gave me one dirham and asked me to
buy him Waziri figs. I bought him some. When he broke his fast, he took one of
them, put it into his mouth, then spat it out and broke into tears saying, ‘Take
them away [from me]!’ When I asked him about this, he answered: ‘A voice in
my heart cried out: “Aren’t you ashamed? At first you renounced a desire for My
sake, but now you are returning to it once again!”’”
They recite:
The letter nunof [the word] hawan(“humiliation”) is stolen from [the
word] hawa(“desire”)
Therefore he who succumbs to every passion is subject to humiliation!
Know that the soul has many wicked traits. One of them is envy.
Envy (hasad)
God Most High said: “Say: ‘I take refuge with the Lord of the Daybreak from
the evil of what He has created.” He also said: “[I take refuge] from the evil of

When the deed of a [deceased] servant passes by him which glows like the glow
of the sun, he would say: “Stop! I am the angel of envy. Strike the doer of this
deed in the face with this deed, for he has been envious!” Mu∏awiyya190 said: “I
am able to please every person, except the envier. Nothing will ever please him,
except the cessation of God’s beneficence [toward other people].” It is said:
“The envier is a violent tyrant, for he never lets go and leaves nothing behind
him.” ∏Umar b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz said: “I have not seen an oppressor who would
resemble more the oppressed than the envier. [His is] constant grief and incessant
panting.” It is said: “Among the sins of the envier is that he flatters, when he is
present, backbites when he is absent, and rejoices at calamity when it befalls
[others].” Mu∏awiyya191said: “No bad character trait is more just than envy, for
it kills the envier before the one whom he envies.”//228
It is said that God – may He be exalted – revealed to Solomon, son of David,
– peace be upon them: “I command that you not do seven things: do not slander
186 Q. 113:1, 2 and 5. 187 That is, Satan. 188 A great Arab philologist and collector of Bedouin lore; he died in 213/828. 189 See IM, pp. 21–22. 190 The first caliph and founder of the Umayyad dynasty, who ruled from 41/661 to 60/680. 191 See the previous note.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 172
172 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
My righteous servants in their absence, do not envy any of My servants …”
Solomon exclaimed: “O my Lord, this is enough for me!” Moses – peace be upon
him – saw a man next to God’s throne and grew envious of him. He asked: “Thanks
to what [has he acquired that position]?” Someone answered him: “[Thanks to]
his not being envious of people on account of the favors bestowed upon them
by God!” It is said that the envier feels perplexed whenever he sees [God’s]
beneficence [towards others] and rejoices when he sees somebody [committing]
a fault. It is said: “If you wish to be safe from the envier, conceal your affairs
from him.” It is said: “The envier is angry at one who has no sin and stingy with
what he does not possess.” It is also said: “Beware of exerting yourself in trying
to win the affection of one who envies you, for he will never accept your good
deeds.” It is also said: “Whenever God Most High wishes to give power over [His]
servant to an enemy without mercy, He gives it to someone who envies him.”
They recite [the following verse]:
What can say more about man’s misfortune
When you see those who used to envy him
now have pity on him!
They also recite:
One can hope that every enmity will eventually be terminated
Except for the enmity of one who is envious of you.
Ibn al-Mu∏tazz recited:192
Tell the envier who is about to breathe out a complaint
O you who have wronged others, [how can] someone complain about the
wrongs done to him?!
They also recite:
When God wants to make public a virtue that has been hidden
He bestows upon it the tongue of the envier.
Among the other blameworthy character traits of the human soul is the habit of
backbiting.//229
Backbiting (ghiba)
God – may He be exalted – said: “Do not backbite one another; would any of you
like to eat the flesh of his brother dead?”193
192 ∏Abdallah b. al-Mu∏tazz (assassinated in 296/908), was son of the thirteenth caliph of the
∏Abbasid dynasty. He distinguished himself as an accomplished poet and literary critic. Upon
his father’s death he was proclaimed caliph and killed on the same day, giving birth to the
famous saying “the caliph of one hour”.
193 Q. 49:12.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 173
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 173
Abu Sa∏id Muhammad b. Ibrahim al-Isma∏ili informed us: Abu Bakr
Muhammad b. al-Husayn b. al-Hasan b. al-Khalil informed us: ∏Ali b. al-Hasan
told us: Ishaq b. ∏Isa b. Bint Dawud b. Abi Hind told us: Muhammad b. Abi
Humayd told us on the authority of Musa b. Wardan, on the authority of Abu
Hurayra, who said that when a man who had been sitting with the Messenger of
God – may God bless and greet him – rose [and left], someone in the gathering
said: “How feeble this man is!” The Messenger – may God praise and greet him
– retorted: “You have eaten your brother [alive], [when] you backbite him!” God
revealed to Moses – peace be upon him: “He who dies after having repented of
backbiting will be the last one to enter Paradise and he who dies persisting in it
will be the first one to enter the hellfire.”
∏Awf said: “I came to Ibn Sirin194 and began to discuss [the misdeeds of]
al-Hajjaj.195Ibn Sirin told me: ‘God Most High is a just arbiter. He takes against
al-Hajjaj as much as He takes for him. As for you, if you were to meet God – may
He be glorious and magnificent – tomorrow, the smallest sin you have committed
will be much more grievous for you than the greatest sin committed by al-Hajjaj!’”
It is said that Ibrahim b. Adham was invited to a dinner. He attended it. They
were discussing a man who did not come. Some of them said: “He is boring!”
Ibrahim said: “This is what my soul has done to me! I came to a party where
people are slandered in their absence.” He left and would not eat for three days
after that. It is said: “The backbiter is like a man who has installed a catapult and
started to shoot his good deeds in all directions. He backbites one who is in
Khurasan, another who is in Syria, one who is in the Hijaz, another who is in the
land of the Turks.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 172
172 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
My righteous servants in their absence, do not envy any of My servants …”
Solomon exclaimed: “O my Lord, this is enough for me!” Moses – peace be upon
him – saw a man next to God’s throne and grew envious of him. He asked: “Thanks
to what [has he acquired that position]?” Someone answered him: “[Thanks to]
his not being envious of people on account of the favors bestowed upon them
by God!” It is said that the envier feels perplexed whenever he sees [God’s]
beneficence [towards others] and rejoices when he sees somebody [committing]
a fault. It is said: “If you wish to be safe from the envier, conceal your affairs
from him.” It is said: “The envier is angry at one who has no sin and stingy with
what he does not possess.” It is also said: “Beware of exerting yourself in trying
to win the affection of one who envies you, for he will never accept your good
deeds.” It is also said: “Whenever God Most High wishes to give power over [His]
servant to an enemy without mercy, He gives it to someone who envies him.”
They recite [the following verse]:
What can say more about man’s misfortune
When you see those who used to envy him
now have pity on him!
They also recite:
One can hope that every enmity will eventually be terminated
Except for the enmity of one who is envious of you.
Ibn al-Mu∏tazz recited:192
Tell the envier who is about to breathe out a complaint
O you who have wronged others, [how can] someone complain about the
wrongs done to him?!
They also recite:
When God wants to make public a virtue that has been hidden
He bestows upon it the tongue of the envier.
Among the other blameworthy character traits of the human soul is the habit of
backbiting.//229
Backbiting (ghiba)
God – may He be exalted – said: “Do not backbite one another; would any of you
like to eat the flesh of his brother dead?”193
192 ∏Abdallah b. al-Mu∏tazz (assassinated in 296/908), was son of the thirteenth caliph of the
∏Abbasid dynasty. He distinguished himself as an accomplished poet and literary critic. Upon
his father’s death he was proclaimed caliph and killed on the same day, giving birth to the
famous saying “the caliph of one hour”.
193 Q. 49:12.

It is said: “The backbiter is like a man who has installed a catapult and
started to shoot his good deeds in all directions. He backbites one who is in
Khurasan, another who is in Syria, one who is in the Hijaz, another who is in the
land of the Turks. He thus scatters his good deeds, and when he finally finds
himself standing [before God], he has nothing with him.” It is said that a certain
servant of God will be given his ledger [of deeds] on the Day of Judgement. He
will see not a single good deed in it and will ask [God]: “Where are my prayers,
my fasting and my acts of obedience?” He will be told: “All your good works
were invalidated due to your backbiting!” It is said: “God will cut in half the sins
of a man who has suffered from backbiting.” Sufyan b. al-Husayn said: “I was
sitting with Iyas b. Mu∏awiyya and spoke badly of a man who was not there. Sufyan asked me: ‘Have you taken part in the [holy] war against the Turks and
the Byzantines this year?’ I answered: ‘No, I have not.’ He said: ‘So, the Turks
and the Byzantines are safe from you, while your Muslim brother is not!’”//230
It is said that [on the Day of Judgement] a certain man will be given his ledger
[of deeds] and will find in it the good deeds he never did. He will be told:
“This is your reward for people’s backbiting against you of which you were not
aware!”
194 A famous hadithcollector and interpreter of dreams, who was renowned for his piety. He died
in 110/728. 195 The Umayyad general, who was notorious for his “ruthless efficiency” and cruelty. He died
in 95/714.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 174
174 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Someone asked Sufyan al-Thawri about the saying of the Prophet – may
God bless and greet him – “Verily, God hates the people of the house of
flesheaters.” Sufyan responded: “That is, the ones who backbite; as if they eat
the other people’s flesh.” Someone mentioned backbiting in the presence of
∏Abdallah b. al-Mubarak. He commented: “If I were ever to slander anyone in
his absence, I would slander my parents, for they are more deserving of my good
deeds than anybody else.” Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “Let each believer benefit
from you in the following three ways: if you cannot be of help to him, at least
do not harm him; if you cannot make him happy, at least do not make him sad;
if you cannot praise him, at least do not blame him.” Someone told al-Hasan
al-Basri: “So-and-so slandered you behind your back.” He sent that man a plateful
of sweetmeats, saying: “It has come to my attention that you have lavished your
good deeds upon me, so I would like to recompense you.”
∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi informed me: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Basri informed
us: Ahmad b. ∏Amr al-Qatawani informed us: Sahl b. ∏Uthman al-∏Askari told us:
al-Rabi∏ b. Badr told us on the authority of Aban, on the authority of Anas b. Malik that the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – said: “He
who has renounced the veil of shame, cannot be an object of backbiting.” I heard
Hamza b. Yusuf al-Sahmi say: I heard Abu Tahir Muhammad b. Usayd al-Raqqi
say: I heard Ja∏far b. Muhammad b. Nusayr say: al-Junayd said: “Once I was
sitting in the al-Shuniziyya mosque, waiting for the bier of a newly deceased to
arrive, so that I could pray over him. The people of Baghdad were sitting there
according to their [social] ranks waiting for the funeral bier to arrive. [Suddenly]
I saw a poor man who looked like an ascetic begging from people.It is said: “The backbiter is like a man who has installed a catapult and
started to shoot his good deeds in all directions. He backbites one who is in
Khurasan, another who is in Syria, one who is in the Hijaz, another who is in the
land of the Turks. He thus scatters his good deeds, and when he finally finds
himself standing [before God], he has nothing with him.” It is said that a certain
servant of God will be given his ledger [of deeds] on the Day of Judgement. He
will see not a single good deed in it and will ask [God]: “Where are my prayers,
my fasting and my acts of obedience?” He will be told: “All your good works
were invalidated due to your backbiting!” It is said: “God will cut in half the sins
of a man who has suffered from backbiting.” Sufyan b. al-Husayn said: “I was
sitting with Iyas b. Mu∏awiyya and spoke badly of a man who was not there. Sufyan asked me: ‘Have you taken part in the [holy] war against the Turks and
the Byzantines this year?’ I answered: ‘No, I have not.’ He said: ‘So, the Turks
and the Byzantines are safe from you, while your Muslim brother is not!’”//230
It is said that [on the Day of Judgement] a certain man will be given his ledger
[of deeds] and will find in it the good deeds he never did. He will be told:
“This is your reward for people’s backbiting against you of which you were not
aware!”
194 A famous hadithcollector and interpreter of dreams, who was renowned for his piety. He died
in 110/728. 195 The Umayyad general, who was notorious for his “ruthless efficiency” and cruelty. He died
in 95/714.

The people of Baghdad were sitting there
according to their [social] ranks waiting for the funeral bier to arrive. [Suddenly]
I saw a poor man who looked like an ascetic begging from people. I thought to
myself: ‘If this one would work to sustain himself, it would be better for him.’
When I returned home after that, I engaged in my usual routine of reciting
a night litany, weeping, praying and so on. However, all my litanies weighed
heavily on me. So I just sat there sleepless. Then my eyes closed and, in my
dream, I saw that poor man spread upon a table [before me] and I heard voices
saying: ‘Eat his flesh, for you have slandered him!’ The real state [of affairs] was
revealed to me and I said: ‘No, I did not slander him. I only said something to
myself.’//231 I was told: ‘This sort of thing is not tolerated from the likes of
you. Go and ask his forgiveness!’ So in the morning I left my house and began
to go around until I saw him at a place with running water where he was picking
up leaves from vegetables that were being washed there. I greeted him. He
responded saying: ‘Abu πl-Qasim you have returned [to this again]?’ I said: ‘No!’
He said: ‘Then may God forgive both of us!’”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Abu Tahir al-Isfaraini say: I heard Abu Ja∏far al-Balkhi say:
“There used to be a man from Balkh196who exerted himself in worshiping God. However, he constantly slandered people behind their backs, saying, ‘So-and-so
196 An area in present day Afghanistan.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 175
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 175
is like this, So-and-so is like that’, and so on. One day I saw him coming out from
a place frequented by effeminate washers. I asked him what had happened to
him. He responded: ‘My speaking ill of other people has brought this upon me. I was attracted to one of them, and now I have to serve them because of him. All
of my old [pious] deeds have vanished, so pray God to forgive me!’”
Contentment (qana∏a)
God Most High said: “And whosoever does a righteous deed, be it male or
female, and is a believer, we shall assuredly give him a goodly life to live.”197
Many commentators say: “The goodly life in this world means contentment.”
Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami informed us: Abu ∏Amr Muhammad
b. Ja∏far b. Matar said: Muhammad b. Musa al-Hulwani told us: ∏Abdallah b. Ibrahim al-Ghifari told us on the authority of al-Munkadir b. Muhammad, on
the authority of his father, on the authority of Jabir b. ∏Abdallah, who said: “The
Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – said: ‘Contentment is
the treasure that cannot be exhausted.’” Abu πl-Hasan al-Ahwazi informed us:
Ahmad b. ∏Ubaydallah al-Basri told us: ∏Abdallah b. Ayyub al-Qirabi said: Abu
πl-Rabi∏a al-Zahrani told us: Isma∏il b. Zakariya//232 told us on the authority of
Abu πl-Rajaπ, on the authority of Burd b. Sinan, on the authority of Makhul, on
the authority of Wathila b. al-Asqa∏, on the authority of Abu Hurayra – may God
be pleased with him – that the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him
– said: “Be scrupulous and you will be the greatest worshiper of [all] people;
be content and you will be the most thankful of [all] people; wish for other
people what you wish for yourself, and you will be a faithful [servant]; be a good
neighbor to those who live near you and you will be a [true] believer.The people of Baghdad were sitting there
according to their [social] ranks waiting for the funeral bier to arrive. [Suddenly]
I saw a poor man who looked like an ascetic begging from people. I thought to
myself: ‘If this one would work to sustain himself, it would be better for him.’
When I returned home after that, I engaged in my usual routine of reciting
a night litany, weeping, praying and so on. However, all my litanies weighed
heavily on me. So I just sat there sleepless. Then my eyes closed and, in my
dream, I saw that poor man spread upon a table [before me] and I heard voices
saying: ‘Eat his flesh, for you have slandered him!’ The real state [of affairs] was
revealed to me and I said: ‘No, I did not slander him. I only said something to
myself.’//231 I was told: ‘This sort of thing is not tolerated from the likes of
you. Go and ask his forgiveness!’ So in the morning I left my house and began
to go around until I saw him at a place with running water where he was picking
up leaves from vegetables that were being washed there. I greeted him. He
responded saying: ‘Abu πl-Qasim you have returned [to this again]?’ I said: ‘No!’
He said: ‘Then may God forgive both of us!’”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Abu Tahir al-Isfaraini say: I heard Abu Ja∏far al-Balkhi say:
“There used to be a man from Balkh196who exerted himself in worshiping God. However, he constantly slandered people behind their backs, saying, ‘So-and-so
196 An area in present day Afghanistan.

Sinan, on the authority of Makhul, on
the authority of Wathila b. al-Asqa∏, on the authority of Abu Hurayra – may God
be pleased with him – that the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him
– said: “Be scrupulous and you will be the greatest worshiper of [all] people;
be content and you will be the most thankful of [all] people; wish for other
people what you wish for yourself, and you will be a faithful [servant]; be a good
neighbor to those who live near you and you will be a [true] believer. And laugh
little, for much laughter murders the heart!” Bishr al-Hafi said: “Contentment
is an angel who dwells only in the believing heart.”
They say: “The poor are dead except for those whom God Most High has
revived with the power of contentment.” I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say:
I heard ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad al-Sha∏rani say: I heard Ishaq b. Ibrahim b. Abi
Hassan al-Anmati say: I heard Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari say: I heard Sulayman
al-Darani say: “Contentment relates to satisfaction (rida) in the same way
scrupulousness relates to renunciation [of the world] (zuhd) – that is, content-
ment is the beginning of satisfaction and scrupulousness is the beginning of
renunciation.” They say that contentment is to keep your calm in the absence of
things that you are accustomed to. Abu Bakr al-Maraghi said: “The intelligent
person is one who deals with this world with contentment and deferment, while
at the same time aspiring and hastening to the Hereafter and exercising his
knowledge and striving in what concerns his faith.”
Abu ∏Abdallah b. Khafif said: “Contentment is not to seek what you have lost
and to be satisfied with what you have.” It is said that the meaning of God’s
197 Q. 16:97; 16:99, according to Arberry’s translation.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 176
176 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
words: “God shall provide them with a fair provision”198 is contentment.
Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Tirmidhi said: “Contentment is one’s satisfaction with
what has been allotted to him [by God].” It is also said that contentment is finding
sufficiency in what one has and not aspiring to that which one does not have.
Wahb said: “Greatness and wealth went out seeking a companion. They met
with contentment and decided to settle down [and seek no more].” It is said:
“For him whose contentment is copious [fatty] every broth tastes good. And he
who turns to God Most High//233 in every situation will be rewarded by God
with contentment.” It is said that one day Abu Hazim passed by a butcher, who
had some fatty meat. The butcher told him: “Abu Hazim, take some of it, for it
is fatty!” He answered that he had no money. The butcher told him: “I will give
you a postponement [on your payment]!” Abu Hazim answered: “My soul will
give me a still better postponement than you!” Someone asked a Sufi: “Who of
mankind is most content?” He answered: “He who is the most helpful to others,
while being the least burdensome for them.” In the Psalms it is said: “He who
is content is rich, even when he goes hungry.” It is said that God Most High
placed five things in five different places: greatness in obedience, humiliation in
disobedience, awe [of God] in the night vigil, wisdom into the empty stomach
and wealth in contentment.
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Nasr b.
Muhammad say: I heard Sulayman b. Abi Sulayman say: I heard Abu πl-Qasim
b. Abi Nizar say: I heard Ibrahim al-Maristani say: “Avenge yourself on your
greed by contentment as you avenge yourself on your enemy.” Dhu πl-Nun
al-Misri said: “One who is content receives respite from other people and rises
above his peers.” They say: “One who is content finds rest from [his] labors199and
rises above all.” Al-Kattani said: “One who sells desire for contentment gains
greatness and manly honor (muruwa).” They say: “One whose eyes aspire after
what other people have is gripped by constant sadness and distress.” They recite
[the following verse]:
It is better for a young man (fata) to remain noble, but hungry
Than to experience a day of disgrace
that brings him wealth!
It is said that someone saw a wise man eating vegetables discarded at a spring.
He remarked: “If you were to be in the service of the Sultan, you wouldn’t have
to eat this.” The wise man replied: “If you were content with this, you wouldn’t
have to serve the Sultan!”//234 It is said: “As the eagle flies high in the air
neither the hunter’s sight nor his desire [to catch it] can reach it. Only when it
craves a piece of carrion suspended [in the hunter’s] snare does it descend from its
height and get entangled in the snare’s web.” When Moses – peace be upon him
198 Q. 22:58; 22:57, according to Arberry’s translation.
199 Or “his preoccupations”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 177
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 177
– breathed out words of greed, saying: “If thou hadst wished, thou couldst have
taken a wage for that”,200al-Khidr told him: “This is the parting of ways between
me and thee.”201 They say that when Moses uttered those words, a gazelle
appeared before them. They were both hungry. The side [of the gazelle that]
faced Moses – peace be upon him – was not roasted, while the one that faced
al-Khidr was roasted.
It is said that the words of God Most High – “Surely the pious shall be in
bliss”202 – refer to contentment [with one’s portion] in this life, whereas [God’s
words] “And the wicked are in fire”203refer to desire for [the delights of] this life.
It is also said that the words of God Most High – “The freeing of a slave”204 –
refer to setting oneself free from the humiliation of greed. It is said that the
words of God Most High – “People of the [Prophet’s] House, God only desires
to put away from you abomination” – mean avarice and greed, whereas [His
words] – “and to cleanse you in the most perfect way”205– denote [cleansing] by
means of generosity and altruism. It is said that the words of God Most High
– [quoting Solomon, who said] “Give me a kingdom such as may not befall
anyone after me”206– mean “Give me a rank of contentment which will be unique
to me and no one else, so that I shall always be satisfied with Your decree.” And
they say regarding God’s words – “Assuredly I will chastise him [the hoopoe]207
with a terrible chastisement”208– that they mean “I will deprive him of contentment
and try him with greed.” [Solomon] wanted to say: “I will ask God Most High
to do this to him [the hoopoe].”
Someone asked Abu Yazid al-Bistami: “How have you achieved what you
have achieved?”//235 He answered: “I gathered all the [good] things of this
world, tied them together with the rope of contentment, placed them in the
catapult of sincere striving, and cast them into the sea of despair. Then I rested.”
I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi209 say: I heard Muhammad b. Farhan
at Samarra say: I heard my uncle ∏Abd al-Wahhab say: “During the days of the
pilgrimage season I was sitting with al-Junayd. He was surrounded by a large
group of Persians and Arabs who were born in foreign lands. A man came with
five hundred dinarsand put them in front of him saying: ‘Distribute them among
these poor people.’ Al-Junayd asked: ‘Do you have more?’ The man answered:
‘Yes, I have plenty of these.’ ‘Do you want to have more?’ asked al-Junayd. He
200 Q. 18:77.
201 Q. 18:78.
202 Q. 82:13.
203 Q. 82:14.
204 Q. 90:13.
205 Q. 33:33.
206 Q. 38:35; 38:34 in Arberry’s translation.
207 A reference to the hoopoe, who delivered to Solomon a message about the queen of Sheba.
208 Q. 27:21.
209 Or “al-Sadafi”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 178
178 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
answered: ‘Yes.’ Al-Junayd told him: ‘Then take them back, for you are more in
need of them than we are!’ And he did not accept them.”
Trust in God (tawakkul)
God – may He be great and Exalted – said: “And whosoever puts his trust in God,
He shall suffice him.”210He also said: “And in God let the believers put all their
trust.”211[Finally,] He said: “Put all your trust in God, if you are believers.”212
The imam Abu Bakr Muhammad b. al-Hasan b. Furak213 said: ∏Abdallah b.
Ja∏far b. Ahmad al-Isbahani told us: Yunus b. Habib b. ∏Abd al-Qahir told us:
Abu Dawud al-Tayalisi told us: Hammad b. Maslama214told us on the authority
of ∏Asim b. Bahdala, on the authority of Zirr b. Hubaysh, on the authority of
∏Abdallah b. Mas∏ud – may God be pleased with him – that: “The Messenger
of God – may God bless and greet him – said: ‘I was shown all the [religious]
communities at the time of the pilgrimage. I saw that my community had filled
both the valley and the plain [of ∏Arafat]. I was pleased with their great number
and their appearance. I was asked: “Are you satisfied?” I answered: “Yes.”’ [A
voice] said [to me]: ‘Among these there are seventy thousand who will enter
Paradise without reckoning. They have never allowed themselves to be treated
by cauterization, nor to divine the future by [observing] birds’ flight, nor have
resorted to [the magician’s] charms. They have put their trust in God alone.’
[When the Prophet said this] ∏Ukkasha b. Muhsin al-Asadi stood up and
requested: ‘Messenger of God, pray to God that He would make me one
of them!’ The Messenger of God replied, saying: ‘O God, make him one of
them!’//236 Another person stood up and asked: ‘Pray to God that He would
make me one of them!’ The Messenger – may God bless and greet him
– answered: ‘∏Ukkasha has preceded you in this!’”
I heard ∏Abdallah b. Yusuf al-Isbahani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say: I
heard Abu Bakr al-Wajihi say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say: I asked ∏Amr b.
Sinan to tell me a story about Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari].215 ∏Amr said that
Sahl once said: “One who trusts God is distinguished by three signs: he does not
ask, does not refuse [when given], and does not hold on [to what was given to
him].” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy
on him – say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah al-Shirazi
say: “I heard Abu Musa al-Daylubi say that someone asked Abu Yazid al-Bistami
about trust in God. He, in turn, asked me what I thought about it. I answered: ‘My
companions say: “Even if wild beasts and poisonous snakes were all around you,
210 Q. 65:3.
211 Q. 14:11; 14:14 in Arberry’s translation.
212 Q. 5:23; 5:26 in Arberry’s translation.
213 A famous Ash∏ari theologian and teacher of al-Qushayri, who resided in Nishapur. He died in
406/1015.
214 Or “b. al-Salama”.
215 On him, see IM, pp. 83–88 and Böwering, Mystical Vision.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 179
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 179
your innermost heart would still not be perturbed!”’ Abu Yazid answered:
‘Yes, this is close. But if you were to [observe] the people of Paradise enjoying
themselves in its gardens and the people of Hell being tortured by its fires, and
you would give preference to one over the other, you would leave the realm of
trust in God altogether.’” Sahl b. ∏Abdallah said: “The beginning of trust in God
is when the servant places himself before God as a dead corpse is placed before
the washer of the dead, who turns it however he wishes, while the body has
no moves nor will of its own.” Hamdun al-Qassar said: “Trust in God is taking
refuge in God Most High.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Ahmad
al-Balkhi say: I heard Muhammad b. Hamid say: I heard Ahmad b. Khadrawayh
say: “A man asked Hatim al-Asamm: ‘From where do you get your provisions?’
He answered: ‘To God belong the treasures of the heavens and of the earth, but
the hypocrites do not understand.’”216
Know that the place of trust is in the heart. Outward action does not
necessarily contradict trust in the heart. Once the servant has ascertained that
determination comes from God Most High, he realizes that any hardship he
experiences is pre-determined [by God] and any success he may have is also
facilitated by God. ∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd
al-Basri told us: Ghaylan b. ∏Abd al-Samad told us: Isma∏il b. Mas∏ud al-Jahdari
told us: Khalid b. Yahya told us: “My uncle al-Mughira b. Abi Qurra recounted
on the authority of Anas b.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 178
178 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
answered: ‘Yes.’ Al-Junayd told him: ‘Then take them back, for you are more in
need of them than we are!’ And he did not accept them.”
Trust in God (tawakkul)
God – may He be great and Exalted – said: “And whosoever puts his trust in God,
He shall suffice him.”210He also said: “And in God let the believers put all their
trust.”211[Finally,] He said: “Put all your trust in God, if you are believers.”212
The imam Abu Bakr Muhammad b. al-Hasan b. Furak213 said: ∏Abdallah b.
Ja∏far b. Ahmad al-Isbahani told us: Yunus b. Habib b. ∏Abd al-Qahir told us:
Abu Dawud al-Tayalisi told us: Hammad b. Maslama214told us on the authority
of ∏Asim b. Bahdala, on the authority of Zirr b. Hubaysh, on the authority of
∏Abdallah b. Mas∏ud – may God be pleased with him – that: “The Messenger
of God – may God bless and greet him – said: ‘I was shown all the [religious]
communities at the time of the pilgrimage. I saw that my community had filled
both the valley and the plain [of ∏Arafat]. I was pleased with their great number
and their appearance. I was asked: “Are you satisfied?” I answered: “Yes.”’ [A
voice] said [to me]: ‘Among these there are seventy thousand who will enter
Paradise without reckoning. They have never allowed themselves to be treated
by cauterization, nor to divine the future by [observing] birds’ flight, nor have
resorted to [the magician’s] charms. They have put their trust in God alone.’
[When the Prophet said this] ∏Ukkasha b. Muhsin al-Asadi stood up and
requested: ‘Messenger of God, pray to God that He would make me one
of them!’ The Messenger of God replied, saying: ‘O God, make him one of
them!’//236 Another person stood up and asked: ‘Pray to God that He would
make me one of them!’ The Messenger – may God bless and greet him
– answered: ‘∏Ukkasha has preceded you in this!’”
I heard ∏Abdallah b. Yusuf al-Isbahani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say: I
heard Abu Bakr al-Wajihi say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say: I asked ∏Amr b.
Sinan to tell me a story about Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari].215 ∏Amr said that
Sahl once said: “One who trusts God is distinguished by three signs: he does not
ask, does not refuse [when given], and does not hold on [to what was given to
him].” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy
on him – say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah al-Shirazi
say: “I heard Abu Musa al-Daylubi say that someone asked Abu Yazid al-Bistami
about trust in God. He, in turn, asked me what I thought about it. I answered: ‘My
companions say: “Even if wild beasts and poisonous snakes were all around you,
210 Q. 65:3.
211 Q. 14:11; 14:14 in Arberry’s translation.
212 Q. 5:23; 5:26 in Arberry’s translation.
213 A famous Ash∏ari theologian and teacher of al-Qushayri, who resided in Nishapur. He died in
406/1015.
214 Or “b. al-Salama”.
215 On him, see IM, pp. 83–88 and Böwering, Mystical Vision.

Yahya told us: “My uncle al-Mughira b. Abi Qurra recounted
on the authority of Anas b. Malik that a certain man came [to the Prophet] riding
his she-camel//237 and asked him: ‘Messenger of God, should I leave her loose
and put my trust in God?’ The Prophet responded: ‘Tie her up and trust in
God!’”
Ibrahim al-Khawwas said: “He who trusts in God when dealing with himself
will also trust God when dealing with others.” Bishr al-Hafi said: “One Sufi said:
‘I have put my trust in God [and failed].’ However, he lied to God Most High. If he were indeed to put his trust in God, he would have been content with what
God did to him.” Someone asked Yahya b. Mu∏adh [al-Razi]: “When can a man
trust God?” He answered: “When he is content to have God as his trustee.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy
on him – say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Ali b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Abdallah
b. Muhammad b. al-Samit say: I heard Ibrahim al-Khawwas say: “As I was
journeying in the desert I heard someone speak. I looked around and saw a
Bedouin walking along. He told me: ‘Ibrahim, trust in God resides with us
[people of the desert], so stay with us until your trust has become sound. Don’t
you see that you are driven to cities by the food that you hope to find there? Therefore, stop pinning your hopes on cities and put your trust in God instead!’”
I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Farisi say: I
heard Muhammad b. ∏Ataπ say that someone asked him about the true essence of
trust in God. He answered: “It is when anxiety about things of this world does
216 Q. 63:7.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 180
180 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
not prevail over you despite your dire need of them and when your reliance upon
God prevails in you despite your dependence on such things.”
I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say: “The
condition for trust in God is what Abu Turab al-Nakhshabi had in mind when
he said: ‘To prostrate your body in worship, to attach your heart to lordship,
and to find solace in sufficiency; when you are given, you are thankful and when
you are denied, you persevere.’” Dhu πl-Nun said: “Trust in God is to give up
planning for yourself and to abandon [reliance on your own] power and ability. The servant is capable of trust in God only when he has realized that God – may
He be exalted – knows and sees his condition.” I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn
say: I heard Abu πl-Faraj al-Warathani say: I heard Ahmad b. Muhammad
al-Qirmisini say: I heard al-Kattani say: I heard Abu Ja∏far b. Abi πl-Faraj say:
“Once I saw a villain (shatir) nicknamed ‘∏Aπisha’s Camel’ being whipped. I asked
him: ‘When will this lashing be easier for you?’ He answered://238 ‘When the
one on whose account I am being whipped will see me.’” I heard ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad say: I heard al-Husayn b. Mansur say to Ibrahim al-Khawwas: “What
have you achieved throughout all these travels of yours and your wanderings in
the deserts?” He answered: “I have persevered in my trust in God, disciplining
my soul thereby.” Al-Husayn [b. Mansur] asked him: “So you have spent your
entire life taking care of your inner self. What about annihilating your inner self
through unifying it with God (tawhid)?”
I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say: “Trust
in God is what Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq once said – that is, ‘Limiting your livelihood’s
worth to one day only and giving up concern about what will happen [to you]
tomorrow.’” Or, as Sahl b.Yahya told us: “My uncle al-Mughira b. Abi Qurra recounted
on the authority of Anas b. Malik that a certain man came [to the Prophet] riding
his she-camel//237 and asked him: ‘Messenger of God, should I leave her loose
and put my trust in God?’ The Prophet responded: ‘Tie her up and trust in
God!’”
Ibrahim al-Khawwas said: “He who trusts in God when dealing with himself
will also trust God when dealing with others.” Bishr al-Hafi said: “One Sufi said:
‘I have put my trust in God [and failed].’ However, he lied to God Most High. If he were indeed to put his trust in God, he would have been content with what
God did to him.” Someone asked Yahya b. Mu∏adh [al-Razi]: “When can a man
trust God?” He answered: “When he is content to have God as his trustee.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy
on him – say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Ali b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Abdallah
b. Muhammad b. al-Samit say: I heard Ibrahim al-Khawwas say: “As I was
journeying in the desert I heard someone speak. I looked around and saw a
Bedouin walking along. He told me: ‘Ibrahim, trust in God resides with us
[people of the desert], so stay with us until your trust has become sound. Don’t
you see that you are driven to cities by the food that you hope to find there? Therefore, stop pinning your hopes on cities and put your trust in God instead!’”
I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Farisi say: I
heard Muhammad b. ∏Ataπ say that someone asked him about the true essence of
trust in God. He answered: “It is when anxiety about things of this world does
216 Q. 63:7.

Mansur] asked him: “So you have spent your
entire life taking care of your inner self. What about annihilating your inner self
through unifying it with God (tawhid)?”
I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say: “Trust
in God is what Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq once said – that is, ‘Limiting your livelihood’s
worth to one day only and giving up concern about what will happen [to you]
tomorrow.’” Or, as Sahl b. ∏Abdallah said: “Putting yourself in the hands of
God, so that he would do with you what He wants.” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd
al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard Muhammad
b. Ja∏far b. Muhammad say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Bardha∏i say: I heard Abu
Ya∏qub al-Nahrajuri say: “Trust in God in its perfect essence manifested itself in
what happened to Abraham. [As he was flying through the air]217he told Gabriel
[who had offered him his help]: ‘No, not from you!’ For his [Abraham’s] self had
been annihilated in God [to such an extent that] he could see no one else but God
alone – may He be great and exalted!”
I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard Sa∏id b. Ahmad b. Muhammad say:
I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Sahl say: I heard Sa∏id b. ∏Uthman al-Khayyat
say: I heard Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri say, when asked about trust in God: “Divesting
oneself from all masters [other than God] and cutting one’s attachment to all
causes [other than God].” The inquirer asked him: “Tell me more!” Dhu πl-Nun
responded: “Throwing oneself into worship and ridding oneself of any pretension
to lordship.” I also heard him say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Munazil say: I heard
Hamdun al-Qassar say, when asked about trust in God: “It is as if you had ten
217 According to the Biblical and Qurπanic tradition, Abraham was thrown onto a bonfire by his
infidel persecutors only to be miraculously rescued by the Archangel Gabriel.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 181
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 181
thousand dirhams in your possession and one daniq218 worth of debt, yet you
would not be able to rest easy [fearing] that you might die without having this
debt settled.//239 Or as if you had a debt of ten thousand dirhamsand no means
to pay it back [after your death], yet you would not despair of God Most High’s
settling it for you.” Someone asked Abu ∏Abdallah al-Qurashi about trust in
God. He answered: “Holding on to God in every state.” The inquirer asked:
“Tell me more!” Al-Qurashi continued: “Giving up reliance on any cause that
leads to another cause so as to render God the sole possessor of all causes.” Sahl
b. ∏Abdallah said: “Trust in God is the [spiritual] state of the Prophet – may God
bless and greet him – while earning is his custom (sunna). Whoever adheres to his
[the Prophet’s] state, will never depart from his custom.” Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz
said: “Trust in God is agitation without rest and rest without agitation.” It is also
said: “Trust in God is when abundance and scarcity are one and the same to
you.” Ibn Masruq said: “Trust in God is to surrender oneself to the rule of
divine commands and decrees.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Abdallah al-Razi say: I heard
Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri say: “Trust in God is to be satisfied with and rely on
God Most High.” I also heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard
Muhammad b. Muhammad b. Ghalib relate on the authority of al-Husayn b. Mansur, who said: “The true trust in God is when one does not eat anything in
a land where there might be someone more deserving of food than him.” I also
heard him say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali say: I heard Mansur b. Ahmad al-Harbi
say: Ibn Abi Shaykh related to us that he heard ∏Umar b. Sinan say: “Once
Ibrahim al-Khawwas passed us by. We asked him to tell us about the most
wondrous thing he had ever seen during his travels.Mansur] asked him: “So you have spent your
entire life taking care of your inner self. What about annihilating your inner self
through unifying it with God (tawhid)?”
I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say: “Trust
in God is what Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq once said – that is, ‘Limiting your livelihood’s
worth to one day only and giving up concern about what will happen [to you]
tomorrow.’” Or, as Sahl b. ∏Abdallah said: “Putting yourself in the hands of
God, so that he would do with you what He wants.” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd
al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard Muhammad
b. Ja∏far b. Muhammad say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Bardha∏i say: I heard Abu
Ya∏qub al-Nahrajuri say: “Trust in God in its perfect essence manifested itself in
what happened to Abraham. [As he was flying through the air]217he told Gabriel
[who had offered him his help]: ‘No, not from you!’ For his [Abraham’s] self had
been annihilated in God [to such an extent that] he could see no one else but God
alone – may He be great and exalted!”
I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard Sa∏id b. Ahmad b. Muhammad say:
I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Sahl say: I heard Sa∏id b. ∏Uthman al-Khayyat
say: I heard Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri say, when asked about trust in God: “Divesting
oneself from all masters [other than God] and cutting one’s attachment to all
causes [other than God].” The inquirer asked him: “Tell me more!” Dhu πl-Nun
responded: “Throwing oneself into worship and ridding oneself of any pretension
to lordship.” I also heard him say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Munazil say: I heard
Hamdun al-Qassar say, when asked about trust in God: “It is as if you had ten
217 According to the Biblical and Qurπanic tradition, Abraham was thrown onto a bonfire by his
infidel persecutors only to be miraculously rescued by the Archangel Gabriel.

Sinan say: “Once
Ibrahim al-Khawwas passed us by. We asked him to tell us about the most
wondrous thing he had ever seen during his travels. He answered: “[It is when]
I met al-Khidr – peace be on him – and he requested my companionship, yet
I was afraid that I might compromise my trust in God by relying on him. So I
left him.”
Someone asked Sahl b. ∏Abdallah about trust in God. He answered: “It
is when a heart lives with God Most High alone without attaching itself to
anything else.” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy
on him – say: “The one who puts his trust in God goes through three stages:
trust in God, [self-]surrender [to God], and relegating [one’s affairs to God]. The one who practices trust in God relies on His promise [of sustenance]; the
one who surrenders himself [to God] is content with his knowledge [of God];
and the one who relegates his affairs [to God] is satisfied with His decree.”//240
I also heard him [al-Daqqaq] say: “Trust in God is the beginning, [self-]surrender
is the middle and relegating [one’s affairs to God] is the end.” Someone asked
al-Daqqaq about trust in God. He answered: “It is eating without appetite.” Yahya
b. Mu∏adh said: “Putting on woolen clothing is [setting up] shop; discoursing
about renunciation is a profession; and traveling with caravans [of pilgrims] is
ostentation. All these are nothing but attachments [to this world].”
218 A coin worth one-sixth of the dirham.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 182
182 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
A man came to al-Shibli to complain to him about his large family. Al-Shibli
retorted: “Go back to your house and expel from it anyone whose sustenance
is not obligatory for God Most High!” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman
al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali say: I
heard Ahmad b. ∏Ataπ say: I learned from Muhammad b. al-Husayn that Sahl
b. ∏Abdallah said: “Whoever condemns stirring oneself [to earn a livelihood]
condemns the Prophet’s custom; and whoever condemns trust in God [to provide
for him] condemns faith.” I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard Ahmad b. ∏Ali b. Ja∏far say: I heard Ja∏far al-Khuldi say: Ibrahim al-Khawwas said: “I was
on my way to Mecca, when I met a wild-looking person. I said to myself: ‘Is this
a man or a jinn?’ He answered: ‘I am a jinn.’ ‘Where are you headed?’ I asked
him. He said that he was going to Mecca. I asked him: ‘Do you travel without
any provisions?’ He said: ‘Yes! Among us, too, are those who travel putting their
trust in God.’ I asked him: ‘What, then, is trust in God?’ He answered: ‘Taking
[your provisions] from God Most High.’” I heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard
Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Baghdadi say: I heard al-Farghani say: “Ibrahim al-Khawwas
excelled in the art of trust and attained a great sophistication in it. However, he
never parted with a needle and thread, a [begging] bowl,219and a pair of scissors. Someone asked him: ‘Abu Ishaq, why do you carry all these things, while you
abstain from all other things?’ He answered: ‘Things like these do not contradict
trust in God, for God – may He be exalted – has made certain rules obligatory
for everyone. Thus, a dervish has but one piece of clothing, which may be torn. If he does not have a needle and thread, his private parts may be exposed and
his prayer becomes invalid;//241 and if he has no bowl, his ablutions may be
corrupted.Sinan say: “Once
Ibrahim al-Khawwas passed us by. We asked him to tell us about the most
wondrous thing he had ever seen during his travels. He answered: “[It is when]
I met al-Khidr – peace be on him – and he requested my companionship, yet
I was afraid that I might compromise my trust in God by relying on him. So I
left him.”
Someone asked Sahl b. ∏Abdallah about trust in God. He answered: “It
is when a heart lives with God Most High alone without attaching itself to
anything else.” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy
on him – say: “The one who puts his trust in God goes through three stages:
trust in God, [self-]surrender [to God], and relegating [one’s affairs to God]. The one who practices trust in God relies on His promise [of sustenance]; the
one who surrenders himself [to God] is content with his knowledge [of God];
and the one who relegates his affairs [to God] is satisfied with His decree.”//240
I also heard him [al-Daqqaq] say: “Trust in God is the beginning, [self-]surrender
is the middle and relegating [one’s affairs to God] is the end.” Someone asked
al-Daqqaq about trust in God. He answered: “It is eating without appetite.” Yahya
b. Mu∏adh said: “Putting on woolen clothing is [setting up] shop; discoursing
about renunciation is a profession; and traveling with caravans [of pilgrims] is
ostentation. All these are nothing but attachments [to this world].”
218 A coin worth one-sixth of the dirham.

Thus, a dervish has but one piece of clothing, which may be torn. If he does not have a needle and thread, his private parts may be exposed and
his prayer becomes invalid;//241 and if he has no bowl, his ablutions may be
corrupted. Therefore, if you see a poor man who has neither bowl nor needle and
thread, be wary of the perfection of his prayer.”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“Trust in God is the characteristic of the [ordinary] believers; surrendering
oneself to God is the characteristic of the elect; and relegating [one’s affairs to
God] is the characteristic of those who have achieved unity [with God]. [In other
words], trust in God is the characteristic of the common folk; surrendering is the
characteristic of the elect; and relegating is the characteristic of the elect of
the elect.” I also heard him [al-Daqqaq] say: “Trust is the characteristic of the
friends of God (awliyaπ); surrendering is the characteristic of Abraham – peace
be upon him – and relegating is the characteristic of our prophet Muhammad
– may God bless and greet him.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Baghdadi
say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Farghani say: I heard Abu Ja∏far
al-Haddad say: “For more than ten years I lived in the state of trust in God,
while working in the bazaar (suq). Every day I would receive my wages, but I did
not use this money even to pay for a drink of water or for the admission fee to a
219 A bowl that could be used for both begging and drinking.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 183
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 183
public bath. Instead, I would bring this money to the poor folks who resided at
the al-Shuniziyya mosque. In this way I preserved my state [of trust].”
I heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard Abu Bakr Muhammad
b. ∏Abdallah b. Shadhan say: I heard al-Khawwas say: I heard al-Husayn, brother
of Sinan, say: “I made fourteen pilgrimages [to Mecca] in the state of trust,
barefoot. Whenever a thorn entered my foot I would remind myself that I
had imposed trust in God upon myself, so I would rub it [the thorn] against
the ground and walk on.” I also heard him say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah
the Preacher (wa∏iz) say: I heard Khayr al-Nassaj say: I heard Abu Hamza
[al-Baghdadi] say: “When I have a vow to practice trust in God, I’d be ashamed
before God Most High to enter the desert with a full stomach lest my journey
should rely on my prior satiety with which I had equipped myself in advance.”
Someone asked Hamdun al-Qassar about trust in God. He answered: “This
is a stage that I have not reached yet. How can one who has not yet perfected his
faith speak of trust in God?” They say that the one who trusts God is similar to
an infant, who knows nothing but his mother’s breast, which he always seeks. Likewise, one who trusts God is always led to his Lord Most High. One of the
Sufis related: “I was in the desert walking before a caravan, when I saw someone
in front of me. I hurried to catch up with him and saw a woman with a staff in her
hand walking slowly. I thought that she was exhausted, so I reached into//242
my pocket and brought out twenty dirhams. I told her: ‘Take this and wait until
the caravan catches up with you.Thus, a dervish has but one piece of clothing, which may be torn. If he does not have a needle and thread, his private parts may be exposed and
his prayer becomes invalid;//241 and if he has no bowl, his ablutions may be
corrupted. Therefore, if you see a poor man who has neither bowl nor needle and
thread, be wary of the perfection of his prayer.”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“Trust in God is the characteristic of the [ordinary] believers; surrendering
oneself to God is the characteristic of the elect; and relegating [one’s affairs to
God] is the characteristic of those who have achieved unity [with God]. [In other
words], trust in God is the characteristic of the common folk; surrendering is the
characteristic of the elect; and relegating is the characteristic of the elect of
the elect.” I also heard him [al-Daqqaq] say: “Trust is the characteristic of the
friends of God (awliyaπ); surrendering is the characteristic of Abraham – peace
be upon him – and relegating is the characteristic of our prophet Muhammad
– may God bless and greet him.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Baghdadi
say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Farghani say: I heard Abu Ja∏far
al-Haddad say: “For more than ten years I lived in the state of trust in God,
while working in the bazaar (suq). Every day I would receive my wages, but I did
not use this money even to pay for a drink of water or for the admission fee to a
219 A bowl that could be used for both begging and drinking.

I thought that she was exhausted, so I reached into//242
my pocket and brought out twenty dirhams. I told her: ‘Take this and wait until
the caravan catches up with you. You should then pay your fare with this money
and catch up with me in the evening, so that I could arrange everything for you.’
She said, as she raised her hand in the air like this and suddenly [I saw] dinarsin
her palm: ‘You take dirhamsout of your pocket (jayb) and I take dinars out of the
unseen (ghayb).’”
Once Abu Sulayman al-Darani saw a man in Mecca who would live on
nothing but some water from the Zamzam well.220 Many days elapsed. One day
Sulayman asked him: “If the water of Zamzam were to dry up, what would you
drink?” The man jumped to his feet, kissed Sulayman’s head and said: “May
God give you a good reward! You have guided me aright, for I have nearly
become a worshiper of Zamzam over the past few days!” Ibrahim al-Khawwas
related: “Once on my way to Syria I saw a young man of good manners. He asked
me: ‘Would you like a companion?’ When I told him that I was hungry, he
replied: ‘Whenever you are hungry, I will be hungry as well!’ We had stayed
together for four days, until something was given to us and I invited him to
partake of it with me. He responded saying: ‘I have made a vow not to accept
anything from intermediaries.’ I told him: ‘You are meticulous indeed [in your
trust in God]!’ He answered: ‘None of your idle words! The stern judge is
watching [us]. What have you to do with trust in God?’ He then added: ‘The
least [portion of] trust is when you encounter sources of satisfying your needs
but your soul aspires toward nothing but Him Who holds all sufficiency!’”
220 The sacred well located in the Meccan sanctuary.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 184
184 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
They say that trust in God is negating doubts and relegating [all your affairs
to] the King of Kings. They say that once a group of men came to al-Junayd – may
God have mercy on him – and asked: “Where should we seek our sustenance?”
He answered: “If you know where it is, go seek it there!” They asked: “Do we
have to ask God for it?” He told them: “If you know that He has forgotten you,
remind Him!” They asked: “So should we go home [and sit there] trusting in
God?” He answered: “Testing [God’s generosity] leads to doubt.” “So, what’s
the trick?” asked they. “The trick is to give up all tricks!” answered al-Junayd. Abu Sulayman al-Darani told Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari:221//243 “Ahmad, the
roads to the Hereafter are many. Your master knows many of them except this
blessed one [named] trust in God. I have not caught even a whiff of it.” It
is said that trust in God is to be sure of what is in the hand of God Most
High and to despair of what is in the hands of people. It is also said that trust in
God is emptying one’s innermost heart of any thought of how one can secure
one’s livelihood. Someone asked al-Muhasibi – may God have mercy on him – about someone
who places his trust in God: “Can he still have any desire?” He answered:
“Thoughts and concerns that spring from his [human] nature still occur in him,
yet they can do him no harm, for in his abandonment of desire he is reinforced
by despairing of what is in the hands of people.” It is said that when al-Nuri was
starving in the desert, he heard a voice say: “Which thing do you love more: means
[of obtaining sustenance] or sufficiency [with what you have]?” He answered:
“There’s no goal higher than sufficiency!” And he spent seventeen more days
without eating anything.It is also said that trust in
God is emptying one’s innermost heart of any thought of how one can secure
one’s livelihood. Someone asked al-Muhasibi – may God have mercy on him – about someone
who places his trust in God: “Can he still have any desire?” He answered:
“Thoughts and concerns that spring from his [human] nature still occur in him,
yet they can do him no harm, for in his abandonment of desire he is reinforced
by despairing of what is in the hands of people.” It is said that when al-Nuri was
starving in the desert, he heard a voice say: “Which thing do you love more: means
[of obtaining sustenance] or sufficiency [with what you have]?” He answered:
“There’s no goal higher than sufficiency!” And he spent seventeen more days
without eating anything. Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari said: “If after five days the poor
man222says, ‘I am hungry’, send him to the bazaar and tell him to work and earn
[his living].” Abu Turab al-Nakhshabi once saw a Sufi, who after having fasted
for three days, stretched his hand to a melon rind. He exclaimed: “Sufism is not
for you! Keep to the bazaar!” Abu Ya∏qub al-Aqta∏ al-Basri said: “Once I went
hungry for ten days in the Sacred Precinct [of Mecca]. I felt very weak and my
soul began to tempt me. I went to the valley to find something that would abate
my weakness. Suddenly, I saw a discarded turnip lying on the ground. I picked it
up. I felt that uneasiness entered my heart, as if someone were trying to say to me:
‘You have gone hungry for ten days and, in the end, you found your happiness
in a rotten turnip!’ I threw it away, went to the [Sacred] Mosque and sat there. Suddenly, I saw a non-Arab man who sat in front of me and put before me a
satchel, saying: ‘This is for you.’ ‘Why have you chosen me?’ I asked him. He
responded: ‘For ten days we were at sea, and our ship was about to go under.I thought that she was exhausted, so I reached into//242
my pocket and brought out twenty dirhams. I told her: ‘Take this and wait until
the caravan catches up with you. You should then pay your fare with this money
and catch up with me in the evening, so that I could arrange everything for you.’
She said, as she raised her hand in the air like this and suddenly [I saw] dinarsin
her palm: ‘You take dirhamsout of your pocket (jayb) and I take dinars out of the
unseen (ghayb).’”
Once Abu Sulayman al-Darani saw a man in Mecca who would live on
nothing but some water from the Zamzam well.220 Many days elapsed. One day
Sulayman asked him: “If the water of Zamzam were to dry up, what would you
drink?” The man jumped to his feet, kissed Sulayman’s head and said: “May
God give you a good reward! You have guided me aright, for I have nearly
become a worshiper of Zamzam over the past few days!” Ibrahim al-Khawwas
related: “Once on my way to Syria I saw a young man of good manners. He asked
me: ‘Would you like a companion?’ When I told him that I was hungry, he
replied: ‘Whenever you are hungry, I will be hungry as well!’ We had stayed
together for four days, until something was given to us and I invited him to
partake of it with me. He responded saying: ‘I have made a vow not to accept
anything from intermediaries.’ I told him: ‘You are meticulous indeed [in your
trust in God]!’ He answered: ‘None of your idle words! The stern judge is
watching [us]. What have you to do with trust in God?’ He then added: ‘The
least [portion of] trust is when you encounter sources of satisfying your needs
but your soul aspires toward nothing but Him Who holds all sufficiency!’”
220 The sacred well located in the Meccan sanctuary.

Suddenly, I saw a non-Arab man who sat in front of me and put before me a
satchel, saying: ‘This is for you.’ ‘Why have you chosen me?’ I asked him. He
responded: ‘For ten days we were at sea, and our ship was about to go under. Each of us made a vow that, if God Most High rescued us, he would give
something as alms to the first person his eyes fell on among the inhabitants of
Mecca. You are the first person I have met.’//244 I asked him to open the satchel. When he opened it [I saw] fine Egyptian cakes, shelled almonds, and cubes of
221 On these Syrian Sufis, see IM, pp. 36–39. 222 That is, a Sufi.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 185
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 185
sugar. I took a handful of each and told him: ‘Take the rest to your kids. It is my
gift to them. I have taken enough.’ Then I said to myself: ‘Your provisions were
on their way to you for ten days, and you were looking for it in the empty valley!’”
I [al-Qushayri] heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Abu
Bakr al-Razi say: “I was with Mimshadh al-Dinawari, when talk of debts came
up. He said: ‘Once I had a debt, which weighed heavy on my heart. In my dream
I heard a voice say to me: “O miser! You have borrowed such-and-such amount
from us. Borrow [more]! The borrowing is on you and the giving is on us!” From
then on I never had any financial dealings with either a grocer or a butcher!’”
It is recounted that Bunan the Porter (al-hammal) said: “Once I set out on a
journey from Egypt to Mecca with some provisions. A woman approached me and
said: ‘Bunan, you are a porter. You carry [your provisions] on your back, because
you do not believe that God will provide for you!’ So I threw my provisions
away. I continued on my journey without eating anything for three days. Then I
found an anklet on the road and said to myself: ‘I will carry it until I come upon
its owner. Maybe he will give me something when I return it to him.’ Then the
same woman appeared before me and told me: ‘So now you are a merchant! You
say: “Maybe I will come upon its owner, so that I could take something from
him!”’ She then threw a few coins at me, saying: ‘Spend them!’ They lasted almost
until I reached Mecca.” It is related that Bunan was in need of a slave girl to
serve him. His need came to the attention of his friends, who collected her price
for him and told him: “Here’s the money.You
say: “Maybe I will come upon its owner, so that I could take something from
him!”’ She then threw a few coins at me, saying: ‘Spend them!’ They lasted almost
until I reached Mecca.” It is related that Bunan was in need of a slave girl to
serve him. His need came to the attention of his friends, who collected her price
for him and told him: “Here’s the money. A group [of slaves] will come to you
and you will purchase the one who suits you most.” When the group arrived,
the opinions of all agreed on a certain woman and they told him [Bunan]: “This
one is right for you!” They [the friends] asked her owner what her price was. He answered that she was not for sale. When they pleaded with him, he said:
“This woman belongs to Bunan the Porter. A woman from Samarqand wants to
present her to him.” So she was brought to Bunan. She told him [her] story. I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad b. al-Hasan
al-Makhzumi say: Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Salih told us: Muhammad b. ∏Abdun
told us: al-Hasan al-Khayyat told us: “I was with Bishr al-Hafi, when a group of
strangers came to his house and greeted him. He asked them where they were
from.//245 They answered: ‘We are from Syria. We have come to greet you on
our way to the pilgrimage.’ He told them: ‘May God Most High reward you!’
They invited him to go with them. He said: ‘On three conditions: we do not
carry any [provisions] with us; we do not ask [anyone] for anything; and if
someone gives something to us, we shall not accept it.’ They answered: ‘As for
not carrying anything with us, yes; as for not asking for anything, yes; however,
as for not accepting anything, we cannot do this.’ He told them: ‘You should set
out with trust in [God’s] providing for the pilgrims!’ He then told [me]: ‘Hasan,
there are three types of the poor. First, the poor one who does not ask and, if
given anything, would not accept it; this one belongs to those who subsist by
[their] spirits.Suddenly, I saw a non-Arab man who sat in front of me and put before me a
satchel, saying: ‘This is for you.’ ‘Why have you chosen me?’ I asked him. He
responded: ‘For ten days we were at sea, and our ship was about to go under. Each of us made a vow that, if God Most High rescued us, he would give
something as alms to the first person his eyes fell on among the inhabitants of
Mecca. You are the first person I have met.’//244 I asked him to open the satchel. When he opened it [I saw] fine Egyptian cakes, shelled almonds, and cubes of
221 On these Syrian Sufis, see IM, pp. 36–39. 222 That is, a Sufi.

He said: ‘On three conditions: we do not
carry any [provisions] with us; we do not ask [anyone] for anything; and if
someone gives something to us, we shall not accept it.’ They answered: ‘As for
not carrying anything with us, yes; as for not asking for anything, yes; however,
as for not accepting anything, we cannot do this.’ He told them: ‘You should set
out with trust in [God’s] providing for the pilgrims!’ He then told [me]: ‘Hasan,
there are three types of the poor. First, the poor one who does not ask and, if
given anything, would not accept it; this one belongs to those who subsist by
[their] spirits. Second, the poor one who does not ask for anything, but, if given
anything, would accept it; for such people tables [of food] will be set in the543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 186
186 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
precincts of Paradise. Third, the poor one who asks for something and, if given,
accepts only the bare minimum of it; his penance is his benefaction.”
Someone said to Habib al-∏Ajami: “Why did you give up trade?” He answered:
“I found the Guarantor to be trustworthy.” It is said that once upon a time one
man embarked on a journey carrying a loaf of bread. He made a vow, saying:
“When I eat it, I will die!” God dispatched an angel to him, saying: “If he eats
it, provide for him; if he does not eat it, do not give anything to him!” So the loaf
remained with that man until he died. He did not touch it and it remained intact. It is said that to the one who enters into the arena of relegation [of one’s affairs
to God], the object of his desire will be brought as a bride is brought to her
husband. The difference between negligence and relegation is this: [your]
negligence concerns the rights of God Most High,223 which is blameworthy,
whereas relegation concerns your own rights,224which is praiseworthy. ∏Abdallah
b. al-Mubarak said: “Whoever takes a fils225 worth of the forbidden has no trust
in God.” I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Nasr b. Abi Nasr al-∏Attar say: I heard ∏Ali b. Muhammad
al-Misri say: I heard Abu Sai∏d al-Kharraz say: “Once I went into the desert
without any provisions. Suddenly I was overcome with need. At some distance I
saw a [caravan] station. I rejoiced that I had reached [my destination]. Then I
thought to myself: ‘I have found respite and put my trust into something other
than Him!’ So I made a vow not to enter this way-station unless someone carried
me there. So I dug a hole for myself in the sand and buried my body in it up to
my chest.He said: ‘On three conditions: we do not
carry any [provisions] with us; we do not ask [anyone] for anything; and if
someone gives something to us, we shall not accept it.’ They answered: ‘As for
not carrying anything with us, yes; as for not asking for anything, yes; however,
as for not accepting anything, we cannot do this.’ He told them: ‘You should set
out with trust in [God’s] providing for the pilgrims!’ He then told [me]: ‘Hasan,
there are three types of the poor. First, the poor one who does not ask and, if
given anything, would not accept it; this one belongs to those who subsist by
[their] spirits. Second, the poor one who does not ask for anything, but, if given
anything, would accept it; for such people tables [of food] will be set in the

Then I
thought to myself: ‘I have found respite and put my trust into something other
than Him!’ So I made a vow not to enter this way-station unless someone carried
me there. So I dug a hole for myself in the sand and buried my body in it up to
my chest. In the middle of the night [the inhabitants of the way-station] heard a
voice saying: ‘O people of the way-station, one of the friends of God Most High
has buried himself in the sand. Go to him!’ So a group of people came to me. They brought me out and carried me to the way-station.”//246
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard Muhammad b. Hasan al-Makhzumi say: I heard Ibn al-Maliki say: Abu
Hamza al-Khurasani said: “One year I went on the pilgrimage. As I was walking
along the road, I fell into a well. My soul prompted me to cry for help. However,
I said to myself: ‘No, by God, I will never cry for help!’ Before I could finish with
this thought, two men passed by the mouth of the well. One of them said to the
other: ‘Come on, let’s cover the mouth of this well lest someone fall into it.’ They
brought some reed and mats and blocked off the mouth of the well. I wanted to
cry out, then said to myself: ‘I will cry to the One Who is nearer to me than they!’
So I did not say a word. After a while, something came by, opened the mouth of
the well, and lowered its leg into the pit, as if it wanted to tell me in a growl:
‘Hold onto me!’ When I realized that this [invitation] came from Him, I grabbed
hold of it and it pulled me out. And, lo, it turned out to be a lion. Then it went
away. Suddenly [I heard] a voice, saying: ∏Abu Hamza, isn’t this better!? I have
223 That is, you neglect your obligations toward Him. 224 That is, you forfeit them in favor of God. 225 A small coin.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 187
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 187
saved you from one peril by another one!’ As I continued on my way, I recited
[the following verses]:
I am afraid to show You what I try to conceal, while my innermost self
reveals what my gaze relates to it
My shame before You forbade me to conceal my passion
By giving me understanding of Yourself You allowed me
to be rid of a veil [between You and me]
You treated me gently by exposing my outer self to
my hidden one and gentleness was achieved through another
gentleness
You showed Yourself to me in the realm of the unseen, as
If You wanted to intimate to me that You were within my grasp
When I saw you, my awe of You made me feel lonely
Then You became my intimate friend by showing me Your kindness
and affection
You revived [Your] lover after he had died from love of You
Thus, life and death rub shoulders: this is indeed a marvelous thing!”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Hasan – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard
Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard Abu Sa∏id al-Taharti say: I heard Hudhayfa
al-Mar∏ashi – a servant and companion of Ibrahim b. Adham – say that someone
asked him:226 “What is the most marvelous thing you ever saw from him?” He
answered://247 “We were on our way to Mecca without finding anything to eat
for many days. Finally, we reached Kufa and took shelter in a ruined mosque.
Ibrahim b. Adham looked at me and said: ‘Hudhayfa, I see that you are hungry.’
I replied: ‘Yes, you are right.’ He asked me to bring him some paper and writing
utensils. When I brought them to him, he wrote: ‘In the name of God, the
Compassionate, the Merciful. You are the One who is sought after in every state
and pointed to by every sign:
I praise [You], I thank [You], and I remember Your name
And yet I am hungry, thirsty, and naked
These are six qualities: I am responsible for half of them,
So take responsibility for the other half, O Maker
Should I praise anyone but You, I will be plunged into a raging fire
Hold back Your servant from entering the fire
My asking You is like being in the fire for me
I wonder if You would force me to enter the fire?’
He gave me that piece of paper, saying: ‘Go out and do not allow your heart
to attach itself to anyone, except God Most High. Give this paper to the first
person you meet.’ I went out and the first person whom I met was a man on a
226 That is, al-Mar∏ashi.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 188
188 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
mule. I gave him the paper. He took it and started to cry. He then asked me:
‘Where is the one who wrote this?’ I answered that he was in such-and-such
mosque. He gave me a purse with six hundred dinars. When I met another man
I asked him who the man on the mule was. He answered that he was a Christian.
I returned to Ibrahim b. Adham and told him the story. He told me: ‘Do not
touch it [the purse], for he will soon be here.’ After a short while the Christian
indeed arrived. He prostrated himself in front of Ibrahim b. Adham and became
a Muslim.”
Gratitude (shukr)
God – may He be great and exalted – said: “If you are grateful, surely I will
increase you.”227Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan [al-Ahwazi] told us: Abu
πl-Hasan//248 al-Saffar informed us: al-Asqati told us: Minjab told us: Yahya b.
Ya∏la told us on the authority of Abu Khabab, on the authority of ∏Ataπ: “I came
to see ∏Aπisha – may God be pleased with her – with ∏Ubayd b. ∏Umayr. I said:
‘Tell us of the most wondrous thing you ever saw of the Messenger of God –
may God bless and greet him.’ She wept and asked: ‘Was there anything he did
that was not wondrous? He came to me one night and went to bed with me (or
perhaps she said: ‘under the bedclothes with me’), so that his skin would touch
mine. He then asked: “O daughter of Abu Bakr, let me worship my Lord.”’ She
said: ‘I told him that I loved being close to him. Then I let him go. He stood
up and went to a water-skin to perform his ablutions. He poured out much
water. He then began to pray. [As he was praying] he wept profusely so that
his tears began to stream down his chest. He wept as he was bending; he wept
as he was prostrating himself; he wept as he raised his head [after finishing a
prayer cycle]. He did so, until Bilal228 came and called him to utter the call to
prayer. I asked him: “Messenger of God, what makes you weep after God has
forgiven you all your past and future sins?” He asked me: “Am I not a grateful
servant? How can I not weep after God has revealed to me this verse: ‘Surely
in the creation of the heavens and the earth … [are signs for a people who
understand].’”’”229
The master [al-Qushayri] said: “The True Reality of gratitude, according
to the people of true realization (ahl al-tahqiq)230 is to recognize humbly the
beneficence of the Benefactor, for God – praise be to Him – called Himself “The
Grateful” (al-shakur) in an allegorical sense, not in a real one. This means that
He rewards His servants for their gratitude. He thus described His reward for
227 Q. 14:7.
228 A black (Abyssinian) Companion of the Prophet, who was famous for his beautiful voice and
who therefore was appointed to perform the call to prayer in the first Muslim community at
Medina.
229 Q. 2:164; 2:158, according to Arberry’s translation.
230 That is, accomplished Sufi masters.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 189
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 189
the gratitude of His servants, as [His own] gratitude in the same way as He said
[about evildoers]: ‘The recompense of evil is evil.’”231
It is said that God Most High’s gratitude consists of His giving an abundant
reward for even a minor [good] deed, as in the [Arabic] phrase, “a grateful
beast of burden”, [which is said] when it accumulates more fat in comparison to
the [small] amount of fodder given to it. One can say that the True Reality of
gratitude is to praise the Benefactor by mentioning His beneficence. Likewise, the
servant’s praise of God Most High consists of his mentioning His beneficence
toward him. As for the servant’s beneficence, it consists of obeying God Most
High. As for God’s beneficence, it consists of His bestowal upon the servant//249
of the ability to [express] his gratitude to Him. The gratitude of the servant in its
true sense is when he acknowledges his Lord’s beneficence by his tongue, while at
the same time confirming it by his heart. Thus, gratitude falls into the following
categories: the gratitude of the tongue when the servant humbly acknowledges
God’s beneficence; the gratitude of the body and [its] limbs, which is characterized
by fidelity and service; and the gratitude of the heart when [the servant] exerts
himself on the carpet of witnessing [God] while preserving His sanctity. It is said
that the learned express their gratitude by their words; the worshipers by their
deeds; the divine gnostics by their rectitude in all of their states.Thus, gratitude falls into the following
categories: the gratitude of the tongue when the servant humbly acknowledges
God’s beneficence; the gratitude of the body and [its] limbs, which is characterized
by fidelity and service; and the gratitude of the heart when [the servant] exerts
himself on the carpet of witnessing [God] while preserving His sanctity. It is said
that the learned express their gratitude by their words; the worshipers by their
deeds; the divine gnostics by their rectitude in all of their states. Abu Bakr al-Warraq said: “Gratitude for [God’s] beneficence is bearing
witness to [God’s] gift, while preserving [God’s] sanctity.” Hamdun al-Qassar
said: “Gratitude for [God’s] beneficence is when you consider yourself to be an
uninvited guest at its feast.” Al-Junayd said: “There’s an air of imperfection
about gratitude, for [one who expresses his gratitude] seeks an increase [in divine
beneficence], while he should be content with the portion allotted to him by God
Most High.” Abu ∏Uthman [al-Hiri] said: “Gratitude is to realize one’s inability
to be grateful.” It is also said that to be grateful for gratitude is better than simple
gratitude, because you see that your gratitude stems from His giving you this
ability, and this ability is [God’s] greatest beneficence toward you. So you thank
Him for giving you [the ability] to be grateful; then you thank Him for the [gift
of the] gratitude for gratitude, and so on without end. It is said that gratitude
is to give credit humbly for the beneficence to the [true] Benefactor. Al-Junayd
said: “Gratitude is to consider yourself to be undeserving of beneficence.”
Ruwaym b. Ahmad said: “Gratitude is to exhaust your ability [to be grateful].” It
is said that the ordinary grateful person is grateful [to God] for what he has, while
the truly grateful one is grateful [to God] for what he has lost.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 188
188 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
mule. I gave him the paper. He took it and started to cry. He then asked me:
‘Where is the one who wrote this?’ I answered that he was in such-and-such
mosque. He gave me a purse with six hundred dinars. When I met another man
I asked him who the man on the mule was. He answered that he was a Christian.
I returned to Ibrahim b. Adham and told him the story. He told me: ‘Do not
touch it [the purse], for he will soon be here.’ After a short while the Christian
indeed arrived. He prostrated himself in front of Ibrahim b. Adham and became
a Muslim.”
Gratitude (shukr)
God – may He be great and exalted – said: “If you are grateful, surely I will
increase you.”227Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan [al-Ahwazi] told us: Abu
πl-Hasan//248 al-Saffar informed us: al-Asqati told us: Minjab told us: Yahya b.
Ya∏la told us on the authority of Abu Khabab, on the authority of ∏Ataπ: “I came
to see ∏Aπisha – may God be pleased with her – with ∏Ubayd b. ∏Umayr. I said:
‘Tell us of the most wondrous thing you ever saw of the Messenger of God –
may God bless and greet him.’ She wept and asked: ‘Was there anything he did
that was not wondrous? He came to me one night and went to bed with me (or
perhaps she said: ‘under the bedclothes with me’), so that his skin would touch
mine. He then asked: “O daughter of Abu Bakr, let me worship my Lord.”’ She
said: ‘I told him that I loved being close to him. Then I let him go. He stood
up and went to a water-skin to perform his ablutions. He poured out much
water. He then began to pray. [As he was praying] he wept profusely so that
his tears began to stream down his chest. He wept as he was bending; he wept
as he was prostrating himself; he wept as he raised his head [after finishing a
prayer cycle]. He did so, until Bilal228 came and called him to utter the call to
prayer. I asked him: “Messenger of God, what makes you weep after God has
forgiven you all your past and future sins?” He asked me: “Am I not a grateful
servant? How can I not weep after God has revealed to me this verse: ‘Surely
in the creation of the heavens and the earth … [are signs for a people who
understand].’”’”229
The master [al-Qushayri] said: “The True Reality of gratitude, according
to the people of true realization (ahl al-tahqiq)230 is to recognize humbly the
beneficence of the Benefactor, for God – praise be to Him – called Himself “The
Grateful” (al-shakur) in an allegorical sense, not in a real one. This means that
He rewards His servants for their gratitude. He thus described His reward for
227 Q. 14:7.
228 A black (Abyssinian) Companion of the Prophet, who was famous for his beautiful voice and
who therefore was appointed to perform the call to prayer in the first Muslim community at
Medina.
229 Q. 2:164; 2:158, according to Arberry’s translation.
230 That is, accomplished Sufi masters.

Al-Junayd
said: “Gratitude is to consider yourself to be undeserving of beneficence.”
Ruwaym b. Ahmad said: “Gratitude is to exhaust your ability [to be grateful].” It
is said that the ordinary grateful person is grateful [to God] for what he has, while
the truly grateful one is grateful [to God] for what he has lost. Likewise, they say
that the ordinary grateful is grateful for a gift, while the truly grateful one is
grateful for the denial of the gift.//250 They also say that the ordinary grateful
person is grateful for beneficence, while the truly grateful is grateful for adversity. They also say that the ordinary grateful person thanks [God] at a time of
abundance, whereas the truly grateful one thanks [God] at a time of deprivation. 231 Q. 42:40; 42:37, according to Arberry’s translation.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 190
190 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard the master Abu Sahl al-Su∏luki say: I heard al-Murta∏ish say:
I heard al-Junayd say: “Once, as I was playing before al-Sari232 (I was a seven-
year-old boy at that time), his visitors began to discuss gratitude. He asked me:
‘[My] boy, what is gratitude?’ I replied: ‘That you do not disobey God with all
the beneficence He has bestowed upon you!’ He then said: ‘Soon God’s special
blessing for you will be your tongue!’” Al-Junayd used to say: “I cannot help
crying, whenever I [remember] these words uttered by al-Sari.” Al-Shibli said:
“Gratitude is when you see the Benefactor, not His beneficence.” It is said that
gratitude is preserving what one has and chasing after what is lost. Abu ∏Uthman
[al-Hiri] said: “The common people are grateful to the One Who feeds and
clothes them, whereas the elect are grateful for the [subtle] meanings that enter
their hearts.”
It is said that David – upon him be peace – said: “O my God, how can I thank
You, when my very gratitude toward You is a beneficence that comes from You?”
Then God revealed to him: “Now you have really thanked Me!” Moses – upon
him be peace – said in his intimate conversation [with God]: “My God, You
created Adam with Your hand and did this and did that … How can I thank
You?” God answered: “He knows that [all] this comes from Me, so his knowledge
of this is his [best] gratitude to Me!” It is related that someone had an intimate
friend, whom the ruler threw into prison. He wrote to his friend from there.Abu ∏Uthman
[al-Hiri] said: “The common people are grateful to the One Who feeds and
clothes them, whereas the elect are grateful for the [subtle] meanings that enter
their hearts.”
It is said that David – upon him be peace – said: “O my God, how can I thank
You, when my very gratitude toward You is a beneficence that comes from You?”
Then God revealed to him: “Now you have really thanked Me!” Moses – upon
him be peace – said in his intimate conversation [with God]: “My God, You
created Adam with Your hand and did this and did that … How can I thank
You?” God answered: “He knows that [all] this comes from Me, so his knowledge
of this is his [best] gratitude to Me!” It is related that someone had an intimate
friend, whom the ruler threw into prison. He wrote to his friend from there. The
friend responded, saying: “Be grateful to God Most High!” Then the man was
beaten [in prison] and wrote about this to his friend, who responded to him,
saying: “Be grateful to God Most High!” Then they brought to that man a
Zoroastrian with diarrhea who was put in shackles in such a way that one shackle
was attached to the Zoroastrian’s foot and the other to the foot of the man. The
Zoroastrian would get up many times during the night. Therefore, he was forced
to stand over him until he finished his business. The man wrote about this to his
friend, who responded, saying: “Be grateful to God!” The other replied: “How
long will you be saying this? Is there a trial that is worse that this?”//251 The
friend wrote back to him, saying: “If the girdle [of the infidel]233 that he wears
was put around your waist just as the shackle he wears was put around your
foot, what would you do then?!” It is said that a man came to Sahl b. ∏Abdallah
[al-Tustari] and said: “A thief broke into my house and stole my possessions!” Sahl
replied: “Be grateful to God Most High!Al-Junayd
said: “Gratitude is to consider yourself to be undeserving of beneficence.”
Ruwaym b. Ahmad said: “Gratitude is to exhaust your ability [to be grateful].” It
is said that the ordinary grateful person is grateful [to God] for what he has, while
the truly grateful one is grateful [to God] for what he has lost. Likewise, they say
that the ordinary grateful is grateful for a gift, while the truly grateful one is
grateful for the denial of the gift.//250 They also say that the ordinary grateful
person is grateful for beneficence, while the truly grateful is grateful for adversity. They also say that the ordinary grateful person thanks [God] at a time of
abundance, whereas the truly grateful one thanks [God] at a time of deprivation. 231 Q. 42:40; 42:37, according to Arberry’s translation.

Is there a trial that is worse that this?”//251 The
friend wrote back to him, saying: “If the girdle [of the infidel]233 that he wears
was put around your waist just as the shackle he wears was put around your
foot, what would you do then?!” It is said that a man came to Sahl b. ∏Abdallah
[al-Tustari] and said: “A thief broke into my house and stole my possessions!” Sahl
replied: “Be grateful to God Most High! If the other thief, that is Satan, had
entered your heart and corrupted your faith, what would you have done then?!”
It is said that the gratitude of the eyes is that you hide a fault that you see in
your friend, while the gratitude of the ears is that you hide a faulty word that you
hear from him. It is also said that gratitude is taking delight in praising Him for
what one has not deserved. 232 Al-Sari al-Saqati was al-Junayd’s uncle. See IM, pp. 50–52. 233 Non-Muslims who lived in lands under Muslim rule were required to display certain marks
(such as a girdle), which indicated their status as a protected minority.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 191
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 191
I heard al-Sulami say: I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard al-Husayn
b. Yahya say: I heard Ja∏far say: I heard al-Junayd say: “Whenever [my uncle]
al-Sari [al-Saqati] would want me to benefit from him, he would ask me: ‘Abu
πl-Qasim, what is gratitude?’ I would answer: ‘It is when you are not using anything
of His beneficence to disobey Him!’ He would ask me: ‘When did you learn this?’
I would answer: ‘During my studying with you.’”
It is said that Hasan b. ∏Ali234 once clung to a column [in the mosque of
Mecca] and said: “My God, you have bestowed blessings on me, and You do not
find me grateful! You have tested me, and You do not find me patient! Yet,
despite my being ungrateful, You have not withheld Your blessings from me
and You have not prolonged my hardship despite my being impatient! My
God, nothing but generosity comes from the Generous One!” It is said: “If
your hand is not long enough to repay [a blessing], you should [at least] stretch
your tongue in giving thanks!” It is also said that four acts bring no fruit to those
who do them: telling a secret to a deaf man, bestowing blessings on the one
who is ungrateful, sowing seeds in a salt marsh, and lighting a lamp in broad
daylight. It is said that when the prophet Idris235 – upon whom be peace – received
tidings of forgiveness [from God], he asked [God] for a [long] life. When he was
asked about this [wish], he answered: “[I need it] in order to give my gratitude
to Him, for prior to this I was working [to secure His] forgiveness.” At that
moment, an angel extended its wing and carried him to heaven. It is said that
one of the prophets – peace be upon them – passed by a small stone, from which
much water was gushing forth.Is there a trial that is worse that this?”//251 The
friend wrote back to him, saying: “If the girdle [of the infidel]233 that he wears
was put around your waist just as the shackle he wears was put around your
foot, what would you do then?!” It is said that a man came to Sahl b. ∏Abdallah
[al-Tustari] and said: “A thief broke into my house and stole my possessions!” Sahl
replied: “Be grateful to God Most High! If the other thief, that is Satan, had
entered your heart and corrupted your faith, what would you have done then?!”
It is said that the gratitude of the eyes is that you hide a fault that you see in
your friend, while the gratitude of the ears is that you hide a faulty word that you
hear from him. It is also said that gratitude is taking delight in praising Him for
what one has not deserved. 232 Al-Sari al-Saqati was al-Junayd’s uncle. See IM, pp. 50–52. 233 Non-Muslims who lived in lands under Muslim rule were required to display certain marks
(such as a girdle), which indicated their status as a protected minority.

When he was
asked about this [wish], he answered: “[I need it] in order to give my gratitude
to Him, for prior to this I was working [to secure His] forgiveness.” At that
moment, an angel extended its wing and carried him to heaven. It is said that
one of the prophets – peace be upon them – passed by a small stone, from which
much water was gushing forth. When he wondered at that, God made it speak
to him and say: “Since the moment I heard God Most High say: ‘A [hell]fire,
whose fuel is men and stones’,236I cannot help weeping out of fear!” The prophet
then prayed to God to protect that stone, whereupon God Most High//252
revealed to him: “I have already protected it from the hellfire.” The prophet
went on. When he returned, he found that water continued to gush forth from
it. When he wondered about that, God gave the stone [the gift of] speech. He
asked it: “Why do you keep weeping, after God has forgiven you?” It answered:
“That weeping was out of sadness and fear. Now I am weeping out of gratitude
and joy!”
It is said that the grateful person is always in the presence of increase,
because he constantly bears witness to [God’s] blessing, for God Most High said:
“If you are grateful, surely I will increase you.”237 And the one who is patient is
with God Most High, because he finds himself in the presence of the One Who
234 A grandson of the Prophet by his cousin ∏Ali and his daughter Fatima. The Shi∏ites consider
him their second imam. He died in 49/669. 235 A prophetic figure mentioned in the Qurπan, 19:57 and 21:85, who is usually identified with
the Biblical Elijah or Enoch. 236 Q. 66:6. 237 Q. 14:7543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 192
192 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
puts him to test, for God – may He be blessed – said: “Verily, God is with the
patient.”238
It is recounted that a delegation [of Bedouin tribes] came to ∏Umar b. ∏Abd
al-∏Aziz – may God be pleased with him. Among them was a youth. When he
started to speak, ∏Umar [interrupted him], saying: “[Let] the elders [speak
first]!” The youth objected to him saying: “O Commander of the Faithful, if this
matter239were to be determined based on one’s age, then there are among Muslims
those who are older than you!” ∏Umar ordered him to speak. He said: “We
are not a delegation of desire;240 nor are we a delegation of fear.241 As for desire,
your generosity has already fulfilled it. As for fear, your justice has protected us
from it.” ∏Umar asked him: “Who then are you?” The youth answered: “We are
a delegation of gratitude. We have come here to thank you and then to depart.”
They [the Bedouin] recited [the following]:
It’s a pity that my gratitude is silent about
Your deeds; however your goodness speaks for itself
I see your good deed, yet I conceal it
I am therefore like a thief, who steals from the hand of
The generous man.
It is said that God Most High revealed to Moses – peace be upon him: “I will
have mercy upon My servants, both those who are tested by adversity and those
who are spared from it!” He asked God: “Why those who are spared from it?”
He answered: “Because they are not grateful enough for My saving them from
it!” It is said: “Praise is due [to God] for [the gift of] breath and gratitude is
due for the blessings of the senses.” It is also said: “Praise begins with Him,
while gratitude is your following that which comes from Him.” According to
an authentic report [from the Prophet]: “Among the first ones to be invited to
Paradise are those who have been grateful to God for any state [He has put them
into].” It is also said: “Praise is due for what [God] averts [from you], while
gratitude is due for the good He does [to you].”
It is related that one Sufi said: “During one of my journeys I saw an old man
of very advanced age.//253 I asked him about his condition. He answered:
‘Early in my life I fell in love with my cousin, who reciprocated my feelings.
Eventually, we got married. On the night of our wedding we said: “Let’s spend
this night giving thanks to God Most High for uniting us!” So we spent that
night in prayer, paying no attention to each other. When the second night came,
we made the same [pledge], and for seventy or eighty years we have done so
every night. Isn’t it so, my lady?’ ‘It is just as my husband says,’ answered the
old lady.”
238 Q. 2:153, 8:46, etc.
239 That is, leadership of the Muslim community.
240 That is, one that seeks some benefit from the Caliph.
241 That is, one that came to the Caliph out of fear.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 193
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 193
Certainty (yaqin)
God Most High said: “who have certainty in what has been sent down to thee
and what has been sent down before thee, and have faith in the Hereafter.”242The
master and imam Abu Bakr Muhammad b. al-Hasan b. Furak told us: Abu Bakr
Ahmad b. Mahmud b. Khurrazadh al-Ahwazi told us at Ahwaz: Ahmad b. Sahl
b. Ayyub told us: Khalid (that is, Ibn Zayd)243told us: Sufyan al-Thawri told us
on the authority of Sharik b. ∏Abdallah, on the authority of Sufyan b. ∏Uyayna,
on the authority of Sulayman al-Taymi, on the authority of Khaythama, on the
authority of ∏Abdallah b. Mas∏ud, who said that the Prophet – may God bless
and greet him – said: “Do not be pleased, when God’s displeasure has befallen
someone; do not praise anyone for the bounty that comes from God – may He
be great and exalted; do not blame anyone for what God Most High has withheld
from you! For God’s sustenance is not given to you by the desire of the one who
desires [something for you], nor is it repelled from you by the hatred of the one
who hates [you]. Verily, God Most High in His justice and fairness has placed
[all] pleasure and delight into satisfaction and certainty, whereas He has placed
[all] sorrow and worry into doubt and displeasure.”
Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami told us: Abu Ja∏far Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Sa∏id al-Razi told us: ∏Ayyash b. Hamza told us: Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari
told us: Abu ∏Abdallah al-Antaki said: “When even the smallest [particle of]
certainty enters one’s heart, it fills the heart with light and expels whatever doubt
there is in it. Consequently, the heart becomes filled with gratitude to and fear
of God Most High.” It is related that Abu Ja∏far al-Haddad said: “Once Abu
Turab al-Nakhshabi saw me in the desert, as I was sitting next to a pond. It had
been sixteen days since I had eaten or drunk anything. He asked me why I was
sitting like that.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 192
192 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
puts him to test, for God – may He be blessed – said: “Verily, God is with the
patient.”238
It is recounted that a delegation [of Bedouin tribes] came to ∏Umar b. ∏Abd
al-∏Aziz – may God be pleased with him. Among them was a youth. When he
started to speak, ∏Umar [interrupted him], saying: “[Let] the elders [speak
first]!” The youth objected to him saying: “O Commander of the Faithful, if this
matter239were to be determined based on one’s age, then there are among Muslims
those who are older than you!” ∏Umar ordered him to speak. He said: “We
are not a delegation of desire;240 nor are we a delegation of fear.241 As for desire,
your generosity has already fulfilled it. As for fear, your justice has protected us
from it.” ∏Umar asked him: “Who then are you?” The youth answered: “We are
a delegation of gratitude. We have come here to thank you and then to depart.”
They [the Bedouin] recited [the following]:
It’s a pity that my gratitude is silent about
Your deeds; however your goodness speaks for itself
I see your good deed, yet I conceal it
I am therefore like a thief, who steals from the hand of
The generous man.
It is said that God Most High revealed to Moses – peace be upon him: “I will
have mercy upon My servants, both those who are tested by adversity and those
who are spared from it!” He asked God: “Why those who are spared from it?”
He answered: “Because they are not grateful enough for My saving them from
it!” It is said: “Praise is due [to God] for [the gift of] breath and gratitude is
due for the blessings of the senses.” It is also said: “Praise begins with Him,
while gratitude is your following that which comes from Him.” According to
an authentic report [from the Prophet]: “Among the first ones to be invited to
Paradise are those who have been grateful to God for any state [He has put them
into].” It is also said: “Praise is due for what [God] averts [from you], while
gratitude is due for the good He does [to you].”
It is related that one Sufi said: “During one of my journeys I saw an old man
of very advanced age.//253 I asked him about his condition. He answered:
‘Early in my life I fell in love with my cousin, who reciprocated my feelings.
Eventually, we got married. On the night of our wedding we said: “Let’s spend
this night giving thanks to God Most High for uniting us!” So we spent that
night in prayer, paying no attention to each other. When the second night came,
we made the same [pledge], and for seventy or eighty years we have done so
every night. Isn’t it so, my lady?’ ‘It is just as my husband says,’ answered the
old lady.”
238 Q. 2:153, 8:46, etc.
239 That is, leadership of the Muslim community.
240 That is, one that seeks some benefit from the Caliph.
241 That is, one that came to the Caliph out of fear.

It had
been sixteen days since I had eaten or drunk anything. He asked me why I was
sitting like that. I told him: ‘I am [vacillating] between knowledge and certainty,
waiting to see which of them will prevail, so that I may follow it.’ He meant to say:
‘If knowledge prevails in me, I will drink, and if certainty, I will pass on [without
drinking].’ [Abu Turab] told me: ‘A great future awaits you!’” Abu ∏Uthman
al-Hiri said: “Certainty is not to concern oneself with the morrow.”//254 Sahl
b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] said: “Certainty comes from the abundance and true
realization of faith.” He also said: “Certainty is a branch of faith, which is slightly
lower than the ultimate confirmation of [the truth] of faith (tasdiq).”244
A Sufi said: “Certainty is the knowledge deposited [by God] in the heart.”
He implied that it is not acquired [but given]. Sahl said: “Unveiling is the
beginning of certainty. That is why one of the pious ancestors said: ‘Even if the
veil is lifted, this will not increase my certainty.’ Then come direct witnessing
and contemplation [of God] (mu∏ayana wa-mushahada).” Abu ∏Abdallah b. Khafif said: “Certainty is the true realization by the innermost heart of the
realities of the Unseen.” Abu Bakr b. Tahir said: “Knowledge is acquired by way
242 Q. 2:2–4. 243 Or, “Ibn Yazid”. 244 According to scholarly consensus, tasdiq constitutes the pinnacle of faith.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 194
194 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
of opposing doubts, whereas certainty presupposes no doubt [whatsoever].” He
thus referred to both acquired knowledge and that that comes by way of intuition. The knowledge of this folk [Sufis] is like this: in the beginning it is acquired, and
in the end it comes by way of intuition. I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say that one Sufi said: “The first of
the mystical stations is knowledge (ma∏rifa), then certainty, then confirmation
(tasdiq), then sincerity (ikhlas), then [direct] witnessing (shahada), then [full]
obedience (ta∏a); and faith (iman) is the word that combines all these.” This
individual implied that the first duty [of the faithful] is to know God – praise be
to Him. This knowledge can only be obtained by fulfilling its conditions. They
begin with the correct vision; then, once the proofs begin to follow one upon the
other, clear evidence is obtained, and one begins [to see] the succession of [divine]
lights and acquires an inner vision; then one is no longer in need of contemplating
any further proofs [of God’s existence]. This is the state of certainty. This is
followed by the ultimate confirmation from the True Reality – may He be
praised – that what He promised would happen in the future in response to His
servant’s plea will indeed happen, as was promised. Because the confirmation is
the [belief by the servant] in what [God] has promised [him]. After this comes
sincerity in [the servant’s] fulfillment of God’s requirements. Then [God] shows
His response [in the form] of a beatific vision, which is followed by the [servant’s]
acts of obedience, as was prescribed to him and [his] denudation of what was
proscribed to him. This is exactly what the imam Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Furak alluded to, when I heard him say: “What the tongue utters is nothing but
what overflows the heart.” Sahl b.It had
been sixteen days since I had eaten or drunk anything. He asked me why I was
sitting like that. I told him: ‘I am [vacillating] between knowledge and certainty,
waiting to see which of them will prevail, so that I may follow it.’ He meant to say:
‘If knowledge prevails in me, I will drink, and if certainty, I will pass on [without
drinking].’ [Abu Turab] told me: ‘A great future awaits you!’” Abu ∏Uthman
al-Hiri said: “Certainty is not to concern oneself with the morrow.”//254 Sahl
b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] said: “Certainty comes from the abundance and true
realization of faith.” He also said: “Certainty is a branch of faith, which is slightly
lower than the ultimate confirmation of [the truth] of faith (tasdiq).”244
A Sufi said: “Certainty is the knowledge deposited [by God] in the heart.”
He implied that it is not acquired [but given]. Sahl said: “Unveiling is the
beginning of certainty. That is why one of the pious ancestors said: ‘Even if the
veil is lifted, this will not increase my certainty.’ Then come direct witnessing
and contemplation [of God] (mu∏ayana wa-mushahada).” Abu ∏Abdallah b. Khafif said: “Certainty is the true realization by the innermost heart of the
realities of the Unseen.” Abu Bakr b. Tahir said: “Knowledge is acquired by way
242 Q. 2:2–4. 243 Or, “Ibn Yazid”. 244 According to scholarly consensus, tasdiq constitutes the pinnacle of faith.

This is exactly what the imam Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Furak alluded to, when I heard him say: “What the tongue utters is nothing but
what overflows the heart.” Sahl b. ∏Abdallah said: “When the heart finds solace
in something other than God Most High, it is barred from smelling the fragrance
of certainty.” Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri said: “Certainty prompts the servant to cut
short his hopes [for things of this world]; cutting short one’s hopes, in turn,
prompts him to [embrace] renunciation;//255 renunciation produces wisdom,
and wisdom produces desire to ponder upon one’s fate in the Hereafter.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Baghdadi say: I heard Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri say: “There
are three signs of certainty: reducing one’s association with people in public;
avoiding praise of people for what they give [one], and restraining oneself from
censuring them when they deny [one’s request]. There are three signs of utmost
certainty (yaqin al-yaqin): looking toward God Most High in everything; having
recourse to Him in every matter; and seeking His aid in every condition.”
Al-Junayd – may God have mercy on him – said: “Certainty is the constant
presence in the heart of the knowledge that is not subject to fluctuation, change
or vacillation.” Ibn ∏Ataπ said: “People attain certainty to the same degree as they
attain fear of God. The root of fear of God is opposing that which is prohibited
[by Him], while opposing that which is prohibited is the same as opposing one’s
soul. To the extent to which they depart from their souls, they arrive at certainty.”
A Sufi said: “Certainty is but unveiling, and unveiling may be of three kinds:
unveiling by means of good tidings; unveiling by means of the demonstration of543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 195
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 195
[divine] Power; and unveiling by means of [receiving] the true realities of faith.”
Know that in the language of this folk [Sufis] “unveiling” means the appearance
of something to the heart that takes full possession of it without leaving any room
for doubt. Sometimes by “unveiling” they imply the state that is experienced by
a person who is neither awake nor asleep. The Sufis occasionally refer to this
state as “confirmation”. I heard the imam Abu Bakr b. Furak say: “I asked Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi
about something he had said. He answered: ‘I saw certain people in such and
such state.’ I asked him: ‘Did you see them with your own eyes or by unveiling?’
He answered: ‘By unveiling.’” ∏Amir b. ∏Abd Qays said: “Even if the veil were
to be removed, my certainty would not increase.” It is said that certainty is direct
vision by means of the strength of one’s faith. It is also said that certainty is the
cessation of acts of opposition [to the divine Will].//256 Al-Junayd – may God
have mercy on him – said: “Certainty is the removal of doubts through witnessing
the Unseen.”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq comment on the words of the Prophet
– may God bless and greet him – about ∏Isa b. Maryam – peace be upon him:
“Had his certainty been greater, he would have walked through the air as I
did.” [According to Abu ∏Ali,] the Prophet alluded to his own state during the
Night of Ascension,245 because one of the subtle mysteries of the Ascension is
that the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – said: “I saw Buraq246 stay
behind me, while I continued to walk on.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Ahmad b. ∏Ali b. Ja∏far say: I
heard Ibrahim b. Fatik say: I heard al-Junayd say: “I heard that someone asked
al-Sari about certitude.This is exactly what the imam Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Furak alluded to, when I heard him say: “What the tongue utters is nothing but
what overflows the heart.” Sahl b. ∏Abdallah said: “When the heart finds solace
in something other than God Most High, it is barred from smelling the fragrance
of certainty.” Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri said: “Certainty prompts the servant to cut
short his hopes [for things of this world]; cutting short one’s hopes, in turn,
prompts him to [embrace] renunciation;//255 renunciation produces wisdom,
and wisdom produces desire to ponder upon one’s fate in the Hereafter.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Baghdadi say: I heard Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri say: “There
are three signs of certainty: reducing one’s association with people in public;
avoiding praise of people for what they give [one], and restraining oneself from
censuring them when they deny [one’s request]. There are three signs of utmost
certainty (yaqin al-yaqin): looking toward God Most High in everything; having
recourse to Him in every matter; and seeking His aid in every condition.”
Al-Junayd – may God have mercy on him – said: “Certainty is the constant
presence in the heart of the knowledge that is not subject to fluctuation, change
or vacillation.” Ibn ∏Ataπ said: “People attain certainty to the same degree as they
attain fear of God. The root of fear of God is opposing that which is prohibited
[by Him], while opposing that which is prohibited is the same as opposing one’s
soul. To the extent to which they depart from their souls, they arrive at certainty.”
A Sufi said: “Certainty is but unveiling, and unveiling may be of three kinds:
unveiling by means of good tidings; unveiling by means of the demonstration of

Ja∏far say: I
heard Ibrahim b. Fatik say: I heard al-Junayd say: “I heard that someone asked
al-Sari about certitude. He answered: ‘It is your tranquility in the face of thoughts
that swarm in your breast, because you have become certain that your own
actions will neither benefit you, nor divert from you what has been predestined
for you [by God].’” I also heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard
∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali say: I heard Abu Ja∏far al-Isbahani say: I heard ∏Ali b. Sahl say:
“[Being in the] presence [of God] is better than certitude, because presence
implies permanent states, while certitude comes and goes.” It seems that he
considered certitude as the beginning stage of presence, the latter being the
continuation of the former. It also seems that he implied that there can be
certitude that is not followed by presence, while there can be no presence that is
not preceded by certitude. This is why al-Nuri said: “Certitude is nothing other
than witnessing [God].” He meant that in the process of witnessing one acquires
complete certitude, for one who has no trust in what comes from God Most
High can never witness Him. Abu Bakr al-Warraq said: “Certitude is the foundation of the heart by which
one’s faith is perfected. One knows God through certitude, while the intellect
245 See the entry “al-Israπ wa πl-mi∏radj” in EI. 246 The fabulous mount that, according to Islamic tradition, brought Muhammad from Mecca to
Jerusalem. See the previous note.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 196
196 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
keeps one away from God Most High.” Al-Junayd said: “Thanks to certainty
some people walk on water and the best of them are those who die of thirst
through their certitude.” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I
heard al-Husayn b. Yahya say: I heard Ja∏far al-Khuldi say: I heard Ibrahim
al-Khawwas say: “Once, in the middle of a trackless desert I met a youth, who
was as beautiful as an ingot of silver. I asked him about his destination. He said
that he was heading to Mecca. ‘Without provisions, camel or money?’, I asked him.
He told me: ‘O you whose certainty is weak! How can the One Who preserves
the heavens and the earth be incapable of delivering me to Mecca without any
provisions?’ Afterwards, when I arrived in Mecca, I met//257 him going around
the Ka∏ba and saying:
O my eye keep on crying incessantly,
O my soul perish of grief,
Do not love anyone except Him Who is glorious and everlasting!
“When he saw me, he asked: ‘O shaykh, is your certitude still as weak as it was
before?’” I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I
heard al-Nahrajuri say: “When the servant has realized fully the true essence
of certainty, his afflictions become his blessings and his comfort becomes his
afflictions.”
Abu Bakr al-Warraq said that certitude can be of three kinds – namely, the
certitude of good tidings [from God], the certitude of [divine] proofs, and the
certitude of witnessing [God]. Abu Turab al-Nakhshabi said: “Once I saw a
young lad walking across the desert with no provisions. I said to myself: ‘If he
has no certitude, he will surely perish.’ I then told him: ‘How can you be in such
a place with no provisions?’ He replied: ‘O shaykh, raise your head. Do you see
anyone but God – may He be great and exalted?’ I told him: ‘Now you can go
wherever you wish!’”
I heard Muhammd b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Isbahani say: I
heard Muhammad b. ∏Isa say: I heard Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz say: “Knowledge is
what makes you act and certitude is what brings you [to your goal].” I also heard
him say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard Abu ∏Uthman al-Adami say: I
heard Ibrahim al-Khawwas say: “I looked for a livelihood that would allow me to
eat licit food. So I took to fishing. One day a fish swam into my net. I took it out
and threw the net into the water once again. Another fish was trapped in it. I took
it out and cast the net [into the water] once again. Suddenly, I heard a voice saying:
‘Couldn’t you find a livelihood other than going after those who mention My
name, then killing them?!’ I tore my net apart and abandoned fishing forthwith.”
Patience (sabr)
God – may He be great and exalted – said: “And be patient; yet is thy patience
with the help of God.”247//258
247 Q. 16:127; 16:129, according to Arberry’s translation.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 197
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 197
∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Basri informed
us: Ahmad b. ∏Ali al-Kharraz informed us: Usayd b. Zayd told us: Mas∏ud b. Sa∏d
told us on the authority of al-Zayyat, on the authority of Abu Hurayra, on the
authority of ∏Aπisha – may God be pleased with her – who recounted the following
words of the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him: “Patience is to
be exercised at the first attack.” ∏Ali b. Ahmad informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd
informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Umar told us: Muhammad b. Mirdas told us: Yusuf b. ∏Atiyya told us on the authority of ∏Ataπ b. Abi Maymuna, on the authority of
Anas b. Malik – may God be pleased with him – that the Messenger of God – may
God bless and greet him – said: “Patience is to be exercised at the first shock.”
Patience can be of different sorts: patience with what one has acquired
through one’s own deeds and patience with what one has not acquired through
one’s deeds. Patience with what one has acquired can be of two kinds: endurance
of that which God Most High has commanded and endurance of that which
He has prohibited. As for patience with what one has not acquired through
one’s deeds, it is one’s endurance of the hardships decreed for one by God,
which cause one’s suffering. I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard al-Husayn b. Yahya say: I heard Ja∏far b. Muhammad say: I heard al-Junayd say: “The journey
from this world to the next is simple for the believer – relinquishing [God’s]
creatures in order to be with God is difficult, while journey from one’s self to
God Most High is even more difficult. However, patience with God is the most
difficult of all.” Someone asked al-Junayd about patience. He answered: “It is
drinking down a bitter cup without a grimace.” ∏Ali b.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 196
196 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
keeps one away from God Most High.” Al-Junayd said: “Thanks to certainty
some people walk on water and the best of them are those who die of thirst
through their certitude.” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I
heard al-Husayn b. Yahya say: I heard Ja∏far al-Khuldi say: I heard Ibrahim
al-Khawwas say: “Once, in the middle of a trackless desert I met a youth, who
was as beautiful as an ingot of silver. I asked him about his destination. He said
that he was heading to Mecca. ‘Without provisions, camel or money?’, I asked him.
He told me: ‘O you whose certainty is weak! How can the One Who preserves
the heavens and the earth be incapable of delivering me to Mecca without any
provisions?’ Afterwards, when I arrived in Mecca, I met//257 him going around
the Ka∏ba and saying:
O my eye keep on crying incessantly,
O my soul perish of grief,
Do not love anyone except Him Who is glorious and everlasting!
“When he saw me, he asked: ‘O shaykh, is your certitude still as weak as it was
before?’” I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I
heard al-Nahrajuri say: “When the servant has realized fully the true essence
of certainty, his afflictions become his blessings and his comfort becomes his
afflictions.”
Abu Bakr al-Warraq said that certitude can be of three kinds – namely, the
certitude of good tidings [from God], the certitude of [divine] proofs, and the
certitude of witnessing [God]. Abu Turab al-Nakhshabi said: “Once I saw a
young lad walking across the desert with no provisions. I said to myself: ‘If he
has no certitude, he will surely perish.’ I then told him: ‘How can you be in such
a place with no provisions?’ He replied: ‘O shaykh, raise your head. Do you see
anyone but God – may He be great and exalted?’ I told him: ‘Now you can go
wherever you wish!’”
I heard Muhammd b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Isbahani say: I
heard Muhammad b. ∏Isa say: I heard Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz say: “Knowledge is
what makes you act and certitude is what brings you [to your goal].” I also heard
him say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard Abu ∏Uthman al-Adami say: I
heard Ibrahim al-Khawwas say: “I looked for a livelihood that would allow me to
eat licit food. So I took to fishing. One day a fish swam into my net. I took it out
and threw the net into the water once again. Another fish was trapped in it. I took
it out and cast the net [into the water] once again. Suddenly, I heard a voice saying:
‘Couldn’t you find a livelihood other than going after those who mention My
name, then killing them?!’ I tore my net apart and abandoned fishing forthwith.”
Patience (sabr)
God – may He be great and exalted – said: “And be patient; yet is thy patience
with the help of God.”247//258
247 Q. 16:127; 16:129, according to Arberry’s translation.

However, patience with God is the most
difficult of all.” Someone asked al-Junayd about patience. He answered: “It is
drinking down a bitter cup without a grimace.” ∏Ali b. Abi Talib – may God be
pleased with him – said: “Patience in relation to faith is like the head in relation
to [the rest of] the body.”
Abu πl-Qasim al-Hakim said that the words of God Most High “And be
patient”248 mean a command to worship [Him] (∏ibada), while His words “Yet
is thy patience only with the help of God”249 mean [absolute] servanthood
(∏ubudiyya). He who has risen from the degree of ‘for You’ to the degree of ‘by
You’ has advanced from worship to [absolute] servanthood.”250 The Prophet –
may God greet him and bless him – said: “By You I live and by You I die.”//259
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Abu Ja∏far al-Razi
say: I heard ∏Ayyash251say: I heard Ahmad say: I asked Abu Sulayman [al-Darani]
about patience. He answered: “By God, if we cannot endure what we like, how,
then, can we endure what we dislike?!” Dhu πl-Nun said: “Patience is staying
away from acts of disobedience, keeping quiet while sipping the agonies of
248 Q. 16:127; 16:128, according to Arberry’s translation. 249 Q. 16:127; 16:128, according to Arberry’s translation. 250 That is, at the first stage, the servant seeks to please God by serving Him faithfully in
expectation of reward in the Hereafter; at the second stage, the servant performs his worship
through and by God, meaning that God becomes his sole “raison d’être”, as it were. 251 Or “∏Abbas”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 198
198 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
misfortune, and showing contentment when poverty invades the arena of [your]
livelihood.” Ibn ∏Ataπ said: “Patience is to show good manners in the face of
misfortune.” It is also said that patience is “self-annihilation in misfortune without
showing signs of discontent”.
Abu ∏Uthman [al-Hiri] said: “One is most steadfast, when one has accustomed
oneself to enduring the attacks of all manner of adversities.” It is said that
patience is to behave in adversity in the same way one behaves [in times of]
well-being. Abu ∏Uthman said: “The best reward for [one’s] worship is the
reward for [one’s] patience. There’s no higher reward. For God Most High said:
‘We shall recompense those who were patient their wage, according to the best
they did.’”252 ∏Amr b. ∏Uthman [al-Hiri] said: “Patience is to hold on to God
Most High – may He be praised – and a quiet and welcoming acceptance of the
afflictions He inflicts [on you].” [Ibrahim] al-Khawwas said: “Patience is holding
on to the commands of the Book and the [Prophet’s] custom.” Yahya b. Mu∏adh
[al-Razi] said: “The patience of lovers [of God] (muhibbin) is greater than
the patience of [world] renouncers (zahidin). I cannot fathom, how they can
persevere!” They [Sufis] recite the following:
Patience is praiseworthy under all circumstances, except patience toward
You,253for this is not praiseworthy.
Ruwaym [b. Ahmad] said: “Patience is giving up complaint.” Dhu πl-Nun said:
“Patience is seeking help [only] from God Most High.” I heard the master Abu
∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say: “Patience is like its name.”
Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami recited to me: Abu Bakr al-Razi recited
to me: Ibn ∏Ataπ recited to me [the following verse] that he composed:
I will be patient in order to please You, even though my sorrow kills me
It suffices me that You are pleased, even though my patience kills me.
Abu ∏Abdallah b. Khafif said: “There are three types of patience: one who
aspires to be patient; one who is patient; and one whose patience has no limit.”
∏Ali b. Abi Talib – may God be pleased with him – said: “Patience is a beast of
burden that never tires.”//260 I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn: I heard ∏Ali b.
∏Abdallah al-Basri, who said: “Someone came to al-Shibli and asked him: ‘Which
patience is most difficult for those who are patient?’ He answered: ‘Patience in
God – may He be great and exalted.’ The man said: ‘No.’ Al-Shibli said: ‘Patience
for [the sake of] God.’ The man said: ‘No.’ Al-Shibli said: ‘Patience with God.’
The man said: ‘No.’ ‘What is it, then?’ asked al-Shibli. ‘Patience without God,’254
answered the man. Al-Shibli let out such a loud scream that it would seem that
he nearly gave up the ghost.” I also heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I
252 Q. 16:96; 16:98, according to Arberry’s translation.
253 Or, perhaps, “from You”.
254 That is, enduring something without God’s assistance.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 199
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 199
heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. Shadhan say: I heard Muhammad al-Jurayri
say: “Patience is making no distinction between a state of blessing and a state
of suffering; in either of them, the servant’s mind remains unperturbed. To be
patient is to remain unperturbed during a trial, while experiencing the hardships
of suffering.”One Sufi recited:
I was patient and did not reveal my love for You to my patience
I concealed what You had done to me from my patience
Out of fear that my soul would secretly complain of my passion to
My tears, and they would flow without my noticing it.
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“Those who are patient have won the best of all things in both worlds: they have
found themselves in [the state of] togetherness with God, for God Most High
said: ‘Surely, God is with the patient.’”255 It is said regarding the meaning of
God Most High’s words, “O believers, be patient and persevere in your patience
and hold on to God”,256that patience is lower than persevering in patience, while
persevering in patience is lower than holding on to God. It is therefore said:
“Be patient with your souls in obeying God Most High; persevere in patience
with your hearts, while facing misfortunes for the sake of God; hold on to God
with your innermost selves in striving to God.” And it is also said: “Be patient
for the sake of God; persevere in patience by God; and hold on to God [by being]
with Him.”
It is said that God Most High revealed to David – upon whom be peace
– [the following words]: “Imitate My character traits, for one of them is that I
am the Most Patient.” It is said: “Gulp down patience in abundance, for if it kills
you, you will die as a martyr, and if it lets you live, you will live in glory.” It is
said: “Patience for the sake of God is suffering; patience by God is subsisting [in
Him]; patience in God is a trial; patience with God is faithfulness [toward Him],
and patience without God is harshness [toward you].”//261
They recite [the following verse]:
Patience without you is blameworthy in its consequences,
Whereas patience in all else is praiseworthy.
They also recite:
How can I be patient without one who resides so close to me as my right
hand to my left one
Men may trifle with many things, however, I have seen how love
trifles with them.
255 Q. 2:153; 2:148, according to Arberry’s translation.
256 Q. 3:200.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 200
200 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
It is said: “Patient perseverance in seeking [something] predicts success, while
patience in persevering trials promises deliverance.” I heard Mansur b. Khalaf
– may God have mercy on him – say: “A man was stripped for flogging with a
whip. When brought back to prison [after the flogging], he called over one of the
inmates and spat something into his palm. This turned out to be bits of silver.
They asked him about it. He answered: ‘I had two dirhams in my mouth. Among
those present there was someone who watched me. I did not want him to see
me crying out, so I kept biting these dirhams until they were pulverized in my
mouth.” It is said: “Your [spiritual] state is your stronghold, and everything
other than God Most High is your enemy. So be steadfast in the stronghold of
your state.” It is said: “Patient perseverance is being patient in being patient, until
one patience drowns in the other and patience becomes incapable of patience.”
They say about this:
He patiently persevered in patience, so that patience appealed to him
for help
The lover then called out to patience: “Patience!”
Once al-Shibli was confined to a lunatic asylum. A group of people came to visit
him. He asked them: “Who are you?” They answered: “We are those who love
you and we have come to visit you.” He started to throw stones at them and they
ran away. He then said: “O liars! If you were really those who love me, you would
have been patient, when I tried you.” According to a transmitted report, [God
said]: “I always see what those who are tested forbear for My sake.” God Most
High [also] said: “And be thou patient under the judgement of thy Lord: surely
thou art before Our eyes.”257 A Sufi said: “When I was in Mecca, I saw a poor
man258 circumambulating the House [of God].259 He took a scrap of paper out
of his pocket, looked at it, and walked on. He did the same the next day. For
several days I watched him doing the same. Finally, one day he completed another
circumambulation, looked at the paper, stepped back [from the Ka∏ba] and
suddenly fell down dead. I took the paper out of his pocket. It said: ‘And be
thou patient under the judgement of thy Lord: surely thou art before Our
eyes.’”260//262
It is related that a beardless youth was seen striking an old man in the face
with his sandal. Someone asked him: “Aren’t you ashamed? How can you beat
this old man on his cheeks in such a way?” “His sin is great,” answered the young
man. They asked: “What is that?” He answered: “This man claims that he
desires me, yet he has not seen me for three nights!” Someone said: “When
I arrived in India, I came across a one-eyed man nicknamed ‘So-and-so the
Patient’.” I asked people about his story. They said: “When this man was in the
257 Q. 52:48; 52:47, according to Arberry’s translation.
258 That is, another Sufi.
259 That is, the Ka∏ba.
260 See note 257.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 201
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 201
prime of his youth, a friend of his set out on a journey. The man came to bid him
farewell. [When he started to cry] one of his eyes shed tears, while the other
remained dry. He said to the eye that did not cry: ‘Why didn’t you weep at the
departure of my friend? I will now deprive you of seeing this world!’ He closed
his eye and has not opened it for sixty years.”
Someone commented on the words of God Most High, “So be thou patient
with a sweet patience”,261 that “sweet patience” here refers to someone who has
just been struck with an affliction without anyone taking notice of him [suffering
it]. ∏Umar b. al-Khattab – may God have mercy on him – said: “If patience
and gratitude were two camels, I would not care which one of them I rode.”
Whenever Ibn Shubruma262 found himself afflicted by trials, he used to say:
“[These are but] clouds that will [soon] disperse.” According to one report,
when someone asked the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – about faith
(iman), he answered: “Patience and generosity.” Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman
al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him – said: Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Tahir
al-Sufi informed us: Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Tijani told us: Muhammad b. Isma∏il
al-Bukhari told us: Musa b. Isma∏il told us: Suwayd b. Hatim told us: ∏Abdallah
b. ∏Ubayd told us on the authority of ∏Umayr, who related this on the authority
of his father, on the authority of his grandfather, who said that when the Prophet
– may God bless and greet him – was asked about faith, he answered: “Patience
and generosity.”
Someone asked al-Sari [al-Saqati] about patience. As he began his speech,
a scorpion crawled up his foot and stung it repeatedly with its tail. Yet he
remained still.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 200
200 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
It is said: “Patient perseverance in seeking [something] predicts success, while
patience in persevering trials promises deliverance.” I heard Mansur b. Khalaf
– may God have mercy on him – say: “A man was stripped for flogging with a
whip. When brought back to prison [after the flogging], he called over one of the
inmates and spat something into his palm. This turned out to be bits of silver.
They asked him about it. He answered: ‘I had two dirhams in my mouth. Among
those present there was someone who watched me. I did not want him to see
me crying out, so I kept biting these dirhams until they were pulverized in my
mouth.” It is said: “Your [spiritual] state is your stronghold, and everything
other than God Most High is your enemy. So be steadfast in the stronghold of
your state.” It is said: “Patient perseverance is being patient in being patient, until
one patience drowns in the other and patience becomes incapable of patience.”
They say about this:
He patiently persevered in patience, so that patience appealed to him
for help
The lover then called out to patience: “Patience!”
Once al-Shibli was confined to a lunatic asylum. A group of people came to visit
him. He asked them: “Who are you?” They answered: “We are those who love
you and we have come to visit you.” He started to throw stones at them and they
ran away. He then said: “O liars! If you were really those who love me, you would
have been patient, when I tried you.” According to a transmitted report, [God
said]: “I always see what those who are tested forbear for My sake.” God Most
High [also] said: “And be thou patient under the judgement of thy Lord: surely
thou art before Our eyes.”257 A Sufi said: “When I was in Mecca, I saw a poor
man258 circumambulating the House [of God].259 He took a scrap of paper out
of his pocket, looked at it, and walked on. He did the same the next day. For
several days I watched him doing the same. Finally, one day he completed another
circumambulation, looked at the paper, stepped back [from the Ka∏ba] and
suddenly fell down dead. I took the paper out of his pocket. It said: ‘And be
thou patient under the judgement of thy Lord: surely thou art before Our
eyes.’”260//262
It is related that a beardless youth was seen striking an old man in the face
with his sandal. Someone asked him: “Aren’t you ashamed? How can you beat
this old man on his cheeks in such a way?” “His sin is great,” answered the young
man. They asked: “What is that?” He answered: “This man claims that he
desires me, yet he has not seen me for three nights!” Someone said: “When
I arrived in India, I came across a one-eyed man nicknamed ‘So-and-so the
Patient’.” I asked people about his story. They said: “When this man was in the
257 Q. 52:48; 52:47, according to Arberry’s translation.
258 That is, another Sufi.
259 That is, the Ka∏ba.
260 See note 257.

As he began his speech,
a scorpion crawled up his foot and stung it repeatedly with its tail. Yet he
remained still. When asked why he did not brush it away, he answered: “I was
ashamed before God Most High to discourse on patience, while myself being
incapable of remaining patient.” In one report it is said: “The poor who are
patient will sit near God on the Day of Resurrection.” God Most High revealed
to one of His prophets: “I afflicted My servant with My trial, so he called upon
Me. I was slow in answering him, so he complained to Me. Then I asked him:
‘My servant! How can I have mercy on you [by relieving you] from something
with which I have mercy on you?’”263//263
Ibn ∏Uyayna commented on God’s words, “We appointed from among them
leaders guiding by Our command, when they endured patiently”,264 saying:
“When they grasped the root of this affair,265 We appointed from among them
261 Q. 70:5. 262 Son (or grandson) of a Companion of the Prophet named Shubruma, he was famous as a
transmitter of hadithand a jurist, and, at one time, the chief judge of Kufa. Ibn Shubruma
was also known for his sharp wit and tongue, and his maxims are often quoted in later Arabic
literature. He died in 144/761. 263 That is, trials are a necessary precondition for patience, which will be richly rewarded by God
in the Hereafter. By failing to be patient, the servant deprives himself of enjoying God’s
mercy in the future life. 264 Q. 32:24. 265 That is, divine command equals religion, of which patience is the root.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 202
202 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
leaders.” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “The definition of patience
is that you do not resist the [divine] decree; showing [signs] of affliction upon one’s
face does not necessarily invalidate patience, for God Most High said to Job:
‘Surely, We found him a patient man. How excellent a servant he was. He always
turned [to Us].’”266 And this is in spite of the fact that [he complained to God
elsewhere], saying “Affliction has visited me.”267I also heard him [al-Daqqaq] say:
“God extracted this phrase, namely ‘Affliction has visited me’, from Job so that
it may serve as a respite for the weak ones of this [Muslim] community.” One Sufi
said: “[God] said ‘We found him a patient man (sabir).’ He did not say ‘most patient’
(sabur), because he was not patient in all conditions; from time to time he took
delight in his affliction and enjoyed it. Whenever he took delight in his affliction
he was no longer patient. This is why [God] did not call him ‘most patient’.”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“The true essence of patience is to emerge from affliction in the same state
that you entered it. Like Job – peace be upon him – when he said at the end of
his affliction: ‘Affliction has visited me, and Thou art the most merciful of
the merciful.’268He preserved the proper manner of speech, because he made an
allusion by saying ‘Thou are the most merciful of the merciful’, instead of saying
explicitly ‘[God] have mercy on me’.”
Know that there are two kinds of patience: the patience of the worshipers
(∏abidin) and the patience of lovers [of God] (muhibbin). As for the patience of the
worshipers, it is best that it be preserved; as for the patience of the lovers, it is
best that it be abandoned. They have this meaning in mind when they recite:
On the day of separation it became clear that his resolve
To be patient was but an idle illusion.
The master Abu ∏Ali implied the same meaning when he said: “Jacob//264 –
peace be upon him – woke up after he had promised himself to be patient, saying:
‘[Come] sweet patience’,269that is, ‘Mine is sweet patience’, and yet even before
evening had come, he uttered: ‘Ah, woe is me for Joseph!’”270
Awareness [of God] (muraqaba)271
God Most High said: “God is watchful over everything.”272 Abu Nu∏aym
∏Abd al-Malik b. al-Hasan b. Muhammad told us: Abu ∏Awana Ya∏qub b. Ishaq
266 Q. 38:44.
267 Q. 21:83.
268 Q. 21:83.
269 Q. 12:83.
270 Q. 12:84.
271 This Sufi term may mean both “self-examination” by the Sufi of his inner thoughts and
intentions and his constant awareness of God’s observing him. See, e.g., Chittick, Sufi Path of
Knowledge, p. 348.
272 Q. 33:52.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 203
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 203
informed us: Yusuf b. Sa∏id b. Muslim told us: Khalid b. Yazid told us: Isma∏il b. Abi Khalid told us on the authority of Qays b. Abi Hazim, on the authority of Jarir
b. ∏Abdallah al-Bajali: “[The Archangel] Gabriel came to the Prophet – may God
bless and greet him – in the image of a man and asked: ‘Muhammad, what is
faith (iman)?’ He answered: ‘To believe in God and His angels, His books, His
messengers, and [His] decree (qadar) – be it good or bad, sweet or bitter [for
you].’ The man said: ‘You have spoken the truth.’ He [al-Bajali] said: ‘We were
surprised that someone would declare the Prophet – may God bless and greet
him – to be truthful, for he [first] asked him a question, [then] declared his
answer to be truthful.’ The man then said: ‘Tell me, what is Islam273?’ The Prophet
answered: ‘Islam is to perform your prayer(s), give alms, fast [during the month]
of Ramadan, and to perform the pilgrimage to the House [of God].’ The man
said: ‘You have spoken the truth.’ He then said: ‘Tell me what is doing the
beautiful (ihsan)274?’ The Prophet answered: ‘To worship God as if you see
Him, for even though you may not see Him, He [always] sees you.’” [Here the
Prophet] alluded to the state of awareness [of God], for awareness is the servant’s
knowledge that [his] Lord – praise be to Him – is always watching him. The
servant’s perseverance in this knowledge is nothing but his awareness of his
Lord, which is the source of all good for him. He will arrive at this stage only
after he has completed the stage of self-scrutiny (muhasaba).543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 202
202 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
leaders.” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “The definition of patience
is that you do not resist the [divine] decree; showing [signs] of affliction upon one’s
face does not necessarily invalidate patience, for God Most High said to Job:
‘Surely, We found him a patient man. How excellent a servant he was. He always
turned [to Us].’”266 And this is in spite of the fact that [he complained to God
elsewhere], saying “Affliction has visited me.”267I also heard him [al-Daqqaq] say:
“God extracted this phrase, namely ‘Affliction has visited me’, from Job so that
it may serve as a respite for the weak ones of this [Muslim] community.” One Sufi
said: “[God] said ‘We found him a patient man (sabir).’ He did not say ‘most patient’
(sabur), because he was not patient in all conditions; from time to time he took
delight in his affliction and enjoyed it. Whenever he took delight in his affliction
he was no longer patient. This is why [God] did not call him ‘most patient’.”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“The true essence of patience is to emerge from affliction in the same state
that you entered it. Like Job – peace be upon him – when he said at the end of
his affliction: ‘Affliction has visited me, and Thou art the most merciful of
the merciful.’268He preserved the proper manner of speech, because he made an
allusion by saying ‘Thou are the most merciful of the merciful’, instead of saying
explicitly ‘[God] have mercy on me’.”
Know that there are two kinds of patience: the patience of the worshipers
(∏abidin) and the patience of lovers [of God] (muhibbin). As for the patience of the
worshipers, it is best that it be preserved; as for the patience of the lovers, it is
best that it be abandoned. They have this meaning in mind when they recite:
On the day of separation it became clear that his resolve
To be patient was but an idle illusion.
The master Abu ∏Ali implied the same meaning when he said: “Jacob//264 –
peace be upon him – woke up after he had promised himself to be patient, saying:
‘[Come] sweet patience’,269that is, ‘Mine is sweet patience’, and yet even before
evening had come, he uttered: ‘Ah, woe is me for Joseph!’”270
Awareness [of God] (muraqaba)271
God Most High said: “God is watchful over everything.”272 Abu Nu∏aym
∏Abd al-Malik b. al-Hasan b. Muhammad told us: Abu ∏Awana Ya∏qub b. Ishaq
266 Q. 38:44.
267 Q. 21:83.
268 Q. 21:83.
269 Q. 12:83.
270 Q. 12:84.
271 This Sufi term may mean both “self-examination” by the Sufi of his inner thoughts and
intentions and his constant awareness of God’s observing him. See, e.g., Chittick, Sufi Path of
Knowledge, p. 348.
272 Q. 33:52.

The
servant’s perseverance in this knowledge is nothing but his awareness of his
Lord, which is the source of all good for him. He will arrive at this stage only
after he has completed the stage of self-scrutiny (muhasaba). For when he takes
account of what he has done in the past, corrects his [inner] state in the present,
follows the path of Truth, takes good care of his heart in dealing with God Most
High, stays with God Most High in every breath he makes, and observes God
Most High in all his states, he will then realize that God – praise be to Him – is
watching over him, that He is close to his heart, that He knows [all] his states,
watches [all] his actions and hears [all] he says. Whosoever neglects all of this is
shut off from attaining God, not to mention from the true realities of closeness
[with Him]. I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard al-Jurayri say: “Whosoever has
not firmly established [God-fearing] piety and [constant] awareness between
himself and God Most High will never attain unveiling and witnessing.” I heard
the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say://265
“A ruler once had a vizier. One day, when the vizier was standing before him,
he turned to one of the ruler’s slaves present there, not out of suspicion but
because of a noise or movement that he sensed from them. It so happened
that at that very moment the ruler looked at the vizier. The latter was afraid
that the ruler would imagine that he looked at them out of suspicion, therefore
he continued to look sideways. From that day on, whenever the vizier entered
in the ruler’s presence he would always look to the side, so that the ruler
thought that this was part of his inborn character. Now, this is one creature’s
273 That is, submission to God. 274 This word is sometimes translated as “beneficence”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 204
204 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
awareness of another creature. What, then, should be the servant’s awareness of
his [divine] Master?”
I heard a Sufi say: “One ruler had a slave, whom he liked more than his other
slaves, although he was neither more valuable, nor more handsome than the rest. When people asked him about this, he decided to show them that that slave’s
service was superior to that of his other slaves. One day he was riding with his
entourage. In the distance was a snow-capped mountain. The ruler looked at the
mountain, then lowered his head. [Suddenly,] the slave urged his horse to run
and galloped off. The people [in the entourage] did not know why he did so. After a short while the slave returned carrying with him some ice. The ruler asked
him: ‘How did you know that I wanted ice?’ The slave replied: ‘You glanced at
it [the mountain], and the glance of the ruler is always for a purpose.’ The ruler
said: ‘I have singled him out for favor and liking, because for everyone there is
an occupation, and his occupation is to take note of my glances and to be aware
of my moods.’”
A Sufi said: “Whosoever is aware of God in his thoughts, God will protect
his limbs [from any sin].” Someone asked Abu πl-Husayn b. Hind: “When does
the shepherd chase his sheep away from the pastures of perdition by the staff of
protection?” He answered: “When he knows that he is [himself] being watched.”
It is related that Ibn ∏Umar275– may God be pleased with him – was on a journey,
when he saw a slave tending some sheep. Ibn ∏Umar asked him whether he would
sell him one sheep.Hind: “When does
the shepherd chase his sheep away from the pastures of perdition by the staff of
protection?” He answered: “When he knows that he is [himself] being watched.”
It is related that Ibn ∏Umar275– may God be pleased with him – was on a journey,
when he saw a slave tending some sheep. Ibn ∏Umar asked him whether he would
sell him one sheep. The slave answered: “These sheep are not mine.” Ibn ∏Umar
told him: “Then tell the owner that it was taken by a wolf.” The slave exclaimed:
“And how about God?” From that time on, Ibn ∏Umar would always say: “That
slave said: ‘How about God?’”
Al-Junayd said: “He who has achieved perfection in awareness fears the loss of
favor only from his Lord and no one else.” One Sufi master had many disciples. However, he would always single out one of them for his favors and affection
over anyone else. When some folk asked him about this, he said: “I will explain
this to you.” He gave each of his disciples a bird and instructed them: “Slaughter
this bird so that no one can see [you doing this].” The disciples went away. When
they returned each of them brought with him a slaughtered bird. Only [the
master’s favorite disciple] brought back his bird alive. The master asked him why
he did not kill it. He answered: “You ordered me to slaughter it, so that no one
would see this. However, I could not find a place where no one would see me.”
The master said: “This is why I singled him out for my favor and affection!”
Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri said: “One sign of awareness is to give preference to what
is preferred by God Most High and to glorify what God Most High glorifies,
while denigrating what God Most High denigrates.”//266 Al-Nasrabadhi said:
“Hope prompts you to obedience; fear [of God] distances you from disobedience;
awareness [of God] leads to the paths of true realities.” I heard Muhammad b. 275 ∏Abdallah b. ∏Umar, son of the second rightly guided caliph ∏Umar.The
servant’s perseverance in this knowledge is nothing but his awareness of his
Lord, which is the source of all good for him. He will arrive at this stage only
after he has completed the stage of self-scrutiny (muhasaba). For when he takes
account of what he has done in the past, corrects his [inner] state in the present,
follows the path of Truth, takes good care of his heart in dealing with God Most
High, stays with God Most High in every breath he makes, and observes God
Most High in all his states, he will then realize that God – praise be to Him – is
watching over him, that He is close to his heart, that He knows [all] his states,
watches [all] his actions and hears [all] he says. Whosoever neglects all of this is
shut off from attaining God, not to mention from the true realities of closeness
[with Him]. I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard al-Jurayri say: “Whosoever has
not firmly established [God-fearing] piety and [constant] awareness between
himself and God Most High will never attain unveiling and witnessing.” I heard
the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say://265
“A ruler once had a vizier. One day, when the vizier was standing before him,
he turned to one of the ruler’s slaves present there, not out of suspicion but
because of a noise or movement that he sensed from them. It so happened
that at that very moment the ruler looked at the vizier. The latter was afraid
that the ruler would imagine that he looked at them out of suspicion, therefore
he continued to look sideways. From that day on, whenever the vizier entered
in the ruler’s presence he would always look to the side, so that the ruler
thought that this was part of his inborn character. Now, this is one creature’s
273 That is, submission to God. 274 This word is sometimes translated as “beneficence”.

275 ∏Abdallah b. ∏Umar, son of the second rightly guided caliph ∏Umar. One of the most
prominent personalities in the first generation of the Muslims, he died in 74/693.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 205
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 205
al-Husayn say: Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Baghdadi said: I asked Ja∏far b. Nusayr about
awareness [of God]. He answered: “[It is] watching over your innermost self,
because of your awareness that God – praise be to Him – watches [your] every
thought.” I also heard him say: I heard Abu πl-Hasan al-Farisi say: I heard al-Jurayri
say: “This cause of ours [Sufis] rests on two foundations: you accustom your soul
to be aware of God Most High and you know that [the Divine Law] is visible
in your actions.” I also heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard
Abu πl-Qasim al-Baghdadi say: I heard al-Murta∏ish say: “Awareness [of God] is
watching over your innermost heart by taking note of the Unseen with every
breath and every phrase.” Ibn ∏Ataπ was asked what was the best act of obedience
[to God]. He answered: “Being constantly aware of God.” Ibrahim al-Khawwas
said: “Watchfulness brings about awareness [of God], and awareness brings about
the dedication to God Most High of one’s innermost self and one’s outward
[actions].”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi say: “The best things that man has
come to observe as he travels along this [Sufi] path are: self-scrutiny, awareness
[of God], and guiding his actions by the knowledge [of the Divine Law].” I also
heard him say: I heard ∏Abdallah al-Razi say: I heard Abu ∏Uthman [al-Maghribi]
say: “Abu Hafs [al-Haddad] told me: ‘When you preside [over an assembly
of students], make sure to exhort your own heart and soul. Do not allow their
attending your lecture to beguile you, for they are aware of your exterior, whereas
God is aware of your interior.’” I heard him say: I heard Muhammad b.He answered: “Being constantly aware of God.” Ibrahim al-Khawwas
said: “Watchfulness brings about awareness [of God], and awareness brings about
the dedication to God Most High of one’s innermost self and one’s outward
[actions].”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi say: “The best things that man has
come to observe as he travels along this [Sufi] path are: self-scrutiny, awareness
[of God], and guiding his actions by the knowledge [of the Divine Law].” I also
heard him say: I heard ∏Abdallah al-Razi say: I heard Abu ∏Uthman [al-Maghribi]
say: “Abu Hafs [al-Haddad] told me: ‘When you preside [over an assembly
of students], make sure to exhort your own heart and soul. Do not allow their
attending your lecture to beguile you, for they are aware of your exterior, whereas
God is aware of your interior.’” I heard him say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah
say: I heard Abu Ja∏far al-Saydalani say: I heard Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz say: “One
of my masters told me: ‘You must watch over your innermost self and be aware
[of God].’ One day, as I was traveling in the desert, I heard a noise behind me that
frightened me. I wanted to turn around [to see what it was]. However, I did not. Then I saw something [hovering] over my shoulder. I kept watching over my
inner self, and it finally went away. I turned around, and saw a huge lion.”
Al-Wasiti said: “The best act of obedience [to God] is watching over the
moments.” This means that one should not look beyond the limit set [to one
by God]; that one should not be aware of anyone but one’s Lord; and that one
should keep company only with one’s own [mystical] moment (waqt). Satisfaction (rida)
God Most High said: “God is well-pleased with them and they are well-pleased
with Him.”276
∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi – may God have mercy on him – informed us:
Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Basri told us: al-Kuraymi277 told us: “Ya∏qub b.275 ∏Abdallah b. ∏Umar, son of the second rightly guided caliph ∏Umar. One of the most
prominent personalities in the first generation of the Muslims, he died in 74/693.

Ahmad al-Ahwazi – may God have mercy on him – informed us:
Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Basri told us: al-Kuraymi277 told us: “Ya∏qub b. Isma∏il
al-Sallal told us: Abu ∏Asim al-∏Abbadani told us on the authority of al-Fadl b. 276 Q. 5:119; cf. 9:100; 9:97 according to Arberry’s translation. 277 In another reading, “al-Kudaymi”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 206
206 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
∏Isa al-Raqashi, on the authority of Muhammad b. al-Munkadir, on the authority
of Jabir, who related that the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him
– said: “When the people of Paradise will gather together, a light will shine on
them from the gate of Paradise. They will raise their heads and see their Lord
Most High looking down upon them. He will say: ‘O people of Paradise, ask of
Me!’ They will say: ‘We desire that You be pleased with us.’ God Most High will
reply: ‘My pleasure has settled you in this abode of mine and bestowed My
mercy upon you! The time has come, ask Me again!’ They will say: ‘We ask you
for more!’” He [the Prophet] said: “They will be given noble steeds made of
rubies with reins studded with green emeralds and rubies. They will ride upon
these steeds, which will, with each step, set their hooves as far as their eye can
see. Then God – praise be to Him – will command that trees with fruit upon
them be brought there. Then maidens of Paradise (houries) will come to them,
saying: ‘We are the blessed ones, who are free from any fault; we are also
eternal, we never die; we are mates for noble believing folk.’ Then God – praise
be to Him – will order piles of white sweet-smelling musk to be delivered and
they will be stimulated by a fragrant wind called ‘the Arouser’ (muthir) until they
reach the Garden of Eden, which is the very heart of Paradise. The angels will
announce: ‘O our Lord, the folk have arrived!’ and God will say: ‘Welcome to
the truthful ones, welcome to the obedient ones!’” He [the Prophet] said: “The
veil will be lifted for them and they will see God – may He be great and exalted
– and they will enjoy the light of the All-Compassionate so that they will no
longer see one another.Then maidens of Paradise (houries) will come to them,
saying: ‘We are the blessed ones, who are free from any fault; we are also
eternal, we never die; we are mates for noble believing folk.’ Then God – praise
be to Him – will order piles of white sweet-smelling musk to be delivered and
they will be stimulated by a fragrant wind called ‘the Arouser’ (muthir) until they
reach the Garden of Eden, which is the very heart of Paradise. The angels will
announce: ‘O our Lord, the folk have arrived!’ and God will say: ‘Welcome to
the truthful ones, welcome to the obedient ones!’” He [the Prophet] said: “The
veil will be lifted for them and they will see God – may He be great and exalted
– and they will enjoy the light of the All-Compassionate so that they will no
longer see one another. God will tell [the angels]: ‘Return them to their palaces
with precious gifts!’” He [the Prophet] said: “They will be brought back, and will
be able to see one another.” The Messenger of God – may God bless and greet
him – said: “This is what God Most High meant, when he said: ‘Hospitality278
from One All-Forgiving, One All-Compassionate.’”279
The Iraqis and the Khurasanians disagree regarding satisfaction: is it a
mystical state or a mystical station?280 The Khurasanians say that satisfaction
is a station, and that it is the ultimate point of [the station of] trust in God
(tawakkul). That is, it is one of those things that a servant of God acquires through
his own effort. The Iraqis, on the other hand, say that satisfaction is a state and
that it is not acquired by the servant. It is a phenomenon that descends upon the
heart of the servant and dwells in it as all other states.//268 One can combine
these two teachings and say: “At the beginning [of the Sufi path], the servant
acquires satisfaction, so it is a station, while in the end it becomes a state, and,
therefore, can no longer be acquired.Ahmad al-Ahwazi – may God have mercy on him – informed us:
Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Basri told us: al-Kuraymi277 told us: “Ya∏qub b. Isma∏il
al-Sallal told us: Abu ∏Asim al-∏Abbadani told us on the authority of al-Fadl b. 276 Q. 5:119; cf. 9:100; 9:97 according to Arberry’s translation. 277 In another reading, “al-Kudaymi”.

The Iraqis, on the other hand, say that satisfaction is a state and
that it is not acquired by the servant. It is a phenomenon that descends upon the
heart of the servant and dwells in it as all other states.//268 One can combine
these two teachings and say: “At the beginning [of the Sufi path], the servant
acquires satisfaction, so it is a station, while in the end it becomes a state, and,
therefore, can no longer be acquired. When different people discourse about
satisfaction, each one conveys his own state and his own share of experience. This
is why they differ from one another when they discuss it, for their experiences
and their portions of it are diverse. As for religious knowledge (∏ilm), it stipulates
278 Or “provision”. 279 Q. 41:32. 280 For a discussion of the differences between mystical states and stations see IM, pp. 303–309.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 207
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 207
unconditionally that the person who is satisfied with God’s [will] should never
oppose what has been decreed for him [by God].”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “Satisfaction is not that you
remain immune to affliction; it is that you do not oppose [divine] judgement
and decree. Know that it is incumbent upon the servant to be satisfied with the
[divine] decree, with which he has been ordered [by God] to be satisfied. For not
everything that constitutes [the divine] decree requires or permits the servant’s
satisfaction – for instance, disobedience and various trials [prescribed by God] to
the Muslim community. The Sufi masters have said: “Satisfaction is the greatest
gate of God.” They imply that he who is graced by satisfaction will receive God’s
most perfect welcome and will be granted the highest proximity [with Him]. I
heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: Abu Ja∏far
al-Razi informed us: al-∏Abbas b. Hamza said: Ibn Abi πl-Hawari told us: ∏Abd
al-Wahid b. Zayd said: “Satisfaction is the greatest door of God and Paradise
on earth.”
Know that the servant will never be satisfied with God – praise be to Him
– until after God – praise be to Him – is satisfied with him, for God – may He
be great and exalted – said: “God is well-pleased with them and they are well-
pleased with him.”281 I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “A disciple
asked his master: ‘Does the servant know whether God Most High is satisfied with
him?’ The master answered: ‘No, how can he know that, when His satisfaction
[belongs to] the Unknown (ghayb)?’ The disciple objected, saying: ‘Yes, he can
know that.’ The master asked how that could be.Hamza said: Ibn Abi πl-Hawari told us: ∏Abd
al-Wahid b. Zayd said: “Satisfaction is the greatest door of God and Paradise
on earth.”
Know that the servant will never be satisfied with God – praise be to Him
– until after God – praise be to Him – is satisfied with him, for God – may He
be great and exalted – said: “God is well-pleased with them and they are well-
pleased with him.”281 I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “A disciple
asked his master: ‘Does the servant know whether God Most High is satisfied with
him?’ The master answered: ‘No, how can he know that, when His satisfaction
[belongs to] the Unknown (ghayb)?’ The disciple objected, saying: ‘Yes, he can
know that.’ The master asked how that could be. The disciple answered: ‘If I
find my heart satisfied with God Most High, I learn that He too is satisfied with
me!’ The master said: ‘You have spoken well, young man!’”
It is said that Moses – peace be upon him – said: “My God, show me an
action that I could perform in order to satisfy You.” God answered: “You will
be unable to bear it.” Moses – peace be upon him – prostrated himself before
God and implored Him. Then God, Most High revealed to him: “O son of
∏Imran, My satisfaction lies in your satisfaction with My decree!”
Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman – may God have mercy on him – said: Abu
Ja∏far al-Razi said: al-∏Abbas b. Hamza said: Ibn Abi πl-Hawari said: I heard Abu
Sulayman al-Darani//269 say: “When the servant has abandoned his passions,
he will be satisfied.” I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: “Whoever wants to attain
the abode of satisfaction must adhere to that which satisfies God.” Muhammad
b. Khafif said: “There are two kinds of satisfaction: satisfaction with Him and
satisfaction with what comes from Him.The Iraqis, on the other hand, say that satisfaction is a state and
that it is not acquired by the servant. It is a phenomenon that descends upon the
heart of the servant and dwells in it as all other states.//268 One can combine
these two teachings and say: “At the beginning [of the Sufi path], the servant
acquires satisfaction, so it is a station, while in the end it becomes a state, and,
therefore, can no longer be acquired. When different people discourse about
satisfaction, each one conveys his own state and his own share of experience. This
is why they differ from one another when they discuss it, for their experiences
and their portions of it are diverse. As for religious knowledge (∏ilm), it stipulates
278 Or “provision”. 279 Q. 41:32. 280 For a discussion of the differences between mystical states and stations see IM, pp. 303–309.

Hamza said: Ibn Abi πl-Hawari said: I heard Abu
Sulayman al-Darani//269 say: “When the servant has abandoned his passions,
he will be satisfied.” I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: “Whoever wants to attain
the abode of satisfaction must adhere to that which satisfies God.” Muhammad
b. Khafif said: “There are two kinds of satisfaction: satisfaction with Him and
satisfaction with what comes from Him. Satisfaction with Him is when one is
satisfied with His arrangement of affairs, while satisfaction with that which
comes from Him is [satisfaction] with His decree.” I heard the master Abu
∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “The path of the travelers is longer, because it is the path of
self-discipline. The path of the elect is shorter, but it is more difficult because
it presupposes that you act to satisfy Him and that you are satisfied with His
281 Q. 5:119; cf. 9:100, 9:97, according to Arberry’s translation.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 208
208 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
decree.” Ruwaym [b. Ahmad] said: “Satisfaction is that God has placed Gehenna282
to one’s right side, yet one does not ask God to move it to his left side.”
Abu Bakr b. Tahir said: “Satisfaction is removing loathing from one’s heart,
so that there will be nothing in it except happiness and joy.” Al-Wasiti said:
“Make use of satisfaction to your uttermost, but do not let satisfaction make use
of you, lest you may become veiled [from God] by its sweetness, and by your
vision of it from the True Reality of that which you contemplate.” Know that
al-Wasiti’s phrase is of great importance. It contains a warning about a hidden
danger that awaits this folk.283 Their preoccupation with [spiritual] states may
veil them from the One Who brings about these states. A person who delights in
his [state of] satisfaction and whose heart takes pleasure in it, may become veiled
by his state from contemplating the Real. Likewise, al-Wasiti said: “Beware of
indulging in the acts of piety! They are a deadly poison.”
Ibn Khafif said: “Satisfaction is the heart’s preoccupation with divine decrees
and its agreement with what pleases God and that which He has chosen for
it.” Someone asked Rabi∏a al-∏Adawiyya: “When will the servant [of God] be
satisfied?” She said: “When he rejoices at afflictions as much as he rejoices at
bounty.” Al-Shibli said in the presence of al-Junayd: “There’s no power or
might except by God!” Al-Junayd told him: “These words of yours show a soul
gripped with distress and your distress comes from your abandoning satisfaction
with God’s decree.” Al-Shibli fell silent. Abu Sulayman al-Darani said: “[True]
satisfaction is when you do not ask God Most High for Paradise nor seek refuge
in Him from the hellfire.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Baghdadi
say: I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Sahl say: I heard Sa∏id b.Hamza said: Ibn Abi πl-Hawari said: I heard Abu
Sulayman al-Darani//269 say: “When the servant has abandoned his passions,
he will be satisfied.” I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: “Whoever wants to attain
the abode of satisfaction must adhere to that which satisfies God.” Muhammad
b. Khafif said: “There are two kinds of satisfaction: satisfaction with Him and
satisfaction with what comes from Him. Satisfaction with Him is when one is
satisfied with His arrangement of affairs, while satisfaction with that which
comes from Him is [satisfaction] with His decree.” I heard the master Abu
∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “The path of the travelers is longer, because it is the path of
self-discipline. The path of the elect is shorter, but it is more difficult because
it presupposes that you act to satisfy Him and that you are satisfied with His
281 Q. 5:119; cf. 9:100, 9:97, according to Arberry’s translation.

Ahmad b. Sahl say: I heard Sa∏id b. ∏Uthman say: I
heard Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri//270 – may God have mercy on him – say: “There
are three signs of satisfaction: “Giving up [your] free choice in anticipation of the
[passing of] divine decree; feeling no bitterness after the decree has been passed;
and [experiencing] the excitement of love [of God] in the middle of affliction.” I
also heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard Muhammad b. Ja∏far
al-Baghdadi say: I heard Isma∏il b. Muhammad al-Saffar say: I heard Muhammad
b. Yazid al-Mubarrad say: “Someone told al-Husayn b. Ali b. Abi Talib284– may
God be pleased with both of them – that Abu Dharr285once said: ‘I like poverty
more than wealth and I like illness more than health.’ He [al-Husayn] answered:
‘May God have mercy on Abu Dharr! As for me, I say: “He who puts his trust
in that which was predetermined for him by God Most High, can desire only that
which God – may He be great and exalted – has predetermined for him.”’”
282 A place of torment, hell. This term is derived from the name of the valley of Hinnom near
Jerusalem, where refuse was burned in Biblical times. 283 That is, the Sufis. 284 The younger son of the fourth rightly guided caliph ∏Ali and the third imamof the Twelver
Shi∏ites. Soon after he made a bid for power following the death of the first Umayyad caliph
Mu∏awiyya, he and his supporters were killed by an Umayyad army at Kerbela, Iraq, in 60/680. 285 A Companion of the Prophet who was famous for his frugality and austerity of character.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 209
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 209
Al-Fudayl b. ∏Iyad told Bishr al-Hafi: “Satisfaction is better than renunciation
of this world, because he who is satisfied never aspires to anything above his
station.” Someone asked Abu ∏Uthman [al-Hiri] about the words of the Prophet
– may God bless and greet him, “I ask You to grant me satisfaction after
[Your] decree has been passed [on me].” He answered: “Because satisfaction in
anticipation of the decree is just a resolve to be satisfied, whereas satisfaction
after [the passing of] the decree is [true] satisfaction.” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd
al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard ∏Abdallah
al-Razi say: I heard Ibn Abi Hassan al-Anmati say: I heard Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari
say: I heard Abu Sulayman [al-Darani] say: “I hope to come to learn at least a small
portion of satisfaction: when He throws me into the hellfire, I will be satisfied
with this.” Abu ∏Umar al-Dimashqi said: “Satisfaction is to abandon anxiety
over [the workings of] the divine command, whatever it might be.” Al-Junayd
said: “Satisfaction is abandoning [your] free choice.” Ibn ∏Ataπ said: “Satisfaction
is directing [your] heart toward God Most High’s pre-eternal choice [of destiny] for
His servant and giving up resentment.” Ruwaym [b. Ahmad] said: “Satisfaction
is accepting divine decrees with joy.” Al-Muhasibi said: “Satisfaction is the
tranquility of the heart in the face of the stream of divine decrees.” Al-Nuri said:
“Satisfaction is that [your] heart rejoices after having tasted the bitterness of the
divine verdict.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu πl-Husayn al-Farisi say: I
heard al-Jurayri say: “Whoever is satisfied without measure, God Most High
will raise him above his limit.” I also heard him say: I heard Ahmad b. ∏Ali say:
I heard al-Hasan b.Ahmad b. Sahl say: I heard Sa∏id b. ∏Uthman say: I
heard Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri//270 – may God have mercy on him – say: “There
are three signs of satisfaction: “Giving up [your] free choice in anticipation of the
[passing of] divine decree; feeling no bitterness after the decree has been passed;
and [experiencing] the excitement of love [of God] in the middle of affliction.” I
also heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard Muhammad b. Ja∏far
al-Baghdadi say: I heard Isma∏il b. Muhammad al-Saffar say: I heard Muhammad
b. Yazid al-Mubarrad say: “Someone told al-Husayn b. Ali b. Abi Talib284– may
God be pleased with both of them – that Abu Dharr285once said: ‘I like poverty
more than wealth and I like illness more than health.’ He [al-Husayn] answered:
‘May God have mercy on Abu Dharr! As for me, I say: “He who puts his trust
in that which was predetermined for him by God Most High, can desire only that
which God – may He be great and exalted – has predetermined for him.”’”
282 A place of torment, hell. This term is derived from the name of the valley of Hinnom near
Jerusalem, where refuse was burned in Biblical times. 283 That is, the Sufis. 284 The younger son of the fourth rightly guided caliph ∏Ali and the third imamof the Twelver
Shi∏ites. Soon after he made a bid for power following the death of the first Umayyad caliph
Mu∏awiyya, he and his supporters were killed by an Umayyad army at Kerbela, Iraq, in 60/680. 285 A Companion of the Prophet who was famous for his frugality and austerity of character.

al-Husayn say: I heard Abu πl-Husayn al-Farisi say: I
heard al-Jurayri say: “Whoever is satisfied without measure, God Most High
will raise him above his limit.” I also heard him say: I heard Ahmad b. ∏Ali say:
I heard al-Hasan b. al-∏Alawayh286say: Abu Turab al-Nakhshabi said: “He whose
heart puts any value on this world will never attain satisfaction.” Shaykh Abu
∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami informed us: Abu ∏Amr b. Hamdan informed us://271
∏Abdallah b. Shiruya287 told us: Bishr b. al-Hakam told us: ∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. Muhammad told us on the authority of Yazid b. al-Hadi, on the authority of
Muhammad b. Ibrahim, on the authority of ∏Amir b. Sa∏d, on the authority of
al-∏Abbas b. ∏Abd al-Muttalib, who said that the Messenger of God – may God
bless and greet him – said: “He who is satisfied with God as his Lord has tasted
the flavor of faith.”
It is said that ∏Umar b. al-Khattab wrote a letter to Abu Musa al-Ash∏ari288–
may God be pleased with both of them – saying: “All goodness lies in satisfaction. Be satisfied, if you can; if not, then endure patiently.” It is said that ∏Utba
al-Ghulam spent the entire night until dawn saying: “If You punish me, I love
You, and if You have mercy on me, I love You.” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq say: “Man is made of potter’s clay and clay has nothing in it that
would allow it to oppose the verdict of God Most High.” Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri
said: “For forty years God – may He be great and exalted – has never placed me
286 Or “al-∏Alluya”. 287 Or, “al-Shitriyya”. 288 A Companion of the Prophet and military commander, he died after 42/662.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 210
210 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
in a state that I dislike; nor has He transferred me from that state to a state that
I would resent.” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “A man was angry
with a slave of his. The slave asked another person to intercede on his behalf
with the other man. The master pardoned him, yet the slave burst into tears. The intercessor asked him: ‘Why are you crying? Your master has pardoned
you.’ The master answered [instead of him]: ‘He wants to obtain my satisfaction,
but there is no way for him to achieve this. This is why he cries.’”
Servanthood (∏ubudiyya)
God – may He be great and exalted – said: “Serve thy Lord, until the Certainty289
comes to thee.”290 Abu πl-Hasan al-Ahwazi – may God have mercy on him –
informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Saffar informed us: ∏Ubayd b. Sharik told us:
Yahya told us: Malik told us on the authority of Habib291b. ∏Abd al-Rahman, on
the authority of Hafs b. ∏Asim b. ∏Umar b.∏Asim b. ∏Umar b. al-Khattab, on the authority of Abu
Sa∏id al-Khudri and Abu Hurayra that the Messenger of God – may God bless
and greet him – said: “Seven are those whom God will shade with His shade on
the day there will be no shade but His: a just leader (imam ∏adil), a youth raised
in the service of God Most High, a man whose heart remains attached to the
mosque from the moment he leaves it until he comes back to it, two men who
love each other for the sake of God and who come together and take leave of one
another in this condition, a man who remembers God Most High in private, his
eyes overflowing with tears, a man who responds to a beautiful woman who tries
to seduce him, saying: ‘I fear God, Lord of the worlds’, and a man who gives alms
in such secrecy that his left hand does not know what his right hand gives.”//272
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“Servanthood is more complete than worship (∏ibada); first comes worship, then
servanthood, then servitude (∏ubuda). Worship belongs to the common believers;
servanthood to the elect; and servitude to the elect of the elect.” I also heard him
say: “Worship belongs to those who possess certitude; servanthood belongs to
those who possess the essence of certainty; and servitude belongs to those who
possess the True Reality of certainty.” He also said: “Worship is for those who
strive [on the path of God] (mujahadat); servanthood is for those who subject
themselves to strictures (mukabadat); and servitude is a sign of those who witness
God (mushahadat).al-Khattab, on the authority of Abu
Sa∏id al-Khudri and Abu Hurayra that the Messenger of God – may God bless
and greet him – said: “Seven are those whom God will shade with His shade on
the day there will be no shade but His: a just leader (imam ∏adil), a youth raised
in the service of God Most High, a man whose heart remains attached to the
mosque from the moment he leaves it until he comes back to it, two men who
love each other for the sake of God and who come together and take leave of one
another in this condition, a man who remembers God Most High in private, his
eyes overflowing with tears, a man who responds to a beautiful woman who tries
to seduce him, saying: ‘I fear God, Lord of the worlds’, and a man who gives alms
in such secrecy that his left hand does not know what his right hand gives.”//272
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“Servanthood is more complete than worship (∏ibada); first comes worship, then
servanthood, then servitude (∏ubuda). Worship belongs to the common believers;
servanthood to the elect; and servitude to the elect of the elect.” I also heard him
say: “Worship belongs to those who possess certitude; servanthood belongs to
those who possess the essence of certainty; and servitude belongs to those who
possess the True Reality of certainty.” He also said: “Worship is for those who
strive [on the path of God] (mujahadat); servanthood is for those who subject
themselves to strictures (mukabadat); and servitude is a sign of those who witness
God (mushahadat). One who does not spare his soul for the sake of God is a
worshiper; one who does not withhold his heart for the sake of God is a servant;
and one who generously gives God his spirit is a possessor of servitude.” They say:
“Servanthood is practicing acts of obedience in the most ample manner, while
seeing the shortcomings of your actions and keeping in mind that whatever
virtues you might possess have been predetermined by God’s decree.” It is said:
289 Usually understood as death.al-Husayn say: I heard Abu πl-Husayn al-Farisi say: I
heard al-Jurayri say: “Whoever is satisfied without measure, God Most High
will raise him above his limit.” I also heard him say: I heard Ahmad b. ∏Ali say:
I heard al-Hasan b. al-∏Alawayh286say: Abu Turab al-Nakhshabi said: “He whose
heart puts any value on this world will never attain satisfaction.” Shaykh Abu
∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami informed us: Abu ∏Amr b. Hamdan informed us://271
∏Abdallah b. Shiruya287 told us: Bishr b. al-Hakam told us: ∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. Muhammad told us on the authority of Yazid b. al-Hadi, on the authority of
Muhammad b. Ibrahim, on the authority of ∏Amir b. Sa∏d, on the authority of
al-∏Abbas b. ∏Abd al-Muttalib, who said that the Messenger of God – may God
bless and greet him – said: “He who is satisfied with God as his Lord has tasted
the flavor of faith.”
It is said that ∏Umar b. al-Khattab wrote a letter to Abu Musa al-Ash∏ari288–
may God be pleased with both of them – saying: “All goodness lies in satisfaction. Be satisfied, if you can; if not, then endure patiently.” It is said that ∏Utba
al-Ghulam spent the entire night until dawn saying: “If You punish me, I love
You, and if You have mercy on me, I love You.” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq say: “Man is made of potter’s clay and clay has nothing in it that
would allow it to oppose the verdict of God Most High.” Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri
said: “For forty years God – may He be great and exalted – has never placed me
286 Or “al-∏Alluya”. 287 Or, “al-Shitriyya”. 288 A Companion of the Prophet and military commander, he died after 42/662.

Worship belongs to the common believers;
servanthood to the elect; and servitude to the elect of the elect.” I also heard him
say: “Worship belongs to those who possess certitude; servanthood belongs to
those who possess the essence of certainty; and servitude belongs to those who
possess the True Reality of certainty.” He also said: “Worship is for those who
strive [on the path of God] (mujahadat); servanthood is for those who subject
themselves to strictures (mukabadat); and servitude is a sign of those who witness
God (mushahadat). One who does not spare his soul for the sake of God is a
worshiper; one who does not withhold his heart for the sake of God is a servant;
and one who generously gives God his spirit is a possessor of servitude.” They say:
“Servanthood is practicing acts of obedience in the most ample manner, while
seeing the shortcomings of your actions and keeping in mind that whatever
virtues you might possess have been predetermined by God’s decree.” It is said:
289 Usually understood as death. 290 Q. 15:99. 291 Or “Khubayb”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 211
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 211
“Servanthood is giving up your personal choice in favor of what has been
foreordained for you by divine decrees.” It is also said: “Servanthood is freeing
yourself from your power and might, and recognizing the grants and blessings
that He bestows upon you.” It is also said: “Servanthood is embracing whatever
God has commanded for you and departing from what He has prohibited for
you.” Someone asked Muhammad b. Khafif about the correct servanthood. He
answered: “When the servant places his burden upon his Master and patiently
bears with Him its afflictions.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Baghdadi say: I heard Ja∏far b. Muhammad
b. Nusayr say: I heard Ibn Masruq say: I heard Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] say:
“One can never achieve true servanthood without enduring four things: hunger,
nakedness, poverty, and humiliation.” They say: “Servanthood is to give oneself
fully to God and to place one’s burdens upon Him.” They also say: “One of the
signs of servanthood is giving up one’s own planning and watching [the workings
of] divine decrees.”
Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri said: “Servanthood is that you remain His servant at
all times, while He remains your Lord at all times.” Al-Jurayri said: “Servants of
[God’s] bounties are many. However, servants of the Bounty-Giver are very rare
indeed.”//273 The master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq said: “You are the servant of
whoever holds you in his bondage.∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] say:
“One can never achieve true servanthood without enduring four things: hunger,
nakedness, poverty, and humiliation.” They say: “Servanthood is to give oneself
fully to God and to place one’s burdens upon Him.” They also say: “One of the
signs of servanthood is giving up one’s own planning and watching [the workings
of] divine decrees.”
Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri said: “Servanthood is that you remain His servant at
all times, while He remains your Lord at all times.” Al-Jurayri said: “Servants of
[God’s] bounties are many. However, servants of the Bounty-Giver are very rare
indeed.”//273 The master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq said: “You are the servant of
whoever holds you in his bondage. If you are in the bondage of your soul, then
you are its servant; if you are in the bondage of this world of yours, then you are
its servant.” The Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – said: “A
plague be on the slaves of dirhams, a plague be on the slaves of dinars;a plague be
on the wearers of embroidered garments!” Abu Zayn292saw a man and asked him:
“What is your trade?” He answered: “I serve293 donkeys.” Abu Zayn answered:
“May God Most High destroy your donkeys, so that you become a servant of
God, not a servant of donkeys!”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard my grandfather
Abu ∏Amr b. Nujayd say: “No man can take even one step along the path of
servanthood until he sees his deeds as hypocrisy and his spiritual states as
pretensions.” I also heard him say: I heard ∏Abdallah al-Mu∏allim say: I heard
∏Abdallah al-Munazil say: “A person remains a slave of God as long as he does
not seek a servant for himself. If he begins to seek a servant for himself, he falls
from the rank of servanthood and abandons its manners.” I also heard him say:
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Ja∏far b. Nusayr say: I heard Ibn
Masruq say: I heard Sahl b.Worship belongs to the common believers;
servanthood to the elect; and servitude to the elect of the elect.” I also heard him
say: “Worship belongs to those who possess certitude; servanthood belongs to
those who possess the essence of certainty; and servitude belongs to those who
possess the True Reality of certainty.” He also said: “Worship is for those who
strive [on the path of God] (mujahadat); servanthood is for those who subject
themselves to strictures (mukabadat); and servitude is a sign of those who witness
God (mushahadat). One who does not spare his soul for the sake of God is a
worshiper; one who does not withhold his heart for the sake of God is a servant;
and one who generously gives God his spirit is a possessor of servitude.” They say:
“Servanthood is practicing acts of obedience in the most ample manner, while
seeing the shortcomings of your actions and keeping in mind that whatever
virtues you might possess have been predetermined by God’s decree.” It is said:
289 Usually understood as death. 290 Q. 15:99. 291 Or “Khubayb”.

al-Husayn say: I heard Ja∏far b. Nusayr say: I heard Ibn
Masruq say: I heard Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] say: “One will not achieve
true service [of God] until one has reached a stage at which one shows neither
signs of poverty while being destitute nor signs of well-being while being wealthy.”
It is said: “Servanthood is bearing witness to the divine lordship.”
292 Or “Abu Yazid [al-Bistami]”. 293 That is, “I provide.”543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 212
212 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
I heard al-Nasrabadhi say: “The worth of the servant corresponds to the worth of
the object of his service. Likewise, the virtue of the one who knows corresponds
to the virtue of the object of his knowledge.” Abu Hafs [al-Haddad] said:
“Servanthood is the adornment of the servant. Whoever abandons it, forfeits this
adornment.” I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him
– say: I heard Abu Ja∏far al-Razi say: I heard ∏Abbas b. Hamza say: I heard
Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari say: I heard al-Nibaji say: “The root of servanthood is
in three things: you must not oppose any of His rulings; you must not withhold
anything from Him; you must never be heard asking for something from someone
other than Him. I also heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard Abu
πl-Husayn al-Farisi say: I heard Ibn ∏Ataπ say: “Servanthood consists of four
traits: being faithful to one’s vows; observing the limits [established by God];
satisfaction with what you have; and bearing patiently that which you have not.”
I also heard him say: I heard Muhammad b. Shadhan say: I heard al-Kattani say:
I heard ∏Amr b. ∏Uthman al-Makki say: “Among the many pious men who resided
in Mecca and elsewhere and among those who came to us [in Mecca] during the
pilgrimage season I have met no one as passionate in his striving (ijtihad) and
more persevering in worship than al-Muzani294 – may God have mercy on him.
Nor have I ever seen someone as respectful of the commands of God Most High
or someone as strict with himself and as generous to others.”//274
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “Nothing is nobler than
servanthood. Nor is there a more perfect name for the believer than [being called
‘servant’]. This is the reason why God – glory to him – said about the Prophet –
may God bless and greet him – on the night of his ascension to heaven – which
was his greatest moment in his entire worldly life: ‘Glory be to Him, Who carried
His servant by night from the Holy Mosque [to the Further Mosque].’295 The
Most High also said: ‘And then revealed to His servant what He revealed.’296 If
there were a name greater than ‘servant’ God would definitely have called him
by it.” With this meaning in mind they recite:
∏Amr, to avenge me is a duty of my Zahra, anyone who hears and sees
knows this
Call me by no name but a slave of her, for it is my noblest name!
One Sufi said: “There are only two things [that prevent you from achieving
servanthood]: when you find repose in things that you like, and when you rely
on your own actions. Once you have shed these two things, you have given
servanthood its due.” Al-Wasiti said: “Beware of the delight of giving [to others],
294 Ibrahim b. Yahya al-Muzani was a foremost disciple and exponent of the great jurisprudent
al-Shafi∏i. He lived and died in Egypt in 264/878.
295 Q. 17:1.
296 Q. 53:10.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 213
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 213
for it may become a veiling for the people of purity.”297Abu ∏Ali al-Juzjani said:
“Satisfaction [with God] is servanthood’s courtyard; patience is its door; and
relegating all power to God (tafwid) is its house. You raise your voice at the
door,298 hurry through the courtyard, and then have rest in the house.” I heard
the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “Just as Lordship is a property of the Real
– glory be to Him – which never ceases, so is servanthood a property of God’s
servant which stays with him as long as he is alive.” A Sufi recited:
If you ask me, I will say: “I am his servant.”
If you ask him, he will say: “Here’s my slave.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard al-Nasrabadhi say:
“Acts of worship that are performed in search of [God’s] pardon and forgiveness
for their flaws are closer [to their goal] than those that are performed out of
desire for compensation and reward.” I also heard him say: I heard al-Nasrabadhi
say: “Servanthood is shedding the awareness of your service in witnessing the
One being served.” I also heard him say: I heard Abu Bakr Muhammad b.
∏Abdallah b. Shadhan say: I heard al-Jurayri say: “Servanthood is abandoning all
preoccupations and preoccupying yourself with the preoccupation299 that is the
root of repose.”//275
Desire (irada)
God – may He be great and exalted – said: “And do not drive away those who
call upon their Lord at morning and evening desiring His countenance.”300 ∏Ali
b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd informed us: Hisham b. ∏Ali
told us: al-Hakam b. Aslam told us: Isma∏il b. Ja∏far told us on the authority of
Humayd on the authority of Anas [b. Malik] – may God be pleased with him –
who said that the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – said: “When God
desires good for His servant, He puts him to use.” Someone asked him: “How
does He put him to use?” The Prophet responded: “He gives him success in
performing a pious work before death.”
Desire is the beginning of the path of the wayfarers and the name of the first
station of those who aspire to God Most High. This feature is called “desire”
because desire precedes every matter. If the servant of God does not desire
something, he will not do it. Since this is the beginning for those who travel on
the path to God – may He be great and exalted – it is called “desire” by analogy
with the desire that precedes all matters. “One who desires” (murid)301derives his
name from “desire” (irada) in the same way as “one who knows” (∏alim) derives
his name from “knowledge” (∏ilm), for both belong to [the category of] derivative
297 That is, to the Sufis.
298 In order to be let in.
299 That is, the service of God.
300 Q. 6:52.
301 This term is usually rendered into English as “[Sufi] disciple”, or “aspirant”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 214
214 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
names. However, according to the usage of this [Sufi] community, the murid is
someone who has no desire; he who has not stripped himself from desire, cannot
be counted among murids. Yet, in the regular usage, he who has no desire cannot
be considered to be of those who desire (murid). Sufis have spoken much about
desire, each one speaking according to what has manifested in his heart. The
majority of Sufi masters say: “Desire is giving up what people are accustomed to,
and the custom of most people is to race in the fields of forgetfulness, the drives
of their passions, and to reside in the domain of their desire.” However, the
[Sufi] muridhas rid himself from all of those qualities. His abandoning them is a
sign and proof of the soundness of [his] desire. This condition is called “desire”,
which is the abandonment of [one’s] habits, for the abandonment of [one’s]
habits is the sign of desire. The True Reality of desire is that your heart rushes
forth in search of God – praise be to Him. It is therefore said that desire is “the
anguish that reduces any fear to insignificance”.//276
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him –
recount on the authority of Mimshadh al-Dinawari, who said: “When I learned
how serious the conditions of the poor302 are, I ceased joking with any of them. Once a poor man came to me and said: ‘Master, I wish you could prepare a
sweetmeat for me.’ Suddenly, the words ‘desire’ (irada) and ‘sweetmeat’ (∏asida)
flew from my tongue in a jesting way. [On hearing this] the poor man withdrew,
without me taking notice of that. I ordered the sweetmeat to be prepared, then
started to look for the man, but could not find him. Later on, I learned what
had happened to him.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 213
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 213
for it may become a veiling for the people of purity.”297Abu ∏Ali al-Juzjani said:
“Satisfaction [with God] is servanthood’s courtyard; patience is its door; and
relegating all power to God (tafwid) is its house. You raise your voice at the
door,298 hurry through the courtyard, and then have rest in the house.” I heard
the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “Just as Lordship is a property of the Real
– glory be to Him – which never ceases, so is servanthood a property of God’s
servant which stays with him as long as he is alive.” A Sufi recited:
If you ask me, I will say: “I am his servant.”
If you ask him, he will say: “Here’s my slave.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard al-Nasrabadhi say:
“Acts of worship that are performed in search of [God’s] pardon and forgiveness
for their flaws are closer [to their goal] than those that are performed out of
desire for compensation and reward.” I also heard him say: I heard al-Nasrabadhi
say: “Servanthood is shedding the awareness of your service in witnessing the
One being served.” I also heard him say: I heard Abu Bakr Muhammad b.
∏Abdallah b. Shadhan say: I heard al-Jurayri say: “Servanthood is abandoning all
preoccupations and preoccupying yourself with the preoccupation299 that is the
root of repose.”//275
Desire (irada)
God – may He be great and exalted – said: “And do not drive away those who
call upon their Lord at morning and evening desiring His countenance.”300 ∏Ali
b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd informed us: Hisham b. ∏Ali
told us: al-Hakam b. Aslam told us: Isma∏il b. Ja∏far told us on the authority of
Humayd on the authority of Anas [b. Malik] – may God be pleased with him –
who said that the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – said: “When God
desires good for His servant, He puts him to use.” Someone asked him: “How
does He put him to use?” The Prophet responded: “He gives him success in
performing a pious work before death.”
Desire is the beginning of the path of the wayfarers and the name of the first
station of those who aspire to God Most High. This feature is called “desire”
because desire precedes every matter. If the servant of God does not desire
something, he will not do it. Since this is the beginning for those who travel on
the path to God – may He be great and exalted – it is called “desire” by analogy
with the desire that precedes all matters. “One who desires” (murid)301derives his
name from “desire” (irada) in the same way as “one who knows” (∏alim) derives
his name from “knowledge” (∏ilm), for both belong to [the category of] derivative
297 That is, to the Sufis.
298 In order to be let in.
299 That is, the service of God.
300 Q. 6:52.
301 This term is usually rendered into English as “[Sufi] disciple”, or “aspirant”.

I ordered the sweetmeat to be prepared, then
started to look for the man, but could not find him. Later on, I learned what
had happened to him. I was told that he left [my house] immediately saying to
himself: ‘Desire (irada) and sweetmeat (∏asida), desire (irada) and sweetmeat
(∏asida) …’ He wandered about aimlessly until he entered the desert, where he
kept repeating these words until he died.”
A Sufi master said: “I was alone in the desert and became depressed. So I
cried: ‘Human beings, talk to me!’, ‘Jinns, talk to me!’ Suddenly I heard a voice,
asking me: ‘What do you desire?’ I said: ‘I desire God Most High!’ The voice said:
‘Why do you desire God?’, meaning that someone who called on the jinns and
human beings to talk to him could not possibly have desired God – may He
be great and exalted.” He who desires, keeps aspiring [to Him] day and night. Outwardly he is characterized by self-exertion, while inwardly he is engaged in
struggle [against his ego]. He abandons the bed of repose and is preoccupied
[with worship] at all times; he bears hardships, carries heavy burdens, seeks to
improve his moral qualities, practices [self-imposed] strictures, copes with all
kind of terrors and leaves behind all [false] appearances. Of this state it is said:
I passed the night in the desert, fearing neither lion nor wolf
My longing overwhelmed me and I wandered hastily through the night,
For my passionate desire granted me no respite. 302 That is, “Sufis”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 215
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 215
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “Desire is anguish in your innermost
self, a sting in your heart, a torment in your soul, and a stirring in your inner
being; it is fires raging in human hearts.” I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say:
I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Sabbak say: I heard
Yusuf b. al-Husayn say: “There was a pact between Abu Sulayman [al-Darani]
and Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari, according to which Ahmad was not supposed to
disobey anything that Abu Sulayman might command him to do. Once he came
to Abu Sulayman, when he was lecturing to his students. He told his teacher:
‘The oven is hot. What do you command?’ Abu Sulayman did not respond. When
he repeated the same phrase two or three times, Abu Sulayman told him in a
fit of anger: ‘Then go and sit in it!’ He forgot about Ahmad for a while, then
remembered, and told [his students]: ‘Go look for Ahmad, for he is in the oven. He made a pledge never to disobey me.’ When they saw him sitting in the oven,
they noticed that not a single hair on him was burned.”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “In my early youth I strove hard
to achieve [true] desire. I used to say to myself: ‘If I only knew what the meaning
of desire is!’” It is said that those who desire [God] have the following qualities:
loving supererogatory acts of piety; dispensing sincere advice to [the members of
the community]; feeling comfortable in retreat; being patient in the face of divine
decrees, no matter how harsh; always obeying the divine command; feelingashamed
under the gaze of God; seeking any means that can bring them closer to God; being
happy in humility; giving the heart no rest until it attains its Lord.He made a pledge never to disobey me.’ When they saw him sitting in the oven,
they noticed that not a single hair on him was burned.”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “In my early youth I strove hard
to achieve [true] desire. I used to say to myself: ‘If I only knew what the meaning
of desire is!’” It is said that those who desire [God] have the following qualities:
loving supererogatory acts of piety; dispensing sincere advice to [the members of
the community]; feeling comfortable in retreat; being patient in the face of divine
decrees, no matter how harsh; always obeying the divine command; feelingashamed
under the gaze of God; seeking any means that can bring them closer to God; being
happy in humility; giving the heart no rest until it attains its Lord. Abu Bakr
al-Warraq said: “Those who desire face three evils: marriage, taking down hadith,
and journeying abroad.” Someone asked him: “Why did you stop writing down
hadith?” He answered: “They prevented me from keeping up my desire.” Hatim
al-Asamm said: “If you see an aspirant (murid), who desires something other than
the True Object of his desire (murad), know that he has exposed his depravity.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard
al-Kattani say: “Three things are required of the murid: sleeping only when
overcome [by sleep]; eating only when overcome by need; and speaking only when
absolutely necessary.” I also heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard
Husayn b. Ahmad b. Ja∏far say: I heard Ja∏far b.I ordered the sweetmeat to be prepared, then
started to look for the man, but could not find him. Later on, I learned what
had happened to him. I was told that he left [my house] immediately saying to
himself: ‘Desire (irada) and sweetmeat (∏asida), desire (irada) and sweetmeat
(∏asida) …’ He wandered about aimlessly until he entered the desert, where he
kept repeating these words until he died.”
A Sufi master said: “I was alone in the desert and became depressed. So I
cried: ‘Human beings, talk to me!’, ‘Jinns, talk to me!’ Suddenly I heard a voice,
asking me: ‘What do you desire?’ I said: ‘I desire God Most High!’ The voice said:
‘Why do you desire God?’, meaning that someone who called on the jinns and
human beings to talk to him could not possibly have desired God – may He
be great and exalted.” He who desires, keeps aspiring [to Him] day and night. Outwardly he is characterized by self-exertion, while inwardly he is engaged in
struggle [against his ego]. He abandons the bed of repose and is preoccupied
[with worship] at all times; he bears hardships, carries heavy burdens, seeks to
improve his moral qualities, practices [self-imposed] strictures, copes with all
kind of terrors and leaves behind all [false] appearances. Of this state it is said:
I passed the night in the desert, fearing neither lion nor wolf
My longing overwhelmed me and I wandered hastily through the night,
For my passionate desire granted me no respite. 302 That is, “Sufis”.

Ahmad b. Ja∏far say: I heard Ja∏far b. Nusayr say: I heard al-Junayd
say: “When God Most High desires something good for the murid, He places
him among the Sufis and shields him from the company of Qurπan reciters.303 I
also heard him say: I heard al-Raqqi304say: I heard al-Daqqaq say: “The ultimate
stage of desire is when you point toward God Most High and find Him where
you pointed to.” I asked him: “What renders desire unnecessary?” He answered:
“When you can find Him without pointing.”
I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Ayyash b. Abi πl-Sahw305
say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Daqqaq say: “The muridcannot be called that until the
303 Because they make the recitation of the Qurπan their source of livelihood. 304 Or “al-Duqqi”. 305 Or “al-Sakhr”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 216
216 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
angel on his left side306 has been unable write anything down [against him] for
twenty years. Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri said: “If one lacks proper desire from the
outset, one’s estrangement [from God] will only increase with the passage of
days.” He also said: “When the murid hears something of the Sufi sciences and
acts according to it, he thereby allows wisdom to enter his heart and settle there
until the end of his days. He himself benefits from this [wisdom], and when he
discourses about it, all those who listen to him benefit as well. As for the person
who hears something of the Sufi sciences, but fails to act according to it, it [what
he hears] is like a story that is remembered for a few days and then forgotten.”
Al-Wasiti said: “The first station of the murid is to desire God – may He be
praised – which he achieves by abandoning his own desire.” Yahya b. Mu∏adh
said: “The most difficult thing for the muridsis to keep company with those who
oppose them.” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Abu
πl-Qasim al-Razi say: I heard Yusuf b. al-Husayn say: “When you see a murid who
practices concessions307and engages in gainful employment, [know that] nothing
good will come out of him.” I also heard him [al-Razi?] say: I heard Muhammad
b. al-Husayn say: I heard Ja∏far al-Khuldi say: “Someone asked al-Junayd: ‘Why
should the murids listen to pious stories?’ He answered: ‘Pious stories are like
God’s legions. He strengthens their hearts with them.’ Someone asked him
whether he had any evidence [to support his statement]. He answered: ‘Yes, God
– may He be great and exalted – said: “And all that We relate to thee of the
tidings of the messengers is only that wherewith We [seek to] strengthen thy
heart.”308I also heard him say: I heard Muhammad b.Ahmad b. Ja∏far say: I heard Ja∏far b. Nusayr say: I heard al-Junayd
say: “When God Most High desires something good for the murid, He places
him among the Sufis and shields him from the company of Qurπan reciters.303 I
also heard him say: I heard al-Raqqi304say: I heard al-Daqqaq say: “The ultimate
stage of desire is when you point toward God Most High and find Him where
you pointed to.” I asked him: “What renders desire unnecessary?” He answered:
“When you can find Him without pointing.”
I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Ayyash b. Abi πl-Sahw305
say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Daqqaq say: “The muridcannot be called that until the
303 Because they make the recitation of the Qurπan their source of livelihood. 304 Or “al-Duqqi”. 305 Or “al-Sakhr”.

He strengthens their hearts with them.’ Someone asked him
whether he had any evidence [to support his statement]. He answered: ‘Yes, God
– may He be great and exalted – said: “And all that We relate to thee of the
tidings of the messengers is only that wherewith We [seek to] strengthen thy
heart.”308I also heard him say: I heard Muhammad b. Khalid say: I heard Ja∏far
[al-Khuldi] say: I heard al-Junayd say: “The true murid is in no need of the
learning of the scholars (∏ulamaπ).”
As for the difference between one who desires (murid) and one who is desired
[by God] (murad), it is that every murid is, in essence, a murad. For if he were
not desired by God Most High (murad) to desire Him, he would not be one who
desires (murid). In other words, nothing can happen unless God Most High
desires it, therefore one who desires (murid) is not other than he who is desired
(murad). For God – praise be to Him – singles this person out for His desire and
bestows upon him the desire [for Him]. However, this folk309 still differentiate
between murid and murad. The murid is the beginner [on the path to God], while
the murad is the one who has reached [its] end. The murid is one who is placed
in the middle of exhausting works (ta∏ab) and cast into the strictures of hard
labor. For the murad, on the other hand, [divine] command is sufficient in any
hardship he goes through. Whereas the murid has to exert himself strenuously,
the murad is assisted [by God] and is put at ease. 306 That is, the one who records his evil deeds, as opposed to the angel on his right side that
records his good deeds. 307 That is, who does not exert himself to his full capacity in observing the Divine Law. 308 Q. 11:120; 11:121, according to Arberry’s translation. 309 That is, the Sufis.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 217
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 217
God Most High treats the travelers [on the Sufi path] differently. Most
of them are granted success in their striving and, after much strenuous self-
exertion, arrive at sublime matters. However, many of them are shown these
sublime matters already at the beginning [of their path]. Thus they reach the
heights that many of those who practice arduous self-discipline don’t. Yet, most
of those who are assisted by God’s companionship choose to return to the
arduousself-exertions in order to undertake their share of the hardships (which has
so far eluded them) that characterize the practitioners of arduous self-discipline. I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “The murid carries [the load of
hardship], while the muradis carried [to his goal].” I also heard him say: “Moses
– peace be upon him – was a murid, because he said: “Lord, open my breast [to
truth].”310 Our Prophet – may God bless and greet him – was a murad, because
God Most High said of him: “Did We not expand thy breast for thee and lift
from thee thy burden, the burden that weighed down thy back? Did We not exalt
thy fame?”311Likewise, Moses – peace be upon him – asked: “Oh my Lord, show
me, that I may behold Thee!” God said: “Thou shalt not see Me!”312 On the
other hand, God told our Prophet – may God bless and greet him: “Hast thou
not regarded thy Lord, how He has stretched out the shadow?”313 According to
Abu ∏Ali, the intention of the phrases “Hast thou not regarded thy Lord” and
“how He has stretched out the shadow” was to conceal the story’s [true] meaning314
and to show the strength of [the Prophet’s] state. When someone asked al-Junayd about the muridand the murad, he answered:
“The murid is governed by religious science (∏ilm), whereas the murad stays
under God’s protection – praise be to Him. Therefore the murid walks, while
the murad flies.He strengthens their hearts with them.’ Someone asked him
whether he had any evidence [to support his statement]. He answered: ‘Yes, God
– may He be great and exalted – said: “And all that We relate to thee of the
tidings of the messengers is only that wherewith We [seek to] strengthen thy
heart.”308I also heard him say: I heard Muhammad b. Khalid say: I heard Ja∏far
[al-Khuldi] say: I heard al-Junayd say: “The true murid is in no need of the
learning of the scholars (∏ulamaπ).”
As for the difference between one who desires (murid) and one who is desired
[by God] (murad), it is that every murid is, in essence, a murad. For if he were
not desired by God Most High (murad) to desire Him, he would not be one who
desires (murid). In other words, nothing can happen unless God Most High
desires it, therefore one who desires (murid) is not other than he who is desired
(murad). For God – praise be to Him – singles this person out for His desire and
bestows upon him the desire [for Him]. However, this folk309 still differentiate
between murid and murad. The murid is the beginner [on the path to God], while
the murad is the one who has reached [its] end. The murid is one who is placed
in the middle of exhausting works (ta∏ab) and cast into the strictures of hard
labor. For the murad, on the other hand, [divine] command is sufficient in any
hardship he goes through. Whereas the murid has to exert himself strenuously,
the murad is assisted [by God] and is put at ease. 306 That is, the one who records his evil deeds, as opposed to the angel on his right side that
records his good deeds. 307 That is, who does not exert himself to his full capacity in observing the Divine Law. 308 Q. 11:120; 11:121, according to Arberry’s translation. 309 That is, the Sufis.

When someone asked al-Junayd about the muridand the murad, he answered:
“The murid is governed by religious science (∏ilm), whereas the murad stays
under God’s protection – praise be to Him. Therefore the murid walks, while
the murad flies. Can a walker overtake the flyer?” It is related that Dhu πl-Nun
sent a messenger to Abu Yazid, saying: “Tell him: ‘How long will this sleep and
indolence last? The caravan has passed by!’” Abu Yazid told [the messenger]:
“Say to my brother Dhu πl-Nun: ‘The [true] man is he who sleeps through the
entire night, then awakes at the caravan’s destination before it arrives there.’”
Dhu πl-Nun said: “Congratulations to him! These are the words that our present
condition does not allow us to utter!”
Uprightness (istiqama)
God Most High said: “Those who have said ‘Our Lord is God’ have then
become upright.”315The imam Abu Bakr Muhammad b. al-Hasan b. Furak – may
God have mercy on him – said: ∏Abdallah b. Ja∏far b. Ahmad al-Isbahani told us:
Abu Bishr Yunus b. Habib said: Abu Dawud al-Tayalisi said: Shu∏ba said on the
310 Q. 20:25; 20:26, according to Arberry’s translation. 311 Q. 94:1–4. 312 Q. 7:143; 7:138, according to Arberry’s translation. 313 Q. 25:45; 25:47, according to Arberry’s translation. 314 That is, the fact that the Prophet could see God. 315 Q. 41:30; 41:31, according to Arberry’s translation.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 218
218 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
authority of al-A∏mash, on the authority of Salim b. Abi al-Ja∏d, on the authority
of Thawban, a client (mawla) of the Prophet – may God bless and greet him –
that he said: “Be upright! Though you will never be able to do this fully. Know
that the best part of your religion is prayer, and only the [true] believer is
capable of preserving his [ritual] purity.”
Uprightness is a degree that perfects and completes all affairs. Thanks to it
good deeds and their proper order are achieved. He who is not upright in his
spiritual state has wasted his striving and his efforts are all in vain. God Most
High said: “And be not as a woman who breaks her thread, after it is firmly spun,
into fibers.”316//280 One who has no uprightness among his qualities will not be
able to advance from one [mystical] station to another. Nor can he build his way
[to God] on a sound foundation. It is necessary for one who embarks [on the Sufi
path] to be upright in the rules pertaining to the beginnings [of it]. Likewise,
each [perfected] gnostic must practice uprightness in the manners pertaining to
the end [of the path]. A sign of steadfastness for the beginners is that their deeds
are not marred by laxity. For those in the middle a sign of their uprightness is
that their progress along the path presupposes no pausing. As for those who have
attained the end of the path their sign is that their progress is not impeded by
any veils. I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“Uprightness has three degrees: setting things right (taqwim) by disciplining
one’s self; seeking uprightness (iqama) by refining one’s heart; and remaining
upright (istiqama) by bringing one’s innermost self near God. Abu Bakr – may
God be pleased with him – said about God’s words “And then they have become
upright”317 that they mean that “They do not associate anyone or anything
with God” (lam yushriku).When someone asked al-Junayd about the muridand the murad, he answered:
“The murid is governed by religious science (∏ilm), whereas the murad stays
under God’s protection – praise be to Him. Therefore the murid walks, while
the murad flies. Can a walker overtake the flyer?” It is related that Dhu πl-Nun
sent a messenger to Abu Yazid, saying: “Tell him: ‘How long will this sleep and
indolence last? The caravan has passed by!’” Abu Yazid told [the messenger]:
“Say to my brother Dhu πl-Nun: ‘The [true] man is he who sleeps through the
entire night, then awakes at the caravan’s destination before it arrives there.’”
Dhu πl-Nun said: “Congratulations to him! These are the words that our present
condition does not allow us to utter!”
Uprightness (istiqama)
God Most High said: “Those who have said ‘Our Lord is God’ have then
become upright.”315The imam Abu Bakr Muhammad b. al-Hasan b. Furak – may
God have mercy on him – said: ∏Abdallah b. Ja∏far b. Ahmad al-Isbahani told us:
Abu Bishr Yunus b. Habib said: Abu Dawud al-Tayalisi said: Shu∏ba said on the
310 Q. 20:25; 20:26, according to Arberry’s translation. 311 Q. 94:1–4. 312 Q. 7:143; 7:138, according to Arberry’s translation. 313 Q. 25:45; 25:47, according to Arberry’s translation. 314 That is, the fact that the Prophet could see God. 315 Q. 41:30; 41:31, according to Arberry’s translation.

I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“Uprightness has three degrees: setting things right (taqwim) by disciplining
one’s self; seeking uprightness (iqama) by refining one’s heart; and remaining
upright (istiqama) by bringing one’s innermost self near God. Abu Bakr – may
God be pleased with him – said about God’s words “And then they have become
upright”317 that they mean that “They do not associate anyone or anything
with God” (lam yushriku). ∏Umar said that these words mean that “They do
not swindle like foxes”. The commentary of the Trustworthy One318 points to
the observance of the foundations of God’s oneness (tawhid), whereas ∏Umar’s
commentary implies an attempt to find an explanation (talab al-taπwil) and
keeping the conditions of one’s pacts [with God]. Ibn ∏Ataπ said that these words
mean: “They have become upright by dedicating their hearts exclusively to God
Most High.” Abu ∏Ali al-Juzjani said: “Be a seeker of uprightness, not a seeker
of [divine] beneficence (karama), because your lower self prompts you toward
seeking beneficence, whereas your Lord – may He be great and exalted – demands
that you seek uprightness.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Abu ∏Ali
al-Shabbuwi say: “I saw the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – in a dream
and I said: ‘It is reported that you, Messenger of God, said that the chapter
of Hud319 has made your hair turn white. What was it that made your hair turn
316 Q. 16:92; 16:94, according to Arberry’s translation. 317 Q. 16:92. 318 An epithet of Abu Bakr (al-siddiq). 319 Q. 11.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 219
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 219
white: the stories of the prophets of the past and of the destruction of nations?’
He answered: ‘No, it was [God’s command] “Be upright, as you have been
commanded!”’320It is said that only the greatest of men are capable of maintaining
uprightness, because it means the abandonment of one’s habits and departure//281
from habitual routines and customs, while standing before God Most High in
full truthfulness and sincerity. This is why the Messenger of God – may God
bless and greet him – said: “Be upright! Though you will never be able to do
this fully.” Al-Wasiti said: “Uprightness is the property that completes all
virtues and the loss of which makes them turn ugly.” It is told that al-Shibli
– may God have mercy on him – said: “Uprightness means that you expect
the Resurrection to occur at any moment.” It is said that uprightness in one’s
speech means to forsake backbiting; uprightness in one’s deeds means to
abandon innovations in religion (bid∏a); uprightness in one’s good works means
to avoid laxity; and uprightness in one’s spiritual states means to rid oneself of
the veil.
I heard the master Abu Bakr Muhammad b. al-Hasan b. Furak say: “The
letter ‘S’ in the word ‘to be upright’ (istiqama) implies asking.321 Therefore, it
means that they ask God Most High to render them upright in their declaration
of God’s oneness, then make them faithful in their commitment and their keeping
the boundaries [of God’s Law].” The master said: “Know that steadfastness
necessitates the continual flow of divine graces (karamat), for God Most High said:
‘Would that they be upright on the way, we would give them to drink of water
copiously.’322 He did not say: ‘We shall let them drink of water’ (saqaynahum),
He said: ‘We would give them water to drink in abundance (asqaynahum).’” The
Arabs say: “We shall give him water to drink”, implying the continuity of the
action.
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard al-Husayn b. Ahmad say: I heard Abu al-∏Abbas al-Farghani say: I heard
al-Junayd say: “Once I met a young Sufi disciple in the desert sitting under an
acacia tree. I asked him what made him sit there. He answered: ‘It is something
that I lost [here].’ I left him where he was and continued on my way. When I was
returning from my pilgrimage, I found that youth again, except this time he
sat closer to the tree. I asked him: ‘Why are you sitting here?’ He answered: ‘I
have found what I was looking for on this spot, so I have decided to stay here.’”
Al-Junayd commented: “I do not know what is more noble: his perseverance in
seeking the state that he lost or his perseverance in sticking to the place where he
found what he was looking for.”
320 Q. 11:112; 11:114, according to Arberry’s translation.
321 The tenth form of the verb qama“to be straight” connotes the process of asking – that is, “to
seek to be/or to remain upright”.
322 Q. 72:16.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 220
220 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Sincerity (ikhlas)
God Most High said: “Belongs not sincere religion to God?”323 ∏Ali b. Ahmad
al-Ahwazi informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Basri told us//282: Ja∏far b. Ahmad al-Faryabi told us: Abu Talut told us: Haniπ b. ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Abi
∏Abla al-∏Uqayli told us on the authority of Ibrahim b. Abi ∏Abla al-∏Uqayli, who
said: ∏Atiyya b. Washshaj [Wassaj] told me on the authority of Anas b. Malik –
may God be pleased with him – who said: “The Messenger of God – may God
bless and greet him – said: ‘There are three things that prevent the heart of the
believer from being unfaithful: being sincere to God in his actions, counseling
those in power, and always holding on to the community of Muslims.’” The
master [Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq] said: “Sincerity means making God – praise be to
Him – the sole object of one’s worship.” By worship he meant seeking closeness
to God – praise be to Him – to the exclusion of everything else, such as making
a show [of one’s piety] for other people, seeking their praise and taking delight
in it, or any other thing [that distracts one] from getting closer to God Most
High. It is true that sincerity is to protect one’s actions from being observed
by people. It is also true that sincerity means pious concealment [of one’s good
deeds] from being observed by people. According to an authentic tradition,
“The Prophet – may God bless and greet him – said on the authority of Gabriel,
who spoke on the authority of God Most High – praise be to Him – Who said:
‘Sincerity is the greatest mystery that I have deposited in the hearts of those
servants of Mine whom I love.’”
I asked Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – about sincerity. He answered: I asked ∏Ali b. Sa∏id and Ahmad b. Zakariya
about sincerity. They said: We asked ∏Ali b. Ibrahim al-Shaqiqi about sincerity. He answered: I asked Muhammd b. Ja∏far al-Khassaf about sincerity.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 219
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 219
white: the stories of the prophets of the past and of the destruction of nations?’
He answered: ‘No, it was [God’s command] “Be upright, as you have been
commanded!”’320It is said that only the greatest of men are capable of maintaining
uprightness, because it means the abandonment of one’s habits and departure//281
from habitual routines and customs, while standing before God Most High in
full truthfulness and sincerity. This is why the Messenger of God – may God
bless and greet him – said: “Be upright! Though you will never be able to do
this fully.” Al-Wasiti said: “Uprightness is the property that completes all
virtues and the loss of which makes them turn ugly.” It is told that al-Shibli
– may God have mercy on him – said: “Uprightness means that you expect
the Resurrection to occur at any moment.” It is said that uprightness in one’s
speech means to forsake backbiting; uprightness in one’s deeds means to
abandon innovations in religion (bid∏a); uprightness in one’s good works means
to avoid laxity; and uprightness in one’s spiritual states means to rid oneself of
the veil.
I heard the master Abu Bakr Muhammad b. al-Hasan b. Furak say: “The
letter ‘S’ in the word ‘to be upright’ (istiqama) implies asking.321 Therefore, it
means that they ask God Most High to render them upright in their declaration
of God’s oneness, then make them faithful in their commitment and their keeping
the boundaries [of God’s Law].” The master said: “Know that steadfastness
necessitates the continual flow of divine graces (karamat), for God Most High said:
‘Would that they be upright on the way, we would give them to drink of water
copiously.’322 He did not say: ‘We shall let them drink of water’ (saqaynahum),
He said: ‘We would give them water to drink in abundance (asqaynahum).’” The
Arabs say: “We shall give him water to drink”, implying the continuity of the
action.
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard al-Husayn b. Ahmad say: I heard Abu al-∏Abbas al-Farghani say: I heard
al-Junayd say: “Once I met a young Sufi disciple in the desert sitting under an
acacia tree. I asked him what made him sit there. He answered: ‘It is something
that I lost [here].’ I left him where he was and continued on my way. When I was
returning from my pilgrimage, I found that youth again, except this time he
sat closer to the tree. I asked him: ‘Why are you sitting here?’ He answered: ‘I
have found what I was looking for on this spot, so I have decided to stay here.’”
Al-Junayd commented: “I do not know what is more noble: his perseverance in
seeking the state that he lost or his perseverance in sticking to the place where he
found what he was looking for.”
320 Q. 11:112; 11:114, according to Arberry’s translation.
321 The tenth form of the verb qama“to be straight” connotes the process of asking – that is, “to
seek to be/or to remain upright”.
322 Q. 72:16.

He answered: I asked Muhammd b. Ja∏far al-Khassaf about sincerity. He answered:
I asked Ahmad b. Bashshar about sincerity. He answered: I asked Abu Ya∏qub
al-Shariti about sincerity. He answered: I asked Ahmad b. Ghassan about
sincerity. He answered: I asked ∏Abd al-Wahid b. Zayd about sincerity.324 He
answered: I asked al-Hasan [al-Basri] about sincerity. He answered: I asked
Hudhayfa about sincerity. He answered: I asked the Prophet – may God bless
and greet him – about sincerity. He answered: I asked Gabriel about sincerity. He answered: I asked the Lord of greatness about sincerity. He answered: “This
is one of My mysteries, which I have deposited into the hearts of those servants
whom I love.”//283
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “Sincerity is to protect one’s
action from being observed by people. As for truthfulness (sidq), it is cleansing
oneself of being aware of one’s self. The sincere one is free of self-conceit, while
the truthful one is free from self-glorification.” Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri said:
“Sincerity is only perfected by being truthful in it and by constant forbearance
323 Q. 39:3. 324 See IM, pp. 16–18.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 221
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 221
in it. As for truthfulness, it is only perfected by being sincere and constant in it.”
Abu Ya∏qub al-Susi said: “As long as people notice sincerity in their sincerity,
their sincerity is in need of sincerity.” Dhu πl-Nun said: “Sincerity has three
signs: when the praise and blame of the common folk become equal in your eyes;
when you become oblivious of your good deeds as you are doing them; and when
you forget about your reward [for your good deeds] in the Hereafter.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy
on him – say: I heard Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi say: “Sincerity is something in
which your lower soul never finds pleasure. This is the sincerity of the ordinary
folk. As for the sincerity of the elect, it is something that happens to them without
them knowing it. Thus they show acts of obedience [to God], while remaining
unaware of them, nor seeing or counting them. This is the sincerity of the elect.”
Abu Bakr al-Daqqaq said: “The major flaw of the sincere one is that he is aware
of his sincerity. When God Most High wants to render his sincerity pure, he
removes from his sincerity his awareness of being sincere. He thus becomes
sincere through God (mukhlas), not sincere on his own accord (mukhlis). Sahl
[al-Tustari] said: “No one knows hypocrisy better than the sincere one (mukhlis).”
I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard ∏Abdallah b.He thus becomes
sincere through God (mukhlas), not sincere on his own accord (mukhlis). Sahl
[al-Tustari] said: “No one knows hypocrisy better than the sincere one (mukhlis).”
I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali say: I heard
al-Wajihi say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say: Ruwaym told me that Abu Sa∏id
al-Kharraz said: “The hypocrisy of the divine gnostics (∏arifin) is better than the
sincerity of the beginners on the Sufi path (muridin).” Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri said:
“Sincerity is that which is protected from the corruption by the Enemy325.” Abu
∏Uthman [al-Hiri] said: “Sincerity is to forget about creatures through constantly
gazing on the Creator.” Hudhayfa al-Mar∏ashi said: “Sincerity is when the servant’s
outward actions are the same as his [inner] thoughts.” It is said: “Sincerity is that
by which one seeks God – may He be praised – and by which one strives to be
truthful.” It is also said that sincerity is when one remains blind to one’s own
good deeds. I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard Abu πl-Husayn al-Farisi say://284 I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say:
I heard ∏Ali b. ∏Abd al-Hamid: I heard al-Sari [al-Saqati] say: “One who adorns
himself for other people with something that is not [part of his character] will fall
from the sight of God Most High.” I also heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn]
say: I heard ∏Ali b. Bundar al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Mahmud say: I heard
Muhammad b. ∏Abd Rabbihi say: al-Fudayl [b. ∏Iyad] said: “Abandoning good
works for the sake of people is hypocrisy; doing them for the sake of people
is polytheism; sincerity is that God absolves you from both.” Al-Junayd said:
“Sincerity is a secret between God and His servant.He answered: I asked Muhammd b. Ja∏far al-Khassaf about sincerity. He answered:
I asked Ahmad b. Bashshar about sincerity. He answered: I asked Abu Ya∏qub
al-Shariti about sincerity. He answered: I asked Ahmad b. Ghassan about
sincerity. He answered: I asked ∏Abd al-Wahid b. Zayd about sincerity.324 He
answered: I asked al-Hasan [al-Basri] about sincerity. He answered: I asked
Hudhayfa about sincerity. He answered: I asked the Prophet – may God bless
and greet him – about sincerity. He answered: I asked Gabriel about sincerity. He answered: I asked the Lord of greatness about sincerity. He answered: “This
is one of My mysteries, which I have deposited into the hearts of those servants
whom I love.”//283
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “Sincerity is to protect one’s
action from being observed by people. As for truthfulness (sidq), it is cleansing
oneself of being aware of one’s self. The sincere one is free of self-conceit, while
the truthful one is free from self-glorification.” Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri said:
“Sincerity is only perfected by being truthful in it and by constant forbearance
323 Q. 39:3. 324 See IM, pp. 16–18.

∏Abd Rabbihi say: al-Fudayl [b. ∏Iyad] said: “Abandoning good
works for the sake of people is hypocrisy; doing them for the sake of people
is polytheism; sincerity is that God absolves you from both.” Al-Junayd said:
“Sincerity is a secret between God and His servant. Even the recording angel326
knows nothing of it so that he cannot write it down; nor does Satan know of it so
that he cannot corrupt it; nor is his passion aware of it, so that it will notinfluence
him.” Ruwaym said: “Sincerity in one’s deeds is that the one who performs them
325 That is, Satan. 326 That is, the angel who records man’s every deed.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 222
222 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
seeks no compensation for them in either this world or the Hereafter, nor does
he ask for a reward in either of these two realms.”
Someone asked Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari]: “What is the hardest thing
for one’s lower soul?” He answered: “Sincerity, for the soul has no share in it.”
Someone asked a Sufi about sincerity. He answered: “It is that you ask no one
but God – may He be great and exalted – to be the witness of your good deeds.”
One Sufi related: “One day I entered Sahl b. ∏Abdallah’s house on Friday before
the prayer. Suddenly, I saw a snake in his house, so I paused at the porch. He
told me: ‘Come in! One cannot attain the True Reality of faith if one is afraid of
anything on this earth [other than God]!’ He then asked me: ‘Would you like to
perform the prayer in a congregational mosque?’ I said: ‘[Yes,] but the [closest]
mosque is at a distance of a one day and one night journey from here.’ He
took me by the hand, and in a matter of minutes we found ourselves at the
mosque. We entered it and performed our Friday prayer, then came out and
watched the members of the congregation leaving the mosque. Sahl said: ‘There
are so many people who say “There’s no deity but God”, yet so few of them
are sincere.’”
Hamza b. Yusuf al-Jurjani informed us: Muhammad b. Muhammad b. ∏Abd
al-Rahim told us: Abu Talib Muhammad b. Zakariya al-Muqaddasi told us: Abu
Qirsafa Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-Wahhab al-∏Asqalani told us: Zakariya b. Nafi∏
told us: Muhammad b. Yazid al-Qaratisi told us on the authority of Isma∏il b. Abi
Khalid, on the authority of Makhul, who said: “Anyone who has remained sincere
for forty days will see wisdom flowing from the springs of his heart to his
tongue.” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy
on him – say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. Shadhan say: I heard ∏Abd
al-Razzaq say: I heard Yusuf b.∏Abd Rabbihi say: al-Fudayl [b. ∏Iyad] said: “Abandoning good
works for the sake of people is hypocrisy; doing them for the sake of people
is polytheism; sincerity is that God absolves you from both.” Al-Junayd said:
“Sincerity is a secret between God and His servant. Even the recording angel326
knows nothing of it so that he cannot write it down; nor does Satan know of it so
that he cannot corrupt it; nor is his passion aware of it, so that it will notinfluence
him.” Ruwaym said: “Sincerity in one’s deeds is that the one who performs them
325 That is, Satan. 326 That is, the angel who records man’s every deed.

∏Abdallah b. Shadhan say: I heard ∏Abd
al-Razzaq say: I heard Yusuf b. al-Husayn say: “The greatest thing in this world
is sincerity. How many times did I try to remove hypocrisy from my heart, yet
it sprang up there again in new guise.”//285 I also heard him [al-Sulami] say:
I heard al-Nasrabadhi say: I heard Abu πl-Jahm say: I heard Ibn Abi πl-Hawari
say: I heard Abu Sulayman [al-Darani] say: “When you are sincere, Satan’s
whisperings and hypocrisy will fall away from you!”
Truthfulness (sidq)
God Most High said: “O believers, fear God, and be with the truthful ones.”327
The master Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Furak – may God have mercy on him –
informed us: ∏Abdallah b. Ja∏far b. Ahmad al-Isbahani told us: Abu Bishr Yunus b. Habib told us: Abu Dawud al-Tayalisi told us: Shu∏ba told us on the authority
of Mansur, on the authority of Abu Waπil, on the authority of ∏Abdallah b. Mas∏ud, who heard that the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – said: “The
servant of God, who is truthful and who constantly aspires to remain trustworthy,
will be recorded in the Book of God as a trustful one (siddiq), whereas the servant
327 Q. 9:119; 9:120, according to Arberry’s translation.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 223
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 223
of God who lies and aspires to keep lying, will be recorded into the Book of God
as a liar (kadhdhab). The master [Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq] said: “Truthfulness is the foundation of this
affair328.” Through it its perfection is effected and its correct order is achieved. It comes immediately after the rank of prophethood, for God Most High said:
“And with those whom God has blessed: the prophets and truthful ones.”329The
word “trustworthy” (sadiq) is derived from the word “truth” (sidq), whereas the
word “truthful” is the emphatic form of it – that is, one whose truth is abundant,
who is dominated by truth – in the same way as the words khimmirand sikkir are
emphatic forms for “drunkard”. The minimal requirement for truthfulness is that
one’s outward actions and inward thoughts are equal. That is, the “trustworthy”
is one who speaks truth, whereas the “truthful” is one who is veracious in his
words, deeds, and spiritual states. Ahmad b. Khadrawayh said: “Whoever wishes
God Most High to be with him should be truthful, for God Most High said:
‘Surely, God is with the truthful ones.’”330
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard al-Farghani say: I heard
al-Junayd say: “The trustworthy one (sadiq) undergoes change forty times a day,
while the hypocrite remains in one and the same state for forty years.” Abu
Sulayman al-Darani said: “If the truthful one desired to describe that which
resides in his heart, he would have no need to move his tongue.”331 It is said:
“Truthfulness means to speak the truth, even if this means your destruction.” It
is also said: “Truthfulness is when [your] innermost thoughts are in harmony with
your speech.” Al-Qannad said: “Truthfulness (sidq) is preventing your mouth
(shidq) from uttering things that are prohibited [by God].” ∏Abd al-Wahid b.Khadrawayh said: “Whoever wishes
God Most High to be with him should be truthful, for God Most High said:
‘Surely, God is with the truthful ones.’”330
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard al-Farghani say: I heard
al-Junayd say: “The trustworthy one (sadiq) undergoes change forty times a day,
while the hypocrite remains in one and the same state for forty years.” Abu
Sulayman al-Darani said: “If the truthful one desired to describe that which
resides in his heart, he would have no need to move his tongue.”331 It is said:
“Truthfulness means to speak the truth, even if this means your destruction.” It
is also said: “Truthfulness is when [your] innermost thoughts are in harmony with
your speech.” Al-Qannad said: “Truthfulness (sidq) is preventing your mouth
(shidq) from uttering things that are prohibited [by God].” ∏Abd al-Wahid b. Zayd332
said: “Truthfulness is to be loyal to God – praise be to Him – in [all your] actions.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Baghdadi
say: I heard Ja∏far b. Nusayr say: I heard al-Jurayri say: I heard Sahl b. ∏Abdallah
say: “Anyone who conceals his true thoughts from himself or from others will
never gain a whiff of truthfulness.” Abu Sa∏id al-Qurashi said: “The truthful one
is he who is ready to die without being ashamed of exposing his innermost secrets,
for God Most High said: ‘Long for death, when you speak truly.’”333
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Thaqafi say that one day ∏Abdallah b. Munazil told him:
“Abu ∏Ali, get ready for death, for there’s no escape from it.” Abu ∏Ali responded
saying: “And you, ∏Abdallah, get ready for death, for there’s no escape from it.”
328 That is, the Sufi path. 329 Q. 4:69; 4:71, according to Arberry’s translation. 330 Q. 2:153.∏Abdallah b. Shadhan say: I heard ∏Abd
al-Razzaq say: I heard Yusuf b. al-Husayn say: “The greatest thing in this world
is sincerity. How many times did I try to remove hypocrisy from my heart, yet
it sprang up there again in new guise.”//285 I also heard him [al-Sulami] say:
I heard al-Nasrabadhi say: I heard Abu πl-Jahm say: I heard Ibn Abi πl-Hawari
say: I heard Abu Sulayman [al-Darani] say: “When you are sincere, Satan’s
whisperings and hypocrisy will fall away from you!”
Truthfulness (sidq)
God Most High said: “O believers, fear God, and be with the truthful ones.”327
The master Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Furak – may God have mercy on him –
informed us: ∏Abdallah b. Ja∏far b. Ahmad al-Isbahani told us: Abu Bishr Yunus b. Habib told us: Abu Dawud al-Tayalisi told us: Shu∏ba told us on the authority
of Mansur, on the authority of Abu Waπil, on the authority of ∏Abdallah b. Mas∏ud, who heard that the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – said: “The
servant of God, who is truthful and who constantly aspires to remain trustworthy,
will be recorded in the Book of God as a trustful one (siddiq), whereas the servant
327 Q. 9:119; 9:120, according to Arberry’s translation.

330 Q. 2:153. 331 That is, because being truthful in his words and deeds, he would have nothing new to impart
to his listeners. 332 On him see IM, pp. 16–18. 333 Q. 2:94; 2:88, according to Arberry’s translation.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 224
224 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
On hearing this, ∏Abdallah stretched his hand, put his head on it, as if it were a
pillow, and said: “I am already dead!” Abu ∏Ali fell silent, because he was unable
to match what ∏Abdallah had just done, for Abu ∏Ali still had attachments [to this
world], whereas ∏Abdallah had rid himself completely of them all. I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy
on him – say: “Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Dinawari was preaching [to a crowd], when
suddenly an old woman who was there let out a shout. Abu πl-∏Abbas told her:
‘Die now!’ She rose up, made a few steps, then turned to him saying, ‘I have
died’, and she fell dead.” Al-Wasiti said: “Sincerity is when one’s declaration
of [God’s] unity is tied with one’s intention to act [according to it].” It is said
that ∏Abd al-Wahid b. Zayd asked one of his students, whose body had become
emaciated: “Son, have you been fasting constantly?” He answered: “I do not
perpetuate the breaking of my fast (iftar).” [∏Abd al-Wahid] then asked: “Do
you stay wake all night?” [The youth] answered: “I do not perpetuate my sleep.”
∏Abd al-Wahid then asked: “So what, then, has emaciated you?” The youth
answered: “[My] never-ending desire, and my never-ending concealment of it.”
∏Abd al-Wahid exclaimed: “Be silent! How dare you!” On hearing this the youth
sprang to his feet, walked a couple of steps, said “Oh, my God, if I am sincere,
take me!”, and fell down dead. It is related that Abu ∏Amr al-Zajjaji said: “My mother died and I inherited
a house from her. I sold it//287 for fifty dinars and went on the hajj. When
I reached [the ruins of] Babel, I came across an overseer of the canals (ahad
al-qanaqina),334 who asked me: ‘What do you have with you?’ I said to myself:
‘Truthfulness is [always] better’ and told him that I had fifty dinars. He said:
‘Give them to me!’ I handed over [my] purse to him.330 Q. 2:153. 331 That is, because being truthful in his words and deeds, he would have nothing new to impart
to his listeners. 332 On him see IM, pp. 16–18. 333 Q. 2:94; 2:88, according to Arberry’s translation.

When
I reached [the ruins of] Babel, I came across an overseer of the canals (ahad
al-qanaqina),334 who asked me: ‘What do you have with you?’ I said to myself:
‘Truthfulness is [always] better’ and told him that I had fifty dinars. He said:
‘Give them to me!’ I handed over [my] purse to him. He counted them [the dinars]
and there were indeed fifty dinars. He said: ‘Take them back. Your truthfulness
has impressed me!’ He then dismounted his horse and told me: ‘Take it
and ride!’ I said: ‘No, I do not want to!’ However, he said that I must and
he eventually prevailed over me. When I mounted the horse, he said: ‘I will be
following you.’ And indeed after one year he caught up with me and stayed with
me until he died.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say:
I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard Ja∏far al-Khawwas say: I heard Ibrahim
al-Khawwas say: “You will never see the truthful man except performing his
obligations or engaging in a good deed.” I also heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard Abu πl-Husayn b. Miqsam say: I heard Ja∏far al-Khawwas
say: I heard al-Junayd say: “The true essence of truthfulness is when you
speak truth in a situation from which only a lie can rescue you.” It is said:
“Three things never elude the truthful: sweetness [of character], awe [of God],
and grace.”
334 The meaning of this word is not quite clear; it may also mean “an expert on finding water” or
something along these lines.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 225
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 225
It is related that God – praise be to Him – revealed [the following words to
David] – peace be upon him: “David, whoever has trust in me in his innermost
self, I will make him trustworthy in the eyes of [My] creatures.” It is related that
Ibrahim b. Dawha and Ibrahim Sitanba were about to enter the desert. Ibrahim
b. Sitanba said: “Abandon any [mundane] attachments that [still] remain with
you!” Ibrahim b. Dawha said: “I have already abandoned everything except one
dinar.” Ibrahim b. Sitanba exclaimed: “Ibrahim, do not keep my innermost self
preoccupied [with it]! Give up all the attachments that [still] remain with you!”
Ibrahim b. Dawha said: “So, I threw that dinaraway.” However, he kept saying:
“Ibrahim, abandon any attachments that you [still] have!” [Ibrahim b. Dawha]
said: “[Suddenly] I remembered that I had [spare] sandal thongs with me. So I
threw them away and [from then on] whenever I was in need of a sandal thong
on that journey, I immediately found one.” [On seeing this], Ibrahim b. Sitanba
said: “This is what happens when you deal with God Most High truthfully!”
Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri – may God have mercy on him – said: “Truthfulness
is the sword of God that cuts through everything it falls on.” Sahl b. ∏Abdallah
[al-Tustari] said: “When the truthful begin to talk to themselves,335 they are
beginning to betray their truthfulness.” When someone asked Fath al-Mawsili
about truthfulness, he thrust his hand into the blacksmith’s forge, brought out a
piece of [hot] iron//288 and held it in his palm, saying “This is truthfulness!”
Yusuf b.Sitanba
said: “This is what happens when you deal with God Most High truthfully!”
Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri – may God have mercy on him – said: “Truthfulness
is the sword of God that cuts through everything it falls on.” Sahl b. ∏Abdallah
[al-Tustari] said: “When the truthful begin to talk to themselves,335 they are
beginning to betray their truthfulness.” When someone asked Fath al-Mawsili
about truthfulness, he thrust his hand into the blacksmith’s forge, brought out a
piece of [hot] iron//288 and held it in his palm, saying “This is truthfulness!”
Yusuf b. Asbat said: “One night spent dealing with God truthfully is dearer to
me than wielding my sword for the sake of God Most High.”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq saying: “Truthfulness means being
with other people in the same way as you consider yourself to be or considering
yourself to be as you are [in yourself].” Someone asked al-Harith al-Muhasibi
about the signs of truthfulness. He answered: “The truthful person would be
unperturbed if any respect for him disappeared from the hearts of people as long
as his own heart remained virtuous. He would not want even one grain’s worth
of his good deeds to be known to people; and yet, he would not mind if people
were to observe any of his wrongdoing. For if he were to mind this, this would
mean that he desired his worth to increase in the eyes of other people. And this
[desire] is not among the features of the truthful.”
A Sufi said: “If you do not fulfill your perpetual obligation (fard daπim),
your occasional obligation (fard muπaqqat) will not be accepted from you.”336
Someone asked him about the meaning of “perpetual obligation”. He answered:
“Truthfulness.” It is said: “If you seek God in truthfulness, He will grant you a
mirror in which you will see all the marvels of this world and the Hereafter.” It is
said: “Hold on to truthfulness when you fear that it will harm you, for [in reality]
it will benefit you.When
I reached [the ruins of] Babel, I came across an overseer of the canals (ahad
al-qanaqina),334 who asked me: ‘What do you have with you?’ I said to myself:
‘Truthfulness is [always] better’ and told him that I had fifty dinars. He said:
‘Give them to me!’ I handed over [my] purse to him. He counted them [the dinars]
and there were indeed fifty dinars. He said: ‘Take them back. Your truthfulness
has impressed me!’ He then dismounted his horse and told me: ‘Take it
and ride!’ I said: ‘No, I do not want to!’ However, he said that I must and
he eventually prevailed over me. When I mounted the horse, he said: ‘I will be
following you.’ And indeed after one year he caught up with me and stayed with
me until he died.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say:
I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard Ja∏far al-Khawwas say: I heard Ibrahim
al-Khawwas say: “You will never see the truthful man except performing his
obligations or engaging in a good deed.” I also heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard Abu πl-Husayn b. Miqsam say: I heard Ja∏far al-Khawwas
say: I heard al-Junayd say: “The true essence of truthfulness is when you
speak truth in a situation from which only a lie can rescue you.” It is said:
“Three things never elude the truthful: sweetness [of character], awe [of God],
and grace.”
334 The meaning of this word is not quite clear; it may also mean “an expert on finding water” or
something along these lines.

And this
[desire] is not among the features of the truthful.”
A Sufi said: “If you do not fulfill your perpetual obligation (fard daπim),
your occasional obligation (fard muπaqqat) will not be accepted from you.”336
Someone asked him about the meaning of “perpetual obligation”. He answered:
“Truthfulness.” It is said: “If you seek God in truthfulness, He will grant you a
mirror in which you will see all the marvels of this world and the Hereafter.” It is
said: “Hold on to truthfulness when you fear that it will harm you, for [in reality]
it will benefit you. Give up a lie when you think that it will benefit you, for [in
335 Or “to their souls” – that is, when they stop saying publicly what they think. 336 According to a commentator, the former denotes an obligation that is required at all times,
such as faith, whereas the latter refers to obligations due at particular times, such as daytime
fasting during the month of Ramadan.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 226
226 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
reality] it will harm you.” It is said: “Everything is something. However, the
friendship of a liar is nothing.” It is said: “The sign of the liar is that he makes
plenty of promises, when there is no one around to take him up on them.” Ibn
Sirin said: “Words are so broad that they absolve the intelligent man of lying.”337
It is also said: “A trustworthy (saduq) merchant will never be destitute.”
Shame (haya)
God Most High said: “Does he not know that God sees?”338//289 Abu Bakr
Muhammad b. ∏Abdus al-Hiri al-Muzakki informed us: Abu Sahl Ahmad b.
Muhammad b. Ziyad al-Nahwi in Baghdad informed us: Ibrahim b. Muhammad
b. al-Haytham told us: Musa b. al-Hayyan told us: al-Muqaddami told us on the
authority of ∏Ubaydallah b. ∏Umar, on the authority of Nafi∏, on the authority of
Ibn ∏Umar – may God be pleased with both of them – that: the Messenger of
God – may God bless and greet him – said: “Shame is part of faith.” Abu Sa∏id
Muhammad b. Ibrahim al-Isma∏ili informed us: Abu ∏Uthman ∏Amr b. ∏Abdallah
al-Basri told us: Abu Ahmad Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-Wahhab told us: Ya∏la
b. ∏Ubayd told us: Aban b. Ishaq told us on the authority of al-Sabbah b.
Muhammad, on the authority of Murra al-Hamdani, on the authority of
[∏Abdallah] Ibn Mas∏ud – may God be pleased with him – that the Prophet
of God – may God bless and greet him – told his Companions one day: “Be
ashamed in the eyes of God as it befits Him!” They answered: “We are ashamed,
the Prophet of God. Praise be to God!” He answered: “It is not that! He who
feels himself ashamed in the eyes of God as it befits Him must guard his head
from that which occurs to it and his stomach from that which it contains; and he
must constantly remember death and afflictions. He who seeks the Hereafter
must abandon the adornments of this life. Only he who has done all this is
ashamed in the eyes of God as it befits Him.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: Abu Nasr al-Waziri
told us: Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad told us: al-Ghallabi told us:
Muhammad b. Makhlad told us that his father said: “A wise man said: ‘Renew
[your] shame by keeping company with the One in the presence of Whom all
others feel ashamed of themselves!’” I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard
Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard Ibn ∏Ataπ say: “The greatest knowledge is awe and
shame. When they disappear from [one’s heart] nothing good remains there.” I
also heard him say: I heard Abu πl-Faraj al-Warathani say: I heard Muhammad
b. Ahmad b. Ya∏qub say: Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-Malik said: I heard Dhu πl-Nun
al-Misri say: “Shame is the presence of awe [of God] in your heart as a result of
your consternation over your past transgressions against your Lord Most High.”
Dhu πl-Nin al-Misri also said: “Love makes [one] speak, shame silences, and fear
337 That is, the multiple meanings of words makes lying unnecessary, if one knows how to use
them.
338 Q. 96:14.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 227
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 227
unsettles.” Abu ∏Uthman [al-Hiri] said: “He who discourses about shame, without
being ashamed in the eyes of God – may He be great and exalted – is being led
on step by step (mustadraj).”
I heard Abu Bakr b. Ishkib say: al-Hasan b. al-Haddad came to ∏Abdallah b. Munazil, who asked where he came from. He answered: “From a meeting of
Abu πl-Qasim the Preacher (al-mudhakkir).” “What was he speaking about?”
asked ∏Abdallah. Al-Hasan said that he was speaking about shame. ∏Abdallah
exclaimed: “How odd! How can one who is not ashamed of himself in the
eyes of God Most High speak about shame?”339//290. I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Baghdadi say: I heard Ahmad b. Salih
say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdun say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Muπaddib say:
al-Sari said: “Shame and intimacy knock on the door of the heart. If they find
there renunciation (zuhd) and scrupulousness (wara∏), they settle down. If not
they walk away.” I also heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard
Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. Shadhan say: I heard al-Jurayri say: “The first
generation of people traded religion among themselves (ta∏amal) until it grew
thin. The second generation traded fidelity among themselves until it disappeared. The third generation traded chivalry among themselves until it disappeared
as well. The fourth generation traded shame among themselves until shame
disappeared. Now people have started to trade desire [for Paradise] and fear [of
punishment in the Hereafter] …”
They say about the words of God Most High, “For she [the wife of Potiphar]
desired him and he would have taken her, but that he saw the proof of his Lord”,340
that the “proof” here was that she put a piece of cloth over the face of an idol
[stationed] in a corner of her house.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 226
226 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
reality] it will harm you.” It is said: “Everything is something. However, the
friendship of a liar is nothing.” It is said: “The sign of the liar is that he makes
plenty of promises, when there is no one around to take him up on them.” Ibn
Sirin said: “Words are so broad that they absolve the intelligent man of lying.”337
It is also said: “A trustworthy (saduq) merchant will never be destitute.”
Shame (haya)
God Most High said: “Does he not know that God sees?”338//289 Abu Bakr
Muhammad b. ∏Abdus al-Hiri al-Muzakki informed us: Abu Sahl Ahmad b.
Muhammad b. Ziyad al-Nahwi in Baghdad informed us: Ibrahim b. Muhammad
b. al-Haytham told us: Musa b. al-Hayyan told us: al-Muqaddami told us on the
authority of ∏Ubaydallah b. ∏Umar, on the authority of Nafi∏, on the authority of
Ibn ∏Umar – may God be pleased with both of them – that: the Messenger of
God – may God bless and greet him – said: “Shame is part of faith.” Abu Sa∏id
Muhammad b. Ibrahim al-Isma∏ili informed us: Abu ∏Uthman ∏Amr b. ∏Abdallah
al-Basri told us: Abu Ahmad Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-Wahhab told us: Ya∏la
b. ∏Ubayd told us: Aban b. Ishaq told us on the authority of al-Sabbah b.
Muhammad, on the authority of Murra al-Hamdani, on the authority of
[∏Abdallah] Ibn Mas∏ud – may God be pleased with him – that the Prophet
of God – may God bless and greet him – told his Companions one day: “Be
ashamed in the eyes of God as it befits Him!” They answered: “We are ashamed,
the Prophet of God. Praise be to God!” He answered: “It is not that! He who
feels himself ashamed in the eyes of God as it befits Him must guard his head
from that which occurs to it and his stomach from that which it contains; and he
must constantly remember death and afflictions. He who seeks the Hereafter
must abandon the adornments of this life. Only he who has done all this is
ashamed in the eyes of God as it befits Him.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: Abu Nasr al-Waziri
told us: Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad told us: al-Ghallabi told us:
Muhammad b. Makhlad told us that his father said: “A wise man said: ‘Renew
[your] shame by keeping company with the One in the presence of Whom all
others feel ashamed of themselves!’” I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard
Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard Ibn ∏Ataπ say: “The greatest knowledge is awe and
shame. When they disappear from [one’s heart] nothing good remains there.” I
also heard him say: I heard Abu πl-Faraj al-Warathani say: I heard Muhammad
b. Ahmad b. Ya∏qub say: Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-Malik said: I heard Dhu πl-Nun
al-Misri say: “Shame is the presence of awe [of God] in your heart as a result of
your consternation over your past transgressions against your Lord Most High.”
Dhu πl-Nin al-Misri also said: “Love makes [one] speak, shame silences, and fear
337 That is, the multiple meanings of words makes lying unnecessary, if one knows how to use
them.
338 Q. 96:14.

The fourth generation traded shame among themselves until shame
disappeared. Now people have started to trade desire [for Paradise] and fear [of
punishment in the Hereafter] …”
They say about the words of God Most High, “For she [the wife of Potiphar]
desired him and he would have taken her, but that he saw the proof of his Lord”,340
that the “proof” here was that she put a piece of cloth over the face of an idol
[stationed] in a corner of her house. Yusuf – peace be upon him – asked her: “What
are you doing?” She answered: “I am ashamed of him.” Then Yusuf – peace be
upon him – said: “And I am even more ashamed of myself before God Most
High!” They say about the words of God Most High, “One of the women came
to him [Moses] walking with shyness”,341 that she was embarrassed before him,
because she was offering him hospitality and was embarrassed that Moses might
not accept it. This is the kind of shame that is associated with generosity. I heard
Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard ∏Abdallah
b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu Muhammad al-Baladhuri say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah
al-∏Umari say: I heard Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari say: I heard Abu Sulayman
al-Darani say: “God Most High said: ‘My servant, as long as you are ashamed
before Me, I will make people forget your sins and I will make all corners of the
earth forget your sins. I will erase all your transgressions from the Mother of the
Books342and will not take you to account on the Day of Judgement.’”
339 He apparently referred to a preacher who had made preaching a source of his livelihood – a
practice that was condemned by many Sufi masters. See IM, pp. 23–25 and 50. 340 Q. 12:24. 341 Q. 28:25. 342 That is, the book in which the destinies of all human beings are inscribed.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 228
228 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
A man was seen praying outside the mosque. Someone asked him: “Why can’t
you enter the mosque and pray there?” He answered: “I am ashamed to enter
God’s house after I have disobeyed Him!” They say: “One of the signs of those
who possess shame is that one will never see them in a shameful condition.” A
Sufi said: “Once we were traveling by night and entered a thicket. There we
came upon a sleeping man, whose horse was grazing at his head. We woke him
up and asked him: ‘Aren’t you afraid of sleeping in such a scary place that is full
of wild beasts?’ He raised his head and said: ‘I would be ashamed before God
Most High if I were to be afraid of anyone other than Him!’ He then put his head
down and fell back to sleep.”//291
God – praise be to Him – revealed to Jesus – peace be upon him: “Admonish
yourself. If you heed the admonishment, then admonish others. If not, then
be ashamed before Me, when you admonish others!” It is said that there are
different kinds of shame. One is the shame of transgression, as in the case with
Adam – peace be upon him. When God asked him, “Are you fleeing from Me?”,
he answered, “No, I am fleeing from shame before You!” Another is the shame
of falling short (taqsir), as in the case of the angels, who told [God]: “We have
not worshiped You as You deserve [to be worshiped]!” Another type of shame is
the shame of reverence (ijlal). It was characteristic of [the angel] Israfil – peace
be upon him – who wrapped himself in his wings out of shame before God – may
He be great and exalted! There’s also the shame of generosity, which pertained
to the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – for he was ashamed to ask [the
people of his] community (umma) to leave him alone.The fourth generation traded shame among themselves until shame
disappeared. Now people have started to trade desire [for Paradise] and fear [of
punishment in the Hereafter] …”
They say about the words of God Most High, “For she [the wife of Potiphar]
desired him and he would have taken her, but that he saw the proof of his Lord”,340
that the “proof” here was that she put a piece of cloth over the face of an idol
[stationed] in a corner of her house. Yusuf – peace be upon him – asked her: “What
are you doing?” She answered: “I am ashamed of him.” Then Yusuf – peace be
upon him – said: “And I am even more ashamed of myself before God Most
High!” They say about the words of God Most High, “One of the women came
to him [Moses] walking with shyness”,341 that she was embarrassed before him,
because she was offering him hospitality and was embarrassed that Moses might
not accept it. This is the kind of shame that is associated with generosity. I heard
Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard ∏Abdallah
b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu Muhammad al-Baladhuri say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah
al-∏Umari say: I heard Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari say: I heard Abu Sulayman
al-Darani say: “God Most High said: ‘My servant, as long as you are ashamed
before Me, I will make people forget your sins and I will make all corners of the
earth forget your sins. I will erase all your transgressions from the Mother of the
Books342and will not take you to account on the Day of Judgement.’”
339 He apparently referred to a preacher who had made preaching a source of his livelihood – a
practice that was condemned by many Sufi masters. See IM, pp. 23–25 and 50. 340 Q. 12:24. 341 Q. 28:25. 342 That is, the book in which the destinies of all human beings are inscribed.

It was characteristic of [the angel] Israfil – peace
be upon him – who wrapped himself in his wings out of shame before God – may
He be great and exalted! There’s also the shame of generosity, which pertained
to the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – for he was ashamed to ask [the
people of his] community (umma) to leave him alone. Therefore God Most High
[had to] say: “[And when you have had the meal, disperse,] neither lingering for
idle talk.”343 Another type of shame is the shame of embarrassment, which was
characteristic of ∏Ali – may God be pleased with him – when he asked (bearing
in mind the status of [the Prophet’s daughter] Fatima – may God be pleased with
her) al-Miqdad b. al-Aswad to ask the Messenger of God – may God bless and
greet him – for a ruling concerning the emission of the sperm resulting from
foreplay. Then there is the shame of humility, which was characteristic of Moses
– peace be upon him – when he said: “When I need something from this world,
I am ashamed to ask You [for it], my Lord!” To which God – may He be great
and exalted – responded, saying: “Ask Me, even for salt for the dough of your
bread and the fodder for your sheep!” Finally, there is the shame of [divine]
beneficence. This is the shame of the Lord – praise be to Him – when He gives
His servant a sealed book, after he has crossed the bridge leading to the Hereafter. In this book it is written: “You did what you did and I was ashamed of showing
it to you. Go now, for I have forgiven you!” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq say regarding this issue that Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “Praise be the
[Lord] Who is ashamed of His sinning servant.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Ahmad b. Ja∏far
say: I heard Zanjawayh al-Labbad say: I heard ∏Ali b. al-Husayn al-Hilali say: I
343 Q. 33:53.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 229
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 229
heard Ibrahim b. al-Ash∏ath say: I heard al-Fudayl b. ∏Iyad say: “There are five
signs of wretchedness [in mankind]: the coarseness of the heart, the ruthlessness
of the eye, the paucity of shame, desire for this world, and expecting too much
of it.” In a revealed book it is said: “My servant is unjust to Me. When he calls
upon Me, I am embarrassed to turn him down. And yet he disobeys Me without
being ashamed before Me!”344
Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “If a man is ashamed before God Most High while
being obedient, God will be ashamed of [punishing] him, when he sins.”//292
Know that shame is like melting, for they say that shame melts man’s innards
under the gaze of His Master. It is said: “Shame is the contraction of the heart,
when it seeks to exalt its Lord.” It is also said: “When a man sits to preach to
other people, his two [recording] angels345 tell him: ‘Admonish yourself as you
admonish others, or else be ashamed before your Master, for He always watches
you!’” Someone asked al-Junayd about shame. He answered: “When you see
both the favors of your God and your shortcomings there emerges between them
the state known as ‘shame’.” Al-Wasiti said: “A man cannot feel the brand of
shame until he has transgressed one of God’s laws or violated one of his pacts
[with Him].” Al-Wasiti also said: “Sweat streams forth from a man who feels
shame, for this is a blessing that God puts into him. As long as any trace [of his
soul’s influence] remains in him, he is barred from being ashamed.”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“Shame is the abandoning of all [personal] pretensions before God – may He be
great and exalted!” I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad
b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas
b. al-Walid al-Zawzani say: I heard Muhammad b.It was characteristic of [the angel] Israfil – peace
be upon him – who wrapped himself in his wings out of shame before God – may
He be great and exalted! There’s also the shame of generosity, which pertained
to the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – for he was ashamed to ask [the
people of his] community (umma) to leave him alone. Therefore God Most High
[had to] say: “[And when you have had the meal, disperse,] neither lingering for
idle talk.”343 Another type of shame is the shame of embarrassment, which was
characteristic of ∏Ali – may God be pleased with him – when he asked (bearing
in mind the status of [the Prophet’s daughter] Fatima – may God be pleased with
her) al-Miqdad b. al-Aswad to ask the Messenger of God – may God bless and
greet him – for a ruling concerning the emission of the sperm resulting from
foreplay. Then there is the shame of humility, which was characteristic of Moses
– peace be upon him – when he said: “When I need something from this world,
I am ashamed to ask You [for it], my Lord!” To which God – may He be great
and exalted – responded, saying: “Ask Me, even for salt for the dough of your
bread and the fodder for your sheep!” Finally, there is the shame of [divine]
beneficence. This is the shame of the Lord – praise be to Him – when He gives
His servant a sealed book, after he has crossed the bridge leading to the Hereafter. In this book it is written: “You did what you did and I was ashamed of showing
it to you. Go now, for I have forgiven you!” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq say regarding this issue that Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “Praise be the
[Lord] Who is ashamed of His sinning servant.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Ahmad b. Ja∏far
say: I heard Zanjawayh al-Labbad say: I heard ∏Ali b. al-Husayn al-Hilali say: I
343 Q. 33:53.

∏Abdallah al-Sufi – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas
b. al-Walid al-Zawzani say: I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Juzjani say: I heard
Abu Bakr al-Warraq say: “Occasionally, I would pray two prayers to God Most
High then come away ashamed as if I have robbed someone.”
Freedom (hurriyya)
God – may He be great and exalted – said: “[They] prefer others to themselves
even though poverty be their portion.”346He347explained: “They have preferred
others to themselves, because they have freed themselves from that which they
have given up and preferred.”
∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Basri informed
us: Ibn Abi Qammash told us: Muhammad b. Salih b. al-Nattah told us: Nu∏aym
b. Muwarri∏ b. Tawba told us on the authority of Isma∏il al-Makki, on the
authority of ∏Amr b. Dinar, on the authority of Tawus, on the authority of
[∏Abdallah] Ibn ∏Abbas, who said that the Messenger of God – may God bless
344 I have not been able to identify this Biblical reference. 345 According to an Islamic belief, each person is always accompanied by two angels, one of which
records his/her good deeds, the other his/her bad deeds. 346 Q. 59:9. 347 That is, al-Qushayri.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 230
230 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
and greet him – said: “What satisfies each one of you is what he is content with.
For everything will end up in the four cubits and a span,348//293 because all
things eventually come to an end.”
He349said: “Freedom means that the servant of God does not allow himself to
become enslaved by [other] creatures, nor is he subject to the power of originated
things (mukawwanat). The sign of its soundness is that his heart is no longer
capable of distinguishing different things to such an extent that everything he
sees looks equal to him.” Haritha350– may God be pleased with him – said to the
Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him: “I have relinquished this
world and now its stones and gold are equal to me.” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say: “Whoever comes into this world
free from it departs for the next world being free from it.” I heard Muhammad
b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu Muhammad al-Maraghi say on the authority of
al-Raqqi351that al-Daqqaq352said: “Whoever lives in this world being free from it
will live in the next world being free from it.”
Know that the True Reality of freedom lies in the perfection of one’s
servanthood (∏ubudiyya). When one’s servanthood before God is sincere, one’s
freedom is cleansed from attachment to anything other than God. Those who
fathom that the servant may occasionally remove the bridle of servanthood and
turn his sight away from [God’s] commands and prohibitions in the realm of the
Divine Law (dar al-taklif), while being of sound mind, [are deluded,] for this is
nothing but forfeiting one’s religion.
God – praise be to Him – said to His Prophet – may God bless and greet
him: “Serve thy Lord until the Certitude comes to you.”353 All commentators
agree that [the Certitude] here means one’s appointed time [of death] (ajal).
When the folk (qawm)354 speak of freedom they imply that one is not bound
by any mundane attachments or fleeting things of this world nor those of the
Hereafter. This man devotes himself solely to God and is subject to neither the
transitory things of this world, nor to the fulfillment of his desires, nor to the
promptings of aspirations; he has no requests, no goals, no need, and no fortune.
Someone asked al-Shibli: “Don’t you know that God Most High is merciful?”
He answered: “Yes, of course, but since I learned about His mercifulness, I have
never asked Him to have mercy on me!”//294 The station of freedom is very
rare. I heard the master Abu ∏Ali [al-Daqqaq] – may God have mercy on him –
say: Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Sayyari used to say: “If using words other than the Qurπan
in one’s prayer were to be permitted, they should have been the following:
348 That is, the size of a grave.
349 See note 347.
350 A Companion of the Prophet.
351 Or “al-Duqqi”.
352 Or “al-Zaqqaq”.
353 Q. 15:99.
354 That is, “Sufis”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 231
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 231
I wish that the fate (zaman) grant me something that is [hardly]
possible:
That my eyes would fall on the face of a free man (hurr)!”
The Sufi masters have discoursed profusely on freedom. Thus, al-Husayn b.
Mansur [al-Hallaj] said: “Whoever aspires to freedom, let him devote himself
constantly to the service [of God]!” Someone asked al-Junayd’s opinion about
someone whose debt to this world does not exceed the amount of moisture
one can squeeze out of a date stone. He answered: “A slave who has signed a
manumission contract with his owner remains a slave while he owes even one
dirham[to his owner].” I heard Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Abu
Bakr al-Razi say: I heard Abu ∏Umar al-Anmati say: I heard al-Junayd say:
“You will never attain sincere freedom until there remains even one bit of true
servanthood that you owe to Him.” Bishr al-Hafi said: “Whoever wants to taste
the flavor of freedom and to find rest from servanthood must purify the secret
(sarira) between himself and God Most High.”
Al-Husayn b. Mansur said: “When the servant has fulfilled all the stations of
servanthood, he becomes free of the hardship of servanthood. He then [becomes
capable of] acquiring servanthood without any effort or self-exertion on his part.
This is the station of the prophets and the truthful (siddiqun).” That is, he is being
borne (mahmul) [toward his goal]; no difficulty attaches itself to his heart, even
though [outwardly] he remains adorned by [the injunctions of] the Divine Law.355
Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman [al-Sulami] recited to us: Abu Bakr al-Razi
recited to us: Mansur al-Faqih (“the Jurist”) recited to us:
No free man remains among mankind, not a single one,
Nor is one found among the jinn!
The free of these two communities have departed
And the sweetness of life has grown bitter!
Know that the greatest kind of freedom lies in serving the poor.356 I heard the
master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say: “God Most
High revealed to [the prophet] David – peace be upon him: ‘If you see anyone
who seeks Me, be his servant!’” The Prophet – may God bless and greet him –
said: “The master of a people is their servant.” I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn
– may God have mercy on him – say: I heard Muhammad b. Ibrahim b. al-Fadl
say: I heard Muhammad b. al-Rumi say: I heard Yahya b. Mu∏adh say: “The
children of this world are served by slave boys and slave girls, whereas the children
of the next world are served by the righteous and the free.” I also heard him
[Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Uthman b. Yahya say: I
heard ∏Ali b. Muhammad al-Misri say: I heard Yusuf b. Musa say: I heard Ibn
355 That is, even though everyone continues to see him exerting himself in fulfilling the injunctions
of the shari∏a.
356 That is, the Sufis.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 232
232 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Khubayq say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard Ibrahim b. Adham
say: “One who is noble and free withdraws from this world before he is removed
from it [by God].” Ibrahim b. Adham also said: “Keep the company of none
except one who is noble and free: he will listen, but will not speak [to others].”
Remembrance (dhikr)
God Most High said: “O believers, remember God oft.”357Abu πl-Husayn ∏Ali b.
Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. Bashran informed us in Baghdad: Abu ∏Ali al-Husayn
b. Safwan al-Bardha∏i informed us: Abu Bakr b. ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. Abi
πl-Dunya told us: Harun b. Ma∏ruf said: Anas b. ∏Iyad told us: ∏Abdallah b. Sa∏id
b. Abi Hind told us on the authority of Ziyad b. Abi Ziyad, on the authority of
Abu Bahriyya, on the authority of Abu πl-Dardaπ – may God be pleased with him
– that the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – said: “Have I not
told you of the best of your works, the purest of them in your Lord’s eyes and
the ones that are the most exalted in your ranks? They are better than giving gold
and silver in charity and fighting your enemy and striking their necks as they
are striking yours? They asked him: ‘What is it, O Messenger of God?’ He
answered: ‘Remembering God Most High!’”
Abu Nu∏yam ∏Abd al-Malik b. al-Hasan informed us: Ya∏qub b. Ishaq b.
Ibrahim said: al-Dayri358 told us on the authority of ∏Abd al-Razzaq, on the
authority of Ma∏mar the authority of al-Zuhri, on the authority of Thabit, on the
authority of Anas [b. Malik], who said that the Messenger of God – may God
bless and greet him – said: “The Hour of Judgement will not come upon one
who is saying: ‘God! God!’” ∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan said: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd
said: Mu∏adh//296 said: My father said on the authority of Humayd, on the
authority of Anas b. Malik, that the Messenger of God – may God bless and
greet him – said: “The Hour of Judgement will not come until no one on this
earth will be saying: ‘God! God!’”
The master said: “Remembrance is a powerful pillar of the path to God –
praise be to Him! Indeed, it is the very foundation of this path, for one can only
reach God by constantly remembering His name.”
There are two types of remembrance; the remembrance of the tongue
and the remembrance of the heart. The continual remembrance of the tongue
eventually brings the servant to the remembrance of the heart. The true effect,
however, lies in the remembrance of the heart. If the servant is able to perform
remembrance with both his tongue and his heart, he has achieved perfection in
both his personal state and his wayfaring. I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God
have mercy on him – say: “Remembrance is the mandate (manshur) of sainthood.
He who is given access to the remembrance is given the mandate, whereas he
who is denied remembrance is banished [from the proximity of God].” It is said
357 Q. 33:41.
358 Or “al-Dabari”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 233
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 233
that at the beginning of his wayfaring al-Shibli would go down into a cellar
carrying with him a bundle of sticks. Whenever negligence entered his heart
he would beat himself with a stick until he broke it upon himself. Sometimes,
he ran out of the sticks before evening came, so he would strike his hands and
feet against the wall. It is said the remembrance of God by the heart is the sword
of the seekers with which they fight against their enemies and ward off any faults
that assail them. When an affliction overcomes the servant of God, his heart
should seek refuge with God Most High, and all that he abhors will be diverted
from him. Someone asked al-Wasiti about remembrance. He answered: “It is to depart
from the arena of negligence to the vast expanse of witnessing [God], which
is ruled by intense fear and love of Him.” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman
al-Sulami say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu Muhammad
al-Baladhuri say: I heard ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Bakr say: I heard Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri
say: “He who mentions God Most High honestly, will forget about anything else
through his remembrance. God will then protect him from everything and will
recompense him for everything [he has missed].” I also heard him [al-Sulami]
say: I heard ∏Abdallah al-Mu∏allim say: I heard Ahmad al-Masjidi say://297
“Someone asked Abu ∏Uthman [al-Hiri]: ‘We remember God Most High, but we
find no sweetness in our hearts as a result of this.’ He answered: ‘Give praise to
GodMost High that He at least has adorned your limbs with acts of obedience!’”
According to a well-known tradition from the Messenger of God – may God
bless and greet him – he said: “When you pass by the gardens of Paradise, alight
and graze there!” [His followers] asked him: “What are the gardens of Paradise?”
He answered: “The gatherings at which God is remembered.”
Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b.Bakr say: I heard Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri
say: “He who mentions God Most High honestly, will forget about anything else
through his remembrance. God will then protect him from everything and will
recompense him for everything [he has missed].” I also heard him [al-Sulami]
say: I heard ∏Abdallah al-Mu∏allim say: I heard Ahmad al-Masjidi say://297
“Someone asked Abu ∏Uthman [al-Hiri]: ‘We remember God Most High, but we
find no sweetness in our hearts as a result of this.’ He answered: ‘Give praise to
GodMost High that He at least has adorned your limbs with acts of obedience!’”
According to a well-known tradition from the Messenger of God – may God
bless and greet him – he said: “When you pass by the gardens of Paradise, alight
and graze there!” [His followers] asked him: “What are the gardens of Paradise?”
He answered: “The gatherings at which God is remembered.”
Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Bakkar359 informed us in Baghdad: Abu ∏Ali b. Safwan
told us: Ibn Abi πl-Dunya said: al-Haytham b. Kharija said: Isma∏il b. ∏Ayyash
said on the authority of ∏Umar b. ∏Abdallah that Khalid b. ∏Abdallah b. Safwan
told him on the authority of Jabir b. ∏Abdallah, who said: “The Messenger of
God – may God bless and greet him – came out to us and said: ‘O people, alight
and graze in the gardens of Paradise!’ We asked him: ‘O Messenger of God, what
are the gardens of Paradise?’ He answered: ‘The gathering at which God is
remembered. So, go forth, morning and evening, and remember God. Let anyone
who wishes to know his standing with God see what standing God has with him! For God – praise be to Him – grants everyone the same standing as one oneself
grants to Him!’”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad al-Farraπ say:
I heard al-Shibli say: “Does not God – may He be exalted – say: ‘I am in the
company of he who remembers Me’? What benefit did you reap from the
companionship of God Most High?”
I heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard ∏Abdallah b.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 232
232 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Khubayq say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard Ibrahim b. Adham
say: “One who is noble and free withdraws from this world before he is removed
from it [by God].” Ibrahim b. Adham also said: “Keep the company of none
except one who is noble and free: he will listen, but will not speak [to others].”
Remembrance (dhikr)
God Most High said: “O believers, remember God oft.”357Abu πl-Husayn ∏Ali b.
Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. Bashran informed us in Baghdad: Abu ∏Ali al-Husayn
b. Safwan al-Bardha∏i informed us: Abu Bakr b. ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. Abi
πl-Dunya told us: Harun b. Ma∏ruf said: Anas b. ∏Iyad told us: ∏Abdallah b. Sa∏id
b. Abi Hind told us on the authority of Ziyad b. Abi Ziyad, on the authority of
Abu Bahriyya, on the authority of Abu πl-Dardaπ – may God be pleased with him
– that the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – said: “Have I not
told you of the best of your works, the purest of them in your Lord’s eyes and
the ones that are the most exalted in your ranks? They are better than giving gold
and silver in charity and fighting your enemy and striking their necks as they
are striking yours? They asked him: ‘What is it, O Messenger of God?’ He
answered: ‘Remembering God Most High!’”
Abu Nu∏yam ∏Abd al-Malik b. al-Hasan informed us: Ya∏qub b. Ishaq b.
Ibrahim said: al-Dayri358 told us on the authority of ∏Abd al-Razzaq, on the
authority of Ma∏mar the authority of al-Zuhri, on the authority of Thabit, on the
authority of Anas [b. Malik], who said that the Messenger of God – may God
bless and greet him – said: “The Hour of Judgement will not come upon one
who is saying: ‘God! God!’” ∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan said: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd
said: Mu∏adh//296 said: My father said on the authority of Humayd, on the
authority of Anas b. Malik, that the Messenger of God – may God bless and
greet him – said: “The Hour of Judgement will not come until no one on this
earth will be saying: ‘God! God!’”
The master said: “Remembrance is a powerful pillar of the path to God –
praise be to Him! Indeed, it is the very foundation of this path, for one can only
reach God by constantly remembering His name.”
There are two types of remembrance; the remembrance of the tongue
and the remembrance of the heart. The continual remembrance of the tongue
eventually brings the servant to the remembrance of the heart. The true effect,
however, lies in the remembrance of the heart. If the servant is able to perform
remembrance with both his tongue and his heart, he has achieved perfection in
both his personal state and his wayfaring. I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God
have mercy on him – say: “Remembrance is the mandate (manshur) of sainthood.
He who is given access to the remembrance is given the mandate, whereas he
who is denied remembrance is banished [from the proximity of God].” It is said
357 Q. 33:41.
358 Or “al-Dabari”.

What benefit did you reap from the
companionship of God Most High?”
I heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Musa
al-Salami say: I heard al-Shibli reciting the following in his session:
359 Or “Bishr”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 234
234 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
I remembered Your name not because I had forgotten You even for
one instant
The easiest part of remembrance is to remember You with my tongue
I almost died even without ecstasy actually overcoming me
My heart trembles, overwhelmed with love
And my ecstasy showed me that You are with me
I witnessed Your presence everywhere
Then I addressed one who was present without uttering a word
And noticed one whom I knew without actually seeing him!
One of the characteristics of remembrance is that it is not confined to appointed
times. Actually, the servant of God is enjoined to remember God at all times as
[his religious] duty//298 or as a recommendation. As for the prayer, in spite of
its being the noblest of all acts of worship, it can be said during appointed times
only, while the remembrance of God in the heart [is recommended] in all states
and conditions.
God Most High said: “And [men] who remember God standing and sitting
and [lying] on their sides.”360 I heard the imam Abu Bakr b. Furak – may God
have mercy on him – say: “‘Standing’ here means ‘remembering Him as it befits
Him’, while ‘sitting’ means ‘abandoning any pretension vis-à-vis Him.’” I heard
Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami ask the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq:
“What is more perfect: remembrance or [rational] contemplation (fikr)?” The
master, in turn, asked him: “And what do you think about this?” Shaykh Abu
∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami said: “In my view, remembrance is more perfect
than contemplation, for God – praise be to Him – attributed remembrance
to Himself, while He never did the same for contemplation. And anything that
is attributed to God – praise be to Him – is always better than that which is
attributed to His creatures.” The master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have
mercy on him – approved that answer.
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard al-Kattani say: “If
remembering Him was not imposed on me [as a duty], I would not remember Him
at all out of my awe for Him – for how can someone as lowly as me remember
Him without cleansing his mouth one thousand times as a penance for mentioning
Him?!”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him –
recite the following:
I cannot remember your name without having my heart,
my innermost self, and my spirit restrain me whenever even one thought
of you visits me
As if an invisible watcher from you tells me: “Beware!” “Woe onto you!”
“Beware of this recollection!”
360 Q. 3:191; 3:187, according to Arberry’s translation.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 235
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 235
One of the characteristics of remembrance is that God always reciprocates one’s
remembrance of Him, for God Most High said: “Remember Me and I will
remember you.”361According to a sound tradition, Gabriel – peace be upon him
– said to the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – that God Most
High said: “I have given your community something that I have not given to
any other community.” The Messenger asked: “What is that, Gabriel?” He
answered: “God Most High said: ‘Remember Me and I will remember you!’ He
has not said that to any other community.” It is said: “The angel of death asks
the permission of the one who recollects [God] before seizing his spirit.”//299
According to one of the [holy] books, Moses – peace be upon him – said:
“Where do you reside, my Lord?” God Most High revealed to him: “In the heart
of My faithful servant.” This implies the dwelling of remembrance [of God], for
God Most High is far removed from any notion of residing or dwelling. This
“residence” means only the affirmation and appropriation [of God’s name by the
servant]. I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say:
I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali say: I heard Faris say: I heard al-Thawri say: I heard
Dhu πl-Nun say, when I asked him about remembrance: “It means the absence
of the one who remembers from his act of remembrance.” He then recited the
following [verse]:
I multiply my remembrance of you not because I have forgotten you
Remembrance simply flows from my tongue! Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] said: “Not a single day passes without the Majestic
One calling out: ‘O My servant, you have not treated Me justly, for I remember
you, while you forget Me. I invite you to be with Me, while you go to visit others. I ward off afflictions from you, while you keep sinning.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 234
234 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
I remembered Your name not because I had forgotten You even for
one instant
The easiest part of remembrance is to remember You with my tongue
I almost died even without ecstasy actually overcoming me
My heart trembles, overwhelmed with love
And my ecstasy showed me that You are with me
I witnessed Your presence everywhere
Then I addressed one who was present without uttering a word
And noticed one whom I knew without actually seeing him!
One of the characteristics of remembrance is that it is not confined to appointed
times. Actually, the servant of God is enjoined to remember God at all times as
[his religious] duty//298 or as a recommendation. As for the prayer, in spite of
its being the noblest of all acts of worship, it can be said during appointed times
only, while the remembrance of God in the heart [is recommended] in all states
and conditions.
God Most High said: “And [men] who remember God standing and sitting
and [lying] on their sides.”360 I heard the imam Abu Bakr b. Furak – may God
have mercy on him – say: “‘Standing’ here means ‘remembering Him as it befits
Him’, while ‘sitting’ means ‘abandoning any pretension vis-à-vis Him.’” I heard
Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami ask the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq:
“What is more perfect: remembrance or [rational] contemplation (fikr)?” The
master, in turn, asked him: “And what do you think about this?” Shaykh Abu
∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami said: “In my view, remembrance is more perfect
than contemplation, for God – praise be to Him – attributed remembrance
to Himself, while He never did the same for contemplation. And anything that
is attributed to God – praise be to Him – is always better than that which is
attributed to His creatures.” The master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have
mercy on him – approved that answer.
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard al-Kattani say: “If
remembering Him was not imposed on me [as a duty], I would not remember Him
at all out of my awe for Him – for how can someone as lowly as me remember
Him without cleansing his mouth one thousand times as a penance for mentioning
Him?!”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him –
recite the following:
I cannot remember your name without having my heart,
my innermost self, and my spirit restrain me whenever even one thought
of you visits me
As if an invisible watcher from you tells me: “Beware!” “Woe onto you!”
“Beware of this recollection!”
360 Q. 3:191; 3:187, according to Arberry’s translation.

I invite you to be with Me, while you go to visit others. I ward off afflictions from you, while you keep sinning. O son of Adam, what will
you say tomorrow, when you come to see Me?!’” Abu Sulayman al-Darani said:
“In Paradise there are tracts of land. Whenever anyone remembers God’s name,
angels begin to plant trees there. Every now and then an angel stops planting. When asked why he stopped, he answers: ‘My [human] counterpart has grown
lax [in his remembrance].’”
Al-Hasan [al-Basri] said: “Seek pleasure in three things: the [ritual] prayer,
the remembrance of God’s name, and in the recitation of the Qurπan. If you find
pleasure in these, fine. If not, then know that the door is shut.” Hamid al-Aswad
said: “Once I traveled with Ibrahim al-Khawwas. We came to a place that was
teeming with snakes. He put down his water-skin and sat down. I, too, sat down. Then night came, the air grew cool, and the snakes came out [in great numbers]. I called upon the master, who said: ‘Remember God!’ As soon as I started
remembering God, the snakes withdrew and did not return. So we sat for a
while, until the air grew even cooler and the snakes came out again. I again called
upon the master, and he said: ‘Remember God!’ I started remembering God, and
361 Q. 2:152; 2:147, according to Arberry’s translation.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 236
236 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
the snakes withdrew and did not return. After a while I called upon him again,
and he said the same to me. So I kept remembering God until morning came. When we woke up, he stood up and walked on, and I followed him. Suddenly, a
big snake fell out of his bedroll, into which it had slipped during the night. I
asked him: ‘Didn’t you notice that snake?’ He answered: ‘No, it’s been a while
since I slept so well as last night!’” Abu ∏Uthman [al-Hiri] said: “One cannot
appreciate the desolation of negligence, until one has tasted the flavor of intimacy
induced by remembrance of God.”//300
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Abd al-Rahman b. ∏Abdallah
al-Dhubyani say: I heard al-Jurayri say: I heard al-Junayd say: I heard al-Sari
say: “In one of the books revealed by God it is said: ‘Whenever the remembrance
of Me dominates My servant, he is enamored of Me (∏ashiqani) and I am enamored
of him (∏ashiqtuh).’” He [al-Sari] also said: “God Most High revealed to David
– peace be upon him: ‘Rejoice in Me and take pleasure in remembering Me!’”
[Sufyan] al-Thawri said: “Everyone has his own punishment. The punishment
of the divine gnostic (∏arif bi-πllah) is to be deprived of the remembrance of
God.” In the Gospels it is said: “Remember Me when you are angry and I will
remember you when I am angry, for My helping you is better for you than your
helping yourself.” Someone asked a monk: “Are you fasting?” He answered:
“I am fasting by remembering Him. Whenever I remember anyone other than
Him, I break my fast.” If remembrance of God takes hold of one’s heart, each
time a devil seeks to approach it he is seized by a fit of writhing, in the same way
as man is seized by a fit of writhing whenever a devil tries to draw near him.I invite you to be with Me, while you go to visit others. I ward off afflictions from you, while you keep sinning. O son of Adam, what will
you say tomorrow, when you come to see Me?!’” Abu Sulayman al-Darani said:
“In Paradise there are tracts of land. Whenever anyone remembers God’s name,
angels begin to plant trees there. Every now and then an angel stops planting. When asked why he stopped, he answers: ‘My [human] counterpart has grown
lax [in his remembrance].’”
Al-Hasan [al-Basri] said: “Seek pleasure in three things: the [ritual] prayer,
the remembrance of God’s name, and in the recitation of the Qurπan. If you find
pleasure in these, fine. If not, then know that the door is shut.” Hamid al-Aswad
said: “Once I traveled with Ibrahim al-Khawwas. We came to a place that was
teeming with snakes. He put down his water-skin and sat down. I, too, sat down. Then night came, the air grew cool, and the snakes came out [in great numbers]. I called upon the master, who said: ‘Remember God!’ As soon as I started
remembering God, the snakes withdrew and did not return. So we sat for a
while, until the air grew even cooler and the snakes came out again. I again called
upon the master, and he said: ‘Remember God!’ I started remembering God, and
361 Q. 2:152; 2:147, according to Arberry’s translation.

The punishment
of the divine gnostic (∏arif bi-πllah) is to be deprived of the remembrance of
God.” In the Gospels it is said: “Remember Me when you are angry and I will
remember you when I am angry, for My helping you is better for you than your
helping yourself.” Someone asked a monk: “Are you fasting?” He answered:
“I am fasting by remembering Him. Whenever I remember anyone other than
Him, I break my fast.” If remembrance of God takes hold of one’s heart, each
time a devil seeks to approach it he is seized by a fit of writhing, in the same way
as man is seized by a fit of writhing whenever a devil tries to draw near him. Then the devils converge upon their fellow devil and ask: “What has happened
[to you]?” And they hear the answer: “Men have overcome him!”
Sahl [al-Tustari] said: “I know of no sin more heinous than forgetting the Lord
Most High.” It is also said that the angels cannot carry a silent remembrance of
God up to Him, because it is a secret between the servant and His God, may He
be great and exalted. A Sufi related: “I was told about a man who practiced
remembrance of God in the woods. So I came to see him. As he was sitting
there, a huge lion attacked him and tore off a piece of his flesh from him. We
both fainted. When we regained consciousness, I asked him about what had just
happened. He answered: ‘God has appointed this lion to watch over me. Each
time I become lax [in my remembrance of Him] it takes a bite out of me, as you
have just seen.’”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard al-Husayn b. Yahya say: I heard Ja∏far b. Nusayr say: I heard al-Jurayri say: “There was among
us a man who was constantly repeating the name of God, “Allah, Allah.” One
day a branch from a tree fell upon his head, splitting it open. As his blood fell
upon the ground, it formed the words: ‘God, God (Allah).’”543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 237
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 237
Chivalry (futuwwa)
God Most High said: “They362were [chivalrious] young men (fitya) who believed
in their Lord, and We increased them in guidance.”363//301. The master [al-Qushayri] said: “The foundation of chivalry is that the
servant of God always exerts himself in the service of others.” The Prophet –
may God bless and greet him – said: “God Most High attends consistently to
the needs of His servant as long as His servant attends to the needs of his
fellow Muslims.” ∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan reported the same story to us. He said: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd informed us: Isma∏il b. al-Fadl told us: Ya∏qub b. Humayd b. Kasib told us: Ibn Abi Hazim related this to us on the authority of
∏Abdallah b. ∏Amir al-Aslami, on the authority of ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Hurmuz
al-A∏raj on the authority of Abu Hurayra, on the authority of Zayd b. Thabit –
may God be pleased with both of them – that the Messenger of God – may God
bless and greet him – said: “God Most High attends consistently to the needs of
His servant as long as His servant attends to the needs of his fellow Muslims.”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “No one has achieved perfection
in chivalry, except the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – for on
the Day of Judgement everyone will be saying, ‘Me, Me’, except the Messenger
of God, who will be saying: ‘My community, my community!’” I heard Shaykh
Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard
Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu Ja∏far al-Farghani say: I heard
al-Junayd say: “Chivalry resides in Syria, eloquence in Iraq, and truthfulness in
Khurasan.” I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad
al-Razi say: I heard Muhammad b. Nasr b. Mansur al-Saπigh say: I heard
Muhammad b. Mardawayh say: I heard al-Fudayl [b.The punishment
of the divine gnostic (∏arif bi-πllah) is to be deprived of the remembrance of
God.” In the Gospels it is said: “Remember Me when you are angry and I will
remember you when I am angry, for My helping you is better for you than your
helping yourself.” Someone asked a monk: “Are you fasting?” He answered:
“I am fasting by remembering Him. Whenever I remember anyone other than
Him, I break my fast.” If remembrance of God takes hold of one’s heart, each
time a devil seeks to approach it he is seized by a fit of writhing, in the same way
as man is seized by a fit of writhing whenever a devil tries to draw near him. Then the devils converge upon their fellow devil and ask: “What has happened
[to you]?” And they hear the answer: “Men have overcome him!”
Sahl [al-Tustari] said: “I know of no sin more heinous than forgetting the Lord
Most High.” It is also said that the angels cannot carry a silent remembrance of
God up to Him, because it is a secret between the servant and His God, may He
be great and exalted. A Sufi related: “I was told about a man who practiced
remembrance of God in the woods. So I came to see him. As he was sitting
there, a huge lion attacked him and tore off a piece of his flesh from him. We
both fainted. When we regained consciousness, I asked him about what had just
happened. He answered: ‘God has appointed this lion to watch over me. Each
time I become lax [in my remembrance of Him] it takes a bite out of me, as you
have just seen.’”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard al-Husayn b. Yahya say: I heard Ja∏far b. Nusayr say: I heard al-Jurayri say: “There was among
us a man who was constantly repeating the name of God, “Allah, Allah.” One
day a branch from a tree fell upon his head, splitting it open. As his blood fell
upon the ground, it formed the words: ‘God, God (Allah).’”

Mansur al-Saπigh say: I heard
Muhammad b. Mardawayh say: I heard al-Fudayl [b. ∏Iyad] say: “Chivalry means
forgetting the faults of your brothers.”
It is said: “Chivalry is when you do not consider yourself superior to others.”
Abu Bakr al-Warraq said: “The chivalrous person has no enemies whatsoever.”
Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Tirmidhi said: “Chivalry means that you are your own
enemy before God.”364It is also said: “The chivalrous person cannot be an enemy
to anyone [but himself].” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have
mercy on him – say: I heard al-Nasrabadhi say: “The Men of the Cave were
called ‘[chivalrous] young men’,365 because they believed in their Lord without
any intermediary.” It is said that the chivalrous person is one who has broken
idols, for God Most High said: “We heard a [chivalrous] young man named
Abraham making mention of them [the idols of his people]”;366He also said: “He
broke them [the idols] into fragments.”367 The idol of every person is his own
self, therefore he who refuses to obey his passions is chivalrous in truth.//302
362 That is, “the Men of the Cave” mentioned in Chapter/sura18 of Qurπan. 363 Q. 18:13; 18:12, according to Arberry’s translation. 364 That is, you are always the first to acknowledge your failings before God. 365 See note 362. 366 Q. 21:60; 21:61, according to Arberry’s translation. 367 Q. 21:58; 21:59, according to Arberry’s translation.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 238
238 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Al-Harith al-Muhasibi said: “Chivalry means that you act justly, while not
demanding justice for your own self.” ∏Amr b. ∏Uthman al-Makki said: “Chivalry
means having good moral character.” Someone asked al-Junayd about chivalry. He answered: “It is that you neither avoid the poor, nor confront the rich.”
Al-Nasrabadhi said: “Manliness (muruwa)368is part of chivalry. It means turning
away from both worlds in disdain.”369 Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Tirmidhi said:
“Chivalry means that the permanent and the transitory are equal in your eyes.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say:
I heard ∏Ali b. ∏Umar al-Hafiz say: I heard Abu Isma∏il b. Ziyad say: I heard
∏Abdallah b. Ahmad b. Hanbal say: “Someone asked my father about chivalry. He answered: ‘Abandoning what you are longing for, for what you dread.’”
Someone asked a Sufi about chivalry. He answered: “It means that you do not
care whether the guest whom you entertain at your table is a friend of God or an
unbeliever.” I heard one learned man say: “A Magian asked hospitality from
Abraham, the Friend of God – peace be upon him. Abraham told him: ‘Only if
you embrace Islam!’370 The Magian walked away. At that moment, God Most
High revealed to him the following: ‘For fifty years I have fed him despite his
unbelief. Couldn’t you have offered him a morsel without asking him to change
his religion?’ On hearing this, Abraham – peace be upon him – rushed after the
Magian until he caught up with him. He then apologized before him. When the
Magian asked him about the cause [of his change of heart], he explained what
had happened to him, whereupon the Magian embraced Islam.”
Al-Junayd said: “Chivalry means keeping trouble [away from others] and
spending magnanimously [on them].” Sahl b.Mansur al-Saπigh say: I heard
Muhammad b. Mardawayh say: I heard al-Fudayl [b. ∏Iyad] say: “Chivalry means
forgetting the faults of your brothers.”
It is said: “Chivalry is when you do not consider yourself superior to others.”
Abu Bakr al-Warraq said: “The chivalrous person has no enemies whatsoever.”
Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Tirmidhi said: “Chivalry means that you are your own
enemy before God.”364It is also said: “The chivalrous person cannot be an enemy
to anyone [but himself].” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have
mercy on him – say: I heard al-Nasrabadhi say: “The Men of the Cave were
called ‘[chivalrous] young men’,365 because they believed in their Lord without
any intermediary.” It is said that the chivalrous person is one who has broken
idols, for God Most High said: “We heard a [chivalrous] young man named
Abraham making mention of them [the idols of his people]”;366He also said: “He
broke them [the idols] into fragments.”367 The idol of every person is his own
self, therefore he who refuses to obey his passions is chivalrous in truth.//302
362 That is, “the Men of the Cave” mentioned in Chapter/sura18 of Qurπan. 363 Q. 18:13; 18:12, according to Arberry’s translation. 364 That is, you are always the first to acknowledge your failings before God. 365 See note 362. 366 Q. 21:60; 21:61, according to Arberry’s translation. 367 Q. 21:58; 21:59, according to Arberry’s translation.

He then apologized before him. When the
Magian asked him about the cause [of his change of heart], he explained what
had happened to him, whereupon the Magian embraced Islam.”
Al-Junayd said: “Chivalry means keeping trouble [away from others] and
spending magnanimously [on them].” Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] said: “Chivalry
means holding on to the custom of the Prophet.” It is said: “Chivalry is being
faithful and observing the limits [set by God].” It is said: “Chivalry is a virtue that
you perform without attributing it to yourself.” It is said: “Chivalry is that you
do not hide from those who seek your assistance.” It is said: “Chivalry is that you
neither hoard [wealth] nor seek excuses [not to give it away to those in need].” It
is said: “Chivalry is showing [your gratitude for God’s bounty] and hiding the
hardship [inflicted upon you by God].” It is said: “Chivalry is when you invite ten
guests [for a meal] and care not whether eleven or nine actually come.” It is said:
“Chivalry is never giving preference [for one thing or person over the other].”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Ahmad b. Khadrawayh say to his wife, Umm ∏Ali: “I want to
throw a feast and to invite to it the clever bandit of honor (∏ayyar shatir) who
is head of the [chivalrous] young men (raπs al-fityan)371 in our town.” The wife
368 On this noble quality of character, see the article “Muruπa” in EI. 369 That is, this world and the Hereafter. 370 According to the Qurπan, Abraham’s religion was neither Judaism nor Christianity, but
“submission” to God, or Islam. 371 The ∏ayyars (∏ayyarun) were members of local urban militias in Muslim cities and towns,
who adhered to a specific code of honor. For details see Bosworth, The Mediaeval Islamic
Underworld.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 239
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 239
responded: “It is inappropriate for the likes of you to invite [chivalrous] young
men to your house.” However, he persisted [in his wish],//303 and his wife
told him: “If you want to do this, then have all your sheep, cows and donkeys
slaughtered and laid one after another from the door of that man’s house to your
own door.” Ahmad b. Khadrawayh asked her: “Well, I understand [why I should
slaughter] the sheep and the cows. But what do the donkeys have to do with
this?” The wife answered: “If you decide to invite a [chivalrous] young man to
your house, you should make sure that all the dogs of your neighborhood should
partake of your feast as well!”
It is related that one Sufi invited his friends to his house for a meal. Among
them was a Sufi shaykh from Shiraz.372After the feast they tried to perform [Sufi]
recitation (sama∏),but were suddenly overcome by sleep. The shaykh from Shiraz
asked the host what could have caused it. He said: “I do not know! I have
carefully ascertained the propriety of all food,373except the eggplants. I forgot to
ask about where they had come from.” When they woke up next morning, they
[went to] the eggplant vendor and interrogated him. He told them: “I had no
eggplants in my store, so I stole them from such-and-such place and sold them.”
So they brought the man to the owner of that land in order to resolve this issue. When they came to the owner, he exclaimed: “Are you asking me about the one
thousand eggplants which were stolen from me?! I am giving him [as a gift] this
plot of land, two oxen, a donkey and plow as gifts so that he will not have to do
such a thing again!”
It is said that a man married a woman, who suddenly became ill with smallpox
right on the night of consummation. [After seeing this] the bridegroom declared
that his eyesight had weakened; then he said that he had become completely
blind.He then apologized before him. When the
Magian asked him about the cause [of his change of heart], he explained what
had happened to him, whereupon the Magian embraced Islam.”
Al-Junayd said: “Chivalry means keeping trouble [away from others] and
spending magnanimously [on them].” Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] said: “Chivalry
means holding on to the custom of the Prophet.” It is said: “Chivalry is being
faithful and observing the limits [set by God].” It is said: “Chivalry is a virtue that
you perform without attributing it to yourself.” It is said: “Chivalry is that you
do not hide from those who seek your assistance.” It is said: “Chivalry is that you
neither hoard [wealth] nor seek excuses [not to give it away to those in need].” It
is said: “Chivalry is showing [your gratitude for God’s bounty] and hiding the
hardship [inflicted upon you by God].” It is said: “Chivalry is when you invite ten
guests [for a meal] and care not whether eleven or nine actually come.” It is said:
“Chivalry is never giving preference [for one thing or person over the other].”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Ahmad b. Khadrawayh say to his wife, Umm ∏Ali: “I want to
throw a feast and to invite to it the clever bandit of honor (∏ayyar shatir) who
is head of the [chivalrous] young men (raπs al-fityan)371 in our town.” The wife
368 On this noble quality of character, see the article “Muruπa” in EI. 369 That is, this world and the Hereafter. 370 According to the Qurπan, Abraham’s religion was neither Judaism nor Christianity, but
“submission” to God, or Islam. 371 The ∏ayyars (∏ayyarun) were members of local urban militias in Muslim cities and towns,
who adhered to a specific code of honor. For details see Bosworth, The Mediaeval Islamic
Underworld.

I am giving him [as a gift] this
plot of land, two oxen, a donkey and plow as gifts so that he will not have to do
such a thing again!”
It is said that a man married a woman, who suddenly became ill with smallpox
right on the night of consummation. [After seeing this] the bridegroom declared
that his eyesight had weakened; then he said that he had become completely
blind. So the bride was brought to his house and stayed in it for twenty years
until she died. All of a sudden, the man opened his eyes. When someone asked
him about this, he answered: “I was never blind, I simply feigned blindness in
order not to upset her [the wife].” On hearing that, someone told him: “You have
indeed surpassed all [chivalrous] young men!”
Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri said: “He who seeks to acquire exquisite manners,
should follow the example of the water-carriers of Baghdad.” Someone asked
him: “What about them?” He said: “When I was brought before the caliph
on the accusations of heresy,374 I saw a water-carrier in a turban, who wore an
Egyptian-style cloth; he had in his hand several clay pitchers. I asked them whether
he was a personal water-carrier of the caliph, but was told that he was an ordinary
water-carrier, who served the common folk. So I took one of his pitchers and
drank from it. Then I asked one of my companions to give him one dinar. 372 A province in south-western Iran. 373 That is, he made sure that the food came from religiously sound sources. 374 Dhu πl-Nun was said to have adhered to the doctrine of the uncreated Qurπan, which was
contrary to the state supported doctrine that held it to be created.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 240
240 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
However, hedid not take it, saying: ‘You are a prisoner. It is contrary to the code
of chivalry to take anything from you!’”
One of our late friends – may God have mercy on him – said: “It is contrary
to the chivalric code of honor to earn a profit from one’s friends.” There was a
[chivalrous] young man named Ahmad b. Sahl al-Tajir.375 I bought a piece of
white cloth from him. He charged me exactly what he himself had paid for it. I
asked him why he had not surcharged me for it. He answered: “I will take the
price of it from you, but I will not burden you with debt [to me],376because I am
not afraid of looking better in your eyes than I actually am. However, I will not
earn any profit from you, for it is contrary to the code of chivalry to earn profit
from one’s friend.”//304 It is said that a man who had made claims of chivalry
traveled from Nishapur to Nasa,377 where someone invited him for a meal along
with a group of [chivalrous] young men. When they had finished their feast,
a slave girl came to pour water for them to wash their hands. The man from
Nishapur retracted his hands, saying: “It is not allowed by the code of chivalry
for a girl to pour water for men!” One of those present remarked: “I have come
to this house for many years, yet I have never taken any notice of whether it was
a man or a woman who poured water for us to wash our hands!”
I heard Mansur al-Maghribi say: “Someone wanted to put the bandit of
honor (∏ayyar) named Nuh al-Naysaburi to a test. He sold him a slave girl dressed
as a young man, stipulating that she indeed was a young man. The girl was very
beautiful. Nuh purchased her thinking that she was indeed a young man. She
stayed with him for many months.I am giving him [as a gift] this
plot of land, two oxen, a donkey and plow as gifts so that he will not have to do
such a thing again!”
It is said that a man married a woman, who suddenly became ill with smallpox
right on the night of consummation. [After seeing this] the bridegroom declared
that his eyesight had weakened; then he said that he had become completely
blind. So the bride was brought to his house and stayed in it for twenty years
until she died. All of a sudden, the man opened his eyes. When someone asked
him about this, he answered: “I was never blind, I simply feigned blindness in
order not to upset her [the wife].” On hearing that, someone told him: “You have
indeed surpassed all [chivalrous] young men!”
Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri said: “He who seeks to acquire exquisite manners,
should follow the example of the water-carriers of Baghdad.” Someone asked
him: “What about them?” He said: “When I was brought before the caliph
on the accusations of heresy,374 I saw a water-carrier in a turban, who wore an
Egyptian-style cloth; he had in his hand several clay pitchers. I asked them whether
he was a personal water-carrier of the caliph, but was told that he was an ordinary
water-carrier, who served the common folk. So I took one of his pitchers and
drank from it. Then I asked one of my companions to give him one dinar. 372 A province in south-western Iran. 373 That is, he made sure that the food came from religiously sound sources. 374 Dhu πl-Nun was said to have adhered to the doctrine of the uncreated Qurπan, which was
contrary to the state supported doctrine that held it to be created.

Nuh purchased her thinking that she was indeed a young man. She
stayed with him for many months. Someone asked her: “Did he know that you
were a girl?” She answered: “No, he has never touched me, since he considered
me to be a young man.”
It is related that a chivalrous man was asked to hand over to the ruler (sultan)
the youth who served him. He declined. He received one thousand lashes and
yet he still did not surrender the youth. It so happened that on that same night
he had a nocturnal emission. It was very cold outside, yet, when he woke up, he
performed a full ablution with cold water.378 Someone told him: “You have put
your life in danger!” He answered: “I would have been ashamed before God Most
High that I was able to endure one thousand lashes for the sake of a creature and
not to endure the harshness of washing [myself] with cold water for His sake!”
A group of [chivalrous] young men came to visit a man who was famous for
his chivalry. [When they arrived], the man called out, saying: “[Servant-]boy,
bring the tray [with food]!” However, the boy did not bring anything. The man
kept calling on him again and again … The visitors looked at one another and
said: “It is contrary to [the rules of] chivalry that someone would employ a
person who fails to bring the tray after being asked so many times!” [When the
375 That is, “the Merchant”. 376 That is, “if I were to give it to you without any charge”. 377 A city in Khurasan. 378 A nocturnal emission requires major ablution under the Islamic law.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 241
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 241
servant finally appeared], the host asked him: “Why have you tarried so long
with the tray?” The boy answered: “There was an ant on it, and it is contrary to
[the rules of] chivalry to bring out the tray to the men of chivalry when there is
an ant on it, nor is it appropriate to toss it off the tray. So I tarried, until the ant
finally crawled off the tray on its own.” The visitors told the boy: “You did
everything right, boy! You are therefore the kind to serve men of chivalry!”
It is related that a certain man was spending a night in Medina after the
pilgrimage [season]. He dreamed that his purse was stolen. He came out [of his
room] and saw Ja∏far al-Sadiq.379The man accosted him and demanded: “You took
my purse?” “What was in it?” asked Ja∏far. “One thousand dinars,” answered the
man. Ja∏far took him to his house and weighed out one thousand dinarsfor him. When the man returned to his house and entered it, he discovered his purse,
which he thought had been stolen from him. So the man went back to Ja∏far to
apologize and to return his money to him. However, the latter refused to accept
it, saying: “When I give something to someone, I never claim it back!” The
man asked one of those present who he was. They told him that it was Ja∏far
al-Sadiq.//305
Shaqiq al-Balkhi asked Ja∏far b. Muhammad [al-Sadiq] about chivalry.They told him that it was Ja∏far
al-Sadiq.//305
Shaqiq al-Balkhi asked Ja∏far b. Muhammad [al-Sadiq] about chivalry. The
latter inquired: “And what do you say?” Shaqiq said: “If we are given something,
we are grateful, and if we are denied something, we persevere.” Ja∏far exclaimed:
“That is what the dogs here in Medina also do!” Shaqiq inquired: “O son of
the Messenger’s daughter, what, then, do you regard as chivalry?” He answered:
“If we are given something, we prefer [to give it to someone else], and if we are
denied we are grateful!”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard al-Jurayri say: “One evening
Shaykh Abu πl-∏Abbas b. Masruq invited us to his house. On our way we met a
friend of ours and told him: ‘Come with us as the Shaykh’s guests!’ ‘But he didn’t
invite me,’ said our friend. We told him: ‘We shall ask permission on your behalf
in the same way as the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – asked
permission on behalf of ∏Aπisha – may God be pleased with her.’ So we took him
with us. When we arrived at the door of the Shaykh’s house, we informed about
our conversation. He said: ‘You [the friend] must have given me a special place
in your heart, if you have decided to visit me without invitation. I therefore owe
you one thing. You cannot proceed to your place without first stepping on my
cheek.’ He kept persuading the man, then placed one of his cheeks on the floor. The guest was led up to him and gently put his foot on his other cheek. The
Shaykh kept dragging his face against the floor until he reached his seat.”
Know that it is a condition of chivalry to conceal the faults of one’s friends,
especially those of them that elicit the glee of their enemies. I heard Abu ∏Abd
al-Rahman al-Sulami often say to al-Nasrabadhi: “∏Ali, our singer,380drinks [wine]
379 The sixth imamof the Shi∏ites, who was renowned for his piety and humility.Nuh purchased her thinking that she was indeed a young man. She
stayed with him for many months. Someone asked her: “Did he know that you
were a girl?” She answered: “No, he has never touched me, since he considered
me to be a young man.”
It is related that a chivalrous man was asked to hand over to the ruler (sultan)
the youth who served him. He declined. He received one thousand lashes and
yet he still did not surrender the youth. It so happened that on that same night
he had a nocturnal emission. It was very cold outside, yet, when he woke up, he
performed a full ablution with cold water.378 Someone told him: “You have put
your life in danger!” He answered: “I would have been ashamed before God Most
High that I was able to endure one thousand lashes for the sake of a creature and
not to endure the harshness of washing [myself] with cold water for His sake!”
A group of [chivalrous] young men came to visit a man who was famous for
his chivalry. [When they arrived], the man called out, saying: “[Servant-]boy,
bring the tray [with food]!” However, the boy did not bring anything. The man
kept calling on him again and again … The visitors looked at one another and
said: “It is contrary to [the rules of] chivalry that someone would employ a
person who fails to bring the tray after being asked so many times!” [When the
375 That is, “the Merchant”. 376 That is, “if I were to give it to you without any charge”. 377 A city in Khurasan. 378 A nocturnal emission requires major ablution under the Islamic law.

The
Shaykh kept dragging his face against the floor until he reached his seat.”
Know that it is a condition of chivalry to conceal the faults of one’s friends,
especially those of them that elicit the glee of their enemies. I heard Abu ∏Abd
al-Rahman al-Sulami often say to al-Nasrabadhi: “∏Ali, our singer,380drinks [wine]
379 The sixth imamof the Shi∏ites, who was renowned for his piety and humility. 380 That is, the performer of Sufi poetry during Sufi gatherings.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 242
242 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
during the night and comes to your [Sufi] gathering during the day.” But
al-Nasrabadhi would not listen to these rumors until one day he happened to be
walking in the company of one of those who had mentioned to him these things
about ∏Ali. All of a sudden they found ∏Ali lying on the ground, drunk. As
al-Nasrabadhi was washing his mouth, his companion told him: “How often
have we told the Shaykh about his [drinking], but he would not listen?! Here’s
∏Ali in the very condition that we described!” On hearing this, al-Nasrabadhi
turned to the scold and told him: “Put him on your shoulders and carry him to
his house!” The scold was unable to disobey the Shaykh’s command. I also heard
him [al-Sulami] say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Farisi say: I heard al-Murta∏ish say:
“Abu Hafs and I and some other folk went to see a sick friend of ours whom we
had frequented. Abu Hafs asked the sick man: ‘Would you like to recover?’ The
man said: ‘Yes.’ He [Abu Hafs] then told//306 his companions: ‘Take his burden
from him!’ The sick man suddenly stood up and came out with us. The next
morning, however, all of us became bedridden and had ourselves to receive visits
from our friends.”
Spiritual insight (firasa)
God Most High said: “Surely in that are signs for those who discern [marks].”381
They say that [God] thereby meant “those who have spiritual insight”. Shaykh
Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him – informed us:
Ahmad b. ∏Ali b. al-Hasan al-Razi informed us: Muhammad b. Ahmad b. al-Sakan
informed us: Musa b. Dawud told us: Muhammad b. Kathir al-Kufi told us:
∏Amr b.The
Shaykh kept dragging his face against the floor until he reached his seat.”
Know that it is a condition of chivalry to conceal the faults of one’s friends,
especially those of them that elicit the glee of their enemies. I heard Abu ∏Abd
al-Rahman al-Sulami often say to al-Nasrabadhi: “∏Ali, our singer,380drinks [wine]
379 The sixth imamof the Shi∏ites, who was renowned for his piety and humility. 380 That is, the performer of Sufi poetry during Sufi gatherings.

Dawud told us: Muhammad b. Kathir al-Kufi told us:
∏Amr b. Qays related on the authority of ∏Atiyya, on the authority of Abu Sa∏id
al-Khudri that the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – said:
“Beware of the insight of the faithful [person], for he sees with the light of God
– may He be great and exalted!”
Insight is a phenomenon that descends into the heart and expels everything
there that opposes it; thus it takes possession of the heart. Etymologically it is
derived from the phrase “the prey (farisa) of the wild animal”. The human heart
is incapable of opposing insight, no matter how hard it tries. The strength of
insight corresponds to the strength of one’s faith: the stronger one’s faith, the
stronger one’s insight. Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz said: “He who sees with the light
of insight, sees with the light of God; the substance of his knowledge comes
from God unmixed with either negligence or forgetfulness. The decree of
God thus flows freely from the tongue of His [faithful] servant.” His phrase
“he [the servant] sees by the light of God” means that he sees by a light which
God has bestowed specifically upon him. Al-Wasiti said: “Insights are flashes of
light that illuminate the heart; they are a firmly established knowledge that
carries the hearts of men into the realms of the Unseen, from one realm to
the other until they begin to see things in such a way as God – praise be to Him
381 Q. 15:75.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 243
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 243
– wants them to see these things; they thus speak straight from their innermost
hearts.”
It is related that Abu πl-Hasan al-Daylami said: “Once I came to Antioch in
order to meet a black man, who was said to have been able to speak about secret
truths (asrar). I stayed there until he finally descended from the mountain
Lukam carrying some licit provisions for sale. I had not eaten for a few days and
was very hungry. So I asked him how much he wanted for the provisions that he
had with him and made him believe that I wanted to purchase them from him. He told me: ‘Sit here! When we sell something of these [provisions], we shall give
you//307 some of our proceeds, so that you could purchase something for you
[to eat].’ I left him for another [vendor] in order to convince him that I wanted
to find a better bargain. After a while I returned to him saying: ‘If you intend to
sell this, then tell me: how much does it cost?’ He replied saying: ‘You have not
eaten for two days. Now, sit down: if I sell something, I’ll give you [enough]
of it to purchase some [food].’ So I sat down for a while. Indeed, when he
sold something [of his goods], he gave me the money and left. I followed him. He turned to me and said: ‘If you have a need, then present it to God Most High. If, however, you ask something to please your own soul, then you will be denied
the fulfillment of your wish.’”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say:
I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard al-Kattani say: “Insight is the
unveiling of certainty and the direct vision of the Unseen, which is one of the
stations of faith.” It is related that al-Shafi∏i382 and Muhammad b. al-Husayn –
may God have mercy on both of them – were in the Sacred Mosque [of Mecca],
when a stranger entered it. Muhammad b.Dawud told us: Muhammad b. Kathir al-Kufi told us:
∏Amr b. Qays related on the authority of ∏Atiyya, on the authority of Abu Sa∏id
al-Khudri that the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – said:
“Beware of the insight of the faithful [person], for he sees with the light of God
– may He be great and exalted!”
Insight is a phenomenon that descends into the heart and expels everything
there that opposes it; thus it takes possession of the heart. Etymologically it is
derived from the phrase “the prey (farisa) of the wild animal”. The human heart
is incapable of opposing insight, no matter how hard it tries. The strength of
insight corresponds to the strength of one’s faith: the stronger one’s faith, the
stronger one’s insight. Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz said: “He who sees with the light
of insight, sees with the light of God; the substance of his knowledge comes
from God unmixed with either negligence or forgetfulness. The decree of
God thus flows freely from the tongue of His [faithful] servant.” His phrase
“he [the servant] sees by the light of God” means that he sees by a light which
God has bestowed specifically upon him. Al-Wasiti said: “Insights are flashes of
light that illuminate the heart; they are a firmly established knowledge that
carries the hearts of men into the realms of the Unseen, from one realm to
the other until they begin to see things in such a way as God – praise be to Him
381 Q. 15:75.

al-Husayn –
may God have mercy on both of them – were in the Sacred Mosque [of Mecca],
when a stranger entered it. Muhammad b. al-Husayn said, “My insight tells me
that he is a carpenter”, whereas al-Shafi∏i said, “My insight tells me that he is
a blacksmith.” So they approached him and queried him [about his profession]. He answered: “One time I was a blacksmith, but now I work as a carpenter.”
Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz said: “The seeker of hidden [realities] (mustanbit) is
constantly contemplating the Unseen. He does not forget it even for one moment
and nothing is concealed from him. He is the one whom God Most High
mentioned [in the following verse]: ‘Those of them who seek [hidden truths],
would have known the matter.’”383
The one who discerns [signs] (mutawassim) knows what is [hidden] in the
secret recesses of hearts by means of evidential proofs and signs. God Most High
said, “Surely in that are signs for those who discern [marks]”,384that is, “for the
ones who know the signs that God manifests to the two groups: His friends and
His enemies”. The one who has insight sees by the light of God Most High. It consists of
the flashes of light that shine in his heart. By means of these flashes he grasps the
382 A renowned Muslim scholar, who established the Shafi∏i school of law. 383 Q. 4:83; 4:85, according to Arberry’s translation. 384 Q. 15:75.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 244
244 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
meanings [of things]. Such a person belongs to the elite of the faithful, who are
better endowed [than those who discern marks]; they are the “ones who are
learned [in the science of] the Book”, in accord with God’s words: “Be learned
in [the science of ] the Book”,385namely, scholars and wise men, who are adorned
by the virtues of God in their thought and in their morals. They are no longer in
need of communication with [God’s] creatures, nor of paying any attention and
being preoccupied with them.//308
It is related that Abu πl-Qasim al-Munadi, a famous Sufi master from Nishapur,
fell ill. [His friends] Abu πl-Hasan al-Bushanji and al-Hasan al-Haddad went to
visit him. En route they bought a half dirhamworth of apples for him on credit. When they brought the apples to him and sat [next to his bed], Abu πl-Qasim
said: “What is the darkness [around you]?” They left, asking one another: “What
have we done?” After thinking about what had happened they said: “Perhaps it
is that we have not paid for the apples?” So, they gave the vendor [the price of
the apples], and then returned to him [al-Munadi]. As soon as he saw them, he
exclaimed: “This is strange! How can one get rid of this darkness so quickly? Tell me about your affair!” So they told him their story. He said: “Yes, each of
you relied on the other to pay the price [of the apples], while the vendor was too
embarrassed to ask you for money. So, the debt was never settled and I was the
cause of it. Therefore, I saw that when I observed you.” That man, Abu πl-Qasim
al-Munadi, used to go to the marketplace every day to cry his wares. As soon as
he earned an amount sufficient for his needs, which could be a daniq386 or half
a dirham, he would leave the market and return to his primary occupation (raπs
waqtih) and to the scrutiny of his heart. Al-Husayn b.al-Husayn –
may God have mercy on both of them – were in the Sacred Mosque [of Mecca],
when a stranger entered it. Muhammad b. al-Husayn said, “My insight tells me
that he is a carpenter”, whereas al-Shafi∏i said, “My insight tells me that he is
a blacksmith.” So they approached him and queried him [about his profession]. He answered: “One time I was a blacksmith, but now I work as a carpenter.”
Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz said: “The seeker of hidden [realities] (mustanbit) is
constantly contemplating the Unseen. He does not forget it even for one moment
and nothing is concealed from him. He is the one whom God Most High
mentioned [in the following verse]: ‘Those of them who seek [hidden truths],
would have known the matter.’”383
The one who discerns [signs] (mutawassim) knows what is [hidden] in the
secret recesses of hearts by means of evidential proofs and signs. God Most High
said, “Surely in that are signs for those who discern [marks]”,384that is, “for the
ones who know the signs that God manifests to the two groups: His friends and
His enemies”. The one who has insight sees by the light of God Most High. It consists of
the flashes of light that shine in his heart. By means of these flashes he grasps the
382 A renowned Muslim scholar, who established the Shafi∏i school of law. 383 Q. 4:83; 4:85, according to Arberry’s translation. 384 Q. 15:75.

As soon as
he earned an amount sufficient for his needs, which could be a daniq386 or half
a dirham, he would leave the market and return to his primary occupation (raπs
waqtih) and to the scrutiny of his heart. Al-Husayn b. Mansur said: “When God takes possession of man’s heart,
He bestows upon it [divine] secrets, which it contemplates and communicates
[to others].” When someone asked a Sufi master about insight, he answered: “It
is when spirits circulate in the sphere of divine majesty (malakut), [where] they
observe the meanings hidden in the Unseen. Then they speak about the secrets of
the created world on the basis of direct witnessing (mushahada), not on the basis
of guess or supposition.” It is related that Zakariya al-Shakhtani had an affair
with a certain woman before his repentance.387 One day, after he had already
become one of the best disciples of Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri, he was standing by his
side. At that moment, a thought about that woman visited him. [Immediately],
Abu ∏Uthman raised his head and told him: “Aren’t you ashamed?”
The master and imam [al-Qushayri] – may God have mercy on him – related:
“At the beginning of my discipleship under the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq
– may God be pleased with him – I used to hold teaching sessions at the Mutarriz
mosque [in Nishapur]. At some point, I asked his permission to take leave in
order to visit [the city of] Nasa. He granted my request. One day, as he and I
385 Q. 3:79; 3:74, according to Arberry’s translation. 386 A small coin worth one-sixth of a dirham. 387 Namely, before he entered the Sufi path.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 245
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 245
were walking together on the way to his teaching session, it occurred to me: ‘If
only he could replace me in my teaching sessions during my absence.’ At that
moment, he turned to me and said: ‘I will replace you in your teaching session
during your absence.’ I walked a little further. Then it occurred to me that he
was not well and that it would be difficult for him to stand in for me for two days
per week. I thought: ‘Perhaps he should teach my session only once a week?’
Again he turned to me and said: ‘If I am unable to teach for you two days a week,
I will replace you [in your session] only once a week.’ I walked a little further, and
then another matter occurred to me. Again he turned to me and said exactly what
that matter was about.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard my grandfather Abu ∏Amr b. Nujayd say: “Shah al-Kirmani388
was possessed of a sharp insight, which never failed him. He would say: ‘Whoever
turns his eyes away from illicit things restrains himself from passionate drives
(shahawat), reinforces his inner self with constant self-scrutiny (muraqaba) and
his outward [behavior] with conformity to the Prophet’s custom,//309 and
accustoms himself to eating only licit food, will never fail in his insight.’”
Someone asked Abu πl-Husayn al-Nuri: “Where do possessors of insight derive
it from?” He answered with the following words of God Most High: “I [God]
breathed My spirit in him.”389One who has a greater portion of this [divine] light
is distinguished by a sounder witnessing and truer insight in his judgement.Nujayd say: “Shah al-Kirmani388
was possessed of a sharp insight, which never failed him. He would say: ‘Whoever
turns his eyes away from illicit things restrains himself from passionate drives
(shahawat), reinforces his inner self with constant self-scrutiny (muraqaba) and
his outward [behavior] with conformity to the Prophet’s custom,//309 and
accustoms himself to eating only licit food, will never fail in his insight.’”
Someone asked Abu πl-Husayn al-Nuri: “Where do possessors of insight derive
it from?” He answered with the following words of God Most High: “I [God]
breathed My spirit in him.”389One who has a greater portion of this [divine] light
is distinguished by a sounder witnessing and truer insight in his judgement. Don’t you see that God’s breathing His spirit into him390 necessitated His
demand [for the angels] to prostrate themselves before him, in accordance with
God’s statement: ‘When I have shaped him, and breathed My spirit in him, fall
you [angels] down, bowing before him.’”391These statements of Abu πl-Husayn
al-Nuri are somewhat ambiguous in that he mentioned the breathing of the
spirit not for the sake of confirming the beliefs of those misguided individuals
who think that the spirits are eternal. [On the contrary,] something that is subject
to breathing, unification and separation is also liable to influence and change,
which are the properties of originated entities. God Most High – praise be to
Him – has favored the faithful with the [faculty] of vision and with lights, which
enable them to have insights. They are none other than knowledge, which is
confirmed by the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – who said: “For he [the
faithful] sees with the light of God”,392that is, God Most High has distinguished
the faithful person with knowledge and vision, which has set him apart from
all other [created] forms.As soon as
he earned an amount sufficient for his needs, which could be a daniq386 or half
a dirham, he would leave the market and return to his primary occupation (raπs
waqtih) and to the scrutiny of his heart. Al-Husayn b. Mansur said: “When God takes possession of man’s heart,
He bestows upon it [divine] secrets, which it contemplates and communicates
[to others].” When someone asked a Sufi master about insight, he answered: “It
is when spirits circulate in the sphere of divine majesty (malakut), [where] they
observe the meanings hidden in the Unseen. Then they speak about the secrets of
the created world on the basis of direct witnessing (mushahada), not on the basis
of guess or supposition.” It is related that Zakariya al-Shakhtani had an affair
with a certain woman before his repentance.387 One day, after he had already
become one of the best disciples of Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri, he was standing by his
side. At that moment, a thought about that woman visited him. [Immediately],
Abu ∏Uthman raised his head and told him: “Aren’t you ashamed?”
The master and imam [al-Qushayri] – may God have mercy on him – related:
“At the beginning of my discipleship under the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq
– may God be pleased with him – I used to hold teaching sessions at the Mutarriz
mosque [in Nishapur]. At some point, I asked his permission to take leave in
order to visit [the city of] Nasa. He granted my request. One day, as he and I
385 Q. 3:79; 3:74, according to Arberry’s translation. 386 A small coin worth one-sixth of a dirham. 387 Namely, before he entered the Sufi path.

God Most High – praise be to
Him – has favored the faithful with the [faculty] of vision and with lights, which
enable them to have insights. They are none other than knowledge, which is
confirmed by the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – who said: “For he [the
faithful] sees with the light of God”,392that is, God Most High has distinguished
the faithful person with knowledge and vision, which has set him apart from
all other [created] forms. Thus, calling knowledge and vision “lights” is not an
innovation,393nor is it a mistake to describe this as “breathing”, although [in this
particular case the process of] creation is intended. 388 On him see al-Sulami, Tabaqat, pp. 183–185. He died around 299/911–912. 389 Q. 15:29. 390 That is, Adam. 391 Q. 15:29. 392 See p. 242. 393 Since it was mentioned by the Prophet.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 246
246 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Al-Husayn b. Mansur said: “The person with insight hits his target with the
first shot; he is not diverted [from it] by a far-fetched interpretation (taπwil),
guessing or presupposition.” It is said: “The insight of the beginners (muridun)
is a guess that requires verification (tahqiq), whereas the insight of the gnostics
(∏arifun) is the verification that requires the True Reality (haqiqa).” Ahmad b. ∏Asim al-Antaki said: “If you attend the gathering of the truthful (ahl al-sidq), be
truthful with them, for they are the spies of hearts. They enter your hearts and
leave them without you taking notice.” I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may
God have mercy on him – say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard [Ja∏far]
al-Khuldi say: I heard Abu Ja∏far al-Haddad say: “Insight is that something
occurs to you without any opposition. However, when your occurrence encounters
an opposing thought, it is just a transient idea and self-suggestion (hadith al-nafs).”
It is said that Abu ∏Abdallah al-Razi, who resided in Nishapur,//310 related
the following: “Ibn al-Anbari presented me with a woolen garment. [Later on],
I noticed that [Abu Bakr] al-Shibli wore on his head an elegant cap (qalansuwa),
which matched my garment. In my heart I wished that I would have both: the
garment and the cap. When al-Shibli rose to leave the gathering, he turned
toward me and I followed him, for it was his habit, whenever he wanted me to
follow him, to turn toward me [as an invitation]. When we entered his house, he
told me: ‘Take off this woolen garment!’ So I took it off. He folded it and threw
his cap on top of it. He then called for fire and burned both of them.”
Abu Hafs al-Naysaburi said: “One should not claim to possess insight.God Most High – praise be to
Him – has favored the faithful with the [faculty] of vision and with lights, which
enable them to have insights. They are none other than knowledge, which is
confirmed by the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – who said: “For he [the
faithful] sees with the light of God”,392that is, God Most High has distinguished
the faithful person with knowledge and vision, which has set him apart from
all other [created] forms. Thus, calling knowledge and vision “lights” is not an
innovation,393nor is it a mistake to describe this as “breathing”, although [in this
particular case the process of] creation is intended. 388 On him see al-Sulami, Tabaqat, pp. 183–185. He died around 299/911–912. 389 Q. 15:29. 390 That is, Adam. 391 Q. 15:29. 392 See p. 242. 393 Since it was mentioned by the Prophet.

He folded it and threw
his cap on top of it. He then called for fire and burned both of them.”
Abu Hafs al-Naysaburi said: “One should not claim to possess insight. At the
same time, one should beware of other people’s insight, for the Prophet – may
God bless and greet him – said: ‘Beware of the insight of the faithful [person].’
He [the Prophet] did not say: ‘Practice insight!’ How can claims to insight be
appropriate for those who are expected to be wary of it?” Abu πl-∏Abbas b. Masruq
said: “Once I went to see an old man, who was a companion of ours, after he had
fallen ill. I found him in a state of abject destitution, and said to myself: ‘How does
this man make a living?’ He exclaimed: ‘Abu πl-∏Abbas, cast away these lowly
thoughts, for God has hidden gifts [that He gives to His servants]!’” Al-Zabidi394
related: “Once I was in a mosque in Baghdad with a group of the poor.395Nothing
was given to us [as alms] for several days, so I came to [Ibrahim] al-Khawwas to
ask him for something. As soon as he saw me, he inquired: ‘Does God know of
the need that has brought you to me?’ I answered: ‘Of course!’ ‘Then keep quiet
and do not exhibit it to any of His creatures!’ I returned [to the mosque], and,
before long, I was given in alms more than I needed.”
It is said that one day Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] was in the congregational
mosque [of Basra]. Suddenly, a dove [fell on the floor] overcome by extreme heat
and exhaustion. Sahl exclaimed: “Shah al-Kirmani has just died, by God’s leave.”
Those who were in the mosque wrote that down, and indeed it was exactly as he
394 Or, “al-Zubayri”. 395 That is, Sufis.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 247
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 247
said. Once the famous [shaykh] Abu ∏Abdallah al-Turughandhi396 was traveling
to Tus.397 When he reached [the city of] Kharw, he asked his companion to
purchase some bread. The companion bought the amount that was sufficient for
the two of them. However, al-Turughandhi asked him to purchase more. So
the companion deliberately purchased food enough for ten men, as if he could
not believe that the shaykh’s words made any sense at all. He398said: “When we
climbed the mountain, we encountered a group of men who had been tied up by
thieves. They had not eaten anything for days, so they asked us for food. The
shaykh then said: ‘Prepare a table for them!’”
The shaykh and imam [al-Qushayri] said: “One day, I was sitting next to
the master and imam Abu ∏Ali [al-Daqqaq]. There was talk of how Shaykh Abu
∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him – used to follow the
custom of the [common] Sufi folk by rising up [in ecstasy] during a session of
music and invocation (sama∏).399 The master Abu ∏Ali exclaimed: ‘It is better to
keep quiet about a person like him being in such a state!’ In the same gathering he
told me: ‘Go to al-Sulami. You will find him sitting in his library. On top of his
books there will be a small square red volume//311 with the poetry of al-Husayn
b. Mansur [al-Hallaj]. Take this volume, without saying anything to him, then
bring it to me.’ It was midday, when the heat was strong. So I came to him, as
he was sitting in his library and the volume was indeed in the place mentioned
by Abu ∏Ali. When I sat down, Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami began to
speak. He said: ‘There once was a man who used to censure one scholar for his
[uncontrollable] movements during Sufi music sessions. Once that same man
was seen in the privacy of his house, whirling around like a person in a state of
ecstasy (mutawajid).He folded it and threw
his cap on top of it. He then called for fire and burned both of them.”
Abu Hafs al-Naysaburi said: “One should not claim to possess insight. At the
same time, one should beware of other people’s insight, for the Prophet – may
God bless and greet him – said: ‘Beware of the insight of the faithful [person].’
He [the Prophet] did not say: ‘Practice insight!’ How can claims to insight be
appropriate for those who are expected to be wary of it?” Abu πl-∏Abbas b. Masruq
said: “Once I went to see an old man, who was a companion of ours, after he had
fallen ill. I found him in a state of abject destitution, and said to myself: ‘How does
this man make a living?’ He exclaimed: ‘Abu πl-∏Abbas, cast away these lowly
thoughts, for God has hidden gifts [that He gives to His servants]!’” Al-Zabidi394
related: “Once I was in a mosque in Baghdad with a group of the poor.395Nothing
was given to us [as alms] for several days, so I came to [Ibrahim] al-Khawwas to
ask him for something. As soon as he saw me, he inquired: ‘Does God know of
the need that has brought you to me?’ I answered: ‘Of course!’ ‘Then keep quiet
and do not exhibit it to any of His creatures!’ I returned [to the mosque], and,
before long, I was given in alms more than I needed.”
It is said that one day Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] was in the congregational
mosque [of Basra]. Suddenly, a dove [fell on the floor] overcome by extreme heat
and exhaustion. Sahl exclaimed: “Shah al-Kirmani has just died, by God’s leave.”
Those who were in the mosque wrote that down, and indeed it was exactly as he
394 Or, “al-Zubayri”. 395 That is, Sufis.

He said: ‘There once was a man who used to censure one scholar for his
[uncontrollable] movements during Sufi music sessions. Once that same man
was seen in the privacy of his house, whirling around like a person in a state of
ecstasy (mutawajid). When someone asked him about that, he responded: “There
was a problem that I was unable to resolve. Suddenly, it became clear to me. I
was unable to control my joy, so I rose up and began to whirl around!” He was
told: “This is exactly what they [Sufis] experience!”’ When I saw that everything
[in the library] was exactly as the master Abu ∏Ali told me, and when Shaykh
Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami uttered exactly the same words that the master
Abu ∏Ali had said earlier,400I was completely bewildered and asked myself: ‘How
should I behave in this situation between those two?’ I mulled over this matter
in my thoughts and decided: ‘There’s nothing left for me but truth!’ Then I told
[al-Sulami]: ‘The master Abu ∏Ali described this volume to me and told me to
bring it to him without asking your permission. On the one hand, I am afraid of
you; on the other, I cannot disobey his orders. What will you command me to
do?’ He brought out a six-part volume of sayings by al-Husayn [b. Mansur],
which included his own book titled al-Sayhur fi naqd al-duhur, and instructed
396 Or “al-Turughbadhi”. 397 A city in Iran near present-day Mashhad (Meshhed). 398 Probably the companion, but the identity of the speaker is not quite clear from the context. 399 On sama∏ see IM, pp. 322–325. 400 That is, that one should not publicly discuss the ecstatic behavior of fellow Sufis.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 248
248 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
me: ‘Take this to him [Abu ∏Ali] and tell him that I have studied this volume and
quoted some poems from it in my own writings.’ So I left.”
It is related that al-Hasan al-Haddad – may God have mercy on him – said:
“I was in the company of Abu πl-Qasim al-Munadi, when he hosted a group of
Sufis. He asked me to go out and bring them something [to eat]. I rejoiced at his
request, since he [thereby] permitted me to provide for the needs of the Sufis,
despite the fact that he knew that I myself was poor. So I took a basket and left. When I reached the road [called] ‘Sayyar’, I saw an imposing looking elder. I
greeted him and said: ‘A group of Sufis have gathered in such-and-such place. Would you like to show them your noble character traits?’ He ordered some
bread, meat and grapes to be brought from his shop. When I reached the door of
Abu πl-Qasim al-Munadi’s house, he called from behind the door saying: ‘Take
this back to where you took it from!’ So I returned to the elder and said: ‘They
[the Sufis] were not there. I assume that they must have left [while I was looking
for food].”’ So I returned everything to the elder, then I went to the marketplace,
where I was given some food. I carried it with me [to al-Munadi’s house]. [This
time] he bade me to come in. I recounted my story to him. He said: ‘Yes, that
man’s [nickname] is “Ibn Sayyar.”401 He is one of the governor’s men. If you
join//312 the Sufis, then give them what you have [now], not what you had
earlier!’”
Abu πl-Husayn al-Qarafi related: “I paid a visit to Abu πl-Khayr al-Tinati. When I was about to bid him farewell, he accompanied me to the gate of the
mosque and said: ‘Abu πl-Husayn, I know that you never carry any provisions
with you. However, you should take these two apples with you.’ I took and put
them in my pocket, whereupon I went on my way.He said: ‘There once was a man who used to censure one scholar for his
[uncontrollable] movements during Sufi music sessions. Once that same man
was seen in the privacy of his house, whirling around like a person in a state of
ecstasy (mutawajid). When someone asked him about that, he responded: “There
was a problem that I was unable to resolve. Suddenly, it became clear to me. I
was unable to control my joy, so I rose up and began to whirl around!” He was
told: “This is exactly what they [Sufis] experience!”’ When I saw that everything
[in the library] was exactly as the master Abu ∏Ali told me, and when Shaykh
Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami uttered exactly the same words that the master
Abu ∏Ali had said earlier,400I was completely bewildered and asked myself: ‘How
should I behave in this situation between those two?’ I mulled over this matter
in my thoughts and decided: ‘There’s nothing left for me but truth!’ Then I told
[al-Sulami]: ‘The master Abu ∏Ali described this volume to me and told me to
bring it to him without asking your permission. On the one hand, I am afraid of
you; on the other, I cannot disobey his orders. What will you command me to
do?’ He brought out a six-part volume of sayings by al-Husayn [b. Mansur],
which included his own book titled al-Sayhur fi naqd al-duhur, and instructed
396 Or “al-Turughbadhi”. 397 A city in Iran near present-day Mashhad (Meshhed). 398 Probably the companion, but the identity of the speaker is not quite clear from the context. 399 On sama∏ see IM, pp. 322–325. 400 That is, that one should not publicly discuss the ecstatic behavior of fellow Sufis.

When I was about to bid him farewell, he accompanied me to the gate of the
mosque and said: ‘Abu πl-Husayn, I know that you never carry any provisions
with you. However, you should take these two apples with you.’ I took and put
them in my pocket, whereupon I went on my way. For three days nothing came
my way, so I took out one of the apples and ate it. When I wanted to reach for
the second, I discovered that both apples were in my pocket. So, I ate them time
and again, and they kept returning until I finally reached the gates of Mosul.402
I said to myself: ‘These apples are breaching my state of reliance [on God]
(tawakkul), for they have become my provision!’ So I took them out of my pocket
for the last time and looked around. I saw a pauper wrapped in a cloak, who cried
out: ‘I crave an apple!’ So I gave him the apples. As I was walking on, it occurred
to me that the shaykh403 actually sent them to him, while I was but their keeper
on the way. I went back looking for the pauper, but could not find him.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali say: I heard
Abu ∏Amr b. ∏Alwan say: “There was a youth among the companions of al-Junayd,
who was able to read other people’s thoughts. When al-Junayd learned about this,
he asked him: ‘What is it that people say about you?’ The youth told al-Junayd:
‘Think of something!’ ‘I have done so!’ said al-Junayd. The youth told him: ‘You
401 Literally, “Son of the Sayyar [district]” – that is, someone who was apparently put in charge
of it by the local ruler. 402 In present-day Iraq. 403 That is, al-Qarafi.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 249
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 249
thought of such-and-such.’ Al-Junayd denied that. The youth said: ‘Think again!’
He did. The youth said: ‘You thought of such-and-such.’ Al-Junayd denied that
again. The same thing happened for the third time. The youth exclaimed: ‘This
is odd! You are trustworthy and I know [what] my heart [tells me].’ Al-Junayd
then said: ‘You were right all three times, but I wished to test you in order to see
if your heart would change.’”
I heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah al-Razi
say: “When Ibn al-Raqqi404 became ill, someone brought him a cup of medicine
and he took it. He then said: ‘Today a [grave] incident has happened in this
kingdom.405I won’t eat or drink until I know what it is.’ In a few days, the news
arrived that the Qarmati [army] entered Mecca on that same day and massacred
many people there.”406I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God
have mercy on him – say: I heard Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi say: “When this
story was mentioned to Ibn al-Katib, he said: ‘This is strange indeed!’ I [Abu
∏Uthman] told him: ‘There’s nothing strange about it!’ Then Abu ∏Ali b. al-Katib
queried me: ‘And what events are taking place in Mecca today?’ I answered:
‘The tribes [named] Talha and Hasan are fighting each other. The Talha tribe is
headed by a black man wearing a red turban. [Also] today there hovers over Mecca
a huge cloud equal in size to the Meccan sanctuary.’ Abu ∏Ali wrote to Mecca
and things there turned out to be exactly as I had told him.”
It is related that Anas b. Malik407 – may God be pleased with him – said:
“Once I came to ∏Uthman b. ∏Affan408 – may God be pleased with him – after I
had met a woman on the road and admired her beauty.When I was about to bid him farewell, he accompanied me to the gate of the
mosque and said: ‘Abu πl-Husayn, I know that you never carry any provisions
with you. However, you should take these two apples with you.’ I took and put
them in my pocket, whereupon I went on my way. For three days nothing came
my way, so I took out one of the apples and ate it. When I wanted to reach for
the second, I discovered that both apples were in my pocket. So, I ate them time
and again, and they kept returning until I finally reached the gates of Mosul.402
I said to myself: ‘These apples are breaching my state of reliance [on God]
(tawakkul), for they have become my provision!’ So I took them out of my pocket
for the last time and looked around. I saw a pauper wrapped in a cloak, who cried
out: ‘I crave an apple!’ So I gave him the apples. As I was walking on, it occurred
to me that the shaykh403 actually sent them to him, while I was but their keeper
on the way. I went back looking for the pauper, but could not find him.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali say: I heard
Abu ∏Amr b. ∏Alwan say: “There was a youth among the companions of al-Junayd,
who was able to read other people’s thoughts. When al-Junayd learned about this,
he asked him: ‘What is it that people say about you?’ The youth told al-Junayd:
‘Think of something!’ ‘I have done so!’ said al-Junayd. The youth told him: ‘You
401 Literally, “Son of the Sayyar [district]” – that is, someone who was apparently put in charge
of it by the local ruler. 402 In present-day Iraq. 403 That is, al-Qarafi.

Malik407 – may God be pleased with him – said:
“Once I came to ∏Uthman b. ∏Affan408 – may God be pleased with him – after I
had met a woman on the road and admired her beauty. ∏Uthman – may God
be pleased with him – said: ‘One of you has come to me today with traces of
adultery in his eyes?’ I asked him: ‘Can there be [prophetic] inspiration after [the
death of] the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him?’ He answered:
‘No. However, there can still be perspicacity, irrefutable proof, and a veracious
insight!’” Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz said: “Once I entered the Sacred Mosque [of
Mecca] and saw a Sufi wearing two cloaks asking people for alms. I said to
myself: ‘Men like him are a burden on people.’ He looked at me and said: ‘God
knows what is in your souls, so be fearful of Him!’409 In my heart I begged his
forgiveness and he responded, saying: ‘It is He Who accepts repentance from His
servants.’410”
It is related that Ibrahim al-Khawwas said: “Once I was in the Medina
congregational mosque in Baghdad with a group of Sufis. There came to us an
404 Or “Ibn al-Barqi”. 405 That is, the Caliphate. 406 For details, see Halm, The Empire of the Mahdi, pp. 247–264. 407 A close companion and servant of the Prophet, who died around 91–93/709–711. He dis-
tinguished himself as a prolific hadith transmitter. 408 The third of the so-called “rightly-guided” caliphs (successors to the Prophet), who was
assassinated in 35/655. 409 Q. 2:235. 410 Q. 42:25; 42:24, according to Arberry’s translation.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 250
250 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
elegant looking young man, who emitted a sweet smell and had beautiful hair and
handsome face. I told my companions: ‘It has occurred to me that he is a Jew!’
My companions resented [my saying] that. Then both the young man and I went
out of the mosque, but [after a while] the young man came back to them and
asked: ‘What did that shaykh say about me?’ They were too ashamed to tell him. However, he insisted and they [finally] told him: ‘He said that you were a Jew.’
The young man came to me, prostrated himself before me, and embraced Islam. When he was asked why he had done this, he said: ‘In our [Jewish] books we
read that the insight of the veracious one never fails him. So I said to myself: “I
will test the Muslims.” I began to watch them closely until I said to myself: “If
there be a veracious person in their midst, he will be found among the Sufis
(fi hadhihi πl-taπifa), for they utter the words of God – praise be upon Him. So
I concealed my true identity from them (labistu ∏alayhim). However, when this
shaykh saw me and perceived my [true identity through his insight], I realized
that he indeed was a veracious one.”’ That young man subsequently became a
great Sufi master.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy
on him – say: I heard ∏Abdallah//314 b. Ibrahim b. al-∏Alaπ say: I heard
Muhammad b. Dawud say: “We were with al-Jurayri, when he asked: ‘Is there a
man among you, whom God – praise be to Him – would inform about an event
that is about to take place in His Kingdom, before He actually had it take place?’
We answered ‘No, there isn’t!’ He then said: ‘Weep then for the hearts that
receive nothing from God Most High!’” Abu Musa al-Daylami411 said that he
asked ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Yahya about trust in God (tawakkul).Malik407 – may God be pleased with him – said:
“Once I came to ∏Uthman b. ∏Affan408 – may God be pleased with him – after I
had met a woman on the road and admired her beauty. ∏Uthman – may God
be pleased with him – said: ‘One of you has come to me today with traces of
adultery in his eyes?’ I asked him: ‘Can there be [prophetic] inspiration after [the
death of] the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him?’ He answered:
‘No. However, there can still be perspicacity, irrefutable proof, and a veracious
insight!’” Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz said: “Once I entered the Sacred Mosque [of
Mecca] and saw a Sufi wearing two cloaks asking people for alms. I said to
myself: ‘Men like him are a burden on people.’ He looked at me and said: ‘God
knows what is in your souls, so be fearful of Him!’409 In my heart I begged his
forgiveness and he responded, saying: ‘It is He Who accepts repentance from His
servants.’410”
It is related that Ibrahim al-Khawwas said: “Once I was in the Medina
congregational mosque in Baghdad with a group of Sufis. There came to us an
404 Or “Ibn al-Barqi”. 405 That is, the Caliphate. 406 For details, see Halm, The Empire of the Mahdi, pp. 247–264. 407 A close companion and servant of the Prophet, who died around 91–93/709–711. He dis-
tinguished himself as a prolific hadith transmitter. 408 The third of the so-called “rightly-guided” caliphs (successors to the Prophet), who was
assassinated in 35/655. 409 Q. 2:235. 410 Q. 42:25; 42:24, according to Arberry’s translation.

Dawud say: “We were with al-Jurayri, when he asked: ‘Is there a
man among you, whom God – praise be to Him – would inform about an event
that is about to take place in His Kingdom, before He actually had it take place?’
We answered ‘No, there isn’t!’ He then said: ‘Weep then for the hearts that
receive nothing from God Most High!’” Abu Musa al-Daylami411 said that he
asked ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Yahya about trust in God (tawakkul). He answered: “It
is when you push your hand up to the elbow into the mouth of a great serpent,
fearing nothing but God Most High.” He continued: “I then went to Abu Yazid
[al-Bistami] in order to ask him about trust in God. When I knocked on his door,
he inquired: ‘Don’t the words of ∏Abd al-Rahman suffice you?’ When I asked
him to open the door, he replied: ‘Since you have come to me not as a guest [but
as an enquirer], the answer has come to you from behind the door.’ He would
not open the door, so I went away and waited one year before returning to him. He said to me: ‘Welcome! [This time] you have come to me as a guest.’ I stayed
with him for one month. [During that time] he would tell me every single thing
that occurred to me in my heart. When he was about to bid farewell to me,
I begged him: ‘Teach me a useful lesson (faπida)!’ He said: ‘My mother told
me that when she was pregnant with me, she could only reach her hand for food
that was licit. Whenever she was given a suspicious food,412 her hand could not
touch it.’”
Ibrahim al-Khawwas said: “Once I traveled [across] the desert, where I
suffered much hardship. When I was finally able to reach Mecca, I felt proud of
myself. Suddenly, an old woman called out to me, saying: ‘Ibrahim, I was with
411 Or “al-Daybuli”. 412 That is, the food the provenance of which was in doubt.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 251
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 251
you in the desert, but I never dared to talk to you then for fear of distracting your
inner self [from your goal]. Now, cast away these evil whisperings (wasawis)!’”
It is said that al-Farghani used to go on hajj every year. Each time he would
pass Nishapur without stopping by Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri’s house. He related:
“[Eventually] I [decided to] visit him. I greeted him. However, he did not return
my greetings. I said to myself: ‘A Muslim comes to him and gives him his
greetings, but he does not greet him in return?!’ Abu ∏Uthman replied: ‘[A
Muslim] like this one, who goes on hajj, leaving his mother [in distress] and
showing no reverence to her?’ So I returned to Farghana413 and looked after my
mother until she died. After that I went to Abu ∏Uthman again. When I entered
his house, he received me and seated me next to himself.” So al-Farghani stayed
with Abu ∏Uthman, who entrusted him with looking after his mount until he
[Abu ∏Uthman] died. Khayr al-Nassaj said: “I was sitting in my house one day, when it suddenly
occurred to me that al-Junayd was waiting at the door. I brushed this thought
aside. However, it came to me a second time, then a third time. So I finally came
out, and indeed there was al-Junayd, who asked me: ‘Why did not you come out
at the first thought?’” Muhammad b. al-Husayn al-Bistami said://315 “When I
came to Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi, I said to myself: ‘Perhaps he would like me
to bring something to him [as a gift]?’ Abu ∏Uthman responded: ‘Not only do
people want me to take something from them, they also want me to beg this
from them!’” A Sufi recounted: “I was in Baghdad, when it occurred to me that
al-Murta∏ish would bring me fifteen dirhams so that I could buy a water-skin, a
rope and [a pair of] sandals in order to go into the desert. Soon there was a knock
on the door. When I opened the door, I saw al-Murta∏ish with a cloth purse.Dawud say: “We were with al-Jurayri, when he asked: ‘Is there a
man among you, whom God – praise be to Him – would inform about an event
that is about to take place in His Kingdom, before He actually had it take place?’
We answered ‘No, there isn’t!’ He then said: ‘Weep then for the hearts that
receive nothing from God Most High!’” Abu Musa al-Daylami411 said that he
asked ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Yahya about trust in God (tawakkul). He answered: “It
is when you push your hand up to the elbow into the mouth of a great serpent,
fearing nothing but God Most High.” He continued: “I then went to Abu Yazid
[al-Bistami] in order to ask him about trust in God. When I knocked on his door,
he inquired: ‘Don’t the words of ∏Abd al-Rahman suffice you?’ When I asked
him to open the door, he replied: ‘Since you have come to me not as a guest [but
as an enquirer], the answer has come to you from behind the door.’ He would
not open the door, so I went away and waited one year before returning to him. He said to me: ‘Welcome! [This time] you have come to me as a guest.’ I stayed
with him for one month. [During that time] he would tell me every single thing
that occurred to me in my heart. When he was about to bid farewell to me,
I begged him: ‘Teach me a useful lesson (faπida)!’ He said: ‘My mother told
me that when she was pregnant with me, she could only reach her hand for food
that was licit. Whenever she was given a suspicious food,412 her hand could not
touch it.’”
Ibrahim al-Khawwas said: “Once I traveled [across] the desert, where I
suffered much hardship. When I was finally able to reach Mecca, I felt proud of
myself. Suddenly, an old woman called out to me, saying: ‘Ibrahim, I was with
411 Or “al-Daybuli”. 412 That is, the food the provenance of which was in doubt.

Soon there was a knock
on the door. When I opened the door, I saw al-Murta∏ish with a cloth purse. He
told me: ‘Take this!’ I said: ‘My lord, I do not want it!’ ‘How much did you
want?’ he asked me. ‘Fifteen dirhams.’ He said: ‘Here’s fifteen dirhams!’”
A Sufi said about God’s words, “Is he who was dead and We gave him life,
[and appointed for him a light to walk by among the people as one of those
who are in the depth of darkness?]”414 that they mean, “Is he whose intellect
was dead, but whom God Most High has revived with the light of insight and to
whom He has given the light of [divine] revelation and direct contemplation [of
divine mysteries] like a man who walks negligently among the negligent folk
(ahl al-ghafla)?” It is said: “He whose insight is sound ascends to the stage of
witnessing (mushahada).” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I
heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn al-Baghdadi say: I heard Ja∏far b. Muhammad
b. Nusayr say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas b. Masruq say: “Once a Sufi master (shaykh)
came to us. He discoursed beautifully to us about this affair [of ours].415He was
well spoken and showed excellent judgement. In one of his discourses he told us:
‘Tell me about everything that might occur to you.’ Suddenly, it occurred to me
413 In present-day Uzbekistan. 414 Q. 6:122. 415 That is, Sufism.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 252
252 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
that he was a Jew. My thought grew stronger and stronger and persisted until I
decided to share it with al-Jurayri, who resented it. So I decided to inform that
man about it. I told him: ‘You tell us to let you know about any thought that
might occur to us. It has occurred to me that you are a Jew!’ He fell silent, then
raised his head and said: ‘You have spoken the truth. I bear witness that there is
no deity but God and that Muhammad is His messenger.’ He then said: ‘I have
practiced all religious denominations, saying to myself: “If there is any truth
among this community,416then it should be among this folk.”417So I mingled with
you in order to test you, and now [I am convinced that] you are truthful.’ He
became a good Muslim.”
It is reported that al-Sari [al-Saqti] used to say to al-Junayd: “Go preach
to people!” Al-Junayd recounted: “At that time, in my heart there was fear of
speaking in public, because I was not sure that I was worthy of it. One night,
which happened to be a Friday night, in my dream I saw the Prophet – may God
bless and greet him – who instructed me: ‘Go preach to people!’ When I woke
up, I went to al-Sari’s house before he had woken up and knocked on his door.
He inquired: ‘So you did not believe me until you were told [to do this by the
Prophet]?’” Next day, al-Junayd came to the Friday mosque and sat before the
people. Immediately word got around that al-Junayd sat [in the mosque] in order
to preach to people. A Christian youth in disguise approached him and said:
“Master, what is the meaning of the words of the Messenger of God – may God
bless and greet him: ‘Beware of the insight of the faithful [person], for he sees
with the light of God Most High.’ Al-Junayd bowed his head for a moment, then
raised it and said: “Embrace Islam! The time has come for you to become a
Muslim!” So the youth became a Muslim.
Moral character (khuluq)
God Most High said: “Surely, thou [the Prophet] art of a good moral character.”418
∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi informed us: Abu πl-Hasan al-Saffar al-Basri informed
us: Hisham b. Muhammad b. Ghalib told us: Mu∏alla b. Mahdi told us: Bashshar
b. Ibrahim al-Numayri told us: Ghaylan b. Jarir told us on the authority of Anas
[b. Malik], who said: “Someone asked the Messenger of God, ‘Which of the
faithful have the best faith?’ He answered: ‘Those of them who have the best
moral character.’”
Thus, a good moral character is the servant’s greatest virtue, one by means
of which the true essence of men is known. One who is hidden by his outward
complexion (khalq) reveals himself through his moral character. I heard the
master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say: “God Most
High favored His Prophet – may God bless and greet him – with many excellent
416 That is, the Muslims.
417 That is, the Sufis.
418 Q. 68:4.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 253
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 253
qualities. However, none of them is more praiseworthy than his good moral
character, for God Most High said: ‘Surely, thou [the Prophet] art upon a good
character.’” Al-Wasiti said: “He [God] attributed a good moral character to him
[the Prophet] because he gave away both worlds,419while being content with God
Most High.” Al-Wasiti also said that “good moral character” means that one
shows no enmity toward anyone, nor is shown any enmity by anyone due to one’s
intimate knowledge of God Most High.//317 Al-Husayn b. Mansur [al-Hallaj]
said: “The meaning of this [verse] is that one remains unperturbed when one is
harshly treated by [God’s] creatures, after having witnessed [their] Creator.”
Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz said: “[Good character] means that you have no concern
other than God Most High.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard al-Husayn b. Ahmad b. Ja∏far say: I heard al-Kattani say: “Sufism is good moral character. Whoever surpasses you in moral character has also surpassed you in Sufism.” It
is said of Ibn ∏Umar420– may God be pleased with both of them421– that he said:
“If you hear me say to a slave: ‘May God disgrace you!’ then consider him to be
a free man!” Al-Fudayl said: “He who has shown every [possible] virtue, yet has
mistreated his chicken, should not be considered to be among the virtuous.” It
is said that whenever Ibn ∏Umar – may God be pleased with both of them – saw
a slave of his performing his prayer diligently, he would manumit him. When [all
his servants] learned about this character trait of his, they began to perform prayer
diligently to impress him so that he would manumit them. When someone
mentioned this to him, he said: “When someone deceives us for the sake of God,
we allow ourselves to be deceived.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad b.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 252
252 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
that he was a Jew. My thought grew stronger and stronger and persisted until I
decided to share it with al-Jurayri, who resented it. So I decided to inform that
man about it. I told him: ‘You tell us to let you know about any thought that
might occur to us. It has occurred to me that you are a Jew!’ He fell silent, then
raised his head and said: ‘You have spoken the truth. I bear witness that there is
no deity but God and that Muhammad is His messenger.’ He then said: ‘I have
practiced all religious denominations, saying to myself: “If there is any truth
among this community,416then it should be among this folk.”417So I mingled with
you in order to test you, and now [I am convinced that] you are truthful.’ He
became a good Muslim.”
It is reported that al-Sari [al-Saqti] used to say to al-Junayd: “Go preach
to people!” Al-Junayd recounted: “At that time, in my heart there was fear of
speaking in public, because I was not sure that I was worthy of it. One night,
which happened to be a Friday night, in my dream I saw the Prophet – may God
bless and greet him – who instructed me: ‘Go preach to people!’ When I woke
up, I went to al-Sari’s house before he had woken up and knocked on his door.
He inquired: ‘So you did not believe me until you were told [to do this by the
Prophet]?’” Next day, al-Junayd came to the Friday mosque and sat before the
people. Immediately word got around that al-Junayd sat [in the mosque] in order
to preach to people. A Christian youth in disguise approached him and said:
“Master, what is the meaning of the words of the Messenger of God – may God
bless and greet him: ‘Beware of the insight of the faithful [person], for he sees
with the light of God Most High.’ Al-Junayd bowed his head for a moment, then
raised it and said: “Embrace Islam! The time has come for you to become a
Muslim!” So the youth became a Muslim.
Moral character (khuluq)
God Most High said: “Surely, thou [the Prophet] art of a good moral character.”418
∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi informed us: Abu πl-Hasan al-Saffar al-Basri informed
us: Hisham b. Muhammad b. Ghalib told us: Mu∏alla b. Mahdi told us: Bashshar
b. Ibrahim al-Numayri told us: Ghaylan b. Jarir told us on the authority of Anas
[b. Malik], who said: “Someone asked the Messenger of God, ‘Which of the
faithful have the best faith?’ He answered: ‘Those of them who have the best
moral character.’”
Thus, a good moral character is the servant’s greatest virtue, one by means
of which the true essence of men is known. One who is hidden by his outward
complexion (khalq) reveals himself through his moral character. I heard the
master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say: “God Most
High favored His Prophet – may God bless and greet him – with many excellent
416 That is, the Muslims.
417 That is, the Sufis.
418 Q. 68:4.

When someone
mentioned this to him, he said: “When someone deceives us for the sake of God,
we allow ourselves to be deceived.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah
al-Razi say: I heard Abu Muhammad al-Jurayri say: I heard al-Junayd say: I heard
al-Harith al-Muhasibi say: “We have abandoned three things: decent appearance
accompanied by self-restraint, nice words accompanied by trustworthiness,
and good brotherhood accompanied by dependability.”422 I also heard him
[Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad al-Razi say:
“Good moral character consists of denigrating your actions toward Him and
exalting His actions toward you.” Someone asked al-Ahnaf:423“Who taught you
[your] moral character?” He answered: “Qays b. ∏Asim al-Minqari.”424“How far
did his moral character extend?” asked the inquirer. Al-Ahnaf said: “He was
sitting in his house, when his slave girl brought a skewer with sizzling pieces of
meat. It fell from her hand on one of his infant sons, who died instantly. The
419 That is, this world and the Hereafter. 420 ∏Abdallah, son of the second “rightly guided” caliph ∏Umar, who died in 73/693. 421 ∏Abdallah and his father ∏Umar b. al-Khattab. 422 Namely, one’s words and appearances are no longer supported by one’s actions. 423 Al-Ahnaf b. Qays, a leader of the powerful Tamim tribe under the Umayyads, who was famous
for his poetic talent, nobility of character, and sagacity; he died in 67/687. 424 A leader of the Muqa∏is tribe (a subdivision of the Tamim), who was renowned for his
generosity and leniency towards his enemies; he died in 47/667.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 254
254 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
slave girl was overcome with agony. Qays told her: ‘Fear not, you are now a free
woman for God’s sake!’”
Shah al-Kirmani said: “A sign of the good moral character is that you do not
harm others, while bearing patiently the distress they inflict on you.”//318 The
Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – said: “You will never make
people happy by your wealth. Therefore make them happy by a friendly expression
on your face and by [your] good moral character.” Someone asked Dhu πl-Nun
al-Misri: “Who has the greatest share of troubles?” He answered: “Those who
have the worst moral character.” Wahb [b. Munabbih] said: “If one is able to
maintain a good moral character for forty days, God will make it part of his
natural disposition (tabi∏a).” Al-Hasan al-Basri said about the words of God Most
High, “Purify thy robes, [O Prophet]”,425 that they mean “Improve your moral
character”. A certain ascetic had a ewe. [One day] he saw that one of its legs was missing. He asked who had done this.426One of his slaves admitted that he had. The ascetic
asked him: “Why?” The man said: “I wanted you to be distressed over it.” The
ascetic told him: “No, I will not distress the One who ordered you to do so! Go,
you are free now!” Someone asked Ibrahim b. Adham: “Have you ever found
delight in [something of] this world?” He answered: “Yes, twice. The first time,
when I was sitting and a stranger came and urinated on me. The second time, when
I was sitting and a stranger came and slapped me round the face.” It is related
that whenever boys saw Uways al-Qarani,427they would pelt him with stones. In
response, he would just tell them: “If you have to do this, then use small stones,
lest you break my legs and prevent me from performing my prayers.”
One day al-Ahnaf b. Qays found himself followed by a stranger, who was
insulting him.When someone
mentioned this to him, he said: “When someone deceives us for the sake of God,
we allow ourselves to be deceived.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah
al-Razi say: I heard Abu Muhammad al-Jurayri say: I heard al-Junayd say: I heard
al-Harith al-Muhasibi say: “We have abandoned three things: decent appearance
accompanied by self-restraint, nice words accompanied by trustworthiness,
and good brotherhood accompanied by dependability.”422 I also heard him
[Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad al-Razi say:
“Good moral character consists of denigrating your actions toward Him and
exalting His actions toward you.” Someone asked al-Ahnaf:423“Who taught you
[your] moral character?” He answered: “Qays b. ∏Asim al-Minqari.”424“How far
did his moral character extend?” asked the inquirer. Al-Ahnaf said: “He was
sitting in his house, when his slave girl brought a skewer with sizzling pieces of
meat. It fell from her hand on one of his infant sons, who died instantly. The
419 That is, this world and the Hereafter. 420 ∏Abdallah, son of the second “rightly guided” caliph ∏Umar, who died in 73/693. 421 ∏Abdallah and his father ∏Umar b. al-Khattab. 422 Namely, one’s words and appearances are no longer supported by one’s actions. 423 Al-Ahnaf b. Qays, a leader of the powerful Tamim tribe under the Umayyads, who was famous
for his poetic talent, nobility of character, and sagacity; he died in 67/687. 424 A leader of the Muqa∏is tribe (a subdivision of the Tamim), who was renowned for his
generosity and leniency towards his enemies; he died in 47/667.

In
response, he would just tell them: “If you have to do this, then use small stones,
lest you break my legs and prevent me from performing my prayers.”
One day al-Ahnaf b. Qays found himself followed by a stranger, who was
insulting him. When he approached his neighborhood, he stopped and said:
“Young man, if you have something more [to say], do it now before the halfwits
of my neighborhood hear you and respond to you [in kind].” Someone asked
Hatim al-Asamm: “Should a man put up with others?” He answered: “Yes, except
himself.” It is related that the Commander of the Faithful ∏Ali b. Abi Talib –
may God be pleased with him – called a servant of his, who did not respond to
his call. He called him again and again, but the servant still would not respond. So ∏Ali went to him and found him lying down. ∏Ali asked him: “Didn’t you
hear me?’ The servant answered that he did. “Then what made you ignore
my call?” He answered: “I feel safe from your punishment, so I [allowed myself
to be] lazy.” ∏Ali told him: “Go. You are now free for the sake of God Most
High!”
425 Q. 74:4. 426 That is, cut off one the ewe’s legs. 427 A younger contemporary of the Prophet who is said to have embraced his teaching without
ever meeting him in person. Sources describe him as an impoverished and ragged figure, who
chose to live a life of solitude and privation. He is said to have been killed fighting on ∏Ali’s
side against the army of Mu∏awiyya b. Abi Sufyan in 37/657.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 255
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 255
It is said that Ma∏ruf al-Karkhi went down to the Tigris in order to perform
his ablutions. He laid down his Qurπan and his cloak. A woman came along//319
and took them. Ma∏ruf caught up with her and said: “Sister, I am Ma∏ruf. Don’t
be afraid of me. Do you have a son who can read?” She replied: “No.” “And [your]
husband?” “No,” said the woman. Ma∏ruf told her: “Then give me the Qurπan
back and keep the cloak.” Once thieves broke impudently into Shaykh Abu ∏Abd
al-Rahman al-Sulami’s house and stole everything they could find. I heard one
of our companions recount [the following story]: “I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd
al-Rahman al-Sulami say: ‘I was passing through the marketplace one day when
I saw my cloak on a vendor.428I turned away from him and left.’”
I hear Shaykh Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj al-Tusi
say: I heard al-Wajihi say: al-Jurayri said: “When I came back from Mecca
– may God protect it – the first thing I did was to go to al-Junayd, so as to save
him the trouble [of visiting me]. I greeted him, then went to my house. When I
was praying the morning prayer in the mosque the following day, I discovered
that he was also praying in the row behind me. I told him: ‘Didn’t I come to
you the other day in order to save you the trouble?’ He said: ‘That was your
munificence, while [praying behind you after the hajj] is your due.’” Someone
asked Abu Hafs [al-Haddad] about good moral character.When I
was praying the morning prayer in the mosque the following day, I discovered
that he was also praying in the row behind me. I told him: ‘Didn’t I come to
you the other day in order to save you the trouble?’ He said: ‘That was your
munificence, while [praying behind you after the hajj] is your due.’” Someone
asked Abu Hafs [al-Haddad] about good moral character. He said: “This is what
God – may He be great and exalted – bestowed upon His Prophet – may God
bless and greet him – when He said: ‘Embrace forgiveness and bid to that which
is honorable.’”429It is said: “Good moral character is that you be close to people,
while being a stranger to what occurs among them.”430
It is said: “Good moral character is that you accept harsh treatment from
your fellow creatures and God’s decree with neither vexation, nor anxiety.” It
is related that Abu Dharr431 was watering his camels at a pond, when a stranger
rushed in and broke open [a side] of the pond. Abu Dharr first sat down, then
lay down. When someone asked him about this, he answered: “The Messenger
of God – may God bless and greet him – commanded us to sit down whenever
we are angry and, should [our] anger persist, to lie down.” In the Gospel it is
said: “O My servant, remember Me when you are angry, and I will remember
you when I am angry!” A woman shouted to Malik b. Dinar: “You hypocrite!”
He answered: “Woman, you have found a name for me that the people of Basra
have missed [thus far]!”
Luqman432said to his son: “There are three men whose true character makes
itself known on three instances: a prudent man at the time of anger; a valiant man
at the time of war; and a brother at the time when someone is in need of him.”
428 Or auctioneer (man yazid). 429 Q. 7:199; 7:197, according to Arberry’s translation. 430 That is, to their quarrels and disputes. 431 A pious and frugal Companion of the Prophet who died in 31 or 32/652 or 653.In
response, he would just tell them: “If you have to do this, then use small stones,
lest you break my legs and prevent me from performing my prayers.”
One day al-Ahnaf b. Qays found himself followed by a stranger, who was
insulting him. When he approached his neighborhood, he stopped and said:
“Young man, if you have something more [to say], do it now before the halfwits
of my neighborhood hear you and respond to you [in kind].” Someone asked
Hatim al-Asamm: “Should a man put up with others?” He answered: “Yes, except
himself.” It is related that the Commander of the Faithful ∏Ali b. Abi Talib –
may God be pleased with him – called a servant of his, who did not respond to
his call. He called him again and again, but the servant still would not respond. So ∏Ali went to him and found him lying down. ∏Ali asked him: “Didn’t you
hear me?’ The servant answered that he did. “Then what made you ignore
my call?” He answered: “I feel safe from your punishment, so I [allowed myself
to be] lazy.” ∏Ali told him: “Go. You are now free for the sake of God Most
High!”
425 Q. 74:4. 426 That is, cut off one the ewe’s legs. 427 A younger contemporary of the Prophet who is said to have embraced his teaching without
ever meeting him in person. Sources describe him as an impoverished and ragged figure, who
chose to live a life of solitude and privation. He is said to have been killed fighting on ∏Ali’s
side against the army of Mu∏awiyya b. Abi Sufyan in 37/657.

430 That is, to their quarrels and disputes. 431 A pious and frugal Companion of the Prophet who died in 31 or 32/652 or 653. 432 A legendary hero and sage of pre-Islamic Arabia, who appears in the Qurπan as a wise father
giving pious admonitions to his son.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 256
256 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Moses – peace be upon him – said: “My God, I plea that I be ascribed no qualities
that I do not possess!” God – praise be to Him – revealed to him: “I have not done
this for Myself. How can I do this for you?”//320 Yahya b. Ziyad al-Harithi
owned a troublesome slave. Someone asked him: “Why do you retain this slave?”
He answered: “In order to learn temperance through him.” It is said that in the
words of God Most High: “He [God] has lavished on you His blessings, outward
and inward.”433“Outward” here means [man’s] creation [by God]434while “inward”
means [God’s] purifying [man’s] moral character. Al-Fudayl said: “I’d rather
have a good-natured sinner than bad-natured worshiper as my companion.”
It is said that good moral character consists of taking adversity in one’s stride
(bi-husn al-mudara). It is related that Ibrahim b. Adham was traveling in a desert, when he
encountered a soldier, who asked him: “Where is the closest settlement?” Ibrahim
b. Adham pointed toward the graveyard, whereupon the soldier struck him on
the head and wounded him. When the soldier finally let him go, he was told that
[he had beaten] Ibrahim b. Adham, the [famous] ascetic from Khurasan. When the
soldier returned to apologize before him, Ibrahim told him: “When you struck
me, I asked God Most High to [admit] you to Paradise.” The soldier inquired why
he had done that. Ibrahim told him: “Because I knew that God would reward me
for this. However, I did not want my portion to be good at your expense and
your portion to be bad because of me!”
It is related that a man invited Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri to dinner. When he
came to the man’s door, the latter told him: “Sir, this is not a good time for
you to enter [my house]. I regret it, but you must leave.” When Abu ∏Uthman
reached his home, the man caught up with him and repeated his apologies and
said: “Sir, I regret [turning you back].430 That is, to their quarrels and disputes. 431 A pious and frugal Companion of the Prophet who died in 31 or 32/652 or 653. 432 A legendary hero and sage of pre-Islamic Arabia, who appears in the Qurπan as a wise father
giving pious admonitions to his son.

When he
came to the man’s door, the latter told him: “Sir, this is not a good time for
you to enter [my house]. I regret it, but you must leave.” When Abu ∏Uthman
reached his home, the man caught up with him and repeated his apologies and
said: “Sir, I regret [turning you back]. You may come now.” Abu ∏Uthman took
off and went [to the man’s house]. When he came to the door of the man’s house,
the man said the same as he did the first time. He did the same the third and
fourth times. Time and again, Abu ∏Uthman came back to the man’s door only
to be sent away. Finally, the man told him that he simply wanted to test him. He
apologized profusely and praised Abu ∏Uthman highly [for his perseverance]. However, Abu ∏Uthman told him: “Do not praise me for a character trait that
you commonly find among dogs, for when a dog is called, it comes, and when it
is yelled at, it runs away.” It is related that Abu ∏Uthman was crossing a street
one day, when someone dumped a bucket of ashes on him. His companions were
very angry and began to curse the person who dumped the ashes. However, Abu
∏Uthman told them: “Don’t say a word! He who has deserved the [hell]fire, yet
has managed to get away with just ashes, has no right to be angry!”
It is related that a Sufi was staying in Ja∏far b. Hanzala’s house. The latter
did his utmost to serve him well. The Sufi//321 used to tell him: “What a
wonderful man you are, were it not for the fact that you are Jewish!” To which
433 Q. 31:20; 31:19, according to Arberry’s translation. 434 Q. 7:10; 15:26–29.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 257
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 257
Ja∏far responded: “My religious creed (∏aqidati) has no effect on my service of
your needs! Therefore, pray for a cure for yourself and for guidance for me!” It
is said that ∏Abdallah al-Khayyat [the Taylor] had a Magian as his customer. ∏Abdallah sewed clothes for him and the Magian paid him with counterfeit
money. One day, when ∏Abdallah left his shop on an errand, the Magian came
with his counterfeit money and tried to give it to ∏Abdallah’s apprentice. When
the apprentice refused to accept it, the Magian paid him genuine money. When
∏Abdallah came back to his shop, he asked the apprentice: “Where’s the Magian’s
shirt?” The apprentice told him what had happened. ∏Abdallah exclaimed: “You
have done a terrible thing! For a long time he has done business with me with
[such counterfeit] money. I have been patient with him throughout and tossed
his money into a well, so that he would not cheat other folk with it!”
It is said that bad moral character oppresses the heart of its possessor,
because it leaves no room there for anything other than his [selfish] desires. It
thus becomes like a small house, which is barely enough for its tenant. It is said
that one sign of good character is that you are not annoyed by whoever prays by
your side [during the ritual prayer]. As for bad character, it consists of paying
attention to the bad character of others. Someone asked the Messenger of God
– may God bless and greet him – about bad luck, he said: “Bad character!”
Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali al-Ahwazi informed us: Abu πl-Hasan al-Saffar al-Basri
told us: Mu∏adh b. al-Muthanna told us: Yahya b. Ma∏na435 told us: Marwan
al-Fazari told us: Yazid b.When he
came to the man’s door, the latter told him: “Sir, this is not a good time for
you to enter [my house]. I regret it, but you must leave.” When Abu ∏Uthman
reached his home, the man caught up with him and repeated his apologies and
said: “Sir, I regret [turning you back]. You may come now.” Abu ∏Uthman took
off and went [to the man’s house]. When he came to the door of the man’s house,
the man said the same as he did the first time. He did the same the third and
fourth times. Time and again, Abu ∏Uthman came back to the man’s door only
to be sent away. Finally, the man told him that he simply wanted to test him. He
apologized profusely and praised Abu ∏Uthman highly [for his perseverance]. However, Abu ∏Uthman told him: “Do not praise me for a character trait that
you commonly find among dogs, for when a dog is called, it comes, and when it
is yelled at, it runs away.” It is related that Abu ∏Uthman was crossing a street
one day, when someone dumped a bucket of ashes on him. His companions were
very angry and began to curse the person who dumped the ashes. However, Abu
∏Uthman told them: “Don’t say a word! He who has deserved the [hell]fire, yet
has managed to get away with just ashes, has no right to be angry!”
It is related that a Sufi was staying in Ja∏far b. Hanzala’s house. The latter
did his utmost to serve him well. The Sufi//321 used to tell him: “What a
wonderful man you are, were it not for the fact that you are Jewish!” To which
433 Q. 31:20; 31:19, according to Arberry’s translation. 434 Q. 7:10; 15:26–29.

al-Muthanna told us: Yahya b. Ma∏na435 told us: Marwan
al-Fazari told us: Yazid b. Kaysan told us on the authority of Abu Hazim, on
the authority of Abu Hurayra – may God be pleased with him – that someone
asked the Messenger of God: “Messenger of God, pray to God Most High against
polytheists!” He answered: “I was sent [by God] as a mercy, not as a punishment!”
Munificence (jud) and generosity (sakhaπ)
God – may He be great and exalted – said: “They prefer others above themselves,
even though poverty is their portion.”436 ∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan informed us:
Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd informed us: al-Hasan b. al-∏Abbas//322 told us: Sahl told us:
Sa∏id b. Muslim told us on the authority of Yahya b. Sa∏id, on the authority of
Muhammad b. Ibrahim, on the authority of ∏Alqama that ∏Aπisha437 – may God
be pleased with her – said that the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet
him – said: “The generous are close to God Most High, close to people, close to
Paradise and far from the [hell]fire, while the miserly are far from God Most
High, far from people, far from Paradise, and close to the [hell]fire. God loves
the generous ignoramus (jahil) more than the miserly worshiper.”
The master [al-Qushayri] said: “In the parlance of the folk438 there’s no
difference between munificence and generosity. God – praise be to Him – on the
435 Or “al-Mu∏in”. 436 Q. 59:9. 437 The third (and favorite) wife of the Prophet, who died in 58/678. 438 That is, Sufis.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 258
258 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
other hand, is not described as “generous” or “munificent”, for lack of an
appropriate precedent [in the Qurπan or the Sunna]. The true essence of generosity
is that one has no difficulty giving [to others]. According to the folk, generosity
is the first step, which is followed by munificence and, finally, preferring others
to oneself (ithar). He who gives away a portion and saves a portion for himself is
generous. He who gives away a lot and saves a little for himself is munificent. He
who suffers from shortage, yet gives away his bare minimum to someone else, is
one who gives preference to others over himself. Likewise, I heard the master
Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say that Asmaπ b. Kharija
said: “I hate to turn down anyone who approaches me with a need, because if he
is noble, I guard his honor,439while if he is base I guard my honor from him.” It
is related that Muwarriq al-∏Ijli was very sophisticated in showing friendship
toward his companions.440 He would leave one thousand dirhams with them and
say: “Keep this for me until I come back.” After a while he would send them a
note saying: “These dirhamsare yours [to spend].”
A man from Manbij441 met another man from Medina and inquired about
him. When he was told that the man had come from Medina, he told him: “A man
from your city named al-Hakam b. ∏Abd al-Muttalib came to us and made us
rich.” The man from Medina asked: “How come? He came to you with nothing
but a hair-shirt on his back?” The man from Manbij replied: “He did not enrich
us with money. Rather, he taught us generosity. We started to give to one another,
until all of us grew rich.” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “When
Ghulam al-Khalil slandered the Sufis [of Baghdad] before the caliph,442 he
ordered them to be beheaded.al-Muthanna told us: Yahya b. Ma∏na435 told us: Marwan
al-Fazari told us: Yazid b. Kaysan told us on the authority of Abu Hazim, on
the authority of Abu Hurayra – may God be pleased with him – that someone
asked the Messenger of God: “Messenger of God, pray to God Most High against
polytheists!” He answered: “I was sent [by God] as a mercy, not as a punishment!”
Munificence (jud) and generosity (sakhaπ)
God – may He be great and exalted – said: “They prefer others above themselves,
even though poverty is their portion.”436 ∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan informed us:
Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd informed us: al-Hasan b. al-∏Abbas//322 told us: Sahl told us:
Sa∏id b. Muslim told us on the authority of Yahya b. Sa∏id, on the authority of
Muhammad b. Ibrahim, on the authority of ∏Alqama that ∏Aπisha437 – may God
be pleased with her – said that the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet
him – said: “The generous are close to God Most High, close to people, close to
Paradise and far from the [hell]fire, while the miserly are far from God Most
High, far from people, far from Paradise, and close to the [hell]fire. God loves
the generous ignoramus (jahil) more than the miserly worshiper.”
The master [al-Qushayri] said: “In the parlance of the folk438 there’s no
difference between munificence and generosity. God – praise be to Him – on the
435 Or “al-Mu∏in”. 436 Q. 59:9. 437 The third (and favorite) wife of the Prophet, who died in 58/678. 438 That is, Sufis.

Rather, he taught us generosity. We started to give to one another,
until all of us grew rich.” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “When
Ghulam al-Khalil slandered the Sufis [of Baghdad] before the caliph,442 he
ordered them to be beheaded. Al-Junayd [avoided this trial] by presenting himself
as a jurist (faqih), for he indeed issued legal rulings according to the juridical
school [named after] Abu//323 Thawr,443 while others, including al-Shahham,
al-Raqqam, and al-Nuri, were arrested. When leather mats were spread for
their beheading, al-Nuri stepped forward. The executioner asked him: ‘Do you
know what you are stepping forward for?’ Al-Nuri responded that he did. The
executioner then asked him: ‘Then what makes you hurry?’ Al-Nuri answered:
‘I’d rather my companions live another moment.’ The executioner was perplexed
and reported the matter to the caliph, who sent the Sufis over to the judge to
investigate their affair. The judge posed several legal questions to Abu πl-Husayn
al-Nuri, who answered them all. He then proceeded to say [the following]: ‘God
has servants who, when they stand, they stand for the sake of God; when they
speak, they speak for the sake of God.’ He said other things as well that made the
439 By fulfilling his need. 440 Literally, “his brothers” (ikhwanuh). 441 An ancient town in Syria, located north-west of Aleppo. 442 See IM, pp. 61–62. 443 Ibrahim b. Khalid Abu Thawr (d. 240/854), a prominent jurist, who adhered closely to the
school of law founded by al-Shafi∏i. However, his opinions were sufficiently different from
those of al-Shafi∏i to consider him to be the founder of an independent school of law.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 259
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 259
judge weep. He then sent the following note to the caliph: ‘If these folk are
heretics, then there’s not a single [faithful] Muslim on the face of the earth.’”
It is related that ∏Ali b. al-Fudayl444used to buy his goods from neighborhood
merchants. Someone told him: “You could buy [the same goods] cheaper if you
shopped at the [city] market!” He answered: “These merchants have settled in
our neighborhood in the hope of serving our needs.” It is related that someone
sent [as a gift] a slave girl to Jabala, when he had his companions with him. He said: “It would be an ugly thing if I were to accept her for myself in your
presence. At the same time, I hate to privilege one of you by [giving] her to
him, for all of you have a right to her and to [being] honored [by me]. This girl
cannot be divided [among you].” There were eighty people there. So he ordered
that each of them be given a slave girl or a slave boy. It is said that ∏Ubaydallah
b. Abi Bakra445felt thirsty while on the road. He asked for water at the house of a
woman. The woman brought out a cup and stood behind the door, saying: “Stay
away from the door and let one of your slaves come and get it. I am a [modest]
Arab woman, but my servant died a few days ago.”446∏Ubaydallah drank the water
and told his slave: “Give her ten thousand dirhams.” The woman said: “May
God be Glorified! Are you ridiculing me?” ∏Ubaydallah said [to his slave]: “Take
twenty thousand dirhamsto her.” She said: “I ask God Most High (to grant you)
good health.” ∏Ubaydallah exclaimed: “Boy, give her thirty thousand dirhams!”
On hearing that she slammed the door before him and cried: “Shame on you!”
But the boy [finally] brought her thirty thousand dirhams and she accepted it. Before nightfall she was receiving numerous suitors. It is said that munificence is acting on first impulse (al-khatir al-awwal).Rather, he taught us generosity. We started to give to one another,
until all of us grew rich.” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “When
Ghulam al-Khalil slandered the Sufis [of Baghdad] before the caliph,442 he
ordered them to be beheaded. Al-Junayd [avoided this trial] by presenting himself
as a jurist (faqih), for he indeed issued legal rulings according to the juridical
school [named after] Abu//323 Thawr,443 while others, including al-Shahham,
al-Raqqam, and al-Nuri, were arrested. When leather mats were spread for
their beheading, al-Nuri stepped forward. The executioner asked him: ‘Do you
know what you are stepping forward for?’ Al-Nuri responded that he did. The
executioner then asked him: ‘Then what makes you hurry?’ Al-Nuri answered:
‘I’d rather my companions live another moment.’ The executioner was perplexed
and reported the matter to the caliph, who sent the Sufis over to the judge to
investigate their affair. The judge posed several legal questions to Abu πl-Husayn
al-Nuri, who answered them all. He then proceeded to say [the following]: ‘God
has servants who, when they stand, they stand for the sake of God; when they
speak, they speak for the sake of God.’ He said other things as well that made the
439 By fulfilling his need. 440 Literally, “his brothers” (ikhwanuh). 441 An ancient town in Syria, located north-west of Aleppo. 442 See IM, pp. 61–62. 443 Ibrahim b. Khalid Abu Thawr (d. 240/854), a prominent jurist, who adhered closely to the
school of law founded by al-Shafi∏i. However, his opinions were sufficiently different from
those of al-Shafi∏i to consider him to be the founder of an independent school of law.

Before nightfall she was receiving numerous suitors. It is said that munificence is acting on first impulse (al-khatir al-awwal). I
heard one of the companions of Abu πl-Hasan al-Bushanji – may God have mercy
on him – say: “One Abu πl-Hasan al-Bushanji was in the outhouse. [Suddenly]
he called a disciple of his and asked him to take the shirt off his back and to
present it to so-and-so. Someone asked him: ‘Couldn’t you wait until you came
out of the outhouse?’ He answered: ‘I do not trust myself not to change my
mind//324 about [giving away] my shirt!’”
Someone asked Qays b. Sa∏d b. ∏Ubada: “Have you ever seen anyone more
generous than yourself?” He answered: “Yes. One day in the desert we came upon
the camp of a Bedouin woman. When her husband arrived, she told him: ‘Two
guests have come to stay with us.’ He then brought a she-camel, slaughtered it
and said: ‘This is for you!’ The next day he brought another one and slaughtered
it, saying ‘This is for you!’ We objected: ‘We have eaten only a little of the one
you slaughtered the other day!’ He responded: ‘I do not give yesterday’s food to
my guests!’ We stayed with him two or three more days, because it was raining,
and he continued to do this [every day]. When we were about to depart, we left
444 That is, son of the famous ascetic al-Fudayl b. ∏Iyad. 445 The Arab military commander and governor of the Persian province of Sistan under the
Umayyads. He died in 79/698. 446 And therefore could not bring water to her guests.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 260
260 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
one hundred dinarsin his tent, saying to his wife: ‘Apologize to him on our behalf.’
We continued our journey. At midday, we saw the man behind us shouting: ‘Stop,
you ignoble riders! You have paid me for my hospitality!’ When he approached
us, he said: ‘Take this [money] back, or else I will stab you with my spear!’ So
we took the money and left, while he recited [the following]:
Your robbing [me] of the reward due to me for what I have given you
Is enough to humiliate me [for the rest of my life]!”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him
– say: “Abu ∏Abdallah al-Rudhbari came to visit one of his friends. The friend was
not at home and the door of his house was shut. He exclaimed: ‘Here’s a Sufi,
whose door is locked! Break the lock! Break the lock!’ He then ordered everything
he could find in the man’s house and yard to be taken to the marketplace and
sold. Al-Rudhbari and his companions sold all this, bought the things that they
wanted from the proceeds, and returned to his house. When the owner of the
house returned, he could not utter a single word. His wife came after him, wearing
a cloak. When she entered the house, she threw off her garment and exclaimed:
‘This, too, is part of our property, so go and sell it as well!’ The husband asked
her: ‘Why are you giving this away on your own accord?’ She answered: ‘Hush! A master like him [al-Rudhbari] confronts us and passes his judgement on us in
this manner, yet we are still trying to hide something from him?’”
Bishr b. al-Harith [al-Hafi] said: “Seeing a miser hardens one’s heart.” It is
said that Qays b. Sa∏d b. ∏Ubada fell ill. His friends tarried in visiting him, so he
asked what was wrong with them.Before nightfall she was receiving numerous suitors. It is said that munificence is acting on first impulse (al-khatir al-awwal). I
heard one of the companions of Abu πl-Hasan al-Bushanji – may God have mercy
on him – say: “One Abu πl-Hasan al-Bushanji was in the outhouse. [Suddenly]
he called a disciple of his and asked him to take the shirt off his back and to
present it to so-and-so. Someone asked him: ‘Couldn’t you wait until you came
out of the outhouse?’ He answered: ‘I do not trust myself not to change my
mind//324 about [giving away] my shirt!’”
Someone asked Qays b. Sa∏d b. ∏Ubada: “Have you ever seen anyone more
generous than yourself?” He answered: “Yes. One day in the desert we came upon
the camp of a Bedouin woman. When her husband arrived, she told him: ‘Two
guests have come to stay with us.’ He then brought a she-camel, slaughtered it
and said: ‘This is for you!’ The next day he brought another one and slaughtered
it, saying ‘This is for you!’ We objected: ‘We have eaten only a little of the one
you slaughtered the other day!’ He responded: ‘I do not give yesterday’s food to
my guests!’ We stayed with him two or three more days, because it was raining,
and he continued to do this [every day]. When we were about to depart, we left
444 That is, son of the famous ascetic al-Fudayl b. ∏Iyad. 445 The Arab military commander and governor of the Persian province of Sistan under the
Umayyads. He died in 79/698. 446 And therefore could not bring water to her guests.

∏Ubada fell ill. His friends tarried in visiting him, so he
asked what was wrong with them. He was told: “They [are not coming] because
they are ashamed of the debts they owe you.” He exclaimed: “May God curse
the money that prevents friends from visiting [one of their own]!” He then//325
asked the town crier to announce: “Whoever owes anything to Qays is now free
from it!” By the nightfall the porch of his house was broken by all those who
came to visit him. Someone said to ∏Abdallah b. Ja∏far: “You give generously when
asked, yet you give no ground to someone who opposes you.” He answered:
“I am generous with my money, yet I am stingy with my intellect.” It is said
that ∏Abdallah b. Ja∏far once went to inspect his property in the countryside. He stopped at a date palm grove where a black slave boy was working. When
food was brought to the slave boy, a dog came from outside the garden and
approached the boy. He threw a piece of bread to it, and it ate it. He threw it
another piece of bread, then a third one, and the dog ate them, as ∏Abdallah b. Ja∏far was looking on. He then asked the boy: “How much food do you get every
day?” The boy answered: “Just what you have seen!” Ja∏far asked him: “Why did
you prefer the dog over yourself?” The boy responded: “This is not an area that
dogs normally frequent. This dog must have come from afar, so I did not want
to turn it away.” ∏Abdallah b. Ja∏far asked him: “How will you manage [without
food]?” The boy said: “I will persevere through the rest of the day.” ∏Abdallah
exclaimed: “I have been reproached for being too generous! However, this boy
is more generous than I!” So he purchased the date palm grove, the boy and all543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 261
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 261
the tools that were there, then manumitted the boy and gave all this [property]
to him.”
It is related that a man went one day to visit a friend of his. When he knocked
on his door, the friend came out and asked him: “Why have you come?” The
man answered: “Because of a four-hundred dirhamdebt that I am saddled with.”
The friend went inside, weighed out four hundred dirhams and brought them
out to him. He then returned home in tears. His wife asked him: “Why could you
not find an excuse [not to give him the money], if giving [it to him] is so hard for
you?” The man said: “I am weeping only because I was unable to perceive his
need so that he had to reveal it to me!” Mutarrif b. al-Shikhkhir said: “Whenever
one of you is in need of my assistance, let him deliver it to me in writing, for
I hate to see the humiliation of need on anyone’s face.” A man, who wanted to
embarrass ∏Abdallah b. al-∏Abbas, visited the prominent people of the city and
told them: “Ibn al-∏Abbas invites you to have dinner with him tonight!” So, the
notables came to him and filled his entire house. He asked what was going on and
was told the story. He immediately proceeded to order fruit, bread, and various
dishes to be bought. In this way, he managed to salvage the situation. When the
feast was over, he asked his household managers: “Do we have [enough money]
to offer this [hospitality] every day?” They said: “Yes [we do].” He then said:
“Then let’s entertain all of them here every day!”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: the master Abu Sahl//326 al-Su∏luki was performing his ablutions
in his courtyard, when a man approached him and asked for alms. He had
nothing with him at that time, so he said: “Wait until I am finished.” The man
waited. When al-Su∏luki finished [his ablutions], he said: “Take this [valuable]
bottle and go!” The man took the bottle and left.∏Ubada fell ill. His friends tarried in visiting him, so he
asked what was wrong with them. He was told: “They [are not coming] because
they are ashamed of the debts they owe you.” He exclaimed: “May God curse
the money that prevents friends from visiting [one of their own]!” He then//325
asked the town crier to announce: “Whoever owes anything to Qays is now free
from it!” By the nightfall the porch of his house was broken by all those who
came to visit him. Someone said to ∏Abdallah b. Ja∏far: “You give generously when
asked, yet you give no ground to someone who opposes you.” He answered:
“I am generous with my money, yet I am stingy with my intellect.” It is said
that ∏Abdallah b. Ja∏far once went to inspect his property in the countryside. He stopped at a date palm grove where a black slave boy was working. When
food was brought to the slave boy, a dog came from outside the garden and
approached the boy. He threw a piece of bread to it, and it ate it. He threw it
another piece of bread, then a third one, and the dog ate them, as ∏Abdallah b. Ja∏far was looking on. He then asked the boy: “How much food do you get every
day?” The boy answered: “Just what you have seen!” Ja∏far asked him: “Why did
you prefer the dog over yourself?” The boy responded: “This is not an area that
dogs normally frequent. This dog must have come from afar, so I did not want
to turn it away.” ∏Abdallah b. Ja∏far asked him: “How will you manage [without
food]?” The boy said: “I will persevere through the rest of the day.” ∏Abdallah
exclaimed: “I have been reproached for being too generous! However, this boy
is more generous than I!” So he purchased the date palm grove, the boy and all

He had
nothing with him at that time, so he said: “Wait until I am finished.” The man
waited. When al-Su∏luki finished [his ablutions], he said: “Take this [valuable]
bottle and go!” The man took the bottle and left. Al-Su∏luki waited until he
knew that the man was far away, then cried out: “A man entered [my house] and
took the bottle!” [His family] went out searching for the man, but could not
catch up with him. Al-Su∏luki did that because his household used to reproach
him for his excessive generosity. I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: “The master
Abu Sahl [al-Su∏luki] gave his robe to a certain man in [the middle of] the
winter. Since he had no other robe, he had to put on a woman’s robe whenever
he went out to teach [his classes]. Once a delegation of distinguished men
arrived from Fars.447It included all kinds of famous scholars: jurists, theologians
(mutakallimun), grammarians, and so on. The ruler of the city,448Abu πl-Hasan,
sent for Abu Sahl, ordering him to ride out to meet the delegation. He put
on a woolen tunic over his woman’s robe and rode out. [When the ruler saw
him], he exclaimed: ‘He has humiliated me in front of the entire city by riding
out in the woman’s robe!’ However, when Sahl started to debate them, his
arguments proved to be superior to theirs in every field of knowledge they
represented.”
447 A province in Iran. 448 That is, Nishapur.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 262
262 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: “The master Abu Sahl [al-Su∏luki] never
handed alms to anyone directly. Rather, he would cast it on the ground, so that
the beggar would pick the alms from the ground, saying: ‘This world is of so little
worth that, for the love of it, I do not want to see my hand putting anything into
the hand of another man.’ However, [the Prophet] – may God bless and greet
him – said: ‘The upper hand449is better than the lower hand450.’”
Abu Marthad – may God have mercy on him – was a generous person. Once
a poet praised him in his verse. Abu Marthad told him: “I have nothing to give
you [for your poem]. However, you should take me to the judge and claim that
I owe you ten thousand dirhams, and I will confirm this. Then have me put into
prison. My family will not allow me to be in prison for long.” The poet did as he
was told, and by the end of that same day he received ten thousand dirhams, while
Abu Marthad was released from prison. It is related that a man asked al-Hasan
b. ∏Ali b. Abi Talib – may God be pleased with him – for some charity and the
latter gave him fifty thousand dirhams and five thousand dinars. He then said:
“Bring a porter to carry this money for you!” When the man brought a porter,
al-Hasan gave the man his shawl, saying: “The porter’s wages are also on me!”
A woman asked Layth b. Sa∏d451 for a bowl of honey. He ordered her an
entire skin full of honey. When someone asked him about that, he replied: “She
asked according to her need, while I gave according to my benefaction!” A Sufi
related: “One day I was performing the morning prayer in the mosque of
al-Ash∏ath452at Kufa. I came there in search of one of my debtors. When//327 I
completed my prayer, someone put in front of me a suit of clothes and a pair of
sandals.He had
nothing with him at that time, so he said: “Wait until I am finished.” The man
waited. When al-Su∏luki finished [his ablutions], he said: “Take this [valuable]
bottle and go!” The man took the bottle and left. Al-Su∏luki waited until he
knew that the man was far away, then cried out: “A man entered [my house] and
took the bottle!” [His family] went out searching for the man, but could not
catch up with him. Al-Su∏luki did that because his household used to reproach
him for his excessive generosity. I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: “The master
Abu Sahl [al-Su∏luki] gave his robe to a certain man in [the middle of] the
winter. Since he had no other robe, he had to put on a woman’s robe whenever
he went out to teach [his classes]. Once a delegation of distinguished men
arrived from Fars.447It included all kinds of famous scholars: jurists, theologians
(mutakallimun), grammarians, and so on. The ruler of the city,448Abu πl-Hasan,
sent for Abu Sahl, ordering him to ride out to meet the delegation. He put
on a woolen tunic over his woman’s robe and rode out. [When the ruler saw
him], he exclaimed: ‘He has humiliated me in front of the entire city by riding
out in the woman’s robe!’ However, when Sahl started to debate them, his
arguments proved to be superior to theirs in every field of knowledge they
represented.”
447 A province in Iran. 448 That is, Nishapur.

I came there in search of one of my debtors. When//327 I
completed my prayer, someone put in front of me a suit of clothes and a pair of
sandals. When I asked what it was, I was told that al-Ash∏ath had just returned
from Mecca and ordered [such presents] to be given to the entire congregation
of his mosque. I told them: ‘I have come here in search of my debtor, so I do not
belong to this congregation.’ They told me: ‘This is to be given to all those who
have come to the mosque.’” It is related that when the hour of al-Shafi∏i’s – may
God be pleased with him – death drew near, he said: “Tell so-and-so to wash my
body!” However, the man happened to be away. When he came back [from his
trip], he was told about this. The man then asked for al-Shafi∏i’s ledger, and
found that al-Shafi∏i had a debt of seventy-thousand dirhams. He settled that
debt, saying: “This is my washing of his [body]!” It is related that when al-Shafi∏i
came from Sanaa453 to Mecca, he had with him ten thousand dinars. Someone
told him to purchase a slave girl [to serve him] with this money. He set up a
tent outside Mecca and put the dinars [on his robe] and began to give away
these dinars. He would give a fistful of them to anyone who came to see him. By
449 That is, the hand of the giver. 450 That is, the hand of the taker. 451 A famous hadith collector and jurist, who lived and died in Egypt in 175/791. 452 A tribal leader from Hadramawt, who took an active part in the conquest of Iraq. He later
settled in Kufa, where he died in 40/661. 453 The capital city of present-day Yemen.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 263
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 263
midday, he stood up and shook out his robe: there was not a single piece left
on him.
It is related that al-Sari [al-Saqati] left his house on a festival day and
encountered a man of importance, to whom he gave only a cursory greeting. He
was told: “This is a man of importance!” He answered: “Yes, I recognized him.
However, a well-attested tradition has it that whenever two Muslims meet, one
hundred divine blessings are divided between them, of which ninety go to
the more cheerful one. So, I wanted him to receive the larger portion [of the
blessings]. It is related that the Commander of the Faithful ∏Ali b. Abi Talib
– may God be pleased with him – was found weeping one day. When asked what
made him cry, he told: “Not a single guest has come over in the past seven days.
I am afraid that God Most High may have decided to humiliate me!” It is related
that Malik b. Anas454 – may God be pleased with him – said: “The tax of any
house is that [its owner] should set aside a room for guests [in it].”
Concerning the words of God Most High, “Hast thou received the story
of the honored guests of Abraham?”455 the guests are called “honored” because
Abraham attended upon them himself, and the guest of an honorable person
(karim) is also honorable. Ibrahim b. al-Junayd said: “There are four things that
the noble person should not be remiss in, even if he be a prince: standing up
from his place when his father enters [the room], serving his guests [personally],
serving a scholar from whom you have learned, and asking [men of learning]
about what he does not know.”
Ibn ∏Abbas – may God be pleased with him – said concerning the words of
God Most High, “There is no fault in you that you eat//328 whether in groups
or separately”,456that it means: “They [the Companions of the Prophet] felt uneasy
when any one of them would eat alone, so God gave them permission to do
that.” It is related that one day ∏Abdallah b. ∏Amir b. Kurayz457offered hospitality
to a man. He entertained him very well. However, when the guest was about to
depart, his servants did not help him [with his preparations]. When someone
reprimanded him, he answered: “They never help anyone who leaves us!”
∏Abdallah b. Bakawayh the Sufi recited to us the following verse of al-Mutanabbi:458
If you leave a company who could prevent you from departing
Then they are the ones that are leaving!
∏Abdallah b. Mubarak said: “Being generous with regard to what other people
possess459is better than being generous in giving away [one’s own possessions].”
454 A famous early jurist, founder of the Maliki legal school of Sunni Islam; he died in 179/796.
455 Q. 51:24.
456 Q. 24:61.
457 Governor of Basra (d. 59/680) under ∏Uthman and Mu∏awiyya, who was renowned for his
generosity.
458 A great Arab poet, who died in 354/955.
459 That is, being happy at the sight of other people’s wealth.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 264
264 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
A Sufi recounted: “On a very cold day I came to visit Bishr b. al-Harith. He had
no clothes on him and sat there trembling [from cold]. I told him: ‘Abu Nasr, on
a day like this people put on extra clothing! Why do you have so little [clothing
on you]?’ He answered: ‘I have remembered the poor and their plight. Since I have
nothing to bestow on them, I have decided to keep their company in enduring
this cold!’”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: “I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard [Abu ∏Ali] al-Daqqaq say:
“Generosity lies not in the wealthy giving to the indigent (mu∏dam). Generosity
lies in the indigent giving to the wealthy!”
Jealousy (ghayra)
God Most High said: “My Lord has only forbidden indecencies, the inward
and the outward.”460 Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdus al-Muzakki
informed us: Abu Ahmad Hamza b. al-∏Abbas al-Bazzaz informed us in Baghdad:
Muhammad b. Ghalib b. Harb told us: ∏Abdallah b. Muslim told us: Muhammad
b. al-Furat told us on the authority of Ibrahim al-Hajari, on the authority of Abu
πl-Ahwas, on the authority of ∏Abdallah b. Mas∏ud, who said: “The Messenger of
God – may God bless and greet him – said: ‘No one is more jealous than God
Most High. Out of His jealousy He has forbidden indecencies, the inward and
the outward.’”//329 ∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd
al-Saffar informed us: Abu πl-Husayn b. Bunan told us: ∏Abdallah b. Rajaπ told
us: Harb b. Shaddad told us: Yahya b. Abi Kathir told us on the authority of Abu
Salama that Abu Hurayra – may God be pleased with him – told them that
the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – said: “God is jealous
and the believer is jealous. The jealousy of God Most High is aroused when the
believing servant commits an act prohibited by God.”
Jealousy (ghayra) is resentment against sharing [something] with another
(ghayr).543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 263
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 263
midday, he stood up and shook out his robe: there was not a single piece left
on him.
It is related that al-Sari [al-Saqati] left his house on a festival day and
encountered a man of importance, to whom he gave only a cursory greeting. He
was told: “This is a man of importance!” He answered: “Yes, I recognized him.
However, a well-attested tradition has it that whenever two Muslims meet, one
hundred divine blessings are divided between them, of which ninety go to
the more cheerful one. So, I wanted him to receive the larger portion [of the
blessings]. It is related that the Commander of the Faithful ∏Ali b. Abi Talib
– may God be pleased with him – was found weeping one day. When asked what
made him cry, he told: “Not a single guest has come over in the past seven days.
I am afraid that God Most High may have decided to humiliate me!” It is related
that Malik b. Anas454 – may God be pleased with him – said: “The tax of any
house is that [its owner] should set aside a room for guests [in it].”
Concerning the words of God Most High, “Hast thou received the story
of the honored guests of Abraham?”455 the guests are called “honored” because
Abraham attended upon them himself, and the guest of an honorable person
(karim) is also honorable. Ibrahim b. al-Junayd said: “There are four things that
the noble person should not be remiss in, even if he be a prince: standing up
from his place when his father enters [the room], serving his guests [personally],
serving a scholar from whom you have learned, and asking [men of learning]
about what he does not know.”
Ibn ∏Abbas – may God be pleased with him – said concerning the words of
God Most High, “There is no fault in you that you eat//328 whether in groups
or separately”,456that it means: “They [the Companions of the Prophet] felt uneasy
when any one of them would eat alone, so God gave them permission to do
that.” It is related that one day ∏Abdallah b. ∏Amir b. Kurayz457offered hospitality
to a man. He entertained him very well. However, when the guest was about to
depart, his servants did not help him [with his preparations]. When someone
reprimanded him, he answered: “They never help anyone who leaves us!”
∏Abdallah b. Bakawayh the Sufi recited to us the following verse of al-Mutanabbi:458
If you leave a company who could prevent you from departing
Then they are the ones that are leaving!
∏Abdallah b. Mubarak said: “Being generous with regard to what other people
possess459is better than being generous in giving away [one’s own possessions].”
454 A famous early jurist, founder of the Maliki legal school of Sunni Islam; he died in 179/796.
455 Q. 51:24.
456 Q. 24:61.
457 Governor of Basra (d. 59/680) under ∏Uthman and Mu∏awiyya, who was renowned for his
generosity.
458 A great Arab poet, who died in 354/955.
459 That is, being happy at the sight of other people’s wealth.

Abi Kathir told us on the authority of Abu
Salama that Abu Hurayra – may God be pleased with him – told them that
the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – said: “God is jealous
and the believer is jealous. The jealousy of God Most High is aroused when the
believing servant commits an act prohibited by God.”
Jealousy (ghayra) is resentment against sharing [something] with another
(ghayr). When God – praise be to Him – is called “jealous” this means He is not
pleased with sharing with anyone the obedience of His servant that rightfully
belongs to Him [alone]. It is related that one day the verse “When thou recitest the
Koran, We place between thee, and those who do not believe in the world to come,
a curtain obstructing”461was recited before al-Sari. He asked his companions: “Do
you know what this curtain is? It is the curtain of jealousy. No one is more jealous
than God Most High.” By saying “the curtain of jealousy” al-Sari meant that God
never imparts the true religion to the unbelievers. The master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq
– may God have mercy on him – used to say: “God Most High has attached
to the feet of those remiss in worshiping Him the weights of abandonment
(khidhlan); He has chosen them for banishment from Himself and removed them
from His closeness, causing them to fall behind [in their worship].” They recite:
460 Q. 7:33; 7:31, according to Arberry’s translation. 461 Q. 17:45; 17:46, according to Arberry’s translation.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 265
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 265
I long for the one I have passion for; however, how can I protect myself
From the [jealous] slander of [my] friends?
They also say about this situation: “[He is] a sick man whom no one comes
to visit and a desiring one whom no one desires.” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard al-∏Abbas al-Zawzani
say: “I was blessed with a good start [on the path of God], because I knew [the
distance] between me and the goal I have aspired to reach. One night, in a dream,
I saw myself falling from the peak of the mountain I had aspired to reach. I
was saddened by this. Then a slumber came over me and I saw a man who told
me: ‘Oh ∏Abbas, God did not want you to attain//330 the goal you aspired to.
However, a wisdom was revealed to your tongue.’ He proceeded to say: ‘When I
woke up, I was entrusted with the words of wisdom.’”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“There was a Sufi master (shaykh), who experienced [his] state and moment with
God. He went into hiding and was not seen among the poor.462After a while he
came back in a mystical state (waqt) that was different from the one he was in
before. When he was asked about what had happened, he answered: ‘Alas, a veil
has come down …’” The master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on
him – used to say, when, during a Sufi session, something irritating entered the
hearts of those present: “This is the jealousy of God – praise be to Him.” Abu
∏Ali meant that the purity of the mystical moment (waqt) he was experiencing
eluded his companions. They imply this sense when they recite:
She wanted to visit us, but when she looked into a mirror, her beautiful
face prevented her from coming.
Someone asked a Sufi: “Do you wish to see Him?” He said: “No.” They asked
him: “Why not?” He answered: “This beauty is too lofty to be seen by someone
like me!”
They have this meaning in mind, when they recite:
I envy my eyes when they look at you, so I lower them: seeing you
strutting around in all your beauty makes me jealous of you for you!
Someone asked al-Shibli: “When do you find rest [from jealousy]?” He answered:
“When I find no one else [in the entire world] who remembers (dhakir) Him!” I
heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – mention
the words of the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – after he had purchased
a horse from a Bedouin. The Bedouin then asked him to rescind their transaction
and the Prophet agreed to that. The Bedouin told him: “May God Most High
give you a long life! Who are you?” The Prophet – may God bless and greet him
– said: “A man of the Quraysh.” One of the Companions present there exclaimed:
462 That is, the Sufis.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 266
266 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
“How rude of you not to recognize your Prophet!” [Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq] – may
God have mercy on him – commented: “The Prophet said: ‘[I am] a man of
the Quraysh’ out of jealousy, because otherwise he would have been obligated to
answer to everyone who asked him who he was. However, God – praise be to
Him – [prevented him from doing this] by casting the aforementioned words on
the tongue of the Companion.”
Some people say that jealousy is an attribute of beginners on the Sufi path
and that one with the [genuine] knowledge of divine oneness (tawhid) can display
no jealousy. Such a person is incapable of exercising his own choice, for he has
no authority over what happens in the Kingdom [of God]. It is God Most High
Who has authority over everything and determines things as He pleases.//331 I
heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him
– say: I heard Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi say: “Jealousy pertains to beginners, not
to those who have attained [divine] realities (haqaπiq). I also heard him [al-Sulami]
say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Isbahani say: I heard al-Shibli say: “There are two types
of jealousy: one, when human beings are jealous of one another; and the other,
when God is jealous of [His servants’] hearts.” Al-Shibli also said: “God is also
jealous of the breaths of His servants lest they be wasted on something other than
God Most High. One must conclude that there are two types of jealousy: God’s
being jealous of His servant, meaning that He keeps him away from His creatures
out of His envy for him; and the servant’s being jealous of God, meaning that he
devotes all his spiritual states and breaths to no one but God Most High. One
should not say: “I am jealous of God.” Rather one should say: “I am jealous for
the sake of God.” Thus, being jealous of God Most High is nothing but ignorance
which may lead to the abandonment of faith.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 265
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 265
I long for the one I have passion for; however, how can I protect myself
From the [jealous] slander of [my] friends?
They also say about this situation: “[He is] a sick man whom no one comes
to visit and a desiring one whom no one desires.” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard al-∏Abbas al-Zawzani
say: “I was blessed with a good start [on the path of God], because I knew [the
distance] between me and the goal I have aspired to reach. One night, in a dream,
I saw myself falling from the peak of the mountain I had aspired to reach. I
was saddened by this. Then a slumber came over me and I saw a man who told
me: ‘Oh ∏Abbas, God did not want you to attain//330 the goal you aspired to.
However, a wisdom was revealed to your tongue.’ He proceeded to say: ‘When I
woke up, I was entrusted with the words of wisdom.’”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“There was a Sufi master (shaykh), who experienced [his] state and moment with
God. He went into hiding and was not seen among the poor.462After a while he
came back in a mystical state (waqt) that was different from the one he was in
before. When he was asked about what had happened, he answered: ‘Alas, a veil
has come down …’” The master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on
him – used to say, when, during a Sufi session, something irritating entered the
hearts of those present: “This is the jealousy of God – praise be to Him.” Abu
∏Ali meant that the purity of the mystical moment (waqt) he was experiencing
eluded his companions. They imply this sense when they recite:
She wanted to visit us, but when she looked into a mirror, her beautiful
face prevented her from coming.
Someone asked a Sufi: “Do you wish to see Him?” He said: “No.” They asked
him: “Why not?” He answered: “This beauty is too lofty to be seen by someone
like me!”
They have this meaning in mind, when they recite:
I envy my eyes when they look at you, so I lower them: seeing you
strutting around in all your beauty makes me jealous of you for you!
Someone asked al-Shibli: “When do you find rest [from jealousy]?” He answered:
“When I find no one else [in the entire world] who remembers (dhakir) Him!” I
heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – mention
the words of the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – after he had purchased
a horse from a Bedouin. The Bedouin then asked him to rescind their transaction
and the Prophet agreed to that. The Bedouin told him: “May God Most High
give you a long life! Who are you?” The Prophet – may God bless and greet him
– said: “A man of the Quraysh.” One of the Companions present there exclaimed:
462 That is, the Sufis.

One must conclude that there are two types of jealousy: God’s
being jealous of His servant, meaning that He keeps him away from His creatures
out of His envy for him; and the servant’s being jealous of God, meaning that he
devotes all his spiritual states and breaths to no one but God Most High. One
should not say: “I am jealous of God.” Rather one should say: “I am jealous for
the sake of God.” Thus, being jealous of God Most High is nothing but ignorance
which may lead to the abandonment of faith. As for jealousy for the sake of God,
it demands [of His servant] the maintenance of His rights and purifying his deeds
for His sake. Know that it is God’s custom with regard to His friends to throw them into
confusion each time they rely on something other [than Him], take notice of
something other, or cleave to something else with their hearts. He is jealous of
their hearts to such an extent that He brings them [the hearts] back to Himself,
faithful to Him, empty of anything [other than Him] that they may have relied on,
noticed or cleaved to. As in the case of Adam – peace be upon him: no sooner had
he set his mind on staying in the garden of Paradise forever, than God expelled
him from it. The same happened to Abraham – peace be upon him – when he
delighted in his son Ishmael – peace be upon him. God ordered him to sacrifice
him, so that he would banish him from his heart. “When they both surrendered,
and he flung him upon his brow”,463his heart was purified of his [love of] his son
and God commanded him to make a substitute sacrifice [of a ram]. I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Abu Zayd al-Marwazi – may God have mercy on him – say:
I heard Ibrahim b. Shayban say: I heard Muhammad b. Hassan say: “One day,
463 Qurπan 37:103, 37:104, according to Arberry’s translation.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 267
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 267
when I was wandering in the mountains of Lebanon, a young man came upon
me. His skin was burned by the hot desert winds and sandstorms. When he saw
me, he suddenly turned away and fled. I followed him, asking him to share a
[wise] word with me. He told me: ‘Beware, for He is jealous. He dislikes seeing
anything other than Him in the heart of His servant!’” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd
al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him – say: “Al-Nasrabadhi said:
‘God Most High is jealous. Part of His jealousy is that He has made no road to
Himself other than Himself.’”
It is said that God – praise be to Him – revealed to one of His prophets:
“When so-and-so is in need of Me, I too am in need of him. If he satisfies My
need, I will satisfy his.” That prophet – peace be upon him – then said in his
intimate dialogue (munajat) with God: “My God, how can you have a need?” He
answered: “That man’s heart found support in something other than Me. May
he empty his heart of that thing, so that I could satisfy his need!”//332 It is
related that in his dream Abu Yazid al-Bistami saw a band of houris. He gazed
upon them, whereupon he was deprived of his [mystical] moment with God. After that he saw the houris in his dream once again. However, this time he paid
no attention to them, saying: “You are nothing but distractions (shawaghil)!”
It is related that when Rabi∏a al-∏Adawiyya fell ill, someone asked her: “What
is the cause of your illness?” She answered: “My heart was attracted to Paradise,
so He chastised me for that. However, He is benevolent [toward His servants].464
I will never do this again!” It is related that al-Sari [al-Saqati] said: “I was looking
for a friend of mine for a long time. One day, when I was traveling through some
mountains, I came across a group of people afflicted with various diseases and
blindness. I asked them what they were doing there.One must conclude that there are two types of jealousy: God’s
being jealous of His servant, meaning that He keeps him away from His creatures
out of His envy for him; and the servant’s being jealous of God, meaning that he
devotes all his spiritual states and breaths to no one but God Most High. One
should not say: “I am jealous of God.” Rather one should say: “I am jealous for
the sake of God.” Thus, being jealous of God Most High is nothing but ignorance
which may lead to the abandonment of faith. As for jealousy for the sake of God,
it demands [of His servant] the maintenance of His rights and purifying his deeds
for His sake. Know that it is God’s custom with regard to His friends to throw them into
confusion each time they rely on something other [than Him], take notice of
something other, or cleave to something else with their hearts. He is jealous of
their hearts to such an extent that He brings them [the hearts] back to Himself,
faithful to Him, empty of anything [other than Him] that they may have relied on,
noticed or cleaved to. As in the case of Adam – peace be upon him: no sooner had
he set his mind on staying in the garden of Paradise forever, than God expelled
him from it. The same happened to Abraham – peace be upon him – when he
delighted in his son Ishmael – peace be upon him. God ordered him to sacrifice
him, so that he would banish him from his heart. “When they both surrendered,
and he flung him upon his brow”,463his heart was purified of his [love of] his son
and God commanded him to make a substitute sacrifice [of a ram]. I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard Abu Zayd al-Marwazi – may God have mercy on him – say:
I heard Ibrahim b. Shayban say: I heard Muhammad b. Hassan say: “One day,
463 Qurπan 37:103, 37:104, according to Arberry’s translation.

One day, when I was traveling through some
mountains, I came across a group of people afflicted with various diseases and
blindness. I asked them what they were doing there. They told me: ‘There’s a man
[in the cave] up there. Once a year he comes out and prays for these [sick] people,
whereupon they are cured [of their afflictions].’ So I waited until he came out. He prayed for them, and they indeed were cured. I followed him and caught
up with him, saying: ‘I have an inner illness. How can I treat it?’ He responded:
‘Sari, leave me alone, for God Most High is jealous. When he sees you rely on
someone other than Him, your status in His eyes will be diminished!’”
The master [Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq] said: “Some Sufis grow jealous when they
observe other people remember God Most High mechanically. They are unable
to tolerate this sight and are aggravated by it.” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say: “One day, a Bedouin entered
the mosque of the Messenger of God and urinated in it. The Companions rushed
toward him in order to throw him out [of the mosque].” Abu ∏Ali commented on
this episode, saying: “True, the Bedouin misbehaved. However, the Companions
were ashamed and embarrassed at the sight of that depravity. The same is true
of the servant of God. Once he has realized the greatness of God’s majesty, he
suffers each time he hears someone remembering God mechanically or performing
an act of obedience to Him without showing proper reverence [for Him].” It is
464 That is, “He has pardoned me”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 268
268 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
related that a son of Abu Bakr al-Shibli named Abu πl-Hasan died. His mother
cut her hair as a sign of mourning for him. As for al-Shibli, he went to the public
bath and shaved off his beard. When he started to receive condolences, everyone
who came to him asked: “Abu Bakr, what have you done?” He would say: “I have
done this in solidarity with my wife.” One of the visitors pressed him, asking
“Abu Bakr, tell me the truth. Why have you done this?” He responded: “I knew
that the people who would come to extend their condolences to me would mention
God’s name vainly, when they would say: ‘May God Most High recompense you
[for your loss]!’ So I sacrificed my beard to [avert their attention and] prevent
their mention of God’s name in vain.”
[Abu πl-Husayn] al-Nuri on hearing a muezzin465 [summon people to the
prayer] would exclaim: “A curse and deadly poison!” Or he would hear a dog
bark and say: “Here I am [God], at Your service!” Someone told him, “Isn’t this
apostasy? How can one tell a believer who utters the profession of faith that [his
words are] ‘A curse and deadly poison’? Or how can one say ‘Here I am [God],
at your service’ to a barking dog?” Al-Nuri responded: “As for the muezzin, he
mentioned God’s name mechanically (∏ala raπs al-ghafla). As for the dog, didn’t
God Most High say: ‘Nothing is, that does not proclaim His praise [but you do
not understand their extolling].’”466One day al-Shibli was performing the call to
the prayer.One day, when I was traveling through some
mountains, I came across a group of people afflicted with various diseases and
blindness. I asked them what they were doing there. They told me: ‘There’s a man
[in the cave] up there. Once a year he comes out and prays for these [sick] people,
whereupon they are cured [of their afflictions].’ So I waited until he came out. He prayed for them, and they indeed were cured. I followed him and caught
up with him, saying: ‘I have an inner illness. How can I treat it?’ He responded:
‘Sari, leave me alone, for God Most High is jealous. When he sees you rely on
someone other than Him, your status in His eyes will be diminished!’”
The master [Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq] said: “Some Sufis grow jealous when they
observe other people remember God Most High mechanically. They are unable
to tolerate this sight and are aggravated by it.” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say: “One day, a Bedouin entered
the mosque of the Messenger of God and urinated in it. The Companions rushed
toward him in order to throw him out [of the mosque].” Abu ∏Ali commented on
this episode, saying: “True, the Bedouin misbehaved. However, the Companions
were ashamed and embarrassed at the sight of that depravity. The same is true
of the servant of God. Once he has realized the greatness of God’s majesty, he
suffers each time he hears someone remembering God mechanically or performing
an act of obedience to Him without showing proper reverence [for Him].” It is
464 That is, “He has pardoned me”.

Or how can one say ‘Here I am [God],
at your service’ to a barking dog?” Al-Nuri responded: “As for the muezzin, he
mentioned God’s name mechanically (∏ala raπs al-ghafla). As for the dog, didn’t
God Most High say: ‘Nothing is, that does not proclaim His praise [but you do
not understand their extolling].’”466One day al-Shibli was performing the call to
the prayer. After he had uttered the profession of faith467twice, he [paused] and
said: “Had You not ordered me to do so, I would never have mentioned anyone
else along with You!” One man heard another say: “May God be exalted (jalla
πllah)!” He told him: “I would rather you exalt Him above [your exaltation]!” A
Sufi related that he heard Abu πl-Hasan al-Khazafani – may God have mercy on
him – say: “I utter the words ‘There is no deity but God’ from the bottom of
my heart, while I utter the words ‘Muhammad is the Messenger of God’ from
my earlobe.”468 Those of you who see only the outward meaning of these words
might imagine that al-Khazafani has degraded the Divine Law (shar∏). However,
this thought is incorrect, because in reality attributing something other than
God to the [absolute and unique] majesty of God – praise be to Him – is itself a
degrading [of Him].”
Friendship with God (wilaya)469
God Most High said: “Surely God’s friends – no fear be on them, neither shall
they sorrow.”470 Hamza b. Yusuf al-Sahmi – may God have mercy on him –
465 The person who calls the congregation to a prayer. 466 Q. 17:44; 17:45, according to Arberry’s translation. 467 Namely, that there is no deity but God and that Muhammad is His Messenger. 468 That is, “Simply because I was commanded by God to do so.”
469 For a detailed discussion of this term, which is often rendered into English as “sainthood”, see
Cornell, Realm of the Saint, pp. xvii–xliv, et passim.The term may connote both a holy person’s
proximity to God and God’s patronage vis-à-vis His elected servants. 470 Q. 10:62; 10:64, according to Arberry’s translation.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 269
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 269
informed us: ∏Abdallah b. ∏Adi al-Hafiz told us: Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Harun b. Humayd told us: Muhammad b. Harun al-Muqri471 told us: Hammad
al-Khayyat told us on the authority of ∏Abd al-Wahid b. Maymun, a client of
∏Urwa, on the authority of ∏Urwa,//334 on the authority of ∏Aπisha – may God
be pleased with her – that the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – said:
“God Most High says: ‘Whoever has caused harm to a friend of mine (walí) has
[thereby] declared war against me. My servant approaches Me by performing
the obligations that I have imposed on him. He draws even nearer to Me by
performing supererogatory acts of piety (nawafil) until I love him. Nothing that
I do makes Me more hesitant than having to seize the spirit of My faithful
servant, because he dreads death, while I loathe causing harm to him. However,
there is no escape [for him] from it.’”472
“Friend” has two meanings. One of them implies passivity473– namely, “one
whose affairs are managed (yatawalla) by God – praise be to Him”. As God Most
High says: “He [God] manages the affairs of the righteous.”474That is, God does
not entrust the affairs of His servant to him for a single moment; He Himself is
in charge of his affairs. The second meaning implies an intensity of action on the
part of the actor.475That is, the “friend” (walí) is one who is thoroughly engaged
in worshiping and obeying God to such an extent that his virtuous acts follow
one upon the other without being interrupted by any [tinge] of disobedience. Both meanings must apply in order for the friend of God to be a [genuine]
friend. He must fulfill his obligations toward God Most High meticulously and
exhaustively, while God, in turn, protects him constantly [from any disobedience]
in good or bad times.Or how can one say ‘Here I am [God],
at your service’ to a barking dog?” Al-Nuri responded: “As for the muezzin, he
mentioned God’s name mechanically (∏ala raπs al-ghafla). As for the dog, didn’t
God Most High say: ‘Nothing is, that does not proclaim His praise [but you do
not understand their extolling].’”466One day al-Shibli was performing the call to
the prayer. After he had uttered the profession of faith467twice, he [paused] and
said: “Had You not ordered me to do so, I would never have mentioned anyone
else along with You!” One man heard another say: “May God be exalted (jalla
πllah)!” He told him: “I would rather you exalt Him above [your exaltation]!” A
Sufi related that he heard Abu πl-Hasan al-Khazafani – may God have mercy on
him – say: “I utter the words ‘There is no deity but God’ from the bottom of
my heart, while I utter the words ‘Muhammad is the Messenger of God’ from
my earlobe.”468 Those of you who see only the outward meaning of these words
might imagine that al-Khazafani has degraded the Divine Law (shar∏). However,
this thought is incorrect, because in reality attributing something other than
God to the [absolute and unique] majesty of God – praise be to Him – is itself a
degrading [of Him].”
Friendship with God (wilaya)469
God Most High said: “Surely God’s friends – no fear be on them, neither shall
they sorrow.”470 Hamza b. Yusuf al-Sahmi – may God have mercy on him –
465 The person who calls the congregation to a prayer. 466 Q. 17:44; 17:45, according to Arberry’s translation. 467 Namely, that there is no deity but God and that Muhammad is His Messenger. 468 That is, “Simply because I was commanded by God to do so.”
469 For a detailed discussion of this term, which is often rendered into English as “sainthood”, see
Cornell, Realm of the Saint, pp. xvii–xliv, et passim.The term may connote both a holy person’s
proximity to God and God’s patronage vis-à-vis His elected servants. 470 Q. 10:62; 10:64, according to Arberry’s translation.

Both meanings must apply in order for the friend of God to be a [genuine]
friend. He must fulfill his obligations toward God Most High meticulously and
exhaustively, while God, in turn, protects him constantly [from any disobedience]
in good or bad times. One of the conditions of being a friend of God is to enjoy
His protection (mahfuz), in the same way as one of the conditions of being
a prophet is to be infallible (ma∏sum). Anyone who violates the Divine Law is
deluded and deceived. I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“Abu Yazid al-Bistami decided to visit a man who had the reputation of being a
friend of God. When he arrived at the mosque where the man used to pray, he
sat down and waited until the man came out. When the man was coming out, he
spat. Abu Yazid left immediately without even greeting the man. He said: ‘This
man cannot be trusted with maintaining the rules prescribed by the Divine Law. How can he be privy to God’s [intimate] secrets?!’”
471 Or “al-Maqqari”. 472 For a full version of this famous hadith qudsi(a report in which God speaks in the first person
with the Prophet as the transmitter), see Chittick, The Sufi Path of Knowledge, pp. 325–331 and
idem, The Self-Disclosure, “Index of Terms” under “obligatory and supererogatory [acts]”. 473 That is, grammatically it is an intensifying adjective formed on the pattern fa∏íl, substituting
for the form maf∏úl (passive participle) that implies the passivity of the subject. 474 Q. 7:196. 475 This meaning is derived from the same adjectival form fa∏íl which may also connote the
intensity of action. It takes here the meaning of fá∏il(the active participle).543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 270
270 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Sufis disagree as to whether a friend of God may or may not know that he is
one. Some claim that this is not possible, saying: “The friend of God always looks
upon himself with humility. Whenever he manifests divine graces (karamat),476he
becomes frightened, because he believes that this is but a [divine] ruse (makr).477
Therefore, he is constantly seized with fear as he is afraid of diminishing his rank
[in the eyes of God] and of his eventual state being contrary to his current
one.”478 Such people consider fidelity [to the principles of friendship] until the
very end to be one of its preconditions. Sufi masters of this group//335 have
told many stories to illustrate this idea and it has numerous supporters among
them. If we were to recount them all, we would forfeit our goal of concision. One
of those masters whom we have known to have adhered to this idea was imam
Abu Bakr b. Furak – may God have mercy on him.479
However, there are those who claim: “It is possible that the friend of God is
aware of being one and, therefore, constant fidelity [to the principles of friendship
with God] is not a precondition for retaining the status of the friend in the
Hereafter.” If this is indeed the case, then the friend of God can receive divine
graces480from God by which God lets him know that he is assured of a favorable
outcome [in the Hereafter]. Thus one must acknowledge the possibility of divine
graces being bestowed on [God’s] friends. Even though the fear of the unfavorable
outcome [in the Hereafter] may depart from his heart, his condition of awe,
reverence and exaltation of God is more perfect and stronger than such a fear in
any case. For even a small amount of reverence and awe is more comforting for
the hearts of men than an abundance of fear.Both meanings must apply in order for the friend of God to be a [genuine]
friend. He must fulfill his obligations toward God Most High meticulously and
exhaustively, while God, in turn, protects him constantly [from any disobedience]
in good or bad times. One of the conditions of being a friend of God is to enjoy
His protection (mahfuz), in the same way as one of the conditions of being
a prophet is to be infallible (ma∏sum). Anyone who violates the Divine Law is
deluded and deceived. I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“Abu Yazid al-Bistami decided to visit a man who had the reputation of being a
friend of God. When he arrived at the mosque where the man used to pray, he
sat down and waited until the man came out. When the man was coming out, he
spat. Abu Yazid left immediately without even greeting the man. He said: ‘This
man cannot be trusted with maintaining the rules prescribed by the Divine Law. How can he be privy to God’s [intimate] secrets?!’”
471 Or “al-Maqqari”. 472 For a full version of this famous hadith qudsi(a report in which God speaks in the first person
with the Prophet as the transmitter), see Chittick, The Sufi Path of Knowledge, pp. 325–331 and
idem, The Self-Disclosure, “Index of Terms” under “obligatory and supererogatory [acts]”. 473 That is, grammatically it is an intensifying adjective formed on the pattern fa∏íl, substituting
for the form maf∏úl (passive participle) that implies the passivity of the subject. 474 Q. 7:196. 475 This meaning is derived from the same adjectival form fa∏íl which may also connote the
intensity of action. It takes here the meaning of fá∏il(the active participle).

Even though the fear of the unfavorable
outcome [in the Hereafter] may depart from his heart, his condition of awe,
reverence and exaltation of God is more perfect and stronger than such a fear in
any case. For even a small amount of reverence and awe is more comforting for
the hearts of men than an abundance of fear. When the Prophet – may God bless
and greet him – said: “Ten of my Companions will be in Paradise”, those ten no
doubt believed the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – and were
confident of the good outcome for them [in the Hereafter]. Yet, this [realization]
did not detract from their [righteous] state [in this life]. One of the conditions of a proper understanding of prophethood is the
acknowledgement of the definition of [prophetic] miracles, which includes the
realization of their veracity. A friend of God, when he manifests divine graces,481
can always distinguish them from the miracles [pertaining to the prophets]. When he observes something like this, he realizes that he is on the true path
at that moment. So, it is permissible for him to believe that he will maintain the
same state in the Hereafter. This realization is itself a divine grace for him. Thus,
the doctrine of divine graces [granted to] saints is correct. This is confirmed by
476 That is, whenever he happens to work miracles. 477 That is, he thinks that God is testing him. 478 That is, he is aware that his present status as a friend of God does not guarantee his being
among the blessed in the Hereafter. 479 A famous theologian of the Ash∏arite school, who lived in Nishapur; he died 406/1015, probably
poisoned by members of a rival theological school. 480 That is, miracles. 481 That is, saintly miracles, which do not have the same status as prophetic miracles.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 271
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 271
numerous stories transmitted by this group,482as we shall mention in the chapter
on the divine graces, God willing. Among the Sufi masters whom we met, the
master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – used to adhere to
this [latter] opinion. It is said that Ibrahim b. Adham once asked a certain man: “Would you
like to be a friend of God?” He said: “Yes.” Ibrahim b. Adham told him: “[Then]
desire not anything of this world and the next one, dedicate yourself fully to God
Most High and turn your face toward God, so that He would turn His face to
you and make you a friend of His.” Yahya b. Mu∏adh described the friends of
God in the following manner: “They are those of His servants who have been
clothed with intimacy [with Him] after suffering [for His sake] (mukabada). They
have been granted rest after striving for His sake through arriving at the station
of friendship [with Him].” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami
– may God have mercy on him – say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah//336 say: I
heard my paternal uncle (∏ammi) al-Bistami say: I heard my father say: I heard
Abu Yazid say: “God’s friends are His brides and no one looks at brides except
their family. They are wrapped up in the covers of intimacy [with Him]. No one
sees them in either this world or the next.” I heard Abu Bakr al-Saydalani (the
Pharmacist), who was a righteous man, say: “In the graveyard of al-Hira,483 I
was often repairing the tombstone of Abu Bakr al-Tamastani and engraving his
name on it. Continually, the tombstone was dug out and stolen, while all other
tombs in the vicinity remained intact. I was surprised by this and asked Abu ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – about it one day. He responded:
‘That master chose to remain anonymous in this world, whereas you want to
make his grave known by a tombstone that you constructed [for this purpose].Even though the fear of the unfavorable
outcome [in the Hereafter] may depart from his heart, his condition of awe,
reverence and exaltation of God is more perfect and stronger than such a fear in
any case. For even a small amount of reverence and awe is more comforting for
the hearts of men than an abundance of fear. When the Prophet – may God bless
and greet him – said: “Ten of my Companions will be in Paradise”, those ten no
doubt believed the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – and were
confident of the good outcome for them [in the Hereafter]. Yet, this [realization]
did not detract from their [righteous] state [in this life]. One of the conditions of a proper understanding of prophethood is the
acknowledgement of the definition of [prophetic] miracles, which includes the
realization of their veracity. A friend of God, when he manifests divine graces,481
can always distinguish them from the miracles [pertaining to the prophets]. When he observes something like this, he realizes that he is on the true path
at that moment. So, it is permissible for him to believe that he will maintain the
same state in the Hereafter. This realization is itself a divine grace for him. Thus,
the doctrine of divine graces [granted to] saints is correct. This is confirmed by
476 That is, whenever he happens to work miracles. 477 That is, he thinks that God is testing him. 478 That is, he is aware that his present status as a friend of God does not guarantee his being
among the blessed in the Hereafter. 479 A famous theologian of the Ash∏arite school, who lived in Nishapur; he died 406/1015, probably
poisoned by members of a rival theological school. 480 That is, miracles. 481 That is, saintly miracles, which do not have the same status as prophetic miracles.

I was surprised by this and asked Abu ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – about it one day. He responded:
‘That master chose to remain anonymous in this world, whereas you want to
make his grave known by a tombstone that you constructed [for this purpose]. However, God – praise be to Him – chose to conceal his grave, as he chose to
remain anonymous [in this world].’” Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi said: “A friend of
God might become renowned (mashhur), but he will never be seduced (maftun)
[by this].”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard al-Nasrabadhi say: “Friends of God have no demands; they
remain weak and anonymous.” He [al-Sulami] also said: “The furthest reaches
(nihayat) of the friends of God are the beginnings (bidayat) of the prophets.”
Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] said: “The friend of God is he whose actions
always coincide [with the will of God].” Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “The friend
of God shows no pretense, nor can he be hypocritical. How few peers such a
person may have!”
Abu ∏Ali al-Juzjani said: “The friend of God annihilates his own state, while
remaining in the contemplation of God – praise be to Him. God takes possession
of his guidance so that the lights of His guidance would descend on him without
interruption. He thus becomes completely oblivious of himself and resides with
482 That is, the Sufis. 483 A city in lower Iraq, south-west of present-day Najaf.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 272
272 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
no one but God.” Abu Yazid [al-Bistami] said: “The shares (huzuz) allotted [by
God] to [His] friends differ from each other in accordance with four [divine]
names. Each group [acts] according to the name [assigned] to it. These names
are: ‘The First’, ‘The Last’, ‘The Outward’, and ‘The Inward’. When a friend
of God becomes oblivious of these names, after having been clothed with them,
he achieves perfection. One whose allotted share is the divine name ‘Outward’
contemplates the marvels of God’s power; one whose allotted share is the name
‘Inward’ contemplates the divine lights that appear in the innermost hearts [of
men]; one whose allotted share is the name ‘First’ occupies himself with the
things of the past; while one whose allotted share is the name ‘Last’ is attached
(murtabit) to the things that will happen in the future. Each friend receives the
manifestation of his name according to his ability, except for those whom God –
praise be to Him – has, in His goodness, taken under His [personal] protection
by putting Himself in his place.” The words of Abu Yazid indicate that God
has some elect [friends] (khawass) who rise above those divisions [according to
the divine names]. They are concerned neither with recollecting past things, nor
thinking about things to come; nor are they captivated by any [worldly] calamities
(tawariq). They are//337 the folk of divine realities, whose creaturely features
have been completely erased. God Most High had them in mind, when He said:
“Thou would have thought them awake, as they lay sleeping.”484
Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “The friend of God is His sweet basil which He
planted in this earth of His.I was surprised by this and asked Abu ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – about it one day. He responded:
‘That master chose to remain anonymous in this world, whereas you want to
make his grave known by a tombstone that you constructed [for this purpose]. However, God – praise be to Him – chose to conceal his grave, as he chose to
remain anonymous [in this world].’” Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi said: “A friend of
God might become renowned (mashhur), but he will never be seduced (maftun)
[by this].”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard al-Nasrabadhi say: “Friends of God have no demands; they
remain weak and anonymous.” He [al-Sulami] also said: “The furthest reaches
(nihayat) of the friends of God are the beginnings (bidayat) of the prophets.”
Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] said: “The friend of God is he whose actions
always coincide [with the will of God].” Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “The friend
of God shows no pretense, nor can he be hypocritical. How few peers such a
person may have!”
Abu ∏Ali al-Juzjani said: “The friend of God annihilates his own state, while
remaining in the contemplation of God – praise be to Him. God takes possession
of his guidance so that the lights of His guidance would descend on him without
interruption. He thus becomes completely oblivious of himself and resides with
482 That is, the Sufis. 483 A city in lower Iraq, south-west of present-day Najaf.

God Most High had them in mind, when He said:
“Thou would have thought them awake, as they lay sleeping.”484
Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “The friend of God is His sweet basil which He
planted in this earth of His. When the veracious ones (siddiqun) inhale it, its
fragrance reaches their hearts and they begin to long for their Master and to
increase their acts of worship according to their different natural predispositions.”
Someone asked [Abu Bakr] al-Wasiti: “How is the friend of God nurtured in his
friendship [with Him]?” He answered: “In the beginning, through his acts of
worship and devotion and in his maturity through God’s concealing from him
His kind nature. He then drags him back to the attributes and qualities which
were assigned to him from eternity, and, after that, He makes him taste [the
sweetness of His presence] by sustaining him in all his states.”
It is said that the friend of God is distinguished by three features: his
constant preoccupation (shughl) with God; his recourse (firar) to God [under
any circumstances]; and his concern (hamm) with God [at all times]. [Abu Sa∏id]
al-Kharraz said: “When God Most High decides to make someone His friend,
He opens for him the door of the recollection [of His name]. When he has tasted
the sweetness of recollection, He opens for him the door of proximity [to Him]. He then elevates him to intimate conversations [with Him] and seats him on the
throne of [divine] unity. After that, He raises the veils [that have separated him
from God] and allows him to enter the abode of unicity (fardaniyya) by revealing
to him the [divine] glory and magnificence. When his eyes have fallen on the
[divine] glory and magnificence, his ‘I’ disappears completely and he becomes a
484 Q. 18:18.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 273
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 273
non-existent entity deprived of any power. He then falls under God’s exalted
protection, free from any pretensions to selfhood.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say: I heard Abu
Turab al-Nakhshabi say: “Whenever one’s heart becomes accustomed to turning
away from God, it inevitably declares war on His friends. It is said that one of
the features of the friends of God is that they have no fear, for fear implies an
anticipation of some dreaded event to occur in the future or an apprehension that
one might somehow miss a thing that one loves. The friend of God, on the other
hand, is the son of his moment, who has no future to be afraid of.” Just as he has
no fear, the friend has no hope either, for hope implies expecting an agreeable
thing to occur or a dreaded thing to be averted sometime in the future. Likewise,
the friend of God feels no sorrow, for sorrow is but a hardship that resides in the
heart. How can one feel sorrow while basking in the light of satisfaction (rida)
and enjoying the coolness of complete compliance [with the divine will]? Didn’t
God Most High say: “Surely God’s friends – no fear be on them, neither shall
they sorrow.”485//338
Supplicatory prayer (du∏aπ)
God Most High said: “Call on your Lord, humbly and secretly.”486He – may He
be great and exalted – also said: “Your Lord has said: ‘Call upon Me and I will
answer you.’”487 ∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan informed us: Abu πl-Hasan al-Saffar
al-Basri informed us: Muhammad b. Ahmad al-∏Udi told us: Kamil told us: Ibn
Lahi∏a told us: Khalid b. Yazid said on the authority of Sa∏id b. Abi Hilal, on the
authority of Anas b. Malik that the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet
him – said: “Supplicatory prayer is the core of worship [of God].” Supplicatory
prayer is the key to every need.God Most High had them in mind, when He said:
“Thou would have thought them awake, as they lay sleeping.”484
Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “The friend of God is His sweet basil which He
planted in this earth of His. When the veracious ones (siddiqun) inhale it, its
fragrance reaches their hearts and they begin to long for their Master and to
increase their acts of worship according to their different natural predispositions.”
Someone asked [Abu Bakr] al-Wasiti: “How is the friend of God nurtured in his
friendship [with Him]?” He answered: “In the beginning, through his acts of
worship and devotion and in his maturity through God’s concealing from him
His kind nature. He then drags him back to the attributes and qualities which
were assigned to him from eternity, and, after that, He makes him taste [the
sweetness of His presence] by sustaining him in all his states.”
It is said that the friend of God is distinguished by three features: his
constant preoccupation (shughl) with God; his recourse (firar) to God [under
any circumstances]; and his concern (hamm) with God [at all times]. [Abu Sa∏id]
al-Kharraz said: “When God Most High decides to make someone His friend,
He opens for him the door of the recollection [of His name]. When he has tasted
the sweetness of recollection, He opens for him the door of proximity [to Him]. He then elevates him to intimate conversations [with Him] and seats him on the
throne of [divine] unity. After that, He raises the veils [that have separated him
from God] and allows him to enter the abode of unicity (fardaniyya) by revealing
to him the [divine] glory and magnificence. When his eyes have fallen on the
[divine] glory and magnificence, his ‘I’ disappears completely and he becomes a
484 Q. 18:18.

Abi Hilal, on the
authority of Anas b. Malik that the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet
him – said: “Supplicatory prayer is the core of worship [of God].” Supplicatory
prayer is the key to every need. It is the resting place of all those in need, the
recourse of the disturbed, and a respite for those who aspire. God Most High
– praise be to Him – censured those who abandon prayer, when He said: “They
[the hypocrites] keep their hands shut.”488 They say that this means “They do
not stretch them to Us in supplication.”
Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] said: “God Most High fashioned His creatures
and commanded: ‘Speak to Me in secret; if you don’t do this, then look toward
Me; if you don’t do this, then listen to Me; and if you don’t do any of this, at
least wait at My door; and if you don’t do this either, then submit your needs to
Me.’” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him –
say: Sahl b. ∏Abdallah said: “The prayer most likely to be answered [by God]
is that of one’s spiritual state (hal). The prayer of the spiritual state is the prayer
485 Q. 10:62; 10:64, according to Arberry’s translation. 486 Q. 7:55; 7:53, according to Arberry’s translation. 487 Q. 40:60; 40:62, according to Arberry’s translation. 488 Q. 9:67.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 274
274 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
of a man who is forced to pray to God in order to fulfill his need.” Hamza b. Yusuf al-Sahmi – may God have mercy on him – informed us: I heard Abu
∏Abdallah al-Makanisi say: “I was with al-Junayd one day, when a woman came
to him. She said: ‘Pray to God so that my son be returned to me. For I have a
son, who has gone missing.’ Al-Junayd told her: ‘Go away and be patient!’ She
came back after a while, and pleaded with him once again. Again, he told her:
‘Go away and be patient!’ She left only to return again and again, but al-Junayd
would keep saying: ‘Go away and be patient!’ Finally, she exclaimed: ‘My patience
has come to an end. I am no longer able to persevere. Pray to God on my behalf!’
Al-Junayd told her: ‘If this is true, then go away, for your son has returned!’
Indeed, she went home and found her son there. She then returned in order to
thank him for this. Someone asked al-Junayd: ‘How could you possibly have
known this?’ He answered: ‘Didn’t God Most High say: “He Who answers the
constrained, when he calls unto Him, and removes the evil”.’”489//339
People disagree as to whether it is better to pray for something or to keep
silent and be satisfied [with their condition]. The first group says: “Supplicatory
prayer is itself an act of worship, for the Prophet – may God bless and greet
him – said, ‘Supplicatory prayer is the core of worship [of God]’, therefore the
performance of worship is better than refraining from it. Besides, this is a right
due to God Most High. Even though God may not answer the servant’s prayer
and he will not receive what he has asked for, he has still given his Lord what is
due to Him.Abi Hilal, on the
authority of Anas b. Malik that the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet
him – said: “Supplicatory prayer is the core of worship [of God].” Supplicatory
prayer is the key to every need. It is the resting place of all those in need, the
recourse of the disturbed, and a respite for those who aspire. God Most High
– praise be to Him – censured those who abandon prayer, when He said: “They
[the hypocrites] keep their hands shut.”488 They say that this means “They do
not stretch them to Us in supplication.”
Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] said: “God Most High fashioned His creatures
and commanded: ‘Speak to Me in secret; if you don’t do this, then look toward
Me; if you don’t do this, then listen to Me; and if you don’t do any of this, at
least wait at My door; and if you don’t do this either, then submit your needs to
Me.’” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him –
say: Sahl b. ∏Abdallah said: “The prayer most likely to be answered [by God]
is that of one’s spiritual state (hal). The prayer of the spiritual state is the prayer
485 Q. 10:62; 10:64, according to Arberry’s translation. 486 Q. 7:55; 7:53, according to Arberry’s translation. 487 Q. 40:60; 40:62, according to Arberry’s translation. 488 Q. 9:67.

Besides, this is a right
due to God Most High. Even though God may not answer the servant’s prayer
and he will not receive what he has asked for, he has still given his Lord what is
due to Him. For prayer is nothing but an expression of the need inherent in the
state of servanthood (∏ubudiyya).” Abu Hazim al-A∏raj said: “Being deprived of
prayer is harder for me than [my prayer] not being answered.” Another group
argues that silence and passivity in the face of divine decree are more perfect [states]
and satisfaction with the divine choice is more appropriate [for the servant]. This
is why al-Wasiti said: “Choosing what has been for you in pre-eternity is better
than opposing the divine decree of the moment (waqt) [by praying to God].” The
Prophet – may God bless and greet him – said, quoting God’s communication: “I
will give a better reward to the servant whose recollection of My [name] prevents
him from asking Me for something over those who ask something of Me.”
Others say: “The servant should pray to God with his tongue, while maintaining
satisfaction [with His decree] in his heart. In this way, he should combine both.”
The most appropriate stance is to say that moments vary: in certain circum-
stances (ahwal) prayer is preferable to silence and constitutes the proper behavior
(adab), while in others silence is preferable to prayer and constitutes the proper
behavior. The servant realizes this with every [new] moment, for the knowledge
of each moment takes place as moments flow. Whenever the servant’s heart finds
a sign pointing to prayer, then prayer is preferable and whenever it finds a sign
pointing to silence, then silence is preferable. One should also say: “While in
the state of prayer, the servant must not be neglectful of contemplating His Lord
Most High. He is also required to monitor his spiritual state. If his prayer leads to
489 Q. 27:62.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 275
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 275
the expansion (bast)490of his current moment, than prayer is preferable for him. However, if, during his prayer, his heart feels something like an irritation (zajr)
and contraction (qabd), then abandoning prayer at that moment is preferred. If his heart finds neither expansion nor an irritation, then his praying or not
praying is equal for him. If in this moment in time he is preoccupied with
[exoteric] knowledge (∏ilm),491 then prayer is preferable for him, since it is [part
of] worship. However, if in this moment in time he is preoccupied with [esoteric]
knowledge (ma∏rifa), a mystical state and silence, then silence is preferable for
him. It is also appropriate to say: “For anything that benefits the Muslims and
gives God His due, prayer is always preferable. As for anything that benefits the
servant’s own self, silence is better.”
According to a transmitted report: “When a servant whom God – praise
be to Him – loves prays to Him, He says: ‘Gabriel, do not fulfill the need of My
servant just yet, for I love to listen to his voice.’ However, when a servant whom
God dislikes prays to God, He says://340 ‘Gabriel, fulfill his need [immediately],
for I abhor his voice!’” It is related that Yahya b. Sa∏id al-Qattan – may God have
mercy on him – saw God – praise be to Him – in a dream and asked Him: “I pray
so much to You, my God. However, You do not answer me!” God responded:
“Yahya, this is because I love to listen to your voice!” The Prophet – may God
bless and greet him – said: “By the One Who holds my soul in his hand, when
the servant with whom God is angry prays to Him, He turns away from him. When the servant prays to God once again, He turns away from Him again. The
servant prays for the third time, and again God turns away from him.Besides, this is a right
due to God Most High. Even though God may not answer the servant’s prayer
and he will not receive what he has asked for, he has still given his Lord what is
due to Him. For prayer is nothing but an expression of the need inherent in the
state of servanthood (∏ubudiyya).” Abu Hazim al-A∏raj said: “Being deprived of
prayer is harder for me than [my prayer] not being answered.” Another group
argues that silence and passivity in the face of divine decree are more perfect [states]
and satisfaction with the divine choice is more appropriate [for the servant]. This
is why al-Wasiti said: “Choosing what has been for you in pre-eternity is better
than opposing the divine decree of the moment (waqt) [by praying to God].” The
Prophet – may God bless and greet him – said, quoting God’s communication: “I
will give a better reward to the servant whose recollection of My [name] prevents
him from asking Me for something over those who ask something of Me.”
Others say: “The servant should pray to God with his tongue, while maintaining
satisfaction [with His decree] in his heart. In this way, he should combine both.”
The most appropriate stance is to say that moments vary: in certain circum-
stances (ahwal) prayer is preferable to silence and constitutes the proper behavior
(adab), while in others silence is preferable to prayer and constitutes the proper
behavior. The servant realizes this with every [new] moment, for the knowledge
of each moment takes place as moments flow. Whenever the servant’s heart finds
a sign pointing to prayer, then prayer is preferable and whenever it finds a sign
pointing to silence, then silence is preferable. One should also say: “While in
the state of prayer, the servant must not be neglectful of contemplating His Lord
Most High. He is also required to monitor his spiritual state. If his prayer leads to
489 Q. 27:62.

When the servant prays to God once again, He turns away from Him again. The
servant prays for the third time, and again God turns away from him. When the
servant prays to Him for the fourth time, God Most High says to His angels: ‘My
servant has refused to pray to anyone other than Me, therefore I have answered
his prayer.’”
Abu πl-Husayn ∏Ali b. Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. Bashran informed us in
Baghdad: Abu ∏Amr ∏Uthman b. Ahmad, nicknamed “Ibn al-Sammak”, told us:
Muhammad b. ∏Abd Ribbihi al-Hadrami said: Bishr b. ∏Abd al-Malik informed
us: Musa b. al-Hajjaj told us: Malik b. Dinar said: al-Hasan [al-Basri] told us on
the authority of Anas b. Malik – may God be pleased with him – who said: “In
the time of the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – there lived
a man who brought goods [for sale] from Syria to Medina and from there back
to Syria. He traveled alone, not with any caravan, putting his trust in God – may
He be great and exalted. Once, as he was traveling from Syria to Medina he
was confronted by a robber riding a horse. The robber ordered him to stop. The
merchant stopped and told the robber: ‘Take my merchandise and leave me
alone!’ The robber responded: ‘I already have your merchandise. However, I
want your soul as well!’ The merchant said: ‘Why do you need my soul? Take
my merchandise and leave me alone!’ However, the robber repeated what he had
490 See the chapter on “expansion” (bast) and “contraction” (qabd) (pages 79–81). 491 That is, the knowledge of the external aspects of religion (zahir) as opposed to the realization
of its internal meaning (batin).543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 276
276 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
just said, to which the merchant responded: ‘Then wait until I perform my
ablutions, my ritual prayer, and my supplicatory prayer.’ The robber said: ‘Do
as you see fit.’ The merchant rose, performed his ablution, his ritual prayer of
four prostrations, whereupon he raised his hands to the sky and uttered: ‘O the
Loving One, O the Loving One! You are the possessor of the magnificent throne
[of the Universe], the One in Whom all things originate and to Whom they return,
You, Who does whatever He pleases! I implore you by the light [emanating
from] Your face, the light that fills all the corners of this Universe, I implore you
by Your power, with which You have predetermined the fate of Your creation
and Your mercy which has encompassed everything. There’s no deity but You! O [my] succor, come to my rescue.’ (And he repeated this three times.) As soon
as he completed his supplicatory prayer, there appeared a rider dressed all in
green on a grey horse. He held in his hand a spear made of light. When the
robber saw the rider, he abandoned the merchant and rode toward the rider. When he approached him, the rider charged him and dealt him a blow that threw
him from his horse. Then he came up to the merchant and told him: ‘Rise and
kill him!’ The merchant asked him: ‘Who are you? I have never killed anyone in
my entire life and I abhor killing anyone!’ Then the rider returned//341 to the
robber and killed him. Then he came to the merchant once again and said:
‘Know that I am an angel from the third heaven. When you uttered your prayer
for the first time, we heard a noise at the gates of the heavens.Then he came to the merchant once again and said:
‘Know that I am an angel from the third heaven. When you uttered your prayer
for the first time, we heard a noise at the gates of the heavens. We [angels] said
to each other: ‘Something has happened!’ When you prayed the second time, the
gates of the heavens were thrown open and there appeared sparks of fire from
behind them.’ When you prayed for the third time, Gabriel – peace be upon him
– fell from [the upper heaven], screaming: ‘Who will come to the rescue of this
distressed one?’ So I asked my Lord to entrust me with his [the robber’s] killing. Know, O servant of God, that whoever prays to Him with a prayer like yours
at the time of distress, hardship or any other affliction, God Most High will
surely relieve him from it and come to his rescue.’ So, the merchant returned to
Medina safe and sound, and went to the Prophet – may God bless and greet him
– to tell him the story of what had happened. The Prophet – may God bless and
greet him – told him: ‘God – may He be great and exalted – has dictated to you
His Most Beautiful Names. Whoever implores Him with them will receive His
answer, and whoever asks something of Him by them, his request will be granted.’”
Part of the proper conduct in supplicatory prayer is the continual attentiveness
of the heart so that it shall not be neglectful. It is related that the Prophet – may
God bless and greet him – said: “God Most High will never answer the prayer of
a servant whose heart is heedless.” Another condition is that the supplicant’s food
be lawful (halal), for the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – said: “Obtain
your livelihood properly and your supplicatory prayer will be answered.” It is
said that supplicatory prayer is a key whose ridges are made of a lawful morsel. Yahya b. Mu∏adh used to pray, saying: “O my God, how can I, who disobey
You, ask You for something [in prayer]?When the servant prays to God once again, He turns away from Him again. The
servant prays for the third time, and again God turns away from him. When the
servant prays to Him for the fourth time, God Most High says to His angels: ‘My
servant has refused to pray to anyone other than Me, therefore I have answered
his prayer.’”
Abu πl-Husayn ∏Ali b. Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. Bashran informed us in
Baghdad: Abu ∏Amr ∏Uthman b. Ahmad, nicknamed “Ibn al-Sammak”, told us:
Muhammad b. ∏Abd Ribbihi al-Hadrami said: Bishr b. ∏Abd al-Malik informed
us: Musa b. al-Hajjaj told us: Malik b. Dinar said: al-Hasan [al-Basri] told us on
the authority of Anas b. Malik – may God be pleased with him – who said: “In
the time of the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – there lived
a man who brought goods [for sale] from Syria to Medina and from there back
to Syria. He traveled alone, not with any caravan, putting his trust in God – may
He be great and exalted. Once, as he was traveling from Syria to Medina he
was confronted by a robber riding a horse. The robber ordered him to stop. The
merchant stopped and told the robber: ‘Take my merchandise and leave me
alone!’ The robber responded: ‘I already have your merchandise. However, I
want your soul as well!’ The merchant said: ‘Why do you need my soul? Take
my merchandise and leave me alone!’ However, the robber repeated what he had
490 See the chapter on “expansion” (bast) and “contraction” (qabd) (pages 79–81). 491 That is, the knowledge of the external aspects of religion (zahir) as opposed to the realization
of its internal meaning (batin).

Yahya b. Mu∏adh used to pray, saying: “O my God, how can I, who disobey
You, ask You for something [in prayer]? And how can I not ask You, Who are ever
generous?” It is related that Moses – peace be upon him – passed by a man who543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 277
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 277
was humbly making his supplicatory prayer. Moses said: “My God, if only I had
the power [to fulfill] his need, I would have done so!” Then God Most High
revealed to him: “I am more compassionate toward him than you, for when he
prays to Me his heart is preoccupied with his sheep and goats. I do not answer
the prayer of a servant whose heart is preoccupied with someone other than
Me.” Moses – peace be upon him – mentioned this to the man. He then turned
himself wholly to God Most High, and his need was fulfilled [by God]. Some
people told Ja∏far al-Sadiq: “What is wrong with us? We pray, but our prayers
are not answered?” He responded: “Because you pray to the One Whom you do
not know!”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “Ya∏qub b. Layth492 developed
an ailment which eluded his physicians. He was told: ‘In your realm there’s
a righteous man named Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari]. If he were to pray for
you, God – praise be to Him – may answer his prayer.’ So [Ya∏qub b. Layth]
summoned Sahl to his court and told him: ‘Pray to God – may He be great and
exalted – on my behalf.’ Sahl told him: ‘How can my prayer on your behalf be
answered,//342 when you unjustly hold people in your prisons?’ So Ya∏qub
released all the prisoners he had held. Sahl prayed: ‘O God, You have already
shown him the humiliation of being disobedient [toward You]. Now show him
the power of being obedient [to You] by removing his affliction!’ [Thereupon]
Ya∏qub recovered from his illness. He offered a great deal of money to Sahl, but
the latter refused to accept it. Someone told him: ‘You should have accepted
this money in order to give it to the poor!’ Sahl cast his glance on some desert
pebbles and they turned into jewels. He then asked his companions: ‘How can a
man [like myself] who has been granted such power stand in need of Ya∏qub b.Yahya b. Mu∏adh used to pray, saying: “O my God, how can I, who disobey
You, ask You for something [in prayer]? And how can I not ask You, Who are ever
generous?” It is related that Moses – peace be upon him – passed by a man who

Someone told him: ‘You should have accepted
this money in order to give it to the poor!’ Sahl cast his glance on some desert
pebbles and they turned into jewels. He then asked his companions: ‘How can a
man [like myself] who has been granted such power stand in need of Ya∏qub b. Layth’s money?’”
It is related that Salih al-Murri used to say: “If one keeps knocking on the
door persistently, it will eventually open for one.” To this Rabi∏a [al-∏Adawiyya]
responded, saying: “For how long will you continue saying this? Has the door
ever been closed, so that one had to request that it be opened?” Salih replied: “An
old man [like myself] has shown ignorance (jahila), while a woman has shown
[true] knowledge (∏alimat).” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami
– may God have mercy on him – say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard Abu
Bakr al-Harbi say: I heard al-Sari [al-Saqati] say: “One day I attended a gathering
at Ma∏ruf al-Karkhi’s house. A man came to him and said: ‘Abu Mahfuz, can
you pray to God Most High that my purse be returned to me?’ There was one
thousand dinarsin it and it was stolen [from me]. Ma∏ruf did not say a word. The
man asked him once again. He did not say a word. The man asked again. Finally,
Ma∏ruf responded, saying: ‘What should I say? [God,] return to this man what
You have withheld from Your prophets and Your elect ones (asfiyaπ)?’ However,
492 Ya∏qub b. Layth al-Saffar (“the Coppersmith”), the leader of a popular rebellion against the
∏Abbasids in eastern Iran, who was able to assert his control over part of eastern Iran and
Afghanistan; he died in 265/879.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 278
278 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
the man kept pleading, ‘Pray to God Most High on my behalf!’ until Ma∏ruf
finally said: ‘O my God, choose what’s best for him!’”
It is related that al-Layth said: “One day I met ∏Uqba b. Nafi∏.493 He was
blind. After a while I met him again. This time he could see. I asked him: ‘How
was your sight restored?’ He answered: ‘Someone came to me in a dream and told
me: “Say: ‘O Near One (ya qarib)! O One Who answers! O One Who hears the
prayer! O One Who is kind to anyone He wishes! Return my eyesight to me!’” I
said this and God – may He be great and exalted – returned my eyesight to me!’”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “When I first returned from
Marv to Nishapur, I was afflicted with a pain in my eye. For several days, I was
unable to sleep. One morning I was finally overcome with slumber and heard a
voice saying: ‘Shall not God suffice His servant?’494 When I woke up, both my
eyesore and my pain were gone. Since then, I have never been afflicted by any
eye pain.” It is related that Muhammad b. Khuzayma said: “When Ahmad b. Hanbal495died, I was//343 in Alexandria. I was overcome with sadness. Then, in
a dream I saw Ahmad b. Hanbal walking proudly. I asked him: ‘Abu ∏Abdallah,
whence this [proud] gait?’ He responded: ‘This is the gait of the servants of God
in the abode of peace.’ I asked: ‘What has God – may He be great and exalted
– done with you?’ He answered: ‘He pardoned me, placed a crown on my head
and golden sandals on my feet. God told me: “Ahmad, this is [a reward for] your
saying that the Qurπan is My speech!” He then added: “Ahmad, pray to Me with
the prayer that has come to you from Sufyan al-Thawri and which you used to
utter while you were in that world!” So I said: “O Lord of everything! By Your
power over everything, pardon me for everything and question me not about
anything [I have done]!” God then said: “Ahmad, this is Paradise.Someone told him: ‘You should have accepted
this money in order to give it to the poor!’ Sahl cast his glance on some desert
pebbles and they turned into jewels. He then asked his companions: ‘How can a
man [like myself] who has been granted such power stand in need of Ya∏qub b. Layth’s money?’”
It is related that Salih al-Murri used to say: “If one keeps knocking on the
door persistently, it will eventually open for one.” To this Rabi∏a [al-∏Adawiyya]
responded, saying: “For how long will you continue saying this? Has the door
ever been closed, so that one had to request that it be opened?” Salih replied: “An
old man [like myself] has shown ignorance (jahila), while a woman has shown
[true] knowledge (∏alimat).” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami
– may God have mercy on him – say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard Abu
Bakr al-Harbi say: I heard al-Sari [al-Saqati] say: “One day I attended a gathering
at Ma∏ruf al-Karkhi’s house. A man came to him and said: ‘Abu Mahfuz, can
you pray to God Most High that my purse be returned to me?’ There was one
thousand dinarsin it and it was stolen [from me]. Ma∏ruf did not say a word. The
man asked him once again. He did not say a word. The man asked again. Finally,
Ma∏ruf responded, saying: ‘What should I say? [God,] return to this man what
You have withheld from Your prophets and Your elect ones (asfiyaπ)?’ However,
492 Ya∏qub b. Layth al-Saffar (“the Coppersmith”), the leader of a popular rebellion against the
∏Abbasids in eastern Iran, who was able to assert his control over part of eastern Iran and
Afghanistan; he died in 265/879.

God told me: “Ahmad, this is [a reward for] your
saying that the Qurπan is My speech!” He then added: “Ahmad, pray to Me with
the prayer that has come to you from Sufyan al-Thawri and which you used to
utter while you were in that world!” So I said: “O Lord of everything! By Your
power over everything, pardon me for everything and question me not about
anything [I have done]!” God then said: “Ahmad, this is Paradise. Enter!” And
I entered it.’”
It is related that a youth once clutched the cover of the Ka∏ba saying: “O my
God, You have no partner to whom one may turn [for help], nor a vizier whom
one may bribe [to gain access to You]. If I obey You, it is only due to Your good
grace, so all praise still belongs to You. If, on the other hand, I disobey, I do so out
of my own ignorance, so that You have a clear proof against me. Yet, although
Your proof against me is firmly established and the proof [of my innocence]
is invalid in Your eyes, You have still pardoned me!” [Suddenly], he heard a
voice saying: “This youth is safe from the hellfire.” They say: “[The object of]
supplicatory prayer is to present one’s need to God Most High. Yet, the Lord
will still do as He pleases.” They say: “The prayer of the ordinary people is their
words; the prayer of ascetics (zuhhad) is their deeds; and the prayer of divine
493 A prominent military commander, who directed the Arab conquest of North Africa. He fell
in a battle against a Berber-Byzantine force in 63/683. ∏Uqba’s real historical personality is
obscured by a thick layer of legends associated with his name. 494 Q. 39:36. 495 The famous hadith collector and transmitter who founded the Hanbali religio-political school
in Baghdad. He died there in 241/855.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 279
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 279
gnostics (∏arifun) is their spiritual states.” They also say: “The best prayer is
one that springs from [one’s] sorrows.” A Sufi said: “If you have asked God
for something, and He grants your request, ask Him immediately for Paradise,
for this may be the day when all your requests are being granted.” They
say: “The tongues of the beginners [on the Sufi path] are overflowing with
supplicatory prayers, whereas the tongues of those who have attained true realities
(mutahaqqiqun) are devoid of them.” When someone asked al-Wasiti to make a
prayer, he said: “I am afraid that if I pray, I will be told: ‘If you are asking Us
for something that We have already predetermined for you, you are thereby
mistrusting Us. And if you ask Us for something that we have not predetermined
for you, then your praise of Us is false. If, on the other hand, you remain
content, We shall bestow upon you the things that We have decreed for you from
eternity.’”
It is related that ∏Abdallah b. Munazil said: “I have not prayed for fifty years
and do not wish anyone else to pray on my behalf.” They say: “Prayer is the
ladder of the sinful.” They say: “Prayer is an exchange of messages. As long as
this exchange is maintained, all is well.” They also say: “The sinful make their
prayers with their tears.”//344 I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may
God have mercy on him – say: “When the sinner weeps, he sends a message to
God – may He be great and exalted.” About this they recite the following [verse]:
The tears of the young man reveal what he is trying to conceal
And his sighs show what is hidden in his heart.Munazil said: “I have not prayed for fifty years
and do not wish anyone else to pray on my behalf.” They say: “Prayer is the
ladder of the sinful.” They say: “Prayer is an exchange of messages. As long as
this exchange is maintained, all is well.” They also say: “The sinful make their
prayers with their tears.”//344 I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may
God have mercy on him – say: “When the sinner weeps, he sends a message to
God – may He be great and exalted.” About this they recite the following [verse]:
The tears of the young man reveal what he is trying to conceal
And his sighs show what is hidden in his heart. A Sufi said: “Praying is the abandoning of sins.” They say: “Prayer is the tongue
of passionate longing for the Beloved.” They say: “Obtaining permission to pray
[from God] is better for the servant than having his supplication granted.”
Al-Kattani said: “God Most High casts apologies on the tongue of the believer
only in order to open the door of His pardon for him.” This means: “Supplicatory
prayer puts you in the presence of God, whereas [God’s] granting [your
request] leads to [your] departure [from Him]. Therefore, standing at [God’s]
door [in supplication] is better than leaving [Him] after [your request] is
granted.” They say: “Prayer means addressing God Most High with the tongue
of humility and shame (hayaπ).” They say: “One of the conditions of prayer is
to accept [divine] decrees with contentment.” They say: “How can you expect
[God] to answer your prayer, when you have cluttered its passage with your
sinful deeds?” Someone asked a Sufi to pray on his behalf. He answered: “You
are already distancing yourself enough from God by putting an intermediary
between you and Him.”
I heard Hamza b.Yusuf al-Sahmi say: I heard Abu πl-Fath Nasr b. Ahmad b. ∏Abd al-Malik say: I heard ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Ahmad say: I heard my father
relate: “A woman came to [the shaykh] Baqi b.God told me: “Ahmad, this is [a reward for] your
saying that the Qurπan is My speech!” He then added: “Ahmad, pray to Me with
the prayer that has come to you from Sufyan al-Thawri and which you used to
utter while you were in that world!” So I said: “O Lord of everything! By Your
power over everything, pardon me for everything and question me not about
anything [I have done]!” God then said: “Ahmad, this is Paradise. Enter!” And
I entered it.’”
It is related that a youth once clutched the cover of the Ka∏ba saying: “O my
God, You have no partner to whom one may turn [for help], nor a vizier whom
one may bribe [to gain access to You]. If I obey You, it is only due to Your good
grace, so all praise still belongs to You. If, on the other hand, I disobey, I do so out
of my own ignorance, so that You have a clear proof against me. Yet, although
Your proof against me is firmly established and the proof [of my innocence]
is invalid in Your eyes, You have still pardoned me!” [Suddenly], he heard a
voice saying: “This youth is safe from the hellfire.” They say: “[The object of]
supplicatory prayer is to present one’s need to God Most High. Yet, the Lord
will still do as He pleases.” They say: “The prayer of the ordinary people is their
words; the prayer of ascetics (zuhhad) is their deeds; and the prayer of divine
493 A prominent military commander, who directed the Arab conquest of North Africa. He fell
in a battle against a Berber-Byzantine force in 63/683. ∏Uqba’s real historical personality is
obscured by a thick layer of legends associated with his name. 494 Q. 39:36. 495 The famous hadith collector and transmitter who founded the Hanbali religio-political school
in Baghdad. He died there in 241/855.

∏Abd al-Malik say: I heard ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Ahmad say: I heard my father
relate: “A woman came to [the shaykh] Baqi b. Makhlad496 and told him: ‘The
496 A celebrated transmitter of hadithand exegete of Cordova, who died in 276/889.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 280
280 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Christians497 have captured my son. [I cannot ransom him] because I have no
property except my house, which I cannot sell. If only you could direct me
to someone who could ransom him, for I have no rest or consolation and cannot
distinguish day from night.’ Baqi told her: ‘Fine. Go [back home] and I will look
into this matter, God willing.’ The shaykh then bowed his head and moved his
lips. We waited a few days. Then, after a while, the woman returned bringing her
son with her. She called out to the shaykh, saying: ‘He returned home safely and
has a story to tell you!’ The young man said: ‘I was a captive of a Christian ruler
along with other prisoners. The ruler had a man who was charged with making
us work every day. He used to take us into the desert to do some work, then
bring us back in chains. As we were coming back from our work after sunset
accompanied by our guard, the chains on my legs suddenly broke open and fell
on the ground.’ He then mentioned the exact date and time when this happened
and they coincided with those during which the woman came to Baqi and he
made his [silent] prayer. The young man continued: ‘Our guard rushed to me
shouting: “You have broken your chain!” I told him: “No, it simply fell from
my legs!” The guard was bewildered. He called his comrades, who brought a
blacksmith with them and put me back in chains. As soon as I took a few steps,
the chain dropped from my legs once again. Now they were all bewildered. They
called for some of their monks, who asked me: “Do you have a mother?” I said:
“Yes.” They told me: “Her prayer [on your behalf] has been answered.∏Abd al-Malik say: I heard ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Ahmad say: I heard my father
relate: “A woman came to [the shaykh] Baqi b. Makhlad496 and told him: ‘The
496 A celebrated transmitter of hadithand exegete of Cordova, who died in 276/889.

Now they were all bewildered. They
called for some of their monks, who asked me: “Do you have a mother?” I said:
“Yes.” They told me: “Her prayer [on your behalf] has been answered. God
– may He be great and exalted – has released you from bondage, and we can no
longer keep you in chains.” So they gave me some provisions and an escort, who
took me back to Muslim territory.’”
Poverty (faqr)
God Most High said: “For the poor who are restrained in the way of God, and
are unable to journey in the land; the ignorant man supposes them rich because
of their abstinence, but thou shalt know them by their mark – they do not beg of
people in a demanding way. And whatever good you expend, surely God has
knowledge of it.”498
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Husayn b. Shuja∏ b. al-Hasan499b. Musa al-Bazzaz informed
us in Baghdad: Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Ja∏far b. Muhammad b. al-Haytham
al-Anbari informed us: Ja∏far b. Muhammad al-Saπigh told us: Qabisa told us:
Sufyan [al-Thawri] told us on the authority of Muhammad b. ∏Amr b. ∏Alqama, on
the authority of Abu Salama, on the authority of Abu Hurayra, on the authority
of the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – who said: “The poor will enter
Paradise five hundred years before the rich, which is half a day [according to the
497 Al-Rum, literally “the Byzantines”; this term in al-Andalus was applied to the Romance-
speaking Christians of the northern part of the country. 498 Q. 2:273; 2:274, according to Arberry’s translation. 499 Or “al-Husayn”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 281
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 281
reckoning of the Qurπan].”500Abu Bakr Muhammad b. ∏Abdus al-Hiri informed
us in Baghdad: Abu Ahmad Hamza b. al-∏Abbas al-Bazzaz told us in Baghdad:
Muhammad b. Ghalib b. Harb told us: Muhammad b. Salama told us: Muhammad
b. Abi πl-Furat told us on the authority of Ibrahim al-Hajari on the authority of
Abu πl-Ahwas, on the authority of ∏Abdallah [b. al-∏Abbas] that the Messenger of
God – may God bless and greet him – said: “The indigent is not he who wanders
around in the hope of getting a morsel or two or a date or two.” Someone asked
him: “Who, then, is the indigent one, Messenger of God?” He answered: “He is
one who cannot find that which satisfies his need, yet is leery of begging [people
for alms]//346 and [his poverty] is inconspicuous, therefore no one gives him
any charity.”
The master [Abu πl-Qasim al-Qushayri] said: “He meant that ‘being ashamed
of begging people [for alms]’ actually implies ‘being ashamed before God
Most High to beg people [for alms]’, not ‘being ashamed of begging people
[for alms]’.”
Poverty is the hallmark of the friends of God (awliyaπ), a decoration of
the pure (asfiyaπ), and the special feature with which God – praise be to Him –
distinguishes His elect ones from among the righteous and the prophets. The
poor are the elect servants of God – may He be glorified and exalted – and the
carriers of His secrets among His creatures. By means of them God protects
His creatures and due to their blessings He bestows livelihood upon them. The
poor are the patient ones, who will sit next to God Most High on the Day of
Judgement, as related in a report transmitted from the Prophet – may God bless
and greet him. The master Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami informed us: Ibrahim b. Ahmad
b. Muhammad b. Rajaπ al-Fazari told us: ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. Ja∏far b. Ahmad b. Khushaysh al-Baghdadi told us: ∏Uthman b. Ma∏bad told us: ∏Umar
b.Now they were all bewildered. They
called for some of their monks, who asked me: “Do you have a mother?” I said:
“Yes.” They told me: “Her prayer [on your behalf] has been answered. God
– may He be great and exalted – has released you from bondage, and we can no
longer keep you in chains.” So they gave me some provisions and an escort, who
took me back to Muslim territory.’”
Poverty (faqr)
God Most High said: “For the poor who are restrained in the way of God, and
are unable to journey in the land; the ignorant man supposes them rich because
of their abstinence, but thou shalt know them by their mark – they do not beg of
people in a demanding way. And whatever good you expend, surely God has
knowledge of it.”498
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Husayn b. Shuja∏ b. al-Hasan499b. Musa al-Bazzaz informed
us in Baghdad: Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Ja∏far b. Muhammad b. al-Haytham
al-Anbari informed us: Ja∏far b. Muhammad al-Saπigh told us: Qabisa told us:
Sufyan [al-Thawri] told us on the authority of Muhammad b. ∏Amr b. ∏Alqama, on
the authority of Abu Salama, on the authority of Abu Hurayra, on the authority
of the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – who said: “The poor will enter
Paradise five hundred years before the rich, which is half a day [according to the
497 Al-Rum, literally “the Byzantines”; this term in al-Andalus was applied to the Romance-
speaking Christians of the northern part of the country. 498 Q. 2:273; 2:274, according to Arberry’s translation. 499 Or “al-Husayn”.

Khushaysh al-Baghdadi told us: ∏Uthman b. Ma∏bad told us: ∏Umar
b. Rashid told us on the authority of Malik [b. Anas], on the authority of Nafi∏,
on the authority of [∏Abdallah] b. ∏Umar, on the authority of ∏Umar b. al-Khattab
– may God be pleased with him – that the Messenger of God – may God bless
and greet him – said: “There is a key to everything and the key to Paradise is love
of the indigent, for the poor are the patient ones, who will sit next to God Most
High on the Day of Judgement.” It is related that someone brought ten thousand
dinars to Ibrahim b. Adham. However, he refused to accept them, saying: “Do
you want to erase my name from the roster of the poor by ten thousand dinars? I
will never do this!” Mu∏adh al-Nasafi said: “God Most High will never destroy
a people, no matter what they do, unless they hold the poor in contempt and
humiliate them!” It is said: “If the poor in God had no other virtue except their
desire that the Muslims enjoy the abundance of provisions and their availability
to all, this would be sufficient for them. Then they would need to purchase these
500 According to Islamic theology, time in the Hereafter will be different from that of this world;
see Q. 22:47.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 282
282 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
provisions, while the rich would have to sell them. If this is the case with the
ordinary poor, what would then be the status of the elect among them?”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard ∏Abd al-Wahid
b. Bakr say: I heard Abu Bakr b. Sam∏an say: I heard Abu Bakr b. Mas∏ud
say: “Someone asked Yahya b. Mu∏adh about poverty. He answered: ‘Its True
Reality is that the servant of God is independent of anything except God and
its mark is not being in need of any provisions.’” I also heard him [al-Sulami]
say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard Ibrahim al-Qassar say: “Poverty
is a clothing that brings about contentment (rida), if one has realized its true
meaning.”//347 A poor man from Zuzan came to the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq
in the year 394 [1003] or 395 [1004]. He was wearing a hair-shirt and a hat made
of wool. One of Abu ∏Ali’s companions asked him mockingly: “How much did
you pay for this wool?” He answered: “I bought it with this world [of ours]. However, if I were offered the Hereafter for it, I would not sell it!” I heard the
master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “A poor man stood up during a [Sufi] gathering
and begged for charity, saying: ‘I have gone hungry for three days!’ One of
the Sufi masters who was there exclaimed: ‘You lie! Poverty is a secret [between
you and] God. He does not entrust His secret to someone who divulges it to
whomever he wishes!’”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad b. al-Farraπ say:
I heard Abu Zakariya al-Nakhshabi say: I heard Hamdun al-Qassar say: “When
Satan and his troops get together, nothing makes them more happy than three
things: when someone murders a believing Muslim, when someone dies in the
state of unbelief, and when [they see a man whose] heart dreads poverty.” I also
heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard ∏Abdallah b.Khushaysh al-Baghdadi told us: ∏Uthman b. Ma∏bad told us: ∏Umar
b. Rashid told us on the authority of Malik [b. Anas], on the authority of Nafi∏,
on the authority of [∏Abdallah] b. ∏Umar, on the authority of ∏Umar b. al-Khattab
– may God be pleased with him – that the Messenger of God – may God bless
and greet him – said: “There is a key to everything and the key to Paradise is love
of the indigent, for the poor are the patient ones, who will sit next to God Most
High on the Day of Judgement.” It is related that someone brought ten thousand
dinars to Ibrahim b. Adham. However, he refused to accept them, saying: “Do
you want to erase my name from the roster of the poor by ten thousand dinars? I
will never do this!” Mu∏adh al-Nasafi said: “God Most High will never destroy
a people, no matter what they do, unless they hold the poor in contempt and
humiliate them!” It is said: “If the poor in God had no other virtue except their
desire that the Muslims enjoy the abundance of provisions and their availability
to all, this would be sufficient for them. Then they would need to purchase these
500 According to Islamic theology, time in the Hereafter will be different from that of this world;
see Q. 22:47.

al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad b. al-Farraπ say:
I heard Abu Zakariya al-Nakhshabi say: I heard Hamdun al-Qassar say: “When
Satan and his troops get together, nothing makes them more happy than three
things: when someone murders a believing Muslim, when someone dies in the
state of unbelief, and when [they see a man whose] heart dreads poverty.” I also
heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ataπ say: I heard Abu Ja∏far
al-Farghani say: I heard al-Junayd say: “O poor ones, you are known thanks to
God and you are being honored because of Him. However, how will you fare
with God when you find yourselves alone with Him?” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd
al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Baghdadi say: I
heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Farghani say: I heard someone ask al-Junayd:
“Which state is better: being in need of God Most High – praise be to Him – or
being satisfied with God Most High?” Al-Junayd responded: “When one’s
need in God – may He be great and exalted – is sound, then one’s complete
satisfaction with God Most High is sound too. Therefore, you should not ask
which of them is better, for one cannot be perfected without the other.” I also
heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard Abu Ja∏far
[al-Farghani] say: I heard Ruwaym [b. Ahmad] say, when asked about the
characteristic feature of the poor person: “Placing oneself under the commands
of God Most High.”//348 It is said that the poor are distinguished by three
character traits: protecting one’s secret heart [from evil influences], performing
one’s religious duty (fard), and maintaining one’s poverty. Someone asked Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz: “Why does the beneficence of the rich
not reach the poor?” He answered: “For three reasons: their wealth is illegal,
their giving is not approved by God, and because the poor are meant to suffer.”543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 283
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 283
God – may He be great and exalted – revealed to Moses – peace be upon him:
“When you see the poor, beg them in the same way you beg the rich. If you do
not do this, then you can bury everything I have taught you under the dust.” It
is related that Abu πl-Dardaπ501said: “I’d rather fall from the wall of a castle and
be smashed to pieces than attend a gathering of the rich, because I heard the
Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – say: ‘Beware of sitting
together with the dead.’ Someone asked him who were ‘the dead’. He responded:
‘The rich.’” Someone complained to al-Rabi∏ b. Khuthaym about high prices. He responded: “We are not worthy of being starved by God. He only starves His
friends (awliyaπ).” Ibrahim b. Adham said: “We sought poverty but got wealth,
whereas other people sought wealth but got only poverty.” I heard Muhammad
b. al-Husayn say: I heard Ahmad b. ∏Ali say: I heard al-Hasan b. ∏Alawayh say:
“Someone asked Yahya b. Mu∏adh about poverty. He answered: ‘It is nothing but
fear of poverty.’” Someone asked [a Sufi]: “What is wealth?” He answered: “It
is trust (amn) in God Most High.” I also heard him [Muhammad b.Mu∏adh about poverty. He answered: ‘It is nothing but
fear of poverty.’” Someone asked [a Sufi]: “What is wealth?” He answered: “It
is trust (amn) in God Most High.” I also heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn]
say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard al-Jurayri say: I heard al-Karini502say:
“The poor person who is sincere shuns wealth lest he becomes rich and spoils his
poverty, whereas the wealthy one shuns poverty lest it comes and deprives him
of his wealth.” Someone asked Abu Hafs: “How does the poor one approach his
Lord – may He be great and exalted –?” He responded: “The poor one has
nothing but poverty with which to approach his Lord.”//349 It is said that
God Most High revealed the following to Moses – peace be upon him: “Would
you like to have all the good works of the whole of mankind on the Day of
Judgement?” He answered: “Yes.” God said: “[Then you must] visit the sick and
clear lice from theclothing of the poor.” So Moses – peace be upon him – made
a habit for himself of spending seven days of each month delousing the garments
of the poor and visiting the sick. Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] said: “There are five things that constitute the
[true] core of everyone’s soul: a poor man who shows himself to be free from want,
a hungry man who shows himself to be satiated, a sad man who shows happiness,
a man who shows love to his adversary, and a man who fasts during the day and
keeps vigil during the night without showing weakness.” Bishr b. al-Harith said:
“The best station is [to be able to] withstand poverty until your grave.” Dhu πl-Nun
said: “God’s displeasure with His servant becomes evident when he [the servant]
is afraid of poverty.” Al-Shibli said: “The minimal indication of true poverty is
this: when the servant who is offered the entire world decides to give it out as
charity.al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad b. al-Farraπ say:
I heard Abu Zakariya al-Nakhshabi say: I heard Hamdun al-Qassar say: “When
Satan and his troops get together, nothing makes them more happy than three
things: when someone murders a believing Muslim, when someone dies in the
state of unbelief, and when [they see a man whose] heart dreads poverty.” I also
heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ataπ say: I heard Abu Ja∏far
al-Farghani say: I heard al-Junayd say: “O poor ones, you are known thanks to
God and you are being honored because of Him. However, how will you fare
with God when you find yourselves alone with Him?” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd
al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Baghdadi say: I
heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Farghani say: I heard someone ask al-Junayd:
“Which state is better: being in need of God Most High – praise be to Him – or
being satisfied with God Most High?” Al-Junayd responded: “When one’s
need in God – may He be great and exalted – is sound, then one’s complete
satisfaction with God Most High is sound too. Therefore, you should not ask
which of them is better, for one cannot be perfected without the other.” I also
heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard Abu Ja∏far
[al-Farghani] say: I heard Ruwaym [b. Ahmad] say, when asked about the
characteristic feature of the poor person: “Placing oneself under the commands
of God Most High.”//348 It is said that the poor are distinguished by three
character traits: protecting one’s secret heart [from evil influences], performing
one’s religious duty (fard), and maintaining one’s poverty. Someone asked Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz: “Why does the beneficence of the rich
not reach the poor?” He answered: “For three reasons: their wealth is illegal,
their giving is not approved by God, and because the poor are meant to suffer.”

∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] said: “There are five things that constitute the
[true] core of everyone’s soul: a poor man who shows himself to be free from want,
a hungry man who shows himself to be satiated, a sad man who shows happiness,
a man who shows love to his adversary, and a man who fasts during the day and
keeps vigil during the night without showing weakness.” Bishr b. al-Harith said:
“The best station is [to be able to] withstand poverty until your grave.” Dhu πl-Nun
said: “God’s displeasure with His servant becomes evident when he [the servant]
is afraid of poverty.” Al-Shibli said: “The minimal indication of true poverty is
this: when the servant who is offered the entire world decides to give it out as
charity. If, however, after that he says to himself, ‘I should have saved some of
it [at least for] one day’, his poverty is insincere.” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq say: “People dispute what is better: poverty or wealth. In my opinion,
it is best when one is given enough to sustain himself (kifayatah), whereupon one
perseveres with this [for the rest of one’s life].”
501 A Companion of the Prophet, who was renowned for his asceticism and frugality. 502 Or “al-Karnabi”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 284
284 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah al-Razi say: I
heard Abu Muhammad b. Yasin say: “I asked Ibn al-Jallaπ about poverty. He fell
silent until everyone else had left, then walked away himself only to return [to
me] after a short while. He then said: ‘[When you asked,] I had four daniqs503on me
and was thus ashamed before God – may He be great and exalted – to converse
about poverty. So I left and gave them away.’ He then sat down and began to
converse about poverty.” I also heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I
heard ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad al-Dimashqi say: Ibrahim b. al-Muwallad said:
“I asked Ibn al-Jallaπ: ‘When does the poor one [consider himself deserving] of
his name?’ He responded: ‘When he rids himself of any trace of it.’ I asked him:
‘How can this be?’//350 He said: ‘When he has it, it does not belong to him, and
when he does not have it, it belongs to him!’” They say: “True poverty is that
the poor one in his poverty is not satisfied with anything, except He for Whom
he has [true] need.” ∏Abdallah b. al-Mubarak said: “To appear rich while being
poor is better than poverty itself.”
I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard Hilal b. Muhammad say:
I heard al-Naqqash say: I heard Bunan al-Misri say: “One day, as I was sitting in
Mecca, I saw a youth in front of me. A man approached him who was carrying a
purse full of dirhams. He placed it in front of him, to which the youth responded,
saying: ‘I do not need this!’ The man told him: ‘Then give this [money] to
the indigent (masakin).’ When the evening came, I saw the youth in the valley
begging. I told him: ‘You should have saved at least some of that [money] for
yourself!’ He answered: ‘At that time, I was not sure I would still be alive now!’”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard ∏Ali b.∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] said: “There are five things that constitute the
[true] core of everyone’s soul: a poor man who shows himself to be free from want,
a hungry man who shows himself to be satiated, a sad man who shows happiness,
a man who shows love to his adversary, and a man who fasts during the day and
keeps vigil during the night without showing weakness.” Bishr b. al-Harith said:
“The best station is [to be able to] withstand poverty until your grave.” Dhu πl-Nun
said: “God’s displeasure with His servant becomes evident when he [the servant]
is afraid of poverty.” Al-Shibli said: “The minimal indication of true poverty is
this: when the servant who is offered the entire world decides to give it out as
charity. If, however, after that he says to himself, ‘I should have saved some of
it [at least for] one day’, his poverty is insincere.” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq say: “People dispute what is better: poverty or wealth. In my opinion,
it is best when one is given enough to sustain himself (kifayatah), whereupon one
perseveres with this [for the rest of one’s life].”
501 A Companion of the Prophet, who was renowned for his asceticism and frugality. 502 Or “al-Karnabi”.

He placed it in front of him, to which the youth responded,
saying: ‘I do not need this!’ The man told him: ‘Then give this [money] to
the indigent (masakin).’ When the evening came, I saw the youth in the valley
begging. I told him: ‘You should have saved at least some of that [money] for
yourself!’ He answered: ‘At that time, I was not sure I would still be alive now!’”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard ∏Ali b. Bundar
al-Sayrafi say: I heard Mahfuz say: I heard Abu Hafs [al-Haddad] say: “The
best way for the servant to reach his Master is to be in need of Him in all his
[spiritual] states, to follow the custom [of His prophet] in all his deeds, and to eat
nothing but licit food.” I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard al-Husayn b. Ahmad say: I heard al-Murta∏ish say: “The aspirations of the poor should not
run ahead of his feet.” I also heard him say: I heard Abu πl-Faraj al-Warathani say:
I heard Fatima, sister of Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari, say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari
say: “There were four individuals [who were unique in terms of poverty] during
their time. One would not accept anything from either his brethren or the
rulers. This was Yusuf b. Asbat. He inherited seventy thousand dirhamsfrom his
father, yet accepted none of it. He used to weave palm-leaf mats with his own
hands. Another one – Abu Ishaq al-Fazari – used to accept [donations] from his
brethren or the rulers. Whatever he accepted from his brethren he used to spend
on those folks who concealed their poverty and refused to move [in order to
collect charity]; whatever he accepted from the rulers he used to bring to the
deserving ones from among the inhabitants of Tarsus.504The third was ∏Abdallah
b. al-Mubarak. He would never accept [donations] from the rulers and whatever
503 A coin worth one-sixth of a dinar. 504 An ancient city in present-day Turkey, some 240 miles south-east of the capital Ankara.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 285
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 285
he accepted from his brethren, he would reimburse them in kind. The fourth was
Makhlad b. al-Husayn.//351 He would accept [donations] from the rulers, but
not from his brethren, saying: ‘The ruler does no one a favor [by his generosity],
while the brethren do.’”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “A transmitted report says:
‘Whoever humbles himself to a rich man because of his wealth has lost two-thirds
of his faith.’ This is because a man [acts] by his heart, by his tongue and by
his soul. Therefore, whenever he humbles himself to a rich man by his soul
and his tongue he has lost two-thirds of his faith; and whenever he assumes his
superiority by his heart, while also humbling himself to him by his soul and his
tongue, he has lost his faith in its entirety.” It is said: “The minimal require-
ments for the poor man in his poverty are four: a knowledge that guides him; a
scrupulous discernment (wara∏) that keeps him away [from the forbidden]; a
certainty (yaqin) that leads him [to his goal]; and a remembrance [of God] (dhikr)
that brings about his intimacy [with God].” It is also said: “He who aspires after
the honor bestowed by poverty will die poor, while he who aspires after poverty
in order not to be distracted from God Most High [by mundane things], will die
rich.”
Al-Muzayyin said: “There used to be more paths to God than the stars of the
sky. Of these only one has remained – that of poverty, for it is the soundest of them
all.” I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard al-Husayn b. Yusuf al-Qazwini
say: I heard Ibrahim b. al-Muwallad say: I heard al-Hasan b. ∏Ali say: I heard
al-Nuri say: “The sign of the poor is that he remains quiet at the time of scarcity
and gives whatever he has to others at the time of plenty.” I also heard him
[Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: “Someone
asked al-Shibli about the true essence of poverty.He placed it in front of him, to which the youth responded,
saying: ‘I do not need this!’ The man told him: ‘Then give this [money] to
the indigent (masakin).’ When the evening came, I saw the youth in the valley
begging. I told him: ‘You should have saved at least some of that [money] for
yourself!’ He answered: ‘At that time, I was not sure I would still be alive now!’”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard ∏Ali b. Bundar
al-Sayrafi say: I heard Mahfuz say: I heard Abu Hafs [al-Haddad] say: “The
best way for the servant to reach his Master is to be in need of Him in all his
[spiritual] states, to follow the custom [of His prophet] in all his deeds, and to eat
nothing but licit food.” I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard al-Husayn b. Ahmad say: I heard al-Murta∏ish say: “The aspirations of the poor should not
run ahead of his feet.” I also heard him say: I heard Abu πl-Faraj al-Warathani say:
I heard Fatima, sister of Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari, say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari
say: “There were four individuals [who were unique in terms of poverty] during
their time. One would not accept anything from either his brethren or the
rulers. This was Yusuf b. Asbat. He inherited seventy thousand dirhamsfrom his
father, yet accepted none of it. He used to weave palm-leaf mats with his own
hands. Another one – Abu Ishaq al-Fazari – used to accept [donations] from his
brethren or the rulers. Whatever he accepted from his brethren he used to spend
on those folks who concealed their poverty and refused to move [in order to
collect charity]; whatever he accepted from the rulers he used to bring to the
deserving ones from among the inhabitants of Tarsus.504The third was ∏Abdallah
b. al-Mubarak. He would never accept [donations] from the rulers and whatever
503 A coin worth one-sixth of a dinar. 504 An ancient city in present-day Turkey, some 240 miles south-east of the capital Ankara.

al-Husayn] say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: “Someone
asked al-Shibli about the true essence of poverty. He answered: ‘It is that the
servant of God finds satisfaction in nothing but God – may He be great and
exalted.’” I also heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard Mansur
b. Khalaf al-Maghribi say: Abu Sahl al-Khashshab the Elder (al-kabir) said:
“Poverty is [both] poverty and submissiveness.” I responded, saying, “On the
contrary, it is poverty and greatness”, to which he responded, saying, “Poverty
and [a plot of] land [in which you will be buried]”, to which I responded, saying,
“On the contrary, it is poverty and a throne [in the presence of God]”. I heard
the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “Someone asked me about the meaning of
the words of the Prophet – may God bless and greet him: ‘Poverty is close to
unbelief.’ I answered: ‘The virtue and strength of a thing is in inverse proportion
to the harm it brings. Whatever possesses the most virtue //352 has the most
harmful effect as its opposite. For instance, faith is the noblest of all qualities,
yet it has unbelief as its opposite. Since the danger inherent in poverty is that it
may turn into unbelief, it leaves no doubt that it [poverty] is the noblest of all
attributes.’”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Abu Nasr
al-Harawi say: I heard al-Murta∏ish say: I heard al-Junayd say: “If you meet
a poor man, treat him with kindness not with knowledge, for kindness pleases543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 286
286 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
him, whereas knowledge alienates him.” I asked him: “Abu πl-Qasim, how can
knowledge alienate the poor man?” He answered: “Yes, if the poor man is sincere
in his poverty, then your presenting him with your knowledge will melt him in
the same way the fire melts [a piece of] lead.” I also heard him [al-Sulami] say:
“I heard ∏Abdallah al-Razi say: I heard Muzaffar al-Qirmisini say: “The poor
one has no need of God.” The master Abu πl-Qasim [al-Qushayri] said: “This
expression may be somewhat confusing for those who hear it, if they are ignorant
of the aim of this folk.505 The speaker implied that [the servant of God] should
abandon any demands, give up his own free choice and be satisfied with God’s
– praise be to Him – decrees in his regard.”
Ibn Khafif said: “Poverty means a lack of any property and the abandonment
of the attributes of one’s own self.” Abu Hafs [al-Haddad] said: “One’s poverty is
not perfect until giving [to others] becomes more agreeable to one than receiving. Generosity is not when the wealthy one gives something to the indigent one. It
is when the indigent one gives something to the wealthy one.” I heard Muhammad
b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Abd al-Wahid b. Bakr say: I heard al-Duqqi say: I
heard Ibn al-Jallaπ say: “If humility were not an honorable quality in the eyes of
God, then the poor would swagger when they walk.” Yusuf b. Asbat said: “For
forty years I have had only one shirt.” One of them [Sufis] said: “[In a dream] I
saw the [event of the] Day of Judgement. It was announced: ‘May Malik b. Dinar
and Muhamad b. Wasi∏ be brought into Paradise!’ As I was watching I wondered
which one of them would enter first. It was Muhammad b. Wasi∏. I asked why he
preceded [Malik b. Dinar] and was told://353 ‘He had only one shirt, whereas
Malik had two!’” Muhammad al-Musuhi said: “The poor one has no need for
anything [in this world].” Someone asked Sahl b.al-Husayn] say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: “Someone
asked al-Shibli about the true essence of poverty. He answered: ‘It is that the
servant of God finds satisfaction in nothing but God – may He be great and
exalted.’” I also heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard Mansur
b. Khalaf al-Maghribi say: Abu Sahl al-Khashshab the Elder (al-kabir) said:
“Poverty is [both] poverty and submissiveness.” I responded, saying, “On the
contrary, it is poverty and greatness”, to which he responded, saying, “Poverty
and [a plot of] land [in which you will be buried]”, to which I responded, saying,
“On the contrary, it is poverty and a throne [in the presence of God]”. I heard
the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “Someone asked me about the meaning of
the words of the Prophet – may God bless and greet him: ‘Poverty is close to
unbelief.’ I answered: ‘The virtue and strength of a thing is in inverse proportion
to the harm it brings. Whatever possesses the most virtue //352 has the most
harmful effect as its opposite. For instance, faith is the noblest of all qualities,
yet it has unbelief as its opposite. Since the danger inherent in poverty is that it
may turn into unbelief, it leaves no doubt that it [poverty] is the noblest of all
attributes.’”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Abu Nasr
al-Harawi say: I heard al-Murta∏ish say: I heard al-Junayd say: “If you meet
a poor man, treat him with kindness not with knowledge, for kindness pleases

I asked why he
preceded [Malik b. Dinar] and was told://353 ‘He had only one shirt, whereas
Malik had two!’” Muhammad al-Musuhi said: “The poor one has no need for
anything [in this world].” Someone asked Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari]: “When
can the poor one enjoy repose?” He answered: “Only when he expects nothing for
himself in any given moment (waqt).” Some folk mentioned poverty and wealth
in the presence of Yahya b. Mu∏adh. He said: “[On the Day of Judgement] one
will weigh neither poverty nor wealth. What will be weighed is patience and
gratitude. Then it will be said: ‘He was grateful [to God] and patient.’”
It is related that God Most High said to one of His prophets – peace be upon
them: “If you want to know whether I am satisfied with you, look to what extent
the poor are satisfied with you.” Abu Bakr al-Zaqqaq said: “One whose poverty
is devoid of fear of God (tuqa) eats food that is wholly illicit.” It is related that
during gatherings at Sufyan al-Thawri’s house the poor were treated as if they
were princes. I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard
Muhammad b Ahmad al-Farraπ say: I heard Abu Bakr b. Tahir say: “Among the
character traits of the poor is that they have no desire [for things] of this world. If one of them does have it, it should never exceed what is sufficient for him
(kifayatuh).” He then said: “∏Abdallah b. Ibrahim b. al-∏Alaπ recited to me: Ahmad
b. ∏Ataπ recited to me:
505 That is, the Sufis.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 287
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 287
They told [me]: ‘Tomorrow is a holiday. What will you wear?’
I answered: ‘The garment of the one who pours out love in abundant
gulps!’
Poverty and patience are my two garments underneath which is a heart
that sees its intimate companion on Fridays and holidays
The best garment in which to meet your beloved on the day of visitation
is one that he has clad you with
Time for me is nothing but [incessant] mourning, when you are not with
me, O my hope! And my holiday is whenever I can see and hear you!”
They say that these verses belong to Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari. Abu Bakr al-Misri
said, when asked about the poor man who is sincere: “It is he who has nothing
and is not inclined to [acquire] anything.” Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri said://354 “In
my eyes, a constant need of God Most High that is tainted by confusion (takhlit)
is still better than constant serenity that is tainted by self-conceit.”
I heard Abu ∏Abdallah al-Shirazi say: I heard ∏Abd al-Wahid b. Ahmad say:
I heard Abu Bakr al-Jawwal say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah al-Husri say: “For twenty
years Abu Ja∏far al-Haddad used to work, making one dinar per day. He would
then spend it on the poor and fast. Between the sunset and evening prayer
he would go around from door to door seeking charity.” I heard Muhammad
b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Husayn b. Yusuf al-Qazwini say: I heard
Ibrahim b. al-Muwallad say: I heard al-Hasan b. ∏Ali say: I heard [Abu πl-Husayn]
al-Nuri say: “One of the marks of the poor is to remain content in times of
want and to spend lavishly [on others] during times of plenty.” I also heard
him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard
Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Kattani say: “There was a youth with us in Mecca who
wore tattered rags. He never attended our gatherings or sat with us [during our
conversations]. I developed affection for him in my heart.I asked why he
preceded [Malik b. Dinar] and was told://353 ‘He had only one shirt, whereas
Malik had two!’” Muhammad al-Musuhi said: “The poor one has no need for
anything [in this world].” Someone asked Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari]: “When
can the poor one enjoy repose?” He answered: “Only when he expects nothing for
himself in any given moment (waqt).” Some folk mentioned poverty and wealth
in the presence of Yahya b. Mu∏adh. He said: “[On the Day of Judgement] one
will weigh neither poverty nor wealth. What will be weighed is patience and
gratitude. Then it will be said: ‘He was grateful [to God] and patient.’”
It is related that God Most High said to one of His prophets – peace be upon
them: “If you want to know whether I am satisfied with you, look to what extent
the poor are satisfied with you.” Abu Bakr al-Zaqqaq said: “One whose poverty
is devoid of fear of God (tuqa) eats food that is wholly illicit.” It is related that
during gatherings at Sufyan al-Thawri’s house the poor were treated as if they
were princes. I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard
Muhammad b Ahmad al-Farraπ say: I heard Abu Bakr b. Tahir say: “Among the
character traits of the poor is that they have no desire [for things] of this world. If one of them does have it, it should never exceed what is sufficient for him
(kifayatuh).” He then said: “∏Abdallah b. Ibrahim b. al-∏Alaπ recited to me: Ahmad
b. ∏Ataπ recited to me:
505 That is, the Sufis.

He never attended our gatherings or sat with us [during our
conversations]. I developed affection for him in my heart. One day I came into
possession of two hundred dirhamsthat came from a lawful source (halal). I took
them with me and put them on the edge of his prayer mat and said: ‘This has
come to me from a lawful source. Spend this [money] on whatever you want.’
He looked at me askance and then revealed to me what was concealed from me,
saying: ‘I bought [this opportunity] to be in the presence with God Most High
for seventy thousand dinars, not to count my other properties and estates. And
you want to cheat me out of these [two hundred dirhams]?’ He stood up and
scattered the money. I sat there crouching as I was trying to gather it from the
ground. I have never witnessed the like of the dignity with which he left, nor the
like of the ignominy with which I was trying to gather up the money.”
Abu ∏Abdallah b. Khafif said: “For forty years I have been unable to pay
the alms due at the end of Ramadan,506 yet I have enjoyed a great prestige
both among the common folk and the elite.” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abdallah b. 506 Because he had no taxable property.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 288
288 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Bakawayh al-Sufi say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah b. Khafif telling this story. I also
heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard Abu Ahmad al-Saghir (the
Younger) say: “I asked Abu ∏Abdallah b. Khafif about a poor man who went
hungry for three days, whereupon he went out asking for alms: ‘How would you
describe him?’ He said: ‘This is greedy! [One should tell such people:] “Eat and
be quiet!” When a poor man behaves like this, he has disgraced all of you!’” I
heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali al-Sufi say: I heard
al-Duqqi say, when he was asked about the bad manners of the poor before
God in their affairs. He responded: “It is when they stoop down from [the search
of] true realities (haqiqa) to [the search of] received knowledge (∏ilm).” I also
heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah
al-Tabari say: I heard Khayr al-Nassaj say: “[One day] I entered a mosque
and found a poor man there. When he saw me, he approached me, saying: ‘O
master, have mercy on me, for my affliction is great indeed!’ I asked him what
his affliction was. He told me: ‘I have not been able to experience any affliction
and I have been in good health!’ I looked at him and, lo, he was immediately
showered with [the good things of] this world.’” I also heard him [Muhammad
b. al-Husayn] say: I heard Muhammad b. Muhammad b. Ahmad say: I heard
Abu Bakr b. al-Warraq say: “May God bless the poor in this world and the next
one!” Someone asked him [Abu Bakr] what he meant by this. He answered:
“The ruler in this world cannot impose any property tax on him, while the
All-Powerful One cannot call him to account in the Hereafter.”
Sufism (tasawwuf)
The praise of purity (safaπ)507 is on everybody’s tongue, while its opposite,
impurity, deserves [nothing but] blame. ∏Abdallah b. Yusuf al-Isbahani informed
us: ∏Abdallah b. Yahya al-Talhi informed us: al-Husayn b.He never attended our gatherings or sat with us [during our
conversations]. I developed affection for him in my heart. One day I came into
possession of two hundred dirhamsthat came from a lawful source (halal). I took
them with me and put them on the edge of his prayer mat and said: ‘This has
come to me from a lawful source. Spend this [money] on whatever you want.’
He looked at me askance and then revealed to me what was concealed from me,
saying: ‘I bought [this opportunity] to be in the presence with God Most High
for seventy thousand dinars, not to count my other properties and estates. And
you want to cheat me out of these [two hundred dirhams]?’ He stood up and
scattered the money. I sat there crouching as I was trying to gather it from the
ground. I have never witnessed the like of the dignity with which he left, nor the
like of the ignominy with which I was trying to gather up the money.”
Abu ∏Abdallah b. Khafif said: “For forty years I have been unable to pay
the alms due at the end of Ramadan,506 yet I have enjoyed a great prestige
both among the common folk and the elite.” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abdallah b. 506 Because he had no taxable property.

Yusuf al-Isbahani informed
us: ∏Abdallah b. Yahya al-Talhi informed us: al-Husayn b. Ja∏far told us: ∏Abdallah
b. Nawfal told us: Abu Bakr b. ∏Ayyash told us on the authority of Ziyad b. Abi
Ziyad, on the authority of Abu Juhayfa,508 who said: “The Messenger of God
– may God bless and greet him – came out to us one day with the color [of his
face] changed, saying: ‘Purity has disappeared from this world, leaving nothing
but impurity. Therefore, today death is a blessing for every [faithful] Muslim!’”
With time, this name came to be applied to the entire group. They began
to say: “[This is] ‘a man of purity’ (rajul sufi) with [the word] sufiyya being the
plural.” As for the one who aspires to reach this [condition], he came to be called
mutasawwif, with mutasawwifafor its plural. No evidence for such an etymological
analogy can be found in the Arabic language. It is more likely that it is a nickname
of sorts. There are also those who claim that it is derived from the word “wool”
(suf); therefore, the verb tasawwaf would mean “to wear wool”, in the same
507 According to an etymology popular in some Sufi circles, the word tasawwufis derived from
the Arabic root SFW with the general meaning of “being pure”; see IM,p. 5. 508 Or “Abu Hujayfa”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 289
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 289
manner as the verb taqammas means “to wear a shirt (qamis)”. This is possible. However, this folk are not unique in wearing wool.//356 There are also those
who argue that the Sufis derive their name from the covered room (suffa)509
[adjacent to] the mosque of the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet
him. However, the word “Sufi” could not possibly have derived from suffa. [The
same is true of] those who derive the word “Sufi” from “purity” (safaπ); this,
too, is far-fetched from the linguistic point of view. There are those who argue
that it is derived from the word “row” (saff), meaning that they [Sufis] are in the
front row [before God] with their hearts. This meaning is correct in principle,
albeit the language disallows that it be derived from the word saff. In all, however,
this group is too renowned to need any justification by attributing itself to any
[particular] word or etymology. People have had much debate over the meaning
of “Sufism” and “Sufi”. Each one of them has spoken from his own experience
(ma waqa∏ lah), so we cannot exhaust this topic without violating our [stated]
principle of being concise. We therefore will limit ourselves to mentioning some
of what they have said without going into details, God willing. I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Yahya al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali
al-Tamimi say: “Someone asked Abu Muhammad al-Jurayri about Sufism: ‘It
means assuming every sublime moral character trait and giving up every lowly
one.’” I heard ∏Abdallah b. Yusuf al-Isbahani say: I heard my father say: I heard
Abu ∏Abdallah Muhammad b. ∏Ammar al-Hamadani say: I heard Abu Muhammad
al-Maraghi say: “Someone asked my master about Sufism.Yusuf al-Isbahani informed
us: ∏Abdallah b. Yahya al-Talhi informed us: al-Husayn b. Ja∏far told us: ∏Abdallah
b. Nawfal told us: Abu Bakr b. ∏Ayyash told us on the authority of Ziyad b. Abi
Ziyad, on the authority of Abu Juhayfa,508 who said: “The Messenger of God
– may God bless and greet him – came out to us one day with the color [of his
face] changed, saying: ‘Purity has disappeared from this world, leaving nothing
but impurity. Therefore, today death is a blessing for every [faithful] Muslim!’”
With time, this name came to be applied to the entire group. They began
to say: “[This is] ‘a man of purity’ (rajul sufi) with [the word] sufiyya being the
plural.” As for the one who aspires to reach this [condition], he came to be called
mutasawwif, with mutasawwifafor its plural. No evidence for such an etymological
analogy can be found in the Arabic language. It is more likely that it is a nickname
of sorts. There are also those who claim that it is derived from the word “wool”
(suf); therefore, the verb tasawwaf would mean “to wear wool”, in the same
507 According to an etymology popular in some Sufi circles, the word tasawwufis derived from
the Arabic root SFW with the general meaning of “being pure”; see IM,p. 5. 508 Or “Abu Hujayfa”.

Yusuf al-Isbahani say: I heard my father say: I heard
Abu ∏Abdallah Muhammad b. ∏Ammar al-Hamadani say: I heard Abu Muhammad
al-Maraghi say: “Someone asked my master about Sufism. He answered: ‘I
heard that when al-Junayd was asked about it, he responded: “It means that God
causes you to die for yourself, while endowing you with a life in Him.”’” I heard
Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard ∏Abd al-Wahid al-Farisi
say: I heard Abu πl-Fatik say: I heard al-Husayn b. Mansur say, when someone
asked him about “Sufi”: “He is solitary in his essence: no one accepts him
and he accepts no one.”510I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad say: I heard Ja∏far b. Muhammad b. Nusayr say: I heard Abu ∏Ali
al-Warraq say: I heard Abu Hamza al-Baghdadi say: “One sign of the sincere
Sufi is that he is poor after having been wealthy, that he shows humility after
having been glorified, and that he seeks anonymity after having experienced
fame. As for the sign of the false Sufi, he enriches himself with [the things of]
this world after having been poor, aspires to glory after having been humiliated,
and seeks fame after anonymity.”
Someone asked ∏Amr b. ∏Uthman al-Makki about Sufism. He answered: “It
is that the servant of God’s behavior in each moment (waqt) is most appropriate
for that particular moment.” Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Qassab said: “Sufism means
a noble moral character trait that a noble person shows in a noble moment in time
509 This word is sometimes translated as “bench”; but is more likely to apply to a portico or
vestibule attached to the mosque, where a number of indigent Muslim were sheltered and fed
by the Prophet. 510 That is, he belongs exclusively to God.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 290
290 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
(waqt) in the presence of a noble company.” Someone asked Samnun [al-Muhibb]
about Sufism. He responded: “It means that you own nothing and nothing owns
you.”//357 Someone asked Ruwaym [b. Ahmad] about Sufism. He answered:
“Turning yourself over to God Most High, so that He may do with you what He
wants.” Someone asked al-Junayd about Sufism. He answered: “Remaining with
God Most High without any [physical] attachment (∏alaqa).” I heard ∏Abdallah
b. Yusuf al-Isbahani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj al-Tusi say: Muhammad
b. al-Fadl informed me: I heard ∏Ali b. ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Wasiti say: I heard
Ruwaym b. Ahmad al-Baghdadi say: “Sufism rests on three characteristics:
sticking to poverty and being in need of God [alone]; achieving perfection in
generosity and altruism (ithar);511 relinquishing resistance [to divine decrees]
and [your] free choice.” Ma∏ruf al-Karkhi said: “Sufism means grasping divine
realities (haqaπiq) and despairing (yaπs) of what the hands of men hold.” Hamdun
al-Qassar said: “Keep the company of the Sufis. They find excuses for your errors,
while not glorifying you for your good deeds.” Someone asked [Abu Sa∏id]
al-Kharraz about the Sufis. He answered: “They are a folk who are provided for
[by God] until they rejoice and who are deprived [by God] until they are lost [to
themselves]. Then they are summoned from the depth of [divine] mysteries [by
a voice saying]: ‘Come on!He answered: “They are a folk who are provided for
[by God] until they rejoice and who are deprived [by God] until they are lost [to
themselves]. Then they are summoned from the depth of [divine] mysteries [by
a voice saying]: ‘Come on! Weep over us!’” Al-Junayd said: “Sufism is a struggle
with no truce.” He also said: “They are the inhabitants of one household, which
no one but they can enter.” He also said: “Sufism is the recollection of God at
a gathering [of like-minded people], ecstasy at the hearing [of this recollection],
and action in compliance with the Divine Law.” He also said: “The Sufi is like
a [fertile] soil: [all manner of ] base things (qabih) are cast onto it, yet it produces
nothing except beautiful (malih) things.” He also said: “He [the Sufi] is like
the earth which is trampled upon by both the righteous and the evildoers; he is
[also] like the cloud which casts its shade on all things; or like the raindrop that
quenches everyone’s thirst.” He also said: “If you see a Sufi who is concerned
about his appearance, you should know that his inner self is rotten (kharab).”
Sahl al-Tustari said: “The Sufi is he who does not care if his blood be spilled
and his property taken away from him.” Al-Nuri said: “One of the signs of a
[true] Sufi is [his] contentment during times of scarcity and generosity to others
during times of plenty.”//358 Al-Kattani said: “Sufism (tasawwuf) is but good
morals (khuluq); whoever surpasses you in good morals surpasses you in purity
(safaπ).” Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari said: “Sufism is a vigil at the door of the Beloved,
even when you are being chased away.” He also said: “[Sufism] is the purity
of nearness [with God], after the filth of banishment.” It is also said: “There’s
nothing more repugnant (qabih) than a niggardly Sufi (sufi shahih).” It is also
said: “Sufism is an empty hand and a beautiful heart.” Al-Shibli said: “Sufism is
to sit with God [unperturbed] by any concern.” Ibn Mansur512said: “The Sufi is
one who is appointed (mushir) by God Most High, while other creatures are
511 Literally, “in preferring others to yourself”.Then they are summoned from the depth of [divine] mysteries [by
a voice saying]: ‘Come on! Weep over us!’” Al-Junayd said: “Sufism is a struggle
with no truce.” He also said: “They are the inhabitants of one household, which
no one but they can enter.” He also said: “Sufism is the recollection of God at
a gathering [of like-minded people], ecstasy at the hearing [of this recollection],
and action in compliance with the Divine Law.” He also said: “The Sufi is like
a [fertile] soil: [all manner of ] base things (qabih) are cast onto it, yet it produces
nothing except beautiful (malih) things.” He also said: “He [the Sufi] is like
the earth which is trampled upon by both the righteous and the evildoers; he is
[also] like the cloud which casts its shade on all things; or like the raindrop that
quenches everyone’s thirst.” He also said: “If you see a Sufi who is concerned
about his appearance, you should know that his inner self is rotten (kharab).”
Sahl al-Tustari said: “The Sufi is he who does not care if his blood be spilled
and his property taken away from him.” Al-Nuri said: “One of the signs of a
[true] Sufi is [his] contentment during times of scarcity and generosity to others
during times of plenty.”//358 Al-Kattani said: “Sufism (tasawwuf) is but good
morals (khuluq); whoever surpasses you in good morals surpasses you in purity
(safaπ).” Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari said: “Sufism is a vigil at the door of the Beloved,
even when you are being chased away.” He also said: “[Sufism] is the purity
of nearness [with God], after the filth of banishment.” It is also said: “There’s
nothing more repugnant (qabih) than a niggardly Sufi (sufi shahih).” It is also
said: “Sufism is an empty hand and a beautiful heart.” Al-Shibli said: “Sufism is
to sit with God [unperturbed] by any concern.” Ibn Mansur512said: “The Sufi is
one who is appointed (mushir) by God Most High, while other creatures are
511 Literally, “in preferring others to yourself”. 512 Or “Abu Mansur”; probably “al-Husayn b.Yusuf al-Isbahani say: I heard my father say: I heard
Abu ∏Abdallah Muhammad b. ∏Ammar al-Hamadani say: I heard Abu Muhammad
al-Maraghi say: “Someone asked my master about Sufism. He answered: ‘I
heard that when al-Junayd was asked about it, he responded: “It means that God
causes you to die for yourself, while endowing you with a life in Him.”’” I heard
Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard ∏Abd al-Wahid al-Farisi
say: I heard Abu πl-Fatik say: I heard al-Husayn b. Mansur say, when someone
asked him about “Sufi”: “He is solitary in his essence: no one accepts him
and he accepts no one.”510I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad say: I heard Ja∏far b. Muhammad b. Nusayr say: I heard Abu ∏Ali
al-Warraq say: I heard Abu Hamza al-Baghdadi say: “One sign of the sincere
Sufi is that he is poor after having been wealthy, that he shows humility after
having been glorified, and that he seeks anonymity after having experienced
fame. As for the sign of the false Sufi, he enriches himself with [the things of]
this world after having been poor, aspires to glory after having been humiliated,
and seeks fame after anonymity.”
Someone asked ∏Amr b. ∏Uthman al-Makki about Sufism. He answered: “It
is that the servant of God’s behavior in each moment (waqt) is most appropriate
for that particular moment.” Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Qassab said: “Sufism means
a noble moral character trait that a noble person shows in a noble moment in time
509 This word is sometimes translated as “bench”; but is more likely to apply to a portico or
vestibule attached to the mosque, where a number of indigent Muslim were sheltered and fed
by the Prophet. 510 That is, he belongs exclusively to God.

Weep over us!’” Al-Junayd said: “Sufism is a struggle
with no truce.” He also said: “They are the inhabitants of one household, which
no one but they can enter.” He also said: “Sufism is the recollection of God at
a gathering [of like-minded people], ecstasy at the hearing [of this recollection],
and action in compliance with the Divine Law.” He also said: “The Sufi is like
a [fertile] soil: [all manner of ] base things (qabih) are cast onto it, yet it produces
nothing except beautiful (malih) things.” He also said: “He [the Sufi] is like
the earth which is trampled upon by both the righteous and the evildoers; he is
[also] like the cloud which casts its shade on all things; or like the raindrop that
quenches everyone’s thirst.” He also said: “If you see a Sufi who is concerned
about his appearance, you should know that his inner self is rotten (kharab).”
Sahl al-Tustari said: “The Sufi is he who does not care if his blood be spilled
and his property taken away from him.” Al-Nuri said: “One of the signs of a
[true] Sufi is [his] contentment during times of scarcity and generosity to others
during times of plenty.”//358 Al-Kattani said: “Sufism (tasawwuf) is but good
morals (khuluq); whoever surpasses you in good morals surpasses you in purity
(safaπ).” Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari said: “Sufism is a vigil at the door of the Beloved,
even when you are being chased away.” He also said: “[Sufism] is the purity
of nearness [with God], after the filth of banishment.” It is also said: “There’s
nothing more repugnant (qabih) than a niggardly Sufi (sufi shahih).” It is also
said: “Sufism is an empty hand and a beautiful heart.” Al-Shibli said: “Sufism is
to sit with God [unperturbed] by any concern.” Ibn Mansur512said: “The Sufi is
one who is appointed (mushir) by God Most High, while other creatures are
511 Literally, “in preferring others to yourself”. 512 Or “Abu Mansur”; probably “al-Husayn b. Mansur al-Hallaj”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 291
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 291
pointers to (asharu) God Most High.” Al-Shibli said: “The Sufi is he who cuts
himself off from creatures to attach himself to God, for God Most High said [to
Moses], ‘I have chosen thee for My service’,513 thereby cutting you off from all
else; He then said to [Moses]: ‘Thou shalt not see Me.’”514 Al-Shibli also said:
“Sufis are children in the lap of God.” He also said: “Sufism is a lightning that
burns everything (barqa muhriqa).” He also said: “Sufism is a guarantee against
paying heed to creatures.” Ruwaym said: “The Sufis are on the right track as long
as they quarrel with one another.515As soon as they make peace, they go astray.”
Al-Jurayri said: “Sufism is scrutinizing one’s spiritual states and maintaining
proper manners (adab).” Al-Muzayyin said: “Sufism is [full] obedience to God.”
Abu Turab al-Nakhshabi said: “The Sufi is not sullied by anything and is
purified by everything.” It is said: “The Sufi is not exhausted by [his] quest and
undisturbed by mundane things.” I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard
Abu Nasr al-Sarraj [al-Tusi] say: “Someone asked Dhu πl-Nun//359 al-Misri
about the Sufis. He answered: ‘They are the folk who have chosen God – may He
be great and exalted – over all else, and who God – may He be great and exalted
– has chosen over everyone else.’” [Abu Bakr] al-Wasiti – may God have mercy
on him – said: “At the beginning, the [Sufi] folk were guided by clear evidence
(isharat), which later turned into mere motions (harakat), and now they are left
with nothing but regrets (hasarat).” Someone asked al-Nuri about “Sufi”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 291
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 291
pointers to (asharu) God Most High.” Al-Shibli said: “The Sufi is he who cuts
himself off from creatures to attach himself to God, for God Most High said [to
Moses], ‘I have chosen thee for My service’,513 thereby cutting you off from all
else; He then said to [Moses]: ‘Thou shalt not see Me.’”514 Al-Shibli also said:
“Sufis are children in the lap of God.” He also said: “Sufism is a lightning that
burns everything (barqa muhriqa).” He also said: “Sufism is a guarantee against
paying heed to creatures.” Ruwaym said: “The Sufis are on the right track as long
as they quarrel with one another.515As soon as they make peace, they go astray.”
Al-Jurayri said: “Sufism is scrutinizing one’s spiritual states and maintaining
proper manners (adab).” Al-Muzayyin said: “Sufism is [full] obedience to God.”
Abu Turab al-Nakhshabi said: “The Sufi is not sullied by anything and is
purified by everything.” It is said: “The Sufi is not exhausted by [his] quest and
undisturbed by mundane things.” I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard
Abu Nasr al-Sarraj [al-Tusi] say: “Someone asked Dhu πl-Nun//359 al-Misri
about the Sufis. He answered: ‘They are the folk who have chosen God – may He
be great and exalted – over all else, and who God – may He be great and exalted
– has chosen over everyone else.’” [Abu Bakr] al-Wasiti – may God have mercy
on him – said: “At the beginning, the [Sufi] folk were guided by clear evidence
(isharat), which later turned into mere motions (harakat), and now they are left
with nothing but regrets (hasarat).” Someone asked al-Nuri about “Sufi”. He
answered: “It is one who has heard [divine commands] and who has chosen to
observe them.” I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani – may God have mercy on him –
say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say: “I asked al-Husri: ‘What do you think about
“Sufi”?’ He answered: ‘It is he whom the earth cannot carry and whom the sky
cannot shade.’” The master Abu πl-Qasim [al-Qushayri]: said: “He [al-Husri]
referred to the [spiritual] state of ‘erasure’ (mahw).”516It is said: “The Sufi is he
who, when presented with two good states or two moral qualities, always opts for
the better of the two.”
Someone asked al-Shibli: “Why are the Sufis (sufiyya) called so?” He
answered: “Because the traces of their [lower] selves still persist in them.He answered: ‘They are the folk who have chosen God – may He
be great and exalted – over all else, and who God – may He be great and exalted
– has chosen over everyone else.’” [Abu Bakr] al-Wasiti – may God have mercy
on him – said: “At the beginning, the [Sufi] folk were guided by clear evidence
(isharat), which later turned into mere motions (harakat), and now they are left
with nothing but regrets (hasarat).” Someone asked al-Nuri about “Sufi”. He
answered: “It is one who has heard [divine commands] and who has chosen to
observe them.” I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani – may God have mercy on him –
say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say: “I asked al-Husri: ‘What do you think about
“Sufi”?’ He answered: ‘It is he whom the earth cannot carry and whom the sky
cannot shade.’” The master Abu πl-Qasim [al-Qushayri]: said: “He [al-Husri]
referred to the [spiritual] state of ‘erasure’ (mahw).”516It is said: “The Sufi is he
who, when presented with two good states or two moral qualities, always opts for
the better of the two.”
Someone asked al-Shibli: “Why are the Sufis (sufiyya) called so?” He
answered: “Because the traces of their [lower] selves still persist in them. Otherwise, they would have no name at all.” I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say:
I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say: “Someone asked Ibn al-Jallaπ about the meaning
of ‘Sufi’. He answered: ‘We do not know him through the definitions of ordinary
knowledge. However, we know that he is one who is poor and deprived of any
means of sustenance (asbab), and who remains with God Most High no matter
where he is, yet God – praise be to Him – does not bar him from knowing any
place. Such a person is called “Sufi”.’” One Sufi said: “Sufism means that you
lose your social status (jah) and blacken your face in this world and the next.”
Abu Ya∏qub al-Mazabili said: “Sufism is a state in which human attributes are
513 Q. 20:41; 20:44, according to Arberry’s translation. 514 Q. 7:143; 7:138, according to Arberry’s translation.Weep over us!’” Al-Junayd said: “Sufism is a struggle
with no truce.” He also said: “They are the inhabitants of one household, which
no one but they can enter.” He also said: “Sufism is the recollection of God at
a gathering [of like-minded people], ecstasy at the hearing [of this recollection],
and action in compliance with the Divine Law.” He also said: “The Sufi is like
a [fertile] soil: [all manner of ] base things (qabih) are cast onto it, yet it produces
nothing except beautiful (malih) things.” He also said: “He [the Sufi] is like
the earth which is trampled upon by both the righteous and the evildoers; he is
[also] like the cloud which casts its shade on all things; or like the raindrop that
quenches everyone’s thirst.” He also said: “If you see a Sufi who is concerned
about his appearance, you should know that his inner self is rotten (kharab).”
Sahl al-Tustari said: “The Sufi is he who does not care if his blood be spilled
and his property taken away from him.” Al-Nuri said: “One of the signs of a
[true] Sufi is [his] contentment during times of scarcity and generosity to others
during times of plenty.”//358 Al-Kattani said: “Sufism (tasawwuf) is but good
morals (khuluq); whoever surpasses you in good morals surpasses you in purity
(safaπ).” Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari said: “Sufism is a vigil at the door of the Beloved,
even when you are being chased away.” He also said: “[Sufism] is the purity
of nearness [with God], after the filth of banishment.” It is also said: “There’s
nothing more repugnant (qabih) than a niggardly Sufi (sufi shahih).” It is also
said: “Sufism is an empty hand and a beautiful heart.” Al-Shibli said: “Sufism is
to sit with God [unperturbed] by any concern.” Ibn Mansur512said: “The Sufi is
one who is appointed (mushir) by God Most High, while other creatures are
511 Literally, “in preferring others to yourself”. 512 Or “Abu Mansur”; probably “al-Husayn b. Mansur al-Hallaj”.

514 Q. 7:143; 7:138, according to Arberry’s translation. 515 That is, as long as they are eager to correct each other in their pursuit of godliness. 516 That is, one in which the Sufi loses his identity and joins God.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 292
292 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
dissolved.” Abu Hasan al-Sirawani said: “The [true] Sufi concerns himself with
divine visitations (waridat), not with litanies (award).”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“The best thing that has been uttered regarding this matter is the following:
‘This path is not appropriate except for those with whose spirits God cleans
the dunghills (mazabil).’” This is why Abu ∏Ali once said: “If the poor one had
nothing except for his spirit which he would offer to the dog guarding this door,
the dog would not even look at it.” The master Abu Sahl al-Su∏luki said: “Sufism
is an aversion to (i∏rad) any opposition (i∏tirad) [to God’s will].”//360 Al-Husri
said: “The Sufi does not exist after his absence and is not absent after his existence.”
The master al-Qushayri commented: “This statement is complicated. By saying
that ‘he [Sufi] does not exist after his absence’, he implied that when the Sufi’s
faults (afat) fall away from him, they never return. As for his statement ‘he is
not absent after his existence’, it means that if he is preoccupied with God and
nothing else, he retains his [high] status [in the eyes of God], while the rest of
God’s creatures lose theirs, and that things of this world (hadithat) have no
impact on him.” It is said: “The Sufi is completely effaced by the glimpses of the
Divine.” It is also said: “The Sufi is forced to act (maqhur) according to God’s
dispensations and is protected [from error] by [his] acts of worship.” It is said:
“The Sufi is not subject to change. If, however, he undergoes any change, it
smears him not.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard al-Husayn b. Ahmad al-Razi say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Misri
say: I heard al-Kharraz say: “I was in the mosque of Kairouan517during the Friday
prayer, when I observed a man going around, saying: ‘Show me charity! I was
a Sufi, but have now become weak.’ I offered him some charity, but he told
me: ‘Go away and leave me alone! This is not what I ask for!’ And he refused my
donation.”
Good manners (adab)
God Most High said: “His eyes [the Prophet’s] swerved not, nor swept astray.”518
They say: “[This means that] he [the Prophet] observed the manners of
[being in] the presence [of God] (adab).” God Most High also said: “[Believers,]
guard yourselves and your families against the Fire.”519According to Ibn ∏Abbas’s
interpretation, this means: “Instruct them and teach them proper manners.”
∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi informed us: Abu πl-Hasan al-Saffar al-Basri
informed us: Ghannam said: ∏Abd al-Samad b. al-Nu∏man said: ∏Abd al-Malik b.
al-Husayn told us on the authority of ∏Abd al-Malik b. ∏Umayr, on the authority
of Mus∏ab b. Shayba, on the authority of ∏Aπisha – may God be pleased with her
517 An ancient mosque and religious college located in present-day Tunisia.
518 Q. 53:17.
519 Q. 66:6.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 293
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 293
– who transmitted this from the Prophet//361 – may God bless and greet
him – that he said: “It is the right of every child that its parent give it a good
name, a good wet-nurse, and teach it good manners.” It is related that Sa∏id b. al-Musayyib said: “Whoever does not know his obligations toward God – may
He be great and exalted – and fails to comply (yataπaddab) with God’s commands
and prohibitions, is barred from good manners (adab).” It is related that the
Prophet – may God bless and greet him – said: “God – may He be great and
exalted – has instructed me in good manners and His instruction was excellent.”
In truth, good manners is the combination of all virtuous character traits. The
well-mannered person is one who has combined in himself all good character
traits. Hence the word maπdaba, which means “a gathering of well-mannered
people”. I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God be pleased with him
– say: “The servant of God reaches Paradise by being obedient [toward Him],
and he reaches God Himself by means of his good manners.” I also heard him
say: “I saw how someone tried to stretch his hand toward his nose in order to
pick it during the prayer, but his hand was stopped.” The master [al-Qushayri]
said: “He must have said this about himself, for no one but he himself could
have known that his hand was stopped.” The master Abu ∏Ali – may God have
mercy on him – made a vow not to lean against anything. One day, I met him at
a gathering and tried to put a cushion behind his back, because I saw that he had
nothing to lean against. He discreetly moved away from my cushion. I thought
that he was wary of the cushion because it was not covered by a cloth or rug. However, he told me: “I want no support whatsoever.” After that I kept watching
him [for a while] and indeed he never leaned against anything.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 292
292 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
dissolved.” Abu Hasan al-Sirawani said: “The [true] Sufi concerns himself with
divine visitations (waridat), not with litanies (award).”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“The best thing that has been uttered regarding this matter is the following:
‘This path is not appropriate except for those with whose spirits God cleans
the dunghills (mazabil).’” This is why Abu ∏Ali once said: “If the poor one had
nothing except for his spirit which he would offer to the dog guarding this door,
the dog would not even look at it.” The master Abu Sahl al-Su∏luki said: “Sufism
is an aversion to (i∏rad) any opposition (i∏tirad) [to God’s will].”//360 Al-Husri
said: “The Sufi does not exist after his absence and is not absent after his existence.”
The master al-Qushayri commented: “This statement is complicated. By saying
that ‘he [Sufi] does not exist after his absence’, he implied that when the Sufi’s
faults (afat) fall away from him, they never return. As for his statement ‘he is
not absent after his existence’, it means that if he is preoccupied with God and
nothing else, he retains his [high] status [in the eyes of God], while the rest of
God’s creatures lose theirs, and that things of this world (hadithat) have no
impact on him.” It is said: “The Sufi is completely effaced by the glimpses of the
Divine.” It is also said: “The Sufi is forced to act (maqhur) according to God’s
dispensations and is protected [from error] by [his] acts of worship.” It is said:
“The Sufi is not subject to change. If, however, he undergoes any change, it
smears him not.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
him – say: I heard al-Husayn b. Ahmad al-Razi say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Misri
say: I heard al-Kharraz say: “I was in the mosque of Kairouan517during the Friday
prayer, when I observed a man going around, saying: ‘Show me charity! I was
a Sufi, but have now become weak.’ I offered him some charity, but he told
me: ‘Go away and leave me alone! This is not what I ask for!’ And he refused my
donation.”
Good manners (adab)
God Most High said: “His eyes [the Prophet’s] swerved not, nor swept astray.”518
They say: “[This means that] he [the Prophet] observed the manners of
[being in] the presence [of God] (adab).” God Most High also said: “[Believers,]
guard yourselves and your families against the Fire.”519According to Ibn ∏Abbas’s
interpretation, this means: “Instruct them and teach them proper manners.”
∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi informed us: Abu πl-Hasan al-Saffar al-Basri
informed us: Ghannam said: ∏Abd al-Samad b. al-Nu∏man said: ∏Abd al-Malik b.
al-Husayn told us on the authority of ∏Abd al-Malik b. ∏Umayr, on the authority
of Mus∏ab b. Shayba, on the authority of ∏Aπisha – may God be pleased with her
517 An ancient mosque and religious college located in present-day Tunisia.
518 Q. 53:17.
519 Q. 66:6.

I thought
that he was wary of the cushion because it was not covered by a cloth or rug. However, he told me: “I want no support whatsoever.” After that I kept watching
him [for a while] and indeed he never leaned against anything. I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say: I heard
Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Basri say: I heard al-Jalajili al-Basri say: “The declaration
of the unity of God (tawhid) is an obligation that requires faith; therefore a
person without faith (iman) cannot declare God’s unity. Faith is an obligation
that requires [the observance of the] Divine Law (shari∏a); therefore a person
without the Divine Law can have neither faith nor the declaration of the unity of
God. The Divine Law is an obligation that requires good manners; therefore a
person who has no manners can have neither the Divine Law, nor faith, nor the
declaration of the unity of God.”
Ibn ∏Ataπ said: “Good manners means that you stick to good deeds.” Someone
inquired of him what this meant. He answered: “This means that you treat God
properly both inwardly and outwardly. If you do this, you are a well-mannered
person (adib), even though you are not an Arab.”520//362. He then recited the
following:
When she spoke, she showed the utmost eloquence (malaha)
And when she kept silent, she showed the utmost elegance (malih). 520 According to a commonly held belief, the Arabs had an “inborn” ability to show “good
manners” (adab) under any circumstances.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 294
294 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Muhammad b. al-Husayn informed us: I heard ∏Abdallah al-Razi say: I heard
al-Jurayri say: “For twenty years I have not stretched my legs even in a solitary
retreat (khalwa), for one should observe good manners in the presence of God.”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“Whoever associates himself with rulers without showing good manners will be
killed through his ignorance.” It is related that someone asked Ibn Sirin: “What
kind of good manners brings one closest to God Most High?” He answered:
“Acknowledging His Lordship (rububiyatuh), showing obedience to Him through
one’s deeds, praising God in good times and being patient in bad ones.” Yahya b.
Mu∏adh said: “If the divine gnostic misbehaves with the object of his knowledge
(ma‘rufuh),521he will perish along with the doomed.”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“Abandoning good manners necessitates expulsion. When one misbehaves on
the carpet [in the living room], one is banished to the door; when one misbehaves
at the door, one will be banished to the barnyard.” Someone asked al-Hasan
al-Basri: “Much has been said about the knowledge of good manners. Which of
them are most beneficial in this world and most effective [in securing reward]
in the Hereafter?” He answered: “Being knowledgeable in matters of religion.
Renouncing this world, and being aware of your obligations toward God – may He
be great and exalted.” Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “One who has shown good manners
toward God Most High will become one of His beloved.” Sahl [al-Tustari] said:
“The folk (qawm)522seek God’s help in fulfilling His commands and are steadfast
in observing good manners toward Him.” It is related that Ibn al-Mubarak said:
“We need a small amount of good manners more than we need a great deal of
knowledge.” I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad
b. Sa∏id say: I heard al-∏Abbas b. Hamza say: Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari told us:
al-Walid b. ∏Utba said: Ibn al-Mubarak said: “We kept seeking good manners
even after those who could have taught them to us were all gone.” They say:
“There are three character traits that preclude estrangement [from God]//363:
avoiding those who hold suspicious beliefs (ahl al-rayb), [observing] good
manners, and causing no harm to others.”
Shaykh Abu ∏Abdallah al-Maghribi – may God be pleased with him – recited
to me the following verses pertaining to this matter:
Three things adorn the stranger in his wanderings
They are good manners, then good morals, and, thirdly,
Keeping away from that which is suspicious.
When Abu Hafs [al-Haddad] arrived in Baghdad, al-Junayd told him: “You
have instructed your followers in manners [suitable] for sultans!” Abu Hafs
answered: “Beautiful outward manners are a sign of beautiful manners on the
521 That is, God.
522 That is, the Sufis.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 295
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 295
inside!” ∏Abdallah b. al-Mubarak is said to have said: “Good manners for the
gnostic is what repentance is for the beginner [on the Sufi path].” I heard Mansur
b. Khalaf al-Maghribi say: “Someone said to a Sufi: ‘You have bad manners!’ He
answered: ‘No, I do not have bad manners!’ He was then asked: ‘Who taught you
manners?’ He answered: ‘The Sufis!’”
I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Tusi al-Sarraj say:
“With respect to manners people can be divided into three categories: the people
of this world, most of whose manners have to do with eloquence, rhetoric,
and the study of various sciences, names of rulers, and poetry of the Arabs; the
second category comprises the men of religion, who acquire their manners through
the subjugation of their [base] souls, restraining their members [from prohibited
things], observing the norms of the Divine Law, and abandoning passions
and appetites; the third category comprises the elite (khususiyya); their manners
consist of purifying their hearts, scrutinizing their inner thoughts, being faithful
to their pacts, observing [the conditions of] every [spiritual] moment (waqt),
paying little attention to tempting thoughts, and observing the rules of proper
behavior in their striving [toward God], during the time of being in the presence
[of God], and while traversing the stations of proximity [with Him].”
It is recounted that Sahl b. ∏Abdallah said: “Whoever has succeeded in
forcing himself to observe good manners will be sincere in his worship of God.”
It is said: “No one can attain perfection in good manners except for the prophets
and the veracious ones (siddiqun).” ∏Abdallah b. al-Mubarak said: “Much has
been said about good manners.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 294
294 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Muhammad b. al-Husayn informed us: I heard ∏Abdallah al-Razi say: I heard
al-Jurayri say: “For twenty years I have not stretched my legs even in a solitary
retreat (khalwa), for one should observe good manners in the presence of God.”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“Whoever associates himself with rulers without showing good manners will be
killed through his ignorance.” It is related that someone asked Ibn Sirin: “What
kind of good manners brings one closest to God Most High?” He answered:
“Acknowledging His Lordship (rububiyatuh), showing obedience to Him through
one’s deeds, praising God in good times and being patient in bad ones.” Yahya b.
Mu∏adh said: “If the divine gnostic misbehaves with the object of his knowledge
(ma‘rufuh),521he will perish along with the doomed.”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“Abandoning good manners necessitates expulsion. When one misbehaves on
the carpet [in the living room], one is banished to the door; when one misbehaves
at the door, one will be banished to the barnyard.” Someone asked al-Hasan
al-Basri: “Much has been said about the knowledge of good manners. Which of
them are most beneficial in this world and most effective [in securing reward]
in the Hereafter?” He answered: “Being knowledgeable in matters of religion.
Renouncing this world, and being aware of your obligations toward God – may He
be great and exalted.” Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “One who has shown good manners
toward God Most High will become one of His beloved.” Sahl [al-Tustari] said:
“The folk (qawm)522seek God’s help in fulfilling His commands and are steadfast
in observing good manners toward Him.” It is related that Ibn al-Mubarak said:
“We need a small amount of good manners more than we need a great deal of
knowledge.” I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad
b. Sa∏id say: I heard al-∏Abbas b. Hamza say: Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari told us:
al-Walid b. ∏Utba said: Ibn al-Mubarak said: “We kept seeking good manners
even after those who could have taught them to us were all gone.” They say:
“There are three character traits that preclude estrangement [from God]//363:
avoiding those who hold suspicious beliefs (ahl al-rayb), [observing] good
manners, and causing no harm to others.”
Shaykh Abu ∏Abdallah al-Maghribi – may God be pleased with him – recited
to me the following verses pertaining to this matter:
Three things adorn the stranger in his wanderings
They are good manners, then good morals, and, thirdly,
Keeping away from that which is suspicious.
When Abu Hafs [al-Haddad] arrived in Baghdad, al-Junayd told him: “You
have instructed your followers in manners [suitable] for sultans!” Abu Hafs
answered: “Beautiful outward manners are a sign of beautiful manners on the
521 That is, God.
522 That is, the Sufis.

∏Abdallah said: “Whoever has succeeded in
forcing himself to observe good manners will be sincere in his worship of God.”
It is said: “No one can attain perfection in good manners except for the prophets
and the veracious ones (siddiqun).” ∏Abdallah b. al-Mubarak said: “Much has
been said about good manners. We simply say: ‘It is [nothing but] the knowledge
of your soul.’” Al-Shibli said: “Speaking profusely in the presence of God –
praise be to Him – is [a sign of] bad manners.” Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri said: “The
manners of the divine gnostic (∏arif) are superior to any other kind of manners,
because his heart is instructed in good manners by the object of his knowledge.”
A Sufi said: “God – praise be to Him – said: ‘When I allow someone to stay in
the presence of My names and attributes, I always impose//364 proper manners
upon him; when, however, I decide to reveal to him the True Reality of My
essence (haqiqat dhati), I impose perdition (atab) upon him. So, choose what you
like best: good manners or perdition!’”
It is said that one day Ibn ∏Ataπ pushed his leg in the middle of the circle
of his companions, saying: “Violating the rules of proper behavior amidst its
upholders is itself [a sign] of proper behavior!” This statement is justified by the
following report: “The Prophet – may God bless and greet him – was with Abu
Bakr and ∏Umar, when ∏Uthman entered [the room]. The Prophet covered up
his thigh, saying: ‘How can I not be ashamed before a man, before whom even
the angels feel ashamed?’” The Prophet – may God bless and greet him – thereby
indicated that despite ∏Uthman’s bashfulness, which the Prophet held in high
regard, his relations with Abu Bakr and ∏Umar were more intimate. A similar
meaning is conveyed by the following verses:543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 296
296 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
I behave with restraint and modesty; however, when I find myself in the
company of trustworthy and honorable people
I let myself loose and behave naturally, speaking what I want without any
bashfulness. Al-Junayd said: “When one’s love [of God] is true, the rules of proper behavior
fall away.” On the other hand, Abu ∏Uthman [al-Hiri] said: “When one’s love [of
God ] has proved to be true, one must nevertheless be meticulous in observing
good manners.” Al-Nuri said: “He who does not observe the rules of proper
behavior in his mystical moment (waqt), his moment will turn into spite (maqt).”
Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri said: “When the seeker (murid) leaves the bounds of proper
behavior, he will return to where he came from.” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say the following about the words
of God – may He be great and exalted: “Job, when he called unto his Lord,
said: ‘Behold, affliction has visited me, and Thou art the most merciful of the
merciful.’523 He [Job] did not say, ‘Have mercy on me!’, because he wanted to
observe the proper rules of address. The same is true of Jesus – peace be upon him
– who said: ‘And if Thou chastisest them, they art Thy servants’524and ‘If indeed
I said it, Thou knowest it.’525He [Jesus] did not simply claim: ‘I did not say [such a
thing]’ in order to observe the rules of proper behavior in the presence [of God].’”
I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi – may God have mercy on him – say:
I heard Abu πl-Tayyib b. al-Farkhan say: I heard al-Junayd say: “One righteous
man came to me on a Friday and asked me: ‘Send with me one of your poor folk
[to my house]. He [may] bring me joy and eat something with me.’ I looked
around and saw a poor man, in whom I observed the marks of dire need. I called
on him//365 and said: ‘Go with this old man and bring him joy!’ The poor man
departed.∏Abdallah said: “Whoever has succeeded in
forcing himself to observe good manners will be sincere in his worship of God.”
It is said: “No one can attain perfection in good manners except for the prophets
and the veracious ones (siddiqun).” ∏Abdallah b. al-Mubarak said: “Much has
been said about good manners. We simply say: ‘It is [nothing but] the knowledge
of your soul.’” Al-Shibli said: “Speaking profusely in the presence of God –
praise be to Him – is [a sign of] bad manners.” Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri said: “The
manners of the divine gnostic (∏arif) are superior to any other kind of manners,
because his heart is instructed in good manners by the object of his knowledge.”
A Sufi said: “God – praise be to Him – said: ‘When I allow someone to stay in
the presence of My names and attributes, I always impose//364 proper manners
upon him; when, however, I decide to reveal to him the True Reality of My
essence (haqiqat dhati), I impose perdition (atab) upon him. So, choose what you
like best: good manners or perdition!’”
It is said that one day Ibn ∏Ataπ pushed his leg in the middle of the circle
of his companions, saying: “Violating the rules of proper behavior amidst its
upholders is itself [a sign] of proper behavior!” This statement is justified by the
following report: “The Prophet – may God bless and greet him – was with Abu
Bakr and ∏Umar, when ∏Uthman entered [the room]. The Prophet covered up
his thigh, saying: ‘How can I not be ashamed before a man, before whom even
the angels feel ashamed?’” The Prophet – may God bless and greet him – thereby
indicated that despite ∏Uthman’s bashfulness, which the Prophet held in high
regard, his relations with Abu Bakr and ∏Umar were more intimate. A similar
meaning is conveyed by the following verses:

He [may] bring me joy and eat something with me.’ I looked
around and saw a poor man, in whom I observed the marks of dire need. I called
on him//365 and said: ‘Go with this old man and bring him joy!’ The poor man
departed. Soon afterwards, the old man came to me and said: ‘Abu πl-Qasim,
that poor man ate nothing but a small morsel, then left my house!’ I asked him:
‘Perhaps you said some harsh word to him?’ The old man said: ‘No, I said
nothing!’ I looked around and saw the poor man sitting nearby. I asked him:
‘Why did not you make him happy [by sharing his meal with him]?’ He said: ‘My
lord, I traveled from Kufa to Baghdad without eating anything en route. I did
not want to appear ill-mannered in your presence [by asking you for food]. When
you called on me, I was glad, because the invitation came from you [without my
request]. So I followed [the old man] as if I was heading for Paradise. When I sat
at his table, he gave me a piece of food, saying: “Eat it! I love [sharing] this dish
[with you] more than ten thousand dirhams!” When I heard him say this, I realized
that his intentions were mean (daniπ al-himma), so I decided not to eat his food.’”
Al-Junayd then said [to the host]: “Didn’t I tell you that you misbehaved toward
523 Q. 21:83. 524 Q. 5:118; in this passage the Qurπanic Jesus disowns his misguided followers (i.e., the Christians),
who deified him and his mother. 525 Q. 5:116.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 297
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 297
this [poor] man?” The host exclaimed: “Abu πl-Qasim, I repent!” So, al-Junayd
told the poor man to go back with the old man and to fill [his heart] with joy. The rules of travel (safar)
God – may He be great and exalted – said: “It is He Who conveys you on the land
and the sea.”526 ∏Ali Ahmad b. ∏Abdan informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Basri
informed us: Muhammad b. al-Faraj al-Azraq told us: Hajjaj told us: Ibn Jurayj
said: Abu πl-Zubayr informed us that ∏Ali al-Azdi informed him that ∏Ibn ∏Umar
related to them: “When the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him
– mounted a camel in order to set out on a journey, he would say ‘God is the
greatest’ (Allah akbar) three times, whereupon he would add: ‘Glory be to Him
Who has subjugated this [beast] to us, and we ourselves were not equal to it;
surely unto God we are turning.’527 He would then proceed saying: ‘O God, in
this journey we plead that You grant us righteousness and piety and only the
deeds that please You! O God, make our journey easy for us! O God, You are
our companion in this journey and our representative with our family [that we
are leaving behind]. O God, I take refuge in You against the hardships of this
journey, the worries of the return and the evil eye in our property and family.’
And when he returned, he would repeat the same words: ‘We are coming back
repentant, and praising our Lord!’”
The master [al-Qushayri] said: “Since most folks of this group (taπifa)528
recommend travel, we have dedicated a special chapter of this epistle to it. For it
is indeed one of their greatest achievements. Yet, even within this group people
still disagree as to whether [one should] travel. Some even//366 give preference
to staying in one place over travel. They would not travel unless this is a [religious]
obligation (fard), such as, for example, the performance of the pilgrimage.He [may] bring me joy and eat something with me.’ I looked
around and saw a poor man, in whom I observed the marks of dire need. I called
on him//365 and said: ‘Go with this old man and bring him joy!’ The poor man
departed. Soon afterwards, the old man came to me and said: ‘Abu πl-Qasim,
that poor man ate nothing but a small morsel, then left my house!’ I asked him:
‘Perhaps you said some harsh word to him?’ The old man said: ‘No, I said
nothing!’ I looked around and saw the poor man sitting nearby. I asked him:
‘Why did not you make him happy [by sharing his meal with him]?’ He said: ‘My
lord, I traveled from Kufa to Baghdad without eating anything en route. I did
not want to appear ill-mannered in your presence [by asking you for food]. When
you called on me, I was glad, because the invitation came from you [without my
request]. So I followed [the old man] as if I was heading for Paradise. When I sat
at his table, he gave me a piece of food, saying: “Eat it! I love [sharing] this dish
[with you] more than ten thousand dirhams!” When I heard him say this, I realized
that his intentions were mean (daniπ al-himma), so I decided not to eat his food.’”
Al-Junayd then said [to the host]: “Didn’t I tell you that you misbehaved toward
523 Q. 21:83. 524 Q. 5:118; in this passage the Qurπanic Jesus disowns his misguided followers (i.e., the Christians),
who deified him and his mother. 525 Q. 5:116.

Some even//366 give preference
to staying in one place over travel. They would not travel unless this is a [religious]
obligation (fard), such as, for example, the performance of the pilgrimage. Among
those who preferred staying put were al-Junayd, Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari],
Abu Yazid al-Bistami, Abu Hafs [al-Haddad], and some others. Others, however,
had chosen travel and remained committed to it until they departed from this
world, for instance, Abu ∏Abdallah al-Maghribi, Ibrahim b. Adham, and so on. Many of them traveled extensively at the beginning [of their Sufi calling],
then, toward the end of their lives, they settled down and stayed put. This is the
case with Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri, al-Shibli, and others. Each of them had principles
upon which he built his progress [to God]. Know that travel can be divided
into two parts: travel with your body, which implies moving from one place
to another; travel with your heart, which implies rising from one attribute to
another. One sees many who travel with their bodies, while those who travel with
their hearts are few. I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“In a village called ‘Farakhk’ near [the city of] Nishapur there lived a Sufi master,
526 Q. 10:22. 527 Q. 43:13–14. 528 That is, the Sufis.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 298
298 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
who had written a number of books on Sufi science. Someone once asked him:
‘Shaykh, have you ever traveled?’ He, in turn, asked: ‘[Are you asking about]
travel in the earth or travel in the heavens? As for the former, the answer is no;
as for latter, yes.’” I also heard him [al-Daqqaq] – may God have mercy on him
– say: “One day, when I resided in Merv, a Sufi came to me, saying: ‘I have
traveled a long way in order to meet you!’ I told him: ‘Had you parted ways
with your lower soul, one step would have sufficed for you.’” Stories about the
travels of the Sufis vary according to the different types and spiritual states they
represent. I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have
mercy on him – say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-∏Alawi say: I heard Ja∏far b. Muhammad say: I heard Ahnaf al-Hamadhani say: “Once I was alone in the
desert completely exhausted. So, I raised my hands and pleaded: ‘O Lord, I am
weak and sick, so I ask for Your hospitality!’ Suddenly, in my heart I felt as if
someone asked me: ‘Who invited you?’ I answered: ‘O Lord, isn’t it a domain
(mamlaka) that can accommodate an uninvited guest?’ All of a sudden I heard a
voice behind me; when I turned around, I saw a Bedouin riding a camel. He asked
me: ‘Foreigner, where are you headed?’ ‘To Mecca.’ ‘Did He invite you?’ I said:
‘I don’t know.’ He told me: ‘Didn’t God say: “Only if he [a pilgrim] is able to
make his way there.”’529I told him: ‘This is a vast domain that can accommodate
an uninvited guest.’ He told me: ‘What a splendid uninvited guest you are!//367
Do you know how to manage a camel?’ I said that I did. He then dismounted
from his camel and gave it to me, saying: ‘Ride it!’”
I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard Muhammad b.Some even//366 give preference
to staying in one place over travel. They would not travel unless this is a [religious]
obligation (fard), such as, for example, the performance of the pilgrimage. Among
those who preferred staying put were al-Junayd, Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari],
Abu Yazid al-Bistami, Abu Hafs [al-Haddad], and some others. Others, however,
had chosen travel and remained committed to it until they departed from this
world, for instance, Abu ∏Abdallah al-Maghribi, Ibrahim b. Adham, and so on. Many of them traveled extensively at the beginning [of their Sufi calling],
then, toward the end of their lives, they settled down and stayed put. This is the
case with Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri, al-Shibli, and others. Each of them had principles
upon which he built his progress [to God]. Know that travel can be divided
into two parts: travel with your body, which implies moving from one place
to another; travel with your heart, which implies rising from one attribute to
another. One sees many who travel with their bodies, while those who travel with
their hearts are few. I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“In a village called ‘Farakhk’ near [the city of] Nishapur there lived a Sufi master,
526 Q. 10:22. 527 Q. 43:13–14. 528 That is, the Sufis.

He then dismounted
from his camel and gave it to me, saying: ‘Ride it!’”
I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad
al-Najjar say: I heard al-Kattani say, when some Sufi asked him for pious advice:
“Strive to be a guest of some mosque every night and to die only between two
stations!”530 It is related that al-Husri used to say: “To sit down once is better
than to make one thousand pilgrimages!” He meant a sitting down that produces
a deep concentration of [spiritual] energy (hamm) in such a way as to witness
God (shuhud). Upon my life!531 Such a sitting is indeed better than a thousand
pilgrimages performed in the state of absence from God! I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Sufi – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali
al-Tamimi say: “It is related that Muhammad b. Isma∏il al-Farghani recounted:
‘Abu Bakr al-Zaqqaq, al-Kattani and I traveled together for some twenty years
without mixing with or befriending anyone else. Whenever we arrived at a town
which had a [respected] master (shaykh) we would go to greet him and would
sit with him until nightfall. We would then go to a [local] mosque. Al-Kattani
would perform his prayers from the beginning of the night, during which time
he would recite the entire Qurπan. Al-Zaqqaq would sit [throughout the night]
facing the direction of prayer (qibla), while I would lie on my back and immerse
529 That is, to journey to Mecca in order to perform the rites of the pilgrimage. See Q. 3:97; 3:91,
according to Arberry’s translation. 530 That is, on the way from one place to the next. 531 This is, apparently, the voice of the author (al-Qushayri).543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 299
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 299
myself in contemplation. When morning came, we would perform the morning
prayer with the ritual ablution of the evening prayer.532If someone happened to
sleep in the mosque during that night, we would consider him to be better than
ourselves.’”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him – say: I
heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali say: I heard ∏Isa al-Qassar say that someone asked
Ruwaym [b. Ahmad] about the rules of travel. He answered: “The traveler’s
aspiration should not outstrip his steps and his resting place should be the
place where his heart has stopped.” It is related that Malik b. Dinar said:
“God Most High revealed to Moses – peace be upon him: ‘Take a pair of
sandals of iron and an iron staff. Then travel the earth, seeking wise traditions
and admonitions until the sandals are worn out and the staff is broken.’” It is
related that Abu ∏Abdallah al-Maghribi always traveled with his companions. Throughout [his journeys] he would maintain the state of ritual consecration
(muhrim);533whenever he happened to violate it, he would re-consecrate himself
again. Yet, his ritual garment would never become dirty, and his hair and nails
would not grow at all. His companions used to walk behind him during the night. Whenever one of them strayed from the path, he would call out, saying: “To
your right, so-and-so!” or “To your left, so-and-so!” He would never stretch his
hand to anything ordinary people wanted. His meal consisted of a root of some
plant which had to be plucked out of the ground [in order] to feed him.//368
They say: “If you say to your companion, ‘Stand up, let’s go!’ and he would ask
you ‘Where?’, he is no longer your companion.” They have this idea in mind when
they recite:
When someone seeks their help [in battle] they never ask the caller:
“To which fight?” or “To what place?”
It is related that Abu ∏Ali al-Ribati said: “I used to travel with ∏Abdallah
al-Marwazi.He then dismounted
from his camel and gave it to me, saying: ‘Ride it!’”
I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad
al-Najjar say: I heard al-Kattani say, when some Sufi asked him for pious advice:
“Strive to be a guest of some mosque every night and to die only between two
stations!”530 It is related that al-Husri used to say: “To sit down once is better
than to make one thousand pilgrimages!” He meant a sitting down that produces
a deep concentration of [spiritual] energy (hamm) in such a way as to witness
God (shuhud). Upon my life!531 Such a sitting is indeed better than a thousand
pilgrimages performed in the state of absence from God! I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Sufi – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali
al-Tamimi say: “It is related that Muhammad b. Isma∏il al-Farghani recounted:
‘Abu Bakr al-Zaqqaq, al-Kattani and I traveled together for some twenty years
without mixing with or befriending anyone else. Whenever we arrived at a town
which had a [respected] master (shaykh) we would go to greet him and would
sit with him until nightfall. We would then go to a [local] mosque. Al-Kattani
would perform his prayers from the beginning of the night, during which time
he would recite the entire Qurπan. Al-Zaqqaq would sit [throughout the night]
facing the direction of prayer (qibla), while I would lie on my back and immerse
529 That is, to journey to Mecca in order to perform the rites of the pilgrimage. See Q. 3:97; 3:91,
according to Arberry’s translation. 530 That is, on the way from one place to the next. 531 This is, apparently, the voice of the author (al-Qushayri).

Whenever one of them strayed from the path, he would call out, saying: “To
your right, so-and-so!” or “To your left, so-and-so!” He would never stretch his
hand to anything ordinary people wanted. His meal consisted of a root of some
plant which had to be plucked out of the ground [in order] to feed him.//368
They say: “If you say to your companion, ‘Stand up, let’s go!’ and he would ask
you ‘Where?’, he is no longer your companion.” They have this idea in mind when
they recite:
When someone seeks their help [in battle] they never ask the caller:
“To which fight?” or “To what place?”
It is related that Abu ∏Ali al-Ribati said: “I used to travel with ∏Abdallah
al-Marwazi. Before I met him, he used to travel in the desert with neither
provisions nor a mount. When I attached myself to him, he asked me: ‘Would
you like me or you to be in charge (amir)?’ I answered: ‘Rather yourself.’ He
then asked me: ‘Will you obey [me]?’ I said: ‘Yes.’ He took a bag, filled it with
provisions and put it on his back. When I asked him to give it to me to carry, he
told me: ‘I am in charge here, and you are to obey me!’ When the night came, it
rained, so he stayed over me holding a cover to protect me from the rain. I kept
saying to myself: ‘I wish I had died rather than tell him: “You will be in charge!”’
532 That is, during the night they would preserve their ritual purity intact by engaging in acts of
devotion. 533 The state of ritual purity required of all pilgrims during their stay on the Meccan precincts in
the pilgrimage season. This state (ihram) requires, among other things, that the pilgrims do
not trim their hair or clip their nails. It also requires wearing a simple garment consisting of
two pieces of white unsewn fabric.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 300
300 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
He then told me: ‘If you want to accompany someone in his travels, you should
treat him the way I have treated you.’”
A youth came to visit Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari. When he was about to leave,
he said: “Would the master say something [wise to me]?” Abu ∏Ali responded:
“Young man, [the Sufis of old] never got together at a [prearranged] appointment
(maw∏id), nor dispersed after taking each other’s council (mashura).”534
Al-Muzayyin the Elder said: “One day I was traveling with Ibrahim al-
Khawwas on one of his journeys. All of a sudden, I saw a scorpion crawling
toward his thigh. I got up to kill it. However, he stopped me, saying: ‘Leave it
alone! Everything is in need of us, only we are not in need of anything.’” Abu
∏Abdallah al-Nasibini said: “I traveled for thirty years without ever patching my
[Sufi] garment (muraqqa∏),535heading for a place in which I knew I would meet a
friend, and without ever allowing anyone to carry anything for me.”
Know that after this folk have observed [all] the rules of proper behavior
in the presence of God by exerting themselves strenuously (mujahadat), they
have desired to add something else to this. So they have added the injunction
to travel in order to force their lower souls to abandon the things that they
[souls] enjoy and to part ways with acquired knowledge in order to remain with
God without any link or means. One thing that they have not given up is their
[mystical] prayers (awrad). [Sufi masters] say: “Dispensations from required
obligations (rukhas)536 apply only to those who travel out of necessity. [They do
not apply to us], since travels for us are neither a job nor a necessity.”//369
I heard Abu Sadiq b. Habib say: I heard al-Nasrabadhi say: “One day, I
lost my strength in the desert and lost any hope [of survival].Whenever one of them strayed from the path, he would call out, saying: “To
your right, so-and-so!” or “To your left, so-and-so!” He would never stretch his
hand to anything ordinary people wanted. His meal consisted of a root of some
plant which had to be plucked out of the ground [in order] to feed him.//368
They say: “If you say to your companion, ‘Stand up, let’s go!’ and he would ask
you ‘Where?’, he is no longer your companion.” They have this idea in mind when
they recite:
When someone seeks their help [in battle] they never ask the caller:
“To which fight?” or “To what place?”
It is related that Abu ∏Ali al-Ribati said: “I used to travel with ∏Abdallah
al-Marwazi. Before I met him, he used to travel in the desert with neither
provisions nor a mount. When I attached myself to him, he asked me: ‘Would
you like me or you to be in charge (amir)?’ I answered: ‘Rather yourself.’ He
then asked me: ‘Will you obey [me]?’ I said: ‘Yes.’ He took a bag, filled it with
provisions and put it on his back. When I asked him to give it to me to carry, he
told me: ‘I am in charge here, and you are to obey me!’ When the night came, it
rained, so he stayed over me holding a cover to protect me from the rain. I kept
saying to myself: ‘I wish I had died rather than tell him: “You will be in charge!”’
532 That is, during the night they would preserve their ritual purity intact by engaging in acts of
devotion. 533 The state of ritual purity required of all pilgrims during their stay on the Meccan precincts in
the pilgrimage season. This state (ihram) requires, among other things, that the pilgrims do
not trim their hair or clip their nails. It also requires wearing a simple garment consisting of
two pieces of white unsewn fabric.

[They do
not apply to us], since travels for us are neither a job nor a necessity.”//369
I heard Abu Sadiq b. Habib say: I heard al-Nasrabadhi say: “One day, I
lost my strength in the desert and lost any hope [of survival]. Suddenly my gaze
fell upon the moon and I saw [the following words of God] inscribed on it: ‘God
will suffice you.’537I regained my strength and from that time on this saying was
bestowed upon me.” Abu Ya∏qub al-Susi said: “In his journey the traveler needs
four things: a knowledge that guides him, scrupulous piety that restrains him
[from the forbidden], an [ecstatic] state that carries him along, and a good moral
character that protects him.” They say: “Travel (safar) is named by this name,
because it reveals (yusfir) the [true] character of men.” When al-Kattani learnedthat
a Sufi went to Yemen, then returned, he would order [his followers] to keep away
from him. He did so because at that time many of them [Sufis] used to travel to
Yemen to seek comfort (rifq). It is related that Ibrahim al-Khawwas never took
anything with him on his journeys. The only things that he never parted with were
a needle and a bowl. He used the needle to mend his robe when it was torn in order
to conceal his private parts; as for the bowl, he used it for his ablutions. This is why
he considered them neither an attachment [to this world] nor a source of comfort. 534 That is, they had never planned anything in advance, allowing God to guide them in their
movements. 535 This patched ragged robe was a symbol of the Sufi lifestyle. 536 Such dispensations (e.g., exemption from fasting and daily prayers) applied to ordinary travelers. 537 Q. 2:137; 2:131, according to Arberry’s translation.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 301
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 301
It is related that Abu ∏Abdallah al-Razi said: “I left [the city of] Tarsus538
barefoot. I was accompanied by a friend of mine. When we came to a village in
Syria, a Sufi brought me a pair of sandals, but I refused to accept them. My
friend exclaimed: ‘Put them on! I have been sick, so God has rewarded you
with this on my account!’ I asked him about his condition. He answered: ‘I
took off my sandals [at the beginning of our journey] in order to show solidarity
with you, as required by the rules of companionship.’” It is related that Ibrahim
al-Khawwas was once traveling with three other people. They came across a
mosque in the desert and decided to spend a night there. The mosque had no
door and it was very cold outside. So they slept there. When they woke up they
saw al-Khawwas standing at the entrance. They asked him what he was doing. He answered: “I was afraid that you might get cold.” So he stood there all night
long. It is related that al-Kattani asked his mother to allow him to perform a
pilgrimage [to Mecca]. She gave him her permission and he departed. When he
was traveling in the desert, his robe was soiled with his urine. He said to himself:
“My condition (hali) is now flawed.” So he returned. When he knocked on the
door of his house, his mother answered him and opened the door. He noticed
that [all that time] she had been sitting next to the door. He asked her why she
was doing this. She answered: “After you had left, I made a vow not to leave this
spot until I saw you again.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad
al-Dimashqi say: I heard/370 Ibrahim b.[They do
not apply to us], since travels for us are neither a job nor a necessity.”//369
I heard Abu Sadiq b. Habib say: I heard al-Nasrabadhi say: “One day, I
lost my strength in the desert and lost any hope [of survival]. Suddenly my gaze
fell upon the moon and I saw [the following words of God] inscribed on it: ‘God
will suffice you.’537I regained my strength and from that time on this saying was
bestowed upon me.” Abu Ya∏qub al-Susi said: “In his journey the traveler needs
four things: a knowledge that guides him, scrupulous piety that restrains him
[from the forbidden], an [ecstatic] state that carries him along, and a good moral
character that protects him.” They say: “Travel (safar) is named by this name,
because it reveals (yusfir) the [true] character of men.” When al-Kattani learnedthat
a Sufi went to Yemen, then returned, he would order [his followers] to keep away
from him. He did so because at that time many of them [Sufis] used to travel to
Yemen to seek comfort (rifq). It is related that Ibrahim al-Khawwas never took
anything with him on his journeys. The only things that he never parted with were
a needle and a bowl. He used the needle to mend his robe when it was torn in order
to conceal his private parts; as for the bowl, he used it for his ablutions. This is why
he considered them neither an attachment [to this world] nor a source of comfort. 534 That is, they had never planned anything in advance, allowing God to guide them in their
movements. 535 This patched ragged robe was a symbol of the Sufi lifestyle. 536 Such dispensations (e.g., exemption from fasting and daily prayers) applied to ordinary travelers. 537 Q. 2:137; 2:131, according to Arberry’s translation.

al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad
al-Dimashqi say: I heard/370 Ibrahim b. al-Muwallad say: I heard Ibrahim
al-Qassar say: “I have traveled for thirty years in order to incline people’s hearts
to the poor.”539A man came to Dawud al-Taπi and said: “Abu Sulayman, my soul
has been prompting me to meet you for a long time.” Dawud answered: “On the
contrary, when the bodies are quiet and the hearts are calm, the meeting is
always easier!” I heard Abu Nasr al-Sufi, a companion of al-Nasrabadhi, say: “I
disembarked from the sea in the region of Oman. As I was walking across the
marketplace I felt hunger. I reached a food store and saw there a roasted lamb and
all kinds of sweetmeats. I approached a man and asked him: ‘Buy me some of it!’
He asked me: ‘Why? Do I owe you anything or am I in your debt?’ I insisted,
saying: ‘You must buy some of it for me!’ Another man saw me and said:
‘Leave him alone, young man! I, not he, am the one who is obligated to buy you
whatever you want! So make your request to me and choose what you want!’ He
then purchased for me what I wanted and left.” Abu πl-Hasan al-Misri related:
“On my journey from Tripoli540 I came across al-Sijzi.541 We went on for days
without eating anything. One day I saw a discarded gourd and began to eat it. The shaykh [al-Sijzi] stared at me, but said nothing. He did not touch it. So I
cast the gourd away, for I realized that he disapproved of what I was doing. On
538 In present-day Turkey. 539 That is, to the Sufis. 540 A city in present-day Lebanon. 541 Or “al-Shajari”, according to another reading.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 302
302 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
that day we were given five dinars. We came to a village and I said to myself:
‘Now the shaykh will no doubt purchase some [food] for us.’ However, he went
on without buying anything. He then said: ‘You probably thought: “Well now,
we are walking hungry, and he has not purchased anything [for us].” We shall
approach a village called “Yahudiyya” where a man and his family live. When we
enter the village, he will play host to us and I will give him that money, so that
he can spend it on both us and his family.’ So, we came there and he gave that
man those dinars, so that he could spend them. When we were about to leave
[that place], he told me: ‘Where are you headed, Abu πl-Hasan?’ I told him: ‘I
want to continue with you!’ He answered: ‘You have betrayed me on account of
a gourd, and you still want to accompany me? No way!’ And he refused to have
me as his companion.”
I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Shirazi – may God have mercy on him
– say: I heard Abu Ahmad the Younger say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah b. Khafif say:
“When I was young, I met a Sufi,//371 who saw signs of privation and hunger
on me. He brought me to his house and served me meat cooked in groats.
However, the meat was spoiled, so I ate the gravy, but avoided the meat because
of its condition. He gave me a morsel, and I ate it against my wish. When he gave
me another one, I was overcome with nausea. When he noticed that in me, he
was embarrassed and I myself was embarrassed for his sake. I left immediately
and set out on a journey. I sent someone to my mother to break the news [of my
departure] and to fetch my patched robe for me. My mother did not object to
my decision; on the contrary, she was pleased with my departure. So I left from
al-Qadisiyya542with a group of Sufis. We lost our way, used up all our provisions
and prepared to die. We reached a Bedouin encampment, but found nothing
there. We were so desperate that we purchased a dog from the Bedouin for many
dinars. We roasted it and I was given a morsel of its flesh. When I was about to
eat it, I contemplated my plight and realized that it was the consequence of the
embarrassment of that Sufi [who had fed me]. So I repented and fell silent. Then
the Bedouin showed us the way and we departed. I performed my pilgrimage
and when I returned, I apologized to that Sufi.”
Companionship (suhba)
God – may He be great and exalted – said: “And when the two543 were in the
Cave, he said to his companion, ‘Sorrow not; surely God is with us.’”544 When
God – praise be to Him – bestowed companionship upon [Abu Bakr] al-Siddiq,
He made it clear that [the Prophet] did so out of compassion because he said:
542 A town in present-day Iraq.
543 This verse is usually interpreted as a reference to the Prophet’s flight from Mecca to Medina,
during which he was accompanied by Abu Bakr; the two were pursued by their Meccan foes
and hid themselves in a cave.
544 Q. 9:40.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 303
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 303
“Sorrow not; surely God is with us.” For a noble person always shows compassion
toward the one who accompanies him. ∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi – may God have mercy on him – informed us:
Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Basri informed us: Yahya b. Muhammad al-Jayyani told us:
∏Uthman b. ∏Abdallah al-Qurashi told us on the authority of Nu∏aym b. Salim,
on the authority of Anas b. Malik, who said that the Messenger of God – may
God bless and greet him – said: “When do I meet my beloved friends (ahbabi)?”
His companions replied: “By our father and mother! Aren’t we then your beloved
friends?” He answered: “You are my Companions (ashabi); as for my beloved
friends, they are those who have trusted me without ever seeing me. Therefore
my passion for them is greater!”
Companionship can be of three kinds: companionship with someone who
stands above you [in rank]; this is but service (khidma). [The second type is]
companionship with someone who is below you; it requires that the follower be
treated with compassion and kindness and the one who is followed to be treated
with compliance and respect. [And the third type is] the companionship of peers
and equals, which rests on giving preference [to them over yourself] (ithar)
and spiritual chivalry. When one accompanies a master,//372 whose [spiritual]
rank (rutba) is equal to one’s own, one should abandon any opposition to him,
while interpreting everything that comes from him in a positive vein. I heard a
companion of Mansur b. Khalaf al-Maghribi ask him: “How many years have
you accompanied Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi?” He looked askance at him and
said: “I wasn’t his companion; rather I served him for some time.” When you
have someone of an inferior station as your companion, you would violate the
rules of proper companionship were you not to alert him to a deficiency of his
spiritual state. It is about this that Abu πl-Khayr al-Tinati wrote to Ja∏far b.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 302
302 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
that day we were given five dinars. We came to a village and I said to myself:
‘Now the shaykh will no doubt purchase some [food] for us.’ However, he went
on without buying anything. He then said: ‘You probably thought: “Well now,
we are walking hungry, and he has not purchased anything [for us].” We shall
approach a village called “Yahudiyya” where a man and his family live. When we
enter the village, he will play host to us and I will give him that money, so that
he can spend it on both us and his family.’ So, we came there and he gave that
man those dinars, so that he could spend them. When we were about to leave
[that place], he told me: ‘Where are you headed, Abu πl-Hasan?’ I told him: ‘I
want to continue with you!’ He answered: ‘You have betrayed me on account of
a gourd, and you still want to accompany me? No way!’ And he refused to have
me as his companion.”
I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Shirazi – may God have mercy on him
– say: I heard Abu Ahmad the Younger say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah b. Khafif say:
“When I was young, I met a Sufi,//371 who saw signs of privation and hunger
on me. He brought me to his house and served me meat cooked in groats.
However, the meat was spoiled, so I ate the gravy, but avoided the meat because
of its condition. He gave me a morsel, and I ate it against my wish. When he gave
me another one, I was overcome with nausea. When he noticed that in me, he
was embarrassed and I myself was embarrassed for his sake. I left immediately
and set out on a journey. I sent someone to my mother to break the news [of my
departure] and to fetch my patched robe for me. My mother did not object to
my decision; on the contrary, she was pleased with my departure. So I left from
al-Qadisiyya542with a group of Sufis. We lost our way, used up all our provisions
and prepared to die. We reached a Bedouin encampment, but found nothing
there. We were so desperate that we purchased a dog from the Bedouin for many
dinars. We roasted it and I was given a morsel of its flesh. When I was about to
eat it, I contemplated my plight and realized that it was the consequence of the
embarrassment of that Sufi [who had fed me]. So I repented and fell silent. Then
the Bedouin showed us the way and we departed. I performed my pilgrimage
and when I returned, I apologized to that Sufi.”
Companionship (suhba)
God – may He be great and exalted – said: “And when the two543 were in the
Cave, he said to his companion, ‘Sorrow not; surely God is with us.’”544 When
God – praise be to Him – bestowed companionship upon [Abu Bakr] al-Siddiq,
He made it clear that [the Prophet] did so out of compassion because he said:
542 A town in present-day Iraq.
543 This verse is usually interpreted as a reference to the Prophet’s flight from Mecca to Medina,
during which he was accompanied by Abu Bakr; the two were pursued by their Meccan foes
and hid themselves in a cave.
544 Q. 9:40.

Khalaf al-Maghribi ask him: “How many years have
you accompanied Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi?” He looked askance at him and
said: “I wasn’t his companion; rather I served him for some time.” When you
have someone of an inferior station as your companion, you would violate the
rules of proper companionship were you not to alert him to a deficiency of his
spiritual state. It is about this that Abu πl-Khayr al-Tinati wrote to Ja∏far b. Muhammad Nusayr, saying: “The burden of the ignorance of the poor rests on
you alone, because you are too preoccupied with your own self to instruct them
in good manners, thereby allowing them to persist in ignorance.” If, on the other
hand, you accompany someone of an equal rank, then your approach is that
of being blind toward his faults and interpreting, as far as possible, everything
you see from him in a positive way. If you are unable to find any [favorable]
interpretation, then blame and recriminate yourself. I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari said: I told Abu Sulayman al-Darani: “So-and-so is of
little import to me.” Abu Sulayman responded: “He is of little import to me as
well. However, we may be mistaken about our own status. That is, we may not
be from among the righteous (salihun) and thus do not love them!” It is related
that a certain man accompanied Ibrahim b. Adham. When they were about to
part ways, the man asked Ibrahim: “If you have found any fault with me, let me
know what it is!” Ibrahim answered: “I have found no fault with you, because I
have been looking at you with an eye of affection and therefore have seen only
good in you. Therefore, ask someone else about your faults.” It is with this
meaning in mind that they recite the following verses:543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 304
304 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
The eye of contentment is blind to any fault,
While the eye of spite reveals every error. It is related that Ibrahim b. Shayban said: “We have never accompanied anyone
who said: ‘My sandals.’”545 I heard Abu Hatim al-Sufi say: I heard Abu Nasr
al-Sarraj say: “Abu Ahmad al-Qalanisi, who was a teacher of al-Junayd, said: ‘I
accompanied some folk from Basra, who treated me with much honor. One day
I asked them, ‘Where’s my waist-cloth?’, and, lo, I fell from their grace.’”//372
I heard Abu Hatim say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say: I heard Zaqqaq546say: “I
have kept company with this folk547 for forty years and I have seen them always
showing friendship toward one another or friendship toward those who love
them. He who does not accompany his deeds by piety and scrupulousness eats
nothing but what is totally illicit.” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “A
certain man told Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari]: ‘Abu Muhammad, I want to be
your companion.’ He asked him: ‘If one of us dies, who will be the companion
of the survivor?’ The other man answered: ‘God.’ Sahl said: ‘Then let us
accompany Him now!’” A man accompanied another man for some time. One of
them then decided to part ways with his companion and asked him permission
[to leave]. To this, the companion replied: “Only on the condition that your next
companion be superior to us. And if this is the case, then you should still not be
his companion, since you chose us as your first companion.” The other man then
said: “The desire to leave has disappeared from my heart.”
I heard Abu Hatim al-Sufi say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say: I heard
al-Duqqi say: I heard al-Kattani say: “A certain man used to be my companion. However, my heart disagreed with him. I gave him a present in order to remove
this dislike from my heart. However, it remained there.Khalaf al-Maghribi ask him: “How many years have
you accompanied Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi?” He looked askance at him and
said: “I wasn’t his companion; rather I served him for some time.” When you
have someone of an inferior station as your companion, you would violate the
rules of proper companionship were you not to alert him to a deficiency of his
spiritual state. It is about this that Abu πl-Khayr al-Tinati wrote to Ja∏far b. Muhammad Nusayr, saying: “The burden of the ignorance of the poor rests on
you alone, because you are too preoccupied with your own self to instruct them
in good manners, thereby allowing them to persist in ignorance.” If, on the other
hand, you accompany someone of an equal rank, then your approach is that
of being blind toward his faults and interpreting, as far as possible, everything
you see from him in a positive way. If you are unable to find any [favorable]
interpretation, then blame and recriminate yourself. I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari said: I told Abu Sulayman al-Darani: “So-and-so is of
little import to me.” Abu Sulayman responded: “He is of little import to me as
well. However, we may be mistaken about our own status. That is, we may not
be from among the righteous (salihun) and thus do not love them!” It is related
that a certain man accompanied Ibrahim b. Adham. When they were about to
part ways, the man asked Ibrahim: “If you have found any fault with me, let me
know what it is!” Ibrahim answered: “I have found no fault with you, because I
have been looking at you with an eye of affection and therefore have seen only
good in you. Therefore, ask someone else about your faults.” It is with this
meaning in mind that they recite the following verses:

I gave him a present in order to remove
this dislike from my heart. However, it remained there. So I took that man to my
house and told him: ‘Place your foot on my cheek!’ He refused. I told him that
he must do this. I then made a vow that he should not remove his foot from my
cheek until God removed this dislike from my heart. When this [feeling] was
removed, I told him: ‘Now, you can raise your foot!’” Ibrahim b. Adham used
[to earn his living] as a seasonal harvester and an orchard watchman, spending
[everything] he had earned on his companions. He kept company with a group
of his companions, working during the day and spending the money he earned
on them. They used to get together during the night after having fasted during
the day. Ibrahim was usually late from his work, so they said: “Let’s break our
fast without him. Perhaps he will be joining us sooner because of that.” So they
broke their fast and fell asleep. When Ibrahim returned, he found them fast
asleep. He said: “Poor things! Perhaps they had nothing to eat!” So he took some
flour that was at that place and kneaded it. He then lit the fire and threw some
545 That is, a true companion must always use the plural of the first person to refer to his
possessions, indicating his willingness to share them with his friends. 546 Or “al-Duqqi”, according to an alternative reading. 547 That is, the Sufis.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 305
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 305
ashes on the bread dough. When they woke up, they found him blowing on the
fire with his beard and moustache pressed against the floor. They asked him
what he was doing. He answered: “I thought you had no food to break your fast
with and had fallen asleep, so I wanted to wake you up only when the dough
was ready to be baked.”//374 They said to each other: “Look what we have done
and how he treats us after that!” It is related that before taking someone as
his companion Ibrahim b. Adham would lay down three conditions for him
– namely, that it would be him who served [his companion], that he would utter
the call to the prayer, and that he would receive the same portion of any worldly
sustenance God might provide. One day a companion of his told him: “What
if I am not capable of this?” Ibrahim answered: “I liked his honesty.” Yusuf b. al-Husayn said: “I asked Dhu πl-Nun: ‘Who should I keep company with?’ He
answered: ‘Anyone from whom you do not hide anything that God Most High
knows about you.’” Sahl b. ∏Abdallah told someone: “If you are afraid of wild
beasts, you cannot be my companion.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad b. al-Hasan
al-∏Alawi say: ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Hamdan told us: al-Qasim b. Munabbih told us:
I heard Bishr b. al-Harith say: “When you keep company with an evil folk, you
begin to think ill of even the elect ones (akhyar).” Al-Junayd recounted, saying:
“When Abu Hafs [al-Haddad] arrived at Baghdad, he had with him a bald man
who never uttered a word. I asked [other] companions of Abu Hafs about him. They said: ‘This man spent one hundred thousand dirhams on Abu Hafs, then
borrowed another one hundred thousand to spend on him.I gave him a present in order to remove
this dislike from my heart. However, it remained there. So I took that man to my
house and told him: ‘Place your foot on my cheek!’ He refused. I told him that
he must do this. I then made a vow that he should not remove his foot from my
cheek until God removed this dislike from my heart. When this [feeling] was
removed, I told him: ‘Now, you can raise your foot!’” Ibrahim b. Adham used
[to earn his living] as a seasonal harvester and an orchard watchman, spending
[everything] he had earned on his companions. He kept company with a group
of his companions, working during the day and spending the money he earned
on them. They used to get together during the night after having fasted during
the day. Ibrahim was usually late from his work, so they said: “Let’s break our
fast without him. Perhaps he will be joining us sooner because of that.” So they
broke their fast and fell asleep. When Ibrahim returned, he found them fast
asleep. He said: “Poor things! Perhaps they had nothing to eat!” So he took some
flour that was at that place and kneaded it. He then lit the fire and threw some
545 That is, a true companion must always use the plural of the first person to refer to his
possessions, indicating his willingness to share them with his friends. 546 Or “al-Duqqi”, according to an alternative reading. 547 That is, the Sufis.

I asked [other] companions of Abu Hafs about him. They said: ‘This man spent one hundred thousand dirhams on Abu Hafs, then
borrowed another one hundred thousand to spend on him. Yet, Abu Hafs will
not permit him to utter a single word!’” Dhu πl-Nun said: “Do not keep company
with God, unless you obey Him; do not keep company with [His] creatures unless
you dispense advice to them; do not keep company with your lower self unless
you oppose it, and do not keep company with the Devil unless you show enmity
toward him.” Someone asked Dhu πl-Nun: “Who should I keep company with?”
He answered: “With someone who will pay visits to you when you fall ill and
someone who will repent on your behalf when you sin.” I heard the master Abu
∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say: “A tree that grows by itself
and is not cultivated by anyone will bring forth leaves but no fruit. Likewise, a
disciple (murid) who has no master to study with – nothing [good] will come out
of him.” The master Abu ∏Ali [al-Daqqaq] used to say: “I took this [Sufi] path
from al-Nasrabadhi, who took it from al-Shibli, who took it from al-Junayd,
who took it from al-Sari [al-Saqati], who took it from Ma∏ruf al-Karkhi, who
took it from Dawud al-Taπi, who studied under the Successors [of the Prophet’s
Companions].” I also heard him [al-Daqqaq] say: “I would never come to
al-Nasrabadhi’s teaching sessions without first making a full ablution.”
The master Abu πl-Qasim al-Qushayri said: “As a beginner I would never
enter into the presence of my master Abu ∏Ali//375 unless I was fasting. I would
also perform a full ablution. How many times did I come to the door of his school
only to turn back out of my lack of resolve to enter [his house]? When I overcame
my timidity and entered the school, I would be overcome by a sense of numbness543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 306
306 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
in the middle of it to such an extent that one could stick a needle into me
without my taking notice of it. When I had an issue [to discuss] I had no need to
move my tongue in order to ask him about it, for no sooner than I found myself
in his presence, he would start to explain it [to me]. Many a time I witnessed this
phenomenon on his part. Sometimes I would think to myself: ‘If God were to
send a messenger to His creatures during my lifetime, could I possibly have felt
for him the same respect that I had for Abu ∏Ali – may God have mercy on him?’
I could not imagine that this was possible at all. Throughout my attendance of
his teaching sessions and being in his presence, after a [spiritual] bond (wasla) had
formed between us, not for a single moment until his very death did a thought
of disputing [his opinion] cross my mind.”
Hamza b. Yusuf al-Sahmi al-Jurjani – may God have mercy on him – informed
us: Muhammad b. Ahmad al-∏Abdi informed us: ∏Abu ∏Awana informed us:
Yusuf told us: Khalaf b. Tamim Abu πl-Ahwas told us on the authority of
Muhammad b. Nadr al-Harithi, who said: “God – praise be to him – revealed
to Moses – peace be upon him: ‘Be alert and seek companions for yourself.
Rid yourself of any companion who does not rejoice in obeying you and never
keep company with him, for he will make your heart harden and will be your
adversary. Multiply your thoughts of Me and you will deserve My gratefulness
and the abundance of My grace.’”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
Him – say: ∏Abdallah b. al-Mu∏allim said: I heard Abu Bakr al-Tamastani say:
“Be God’s companions, and if you are not able, then keep company with God’s
companions, so that the blessings of their companionship brings you to the
companionship of God.”
The Oneness of God (tawhid)548
God – may He be great and exalted – said: “Your God is one God.”549Imam Abu
Bakr Muhammad b. al-Hasan b. Furak – may God be pleased with him –
informed us: Ahmad b. Mahmud b. Khurrazadh told us: Masih550 b. Hatim
al-∏Uqli told us: al-Hajabi//376 ∏Abdallah b. ∏Abd al-Wahhab told us: Hammad
b. Zayd told us on the authority of Sa∏id b. Sa∏d b. Hatim al-∏Ataki, on the
authority of Ibn Abi Sadaqa, on the authority of Muhammad b. Sirin, on the
authority of Abu Hurayra, who said: “The Messenger of God – may God bless
and greet him – said: ‘Once, in the previous epoch, there lived among us a man
who had done no good whatsoever except declare God’s oneness. He told his
family: “When I die, burn me up, grind me into ashes, and scatter half of them
over the land and the other half over the sea on a windy day!” [When he died],
548 This term means simultaneously “oneness [of God]” and “declaration or affirmation of God’s
oneness”.
549 Q. 2:163; 2:158, according to Arberry’s translation.
550 Or “Musabbih”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 307
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 307
they did as he told them. God – may He be great and exalted – said to the wind:
“Bring me what you have taken!” and the man appeared before him. God asked
him: “What prompted you to do what you did?” The man answered: “[I did
that], because I was ashamed of You!” So, God pardoned him.’”
“Oneness” means to declare that a certain thing is one. Knowing that a
certain thing is one is also “oneness”. They [Arabs] say, “I have rendered you
one”, meaning “I have described you as singularity (wahdaniyya)”. Likewise, they
[Arabs] say, “I have rendered you courageous”, meaning “I have described you
as being courageous”. From the linguistic point of view, it [is derived from the
verbs] wahada and yahidu (“he was/is one”). Its derivatives are wáhid, wahd,
and wahíd with the meaning “being one and alone”. Its synonym is [the verb]
farada(“to be single”) with its derivatives fárid, fard, and faríd(“being single or
sole”). The root of the word ahad(“one”) is wahd(“being one”); the letter waw
of the root has turned into the hamza, because the consonant waw when it is
followed by the vowel a(fatha) may [occasionally] convert into the hamza. The
same happens to the waw, when it is followed by the vowels i (kasra) and u
(damma), for example “charming woman” (imraπa asmaπ), which was [initially
pronounced] imraπawasmaπ– a derivative of the noun wasama(“charm”). From the theological viewpoint, God’s being one means that He is not
subject to addition or subtraction. This is different from your saying, “One
man”, because that man may have a hand or a leg missing – that is, he is subject
to subtraction.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 306
306 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
in the middle of it to such an extent that one could stick a needle into me
without my taking notice of it. When I had an issue [to discuss] I had no need to
move my tongue in order to ask him about it, for no sooner than I found myself
in his presence, he would start to explain it [to me]. Many a time I witnessed this
phenomenon on his part. Sometimes I would think to myself: ‘If God were to
send a messenger to His creatures during my lifetime, could I possibly have felt
for him the same respect that I had for Abu ∏Ali – may God have mercy on him?’
I could not imagine that this was possible at all. Throughout my attendance of
his teaching sessions and being in his presence, after a [spiritual] bond (wasla) had
formed between us, not for a single moment until his very death did a thought
of disputing [his opinion] cross my mind.”
Hamza b. Yusuf al-Sahmi al-Jurjani – may God have mercy on him – informed
us: Muhammad b. Ahmad al-∏Abdi informed us: ∏Abu ∏Awana informed us:
Yusuf told us: Khalaf b. Tamim Abu πl-Ahwas told us on the authority of
Muhammad b. Nadr al-Harithi, who said: “God – praise be to him – revealed
to Moses – peace be upon him: ‘Be alert and seek companions for yourself.
Rid yourself of any companion who does not rejoice in obeying you and never
keep company with him, for he will make your heart harden and will be your
adversary. Multiply your thoughts of Me and you will deserve My gratefulness
and the abundance of My grace.’”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on
Him – say: ∏Abdallah b. al-Mu∏allim said: I heard Abu Bakr al-Tamastani say:
“Be God’s companions, and if you are not able, then keep company with God’s
companions, so that the blessings of their companionship brings you to the
companionship of God.”
The Oneness of God (tawhid)548
God – may He be great and exalted – said: “Your God is one God.”549Imam Abu
Bakr Muhammad b. al-Hasan b. Furak – may God be pleased with him –
informed us: Ahmad b. Mahmud b. Khurrazadh told us: Masih550 b. Hatim
al-∏Uqli told us: al-Hajabi//376 ∏Abdallah b. ∏Abd al-Wahhab told us: Hammad
b. Zayd told us on the authority of Sa∏id b. Sa∏d b. Hatim al-∏Ataki, on the
authority of Ibn Abi Sadaqa, on the authority of Muhammad b. Sirin, on the
authority of Abu Hurayra, who said: “The Messenger of God – may God bless
and greet him – said: ‘Once, in the previous epoch, there lived among us a man
who had done no good whatsoever except declare God’s oneness. He told his
family: “When I die, burn me up, grind me into ashes, and scatter half of them
over the land and the other half over the sea on a windy day!” [When he died],
548 This term means simultaneously “oneness [of God]” and “declaration or affirmation of God’s
oneness”.
549 Q. 2:163; 2:158, according to Arberry’s translation.
550 Or “Musabbih”.

From the theological viewpoint, God’s being one means that He is not
subject to addition or subtraction. This is different from your saying, “One
man”, because that man may have a hand or a leg missing – that is, he is subject
to subtraction. On the other hand, God – praise be to Him – is essentially one
(ahadiyyu πl-dhat), which is contrary to the usage of this word551when it is applied
to the carrier [of a multitude of qualities and parts].552 One of those who has
attained truth (ahl al-tahqiq) said: “God’s being one means the denial of any
multiplicity in His essence; the denial of any resemblance [between] His True
Reality and attributes [and those of His creatures]; and the denial of any partner
(sharik) in His deeds and creations.”
There are three types of [the declaration of divine] oneness. The first is [the
affirmation of] oneness by God to God, which means that He knows that He is
one and He declares Himself to be one. The second is [the declaration of] oneness
by God – praise be to Him – to His creatures, which means that He commands
His servant that he affirm [His oneness] and that He creates the awareness of His
oneness in him. The third is [the declaration of] oneness by God’s creatures to
God – praise be to Him – which means that the servant knows that God – may
He be great and exalted – is one and then affirms and declares that He is
one.//377 This, in a nutshell, is the definition of [the declaration of] oneness. Sufi masters disagree about the meaning of oneness. I heard Shaykh Abu
∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard
551 That is, “one”. 552 According to a medieval commentator, al-Qushayri implies that the word “one” is true of
God alone, since in the case of other objects “oneness” is applied metaphorically because their
essences always consist of multiple parts and faculties.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 308
308 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. Shadhan say: I heard Yusuf b. al-Husayn say: I heard
Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri say, when he was asked about [the declaration of] oneness:
“It is that you know that the power of God Most High resides in all things without
admixture, that He creates all things without any manipulation, that He is the
cause of everything He produces, and that His act of creation is not caused [by
anything]. Whatever you may imagine, God is totally different from it.” I also
heard him say: I heard Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Zakariyya say: I heard Ahmad
b. ∏Ataπ say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Salih say: al-Jurayri said: “The knowledge of
oneness can be articulated only with the tongue of oneness.” Someone asked
al-Junayd about oneness. He answered that it is: “To assert the oneness of the
One, while truly realizing His unicity (tahqiq wahdaniyatih) and perfecting His
singularity (ahadiyatih) [by stating] that He is the One, ‘Who has not begottenand
has not been begotten’,553 while denying that He [may] have any counterparts,
equals or semblances and divesting Him of any similarity (tashbih), quality, image,
or likeness, [as stated in the Qurπan]: ‘Like Him there is naught; He is the
All-Hearing, All-Seeing.’”554Al-Junayd also said: “Those possessors of intellects
who have arrived at its utmost realization, have arrived at bewilderment (hayra).”555
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu πl-Hasan b. Miqsam556
say: I heard Ja∏far b.From the theological viewpoint, God’s being one means that He is not
subject to addition or subtraction. This is different from your saying, “One
man”, because that man may have a hand or a leg missing – that is, he is subject
to subtraction. On the other hand, God – praise be to Him – is essentially one
(ahadiyyu πl-dhat), which is contrary to the usage of this word551when it is applied
to the carrier [of a multitude of qualities and parts].552 One of those who has
attained truth (ahl al-tahqiq) said: “God’s being one means the denial of any
multiplicity in His essence; the denial of any resemblance [between] His True
Reality and attributes [and those of His creatures]; and the denial of any partner
(sharik) in His deeds and creations.”
There are three types of [the declaration of divine] oneness. The first is [the
affirmation of] oneness by God to God, which means that He knows that He is
one and He declares Himself to be one. The second is [the declaration of] oneness
by God – praise be to Him – to His creatures, which means that He commands
His servant that he affirm [His oneness] and that He creates the awareness of His
oneness in him. The third is [the declaration of] oneness by God’s creatures to
God – praise be to Him – which means that the servant knows that God – may
He be great and exalted – is one and then affirms and declares that He is
one.//377 This, in a nutshell, is the definition of [the declaration of] oneness. Sufi masters disagree about the meaning of oneness. I heard Shaykh Abu
∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him – say: I heard
551 That is, “one”. 552 According to a medieval commentator, al-Qushayri implies that the word “one” is true of
God alone, since in the case of other objects “oneness” is applied metaphorically because their
essences always consist of multiple parts and faculties.

al-Husayn say: I heard Abu πl-Hasan b. Miqsam556
say: I heard Ja∏far b. Muhammad say: I heard al-Junayd say, when asked about
oneness: “It is a reality in which all outward traces (rusum) disappear and all
knowledge passes away, while God Most High remains as He always has been.”
Al-Husri said: “Our principles in regard to oneness are five: the removal of the
temporary, the assertion of the [absolute] singularity of the Eternal, the flight
from the loved ones, the departure from the native land, and the forgetfulness of
what is known and unknown.”//378 I heard Mansur b. Khalaf al-Maghribi say:
“Once I found myself in the courtyard of the Friday mosque in Baghdad – that
is, the mosque of [the caliph] al-Mansur – while al-Husri was discoursing about
oneness. [Suddenly] I noticed two angels ascending to the sky. One of them said
to the other: ‘What this man says is but [theological] science (∏ilm)557, whereas
[the true declaration] oneness is something else.’” He [Mansur] was [probably]
in the state between wakefulness and sleep. Faris said: “Oneness means giving
up any [earthly] means under the influence of [an overwhelming] spiritual state,
while returning to them, as commanded [by the Divine Law]; [it also] means
the realization that good deeds cannot change one’s assigned portion [in the
Hereafter], be it salvation or perdition.” Someone inquired of al-Junayd about
the [doctrine of] oneness pertaining to the [spiritual] elite (tawhid al-khass). He
answered: “It means that the servant appears before God – praise be to Him – as
553 Q. 112:3. 554 Q. 42:11; 42:9, according to Arberry’s translation. 555 Because of the subtlety of the notion of God being absolutely transcendent, while being
simultaneously ascribed, in the Qurπan, human-like characteristics. 556 Or “al-Muqassim”. 557 According to another version of the text, “the science of oneness”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 309
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 309
a soulless body (shabah) that is moved by nothing except the workings of His
predetermination (tadbir), which flow through the channels of the divine decrees
(ahkam) emanating from His power (qudra), which [in turn] emerges from the
depths of His oneness; [as a consequence] he [the servant] is annihilated – in
the proximity to God – from his own self, from the call of this world to him,
and from his response [to this call] through the realities of divine existence and
unicity (wahdaniyya) and [loses] his own sensations and actions. This is because
God – praise be to Him – now has placed him in the station which He wishes for
him, which means that the servant’s current state returns to its very beginning,
and he becomes what he was before he was.”558Someone asked al-Bushanji about
oneness. He said: “It is neither likening the Divine Essence [to creatures], nor
stripping It of any attributes.”559
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard Abu πl-Husayn560al-∏Anbari say: I heard Sahl b. ∏Abdallah
say, when asked about the essence of God – may He be great and exalted: “The
essence of God is described by [religious] knowledge, [yet] it cannot be grasped
by any comprehension nor seen by the [human] sights in this world. It is found
in the realities of faith without having any limit, being subject to human grasp, or
dwelling in any creature. It will be seen by the [human] sights in the Hereafter
plainly in its royal might and power. Creatures are barred from knowing its inner
reality (kunh), yet it shows itself to them by means of its signs (ayatuh). The
hearts know it, while the intellects cannot grasp it.al-Husayn say: I heard Abu πl-Hasan b. Miqsam556
say: I heard Ja∏far b. Muhammad say: I heard al-Junayd say, when asked about
oneness: “It is a reality in which all outward traces (rusum) disappear and all
knowledge passes away, while God Most High remains as He always has been.”
Al-Husri said: “Our principles in regard to oneness are five: the removal of the
temporary, the assertion of the [absolute] singularity of the Eternal, the flight
from the loved ones, the departure from the native land, and the forgetfulness of
what is known and unknown.”//378 I heard Mansur b. Khalaf al-Maghribi say:
“Once I found myself in the courtyard of the Friday mosque in Baghdad – that
is, the mosque of [the caliph] al-Mansur – while al-Husri was discoursing about
oneness. [Suddenly] I noticed two angels ascending to the sky. One of them said
to the other: ‘What this man says is but [theological] science (∏ilm)557, whereas
[the true declaration] oneness is something else.’” He [Mansur] was [probably]
in the state between wakefulness and sleep. Faris said: “Oneness means giving
up any [earthly] means under the influence of [an overwhelming] spiritual state,
while returning to them, as commanded [by the Divine Law]; [it also] means
the realization that good deeds cannot change one’s assigned portion [in the
Hereafter], be it salvation or perdition.” Someone inquired of al-Junayd about
the [doctrine of] oneness pertaining to the [spiritual] elite (tawhid al-khass). He
answered: “It means that the servant appears before God – praise be to Him – as
553 Q. 112:3. 554 Q. 42:11; 42:9, according to Arberry’s translation. 555 Because of the subtlety of the notion of God being absolutely transcendent, while being
simultaneously ascribed, in the Qurπan, human-like characteristics. 556 Or “al-Muqassim”. 557 According to another version of the text, “the science of oneness”.

Creatures are barred from knowing its inner
reality (kunh), yet it shows itself to them by means of its signs (ayatuh). The
hearts know it, while the intellects cannot grasp it. The faithful look at it with
their eyes, yet they cannot ever comprehend or grasp it.”
Al-Junayd said: “The best thing one has ever said about oneness is the words
of Abu Bakr al-Siddiq – may God be pleased with him: ‘Praise be to Him Who
has granted His creatures access to the knowledge of Himself only through their
inability (∏ajz) to know Him!’”//379
The master Abu πl-Qasim [al-Qushayri] said: [Abu Bakr] al-Siddiq – may
God be pleased with him – did not mean that God cannot be known. According
to those who have attained the True Reality (muhaqqiqun), the inability [to know
God] can only pertain to something that exists; it cannot apply to something that
has no existence. Thus, for a paralyzed person sitting (qu∏ud) is not possible,561for
it requires of him neither an assumption [of this state], nor any action, because
the state of sitting already resides in him. Likewise, one who knows God (∏arif)
is incapable of [the act of] knowing God, for this knowledge already resides in
558 A reference to the primordial covenant between God and the human race, which was then
forgotten by human beings as they became distracted from it by the drives and temptations
of their lower souls and the allure of this world. For details see Böwering, Mystical Vision,
pp. 147–157,175–184 et passim. 559 This is a typical Ash∏ari position that is supposed to represent the “middle path” between
what was seen as an excessive “anthropomorphism” of the Hanbalites and a denial of divine
attributes by their opponents, the Mu∏tazilis. 560 Or “al-Hasan”. 561 That is, he is already in the state of permanent sitting.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 310
310 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
him, since, in his case, it is a necessity. And this folk562 believe that, in the end,
knowledge of God – praise be to Him – is a necessity for all of them. At the
beginning [of the Sufi path], knowledge of God, even if it is true, is [always]
acquired (kasbiyya). However, al-Siddiq – may God be pleased with him –
counted it for nothing in regard to the necessary knowledge. For him, it was like
[the light of] a lamp at the rise of the sun, when its rays encompass it. I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Ahmad b. Sa∏id al-Basri in
Kufa say: I heard Ibn al-A∏rabi say: al-Junayd said: “The [knowledge of] oneness
that is peculiar to the Sufis consists in the singling out (ifrad) of the eternal (qidam)
from the temporary (hadath), leaving your homeland, giving up on things
that please you, and abandoning what is known and what is unknown until God
– praise be to Him – replaces everything [for you].” Yusuf b. al-Husayn said:
“One who has fallen into the seas of oneness will only grow more thirsty with the
passage of time.” Al-Junayd said: “The knowledge of [divine] oneness is different
from His existence and His existence is distinct from His knowledge.” He also
said: “The knowledge of [divine] oneness rolled up its carpets563 twenty years
ago, while people keep discoursing around its edges.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad al-
Isbahani say: “A man stopped before al-Husayn b. Mansur and said: ‘Who is this
God about Whom everyone talks?’ He answered: ‘He is the origin of all creatures,
Who Himself has no origin.’” I also heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say:
I heard Mansur b.Creatures are barred from knowing its inner
reality (kunh), yet it shows itself to them by means of its signs (ayatuh). The
hearts know it, while the intellects cannot grasp it. The faithful look at it with
their eyes, yet they cannot ever comprehend or grasp it.”
Al-Junayd said: “The best thing one has ever said about oneness is the words
of Abu Bakr al-Siddiq – may God be pleased with him: ‘Praise be to Him Who
has granted His creatures access to the knowledge of Himself only through their
inability (∏ajz) to know Him!’”//379
The master Abu πl-Qasim [al-Qushayri] said: [Abu Bakr] al-Siddiq – may
God be pleased with him – did not mean that God cannot be known. According
to those who have attained the True Reality (muhaqqiqun), the inability [to know
God] can only pertain to something that exists; it cannot apply to something that
has no existence. Thus, for a paralyzed person sitting (qu∏ud) is not possible,561for
it requires of him neither an assumption [of this state], nor any action, because
the state of sitting already resides in him. Likewise, one who knows God (∏arif)
is incapable of [the act of] knowing God, for this knowledge already resides in
558 A reference to the primordial covenant between God and the human race, which was then
forgotten by human beings as they became distracted from it by the drives and temptations
of their lower souls and the allure of this world. For details see Böwering, Mystical Vision,
pp. 147–157,175–184 et passim. 559 This is a typical Ash∏ari position that is supposed to represent the “middle path” between
what was seen as an excessive “anthropomorphism” of the Hanbalites and a denial of divine
attributes by their opponents, the Mu∏tazilis. 560 Or “al-Hasan”. 561 That is, he is already in the state of permanent sitting.

Mansur and said: ‘Who is this
God about Whom everyone talks?’ He answered: ‘He is the origin of all creatures,
Who Himself has no origin.’” I also heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say:
I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard al-Shibli say: “One who has learned
a dust-speck worth of the knowledge of [divine] oneness will not be able to
carry even a bedbug [worth of weight in addition], because of the great weight of
his load.” I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say:
“Someone asked al-Shibli://380 ‘Tell us about pure oneness with the tongue
of exceptional truth (haqq mufarrad)!’ He exclaimed: ‘Woe to you! Whoever
speaks about oneness by using ordinary expressions (∏ibara) is a heretic (mulhid);
whoever makes [allegorical] allusions (ashara) to it is a dualist; whoever points to
it [with a gesture] is a worshiper of idols; whoever utters (nataqa) it plainly is
reckless (ghafil); whoever keeps silent about it is ignorant; whoever fathoms that
he has arrived at its realization is vain; whoever thinks that he has come close
to it is in fact far from it; whoever thinks that he has found it in his ecstasy will
lose it. And each time you think that you are able to discern its meaning by
your imagination and attain its significance by your intellect in the most perfect
manner, it comes back to you rejected, temporal and transient like yourselves.”
Yusuf b. al-Husayn said: “The [declaration of] oneness of the spiritual
elite means that the servant stands in the presence of God most High with his
innermost self, his ecstatic state of finding (wajd),564 and his heart, while being
subject to the workings of His predetermination and the decree emanating from
562 That is, the Sufis. 563 That is, “left”, “disappeared”. 564 That is, a state that is engendered by a direct encounter with God.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 311
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 311
His power, drowned in the seas of [divine] oneness through the annihilation
from (fanaπ ∏an) his own self and loss of any perception. Then God – praise be to
Him – places him in the station that He wants of him, so that he would be as he
was before he was, being moved by nothing except divine commands.” They say:
“[The declaration of] oneness belongs to God, and creatures are superfluous
(tufayli).” They say: “Oneness means the dropping of all personal and possessive
prounouns; you cannot say: ‘mine’, ‘with me’, ‘from me’, ‘to me’.” Someone
asked Abu Bakr al-Tamastani about oneness. He answered: “[The declaration of]
oneness, the one who declares it, and the One who is declared are one. These
three, then.” Ruwaym [b.He answered: “[The declaration of]
oneness, the one who declares it, and the One who is declared are one. These
three, then.” Ruwaym [b. Ahmad] said: “[The declaration of] oneness is the
erasure of the traces of humanity and bringing forth [those of] divinity.”
When Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq was approaching the end of his life and suffering
from ailments, I heard him say: “One of the signs of [divine] help is [that the
awareness of divine] oneness is preserved [in you] at the time of the passing of
divine decrees.” He then proceeded to explain his statement by pointing to his
own condition: “God cuts you piece by piece with the scissors of [His] power
[thereby] executing His decrees in your regard, while you remain grateful and
full of gratitude to Him.” Al-Shibli said: “Whoever imagines that he has attained
[divine] oneness has not smelt even a whiff of it.” Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz said:
“The first station of someone who has found and truly realized the knowledge of
oneness is that any awareness of [mundane] things vanishes from his heart and
he is left alone with God – may He be great and exalted.”//381 Al-Shibli asked
a certain man: “Do you know why your [declaration of] oneness is incomplete?”
He exclaimed: “No, I don’t!” Al-Shibli said: “Because you are seeking it through
your own self!”
Ibn ∏Ataπ said: “One sign of a true [declaration] of oneness is losing
consciousness of it, which means that a person who performs it becomes one [with
God].” They say: “There are people, who [in their declaration of divine oneness]565
are granted the vision of [divine] actions; they can see all temporal occurrences
through God Most High. Others are granted the vision of the True Reality; they
lose consciousness of anything aside from Him and witness the mystery (sirr)
of a [complete and undifferentiated] unity (jam∏) within their own innermost
mystery, while their outward aspect continues to witness dispersion (tafriqa).”566
I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Ali b.Mansur and said: ‘Who is this
God about Whom everyone talks?’ He answered: ‘He is the origin of all creatures,
Who Himself has no origin.’” I also heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say:
I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard al-Shibli say: “One who has learned
a dust-speck worth of the knowledge of [divine] oneness will not be able to
carry even a bedbug [worth of weight in addition], because of the great weight of
his load.” I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say:
“Someone asked al-Shibli://380 ‘Tell us about pure oneness with the tongue
of exceptional truth (haqq mufarrad)!’ He exclaimed: ‘Woe to you! Whoever
speaks about oneness by using ordinary expressions (∏ibara) is a heretic (mulhid);
whoever makes [allegorical] allusions (ashara) to it is a dualist; whoever points to
it [with a gesture] is a worshiper of idols; whoever utters (nataqa) it plainly is
reckless (ghafil); whoever keeps silent about it is ignorant; whoever fathoms that
he has arrived at its realization is vain; whoever thinks that he has come close
to it is in fact far from it; whoever thinks that he has found it in his ecstasy will
lose it. And each time you think that you are able to discern its meaning by
your imagination and attain its significance by your intellect in the most perfect
manner, it comes back to you rejected, temporal and transient like yourselves.”
Yusuf b. al-Husayn said: “The [declaration of] oneness of the spiritual
elite means that the servant stands in the presence of God most High with his
innermost self, his ecstatic state of finding (wajd),564 and his heart, while being
subject to the workings of His predetermination and the decree emanating from
562 That is, the Sufis. 563 That is, “left”, “disappeared”. 564 That is, a state that is engendered by a direct encounter with God.

Others are granted the vision of the True Reality; they
lose consciousness of anything aside from Him and witness the mystery (sirr)
of a [complete and undifferentiated] unity (jam∏) within their own innermost
mystery, while their outward aspect continues to witness dispersion (tafriqa).”566
I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Ali b. Muhammad
al-Qazwini say: I heard al-Qunfudh567say: “When someone asked al-Junayd about
[the declaration of] unity, he said: ‘I heard someone recite the following:
He sang to me from my heart and I sang to him as he did to me
We were wherever they were and they were wherever we were.’
565 This phrase is omitted from some versions of the text. 566 That is, the dispersion of divine attributes in the things and phenomena of the empirical
world. 567 In another reading, “al-Qannad”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 312
312 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
[On hearing this] someone exclaimed: ‘So the Qurπan and the sacred tradition
(akhbar) have perished?!’ He answered: ‘No. However, a man who declares divine
oneness avails himself of the simplest and clearest words!’”
How some Sufis [of old] behaved at the time of their departure
from this world (ahwaluhum ∏inda πl-khuruj min al-dunya)
God Most High said: “[The Godfearing] whom the angels take while they are
goodly.”568That is, for those who better their souls by devoting themselves [fully
to God] returning to their Master is easy. ∏Abdallah b. Yusuf al-Isbahani informed us: Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Muhammad
b. ∏Uqba al-Shaybani said in Kufa: al-Khadir b. Aban al-Hashimi told us: Abu
Hudba told us on the authority of Anas b. Malik that the Messenger of God –
may God bless and greet him – said: “When the servant of God is overcome with
pain and agony of death, his members greet each other, saying: ‘Peace be upon
you! You separate yourself from me and I separate myself from you until the Day
of Judgement.’”
Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami informed us: Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Asamm
told us: al-Khadir b. Aban al-Hashimi told us: Sawwar told us: Ja∏far told us on
the authority of Thabit, on the authority of Anas that the Prophet – may God
bless and greet him – came to see a youth who was dying. He asked him: “How
do you feel?” He answered: “I place my hope//382 in God Most High and am
afraid of my sins.” The Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – said:
“When these two things come together in the heart of a faithful servant of God
at such a moment, God will inevitably grant him what he hopes for and render
him from what he is afraid of.”
Know that the conditions of Sufis at the time of dying vary. Some are over-
whelmed by awe (hayba), while others experience hope (rajaπ).Others are granted the vision of the True Reality; they
lose consciousness of anything aside from Him and witness the mystery (sirr)
of a [complete and undifferentiated] unity (jam∏) within their own innermost
mystery, while their outward aspect continues to witness dispersion (tafriqa).”566
I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Ali b. Muhammad
al-Qazwini say: I heard al-Qunfudh567say: “When someone asked al-Junayd about
[the declaration of] unity, he said: ‘I heard someone recite the following:
He sang to me from my heart and I sang to him as he did to me
We were wherever they were and they were wherever we were.’
565 This phrase is omitted from some versions of the text. 566 That is, the dispersion of divine attributes in the things and phenomena of the empirical
world. 567 In another reading, “al-Qannad”.

He asked him: “How
do you feel?” He answered: “I place my hope//382 in God Most High and am
afraid of my sins.” The Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – said:
“When these two things come together in the heart of a faithful servant of God
at such a moment, God will inevitably grant him what he hopes for and render
him from what he is afraid of.”
Know that the conditions of Sufis at the time of dying vary. Some are over-
whelmed by awe (hayba), while others experience hope (rajaπ). To others things
are revealed that bring them serenity (sukun) and a beautiful trust [in the favorable
outcome in the Hereafter]. Abu Muhammad al-Jurayri recounted: “I was with
al-Junayd at the time of his death. It was a Friday [that coincided with] the New
Year’s Day.569He was reading the [entire] Qurπan until he finished it. I asked him:
‘Abu πl-Qasim, [you are doing this] even in this condition?’ He answered: ‘For
whom would be this more appropriate than myself – one whose page is about to
be turned!’” I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say:
I came to know that Abu Muhammad al-Harawi said: “I was with al-Shibli on
the night he died. Throughout that night he kept reciting the following verses:
Every house570You reside in needs no lamps
Your face to which we aspire will be our evidence
On that day all people will bring their evidences [to God].”
568 Q. 16:32; 16:34, according to Arberry’s translation. 569 The first day of the Persian new year which, at that time, was celebrated around mid-June. 570 That is, in the heart of every believer, according to a commentator.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 313
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 313
It is related that ∏Abdallah b. Munazil said: “Hamdun al-Qassar admonished
his companions not to leave him among women at the time of his death.” When
Bishr al-Hafi was about to die, someone asked him: “Abu Nasr, it looks as if you
like life?” He responded: “Entering in the presence of God – may He be great
and exalted – is hard.” Whenever Sufyan al-Thawri was getting ready to set out
on a journey, his companions would ask him: “Did you leave us instructions as to
what we should do?” He would say: “If you find death, buy it for me!” However,
when his time drew near, he exclaimed: “I used to long for this, but, lo, it is hard!”
When death came to al-Hasan b. ∏Ali b. Abi Talib, he wept. Someone asked him
why he was weeping. He answered: “I am entering into the presence of a master
(sayyid) Whom I have never seen before!” When death came to Bilal,571his wife
cried: “What a painful affliction!” He objected, saying: “On the contrary, what
a happy occasion! Tomorrow I will meet my beloved – Muhammad and his
host (hizb)!”//383 On his deathbed ∏Abdallah b. Mubarak opened his eyes and
laughed, saying: “[This is indeed a mighty triumph], and for the like of this let
the workers work!”572 It is related that [during his life] Makhul al-Shami was
often overwhelmed with sadness. However, when people came to visit him on his
deathbed, they found him laughing.He asked him: “How
do you feel?” He answered: “I place my hope//382 in God Most High and am
afraid of my sins.” The Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – said:
“When these two things come together in the heart of a faithful servant of God
at such a moment, God will inevitably grant him what he hopes for and render
him from what he is afraid of.”
Know that the conditions of Sufis at the time of dying vary. Some are over-
whelmed by awe (hayba), while others experience hope (rajaπ). To others things
are revealed that bring them serenity (sukun) and a beautiful trust [in the favorable
outcome in the Hereafter]. Abu Muhammad al-Jurayri recounted: “I was with
al-Junayd at the time of his death. It was a Friday [that coincided with] the New
Year’s Day.569He was reading the [entire] Qurπan until he finished it. I asked him:
‘Abu πl-Qasim, [you are doing this] even in this condition?’ He answered: ‘For
whom would be this more appropriate than myself – one whose page is about to
be turned!’” I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say:
I came to know that Abu Muhammad al-Harawi said: “I was with al-Shibli on
the night he died. Throughout that night he kept reciting the following verses:
Every house570You reside in needs no lamps
Your face to which we aspire will be our evidence
On that day all people will bring their evidences [to God].”
568 Q. 16:32; 16:34, according to Arberry’s translation. 569 The first day of the Persian new year which, at that time, was celebrated around mid-June. 570 That is, in the heart of every believer, according to a commentator.

Mubarak opened his eyes and
laughed, saying: “[This is indeed a mighty triumph], and for the like of this let
the workers work!”572 It is related that [during his life] Makhul al-Shami was
often overwhelmed with sadness. However, when people came to visit him on his
deathbed, they found him laughing. When they inquired of him about that, he
answered: “Why should I not laugh, when I am about to depart from what I have
always been on guard against and am soon to approach that which I have always
looked forward to and hoped for!” Ruwaym related: “I was present at the death
of Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz, who recited the following with his last breath:
The hearts of the [divine] gnostics long for remembrance [of God]
And during the moments of their intimate conversations [with God]
(munajat) they always think about the mystery (sirr)573
They were given wine-cups that bring sure death
So that they become oblivious of this world like a drunkard
Their aspirations (humum) roam around an encampment
In which God’s beloved shine like resplendent stars
While their mortal bodies on the earth have already been destroyed by
their love of Him,
Their spirits, draped in veils, rise to heavens
They will not rest until they find themselves close to their Beloved
And will not flinch, when they encounter a calamity or harm.”
Someone told al-Junayd that Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz often fell into ecstasy on
the eve of his death. He commented: “It was not surprising, for his spirit was
longing for departure!” When a Sufi was about to die, he said [to his servant]:
571 An Ethiopian slave from Mecca, who became a close Companion of the Prophet; he was
renowned for his beautiful voice and served as the one who performed the call to prayer for
the first Muslim community. He died in Syria at the time of the Muslim conquests. 572 Q. 37:61; 37:59, according to Arberry’s translation. 573 This word may denote both “mystery” and the mystic’s “innermost self”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 314
314 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
“Shackle me and rub my cheeks with dust!” He then exclaimed: “The time of
departure has come; I am not free from sin and there’s no excuse that I could
produce to exonerate myself, nor is there any power with which I could help
myself. There’s only You to help me, only You to help me!” He then issued
a loud cry and died. [Suddenly,] those who were there heard a voice saying:
“The servant has surrendered himself to his Master, and the Master has accepted
him!” Someone asked Dhu πl-Nun on his death bed: “What do you desire?” He
answered: “To know Him for one instant before I die!” Someone told a Sufi in
his death agony: “Say ‘God!’” He exclaimed: “How long will you be telling me:
‘Say “God!”, while I have been burned by Him!’”
Someone related: “I was with Mimshadh al-Dinawari, when a poor man came
and said: ‘Peace be upon you!’ Those present returned his greeting. He then
said: ‘Is there around here a clean place in which one could die?’ They showed
him such a place, near which there was a water spring. The man performed his
ritual ablution and a prayer [at the spring], then proceeded to the place that they
had showed him. He then stretched his feet and died.” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd
al-Rahman al-Sulami say: “One day Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Dinawari was delivering
a sermon in his gathering. Suddenly, a woman yelled out of ecstasy. He told
her: ‘Die!’ She stood up and went away. When she reached the door,//384 she
turned toward him and said, ‘I have just died’, and she fell on the floor, dead.”
A Sufi recounted: “I was with Mimshadh al-Dinawari at the time of his death. He was asked: ‘How do you find your illness?’ He answered: ‘You’d better ask
my illness how it finds me!’ He was told: ‘Say: “There’s no deity but God!”’ He
turned his face to the wall and said: ‘You have annihilated my entire self (kulli)
in Your entirety (kullika).Mubarak opened his eyes and
laughed, saying: “[This is indeed a mighty triumph], and for the like of this let
the workers work!”572 It is related that [during his life] Makhul al-Shami was
often overwhelmed with sadness. However, when people came to visit him on his
deathbed, they found him laughing. When they inquired of him about that, he
answered: “Why should I not laugh, when I am about to depart from what I have
always been on guard against and am soon to approach that which I have always
looked forward to and hoped for!” Ruwaym related: “I was present at the death
of Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz, who recited the following with his last breath:
The hearts of the [divine] gnostics long for remembrance [of God]
And during the moments of their intimate conversations [with God]
(munajat) they always think about the mystery (sirr)573
They were given wine-cups that bring sure death
So that they become oblivious of this world like a drunkard
Their aspirations (humum) roam around an encampment
In which God’s beloved shine like resplendent stars
While their mortal bodies on the earth have already been destroyed by
their love of Him,
Their spirits, draped in veils, rise to heavens
They will not rest until they find themselves close to their Beloved
And will not flinch, when they encounter a calamity or harm.”
Someone told al-Junayd that Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz often fell into ecstasy on
the eve of his death. He commented: “It was not surprising, for his spirit was
longing for departure!” When a Sufi was about to die, he said [to his servant]:
571 An Ethiopian slave from Mecca, who became a close Companion of the Prophet; he was
renowned for his beautiful voice and served as the one who performed the call to prayer for
the first Muslim community. He died in Syria at the time of the Muslim conquests. 572 Q. 37:61; 37:59, according to Arberry’s translation. 573 This word may denote both “mystery” and the mystic’s “innermost self”.

When she reached the door,//384 she
turned toward him and said, ‘I have just died’, and she fell on the floor, dead.”
A Sufi recounted: “I was with Mimshadh al-Dinawari at the time of his death. He was asked: ‘How do you find your illness?’ He answered: ‘You’d better ask
my illness how it finds me!’ He was told: ‘Say: “There’s no deity but God!”’ He
turned his face to the wall and said: ‘You have annihilated my entire self (kulli)
in Your entirety (kullika). This is the reward of one who loves You!’” Someone
asked Abu Muhammad al-Dabili, when he was about to die: “Say: ‘There is
no deity but God!’” He answered: “We already know this and have been
annihilated [in God] through it.” He then recited:
He clothed Himself in the robe of desolation when I longed after Him and
Turned away from me, because He did not want me to be His servant. On his death bed al-Shibli was told: “Say: ‘There’s no deity, but God!’” [Instead],
he recited the following:
The king of his love said: ‘I accept no bribes!’
Ask him – may I be his ransom – why he insists on killing me! I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali al-Tamimi say:
I heard Ahmad b. ∏Ataπ say: I heard a certain Sufi say: “When Yahya al-Istakhri
was on his death bed, one of us told him: ‘Say: “I bear witness that there’s no
deity, but God.”’ Yahya sat erect, then took one of those present by the hand and
said: say: ‘I bear witness that there’s no deity, but God.’ He then took another
one by the hand [and said the same thing], until he made everyone who was there
bear witness. After that he died.” Fatima, the sister of Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari,543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 315
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 315
related: “When the death hour of my brother Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari drew nigh,
his head was resting in my lap. He opened his eyes and said: ‘The gates of the
heaven are open, the gardens of Paradise are in blossom and a [heavenly] voice
tells me: “Abu ∏Ali, we have bestowed upon you the highest rank, even though
you may not have wished it [for yourself].”’ He then recited the following:
By Your Truth! I have [tried to gaze] upon anyone else but You
With an eye of passionate love, until I have finally seen You
With my weakening sight I see how You torment me
And how [Your] cheek shows itself from Your [sweet] harvest. I heard a Sufi say: “When Ahmad b. Nasr – may God have mercy on him – was
on his death bed, someone told him://385 ‘Say: “I bear witness that there’s
no deity, but God.”’ He looked at the man and said: ‘Be respectful!’ (bihurmati
ma-kun, in Persian).” One Sufi recounted: “I saw a Sufi, a stranger, who was
about to give up his spirit. His face was covered with flies. I sat next to him and
brushed the flies from his face. He opened his eyes and said: ‘Who is that? For
so many years I have been waiting for a moment that will belong to me and no
one else. It has finally come, and here come you and intrude yourself onto it! Go
away, may God protect you!’” Abu ∏Imran al-Istakhri said: “I saw Abu Turab
[al-Nakhshabi] in the desert standing upright, dead. Nothing propped him up!”
I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say: “The
cause of Abu πl-Husayn al-Nuri’s death was that he heard the following verse:
In my love of you I have kept frequenting a place
Which bewilders those hearts that settle there. “Al-Nuri fell into ecstasy and wandered into a field where he came upon a bed
of freshly cut reeds. Their stems were sharp as swords.When she reached the door,//384 she
turned toward him and said, ‘I have just died’, and she fell on the floor, dead.”
A Sufi recounted: “I was with Mimshadh al-Dinawari at the time of his death. He was asked: ‘How do you find your illness?’ He answered: ‘You’d better ask
my illness how it finds me!’ He was told: ‘Say: “There’s no deity but God!”’ He
turned his face to the wall and said: ‘You have annihilated my entire self (kulli)
in Your entirety (kullika). This is the reward of one who loves You!’” Someone
asked Abu Muhammad al-Dabili, when he was about to die: “Say: ‘There is
no deity but God!’” He answered: “We already know this and have been
annihilated [in God] through it.” He then recited:
He clothed Himself in the robe of desolation when I longed after Him and
Turned away from me, because He did not want me to be His servant. On his death bed al-Shibli was told: “Say: ‘There’s no deity, but God!’” [Instead],
he recited the following:
The king of his love said: ‘I accept no bribes!’
Ask him – may I be his ransom – why he insists on killing me! I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali al-Tamimi say:
I heard Ahmad b. ∏Ataπ say: I heard a certain Sufi say: “When Yahya al-Istakhri
was on his death bed, one of us told him: ‘Say: “I bear witness that there’s no
deity, but God.”’ Yahya sat erect, then took one of those present by the hand and
said: say: ‘I bear witness that there’s no deity, but God.’ He then took another
one by the hand [and said the same thing], until he made everyone who was there
bear witness. After that he died.” Fatima, the sister of Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari,

“Al-Nuri fell into ecstasy and wandered into a field where he came upon a bed
of freshly cut reeds. Their stems were sharp as swords. He walked over them [in
ecstasy] repeating the [above] line of poetry until the next day, blood gushing out
of [the wounds on] his feet. [Finally, he] fell on the floor as a drunkard. His feet
swelled up and he died. It is said that on his bed he was asked to say: ‘There’s no
deity, but God.’ He responded: ‘Am I not returning to Him?’”
It is related that Ibrahim al-Khawwas came down with diarrhea in the
congregational mosque of Rayy574. Once, after having relieved himself, he entered
water575 in order to perform an ablution. It was then that his soul departed. I
heard Mansur al-Maghribi relate that Yusuf b. al-Husayn finally came to visit him
in his illness after many days of absence and neglect. When he saw al-Khawwas,
he asked him whether he would like anything. Al-Khawwas said: “Yes, I would
like a piece of fried liver.” The master Abu πl-Qasim [al-Qushayri] commented:
“Perhaps there is a hint in this phrase, implying: ‘I would like a heart that is
compassionate toward the poor and a liver that is fried and burned to feed a
574 An ancient Persian city, now in ruins, which lies some five miles south-east of Tehran, Iran. 575 Probably an ablution pond located near or in the mosque.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 316
316 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
stranger.’ He [al-Khawwas] thereby showed his displeasure with Yusuf b.
al-Husayn for neglecting to visit with him.” It is related that the cause of Ibn
∏Ataπ [al-Adami’s] death was that he was once brought before the vizier [Hamid],
who spoke harshly to him. Ibn ∏Ataπ told him: “Be quiet, man!” The vizier ordered
the guards to beat him on his head with his shoes, and he died because of it.
I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Abdallah
b. ∏Ali al-Tamimi say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Duqqi say: “We were with Abu Bakr
al-Zaqqaq one morning. [Suddenly,] he said: ‘My God, for how long will You
keep me//386 here?’ Before the time of the first morning prayer came, he was
dead.” It is related that Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari said: “One day I met a youth in the
desert. When he saw me, he exclaimed: ‘Isn’t it enough for Him that He has
enflamed me with His love so as to make me sick?’ I then saw him giving up his
spirit. I told him, ‘Say: “There’s no deity, but God”’, to which he responded,
saying:
O One from Whom, although He torments me, I have no escape
O One, Who has installed Himself in my heart for ever and ever!”
Someone told al-Junayd: “Say: ‘There’s no deity, but God.’” He responded,
saying: “I have not forgotten Him, so that I should be reminded to remember
Him!” He then recited the following:
He is present in my heart, He resides there
I have not forgotten Him, so that I should be reminded about Him
He is my master and my support
And my portion from Him is great indeed!
I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali al-Tamimi
say: I asked a servant of al-Shibli, Ja∏far b. Nusayr Bakran al-Dinawari, about
things that he saw from him. He related the following on his authority: “[Once]
I576owed a dirhamthat was improperly obtained. [To expiate my sin] I had given
away thousands of dirhams in the name of its owner, so that I could set my
mind at ease on this account.” [On his death bed] al-Shibli told me: “Give me
the ablution for prayer.” I gave him the ablution. However, I forgot to run water
through his beard. At that time, he had lost his ability to speak, therefore he
grabbed me by the hand and rubbed through his beard. After that he expired.”
After Ja∏far had related this [about al-Shibli], he burst into tears, saying: “What
can you say about a man who did not neglect a single rule of the Divine Law
even on his death bed?!” I heard ∏Abdallah b. Yusuf al-Isbahani say: I heard
Abu πl-Hasan ∏Abdallah al-Tarsusi: I heard ∏Allush577 al-Dinawari say: I heard
al-Muzayyin the Elder say: “Once, when I was in Mecca, I was overcome by
agitation. So, I left Mecca for Medina. When I reached the well of Maymuna, I
576 That is, al-Shibli, as quoted by his servant.
577 Or “∏Allus”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 317
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 317
came across a youth who lay prostrated on the ground. When I approached him,
I saw that he was about to expire. I told him: ‘Say: “There’s no deity but God!”’
He opened his eyes and recited the following:
If I die, my heart is filled with passion,
For the noble men perish by the illness of passion. He then issued a shriek and expired. I washed him, wrapped him up in a shroud,
and prayed over him. After I had buried him, my desire for travel suddenly
subsided and I returned to Mecca.”
Someone asked a Sufi: “Do you love death?” He answered: “It is better to go
to someone from whom you hope to see good than to stay with someone from
whose evil you cannot be protected.” It is related that al-Junayd said: “I was with
my master Ibn al-Karnabi, when he was giving up his soul. I raised my eyes
to the sky [in prayer for him]. However, he told me: ‘Not yet.’ Then I lowered
my gaze, to which he responded, saying: ‘Not yet.’ That is, he was still too near
you//387 for you to look at the sky or to the earth. He [Ibn al-Karnabi] had
not yet reached his place.” I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr
[al-Sarraj] al-Tusi say: I heard one of our companions say: “Abu Yazid said at
his death: ‘I remember You only after I have neglected You, and You take my
soul only after I have slackened [in my worship of You].”
I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say: I heard
al-Wajihi say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say: “One day I arrived in Egypt
only to find a large crowd of people. They told me: ‘We have just accompanied
the funeral bier of a youth who died after he had heard the following verses:
Great is the longing of the servant that prompts him to seek a glimpse
of You.’
[After he had heard this], he issued a shriek and expired.”
It is related that a group of people came to visit Mimshadh al-Dinawari on
his death bed.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 316
316 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
stranger.’ He [al-Khawwas] thereby showed his displeasure with Yusuf b.
al-Husayn for neglecting to visit with him.” It is related that the cause of Ibn
∏Ataπ [al-Adami’s] death was that he was once brought before the vizier [Hamid],
who spoke harshly to him. Ibn ∏Ataπ told him: “Be quiet, man!” The vizier ordered
the guards to beat him on his head with his shoes, and he died because of it.
I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Abdallah
b. ∏Ali al-Tamimi say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Duqqi say: “We were with Abu Bakr
al-Zaqqaq one morning. [Suddenly,] he said: ‘My God, for how long will You
keep me//386 here?’ Before the time of the first morning prayer came, he was
dead.” It is related that Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari said: “One day I met a youth in the
desert. When he saw me, he exclaimed: ‘Isn’t it enough for Him that He has
enflamed me with His love so as to make me sick?’ I then saw him giving up his
spirit. I told him, ‘Say: “There’s no deity, but God”’, to which he responded,
saying:
O One from Whom, although He torments me, I have no escape
O One, Who has installed Himself in my heart for ever and ever!”
Someone told al-Junayd: “Say: ‘There’s no deity, but God.’” He responded,
saying: “I have not forgotten Him, so that I should be reminded to remember
Him!” He then recited the following:
He is present in my heart, He resides there
I have not forgotten Him, so that I should be reminded about Him
He is my master and my support
And my portion from Him is great indeed!
I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali al-Tamimi
say: I asked a servant of al-Shibli, Ja∏far b. Nusayr Bakran al-Dinawari, about
things that he saw from him. He related the following on his authority: “[Once]
I576owed a dirhamthat was improperly obtained. [To expiate my sin] I had given
away thousands of dirhams in the name of its owner, so that I could set my
mind at ease on this account.” [On his death bed] al-Shibli told me: “Give me
the ablution for prayer.” I gave him the ablution. However, I forgot to run water
through his beard. At that time, he had lost his ability to speak, therefore he
grabbed me by the hand and rubbed through his beard. After that he expired.”
After Ja∏far had related this [about al-Shibli], he burst into tears, saying: “What
can you say about a man who did not neglect a single rule of the Divine Law
even on his death bed?!” I heard ∏Abdallah b. Yusuf al-Isbahani say: I heard
Abu πl-Hasan ∏Abdallah al-Tarsusi: I heard ∏Allush577 al-Dinawari say: I heard
al-Muzayyin the Elder say: “Once, when I was in Mecca, I was overcome by
agitation. So, I left Mecca for Medina. When I reached the well of Maymuna, I
576 That is, al-Shibli, as quoted by his servant.
577 Or “∏Allus”.

He [Ibn al-Karnabi] had
not yet reached his place.” I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr
[al-Sarraj] al-Tusi say: I heard one of our companions say: “Abu Yazid said at
his death: ‘I remember You only after I have neglected You, and You take my
soul only after I have slackened [in my worship of You].”
I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say: I heard
al-Wajihi say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say: “One day I arrived in Egypt
only to find a large crowd of people. They told me: ‘We have just accompanied
the funeral bier of a youth who died after he had heard the following verses:
Great is the longing of the servant that prompts him to seek a glimpse
of You.’
[After he had heard this], he issued a shriek and expired.”
It is related that a group of people came to visit Mimshadh al-Dinawari on
his death bed. They asked him: “How has God treated you?” He answered: “For
thirty years I have been shown Paradise and things that are in it, yet I have
not given it even one glance!” At his death agony they asked him: “How does
your heart feel?” He answered: “It’s been thirty years since I lost my heart!” I
heard Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali
al-Tamimi say: I heard al-Wajihi say: “Ibn Bunan died because a certain spiritual
state entered his heart, as a result of which he began to roam aimlessly. When
some people found him in the middle of the desert of the Israelites lying on the
sand, he opened his eyes and said: ‘Graze here! This is the grazing ground of the
beloved [of God] (ahbab).’ After that his spirit departed.”
Abu Ya∏qub al-Nahrajuri said: “When I was in Mecca, a Sufi came to me
carrying one dinar and said: ‘If I die tomorrow, use half of this [dinar] to dig a
grave [for me] and another half to perform funeral rites on me.’ I thought to
myself: ‘This man has gone mad; probably the penury of the Hijaz has afflicted543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 318
318 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
him.’ When the next day came, he began to circumambulate the Ka∏ba. He made
a few steps, then stretched himself on the ground. I said [to myself]: ‘Here it is:
he is trying to fake death!’ However, when I came up to him and tried to move
him, I discovered that he was indeed dead. I then buried him, as he requested.”
When the condition of Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri deteriorated, his son Abu Bakr tore
his shirt. Abu ∏Uthman opened his eyes and told him: “My son, violating the
[Prophet’s] custom outwardly results in hypocrisy within your inner self.” It is
related that Ibn ∏Ataπ came to al-Junayd at the time of his death. He greeted him,
but al-Junayd was slow in giving his reply. Finally, he returned the greeting,
adding: “Excuse me. I was reciting my prayers (wird).” After that he expired. Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari related: “A Sufi who came to us died. When I put him
in the grave,//388 I opened his face before covering him with earth so that God
– may He be great and exalted – could extend His mercy on him as a stranger.578
Suddenly, he opened his eyes and said: ‘Abu ∏Ali, are you pampering me before
Him, Who has already pampered me?’ I inquired of him: ‘Sir, how can you live
after death?’ He said: ‘No, I am alive, for everyone who loves God – may He be
great and exalted – is alive, so that I can help you, O Rudhbari, tomorrow579with
my status (jahi) [in the eyes of God].’”
It is related that Ibn Sahl al-Isbahani said: “Do you really think I will die
like any ordinary person – getting sick and receiving visits [from friends]. [No,]
I will simply be called upon and it will be said: ‘∏Ali!’, and I will answer
[the call].” One day, as he was out walking, he uttered: “Here I am, God!” and
expired. I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah
b.He [Ibn al-Karnabi] had
not yet reached his place.” I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr
[al-Sarraj] al-Tusi say: I heard one of our companions say: “Abu Yazid said at
his death: ‘I remember You only after I have neglected You, and You take my
soul only after I have slackened [in my worship of You].”
I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say: I heard
al-Wajihi say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say: “One day I arrived in Egypt
only to find a large crowd of people. They told me: ‘We have just accompanied
the funeral bier of a youth who died after he had heard the following verses:
Great is the longing of the servant that prompts him to seek a glimpse
of You.’
[After he had heard this], he issued a shriek and expired.”
It is related that a group of people came to visit Mimshadh al-Dinawari on
his death bed. They asked him: “How has God treated you?” He answered: “For
thirty years I have been shown Paradise and things that are in it, yet I have
not given it even one glance!” At his death agony they asked him: “How does
your heart feel?” He answered: “It’s been thirty years since I lost my heart!” I
heard Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali
al-Tamimi say: I heard al-Wajihi say: “Ibn Bunan died because a certain spiritual
state entered his heart, as a result of which he began to roam aimlessly. When
some people found him in the middle of the desert of the Israelites lying on the
sand, he opened his eyes and said: ‘Graze here! This is the grazing ground of the
beloved [of God] (ahbab).’ After that his spirit departed.”
Abu Ya∏qub al-Nahrajuri said: “When I was in Mecca, a Sufi came to me
carrying one dinar and said: ‘If I die tomorrow, use half of this [dinar] to dig a
grave [for me] and another half to perform funeral rites on me.’ I thought to
myself: ‘This man has gone mad; probably the penury of the Hijaz has afflicted

I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah
b. Khafif say: I heard Abu πl-Hasan al-Muzayyin say: “When Abu Ya∏qub al-
Nahrajuri came to his final end, I told him, as he was experiencing the agony
of death: ‘Say: “There’s no deity, but God.”’ He smiled at me and answered:
‘Are you talking to me?! By the majesty of the One Who will never taste death,
nothing is left between Him and myself, except the veil of majesty.’ As soon as
he uttered that, his light went out.” Al-Muzayyin, who recounted this story,
then said, grabbing his beard: ‘A cupper580 like myself [had the cheek] to ask
God’s friends [like him] to utter the profession of faith (shahada)?! What
a shame!’” He would always weep, when he told this story. Abu πl-Husayn
al-Maliki said: “I kept the company of Khayr al-Nassaj581 for many years. Eight
days before his death he told me: ‘I will die on Thursday around the sunset
prayer. I will be buried on Friday before the [Friday] prayer. You may forget
this. [Please] do not forget!’ Abu πl-Husayn said: ‘I forgot about it until that
Friday. Then I met someone who informed me about his death. I went out to
578 That is, the fact that he died far from his home was supposed to improve his fate in the
Hereafter. 579 That is, when you yourself die. 580 His nickname, “Muzayyin”, indicates that he was a barber; barbers often served as cuppers
as well. 581 A famous Sufi of Baghdad, who died in 322/934.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 319
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 319
join his funeral procession, only to find some people, who told me: ‘He will
be buried after the prayer.’ I walked on and encountered the funeral procession
that had left [his house] before the prayer, as he told me. I asked one of those
who were with him at his death [about his condition]. He said: ‘At first, he lost
consciousness, then came to himself and turned in the direction of [God’s]
House582, saying: “Wait, may God protect you! You are a servant under orders
(∏abd maπmur) and I am a servant under orders. That which you have been
ordered to do will not elude you. However, that which I have been ordered may
elude me.” He then asked for water to perform his ablutions, after which he
prayed. He then stretched out and his eyes grew dull.’ Someone saw him in a
dream after his death and asked him about his condition. He answered: ‘Don’t ask. However, I have finally rid myself of this filthy world of yours!’”
Abu πl-Husayn al-Himsi, the author of the “Book of Delectation of Mysteries”,
mentioned that when Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] died, people flocked to his
funeral procession in great numbers. In that city583there was a Jew, some seventy
years old. When he heard the commotion,//389 he went out to see what it was. When he saw the funeral procession, he exclaimed: “Do you see what I see?”
They answered: “No, we don’t.” He then said: “I see crowds descending from
the heavens in order to touch the bier of the deceased.” He then uttered the
[Muslim] profession of faith and embraced Islam. He became a good Muslim. I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard Abu Ja∏far b. Qays in Egypt say: I heard Abu Sa∏id
al-Kharraz say: “Once I was in Mecca. As I was whiling away my day at the gate
of Banu Shayba, I noticed a youth with a handsome face, lying there dead.I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah
b. Khafif say: I heard Abu πl-Hasan al-Muzayyin say: “When Abu Ya∏qub al-
Nahrajuri came to his final end, I told him, as he was experiencing the agony
of death: ‘Say: “There’s no deity, but God.”’ He smiled at me and answered:
‘Are you talking to me?! By the majesty of the One Who will never taste death,
nothing is left between Him and myself, except the veil of majesty.’ As soon as
he uttered that, his light went out.” Al-Muzayyin, who recounted this story,
then said, grabbing his beard: ‘A cupper580 like myself [had the cheek] to ask
God’s friends [like him] to utter the profession of faith (shahada)?! What
a shame!’” He would always weep, when he told this story. Abu πl-Husayn
al-Maliki said: “I kept the company of Khayr al-Nassaj581 for many years. Eight
days before his death he told me: ‘I will die on Thursday around the sunset
prayer. I will be buried on Friday before the [Friday] prayer. You may forget
this. [Please] do not forget!’ Abu πl-Husayn said: ‘I forgot about it until that
Friday. Then I met someone who informed me about his death. I went out to
578 That is, the fact that he died far from his home was supposed to improve his fate in the
Hereafter. 579 That is, when you yourself die. 580 His nickname, “Muzayyin”, indicates that he was a barber; barbers often served as cuppers
as well. 581 A famous Sufi of Baghdad, who died in 322/934.

Qays in Egypt say: I heard Abu Sa∏id
al-Kharraz say: “Once I was in Mecca. As I was whiling away my day at the gate
of Banu Shayba, I noticed a youth with a handsome face, lying there dead. As I
was looking at his face, he smiled and said to me: ‘O Abu Sa∏id, don’t you know
that the beloved [of God] are alive even though they have died?! They simply
move from one domain to another!’” I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard
Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard al-Jurayri say that [some people] asked Dhu πl-Nun
for a pious advice as he was lying on his death bed. He responded, saying: “Don’t
distract me, for I am enjoying the beauties of His kindness!” I also heard him
say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad al-Razi say: I heard Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri
say that some people asked Abu Hafs [al-Haddad] as he was lying on his death
bed: “Admonish us!” He answered: “I do not have enough strength to speak.”
However, he eventually gathered strength, and I asked him: “Tell me [what you
want], so that I could pass on your words [to others]!” He said: “My admonition
is this: May every heart be abased by each mistake it commits!”
Divine gnosis (al-ma∏rifa [bi-llah])
God Most High said: “They measured God not with His true measure.”584 It is
written in a commentary that this means: “They have not known God as He
582 That is, the Ka∏ba. 583 That is, Basra. 584 Q. 6:91.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 320
320 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
should be known.” ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-∏Adl: informed
us: Muhammad b. Qasim al-∏Ataki said: Muhammad b. Ashras said: Sulayman
b. ∏Isa al-Shajari,585 said on the authority of ∏Abbad b. Kathir, on the authority
of Hanzala, on the authority of Abu Sufyan, on the authority of al-Qasim b. Muhammad, on the authority of ∏Aπisha – may God be pleased with her – that
the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – said: “The support of the house is
its foundation and the support of the faith is the knowledge of God Most High,
certitude, and a restraining intelligence.” [∏Aπisha] asked him: “By my mother and
my father, what is the restraining intelligence?” He answered: “Refraining from
disobedience to God and eagerness to obey Him.” The master [Abu πl-Qasim
al-Qushayri] said: “According to scholars (∏ulamaπ), ‘gnosis’ (ma∏rifa) means
‘knowledge’ (∏ilm). Thus, all knowledge is gnosis and all gnosis is knowledge. Each person who is cognizant of God (∏arif) is a knower (∏alim). In the usage of
this folk, gnosis is the attribute of one who is cognizant of God//390 – praise be
to Him – and His names and attributes, and of one who has put his trust in God
Most High in his everyday behavior and who has rid himself of bad morals
and transgressions. He then proceeds to reside at the door [of God’s mercy] with
his heart toiling constantly, whereupon he becomes endeared to God Most High
and trusts Him in everything he experiences; the whisperings of his [low] self
abandon him and thoughts about anyone else [but God] never enter his heart. Thus, when he becomes a stranger to all other creatures, completely innocent of
any faults of his [lower] soul, and free from any recourse to or concern for other
[than God], he enters into an uninterrupted intimate conversation with God Most
High and accepts nothing except what is true.Qays in Egypt say: I heard Abu Sa∏id
al-Kharraz say: “Once I was in Mecca. As I was whiling away my day at the gate
of Banu Shayba, I noticed a youth with a handsome face, lying there dead. As I
was looking at his face, he smiled and said to me: ‘O Abu Sa∏id, don’t you know
that the beloved [of God] are alive even though they have died?! They simply
move from one domain to another!’” I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard
Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard al-Jurayri say that [some people] asked Dhu πl-Nun
for a pious advice as he was lying on his death bed. He responded, saying: “Don’t
distract me, for I am enjoying the beauties of His kindness!” I also heard him
say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad al-Razi say: I heard Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri
say that some people asked Abu Hafs [al-Haddad] as he was lying on his death
bed: “Admonish us!” He answered: “I do not have enough strength to speak.”
However, he eventually gathered strength, and I asked him: “Tell me [what you
want], so that I could pass on your words [to others]!” He said: “My admonition
is this: May every heart be abased by each mistake it commits!”
Divine gnosis (al-ma∏rifa [bi-llah])
God Most High said: “They measured God not with His true measure.”584 It is
written in a commentary that this means: “They have not known God as He
582 That is, the Ka∏ba. 583 That is, Basra. 584 Q. 6:91.

He then proceeds to reside at the door [of God’s mercy] with
his heart toiling constantly, whereupon he becomes endeared to God Most High
and trusts Him in everything he experiences; the whisperings of his [low] self
abandon him and thoughts about anyone else [but God] never enter his heart. Thus, when he becomes a stranger to all other creatures, completely innocent of
any faults of his [lower] soul, and free from any recourse to or concern for other
[than God], he enters into an uninterrupted intimate conversation with God Most
High and accepts nothing except what is true. After that, he begins to speak on
behalf of God – praise be to Him – Who imparts to him (ta∏rif) the mysteries
of the dispensations of His foreordained decrees. It is then that he is called a
‘gnostic’ and his state is called ‘gnosis’. In brief, the more estranged he is from
his own self, the more he knows his Lord. Sufi masters have discoursed profusely
about gnosis, each speaking from his own experience and things he has discovered
in his own mystical moment.”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“Among the signs of divine gnosis is awe of Him; the more you have gnosis, the
greater is your awe.” He also said: “Gnosis brings tranquility to your heart;
the more gnosis you have, the greater is your tranquility.” I heard the master Abu
∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Zayd say: I
heard al-Shibli say: “The gnostic has no attachment, the lover has no complaint,
the servant has no [selfish] pretension, the one who fears [God] has no rest,
and no one has escape from God.” I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard
Muhammad b. Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-Wahhab say: I heard al-Shibli say, when
someone asked him about gnosis: “It begins with God Most High, and the rest
of it has no end.” I heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard my father say: I heard Abu
585 Or “al-Sijzi”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 321
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 321
πl-∏Abbas al-Dinawari say: Abu Hafs [al-Haddad] said: “Since I acquired the
gnosis of God Most High, neither truth nor falsehood have ever entered my
heart.”
The master Abu πl-Qasim [al-Qushayri] commented: “What Abu Hafs
said is somewhat problematic. What it most likely means is that, in the opinion
of this folk, gnosis renders the servant completely oblivious of himself due to his
preoccupation with the remembrance of God – praise be upon Him: he witnesses
no one but God – may He be great and exalted – and turns to no one else but
Him. Just as the intelligent person (∏aqil) turns to his heart, his thinking abilities,
and his memory in dealing with matters and spiritual conditions that present
themselves to him, the Sufi gnostic turns to his Lord. If he has been preoccupied
with nothing but his Lord, he has not turned to his heart. So, how can a certain
idea enter the heart of someone who has no heart?//391 This is the difference
between someone who lives through his heart and someone who lives through
his Lord.”
Someone asked Abu Yazid [al-Bistami] about gnosis. He answered, [quoting
the Queen of Sheba]: “Kings, when they enter a city, disorder it and make the
mighty ones of its inhabitants abased.”586 The master [al-Qushayri] said: “This
is the meaning of Abu Hafs’ allusion.” Abu Yazid said: “[All] people possess
[spiritual] states, whereas the gnostic possesses none, because his personal char-
acteristics (rusum) are totally erased, his personality (huwiyya) is fully annihilated
by the personality of the Other, and his qualities are rendered nonexistent by the
qualities of the Other.” Al-Wasiti said: “Man’s gnosis is imperfect as long as he
is content with God and is in need of Him.” The master said: “Being in need of
God and content with Him are signs of the servant’s sobriety (sahw) and of the
persistence of his personal characteristics, because they are part of his attributes.So, how can a certain
idea enter the heart of someone who has no heart?//391 This is the difference
between someone who lives through his heart and someone who lives through
his Lord.”
Someone asked Abu Yazid [al-Bistami] about gnosis. He answered, [quoting
the Queen of Sheba]: “Kings, when they enter a city, disorder it and make the
mighty ones of its inhabitants abased.”586 The master [al-Qushayri] said: “This
is the meaning of Abu Hafs’ allusion.” Abu Yazid said: “[All] people possess
[spiritual] states, whereas the gnostic possesses none, because his personal char-
acteristics (rusum) are totally erased, his personality (huwiyya) is fully annihilated
by the personality of the Other, and his qualities are rendered nonexistent by the
qualities of the Other.” Al-Wasiti said: “Man’s gnosis is imperfect as long as he
is content with God and is in need of Him.” The master said: “Being in need of
God and content with Him are signs of the servant’s sobriety (sahw) and of the
persistence of his personal characteristics, because they are part of his attributes. The gnostic, on the other hand, is completely erased by the object of his gnosis
(ma∏ruf). How can he have any [need] at all when he is fully consumed by His
existence and submerged in the contemplation of Him? He is oblivious of [his]
being, deprived of any sense of his personal traits.” Al-Wasiti also said about
this: “Whoever knows God Most High falls silent, because he becomes mute and
subdued.” The Prophet – may God bless and greet him – said: “I cannot count
your praises.” These are the characteristics of those who have attained the furthest
reaches. As for those who have not yet reached this limit, they have discoursed
profusely about divine gnosis. Muhammad b. al-Husayn informed us: Abu Ja∏far Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Sa∏id al-Razi told us: ∏Ayyash587b. Hamza told us: I heard Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari
say: I heard Ahmad b.He then proceeds to reside at the door [of God’s mercy] with
his heart toiling constantly, whereupon he becomes endeared to God Most High
and trusts Him in everything he experiences; the whisperings of his [low] self
abandon him and thoughts about anyone else [but God] never enter his heart. Thus, when he becomes a stranger to all other creatures, completely innocent of
any faults of his [lower] soul, and free from any recourse to or concern for other
[than God], he enters into an uninterrupted intimate conversation with God Most
High and accepts nothing except what is true. After that, he begins to speak on
behalf of God – praise be to Him – Who imparts to him (ta∏rif) the mysteries
of the dispensations of His foreordained decrees. It is then that he is called a
‘gnostic’ and his state is called ‘gnosis’. In brief, the more estranged he is from
his own self, the more he knows his Lord. Sufi masters have discoursed profusely
about gnosis, each speaking from his own experience and things he has discovered
in his own mystical moment.”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say:
“Among the signs of divine gnosis is awe of Him; the more you have gnosis, the
greater is your awe.” He also said: “Gnosis brings tranquility to your heart;
the more gnosis you have, the greater is your tranquility.” I heard the master Abu
∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Zayd say: I
heard al-Shibli say: “The gnostic has no attachment, the lover has no complaint,
the servant has no [selfish] pretension, the one who fears [God] has no rest,
and no one has escape from God.” I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard
Muhammad b. Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-Wahhab say: I heard al-Shibli say, when
someone asked him about gnosis: “It begins with God Most High, and the rest
of it has no end.” I heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard my father say: I heard Abu
585 Or “al-Sijzi”.

Hamza told us: I heard Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari
say: I heard Ahmad b. ∏Asim al-Antaki say: “Whoever knows God most is most
afraid of Him.” A Sufi said: “Whoever has known God Most High is disgusted
with existence, for despite its breadth this world has become too narrow for
him.” It is said: “Whoever knows God attains a pure livelihood and a good life;
586 Q. 27:34. 587 Or “∏Abbas”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 322
322 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
everyone is in awe of him, while he himself fears no creature, because he becomes
God’s intimate friend.” It is also said: “Whoever knows God loses desire for
things of this world; he is neither attached nor detached.”//392 It is said:
“Gnosis demands both humility and exaltation (ta∏zim) in the same way as
the declaration of [God’s] oneness demands both contentment and surrender
[to God].” Ruwaym [b. Ahmad] said: “Gnosis for the gnostic is like a mirror;
whenever he looks into it, his Master appears to him.” Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri said:
“Friendship with the gnostic is like friendship with God Most High. He treats
you with gentleness and shows kindness to you, thereby imitating God’s moral
qualities.” Someone asked Ibn Yazdaniyar: “When will the gnostic witness God
– praise be to him?” He responded: “When the witness appears, the perceptions
will be annihilated, the senses will fade away, and sincerity will disappear.”588
Al-Husayn b. Mansur said: “When the servant reaches the station of gnosis, God
will dictate to him all his thoughts and protect his innermost mystery (sirr), so
that not a single thought about something apart from God will enter his mind.”
He also said: “One of the signs of the gnostic is that he is empty of any thought
about this world and the next one.” Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] said: “Gnosis
has two goals: confusion (dahash) and bewilderment.”589 I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Sa∏id say: I heard Muhammad
b. Ahmad b. Sahl say: I heard Sa∏id b. ∏Uthman say: I heard Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri
say: “The person who knows God Most High is the most bewildered of all in
regard to Him.” I also heard him [Muhammad b.Hamza told us: I heard Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari
say: I heard Ahmad b. ∏Asim al-Antaki say: “Whoever knows God most is most
afraid of Him.” A Sufi said: “Whoever has known God Most High is disgusted
with existence, for despite its breadth this world has become too narrow for
him.” It is said: “Whoever knows God attains a pure livelihood and a good life;
586 Q. 27:34. 587 Or “∏Abbas”.

Sahl say: I heard Sa∏id b. ∏Uthman say: I heard Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri
say: “The person who knows God Most High is the most bewildered of all in
regard to Him.” I also heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard Abu
Bakr al-Razi say: I heard Abu ∏Umar al-Antaki say: “A man asked al-Junayd:
‘Some possessors of gnosis say that abandoning movements [in the service of
God] (harakat) is part of piety and righteousness.’ Al-Junayd responded, saying:
‘These are the words of those who profess the giving up of acts of worship. I
consider this a grave [sin] (∏azim). A person who steals and commits adultery is
better than one who says such things. The divine gnostics borrow their works
from God Most High and with them they return to Him. Were I to live one
thousand years, I would not fall short in my pious works by an iota!’”
Someone asked Abu Yazid al-Bistami: “How did you acquire this gnosis of
yours?” He answered: “By an empty stomach and a naked body.” Abu Ya∏qub
al-Nahrajuri related: I asked Abu Ya∏qub al-Susi: “Can the gnostic miss any-
thing//393 except God – may He be great and exalted?” He responded, saying:
“Does he see anything but God to miss it?” I asked him: “How does he see
things?” He answered: “He sees them with the eye of [self-]annihilation and
cessation (zawal).” Abu Yazid [al-Bistami] said: “The gnostic is a flyer, whereas
the ascetic is a walker.” It is said: “The eyes of the gnostic are weeping, while
his heart is laughing.” Al-Junayd said: “One cannot be a gnostic until one has
588 Gramlich, in his German translation of the “Epistle” (p. 432), suggests that one should read
ihsas (“sensation”) instead of ikhlas, but all the Arabic texts I have consulted have the latter. 589 On bewilderment and confusion as the marks of true gnosis, see Chittick, The Sufi Path,
“Index” under “bewilderment”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 323
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 323
become like the earth, which is trampled upon by both the righteous and the
sinners, or like the cloud which casts its shadow on everything, or like the rain that
quenches the thirst of those it loves and those it does not love.” Yahya b. Mu∏adh
said: “When the gnostic leaves this world he cannot get enough of two things:
weeping over his lot and praising his Lord – may He be great and exalted.” Abu
Yazid said: “The gnostics acquire their gnosis by abandoning what belongs to
them and keeping what is due to Him.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Abu πl-Husayn
al-Farisi say: I heard Yusuf b. ∏Ali say: “No one can become a [true] gnostic
unless when given the wealth equal to that of [king] Solomon – peace be upon
him – he would not be distracted from God for the blink of an eye.” I also heard
him say: I heard Abu πl-Husayn al-Farisi say: I heard Ibn ∏Ataπ say: “Gnosis
rests on three pillars: awe, humility, and intimacy.” I also heard him say: I
heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. Shadhan say: I heard Yusuf b. al-Husayn say:
“Someone asked Dhu πl-Nun: ‘How have you acquired knowledge of your Lord?’
He responded: ‘I have come to know my Lord through my Lord.Shadhan say: I heard Yusuf b. al-Husayn say:
“Someone asked Dhu πl-Nun: ‘How have you acquired knowledge of your Lord?’
He responded: ‘I have come to know my Lord through my Lord. Were it not for
my Lord, I would not have known Him.’” They say: “The scholar serves as an
example for other people, whereas the gnostic serves as their guide.” Al-Shibli
said: “The gnostic takes no notice of anything other than Him; nor speaks
anything that God has not spoken, nor does he see his protector in anyone but
God Most High.” They say: “The gnostic finds intimacy in the recollection
of God, and God estranges him from [the rest of] His creatures; the gnostic
needs God, and God makes him independent from His creatures; he shows
humility toward God Most High, and God gives him a high position among His
creatures.” Abu πl-Tayyib al-Samarri said: “Gnosis is God’s appearance in the
innermost souls [of His servants] through enlightening them with a constant
stream of lights.” It is said: “The gnostic stands above the things he says, whereas
the scholar stands below the things he says.” Abu Sulayman al-Darani said:
“God unveils [His mysteries] to the gnostic, while he sleeps in his bed, while He
does not unveil//394 anything to any other person, even though he may be
standing in prayer.” Al-Junayd said: “The gnostic is someone on behalf of whose
innermost soul God speaks, while he remains silent.” Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri said:
“Everyone and everything has a punishment of his or its own; the punishment
of the gnostic is when he ceases the recollection of God Most High.”
I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say: I heard
al-Wajihi say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say: I heard Ruwaym say: “The
hypocrisy of the gnostics is better than the sincerity of the aspirants (muridun).”
Abu Bakr al-Warraq said: “The silence of the gnostic is more beneficial; while his
speech is sweeter and more pleasant.” Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri said: “The ascetics590
(zuhhad) are the kings of the Hereafter, while they themselves are but the poor
[in the service of] the gnostics.” Someone asked al-Junayd about the gnostic.Sahl say: I heard Sa∏id b. ∏Uthman say: I heard Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri
say: “The person who knows God Most High is the most bewildered of all in
regard to Him.” I also heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard Abu
Bakr al-Razi say: I heard Abu ∏Umar al-Antaki say: “A man asked al-Junayd:
‘Some possessors of gnosis say that abandoning movements [in the service of
God] (harakat) is part of piety and righteousness.’ Al-Junayd responded, saying:
‘These are the words of those who profess the giving up of acts of worship. I
consider this a grave [sin] (∏azim). A person who steals and commits adultery is
better than one who says such things. The divine gnostics borrow their works
from God Most High and with them they return to Him. Were I to live one
thousand years, I would not fall short in my pious works by an iota!’”
Someone asked Abu Yazid al-Bistami: “How did you acquire this gnosis of
yours?” He answered: “By an empty stomach and a naked body.” Abu Ya∏qub
al-Nahrajuri related: I asked Abu Ya∏qub al-Susi: “Can the gnostic miss any-
thing//393 except God – may He be great and exalted?” He responded, saying:
“Does he see anything but God to miss it?” I asked him: “How does he see
things?” He answered: “He sees them with the eye of [self-]annihilation and
cessation (zawal).” Abu Yazid [al-Bistami] said: “The gnostic is a flyer, whereas
the ascetic is a walker.” It is said: “The eyes of the gnostic are weeping, while
his heart is laughing.” Al-Junayd said: “One cannot be a gnostic until one has
588 Gramlich, in his German translation of the “Epistle” (p. 432), suggests that one should read
ihsas (“sensation”) instead of ikhlas, but all the Arabic texts I have consulted have the latter. 589 On bewilderment and confusion as the marks of true gnosis, see Chittick, The Sufi Path,
“Index” under “bewilderment”.

al-Husayn say:
“Someone asked Dhu πl-Nun: ‘How have you acquired knowledge of your Lord?’
He responded: ‘I have come to know my Lord through my Lord. Were it not for
my Lord, I would not have known Him.’” They say: “The scholar serves as an
example for other people, whereas the gnostic serves as their guide.” Al-Shibli
said: “The gnostic takes no notice of anything other than Him; nor speaks
anything that God has not spoken, nor does he see his protector in anyone but
God Most High.” They say: “The gnostic finds intimacy in the recollection
of God, and God estranges him from [the rest of] His creatures; the gnostic
needs God, and God makes him independent from His creatures; he shows
humility toward God Most High, and God gives him a high position among His
creatures.” Abu πl-Tayyib al-Samarri said: “Gnosis is God’s appearance in the
innermost souls [of His servants] through enlightening them with a constant
stream of lights.” It is said: “The gnostic stands above the things he says, whereas
the scholar stands below the things he says.” Abu Sulayman al-Darani said:
“God unveils [His mysteries] to the gnostic, while he sleeps in his bed, while He
does not unveil//394 anything to any other person, even though he may be
standing in prayer.” Al-Junayd said: “The gnostic is someone on behalf of whose
innermost soul God speaks, while he remains silent.” Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri said:
“Everyone and everything has a punishment of his or its own; the punishment
of the gnostic is when he ceases the recollection of God Most High.”
I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say: I heard
al-Wajihi say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say: I heard Ruwaym say: “The
hypocrisy of the gnostics is better than the sincerity of the aspirants (muridun).”
Abu Bakr al-Warraq said: “The silence of the gnostic is more beneficial; while his
speech is sweeter and more pleasant.” Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri said: “The ascetics590
(zuhhad) are the kings of the Hereafter, while they themselves are but the poor
[in the service of] the gnostics.” Someone asked al-Junayd about the gnostic. He
590 This term can also be translated as “world-renouncers”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 324
324 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
said: “The color of the water is the same as the color of its vessel.” That is, [his
condition is determined] by the command of his mystical moment (waqtuh). Someone asked Abu Yazid about the gnostic. He answered: “[It is he who] sees
only God in his sleep and during his waking hours; he agrees with no one but
God and contemplates no one but God Most High.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad
al-Dimashqi say that someone asked a Sufi master how he got to know God Most
High. He answered: “By a flash that entered the tongue [of someone who] had lost
the common ability to differentiate among things and by a word that appeared
on the tongue [of someone] who had perished and been lost [to this world].”
[The speaker reported here about a direct encounter with God], while at the
same time manifesting a mystery that veils [the true state of things]. [In other
words,] God has made Himself apparent by that which He has manifested, while
at the same time concealing Himself by that which He has veiled.591He is He in
that in which He has made His appearance and He is not He in that in which He
concealed Himself. He then proceeded to recite the following:
You spoke without saying a word, yet this is still nothing but speech
Your speech consists of words, yet it is different from the [usual] speech
You presented yourself to my sight, so that I could hide myself, after you
had been hiding
You darted a lightning at me, that is, you spoke as if you were throwing
lightning bolts. I heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard ∏Ali b. Bundar al-Sirafi say:
I heard al-Jurayri say that someone asked Abu Turab about the characteristics of
the gnostic.al-Husayn say:
“Someone asked Dhu πl-Nun: ‘How have you acquired knowledge of your Lord?’
He responded: ‘I have come to know my Lord through my Lord. Were it not for
my Lord, I would not have known Him.’” They say: “The scholar serves as an
example for other people, whereas the gnostic serves as their guide.” Al-Shibli
said: “The gnostic takes no notice of anything other than Him; nor speaks
anything that God has not spoken, nor does he see his protector in anyone but
God Most High.” They say: “The gnostic finds intimacy in the recollection
of God, and God estranges him from [the rest of] His creatures; the gnostic
needs God, and God makes him independent from His creatures; he shows
humility toward God Most High, and God gives him a high position among His
creatures.” Abu πl-Tayyib al-Samarri said: “Gnosis is God’s appearance in the
innermost souls [of His servants] through enlightening them with a constant
stream of lights.” It is said: “The gnostic stands above the things he says, whereas
the scholar stands below the things he says.” Abu Sulayman al-Darani said:
“God unveils [His mysteries] to the gnostic, while he sleeps in his bed, while He
does not unveil//394 anything to any other person, even though he may be
standing in prayer.” Al-Junayd said: “The gnostic is someone on behalf of whose
innermost soul God speaks, while he remains silent.” Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri said:
“Everyone and everything has a punishment of his or its own; the punishment
of the gnostic is when he ceases the recollection of God Most High.”
I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say: I heard
al-Wajihi say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say: I heard Ruwaym say: “The
hypocrisy of the gnostics is better than the sincerity of the aspirants (muridun).”
Abu Bakr al-Warraq said: “The silence of the gnostic is more beneficial; while his
speech is sweeter and more pleasant.” Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri said: “The ascetics590
(zuhhad) are the kings of the Hereafter, while they themselves are but the poor
[in the service of] the gnostics.” Someone asked al-Junayd about the gnostic. He
590 This term can also be translated as “world-renouncers”.

al-Husayn] say: I heard ∏Ali b. Bundar al-Sirafi say:
I heard al-Jurayri say that someone asked Abu Turab about the characteristics of
the gnostic. He answered: “He is one whom nothing can sully, while everything
is purified by him.” I also heard him say: I heard Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi say:
“The gnostic is someone upon whom the light of knowledge falls, so that he might
observe the marvels of the unseen through it.”//395 I heard the master Abu ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq say: “The gnostic is lost in the sea of veracious realization (tahqiq),
or, as one of them put it: ‘Gnosis is the waves of the sea that plunge down, then
rise only to collapse again.’” Someone asked Yahya b. Mu∏adh [al-Razi] about
the gnostic. He said: “This is someone who is both present and absent (kaπin
baπin).”592 On another occasion he said: “[This is someone] who is here, yet
separate.” Dhu πl-Nun said: “The gnostic is distinguished by three [signs]: the
light of his gnosis does not extinguish the light of his piety; he does not adhere
to an inner knowledge that may contradict an outward [religious] injunction; and
the plenitude of divine graces does not push him towards violating any of God’s
591 This complicated statement is deemed to convey the dynamics of concealment and revelation
that the Sufis ascribed to God, who is immanently present in this world, while at the same
time being transcendent to it and thus unknown and unknowable to His creatures. 592 According to a commentary, he is present with creatures in his body, yet far from them in his
heart.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 325
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 325
prohibitions – may He be great and exalted.” It is said: “One cannot be [con-
sidered] a gnostic if one discourses about gnosis in front of the inhabitants of the
Hereafter, not to mention the inhabitants of this world.” Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz
said: “Gnosis springs from the spring of [divine] grace and exerting oneself [for
the sake of God].” I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard Ja∏far say that someone asked al-Junayd about Dhu πl-Nun’s
statement concerning the [distinguishing] characteristic of the gnostic: “He was
here, but has already left.” Al-Junayd commented, saying: “He is not confined
by any state, and no [mystical] station veils him from advancing through other
stations; when he finds himself with people belonging to any particular station, he
experiences exactly what they experience and he discourses on its particularities
in such a way that they benefit from his discourses.” I heard him [Muhammad
b. al-Husayn] say: I heard ∏Abdallah al-Razi say: I heard Muhammad b. al-Fadl
say: “Gnosis is the heart’s life with God Most High.” I also heard him say:
I heard Ahmad b. ∏Ali b. Ja∏far say: I heard al-Kattani say that someone asked
Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz: “Can the gnostic reach a state in which weeping becomes
a burden for him?” He responded: “Yes, weeping [is necessary] during their
[gnostics’] travel to God Most High. However, once they have arrived at the
true realities of closeness [with God] and tasted the victuals of union with Him
through His grace, weeping no longer remains with them.”//396
Love (mahabba)
God – may He be great and exalted – said: “O believers, whosoever of you turns
from their religion, God will assuredly bring forth a people [instead of you] whom
He loves, and who love Him.”593Abu Nu∏aym ∏Abd al-Malik b. Husayn informed
us: Abu ∏Awana Ya∏qubb.al-Husayn] say: I heard ∏Ali b. Bundar al-Sirafi say:
I heard al-Jurayri say that someone asked Abu Turab about the characteristics of
the gnostic. He answered: “He is one whom nothing can sully, while everything
is purified by him.” I also heard him say: I heard Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi say:
“The gnostic is someone upon whom the light of knowledge falls, so that he might
observe the marvels of the unseen through it.”//395 I heard the master Abu ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq say: “The gnostic is lost in the sea of veracious realization (tahqiq),
or, as one of them put it: ‘Gnosis is the waves of the sea that plunge down, then
rise only to collapse again.’” Someone asked Yahya b. Mu∏adh [al-Razi] about
the gnostic. He said: “This is someone who is both present and absent (kaπin
baπin).”592 On another occasion he said: “[This is someone] who is here, yet
separate.” Dhu πl-Nun said: “The gnostic is distinguished by three [signs]: the
light of his gnosis does not extinguish the light of his piety; he does not adhere
to an inner knowledge that may contradict an outward [religious] injunction; and
the plenitude of divine graces does not push him towards violating any of God’s
591 This complicated statement is deemed to convey the dynamics of concealment and revelation
that the Sufis ascribed to God, who is immanently present in this world, while at the same
time being transcendent to it and thus unknown and unknowable to His creatures. 592 According to a commentary, he is present with creatures in his body, yet far from them in his
heart.

However, once they have arrived at the
true realities of closeness [with God] and tasted the victuals of union with Him
through His grace, weeping no longer remains with them.”//396
Love (mahabba)
God – may He be great and exalted – said: “O believers, whosoever of you turns
from their religion, God will assuredly bring forth a people [instead of you] whom
He loves, and who love Him.”593Abu Nu∏aym ∏Abd al-Malik b. Husayn informed
us: Abu ∏Awana Ya∏qubb. Ishaq told us: al-Sulami told us: ∏Abd al-Razzaq told
us on the authority of Ma∏mar, on the authority of Humam594 b. Munabbih, on
the authority of Abu Hurayra that the Messenger of God – may God bless and
greet him – said: “Whoever loves to meet God, God, too, will love to meet him;
and whoever does not love to meet Him, God, too, will not love to meet him.”
Abu al-Husayn ∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Saffar
al-Basri told us: ∏Abdallah b. Ayyub told us: al-Hasan b. Musa told us: Haytham
b. Kharija told us: al-Husayn b. Yahya told us on the authority of Sadaqa
al-Dimashqi, on the authority of Hisham al-Kattani, on the authority of Anas b. Malik, on the authority of the Prophet – may God bless and greet him, who related
this from Gabriel – peace be upon him, who related this from God Most High –
praise be to Him: “Whoever has denigrated a friend of mine, has declared war on
Me; I do not hesitate in anything more than taking the soul of my faithful servant,
who abhors death, while I abhor harming him; yet, there’s no escape for him
from this. The servant does not draw near Me by anything that I love more than
593 Q. 5:54; 5:56, according to Arberry’s translation. 594 Or “Hammam”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 326
326 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
his fulfillment of the duties that I have imposed upon him. My servant keeps
drawing ever closer to me by [performing] supererogatory acts of worship
(nawafil) until I love him; and whomever I love, I become his hearing, his sight,
his hand, and his support.”
∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd informed us: ∏Ubayd
b. Sharik informed us: Yahya told us: Malik [b. Anas] told us on the authority
of Suhayl b. Abi Salih, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Abu
Hurayra that the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – said: “When God –
may He be great and exalted – loves a servant of His, he tells Gabriel: ‘Gabriel,
I love so-and-so, so love him, too!’ And Gabriel loves him. Then Gabriel
announces to the inhabitants of heaven that God Most High loves so-and-so
and tells them to love him, and they love him too. Then Gabriel makes him
a great welcome on the earth. And when God loathes someone …” Malik said:
“I believe that he [the Prophet] said the same thing regarding loathing.”//397
The master [al-Qushayri] said: “Love is a noble state, as God has attested to His
servant, when he informed him about His love of him. [In the Qurπan] God
is described as loving His servant and the servant is described as loving God
– praise be to Him.” According to the terminology of the scholars “love” is
“desire”. However, according to the parlance of this folk595“love” is not “desire”,
for “desire” cannot apply to the eternal. O God, let “desire” not be understood
[by them] except as drawing near and exalting Him! We shall briefly mention
just some approaches to this issue, God willing. God’s love toward His servant
is but His desire to bestow special favors (in∏am) upon him. Likewise, His mercy
(rahma) toward His servant is but His desire to [bestow] favors upon him. However, mercy is more specific than desire, while love is more specific than
mercy.However, once they have arrived at the
true realities of closeness [with God] and tasted the victuals of union with Him
through His grace, weeping no longer remains with them.”//396
Love (mahabba)
God – may He be great and exalted – said: “O believers, whosoever of you turns
from their religion, God will assuredly bring forth a people [instead of you] whom
He loves, and who love Him.”593Abu Nu∏aym ∏Abd al-Malik b. Husayn informed
us: Abu ∏Awana Ya∏qubb. Ishaq told us: al-Sulami told us: ∏Abd al-Razzaq told
us on the authority of Ma∏mar, on the authority of Humam594 b. Munabbih, on
the authority of Abu Hurayra that the Messenger of God – may God bless and
greet him – said: “Whoever loves to meet God, God, too, will love to meet him;
and whoever does not love to meet Him, God, too, will not love to meet him.”
Abu al-Husayn ∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Saffar
al-Basri told us: ∏Abdallah b. Ayyub told us: al-Hasan b. Musa told us: Haytham
b. Kharija told us: al-Husayn b. Yahya told us on the authority of Sadaqa
al-Dimashqi, on the authority of Hisham al-Kattani, on the authority of Anas b. Malik, on the authority of the Prophet – may God bless and greet him, who related
this from Gabriel – peace be upon him, who related this from God Most High –
praise be to Him: “Whoever has denigrated a friend of mine, has declared war on
Me; I do not hesitate in anything more than taking the soul of my faithful servant,
who abhors death, while I abhor harming him; yet, there’s no escape for him
from this. The servant does not draw near Me by anything that I love more than
593 Q. 5:54; 5:56, according to Arberry’s translation. 594 Or “Hammam”.

Likewise, His mercy
(rahma) toward His servant is but His desire to [bestow] favors upon him. However, mercy is more specific than desire, while love is more specific than
mercy. God Most High’s desire to deliver recompense and favors to [His]
servant is named “mercy”, while His desire to single him out for nearness [to
Him] and lofty [spiritual] states is named “love”. God’s desire – praise be to Him – is but one quality. However, its names
differ in accordance with the different objects of its application. When it applies
to punishment it is named “wrath”; when it applies to all His favors [toward His
servants] it is named “mercy”; and when it applies to the special favors among
them, it is named “love”. Some Sufis say that God’s love toward His servant is
his praise of Him and his lauding of Him for [His] beneficence (jamil). Thus, the
meaning of “love” according to this teaching goes back to Him and His speech,
and His speech is eternal.596 Others argue that God’s love toward His servant
belongs to His attributes of actions, which is a special grace (ihsan) with which
God meets His servant and a special state to which God elevates him. As one of
them said: “[God’s] mercy toward His servant is His showing beneficence toward
595 That is, the Sufis. 596 That is, God’s love for His servant, which consists of endowing the latter with gratitude, was
pre-determined from eternity in divine foreknowledge (= His “speech”), which pertains to
the divine essence.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 327
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 327
him.” As for the earlier generations [of the Sufis], they said that love was one of
the [divine] attributes of goodness (khayriyya). Although they used this word,
they refrained from explaining it in detail. As regards that which goes beyond this
summary – namely, the known characteristics of love pertaining to creatures,
such as an inclination to a certain thing or seeking intimacy with a certain thing,
as is the case with the human lover and his beloved – the Eternal One is far too
exalted for this. As for the servant’s love of God, it is a state that he finds in his heart that
is too subtle for any expression. Such a state may move the servant to exalt
Him, to seek His satisfaction, to be impatient, and to long passionately for
Him, to be restless without Him, and to find intimacy with Him in his heart by
remembering Him. The servant’s love of God – praise be to Him – involves
neither an inclination nor a limit. How can this be otherwise, when His everlasting
Essence is too holy to allow any contact, grasp or comprehension? It is better
for the lover to be in the state of full engrossment in his beloved than to be in a
state characterized//398 by any limitation. Love, as such, cannot be described
or defined by any clear and understandable description or definition.597Usually,
an exhaustive discussion [of it] is required when something is [so] complex. However, when the confusion disappears, there is no longer any need to delve
into explanations. People have suggested numerous explanations of love and have discoursed
profusely about [the meaning of] its root in the [Arabic] language. Some argue
that hubb(love) is a name that denotes the purity of affection (safaπ al-mawadda),
because the Arabs say habab al-asnan598 about white and fresh-looking teeth. They also say habab599 about things that appear on the surface of the water
during a heavy rain.Likewise, His mercy
(rahma) toward His servant is but His desire to [bestow] favors upon him. However, mercy is more specific than desire, while love is more specific than
mercy. God Most High’s desire to deliver recompense and favors to [His]
servant is named “mercy”, while His desire to single him out for nearness [to
Him] and lofty [spiritual] states is named “love”. God’s desire – praise be to Him – is but one quality. However, its names
differ in accordance with the different objects of its application. When it applies
to punishment it is named “wrath”; when it applies to all His favors [toward His
servants] it is named “mercy”; and when it applies to the special favors among
them, it is named “love”. Some Sufis say that God’s love toward His servant is
his praise of Him and his lauding of Him for [His] beneficence (jamil). Thus, the
meaning of “love” according to this teaching goes back to Him and His speech,
and His speech is eternal.596 Others argue that God’s love toward His servant
belongs to His attributes of actions, which is a special grace (ihsan) with which
God meets His servant and a special state to which God elevates him. As one of
them said: “[God’s] mercy toward His servant is His showing beneficence toward
595 That is, the Sufis. 596 That is, God’s love for His servant, which consists of endowing the latter with gratitude, was
pre-determined from eternity in divine foreknowledge (= His “speech”), which pertains to
the divine essence.

Some argue
that hubb(love) is a name that denotes the purity of affection (safaπ al-mawadda),
because the Arabs say habab al-asnan598 about white and fresh-looking teeth. They also say habab599 about things that appear on the surface of the water
during a heavy rain. Hence mahabba600 means the “boiling” or “stirring” of the
heart when it is thirsty and its passionate longing for meeting its beloved. They
also say that hubb is derived from [the phrase] habab al-maπwith the meaning of
its [water’s] “center” and that it was called thus because of the centrality of love to
the heart’s preoccupations. Others say that it is derived from [the words] luzum
and thabat,601[because the Arabs] say: ahabba al-ba∏ir,“the camel has kneeled and
refused to stand up”. Likewise, the lover persists in remembering his beloved in
his heart. They also say that hubb is derived from hibb, which means “earring”. The poet said:
The snake, menacingly flicking its tongue, stayed close to him
As if it were an earring, overhearing a secret conversation. 597 According to an alternative reading, “Love cannot be described or defined by a description or
a definition that is clear and conducive to [our] comprehension.”
598 Literally, “teeth that are covered with streaks of saliva”. 599 Literally, “bubbles” or “ripples”. 600 “Love.”
601 Namely, “persistence” and “stubbornness”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 328
328 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
The earring was called hibb, because of being constantly attached to the ear or
because of its constant movement and agitation. Both these meanings are true
about love (hubb). They also say that it comes from [the word] habb,which is the
plural of habba.602 The “kernel” of the heart is that which sustains it, so it was
named hubbdue to its importance, because [the words] habb and hubbare similar
to [the words] ∏amrand ∏umr.603They also say that hubbcomes from hibba, which
is the seed of the desert. Hubb was called so because it is the seed of life in the
same way as the seed is the life604of all vegetation. It is also said that hubbdenotes
four pieces of wood on which the [earthenware] jar is placed. Love is called
thus because of the disdain and humiliation that the lover tolerates from his
beloved.//399 They say that hubbis the jar filled with water, because it contains
what is poured into it and can take no more than what is already there. Likewise,
the heart is brimming with love that leaves no room for anyone but the beloved. As for the sayings of Sufi masters about this matter, one of them said:
“[Love is] a constant longing of the enraptured heart” (al-mayl al-daπim bi-πl-qalb
al-haπim).Likewise,
the heart is brimming with love that leaves no room for anyone but the beloved. As for the sayings of Sufi masters about this matter, one of them said:
“[Love is] a constant longing of the enraptured heart” (al-mayl al-daπim bi-πl-qalb
al-haπim). They say: “Love is giving preference to the beloved over all other
attachments.” They say: “[It is] to agree with the beloved in his presence and his
absence.” They say: “[It is] erasing the lover’s attributes and fixing the beloved
in his [lover’s] essence.” They say: “[It is] the heart’s compliance with the will
of its Lord.” They say: “[It is] the fear of [displaying] irreverence (tark al-hurma)
accompanied by the constancy of service.” Abu Yazid al-Bistami said: “Love
means denigrating your own efforts and exaggerating whatever your beloved
does, no matter how small it is.” Sahl [al-Tustari] said: “Love means to embrace
obedience and part ways with disobedience.” When someone asked al-Junayd
about love, he answered: “[It is] the substitution of the attributes of the lover
for those of the beloved.” He [al-Junayd] thus alluded to the remembrance of
the beloved that takes possession of the lover to such an extent that only the
remembrance of the attributes of the beloved remains and he becomes totally
oblivious of his own attributes and no longer perceives them.As for the sayings of Sufi masters about this matter, one of them said:
“[Love is] a constant longing of the enraptured heart” (al-mayl al-daπim bi-πl-qalb
al-haπim). They say: “Love is giving preference to the beloved over all other
attachments.” They say: “[It is] to agree with the beloved in his presence and his
absence.” They say: “[It is] erasing the lover’s attributes and fixing the beloved
in his [lover’s] essence.” They say: “[It is] the heart’s compliance with the will
of its Lord.” They say: “[It is] the fear of [displaying] irreverence (tark al-hurma)
accompanied by the constancy of service.” Abu Yazid al-Bistami said: “Love
means denigrating your own efforts and exaggerating whatever your beloved
does, no matter how small it is.” Sahl [al-Tustari] said: “Love means to embrace
obedience and part ways with disobedience.” When someone asked al-Junayd
about love, he answered: “[It is] the substitution of the attributes of the lover
for those of the beloved.” He [al-Junayd] thus alluded to the remembrance of
the beloved that takes possession of the lover to such an extent that only the
remembrance of the attributes of the beloved remains and he becomes totally
oblivious of his own attributes and no longer perceives them. Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari
said: “Love means compliance.” Abu ∏Abdallah al-Qurashi said: “True love means
giving yourself fully to the one you love, so that there would be nothing in you
that belongs to you.” Al-Shibli said: “Love is named mahabba because it erases
(tamhu) everything from the [lover’s] heart except the beloved.” Ibn ∏Ataπ said:
“Love means constant [self-]reproach.”
I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say: “Love
is pleasure (ladhdha) and the site of the [divine] reality (haqiqa) is puzzlement
(dahash).” I also heard him say: “Loving desire (∏ishq) means to transgress the
limit (mujawazat al-hadd), and God – praise be to Him – cannot be described as
a transgressor of the limit, so loving desire cannot be attributed to Him.They say: “Love is giving preference to the beloved over all other
attachments.” They say: “[It is] to agree with the beloved in his presence and his
absence.” They say: “[It is] erasing the lover’s attributes and fixing the beloved
in his [lover’s] essence.” They say: “[It is] the heart’s compliance with the will
of its Lord.” They say: “[It is] the fear of [displaying] irreverence (tark al-hurma)
accompanied by the constancy of service.” Abu Yazid al-Bistami said: “Love
means denigrating your own efforts and exaggerating whatever your beloved
does, no matter how small it is.” Sahl [al-Tustari] said: “Love means to embrace
obedience and part ways with disobedience.” When someone asked al-Junayd
about love, he answered: “[It is] the substitution of the attributes of the lover
for those of the beloved.” He [al-Junayd] thus alluded to the remembrance of
the beloved that takes possession of the lover to such an extent that only the
remembrance of the attributes of the beloved remains and he becomes totally
oblivious of his own attributes and no longer perceives them. Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari
said: “Love means compliance.” Abu ∏Abdallah al-Qurashi said: “True love means
giving yourself fully to the one you love, so that there would be nothing in you
that belongs to you.” Al-Shibli said: “Love is named mahabba because it erases
(tamhu) everything from the [lover’s] heart except the beloved.” Ibn ∏Ataπ said:
“Love means constant [self-]reproach.”
I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say: “Love
is pleasure (ladhdha) and the site of the [divine] reality (haqiqa) is puzzlement
(dahash).” I also heard him say: “Loving desire (∏ishq) means to transgress the
limit (mujawazat al-hadd), and God – praise be to Him – cannot be described as
a transgressor of the limit, so loving desire cannot be attributed to Him. Were the
loves of the entire created world brought together in one and the same person,
602 That is, “kernel,” “the innermost [part]”.Some argue
that hubb(love) is a name that denotes the purity of affection (safaπ al-mawadda),
because the Arabs say habab al-asnan598 about white and fresh-looking teeth. They also say habab599 about things that appear on the surface of the water
during a heavy rain. Hence mahabba600 means the “boiling” or “stirring” of the
heart when it is thirsty and its passionate longing for meeting its beloved. They
also say that hubb is derived from [the phrase] habab al-maπwith the meaning of
its [water’s] “center” and that it was called thus because of the centrality of love to
the heart’s preoccupations. Others say that it is derived from [the words] luzum
and thabat,601[because the Arabs] say: ahabba al-ba∏ir,“the camel has kneeled and
refused to stand up”. Likewise, the lover persists in remembering his beloved in
his heart. They also say that hubb is derived from hibb, which means “earring”. The poet said:
The snake, menacingly flicking its tongue, stayed close to him
As if it were an earring, overhearing a secret conversation. 597 According to an alternative reading, “Love cannot be described or defined by a description or
a definition that is clear and conducive to [our] comprehension.”
598 Literally, “teeth that are covered with streaks of saliva”. 599 Literally, “bubbles” or “ripples”. 600 “Love.”
601 Namely, “persistence” and “stubbornness”.

Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari
said: “Love means compliance.” Abu ∏Abdallah al-Qurashi said: “True love means
giving yourself fully to the one you love, so that there would be nothing in you
that belongs to you.” Al-Shibli said: “Love is named mahabba because it erases
(tamhu) everything from the [lover’s] heart except the beloved.” Ibn ∏Ataπ said:
“Love means constant [self-]reproach.”
I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say: “Love
is pleasure (ladhdha) and the site of the [divine] reality (haqiqa) is puzzlement
(dahash).” I also heard him say: “Loving desire (∏ishq) means to transgress the
limit (mujawazat al-hadd), and God – praise be to Him – cannot be described as
a transgressor of the limit, so loving desire cannot be attributed to Him. Were the
loves of the entire created world brought together in one and the same person,
602 That is, “kernel,” “the innermost [part]”. 603 In that both have the same meaning, despite the different vowels in their first syllable. 604 Literally, “the core”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 329
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 329
he would still be unable to love God – praise be to Him – as He deserves. Therefore
one cannot say that someone has transgressed the limit in his love of God. So,
God Himself is not described as possessing loving desire (ya∏shaq), nor should
the servant describe Him as such. Thus, loving passion is [totally] negated://400
neither the servant nor God – praise be to Him – uses it to describe the other.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard al-Shibli say: “Love means that you are jealous of someone
who may love your beloved as much as you do.” I heard him [al-Sulami] say: I
heard Abu πl-Husayn al-Farisi say: I heard Ibn ∏Ataπ say about love: “[It is] the
stems that are planted in the heart; they bring fruit according to the strength of
[one’s] understanding (∏uqul).” I also heard him say: I heard al-Nasrabadhi say:
“One love demands that blood be spared and another that it be spilt.” I heard
Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-∏Alawi say: I heard Ja∏far say: I heard Samnun say: “Lovers
of God Most High have removed nobility from this world and the Hereafter,
because the Prophet – may God bless and greet Him – said: ‘Man is always with
the one he loves’ and they [the lovers] are always with God Most High.” Yahya
b. Mu∏adh said: “Love is something that is neither decreased by coarseness [of
character], nor increased by righteousness (birr).” He also said: “A man who claims
to be in love [with God] is insincere if he does not observe the limits set by Him.”
Al-Junayd said: “When love is true, the rules of proper behavior disappear.” I
heard the master Abu ∏Ali [al-Daqqaq] recite the following verses pertinent to
this matter:
When love between folk is pure and their affection lasts,
[Their] praise [of each other] turns ugly. [Likewise, Abu ∏Ali] used to say: “You will not see a compassionate father who
[excessively] honors his son in talking to him.Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari
said: “Love means compliance.” Abu ∏Abdallah al-Qurashi said: “True love means
giving yourself fully to the one you love, so that there would be nothing in you
that belongs to you.” Al-Shibli said: “Love is named mahabba because it erases
(tamhu) everything from the [lover’s] heart except the beloved.” Ibn ∏Ataπ said:
“Love means constant [self-]reproach.”
I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say: “Love
is pleasure (ladhdha) and the site of the [divine] reality (haqiqa) is puzzlement
(dahash).” I also heard him say: “Loving desire (∏ishq) means to transgress the
limit (mujawazat al-hadd), and God – praise be to Him – cannot be described as
a transgressor of the limit, so loving desire cannot be attributed to Him. Were the
loves of the entire created world brought together in one and the same person,
602 That is, “kernel,” “the innermost [part]”. 603 In that both have the same meaning, despite the different vowels in their first syllable. 604 Literally, “the core”.

Mu∏adh said: “Love is something that is neither decreased by coarseness [of
character], nor increased by righteousness (birr).” He also said: “A man who claims
to be in love [with God] is insincere if he does not observe the limits set by Him.”
Al-Junayd said: “When love is true, the rules of proper behavior disappear.” I
heard the master Abu ∏Ali [al-Daqqaq] recite the following verses pertinent to
this matter:
When love between folk is pure and their affection lasts,
[Their] praise [of each other] turns ugly. [Likewise, Abu ∏Ali] used to say: “You will not see a compassionate father who
[excessively] honors his son in talking to him. When other people address him
[formally], the father just says: “Hey, so-and-so!” Al-Kattani said: “Love is giving
preference to the beloved over oneself.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu Sa∏id al-Arrajani say: I
heard Bundar b. al-Husayn relate: “Someone saw Majnun of the Banu ∏Amir
[tribe]605in a dream and asked him: ‘What has God done to you?’ He answered:
‘He pardoned me and set me as an argument against all those who claim love.’”
Abu Ya∏qub al-Susi related: “True love means that the servant of God forgets
the earthly portion (hazz) allotted to him by Him and then also forgets that
he needs it.” Al-Husayn b. Mansur [al-Hallaj] said: “True love means that you
remain with your beloved divested of all your own attributes.” I heard Shaykh
Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: “Someone said to al-Nasrabadhi: ‘You have
no part in the love [of God].’ He responded: ‘They606have been sincere [in their
605 A hero of Arabian folklore, who came to exemplify unrequited and tragic love. He is also
known as the “Majnun of Layla”, after the name of his beloved. 606 That is, those who love God.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 330
330 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
love]. However, I have received only their sorrows. See how I am being consumed
by this!’”//401 I heard him [al-Sulami] say: Al-Nasrabadhi said: “Love means
avoiding any distractions under any circumstances.” He then recited the following:
While some in their long-lasting passion may [occasionally] taste
diversion
I, however, because of Layla607have never tasted it
The most I have experienced since meeting her are
My desires, which are not real, like the flashes of a lightning.
Muhammad b. al-Fadl said: “Love means that the heart is devoid of any other
love, except the love of the beloved.” Al-Junayd said: “Love is an abundance of
desire that is never requited (al-mayl bila nayl).” It is said: “Love is a confusion
that settles in the heart on account of the beloved.” They also say: “Love is a trial
that settles in the heart because [of its aspiration toward] the beloved.” Ibn ∏Ataπ
recited:
I planted a stem of passion for the people of love
For no one before me had ever known what passion is
It covered the stem with leaves and rendered its leaning608ripe
Then it yielded to me the bitterness of a sweet fruit
The passion of all the lovers of [the world], if they were to trace it back
Comes from this source [of mine].
They say: “Love’s beginning is deception, while its end is death.” I heard the
master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – comment on the
words of the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – “Your love of something
makes you blind and mute” as follows: “It makes one blind to others out of
jealousy and to the beloved out of awe [of him].” He then proceeded to recite the
following:
When [I came out and] he appeared before me, I was so terrified by his
[giant] stature
That I reverted to the state of someone who never wanted to go.
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: Ahmad b. ∏Ataπ said: I heard
Ibrahim b. Fatik say: I heard al-Junayd say: I heard al-Harith al-Muhasibi
say: “Love means you are inclined toward someone in your entirety, then you
give preference to this someone over yourself, your spirit and your possessions,
then you comply with his wishes openly and secretly, whereupon you acquire the
awareness of your love’s imperfection.” I heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard
Ahmad b. ∏Ataπ say: I heard ∏Abbas b. ∏Isam say://402 I heard al-Junayd say: I
607 See note 605.
608 A word play on the meaning of the word sabwa, which denotes both “longing for something”
and “the leaning of a tree”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 331
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 331
heard al-Sari [al-Saqati] say: “Love between two is incomplete until one of them
can say to the other: ‘I!’” Al-Shibli said: “The lover perishes if he keeps silent,
whereas the gnostic perishes if he does not keep silent.” It is said: “Love is a
flame in the heart that burns down everything except what the beloved wishes.”
It is also said: “Love means to exert oneself to the utmost degree, while allowing
the beloved do as he pleases.” Al-Nuri said: “Love means tearing down all veils
and unveiling all secrets.” Abu Ya∏qub al-Susi said: “Love is imperfect until the
lover abandons the vision of his love for the one whom he loves by annihilating
the very awareness of his love.” Ja∏far recounted that al-Junayd said: “Al-Sari
gave me a piece of paper, saying ‘This is better for you than seven hundred
[pious] stories or the choicest [prophetic] reports.’ It read:
When I said that I loved her, she told me: ‘You have lied to me! Don’t I
see that
The members [of your body] are still covered [with flesh]?’
It is not [true] love until the heart sticks to your bowels
And until you are so emaciated that you are unable to respond to someone
who calls on you
And until you are wasted away so that your passion has left you nothing
But a naked eyeball with which you pray and seek intimacy [with your
beloved]!”
Ibn Masruq related: “I saw Samnun [al-Muhibb] speaking about love; all the
lamps in the mosque [where he was speaking] broke up!” I heard Muhammad b.
al-Husayn say: I heard Ahmad b. ∏Ali say: I heard Ibrahim b. Fatik say: “I heard
Samnun as he was holding a session in the mosque and discoursing about love.
A small bird approached him and began to draw nearer and nearer, until it finally
perched on his hand. Then it began to strike the floor with its beak until blood
flowed from it. After that it expired.” Al-Junayd said: “Each love has its object,609
and when the object disappears, love disappears with it.” It is related that al-Shibli
was confined to a lunatic asylum.610A group of people came to visit him. He asked
them: “Who are you?” They replied: “Abu Bakr, we are those who love you!” He
then started to throw rocks at them and they ran away. He exclaimed: “If you
claim that you love me, you should patiently tolerate the harm that I cause you!”
Al-Shibli recited:
O the Benevolent Master, [my] love of You resides in my innards//403
O You, who remove sleep from my eyelids, You know well what has
happened to me.
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah
say: I heard al-Nahrajuri say: I heard ∏Ali b. ∏Ubayd say: Yahya b. Mu∏adh wrote
609 In an alternative reading, “each love has its compensation”.
610 According to an oft-cited story, he was placed there for his ecstatic utterances that scandalized
the public.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 332
332 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
to Abu Yazid [al-Bistami], saying: “I have become drunk after drinking too much
from the cup of His love.” Abu Yazid wrote back to him, saying: “Someone else
has drunk the seas that are on earth and in heaven and yet has not quenched his
thirst and his tongue is sticking out [of his mouth] as he utters: ‘Is there any
more?’”611
They recite the following:
I wonder at someone who says: “I remember my intimate friend.”
Did I forget [him], so that I have to remember what I forgot?
When I remember you, I die, only to live again soon after
And were it not for my trust in you, I would have never lived again
I live thanks to my aspiration [toward you] and I die because of [my]
passionate longing
How often have I lived and died because of you!
I have drunk [the wine of] love one cup after another
Yet, the wine has not run out and my thirst has not been quenched!
It is related that God Most High revealed the following to Jesus – peace be upon
him: “Verily, when I search the heart of a servant of mine and do not find there
love of this world and the next, I fill it with love of Me.” I saw this written by
the hand of my master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him: “In
one of the revealed books it is said: ‘My servant, I render what is due to you by
loving you, so render what is due to Me by loving Me!’” ∏Abdallah b. al-Mubarak
said: “Whoever is endowed with a portion of [divine] love, while not being
endowed with an equal portion of [divine] fear, is deluded.” It is said: “Love is
that which erases every trace of you.” It is also said: “Love is an intoxication,
whose possessor will not get sober until he witnesses his beloved.” As for the
intoxication that happens during the witnessing, it eludes any description. They
recite:
The circling of the cup [of wine] made my companions drunk,
While I was intoxicated with the one who passed it around.
The master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq was fond of reciting the following line:
I have two types of intoxication, while my boon-companions have only
one
It is something that distinguishes me from among them.
Ibn ∏Ataπ said: “Love is a constant [self-]recrimination.” The master Abu ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq had a slave girl named Fayruz. He loved her for the many services
she rendered to him. I heard him say: “One day Fayruz was pestering me and
lashing me repeatedly with her tongue. Abu πl-Hasan al-Qariπ reprimanded her,
611 Q. 50:30; this passage describes the condition of sinners in Hell.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 333
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 333
saying: ‘Why are you pestering the shaykh?’ She answered: ‘Because I love him!’”
Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “A mustard seed’s worth of love, in my opinion, is better
than seventy years of worship without love.”//404 It is related that a youth
recited the following verse to [a crowd of] people on a feast day:
Whoever wants to die out of loving passion, let him die!
For there’s no good in loving passion without death!
He then hurled himself from a high roof and fell onto earth dead. It is related
that a man from India had a loving passion for a slave girl. When she was about
to depart, the man came to bid her farewell. Tears poured from one of his eyes,
but the other remained dry. He then shut the eye that did not cry and kept it shut
for eighty-four years as a punishment for it for not crying at the departure of his
beloved. About this they recite the following:
One of my eyes shed tears on the morning of the separation,
While the other was stingy in its weeping
So I punished the one that withheld tears by shutting it on the day
we finally reunited.
A Sufi related: “We were with Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri one day, discussing love. He
exclaimed: “Refrain from this issue! If your souls fail to understand it properly,
they might lay claims to it.” He then recited the following:
Fear and sadness are better for the evildoer, when he practices devotion,
While love is appropriate for the one who fears God and is free from any
defilement.
Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “Whoever discusses [divine] love amidst those who do
not understand it, makes false claims.” It is related that a man claimed that he was
madly in love with someone. The young man612told him: “How come [you love
me], while my brother’s face is more handsome and more perfect [than mine]?”
The man raised his head and turned [to the brother]. They both were standing
on the roof [of a house] and the young man pushed him from the roof, exclaiming:
“This is the recompense of someone who claims that he loves us, yet looks at
someone else!”
Samnun [al-Muhibb] used to elevate love above divine gnosis, while the
majority [of Sufis] give preference to gnosis over love. According to those who
have attained the truth (muhaqqiqun), love is an immersion into pleasure, while
gnosis is witnessing [God] in perplexity (hayra) and being annihilated in awe [of
Him]. Abu Bakr al-Kattani said: “A discussion of the issue of love occurred in
Mecca during the pilgrimage season. [Sufi] masters discoursed about it, al-Junayd
being the youngest of all. They asked him: ‘Tell us what you think, Iraqi!’ He
lowered his head and tears streamed from his eyes. He then uttered: ‘When the
612 Apparently, the object of his affection.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 334
334 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
servant of God forgets about himself, becomes united with the recollection of his
Lord, renders what is due to Him, and watches Him with his heart, [then] the
lights of His essence incinerate his heart, his drinking from the cup of affection
becomes pure, and the Mighty One unveils the curtains of His mystery before
him. [Afer that] if he talks, he talks through God; if he utters [a word], it is
from God; if he moves, he moves by God’s command; if he rests, he rests with
God; he is thus, through God, for God and with God.’ The [Sufi] masters burst
into tears and said: ‘Nothing can be added to this! May God empower you, O the
crown of the [divine] gnostics!’” It is related that God revealed to David – peace
be upon him: “David, I have prohibited that love for any one else but Me enter
the hearts of men!”
Hamza b. Yusuf al-Sahmi informed us: Muhammad b. Ahmad b. al-Qasim
informed us: Humayyim b. Humam told us: Ibrahim b. al-Harith informed us:
∏Abd al-Rahman b. ∏Affan told us: Muhammad b. Ayyub told us: Abu πl-∏Abbas,
the servant of Fudayl b. ∏Iyad told us: “When al-Fudayl’s urine was suppressed,
he raised his hands and exclaimed: ‘My God, by my love of You, release me
from this!’ And before we could move, he was cured!” It is said: “Love is giving
preference [to the lover over oneself], as the wife of al-∏Aziz613said, when she erred
in her affair, ‘I solicited him, but he is a truthful man’,614while at the beginning
she was saying, ‘What is the recompense of him who proposes evil against thy
folk, but he should be imprisoned, or a painful chastisement?’615 Thus, at the
beginning she ascribed sin to him. However, in the end she accused herself of
infidelity.” I [al-Qushayri] heard the master Abu ∏Ali [al-Daqqaq] relate this.∏Iyad told us: “When al-Fudayl’s urine was suppressed,
he raised his hands and exclaimed: ‘My God, by my love of You, release me
from this!’ And before we could move, he was cured!” It is said: “Love is giving
preference [to the lover over oneself], as the wife of al-∏Aziz613said, when she erred
in her affair, ‘I solicited him, but he is a truthful man’,614while at the beginning
she was saying, ‘What is the recompense of him who proposes evil against thy
folk, but he should be imprisoned, or a painful chastisement?’615 Thus, at the
beginning she ascribed sin to him. However, in the end she accused herself of
infidelity.” I [al-Qushayri] heard the master Abu ∏Ali [al-Daqqaq] relate this. It
is related that Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz said: “In a dream I saw the Prophet – may
God bless and greet him – and asked him: ‘Messenger of God, forgive me, for
my love of God has distracted me from loving you!’ He exclaimed: ‘O the blessed
one! Whoever loves God Most High, loves me [as well]!’” In one of her intimate
conversations with God, Rabi∏a [al-∏Adawiyya] said: “My God, can you burn with
fire a heart that loves You?” She heard a voice saying: “We have not done so. Do not think ill of Us!” They say that [the word] “love” (hubb) has two letters,
haπ and baπ, because one who is in love abandons both his spirit (ruh) and his
body (badan).616
The consensus of the sayings of the Sufis [regarding this matter] is this: love
is compliance [with the will of God], while the strongest compliance is that of the
heart. Love necessitates the rejection of any difference [between its object and
subject]; the lover always remains with his beloved, as confirmed by the following
report. The imam Abu Bakr b. Furak – may God have mercy on him – told us:
the judge Ahmad b. Mahmud b. Khurrazadh informed us: al-Hasan b. Hammad
b. Fadala told us: Yahya b. Habib told us: Marhum b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz told us on
613 The Biblical Potiphar of the story of Joseph. 614 Q. 12:51. 615 Q. 12:25.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 333
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 333
saying: ‘Why are you pestering the shaykh?’ She answered: ‘Because I love him!’”
Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “A mustard seed’s worth of love, in my opinion, is better
than seventy years of worship without love.”//404 It is related that a youth
recited the following verse to [a crowd of] people on a feast day:
Whoever wants to die out of loving passion, let him die!
For there’s no good in loving passion without death!
He then hurled himself from a high roof and fell onto earth dead. It is related
that a man from India had a loving passion for a slave girl. When she was about
to depart, the man came to bid her farewell. Tears poured from one of his eyes,
but the other remained dry. He then shut the eye that did not cry and kept it shut
for eighty-four years as a punishment for it for not crying at the departure of his
beloved. About this they recite the following:
One of my eyes shed tears on the morning of the separation,
While the other was stingy in its weeping
So I punished the one that withheld tears by shutting it on the day
we finally reunited.
A Sufi related: “We were with Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri one day, discussing love. He
exclaimed: “Refrain from this issue! If your souls fail to understand it properly,
they might lay claims to it.” He then recited the following:
Fear and sadness are better for the evildoer, when he practices devotion,
While love is appropriate for the one who fears God and is free from any
defilement.
Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “Whoever discusses [divine] love amidst those who do
not understand it, makes false claims.” It is related that a man claimed that he was
madly in love with someone. The young man612told him: “How come [you love
me], while my brother’s face is more handsome and more perfect [than mine]?”
The man raised his head and turned [to the brother]. They both were standing
on the roof [of a house] and the young man pushed him from the roof, exclaiming:
“This is the recompense of someone who claims that he loves us, yet looks at
someone else!”
Samnun [al-Muhibb] used to elevate love above divine gnosis, while the
majority [of Sufis] give preference to gnosis over love. According to those who
have attained the truth (muhaqqiqun), love is an immersion into pleasure, while
gnosis is witnessing [God] in perplexity (hayra) and being annihilated in awe [of
Him]. Abu Bakr al-Kattani said: “A discussion of the issue of love occurred in
Mecca during the pilgrimage season. [Sufi] masters discoursed about it, al-Junayd
being the youngest of all. They asked him: ‘Tell us what you think, Iraqi!’ He
lowered his head and tears streamed from his eyes. He then uttered: ‘When the
612 Apparently, the object of his affection.

615 Q. 12:25. 616 The word ruhends in the letter haπ, while the word badan begins with baπ.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 335
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 335
the authority of Sufyan al-Thawri, on the authority of al-A∏mash, on the authority
of Waπil, on the authority of Abu Musa al-Ash∏ari that someone told the Prophet
– may God bless and greet him://406 “Can a man love someone without attaching
himself to him?” The Prophet answered: “Man is [always] with one whom he
loves.” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard ∏Abdallah
al-Razi say: I heard Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri say: I heard Abu Hafs [al-Haddad]
say: “Most damage to the [Sufi’s spiritual] states comes from three things: the
transgression of the gnostics, the infidelity of the lovers, and the falsehood of
the aspirants. Abu ∏Uthman explained: “the transgression of the gnostics” means
that they turn their sight, tongue and hearing toward the affairs and delights of
this world; “the infidelity of the lovers” is that they choose their passion over
against contentment with God – may He be great and exalted – in whatever
befalls them; and “the falsehood of the aspirants” is that they remember and
watch creatures more than they remember and watch God – may He be great and
exalted! I also heard him [al-Sulami] say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard Abu
πl-Qasim al-Jawhari say: I heard Abu ∏Ali Mimshad b. Sa∏id al-∏Ukbari say: “A
male swallow sought the affection of a female one under the dome of Solomon’s
palace. She rejected his courtship, and he told her: ‘How can you reject me? If
you wish, I will collapse this dome upon Solomon!’ Solomon – peace be upon
him – summoned him and asked: ‘What caused you to say such a thing?’ The
male swallow replied: ‘O prophet of God! One cannot blame the lovers for the
things they say!’ Solomon said: ‘You have spoken the truth!’”
Passionate longing (shawq)
God – may He be great and exalted – said: “Who so looks to encounter God,
God’s term is coming.”617 ∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan al-Ahwazi informed us:
Ahmad b.615 Q. 12:25. 616 The word ruhends in the letter haπ, while the word badan begins with baπ.

Ahmad b. ∏Abdan al-Ahwazi informed us:
Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Basri informed us: Ibn Abi Qammash informed us: Isma∏il
b. Zurara informed us: on the authority of Hammad b. Zayd: ∏Ataπ b. al-Saπib
informed us on the authority of his father: “[Once] ∏Ammar b. Yasir618 was
performing a prayer with us. He cut it short, and I asked him: ‘Why did you make
it lighter [than usual], Abu Yaqzan?’ He answered: ‘No harm for me in that! I
prayed to God with the [supplicatory] prayers that I heard from the Messenger
of God – may God bless and greet him.’ When he finished his prayer, one of
those present followed him and asked him about that prayer. He answered: ‘My
God, by Your knowledge of the Unseen and by Your power over Your creatures,
let me live a life that You know is best for me//407 and let me die a death that
You know is best for me! My God, I ask that You grant me fear of You inwardly
and outwardly, and I ask that you grant me a truthful word in both contentment
617 Q. 29:5. 618 A Companion of the Prophet and a partisan of ∏Ali, who was killed at the battle of Siffin in
37/657.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 336
336 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
and anger, I ask that You grant me the just mean in wealth and poverty, I ask that
You grant me a never-ending bliss and an incessant joy! I ask that You grant me
satisfaction with Your judgement and a pleasant life after death. I ask that You
grant me the vision of Your noble face and passionate longing for a meeting with
You without a harmful affliction nor a misleading temptation. My God, adorn
us with the adornment of faith! My God, place us among those who walk on the
right path!’”
The master [al-Qushayri] said: “Passionate longing is the heart’s desire to
meet its beloved; it is equal to the amount of love. I heard the master Abu ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq making a distinction between passionate longing (shawq) and yearning
(ishtiyaq), when he said: “Passionate longing subsides after the meeting and vision
[of the beloved], and yearning completely disappears after the meeting.” About
this they recite the following:
No sooner than a gaze is deflected by his sight,
It returns to him full of passion. I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard al-Nasrabadhi say:
“All creatures possess the station of passionate longing, while they do not possess
yearning, because whoever enters the state of yearning loses his mind, leaving
no trace or constancy (qarar) behind him.” It is related that Ahmad b. Hamid
al-Aswad came to ∏Abdallah b. Munazil and said: “I saw in a dream that you will
die in a year. Shouldn’t you prepare for the departure?” ∏Abdallah b. Munazil
responded to him, saying: “You have given us a long time! Will I [be able] to live
for one year? I found consolation in that verse of al-Thaqafi (he meant Abu ∏Ali
[al-Thaqafi]):
O you, who bemoans his passionate longing due to the long separation,
Be patient, perhaps you will meet the one you love tomorrow!”
Abu ∏Uthman [al-Hiri] said: “A sign of passionate longing is to lovingly welcome
death with relief.” Yahya b.Ahmad b. ∏Abdan al-Ahwazi informed us:
Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Basri informed us: Ibn Abi Qammash informed us: Isma∏il
b. Zurara informed us: on the authority of Hammad b. Zayd: ∏Ataπ b. al-Saπib
informed us on the authority of his father: “[Once] ∏Ammar b. Yasir618 was
performing a prayer with us. He cut it short, and I asked him: ‘Why did you make
it lighter [than usual], Abu Yaqzan?’ He answered: ‘No harm for me in that! I
prayed to God with the [supplicatory] prayers that I heard from the Messenger
of God – may God bless and greet him.’ When he finished his prayer, one of
those present followed him and asked him about that prayer. He answered: ‘My
God, by Your knowledge of the Unseen and by Your power over Your creatures,
let me live a life that You know is best for me//407 and let me die a death that
You know is best for me! My God, I ask that You grant me fear of You inwardly
and outwardly, and I ask that you grant me a truthful word in both contentment
617 Q. 29:5. 618 A Companion of the Prophet and a partisan of ∏Ali, who was killed at the battle of Siffin in
37/657.

Will I [be able] to live
for one year? I found consolation in that verse of al-Thaqafi (he meant Abu ∏Ali
[al-Thaqafi]):
O you, who bemoans his passionate longing due to the long separation,
Be patient, perhaps you will meet the one you love tomorrow!”
Abu ∏Uthman [al-Hiri] said: “A sign of passionate longing is to lovingly welcome
death with relief.” Yahya b. Mu∏adh said: “One of the signs of passionate longing
is the weaning of one’s members from temptations (shahawat).” I heard the master
Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “David – peace be upon him – went out into the desert
all on his own and God revealed to him: ‘Why do I see you all alone, David?’ He
answered: ‘My God,//408 my heart has preferred longing for Your company
over itself and barred me from keeping the company of creatures!’ Then God Most
High revealed to him: ‘Go back to them! You have come to me as a runaway
slave, whereas I have recorded you into the Guarded Tablet as a great hero!’”
It is related that there once was an old woman, one of whose relatives returned
from a trip. Her family displayed joy [at his arrival], whereas the old woman
started to cry. They asked her: “What makes you cry?” She answered: “The arrival
of this youth reminded me of the day on which [we shall be brought] before God
Most High.”
Someone asked Ibn ∏Ataπ about passionate longing. He answered: “The
burning of the intestines, the inflammation of the hearts, and the shredding of543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 337
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 337
the livers.” He was also asked: “What is greater: loving passion, or love?” He
answered: “Love, because loving passion is born out of it.” One Sufi said:
“Loving passion is an inflammation that begins in the folds of the intestines and
occurs as a result of separation. It dies down as the meeting draws near. When
the innermost selves are dominated by the contemplation of the beloved, they
are no longer subject to passionate longing.” A Sufi was asked whether he had
experienced passionate longing. He answered: “No, for passionate longing is after
someone who is absent, whereas He is [always] present.” I heard the master Abu
∏Ali al-Daqqaq say about the words of God – may He be great and exalted, “I
[Moses] have hastened to Thee, O my Lord, only that I may satisfy Thee”,619that
it means “[I hastened] out of passionate longing for Thee”; however, he concealed
it620 by the word “satisfaction”. I also heard him – may God Most High have
mercy on him – say: “One of the signs of passionate longing is that the one who
stands on the carpet of well-being (∏awafi) desires death, as happened to Joseph
– peace be upon him. When he was thrown into a well, he did not say: ‘[God] let
me die!’; nor did he say this when he was thrown into [Pharaoh’s] prison. Only
when his parents came to him, his brothers prostrated themselves before him and
sovereignty and bliss were perfected for him, did he say: ‘Receive me to Thee
[after my death] in true submission!’”621They have this meaning in mind when
they recite:
We experience the utmost joy; however, only through you is our joy
complete
Shame on us for our condition, O my beloved people, for you are absent,
whereas we are present.
They also recited about this:
Someone rejoices at the new festival, while there’s no joy in it for me
My joy would only be complete, if my beloved were to be present
here.//409
Ibn Khafif said: “Loving passion is the repose of the hearts in the ecstatic
encounter [with God] (wajd) and the love of an intimate meeting [with Him].”
Abu Yazid [al-Bistami] said: “God has servants who, if He were to bar them from
seeing Him in Paradise, would seek to escape from Paradise, in the same way as
the inhabitants of the hellfire seek to escape from it.”
Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi informed us: Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Hashimi
informed us at Baydaπ622: Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Khuza∏i told us: ∏Abdallah
al-Ansari said: I heard al-Husayn al-Ansari say: “In a dream I saw that the Day
of Judgement had arrived and there was a man standing under God’s throne.
619 Q. 20:84.
620 That is, the passionate longing.
621 Q. 12:101.
622 The names of several Iranian cities and towns.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 338
338 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
God – praise be to Him – asked: ‘My angels, who is this?’ They answered that
God knew best. He then said: ‘This is Ma∏ruf al-Karkhi. He is intoxicated with
the love of Me and will only come to when he meets Me!’” In another version of
the story of this dream God says: “This is Ma∏ruf al-Karkhi. He left this world
longing for God, and God – may He be great and exalted – permitted him to
gaze at Him.” Faris said: “The hearts of those who long passionately for God are
enlightened by the light of God Most High. When their passionate longing is
stirred, this light fills both the heavens and the earth. God then introduces them
to His angels, saying: ‘These ones are passionately longing for Me. I want you to
bear witness that I passionately long for them even more than they do.’”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say the following about the words of
the Prophet – peace be upon him: “I ask that You grant me passionate longing
for a meeting with Me.” “Passionate longing consists of one hundred parts, of
which ninety-nine belong to Him, and one is distributed among all mankind. He wanted even this part for Himself as well, being jealous that even a splinter
of passionate longing might belong to someone else.” It is said: “The passionate
longing of those who are near to God is more perfect than the passionate longing
of those who are still veiled [from Him].” Therefore, they recite the following:
The worst affliction is passionate longing on a day when the tents
[of the lovers] are close to one another. It is said: “Those who experience passionate longing are gulping the sweetness
of death when it arrives, because the pleasure of the arrival [in His presence]
(wusul) unveiled to them is sweeter than honey [to them].” I heard Muhammad
b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Abdallah b.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 337
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 337
the livers.” He was also asked: “What is greater: loving passion, or love?” He
answered: “Love, because loving passion is born out of it.” One Sufi said:
“Loving passion is an inflammation that begins in the folds of the intestines and
occurs as a result of separation. It dies down as the meeting draws near. When
the innermost selves are dominated by the contemplation of the beloved, they
are no longer subject to passionate longing.” A Sufi was asked whether he had
experienced passionate longing. He answered: “No, for passionate longing is after
someone who is absent, whereas He is [always] present.” I heard the master Abu
∏Ali al-Daqqaq say about the words of God – may He be great and exalted, “I
[Moses] have hastened to Thee, O my Lord, only that I may satisfy Thee”,619that
it means “[I hastened] out of passionate longing for Thee”; however, he concealed
it620 by the word “satisfaction”. I also heard him – may God Most High have
mercy on him – say: “One of the signs of passionate longing is that the one who
stands on the carpet of well-being (∏awafi) desires death, as happened to Joseph
– peace be upon him. When he was thrown into a well, he did not say: ‘[God] let
me die!’; nor did he say this when he was thrown into [Pharaoh’s] prison. Only
when his parents came to him, his brothers prostrated themselves before him and
sovereignty and bliss were perfected for him, did he say: ‘Receive me to Thee
[after my death] in true submission!’”621They have this meaning in mind when
they recite:
We experience the utmost joy; however, only through you is our joy
complete
Shame on us for our condition, O my beloved people, for you are absent,
whereas we are present.
They also recited about this:
Someone rejoices at the new festival, while there’s no joy in it for me
My joy would only be complete, if my beloved were to be present
here.//409
Ibn Khafif said: “Loving passion is the repose of the hearts in the ecstatic
encounter [with God] (wajd) and the love of an intimate meeting [with Him].”
Abu Yazid [al-Bistami] said: “God has servants who, if He were to bar them from
seeing Him in Paradise, would seek to escape from Paradise, in the same way as
the inhabitants of the hellfire seek to escape from it.”
Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi informed us: Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Hashimi
informed us at Baydaπ622: Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Khuza∏i told us: ∏Abdallah
al-Ansari said: I heard al-Husayn al-Ansari say: “In a dream I saw that the Day
of Judgement had arrived and there was a man standing under God’s throne.
619 Q. 20:84.
620 That is, the passionate longing.
621 Q. 12:101.
622 The names of several Iranian cities and towns.

It is said: “Those who experience passionate longing are gulping the sweetness
of death when it arrives, because the pleasure of the arrival [in His presence]
(wusul) unveiled to them is sweeter than honey [to them].” I heard Muhammad
b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali say: I heard Ja∏far say: I heard
al-Junayd say: I heard al-Sari [al-Saqati] say: “Passionate longing is the greatest
station for the gnostic, when he has realized its True Reality (tahaqqaq); and
when he has realized it, he forgets everything that distracts him from the One for
Whom he is longing.”//410 Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri commented on the words of
God Most High, “God’s term is coming”,623saying: “This is the solace of those
who passionately long for Him.”
It is related that God Most High revealed to David – peace be upon him:
“Tell the young men of Israel: ‘Why are you busying yourselves with something
other than Me, while I have passionate longing for you? Whence this rudeness?!’”
It is also related that God – may He be great and exalted – revealed to David
– peace be upon him: “If only those who turn their backs on Me knew how I
aspire to them, how I seek their company, and how passionately I want them to
abandon their disobedience, they would have died of passionate longing for Me
and the joints of their bodies would have been severed from one another because
of [their] love for Me. This is what I wish for those who turn their backs on Me. What, then, will I wish for those who turn to Me?!” It is recorded in the Torah:
623 Q. 29:5.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 339
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 339
“We have passionate longing for you, yet you long not for Us; We frighten
you, yet you are not afraid [of Us]; We lament for you, yet you voice no lament
[for Us].”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “Shu∏ayb624wept until he became
blind. God – may He be great and exalted – restored his eye-sight. He then wept
more until he turned blind again. God – may He be great and exalted – restored
his eye-sight once again. Again, he wept until he turned blind. Then God Most
High revealed to him: ‘If you were weeping for the sake of Paradise, I have
already allowed you to enter it; if you were weeping for the fear of Hell, I have
already exonerated you from it.’ Shu∏yab said: ‘No, I [wept] out of passionate
longing for You.’ God revealed to him: ‘This is why I made my prophet and
interlocutor (kalimi)625serve you for ten years!’”
It is said: “Whoever longs for God, all things long for him.” According to
a [prophetic] report, “Paradise longs for three [individuals]: ∏Ali, ∏Ammar [b.
Yasir]626 and Salman [al-Farisi].”627 I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say:
“One Sufi master said: ‘I came to the marketplace where all things longed for
me, while I remained free from them.’”
I heard the master Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard ∏Abdallah b.
Ja∏far say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Umar al-Ramli say: Muhammad b. Ja∏far the
imam told us: Ishaq b. Ibrahim told us: Marhum told us: I heard Malik b. Dinar
say: “I found the following in the Torah: ‘We have a passionate longing for you,
but you long not for Us; We play the flute for you, but you dance not.’”//411 I
heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard Muhammad b. Farhan say:
I heard al-Junayd say, when someone asked him why the lover weeps when
he meets his beloved: “[He weeps] out of joy [at meeting] him and because of
the strength of his longing for him. I have heard that two brothers [met] and
embraced each other. One of them exclaimed: ‘O passionate longing!’, while the
other cried: ‘O [painful] ecstasy!’”
On how [God] protects the hearts of Sufi masters and on
[the necessity of] not opposing them [in anything they do]
God Most High said regarding the story about Moses and al-Khadir628– peace be
upon them both: “Shall I follow thee so that thou teachest me, of what thou hast
been taught, right judgement?”629The master [al-Qushayri] commented: “When
624 An Arabian prophet mentioned in the Qurπan (11:91); he was sent to the “People of the
Thicket”, whose identity remains a moot point. Shu∏yab is sometimes identified by Qurπan
commentators as Jethro, the father-in-law of Moses, mentioned in Exodus (for example, 3:1;
4:18.)
625 That is, Moses, to whom God spoke directly; see Q. 27:28.
626 A Companion of the Prophet, who sided with ∏Ali and was killed at the Battle of Siffin in
37/657.
627 A famous Companion of the Prophet, who died in 35/655.
628 Q. 18:60–78.
629 Q. 18:66.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 340
340 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
he [Moses] wanted to accompany al-Khadir, he observed the rules of proper
behavior. At first, he asked the permission to be a companion, to which al-Khadir
replied by setting a condition for him that he [Moses] not contradict him in
anything, nor oppose any of his judgements. When Moses – peace be upon him
– disagreed with him, he [al-Khadir] forgave him. He did the same another time. However, when it came to the third time – three being the last number of the
small amount and the first of the large one – he sought separation [from him],
saying: ‘This is the parting between me and thee.’”630
Al-Hasan al-Ahwazi informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Basri told us: Abu
Salim al-Qazzaz told us: Yazid b. Bayan told us: Abu πl-Raja’631 told us on the
authority of Anas b. Malik, who said that the Messenger of God – may God bless
and greet him – said: “A young man does not honor an old man without God
Most High appointing someone who will honor him when he gets old.” I heard
the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say: “The
beginning of every separation is controversy (mukhalafa).” He implied that who-
ever opposes his master has forfeited his spiritual path (tariqa) and the [spiritual]
bond between them is broken, although they may continue to share the same
space. Whoever has accompanied a Sufi master, then opposed him in his heart,
has violated the pact of companionship, which requires repentance from him. At
the same time, some Sufi masters say: “Disobedience toward masters cannot be
expiated by any repentance.” I heard the master Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami
say: “I set out to Marv when my master Abu Sahl al-Su∏luki was still alive. Before I departed, he used to hold a teaching session on Friday mornings during
which [attendees] read the text of the Qurπan, taking turns.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 339
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 339
“We have passionate longing for you, yet you long not for Us; We frighten
you, yet you are not afraid [of Us]; We lament for you, yet you voice no lament
[for Us].”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “Shu∏ayb624wept until he became
blind. God – may He be great and exalted – restored his eye-sight. He then wept
more until he turned blind again. God – may He be great and exalted – restored
his eye-sight once again. Again, he wept until he turned blind. Then God Most
High revealed to him: ‘If you were weeping for the sake of Paradise, I have
already allowed you to enter it; if you were weeping for the fear of Hell, I have
already exonerated you from it.’ Shu∏yab said: ‘No, I [wept] out of passionate
longing for You.’ God revealed to him: ‘This is why I made my prophet and
interlocutor (kalimi)625serve you for ten years!’”
It is said: “Whoever longs for God, all things long for him.” According to
a [prophetic] report, “Paradise longs for three [individuals]: ∏Ali, ∏Ammar [b.
Yasir]626 and Salman [al-Farisi].”627 I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say:
“One Sufi master said: ‘I came to the marketplace where all things longed for
me, while I remained free from them.’”
I heard the master Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard ∏Abdallah b.
Ja∏far say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Umar al-Ramli say: Muhammad b. Ja∏far the
imam told us: Ishaq b. Ibrahim told us: Marhum told us: I heard Malik b. Dinar
say: “I found the following in the Torah: ‘We have a passionate longing for you,
but you long not for Us; We play the flute for you, but you dance not.’”//411 I
heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard Muhammad b. Farhan say:
I heard al-Junayd say, when someone asked him why the lover weeps when
he meets his beloved: “[He weeps] out of joy [at meeting] him and because of
the strength of his longing for him. I have heard that two brothers [met] and
embraced each other. One of them exclaimed: ‘O passionate longing!’, while the
other cried: ‘O [painful] ecstasy!’”
On how [God] protects the hearts of Sufi masters and on
[the necessity of] not opposing them [in anything they do]
God Most High said regarding the story about Moses and al-Khadir628– peace be
upon them both: “Shall I follow thee so that thou teachest me, of what thou hast
been taught, right judgement?”629The master [al-Qushayri] commented: “When
624 An Arabian prophet mentioned in the Qurπan (11:91); he was sent to the “People of the
Thicket”, whose identity remains a moot point. Shu∏yab is sometimes identified by Qurπan
commentators as Jethro, the father-in-law of Moses, mentioned in Exodus (for example, 3:1;
4:18.)
625 That is, Moses, to whom God spoke directly; see Q. 27:28.
626 A Companion of the Prophet, who sided with ∏Ali and was killed at the Battle of Siffin in
37/657.
627 A famous Companion of the Prophet, who died in 35/655.
628 Q. 18:60–78.
629 Q. 18:66.

At
the same time, some Sufi masters say: “Disobedience toward masters cannot be
expiated by any repentance.” I heard the master Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami
say: “I set out to Marv when my master Abu Sahl al-Su∏luki was still alive. Before I departed, he used to hold a teaching session on Friday mornings during
which [attendees] read the text of the Qurπan, taking turns. When I returned, I
found out that he had discontinued that session in order to give room to the lecture
session taught by Abu πl-Ghafani. I was perplexed by this and kept saying to
myself: ‘He has replaced the session of Qurπan recitation with a lecture session!’
One day, he told me: ‘∏Abd al-Rahman, what do people say about me?’ I told
him: ‘They say that you discontinued the session of Qurπan recitation in order to
set up a lecture session!’ He told me: ‘Whoever asks his teacher “why?” will not
prosper.’” It is known that al-Junayd said: “One day I came to al-Sari [al-Saqati]
and he ordered me to do something. I fulfilled the task quickly, and when I came
back he gave me a piece of paper, saying: ‘This is for your fulfilling your task for me
quickly!’ I read the paper, which said: ‘I heard a camel driver sing this in the desert:
I weep and do you know what makes me weep? I weep out of fear that you
will abandon me, that my bond with you will be severed and that you will
desert me.’”
It is related that Abu πl-Hasan al-Hamadani al-∏Alawi said: “One night I was with
Ja∏far al-Khuldi. [Earlier] at home, I had ordered that a chicken be broiled in the
630 Q. 18:78. 631 According to an alternative reading, “Abu Rahhal”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 341
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 341
oven, and I was thinking of it. Ja∏far invited me to spend that night with him, but
I found an excuse not to, and returned home. [When I came home,] the chicken
was taken out of the oven and placed before me. [All of a sudden] a dog entered
[the house] through the door and carried the chicken off, because those who were
there were distracted [by something]. Then they brought out to us the gravy in
which the chicken was cooked. It became entangled in the hem of the servant’s
garment and spilled over. When I woke up next day, I went to Ja∏far. As soon
as his gaze fell on me, he said: ‘When someone does not protect the hearts of
[his] masters, God empowers a dog to punish him!’” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd
al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali al-Tusi say: I heard Abu
∏Abdallah al-Dinawari say: I heard al-Hasan al-Damaghani say: I heard ∏Ammi
al-Bistami632 relate on the authority of his father that Shaqiq al-Balkhi and Abu
Turab al-Nakhshabi came to Abu Yazid al-Bistami. A table cloth [with food] was
brought out for them and [there came] a youth who served Abu Yazid. [Shaqiq
and Abu Turab] invited him to eat with them. He told them: “I am fasting.”
Shaqiq told him: “Eat and you will receive a month’s worth of fasting as your
reward!” However, he declined. Shaqiq then said: “Eat, and you will receive a
year’s worth of fasting as your reward!” He again declined. Then Abu Yazid
exclaimed: “Leave him alone, for he has [now] fallen from God’s grace!” [Indeed,]
in a year that youth was caught as he was trying to steal something, and his hand
was chopped off. I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “Sahl b. ∏Abdallah
[al-Tustari] ascribed friendship with God (wilaya) to a man who was a baker in
Basra. One of Sahl b. ∏Abdallah’s friends heard about this and aspired to see
that man. He set out for//413 Basra and went to the baker’s shop.At
the same time, some Sufi masters say: “Disobedience toward masters cannot be
expiated by any repentance.” I heard the master Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami
say: “I set out to Marv when my master Abu Sahl al-Su∏luki was still alive. Before I departed, he used to hold a teaching session on Friday mornings during
which [attendees] read the text of the Qurπan, taking turns. When I returned, I
found out that he had discontinued that session in order to give room to the lecture
session taught by Abu πl-Ghafani. I was perplexed by this and kept saying to
myself: ‘He has replaced the session of Qurπan recitation with a lecture session!’
One day, he told me: ‘∏Abd al-Rahman, what do people say about me?’ I told
him: ‘They say that you discontinued the session of Qurπan recitation in order to
set up a lecture session!’ He told me: ‘Whoever asks his teacher “why?” will not
prosper.’” It is known that al-Junayd said: “One day I came to al-Sari [al-Saqati]
and he ordered me to do something. I fulfilled the task quickly, and when I came
back he gave me a piece of paper, saying: ‘This is for your fulfilling your task for me
quickly!’ I read the paper, which said: ‘I heard a camel driver sing this in the desert:
I weep and do you know what makes me weep? I weep out of fear that you
will abandon me, that my bond with you will be severed and that you will
desert me.’”
It is related that Abu πl-Hasan al-Hamadani al-∏Alawi said: “One night I was with
Ja∏far al-Khuldi. [Earlier] at home, I had ordered that a chicken be broiled in the
630 Q. 18:78. 631 According to an alternative reading, “Abu Rahhal”.

∏Abdallah’s friends heard about this and aspired to see
that man. He set out for//413 Basra and went to the baker’s shop. He observed
the baker baking bread with his head covered with a veil,633as was the custom of
bakers. [The visitor] said to himself: ‘If he were a friend of God his hair would
not be burned even without the veil.’ He then greeted the baker and asked him
about something. However, the baker told him: ‘You thought ill of me, so do not
bother to talk to me now!’ and he refused to talk to him.”
I heard the master Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard ∏Abdallah
al-Razi say that he heard Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri praise Muhammad b. al-Fadl
al-Balkhi. Al-Razi aspired to see him and came to visit him. However, [when he
met al-Balkhi] he did not find him to be as he had expected. He returned to Abu
∏Uthman and the latter asked him: “How did you find him?” He answered:
“I did not find him to be as I expected him to be.” Abu ∏Uthman told him:
“You thought ill of him, and when one thinks ill of another, one is barred from
his virtues. Go back to him with respect.” So ∏Abdallah returned to him [with
respect] and [this time] benefited from his visit. It is related that ∏Amr b. ∏Uthman al-Makki saw al-Husayn b. Mansur [al-Hallaj] write something and
asked him what it was. He answered: “With this I can compete with (u∏arid) the
Qurπan!” [On hearing this,] ∏Amr b. ∏Uthman cursed him and abandoned him. 632 That is, “my paternal uncle”. 633 To protect his face and hair from the intense heat of the oven.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 342
342 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Sufi masters say: “What happened to him [al-Hallaj]634long after that was because
of the curse of that master.”635
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God Most high have mercy on
him – say: “When the inhabitants of Balkh expelled Muhammad b. al-Fadl from
their city, he cursed them, saying: ‘God, deprive them of sincerity!’ From that
time on, not a single veracious person has come from Balkh.” I heard Ahmad b.
Yahya al-Abiwardi say: “Whoever has won the satisfaction of his master will
not receive his reward during his lifetime, so that his praise for that master would
not leave his heart. Only when the master dies will God – may He be great and
exalted – show him the reward due to him from the master’s satisfaction. However,
when someone’s master is dissatisfied with him, he too will not receive the
recompense for this dissatisfaction as long as his master is alive in order that the
master may have no pity on him, for by their nature masters are all-forgiving.
Only when the master dies will the disciple [who earned his dissatisfaction] be
recompensed.”
Listening to music (sama∏)
God – may He be great and exalted – said: “So give thou good tidings to My
servants who give ear to the Word and follow the fairest of it.”636 The definite
article of “the Word” implies that it has an all-comprehensive and universal
[meaning], as indicated by His praise of those who follow “the fairest” of it. God
Most High said: “They shall walk with joy in a green meadow.”637 According
to one interpretation, [“walking with joy”] means listening to music. Know that
“listening to music” is permissible, when it means the perception of beautiful
sounds and pleasant melodies, when the listener//414 does not intend anything
that is prohibited, when he does not listen to anything that is condemned by the
Divine Law, when he allows no free rein to his passions, and is not seduced by
the amusement that resides in it.
There is no disagreement that poems were recited before the Messenger
of God – may God bless and greet him – and that he listened to them, without
condemning those who recited them. If he allowed listening to this poetry without
musical accompaniment, [there is no reason why his] judgement would be
different, if it were to be listened to when musical accompaniment takes place.
This much is obvious. [Furthermore] the listener should have an abundant
desire to perform acts of obedience [to God] and remember the [high spiritual]
ranks that God Most High has established for His Godfearing servants, so that
this would make him free from any lapses and immediately bring pure divine
visitations to his heart, [all of] which is laudable from the standpoint of religion
and preferred from the viewpoint of the Divine Law.
634 He was executed in Baghdad in 309/922 on charges of heresy.
635 That is, ∏Amr al-Makki.
636 Q. 39:17–18.
637 Q. 30:15.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 343
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 343
In the statements of the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him
– there are some things that resemble poetry, although he may not have intended
it to be such. Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Saffar informed us: al-Harith b. Abi Usama told us: Abu πl-Nadr told
us: Shu∏ba told us on the authority of Humayd, who said: I heard Anas [b. Malik]
say: “The [Prophet’s] Helpers638 (ansar) were digging the ditch,639 chanting the
following:
We have pledged our allegiance to Muhammad in [his] struggle (jihad)
As long as we are alive. “The Messenger – may God bless and greet him – responded to them, saying:
‘O God, there’s no life except that of the Hereafter, be benevolent to the Helpers
and the Emigrants!’” Although this phrase of the Messenger – may God bless
and greet him – is not composed according to a poetic meter, it is still close to
poetry. The first Muslims and the great scholars [of the subsequent generations]
used to listen to the chanting of poetry. Among those of them who allowed it was
Malik b. Anas, and all the people of the Hijaz allowed singing (ghinaπ). As for the
songs of the camel drivers (hidaπ), all of them agreed that it was permissible. Reports and traditions to this effect are abundant. It is related that Ibn Jurayj
permitted listening to music. Someone asked him: “When you will be brought
[before God] on the Day of Judgement with your good and evil deeds, on which
side will your [allowing] of music be?” He answered, “Neither among the good,
nor among the evil”, implying that it is allowed (mubah).640 As for al-Shafi∏i,641
he did not prohibit it, although he considered it to be reprehensible for the
common folk. However, if someone makes singing his profession or listens to it
constantly by way of entertainment, then his testimony [in court] is to be rejected.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 342
342 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Sufi masters say: “What happened to him [al-Hallaj]634long after that was because
of the curse of that master.”635
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God Most high have mercy on
him – say: “When the inhabitants of Balkh expelled Muhammad b. al-Fadl from
their city, he cursed them, saying: ‘God, deprive them of sincerity!’ From that
time on, not a single veracious person has come from Balkh.” I heard Ahmad b.
Yahya al-Abiwardi say: “Whoever has won the satisfaction of his master will
not receive his reward during his lifetime, so that his praise for that master would
not leave his heart. Only when the master dies will God – may He be great and
exalted – show him the reward due to him from the master’s satisfaction. However,
when someone’s master is dissatisfied with him, he too will not receive the
recompense for this dissatisfaction as long as his master is alive in order that the
master may have no pity on him, for by their nature masters are all-forgiving.
Only when the master dies will the disciple [who earned his dissatisfaction] be
recompensed.”
Listening to music (sama∏)
God – may He be great and exalted – said: “So give thou good tidings to My
servants who give ear to the Word and follow the fairest of it.”636 The definite
article of “the Word” implies that it has an all-comprehensive and universal
[meaning], as indicated by His praise of those who follow “the fairest” of it. God
Most High said: “They shall walk with joy in a green meadow.”637 According
to one interpretation, [“walking with joy”] means listening to music. Know that
“listening to music” is permissible, when it means the perception of beautiful
sounds and pleasant melodies, when the listener//414 does not intend anything
that is prohibited, when he does not listen to anything that is condemned by the
Divine Law, when he allows no free rein to his passions, and is not seduced by
the amusement that resides in it.
There is no disagreement that poems were recited before the Messenger
of God – may God bless and greet him – and that he listened to them, without
condemning those who recited them. If he allowed listening to this poetry without
musical accompaniment, [there is no reason why his] judgement would be
different, if it were to be listened to when musical accompaniment takes place.
This much is obvious. [Furthermore] the listener should have an abundant
desire to perform acts of obedience [to God] and remember the [high spiritual]
ranks that God Most High has established for His Godfearing servants, so that
this would make him free from any lapses and immediately bring pure divine
visitations to his heart, [all of] which is laudable from the standpoint of religion
and preferred from the viewpoint of the Divine Law.
634 He was executed in Baghdad in 309/922 on charges of heresy.
635 That is, ∏Amr al-Makki.
636 Q. 39:17–18.
637 Q. 30:15.

Someone asked him: “When you will be brought
[before God] on the Day of Judgement with your good and evil deeds, on which
side will your [allowing] of music be?” He answered, “Neither among the good,
nor among the evil”, implying that it is allowed (mubah).640 As for al-Shafi∏i,641
he did not prohibit it, although he considered it to be reprehensible for the
common folk. However, if someone makes singing his profession or listens to it
constantly by way of entertainment, then his testimony [in court] is to be rejected. While al-Shafi∏i considered listening to music among those things that diminish
one’s manhood, he nevertheless did not attribute it to [the category of] actions
prohibited [by the Law].//415
However, we are not talking here about this kind of listening, for this group642
occupies too high a rank to listen to music for the sake of entertainment, or to
sit at a music session negligently, or to busy their hearts with any nonsense
(laghw), or to listen to music in an unsuitable manner. Many reports concerning
638 The Prophet’s followers in Medina, as opposed to the Emigrants, who left Mecca to follow
him to Medina. 639 In anticipation of the siege of Medina by the hostile Meccan force and its allies, the Prophet
ordered a ditch to be dug around the vulnerable parts of the city. 640 One of the intermediate categories of Islamic law that fall in between acts that are strictly
prohibited and strongly commanded. Being “allowed” means that a certain act is neither
religiously reprehensible, nor laudable, but is tolerated. 641 A great legal scholar, who established one of the four major schools of Sunni law. The author
of the present book, al-Qushayri, adhered to the Shafi∏i legal school. 642 The Sufis.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 344
344 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
the permissibility of listening to music are reported on the authority of Ibn
∏Umar.643 The same is true of ∏Abdallah b. Ja∏far b. Abi Talib and ∏Umar [b. al-Khattab] – may God be pleased with all of them – who [also] transmitted
reports about the singing of caravan drivers. Poems were recited in the presence
of the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – and he did not prohibit it. It is
also related that he himself asked for [some] poems to be recited [to him]. It is
also well known and obvious that [once] he entered the house of ∏Aπisha – may
God be pleased with her – when two of [her] slave girls were singing there, yet
he did not prohibit them [from singing]. Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami informed us: Muhammad b. Ja∏far
b. Muhammad b. Matar informed us: al-Hubab b. Muhammad al-Tustari told
us: Abu πl-Ash∏ath informed us: Muhammad b. Bakr al-Bursani told us: Shu∏ba
told us on the authority of Hisham b. ∏Urwa, on the authority of his father, on
the authority of ∏Aπisha – may God be pleased with her – that she related that
Abu Bakr al-Siddiq644– may God be pleased with him – came to her, when two
singing-girls were singing about how the Helpers were fighting each other at
the Battle of Bu∏ath.645 Abu Bakr said twice: “The flute of the Devil!” while the
Prophet – may God bless and greet him – said: “Leave them646alone, Abu Bakr! Each folk has its own festival, and our festival is today!” ∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi
informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd informed us: ∏Uthman b. ∏Umar al-Dabbi told
us: Abu Kamil told us: Abu ∏Awana told us on the authority of al-Ajlah, on the
authority of Abu Zubayr, on the authority of ∏Aπisha – may God be pleased with
her – that she arranged a marriage for a female relative of hers on the Helpers’
side. The Prophet – may God bless and greet him – came and asked: “Have you
taken the bride to the bridegroom?” ∏Aπisha said that they had.Someone asked him: “When you will be brought
[before God] on the Day of Judgement with your good and evil deeds, on which
side will your [allowing] of music be?” He answered, “Neither among the good,
nor among the evil”, implying that it is allowed (mubah).640 As for al-Shafi∏i,641
he did not prohibit it, although he considered it to be reprehensible for the
common folk. However, if someone makes singing his profession or listens to it
constantly by way of entertainment, then his testimony [in court] is to be rejected. While al-Shafi∏i considered listening to music among those things that diminish
one’s manhood, he nevertheless did not attribute it to [the category of] actions
prohibited [by the Law].//415
However, we are not talking here about this kind of listening, for this group642
occupies too high a rank to listen to music for the sake of entertainment, or to
sit at a music session negligently, or to busy their hearts with any nonsense
(laghw), or to listen to music in an unsuitable manner. Many reports concerning
638 The Prophet’s followers in Medina, as opposed to the Emigrants, who left Mecca to follow
him to Medina. 639 In anticipation of the siege of Medina by the hostile Meccan force and its allies, the Prophet
ordered a ditch to be dug around the vulnerable parts of the city. 640 One of the intermediate categories of Islamic law that fall in between acts that are strictly
prohibited and strongly commanded. Being “allowed” means that a certain act is neither
religiously reprehensible, nor laudable, but is tolerated. 641 A great legal scholar, who established one of the four major schools of Sunni law. The author
of the present book, al-Qushayri, adhered to the Shafi∏i legal school. 642 The Sufis.

∏Umar al-Dabbi told
us: Abu Kamil told us: Abu ∏Awana told us on the authority of al-Ajlah, on the
authority of Abu Zubayr, on the authority of ∏Aπisha – may God be pleased with
her – that she arranged a marriage for a female relative of hers on the Helpers’
side. The Prophet – may God bless and greet him – came and asked: “Have you
taken the bride to the bridegroom?” ∏Aπisha said that they had. The Prophet asked:
“Did you send anyone who would sing [for them]?” She said no. The Prophet
said: “The Helpers like love songs. You should have sent [them] someone who
would recite this [poem]:
We have come to you, we have come to you
Greet us and we shall greet you!”//416
The master and imam Abu Bakr Muhammad b. al-Hasan b. Furak – may God
be pleased with him – informed us: Ahmad b. Mahmud b. Khurrazadh told
us: al-Hasan b. al-Harith al-Ahwazi said: Sa∏id told us on the authority of Sadaqa
bint Abi ∏Imran that she said: ∏Alqama b. Marthad told us on the authority
of Zadhan, on the authority of al-Baraπ b. ∏Azib, who said that he heard the
Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – say: “Adorn the Qurπan with
643 Son of the second caliph ∏Umar b. al-Khattab. 644 The first caliph and ∏Aπisha’s father. 645 This battle occurred in 617 C.E. between the two major Medinan tribes, Aws and Khazraj,
whose members later invited Muhammad to arbitrate between them and became his first
Medinan followers. 646 That is, the two singing girls.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 345
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 345
your voices, for a beautiful voice makes the Qurπan more beautiful.” ∏Ali b.
Ahmad b. ∏Abdan al-Ahwazi informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd told us: ∏Uthman b.
∏Umar al-Dabbi informed us: Abu πl-Rabi∏ told us: ∏Abd al-Salam b. Hashim told
us: ∏Abdallah b. Muharrir,647on the authority of Qatada, on the authority of Anas
b. Malik, said that the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – said:
“Everything has its adornment, and the adornment of the Qurπan is a beautiful
voice.” ∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd informed us:
Yunus al-Karimi648told us: al-Dahhaq b. Makhlad Abu ∏Asim told us: Shabib b.
Bishr al-Halabi told us on the authority of Anas b. Malik that the Messenger of
God – may God bless and greet him – said: “Two sounds are cursed: the sound
of wailing at the time of an affliction; and the sound of the flute at the time of
happiness (ni∏ma).”649 The meaning of the words [of the Messenger] imply his
allowing [of listening to music] on certain occasions, so any specific [and hard-
and-fast] ruling650in this regard should be considered invalid. Reports about this
matter are numerous. If we continue to recount such stories further, we shall
depart from our goal of being concise. It is told that a certain man recited the
following verses in front of the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him:
She appeared and her cheek-bones shone like a piece of jet
jewelry
She turned around, and I said to her with my heart all ablaze:
“Woe unto both of you,651is there upon me a sin for my love [of her]?”
The Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – said: “No!” God Most
High bestowed a beautiful voice on some people as a blessing, saying: “He
increases creation as He wills.”652Some interpreters say that among these things is
a beautiful voice.//417 At the same time God – praise be to Him – condemned
an ugly voice, saying: “The most hideous of voices is the ass’s.”653 One cannot
ignore [the fact] that the hearts [of people] take pleasure in nice voices and find
a repose in them. Thus, a child is calmed by a nice voice and a camel endures the
hardships of a journey and the heaviness of its burden when [the caravan driver]
sings his song for it. God Most High said: “Do they not consider how the camel
was created?”654Isma∏il b. ∏Ulayya related: “I used to stroll with al-Shafi∏i – may
God have mercy on him – in the heat of the midday. As we were passing a
certain place, we heard a person recite something. Al-Shafi∏i told me: ‘Let’s go
there [to listen]!’ He then asked me: ‘Did this amuse you?’ I said: ‘No.’ He then
647 Or “al-Muharraz”.
648 Or “al-Kudaymi”.
649 According to another version of the text, the last word should be read as naghama– that is,
“singing”.
650 That is, one that absolutely prohibits the practice in question.
651 That is, her cheek-bones.
652 Q. 35:1.
653 Q. 31:19; 31:17, according to Arberry’s translation.
654 Q. 88:17.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 346
346 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
told me: ‘You have no perception!’” The Messenger of God said: “God Most
High does not like to listen to anything more than listening to a prophet who
sings (yataghanni) the Qurπan.” ∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd informed us: Ibn Mulhan told us: Yahya b. Bukayr told us: al-Layth told
us on the authority of ∏Uqayl, on the authority of Ibn Shihab, who said that Abu
Salama informed him on the authority of Abu Hurayra that the Messenger
of God – may God bless and greet him – said: “God Most High does not like to
listen to anything more than to a prophet who publicly sings the Qurπan.”
It is related that the jinn, human beings, birds and beasts used to listen to
David – peace be upon him – when he recited the Psalms. They used to carry
away four hundred funeral biers from his reciting session with bodies of those
who had died while listening to his recitation. The Messenger of God – may God
bless and greet him – said to Abu Musa al-Ash∏ari:655 “I was given one of the
psalms that used to belong to the tribe of David.”//418 Mu∏adh b. Jabal said to
the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him: “If I knew that you would
listen [to my recitation], I would make it [sound] very beautiful.” Abu Hatim
al-Sijistani informed us: ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali al-Sarraj informed us: Abu Bakr
Muhammad b. Dawud al-Dinawari al-Duqqi656 related: “I was in the desert,
where I came across a Bedouin tribe. A man from that tribe hosted me. There I
saw a black slave in shackles and some dead camels lying in the yard. The slave
told me: ‘This night you are a guest and you are [thus] held dear by my master. Intercede before him on my behalf and he will not turn you down.’ I told the host:
‘I will not eat any of your food until you free this slave!’ The host exclaimed:
‘This slave has impoverished me and ruined my property!’ I asked him what he
had done.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 345
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 345
your voices, for a beautiful voice makes the Qurπan more beautiful.” ∏Ali b.
Ahmad b. ∏Abdan al-Ahwazi informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd told us: ∏Uthman b.
∏Umar al-Dabbi informed us: Abu πl-Rabi∏ told us: ∏Abd al-Salam b. Hashim told
us: ∏Abdallah b. Muharrir,647on the authority of Qatada, on the authority of Anas
b. Malik, said that the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – said:
“Everything has its adornment, and the adornment of the Qurπan is a beautiful
voice.” ∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd informed us:
Yunus al-Karimi648told us: al-Dahhaq b. Makhlad Abu ∏Asim told us: Shabib b.
Bishr al-Halabi told us on the authority of Anas b. Malik that the Messenger of
God – may God bless and greet him – said: “Two sounds are cursed: the sound
of wailing at the time of an affliction; and the sound of the flute at the time of
happiness (ni∏ma).”649 The meaning of the words [of the Messenger] imply his
allowing [of listening to music] on certain occasions, so any specific [and hard-
and-fast] ruling650in this regard should be considered invalid. Reports about this
matter are numerous. If we continue to recount such stories further, we shall
depart from our goal of being concise. It is told that a certain man recited the
following verses in front of the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him:
She appeared and her cheek-bones shone like a piece of jet
jewelry
She turned around, and I said to her with my heart all ablaze:
“Woe unto both of you,651is there upon me a sin for my love [of her]?”
The Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – said: “No!” God Most
High bestowed a beautiful voice on some people as a blessing, saying: “He
increases creation as He wills.”652Some interpreters say that among these things is
a beautiful voice.//417 At the same time God – praise be to Him – condemned
an ugly voice, saying: “The most hideous of voices is the ass’s.”653 One cannot
ignore [the fact] that the hearts [of people] take pleasure in nice voices and find
a repose in them. Thus, a child is calmed by a nice voice and a camel endures the
hardships of a journey and the heaviness of its burden when [the caravan driver]
sings his song for it. God Most High said: “Do they not consider how the camel
was created?”654Isma∏il b. ∏Ulayya related: “I used to stroll with al-Shafi∏i – may
God have mercy on him – in the heat of the midday. As we were passing a
certain place, we heard a person recite something. Al-Shafi∏i told me: ‘Let’s go
there [to listen]!’ He then asked me: ‘Did this amuse you?’ I said: ‘No.’ He then
647 Or “al-Muharraz”.
648 Or “al-Kudaymi”.
649 According to another version of the text, the last word should be read as naghama– that is,
“singing”.
650 That is, one that absolutely prohibits the practice in question.
651 That is, her cheek-bones.
652 Q. 35:1.
653 Q. 31:19; 31:17, according to Arberry’s translation.
654 Q. 88:17.

The slave
told me: ‘This night you are a guest and you are [thus] held dear by my master. Intercede before him on my behalf and he will not turn you down.’ I told the host:
‘I will not eat any of your food until you free this slave!’ The host exclaimed:
‘This slave has impoverished me and ruined my property!’ I asked him what he
had done. The host said: ‘He has a beautiful voice. I used to live off the work of
these camels. This slave put a very heavy load on them and sang to them [so
beautifully] that they ran three days’ worth of distance in just one day. When he
finally unloaded them, they died immediately. However, I grant your wish.’ And
he removed the shackles from the slave. In the morning, I wished to listen to
his voice. I asked [the host] for that, and he ordered the slave to sing to a camel
that was near a well, drinking. When the slave started to sing, the camel rushed
forth headlong and tore up his rope. I do not think I have ever heard a more
beautiful voice. I fell unconscious [and lay there] until the host gave a sign to him
to fall silent.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Muhammad
b. ∏Abdallah b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz say: I heard Abu ∏Amr657 al-Anmati say: I heard
al-Junayd say, when someone asked him: “Why is a man [usually] quiet, but
becomes agitated when he hears music?” He answered: “God Most High
addressed [disembodied human] souls during the primordial pact, saying: ‘Am I
655 A distinguished Companion of the Prophet and military leader of the early Muslim community
who died around 42/662. 656 Or “al-Raqqi”. 657 Or “∏Abu ∏Umar”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 347
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 347
not your Lord?’ They answered: ‘Yes, we testify’,658 and the spirits [of human
beings] fully absorbed the sound of these words, so whenever they listen to music,
the remembrance of that [original act of] hearing agitates them.” I heard the
master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “Listening to music is prohibited for the common
folk because they still remain under the influence of their [lower] souls; it is
permitted for ascetics (zuhhad) because they engage in the spiritual struggle
[against their base instincts]; it is recommended (mustahabb) to our companions659
because they enliven their hearts [through it].”//419 I heard Abu Hatim
al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sufi say: I heard al-Wajihi say: I heard Abu
∏Ali al-Rudhbari say that al-Harith al-Muhasibi used to say: “There are three
things that one enjoys when one happens to have them; they, however, have
eluded us. [They are:] A beautiful face, when it is accompanied by self-restraint;
a beautiful voice, when it is accompanied by piety; and a beautiful friendship,
when it is accompanied by fidelity.”
Someone asked Dhu πl-Nun about a beautiful voice. He answered: “[Beautiful]
speeches and [subtle] gestures that God Most High has placed in every righteous
man and woman.” When he was asked about listening to music another time, he
responded: “[This is] a divine visitation (warid) that excites the hearts [to seek]
God. Whoever heeds it in truth (bi-haqq), attains truth (tahaqqaq), and whoever
heeds it with his lower soul, apostatizes (tazandaq).” Ja∏far b.He answered: “[Beautiful]
speeches and [subtle] gestures that God Most High has placed in every righteous
man and woman.” When he was asked about listening to music another time, he
responded: “[This is] a divine visitation (warid) that excites the hearts [to seek]
God. Whoever heeds it in truth (bi-haqq), attains truth (tahaqqaq), and whoever
heeds it with his lower soul, apostatizes (tazandaq).” Ja∏far b. Nusayr related on
the authority of al-Junayd that the latter said: “[Divine] mercy (rahma) descends
upon the poor in three places: when they listen to music, for they hear it only
through a true aspiration and speak only out of an ecstatic encounter [with God];
when they eat their food, for they eat it only out of a true need; and during
a discussion of religious matters, for they mention only the [pious] character
traits of God’s friends (awliyaπ).” I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard
al-Husayn b. Ahmad b. Ja∏far say: I heard Abu Bakr Mimshadh al-Dinawari say:
I heard al-Junayd say: “Listening to music is a temptation (fitna) for someone
who seeks it, and a repose for someone who suddenly encounters it.” It is also
related that al-Junayd said: “Listening to music requires three things: time
(zaman), a place (makan), and friends (ikhwan).”
Someone asked al-Shibli about listening to music. He answered: “Its outward
aspect is temptation (fitna), while its inward aspect is exhortation (∏ibra). Whoever
understands its subtle allusion is granted the listening that brings exhortation; if
not, he falls victim to [its] temptation and sets himself up for a trial.” They say:
“Listening to music is allowed only to one whose soul is dead and whose heart
is still living. The soul of such a person is slaughtered by the sword of spiritual
self-exertion and his heart is enlivened by the light of compliance [with God’s
will].” Someone inquired of Abu Ya∏qub al-Nahrajuri about listening to music.The slave
told me: ‘This night you are a guest and you are [thus] held dear by my master. Intercede before him on my behalf and he will not turn you down.’ I told the host:
‘I will not eat any of your food until you free this slave!’ The host exclaimed:
‘This slave has impoverished me and ruined my property!’ I asked him what he
had done. The host said: ‘He has a beautiful voice. I used to live off the work of
these camels. This slave put a very heavy load on them and sang to them [so
beautifully] that they ran three days’ worth of distance in just one day. When he
finally unloaded them, they died immediately. However, I grant your wish.’ And
he removed the shackles from the slave. In the morning, I wished to listen to
his voice. I asked [the host] for that, and he ordered the slave to sing to a camel
that was near a well, drinking. When the slave started to sing, the camel rushed
forth headlong and tore up his rope. I do not think I have ever heard a more
beautiful voice. I fell unconscious [and lay there] until the host gave a sign to him
to fall silent.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Muhammad
b. ∏Abdallah b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz say: I heard Abu ∏Amr657 al-Anmati say: I heard
al-Junayd say, when someone asked him: “Why is a man [usually] quiet, but
becomes agitated when he hears music?” He answered: “God Most High
addressed [disembodied human] souls during the primordial pact, saying: ‘Am I
655 A distinguished Companion of the Prophet and military leader of the early Muslim community
who died around 42/662. 656 Or “al-Raqqi”. 657 Or “∏Abu ∏Umar”.

Whoever
understands its subtle allusion is granted the listening that brings exhortation; if
not, he falls victim to [its] temptation and sets himself up for a trial.” They say:
“Listening to music is allowed only to one whose soul is dead and whose heart
is still living. The soul of such a person is slaughtered by the sword of spiritual
self-exertion and his heart is enlivened by the light of compliance [with God’s
will].” Someone inquired of Abu Ya∏qub al-Nahrajuri about listening to music. He
answered: “This is a state that brings about the return to the [divine] mysteries
through the burning [of one’s self].”//420 They say: “Listening to music is a
658 Q. 7:172. 659 That is, the Sufis.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 348
348 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
delicious nourishment for the spirits of [divine] gnostics.” I heard the master
Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “Listening to music is [man’s] nature (tab∏), unless it
comes from [obeying] the Divine Law; it is violation, unless it comes from a true
[aspiration]; and it is temptation, unless it comes from pious exhortation.” They
say: “Listening to music is of two types. [The first type is] listening to music
by way of religious learning and sobriety. One who takes part in it must have
knowledge of [divine] names and attributes, or else he will fall into pure unbelief. [The other type is] listening to music by way of a spiritual state. One who takes
part in it must eliminate all his human attributes and purify himself from all
mundane attachments and traces by manifesting the characteristics of the True
Reality.” Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari related: “I asked Abu Sulayman [al-Darani]
about listening to music.” He said: “I like it more when it comes from two rather
than one.” Someone asked Abu πl-Husayn al-Nuri about “Sufi”. He responded:
“It is he who listens to music and chooses means.”660 Once someone asked Abu
∏Ali al-Rudhbari about listening to music. He answered: “If only we could make
it pure step by step!”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Abu ∏Uthman
al-Maghribi say: “Whoever lays claim to listening to music without listening
to the voices of birds, the creaking of the door, or the rattling of winds is a false
pretender.” I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj al-Tusi
say: I heard Abu πl-Tayyib Ahmad b. Muqatil al-∏Akki say: Ja∏far [al-Khuldi]
related: “Ibn Ziri,661a companion of al-Junayd, was a distinguished Sufi master. He used to frequent places where listening to music took place.Whoever
understands its subtle allusion is granted the listening that brings exhortation; if
not, he falls victim to [its] temptation and sets himself up for a trial.” They say:
“Listening to music is allowed only to one whose soul is dead and whose heart
is still living. The soul of such a person is slaughtered by the sword of spiritual
self-exertion and his heart is enlivened by the light of compliance [with God’s
will].” Someone inquired of Abu Ya∏qub al-Nahrajuri about listening to music. He
answered: “This is a state that brings about the return to the [divine] mysteries
through the burning [of one’s self].”//420 They say: “Listening to music is a
658 Q. 7:172. 659 That is, the Sufis.

Muqatil al-∏Akki say: Ja∏far [al-Khuldi]
related: “Ibn Ziri,661a companion of al-Junayd, was a distinguished Sufi master. He used to frequent places where listening to music took place. If he liked it,
he would spread his garment on the floor and say: ‘The Sufi is wherever
his heart is.’ If he did not like it, he would say, ‘Listening to music is only for
those who possess hearts (arbab al-qulub)’, then walk away, taking his sandals
with him.”662 I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him
– say: I heard ∏Abd al-Wahid b. Bakr say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Abd al-Majid say:
“Someone asked Ruwaym [b. Ahmad] about the ecstasy the Sufis experience
(wajd) during listening to music. He answered: ‘They witness realities that are
hidden from others. They point to them, exclaiming: “[Come] to me!” “[Come]
to me!” Then a veil falls and their joy turns into grief; some of them tear their
clothes, others scream, still others weep – each in accord with what was allotted
to him.’” I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Tamimi say: I heard
∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali say: I heard al-Husri say in one of his lectures: “What do I
do with a listening that ceases when the one who listens [himself] ceases to
be? This is why your listening must be permanent, and not interrupted.”//421
He [∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali] also said that al-Husri said: “[The listener] must have a
660 That is, one who carefully selects his means of livelihood in order to avoid things that are
unlawful. 661 Or “Ibn Zizi”. 662 This phrase may be interpreted as a veiled criticism of the participants in the session that he
disliked.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 349
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 349
permanent thirst and a permanent drinking, for whenever his drinking increases,
his thirst increases as well.” According to Mujahid,663 God’s words “They shall
walk with joy in a green meadow”664 mean [that they665 will be] listening to the
maidens of Paradise singing with pleasant voices: “We are eternal, we shall never
die; we are blessed, we shall never suffer!” They say: “Listening is a call and
ecstasy is aspiration [in response] to it.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi say:
“The hearts of the people of the [divine] Truth are always present and their ears
are always open.” I also heard him say: I heard the master Abu Sahl al-Su∏luki
say: “The listener is hovering between veiling (istitar) and manifestation (tajalli). The veiling necessitates inflammation, while the manifestation brings about
relief. Out of the veiling originate the movements of the aspirants (muridun),
while out of the manifestation originates the repose of those who have arrived
[at their goal] (wasilun). This is the site of uprightness and stability. This is a
characteristic of [divine] presence which allows nothing but humility under the
passage of awe-inspiring divine visitations. God Most High said [about this]:
‘When they were in its presence they said, “Be silent!”’”666
Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri said: “Listening has three faces. One of them [is turned]
to the aspirants and beginners, who seek to attain noble spiritual states through
it, and in which they may be subject to temptation and hypocrisy. The second
face belongs to the veracious ones, who seek to intensify their spiritual states. They
listen only to that which agrees with their mystical moments. The third face
belongs to the people of uprightness from among the gnostics.Muqatil al-∏Akki say: Ja∏far [al-Khuldi]
related: “Ibn Ziri,661a companion of al-Junayd, was a distinguished Sufi master. He used to frequent places where listening to music took place. If he liked it,
he would spread his garment on the floor and say: ‘The Sufi is wherever
his heart is.’ If he did not like it, he would say, ‘Listening to music is only for
those who possess hearts (arbab al-qulub)’, then walk away, taking his sandals
with him.”662 I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn – may God have mercy on him
– say: I heard ∏Abd al-Wahid b. Bakr say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Abd al-Majid say:
“Someone asked Ruwaym [b. Ahmad] about the ecstasy the Sufis experience
(wajd) during listening to music. He answered: ‘They witness realities that are
hidden from others. They point to them, exclaiming: “[Come] to me!” “[Come]
to me!” Then a veil falls and their joy turns into grief; some of them tear their
clothes, others scream, still others weep – each in accord with what was allotted
to him.’” I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Tamimi say: I heard
∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali say: I heard al-Husri say in one of his lectures: “What do I
do with a listening that ceases when the one who listens [himself] ceases to
be? This is why your listening must be permanent, and not interrupted.”//421
He [∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali] also said that al-Husri said: “[The listener] must have a
660 That is, one who carefully selects his means of livelihood in order to avoid things that are
unlawful. 661 Or “Ibn Zizi”. 662 This phrase may be interpreted as a veiled criticism of the participants in the session that he
disliked.

They
listen only to that which agrees with their mystical moments. The third face
belongs to the people of uprightness from among the gnostics. They leave God
Most High to choose whatever movement or repose may enter their hearts.” I
heard the master Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him
– say: I heard Abu πl-Faraj al-Shirazi say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say: Abu
Sa∏id al-Kharraz said: “When someone feels that during ‘understanding’ – that is,
during a listening session – he is overwhelmed and his movements take control
over him, the sign of his [sincerity]//422 is that his ecstasy makes the listening
session in which he participates more beautiful.” Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman
al-Sulami said that when this statement was mentioned to Abu ∏Uthman
al-Maghribi, he said: “This is just the minor part of this [state]. The real sign [of
his sincerity] is that there remains in his session not a single sincere individual
who does not feel affection for him, while there also remains no pretender who
does not feel alienated from him.”
Bundar b. al-Husayn said: “Listening [may occur] according to three different
modes. There are those who listen by their [lower] nature, then those who listen
by their spiritual state, and those who listen truly.667 Those who listen by their
663 A renowned Qurπan interpreter, whose work laid the foundations of Qurπanic exegesis. He died
between 100/718 and 104/722. 664 Q. 30:15; 30:14, according to Arberry’s translation. 665 That is, the blessed. 666 Q. 46:29. 667 Or “by God” (bi πl-haqq).543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 350
350 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
nature can be found both among the commoners and the elite, since human
nature is innately prone to a beautiful voice. Those who listen by their spiritual
state expect to remember such things as reproach, speech, arrival, departure,
proximity, distance, and regrets that someone is gone or desire to see someone
arrive [as well as] faithfulness to an agreement, fulfillment of a promise or its
violation, remembrance of anxiety or passion, fear of separation or the joy of
meeting or the threat of departure and so on. As for those who listen truly, they
listen by and for God Most High. They cannot be described by the states that
are associated with human passions, for the passions pertain to imperfection
and deficiency. Rather, such listeners listen truly and genuinely, not out of any
[mundane] need or aspiration. They say that those who listen belong to three
classes. First are the children of divine realities who in their listening resort to
God’s – praise be to Him – addressing them. The second class are those who
address God Most High in their hearts by the words that they listen to. They
strive to achieve truthfulness in what they point toward God with. The third
type are the poor ones who have absolutely no possessions and who have severed
all ties with this world and its sins. They listen freely and willingly with their
hearts, and they are the closest of all of them to salvation.”
I heard Muhammad b.They
listen only to that which agrees with their mystical moments. The third face
belongs to the people of uprightness from among the gnostics. They leave God
Most High to choose whatever movement or repose may enter their hearts.” I
heard the master Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami – may God have mercy on him
– say: I heard Abu πl-Faraj al-Shirazi say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say: Abu
Sa∏id al-Kharraz said: “When someone feels that during ‘understanding’ – that is,
during a listening session – he is overwhelmed and his movements take control
over him, the sign of his [sincerity]//422 is that his ecstasy makes the listening
session in which he participates more beautiful.” Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman
al-Sulami said that when this statement was mentioned to Abu ∏Uthman
al-Maghribi, he said: “This is just the minor part of this [state]. The real sign [of
his sincerity] is that there remains in his session not a single sincere individual
who does not feel affection for him, while there also remains no pretender who
does not feel alienated from him.”
Bundar b. al-Husayn said: “Listening [may occur] according to three different
modes. There are those who listen by their [lower] nature, then those who listen
by their spiritual state, and those who listen truly.667 Those who listen by their
663 A renowned Qurπan interpreter, whose work laid the foundations of Qurπanic exegesis. He died
between 100/718 and 104/722. 664 Q. 30:15; 30:14, according to Arberry’s translation. 665 That is, the blessed. 666 Q. 46:29. 667 Or “by God” (bi πl-haqq).

The third
type are the poor ones who have absolutely no possessions and who have severed
all ties with this world and its sins. They listen freely and willingly with their
hearts, and they are the closest of all of them to salvation.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard
Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say, when asked about listening: “[It is] the unveiling of the
innermost selves for the vision of the Beloved.” When someone asked [Ibrahim]
al-Khawwas, “Why should anyone be stirred by listening to anything other
than the Qurπan, whereas this668 does not happen to him when he listens to the
Qurπan?”, he answered: “Because listening to the Qurπan is but a shock (sadma),
so no one is capable of moving during it due to the strength of its overpowering
force. Listening to regular speech, on the other hand, results in a relief and
repose, so one can move during it.”//423 I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I
heard ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Razi say: I heard al-Junayd
say: “When you see an aspirant who loves listening, know that he still has traces
of vanity (batala) in him.” I also heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I
heard ∏Ali b. ∏Abdallah al-Baghdadi say: I heard Abu Sa∏id al-Ramli say: Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] said: “Listening to music is a knowledge that God Most
High has reserved for Himself. No one but He knows it.”
Ahmad b. Muqatil al-∏Akki related: “When Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri entered
Baghdad, [local] Sufis gathered around him. Among them was a singer (qawwal). The Sufis asked Dhu πl-Nun’s permission to have him [the singer] perform some-
thingfor them. He gave them [his] permission, and the singer began to recite:
Even a little amount of [my] passion for you has caused me [great] pain
What would happen, if it were to take full control over me? You have brought together in my heart a passion that used to be shared
with others
668 That is, the stirring.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 351
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 351
Have you no sympathy for one who is broken by mourning,
who weeps, while one who is free [from affliction] is laughing?! [On hearing this] Dhu πl-Nun stood up and fell on his face, blood streaming from
his forehead onto the ground. Then one of the Sufis also stood up and displayed
ecstatic behavior. Dhu πl-Nun told him, ‘[The All-Compassionate] Who sees
thee when thou standest’,669 and the man sat down.” I heard the master Abu
∏Ali al-Daqqaq say about this story: “Dhu πl-Nun was able to perceive [the true
motive of] that man and to let him know that this was not his place,670 whereas
the man was fair enough to accept this from him when he sat down.”
I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Tamimi say: I heard
∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali al-Sufi say: I heard al-Duqqi671say: I heard Ibn al-Jallaπ say: “In
the Maghrib, there were two [Sufi] masters, who had [numerous] companions
and disciples. One was named Jabala, the other Zurayq. One day, Zurayq and
his companions came to visit Jabala. One of the companions of Zurayq recited
a passage [from the Qurπan]. On hearing it a companion of Jabala issued a cry and
died. The next morning, Jabala asked Zurayq: ‘Where is the man who recited
yesterday? Let him read again.’ The man read a verse [from the Qurπan]. A
companion of Jabala issued a cry and the reciter died. Jabala commented: ‘One
for one, but the one who started is more at fault!’” Someone asked Ibrahim
al-Maristani about movement during a listening session. He responded: “I have
heard that Moses – peace be upon him – was sermonizing among the Children
of Israel. One of his listeners tore up his shirt [out of ecstasy].The third
type are the poor ones who have absolutely no possessions and who have severed
all ties with this world and its sins. They listen freely and willingly with their
hearts, and they are the closest of all of them to salvation.”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Razi say: I heard
Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say, when asked about listening: “[It is] the unveiling of the
innermost selves for the vision of the Beloved.” When someone asked [Ibrahim]
al-Khawwas, “Why should anyone be stirred by listening to anything other
than the Qurπan, whereas this668 does not happen to him when he listens to the
Qurπan?”, he answered: “Because listening to the Qurπan is but a shock (sadma),
so no one is capable of moving during it due to the strength of its overpowering
force. Listening to regular speech, on the other hand, results in a relief and
repose, so one can move during it.”//423 I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I
heard ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Razi say: I heard al-Junayd
say: “When you see an aspirant who loves listening, know that he still has traces
of vanity (batala) in him.” I also heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I
heard ∏Ali b. ∏Abdallah al-Baghdadi say: I heard Abu Sa∏id al-Ramli say: Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] said: “Listening to music is a knowledge that God Most
High has reserved for Himself. No one but He knows it.”
Ahmad b. Muqatil al-∏Akki related: “When Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri entered
Baghdad, [local] Sufis gathered around him. Among them was a singer (qawwal). The Sufis asked Dhu πl-Nun’s permission to have him [the singer] perform some-
thingfor them. He gave them [his] permission, and the singer began to recite:
Even a little amount of [my] passion for you has caused me [great] pain
What would happen, if it were to take full control over me? You have brought together in my heart a passion that used to be shared
with others
668 That is, the stirring.

He responded: “I have
heard that Moses – peace be upon him – was sermonizing among the Children
of Israel. One of his listeners tore up his shirt [out of ecstasy]. God Most High
then revealed to Moses: ‘Tell him: “Tear up your heart, not your clothing for
Me!”’” Abu ∏Ali al-Maghazili asked al-Shibli: “From time to time, a verse from
the Book of God – may He be great and exalted – reaches my ears that urges me
to abandon [mundane] affairs and to turn away from this world. However, after
a while, I return to my original state and to people.//424 Al-Shibli responded:
“That which draws you to Him is His sympathy and kindness for you from Him,
while that which returns you to yourself is His pity for you from Him, because
it is not appropriate for you to divest yourself of all ability and power, when you
turn to Him.” I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say:
I heard Ahmad b. Muqatil al-∏Akki say: “I was in a mosque with al-Shibli one
night during the month of Ramadan. He and I were praying behind the imam
of that mosque, when the imam recited: ‘If We willed, We could take away
what We have revealed to thee.’672Al-Shibli issued a loud shriek and trembled so
[violently] that I said to myself that he was about to give up his spirit. He then
exclaimed: ‘He says such things to His loved ones!’ And he kept repeating this
many times.”
669 Q. 26:218. 670 Or “his station” (maqamuh). 671 In another version, “al-Raqqi”. 672 Q. 17:86; 17:87, according to Arberry’s translation.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 352
352 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
It is related that al-Junayd said: “One day I came to al-Sari [al-Saqati] and
found a man lying unconscious there. I asked him what had happened to him. He answered: ‘He heard a verse from the Book of God Most High.’ I said: ‘It
should be recited to him one more time.’ This was done and he came to. Al-Sari
asked me: ‘Where did you learn this?’ I answered: ‘The eye[sight] of Jacob was
gone because of Joseph’s shirt, but it also returned to him due to it.’ Al-Sari
approved my answer.” I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr
al-Sarraj say: I heard ∏Abd al-Wahid b. ∏Alwan say: “A young companion of
al-Junayd used to issue a loud shriek each time he heard a remembrance of
God’s name (dhikr). Al-Junayd [finally] told him: ‘If you do this one more
time, you will no longer be my companion!’ From then on, each time he heard
something [of recollection], he would grow pale and try to restrain himself so
that [sweat] would begin to drip from his hair and body. One day, he issued a cry
and expired.” I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say:
“One of my [Sufi] brothers recounted to me on the authority of Abu πl-Husayn
al-Darraj, saying: ‘I left Baghdad in order to meet Yusuf b. al-Husayn al-Razi. When I came to Rayy,673I began asking about his residence. Each person I asked
would tell me: “What business do you have with this heretic (zindiq)?” They
were so upset thereby, that I decided to go back. I spent that night in a mosque,
thinking: “Since I have come to this city anyway, the least I can do is to visit him!”
So I kept inquiring about his whereabouts until I was finally led to his mosque. He was sitting in the mihrab with a book-stand in front of him on which there
was a copy of the Qurπan. He was reading from it. And lo and behold, he was an
imposing master with a handsome face and a beautiful beard. I approached him
and greeted him.He responded: “I have
heard that Moses – peace be upon him – was sermonizing among the Children
of Israel. One of his listeners tore up his shirt [out of ecstasy]. God Most High
then revealed to Moses: ‘Tell him: “Tear up your heart, not your clothing for
Me!”’” Abu ∏Ali al-Maghazili asked al-Shibli: “From time to time, a verse from
the Book of God – may He be great and exalted – reaches my ears that urges me
to abandon [mundane] affairs and to turn away from this world. However, after
a while, I return to my original state and to people.//424 Al-Shibli responded:
“That which draws you to Him is His sympathy and kindness for you from Him,
while that which returns you to yourself is His pity for you from Him, because
it is not appropriate for you to divest yourself of all ability and power, when you
turn to Him.” I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say:
I heard Ahmad b. Muqatil al-∏Akki say: “I was in a mosque with al-Shibli one
night during the month of Ramadan. He and I were praying behind the imam
of that mosque, when the imam recited: ‘If We willed, We could take away
what We have revealed to thee.’672Al-Shibli issued a loud shriek and trembled so
[violently] that I said to myself that he was about to give up his spirit. He then
exclaimed: ‘He says such things to His loved ones!’ And he kept repeating this
many times.”
669 Q. 26:218. 670 Or “his station” (maqamuh). 671 In another version, “al-Raqqi”. 672 Q. 17:86; 17:87, according to Arberry’s translation.

And lo and behold, he was an
imposing master with a handsome face and a beautiful beard. I approached him
and greeted him. He returned my greetings. He asked me: “Where [are you] from?”
I answered: “From Baghdad. I wanted to visit [you], master.” He inquired: “If
you were in a strange city and someone were to propose to you, ‘Stay with me and
I will buy you either a house or a slave girl’ would this have possibly prevented you
from visiting me?” I said: “Sir, God most High has not tested me with anything
like this! Had this happened I would not have known what to do!” He said: “Are
you good enough to recite anything?” I said yes, and recited://425
I saw you building assiduously on my property
[However,] were you a man of sound judgement
You would have smashed that which you were building! When he heard this, he closed the copy of the Qurπan and started to weep until
both his beard and his clothing were soaked [with his tears] and I felt pity for him
on account of the abundance of his weeping. He then told me: “My son, do not
blame the people of Rayy for saying: ‘Yusuf b. al-Husayn is a heretic.’ Since the
time of the prayer I was reading the Qurπan without a single tear dropping from
my eye, whereas I felt as if it were the Day of Judgement, because of that verse!”’”
673 That is, the native city of al-Razi, as his name (“he of Rayy”) indicates.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 353
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 353
I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Abdallah
b. ∏Ali al-Tusi say: I heard al-Duqqi674say: I heard al-Darraj say: “As Ibn al-Fuwati
and I were walking along the Tigris between Basra and Ubulla, we came upon a
beautiful castle with a watchtower. Upon it was a man with a slave girl, who was
singing the following:
On the path of God there is a love that is bestowed on me for you
You change (tatalawwan) with every new day, but it is more appropriate
for you not to be like that. Listening underneath the watchtower, was a young man with a leather [begging]
bowl, dressed in a patched robe.675 He exclaimed: ‘O girl, by the life of your
master, sing once again: “You change with every day, but it is more for you not to
be like that.”’ She repeated this line. The young man said [again]: ‘Repeat!’ She
did. The dervish exclaimed: ‘This, by God, is my [constant] change676with God!’
He then issued a loud cry and his spirit departed. The owner of the castle told
the slave girl: ‘You are now free for the sake of God Most High!’ The people of
Basra came over and, when they had finished burying him and praying over him,
the owner of the castle stood up and exclaimed: ‘Don’t you know me, [people]! Bear witness that I give up all I have for the sake of God and that all my slaves
are now free!’ He then girded himself with a waist-cloth, put on a [shabby] robe,
gave away his castle as charity and left. No one has seen his face or heard any
news about him ever since.”
I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Abdallah
b. ∏Ali al-Tusi say: I heard Yahya b. al-Rida al-∏Alawi say: “When Abu Hulman677
al-Dimashqi heard a pilgrim performing a circumambulation of the Ka∏ba recite:
‘O wild thyme!’ (ya sa∏tar barri), he lost conscience and fell down. When he came
to, someone asked him about this. He answered: ‘I thought that he was saying:
“Strive and you will see My goodness!And lo and behold, he was an
imposing master with a handsome face and a beautiful beard. I approached him
and greeted him. He returned my greetings. He asked me: “Where [are you] from?”
I answered: “From Baghdad. I wanted to visit [you], master.” He inquired: “If
you were in a strange city and someone were to propose to you, ‘Stay with me and
I will buy you either a house or a slave girl’ would this have possibly prevented you
from visiting me?” I said: “Sir, God most High has not tested me with anything
like this! Had this happened I would not have known what to do!” He said: “Are
you good enough to recite anything?” I said yes, and recited://425
I saw you building assiduously on my property
[However,] were you a man of sound judgement
You would have smashed that which you were building! When he heard this, he closed the copy of the Qurπan and started to weep until
both his beard and his clothing were soaked [with his tears] and I felt pity for him
on account of the abundance of his weeping. He then told me: “My son, do not
blame the people of Rayy for saying: ‘Yusuf b. al-Husayn is a heretic.’ Since the
time of the prayer I was reading the Qurπan without a single tear dropping from
my eye, whereas I felt as if it were the Day of Judgement, because of that verse!”’”
673 That is, the native city of al-Razi, as his name (“he of Rayy”) indicates.

When he came
to, someone asked him about this. He answered: ‘I thought that he was saying:
“Strive and you will see My goodness! (isa∏ tara birri).”’” ∏Utba al-Ghulam heard
a man say: “Praise be to the Lord of the heavens, truly, the lover is in distress!”
∏Utba uttered, “You have spoken the truth!”, while another man, on hearing
this same phrase, said, “You have lied!” Each one heard, according to his [own
spiritual] state. I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say:
I heard Abu πl-Hasan//426 ∏Ali b. Muhammad al-Sufi678 say: I heard Ruwaym
[b. Ahmad] say, when someone asked him about how Sufi masters behave during
674 Or “al-Raqqi”. 675 That is, the usual attributes of an itinerant dervish. 676 In the sense of “vacillation”. 677 This is, obviously, a mistake; his correct name is Abu Hulman al-Farisi. Active in the early
4th/10thcentury, he was considered to be the founder of a heretical group known as “hulmaniyya”. Abu Hulman and his followers espoused a heretical doctrine, according to which God can dwell
and be contemplated in beautiful people and objects. He was also known for his predilection
for listening to music. 678 Or “al-Sayrafi”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 354
354 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
listening sessions. He answered: “As if they were a flock of sheep attacked by a
wolf.” It is related that Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz said: “I saw ∏Ali b. al-Muwaffaq
say during a listening session: ‘Let me stand!’ They raised him; he stood up and
behaved ecstatically, whereupon he said: ‘I am dancing master! (shaykh zaffan.)’”
They say that al-Duqqi679 kept vigil all night until dawn, reciting the following
verse, while all those who were present wept. This is this verse:
By God, give back the heart of a distressed one
For whose beloved there’s no substitute. I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Tamimi say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali al-Sufi
say: I heard ∏Ali b. al-Husayn b. Ahmad at Basra680say: I heard my father say: “I
served Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] for many years without ever seeing him
changing his condition during a listening session, whether this be a recollection
of God’s name or a recitation of the Qurπan. However, at the end of his life, when
he heard [the Qurπanic verse] ‘Today no ransom shall be taken from you’,681I saw
him grow pale and tremble so that he nearly fell down. When he returned to his
original state of sobriety (sahw), I asked him about this. He answered: ‘My dear
(habibi), we have grown weak!’” Ibn Salim682related: “I saw him another time, when
[the verse] ‘That day, the [true] Kingdom shall belong to the All-Merciful’683was
read in his presence. His condition changed and he nearly fell. I inquired him
about this, and he answered: ‘We have become weak!’” This is a feature of the
outstanding [masters]: whenever a divine visitation (warid) descends on them, no
matter how powerful it may be, they prove to be stronger than it. I heard the master Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: “I went to visit Abu
∏Uthman al-Maghribi, when someone was drawing water from a well by using a
pulley.When he came
to, someone asked him about this. He answered: ‘I thought that he was saying:
“Strive and you will see My goodness! (isa∏ tara birri).”’” ∏Utba al-Ghulam heard
a man say: “Praise be to the Lord of the heavens, truly, the lover is in distress!”
∏Utba uttered, “You have spoken the truth!”, while another man, on hearing
this same phrase, said, “You have lied!” Each one heard, according to his [own
spiritual] state. I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say:
I heard Abu πl-Hasan//426 ∏Ali b. Muhammad al-Sufi678 say: I heard Ruwaym
[b. Ahmad] say, when someone asked him about how Sufi masters behave during
674 Or “al-Raqqi”. 675 That is, the usual attributes of an itinerant dervish. 676 In the sense of “vacillation”. 677 This is, obviously, a mistake; his correct name is Abu Hulman al-Farisi. Active in the early
4th/10thcentury, he was considered to be the founder of a heretical group known as “hulmaniyya”. Abu Hulman and his followers espoused a heretical doctrine, according to which God can dwell
and be contemplated in beautiful people and objects. He was also known for his predilection
for listening to music. 678 Or “al-Sayrafi”.

I inquired him
about this, and he answered: ‘We have become weak!’” This is a feature of the
outstanding [masters]: whenever a divine visitation (warid) descends on them, no
matter how powerful it may be, they prove to be stronger than it. I heard the master Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: “I went to visit Abu
∏Uthman al-Maghribi, when someone was drawing water from a well by using a
pulley. Abu ∏Uthman asked me: ‘Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman, do you know what the
pulley says?’ I said: ‘No.’ He said: ‘It says: “God, God …”’” I heard Muhammad
b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Ali b. Tahir say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. Sahl say:
I heard Ruwaym say: It is related that ∏Ali b. Abi Talib – may God be pleased with
him – said to his companions, when he heard the sound of a [church] bell: “Do you
know what it says?” They answered: “No.” He said: “It says: ‘Praise be to God,
truly, truly; the Master is eternal, the One who abides.’” I heard Muhammad
b. Ahmad al-Tamimi say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali say: I heard Ahmad b. ∏Ali
al-Karakhi al-Wajihi say: “A group of Sufis used to gather at the house of
al-Hasan//427 al-Qazzaz. They were accompanied by singers, whose singing
made them ecstatic. When Mimshadh al-Dinawari [once] observed them, they fell
679 Or “al-Raqqi”. 680 His correct name is Abu πl-Hasan Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Salim (Ibn Salim) al-Basri
(d. 356/967), the foremost follower, along with his father, of the renowned Sufi master Sahl
al-Tustari. 681 Q. 57:15; 57:14, according to Arberry’s translation. 682 See note 680. 683 Q. 25:26.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 355
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 355
silent. He told them: ‘Go back to what you were doing! Were all the musical
instruments of this world assembled in my ear, this would not affect my concen-
tration [on God] (hamm), nor would this cure my present condition!’” According
to the same line of transmission, al-Wajihi said: “In this business of ours684 we
have reached a point that is similar to the edge of a sword. If we were to incline
[here] even this much, we would fall into the hellfire.” Khayr al-Nassaj said:
“Moses, the son of ∏Imran685 – may God bless them both – was preaching to a
group of people. One of them screamed. When Moses scolded him, God Most
High revealed to him: ‘It is because of My kindness that they weep; it is because
of their love of Me that they expose themselves [to censure]; it is because of
their ecstasy in [finding] Me that they scream! Why, then, do you denounce My
servants?’”
Al-Shibli heard someone call: “A dozen cucumbers (khiyar) are for one
daniq686!” He issued a cry, saying: “If the virtuous ones (khiyar) are one daniq
for a dozen, what would be the price of the evil ones?!”687They say: “When the
maidens of Paradise begin to sing, the trees of Paradise blossom.” It is related
that ∏Awn b. ∏Abdallah ordered a slave girl with a beautiful voice to sing a sad
melody to make people cry.
Someone inquired of Abu Sulayman al-Darani about listening to music. He
responded: “Each heart that longs for a beautiful voice is weak and must be
treated in the same way one treats a child when one wants it to sleep.” Abu
Sulayman then added: “A beautiful voice does not introduce anything into
the heart. Rather it sets in motion something that already resides there.” Ibn Abi
πl-Hawari commented: “By God, Abu Sulayman spoke truth!” Al-Jurayri said
[about the Qurπanic verse]: “Be you [knowledgeable] masters.”688 This means,
“[Be] those who listen to God and speak through Him.”
Someone asked a Sufi about listening to music. He answered: “Flashes of
lighting that glitter, then fade away; lights that appear then disappear. How sweet
they are when they remain with someone even for the blink of an eye!” He then
recited:
A thought entered into his innermost heart as if it were a lightning bolt that
flashed, then disappeared.
They say: “Every [human] limb has a part in listening to music. When a part of
it falls on the eye, it weeps; when a part of it falls on the tongue, it cries out; when
a part of it falls on the hand, it tears clothes apart and beats the breast; when a
part of it falls on the leg, it dances.” It is related that when a Persian king died,
684 That is, the Sufi path.
685 The Biblical ∏Amram.
686 A small coin equal to one-sixth of a dirham.
687 A pun based on the Arabic homonym khiyar, which denotes both the “virtuous ones” and the
“cucumbers”.
688 Q. 3:79; 3:74, according to Arberry’s translation.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 356
356 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
he left behind a small son. When his subjects wanted to pledge their fealty to
him,689they asked [themselves]: “How//428 can we determine [the extent of] his
knowledge and cleverness?” They then agreed to bring a singer and have him
sing something. If the son were to listen attentively, they would know that he was
intelligent. So they brought a singer. As soon as he sang something, the suckling
laughed. They kissed the ground before him and pledged their fealty to him. I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “Abu ∏Amr b. Nujayd,
al-Nasrabadhi and [Sufis of] their generation assembled in a certain place. Al-Nasrabadhi said: ‘I believe that when a group of people gather together, it is
better that only one person should speak, while the rest should remain silent
rather than engage in backbiting on somebody’s account.’ Abu ∏Amr retorted:
‘Even if you had been backbiting for thirty years, this is still better690for you than
displaying something you do not really feel at the time of listening.’” I heard
the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on him – say: “There
are three groups of people as far as listening is concerned: the one who aspires to
listen (mutasammi∏), the one who listens (mustami∏), and the [real] listener (sami∏). The first listens according to his mystical moment (waqt); the second, according
to his [overall] spiritual state (hal); and the third listens in truth (bi-haqq).”
Repeatedly, I asked the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God Most High
have mercy on him – for a concession regarding listening to music. However,
he kept referring me to things that one must avoid [in it]. Then, after a long
companionship [between us] he [finally] said: “Sufi masters say: ‘If your heart is
attached to God – praise be upon Him – then there’s no harm in it!’” Abu πl-Hasan
∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Basri informed us:
Isma∏il b.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 355
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 355
silent. He told them: ‘Go back to what you were doing! Were all the musical
instruments of this world assembled in my ear, this would not affect my concen-
tration [on God] (hamm), nor would this cure my present condition!’” According
to the same line of transmission, al-Wajihi said: “In this business of ours684 we
have reached a point that is similar to the edge of a sword. If we were to incline
[here] even this much, we would fall into the hellfire.” Khayr al-Nassaj said:
“Moses, the son of ∏Imran685 – may God bless them both – was preaching to a
group of people. One of them screamed. When Moses scolded him, God Most
High revealed to him: ‘It is because of My kindness that they weep; it is because
of their love of Me that they expose themselves [to censure]; it is because of
their ecstasy in [finding] Me that they scream! Why, then, do you denounce My
servants?’”
Al-Shibli heard someone call: “A dozen cucumbers (khiyar) are for one
daniq686!” He issued a cry, saying: “If the virtuous ones (khiyar) are one daniq
for a dozen, what would be the price of the evil ones?!”687They say: “When the
maidens of Paradise begin to sing, the trees of Paradise blossom.” It is related
that ∏Awn b. ∏Abdallah ordered a slave girl with a beautiful voice to sing a sad
melody to make people cry.
Someone inquired of Abu Sulayman al-Darani about listening to music. He
responded: “Each heart that longs for a beautiful voice is weak and must be
treated in the same way one treats a child when one wants it to sleep.” Abu
Sulayman then added: “A beautiful voice does not introduce anything into
the heart. Rather it sets in motion something that already resides there.” Ibn Abi
πl-Hawari commented: “By God, Abu Sulayman spoke truth!” Al-Jurayri said
[about the Qurπanic verse]: “Be you [knowledgeable] masters.”688 This means,
“[Be] those who listen to God and speak through Him.”
Someone asked a Sufi about listening to music. He answered: “Flashes of
lighting that glitter, then fade away; lights that appear then disappear. How sweet
they are when they remain with someone even for the blink of an eye!” He then
recited:
A thought entered into his innermost heart as if it were a lightning bolt that
flashed, then disappeared.
They say: “Every [human] limb has a part in listening to music. When a part of
it falls on the eye, it weeps; when a part of it falls on the tongue, it cries out; when
a part of it falls on the hand, it tears clothes apart and beats the breast; when a
part of it falls on the leg, it dances.” It is related that when a Persian king died,
684 That is, the Sufi path.
685 The Biblical ∏Amram.
686 A small coin equal to one-sixth of a dirham.
687 A pun based on the Arabic homonym khiyar, which denotes both the “virtuous ones” and the
“cucumbers”.
688 Q. 3:79; 3:74, according to Arberry’s translation.

Ahmad al-Ahwazi informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Basri informed us:
Isma∏il b. al-Fadl told us: Yahya b. Ya∏la al-Razi told us: Hafs b. ∏Umar al-∏Umari
told us: Abu ∏Amr ∏Uthman b. Badr told us: Harun b. Hamza691 told us on the
authority of al-Ghadafiri,692on the authority of Sa∏id b. Jubayr, on the authority
of [∏Abdallah] Ibn ∏Abbas – may God be pleased with both of them – that God –
praise be to Him – revealed to Moses – peace be upon him: “I have placed in you
ten thousand listening faculties, so that you can hear My words, and ten thousand
tongues, so that you can respond to Me. However, you are most beloved and
close to Me when you multiply your blessings for Muhammad – may God
bless and greet him!” It is related that a Sufi saw the Prophet – may God bless
and greet him – in a dream. He said: “Mistakes in this [matter] are [especially]
numerous.” He meant listening to music. I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman
al-Sulami say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. Shadhan say: I heard Abu
Bakr al-Nihawandi say: I heard ∏Ali al-Saπih say: I heard Abu πl-Harith al-Awlasi
say: “As I was resting on a roof, in a dream I saw the Devil – may God curse him
689 That is, the son. 690 Literally, “more conducive to salvation”. 691 Or “Harun Abu Hamza”. 692 Or “al-∏Udhafir”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 357
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 357
– on one of the roofs of [the town of] Awlas. On his right was a group of people
and on his left was another one. They were dressed in clean clothes. He said to
one group: ‘Sing!’ They sang and performed melodically. The beauty of their
singing scared me so that I decided to hurl myself off the roof. He then said [to
them]: ‘Dance!’ and they danced in the most beautiful manner. He then told me:
‘Abu πl-Harith, I have not found a better way to gain access to you than this!’”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali say: “One
night//429 I was with al-Shibli – may God have mercy on him. When a singer
sang something, al-Shibli issued a shriek and behaved ecstatically, while sitting.
Someone asked him: ‘Abu Bakr, what’s wrong with you? You are sitting in the
midst of a [listening] session!’ He rose in ecstasy and recited:
I have two intoxications, whereas my boon-companions have just one
This is the [only] thing that singles me out among them.”
I also heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah
al-Isbahani say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say: “As I was passing by a castle
[one day], I saw a youth with a handsome face lying on the ground. He was
surrounded by a group of people. I inquired about him. They said: ‘As he was
passing by this castle, [he heard] a slave girl sing:
Great is the resolution of a servant that impels [him] to see you
Isn’t it enough for [his] eye to see someone who has already seen you?
He let out a shriek and expired.’”
Miracles of God’s friends (karamat al-awliyaπ)
The master Abu πl-Qasim [al-Qushayri] says that it is possible for God’s friends to
display miracles.693The proof of the [miracle’s] possibility is that it is something
that can be conceived by the intellect and that its occurrence does not lead to the
suspension of any basic principle. One must ascribe to God – praise be to Him –
the ability to originate it, and, since it can be made possible by God – praise be
to Him – then there is nothing that can negate the possibility of it taking place.
When someone displays miracles, this is a sign of his being truthful in his spiritual
states. [Conversely,] they cannot be displayed by someone who is insincere. One
evidence of this is that the Eternal One – praise be to Him – has informed us
by means of a [persuasive] argument that it is something that can be conceived
[by our intellects], so that we could discern between one who is truthful in his
spiritual states and one who is insincere. This can only be done through singling
out the friend of God by [granting him] something that the imposter in his
693 One should bear in mind that in Islamic theology saintly miracles (karamat) are clearly
distinguished from prophetic ones (mu∏jizat), the latter being the exclusive prerogative of the
prophets. For details, see the article “Karama” in EI.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 358
358 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
pretensions cannot possibly have. The miracle, as we have pointed out, is precisely
this very thing. The miracle must be a matter that breaks the habitual order [of events] (∏ada)
during the period when the [divinely ordained] religious obligation (taklif) is in
force.694 It is displayed by an individual who is characterized by saintliness in
order to ascertain the truthfulness of his spiritual state. Those who have attained
the [divine] truth (ahl al-haqq) have discoursed profusely regarding the difference
between prophetic and saintly miracles. The imam Abu Ishaq al-Isfaraini – may
God have mercy on him – argued that prophetic miracles (mu∏jizat) [serve as]
demonstrations of the truthfulness of the prophets and a proof of [their] prophetic
mission, which is unique to prophets. Likewise, a sound intellect serves as a proof
of the learned man being a learned man; it cannot be found in anyone who is
not learned. He [al-Isfaraini] also taught that saintly miracles resemble [God’s]
answering [somebody’s] prayer (ijabat al-da∏wa). As for the kind of miracles that
the prophets have, this is not the case.//430
The imam Abu Bakr b. Furak – may God have mercy on him – used to argue
that prophetic miracles are proofs of truthfulness. In his words, when the miracle
worker claims prophethood, prophetic miracles [are meant to] demonstrate his
veracity. When, however, the miracle worker claims sainthood (wilaya), the
miracle [only] demonstrates the truthfulness of his spiritual state. It is, therefore,
called karama, not mu∏jiza. Although the former is a type of the latter, there is a
difference [between them]. [Abu Bakr] – may God have mercy on him – used
to argue that the difference between prophetic and saintly miracles is that the
prophets are commanded to display miracles, whereas the friend of God must
hide and conceal them.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 357
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 357
– on one of the roofs of [the town of] Awlas. On his right was a group of people
and on his left was another one. They were dressed in clean clothes. He said to
one group: ‘Sing!’ They sang and performed melodically. The beauty of their
singing scared me so that I decided to hurl myself off the roof. He then said [to
them]: ‘Dance!’ and they danced in the most beautiful manner. He then told me:
‘Abu πl-Harith, I have not found a better way to gain access to you than this!’”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali say: “One
night//429 I was with al-Shibli – may God have mercy on him. When a singer
sang something, al-Shibli issued a shriek and behaved ecstatically, while sitting.
Someone asked him: ‘Abu Bakr, what’s wrong with you? You are sitting in the
midst of a [listening] session!’ He rose in ecstasy and recited:
I have two intoxications, whereas my boon-companions have just one
This is the [only] thing that singles me out among them.”
I also heard him [Muhammad b. al-Husayn] say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah
al-Isbahani say: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say: “As I was passing by a castle
[one day], I saw a youth with a handsome face lying on the ground. He was
surrounded by a group of people. I inquired about him. They said: ‘As he was
passing by this castle, [he heard] a slave girl sing:
Great is the resolution of a servant that impels [him] to see you
Isn’t it enough for [his] eye to see someone who has already seen you?
He let out a shriek and expired.’”
Miracles of God’s friends (karamat al-awliyaπ)
The master Abu πl-Qasim [al-Qushayri] says that it is possible for God’s friends to
display miracles.693The proof of the [miracle’s] possibility is that it is something
that can be conceived by the intellect and that its occurrence does not lead to the
suspension of any basic principle. One must ascribe to God – praise be to Him –
the ability to originate it, and, since it can be made possible by God – praise be
to Him – then there is nothing that can negate the possibility of it taking place.
When someone displays miracles, this is a sign of his being truthful in his spiritual
states. [Conversely,] they cannot be displayed by someone who is insincere. One
evidence of this is that the Eternal One – praise be to Him – has informed us
by means of a [persuasive] argument that it is something that can be conceived
[by our intellects], so that we could discern between one who is truthful in his
spiritual states and one who is insincere. This can only be done through singling
out the friend of God by [granting him] something that the imposter in his
693 One should bear in mind that in Islamic theology saintly miracles (karamat) are clearly
distinguished from prophetic ones (mu∏jizat), the latter being the exclusive prerogative of the
prophets. For details, see the article “Karama” in EI.

Although the former is a type of the latter, there is a
difference [between them]. [Abu Bakr] – may God have mercy on him – used
to argue that the difference between prophetic and saintly miracles is that the
prophets are commanded to display miracles, whereas the friend of God must
hide and conceal them. The prophet [Muhammad] – may God bless and greet
him – laid claim to this695 and spoke unequivocally about it. As for the friend
of God, he does not lay claim to it, nor does he speak unequivocally about his
miracles due to the possibility that this is but a ruse [on the part of God] (makr). The judge Abu Bakr al-Ash∏ari, the prodigy of his age in his field,696argued
that prophetic miracles are characteristic of the prophets, while saintly miracles
pertain to God’s friends. God’s friends cannot display prophetic miracles, because
one of the conditions of the prophetic miracles is that they should be associated
with a claim of prophethood. The prophetic miracle cannot be such in and of
itself. It must meet a wide variety of definitions. If one of these conditions is not
fulfilled, it cannot be a prophetic miracle. One of these conditions is a claim of
prophethood, while God’s friend cannot lay claim to prophethood. Therefore
that which he displays cannot be a prophetic miracle. This is a doctrine that we
rely on, teach and believe in. All or almost all of the conditions of the prophetic
694 Namely, between now and the Day of Judgement, when all divine ordinances concerning this
world will be suspended. 695 That is, his prophetic mission. 696 A renowned representative of the Ash∏arite school of speculative theology, who is better known
as Abu Bakr al-Baqillani (d. 403/1013).543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 359
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 359
miracle are found in the saintly miracle, except this one. The saintly miracle is,
without any doubt, an originated event (muhdath), for what is eternal cannot be
attributed to any [created thing]. It is an [act of] disrupting the established order
of things, which takes place during the time when religious obligation is in force. It is displayed by a servant of God as a sign of his special status and privilege
[bestowed upon him by God]. It may happen to him as a result of his wish
and supplication, but it may not happen to him either. Occasionally, it may take
place irrespective of his wish. The friend of God has not been commanded to call
people to himself. However, if He [God] reveals any of this to a person who
deserves it, then it becomes possible. Those who have attained the truth have disagreed over whether it is
permissible that the friend of God know if he is one. The imam Abu Bakr b. Furak
– may God have mercy on him – used to argue that it was not permissible,
because this would deprive him of fear of God and instill in him a sense of
security. However, the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God have mercy on
him – used to argue that this is permissible. We prefer his position and uphold
it.//431 This does not necessarily apply to all the friends of God – namely, that
each of them would know that he is one of them. Some of them may know this,
while others may not. Whenever someone learns that he is a friend of God, this is
but a miracle unique to him. When a certain friend of God performs a miracle,
this does not mean that all other friends of God ought necessarily to perform it
as well. Moreover, if a friend of God fails to display a miracle during his lifetime,
its lack does not impugn his status as a friend of God. The case of the prophets
is different.Although the former is a type of the latter, there is a
difference [between them]. [Abu Bakr] – may God have mercy on him – used
to argue that the difference between prophetic and saintly miracles is that the
prophets are commanded to display miracles, whereas the friend of God must
hide and conceal them. The prophet [Muhammad] – may God bless and greet
him – laid claim to this695 and spoke unequivocally about it. As for the friend
of God, he does not lay claim to it, nor does he speak unequivocally about his
miracles due to the possibility that this is but a ruse [on the part of God] (makr). The judge Abu Bakr al-Ash∏ari, the prodigy of his age in his field,696argued
that prophetic miracles are characteristic of the prophets, while saintly miracles
pertain to God’s friends. God’s friends cannot display prophetic miracles, because
one of the conditions of the prophetic miracles is that they should be associated
with a claim of prophethood. The prophetic miracle cannot be such in and of
itself. It must meet a wide variety of definitions. If one of these conditions is not
fulfilled, it cannot be a prophetic miracle. One of these conditions is a claim of
prophethood, while God’s friend cannot lay claim to prophethood. Therefore
that which he displays cannot be a prophetic miracle. This is a doctrine that we
rely on, teach and believe in. All or almost all of the conditions of the prophetic
694 Namely, between now and the Day of Judgement, when all divine ordinances concerning this
world will be suspended. 695 That is, his prophetic mission. 696 A renowned representative of the Ash∏arite school of speculative theology, who is better known
as Abu Bakr al-Baqillani (d. 403/1013).

Moreover, if a friend of God fails to display a miracle during his lifetime,
its lack does not impugn his status as a friend of God. The case of the prophets
is different. They must perform miracles, because a prophet is sent to creatures
and people who need to know the veracity [of his claim], which can only be
accomplished by means of a miracle. The case of the friend of God is the opposite
of this, because neither he nor the people [around him] ought to know that he is
a friend of God. Ten of the Companions of the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet
him – trusted him when he said that they would be among the inhabitants of
Paradise. As for the opinion of those who argue that this is not possible, because
[the promise] would divest them of the fear of God, it does not really matter,
because those who were promised would still be afraid of [God’s] changing His
decree in the Hereafter. The awe, respect and reverence of God – praise be to
Him – that they found in their hearts only increased, resulting in a great deal
of fear [of Him]. Know that the friend of God must not find repose in a saintly
miracle, nor even take notice of it. When they697experience anything of this sort
it only [strengthens] their certitude and increases their [spiritual] insight (basira),
because they realize that this is an action [coming] from God and they see in it
a proof of the soundness of their [religious] convictions. In all, acknowledging
the possibility of performance of saintly miracles by the friends of God is an
obligation. This is held by the majority of the learned (ahl al-ma∏rifa). Thanks to
697 Namely, friends of God.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 360
360 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
the abundance of sound reports and stories about various types [of miracles],
the awareness of their existence and of their manifestation through God’s friends
has become firmly established and free from any doubt. Whoever has kept the
company of the Sufis and heard their reports and stories will have not even the
slightest doubt concerning this thesis. Among its proofs found in the Qurπan is
the story of a companion of Solomon – peace be upon him – who said: “I will
bring it [the throne] to thee, before even thy glance returns to thee.”698Yet, he was
not a prophet. There is also a sound report about the Commander of the Faithful
∏Umar b. al-Khattab – may God be pleased with him – according to which he
exclaimed, “O Sariya, [watch out for] the mountain!” during his Friday sermon
and [according to which] the voice of ∏Umar reached Sariya,//432 putting him
on guard against the ambush of the enemy on a mountain at that same time.699
One may then ask: “How is it possible that some saintly miracles may surpass
the miracles performed by [God’s] messengers? And how it is possible [thereby]
to give preference to the friends of God over the prophets – peace be upon
them?” [In response] one should say: “These saintly miracles follow the prophetic
miracles of our Prophet – may God bless and greet him – because no one who
is not truthful in his religion can display a saintly miracle. Each prophet whose
saintly miracle was manifested through a member of his community can count it
among his prophetic miracles. For if this messenger had not been truthful [in his
message], no saintly miracle would have been manifested by any of his followers. As for the rank of the friends of God, it is lower than that of the prophets – peace
be upon them – according to the consensus reached [by the scholars].Moreover, if a friend of God fails to display a miracle during his lifetime,
its lack does not impugn his status as a friend of God. The case of the prophets
is different. They must perform miracles, because a prophet is sent to creatures
and people who need to know the veracity [of his claim], which can only be
accomplished by means of a miracle. The case of the friend of God is the opposite
of this, because neither he nor the people [around him] ought to know that he is
a friend of God. Ten of the Companions of the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet
him – trusted him when he said that they would be among the inhabitants of
Paradise. As for the opinion of those who argue that this is not possible, because
[the promise] would divest them of the fear of God, it does not really matter,
because those who were promised would still be afraid of [God’s] changing His
decree in the Hereafter. The awe, respect and reverence of God – praise be to
Him – that they found in their hearts only increased, resulting in a great deal
of fear [of Him]. Know that the friend of God must not find repose in a saintly
miracle, nor even take notice of it. When they697experience anything of this sort
it only [strengthens] their certitude and increases their [spiritual] insight (basira),
because they realize that this is an action [coming] from God and they see in it
a proof of the soundness of their [religious] convictions. In all, acknowledging
the possibility of performance of saintly miracles by the friends of God is an
obligation. This is held by the majority of the learned (ahl al-ma∏rifa). Thanks to
697 Namely, friends of God.

For if this messenger had not been truthful [in his
message], no saintly miracle would have been manifested by any of his followers. As for the rank of the friends of God, it is lower than that of the prophets – peace
be upon them – according to the consensus reached [by the scholars]. When
someone asked Abu Yazid al-Bistami about this issue, he answered: “What the
prophets receive is like a water-skin full of honey from which a single drop of
honey has fallen. This drop is similar to what all the friends of God possess and
that which remains in the container is similar to what our Prophet – may God
bless and greet him – possesses.”
Section (fasl)
These saintly miracles may come in response to a prayer, such as the appearance
of food at a time of need without any visible means; or the appearance of water
698 Q. 27:40; this is a reference to the Qurπanic encounter between Solomon and Bilqis (the
Queen of Sheba of the Biblical tradition) during which a person in Solomon’s entourage offers
to miraculously transfer Bilqis’ throne to Solomon’s palace. In the later exegetical tradition,
the unnamed companion was identified as Asaf b. Barakhya, a confidant and minister to King
Solomon. 699 A story that is often mentioned in Sufi sources as a proof of the possibility of miracles. According to it, the second caliph was preaching to a congregation in Medina, when he suddenly
interrupted his sermon and uttered the aforementioned phrase addressed to a field commander
Sariya b. Zunaym al-Duπili (d. ca. 30/650). It was miraculously heard by the addressee, who
was fighting a Persian force at the city of Nihawand, and warned him of the impending attack
of a Persian contingent hiding on a local mountain.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 361
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 361
at the time of drought; or enabling [someone] to traverse a [great] distance in a
short time; or an escape from an enemy; or hearing the speech of an invisible
speaker, and other kinds of things that break the established order [of things].
Know, that today it is definitely and surely known that among the many things
that God has preordained some may never appear in the form of saintly miracles
under any circumstances. These include the origination of a human being without
two parents, the transformation of an inanimate matter into a beast or an animal,
and so on and so forth.
Section
If someone asks, “What is the meaning of ‘friend of God’ (walí)?”, they say:
“There are two possibilities.” First, it may be [formed on the pattern of the passive
participle] fa∏íl as the intensification of the meaning of [the active participle]
fá∏il, as in [the words] ∏alím (“very knowledgeable”), qadír (“very powerful”),
and so on. In this case, its meaning would be “one whose acts of piety followed
one upon the other without being interrupted by any disobedience.” It is also
possible that it is [formed on the pattern] fa∏íl implying the passivity [of the
subject], as in qatíl in the sense of “one who is killed” (maqtúl) or jaríhin the sense
of “one who is wounded” (majrúh). That is, walí is one whom God – praise be
to Him – has taken (yatawalla) under His protection and care at all times and
incessantly (∏ala πl-tawali). God does not create for him [the phenomenon of]
abandonment (khidhlan),700which may have rendered him capable of disobedience.
Rather, His assistance to His friend is incessant, which enables him to remain
obedient [all the time]. As God Most High said: “He [God] takes into His
protection the righteous.”701//433
Section
If someone asks, “Can a friend of God be protected from sin (ma∏sum)?”, they
say: “If [one implies] necessarily and essentially, as is said about the prophets,
then the answer is no. If, however, [one means] that [they are] divinely protected
and do not persist in any sins, even though [they may occasionally] display
minor faults, failings and slippages, then this quality can be included into their
description.” Someone asked al-Junayd: “Abu πl-Qasim, can a gnostic commit
adultery?” He lowered his head and remained silent for a while, then raised his
head and said: “God’s commandment is a destiny decreed.”702
Section
If someone asks, “Can fear abandon the friends of God?”, they [should] answer:
“Fear dominates the greatest among them, yet what we have said earlier about
700 That is, God protects His friend from any error at all times.
701 Q. 7: 196.
702 Q. 33:38.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 362
362 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
this is not impossible, if rare.” Al-Sari al-Saqati said: “If someone were to enter
a garden with many trees and on each tree were a bird saying in a clear [Arabic]
language: ‘Peace be upon you, O friend of God!’ and he would not fear this to be
a ruse of God (makr), he has already been deceived.” Stories such as this abound
among the Sufis.
Section
If someone asks, “Is it possible to see God – praise be upon Him – in this world
by means of a saintly miracle?”, the answer is: “The best opinion about this is
that [such a vision] is not possible, due to a consensus [reached by scholars]
regarding this matter.” I heard the imam Abu Bakr b. Furak – may God be
pleased with him – relate on the authority of Abu πl-Hasan al-Ash∏ari703that the
latter expounded two teachings concerning this matter in his big book [devoted
to] the vision [of God].
Section
If someone asks, “Is it possible that a person might be a friend of God now, but
will change this status at the end of his life?”, they say: “Those who consider
the favorable outcome [of one’s life] among the conditions of sainthood do not
allow this.” Others, however, argue that one can be a true believer at present, even
though one’s state might change later on; therefore, it is not impossible that one
may be a true and sincere friend of God at the moment, then change one’s status.
We opt for this view.//434 It is possible for the miracles of a friend of God to
include his knowledge that he is assured a favorable outcome [in the Hereafter]
which will remain unchanged until his death. This issue is relevant to what we
havealready mentioned regarding the friend of God knowing that he is one.
Section
If someone asks, “Can the fear of [divine] ruse leave the friend of God?”, they
say: “When he is detached from his surroundings, snatched from his conscious-
ness and removed from his sense perception by his spiritual state, consumed
completely by that which has taken possession of him, [fear disappears]. For fear
is an attribute of those who are present.”704
Section
If someone asks, “What [feature] dominates the friend of God in his state of
sobriety?”, they say: “[First,] his sincerity in observing the rights of God – praise
703 A renowned Sunni theologian who founded the Ash∏arite school of speculative theology,
which gradually became dominant among the Sunnis; he died in Baghdad in 324/935.
704 That is, those who retain their self-consciousness.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 363
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 363
be to Him – then his friendliness and compassion toward other people in all
his states, then the extension of his mercy to entire mankind, then his constant
forbearance toward them and [his dealing with them] with gentleness. He
constantly beseeches God – may He be great and exalted – to show benevolence
toward them, while not asking [anything] from them. He applies his spiritual
energy (himma) toward the salvation of mankind and seeks not to avenge himself
on them. He abstains from being resentful toward God’s creatures, keeps his
hands away from their property, displays no greed at all in any manner, and
withholds his tongue from saying evil things about them. He guards himself
from seeing their failings and shows no adversity toward anyone in this world
and the next.”
Know that one of the greatest miracles that the friends of God enjoy is
[God’s] assistance in [performing] acts of obedience [toward Him] and [divine]
protection from disobedience and opposition [to the divine will]. Among the
Qurπanic proofs of the existence of saintly miracles is that which God – praise
be to Him – said about Mary – peace be upon her – who was neither a prophet,
nor a messenger of God: “Whenever Zachariah went in to her [Mary] in the
Sanctuary, he found her provisioned.”705 He would ask her: “How come this to
thee?” and Mary would answer: “From God.”706 Another proof is the words of
God – praise be to Him – [addressed to Mary]: “Shake also to thee the palm-trunk,
and there shall come tumbling upon thee dates fresh and ripe.”707 And that was
not the season for dates. Likewise, the story of the sleepers of the cave and
the miraculous deeds they displayed, such as their dog talking to them and so
forth.708To the same category belongs the story of Dhu πl-Qarnayn,709whom God
– praise be to Him – empowered like no one else.Among the
Qurπanic proofs of the existence of saintly miracles is that which God – praise
be to Him – said about Mary – peace be upon her – who was neither a prophet,
nor a messenger of God: “Whenever Zachariah went in to her [Mary] in the
Sanctuary, he found her provisioned.”705 He would ask her: “How come this to
thee?” and Mary would answer: “From God.”706 Another proof is the words of
God – praise be to Him – [addressed to Mary]: “Shake also to thee the palm-trunk,
and there shall come tumbling upon thee dates fresh and ripe.”707 And that was
not the season for dates. Likewise, the story of the sleepers of the cave and
the miraculous deeds they displayed, such as their dog talking to them and so
forth.708To the same category belongs the story of Dhu πl-Qarnayn,709whom God
– praise be to Him – empowered like no one else. To the same category belongs
the story of al-Khadir – peace be upon him – and the miracles that he manifested,
such as the construction of the wall and so forth, as well as his knowledge of what
was concealed from Moses – peace be upon him.710All these deeds that broke the
established custom were attributed to al-Khadir – peace be upon him – despite
the fact that he was not a prophet, only a friend of God.711
Among other reports pertaining to this theme is the story of Jurayj the
Monk. Abu Nu∏aym//435 ∏Abd al-Malik b. al-Hasan al-Isfaraini informed us:
Abu ∏Awana Ya∏qub b. Ibrahim b. Ishaq informed us: ∏Ammar b. Rajaπ told us:
Wahb b. Jarir told us: My father told me: I heard Muhammad b. Sirin relate on
the authority of Abu Hurayra that the Messenger of God – may God bless and
705 Q. 3:37; 3:33, according to Arberry’s translation. 706 Q. 3:37. 707 Q. 19:25. 708 Q. 18:9–27. 709 A Qurπanic personage, who is traditionally identified with Alexander the Great; see Q. 18:83–98. 710 The story of Moses and his mysterious companion, traditionally identified as al-Khadir (Elijah),
whose inexplicable behavior confounded the Hebrew prophet. See Q. 18:65–82.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 362
362 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
this is not impossible, if rare.” Al-Sari al-Saqati said: “If someone were to enter
a garden with many trees and on each tree were a bird saying in a clear [Arabic]
language: ‘Peace be upon you, O friend of God!’ and he would not fear this to be
a ruse of God (makr), he has already been deceived.” Stories such as this abound
among the Sufis.
Section
If someone asks, “Is it possible to see God – praise be upon Him – in this world
by means of a saintly miracle?”, the answer is: “The best opinion about this is
that [such a vision] is not possible, due to a consensus [reached by scholars]
regarding this matter.” I heard the imam Abu Bakr b. Furak – may God be
pleased with him – relate on the authority of Abu πl-Hasan al-Ash∏ari703that the
latter expounded two teachings concerning this matter in his big book [devoted
to] the vision [of God].
Section
If someone asks, “Is it possible that a person might be a friend of God now, but
will change this status at the end of his life?”, they say: “Those who consider
the favorable outcome [of one’s life] among the conditions of sainthood do not
allow this.” Others, however, argue that one can be a true believer at present, even
though one’s state might change later on; therefore, it is not impossible that one
may be a true and sincere friend of God at the moment, then change one’s status.
We opt for this view.//434 It is possible for the miracles of a friend of God to
include his knowledge that he is assured a favorable outcome [in the Hereafter]
which will remain unchanged until his death. This issue is relevant to what we
havealready mentioned regarding the friend of God knowing that he is one.
Section
If someone asks, “Can the fear of [divine] ruse leave the friend of God?”, they
say: “When he is detached from his surroundings, snatched from his conscious-
ness and removed from his sense perception by his spiritual state, consumed
completely by that which has taken possession of him, [fear disappears]. For fear
is an attribute of those who are present.”704
Section
If someone asks, “What [feature] dominates the friend of God in his state of
sobriety?”, they say: “[First,] his sincerity in observing the rights of God – praise
703 A renowned Sunni theologian who founded the Ash∏arite school of speculative theology,
which gradually became dominant among the Sunnis; he died in Baghdad in 324/935.
704 That is, those who retain their self-consciousness.

See Q. 18:65–82. 711 However, some Muslim scholars consider al-Khadir to be a prophet.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 364
364 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
greet him – said:712 “Only three individuals spoke from the cradle: Jesus son
of Mary, an infant at the time of Jurayj, and one more infant. As for Jesus, you
already know about him. As for Jurayj, he was a pious man of the Children of
Israel. He had a mother. One day, as he was praying, his mother felt a strong
longing for him and called upon him: ‘Jurayj!’ He asked: ‘My Lord, is it better
[for me] to pray or to come to her?’ So, he continued his prayer. She called upon
him once again, and he said the same thing and continued his prayer. His mother
found this hard to bear and said: ‘My God, do not let him die until You have
shown him the faces of prostitutes!’ There was among the Children of Israel
a prostitute. She told them: ‘I will seduce Jurayj, so that he would commit
fornication.’ She then came to him, but was unable to achieve anything. There
was a shepherd, who used to spend the night at the foot of Jurayj’s retreat. When
Jurayj rejected her, she endeavored to attract the shepherd to herself. He came
to her, and [after a while] she gave birth to a child, whereupon she said: ‘This
child of mine is from Jurayj!’ The Children of Israel came to Jurayj, destroyed
his retreat, and upbraided him. He prayed and made a supplication. He then
punched the boy with his hand.” Muhammad [b. Sirin] continued: Abu Hurayra
said: “I was looking at the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – when he said,
‘With his hand’713 [then added]: ‘Boy, who is your father?’ The boy answered:
‘The shepherd!’ [The Children of Israel] regretted what they had done and
apologized before him, saying: ‘We shall build for you a retreat of gold’ – or
perhaps they said ‘silver’. However, he declined and he rebuilt it as it had been
before. As for another infant [who spoke from the cradle], there was a lady with a
suckling child.See Q. 18:65–82. 711 However, some Muslim scholars consider al-Khadir to be a prophet.

However, he declined and he rebuilt it as it had been
before. As for another infant [who spoke from the cradle], there was a lady with a
suckling child. [Once] there passed by her a young man with a handsome face
and beautiful complexion. She exclaimed: ‘My God, make my child be like that!’
The child then spoke, saying: ‘My God, don’t make me be like that!’” Muhammad
b. Sirin said: “I was watching the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – as
he was recounting the words of the suckling child. Then, there passed by them
a woman who was said to have stolen, fornicated and was punished [for that]. The mother exclaimed: ‘God, do not make my child be like that!’ The child,
however, said: ‘God, make me be like her!’ Its mother inquired it about that. It answered: ‘This young man is a tyrant, and for the woman, although they
say about her that she has fornicated, she in fact has not; although they say that
she has stolen she has not. She has simply kept saying: ‘God is sufficient for
me!’”//436 This report is related in the Sahih.714
712 Following this, al-Qushayri provides an alternative chain of transmission of the same prophetic
report, which is: “Abu ∏Awana said: al-San∏ani told me: Abu ∏Umama said: Al-Husayn b. Muhammad al-Muruwadhi said: Jarir b. Hazim said to us, on the authority of Muhammad b. Sirin, on the authority of Abu Hurayra: …”
713 Probably, Abu Hurayra refers to the Prophet’s gesturing as he recounted the story. 714 One of the two most respected collections of “sound” reports going back to the Prophet and
his Companions. It was assembled by a famous traditionalist, al-Bukhari, who died in 256/870.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 365
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 365
To the same category belongs the story of the cave, which is well known and
which is recorded in the collections of sound [prophetic] reports. Abu Nu∏aym
∏Abd al-Malik b. al-Hasan al-Isfaraini informed us: Abu ∏Awana Ya∏qub b. Ibrahim told us: Muhammad b. ∏Awn,715 Yazid b. ∏Abd al-Samad al-Dimashqi,
∏Abd al-Karim b. al-Haytham al-Dayr∏aquli and Abu πl-Khasib b. al-Mustanir
al-Massisi told us: Abu πl-Yaman told us: Shu∏ayb told us on the authority of
al-Zuhri, on the authority of Salim, on the authority of his father, who said that
the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – said: “A long time ago,
three men set out on a journey. When night came, they found refuge in a cave. When they entered it, a big rock fell from the mountain and blocked them in the
cave. They said: ‘By God, there is no rescue for us from this rock unless we
appeal to God Most High by means of our good deeds!’ One of them said: ‘I had
two very elderly parents. I would never give an evening drink to either my family
or my livestock before first offering it to them. One day, my search for firewood
prevented [me from coming home before dark], and I only arrived at home,
when they were already asleep. I milked [one of my animals] to prepare their
evening drink. However, when I came to them, they were already asleep. I was
reluctant to wake them up, while at the same time unwilling to offer an evening
drink to either my family or my livestock. So, I stood with a cup in hand waiting
for them to wake up until the break of dawn. They [finally] woke up and drank
their evening drink. My God, if I did this seeking Your pleasure, relieve us from
our plight!’ A crack opened in the rock, but the opening was not wide enough for
them to get out through it.” The Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him
– continued: “The second man said: ‘My God, I had a cousin whom I loved more
than any other human being.However, he declined and he rebuilt it as it had been
before. As for another infant [who spoke from the cradle], there was a lady with a
suckling child. [Once] there passed by her a young man with a handsome face
and beautiful complexion. She exclaimed: ‘My God, make my child be like that!’
The child then spoke, saying: ‘My God, don’t make me be like that!’” Muhammad
b. Sirin said: “I was watching the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – as
he was recounting the words of the suckling child. Then, there passed by them
a woman who was said to have stolen, fornicated and was punished [for that]. The mother exclaimed: ‘God, do not make my child be like that!’ The child,
however, said: ‘God, make me be like her!’ Its mother inquired it about that. It answered: ‘This young man is a tyrant, and for the woman, although they
say about her that she has fornicated, she in fact has not; although they say that
she has stolen she has not. She has simply kept saying: ‘God is sufficient for
me!’”//436 This report is related in the Sahih.714
712 Following this, al-Qushayri provides an alternative chain of transmission of the same prophetic
report, which is: “Abu ∏Awana said: al-San∏ani told me: Abu ∏Umama said: Al-Husayn b. Muhammad al-Muruwadhi said: Jarir b. Hazim said to us, on the authority of Muhammad b. Sirin, on the authority of Abu Hurayra: …”
713 Probably, Abu Hurayra refers to the Prophet’s gesturing as he recounted the story. 714 One of the two most respected collections of “sound” reports going back to the Prophet and
his Companions. It was assembled by a famous traditionalist, al-Bukhari, who died in 256/870.

They [finally] woke up and drank
their evening drink. My God, if I did this seeking Your pleasure, relieve us from
our plight!’ A crack opened in the rock, but the opening was not wide enough for
them to get out through it.” The Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him
– continued: “The second man said: ‘My God, I had a cousin whom I loved more
than any other human being. I tried to instill in her affection for me. However,
she turned me down. Finally, one year she had fallen on hard times and came to
me. I gave her one hundred and twenty dinars on the condition that she would
become mine. So she came to me and as I was about to make her mine she told
me: ‘It is not allowed for you to break the seal unless you have the right [to do so]!’
So I shunned from sleeping with her and walked away from her, leaving with her
all the gold that I had given her. My God, if I did that seeking Your pleasure,
relieve us from our plight!’ The rock cracked wider, but they [still] were unable
to get out of the cave.” The Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him
– said: “The third man uttered: ‘My God, I used to hire some laborers and paid
them their wages, except for one man, who left without collecting his wages. I
invested his wages with a profit. He came to me after a while and said: “∏Abdallah,
pay me my wages!” I told him: “Everything that you see – the camels, the sheep,
the cows and the slaves, is your wages!” He exclaimed: “∏Abdallah, don’t make
fun of me!” I told him: “I do not make fun of you!” So he took everything [I had]
and left nothing behind! My God, if I did this seeking Your pleasure, relieve us
from our plight!’ The rock cracked open, they got out of the cave and went on
their way.”//437 This is a sound report accepted by all. 715 Or “Muhammad b. ∏Awf”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 366
366 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
To the same category belongs the report from the Messenger of God – may
God bless and greet him – that a cow spoke to him. Abu Nu∏aym al-Isfaraini
informed us: Abu ∏Awana informed us: Yunus b. ∏Abd al-A∏la informed us: Ibn
Wahb informed us: Yunus b. Yazid informed us on the authority of Ibn Shihab,
who said: Sa∏id b. Musayyb told us on the authority of Abu Hurayra that the
Prophet – may God bless and greet him – said: “[Once] a man was driving his
cow, which he had loaded with certain goods. The cow turned to him and said:
‘I was not created for this! I was created to plow.’ The people [in the audience]
exclaimed [in disbelief]: ‘Praise be to God!’ The Prophet – may God bless and
greet him – said: ‘I believe this – I and Abu Bakr and ∏Umar.’” To the same
category belongs the report about Uways al-Qarani716 and about his state and
story as witnessed by ∏Umar b. al-Khattab – may God be pleased with him. Subsequently, he met Harim b. Hayyan and they greeted each other without
having any prior knowledge of one another. All these are conditions that are
contrary to the customary order of things. We have skipped a detailed explanation
of the Uways story, because it is widely known. Miracles have been displayed by the pious ancestors (salaf), including the
Companions [of the Prophet] and the generation that followed them, as well as
those who came in their wake. They are abundant indeed. Many books were
written about this matter, and we shall mention only a few of them for the
sake of brevity, God willing. Thus, [it is related] that Ibn ∏Umar717 was once on
a journey when he met a group of people standing on the road for fear of a
lion. He chased the lion away from the road then told them: “God has given
power over man to things that he fears. Were he afraid of no one but God, no
one would have power over him.” This is a well-known report.They [finally] woke up and drank
their evening drink. My God, if I did this seeking Your pleasure, relieve us from
our plight!’ A crack opened in the rock, but the opening was not wide enough for
them to get out through it.” The Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him
– continued: “The second man said: ‘My God, I had a cousin whom I loved more
than any other human being. I tried to instill in her affection for me. However,
she turned me down. Finally, one year she had fallen on hard times and came to
me. I gave her one hundred and twenty dinars on the condition that she would
become mine. So she came to me and as I was about to make her mine she told
me: ‘It is not allowed for you to break the seal unless you have the right [to do so]!’
So I shunned from sleeping with her and walked away from her, leaving with her
all the gold that I had given her. My God, if I did that seeking Your pleasure,
relieve us from our plight!’ The rock cracked wider, but they [still] were unable
to get out of the cave.” The Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him
– said: “The third man uttered: ‘My God, I used to hire some laborers and paid
them their wages, except for one man, who left without collecting his wages. I
invested his wages with a profit. He came to me after a while and said: “∏Abdallah,
pay me my wages!” I told him: “Everything that you see – the camels, the sheep,
the cows and the slaves, is your wages!” He exclaimed: “∏Abdallah, don’t make
fun of me!” I told him: “I do not make fun of you!” So he took everything [I had]
and left nothing behind! My God, if I did this seeking Your pleasure, relieve us
from our plight!’ The rock cracked open, they got out of the cave and went on
their way.”//437 This is a sound report accepted by all. 715 Or “Muhammad b. ∏Awf”.

He chased the lion away from the road then told them: “God has given
power over man to things that he fears. Were he afraid of no one but God, no
one would have power over him.” This is a well-known report. It is related
that the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – sent al-∏Alaπ b. al-Hadrami on a raid. Between him and his goal there was a patch of sea. He
implored God by His greatest name and his troops walked over the water. It
is related that when ∏Abbad718 b. Bishr and Usayd b. Hudayr [b. Imruπ al-Qays]
left the Messenger of God’s house [one night]; [as they walked] the tip of
the staff of one of them glowed, showing them the way as if it were a lamp. It is
related that a large bowl [of food] was [once] standing in front of Salman and
Abu πl-Dardaπ.719It praised God and they both heard this praise. It is related that
the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – said: “How many a person with
disheveled hair, covered with dust, with nothing but two pieces of clothing to his
716 A semi-legendary figure whose visit to ∏Umar was predicted by the prophet Muhammad, who
had held Uways in high regard. Although the Prophet and Uways never met, they are said to
have communicated telepathically. 717 Son of the second caliph ∏Umar b. al-Khattab. A prominent and highly respected member of
the first Muslim community in his own right, he took an active part in the Muslim conquests. He died at a very advanced age in 73/693. 718 Or “∏Attab b. Bashir”, according to another reading. 719 Two prominent Companions of the Prophet, who were renowned for their loyalty to him and
their piety.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 367
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 367
name, unnoticed, who pleads to God has his plea is granted!”//438 The Prophet
did not specify what exactly such a person may plead to God for. Since these
reports are well known, we have not provided chains of transmission for them. It is related that Sahl b. ∏Abdallah said: “Whoever has renounced this world
for forty days truthfully and with a sincere heart will display miracles. If he fails
to display them, it is because he is not sincere in his renunciation.” Someone
asked Sahl: “How will he display miracles?” He answered: “He takes what he
wants, how he wants, and from wherever he wants.” ∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan
informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Saffar told us: Abu Muslim told us: ∏Amr
b. Marzuq told us: ∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. Abi Salama al-Majashun told us: Wahb b. Kaysan told us on the authority of Ibn ∏Umar, on the authority of Abu Hurayra,
who said that the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – said: “As a man was
saying his prayers, he heard thunder in a cloud. He then heard a voice in the
cloud, saying: ‘Water the garden of so-and-so!’ The cloud moved to a certain
plot and discharged its water onto it. The man followed the cloud and came upon
another man, who was praying in his garden. The [first] man asked the other
what his name was and he gave him his name. The [first] man asked: ‘What will
you do with the harvest of this garden of yours?’ The [second] man asked [in
turn]: ‘Why are you asking about this?’ The [first] man said: ‘I heard a voice
from a cloud, saying: “Water the garden of so-and-so!”’ The [second] man said:
‘Since you have asked, I will divide it into three parts.The [first] man asked the other
what his name was and he gave him his name. The [first] man asked: ‘What will
you do with the harvest of this garden of yours?’ The [second] man asked [in
turn]: ‘Why are you asking about this?’ The [first] man said: ‘I heard a voice
from a cloud, saying: “Water the garden of so-and-so!”’ The [second] man said:
‘Since you have asked, I will divide it into three parts. I will keep one-third for
myself and my wife, one-third I will return to the garden itself,720and one-third
I will set aside for the poor and the travelers.’”
I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say: “When
we arrived in Tustar,721 we saw on the property [that used to belong to] Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari] a house that the locals called ‘the house of the lions’ (bayt
al-siba∏). We asked them about it. They answered: ‘Lions used to come to Sahl. He would take them to this house and play host to them, feeding them with
meat. He then let them go.’” Abu Nasr al-Sarraj said: “The entire population of
Tustar were in agreement about this, despite their great number and no one
denied it.” I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Tamimi say: I heard
∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali al-Sufi//439 say: I heard Hamza b. ∏Abdallah al-∏Alawi say:
“[One day] I went to see Abu πl-Khayr al-Tinati. I made a vow to myself to greet
him and to leave without eating anything at his place. After I had left his house
and walked some distance, I suddenly saw him [walking] behind me with a tray full
of food. He said: ‘Eat this, young man! You have already fulfilled your pledge!’”
Abu πl-Khayr al-Tinati was famous for miracles. Ibrahim al-Raqqi recounted: “I
set out to offer my greetings to him. He performed his sunset prayer, during
which he made a mistake in reciting the ‘Opening’.722I said to myself: ‘My journey
was in vain.’ After I greeted him, I went outside to perform my ablutions. A lion
720 Perhaps in order to offset its maintenance costs?He chased the lion away from the road then told them: “God has given
power over man to things that he fears. Were he afraid of no one but God, no
one would have power over him.” This is a well-known report. It is related
that the Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – sent al-∏Alaπ b. al-Hadrami on a raid. Between him and his goal there was a patch of sea. He
implored God by His greatest name and his troops walked over the water. It
is related that when ∏Abbad718 b. Bishr and Usayd b. Hudayr [b. Imruπ al-Qays]
left the Messenger of God’s house [one night]; [as they walked] the tip of
the staff of one of them glowed, showing them the way as if it were a lamp. It is
related that a large bowl [of food] was [once] standing in front of Salman and
Abu πl-Dardaπ.719It praised God and they both heard this praise. It is related that
the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – said: “How many a person with
disheveled hair, covered with dust, with nothing but two pieces of clothing to his
716 A semi-legendary figure whose visit to ∏Umar was predicted by the prophet Muhammad, who
had held Uways in high regard. Although the Prophet and Uways never met, they are said to
have communicated telepathically. 717 Son of the second caliph ∏Umar b. al-Khattab. A prominent and highly respected member of
the first Muslim community in his own right, he took an active part in the Muslim conquests. He died at a very advanced age in 73/693. 718 Or “∏Attab b. Bashir”, according to another reading. 719 Two prominent Companions of the Prophet, who were renowned for their loyalty to him and
their piety.

He performed his sunset prayer, during
which he made a mistake in reciting the ‘Opening’.722I said to myself: ‘My journey
was in vain.’ After I greeted him, I went outside to perform my ablutions. A lion
720 Perhaps in order to offset its maintenance costs? 721 Tustar (or Shushtar), a town in south-western Iran. 722 That is, the first chapter of the Qurπan (al-Fatiha), which is recited during each prayer.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 368
368 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
rushed toward me and I returned to Abu πl-Khayr, saying: ‘A lion rushed toward
me!’ He went outside and shouted at the lion: ‘Didn’t I tell you not to accost my
guests?’ The lion retreated and I performed my ablutions. When I came back to
him, he said: ‘You are preoccupied with putting externals in order, and you are
afraid of the lion, whereas we are preoccupied with putting [our] hearts in order
and the lion is afraid of us!’”
Ja∏far al-Khuldi had a ring-stone. One day he dropped it into the Tigris. He
knew a well-tested prayer by which to return lost things. He uttered it and found
his ring-stone amidst the papers that he was leafing through. I heard Abu Hatim
al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say that [the words of] this prayer are:
“O the One who brings together all people ‘on the Day wherein is no doubt’,723
bring me together with what I have lost!” Abu Nasr al-Sarraj said: “Abu πl-Tayyb
al-∏Akki showed me a volume that contained [the names of] those who offered
this prayer over something that they lost and then found again. It consisted of
many pages.” I asked Ahmad al-Tabarani al-Sarakhsi – may God have mercy
on him: “Have you ever displayed any miracles?” He answered: “During my
novitiate (iradati), at the beginning of my path [to God], I occasionally searched
for a stone with which to cleanse myself after defecating and could not find one. I would then draw something out of the air and it would turn out to be a precious
stone (jawhar). I would cleanse myself with it and throw it away.” He then asked:
“What is the importance of miracles? Their intended purpose is to strengthen
[one’s] faith in God’s Oneness. He who sees nothing in this existence except
God does not care whether he contemplates an ordinary event or an event that is
contrary to the customary order [of things].”
I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Abdallah b.He performed his sunset prayer, during
which he made a mistake in reciting the ‘Opening’.722I said to myself: ‘My journey
was in vain.’ After I greeted him, I went outside to perform my ablutions. A lion
720 Perhaps in order to offset its maintenance costs? 721 Tustar (or Shushtar), a town in south-western Iran. 722 That is, the first chapter of the Qurπan (al-Fatiha), which is recited during each prayer.

He who sees nothing in this existence except
God does not care whether he contemplates an ordinary event or an event that is
contrary to the customary order [of things].”
I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali say:
I heard Abu πl-Hasan724al-Basri say: “At ∏Abbadan725there was a poor black man
who used to frequent the [local] ruins. I took something with me and sought him
out. When his eyes fell on me, he smiled and pointed with his hand toward the
earth. I saw that the entire earth was covered with shining gold. He told me:
‘Give what you have brought!’ I gave it to him. However, his [spiritual] state
frightened me so, that I ran away from him.” I heard Mansur al-Maghribi say: I
heard Ahmad b. ∏Ataπ al-Rudhbari say: “I used to be//440 excessively concerned
with the matter of ritual purity (tahara). One night I felt oppressed due to the
large amount of water I poured [over myself], while performing my ablutions. My heart would not rest. [Finally,] I said: ‘My Lord, I seek Your forgiveness!’
I then heard a voice saying: ‘Forgiveness lies in knowledge!’ And my sickness
disappeared.”
I heard Mansur al-Maghribi say: “I saw him [al-Rudhbari] one day sitting on
a plain rock in the desert that was covered with the dung of goats and sheep. I
723 Q. 3:9. 724 Or “Abu πl-Khayr al-Basri”. 725 An island in the mouth of Shatt al-∏Arab, which served as a refuge for early Muslim ascetics;
see IM, pp. 17–18.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 369
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 369
asked him: ‘Master, this is the dung of goats and sheep!’ He responded, saying:
‘Legal scholars (fuqahaπ)hold different opinions regarding this matter.’” I heard
Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say: I heard al-Husayn
b. Ahmad al-Razi say: I heard Abu Sulayman al-Khawwas say: “One day I was
riding a donkey. It was pestered by flies and kept shaking its head. As I was
beating its head with a stick that I held in my hand, the donkey raised his head and
uttered: ‘Keep beating! You yourself will be beaten on your head!’” Al-Husayn
[b. Ahmad al-Razi] asked Abu Sulayman: “Did it indeed happen to you?” He
answered: “Yes, it did, [exactly] as you have heard!” It is related that Ibn ∏Ataπ
[al-Adami] said: I heard Abu πl-Husayn al-Nuri say: “Some of these miracles
have occurred to me. I took a cane from some boys, and entered [in the river]
between two boats, saying: ‘By Your greatness, if a three-pound fish does not
come to me, I will drown myself!’ And indeed a fish weighing three pounds came
out to me.” When al-Junayd heard this story, he said: “It would have been better
for him that a snake come out of the water to bite him!” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd
al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Abu πl-Fath Yusuf b. ∏Umar al-Zahid al-Qawwas
at Baghdad say: Muhammad b. ∏Atiya said: ∏Abd al-Kabir b. Ahmad told us:
I heard Abu Bakr al-Saπigh say: I heard Abu Ja∏far al-Haddad, the teacher of
al-Junayd, say: “Once, when I was in Mecca my hair had grown long and I had no
iron instrument to trim my hair with. So I went to a barber in whom I discerned
signs of a good nature and asked him: ‘Will you cut my hair for the sake of God
Most High?’ He said: ‘Yes, with pleasure!’ There was [in his shop] a wealthy
man. The barber pushed him aside, sat me down instead and cut my hair.He who sees nothing in this existence except
God does not care whether he contemplates an ordinary event or an event that is
contrary to the customary order [of things].”
I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali say:
I heard Abu πl-Hasan724al-Basri say: “At ∏Abbadan725there was a poor black man
who used to frequent the [local] ruins. I took something with me and sought him
out. When his eyes fell on me, he smiled and pointed with his hand toward the
earth. I saw that the entire earth was covered with shining gold. He told me:
‘Give what you have brought!’ I gave it to him. However, his [spiritual] state
frightened me so, that I ran away from him.” I heard Mansur al-Maghribi say: I
heard Ahmad b. ∏Ataπ al-Rudhbari say: “I used to be//440 excessively concerned
with the matter of ritual purity (tahara). One night I felt oppressed due to the
large amount of water I poured [over myself], while performing my ablutions. My heart would not rest. [Finally,] I said: ‘My Lord, I seek Your forgiveness!’
I then heard a voice saying: ‘Forgiveness lies in knowledge!’ And my sickness
disappeared.”
I heard Mansur al-Maghribi say: “I saw him [al-Rudhbari] one day sitting on
a plain rock in the desert that was covered with the dung of goats and sheep. I
723 Q. 3:9. 724 Or “Abu πl-Khayr al-Basri”. 725 An island in the mouth of Shatt al-∏Arab, which served as a refuge for early Muslim ascetics;
see IM, pp. 17–18.

So I went to a barber in whom I discerned
signs of a good nature and asked him: ‘Will you cut my hair for the sake of God
Most High?’ He said: ‘Yes, with pleasure!’ There was [in his shop] a wealthy
man. The barber pushed him aside, sat me down instead and cut my hair. He
then gave me a pouch with dirhams and told me: ‘Spend this on some of your
needs!’ I took it and made a decision to pay him back as soon as God bestowed
something on me. I entered the mosque, where I was greeted by a companion of
mine who told me: ‘One of your [Sufi] brothers brought with him from Basra a
purse with three hundred dinarsthat was given to you by another [Sufi] brother
of yours.’ I took the purse and brought it to the barber, saying: ‘This is three
hundred dinars. Spend them on some of your needs!’ He told me: ‘Aren’t you
ashamed of yourself, master? [First] you tell me to cut your hair for the sake of
God Most High, and then you want me to charge a fee for it! Leave, may God
pardon you!’”//441 I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr
al-Sarraj say: I heard Ibn Salim say: “When Ishaq b. Ahmad died, Sahl b. ∏Abdallah
[al-Tustari] went to visit him in his retreat, where he found a basket woven of
palm leaves. In it there were two bottles. One contained a red substance, the
other a white one. He also found there a scrap of gold and a scrap of silver. Sahl
threw both scraps into the Tigris and poured the content of both bottles into the
dust. Now Ishaq was in debt.” Ibn Salim continued: “I asked Sahl: ‘What was in
those two bottles?’ He said: ‘If you pour a dirham worth of its weight from one
of these bottles on several units (mathaqil) of copper, it will turn into gold, and
if you pour a dinar worth of its weight on several units of lead, it will turn into
silver.’ I asked him: ‘Would it have been held against him if he had settled his
debt with this?’ Sahl answered: ‘Friend, he was afraid for his faith.’” It is related543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 370
370 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
that one night al-Nuri went out to the bank of the Tigris and found out that its
two banks drew together [to allow him to cross it]. He walked away, saying: “By
Your greatness, I will only cross it in a boat!”
I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say: al-Wajihi
dictated to me a story about Muhammad b. Yusuf al-Bannaπ. He said: “Abu
Turab al-Nakhshabi displayed many miracles. Once I traveled with him in a
company of forty other people. At one point we were afflicted by starvation. Abu
Turab veered off the road and returned with a bunch of bananas. All of us partook
of it, except a young man who did not eat any of it. Abu Turab told him to eat. He answered: ‘I have made a vow to give up [the quest for] any sort of assured
livelihood (ma∏lumat), yet you have provided me with one. I part company with you
from now on!’ Abu Turab told him: ‘Then keep up your vow!’” Abu Nasr al-Sarraj
related on the authority of Abu Yazid [al-Bistami], who said: “Once Abu ∏Ali
al-Sindi – who was his teacher – came to see me with a sack in his hand. When
he emptied its contents, it turned out to be full of jewels. I asked him where he
obtained this. He answered: ‘I was in a valley over there when I saw this shining
like a lamp, so I took it with me.’ I asked him: ‘What was your [mystical] moment
(waqtuka), when you entered that valley?’ He answered: ‘It was the moment in
which the spiritual state I had been in began to weaken.’” Someone told Abu
Yazid: “So-and-so walked all the way to Mecca in a single night!” He responded:
“Satan – may God curse him – walks from East to West in an hour!”//442 He
was told: “So-and-so walks on water and flies in the air!” He retorted: “Birds,
too, fly in the air and fish flow across the water!” Sahl b.I asked him where he
obtained this. He answered: ‘I was in a valley over there when I saw this shining
like a lamp, so I took it with me.’ I asked him: ‘What was your [mystical] moment
(waqtuka), when you entered that valley?’ He answered: ‘It was the moment in
which the spiritual state I had been in began to weaken.’” Someone told Abu
Yazid: “So-and-so walked all the way to Mecca in a single night!” He responded:
“Satan – may God curse him – walks from East to West in an hour!”//442 He
was told: “So-and-so walks on water and flies in the air!” He retorted: “Birds,
too, fly in the air and fish flow across the water!” Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari]
said: “The greatest miracle is that you change even one of the blameworthy traits
of your moral character.”
I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Tamimi say: I heard
∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali al-Sufi say: I heard Ibn Salim say: “A man named ∏Abd al-Rahman
b. Ahmad used to keep company with Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari]. Once, he
told Sahl: ‘When I perform my ritual ablutions before the prayer, [ablution]
water streams from me as two branches: one of gold and the other of silver.’ Sahl
retorted: ‘Don’t you know that when little children cry, they are given rattles [of
dried poppy heads] in order to be distracted.’” I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani
say: I heard Abu Nasr al-Sarraj say: Ja∏far b. Muhammad informed us: al-Junayd
told me: “One day I went to see al-Sari [al-Saqati]. He told me: ‘A bird used to
come here every day. I would crumble some bread for it and it would eat from
my hand. One day it came, but did not perch on my hand. I thought to myself:
“What might be the cause of this?” I remembered that I had eaten meat with
spices. I said to myself: “I will never eat it again and I repent from having done
this.” And the bird perched on my hand and ate [some bread].’”
Abu ∏Umar726al-Anmati related: “I was in the desert with my master, when it
started to rain. We found refuge in a mosque.So I went to a barber in whom I discerned
signs of a good nature and asked him: ‘Will you cut my hair for the sake of God
Most High?’ He said: ‘Yes, with pleasure!’ There was [in his shop] a wealthy
man. The barber pushed him aside, sat me down instead and cut my hair. He
then gave me a pouch with dirhams and told me: ‘Spend this on some of your
needs!’ I took it and made a decision to pay him back as soon as God bestowed
something on me. I entered the mosque, where I was greeted by a companion of
mine who told me: ‘One of your [Sufi] brothers brought with him from Basra a
purse with three hundred dinarsthat was given to you by another [Sufi] brother
of yours.’ I took the purse and brought it to the barber, saying: ‘This is three
hundred dinars. Spend them on some of your needs!’ He told me: ‘Aren’t you
ashamed of yourself, master? [First] you tell me to cut your hair for the sake of
God Most High, and then you want me to charge a fee for it! Leave, may God
pardon you!’”//441 I heard Abu Hatim al-Sijistani say: I heard Abu Nasr
al-Sarraj say: I heard Ibn Salim say: “When Ishaq b. Ahmad died, Sahl b. ∏Abdallah
[al-Tustari] went to visit him in his retreat, where he found a basket woven of
palm leaves. In it there were two bottles. One contained a red substance, the
other a white one. He also found there a scrap of gold and a scrap of silver. Sahl
threw both scraps into the Tigris and poured the content of both bottles into the
dust. Now Ishaq was in debt.” Ibn Salim continued: “I asked Sahl: ‘What was in
those two bottles?’ He said: ‘If you pour a dirham worth of its weight from one
of these bottles on several units (mathaqil) of copper, it will turn into gold, and
if you pour a dinar worth of its weight on several units of lead, it will turn into
silver.’ I asked him: ‘Would it have been held against him if he had settled his
debt with this?’ Sahl answered: ‘Friend, he was afraid for his faith.’” It is related

I said to myself: “I will never eat it again and I repent from having done
this.” And the bird perched on my hand and ate [some bread].’”
Abu ∏Umar726al-Anmati related: “I was in the desert with my master, when it
started to rain. We found refuge in a mosque. Its roof was leaking, so we climbed
up to the roof with a board to fix the roof. However, the board was too short to
726 Or “∏Amr”, according to an alternative reading.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 371
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 371
reach the wall. My master told me: ‘Stretch it!’ I [managed to] stretch it and it
covered the wall from one edge to the other.” I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah
al-Sufi say: I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Najjar say: I heard al-Duqqi727say:
I heard Abu Bakr al-Daqqaq say: “As I was wandering in the desert of the
Children of Israel, it occurred to me that the knowledge of the True Reality (∏ilm
al-haqiqa) is different from the Divine Law (al-shari∏a). [Suddenly] I heard
a voice from beneath a tree, saying: ‘Each truth that does not conform to the
Divine Law is but unbelief!’” A Sufi related: “I was with Khayr al-Nassaj, when
a certain man came to him and said: ‘Master, I saw you the other day selling yarn
for two dirhams. I followed you and stole them from the fold of your loincloth. Suddenly, my hand became//443 paralyzed with two dirhams clasped in my
fist!’ Khayr laughed and pointed his hand at the hand of the man and it opened. He then said: ‘Go and purchase something for your family with these dirhams. And never do anything like this again!’” It is related that Ahmad b. Muhammad
al-Sulami said: “One day I went to see Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri and saw before him a
golden basin. Burning around it was a mixture of aromatic incenses and ambergris. He told me: ‘You are one of those who enter into the presence of kings, when
they feel generous!’ He gave me one dirham with which I was able to pay all
my expenses all the way to Balkh.”728It is related that Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz said:
“During one of my travels, there appeared before me something to eat every three
days. This sufficed me. Once, however, three days passed by without anything
presenting itself for me and I grew weak. As I sat down, I heard a voice saying:
‘What do you like best: power or means?’ ‘Power,’ I replied. Instantly, I stood up
and for twelve days I walked without eating anything.I said to myself: “I will never eat it again and I repent from having done
this.” And the bird perched on my hand and ate [some bread].’”
Abu ∏Umar726al-Anmati related: “I was in the desert with my master, when it
started to rain. We found refuge in a mosque. Its roof was leaking, so we climbed
up to the roof with a board to fix the roof. However, the board was too short to
726 Or “∏Amr”, according to an alternative reading.

As I sat down, I heard a voice saying:
‘What do you like best: power or means?’ ‘Power,’ I replied. Instantly, I stood up
and for twelve days I walked without eating anything. Yet, I was not exhausted.”
Al-Murta∏ish related: I heard [Ibrahim] al-Khawwas say: “I had been wan-
dering across the desert for many days on end [until] a stranger approached
and greeted me. He asked me whether I was lost. I said: ‘Yes.’ He told me: ‘Why
don’t I show you the way?’ He then walked a few steps in front of me, whereupon
he disappeared from my sight. I found myself on the thoroughfare. From that
moment on, I experienced neither hunger nor thirst in my journey.” I heard
Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Umar b. Yahya al-Ardabili say: I
heard al-Duqqi729say: I heard Ibn al-Jallaπ relate to me: “After my father died, he
kept laughing [while lying] on the washing litter. No one dared to wash his body,
because they thought he was still alive. Finally, one of his close followers came and
washed him.” I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Tamimi say: I heard ∏Abdallah
b. ∏Ali say: I heard Talha al-Qasaπiri730 say: I heard al-Manihi, a companion of
Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari], relate: “Sahl used to abstain from food for eighty
days. Whenever he ate, he grew weaker, while when he went hungry he grew
stronger. At the beginning of the month of Ramadan Abu ∏Ubayd al-Busri would
727 Or “al-Raqqi”, according to another version. 728 An ancient city in northern Afghanistan. 729 Or “al-Raqqi”, according to an alternative reading. 730 Or, according to another reading, “al-Ghadaπiri”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 372
372 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
come to his wife and tell her: ‘Seal the door of my room with clay and throw me
each night a loaf of bread through that small window!’ On the day of the festival
[of the breaking of the fast] we would open the door, his wife would come into
his room and would discover thirty loaves of bread in one of its corners. Although
he did not eat, drink or sleep [for the entire month], he would not miss a single
cycle of his prayer.”//444
Abu πl-Harith al-Awlasi said: “For thirty years I lived with my tongue
listening to no one but my innermost self. After that [my] condition changed so
that my innermost self would listen to no one but my Lord!” Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi told us: Abu πl-Hasan, a servant of Sha∏wana, said: I heard
∏Ali b. Salim say: “At the end of his life, Sahl b. ∏Abdallah was afflicted by a
paralysis. When the time of the prayer came, his hands and feet would be
loosened, and, after he had fulfilled his religious duty, they would return to their
original [paralyzed] state.” Abu ∏Imran al-Wasiti related: “[Our] ship sank, and
my wife and I kept afloat on a board. Under these circumstances she gave birth
to a girl. She called upon me, saying: ‘Thirst is killing me!’ I told her: ‘God sees
our condition!’ I raised my head and saw a man [suspended] in the middle of the
air. In his hand was a chain of gold to which a ruby cup was attached. He told us:
‘Drink [this]!’ I seized the cup and we both drank from it. The water was more
fragrant than musk, colder than ice and sweeter than honey. I asked him: ‘Who
are you – may God have mercy on you?’ He said: ‘I am a servant of your Master!’
I asked him how he attained such a [lofty] rank. He answered: ‘I abandoned [all]
my desires for the sake of His pleasure and He seated me on the air.’ He then
disappeared from my sight and I have not seen him since.”
Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi informed us: Bakran b.As I sat down, I heard a voice saying:
‘What do you like best: power or means?’ ‘Power,’ I replied. Instantly, I stood up
and for twelve days I walked without eating anything. Yet, I was not exhausted.”
Al-Murta∏ish related: I heard [Ibrahim] al-Khawwas say: “I had been wan-
dering across the desert for many days on end [until] a stranger approached
and greeted me. He asked me whether I was lost. I said: ‘Yes.’ He told me: ‘Why
don’t I show you the way?’ He then walked a few steps in front of me, whereupon
he disappeared from my sight. I found myself on the thoroughfare. From that
moment on, I experienced neither hunger nor thirst in my journey.” I heard
Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard ∏Umar b. Yahya al-Ardabili say: I
heard al-Duqqi729say: I heard Ibn al-Jallaπ relate to me: “After my father died, he
kept laughing [while lying] on the washing litter. No one dared to wash his body,
because they thought he was still alive. Finally, one of his close followers came and
washed him.” I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Tamimi say: I heard ∏Abdallah
b. ∏Ali say: I heard Talha al-Qasaπiri730 say: I heard al-Manihi, a companion of
Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari], relate: “Sahl used to abstain from food for eighty
days. Whenever he ate, he grew weaker, while when he went hungry he grew
stronger. At the beginning of the month of Ramadan Abu ∏Ubayd al-Busri would
727 Or “al-Raqqi”, according to another version. 728 An ancient city in northern Afghanistan. 729 Or “al-Raqqi”, according to an alternative reading. 730 Or, according to another reading, “al-Ghadaπiri”.

He answered: ‘I abandoned [all]
my desires for the sake of His pleasure and He seated me on the air.’ He then
disappeared from my sight and I have not seen him since.”
Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi informed us: Bakran b. Ahmad al-Jili told
us: I heard Yusuf b. al-Husayn say: I heard Dhu πl-Nun say: “At the Ka∏ba I
observed a young man, who repeatedly bowed and prostrated himself [in prayer]. I approached and said: ‘You are making a lot of prayers!’ He responded: ‘I am
waiting for my Lord’s permission to depart!’ Then I saw a piece of paper that
read: “From the Glorious and All-Forgiving One to My sincere servant. Leave,
for I have forgiven thee thy former and latter sins.’”731A Sufi related: “I was in
the city of the Messenger of God732 – may God bless and greet him – in his
mosque, exchanging [stories about] God’s signs733 with a group of other people. Near us was a blind man, listening. He then approached us and said: ‘I enjoyed
your speeches. Know, that I had a little daughter and other children and that I
[used to earn my livelihood] by gathering firewood at a certain place. One day, I
went there and saw a young man dressed in a linen shirt with sandals on his feet. I thought that he must have lost his way. I came up to him in order to steal his
clothes. I told him to take off the clothes that he had on himself. He told me:
“Go away, may God protect you!” I persisted, repeating my demand three times,
731 Q. 48:2. 732 That is, Medina. 733 That is, the miracles of the friends of God.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 373
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 373
until he finally said: “So be it?” I said: “So be it!” He pointed at my eyes with his
finger from some distance away and my eyes flowed out. I cried out: “By God,
who are you?” He said: “Ibrahim al-Khawwas.”’” Dhu πl-Nun related: “Once
I was on board a ship, when a piece of expensive fabric was stolen. People
suspected a certain man of doing that. I said: ‘Leave him alone until I have a
friendly chat//445 with him.’ This young man was sleeping wrapped in his
cloak. When he stuck his head out of his cloak, Dhu πl-Nun asked him about this
matter. The young man exclaimed: ‘How can you tell me this? My Lord, I
implore You that not a single fish shall come out [of the sea] without bringing
a jewel with it!’ And I indeed saw fish appearing on the surface of the sea, each
carrying a jewel in its mouth. The young man then threw himself into the sea
and walked all the way across the sea to the shore.”
Ibrahim al-Khawas related: “Once I went into the desert. In the middle of it
I met a Christian girdled with the belt [of protection] (zunnar).734 He requested
that he be my companion, and we traveled together for seven days. He told
me: ‘O monk of the monotheists (hanafiyya),735show your hospitality, for we are
hungry!’ I said: ‘My God, do not let me be disgraced before this unbeliever!’ I
then saw a tray with food, roast meat, dates and a pitcher full of water. We ate,
drank and walked for seven more days. This time I spoke before him, saying:
‘O monk of the Christians, show me what you can! For it’s now your turn!’ He
leaned upon his staff and said a prayer, and, lo, there appeared before us two
trays with twice the food that was on my tray. I was bewildered, grew pale and
refused to eat. He persisted, but I did not respond to him until he finally said:
‘I have two good tidings for you.He answered: ‘I abandoned [all]
my desires for the sake of His pleasure and He seated me on the air.’ He then
disappeared from my sight and I have not seen him since.”
Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi informed us: Bakran b. Ahmad al-Jili told
us: I heard Yusuf b. al-Husayn say: I heard Dhu πl-Nun say: “At the Ka∏ba I
observed a young man, who repeatedly bowed and prostrated himself [in prayer]. I approached and said: ‘You are making a lot of prayers!’ He responded: ‘I am
waiting for my Lord’s permission to depart!’ Then I saw a piece of paper that
read: “From the Glorious and All-Forgiving One to My sincere servant. Leave,
for I have forgiven thee thy former and latter sins.’”731A Sufi related: “I was in
the city of the Messenger of God732 – may God bless and greet him – in his
mosque, exchanging [stories about] God’s signs733 with a group of other people. Near us was a blind man, listening. He then approached us and said: ‘I enjoyed
your speeches. Know, that I had a little daughter and other children and that I
[used to earn my livelihood] by gathering firewood at a certain place. One day, I
went there and saw a young man dressed in a linen shirt with sandals on his feet. I thought that he must have lost his way. I came up to him in order to steal his
clothes. I told him to take off the clothes that he had on himself. He told me:
“Go away, may God protect you!” I persisted, repeating my demand three times,
731 Q. 48:2. 732 That is, Medina. 733 That is, the miracles of the friends of God.

I was bewildered, grew pale and
refused to eat. He persisted, but I did not respond to him until he finally said:
‘I have two good tidings for you. First, I bear witness that there is no deity but
God and that Muhammad is His messenger.’ And he untied his belt. As for the
second, I prayed: ‘My God, if this servant of Yours has any worth in Your eyes,
give me such-and-such.’ And He did. We then ate, and walked forth. We736then
performed a pilgrimage. We stayed in Mecca for one year, whereupon he died
and was buried in its vicinity.”
Muhammad b. al-Mubarak al-Suri said: “As Ibrahim b. Adham and I were
on our way to Jerusalem, there came the afternoon time and we made a halt
under a pomegranate tree. After we had offered several prayers, we heard a voice
from under the tree, saying: ‘Abu Ishaq, honor us by partaking something of
us.’ Ibrahim lowered his head. The voice spoke [to] us three times, then said [to
me]: ‘Muhammad, intercede before him on my behalf, so that he would partake
something of us!’ I said: ‘Abu Ishaq, you have heard [it].’ He stood up and plucked
two pomegranates. He ate one and gave me the other. I ate it and it was sour. The
tree [itself] was short. However, when we passed it by on our way back, it was a
tall tree with sweet pomegranates. It started to bear fruit twice a year and people
734 The belt symbolized the dependent status of Jewish and Christian minorities under Muslim
rule. 735 That is, the Muslims. 736 Another reading has “he”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 374
374 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
named it ‘the Pomegranate Tree of the Worshipers’. Worshipers used to
seek shelter in its shade.” I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard
Muhammad b. al-Farhan say: I heard al-Junayd say: I heard Abu Ja∏far al-Khassaf
say: Jabir al-Rahbi told me: “The people of al-Rahba737often expressed to me their
rejection of saintly miracles. One day I rode into Rahba sitting on a lion,//446
and asked them: ‘Where are those who accuse the friends of God of lying?’ From
that time on they have left me alone.”
I heard Mansur al-Maghribi say: “A Sufi saw al-Khadir – peace be upon
him – and asked him: ‘Have you ever seen anyone who is above yourself?’ He
answered: ‘Yes, ∏Abd al-Razzaq b. Humam used to relate prophetic reports at
Medina, and [many] people gathered around him to listen. I saw [nearby] a
young man [sitting] with his head upon his knees, and exclaimed: ‘Hey you,
∏Abd al-Razzaq relates the reports of the Messenger of God – may God bless and
greet him. How come you are not listening to him?’ He said: ‘He relates from the
person who is dead,738 whereas I am never absent from God!’739 I asked him:
‘If things are like you say, who am I?’ He raised his head and said: ‘You are
my brother Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Khadir.’ I then realized that God has servants
whom I do not know.’” Ibrahim b. Adham had a companion named Yahya, who
worshiped God in a room that had neither a ladder nor a staircase. Whenever he
needed to perform an ablution, he would go to the door of his room and utter:
‘There’s no power nor strength save in God!’ He would then fly through the air,
like a bird. After he performed his ablutions, he would [again] say: ‘There’s no
power nor strength save in God’ and would return to his room.” Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi informed us: I heard ∏Umar b. Muhammad b.I was bewildered, grew pale and
refused to eat. He persisted, but I did not respond to him until he finally said:
‘I have two good tidings for you. First, I bear witness that there is no deity but
God and that Muhammad is His messenger.’ And he untied his belt. As for the
second, I prayed: ‘My God, if this servant of Yours has any worth in Your eyes,
give me such-and-such.’ And He did. We then ate, and walked forth. We736then
performed a pilgrimage. We stayed in Mecca for one year, whereupon he died
and was buried in its vicinity.”
Muhammad b. al-Mubarak al-Suri said: “As Ibrahim b. Adham and I were
on our way to Jerusalem, there came the afternoon time and we made a halt
under a pomegranate tree. After we had offered several prayers, we heard a voice
from under the tree, saying: ‘Abu Ishaq, honor us by partaking something of
us.’ Ibrahim lowered his head. The voice spoke [to] us three times, then said [to
me]: ‘Muhammad, intercede before him on my behalf, so that he would partake
something of us!’ I said: ‘Abu Ishaq, you have heard [it].’ He stood up and plucked
two pomegranates. He ate one and gave me the other. I ate it and it was sour. The
tree [itself] was short. However, when we passed it by on our way back, it was a
tall tree with sweet pomegranates. It started to bear fruit twice a year and people
734 The belt symbolized the dependent status of Jewish and Christian minorities under Muslim
rule. 735 That is, the Muslims. 736 Another reading has “he”.

∏Abdallah al-Sufi informed us: I heard ∏Umar b. Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Shirazi
at Basra say: I heard Abu Muhammad Ja∏far al-Hadhdhaπ at Shiraz say: “I studied
under Abu ∏Umar al-Istakhri. Whenever a question would occur to me, I would
set out for Istakhr.740 Sometimes he would resolve it for me without me even
asking him about it and sometimes I would ask him and he would answer. Once
I was prevented from making a journey [to Istakhr]. However, when a question
entered my mind he would respond to me from Istakhr and dealt with the matter
that had presented itself to me.”
Someone related: “A poor man741 died in a dark room. When we wanted to
wash his body, we had to look for a lamp. [Suddenly,] a light appeared through
a small window and illuminated the house. We washed him, and when we were
done the light disappeared as if it had never been there.” Adam b. Abi Iyas related:
“When we resided at ∏Asqalan,742 a young man would come to us and converse
with us. When we finished our discussion, he would stand and pray [with us]. 737 An ancient city, now in ruins, on the right bank of the river Euphrates in present-day Syria. 738 That is, the prophet Muhammad. 739 Who is eternal. 740 An ancient city in the province of Fars, Iran. 741 That is, a Sufi. 742 Heb. “Ashkelon”, a coastal city in present-day Israel–Palestine.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 375
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 375
One day he bid us farewell, saying that he wanted to go to Alexandria.743 I left
with him and offered him a few dirhams, but he refused to take them. When I
insisted, he threw a handful of sand into his leather bowl and added some sea
water to it. He then told me: ‘Eat it!’ I looked [into it] and, lo, it was a gruel with
lots of sugar in it. He then said: ‘Does someone who has such a stature//447
with God need your petty change?’ He then recited the following:
By the right of passionate love, O those who love me consider the
speech of my impassioned encounter (wujudi) with God, which this
encounter has rendered unintelligible
It is forbidden for the heart captivated by passion to find solace
in anything else!”
Someone else recited the following:
In neither the heart nor the soul [of the lover] is there any empty space
for the beloved to see
He is my aspiration, my desire and my joy
And it is through him, as long as I live, that my life is [full of] delight
When sickness happens to enter my heart
I will not be able to find any healer for it apart from him. Ibrahim al-Ajurri related: “A Jew came to me to demand a debt that I had owed
him. At that moment I was sitting next to a kiln for baking bricks (ajurr).744The
Jew told me: ‘Ibrahim, show me a miracle that would make me become a Muslim!’
I asked him: ‘Will you do it?’ He said that he would. I told him: ‘Take off your
outer garment!’ When he took it off, I wrapped it up and put my own garment
around it. After that I threw all this into the kiln and entered the kiln, drawing
the clothing out of the blaze. I went out through the other door and, lo and
behold, my garment preserved its original form, undamaged, whereas his turned
into a bunch of ashes.∏Abdallah al-Sufi informed us: I heard ∏Umar b. Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Shirazi
at Basra say: I heard Abu Muhammad Ja∏far al-Hadhdhaπ at Shiraz say: “I studied
under Abu ∏Umar al-Istakhri. Whenever a question would occur to me, I would
set out for Istakhr.740 Sometimes he would resolve it for me without me even
asking him about it and sometimes I would ask him and he would answer. Once
I was prevented from making a journey [to Istakhr]. However, when a question
entered my mind he would respond to me from Istakhr and dealt with the matter
that had presented itself to me.”
Someone related: “A poor man741 died in a dark room. When we wanted to
wash his body, we had to look for a lamp. [Suddenly,] a light appeared through
a small window and illuminated the house. We washed him, and when we were
done the light disappeared as if it had never been there.” Adam b. Abi Iyas related:
“When we resided at ∏Asqalan,742 a young man would come to us and converse
with us. When we finished our discussion, he would stand and pray [with us]. 737 An ancient city, now in ruins, on the right bank of the river Euphrates in present-day Syria. 738 That is, the prophet Muhammad. 739 Who is eternal. 740 An ancient city in the province of Fars, Iran. 741 That is, a Sufi. 742 Heb. “Ashkelon”, a coastal city in present-day Israel–Palestine.

After that I threw all this into the kiln and entered the kiln, drawing
the clothing out of the blaze. I went out through the other door and, lo and
behold, my garment preserved its original form, undamaged, whereas his turned
into a bunch of ashes. So, that Jew embraced Islam.” It is related that Habib
al-∏Ajami was seen at Basra on the Day of Provisioning [oneself] with Water
(yawm al-tarwiya)and at the Day of the [Plain of] ∏Arafat (yawm ∏arafa).745I heard
Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah
al-Farghani say: “∏Abbas b. al-Muhtadi married a certain woman. On the night
after the wedding, however, he found himself seized with remorse. When he tried
to approach [his wife], he was forcefully kept from her (zujira ∏anha) in such a way
as he could not sleep with her. So he left her, and in three days it turned out that
she already had a husband.”746The master and imam [al-Qushayri] commented:
743 A major city in Egypt. 744 Al-Ajurri’s name indicates that he earned his living making and baking bricks. 745 These are two consecutive days during the pilgrimage season, namely, the 8thand the 9thof the
month of Dhu πl-Hijja; before proceeding to the Plain of ∏Arafat from the vicinity of Mecca,
thepilgrims provided themselves with water for the journey on the next day. 746 The implication here is that her husband might have been absent (in a travel or battle) for a long
time. In such cases a judgement is issued allowing the deserted wife to remarry.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 376
376 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
“This is a true miracle, because [his] religious knowledge guarded him [from the
sin of cohabiting with a woman who had a living husband]!”
It is related that al-Fudayl b. ∏Iyad once found himself on one of the mountains
around [the valley of Mina].747He said: “If only a friend of God would order this
mountain to tremble, it would surely tremble. When the mountain moved, he
said: ‘Stand still! I don’t want you to do this!’ And the mountain was still!”//448
∏Abd al-Wahid b. Zayd748asked Abu ∏Asim al-Basri: “How did you behave when
al-Hajjaj749summoned you?” He said: “I was in my room, when they knocked on
my door750and came in. I gave myself a push and found myself on the mountain
of Abu Qubays near Mecca!” ∏Abd al-Wahid asked him: “How did you eat?” He
answered: “Every time I wanted to break my fast, an old woman would climb up
to me with two loaves of bread, which I used to eat while in Basra.” ∏Abd al-Wahid
commented: “God Most High ordered this [entire] world to serve Abu ∏Asim.”
It is related that when ∏Amir b. ∏Abd Qays751received his military stipend, he would
give of it to everyone who met him on his way. Once at home, he would throw the
money on the floor and its amount would be the same as he had received, nothing
missing. I heard Abu ∏Abdallah al-Shirazi say: I heard Abu Ahmad al-Kabir
say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah b. Khafif say: I heard Abu ∏Amr al-Zajjaji say: “When
I was about to set out on a pilgrimage, I went to al-Junayd, who gave me a real
dirham.752I tied it up in my waist-cloth. [En route] each time I entered a house I
found friends there, so I never needed that dirham. When I returned to Baghdad
and came to al-Junayd, he stretched his hand and told me: ‘Give [it to me]!’
He then asked me: ‘How was it?’ I answered: ‘The ordinance was fulfilled!’” Abu
Ja∏far al-A∏war recounted: “I was with Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri.After that I threw all this into the kiln and entered the kiln, drawing
the clothing out of the blaze. I went out through the other door and, lo and
behold, my garment preserved its original form, undamaged, whereas his turned
into a bunch of ashes. So, that Jew embraced Islam.” It is related that Habib
al-∏Ajami was seen at Basra on the Day of Provisioning [oneself] with Water
(yawm al-tarwiya)and at the Day of the [Plain of] ∏Arafat (yawm ∏arafa).745I heard
Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah
al-Farghani say: “∏Abbas b. al-Muhtadi married a certain woman. On the night
after the wedding, however, he found himself seized with remorse. When he tried
to approach [his wife], he was forcefully kept from her (zujira ∏anha) in such a way
as he could not sleep with her. So he left her, and in three days it turned out that
she already had a husband.”746The master and imam [al-Qushayri] commented:
743 A major city in Egypt. 744 Al-Ajurri’s name indicates that he earned his living making and baking bricks. 745 These are two consecutive days during the pilgrimage season, namely, the 8thand the 9thof the
month of Dhu πl-Hijja; before proceeding to the Plain of ∏Arafat from the vicinity of Mecca,
thepilgrims provided themselves with water for the journey on the next day. 746 The implication here is that her husband might have been absent (in a travel or battle) for a long
time. In such cases a judgement is issued allowing the deserted wife to remarry.

[En route] each time I entered a house I
found friends there, so I never needed that dirham. When I returned to Baghdad
and came to al-Junayd, he stretched his hand and told me: ‘Give [it to me]!’
He then asked me: ‘How was it?’ I answered: ‘The ordinance was fulfilled!’” Abu
Ja∏far al-A∏war recounted: “I was with Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri. We were trading
stories about how things obey [the orders of] the friends of God. Dhu πl-Nun
said: ‘One sign of [such] obedience is that I tell this couch to walk around and
visit [all] four corners of this house, then to return to its place.’ He did [as he had
said], and indeed the couch walked around, visiting [all] four corners of the house,
then returned to its place. Among us was a youth, who burst into tears, then died
instantaneously.”
It is related that Wasil al-Ahdab was reading [the verse]: “And in heaven
is your provision, and that [which] you are promised.”753 He exclaimed: “My
747 An area near Mecca that serves as a station on the pilgrimage route. 748 On him, see IM, pp. 16–18. 749 Al-Hajjaj b. Yusuf al-Thaqafi (d. 95/714), a talented military commander and statesman
under the early Umayyad caliphs (especially, ∏Abd al-Malik), who was notorious for his
cruelty and “ruthless efficiency”, which earned him an unfavorable reputation in later Muslim
literature and folk-lore, especially under the ∏Abbasids. Fiercely loyal to the Umayyad dynasty,
he persecuted anyone who dared to raise their voice against its rule. 750 The context of the story and Abu ∏Asim’s name indicate that he resided in Basra at that time. 751 An early ascetic (d. around 50/670), who is said to have deliberately imitated the world
denouncing attitudes of Christian monks. 752 Namely, one whose weight and composition met the state standard. 753 Q. 51:22.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 377
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 377
provision is in heaven, and I have been searching for it here on earth. By God, I
will not search for it anymore!” He settled in some ruins and spent two days
there. Nothing was given to him and he felt great distress. On the third day,
a palm-leaf basket full of dates appeared before him. He had a brother, whose
intention was even stronger [than his]. When the brother joined him, there
appeared before them two baskets. This condition of theirs persisted until death
separated them.//449 A Sufi related: “I watched over Ibrahim b. Adham in the
garden that he was guarding.754 When he was overcome with slumber, there
appeared a snake with a bunch of narcissus in its mouth and fanned over him with
it.” It is related: “As a group of people was traveling with Ayyub al-Sakhtiyani
they despaired of finding water. Ayyub asked [them]: ‘Will you keep my secret
as long as I am alive?’ They answered: ‘Yes!’ Ayyub spun around and, lo, water
gushed forth [from the ground] and we drank of it. When we arrived in Basra,
Hammad b. Zayd told this story. ∏Abd al-Wahid b. Zayd [confirmed it], saying:
‘I witnessed that with him on that day!’”
Bakr b. ∏Abd al-Rahman said: “We were with Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri in the
desert. We found shelter under a tree of the Umm Ghaylan species.755I said: ‘How
wonderful this place would be if there were dates here!’ Dhu πl-Nun smiled and
said: ‘Do you [really] want dates?’ He shook the tree and uttered: ‘I adjure you
by Him Who originated you and made you a tree, shower fresh dates upon us!’
He shook it again and fresh dates showered down. We ate them and were satiated
[with them]. After we took a nap and woke up, we shook the tree [again], but
it showered us with thorns!” Abu πl-Qasim b. Marwan al-Nihawandi related:
“[Once] Abu Bakr al-Warraq and I were walking along the sea shore towards
Saydaπ756with Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz.[En route] each time I entered a house I
found friends there, so I never needed that dirham. When I returned to Baghdad
and came to al-Junayd, he stretched his hand and told me: ‘Give [it to me]!’
He then asked me: ‘How was it?’ I answered: ‘The ordinance was fulfilled!’” Abu
Ja∏far al-A∏war recounted: “I was with Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri. We were trading
stories about how things obey [the orders of] the friends of God. Dhu πl-Nun
said: ‘One sign of [such] obedience is that I tell this couch to walk around and
visit [all] four corners of this house, then to return to its place.’ He did [as he had
said], and indeed the couch walked around, visiting [all] four corners of the house,
then returned to its place. Among us was a youth, who burst into tears, then died
instantaneously.”
It is related that Wasil al-Ahdab was reading [the verse]: “And in heaven
is your provision, and that [which] you are promised.”753 He exclaimed: “My
747 An area near Mecca that serves as a station on the pilgrimage route. 748 On him, see IM, pp. 16–18. 749 Al-Hajjaj b. Yusuf al-Thaqafi (d. 95/714), a talented military commander and statesman
under the early Umayyad caliphs (especially, ∏Abd al-Malik), who was notorious for his
cruelty and “ruthless efficiency”, which earned him an unfavorable reputation in later Muslim
literature and folk-lore, especially under the ∏Abbasids. Fiercely loyal to the Umayyad dynasty,
he persecuted anyone who dared to raise their voice against its rule. 750 The context of the story and Abu ∏Asim’s name indicate that he resided in Basra at that time. 751 An early ascetic (d. around 50/670), who is said to have deliberately imitated the world
denouncing attitudes of Christian monks. 752 Namely, one whose weight and composition met the state standard. 753 Q. 51:22.

After we took a nap and woke up, we shook the tree [again], but
it showered us with thorns!” Abu πl-Qasim b. Marwan al-Nihawandi related:
“[Once] Abu Bakr al-Warraq and I were walking along the sea shore towards
Saydaπ756with Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz. He saw somebody [walking] in the distance
and said: ‘Sit down! This person must be a friend of God!’ Soon a young man
with a handsome face came by. He was carrying a [begging] leather-bowl and
an inkpot and wearing a patched frock. Abu Sa∏id turned to him in order to
reprimand his carrying [both] the inkpot and the beggar’s bowl757 and said: ‘O
young man, what are the paths to God Most High?’ He answered: ‘Abu Sa∏id, I
know two paths to God: the common and the elect. You are on the common path. As for the elect path, let me show it to you.’ He then walked over the water until
he vanished from our sight.” Abu Sa∏id left perplexed. Al-Junayd narrated: “I
went to the al-Shuniziya758mosque and saw there a group of Sufis discussing the
signs of God. One of them said: ‘I knew a man who could order this column to
become half gold and half silver, and it would be [as he said].’” Al-Junayd said: “I
looked [at it] and it indeed was half gold and half silver!” It is related that when
754 According to a legend, he earned his livelihood as a night watchman guarding gardens and
fields. 755 A species of the acacia tree common to the arid desert. 756 Ancient “Sidon”; a coastal city in present-day Lebanon. 757 Because one was an attribute of a scholar, the other one of a mendicant dervish. 758 A mosque and cemetery in the western part of Baghdad.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 378
378 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Sufyan al-Thawri went on a pilgrimage with Shayban al-Ra∏i, they encountered
a lion. Sufyan cried: ‘Do you see this lion?’ ‘Don’t be afraid,’ Shayban told him. He then took the lion by the ear and rubbed it, after which the lion wagged its
tail. Sufyan asked him: ‘Isn’t it but vainglory?’ Shayban retorted, saying: ‘If it
were not for the fear of vainglory, I would have put my possessions on its back,
so that it would carry it all the way to Mecca!’”//450
It is related that after al-Sari [al-Saqati] had abandoned his business, his
sister supported him from the proceeds she earned by selling the yarn she
spun. One day she came late to his house. He asked her why she was late. She
answered: “Because my yarn does not sell. People say it is of poor quality.” [That
night] al-Sari refrained from eating her food. When his sister came back to
him after a while, she saw an old woman cleaning his house. She [also] brought
him two loaves of bread every day. The sister was saddened and complained
to Ahmad b. Hanbal,759 who, in turn, mentioned this to al-Sari. The latter said:
“When I refrained from eating her food, God assigned this world to support and
serve me.” Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi informed us: ∏Ali b. Harun told us:
∏Ali b. Abi Muhammad al-Tamimi told us: Ja∏far b. al-Qasim al-Khawwas told
us: Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Tusi told us: Muhammad b. Mansur al-Tusi told
us: “I was with Abu Mahfuz Ma∏ruf al-Karkhi and he prayed for me. When I
returned to him the next day, I noticed a scar on his face. Somebody asked him:
‘Abu Mahfuz, we were with you the other day, and there was no scar on your face
then! What, then, is this?’ ‘Ask about what concerns you!’ retorted al-Karkhi. The man [persisted], saying: ‘By the One Whom you worship, tell [me what
happened]!’ Al-Karkhi related: ‘Last night, after I had prayed here, I wanted to
circumambulate the Ka∏ba.After we took a nap and woke up, we shook the tree [again], but
it showered us with thorns!” Abu πl-Qasim b. Marwan al-Nihawandi related:
“[Once] Abu Bakr al-Warraq and I were walking along the sea shore towards
Saydaπ756with Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz. He saw somebody [walking] in the distance
and said: ‘Sit down! This person must be a friend of God!’ Soon a young man
with a handsome face came by. He was carrying a [begging] leather-bowl and
an inkpot and wearing a patched frock. Abu Sa∏id turned to him in order to
reprimand his carrying [both] the inkpot and the beggar’s bowl757 and said: ‘O
young man, what are the paths to God Most High?’ He answered: ‘Abu Sa∏id, I
know two paths to God: the common and the elect. You are on the common path. As for the elect path, let me show it to you.’ He then walked over the water until
he vanished from our sight.” Abu Sa∏id left perplexed. Al-Junayd narrated: “I
went to the al-Shuniziya758mosque and saw there a group of Sufis discussing the
signs of God. One of them said: ‘I knew a man who could order this column to
become half gold and half silver, and it would be [as he said].’” Al-Junayd said: “I
looked [at it] and it indeed was half gold and half silver!” It is related that when
754 According to a legend, he earned his livelihood as a night watchman guarding gardens and
fields. 755 A species of the acacia tree common to the arid desert. 756 Ancient “Sidon”; a coastal city in present-day Lebanon. 757 Because one was an attribute of a scholar, the other one of a mendicant dervish. 758 A mosque and cemetery in the western part of Baghdad.

What, then, is this?’ ‘Ask about what concerns you!’ retorted al-Karkhi. The man [persisted], saying: ‘By the One Whom you worship, tell [me what
happened]!’ Al-Karkhi related: ‘Last night, after I had prayed here, I wanted to
circumambulate the Ka∏ba. I went to Mecca, performed my circumambulations,
and went over to Zamzam760 in order to drink of its water. I slipped at the door
and hurt my face, as you can see.’”
It is related that ∏Utba al-Ghulam used to sit, saying: “O turtledove! If
you are more obedient to God – may He be great and exalted – than I, then
come and perch on my hand!” And the turtledove did indeed come [to him] and
perched on his hand. Abu ∏Ali al-Razi related: “One day as I was walking along
the Euphrates, I felt a craving for fresh fish. All of a sudden, the water pushed
out a fish toward me and a man came running and asked: ‘Shall I grill it for you?’
I said ‘Yes’, then sat down and ate it.” It is related that Ibrahim b. Adham was
traveling with a company [of people], when a lion confronted them. They cried:
“Abu Ishaq, a lion has confronted us!” Ibrahim came and said [to the lion]: “Lion,
if you have been commanded to do something to us, then go ahead. If not, leave!”
The lion left and the people continued on their way. Hamid al-Aswad related: “I
759 Ibn Hanbal, the founder of the Hanbali legal and theological school, was generally well disposed
toward his Sufi contemporaries, although he reserved the right to criticize what he considered to
be their “excesses”. For details, see Michael Cooperson, “Ahmad Ibn Hanbal and Bishr al-Hafi:
A case study in biographical traditions”, Studia Islamica86/2 (1997), pp. 71–101. 760 The sacred well located in the Meccan sanctuary.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 379
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 379
was in the desert with [Ibrahim] al-Khawwas. When we set up a camp for the
night under a tree, a lion approached us. I climbed up the tree and stayed there
until morning, sleepless, whereas Ibrahim al-Khawwas [continued to] sleep. The
lion sniffed him from head to foot, then walked away.//451 We spent the second
night in a mosque of a village. [While there] a gnat descended on Ibrahim’s face
and bit him. He groaned. I said: ‘This is strange. The other night you were not
afraid of a lion, while tonight you scream from [the bite of] a gnat!’ He said: ‘Last
night, my spiritual state was one with God – may He be great and exalted – while
tonight it is one in which I am on my own.’” It is related that ∏Ataπ al-Azraq’s
wife gave him two dirhams that she had earned spinning yarn, so that he would
buy some flour for them. After he left the house, he encountered a slave girl
crying. He asked her what had happened to her. She answered: “My owner had
given me two dirhams so that I would buy something [for him], but I lost them
and am now afraid that he will beat me.” ∏Ataπ gave her [his] two dirhams and
went away. He sat at the shop of a friend of his, [who earned his living] cutting
teakwood and mentioned to him what had happened to him and [said] that
he was afraid of his wife’s bad temper. His friend told him: “Take some of the
sawdust from the sack over there; maybe it will help you to heat your house, for
at the moment I am unable to assist you in any other way.” So he took the sack
[to his house], opened the door and threw in the bag. He then shut the door [and
went] to the mosque, where he stayed until the dark in order for his family to be
overcome with sleep and for his wife not [to be able] to vent her anger at him. When he opened the door, he found them761baking bread. He asked them where
the bread had come from. They said: “From the flour that was in the sack.What, then, is this?’ ‘Ask about what concerns you!’ retorted al-Karkhi. The man [persisted], saying: ‘By the One Whom you worship, tell [me what
happened]!’ Al-Karkhi related: ‘Last night, after I had prayed here, I wanted to
circumambulate the Ka∏ba. I went to Mecca, performed my circumambulations,
and went over to Zamzam760 in order to drink of its water. I slipped at the door
and hurt my face, as you can see.’”
It is related that ∏Utba al-Ghulam used to sit, saying: “O turtledove! If
you are more obedient to God – may He be great and exalted – than I, then
come and perch on my hand!” And the turtledove did indeed come [to him] and
perched on his hand. Abu ∏Ali al-Razi related: “One day as I was walking along
the Euphrates, I felt a craving for fresh fish. All of a sudden, the water pushed
out a fish toward me and a man came running and asked: ‘Shall I grill it for you?’
I said ‘Yes’, then sat down and ate it.” It is related that Ibrahim b. Adham was
traveling with a company [of people], when a lion confronted them. They cried:
“Abu Ishaq, a lion has confronted us!” Ibrahim came and said [to the lion]: “Lion,
if you have been commanded to do something to us, then go ahead. If not, leave!”
The lion left and the people continued on their way. Hamid al-Aswad related: “I
759 Ibn Hanbal, the founder of the Hanbali legal and theological school, was generally well disposed
toward his Sufi contemporaries, although he reserved the right to criticize what he considered to
be their “excesses”. For details, see Michael Cooperson, “Ahmad Ibn Hanbal and Bishr al-Hafi:
A case study in biographical traditions”, Studia Islamica86/2 (1997), pp. 71–101. 760 The sacred well located in the Meccan sanctuary.

He asked them where
the bread had come from. They said: “From the flour that was in the sack. Don’t
ever buy any other flour!” He exclaimed: “I will do that, God willing!”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard Ja∏far b. Barakat say: “I used to sit in a session with some
Sufis. [Once] I received one dinar and wanted to give it to them. However, it
occurred to me that I might need it myself. [Suddenly] I felt a toothache and
had to have one of my teeth pulled. Then I felt that my other tooth was aching
and I had to have it pulled too. I heard a voice saying: ‘If you do not give
them that dinar, not a single tooth will be left in your mouth!’” The master
[al-Qushayri] said: “As far as miracles are concerned, this one is more perfect
than if he had received many dinarscontrary to the customary order [of things].”
Abu Sulayman al-Darani related: “∏Amir b. [∏Abd] Qays set out for Damascus,
carrying a water-skin. When he wished, water poured from it so he could
make his ablution;//452 when he wished, milk poured from it, so he could
drink it.”
∏Uthman b. ∏Abi πl-∏Atika related: “We were on a raid into Byzantine lands. [Our] commander dispatched a detachment to a certain location and set a certain
day for it [to return to its headquarters]. The day came, but the detachment did
761 That is, his family.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 380
380 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
not arrive. In the mean time Abu Muslim762 was performing his prayer with his
lance thrust into the earth in front of him.763[Suddenly] a bird perched on the head
of his lance, saying: ‘The detachment is safe and sound. It will return to you on
such-and-such day, at such-and-such time.’ Abu Muslim asked it: ‘Who are you,
may God Most High have mercy on you?’ It answered: ‘I am one who expels
sorrow from the hearts of the faithful!’ Abu Muslim went to the commander
and informed him about this. When the day mentioned by the bird arrived, the
detachment came back, as it had foretold.” A Sufi related: “When we were on
board a ship, a sick man who was with us died. We performed burial rites over
him and wanted to throw him into the sea. [Suddenly] the sea dried up and the
ship ran aground. We went out, dug a grave for him and buried him [there]. When
we had finished, the water rose, the ship was lifted, and we continued on our
way.” It is related that when the people of Basra were starving, Habib al-∏Ajami
bought some food on credit and distributed it among the needy. He then took his
purse and put it under his head. When the creditors came demanding money
[from him], he took the purse and it turned out to be full of dirhams. With these
he settled the debts that he owed to them. It is related that Ibrahim b. Adham
wanted to board a ship, but [the crew] refused to allow him [to board] unless he
paid them one dinar. He performed two cycles of prayer on the shore saying,
“My God, they have asked me for something I do not have”, and the sand before
him turned into dinars. Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi told us: ∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. al-Fadl told us:
Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Marwazi told us: ∏Abdallah b. Sulayman told us: Abu
Hamza Nasr b. al-Faraj, the servant of Abu Mu∏awiya al-Aswad lost his eyesight.He asked them where
the bread had come from. They said: “From the flour that was in the sack. Don’t
ever buy any other flour!” He exclaimed: “I will do that, God willing!”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Mansur b. ∏Abdallah say: I heard Ja∏far b. Barakat say: “I used to sit in a session with some
Sufis. [Once] I received one dinar and wanted to give it to them. However, it
occurred to me that I might need it myself. [Suddenly] I felt a toothache and
had to have one of my teeth pulled. Then I felt that my other tooth was aching
and I had to have it pulled too. I heard a voice saying: ‘If you do not give
them that dinar, not a single tooth will be left in your mouth!’” The master
[al-Qushayri] said: “As far as miracles are concerned, this one is more perfect
than if he had received many dinarscontrary to the customary order [of things].”
Abu Sulayman al-Darani related: “∏Amir b. [∏Abd] Qays set out for Damascus,
carrying a water-skin. When he wished, water poured from it so he could
make his ablution;//452 when he wished, milk poured from it, so he could
drink it.”
∏Uthman b. ∏Abi πl-∏Atika related: “We were on a raid into Byzantine lands. [Our] commander dispatched a detachment to a certain location and set a certain
day for it [to return to its headquarters]. The day came, but the detachment did
761 That is, his family.

Sulayman told us: Abu
Hamza Nasr b. al-Faraj, the servant of Abu Mu∏awiya al-Aswad lost his eyesight. However, each time he wanted to recite the Qurπan, he would unroll the scroll
and God would return his eyesight to him. As soon as he rolled the scroll up,
his eyesight would leave him. Ahmad b. al-Haytham al-Mutatayyib764said: Bishr
al-Hafi said: “Tell Ma∏ruf al-Karkhi://453 ‘I will come to you after I have
prayed.’ I delivered the message and waited for him. We prayed the midday
prayer. However, he did not come. We then prayed the afternoon and sunset
prayers [but he did not come]. I said to myself: ‘Praise be to God, a person like
Bishr should say something and not do it! It is impossible that he won’t do it.’
So I waited on the roof of the mosque near the water-trough. Late at night Bishr
finally came with his prayer rug on his head. He approached the Tigris and
walked over the water. I jumped off the roof and kissed his hands and feet, saying:
‘Pray to God for me!’ He prayed for me, then said: ‘Keep my secret!’ I did not
speak about this until he died.” I heard ∏Abdallah al-Shirazi say: Abu πl-Faraj
al-Warathani told us: I heard ∏Ali b. Ya∏qub say at Damascus: I heard Abu Bakr
Muhammad b. Ahmad say: I heard Qasim al-Ju∏i say: “I saw a man circumambulate
762 Abu Muslim al-Khawlani (d. 62/682), a Yemeni warrior of the second generation of Muslims,
who was renowned for his asceticism and piety. 763 Indicating the direction of Mecca toward which the canonical prayers must be performed. 764 Or “al-Mutatabbib”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 381
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 381
the Ka∏ba, who repeated one and the same prayer: ‘My God, You have fulfilled
everyone’s need, but You have not fulfilled my need!’ I asked him: ‘What is it
with you? You say one and the same prayer!’ He answered: ‘I will tell you. Know
that I was one of seven men from different lands, who joined the holy war [against
the Byzantines]. The Byzantines captured us and took us with them in order to
execute us. [Suddenly] I saw how seven doors were opened in the sky. At each
of them stood a beautiful maiden of Paradise. One of us stepped forward and his
head was cut off. I saw a maiden of Paradise descend to the earth with a kerchief
in her hand and receive his spirit. Thus the heads of six men were cut off. Then
one of the Byzantines asked that I be given to him [as a slave]. [The last] maiden
exclaimed: “O you, the deprived one (mahrum), what a thing you have missed!”
The doors [in the sky] were closed and I, my friend, am now having regrets and
grieving for what I have missed!’” Qasim al-Ju∏i added: “I consider him to be
the best of them all, because he saw something they did not see and directed his
passion [toward God] after they had died.” I also heard him [al-Shirazi] say:
I heard Abu πl-Najm Ahmad b. al-Husayn in Khuzistan say: I heard Abu Bakr
al-Kattani say: “As I was traveling to Mecca in the middle of the year, I came
upon a large purse lined with sparkling dinars. I decided to take it with me in
order to distribute it among Mecca’s poor, but a voice told me: ‘If you take it,
We shall deprive you of your [state of] poverty!’”
Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi informed us: Ahmad b. Yusuf al-Khayyat
told us: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say: I heard al-∏Abbas al-Sharqi say: “We
were on the road to Mecca together with Abu Turab al-Nakhshabi.Sulayman told us: Abu
Hamza Nasr b. al-Faraj, the servant of Abu Mu∏awiya al-Aswad lost his eyesight. However, each time he wanted to recite the Qurπan, he would unroll the scroll
and God would return his eyesight to him. As soon as he rolled the scroll up,
his eyesight would leave him. Ahmad b. al-Haytham al-Mutatayyib764said: Bishr
al-Hafi said: “Tell Ma∏ruf al-Karkhi://453 ‘I will come to you after I have
prayed.’ I delivered the message and waited for him. We prayed the midday
prayer. However, he did not come. We then prayed the afternoon and sunset
prayers [but he did not come]. I said to myself: ‘Praise be to God, a person like
Bishr should say something and not do it! It is impossible that he won’t do it.’
So I waited on the roof of the mosque near the water-trough. Late at night Bishr
finally came with his prayer rug on his head. He approached the Tigris and
walked over the water. I jumped off the roof and kissed his hands and feet, saying:
‘Pray to God for me!’ He prayed for me, then said: ‘Keep my secret!’ I did not
speak about this until he died.” I heard ∏Abdallah al-Shirazi say: Abu πl-Faraj
al-Warathani told us: I heard ∏Ali b. Ya∏qub say at Damascus: I heard Abu Bakr
Muhammad b. Ahmad say: I heard Qasim al-Ju∏i say: “I saw a man circumambulate
762 Abu Muslim al-Khawlani (d. 62/682), a Yemeni warrior of the second generation of Muslims,
who was renowned for his asceticism and piety. 763 Indicating the direction of Mecca toward which the canonical prayers must be performed. 764 Or “al-Mutatabbib”.

∏Abdallah al-Sufi informed us: Ahmad b. Yusuf al-Khayyat
told us: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say: I heard al-∏Abbas al-Sharqi say: “We
were on the road to Mecca together with Abu Turab al-Nakhshabi. He veered
off to the side of the road and//454 a young companion of his told him: ‘I am
thirsty.’ Abu Turab stomped the ground with his foot and there appeared a
spring with cold, sweet water. The youth said: ‘I would like to drink it with a
cup.’ Abu Turab struck his hand upon the ground and gave the youth a cup of
white glass that was the nicest I had ever seen. The youth drank and gave it to
us to drink, and the cup remained with us until we reached Mecca. One day Abu
Turab asked me: ‘What do your companions say about these matters which God
generously grants to [some of] His servants?’ I said: ‘I have not seen anyone who
would not believe in them.’ He said: ‘Whoever does not believe in them is an
unbeliever. I inquired of you in the sense of [their] inner states.’ I said: ‘I am not
aware of them speaking about this.’ He commented: ‘Your companions hold that
they765 are a deception on the part of God. However, this is not the case. They
become a deception only when one relies on them. As for those who do not seek
them and who do not rely upon them, [they have attained] the degree of the men
of God (rabbaniyun).’” Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi told us: Abu πl-Faraj
al-Warathani told us: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Ali b. al-Husayn al-Muqri at
Tarsus766say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah b. al-Jallaπ say: “We were in Sari al-Saqati’s
room in Baghdad. After some part of the night had passed, he put on a clean
765 That is, saintly miracles. 766 An ancient city in Cilicia, in present-day Turkey.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 382
382 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
shirt, trousers, a cloak and sandals, then prepared to leave. I asked where he was
going at such a [late] time. He answered: ‘I will visit Fath al-Mawsili.’ As he
was walking through the streets of Baghdad, a night patrol seized him and jailed
him. The next day, an order was issued that he should be flogged along with the
other prisoners. When the executioner raised his hand to strike him, it stopped
[in mid-air] and he was unable to move it. They told the executioner: ‘Beat!’ He
answered: ‘In front of me stands a [Sufi] master, who [keeps] telling [me], “Do
not beat him!”, and I cannot move my hand.’ They investigated who that man
was, and it turned out to be Fath al-Mawsili. So they did not beat him.”767
Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami informed us: Abu πl-Harith
al-Khattabi told us: Muhammad b. al-Fadl told us: ∏Ali b. Muslim told us: Sa∏id
b. Yahya al-Basri told us: “Some people of the Quraysh [tribe] used to attend
the sessions of ∏Abd al-Wahid b. Zayd. One day they came to him and said: ‘We
fear shortage and need.’ He raised his face to the heavens and said: ‘My God, I
implore You with Your lofty name, with which You show [Your] generosity to
whomever You will of Your friends and with which You instruct the pure ones
among Your beloved [servants], that You bestow upon us our daily sustenance
thereby cutting [out] Satan’s bonds from our hearts and the hearts of these com-
panions of ours. For You are the [All-]Compassionate Giver, Whose beneficence
has no beginning and no end. Now, right now, my God!’ Then I heard, by God,
the clattering of the roof and dinars and dirhams showered upon us.//455 ∏Abd
al-Wahid b. Zayd said: ‘May God suffice you – may He be great and exalted
– to the exclusion of everything else!’ The people [of Quraysh] collected this
[money]. Only ∏Abd al-Wahid b.∏Abdallah al-Sufi informed us: Ahmad b. Yusuf al-Khayyat
told us: I heard Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhbari say: I heard al-∏Abbas al-Sharqi say: “We
were on the road to Mecca together with Abu Turab al-Nakhshabi. He veered
off to the side of the road and//454 a young companion of his told him: ‘I am
thirsty.’ Abu Turab stomped the ground with his foot and there appeared a
spring with cold, sweet water. The youth said: ‘I would like to drink it with a
cup.’ Abu Turab struck his hand upon the ground and gave the youth a cup of
white glass that was the nicest I had ever seen. The youth drank and gave it to
us to drink, and the cup remained with us until we reached Mecca. One day Abu
Turab asked me: ‘What do your companions say about these matters which God
generously grants to [some of] His servants?’ I said: ‘I have not seen anyone who
would not believe in them.’ He said: ‘Whoever does not believe in them is an
unbeliever. I inquired of you in the sense of [their] inner states.’ I said: ‘I am not
aware of them speaking about this.’ He commented: ‘Your companions hold that
they765 are a deception on the part of God. However, this is not the case. They
become a deception only when one relies on them. As for those who do not seek
them and who do not rely upon them, [they have attained] the degree of the men
of God (rabbaniyun).’” Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi told us: Abu πl-Faraj
al-Warathani told us: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Ali b. al-Husayn al-Muqri at
Tarsus766say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah b. al-Jallaπ say: “We were in Sari al-Saqati’s
room in Baghdad. After some part of the night had passed, he put on a clean
765 That is, saintly miracles. 766 An ancient city in Cilicia, in present-day Turkey.

Zayd said: ‘May God suffice you – may He be great and exalted
– to the exclusion of everything else!’ The people [of Quraysh] collected this
[money]. Only ∏Abd al-Wahid b. Zayd took nothing [for himself].” I heard Abu
∏Abdallah al-Shirazi say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Juzi768 at
Jundishapur769 say: I heard al-Kattani say: “[In Mecca] I met a Sufi, a stranger,
whom I had not known before. He came up to the Ka∏ba and said: ‘O Lord, I do
not know what those – he meant the people circumambulating the Ka∏ba – are
reciting!’ Someone told him: ‘Look at this sheet of paper!’ [Suddenly] the sheet
flew into the air and disappeared.” I also heard him [al-Shirazi] say: I heard ∏Abd
al-Wahid b. Bakr al-Warathani say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Ali b. al-Husayn
al-Muqri at Tarsus say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah b. al-Jallaπ say: “One day, my
mother had a craving for fish and asked my father to bring her one. My father
went to the market and I followed him. He bought a fish and stood looking for
someone to carry it for him. He saw a boy with another boy stop in front of him. The boy asked: ‘Uncle, you want someone to carry it for you?’ My father said:
‘Yes.’ The boy took the fish and walked along with us. We heard the call to the
prayer. The boy said: ‘The caller is calling to prayer. I need to make my ablution
and pray, if you allow me. If not, you will [have to] carry the fish yourselves.’ He
put down the fish and left. My father said: ‘We’d better put our trust in God
767 That is, Sari al-Saqati. 768 Or “al-Jawzi”. 769 Or “Gondeshapur”; an ancient city in Khuzistan, Iran.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 383
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 383
regarding this fish.’ So we entered the mosque and prayed; when we came out
we found the fish exactly as we left it. The boy picked up the fish and we went
to our house. My father mentioned this [episode] to my mother, who said: ‘Tell
him to stay with us, so that we could eat all together.’ We invited him, but he said
that he was fasting. We told him: ‘Then come back to us tonight!’ He responded:
‘I work as a porter only once a day, and I will not do it twice. However, I will now
retire to the mosque and remain there until the sunset prayer. Then I will come
by your place.’ He then walked away. In the evening, the boy came to us and we
ate together. When we were done, we showed him the place to make ablutions. We noticed that he preferred solitude and left him alone in the house. Now, one
of our relatives had a paralytic daughter. She came to us walking later that night,
and we asked her about [the change in] her condition.770She said that she prayed:
‘Lord, for the sake of our guest, cure me! And, lo, I was able to stand up.’ We went
looking for the boy. The doors were locked as before, but we could not find the
boy. My father commented: ‘Among them771are [both] big and small!’”//456 I
heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: Abu πl-Harith al-Khattabi said: Muhammad
b. al-Fadl told us: ∏Ali b. Muslim told us: Sa∏id b. Yahya al-Basri told us: “I went
to visit ∏Abd al-Wahid b. Zayd. He was sitting in the shade. I asked him: ‘If you
ask God to bestow your sustenance upon you, you hope that He will do this?’ He
answered: ‘My Lord knows better about the well-being of His servants.’ He took
a handful of pebbles from the ground, then said: ‘My God, if You want to make
them gold, then do so!’ And, by God, they became gold in his hand. He threw
them at me, saying: ‘Spend it [as charity]! There’s nothing good in this world,
except that [it prepares you] for the next one.’”
I heard Muhammad b.Zayd said: ‘May God suffice you – may He be great and exalted
– to the exclusion of everything else!’ The people [of Quraysh] collected this
[money]. Only ∏Abd al-Wahid b. Zayd took nothing [for himself].” I heard Abu
∏Abdallah al-Shirazi say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Juzi768 at
Jundishapur769 say: I heard al-Kattani say: “[In Mecca] I met a Sufi, a stranger,
whom I had not known before. He came up to the Ka∏ba and said: ‘O Lord, I do
not know what those – he meant the people circumambulating the Ka∏ba – are
reciting!’ Someone told him: ‘Look at this sheet of paper!’ [Suddenly] the sheet
flew into the air and disappeared.” I also heard him [al-Shirazi] say: I heard ∏Abd
al-Wahid b. Bakr al-Warathani say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Ali b. al-Husayn
al-Muqri at Tarsus say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah b. al-Jallaπ say: “One day, my
mother had a craving for fish and asked my father to bring her one. My father
went to the market and I followed him. He bought a fish and stood looking for
someone to carry it for him. He saw a boy with another boy stop in front of him. The boy asked: ‘Uncle, you want someone to carry it for you?’ My father said:
‘Yes.’ The boy took the fish and walked along with us. We heard the call to the
prayer. The boy said: ‘The caller is calling to prayer. I need to make my ablution
and pray, if you allow me. If not, you will [have to] carry the fish yourselves.’ He
put down the fish and left. My father said: ‘We’d better put our trust in God
767 That is, Sari al-Saqati. 768 Or “al-Jawzi”. 769 Or “Gondeshapur”; an ancient city in Khuzistan, Iran.

He threw
them at me, saying: ‘Spend it [as charity]! There’s nothing good in this world,
except that [it prepares you] for the next one.’”
I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard al-Husayn b. Ahmad
al-Farisi say: I heard al-Duqqi772 say: I heard Ahmad b. Mansur say that the
master Abu Ya∏qub al-Susi related: “As I was washing [the body of] a Sufi
disciple [lying] on the washing bier, he grabbed me by the thumb. I told him:
‘My son, let go of my hand. I know that you are not dead. This is nothing but a
transition from one abode to another.’ And he let go of my hand.” I also heard
him [Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah] say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Tarsusi say: I heard
Ibrahim b. Shayban say: “A young man of proper [spiritual] aspiration (irada)
attached himself to me. He died. My heart was very distraught on his account. When I started to wash his body, I wanted to wash his hands. Because of my
grief, I began washing his left hand first. He pulled it away from me and gave me
his right hand. I said: ‘You are right, my son, and I am wrong.’” I also heard him
say: I heard Abu πl-Najm al-Muqri al-Bardha∏i at Shiraz say: I heard al-Duqqi773
say: I heard Ahmad b. Mansur say: I heard Abu Ya∏qub al-Susi say: “In Mecca a
Sufi novice came to me and said: ‘Master, I will die tomorrow at noon. Take this
770 That is, she was now able to walk on her own. 771 That is, the friends of God. 772 Or “al-Raqqi”. 773 Or “al-Raqqi”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 384
384 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
dinar and spend half of it on digging a grave for me and the other half on my
shroud.’ The next day he came and performed a circumambulation of the Ka∏ba. He then stepped back from it and died. I wrapped him in a shroud and put him in
the grave. [Suddenly] he opened his eyes. I asked him: ‘Is there life after death?’
He answered: ‘I am alive, for every lover of God is alive.’” I heard Shaykh Abu
∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn al-Baghdadi
say: I heard Abu ∏Ali b. Wasif al-Muπaddib say: “One day, Sahl b. ∏Abdallah
[al-Tustari] was discoursing regarding the remembrance of God. He said: ‘If one
who remembers God in truth had the intention to revive the dead, he would
do so.’ He then rubbed a sick man with his hand, and the man was cured and
stood up.”
I heard Abu ∏Abdallah al-Shirazi say: ∏Ali b. Ibrahim b. Ahmad informed me:
∏Uthman b. Ahmad told us: al-Hasan b. ∏Amr told us: I heard Bishr b. al-Harith
say://457 “When ∏Amr b. ∏Utba prayed, a cloud used to hover over his head and
the lions would assemble around him wagging their tails.” I heard him [al-Shirazi]
say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah b. Muflih say: I heard al-Maghazili say: I heard
al-Junayd say: “I had four dirhamsand I went to see al-Sari. I said: ‘Here are four
dirhams that I brought you.’ Al-Sari exclaimed: ‘I give you good news that you
will prosper, [my] boy! I was in need of four dirhams and I prayed: “My God,
send them to me by means of someone who will prosper with You!”’” I also
heard him [al-Shirazi] say: Ibrahim b. Ahmad al-Tabari told me: Ahmad b. Yusuf
told us: Ahmad b. Ibrahim b. Yahya told us: my father told me: Abu Ibrahim
al-Yamani told me: “We set out on a journey together with Ibrahim b. Adham
and were walking along the seashore. We came across a thicket in which there
was plenty of dry firewood. Nearby there was a fort. He said to Ibrahim b.He threw
them at me, saying: ‘Spend it [as charity]! There’s nothing good in this world,
except that [it prepares you] for the next one.’”
I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard al-Husayn b. Ahmad
al-Farisi say: I heard al-Duqqi772 say: I heard Ahmad b. Mansur say that the
master Abu Ya∏qub al-Susi related: “As I was washing [the body of] a Sufi
disciple [lying] on the washing bier, he grabbed me by the thumb. I told him:
‘My son, let go of my hand. I know that you are not dead. This is nothing but a
transition from one abode to another.’ And he let go of my hand.” I also heard
him [Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah] say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Tarsusi say: I heard
Ibrahim b. Shayban say: “A young man of proper [spiritual] aspiration (irada)
attached himself to me. He died. My heart was very distraught on his account. When I started to wash his body, I wanted to wash his hands. Because of my
grief, I began washing his left hand first. He pulled it away from me and gave me
his right hand. I said: ‘You are right, my son, and I am wrong.’” I also heard him
say: I heard Abu πl-Najm al-Muqri al-Bardha∏i at Shiraz say: I heard al-Duqqi773
say: I heard Ahmad b. Mansur say: I heard Abu Ya∏qub al-Susi say: “In Mecca a
Sufi novice came to me and said: ‘Master, I will die tomorrow at noon. Take this
770 That is, she was now able to walk on her own. 771 That is, the friends of God. 772 Or “al-Raqqi”. 773 Or “al-Raqqi”.

Nearby there was a fort. He said to Ibrahim b. Adham: ‘What if we spend the night here and light a fire with this wood?’ He
agreed. We asked [the garrison of the fort] for fire and set up a campfire [with
the dry firewood]. We had with us some bread that we took out in order to eat. One of us said: ‘How wonderful are these coals. If only we had some meat to broil
upon them!’ Ibrahim b. Adham said: ‘God Most High has the power to feed
you!’ Immediately, a lion appeared, chasing an ibex. When the ibex approached
us, it fell and broke its neck. Ibrahim b. Adham stood up and cried: ‘Slaughter
it! God has fed you!’ So we slaughtered it and broiled its meat, as the lion stood
there watching.” I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu πl-Qasim
∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali al-Shajari say: I heard Hamid al-Aswad say: “I was with
Ibrahim al-Khawwas in the desert for seven days, with [our] condition remaining
unchanged [all this time]. On the seventh day, however, I grew weak and sat
down. He turned to me and asked: ‘What has happened to you?’ I said that I
had grown weak. He asked me: ‘What do you need most: food or water?’ I said:
‘Water.’ He then said: ‘Water is behind you.’ I turned and indeed there was
a spring with water that was like fresh milk. I drank and made my ablutions. Ibrahim watched but did not come near. When I was ready to go, I decided to
take some of it with me. However, he said: ‘Don’t do this. This is not something
you keep as provisions.’” I heard Abu ∏Abdallah [al-Shirazi] say: I heard Abu543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 385
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 385
∏Abdallah al-Dabbas al-Baghdadi say: I heard Fatima, the sister of Abu ∏Ali al-
Rudhbari say: I heard Zaytuna, the maid-servant of Abu πl-Husayn al-Nuri,//458
who also served Abu Hamza [al-Baghdadi] and al-Junayd, relate: “It was a cold
day. I asked al-Nuri whether I should bring him anything. He said: ‘Yes.’ I asked
him what he wanted. He said [that he wanted] bread and milk, so I brought them
to him. In front of him there were some extinct coals, which he kept stirring with
his hand to keep it busy [with something]. When he started eating the bread, the
milk began to stream down his arm [mixed] with the black [dust] of the coal. I
said to myself: ‘O Lord, how filthy Your friends are! There’s no one among them
who is clean!’ When I left him and went outside, a woman grabbed me [in the
street] and shouted: ‘You stole a bundle of clothing from me!’ They dragged me
to the police officer. When al-Nuri was informed about this, he went to the police
officer and told him: ‘Don’t detain her, for she is a friend of God Most High!’
The officer said: ‘But what can I do? That woman has brought charges [against
her].’ Then came a maid carrying the bundle of clothing that [the woman]
was looking for. When al-Nuri brought the woman774 home, he told her: ‘And
you [still] say: “How filthy Your friends are!”’ The maid said: ‘I have already
repented before God Most High!’”
I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Shirazi say: I heard Muhammad b. Faris al-Farisi say: I heard Abu πl-Hasan Khayr al-Nassaj say: I heard [Ibrahim]
al-Khawwas say: “On one of my journeys, I experienced such a [strong] thirst
that I collapsed because of it. Suddenly, I felt water being splashed over my face. I opened my eyes and saw before me a handsome man, riding a brownish-gray
horse. He gave me water to drink and told me: ‘Be my co-rider!’ After a short
while, I found myself in the Hijaz.Nearby there was a fort. He said to Ibrahim b. Adham: ‘What if we spend the night here and light a fire with this wood?’ He
agreed. We asked [the garrison of the fort] for fire and set up a campfire [with
the dry firewood]. We had with us some bread that we took out in order to eat. One of us said: ‘How wonderful are these coals. If only we had some meat to broil
upon them!’ Ibrahim b. Adham said: ‘God Most High has the power to feed
you!’ Immediately, a lion appeared, chasing an ibex. When the ibex approached
us, it fell and broke its neck. Ibrahim b. Adham stood up and cried: ‘Slaughter
it! God has fed you!’ So we slaughtered it and broiled its meat, as the lion stood
there watching.” I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard Abu πl-Qasim
∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali al-Shajari say: I heard Hamid al-Aswad say: “I was with
Ibrahim al-Khawwas in the desert for seven days, with [our] condition remaining
unchanged [all this time]. On the seventh day, however, I grew weak and sat
down. He turned to me and asked: ‘What has happened to you?’ I said that I
had grown weak. He asked me: ‘What do you need most: food or water?’ I said:
‘Water.’ He then said: ‘Water is behind you.’ I turned and indeed there was
a spring with water that was like fresh milk. I drank and made my ablutions. Ibrahim watched but did not come near. When I was ready to go, I decided to
take some of it with me. However, he said: ‘Don’t do this. This is not something
you keep as provisions.’” I heard Abu ∏Abdallah [al-Shirazi] say: I heard Abu

I opened my eyes and saw before me a handsome man, riding a brownish-gray
horse. He gave me water to drink and told me: ‘Be my co-rider!’ After a short
while, I found myself in the Hijaz. The man asked me: ‘What do you see?’ I told
him: ‘I see Medina!’ He then said: ‘Dismount, and go and greet the Messenger
of God – may God bless and greet him. Tell him: “Your brother al-Khadir
sends you his greetings!”’” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami
say: I heard Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Baghdadi say: Abu al-Hadid said: I heard
al-Muzaffar al-Jassas say: “One night I was with Nasr al-Kharrat at a certain
location. We were debating issues pertaining to [Sufi] knowledge. Al-Kharrat said:
‘When someone remembers God, at the beginning of his remembrance he needs
to know that his remembrance is by virtue of God Most High’s remembering him
[first], for his own remembrance comes from God’s remembrance.’ I disagreed
with him and he said: ‘If only al-Khadir – peace be upon him – were here
he would bear witness to the correctness of my statement!’ Suddenly, there
appeared [before us] an old man suspended between the sky and the earth. He
approached us and said: ‘He has spoken the truth. One who remembers God
Most High acquires his remembrance by virtue of God Most High’s remembering
him.’ We then realized that that was al-Khadir – peace be upon him.” I heard
774 It seems that the mode of the narrative is switched here from the first-person account of
al-Nuri’s maid to a third-person narrative only to return to the first-person mode again in the
next sentence.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 386
386 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “A man went to Sahl b. ∏Abdallah [al-Tustari]
and said: ‘People say that you can walk on water.’ Sahl said: ‘Ask the muezzin of
this quarter. He is a righteous man who won’t lie.’ The man asked him, and the
muezzin said: ‘I know nothing about it. However, a few days ago he went to the
pond to make his ablution and fell into the water. If it had not been for me, he
would have remained there.’” The master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq said://459 “Sahl
did indeed possess the quality ascribed to him.775 However, God – praise be to
Him – wants to protect [the secrets of] His friends, so He used the story of the
muezzin and the pond as a cover [to hide] the true state of Sahl. For Sahl did
indeed display miracles.”
Similar to this is the story narrated by Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi, who said
that he saw it written down by the hand of Abu πl-Hasan al-Jurjani. It said: “Once
I decided to go to Egypt. It occurred to me that I should travel by ship. Then it
occurred to me that I am well-known there, while I was leery of [mundane] fame. In the meantime, a ship was passing by. Something prompted me and I walked
across the water until I caught up with it and entered it, as people were watching. However, no one said that this was contrary to the customary order of things,
and I realized that the friend of God is always protected [by Him], even if his
actions are obvious.”
Some of the [miraculous] states of the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq – may God
be pleased with him – we witnessed with our own eyes. Thus, he was afflicted
with an inflammation of the bladder and had to urinate several times during
an hour, to the extent that he had to make more than one ablution to perform
two cycles of canonical prayer. He would carry a bottle with him on the way to
his teaching session and would use it several times along the way both coming
and going.I opened my eyes and saw before me a handsome man, riding a brownish-gray
horse. He gave me water to drink and told me: ‘Be my co-rider!’ After a short
while, I found myself in the Hijaz. The man asked me: ‘What do you see?’ I told
him: ‘I see Medina!’ He then said: ‘Dismount, and go and greet the Messenger
of God – may God bless and greet him. Tell him: “Your brother al-Khadir
sends you his greetings!”’” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami
say: I heard Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Baghdadi say: Abu al-Hadid said: I heard
al-Muzaffar al-Jassas say: “One night I was with Nasr al-Kharrat at a certain
location. We were debating issues pertaining to [Sufi] knowledge. Al-Kharrat said:
‘When someone remembers God, at the beginning of his remembrance he needs
to know that his remembrance is by virtue of God Most High’s remembering him
[first], for his own remembrance comes from God’s remembrance.’ I disagreed
with him and he said: ‘If only al-Khadir – peace be upon him – were here
he would bear witness to the correctness of my statement!’ Suddenly, there
appeared [before us] an old man suspended between the sky and the earth. He
approached us and said: ‘He has spoken the truth. One who remembers God
Most High acquires his remembrance by virtue of God Most High’s remembering
him.’ We then realized that that was al-Khadir – peace be upon him.” I heard
774 It seems that the mode of the narrative is switched here from the first-person account of
al-Nuri’s maid to a third-person narrative only to return to the first-person mode again in the
next sentence.

Thus, he was afflicted
with an inflammation of the bladder and had to urinate several times during
an hour, to the extent that he had to make more than one ablution to perform
two cycles of canonical prayer. He would carry a bottle with him on the way to
his teaching session and would use it several times along the way both coming
and going. However, when he sat on his chair, lecturing, he would require no
ablutions, even when the session lasted for a long time. We observed this [quality]
in him for many years, although it did not occur to us during his lifetime that
this was something that violated the customary order [of things]. Only after his
death this thought visited me and I realized [what was going on]. Similar to
this is a story about Sahl b. ∏Abdallah. At the end of his life he was afflicted with
paralysis, yet his strength would return to him at the time of the [canonical]
prayer and he would perform it standing. It is well known that ∏Abdallah
al-Wazzan was paralyzed, yet when he experienced ecstasy while listening to
music he would stand up and take part in it. I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: Ibrahim b. Muhammad al-Maliki
told us: Yusuf b. Ahmad al-Baghdadi told us: Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari told us:
“I went on pilgrimage with Abu Sulayman al-Darani. During our journey, I lost
my water-skin. I told Abu Sulayman: ‘I have lost the water-skin.’ So we were left
without water, and it was very cold. Abu Sulayman prayed: ‘O You Who return
that which was lost and Who guides away from error, return our loss to us!’ All
of a sudden, we heard someone shouting: ‘Who has lost a water-skin?’ I shouted:
775 That is, the ability to walk on the water.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 387
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 387
‘Me!’ I took it. As we continued on our way, we wrapped ourselves up in fur due
to the severe cold. We came across a man dressed in rags, who was dripping with
sweat. Abu Sulayman told him: ‘Come on, we shall share with you some of our
[warm]//460 clothes!’ The man responded: ‘Abu Sulayman, how can you instruct
us in [matters of] renunciation, while you suffer from cold? I have been traveling
through this wasteland, yet I have never shivered nor trembled. During the cold
season God has clothed me with the heat of His love, while during the summer
He has clothed me with the cool taste of His love!’ He then went away.”
I also heard him [Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi] say: I heard Abu Bakr
al-Takriti say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Kattani say: I heard [Ibrahim]
al-Khawwas say: “Once I was walking through the desert in the middle of the
day. I arrived at a tree with [a spring of] water nearby and made camp there. Suddenly, I saw an enormous lion coming towards me. I surrendered myself [to
my fate]. As the lion came close to me, [I saw that] it was limping. It groaned,
knelt in front of me and put its paw onto my lap. I looked at it and discovered
that it was swollen and smeared with pus and blood. I took a piece of wood and
pierced the place swollen with pus. Then I tied a piece of cloth around its paw. The lion went away. It soon came back with [its] two cubs, which wagged their
tails at me. They brought me a loaf of bread.” I also heard him say: ∏Ali al-Saπih
told us: Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. Matraf776 told us: Muhammad b. al-Hasan
al-∏Asqalani told us: Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari told us: “Muhammad b. al-Sammak
complained to us [about his health]. So we took [a sample of] his urine and headed
to the doctor, who was a Christian. As we were traveling between al-Hira and
Kufa777 we came across a man with a handsome face, who emanated a pleasant
smell and wore a clean garment.Thus, he was afflicted
with an inflammation of the bladder and had to urinate several times during
an hour, to the extent that he had to make more than one ablution to perform
two cycles of canonical prayer. He would carry a bottle with him on the way to
his teaching session and would use it several times along the way both coming
and going. However, when he sat on his chair, lecturing, he would require no
ablutions, even when the session lasted for a long time. We observed this [quality]
in him for many years, although it did not occur to us during his lifetime that
this was something that violated the customary order [of things]. Only after his
death this thought visited me and I realized [what was going on]. Similar to
this is a story about Sahl b. ∏Abdallah. At the end of his life he was afflicted with
paralysis, yet his strength would return to him at the time of the [canonical]
prayer and he would perform it standing. It is well known that ∏Abdallah
al-Wazzan was paralyzed, yet when he experienced ecstasy while listening to
music he would stand up and take part in it. I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: Ibrahim b. Muhammad al-Maliki
told us: Yusuf b. Ahmad al-Baghdadi told us: Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari told us:
“I went on pilgrimage with Abu Sulayman al-Darani. During our journey, I lost
my water-skin. I told Abu Sulayman: ‘I have lost the water-skin.’ So we were left
without water, and it was very cold. Abu Sulayman prayed: ‘O You Who return
that which was lost and Who guides away from error, return our loss to us!’ All
of a sudden, we heard someone shouting: ‘Who has lost a water-skin?’ I shouted:
775 That is, the ability to walk on the water.

So we took [a sample of] his urine and headed
to the doctor, who was a Christian. As we were traveling between al-Hira and
Kufa777 we came across a man with a handsome face, who emanated a pleasant
smell and wore a clean garment. He asked us where we were going. We said:
‘We are looking for so-and-so, the doctor, to show him Ibn al-Sammak’s urine.’
He exclaimed: ‘You are seeking to help a friend of God by having recourse to
an enemy of His! Smash this [bottle] against the ground and go back to Ibn
al-Sammak. Tell him: “Put your hand on the place that hurts and say: ‘With the
truth We have sent it down, and with the truth it has come down.’”’778The man
then disappeared from our sight. We returned to Ibn al-Sammak and told him
about what had happened. He put his hand on the place that hurt him and said
what the man had said. He was cured on the spot, and said: ‘That was al-Khadir
– peace be upon him!’”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Muhammad
al-Sufi say: I heard my uncle (∏Ammi) al-Bistami say: “We were present at Abu
Yazid al-Bistami’s teaching session, when he said: ‘Let’s go and welcome a friend
of God Most High!’ We stood up and went. When we reached the city gate,
we met Ibrahim b. Shayba al-Harawi. Abu Yazid told him: ‘It occurred to me
that I [should] come out to welcome you and intercede on your behalf with my
776 Or “al-Mutarrif”. 777 Cities in lower Iraq. 778 Q. 17:105; 17:107, according to Arberry’s translation.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 388
388 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Lord!’//461 ‘If you were to intercede on behalf of all creatures of this world, this
would not be much,’ responded Ibrahim b. Shayba, ‘for they are but a piece
of dirt!’ Abu Yazid was perplexed by his response.” The master [al-Qushayri]
commented: “The miracle of Ibrahim, who made little of this world, is more
perfect than that of Abu Yazid in so far as he demonstrated [supernatural]
perspicacity and a stance with regard to intercession that corresponded to his
spiritual state.” I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Abu
Bakr al-Razi say: I heard Yusuf b. al-Husayn say: I heard Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri
say, when Salim al-Maghribi asked him about the cause of his repentance: “I left
Egypt779 for a village [in the countryside] and slept while on the road. When I
woke up and opened my eyes, I noticed a blind [nestling] lark that had fallen out
from a tree onto the ground. [Suddenly] the earth split open and there emerged
from it two bowls, one gold and one silver. One of them contained sesame seeds,
the other rosewater. The nestling ate from one and drank from the other. I said
[to myself]: ‘This is sufficient for me! I have repented.’ And I kept standing at
[God’s] door until He finally received me.”
It is related that ∏Abd al-Wahid b. Zayd was afflicted by palsy. When the time
of [canonical] prayer arrived, he wanted to make his ablution. He cried: “Anybody
here?” but no one responded to him. He was afraid that he would miss the time
[of the prayer] and exclaimed: “Lord, set me free from my fetters, so that I can
perform my ablution, and then it will be up to You how to deal with me!” He
was cured and performed his ablutions. He then returned to his bed and reverted
to his prior state.So we took [a sample of] his urine and headed
to the doctor, who was a Christian. As we were traveling between al-Hira and
Kufa777 we came across a man with a handsome face, who emanated a pleasant
smell and wore a clean garment. He asked us where we were going. We said:
‘We are looking for so-and-so, the doctor, to show him Ibn al-Sammak’s urine.’
He exclaimed: ‘You are seeking to help a friend of God by having recourse to
an enemy of His! Smash this [bottle] against the ground and go back to Ibn
al-Sammak. Tell him: “Put your hand on the place that hurts and say: ‘With the
truth We have sent it down, and with the truth it has come down.’”’778The man
then disappeared from our sight. We returned to Ibn al-Sammak and told him
about what had happened. He put his hand on the place that hurt him and said
what the man had said. He was cured on the spot, and said: ‘That was al-Khadir
– peace be upon him!’”
I heard Muhammad b. al-Husayn say: I heard ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Muhammad
al-Sufi say: I heard my uncle (∏Ammi) al-Bistami say: “We were present at Abu
Yazid al-Bistami’s teaching session, when he said: ‘Let’s go and welcome a friend
of God Most High!’ We stood up and went. When we reached the city gate,
we met Ibrahim b. Shayba al-Harawi. Abu Yazid told him: ‘It occurred to me
that I [should] come out to welcome you and intercede on your behalf with my
776 Or “al-Mutarrif”. 777 Cities in lower Iraq. 778 Q. 17:105; 17:107, according to Arberry’s translation.

He was afraid that he would miss the time
[of the prayer] and exclaimed: “Lord, set me free from my fetters, so that I can
perform my ablution, and then it will be up to You how to deal with me!” He
was cured and performed his ablutions. He then returned to his bed and reverted
to his prior state. Abu Ayyub al-Hammal related: “Whenever Abu ∏Abdallah
al-Daylami decided to make camp during his travels, he would lean up to his
donkey and say in its ear: ‘I would have wanted to tie you up. However, I won’t
tie you up and will send you to graze in the field. When we choose to depart, do
come back!’ When the time of departure came, the donkey would come back.” It
is said that Abu ∏Abdallah al-Daylami had arranged a marriage for his daughter
and needed to supply her with dowry. He used to prepare a robe that he would
sell for one dinar each time [he was in need]. So he prepared a robe and took it
to a dealer. The dealer told him: “This is worth more than one dinar.” They kept
driving the price up until it reached one hundred dinars and al-Daylami was
able to provide a dowry for his daughter. Al-Nadr b. Shumayl said: “I bought a
waste-wrapper, then found out that it was too short. I asked my Lord to stretch it
by one cubit.” He added: “If I had asked for more, He would have given me more!”
It is related that ∏Amir b. ∏Abd Qays asked [God] to make his ablutions easy for
him during the winter. [From then on] whenever he brought [ablution water], it
steamed. He also asked [God] to remove passion for women from his heart, so that
he would pay no attention to them. Finally, he asked [God] to expel Satan from
his heart. When he prayed, however, [God] did not grant his wish [this time]. 779 Misr; the story-teller probably refers to Fustat, the first city founded in Egypt by its Muslim
conquerors. It served as the residence of the Muslim governors of Egypt, and thus as its de
factocapital.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 389
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 389
Bishr b. al-Harith related: “I came home and found a man there. I asked him:
‘Who are you? You entered my home without my permission!’ The man said: ‘I
am your brother al-Khadir.’ I asked him to pray for me. He said: ‘May God make
your obedience to Him easy!’ I asked him: ‘Say more!’ He said: ‘May He conceal
your obedience from you!’”//462 Ibrahim al-Khawwas related: “During one
of my journeys to Mecca, I entered some ruins at night. There I encountered
a huge lion. I was scared. Then I heard a voice: ‘Be steadfast! Around you are
seventy thousand angels to protect you!’” Muhammad b. al-Husayn informed us:
Abu πl-Faraj al-Warathani informed us: I heard Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Muhammad
al-Sirafi say: I heard Ja∏far al-Daybuli say: “When al-Nuri went into a stream,
a thief stole his clothes. He then brought them back, because his hand had
withered. Al-Nuri said: ‘He returned [our] clothes to us, and we return his hand
to him.’ After that he was cured.” Al-Shibli related: “Once I made a vow not
to eat anything except that which is permitted [by the Divine Law] (halal). One
day, as I was wandering about in the desert, I came upon a fig tree. When I
stretched my hand toward it, the tree called to me, saying: ‘Keep your vow! Don’t eat from me, for I belong to a Jew!’”
Abu ∏Abdallah b. Khafif related: “On my way to the pilgrimage, I visited
Baghdad. The vainglory of the Sufis had filled my head: I did not eat bread for
forty days, did not go to see al-Junayd, then left [Baghdad] and drank no water
until I reached [the town of] Zubala(h),780 while maintaining my ritual purity.781
[Suddenly] I saw a gazelle at the brim of a well, drinking. I was thirsty. When I
approached the well, the gazelle fled, and lo, the water [level] in the well dropped
to its very bottom.He was afraid that he would miss the time
[of the prayer] and exclaimed: “Lord, set me free from my fetters, so that I can
perform my ablution, and then it will be up to You how to deal with me!” He
was cured and performed his ablutions. He then returned to his bed and reverted
to his prior state. Abu Ayyub al-Hammal related: “Whenever Abu ∏Abdallah
al-Daylami decided to make camp during his travels, he would lean up to his
donkey and say in its ear: ‘I would have wanted to tie you up. However, I won’t
tie you up and will send you to graze in the field. When we choose to depart, do
come back!’ When the time of departure came, the donkey would come back.” It
is said that Abu ∏Abdallah al-Daylami had arranged a marriage for his daughter
and needed to supply her with dowry. He used to prepare a robe that he would
sell for one dinar each time [he was in need]. So he prepared a robe and took it
to a dealer. The dealer told him: “This is worth more than one dinar.” They kept
driving the price up until it reached one hundred dinars and al-Daylami was
able to provide a dowry for his daughter. Al-Nadr b. Shumayl said: “I bought a
waste-wrapper, then found out that it was too short. I asked my Lord to stretch it
by one cubit.” He added: “If I had asked for more, He would have given me more!”
It is related that ∏Amir b. ∏Abd Qays asked [God] to make his ablutions easy for
him during the winter. [From then on] whenever he brought [ablution water], it
steamed. He also asked [God] to remove passion for women from his heart, so that
he would pay no attention to them. Finally, he asked [God] to expel Satan from
his heart. When he prayed, however, [God] did not grant his wish [this time]. 779 Misr; the story-teller probably refers to Fustat, the first city founded in Egypt by its Muslim
conquerors. It served as the residence of the Muslim governors of Egypt, and thus as its de
factocapital.

I was thirsty. When I
approached the well, the gazelle fled, and lo, the water [level] in the well dropped
to its very bottom. I walked on and exclaimed: ‘My Lord, am I not of the
same stature [in Your eyes] as this gazelle?’ I heard [a voice] behind me, saying:
‘We have tested you, and you have not showed [enough] patience!’ I returned
and, indeed, the well was full of water. I filled my water-skin with it and used
it for drinking and ablutions all the way to Medina, but it was never exhausted. As I was drinking [from it], I heard a voice saying: ‘The gazelle came with
neither a water-skin, nor a rope, whereas you came with both a water-skin and a
rope!’ On my return from the pilgrimage [via Baghdad] I went to the [Baghdad]
Friday mosque. When al-Junayd saw me, he said: ‘If you had only been patient,
water would have gushed forth from under your feet! If only you had just an
hour’s worth of patience!’” I heard Hamza b. Yusuf al-Sahmi al-Jurjani say: I
heard [Abu] Ahmad b. ∏Adi al-Hafiz say: I heard Ahmad b. Hamza at Fustat
(Misr) say: ∏Abd al-Wahhab, a pious man, told me: Muhammad b. Sa∏id al-Basri
related: “As I was walking in the streets of Basra, I saw a Bedouin driving
a camel. As I was looking at him, the camel fell down dead and its saddle and
baggage [also] fell on the ground. I was about to walk on, but, as I looked, I
saw the Bedouin pray: ‘The Causer of all causes, O the Master of all seekers,
return to me what I have just lost//463 – the camel that carried the saddle and
780 A small town in lower Iraq. 781 Through constant praying.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 390
390 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
the baggage!’ And, lo, the camel stood up with both the saddle and the baggage
upon its back!”
It is related that Shibl al-Marwazi had a strong appetite for meat and bought
some of it for a half dirham.On the way, a kite snatched it from him. Shibl went
into the mosque to pray. When he returned home, his wife served meat to him. “Where is this from?” he asked. She said: “Two kites had a fight and this fell
down from them.” Shibl exclaimed: “Praise be to God, Who has not forgotten
Shibl, even though Shibl has often forgotten Him!” Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah
al-Sufi informed us: ∏Abd al-Wahid b. Bakr al-Warathani told us: I heard
Muhammad b. Dawud say: I heard Abu Bakr b. Mu∏ammar say: I heard Ibn Abi
∏Ubayd al-Busri recount on the authority of his father: “My father once took part
in a military campaign.782As he was riding together with his detachment, the colt
he was riding died under him. He prayed: ‘O Lord, lend it to us, so that we can
return to Busra!’ – he meant his [native] village. [All of sudden,] the colt stood
up. After he took part in the campaign and returned home, he ordered me to
unsaddle the colt. I said: ‘It is sweating. If I take the saddle off it, it may catch a
cold.’ The father said: ‘It is on loan, my son!’ When I unsaddled the colt, it fell
down dead.” It is related that one Sufi used to be a grave-robber [before he
repented]. Once a woman died. When people prayed over her, the grave-robber
prayed with them in order to know where her grave was. When the night came,
he dug the grave up. The woman exclaimed: “Praise be to God!I was thirsty. When I
approached the well, the gazelle fled, and lo, the water [level] in the well dropped
to its very bottom. I walked on and exclaimed: ‘My Lord, am I not of the
same stature [in Your eyes] as this gazelle?’ I heard [a voice] behind me, saying:
‘We have tested you, and you have not showed [enough] patience!’ I returned
and, indeed, the well was full of water. I filled my water-skin with it and used
it for drinking and ablutions all the way to Medina, but it was never exhausted. As I was drinking [from it], I heard a voice saying: ‘The gazelle came with
neither a water-skin, nor a rope, whereas you came with both a water-skin and a
rope!’ On my return from the pilgrimage [via Baghdad] I went to the [Baghdad]
Friday mosque. When al-Junayd saw me, he said: ‘If you had only been patient,
water would have gushed forth from under your feet! If only you had just an
hour’s worth of patience!’” I heard Hamza b. Yusuf al-Sahmi al-Jurjani say: I
heard [Abu] Ahmad b. ∏Adi al-Hafiz say: I heard Ahmad b. Hamza at Fustat
(Misr) say: ∏Abd al-Wahhab, a pious man, told me: Muhammad b. Sa∏id al-Basri
related: “As I was walking in the streets of Basra, I saw a Bedouin driving
a camel. As I was looking at him, the camel fell down dead and its saddle and
baggage [also] fell on the ground. I was about to walk on, but, as I looked, I
saw the Bedouin pray: ‘The Causer of all causes, O the Master of all seekers,
return to me what I have just lost//463 – the camel that carried the saddle and
780 A small town in lower Iraq. 781 Through constant praying.

When the night came,
he dug the grave up. The woman exclaimed: “Praise be to God! A man who has
been forgiven is taking the shroud of a woman who has been forgiven!” He said:
“Suppose you have been forgiven, but what about me?” The woman said: “God
has forgiven both myself and all those who prayed over me!” He said: “So I left
her alone and replaced the earth on her grave.” The man then repented and his
repentance was good. I heard Hamza b. Yusuf say: I heard Abu πl-Hasan Isma∏il b. ∏Amr b. Kamil
in Egypt say: I heard Abu Muhammad Nu∏man b. Musa al-Hiri at al-Hira783
say: “I saw Dhu πl-Nun after two men had a fight. One of them was a sultan’s
retainer, the other a commoner. The commoner attacked the soldier and broke his
tooth. The soldier grabbed him and cried: ‘Let the commander settle between
us!’ As they were passing by Dhu πl-Nun, people told them: ‘Go to the [Sufi]
master!’ They went to him and appraised him of what had happened. He took
the tooth, moistened it with his saliva and put it back in the soldier’s mouth,
moving his lips [in prayer]. The tooth, by God’s leave, held. The soldier kept
examining his mouth only to discover that all his teeth were alike.” Abu πl-Husayn
Muhammad b. al-Husayn al-Qattan informed us at Baghdad: Abu ∏Ali Isma∏il
b. Muhammad b. Isma∏il al-Saffar told us: al-Hasan b. ∏Arafa b. Yazid told us:
∏Abdallah b. Idris al-Awdi told us on the authority of Isma∏il b. Abi Khalid, on
the authority of Abu Sabra al-Nakha∏i: “A man from Yemen was on his way [to
782 Probably against the Byzantines. 783 Thus in our text, but it is more likely that the man’s name was “al-Jizi”, from al-Jiza, a city
in Egypt.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 391
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 391
the Hijaz], when his donkey expired. He made an ablution, then performed two
cycles of prayer and said://464 ‘My God, I have come to fight a holy war in
order to win Your pleasure and I bear witness that You can revive the dead and
resurrect those who are in the graves! Don’t let me oblige anyone! Today I ask
You to resurrect my donkey.’ The donkey stood up and wiggled its ears.”
I heard Hamza b. Yusuf say: I heard Abu Bakr al-Nabulusi say: I heard Abu
Bakr al-Hamdhani say: “I stayed in the desert of the Hijaz for days on end, eating
nothing. I was craving hot beans and bread that are made at Bab al-Taq,784but I
said to myself: ‘I am in [the middle of] the desert and there’s a great distance
between me and Iraq, so my wish will never be fulfilled.’ Before I could finish
my thought, a Bedouin cried from afar: ‘Hot beans and bread!’ I came up to him
and asked: ‘Do you [indeed] have hot beans and bread?’ He said: ‘Yes.’ He spread
out the waist-wrapper that was on him, took out beans and bread, and invited me
to eat. I ate. He invited me to eat three times, and I ate. On the fourth time I said:
‘For the sake of the One Who sent you to me, who are you?’ He answered: ‘I am
al-Khadir.’ Then he disappeared and I saw him no more.”
I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard Abu πl-∏Abbas
b. al-Khashshab al-Baghdadi say: I heard Abu Ja∏far al-Haddad say: “I arrived
at Tha∏labiyya,785 which lay in ruins. I had not eaten anything for seven days. I
went inside the domed building. Then some Khurasanians came by, who were
so exhausted [by their journey] that they threw themselves on the ground at the
entrance to the building. Then a Bedouin came riding a she-camel and threw
some dates before them. They started to eat and said nothing to me, while
the Bedouin did not see me.When the night came,
he dug the grave up. The woman exclaimed: “Praise be to God! A man who has
been forgiven is taking the shroud of a woman who has been forgiven!” He said:
“Suppose you have been forgiven, but what about me?” The woman said: “God
has forgiven both myself and all those who prayed over me!” He said: “So I left
her alone and replaced the earth on her grave.” The man then repented and his
repentance was good. I heard Hamza b. Yusuf say: I heard Abu πl-Hasan Isma∏il b. ∏Amr b. Kamil
in Egypt say: I heard Abu Muhammad Nu∏man b. Musa al-Hiri at al-Hira783
say: “I saw Dhu πl-Nun after two men had a fight. One of them was a sultan’s
retainer, the other a commoner. The commoner attacked the soldier and broke his
tooth. The soldier grabbed him and cried: ‘Let the commander settle between
us!’ As they were passing by Dhu πl-Nun, people told them: ‘Go to the [Sufi]
master!’ They went to him and appraised him of what had happened. He took
the tooth, moistened it with his saliva and put it back in the soldier’s mouth,
moving his lips [in prayer]. The tooth, by God’s leave, held. The soldier kept
examining his mouth only to discover that all his teeth were alike.” Abu πl-Husayn
Muhammad b. al-Husayn al-Qattan informed us at Baghdad: Abu ∏Ali Isma∏il
b. Muhammad b. Isma∏il al-Saffar told us: al-Hasan b. ∏Arafa b. Yazid told us:
∏Abdallah b. Idris al-Awdi told us on the authority of Isma∏il b. Abi Khalid, on
the authority of Abu Sabra al-Nakha∏i: “A man from Yemen was on his way [to
782 Probably against the Byzantines. 783 Thus in our text, but it is more likely that the man’s name was “al-Jizi”, from al-Jiza, a city
in Egypt.

Then a Bedouin came riding a she-camel and threw
some dates before them. They started to eat and said nothing to me, while
the Bedouin did not see me. After some time, the Bedouin returned and asked
them: ‘Is there anyone here beside you?’ They said: ‘Yes, there is a man inside
this building.’ He asked me: ‘Who are you? Why did you not talk [to me]? On
my way I encountered a man, who told me: “You have left behind a man whom
you have not fed.” I was unable to continue my journey and the road was made
longer for me because I had to walk [extra] miles.’ He put a lot of dates before
me and left. I invited the Khurasanians to eat and they ate together with me.” I
heard Hamza b. Yusuf say: I heard Abu Tahir al-Raqqi say: I heard Ahmad b. ∏Ataπ say: “A camel once spoke to me. On my way to Mecca I saw camels that
carried litters on them. They were extending their necks in the night. I said:
‘Praise be to the One Who could relieve them of that which they are carrying!’
My own camel then turned to me and uttered: ‘Say: “God is great!”’ and I said:
‘God is great!’”
I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard al-Hasan786 b. Ahmad
al-Farisi say: I heard al-Duqqi787say: I heard Abu Bakr b. Mu∏ammar say: I heard
Abu Zur∏a al-Janbi say: “A certain woman tried to deceive me. She told me:
784 A district of Baghdad. 785 A way-station on the pilgrimage route to Mecca. 786 Or “al-Husayn”. 787 Or “al-Raqqi”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 392
392 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
‘Won’t you come into the house to visit a sick person?’ When I came in, she
locked the door. When I found no one there, I realized what she was up to. I
prayed: ‘My God, make her black!’ And she was blackened. She was frightened
and opened the door so that I could leave.//465 I then prayed: ‘My God, return
her to her [original] state!’ And He returned her to her [original] state.” I heard
Hamza b. Yusuf say: I heard Abu Muhammad al-Ghitrifi say: I heard [Abu Nasr]
al-Sarraj say: I heard Abu Sulayman al-Rumi say: I heard Khalil al-Haddad
relate: “My son Muhammad went missing and we were losing our minds from
grief. I went to Ma∏ruf al-Karkhi and said: ‘Abu Mahfuz, my son disappeared
and his mother is losing her mind from grief!’ He asked me what I wanted [him
to do]. I said: ‘Pray to God that He return him [to us].’ He prayed: ‘My God, the
heaven and the earth are Yours and what lies between them is Yours also. Bring
Muhammad [back]!’” Khalil continued, saying: “I went to the Damascus gate788
and found him standing there. ‘Where have you been, Muhammad?’ I asked him.
He said: ‘My father, just a few moments ago I was in al-Anbar.’”789
The master Abu πl-Qasim [al-Qushayri] said: “Know that stories of this sort
are countless. If we were to add to them more than we have already mentioned
we would go beyond the confines of brevity that we strive to achieve. What we
have already mentioned suffices for this topic.”
The vision of the Sufis (ruπyat al-qawm)
God Most High said: “For them790there are good tidings in the present life and
in the life to come.”791 [Commentators] say: “This [means] the beautiful vision
that the believer will see or that will be shown to him.”
Abu πl-Hasan al-Ahwazi informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Basri informed
us: Ishaq b. Ibrahim al-Munqari told us: Mansur b. Abi Muzahim told us: Abu
Bakr b. ∏Ayyash told us on the authority of ∏Asim, on the authority of Abu Salih,
on the authority of Abu πl-Dardaπ, who said that someone questioned the Prophet
– may God bless and greet him – about this verse, that is, “For them there are
good tidings in the present life and in the life to come.” The Prophet responded:
“No one has asked me about this verse before. This [means] the beautiful vision
that the believer will see or that will be shown to him.”
Sayyid792 Abu πl-Hasan Muhammad b. al-Husayn al-∏Alawi informed us:
Abu ∏Ali al-Husayn b. Muhammad [b.] Zayd informed us: ∏Abdallah b. al-Walid
told us on the authority of Sufyan [al-Thawri], on the authority of Yahya b.
Sa∏id, on the authority of Abu Salama, on the authority of Abu Qatada that the
Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – said: “Visionary dream
788 In Baghdad.
789 A city on the left bank of the Euphrates, some thirty-eight miles from Baghdad.
790 That is, the friends of God.
791 Q. 10:64.
792 An honorific title of a descendant of the Prophet.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 393
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 393
(ruπya) is from God, while dream (hulm) is from Satan. If one of you dreams a
night dream that he dislikes, let him spit to his left and take refuge in God.793In
this case, it won’t hurt him.”//466
Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Ahmad ∏Abdus al-Muzakki informed us: Abu
Ahmad Hamza b. al-∏Abbas al-Bazzaz told us: ∏Ayyash b. Muhammad b. Hatim
told us: ∏Abdallah b. Musa told us: Israπil told us on the authority of Abu Ishaq, on
the authority of Abu πl-Ahwas, on the authority of Abu ∏Ubayda, on the authority
of ∏Abdallah b. Mas∏ud, who said that the Messenger of God – may God bless
and greet him – said: “Whoever sees me in a dream has seen me, for Satan cannot
appear in my form.” The meaning of this report is this: This vision is a veracious
one and its interpretation is truth, for vision is one type of miracle. The correct
definition of vision is the thoughts that enter the heart and the states that take
their shape in the imagination (wahm), when sleep does not entirely suppress
perception. When a person is in a waking state, he believes that this was a
true vision. However, for human beings this is but visual forms and imaginings
that reside in their hearts. When their external perceptions abandon them, these
imaginings are stripped of the knowledge both acquired and necessary, and
then this state strengthens itself in the seer. However, when he wakes up, the
states that he imagined weaken in comparison to his perception [of things] by
means of his [physical] sight and by means of the necessary knowledge [granted
to him]. The seer of dreams is like a person who sees by means of the light of a
lamp, when the darkness falls. However, when the sun rises it outshines the light
of the lamp, for the latter is weak in comparison to the light of the sun.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 392
392 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
‘Won’t you come into the house to visit a sick person?’ When I came in, she
locked the door. When I found no one there, I realized what she was up to. I
prayed: ‘My God, make her black!’ And she was blackened. She was frightened
and opened the door so that I could leave.//465 I then prayed: ‘My God, return
her to her [original] state!’ And He returned her to her [original] state.” I heard
Hamza b. Yusuf say: I heard Abu Muhammad al-Ghitrifi say: I heard [Abu Nasr]
al-Sarraj say: I heard Abu Sulayman al-Rumi say: I heard Khalil al-Haddad
relate: “My son Muhammad went missing and we were losing our minds from
grief. I went to Ma∏ruf al-Karkhi and said: ‘Abu Mahfuz, my son disappeared
and his mother is losing her mind from grief!’ He asked me what I wanted [him
to do]. I said: ‘Pray to God that He return him [to us].’ He prayed: ‘My God, the
heaven and the earth are Yours and what lies between them is Yours also. Bring
Muhammad [back]!’” Khalil continued, saying: “I went to the Damascus gate788
and found him standing there. ‘Where have you been, Muhammad?’ I asked him.
He said: ‘My father, just a few moments ago I was in al-Anbar.’”789
The master Abu πl-Qasim [al-Qushayri] said: “Know that stories of this sort
are countless. If we were to add to them more than we have already mentioned
we would go beyond the confines of brevity that we strive to achieve. What we
have already mentioned suffices for this topic.”
The vision of the Sufis (ruπyat al-qawm)
God Most High said: “For them790there are good tidings in the present life and
in the life to come.”791 [Commentators] say: “This [means] the beautiful vision
that the believer will see or that will be shown to him.”
Abu πl-Hasan al-Ahwazi informed us: Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Basri informed
us: Ishaq b. Ibrahim al-Munqari told us: Mansur b. Abi Muzahim told us: Abu
Bakr b. ∏Ayyash told us on the authority of ∏Asim, on the authority of Abu Salih,
on the authority of Abu πl-Dardaπ, who said that someone questioned the Prophet
– may God bless and greet him – about this verse, that is, “For them there are
good tidings in the present life and in the life to come.” The Prophet responded:
“No one has asked me about this verse before. This [means] the beautiful vision
that the believer will see or that will be shown to him.”
Sayyid792 Abu πl-Hasan Muhammad b. al-Husayn al-∏Alawi informed us:
Abu ∏Ali al-Husayn b. Muhammad [b.] Zayd informed us: ∏Abdallah b. al-Walid
told us on the authority of Sufyan [al-Thawri], on the authority of Yahya b.
Sa∏id, on the authority of Abu Salama, on the authority of Abu Qatada that the
Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him – said: “Visionary dream
788 In Baghdad.
789 A city on the left bank of the Euphrates, some thirty-eight miles from Baghdad.
790 That is, the friends of God.
791 Q. 10:64.
792 An honorific title of a descendant of the Prophet.

The seer of dreams is like a person who sees by means of the light of a
lamp, when the darkness falls. However, when the sun rises it outshines the light
of the lamp, for the latter is weak in comparison to the light of the sun. Thus, the
condition of dream is like that of someone in the lamplight, while the condition
of someone who wakes up is like that of someone upon whom the day rises. One
who has woken up remembers things that he was imagining while asleep. Now
those stories and thoughts that enter the heart of the sleeper may occasionally
come from Satan, occasionally from the promptings of the soul, and occasionally
from the thoughts [dictated] by angels. Sometimes they come as notifications
from God – may He be great and exalted – Who creates them directly in the
heart of the seer. According to a [prophetic] report: “The most veracious of you
in vision are the most veracious of you in speech.”
Know that there are two kinds of sleep: the sleep of unconsciousness (nawm
ghafla) and the sleep of habit (nawm ∏ada). Such sleep is not praiseworthy; on the
contrary, it is flawed, because it is the brother of death. A transmitted report
says: “Sleep is the brother of death.”//467 God – may He be great and exalted
– said: “It is He Who recalls you by night and He knows what you work by
day.”794God Most High also said: “God takes the souls at the time of their death,
and that which has not died, in its sleep.”795They say: “If there were [any] good
in sleep, there would be sleep in Paradise.” They say: “When God cast sleep over
793 By saying chapter 114 of the Qurπan. 794 Q. 6:60. 795 Q. 39:42.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 394
394 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Adam in Paradise, He extracted Eve from him, and all his trials happened to him
when Eve was created.”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “When Abraham said to Ishmael
– peace be upon both of them, ‘My son, I see in a dream that I sacrifice thee’,796
Ishmael responded: ‘This is the recompense of someone who falls asleep [in
the presence of] his Beloved. If you had not slept, you would not have been
commanded to slaughter your child!’” They say that God Most High revealed
to David – peace be upon him: “Whoever falls asleep when the night comes, lies
when he claims that he loves Me.” Sleep is the opposite of knowledge. This is
why al-Shibli said: “One sleep in a thousand years is an abomination.” Al-Shibli
said: “God looked at His creatures and said: ‘Who sleeps is neglectful; who is
neglectful is veiled [from God].’” Al-Shibli used to rub salt into his eyes, so that
he would not fall asleep. It is with this meaning in mind that the Sufis recite:
How strange that a lover should fall asleep
For any sleep is forbidden to the lover! They say: “The Sufi novice eats only when in need, sleeps only when overcome,
and speaks only out of necessity.” When Adam – peace be upon him – fell asleep
in the presence of God, he was told: “This is Eve, so that you might rest in her.”797
This is the recompense of one who falls asleep in divine presence. They say: “If
you are present with God, you do not sleep, for sleeping in God’s presence is bad
manners.” They say: “If you are absent, you belong to the people of grief and
affliction, and the afflicted one cannot be overtaken by sleep.”
As for those who exert themselves [for God’s sake], their sleep is a charity
bestowed upon them by God. God – may He be great and exalted – is proud of
a servant of His who falls asleep while praying. He says: “Look at My servant.The seer of dreams is like a person who sees by means of the light of a
lamp, when the darkness falls. However, when the sun rises it outshines the light
of the lamp, for the latter is weak in comparison to the light of the sun. Thus, the
condition of dream is like that of someone in the lamplight, while the condition
of someone who wakes up is like that of someone upon whom the day rises. One
who has woken up remembers things that he was imagining while asleep. Now
those stories and thoughts that enter the heart of the sleeper may occasionally
come from Satan, occasionally from the promptings of the soul, and occasionally
from the thoughts [dictated] by angels. Sometimes they come as notifications
from God – may He be great and exalted – Who creates them directly in the
heart of the seer. According to a [prophetic] report: “The most veracious of you
in vision are the most veracious of you in speech.”
Know that there are two kinds of sleep: the sleep of unconsciousness (nawm
ghafla) and the sleep of habit (nawm ∏ada). Such sleep is not praiseworthy; on the
contrary, it is flawed, because it is the brother of death. A transmitted report
says: “Sleep is the brother of death.”//467 God – may He be great and exalted
– said: “It is He Who recalls you by night and He knows what you work by
day.”794God Most High also said: “God takes the souls at the time of their death,
and that which has not died, in its sleep.”795They say: “If there were [any] good
in sleep, there would be sleep in Paradise.” They say: “When God cast sleep over
793 By saying chapter 114 of the Qurπan. 794 Q. 6:60. 795 Q. 39:42.

God – may He be great and exalted – is proud of
a servant of His who falls asleep while praying. He says: “Look at My servant. He sleeps, but his spirit is with Me and his body is [prostrated] before Me!”
The master [al-Qushayri] said: “That is, his spirit is in the state of intimate
conversation [with God] (najwa) and his body is spread on the carpet of worship.”
They say: “If one sleeps in the state of ritual purity,798 one’s spirit then receives
permission to circumambulate the throne [of God] and to prostrate itself before
God – may He be great and exalted.” God Most High said: “We appointed you
sleep for rest.”799//468 I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “A man
complained to a Sufi master that he slept too much. The master said: ‘Go and
thank God Most High for [your] health! How many a sick man is craving a
wink of the sleep that you complain about!’” They say: “Nothing is harder on
the Devil than the sleep of the sinner. He complains: ‘When will he wake up and
stand up, so he could disobey God?!’” They say: “The sinner’s best state is when
he is asleep. If he has no time, nothing will be held [by God] against him.” I
796 Q. 37:102. 797 Q. 7:189; 7:188, according to Arberry’s translation. 798 That is, after performing an ablution. 799 Q. 78:9.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 395
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 395
heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “Shah al-Kirmani used to practice
night vigils. Once he was overcome with sleep and saw God – praise be to Him
– in a dream. From that time on, he would deliberately try to sleep [as much as
possible]. When someone asked him about this, he recited:
I found the joy of my heart in my sleep
And I have come to love slumber and sleep!”
It is related that a man had two disciples who disagreed over an issue. One of
them claimed: “Sleep is better, because a man does not disobey God in this
state.” The other said: “Wakefulness is better, because one knows God Most
High in this state.” They brought this issue to the master for arbitration. He
said: “You who speak of the superiority of sleep, death is better for you than life. You who speak of the superiority of wakefulness, life is better for you than
death.” They say: “A certain man bought a slave girl. When the night came, he
told her to make his bed. The slave girl asked him: ‘My master, is there a master
above you?’ He said: ‘Yes.’ ‘Does your master ever sleep?’ asked the slave girl. He said ‘No.’ She then said: ‘Aren’t you ashamed to sleep, while your master
doesn’t?’” They say that a little girl asked Sa∏id b. Jubayr: “Why don’t you
sleep?” He answered: “Gehenna does not allow me to sleep!” They say: “Malik
b. Dinar’s daughter asked him: “Why don’t you sleep?” He answered: “Your
father is afraid of a surprise attack by night!” It is related that when al-Rabi∏ b. Khuthaym died, a little girl asked her father: “Where has the pillar that used to
stand in our neighbor’s yard gone?” The father responded: “Our neighbor was a
pious man who used to stand in prayer all night, from beginning to end.” The
girl thought that he was a pillar, because she would only climb up the roof of her
house [to sleep] at night and [always] find him standing [there].God – may He be great and exalted – is proud of
a servant of His who falls asleep while praying. He says: “Look at My servant. He sleeps, but his spirit is with Me and his body is [prostrated] before Me!”
The master [al-Qushayri] said: “That is, his spirit is in the state of intimate
conversation [with God] (najwa) and his body is spread on the carpet of worship.”
They say: “If one sleeps in the state of ritual purity,798 one’s spirit then receives
permission to circumambulate the throne [of God] and to prostrate itself before
God – may He be great and exalted.” God Most High said: “We appointed you
sleep for rest.”799//468 I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “A man
complained to a Sufi master that he slept too much. The master said: ‘Go and
thank God Most High for [your] health! How many a sick man is craving a
wink of the sleep that you complain about!’” They say: “Nothing is harder on
the Devil than the sleep of the sinner. He complains: ‘When will he wake up and
stand up, so he could disobey God?!’” They say: “The sinner’s best state is when
he is asleep. If he has no time, nothing will be held [by God] against him.” I
796 Q. 37:102. 797 Q. 7:189; 7:188, according to Arberry’s translation. 798 That is, after performing an ablution. 799 Q. 78:9.

Dinar’s daughter asked him: “Why don’t you sleep?” He answered: “Your
father is afraid of a surprise attack by night!” It is related that when al-Rabi∏ b. Khuthaym died, a little girl asked her father: “Where has the pillar that used to
stand in our neighbor’s yard gone?” The father responded: “Our neighbor was a
pious man who used to stand in prayer all night, from beginning to end.” The
girl thought that he was a pillar, because she would only climb up the roof of her
house [to sleep] at night and [always] find him standing [there]. A Sufi related:
“In [one’s] sleep [one encounters] some realities that do not occur in [one’s]
waking state. Thus, in a dream a man can see the Elect One800 – peace be upon
him – [his] Companions, and the pious Muslims of the earlier generations
(salaf), while he is unable to see them in his waking state. Likewise, he can see
God in a dream, which is a great distinction.”//469
It is related that Abu Bakr al-Ajurri saw God – praise be to Him – in a dream. God asked him: “Ask for what you need!” I said: “My God, pardon all sinners
of the community of Muhammad – may God bless and greet him!” He said: “It is
more appropriate that I do this rather than you. Ask for what you [yourself] need!”
Al-Kattani related: “In a dream I saw the Prophet – may God bless and greet
him. He said: ‘Whoever adorns himself for the sake of people with something
which, as God knows, he does not have, will be disgraced by God.’ He also said:
‘I saw the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – in a dream and asked him:
“Pray to God that my heart will not die!” He said: ‘Say forty times every day,
“O Living, O Self-Sufficient”, and God will enliven your heart!” Al-Hasan b. 800 An epithet of the Prophet (al-mustafa).543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 396
396 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
∏Ali801 – may God be pleased with both of them – saw Jesus son of Mary in a
dream and asked him: “I want to make a seal-ring. What should I inscribe on it?”
Jesus answered: “Inscribe on it: ‘There is no deity but God, the King, the Manifest
Truth.’802This is written at the end of the Gospel.” It is related that Abu Yazid
[al-Bistami] said: “I saw my Lord – may He be great and exalted – in a dream and
asked Him: ‘What is the path to You?’ ‘Abandon your [lower] soul, and come!’”
Ahmad b. Khadrawayh803 saw his Lord in a dream. He told him: “Everyone
demands something from Me. Only Abu Yazid demands Me.” Yahya b. Sa∏id
al-Qattan said: “I saw my Lord in a dream and said: ‘O Lord, how many times have
I prayed to You and You have not answered me!’ Most High said: ‘Yahya, I love
hearing your voice!’” Bishr b. al-Harith said: “I saw the Commander of the Faithful
∏Ali b. Abi Talib – may God be pleased with him – in a dream and said: ‘O
Commander of the Faithful, advise me!’ He said: ‘How beautiful is the inclination
of the rich toward the poor in their search of the reward of God Most High! And
how beautiful is the pride of the poor toward the rich in their reliance on God
Most High!’ I asked: ‘O Commander of the Faithful, give me more!’ He recited:
You were dead, then became alive and soon you shall be dead [again]
A residence in the abode of transience is hardly possible
So build a residence [for yourself] in the abode of eternity!”
It is related that someone saw Sufyan al-Thawri in a dream and asked him: “What
did God Most High do to you?” He answered: “He showed mercy to me.” He
was asked: “And what is the state of ∏Abdallah b. al-Mubarak?” He answered:
“He is one of those who enter into the presence of [their] Lord twice a day.”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say that the master Abu Sahl al-Su∏luki
saw Abu Sahl//470 al-Zajjaji in a dream.Dinar’s daughter asked him: “Why don’t you sleep?” He answered: “Your
father is afraid of a surprise attack by night!” It is related that when al-Rabi∏ b. Khuthaym died, a little girl asked her father: “Where has the pillar that used to
stand in our neighbor’s yard gone?” The father responded: “Our neighbor was a
pious man who used to stand in prayer all night, from beginning to end.” The
girl thought that he was a pillar, because she would only climb up the roof of her
house [to sleep] at night and [always] find him standing [there]. A Sufi related:
“In [one’s] sleep [one encounters] some realities that do not occur in [one’s]
waking state. Thus, in a dream a man can see the Elect One800 – peace be upon
him – [his] Companions, and the pious Muslims of the earlier generations
(salaf), while he is unable to see them in his waking state. Likewise, he can see
God in a dream, which is a great distinction.”//469
It is related that Abu Bakr al-Ajurri saw God – praise be to Him – in a dream. God asked him: “Ask for what you need!” I said: “My God, pardon all sinners
of the community of Muhammad – may God bless and greet him!” He said: “It is
more appropriate that I do this rather than you. Ask for what you [yourself] need!”
Al-Kattani related: “In a dream I saw the Prophet – may God bless and greet
him. He said: ‘Whoever adorns himself for the sake of people with something
which, as God knows, he does not have, will be disgraced by God.’ He also said:
‘I saw the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – in a dream and asked him:
“Pray to God that my heart will not die!” He said: ‘Say forty times every day,
“O Living, O Self-Sufficient”, and God will enliven your heart!” Al-Hasan b. 800 An epithet of the Prophet (al-mustafa).

And
how beautiful is the pride of the poor toward the rich in their reliance on God
Most High!’ I asked: ‘O Commander of the Faithful, give me more!’ He recited:
You were dead, then became alive and soon you shall be dead [again]
A residence in the abode of transience is hardly possible
So build a residence [for yourself] in the abode of eternity!”
It is related that someone saw Sufyan al-Thawri in a dream and asked him: “What
did God Most High do to you?” He answered: “He showed mercy to me.” He
was asked: “And what is the state of ∏Abdallah b. al-Mubarak?” He answered:
“He is one of those who enter into the presence of [their] Lord twice a day.”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say that the master Abu Sahl al-Su∏luki
saw Abu Sahl//470 al-Zajjaji in a dream. [During his lifetime] the latter used
to uphold the teaching about the eternity of punishment [for the sinners in the
afterlife]. Al-Su∏luki asked him: “What did God do to you?” Al-Zajjaji responded:
“Things here are easier than we thought.” Someone saw al-Hasan b. ∏Isam
al-Shaybani in a dream and asked him: “What did God do to you?” He said:
“What can come from the Benevolent One except benevolence?” Someone saw
a Sufi in a dream and asked him about his state. He recited:
They took us to account and were precise,
Then they treated us kindly and set us free! Someone saw Habib al-∏Ajami804 in a dream and asked: “Are you dead, Habib
al-∏Ajami?” He said: “Far from it! My Persianhood (∏ujma) has left me and I
801 The elder son of ∏Ali b. Abi Talib, the cousin and brother-in-law of the Prophet. 802 Q. 24:25. 803 Or “Khidruya”, according to the Persian pronunciation. 804 His last name can be translated as both “the Persian” and “the Barbarian”; as a generic term
this word denotes anyone who speaks Arabic with a foreign accent. It has become a generic
term for non-native speakers of Arabic.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 397
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 397
reside in a bliss (ni∏ma).” It is related that al-Hasan al-Basri entered the mosque
in order to pray the sunset prayer. He found Habib al-∏Ajami there serving as the
prayer leader and he did not pray behind him, because he was afraid that Habib
would mispronounce the [words of] the prayer due to the foreignness of his
tongue.805On that night in a dream he saw someone who said: “Why didn’t you
pray behind him? Had you prayed behind him, all your prior sins would have
been forgiven!” Someone saw Malik b. Anas in a dream and asked him: “What
did God do to you?” He answered: “I was forgiven thanks to the words that
∏Uthman b. ∏Affan806 – may God be pleased with him – uttered each time he
saw a funeral procession: ‘Praise be to the Living One Who never dies!’807” On
the night of al-Hasan al-Basri’s death someone saw in a dream that the gates
of the heaven were opened and a crier announced: “Verily, al-Hasan al-Basri is
coming to God Most High, Who is pleased with him!”
I heard Abu Bakr b. Ishkib say: I saw the master Abu Sahl al-Su∏luki in a
dream in a pleasant state and asked him: “Master, how did you attain this [state]?”
He said: “By thinking well of my Lord!” Someone saw al-Jahiz808in a dream and
asked him: “What did God do to you?” [In response] he recited:
Don’t ever write with your hand anything that you won’t be happy to see
On the Day of Judgement. In a dream al-Junayd saw the Devil naked and asked him: “Aren’t you ashamed
of yourself before people?” He answered: “Those are not [real] people! The real
people are in the al-Shuniziyya mosque. They emaciate my body and burn my
liver!” Al-Junayd said: “When I woke up, I went to the mosque and saw a group
of people with their heads on their knees, engrossed in contemplation.And
how beautiful is the pride of the poor toward the rich in their reliance on God
Most High!’ I asked: ‘O Commander of the Faithful, give me more!’ He recited:
You were dead, then became alive and soon you shall be dead [again]
A residence in the abode of transience is hardly possible
So build a residence [for yourself] in the abode of eternity!”
It is related that someone saw Sufyan al-Thawri in a dream and asked him: “What
did God Most High do to you?” He answered: “He showed mercy to me.” He
was asked: “And what is the state of ∏Abdallah b. al-Mubarak?” He answered:
“He is one of those who enter into the presence of [their] Lord twice a day.”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say that the master Abu Sahl al-Su∏luki
saw Abu Sahl//470 al-Zajjaji in a dream. [During his lifetime] the latter used
to uphold the teaching about the eternity of punishment [for the sinners in the
afterlife]. Al-Su∏luki asked him: “What did God do to you?” Al-Zajjaji responded:
“Things here are easier than we thought.” Someone saw al-Hasan b. ∏Isam
al-Shaybani in a dream and asked him: “What did God do to you?” He said:
“What can come from the Benevolent One except benevolence?” Someone saw
a Sufi in a dream and asked him about his state. He recited:
They took us to account and were precise,
Then they treated us kindly and set us free! Someone saw Habib al-∏Ajami804 in a dream and asked: “Are you dead, Habib
al-∏Ajami?” He said: “Far from it! My Persianhood (∏ujma) has left me and I
801 The elder son of ∏Ali b. Abi Talib, the cousin and brother-in-law of the Prophet. 802 Q. 24:25. 803 Or “Khidruya”, according to the Persian pronunciation. 804 His last name can be translated as both “the Persian” and “the Barbarian”; as a generic term
this word denotes anyone who speaks Arabic with a foreign accent. It has become a generic
term for non-native speakers of Arabic.

The real
people are in the al-Shuniziyya mosque. They emaciate my body and burn my
liver!” Al-Junayd said: “When I woke up, I went to the mosque and saw a group
of people with their heads on their knees, engrossed in contemplation. When
they saw me, they said: ‘May you not be deceived by the story of the evil one!’”
After al-Nasrabadhi’s death someone saw him at Mecca in a dream and asked
him: “What did God Most High do to you?” He said: “I was reprimanded in the
way the noble ones (ashraf) are reprimanded. Then a voice called on me, saying:
‘Abu πl-Qasim, is there unification after separation?’ I said: ‘No, O Possessor of
Majesty!’ And no sooner had they put me in the grave than I was with the
One!”//471 It is related that someone saw Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri in a dream and
asked him: “What did God do to you?” He said: “In that life I asked Him to grant
three of my wishes. He granted some of them and I hope that He will grant me the
rest [in the afterlife]. [First,] I asked Him to grant me one of the ten [good] things
805 See note 804. 806 The third of the four “rightly guided” successors (caliphs) of the Prophet, who was murdered
by a group of mutineers in 35/655. 807 It is not clear who uttered these words: someone who was present at Malik’s funeral, or,
perhaps, ∏Uthman’s words served as his intercession before God on behalf of all deceased. 808 A celebrated man of letters and prolific author from Basra, who adhered to the Mu∏tazilite
school of speculative theology; he died in 255/869. His works addressed a wide variety of
themes from language and belles-lettresto politics and theology.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 398
398 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
that Ridwan809 holds in his hand and He gave it to me by Himself; [second, I
asked Him] to torture me with ten tortures of which the hand of Malik810 holds
just one, and He did that Himself; [third, I asked Him] to endow me with [the
ability to] recollect Him with the tongue of eternity.”811It is related that someone
saw al-Shibli in a dream after his death and asked him: “What did God Most
High do to you?” He answered: “He did not take me to task for any of my claims,
except one. One day I said: ‘There is no greater loss than the loss of Paradise and
entry into Hell.’ God told me: ‘What loss can be greater than the loss of meeting
with Me?’”
I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “Al-Jurayri saw al-Junayd in a
dream [after his death] and asked him: ‘How are you, Abu πl-Qasim?’ He answered:
‘Gone are all those allegorical allusions (isharat), and all those unequivocal
expressions (∏ibarat) have vanished. Only those praises of God that we used to
utter in the morning have benefited us [in the Hereafter]!’” Al-Nibaji said: “One
day I had a craving for something. In a dream I heard a voice saying: ‘Does
it befit a free man seeking [God] (al-hurr al-murid) to humiliate himself before
[His] servants, while he can receive everything he wants from his Master?’” Ibn
al-Jallaπ said: “I arrived in Medina destitute and hungry. I went to the grave [of
the Prophet] and said: ‘I am your guest, the prophet of God.’ Then I fell asleep
and, in my dream, saw the Prophet – may God bless and greet him. He gave me
a loaf of bread and I ate half of it. When I woke up, I [still] held the other half in
my hand.” A Sufi related: “I saw the Prophet – may God bless and greet him – in
a dream. He told me: ‘Go visit Ibn ∏Awn, for he loves God and His messenger!’”
It is related that ∏Utba al-Ghulam saw a beautiful maiden of Paradise (hawraπ) in a
dream. She told him: “∏Utba, I am in love with you.The real
people are in the al-Shuniziyya mosque. They emaciate my body and burn my
liver!” Al-Junayd said: “When I woke up, I went to the mosque and saw a group
of people with their heads on their knees, engrossed in contemplation. When
they saw me, they said: ‘May you not be deceived by the story of the evil one!’”
After al-Nasrabadhi’s death someone saw him at Mecca in a dream and asked
him: “What did God Most High do to you?” He said: “I was reprimanded in the
way the noble ones (ashraf) are reprimanded. Then a voice called on me, saying:
‘Abu πl-Qasim, is there unification after separation?’ I said: ‘No, O Possessor of
Majesty!’ And no sooner had they put me in the grave than I was with the
One!”//471 It is related that someone saw Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri in a dream and
asked him: “What did God do to you?” He said: “In that life I asked Him to grant
three of my wishes. He granted some of them and I hope that He will grant me the
rest [in the afterlife]. [First,] I asked Him to grant me one of the ten [good] things
805 See note 804. 806 The third of the four “rightly guided” successors (caliphs) of the Prophet, who was murdered
by a group of mutineers in 35/655. 807 It is not clear who uttered these words: someone who was present at Malik’s funeral, or,
perhaps, ∏Uthman’s words served as his intercession before God on behalf of all deceased. 808 A celebrated man of letters and prolific author from Basra, who adhered to the Mu∏tazilite
school of speculative theology; he died in 255/869. His works addressed a wide variety of
themes from language and belles-lettresto politics and theology.

He told me: ‘Go visit Ibn ∏Awn, for he loves God and His messenger!’”
It is related that ∏Utba al-Ghulam saw a beautiful maiden of Paradise (hawraπ) in a
dream. She told him: “∏Utba, I am in love with you. Be careful not to do anything
that would stand between you and me!” ∏Utba then told her: “I have divorced
this world thrice and I will not return to it until I meet you!” I heard Mansur
al-Maghribi say: “In Syria I saw a distinguished Sufi master who habitually kept
to himself (inqibad). I was told: ‘If you want this master to be friendly to you,
greet him by saying: “May God endow you with the maidens of Paradise!” He
will be pleased with you thanks to this greeting.’ I asked them about the reason
for that and was told that he had seen some maidens of Paradise in his dream and
this [scene] remained in his heart. So I went to him and greeted him, saying:
‘May God endow you with the maidens of Paradise!’ And the master was friendly
to me.”//472 It is related that Ayyub al-Sakhtiyani saw a funeral procession of a
sinner and hid in an entrance hall of a house lest he be required to offer a funeral
prayer for it. A Sufi saw the deceased in a dream and asked: “What did God do
to you?” He answered: “He pardoned me and said: ‘Tell Ayyub al-Sakhtiyani:
809 The angel that guards the gates of Paradise, who dresses and serves the blessed, and draws away
the veils that cover the face of God. 810 The angel of Hell who torments its inhabitants. 811 According a commentator, the first two wishes were granted in the Hereafter, while the last
was granted in his earthly life.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 399
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 399
“Say: If you possessed the treasures of my Lord’s mercy, yet would you hold back
for fear of expending.”’812” It is said that on the night Malik b. Dinar died [people]
saw as if the gates of heaven had opened and a voice announced: “Verily, Malik
b. Dinar has become a dweller in Paradise!” A Sufi recounted: “On the night that
Dawud al-Taπi died, I saw a light and angels, both ascending and descending. I
asked [them]: ‘What night is this?’ They said: ‘This is the night in which Dawud
al-Taπi died. Paradise has been decorated for the arrival of his spirit [amidst its
inhabitants].’813”
The master Abu πl-Qasim al-Qushayri said: “I saw the master Abu ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq in a dream [after his death] and asked: ‘What did God do to you?’ He
answered: ‘Forgiveness is not of great importance here and of the least importance
among those present here is so-and-so’ – and he mentioned his name. It occurred
to me in my dream that the person he had in mind had unlawfully killed a man.”
It is related that when Kurz b. Wabra died, someone saw in a dream as if the
inhabitants of the graves had come clad in new white garments. When the seer
of the dream asked them what it was, he was told: “The inhabitants of the graves
have put on new garments because Kurz b. Wabra is coming to [join] them.”
Someone saw Yusuf b. al-Husayn in a dream and asked him: “What did God do
to you?” He said: “God has pardoned me.” When [the dreamer] asked him why,
he answered: “Because I had never mixed seriousness with joke.” Someone saw
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Zarrad in a dream and asked him: “What did God Most High
do to you?” He answered: “He stationed me [before Him] and pardoned me
all the sins that I had committed to in my earthly life, except one, which I was
too ashamed to admit. So he kept me standing and sweating until flesh started
to fall off my face.” The dreamer asked what his sin was.He told me: ‘Go visit Ibn ∏Awn, for he loves God and His messenger!’”
It is related that ∏Utba al-Ghulam saw a beautiful maiden of Paradise (hawraπ) in a
dream. She told him: “∏Utba, I am in love with you. Be careful not to do anything
that would stand between you and me!” ∏Utba then told her: “I have divorced
this world thrice and I will not return to it until I meet you!” I heard Mansur
al-Maghribi say: “In Syria I saw a distinguished Sufi master who habitually kept
to himself (inqibad). I was told: ‘If you want this master to be friendly to you,
greet him by saying: “May God endow you with the maidens of Paradise!” He
will be pleased with you thanks to this greeting.’ I asked them about the reason
for that and was told that he had seen some maidens of Paradise in his dream and
this [scene] remained in his heart. So I went to him and greeted him, saying:
‘May God endow you with the maidens of Paradise!’ And the master was friendly
to me.”//472 It is related that Ayyub al-Sakhtiyani saw a funeral procession of a
sinner and hid in an entrance hall of a house lest he be required to offer a funeral
prayer for it. A Sufi saw the deceased in a dream and asked: “What did God do
to you?” He answered: “He pardoned me and said: ‘Tell Ayyub al-Sakhtiyani:
809 The angel that guards the gates of Paradise, who dresses and serves the blessed, and draws away
the veils that cover the face of God. 810 The angel of Hell who torments its inhabitants. 811 According a commentator, the first two wishes were granted in the Hereafter, while the last
was granted in his earthly life.

al-Husayn in a dream and asked him: “What did God do
to you?” He said: “God has pardoned me.” When [the dreamer] asked him why,
he answered: “Because I had never mixed seriousness with joke.” Someone saw
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Zarrad in a dream and asked him: “What did God Most High
do to you?” He answered: “He stationed me [before Him] and pardoned me
all the sins that I had committed to in my earthly life, except one, which I was
too ashamed to admit. So he kept me standing and sweating until flesh started
to fall off my face.” The dreamer asked what his sin was. He said: “One day I
looked at a handsome person and was too ashamed to mention it.”
I heard Abu Sa∏id al-Shahham say: “In a dream I saw the master and imam
Abu πl-Tayyib Sahl al-Su∏luki814 and told him: ‘O master!’ ‘Forget about “the
master”!’ he responded. ‘After all those [spiritual] states you experienced [in this
life]?’ I asked him. ‘They were of no use to us,’ he said. Then I asked him: ‘What
did God do to you?’ He said: ‘He pardoned me, thanks to the issues that the
old and infirm folks used to question me about and to which I responded.’” I
heard Abu Bakr al-Rashidi al-Faqih say: “In a dream I saw Muhammad al-Tusi
al-Mu∏allim who said://473 ‘Recite this to Abu Sa∏id al-Saffar al-Muπaddib:
We used to keep the pledge not to deviate from [our] passion
But, by love’s life, you have deviated, whereas we have not
You have been distracted from us by the company of others
And you have shown alienation [toward us], no we were not like this
[before]
812 Q. 17:100; 17:103, according to Arberry’s translation. 813 This last phrase is omitted from one of the versions of the text. 814 He was a prominent Shafi∏i jurist, who was born in Isfahan and spent most of his life in
Nishapur; he died either in 402/1011 or 404/1014.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 400
400 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
May He Who directs affairs by His knowledge unite us after
death just as we used to be!’
“When I woke up, I recited this to Abu Sa∏id al-Saffar, who told me: ‘I used to
visit his grave every Friday. However, I neglected to visit it this [last] Friday.’”
A Sufi related: “In a dream I saw the Messenger of God – may God bless and
greet him – surrounded by a group of the poor.815While he was in that state, two
angels descended from heaven. One of them had a basin in his hand, the other
a pitcher. [One] placed the basin before the Messenger of God – may God
bless and greet him – [while the other] washed his hands. The Messenger then
ordered the two angels to wash the hands of the poor. After that, the basin was
placed before me. One angel said to the other: ‘Don’t pour water on his hands,
for he is not one of them.’ I asked the Messenger of God: ‘Has it not been reported
that you said: “A man belongs to those he loves”?’ He said: ‘Yes, indeed.’ I
said: ‘I love you and I love these poor ones!’ The Messenger – may God bless
and greet him – then commanded: ‘Pour water on his hands, for he is one of
them!’”
It is related that a Sufi was constantly calling: “Well-being! Well-being!”
Someone asked him about the meaning of this prayer. He explained: “Initially, I
worked as a porter. One day, I was carrying a heavy load of flour. I put it down
in order to have some rest and said: ‘O Lord, if You were to provide me with
two loaves of bread without toil, I would be content with them!’ Suddenly, there
appeared two men who were quarreling with one another. When I stepped
forward in order make peace between them, one of them struck me on the head
with something in an attempt to strike his opponent. My face was bloodied. Then
the local constable arrived and arrested them. When he saw me stained with blood,
he thought that I too took part in the quarrel and put me in jail.al-Husayn in a dream and asked him: “What did God do
to you?” He said: “God has pardoned me.” When [the dreamer] asked him why,
he answered: “Because I had never mixed seriousness with joke.” Someone saw
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Zarrad in a dream and asked him: “What did God Most High
do to you?” He answered: “He stationed me [before Him] and pardoned me
all the sins that I had committed to in my earthly life, except one, which I was
too ashamed to admit. So he kept me standing and sweating until flesh started
to fall off my face.” The dreamer asked what his sin was. He said: “One day I
looked at a handsome person and was too ashamed to mention it.”
I heard Abu Sa∏id al-Shahham say: “In a dream I saw the master and imam
Abu πl-Tayyib Sahl al-Su∏luki814 and told him: ‘O master!’ ‘Forget about “the
master”!’ he responded. ‘After all those [spiritual] states you experienced [in this
life]?’ I asked him. ‘They were of no use to us,’ he said. Then I asked him: ‘What
did God do to you?’ He said: ‘He pardoned me, thanks to the issues that the
old and infirm folks used to question me about and to which I responded.’” I
heard Abu Bakr al-Rashidi al-Faqih say: “In a dream I saw Muhammad al-Tusi
al-Mu∏allim who said://473 ‘Recite this to Abu Sa∏id al-Saffar al-Muπaddib:
We used to keep the pledge not to deviate from [our] passion
But, by love’s life, you have deviated, whereas we have not
You have been distracted from us by the company of others
And you have shown alienation [toward us], no we were not like this
[before]
812 Q. 17:100; 17:103, according to Arberry’s translation. 813 This last phrase is omitted from one of the versions of the text. 814 He was a prominent Shafi∏i jurist, who was born in Isfahan and spent most of his life in
Nishapur; he died either in 402/1011 or 404/1014.

Then
the local constable arrived and arrested them. When he saw me stained with blood,
he thought that I too took part in the quarrel and put me in jail. I remained in
the jail for some time, and each day two loaves of bread were brought to me. One
night, in a dream I heard a voice saying: ‘You asked for two loaves of bread every
day without any exertion on your part. However, you did not ask for well-being,
so God has given you what you asked for.’ When I woke up, I uttered: ‘Well-being! Well-being!’ [All of a sudden] I heard that someone knocked on the door of the
jail, crying: ‘Where is ∏Umar the Porter (al-Hammal)?’ They then set me free
and let me go.”
Al-Kattani related: “One of our companions had an inflamed eye. Someone
asked him why he was not treating it. He answered: ‘I made a vow not to treat it
until it heals on its own.’ Then I [al-Kattani] saw in a dream that someone said:
‘Had all the inhabitants of the hellfire made such a vow, we would have taken
them out of the fire!’” It is related that al-Junayd said: “In a dream I saw myself
preaching to people. An angel appeared before me and asked: ‘What makes those
close to God the closest to Him?’ I answered: ‘A secret deed measured by a
trustworthy scale.’//474 The angel departed from me, saying: ‘By God, this is
815 That is, Sufis.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 401
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 401
indeed a blessed speech!’” A man said to al-∏Alaπ b. Ziyad: “In a dream I saw you
among the inhabitants of Paradise!” He answered: “Perhaps Satan wanted to
foist something on me, but I was rendered immune to it. So he dispatched a man
to me whom he charged with achieving his goal of leading me astray!” Someone
saw ∏Ataπ al-Salami in a dream and told him: “[During your lifetime] you used to
be constantly grief-stricken. What did God Most High do to you?” He answered:
“By God, He replaced that with a long rest and constant joy!” The dreamer asked
him: “What rank do you occupy?” He answered [quoting the Qurπan]: “They
are with those whom God has blessed, prophets, just men, the righteous …”816
Someone saw al-Awza∏i817in a dream. He said: “I have not seen here a rank loftier
than that of the scholars, followed by that of the sad ones.” Al-Nibaji related: “In
a dream I was told: ‘Whoever entrusts God with his sustenance will see his moral
character bettered, his soul generous in expending it, and tempting thoughts in
his canonical prayer being rare.’” Someone saw Zubayda818and asked her: “What
did God do to you?” She said: “He pardoned me.” The dreamer asked: “[That
is] because of the charitable donations you expended on the road to Mecca?”
“No,” she said. “This was but the fee that reverted to its [rightful] owners.819
He pardoned me on account of my [sincere] intention.” Someone saw Sufyan
al-Thawri in a dream and asked him: “What did God do to you?” He answered:
“My first step landed on the Bridge820and the second in Paradise.” Ahmad b. Abi
πl-Hawari related: “In a dream I saw a young woman of the beauty the like of
which I had never seen. Her face radiated light. I asked her what had made her
face so radiant. She answered: ‘Do you remember the night on which you wept?’
I said: ‘Yes.’ She said: ‘A drop of your tears was brought to me.Then
the local constable arrived and arrested them. When he saw me stained with blood,
he thought that I too took part in the quarrel and put me in jail. I remained in
the jail for some time, and each day two loaves of bread were brought to me. One
night, in a dream I heard a voice saying: ‘You asked for two loaves of bread every
day without any exertion on your part. However, you did not ask for well-being,
so God has given you what you asked for.’ When I woke up, I uttered: ‘Well-being! Well-being!’ [All of a sudden] I heard that someone knocked on the door of the
jail, crying: ‘Where is ∏Umar the Porter (al-Hammal)?’ They then set me free
and let me go.”
Al-Kattani related: “One of our companions had an inflamed eye. Someone
asked him why he was not treating it. He answered: ‘I made a vow not to treat it
until it heals on its own.’ Then I [al-Kattani] saw in a dream that someone said:
‘Had all the inhabitants of the hellfire made such a vow, we would have taken
them out of the fire!’” It is related that al-Junayd said: “In a dream I saw myself
preaching to people. An angel appeared before me and asked: ‘What makes those
close to God the closest to Him?’ I answered: ‘A secret deed measured by a
trustworthy scale.’//474 The angel departed from me, saying: ‘By God, this is
815 That is, Sufis.

I asked her what had made her
face so radiant. She answered: ‘Do you remember the night on which you wept?’
I said: ‘Yes.’ She said: ‘A drop of your tears was brought to me. I rubbed it into
my face and it became like this.’”
It is related that Yazid al-Raqashi821saw the Prophet – may God bless and greet
him – in a dream and recited [some passages from] the Qurπan to him, whereupon
the Prophet asked: “This is the recitation, but where is the weeping?” Al-Junayd
related: “In a dream I saw two angels descend from heaven. One of them asked:
‘What is truthfulness (sidq)?’ I answered: ‘Being faithful to one’s promise.’ The
second [angel] said, ‘He has spoken truth’, and they ascended [to heaven].”
Someone saw Bishr al-Hafi in a dream and asked him: “What did God Most
High do to you?” Bishr said: “He pardoned me and said: ‘Bishr, aren’t you
816 Q. 4:69; 4:71, according to Arberry’s translation. 817 A renowned jurist from Syria under the Umayyads, who died in 157/774. 818 Zubayda bint Ja∏far (216/832), wife of the caliph Harun al-Rashid, who was renowned for
her piety and charitable activities, including the improvement of the pilgrimage road to
Mecca. 819 Since the money she donated was, in the final account, extracted from the caliph’s subjects,
often unlawfully, the caliph’s subjects were its rightful owners. 820 The bridge over Hell, which the righteous cross in the winking of an eye and which the wicked
fall off of into the fire of Gehenna. 821 Yazid b. Aban al-Raqashi (d. 129/738) belonged to the circle of al-Hasan al-Basri and was
famous for his world-renouncing attitude.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 402
402 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
ashamed before Me, for having been so much afraid of Me?!’”//475 Someone
saw Abu Sulayman al-Darani in a dream and asked him: “What did God do to
you?” He answered: “He pardoned me. Nothing did more harm to me than
the allegorical allusions of the Sufis!” ∏Ali b. al-Muwaffaq said: “One day I was
thinking about my family and the poverty that they were suffering. Then I saw
in a dream a sheet of paper. Written on it was [the following]: ‘In the name
of God the Merciful, the Compassionate. O Ibn al-Muwaffaq, how can you be
afraid of poverty, when I am your Lord?’ At the end of the night, a man brought
me a purse which contained five thousand dinars and told me: ‘Take them, you
of weak certitude!’” Al-Junayd related: “In a dream I saw myself standing in
front of God Most High. He told me: ‘Abu πl-Qasim, where do you get the words
that you say?’ I answered: ‘I say nothing but truth.’ He told me: ‘You have spoken
the truth!’” Abu Bakr al-Kattani said: “In a dream I saw a young man, the most
handsome I had ever seen. I asked him who he was. ‘I am the fear of God (taqwa),’
he answered. ‘Where do you reside,’ I asked him. ‘In the heart of every sad
individual,’ he answered. Then I turned and saw a black woman, as ugly as one
can [possibly] be. I asked her who she was. She answered: ‘I am laughter.’ I asked
her: ‘Where do you reside?’ ‘In every cheerful, carefree heart,’ she answered. When I woke up, I made a vow never to laugh, unless I am overcome [with
laughter].” It is related that Abu ∏Abdallah b. Khafif said: “In a dream I saw the
Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him. He told me: ‘Whoever has
known the path to God Most High, followed it and then deviated from it, will
taste the punishment that no one in the world has ever suffered.’” Someone
saw al-Shibli in a dream and asked him: “What did God Most High do to you?”
He answered: “He interrogated me until I grew desperate.I asked her what had made her
face so radiant. She answered: ‘Do you remember the night on which you wept?’
I said: ‘Yes.’ She said: ‘A drop of your tears was brought to me. I rubbed it into
my face and it became like this.’”
It is related that Yazid al-Raqashi821saw the Prophet – may God bless and greet
him – in a dream and recited [some passages from] the Qurπan to him, whereupon
the Prophet asked: “This is the recitation, but where is the weeping?” Al-Junayd
related: “In a dream I saw two angels descend from heaven. One of them asked:
‘What is truthfulness (sidq)?’ I answered: ‘Being faithful to one’s promise.’ The
second [angel] said, ‘He has spoken truth’, and they ascended [to heaven].”
Someone saw Bishr al-Hafi in a dream and asked him: “What did God Most
High do to you?” Bishr said: “He pardoned me and said: ‘Bishr, aren’t you
816 Q. 4:69; 4:71, according to Arberry’s translation. 817 A renowned jurist from Syria under the Umayyads, who died in 157/774. 818 Zubayda bint Ja∏far (216/832), wife of the caliph Harun al-Rashid, who was renowned for
her piety and charitable activities, including the improvement of the pilgrimage road to
Mecca. 819 Since the money she donated was, in the final account, extracted from the caliph’s subjects,
often unlawfully, the caliph’s subjects were its rightful owners. 820 The bridge over Hell, which the righteous cross in the winking of an eye and which the wicked
fall off of into the fire of Gehenna. 821 Yazid b. Aban al-Raqashi (d. 129/738) belonged to the circle of al-Hasan al-Basri and was
famous for his world-renouncing attitude.

Khafif said: “In a dream I saw the
Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him. He told me: ‘Whoever has
known the path to God Most High, followed it and then deviated from it, will
taste the punishment that no one in the world has ever suffered.’” Someone
saw al-Shibli in a dream and asked him: “What did God Most High do to you?”
He answered: “He interrogated me until I grew desperate. When He saw my
desperation, He enveloped me in His mercy.”
Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi said: “In a dream, I heard a voice saying: ‘Abu
∏Uthman, fear God in poverty even in matters as unimportant as a sesame
seed.’” It is related that Abu Sa∏id had a son, who had predeceased him. Abu
Sa∏id saw him in a dream and told him: “My son, advise me!” The son said:
“Father, do not deal with God in a cowardly manner!” “Tell me more,” asked
Abu Sa∏id. The son said: “Do not contradict God in what He demands of you.”
“Tell me more,” asked Abu Sa∏id. The son said: “Don’t set a shirt between you
and God!” [After that,] Abu Sa∏id did not wear a shirt for thirty years.//476 A
Sufi used to say in his prayer: “My God, if something does no harm to You,
while benefiting us, do not prevent it from [happening to] us.” In a dream he was
told: “If something neither harms you, nor benefits you – give it up!” Abu πl-Fadl
al-Isbahani related: “In a dream I saw the Messenger of God – may God bless
and greet him. I told him: ‘Messenger of God, ask God not to deprive me of
faith!’ The Messenger – may God bless and greet him – said: ‘This is something
God Most High has already assured!’” Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz related: “In a dream
I saw the Devil and raised my walking stick in order to hit him. [Suddenly] I
heard a voice saying: ‘He is not afraid of this. He is afraid of a light [of faith] that
resides in the heart!’”543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 403
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 403
A Sufi related: “I used to direct my prayers to Rabi∏a al-∏Adawiyya.822 Once
I saw her in a dream saying: ‘Your gifts come to us on the dishes of light wrapped
up in the napkins of light!’” It is related that Sammak823 b. Harb said: “When I
went blind, I saw in a dream someone who told me: ‘Go to the Euphrates, immerse
yourself in it, then open your eyes!’ I did so, and my eyesight returned to me.”
It is related that someone saw Bishr al-Hafi in a dream and asked him: “What did
God do to you?” He said: “When I saw my Lord – may He be great and exalted
– He told me: ‘Welcome, Bishr! I took you to Myself on the day I took you to
Myself and there’s no one on the [entire] earth whom I love more!’”
Spiritual advice for Sufi novices (wasaya li πl-muridin)
The master and imam [al-Qushayri] said: “After we have mentioned some
episodes from the biographies of the [Sufi] folk and complemented this with
chapters on the stations [of the Sufi] path, we would like to complete this
epistle with some spiritual advice (wasiyya)824 for [Sufi] novices. We ask God
Most High that He help them in properly executing this advice, that He not
prevent them from fulfilling it, and that He not use it as an argument against
us.825 The first step of the [Sufi] novice on this [Sufi] path requires that he be
sincere, so that he could build on a sound foundation. Sufi masters have said
[about this]: “They were deprived of the arrival [in God’s presence] (wusul),
because they neglected the foundations (usul).” Likewise, I heard the master Abu
∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “The beginning [of the Sufi path] requires a sound belief
that binds the servant and God Most High – one that is free from uncertainty
and doubt, devoid of delusion and innovation, and derived from [irrefutable]
proofs and arguments.” It is revolting if the novice should espouse a teaching
that does not belong to this [Sufi] path.We ask God
Most High that He help them in properly executing this advice, that He not
prevent them from fulfilling it, and that He not use it as an argument against
us.825 The first step of the [Sufi] novice on this [Sufi] path requires that he be
sincere, so that he could build on a sound foundation. Sufi masters have said
[about this]: “They were deprived of the arrival [in God’s presence] (wusul),
because they neglected the foundations (usul).” Likewise, I heard the master Abu
∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “The beginning [of the Sufi path] requires a sound belief
that binds the servant and God Most High – one that is free from uncertainty
and doubt, devoid of delusion and innovation, and derived from [irrefutable]
proofs and arguments.” It is revolting if the novice should espouse a teaching
that does not belong to this [Sufi] path. If a Sufi happens to adhere to a teaching
of those who deviate from the Sufi path,//477 this is but a result of his ignorance
of the teachings of the followers of this path. For their arguments in support of
their beliefs are clearer than anyone else’s and the foundations of their teachings
are firmer than the foundations of any other teaching. People [belong to two
classes]: they are either adherents of received knowledge (naql) and transmitted
reports (athar), or supporters of [rational] knowledge (∏aql) and speculation
(fikr). The masters of this community (taπifa) have risen above them all. What
others consider to be unknown is but a manifest [truth] for them. The knowledge
that other people can only aspire to is rendered real to them by God – praise
be to Him. They are those who have arrived [in the presence of God], while the
rest are guided by argumentative reasoning. They are as the poet described
them:
822 The celebrated female mystic from Basra, who figures prominently in the Sufi lore; she died
in 185/801; see IM, pp. 26–32. 823 Or “Simak”. 824 This term can also be translated as, for example, “instruction”, “bequest” and “counsel”.Khafif said: “In a dream I saw the
Messenger of God – may God bless and greet him. He told me: ‘Whoever has
known the path to God Most High, followed it and then deviated from it, will
taste the punishment that no one in the world has ever suffered.’” Someone
saw al-Shibli in a dream and asked him: “What did God Most High do to you?”
He answered: “He interrogated me until I grew desperate. When He saw my
desperation, He enveloped me in His mercy.”
Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi said: “In a dream, I heard a voice saying: ‘Abu
∏Uthman, fear God in poverty even in matters as unimportant as a sesame
seed.’” It is related that Abu Sa∏id had a son, who had predeceased him. Abu
Sa∏id saw him in a dream and told him: “My son, advise me!” The son said:
“Father, do not deal with God in a cowardly manner!” “Tell me more,” asked
Abu Sa∏id. The son said: “Do not contradict God in what He demands of you.”
“Tell me more,” asked Abu Sa∏id. The son said: “Don’t set a shirt between you
and God!” [After that,] Abu Sa∏id did not wear a shirt for thirty years.//476 A
Sufi used to say in his prayer: “My God, if something does no harm to You,
while benefiting us, do not prevent it from [happening to] us.” In a dream he was
told: “If something neither harms you, nor benefits you – give it up!” Abu πl-Fadl
al-Isbahani related: “In a dream I saw the Messenger of God – may God bless
and greet him. I told him: ‘Messenger of God, ask God not to deprive me of
faith!’ The Messenger – may God bless and greet him – said: ‘This is something
God Most High has already assured!’” Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz related: “In a dream
I saw the Devil and raised my walking stick in order to hit him. [Suddenly] I
heard a voice saying: ‘He is not afraid of this. He is afraid of a light [of faith] that
resides in the heart!’”

823 Or “Simak”. 824 This term can also be translated as, for example, “instruction”, “bequest” and “counsel”. 825 That is, in case they prove to be incorrect.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 404
404 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
My night has turned to dawn thanks to your face
While its darkness spreads itself among people
They are enveloped with darkness
Whereas we roam in the bright shine of the day. There has never been an age in the history of Islam without a master of this
community who was proficient in the science of the oneness [of God]. There has
never been a leader of the Sufis to whom the greatest scholars of his epoch would
not subordinate themselves and pay obeisance and seek blessing of. Had they not
had the distinction and special qualities to them, this would not have been so. Once, as Ahmad b. Hanbal was sitting with al-Shafi∏i,826 Shayban al-Ra∏i827
came to them. Ahmad said [to al-Shafi∏i]: “Abu ∏Abdallah, I’d like to draw your
attention to his lack of knowledge,828so that he would busy himself with acquiring
some of it.” Al-Shafi∏i exclaimed: “Don’t do this!” However, Ibn Hanbal did
not desist. He asked Shayban: “What can you say about someone who forgot [to
perform] one of the five [canonical] daily prayers and cannot remember which
of them he forgot? Shayban, what do you think he should do?” Shayban replied:
“Ahmad, that is a heart that was neglectful of God Most High. Therefore, it
must be educated [in good manners], so that it would never ever be neglectful of
its Master.” [On hearing this] Ahmad [b. Hanbal] fainted. When he came to,
al-Shafi∏i – may God have mercy on him – said: “Didn’t I tell you to leave him
alone?!” Shayban al-Ra∏i was an illiterate man. If an illiterate Sufi like him had
such a stature, one can only fathom what their leaders were like!//478 It is
related that the teaching circle829 of the great jurist named Abu ∏Imran used to
assemble [in the mosque] next to al-Shibli’s teaching circle. Whenever al-Shibli
spoke, the members of Abu ∏Imran’s circle would migrate to him.823 Or “Simak”. 824 This term can also be translated as, for example, “instruction”, “bequest” and “counsel”. 825 That is, in case they prove to be incorrect.

If an illiterate Sufi like him had
such a stature, one can only fathom what their leaders were like!//478 It is
related that the teaching circle829 of the great jurist named Abu ∏Imran used to
assemble [in the mosque] next to al-Shibli’s teaching circle. Whenever al-Shibli
spoke, the members of Abu ∏Imran’s circle would migrate to him. [One day]
the members of al-Shibli’s circle asked him a question about menstruation in
order to embarrass him. [In response] al-Shibli mentioned [all] the teachings
pertaining to this issue as well as disagreements over it. [On hearing this] Abu
∏Imran stood up and kissed al-Shibli on the head saying: “Abu Bakr, I have
heard ten statements about this issue which I have not heard before. Out of that
which you said [about this issue], I knew only three teachings!” The jurist named
Abu πl-∏Abbas b. Surayj830was passing by the teaching circle of al-Junayd – may
God have mercy on both of them – and heard him speak. Someone asked him
what he thought about that speech. He answered: “I do not understand what he
said, but I felt in his words the strength that an idle talker can never produce.”
826 Both were the most distinguished scholars and jurists of their age, who founded legal schools
named after them. 827 That is, Shayban “the Shepherd”. 828 Ibn Hanbal apparently implied the knowledge of the transmitted [prophetic] reports and
jurisprudence. 829 Before the emergence of religious colleges (madrasa) each distinguished scholar conducted his
teaching session in a mosque, surrounded by the “circle” (halqa) of his disciples. 830 A distinguished Shafi∏i scholar who died in 306/918.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 405
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 405
Someone asked ∏Abdallah b. Sa∏id b. Kullab: “You have debated the teachings of
every [scholar] you have heard. There is a man named al-Junayd. Go and see if you
can challenge him.” ∏Abdallah attended al-Junayd’s circle. He asked al-Junayd
about God’s oneness (tawhid). When al-Junayd responded, ∏Abdallah became
confused and asked him to repeat what he had said. Al-Junayd repeated the same
point but used different words [to express it]. ∏Abdallah told him: “I am unable
to grasp this; can you say this again for me?” Al-Junayd repeated this to him
using different expressions. ∏Abdallah told him: “I am unable to grasp what you
say. Can you dictate this for me?” Al-Junayd said: “If you [are ready to] traverse
it,831 I will dictate this to you.” ∏Abdallah stood up, recognized his [al-Junayd’s]
superiority and acknowledged his exalted status. The foundations of this
community are the soundest foundation, its leaders are the greatest and its
scholars are the most learned of men. Therefore the novice who has faith in
them, if he travels along [their] path and aspires toward their goals, will share in
the unveilings of the unseen [that they witness] and will have no need in the
meddling of anyone who does not belong to this community. If he aspires to
the path of [pious] precedent and is not independent in his spiritual state,
if he strives to depart from the domains of blind imitation in order to arrive at
the true realization (tahqiq), then he must follow in the footsteps of its founders
and tread the path of this generation [of Sufis], for they are better than anyone
else. I heard Shaykh Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami say: I heard AbuBakr al-Razi
say: I heard al-Shibli say: “What do you think about knowledge compared to
which the knowledge of the learned may seem doubtful?” I also heardMuhammad
b. ∏Ali b. Muhammad al-Mukharrimi say: I heard Muhammad b.If an illiterate Sufi like him had
such a stature, one can only fathom what their leaders were like!//478 It is
related that the teaching circle829 of the great jurist named Abu ∏Imran used to
assemble [in the mosque] next to al-Shibli’s teaching circle. Whenever al-Shibli
spoke, the members of Abu ∏Imran’s circle would migrate to him. [One day]
the members of al-Shibli’s circle asked him a question about menstruation in
order to embarrass him. [In response] al-Shibli mentioned [all] the teachings
pertaining to this issue as well as disagreements over it. [On hearing this] Abu
∏Imran stood up and kissed al-Shibli on the head saying: “Abu Bakr, I have
heard ten statements about this issue which I have not heard before. Out of that
which you said [about this issue], I knew only three teachings!” The jurist named
Abu πl-∏Abbas b. Surayj830was passing by the teaching circle of al-Junayd – may
God have mercy on both of them – and heard him speak. Someone asked him
what he thought about that speech. He answered: “I do not understand what he
said, but I felt in his words the strength that an idle talker can never produce.”
826 Both were the most distinguished scholars and jurists of their age, who founded legal schools
named after them. 827 That is, Shayban “the Shepherd”. 828 Ibn Hanbal apparently implied the knowledge of the transmitted [prophetic] reports and
jurisprudence. 829 Before the emergence of religious colleges (madrasa) each distinguished scholar conducted his
teaching session in a mosque, surrounded by the “circle” (halqa) of his disciples. 830 A distinguished Shafi∏i scholar who died in 306/918.

∏Ali b. Muhammad al-Mukharrimi say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah
al-Farghani say: I heard al-Junayd say: “Had I known that God has created
a knowledge under the sun//479 that is nobler than what we together with
our companions and brothers are teaching, I would have aspired and striven
toward it!” After the seeker has established a pact between himself and God,
he should obtain – either through his own realization (tahqiq) or by means of
asking the religious authorities – the knowledge of the Divine Law that allows
him to fulfill his religious duty. When the rulings of legal scholars vary, he
should adopt the most comprehensive of them and seek to avoid any controversy. Dispensations from obligatory requirements (rukhas) are intended for the weak
ones and those who seek to shirk [their duties] by referring to their [mundane]
needs and concerns. As for this [Sufi] community, they have no concern except
for observing the rights of God – praise be to Him. Therefore, they say that if a
Sufi has taken recourse from the rank of the True Reality to a dispensation from
the requirements of the Divine Law, he has departed from his pact with God and
violated that which has existed between God Most High and himself. Now, the
novice must be educated in good manners by a [Sufi] master. If he does not have
one, he will never succeed. Abu Yazid said: “He who does not have a master,
831 That is, the Sufi path.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 406
406 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Satan is his leader.” I heard the master Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq say: “The tree that
has grown on its own without a gardener will bring forth foliage, but will never
bring any fruit. Likewise, if the novice has no master to take his teaching from
breath after breath, then he worships nothing but his personal whims and will
never achieve what he aspires to.” If the novice wants to walk along the [right]
path, he must seek refuge in God from any slip and abandon all errors – be they
manifest or hidden, small or great. He must seek to obtain the pleasure of his
adversaries, for he who fails to satisfy his adversary will not achieve anything on
this [Sufi] path. Thus they have proceeded until they have begun to cut all ties and pre-
occupations of this world, for this path rests on the emptiness of the heart [from
all mundane preoccupations]. Al-Shibli told al-Husri at the beginning of his
novitiate: “If something other than God Most High enters your mind from one
Friday during which you visit me to the next, you are prohibited from visiting me.”
When the aspirant seeks to cut ties to this world, he should first abandon [his]
property; property distracts one from God. There’s no aspirant in this affair of
ours832who remains attached to this world. If he does keep this attachment,//480
then it will soon drag him back to what he aspired to leave behind. And when
he abandons property, he must also give up his [social] status (jah), for clinging
to one’s love of rank is a major obstacle. If the aspirant is concerned by other
people accepting or rejecting him, nothing [good] will come out of him. The
worst thing that can happen to the aspirant is that people begin to take notice of
him [looking at him] with an approving eye and [seeking his] blessing.∏Ali b. Muhammad al-Mukharrimi say: I heard Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah
al-Farghani say: I heard al-Junayd say: “Had I known that God has created
a knowledge under the sun//479 that is nobler than what we together with
our companions and brothers are teaching, I would have aspired and striven
toward it!” After the seeker has established a pact between himself and God,
he should obtain – either through his own realization (tahqiq) or by means of
asking the religious authorities – the knowledge of the Divine Law that allows
him to fulfill his religious duty. When the rulings of legal scholars vary, he
should adopt the most comprehensive of them and seek to avoid any controversy. Dispensations from obligatory requirements (rukhas) are intended for the weak
ones and those who seek to shirk [their duties] by referring to their [mundane]
needs and concerns. As for this [Sufi] community, they have no concern except
for observing the rights of God – praise be to Him. Therefore, they say that if a
Sufi has taken recourse from the rank of the True Reality to a dispensation from
the requirements of the Divine Law, he has departed from his pact with God and
violated that which has existed between God Most High and himself. Now, the
novice must be educated in good manners by a [Sufi] master. If he does not have
one, he will never succeed. Abu Yazid said: “He who does not have a master,
831 That is, the Sufi path.

If the aspirant is concerned by other
people accepting or rejecting him, nothing [good] will come out of him. The
worst thing that can happen to the aspirant is that people begin to take notice of
him [looking at him] with an approving eye and [seeking his] blessing. For the
[common] folk have no inkling of all this, while the novice has not yet made right
his aspiration [to God], so how can one seek to obtain his blessing? [Sufi] novices
are required to abandon their renown, for it is a deadly poison to them. After
the aspirant has given up his property and rank, he should make good his
pact with God Most High and not oppose his master in anything that the latter
prescribes to him. For opposition to one’s master during one’s novitiate is a grave
deficiency, because one’s initial state is the best indicator of [what will happen
to him] during the rest of his life. One condition for success is that there should
be no opposition to the master in his student’s heart. If it occurs to the aspirant
that he has any value or power in this world and the next, or that there’s on the
face of the earth someone who is more lowly than he, he has no right to [aspire
to God]. For one must exert oneself in order to know one’s Lord and not to seek
power for oneself. There is a great difference between a person who aspires to God
Most High and a person who aspires to self-aggrandizement, either in this life or
the Hereafter. Next, the novice must preserve his secret from his ilk, except his
master. If he has concealed even one breath from his master, he will have betrayed
him in his right of companionship. Should he happen to disagree with what
the master has commanded to him, he must confess this in front of his master
immediately. He then should submit himself to the master’s judgement as a
832 Namely, Sufism.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 407
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 407
punishment for his transgression and objection. This may be an [expiatory] journey
assigned to him by the master or [some other] penance, as the master sees fit. The master has no right to overlook the failings of his novices, for this is but
the forfeiture of the rights due to God Most High. As long as the novice retains
any of his [mundane] attachments, the master is unable to instill in him the
[proper] remembrance [of God], for he [the master] must first test him. When
the master’s heart bears witness to the novice’s proper intention, the master must
stipulate that the novice on the Sufi path should accept all the verdicts of God’s
decree [in his regard]. The master must also establish a pact with him [demanding]
that he should not depart from this path despite any harm, humiliation, poverty,
illness or pain that may afflict him and that his heart not be diverted to easy ways
and have recourse to dispensations during the attacks of need and want. Nor
should he prefer rest or be overcome with laziness, for coming to a halt for the
aspirant is worse than becoming lax. The difference between them is that laxity
means a departure and forfeiture of one’s aspiration [to God], while a halt means
resting from the [hardships] of travel in favor of the pleasures of laziness. Nothing
good will come out of the novice who makes a halt at the beginning of his
aspiration. Once the master has tested the novice, he instructs him in a method
of remembrance as he sees fit and commands him to mention a certain name [of
God] with his own tongue. He then orders that the heart of the aspirant recollect
God alongside the tongue. He tells him: “Keep this remembrance with you//481
constantly as if you were always present with God in your heart.If the aspirant is concerned by other
people accepting or rejecting him, nothing [good] will come out of him. The
worst thing that can happen to the aspirant is that people begin to take notice of
him [looking at him] with an approving eye and [seeking his] blessing. For the
[common] folk have no inkling of all this, while the novice has not yet made right
his aspiration [to God], so how can one seek to obtain his blessing? [Sufi] novices
are required to abandon their renown, for it is a deadly poison to them. After
the aspirant has given up his property and rank, he should make good his
pact with God Most High and not oppose his master in anything that the latter
prescribes to him. For opposition to one’s master during one’s novitiate is a grave
deficiency, because one’s initial state is the best indicator of [what will happen
to him] during the rest of his life. One condition for success is that there should
be no opposition to the master in his student’s heart. If it occurs to the aspirant
that he has any value or power in this world and the next, or that there’s on the
face of the earth someone who is more lowly than he, he has no right to [aspire
to God]. For one must exert oneself in order to know one’s Lord and not to seek
power for oneself. There is a great difference between a person who aspires to God
Most High and a person who aspires to self-aggrandizement, either in this life or
the Hereafter. Next, the novice must preserve his secret from his ilk, except his
master. If he has concealed even one breath from his master, he will have betrayed
him in his right of companionship. Should he happen to disagree with what
the master has commanded to him, he must confess this in front of his master
immediately. He then should submit himself to the master’s judgement as a
832 Namely, Sufism.

He then orders that the heart of the aspirant recollect
God alongside the tongue. He tells him: “Keep this remembrance with you//481
constantly as if you were always present with God in your heart. Nothing but
this name should flow from your tongue, if you are capable of this.” The master
then orders that the aspirant always maintain ritual purity, that he should not
sleep unless overwhelmed [by sleep], that he reduce the amount of his food bit
by bit until he has grown accustomed to it. A report says: “He who allows his
riding animal to perish on a journey traverses no distance nor has a back to
carry [his goods on].” The master then orders the aspirant to seek solitude and
retreat and, while in this state, spare no effort in banishing mundane thoughts
and distracting promptings from his heart. Know that no aspirant in this state at the beginning of his aspiration is free
from evil whisperings that may corrupt his determination, especially when he
possesses an adroit heart. Few are aspirants who do not encounter such states at
the beginning of their progress. Such are temptations that the aspirants usually
encounter. When the master observes adroitness in the aspirant, he must direct
him to rational proofs, for there is no doubt that one who aspires toward [religious]
knowledge rids himself by it from the evil whisperings that accost him. When
the master discerns in his disciple the [necessary] strength and determination in
following the [Sufi] path, he orders him to be patient and to constantly recollect
[God’s name] so that before long the lights of his acceptance [by God] would
begin to shine in his heart and the suns of arrival [in God’s presence] would
rise in his innermost self. These rules apply only to few aspirants. In most cases,
one has to treat them by referring them to speculative reasoning (nazar) and
the witnessing of [divine] signs, provided that the aspirant has acquired the543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 408
408 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
knowledge of the fundamentals of religion in accordance with the need that is
peculiar to him. Know that aspirants are particularly vulnerable to the temptations of this
sort.833 When they withdraw to a place where they engage in the remembrance
[of God] or participate in listening to music and recitation and so on, they may
hear whisperings in their souls or blameworthy thoughts might occur to them. They know for sure that God – praise be to Him – is far above all this. They have
no doubt whatsoever that it is but falsehood, but it persists and they undergo
severe suffering due to this, to the extent that they experience the ugliest
of curses, the ugliest of insinuations, and the most repulsive of thoughts. The
aspirant, however, is unable to utter them with his tongue, nor display them
to anyone else. This is the worst thing that can happen to him. In this case, he
should pay no attention to such thoughts, constantly remember [God] and pray
to God, asking His protection from this.//482
These thoughts are not the whisperings of Satan. Rather they are the
promptings of one’s lower soul. However, if the servant of God pays no attention
to them, they will soon come to an end. Part of the rules of proper behavior for
the aspirant – indeed an obligation pertaining to his spiritual state – is that he
should remain in the place where his aspiration started and not travel anywhere
until the [Sufi] path has accepted him and his heart has arrived in the presence
of his Lord. Travel at a wrong time for the aspirant is but deadly poison and not
one of those who has traveled at a wrong time has ever attained the place he has
hoped to reach. If God wishes good to the aspirant, he makes him firm from the
very beginning. If, however, He wishes ill to the aspirant, He will keep sending
him back to his initial state and profession.He then orders that the heart of the aspirant recollect
God alongside the tongue. He tells him: “Keep this remembrance with you//481
constantly as if you were always present with God in your heart. Nothing but
this name should flow from your tongue, if you are capable of this.” The master
then orders that the aspirant always maintain ritual purity, that he should not
sleep unless overwhelmed [by sleep], that he reduce the amount of his food bit
by bit until he has grown accustomed to it. A report says: “He who allows his
riding animal to perish on a journey traverses no distance nor has a back to
carry [his goods on].” The master then orders the aspirant to seek solitude and
retreat and, while in this state, spare no effort in banishing mundane thoughts
and distracting promptings from his heart. Know that no aspirant in this state at the beginning of his aspiration is free
from evil whisperings that may corrupt his determination, especially when he
possesses an adroit heart. Few are aspirants who do not encounter such states at
the beginning of their progress. Such are temptations that the aspirants usually
encounter. When the master observes adroitness in the aspirant, he must direct
him to rational proofs, for there is no doubt that one who aspires toward [religious]
knowledge rids himself by it from the evil whisperings that accost him. When
the master discerns in his disciple the [necessary] strength and determination in
following the [Sufi] path, he orders him to be patient and to constantly recollect
[God’s name] so that before long the lights of his acceptance [by God] would
begin to shine in his heart and the suns of arrival [in God’s presence] would
rise in his innermost self. These rules apply only to few aspirants. In most cases,
one has to treat them by referring them to speculative reasoning (nazar) and
the witnessing of [divine] signs, provided that the aspirant has acquired the

If God wishes good to the aspirant, he makes him firm from the
very beginning. If, however, He wishes ill to the aspirant, He will keep sending
him back to his initial state and profession. And if God wishes to test the aspirant,
He will banish him to the wastelands of alienation from Him. Now, this applies to the aspirant who is destined to reach his goal. There are,
however, young men who are best suited for the path of outward service to the
poor.834Such an individual is lower than them in his rank pertaining to the path. He and the likes of him are content to imitate the outward customs [of the Sufi
folk]. They dedicate themselves to travels. The most they can achieve on this path
is to journey [to different lands], to visit places to which people aspire, and to
meet [Sufi] masters in a purely outward manner. Therefore they witness only the
outward aspects of things and are content with that kind of travel. Such people
should travel incessantly so that idleness would not prompt them to commit
things that are prohibited [by the Divine Law]. For if a young man enjoys rest
and idleness, he enters the arena of temptation (fitna). It is very detrimental for the novice to find himself amidst an assembly of
[advanced] Sufi masters and [their] companions. If one happens to be tested in
this manner, one should show [great] respect for the Sufi masters, render services
to those in their entourage, never oppose them and should make them feel at
833 Namely, doubt and devilish promptings. 834 Namely, the Sufis.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 409
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 409
ease. One should also seek that the heart of a Sufi master not be alienated from
him. In dealing with Sufi masters one must always take their part against oneself
and never one’s own part against them. One should always consider oneself
indebted to each of them, while at the same time not considering them in any way
indebted to oneself. The aspirant must never disagree with anyone. If he knows
that he is right, he must keep silent and show his agreement with everyone. If the
aspirant laughs, or is prone to anger and debate – nothing [good] will come out
of him. If the aspirant finds himself amidst an assembly of Sufis – be this on the
road or at gathering – he must not disagree with [any aspect of] their outward
behavior – be it food, fasting, rest, or movement. If he feels disagreement with them
in his innermost self and in his heart, he should keep his heart with God – may
He be great and exalted. If, for instance, they invite him to eat, he should eat one
or two morsels and not allow his lower soul revel in its appetite.//483
A constant and ostentatious recitation of [Sufi] litanies is not part of proper
manners among the aspirants. The [Sufi] folk engage in the purification of their
thoughts, improving their morals and banishing forgetfulness from their hearts
[inwardly], not by multiplying the acts of piety. They, however, must observe all
prescribed rites and follow [the prophetic] customs. As for the supererogatory
prayers, a constant remembrance of God in one’s heart is better for the aspirants. The aspirant’s principal fortune is his [ability] to tolerate everyone in good
spirit, to accept everything he encounters with contentment, to patiently withstand
hardship and poverty, and to give up demands and opposition [toward anyone] in
both little and big things that he receives as his allotted share.As for the supererogatory
prayers, a constant remembrance of God in one’s heart is better for the aspirants. The aspirant’s principal fortune is his [ability] to tolerate everyone in good
spirit, to accept everything he encounters with contentment, to patiently withstand
hardship and poverty, and to give up demands and opposition [toward anyone] in
both little and big things that he receives as his allotted share. If he is incapable of
tolerating these things, he must go back to the marketplace. For if he desires
what the ordinary people desire, he must obtain it from wherever people obtain
it – from the toil of his hand and the sweat of his brow. After the aspirant has
adopted a constant remembrance of God and has gone into a retreat, he may find
there things that he has not witnessed before – which may occur to him in his
sleep, in his waking state and in a state between these two. He may hear speeches
and contemplate images that contradict the customary order [of things]. He must
never preoccupy himself with any of such things, nor find repose in them, nor
anticipate their arrival. For all this is but distraction from God – praise be to
Him. Under those conditions he must describe all this to his master, so that his
[the aspirant’s] heart would be emptied of this. The master, in his turn, must protect his secret, keep it away from others
and make it look unimportant in his [aspirant’s] eyes. For all this is nothing but
tests, and reliance on it is a ruse [on the part of God]. Therefore the aspirant
should be on his guard against this and pay little attention to this, for it has
little significance beyond this.If God wishes good to the aspirant, he makes him firm from the
very beginning. If, however, He wishes ill to the aspirant, He will keep sending
him back to his initial state and profession. And if God wishes to test the aspirant,
He will banish him to the wastelands of alienation from Him. Now, this applies to the aspirant who is destined to reach his goal. There are,
however, young men who are best suited for the path of outward service to the
poor.834Such an individual is lower than them in his rank pertaining to the path. He and the likes of him are content to imitate the outward customs [of the Sufi
folk]. They dedicate themselves to travels. The most they can achieve on this path
is to journey [to different lands], to visit places to which people aspire, and to
meet [Sufi] masters in a purely outward manner. Therefore they witness only the
outward aspects of things and are content with that kind of travel. Such people
should travel incessantly so that idleness would not prompt them to commit
things that are prohibited [by the Divine Law]. For if a young man enjoys rest
and idleness, he enters the arena of temptation (fitna). It is very detrimental for the novice to find himself amidst an assembly of
[advanced] Sufi masters and [their] companions. If one happens to be tested in
this manner, one should show [great] respect for the Sufi masters, render services
to those in their entourage, never oppose them and should make them feel at
833 Namely, doubt and devilish promptings. 834 Namely, the Sufis.

For all this is nothing but
tests, and reliance on it is a ruse [on the part of God]. Therefore the aspirant
should be on his guard against this and pay little attention to this, for it has
little significance beyond this. Know that the most detrimental thing for the
aspirant is that he may take delight in the signs of proximity and special favor
that God – praise be to Him – casts into his innermost heart, as if He is saying:
“I have bestowed special favor upon you and singled you out from among your
peers.” However, when he decides to reject such suggestions, he will find himself
elevated above this [stage] by means of veridical unveilings that will manifest543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 410
410 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
themselves to him. Books, however, cannot provide a [detailed] explanation of
this.
If the aspirant cannot find someone who could instruct him in the place he
lives, it is incumbent on him to travel to someone who is renowned//484 in his
age for [his] guidance of novices. He must stay with this teacher and never leave
the door of his house except for the canonical prayers. Know that one must give
precedence to the knowledge of the Lord of the [Sacred] House835– praise be to
Him – over visiting the [Sacred] House, for were it not for the knowledge of
the Lord of the House, visiting His House would not have been required. Those
young men from among Sufi novices who go on a pilgrimage without the advice of
their masters are driven by the promptings of their lower souls. Even though they
may display the outward signs of this [Sufi] path their travel [to the pilgrimage
site] is without [any] foundation. One evidence of this is that the more they
travel, the greater the detachment of their hearts is [from God]. Departing even
a few steps from their own lower souls would have been more beneficial to them
than a thousand journeys.
The aspirant who pays a visit to a Sufi master must observe certain conditions.
He must show respect to the master upon his entry and look at him with humility.
Should the master choose him for any service, he should consider it to be a great
favor.
Section
The aspirant should not ascribe infallibility to Sufi masters. Instead he should
concede their states to them [as they are], think well of them and observe the
limits set by God Most High in everything that the master instructs him to do.
[His] knowledge is sufficient to him in distinguishing right from wrong.
Section
Every aspirant in whose heart the things of this world retain any value and
significance can be associated with aspiration [to God] only metaphorically.
As long as there remains in his heart preference for the pleasant things that he
has given up, while he performs an act of righteousness or deals with a certain
individual, then he is faking his true state and there is a danger that he might
return to this world. For the goal of the aspirant lies in cutting and abandoning all
ties to it, and not striving to [ostentatious] works of righteousness. It is absolutely
inappropriate that the aspirant should [first] give up his property and inheritance
and then become a captive to his [new] profession. Instead, he should seek a
state when having and not having make no difference to him, so that he would
not shun any poor person on account of it nor oppress anyone, even a fire-
worshiper.//485
835 That is, the Ka∏ba.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 411
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 411
Section
When the hearts of Sufi masters accept an aspirant, this is the clearest proof that
he will achieve salvation. As for he whom the heart of a master has rejected, he
will inevitably see the consequence of this, even though this may take some time.
If someone is destined [by God] to show disrespect toward Sufi masters, he has
already displayed an unmistakable sign of his wretchedness [in the Hereafter].
Section
Seeking the company of youth is one of the gravest afflictions on this path. It
is the consensus of Sufi masters that if God has afflicted someone with this sin
then this person has been humiliated and deserted not only by God – may He
be great and exalted – but also by himself, even though God may have granted
him thousands upon thousands of miracles. Even if he has attained the rank of
the witnesses [of faith] (shuhadaπ), as alluded in a transmitted report, isn’t it [a
fact] that the heart may become preoccupied by a [mere] creature? Even worse
than this [affliction] is that the heart considers this too trivial and regards this
as totally unimportant. [About this] God Most High said: “You reckoned it
a light thing, and with God it is a grave thing.”836 Al-Wasiti said [about this]:
“When God wants to humiliate His servant, He throws him among evil-smelling
trash and corpses.”
I heard Abu ∏Abdallah al-Sufi say: I heard Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Najjar
say: I heard Abu ∏Abdallah al-Husri say: I heard Fath al-Mawsili say: “I kept
company with thirty [Sufi] masters, who were considered to be among the
Substitutes (al-abdal).837 When I was about to leave them, each of them gave
me one and the same advice: ‘Stay away from the company of youth and do not
mingle with them!’” There are, however, those who claim to have overcome the
depravity pertaining to this issue838 and who argue that this is but a test of the
[human] spirit that does no harm. [As their proof] they recount the insinuations
of those who teach about the “sign” (sháhid)839 and the anecdotes about certain
Sufi masters and the sinful behavior that they have exhibited, which it would
have been more appropriate for them to conceal [from the public]. This kind
of talk approximates to polytheism and amounts to [sheer] unbelief. So may the
aspirant avoid the company of youths or mingling with them, for this easily
opens the door//486 of [his] abandonment and rejection [by God]. Let us take
refuge in God from evil behavior!
836 Q. 24:15; 24:14, according to Arberry’s translation.
837 One of the most elevated ranks in the Sufi spiritual hierarchy. They were thus called for their
ability to maintain their presence in several different places at the same time.
838 Namely, keeping company with youths.
839 Namely, a young boy or man, whom they consider to be a reflection of divine beauty (mis-
guidedly, according to al-Qushayri).543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 412
412 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Section
Another grave sin that may afflict the aspirant is the secret envy of his brothers
that may penetrate his heart. It may occur as a result of the special treatment that
God – may He be great and exalted – accords to his peers on this [Sufi] path and
which He deprives him of. He should know that what happens is but portions
[that God bestows upon His creatures] (qisam). The servant can purify himself
from [envy] by finding his satisfaction in God’s existence and eternal nature
rather than in His generosity and grace. Whatever you see, O aspirant, has been
predetermined by God – so carry His burden [patiently]. This is the custom that
is followed by the cleverest of the seekers [of God].
Section
When the aspirant happens to find himself in a company of people, it is his
obligation to give preference to every single one of them [over himself]. He should
put above himself every person, regardless of whether that person is hungry or
sated. He should seek instruction from anyone who displays signs of masterly
features, even though he may be more knowledgeable than his teacher. He840can
only arrive at this stage by divesting himself of his own power and capacity, and
by being guided to it by God’s might and beneficence.
Section
In regard to the aspirant’s behavior at a listening session, it is never appropriate
that he should move during it on his own accord. He can only be excused, if a
divine visitation [commanding] movement descends upon him, in which case its
intensity should not exceed the strength of the power (ghalaba) that overwhelms
him. When this overwhelming power ceases, he must sit down and be still. If,
however, he continues to move seeking pleasure in ecstasy without such an over-
whelming power and necessity, then this is not right. When he has accustomed
himself to this [rule] he holds [himself] back and does not display any [divine]
realities imparted to him. The most he can hope for when he has attained such
states is to take delight in them in his heart.
In general, movement takes a toll on everyone who engages in it and detracts
from his spiritual state regardless of whether this is a master or an aspirant.
The only exception is that it is dictated by one’s [mystical] moment (waqt)
or an overwhelming power that deprives one of one’s [sense of] discernment
(tamyiz).//487 However, when the master instructs the aspirant to move and he
engages in this movement in accord with the master’s instruction, then there is
no harm in it, for the master is one who has authority over him. If [advanced]
Sufis instruct the aspirant to join in their movements,841 he should join them in
840 That is, the aspirant.
841 That is, in their dance and body postures.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 413
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 413
what they are doing, and perform what is necessary in order to prevent their hearts
from alienating themselves [from him]. Now, if his spiritual state is sincere, it
will prevent the hearts of the [advanced] Sufis from questioning him when he
joins them. As to the throwing off of one’s clothes [during a listening session], the aspirant
has absolutely no right to take back anything that he has given away [in this
manner], except when a Sufi master instructs him to do so. He then treats it as
a loaned thing in his heart and takes it back only to give it away later without
alienating the heart of the master. If the aspirant who has not done so before
[finds himself among] a group of Sufis whose custom is to throw off their robes
– and the aspirant knows that they return them [to one another] and there is
no master among them to whom he could entrust his embarrassment and his
uneasiness – it is best that he join in their custom and choose to cast his robe
off before the singer,842even though they may take theirs back. He is also allowed
not to cast it off, because he knows that they are accustomed to taking back what
they have cast off [before the singer]. For the impropriety lies in their custom of
taking back [their] robes and not in his opposing what they do. Nevertheless, the
best way is to cast off [his robe] in accord with them, then not take it back. Under
no circumstance should the aspirant make demands of the singer, for it is the
sincerity of his [aspirant’s] spiritual state that causes the singer to repeat certain
things, while causing others to follow [him]. Whoever seeks blessing from the aspirant does injustice to him, for since
he has little spiritual power, this may harm him. Therefore it is incumbent upon
the aspirant not to display his [spiritual] status in front of anyone who ascribes
to him blessing and [high] status.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 412
412 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Section
Another grave sin that may afflict the aspirant is the secret envy of his brothers
that may penetrate his heart. It may occur as a result of the special treatment that
God – may He be great and exalted – accords to his peers on this [Sufi] path and
which He deprives him of. He should know that what happens is but portions
[that God bestows upon His creatures] (qisam). The servant can purify himself
from [envy] by finding his satisfaction in God’s existence and eternal nature
rather than in His generosity and grace. Whatever you see, O aspirant, has been
predetermined by God – so carry His burden [patiently]. This is the custom that
is followed by the cleverest of the seekers [of God].
Section
When the aspirant happens to find himself in a company of people, it is his
obligation to give preference to every single one of them [over himself]. He should
put above himself every person, regardless of whether that person is hungry or
sated. He should seek instruction from anyone who displays signs of masterly
features, even though he may be more knowledgeable than his teacher. He840can
only arrive at this stage by divesting himself of his own power and capacity, and
by being guided to it by God’s might and beneficence.
Section
In regard to the aspirant’s behavior at a listening session, it is never appropriate
that he should move during it on his own accord. He can only be excused, if a
divine visitation [commanding] movement descends upon him, in which case its
intensity should not exceed the strength of the power (ghalaba) that overwhelms
him. When this overwhelming power ceases, he must sit down and be still. If,
however, he continues to move seeking pleasure in ecstasy without such an over-
whelming power and necessity, then this is not right. When he has accustomed
himself to this [rule] he holds [himself] back and does not display any [divine]
realities imparted to him. The most he can hope for when he has attained such
states is to take delight in them in his heart.
In general, movement takes a toll on everyone who engages in it and detracts
from his spiritual state regardless of whether this is a master or an aspirant.
The only exception is that it is dictated by one’s [mystical] moment (waqt)
or an overwhelming power that deprives one of one’s [sense of] discernment
(tamyiz).//487 However, when the master instructs the aspirant to move and he
engages in this movement in accord with the master’s instruction, then there is
no harm in it, for the master is one who has authority over him. If [advanced]
Sufis instruct the aspirant to join in their movements,841 he should join them in
840 That is, the aspirant.
841 That is, in their dance and body postures.

Whoever seeks blessing from the aspirant does injustice to him, for since
he has little spiritual power, this may harm him. Therefore it is incumbent upon
the aspirant not to display his [spiritual] status in front of anyone who ascribes
to him blessing and [high] status. Section
When the aspirant is tested by [worldly] renown, a secure and abundant livelihood,
friendship with a youth, attraction to a woman or the [comforting] belief in
an assured source of sustenance, and there is no master next to him who would
suggest to him how to rid himself of this, then he should travel and move away
from his place of residence, in order to distract his ego from this condition.//488
There is nothing more harmful for the heart of the aspirant than to achieve
[worldly] renown before extinguishing his human nature. One of the requirements of proper behavior is that the aspirant’s knowledge
of the [Sufi] path should not be ahead of his actual [spiritual] stage [along it]. Should he learn the ways of this [Sufi] community and imitate the acquisition
of the knowledge of the issues and [spiritual] states that they face before actually
realizing his true status [vis-à-vis them] and acting accordingly, his arrival at all
these things will be delayed. That is why the Sufi masters say: “When the gnostic
speaks [profusely] about [his] gnosis, consider him to be ignorant!” For this is
842 As a sign of gratitude and payment.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 414
414 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
nothing but talking about mystical stations without [direct] knowledge [of
them]. He whose knowledge is greater than his station is a possessor of [abstract]
knowledge, not a traveler on the [Sufi] path.
Section
One of the requirements of proper manners is that aspirants should not seek
prominence (tasaddur), nor have disciples and novices. For the aspirant (murid)
who has become one to whom others aspire (murad) before ridding himself of his
human nature and his failings is veiled from the True Reality. Therefore his
instructions and teachings will benefit no one.
Section
When an aspirant renders services to [advanced] Sufis [he should know] that
their inner thoughts843are their messengers to him. Therefore, the aspirant must
not resist sincere striving in their service and the total dedication of his efforts
[for their well-being] that his innermost soul commands him.
Section
If it is the aspirant’s duty to render services to Sufis, he should bear it patiently
if they are harsh to him. Even if he believes that he spares no effort in their
service, while they never praise him [for that], he should apologize to them for
his shortcomings and assert that it is he himself who is at fault, thereby soothing
their hearts. [He should do this] even though he may know that he has nothing
to be blamed for. Even though they may persist in being harsh toward him, he
should exert himself in their service and in his solicitude [toward them]. I heard
imam Abu Bakr b. Furak say: “As an adage has it: ‘If you cannot be patient under
the hammer, why then become an anvil?’” With this in mind the Sufis recite:
I would occasionally come to him to submit my apologies to him
For my sins even before I have done any wrong.//489
Section
The foundation and the essence of this matter844 is the observance of the rules
of the Divine Law, the guarding of one’s hand from stretching to anything that
is forbidden or ambiguous [under it], protecting one’s senses from prohibited
things, and avoiding forgetfulness of God Most High even for [the duration of]
a single breath. If, in the time of need, one is not allowed to consider lawful
as much as a sesame seed because of doubt about [its provenance], how [do you
think] one should behave at a time of ease and free choice?
843 That is, “their wishes and desires”, according to a commentator.
844 That is, Sufism.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 415
ABU πL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI 415
It is the aspirant’s duty to constantly exert himself in an effort to give up
passionate desires (shahawat). For whoever follows his passion, forfeits his purity.
One of the ugliest features in the aspirant is that he reverts to the passion which
he previously gave up for the sake of God Most High.
Section
It is the aspirant’s duty to keep his pact with God Most High. Breaking the pact
while on the path of aspiration is [for the aspirant] like apostasy (ridda) for the
people of outward [faith]. The aspirant should not, as far as possible, promise
to God Most High anything of his own free choice, for the requirements of the
Divine Law contain enough to satisfy anyone’s ability [to worship God]. God
said regarding certain folk: “[Monasticism]845they invented – we did not prescribe
it to them – only seeking the good pleasure of God; but they observed it not as
it should be observed.”846
Section
It is the aspirant’s duty not to entertain high hopes [for the future], for the poor
one847is the son of his [mystical] moment.848Nothing will come out of the aspirant
who makes plans for the future, looks beyond his [condition] in the present
moment and anticipates what might happen to him.
Section
It is the aspirant’s duty that he has no [secure] sustenance, no matter how small,
especially when he is in the company of Sufis. For the darkness of [secure]
sustenance stifles the light of the [mystical] moment.
Section
It is the aspirant’s duty – which applies to all those who travel along this [Sufi] path
– not to accept any favors from women, not to mention actively seeking them.//490
This is the way of the masters of the Sufi community and what they have advised
others to do.
845 This word appears only in some versions of the text; others omit it.
846 Q. 57:27; 57:29, according to Arberry’s translation. This verse is a matter of controversy
among Muslim exegetes, since it allows two diametrically opposed interpretations: one is
favorable toward the Christian monks (in which case, one reads “We did not prescribe it for
them except that [it arose] out of desire for the satisfaction of God”); the other is critical of
their “innovation”, as in the translation suggested by Arberry.
847 That is, the Sufi.
848 That is, he lives by the “here and now”.543 Epistle 05 Chapter 3 21/12/06 12:08 PM Page 416
416 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Section
It is the aspirant’s duty to keep away from worldly people, for keeping company
with them is a time-tested poison. They will benefit from him, while they will
detract from his [spiritual] stature. God Most High said: “Obey not him whose
heart We have made neglectful of Our remembrance.”849 Those who renounce
the world (zuhhad) take money out of their purses in order to draw closer to
God, whereas the pure ones850 take the creatures [of this world] and [mundane]
knowledge out of their hearts in order to attain to God’s True Reality.
The master and imam Abu πl-Qasim ∏Abd al-Karim b. Hawazin al-Qushayri
– may God be pleased with him – said: “This is our advice to the aspirants. We
ask that God the Generous grant them success and that He not hold it against
us [in the Hereafter]. We have completed dictating this Epistleat the beginning
of the year four hundred and thirty-eight.851 We ask God the Generous not to
make it an argument against us and not to punish us on account of it [in the
Hereafter]. On the contrary, [we ask] that it serve for us as a means [to salvation]
and a benefit. Verily, His grace is His wont and forgiveness is [always] ascribed
to Him.”
Praise be to God as is His due. May His graces, blessings and mercy be on
His messenger, our master the virgin (ummi)852Prophet as well as upon his pure
family and his elect and noble Companions! May God greet them all abundantly!
849 Q. 18:28; 18:27, according to Arberry’s translation.
850 Ahl al-safaπ– that is, the Sufis.
851 That is, 1046 C.E.
852 That is, one whose mission and teachings were original and unprecedented.543 Epistle 06 Gloss 21/12/06 12:05 PM Page 417
GLOSSARY
∏Abd: servant of God; worshiper
Abdal: lit. “substitutes”; members of the highest rank of the Sufi spiritual
hierarchy; they were called so for their ability to maintain their presence in
several different places at the same time
∏Abid, pl., ∏ubbad:[a devout] worshiper of God
Adab:good manners [in the presence of God or one’s fellow human beings]
[al-]Akhira:the Hereafter as opposed to this life ([al-]dunya)
Akhlaq:a person’s character traits, especially his or her manners and morals
∏Alaqa(t):attachment(s) to this world and mundane things
∏Arif [bi-πllah], lit. “he who knows God”; gnostic; the highest category of Sufi
masters; see also ma∏rifa
Asbab,sing., sabab: means of existence and sustenance that may distract the Sufi
from worshiping God as befits Him
Awba: a variant of tawba; “return to God after repenting before Him”; the ultimate
stage of repentance (tawba)
Awliyaπ, sing., wali:“friends of God” or “God’s protegés”; advanced Sufi masters,
who in Western literature are sometimes identified as the Muslim equivalent of
Christian saints
∏Ayn al-yaqin: the essence of certainty; a state of absolute certainty experienced
by the mystic; see also yaqin and haqq al-yaqin
∏Ayyar: bandit of honor; a member of urban militia, who adhered to a special
code of honor; see also futuwwa
Balaπ:affliction or trial to which God may subject His servant
Baqaπ: the mystic’s subsistence/survival in God following fanaπ
Basira: inward vision; insight
Bast: expansion; a state of ease, confidence and joy experienced by the Sufi; see
also qabd
Batin: see zahir543 Epistle 06 Gloss 21/12/06 12:05 PM Page 418
418 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Bawadih/Hujum:“attacks” or “onslaughts” of mystical states upon the Sufi
Bu∏d:distance from God as opposed to qurb
Bukaπ: weeping, crying; a Sufi practice
Dhawq: “[direct] tasting” of the true realities behind the appearances of the
empirical world
Dhikr: remembrance/recollection of God and his names
[al-]Dunya: see [al-]Akhira
Du∏aπ: supplicatory prayer, as opposed to the canonical one; see also sala(t)
[al-]Dunya:this world and its “deceptive” trappings
Fanaπ: the mystic’s self-annihilation in God; see also baqaπ
Faqr: poverty; a station of the mystical path
Farq:separation; the state of detachment from God; see also jam∏
Fata/fityan: see futuwwa
Fikr, fikra: contemplation; self-scrutiny
Firasa: clairvoyance; supernatural perspicacity
Futuwwa: spiritual “chivalry” – a code of honor to be observed by the genuine
Sufi, which enjoins him to be generous, to give preference to others over his own
self, and to help the poor and needy
Ghafla: temporary forgetfulness of God and His commands
Ghafr: concealment, veil; the state of being barred from God
Ghayb: the unseen; the realm of divine mysteries that is closed to everyone but
the most advanced Sufi gnostics
Ghayba: “absence from God” (both mental and devotional), as opposed to
“being present with Him” (hudur)
Ghayra:“jealousy” of God toward His servants, namely His insistence that they
turn to and seek help of no one but Him
Ghiba:backbiting; one of the sins to be avoided by the Sufis543 Epistle 06 Gloss 21/12/06 12:05 PM Page 419
GLOSSARY 419
Hadith: report about an action or saying of the Prophet
Hajis, pl.,hawajis:the promptings of the lower soul; see also khawatir and waswas
Hal: spiritual state which the mystic experiences on his way to God; see also
maqam
Haqiqa:True Reality; ultimate truth; the genuine state of affairs
[al-]Haqq: the Real; the True Reality; God
Haqq al-yaqin: truth of certainty; a state of certainty experienced by the mystic
Hasad:envy, in particular, being envious of somebody’s more advanced spiritual
state; a sin to be avoided by the Sufis
Hatif: invisible voice by which God communicates with His elect friends
Hawa, pl., ahwaπ: urges and drives of one’s lower soul (nafs)
Haya: shame before God
Hayba:awe and trepidation before God
Hayra; tahayyur: perplexity, bewilderment of the mystic in the face of ever-
changing divine self-manifestations
Hudur: “being present with God” (with one’s entire self), as opposed to “absence
from God” (ghayba)
Hujum:see bawadih
Hulm: a variety of dream that may occasionally carry a negative connotation as
opposed to ruπya
Huzn:sadness and despondency; a Sufi virtue
∏Ibada/∏ubudiyya: worship of God, especially fulfilling one’s obligations toward
Him
∏Ibara: see Ishara
I∏jab: complacency; self-conceit
Ikhlas: sincerity before God; a sine qua nonof the Sufi path
Ikhtiyar: freedom of choice and the ability to choose among several options
Ilham: [divine] inspiration; revelation
∏Ilm al-yaqin: a variant of yaqin543 Epistle 06 Gloss 21/12/06 12:05 PM Page 420
420 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Iman: faith; the middle/intermediate member of the famous Sufi triad: islam
(external submission) – iman (internalization of faith) – ihsan(serving God as if
you see Him; that is, acting in full compliance with His will)
Inaba: turning to God in repentance; an advanced stage of repentance (tawba)
Irada: aspiration to God; the state of turning to God and entering on the path
leading to Him; see also murid
Ishara: indirect allusion as opposed to clear and unequivocal statement (∏ibara)
∏Ishq:the mystic’s passionate longing [for God]
Istiqama: uprightness; moral rectitude
Jam∏: unification; the state of being in the presence of God
Jamal: [divine] beauty; the benign aspect of God as opposed to that of divine
majesty (jalal)
Jihad: struggle against the drives and passions of one’s low soul; fighting against
an “infidel” enemy
Jud:generosity (usually of God to human beings)
Karama: saintly miracle – that is, one that is performed by a friend of God and
not a prophet, whose miracle is called mu∏jiza
Kashf: unveiling; the disclosure of true realities and secrets of being before the
Sufi
Khadim:servant – and sometimes also disciple – of a Sufi master
Khalwa: retreat; isolation; a common Sufi practice
Khawatir, sing., khatir: secret thoughts – often blameworthy and distracting –
that may visit or even assault the Sufi; they usually emanate from the Sufi’s own
lower soul that is in league with the Devil; see also waswas
Khawf:fear of God’s wrath as opposed to rajaπ
Khidhlan:abandonment by God of His servant to punish him for his transgressions
Khirqa: Sufi cloak or robe; a piece of patched garment worn by the Sufi as an
outward sign of his affiliation with the ascetic and mystical movement in Islam
Khuluq: good moral qualities
Khumul: humility; resignation543 Epistle 06 Gloss 21/12/06 12:05 PM Page 421
GLOSSARY 421
Khushu∏:humility before God; see also tawadu∏
Kibr/takabbur:pride as opposed to khushu∏ and tawadu∏
Ladhdha: pleasure [in the presence of God]
Lawaπih: the mystical experience of the “glimmings” of divine presence; see also
lawami∏ and tawali∏
Lawami∏: the mystical experience of the “flashes” of divine presence; see also
lawaπihand tawali∏
Mahabba/hubb: mystical love of God and loving relationship between God and
man; see also shawqand ∏ishq
Mahq: the experience of being “ground down” and obliterated by divine
presence
Mahw: the experience of being “erased” and “annihilated” by divine presence
Makasib: “earnings”; something that one acquires by means of sincere worship
of God; see mawahib
Makr: divine ruse; a test set by God for the Sufi
Malakut: the realm/sphere of divine majesty
Maqam: spiritual station [on the Sufi path]
Ma∏rifa [bi-llah]:[divine] gnosis; the supersensory, revelatory knowledge of God
and the world granted to the accomplished Sufi master; see also ∏arif
Mawahib: divine gifts and graces that are granted to God’s servant “free of charge”
Mu∏ayana: direct contemplation [of God and divine realities] by the Sufi; see
also mushahada
Muhaqqiq:one who has attained truth; truth-verifier; an accomplished mystic
Muhasaba: taking account of one’s actions and thoughts; self-scrutiny
Muhibb/habib: lover/beloved; usually in reference to the mystic and his divine
Beloved
Mujahada:self-exertion on the path of God; Sufi practices aimed at minimizing
detrimental drives and promptings of the lower soul through abstention from the
delights of this world and strict self-discipline
Mu∏jiza: see karama543 Epistle 06 Gloss 21/12/06 12:05 PM Page 422
422 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Mukabada: spiritual struggle; self-exertion on the path to God; see also mujahada
Mukashafa: see kashf
Mukhalafat al-nafs: “opposing one’s soul”; resisting its self-centred drives and
passions; see also nafs
Munazala: spiritual station; see also maqam
Muraqaba: awareness of God’s presence by the Sufi and the concomitant self-
scrutiny of his actions and thoughts
Murid:lit. “one who aspires”;aspirant; Sufi novice/disciple
Muruπa: manliness; a code of chivalry and nobility of spirit practiced by the Sufis
Mushahada: direct witnessing of God and/or the true realities of existence; see
also mu∏ayana
Mutasawwif, pl., mutasawwifa: Sufi(s) and those who try to imitate them
Nadam, nadama: remorse; a Sufi virtue
Nafas:bringing one’s “breath” in compliance with the changing modes of divine
existence – the utmost stage of the Sufi’s spiritual journey
Nafs: appetitive soul; self
Nawafil:supererogatory acts of piety and worship – e.g., night vigils and additional
prayers practiced by Sufis
Qabd: contraction; a state of distress and agony that may assault a Sufi; the opposite
of bast
Qadaπ: divine decree; predestination
Qalb:heart as an instrument of cognition and an arena of the mystic’s encounter
with God; it occupies the intermediate position in the triad nafs–qalb–ruh
Qana∏a:contentment with God’s decree and one’s apportioned lot
Qurb: the state ofproximity to God as opposed to bu∏d
Qawm: [Sufi] folk; Sufis
Raghba: desire; aspiration
Rahba: horror before God543 Epistle 06 Gloss 21/12/06 12:05 PM Page 423
GLOSSARY 423
Rahbaniyya: monasticism
Rajaπ:hope for God’s grace and mercy as opposed to khawf
Rida: contentment; satisfaction with divine decree
Riyaπ: hypocrisy; complacency; self-conceit
Riyada: ascetic exercise; self-exertion
Rububiyya: divine lordship
Ruh: spirit; the divine “spark” cast in the human body
Ruπya:visionary experience; vision of God [in the Hereafter]
Sabr: patience in the face of adversity; a Sufi virtue
Sadiq: sincere one
Safaπ:purity
Safar: journey or travel undertaken by Sufis in search of masters or to fulfill the
duty of hajj
Sahw: sobriety as opposed to “intoxication” (sukr) with a mystical state
Sakhaπ: generosity (usually of human beings as opposed to jud)
Sakina: divine presence; Shekina
Sala(t):canonical prayer (there are five of them), as opposed to the supplicatory
one; see also du∏aπ
Sama∏: listening to music; spiritual concert
Samt: silence; a Sufi virtue
Satr: concealment of/from God as opposed to His [self-]disclosure/revelation
(tajalli)
Shahada: direct witnessing of God by the mystic; see also mushahada
Sháhid:lit. “witness”; a sign of divine grace or presence that appears to the Sufi;
also a youth, whose beauty was viewed by some Sufis as a reflection of divine
perfection; the practice of gazing at “beardless young men” to gain a glimpse of
divine beauty was condemned by many Sufi masters
Shahwa: desire; passion (usually base)
Shakur: the grateful one
Shari∏a: the Divine Law543 Epistle 06 Gloss 21/12/06 12:05 PM Page 424
424 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Shawq: loving passion; longing
Shaykh:lit. “elder”; a Sufi master
Shubha: lit. “that which is suspicious”; a thing the status of which is dubious
from the viewpoint of the Divine Law
Shukr:gratitude or gratefulness, especially toward God
Siddiq: “one who is truthful and trustworthy” – an advanced Sufi master; also,
an epithet of the first caliph Abu Bakr [al-Siddiq]
Sidq:truthfulness and sincerity before God; see also ikhlas
Sirr:the “heart of hearts”of the Sufi; the arena of his loving relation with God;
see also nafs and ruh
Suπ al-khuluq/suπ al-adab:improper behavior before God and other people
Suhba: companionship among the Sufis, which usually involved the training of
a younger Sufi (murid) or Sufis by a more advanced one known as shaykh
Sukr: “intoxication” with a mystical state; see sahw
Sunna: the [exemplary] custom of the Prophet
Ta∏a: act of worship, piety and obedience to God
Tadbir: divine predestination of events; the ability to exercise one’s free choice
Tafakkur/fikr/fikra: pious meditation; a spiritual practice current among the Sufis
Tafriqa: a vision or perception of the plurality of the empirical world; the opposite
of jam∏
Tahayyur: the state of bewilderment and perplexion
Tajalli:self-revelation/manifestation of God;see also satr
Talwin:“inconstancy” of one’s spiritual states, when one is quickly succeeded by
another; the opposite of stability or “fixity” (tamkin) of one’s state
Tamkin: “stability” or“fixity”; the stabilization of one’s spiritual state (hal); the
opposite of talwin
Taqwa: fear of God and pious behavior springing from it; piety; righteousness
Tasarruf (tasrif): the ability to exercise freedom of choice and perform certain
actions
Tasawwuf: putting on a woolen garment; Sufism
Tasdiq: confirmation543 Epistle 06 Gloss 21/12/06 12:05 PM Page 425
GLOSSARY 425
Taslim: surrender to God’s will
Tasrif: see Tasarruf
Tawadu∏: modestyand humbleness before God; see also khushu∏
Tawajud: ecstatic behavior that was often associated with listening to music
(sama∏); see also wajdand wujud
Tawakkul: trust in God; a total reliance on God by the Sufi
Tawali∏: the mystical experience of the “dawnings” of divine presence; see also
lawaπih andlawami∏
Tawba/awba: lit. “return to God”; repentance; see also inabaand awba
Tawfiq:divine assistance
Tawhid: the doctrine that declares God to be one and only
∏Ubuda:see also∏ibadaand∏ubudiyya
∏Ubudiyya:the state of servanthood before God; worship of God
∏Ujb: complacency; self-conceit; smugness
Uns:intimacy with God, as opposed to awe before Him (hayba)
∏Uzla: solitude; isolation: a Sufi exercise
Wajd: ecstatic rapture engendered by the mystic’s encounter with the Divine
Reality; see also wujud
Wahda: unicity/oneness of God
Wali/Walí:see awliyaπ
Waqi∏a: spiritual event/state
Waqt:mystical moment in time; the eternal “here-and-now” of the Sufi
Wara∏: scrupulousness in discerning between the licit and the forbidden under
the Divine Law
Warid: occurrence; divine visitation
Wasiyya, pl., wasaya: spiritual advice; admonition
Waswas, pl., wasawis:devilish whisperings; secret thoughts that may distract the
Sufi on his path to God; see also khawatir
Wilaya:the state of being a friend of God; see awliyaπ543 Epistle 06 Gloss 21/12/06 12:05 PM Page 426
426 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Wird, pl., awrad:prayer; supplication
Wujud: the act of “finding” of God by the mystic, which may throw him into
ecstasy or induce a trance
Yaqin: certain, unshakeable knowledge of God and trust in Him; see also ∏ayn
al-yaqin and haqq al-yaqin
Zahid: pl., zuhhad: world-renouncer; ascetic
Zahir: the outward, external aspect of a certain thing or phenomenon as opposed
to its inward, secret aspect (batin)
Zuhd:renunciation; abstention from the delights and allure of this world; asceticism543 Epistle 07 Biblio 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 427
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abbreviations
EI Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2nd. edition, vols. 1–11, E. J. Brill, Leiden, 1954–2004.
IM Knysh, Alexander,Islamic Mysticism: A Short History, E. J. Brill, Leiden, 2000.
Q. Arberry, Arthur J. (trans.), The Koran Interpreted, Simon and Schuster, New
York, 1996.
Full titles of other cited works
Ahmad b. Hanbal, Al-Musnad, Bulaq, Cairo, 1313 A.H.
Anonymous, Adab al-muluk: Ein Handbuch zur islamischen Mystik aus dem 4./10.
Jahrhundert, (ed.) Bernd Radtke, Franz Steiner, Beirut, 1991.
Baldick, Julian, Mystical Islam: An Introduction to Sufism, I. B. Tauris, London,
1989.
Edmund Bosworth, The Mediaeval Islamic Underworld: The Banu Sasan in Arabic
Society and Literature, E. J. Brill, Leiden, 1976.
Böwering, Gerhard, The Mystical Vision of Existence in Classical Islam, Walter de
Gruyter, Berlin and New York, 1980.
Chittick, William, The Self-Disclosure of God: Principles of Ibn al-∏Arabi’s Cosmology,
SUNY Press, Albany, N.Y., 1998.
—The Sufi Path of Knowledge: Ibn al-∏Arabi’s Metaphysics of Imagination, SUNY
Press, Albany, N.Y., 1989.
Cooperson, Michael, “Ahmad Ibn Hanbal and Bishr al-Hafi: A Case Study in
Biographical Traditions”, Studia Islamica86/2 (1997).
Cornell, Vincent, Realm of the Saint: Power and Authority in Moroccan Sufism,
University of Texas Press, Austin, 1998.
Ernst, Carl, Words of Ecstasy in Sufism, SUNY Press, Albany, N.Y., 1985.
Frank, Richard, Beings and Their Attributes: The Teaching of the Basran School of
theMu∏tazila in the Classical Period, SUNY Press, Albany, N.Y., 1978.
Gimaret, Daniel,Les Noms Divins en Islam, Cerf, Paris, 1988.
Gramlich, Richard (trans.), Das Sendschreiben al-Qu˘sayris über das Sufitum, Franz
Steiner, Wiesbaden, 1989.
Halm, Heinz, The Empire of the Mahdi(trans. Michael Bonner), E. J. Brill, Leiden,
1996.
Harris, Rabia (trans.),The Risalah: Principles of Sufism, ed. by Laleh Bakhtiar, Kazi
Publications, Chicago, IL, 2002.
Mojaddedi, Jawid, The Biographical Tradition in Sufism, Curzon Press, Richmond,
Surrey, 2001.543 Epistle 07 Biblio 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 428
428 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
al-Qushayri, Lataπif al-isharat, ed. by Ibrahim Basyuni, Dar al-kitab al-∏arabi,
Cairo, 1968.
—Al-Risala al-qushayriyya, ed. by ∏Abd al-Halim Mahmud and Mahmud b.
al-Sharif, Dar al-kutub al-haditha, Cairo, 1966.
—Al-Risala al-qushayriyya fi ∏ilm al-tasawwuf, with commentaries by Zakariya
al-Ansari, Dar al-kutub al-∏arabiyya al-kubra, Mustafa al-Babi al-Halabi, Cairo,
1276 A.H. (1859 C.E.).
—Al-Risala al-qushayriyya, with commentaries by Mustafa al-∏Arusi and Zakariya
al-Ansari, ∏Abd al-Wakil al-Darubi and Tasin ∏Arafa, Jami∏ al-Darwishiyya,
Damascus, no date.
—Al-Risala al-qushayriyya fi ∏ilm al-tasawwuf, ed. by Muhammad ∏Abd al-Rahman
al-Mar∏ashali, Dar ihyaπ al-turath al-∏arabi, Beirut, 1998.
al-Sarraj, Kitab al-luma∏ fi πl-tasawwuf, ed. by Reynold A. Nicholson, E. J. Brill,
Leiden, 1914.
al-Sulami, Tabaqat al-sufiyya, ed. by Johannes Pedersen, E. J. Brill, Leiden, 1960.
Schimmel, Annemarie, MysticalDimensionsof Islam, University of North Carolina
Press, Chapel Hill, 1975.
van Ess, Josef, “Vision and Ascension: Surat al-Najmand Its Relationship with
Muhammad’s mi∏raj” in Journal of Qurπanic Studies, vol. 1/1 (1999).
von Schlegell, Barbara, Principles of Sufism, Mizan Press, Berkeley, 1990.
Wensinck, Arent, Concordance et Indices de la Tradition Musulmane, E. J. Brill,
Leiden, 1936–1969.543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 429
INDEX
A ∏Abd al-Malik b. al-Hasan b. Muhammad b. Ishaq
Aban b. Abi ∏Ayyash Firuz al-∏Abdi, Abu Isma∏il al-Isfaraini, Abu Nu∏aym (d. 400/1009)
(d. 138/755–6 or somewhat later) 174 152, 202, 232, 363, 365
Aban b. Ishaq al-Asadi al-Kufi al-Nahwi 226 ∏Abd al-Malik b. (al-)Husayn al-Nakha∏i al-Kufi,
Aban b. Tha∏lab [Taghlib] b. Riyah al-Jurayri Abu Malik 292
al-Kufi al-Raba∏i, Abu Sa∏d (d. ca 141/758–9) ∏Abd al-Malik b. ∏Umayr b. Suwayd b. Haritha
161 al-Qurashi al-Kufi, Abu ∏Umar al-ma∏ruf
Abandonment [by God] (khidhlan) 264, 361, 411 bi-πl-Qibti (d. ca 136/753–4) 292
∏Abbad b. Bishr b. Waqsh al-Khazraji (killed in ∏Abd al-Rahim b. ∏Ali al-Bazzaz al-Hafiz, Abu
12/633) 366 πl-Qasim 23
∏Abbad b. Kathir 320 ∏Abd al-Rahman b. ∏Abdallah 45
∏Abbadan 34, 368 ∏Abd al-Rahman b. ∏Abdallah al-Dhubyani 236
al-πAbbas b. πAbd al-Muttalib b. Hashim b. ∏Abd ∏Abd al-Rahman b. ∏Abdallah b. ∏Utba b. ∏Abdallah
Manaf, Abu πl-Fadl (d. ca 32/653) 209 b. Mas∏ud al-Kufi al-Mas∏udi (d. 165/781–2
al-∏Abbas b. (al-)Fadl al-Asqati (al-Isqati) 118, or 160/776–7) 143
125 ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Abi Hatim Muhammad b. Idris
(al-)∏Abbas (or ∏Ayyash) b. Hamza b. ∏Abdallah b. al-Mundhir al-Tamimi al-Hanzali al-Razi
al-Naysaburi al-Wa∏iz, Abu πl-Fadl (d. 288/901) (d. 327/938) 25
129, 159, 207, 212, 294, 321 ∏Abd al-Rahman b. ∏Affan 334
∏Abbas b. ∏Isam 135, 330 ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Ahmad 279, 370
∏Abbas b. al-Muhtadi al-Sufi, Abu πl-Fadl 133, ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Ahmad b. Baqi b. Makhlad, Abu
375 πl-Hasan 279
al-∏Abbas al-Sharqi 381 ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Ahmad al-Sufi 56
∏Abbas b. Tamim 151 ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Bakr 233
al-∏Abbas al-Zawzani 265 ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Hamdan 305
∏Abd al-A∏la b. Hammad b. Nasr al-Bahili, Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Hurmuz al-A∏raj al-Madani,
Yahya al-ma∏ruf bi-’l-Narsi (or al-Qurashi) Abu Dawud (d. 107/725–6) 237
(d. 237/851) 125 ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Ibrahim b. Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. ∏Abdallah b. Abi Salama Maymun Yahya al-Muzakki, Abu πl-Hasan b.543 Epistle 07 Biblio 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 428
428 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
al-Qushayri, Lataπif al-isharat, ed. by Ibrahim Basyuni, Dar al-kitab al-∏arabi,
Cairo, 1968.
—Al-Risala al-qushayriyya, ed. by ∏Abd al-Halim Mahmud and Mahmud b.
al-Sharif, Dar al-kutub al-haditha, Cairo, 1966.
—Al-Risala al-qushayriyya fi ∏ilm al-tasawwuf, with commentaries by Zakariya
al-Ansari, Dar al-kutub al-∏arabiyya al-kubra, Mustafa al-Babi al-Halabi, Cairo,
1276 A.H. (1859 C.E.).
—Al-Risala al-qushayriyya, with commentaries by Mustafa al-∏Arusi and Zakariya
al-Ansari, ∏Abd al-Wakil al-Darubi and Tasin ∏Arafa, Jami∏ al-Darwishiyya,
Damascus, no date.
—Al-Risala al-qushayriyya fi ∏ilm al-tasawwuf, ed. by Muhammad ∏Abd al-Rahman
al-Mar∏ashali, Dar ihyaπ al-turath al-∏arabi, Beirut, 1998.
al-Sarraj, Kitab al-luma∏ fi πl-tasawwuf, ed. by Reynold A. Nicholson, E. J. Brill,
Leiden, 1914.
al-Sulami, Tabaqat al-sufiyya, ed. by Johannes Pedersen, E. J. Brill, Leiden, 1960.
Schimmel, Annemarie, MysticalDimensionsof Islam, University of North Carolina
Press, Chapel Hill, 1975.
van Ess, Josef, “Vision and Ascension: Surat al-Najmand Its Relationship with
Muhammad’s mi∏raj” in Journal of Qurπanic Studies, vol. 1/1 (1999).
von Schlegell, Barbara, Principles of Sufism, Mizan Press, Berkeley, 1990.
Wensinck, Arent, Concordance et Indices de la Tradition Musulmane, E. J. Brill,
Leiden, 1936–1969.

∏Abdallah b. Abi Salama Maymun Yahya al-Muzakki, Abu πl-Hasan b. Abi Ishaq
al-Majashun, Abu ∏Abdallah (d. 164/780–1) (d. 397/1006) 129, 155, 161
367 ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-∏Adl
∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. Abi Hazim Salama b. Dinar 320
al-Muharibi (d. 184/800–1) 122 ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Muhammad al-Sufi 387
∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. Abi Salama see∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Sa∏id b. Mawhab 145
∏Abdallah b. Abi Salama ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Yahya al-Aswad al-Daybuli 250
∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. al-Fadl 26, 159, 380 ∏Abd al-Razzaq b. Hammam b. Nafi∏ al-Himyari, Abu
∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. Mu∏awiyya b. ∏Abdallah al-Basri, Bakr (d. 211/826–7) 138, 222, 232, 325, 374
Abu Khalid (d. 284/897–8) 122 ∏Abd al-Samad b. al-Nu∏man al-Baghdadi al-Nasaπi
∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. Muhammad b. ∏Ubayd b. Abi al-Bazzaz, Abu Muhammad (d. 216/831–2)
∏Ubayd al-Darawardi al-Madani, Abu 292
Muhammad (d. ca 187/803) 209 ∏Abd al-Samad b. Yazid al-Sa∏igh al-ma∏ruf
∏Abd al-∏Aziz al-Najrani 119 bi-Mardawayh, Abu ∏Abdallah (d. 235/850)
∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. ∏Umayr 159 142
∏Abd al-Kabir b. Ahmad 369 ∏Abd al-Wahhab 177, 389
∏Abd al-Karim b. al-Haytham b. Ziyad b. ∏Imran ∏Abd al-Wahhab b. ∏Abd al-Majid b. al-Salt b. al-Qattan al-Dayr∏aquli, Abu Yahya (d. ∏Ubaydallah al-Thaqafi al-Basri, Abu
278/891–2) 365 Muhammad (d. 194/810) 154
∏Abd al-Malik b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. Jurayj al-Umawi ∏Abd al-Wahid b. Ahmad 287
al-Makki, Abu πl-Walid (d. 149–151/766–769) ∏Abd al-Wahid b. ∏Ali seeal-Sayyari, ∏Abd al-Wahid
297, 343 b. ∏Ali543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 430
430 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
∏Abd al-Wahid b. ∏Alwan, Abu ∏Amr 352 ∏Abdallah b. al-Husayn b. Balawayh (Baluya)
∏Abd al-Wahid b. Bakr, Abu πl-Faraj al-Warathani al-Sufi, Abu πl-Qasim 37, 227, 233
al-Shirazi (d. 372/982–3) 10–11, 41, 48, ∏Abdallah b. Ibrahim b. al-∏Alaπ 250, 286
160, 180, 226, 282, 284, 286, 348, 382, 390 ∏Abdallah b. Ibrahim b. ∏Amir al-Ghifari al-Madani,
∏Abd al-Wahid b. Maymun, Abu Hamza 269 Abu Muhammad 175
∏Abd al-Wahid b. Muhammad b. Shah al-Farisi ∏Abdallah b. Idris b. Yazid b. ∏Abd al-Rahman b. al-Shirazi al-Isbahani, Abu πl-Husayn (d. ca al-Aswad al-Awdi al-Za∏afiri al-Kufi, Abu
380/990) 289 Muhammad (d. 192/808) 390
∏Abd al-Wahid b. Zayd al-Basri (d. ca 150/767, ∏Abdallah b. Ja∏far see∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. 177/793–4) 134, 136, 207, 220, 224, 377, Ja∏far
382–3, 388 ∏Abdallah b. Ja∏far b. Abi Talib b. ∏Abd al-Muttalib
∏Abdallah b. (al-)∏Abbas b. ∏Abd al-Muttalib al-Hashimi (d. ca 80/699–700) 260, 344
al-Qurashi al-Hashimi, Abu πl-∏Abbas ∏Abdallah b. Ja∏far b. Ahmad b. Faris al-Isbahani,
(d. 68/687 or later) 5, 261, 281 Abu Muhammad (d. 346/958) 178, 217,
∏Abdallah b. ∏Abd al-Hamid 34 222, 339
∏Abdallah b. ∏Abd al-Majid al-Sufi 348 ∏Abdallah b. al-Jaf∏ar b. Ahmad b. Khushaysh
∏Abdallah b. ∏Abd al-Wahhab al-Hajabi al-Basri, Abu al-Sayrafi al-Baghdadi, Abu πl-∏Abbas
Muhammad (d. 227–228/841–843) 306 (d. 318/930–1) 281
∏Abdallah b. ∏Adi b. ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Kharraz seeal-Kharraz, Abu
al-Mubarak al-Jurjani al-Hafiz, Abu Ahmad Muhammad ∏Abdallah
b. al-Qattan (d. 365/976) 39, 269 ∏Abdallah al-Khayyat 257
∏Abdallah b. Ahmad b. Hanbal, Abu ∏Abd ∏Abdallah b. Khubayq b. Sabiq al-Antaki, Abu
al-Rahman (d. 290/903) 238 Muhammad (d. 200/815–16) 41
∏Abdallah b. Ahmad al-Istakhri, Abu Muhammad ∏Abdallah b. Lahi∏a b. ∏Uqba al-Hadrami al-Misri,
158–9 Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman (d. 174/790) 273
∏Abdallah b. Ahmad b. Ja∏far b.Ahmad b. Ja∏far b. Ahmad al-Shaybani ∏Abdallah al-Maghazili seeal-Maghazili
al-Naysaburi, Abu Muhammad b. Abi Hamid ∏Abdallah b. Mahmud 221
(d. 372/983) 228–9 ∏Abdallah b. Marwan (al-Khuza∏i al-Basri?) 130
∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali b. Muhammad b. Yahya al-Tamimi ∏Abdallah al-Marwazi (possibly Abu Muhammad
see al-Sarraj, Abu Nasr ∏Abdallah b. Ahmad al-Ribati al-Marwaziπ
∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali al-Sijzi (or al-Shajari), Abu πl-Qasim 299
384 ∏Abdallah b. Mas∏ud seeIbn Mas∏ud, ∏Abdallah
∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali al-Tamimi al-Sufi seeal-Sarraj, ∏Abdallah al-Mu∏allim see∏Abdallah b. Muhammad
Abu Nasr b. Fadlawayh (Fadluya)
∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali al-Tusi seeal-Sarraj, Abu Nasr ∏Abdallah b. al-Mubarak, Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman
∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali b. Yahya al-Tamimi (= ∏Abdallah (d. 181/797) 128, 136, 174, 186, 284, 295,
b. ∏Ali b. Muhammad b. Yahya) seeal-Sarraj, 332, 396
Abu Nasr ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad (al-Sha∏rani? possibly the
∏Abdallah b. ∏Amir al-Aslami al-Madani, Abu ∏Amir same as below) 180, 228
(d. 150/767 or 151/768) 237 ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. ∏Abd
∏Abdallah b. ∏Amir b.Kurayz b. Rabi∏a al-Umawi, al-Rahman al-Razi al-ma∏ruf bi-πl-Sha∏rani, Abu
Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman (d. 59/680) 263 Muhammad (d. 353/964) 35, 45, 69, 140,
∏Abdallah al-Ansari 337 142, 144–5, 163, 175, 180, 237, 253, 319, 350
∏Abdallah b. ∏Ata∏ 282 ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Razi
∏Abdallah b. ∏Awn b. Abi ∏Awn ∏Abd al-Malik see∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. b. Yazid al-Hilali al-Baghdadi al-Adami ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Razi
al-Kharraz, Abu Muhammad (d. probably ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-Wahhab see
232/847) 398 Abu Sa∏id al-Qurashi
∏Abdallah b. Ayyub al-Qirabi 157, 175, 325 ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. Abi πl-Dunya seeIbn
∏Abdallah b. Bakawayh (Bakuya) 263 Abi πl-Dunya
∏Abdallah b. Burayda 129 ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad al-Dimashqi seeAbu πl-
∏Abdallah al-Dinawari 341 Qasim ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad al-Dimashqi
∏Abdallah b. al-Harith al-Ansari al-Basri, Abu ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b.∏Abdallah b. Abi Salama Maymun Yahya al-Muzakki, Abu πl-Hasan b. Abi Ishaq
al-Majashun, Abu ∏Abdallah (d. 164/780–1) (d. 397/1006) 129, 155, 161
367 ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-∏Adl
∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. Abi Hazim Salama b. Dinar 320
al-Muharibi (d. 184/800–1) 122 ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Muhammad al-Sufi 387
∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. Abi Salama see∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Sa∏id b. Mawhab 145
∏Abdallah b. Abi Salama ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Yahya al-Aswad al-Daybuli 250
∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. al-Fadl 26, 159, 380 ∏Abd al-Razzaq b. Hammam b. Nafi∏ al-Himyari, Abu
∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. Mu∏awiyya b. ∏Abdallah al-Basri, Bakr (d. 211/826–7) 138, 222, 232, 325, 374
Abu Khalid (d. 284/897–8) 122 ∏Abd al-Samad b. al-Nu∏man al-Baghdadi al-Nasaπi
∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. Muhammad b. ∏Ubayd b. Abi al-Bazzaz, Abu Muhammad (d. 216/831–2)
∏Ubayd al-Darawardi al-Madani, Abu 292
Muhammad (d. ca 187/803) 209 ∏Abd al-Samad b. Yazid al-Sa∏igh al-ma∏ruf
∏Abd al-∏Aziz al-Najrani 119 bi-Mardawayh, Abu ∏Abdallah (d. 235/850)
∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. ∏Umayr 159 142
∏Abd al-Kabir b. Ahmad 369 ∏Abd al-Wahhab 177, 389
∏Abd al-Karim b. al-Haytham b. Ziyad b. ∏Imran ∏Abd al-Wahhab b. ∏Abd al-Majid b. al-Salt b. al-Qattan al-Dayr∏aquli, Abu Yahya (d. ∏Ubaydallah al-Thaqafi al-Basri, Abu
278/891–2) 365 Muhammad (d. 194/810) 154
∏Abd al-Malik b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. Jurayj al-Umawi ∏Abd al-Wahid b. Ahmad 287
al-Makki, Abu πl-Walid (d. 149–151/766–769) ∏Abd al-Wahid b. ∏Ali seeal-Sayyari, ∏Abd al-Wahid
297, 343 b. ∏Ali

al-Harith al-Ansari al-Basri, Abu ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. Fadlawayh (Fadluya)
πl-Walid 149 al-Mu∏allim 63, 211, 233, 306
∏Abdallah b. Hashim b. Hayyan al-∏Abdi al-Tusi, ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. Ja∏far b. Hayyan
Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman (d. 155/771 or later) al-Isbahani, Abu Muhammad, known as Abu
143 πl-Shaykh (d. 369/979) 160543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 431
INDEX 431
∏Abdallah b. Muhammad al-Kharraz al-Razi see ∏Abdallah b. Zayd b. ∏Amr b. Wa∏il b. Malik, Abu
al-Kharraz, Abu Muhammad ∏Abdallah b. Qilaba (d. 104/722 or 105/723–4) 171
Muhammad al-Abhari seeAbu Bakr ∏Abdallah b. Tahir al-Abhari
∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. Munazil al-Naysaburi, Abiward 20–1
Abu Mahmud (d. 329–332/940–944) 43, Abraham 151, 168, 180, 182, 237–8, 263, 266, 394
63, 166, 180, 211, 223, 227, 279, 313, 336 Absence (ghayba) 91–3, 146
∏Abdallah b. Muhammad al-Razi see∏Abdallah b. Abstention (zuhd) 130, 131, 134–8, 175, 194, 209,
Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. ∏Abd al-Rahman 227, 367, 387, 416
∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. al-Samit 179 Abu πl-∏Abbas (a servant of al-Fudayl b. ∏Iyad) 334
∏Abdallah b. Muhammad al-Sha∏rani see∏Abdallah b. Abu πl-∏Abbas Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Dinawari
Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Razi (d. ca 340/951–2) 71, 160, 224, 314
∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. Wasi∏ b. Jabir al-Azdi Abu πl-∏Abbas Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Masruq
166 (d. 298–9/910–11) 23, 54, 241, 246, 250
∏Abdallah b. Muharrir al-∏Amiri al-Jazari al-Harrani Abu πl-∏Abbas Ahmad b. ∏Umar b. Surayj
(d. 150–160/767–777) 345 al-Baghdadi al-Qadi (d. 306/918) 44, 63,
∏Abdallah b. Munazil see∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. 150, 404
Munazil Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Asamm 312
∏Abdallah b. Musa b. al-Husayn al-Salami, Abu Abu πl-∏Abbas b. ∏Ataπ seeAhmad b. ∏Ata∏, Abu
πl-Hasan (d. 366/976–7 or 374/984–5) 5, πl-∏Abbas
233, 393 Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Baghdadi seeAbu πl-∏Abbas b. ∏Abdallah b. Muslim 264 al-Khashshab orAbu πl-∏Abbas Ahmad b. ∏Abdallah b. Nawfal 288 ∏Umar b. Surayj
∏Abdallah b. Qays seeAbu Musa al-Ash∏ari Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Damaghani, Ahmad b. Khalid
∏Abdallah b. Qays al-Sakuni al-Taraghimi al-Himsi, (d. 280/893–4) 124
Abu Bahriya (d. 86–96/705–715) 232 Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Dinawari seeAbu πl-∏Abbas Ahmad
∏Abdallah b. Rajaπ b. ∏Amr al-Basri, Abu ∏Amr b. Muhammad al-Dinawari
(d.∏Amr al-Basri, Abu ∏Amr b. Muhammad al-Dinawari
(d. propably 219/834–5) 264 Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Farghani al-Dimashqi al-Darir,
∏Abdallah al-Razi see∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. Hajib b. Malik b. Arkin (d. 306/918–19)
∏Abdallah b. ∏Abd al-Rahman 219, 223
∏Abdallah b. Sahl 117, 354 Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Hashimi 337
∏Abdallah b. Sa∏id b. Abi Hind al-Fazari al-Madani, Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Karaji (or al-Karkhi) 70
Abu Bakr (d. 147/764–5) 232 Abu πl-∏Abbas (b.) al-Khashshab, Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. Sa∏id b. Kullab seeIbn Kullab al-Hasan (probably b. al-Husayn) b. Sa∏id b. ∏Abdallah b. Salih 308 al-Khashshab al-Mukharrimi al-Baghdadi
∏Abdallah b. Shiruya 209 (d. 361/971–2) 13, 34, 40, 46, 51, 61, 118,
∏Abdallah b. Shubruma b. al-Tufayl b. Hassan b. 128–9, 150, 182, 194, 205, 208, 211, 223, 227,
al-Mundhir b. Dirar b. ∏Amr al-Dabbi 391
al-Kufi, Abu Shubruma (d. 144/761–2) 201 Abu πl-∏Abbas b. Masruq seeAbu πl-∏Abbas Ahmad
∏Abdallah b. Sulayman 380 b. Muhammad b. Masruq
∏Abdallah b. Tahir seeAbu Bakr ∏Abdallah b. Tahir Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Mu∏addib 227
al-Abhari Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Qass seeAhmad b. Abi Ahmad
∏Abdallah b. ∏Ubayd b. ∏Umayr b. Qatada al-Tabari
al-Laythi al-Junda∏i al-Makki, Abu Hashim Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Qassab seeal-Qassab, Abu πl-∏Abbas
(d. 113/731–2) 201 Ahmad b. Muhammad
∏Abdallah b. ∏Umar b. al-Khattab, Abu ∏Abd Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Sayyad 53
al-Rahman (d. 74/693–4) 204, 226, 253, Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Sayyari seeal-Sayyari, Abu πl-∏Abbas
281, 344 Abu πl-∏Abbas b. Surayj seeAbu πl-∏Abbas Ahmad b. ∏Abdallah b. ∏Uthman b. Yahya 231 ∏Umar b. Surayj
∏Abdallah b. Wahb b. Muslim al-Qurashi al-Misri, Abu πl-∏Abbas b. al-Walid seeAbu πl-∏Abbas
Abu Muhammad (d. 197/813) 155, 366 al-Walid b. Ahmad
∏Abdallah b. al-Walid b. Maymun al-Umawi Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Walid b. Ahmad b. Muhammad
al-Makki, Abu Muhammad al-ma∏ruf b. al-Walid b. Ziyad al-Zawzani (d. 376/986)
bi-πl-∏Adani 392 229
∏Abdallah al-Wazzan 386 Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Dirfash 159
∏Abdallah b. Yahya al-Talhi 288 Abu ∏Abdallah b.al-Harith al-Ansari al-Basri, Abu ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. Fadlawayh (Fadluya)
πl-Walid 149 al-Mu∏allim 63, 211, 233, 306
∏Abdallah b. Hashim b. Hayyan al-∏Abdi al-Tusi, ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. Ja∏far b. Hayyan
Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman (d. 155/771 or later) al-Isbahani, Abu Muhammad, known as Abu
143 πl-Shaykh (d. 369/979) 160

376/986)
bi-πl-∏Adani 392 229
∏Abdallah al-Wazzan 386 Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Dirfash 159
∏Abdallah b. Yahya al-Talhi 288 Abu ∏Abdallah b. ∏Abdallah seeIbn Bakuya
∏Abdallah b. Yusuf al-Isbahani, Abu Muhammad Abu ∏Abdallah al-Antaki seeAhmad b. ∏Asim
24, 30, 36–7, 46, 138, 178, 288–90, 312, 316 al-Antaki543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 432
432 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Abu ∏Abdallah b. Bakawayh (Bakuya) seeIbn Abu ∏Ali b. Wasif al-Mu∏addib 384
Bakawayh (Bakuya) Abu ∏Ammar al-Husayn b. Hurayth b. al-Hasan
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Dabbas al-Baghdadi 384–5 al-Khuza∏i al-Marwazi (d. 244/859) 21
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Daylami 388 Abu ∏Amr b. ∏Alwan (= Ibn Khalaf ∏Alwan b. Abu ∏Abdallah al-Farisi 40 ∏Alwan) 23, 248
Abu ∏Abdallah b. al-Jallaπ seeIbn al-Jalla∏ Abu ∏Amr al-Bikandi 154
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Maghribi, Muhammad b. Isma∏il Abu ∏Amr al-Dimashqi seeAbu ∏Umar al-Dimashqi
(d. ca 299/911–12) 54, 66, 169, 297–9 Abu ∏Amr b. Hamdan seeMuhammad b. Ahmad
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Makanisi 274 b. Hamdan b. ∏Ali
Abu ∏Abdallah b. Muflih 384 Abu ∏Amr (or Abu ∏Umar or Abu ∏Imran) al-Istakhri,
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Muqriπ seeMuhammad b. Ahmad ∏Abd al-Rahim b. Musa 315, 374
b. Muhammad al-Muqri∏ Abu ∏Amr al-Jawlasti 36
Abu ∏Abdallah b. Muslih 114 Abd ∏Amr b. Matar = Abu ∏Amr Muhammad b. Abu ∏Abdallah al-Nasibini 300 Ja∏far b. Muhammad b. Matar al-Naysaburi
Abu ∏Abdallah b. Qahraman 13 (d. 360/971) 29, 175
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Qurashi, Muhammad b. Sa∏id Abu ∏Amr b. Nujayd seeIsma∏il b. Nujayd
114, 181, 328 Abu ∏Amr b. al-Sammak seeIbn al-Sammak, Abu
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Ramli, Muhammad b. ∏Abd ∏Amr ∏Uthman b. Ahmad
al-∏Aziz b. Muhammad al-∏Umari better Abu ∏Amr al-Zajjaji, Muhammad b. Ibrahim b. known as Ibn al-Wasiti 123 Yusuf b. Muhammad al-Naysaburi (d. Abu ∏Abdallah al-Razi seeal-Husayn b. Ahmad 348/959–60) 67, 72, 224, 376
b. Ja∏far al-Razi Abu πl-Ash∏ath 344
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Rudhabari seeAhmad b. ∏Ataπ, Abu ∏Asim al-Basri al-∏Abbadani al-Mara∏i,
Abu ∏Abdallah ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ubaydallah 376
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Shirazi seeIbn Khafif or Ibn Abu πl-Aswad al-Du∏ali (d. 69/688) 129
Bakuya Abu ∏Awana al-Waddah b. ∏Abdallah al-Yashkuri
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Sijzi (d. 255/868–9) 301 al-Wasiti al-Bazzaz (d. 176/792) 344
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Sufi seeIbn Bakuya, Abu Abu ∏Awana Ya∏qub (b. Ibrahim) b.376/986)
bi-πl-∏Adani 392 229
∏Abdallah al-Wazzan 386 Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Dirfash 159
∏Abdallah b. Yahya al-Talhi 288 Abu ∏Abdallah b. ∏Abdallah seeIbn Bakuya
∏Abdallah b. Yusuf al-Isbahani, Abu Muhammad Abu ∏Abdallah al-Antaki seeAhmad b. ∏Asim
24, 30, 36–7, 46, 138, 178, 288–90, 312, 316 al-Antaki

176/792) 344
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Sufi seeIbn Bakuya, Abu Abu ∏Awana Ya∏qub (b. Ibrahim) b. Ishaq
∏Abdallah al-Isfarayini 202, 325, 363, 365
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Tarwaghandi 86 Abu Ayyub al-Hammal 388
Abu ∏Abdallah al-∏Umari 227 Abu πl-Azhar al-Mayyafariqini 41
Abu Ahmad b. ∏Adi al-Hafiz see∏Abdallah b. ∏Adi Abu Bahriya see∏Abdallah b. Qays al-Sakuni
b. ∏Abdallah Abu Bakr ∏Abdallah b. Tahir al-Abhari (d. ca
Abu Ahmad Hamza al-Bazzaz seeHamza b. 330/941–2) 66, 193, 208, 286
al-∏Abbas Abu Bakr b. Abu ∏Uthman 45
Abu Ahmad b. ∏Isa 63 Abu Bakr b. ∏Affan 27
Abu Ahmad the Junior (al-Saghir), al-Hasan b. ∏Ali Abu Bakr b. Ahmad al-Balkhi 53
(d. 385/995–6 or 384/994–5) 70, 160, 288, Abu Bakr al-Ajurri, Muhammad b. al-Husayn b. 302 ∏Abdallah (d. 360/970) 395
Abu Ahmad al-Kabir, al-Fadl b. Muhammad Abu Bakr b. ∏Ayyash b. Salim al-Asadi al-Kufi
(d. 377/987–8) 376 al-Muqriπ (d. ca 193/808) 288, 392
Abu Ahmad al-Qalanisi see al-Qalanisi, Abu Ahmad Abu Bakr al-Balkhi seeAbu Bakr b. Ahmad al-Balkhi
Abu πl-Ahwas see∏Awf b. Malik b. Nadla orKhalaf Abu Bakr al-Bardha∏i 180
b. Tamim Abu Bakr b. Bint Mu∏awiyya 27
Abu ∏Ali al-Balkhi seeAbu ∏Ali Sa∏id b. Ahmad Abu Bakr al-Farisi seeal-Tamastani, Abu Bakr
Abu ∏Ali al-Dallal 13 Abu Bakr b. Furak seeAbu Bakr Muhammad b. Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq seeal-Daqqaq, Abu ∏Ali al-Hasan b. Furak
Abu ∏Ali al-Farisi 242 Abu Bakr al-Ghazzal 158
Abu ∏Ali al-Juzjani seeal-Juzjani Abu Bakr al-Hamdhani 391
Abu ∏Ali b. al-Katib seeIbn al-Katib Abu Bakr al-Harbi, Muhammad b. Sa∏id 22, 24,
Abu ∏Ali al-Razi 21, 378 155, 277
Abu ∏Ali al-Ribati 299 Abu Bakr al-Husayn b. ∏Ali b. Yazdaniyar 67
Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhabari seeal-Rudhabari, Abu ∏Ali Abu Bakr b. Ishkib 152, 227, 397
Abu ∏Ali al-Shabbuwi, Ahmad (or Muhammad) b. Abu Bakr al-Jawwal 287
∏Umar al-Marwazi 218 Abu Bakr al-Kattani seeal-Kattani, Abu Bakr
Abu ∏Ali al-Sindi 370 Abu Bakr al-Maraghi 175
Abu ∏Ali al-Thaqafi seeal-Thaqafi, Abu ∏Ali Abu Bakr b. Mas∏ud 282543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 433
INDEX 433
Abu Bakr al-Misri, Muhammad b. Ibrahim Abu Hafs al-Naysaburi (al-Nisaburi) al-Haddad,
(d. 345/956–7) 65, 287, 292 ∏Amr (or ∏Umar) b. Salama (or: Salm, Salim,
Abu Bakr b. Mu∏ammar seeMuhammad b. Aslam, Maslama, Muslim) (d. between
Mu∏ammar 265/874 and 270/879) 38–9, 45, 57, 62–3,
Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Balkhi 179, 92, 113, 116, 121, 126, 136, 142, 143, 144,
380 147, 168, 205, 212, 242, 246, 255, 283, 284,
Abu Bakr Muhammad b. al-Hasan b. Furak 286, 294, 297, 305, 319, 321, 335
al-Ansari al-Isbahani (d. 406/1015) 8, 72, Abu Hamza al-Baghdadi, Muhammad b. Ibrahim
111, 145, 159, 178, 193–5, 217–19, 222, 234, al-Bazzaz (d. 269/882–3 or 289/902) 57–8,
270, 306, 334–5, 344, 358–9, 362, 414 60, 105, 140, 183, 289, 385
Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Ja∏far al-Baghdadi 21, Abu Hamza al-Khurasani (d. 290/903) 60–1, 186
280 Abu Hanifa al-Nu∏man b. Thabit (d. 150/767)
Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Shadhan seeMuhammad 29, 127, 140
b. ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz Abu πl-Harith al-Awlasi, Fayd b. al-Khadir
b. Shadhan (d. 297/909–10) 356, 372
Abu Bakr al-Nabulusi 391 Abu πl-Harith al-Khattabi, ∏Ali b. al-Qasim b. Ahmad
Abu Bakr al-Nihawandi 356 b. Muhammad b. al-Khattab (d. 350/961)
Abu Bakr al-Rashidi seeal-Rashidi, Abu Bakr 382–3
Abu Bakr al-Razi seeMuhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. Abu πl-Hasan 261
Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. Shadhan Abu πl-Hasan (servant of Sha∏wana) 372
Abu Bakr al-Sabbak 215 Abu πl-Hasan b. ∏Abdallah al-Fuwati al-Tarsusi
Abu Bakr al-Sa∏igh 369 24, 316
Abu Bakr al-Sa∏ih 159 Abu πl-Hasan b. Abi πl-Hawari seeIbn Abi πl-Hawari
Abu Bakr b. Sam∏an 282 Abu πl-Hasan al-Ahwazi see∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan
Abu Bakr b. Shadhan seeMuhammad b. ∏Abdallah Abu πl-Hasan al-∏Alawi seeAbu πl-Hasan
b. Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. Shadhan al-Hamadhani
Abu Bakr al-Siddiq, ∏Abdallah b. ∏Uthman b. ∏Amir Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Ahmad al-Ahwazi see∏Ali b. (d. 13/634) 129, 140, 188, 218, 295, 302, Ahmad b.(d. 13/634) 129, 140, 188, 218, 295, 302, Ahmad b. ∏Abdan
309–10, 344, 366 Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Muhammad al-Sayrafi 389
Abu Bakr b. Tahir seeAbu Bakr ∏Abdallah b. Tahir Abu πl-Hasan al-Damaghani 341
Abu Bakr al-Tarsusi 383 Abu πl-Hasan al-Farisi (possibly the same as Abu
Abu Bakr b. ∏Uthman (b. Abi ∏Uthman al-Hiri?) πl-Husayn al-Farisi?) 11, 32, 55, 126, 130,
49 205, 209, 212, 221, 323, 329
Abu Bakr al-Warraq seeal-Warraq, Abu Bakr Abu πl-Hasan al-Hamadhani al-∏Alawi, Muhammad
Abu Bakr al-Wasiti seeal-Wasiti, Abu Bakr b. al-Husayn 243, 340, 392
Abu Bakr al-Zaqqaq seeal-Zaqqaq Abu πl-Hasan b. Jahdam see∏Ali b. Jahdam
Abu Bishr Yunus b. Habib see Yunus b. Habib Abu πl-Hasan al-Jurjani 386
Abu πl-Dardaπ ∏Uwaymir b. Zayd al-Ansari Abu πl-Hasan al-Khazafani (possibly = Abu πl-Hasan
al-Khazraji (d. 32/652–3) 148, 232, 283, Muhammad b. al-Fadl b.∏Ali b. al-∏Abbas b. 366, 392 al-Walid b. Bihzadhan al-Harbi al-Khazafi,
Abu πl-Dawaniq 133 d. 382/992 268
Abu Dawud al-Tayalisi, Sulayman b. Dawud b. Abu πl-Hasan b. Miqsam seeAbu πl-Hasan Ahmad
Jarud (d. 203/818–19) 178, 217, 222 b. Muhammad b. al-Hasan b. Ya∏qub
Abu Dharr Jundab b. Junada b. Sufyan al-Ghifari Abu πl-Hasan al-Misri see∏Ali b. Muhammad b. (d. 32/652–3) 129, 166, 208, 255 Ahmad b. al-Hasan al-Misri
Abu Dujana 20 Abu πl-Hasan al-Qari∏ 332
Abu πl-Fadl al-∏Attar seeNasr b. Abi Nasr Abu πl-Hasan al-Qazwini see∏Ali b. Muhammad
Muhammad b. Mihruya
Abu πl-Fadl al-Isbahani 402 Abu πl-Hasan al-Saffar al-Basri 151, 188, 252,
Abu πl-Faraj al-Shirazi see∏Abd al-Wahid b. Bakr 257, 273, 292
Abu πl-Faraj al-Warathani see∏Abd al-Wahid b. Bakr Abu πl-Hasan b. al-Sa∏igh al-Dinawari, ∏Ali b. Abu Farwa Yazid b. Sinan b. Yazid al-Tamimi Muhammad b. Sahl (d. 330/941–2) 59
al-Jazari al-Rahawi (d. 155/771) 134 Abu πl-Hasan al-Sha∏rani 42
Abu πl-Fatik seeIbrahim b. Fatik Abu πl-Hasan al-Sirawani seeal-Sirawani, Abu
Abu πl-Ghafani 340 πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Ja∏far
Abu Habib Hamza seeHamza b.176/792) 344
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Sufi seeIbn Bakuya, Abu Abu ∏Awana Ya∏qub (b. Ibrahim) b. Ishaq
∏Abdallah al-Isfarayini 202, 325, 363, 365
Abu ∏Abdallah al-Tarwaghandi 86 Abu Ayyub al-Hammal 388
Abu ∏Abdallah al-∏Umari 227 Abu πl-Azhar al-Mayyafariqini 41
Abu Ahmad b. ∏Adi al-Hafiz see∏Abdallah b. ∏Adi Abu Bahriya see∏Abdallah b. Qays al-Sakuni
b. ∏Abdallah Abu Bakr ∏Abdallah b. Tahir al-Abhari (d. ca
Abu Ahmad Hamza al-Bazzaz seeHamza b. 330/941–2) 66, 193, 208, 286
al-∏Abbas Abu Bakr b. Abu ∏Uthman 45
Abu Ahmad b. ∏Isa 63 Abu Bakr b. ∏Affan 27
Abu Ahmad the Junior (al-Saghir), al-Hasan b. ∏Ali Abu Bakr b. Ahmad al-Balkhi 53
(d. 385/995–6 or 384/994–5) 70, 160, 288, Abu Bakr al-Ajurri, Muhammad b. al-Husayn b. 302 ∏Abdallah (d. 360/970) 395
Abu Ahmad al-Kabir, al-Fadl b. Muhammad Abu Bakr b. ∏Ayyash b. Salim al-Asadi al-Kufi
(d. 377/987–8) 376 al-Muqriπ (d. ca 193/808) 288, 392
Abu Ahmad al-Qalanisi see al-Qalanisi, Abu Ahmad Abu Bakr al-Balkhi seeAbu Bakr b. Ahmad al-Balkhi
Abu πl-Ahwas see∏Awf b. Malik b. Nadla orKhalaf Abu Bakr al-Bardha∏i 180
b. Tamim Abu Bakr b. Bint Mu∏awiyya 27
Abu ∏Ali al-Balkhi seeAbu ∏Ali Sa∏id b. Ahmad Abu Bakr al-Farisi seeal-Tamastani, Abu Bakr
Abu ∏Ali al-Dallal 13 Abu Bakr b. Furak seeAbu Bakr Muhammad b. Abu ∏Ali al-Daqqaq seeal-Daqqaq, Abu ∏Ali al-Hasan b. Furak
Abu ∏Ali al-Farisi 242 Abu Bakr al-Ghazzal 158
Abu ∏Ali al-Juzjani seeal-Juzjani Abu Bakr al-Hamdhani 391
Abu ∏Ali b. al-Katib seeIbn al-Katib Abu Bakr al-Harbi, Muhammad b. Sa∏id 22, 24,
Abu ∏Ali al-Razi 21, 378 155, 277
Abu ∏Ali al-Ribati 299 Abu Bakr al-Husayn b. ∏Ali b. Yazdaniyar 67
Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhabari seeal-Rudhabari, Abu ∏Ali Abu Bakr b. Ishkib 152, 227, 397
Abu ∏Ali al-Shabbuwi, Ahmad (or Muhammad) b. Abu Bakr al-Jawwal 287
∏Umar al-Marwazi 218 Abu Bakr al-Kattani seeal-Kattani, Abu Bakr
Abu ∏Ali al-Sindi 370 Abu Bakr al-Maraghi 175
Abu ∏Ali al-Thaqafi seeal-Thaqafi, Abu ∏Ali Abu Bakr b. Mas∏ud 282

Fatik Abu πl-Hasan al-Sirawani seeal-Sirawani, Abu
Abu πl-Ghafani 340 πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Ja∏far
Abu Habib Hamza seeHamza b. ∏Abdallah Abu Hashim Sahib al-Za∏farani al-Basri, ∏Ammar b. Abu al-Hadid 385 ∏Umara 157543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 434
434 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Abu Hatim al-∏Attar al-Basri 40 Abu Ishaq Ibrahim b. Muhammad al-Fazari
Abu Hatim al-Sijistani al-Sufi al-Tamimi, (d. 186/802) 284
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Abu Ishaq al-Isfaraini seeal-Isfaraini
Yahya 5, 7, 32, 115, 150, 159, 164, 180, Abu Ja∏far al-A∏war 376
221, 255, 289, 291, 293–5, 304, 310, 312, Abu Ja∏far al-Balkhi 174
315–17, 323, 346, 347, 348, 351–3, 367–70 Abu Ja∏far al-Farghani, seeal-Farghani, Abu Ja∏far
Abu Hazim al-Makki 257 Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah
Abu Hazim Salama b. Dinar al-A∏raj (d. ca Abu Ja∏far al-Haddad 182, 193, 246, 287, 369,
140/757–8) 176, 274 391
Abu Hudba 312 Abu Ja∏far Muhammad b. Ya∏qub b. al-Faraj al-Sufi
Abu Hujayfa Wahb b. ∏Abdallah al-Suwali, known al-Samiri al-ma∏ruf bi-Ibn al-Faraji (d. ca
as Wahb al-Khayr (d. ca 74/693–4) 288 270/883) 180
Abu Hulman al-Dimashqi al-Farisi 353 Abu Ja∏far b. Qays 319
Abu Hurayra ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Sahr al-Dawsi Abu Ja∏far al-Razi seeMuhammad b. Ahmad b. al-Yamani (d. probably 58/677–8 or Sa∏id
59/678–9) 122, 129, 132, 138, 142, 152, Abu πl-Jahm 222
155, 165, 173, 175, 197, 210, 237, 257, 264, Abu Kamil Muzaffar b. Mudrik al-Khurasani
280, 306, 325–6, 346, 363–4, 366–7 (d. 207/822–3) 344
Abu πl-Husayn b. Ahmad al-∏Attar al-Balkhi 31 Abu Khabab al-Walid b. Bukayr al-Tamimi
Abu πl-Husayn ∏Ali b. Hind al-Farisi al-Qurashi al-Tuhawi al-Kufi 188
204 Abu Khallad 134
Abu πl-Husayn al-Basri 128 Abu πl-Khasib b. al-Mustanir al-Massisi 365
Abu πl-Husayn b. Bunan al-Misri (d. 310/922–3) Abu πl-Khayr al-Aqta∏ al-Tinati, ∏Abbad b. ∏Abdallah
66, 264 (d. 349/960–1) 64, 159, 248, 303, 367
Abu πl-Husayn al-Damaghani, al-Hasan b. ∏Ali b. Abu πl-Khayr al-Basri 368
Hanawayh (Hannuya) 6 Abu πl-Khayr al-Tinati see Abu πl-Khayr al-Aqta∏
Abu πl-Husayn al-Darraj, Sa∏id b. al-Husayn Abu Marthad Kannaz b. Husayn b. Yarbu∏ b. Tarif
(d. 320/932 or later) 352 b. Khurshuba al-Ghanawi (d. 12/633–4)
Abu πl-Husayn b. Faris (Abu πl-Husayn Ahmad b.Fatik Abu πl-Hasan al-Sirawani seeal-Sirawani, Abu
Abu πl-Ghafani 340 πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Ja∏far
Abu Habib Hamza seeHamza b. ∏Abdallah Abu Hashim Sahib al-Za∏farani al-Basri, ∏Ammar b. Abu al-Hadid 385 ∏Umara 157

12/633–4)
Abu πl-Husayn b. Faris (Abu πl-Husayn Ahmad b. 262
Faris b. Zakariya, d. 395/1004) 44 Abu Mu∏adh al-Qazwini 13
Abu πl-Husayn al-Farisi seeAbu πl-Husayn al-Farisi, Abu Mu∏awiya al-Aswad 380
Muhammad b. Ahmad orAbu πl-Husayn ∏Ali Abu Mu∏awiyya al-Darir, Muhammad b. Khazim
b. Hind al-Farisi (or b. Mu∏awiya) al-Tamimi al-Sa∏di al-Kufi
Abu πl-Husayn al-Farisi, Muhammad b. Ahmad b. (d. 195/810–11) 152, 155
Ibrahim 11, 55, 126, 179, 209, 212, 221, Abu Muhammad b. Abi Hamid, see∏Abdallah b. 323, 329 Ahmad b. Ja∏far
Abu πl-Husayn al-Hajjaji seeal-Hajjaji Abu Muhammad al-Baladhuri, seeAhmad b. Abu πl-Husayn al-Himsi 319 Ibrahim b. Hashim
Abu πl-Husayn b. Hind seeAbu πl-Husayn ∏Ali b. Abu Muhammad al-Harawi 312
Hind Abu Muhammad al-Istakhri, see∏Abdallah b. Abu πl-Husayn al-Maliki 60, 318 Ahmad al-Istakhri
Abu πl-Husayn al-Nuri seeAl-Nuri, Abu πl-Husayn Abu Muhammad al-Maraghi 230, 289
Ahmad b.Muhammad Abu Muhammad b. Yasin 284
Abu πl-Husayn al-Qarafi, ∏Ali b. ∏Uthman 248 Abu Muqatil al-∏Akki 82
Abu πl-Husayn al-Razi 40, 160 Abu Musa al-Ash∏ari, ∏Abdallah b. Qays (d. probably
Abu πl-Husayn al-Warraq seeal-Warraq, Abu 42/662–3) 209, 335, 346
πl-Husayn Abu Musa al-Bastami seeAbu Musa ∏Isa b. Adam
Abu πl-Husayn al-Zanjani 126 Abu Musa al-Daybuli (or al-Dabili) 178, 250
Abu Ibrahim 161 Abu Musa ∏Isa b. Adam b. ∏Isa al-Bastami
Abu Ibrahim al-Yamani 384 (al-Bistami) 32, 272
Abu ∏Imran al-Istakhri seeAbu ∏Amr al-Istakhri Abu Muslim 367, 380
Abu ∏Imran al-Kabir 57 Abu Muslim al-Khawlani al-Yamani, ∏Abdallah b. Abu ∏Imran al-Wasiti 372 Thuwab (d. 62/682) 380
Abu ∏Iqal b. ∏Alwan al-Maghribi 86 Abu πl-Nadr Hashim b. al-Qasim b. Muslim b. Abu Ishaq ∏Amr b. ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali al-Sabi∏i Miqsam al-Laythi al-Baghdadi (d. 207/832 or
al-Hamadhani al-Kufi (d. 127/745) 393 205/821) 343543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 435
INDEX 435
Abu Nadra al-Mundhir b. Malik b. Quta∏a al-∏Abdi Abu Sa∏id al-Qurashi, ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad
118 b. ∏Abd al-Wahhab b. Nusayr al-Razi
Abu πl-Najm al-Muqri al-Bardha∏i 383 (d. 382/992–3) 56, 156, 223
Abu Nasr al-Harawi 285 Abu Sa∏id al-Ramli 350
Abu Nasr al-Isbahani 43–4, 196, 266 Abu Sa∏id al-Saffar (al-Mu∏addib) 399–400
Abu Nasr the Muezzin (al-Mu∏adhdhin) 92 Abu Salama b. ∏Abd al-Rahman b. ∏Awf b. ∏Abd ∏Awf
Abu Nasr al-Sufi 301, 347 al-Zuhri al-Madani (d. probably 94/712–13)
Abu Nasr al-Tammar 160 138, 264, 280, 346, 392
Abu Nasr al-Tusi seeal-Sarraj, Abu Nasr Abu Salih Dhakwan al-Samman al-Zayyat al-Madani
Abu Nasr al-Waziri, Muhammad b. Tahir b. (d.101/719–20) 392
Muhammad b. al-Hasan b. al-Wazir (d. Abu Salih Hamdun seeHamdun al-Qassar
365/976) 226 Abu Salim (?) Muhammad b. Yahya b. al-Mundhir
Abu Nu∏aym al-Isfaraini see∏Abd al-Malik b. al-Qazzaz 340
al-Hasan al-Isfaraini Abu Sufyan (al-)Tarif b. Shihab al-Sa∏di al-Basri
Abu πl-Qasim ∏Abdallah b. al-Husayn see∏Abdallah al-Ashall 149, 320
b. al-Husayn b. Baluya Abu Sulayman al-Darani seeal-Darani
Abu πl-Qasim ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad al-Dimashqi Abu Sulayman al-Khawwas 369
62, 129, 144, 284, 301, 324 Abu Sulayman al-Rumi 392
Abu πl-Qasim b. Abi Nizar 176 Abu Tahir al-Isfaraini 174
Abu πl-Qasim al-Baghdadi 205 Abu Talut 220
Abu πl-Qasim al-Dimashqi see Abu πl-Qasim Abu πl-Tayyib al-∏Akki see Ahmad b. Muqatil
∏Abdallah b. Muhammad al-Dimashqi al-∏Akki
Abu πl-Qasim al-Hakim, Ishaq b. Muhammad b. Abu πl-Tayyib b. Farkhan 296
Isma∏il al-Samarqandi (d. 342/953) 143–4, Abu πl-Tayyib al-Maraghi 5
197 Abu πl-Tayyib al-Samarri 137, 323
Abu πl-Qasim al-Jawhari 335 Abu Thawr Ibrahim b. Khalid b. Abi πl-Yaman
Abu πl-Qasim b. Marwan (or b. Mardan) al-Kalbi (d. 240/854) 43, 258
al-Nihawandi 377 Abu Turab al-Nakhshabi, ∏Askar b. Husayn
Abu πl-Qasim al-Mudhakkir 227 (d.12/633–4)
Abu πl-Husayn b. Faris (Abu πl-Husayn Ahmad b. 262
Faris b. Zakariya, d. 395/1004) 44 Abu Mu∏adh al-Qazwini 13
Abu πl-Husayn al-Farisi seeAbu πl-Husayn al-Farisi, Abu Mu∏awiya al-Aswad 380
Muhammad b. Ahmad orAbu πl-Husayn ∏Ali Abu Mu∏awiyya al-Darir, Muhammad b. Khazim
b. Hind al-Farisi (or b. Mu∏awiya) al-Tamimi al-Sa∏di al-Kufi
Abu πl-Husayn al-Farisi, Muhammad b. Ahmad b. (d. 195/810–11) 152, 155
Ibrahim 11, 55, 126, 179, 209, 212, 221, Abu Muhammad b. Abi Hamid, see∏Abdallah b. 323, 329 Ahmad b. Ja∏far
Abu πl-Husayn al-Hajjaji seeal-Hajjaji Abu Muhammad al-Baladhuri, seeAhmad b. Abu πl-Husayn al-Himsi 319 Ibrahim b. Hashim
Abu πl-Husayn b. Hind seeAbu πl-Husayn ∏Ali b. Abu Muhammad al-Harawi 312
Hind Abu Muhammad al-Istakhri, see∏Abdallah b. Abu πl-Husayn al-Maliki 60, 318 Ahmad al-Istakhri
Abu πl-Husayn al-Nuri seeAl-Nuri, Abu πl-Husayn Abu Muhammad al-Maraghi 230, 289
Ahmad b.Muhammad Abu Muhammad b. Yasin 284
Abu πl-Husayn al-Qarafi, ∏Ali b. ∏Uthman 248 Abu Muqatil al-∏Akki 82
Abu πl-Husayn al-Razi 40, 160 Abu Musa al-Ash∏ari, ∏Abdallah b. Qays (d. probably
Abu πl-Husayn al-Warraq seeal-Warraq, Abu 42/662–3) 209, 335, 346
πl-Husayn Abu Musa al-Bastami seeAbu Musa ∏Isa b. Adam
Abu πl-Husayn al-Zanjani 126 Abu Musa al-Daybuli (or al-Dabili) 178, 250
Abu Ibrahim 161 Abu Musa ∏Isa b. Adam b. ∏Isa al-Bastami
Abu Ibrahim al-Yamani 384 (al-Bistami) 32, 272
Abu ∏Imran al-Istakhri seeAbu ∏Amr al-Istakhri Abu Muslim 367, 380
Abu ∏Imran al-Kabir 57 Abu Muslim al-Khawlani al-Yamani, ∏Abdallah b. Abu ∏Imran al-Wasiti 372 Thuwab (d. 62/682) 380
Abu ∏Iqal b. ∏Alwan al-Maghribi 86 Abu πl-Nadr Hashim b. al-Qasim b. Muslim b. Abu Ishaq ∏Amr b. ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali al-Sabi∏i Miqsam al-Laythi al-Baghdadi (d. 207/832 or
al-Hamadhani al-Kufi (d. 127/745) 393 205/821) 343

240/854) 43, 258
al-Nihawandi 377 Abu Turab al-Nakhshabi, ∏Askar b. Husayn
Abu πl-Qasim al-Mudhakkir 227 (d. 245/859) 38, 40, 42, 51–2, 55, 60, 160,
Abu πl-Qasim al-Munadi 244, 248 180, 184, 193, 196, 209, 273, 291, 315, 324–5,
Abu πl-Qasim b. (Abi?) Musa 13, 146 341, 370, 381
Abu πl-Qasim b. Musa seeAbu πl-Qasim b. (Abi?) Abu ∏Ubayd al-Busri, Muhammad b. Hassan
Musa (d.238/852–3, probably later) 47, 51–3,
Abu πl-Qasim al-Razi seeJa∏far b. Ahmad b. 371
Muhammad Abu ∏Ubayda ∏Amir b. ∏Abdallah b. al-Jarrah
Abu Qatada al-Harith b. Rib∏i b. Bulduma al-Qurashi (d. 18/639) 393
al-Salami al-Madani (d. probably 54/673–4) Abu Umama al-Bahili, Sudayy b. ∏Ajlan b. Wahb
392 (d. ca 86/705) 128, 138, 364
Abu Qilaba see∏Abdallah b. Zayd b. ∏Amr Abu ∏Umar ∏Ali b. Muhammad b. ∏Ali b. Bashshar
Abu Qirsafa Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-Wahhab b. Salman al-Anmati 23, 44, 117, 124, 168,
al-∏Asqalani 222 231, 346
Abu Qubays 376 Abu ∏Umar al-Anmati, seeAbu ∏Umar ∏Ali b. Abu πl-Rabi∏ al-Wasiti al-A∏raj 30 Muhammad b. ∏Ali
Abu πl-Rabi∏ al-Zahrani seeSulayman b. Dawud Abu ∏Umar al-Antaki 322
al-∏Ataki Abu ∏Umar al-Dimashqi (also known as Abu ∏Amr
Abu πl-Rajaπ seeMuhriz b. ∏Abdallah al-Dimashqi) (d. 320/932) 47, 69, 144, 209
Abu Sabra al-Nakha∏i, ∏Abdallah b. ∏Abis 390 Abu ∏Umar al-Istakhri see Abu ∏Amr al-Istakhri
Abu Sa∏d al-Malini seeal-Malini Abu ∏Uthman al-Adami 196
Abu Sa∏dan (Sa∏id) al-Taharti 187 Abu ∏Uthman al-Baladi 28
Abu Sadiq b. Habib 300 Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri seeal-Hiri, Abu ∏Uthman
Abu Sahl al-Khashshab al-Kabir 18, 24, 285 Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi, Sa∏id b. Sallam
Abu Sahl al-Su∏luki seeal-Su∏luki (d. 373/983) 8, 9, 45, 59, 72, 118, 121, 123,
Abu Sa∏id b. al-A∏rabi seeIbn al-A∏rabi, Abu Sa∏id 150, 158, 195, 205, 221, 249, 251, 266, 271,
Abu Sa∏id al-Arrajani 329 303, 324, 348–9, 354, 386, 402
Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz seeal-Kharraz, Abu Sa∏id Abu ∏Uthman Sa∏id b. Abu Sa∏id seeSa∏id b. Ahmad
Abu Sa∏id al-Khudri seeal-Khudri, Abu Sa∏id b. Muhammad b. Ja∏far543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 436
436 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Abu ∏Uthman Sa∏id b. Ahmad seeSa∏id b. Ahmad b. Ahmad b. ∏Ata∏, Abu πl-∏Abbas b. Muhammad b. Muhammad b. Ja∏far Sahl b. ∏Ataπ al-Adami (killed 309/921–2)
Abu Wa∏il Shaqiq b. Salama al-Asadi al-Kufi (d. 28, 56
during the caliphate of ∏Umar Ahmad b. ∏Ata∏, Abu ∏Abdallah al-Rudhabari
13–23/634–644) 222 (d. 369/980) 13–14, 55, 73, 286, 308, 330,
Abu πl-Walid al-Tayalisi seeHisham b. ∏Abd 368, 391
al-Malik al-Bahili Ahmad b. Bashshar b. ∏Abdallah b. ∏Umar b. ∏Amri
Abu πl-Yaman al-Hakam b. Nafi∏ al-Bahrani al-Sirafi (al-Sayrafi) 220
al-Himsi (d. 211/826–7 or 222/837) 365 Ahmad b. al-Fath 140
Abu Ya∏qub al-Aqta∏ al-Basri 184 Ahmad b. Ghassan 220
Abu Ya∏qub al-Mazabili (d. ca 290/903) 291 Ahmad b. Hamid al-Aswad seeAhmad al-Aswad
Abu Ya∏qub al-Nahrajuri seeal-Nahrajuri al-Dinawari
Abu Ya∏qub al-Shariti (or al-Shuruti) 220 Ahmad b. Hamza 389
Abu Ya∏qub al-Susi, Yusuf b. Hamdan 64, 124, Ahmad b. Hanbal (d. 241/855) 26, 57, 132, 135,
221, 300, 322, 329, 331, 383 137, 148, 278, 378, 404
Abu Yazid al-Bastami (or al-Bistami) b. Tayfur b. Ahmad b. al-Haytham al-Mutatabbib 380
∏Isa b. Surushan (d. probably 261/874–5) Ahmad b. al-Husayn 138
32–3, 38, 93, 95, 118, 123, 127, 164, 177–9, Ahmad b. al-Husayn, Abu πl-Najm 381
211, 217, 250, 267, 269, 271–2, 297, 317, Ahmad b. Ibrahim b. Hashim al-Tusi al-Baladhuri
321–2, 324, 328, 332, 338, 341, 360, 370, al-Mudhakkir al-Hafiz al-Wa∏iz, Abu
387–8, 396, 405 Muhammad (killed 339/950–1) 227
Abu Zakariya al-Nakhshabi 282 Ahmad b. Ibrahim b. Yahya 384
Abu Zayd Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdallah b. Ahmad b. ∏Isa (possibly the same as al-Kharraz, Abu
Muhammad al-Fashani al-Marwazi al-Faqih, Sa∏id Ahmad b. ∏Isa) 37, 53, 63, 155
Abu Zayd (d. 371/982) 66, 266 Ahmad b. Isma∏il al-Azdi 134
Abu πl-Zubayr Muhammad b. Muslim b. Tadrus Ahmad b. Khadrawayh (Khidruya) al-Balkhi, Abu
al-Asadi al-Makki (d. 126/743–4) 297 Hamid (d.Khadrawayh (Khidruya) al-Balkhi, Abu
al-Asadi al-Makki (d. 126/743–4) 297 Hamid (d. 240/854–5) 19, 36, 38, 52–3,
Abu Zur∏a al-Janbi 21, 51, 391 119, 179, 223, 238–9
Actions seeDeeds Ahmad b. Mahmud b. Khurrazadh al-Ahwazi, Abu
Adam 13, 32, 116, 144, 147, 164, 171, 190, 228, Bakr 111, 193, 306, 334, 344
235, 245, 266, 394 Ahmad b. Mansur 160, 383
Adam b. Abi Iyas, Abu πl-Hasan b. ∏Abd al-Rahman Ahmad al-Masjidi 233
b. Muhammad al-∏Asqalani (d. 220/835) Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Farghani
374 160, 375
Admonition 228–9 Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Salim 158
Advice seeSpiritual advice Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Salim al-Basri,
Affirmation (ithbat) 96 Abu πl-Hasan (d. 356/967) 131, 293, 354
Affliction/Trial (balaπ) 3, 202, 206–8, 211, 226, Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Zakariya
233, 235, 276–8, 394 al-Taghlibi, Abu πl-∏Abbas al-ma∏ruf bi-Ibn
Afghanistan 18, 31, 46, 174, 277, 371 Abi Shaykh al-Khalanji 308
Ahmad b. Abi Ahmad al-Tabari, Abu πl-Abbas (b.) Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ∏Ali b. Harun, Abu
al-Qass 42 πl-∏Abbas al-Barda∏i 11
Ahmad b. Abi πl-Hawari seeIbn Abi πl-Hawari Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Basri seeAhmad b. Ahmad b. Abi Rawh 157 Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Salim
Ahmad b. Abu Tahir al-Khurasani 129 Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Bukhari 31
Ahmad b. ∏Ali, Abu πl-Husayn 64–5 Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Ibrahim al-Mahrajani,
Ahmad b. ∏Ali al-Dimashqi 26 Abu Nu∏aym 143
Ahmad b. ∏Ali al-Hasan b. Shadhan al-Muqriπ Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Khurrazadh (or Khurzad)
al-Tajir al-Hasnuyi, Abu Hamid (d. ca seeAhmad b. Mahmud b. Khurrazadh
340/951–2) 209, 242 Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Qirmisini 180
Ahmad b. ∏Ali b. Ja∏far al-Qazzaz al-Jurjani, Abu Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Salih b. ∏Abdallah
πl-Qasim 56, 118, 125, 136, 182, 195, 325 al-Samarqandi, Abu Yahya 185
Ahmad b. ∏Asim al-Antaki, Abu ∏Ali (or Abu Ahmad b. Muhammad b. al-Sari b. Yahya b. Abi
∏Abdallah; d. 220/835) 41, 125, 150, 246, Darim al-Muhaddith al-Kufi al-Rafidi, Abu
321 Bakr (d. 352/963) 37
Ahmad al-Aswad al-Dinawari 336 Ahmad b.240/854) 43, 258
al-Nihawandi 377 Abu Turab al-Nakhshabi, ∏Askar b. Husayn
Abu πl-Qasim al-Mudhakkir 227 (d. 245/859) 38, 40, 42, 51–2, 55, 60, 160,
Abu πl-Qasim al-Munadi 244, 248 180, 184, 193, 196, 209, 273, 291, 315, 324–5,
Abu πl-Qasim b. (Abi?) Musa 13, 146 341, 370, 381
Abu πl-Qasim b. Musa seeAbu πl-Qasim b. (Abi?) Abu ∏Ubayd al-Busri, Muhammad b. Hassan
Musa (d.238/852–3, probably later) 47, 51–3,
Abu πl-Qasim al-Razi seeJa∏far b. Ahmad b. 371
Muhammad Abu ∏Ubayda ∏Amir b. ∏Abdallah b. al-Jarrah
Abu Qatada al-Harith b. Rib∏i b. Bulduma al-Qurashi (d. 18/639) 393
al-Salami al-Madani (d. probably 54/673–4) Abu Umama al-Bahili, Sudayy b. ∏Ajlan b. Wahb
392 (d. ca 86/705) 128, 138, 364
Abu Qilaba see∏Abdallah b. Zayd b. ∏Amr Abu ∏Umar ∏Ali b. Muhammad b. ∏Ali b. Bashshar
Abu Qirsafa Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-Wahhab b. Salman al-Anmati 23, 44, 117, 124, 168,
al-∏Asqalani 222 231, 346
Abu Qubays 376 Abu ∏Umar al-Anmati, seeAbu ∏Umar ∏Ali b. Abu πl-Rabi∏ al-Wasiti al-A∏raj 30 Muhammad b. ∏Ali
Abu πl-Rabi∏ al-Zahrani seeSulayman b. Dawud Abu ∏Umar al-Antaki 322
al-∏Ataki Abu ∏Umar al-Dimashqi (also known as Abu ∏Amr
Abu πl-Rajaπ seeMuhriz b. ∏Abdallah al-Dimashqi) (d. 320/932) 47, 69, 144, 209
Abu Sabra al-Nakha∏i, ∏Abdallah b. ∏Abis 390 Abu ∏Umar al-Istakhri see Abu ∏Amr al-Istakhri
Abu Sa∏d al-Malini seeal-Malini Abu ∏Uthman al-Adami 196
Abu Sa∏dan (Sa∏id) al-Taharti 187 Abu ∏Uthman al-Baladi 28
Abu Sadiq b. Habib 300 Abu ∏Uthman al-Hiri seeal-Hiri, Abu ∏Uthman
Abu Sahl al-Khashshab al-Kabir 18, 24, 285 Abu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi, Sa∏id b. Sallam
Abu Sahl al-Su∏luki seeal-Su∏luki (d. 373/983) 8, 9, 45, 59, 72, 118, 121, 123,
Abu Sa∏id b. al-A∏rabi seeIbn al-A∏rabi, Abu Sa∏id 150, 158, 195, 205, 221, 249, 251, 266, 271,
Abu Sa∏id al-Arrajani 329 303, 324, 348–9, 354, 386, 402
Abu Sa∏id al-Kharraz seeal-Kharraz, Abu Sa∏id Abu ∏Uthman Sa∏id b. Abu Sa∏id seeSa∏id b. Ahmad
Abu Sa∏id al-Khudri seeal-Khudri, Abu Sa∏id b. Muhammad b. Ja∏far

220/835) 41, 125, 150, 246, Darim al-Muhaddith al-Kufi al-Rafidi, Abu
321 Bakr (d. 352/963) 37
Ahmad al-Aswad al-Dinawari 336 Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Sulami 371543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 437
INDEX 437
Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Thaghri (or al-Baghawi) Aleppo 258
51 Alexandria 278, 375
Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Tusi 378 ∏Ali b. ∏Abd al-Hamid al-Jada∏iri al-Halabi 221
Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Yahya al-Sufi (probably ∏Ali b. ∏Abd al-Rahim al-Wasiti seeal-Qannad,
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Muhammad Abu πl-Hasan
b. Yahya, Abu Hatim al-Sijistani al-Sufi ∏Ali b. ∏Abdallah al-Azdi al-Bariqi, Abu ∏Abdallah b. al-Tamimi) 131 Abi πl-Walid 297
Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Zakariya seeAhmad b. ∏Ali b. ∏Abdallah al-Baghdadi see∏Ali b. ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Zakariya Muhammad al-Baghdadi
Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Zayd 320 ∏Ali b. ∏Abdallah al-Basri 198
Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Ziyad al-Nahwi 226 ∏Ali b. ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad al-Baghdadi, Abu
Ahmad b. Muqatil al-∏Akki al-Baghdadi, Abu πl-Hasan (d. ca 380/990) 350
πl-Tayyib 348, 350–2 ∏Ali b. Abi ∏Ali b. ∏Utba b. Abi Lahab 167
Ahmad b. Nasr 315 ∏Ali b. Abi Muhammad al-Tamimi 378
Ahmad b. Sahl b. Ayyub 193 ∏Ali b. Abi Talib (killed in 40/661) 131
Ahmad b. Sahl al-Tajir 240 ∏Ali b. Abi Talib 197–8, 254, 262, 263, 313, 354,
Ahmad b. Sa∏id b. Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Ma∏dan 396
al-Ma∏dani al-Basri, Abu πl-∏Abbas (d. 375/986) ∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan al-Ahwazi, Abu πl-Hasan
310 (or Abu πl-Husayn, d. 415/1024) 111, 122,
Ahmad b. Salih seeAhmad b. Muhammad b. Salih 125, 128, 138, 145, 148, 149, 151, 155, 157,
Ahmad al-Tabarani al-Sarakhsi 368 161–2, 167, 174, 179, 188, 197, 205, 213, 220,
Ahmad b. Tulun (r. 254–270/868–884) 57 229, 232, 237, 252, 257, 264, 273, 292, 303,
Ahmad b. ∏Ubayd al-Saffar al-Basri, Abu πl-Hasan 325–6, 335, 343–6, 356, 367
111, 118, 122, 125, 138, 145, 148, 149, 155, ∏Ali al-∏Attar see∏Ali b. al-Hasan b. Ja∏far al-∏Attar
157, 161–2, 167, 171, 174, 179, 197, 205, 210, ∏Ali al-Azdi see∏Ali b. ∏Abdallah al-Azdi
213, 220, 229, 232, 237, 257, 264, 297, 303, ∏Ali b. Bakkar al-Basri al-Zahid, Abu πl-Hasan (d. ca
325–6, 335, 340, 343–6, 356, 367, 392 199/814–5) 141
Ahmad b.220/835) 41, 125, 150, 246, Darim al-Muhaddith al-Kufi al-Rafidi, Abu
321 Bakr (d. 352/963) 37
Ahmad al-Aswad al-Dinawari 336 Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Sulami 371

Bakkar al-Basri al-Zahid, Abu πl-Hasan (d. ca
325–6, 335, 340, 343–6, 356, 367, 392 199/814–5) 141
Ahmad b. ∏Ubaydallah al-Basri 162, 175 ∏Ali b. Bakran 157
Ahmad b. ∏Umar 197 ∏Ali b. Bashran see∏Ali b. Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah
Ahmad b. Yahya al-Abiwardi 342 b. Bashran
Ahmad b. Yunus 125 ∏Ali b. Bundar b. al-Husayn al-Sayrafi/al-Sirafi
Ahmad b. Yusuf b. Khalid al-Muhallabi al-Azdi (al-Sufi), Abu πl-Hasan (d. 359/969–70)
al-Sulami al-Naysaburi better known as 221, 284, 324
Hamdan, Abu πl-Hasan (d. 264/877–8) ∏Ali b. al-Fudayl b. ∏Iyad al-Tamimi (d. 174/790–1)
138, 384 259
Ahmad b. Yusuf al-Khayyat 381 ∏Ali b. Harb b. Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Mawsili,
Ahmad b. Zakariya 111, 220 Abu πl-Hasan (d. 260/873–4) 30, 152
Ahnaf al-Hamadhani 298 ∏Ali b. Harun 378
al-Ahnaf b. Qays b. Mu∏awiya b. Husayn al-Murri ∏Ali b. al-Hasan 173
al-Sa∏di al-Minqari al-Tamimi (d. ca 72/691–2) ∏Ali b. al-Hasan b. Ja∏far al-∏Attar al-Bazzaz
253–4 al-Makhrami al-ma∏ruf bi-Ibn al-∏Attar,
Ahwaz 114, 193 Abu πl-Husayn (d. 376/986) 131
al-Ahwazi see∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan ∏Ali b. al-Hasan b. Musa al-Hilali al-Darabjirdi,
∏A∏isha 145, 151, 188, 197, 241, 257, 269, 292, Abu πl-Hasan b. Abi ∏Isa (d. 269/883) 228
320, 344 ∏Ali b. Hubaysh 155
al-Ajlah, Yahya b. ∏Abdallah b. Hujayya al-Kindi, ∏Ali b. al-Husayn 138, 161
Abu Hujayya (d. ca 145/762) 129, 344 ∏Ali b. al-Husayn b. ∏Ali b. Abi Talib, known as
Al-Ajurri seeAbu Bakr al-Ajurri or Ibrahim Zayn al-∏abidin (d. between 92/710 and
al-Ajurri 99/717) 92
al-Akhfash seeAhmad b. ∏Imran b. Salama ∏Ali b. Husayn al-Arrajani 159
al-∏Akki seeAbu Muqatil al-∏Akki ∏Ali b. Ibrahim b. Ahmad 384
al-∏Alaπ b. ∏Abdallah al-Hadrami (d. 21/641–2 or ∏Ali b. Ibrahim al-Haddad, Abu πl-Husayn 44
later) 366 ∏Ali b. Ibrahim al-Husri seeal-Husri, Abu πl-Hasan
al-∏Alaπ b. Zayd 148 ∏Ali b. Ibrahim
al-∏Alaπ b. Ziyad b. Matar b. Shurayh al-∏Adawi ∏Ali b. Ibrahim al-Qadi 159
al-Basri, Abu Nasr (d. 94/712–13) 401 ∏Ali b. Ibrahim al-Shaqiqi 220543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 438
438 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
∏Ali b. Ibrahim al-∏Ukbari 145 al-A∏mash seeSulayman b. Mihran
∏Ali b. ∏Isa b. Dawud b. al-Jarrah (d. 334/946) 23, al-∏Amili, Bahaπ al-din seeBahaπ al-din al-∏Amili
117 ∏Amir b. ∏Abd Qays (= ∏Amir b. ∏Abdallah b. ∏Abd
∏Ali b. ∏Isa b. Mahan (d. 195/810) 31 Qays al-∏Anbari) (d. 41–60/661–680) 195,
∏Ali b. Jahdam see∏Ali b. ∏Abdallah b. al-Hasan b. 376, 388
Jahdam ∏Amir b. Abi πl-Furat 142
∏Ali b. Khashram b. ∏Abd al-Rahman b. ∏Ataπ b. ∏Amir b. Sa∏d b. Abi Waqqas al-Zuhri al-Madani
Hilal 25 (d. 104/722–3) 209
∏Ali b. Muhammad 38 ∏Ammar b. Raja∏ 363
∏Ali b. Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. Bashran ∏Ammar b. Yasir b. ∏Amir al-Kinani al-Madhhiji,
al-Mu∏addil al-Umawi, Abu πl-Husayn Abu πl-Yaqzan (killed in 37/657) 335, 339
(d. 415/1024) 232, 275 ∏Ammi (Uncle) al-Bastami/al-Bistami, Abu ∏Imran
∏Ali b. Muhammad b. Ahmad b. al-Hasan al-Misri, Musa b. ∏Isa al-ma∏ruf bi-∏Ammi 32–3, 271,
Abu πl-Hasan (d. 338/950) 18, 61, 186, 341, 387
231–2, 301 ∏Amr 212
∏Ali b. Muhammad al-Dallal 22 ∏Amr b. ∏Abdallah al-Basri, Abu ∏Uthman 226
∏Ali b. Muhammad b. Mihruya al-Qazwini, Abu ∏Amr b. Dinar al-Makki al-Jumahi al-Athram, Abu
πl-Hasan 60, 311–12 Muhammad (d. 125–126/742–744) 64, 229
∏Ali b. Muhammad al-Misri see∏Ali b. Muhammad ∏Amr b. Marzuq al-Bahili al-Basri, Abu ∏Uthman
b. Ahmad b. al-Hasan (d. 224/838–9) 367
∏Ali b. Muhammad b. Muhammad b. ∏Uqba ∏Amr b. Qays al-Mula∏i al-Kufi, Abu ∏Abdallah
al-Shaybani, Abu πl-Hasan 312 (d. 146/763–4) 242
∏Ali b. Musa b. Ja∏far al-Rida, Abu πl-Hasan ∏Amr b. Sinan 178
(d. 203/818) 21–3 ∏Amr b. ∏Utba b. Farqad al-Sulami al-Kufi (killed in
∏Ali b. Musa al-Taharti, Abu ∏Addallah (321/933) 32/652–3) 384
130 ∏Amr b. ∏Uthman b. Kurayb b. Ghusas al-Makki,
∏Ali b. Mushir al-Qurashi al-Kufi, Abu πl-Hasan Abu ∏Abdallah (d. probably 291/904) 28,
(d. 189/804–5) 161 50, 54, 67, 98, 212, 238, 289, 341
∏Ali b. Muslim 382–3 ∏Amram (∏Imran) 355
∏Ali b.Bakkar al-Basri al-Zahid, Abu πl-Hasan (d. ca
325–6, 335, 340, 343–6, 356, 367, 392 199/814–5) 141
Ahmad b. ∏Ubaydallah al-Basri 162, 175 ∏Ali b. Bakran 157
Ahmad b. ∏Umar 197 ∏Ali b. Bashran see∏Ali b. Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah
Ahmad b. Yahya al-Abiwardi 342 b. Bashran
Ahmad b. Yunus 125 ∏Ali b. Bundar b. al-Husayn al-Sayrafi/al-Sirafi
Ahmad b. Yusuf b. Khalid al-Muhallabi al-Azdi (al-Sufi), Abu πl-Hasan (d. 359/969–70)
al-Sulami al-Naysaburi better known as 221, 284, 324
Hamdan, Abu πl-Hasan (d. 264/877–8) ∏Ali b. al-Fudayl b. ∏Iyad al-Tamimi (d. 174/790–1)
138, 384 259
Ahmad b. Yusuf al-Khayyat 381 ∏Ali b. Harb b. Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Mawsili,
Ahmad b. Zakariya 111, 220 Abu πl-Hasan (d. 260/873–4) 30, 152
Ahnaf al-Hamadhani 298 ∏Ali b. Harun 378
al-Ahnaf b. Qays b. Mu∏awiya b. Husayn al-Murri ∏Ali b. al-Hasan 173
al-Sa∏di al-Minqari al-Tamimi (d. ca 72/691–2) ∏Ali b. al-Hasan b. Ja∏far al-∏Attar al-Bazzaz
253–4 al-Makhrami al-ma∏ruf bi-Ibn al-∏Attar,
Ahwaz 114, 193 Abu πl-Husayn (d. 376/986) 131
al-Ahwazi see∏Ali b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdan ∏Ali b. al-Hasan b. Musa al-Hilali al-Darabjirdi,
∏A∏isha 145, 151, 188, 197, 241, 257, 269, 292, Abu πl-Hasan b. Abi ∏Isa (d. 269/883) 228
320, 344 ∏Ali b. Hubaysh 155
al-Ajlah, Yahya b. ∏Abdallah b. Hujayya al-Kindi, ∏Ali b. al-Husayn 138, 161
Abu Hujayya (d. ca 145/762) 129, 344 ∏Ali b. al-Husayn b. ∏Ali b. Abi Talib, known as
Al-Ajurri seeAbu Bakr al-Ajurri or Ibrahim Zayn al-∏abidin (d. between 92/710 and
al-Ajurri 99/717) 92
al-Akhfash seeAhmad b. ∏Imran b. Salama ∏Ali b. Husayn al-Arrajani 159
al-∏Akki seeAbu Muqatil al-∏Akki ∏Ali b. Ibrahim b. Ahmad 384
al-∏Alaπ b. ∏Abdallah al-Hadrami (d. 21/641–2 or ∏Ali b. Ibrahim al-Haddad, Abu πl-Husayn 44
later) 366 ∏Ali b. Ibrahim al-Husri seeal-Husri, Abu πl-Hasan
al-∏Alaπ b. Zayd 148 ∏Ali b. Ibrahim
al-∏Alaπ b. Ziyad b. Matar b. Shurayh al-∏Adawi ∏Ali b. Ibrahim al-Qadi 159
al-Basri, Abu Nasr (d. 94/712–13) 401 ∏Ali b. Ibrahim al-Shaqiqi 220

189/804–5) 161 50, 54, 67, 98, 212, 238, 289, 341
∏Ali b. Muslim 382–3 ∏Amram (∏Imran) 355
∏Ali b. al-Muwaffaq al-Baghdadi, Abu πl-Hasan Anas b. ∏Iyad al-Laythi al-Madani, Abu Damra
(d. 265/878–9) 354, 402 (d. 200/815–16 or earlier) 232
∏Ali b. al-Nahhas al-Misri 158 Anas b. Malik b. al-Nadr b. Damdam b. Zayd
∏Ali al-Qawwal 72 al-Najjari al-Khazraji, Abu Hamza (d. ca
∏Ali al-Razi 145 91–93/709–711) 111, 125, 149, 157, 161,
∏Ali b. Razin, Abu πl-Hasan 54 174, 179, 197, 213, 220, 232, 249, 252, 273,
∏Ali b. Sahl b. al-Azhar al-Isbahani, Abu πl-Hasan 275, 303, 312, 325, 340, 343, 345
(d. 307/919–20) 54–5, 195 [al-]Anbar 392
∏Ali b. Sa∏id al-Thaghri [al-Massisi] 73, 220 al-∏Anbari, Abu πl-Hasan see∏Umar b. Wasil al-Basri
∏Ali b. Sa∏ih 356, 387 Angel(s) 12, 60, 91, 106–7, 109, 127, 171, 191,
∏Ali b. Salim 372 203, 206, 216, 221, 228, 235, 245, 275–6, 308,
∏Ali b. Shahmardhan 150 338, 389, 393, 399–401
∏Ali b. Tahir 354 see alsoGabriel, Israfil, ∏Izra∏il, Malik, Michael,
∏Ali b. ∏Ubayd 331 Ridwan
∏Ali b. ∏Umar b. Ahmad b. Mahdi b. Mas∏ud al-Anmati seeAbu ∏Umar ∏Ali b. Muhammad b. ∏Ali
al-Hafiz al-Daraqutni, Abu πl-Hasan b. Bashshar b. Salman or Ishaq b. Ibrahim b. (d. 385/995) 20, 238 Abi Hassan
∏Ali b. Ya∏qub b. Suwayd al-Warraq 380 Annihilation seeSelf-Annihilation [in God]
∏Ali b. Yazid al-Fara∏idi, Abu πl-Hasan 128, 138, 162 al-Ansari 13
∏Ali b. Zayd b. Jud∏an al-Rawi 118 al-Antaki see∏Abdallah b. Khubayq or Ahmad b. ∏Allus al-Dinawari 316 ∏Asim or Abu ∏Umar al-Antaki
Allusion (ishara) 398 Antioch 41, 243
∏Alqama b. Marthad al-Hadrami al-Kufi, Abu al-Aqta∏ seeAbu πl-Khayr al-Aqta∏ or Abu Ya∏qub
πl-Harith 344 al-Aqta∏
∏Alqama b. Qays b. ∏Abdallah b. Malik b. ∏Alqama Arabia 55, 255
al-Nakha∏i al-Kufi, Abu Shubayl (d. 61/680–1 ∏Arafat (plain) 111, 178, 375
or later) 161 Armenia 67
∏Alwan b. ∏Alwan seeAbu ∏Amr b. ∏Alwan Arrajan 71543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 439
INDEX 439
al-Arrajani seeAbu Sa∏id al-Arrajani Ayyub b. Abi Tamima Kaysan al-Sakhtiyani
Asaf b. Barakhya 360 al-Basri (d. ca 131/748, possibly earlier) 398
Ascension to heaven (al-mi∏raj) 8, 101, 212 al-A∏zab seeIbrahim b. ∏Ali al-A∏zab
Ascetic (zahid; pl. zuhhad) 17 al-Azdi seeShaqiq al-Balkhi
Ascetic 18, 21, 135, 174, 254, 256, 322, 376
Asceticism see“Abstention” (zuhd) B
al-Ash∏ari, Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Isma∏il (d. 324/935–6) Backbiting (ghiba) 52, 139, 172–7, 219, 356
362 Bad/poor manners (suπ al-khuluq/suπ al-adab)
Ash∏arite(s) 9, 11, 270, 358, 362 58, 60, 72, 159, 288, 295, 394
al-Ash∏ath b. Qays b. Ma∏dikarib al-Kindi, Abu Baghdad 4–6, 8–11, 21–9, 42, 44–8, 50–1, 53–4,
Muhammad (d. ca 40/660–1) 262 60–5, 68, 73, 82, 86, 105, 130, 134, 153, 165,
∏Asim b. Bahdala (or ∏Asim b. Abi πl-Najud ) 168, 169, 174, 226, 232–3, 239, 246, 249, 251,
al-Asadi al-Kufi, Abu Bakr (d. 127/744–5 or 258, 264, 275, 278, 280–1, 294–6, 305, 308,
128/745–6) 178, 392 318, 342, 350, 352, 362, 369, 376–7, 381–2,
Asmaπ b. Kharija b. Hisn b. Hudhayfa al-Fazari 389–92
(d. ca 66/685–6) 258 Baghshur 46
al-Asma∏i, Abu Sa∏id ∏Abd al-Malik b. Qurayb b. Ba∏ja b. Abdallah b. Badr al-Juhani (d. before
Asma∏ (d. ca 213/828) 172 101/719–20, possibly 100/718–19) 122
Aspirant/[Sufi] novice (murid) 4, 49, 59, 68, 113, Bakr b. ∏Abd al-Rahman 377
213–17, 296, 305, 383, 394, 398, 402–16 Bakr b. Sulaym al-Sawwaf 150
∏Asqalan/Ashkelon 374 Bakran b. Ahmad al-Jili 372
al-Asqati seeal-∏Abbas b. Fadl al-Asqati Bakran al-Dinawari, Ja∏far b. Nusayr (servant of
∏Ataπ b. Abi Maymuna Mani∏ al-Basri, Abu Mu∏adh al-Shibli) 61, 316
(d. 131/748–9) 197 Balaam 147
∏Ataπ al-Azraq 379 Al-Baladhuri, Abu Muhammad seeAhmad b. ∏Ataπ b. al-Sa∏ib b. Malik al-Thaqafi, Abu πl-Sa∏ib Ibrahim b. Hashim
(d. 136/753–4) 335 Balkh 18, 31, 37, 48, 53, 342, 371
∏Ataπ al-Salami al-∏Abdi al-Basri (d. ca 140/796) Banu Shayba 150, 319
401 Baqi b. Makhlad b. Yazid al-Qurtubi, Abu ∏Abd
∏Ataπ b.189/804–5) 161 50, 54, 67, 98, 212, 238, 289, 341
∏Ali b. Muslim 382–3 ∏Amram (∏Imran) 355
∏Ali b. al-Muwaffaq al-Baghdadi, Abu πl-Hasan Anas b. ∏Iyad al-Laythi al-Madani, Abu Damra
(d. 265/878–9) 354, 402 (d. 200/815–16 or earlier) 232
∏Ali b. al-Nahhas al-Misri 158 Anas b. Malik b. al-Nadr b. Damdam b. Zayd
∏Ali al-Qawwal 72 al-Najjari al-Khazraji, Abu Hamza (d. ca
∏Ali al-Razi 145 91–93/709–711) 111, 125, 149, 157, 161,
∏Ali b. Razin, Abu πl-Hasan 54 174, 179, 197, 213, 220, 232, 249, 252, 273,
∏Ali b. Sahl b. al-Azhar al-Isbahani, Abu πl-Hasan 275, 303, 312, 325, 340, 343, 345
(d. 307/919–20) 54–5, 195 [al-]Anbar 392
∏Ali b. Sa∏id al-Thaghri [al-Massisi] 73, 220 al-∏Anbari, Abu πl-Hasan see∏Umar b. Wasil al-Basri
∏Ali b. Sa∏ih 356, 387 Angel(s) 12, 60, 91, 106–7, 109, 127, 171, 191,
∏Ali b. Salim 372 203, 206, 216, 221, 228, 235, 245, 275–6, 308,
∏Ali b. Shahmardhan 150 338, 389, 393, 399–401
∏Ali b. Tahir 354 see alsoGabriel, Israfil, ∏Izra∏il, Malik, Michael,
∏Ali b. ∏Ubayd 331 Ridwan
∏Ali b. ∏Umar b. Ahmad b. Mahdi b. Mas∏ud al-Anmati seeAbu ∏Umar ∏Ali b. Muhammad b. ∏Ali
al-Hafiz al-Daraqutni, Abu πl-Hasan b. Bashshar b. Salman or Ishaq b. Ibrahim b. (d. 385/995) 20, 238 Abi Hassan
∏Ali b. Ya∏qub b. Suwayd al-Warraq 380 Annihilation seeSelf-Annihilation [in God]
∏Ali b. Yazid al-Fara∏idi, Abu πl-Hasan 128, 138, 162 al-Ansari 13
∏Ali b. Zayd b. Jud∏an al-Rawi 118 al-Antaki see∏Abdallah b. Khubayq or Ahmad b. ∏Allus al-Dinawari 316 ∏Asim or Abu ∏Umar al-Antaki
Allusion (ishara) 398 Antioch 41, 243
∏Alqama b. Marthad al-Hadrami al-Kufi, Abu al-Aqta∏ seeAbu πl-Khayr al-Aqta∏ or Abu Ya∏qub
πl-Harith 344 al-Aqta∏
∏Alqama b. Qays b. ∏Abdallah b. Malik b. ∏Alqama Arabia 55, 255
al-Nakha∏i al-Kufi, Abu Shubayl (d. 61/680–1 ∏Arafat (plain) 111, 178, 375
or later) 161 Armenia 67
∏Alwan b. ∏Alwan seeAbu ∏Amr b. ∏Alwan Arrajan 71

Makhlad b. Yazid al-Qurtubi, Abu ∏Abd
∏Ataπ b. Yasar al-Hilali al-Madani, Abu Muhammad al-Rahman (d. 276/889) 279–80
(d. 107/725–6) 151, 155 al-Baqillani, Abu Bakr Muhammad b. al-Tayyib b. al-∏Atawi, Abu Bakr 45 Muhammad b. Ja∏far b. al-Qasim (d. 403/1013)
∏Atiyya b. Sa∏d b. Junada al-∏Awfi al-Jadali al-Kufi, 358
Abu πl-Hasan (d. 111/729–30, possibly later) Baraπ b. ∏Azib b. al-Harith b. ∏Adi al-Madani, Abu
242 ∏Umara (d. 72/691–2) 344
Attachment(s) [to this world] (∏alaqa(t)) 290, 300 Barber 318, 369
Attacks (bawadih/hujum) 100 al-Bardha∏i (or al-Barda∏i) seeAbu Bakr al-Bardha∏i
al-∏Attar seeAbu πl-Husayn b. Ahmad al-∏Attar or or Abu πl-Najm al-Muqriπ or Ahmad b. Nasr b. Muhammad b. Ahmad orAbu Hatim Muhammad b. ∏Ali b. Harun or al-Husayn b. al-∏Attar al-Basri or∏Ali b. al-Hasan b. Ja∏far Safwan b. Ishaq
al-∏Attar. al-Barusi, Abu πl-Hasan Salm b. al-Hasan 42
Awareness of God (muraqaba) 202–5, 213, 245 Bashshar b. Ibrahim al-Numayri 252
Awe (hayba) 81, 82, 93, 143, 234, 270, 312, Basil seeSweet Basil
322–3, 333, 349, 359 Basra 8, 13, 27, 34, 41, 42, 117, 127–8, 131, 154,
∏Awf b. Abi Jamila al-∏Abdi al-Hajari al-Basri, Abu 158, 246, 255, 263, 304, 319, 341, 353, 369,
Sahl (d. 146/763–4 or 147/764–5) 173 374, 375–7, 380, 389, 397, 403
∏Awf b. Malik b. Nadla al-Jushami al-Kufi, Abu Bastam/Bistam 38, 93, 127
πl-Ahwas 264, 281, 393 Baydaπ 337–8
Awlas 357 Bazaar/Market-place (suq) 23, 40, 47, 61, 119,
al-Awlasi seeAbu πl-Harith al-Awlasi 163, 182, 184, 244, 259, 382
∏Awn b. ∏Abdallah b. ∏Utba b. Mas∏ud al-Hudhali al-Bazzaz see∏Abd al-Rahim b. ∏Ali al-Bazzaz or Abu
(d. ca 115/733) 355 Hamza al-Baghdadi or ∏Ali b. al-Hasan b. Aws 344 Ja∏far al-∏Attar or Hamza b. al-∏Abbas al-Bazzaz
al-Awza∏i, Abu ∏Amr ∏Abd al-Rahman b. ∏Amr b. or al-Husayn b. Shuja∏ b. al-Hasan
Yuhmid (d. 157/774) 401 Beard 19, 30, 61, 64, 162, 268, 305, 316–19, 352
∏Ayyash b. Abi πl-Sawh 197, 215 Bedouin (Bedouins) 97, 171, 179, 192, 259, 265,
∏Ayyash b. Muhammad b. Hatim 393 267, 302, 346, 389–91543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 440
440 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Beloved seeLover Clothing 97, 154, 167, 181–2, 264, 282–3, 351–2,
al-Bikandi see Muhammad b. Muhammad b. 366, 375, 385
al-Ash∏ath Companionship (suhba) 302–6
Bilal al-Khawwa 26 Concealment (satr) 96, 97, 220, 224, 324
Bilal b. Rabah al-Habashi, Abu ∏Abdallah Contemplation/Self-scrutiny (fikr; tafakkur) 112,
(d. 20/641, maybe earlier) 166, 188, 313 193, 234, 251, 271, 403
Bilqis (the Queen of Sheba) 360 Contentment/Satisfaction (qana∏a/rida) 77–9,
Bishr b. ∏Abd al-Malik 275 175–7, 282, 290
Bishr b. al-Hakam b. Habib b. Mihran al-∏Abdi Contraction (qabd) 79–82, 108, 275
al-Naysaburi, Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman
(d. 238/852–3 or 237/851–2) 209 D
Bishr b. al-Harith b. ∏Abd al-Rahman b. ∏Ataπ b. al-Dabari, Abu Ya∏qub Ishaq b. Ibrahim b. ∏Abbad
Hilal al-Hafi, Abu Nasr (d. 227/842) 25–7, 232
41, 53–4, 130–1, 137, 140, 145, 156, 160, 165, al-Dabbas seeAbu ∏Abdallah al-Dabbas
175, 179, 185, 209, 231, 260, 263–4, 283, 305, al-Dabili, Abu Muhammad 314
313, 378, 380, 384, 389, 396, 401–3 al-Dahhaq b. Makhlad b. al-Dahhak b. Muslim b. Bishr b. Musa al-Asadi 128, 138, 149 al-Dahhak al-Shaybani al-Basri, Abu ∏Asim
Breath (nafas) 105–6 al-Nabil (d. 211–13/826–29) 345
Bu∏ath 344 al-Dallal see∏Ali b. Muhammad al-Dallal
Bukhara 39 al-Damaghani seeAbu πl-∏Abbas al-Damaghani or
al-Bukhari, Muhammad b. Isma∏il seeMuhammad Abu πl-Hasan al-Damaghani or Abu πl-Husayn
b. Isma∏il b. Ibrahim b. Mughira al-Damaghani. Bunan b. ∏Abdallah al-Baghdadi al-Misri 284 Damascus 35, 39, 47, 65, 68, 132, 159, 379–80, 392
Bunan b. Muhammad b. Hamdan b. Hamdan b. Dandanaqan 42
Sa∏id al-Hammal, Abu πl-Hasan (d. 316/928) al-Dandanaqani seeMansur b. ∏Ammar
57, 185 Daniq seeMoney
Bundar b. al-Husayn b. Muhammad b. Muhallab al-Daqqaq, Abu ∏Ali al-Hasan b. ∏Ali b. Muhammad
al-Shirazi al-Arrajani, Abu πl-Husayn 71, (d.∏Ali b. Muhammad
al-Shirazi al-Arrajani, Abu πl-Husayn 71, (d. 405/1015) 7, 13, 22, 24–6, 28, 29, 36,
329, 349 44, 45, 58, 61, 62, 75–6, 78–80, 84–5, 87, 92,
Buraq 195 96, 101, 104, 105–6, 113–14, 118, 120, 123–5,
Burd b. Sinan al-Shami al-Dimashqi, Abu πl-∏Alaπ 131, 135, 137–8, 141–6, 151, 154, 156–8, 160,
(d. 135/752–3) 175 162, 180–2, 195, 198–9, 202–3, 207–15,
Bushanj 42 217–18, 220–3, 228–32, 234, 237, 244, 247–8,
al-Bushanji, Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Ahmad b. Sahl 252, 258, 264–7, 269–71, 273, 277–9, 282–5,
(d. 348/953) 6, 69–70, 116, 244, 259, 309 292–4, 296–8, 303–5, 311, 320, 324, 328–30,
al-Busri, Abu ∏Ubayd seeAbu ∏Ubayd al-Busri 332, 334, 336–41, 342, 347–8, 351, 356, 359,
Byzantine(s) 21, 146, 147, 173, 278, 379, 381, 371, 385–6, 394–9, 403, 406
390 Daran 35
al-Darani, Abu Sulayman ∏Abd al-Rahman b. C Ahmad b. ∏Atiya (d. 215/830) 35, 39, 41,
Cairo 20 113, 121, 130, 135, 136, 145, 159, 162, 165,
Camel 73, 163, 179, 180, 196, 259, 297, 298, 327, 170, 175, 183–4, 197, 207–9, 215, 222–3, 227,
345–6, 389–91 235, 303, 323, 348, 355, 379, 386–7, 401–2
Camel-driver (hidaπ) 340, 343 al-Daraqutni al-Hafiz see∏Ali b. ∏Umar b. Ahmad
Canonical prayer (salat) 386, 388, 401 b. Mahdi
Central Asia 8, 30, 132 al-Darraj seeAbu πl-Husayn al-Darraj
Certain knowledge (∏ilm al-yaqin) seeCertainty David 18, 116, 155, 170–1, 190, 199, 225, 231–2,
Certainty (yaqin) 107, 194–6, 285 236, 334, 336, 338, 346, 394
Character traits/Moral character (akhlaq) 3, 20, Dawnings (tawali∏) 99–100
56, 90, 109, 119, 123, 172, 199, 238, 244, 248, al-Dawraqi seeBashir b. ∏Uqba
252–7, 282, 286–7, 289, 293–4, 300, 347, 370, Dawud b. Mu∏adh 158
401 Dawud b. Nusayr al-Ta∏i al-Kufi, Abu Sulayman
Chivalrious/gallant ones (fityan) 136, 237–42 22, 29, 140, 156, 301, 305, 399
Chivalry (futuwwa) 39, 69, 70, 90, 227, 237–42, Dawud al-Zahiri, Abu Sulayman b. ∏Ali b. Khalaf
303 al-Isbahani (d.Makhlad b. Yazid al-Qurtubi, Abu ∏Abd
∏Ataπ b. Yasar al-Hilali al-Madani, Abu Muhammad al-Rahman (d. 276/889) 279–80
(d. 107/725–6) 151, 155 al-Baqillani, Abu Bakr Muhammad b. al-Tayyib b. al-∏Atawi, Abu Bakr 45 Muhammad b. Ja∏far b. al-Qasim (d. 403/1013)
∏Atiyya b. Sa∏d b. Junada al-∏Awfi al-Jadali al-Kufi, 358
Abu πl-Hasan (d. 111/729–30, possibly later) Baraπ b. ∏Azib b. al-Harith b. ∏Adi al-Madani, Abu
242 ∏Umara (d. 72/691–2) 344
Attachment(s) [to this world] (∏alaqa(t)) 290, 300 Barber 318, 369
Attacks (bawadih/hujum) 100 al-Bardha∏i (or al-Barda∏i) seeAbu Bakr al-Bardha∏i
al-∏Attar seeAbu πl-Husayn b. Ahmad al-∏Attar or or Abu πl-Najm al-Muqriπ or Ahmad b. Nasr b. Muhammad b. Ahmad orAbu Hatim Muhammad b. ∏Ali b. Harun or al-Husayn b. al-∏Attar al-Basri or∏Ali b. al-Hasan b. Ja∏far Safwan b. Ishaq
al-∏Attar. al-Barusi, Abu πl-Hasan Salm b. al-Hasan 42
Awareness of God (muraqaba) 202–5, 213, 245 Bashshar b. Ibrahim al-Numayri 252
Awe (hayba) 81, 82, 93, 143, 234, 270, 312, Basil seeSweet Basil
322–3, 333, 349, 359 Basra 8, 13, 27, 34, 41, 42, 117, 127–8, 131, 154,
∏Awf b. Abi Jamila al-∏Abdi al-Hajari al-Basri, Abu 158, 246, 255, 263, 304, 319, 341, 353, 369,
Sahl (d. 146/763–4 or 147/764–5) 173 374, 375–7, 380, 389, 397, 403
∏Awf b. Malik b. Nadla al-Jushami al-Kufi, Abu Bastam/Bistam 38, 93, 127
πl-Ahwas 264, 281, 393 Baydaπ 337–8
Awlas 357 Bazaar/Market-place (suq) 23, 40, 47, 61, 119,
al-Awlasi seeAbu πl-Harith al-Awlasi 163, 182, 184, 244, 259, 382
∏Awn b. ∏Abdallah b. ∏Utba b. Mas∏ud al-Hudhali al-Bazzaz see∏Abd al-Rahim b. ∏Ali al-Bazzaz or Abu
(d. ca 115/733) 355 Hamza al-Baghdadi or ∏Ali b. al-Hasan b. Aws 344 Ja∏far al-∏Attar or Hamza b. al-∏Abbas al-Bazzaz
al-Awza∏i, Abu ∏Amr ∏Abd al-Rahman b. ∏Amr b. or al-Husayn b. Shuja∏ b. al-Hasan
Yuhmid (d. 157/774) 401 Beard 19, 30, 61, 64, 162, 268, 305, 316–19, 352
∏Ayyash b. Abi πl-Sawh 197, 215 Bedouin (Bedouins) 97, 171, 179, 192, 259, 265,
∏Ayyash b. Muhammad b. Hatim 393 267, 302, 346, 389–91

∏Ali b. Khalaf
303 al-Isbahani (d. 270/884) 48
Christian/Christianity 2, 147, 188, 238, 252, 280, al-Daybuli seeAbu Musa al-Daybuli or Ja∏far
373, 387, 414 al-Daybuli543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 441
INDEX 441
al-Daylami, Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Muhammad 243 Essence of certainty (∏ayn al-yaqin) seeCertainty
Death 19, 208–10, 213, 226, 230, 235, 269, Euphrates 374, 378, 392, 403
312–19, 338, 393 Eve 394
Deeds/Actions/Works 109, 113, 139, 146, 174, Expansion (bast) 79–82, 108, 275
189, 192, 197, 211, 216–25, 266, 278–9, 284,
290, 293–4, 304, 365, 410 F
Demavend 61 al-Fadl b. ∏Isa b. Aban al-Raqashi al-Basri, Abu ∏Isa
Desire/Passion (irada; shahwa; shawq, ∏ishq) 119, 205
123, 145, 156–60, 170, 184–6, 192–3, 206, al-Fadl b. Sadaqa 155
213–16, 224–9, 286–7, 326, 326, 328, 322, 415 Faith (iman) 194, 201–3, 209, 226, 242, 266, 268,
Devil seeIblis 293
Dhakwan al-Samman seeAbu Salih Dhakwan al-Fara∏idi see∏Ali b. Yazid al-Fara∏idi
Dhat ∏Irq 158 Farakhk 297
Dhu πl-Nun al-Misri, Abu πl-Fayd Thawban b. Farghana 58
Ibrahim al-Ikhmimi (d. 245/860) 7, 10, 12, al-Farghani, Abu πl-∏Abbas see Abu πl-∏Abbas
19–20, 27, 33, 47, 51–3, 78, 93, 115–16, al-Farghani
120–1, 123, 125–6, 136, 140, 144, 148, 167, al-Farghani, Abu Bakr (320/932) 43, 46
168, 176, 180–1, 194, 197–8, 204, 208, 211, al-Farghani, Abu Ja∏far Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah
217, 221, 225–6, 233, 235, 239, 254, 283, 287, 128, 182, 237, 251, 282, 405
291, 295–6, 305, 308, 314, 319, 322–4, 333, Faris b. ∏Isa al-Dinawari al-Baghdadi, Abu πl-Qasim
347, 350–1, 371–3, 376–7, 388, 390, 397 (or Abu πl-Tayyib) (d. ca 340/951) 235,
Dhu πl-Qarnayn 363 308, 338
al-Dimashqi seeAbu πl-Qasim ∏Abdallah b. al-Farisi seeAbu ∏Abdallah al-Farisi or Abu ∏Ali
Muhammad al-Dimashqi al-Farisi or Abu πl-Husayn al-Farisi or
Dinar seeMoney al-Tamastani, Abu Bakr al-Farisi
al-Dinawari see∏Abdallah al-Dinawari or Abu al-Farraπ seeMuhammad b. Ahmad b. Hamdun
πl-∏Abbas Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Dinawari Fars 71, 261, 374
orAbu πl-Hasan b. al-Sa∏igh orAhmad Fath b. Sa∏id al-Mawsili, Abu Nasr (d. 220/835)
al-Aswad orBakran al-Dinawari oral-Duqqi, 225, 382, 411
Abu Bakr oral-Hasan al-Qazzaz or∏Isa Fath b. Shakhraf b.∏Ali b. Khalaf
303 al-Isbahani (d. 270/884) 48
Christian/Christianity 2, 147, 188, 238, 252, 280, al-Daybuli seeAbu Musa al-Daybuli or Ja∏far
373, 387, 414 al-Daybuli

220/835)
al-Aswad orBakran al-Dinawari oral-Duqqi, 225, 382, 411
Abu Bakr oral-Hasan al-Qazzaz or∏Isa Fath b. Shakhraf b. Dawud b. Muzahim al-Kissi,
al-Qassar or al-Kisa∏i, Abu Bakr orMimshadh Abu Nasr (d. 273/887) 41
al-Dinawari. Fatima, daughter (bint) of Muhammad
Direct tasting seeTasting (dhawq) (d. 11/632–2) 92, 157, 191, 228
Dirham seeMoney Fatima, sister (ukht) of Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhabari
Discernment (wara∏) 77, 86, 285 284, 314, 385
Distance (bu∏d) 103–5 Fatima, Umm ∏Ali seeUmm ∏Ali Fatima
Dream (manam; hulm) 392–403 Fayruz/Firuz 332
Drinking (dhawq) seeTasting (shurb) al-Fazari seeAbu Ishaq Ibrahim b. Muhammad
Drunk/Drunkard 93–4, 153, 223, 313–15 Fear (khawf and taqwa) 93, 103, 112, 125–30,
Drunkenness (sukr) 93–4 142–50, 156, 157, 164, 170, 192–4, 204, 227,
al-Duqqi, Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Dawud 233, 270, 273, 286, 359, 361–2, 402
al-Dinawari (d. 366/977, possibly earlier) al-Firyabi seeJa∏far b. Muhammad al-Firyabi or
51, 57, 68, 69, 86, 215, 230, 286, 288, 304, Muhammad b. Yusuf b. Waqid
316, 346 Fish 132, 159, 196, 369, 370, 373, 378, 382–3
Fixity seeStability (tamkin)
E Flashes (lawami∏) 99–100, 242–3, 330, 355
Ecstasy (wajd; tawajud; wujud) 3–4, 83–6, 93, Freedom (hurriya) 229–31
108, 234, 247, 290, 310, 313–15, 337–9, Friend(s) of God (wali, pl., awliyaπ) 124, 142,
348–9, 351, 354–7, 412 151, 168, 182, 186, 238, 267–73, 281, 283,
Effeminate man (muhannath) 154, 175 341, 347, 357–63, 372–7, 383–7, 392
Ego seeSoul Friendship with God (wilaya) 268–70, 322, 341,
Egypt 7, 19–20, 27, 49, 57, 59, 62, 66, 130, 169, 358
185, 212, 262, 317, 319, 375, 386, 388, 390 al-Fudayl b. ∏Iyad b. Mas∏ud b. Bishr al-Tamimi
Elijah (Ilyas) seeal-Khadir/al-Khidr al-Yarbu∏i al-Khurasani, Abu ∏Ali
Enoch 191 (d. 187/803) 18, 20–1, 138, 142, 144, 157,
Envy (hasad) 171–2, 412 162–3, 165, 209, 221, 229, 237, 253, 256, 259,
Erasure (mahw) 96, 104, 291 376543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 442
442 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Fustat 20, 388–90 al-Hakam b. ∏Abd al-Muttalib 258
al-Fuwati seeAbu πl-Hasan b. ∏Abdallah al-Fuwati al-Hakam b. Aslam 213
al-Hakam b. Hisham (b. al-Hakam) b. ∏Abd
G al-Rahman al-Thaqafi al-Kufi, Abu
Gabriel (angel) 12, 36, 147, 149, 150, 180, 203, Muhammad 134
220, 235, 275–6, 325–6 al-Hakam b. Musa (b. Abi Zuhayr Shirzad
Gallant ones seeChivalrious ones al-Baghdadi; d. ca 232/847) 111
Garment(s), seeClothing al-Hakam b. Nafi∏ al-Bahrani seeAbu πl-Yaman
Gehenna, seeHell al-Hakam b. Nafi∏
Generosity/Munificence (sakhaπ; jud) 227–8, al-Hakim al-Tirmidhi seeal-Tirmidhi, Abu
253, 257–64, 286, 290 ∏Abdallah Muhammad b. ∏Ali or al-Warraq,
al-Ghallabi 226 Abu Bakr Muhammad
Ghassan b. ∏Ubayd b. Abi ∏Atika Tarif b. Salman al-Hallaj, al-Husayn b. Mansur (killed in 309/922)
111 6–8, 14, 56, 128, 146, 158, 231, 247, 253,
Ghaylan b. ∏Abd al-Samad 179 289–90, 329–30, 341
Ghaylan b. Jarir al-Mi∏wali al-Azdi al-Basri Hamdun al-Qassar, Abu Salih b. Ahmad b. ∏Umara
(d. 129/746–7) 252 (d. 271/884–5) 63, 166, 179, 180, 183, 189,
al-Ghitrifi, Abu Muhammad (probably a mistaken 282, 290, 313
rendition of the name of Abu Ahmad Hamid al-Aswad 235, 378–9, 384
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. al-Husayn b. Hamid al-Laffaf seeHamid b. Mahmud b. Harb
al-Qasim b. al-Ghitrif al-Ribati al-Jurjani Hamid b. Mahmud b. Harb al-Naysaburi al-Laffaf,
al-∏Abdi, d. 377/987) 392 Abu ∏Ali (d. 266/976–7) 36
Ghulam Khalil = Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Ghalib Hammad al-Khayyat 269
b. Khalid b. Mirdas al-Bahili al-Basri, better Hammad b. Salama b. Dinar al-Basri, Abu Salama
known as Ghulam Khalil (d. 275/888–9) (d. 167/784) 178
258 Hammad b. Zayd b. Dirham al-Jahdami al-Basri
Glimmers (lawa∏ih) 78, 99–100 al-Azraq, Abu Isma∏il (d. 179/795–6) 306,
[Divine] Gnosis (ma∏rifa) 5–6, 108, 275, 319–25, 335, 377
333, 413 Hammam b. Munabbih 325
[Divine] Gnostic (∏arif) 106, 123, 135, 136–40, Hamza b.220/835)
al-Aswad orBakran al-Dinawari oral-Duqqi, 225, 382, 411
Abu Bakr oral-Hasan al-Qazzaz or∏Isa Fath b. Shakhraf b. Dawud b. Muzahim al-Kissi,
al-Qassar or al-Kisa∏i, Abu Bakr orMimshadh Abu Nasr (d. 273/887) 41
al-Dinawari. Fatima, daughter (bint) of Muhammad
Direct tasting seeTasting (dhawq) (d. 11/632–2) 92, 157, 191, 228
Dirham seeMoney Fatima, sister (ukht) of Abu ∏Ali al-Rudhabari
Discernment (wara∏) 77, 86, 285 284, 314, 385
Distance (bu∏d) 103–5 Fatima, Umm ∏Ali seeUmm ∏Ali Fatima
Dream (manam; hulm) 392–403 Fayruz/Firuz 332
Drinking (dhawq) seeTasting (shurb) al-Fazari seeAbu Ishaq Ibrahim b. Muhammad
Drunk/Drunkard 93–4, 153, 223, 313–15 Fear (khawf and taqwa) 93, 103, 112, 125–30,
Drunkenness (sukr) 93–4 142–50, 156, 157, 164, 170, 192–4, 204, 227,
al-Duqqi, Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Dawud 233, 270, 273, 286, 359, 361–2, 402
al-Dinawari (d. 366/977, possibly earlier) al-Firyabi seeJa∏far b. Muhammad al-Firyabi or
51, 57, 68, 69, 86, 215, 230, 286, 288, 304, Muhammad b. Yusuf b. Waqid
316, 346 Fish 132, 159, 196, 369, 370, 373, 378, 382–3
Fixity seeStability (tamkin)
E Flashes (lawami∏) 99–100, 242–3, 330, 355
Ecstasy (wajd; tawajud; wujud) 3–4, 83–6, 93, Freedom (hurriya) 229–31
108, 234, 247, 290, 310, 313–15, 337–9, Friend(s) of God (wali, pl., awliyaπ) 124, 142,
348–9, 351, 354–7, 412 151, 168, 182, 186, 238, 267–73, 281, 283,
Effeminate man (muhannath) 154, 175 341, 347, 357–63, 372–7, 383–7, 392
Ego seeSoul Friendship with God (wilaya) 268–70, 322, 341,
Egypt 7, 19–20, 27, 49, 57, 59, 62, 66, 130, 169, 358
185, 212, 262, 317, 319, 375, 386, 388, 390 al-Fudayl b. ∏Iyad b. Mas∏ud b. Bishr al-Tamimi
Elijah (Ilyas) seeal-Khadir/al-Khidr al-Yarbu∏i al-Khurasani, Abu ∏Ali
Enoch 191 (d. 187/803) 18, 20–1, 138, 142, 144, 157,
Envy (hasad) 171–2, 412 162–3, 165, 209, 221, 229, 237, 253, 256, 259,
Erasure (mahw) 96, 104, 291 376

179/795–6) 306,
[Divine] Gnosis (ma∏rifa) 5–6, 108, 275, 319–25, 335, 377
333, 413 Hammam b. Munabbih 325
[Divine] Gnostic (∏arif) 106, 123, 135, 136–40, Hamza b. al-∏Abbas al-Bazzaz, Abu Ahmad 264,
142, 218, 236, 294–5, 309, 320–5, 331, 338, 280–1, 392–3
361, 413 Hamza b. ∏Abdallah al-∏Abbadani, Abu Habib: Sahl
Good manners/Proper behavior (adab) 2–3, 138, al-Tustari bei 34
141, 183, 198, 274, 292–6, 303, 404, 413 Hamza b. ∏Abdallah al-∏Alawi al-Husayni, Abu
Gratitude/Gratefulness (shukr) 188–93, 286 πl-Qasim 367–8
Hamza b. Yusuf b. Ibrahim b. Musa b. Ibrahim
H al-Sahmi al-Jurjani, Abu πl-Qasim (d. Habib al-∏Ajami, Abu Muhammad b. Muhammad 428/1036–7 or 427/1035–6) 134, 174, 222,
(d. 156/772) 186, 375, 380, 396–7 268–9, 274, 279, 306, 334, 389–91
Habib al-Maghribi 72 Hanbalite(s) 9–10, 308–9
al-Habir 55 Haniπ b. ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Abi ∏Abla al-∏Uqayli
al-Haddad seeAbu Hafs al-Naysaburi or ∏Ali b. 220
Ibrahim al-Haddad or Abu Ja∏far al-Haddad Harb b. Shaddad al-Yashkuri al-Basri, Abu
or al-Hasan al-Haddad πl-Khattab (d. 161/777–8) 264
Hadith 24–5, 156, 201, 215, 278 al-Harbi seeAbu Bakr al-Harbi or Ibrahim b. Ishaq
Hadramawt 262 b. Bashir or Mansur b. Ahmad al-Harbi
Hafs b. ∏Asim b. ∏Umar b. al-Khattab 210 Harim b. Hayyan b. Malik al-πAbdi al-Azdi (d. ca
Hafs b. ∏Umar al-∏Umari 356 26/646) 366
al-Hajabi, see∏Abdallah b. ∏Abd al-Wahhab al-Hajabi al-Harith b. Abi Usama seeal-Harith b. Muhammad
al-Hajari, Ibrahim, seeIbrahim b. Muslim al-∏Abdi b. Abi Usama
al-Hajjaj b. Furafisa 158 al-Harith b. Muhammad b. Abi Usama al-Tamimi
Hajjaj b. Muhammad al-Missisi al-A∏war, Abu (d. 282/896) 343
Muhammad (d. 206/821–2) 297 al-Harith al-Muhasibi see al-Muhasibi, Abu
al-Hajjaj b. Yusuf al-Thaqafi (d. 95/714) 173, 376 ∏Abdallah al-Harith
al-Hajjaji, Abu πl-Husayn (or Abu πl-Hasan) Harith b. Shihab 171
Muhammad b. Muhammad b. Ya∏qub b. Haritha b. Suraqa b. al-Harith b. ∏Adi b. Malik
al-Hajjaj al-Naysaburi (d. 368/978–9) 26 al-Ansari (killed at Badr in 2/624) 230543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 443
INDEX 443
Harun, Abu Hamza b. al-Mughira b. Hakim Hell 38, 77, 92, 155, 160–1, 173, 179, 191,208,
al-Bajali al-Razi 356 256–7, 332, 339, 398, 402
Harun b. Ma∏ruf al-Marwazi al-Khazzaz al-Darir, Hellfire seeHell
Abu ∏Ali (d. 231/845–6) 232 Hereafter ([al-]akhira) 135, 143, 144, 150, 155,
Harun b. Muhammad al-Daqqaq 158 156–8, 166–7, 175, 184, 193, 194, 201, 222,
Harun al-Rashid, caliph (r. 170–193/786–809) 226–30, 238, 270, 282, 288, 294, 308–9, 312,
133, 401 323–5, 343, 359, 362, 398, 406, 416
al-Hasan b. al-∏Abbas 257 [al-]Hijaz 173, 317, 343, 385, 391
al-Hasan b. ∏Abdallah b. Sa∏id al-∏Askari, Abu Hilal b. Ahmad 10
Ahmad (d. 382/993) 21 Hilal b. Muhammad 284
al-Hasan b. ∏Alawayh (∏Alluya) seeal-Hasan b. ∏Ali al-Hilali see∏Ali b. al-Hasan b. Musa
b. Muhammad b. Sulayman al-Hira 62, 271, 387
al-Hasan b. ∏Ali 32, 167, 285, 287 al-Hiri, Abu ∏Uthman Sa∏id b. Isma∏il b. Sa∏id b. al-Hasan b. ∏Ali b. Abi Talib, Abu Muhammad Mansur al-Razi (d. 298/910) 45–6, 49, 62,
(d. 49/669–70, possibly later) 262, 313 67, 69, 78–9, 113, 117, 121, 130, 132, 135–6,
al-Hasan b. ∏Ali b. Muhammad b. Sulayman al-Qattan, 143, 145, 157, 181, 189–90, 193, 198, 209,
better known as Ibn ∏al-Alawayh (∏Alluya), 216, 221, 227, 233, 236, 244, 256, 296–8,
Abu Muhammad (d. 298/911) 130, 209 318–19, 335–6, 338, 341, 349
al-Hasan b. ∏Amr b. al-Jahm al-Sabi∏i (or al-Shi∏i), Hisham b. ∏Abd al-Malik al-Bahili al-Tayalisi
Abu πl-Husayn (d. 288/901) 161, 384 al-Basri, Abu πl-Walid (d. 227/841) 157,
al-Hasan b. ∏Arafa b. Yazid al-∏Abdi al-Baghdadi 213
al-Mu∏addib, Abu ∏Ali (d. 257/870–1) 390 Hisham al-Kattani 325
al-Hasan al-Basri, Abu Sa∏id b. Abi πl-Hasan Yasar Hisham b. ∏Urwa b. al-Zubayr b. al-∏Awwam
(d. 110/728) 132–3, 136, 157, 161, 174, al-Asadi, Abu πl-Mundhir (d. 145–7/762–5)
220, 235, 254, 275, 294, 397, 401 344
al-Hasan al-Haddad 227, 244, 248 Holy war (jihad) 118, 125, 173, 381, 399
al-Hasan b. Hammad b.145–7/762–5)
220, 235, 254, 275, 294, 397, 401 344
al-Hasan al-Haddad 227, 244, 248 Holy war (jihad) 118, 125, 173, 381, 399
al-Hasan b. Hammad b. Fadala 334–5 Hope (rajaπ) 19, 93, 112, 146, 148–50, 179, 204,
al-Hasan (or al-Husayn) b. al-Harith al-Ahwazi 273, 312, 412
340, 344 al-Hubab b. Muhammad al-Tustari 344
al-Hasan b. ∏Isam al-Shaybani 396 Hud (prophet) 218
al-Hasan b. Khalid 148 Hudhayfa b. Qatada al-Mar∏ashi (d. 207/822–3)
al-Hasan al-Khayyat 185 129, 161, 187, 220–1
al-Hasan b. Musa 325 Hudhayfa b. al-Yaman (d. 36/656) 220
al-Hasan al-Qazzaz al-Dinawari 119, 354 Humayd b. Abi Humayd al-Khuza∏i al-Basri al-Tawil,
al-Hasan b. Rashiq al-∏Askari, Abu Muhammad Abu ∏Ubayda (d. 143–1 or 142/759–60)
(d. 370/980) 20 213, 232, 342–3
al-Hasan b. Safwan 150 Humayd al-Tusi (d. 210/825–6) and Dawud al-Ta∏i
al-Hasan al-Sawi 164 29
al-Hasan (al-Husayn), brother (akhu) of Sinan 183 Humayyim b. Humam/Hammam 334
Hashim b. Khalid 145 Humility (khushu∏) seeModesty (tawadu∏)
Hashim b. al-Qasim b. Muslim, seeAbu πl-Nadr Hunger (ju∏) 157–9, 211
Hashim b. al-Qasim al-Husayn b. ∏Abdallah b. Sa∏id, Abu ∏Abdallah
al-Hasnuyi, seeAhmad b. ∏Ali b. al-Hasan 155
Hassan b. Abu Sinan b. Abi Awfa al-Tanukhi al-Husayn (al-Husayn) b. Ahmad al-Farisi 383,
(d. probably 180/796–7) 133 391–2
Hatim al-Asamm, Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman b. ∏Unwan al-Husayn b. Ahmad b. Ja∏far al-Razi better
(d. 237/851–2) 30–1, 36–7, 40, 137, 145, known as Ibn al-Baghdadi, Abu ∏Abdallah
147, 170, 179, 215, 254 (d. 404/1014) 49, 57, 130, 219, 253, 284,
Haytham b. Kharija al-Khurasani al-Marwazi, Abu 292, 347, 369
Muhammad (d. 227/842) 233, 325 al-Husayn b. ∏Ali 117
Heart (qalb) 97–8, 106–10, 112–18, 121, 123–5, Husayn b. ∏Ali al-Qirmisini 169
135–7, 139–42, 144–5, 149–50, 156, 161–6, al-Husayn b. ∏Alluya 38, 118
168, 171–2, 175, 189–90, 214–16, 218, 220–3, al-Husayn al-Ansari 337
225–9, 231–4, 236, 244–6, 248–9, 257, 266–7, al-Husayn b. Hurayth seeAbu ∏Ammar Al-Husayn
270, 274–6, 279, 282–3, 285–7, 294–5, 297–8, b.179/795–6) 306,
[Divine] Gnosis (ma∏rifa) 5–6, 108, 275, 319–25, 335, 377
333, 413 Hammam b. Munabbih 325
[Divine] Gnostic (∏arif) 106, 123, 135, 136–40, Hamza b. al-∏Abbas al-Bazzaz, Abu Ahmad 264,
142, 218, 236, 294–5, 309, 320–5, 331, 338, 280–1, 392–3
361, 413 Hamza b. ∏Abdallah al-∏Abbadani, Abu Habib: Sahl
Good manners/Proper behavior (adab) 2–3, 138, al-Tustari bei 34
141, 183, 198, 274, 292–6, 303, 404, 413 Hamza b. ∏Abdallah al-∏Alawi al-Husayni, Abu
Gratitude/Gratefulness (shukr) 188–93, 286 πl-Qasim 367–8
Hamza b. Yusuf b. Ibrahim b. Musa b. Ibrahim
H al-Sahmi al-Jurjani, Abu πl-Qasim (d. Habib al-∏Ajami, Abu Muhammad b. Muhammad 428/1036–7 or 427/1035–6) 134, 174, 222,
(d. 156/772) 186, 375, 380, 396–7 268–9, 274, 279, 306, 334, 389–91
Habib al-Maghribi 72 Hanbalite(s) 9–10, 308–9
al-Habir 55 Haniπ b. ∏Abd al-Rahman b. Abi ∏Abla al-∏Uqayli
al-Haddad seeAbu Hafs al-Naysaburi or ∏Ali b. 220
Ibrahim al-Haddad or Abu Ja∏far al-Haddad Harb b. Shaddad al-Yashkuri al-Basri, Abu
or al-Hasan al-Haddad πl-Khattab (d. 161/777–8) 264
Hadith 24–5, 156, 201, 215, 278 al-Harbi seeAbu Bakr al-Harbi or Ibrahim b. Ishaq
Hadramawt 262 b. Bashir or Mansur b. Ahmad al-Harbi
Hafs b. ∏Asim b. ∏Umar b. al-Khattab 210 Harim b. Hayyan b. Malik al-πAbdi al-Azdi (d. ca
Hafs b. ∏Umar al-∏Umari 356 26/646) 366
al-Hajabi, see∏Abdallah b. ∏Abd al-Wahhab al-Hajabi al-Harith b. Abi Usama seeal-Harith b. Muhammad
al-Hajari, Ibrahim, seeIbrahim b. Muslim al-∏Abdi b. Abi Usama
al-Hajjaj b. Furafisa 158 al-Harith b. Muhammad b. Abi Usama al-Tamimi
Hajjaj b. Muhammad al-Missisi al-A∏war, Abu (d. 282/896) 343
Muhammad (d. 206/821–2) 297 al-Harith al-Muhasibi see al-Muhasibi, Abu
al-Hajjaj b. Yusuf al-Thaqafi (d. 95/714) 173, 376 ∏Abdallah al-Harith
al-Hajjaji, Abu πl-Husayn (or Abu πl-Hasan) Harith b. Shihab 171
Muhammad b. Muhammad b. Ya∏qub b. Haritha b. Suraqa b. al-Harith b. ∏Adi b. Malik
al-Hajjaj al-Naysaburi (d. 368/978–9) 26 al-Ansari (killed at Badr in 2/624) 230

∏Alluya 38, 118
168, 171–2, 175, 189–90, 214–16, 218, 220–3, al-Husayn al-Ansari 337
225–9, 231–4, 236, 244–6, 248–9, 257, 266–7, al-Husayn b. Hurayth seeAbu ∏Ammar Al-Husayn
270, 274–6, 279, 282–3, 285–7, 294–5, 297–8, b. Hurayth
310–12, 315–18, 320–2, 327–8, 330–1, 334–6, al-Husayn b. Isma∏il seeal-Mahamili, Abu ∏Abdallah
347–8, 354–6, 367–9, 393, 402, 406–13, 416 al-Husayn b. Ja∏far 288543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 444
444 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
al-Husayn al-Maghazili seeal-Maghazili, al-Husayn Ibn al-Barqi (not to be confused with the better
al-Husayn b. Mansur seeal-Hallaj known Abu Bakr b. al-Barqi, Ahmad b. al-Husayn b. Muhammad b. Bahram al-Tamimi Abdallah b. ∏Abd al-Rahim al-Zuhri al-Misri,
al-Muruwadhi, Abu Muhammad (d. 213/ d. 270/884) 249
828–9) 364 Ibn Batta see∏Ubaydallah b. Muhammad
al-Husayn b. Muhammad b. Musa b. Khalid b. Ibn Bunan seeAbu πl-Husayn b. Bunan
Salim al-Azdi (d. 348/959–60) 321 Ibn Faris seeAbu πl-Husayn b. Faris
al-Husayn b. Muhammad b. Zayd, Abu ∏Ali 392 Ibn Fatik, seeIbrahim b. Fatik
al-Husayn b. Safwan b. Ishaq b. Ibrahim Ibn Furak seeAbu Bakr Muhammad b. al-Hasan b. al-Bardha∏i, Abu ∏Ali (d. 340/952) 232 Furak
al-Husayn b. Shuja∏ b. al-Hasan b. Musa al-Sufi Ibn al-Fuwati 353
al-Mawsili al-Bazzaz, Abu ∏Abdallah Ibn Jahdam see∏Ali b. ∏Abdallah b. al-Hasan b. (d. 423/1032) 280 Jahdam
al-Husayn b. Yahya al-Shafi∏i 28, 169, 191, 196, Ibn al-Jallaπ, Abu ∏Abdallah Ahmad b. Yahya
197, 236, 325 al-Baghdadi al-Shami (d. 306/918) 40, 41,
al-Husayn b. Yusuf al-Qazwini, Abu ∏Ali 285, 287 47, 51–2, 59, 62, 68, 130, 135, 144, 284, 286,
al-Husri, Abu ∏Abdallah 287, 411 291, 351, 371, 381, 398
al-Husri, Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b. Ibrahim al-Basri Ibn Jurayj see∏Abd al-Malik b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. (d. 371/981) 73, 291, 298, 308, 348, 406 Jurayj
Ibn al-Karnabi, Abu Ja∏far 317
I Ibn Kasib 118
Iblis (Devil; Satan) 13, 36, 43, 53, 56, 64, 70, 106, Ibn al-Katib, Abu ∏Ali al-Hasan b. Ahmad (d. ca
138, 144, 147, 160, 161, 171, 190, 221, 236, 340/951–2) 65, 72, 249
282, 305, 344, 356, 370, 388, 393–5, 397, 401, Ibn Khadrawayh seeAhmad b. Khadrawayh
406 (Khidruya) al-Balkhi
Ibn ∏Abbas see∏Abdallah b. ∏Abbas Ibn Khafif, Abu ∏Abdallah Muhammad b. Khafif
Ibn Abi πl-Dunya, Abu Bakr ∏Abdallah b. al-Dabbi al-Shirazi (d. around 371/981)
Muhammad b. ∏Ubayd b. Sufyan al-Qurashi 28, 48, 55–6, 70, 107, 135, 156, 208, 286, 337
(d.∏Ubayd b. Sufyan al-Qurashi 28, 48, 55–6, 70, 107, 135, 156, 208, 286, 337
(d. 281/894) 27, 150, 233 Ibn al-Khashshab seeAbu πl-∏Abbas b. al-Khashshab
Ibn Abi Hassan al-Anmati seeIshaq b. Ibrahim b. Ibn Khubayq see ∏Abdallah b. Khubayq
Abi Hassan Ibn Kullab, Abu Muhammad ∏Abdallah b. Sa∏id
Ibn Abi πl-Hawari, Abu πl-Hasan Ahmad b. al-Qattan (d. 240/854 or later) 405
Maymun (d. 230/844–5) 35, 39, 46, 129, Ibn Lahi∏a, see∏Abdallah b. Lahi∏a
145, 159, 165, 175, 184, 193, 207, 209, 212, Ibn Makhlad, seeMuhammad b. Makhlad b. Hafs
215, 222, 227, 294, 303, 321, 348, 355, 386, Ibn al-Maliki 186
401 Ibn Masruq seeAbu πl-∏Abbas Ahmad b. Ibn Abi Hazim see∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. Ali Hazim Muhammad b. Masruq or Muhammad b. Ibn Abi Qammash 229, 335 Masruq
Ibn Abi Sadaqa 306 Ibn Mas∏ud, Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman ∏Abdallah b. Ibn Abi Shaykh seeAhmad b. Muhammad b. Mas∏ud b. Ghafil al-Hudhali (d. 32/653)
Ahmad b. Zakariya 140, 171, 226
Ibn ∏Alawayh (∏Alluya) seeal-Hasan b. ∏Ali b. Ibn Milhan, ∏Abdallah b. Qatada 345
Muhammad b. Sulayman Ibn Miqsam seeAbu πl-Hasan Ahmad b. Ibn al-Anbari, Abu Bakr Muhammad b. al-Qasim Muhammad b. al-Hasan b. Ya∏qub
b. Muhammad b. Bashshar (d. 328/940) Ibn al-Mubarak see∏Abdallah b. al-Mubarak
246 Ibn al-Mu∏tazz, Abu πl-∏Abbas ∏Abdallah b. Ibn al-A∏rabi, Abu Sa∏id Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Muhammad (d. 296/909) 172
Ziyad b. Bishr al-∏Anazi (d. 341/952) 66–7, Ibn Nujayd seeIsma∏il b. Nujayd
164, 310, 402 Ibn al-Qattan see∏Abdallah b. ∏Adi b. ∏Abdallah
Ibn ∏Ataπ see Ahmad b. ∏Ata∏, Abu πl-∏Abbas b. Ibn Rashiq seeal-Hasan b. Rashiq
Muhammad b. Sahl b. ∏Ataπ or Ahmad b. Ibn al-Sa∏igh see Abu πl-Hasan b. al-Sa∏igh
∏Ata∏, Abu ∏Abdallah al-Rudhabari Ibn Salim seeAhmad b. Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Ibn al-∏Attar see∏Ali b. al-Hasan b. Ja∏far al-∏Attar Salim or ∏Ali b. Salim orMuhammad b. Ibn ∏Awn see∏Abdallah b. ∏Awn Ahmad b. Salim. Ibn Bakawayh (Bakuya), Abu ∏Abdallah Muhammad Ibn al-Sammak 141
b. ∏Abdallah al-Shirazi al-Sufi (d. 428/1037) Ibn al-Sammak, Abu πl-∏Abbas Muhammad b.∏Alluya 38, 118
168, 171–2, 175, 189–90, 214–16, 218, 220–3, al-Husayn al-Ansari 337
225–9, 231–4, 236, 244–6, 248–9, 257, 266–7, al-Husayn b. Hurayth seeAbu ∏Ammar Al-Husayn
270, 274–6, 279, 282–3, 285–7, 294–5, 297–8, b. Hurayth
310–12, 315–18, 320–2, 327–8, 330–1, 334–6, al-Husayn b. Isma∏il seeal-Mahamili, Abu ∏Abdallah
347–8, 354–6, 367–9, 393, 402, 406–13, 416 al-Husayn b. Ja∏far 288

∏Abdallah al-Shirazi al-Sufi (d. 428/1037) Ibn al-Sammak, Abu πl-∏Abbas Muhammad b. Sabih
70, 160 (d. 183/799–800) 22–3, 387543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 445
INDEX 445
Ibn al-Sammak, Abu ∏Amr ∏Uthman b. Ahmad b. Ibrahim b. al-Junayd, Abu Ishaq (d. ca 260/873–4)
∏Abdallah b. Yazid al-Daqqaq (d. 344/955) 263
275 Ibrahim b. Khalid b. Abi πl-Yaman seeAbu πl-Thawr
Ibn Sayyar seeal-Sayyari, Abu πl-∏Abbas Ibrahim b. Khalid
Ibn Shadhan seeMuhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. Ibrahim al-Khawwas, Abu Ishaq b. Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. Shadhan Isma∏il (d. 291/904) 56, 182, 350, 373, 378
Ibn Shahin 12 Ibrahim al-Maristani seeIbrahim b. Ahmad
Ibn Shihab seeal-Zuhri, Muhammad b. Muslim b. al-Maristani
∏Ubaydallah Ibrahim b. Miqsam 168
Ibn Shubruma see∏Abdallah b. Shubruma. Ibrahim b. Muhammad b. al-Harith 160
Ibn Sirin, Abu Bakr Muhammad (d. 110/728) Ibrahim b. Muhammad b. al-Haytham 226
127, 148, 173, 226, 294, 306 Ibrahim b. Muhammad al-Maliki 386
Ibn Surayj, Abu πl-∏Abbas seeAbu πl-∏Abbas Ahmad Ibrahim b. Muhammad b. Yahya al-Muzakki
b. ∏Umar b. Surayj al-Naysaburi, Abu Ishaq (d. 362/973) 30
Ibn Tahir seeAbu Bakr ∏Abdallah b. Tahir al-Abhari Ibrahim b. Muslim al-∏Abdi al-Kufi, Abu Ishaq
Ibn Tulun seeAhmad b. Tulun al-ma∏ruf bi-πl-Hajari 182
Ibn ∏Umar see∏Abdallah b. ∏Umar b. al-Khattab Ibrahim b. al-Muwallad seeIbrahim b. Ahmad b. Ibn ∏Uyayna see Sufyan b. ∏Uyayna al-Muwallad
Ibn Wahb see∏Abdallah b. Wahb b. Muslim Ibrahim al-Nakha∏i seeIbrahim b. Yazid (b. Qays)
Ibn al-Wasiti seeAbu ∏Abdallah al-Ramli b. al-Aswad
Ibn Yazdaniyar seeAbu Bakr al-Husayn b. ∏Ali b. Ibrahim al-Qassar seeal-Raqqi, Abu Ishaq Ibrahim
Yazdaniyar Ibrahim al-Raqqi seeIbrahim b. Ahmad b. Ibn Ziyad, Abu Isma∏il 238 al-Muwallad or al-Raqqi, Abu Ishaq Ibrahim
Ibn Zizi, Abu Ya∏qub 114, 348 Ibrahim al-Ribati seeIbrahim b. Dawha
Ibrahim b. ∏Abdallah (b. Hatim al-Harawi, Abu Ibrahim (b.) Shayba (Sitanba) al-Harawi, Abu Ishaq
Ishaq, d. 244/858–9?) 162 225, 387
Ibrahim b. Adham b. Mansur, Abu Ishaq (d. ca Ibrahim b. Shayban al-Qirmisini, Abu Ishaq (d.∏Abdallah al-Shirazi al-Sufi (d. 428/1037) Ibn al-Sammak, Abu πl-∏Abbas Muhammad b. Sabih
70, 160 (d. 183/799–800) 22–3, 387

ca Ibrahim b. Shayban al-Qirmisini, Abu Ishaq (d. ca
162/778–9) 18–19, 119, 127–9, 131, 141, 300/912) 54, 66–7, 145, 164, 169, 266, 304,
152, 166, 173, 188, 232, 254–6, 271, 281, 283, 383
297, 303–5, 373–4, 377–80, 384 Ibrahim al-Utrush 155
Ibrahim b. Ahmad al-Maristani, Abu Ishaq 56, Ibrahim b. Yahya 384
176, 351 Ibrahim b. Yazid b. Qays b. al-Aswad b. ∏Amr
Ibrahim b. Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Rajaπ al-Fazari al-Nakha∏i, Abu ∏Imran (d. 96/814) 132, 161
281 Idris 390
Ibrahim b. Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Tabari, Abu ∏Imran b. Musa al-Isfanji 134
Ishaq 384 Inconstancy (talwin) 100–2
Ibrahim b. Ahmad b. al-Muwallad al-Raqqi, Abu India 200, 333
Ishaq (d. 342/953–4) 284–5, 301, 367 Innermost self/Innermost secret (sirr) 106, 110,
Ibrahim b. Ahmad al-Tabari seeIbrahim b. Ahmad 123–4, 142–3, 150, 162, 179–80, 184–5, 188,
b. Muhammad al-Tabari 194, 199, 203, 205, 214–15, 218, 223–5,
Ibrahim al-Ajurri al-Saghir al-Baghdadi, Abu Ishaq 234–5, 243, 310–11, 313, 322, 372, 407
375 Insight (basira) 359
Ibrahim b. al-Ash∏ath 229 Intimacy (uns) 81–3, 104, 122–4, 146, 167, 227,
Ibrahim b. Bashshar b. Muhammad al-Khurasani, 236, 271, 285, 323, 327
Abu Ishaq (d. ca 240/854–5) 18 Intoxication (sukr) 93–4, 332
Ibrahim al-Dabbagh al-Shirazi 71 seealso Drunkeness
Ibrahim b. Dawha al-Ribati al-Harawi, Abu Ishaq Inward seeOutward
225 Iram 85
Ibrahim b. Fatik b. Sa∏id al-Baghdadi, Abu πl-Fatik Iran 7, 11, 21, 34, 37, 51–2, 54, 61, 71, 127, 239,
11, 136, 163, 195, 330–1 247, 261, 277, 315, 367, 382
Ibrahim b. Firas 34 Iraq(is) 22–3, 29, 43, 57, 60, 206–8, 237, 248,
Ibrahim al-Hajari seeIbrahim b. Muslim al-∏Abdi 262, 271, 302, 387, 389, 391
Ibrahim al-Harbi seeIbrahim b. Ishaq b. Bashir ∏Isa b. Aban b. Sadaqa, Abu Musa (d. 221/836)
Ibrahim b. al-Harith 334 57
Ibrahim b. Ishaq b. Ibrahim b. Bashir b. ∏Abdallah ∏Isa b. Adam seeAbu Musa ∏Isa b. Adam
al-Baghdadi al-Harbi, Abu Ishaq (d. 285/898) ∏Isa b. Maryam seeJesus
63 ∏Isa al-Qassar al-Dinawari 299543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 446
446 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
∏Isa b. Talha b. ∏Ubaydallah al-Tamimi al-Madani, Israel 133, 147, 338, 351, 364, 371, 374
Abu Muhammad (d. 100/718–9) 142 Israfil (angel) 228
∏Isa b. Yunus b. Abi Ishaq ∏Amr al-Sabi∏i al-Hamdani Istakhr 374
al-Kufi, Abu ∏Amr (d. 188/803 or 191/806–7) al-Istakhri see∏Abdallah b. Ahmad al-Istakhri or
135 Abu ∏Amr (or ∏Umar or ∏Imran) al-Istakhri or
Isaac 168 Yahya al-Istakhri
∏Isam b. Yusuf al-Balkhi (d. probably 215/830–31) Iyas b. Mu∏awiya b. Qurra al-Basri al-Muzani, Abu
170 Wathila (d. 121/739 or 122/740) 173
Isfahan/Isbahan 399 ∏Izra∏il (the angel of death) 60
al-Isfanjani (or perhaps Isfijabi?), Abu Nasr Ahmad
b. Sa∏id 6 J
al-Isfanji see∏Imran b. Musa Jabala b. Suhaym al-Taymi al-Kufi (d. 125 or
al-Isfaraini see∏Abd al-Malik b. al-Hasan al-Isfaraini, 126/742–4) 259, 351
Abu Nu∏aym or Abu Tahir al-Isfaraini or Jabir b. ∏Abdallah b. ∏Amr b. Haram b. Tha∏laba
al-Isfaraini, Abu Ishaq al-Khazraji al-Salami (d. probably 78/697–8)
al-Isfaraini, Abu πl-Ishaq Ibrahim b. Muhammad b. 167, 175, 233
Ibrahim b. Mihran (d. 418/1027) 11, 358 Jabir al-Rahbi 374
Ishaq b. Ahmad 370 Jacob 156, 168, 202, 352
Ishaq b. Ibrahim 339 Ja∏far b. Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Muqriπ al-Razi,
Ishaq b. Ibrahim b. ∏Abbad seeal-Dabari, Abu Abu πl-Qasim (d.378/988–9) 159, 216
Ya∏qub Ja∏far al-Daybuli 389
Ishaq b. Ibrahim b. Abi Hassan al-Anmati, Abu Ja∏far al-Hadhdha∏, Abu Muhammad (d. 341/952–3)
Ya∏qub (d. 302/914) 35, 175 374
Ishaq b. Ibrahim al-Munqari 392 Ja∏far b. Hanzala al-Bahrani 256
Ishaq b. ∏Isa b. Bint Dawud b. Abi Hind Ja∏far al-Khawwas seeJa∏far b.alQasim al-Khawwas
al-Qushayri 173 orJa∏far b.Muhammad al-Khawwas
Ishaq b. Khalaf al-ma∏ruf bi-Ibn al-Tabib (d. ca Ja∏far al-Khuldi seeJa∏far b.Muhammad b. Nusayr
230/844–5) 129 Ja∏far b. Muhammad b. Nusayr, Abu Muhammad
Ishmael (prophet) 266, 394 al-Khuldi (d.Muhammad b. Nusayr, Abu Muhammad
Ishmael (prophet) 266, 394 al-Khuldi (d. 348/959–60) 12–14, 24, 28,
Islam seeFaith 35–7, 51, 68, 81, 170, 174, 181–2, 196–7, 211,
Isma∏il seeIshmael 216, 246, 251, 289, 298, 303, 308, 340, 368, 370
Isma∏il b. Abi Khalid al-Ahmasi (d. 146/763–4) Ja∏far b. Muhammad al-Sadiq (d.148/765) 12,
203, 222, 390 241, 277
Isma∏il b. ∏Amr b. Kamil 390 Ja∏far b. Muhammad b. Shakir al-Baghdadi, Abu
Isma∏il b. ∏Ayyash b. Sulaym al-∏Ansi al-Himsi, Abu Muhammad al-Sa∏igh (d. 279/893) 280
∏Utba (d. 181/797–8 or 182/798–9) 233 Ja∏far b. Mujashi∏ 134
Isma∏il b. al-Fadl 171, 237, 356 Ja∏far b. Nusayr seeJa∏far b.Muhammad b. Nusayr
Isma∏il b. Ja∏far b. Abi Kathir al-Ansari al-Zarqi, Ja∏far b. al-Qasim al-Khawwas 224, 378
Abu Ishaq (d. 180/796–7) 213 Ja∏far al-Sadiq seeJa∏far b.Muhammad al-Sadiq
Isma∏il al-Makki seeIsma∏il b. Muslim al-Makki Ja∏far b. Sulayman 160
Isma∏il b. Mas∏ud al-Jahdari al-Basri, Abu Mas∏ud al-Jahiz, Abu ∏Uthman ∏Amr b. Bahr b. Mahbub
(d. 248/862–3) 179 al-Kina∏i (255/868–9) 397
Isma∏il b. Muhammad b. Isma∏il b. Salih b. ∏Abd Jahm al-Raqqi 86
al-Rahman al-Saffar al-Nahwi, Abu ∏Ali al-Jalajili al-Basri 293
(d. 341/952) 208, 390 al-Janbi, Abu Zur∏a seeAbu Zur∏a al-Janbi
Isma∏il b. Muslim al-Makki al-Basri, Abu Ishaq 229 al-Jannabi, Abu Tahir Sulayman b.Abi Sa∏id
Isma∏il b. Nujayd b. Ahmad b. Yusuf b. Khalid, (d. 332/943–4) 55
Abu ∏Amr al-Sulami al-Naysaburi (d. Jarir b. ∏Abdallah b. Jabir al-Bajali, Abu ∏Amr
366/976–7) 40, 46, 67, 69, 113, 119, 211, (d. 51/671 or later) 203
245, 356 Jarir b. Hazim (b. Zayd) b. ∏Abdallah b. Shuja∏
Isma∏il b. ∏Ulayya, Abu Bishr (d. 193/809) 345 al-Azdi al-∏Ataki al-Basri, Abu πl-Nadr
Isma∏il b. Zakariya b. Murra al-Khulqani, Abu (d. 175/791–2) 364
Ziyad (d. 173/789–90, possibly 174/790–91) al-Jawhari, Abu πl-Qasim seeAbu πl-Qasim
175 al-Jawhari
Isma∏il b. Ziyad al-Ta∏i (al-Sakuni?, d. 247/861–2) al-Jawhari, Muhammad b. al-Husayn 10
30 Jealousy (ghayra) 264–8
Isma∏il b.ca Ibrahim b. Shayban al-Qirmisini, Abu Ishaq (d. ca
162/778–9) 18–19, 119, 127–9, 131, 141, 300/912) 54, 66–7, 145, 164, 169, 266, 304,
152, 166, 173, 188, 232, 254–6, 271, 281, 283, 383
297, 303–5, 373–4, 377–80, 384 Ibrahim al-Utrush 155
Ibrahim b. Ahmad al-Maristani, Abu Ishaq 56, Ibrahim b. Yahya 384
176, 351 Ibrahim b. Yazid b. Qays b. al-Aswad b. ∏Amr
Ibrahim b. Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Rajaπ al-Fazari al-Nakha∏i, Abu ∏Imran (d. 96/814) 132, 161
281 Idris 390
Ibrahim b. Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Tabari, Abu ∏Imran b. Musa al-Isfanji 134
Ishaq 384 Inconstancy (talwin) 100–2
Ibrahim b. Ahmad b. al-Muwallad al-Raqqi, Abu India 200, 333
Ishaq (d. 342/953–4) 284–5, 301, 367 Innermost self/Innermost secret (sirr) 106, 110,
Ibrahim b. Ahmad al-Tabari seeIbrahim b. Ahmad 123–4, 142–3, 150, 162, 179–80, 184–5, 188,
b. Muhammad al-Tabari 194, 199, 203, 205, 214–15, 218, 223–5,
Ibrahim al-Ajurri al-Saghir al-Baghdadi, Abu Ishaq 234–5, 243, 310–11, 313, 322, 372, 407
375 Insight (basira) 359
Ibrahim b. al-Ash∏ath 229 Intimacy (uns) 81–3, 104, 122–4, 146, 167, 227,
Ibrahim b. Bashshar b. Muhammad al-Khurasani, 236, 271, 285, 323, 327
Abu Ishaq (d. ca 240/854–5) 18 Intoxication (sukr) 93–4, 332
Ibrahim al-Dabbagh al-Shirazi 71 seealso Drunkeness
Ibrahim b. Dawha al-Ribati al-Harawi, Abu Ishaq Inward seeOutward
225 Iram 85
Ibrahim b. Fatik b. Sa∏id al-Baghdadi, Abu πl-Fatik Iran 7, 11, 21, 34, 37, 51–2, 54, 61, 71, 127, 239,
11, 136, 163, 195, 330–1 247, 261, 277, 315, 367, 382
Ibrahim b. Firas 34 Iraq(is) 22–3, 29, 43, 57, 60, 206–8, 237, 248,
Ibrahim al-Hajari seeIbrahim b. Muslim al-∏Abdi 262, 271, 302, 387, 389, 391
Ibrahim al-Harbi seeIbrahim b. Ishaq b. Bashir ∏Isa b. Aban b. Sadaqa, Abu Musa (d. 221/836)
Ibrahim b. al-Harith 334 57
Ibrahim b. Ishaq b. Ibrahim b. Bashir b. ∏Abdallah ∏Isa b. Adam seeAbu Musa ∏Isa b. Adam
al-Baghdadi al-Harbi, Abu Ishaq (d. 285/898) ∏Isa b. Maryam seeJesus
63 ∏Isa al-Qassar al-Dinawari 299

247/861–2) al-Jawhari, Muhammad b. al-Husayn 10
30 Jealousy (ghayra) 264–8
Isma∏il b. Zurara 335 Jerusalem 127–8, 195, 208, 373543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 447
INDEX 447
Jesus (∏Isa) 133, 147, 228, 296, 364, 396 Khalid b. Zayd b. Kulayb seeAbu Ayyub al-Ansari
Jew(s) 148, 165, 250–2, 319, 375, 389 Kharija b. Mus∏ab b. Kharija al-Khurasani
(al-)Jibal (province) 52 al-Sarakhsi (d.168/785) 151
Jinn (spirits) 5, 82–3, 138, 141, 182, 231, 346 al-Kharraz, Abu Muhammad ∏Abdallah b. Job 202, 296 Muhammad al-Razi (d. before 310/922–3)
Joseph (Yusuf) 90–1, 101, 168, 202, 227, 337 57
Joy 108 al-Kharraz, Abu Sa∏id Ahmad b. ∏Isa al-Baghdadi
al-Judi (mountain) 162 (d. 277/890–1) 13, 18, 52–3, 56, 60, 64–6,
al-Junayd, Abu πl-Qasim b.Muhammad b. 82, 133, 181, 186, 196, 205, 221, 243, 249,
al-Junayd (d.297/910) 4–7, 9, 11–14, 253, 272, 282, 290, 292, 311, 313, 319, 325,
22–4, 28, 35, 39, 43–7, 49, 51–2, 54–65, 67–8, 334, 349, 354, 371, 377, 402
79, 81–4, 89, 92, 98, 107, 114–15, 118, 124, al-Kharraz, Ahmad b. ∏Ali 196–7
128–9, 135–7, 145, 161, 164, 168, 170–1, Kharw 247
174–5, 178, 184, 189–91, 194–5, 197, 204, al-Khashshab seeAbu Sahl al-Khashshab al-Kabir
208–9, 215–16, 219–21, 223–4, 229, 231, al-Khassaf seeAbu Ja∏far al-Khassaf
236–8, 248–9, 251–2, 255, 258, 274, 282, 285, al-Khattabi seeAbu πl-Harith al-Khattabi
289–90, 294–7, 303–5, 308–10, 312–14, al-Khawwas seeAbu Sulayman alKhawwas or
316–18, 322–4, 328–33, 338–40, 347–8, Bilal al-Khawwas orJa∏far b. Muhammad
350–2, 361, 369–71, 373–4, 376–8, 385, 389, al-Khawwas orJa∏far b. al-Qasim alKhawwas
404–5 orIbrahim al-Khawwas
Junayd al-Hajjam (the Cupper) 29 Khayr al-Nassaj, Muhammad b. Isma∏il al-Samarri
Jurayj (Gregorius) 363–4 (d. 322/934) 60–1, 183, 251, 355, 371,
al-Jurayri, Abu Muhammad Muhammad b. 385
al-Husayn (d.311/923–4) 4, 25, 43, 55, Khaythama b. ∏Abd al-Rahman b.Abi Sabra al-Ju∏fi
69–72, 84, 123, 128, 199, 203–5, 209–11, 213, al-Kufi (d.ca80/699–700) 193
223, 227, 236, 241, 250–3, 255, 283, 289, 291, Khazraj 344
294, 308, 312, 319, 324, 355, 398 al-Khidr 124, 177, 181
al-Juzi seeMuhammad b. ∏Ali al-Juzi Khubayb b.247/861–2) al-Jawhari, Muhammad b. al-Husayn 10
30 Jealousy (ghayra) 264–8
Isma∏il b. Zurara 335 Jerusalem 127–8, 195, 208, 373

∏Abd al-Rahman b.Abi Sabra al-Ju∏fi
69–72, 84, 123, 128, 199, 203–5, 209–11, 213, al-Kufi (d.ca80/699–700) 193
223, 227, 236, 241, 250–3, 255, 283, 289, 291, Khazraj 344
294, 308, 312, 319, 324, 355, 398 al-Khidr 124, 177, 181
al-Juzi seeMuhammad b. ∏Ali al-Juzi Khubayb b. ∏Abd al-Rahman b.Khubayb b. al-Juzjani, Abu ∏Ali al-Hasan b. ∏Ali 213, 218, 271 Yasaf al-Ansari alKhazraji al-Madani, Abu
πl-Harith (d. 132/749–50) 210
K al-Khudri, Abu Sa∏id Sa∏d b. Malik b. Sinan
[al-]Ka∏ba 19, 49, 64, 132, 152–4, 165, 196, 200, al-Khazraji (d. ca 74/693) 118, 125, 155,
278, 318–19, 353, 372, 378, 380–4, 410 163, 210, 242
Kahmas, Abu Muhammad b. al-Husayn al-Khuldi, Ja∏far seeJa∏far b. Muhammad b. Nusayr
al-Hamadhani 132 Khurasan(ians) 5, 11, 20–1, 30, 36–9, 44–5, 58,
Kamil b. Talha al-Jahdari al-Basri, Abu Yahya 69–70, 72, 160, 173, 206, 237, 240, 256, 391
(d. 231/845–6) 273 Khuzistan 381–2
al-Karini/al-Karnabi 283, 317 al-Kudaymi seeMuhammad b.Yunus b. Musa
al-Karnabi seeal-Karini Kufa 22, 41, 60, 63, 91–2, 124, 187–8, 201, 262,
Karramiyya 9–10 296, 310–12, 387
Kathir b. Hisham al-Kilabi al-Raqqi, Abu Sahl Kuradabadh 39
(d. probably 207/911) 134 Kurdistan 162
al-Kattani, Abu Bakr Muhammad b.∏Ali b. Ja∏far Kurz b. Wabra, Abu ∏Abdallah (d.110/728–9)
(d. 322/934) 49–50, 64, 126, 137, 176, 180, 399
212, 215, 234, 243, 253, 279, 287, 290, 298–301,
304, 325, 329, 333, 381–2, 387, 395, 400, 402 L
Kerbela 208 Laughter 151, 175, 402
Khadija 157 [Divine] Law (Shari∏a) 3, 17, 20, 293–5, 371, 405,
al-Khadir/al-Khidr 18, 26, 124, 177, 181, 340, 414–15
363, 385–9, 391 Layla 139, 329
al-Khadir, Abu πl-∏Abbas 374 al-Layth 278
Khalaf b. Tamim, Abu πl-Ahwas 306 al-Layth b. Sa∏d b. ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Fahmi
Khalaf b. al-Walid 149 al-Misri, Abu πl-Harith (d. 175/791) 262,
Khalid b. ∏Abdallah b. Safwan 233 346
Khalid b. Yahya 179 Lebanon 73, 267, 301, 377
Khalid b. Yazid al-Jumahi al-Basri, Abu ∏Abd Lights (lawa∏ih) 78, 99, 245, 252, 271–2, 276,
al-Rahman (d. 139/ 756–7) 203, 273 323, 334, 407543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 448
448 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Lion(s) 57, 186, 205–6, 236, 366–8, 374, 378–9, 114, 119–21 123–4, 150, 178, 223, 224, 246,
384, 387–9 271–3, 282, 285–7, 309–10, 329, 331–2, 357, 379
Listening to music (sama∏) 342–56, 408 Mansur b. ∏Abdallah al-Dimarti al-Isbahani, Abu
Longing seePassionate longing and Desire πl-Hasan 357
Love (mahabba; hubb) 7, 313–17, 325–38 Mansur b. ∏Abdallah b. Khalid b.Ahmad al-Khalidi
Lover/Beloved (muhibb/habib) 106, 142–3, 150, al-Dhuhli, Abu ∏Ali (d. ca 400/1009–10)
187, 199, 200, 208–9, 279, 286–7, 290, 302–3, 8,14, 19, 62, 63–4, 85, 114, 119–21, 123, 150,
313–14, 317–19, 327–33, 334–5, 350 168, 187
al-Lukam (or Lukkam) 169, 243 Mansur b. Abi Muzahim Bashir al-Turki
Luqman 255 al-Baghdadi, Abu Nasr (d.235/850) 392
Lust seePassion and Desire al-Mansur, Abu Ja∏far (caliph; r.136–158/754–775)
133, 308
M Mansur b. Ahmad al-Harbi 181–2
Ma∏bad (probably Ma∏bad b. ∏Abdallah b. Ukaym Mansur b. ∏Ammar al-Dandanaqani, Abu πl-Sari
al-Juhani, murdered in 83/702–3) 171 (d. 225/839–40) 42, 153–4
al-Madaπin 51 Mansur al-Faqih seeMansur b.Muhammad b. al-Maghazili, ∏Abdallah 26, 47, 51 Ibrahim al-Faqih
al-Maghazili, Abu ∏Ali al-Asamm al-Baghdadi Mansur b. Khalaf al-Maghribi 96–7, 146–7, 240,
351, 384 285, 295, 303, 308, 315, 368, 374, 398–9
Maghrib(i) 64, 351 Mansur al-Maghribi seeMansur b.Khalaf
al-Maghribi seeAbu ∏Abdallah al-Maghribi orAbu al-Maghribi
∏Uthman al-Maghribi orHabib al-Maghribi Mansur b. Muhammad b. Ibrahim al-Faqih, Abu
Magian(s) 151, 238, 257 Nasr 37, 231
al-Mahamili, Abu ∏Abadallah al-Husayn b. Isma∏il b. Mansur b. al-Mu∏tamir b. ∏Abdallah b. Rabi∏a
Muhammad b. Isma∏il b. Sa∏id b. Aban al-Kufi, Abu ∏Attab (d.132/749–50) 222–4
al-Dabbi (d. 330/941) 26 al-Maraghi see Abu Muhammad al-Maraghi
Mahfuz b. Mahmud al-Naysaburi (d.303/915–6 or Mardawayh al-Sa∏igh see∏Abd al-Samad b. Yazid
304/916–7) 143,284 al-Sa∏igh
Maidens of Paradise(houries) 206, 349, 355, 381, Marhum b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz b.Yazid
304/916–7) 143,284 al-Sa∏igh
Maidens of Paradise(houries) 206, 349, 355, 381, Marhum b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz b. Mihran al-∏Attar
398 al-Umawi, Abu Muhammad (d. 188/803–4)
Majnun 329 334, 339
Makhlad b. al-Husayn al-Azdi al-Muhallabi al-Basri al-Maristani seeIbrahim b. Ahmad al-Maristani
(d. 191/806–7) 158, 285 Market-place seeBazaar
Makhul b. Abi Muslim Shuhrab al-Shami al-Hudhali, Ma∏ruf b. Fayruz al-Karkhi, Abu Mahfuz
Abu ∏Abdallah (d. 112–119/730–737) 175, (d. 200/815–6) 21–3, 130, 155, 255, 277,
222, 313 289–90, 305–6, 338, 378, 380–1, 392
al-Makhzumi, Muhammad b. al-Hasan 185–6 Marw/Merv 8, 20, 25, 42, 58, 68, 141, 298
al-Malamati seeMuhammad b.Ahmad al-Malamati Marwan b. Mu∏awiya b. al-Harith b.Asmaπ b. Malamatiyya 38, 39, 42, 44–5, 63 Kharija al-Fazari al-Kufi, Abu ∏Abdallah
Malik (angel) 397 (d.193/808–9) 149, 257
Malik b. Anas b. Malik b. Abi ∏Amir al-Asbahi al-Marwazi, Abu Zayd seeMuhammad b. Ahmad b. al-Himyari, Abu ∏Abdallah (d. 179/795) ∏Abdallah b.Muhammad al-Marwazi
150, 210, 262–3, 280–1, 325–6, 342–3, 397 Mary 133, 363–4, 396
Malik b. Dinar, Abu Yahya (d. 131/748–9 or earlier) al-Mas∏udi see∏Abd al-Rahman b.∏Abdallah b. ∏Utba
131, 148, 152, 160, 255, 275, 286, 298–9, 339, Maymun al-Ghazzal, Abu ∏Abdallah 30
395, 399 al-Mayyafariqini seeAbu πl-Azhar al-Mayyafariqini
Malik b. Mas∏ud 124 al-Mazabili seeAbu Ya∏qub al-Mazabili
Malik b. Mighwal b. ∏Asim b. Ghaziya b. Haritha Mecca 9, 17–18, 20–1, 33, 35, 41, 49, 57, 60–1,
al-Kufi, Abu ∏Abdallah (d. 159/776, possibly 67–9, 72, 86, 117–18, 130, 132, 154, 158,
earlier) 145 182–8, 191, 195–6, 200, 212, 243, 249–50,
Ma∏mar b. Rashid al-Azdi al-Basri, Abu ∏Urwa 255, 262, 284, 287, 298, 301–2, 313, 316–19,
(d. 152/769 or 153/770) 138, 232, 325 333, 343, 369–70, 376, 378, 381–3, 389, 391,
Manbij 258 397, 401
Manliness (muruwa) 176–7, 237–8 Medina 17, 71, 164–5, 188, 241, 249, 258, 275–6,
Mansur b. ∏Abdallah (al-Dhuhli oral-Isbahani; 302, 316, 342, 360, 372–4, 385, 389, 398
possibly the same asMansur b.∏Abd al-Rahman b.Abi Sabra al-Ju∏fi
69–72, 84, 123, 128, 199, 203–5, 209–11, 213, al-Kufi (d.ca80/699–700) 193
223, 227, 236, 241, 250–3, 255, 283, 289, 291, Khazraj 344
294, 308, 312, 319, 324, 355, 398 al-Khidr 124, 177, 181
al-Juzi seeMuhammad b. ∏Ali al-Juzi Khubayb b. ∏Abd al-Rahman b.Khubayb b. al-Juzjani, Abu ∏Ali al-Hasan b. ∏Ali 213, 218, 271 Yasaf al-Ansari alKhazraji al-Madani, Abu
πl-Harith (d. 132/749–50) 210
K al-Khudri, Abu Sa∏id Sa∏d b. Malik b. Sinan
[al-]Ka∏ba 19, 49, 64, 132, 152–4, 165, 196, 200, al-Khazraji (d. ca 74/693) 118, 125, 155,
278, 318–19, 353, 372, 378, 380–4, 410 163, 210, 242
Kahmas, Abu Muhammad b. al-Husayn al-Khuldi, Ja∏far seeJa∏far b. Muhammad b. Nusayr
al-Hamadhani 132 Khurasan(ians) 5, 11, 20–1, 30, 36–9, 44–5, 58,
Kamil b. Talha al-Jahdari al-Basri, Abu Yahya 69–70, 72, 160, 173, 206, 237, 240, 256, 391
(d. 231/845–6) 273 Khuzistan 381–2
al-Karini/al-Karnabi 283, 317 al-Kudaymi seeMuhammad b.Yunus b. Musa
al-Karnabi seeal-Karini Kufa 22, 41, 60, 63, 91–2, 124, 187–8, 201, 262,
Karramiyya 9–10 296, 310–12, 387
Kathir b. Hisham al-Kilabi al-Raqqi, Abu Sahl Kuradabadh 39
(d. probably 207/911) 134 Kurdistan 162
al-Kattani, Abu Bakr Muhammad b.∏Ali b. Ja∏far Kurz b. Wabra, Abu ∏Abdallah (d.110/728–9)
(d. 322/934) 49–50, 64, 126, 137, 176, 180, 399
212, 215, 234, 243, 253, 279, 287, 290, 298–301,
304, 325, 329, 333, 381–2, 387, 395, 400, 402 L
Kerbela 208 Laughter 151, 175, 402
Khadija 157 [Divine] Law (Shari∏a) 3, 17, 20, 293–5, 371, 405,
al-Khadir/al-Khidr 18, 26, 124, 177, 181, 340, 414–15
363, 385–9, 391 Layla 139, 329
al-Khadir, Abu πl-∏Abbas 374 al-Layth 278
Khalaf b. Tamim, Abu πl-Ahwas 306 al-Layth b. Sa∏d b. ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Fahmi
Khalaf b. al-Walid 149 al-Misri, Abu πl-Harith (d. 175/791) 262,
Khalid b. ∏Abdallah b. Safwan 233 346
Khalid b. Yahya 179 Lebanon 73, 267, 301, 377
Khalid b. Yazid al-Jumahi al-Basri, Abu ∏Abd Lights (lawa∏ih) 78, 99, 245, 252, 271–2, 276,
al-Rahman (d. 139/ 756–7) 203, 273 323, 334, 407

152/769 or 153/770) 138, 232, 325 333, 343, 369–70, 376, 378, 381–3, 389, 391,
Manbij 258 397, 401
Manliness (muruwa) 176–7, 237–8 Medina 17, 71, 164–5, 188, 241, 249, 258, 275–6,
Mansur b. ∏Abdallah (al-Dhuhli oral-Isbahani; 302, 316, 342, 360, 372–4, 385, 389, 398
possibly the same asMansur b. ∏Abdallah b. Meditation (tafakkur; fikr; fikra) see
Khalid) 31–2, 38, 44, 62, 63–4, 66, 71, 85, Contemplation/Self-scrutiny543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 449
INDEX 449
Meshhed 54, 247 343–4, 356–7, 360, 364, 367, 392, 395–6, 398,
Mesopotamia 162 401–2
Michael (angel) 147 Muhammad b. al-∏Abbas 27
al-Mihrijani seeAhmad b. Muhammad b. Ibrahim Muhammad b. al-∏Abbas b. al-Dirafsh al-Dimashqi
Mimshadh al-Dinawari (d. 299/911–2) 59, 140, 165
185, 214, 314, 317, 347, 354 Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz al-Marwazi, Abu Bakr
Mimshadh b. Sa∏id al-∏Ukbari, Abu ∏Ali 335 58
Mina 376 Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz theMuezzin
Minjab b. al-Harith b. ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Tamimi (al-mu∏adhdhin), Abuπl-Husayn 38
al-Kufi, Abu Muhammad (d. 231/845–6) Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-Malik 226
188 Muhammad b. ∏Abd Rabbihi (al-Hadrami) 221, 275
al-Miqdad b. ∏Amr b. Tha∏laba b.Malik al-Kindi, Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-Rahman b.∏Ubayd
Abu Ma∏bad yu∏rafu bi-Ibn al-Aswad al-Qurashi al-Tamimi, aclient of the Al Talha
(d.33/653–4) 228 tribe 142
Miracle [of a friend of God]/Divine grace (karama) Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-Wahhab al-∏Asqalani seeAbu
218, 270, 357–8 Qirsafa Muhammad
Modesty (tawadu∏)/Humility (khushu∏) 19, 161–6, Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-Wahhab b.Habib b. Mihran
170, 215, 270, 277, 279, 286, 322–3, 349, 410 al-∏Abdi al-Naysaburi al-Farra∏, Abu Ahmad
[Mystical] Moment (waqt) 75–7, 96, 100–1, 106, (d. 272/885–6) 226
141, 205–6, 265, 267, 274–5, 286, 289–90, Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah 9, 138, 157–8, 205, 232,
295–6, 320, 324, 349, 356, 370, 412, 415 234, 243
Money 27, 37–8, 74, 132, 154, 165, 176, 182, 183, Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz al-Tabari,
185, 196, 241, 244, 257, 258–62, 277, 284, Abu Bakr 49, 55, 288
287, 302, 304, 376, 380, 382, 401, 416 Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Farghani seeal-Farghani,
Monk(s) 122, 142, 236, 280, 373, 376, 415 Abu Ja∏far
Moral character (khuluq) 252–7, 289, 300, 370, Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Khuza∏i 337
401 Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. ∏Abd
Moral character see alsoCharacter Traits al-∏Aziz b.Muhammad b. ∏Abd
Moral character see alsoCharacter Traits al-∏Aziz b. Shadhan al-Wa∏iz al-Razi, Abu
Moses (Musa) 18, 26, 94, 97, 101, 131, 163, 164, Bakr (d.376/986) 5–6, 9, 20, 22–5, 37, 43,
172–3, 177, 190, 207, 217, 228, 235, 256, 276, 49, 68, 120, 138, 140, 155, 164, 169, 183, 199,
277, 283, 291, 299, 306, 337, 339, 351, 355–6, 213–15, 222, 226–7, 232, 234, 243, 253, 264,
363 271–2, 308, 323, 325, 346, 356
Mosul 248 Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. Mutarrif (or Matraf)
Mu∏adh b. Jabal b. ∏Amr b. Aws b.∏A∏id al-Ansari 387
al-Khazraji, Abu∏Abd al-Rahman (d. 18/639) Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Razi seeMuhammad b. 140–1, 144, 167, 232, 346 ∏Abdallah b.Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz
Mu∏adh b. al-Muthanna 257 Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. Shadhan see
Mu∏adh al-Nasafi 281 Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b.Muhammad b. Mu∏afa b. ∏Imran b. Nufayl al-Azdi al-Mawsili, Abu ∏Abd al-∏Aziz b.Shadhan
Mas∏ud (d. 184–6/800–2) 26, 171 Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Shirazi seeIbn Bakuya
Mu∏alla b. Mahdi 252 Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi seeIbn
Mu∏awiyya b. Abi Sufyan Sakhr b.Harb b. Umayya Bakawayh/Bakuya
(ruled 41–60/661–680) 173, 208–9, 254, Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Tabari seeMuhammad
263 b. ∏Abdallah b.∏Abd al-∏Aziz
al-Mubarrad see Muhammad b.Yazid b. ∏Abd Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ubaydallah 158–61
al-Akbar Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah al-Wa∏iz seeMuhammad
Mughira b. Abi Qurra ∏Ubayd b. Qays al-Sadusi b. ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz
al-Basri 179 b.Shadhan
Muhammad/Prophet 4, 5, 12, 15–17, 20, 25, 28, Muhammad b. ∏Abdun b. ∏Isa al-Qattan, Abu Bakr
35, 39, 42–3, 44, 46, 52, 56, 59, 70–1, 73, 79, 185, 227
85, 91–2, 97, 101, 103, 111, 125, 127–30, Muhammad b. Abi Bakr b. ∏Ali b.∏Ataπ b. Muqaddam
132–4, 148–9, 152, 161, 164–5, 167, 171, 174, al-Muqaddami al-Thaqafi al-Basri, Abu
178–83, 188, 190–3, 195, 197, 201–3, 206, ∏Abdallah (d. 234/848–9) 225–6
208–10, 212–13, 217–18, 220, 222–3, 226, 228, Muhammad b. Abi πl-Furat seeMuhammad b.152/769 or 153/770) 138, 232, 325 333, 343, 369–70, 376, 378, 381–3, 389, 391,
Manbij 258 397, 401
Manliness (muruwa) 176–7, 237–8 Medina 17, 71, 164–5, 188, 241, 249, 258, 275–6,
Mansur b. ∏Abdallah (al-Dhuhli oral-Isbahani; 302, 316, 342, 360, 372–4, 385, 389, 398
possibly the same asMansur b. ∏Abdallah b. Meditation (tafakkur; fikr; fikra) see
Khalid) 31–2, 38, 44, 62, 63–4, 66, 71, 85, Contemplation/Self-scrutiny

234/848–9) 225–6
208–10, 212–13, 217–18, 220, 222–3, 226, 228, Muhammad b. Abi πl-Furat seeMuhammad b. 230–2, 237, 246, 249, 252–5, 257, 265, 269, al-Furat
270, 274–6, 280–1, 283–5, 292–3, 295–6, Muhammad b. Abi Humayd Ibrahim al-Ansari
302–3, 312–13, 325–6, 329–30, 334, 338–9, al-Zuraqi, Abu Ibrahim 173543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 450
450 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Muhammad b. Ahmad 117 Muhammad b. ∏Ali b. ∏Abdallah b.Ya∏qub b. Isma∏il
Muhammad b. Ahmad, Abu Bakr al-Qindili seeAbu al-Sulami, Abu πl-Hasan, yu∏rafu bi-πl-Hibri
Bakr Muhammad b. Ahmad 143
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-∏Alawi 159, 298, 329
al-Marwazi seeAbu Zayd Muhammad b. Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Hafiz 13
Ahmad b. ∏Abdallah Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Hibri seeMuhammad b. ∏Ali
Muhammad b. Ahmad al-∏Abdi 306 b. ∏Abdallah b. Ya∏qub
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdus al-Hiri Muhammad b. ∏Ali b. al-Husayn 179
al-Muzakki al-∏Adl, Abu Bakr 142–3, 226, Muhammad b. ∏Ali b. al-Husayn al-Muqri∏ 381–2
264, 393 Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Juzi (al-Jawzi), Abu ∏Abdallah
Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Balkhi seeAbu Bakr 382
Muhammad b.Ahmad al-Balkhi Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Kattani seeal-Kattani, Abu
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Dalawayh (Dalluya) Bakr Muhammad b. ∏Ali
al-Daqqaq, Abu Bakr 142, 215, 221 Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Marwazi seeMuhammad b. Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Farisi seeAbu πl-Husayn ∏Ali b. Shaqiq
al-Farisi Muhammad b. ∏Ali b. Muhammad al-Mukharrimi
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Hamdan b.∏Ali b. 405
∏Abdallah b. Sinan al-Hiri al-Naysaburi, Abu Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Nahawandi, Abu Mansur
∏Amr (d.376/987, possibly later) 45, 209 144
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Hamdun, Abu Bakr Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Qassab seeal-Qassab, Abu
al-Farraπ (d. 370/980–1) 11, 49–50, 121, Ja∏far
126, 166–7, 233 Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Takriti, AbuBakr 387
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Harun (al-∏Udi?) 165 Muhammad b. ∏Ali al-Tirmidhi seeal-Tirmidhi,
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Harun al-∏Udi 273 Abu ∏Abdallah
Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Isbahani 310 Muhammad b. ∏Ammar al-Hamadani, Abu
Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Juzjani 229 ∏Abdallah 289
Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Malamati 46 Muhammad b. ∏Amr b. ∏Alqama b.Waqqas al-Laythi
Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Marwazi seeAbu Zayd al-Madani, Abu ∏Abdallah (d. 144–5/761–3)
Muhammad b.Ahmad b. ∏Abdallah 280
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Ja∏far see Muhammad b.234/848–9) 225–6
208–10, 212–13, 217–18, 220, 222–3, 226, 228, Muhammad b. Abi πl-Furat seeMuhammad b. 230–2, 237, 246, 249, 252–5, 257, 265, 269, al-Furat
270, 274–6, 280–1, 283–5, 292–3, 295–6, Muhammad b. Abi Humayd Ibrahim al-Ansari
302–3, 312–13, 325–6, 329–30, 334, 338–9, al-Zuraqi, Abu Ibrahim 173

Muhammad b. Ja∏far see Muhammad b. ∏Amr b. ∏Ataπ b.∏Abbas b. ∏Alqama
Ibn al-Haddad al-∏Amiri al-Qurashi al-Madani, Abu ∏Abdallah
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Sahl 155, 181
al-Sayrafi, Abu πl-Fadl (d. 347/958) 20, Muhammad b. Ashras 320
180, 208, 322 Muhammad b. ∏Atiya 369
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Tamimi Muhammad b. ∏Awf b. Sufyan al-Ta∏i al-Himsi,
seeAbu Hatim al-Sijistani Abu Ja∏far (d.272–3/885–7) 365
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Yahya Muhammad b. Ayyub 334
al-Sufi seeAbu Hatim al-Sijistani al-Sufi Muhammad b. Bakr b. ∏Uthman al-Bursani al-Basri,
Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Najjar 298, 371, 411 Abu ∏Abdallah (d. ca 203/819) 344
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. al-Qasim 334 Muhammad al-Baqir seeMuhammad b. ∏Ali b. Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Sahl seeMuhammad b. al-Husayn b. ∏Ali b.Abi Talib
Ahmad b.Muhammad b. Sahl Muhammad b. Bishr 158
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Sa∏id alRazi al-Mukattib, Muhammad b. Dawud al-Dinawari seeal-Duqqi,
Abu Ja∏far 159, 193, 294, 321, 322 Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Dawud
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. al-Sakan 242 Muhammad b. Dawud b. Sulayman al-Zahid
Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Sufi seeAbu Hatim al-Naysaburi (d. 342/953) 129
al-Sijistani al-Sufi Muhammad b. al-Fadl b. al-∏Abbas b. Hafs, Abu
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Tahir alSufi 201 ∏Abdallah al-Balkhi (d. 319/931) 49, 120,
Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Tamimi seeAbu Hatim 136, 290, 325, 330, 341–2, 382–3
al-Sijistani Muhammad b. (al-)Fadl b. Jabir 111, 125, 161,
Muhammad b. Ahmad al-∏Udi seeMuhammad b. 330
Ahmad b.Harun al-∏Udi Muhammad b. al-Faraj b. ∏Abd al-Warith
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Yahya seeAbu Hatim al-Baghdadi al-Qurashi al-Azraq, Abu
al-Sijistani al-Sufi ∏Abdallah (d.236/850–1) 297
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Ya∏qub al-Tusi, Abu Nasr Muhammad b. Farhan 177, 339, 374
226 Muhammad b. Faris al-Farisi 385543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 451
INDEX 451
Muhammad al-Farraπ seeMuhammad b. Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ∏Isa 196
Hamdun Muhammad b. Isma∏il 36, 60
Muhammad b. al-Furat al-Tamimi al-Kufi, Abu Muhammad b. Isma∏il al-Farghani, Abu Bakr 298
∏Ali 264 Muhammad b. Isma∏il b. Ibrahim b.Mughira
Muhammad b. Ghalib seeTamtam, Abu Ja∏far al-Bukhari al-Ju∏fi (d.256/870) 201
Muhammad b. Hamid b. Muhammad b. Ibrahim b. Muhammad b. Ja∏far 138
Isma∏il al-Sulami al-Khurasani, Abu Ahmad Muhammad b. Ja∏far al-Baghdadi seeAbu Bakr
19, 38, 119, 123, 179 Muhammad b.Ja∏far
Muhammad b. Harun b. Humayd, Abu Bakr 269 Muhammad b. Ja∏far al-Imam 339
Muhammad b. Harun al-Muqri 269 Muhammad b. Ja∏far al-Khassaf 220
Muhammad b. al-Hasan seeal-Shaybani, Abu Muhammad b. Ja∏far b. Muhammad 180
∏Abdallah Muhammad b. Ja∏far b. Muhammad b. al-Haytham
Muhammad b. al-Hasan 138, 145 b. ∏Imran b. Burayd al-Anbari, Abu Bakr
Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-∏Alawi 305 al-Bundar (d.360/970) 280
Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-∏Asqalani 387 Muhammad b. Ja∏far b. Muhammad b. Matar 344
Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Baghdadi seeAbu Muhammad b. Ja∏far al-Naysaburi seeAbu ∏Amr b. πl-∏Abbas al-Khashshab Matar
Muhammad b. al-Hasan b. Khalid al-Baghdadi Muhammad b. Kathir b. Abi ∏Ataπ al-Thaqafi
216 al-San∏ani al-Massisi (d.216/831–2 or later)
Muhammad b. al-Hasan b. al-Khashshab seeAbu 162
πl-∏Abbas al-Khashshab Muhammad b. Kathir al-Qurashi al-Kufi, Abu
Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Mukharrimi seeAbu Ishaq 242
πl-∏Abbas al-Khahshsab Muhammad b. Khalid seeMuhammad b. al-Hasan
Muhammad b. al-Hasan b. Qutayba al-∏Asqalani b. Khalid
(d. 310/922–3) 129 Muhammad b. Khuzayma 278
Muhammad b. al-Hassan seeAbu ∏Ubayd al-Busri Muhammad b. al-Layth b. Muhammad b. Yazid
Muhammad b. Hassan 266 al-Jawhari, Abu Bakr (d. 297/910 or 299/912)
Muhammad b. al-Husayn seeal-Jawhari or 36
Muhammad b. al-Husayn al-Baghdadi or Muhammad b. al-Mahbub 8
Muhammad b. al-Husayn al-Bastami or Muhammad b. Makhlad b. Hafs al-Duri al-∏Attar,
Muhammad b. al-Husayn b.Muhammad b. Ja∏far see Muhammad b. ∏Amr b. ∏Ataπ b.∏Abbas b. ∏Alqama
Ibn al-Haddad al-∏Amiri al-Qurashi al-Madani, Abu ∏Abdallah
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Sahl 155, 181
al-Sayrafi, Abu πl-Fadl (d. 347/958) 20, Muhammad b. Ashras 320
180, 208, 322 Muhammad b. ∏Atiya 369
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Tamimi Muhammad b. ∏Awf b. Sufyan al-Ta∏i al-Himsi,
seeAbu Hatim al-Sijistani Abu Ja∏far (d.272–3/885–7) 365
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Yahya Muhammad b. Ayyub 334
al-Sufi seeAbu Hatim al-Sijistani al-Sufi Muhammad b. Bakr b. ∏Uthman al-Bursani al-Basri,
Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Najjar 298, 371, 411 Abu ∏Abdallah (d. ca 203/819) 344
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. al-Qasim 334 Muhammad al-Baqir seeMuhammad b. ∏Ali b. Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Sahl seeMuhammad b. al-Husayn b. ∏Ali b.Abi Talib
Ahmad b.Muhammad b. Sahl Muhammad b. Bishr 158
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Sa∏id alRazi al-Mukattib, Muhammad b. Dawud al-Dinawari seeal-Duqqi,
Abu Ja∏far 159, 193, 294, 321, 322 Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Dawud
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. al-Sakan 242 Muhammad b. Dawud b. Sulayman al-Zahid
Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Sufi seeAbu Hatim al-Naysaburi (d. 342/953) 129
al-Sijistani al-Sufi Muhammad b. al-Fadl b. al-∏Abbas b. Hafs, Abu
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Tahir alSufi 201 ∏Abdallah al-Balkhi (d. 319/931) 49, 120,
Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Tamimi seeAbu Hatim 136, 290, 325, 330, 341–2, 382–3
al-Sijistani Muhammad b. (al-)Fadl b. Jabir 111, 125, 161,
Muhammad b. Ahmad al-∏Udi seeMuhammad b. 330
Ahmad b.Harun al-∏Udi Muhammad b. al-Faraj b. ∏Abd al-Warith
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Yahya seeAbu Hatim al-Baghdadi al-Qurashi al-Azraq, Abu
al-Sijistani al-Sufi ∏Abdallah (d.236/850–1) 297
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Ya∏qub al-Tusi, Abu Nasr Muhammad b. Farhan 177, 339, 374
226 Muhammad b. Faris al-Farisi 385

Hafs al-Duri al-∏Attar,
Muhammad b. al-Husayn b. al-Hasan b. Abu ∏Abdallah (d. 331/943) 160, 226
Khalil orMuhammad b. al-Husayn Muhammad b. Mansur b. Dawud b.Ibrahim
b.Muhammad orMuhammad b.al-Husayn al-Tusi, Abu Ja∏far (d.254/868) 378
al-Qattan or al-Sulami, Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman Muhammad b. Mardawayh 237
Muhammad b. al-Husayn al-∏Alawi seeAbu πl-Hasan Muhammad b. Masruq 28
al-Hamadhani al-∏Alawi Muhammad b. Mirdas al-Ansari alBasri, Abu
Muhammad b. al-Husayn al-Baghdadi 43–4, ∏Abdallah (d.249/863–4) 197
52–3, 251–2, 383–4 Muhammad b. Mu∏ammar, Abu Bakr 51, 390–1
Muhammad b. al-Husayn al-Bistami 251 Muhammad b. Mu∏awiyya b. A∏yanal-Naysaburi,
Muhammad b. al-Husayn b. al-Hasan b. al-Khalil, Abu ∏Ali (d.229/843–4) 167
Abu Bakr 173 Muhammad b. al-Mubarak b. Ya∏la al-Qurasi al-Suri
Muhammad b. al-Husayn b. Muhammad b. al-Fadl al-Qalanisi, Abu ∏Abdallah (d. 215/830)
al-Azraq al-Qattan, Abu πl-Husayn (d. 373
415/1024) 114–17, 136, 191, 205, 211–12, Muhammad b. Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-Rahim
215–16, 223–4, 227–33, 235–7, 243, 246, 249, 222
283–6, 294, 299, 301, 305, 308, 329–31, 338, Muhammad b. Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-Wahhab
390 320
Muhammad b. al-Husayn al-Qattan, Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Muhammad b.Ahmad b. Ishaq
(possibly, the same asabove) 138, 390 al-Hakim al-Kabir al-Naysaburi, al-Karabisi,
Muhammad b. Ibrahim b. al-Fadl al-Hashimi Abu Ahmad (d. 378/988) 288
115, 231 Muhammad b. Muhammad b. Ahyad b. Mujahid
Muhammad b. Ibrahim b. al-Harith b. Khalid al-Qattan al-Balkhi, Abu Bakr (d. probably
al-Qurashi al-Taymi, Abu ∏Abdallah (d. 347/958–9) 53
119/737–8) 209 Muhammad b. Muhammad b. Ghalib, Abu Bakr
Muhammad b. Ibrahim al-Isma∏ili, Abu Sa∏id 6, 181
173, 226 Muhammad b. Muhammad al-Jurjani 38543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 452
452 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Muhammad b. al-Munkadir b. ∏Abdallah b. Mujahid b. Jabr al-Makki, Abu πl-Hajjaj (d. 104/772)
al-Hudayr al-Taymi (d.possibly 130/747–8) 125, 162, 349
167, 206 al-Mukharrimi seeAbu πl-∏Abbas al-Khashshab or
Muhammad b. Musa seeal-Wasiti, Abu Bakr Muhammad b. ∏Ali b. Muhammad
Muhammad b. Musa Mulqabadh 60, 62
Muhammad b. Musa al-Hulwani 175 al-Munadi seeAbu πl-Qasim al-Munadi
Muhammad b. al-Musayyib b. Ishaq al-Naysaburi al-Munkadir b. Muhammad b. al-Munkadir
al-Arghiyani al-Isfanji (d. 315/927–8) 145 al-Qurashi al-Taymi al-Madani (d. 180/796-7)
Muhammad b. Muslim seeAbu πlZubayr 175
Muhammad b. Muslim oral-Zuhri, al-Muqaddami seeMuhammad b.Abi Bakr b. ∏Ali b. Muhammad b. Muslim ∏Ata∏
Muhammad b. al-Nadr al-Harithi, Abu ∏Abd Muriq seeMuwarriq b. Mushamrij
al-Rahman 306 Murra b. Sharahil al-Hamdani al-Saksaki al-Kufi
Muhammad b. Nasr b. Mansur b.∏Abd al-Rahman al-ma∏ruf bi-Murra al-Tayyib wa-Murra
b. Hisham al-Sa∏igh, Abu Ja∏far (d. 297/910) al-Khayr, Abu Isma∏il (d. 76/695–6) 226
142, 163, 237 al-Murta∏ish, Abu Muhammad ∏Abdallah b. Muhammad b. al-Qasim al-∏Ataki 320 Muhammad (d.328/939–40) 46, 62, 72,
Muhammad b. al-Rumi 115, 231 120, 190, 205, 242, 251, 284–5, 371
Muhammad b. Sa∏id see Abu Bakr al-Harbi Musa b. Dawud al-Dabbi al-Tarsusi al-Khulqani
Muhammad b. Sa∏id al-Basri 389 (d. 217/832–3) 242
Muhammad b. Sa∏id b. Sulayman b.∏Abdallah al-Kufi, Musa b. al-Hajjaj 275
Abu Ja∏far b. al-Isbahani (d. 220/835) 138 Musa b. Hayyan 226
Muhammad b. Salih b. Mihran al-ma∏ruf bi-Ibn Musa b. ∏Isa al-Bastami see∏Ammi al-Bastami/
al-Nattah, Abu ∏Abdallah or Abu Ja∏far al-Bistami
(d.252/866) 229 Musa b. Isma∏il al-Minqari al-Tabudhaki al-Basri,
Muhammad b. Sawwar al-Basri 33 Abu Salama (d.223/837–8) 201
Muhammad b. Sirin seeIbn Sirin, Abu Bakr Musa b. Wardan al-Qurashi al-∏Amiri al-Basri, Abu
Muhammad ∏Umar (d.117/735–6) 173
Muhammad b. Tahir b. Muhammad see Abu Nasr Mus∏ab b. Shayba b.Hafs al-Duri al-∏Attar,
Muhammad b. al-Husayn b. al-Hasan b. Abu ∏Abdallah (d. 331/943) 160, 226
Khalil orMuhammad b. al-Husayn Muhammad b. Mansur b. Dawud b.Ibrahim
b.Muhammad orMuhammad b.al-Husayn al-Tusi, Abu Ja∏far (d.254/868) 378
al-Qattan or al-Sulami, Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman Muhammad b. Mardawayh 237
Muhammad b. al-Husayn al-∏Alawi seeAbu πl-Hasan Muhammad b. Masruq 28
al-Hamadhani al-∏Alawi Muhammad b. Mirdas al-Ansari alBasri, Abu
Muhammad b. al-Husayn al-Baghdadi 43–4, ∏Abdallah (d.249/863–4) 197
52–3, 251–2, 383–4 Muhammad b. Mu∏ammar, Abu Bakr 51, 390–1
Muhammad b. al-Husayn al-Bistami 251 Muhammad b. Mu∏awiyya b. A∏yanal-Naysaburi,
Muhammad b. al-Husayn b. al-Hasan b. al-Khalil, Abu ∏Ali (d.229/843–4) 167
Abu Bakr 173 Muhammad b. al-Mubarak b. Ya∏la al-Qurasi al-Suri
Muhammad b. al-Husayn b. Muhammad b. al-Fadl al-Qalanisi, Abu ∏Abdallah (d. 215/830)
al-Azraq al-Qattan, Abu πl-Husayn (d. 373
415/1024) 114–17, 136, 191, 205, 211–12, Muhammad b. Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-Rahim
215–16, 223–4, 227–33, 235–7, 243, 246, 249, 222
283–6, 294, 299, 301, 305, 308, 329–31, 338, Muhammad b. Muhammad b. ∏Abd al-Wahhab
390 320
Muhammad b. al-Husayn al-Qattan, Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Muhammad b.Ahmad b. Ishaq
(possibly, the same asabove) 138, 390 al-Hakim al-Kabir al-Naysaburi, al-Karabisi,
Muhammad b. Ibrahim b. al-Fadl al-Hashimi Abu Ahmad (d. 378/988) 288
115, 231 Muhammad b. Muhammad b. Ahyad b. Mujahid
Muhammad b. Ibrahim b. al-Harith b. Khalid al-Qattan al-Balkhi, Abu Bakr (d. probably
al-Qurashi al-Taymi, Abu ∏Abdallah (d. 347/958–9) 53
119/737–8) 209 Muhammad b. Muhammad b. Ghalib, Abu Bakr
Muhammad b. Ibrahim al-Isma∏ili, Abu Sa∏id 6, 181
173, 226 Muhammad b. Muhammad al-Jurjani 38

Muhammad see Abu Nasr Mus∏ab b. Shayba b. Jubayr b.Shayba b. ∏Uthman
al-Waziri b. Abi Talha b. ∏Abd al-∏Uzza al-∏Abdari
Muhammad al-Tusi al-Mua∏llim (possibly the same al-Makki al-Hujjabi 292
as Muhammad b. Mansur b. Dawud) 399 Musabbih b. Hatim al-∏Uqli 306
Muhammad b. ∏Umar b. al-Fadl b.Ghalib b. Salama Muslim al-A∏war seeMuslim b.Kaysan
al-Ju∏fi, Abu ∏Abdallah (d. 361/972) 23 Muslim b. Kaysan al-Dabbi al-Mula∏i al-Barrad
Muhammad b. ∏Umar al-Ramli 339 al-A∏war, Abu∏Abdallah 161
Muhammad b. Usayd al-Raqqi, Abu Tahir 174 Muslim b. Salim 151
Muhammad b. ∏Uthman 145 al-Musuhi, Abu ∏Ali al-Hasan b.∏Ali 57
Muhammad b. Wasi∏ b. Jabir b. al-Akhnas al-Azdi, al-Musuhi, Muhammad 286
Abu ∏Abdallah (or Abu Bakr) (d. 120/737) al-Mutanabbi, Abu πl-Tayyib Ahmad b. al-Husayn
286 b. al-Hasan b. ∏Abd al-Samad al-Ju∏fi al-Kufi
Muhammad b. Yazid b. ∏Abd al-Akbar al-Thumali (killed 354/965) 263
al-Azdi al-Mubarrad, Abu πl-∏Abbas Mutarrif b. ∏Abdallah b. al-Shikhkhir al-∏Amiri
(d.285/898) 208 al-Harashi, Abu ∏Abdallah (d. probably
Muhammad b. Yazid al-Qaratisi 222 87/706) 261
Muhammad b. Yunus b. Musa b.Sulayman al-Mutarriz 244
al-Kudaymi al-Sami al-Basri, Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Mutawakkil, Ja∏far b. Muhammad (ruled
(d.286/899–900) 205, 345 232-247/847–861) 19
Muhammad b. Yusuf 30 Mu∏tazilite(s) 9–10, 14, 65, 309, 397
Muhammad b. Yusuf al-Banna∏ 370 Muwarriq (or Muriq) b. Mushamrij al-∏Ijli al-Basri,
Muhammad b. Yusuf b. Waqid b.∏Uthman Abu Mu∏tamir (d.ca 100/718) 258
al-Firyabi (d. 212/827) 129 al-Muzaffar al-Jassas 385
Muhammad b. Zakariya al-Muqaddasi (al-Maqdisi), al-Muzaffar al-Qirmisini 65, 286
Abu Talib 222 al-Muzakki see∏Abd al-Rahman b.Ibrahim b. al-Muhasibi, Abu ∏Abdallah al-Harith b. Asad Muhammad b. Yahya al-Muzakki orIbrahim
(d. 243/857) 28, 41–3, 54, 114, 131, 184, b. Muhammad b. Yahya al-Muzakki
209, 225, 238, 253, 330, 347 al-Muzani, Isma∏il b. Yahya b.Isma∏il al-Misri, Abu
Muhriz b. ∏Abdallah al-Jazari, Abu πl-Raja∏ 175 Ibrahim (d. 264/877–8) 212543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 453
INDEX 453
al-Muzayyin al-Kabir (the Elder), Abu Ja∏far Oman 301
(sometimes difficult todistinguish from the Oneness of God/Declaration of oneness of God
one below) 285, 291, 300, 316–18 (tawhid) 13, 122, 180, 218–19, 266, 293–4,
al-Muzayyin al-Saghir (the Junior), Abu πl-Hasan 306–12, 405
∏Ali b. Muhammad (d. 328/939–40) 65, Outward/Inward (zahir/batin) 145, 205, 223,
285, 291, 318 245, 256, 264, 271–2, 294, 408–10, 415
N P
al-Nadir 161 Palestine 47, 374
al-Nadr b. Shumayl b. Kharasha b.Yazid al-Mazini Paradise 8, 10, 24, 27, 38, 72, 133, 144, 147, 161,
al-Tamimi (d.203/818–9) 388 162, 167, 173, 179, 186, 192, 206–8, 227, 233,
Nafi∏ mawla ∏Abdallah b. ∏Umar al-Madani, Abu 235, 256–7, 267, 270, 278, 281, 296, 315, 317,
∏Abdallah (d.117/735 or later) 226, 281 337–9, 355, 359, 393–4, 398–9, 401
Nafi∏ b. Hurmuz, Abu Hurmuz 125 Passion (hawa∏) 85–6, 119, 143, 161, 167, 170,
al-Nahrajuri, Abu Ya∏qub Ishaq b.Muhammad b. 187, 221, 316–17, 330–3, 334–7
Ayyub (d.330/941–2) 59, 64–5, 180, 196, see alsoDesire
318, 322, 331, 347 Passionate longing (∏ishq, shawq) 78, 93–4, 264–5,
al-Nakha∏i seeIbrahim b. Yazid b.al-Aswad 279, 317, 327, 332, 335–9
al-Naqqash 284 see alsoDesire
Nasa (city) 240, 244 Patience (sabr) 197–202, 213, 215, 274, 286
al-Nasibini seeAbu ∏Abdallah al-Nasibini Perspicacity seeSpiritual Insight
Nasr b. Abi Nasr seeNasr b.Muhammad b. Ahmad Pharaoh 10, 42, 337
Nasr b. Ahmad 34 Pilgrimage (hajj) 92, 111–12, 120, 154, 165, 170,
Nasr b. Ahmad b. ∏Abd al-Malik, Abu πl-Fath 279 178, 183–4, 186, 203, 212, 219, 224, 251, 255,
Nasr b. al-Faraj, Abu Hamza 380 297–8, 333, 373, 375–8, 389, 410
Nasr al-Kharrat 385 Potiphar (al-∏Aziz) 334
Nasr b. Muhammad b. Ahmad b.Ya∏qub b. Abi Poverty (faqr) 19, 136, 159, 211, 229, 257, 280–8,
Nasr al-∏Attar al-Tusi, Abu πl-Fadl 26, 176 402, 407
al-Nasrabadhi, Abu πl-Qasim Ibrahim b. Prayer/Supplication (wird; pl.Muhammad see Abu Nasr Mus∏ab b. Shayba b. Jubayr b.Shayba b. ∏Uthman
al-Waziri b. Abi Talha b. ∏Abd al-∏Uzza al-∏Abdari
Muhammad al-Tusi al-Mua∏llim (possibly the same al-Makki al-Hujjabi 292
as Muhammad b. Mansur b. Dawud) 399 Musabbih b. Hatim al-∏Uqli 306
Muhammad b. ∏Umar b. al-Fadl b.Ghalib b. Salama Muslim al-A∏war seeMuslim b.Kaysan
al-Ju∏fi, Abu ∏Abdallah (d. 361/972) 23 Muslim b. Kaysan al-Dabbi al-Mula∏i al-Barrad
Muhammad b. ∏Umar al-Ramli 339 al-A∏war, Abu∏Abdallah 161
Muhammad b. Usayd al-Raqqi, Abu Tahir 174 Muslim b. Salim 151
Muhammad b. ∏Uthman 145 al-Musuhi, Abu ∏Ali al-Hasan b.∏Ali 57
Muhammad b. Wasi∏ b. Jabir b. al-Akhnas al-Azdi, al-Musuhi, Muhammad 286
Abu ∏Abdallah (or Abu Bakr) (d. 120/737) al-Mutanabbi, Abu πl-Tayyib Ahmad b. al-Husayn
286 b. al-Hasan b. ∏Abd al-Samad al-Ju∏fi al-Kufi
Muhammad b. Yazid b. ∏Abd al-Akbar al-Thumali (killed 354/965) 263
al-Azdi al-Mubarrad, Abu πl-∏Abbas Mutarrif b. ∏Abdallah b. al-Shikhkhir al-∏Amiri
(d.285/898) 208 al-Harashi, Abu ∏Abdallah (d. probably
Muhammad b. Yazid al-Qaratisi 222 87/706) 261
Muhammad b. Yunus b. Musa b.Sulayman al-Mutarriz 244
al-Kudaymi al-Sami al-Basri, Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Mutawakkil, Ja∏far b. Muhammad (ruled
(d.286/899–900) 205, 345 232-247/847–861) 19
Muhammad b. Yusuf 30 Mu∏tazilite(s) 9–10, 14, 65, 309, 397
Muhammad b. Yusuf al-Banna∏ 370 Muwarriq (or Muriq) b. Mushamrij al-∏Ijli al-Basri,
Muhammad b. Yusuf b. Waqid b.∏Uthman Abu Mu∏tamir (d.ca 100/718) 258
al-Firyabi (d. 212/827) 129 al-Muzaffar al-Jassas 385
Muhammad b. Zakariya al-Muqaddasi (al-Maqdisi), al-Muzaffar al-Qirmisini 65, 286
Abu Talib 222 al-Muzakki see∏Abd al-Rahman b.Ibrahim b. al-Muhasibi, Abu ∏Abdallah al-Harith b. Asad Muhammad b. Yahya al-Muzakki orIbrahim
(d. 243/857) 28, 41–3, 54, 114, 131, 184, b. Muhammad b. Yahya al-Muzakki
209, 225, 238, 253, 330, 347 al-Muzani, Isma∏il b. Yahya b.Isma∏il al-Misri, Abu
Muhriz b. ∏Abdallah al-Jazari, Abu πl-Raja∏ 175 Ibrahim (d. 264/877–8) 212

Abi Poverty (faqr) 19, 136, 159, 211, 229, 257, 280–8,
Nasr al-∏Attar al-Tusi, Abu πl-Fadl 26, 176 402, 407
al-Nasrabadhi, Abu πl-Qasim Ibrahim b. Prayer/Supplication (wird; pl. awrad) 84, 300
Muhammad (d.366/976–7) 10–11, 72–3, see alsoSupplicatory Prayer and Canonical
87–8, 121, 126, 135, 137, 150, 204, 212–13, Prayer
222, 237–8, 242, 267, 271, 300–1, 305, 329, Presence [with God] (hudur, muhadara) 3, 91–3,
336, 356 97–8, 145–6, 194–5, 295, 349, 408
Naysabur/Nishapur 8, 11, 37–9, 42, 44–5, 60–3, Pride/Hubris (kibr; takabbur) 106–7, 161, 170–1
69, 71–2, 77–8, 92, 143, 240, 244, 246, 251, Prophet (Muhammad) seeMuhammad
261, 270, 278, 297, 399 Prophetic custom seeSunna
Nibaj 41, 158 Proximity to God (qurb) 103–5, 115, 150, 207,
al-Nibaji, Abu ∏Abdallah Sa∏id b. Yazzid 53, 212, 232–3, 268, 272–3, 295, 308–9, 409
398, 401
Nihawand 43, 360 Q
Nishapur seeNaysabur Qabisa b. ∏Uqba b. Muhammad b.Sufyan b. ∏Uqba
Noah 142, 162 b. Rabi∏a al-Suwa∏i al-Kufi, Abu ∏Amir
[Sufi] Novice seeAspirant (d.215/830–1) 280
Nu∏aym b. Muwarri∏ b. Tawba b.Abi πl-Asad al-Qahtabi, Abu Bakr 80
Kaysan b. Rashid al-Basri 229 al-Qalanisi, Abu Ahmad Mus∏ab b.Ahmad Mus∏ab
Nu∏aym b. Salim al-Qurashi 303 (d. 270/884 orlater) 50, 304
Nuba 19 al-Qa∏nabi, Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman ∏Abdallah b. Nuh al-∏Ayyar al-Naysaburi (al-Nishapuri) 240 Maslama b. Qa∏nab al-Harithi (d. 221/835–6)
al-Nuri, Abu πl-Husayn Ahmad 64, 67–8, 84, 98, 122
105, 115, 144, 184, 195, 209, 245, 258–9, 268, al-Qannad, Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b.∏Abd al-Rahman
285, 287, 290, 315, 330–1, 348, 369, 385, 389 al-Wasiti (d.probably 330/941) 223, 311
al-Nuri, Abu πl-Husayn Ahmad b.Muhammad al-Qarafi seeAbu πl-Husayn al-Qarafi
(d. 295/907–8) 8,10, 46–7, 56, 58 al-Qaratisi seeMuhammad b.Yazid al-Qaratisi or
∏Umar b.Sa∏id b. ∏Abd al-Rahman
O Qarmatis/Carmathians 55, 249
Occurrence/Divine visitation (warid) 108, 246, Qasim b. Ahmad 30
347, 354, 412 al-Qasim b. Muhammad 145543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:06 PM Page 454
454 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
al-Qasim b. Muhammad b. Abi Bakr al-Siddiq, al-Raqqi, Abu Ishaq Ibrahim b.Dawud al-Qassar
Abu Muhammad (d.106/724–5, or somewhat (d. 326/937–8) 59, 367
earlier) 320 al-Raqqi, Abu Tahir 391
al-Qasim b. Munabbih b. Yasin al-Harbi, Abu al-Rashidi, Abu Bakr al-Faqih 399
Muhammad 305 Rayy 7, 45, 52, 56, 57, 352
al-Qasim b. al-Qasim seeal-Sayyari, Abu πl-∏Abbas Remembrance/recollection (dhikr) 123, 232–6,
al-Qasim b. al-Qasim 272–3, 285, 290, 323, 351–2, 384–5, 407–9,
al-Qassab, Abu Ja∏far Muhammad b.∏Ali al-Sufi 416
(d. 275/888–9) 43,50, 289 Renunciation seeAbstention
al-Qassar seeHamdun al-Qassar oral-Raqqi, Abu Repentance (tawba), (inaba) 77, 90, 111–17, 153,
Ishaq 244, 249
Qasyun (mount) 65 [Solitary] Retreat (khalwa) 113, 122–4, 215, 294,
Qatada b. Di∏ama b. Qatada b. ∏Aziz b. ∏Amr b. 409
Rabi∏a b. ∏Amr b. alHarith al-Sadusi, Abu al-Ribati seeAbu ∏Ali al-Ribati
πl-Khattab (d. ca 117/735) 143, 345 Ridwan seeAngels
al-Qattan seeal-Hasan b. ∏Ali b.Muhammad b. Riyah b. ∏Amr al-Qaysi, Abu Muhasir 154
Sulayman al-Qattan orMuhammad al-Husayn al-Rudhbari seeAhmad b. ∏Ata∏, Abu ∏Abdallah
al-Qattan al-Rudhbari oralRudhbari, Abu ∏Ali
Qays b. Abi Hazim Husayn b. ∏Awf al-Baghali al-Rudhbari, Abu ∏Ali Ahmad b.Muhammad (or
al-Kufi, Abu ∏Abdallah (d. 84/703 or later) Abu ∏Ali Muhammad b. Ahmad) b. al-Qasim
203 (d. 322/934) 44, 57, 62, 65, 73–4, 119–20,
Qays b. ∏Asim b. Sinan b. Khalid al-Minqari 150, 160, 178, 184, 221, 273, 284, 287, 290,
al-Sa∏di al-Tamimi (d.47/667) 253–4 300, 314–18, 323, 328, 347–50, 357, 381, 385
Qays b. Sa∏d b. ∏Ubada b. Dulaym b.Haritha Rules of trvel seeTravel
al-Ansari al-Khazrji (d.a 60/679–80) Ruse (makr) 270, 358, 362,409
259–60 Rustam al-Shirazi al-Sufi 159
al-Qazwini see∏Ali b. Muhammad b. Mihruya or Ruwaym b. Ahmad b. Yazid b.Ruwaym, Abu
al-Husayn b. Yusuf al-Qazwini Muhammad (d.303/915–6) 5, 28, 48,
al-Qazzaz seeAbu Salm Muhammad b.Abi Poverty (faqr) 19, 136, 159, 211, 229, 257, 280–8,
Nasr al-∏Attar al-Tusi, Abu πl-Fadl 26, 176 402, 407
al-Nasrabadhi, Abu πl-Qasim Ibrahim b. Prayer/Supplication (wird; pl. awrad) 84, 300
Muhammad (d.366/976–7) 10–11, 72–3, see alsoSupplicatory Prayer and Canonical
87–8, 121, 126, 135, 137, 150, 204, 212–13, Prayer
222, 237–8, 242, 267, 271, 300–1, 305, 329, Presence [with God] (hudur, muhadara) 3, 91–3,
336, 356 97–8, 145–6, 194–5, 295, 349, 408
Naysabur/Nishapur 8, 11, 37–9, 42, 44–5, 60–3, Pride/Hubris (kibr; takabbur) 106–7, 161, 170–1
69, 71–2, 77–8, 92, 143, 240, 244, 246, 251, Prophet (Muhammad) seeMuhammad
261, 270, 278, 297, 399 Prophetic custom seeSunna
Nibaj 41, 158 Proximity to God (qurb) 103–5, 115, 150, 207,
al-Nibaji, Abu ∏Abdallah Sa∏id b. Yazzid 53, 212, 232–3, 268, 272–3, 295, 308–9, 409
398, 401
Nihawand 43, 360 Q
Nishapur seeNaysabur Qabisa b. ∏Uqba b. Muhammad b.Sufyan b. ∏Uqba
Noah 142, 162 b. Rabi∏a al-Suwa∏i al-Kufi, Abu ∏Amir
[Sufi] Novice seeAspirant (d.215/830–1) 280
Nu∏aym b. Muwarri∏ b. Tawba b.Abi πl-Asad al-Qahtabi, Abu Bakr 80
Kaysan b. Rashid al-Basri 229 al-Qalanisi, Abu Ahmad Mus∏ab b.Ahmad Mus∏ab
Nu∏aym b. Salim al-Qurashi 303 (d. 270/884 orlater) 50, 304
Nuba 19 al-Qa∏nabi, Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman ∏Abdallah b. Nuh al-∏Ayyar al-Naysaburi (al-Nishapuri) 240 Maslama b. Qa∏nab al-Harithi (d. 221/835–6)
al-Nuri, Abu πl-Husayn Ahmad 64, 67–8, 84, 98, 122
105, 115, 144, 184, 195, 209, 245, 258–9, 268, al-Qannad, Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b.∏Abd al-Rahman
285, 287, 290, 315, 330–1, 348, 369, 385, 389 al-Wasiti (d.probably 330/941) 223, 311
al-Nuri, Abu πl-Husayn Ahmad b.Muhammad al-Qarafi seeAbu πl-Husayn al-Qarafi
(d. 295/907–8) 8,10, 46–7, 56, 58 al-Qaratisi seeMuhammad b.Yazid al-Qaratisi or
∏Umar b.Sa∏id b. ∏Abd al-Rahman
O Qarmatis/Carmathians 55, 249
Occurrence/Divine visitation (warid) 108, 246, Qasim b. Ahmad 30
347, 354, 412 al-Qasim b. Muhammad 145

Yazid b.Ruwaym, Abu
al-Husayn b. Yusuf al-Qazwini Muhammad (d.303/915–6) 5, 28, 48,
al-Qazzaz seeAbu Salm Muhammad b. Yahya or 67–70, 115, 128, 136, 189, 198, 208–9, 221,
Ahmad b.Ali b. Ja∏far al-Qazzaz oral-asan 282, 290–1, 299, 311, 313, 322–3, 348, 354
al-Qazzaz
al-Qirmisini seeAhmad b. Muhammad al-Qirmisini S
orIbrahim b.Shayban orMuzaffar al-Qirmisini al-Sabbah b. Muhammad b. Abi Hazim al-Baghali
al-Qurashi seeAbu ∏Abdallah al-Qurashi orAbu al-Ahmasi al-Kufi 226
Sa∏id al-Qurashi Sadaqa bt. Abi ∏Imran 344–5
Quraysh 265–6, 382 Sadaqa al-Dimashqi (Abu πl-∏Abbas Sadaqa b. Qurayza 161 Khalid al-Umawi or Abu Mu∏awiya b. ∏Abdallah al-Samin) 325
R Sadness (huzn) 108, 155–7
al-Rabbani 158 al-Saffar seeAbu πl-Hasan al-Saffar al-Basri orAbu
al-Rabi∏ b. Badr b. ∏Amr b. Jarad al-Tamimi al-Sa∏di Sa∏id al-Saffar orIsma∏il b. Muhammad b. al-Basri, Abu πl-∏Alaπ (d. 178/794–5) 174 Isma∏il
al-Rabi∏ b. Khuthaym b. ∏A∏idh al-Thawri al-Kufi, Sahl b. ∏Abdallah seeSahl al-Tustari
Abu Yazid (d.61/680 or later) 91, 283, 395 Sahl b. Ibrahim 19
Rabi∏a al-∏Adawiyya (d. 185/801) 116–17, 133, Sahl al-Su∏luki, Abu πl-Tayyib (d.402/1011 or
156, 208, 267, 277, 334–5, 402–3 404/1014) 399
Rajaπ b. Haya b. Jarwal al-Kindi, Abu πl-Miqdam Sahl al-Tustari, Abu Muhammad b.∏Abdallah b. (d. 112/730–1) 166 Yunus b. ∏Isa (d.283/896) 8, 13, 27, 33–4,
al-Rahba 374 55, 65, 114–15, 123–6, 131–2, 140, 158–9,
Ramadan 62, 158, 203, 225, 351, 371 161, 168, 178, 181–2, 190–1, 193–4, 211,
Ramla 47 221–3, 225, 235–6, 238, 246, 257, 271, 273,
al-Ramli seeAbu ∏Abdallah al-Ramli orMuhammad 283, 286, 290, 294–5, 297, 304–5, 309, 319,
b.∏Umasral-Ramli 322, 341, 350, 354, 367, 370, 384, 386
Raphael seeAngels Sahl b. ∏Uthman b. Faris al-Kindi al-∏Askari, Abu
al-Raqashi seeal-Fadl b. ∏Isa b. Aban orYazid b. Mas∏ud (d.235/849–50) 174
Aban Sa∏id b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz al-Halabi al-Zahid
al-Raqqam 258 (d. 318/930–1) 39543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:07 PM Page 455
INDEX 455
Sa∏id b. ∏Abdallah 111 al-Sarraj, Abu Nasr ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali b. Muhammad
Sa∏id b. Abi Hilal al-Laythi al-Misri, Abu πl-∏Alaπ b. Yahya al-Tamimi al-Tusi (d. 378/988)
(d. 135/752–3 or133/750–1 or 149/766–7) 5, 7, 24–6, 32, 57, 61, 115, 140, 159, 164,
273 178–80, 255, 290–1, 293–5, 304, 310–11, 323,
Sa∏id b. Ahmad al-Balkhi seeAbu ∏Ali Sa∏id b. Ahmad 346, 348, 351–3, 367–70, 391–2
Sa∏id b. Ahmad b. Muhammad b.Ja∏far Satan seeIblis
al-Naysaburi, Abu ∏Uthman (d. 369/979) Satisfaction (rida) 176, 205–10, 212–13, 273–4,
20, 124, 135, 180 285, 327, 337, 412–15
Sa∏id b. ∏Amr 30 see alsoContentment
Sa∏id b. Jubayr b. Hisham al-Asadi al-Walibi, Abu Sawwar 312
∏Abdallah (killed 95/714) 162, 356, 395 Sayda∏ 377
Sa∏id b. al-Musayyib b. Hazn b. Abi Wahb al-Saydalani, Abu Bakr 271
al-Makhzumi al-Qurashi, Abu Muhammad al-Saydalani, Abu Ja∏far 9, 205
(d. 94/713) 293 al-Sayrafi seeAbu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b.Muhammad
Sa∏id b. Muslim 257 al-Sirafi (al-Sayrafi) orAbu πl-Qasim al-Sirafi
Sa∏id b. Sallam seeAbu ∏Uthman al-Maghribi (al-Say-rafi)
Sa∏id b. ∏Uthman b. ∏Ayyash al-Khayyat, Abu al-Sayyad seeAbu πl-∏Abbas al-Sayyad
∏Uthman (d.294/906–7) 19–20, 180, 208, al-Sayyari, ∏Abd al-Wahid b. ∏Ali al-Naysaburi
322 (d. 375/985–6) 10
Sa∏id b. Yahya al-Basri 382–3 al-Sayyari, Abu πl-∏Abbas al-Qasim b. al-Qasim b. Sa∏id b. Zayd b. ∏Amr b. Nuqayl b.∏Abd al-∏Uzza Mahdi b. Bint Ahmad b. Sayyar al-Marwazi
al-∏Adawi, Abu πl-A∏war (d. 51/671) al-Sa∏igh (d.342/953–4) 7–8, 68
see∏Abd al-Samad b. Yazid orMuhammad b. Scrupulousness (wara∏) 129–33, 227
Nasr b. Mansur Seclusion (∏uzla) seeRetreat
al-Sa∏ih seeAbu Bakr al-Sa∏ih or∏Ali al-Sa∏ih Secret thought(s) (khatir;pl. khawatir) 106, 223,
Sainthood seeFriendship with God 259, 295, 414
Salama b. Dinar seeAbu Hazim Salama b. Dinar Seeker (murid) seeAspirant/ Novice
Salama b. Sa∏id b. ∏Atiya al-Basri al-Salami see Self-annihilation in God (fana∏) 3, 85–6, 89–91,
∏Abdallah b. Musa b.∏Atiya al-Basri al-Salami see Self-annihilation in God (fana∏) 3, 85–6, 89–91,
∏Abdallah b. Musa b. al-Husayn al-Salami 120, 180, 198, 311, 322, 333
Salih b. Bashir al-Murri, Abu Bishr (d. 172/778–9 Self-exertion (jihad)/spiritual struggle (mujahada)
or 176/792–3) 277 19, 106–7, 109, 118, 140, 214, 231, 343, 347
Salim b. ∏Abdallah b. ∏Umar b. al-Khattab Self-manifistation/Self-revelation ofGod (tajalli)
al-∏Adawi, Abu ∏Umar (d. probably 106/725) 96, 349
365 Self-scrutiny/self-examination (muhasaba) 203–5,
Salim b. al-Ja∏d al-Gharafani al-Ashja∏i al-Kufi 245
(d. 97/715–16 or98/716–17) 217, 364 Separation/Detachment [from God] (farq; tafriqa)
Salim al-Maghribi 20, 388 87–9, 98, 105, 123, 245, 397
Salm al-Barusi seeal-Barusi, Abu πl-Hasan Servanthood (∏ubudiyya) 197, 210, 230, 274
Salman al-Farisi (d. 35–36/655–7) 339, 366 al-Shabbuwi seeAbu ∏Ali al-Shabbuwi
al-Samadani 158 al-Shafi∏i, Muhammad b. Idris (d.204/820) 26,
Samarqand/Samarkand 20, 48, 71, 185 243, 258, 262, 343–5, 404
Samarra 60, 177 Shah b. Shuja∏ al-Kirmani, Abu πl-Fawaris
Sammak b. Harb seeSimak b.Harb (d. 270/883–4) 45, 52, 141, 144, 149,
Samnun b. Hamza or b. ∏Abdallah al-Khawwas 245–6, 254, 395
al-Muhibb, Abuπ l-Hasan (d. ca 300/912) al-Shahham (possibly the same asbelow) 258
50–1, 68–9, 290, 329, 331–3 al-Shahham, Abu Sa∏id 399
Sanaa 262 Shahr b. Hawshab 148
Sarakhs 21 Shame (haya∏) 226–9, 279
al-Sari b. Mughallis al-Saqati, Abu πl-Hasan Shaqiq al-Balkhi, Abu ∏Ali b. Ibrahim al-Azdi
(d. 251/865 or later) 23–5, 41–3, 46, 50, (d. 194/810) 30, 136, 241, 341
53–4, 57, 60, 114–15, 118, 121, 129, 135–6, Shaqiq b. Salama seeAbu Wa∏il
156–7, 170, 190, 195–6, 201, 221, 227, 236, Sharik b. ∏Abdallah b. Abi Namir al-Qurashi
252, 263–4, 267, 305, 331, 338–40, 352, 362, al-Madani, Abu ∏Abdallah (d. ca 140/757–8)
370, 378, 382, 384 193
Sariya b. Zunaym al-Du∏ili (d.ca30/650) 360 Shayban al-Ra∏i, Muhammad b.∏Abdallah
al-Sarraj, Abu πl-∏Abbas Muhammad b. Ishaq see (d. 158/774–5) 378, 404
Muhammad b.Yazid b.Ruwaym, Abu
al-Husayn b. Yusuf al-Qazwini Muhammad (d.303/915–6) 5, 28, 48,
al-Qazzaz seeAbu Salm Muhammad b. Yahya or 67–70, 115, 128, 136, 189, 198, 208–9, 221,
Ahmad b.Ali b. Ja∏far al-Qazzaz oral-asan 282, 290–1, 299, 311, 313, 322–3, 348, 354
al-Qazzaz
al-Qirmisini seeAhmad b. Muhammad al-Qirmisini S
orIbrahim b.Shayban orMuzaffar al-Qirmisini al-Sabbah b. Muhammad b. Abi Hazim al-Baghali
al-Qurashi seeAbu ∏Abdallah al-Qurashi orAbu al-Ahmasi al-Kufi 226
Sa∏id al-Qurashi Sadaqa bt. Abi ∏Imran 344–5
Quraysh 265–6, 382 Sadaqa al-Dimashqi (Abu πl-∏Abbas Sadaqa b. Qurayza 161 Khalid al-Umawi or Abu Mu∏awiya b. ∏Abdallah al-Samin) 325
R Sadness (huzn) 108, 155–7
al-Rabbani 158 al-Saffar seeAbu πl-Hasan al-Saffar al-Basri orAbu
al-Rabi∏ b. Badr b. ∏Amr b. Jarad al-Tamimi al-Sa∏di Sa∏id al-Saffar orIsma∏il b. Muhammad b. al-Basri, Abu πl-∏Alaπ (d. 178/794–5) 174 Isma∏il
al-Rabi∏ b. Khuthaym b. ∏A∏idh al-Thawri al-Kufi, Sahl b. ∏Abdallah seeSahl al-Tustari
Abu Yazid (d.61/680 or later) 91, 283, 395 Sahl b. Ibrahim 19
Rabi∏a al-∏Adawiyya (d. 185/801) 116–17, 133, Sahl al-Su∏luki, Abu πl-Tayyib (d.402/1011 or
156, 208, 267, 277, 334–5, 402–3 404/1014) 399
Rajaπ b. Haya b. Jarwal al-Kindi, Abu πl-Miqdam Sahl al-Tustari, Abu Muhammad b.∏Abdallah b. (d. 112/730–1) 166 Yunus b. ∏Isa (d.283/896) 8, 13, 27, 33–4,
al-Rahba 374 55, 65, 114–15, 123–6, 131–2, 140, 158–9,
Ramadan 62, 158, 203, 225, 351, 371 161, 168, 178, 181–2, 190–1, 193–4, 211,
Ramla 47 221–3, 225, 235–6, 238, 246, 257, 271, 273,
al-Ramli seeAbu ∏Abdallah al-Ramli orMuhammad 283, 286, 290, 294–5, 297, 304–5, 309, 319,
b.∏Umasral-Ramli 322, 341, 350, 354, 367, 370, 384, 386
Raphael seeAngels Sahl b. ∏Uthman b. Faris al-Kindi al-∏Askari, Abu
al-Raqashi seeal-Fadl b. ∏Isa b. Aban orYazid b. Mas∏ud (d.235/849–50) 174
Aban Sa∏id b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz al-Halabi al-Zahid
al-Raqqam 258 (d. 318/930–1) 39

Ishaq see (d. 158/774–5) 378, 404
Muhammad b. Ishaq Shibl al-Marwazi 390543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:07 PM Page 456
456 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
al-Shibli, Abu Bakr Dulaf b. Jahdar (d. 334/946) Sufyan al-Thawri seeSufyan b.Sa∏id al-Thawri
5, 10, 12, 60–2, 66, 71–3, 82, 85, 92, 96, 108, Sufyan b. ∏Uyayna b. Abi ∏Imran Maymun al-Hilali
124, 129, 136, 148, 165, 182, 190, 198–200, al-Kufi, Abu Muhammad (d. 198/814)
208, 219, 230, 233, 246, 265–6, 268, 283–5, 118, 156, 193, 201
290–1, 295, 297, 305, 310–12, 314, 316, 320, Suhayl b. Abi Salih Dakwan al-Samman al-Madani,
323, 328–9, 331, 347, 351, 355–7, 389, 394, Abu Yazid (d. during a reign of al-Mansur,
398, 402–6 136–158/754–775) 326
Ship 372, 380, 386 al-Sulami, Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman Muhammad b. Shiraz 7, 28, 107, 239, 374, 383 al-Husayn b.Muhammad b. Musa
Shu∏ayb (prophet) 339, 365 (d.412/1021) 6–10, 13, 18–29, 31–42,
Shu∏ayb b. Harb al-Mada∏ini al-Baghdadi, Abu Salih 43–53, 57, 60–70, 72–3, 81, 85–8, 114–20,
(d.197/812–13) 124, 165 123–6, 129, 134–8, 140, 143–5, 150, 157,
Shu∏ba b. al-Hajjaj b. al-Ward al-∏Ataki al-Azdi 159–63, 164–70, 174–8, 179–82, 185–6,
al-Wasiti al-Basri, Abu πl-Bistam (d. 160/776–7) 190–1, 193–8, 201, 203–9, 211–13, 216, 218,
143, 161, 217, 223, 343–4 220–4, 226–38, 241–2, 245–7, 249–55, 260–2,
al-Shuniziyya (mosque) 62, 174, 183, 377–8, 397 264, 266, 271–3, 281–2, 284–6, 289, 292, 298,
al-Siddiq seeAbu Bakr al-Siddiq 306–9, 312, 314, 319–23, 325, 329–31, 335–6,
Sign (shahid) seeWitness 339–41, 344, 346–9, 354, 356, 369, 379,
al-Sijzi seeAbu ∏Abdallah al-Sijzi 382–8, 391, 405
Silence (samt) 138–42, 275 al-Sulami, Ahmad b. Yusuf seeAhmad b. Yusuf b. Simak (Sammak) b. Harb b. Aws b.Khalid Khalid
al-Dhuhli al-Bakri al-Kufi, Abu πl-Mughira Sulayman b. Abi Sulayman 176
(d.ca121/739) 403 Sulayman b. Dawud seeSolomon
Sin 111–12, 115, 117, 121, 132, 156, 171–3, 200, Sulayman b. Dawud al-∏Ataki al-Zahrani al-Basri,
204, 236, 322, 361, 399, 411 Abu πl-Rabi∏ (d. 234/848–9) 160, 345
Sinai 26, 49, 163 Sulayman b. Dawud b.234/848–9) 160, 345
Sinai 26, 49, 163 Sulayman b. Dawud b. Jarud seeAbu Dawud
Sincerity (ikhlas) 194, 219–23, 362 al-Tayalisi
al-Sirawani, Abu πl-Hasan ∏Ali b.Ja∏far b. Dawud Sulayman d. ∏Isa b. Najih al-Sijzi (oral-Shajari)
292 320
Sobriety (sahw) 85, 88, 93–4, 321, 348, 354, 362 Sulayman al-Khawwas 129
Solomon 114, 171–2, 177, 323, 335, 360 Sulayman b. Mihran al-Asadi al-Kahili al-A∏mash,
Soul (nafs) 106–7, 109–10, 118–21, 123, 137, 140, Abu Muhammad (d. 148/765–6) 218, 335
142–4, 146, 160, 167–73, 184, 186, 194, 199, Sulayman b. Tarkhan al-Taymi al-Basri, Abu
205–8, 210, 215, 221–2, 243, 275–6, 285, 295, πl-Mu∏tamir (d.143/760–1) 193
323, 347, 393, 401, 408, 414 Sulayman al-Taymi seeSulaymanb. Tarkhan
Spirit (ruh) 11, 110, 210, 234–5, 245, 269, al-Su∏luki, Abu Sahl Muhammad b.Sulayman b. 313–17, 330, 334, 394–5, 411 Muhammad b. Harun (d. 369/980) 87,
Spiritual advice (wasiyya) 403–16 151, 190, 261, 292, 340, 349, 397
Spiritual insight/Perspicacity (firasa) 242, 388 Sunna [of the Prophet] 4, 8, 17, 258
Stability/Fixity (tamkin) 100–2 Supplicatory prayer (du∏a∏) 273–80
[Mystical]/[Spiritual] State (hal) 3, 19, 78–9, 83, al-Susi see Abu Ya∏qub al-Susi
87–92, 95, 100–2, 106, 108, 116, 120, 141, Suwayd b. Ibrahim al-Jahdari al-Hannat al-Basri,
200, 206–8, 217–19, 223, 265, 273–5, 291, Abu Hatim (d.167/783–4) 201
303, 308–11, 316, 324–5, 348–50, 353–4, 356, Sweet basil 272
358, 362–8, 370, 379, 388, 397–400, 405, 408, Syria 18, 45, 47, 59, 63–4, 68–9, 73–4, 166–7,
412–13 169, 173, 183–5, 237, 258, 275, 301, 313, 374,
[Mystical] Station (maqam) 77–8, 81, 111, 194, 398–401
206, 218, 310–11, 325, 414
Striving (mujahada) seeSelf-exertion T
Subsistence/survival in God (baqa∏) 89–91 al-Tabari seeMuhammad b.∏Abdallah b. ∏Abd
Sufism (tasawwuf) 17, 288–92 al-∏Aziz al-Tabari
Sufyan b. (al-)Husayn b. al-Hasan al-Wasiti 173 al-Taharti see∏Ali b. Musa al-Taharti
Sufyan b. Muhammad al-Jawhari, Abu πl-Fadl 161 Tahir b. Isma∏il al-Razi 11
Sufyan b. Sa∏id b.Ishaq see (d. 158/774–5) 378, 404
Muhammad b. Ishaq Shibl al-Marwazi 390

Isma∏il al-Razi 11
Sufyan b. Sa∏id b. Masruq al-Thawri, Abu al-Takriti seeMuhammad b. ∏Ali al-Takriti
∏Abdallah (d. 161/777–8) 18, 129–30, 133, Talha al-Ghada∏iri al-Basri 371
135, 148–9, 164, 174, 193, 236, 278, 280–1, al-Talhi see∏Abdallah b. Yahya alTalhi
286, 313, 335, 378, 392, 396, 401 Talq b. Habib al-∏Anazi al-Basri (d.ca 90/708) 126543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:07 PM Page 457
INDEX 457
al-Tamastani, Abu Bakr al-Farisi (d.ca 340/951–2) Truthfulness see alsoSincerity (ikhlas)
71, 140, 271, 306, 311 Turkey 284, 301, 381
al-Tamimi seeAbu Hatim al-Sij-istani orAbu Turkmenistan 20, 25
Mu∏awiya al-Darir or∏Ali b. Abi Muhammad Turks 31, 166, 173
oral-Fudayl b. ∏Iyad oral-Sarraj, Abu Nasr al-Turughbadhi, Abu ∏Abdallah Muhammad b. ∏Abdallah b. ∏Ali orTalha b.∏Ubaydallah Muhammad b. al-Hasan (d. ca 350/961)
Tammam 167 247
Tamtam, Abu Ja∏far Muhammad b.Ghalib b. Harb Tus (city) 54, 247
al-Dabbi al-Basri (d. 283/896) 264, 281 Tustar (city) 34, 367
Tarif b. Shihab, Abu Sufyan seeAbu Sufyan Tarif Tyre (city) 73
Tarsus 284, 301, 382
Tasting (dhawq) and Drinking (shurb) 95, 242, 334 U
Tawus b. Kaysan al-Yamani al-Himyari al-Janadi, ∏Ubayd b. Sharik 210, 326
Abu ∏Abd al-Rahman (d. ca 100–106/718–725 ∏Ubayd b. ∏Umar b. Qatada b. Sa∏id b. ∏Amir
or possibly later) 229 al-Laythi al-Junda∏i al-Makki, Abu ∏Asim
al-Tayalisi seeAbu Dawud al-Tayalisi orHisham b. (d. 68/687–8) 188
∏Abd al-Malik al-Bahili ∏Ubaydallah b. Abi Bakra al-Thaqafi, Abu Hatim
Tayfur al-Bastami/al-Bistami 32 (d. 79/698–9) 259
Tayfur b. ∏Isa b. Adam b. ∏Isa b. ∏Ali al-Bastami/ ∏Ubaydallah b. Ahmad b. Ya∏qub al-Muqri∏ 134
al-Bistami, Abu Yazid al-Saghir (or al-Asghar) ∏Ubaydallah b. Luπluπ b. Ja∏far b.Hammuya
32 al-Sulami al-Saji, Abu πl-Qasim 34
Taynat 64 ∏Ubaydallah b. Muhammad b.Ahmad (or b. Tehran 315 Muhammad) b.Hamdan al-∏Ukbari al-ma∏ruf
Thabit b. Aslam al-Bunani al-Basri, Abu bi-Ibn Batta, Abu ∏Abdallah (d.387/997) 37
Muhammad (d. 127/744–5 or123/740–1) ∏Ubaydallah b. ∏Umar b. Hafs b.∏Asim b. ∏Umar b. 232, 312 al-Khattab al-∏Adawi al-∏Umari, Abu
al-Thaghri seeAhmad b. Muhammad al-Thaghri ∏Uthman (d. 147/764) 226
Tha∏labiyya 391 ∏Ubaydallah b. ∏Uthman b. Yahya al-Daqqaq better
al-Thaqafi, Abu ∏Ali Muhammad b.∏Abd al-Wahhab known as Janiqa, Abu πl-Qasim (d. 390/1000)
(d. 328/940) 39, 63, 223, 336 27
Thawban b. Bughdud, Abu ∏Abdallah (d.Isma∏il al-Razi 11
Sufyan b. Sa∏id b. Masruq al-Thawri, Abu al-Takriti seeMuhammad b. ∏Ali al-Takriti
∏Abdallah (d. 161/777–8) 18, 129–30, 133, Talha al-Ghada∏iri al-Basri 371
135, 148–9, 164, 174, 193, 236, 278, 280–1, al-Talhi see∏Abdallah b. Yahya alTalhi
286, 313, 335, 378, 392, 396, 401 Talq b. Habib al-∏Anazi al-Basri (d.ca 90/708) 126

328/940) 39, 63, 223, 336 27
Thawban b. Bughdud, Abu ∏Abdallah (d. 54/673–4) ∏Ubaydallah b. Zuhr al-Damri 128, 138
218 Ubulla 353
al-Thawri, Sufyan seeSufyan b.Sa∏id al-Thawri al-∏Udhafir 356
Thoughts/Promptings (khawatir) 9, 106–8, 184, al-∏Ukbari seeAbu πl-Faraj al-Ukbari or∏Ali b. 202–4, 221, 223, 295, 322, 393, 401, 408 Ibrahim orimshadh b. Sa∏idor∏Ubaydallah
Tigris (river) 60, 155, 255, 353, 368–70, 380 b. Muhammad
al-Tinati seeAbu πl-Khayr al-Aqta∏ ∏Ukkasha b. Muhsin b. Hurthan al-Asadi
al-Tirmidhi seeal-Tirmidhi, Abu ∏Abdallah (d. 12/633) 178
Muhammad oral-Warraq, Abu Bakr ∏Ulaym al-Majnun 148
al-Tirmidhi, Abu ∏Abdallah Muhammad b. ∏Ali ∏Umar b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz (r. 99–101/717–720) 132,
al-Hakim (d.ca300/912) 52–3, 161, 176, 140, 162–6, 171–2, 192
237–8 ∏Umar b. ∏Abdallah 233
Torah 156, 338, 339 ∏Umar al-Hammal 400
Transoxiana 61 ∏Umar b. al-Khattab (killed in23/644) 164, 167,
Travel (safar) 117, 182, 297–300, 407–8, 413–15 201, 204,209–10, 218, 253, 281, 295, 344,
Trial seeAffliction 360, 366
Tripoli (city) 301 ∏Umar b. Muhammad b. Ahmad 86
True Reality/Truth (haqiqa) 81, 85, 87, 97, 101, ∏Umar b. Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Shirazi 374
104–5, 162–3, 167–8, 193–4, 208, 210, 245–6, ∏Umar b. Muslim al-Thaqafi 148
282, 288, 295, 309, 311, 328, 338, 348, 358, ∏Umar b. Rashid al-Madani al-Jari, Abu Hafs 281
371, 405, 414, 416 ∏Umar b. Sa∏id b. ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Qaratisi, Abu
Trust in God/Reliance on God (tawakkul) 30, Bakr 27
77, 178–86, 206–7, 250, 276 ∏Umar b. Sinan 181
Truth seeTrue Reality ∏Umar b. Wasil al-Basri al-∏Anbari, Abu πl-Husayn
Truth of certainty (haqq al-yaqin) seeCertainty (d. probably 312/924) 8, 34, 309
Truthfulness (sidq) 203, 206, 219, 221, 222–5, ∏Umar b. Yahya al-Ardabili 371
231, 237, 246, 358, 401–2 ∏Umayy al-Bastami see∏Ammi al-Bastami543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:07 PM Page 458
458 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Umm ∏Ali, Fatima 238 Wahb b. Munabbih al-Anbari al-San∏ani
Umm al-Darda∏, Hujayma bint.Hayy al-Awsabiya al-Dhimari, Abu ∏Abdallah (d.114/733) 254
al-Dimashqiya (d.81/700) 148 al-Wajihi, Ahmad b. ∏Ali al-Karaji (or al-Karkhi),
Unification (jam∏) 87–9, 105, 311–12, 397–8 Abu Bakr 178, 221, 255, 317, 323, 347,
Unification of Unification (jam∏ al-jam∏) 88, 245 355, 370
Unseen/Realm of divine mystery (ghayb) 105, Waki∏ b. al-Jarrah b. Malih al-Ru∏asi al-Kufi, Abu
144, 183, 187, 193–5, 205, 207, 242–4, 324, Sufyan (d. 196/812 or197/812) 135, 157
335, 405 al-Walid b. Bukayr seeAbu Khabab
Unveiling (kashf/mukashafa) 94, 97–100, 139, al-Walid b. ∏Utba al-Ashja∏i al-Dimashqi, Abu
193–5, 203–4, 243, 331, 350 πl-∏Abbas (d. 240/854) 294
Uprightness (istiqama) 217–19 al-Warathani see∏Abd al-Wahid b.Bakr
∏Uqayl b. Khalid b. ∏Aqil al-Ayli al-Umawi, Abu al-Warraq, Abu ∏Ali 289
Khalid (d. 144/761–2, possibly earlier) 346 al-Warraq, Abu Bakr Muhammad b.∏Umar al-Balkhi
∏Uqba b. ∏Amir b. ∏Abs b. ∏Amr b.∏Adi al-Juhani al-Tirmidhi al-Hakim (d. ca 280/893 or later)
(d. ca 58/678) 138 53, 123, 189, 195, 196, 215, 229, 237
∏Uqba b. Nafi∏ b. ∏Abd al-Qays al-Umawi al-Qurashi al-Warraq, Abu πl-Husayn Muhammad b. Sa∏id
al-Fihri (killed in 63/683) 278 (d. 320/932) 46, 121, 157
Urmiya 67 Wasil al-Ahdab seeWasil b. Hayyan
∏Urwa b. al-Zubayr b. al-∏Awwam al-Asadi, Abu Wasil b. Hayyan al-Ahdab al-Asadi al-Kufi
∏Abdallah (d.94/712–13) 164, 269 (d. 120/738 or 129/746–7) 376
Usama b. Zayd al-Laythi al-Madani, Abu Zayd al-Wasiti, Abu Bakr Muhammad b.Musa
(d. 153/770) 155 (d. 320/932) 9–10, 14, 58, 68, 78, 115–16,
Usayd b. (al-)Hudayr b. Simak b.∏Atik b. 126, 144–6, 205–8, 212, 215–16, 219, 224,
Imru∏al-Qays, Abu Yahya (d. 20/640–1 or 229, 233, 242, 253, 272, 274, 279, 291, 321,
21/641–2) 366 411
Usayd b. Zayd 197 Wathila b. al-Asqa∏ (d. 83/702–3) 175
Usrushana 61 Weeping (buka∏) 261–3, 313, 322–3, 325, 339,
∏Utba b.328/940) 39, 63, 223, 336 27
Thawban b. Bughdud, Abu ∏Abdallah (d. 54/673–4) ∏Ubaydallah b. Zuhr al-Damri 128, 138
218 Ubulla 353
al-Thawri, Sufyan seeSufyan b.Sa∏id al-Thawri al-∏Udhafir 356
Thoughts/Promptings (khawatir) 9, 106–8, 184, al-∏Ukbari seeAbu πl-Faraj al-Ukbari or∏Ali b. 202–4, 221, 223, 295, 322, 393, 401, 408 Ibrahim orimshadh b. Sa∏idor∏Ubaydallah
Tigris (river) 60, 155, 255, 353, 368–70, 380 b. Muhammad
al-Tinati seeAbu πl-Khayr al-Aqta∏ ∏Ukkasha b. Muhsin b. Hurthan al-Asadi
al-Tirmidhi seeal-Tirmidhi, Abu ∏Abdallah (d. 12/633) 178
Muhammad oral-Warraq, Abu Bakr ∏Ulaym al-Majnun 148
al-Tirmidhi, Abu ∏Abdallah Muhammad b. ∏Ali ∏Umar b. ∏Abd al-∏Aziz (r. 99–101/717–720) 132,
al-Hakim (d.ca300/912) 52–3, 161, 176, 140, 162–6, 171–2, 192
237–8 ∏Umar b. ∏Abdallah 233
Torah 156, 338, 339 ∏Umar al-Hammal 400
Transoxiana 61 ∏Umar b. al-Khattab (killed in23/644) 164, 167,
Travel (safar) 117, 182, 297–300, 407–8, 413–15 201, 204,209–10, 218, 253, 281, 295, 344,
Trial seeAffliction 360, 366
Tripoli (city) 301 ∏Umar b. Muhammad b. Ahmad 86
True Reality/Truth (haqiqa) 81, 85, 87, 97, 101, ∏Umar b. Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Shirazi 374
104–5, 162–3, 167–8, 193–4, 208, 210, 245–6, ∏Umar b. Muslim al-Thaqafi 148
282, 288, 295, 309, 311, 328, 338, 348, 358, ∏Umar b. Rashid al-Madani al-Jari, Abu Hafs 281
371, 405, 414, 416 ∏Umar b. Sa∏id b. ∏Abd al-Rahman al-Qaratisi, Abu
Trust in God/Reliance on God (tawakkul) 30, Bakr 27
77, 178–86, 206–7, 250, 276 ∏Umar b. Sinan 181
Truth seeTrue Reality ∏Umar b. Wasil al-Basri al-∏Anbari, Abu πl-Husayn
Truth of certainty (haqq al-yaqin) seeCertainty (d. probably 312/924) 8, 34, 309
Truthfulness (sidq) 203, 206, 219, 221, 222–5, ∏Umar b. Yahya al-Ardabili 371
231, 237, 246, 358, 401–2 ∏Umayy al-Bastami see∏Ammi al-Bastami

al-Asqa∏ (d. 83/702–3) 175
Usrushana 61 Weeping (buka∏) 261–3, 313, 322–3, 325, 339,
∏Utba b. Aban b. Sam∏a al-Ghulam 127, 209, 353, 352, 401
378, 398 [Satan∏s/Devilish] Whisperings (waswas; pl. ∏Uthman b. ∏Abdallah b. Suraqa b.al-Mu∏tamir wasawis) 106, 122, 222, 251, 320, 407
al-Qurashi al-∏Adawi al-Madani, Abu Witness (shahid) 108–9, 411
∏Abdallah (d. 118/736–7) 303 Witness see alsoSign
∏Uthman b. Abi πl-∏Atika Sulayman al-Azdi Witnessing (mushahada; mu∏ayana) 5–6, 97–8,
al-Dimashqi al-Qadi, Abu Hafs (d. 155/771–2) 107–8, 193–6, 203, 213, 233, 244–5, 251, 321,
379 333, 407
∏Uthman b. ∏Affan (caliph, killed in35/655) 249, Woman/women 2, 210, 244, 249, 250, 254–5,
263–4, 295, 397 259, 262, 274, 279–80, 313–14, 376, 378, 385,
∏Uthman b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdallah seeIbn al-Sammak, 390–1, 402, 413, 415
Abu ∏Amr ∏Uthman Works see Deeds/Actions
∏Uthman b. Badr, Abu ∏Amr 356 Worship of God (∏ibada; ∏ubudiyya) 67, 119, 124,
∏Uthman b. Ma∏bad b. Nuh al-Muqriπ (d. 261/874) 145, 197, 210, 230, 274, 295
281
∏Uthman b. ∏Umar al-Dabbi 344 Y
Uways b. ∏Amir b. Jazπ b. Malik al-Qarani (d. ca Yahya b. ∏Abdallah b. Bukayr al-Qurashi
37/657) 254, 366 al-Makhzumi al-Misri, Abu Zakariya
Uzbekistan 58, 251 (d. 231/845) 346
Yahya b. Abi Kathir al-Ta∏i, Abu Nasr (d. 129/746–7)
V 124, 264
Vision (ru∏ya) 350, 362, 392–3 Yahya b. Aktham b. Muhammad b.Qatan
Vizier (wazir) 203, 278, 316 al-Tamimi, Abu Muhammad (d. 242/857,
probably later) 155
W Yahya b. Ayyub al-Ghafiqi al-Misri, Abu πl-∏Abbas
Wahb b. Jarir b. Hazim b. Zayd b.∏Abdallah b. (d. 168/784–5) 128, 138, 151
Shuja∏ al-Azdi al-Basri, Abu πl-∏Abbas Yahya b. al-∏Ayzar 129
(d. 207/822) 164, 176, 363 Yahya b. Bukayr see Yahya b.∏Abdallah b. Bukayr
Wahb b. Kaysan al-Qurashi al-Madani al-Makki, Yahya b. Habib b. ∏Arabi al-Harithi al-Basri, Abu
Abu Nu∏aym (d.127/744–5) 367 Zakariya (d. 248/862) 334543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:07 PM Page 459
INDEX 459
Yahya b. Hammad b. Abi Ziyad al-Shaybani Yunus b. ∏Ubayd b. Dinar al-∏Abdi (d. 139/756–7)
al-Basri, Abu Bakr (d.215/830–1) 161 130
Yahya al-Istakhri 314 Yunus b. Yazid b. Abi πl-Najjad al-Ayli, Abu Yazid
Yahya al-Jalla∏ 47, 51 (d. 159/775–6) 366
Yahya b. Makhlad al-Miqsami al-Baghdadi, Abu Yusuf b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdallah al-Sufi al-Baghdadi,
Zakariya 171 Abu Ya∏qub 386
Yahya b. Ma∏na b. ∏Awn b. Ziyad b.Bistam Yusuf b. ∏Ali 323
al-Murri al-Ghatafani al-Baghdadi, Abu Yusuf b. Asbat b. Wasil al-Shaybani (d. 195/810–11
Zakariya (d.233/847–8) 257 or 196/811–12 or199/814–15) 41, 129,
Yahya b. Mu∏adh b. Ja∏far al-Razi al-Wa∏iz, Abu 136, 170–1, 225, 284, 286
Zakariya (d. 258/872) 11, 37–8, 45, 95, 113, Yusuf b. ∏Atiya b. Thabit al-Saffar al-Ansari al-Sa∏di
115, 117, 123, 130, 135–7, 141, 144, 150, 158–9, (d. 187/803) 197
165, 174, 179–81, 198, 216, 228–9, 231, 271–2, Yusuf b. al-Husayn al-Razi, Abu Ya∏qub (d. 276, 282–3, 286, 294, 323–5, 329, 331–3, 336 304/916–7) 7, 20, 40, 52, 66, 69, 71, 120,
Yahya b. Muhammad al-Adib, Abu Zakariya 155 160, 215–16, 222, 305, 308, 310, 315–16, 323,
Yahya b. Muhammad al-Jayyani 303 352, 372, 388, 399
Yahya b. al-Rida al-∏Alawi 353 Yusuf b. Musa (Muslim) 231
Yahya b. Sa∏id (possibly the same asone of those Yusuf b. Sa∏id b. Musallam al-Missisi al-Antaki,
below) 134, 257, 392 Abu Ya∏qub (d. 271/884–5) 203
Yahya b. Sa∏id b. Farrukh al-Qattan al-Tamimi Yusuf b. ∏Umar b. Masrur al-Qawwas al-Baghdadi
al-Basri, Abu Sa∏id (d.198/813–14) 143, al-Zahid, Abu πl-Fath (d. 385/995) 34, 369
275, 392–6 Yusuf b. Ya∏qub b. Ishaq seeJoseph
Yahya b. Sa∏id b. Qays b. ∏Amr b.Sahl b. Tha∏laba
al-Ansari al-Najjari al-Madani, Abu Sa∏id Z
(d.143/760 or later) 392 Zachariah (prophet) 363
Yahya b. Ya∏la b. Razi 188, 356 Zadhan al-Kindi al-Kufi al-Darir al-Bazzaz,
Yahya b. Yaman al-∏Ajali al-Kufi, Abu Zakariya Abu ∏Abdallah (d.82/701–2) 344
(d. 188/803–4 or189/804–5) 145 al-Zahirabadhi, Abu Bakr 6
Yahya b. Ziyad b.al-Asqa∏ (d. 83/702–3) 175
Usrushana 61 Weeping (buka∏) 261–3, 313, 322–3, 325, 339,
∏Utba b. Aban b. Sam∏a al-Ghulam 127, 209, 353, 352, 401
378, 398 [Satan∏s/Devilish] Whisperings (waswas; pl. ∏Uthman b. ∏Abdallah b. Suraqa b.al-Mu∏tamir wasawis) 106, 122, 222, 251, 320, 407
al-Qurashi al-∏Adawi al-Madani, Abu Witness (shahid) 108–9, 411
∏Abdallah (d. 118/736–7) 303 Witness see alsoSign
∏Uthman b. Abi πl-∏Atika Sulayman al-Azdi Witnessing (mushahada; mu∏ayana) 5–6, 97–8,
al-Dimashqi al-Qadi, Abu Hafs (d. 155/771–2) 107–8, 193–6, 203, 213, 233, 244–5, 251, 321,
379 333, 407
∏Uthman b. ∏Affan (caliph, killed in35/655) 249, Woman/women 2, 210, 244, 249, 250, 254–5,
263–4, 295, 397 259, 262, 274, 279–80, 313–14, 376, 378, 385,
∏Uthman b. Ahmad b. ∏Abdallah seeIbn al-Sammak, 390–1, 402, 413, 415
Abu ∏Amr ∏Uthman Works see Deeds/Actions
∏Uthman b. Badr, Abu ∏Amr 356 Worship of God (∏ibada; ∏ubudiyya) 67, 119, 124,
∏Uthman b. Ma∏bad b. Nuh al-Muqriπ (d. 261/874) 145, 197, 210, 230, 274, 295
281
∏Uthman b. ∏Umar al-Dabbi 344 Y
Uways b. ∏Amir b. Jazπ b. Malik al-Qarani (d. ca Yahya b. ∏Abdallah b. Bukayr al-Qurashi
37/657) 254, 366 al-Makhzumi al-Misri, Abu Zakariya
Uzbekistan 58, 251 (d. 231/845) 346
Yahya b. Abi Kathir al-Ta∏i, Abu Nasr (d. 129/746–7)
V 124, 264
Vision (ru∏ya) 350, 362, 392–3 Yahya b. Aktham b. Muhammad b.Qatan
Vizier (wazir) 203, 278, 316 al-Tamimi, Abu Muhammad (d. 242/857,
probably later) 155
W Yahya b. Ayyub al-Ghafiqi al-Misri, Abu πl-∏Abbas
Wahb b. Jarir b. Hazim b. Zayd b.∏Abdallah b. (d. 168/784–5) 128, 138, 151
Shuja∏ al-Azdi al-Basri, Abu πl-∏Abbas Yahya b. al-∏Ayzar 129
(d. 207/822) 164, 176, 363 Yahya b. Bukayr see Yahya b.∏Abdallah b. Bukayr
Wahb b. Kaysan al-Qurashi al-Madani al-Makki, Yahya b. Habib b. ∏Arabi al-Harithi al-Basri, Abu
Abu Nu∏aym (d.127/744–5) 367 Zakariya (d. 248/862) 334

188/803–4 or189/804–5) 145 al-Zahirabadhi, Abu Bakr 6
Yahya b. Ziyad b. ∏Ubaydallah al-Harithi, Abu Zahra 212
πl-Fadl (d.ca160/776–7) 256 al-Zajjaji, Abu ∏Amr seeAbu ∏Amr al-Zajjaji
Ya∏la b. ∏Ubayd b. Abi Umayya al-Iyadi al-Tanafisi al-Zajjaji, Abu Sahl 151, 396
al-Kufi, Abu Yusuf (d. 209/825 or 207/823) Zakariya b. Nafi∏ 222
226 Zakariya al-Shakhtani 244
Ya∏qub al-∏Ammi 125 Zamzam 130–1, 183, 378
Ya∏qub b. Humayd b. Kasib al-Makani (d. 240–1/ Al-Zanjawayh (Zanjuya) b. Muhammad b. al-Hasan
854–6) 237 b. ∏Umar al-Labbad, Abu Muhammad
Ya∏qub b. Ishaq b. Ibrahim 152, 232 (d. 318/930–1) 228
Ya∏qub b. Isma∏il al-Sallal (oral-Sallak?) 205 al-Zaqqaq, Abu Bakr Ahmad b.Nasral-Kabir or
Ya∏qub b. al-Layth al-Saffar (d.265/879) 277 Muhammad b.∏Abdallah al-Saghir (the
Yazid b. Aban al-Raqashi al-Basri, Abu ∏Amr Junior) 286, 298, 316
(d. 129/746–7) 401 al-Zaqqaq al-Kabir (the Elder), Abu Bakr Ahmad
Yazid b. ∏Abd al-Samad al-Dimashqi 365 b. Nasr al-Misri (d.290–1/902–4) 49, 67,
Yazid b. ∏Abdallah b. Usama b. al-Hadi al-Laythi 133
al-Madani, Abu ∏Abdallah (d. 139/756–7) al-Zarrad, Abu ∏Abdallah Muhammad b. ∏Ali
209 al-Basri 399
Yazid b. al-Hadi seeYazid b.∏Abdallah b. Usama al-Zawzani see al-∏Abbas al-Zawzani
b. al-Hadi Zayd b. Aslam al-∏Adawi, Abu Usama (d. probably
Yazid b. Kaysan al-Yashkuri al-Kufi, Abu Isma∏il 130/747) 151
257 Zayd b. Isma∏il 134
Yazid al-Raqashi seeYazid b. Aban Zayd b. Thabit b. al-Dahhak al-Ansari al-Furdi
Yazid b. Sinan seeAbu Farwa al-Katib, Abu Kharija (d. 45/665–6 or later)
Yemen(i) 262, 300, 380, 390 164–5, 237
Yunus b. ∏Abd al-A∏la b. Musa b.Maysara b. Hafs Zaytuna 385
al-Sadafi al-Misri, Abu Musa (d. 264/877) al-Zayyat, Abu Sahih Dakwan al-Samman
366 al-Madani (d. 101/719–20) 197
Yunus b. Habib b. ∏Abd al-Qahir al-∏Ijli al-Isbahani, Zirr b. Hubaysh b. Hubasha b. Aw al-Asadi, Abu
Abu Bishr (d.267/880–1) 178, 217, 222 Maryam (d. 81–83/700–702) 178543 Epistle 08 Index 21/12/06 12:07 PM Page 460
460 AL-QUSHAYRI’S EPISTLE ON SUFISM
Ziyad b. Abi Ziyad Maysara al-Makhzumi Zulaykha seeJoseph
al-Madani, client of∏Abdallah b. ∏Ayyash b. Zurayq 351
Abi Rabi∏a (d. 135/752–3) 232, 288 Zuzan 282
Zoroastri(an)(ism) 32–3, 78, 190
see alsoMagian(s)
Zubala 389
Zubayda bint Ja∏far b. al-Mansur al-Hashimiya,
Umm Ja∏far (d.216/831) 133, 401
al-Zubayri 246
al-Zuhri, Muhammad b. Muslim b.∏Ubaydallah b.
∏Abdallah b. Shihab al-Madani (= Ibn
Shihab), Abu Bakr (d. 124/742) 138, 232,
365