MICROCOPY


ROLL


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS

Microfilm Publication M887

RECORDS OF THE UNITED STATES
NUERNBERG WAR CRIMES TRIALS

UNITED STATES OP AMERICA V. KARL BRANDT ET AL. (CASE I)

NOVEMBER 21, 1946-AUGUST 20, 1947

Roll 10 . -

Transcript Volumes (English Version)

Volumes 25-27
June 16-28, 1947


THE NATIONAL ARCHIVES
NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDS SERVICE
GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION


WASHINGTON: 1974


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS

Microfiln Publication M887


RECORDS OF THE UNITED STATES
NUERNBERG WAR CRIMES TRIALS

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KARL BRANDT ET AL. (CASE I)
NOVEMBER 21. 1946-AUCUST 20. 1947


Roll 10


Transcript Volumes (English Version)

Volumes 25-27
June 16-28, 1947


THE NATIONAL ARCHIVES
NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDS SERVICE
GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION


WASHINGTON: 1974


INTRODUCTION

On the 46 rolls of this microfilm publication are reproduced
the records of Case I (United States of America v. Karl Brandt
et at ., or the "Medical" Case), 1 of the 12 trials of war criminals
conducted by the U.S. Government from 1946 to 1949 at Nuernberg
subsequent to the International Military Tribunal held in the
same city. These records consist of German- and English-language
versions of official transcripts of court proceedings, prosecution
and defense briefs, and final pleas of the defendants as well as -/

prosecution and defense exhibits and document books in one lan¬
guage or the other. Also included in this publication are a
minute book, the official court file, order and judgment books,
clemency petitions, and finding aids to the documents.

The transcripts of this trial, assembled in 2 sets of 30
bound volumes (1 set in German and 1 in English), are the recorded
daily trial proceedings. The prosecution and defense briefs and
answers are also in both languages but unbound, as are the final
pleas of the defendants delivered by counsel or defendants and
submitted by the attorneys to the court. The unbound prosecution
exhibits, numbered 1-570, are essentially those documents from
various Nuernberg record series offered in evidence by the
prosecution in this case. The defense exhibits, also unbound,
are predominantly affidavits by various persons. They are
arranged by name of defendant and thereunder numerically. Both
prosecution document books and defense document books consist
of full or partial translations of exhibits into the English
language. Loosely bound in folders, they provide an indication
of the order in which the exhibits were presented before the
tribunal.

The minute book, in one bound volume, is a summary of the
transcripts. The official court file, in four bound volumes,
includes the progress docket, the indictment, amended indictment,
and the service thereof; appointments and applications of defense
counsel and defense witnesses and prosecution comments thereto;
defendants applications for documents; motions; uniform rules of
procedures; and appendixes. The order and judgment books, in
two bound volumes, represent the signed orders, judgments, and
opinions of the tribunal as well as sentences and commitment
papers. Clemency petitions of the defendants, in five bound
volumes, were directed to the military governor, the Judge
Advocate General, the U.S. district court, the Secretary of
Defense, and the Supreme Court of the United States. The finding
aids summarize transcripts, exhibits, and the official court file.

Case I was heard by U.S. Military Tribunal I from November 21,

1946, to August 20, 1947. The records of this case, as the

1


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


records of the other Nuernberg and Far East (IMTFE) war crimes
trials, are part of the National Archives Collection of World War
II War Crimes Records, Record Group 238.

The Brandt case was 1 of 12 separate proceedings held before
several U.S. Military Tribunals at Nuernberg in the U.S. Zone of
Occupation in Germany against officials or citizens of the Third
Reich, as follows:


Case No . United States v.

Karl Brandt et al.

2 Erhard Milch

3 Josef Altstoetter
et al.

4 Oswald Pohl et al.

5 Friedrich Flick
et al.

6 Carl Krauoh et al.

7 Vilhelm List et al.

8 Ulrich Greifelt
et al.

9 Otto Ohlendorf
et al.

10 Al fried Krupp
et al.

11 Ernst von
Veizsaecker et al.

12 Vilhelm von Leeb
et al.


ilar Name


Medical Case
Milch Case
(Luftwaffe)
Justice Case

Pohl Case (SS)
Flick Case
(Industrialist)

I. G. Farben Case
(Industrialist)
Hostage Case
RuSHA Case (SS)

Einsatzgruppen
Case (SS)

Krupp Case
(Industrialist)
Ministries Case

High Command Case


No. of
Defendants


Authority for the proceedings of the International Military
Tribunal against the major Nazi war criminals derived from the
Declaration on German Atrocities (Moscow Declaration) released
November 1, 1943, Executive Order 9547 of May 2, 1945, the London
Agreement of August 8, 1945, the Berlin Protocol of October 6,

1945, and the Charter of the International Military Tribunal.

Authority for the 12 subsequent cases stenmied mainly from
Control Council Law 10 of December 20, 1945, and was reinforced
by Executive Order 9679 of January 16, 1946; U.S. Military Govern¬
ment Ordinances Nos. 7 and 11 of October 18, 1946, and February 17,
1947, respectively; and U.S. Forces, European Theater General
Order 301 of October 24, 1946. The procedures applied by U.S.
Military Tribunals in the subsequent proceedings were patterned
after those of the International Military Tribunal and further
developed in the 12 cases, which required over 1,200 days of
court sessions and generated more than 330,000 transcript pages.


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


. The crimes charged in the Brandt case consisted largely of
medical experiments performed on defenseless concentration camp
inmates against their will; "euthanasia" carried out on the
mentally defective, the physically sick, the aged, and ethnic
and racial groups; and the murder of concentration camp inmates
for the express purpose of collecting skulls and skeletons for
the Anatomical Institute of the Reich University of Strassburg.
The following medical experiments were conducted:


1. High altitude: to investigate effects of low pressure
on persons.

2. Freezing: to test human resistance to extemely low
temperatures.

3. Malaria: to develop controls over the recurring nature
of the disease.

4. Mustard gas: part of a general research program in gas
warfare.

5. Sulfanilamide: to test the efficacy of the drug in bone
muscle and nerve regeneration and bone transplantation.

6. Seawater: to test methods of rendering seawater potable.

7. Epidemic jaundice: to develop an antitoxin against the
disease.

8. Sterilization: to test techniques for preventing further
propagation of the mentally and physically defective.

9. Typhus: to investigate the value of various vaccines.

10. Poison: to test the efficacy of certain poisons.

11. Incendiary bomb: to find better treatment for phosphorus
bums.

The prosecution alleged and the judgment confirmed that these
experiments were not isolated acts of individual doctors and
scientists on their own responsibility but that they were the
result of high-level policy and planning. They were carried out
witJ^>articular brutality, often disregarding all established
medical practice. Consequently, large numbers of the victims
died in the course of or as a result of the experiments.

The euthanasia program was the direct result of a directive
by Hitler of September 1, 1939. It resulted in the secret killing
not only of aged, insane, incurably ill, and deformed German
citizens in sanatoriums in Germany but also in the clandestine
murder of foreign workers. The killing in gas chambers and by
injections in the sanatoriums served as a proving ground for
these forerunners of much larger installations in the mass
extermination camps.

In addition to these experiments, over 100 concentration
camp inmates were killed for the purpose of obtaining their
skeletons. Their ghastly remains were found in Strassburg by
Allied troops.


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


The transcripts of the Brandt case include the indictments
of the following 23 persons all of whom were physicians except
defendants Rudolf Brandt, Viktor Brack, and Wolfran Sievers:

Karl Brandt: Personal physician to Adolf Hitler, Gruppen-
fuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant (Major General) in
the Waffen SS, Reichskoonissar fuer Sanitaets- und Gesund-
heitswesen (Reich Commissioner for Health and Sanitation),
and member of the Reichsforschungsrat (Reich Research
Council).

Kurt Blome: Deputy (of the] Reichsgesundheitsfuehrer (Reich
Health Leader) and Plenipotentiary for Cancer Research in the
Reich Research Council.

Rudolf Brandt: Standartenfuehrer (Colonel) in the Allgemeine
SS, Persoenlicher Referent von Himmler (Personal Admin¬
istrative Officer to Reichsfuehrer SS Himmler), and Min¬
isterial Counselor and Chief of the Ministerial Office in
the Reich Ministry of the Interior.

Joachim Mrugowsky: Oberfuehrer (Senior Colonel) in the
Waffen SS, Oberster Hygieniker, Reichsarzt SS und Polizei
(Chief Hygienist of the Reich Physician SS and Police),
and Chef des Hygienischen Institutes der Waffen SS (Chief
of the Hygienic Institute of the Waffen SS).

Helmut Poppendick: Oberfuehrer in the SS and Chef des
Persoenlichen Stabes des Reichsarztes SS und Polizei (Chief
of the Personal Staff of the Reich Physician SS and Polico).

Wolfram Sievers: Standartenfuehrer in the SS, Reich Manager
of the "Ahnenerbe" Society and Director of its Institut
fuer Wehrwissenschaftliche Zweckforschung (Institute for
Military Scientific Research), and Deputy Chairman of the
Managing Board of Directors of the Reich Research Council.

Karl Genzken: Gruppenfuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant
in the Waffen SS and Chef des Sanitaetsamts der Waffen SS
(Chief of the Medical Department of the Waffen SS).

Karl Gebhardt: Gruppenfuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant
in the Waffen SS, personal physician to Reichsfuehrer SS
Himmler, Oberster Kliniker, Reichsarzt SS und Polizei
(Chief Surgeon of the Staff of the Reich Physician SS and
Police), and President of the German Red Cross.

Viktor Brack: Oberfuehrer in the SS and Sturmbannfuehrer
(Major) in the Waffen SS and Oberdienstleiter, Kanzlei
des Fuehrers der NSDAP (Chief Administrative Officer in
the Chancellery of the Fuehrer to the NSDAP).


4


Waldemar Hoven: Hauptsturmfuehrer (Captain) in the Waffen
SS and Chief Physician of the Buchenwald Concentration Camp.

Herta Oberheuser: Physician at the Ravensbrueck Concentration
Camp and assistant physician to the defendant Gebhardt at the
hospital at Hohenlychen.

Fritz Fischer: Stunibannfuehrer in the Waffen SS and assist¬
ant physician to the defendant Gebhardt at the hospital
at Hohenlychen.

Siegfried Handloser: Generaloberstabsarzt (Lieutenant
General, Medical Service), Heeressanitaetsinspekteur
(Medical Inspector of the Army), and Chef des Wehr-
machtsanitaetswesens (Chief of the Medical Services of the
Arned Forces).

Paul Rostock: Chief Surgeon of the Surgical Clinic in
Berlin, Surgical Adviser to the Army, and Amtschef der
Dienststelle Medizinische Wissenschaft und Forschung .

(Chief of the Office for Medical Science and Research)
under the defendant Karl Brandt, Reich Commissioner for
Health and Sanitation.

Oskar Schroeder: Generaloberstabsarzt; Chef des Stabes,
Inspekteur des Luftwaffe-Sanitaetswesens (Chief of Staff
of the Inspectorate of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe);
and Chef des Sanitaetswesens der Luftwaffe (Chief of the
Medical Service of the Luftwaffe).

Hermann Becker-Freyscng: Stabsarzt in the Luftwaffe
(Captain, Medical Service of the Air Force) and Chief of
the Department for Aviation Medicine of the Medical Service
of the Luftwaffe.

Georg August Weltz: Oberfeldarzt in the Luftwaffe (Lieu¬
tenant Colonel, Medical Service of the Air Force) and
Chief of the Institut fuer Luftfahrtmedizin (Institute for
Aviation Medicine) in Munich.

Wilhelm Beiglboeck: Consulting physician to the Luftwaffe.

Gerhard Rose: Generalarzt of the Luftwaffe (Brigadier
General, Medical Service of the Air Force); Vice President,
Chief of the Department for Tropical Medicine, and Professor
of the Robert Koch Institute; and Hygienic Adviser for
Tropical Medicine to the Chief of the Medical Service of
the Luftwaffe.

Siegfried Ruff: Director of the Department for Aviation
Medicine at the Deutsche Versuchsanstalt fuer Luftfahrt
(German Experimental Institute, for Aviation).

S


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Hans Wolfgang Romberg: Physician on the staff of the Depart-
Bent for Aviation Medicine at the German Experimental Institute
for Aviation.

Konrad Schaefer: Physician on the staff of the Institute for
Aviation Medicine in Berlin.

Adolf Pokorny: Physician, specialist in skin and venereal
diseases.

The indictment consisted of four counts. Count one charged
participation in a common design or conspiracy to commit war crimes
or crimes against humanity. The ruling of the tribunal disregarded
this count, hence no defendant was found guilty of the crime charged
in count one. Count two was concerned with war crimes and count
three, with crimes against humanity. Fifteen defendants were found
guilty, and eight were acquitted on these two counts. Ten defendants
were charged under count four with membership in a criminal organiza¬
tion and were found guilty.

The transcripts also contain the arraignment and plea of each
defendant (all pleaded not guilty), opening and closing statements
of defense and prosecution, and the judgment and sentences, which
acquitted 7 of the 23 defendants (Blome, Pokomy, Romberg, Rostock,
Ruff, Schaefer, and Weltz). Death sentences were imposed on
defendants Brack, Karl Brandt, Rudolf Brandt, Hoven, Gebhardt,
Mrugowsky, and Sievers, and life imprisonment on Fischer, Genzken,
Handloser. Rose, and Schroeder; varying terms of years were given
to defendants Becker-Freyseng, Beiglboeck, Obcrhcuser, and
Poppendick.

The English-language transcript volumes are arranged numer¬
ically, 1-30; pagination is continuous, 1-11S38. The German-
language transcript volumes are numbered la-30a and paginated
1-11756. The letters at the top of each page indicate morning,
afternoon, and evening sessions. The letter "C" designates com¬
mission hearings (to save court time and to avoid assembling
hundreds of witnesses at Nuernberg, in most of the cases one or
more commissions took testimony and received documentary evidence
for consideration by the tribunals). Several hundred pages are
added to the transcript volumes and given number plus letter
designations, such as page number 1044a. Page 1 in volume 1
(English) is preceded by pages numbered 001-039, while the last
page of volume 28 (English) is followed by pages numbered 1-48.

Of the many documents assembled for possible prosecution use,
570 were chosen for presentation as evidence before the tribunal.
These consisted largely of orders, directives, and reports on
medical experiments or the euthanasia program; several interrogation
reports; affidavits; and excerpts from the BeichegeBetzb'Uitt (the
official gazette of Reich laws) as well as correspondence. A number


6


of the medical reports were accompanied by series of photographs
and charts of various experiments.

The first item in the arrangement of the prosecution exhibits
is usually a certificate listing the document number, a short
description of the exhibit, and a statement on the location of
the original document of the exhibit. The certificate is followed
by the document, the actual prosecution exhibit (most of which are
photostats), and a few mimeographed articles with an occasional
carbon of the original. In rare cases the exhibits are followed
by translations or additional certificates. A few exhibits are
original documents, such as:


Exhibit No.


Doc. No .

NO-1314
NO-120
NO-131
NO-132
1696 PS
628 PS
NO-817
616 PS


Exhibit No.


Doc. No.

N0-1S8
NO-1730
NO-890
NO-732

NO-1424
N0-36S
NO-3347


No certificate is attached to several exhibits, including
exhibits 433, 43S-439, 462, 559, and 561. Following exhibit 570
is a tribunal exhibit containing the interrogation of three
citizens of the Netherlands. Number 494 was not assigned, and
exhibit 519 is followed by 519a and 519b.

Other than affidavits, the defense exhibits consist of newspaper
clippings, reports, personnel records, Reichegeeetzblatt excerpts,
and other items. There are 901 exhibits for the defendants. The
defense exhibits are arranged by name of defendant and thereunder by
exhibit number, each followed by a certificate wherever available.

The translations in the prosecution document books are
preceded by indexes listing prosecution document numbers, biased
descriptions, and page numbers of the translation. They arc
generally listed in the order in which the prosecution exhibits
were introduced into evidence before the tribunal. Pages 81-84
of prosecution document book 1 are missing. Books 12, 16, and
19 are followed by addenda. The document books consist largely
of mimeographed pages.

The defense document books are similarly arranged. Each
book is preceded by an index giving document numbers, description,
and page number for each exhibit. The corresponding exhibit
numbers are generally not provided. There are several unindexed
supplements to numbered document books. Prosecution and defense
briefs are arranged alphabetically by names of defendants; final
pleas and defense answers to prosecution briefs follow a similar


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


scheme. Pagination is consecutive, yet there are many pages where
an "a" or "b" is added to the numeral.

The English-language final pleas, closing briefs, and replies
to prosecution briefs of several defendants are missing, as are
a few German-language closing briefs and replies to prosecution
briefs.

At the beginning of roll 1 are filmed key documents from
which Tribunal I derived its jurisdiction: the Moscow Declaration,
U.S. Executive Orders 9547 and 9679, the London Agreement, the
Berlin Protocol, the Charter of the International Military Tri¬
bunal, Control Council Law 10, U.S. Military Government Ordinances
7 and 11, and U.S. Forces, European Theater General Order 301.
Following these documents of authorization is a list of the names
and functions of the members of Tribunal I and counsels.

These documents are followed by the transcript covers giving
such information as name and number of case, volume numbers,
language, page numbers, and inclusive dates. They are followed
by summaries of the daily proceedings providing an additional
finding aid for the transcripts. The exhibits are listed in an
index, which notes type of exhibit, exhibit number and name,
corresponding document number and document book and page, a short
description of the exhibit, and the date when it was offered in
court. The official court file is indexed in the court docket,
which is followed by a list of witnesses.

Not filmed were records duplicated elsewhere in this micro¬
film publication, such as prosecution and defense document books
in the German language that are largely duplications of pros¬
ecution and defense exhibits already microfilmed or opening
statements of prosecution and defense, which can be found in
the transcripts of the proceedings.

The records of the Brandt case are closely related to other
microfilmed records in Record Group 238, specifically prosecution
exhibits submitted to the International Military Tribunal, T988;

NI (Nuernberg Industrialist) Series, T301; NOKW (Nuernberg Armed
Forces High Coranand) Series, Til19; NG (Nuernberg Government)
Series, T1139; and records of the Milch case, M888, the List case,
M893, the Greifelt case, M894, and the Ohlendorf case, M895.

In addition, the record of the International Military Tribunal
at Nuernberg has been published in Trial of the Major War Criminals
Before the International Military Tribunal (Nuernberg, 1947), 42 _
vols. Excerpts from the subsequent proceedings have been pub-
' lished as Trials of War Criminals Before the Nuernberg Military
Tribunal Under Control Council Lau No. 10 (U.S. Government
Printing Office: 1950-53), 15 vols. The Audiovisual Archives
Division of the National Archives and Records Service holds motion
picture records and photographs of all 13 trials and tape re¬
cordings of the International Military Tribunal proceedings.


John Mendelsohn wrote these introductory remarks and arranged
the records for microfilming in collaboration with George Chalou.


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Roll 10
Target 1

Volume 25
June 16-19, 1947


OFFICIAL RECORD


UNITED STATES MILITARY TRIBUNALS

NURNBERG


CASE No. 1 TRIBUNAL I
U.S. vt KARL BRANDT of al
VOLUME 25


TRANSCRIPTS

(English)


16-19 Juno 1947 pp. 9233-9620


Official Transcript of the Anerlean Military
Tribunal in the natter cf the United States
of Arc-rice a*einrt Harl Brandt, et al,
defendants, sitti&tg at Euernber#:, 3eraasy,
on 16 June 1947, 0930, Justice Beals presiding.


TEX .-.A.-SI-jl: Persons in th* courtroco vill pleese find their seete


The Honorable, the Judges of kllltary Tribunal I. Hilitary Tribunal I


is aov in session. God sere the Initei States of Anerica and this hon


orablu Tribunal. There vill be order in the court


Ci FHXSITfcrT: At. fcarshal, hare you ascertained if tho defendants


TEX AAP.5HAL: Kay it olcaao Tour Honor, all the defendante are


present in court orcept for tho defendant Oberheuser, who It absent due


to illness


: Has there been a redlcal eertifiento filod?


TS Jl?S.-XL: Jot tbs defendant tho oroper nodical certificate


• lent'! by the prison surgeon »^11 be filod later,

1-1 r.-iSDUTi The Secretary General ‘'ill note for tho rocord tho


presence of all the defendants in court save the dofoadant Gberhcusor


vho Is ill, end proper atdlcal cirtlflcato vill bo filod later.

.£. fcAIJT: Kay it please the Tribunal,’ last vest the vitness Josof
Tschofcnix arrived here in Suombsr* froa Elu^cnfurt, Austria. Kla^onfurt


Is in the British som In Austria. Tho vitnoss Tschcfcnlk vlll bo unable


to stay In Su.rnberg any CTUndoi length of tlso. The prosocut'on had
anticipated that rebuttal vould be here by this vcok but unfortunately o


voro a little bit optinistie. Tho prosecution romiosts that ve be tv.t


aitted to call the vitness Tschofenix uoon tho completion of tostiaony


of Dr. Ivy and the tesllnoay of the defendant Holglboock, so that ho nay


roturnto his hone vithout axy further delay


Tour request is, counsel, that this vitness


led after the cccpletion of tho teetinoiy of tho defon-


• / Tcs, Tour Honor, or vhatever is convenient for tho


Coart So. 1

16 Jan 4?--l-2-St-rrl.-.*u (Brown)

THE ?2*S:S.J7I: S«il, that is very reasonable. Tour request will
£| greetoi. The witness say be called out of order after the cooDletlon
of th- tcstlnocy of the defendant Belglboeefc.

li. EAEDTj Tho prosecution vUl file (at notice vlth the defenao
counsel.

-■- t Pica nut: The Tribunal will nov nroeeed with the further cress
eranination of the witcesa, Professor Ivy. Z noto that -S’. Solto
desire* fifteen sicutea to cfoas-cxtnino the witness. The Tribunal will
nov hear the croaa exaninetlcn by Dr. 3eltc.

3u XLLTi: Kr. Prcaldent, firat representing Dr. Servatlua, I
should lto to as the reat of the Questions vhich ho did not have the
opportunity to eek on Saturday. *hcn eaiced, he etntod that he had
another half hour's euoatioce to as. I as tho Tribunal to rule
whether or not I aiy as* theae ovations in Dr. Scrvntius'a stead.

Il-i PriSXSST: Dr. Solte nay croaa-cxonine the vitnoae on behnlf

•

of hie aaaoclatc, Dr. Servrtlua. Vo will allow throo cuertoro of rn
hour for Dr. a oltc's croee-exaainrtion.

DR. ASTBr: IVT - Reauncd
CP.CSS-i!-L.IKAl 103 (Continued)

2T DR. XSLTSl

^ profoaaor Ivy, according to your teatisony. thero were two
groupa of conacientloua objectors, the onea who repudiated for ifioal-
iatic rcr.aoaa end the others who repudiated w rr acrvlcca nor ao.* Tho
latter group wa aent to priaon and the firat fonod an organisation
that perfomod public aervlco. Za that correct!

A. It la not correct Just os you have erproeaod it. There la ono

group that rofuaed to render any aort of public aorvico or to cooperate

in any *my and that particular group ia confined. Shore la another

group that ia willing to do verioua things. 4 Sons of thee are willing

to give service In the Radical Corps of the aray. Sone of then ere

willing to give aervico in the ^artamaater'a Departaent. Sooe are

not willing to be connected with tho arsed forces in any way but oro

92*4


COUT*. Jfc. 1

15 Jun «T-tt-l-5>SZ»*i>rlu«en (Srovn^


villi' tc give public service «- e state hospital a* as orderly or aale
sutm. They are trilling to give Service la preventing forest fires and
tc other W7i,

Thou one of these duties la the vay of oublie service ’oartici-
peted in by this second group of conscientious objectors vri the duty
to s^rvs in nodical experiments. Zs that no? bo?

A. Tbs, the volunteered on occasion to sorre as subjects in nodical
experiments. Thoy thought by ao eerving they vould contribute to tho
edvancorent of nedieal knovlcdge vhich vould bo of general service in
taking core of sick end afflicted people.

Q. 3ov, in order to rccoivo a stetunont of tholr content vhich
vould be necessary for the croerinents, vere those vho had doolrrod
tholr readiness to participate in any oxperlccnt inforacd ao to what
the oxporinont vould be llkoT

A. That is eorreet.

Q. Kov vci this d -no? In particular, was this done by a doctor or
by setae official?

a. Tho dootor vjuld vrlto out tho objective of tho ereorlnont, It's
nature, rad doscribo ecy hatards, if any, ottrehod to the oxocrtnont,
end then this vould bo suhnitted to the prospoctivo voluntoor gonorally
by aernt of the lay supervisor of the etetion vhorevor theeo conocion-

m

tlous objectors night be. Than, vhec the consciontlouc objocto.- volun¬
teered rnd esso to the stftion there the erporiaont vro to bo carrlod
cut, then a physician vould, by vord of nouth, explain tho objoctivo and
nature of tho experiment.

Q. Ton say the doctor told hlr. the purpose cal tasks involved in
the esperincut? Z should lUa tc take a concrete example. In the case
)f =nlerie exoariments, of vhich you knov, v* r e for excnule-

A. The malaria oxcerlnento voro not performed on conscientious
objectors.

3. They vorked vitfc prisoners end I essune, fren your previous
testimony, that tho prisoners alto verc informed end oriented. Za that


92'S


Court So. 1

18 Jun 4?-*-l-4-I»-iTi-:eett (Brews) ,

not soT

A. Tas, and before they volunteered.

Q. Veil, vtre theee prisoner* In the malaria experiments told that
they -ould run a high tanperaturei

i. Tea.

Q. Vere they alao told that the experimental subjects vould suffer
aerora complications, for iaatenee, a severe septic threobosis, or that
their heart aoaclcs vould be affected!

A. They were told all passible hazards. As a natter of fact, they
vero told that they night suffer rolapaos for a couple of yocre. And I
night say that In tho United States In the South malaria Is oulto a cco-
aon dleoase and nest people lenov 'hat the disease Is liko. They hardly
have ta be Informed regarding the symptoms of malaria.

n. D you bvllcvc that the oxocrlnontnl subjects, who rro lnyuon
aftor all, really have a clear eancoptlon of vhat the doctor tells then
ab*it tho symptoms of the disease they are about to suffort

A. In the case of malaria I am quite suro tfcat they do have a very
cloar idoa. As a matter of fact, tho first gr-up of prisoners had the
chills and various synptocs of malaria. The other prisoners in tho peni¬
tentiary obviously heard about thoso eymptcos and thoy later voluntoored
to serve as subjects. As o matter of fact, there vero noro voluntoers
in tho penitentiary to serve as subjocts than eculd bo used aal that lo
the situation today, even though the malaria erperlnonts have been going


on nov since October 1944


92*6


16 June <?-X-7‘C_2-l-i!«ch*= (1#., Srrsm)

Court X

4* %

l* X simply vast to ascertain whether in ell t*ie experiment! the
person who fire! hU cowrt really i! were of the extent of vhat he
i« confronted with. Let us say In the taie cf typhus: were these po¬
tential experiatntal subjects given a clear plcute of vhat they were
confronted with through picture! and demonstrations?

X Do you scan the subjects who volunteered to rcoeivc the typhus
vaccine to which X referred? HI they had to fear there wee the cent
sort*of reactions that ere obtained when ove receives typhoid vaccine
and alaiet everyone in the United States has received injections of
typhoid vaccine cf sent sort of analogical substance. I know of no

situation In which the hazards of a acdlcal exptrisent cannot be oa~

•

tisfactortly explained to ani understood by * prospectlv, volunteer.

% ?-at wculd depend on how high the Intellectual lewd of the
experimental subject Is. X eteuld think that in prisons there aro
people who are eltple and do net have a general education and whoso
intellectual ability is fvrhapo not quite so great as rthe Doctor
supposes. Xs that net possible?

A I suepcet cr would believe that the doctor would take that into
ccasideration.

H Veil, wc'shell coat back to that. Sew, in every cxpcrltiont there
are various expcrlecntal scries and roong ethers a scries enlacing
control evrerlncnts. Is t v at not so?

A Sot necessarily.

\ But that is eustoa»ry: isn't it?

A It depends on the nature of the experiment, sonetlnos the pre¬
ceding aninal work servos as tho control.

In this trial wc hpvc hoard that if cne is aining at a specific
result involving the efflcauy of a vaccine, one series is vaccinated
with a known vaccine, then later with another eories and not given e
protective vaccine but is nevertheless infected. It scene to cc that
this is the only vpy of having any eesparison; is that not also you
practice T


le Jaw *7-S'-r«C-2-£-Hicbaa (1st., Brown)
C curt I


A That depends on the nature cf the control, whether you give
virulent Tina or organisn. do not consider it ethical to give
virulent virus or organisn to nsn-prctcctod persons. *hcn you develop
r typhus vaccine, we follow the development cf anti-bodies in the body
of the patient given the vaccine.

?hen you tostify that you had no control series at all that
was infected with virulent bacillit

A That is correct.

\ You said that the experimental subjects could leave the
experiment at any tirel

A Yes.

k Does this not contradict the oor.tcnts of the statement of
consent, according to »'hich the persons who consents must follow all
the rules and orderst

A So, net necessarily.

% 3ut if he has to follow all the orders that tho Victor gives
hla, then hs cannot leave the cxpcrlrwnt?

A Veil, he does not agree not to express the desire to leave
the experiment at any tine. As a nattc* of fact, I hire indie-tod that
to ay knowledge no volunteer has expressed the desire to loa.vc an ex¬
periment.

k But, it is posri'-le th-t vt shall net always have so arny
idealists as experimental *u v Jccts; as one of the haste preconditions
you stated that it was the experimental su v jcct's right to withdraw
from the cxrerl-cnt?

X That is right.

Sow what a v out the case of such a withdrawal when the cx-
periatntal su v J»ct is already infected, already has a fever: is it not
frea the practical point of view Impossible for the cxpcrlaental sub¬
ject to withdraw he h»s ones taken this first step?

A In the case of salaria, that is true hut that not true of


all eases.


92-*8 .


16 -’ure 7-M_7 w *C_3^U<cchan (int., 3r-v)

Court I ' -

<% It v«i precisely in the cast cf Klsrla that I texted to
shew that the possibility of withdrawal docs not for prattle*! pur¬
poses in -Any eases exist at ell.

Professor, do you ksos the nano rf Professor Lcibraxit?

A Tea. I do.

*t Vo you consider Pr»ftssor Lei'rendt e conscientious and
authoratlve scholar7 »'

a I as not faailiar »lth all cf Ms writings axd saying; 1 con¬
sider hla to he a conscientious nar., yes.

Vs Ito you believe that his attitude toward ncdical othics is a
gcod and oorroct one?

A I an act faniliar vith his attitulo toward nodical ethics.

^ Prcfessor Lel^randt was called belore this Tribunal no an
expert witness v y the Prosecution and Qucstlo is regarding professional
ncdical ethics in the field cf research were jut to bin. You hnvt hero
testified that the prlsi-or's statement of concr.t, prisoners in
American prisons, were to v e regarded as volun ;ccr statements of con¬
sent »r.d that froa the profession ethical poin; of view there could *c
no nisgiving regarding ouch ax act of consent, nor a v out having the
cxpcrlrents carried out: It that so!

A Yes.

h I should like to put to you wfcat the other prosecution ox-
pert witness said regarding this point before this Tribunal. He w*s
askedt

"Witness are you of the view that a prisoner, who has been In
prison for over ter. years, will give his consent for an experiment if
he receives oc advantage froa this; do you consider such oensent to
have been voluntarily given!"

The expert witness answered! "Ho, according to ncdical ethics

that is net the ease, because the patient or the prisoner first of all

fi-.ds hiuself in a state cf coercion, since ht is ir preventive custody

•r.d secondly because he Is a l-y-nan and has no way of calculating tho

&2*9


16 June 4»->Uj6^-4-*e«han (1st., Brown)

Court I

effcett ef as operation oa hiaaelf. Ae a l*^--pen, be la tiaply not
la a position to do that.*

sueatlcs: "Are you cf the view that eight hundred irlioacra,
who art detained $t verlcut placet asd who give their costert for
experiaentt do to voluntarily?* Antwer: Io.

^nettles: Jvu are not astwering that in conaldoratlon of who the
or not the experi-ent leadt to laating or only teaporary injury to the
pritoner?* Antwen "Even in the latt cate, ay antwer it ttill no."

(flotation! "If tuch rertont are infected with aalarla, because
they have dcolartd their readiness: do you oonaider that pottlhlc!*

Antwer *Ie, because tuch a voluntary atateaont of content it not right
fron the point of view of nodical cthlca. These sen, at pritoner a,
find thcsoalvia under a state of coercion."


9240


16 Jun-*-'2-3-!-Orc as (Int. Brcwr.)

Court So, I.

Q (Continued) Thereupon the witness iris shown t.c cagasine
Life, L June 19L;, and this is Doc«»nt Marl Brandt lio. 1. to this
dociront which I wish to touch onarcry briefly it onje that in the
United States Prison in Atlanta, in the State Prison in Illinois, and
in tho Reforr School in Sow Jersey, roughly 300 prisoners have declared
their readiness to have thossalvoe infected with malaria so that
doctors cou3l study tho disease. And, in a further passage in this
docunont it says that tho malaria experiments in jcnitantiarica have
show, that railrria is still a very serious nodical problem and it
says further oh page 1*6 of tho report: "S-vura chills arc tho first
oywptcas of malaria. Tho above patient is an insat-- of the Atlanta
Ponitonti-.ry whore xalaria exjeri-onts woro bogun ahd dovolcpod.*

Tnen bolow, wdomoath is the Inst pict-.iro under which tho caption is
"fovur tns as high as 106°, sovero chilis 20 to 60 ninutoo. One of
the canoe was allowed to procoed to a Into strgo before dregs wore
given to cccbnt it." After tho uxport had se-n this report.ho mi
asked, ■rloase give your oxpert opinion on this oxporirent as rogards
nodical p^ ralenihility." Professor loibrondt answered, "I cannot
cmango ay revioualy stated opinion about nodioal ethics involved. I
as of ttkj opinion that such experiments os thoso are an ill chosen
form of biological thinking. And I point out particularly that whon
I aodo ty testimony just now I agree with Eboraeior, tho Jurist, from

+ 9

his book “Dor Arst in Bocht", and I also pointed out that tho pationt
whon giving such approval cannot calculate tho consequences of having
given his consent and if on the basis of my own oxporienco as a mal¬
aria therapeutist and as a psychiatrist, in which capacity I an ac-
custcucd tc giving solaria cures to paralytics, then free this point
of Vior I crust suy that malaria is a very s-rious disease bocauso it
has complications as a consequence, for instance severe spotic thron-
boais or effects on tit noart ooseXiS that have death as a cwisequonco.
And, it is ay opinion that we are not de alin g hare with tho infection

of someone with a little sniffle out with a Tory serious disturbance

9241


16 Ju n k -tS->-2-6rcss (Int. 3rowr.)
Coart So. I*


»hich theoretically always nay have death as a consequence. And in
Tit» of this such experimenta should be carried out on guinea pigs
and not on huean beings."

Will you please say whether this attitude of irofossor
Uibrandt does not have an ethical foundation.

I I do not agree with that statenont of irofossor loibrandt.
First, tho prisoners, thi oxporionco with our prisoner volunteers in
tho United States is a fact showing that that docs not hold and,
secondly, ho ns cities that prisoners cannot bo notivatod to take pr.rt
in radical experiments by humanitarian incontivos. This is cor.tr-ry
to our oxcorioroo.

B. HABDTi lour Honor, I right ask dofonso counsol Just
what ho intorsla to prove by this oxardnation. Kith the exception of
threo questions, tho questions and answors which have bocn ,-ivon horo
yesterday have been covered on Friday and Saturday by Dr. Cjrv-.tius
hiaoolf. Sc -J to no that Dr. Kolto horo has wasted thirty-fivo rdn-
utoe. C-n«t ho got on to his point and finish tho oxari tian that
Dr. Sorvatiua has ably taken up on Saturday.

p u I.ILTH: Dr. Scrv-.tiuo did not approach this question. I
think wo cro resting tiro at ary r-ato, that is tho way tho intorprotor
trarslatod IT. Hardy's words. If wo accontuato tto discusoions to tho
quostiono that tho defense counsel is asking in his conviction thoy
an. cf dofinito inportanco. kr. Hardy wants to know why 1 no asking
thoso quos‘lona - for tho following reasons: Professor loibrandt ....

r*S IPlSIDrlC: Couraol, it ap-oars free tho tost irony of
the witness that ho doos not in all rennets a^roo with tho opinions
of Ir. Loibrandt w>x> testified hero on behalf of the Prosecution.

Sc--s to no that that natter, in view of tho pross of tine, no^. not
be oxplnted upon further since you counsel have asked for so nuch tioa
which h-s be-a accorded. Tho fact that there is a differorc* of opinion
of the two ox port witnesses on bohrlf of Prosecution is clsri-iy before


tho Tribunal near.


9242


16 Jaa i».--S-3-2-Orogg (Int. Brown)

Court So. I.

>fclch theoretically always cay have death as a consequence. And in
new cf this such experiments should be carried out on guinea pigs
and not on hi c an beings.*

If ill you please say whether this attitude of Professor
Liibrandt docs not have an ethical fotndetion#

I I do not agree with that statflQont of Professor Ioibrnndt.
first, ti» prisoners, tto experience with our prisoner volunteers in
the United States is a fact showing that that doos not hold and,
secondly, ho ass-zees that prisoners cannot be activated to take part
in nodical experiments by hwanitarian incentives. This is contrary
to our exporioroo.

a. HABDIi Tour Honor, I night-ask dofenso oour.sol just

%

what ho intends to prove by this oxuninatioa. With tho oxooption of
threo questions, tho questions and aaowors which nave boon givor. horo
yostordey have toon covered on Friday and Saturdsgr by Dr. Survatius
hiasclf . So ma to no that Dr. Halte horo has wasted thirty-five min¬
utes. C-r.«t ho got on to his point and finish tho sxasl.* tion that
Dr. Scnr.tius has ably taken up on Saturday.

D U "UTS: Dr. Scnr.tius did not approach this quoction. I
think wo fro wasting tL-x» at any mto, that is tho way the interpreter
translated Hardy 1 * words. If wo accontuato thi disc-isoions to tho
questions tbit tho dofenso counsel is asking in his conviction they
are cf definite inportanco. kr. Hardy wants to knem why I ns asking
the so quMtioas - fer tho following reasons: Prorossor Idbrmdt ....

THE HESHfiyfs Counsel, it epgsars free tho tostixeny of
the witness that ho does not in nil ronmoots agrou with the opinions
of Dr. laibrr.rdt who testified here ou behalf of the Prosecution.

Sc -~2 to mo that that natter, in view of tho rross of tine, need not
be expiated upon further since you counsel have asked for so nuch tiro
which hrs been accorded. Tho fact that there is a difference of opinion
of tho two expert witnesses on behalf of Prosecution is olorriy before


the Tribunal new.


S242


16 Jor>- M te -3"3—Srcas (let. Brown)

Coert Ho. I.

pp, BELTS: Quite ®°. ®*t »= 8 the purpose of =y line of
questioning ard that'e tte reason I wonted to protest ag-inst the
st'-tenant that this examination of the witness by ne was a waste of
tiso.

7K3 HIZSHSI.T: That is a natter for the Tribunal to detor-
i-irjt entirely, doctor. Proceed.

5Y 0?.. latTS: I have one last question to ask in behalf of Dr. Ser-
vatius:

Ftofosecr Ivy, you said that for you and for doctors in gon-
oral tho’ Hippocratic oath is tho principle according to which you act,
in that so?

A T-s, that oxpreasoo the basic idoas.

q In connection with this trial you w;rkod out a basic
policy for thj por-issibility of oxporiantation and you rugrrd this
policy you worked out of gorxral validity and hold it to bo necessary.
Bocauoo tie Rypnccntic oath contains no precise stator. .t or. those
Hitters of hunan axpor irv,ntition boesrj of i^ort-anco on y in tho
couroo Of r.lativc cod-.rn eodicino, is that not so?

A Toe.

1 Then this gonoral stotawnt of othical policy that you
testified to hero is not of otomal validity but is conditioned in
fenj of tine and in tome of 3pcco and sub^oct to curtain inevitable
changes that himnity geos through, is that correct?

« ;; 0 . i believe tto oath of lyppocratus teachos a fur.dr.-
contal basic truth that is good for all ti*o, nsnely revaremeo for
life. Just as tho principle of tho golden rulo toadies a ac-rrl and
othical principle that is good-for .all otamity or for all tiro.

Q Tou are correct in saying tho basic principle of ethics
is rcvcronco for life. That 'is true for tho doctor and is truo also
for all can. In this I agr-c with you, do I not?

A I pro sura so.

^ However, you know that ov-ry State requires its soldiers


S24"*


1 6 Jui>-»e-3-..-Groas (Ir.t. Brown)

Court So. I.

in tiajo of war to render it8 opponents haraloss and to kill then.

Is that not so? Tho State releases a soldier iron a soldier's high¬
est ethic 21 principle, this principle of reverence of hunan life, and
it doos so rurally and with regard to penalty.

* Defensive war socm to bo a necessary evil but over, in
war a physician taka a care of soldiers, bo ho friend or too, with us
of the codic-.l profession is an exooption in war tiao.

Q I sinply want to sake it clear, and I don't think wo aro
of two cinds in this natter, that tin State has tho pos. Ibility of
releasing htEar. beings free thoir coral mad legal respr-sibilitios if
it doos ?j In tho interact of the State, isn't that so?

k Tcs, in tho Unitod States you don't bavo to fight if you
boliovo that it is wrong.

Q I doubt tftiethor tho translation cv.o through correct.
Would you plor.so repeat your answer, doctor? I askod whothor or not
wo are of ono nind in our boliof that tho State has tho right for
reasons of national nccossity bocauso of a stato of war to free its
citirons froa acral and loeal responsibility and you said.


9244


Court 1

Jhne 16—X-i-1—HD-Xprrow- 3 rovhl

a. I believe It does, but In the United states if a
gore a believes it vroru to fight and to /.111 people in the
c.urso of battle, he does not nave to taste up nras. r o have
c naoiar.tliua objectors in the united States to which I X-.vo
alre-ir referred.

v. D-* you c nsldor the notions of the consclenti-us
objector be os ethlorlly .are as the actions of tnc soldier?

I do.

Shan you -re sn;ln c tnet non who f.llow the orders
of the at :e, nanoly the soldiers, and non who refuso to
f llov tv.se orders, naaoly th*. a/nscler.tlous objective,
arc et.iclly on the sane level?

a. I do, rlth.u b a I do not agree with then.

Vould not the absolute nfflro-tlon of the arson's
ria-at :o refuse to serve in tne v-r lead to the alt la. to
dlaa.iutl n of the at"to and nonce to zh*, st-co'a in bllity
to defend ltsolf?

a. Veil, aoaa believe tn«*t wer is futile and they
t inh c.w: cm defend that posltl.n. Ot.tors bollove that
defensive vrr is neceear.r; and that rirosslvo war is r.n evil.

Hrva you ever seen a case in let^r;’ where a 6tr..o
admits : it itself is crrryin 6 on an -ggrossivo wer? Do
not r.ll st cas inelst they they ««rc cavryln-, on n Justified
and 1 c. .cl wr.r?

a• T.:'t does not vie their clp.lh true.

... =ut tne cltirer. of c st-te aust decide vnet;.er
w.vt -h is doing is g.-td or evil. * r .uld - citizen of the
Unite:. Str os bollove nls own state or believe the views
that he ..cars over the rec.lo frox Germany or Franco?

a. 'a h^ve difference of otlnim in the United Str.-os
»nc. wo t 1 -rate that difference uf opinion.

... I ax sshin* whether the citizen, as c sliple citizen

9245


Court 1

Jun 6 16-14-4-2 -HD-Kc r rcv-3r o vr. i


ie more or lees obliged or coerced tc near what the acate
-die his. If, for example, he Is called to ona; How Id
he to docile whether the reasons for the government's decision
«rc g-od or bed?

^ In a democracy, the citizens elect their own legis¬
lators v.io determine that. Totalitarian and democracy arc
two different worlds of thought and behavior or.d it Is diffi¬
cult tv rco.nolie thorn,

Q. Must r.ot the citizens of totalitarian states obey
tholr governments? ,

I do not believe that they should.

Q. Do you mean to state that, tho citizen of any
totalitarian stote should refuse to obey the orders of hlo
government?

I p.groo.

Z. In that oase, witness, no further questions.

TK£ PREEIOSHT: Did Dr. otclr.bnuor de6iro to ndress
tho Tribunal?

DR. &T£IHBaUSR: (Defense Counsel for thd defendant
Beiglboooh): Mr. President, I have purely medical quoetlona
t mat to the witness c.noornlng themselves solely with tho
sea water case. I ash that I like the oth-r counsel jo
permitted to ash theso questions through ay cllur.t, apart
fr,a a few general questions which I am going .to put mysolf.

RiE PRZ3IEEMT: Vail, Counsel, your cllor.t may propound
ourely scientific and noilcrl questions as Dr. Ruff was
allowed t. tha other day. Vo shall finish first with theso
shorter cress examinations end then or coed with your quoe-
tl.ns, but I notload you rise In your -lrce and I thought
perhaps you and s.ae matter to call to the attention of tho
Tribunal. Cross examination by yourself In ehalf of the
defendant Belglbooci: will be taken up after the shorter cross


9246


Court 1

Juno l5-&~i-3-ED-£errov-3rovn.


exnnin ~~ ns are c ~leted.

: J3 Or. ?lennin e desire to cross ejcr-ine the witness
f-r fifteen sinuses?

•*o will hear fr-c dr. Flcafilnj.

DR. ?LZ&i2K3: dr. Fritz for Dr. Roe a desires to r.ak
c rev quj.-Cl ns in this c vnnectl->r. also.

THi ?R56lD£ilT: I understand tr.at, Dr. .-lenu.in 0 , out wo
will -err r a n-w for fifteen ainutas if j^u desire to cross
exnalne tne witness.

3. DR. nZVXM-. Defense counsel for tho dofer.dr.nt Kvu 0 cveny)
Profess.r, is it on offense n^lnet the prvf3sei-.nr.l
duties of o doctor, in your opinion, if ? doctor rof4Q£»o to
hel r. vtiont s lely because the pati-nt is en eneay of tho
state?

A. K , I do not bollevo tart • d.otor sa.uld refuse
audio* 1 services t * oors n because he is on meny of tho
£-• ;e or aven cn eneay of the doctor.

;. cue.*, refusal aodicol services w. uld then be on
offonoo r'sClnat t o uedlcnl "nd professional duties of tho
dooCvr, in your opinion, would it not?

/v. I bcllavj s'..

i. * factor wno expressed suor. -n opinion - would y u
.dony hi a c.v ri.nt :o la:’ down policies for correct ethical
abdiocl behavior?

a. I answered ay st'tooent because I believe his note
war a c atmry to the toaohln*js of nedicnl ethics.

«ra you faalllnr with Hippocrates’ works, or only
vita .is oath?

I -a frnillpr with soae of nle works, net nil of

In -articular, do you know Hippocrates 1 fifth lettur?
so, I do not.

921*7


A.


Court 1

June 1 S g U lMarro v-3r o vr. *

if i tell you that Hi? ocratoa stated in his letter
«5: ■I shall not have any advantage from the rlghnoes of

the Purslane nor shall I treat a Persian ho cause he 16 an
enemy of the Greek state." Now, If Hippocrates says this
would you still ha of the opinion that Klp-ocrates, who
oxpressod suer, an opinion. Is the right man for lying down
tho basic principles of medical ethics?

a. No, that la not coincident with practices today. I
don't know that he sold that.

HR. HARDY: Hay it please the Tribunal, if Dr. Floating
wishes to refer to any of the works of Klppoorntee, I
suggest ti»t he c-ke thaa available to Dr. Ivy prior to
questioning thereon,

TH2 PRESIDENT: Counsel simply said "If Kip.'oorr.tco said
that what was the wltnoos' opinion of the statonont." It
was breed purely on an assumption.

Counsel mny proooed.

BY DR. FISHING:

Q. Hr. Frosldent, tho question woo not hypothetical.
Rather, Hippocrates actually did soy that in his lettor #>•
Unfortunately, I cannot put the passage to the witness boonuao
I have It only in r Gorman text.

j'ltn-ss. In your testimony you have said that oven today
the oath of Kiopocrotes is still the basic policy for medical
behavior, Let me ask you now, what role do os the oath of
Hippocrates play lr. American medicine? Does the doctor In
/oecrlcc take the oeth of Hippocrates?

«. ’."aan ho graduates from some medical schools he does,
other not.

TH2 PRESIDENT: Counsel, if you have, in a reputable
German translation, toe letter of Hippocrates which you
□entl-zn, y«.u my read thet portion o,f the translation Into


Court 1

Jose 5—H3—Sorrow—Brown.

the record giving the values, the page and the worh In which
It la fw-nd.

DH. ?L2-CiIKS: 3ecauac this Is in Soman I did not bring
it along with no, but I cor. do so later if you wish.

7HZ PRZSIDEJT: I as slcply affording oounsel the
opportunity to do that if he deslroa.

3Y DR. FLSCKXNCH

5. ltnese, I have put the Oath of Hippocrates In
cvld-r.cc in this trial, first in the classical version and,
socondly, in the version that Is used In France. The two
vc rale no are radically different. Therefore, I should lllce
t.' -enow what version of th- Klppocratos Oath is used in
/dcrlca? Car. you tell so whether it is a literal translation
of tho ancient oath or Is It a now f-rsulatlon?

a. according to sy boot rooollectlor., it is a translation
ef the original oath. The A=orlcar. Hodlccl Association,
hovovor, tee developed its basic prlr.olploe to apply to
sodorr. oonlltlcno, but tho brslo prlnoiples have not boor.


-Itored


1 $ JanHk WHi-l-iSaloy (Bro»)

Qaurt 1

Qs IS: in the Eippocrat-s Oath that is ^Jeer. ir. «acrieh -a a further
development of th- ancient Hippocrates Cat.. and incorport-o axlern
concep t io n s, if I understand you corr-ctly?

The principles of the Itcdic-l Sthies of the «uesdcan Ledical
/.3soci iion is . Joe—^nt of ackjc 5,000 to 10,1X0 words* Each principle of the
O th of Hippoer t -a is d-rulopod to indicate how tiuy pply to adorn coalition
of ocdlohl practice, ho- they r. lj to the c!:oicc of students for entrance
into nodical school, nd how they pply to ;p\>up pr ctlec, the prrxtice of
industrial .edicin., .nd other economic and social conditions tha t did not
ocist La to. tine of HippocratvS, «lho basic principle of reverence is life)’"
and tlrt t, - -is re of p dent is the sriix, intws.st which is ir.intain-d -
throug. cs of • sBorican Medic 1 issoointlon.

If I un—rst .nd you correctly the ethical standpoint of Uv. u.dienl
profession is, so to sp&adc, codified in Jseri&an, and the Hippocratic oath
was oh-ply t-hen over to -xpr.33 the r-v-rvnee for hue. n lil- nd the principle
that the patient vrn is und-r Ac Actor's car- should .*-t t- uono any Injury
by t.w dootcr, is th t corr-ct? 3o that it is not the Hippocratic Oath, but UJ
codification of the profession 1 .sdiolal -thics, ccordinj to th- doctor
in JUi-ric , how tc -.t.nin. hia bdr.vior?

Ho, Ini: th- original ofcbh of Hippocrat.s ia s-rv-d as a basis
upon -mich .Vv- been developed th- d~t ila cf -edic'l practice as it in
performed under .ndern conditions*

7/.-a frof-ssor, I ust r- 1 the O-.th of Hippocrates to you in the
classical version. Tou dll s-e fro - this th't the O-.th of Hippocrates in the
cl -aic 1 v-rs.on r- lly is rot a codification of —dical -thics, but is the
contr ct of a pr_-^_d studerfc a. it a L;is teacher, .nd tint end;- incident Uy
Li this ©r.th are a fow ethical wl^ixts introduc-tL It r-ads as follows:

"I s-.joar by .pjllo , the doctor, and by ..skl-pios nd Hy-itia nd Pan Jteia,
and by -11 to. Gods - nd god-8;x.s for .doo- I b-r witn.33 to too S-st of -y
ability and oust of .y Juigu-cfc I t*a- the following 0 -th nd accept the
folio dne responsibility: I shall rev-re ny teacb-r in this it as I


16 Jan a te - B fc- 5 3 ' L aloy (Brown)
Cowt 1


revere cy y.r-nts." This is undoubtedly * point of vi-w tfc t the doctor
J0-3 not -c-.r.J tel y, \i if .x is L. a~cJ i x, shall p.rtak- of ry goods,
-loo his . ec-nd-nts shall do sc. I sh“ll r-g r. hiu _s -y crd£hur. I shill
tench _y brot.~rs cr.ia rt if -Jicy id. _c to iihout* p-y— - dthout
■my cor.tr.--ct.'' ,J 1 the .o_rti.-v.nt science I axil giv- to y oiji sons ns I .
shill giv«. to th_ sons o. ny —-.st-r, and .1 sh.-.li giv- t.._ s_x kncvlcdgu
to the. students in thw a.-x gride uxi stand a— r ail Liu. Ho.v_v-r,

to oth-n I shall not giv- this ._io.lNo ;, Doctor, I thinl: you vdll
igr-e on f -: -a- versions of t.~ Hippocr-.tes Git.-., that tn^y ire i-^x-rtin-nt
md out of lint uith ttr.t?

I Jo not -gr-w ifch that ont-rpret tion, th-.t part of th*
Hippoerr-ic o-t-Lr-cts .xlic.il -due tors toJ-y to be c'r-ful ~nd to
exercise .uCf—nt reg .rding the iid._lL.ctu .1 .bility -nd .oral chmctor *
of x:. th’.t 're p-r-dttoJ to study .edicine.

Frof-3*5r, this p-rt of tu oath Joes not conoem £x nedicil
teacher, but V- relic .1 otu—nts ho iccepted thus- obligitions vis--.-vis
is -r.ster?

Sv. o .th continu-o, pr-scriptioru to -like Ill . -'ey lor the
p-.tient I a. . 1 rej-.ri lid 1 a. 11 .voL. doiiy shit cm hir.. or x.^ure the
patient”?

fee, Li .t ini-ent-a r-v_r-nco fo. Ill-, md that you diould do
x. the viy of tharnpy ttold ye. .dll hnr- the ..-.tient.


Court So. 1

15 Jus 47-fc-6-l-IHX-;oc3e (rrovs)

Q* It la precisely this part of the Hippocratic oath that ie
alsslng in the Jreach version. Proa this it cen he Been that the various
conceptions of the doctors' sedical ethics and what his obligations are
differ free tine to tine vastly and that the Hippocratic oetfc contains
nothing but general principles which as you can see free this letter of
Hippocrates, which I an going to road to you, were not regarded eve.i by
Hippocrates hiuself in the way that they ere regarded and held to be
neoessary today. In this letter to Hipoocrates it says:

■I an not Justified in taking advantage of the richness of the
Persians nor in treating barbarians who rre enenies of the Greek paoplo
or freeing such barbarians froc disease."

That is the fifth letter free Hiopocrates and you have already said

•

that you consider that such an attitude cannot bo brou^t into or is
consonant with the basic principles of nedical ethics, is that sol

A. Tes, that is not coincident with ey nrincioles of the nodical
ethics, os in reverence for life, whether that life be friend or foo,
vhon it cocee to treating their disease and sickness.

IHi POSHEST: Counsel, you will read into the record the titlo
of the book, the author, and the page upon which that auotation is read
froo.

3U 7i~ XIJG: This is the "Hippocrates 7ibol", eveerpts froo
Hippocrates Xorks, editor Dr. Hichnrd Xapferer, Munich and Bad Voorls-
hofen, 1943, Hippocrates Publishing Coapatc', ilerouardt and Co., Stutt¬
gart.

yiTXLSS: I night add that I doubt whether Hiupocretes wrote that
letter. ®

THa rH-.sng.ST: "ill you give the page of the volure on which that
letter nay be found, caonsel?

IE. Jli-IISG: Page 307; the title in Goman is "FiTOOcretes "ibel".

•

I have no further cuestiocs, Tour Honors.

IHE PHBSII53T: The Tribunal win now be in recess for a few sinutes.


9252


Court So. 1

IS Jon 47 -*-7-l-i&.-3card (Vert a nberg)

—_ 2 _ .vjsSHJl: Persons in the courtrcce will please fir 4 their seeto.
-he Trifocal is again In session.

ym pj-.ys^ - 7- Ur. Jrltx oa behalf of the defendant Rose nay cross-
exemiae the witness. Dr. Tritx, I think, asked for fifteen nisutee for
cross examination.

U,. TalCZ (for the defendant note): hr. President, the aasueption
thf.t I asked for fifteen slsutos Is an error. I asked to eross-oxanino
the vitnoss for -no hmr.

7 -i ?;-;S!^ 7--T : iccording to ny schedule I do not think that such
tisc can he allowed, Coetor. You say hrve half an hour In any evont.

ZZ.. Tr.JTS: Your Honor, there Is another setter I '-ant to clear us.

I have purely medical cuestlons to ask of tho witness and In addition
thore wes little tine during tho last few days to discuss this ouostlon
with tho defendant Rose. In order to utilise thw tlae rnd in order to ho
sblo to finish I would like to esk your psrnission for the defendant Eobo
to ask tho sodical cuestlons nlmsolf of the vitnoss.

7 y%. paiSUHiT: Tho defendant Rose nay prooound tho nodical ouostlons
to tho witness on cross oxasination. Tho defendant Rose say leave his
piece la tho dock and esstasc his position bcaido hie counool.

3Y SR. ISJTZi

* q, Prof oss or, did I under a trad you correctly that you sc id that
tho experimental subjeetr of Dr. Eocd, in the yellow fever crwlsento,
wero the doctors who conducted the experiments nnd asobors of the A-cri-
ean arsed forces, and outsldo of tho fatelitlea of tho physicians there
vero no fatalities In these yellow fever experiments?

X. Yes, that Is according to ay lnforsatioa.

I£. FRITZ: Your Honor, the defendant Rose thinks that tho cuestlons
which ve Intended to ask, .because of the licit of ti-.o, will haw to be
shortened to such an extent that it would be better if he could begin
tho cross examination l=ediately In order to csk the ouest as fros a
nodical point of view, and ask them sore briefly and use uo less time.

-r-. ZBSSnSSt: As I steted, the defeatent Rost a?y examine tho wit-


5253


Court So. 1

16 Jua 47-*i-7-2-LEH-2eerd (Vertenberg)


acta u to surely acdicel euesticns. He nay begin to proowind those
ouastloae nov, if hie counsel desires.

ST IS ISS - H A S T 2?.. HCSZ:

Q, Hcv aany -habere of the American arned forces voro used ia the
yellow fever exporiseats of Heed? Eov aery of than vere there?

A. I do not knov.

v Is it not correct that, outside of the t*o persons vhon you
sectioned, only coolies vho had volunteerod for peynent vert used?

a. According to ay iufcrartlon, the t»<> doctors *hot I aentloncd,
Cerroll and Laser, end then American soldiers. I did not kr.ov thr.t
/ thore wore luy natives used.

Q. ’•'oil, you do not knov about it?

A. Ve do net hove coolies in Cube or in the Vest Indies.

q, Ec- lergo is the aortrlity in yellow fovor?

A. How lergo? Tou a«an-—

^ Vhet^is the nortality rrtc?

a. Ihat is ia opidoaict or in the o-rperinents of V*itor Hoed?

v Tollov fever in general.

A. I think it about fifty porcent, if I recollect the figuro cor¬
rectly. It varies.

^ Is It not correct that in the cnee of allxr.ocs, with the execu¬
tion of the Scgrc, the aortrlity rate is oighty to ninety percent?

A. I renoabor thet it is ouite high.

Q, lo it not correct that the ztcmbvr of experiment el subject* in
the Hoed experiments »si aore thra thirty?

A. I do not reneaber.

Q, Then there is no point in asking further aucstloni about it if
you arc not infomed eb»it it.

Tou told the prosecution ia regerd to pages 167 end 16G fro-, the
Philippine Jcurnel, regarding the plague e.meriuents by Strong - you
■aid that the crperiacntel subjects had a tesoereture of one degree
Tahrenheit, end that the hamlossness of the erocrinent ^6 absolutely


Court So. 1

15 Jun 47-i(-7-c-ZSv-3eard (Vartenberg)


~ surprise to the author because he could forotell the successful
results. Did I understand you correctly?

A. 0- the basis of hie enicel experiments.

Jor vfcat reaeon vere criBinals vfco had beer. condensed to death
need for these experiments, in view of thoee facts?

A . I do not Jcnov.

- ash for Zxhibit 513, please. The prosecutor, on Friday,
read from thle exhibit. I want to continue exactly at the sene oleco
vhere he stopped reading:

"Surpriscng ea it nay seen, the injection of these large eaounts of
the living plague organise hare not given riee to any eevero reactions.

A fev hours after the inoculation the teaperaturd of the i"*ividual
usually begins to rise. Vhen the injeotion has beon givon in the sorn-
irwc, the fever nay, on tho evening of the first day, rcoch 26.9 to 39.4,
but rarely has it touched 40 degrees Celsius."

Vaild ycu not like to change your testicony after herring this,
nasely, that the teaperaturee vere hitf»er than ono degroe Fahrenheit?

For 40 dagreee Celeiua is 104 degrees F<hrenheit.

A. As I rocall, I did not specifically specify ono degreo. I
believo I qualified by ssylcg approxlnately cno degree or so. If I
specified only one degree, then I should change ay testisony to soy
approxinately one degree or so.

Q. And free this vording, "eurorising as It cay seos", docs not
one have to gain the iepressien that tho essueption that the injoction
of living pleguo boccilli cculi not have an.*’ unfortunate coneeouences
vas not certain by any scene at the beginning of the eroerlnont?


>255


lr Jure 47-JLJjCi5-l-2VnieH (i-t,. V*r‘ C nh€rg)

Court I

A 'dell, I i-.terprtcd tht expression Surprisingly ac it say
itt-* *» a rhcthorleel txprtaBion for tht reader and net neeceerrily
for Er. Strong.

N D; yen knew that the oxpirlstRta conducted by Strong were
criticised?

a 2 hart never heard then criticised.

^ 3ut that ia nentlcned in the further p°pera by Strong, in
vhl'-h he diaeuaaee thee# eritieia-.a.

A Ko, Z hare act eeen that.

»v The experiment* by Strong were conducted in 1905, and thoy
ver# published in 1906. Thi* injection with.living plague bacilli v eo
one of the »ost Irportent adrer.cea In the fighting of plague. Can you
tell no the reaacn why it took twenty yeare v efore thio dieoovery woo
introduced into practice?

A I c-nnet. That ie true of a timber of sedlcal dloecrorloo.
lor axarcle, rulf-nilaatde had been nade, before it wao applied In
erectids, aeae ten to twenty 7eare.

h ?ee, but that wbo for v ec*uae the chesical-therapeutical
Qualities of oulfonileaidc were not Icr.wn. After thoeo cu?litieo
were known, it did not take twenty yeara >ofore it wa* used in practice.
But these detaila a v out the derelcpnent of plagu* raccinee are not known
to y*u personally?

a act that Colonel Strong w» s criticised for hi* werk.

H Ard clao not the difficulties, why it teck twenty years be¬
fore pi(r« ▼ac'*inci were introduced into nedleal practice?

A The specific reaaonr in thio case aro net known to ce, hut
I do knew that in other caeca thero la quit# a lag® between the origi¬
nal diecorary ar.d its application In pr-ctlea.

<t 5o It la net known to jrcu that the erltleien regardlnr the
dar.rer af this t.e*hcd and the pcssi v lllty that the plague bacilli
e*»uld heeo-e virulent again was the reason for waitieg twenty years,
for further scientific development?


It* Jure /7_y_7«C-e-2-T*nitl« ’fa rten v err)

Court I


A I as act fpsilier with that.

tfc Sc you knew that Strong hlrjelf, in further publications,
reported about the application of this netted with senkeys, «hich
(•led cf the consequences of this Injection of the plague vaccine?

X I as fenlllar with the feet that he used other anlsalo In
hi* studies, tet I do not recall tho details.

* 'ell, 2 ehall ec ever tc another point.

Moreover, froa 7oluse Y1I of the Philippine Journal cf Science,
yen auteitted page. 290 end 291. That la the paper *y Strong regarding
bcrtbarl. Did you read that paper youreclf?

X Toe, 1 read the peper, end then I had phetoateto radc of
these two rage* Indicating ttet vcluntcere were need.

* In addition, you also discussed tte natter with cno of tho
authors of this paper, did you not?

X '" v «t Is correct: Dr. Crowell.

i* Did I understand you correctly, that you oald In your tcotl-
aony on Iridny that none of the crporioentel su v Jccta died?

X Tea, I said that tc the best of sy knowledge none of tho
experlscntal au Jeeta died.

% And since you read the paper yeuraclf, ra you Just ccnflrscd.
tc -x new, say I perheos, In order to refresh ycur sescry, ask you to
turn to page 379 cf this papor? I havt, put c whlto sheet of paper In
that place. Moreover, the tables « to 7 of this peper. Perhaps for
the benefit cf the Tribunal X say read the Isportent lints.

On page 379 It says:

-The natlcnt gradually sank and died at 2 P. ’. on the following

day.“

THD PEiSHarT: Dr. Ecec, frou what booh arc you reeding? 'Ill
you please read lntc the record the title cf the publication?

Z 272X&S? IE. PXSh: "he Phlliuclne Journal cf Science, Yoluac
Y2I, Section tag- 3"9.


9257


/«• '^-TjC-S-S-Cttni. (let., Varied erg)

Coart -

3T Emmy- 3. ?~si:

V lurthar down it says: "Seeropey: Tne half hour eftor

death."

*>.e t« v lei <, 5. 6, and 7, which follow page <14, art anatc-
sicel presentations regarding this. if ill you plerec convince your¬
self?

(Toluac submitted to witness)

After haring leaked at thie text, would you not like to correct
the atateaent you s*da that there wc'c no fatalities?

A Tea, there ia a fatality. I do not knew yot what it vac due
to, though.

v* I thought you read the paper.

A Yea.

% foil, new, if you new went to read over al! thooc pages
which describe the case hlatory cf thia nan, unf-rtunatcly too much
of tfct tiac that ia node available tc at for cuce* 1 onirg you will he
loat. Therefore, I shall now proceed.

Ia fc cri v crl a acrloua dtecaac?

A It dcpcr.da upon how far it advance a.

* fell, you hfTc read the paper through and therefore you
know that the e.-ae hlatorica of the 39 patlcnta arc described exactly
in thie paper, an' how eerioua dc.-ree of illness thcac patients had.

-c ycu agree *ith cc that *erlheri ia - diacaac which causes ocrioue
danare tc the heart and to the nervous aye tea?

A Tvr, II it ia remitted to go to s point where acrloua
drsage occurs.

\ Yce, if one lets it proceed to the extent that the patient
dies of it, then, after all, it has nrocccdcd rretty far.

The prpor aaya thrt the cxpcriscntel au>Jccta could apeak
neither '•n/'llsh nor ."Spanish, «*nd apparently also net the native dialect
which was Broken in Manila, v ut that one had to apeak to ‘hen through
interpreters In their native dialect. They were apparently lllitcr»tcB.


(let., *arter.'crg)

Coxrt •


”o 7c~ consider that persona of that kin J ere a v le to Judge the
slfsifieeaee hir* v eri experiment?

A I think. bo, when hcri'-eri So endemic in the region froa
which they cone.

44 * cll » 7®* i ,ia - « *«U as I do' that herl v crl does net
cce-or In the mountain regions cf the Philippines.

1 So, I an net sure cf that.

\ But In any case you agree with nc, that v crl v crl io ouch an
laportant proxies that the experiments v y Strong, froa an ethical and
scientific point of viev, were Justified to the Jr entire extent?

x I hare heard no criticism cl^ those experiments.

S And you yeursolf do not crltlclxc then either? You know the
peper after aU, do you not?

A Yc«, I read the nape-r the latter part of Dcccah.r, so all
of th re'ject natter is net fraillar to bc nc*.

* But In any cate, at tho tl=o «hcn you were reading it, ?ou
did n-t hare any slsglvlngs a v out It, did you?

k So; I waa prlnarlly interested In finding out whether the
•upsets -ere volunteers and whether they wen offered a reward. That
wrs^thc part of the paper which 1 had photostated.

k -vs, v ut after all, in ordor to aako a photostat one first
has to her. read the paper.

A Yet.

 Sow I want to go ever to the salarla experiments In tho
Anerlcan prison. Exhibit 516 contains a written statement which
waa "lYtn to the experimental subjects regarding the daig involved
In the experiment before they declared their willingness to participate
le the experiment. «e arc apparently concerned with several different
experiments. The experimental subjects had it pointed out to them
th * t tfcc y woula v c inf acted with the Chesssn strain of malaria. Can
you tell *hc Court what kind cf a malaria strain that is?


5259


16 Jttne (Int. nrtohb.rg) (AID)

Coart I


i &, I can*.,

3 Bat if I tall yen that this is a Vary WaH-ta*wn strain of
=alari£ tropic - ., can yea confirm that?

A I oonflrs that, but I *n«t want yea to boliovo that I sa ca
expert on Erlaria*

3 *H11 y u please toll the Triburr.1 whr.t the aclarla which is
caused by lOnsmdius rivax is called in Zn-lish?

.V ViTTJC,

Q Is it net calleburl n tertian?

A Tea* tlrt is ri-ht, and it is sob .el to Kfetpiof.

" tat ia thc scientific nerr cf th. type of mlr.ria that is
oausod by pl a sm tins falcijcroa?


.. I 6- not ffhar. know*

3 Can y u ooofira to no that the scientific met is aOcria
tr.pica, r mlaria perniciosa?

A I do nit kr,¥,

3 Is nalaria tropica o.nsi ‘jrod :»>ro dan-orcuo than beri-n
tirti-ar.?

' * cn sure -f that.

q Tho Ju l-=int of a 'techau ojurt haa boon aaVdtto ! to tho
“rl ur.rl her . This Ju Vtvmt e:reams itself 'it:; tha aclarln x-
p-rtr.,nt if ?rof. Schillia . m thi-. Ju’ ^nt it is lai' '.-..n tint
300 to Leo persons !urir. th- courso of th- mlaria oxp rimnts con¬
ducted by . :chillir. Jiol or are sum t *od f tho
oonsoquarcas -f ml-ria infection* r\s prosecution witness Viewer
str.tod horo worked only with pins:: c* benign

tortiaa* On the othr bond it is woll-inoan, an! you have oo nib rood
tr.-.t in th. .-urican nalaria exp^riaonts th-y workai mlaria tr:pica,
an’ we arc V-th in a roomnt that ralarin tropica is conailerably noro
iairareas than mlaria terttana, ‘by I now a* y u whether fatalities
cccurrod in the mlaria ec^-rinents in .e-orican p.rdtentiarios?

- If fatalities have cocurrod, I hrrro n.t h-ar‘. of thee

9260 . /


“*"J *arte=lcrg)


k >.d y« tec the reports about th*s« aalarla cxperiaents?

^ So, I hare not read the report, on the malaria cxperiaents.

• «l«ply knew Dr. Arrin, who 1. supervising the cxperlaonta at

Staterllle.

k Sr. MeHaney, the prosecutor, tnferaed us hero that In the
Americas malaria cxpcrl-er.t bo fatalities oe.orrod. Of coureo, ho did
not state where he got thl. Information, and of eour.c he vn. not
nader oath either when he aadc that .tatcaent hero. But X havo to tell
you that Prof. Schilling 1. supposed to hare experimented on alaoot
1,CC“ cxpcrlaental subject., fc'cv doe. It not even though you aro not
an expert on nalarla, on the basis of your general nodical knovledgo
not appear sosevhat peculiar to you that In an oxperlncnt with tho
benign nelarl* there 1 . atoned to the a fatality rate of 30 to 40 *
and In cxpcrlscnt. with tho dangcroue fora of salarla no fatalltlco
occur?

•

KH. MC HAIlTi I object to the question being put. It nccc.oa-
rlly suat v c a hypothetical ruction. I don’t think It contain, all
cf tho necessary hypothec, to giro us any probative value from an
answer to the question that has been put. If wc do not know tho con¬
dition of the experimental subjocts who aro used In the two oxporlncnts,
If wc do not know the acthcds of treataent given to the two different
groups of experimental subjects, and X have particular rcfcroncc to the
proof on tho u*c of pyraaldon In Schilling’s experiments, if wo don’t
know certain other fact'rs concerning the trcatacut and the care given
•-hi patients, I do not sco that an answer froa the witness to the
question put can have a.ny probative value.

Tci mSiaJT* The objection Is sustained.

3T SB. SC3k:

H -ere the natives In the Philippines during the years 19C5 to
---2 that Is, during the tine when Strong--vat carrying on his oxpcrl-
aents tk.re with hucan .ejects aocrican citlscns, or free the racial
point of view and according to their nationality were they regarded as


16 June !7-K-JjC_9-iJcldt (In*.., Vartet^erg)
Ccurt I


ncn-A«rican?

A I do not knew. Xy recollection of political history in the
Philippine* Islards i* not Certain.

<i But in any case yon personally are convinced, arc yon not,
that Prof. Strong conducted hia experiments with natives, not bacauso
he considered then racially inferior, but that he nsed then as ex¬
perimental subjects tceusc the government of the Philippines did not
sake eny other subjects available to hln, and he pcraonally in the
knowledge that hia experinenti would eerve nodical research and thns
all of hueenity, was not very such lntoroatcd in the nationality of
the CTpcrinar.tal subjects.

A All I knew ia that thoy were prisoners condemned to doath,
end, according to Er. Crowell, volunteers.

s Ton submittod a docnryr.t to the “‘rl v unal which was givon
the lxhi v lt So. 510, regarding Volntialllaa typhus lnvcatlgatione.

Ton aaid that the expcrlnentnl subjects wero volunteers. Hay I ask
yon how yon know that? I know the paper very well, and in the paper
itself it is not stated.

A I as not sure that I said they wero volunteers. It otatoo
that for this purpose wo solectcd 40 persons fron 30 to 40 yonrs of
ago and on whoa nc previous typhus infection was suspected, according
to ananncsle or historical analysis.

V But do yon have any other sources or laforaetion than tho
p*T< r itself? Did yon speak with Vointlaillas hicsclf?

a I fell quite sure that I did not testify thit volunteers
were used in this'article.

H Then I anst have aisundersteod you. least over tho alcro-
phene that is vhat I heard, and I »vde a note of it.

A That Bay have been implied, the way they were being sub¬
mitted, aad the enactions e*ne in, 'ut I know that volunteers were not
specifically states in this particular article, and la the seat way they
were net specifically stated in the plague experiments of Col. Strong.


16 J«re *7JC7jC-9-CJeldt (1st., Varten'erg)
Ccurt I


And when I found the word "volunteer" wee not •pacifically included in
the experiment of Cel Stronr I celled up Sr. Crowell and discussed tho
natter with his. I could net do that In the ease of this article. And
I wanted to point out that on page 343 it is stated: “It was obvious
thr*. typhus fever in sen could he produced by such inoculum, and as “0
considered it unnecessary to expose human beings to the risk of a cer¬
tain infection, we therefore relied on guinea pigs for control casos.

* I an familiar with that. Arc you a expert in the field of
testing typhus vaccines?

A So, I an net an expert in tho field of typhus.

V But perhaps ycu know just heeeusc of this fact which you
Just pointed out, nasaly, on the basis of the fact that no husaan con¬
trols arc avails'lc, the entire experinont conducted by Veintlcslla.s
and of tho typhus experts io not considered to have any prohat'.vo
valua?

A So, I do not know that.

. But you do know, don't you, that tho roaction of an animal
to an infection does not prove anything In regard to what the ease
infectious naterlal would cause in husan beings?

A X do not know that to be true.

W But you su v nittcd this papor, this article by VelntiBillao
and in this paper tho cxpcrlscnt v y Iranciscnosn is aentioned. Ho
conducted a slsilar experinont and ho used htn^n controls, that is,
infected and ncn-ia=unlxcd .persons, ato you feniliar with that cxporl- ^
sent?

A I an net fanillar with that cxpcriaent.

<i But it is nentioned in this paper! IHd you overlook it?

A I did not lock up the references cited in this paper.

^ But this fact, that he v*cd controls who had not >ccn vaccin¬
ated, is mentioned in this paper v y Telntinillas, over and a v ove that,
do you knew that Blanc and Baltatcard conducted a nusber cf vaccine
tests of that >7pc, in which the persons wfcc were vaccinated were


Court So. 1

16 Jun 47-H-I0-1-S3C1 Ord (Yertenberg)

A. I do not.

Q. Do you knov the erperlsent by Otore, yfco infected unveccinoted
persona vith tythua?

A. 10.

Eo you ienov the experiment ty Yeraln end Laval, vfco lnfcetod
tvo coollea aucceaafully vith typhus!

A. So.

^ 30 y°* oinilar experlaente by Sargent and hla eollabor-

•tora?

A. So.

Q. Do you know alaller exocrlsonte ty Reitano, Mitchell and

✓7

Richardson, Sperrov end Luabroso!

A. Ho.

Q,. Perhaps at leaat you kr.ov the cxperlsent of the Aeerlcona,
ncCalla end rrerston, vfco infected tvo oereona vith Rocky Mountain
•potted fever, and In oerticuler do you kcov why aa their aroerloontal
subject they took r patient vfco hed hod both lege «routoted7
A. So, I do not.

v Dl you ever, at lcaet In Asorican nedlcal Journala, read a
crltlclas of those erocrlsents or orotoata against these cxnerioonto!

A. Ho.

<v avon not, although nov you ore concerning youreelf vith tho
Question of huoan eroorlsents!

A. YbB.

Q. "o return to aal*ria once =orc, nay I aak you whether you con¬
sider it adequate inforsatioc regarding the danger of an eroerlncnt *dth
tropical naloria to say, "While the danger to lifo free this strain of
solaria Is snail, there, la a strong probability of releases or roeurront
nalarla fever for a period uo to several years after the infection"!

A. I know that that la true, yee.

3, Tea, end do you consider this information adeauato In order to
infers an applicant for a selaria exporintnt vfco Is a layran about the


CCQT*. SO. 1

16 Jun V>-*-10-2-ia«-:i«ylord (Vertenberg)

iAS«er« and risks of such an experiment?

A. ?, I believe that la adequate.

V In aay case, you are of the use opinion aa I as, needy, that
aalaria experiments on human subjects, In view of the importance of thle
problas, ere absolutely Justified. aclentiflcally as veil ae ethically,
even if they bring with then darker for hussec llfo.

A. Provided the subjects arc volunteers and the hazards of the -
experiment have been explained to the extent that they are e-mlainod In
the aalarlal experiments ve have conducted In tho United States.

x. Veil, this principle, that you keen constantly to the voluntary
nature of the oxocrinentel subjects, you havo already oxplainod suffi¬
ciently.

Sov, I %«nt to esk you only briefly about two other exocrinonts,
vhother you kaov then, beoeuse in the history of oxoerlacnts on human
subjects they have been widely dlscussod; first, tho oxoerlnont by
Mlor, vho Infected five crncer subjects with kaln-ecrr, with tho
rosult that ell fivo died. Do you consider that oxporlaent ethically
Justified?

A. I did not follow tho first next of that.

v Do you know the experisent by Adler, vfco lnfoctcd five ccncer
patients with kde-ezor, with the result that all fivo died?

A. I so not fenillpr vltr. that oxuericent, but I should llko to
know vfcuthor or not the cancer prtients agroed to this thcrooy. Generally,
vhon e thorrpy of this sort Is trlod, the doctor asks the ortlent to
sign a release. That is eustccrry in performing eurgical operations In
our country, because there Is al%ays a certain aaount of danger associ¬
ated with an anesthetic and an operative procedure, and thie was an un¬
tried therapy, end I uresuse the uatlents were of tho nature of volun¬
teers and agreed to hare this new treatment spoiled or trlod on them.

Did you ever hear of the trectaent of cancer by Infection with'
kala-axar?

A. Tes.

9266


Court So. 1

16 Job -Sty lord ('lartenberg)

Q. 'fell, I sever heard of It.

To you consider it in accordance with nodical ethics if crinlnals
vho are condensed to death are administered e dangerous dosage of medi¬
cines oc that, in ease they should not die of this Doisonlng, the
changes in their liver can be studied after their execution?

A. It did not all cone through to se.

Co you consider it to be in accordance with sedical ethics if
ericinale vho are condemned to death are adainictered dangerous doses of
Bediclaeo so that, if they should not die of this poisoning, the changes
in their liver can be studied after their execution?

A. If those prisoners condonned to death have volunteored and if
there is good reason to believe that such tests are necessary, in ay 1
ooinlon it is ethical to do that. ,

^ All right. V#ll, you do not object to the experinents thoo-
■elves, even if they are so dangerous, but all your objections concern
neroly the ono point, namely, whether the patient hiaeelf, that is the
experimental subject hinaelf, gives hie consont.

A. That is the first principle of acdlcal ethics vhlch I oxplalnod
yestorday in sy testimony. There aro tvo othor principles that alveye
have to be kept in alnd. One is to be sure that the oxperlaent is nocce-
•ary on the basis of previous an I nal experimentation and a knovlodge of
the natural history of the disease, and in this latter case I oroounc
that adoouate animal experimentation had orcccdod the injection of the
volunteer prisoner condemned to dio in order to indicate that such an
experiment vas necessary and vorthvhile to perform. The third principle
of nodical ethics vas that th<- experiment mu6t be done carefully, so ao
not to cause any unnecessary pain and suffering, by adeouately -nullified
scientists, and vfcen there is any prior reason indicating that permanent
disability or death might occur then the scientists themselves should be
villi mg to serve as a subject in the experiments.

v I have no further cuestione.

3--. 7r-HZ: - I also have no further auestions, four Honor.

92S1


Court So. 1

16 Jus «7-k-10-4-i»-Gsylord (Vartsnberg)


7HZ. PHZSISST: Dr. Zau f sa nr ., you say erosB-exanine the witness.

CHCSSJXAXIKATIC5

3Y 35. ZiUThAJT. (7or the defendant Hudolf Brandt):

Q. Professor, I will probably have to aek you only one single
Question. So far ve have discussed only the cuestion of ethics as far
as physicians are concerned. How, I should like to ask you to what
extent a laynan, who Is not a physician, who is not a specialist, can
recognise fross report3, for exanple, reports by Baseher, what the border¬
line is between vhat le admissible ard vfcat ie not adniesible; in other
words, I should like to aek you, can a layaan recognise vhethor the
professional ethical principles, the three which you nontlor.ed, Professor,
were violated when he reads euch reports,-for exaaple, a roport by
Haeehor?

A. Did you say a report by Bnschor?

«<• Tee, a report by Easchcr.

A. y ell, I bellevo they can, and I believe that a lay oorcon

%

reading a report of that sort would be stirred to indignation.

All right, but in order to do so, it Is probably necoseary that
ho study tho report thoroughly, is it not?

A. I do not think so. I think roadlng the portion of tho roport
whoro he stated that ho held people undor w*tcr until they died would


stir a laysan to indignation, should he retd that
! have no fuyhcr Questions, Your Honor.


Court 1

June 15-K-li-i-HD-5amp6on-Vfertanberg


TH£ FRiSlDZST: Hok many other Defense Counsel, If any
desire to cross-examine this vltnese, of course with the
exception of Dr. ctelnbauer on behalf of 3eiglboeck. Dr.
71cp, have you any questions?

D?.. TIP?: Yes, Your Honor. The questions which I
s ould like to out ere only in respeot to the sea water
cmpcria.nts, and, therefore, it would be aore appropriate
if I put them after Dr. Stelnbouor has coroloted hie
onanir.ation.

THE PRESIDENT: Yus, Dr. Steinbauer, you may proceed
t cross examine the witness. The defendant Boiglboook
aey loo vs the doc/, and tfUco hie position beside his oounsol.
You nay orocoed, Counsel.

CR0S5*SXAHIHATI0N.

3Y DR. BTEIHBaUZR: (Attorney for Defendant Frof. Dr.
3-lglboeck):

Professor Ivy, I want to -ddress two brlof quostions
to you mysulf. Vue the problem of making son water potable,
in which you ourself collaborated very well, was It a
contribution to humanity ir. reg-rd to rescue in oca distress?

A. Yea.

i. Do you roo with the Englishmen Dr. 3nk«r, who
vre c c a paper about tnle problem, that every means to bo
nyoll.d to -.eking son water ptoablo has to -bo examined in
advance very carefully in order to avoid great danger?

A. Yes.


DR. 37ZZ>T3AJ2l: Then, I h-’ve no further quoetionf for
the moment, '.'ith the permission of the Tribuna.1, I now a6k
to have Dr. Belglboeck crocs-examine the witness.


Court 1

June 15- 14-11- £-ED-5aap son-’rfartenberg.

DH2 FRS3ID2KT: In cross ex--lr.ini the witness, Dr.
Beiglboeck, -veld arguing with the witness; propound your
questions to Ala lr. ns sizple, scientific language r.s
osslble, mi anku your c-eetions not too lon a . Instead of
asking one very long question. It would be sore profitable
If several shorter questions nr.y be 'propounded. You zay
nrooeod.

CROSS EXaXIXaTIOH
S’- SHS DET2NDAKT DR. 3ISSL3CECK:

i. Professor Ivy, how old were yo- when you conducted
cho 8 3a w^ter oxoerizont on yourself7
A. Forty-nine.

x. How BUoh weight did you lose during tho oxpcrluent?
a. as I recall, In three days 1: was alzost two kilos
s newhoro botweer. f,-r and five pounds. I did t oso experl-
zents late lr. 194 , . . o :.’t be particularly accurate.

i. Do you zem that you lost this zucr. weight per day
or during tho entire course of the ex?3rlzer.t?
a. 0urlr. o three dnya.

i. Onl; two illo^r/«zfl, wit at t-xln & in frosh water?
A. ¥o , I towk nothing but 240 cc of sen water and
2 0 calories of food n day.

i. I zust ivvc zl6understood the translation at the
;lze. It wos zy understnndir. a that durln^ those chroo days
-ou drrnk 2,4CC cc of sea water.

«. Th"*t 16 c-rrect.

k . In other wurde, you only suffered c znxlzuz 1036
f ‘f liquid of 2 X cc; Is that correct?

-•%. as I said, I can't be absolutely ecourr.So i*o rdl.ng
:ha azount of weight I lost.

i. Frofeesor Ivy, is it correct thnt tze ff.eed of
dehydration is var;- Iz-ortezt?


0270


Court 1

Juno 16-14-ll-5-HI>-5an? s on-'rfart enbc rg.

A. Yes, that is correct.

i. If during the condition of thirst one consumes snail
aaounts of liquids, would the spaod of dehydration then be
delayed or in p-rt equalized or balanced?

A. Yea.

Q. Professor, in thj condition of thirst, the body,
fr n lta water stores, aipplles e-aa wtor, is that correct?

A. Yes.

v. Is it also oorrect that the liver, the skin end the
muscle arc the stores of water which w^uld covor this water
lose first?

a. Yes, durin 0 the first day or two.

k . Professor, is it correct^ and do you agrco with the
opinion of Marx, that the muscles are able to give up to
three liters, that is three quarts of water--

THE P.dZ3ID2;T: The translation is not coning through.

5. Do you agree with the opinion of Marx, that tho
-Uscloo arc able to a lvo up two to three llt-ro, or quarts,
of water?

A. Ir., toto, yes.

x. Do yt know that ir, the case of people who have
cholera, it ha boon observed that tho ausclc have lost up
to twenty por cor.t of water?

A. I recall that figure from the liternturo.

Q. That would be nor. than four liteis, or f ur quarto.

A. Yes, thit checks with ny calculations.

x. Professor, is it therefore correct that when water
is lackln 0 , first of '11 the muscles .are affected?

A. I am r.ot sure tney are ;he fli’st to bo effected.

“hoy do lose water beginning early, but whether tney are the
first to be affected, I do not know.


7271


Cfcurt 1

JOn a 16-M-ll-4-ED~5aBpson-1fe rtenberg.

Prom clinical experience with dysentery and cholera,
wo now quite well that It is predominantly the ^xiaclcs
that give- up the water. Do you have any experience lr. this
field?

A. No, bat I would agree with your qualification
"predonln’ntly. 0

Professor, if it i6 correct that the muscle first of
r.ll is effected in the condition of thirst, is it corroct then
too, th”t the dosage caused by thirst, that can be expected
first, rro the protein deterioration of tho musclos?

A. I think that will depend a great deal on whothcr or
not t.iw indlvlaual is -tarvlng — how such protein they are
obtaining lr. their ration.

i. Professor, if a muscle that has loot water is ou.posod
to perform a one work, would it work under vorao conditions
than a muscle that contains n lot of w^tcr?

a. It would work under worse conditions that a muscle
containing - normal amount of voter.

<• •tould it, therefore, be expedient from tho medical
ooint cf view to expect r muscle that has lost water to
work?

A. It co uld perform work, but not as much as in the
normal condition.

i. Professor, I believe you didn't quite understand my
quostlon. My question is — whether from the medic.-1 point
or view it would be expedient to exoect this ausclc to preform
some work that it does not absolutely have to perform?

A. The translation is not clear to me.

i. I did not ask you Professor Ivy, whether a muscle
chr.t nns lost vat_r car. work less well, but I csk-d you
whether it would not be expedient that a mu-clo th C nre
oocn dehydrated. sn»-ld be spared any unnecessary work.

?272


Court 1

Jun e 15-14-1 1- 5-HD- Samp son-Vart ar.berg.

A. I agroo.

Professor, If the blood pressure is measured after a
Btroir., than the experimental subject h-’s to do some work
tef-rohend; Is that correct?

A. That is, to do the amount of work It requires standing.

Yes. Did you convince yourself. Professor Ivy, ttat
In my record of the experiments the blood pressure at rest
of all experimental subjects was t-kon daily?

A. Yes.

%. Do you lo"ve the possibility open that tho blood
proasuro at strain was not taken In order to sparo tho
experimental subject?

A. That is possible, but I wondored why tho blood proasuro
wasn't taker, with the subject prone — lying down.

The blood pressure wns moaaured on tho experimental
subject lr. r. prone position; during the first porlod of tho
experiment -Iso after a strain; and In Individual 00808
toward tho end of the experiments wc did not take tho blood
pressure any s»re under strain because of tho existing weak¬
ness of tho cusolo.

A. I understand,

Q. Professor, Is it known that In an •’dult, too, the
temperature can rice when he 16 In a condition of thlr6t?

A. Yos.

Perhaps I may sr.ow you hero a paper by Denning from
the 1 -st century, --nd I should like to nsk you to look at
p*gos 293,296, .and 304, and oonvlnco youroelf by leans of
Che temperature curves that during the thirst experiment,
which lrsted for six to .seven days, temperatures up to
about tairty-elght centigrade occurrod.


it ProX„aaor, oouU yoi, t-.^rcforv, if auch aufc-fukriL. tcnper tureo occt
in con_:.tior. of thirst, thin., th .6 it ..-.a justifinbL. to consil-r inch an
-xp^rL»..Jt .1 sublet ill or 3- . iscsly ill?

It tx/na th t they r_ conailer bly ._h;\.r toi.

Prof-aaor, I o-li-v- eiv.fc -:.-ae r.cor.s of Dennis* 3 e;.p,.ri.er.ta
show that -r tur-a -*-r>- c lr« y the first c ad i ,ys.

In thw ixpi.eSix.rtM in thia rticl-?

\i Y-s.

icoor lag to.;* lot - f th. eh' rts, on t-._ 3r.. y»U /.th . .y:

I th.-ru: th t I c r. .Ui>cr th t on oa. -xp_ri—nt -n u._ first J y
l-~c ■ _y - t—per-.tui*. ov.. 37 ~.~r, .3 centigr.Je#

Pcxb .pa.

Is ?ro:>soor, ia JUtyJr’.don ; condition of l.ck?

Y~a.

~ii 0.3 th« Juiniatr non of *i^uii Jo »/.y .nt, li.in lack?

7 . - -.--aiatr-tior. of t_r -loss* .y not .0 .wty ..itii th- l .ck;
it -r.y r-* aire plua llitlu 3 It.

Thus you .oul- con slier 1. -x>_li.nt in 3 uch . cs. to use n’.it
soluticna?

hypotonic.

prof-sscr Ivy, Jo you ..u r^ ort in licil lit-r‘.tur_ .ccorJing
to u._c.. e s.ing - — -i_ r .a oc~~v_ it/ c-rt.iniy nft^r thirst a.nfition
ms r-ovw,?

7hir3t ion-; no.

Jo . ou knou sue.. report 2 r-sult of Ui_ urinici.'i, of ac<\ter?

Ho, —c_pt in those c s-s \x\ r . t t s_., Jiu Jr ™ o- . t-r,

JevelopC. h — ucin tlons, .nJ : licJ or cv.roo;rJ or _i~d.


9271s


25 Jun.>-#-Fi;-12-2-L.sscr („ .rt-nbcrg)
Court i


.-rof—sor, I b-lievc to t you h-.v- nisun-erstoo .1 _x -y'.in. I asked
you -...‘■.-tiiep .'ter to- rescue, th t if, 'Iter to; h J town givoi fresh water,
-• oos.rv lor. of p.r:.-r.wnt . h a so 1 r been published to ~iiy ..orll
—Lic‘1 literature?

A; I ~..o of no rticieo to wlicr., \ft-r suoj-cts hiv. ucperi.xnt-.lly
t-Jeor. a. t r is. s„ 11 -ounte for short periods of ti.~, h*ve .rjiifest... uy
Pens n-nt :

frcl.saor, is it corr-cc t.. - luriato._ con-itior. ol thirst, luw
to too o.-c: -un? of to, biool, to’.t is, -u. to to. fact to t - blood los-s
■r.tJ*, the circul.tlns .eount of bioo! xs r- .uc , 1 ?
f-i, an- Sicol voliex. ia r-uc- 1 .

i: f . Prof-asor, Ira- t ..cor of iy .xp«.rLwfi: c. Id you
cor.vir.Cw your:wlf th t to. puli- . N .*.' u-ncy luring to- ex?-.i_ ent toow-w a
tendency to r.-uctlon?

..: "-o, s I recall, there . nej to * rw-uc- . te,

Prof-jsor, if th. bl-ol vela— is r-.uc.l r.. to- frequency of toe
pulse -Ow3 .iot mere .3-, is it coar-ct to t th- .±nut_ volu..e of th- h-~.rt
is r-iucal?

.v: 1-3,

Fot.wesor, aft-r th. ha rC hoc • Juste. to this S.lllor nut- voluno,
'-nl "—’tor ou.. wn wtr v-nou3 _a:.i3tr oi:>r. of liquid of aoout 1/3 of tliv
volu.-, . oull you help to at 1 »- .-t at.. otauljit?

..: I Seoul. not.

: &::c .-. you i.. {;ir.w to t .r ctacing physici n ,<oui; c-nci.xr such
* thinj?

P3, depending u or. to- wn-r l condition of the p.tient.

Q* Px*ofw3aor, fra. the i cc lou. bj - sti_nl nt is UK^ C 0 on,
conclude -e c-rt inly that to_r- - e . uenkness of to- hu-t?

..: I 1. net o-liev- to t you ca.

Prof-ssor, is it cor. .c: to t e.;_ of toe sy-pto^s of -..w:Ja^3a of the
he-.rt or r ito-r f-stor puis- rac. to.a


3lov-r one?


Is lur..-*f?_-l2-3-L-scor (..rtfchbcxg)

Court 1

Tea.

Prci.asor, I o-li.v- you h'.v. -iso cr-fuliy atu_i-l th. vulu-a for
clc<x’. r-ssur-3 ..hieh I r.cor -c. Coui. you corvine, yoarscli th t in “ll
c -.sea t.v blcol pr.ssur. ^-.s nor—'J. -.It-r th. cxp_rL*_rt?

Do j-u i£-.n ft-r th- -xcorLu-.-at-I p-riol?
r.c, th t la .iv-.t I a. n.

..a I rtc d, th_r- ma tuiL-nc; for th- ol.ai pr.ssur. to b-
nor- 1, '.It. IaaoJo c s-= at . x.. t b-lo.. wfttfc it :.s b-ior.,
cut net a-: _;_n 2 ly so.

ji. . ou co.-p.r- th- bl - u.for. th- -xp-rJj-nt :dth the

Dloo . ^r—-ur- it.r th- _tp»r~.-r.tl p.rxo-?

1’tr., th t is ..v.t Z I. an ini.

;.a- . jins «o you . *un. £. t t.w blx>i pr-ssur. - th- u>_ of th-

-xp-.ri.~r.'. i p-rioi . o th- »• - .e ur.i j-ior- th- .xp-ri.-nt?

J.- .... lly sc, or. t.~ r-r J c.

: t.r I shall ca- 3*cl tc thos- ousea l.ich .-r- .’-ocrib-i aa
. n. I 3-11 /Iscjjs t:._ ol o.. pr-9aur-3 I Be c o-s.

.• Ivy, if I t-il you t,. - St-rofQnlio io nothing but Rin?.-r nolutior.,
ic you at'II o-nall-r It Ju^tifi-:, jS S—roiun.in is uo-. ..on thirst
-Xp.r _-r.. . iTu.'—, t.’ co.jc'iv. -1 t at - .h s-rioua l.a.’i-337

... ;; , I a.oul- not ccr.clu.. t. t It v a, b-c use ...

: i?? i-.aor, ...

y oc plotc hi* • ns.v.r t. qu-ation.

It • uat.:Tupt-d.

Ho, I shoui- njt condu — -i : -c .us. St.rofun_a:. .3 ttoetS th-
P'.ti-r.t, i.-r tulrat .xp.ru ait, n.c.es vily ./aa u. e.riouS con-ition;

but o _ rs ..y. In aucr. ucp-ra -is, th. t.ri 1 j s giv— intrr.v-r»U8ly

r.th-r t.: .. or ily.

Thr: j ..ainigter. l»-c .ua. -an Litrv-nou .-juLiis-r tionofa .lt

• •

solution. La r.ccor.-uic- adth 11 of th- st't—-.t3 in —lie 1 iit-r'tur-
kno« tc . rf iu^ic-s thu liqui: ooutuit of th- fco-y --or. . -r_ n-ntly.


16 J \iDtj-U~a-12r-L -L_ascr (jtrtcabwTg)
Court 1 71


UL !x iLf-TT: I -si: tint the rv-'r-: of ^r. Sci£lbatck be. stricken.

K- is joins on iir-ct ex~uirrtion. E. c v. t-stify ~t tfc'.t ti_e.

TE3 F H 5SXj B»Ts Tt*. r:..r.rko oi u;_ dta.sa r-n. in the or.bur- of t-stinor\v
on his ,rt rather th~n - quost-a; t. cl.. it.-x.8a. His r—rks :111 be
stricken lr-\. th; r-csr .. H- -dll o. per.-itt. . to t /*. the at-.n . : .in -Ai
•r.kc .fttt it t—ntu oonc»miag ..is c. n actions h- 1-sir.s.

prof.esor Ivy, nouII you a . tr.-.t *.fUr *n intr.v-nous inaction of
jUng-r vr •. -L alt soluti-.., chills «xth ar.-jp ris-a ;[ t. -r tur. r.
so—ti$ca obo.rv-l?

th- t-chnlqu. is uoi. Ihv- n-v.r s-_n chills n. twJ-
p-r cure . -r r. uarv.rc.u3 f Rinj.r Solution cr sodlufc chloril-

so let ion if the tubing la fr-. 4; if t. . a-lutioi. is fr— if .yrosenic
suoat r.c., t. t is, triple r--2.cfc.iie u- ia use U. o. airo tir t then,
n :ur. - iniucing au’ost.nc. in ti.. .r.’-»r.


35 ?.Uj 2E.\T: Ifc- Tribunal .dll nc., r.c.sa until 1:30 otoloek
r.c. a t until 133^ ours).


16 June i.7-X-S>-13-l-Prla«u( Blown)
Court 5c. 1


AFTtfffDOM 5SGSICK

(The he-ring r convened at 1330 hours, 16 June 1947 )

THE llARSKALz The Tribunal is again i n sesaic*.

THE -REGICEOT: The Secrct-'.ry General will file for the record the
certificate as to the illness of defo-.dant Gb»rheusrr aigrsed by the
prison physician which has been receive. The examination of the witness
coy proceed.


W. AW*Pr IVY - Resumed
CROSS Ewirmou (Continued)

P" DEFENDANT BEISIiBCS;K:

Professor, is it true that on the first day of r hunger-thirst
experiment there is n consid- r'bln ls #f weight?

A. Yrs.

-• Professor, I ask you to tnkn a loek at the case records of cases
1 to 32 nd to assure yourself that th weights botwoen the 20 th and
22 f»d ‘of August cith-r mcnl* the snao or inqrvftso saaewhat and that
from thn 22ni to the 23r* of August i-. all of these cases there is
a pnlpabl* loss of weight.

A. I looked rt the first three charts and I fail to find a weight
rne *r 1 «! ‘ o- the 21 st. I find a weight on th' 20 th, the next weight on

thp 22nd.

. Prof-r 3 or, wouldn’t it bo nonsensical to begin such an nxprr—
irrnt without taking thn weight on thn first day?

A. Yes, I should say so,

r « Frof'iscor, 1-t a ask you to take a look at Case 1 ; on the 20th,

/<& ^5Ti^^?\22nd, 6 A.7, and cn th*. 23rd, 62,2 rr th- respective

, •V'T

O/wrfthts. correct?


jXp r F-Bf’-*i t had begun on thn 21 et should on< net assume
1 to the 21 st a gain in -eight of about two kilogr


place'


9278


j


16 Jan* /.7-i-£T-l>2-Pri^u(Hrein}
Court Ho, 1


9

A* Did ytsu say a gain of twr kUognas?

r , Presupposing that th* nxpwriacnt b-gan on the 21st; so that
th' ^itght on th* 22 nd ia dot- rained air ady twenty-four hours after
th* hung r Rnd thirst bgan, then free th 20 th to th-’ -' 1 st the non
=7 at have galr. d about 2 kilo gran* ,

Y's, I uniorste.od. Ys, booausn the wight on th> 20 th is tL .5
kHagr-wa and on th- 22 nd, fc.,2, ia th sa» j hence, then has been
apparently no loss of -.•eight between August 20th and August 22nd,

O. Thn, Professor, should you not assuao that the «:xp-riaant begain
th* 22nd if free th- 22-d to thn 23ri in this ens aor-« than U points

r

are l*st?

a. Ins,

„ AH th- cairn froe 1 t* 2 show th< saao phenomenon r.a r- gnrds
th* weight. I ask you, plino*«, to look through thu charts and assure
yours* If of that fact briefly.


/


9279


16 C-c* (=30 X) -«-

C^irt 1


..: $ier- ax ao=o oft— ts aissii^.

Pr.-fossor, a; f: o I kh r th- file is complete. Ihoy wax -11
rteeuso-d her- before the TriixuiT-l,

I conn .t fin! -11 of tho shoots. For oc-nplc un.lcr subject No. 32,
the -rcp<-ri~'w I-.ca --re -iissin^. I cox. *x.y..cr yw quest in, y-s, up to
subject lie. 32.

UK. : I do not believe that the ch-.rta -.ni subjects, thr.t then No.

32 c.rfc .incC felt first weight, I d* not r-c 11 then I tr.o questi-niqs
Boi^lbogck th-t the cfr.rt then c.nt'ir,v.: th*t -.n 1 that they otr.rtoe out
the first u'.y f tr.u exp-ri—nt. Ur«ybo thr.t or.y b- helpful.

3Y -£.'2D.jrr 3SIGLBC1CK:

Fr..- the 32a! t the W.th, the expert efts beg-.n -n the 1 st -f
September, ani tlx. .thcr experiment:) D.-;.n on tho 22 n: A ..u^ust. I RIO
-.skins you a i hether the oxpori.-..-ts bwjyn -n the 21 at >r 22 n~, "nl for
t..*.t reno-n I ah-.ll -.ok yuu t- - 1 -ok r.fthe in Sivijnl c.-.oe r-corio n- t
eoepAru the .eights cal t t-_l uo Jx-tii.r the experiments be;.-aj omtho

21 st r the 22 nl.

.jrc>rlins t the .*.i£’.t roc-r-Ia up t subject M-. 32, J.ich io -.s
f .r -ol Ir.re »v.n \blc to f 11 * tho c-.seo, iruic-.t-o th\t the -xpe. i-.unts
otertc on the 22 ni. F-r exn<jp3e n subject II,. 32, -n p 30 32, Uie firot
l-.t- -ixntly is ..ugust 22nd .> th it was 67*1 kilos, tni n the

23r it -o 65.i, inlic-.tins th .t the eX?orLi.rti ~.-.y h-.ve st'.rt-l n ..u 5 uat


Frof-sr-r, is it s- tlct y-u c-.r. niy test the K-.i>erg reflex on
sxxoao .iiz is '.lbv t- st-jxl?

..cc-rling t. jy knmla^e :f thr.t tost, tho w-.y I perf-ru it, it
is necess ry fer the subject to st'al.

Ihcji in Jevply unc -msci «s stntu. -. sifcject couli r. t b- Iv-n the
K-jber- teat?

Zr.t is c.nxct.

-rc—ss r, - y u thin:. ' -.rs.fi t is -t—ply unc.naci us can -.sk


i2£0


C-urt 1


fsr W-t-r.

Ent ecponls up r. rfi other too~ ere so uncc.uscisus tiv't th-y cr rout
... uac.ascl.us p-rs-r. cm esk fur water.

P-rcfc-s.r, in the usual linguistic us-gc ir. Gcr-nn ixlicine the
u:ri "c_. r. 1 acres c t til unconsciousness, such as in - c-.se nl-baticurv.

: . 1 arC - Li -. r • ning.

C-uU 7JU please tell us ih-t;xr ;- -u unl-rst al the rils 'C'—J.t.sc" nl

■unccaacioca" t b- syn'neeuus?

Hr, urn nsci us an. C5_r,t>su are xt ayn-n.—us '.eesrding t th-
way I U 30 the teres .

p Then y-u think thr.t the c.-oIILjii h-r- l-scrib-l is n t one .f loop
unc ■nsci'usneos?

Jr-.t v-rls 1; y-u h v. r-f.r-nc- tc?

I v r.ferrix^ tr. the caso in •;:ich it is sail thr.t the R.-bc rz tost
is positive n- that the ran is in r. s-~d-c nsci us st*t-. I irnt t -.ok
if y -u jr-_ uth -- th t ice rlir.3 t —deal linguistic uu . w o the state
Being rofCive- t. her, is n. of o.:n.L.nce?

A: 7 .. i -penis up n the ic nir\» f t plus R-ibc; I bclievo that
was y ur question. 1 n.t eceust—u! t a lying that - R-eb-rj sign is t.»j
plus 0- it ;.iy Be thr.t tc- t.. -plus R. b-rj c-ui. .x.an th at the mliwinual
coull net atanl But ih-n attesting t st~n r-uLI fall ever to tho gr:uni
s- I dealt i:.v... the —anin- -f tile t \r. plus R b.rc.

Pr. f-s: r, 1-t n- tell p: u thr.t th- t .{.-plus si~n is ua-1 h-n the
r-Ilox-c cm be teste, mi ar- otr njly ;> sitiv— Cm tn- S»chn-r eyeball
r-fl-x a. test-: r. hcnltly p-rson?

.ill! y.u rep- t th. question?

*: C :. y u us- th- -yea 11 presraire r_flex rcc-rlin- t« lachn-r n healt;
p-rs.ns?

I Ir.'t kn.u mat a fcfl-x is ccer-iing t; Eschnor.

jfcia is -. . —fl—x that aff-cts th- rat- f the puisc hen pressure
i .3 ^.rc_eel .a the -ycball.

7es, y-u cm try th-.t tost Beth -n c;nsci-us eal unc nsci us pers ns.


16 Juno-..-R:-U-J-C>;k (3r -c)
Crurt 1


That -~s jy understand!ng -f the atnning -f the c7cbr.ll re ilex, fcut I hr J


1 : It ia use'lly a- designated inGcra*»y Prefesaer. Y-u still ir.ve the
ch'xta ;c:.r. y.u. Picric let us g. thr ugh a feu _f t.icsc c .scs together and
I -jrji t t- ‘ ik y,u whether it is your epinicn that in these cases uator, t.-
utt, fr.i: .-.t-r, ra drunk. Pleasw turn t c'.sj ”.. 3 . D y-u think thr.t this
patient fr— the 26th ta th- 27th ml fr.= the 28th t. the 29th -drank s'ec
fresh .c.tcr, if fren the 23th t- the 29th he lesea -nly 300 grrea -.weight?

Thr.t ia a auall Us f .eight :;hich is c.naist-nt dth taking in 3.ac
wr-t-r. "hw s.cll urir.ry ufcput, he..ever, is hardly c r.3ist-.it '.cith taking
in s..-: -/rter, and when ne is quits thin t; b-gan with the Lm of weight
bec::^a relatively a-.-11 rfUr er r fivo ys f f sti^:.

Prefes.-r, rticru the sjsxxi t f wilt is 230 cc and th; total 1-ss
-f weight is 3CO cc, .ric is f red t- a c-ndusi-n that the x.n wuld h-.vo
lost .nly 50 grass thr-ugh perspirati n and thr wgh respirr.ti.n, n.n tli -.t
ia n.t very pr-bchlu, is it?

it ia n-t v-ry provable sad ^ ihfcerpretr.tijn ir.3 that h-
pr.b“~iy .,-t s._e. wat-r.


9282


16 Jjr.o-A-=L-15-l-^r.sa (Int. 3rowr.)

Court Mj. 1

Q.- Do 70 u agree with ao, professor, when I say that tho first
reaction of a thirsting pors-n when dr i n k i ng water is retention?

Tos, that is true.

Q.- .ould this explain the slight m ur.t urine?

This is consistent, yes, with that explanation.

Q.- In order not to take up too =uch tine I should like to ask
you to tell ao in the other eases I “.a going to put to you whether you
agree with ao that when thu pers n is receiving .ICO cc of sea-water a
day and is fi-sting as w_U, is it n-t so that one .oust count a edni-
nun lvss of weight of 5CO cc day?

Yob, I Of roe with tint generalisation. I sight sr.y for tho
sake of the record in caking those prudictior.B wheth r the sublet did
or did not gain access to f.t.r that I should prefer see the blood
chemistry.

Qi- Th~ blood analyses are available. But I Just w anted to ask
this - take a look at case ie - f,r thr-c successive d.ay.i wci.hts va¬
ry irjc 51.6, 5U5 and then again 51.5. How in this case cannot sno
say with absolute certainty that the p~rs;n h-s been linking c nsi-
der-ble amounts of fresh water?

I ah 0 x 1 x 1 agree.

Q.- Is the ullnens ht-ard when tapping the liver a pathological
synpt x* in and of itself? Or, let .ae put it this way, if in a o-aso
history you fir* a notati.r. that states the liver is the way it was
before, would you regard that as a pathological pchnononc 'n?

Taat question is not clear to :x.

Q.- In one of thos_ charts I noted, "Liver not enlarged, liver
dullness .as bcf.rc" and tho a-:seCution c nstruod this t j 'x a patho¬
logical synptoa.

Th~t would indicate to .o« that the liv-r was the s-oc. as it
was before*

Q.- Proi-ss.r, you have brought up r large r.uabcr f cases here


9233


16 Junj-A-FL-15-2-Gross (Int. 5r nr.)
Court K.. 1


ir. which you hive, been of the opinion ttrt it could bo deduced that se¬
vere ir.jury hoc boon done, and possibly p-rarr^nt injury resulted there
froa. PL-asc tell me whether you think tint in those eases whore, the
subject's weight jr his release fra the OAoeriaent has returnee to its
previous status or has even incronscd a bit - now, in such a case don't
you fc -1 tr.ht th: cxperLoontsl subjects will recover completely niter
thu experiment? - I an ruf.rring, l , T instance, to case 2 Jo. 21 .

I gav. a rather long list .i subjects in which 1 mid r.n in¬
terpretation of tlu r-c-rdo uuld permit thu d.ducti n that they were
quito sick at thu Uriainr.ti.n ,i the ocp.rLo.ntc. H wever, the list
that I gave for those who wore quite sick and in wh^s death aiajjt hr.vo
occurrc ‘ was rather short. „s I recall I gave a list ,f only thru, such
cas-c. K w referring t. case }i,. 21 .

Q.- Tnuro you will find that .r. the 14 f -ugust his w.ight was
54 »dl grass - is that not si?

A.- Yos.

Q.- Now will you plea so l>,k at his rei.ht when he was released?

A.- . non he was ruleas-d the weight was 54. 2 . But ne nay wonder
h.w oich jT that increase jf weight is due t retention of water by
the b. y. It is o.ssiblu that the patient any have received so much
water or fluids that that was retained ,r a 1 -rge -n.unt f that vas
retained and r.cc ur.ts f r th. return of weight th. nor.-.-l level of
54. I • not sec any urinary utputs in this particuL-r subject cn*
<tugust 29, ..u^ust 30, 31st and Sopte ib.r 1 , 2 and 3.

Q.- Pr fess.r, tw. Weeks afUr the end .f the experiment, on 12
Soptc-aber, tho woi-r.t is still a,t d^m th.ro in the chart. In the up¬
per right hand sort of th. table.

»•- D you hrvo reference to D 12/9/44 - 57.5 kilograms?

Q.- That's ri.ht, yes.

Tho weight of 57.5 kilograms is indicated for the 12th S_?ten>-

ber.


92£4


16 Jiw>*-?L-15->Crass (Int. Sriwn)
Court fe. 1


r :.- Profcss:r, would you n-t construe this ns en indication that
ttk. arm hr a cioplctcly rcc.vered since after sore than two weeks after
the conclusion of the experiments his weight stands so high?

«•- ‘f-a, I accept that as an Indication but I should like to loirw
th- urlmry output on the days particularly iaacdi-tely f.U, dng the
experiment so rs to sue this increase in weight was not 'ue to xdecn,

DR. STdIH3.'iJ3i: I should like to sk that the too smaller b oaklets
which tho Sccivt-rj General rr.s sr.y bo shorn to w-U cs th- fover charts.

THE ?5i£SIE-I T: ..r- the bookl-ta cv • liable ir. the Tribunal?

IF.. 93IGLB0iC::: Th- urinary output ie certainly s-t i .wn in the
booklets, for that peri t 7 t 12 Seotcober.

HnRDY: Wo recall, your Hon-r, that during the c.urso of criss
oxrminntijn we f uni that s;aw of the urinary -utputs wore nit cont-inet!
in th- b ks either.

DH. ST The Secretary Gen.r-l has h-.d these b>oks in his

possusslm ell tho tirx; we fr.ve n t had thus since the beginning of
the cr 3s--x.viinr.tl n.

BY DR. BZIGl£ 0 iC 2 C:

Q.- On th»* 28th, tho urinary output is 1,080, which ia a c nsido-
rable at unt i -li in-ti n I r t per* 3 just b..r. thirsting*

Pr-feso.r, in case 23, y a concluded froa th- acute gain in »-i<,ht after
the experiment that injury had boon e ne? .as it y.ur opini n that this
waa a cas- of -err.? C-a- 23 fr a the 30 t th. 31 August?

...- It was ifficuit i >r =« t und-rst-r.. n.w the b dy weight c-ul '
incr. -se fr-m 53.6 to 62.8 fr th- 30 t. the 31at.

Q.- P-rl pa I -ve •_ - oistek- '..r-, I have 59.8 and 62.C r.s thu
two woiphts in question.

Un’ur th- 'ate f 2?th there are tw weights, 60.3 end 59.6, tho
latter is in pencil. On ..u^ust jO, acc^r- in * . th- figure as 2 r-ad it
it is 53.6 rad or. ..ugurt 31at it is 62.8 and n September 1 61, •’a! n
September 2 62, -r; on September 3 62.9.


16 Jun--;L-i5-4-Gros3 (lot. 5r»r.)

Court Ej. 1

Q.- T *t is probebly not 53.8 but 59.e. Tbess arc pencil notations,
!• that r.3t so? The increase fra 59.8 to 62.8 led y:u to lock upon this
ea aoao'-hir.^ pathological. Kow, will yxi plcr.se follow th^ course of

0

the weight hero act conclude that s^=e error was mde in the welching,
cither the patient drank a lot of water just bcf.re the weighing or an
error was x.dc by the recorder?

...- Yos, tfrt is possible.

Q.- You <l 3 n*t consider it probable that a ease f oodena existed
here because excretion th» n,xt day would have be.n inprobnbL,?

j..- ..oil, it is true that the excretion the n.xt day was larger than
the input but that 'oos not -ounn that s j*. oedeaa or.y not have been
present. H:« extensive the oodcae is, is hard to say and I .-a willins
to agrvo thrt tho figure 53.8 is an error in copying down th- weight
bec-u*. it is difficult to believe that the tie at .nay have lost that
nany kilugr os in 24 h-urs and then jur.x ’ up t 62.8 the foil-wing 24
hours.


June lo-A-3r-l>-l~Zarrow (lat. Brown)

C ourt So. 1


^ Professor, if ea X-rpy photograph shows that the pieces of the
l-sv show n she low which is not relieved by cou-'hia,- and thpt the hilus
of the luars is thickened os both sides psd is fibrous, would you not
eor.eur in ay opinion thpt this X-ray shows sir ply that there is a
cert-in pleural thickening of the nieces of the lunrs, that there is
e scar on the pieces of the lun^s?

A “hrt is possible. As I explrf aed in ay direct testimony J
should have to see the X-rry filns nyself before I could base nn
iaterpretciioa or. then or answer that question with any deip-ee of
rccnrr.qf .

^ But you do oyee with se that this X-ray docc not necessarily
show n new process irk In,: piece in the ltln^o?

a I s^ra with that.

Q Professor, when you looked throuth ny exporincntrl records, did
you look at Case f71

A Its, I looked at the record on every subject.

^ I his is a case that was treated with Schaefer wrtcr. This ox-
peri=«ntal subject wrs In the expcrlscnt for twelve dr/c, fastln.: for
ol'fct, and lost k.g kilos throughout the cxpcrlacnts fro:: tho 2 ?nd
to the 2nd of Septesber. Is that not so? Pros 6l.5 or. tho 22nd
to 57 on the 2nd of Septcohor.

A Yes, end then on the 3rd of Scpteabcr, the or tier.*. apparently
■till lost tone core weight.

^ Is the final weight of this exnerincnt’l subject - nancly, of.,5 -
is it tho sane rt the person's weight rouphly when he entered the
experiment?

A Yes.

^ Then you would say that the subject hrd recovered fron this
fastin' cure?

A Yes, on the basis of the infomatlon available.

* la Case 3, Professor, please look in this notebook for the blood
pressure record at the conclusion of the experiment - namely, on the


9227


Just li-»-3Z-lS-2-Zfirrov (let. fercV/n)
Court Jo. 1


29th - asd tell se if these blood pressures ere sorsel! Or. 30 Au-mst
the blood pressure is llU over JC, is ecse 3 .

X Tes, that is nossal.

9, Os thr 1 st of Septesber, under the influence of strychtinewkfclbh
the sen took, the bldod pressure is sosevhrt higher, I 36 over 9 CT

A Are you referring to Subject 31

* Tes.

A X ex sorry, I don't find thet.

^ It's not 00 the chert,

A On the pages thet you had indiceted with this white shu t of
purr, eft»r Subject 3 , on the 3Cth, X find r blood pressure of 119
systolic end 80 diastolic, end then the next record, thnt io on the
3lst, 135 over 9C. The next record is.... Is that what you hove
ref-rcnce to!


^ Tes, that's whrt I an referring to.

Asd on the 2 nd of Septesbcr io there a record of blood pressure!
A Tes, 120 over 7o - prrdca sc, it's I 19 over 70, end then the
specs lifter th*t is blank end nothin.- ie written in.

<% Art those norurl blood pressures, Professor!

A Tos.


\ Is it not oocsiblc, Professor, that in this erso the strychilno
v“ s really Ives rs r. tonic for the ir.teotlr.eo because the sit. vre
constipated rnd was rfreid thnt this would last, so the otrychfciac
v*s here administered, not as a etiaulrnt to the circulation,'‘nit
rs a. tonic for the intestines!

A 2 have never heard of strychnine bein> co uc«*a.

% I css only tell you that in our clinic strychnine web Yury often
ust 4 ns as lntestir.pl tonic, but perhaps thnt isn't the rural


Tow, Professor, X don't went to go through every cast separately
now, but I hrve one brief question.

A re you of the opinion the* intensified vesicuicr respiration


92i3


June la-A-3X-io-3-l>-rrov (In*., Brovc)

C oar*. So. 1

indicates bronchitis?

A Tea,

^ Meet one no*, r. cause that a thirsting person would excrete
roughly hCO cc of urine a day?

A Tea.

^ And If auch a thirsting person can concentrate ep.lt oolution,
do you not agree with io that you can give hla aa such r.a eight
-rasa of salt?

A Tea, that la c reasonable aaaunptloc.

$ Sow, Profeasor, If n pereor. receives roughly 15 grnna of orlt,
vhlch would correrx>nd to about half r. liter of seawater, then he
would eliminate roughly 80C cc r dry of urine? Ze thet not ao?

A Tea. that' a noproxlartely correct.

q Thus, any ona who recolved thlo aaount of arlt would be vorae
off than a perton thirsting?

A Tea.

\ Eowcvtr, if he receive a thla In the fors of 5C0 cc of ocp.
water he would, never thole aa , enve 100 cc r.a co-roarcd with the
thirsting peraon.

A Tea, thrt*# thcoroticrlly possible.

^ Profeaaor, do you ienov thrt the cxperlncnta carried on by
Lcdeil and Sdir. ton nnd Winkler led to the conclusion that snail
(counta of sec voter, bicpuec of this alight saving of wp.tor, pro
better than complete thirst?

a Tea, with thrt Idea in nind I hrve nadc a study of tho-^uection
of the extent to vhlch one nay stretch freeh wpter by adding aoa
water to it, end a sscll quantity of ser weter ary bo Ingested
with Bavin.-, accordin’ to theorotlcpl considerations, cad according
to the oboervptlona of Ledoll rad ouraelvc6. The extent of tho
ability of different individuals to tolerate the additional Boa.vntcr
to the fresh water varies.

^ "her., you resteber, Professor, thrt Lcdeil observed that tv©


92l9


Jane li-X-3-l&-^prrov (x-t. SroWaJ
:«irt so. x


fX'eri=e-*.ri subjects were capable of p concentration of wilt
higher then 2<T

X T*s, end X recall In ay direct testlaony, X said that since I
had not eeca thrt ayself In ay ovn experiments, X have vonderod
whether or not there al-ht not be an experiaentel error In the cr.se
of the figure 2.#.

* Professor, an I right In scylng that between your experiaeats,
so far m I know then, and Iredell's experiments this difference
exists - neatly, that Ledcll first erected a certrln etetus of
dehydration before he gave seawater to be drunk!

X Tes, that'a correct.

* ? hen, is It not possible that a debydreUd body Is caprble of
a better kidney concentration than a bedy thrt has enough vr.ter
ewallpble to be n little luxurious In Its ellnlnatlor. of the salt
concentration!

X Tes, thftt't possible. That's one of the ltoas of lnfomrtlon

I

that ve toe In the literature which we believe requires further
confirmation before It can be generally accepted.


9290


16 to: ^7-,.-uTrul7-l-<tlcr/ ( 1 st. Brown)
Court Jfc, 1


3 Is the a nal ysis cf th- salt concentration In nrlnj a difficult
chcdocl PTCOJ33?

1 2 fct to a wall-trained Christ to a v«eil*.traino J chozdoal
technician,

1 Dor.*t : _u think that scoono who was or. assistant »4th Tho:ias
for 6 years ir L-i?zi was caeablo f oarryin ou. such an analysis.

1 Tos.

1 I asked this question bocauso that is the caso with ry essuoiata
in ths sxp-rfcients. >:os r.;t a sliiht 'diainntion or urine load to tho
concentration cf rosi feel rd.tr --.on in the blood?

.. That is correct,

1 Sara you not ascertain- ?rcf« sor, that the residual nitroyon
quantities in tho tloo* - * y exp-rir.-nfcri subjects 'll net roach any
rlondm prrxrti :ns?

That is sy recollection fren s v oin your fi/uros last January.

I have Kt look.3 ’ the:: ever or a-on then recently,

Q Profosscr, .>iaaso convince yourself of that a ain on tho basis
• ? this hcol&ot which will bo put to y ; you not rf the opinion,
as is jm rally hall to bo so in literature, that th- Juvenile ir anis.a
contains nero water than the adult :r-anise?

1 Yos. ’ ill y u plooso in’ic-.to in this booklet irhera I can find
tho fi'uros on norwpr atcir. nitre-on?

1 The residual nitre on values aro c*rriod c-ntinu-usly hero vdth
tho various ’.atos; uv..ry twe *aya t’.io residual nitr cn was noasurod
in: tho word "flint’ (bleed) i3 next to that di ure? On th. 2dth end on
ah. 3Cth, these arc tha points vbero th. -r rinento reached their
axinaa, or. horu the rcsibial nitr. -r. ;u-ntitles arc Ivon, on * you
“ill fin.’ that in only a for cas-s is t.er. any increase, but neno
roach. * the point f heir, bux-orris. Perhaps you -fill also observe

only th. dairstin* . r up ha certain increase, whereas tho saa~
r -‘v * Toup L:pt n.moi residual riixv en values.


16 Jane !i7-L-».r>-17-2-<'.aioy (Tnt. Prow.)

Zznrt fc. 1

A Yes, that is true, with tho possible oxcsptian of Subj. et 32.

i Tos. In a few casoa it rises above 50, but particularly in tho
casq of the series usir. 500 cc soaur.tar everythin* • is n,mal. Is it not
trio thrt acsasnter taken froa near the seacoast contains lo3s aaLt then
wat-r token free the hi h sons?

A Yos.

Q Do you not then consider it possible that !eCitarranoan soa-
wator taken near tho coaat ni.ht contain a aalt concentration of 2.7
p-r cent?

A Ios, •

P'T^SSOI DR. BIDGIDO’CY* He further questions.

D?. STSUE..02D* (Dr, Stoinbau-r for 3it^clbocck)

3T Dd. SX3K3ATJERI

5 Now, Profossor -

%

ZKZ ’rffiSHEBTl Tho !ofon’ant 3i« clboock nay cor.tinuo to sit by hia
counsol, if he loaircs,

1 I should like, to show to you. Dr. Ivy, tho '.ocunjr.t that Dr.
Sorntius pot to you day boforo yoatorclay, Xarl Brandt, 10 h. This is a ,
rj.v.rt by a .risorxr re ar'-in hun or oxporinont. I shall not put this
to you in r.’jT to show that tho so w^ro similar exparinonts, but booauso
I want to establish oortair. ..x*, regions that arc ua> : ir. it. Lot ::o ivo
this ’ccuiur.t to y.u in tho dnrlish translation.

" . y..~7Kt ''ill Dr, Sts-inbaucr Jdn'ly rtf-r to tho paro an-’ nunber
f tho flocu^ont, "hat Karl 'ran’.t doettaont book tho exhibit ia containod
in, an' tho oxMcit au/har.

D • ~ :3..Ua' t It is Karl Brandt D-cur jit Book lOU, an' on tho
ca.r.* I have I should like tho witrvoss to turn to tho socond pa;:o "hero
th. prisorv.r soys tho fcllcwinj: ‘h'o all ha-’ ina inary physical cilaonta
an:' hysteria." Then five lines further on "Ir. the cases of nsny persona
‘•hair kno-as an! joints swoLUd up to as such as throo tinus nor-el in
half an hour. Sow of the ..arsons fainted


9292


16 Jane h 7-i>*TD-l7-3-Jfclry (inti Brcwn)
Ccurt !fe. 1


3 Dco^r Ivy, decs this rut indicate odaia resultin' fro:- hunpor,
this STwllir, cf tile knsos and Joints?

I dan*< know Vt that loa n s. This is on article apparently
taken fr:n "He -.dors Di ost", which is o fiction Krasina. “o can*t
-'epond on the authenticity cf atatcsjnta nolo in such o acfaiina cr on
tteir scientific accuracy. 7-u i Titers for this r. a si no oro froquontly
pr.ii tc wri*o in a drcaatic and aonsational nanrur for th- purpose cf
intorostin only lay readers.

D -• 3TTIr3..UBRt In thrt cas», Professor, in vierr of what you have
Just soil we shell rut pursue this document further, :n‘ I shall with¬
draw it. I Jo rut '..lab unscientific natter to ho confused with
sciontifio Tatter.

I hare no further questions.

TrT 15531 CErTt Dofjnixnt Pic^olboock will rosuno his plaoe in tho

box.

I understand Dr. Tip? doslros to propound sc w questions to tho
witness,

DoosDr. TIfp 'astro his cliont *. sit host 'o Mn *urin thu croso-
oxnrdnation, -r is it unnecessary,

IT.. TL?t It is r.-t noo-ssary, Tcur Honor.

BT OS. TIP?:

1 Profobscr Ivy, if I havo un' ratoe ‘ you correctly y u said ir.
t Iroct exa m ination that tho consumption of laryo (mounts cf soa-
wat.r for lor. orlo's of ttvo can load to serious injury an’ to loathj
-d I under3tan’ you corroctly?

A Tos.

1 Tou spoke alsj of Sarkatit, thrt is, th. 'ru t: rr.ko son water
pete io, cn ■ told the Tribunal that soawater treated with Berkatit was
identical ir. its metical effects with pure seawater; i’ I understand
/ru correctly in this?

- 103 .


16 Jtoe HT^riO-iT-^-itOay (Int* Brown)
Court !-o. 1


3 Coder these circumstances, Professor Ivy, could a parsen tako
the responsibility of ivir. Sor'ntit as tho dru~ teat takes seawater
potable in practical son anjrcvmcj' coses?

A I lo not onlcrstcad the first ,-rt uf that question?

3 If the consumption ef sutTrct.-r luads to severe injury in the
lor. run an*, if Porte tit water is f.r all practical purposes i'’untied
with soawatcr, then also the consumption of Boric wat^r 3i3t lend to
serious injuries. Thoreforo I ask you, could a parson toko the responsi¬
bility under those circumstances for intro ducin BorkcUt r.s the druc
to bo used in practical cases of soa our; one;’ as tho druf to render
saowator potable for a flior who finds hinsolf in a strto of soa
ewjrr oncy?

%

A to.

Q dter, --s wo knew, Pr.fossor, you havo just studied tho ’ocu-
aont-.tior. for this trial xet carefully, particularly tho Document 3cok
7, which deals with seawater. You wi l l t too vith »- rrhen I say tho
Technical Offico In tho 102! *m doteralnad, dosplto tho nodical cds Ivin -s,
to introduce Borkatit estho dru- to bo usod t -.-..’a scawator potabloj ’o
roa o mh e r tho dseuaontation well on u h to bo ablo U corroborate this.
Professor?

.. That is an Innroeslon which nay bo ainod fren roa Mr. tho
■ocurior.ts.


-I-

16 J'zz.g-jtH*-! &-# oetca( Brovr)

Court I

tot me say la addition, Professor, that the Technical Offico
of tho a t JC was She agency which could ncke the decision or. what
fru£ was to bo used; now in this case was it not the duty of tho nodi¬
cal officer in tho Kedicd Service who was in chargo of tho t roqps
to do everything ho could to prevent tho production of Berkatit for
at least long enough to determine its usefulr.oss or uselessness?

4. Tes.

^ • £mcn lot ue put tho following to you in this nanaor* 2 ho
osporinonts that wore carried out in T ochau for the purposo of ij>-
▼estigatieg seawater you regarded as usoloss bocauso fracm a chemical
point at view it was porfoctly apparent that Borlcatlt was usoloss; van
that not tho point you o^iressed in direct ex a mination to Hr. Hardy?

4. Tes.

C. les no put two nattors to you; ypu said that during tho war
you vero consulting nodical officor in -eerie an offices both in the
Air J ores and tho Havy; therefore I nay horo suppose your und oft band¬
ing for tho foot that a rosponslbllo nodical offloor when considering
tho introduction of a now drug, would huvo to considor not only tho
ch ami cal aspects but also tho clinical aspocto and particularly in
Vor, also tho row uaterial or tochnical sido; is that not so?

4. Tos.

^ . Schroodor and Bockor^-Trcyscn;;, imy two clients, arc alco
of your opinion and wore of that opinion in 19V., so far as tho chami-
c.l side of it is concerned, but from tho documents you have soon you
know that to manufacture Vofctit, nts.oly the S c ha of or drug, cllvor
in largo aiounst was noecssary. In 1944 when G ernmy wasso poor in
rar-’ mat oriels, this silver could only have boon obtained by talcing it
avoy from other agencies where eilvor was also a necessary vital wr.r
a.-, to rial. On the other hand, 3orkctit was made of raw natoriols that
were cos;* to obtain. 0 o you not egroe with no, Professor, that this
technic .1 aspect should not be loft out of consideration in this quoo-


92?5


15 Juna-*a -i4J-l&-2-Heecan(3rown)

Court I


*1°“ a nodical officer is eallod upon to ache a rogponsiblo de¬
cision?

a. 0no cast consider the availability of the raw nat oriel in¬
volved In any process.

Tos. That is, the tcchaicd aspoct spooks in f^vor cf Bozfcfr-
tit. Sow, do you know the nano of Professor a^pin^er f rcc Vienne?

i. To».

You also know of Profossor Eeubner free Berlin?

•>. Yos,

Z. Stoa you will egroo with no. Prof ossor, when I soy thet thoso
two non nro a world fecous clinician and a world fjnous pharmacologist.

d . Yos, thoy are well known.

How, OS actually was the easo, both Professor Huobnor and
Profoscor Ifcpingor said that thoy could not docido without oaporinantii
whothor 3orkatit was pcrb<s>o sonothing that should bo introduced in
tho soa rescuo sorvico for a short tino; now, in view of that foot
would you not giro tko responsible luftv.'Sfo nodical officor at that
tLiO tho right to clarify this problou in an oxporinent, tJ:iag into
consider. tion tho throo aspects, tho uilitary, tho cfcaiical, and tho
clinical?

a. I do not think so.

s • I ask your reasons for that?

reasons arc as I have already indicatod. Ihoro is no
reason tc boliovo thoro is anything in Berkatit which would in any
offocc the salt in the ocaw u tor or alter its absorption, rcton-
t-on or nocration fron the body.

s • z uite SO, Professor, that I readily admit and ny two
clionts wore also of that opinion, but ny question is a different one.
?orht£)o I could procodo it with another question. Hhy does c doctor
carry out an experiment? ?erh£ 5 >s, I can give you ny opinion on this
and it will holp to shorten things a bit; oithor he doos this in ox'-
dor to confim the eorroctnoss of his own idea or if there arc two


9296


15 Ja=fc-4rW-l&-3-Ke«tam(3rwa)

Court I

?oi=t» of view, he wishes to confirm the correctness of one of then!

a • He olio demonstrates if there is rocc or reason for tvo
point a Tt view.

%. \tito so, but you odui tted before that both Professor
Euobaer and Professor ifcpinger ore rocognixod authorities; you said
that yourself!

L . Tea, but Z should not consider than competent in this
particular field.

x, Uny I ask why not! The clinical aspect of this ia a note-
bolio question, namely to that extent the kidneys are ablo to concc>»
trnto salt; you nust admit that at that tine there sos no ono in
Sxrcpe hotter qualified to evaluato that problcn than Profossor
Jnpincori or do you feel differently about that!

1 . Z don*t bolievo that Professor 2fc>piagor had any experience—

ft* Perh^s tho intorprotor could spook louder. Z an not honk¬
ing tho ensvors ti^t you prosent. Professor, will you kindly repoat
tho lest answer!

~* Z do not bclioro that Professor Siplngor hod porforaod ea-
perinento on tho elimination of salt in tho urino and tho ability of
tho Sidneys to concontrato salt.

ft . Shat is a question, which Z, as a lawyer, an not ccupotont
todocido, Z Cin only buso ny statenonts on what has been told no and
Z believe Profossor jfcpingor has dono a groat doal of work in this
fiold, but that does not striko no as boiag tho fundamental quootion.
She basic question is this; if a world ronounoi clinician, of ihooo
conpctcaco thoro can bo no doubt, states: ■!, Professor 4>plno° r i
cn not in a position to state definitely whether Bcrkatit should bo
introduced into practico or not, that nust be decided by on onpori-
nent"—if such cn authority hakes such a statement.

;Q» lour Honor, I believe the witness has answered the

question. 2£iis is merely an argument persuing between d of one o counsol
end tho vitnoss.


9297


16 l S -4- K o *ha s( 3rovn)

Court I

PSasiDZST; 0 bjection overruled, the witness nay answer
the question.

3£2 'TTXSSS: la a situation of that sort, X don't bcliovo the
world renowned dlalclaa la entiroly oceyetont to enovor tho question,

I would prefer to t*)ce tho opinion of a physiologist or bioohajiat

• - - -

oa aa opiaioa of that aort ia preference to hio opinion.

. 3f PH. TZ??s

Q, . Pardon no for saying *o, Prafeaaor, but you oro ov.ndia,-; tho
question. X win ask you thla queatioa; could c responsible nodical
officor in thla altuatloa t^oro Profeaaor %rpin£or olid Profosoor
Euobner 1 a viewa, two roco^aixod cuthoritioe, whoa they oay that fron
tholr point r£ view o^orlnoats aro necoaacry; could ho do that or
should ho rathor aey, X an of a different opiaioa froa thot of thooo
two authcritioe, howovor, whothor X aa ri,;ht or theae two authoritioo
cro ri,>it aust be decidod by aa eaporiaont. I boliovo you oca (£ro
c perfectly clear aaower to that (iuootion?

• X t la not aecoaaory to i^aoro auch on opinion, but oao
ahovld not aocoasarily baao thoir acta oa that opinion without noojo-
ia tho opinioaa I have alroady nontionod, euch as a biochaiict -nd c
physiolojiot, who hero worked on tho subjoct of salt aotabolisu.


5293


16 Jans btM»3!>£9-l-9eard (rat. 3ro*n)
Court Be. 1


Q "oil, Profeasor 5chrool_r is vary sorry that you were not his

advisor at that tine; but, I cen only repeat that if the »orld renowned

clinician, «fco is ro-ardci as an authority and whoso opinion is not to

bo disrc'-rdad, if such a ;cr. says it is possihlo that B&rkatit contains

substances that pcirdt a hi her conoontmtion in tho kidney, at loaat

for a certain la* th cf tine, in ry opinion a radical officer is not to

hsro-ard such an attitudo cn tho port' of this well krwwn authority, but

•

nust ±j what this authority su csts, nn psly, carry out cn experiment,

particularly if tho otter side, na-sly a Pharrccolc- 1 st oxprossos a

0

'iff-rent attitude

It still do os net -.oar. that th- exports-nt was r.occssqry.

Q I °® '^'i ' wo ire not ttndarston'in ore anothor. I an not trying
to hoar frr.i you whothor tho -xp-ria-nt is no cos s ary. That tho orpori-
:»nt was net nocossary, that lorkatdt was nat suitable, th-t was ’.ocidod
in tte -xporlnant, I want to hear f r a y u whothor br n t it was not rlrht
to carry cut expori^nts for this rcascni first, tte raw raatorials
problon played a rale* and, secondly, tu sciontifio authcritios jpoko
in favor of tevirv tho oxport-ajnts carrio:! out, Thjso quostiens woro
or.dor debate, and I do not boliovo that you can assert that all thono
reasons should sinply bo dUro^xrdoi, or.-l tir.t a p-rson she uld sayi I
wiU not carry out any oxp-rfcaante. Those tw footers, tho scientific
O'irions of tha scientists an-’ tho rur r-atoriils question, must bo takon
ir.v consideration by tho -xiSLc-1 officor in quostion,

T.. :£.T5Y: Your Sorer, I object to this. This is pur-ly ar.uno.nt,

Tho witness tes answorod this quostion for Mn cn two cessions. ;.ni ho
is tryir to put wrls in the n nth f tho - itnoss, an l ;ot tha witmss
t say things which the witness .’cos not boliovo. I aust bjoct and
r-'-r:est the th. question bo stricken fren tte record.

JK' ~1T3: v ': Tho Yrlbua&l will propound the quostion to tho
d- inesn.


9299


15 Jtrna 1

Ccurt jfc. l


3T JCIX2 SSEHJDi

~i Doctor Ivy, I aa not suro I understand the nature of ycur stato-
r,ent, »t la this whet it attaints to? It is your view that it can bo
aseertainod ch-dcally and with absolute certainty that the Schaefer
Tofatit would pradpitate salt fron soawatcrj is that correct?

1 Yea.

Q And, it could be ascertained cbrzically with absoluto certainty
that 3orku*s 3ur!atit would net predpitnto salt fron seawater?

A That is opinion.

1 And, that consequently any oxperinent carried cn with Berkatit
would bo in ossoneo nothin rare or loss than an oxperinent oarriocl on
with soowator. Is that tho point?

A That is correct*

Q An it is yaur view that whsn those situations exist, and you
havo on tho one hand Schaefer »s /o fa tit that can bo proven chordoally
as -.jin. Ohio to precipitate salt fre:: son water; and on tho othor hind,
you have Borka*s Berkatit which v±ll not prod pita to tho salt; that you
to not havo two preparations <r substances so closely akin or in oo.-non
as to wrnrnt an axporinent with Boric tit whon you aeto that tho offoct,
that tho prim result or effect is a tjstir. f a pr: duct on tho one hand
th t dll yredpitato salt fro i seawater, an’, a pre ’uct on tl>o othor han’
tho.t will not precipitate salt fron seawater, whjro tho prino bjootivo
ia to 'jtcrrdno a noth ; t: nalej soa water l j is that y ur p ir.t?

A Yes.

T-~ n^STSKIt It see* s to aj the question :rep-unded to tho
It ness was purely erntuatativo. ’lees tho Counsel ’osiro to propound
ary oihir questions to tho wits*.ussf

D' . TI 7: I hr.vo a nuabor cf question, which perhaps it -.dll bo
'- .ib.r to put aft.r the roc*w>.


16 Juno 47- 20-1-Danl e 1 g- (7ai* t a nb erg)

COtfr.7 I , JA5£ I


TK£ iaASHaL: The Tribunal is" again in session.

THi PHJSIDS:.’!: Counsel may .roce.-d.

37 oa. n??:

Q. Prcfes.or, If I understood your attitude to
Berkatlt corraotly-nanoly, as you stated it in the direct
examination, you expressed the view at the tlmo that due
to the pleasant taste -'hioh Serkatlt lends to sea water,
it -would lead the shipwrecked to drl.nK large aaounts of
sea vator, ao, for oxaaplo, occurred with experimental
subject number 2. Did I understand you correctly in that
respect?

a. 7ea, I believe there la a tendency in that
direction.

Q. «nd is this correct too, Professor? Did I under¬
stand your statement correctly that your experimental
subject number "»— a physician who, during-three days,
drank only about 800 00 of sea vatoiv-dld not have any
complaints due to th it?

•i. Yes, that is oorreot f

Q. Now you certainly Know, professor, you have al¬
ready mentioned this with PieglocK, ’.hat not only the
excessive lo.s of water b. t also the loss of salt, that
is, of sodium chloride, can bring with it damaging results.
Did I understand you correctly in that respect too? I
mean, that the loss cf sodium chloride occasioned by
thirsting is damaging?

a. fib, I think that you must have misunderstood
some statement that I m .do.

Q. Professor—

a. If one loses salt is the r suit of perspiration,
then that loss of salt is deleterious.


16 June 47-*-jJC-20-2-Danlol3- (Vartenberg)

JOU.-tT I - G*3Z I

C. I thought. Professor, it was pointed out that

•

through the loss lr. the blood, the bo- called hypochlorenla
— that Is, the sodium cholorlde loss in the blood Is im¬
portant, and that therefore there can be some damaging

results.

A. Phat only occurs with excessive sweating.

Q. But one thing must be correct. Professor. You have
already stated today that a number of scientists, among
tnea Ledoll, were of the opinion that the administration
of small amounts of sea water is better than pure thirstlr^

A. Yes, because they would gain a little water, per¬
haps 100 Ov, and still would be able to excrete that salt
in the urine that would otherwise be formed and excreted.

Nov, Professor Ivy, I want to soeoh with you about
the testimony of the expert, Professor Vollhardt. You have
read his testimony, and therefore you win admit that ho
too statod that the drinhing of small amounts of sea
water is to be preferred to absolute thirsting; is that
oorroct?

a. Yes, that is my reoolloctlon.

'l. Therefore, Professor, it is oorroct th:t the
drinhlng of largo amounts of sea witer Is harmful. On the
contrary, however, the drlncing of small amounts is net
harmful; yes, according to t:.o opinion of some scientists,
is even to bo preferred to thirsting. Now, in your statem¬
ents you thought that you saw a contradiction in the state*
-nts made by Professor Vollhardt. I don't quite ur.dcrat nd
vhat this contradiction was supposed to bo; perhaps you
would be sc mind as to clarify this ccntradictlcn some¬
what .further.


9302


1 June -A-3 J-21 -1 -?o 1 d t -(-orten o ar ;
Court case 1


A I should have to refer to the record.

1?.. rjJtLYi Tlw two points that defor.se counsel referred to. Your Honor,

I hove typewritten hero, but I don't have tho record. If ho wants nc to
reed tho t>o points to hia to sid in exesdnin; It. Ivy, 3 will point out
tho payo nunbors. Lr. Ivy h->a the record before hia and ho con ref or to
it if nooossary. Tho first ono is or pt^e 6U85, ho lon-uayo is tho niddlo
of tha po^» in tho doll hard t testimony, berinnin r 'lth tho word "howovor".
Tho next is et tho bottoa of tho next po;o, pare &-6U, whoroin Vollhnrdt
tostifics that drinkin; sec wotor with Ssrlcrtit would hevo serious conse¬
quences nfter six days, I believe thceo wero tho two on*oa you roforred to.
BY LR. TIP?i

On thoso two plnoos I could find no contradiction. Professor, ~orhr.ps
you oould clarify tho contradiction -hi oh you think you find in thoso two

re°«*

A On Fc“o 833* tho sontonco roads: "Ucwover tho oxporlrunta did not
-ivo c dofinlto supportivo ovidonoj of that but thoy did hovo an lnpor-
t->nt result, not only tho obvious r-ault, r.'taoly tha tho Sohnofcr wotor
«,i supericr to anything olso, but olso the observation thot tho kidnoya
con n.vertheloss oonoontrato sc cstonishly well up to the concentration
cf sos wotor thot in tho future ono oould -ivo tho odvioo thot in anoos
of son distress instead of boin; completely thirsty, onu oould rather
drink pOOco. of soa wotor end ir. that =-r.nor incr.aso tho salt oontonts
of tho blood but would not btve to bo efroid of dcdydrrdion quite so
quiekly." On Fa-c (WjU tho onswor nt th. botton of tha par-, --irst tho
question* "And you went on to say. Professor, that tho ■’admonition’’ of
water with Sortotit which is equal to soo wotor would havo d'-nc serious
injury in practice, end provided it wont on over six doys would load to
dacthr *r.d tho answer is: "It would have serious oonsoquonces aftor
rein; cn for ever six days and wculd aott ecrtclaly land to death of tor—"
which wes the ond of tho sentence. Kcu on ve.ro it is indlooted thot

tho ecnsunption of see water oould, on ;oin; ov r eix days, load cortninly


9303


16 eldt-piartcBt erg}-

Court 1 eaao 1

to death, whoroas oa ?a a £083 it states th'.t cao could giro tho advice
that tr. cesoa of soa dlstross, instead of bs|ar oonplctoly thirsty, ono
aevfd rather drink 9 X>oo. of soa water and w«uld not hsvo to b. afraid
ef dodydrotica quite ao quickly. If rrof. Volihardt had usod 100 or 200 co.
of sea wator, than in =y opinion thoro would havo boon no controdlotion.

Tho contradiction ia in tho feot that tho record ahowa pOOco.

V Frofoaaor, you thus oro of tho opinion that tho contrrdiotion is tho
eaount of tho aoa water aonauaod which Prof, Vollhardt au—ostod*

k Tea.

v* Moll now, in n$r opinion it ia as follows: If a nan who ia at aoa
dlstrosa drinks pure soa water that has not boon troatod in any way, ho
will— and you will probably oonfiro this •- beeouao of tho dlangroablo
teato alone will not drink lores aaounta. On tho othor hand, if ha oonsu-

r

cos water that he a been troated with oerkstit, whioh has a good taato,
tho danger oxiata that ho will oonsiao largor o»unta and increasing
a counts and that this is tho dengor of eorkatit. An I right in that
rcapoct?

A I did not got that lopression froo roading that.

riwxDY* Siay it plocao. Your Honor, nay I r ak dofonso oour.sol if
he intonda to iaply that the V 0 llha rdt toetinor.y is substantially na ho
stated it hare or lust what is the purpose of his question* Is It h'a
own opinion, the opinion of his e*iont, or doos ho wish Lr. Ivy to osaumo
that opinion?

T33 ?fe-3I LOT: Is ooursol oaldng lr. It;* his opinion on that erttor?

LR. TIT?: If I nay see by way of sugploaont, I -shod lr. Ivy whether
this was tho ooinlcn whioh Prof, Volihardt roprcaontod hare, and rhothor
it is the sort opinion that tho oxgort Ins, bcoauao the oontrodiotion
which *rof. Ivy found in Prof, VollhordVa tostiaony I cannot find,
for tho vary ror.son I havo just stated.

a I can’t oonfirn tho interpreted ce of the attorney, "ho contradic¬
tion in the two stetonents, insofar fa ry rereading of tho words and


93 OL


16 June-*-3J-2 -5- r Gldt-('..nrtcnbor<;)-
Court cr.so 1

sentences on the two pe^os, indicato that 110 contradiction la on© in
regard to tho aoount of aoa wator. I did so a ga In tho idea fron rend in’
this thr.t treatin'; tho water with Borkatit night couac then to drink
coro of it — which, howowcr, is tho dofi nito possibility, in cy opi¬
nion. I ha Ye clr-ady toatifiod to that.

k ©ell, now Prof. I wont to leave toot subjcot, rnd 1 craln wnnt to
20 book to tho disoussion of eooe dcousmts. l*ey 1 ask yew to turn to
Prosocution Loounont Hook Vo, 5 In roei^d to sob water experiments, tho
doau»nt book about soa wator, 3rd to look at doouoont VO 171, exhibit
132. 1 bolioYO it is pego 10 in tho ^.nglish doounont book, VO 171 . It
ia ontitlod, Potee "bout the disoussi >n tacking soa wator potable, on
20 Ur.y l$i-4. It has boon polntod out so no it is docuncnt 177. I bog
your ©erdon. It is on pego 11 in tho ar.glish Looumnt Book, nir.utos of
tho two mootings.

A I havo it.

<% All right. Tho doounont roads r id I quotoi" At this meting Lr.
Booknr-rroysong'roportod on tho olini e 1 oxpyimonts oonduotod by Col.
lr. von Sireny and or no to tho final aonolusion that ho did not oonsidor
thon a boin- unob^-otlontblo 'nd oonalusivo enough for final dooision.
Tho ohiof of tho aodiorl sorviou is 0 mvincod that if tho Borka method
is usod, dmoro to health has to bo v ©octod not lator than six days
"ftor tricing Horkotit, whloh dan-go will rosult in p rnanont damngo to
hoolth end oocording to tho opinion of It. Sohaofor will rosult in
doath aftor not lator then 12 days." In ordor to simplify rmttors I
wont to oosuno that Lr. Bookor-FroysORf. rosily -ado this roport, actual¬
ly in tho s' r.o way as it is roportod hero. Con you toll no, Frofesaor
about whioh -apori^nts they r. ra spoaidr.r in this quotation horo?

* 1 believe the;* cro spoakinr obout tho oxnorinonta which l'.t.r
wore done at Laohcu, and I night sey that I agree with the statoamt
that you road.

i. try I esk you. Professor, you say "1 boliovo". 3 would lik© to


9305


16 Jus j-a- 5J-21-U-?eldt-(-.artoafcorg)-
Court 1 caso 1

aiic you what you taso your belief on ia reference to this quotation whioh
I just road. As far es I can see, this ontiro quotation doos not spook
about any exporiaonts et Lnchau. It begins:" At this nesting It. Becker-
Proysen* reported on the clinical experiments conducted by Col. L. von
Sireny." rorhepa tho "Lr. von Sirany" does not ncan anything to you in
this connection, or do you know what oxporinsnts ere =nant hero in sav¬
in' the experiments of Lr. von Sirnny*

a According to sc.- other reading ho is supposed to hove doao some
experi aunts with Berkr water.

k Yob, and the oxporisjonts wore oonductod at the oirforco hospital
in Vloxrna, at the Luftwaffe hospital in Vionno. Thorofore I don't know
froa what you went to eoncludo that they were talking about the oxpori-
aents at Laohau hero. *.ould you plonso toll no why?

A According to tho irproasion that I have goinod froa reeding tho
docuaants in soquonco and tho reoord, this was o preliminary discussion
to tho oxperlaonts at Laohau.

^ excuse no *Frofossor, but I would liko o point out to you tho
following sontoncot First, it is a description of tho oxtorr.sl symptoms.
Then lt soya, and I quoto again, "as c rosult of tho preliminary disouss-
ion it was ogrood to orrcr.go now sorios of exporiccnts of short dura¬
tion." Loos thot not indioato that »ho rrooodlng sontonoos rofur to tho
preliminary discussions end tint this prolinincry discussion hod as its
subjects tho oxporiewnta in Vionno? Othorwiso the for-ulntion "ns n
result of the preliminary d scussicn it was egrood to arrange now oxpori-
monts of short duration,” would net be ccxprohansiblo.

a I obtain tho idon thot this roforrod to tho experirents cf Pr. 3ira-
ny and that new oxperiaents were to bo planned boc-uso his experiments
wore cbjoctioncblo.

n Yet, to th t extent, 1 r.grco with you. This description rofora to
Sirany's exporinjnts and perhaps can you rlso confirm tho following opin¬
ion which, 1 have, naaoly thot tho d-nogo to tho health rhich could be


9306


21 Juno-i-GJ-21 -5-rcldt-(i artor.tor;)-
3curt 1 wm 1

ax-«jct«e ref.ra not to tho exparlnsnts, but to tbo introduction of
Bortatit into -mctioc, which ns foarod.


16 Jur^:-H> 22 - 1 --V.vl- r- ( r.ricnborg)
C-crt 1, C'-G 1


\

I o-iicv- that r.f.rs t the itrge tu health \4iich is tu be
expect'-', i- -ecur in the c.se ihcrc bcrloatit is use- t tr- t ao.a.jator.

Cl j 1-3. Ifcus, this i'sT-jt. ill result if berk tit aruli be intr>-
ixeod as . . r-p-nti-n in the practical am rescue s-rvicc?

ico.

1: ..ll right. N-r, rrefesoer Ivy, mother qu-sti-n in regard t
this sane d:.c*xacnt. ..ftcr the stat-^nts by Lr. h.-x\ly t. y u, you
uulc statement regarding Ke. 2 f t.is document. liny I quctc t ycu
briefly? "In adiition t. th-so experiments 4iich uen: supposed ts last
six days, further cxpcrluontais supp-sod tj be Cirri*- n -.s f-Uows:

Nc. 2 , . .rs as r-urished with am -.ter and berkatit, and as diet “.Is
We prescriood o-i-rgoncy x- rations. Duration r i experiments: 12 J?ys.
Since in the ?ino~n cf the Chief f the lfcdical Service, pexurnent
injuries t lx'1th -r the death -f the uxxriacntal subjects have to be,
expected, tfnly such pers.no should be used as axpcrL«-r.t'.l subjects c.s
:dil x .nxt -t -s. I)-! by the Reich5fudu*cr-SS."

In -.nailer to the quest! n of the prosecutor in regard t.. thioj y.u
at*, ted that y.u could exp I. in this sequence f the exp. r Lent 3 nly by
a'.ying tint th. survival ti.it ;r.s suppxie’. t be founi -ut by -x ns bf
these experiments. Xw eny I .-.3k y-u what y_u moan by "survival tie*"
in this caatcxt?

ft* t-;*t I xrr, th- len: -h .1 ti-c that .ne .aijht survive if they
us— cerh e-.r r sc .-.ter fcre'.te lth b-ricatit. I s id th it b-cuuse
. a ?-j. 12 .1 the English recer-, it is s-ted that "the Gii-f if tb_
_,-ic-.l ~-Trace is convinced tir.t if the Bate*. —th-. is used, damage t-
hc it- -.3 . be expect .d at l eer than 3ix days after taking berk tit;

• . dll rvsait ir. permanent injuries to health. 1, ... m :*

t_ th* -plai n f KCO, Dr. Schaefer, »th<. final result in death, net
later t.rn 12 lays". I think that is c-und advice — pcyeiolosicr.l advice
— bia-eba 2c 1 -vice; a. i.:oi .. t..e experiment ir.s act up f-r the


9306


16 (.ferUhboTs)

Ca*irt 1, Cr-sc V

t

lumtioe, fer 22 ~ys, in sp itc the -..-juing that per-'.r.cnt . r

lc--.tr. _jht rer—t if yau t jk it iuv.-r th*.n six --ys,

i: Pr.f-ss.r, cr. y a tU.1 -a ..-..th.r ir. the entir- pr-^'-i if
u^xri_x.-t3-yiii h .vc tfc*. Icu^cnts in frjnt -f y u — in this entire

s^acnct -&> -xpcris^nts, _i_ y a find .'jy.-rcrt .nqjr re .s r. f r t. inking *
th-.t -jiybrC;* .r.a int^-rcat^ in f inline - ct t?x survival ti.x?

lit, only with th. execution .f th- inplic-.ti.ns ->f t.usc t-..c

3tr.UiUi.ts.

AH ri^ht, Profess;r, .r.y 1 new ask you -vise, is the only
important fcct.r in th_ '.ctextiinntien -f the survival tint — i: -..-o
ah-li call it that — is thnt the ta~ factor or r*. Hue net -Jo
ether f.ct-ra ..hich h-.ve t. be c.nailoxxl; in other •« rtta, is only the ..
tLx tie-cat is^vrtnnt, f r how lanj the caperiu.nt.al subject '.rinl:o
bwrk-.tit i.-atcr, but is it rv-t also inpertrnt h— .stf. th_ p.rs..-. ’.rinks
on c»-.oh single d*jr?

fes, Urt fa c.nvct; r.ix! Is .the cnvir.nxnt .1 c ..liti-na are
ini.-rt-.nt, -jx’. the c nliti ns tf tl». subject t the* beginning of the
exponent*.

J- y-u n .. think in this entire . r- :i ra. .hich 03 lail le.n here
n. s t... ch.xri—nts .-r_ c.rrtcJ ut, 1 y.u fin! *ucrthii\ 'hah *.
statcuenb t:.-t *n -ux.unt f aeveater •. '.s .aiuinistcrel _r r.a a u.£:cel
t l>- • .. jiist-re fliich f the v-rr inning ...ull brin \b at
inf-l c . nsequencc?

.u He, I A. n_t.

; .as . u -re saying tl. t c .:c.^t .f survival ti..o can be s^en
-nly fr ills 1 cuexr.t, but tk .t ii~ rest f u.e pia-ra. n ...^ ctu~A
execution :-o c r.arar;* t the plannw -i such r. otjurii-nt .s is
.-ccrir„ here, ;K .r_ntly?

Yes, tic iec^st tfr.t 1,000 cc -f sux r.t.r -.r.s sjpp-se.. t. h'.v^
b-er. siver. tlx Dechnu uqx.rieu.-h 3 --s oil her ?i -tj's .r 10e -ys # r


16 Junc-A-^- 22 -X^yl=rd (.iartcrfocrg)

C--~- I, Cose 1.

*5.. let us s- to ncthc- sublet, frftss-r Ivy. loo s !1 t qy

, p. ^utor, ttet y. u .ax. fc. the r-siis §orvicc Office in-rlor
• _ sbt&ia ctflBcicatioue bjeefcora Kqsriaitai «bj«ot j. .--I

r_c~b-riq^ t.-.t c-rrcctiy, pjcfcssr Ivy?

Yes. Tfcst is ccrr-ct.

j: ..cull y ju pic-Sc n.w be so kani -s t tell us again :ittt pints
y u ■x'-tc l.un in t:.is later. ?c*-V8 '-3 * preiLin'ry quest!,n, I
■rst tc -C-; Jty did y-u, in :rlcr t -bt'.in cx^ri^nt'-i subjects,

\_ircss y ursclf p.rticul-.rly t: this -fficc?

This office u^-a - lividi-n f tho Sel-ctive Servica \hich fcr4

un.or its sup-rvisi-n c-nscicnti us jbjoctors.

1 * Thoa ;f I ur.-erst «l yeu osrrceUy, it tr.e the .ffiew -hic!i
c.ull give t.>; persdssijo first, basically, f r the execution of the so
experiments?

lie, they v ull .ctunuAc ;i.Jthcr -r n.t the c nsoienticus
objectors could be 0»od \o -xjx. aubjccts f.r the. art,

\i Yeo. In thcr a.r-s, this office first found ut -.bother au*
caperi:until sublets i-r- ‘vilabk?

Th t is C-rreCt.

*: Y-s. lben y u s~.il further, if I re ether c.rr-ctiy, that in
this lelt.r you -escribe- tre .r blc-o U: - \..n e-nccnv,! 'Jxl fch*.t you
enid you t.Zd ihoa why th. ex- nnfce -oro t. be sxdctAal. I boliove
that is c-rr-cfc t is it nX?

Yes, tlr.t is correct,

■j: purtherm re, y.u request el .. 1 c finite nunber f ucpcrl xnt"-l
subject# -1 fsr -- .vfinite peri- 1 ‘-is I r finite place, if 1
rc_ r_t -dstlcen, is that c -ir-ct t ;?

Is Yes.

I sauce that y-u t.l. this ffice too that y u -r one :Z yaur
assistants cr '.nothcr chysicL-.n cuLl supervise the experiment ad that
th. .if ice cruH B. at e-3_ end c ull be rr. that the cxjxri-cr.t hull


16 «JuflO-»-a:-22y4-G .yiirv ( art.noerg)
Ccurt 1, Zzx 1«


to c .rr±o_ iut by qualified scientist;, ia tbit ctp qi fcx.?

lea, that is c.rr.ct; as ' : utter bf feet, t. - preset or

.T-sri expert, untntion aas pass..! n by the opprsprittc ca—aittce

•

.i the llatiorvai Research C-ur.cil*

!

;i Profess >r, -ny x th.n asi you t 1 1 c in tlx. fee -.jatcr
ox p o r l r x n t o:ok, at th. Prosecution ^ cuocnt !iO-185, r-locution
3*ibit 134. It is • go 18 in u:c Zr.rlis;. jxuixnt B-’-fc.. It is
'• letter of the (hi~f if the Ue‘.ical Ser.'icc of the Luftvufc to the
FJUch i-dst-s- .1 the Interior, if the 7th f Junu 19U. The question
-f t>n voluntary r.iur- i the export-xntal subjects '.hieh is .liscusced
In the first s.nt.ncc of this dccuxnt, I ask y-u n-t t. c nciicr at the
.x cat. 2 .n.y '.a:; y.u t. 1 1: at the rest f the sentences, -ox: then
t. tell • e .bother this ±cv —nt lious n t c ntain th_ saac points
esserfc i'llJy as y u put C.wn in y ur lutt.. t. the Solectivo j„rvicc?

I .ij;t shy that .ur ipplicati .n y as .jot. oare extensive, ewch
~r. in detail thin this, that t o scieitific value f the
-xperi writ — the x-y th. experi-xnt .. t be .i.siyv. . nd conducted —

*r-a Is hppr voi by tlx. appropriate c .lit.. f th. «\ti nil Research
C.uncil.

!: 3ui oss.nti.lly y.u ;.vl .ir-t, rr-fess.-r, thL tins ...civunt
c-at'ins tlx sane points hi eh y.u v ust .escribed t. us. The first
sentences describe the prxblo-i: the t... jotheds .filch are t he
deddoti . Tho meet .vrviv-v th. export..:.*. arc. necessary.

Ihe next parngreph requ.3ts th. a^arinent .1 sublets, nd st t.s where
th- J^eiixcts ir- t- bake place. On the sccon 1 page, Dr. Doi^lboeck
is JenLi ... s the -ir.ctir.r fiyoician. Finally, there is the usual
closingsBtatcosnt, ufaich «j c.ntalne^ is. ir. y-ur 1. tter. I ux bqro
a-t c nccm.i itfi details, ?r d-so.-r Ivy, but .nly with the fact that
y-u probably have t_ ad dt that e-occeially this i-tt-r stat-s the

•

■* —thin; t.r.t y u to stated in y-ur apaiicati.n >d.th the c rrwS? ndmg


-liff.r_.5ccs, ef c urse


16 Junc-A-rL*-22-5-0-.ylarJ (jtrtcnbcrg)
wurt 1, ?jc-1

..: :cs, 3A then th.:v. is r. scientist inv ivcI in this -xch'.nj-
r carsgpcr.icncc . It's an nJjinistr-tivo fric-r t -n inistr'.tivc
officer.

Cert-dnly, Profess -r, out it 10 L?xt-'.nt t aly to cl-.rify
th-.t this is the letter fr.u m stamiatrr.'civi office dth scientific
-3sist.-r.t3, tj lx sure, rfdch applies t -nether .TiJinistr .tivc fficc,
rden first h - t give .n principle the per-iasi n th-.t experimental
subj-cto etui-1 be put r.t tr.eir uisp-s-'l at all.


16 June 17-A-C— 23-l-Samoscn(*fertenberg)
Court ?fe, 1


MR. HARD?: So that Dr. Ivy aay get the full significance of this,

I suggest that Defease Counsel bring ho-- th' k* owl- dge of the balance
of the 1 tter written by Bckr-Frfyseng for th*.signature of Schroedor.

7HT FT SIDP.T: His taatiaony was to that off ct. Counsel,

R? DR. TIFF:

r . Y^s, v our Honor, that is oormct. I beliore mi r.gr- ed acre or
less. Professor. If I understood you correctly , you criticized in
this lntt'r o-ly th* fact that it does not contain the necessary
scientific specifi cations. In regard to this, I ray perhaps toll you
froo the t-istiao'y of Prof. Schro- der and Becker-rmyseng th t this
1 tter is only a succory of th* discussions which had alr*ady taken
place b.t-..-cn Prof. Schroedor a-d the competent hynicians who wrro work¬
ing on this, tha Reich Physician of the -i* 1 sand Folice, so that the
scientific »ibj'icts had be-n clarified already in advance , in detail,
and this l»tt r was only a formal matt r and only had to contain thu
scientific question quite bri- fly. a further question, Trofctsor
Ivy, "hon you had aad* your application for those perforei'ig public
■" rvice, what did you do rrv.t? P* rhaps I r.ay ray lu advance thtt
probably ycu r coiwd a notification to the 'ff*ct that ycu worn
p•rrit-tvd to carry out th' exp rinont at such and ouch a place; la
that correct?

A. Yes, and then wo n ccivtd notification r gardi*»g the place that
th* conscientious objectors would coot, free, and approximately their
tir.i of arrival at th* place wh*-r« the • •xperlnent was going to be p> r-
forr.ed,

• . v s. rrof sror, did you carry out th so experiments yourself, u'«d'r
your own guidance anl diructioiT

A. X» s, I was rn sent while th-f exp- r jaunts were goi'tg on. I nado
sc=o of tb< clinical • xardnatio-'S myself, a-«d ch'-cked or*«r conwt-aca
th* daily- resra, and always the w kly records.

T# *.’ould ycu have ban misgivings, Professor, if you had not carried out
-r* cxcerinonts p rsona' ly, but had let anoth r physician whoa you know


013


16 Jut i.7-A-S^23-2^amoson(“art*nfc-rg)

Court SB. 1

as a rood scientist carry out thn xp- riments?

A. That -3 possible; tut since I was ths sponsor, or the so-called
responsible investigator, I could not delegate thtt responsibility
to set;*body else,

r. Certainly, Prof*ssor, since you wore conc-med with your own
research, Kay I now ask you. Professor, how in general — I as net
talking about your vxp rlaant, but about others — how was this do no
in -ach case in sxp rim- ts *;ich you applied for but which you didn't
• x'cuto yourself? How was it ascertain'*! in c ach casn whether the
rxo-rinnntal subjects war* volunteers? Did you undertake this «aca=-
l*etion yoursolf in each casn, or did you leave the responsibility
for that to the executing physician or to th' office which ref* rr*-d
th* experimental subjects to you?

A. "o. Thi subjects hr d to bn volunteers, oth-nda*, they would nev r
go to the placo wh r- th' r xp rimeot was going to bo done. Th* fact
that th*y l'ft the camp for consol-ntious obj ctors a-id w-nt to tho
laboratory was pr'sa faoin oviduoc*- that they wer- volunteers.

So they didn't havo to be -xasined as individuals. How, th*. Inst
subJ' ct. Professor. If I understood you corr- otlu, you said in the
discussion of aalaria exp-rlc'nta that such rxp* rlaant s on prison .rs
or 00 's w-rn suppos'd to bo for thn good of the oocnunityj is that
correct?

A. "nil new, aalarir nxp-riconts w ro not do-.* 1 on conscientious
oh;'-ctors tc ay k owlrd oj they «•>-»•- done- on prison ers in tho penlt'n-
tir-ry.

d, v s, prison rs• A-d the result of th so »xr rinents, if I
unde rate :d ycu cc r ct.lv, was supposed to s -vn hu-onity. In other
words, tc oxer ss it diff- r*ntly, r.s dovnrnor Gr- -n said according to
your t-stimony, tho State cf Illinois c»rri d cut those xp- ris-nts in
ordf-r to help th' Unit- d States win th n?r; is th*t oerr ct?

/. ?■ s. In th ca - of the prisen-rs, th*-y » rr rctivat d in order
to help r “pl‘ sick with malaria, and in th ir consents th* y .


9m


16 Jan- t7-A-o^23-3-'»ra'son(~=‘-rtrrt^rg)

Court ’*o. 1

frequently referred to soldirs, or fri* zs in the eroy. In the case
of tr* co-.acienticus objectors, their objective wo a to contribute
to knowledge, fcnowindgr for th«* prevention or allf.viation of hu.*cao
suffering*

%

.. Thus, you agree with zo, Prof- ssor, with th- atat'cnt I can
that th' ftxprinnts aisod at helping the winning of thn war
in theae ap'dal sectors of sodical research.

«. That was particularly trim of thn nalarln experiewte, It was
•ot tru- of cur .■clnircjc vitanin r* quiron'nt nxn riant a. There wc
hod in nind rehabilitation of the stricken !'Urop. an areas. \to wanted
to know »hat food was b«at in relation to vi twain content, to supoly
pcopl' in «r stricken ares, to k*p thro in good h'alth.

■nr. ?JT IlCT: I ask th- Fros«oution if h- has i»n> mdir-ct examination
of this witness.

H'.. HaHDY: Y a, 7 have, but I think I can cov r it in a half hour.

H ray continue until 4*30. I think I can finish up b-t »• ■»•»» 4:30
and 5:CO.

TH r PTJ^ILTJiT: Do an:-' oth- r 0- f«:r»sa Cou> s-.l d* sir-* to* ask questions
of this wit» ss? Or. Tipp has askrd for a> hour, and h has had «dghty
minutes or morj.

OS. T.IS37T-B'F.s (Attorn* y for D Tenant Si-.v-rs)

I did net have th- int">tion to put any cu* stions to the w'.tn- ss,
but th- r suit of the ;ari>ation today causes r* to ask thr '■ bri f
ru<-stionc, and asw* ring th'a will probably taka a v- ry ahorl.
tiisa 0 'ily.

TT paSSI'E*?: *ill t»n ninut-s be sufficient?

OH. "?U'SG-r3rT.: v "3, Y our u onor; that will bo enough.

T: T "HTI'IirT: tr. Tipp nay co*tir«. for t"i minutes.

HU *■:: 3GTP.r :i: Tb'nk you V- ry much.

~T KU TUP:

Prof ssor Ivy, thus you roecgnic- that -r.c-csiti- s conditioned
by thn >«r wnro a basis for exprrinonts, do :" u * ,G ”"

9315


16 Jane -7-A-5"—23-V-Saap9on("art*-nberg)
Court Fo. 1


T-a.

THE pri'CIL!?"?: I ea- not soo, Cains'-l, liut th-iso ' U 03 tlona of
-roos »a«inafcion -r r pf.rticul&rly p rtin- nt to th« direct <xa~-
i-aticn or to tr.c issu-s at present h*ro.

DR. TIT P: If I r-ay m-ply to this, ’cur Honor, briefly. The question
of th' oxpnria'v.ta was rcisnd, discusred n-p«-.ct*'lly, and a nuzbi.r
of ay collcagu s tri*-d to po .nt out thet the -xo- riev-nts in part,
or for th :acst part, w*m und^rtrk"» b> cause of th necessities
caus'd by the war-tL*. conditions. This point of view hts sc far not
bi<n i-co^niz-d by th Prosecution, and I belinv* th'.t th-' answer
of th. "Xpert sjy clarify this .o tt r co*isi nimbly.

7KT. PhL3I0irT: Th- Tribunal airfcrztands that situ-tion. I don’t
know thft Dr. Ivy is an '.-.pert who can testify on thf.t buh>ct. I
think if you hav no furth* r p« rt'.nont questions, »,*» night turn the
cross-«jinntioi over to l»r. 'iissg >rb r.

PY DR. TIPP: If your honors pl'-as* , I hrve only on* nor* question,
since ay tan has br.*n linitrd by thn Tribunal, !iy question is thu
followi-«g: As you said, th voluntary nntuj • of th* n;;;*irin<intnl
subject is ths first besis for th*. wciasibility of oxpnrinants on
hunan b'iv; altog-th* r. To that octant I und-rstood you correctly,

•lid I net?

A. v *«, I think that should coao first in the list of roquiranants.

", You :t tnd today r* rnrtiing thn pr* r* ouisit-s for voluntary expi r-
L-.nnts on pT-ions co drr.id to death thrt thy ar*> adni:sifcl«' from
the Hthical point of vi‘ w, xp*r sent? of a nature that thn
conditon-d w r* given a radical preparation which uvght hftvn fatal

cansoquar.cos-Prof. lioso started this discussion: /. volunteer was

■-dr.i''ist r d p-ison in this case. Is not such -n nxp'rixint , hew.-v-r,
in centredicticn to th-. fcilcwi'Y; sent? *-cc fren out of Hipprocratus:

T sh’Jl giv- - o hucan bnin* lsth.nl pciscn, even if h«- asks ne for it."

A. Thft, I b.li’v* refers to th* fu-cticn of the physician ns a
th-r-oist, ot an axpnrkrwtilist, an- th* part th t ref- rs to the


9316


16 June ,7-;-S''-23-5-^=p»n(*'ETtofo«rg)
Court So, 1


Oeth of Hippocrates is th&t h-i rust h?-.ve r* spect for lift- and the
human rights of his exp- rimnntal p-ti*nt.

Thus, you believe that you have to liff'-r ntiat*> between the
physician as a therapist, th t is thn curing physician, and the
physician as a r* s* arch work'r; and t .us you rdcit that in each of
the s' 1 functions different Ij.hs, dii f^rt-nt paragraphs of the Oath of
Hippocrates apply.

A. v «s, I obviously do.

■?.. TIFF: Thank you vary rut*. And in that east. I have no further
ni* stions.

CBPfS -^'JHaTION

B? HR. VTJSEGL^ R: (Attorney for D-,f ndnnt Si«v rs)

Pro I ssor, awy I esk you to ra f- r to D oeusftnt Book T I of the
Prosecution, th t is the dominant book with Docunc-it Vo. U 02, Exhibit
66. It is p.-g» 88 in the Goman, and p-g« 82 in the .glish Docu-
r.f't Book; Exhibit 66. Professor Ivy, I now assuno tho case that
a 1/iyrvn, a non-physician, r-'ads this re-ort by Buff, Kascher, and
Rombergs th t hi studies it throoughly, or hn» tho contents of this
mport explained to bin thoroughly, very camfully. lr» you of tho
-pinion th: t this r.'i, who is not a physician, can gath-r fron this
report th’t the experiments th\t ••ore conducted rre not in rgr«'e-
annt with th' c dical profession*! ethics.

?Cl. H tD v : Vv.- I nik th* bafnnsc Counsel n f- 1 r to a prrtieulrr
report.

TH. PRESIDE”: I understood Counsel to identify the document tc
*iich he raforred.

' . -L’HBY: I ■>= sorry, I did not un-nratnnd what report was
indicated.

T:C ?rS.Z~u’Z: -'ill -Couns-l identify th*. jvpert, tho document -gain?
... ”!rISSJ'SB' T: It is Docurwt Prosecution Exhibit 66.

"refessor, shall I repeat rzy question or would you like tc answer it
right now*’

9317


Court So. 1

15 Jun 47-A-24-1 -ZEX-Le*«er (Vartenberg)


jU ?su are referring to Docuseot 4C2, I Relieve, of the Ruff-
r.ocberg-Raseher recort?

Q. Tei.

A. So, he would cot, hut vfcea he reed the description on Page* 88,

65. and on the top of SO of the behavior of the oatient subjected to slow
descent froc high altitude, he night be considerably shocked with the
sysptcns described aai he eight inquire whether such an experinent -ero
necessary.

q, If such a aan, who is not a physician, now, is assured by the
cocoetent authorities that the exteriaental subjects are volunteers, does
this aan. who is cot a physician, have cause to think In that way*

A. Tes, he still can be ratter upset at the description of those

oxierlaenti, being a lay person.

q. Certainly, but do these thoughts of his ova force the layman
now to drew the conclusion that, seen froa the ooint of view of nodical
professional ethics, these exoeriaents were not adclssiUe?

A. Sot necessarily.

q, Sow, Professor, would you please look at the Inst docuaor.t in
this vcluse -it is Docuaent So. 1612-PS, Prosecution Exhibit 79; that
is on page 122 . Kay I ossuae, Profeosor, that you have already rend
this document beforo?

A. I have glanced at it but I have not rend it carefully.

q. It is concerned with research orders which Pinalcr gave directly
to Dr. hatcher, that is. in December 1942. Can a laynon who sees such u
letter gather fr« it that the execution of these oxporiaente, for
reasons of eedical professional ethics, is not adaicsiblo7

A. Certainly not froa this docuaent.

q. Vould you oleesc repeat the answer?

A. Certainly not froa what this docuaent says.

rs. >3ISSaeBHU All right. Thank you very- much. I have no

further cueetione.

r-2 PRESIDES?: The prosecution nay redirect!? oxonine the witness.


9313


Tourt l*o. 1

15 Jun 47-A-24-2-1H-.-Lc• e er (Varterberg)


H2DISC* SCAhTSJglC8

BY HE. KAKJY:

q, Professor Ivy, la your experiments la the field of explosive
decompression conducted et 47,500 feet were they conducted in a Banner ^
tiailar to the experiments outlined in the Euff-Eaacher-Eomberg repor^,
vhieh is Document HO-402 in Prosecution Document 3oole So. 37

JU So.

q, Vhet is the great discrepancy betvccn the Euff oxocrirsents and
your experimental

A. In the Puff experiments the subject vets suddenly lifted to an
altitude of 49,000 or 50,000 foot and free that point he descended slowly,
sisulatlng the descent that would occur with the unrachute open, the
subjects boing exposed to oxygon laclc free that tlmo until thoy roachod
an altituio, wo shall soy, roughly of 16,OCO to 20,000 feet. In tho
experiaonts that we perforsod tho eubjoct was oxolosivoly docomorcsocd
to 40,000 or 47,000 feat, vhcro he reaainod breathing oxygen nt tho sur¬
rounding prossurs at 40,000, or with additional proseuro or nrooouro
breathing at tho altitudo of 47,500 foot.

q, Yhy didn't you find it necessary to extend your oroerimonts to
that phaso as contained in the Euff oxpericontsT

A. Because felt that on the basis of calculations wo could
determine tho amount of oxygen to plaoo in tho bail-out bottle on tho
flyer's pants leg that would toko him free an altitude of 40,COO or 47,500
feet dOkm to a safe 1 -vel vhero he wcxxld no longer noed a suooleaentary
supply of o^gon.

q. Professor Ivy, concerning the oueetions put to you by defense
counsel as to the ability of a layman to analyse these various renorts
of the experiments, isn't it true that if a layman read the Baochcr
reports that the layman might be even more severely shocked by then than
a physician?

A. I should say no to that ouestion because there are portions of
the Sascber report that will shock the physician Just as much as tho lay-


9319


Court So. 1

15 Jus 47-A-24-C“ii ; X-Le«* c r (Vert esc erg)


•>- , and the physicians of the United Stetcs Amy asd Savy vho first cane
into Gemany and learned and read of the exporiaeuts vfcieh had been done
oa run*- beings, without their consent, I assure you vere shocked just
as such as laysea vould be.

q, During the course of your examination by tho defendant ?.uff,
discussion of anoxia took olace end you steted, I bellore, that a person
-ay be exposed to anoxia as a result of slow descent tut that tho sysp-
tces nay not develop until a period of 5 or 10 days had passed. Is that
correct?

A. So. I said that it is oossible for subjects to be exposed to a
period of anoxia and then recover therefroc end have a period of no synp-
tocs for a period of 5 to 10 days and then develop synotose of neurologi¬
cal desago.

Q, Veil, is it possible that those syaotcei eoactlnos did r.ot
nanifest theaoolvos until nonths or yoars after the lesion of the baoal
ganglia inflicted by tho basal action opisodo?

A. So.

q, Tou don't know of any vork along those linos, rs to vhothor
or not this anoxia condition vould dovclop or bo nonifested nonths or
yocrs later?

A. So. If they did not appear vlthln tvo wcoko, there is no
evldcnco indicating that they nay occur Inter with vhich I an frailinr.

Kov, Doctor, concerning your testimony regarding the conscien¬
tious objectors, 1 have e fev points vhich nay tend to clarify thio
situation in the ainds of defense counsel. Vould you toll us how a
person is classified as a conscientious objector?

A. tell, first, evoryone within e certain age group in the United

States had to register.

Register for the draft?

A. 7or the draft or selective service.

Q. That is, conscription into the United States eraed forces?

A. Tee. “hen at soae tiac later the actual draft occurred. The


9320


Court So* 1

15 Jus 47-A-24-4-I3t-Les«er (Vertenberg)

conscientious Objector could announce that he vas a conscientious objector
to urrlog In bet tie or serving vith the nilitery organisation at the
tlno of registration or at the tine of induction or boing drafted.

^ And after he registered his objections to participating in any
nanner in the any, vas ho then alloved to return to his hoce, or was ho
asked to cooperate in natters which did not involve things of a nilitnry
nature?

A. lo, ho was assigned to the Civilian Public Sorvice Agency and
asked if ho wanted to cooperate by rendering public service.

Q, And that public service %s»s work as ordorly in a hospital and
work in various libraries, perhaps, and other public institutions?

A. Tos, or forest fire prevention, and cleaning uo tho woods.

Q. Vas this nan, this conscientious objoctor, in conflnoncnt?

A. They were only placod under conflnenont when they would "not
cooporato in any %«y.

Q, Vas there a national connitteo to tako enro of tho lntorosts of
the objectors?

A. Tcs, as a general rulo tho conscientious objectoro woro auoer-
vised by a civilian religious group, such as tho Quckors or the Hennoa-
itos.

Vas the conscientious objector under any duty to volunteer for
nodical experiments?

A. Soao whatsoever.

Kovovcr, he was under obligation to work In vrrlous libraries
or forest fire prevention, etc., if reoucsted to by the comltteo?

A. Tcs, it we6 necess rtry for bin to render scco sort of public scr-

vico.

“hen you dctvrr.ined that you needed experimental subjecte. How
did it heppen that you decided that conscientious objectors night bo
cede available to you?

A. As I recall, the Betional P.eseerch Council, in view of the fact
that the medical students and dental students were mustered into the er—/

9321


Court So* 1

15 Jan 47-i-24-&-SM-Lesser (Vertcnberg)


end could no longer serve es subjects in erperinents in university and
-.edieel school laboratories, took tho natter up vitfc the Director of the
Civilian Public Service, vho then decided that tho conscientious objectors
night bo allowed to volunteer for such vork in connection vith aedical
schools and research institutes.


9322


16 Jut.-~..-F-> 25---rri-xnu ( .'.rc-fiber-)

CCUTt 1

is. 'ey u.-.t - .<ia ypu icru pmittc. t. -.ppr-nch c—sci-r.tisus
pj&cfcero - si; the»-.Aether r at :-y .-ul valaotcBr f-i* nodical
oyc r i i xnbs?

I r th- inv.stisafc r li. n.t \-;r «h the c nsclcnti.ua bjoct-ra
directly, .c request-- th.t a .certain :«u>er I v lunt--rs b_ -J.1 .-1
or scat t. us through the lircct r f ax Civil: • --lie Service agency,
v. a, c-nsci-nti. us Oj-ct rs -r- s-nt t yur university

1-bvrt-rie.a?

’-’e3, that is c -rrcct.

l»ilc trxy 't y ur l*b r'.tury ..--r. they iiviir. in th.

1 r-dt-rles .-t the university?

Xco, in the - r-.it ri_s r in th- hnpit-la.

ere they un.:ir .qy surveillance \t 11 ?

an- ..r, r. in the r up -.s jj int-i -a le'.xr, su./-rviu.r
r to. _r u., nl it -a nia duty t s-c tir.t tho .xn c'.rricd ^ut U-.oir
instruct i oa pr-p-xly ft- ft tLx.

it p.oaiolc f.r -*v nt *' th-au bj-ct-ra t- r-c-ivo leave
r t irr. txJc-nd liberty?

1: It s art in - at w-.-ri-v.ntc.

-5: jell, .nssuei. f r th- a.-xnt tir.t y u vr. n-t ,3 in. t use the
expert, sat 1 rab£»et f r . p-ri : ’ r throa weeks. s in aich

p altl-nth t he c ul: n.t 5. -n 1- v„ .r * t th- city r u a he
oupp x. t re-ran t y.ur university r.i nil tiixs?

.»: he c.uld lc-.Ve f r ccrt ln ,-ri Is :f tine, varying in

length fr - feu h.ura t. i- 1 days, dcpun-lnj up n the .-r.tur- -f the
uxperinjit. If it -re iietary th-n he h • t. »-"-t t tho

-let table 11 the. ti„e.

.v._n lx -ctwlly hr raw. - -- l c .. ti.n, in c_r.tr .listaction
*-. .-ris ncr in tc instituti.n -r penitentiary?

Xcs,

9323


16 June-. -?_>2 5-2-rr iaytu ( ;:rtcnbers)

ca?s i


:r.. IM'JXT: I h'.Vw ru further ',u,sii_r.s, y ur H-n-r.

31 r g o T L OfT :

Or. Ivy, is it .r is it not yrur .pinion tfc?.t th—xparkaenta
ir. si- ' descent fr- -.n ulcv-i n f 47,500 feet vhicr. xr. c rrie-
ut by Lie Idealists 3eff vii R.ibcr u-r- likely t c .use xysicnl
injury t the experimental sublets?

I sr.iu it uxs p.ssiolu ttr.t thia -dht injure till, lenming
ueOhroisa in thw or in but .tfccndee there r. 3 n. re-.s r. t believ. it
^.ulO CM 130 physical injury.

>: I iiln't r— ~.r Just ..iv.c y.ur ns -r f r th t

..il it 3 for tn.-.t re -3 n I Slid I a. -ui- be reluct nt fe 0 do
such cx.xrku.nts jS -ysclf r th .00 oubjocts ml u.-uU try t. iinl s..e
other ;r;* t. n= .er th. question.

liU ..--/Is Tr- a -ir. ti.n f jr. Ivy is finished, your Huncr. 1
-do.it inquire h ./ l.h,* Jr. 3tcinb-.i*.r ..ill c ntiru- with his re-'irect
jc in ;i-o f tt-o --fexi-nt Eci lb ed:.

-“.inr-rr: 2 -.• u—: ai: or* stoinbnucr h .. l.nc be thinks th.

fttrthcr —-u.l.tlon bftU. .l-.oa: ..it Deijlb^cck .;ill require.

01. OT3UOJJ2B: ity it pie -a- th- Tribur. l, I ah Ml nee.’, -.b.ut *ui
I ... ueat th t I £r.y entinu. thv c\s- t ... rr w. I s.v 11 then
hurry it Pr.feaa-r Ecijlb ed;, nd I . r-e to it th-.t Tach fenik cvi
ae .. .-n. *. -r. o-c'.us- h- .. 3 t return. I only irxtt h v_ -.n
opportunity t. exesdne Dr. 3-i.lt -cO bee .use I Oil n-t knou Tach fenik
. &m L... :i .tely - ;t_r.-.r'.s, port-pa in the rftornoon, I
Me -vua-x. th- u- .tfc-r iatnosD8 - tr- h-r- = tti.t tho c;: in ti.n
f ux.n.38-3 c n Oe c. .-.eluded. I thick the jr secuti.n pro-ue-e a _e
tber .n-as-3 f r the cr.5S-e.:MLa tion.

•: vane n .ble t. t'-lk t yet -nd I d-n't kn.a just i«a tli-y .till
tv -„ie t. t use th- ltn-ss a«nd. K wj, ths witness Tsdi-f-nik -..ill
be .v _L-.lv t-curruu -.ft. *-s stated by defense counsel, he c r. be csllod


9321


16 J —-P->25-3“?r~.u ( ^rtcnbcrg)

C»rt I

-f'.-r ti'c &‘j. f the -ufcrtl-Jit 3ci^Ib _c-. is c . It is *~r~ciblG

vie.. . r scciti.n.

El r.—LjJ.'T: Tfr- Tribunal i i s- in r-ccss until .ino-tliirty

rrtn _^rnin^.

TrL, .JJSE.1: TV.<- Triourr.l -.±11 j- ;n r-<X53 until nir.t-ti'.irty t>-
a-rro*.: .tjmirc •


9325


r


mi

17 Jur--M-FL-1-1-C- (Int. ttutecbarg)
Cnurt Si. 1


Official Transcript of the African
Kilitcry Tribunal in the aatUr ;f
the United States if Ancrica, against
Kcrl Brandt, ut cl, defendant a,
oittir.g at Surr.be rg, Ceroany, ;n
5 Kerch 1917, 0930, Justice 3-=ls pre-
oiding. •

THE .UtSHAL: P.ra-ns in th». c:urt r:a will pleaas find tlfcir


sj.-ta.


The H n.r'ilu, the Judgoa of Military lHbuncl 1.

,'Iilitr.ry Tribunal I is n* in suasion. God save the United Str.tce


if A-v-rica and tide Hon rfiblo Tribunal.

Thor- will bo order in the c-urt rooa.

7HZ FR3SIDH:?: 1*. Kershnl, will you aac-rtoln that the (Sbfondenta
-r« ell irwacnt in Court.

THE UiRSKALr !ioy it pluaau your Honor, tU the defendants nro
present in court.

THE RLSSL2PT: The Secrotary General will note for the :vc rd the
frusence of *11 tba dofondr.rfcc in C.urt.

Counsel aay oroc^G.

®. STSH3ftUZR: F.r the defendant, Pr>fess«r B-iglb ockx
2Y LA. STJU3.A'i3i:

Q.- Witness, in r^-direct uxa.-dirtion I have t. -sk T u only no
ca.stion, sirco duo to y.sterdny's oxsainrti n f the expert *ny qu^ fi¬
ll ns have been clarified. H-rdy asked y u wh is Dr. P-opor. I rn
you tnve onything t . with th- r-a val -f Dr. Popper
-afi thw >thcr tr:o Ju-niah assistants during tfc, yu-r 1938 Jpoin^er's
clinic?

-5.Yho7^v^93B, th* Jewish -ssiat-jrts n-n dismiss,.' fr o all
Vi ckaics^S^ was - -ne at the r^qa-st f the ministry. I had no
influ^cJ'oF.rny'i^i and 1 could n-t have >rcv*at<l it n r -'id I ever
- appr-jVe tlve tj&mjeib which this was d -no and et that tiac I r.a in no
\w“.y‘'>K»VraIbl<^f ■» oersjnr.wl natters in thw clinic and I can r.ly

V-urS^X *■»


17 jajc-U-PL-l^Z-C-ok (Ir.t. tartonborg)

Court Ko. 1


n; I had n-thing at all to do with it.

IF.. STZESa’JIF.: I hero no further quosti ns t put t; the witness,
;.ur Honor.

JUXSS SsBRIKG: Doct.r, car. you explain :ihy th.se non w-r. removed
fr = Dr. dpoingcr's clinic? I think y u said cbout that tine ?.U Juniah
clinicians in Vienna acre reaevod. Did 1 undcrat-rri you corr.ctly?

Yea, Y.«ur H-nor, that was after the German tr pa entered
aU strip, that is, c few days after the declaration >f the inachluea
thia dianiaa-l was undertaken by the ainiatry.

i.- Vca thrt pert t the German anti-Juwiah pr .gran so far aa

7 -u kn»?

That hr.p*»onad with th, transformation )f ..ustria by tbo natio¬
nal S.cir.list Gov-romont, and was, f c urse, r part if the Nazi or oj rra,
I have n ’further questi.aa.

THE PRZSIDS'T: D^.a any Defense Counsel hr.vo any qu.sti.ns to pro-
p urd t: the witnoss?

D3. TIP?: Prjfeaa.r Schrader rnd Dr. Bccker-FTe/aorg:

ST Dr.. TIP?:

iltr*.sa, I t)j have .>nly ne questi.r. t> oak y.u. YeSt-rlay
7'- beard that the expert -f the Proaocuti n, Pr Lss r Ivy, sthtud that
?r f .53 r Zppinger von n t -n export in tv. field .f kidney research.
Perhaps y.u can state y ur .pinion in this natter ir. c r.clusi n, -and I
■sause that the Court idll be interestv : in kn wing what papers Pr feasor
Sppir.fer aubliah-d in this field end related fields.

...- I car. only state fr a n..a ry an' I kr.a the f-11 wing ab ait it.
Ab ut 1921 eppingor, t.guther with Hess, published a book caller. "Ubor
-i'- klinik «!er Iviejainerkrankung", the "Clinical treatment f Xi i-y Di-
*-■- -s". In 1923, Zppinger wr-tu a b -ok, «Th-rapiu und Pathol io c.s
•hnschlichtn OwJoas", Therapy and ?-th >l.-7 i the Hunan Zd-ar.. In this
-k t.e aad« ocsic studies ab ut the salt and hy.r gen aufcaboiis 3 and

•

■c ut the effect of the tyro id gLand of t.aesc functi ns of the ki ney,

?22v


17 Jimi-'--rL-1-3-C; o k (int, V.’rxtcnburg)

Curt Hj. 1


»- at 1936, thoai t»o students of his. Pepper «nd Jc-dul, published a

T - r 7 through study about th» functions of the kierty, which were c,n-

xt-d under the c_r.str.it, lively interest of Eppif*_r hiaoclf. In 1942,

jr 1943, his student «lb rich t .ld nc ftb-ut publications which conc_rn-

•d nephritis oxport.onts in cninal exjx.ri-.eRts, *nd which opened up cn

entirely haft p is view especially Ijt the early steles f nrihritls.
• *

Cfc the basis of those l-.st two w.rks, especially in 1942 r.nd 1943,

•ppine«r ccrried n new investSfinti ns :n the entire field >f kiAwy pc-

tft I-'SjT *nd in his n.t yul published work, which w.-s aupp acv to Ir.vo

the title in Germ "Per.aoabilitcots ?-th 1 ;ic", as far ns I roaoffcor

g-.vo -..new presentation f kidrwy pethol-gy. Tfc-t is wh-t I* know about

Us i rks, -.b>ut this field, but I ea c .evinced that na.r.q the sany

hundreds of scientific papers which h- wr th.r, *r- -loo •: a; &anll-

-r ar.eB which rr_ concern*.! .so queati.ins in p'r 1 Lculnr.

IT. TI??s Thank y u, 1 have no furth-r tactions.

T^C PlZilDvT: ijh th«r« any oth.r questions on tho port af any

chf.nsc counsel?

Thu Prosecution .any cr ss oxnain-.


9328


£


I

Cocrt Sc. 1

1 “ »'un -17-»2-l-iSi-5rc«9 (h'artenberg)


.1. KA?T7: Prosecution has no further cueetion* to out to the
defendant Beiglbceek.

At this tine, Your Honor, I wish to state that ve have the witnees
Tichofenlj here this sorcing and he is ready to take the witness stand.
After the exeaination of the defendant Soiglboecic is ceeoleted, I should
like to cell Tschofenig nrior to the subeittlng of the 3eiglboecfc doeu-
ncnta by defense counsel.

IHZ P52SI 3 1ST: There was one other witness to be called by the
defendant Selgltoedc, the witness hettbach. Is he available, Dr.
StelnbeuerT

Ir.. STEIH3AU2?.: The witness has been eumonei for this afternoon
- the witness Kettbach, because he had to go to -or*.

.3. HARDY: I believe that  -U1 have ccooleted the testimony of
the witness Tschofcnlc toy noon today, Your Honor.

T>Z PrZSIDiST: Tho Tribunal will proceed to hoar the tcstlcony of
tho witnees Tschofenig.

Tho defendant 3eiglboeck ie excused i.-ce the stand end will tafco
his place in the dock.

The Karohal will suenon the witness Tschofenig, who will be called
cut of ordor.

(JOSEPH TSCHGrZHIG, o witness, took tho stand and testified as
follows.)

JUTGa Si3?.ISG: Please hold up your right hand and be sworn.

I swear by God, the Ainighty end Ccniscient, that T -n’ sneak
tha pure truth and will withhold btA odd nothing.

(The witness repeated tho oath.)

You nay be seated.

DI.-ZCT IXA.«:ir3TITF

3Y HE. HARDY:

V Marshal, would you extend tho camhonea of the witness
Tschofeaig so that he can nut then on pror^rly. The;- are not down far
czoixru


9329


Court So. 1

17 Can 4'’-. -2-c-lc>.-Gr oe s (Vantenberg)


Tour name i■ Joseph Ischofenlg, ie that correct?

A. Tee.

V Tou spell ycur last name I-s-c-h-o-f-e-n-i-g?


Q, T h a n k you. -hen and vhere were you born, witness?

A. Cn the 3rd of September 1913 at Pontafel.

Q. ’'culd you briefly tell the Tribunal your educational bac


4^ound,


that is, your primary education in veur childhood and the extent of
yeur education and vhat you did prior to the time that ycu were arrested
by the Gestapo In 1940?

A. Ac a child of a railroad worker's family I went to the elemen¬
tary school and then to senior school for throe years. Thoreuoor. to
the technical school for machine construction and electrotechnics.

Aftor this education I worked for a few months in cy profession.

I*- STnlCAUSx Kr. President, as far as I know-from the tran¬
script and free the,rules of the Tribunal, Tschofonig has beer, brought
hero to bo my witness for cross examination. ! am undor the impression
that lx. Hardy now wants hi= to exaaino hla anew. I think that this
veuli be improper.

EAS3T: Your Honor, I havo celled this witness as a rebuttal
witness and made it ouito clear. Aftor he who on his way here, coco
defensu counsel reaucsted him for cross examination. That was at the


tine I had road this third affidavit and rx. Tachofenig is hero as a
rebuttal witness.

2EZ PBiSIDLTT: Yes, prosecution reoucstod the culling of the vit- .
cess and the witness woe called for the prosecution, to examino hla as a
.-‘-buttal witness. Cf course, counsel for defense will have every cpror-
*icity to cross examine but the prosecution should once the examination
* z tho witness was called by the prosecution in rebuttal.

H XH. EAhDT:

0- Vould you continue, TschofenL., please.


A. After a few months in a technical activity I also participated

9330


Court So. 1

17 Jua 47-k-3-3-EK-Gross ( art cm berg)

is political life, because I as of a social democratic family. Yith
that already Is 1932 I cose into cosflict already et that time with the
lav* of that tin* and w&a arrested a few times. After the 12th of
February 1934 I became a Coe aunl st and as such I took Tart in Illegal
activities. I vat in the concentration ca=p Yoellersdorf. After being
released I worked in =y profession for a fe noaths and then I was oup-
posed to be arrested again. I escaped from this arrest end I worked
illegally politically in Austria. After the annexation of Austria by
the Third Belch I regained in Austria illegally and only toward the end
of 1938 2 left Austria. I ves an Insigrant in Belgius whore, in connec¬
tion with the events of the 10th of Kay 1940, I was transported by the
Surlte (Surete) together with all other lscigrants to southern France.

The Soman authorities case to the comp Cyprlenae whore wc wero kcot
and fetched so and othors free this cacp end transported so back to tho
Gestapo in =y hcec town and aftor some investigations I vas transferred
free thero to Dachau Concentration Camp.

q, “hat was in tho year 1940 that you wore transferred to
Dachau Concentration Camp?

A. Tos.

q. In tho south of December?

A. Tes, in the nonth of Deccobcr, on the 8th of December.

Q, '‘bon did you leave tho Dachau Concentration Ceop?

A. In the Dachau camp I whs liberated bv the American trooos.

q. Vero you cv«.r incarcerated in a penitentiary or orison for
criminal activities other than those of a political nature?

A. So.

Q, Can you tell the Tribunal briofly, Jir. Tschofenlg, whet you
are doing at the present tine and what you have done since your libera¬
tion from a concentration camp, that is, your work, etc.

A After ay liberation by the Amoricon trooos I became a membor

of the International Inmates Committee as representative of the Rational

"cemittoc of the Austrians at Dachau. As leader in the International

9331


Coart So. 1

17 Jun -*7-it-2-4-iHX—Srcss (Yartenberg)

Inmates Ccc=l*.tee I vest along on transport of egr fcllov iunates to
Austria hoping that there I would he able to sec again ay wife end ay
child. I found out that five day# before ay liberation ay wife was cur¬
ie re 4 In a Gestaoo orison. After this stroke of fete the English Hcd
Cross brought na to Carinthla with a number of cy cocredcs and there as
representative of my party I iamcdietcly stored the then provisional
government of that province. Aftor the olection on 25 Kovecber 1945 I
vas a representative in the Land Diet of qy party end ae such ! en active
in political life today.

Q. Ycu are a aerber of Parlienent, so to speak, in Austria at tho
orasent tine?

A. I a= a aeabar of the Corinthian Land Diet of the province of
Carinthla and chairman of ay party in tho Land Diet.

Q, I oeo. Hr. Techofonlg, vhon you arrived in Dachau, you first
worked vith the other inmates on special projects and in February 1941
you wore sent to tho ceap hospital to vork, is that corroet?

A. Zar.ediately after X arrived there, X vas given n clean up Job
end there I worked for tvo aontht with pick and shovel. After that
labor detail I vat sent to the ccap hospital as house “orkor in the
beginning of February 1941.

Q. Hr. Tachofcnlg, the translation here lo spontaneous. That in,
tho interpreter trrnslrtes into English iarodir.toly aftor you hnvo
spoken in Goman. So, if you vculd kindly speak a little slower, it
would be helpful.

XSTSUPnETZS: Hr. Herd;/, ho is specking too slowly.

KArUT: X have been misinformed. You’d you speak a little

fester?

Q, L'ov, in the caap hospital what were your duties?

A. In the cemo hospital I ves first e doaastic worker r-nd then vas

used as a sale nurse for prisoners and when one of ay comrades could

take an assistant into the x-ray stetion he took me as en essistr.nt }r,to

tho dovaloccent rooa of the x-ray station. And through the developments

9332


Court io. 1

17 Jus 47-K-2-5-nHK-3rc«* (Vartenberg)

that too* place in the event* of the cenp the responsible irrtati sender
cf the x-ray vas transported to Ausehvitx and under thoae condit '.on* the
circunstancc* erose end I, e* the only innate vho understood anything
efcout it, ves appointed in that capacity.

Q. That ves in the su=er of 15427

A. Ye*, that vas the beginning of the sunrer of 1942.


9333


IT Juse-H-rlS-Zrrrov (let. Vprteaber^ 3-i- (BZ)

Court I*o. 1

^ Veil, is this erpecity r.s Chief of the X-my strtios, vfert vere
70 ur duties?

A At the bc.rlsnln.; of ay rctivityj I took the usual X-rry plcturcos
rad assisted is the trkias of X-r-ys. Vhes the order of the crap epae
fart ell of the erm lrjj'.d here to he exraised for tuberculosis in
•9*} V T fluorescope, the pfcyeiclrat could, nt that tiae, not rccorplioh
their i"ske pay acre mi therefore left it entirely up to the prisoners
rad, due to thet, X wre rble, through those flusrescopc ixrslnrtiona,
to trin-: prisoners, for vhoa it vr.s seccserry, to tho hospital where
they eould recover r little hit.

IVri there rlvrye » doctor in chrT:te of the X-rry at: tioat

A A t the be-isr.is~, there vra rlwryo r responsible director, r S3
ifcyaleica, vho %s ia ch»ra;o of the X-rry etrtlos rad rl reedy in 19-2
it hrppentd th*t ao responsible SS phjrelcirn vrj rpnointed ra director
of the X-rry etrtlos rad, thus, the X-rry otrtioa vra left to itself.

^ Veil then, rfter 19^3, you were quite independent ia your position
ro Chief of the X-rry ctrtloa, is thrt correct?

A X wpo Independent to the oxteat thrt It concerned the eonpetonco of

the ctrtion iteclf.

«; you recrll r trrr. 3 port which rrrived la frehra in the ouaner
of 19UU eontr.lalnc Gypsy ianrtcc?

A X rcacaber thrt very well,

^ Could you tell us soaethin.’ atout the disposition of the Gypsies
rfter rrrirrl ia Drcfcrut

A Ihe trrascort which rrrived - or. the rverr;o, had the -orcrl
weight of every prisoner,

^ Vhea lid you ecc thea for the first tir.c?

A Accord's- to the instructions of the err.?, X had to tpke r fiuoreo-
oope -f every transport that arrived la the crap rad, in this wry, the
transport, rft£r they had chan-cd their clothes, case iaaedlr.uly to the
hospital, firs'*, to fat dlspcncrry rad then to the X-rry strtior. for
fiuoroscope.


; E-w aeay of the Gypsies did you exclude froa the experiacats pb

333U


17 Juno 4 7-Jf-PK- Xarro w- ( /Orenburg)- -*-3- (-vC)

Court I

physically unfit?

*»• Since I had already hoard about the projected
experimental station before, I tried, as far as pos3lbl«,
to xeei> seme prisoners from the transport out of this.

There ware, a3 far as I remember, 15 to 2C of them who
I exoludei.

Q. 'ore there othir examinations m de to dot rmlno
their fltnesj for the experiments?

After the fact h-.d been established by my
examination of them that there was not a a fflclent num¬
ber for the experimental station, the dispensary, through
the cape himself, and the camp physician - determined
thenaelvos the fact that they wore suitable inaam ch nu
they were simpl • examined and transferred to the oxporl.>-
ental station.

Q.. /ere all the experimental subjects used in the
experiments considered to be lr. perfjot physical condition?

... Tnie transport, considering that it was for a
concentration camp, con bj considered as In good physical
condition. That is, they were ill able to worr.i.

'Zero the ones excluded by ycu in your examinations
definitely not used in the experiments, or wore they later
plched up and used in the experiments?

I don't Know that iny more because the transpor¬
ts then transferred to ^ invalid bloor. from where the
prisoners were then transferred to the experimental
slat.on a few days later.

i. Do you hnov Professor Dr. Belglboaoh.

Prcfosscr Dr. Poigioooch I saw a fe times in
i:;e camp and he also came to the X-ray station a few
times himself.


9*’5


17 Jur.e-ft-?,?- 2-Kwvov- (Wartdoburg )-JH
CCUiIT I

i. Old ha examine any of these inmates to your
icnovlodgo?

/». Dr. Bolglboacit, you noon?

Q* Yus.

... Yes, Dr. oalglbooci:, after ho heard of the
results of the examinations that I got, expr-ssad some
susploion of my results of th^


9^Sa


17 Jttae ft S i- t acrov (V ^rtc-birg)-3-5-(W)
CcUTt I


examination end asked ne for Z -rays, and throng the instruction of
the comp physician to take as fev X-ray pictures as possible boceuso
ve did sot have the natorlel for the. Dr, 3elglboock again chocked tho
persons vfccc I hod examined.

v V ell, did any of tho persons whcc you excluded then bo-
eemo available for tho experiments as a result of tho examination by
?rofes*or 3eiglnoack1 Bo you know that?

4. Ky findings-already during the exporirior.t-had been reported
cs being Incorrect to fee doctor and then he docidod to make hio own
examination and reproeonted ay examination as boing incorroct end with
that he of fee tod that I aysclf could not tuko a fluoroscopo done of
those patients any aero or of those prisoners who were in tho oxporintr.to,
D id you ever see Profoscor Scplngor at tho Dachau coaeontro-

tion Comp?

4. I myself, in tho hospital, was told by one of ay camrolon
that Professor 2 ppingor, boforo the soowator export-ental otation vaa
ostr.bliohod, oamo as a visitor to the Luftwaffs station and ho ctcyod
for two days.

£ . During tho time tho ocawutor oxpo rimonto wore boing conduct¬
ed did you exomiao cay of tho experimental subjects?

4. During the soawator experiments, sick persons or oxportuontal
subjocts wore also brourfmt to no for examination, and during thoso ex¬
aminations Dr. Boiglboeck oxpressod his hietruot of ay results of tho
examination.

$ . Did you notico am* physical change or visible chango in tho
physical condition of the inmates used in tho ooewator experiments
whom you examined then during tho course of the experiments as opposed
to your orrmination which you conducted prior to tho beginning of the
exp'rimonto?

I fouai out for sure already, after two weeks, that tho ph;*-
sicrl condition hod dotorlerated considerably duo to tho oxperimor.tr.


-5336-


17 J—arrow ( ’tfartenburg) (MJ)

Court I

pationts who were la the exporinost.il statica.

v T o 70 U knew whether or net, hr. Xachefosig, that thoao
e^ariuostcl subjects wore volunteers or wot that knowledge over
brGu^it hone to you?

My peraoaol impression waa, S-em the v ory beginning, that
thin transport had boon brought to Dachau undor false pretense and
that tho poople had boon told not that they wore going for expori-
nents but for work, cad whoa the:- found out what It wan -about evoiy-
body tried to got out of It.

Voro you cblo to caeortcln tho nationalities of tho ver-
lcua aubjocta?

i. X uyaolf wo# not ablo to do ao. fcory day I did up to 300
fluoroooopo extinctions cad 100 X -r.y plcturoa aad could talk very
llttlo with tho prisoners *.0 aovly arrivod at tho ctp about tholr
nationality or about tholr ldoaa.

Oould you toll ua approximately vhon tho oxporimontn bogon
zr~\ vhon they woro cocplotul or do you apoclflc.Jly recall tho detoo?

i. 2 ho oxect dato X cannot rccaabor. Xt waa In tho ouisjor of
194-: and, ca far aa I know, tho experiments luotod for about air vooko.

Do you know what h«?ponod to tho oxporinoatid su.Jooto uoOd
In tho experiments aftor tho cccplotion of tho o^poriuontc!

i. After tho cccplotion of tho eucporinonte tho oxporiuontal
subjects woro examined aa to tholr ability towjrk or not to work cad
tho-/ woro divided into groups. Xhoae who woro sick were transforrod
to tho normal block hospitals.

Ci. Voro any of tho itxiatea used in thoao exporinontn-thcao nee
water o^jorincsta-at Dachau ill as a result of the experiments!

X don't know vory much about this since, after the comlo-
ticn of tho experiment, X was unable to take a fluoroscopo of all of
these copcrinental subjects.

Q. Veil, did any of thee havo to report to you for X -rry
after the cccplotion of she experiments!


-9337-


17 J u n©-j4-i»:j- x -5-Karrow(•/.irenburg)--X
C0U3T I

a. I -.now that aftor -he completion of the exper¬
iments, three cf those experimental subject case to the
station for Internal diseases.

Z- Do you hnov for cortain that those three subjects
varo froa the experimental station wherein the saawat-r
experiment8 were conducted?

Yea.

Q. .lien these people came to your station for X-ray,
can you describe to the Tribunal their oondltlon? .

. 1 . .ivory patlor.t who was brought to a station which
traat-d internal diseases was In the aondng brought for
examination to the X-ray station as a now arrival in this
station and of these people these three waro brought from
the station for Intern il diseases on the next morning to
the X-ray station. One of then was r.o longer ablo to
wall: himself. He ••'as or. a stretcher and was carried on
a otretohor up to the X-ray apparatus.


J-C lT-lMPt-U & y-l-T.eehra (1st. Ynrtenber-)
Court To. I


- Yhr.t ayspccus lid they show rs p result of the X-rry examination;
did they show pay positive results to the heart rad the lua^a?

X l still reeenber very well, I hrd to state r.s n result of the
examination that Just the pptieat who vrs hrou.it oa a stretcher that
his lca.re »s well as his heart were alright.

i Do you itsow what hrosered to that in-ate who was hroucht ia oa a.
itretehcr after you X-rryed hist

X The results of ay examination went to the stetion where the insr.tcs
were *ept. I received word that it wr.s not neceesrry to report the
result of the ewninotion to the station since the innate had diod. The
opinion of the station physician, who was an innate hisself, was that
the ultimate cruse were the sea-water exptrlncnts rad that death bed
beer, caused by that.

^ Did you receive this inforcrtlon rs official!

A This report I received officially through the station, with the
instructions to ivo cy report to the secretary office.

} Do you know how Ion.: after the ccsplotion of the ocr-vrter experi¬
ment that this subjoct died; was it a porlod of two wccics, throe or
four days or how Ion.;; do you recall!

A I rcaecber beccuso after they were tr-nsferred to tho station for
internal diseases it wr a only three days lr.tcr that the jr tiont died;
it was not r. ca.se of typhoid and there ver< no other syeptons of
illness that could he determined.

^ V ere you able to see his charts or records and determine froc then
tho cruse of death!

A V h«n I cxp lined hin, I oaw the curves, the sicicncse curve nyeclf
vr.ere the block was nentloned from which he case fros, 31ocJc 1~A, that
was the experimental station, and I could determine that the clinical
examinations had -Area ai ytive results; that was identical with :;y
cxanin-tlon.

' v re-, for the benefit of this Tribunal, lb. Tschofcni^, once p r.in

trt you absolutely sure that this meny you refer to died r.s p. result of

9339


June l T ->-3E-- A p>«Keehas (in'. Vnrtenberg)
0 cart To. 1


the Ko-wter experiuents?

A This vu the general opinion la the hospital rad It la alto ay
ova oplaloa that thlt patient froa the sea-vr.ter ttetlon died as r
result of*.-.the experinects.

X Tour Hoaor, I have ao further questions.

13 ?3SI3Zrr: The counsel for the defendant =»*•• cross-exnulne.

CaOSS»3XAKXyA3I©

3T na. ST2ir3AL*2?4

^ Vhlch religious deaoala»tloa do you belong to?

A I believe In Sod.

x Thlt It a Tad conception.

A It aeant that you have no confetelonal ties end rffillations but
■till boilers In God.

x V here are you livin', In Austria?

A A t Kla.-enfurt.

v And whore do you live now. In rumber.:?

A In lumbers, I *c living at the hotel.

^ 3o you vrlic around freely?

A Tee.

x Hov does It hap cn then that the Austrian newspaper vrotc,
especially your party orjT., which is always w 0 ll informed, "T schofenlg
ves kidnapped by the British and brou/Tht to Burobcr*:?"

A That is the erse because ell offlcerc which I hrfl scnethlnf to
discuss with did so without an}* Interpreters and the sunnons for a
witness, they did not look at the prper which sunnoned no to cone here
as a witness, and they treated =e as r prisoner or threatened to do bo.

x Tnus you did not like to cone to Buraber *? S peak norc slowly
and wait until the interpreter Is ready.

A I .-rve testimony when I found out that Dr. Bel-lbceck was working
In c British hospital In the British tone of Austria before I p*.ve this
testimony to the Police.

x Ve shall sneak about that inter. Vitness, at the nener-t I ra only

°341


1

June l'-y-3Z-U & 5-3-H*ekaa (Jhfc. Vrrteaber^

Court 7c. 1

interested In that your p*_r ty organ writes that the British Irfdnap'.ed
7°ut

X : vr«* Of the opinion thct It was efficient to give ea affidavit
mi in that wy to aake =7 statenent ca ler oath in ELnsenfurt before
the Iribunrl here rad that would be sufficient,

* Raw, it it possible thrt you did not want to cone before pn
American tribunal or thrt you hare rep sens to chance your testimony in
ray vryt

13. EAZSTi Your Honor, I nust obje-it to this, the witness stated ho
ceee hero voluntarily, he strted throurh an oversight he vr.o .given coa-
siderr.blo trouble on his way, he is l^re now voluntrrily and is CJiartor^
•d in the Seutscherhof Hotel rad he us .going to return to Klagenfurt.
there was no coercion or duress exorcized over the witness in any wry
end I wrat that elear for the record.

tHS ParsiETt: the objection io overruled.

3T 3?.. StSOTAUZSl

> V oil, witness, in ray case your party organ had the inprcsslon,
otherwise they would not hrv* wri ;tca th*t you don't want to -o to
rurn-erg; is thrt correct?

A I did not rend ray nowspszri fro*- Austria thus 1 do not know what
was written there.

^ Veil, I era tell you wh-t was written; It sryo that the British
” 0 voresent of Coriathir. requts ;cd you repeatedly* to appear, you did not
cone and thereupon English so?.di:rs cant to fetch you; is that correct?

A That is not correct. I received a request to cone to rurnberg,
by the British Silent. Civl .i*a Affairs, I asked thca to trrncport no
back a^-air. as quickly as porsible, ai I jc very busy and 1 do not hove
the tine to be e.vcy frtxn Coj-gross for r Ion,: tine tc.i the Corintfcia
?r.rli~ncr.t is in session r.O/,

Q, V ell, and there are other big doings .goir. • on and it vrs very'

necessary th-t you are cot ava.y fron hone, I caa understand that. In ay

duties as r defense eounse.., I also obtained sonc infomr.tion about

9341


:-se 17-K-3Z-* -1 ^U-ICeehao (Xnt. Ifcrteaberg)

C ourt ro. 1

you personally, red got the reply, *7ery intelligent, hut fanatic." I
rz no*, reproaching you for that. I nyself. vrs ir. prison in Hitler’s
tine, the Cestrpo repeatedly got -e out of ay hed and I era unde ret end
very easily. (To Kr. Errdy) 1 Flerae do not interrupt so. Hr. Enrdy,

If you lost your vife .

7X2 PESSIDHR! The counsel desirce to arke rr. objection to your
question end he it entitled to he heard.

IB. HAH27I Tour Honor, I think oat her witnesses could perhaps testify
»s to the chrrecter of the witness Tschofenig, that is not the problea
of the defense counsel, if he desires to testify to the character he ary
tr.ke the witness stand end do so, V bather or not the witness Is
•intelligent or fanatic" it is not for the defense counsel to stato
fron this podlua,

7HZ P32SD2T7J The stnteaents contained in counsel's address to
witness were not proper questions to he propounded to the witness. T he
counsel will slaply propound questions to the witness, which the witneos
cm answer properly ns testlcony in the case, then the setter will
oroceed in r sore orderly nrnner end soasvhat fester,

3T 3S. srsimTsai

<; Yitneas, due to the trr.'ic fate which you suffered yourself rnd the
f“.« especially which hcfcll you.vith the dorth of your wife, are you
not especially filled with hr.trodl

* Thnt is not correct, I renrdned c huaro being even in a conccntrp-
tion crap end yet now too.

\ I here to tell you, vitness, thr.t one of your conpr.triots, Ko.jon,
wrote an excellent hook rnd pointed out in particular thnt the concentra¬
tion inartes had feelings of hatred.

A That i6 probably a literary necessity for m author.

EAEDT: Tour E^nor, if the Defense Counsel is quoting Ko-on's hook

iffid Is quoting pcssegcs which he has introduced, which I have called

to the attention of the Tribune!, it Is out of context rod I request

that be be required to suholt the passages In the book to the witnoss,

3342


w ^ e 17-H-2S- ^ 4 p-r-I^ehen ( 1 st. Vn-tcaberg)

C «r: To. 1

Ischofcni^, bo that the witness hinself nay he properly infon ed,

■o that he nay rasvtr the questions intelligently.

THE PHISIllSi’I: The objection in overruled, counsel ary proceed
*•"« quest!one. If he desires to crll prrticuli-r rttention to
cay particular pe^e of Eo$oa «8 hook, he ary do so, the objection . s
overruled. He any proceed.

3T 32. ST2ir3AUZHl

^ On pc.-t 52 , witness, perh^s you could reed out slowly so rll
of us era hear It.

A *J.ost of the people ia the crap were filled with an uniao^lneblo
dosire for revere, the spiritual reaction of helplessness; tortured
sen rrked their brrtns for new e*r^ ; errted such worse tortures which
they vented to inflict soaetlaes in tho future on thoso who now
reacted their whiao on then. The thirst for revea^o wrs directed
towards the entire Ertional Socirllstic 2 # fine rad its followers."

If I ncy now urJcc c rearrk?

^ Tes , do.

A Eunra hein,-s, people who errry such thoughts rloty: with thon
rrt lone wolf* end they did not bclon.: to the f troup of concentration
ersp inartes in .;cnercl, hecmsc ni.hnnm heinr did not reaain rlone
in r concentration casn hy hiasolf. S o, he wrs not hopeless ml
he laic ss because he carried thot nil ia connon rnd heemefl he vr-c
conscious of the fact that this re.tine ap-'ronched its end.

5. 7 hrt is the opinion thrt nrny people ehsdioatslde of the con¬
centration crap too, witness.

”ow, another question, witness,e - vcyyrrcspecloblc physicipr. moepr¬
od here, r Czech, and he reported thrt tho nost naezitv: ruaers wore
current in the cam nnd there wr.s p nras psychosis in the canp; Is
thrt correct?

A A t vfact tine?

V v ell espccicliy rt the critic.'! tine in 1JU4 end later on.

A In IS'-h runors prone beceuse transports of level ides were


’•se 1"*-Xr-2X- -45- o-Keehrs (1st. Yrrtcaber^
Coart ITo. i


node e~.i is 19-5 the razors vert veil founded because his ovs
experience a let the thought arise is the -I'd of every priBcn.r
that the refine, r.t ita end, contctplr-ted the complete liquidation
of .-11 iaaates.

^ If ve cov tcke theae tvo conceptions, arcs psychoale rad hatred
pad if ve combine theae tvo and I furthermore tall you that is your
first isterrocrtios you said youraelf, "I could aot have diroct
laai'ht into the exncriaeatetioa etrtion* rad if I furthermore tell
you thrt *11 vita ease a vitfc who n I smoke r.saured no expreascdly that
nobody died ft a result of the cxperiacnts, I an therefore rekins
you do you aot coaaider it pcaeiblc thrt uncoasciously you were
aubject to thrt area psychosis?

A I did sot hrve direct laal.tht into the cxperlacatol strtion, I
vra not rad on aot aubjeot to area psychoaia rad it is c fret that
vithout execration I era answer for these stnteaente here beforo
tho court rad I con stead by then.

t; V ell, aov, vhrtever you think, I on now coin*: on to yonr
in dir i duel ebsteaente, you v, rr intor routed twice; ia thrt correct?

A 2 vra interrogated three tinea. T he fire*, tine due to ay
report to the polieo; the second tlae by r representative of the
Ticano State Police rsd the third tisc by tho representative of tho
Prosecution of the Court here.

} Crn you tell ae the nrac of the ^entlencn?

A The arae of the representative ef the Police I crn not tell you.

^ But, the lrat one vho interro.a*ted you!

A In Hr.^nfurt....

; To, I sera oa lU l>y 19 u 7.

A In Elacenfurt, I vra iatorro-.y-ted by one Sr. A lexondcr.

^ Thenic you very such. T he first tlae you were interrogated on
7 7ehrasry I9U5?

A The first time it vps I vtc srde the resort.

; Airiest, witness, ve should net sisunder6tend each other - the

5


now


17-K-3*. ’-45 -7-Keehrx (l n t. V^rteobers)
C-oart So. 1


tlae of th * Tribunal is precious; here la this file th re .'ire tv-,
interra>rtions, one of the 7 of Jebruary 19 U 6 pad one *-hich the
physicl,m, 3r. Xlexmder, conducted on i'-y lU, 19 US in rir^enfurt:
let us sperk about your first strteaeat; did you know r. certnin Dr.

Sasckerl

X Yes,

:G. HA 2 DT; Tour Eoaor, 2 request that the vitaeor he elver, the two
conies of the effidevit he signed In Geraray.

IHZ PHDSHa’T: The affidavits which the witness sr.de in the Oerxan
language will be headed to hi a.

23. STSI73XU22: I don't hrve then. Your Honor.

THZ p ~s:3i:7: I understand that, but they should be rvriTable in the
office of the lecretrry Ceacral.

!a * EXHDY: One is Doeuscnt Book To. 5 , Your Honor.

DH. ST2I73AIZH: That is Illegible, it is here.

:-3. EX33Y: - hr other one ie a suonlcnentrl exhibit rnd was ,*uot put
in recently.

3.-. a.a: 3A7IS: Your Honor, I hrve only one cony. 2 could *et only
one copy of the docusent book rnd that is lllociblo.

~ 3 ra-SXBSIfT* The Tribunal will be in recess in a few noatate, nr.4
v " ca it is ir. recess those copies can be orocurcd froa the sfficc of
the Secrctrry General.

Xlri.-ht, the Tribunal will be in recess for a few aoaonts,

(X recess was taken.)


9345


17 June 47-:{-«*:-7-l-2aniols-(Von Soboen)

C0U.1I I - C..S2 I

rURSRAL: The Tribunal is again In session.

- -RSSXDiirT: Counsel nay prooaod.

BY DR. 3TRIHB.JJJR:

*• fitness, did you know Dr. Rascher?

.a. Yes,

Q. Nov I would like to hand you your tv© affidavits—
the originals.

(Documents submitted to -/ltneas)

If you will loo* at your statement of the 7th of
19-.6, you will agraj :1th so If I say ht you begin bv
spooning of Dr. Rascher's experiments?

Yob.

Q. «nd you will also .groo with so if I say that
you and your testisony lth the anno oxperla r.to?

.*• Yes.

Q.. Did you often sue Dr. Rancher -and Dr. 36iglboeok
to goth-. r?

.u Ko.

Q. Dr. Raeohor still t*ero?

A. Nq, Dr. Rasoher was not there,

Q. Then there is no connection between Dr. Rasoher
ar.d Dr. Bolglooock?

The two stations had a connection.

That Is, they were In the same place?

Dr. Rascher 1 3 station was related to the Luft-
v:*i;e experiments. Through Professor Sppinger 1 a visit to
tr.ls Luftwaffe st .tlon, the sea water experimental
st .tlon was set up.

Q. Here during the trial It v 18 stated that or. the
2 Gth cf July 1344 this arrangement was 3pcken of for the
:irst time; Soplnger was there lr. iiucust. I ash you, Is

??46


iv June 47- -it- 7-3-Danlel &-(Von Sohoen)
OX’aI I - CAS2 I


It not possible that you confused Professor 3p?lnger with
so-e one else, perhaps with Dr. Bdiglboeci, "ho was 2p?inger
's assistant, whoa you did not hnow as yet r t the tine?
Please think; it is impossible that Dpplnger was ther- at
that tine.

A. I ynow of the setting up of this station; I
learned of It only v.en Professor Spplnger va3 in Dachau
at the Luftwaffe Station visiting Dr. Ploehnor.

Q. That was BeiglbooCK, ^-plnger's assistant, who
talKed to Ploeknor. Did you Know Spplng r?

;.'o, A did r.ot hnow Dpplngor. T&e visit of Profes¬
sor Spplnger was onnounoed to the oanp by a prisoner.

Q. That was Leoersdorfer?

.x. Yes. The prisoner Leberodcrfer was a student of
Professor appingor.


5747


17 Janc-Jf-^-5-l-?oit!t (Int. v-n Schoa)

C art S->. 1, Case 1

Yes, vary true, in- h- t-lku_ t Sppingcr in August?

nYea,

Then 7 :c Jo u-t exclude tht possibility of a aiatako. finger
»=a there, but /au can't a-./ ccrctiy when hu wea tix.ro?

I canr.;t * ivo the iiet«, but Prof. Zopinger was ther-. Thu ori-
an - r Lebers -tier rec gniroc Tia nni toll! oe ptraonall/ that after ho,
Lebersd ,rfor s>ske to the Prifessr, he aa>vS8w.! ast-.nish.'otnt at fiiy*-
lng - f.rncr 8-uJcn as-ng the Be crloiieils.

Ye3, t; t ia true, ;,ca Bciglbocck there?

A.- I '’or.'t Jen:.

Q.- In any c~.a< .ippir^er was tit re an tnltoJ t. LubursJ.orfcr?

«•* Yea.

Q.- v . 0 :iiU L n. In thia e/fl avit y u a-y th't 60 gypdoa
Here br-u^.it :r-t Sc‘.c..ao'.h^ua-n.

•” Tr. cL rr^t that pria-rwra were tj C-Oj frxa Sachaonhr.uson
'• r tho3 ‘ J o^x-rijonta ant! <nly r.ft.r they arrivin'. was it IsarnuC whoro
they caae fr i, but within the c-ap it was always said the nrla nero
fr-a Saohaenhauaen.

Q.- But they really uer-n't Ira Sachaonhrusen?

A.- I qysdf i it *.ak -ny f tit .era na wh. were use f r thooo
uXJeriacnta where thoy can* froa when they cnao to Dachau.

Q.- Tr.tr. her. y u a-.y <0 gypsies ca.w froo S*chaenh-us>.n, that ii ht
be inc rrect?

n.- It was a l.-.ct fcn.wn in the rap that tivse pe pit c~..- fr a
an-ther ea^p t- Dachau f,r th« eo^riauits.

Q.- The sec .. tine yu any there were n t 60 but 80 to 90. *..’hich
figure is rijht?

...» 2 rcry - I ht tr napjrta for e) . the

-x->jcte oriB;n. rs >ar>. were .thers f r flu.r.sc'pic exaaiir.ti *n, ant!

tr.-t is induct,-- in th- figure which I rnv- hurt, in ay atat.aaait.

93«3


17 Jm»-:~-FL-8-2-Fel_:fc (Ir.t. v n Sch r.)
Court Ho. 1, Case 1


Q.- Then those era pt-plc fra various transports?

A.- J%', Crza orv. transport.

Q.- Then if 73 a l-ok at your testimony you sty n hunger cure was
prescribed. nt the beginning. Is that not a alauxr’erst an-ing? Actually
the pc-pit hr 1 t get especially good f jj- at the beginning -.f tho ex¬
periment?

I hr’ r. thing to do with this station an the Clot f the pri¬
soners, but it was known in the hospital that a distinction was va 'e bot-
wcen the uxperla-r.tol sublets as well as betw-.n foo* and treatment —
You cannot say whether there was c st-rvation diet at the be¬
gin nirg?

«.- It was kn.«n in the camp that the pris n-rs ha ‘ ‘ifforont food.,
or less fo-d, for n few dnys.

n.- Sot y u n't kn-»w anytring *b at this Jr a y ur wn observ.a-

ti.n?

a.- K , I was not -t this station.

Q.- Then y u s-y th. pe-plu were ^iven - salt let. You ere an in¬
to lli. -r.t nan, a-. Tschofeni-_. D'Ank that vor. «.n experiment wrs bein,-
c .n’ucte here t .r.fcc ser. water rinkablo, an ’ c r. iti nc >1 distress
at soc. were to bo imitate.'. *«ne' we can or vs by showing tables that

• 0 a emergency rr.ti ns tai possible. Can y 1

imagine that Beielb eck gave these pe pit a s-lt diet?

n.- Salt *mter experiments — an. apparently salt water was incluc'.-
In the f oC in the h-spital. 3 h thing t» da with t

food r with this particular ntati r., an' tr—ref r. I c-ann.t s*y that any
particular thin, was iivon t. tho tx ale.

r ..- Then you say furth-r they were .jivee salt injeCti ns as a t ;r-
turo. Those 3 a.lt infections w»re always given at the en -f the experi¬
ments t brock ff the experiment for acdical re-.: ns. D you think it
is passible, or il n't y u thick 7 u axe cist "ken when y u say these wuro
giver, as txtmro?


93*9


17 :- 3 -Fclr't (Ir.t. v.n Schcn)

C-jrt Ss. I, Casa 1

The prisoners «h_- cat. ta at luring the experiment said that
the/ Vvr- £iv-r. injections ire' other thirds.

Tio-r. 7 du £-.7 y.u si* casts -f rage.

fl-, I id not see any cases, but I hserd of on u particular

ease.

Q.- Then 73a say Boiglboeck ctlivuxM.’ the so-called tr ubleaakors
* the SS. Can 70a tell ne whoa be turned over to tho SS and why?

n ,- 2rery cxporLxnt" 1 station bad poople wb resists . They wore
.ither t. sub. :it .r they -ere tumod „w_r t the crap auth riti.ee. In
this attack which I bo-rd tb.ut, .-^-.sar-o were t-ken which wer- t pa¬
cify the ~-T3 n according t. the noth which pnrrnUAi in tJe. c.-;p.

Q.- .h-ru aa this e'.ne?

At ti>. strti n, as I bwcr.1.

f..- Then cc r dir t the ruaors, Be. lb eck turned pc nit -v.r
•. tho SS. TTwy ul h v- to be oiesln.. The nuabur .f ex-xri Antal
subjects 1 ul h rt hr t be less.

I was not a nurs.. I 1.' nt havw any statistics n the iri-
s a. re. I c-nr.ot tell y.u wh-tb-r m' when these inci aits occurred and
■hat the 'et-ils aero.

C..- K w you sry bl w-.s t*ken frequently end -»eople wtro treat¬
ed unscientifically, which le t severe me in no ceoo t-

etth. D you kn.w who t. k the bl 1 an ', h-w such?

As an outsider in this station 1 L.-rnod that in - "ili a Dr.
5 ei:lbA.ck*s Luftwaffe assistants undert,ok this -v. ic-.l tre-t.x.nt, n t
hly at Stati n 1 -.., but als at Stiti n 5 , the Luftwaffe stiti a in the
-*b .rat iry.

Q.- Is it true, as y.u wrote, I had ly superficial insight into
c a iti ns?

...- Yes, tirt is true. I c ul.’ mt h~ve .any insight into the i t-
i- i-te cccoxroaco at this st-ti n.


3353


17 Jurfc-l!-rL-'-ir-?cl:'.t (In', v.n Schon)
C-urt So* 1, Case 1


C.- ..t the cn<: y-u s'y other scientists c~.au u ho were ir.torostGi
in those -xpcrlxrss. It is not doer. Apparently you ae~n other ex¬
periments, n.t the see water experiments.

'*•“ Hare I was rtf-rring t the cxporlaental stations in general,
but particularly the Luftwaffe uxperia-ntal st*ti,n.

*•“ sc go on t-> the nffi.nvit -f U 1 ay. You say there that
h-filthy fcypsi.a cone. fr_a Snchs»*iheus-n. You still orintnin that to >.y?

A.- Yes.

Q.- Then you say that the sick po pi- nor- eliminate'.

k.- Yes.

Q.- r.iere must have bwn an vxaairr.ti.in then?

A •- To 0 «

Then y u s jr, I knew only th- rco oi thes- ryosies. I cannot
f-y whet their nati >ndity «.-s. Can y u U.11 e>„ what this racial
signal! n was?

■

...» This transa r* >. ns, P L- 3 , Italians,

Fr-r.cta.n, but It was call.-' a .ypsy transo rt.

Q.- fr.t insignia X' these aen we-r?
lijatiy the black trian. lc.

’ they hew* hnC? r u try «i r the ant part,"

^xoetL'x.s ypni-s ha. a gr—n triangle.

Q.- That 3v,ans criminals?

Y-3.

Then y u describe y.ur z-r-y w,rk. Y^u s-y 3-i lb -ek '‘iotrustoa
~7 flnlings *n- object-- I t; then ane ch-ckc' up .n thus.

«.- Y-s,

r..- Di ‘ yM here the inor-ssi n th t Bcirlb eck ua’erst .-*! the busi-

a.ss?

A *“ 1 ^nly one thin,. Ir. =-i_lb.cck twice perf-ra-.'. ectnti-

*-ti ns aft-r my finir^s an. exoress-- iif-x^r.t opini.na than ay find¬
ings,

9351


17 Juno-l£-FI*-$-5-Fc Zf.t, (let4 v.r. Schon)
C art K;. 1, C c.so 1


Q.- I nMua>- thet 3oigIb>6ck perhaps an?trst-x' mt-j than y^u?

Wo ir. -jct rs ir. the emp uhj -lie n t ov«n kr.:n h*n to harr'lc
t surgical knife ;r a hyp-'-'emic nee Ho.

Q.- Thtac :iorti ver c! ict:ra ?
a.- Thoao aero SS .-ct^rs.


17 Jure-ri.r: (7 r. sc., -r.)

C-urt 1, C so 1

■}: I-u rr.y, witness, tlr-t ysu Iv-.J 3C0 fiu.r.scip- URoinsti ns
1-11;* ml -...ut ICO I-r-.y pictures?

- Tea.

Her. 1-n- <Ue3 tills tnUc7

r-.t v.ri.l. Ir. aeries w;ain'.ti.r.a 11 cn fit- tv- r tjet.

lr.' h . l.n; i;c» " Z-rny pictur- t' 1 ;., Itfc -r. stfjr.ti.ai

ft- the fln lln^B?

A: .itu pr.cticw, tie pictur- Is t ixn in h'-ll * :dnuic, if -ft-

s '.salat nto.

Dil y u hr.vc '.asis'- .nta?

Y-3.

•4* Jli?

In .uotrl .n -n. *. Yo^cL-v.

1: 1 ) y-M kfuu their nus.tt’l

j (ku f th-u, his Jirrt na. u s Fritr Schrtk- ftr. Vitim-.

Tte. <tfc-r n- lr I Yu; al v .. it - he :r.r. fr .. Ixib eh — r. itlionl

st’ilort.

: if I unlvrcfcr.nl It c rrcctly, y u .uat h'.vc jor^ictl

• •

o-ut il,COC flair -se po. ex i Jji ti :is per ye r?

In .y a nthly rqisrt, I r.l.rya fc-J .v-r . tfc.us nU; s-.iotL-oa
-von -i-r_.

Io it n. t p^ssislw ttft r-« - -A«t Jees in vi--.; f ^is

cn-iM uo nueber, cap^ei-.lly -ti.TCo / u --ere trying t help y-ur c:nrn*loa
hlch ..ust h'.Vv listmct-l y_iu* r.ttocti-n?

If n- h'.s s-nsu of lufcy, -del .is ire r. t isp^ssihlc, f
c urc-, me -hey .re r. t likely.

iill r. t Bvilli -as oso * ?; -nclxun .a* help! hi. iln the

I-r'-7o?

I -- .t .A-; th*i. In dsnsix tho X-r y piciuo -s, -ur. ..ore

U l.ct rs w.rkL;- — - -- nfcs

9353


C-uri 1, Cm c i


(Y -T- Sc..0er.)


There ;src .-.la s-c frcacfc_cn in the laftwiifc station?

Kov -il this French :;ct.r .r y.u cv.-.l^t. the findhcs?

As I av-Jaiatd- the finliftss - the * sc-P- ~“ r • pictures.

I -Is t- fci» fia.ir.ss one .r.ssci a:-ft -ft tetter with toe picture*
Lter, lftstraoti. ns u.r; issue.! t- seal niy the picture3 t. tk- st'iijn

.dth.ut .ft

;s K- were y-u supple: ..it. -.-rry fii^s?

Fr._ ncpcri^nce, I s-.: t it t..--t there vas nlwys c'teri.'l
-.v-II-jL. i r A-r-y pictures,

.: 3uty u ifiil c ftc-Zc tV.t ft‘- that ti~e tJare rj a
shortage?

... ;<s hU supplied fr.. too years n fcn«* I.E. st-.ti.n

»r.s s*.t up -.a. uben -c receiv... Cft-U.. f thin .fttcrial.

.it.: hit prclixiin-air li'- a. oio rs rapplic..?

?rca Uu. in^ivUttal st-ti.ftfl, .ft'is ws ..ere s-ftt t the
St ti .-. 3 , ?l 4 # ft-ra nor- sn.e - 3# f r X-r y r - v :• nc >,

bat r_ r the - st part with ut rc_-r/.c as t. -hat thoy :.

.: itn-os, y u *-r-.ye- n. ..era n thr.e ti~ea, ft- this '.s

that tu.ons n fin! . Ic it r. t raftOrkabl- that j- irfty
X-riys :.cr. t'ken?

?.:e flu.r.sc po :r.3 sheeted t b.c-.use the p tiont o
sid: at the station, an. sine- -7 fifths -ere rk.5-.tiv-, die r&.ucat
.r.z oftdc ---'in. In ft- C M, - jpsl© too fin!mgs; in tber - . , Ur.

Bcigl id nerfereo; tho flucrooopc hfcasclf a - X-r ys hr*! - a. t ken.
jon»t yap think trr.l is in- nstrati a f spe-iv. care that

he checked y.ur fir.-in^s?

fiftl in js r.-cr, ckccLw. o-cevuso fr*- the beginniftj tfce» was
t!w T st trot I f uft_ t fe .ris ~r: suit'.Ul- f-r the «. ei&itrfcs.
.a- hft. -lie y.u suiftll- t.:es?

-j..ftys trieX t. help the fri -rs — -y c

That is v-ry nice. But has aid ,-.u X it technic --v‘?

9?54


17 Juac-i-l~r- (V a Sc.-.-or.)

C-urt 1, Cteo 1

In the flu r.sc.pes, I fiaro -pini.ns, fer axp'., eh » ” 1 ..

ti»o _ er*jn unauit ile : r -hia . . ;i<r _ .r iscp s i. eat, .-c-.m- nip
h^.itrp prtainera --r_ t h_ . uifcta. t. tin, -xpcri -..jl s.

J- ; u n.t belie/w, idtncas, th*t cliaicrlly tr ;a— ..ct.r
c-ulh rw-.liic ZiT.t y.u .a- re n.t ;;xvin, trutnful -pini.na?

: frequently tr.: dlfflcaltins in the cup OeC.usc -f l.is ctivity.

*■: 3ut n.t -t Bei£la-».d:»3 t^c?

..t 3cI;lo jck'a tLc I vto e.vc.;c: by tlu. c ..ct.:* b.chuac
.f Bcic.la.-dc^ -latrust.

!: toll - 4 ., if y.u .;.. -c r ,-v.ive pinion, then act Ib-cck

■<r.a suapicieua?

uic pi;y#ic'l c-n.-itln .f t... pris.n.r ..h. s br-ught t-
• - a i^ethlJC .rr.n; ..it.: hie*

:»let's 5. n t thin a. p tiuit vh— y u recall eoxci.lly
ull. ji* - u t .Ik t thle p.ticnt ..-hen y .u X-r y- hiu : r first,
s-c.n l, .• t..ir. ti-c?

Ottrirfc the oxp.ri-i.nt *t tlua eti,i n, no I those experimental
aubjeeto c t «e aerur 1 tt,... .. : ake- hia s ...e questi . .

In Gcn.n?

Y-3, tie op.kc Gcr.r.n

Jjjp u a this -j, x-ryc the o_c »i- ti-.c?

A: 2 I n't la.* b t Lh- r-.n n :.s«

«l:cus- -e, but yuejt c.ll tx, :s h: .t b.1 ru the eupcrixtnt,
-iri— ». . r f-cr the oX...rim.nt?

It s «urir. • the e;cp.i\L;ee3 th t thin me x. f r n l-r~.y
cxvin*ti a.

:: I.'u C'n r -er Ju- ha t.ll he r.s?
l.oC r iqhly I s'll ..v-J-oetJy.

ill, th t Is nt 1. .-tit. gut «fa .t .Ill i- 1 - Lil^? .3
r.. ynsa. 1 ra he U?

.-3 ; r .s 1 eta r—caber, h_ -is <£ -uliu. ; -.e, but the c :;_iti.r.

9355


17 June—_ rd (Vm ucr. - cn )
C-urt I, Cr.su 1


.5 the prisoner before r.r>d iurir.* thw _x;x:ri^_nLs dangt- considerably.

!: h.-t ere these changes?

In .:is appearance and in .da acetal c rxlitin. That ;.t*a

jpr-asod in Ida ens.ers.

■J: Can 7_u tell us whether this Gypsy had any dinmetcristics?

IT it possible, I ..-ultl jive nxxs :nu -thcr clues, but
1 nearer t-;is ;xrs n only ft*-., the circurat :ncc th'.t every enp-rioent'-.l
phase i~ft certain characteristics in .y otn.ry.

7: Tell, we can't really expect that, but was Uio -r.n bright in
a stretcher r Hi he walk?

F r t.c first ixacinntlan, lx was nly with -n esc-rt; later
he was br-tQht n a stretcher#

7: Can you tdl -e r. was the csc.rt?

Prisoners fr - the station*

ell, c lai u 11 th-sc noraes. D ntt y-u knew thay were?

I lon*t rwi^ubsr exactly d ether the nurses hr mht hia r tho
ocpcrlecnt J. sebj.cts thccselvcs.

7 : K --r. he oee t b. 7 .—ry-i, .iiat .Id: he 1 -k like? Jr.fc was
the c.-ir 1 ..is »cin: white, blue, yellow? .hat dd he l.al: like?

The sldr. c.I r -f these people was Irk br:wn, a liUl- ray,
because f th. physical ,:>.t-rl rati n.

7 : .hat ill his face 1 like? s it a ; lien r .r.s it sunken?

It r.s *i_re sunken.

7: ;*ru r—this nan vary :dl. T-u even kn.w hi3 woijfcfc —

Kcijxt.

:7s Tea, he , that is hat I .e n. hat ill his eyes look
like? .ore tie 7 shiny ->r lull?

rt : 7. ae h.r.ast, in y first r sec.nl affidavit, 2 waul have pit
- vea _r. _ what I kn.w, out I have already si; what I kr. . .bout this

person.

i: Ii-i't <ant y.u t. i. -n ty ..at.-, uc, lir. ischofeni . I su

9356

... : J


d


1? Jux«-..-?H-9-5-G--7l - rd (7 n 3chcon)
C Tt 1, CT-30 i


I —rely — iag iuty. I h.-.vo tj cal: t re so things. Dio tils rrn *
ex. I'-in - y-u? DL; ho s-y, “I .V.vc. * hocinchc, n 3t^ch".c'.c?'« .jjy
jtter cu^Ir-inbs?

I n-t ro-xnocr these ic.2ils«

But it # .3 - ru-xkJ)lc c so, vtaat it?


3357


17 Jbno i-7— —..7D—IC—1—' "urthr. (Ir.t» von Schon)

Court I, Case I

.. Thu resaricatala thin aas tbs au Idea fluoroscopic e&sxlnBtion
: r 'i-rad by tho station and — ha was i-cedi&t&y ren-vcd and taken
hack afterwards#

; Did you have ar. X-ray aacfalno with a collapsible table?

A Tea.

1 tact Id you do to ivo this patient special care?

A Patients who wore brru ht for a fluoroscopic examination on a
stretcher wore stood up by the assistants behind the nachino an' were
exanlnod in this position booauso the fluoroscope oxardnation in a
lyin position was possible but more difficult,

1 Do you r„ajubor the inspiration of this patient when ho was
brou ht to you tho last tino? Did ho broctho deeply cr shallowly?

A Ho broathod liku a sick pwrscnj his broathin was short.

1 Did tho patient raii?

A No.

1 Did ho ecu-h?

A Tboso aro details which you aantt possibly oxpoct no to anawor
truthfully.

1 But you have a oo' vcwryj you r^-aber tho h:i«*ht of this inn
althou' h yu had 10,000,11,000 peoplo a yo-.r. It icust have boon a
•- .oaiol ease?

A On: nr ticoa th. hoi ht, more especially when onu has to deal
with a -rson an-' put hin bohinc! the aachine. One can n.ra or lu3s
rc.Tjsbor '.is het ha. 3ut in th- J ark it is not posriblo to sco tho
color ef his jy«3 or the color of his hair or anythin? else.

Did this atlent a: re his liibs or did ha just lie thoro
r-vtionloss?

A Tho s*j aro questions that are icpossi'elo for ^ to answer.

1 Saw jmy patients Id you hare at ycur X-ray station?

A I dcnt unierstan yur question. «•

1 S:v :a-ay alto ;th r? How -.any per yoar? -any p-_-.pl.?

I car.it toll ycu exactly.

9759


17 Jbn 1x7—'w.TD-13-2-?fertha (Inc. von Schon)

Ccurt I, Case I

q oil, approximately,

.. In two years there were several thousands, if net r»ro than
15,000,

h Isn't it possible — you say th;rc w_ro ninety ypsios and thcro
-ro forty-four in th, axp-rin_nt — isn't it possible that this ypsy
«aa ' ri inally intended for the oxj>-rirv?nt and then was put in a
'iff.:rent departed nt or block?

.. /.ftor tho end of the oxpori rx -nts — it was recordod or. thu caso
history fP'-'-a which block the patient caao to tho station,
q Do you know -^.cin the son-water oxrxrLient was finished?
k Tho sea—‘ ter experiment, ns far as I renanbar, lnrtod about six

n-Jes,

q o hr.re records shewin that the last X-rays v_ro or. tho 11th
of Sop to;'bo r; or. th, 16 th of September the station was IssolVod, Do
y.u not believe that th. oth-r ypsios, the *octcrs, tho nurses would
r.Tj loarnod that a .tar. had lod?

a Ke 'lod three 'ays later, .,ft>,r tha exp-rim-nt the subjects had
rominod at the station, ’>ut Ltno lately after tho und soao paoplo voro
tokon to the noraaal hospital for normal treatment,
q Do you know that y.>si-3 stick to- other?

.. So, I do not,

1 That is too ba '. Let's asmae it, then. Don't jrcu b-liavo that
in such a close coxnirdty tho people cul ' certainly have loeraod of it
if threo 'ays after tho ond of tho ajp> .rlaont cno of the- die '.?

.. Events in a corcur.trrtior. canp are such that oven r nei- hb?r can
Hu without M3 cam-. lcaridn about it,

q Sow, if I say to y.u that a nu-'xir f your fra.r coiTaaos aro
axr. ir.j'f at tho sti-*; with you, who say un 'cr oath that it is
inpoasiblo that anyone iiod. Don't you consider it possible that you
have ~do a rlstake?

.. I au net aware that durin th- xp -ria nt *^-’on_ lie- ’ at this

i i * a, a* I fc r:ra.-f:.r ver* ur.11 fcb a th-ii *0 *.

9350


17 Jtono L7—'. 1 ^—1C—3— urtha (Int, von Schon)
Court I, Case I


-ro;r thj cad of the .>o rl^nt. It ir-s on. .f these persons.

1 itness, you sey 2k.art an ! lur s r- r.ti7u 'j you say in your
second affidavit, I faun’ no patholoical synptoas." Br.:, what id
tha r.r. 1c of? «ry 'octor ~H 1 soy thet is impossible,

1 ..t the intend station ’to had all cases _f sickness. In this
ease the nurse as well as tlx doctor ’id not find arc* i noilato
isocso, an ’ the opinion alrca !y 'urin thj fluoroscopic oagwLnation
nhioh tlwy avo was that this was one af tho son-water experimental
subjects.

1 Toll :*ji who was worlcin at this station 'here this aan vras? "ho
wore tho '’actors and nursos?

.. it tbc internal station ttero wars *>, 3 end Ho. 7 and Ho. 9.

Tlv.su ..-raons transferred fren tho uxporlacntol station. And I r.r^nbor
that this porson car e fro* Station 9 Tor fluoroscopa oxa:dnation.

3 ' oro thoro only SS doctors tiv-ro or woro th.ro prisoner-doctors,
too, Fronchaon, Tu oalavs an', so on?

A In tho hospital thjro 'fere only prisoner-doctors wrrlrfjv ,

<1 It is oncrally lawn that these for-i r. 'oot rs w-ro very
oo:jradoly. I ask you, ’an>t you b-liuvo if the rmn was a-Wtod throo
’.ays boforo that ho waul ’ havo boon ivor. water rr ilk by theso
foroi r. doctors, that he weul :on Ivon svaothin • to oat, or

lo you believe that the nan lay tJv>ro helpless for thr*. . da; •a?

i. “vary prisoner vns ivun food an! help. Ivor}' prisoner-’actor
’i • ovurytidn ho coul ’ to halp tho patients.

3 Ton aro a u lical laynan, ara you not?

A Yos, an! as a loynon I bed to she..- tho SS doctors '.-hat an Z-ray
machine -..-as.

1 That i3 torriMo. Put ’o y u bolicvu that 'oi lbo.ck know an
X—ray rschlno?

a I *cn»t ’.cry it.

1 In! do y.u believe fcV. i '.i i eck c ul' Pin’ the b. Innin sta _s

: ~ — on’: rcuiosis — . ,.r» -nsily -hrn y c:ul!?

9360


1? To* L7-W-TD-i:4rJ'nrthr. (la*-, -.-or. Scten)
7 -:rt ~f Cose I


.. 3 'dll l_oVv; that the wXp-rionca of "raetico in tho concon-J

tration oenp.

3 'all, then, yea arse© with ae if I say that B-i lbcjc-: hai a
ri h: to '.istreat yea, bacauso you yourself hare a-’nittci thet you
trioi to deceive bin, tixu h prccotod by borurablo nrtivea.

.. I havo a very Id h opinion of radical scionco, but In a corcorv-
oration oa.jp I ted v iovolo? quito n dl‘‘oror.t e pinion of thaso
'.coters*

1 ffc«r often ad yea s-« "oi lboock, talk to hin?

1 Perhaps two :r throo tinea.

q And hew w_rc those c-otir. 3? * hat te. p-n-d?

A They woro n t vory fri-ndly.

'I ini thrt v.s bocruso <v. ‘.vd to -ark- j-otiona to your x-rry
fin’in a?

1 -ocuaa fin*in;3 ‘i w:t suit hia plans.

"itness, ov.r; r._ ns onoidoa. o 'dll loot tho roat of this,
Argrh-'', yea I.. ’, a ~od Irian-lo»

A lea.

1 la it tr^e that after tte son--.rater oapjriJcnts, .xpocially in
t winter * 19U* ml then into tho sprln of 19U5, tho ncrtality rato
Ir. daoteu lncroaso’ considerably?

A Toa.

T Ani tho ntefcor cf tho sick?

.i Toa, ir. the whole hospital tte .Jur3cnnol ha*. typhoii, in tho

i.-nin c" 19h5, and I ry3olf ot typhus in ..pril,

1 I ask yta, is it xut pc33i' 1 j that all t:^ ix?. rirxnt _ Ejects
•rho -..arc healthy at tho bo innin of tin- oxp.ria.nta an', fasted f r a
C-- *-;-s v_ro healthy but d-i la tor because cf this ’isast-r in tho
or. 5 .

1 It is possible that ;risonjra :f this ux._rin.ntoi station 'iod
the en-ral -..i hrdcs,

°?61


17 j^io-;:-:*-ii-i-ios 6 cr(Vos schoen)

CCUTt I

^ 33 C 73 U snov Trltz PillvoinT

1 eg.

So you knov torllcoiT

a. I can't roiaibor hin very veil.

2 o you knov iiarclo?

* , That veg oTronchr.an at the Luftvaffo st_tlon us far nu I

r somber.

Q. Teg, did you huvt conrudely relations with those pocplo:

Am Tegog pocplo you hare Just mentioned?

Tog.

A. Tog, «s far os I had *ny contact vlth thm.

Q. Tou gay that ot the end of the experiments Professor 3 oi^-
boock drov uj a thorough report. Is van dictated and In It It vr.n
st.-.tod that no ono diodt

A . I do not know of any report. I dldn' t kavo any direct
connections vlth tho station.

2 on't you think that those looplo, nbouvo all tho jjypalos
thoisolvos, vto participated, must know bottor than you that no ono
diod?

V o hod obsorrod that tho czporl-.oatol otatlons ulwcyo
trlod to havo as fov Incidents as possible on their records. Ofton
c.t otho: (Kporlnantcl stations ths persona vho wore tortured to doath
vorc rmovod to tho normal hospital.

^ frou this ogporionco la tho cap? you scy...y'- concl\*od
the? 3 oi;i‘ooock ai*£t have acted in tho goto vay and trlod to conceal
things In tho sn-e vty?

A. I do not condudo this. I uoroly scy that after tho cad of
tho enperi-.ents this ons patient died at tn ir.tornul station vitkout
cny othor pctholotleal sj-^ta-s. There vas nothing oxccpt that ho hod
participated in the experiment.

L nter, eftor the liberation, did you perhaps moot any of tho

9363


17 •uao-»:-kJ-U-2-Lesser (Tea Schoen)

Ccurt X

e^porlsestrl subjects}

a • X do sot rtcaiber dole,; so.

; . Do 7-tt consider the people when I have ntxtionai-Pillvein,
Vorlieok, Kcreio, usd thon there was c Dr. Losse, - do you oosiidcr
then docost, ereditable persons, or do yes vast to say that is your
ova 03^orlasco these people are scoundrels asd cannot be truatod to
tell tho truth}

a . I should like to say that thoso woro decent cosrades.

32. S?2II3^DS?n Thank you. X hare so further questions.

323 P725X32^1 any questions of the vitnocB os the part of any
other defonse coussol? Have tho Proeocutios csy furthor quostioss?

112. HaIST: The Prosecution has no further questions, Tour Honor.

3S2 PH3SXH2.TI Thero b«ia^ no further questions to bo profoundod
to tho witness, tho vitsoss is oxcusod fren tho stand.

liP, HatDTx M^y it please your Honor. *t this tiao I wish to
cell tho attention of the Tribunal to Dr. Stelnbauor's roquest that
wo cell tho witness, Vorlicok, tone tine during the day or the next
day, jn- ywfh os ho wishos to *0 back to Viossa os a businoso trip
end if wo call hia lator, Dr. Stoir.bauor nay bo out of tho city; so,
after tho tostinosy of tho vitsoss, KottOech io hoard, I would bo is
cpooitlon to cull Vorllcok as u rebuttal witness, to couply with tho
wishos of Dr. Stoiabauor. I could Call hin this oftomooa. X vlll
proparo hlu this aoon-tiac and cull hin this afternoon. Kottbach, I
understand, will bo culled too. If kottbach is not horc at this tiao,
D r. Stoiabauor could continue presenting his doctuonts until kottbach,
arrived.

323 ?235IB3»Tx I do not know whether tho witness, Kottbach, is
available ct this tine. Do you know. Dr. Stoin'ooaerT

D3. H: Tour Honors, I have asked Kottbach to bo horo

at noon. I have not seen hin for a few days. I assune that ho will

cone, taou.li, end I ghnil let the Tribunal know. If he doc S n«t ccac
, 9363


17 Jun£^:-:^-ll-S-Ze«slcr (To- Schcen)
CcUTt X


r - - 1 1 Btuc.it tie rest of ay docitonts and I on willin, '.o havo

? illvoic cad Vorlicek be oxanlnod.

5EI PHSSXlESti Tory woll. You do not...Ton said you ashed
;-.«r to be bore at aeon. It la now noon. You don't know wtothor
the witness is here now or not?

2?, SXm^gSu Ho will bo here et 1:30 to out; that ie the
important thin,; for kin.

7PT. psasjsBS: I assuaod tktt's whet you uo^at. Voll, doctor,
you uay now prccood with tho introduction of sceo of your documents.

2?, STZLI3*2X3: Tho next document which I offor is tostiuoay
of 2 r. Sdcar Hermann, Dccunont 7, Ixhioit So. &i. It is ia document
booh 1, pc£0 13 to 15. 2 r. Hermann Was a doctor ia the camp vita

Hci^lbooch, not in 2 -cfcau but la tho com? at lorvis, a troop ccap,
end mot hia thoro. I shall rood only froa po £0 14, tho first sea- t
toaooj

■*J 1 soldiers honorod and lorod hiu; to wards tho patiouts
ho was like a faithfully curing aothor, and ho hod a kind word
for orcxyonc. Hussion and Ituliea priooaors vor.. oftoa treat-
od. Professor 3oi t -.lboock undo no difforcnco botwoon thtc and
our ova people. Ho kept tho: fur loader than tho tiuo allovod
for them as patioats, as ho knew whet a difficult tine thoso
pcoplo hod as prisoners."

? ho neat document which I should like to offor as exhibit 25 is tho
affidavit of Lorenz S cknld, Document 8, voluao 1, pace 16-18. I
read free pa^e 16 at tho top:

■ Tree December 1943 to Karch 1945 I was assigned to tho
2lst ? arachuto Fiold Hospital, Tarvis/Iaomton us Stabsintcndnnt
of tho (Jemon Vckrmucht. ■

X hon I skip a few linos:

■Chief physician was Dr. Jao,,er; Dr. Vilhelm 5ci lboock
was C hief of the Department 0 f internal and infectious diseases. B


936a


17 Junc-i I—hJ—11-4—Hessi er (7ca Echoes)
Court I


fj-.cn ct the botteai

■3«i,-iboock did sot know the reason for his asBl.jnncnt,
nsr*. neither did I. I vcsonl7 concorsod vith tse affair inso¬
far os, as adniolstrativo officer, I h-dto c-lculate the travel—
isG asd other eajonseo."

Shea ho describes Bei-ioocck's return and says, in the center of pofiOB.
'l also as hod hin what tho caup looked like. To this ho
replied that he could tell so nothin.-, as ho had scurcoly ever
on to rod tho c<ep, and had concerned hinealf only with his vork."
Tho next docur.ent is ffidavit of Dr. Pros* Eincelstoss, t&ioh
•.dll be iiibit Ho. 26. It is doeunont 13, on po^o 28 of Document
Book 1. *kis is a doctor who worked with Dr. Soijlboock at Travie.

I reus Point It


■ In sutler 1944 I worked as a physician in tho pnr»-
c chute war-hospital in Xarvis, tfrper Italy. * t obc - tho scuo

tlno Dr. hoi ;lbocck workod thoro. Ho csio to Turvis fra: B-chnu
and I heard that ho had also boon in Turvis before haring boon
csoignod to Dachau.

ShOtt point 3s

■ Ur. Boi-lboock told no, us veil us ethors, that ho vco
in Dachau but that ho had not hk * r.urh of a chunco to aoc tho
lntomd procoduro of the concentration cutp....Dr. Boi.jl'ooock also
told uo that tho pccplo volunteorod for thoso soa-v Q ter apo:'-
i-ents bocause thoy .jot bettor food and did not havo to work, orZ
th t this was not dotrlnontol to th«i one apt that they, to a ccrtdn
extent, suffered fren thirst.'

Then point 6:

■Dr. 3ci.l*ooock hud no pu: sonnl or scientific advantages

frou his experiments; on the contrury he hod to postpone hie

xjvu roscarch work on infectious j_un dice—hajatitis eiidasic.r-

ovir.. to these caperiueats.*

9365


17 Jura-&-i:£-ll-5-Icsslor (Ton Schcen)
Ccurt X


—c next document which I offer is the affidavit of Professor
3r. C nrl-Heins Tlshcher, as Sxhlbit So. 27, Document 3ock 2. So. 50,

3^0 1U. Profossor 2r. Carl Eeinx I iichor is a spociulis 'or dis-
casoi of the teeth, ucuth and jaws. He says in the third nnr^rcph:

"'-hen X heard aoout the extinctions he car led out thero
that v&» the first I had heard of tho esse.-inerts which uere
carried out os coscestratioc car? prisoner!—I asked Selfhood:
Btrolthtway If the concentration ctp prisoners on when he hud to
carry out the siperlcents were voir steers.

■aeiglbaeck answered this question In the affireativo and I
r«:«ober that his statecents gave no the impression that tho pei*-
scns who were used by 3eiglboeck for the oxperlnunts were under
no cacpulslon, but that they were roally volunteors.

■lurtkcraore, X asked 3elglboeck if anyone had beon .:illod
by the e^ericests or whether their health was likely tosuffor in
tho futuro. Solglboeck anewerod this question in ths ne^atiro and X
had tho impression th-s In this respect everything possible was
dona to avoid cccplicationsf

Zin next docuaont will be thennort fl tho Bcitony - avy doctor,
Dr.Bchr, on clinical observations t shipwrockod porsons. Xhis vil bo
duiibit 1:0. 28. It Is docixient So. 19, ^ocucent 3ook 1, page 65.


9566


Court 1 _

June 17—l&-L-HD-?rlaeau- * 0Ti Schoen.

It 13 a long document. I shall re. d merely from F?.ge
the summery. He said:

"In this case three peoole were able to live for 37 days
or. s water aupoly of at first IOC cc. It must, however, be
remembered that the general conditions were extremely ted.

The space available to each person was very •call.

Sight and day hed to be spent in an upright position. In
addition, there was the psychic strain. Day efter day passed.
So lrnd end no ship was sighted.

■Then tr.e first deaths occurred, becoming a J-lly event,
the bodies oould be thrown overboard only with great :at
efforts by the exhausted survivors. The bodies drifted for
days beside the boat wr.ic . hardly moved in tr.e tropical
gL're.of the aun. An enormous desire for life ar.d similar
court- a e Is required to overcome all tbit."

Than I shall offer a documon*, an article In tho English
magazine, NATURE, by Dr. Porker who also deals with sea
vrtcr experiments. Tala will be Exhibit 2S. It io In
Document Book 1, Document 13, on page 56. I shall read the
first sentence showing that tr.e oroblem was discussed else¬
where).

“The possibilities of obtaining potable water from soo
vat r by s.-tae eimole aetnod suitable for ue*. or. lifeboats
ar.d *r. similar clrcuotsncee have been much discus. ” I during
the last few months in tr.e dally Pres* and in other quarters.
S mi of the statements made ond the opinions ex.resseu have
Indicated lack of knowledge of the scientific and practical
aspects of the problem and of the posslbilitlee end
impossibilities. 0

Then he closes with a summer- w..ich I eho Id like to
rend to .r.a Tribunal on psge 34 of tr.e document book.

Conclusion. It cry be that investigation* now

?267


Court 1

;une I7-.i-12-2-HD-rr 1 ueau~Vor. Screen.


=f.de vill lead to 3oac practicable uechod, s-ltabie for use
tr. Ilf • boats, of obtaining drinking voter fr.n eea wrt.r 'ey
si la il. tilled r. or by the use of iae-excli-n^e and r.cid
jxc.v .-.a sccerlals end ohealc. 1 precipitating agents. «ny
set of ropoaed, however, uust be submitted to atrin 3 ent
teats before It la rec amended If undue risk of failure
vita aeri- :a consequences la to be avoided. heonw He
arrangement* nave been zede to crovlde lifeboats wit.: lr.r.ov
quantities of drinking water t.ian has -ravlo sly been the
practice."

The next doc-non t Is an excerpt fr.-n an ir^llsh bo k
by Cvitonloy on shipwrecked parsons, in one supplement.-1
•;ul D>o sent 57. The title la, "Shipwrecked Survivors*.
I w : 1 c. 11 «oj to 7.9k tr.e inter rretore to read t..l: -oouaent
in J... .is- beo“use ay £.; d iiah pronounoirtl n la not very
..,o-: nc. ttner. to C renal ? .o It Into Gern«>r.. It la on 0 r.,o
4 t tho bottom,

■!;.£ rHSSIJEKT: I don't find that doo.iaent, oo.nsol,

I ar.y '*V8 it hero. *

HR, 1*32)1: T-.s prosocuti n d .oe not nave a copy. I‘
ocuaaal - ;• wait until after rocoaa I ary n-vc It ^oon 0 my
:: r». If ot, rrran 0 doents ouuld be -adc by the defense

oo-neel to ob* of the inglieh copy of it.

T!f FRSSIDEET: e .we no copy of foo.uent 5.

Dr. r.^:: 3*U£3: this is only a sup leaent. 2 his

i c-ient wes ner.ded in Inter or.d I ..o; tue copies fron the
r 1 secretary's Office so the prosecuti.n uu=t navj it

~erd •.

;a. I don't nave it et t.d= sine, your Hon-.r.

: be cs van lent I would Dr. 5:einbauar to «t

c. _..cr.duo ru. t -3 i.ennent until I -?ve t e op ortunlty


It.


?3h®


Court 1

June I7-./-l2-5-rl3-?rineau-Von Schoen.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel has some other document he any
offer?

DR. STEIKBjfcBER: the moaent I have no other documents.

v a g _ next document Is er. af.ldavlt of c doctor wr.o Is

aao t Tr.rvlslo, Dr. Joachim uloger, which I would like to
offer c.s -xhlbit 31. This is Dooument 25, first dooument
In Document Book 2, page S8. I shall reed from page 03, at
the bottoa, that:

■Not only Ocrmon soldiers but Itrlisns, iugoslr.vs,
Ruaelrns end roles — pprtly PoV's rnd partly axis workers
or civilians — as I saw for oyeclf, had the same aelf-
acierif icing asdic? 1 rnd nuaan care."

Then *c the bottoa of pr a o 3:

■Profocsor Bolglboeck at first perf-.raed the sen wrter
oxporiaonts or. nlaawlf, drlnkln* dally half a liter of sou
v.-t-r for, -s for c.g I remember, five days in order to
crecwo by this ^reccdln. self-experiment hia own improsoi.n
of the om/'.rlmont. n ICOc.

Then at the bottoa of pngo 101:

■He told so that durlr.t. the teste he constantly carried
tar clinical c.ntrolo. 3y intreven-.ua injcctlor.3 of
oh clolo^lcrl sodium chloride solution, etc., or drinking o'.
free . water, the ■.?tients recovered vcw quickly. Permanent
imarge was not to bo exyocted from the test as ^r.ly acute

reversible changes v-uld here oocurrad. Every lasting
4RBC..0 c Id ;e excluded nb.ut which he got certn - : ey
sinns J : thorou onyeicpl oxaalr.etion ?t the end of his
3tp- in Dec.au. Accordingly/ 30 der — occurred. 0

Sac .-ext doc -uor.t is c statement of Dr. Ernst Dros which
; of.cr re Exhibit 32. It ia in Document Book 1, document
3 k 1, Di c-aont ?, pa t a 13. Dr. 3roa says:

Z, Dr. 1-ros, born on 1 Februrry ISO", Pcrmrn subject,


Court 1

June 17-1.—12-4-KD-Prlneau-Von Sckoen.

surneon by rrofesrion, residing et 14 .V.elnurustrraae,
* J lesbadon-Eieberlcb, herewith declare r. o ~lz that I know
t..« following facte "t first uond: I know Professor Dr.
"lino In 3o lcl'cooou tnrou t n ay col lab rr-lon with hi-- in olio
field nos ltal In Trrvla. Ir. 13-.4 r.e .as 0 lef of tat
..oiled DeTrrtaent wnlle I wee in on-roe of the aseptic
Suroloal "r.d Inter on of the entire surgical Deprrtnent."

T. on I :o jn Co >'_.o 3, pn^e 21 of the d-oeaont bo'.k:

B 0 r. Hsl.lboecx described to -c tno purpose ond execu¬
tion of iha presorib-d ^rporlaer.ta. :.r t..cec experiments
.. v 1 ujteera n-d been trken : nd the- fc d rooeivod
increased rations fwr s«a;j tine, -> ?dd turt ne nad
o ndnotod Che expurlncr.ee in a v r ch t c..j- could n.t
oc 33 .. serl.us ^enuml desra*-"

I.on I c- r.tir.ue r. tnc a -ne p-.c. He e*ys:

“Ho srld tnrt he h-.d hi as o If undertaken .r supervised
c -f ter-treatment of the experiment '1 subjects end thr.t

it A boer. surtrisina to observe how rapidly they rue .vorod
fr - e anhydrsolc c n lit lor. to subjective well-beln_..

I: edl-t.ly after ..Is return no told no th-t ae was jlr.d
tad no ri. not a single Aortk to re.ret."

Then I offiit .na sentence and c, ntlnues
"..oruov r, hnowir.u nl? mentality -nd his c-r.cept oi tno
moiled -v ■■■fes-l-n, I oc. Id believe and r.aer6t nd ale
jersl^n b the assignment ?nd ..Is srtlefaction with Che
.-ur.no cnee, ti r. _f t.ie experiments. I resume tnnt Dr.

3 ol lb.ee rlre-d. knew ne well enou £ n t tar? tine t.
a.nfido ; me fr-r.nl 7 nd without restraint these natters
v old: distressed In so much. “

«ad then Ir. me last p-rr*nrnph:

T id like to add tnnt ir. : ur n-sdtd -ounded

« 2 erlonns -nd r. ended h.. s iisnnur. were tend-- ar.d treated

9370


Court I

June 17-S-12—5-HD-?rlaeaa-Von Schoan.


wit!'. She sane care and tr.e sane interest ce our own wounded
s.Idlers and In t.-is connection I car. name our patients
ftsjor Olen Bryant (0739C90 7 41) end Lt. Robert F. Koran
■0773385 7 43/-i4) of the Aa-rlc«n Air Force, who lc.;- in my
department for some condlsorable time before the collapse."

And the nexc document wnich ^ offer as Exhibit Y.o. 33
is in Document Bock 1, prge 30.

THE PRESIDENT: ’fart is the nuab-r of that document?

D?., 97EI!«3aUE?.: Docuaent 22, pc fee 30, Exhibit 33.

This is cn article fros the First i-.edical Jnivarelty Clinic
Ir. Ylonno on llv^r punctures by Dr. Valter Xofl„r. I shall
only read one sentence, p*\ e e 2, Document page 31 of tho
do accent bo k, at the top:

"Performed after a vell-ndalnistcred local oneschasla,
tho livor puncturo lo no rly p-lnloss and hardly inconven¬
iences tho patient. 0

T2E PRESIDENT: Counsel, lt lo now time to fco Into
rooess. *.t tnla tla^ tho Tribunal will reooss until two
o'clock. It will reconver.o ~t two o'clock. The Tribunal
will now bo Ir. recess.

[n rocoso w-'s trior..)


?371


mi

1 ? ffua-*J- 16 -l-Carrov (Varteaborg)
' Gears X


^zatcoy ssss:cs

( io hearing rsconseasd at 1400 hour*, 17 June 1947)

7ZZ H+:Sr.J,i The Tribunal it again in session.

IZZ ?2ZBnsrT: Counsel proceed with the offering of do-
mu oats.

22. STaXiB^dSl (Defease Ccunsol for the t ofondaat 3olel^oock);
X submit ns Zxhlbit fOO, cn oxoorpt free tho book *Sfcipwrock S uz^
▼Ivors* by Lleutoauit Crltchlcy.

,v? PHiSIDiTT i to Tribunal doesaot socc to hove c opt on.

Are Coruna ooplos of this docur.oat available for tho Tribunal now?

33. SrnS3JJ2?J Thoro are noao. Xt hasn't boon translated.

TSS PPlSIDBrT: 2 ut will bo furnished lator, doubtloss. 6 oo
that thay aro.

32. 62^-3^03*: I now would like to usk tho lntorprotors,
frou this docur.oat which will boeaio *ilblt 30, on tho bott<« of
poC® 140 to road tho paragroh, and then, on tho following pc£°,

?cco 62 , regarding tho loos of wol;;ht, unfl thoa to tronoloto it into
vorsca, If tho Tribunal permits.

IS—Shall I road It, Tour SonorT

Z'"- PPJBira?": Yes, tho intorprotor will road tho portion of


tho docunoat uoatlonod.

XKS&32MBI P ago 140, last paro^nyhi

* XrOso of woi^it. Tho professional fnotor lovansin lost 13.25


kilos (or a.9 per cont of his original woi.Jit) in thlrty-ono drys.


free starvation is loss rapid, however, than that fras
lb. say be lost a day. In son adrift, tho -'ro-
duo to tho exabiaatloa of inodaiu-to food end
generally lacking, but looses of as such os

141 of the docusont book;

say havo lost considerable veijht-50, 60, or 70 lb.,


Tho


9372


17 Jon-15-2-Zorr ov( Vq rt enburg )

Court Z

~s Is scce of our cases, but with the resumption of full diet, woi-^it
is very quickly regained, indicating that the loss of water had boon
responsible for such of tho emaciation...*

K?. HaSUIs Tour Honor, it was the intention of Dr. Stoiabauer
to hero that t ran si a tod into Oexuan sinoltaneonily with tho Zaglioh
reading thorocf—tho two paragraphs.

Z'*Z2Z?5j32B4 Tour Honor, we caH road error tho Soglish and
Ocruca channels at tho sco tine. It has to bo done subsequently.

ZZZ PfiXBXBBRs JTos, I understand that, but it is now boing done
in Ooxucn, isn't it?

XiEXK’hnHSj Tos, Tour Honor.

3?* SZaXXHaUSHx and now, I would liko to ask you to road tho
last paragraph P-go 63, that is Pago 143 of tho document.

IMggy aBIRi ■slthou.'fi dehydration is thou,-*t to lowor bodily
resistance, it is significant how vory raroly thoro devol opt at this
etajo coy of the acute respiratoxy complications, lnfoctivo disordors
or rheumatic, fibrcsitic, nouritic ar nephritic symptacs, tradition¬
ally described as 1 soquclao of oxposuro to cold and wot. 1 ■

22 s::z 13^-2: K ay It please tho Tribunal, for tho tluo I
hey* no furthor documents to subait.

Ky witnoss, Hrr.st Kottbach, in opito of the roquost to eppo r
today, did not coco today. Sfforts aro being nado to bring his hero
now. Thoreforo, I would like to roquost tho Prosocution, tinoo they,
Z bolioro, have two witnesoos hero—Vorlicok end Pillwoln—perils
they can bo excmlnod now. X don't know *cro they uro Vat perfect
that is pcssiblo.

12. E^FDTi It is possible to call the witness Vcrliccfc at thio
tine. Z\o prosecution, however, loos not intend to coll tho vitaous
Pillwoin, Iho prosecution submitted uu affidavit of tho witnoss
Pillwoin end the defense counsol requested him as their witnoss,
having had hin in Kumberg for a considerable time. Defense counsel,


17 J-iZtv-jt-tCJ—15-5-Z^rrov( V ortenburg)
Court I


ia lieu of calling hln to the stand, suicitted an extensive affidavit
fren the witness Plllweln and the prosecution dees not doairo tc cross
examine the witness in view of that fact.

2 ovever, before calling the witness, I ai/Jit ask Dr. Stoinbcuor
whether ho intonds to introduce these charts and records of tho socr-
water exporinento which hav^. boon under discussion hero for a consi-
dorcblo pariod of tir.e. 2 he prosocution intends to introduco thcc if
ho doos not. Howovor, I believe that he roquostod that ho wishos to
Introduco thco. I would like to hear fra: hln on that subjoct,

D2. STDI*a«U33s In rogard to tho lost question, Tour Honors, I
roodl tho incidont that oroao duriug tho examination of qy oli«at in

toward to the fovor cunros. as the fever curvos are in tho possession

•

of tho Prosocution and since Professor Ivy stetod that t i.oy cro c
•uitublo basis for on opinion about tho oaporiuonts, I boliovo that
tho prosocution should thoroforo subait those documents. I should
also liko to use thle occasion in ordor to clarify a furthor quostion.


Piecee lot ae finish.


17 June 47-^-oX-lc-l- perrliv-('.for tenberg)
col*?. 1 : i

A

K?.. H.JIDY: Ye 2 :ould discuss this subject concerning
the documents before vo go or. to another subject. I hive
extensive number of things to take up concerning these
documents. PerLapc *0 con f;r.lsh thit b fore Dr. Steinriuor
gejs -n with s'aething else.

7HZ PR£ 5'DJ.iTs I think it sight ba veil to hear Dr.
Stelnbauar's second phase of this sitter before e oin S lnt0
tr.o natter of aoouaentc. Counsel for the defendant nay
proceed, > *

JJR. iUlNBALiLlj (Counsel for the defendant Buiglboeck):
.vs f ir as the documents are concerned which are under
dlocusolon r.ure, the natter art .3 follows; ?he prosecution
baaed Its evidence cn Joounont Booh 5 which cor.talna
minutes of meetings and statements of witnesses regarding
the seawater oxpe.-imonta. Now, I cade efforts to gather
oviaor.ee a terlal, *nd around Christmas tlrco, I found two
notebooks. One that had a black cover and another notebcox
which I would like to coll the gray notebook. Professor
Bolglboeck was vyr happy about the discovery of these
two notebooks t«scraso they contained a number of faots
vhloh gave him the possibility cf reconstructing his ex¬
periments lr. his mind. He had beer. a prisoner since 'Aw oh
or the beginning of ^rll, 1145, and a prisoner under
Investigation pending trial,

On the BOth of January, Professor Ivy was here, and
I was r.ere, and I was informed that this professor was
interested in the seawater experiments. Professor Bolgl-
toeck on this occasion showed these two notebooxs to
Professor Ivy. Both of ua assumed that It was a purely
scientific Interest cf Professor Ivy's; and according to
his entire attitude, it was entirely ac.er.tlflc because


5375


17 June 4?--.C-16-2-?e.Tln-(7artsnoerg)

COURT I

ho was interested lr. the saawarer question. ?rofesscr Ivy
said at that tlmo that ha especially studied the 1,000 cc
Oroup; ha said: all of these fellows drank water, and that
It -.'-a a vary diligent, scientific work, and too bad that
It vp.b undertaken In -* concentration comp. These two note¬
books -

HR, - »R3Y: Your Honors, —

DR. 3I-IN5*A;CR: (Counsel for the defendant
aJlglboec.c): Just a socont, let so finish, ploaao. Theao Wo
notebooks wore never In the possession of ar.yond else, out
were always lr. ay own possession. On the occasion of this
discussion, at which a aoabor of the prosecution staff was
aloo present. It was found out that the sc-oalled black
book had the noaes of some of the experimental subjeots on
the front page. I kept these notebooks, I had then in my
custody, And in the beginning, or the middle of Kay, I don't
remember the exact date myacre at the noaent, I was request¬
ed to give those notebooks up. At that tlao, I stated that
1 would r.ot hand then over because they contained In part
:r.o noses, and I do not foel that I have the rl *ht to help
the Prosecution lr. their research. I also stated that there
ire names or. the fever oharts, and that I should not submit
*.r.oa, ever. If the danger exists that the expert opinion of
Professor Vollhirit should not be accoptod by the Court.

I should like to remark here that Professor
Yollhardt U3ed these fever charts as the main basis of hi a
testimony, in addition to some other documents Profos :or
Bolglboeck had; and he used these technical fever charts.

Jr.an I received the order to hand them over, I stated that
I should give them up only without the rimes. So that the
Tribunal should not think that I v*3 trying to deceive the


1? June •47- rf -^-ic-'v-?errin-rfartanberg)
-JUa7 I


Court, I told a nuaber of ay colleagues before at that tine,

and they car. testify to that fact, that If the Court wants

•

to 3QO these nazes, I shall give then to the Court at the
resent when the tria: Is concluded.

flow, ay client o saltted this stupid act and put
so In a bad light, too, in public. I then discussed with my
colleagues whether I should at that time take the legal
oor.soquer.ceo and resign from ay position as defense counsel.
I did not do so for the following reasons: When I agreed to
tnJte over the defense of Professor Belglooeoh, I had heard
only good things about him, but he -as represented to ae as
a very weak and sensitive character, a can who Is .subject
to moods. I was Informed that he was torn froa or. oxcollont
career, chased away from hls position, robbed of hla apart-
cont, robbed of hls boohs, hls library, that he had a
serious nervous breakdown, and*In that condition ho was
delivered to the Vienna polloo Copayment In the Spring of
lu4d. I seldom have had as auch trouble as with the defense
of the defendant Belglboeoh, bocauae It was very difficult
with a can who Is as absolutely broken to reach some hind
of an understanding with him. He only assured mo again and
again that he was Innocent and that he was being persecuted
unjustly. I trlod to convince hla that thl6 was not true.

I can state to the Court hero, and witnesses can confirm
this, that In the middle cf February ar.d at the beginning
of Hay I prevented hla froa committing suicide. That Belgl-
boeck la still In a condition ao good as he Is now we can
thank all of hls comrades In the dock for, who assured se
again and again that he 1 b a nice fellow, ar.d they will do
-heir bast the ohear him up. Therefore, I believe that It la
in accordance with my legal obligations as defense


9377


17 June 47-.*-«£-lc-4-?errlr>-( Vartenberg)

• •

COURT I

counsel, r.ov that when I have already finished sy case and
when the prosecution's case in chief is finished, — I didn't
icnov the prosecution would bring new witnesses now and new
evidence — I don't consider it in aocordanoe with ay duty
to leave his alone now because right now is the tlxo when
ho needs sore hslp than ever; and therefore, I believe thit
I should continue ay difficult task further. This setter
brought se Into an unpleasant position myself. I want to
emphasize expressly that ay cooperation with the prosecution
was always a good one, a good relationship. Z think that
..r. HoHanoy can also oonflra that I said I should submit
the list of the naaea, and If the Court desires it, I shall
be glad to do so. Before I do so, I should like to see tho
witness; I should like to do that at the end. I have thlo
cover with the naaea here, and as I said, all of my colleag¬
ues, who are always together with ne in the morning, wore
told by me. before this incident oocurred, that I should
submit this list to the Court so that the impression should
r.ot be created that I trlod to deceive tho Court. The nvotlvo
was that In the case of tho experimental subjects whloh wo
were concerned with, they were prloltlvo,simple people who,
as I already tried to make clear from the gypsy book, In
l-.rge part belong to families who are listed by tho public
authorities \a asocial. I found 17 among these names who
oolong to asocial families here in Bavaria. I do not want
to say anything about the experimental subjoots, who suf¬
fered terribly. 3ut If tho matter should bo followed up
further, or.o would have to get a police record of everyone,
and the family tree, and then one would certainly find that
my statements are correct.


17 June 47-^-^S_lo-5-Per.'ln( .'arter.berg)

COURT I


It is a tragedy that there Is a certain confusion of
persons hare. Dr. Selglboec* says Dr. Popper la guilty, and
he confirms again and again that he never did a thing to
his colleagues; ar.d that especially he was not present at
the time when Popper was dismissed from the clinlo, ar.d
that - the professoni who are now in Vienna can conflrn
this - he rdgretted these Incidents at the time and even
disapproved of them. I cannot say anything more about this
whole affair.

Tl-ii PRY3XDSNT: Counsel Is mistaken. If I understand
him correctly, in one atatonont, and that la that the
Tribunal directed that these books, documents, rocorls,
or.d oharts be turned over to the prosecution. The Tribunal
took thorn Into custody with directions th.t they remain
in the custody of tho General Sooretary only, to be examin¬
ed by olther counsel for tho Prooocutlon or the Defense
In tho presence of somoono designated by the Poor tary
General. The Tribunal never dlrootjd that they should be
turned over to the rroooo tlor., and I have no reason for
supposing that they over were turned over the the prosoo-
utior..

aR. A*2SX: Your Honors, a correction there. During
the examination of the witness, the expert Vcllhardt,
the testimony cf Vollhardt was based on the oharts; ar.d at
that tlxo, the Prosecution had requested that they be allow¬
ed to study the oharts so that they could prop;rly cross-
examine the witness; nnd at that time, the Tribunal Issued
the order that Stolnbauer givo up the oharts for study.

I think that is perhaps what he is referring to.

THS PR23IDaiT: Teohnioally, the papers wcr. still


9379


17 June 47-rf-«^l6-o-?errl.'j--('yartenberg)
COURT I


withir. -he custody of the Tribunal. I had forgotten that.

I think counsel la correct as to that, but that Has aftor
they had been examined by — that was before Belglboeok
took the stand. The Tribunal Is of the opinion that Dr.
Stelnbauer, counsel for the defendant Belglboeok, Is not
subjeot to censure In this natter. The Tribunal appreciates
his forth-right direct statement with those natters and
fools - that Is, the Tribunal Is presently advised upon his
statement that his conduct has been that of an honorable
lawyer. The Tribunal feels that, or Is of the opinion that
all those records and doounonts, having been before the
Tribunal, having been ahown to the witnesses, having been
exhibited to the Tribunal, should now be xado exhibits In
the oase, because a great deal of the evidonoo oonoerns
thoao doouxonts. The Tribunal would direct that those
doouaents should renaln In the custody of the iecrotary
General and becoae exhibits In this caco, and be worked
as exhibits In soxe appropriate manner or.d that .his should
include the covers cf the boo.es so that the books will be
in exactly the sane condition as they were when In the
possession of the defendant Belglboeok. That will be the
crier of the Tribunal, and I understand that counsel for
the defendant Belglboeok Is ready to oonply with that order
of the Tribunal, ax I correct, counsel?


Court Sc. 1

17 Jus 4A-17-1—HEX-Jiai3y (■artenbarg)

IE. S’lnrULl?.: Tet, Tour Honor.

EA=DT: Vooid 1* be possible for .Dr. Stelnbauer to reconstruct
the saxes that vere erased free the charts or does he think that beyond
the reals of possibility!

03 HOSHEST: The erasure of the nans froc the cherts is not
referred to by the defendant Beiglbceck. The defendant Heiglboeck
doesn't adslt erasing tbes. He later adsite he had altered the eteno-
fj aphic notes cn the back of one of the charts.

If thsss charts can be reconstructed oy adding the n=e — nany
of thee were adsltted by the witness on the strad, and the record •dll
show sany of tha cases. Inasfar es the neses can bo rostered to the
original docusent it should be done.

iff. HAaSr: Sot on the original docusent, but on a separate docusent.

TrH tZlSZZL.ii Cn those daily charts - I don't know how you refer
to thee.

The Tribunal approves Dr. Stoinbauor's conduct to continuo under
these clrcuastances and represent his client In this trial.

.3. EAT-IT: Vili defense couneol introduce the exhibit or will I
introduce it as crosscution exhibit!

TEX frHhSIIlhi": The Tribunal understood that counsel for defendant
Beiglbceck stated at one stage of the proceedings these would be offored
as defense docusents. In caso Dr. Stelnbauer doos not c*re to toko that
position they win be offered end «dll be xncelvod as prosecution exhi¬
bits.

<1. BA5DT: Thank you.

JR. SThlSBALhE: I shall give the mmber 34 to this docusent, to
tho docusent and the notebook, and after the session I shall also give
the eorer to the prosecutor so that the nesos on this cover cez he seen
by hi*, and I shall give the original ae e docusent to the Court. Jor
the naaent I shall need it for the even*nation of tho witness.

TrH ?.-HSI3E"T: These docurenta aro still officially in the custody
if the Secretary Oennral pursuant to order of the Tribunal. *hea they


"curt So. 1 .

17 Juc *17-1-1 cy (Vart.r-bcrg)


ere aarked, they »hall be as exhibit and resale in the custody of the

1

Secretary General, u all exhibit* are ia that office.

12. EAPDTj la that connection, when Dr. Steinbauer turns over the
cover and list of nasee, they should be turned over to the Secretary
General, and the orosecution can peruse thee by referring to the Secre¬
tary Goacral for then. Sow, in addition to that there is the oroblea of
the reproduction of these docusccts. After a period of three or four
nore days ve will be well through this eoeplex of sea water exocrin-nte,
and I ask that the Tribunal direct the Secretary General's offico to hare
these charts reproduced. I don't think It lanecoeeary to reoroduco the
two books but v* vould like to haTO a photostat cooy cade of each chart
and tho back of each, vfcich contains penciled statoaents, so that tho
defense coinsel say retain a photostatic cooy and the orosecution like¬
wise.

TEE FSESUEST: The Secrotary Goneral it directed to reoroduco
those charts by photostat, includlty; thoso stenographic notos and any
other notos which cay be foual on the bock of thoso charts, and cake
thoso avallablo to tho orosecution and to the dofonso.

AR. EAHTY: If thcro Is no further discussion concerning thoso
docusents and tho charts, I would like to call the witness Vorlicok to
the stand.

THE PEES!HIT: Has counsel for defendant Bciglbotck anything
further?

ZE. STSXSBAUaS: Ho, I hare nothing else to say. I only here one
request: that I say be ©emitted to sutcit other docuaents, csocciolly
also an expert *+.o never had the opportunity to look at these cherts,
and that tfc# affidavit which I subeit in thv docuccnt book can be suoolc-
sented by the affidavit cf Professor Glatrel, and later then shell be
ccreittcd to sutcit the supolcnentin^ affidavit, and not sutait it now.

THE PaSSIIEE*: Counsel nay subnit docuaents within a roesonrblo
tine that ho desires tc rate It then to the Tribunal. They will be ad¬


mitted.


Court Sc. 1

1 ? Jta 47 ^-l 7 -MEBI-rial 07 (Wfcrtenberg)

Ihe marshal say sueron the witness Yorlicefc.

(JCS2FH YCELICH, a witness, took the stand and testified as follows.)
CHI PPISISL5T: The witness will stand, hold up his right hand, and
he avom, repeating the oath;

I swear by God, the Alslghty and COnlscient, that I will sneak the
pure truth and will withhold and add nothing.

(The witness repeated the oath.)

Has the prosecution precared a witness sheet for this witness?

KE. EAPJJT: Cue to the fact ho %es called without notice I havon't.

TKI PSESXTOR: One should be prepared and filed as soon as con¬
venient.

Counsel nay proceed.

CliLCT LXJUIHATIOJi

SY KH. KAPUT:

Q» Witness, your nano is Joseph Vorlicck?

A. Yos.

v Will you kindly spell your last nace, nloaso?

A. V-o-r-l-i-c-c-k.

Q. -hen and where were you born?

A. Z was born in Berndorf. near Vienna.

Q» Will you kindly outline briefly for the Tribunal the extent
of your education?

A. Tor eight years I went to oleaentary school, public school.

Eil you havo any further education, witness?

A. Bo.

Q» What wrs your occupation prior to the tine you were arrested
for treason in Dccecbcr 1939?

A. I was a truck driver.

Q» 214 rou always live in Vienne?

A. Yes.

Q. Ari you an Austrian national?

A. Yes.

9353


Court So. 1

17 Jun 47- J L-l?-4-£3«'aloy {Var tenterg)

Q, When vas the first tire you vere olaced under arrest?

A. 1935.

Q, Had you ever teen arrested for ary criainal offense prior to
that tine?

A. So.

v What vet the reason for your arrest in 1939?

A. Preparation for high treeson.
v v ko arrested you?

A. The Vienna Gestapo.

Q, Were you given a trial?

A. Tes.

q, And you vure sentenced to lsprisonaent?

A. Tos.

Q, And for hov long?

A. Pour years in the penitentiary,
q, Did you fulfil that sentence?

A. Toe.

Q, Aftor fulfillment of your sontocco vero you then released?

A. Ho, then I wi sent to Dachau.

Q. Whoa did you arrive at Dachau concentration cn=o?

A. On the 6th of .ierch, 1944.
q, Ho- long did you re rain at Dachau?

A. Until the liberation by the American 7th Ar=y.
q. Vhon you arrived in Dachau, vhnt vere your duties? Wore you
assigned to a verk detail?

A. So, first I was sent to Block 15. That was for olght days;
then I entered a coocando work detail.

q. At any ti=o did you ever vork in the concentration cast) hospi¬
tal?

A. I ves only a patient in the concentration cacp hosoltal.
q. Did you ev^r vork in the erroriacntel verde of the hosnital?

A. I essisted sy comrade rillvcia.


9361s


Court So. I

17 Jun 47-A-17-£-£aH-haloy ("artcncerg)


q, Do ywi know Professor Dr. Beiglboecfc?

A. Tee.

Q, Sow did you happen to Jcaov his?

A. I was in 31ode 11 whore at the tine ejDorisents wore being con¬
ducted.

Q* How did you happen to get your Job as a nurse in the experimen¬
tal ward wherein the sea water experiments were being conducted by Er.
Balglboeck?

A. Pillwein cane to ae acd asked ae whether I would like to help
hia in his work. The food was better there.

Q, Vhat was that nano, please, who first asked you?

e

A. Pillwein, Trite.

Q. That is Pillwein?

A. Tea.

q. Vhen you arrived at tho block wherein tho sea vator exooritente
woro being conducted, had the oxoorlneats begun?

A. Too.

q. Vhat did you notlco concerning the conditions in tho oxnorlcontnl
station during the courae of tho so experiments?

A. That the peoplo had to suffor from hunger and thirst.

q. Do you know any of ti*. pirticulrxo concerning the differentiation
between tho oxpericentRl groups?

A. As for as Z can ro::cnbcr, oxccrlscnts wore carried out with sea
water and Schaofer water.

v Do you know Just vhat specific tost the oxnoricontpl subjects
wore put to?

a. So, I don't know that.

q, ’’ero those particulars nede known to you or were they not
available to 70 U?

A. I was not convinced about that, acd I didn't know what it vas
oil about either.

q. Did you know a Yugoslavian, a night nurse at the exoeriner.tal

stetiert?


June 17-X-5Z -1 S~ l-3er r d (1st. V r :*ienber.j)

Court To. 1


A Tes.

^ Ifcat happened to hia?

1 He case into p penrl coapny becrase he fell asleep rr.d, there¬
fore. the Sypsles bed the opportunity to uet vr.tcr; rnd then he wee put
mt la the penrl ccepnny.

\ V bet is r penrl coapany, witnesc?

A V ell, that differs - they report to the outlying eoannndfnt. One
wet verse then the other.

I Yhr.t rerson vr« he sent to this penal coapray, vrt that beemoe
he fell asleep on duty *»t niAt?

X Tes.

3 Vho sent hie to the penrl conpray, do you know?

X 7hrt went throvh BeUlboeck.

^ V eli, now were the experinentol subjects healthy throughout
the experiaeate?

A Tes.

^ Sid they becoac weakened at nil?

A Oh, yes, they did becose worker.

^ Then, they were not healthy throughout the sxpcrlaente?

X Through the entire exporfcente, no, but nt the besianln.; they

were.

^ Sid rny one of the eubjecte ever btcoae violent?

A I don* t know.

< V ell, did any of then ever hrve erraps «nd rs r result He on
the floor in enpilsh?

A Tes.

1 C*s you tell ae ebcut that aorc specifically, witness?

A I entered the roca tl there w'-s between two beds a patient,
he v r s iyin- there, having - crcap attack, and I didn’t know what vas
going on.

^ V hpt hapnened to thr.t patient?

A He helped hiaself, thr.t ie, in pi cut a half hour, he went brek


Juae 17-A-3T—13-2-3errd (is*. Wortenberg)

Court To. 1

to M.

Q Vers the experiacntrl subjects allowed to leave the rooa wherein
th<y were kept during the exrkricent?

A To, that wus strictly forbidden.

% Vet the rooa locked?

A Tee.

Q Did tone one .Turrd the rooa at rll tines?

A Tee.

* Vere not the experlsentrl subjects allowed to .*o out into the
courtyrrd next to the expe riaentrl block?

A Only those of then who were not nt thrt aosent used in the ex-
perlnente.

V err they physically able, soae of then, to .30 out in the yard,
if rllowed?

A Tee.

% Witness, in the course of your duties in the cxpurlaentnl option,
did you have to do aaaual labor or thrt is, week floors rad so forth?

A Tts.

V ill you tell the Tribunrl the incident when you spilled sor.e
wrttr on the floor end hrd to aep it with r cloth?

A Tcs. On order of Fillwcln I hrd to ,*ivc oerwrter to the Oypeleo.
In pert It was -lxcd with wnter rad through ay carelessness I
sipUrd ooae wrtt-r. I went tc fetch » r>,: rad I wiped it up, rad
when I hrd finished I for*ot the rr -. The Oypslcs took this rag
end rocked the wrttr out of it. In the exoeriaent thrt Bcl>beeck
conducted he rot the idea thrt the patients hrd drunk soae wrtrr, rnd
V threats the Gypsies bvtrryed ne or told thrt it w P b I. Bel-lcoedk
croc to ac and rsked ae why this happened. I told hie vhnt hrd
occurred rnd he threatened ce, if thrt should ever happen a.pdn then
I would be put in the experiaeats ayself, would be cxperlsented on
ay self.

v Vere you sure thrt he wps earnest in this thrert?

9367


l'-ir-?r-15-3-3^rd (l n t, Vfertenberr)
Court ro. 1


X Tes.

\ V ell, did you feel Treat danger becmse of the threat?

A Certainly, tfcr1 vr« R -rtter of course la r. crap.

' - Li 3el-Ihoecie ever shout a curse rt the experiment'd subject?

A Frequently, eves.

' he wro extremely severe - 1 th then?

A Tot rdwrys, only sobs tinea,

^ Did the experlaentrl subjects ever ask for relief end west to
quit the experloeats?

A Fo, they didn't try that, bee-use they knew that It wouldn't do
ray *ood rayhow.

% V ill, were these experimental subjects volunteero, witness?

A As frr *o I know they were not.

^ Veil, did they ever volunteer for my sooclrl conam do or sone
such thin.!?

A Veil, this is how It hrnpt-ncd. Since I know the Slrvic Im^u rr.o,
xd there were sone Czechoslovakians pc. on.; then, I spoke with thorn
rr.d they told me thrt they crae fro-j Auschwitz concentration crqp;
they hrd been rsktd who wrnted to volunteer for *ood outside rsoi<Tv-
uer.ts; sone of then reported, rod only when they erne to Dochru did
they find out whrt it wrs about.

s Did the exncrlnentr 1 subjects indicate to you that they were
hnpoy to be experinented on?

a ro.

v Do you know the nationality of the various subjects?

A Tor the cost prrt I do.

% Orn you tell the Trlbur .-1 the nationality of the various subjects,
'’s necr as you err. recollect?

A 7 here were Czechs, Polos, Eun -rrlrn g, Austrims, rr.d &i-rnanc.

^ Eov do you know that these subJe cts were of those vrrlous
nationalities?

a Because I know the Czech Ins-mr^e; therefore, I could eperw. to
the Poles end the Czechs. 9383


•Tine (Int; Vartenbcr*:)

Coart rc. 1

3 ra«, dorian the course of the experiments, that Is In the experinent-
nl station, Itself, did you ere- see cay one die as r. result of the
onuloeatst

A So.

' To u know whether or not any one died while In the experimental

station?

A Only once the experiment lrstod for three tenths. Once after the
experiment I set •« Gypsy end he tcld nc rtaut a comrade who had died.

* did not nsfc hla why he died.

^ Just r rotent, witness, I w«nt to confine your testisony at this
point to your fcnowledce of the conditions, rnd whether or not depths
occurred while the exoerlaents were bein.; conducted In the experimental
strtlon. Ve vlil £«t to the derthe In the hospital or In another
seotlon of the ca::*> later. Sow, during the course of the experiments
ere you aware of any depths?

A So.

^ Vere nay of the cxpcriccntal subjects severely ill, to your know¬
ledge?

A SO.

^ Crn you tell us whether or not It would have been possible that 00=0
ens could krve died durlxc th> courts of the experiments In the experinent-
i*l stetion without your hr vim.- known about it?

a That, I cnn*t tell.

« V hat happened to the experimental subjects rt ths completion of
the experiments?

A T hey were dismissed and turned over to the working block.

v Did tone of then to the hospitnl?

A I don T t know anythin^ about that.

X Veil, were cli UU subjects dlsrdsred rt the cane tine or had soae
of then been dismissed intermittently throughout the experiments?

A As far as I know *11 of them were dismissed at onci, rt the snme time.


v Did you h-ve the impression that some 0 : the croerlmeata.l subjects

93S9


J-ise i'-A-2^-13-?-3eard (lat. Ycrteaberg)
Court Do. 1


wtr( 111 thet they would not lire auc . ioncer?

A I did have thrt Impression, yea; thrt these people would not live
such loader.

h At the completion of the experiments did you, then, nssume new
duties?

A I don't know.

£ Did you aeeuce new duties, you, yourself?

A Jo.

^ Veil, where did you co to work rfter the experinents were
collet ed?

A Then I beceae r patient in ay bloek.

^ Vcr* you able to ascertain whether or not «tny of the lnantcs used
in the experiments were la the hospital?

A I don't know,

^ Kow, would you kindly tell the Tribunal about tte conversation you
hed with the experiaental subject neoed ?rar.x, after the completion
of the experinents?

A About throe aoathe after the experinente I was already In re*th«r
another block; I ert one of the patients ra d hlo name v r s ?rmz. Vc
had r conversation and he told ae durlnr that conversation that ono
of his comrades had died already.


939C


17 June-fc^M^-L-Daniel* (Iat. ;;arte:±erg)
Court No. I, Case I


Q.- Did ha .oear. one of tne persons used In the eraeriaents?


All rijht.

A.- I asked hiifi whether he diei as a result of the exoerL-.ent or
through hunger typhoid. I can't recj^ber any sore whit his answer was
to uy question.

Q.- Do you have any idea who* »er be tried to con.'ey the thought
to you that he died as a result o.‘ the er^eritents cr whether be died
because of the conditions ir. the :ajn; or can't you reaeabor that spe¬
cifically?

A.- I can't reoocber any aor«.

lit. HAR1I: I have no further questions. Your Honor.

THE PRS5ID JiT: I have Just » een inforaed by the Ilarshal that the
witness !Iottbach is not availabli for today and his presence cannot be
procured this after:toon. Can yox use the witness Haagen? Do you dosire
to call the '*itnes« Haagen?

Iff. HARoT: Tho witness Ha*.en is being called by Dr. Tipp, but be

cancelled calling the r.itness Hiagen. The witness haagen is going to

be on the stand for two or three days. Your Honor. If Dr. Tipp can bo

located today we will call the witness Haagen, that ie, if the cross

examination of Yorlicck will net take up too much tiae this afternoon
by Dr. Steinbauor.

TH2 PRS5XD2T: Did you sa> that Dr. Tipp had cancelled his apoli-
cation for the witness?

Jr.. HAHjY: Ko, he had tolf the Marshal rot to bring the witness up
this afternoon, bu-„ to bring tia up in the -oming.

THE PR3SE»u2T: Tne Trihur." 1 will now bo in recess, and during the
recess *e car. ascertain what c;n be done.

(A recess was taker.)


9391


Court 1 lose I

June I7-A-20-l-HD-?eldt-Yon ocr.oon-


TrJZ MARSHAL: 5a o Tribunal la again in session.

5 HS PBE3ID5KT: I understand that counsel for the
Prosecution his concluded his direct examination of the
witnoS3.

13. HnHDY: I neve one or two questions In 6umnction
t - c.si the witness. If It pleese the Tribunal.

THE PH53IDSNT: Proceed.

3. HR, HARDY:

Q. J£r. Tori leek, hove you ever npoeared before a
Tribunal co " witness before?

A. »Yj8.

3cfore this Tribunal I wont you to understand that
you can cloerly testify os to rny frets which you hr.vo
knowledge of concerning the cctlvltloo In the experimental
st-tlon -t Dachau wherein the sod woter experlm.nts took
plros, and I want you to fool perfectly at liberty to
express any opinions y,a.have c-noornin te the experiments
*r.d any of the activities In connection with the experi¬
ments. Now in summitIon, Hr. Vorileok, It Is my undor-
b tending that you st- :e that t.-.o subjects used dll not
v.luntoer for th.- exporicunts, Is that correct?

I can't la glnc volunteering In n camp.

3 y rr.y stretch of the lm-gln tlon could you Imagine
th t tnoy were volunteers in the true sonso of the word?

A. No, I c n't colleve th-t.

Q. Did tne experimental subjects themselves tell
y.; whether or not they volunteered for the experiments?

A. Ziey to la me that they did not volunteer.

Hho told you the story concerning the ®ocir.l

Jjj - Trnd- th-1 taey volunteered for while In «uschwltz?

A. The Czechs told me about that.

Eov often did you talk to the experimental subject??

9392


Coart 1 Crae 1

June 17-E0-2-A-HD-?eldt-7on Screen.

a. Every day.

^r,3 ycu wore oertnln'froa your c nwerertlon with
:hcs- cxoorlaent'-l subjects that s =» of the subjects wero
? lei, 6 a o' shea wore Czechs, end s-.ze were Austrians
and. Eungrrlens?

Yea.

"are chare ar.y Ruesicne emca* the experli^ntal

sub J acta?

n. I do not hnov that.

"are there cny C^rirns *-aonft the axperlnent-l

subjects?

A. Yes.

A. to you h va a*ty thln^ further • u wish to tell

the Tribune1 concerning these axpori-ants?

0

A. Ko, I vw a.thlr.i else tc. say.

:j\. -ARDY: 1*c farther q astlone, Your Honor.


Court So. 1

17 «7ur 47-A-21-l-ieA-Geylord (Vcn Schoen)

ZFJ. F?j.SZ~IZZ : Defense counsel any cross exanino the witness.

CECSS i7_*:i£ATI0S

37 DH. SUrjaA’-nP. (For the defendant Bciglboeck):

v Vitness, hov often have you been exanir.e>d as a witness on the
see vttor ouostlon?
a. Cnee.

Q. Sut I have tvo nffidavlta, both frea the 9th of Hay. Vho took
d;wn these affidavits and why were there two?

a. That tt«t-=ont vaa given at that tine to Pr. Alexander only once,
q, Sut wo have two affidavits which were signed by you. I hrvo
ther hor«.

A. Probebly there rro Just two copies,
q. Sid you diotate it or did you Just sign it?
a. I dictated it aytclf.

S, Sow ! mist aak you, long before that in the spring of 1946
verve't you examined one* by sonevnc oleeT
a. Tcs, but nothing vrs written down.

q, Veil, th*t was a long tine ago. The Vienna pollco took a .
record because I read it nyself.

a. That is possible, but I didn't sic» anything.

q. '/ell, you were examined "by the Vienna, colico, too, you renerber

that?

A. Tc*.

q. Sow I should like to ask you the following: As soon rs tho
gypsies arrived, did thoy coso to the exoerinental station or later?

A. Abcxxt a week later.

q. And whet happened during this week?

A. Z don't know.

q, Vere people already undergoing the croerincnts? '"ere tho
oeotlc elroady drinking wrter or Etrrving, or what ws going on?

A. I don't know. ! only know that when I ce=o there new exnerinonts


were begun


9394


Court 5c. i

17 Jua 47-A-2l-2-L£.i-Geylord (Yon Schoen)

3, Is it right tkct you cane there because your friend Fill-in
asked the professor to take you la aad this facilitated the situation
f-r you?

A. Whether that vent thr:ugh Beiglboeck I don't knov. Plllwcin

caso cad got ce hinself.

Q. I don't loagina Pillvein had the authority to take peoolc Into
the expericent* on his ova Initiative, that is, as nurses?

A. I vns not taken as a nurse.

Q, You vere an assistant nurse.

A. So, I vns not an assistant nurse. I ves a patient. I Just
helped Pillvein.

*. You helped tho nurse?

A. Yes.

v And vhrt ws the nrno of tho station? v, hi»t nunbor did it havo?
a. I don't know.

Q. Perhaps you reeaaber that it vns rocen nunorrl one over arable

ono?

a. I cannot try.

q. Do you know a station I a?

A. So.

Q. But at vhrt station vero ycu yourself when you voro in tbo
hospital?

A. In 9/4.

knov the typhoid station?

A. Yos.

Q. What vns the nunber of that?

A. I don't reneeber.

Sov ycu say, "Before I caae there, a Yugoslav nurso vho was on
night duty vas tfcrjvn out because ho left the key in the door and there¬
fore the patients vtre able to go cut end drink vetcr." And then you go
on to say, "Afterwards one of the greens - that is a crininrl - ccac vho
beat the oeopla and he ves transferred too."

9395


Court S'- 1

17 Jus 47-A-2X-3-IS;-Oeylord (Ton Schema)


A. So, he was before the Tugoslav.

ME. HABDT: Tour Honor, nay I request that the affidavit signed by
the witness 7orlicek bo suteitted to him so that he can follow Dr.
Steinbeucr.

THZ PSISDsI?: The affidavit! nay be submitted to the vltneea.

(The vitae!! 1 b given the affidavit!.)

37 25. STSHBAUHU

q. Do you have It? One of your statements begins, "At tho tlno
-f tho .ccupatioc of Austria..." and the othor ono begins, "Aftor I we
arrested In 1939 ly tho Gestapo...”

A. Tob.

Q, Sow, I as tricing the ono which begins, "At tho tine of the
occupation of Austria...” Tcu say, ”Ab»it July 1944 I was transferred
to the experimental station.”

A. Tes.

Q, "These txnorlnents hed in port already boon started vhon I cane
there.*

a. Tes.

Q, And now cones the story about this nan with the green insignia
and tho TugvSlcv. Is it n't true that It *«s the othor vcy arcund!

A. So, no. Tlrst the greon ono and then the Tugoslnv car.e.

q. Veil, please rerd whet it says In tho affidavit. It says
exactly tho opposite.

A. There -rust bo a mistake here.

Q, It's Incorrect what It says here.

A. Tes.

q. Can you ra=e.:bcr the name of thiB nan with the green Insignia!

A. Only his first name: Kex.

Q. hex - oh, yes, that famous Aax. Ihcn you say, "The exoori-.ontel
subjects were divided Into groups. One group ~as injected with a red
serum,” I hav t asked so many people and nobody knovc any rod serum.

Are you color blind, Mr. TorliccJc!

» 9396

■ J’


Tosrt So. 1

1? ^ 47-A-21-4-IBk-Seylor4 (Tec Schoan)

A. So, I '-es wrong. That was when the blood vaa taken.

Tet, that la yery ioportant. There ia a red poieon. You have
to be Tery careful. Then thla red icroa ia wrong7

X. Yea.

v And what did you think It ^iaT

a. X had no Idea.

Q. Could It hare been blood which had been through the ‘centrifuge?

A. X don't know.

Q. Then you obviously withdraw thla teatlnony. that one grouo van
injected with red eerun aa being lncorreet?

A. Yea.

Q. Vow you tell the incident about the guinea nig. You eay that
Beiglboeck ueed to yell at the gypalea frequently. Vhy?

A. Because they didn't do what they were euppoaed to.

Q. Veil, if you w«re in charge of an excerinent or in charge of a
labor detail and the oaople -are alwaya doing a teething elee than they
were aupnoaei to do, would you oralee then or reprinand then?

A. Certainly, I would aceld then.

Q, Then can't you understand that Belglbocck reproached you for
helping the prisoners drink *«ter?

A. Vhat did you say, doctor?

q, ro you adalt that Boiglboeck had a certain Justification in
nekieg chargee against you and reproaching you for holping the criaoners
drink ^tar?

A. X cannot say.

Q, Hov did 3ei6lboeck treat the people who were not in the exocri¬
ne nt?

A. =e treated then well.

Q. 3id he take an interest in their food?

A. Pillwein and I wont and got the food.

And you certainly aa to it that your conrades «cre fed decently.

A. Decent fcod neens aocething else to ne.

9397


I


Coart So. 1

17 Jan 47-x-2i-&-iS-.-Oayiard (Ton Schoen)

Q. Veil, today ve don't have enaigh to eat either. It alvays
dezonda ca the eireuaatances. Tou and Plllveln distributed the food?

X. Tea.

Q. Sid Seiglboeek aet to it that It vaa dlatrlboted correctly?

X. So, _he didn't.

q. Did ho htvo any roaaon to nlstruat you?

X. So.

q, Do you know that ha threv Hax out because he dlatributod the
food ucjuatlyl

X. ! only heard that.

q. Do you really think you ear. *ay that 3olglboeck vould hare
aade you into a guinea oig?

X. Tea.

Q.

X. That vaa a aattor of ccurae in the caao. If onc had anythin*

to do with the SS-

q, ' Vaa Dr. 3elglboeek In the SS?

TEE PhiSIOEST: The traaalatlon didn't cone through.

FT ». sniSSXULF.:

Q. Tou have to ^lt, vltnoaa, until the translation cocoa through.
I aak you, v®« Professor Bciglbocck in the SS?

A. I aaausod that he vaa.
q, That unifora did ho vear?

X. Brova.

Q, X brovn unlfora?

A. Tea, yellcvlah bro~n.

q, Xad vhat kind of shoulder Insignia did he hare?

A. I don't renccber.

q. Did Selglboeck ever beat anyone?

X. So.

q, Ill he threaten anyone vith a rerolrer?

A. So.

9398


Scurt So. 1

17 Jus 47-A-21-6-I3<-;aylori (Yon Schocn)


Zj. Did SeiglboecVc give the people cigarettes?

A. Tes.

Hov =SL=y cigarettes did the people in tfco cxpericent get?

A. I don't know exactly - tvo or three.

Ivo or three cigarettes. In addition to these two or three
cigarettes, did Sclglboeek give then other cigarettos?

A. I don't know.

Q» Do you consider it possible that ho did?

A. Yes.

Q* Did ho help the gyoslos in any way?

A. I don't know.

V Do you know that one of the gypsies had a so-called cscaoo
oolnt on his Insignia?

A. Yob.

TKS PSXSIDE'I: Wait a Blnute, witness. After your counsol vro-
oousds a question to you, you suet wait a nooent before you answer the
auostlon so that the intorpretors aay coeplcte tho intcrorotation of tho
cusstion.

TSL VITSLSS: Yes.


9309


17 Jun-4.- 1-Z2-1- 'urtha (ir.t. Von Sshcr.)
Court He. I, Caa« lo. 1


by d.u srzrnxnsat

5 Witness, if seasons perioraed an experiment well, didn't
Beiglbcock give hix aore cigarettes? Think it over.

A I don't know anything iaout that.

Q lfo«, Lit'a cone back to this escape insignia. Did or a
of the yr-eioa have this escape point?

A Yes.

Q Do you perhaps r&accbcr his naao?

* * 0 . «

4 ha* there a gypsy who had two oscapo points?

A I can't re-tjcbtr that either.

h Da you know that Professor loJfclboook tried to help thoao
p.oyJe &5t rid of their oscapo points?

A Pill wein told no about thet.

Q You heard about it, then. MOT about thu nationality of
tho pooplor In your affidavits you said that you think — look at
ycur affidavit — that they all spoko Goraan?

A -tost of then.

Q !ioat of then spoko Gorman; even tho Poles spoKo a littlo
Ocraan. ?hjn eaa ons not conclude that thoso people night hove boon
froc Astern Silosia or front ..use Prussic?

A I cannot say.

*

} Ti-on there were thre^ Czechs. . r. Vorlicok, I think you
arc of Czoch d-scont, aren't you i

A Yes.

Q jut you art free Vienna.

A Yes.

4 It as possible that they wore Czechs who wore not from

Bcheaia?

A They told a» that they rare fren Czechoslovakia.

; Couldn't they have bt-cn froa Slovakia, froc Bratislava,


fer oxnaplo?


CA-

'’AGO


17 Jun-A- 3-22-2-: urt'na (Ir.t. von Schoc)

Court So. I, Case So. 1.

A Ho, from Ifaravia.

q Vary will, Moravia. Then ;ou said there «na one Gordon. T>o
you think that's right?

A Ko, I think thara acre twe or throe.
h X can tell you that tharc rere aor-.

A It is possible.

Q Than your statements are not qur.to correct, arc thoy?

A One can't always roa. her everything so well..

3 I'm papers of ths jjpsies, about their nationality, you

didn't see.

A Ho.

Q Vos it custoeary in a concentration canp to koop ono's

papers?

k No.

Q Whore wore tho papers kept?

A I don't know.

• $ 2ut ov.ryorw had a naibar?
k Tec.

4 Do you know what triangle those people wore?

A <71nok triangles.

Q '.ho was given black tri-n-los in the canp?

A The asocial people.

5 Aha I Do you think it is possible that 3eiglboock tried to
help his pjoplo but that the bad people in tho oanp administration
didn't koop their premises?

k I cannot say.

Q Now, I oust put to you that you said tho following to tho
Vienna police —

( itics3 looked through the affidavit.)

3 (Continuing) — it do_cn't a that in there, "Aftar the

liberation I set a gypsy in unich who told an, *1 m getting rlong

very rail; no one died free the experiments* — nor cornu the in-

?4i)l


17 3-22-3-!tortha (Int. von Schon)

Court Uo. II, Case Kc. 1.


port rtt, thing: ’but sany died L'.t^r durina .a fa-iice.'" . t hin k

that we dcr.'-- .. . to get the polic. records frcaa Vienna.

Do you r-^Biber saying that?

A I car. take it. oath that I did not say that.

Q Do you think that the Vienna oolica official invented it?

A In the first place, 1 wasn’t in i.unich; I was only in Dachau.
* ' nybe it s. ys a gypsy fraj : unich.
a That's right.

Q I ask you above all, did you uorc than a year ago w’.xin it
wes officially written down, s=y that people lot-r died in a f'Jiine?

A Tea.

4 Who :x.?t the records in tho c-’np during the ox i xvir».or.ts?

A What kind of records?

Q Records as to tho course of tho ox ; xris»nts, hew nuch water
was drunk, whot -or peoplo had fov^r, and so forth.

a Tho records of fovur and pulse, -nrtly Hllwoin and .xrtly

nysolf•

D.U SI .lKDAUERi Hr. misideflb, Right 1 ask that tho fover
charts bo froduood, inasmuch as the witness said ho hclpod to record
then, that they bo shown to hin for identification? They are ri^ht
hero.

THS KtCSHJBKT: Yes, the favor charts nay be shewn to tho

witness.

(Charts handed to witness and oxnaln od by hi-'.)

« Aro those tho records which you kept at the tiao?

A I-s.

Q ..ho compiled these rae rds?

A rilfcfcin and I.

5 Didn’t sor.c of the .xoscncr-dcctcrs write sor^ of these

n.cor >?

A I -'on’t know,

^ era tha people weishoa?


17 Jun-A-'3-22-i-Turtha (lot.-von ^chon)

Court io. I, Casa do. 1.

k Yea.

3 iho w_ ighid thee?

1 PiUv.in.

Q Did he always record the weight?
k Tos.

4 Can you show ns whore ho r-cordod the weight and tall ne

in (articular who entered thuso final weights at tha right, at the to??

A I was never present when that was done.
h You don't know?
k 'to.

Q Kow were these pcoalo quart-red? hhat kind of accomoda¬
tions wore thjy sivor.? i.*r.- they in djrty barracks, or in clean beds —
A They had nice bods.

Q Did it look like c stall or lake a docent hospital?

A io, it didn't look lika a stall, but ono can't say that
it looked likn a decent rocn either.

i I m afraid 1 don't understand you.

A It was ncro like a cnap.

Q 3ut it was clean ad noct.

A Y-s, it wis clean.

Q And then whon tho pooplo left tho oxporL-rcnt, wore they
given food that was sore than tho era? food or loss?

A It was tha san> as tho regular canp diot.

Q V'orjr.'t they givon additional food?

A I don't know anything about at.

4 Didn't you give out rilk just ait.r the oxpjriaonts were

finished?

A I don't know anything about it.

h 2"t you nust know about it, i_ you :<oiped to dis -riduto
the food to these people ever;.- day.

A I tnsn't there t.vcry day.

3 Cfc, you weren't there ov^ry day? You have already s A th* .

- 9402 -


17 Jun-A-3-22-5 -i-srzhi (ITO. vcr. Schon)

Court i'o. I, Casa Bo. i

nobocy died during the exporfoents, is thnt true?

1 Yes.

Q So , when were tha expert vnts finished?

A Throe weeks later, whan I coao.

Q .'hen wao that,? Can you -iv_- vs tco date?

A I can't say.

Q fcs it January, February, : arch or August?

A It was in July or August.

«* CoulAi't it havo b^«n So .-tabor? Look at the charts.

Look at the cherts. The da to is or. there.

(brat nod by the witness.)

A Ycj, A'sgust —
q And — look carefully.

(C virts again oxssinod by witness.)

A Aujust, SepUcber,

q Tlr.t's right* Aug'-et end Soptcr.J*r. 7ho last nan finishod
drinking his §c‘ -water arri tft. r. vfcat happened?

A Than spocial exporfcants *.roro fwrforned.
q r. Vorlicuk, you don't understand so. Whon thw oxp.ri-
ixr.t ro«r was finish.d, ccrpletoly finishod.

A YosX

q Thor, what happenod? Did f.wy ell stay togetherV Was tho
laboratory loft ttare or wore things taken -way?

/. :;o, it was dissolved. Tho xoplo were sent back to tho

Block.

q That's tl» tins 1 went to talk about. T.ho packed up tho
things, tha bottles, oquipwnt, acalus and so forth?

A I don't know,
w Did you cot help?

A Bo.

q _r_ tho gypeies still tbore?

A I don't know, because I w.rt back os -a patient.

- ?A04 -


i? Jur-A3-2 2- nrtfea (lr.t. von Sehonj
Court Ho. I, Case Ho. 1.


Q Hht» did you loaves?

A I can't say that.

Q ' 3 tho hospital vhjrw you ncr~ sent far 5iray froia Station

11 ?

A There wjro five Blocks bot^_-n thee*

Q Did you havj an opportunity durrns this period to s^t ono or
another of those people at tho bc&inr.inj; of S_ptonbor, the saidclu of
Septc^fcor?

A Ho.

Q lou didn't sot any ctf than?

A Ho.

Q You didn't see Fillwoin oithe-r?

A Yjs.

4 Who axnainod the blood?

A They sure Frenchman.

Q Did they knew how to do that?

A I don't know.

Q Soro.thoy locksaiths, tlcctrlci re?
k Ho, they wore doctors.


- 940'- -


17 June-i-:~-23-l-Lesscr (^on Schoen)
Court I


I tee, they were doctort. Sow ve will tali: aDc it the utigh-
iag. D id ia people gain weight or lose weight?
a- loet weight.

Z. How long did they lote weight?

A. ill tho tine.

jia long at they wore in the erpcrlccat?

A. Yee.

Q. Do you know, tince you helped tow,ito tho rocordt, tiiothor,
at the end, after he pooplo were out of tho otporiaent, their \-oight
wc higher or lower?

A. Shat I do not know.

^ Did you a*o anybody with a high foror?

A. it the Bolt| up to 38 or 30.

38, or 39. -at that at tho beginning of experiment or at

tho end?

A. I can't rcccDSur that.

^ Voro you orer proaont whon an exporinont wac etoppod or

chi u^od?

a. Tot.

Kow waa that done?

a. Tho pationt was sitting and Dr. 3oi*lboook undortook tho
o^oriuent and when tho pationt bog an to cry...

I. Ko, that la not what I want to know. I -want to know how
tho ctrje.incr.ts wore stopped in tho case of tno individual peroona.

Voro they given acoething to drink, or to c*t, or did they Just eiy
■You c.n _.o nou? 1 they givo thaa an injection? ’^hat happened?

a. Ho went bacic to bed.

0.. Va«a he was given water again, did nc recover quickly, or
did it tako days?

a. I don't know.

Pill vein says in his affidavit that at tho end of the osno^-


- 9406 -


17 Ju»n-.*4CJ-23-&-I.csser (Y;n Schoon)
Ccurt Z


izcjit all tha experimental subjects wore still thoro and th_y were
given a few days special care and then release! for labor. Can you
confirs this *wom stat^ent of Pritx Pillwoin?

1- So.

V ay not?

3ooauao I didn't toko any interest in it.

4. Bo you consider it incorroct?

i. So.

D2. STHXiTBalJjSi Z hare no further questions.

S3 piiZSIBSiT: any questions of this witness by any other
defoaso counsol? any ro-diroct examination oy tho Prosocution?

53. SOCEbaLD: Ho furthor quostion on tho part of tho Proso¬
cution, your Honor.

"v~: ppisrDHT: Iho witaos- is excusod free the witaoss otond,
thoro boiaj no furthor questions to be >ropoundod to hi*.

Dees tho fribund understand that tho vltaost, a a-guJ, io now

available?

KS. HaT-DT: Tho witnoso Huagon is now available, y Honor,
and will be called by tho defense counsel.

32. ri?P (Counsel for tho defendants Schroodor and 3ockor-
7rGyscng)| Vith tho poieission of tho Tribunal I should liko to call
tho witness, Haugen, for sy t'-o clients.

rv m \ P.-SSIDSHT: Tho sarshal will KKon tho witnosc, Hongon.

32. TI?P: Hr. President, tho witnoss has boon brought fraa
Jronch custody. It is to bo cupoctod that ho will bo put boforo a
Kilitary Tribunal in TroncO. I should bo gratoful if the Tribunal
would inform hin that he do os not have to testify anything that will
iaoriniaato hinsalf, but that, whatovor he does say aust bo tho truth,
in tho cuatcca-7 form.

112. HaSDT: 3eforo the Tribunal advises tho witness, nay I ra-
quost hot* long Dr. Tip? anticipates tho examination of this witness


- 9/.07 -


17 Jtio-j-ii^-25-5-Lcssor (Ton Schoea)

Court I ^

will tcko cn his part ash how long It will take oa tho part of do-
fcuo cc-unsol 7rltr for Soso uad If any other dofoaso counsel will
went to exsine hin?

TED ?31SZDZi2: Vill counsel enlighten us upon that point?

D3. ri?P: X will nood about a day cad a hall, Mr. Proeidont.

X boliovo that Dr. Tritx will not tdce voiy long; I think 2 or 3 hours
will eoror Dr. Trits* questions, but I cannot sty for usre. I also
know that ny colleague, Dr. Helte, for Eundlosor, would li-:o to ask
clbv questions, but this will not tdee very long.

•2. iUHDYt It soots to no. Tour Honor, that a day and a half
will bo a oonsidorablo length of tine for excclnation of this witnosc.
I should think tho dsfenso counsol could cooporato with one oaothor
and su'o o ton tidy roduco the tine.

THl- PESIDiTI: The Tribunal would tqjprooiate defense oounsol
expediting exenination of thid and other witnesses to the grontoot
possible extent.

Sr.jj x.-z r: a witness, took tho stand and testified os
followsi

BT TK3 ??.3SID2.T:

Yitaoss—do you hoar no?

1. Yos, X hear you.

You uro now about to bo sworn os a wltaoss bof ro this
Military Tribunal X, trial of tho case, tho United Stotos vorsus
lari 3rmdt rux* others. X dosire to inform you that you sro not
requirod to answer any quwstins which Buy bo propoundod to you by
any party or by the Tribunal itself if, la your Judgooat, answering
thoao questions would tend to inc rial auto yourself. Do you under¬
stand that?

i. Yos, I have understood that.

If at any tin a you uro in doubt upon any natter you are
privile-ed to ask the Tribunal's edvleo upon th-t subject, Do you


- 9408 -


17 Juuo-i-;:j-23-i-IreBser (Ton Schoea)
Ccurt I


undorstv^d?

a. Tea, I uni era toad that.

T^~- ??2S12Z2f2: 2iO witness will now be a worn.

3T JTEGi S2»2ISG:

Hold up your right hand end be wvorn, repeating after ne the

o«th:

I Bvocr by God, the ^lnlghty and CBaiseiant, that I will epoch
tho puro truth und will withhold and all nothing.

( Tho witness rapct&d the oath.)

JUTC-- S233IEO: You cay be aeatod.

nazcT minuTicsi

BY H'< :i??j

Profoaaor, you are hero as a witness for the first ti-io
before this Tribunal. To avoid difficulties I should llko to point
out to you, purely froc a technical point of view, that to nafco tho
translation easlor you will havo to nako u pauso botwoon question
nns answor and Walt forth© into preter.

Sow, Profossor, your nrfie is Dr. fc^cn Haugen. You woro born
on tho 17th of Juno 1698 in 3crlin. At prosont you uro a prisoner
in tho Court Prison in Surnberg. You uro a doctor of nodicino by
profecoion and your spocialty is hyglana and baetoriology,—is that
corroct?

a. Yos, that is corroct.

4. Sow wiU you please describe briefly to tho Tribunal your
nodic:l training and career?

a, ?rco 1919 to 1923 I studied ccdicino in 3orlln. In 1923 I
took tho S tnto oxjsinution. In 1924 I was licensed us a physician
and at tho s_=c tine received the Degree of Doctor of kedi'lno. Aftor
that I studied intornal cedicine -s an inturn and later as an assis¬
tant at the Pirst kedicl Clinic, at the Cha-ite, in Berlin, under
Gehoinrat Hiss.


- 9409 -


17 J*iic-«-: j-23-5_Lc8scr (Vcn Schoen)

Gcurt I

3ov. professor, please describe your speciallied profession¬
al training.

2- 1926 I becaco a scientific assistant in the Reich Health
Of:ico In 3e;lia, is the 3acteriologicol Depotaent in 3erlinOohlcc.
2 :ero I founded the d epartacat for virus and tun or research, a new
fiold of rceecrch, vhich was to be set up in the Bacteriological DcnoTt-
nont of tho Roich Health Office at tho tine. Already asan assistant I
did luito c bit of -I cay soy- fund<£iontal work in the fiold of os-
pcrincntrl virua and terror rose rch In this position. In 1927 I
olreedy oocouc c accbo of the Goman Central Coanittoo for fight a-
gainst erne or. In 1928 I rocoivod the annual priso of the Hoich
Hoclth Ofi'ico, Since I was vory cueh interested in locffnlng tho £icri-
ern nothods of virus rcsoarch, I wont, in 1928 as an assistant to tho
Rockefeller Instituto for codicj rosc a rch in Row Tork.idioro I routined
for about ono year. 7horo I worked with Dr. Rivors on oxporlncr.tol
(luootioaB of sntdlpoz and horpos, ospocially lrxiu-ology rosoarch with
tho aid of tissuo cultures, as a rosult of this work....

DR. 71??: ?lo<.sog30uk uoro slowly with this difficult ar.torirl,
vitnois.

a. Sho result :of this work was publiohod in ^joricun rciontific
journals. During this tine I was sorely on lonvo free tho Roich Hc-J.tr.
Of ico. In 1929 I rotumed tfccro. In 1930 I bocaso Rcgiorungsrat and
was eppointod Extraordinary Meabor of tho International Health DcncrJ>~
aont of tho Rockefollor ?oundution in How fork, with tho assignaont
to work ct the yellow fevor laboratory of this Instituto and to try to
brood tho yellow fevor gore, work which had been attesptod already
for years without any success. I succoodod in 1931-32. Inis work wno
published in .coricen and Seram journals. I succoodod, for tho first
tiao, in aching artificial pure cultures of the agent causing yellow
fever. Inport„nt work of jcioric-n scientists Was built up on this, nnl
tais culture uede it possible to develop a vaccine against yelow fever


- 9U0 -


17 €—Lesser (7on Scuocr.)

Court I


itlci is used throughout the world today cud was of great sigulglcunce
for the illio# is tr<^>icj. warfare. «fter this 3-year interruption of.
=7 worh In Berlin I srturaedto the Belch Health Office and w a s ^pointed
a ueeber if the Belch health Office.


- 91H -


17 *fane L7---~-2~-l-Pri=?.r<j( T cn Schon)

Coart ‘.’a. 1

A. cent. Th r I continu'd to work in thn 5.*»ct riologicftl Section
-a h >4 of th* fip* rtaent for virus nnrt tiusor ros-yrch » nd when in
t!i< OOUr3 of th. i-cor-on tion. of. Prussia into t.« Reich the Bncter-
iologicvl Action vs dissolved, cy coll'.-gu-Ji r id “ coved to the
Robert Toeh Institut* which is rlso in B rlin. Cn th- 1st of Ilrrch 1936
I fc'cr.-x - p rtaunt chief nnd professor th r*.. I ccv-tinu- d to «crK tn ro
too in thn 5AQ- r ■:rch field; th-.t is, virus r.-rf tuner r*s<r.rch. I'.
1938 I rc ivrd thn ’ ns at* adsen priz* for ry wort: in th* field of
infectious nxs -J s. Cn th* 1st of Cctoirr 1941 the Hob* rt i och
Imtitut. c. = r. r* gul r prof* ssor of b et«rlclocy r.nd hy e ien«. Ct

thr frdv rsity >f Str ssbourg wh*m, .,t seen tin-., I bdcfinn director
rt the Hgieno I stituto. 1 rseined th r. until htr ss bourg was t'.kon
in “ovrcb T 1944.

For r sons cc* vct d with th^ w*r, on "pproxis tely the 1st of
Sent«b-r 1944 I elrocay took prrt of cy institut to Cborschwiborhnu
-nd, whan *. < h-d to "vacur-to this tow i, >,r. n t to Thurlngin — thrt
is, Sr. lxeld on tht 5rl. — *hcre in April 1945 I ms enpturod -.nd
?it un i;r rr- st by th' /c rlcnns.

.. »>.v I sk you witn .ss to t-11 th Court bri fly • bout your f»te
•It* r you w - fk*n prisoner.

. * rcQ S* li Id - wrs tnk«;n to nn ..c-ric-n int rrog.*»tion c-sp in
• rrnon. Th r I w-s int rrog’t* d rbcut - nurb r of oc'-ations in th*
fi* l- of virus disuses ■ -id froc tvrn I w-n sent to v rious An riern
F"’ find lnt>* me sat caps,

'• n th * iCth °* >’uv.cl r 1945 I w s brou; .t to th<> court prison in
•umb* rg v*1 int rrog :t d thoroutf.ly -bout cy work.

. Frof :scr, wen you let* rrog ted here by the Office of Chief cf
Coun-^l for *r Crir.es?

. v «e, I w-c int rrog-t-d on behalf of this offico on the sub.i-ct.

. /.nd thn subject of the Interrogations, Wnt was it?

- . : w s infrrcg t-i cn thn sr.ee charges which re the subject of
the i-aiotser.t in this trial.


- 9412 -


17 —S' wx“2-rri-~‘’ u(Vcn Schon)

"ourt !*o. 1


>r* you shown docur-oits in the course of this interrogation.
Professor?

. I '• *'S shewn docuc^ ts, documents which I h< ve net seen again

'ccng the r^ corns of this trial.

r . - r n you tell us the result of this interrogation?

A. I w-s not told the result of the interreg-tion but after -bout
two eenths, in Jmu- r? 1946, 1 w s taken free JJuroberg to the Hers-
biwck ifter-'cent ernp. iron there I w"s sent tc Plnttling. There is
• nother if.t‘m-ent crap. Then o». the 15th of June 1946 I ws released
in Plattling by the . -erican . r=y to Sa- lfnld in Thuringia and I
returned th*re.

In -ealfeld I received • call free the hussi* n !ilit'ry Governteont
to he-d - ne^ly founded institute for virus and tuaor research in
Peril'*. I answer-'d this call, r.nd I worked in this institute which is
attach -d to the Institute for !'e«ic .no nrd Biology until the 16th
of iioveeh-r 1946 when, on the occasion of > visit at f-ehlundori in
the seric-n sector, I w-a suddonly rr3t*-d by r- British rdlit'ry
polieocv» without nny warrant cr c ny document. I was taken aw~y by
force and >■ s Kept hidden for two vl a half no-iths in nn Eiiglish
nrisen in inden. This was obviously e case of kidnapping.

Tnly in J-nu r7 1^47 I got out of this prison. I ws turned ov* r
l^ th* French authorities -nd ws taken to Str ssbourg wh* re 1 h«vo
b-« n i* custody nvr since. On th-> 16th of Hay 1 was tr referr-d hen*.

. I'i conn® ticn with this trial, Frofessor, w are instrested in
the ciilit-ry positions which you hold during the war. '*111 you pie- au
tell us briefly wh -1 tbuy wore?

A. Free 1936 to 1939 I w s in th«- Rtsorv*. I w s lways in a positon
of a consulting hygienist with th'> ->ir force physician, of the first
'ir Force in 3-riin. Cn th • 26th of ugust 1M39 I was called up for
v*r s-rvica s Ct-r-rot in the P.-s-irve, again :s consulting hygienist
for tr physician of the First 'ir Fore*-. liy -ctivity • s consulting
hygienist, -s th- n'r*. says, consisted prnrrily =f r.dvising the -ir

- 9413 -


*> T - f >' ' 7 “- 2_-;-?ri=r-u(Vcn S r.cn)

c. :


forco physician on hygienic questions. This -ctivity or An it possible
ror =n, Itrert tiring the ir.r, to continue working -1 ry civili/ r, job -t th«
Robert Koch Institute.

*‘n-n I wrs c-li'd tc Strasbourg on the 1st of October 19U. I tr a first
%v ' n a 1 m»«. Then I ms no long-r working consulting hygienist.

•s lrte -a the aumr of 19A3, it the request of the chi-f of thn
-edic-1 aervic- of thi Luftwnffa, through th* nedi.-ticn cf Professor
-ose, : rsu=<d th • poaition of e consulting hygi« nist, this tia*> for
-ir force physici-n, ftich, who w.-s -Iso in Berlin. poaition ws
'gr-in th.. st. ’iriaory activity end 1 w-s abl* to continue icy work
at th. institute in Str ssbeurg, th"t is, ay ms.-rch -rd ay t-nching
-ctivity. lly ecitivity r S » consjlting hygivdet thus consisted of
priority cf trips to ch. ck hygio.de conditions with the troops; soccr.r.ly,
of ir wing up fnctu-1 r-ports »hich could be ir.j-ort-v"t for the / ir
fl't phyaici n; 'A l h.lo this poaition until thn collapse.

<1. 'four ciUt ry r-nks, Professor: Could ; ou list th* c, too?

. . -si sni*, on thi 26th of '.ugust 1939 I wa cnllnd up *a nn Ob< r-
rat (First Lieut • rnt) of th* --.a rvn; then on thu 1st cf /.pril 1941
: bnc-n. St-bsnrrt, (Crptrln); then on tho 1st of nc ry 1944 l w-.s
c reset-d tc fb .rst-bsr'rzt, (Unjor).
r « Then your prccotions w r *iit- th- nomr.1 thi-.g?

''' s, suit nora-1.

. «.nd on nor cu* stion on this subject, Profnsaor: In your vnrlcus
-' s tiona, civili-n -a W--11 .* s nilitrry, *io wnr- your superiors?

. First, I sh'U discuss ay eivili-n pesdtio-s. . s • nc.b-.r of tho
:; ' lich Office ay L-cdi-te sup- riur w-s thi pr * sid<nt of the Reich

H*.'lth Office r.. the nioct sup rier gency w-s th iMch I'dnistry of
-r.i "nturior. .8 profos.or -nd dep-xtont chi f r.t th- Robert Koch
Iv.titutn eg superior was the president of ti-ia institute ~r,d this,-.a
long 3 th Institute r-s un lur Prussia, th* Prussian Hinist-.r of tho
-nt^rior; I-'t-r, -hen it fccrr.e - Reich institute, th*. Hr ich Jlinister
th* l*it rior.


- 9oL. -


IT June 1' - -S' ric- -iu( Yon Schon)

Court ”c. 1

• s - orefossor rt the University 0 f -tr-asbeurg, I nos irmodifitoly
undr th r ctor thn cur-tor cf this univ rsity r.nd -Iso under
th* 1 inist r cf Sduention.

:y ailit- ry superior during th< wr.r u s -ltor.ys th* a-^ -ir force
physicinn of th* First ir Fore or sir physician, I'-nioh, in Berlin.

: =.‘7 poirt out thrt, ns consulting hygir-ist, I V's *,ct in r. position
to ism- nr.y Ori rs eys- If, but IT I w-.nt d to h'vc ord* rs c.-rri-.d out
1 hnl to neko suggestions to tho r ir force physic inn which h- pi.si-.d
an *s erd rs to the sifcordin’vtn -•.g'-'-ci- s or units. l$y reports, nostly
f-ctu -1 r ports , went directly to th«» 'ir fore- physician nd, when ho
considfr .d it dvis-bl or when th-.r w-s *n erd-r to thnt off.ict, ho
p-ss. d th o on to th/ Chief of th- ! Mic-1 Services of th* Luftwr.ffc,
r * Prof, a tor, did ycu not hold -noth r rrsitiou which :d C ht bn af
int^r st in co -n'ction with this tri- 1 ?

i • v 's, I h»d • other position 's hygienic c nsultnut of the he". 1 th
dir-ccor of tho gev* rr.' nt in Alsncr.

. Th t n-s sft'r you bec-c/i n professor in Strasbourg''

•». Th"t w s frso 1941 on.

. ..nd *ho w^s your sup- ricr in this position?

In Str-scbcurg'*

r. ?.s.

*’-• _ h.-1 «- s th h- ilth director with th- Alsatian govorrinnnt.


17 Juno - 7-..-v.rW 5-1-0 oak (Int. von Scion)

Court So. 1

~i Att! - final question. Professor, ware yon a acni jr of the NSDAP?

1 Tcs, I was ft ncr.bor of the 1631?.

* Di ' y~u hoi-' ary office cr rank ir. SJk. arty?

.. Vo, I Ir.! no .ffico an’, no rank in the arty.

'i Sow lot *s o on to your *ork. Professor. *~h.'t specific fiol’s
f *.± i' you huvo in detail?

A As I Ix.vc already sai l :iy work was that f virus on! btrr
rosoarch, inclu 'in tissue cultures which has a rent 3i nificanco in
this type of research. I :!oalt priimrily with virus research Vecauso
parts of the tu;xrs are a:x>n thi virus diseases. Hero I was primarily
intoroato! in iscovorln th- causes, that is fin in the virus rosponsi-
blo for the various virus iscascs, breo in • this virus, takin;; it
:dcroccopically visible an' in connocticn with that, quostiona r.s to
Loo unity. Thin 1 also ’oalt with thi dovolopaont cf vaccines ajainat
■/inis iseaaos. Virus production n a lor o scale, howevor, never
intoroato! no* Sinco this is net thu .duty >f a research worker in
nor.oal tLxs but the war create! cor. itdons sc that for military roasons
an’ also fir on. ml rens ns it bocoria nueossary to accopt ouch vaccino
pro duetion a3sl ru^r.ts.

1 “oil, we rrill co:io back to vaccine ?rcAuction later. I should like
tc ask you now, witness, since whoa ha * you workoi in this specialized
field*

A Sinco I entered the Reich Health Offico, sinco 1926.

Q And what isoasos, Profossor, wero you spocificnlly intorostod
in?

A In the c-.urso of tho years I w\rkc \ on quito a nuaber cf virus
isoasos. I can nly -ar.tion snnll pox, h-rpos, influenza, various
r s -f Inf] an na tion of tho brrin, psittacosis, then turr.r is oases
an' than the isoasos which ere of interest privily ir. trie trial,
typhus, yell favor, -pi 'tie jaundice r hepatitis an* influence.

3 Professor, yur work is 7-r; ir.j rtant lioro an in connection
•it •.ur work, th_ research assi rr_nus rich wore issue! to yu« Hirst


9116 -


1? Jar.: L 73-2 >-2-7co> (Int. von Schcn)

C urt S-. 1


I shoal ', like tc rjk you to speak _r.. r?±l? an! brl-fly ns ?_ssiblo

on rosoarch assiersants in _-»r«_ral.

A Free: the files which I have soon hora I h-.vo seen that the tern,
“research ’ssi n-er.t 11 has boor, oensi ’arably risusei. "he tern -research
■-- = - is r. t a dear bar 1th nly r.c nsetdn • It

cust bo hvlio' into various r nips, the majority f the research
assi"manta cano about because the scientists asked for assistants
because lar :o fun's arc "onerally not av liable tc the institutes f r
rosoarch st in Geraary to ho2 th_ Reich bosoarch Council .rhich
iovclopod frets the unfortunato position f Oorsan sci.nco an* 'uriny
tho war wo ha;', an opportunity to ack t’.x. rv ’leal inspoctcrato of tho
various br s f th: 'ohncoM f r rosoarch assi meats. Than ono
r.'.q an a; lioaticn, on,, in ’ic'totho su'-Joot an;! the pr^bloa ono

t

w.r.tod to work vl* , • .;.na by this -rk * irtant and

■fay snea. If this op '.on was - then as

a rulo tils involved financial support but this as ospocially important
2urir. tho war. In theso rosoarch assi nunts wo hr * an opportunity tc
obtain r. torial on-* equipment which ha .2 bccouo scarco bocau3o cf tho \rcr
an’ else an opportunity to c.iploy a’lltioml porsomul an', to iiavo
30.1, of tho rtjro inportar.t vork-rs ’eforro’.. It als. , ut

rathjr rar-ly, that tho a ency which I htvo aontiono !, issued tho
rosoarch assiirvints, Those w-ro yon-rally r , ovel--ivr.t osslomonta,

»spo dally in th fi.l-’ technique, physics ar.' chemistry. I cannot
r :v. ;b-r any such assi'ruiants in :y fiol.' cf bactorlolory an’ pnrticu-
larly vires rosoarch. Tho third roup on cannot call research as3i n-
Kf.ta, ‘xit 3laply pro action assi ix-nts, *hich th- institute 'll net
liko to accept, fer instance, vaccin. r _ > ruction, that was th- ’oity of
in’ustiy, in this case, tbs sjrua an’ vaccine in'ustry, but bur tho
i be: a; suber irrso such .bjacticns an willin' V tafc- .vor
?r ‘action assi nrunts.


- 9il7 -


17 Jaaz !:7-nW.TD-2>->Ocok (Ir.t* v*r. Sc&n)

C-'irt *. 1

Q i‘-noss, will you ploaso l.ok ct ^orient bsck 5, look at pa o 6.
r-.j 1 curat I sh.ul' like to 'Hacuss with you is Prosecution Exhibit
13", Inhibit 1S9. It is a letter fr-n y,u t. th_ ?cctcr cf the
Bniv-rsity at Stmssbur into! tho 7th >f October 191x3. In this lottor
y.u ask that the icne Institute ha r«co Tdzoi as a war plant and
ur.'ar tho aoi.rs 1 v 5 y :ito a racier of research r.ssi nnonts. ill
y : :.L~-s toll ns, Professor, un Lr .hich cate ry f th. question you
hr.ra just rationed tho variras as si nrats lit?

* * 3 intc th. in’ivi ual assi mx^nts briefly ono after tho

.thur, The first assi rcrata is a production assi noent f:r yellow

fovor vaccine Iran ut \y t’.v. eich ..viativn 'inistry an* tho Ccitir.r.*or

ir. Chief . f the Luftvraffo frxi tho _ icrl Insp-ctsrato# This is .-urely
%

a pro ’notion assiTtnent,

The saeon.' ono *ls: issued by tho Inspector.-.to cf tho ".olical

vice of tho Luftwuffa is an assi^Trxor.t on typhus vaccine, again a
research nssi-.irvnt.

tha third assi naont is also fr: try, Co tsmtor

ir. Chief f tho Luftwaffe, Chief f tho ‘Jodi cal Sorvico f tho
Luftir.fr i, subject, inflaonsa. It was a iairo reaoarch assi; r.ient to
iscrv.r tho cause f tho isoaso. It include* tho 'ovelopaont of a
:* C .ic-i prooc txr. for tho lovdojnont af vaccine, a research ai
JTjl; -.r*. ansi revnt, ’-ut n.t a ;reaction assi^nnont.

T’v. f.urth assi na-nt *.^3 issued by to., ■' jich Research Council and
r^i.rs rhus. It is also a research assi naunt.

Uk. next one that is listed is els: r.n assi merit f the Roich
.csearcTi C uncil n hopati -is, r epi 'cnic jaun’ico, This was a
roljjct I was especially interested in.

1 Ifcw this Tribunal i3 especially interostod in tho following
question, witness: Ir. w:rkir. ?n those research assi-irunts r;.re you
^n'.a- the supervision f tit offices UUch had ivon y.u these
->r± mints?


17 Jme ----25-6—3 -k (In-, von Scher.)
C ~urt He. 1


:'c, in K7 capacity as Urcctar of the University Instituto I was
wrrkin ;nly under the ?*ict.r on’ Curator -f this University an’, then
the ruieh inis try of Evocation.

1 In such research assi orients an ’ pro ’.action assignments, was it
custc^ary, ■ .fessor, for the work of the scientists to bo chocko:*. in
ary my?

•• Ik,, there ms no right tc chock the w:rk nor any duty, as an
Instituto ’iroctcr is in on in lop-n lent scientific ^sition an.’, n; ono
t tho i’oc f oxjrcisin any central. If ono ha’, a rosoarch assi roont
cno was no rely -'ll -at o'- at certain intervals t: re? rt cr. the prorosa
of tho work or. * with tho oi ’ cf thoso reports the a; oncy that i3suoi

0351 ’xcidod Mother It was north '/.ilia t- o nticuo tho *ork,

r not, that is, wheth-r it was worth whll* to issue further fun*
or.-' x. forth.


17 June—.V-PL?
C*irt 1


(V. r. Schon)


21 ., wr.s it net mother Outy, thr.t is, t j;iv. \n .cc-untng of
thC 23.%,"?

™ Yea, of course, '.ccountirgs ;*cr~ 'oncr/lly giver. it l.r.st
tk* t \:~.s the c sc with us. The .. nqr r.s .irinist»i*oJ cy the University
Tr^r-sury rni th. -cc.untirg wont tlx,u;h.thr.t Alien,

1 : ?r fes.-r, y.u s i_ y u -rkel wit.: research n a..'ll pox,
yell w fever, j .unlice, influcnxr., *al ty.-v.us. 11 ., I ah ulu lele. t;

S- st. vj'.-js rvscrrch w. rk, G-in-. ova* these r-sv .ret .rasiiAxnta,
Lr. President, it dll he access'--;- t us. cwt .Li sp-ci liee.’. t.r..3
re.>o'.ew..ly -.a . s shown in the R.s- c so. In r-or t .v iJ 1 .x;
thc.r-ctic aqpln.ti.os I tr.ve .'.ale. 2 the witness t- bri.f

tffil .vit ; tis subject. I Oeli-Vi thr.t ill s-rve tJ.e Tribunal*a
purp-sc o.t.tr thrn -. 1 -n -iscuaai.n. I Ir.vc put the - cu:xnt in
B-cx-r-Fr-ya-n;, Supplement! He. 6 , hlie.. is n. t re ly yet. I hr.vc
the n-c.as'17’ number -f English 'n. G^r .-wi c.pi -3 here *.n 2 I ah ui.l
lL.e t. r.alc the represent otiv. the Genorr! SBer-try'a office to
nstribut. t 2 ;eac t the Tribunvl, the ?r s-cuti.r., -nl the interpreters
3 th-.t I ocy re%- it nut.

Profess-r Htigun .r.s in ...eric', f.r years *n: h- has ,iven
the fill//it in Ocru-n -n -..ell lab. There nr. tw .1 inrls.

: tain.. thr.t is Uv boot wy t. *.v. i 1 difficulties. I ffor tlds r.a
Becicr-Fre; am;; D-cu.xnt 75, it will j- Inhibit 51 f r B^okvr-Fr-yoen^,
n. hw. is tlx ri;ir.'.l.

CL. P.LliLO.T: C-pi.s f t.x -ifi- v.t m tk- Ger.-'.n 1-....U ill
ir. _ue ti_ e. furnish*! t. the Tribun .1 I sjutc?

OS. TE-.-w Ics, I .ill or* a it tv _rr ,* vrnin^. I ;rx;l
t h re wi e_r. ri_ht n w. S. th t t .ill b. uiv-.rst wiltcie, in,
rr.silent, I ah ull like t. r.--l the .-«t inp.rtnnt y.rlc f t.is
tffilurit. Ko. I Jells with tlx or-fessisc 1 c~nc.ro A the ..itness.

. .. V. lr B Int that. I thr.t. I bc^i


2-11


- 9120 -


i? Juno-*r-H>26~2^Sr;3S (Vun Sch.n)

C:urt 1

II. r.xr-f-rc I b_licv_ itself oi- t- giy- fch- f.lljair^ short
st~.tc exn fc -b ut th- tor-a, us-d -sp-ciily in virus research.
III. 1). Virus oeans rigin'lly ^-is n r b-tt-r livir\; . is n.
virus -x .ns n 3 r up f .,cr_s I s^ci I kind.

2/. Viru l encc_- in-, t.t .i ctu r* .r f t»-> virus.

DR TIP?: Virulort is the r.djectivc.

?). Ttu. r.cti.n f viruiaiCw is cstcbllshe_ esssntird.ly by
ti'.a prcs^ic- f pith.pen in. --r. uitip-.i fnct_r.

a) ..".th .^-n - p-.th-gen -.cti.n - c.p-.city t pr eucc r. typic-1
QT-nifoat JlSC'-S- .

ar.th-.icn f. r huon Pe i.",’ - to- virus ; ir -kc.s . dise'.ae in
hutm ooin*.

P .Uw-wn f.r minis - thu virus pr.duoeo dis-ist un
:d_u Is. .. virus -u . j. citr.er e..clusively p'-to-gen for
.;u_ n being ur p-.to uicn f.r minis .r p th->n f.r b to
•t the s:-x tiix.

b) nti^cn - nii;-n -.cti.n - c .p-.city t jt -ucc specific
Leuudty r specific totib.dica .j-.inst i l'.Ur lnf-ctim in
question.

4) Or* d.-sn't spcil: f virus virulent f.r .-unm beir^s, but
-d ' virus pith ?-n f r hupm beings.

5) Only Ilyin virus s vir ulent, thit is t. s ~.y rotiv- in
s u-f. Killed b 7 p-ysic 1 r dieiuic-.l _t .ns it 1. cos it
Uiw 3.vt tine its .c.ivity .r virulence, th~t i3 t any tho
-eiit_.cn nl p-.to: g-n f ct rs dis'-pp-. r. Him to- virus i3
".virui-nt. It is n;t uL. t. produce i.—unity or dicor.oo.

5) Induction - intr-ductl— of "-r- .r -ctive .o-.rts I it

_:t_ th- b -y eith-ut rej r' t- tl- spocinl aflfrion.

7) H-t -vexy infect!, r. — st result in n -ruiifcct disem—

-) ~ xic - p.is.ning ictim.

I xir, - peis.nin. p~rt - vjus it.. p’th -r. .id m


•inti gen f'-ct-r.


- # 421 -


17 JUR*-.-7_-2»-3-Gr-ss (Vr. 5c. ..;

Czaxt 1

?j Z:~ Correct Zr.^lia; Ur. f r L, fuqg is ir. cul .ti.n - .rtific'.llp
pralueoU infection.

v ;c_~ Mi.r. - th_ purp.se : the in cul l! r. is iajunlantien.

Ti*~ Gear—‘in t-ra "ichutsiapfuas" c ros;;.n_s uith the English
v-.cclR-.tlwn,

10, I taixiianti-T, - prsiucti_n - s.MCific pretcctiv- a; bstnncca
sr '-atl-b-lics -.—.inst n lr.t_r n-tcr'l inf-cti.n with t.._ r_s-
.-cctive uiscr.se. y-.ccx.vt i r. -s there! r» rn .rtific'-l
iu-ttftis-fci-n.

11. i_uniz-'.ti-n gainst‘Virus licenses is j> saibly c:ciusiVv!y

. i«c. virulent virus, .inch Is h.vover n l-d'.er
p*5hej-a i r bern bwin-s.

12, w. n. - v ccin- - r.iaat virus ^isw'.soa Irs t. c.at.tin
iivi.. , i.w. virulent virus, the uiti^en r iuainiain, .ctien *f
Jtich is preserve-!, but the .-.th.;-n, lisc.se j»-‘.ucing -.cti.n
f-r axta beings ;f which I: a iispppc-.nl.

13. T a virus us-i f r v ocUko is .. lifid _r ttenu tc- by
•uounl .. .as-.« .r culture a .uc.i th-.t tfa* p-th .Jen •.cti.n is
su..reset!, the nti>n let- .. h ..vj- is pr*s-rv«.-. Tne virus
jr. in tfc -mads is p-.t.-.eje.i t the, but n l.xv>r f- r hu.-.n
beings.

24. .'.:c ir.tr ucti r. f livir. virus c nt-.inin- v-.ccir._t is

U-a-wT r_ r_ 1 inf_cti.n .it. virulent virus .hich is i:. -ver
n t . re p.ta.>n f.r nu.v. 3>Jjfcs.

Da. :L 4 - lhore f L.fl t;_ si niur. r. the ccrtlfientivn*

rr.:_, ... I . .. i : e» r h • ->n in l-t ii.

.line. _ .1 v- .ray .iv_ uinutes I i; ...ul_ o_ b_tt_r ts at :.rt

t^.-_rr- n_ra_a~.

HU rniSLBWs The Tribunal ill n- b_ in r_c_ss ’until 9:30

-'cl c.: t.a-iveu earning.


- 9122 -


l£ jtine - >: !—.. 7?*-l-I-“arr~w (Int. von Schon)
Court :fc. 1


Official transcript of tho lasxlcan lilitary
Tribunal in the fitter of the United States
of ijerica against liar! Brandt, at al,
defendants, sit tin- at Furnbe Goroany, or.

13 Jam 19U7, 0930, Justice Baals ;residiOt.

rr: "VST-l-L* Persons in the court roou will . lease fir.i their seats.

T&J ifenorable, the Jidccs of military Tribunal I.

~ Hi tar/ Tribunal I is nw in session. God save the United States
of inarioa and this Honorable Tribunal.

Tliero will bo order in the court.

TfE resmBJTT* :r. "arshal, will you ascertain that all the defendants
are pros or.t in the court?

un ■V.’iS.'i.i* 'iy it ~ loaso ycur 'toners, all tho dofon’ants are /resent
in the oourt.

THE HESHEMT* Tho Soorotary G.-naral 'dll noto for tho record tho
presence of all iefonSants in oourt.

Tho witness is redacted that ho is still ttnlor oath and is also
ronir.'.ol that ho noed not arawor ary quostion which ho foals would
incri inato id -self.

Counsel ray proceed.

SHOES a UXBX - nosumd
DE£CT SXdX ,, ..TlOH - Continued

~{ Dl. 71?? (Doferuiu Counsel for dofondr.r.ts Sc brood: r and Bockor-
Froysons) >

q professor, yesterday afternoon wo sto.ood with your r on oral work.
.How, I shoul' like to .o on to tho indivi ‘ual experlcents with vrhioh
:y _t.ro clients aro ccusod. First, I sh al li!:o to discuss your rorfc
in tho field of influenza. Professor “chroo .tor an - Dr. Beckor-Froyson."
arc accuse 1 of ailo-e.Oy c-kiinai huriar. aXj .iriaor.ts in this field.


'.jT.ce cf this in t'.ic ccuiucnts and I thorafore do not
Prosecution -.ses its assertions, but I can assuno«


c^fc^.^Sc_c« 5 ^^\^^ctr.'Qen ~ two dicnt3 and such alle/e ly crininal
Mr-3rir.cr.ts i's sxlBlod tc have boon thrcu\h your ; eraor.. ill you

' ^ *'• L.\ ftol *«3


16 June L>-..~-l-2-;:arrcr (Int. von Sc hen)

Scurt So* i

please describe briefly to tho Tribunal hew the *crk in the field of
influenza cauo about an ! what -.rori: you carried out in !ctail?

.. Firs a, I rust protest enorgetically against tho charge repeatedly
raise.'! by tho prosecution that I carried out criminal exjx-r! ants on
hunan beings. I have found this several ti es ir. the documents.

!y influenza work goes beck to 1935 an: 1936. The nature of tho
influor.ee gem was lobe tod for decades. The so-called "Pfeiffer"
bacillus war, for years, consir'.jrod tho cause of influenza, but in tho
bi opidcidc of the first orld * ar, whore thoro wero -illion3 of oases,
tho opinion bo-an to prevail that influence was caused by a virua-liko
;om, but only wh-n virus research had reached a certain lovol - that
as after the orld ar, in tho 1930*3 - cculd wo systematically begin

to try to discover tho oauso of influonza. In several countries, first

•

in Aoorioa, it was possible to isolato a filterable, invisible virus,
tho specific qualities of which woro soon ascertained by antaal oxpori-
nents. .'.tto^rts to brood this virus fbllcnrod, and a nuitbar of i: nuncio gy
works. In approxlaaWLy 1936, wc hoar! tho first nows, a gain from
.jscrica, that it had boon possiblo to dovolop a living virus vncclno
against influonza, and soon < o oould bo;.in to roaliso an! practico tho
plan#..

: r '. (Interruptin'-.) t ?5ny it doaso your Honor, it doosn*t soon

to no that it*3 nocoesary to o back to the years 1936, 1937 and 1938
in’ iacuso tho whole 'avolopocnt of tho influenza problea. Tho quostion
horc is vrbothor cr not Dr. Haagon coper* .-ntod on human boings with
influonza ir a concentration cau, , whether or not they t ro voluntaors,
an! who tic :r or not h. ro calved or! rs from the ?'©ileal Inapeotorcto,
if Dr# Ti.T is interest©-.!. I Jor.*t soe any reason to iscuss tho whole
history of influenza. Th .joint is as sduple as that.

THE rH23IDE!"j Tho witness nay continue. This .roliainary talk should
ret consune too ouch tine, -mt ho ray rake 3cm ; ralininary explanation
if he- loaires*


9424


lo June ±7- 14-«K-2-1- rf ol oy- (7o n Sohoen)
Court I


TH2 WITNESS: (continuing answer) I had Intended to
be brief anyhow, tut I believe In the interest of whit
will follow it is necessary to give a brief Introduction.

Successful vaccinations * r e -j performed In .eaerlca, —
lr. -snerlca, England and ether countries. *hls question
interested us In Goraany too, of course. In IS’6 I succeed¬
ed In Isolating a good virus strain from an Influenza case
which become known as the ?lau 3traln, and the vlcl38ity
which I proved in on experiment on ayse 1 f. Then we went
on to develop a vaccine. I carried out the first work while
. belonged to the Robert Koch Institute. The work was con¬
tinued in Strasbourg. In the winter of 19-i , -1944, which was
the year vhon there was very serious influenza epldoolc in
-..gland, we were able to perform, prophylactic vaccinations.
The epidemic, as usual, went from the west to the east, so
th*t -o had to oxpeot the epldoalc to spread to Oornany. it
.he request of the Dlrootor cf tho Medical Clinic, and that
is In Strasbourg, Professor Stein, wo lnnoculatod about
2CG persons cf the ollnlc personnel with this lnfluonza
vacolno. There were only very alight reactions observed
with a part of tho oersona who had been vaccinated, which
did not, hovover, reduced the working efficiency zt these
persons in any way. *%t the same time I vaccinated In the
3chir_eck concentration oamp about 20 women who worked In
an asoooially dangerous spot, and that la to say they were
taxon from various barracks to their working places, and
in this way if the first Influenza cases occurred they would
be in danger tneaaelves, but acre especially that they would
carry the germs to the other barracks. So that there was an

outspoken need of Immunization here for this group. Here

* S-2S


18 Juna ■i7-H-ofC-2-2-..aloy-(Von 3c ^oen)

COJ.^IT I

again there vara no reactions which in any way effected the
wording ability of thasa women.

i. Professor, how did the developmental work for this
vaccine taha place?

a. Vail, vaccina production was essentially based on
the experiences gathered in other countries. There were
Francis and .longal in America, and other scientists.

Q. Thus, If A understand you correotly, you h .d a
vaccina which was proved in practice, you took it from
literature to produce your own vaccine?

a. Yes, we used the experiences gathered from the
ublloatlons of other authors.

Q. y 0 v, before the vaccine was used in practice, did
you carry out animals experiments on yoursolf?

.%. Yes, of oour3d, we did. The immunity studios wore
performed on nycelf and ox.-orlmonts on myself ar.d my lab-
oratory personnel to tost the effectiveness of the tolorar.ee,
especially cf the vaccina, fe did this for our own protec¬
tion because wo expected influence, ar.d beo.auao t.non wo
would no doubt be in very close contact with the germ.

3 . Nov, the decisive question. Professor, which will
lntore8t the prosecution most; to prove the lmmunltatlon
jffaot of this vaoolne did you ever perform experiments bv
first vaccinating •' 1 th this vaccina and thon testing tho

effeot by the introduction of tho pathoger.e virus?_

a. :r 0 , we never pjrformed such e xporlaenta^'I do not
know what the purpose of such experiments could have buen.

1 may point out the procedure of Hirst wo have baon able
to test tho immunity quite clearly through laboratory
methods.

£. Tver, in conclusion, .-rofessor, I can sv you *forJ:ei

2426-


13 JUne 47—Jt- 2- '-Hal oy- (Von Soho an)

CX’RT I

in the field cf influenza, ycu produced v.aocino according to
the procedure published by foreign official^ you used In
practice in small amounts as animal and self experiments,
v.d the experiments vhloh are under discussion here wore
not performed by you In this field, Is chat time?

Y03, that Is true. Vo never performed experiments
suoh a3 are mentioned here by the Prosecution, but vo
performed the vacolnatlons vhloh are known the world over
for years.

Q. How, a formal question, Professor, from the
doousent NO-1*? vhloh was dlsoussod yesterday «e sew that
you received a roseoroh assignment from this field; you
told us yesterday that this was a research assignment In
the real sonso, that Is research on the disease ltsolf.

Now, I should llice to ash you, did you rooolve a production
assignment froc the Medical Inspectorate to produce vaccine?

No, we never received an assignment to produce
vaccine from the j-.edloal Inspectorate of the Luftwaffe,

Q. Did you report the results of this work, your
research assignment, to the ..edical Inspectorate?

I no doubt sent the customary reports. That was
in the oondltlons when a research assignment was Issued.

Q. ^th whom. Professor, did you speak within the
^edloal Inspectorate about your work?

In general I spoxe to the insulting Hygienist,
to the Chief cf the .-.odloal Service, Professor Rose, ar.d
to the comp-tent gentleman in the hygiene roforat, that
was Stabarzt <»ttmer at that time, «id the money question
I talked overwlth the administrative offlclalc, that vaa
.vttsrat /enzel.

Did ycu talk to Professor Schroeder about your

94 27


16 JHT. .•i?-!5-«E-a-4-::*loy-(Yon Sohoen)
COU ill I


vorfc?

Yus, I ar. cure that I aust have talked to Profeo-
3 -r Sohrojdor about this work. I told bln sore or loss
what I have Just dd6crlbod.

Con you toll ua -hen these conversations or ono
of those conversations took place?

I believe definitely that that was at the ond of
" K , is-*-, whon Pro-easor Sobreeder visltod no in ay institute
At Strasbourg. .Jid I renenber : told hla ay wishes about
pbtalnlng anlaals, obtaining uaterlals, but I cannot
ro^eaber all tho details of the conversation after such
a long tlao.

Q. Did you talk to Dr. Seokox^-Froyaong about this
subject, witness?

That la possible of ccureo, especially In oonnoo-
tlon with the obtaining of anliala. That -aa a olg prooloa
for ao. Dr. Booker-Freysong dealt with this question whon,
— I think It was in July l»v. wnon ho visited no in
Strasbourg. Cf course I told hi.a ay worries about onlaala.

.iow, -no basic question, on this ooc.aaion,
Professor. You said before aoaethlne, about the Hygiene
Referat, and as referent Is mentioned Stabarrt .*ttner;
can you pprhape jxplaln In which Referat of the nodical
Inspectorate your wcr.< was *ealt with?

... mat oar. really be seer, froa ay own activity as
well as fron tne nano of tne reforer.t. I worked on hygiene
questions, and a oonpotont referent for bvgiono at tne tins
-as Stabartt Att-er.

Professor, the prosecution holds the point of

view _n-t D r . 3eoker-Frey sang was the competent nan in

542 ?


13 June 47-:+-3-5-Maioy-(Von Sohoer.)
C0G3T I


whose Referat hygiene natters ware dealt with, and that
according to the prosecution you supervise! and directed
this worfct

.v. I personally snow nothing about that. any
rate I dealt only with Stabarst Attaer, who did this vorfc
ln the hygiene rof-rat. That was core or ’ess the first
autnorlty for ae and If I wanted to go to a higher authori¬
ty I went to the Department Chief* If I wanted to go to a
still higher egency I went to the Chief of Staff in the
Inspectorate, and finally to the inspectorate of the
helical Survloe. In all the years when I had official
business to do with the Kedloal inspectorate, I never had
any dealings witn D r - Beokei^Freyaong with tho exoootlon,
as I said, of obtaining anlanls, but this quostlon only
became acute In the sua-er of 1944.


94C9


13 Jun» 47-4^S"- 3-1-1:-'hnn(Vca Scfcon)

Court Ife. 1

r. I shell nou lftavti this subject, vitr ->ss, nnd go on to th* n*-xt
ch-Tg- of tr. indie ter nt to b- d*r-lt with, ymndic ra-nrfnouts.
Frcf:39cr ^chrooicr nod f^r. Beckr-?rnyacng aro charged wish responsib¬
ility for xp rlne«*ts on apldcaic jaundice, which, according to the
r rosecutio* , * r- perforard in th- conenutration crap S-.chs< nhr.usen
by -r. Cera-r end you -no also in the concuntrrtion cap Hfttsw*dlnr by
Dr. Dohann mi you. I should likn to > sk you, Irofesser, fir t of all
tc »>scrlb*» ycur work in t.a> field cf cpi^diaic jaundice; pl'fis-i
k-' p th* introduction r-s brief 's possible.

... In l c 4l-^2, I h f vi to aay first of all, we received th first
r-ports “bout th* thr* r.t of pidacic jaundice, especially in th*

-r at-r' thsat r of -r, tht is in th Balkans »nd :aissir. iren a study
of this disc.a , I already knew th t th e-use any b* n filtr.bl
virus 'ni sine’ I srw c rt i. connections bstwnwi influenza and hopa-
titus ' pldcaic-, thirnfom it was obvious thr t I should pnrforn
nthnologic-l t -sta on hnpptitis opidaic'. s This was in collator tio.
with ?rof :8sor fnlk, who gave no nrt>rial fren his nilitary hospital,
but since it hvi to tr-.vol for scr.« tine it -lid not nrovn of vluo.

Then I railed on th.-. clinic in Ctr-ssbeurg nd r c«ivnd nat rial from
rrofnasor St'in, th-. air* ctor of th* inv m-1 clinic th* re :*.d through
th* r.odi-ticrs of th* chi* i physicians of th* r* s arch hospital in
Str'ssb.urg th-y g'.v«i c.< tin necessary ev*t ri-'l fer cy first tosta.

Tgu spoke cf c-t-ri-1, witn-.ss; will you pl-rs«. t*ll thn Tribunal
• hat rxteri'l.it -s and how this w.t rial »no obtain* d?

... It was .ss' .telly th- elirl- tio-s of th* p»ti*mt's liruid froa
their n toe-eh, int-atines, r, : U and tirin'- - "d finally blood t‘*flts s
W'.’H -s liv r pu-ctur*s.

. Tcu said tr. t th* a* t ri‘ 1 a- s obtain d in clinics frees p-ti'-nts;
no-.. to* rs th.is =-t rirl obtr.in-el, witness?

. It ca free jaundice p- ti- nts, »'- h-d to-m dnizt-d to tl.*

^li-ics in cuosti". It .s obtained by thr clinicians th r, scor'd lag

to th di-gnostic procriur’ cuat -r: z~ thr: chout th* r orld, froa th

9430


22 Ju'iT r,7 —l.-T -3-2-;• h- 'iC'on Schon)

Court So. 1

p-ti'ntT. "hen us< d this nr.t>rifl on prinarily nic< •’*<d

r ts. The rice develop d f very ch-r-ct ristic syepton, osj. ci..lly
of tk liv r -d With the cu t- rinl thus obtri’vd v.r wux * blr. to isolate
• virus strnin or a v rrl virus str-ins, which could continuously bi
cultiv-'t d on nicn. Th* r.fiirrl rrt ri* 1 by Frefossor Buchlr in Frei¬
burg or th t received through th* pathology din gnosis, h'. • ’s /.bl tc
check our findings, lr isolated r. virulent virus th«-ro, ’bout tho
ch'rrct ristics cf which, I will s».y only s brl fly '.s peasibl*, The.
aain thing w-s t: t its flit-rabid iilt r, which leaves no b-.ct-.rin
through .Vid i. th reus* 1 it onuses charset riatic eh - ngns in th • liv«.r,
kidnys *r-d lunga -nd ;ns r.'d visibl oicroacopcly for the first
tlan by

Unfortun'tcly beenus* of th. * r»r conditio* .this work could not
be publish-d, but it is now print* d. lb virus ci«n br built in nice
jtd .lso in tissue cultures r.rd which is icrort'.nt for our conaidor-
'tlo, it is pr.nmtly li-rit.d on the cnc h*nd like the t .hus g ra
in th* focus >d on th- oth r h*nd Ilk e“py lung disena-n through
th* disch-rg* of th t ns s*aos _-f tranaoisnion. hi vr. to consider
th’ disuasu , also th. origin of tranSBisslci. Th ..nglieh tom would
fc "-irbemn". For th - npidNsiologicnl signifiennen thrt was n v ry
loo rtv<t fact. That «santinlly ccv rs th h*-phtitis work nr performed
in k." i* stitutc.

. : oi bf:r T go on to th* llog.d xp* rlc* nts, Professor, n ; ro-
lici'i-.ry question; th* Prosecution h s sube^tt* d a nuc&«.r of documents
rai>t»iinif th-.t h-patitis is a vry ir.ngrcus l-_s-s which brings
about c»soc of 'sth on hur. n boinra; con you t'll us sannthiug about
th*t kr:.fesscr?

I sa not r clinician nysdf. .is f'-r 's I »;now free liV-mturs,

c» - v* r, -id free reports of -xp ri nco c- i-. d in this war, I can say

th t p.s for ts corteiity, the dia-Asn ia not langnrcus, I : ou of no

d.f«init 1 * ith, hewnv* r, epidnsdc .laundic hf s gnat oni i«d logical

significant, 3in-> the cendit ens und r w.- icr it is trr.nseiT.trd r--

3431


1? ,-ua-j 47* !VSr-3^Hia«hafi<Voo Schcn)

Court 5c. 1

r£ re t less onlODitu »fc hcvn sum in the troops, that in . ny units
50 ^ tc 60S of th*- nn contracted hepatitis which, of course, grootly
diminished .ht effectiveness of the troops, ’.'a hove also strnn that tlB
disease is carri-d heat .ml that aft- r reccv ry th- garc iv-acinsd a
considerable p riod fo tioo in the body, so thrt when the disoaso
is ov-.rcocc, th<j idividual is a carri* r of th- oisrast-. and can tocor.*.
dnn^'.rtuo. It 'S v ry important to dot rxln. th*; sorted of trans¬
mission of hepatitis. I have already said that certain conclusions
could be irawn frer. our uoxi:. Tor ‘xanplc, th t th* virus is found
in the int stints shew that the possibility of trfns.*aisslon through
f. ces and s-utum «:ist-d. For this r-ason alon« th-re was n gr*..at nd
tc find not only tr* causo of tho disoasc, but also to clarify tho
r.^thod of transmission.

. >o far you hav* told us, Professor, th t your work covon.-d tho
causi» of the disaso »*.d also the method of transmission. Or. this
1'ttrr point, th- prosecution h-s ailegnd that you mi Ur. Uchoo in
the. concentr tion ce.-.ps Jnchsmhausi’n n«i l’atxveil'r carri-d nut
octrir.onts , first t.. discov' r th- onus s of jau'dico and second to
iot- nain*; the cuthod of tmnrmission and thirdly to tost a vaccine.

The prosecution has alleged that oxp.rijfit&l subjects in th*.so
two camps ->n i.fctod with epidemic J-undicn; wh?t have you to say
'bout that?

A. I can only say that no such nxp- rin- * ts w- r porfona* d by n« cr
at ny instituti.n .ith- r in Vatowoll-r cr S?chsehrus n.

'. "itn ss, U prove thnir ass* rti ,n, the Prosecution h'S submitted
ssontially only on* docin* nt. This is an affidavit by l»r. J-ud<.lf
rrndt. It is in document book B uu p»go 1 of th t*:xt. I should liko
to cuct' numb r fivr on p* ge 2, It is deexm* nt IIo. 371, Exhibit
I sh'll (jacto Kt . 5*

"Or. Ebgmn Obnratabsarzt and ccisultant in hygi- n for th*

Imftwffs, had also been Icing n.s- arch «rfc rt tho ’: tz.-dl r Ccnmn-

tm.ticn Tamp in cn effort to discov r an ff-stive i- nccul-ti.n

C-432


IB June 47-H-S^-3-4-y. f-ten(Vcn Sc hen)

Court ?o. 1

•gainst "pi'ifdc Jaundice. As I recall, W. Dotanen eolL'bcratrxl
with Hr _ ;'n in 19 LU, at the Concentration ^;-ao Knrtwnil r and
• rmrisf -ts on involuntary huci i n b* ngs w r*' conducted which r suited
in deaths."

"it-. 33 , will you pi* •- 3n coro-it on this statcnnnt of -d - . Brandt?


9423


June 1&-K-2-—l^Deniele (lat. Von S choen)
Court So. 1


1 I have the document here with this statement end testiaony of Dr.
3rslt. I suet say ifar.t from the beginning to the end thlo statement
i« untrue. Tcither I nor Dr. Dohmen, nor both of us together, ever
performed nay huacc experiments vith hepatitis ecideaicr; I never
terfernei any such transmission experiments.

\ V itness, the "ribunai remembers that vfaen Dr, Brandt was axccined
rs a vitness he withdrew his affidavit on this p-.lnt. He srtd thr.t he
hrd no knowledge of his own on the subject, that he vr.e merely express¬
ing resumptions and conclusions.

X next question. Professor. Did you collaborate with Dr. Dohmen in
the field of hepatitis epidemic*?

X To; there was never any collaboration with Dr. Dohnen in this field.

% But Dr. Dohnen wr.s in Strasbourg once. V hat wrs the rerson for
this visit?

A Dr. Dohmen is an old student of nine. In I 03 U he workod in tho
Heich Health Office and X ac^idnted hin with the nothods of virus
reosareh. In Hrnbur,: he continued to work on virus diseases, and it
is no doubt primarily on the basis of his own experience re a military
doctor duriru- the vrr thrt he bocroe interested in the cauee-Of
hepatitis cpidenict. Ke worked at the Hoburt Koch Institute in this
field. I need not into thrt work any further.

In the years l?hc— 19 U* he dolivered lectures on vrrioue occasions ,

: bolWve at the Vienna. Medical Society md also ct the nsotinyu of
the consulting physicians of the V ehrmacht, which have been ner.tloned
here. I noticed various differences, and I wrs inter*sted in clarify¬
ing these differences. Cn the occasion of a preliminary discussion
in Kohenlyeben at the meeting of the consulting physicians in Key of
‘ 0 ^. I repeatedly expressed my opinion to other coller.-ues, my re-;ret
that I had not been able to consult with Dr. Dohmen on this importr-nt
subject, that ve hrd been vorfcln,- in whrt I mirht call sploadid isolfa-
' 3a » Eternal tbBt that he had made considerable rivancts in the

field of iavteti r y.tia.- the causes, but experience end precaition mode it

9434


(Xat. Yon gchoea)

C curt So. 1

,M: edrleable to ae to eonpere our findings. Thereupon I issued an
invitation to Dr. Do hues to cone to Strasbourg so th«t ia the lahjr/*-
• or 7 tfc ere ve could discuss rad clarify the debatable points.

^ Professor, will you please look at docunent rC- 299 , Sxhibit 1Q01
It is la Docunent 3ook Till, on page 3. It is a letter fron you dated
12 June I 9 UU to Ceaerelarst Professor Dr. Schreibcr, Academy of
KiUtery Kedicine, 3erlin. You write that through this letter you
ere renewing your invitation to Ste.bsa.rst Dr. Dohnen. I rssuae that
this is the invitation you were Just nentloning; is that ri.*tj
A I have this letter here. Professor Schreibcr wns the docisive
personality in epliesic research at that tine. I sent the invitation
to Dr. Dohnen in writing through hin. I was repae.tin.: ® invitation
which I hr.d already given orally.

^ Sow, before Z go on to Dr. Poteen's visit, I have two more
<piestlons on this Docusent r0-2?9. You write in the second paragraph
that Professor Schreiber should dve you several thousand nice, or
obtain then for you. Can you pler.se tell us why you ncod«d so seny
alee?

A X hrvo rlready said before. v>*n X wrs sperkinr of Professor
Schroedcr't and Dr. 3cckcrwr r eyoen.:'s visit, that our miarl oxoeriaent
virk required large nunbere of aniaais. Our owr. breodlng aatcrial was
not adequate; I had to look around to see where I could get rx.in/lo,
in this case for hepatitis, in order to trensfer the ar.terlnl froa
the patients rad to breed the isolated virus by roincl passage, to
keep the virus strains riive.

I Sow reother -joint on this docunent. In the lrst prregrroh you
enquire whether hepatitis research will be carried on in the future
out of funds of the 2 eich 3esearch Council or whether you are to n 6 k
for further funds free the Kedicrl Chief of the Luftwaffe. Did you
-eter obtrfn aoney free the Chief of the Kcdicrl Service of the Luft¬
waffe for hepatitis research?

A To, I never obtfted funds free the Chief of the Xcdicol Sendee of

tne Luftwaffe. The research work wrs carried out on the besis of an

9425


June 15-K-2Z-—?-Srnieis (1st. "on Schoen)
C sort ?o. 1


*sslrn=ent and with funds supplied !$• the 2elch 2eseerch Council.

I Sow, to TO hack to Dr. Dolcea 1 * visit, did Sr. So'—en ecturliy
cone to visit you In Strasbourg!

^ Yes, Sr. Soteen ere* about the aiddle of July, 19^. ?=>r n few
i,»ys. Ve discussed our aalupl experlnent work and other laboratory
work.

q Cn this occasion did you visit the concentration ccsp Batsweiler
together with Sr. Sohnen, witness:

A So. I no sure thrt Sr. Sateen vrs never in Setzveller. I wrs
never there with his, rnd if ht had boon there alone I rc rare I would
he.ve h»rd of it.

q. Professor, on this occreion, or perteps Inter, did Sr. Soteer. sry
that he had carried out exocrlntnts In the field of epidenie Jrundic©
in the concentration cnr? Sachsinfcrusea?

A I can not recenhor Sr. Dohsen spcniln.* to ce of the plronin/: ox*
execution of such a huaan cxperlaont in Sachsenhru sen.

q, Z hen I should like to show you e prosecution docuaent, fc-yin -rau
Docuaent Book Till, on pr^t 3. X* *-» Docuacnt JB-01C, Prosecution
Szhihlt 137. It is r letter froc the Belchsnrxt SS rnd Polioc, si.jncd
by Dr. Crawltx, dated 1 Judy . I do not intend to rend this
letter, but it sr7s thrt in order to prosotc virue research It is
necessary to tmnsftr the virus to huarn beings rnd that Sohnen is
to errry out these things in the concentrrtion crop Sechscnhruscn.

So you know anything pbout thie letter or this incident?

A I have this letter before ae. I do not know this docur.ent and
1 do not know anything rbout the whole incident,

<; You Just srld, witness, that hepatitis enidealer is not a danger¬
ous disease, but Crrwltt, in this docuaent, says thrt el.ht persons
eondesm«d to de-th rre to b<- used ns exoerlacntr.l subjects be cm so
it is to be expected thrt there will be cases of death. Tou have
already expressed your opinion on this ->oint, but I want you to

t onion*. on this rcsorticn of Sr. Orrvitt 1 .

5436


June lS-K-Bt-fe-VSnlcla (1st. Toe Sehoen)

Court To. 1

A this assertion of Dr. Orawitx* herely proves quite clearly that
there could not h.-*e bees ray expert Involved in the setter, cad not
Dr. Do been either, bcc/use r-y doctor who ever worked with hepatitis
icnov* thr.t the coatr^ioa Is not so great that, on the basis of
experinents on sight persons, one era obtain r valuable result. And
es I said before, I nover hc*rd of ray deaths froc hepatitis, so that
ss far es aortal! ty is concerned I nust call it e norwdmgerouo disease.

Q Ton have already said. Professor, that when Dobnen visited you In
Strasbourg you did net visit the concentration casp ITatzveiltr and
certainly did not perfora any hoaan experinents. I understood you
correctly, did X notl

A Tes, that is true. X shall repeat that there wrs no visit together
with Dohcsn to Xatsweiler, and that no huore expcrlsonts were perforaed
there.


IS Jun o -tf -P I>-5—1-F - Id t (Int. vor. Sc bon)
Co^rt So* I, Case I


Q.~ I must correct =7 sc If on Itocuaent So. 010. I said the letter
■ra dat^d the first of July 1942, but it is really the first of June,

190. Ko» to go bock to the human experlsents. The Tribunal will ruie<a-
ber the witness idith Schmidt testified for the Prosecution here. She
testified on the 9th of January 1947, Paco 1378 of the English r-cord.

She said that in the field of hepatitis epidemics only Laboratory work
■as carried out, but no human experiments. According to this t-stinony
no huaan expcrl.acr.ts wore pcrfor&ed, at least not by you. And you kn-w
nothing nbo<rt oth-r ocoplo performing such experiments. But the Prose¬
cution acid that such experiments were pLanned, and submitted a naaixr
of docuzerts. First of all, will you please tell us your own knowledgo
ol thu pLarmliY of huacn atp^rin-nts in this connection.

A.- First I should like to repeat that I personally know nothing
of any human e.\ crimonts with hepatitis cpidcaica in Geraany. 1 know,
hrwevor, that uxocrimental transmission of hcottitis to human beanos
= per formed in er.glr.nd as well as in America. It i 8 true that after

th. -ninal ox>ri-jcnts w.ro coapleted it hr.s to be tested on huoan beings,
how the trwwier of hepatitis upideoicc really occurs. «s far as I ro-
aeaber, this work was first discuss.d in th. h-patitis mooting at
Sr.slnu in 1944. This act ting was in June, 1944, und-r Genera larzt Prof.

Dr. Schreiber, I have already said that he was in charge of epidemic
research in the Reich Research Council. In this resp.ct I should like
to say ho was the leading man in this field. «t this acting the he pa¬
rtis working in >ractice consisted of the int.rnist Prof. Kalk, th-n
Pathologist, Prof. Buechler in rr-iburg, the surgeon. Prof. Zugsclstcrt
“ Strasbourg, end myself. This collaboration of four medical officers
of the Luftwaffe was purely a coincidence. The 5th colleague- in what
- have heard was r conspiracy of the Luftwaffe was Prof. St-in in
Strasbourg, who was an Oberst-arzt in the -nay and a consulting internist
In the army. Following this hepatitis .xetinr, a correspondence ;:ent

" r - n-twecn Gutzeit, rho was the consulting internits of the Chief of

9436


13 J unc-M-FIp-5-2-Falit (Int. von Sc her.)

Court No. I, Case I

the Ms died Service of tto Arcy at the tin. m d who, .-.8 c clinician,
ciin ; leading position in hepatitis research, betw-en Gutzoit end
zysolf.

Q.- ltn.es, "ill you please look nt Docusu-r.t 8 Page 11, Prosocu-
tion Dscuaont ND-124, Exhibit 193. It is a letter with the head "con¬
sulting internist to the Chief of the Arqy Medical Service, 24 June,
1944." It is sisn-xi by Oborstarzt Gutzeit. The letter is addressed to
you. I nsaese that you ere thinking of this letter when you think of
correspond unco botnoon Gut to it and yourself. Is that so?

A.- This letter of the 24th of Juno 1944 from the consulting in¬
ternist of the ArS f IMiozlI Inspector I hove before ac. This is tho
Utter I m . Httsalt refers to his stctuz.nt ct tho hepotitis aootix*
in Breslau and h. hnd said thet tlx. final nreof of tto mturc of tho

•

g-ra, tho various types of virus which had been found, was not final,
and ttet for this purpose one had first to tmnsf.r th. virus, since
only ir. this -y could the -tiology and tho .vthod of trnnsaission bo
clarified. Ho also snia that he would <rJn. tho proper.-1 ions for such
fmzn exp-rlz-nts. ;.t th- tin- h. did not know my d-t“ils specifically
‘bout the nature of the ^xpurincr.tal subject.

Q.- "'ell, .‘Vofesaor when you rec-ivod this letter you probably
wondered what axpwrlxontel subjects -r. Gutz-lt was thinking of. Can
i*ou tell us w-ht Ilnd of exp-rinental subjects you think JJr. Gutzeit had
in rind?

I knew that rrof. Gutzeit hnd an opportunity to obtain tho sol¬
diers or students or xabers of his clinic lor these cxjxriaents. I do
not know wtvtn.r Prof. Gutz-.it actually <rrri d out e^poria-nts of this
nature. In 317 c-.s.. Dr. Lofnon, when he visited a. in Str-sbourg in
July 1944 told 30 nothing -bout It.

Q.- Ken, nitn-ss, -oout tout own ola.ning - ft.r —

IHE P?.SSEzS7: It so-rss to au it would be- profitable- if you Mould

confine the oxnzinntion of this witness zero r#.-rrly to th*. chzr.ros

9439


IB Junc-tf-FL- 5 - 3 -Fcldt (Int. von Scbon)

Court Ko. I, Case I

a* Last these . ..ioois, or sase ol thea. h-vc board a groat deal
-sout Other I don't know whrt tho -witness is »bout to toatl •'y

to, but so far tboro b.-s been co=«r?tiVely little concerning these
i-.f-nd-nts. Can't you briar out such actU-ra that wc d-aire dir ctly
concerning th. issue before th. Tribunal?

- . TI??: I'-, President, that is because tho Prosecution hr a not
jplained or. tut the chargee against Schroder -r.d SeCJcer-Frwyseng arc
y.s.d. I do non which docua.nta -re lnt ndod to be uced a^einat
Schrocd-r n.l _c r*. li Hr. Hardy ill explain tho individual

iocaunts t;..» Pert-in to tho charge -;- .nst ay cli.r.t, I vill be p.lad
to lliit -iy . r.urutioo tc that JUnt. It ia not ly fault. It is bo-
*" u *' tho ?r ..-a r .17- co un: fco t:«c

t hleh u^rw aubedtted, It ur.e not a-id uhnt they
»ur. int-ndoc to ->rov-, nd, <hich ia sor. leoortont, -v.-inst ho -, th-y
inte n ded to b. proof. Pur heps :j. for ;• cm bolp a. or t ooint.

OWv-rvia-, I ui ht odt soa. docu-vnt vhich could possibly affect on.
of ay cli nta.

TK, F?.m XL . T: I a of th. opinion th t th.r. ia sose truth in vhr.t
c>ena l a ys. c.\i the rroawcutor clarify -ny 0! theft, •artUrh?

• Uil T* I har*. no coorunt in this roaroct. Tour Honor. I think t;>

record "nd t;.- d 000-1, nt aperk for theas-ives. I sight r at, Tour Ho-
nor > 1 a . :t oe .raitUo to ace t „ not. 2 that -r. for. .on ia tes¬

tifying front

7 M- Pu-Lii T: for vhat ourpose? .h-t is your re-son for that re¬
peat, corns-1?

. ?: ~ e :3. I teva 0 few line th t the r.ot.s hi ia tratifying

fr-a could co.u.un c -.stipes end -nsw-.ra exactly the arak. -3 th- notoa
-* Owe before u on i.ia pocivn, -nd I would like to cocrr. th.i, t-r.ly
* * r ay o-r. satisf action, to coapnr- f .a to see if these -aw.rs v_ro
11 =r-d«i out or- /.and.

• • - -- • -t-.r of course, r. President i: t auc! - • --

S44C


13 v T u».-fc-FL-5-4-Feiit (In’.. von Sc her.)

Court fo. I, Case I

plic-ted scionti.ic sublet I could not present without very careful
pr-oamtion. Del-nsa -itness-s ns well as Prosecution witnc.ss.3 have
sr'e rct-s before .me. Actually he*, it is cb;v, I think, is t'.v. o:si-
r_!3 of the c'-i.ns, counsel. I don't think th: t hr. Hardy has the right
to s-e tho notes. He C'.n aur-ly ob>jct to th- wita.-ss r-ndinn, he

has not done so.

THZ FRiSE-.T: If Couns-l for tjw Pros.cutior. is of the opinion
that these not-s * hich the witrv-ss is usin? Iron the stand w-re ir~parod
by sooebedy els- or cour.: cross oxmln» hta on thr.t aettor.

•£• F«.SY: I visl: to call to the attrition of th. Tribunal thzt
these notes n«re cbviaisiy prepared by d-.ensc counsel. They contain
th» questions *nd proposed nsw-rs to etch question r.^ they -x nuib-r-
ed up into the un r-ds. If the Tribunal d-air.s to look nt th-a, they
see for *-.._ic-lv -3 .-rr-cisely Just utr.t I '.a referring to. I have no
d-sir. to cross e-aain- on then, tut they or- sore than notes -ihich \to
■jo- in Aneric-n L w to n-lresn the recollection of a witness. They .aro
pr.cis. rx' cont.in n sufficient onount in tl»ea so th-.t the -nr.i.r on
th. notes could the .-.r.sw-r to the question. *nd if the IVibun-.l looks
th-a 07. r closely vo could disoenoe *ith th- entir- test loony of Harden
*.r.d introduce t.vjc- notes. If Hr.r.gen will .vAntain thr.t each answer
t.v.rein will be the answer he will iv- :roj the st.and. It -ill cave ta.o
days of tLac. The notes will -;o in as *. cocuxnt or an affidavit.

Trie PRdSIv— T: I was wondering why this testiaony could .x>t be ,iven
in the fora o:‘ an affidavit. The Tribunal will now be in recess for c.
few air.utes.

(A r-CeS 5 was


9441


is Juna-K-KJ-7-l-Leescr (3rcvn)

Court I

S 2 Z Potsosb in the conrtrooc vill please tJce their

■eats. Ins Tribunal is again in session.

THZ P7JSIBZS7: C cans el Ufqr proceed.

D 2 . SiHJH (C ounsel for Defendant Hoven)* Hr. President, I
request the Tribunal to rule that the Defendant Hoven ney recoin ab¬
sent frsn this afternoon's session, in order to prtyaro his defense.

TED PESSIDiST: Qjon request of counsel for tho defendant Hoven,
the defendant Hoven nay be excused froa attoadauco before tho Tribunal
this afternoon, in order that he nay consult vita his eounsol and pre-
paro his dofonse.

S3, HCnV»Sb’(Counsel for Defendant Pokonv)* Hr. President, I
ask that the defendant Pokorny be excused frau tomorrow's sossion, for
the sice reason.

E£Z PSZSZSBTTi On request of cou$sol for tho defendant Pokorny,
the d of©ndont Pokorny ssy bo excusod free attendance boforo tho Tribu¬
nal during tomorrow*s ftooslon, in order that defendant nay consult
with his counsel in preparation for his dofonso.

Counsel nay proccod.

H3. E^ST* Tour Honor, I do not bellevo that tho Tribunal hus
ruled on objection to tho use of thceo notos on tho part of tho
vitnoss, Hc.gen.

DH. TIP?: Hr. Prosidont, I emphatically object to this repli¬
cation by tho prosecutor. You vill recall that tho witnesses for tho
prosecution hod a largo aueber of notos before than, as, for instnnoo
Professor Ivy, and had to have thee before them 2 hodofenso node no
objections to the way in which tho prosocution handled its vitnoesoc
end I t_ink there is no rale that the prosocutlcn vhould alow tho wit¬
ness to have notes before bin.

TED PaasnfflKTs I Will address a question to tho witness.

3T 2HS P3SBID32J

5 , . 1 fitr.ee s, did 7 CU prepare tho answora to the questions

9442


18 J^<v-C-7-3-fce S3 er (frown)

Court X

vhicu you w*re consulting in ensveriag the questions CE kcd you, or
ild scneaac vise prepare those notes?

i. ie answers could hare been prepared by no ono else bo-
cause 2, alone, know abcut these things. Primarily these are scien¬
tific and uedicol problems of a specialized nature.

$ . Witness. Just answer the questions Did you preparo those
answers or did scuoone else preparo tnea?

i. wore all prepared by uysolf.

mnjflSi Objection is orcrrulod. Oounsol nay procood.
K2. HojCJTz Tour Honor, thon it is ay understanding that the
Prosecution dooe not hare the right to soo the note# free which to
defendant in testifying?

?2lSIDarT: Hot at this tine. On cross-exoalnation couhsol
uxor propound questions which ::ay roquro tho notes to bo shown to tho
Prosocutlon.

®^JT* V ould it be posslblo to giro tho intorprotoro a
copy of the questions and snswors? 2 ho interpretation uight bo con¬
siderably lessened and nado easier if thay used such answers and
questions.

D3. IXPPs Mr, President, that would noon tat I would bo obli^-
od to stick to the questions and ensvoro as they a re down horo.

2HZ?r2S2D2ffj I think it is necessary. Ve will procood as wo
hare boon doing heretofore.

3T 3H. IIPPi

V of tor tie interruption ve shall continue in our

%

discussion of tho last aentioned dccuaent. Ho, I will turn to a now
document. Pleaso toko a look at HO-125, 2shibit 194 of tho ?rosocn>-
ticn, -.iiich is a lotter free you to Prof. Dr. Gutxeit. In the first
Paragraph, regarding the fact that Herr Dahnen will ccce, I quotes «Vb
shaU then review all camon Eoptitis questions and perhaps also sot

up the ojporinents together. 1 I asscie that the Prosecution iaaodiato-

9443


IS Juao-K-i'.J-7-S-Lo■ ■ er (Srcvn)

CcUft I

ly construed the word ■experiments - as a criminal humx being expori-
nent and 2 want to know what experiments you woro thirJcirg of horo.

Ju 2hia lotter of 26 June 1944 I hare before mo in which, la
tho first paragraph, exporimonts or® aonticncd. V hat was meant bore
was animal experiments and fticroseoplc examination*, but under no
circumstances exportmoats on human beings. In connection with Dr.
Dohmon*s visit to me there was no thought of any such exporinonto.

-hat can be scon free the sent scateaco, where I write: *1 c.nr.ot
at prosont deflnitoly answer ycur inquiry about human exporimonts .•

\m Vltness, you wrlto furthor in tho sxo document, that you
horo already arranged with Harr Xalk, that you should undortako that
typo of experiment with your notorial, k'ow, when you uso this word
•matorial*, what do you moan? Did you noun human notorial— oxporinoa-
tcl subjooto, in other words?

Jtm Our natorials woro tho virus for Hepatitis which wo luu-
latod. Shis phrusoclogy has nothing to do with kuaA cxporinontol
notorial.

^ . V itnoss, con you say free this docuaont how you 'mould
imagine that thoeo transmission axp<.riconte would tako pluco, of
which thoro is mention hero?

Jl iftor wo hod isolated tho virus and had seno notion of how
tho transmission was to toko piano, it was, of courso, nocussray to
closo tho circlo and to undortako to clarify tho transmission to human
being*. On various occasions Professor Hold and I had discuosod tho
progress of tho work and siaco both of us, ho at a clinician and I as
am epidemiologist, woro interested in clarifying this Important quota¬
tion, wo also discussed it. Sowovor, asl said, this was only a dis¬
cussion, vithout cur arriving at any specific plans. V o woro a^roed
that wo should carry out such experiments but that only voluntoors
would come into question os experimental subjects and they would bo

I-orsons of seme intelligence, so that they could observe andikt down in

9444


13 Juno-i «• s or (Brown)

Ccurt I


wrltis^ their own subjective reaction. Vo voro thlhd^, prianrily,
of students free tho V ehmacht, nseedy free tho boh mash t Student
companion. Koroovur, clinical eaelnation and observation was ab~
so lately necessary and this a^ain could only be.carried out in a
clinic, or a hospital. Thus, as I have said, wo wero thinking of
students as the persons who cost appropriately not all thoso neces¬
sary pro-rcqulsitcs.

S •

Q. How, wltnoss, tho naxt docuacnt in the stee document book,
PO14, iiibit 195 of tho Prosocutlon, Document H>-126. It is a
lottor frou you to Iclk, of tho 27th of Juno 1944. It is tddrescod
to Oborstarst Prof. Dr. lalk with tho Chi of of tho Luftwaffe Kodioal
Sorvicos, Sonlow. lou said this no raise that your collaboration with
Zalk, Buochlor and Zu*schwcrt, hod no connection with tho bolonline
to tho L uftwnffe; but frou tho addross of this lottor tho Prosecu¬
tion will Indubitably oondudo, since it roods *Vith tho Chief of tho
Ittftvoffo Nodical 8 orvioos* that you turnod to Kr. Kalk bocauoo ho
woo a uoeber of this offico. Can you ploaso axp lain this?


9445


18 J nn»4HU ft-l-Lo«iar (3royn)
Court I


It sir* simple setter to exploit. Zr-is lotter has nothing
to do with Kail's official position as consulting specialist for
internal diseases. Zollc tad been bonbed out in 3erlin, end since I
vos in E t res a bur £ I did not know vhere be lived but I did know that ho
had ca offico with the Chief t the Luftwaffe hodical Soxricos and that
by addressing the lotter to bin thoro X would stand the best chanco
of contacting bin. That is why I wrote to that oldrosc.

Sow, witness, la this lettor youtrltof ■! =nst procood
as soon as pooslblo with the experiments on human beings. Thoso
experiments, of courso, should bo carriod out in Strasoburg or in ito
vicinity.* Horo the Prosocution exceptionally espial nod this contonco,
on 9 June 1946, on pogo 786 of the transcript, and mid that this
reforonco to tho vicinity of Strassburg refers of coureo to tho cor>-
contration cemp Satzwoilor. Sow lot do ask you-dld you actually in¬
tend to carry out those experiments in the Hutxwoilor concentration
coipt

S uch work os tho prosocution understand* undor huuan
oxporiuonts I novor carriod out in a concontration c^ip and nay I go
into this at grector length whon wo aro discussing typhus, or I
have already mid, wi wore thinking primarily of voluntoocs, ®d for tho
location vfcoro this clinical observation was to bu carriod out, wc
thought of the clinics or hospitals in Strassburg or thoso In Prcibuit:
or In Eoidolborg, all of which woro immediately accessible. This also
had tho advoat <£0 the*, in all those 3 plocos thcro wore student cav
panics of tho Vohxriacht.

ft . In the next sontcnco you says “Could you, in your official
position, take the necessary s tops to obtain tho required experimental
subjects? ■ Sow why did you turn specifically to Professor Kclk in
this?

L. Kelt, as a consulting specialist for internal die oases for

the Kcdicnl Services of the Luftwaffe, v as in touch with the chief

9446


18 7ca»4Ue£-&-a-Losser (rrown)

Coart I

physicians of all left waff o a ad other nilitao* hospitals so that the
quoation of eecccnodating the volunteer experimental subjects cou’.d be
neat easily solved by hie. It was ny view that the use of student \
fret: student companies would, « a basic principle, first have to bo
improved by the Chief of the Medical Servico and since Zallc was living
noar hie, it is obvious that I requested hia to obtain this epprovd.
.Lot ue also point out that the Chief of the Kedioel Sorvico of tho
luftwaffo had no fu n da m ental oiieiviofi about using volunteer students
for our work, as can be soon from a subsequent docrco, which poxuito
protoctivo vaccination with a now vacclno against influonja and uhich
spocifios that volunteer s tudents could be used for such experiments.

Q, . Professor, you know the general conditions vhich accord¬
ing to tho prevailed principles of nodical othlos regarding huuan
experiments should procode experiments on hunan beings . Vero thooo
proroquisitos not in your Hepatitis ccperinents, in yoxir-opinion,
nmol;', wore o^orinonts on oalnals carried out boforo they woro
carried out on huccn beings?

1. C ounsel, I *w>poao that I nay rogard this as a rathor
gonoral quostion, slnco wo did not carry out such proliuin.iry oj£jo>-
inonts in tho aattor of Eopatitie; Z op oho about thoso proroquleltoo
droady in another court; they would have been wot hero too; first
tho conslusion of animal export..onto until all possibilities woro
oxhnuntod, then laboratory experiments, so for as thoso could bo
carriod out, and finally, of courao, also experiments on ourselvos
would have boon carried out. Zn all such worfc, not only In testis
Taccinos but dso in examining nouns of contagion, eto., wo followed
this basic prtnciplo; Z cay point out that Z infoctod myself with
Various typed of virous, for exmplo, with u virus which produces cn
in flmnation of tho brain, and Z fool seriously ill an c consequonco.
dso, I t cstod cn influenza virus on myself and received m inflowm-

tion of the lung. Thon,there woro the vaccines we tested on ourcelvo-

9447


18 ^o-JWvJ-^-W^ssor (3rnVn)

Court I

influensc oad new smallpox vaccines and also tho typhus vaccines. I
a: nest Ionia* all this briefly so that you can see what a uattcr of
oocroo It wa; with us that experiments on ourselves should bo enrriod
out. I cf course not trying to set up socc ,-oneral postuelto that
ovory plysinien or research scientist should follow the scco policy.

^ . Shea professor, this wqs a natter of planning and coaai-
derations. May I ask »d:oth*r this plan was ovor put into effect aa
far as you woro concerned?

Am I have already said sovoral tines that this was si r>ly a
uattor of planning and discussion or considerations, and tlut such
contagion cuporlnonts woro not carried out ny us. I can only anowor
this question in the negative, all rosoarch in this field was intor-
ruptod by tho offocts of tho w Q r.

In tho field of Hepatitis did you roooivo a rcoourch ai>-

V

signaent freu tho Medical Inspoctorato, witness?

Am I did not rocoive a rosoarch assignatnt froc tho Modical
Inspoctor.to but let no point out Docuuont 137, Sxhibit Ho.189, Bo. 6,
wkoro a research assigneont fret; tho Boich Rosoarch Council is nontion-
od.


IS Jun-H-'3-9-I-?V±»au Clnt. Brown)

Court Xe. !•

Q You said already that your collaboration with Relic,

Baocrror rad Zuckschwurt was independent of your aeobership in the
Luftwaffe. Lot so ask you in addition whether this joint work was
ordered in any 'ray, directed or supervised by the Medical Inspector¬
ate of tha Luftwaffo7

A h'o, there was no direction or supervision by tho chief of
the Ladieal Inspectorate. This was a purely research assignaont that
wrs entirely independent of our other official or military dutios.

Q Did you ever discuss with Professor Schroeder thusc plans
or tho prerequisites that you have just doserib-d?

A I roally can't recall dotails any more. It is possible
that wo had such discussions but, as I said, aft.r three or four years
I cannot recall tto details.

q Did you talk those matters ov-r with Dr. Bockcr-^roynong?

A At aost I discussed acquiring of animals for cxpcrlnonts
which greatly intorostod Bcckor-Froysong bccauho of his work with tho
chief of tho 'fcdical Inspectorate,

Q I understood you to say, witness, that in July I9hh you
Onoo spoke with Bockor-Frcysong, and I e*s\no that tho possibility
you have just mentioned also rofors to that conversation.

A Yes, that is correct; Bockcr-Froysong and I had only ono
real conversation; namely, on tho occasion of his visit to Strasbourg
in July 19UL.

q I turn now to tho next point; nanoly, tho yollc* fever qx-
porimnts. This charge in tho indict, ent has been withdrawn already
in regard to Bockor-Freysong by tho prosocution, but Schrooder i3 ac¬
cused of having taken a part in tho yallow-fovor oxper:x»-nts that aro
said to have taker, place in tho Buctenwald at Litzweilur concentration
coops. This charge is based by tho prosecution on the fact mentioned
in tho indictment that 3cbreeder oust havo kr.cwro of these experiments
because of his position in tho Ihdicol Inspectorate of tho Luftwaffe.

I

Without going into tha oxjxrinonts, may I ask you to describe your


9U.9


18 Jur>-!> 3-9-2-Friaeau (Iat. 3:-own)

Court Ko. I.

pc pars and work in the field of yellow fovor vary briefly.

A In thi field of yellow fever I ucr'.uxi in two da i feront
periods; th» first tias in 1931 to 1933 in the yellow fever laboratory
in the International Health 3-T.rt ont of tho lochufoiler In- tituto in
N-w York whither I had b_en called as a special associate to breed
yellow fev^r virus; as I have said for the first tiro 1 euccc.c-od in
brooding this culture and or. thu basis of this a vaccino against yollow
fever was d-volopod which is usod ovorywboro Li the world nenr and which
undoubtedly his already sav^d the lives of innun-raole persons.

During the war the Robort-Roch Institute of which I was tho.i
a rusher rucoivod froa tto navy an asrignajnt to uanufacturo yellow
fe7cx vaccino — that nust hnv. boon in th, year :$U. — and tho -res¬
ident of tho institute passed this assign, cr.t on tc ay laboratory;
namely, the assigmont to jrcduco vaccino. Tho vaccino was manufactured
according ts tho 1 rd ruthod. I nood not go into that.

Q Profossor, whore did you got tho virus that was'uood to
manufacture this vaccino?

A I had takon tho nat.rini with as free tho Rockefeller

Institute in Row York when I left and had kept tho viral alivo through-

*

out those yoara bccius,. sciontific work in this field was enormously
valuablo. This was an .already autatod and attenuated virus which was
no longer pathogenic for human boir.'s but was still Yury jotho^nic
for aninala -..ad for this reason it was chornet::risod by mb as highly
virulor.t. I m saying this as an asido to clarify tho question of
pathogenic and virulent again. Tho navy, bofaro introducing this vac-
cir^, wished to havo its tolerability tested as far as hum~r. beings
weru concerned and there w«rc negotiations on the subject with the
president of tho Robert-Koch Instituto and for tho navy, with .-lotton-
orzt Grawitz; and the Latter nogotiatod nth tho Rational Horlth Off ico
and a sanatorium was made available by tha 'balth Office rhero tho r.c-
cinations took place.

Q Tfitnoss, what was tho rare of the s anitaria n ?

949>


18 B-9-3-rrijsau (Int, Sr errs)

Cofart He. I.

A In Berlin, naned Vittennu.

q I wej rsaind the Tri-tinal that tho ritnass Edith f.ch:a±dt
sentiorod the so vaccinations in .'it conau when sh- testified hero. Sho
•ild ttet oxpori-unts on hisaar. t-in-s war- c“-Tried out with th« yellow
fev_r vaociin dt the insane asylum /ittonau.

A Wo us ad about ten persons. Ho received tho servos frcai
the asyl* to tost this inaunixing vacciiv- and first of ‘.11 we usod
the so-<allod aouso test which firit ashes sure whether the iix-.unica-
tion is canploto so that oxperi.iai.t3 of that typo on hunan boings need
not than bo oarri-jd out. This U a process usod throughout tho *.!t>rld.

KAIXY: Your Honor, it do-sn't so-n to do that all this
v-stlnony on tho background of Virus, yellow jaundice ind yoUcm fever
is nocossary. Tho question her. is whether or not oxperinonts woro
conducted, ne alio god in tho iidlctajnt, for yellow fervor rcisonrchj
were thurv ever any hunnn b^irj oxporisonta conducted; if so, w-ro
they conducted on concentratios ccap iaar-tos without th-ir consent;
w..ro any pinna avio for such onduct of oxporinents; war- tho plans
carriod cut; if so, did tho research orders iasuo from tho ltodioal In¬
spector'to or froa tho Roich Air ministry; or whore did thoy issuo
free? It 33-rs to bo fivu cr six questions along tint lino would
cover tho entire fiold. This Tribunal has hoard cor.sidor.ablo ovidonco
concerning tto of fact of various fev-ro and so forth. Tho Witness is
hero to testify as to whether or not these axperiaants wore conducted
-and whether or not ttey originated frcsi th. of^lcu of Schrocd-r or
Bcckcr-Ereysong, I dor.*t s«c the neoossity for covering all these
oth-r i nc i d ent al or iccaU-rial natters.

Tr2 irCSHEJfT: IS* witn.ss testified that tho cxporir.onts
acre carriod out in Berlin. Ho rill await tho next question by dofenso
counsel*

D?.. “I??: If tho jrcsocution has its witnesses testify that
hip-an being oxporiaants w-r- carried ut Without ariing clear rho was

responsible for than, I then think Jr# Hardy should not be surprised if

9451


18 Juiv-JI— 3—9-5-1-riieva (Int. Srovn)
Court Sc. I.


he i'da'i and who gave hin the orders. I don't soo the necessity for
going into ill those particular .v.tt.rs ihat ar_ so far afield, he
hava hod export witnesses testify on oich field, hie hav.. got Outzeit
and 5chudt and various witnesses for lose and the defendant ?.oso hln-
s. If • Hov, the point is whether or not this witness can testify as to
the fact that Schrecdor gave hia ardori to conduct oxp-rirents or
whether Schrccd-r gav c hia tho research assignrcr.t or whether 5oc!ccr-
Freycong gavo hin the research assign-xsnt ,nd wore the cxparlaints
conducted or. husan baings in a concentration caap, as all*, god in tho
indictment, upen p-cplu without their consent. 1 don't soe tho neces¬
sity for continually asking the prosecution to give a full closing
stiteeunt at this tino. It is obvious if ho has documents to discuss
thr.t is porfoctly iiaterLal and tho significar.ca of various docuji»nt3
I can soe that — but I can't soo tho antirinlity of this ithor tvii-
orco.


9-53


Court Sc. 1

13 Ju a 47-4t-lC-l-SH>»-Cook (3rown)


TIP?: If I understand vhat Kr. Hardy Bali, he said that the
experiments in iitteneu ere not being used as a charge against Dr.

Scr-rcoder, hit if the experiments in concentration cares are part of the
charge against Kr. Schroeder then I can conclude that these e'-oorisents
in the Vittenau insane asylum are not included in the charges. Pcrhaos
I nisunderstood hr. Hardy, fcit in eny case that seems to be the meaning
of his statement. Sow, if x hare understood him correctly, and Hr. Hardy
can answer that with yes or no, then I can drop all of the oucetione of
the experiments in Vittenau. I don't know why he doeen't say so.

CHZ PHLSDlSTi So I understand that counsel for the ptjsecutlon
has stated the alleged experiments on inmates of those insane esyluas
■re not included in the charge against any of the defendants.

:C. HARZ? i Your Honor, ! hare participated in drafting the indict¬
ment and Z can't recall any language to that effect.

JU35Z SarBISG: Kr. Hardy, do you now make the statement they are
not included within it?

XH. EAH2JY* Yee, Your Honor.

SR. *I?P: -het i« vhat X wanted to hoar.

3Y DR. TIPP:

%• All right, then we may drop tho oueetion in regard to Vlttor.au,
and lot me ask you further, doctor, you said that tho Robert Hoch Insti¬
tute reccivod tho assignment free the Kory to produce yellow fevor vac¬
cine. Howcvor, there are a number of documents hero showing that you
also received a research assignment from the Kedlcal Insnoc-crate, a
research assignment in the field of yellow fever. This is in Document
Book So. 12, and please turn to pege 80 in the English and 79 in the
German text. Here is Document SC-137, Prosecution Exhibit 189. This le
a letter to the Rector of tho University cf Strassbourg of tho 7th of
October, 1843. This document contains the research assignments that you
received in detail. Witness, this contains your rosearch assignments and
it includes one from the medical Inspectorate of the Luftwaffe. Do you
have this document beforo ycu7


9L5U


Court So.l

18 Jon 47-K-lC-2-£3i-Ccok (3rovn)


A. Yes, I do.

v ' 111 you please tell us v*^t the subject of this research
ass freest va«J

A. jhis research assignment vas an assignment to produce yellow
furor vaccine. This vas an assignment made by the nedicel Inspectorate
as can be seen by the letters where they refer to the Haloh Air Ministry,
Goosander In Chief of the Luft*«ffe, and Medical Inspectorate.

Q, Bow ycu said that the assignment vas given to the F.obert Koch
Eyglonic Institute and Hygienic Institute of the University of Stras¬
bourg, and to you as a somber of these tv© Institutes, is that not so7

A. Yoe, that is correct; that goes bade to Dr. Hose'r ruggertion.
The first assignment did not affect ae directly but only the Bobert Koch
Institute, but since It concerned the eanufacturc of vacclno it was
reforred to laboratory. Cfcly after I coved to Strasebourg did I
rscelve an independent asslgnaent of my own, or at least ay institute
did, and this was extended once or twice up to the yoar 1943, when Africa
was lost, and at this tine the Medical Insoectorate roeucsted no not to
produco any acre vaccine but to keep all of the apoaratus avsilablo that
was necessary for such production, so that production could bo storted
again lator at any time.

Q. Vltr-.sc, dll you cv^r use human bolngs to test your yellow
fever vaccines that you ©roduccd, within the ccanlng of the lndictaont,
or, and this Is the second ouestion, did you ever receive any orders free
the nodical Inspectorate of the Luftwaffe to carry out such orotriaontsT

A. Bo, but I should like to say the following: The eroerlnor.ts of
the 6ort that the orosecutioa charges, nenoly, that first l vaccination
Is carried out and then the person is injected with pathogenic gore# to
test tho efficacy of the vaccination, such eirarinents c«ild not hrve
been carried cn by us at all because we had no virus that "cs cathogenic
for human beings nor did vt need to, because, as I h^ve already said, v i>
had a very reliable croceduro for testing the immunising effects of a
vaccine, namely, in this aforementioned nouse test.

9455


Court So. 1

15 Jos 47-k-lC-c-iax-Cook (Brown)

V "he Tribunal will reacaber that the statement Professor Eeager.
Just aade is substantiated by Professor oeric^ on the 17th of Aoril,

1947, before this Tribunal on cage 6047 of the Xoglish transcript. Sow,
in conclusion I vent to cut to you a few sore documents on these yollov
fever erocrisacts that the prosecution put in evidonce and froo which
they draw the conclusion that you did carry out an Inal evperisents, and
that the Medical Inspectorate of the Luft*effs was in sooc way involvod
in this. Please, vitness, in this connection taka e lock et Document
Book 12, page 109, Docusent 304, Inhibit 315. This is a letter froc you
of the 22nd of October, 1942, to the hedical Inspectorate of tho Luft¬
waffe in 3erlln. The subject roads; Bcscerch orders, file note 55, aad
so forth. Vc have tried to find in this lotter soae indication of
buaan experimentation but v« have not succoeded. Porhape you, as an
export in this satter, can be of assistance to us.

A. This is ^ lettor of 22 October.

Q, Yos, 22 Cctobur.

A. I regret being obliged to say that I cannot understand how any
such construction could be put on this letter. Any s-owciallst can ooo
frea this application that this is an application for laboratory oqulp-
sent, or for the cquipaont necessary for kvcciw; exporiscr.tel animals.

The inclosurcs to tho lettor nro very clearly directions for uso for tho
ycllov fever vaccine vhon it is being used for the troops. Such direc¬
tions are included in vaccines in all of the countries of tho world.

That ttoio ere instructions for doctors with the troops can be seen froa
the lect sentenco in tho docunont vhcro it says, "The vacri:. tlor. is not
followed by skin reaction, general syactoas are usually absent, occacion-
ally mild headaches or physical discccfort occur. Any aorc serious
reactions, especially manifestations of Jeundico or albualnc, must bo
reported Immediately to the .tedicel Inspectorate of the Luftwaffe through
official channels, mentioning Operation 'Juaber."

JTov only a nodical officer could ur_ official channels so it is

obviously absurd to suppose that this could have referred to human evoeri-

9456


Court So. 1

18 Jua 47-K-*lC-4~i£X-Cook (Brown)


It mb simply instructions for use. I think ever:-' 1 - here in
this rcor. has at one tine or enother is his Ufa been vaccinated and aa
everyone knev* the reaction is very slight, Mother it is yellow fever
or smallpox, end very little attention hee been paid to this natter,
although nillions of such vaccinations have been carried out through the
vhole vorld.

Q. Sow, the next document, Professor, osge 112, in the document
book, Document SC-297, inhibit 216. It is a letter with the letterhead
of the Minister of Aviation and the High Ccemead of tho Air Porcc, Borlin,
14 July 1943. It is addressed to you; tho subject is "Eoseerch Order
for Yellow 7ovcr Vaccine". You have already eeid that tho manufacture
of yellow fuvur vaccine was stoppod after the loos of Africa and I wish
to ask you vfcethsr that stopping had anything to do with this document
here?

A. Yos, this letter of the 14th of July asks tho Hedi-rl Inspector¬
ate of the Luftwaffe to etop further production of yollow {over voccino,
etc., tut it is rooussted to koep the existing oculpnont as I havu al¬
ready said. In other words, this lottcr concorns Itself crcluslvoly with
tho production or the Interruption of the production of yellow fovor vne-
cino. This letter certainly has nothing to do with human o too rimentation.

Q. Sow, witness, the next document cbout yollow fovor exoorincr.to
is on page 112. It is Document 10-129, inhibit 217. This is a letter
from the Eigh Ccemand of the Savy on the 7th of Kerch, 1944, to you.

Hero mention is at do of a Japanese Cbcrstabscrzt who should get yollow
fever samples from Strasbourg. Sow, this word, tho Sermon word "Probe",
translated "samples", hes an oaincus ring in this trial. Will you toll
us Just tat kind of yellow fever viruo wp in question here and whother
it has anything to do with tho planning of experiments on hurt a beings.

9L57


June carr&v (Xnt. S-oVtJ

C -•art ro. 1


A I have before ne the letter of 7 March 19 UU, it that the ore you
are talking about!

3 Tee.

1 I he Jrparr 3 r arry vee probably isterested in the production of
yellcv fever vaceine because the war in the Tar Seat was being carried
on in an are* where yellow fever was present. Ve know that the yellow
fever noaqultoea live there but didn't know such about the extent of
the sickness. Eowever, during the war, the widespread transportation
spread the disease. A*- any rate, I asause that the Japanese arny
wn^ted to produce thie yellow fever vaccine for that reason c. d a
Jeornese Oberatabcarst cene to Gsrsany to get such a fellow fever
vaccine virus strain. This event also eeeas to havo boon construed
as sosetking crlninal. I ho worl virus samples that was centioned
hors and which has probably led to this sisunderstandirg. The Oeraan
words "Virus Proben" are not to be translated as yellow fevor virus
experisents or tests, but a» yellow fever virus saaples. In other
vcrds, the Gersan words "Virus Proben" nem bu\U enounts of the
vaccine virus such as Institutes send to each other through* -.1 the
whole world or which aro sent to mthorlticc for then to work on then
md do whatever work they want to do. This then io tho turning-over
of a virus strain and has absolutely nothing to do with exporinonte of
any sort.

^ Pow, witness, the concluding qicstion in this natter. V ith whon
did you negotiete in the Kedleal Inspectorate regarding the production
of this vaccine!

A P ogotirtions about this production ossifpment were carried on,

first of all, with the hygiene referents. That was Str.bsnxst Atncr,

then the depertcent chief. Or. Xrrtlus, and then, of course £ so with

the consulting hygienist. Professor Bose, who, -per force, interested

hinself in these prebless, particularly.

•*

N Old you ever talk about this production with Professor Schroeder!

A IT-, In the entire period during which the vrccine was being produced

9A58


June lS-;^-3£-LI-2-E|irT©v (ir.t. 3rovn}

C ourt Do. 1

I didn't even «ee or speak with Schroeder at ell.

^ Sid 7cu talk with 3eckeiw?reyseng about this?

A So, neither in person nor in writing. At that tiae, es I hare
already said, I didn't know 3ecker-7reyseng p.t all.

^ I turn now to the next count, nicely, the experiaente with T.A.3.
Choi .-vaccine a. Ye don't know when these were alleged to have been
carried out either a»i the only docunent that wo have in this
connection.

\S. EAB3T (Interrupting t Perdon ne, Tour Eonor, I didn't get the
translation of what the next subject will be.

37 33. TIPPl

^ I es turning to the experiaente with T.A.3. Choi.- vaccines. I
have already said that I don't know of such experlcente nor do I know
how the Prosecution coses to know of such exjariaeats. I he only
docusont suhattted in this natter is one that again bears your nose.

It is in Socuaent Book 12, on page 120, Docunent !JO-130, Ixhibit 319-
the letterhead is •Oberstabsarxt Prof. Dr. B. Hangon. Consulting
Physicirn to the Air Ileet Physielm H eich - Strasbourg, U August I 9 UU.
S ubjectj He port on the S uccessss with T.A.B. Choi. - Va-clnes."

Yitnsss, pler.se tell us whether this is a report on a large scale
husan expericent with this T Jl.B. C hoi.- Vacdnos."

X !? his.is sy letter of U A uaust l°Wi. As can be seen froc the
letterhead, this is a report that I put out in ny capacity as Con¬
sulting Hygienist for the A ir Porce Physician, Haich, regarding
troop doctors' exierioeces with a vaccine that, rt that tict, hod
recently been introduced into the Vchr-_acht, nrnely, r: costined
vaccine isnunislng against typhoid, paratyphoid and cholera, which
was sanufaetured ?y vrrious Otraan flrrs. This report vr.s typic'l of
the work of the consulting hygienist, not only for the Air Torce
physicians, but for all other doctors in the rray. A 11 troop
doctors' experience reports in the field of hygiene reached at. I was

to evaluate whr.t I read there and su=arise it and sub®it it to the

9459


June 1 S-^-3£-U-3-Za rr«w (l-t. Prawn)

C curt li. 1

Air ?oree Physician and he. In turn. passed it on to the Kedicrl
Inspectorate if he felt the*, soccthing of scientific icportaace vnt
contained in one of these report*. I do not believe thrt «y other
construction can be put on this report - nacely, that it is an e»-
oerience report - if one rends throu£: it carefully rnd objectively.

I have never seen a report of rx Aserlcen «ny doctor in the field of
hygiene, tut I can't icrgine thrt it differs in rny essential
particular* frox this report. Of huarn experisents or of crininal
huarn experisents there is certainly no indlcr.tlon in this report. 7 his
is sisply a cospilrtion of the experiences that troop doctors had.

^ row. Professor.  are cosing to the lrst rnd perhaps the nost
decisive count of thelndictsent - nascly. the typhus sxperisonts, as
the Prosecution calls thee. Prof eeeor Schroeder rnd Professor 3ccker^-
Preyseng ore charged with reeponeibillty for such typhus experiments.
7hers are two groups of th«e, according to the Prosecution. On the-oso
hand , those carried on rt Buehenwrld concentration eacp by Or. Dln*>-
Schuler *nd to r leaser extent by the defendant Or. Eoven. X h°
second group art the alleged typhue experioente that you carried out
in the Oatsvciltr concentration crap. Before vc turn to the individual
experisonte. Profes-or, plonse tell the Tribunal what the hazards of
typhus ware during the vrr, eepocirlly in the years 1 ol *3. 1°^ rnd
I 9 U 5 when this hazard beerse ccutc? Describe it only to the extent
neeeeocry in order to sake your work understrcdcble.

A I shell try to be brief, but in order to understand this whole
problem one sust bo given eooe general inforartion. Typhus is a very
serious infectious dlaerse which is included in international sedical
circles asong the dleersee * ich «re of general danger rnd is con¬
sequently subject to international control. In cases of such hazard¬
ous and dangerous diseases, every state felt the coral obligation to
do everything to prevent the outbreak of an epidecic because it is very
difficult, once the epidtsio has broken out, to coebet it ond elicinnte

it. This point of view was eabr.-ced, of course, not only by the govern-

9 1 <*>


vane l&-H-2E-ll~U-Eerrov (In*.. 3rovn)
C oar*, To. 1


sect off lei Pis, but also by the responsible rad interested scientists • r.
red physicians bee-use we all, of course, knew fcov prodigious the
draper of tyohus is, not only for waging the w«r but rl so for the
ciTillen poj*ii»tion of the entire world. Typhus is cot only o war
epideaie, but once it hrs taken root in the eonatzy It is also a per.ee-
tlas epidemic vfcich it is enorrously difficult to conbr.t.

£2 PHTSIS'Ti Counsel, the “ribusrl is <j&Ue nwrre tint typhus io
a very dangerous disease that is r. gre»t aenaee to husans and that it
wns r Mncee to Oernrcy during the last vnr, gre-'t danger. I don't
think it it necessary to elaborate that ognia. Ve have heard it froc
several. It's not denied.

3T 33. TUP I

% v itnees, you heard the Tribunal's wish. In the opinion of tho
Tribunal, the typhus danger for 0emrny has rtcady been sufficiently
proved. Please eo on to the subject Itself now. Perhaps you could
spe-k of the usual preventive seasures that are ueed reel net typhus,
particularly as concerns vaccines.

A To prevent typhus there are, ir. general, two procedures. One is
what I night crll the aechanleal procedure, and the other the biologic¬
al procedure. In tho aecfcnalcr.l procedure we rro concerned with
conbatting the lice - I shall not & into that - fcit in the biological
procedure v a are interested in r protective varciae. There are various
vnccir.es available, rad no- to get down to the drux of the natter, I
uust say that the typhus vnccines th"t nrc ar.de froa dead typhus
virus pse not absolute protection against the diesa.se. They nay lead
to e slider fore of the disease , but the infection itself is not
prevented. Dead typhus vaccine, in oth r words, fca.s no absolute
nati-infectious effect, which, however, is the scin point of any


vaccine.


13 June t7-«W-I-aacy(3rcm)

Court Vc, 1

dev lop -1 • llvin? vncdnfl, not on th* rasis of cur own expej*-
irnccs ?nrt r?s-nrch, rut we arte uao cf exp*lienees cf oti - r . -Id

li>.< to ccnticn prixurUy the woric of the French Typhus jv. search, Plane,
Bsltasar, And assistants, Lngrwr, and I/tceilo. 1h~i vaeci/wtin* a
vnooir. r.u't r used tht gives antd-inffictious protection, an-* in
gen* ml in thr naar of virus .dis*As»3 successful vaccination is also
achieved cniy with living virus. L-.t c. nenticn thi •tXAapl«<s cf sonll-
r*ox, i'durnxn rnd yellow fever. In all thsso cashs thnae am vaccines
aado fres a living virus, but it is true that thin virus has boon
aatniod, that it Is •« longer prthcrnic r ..;a. Xt*»

pathogenic "hr rr.cteri.' tics havo b- • n suppressed a*4 rn.vt disappeared,
but h virus r tains its anti-infncticus efficacy. Ihis change is
ncooaplic* 1 in to *cn;s, «dtb< r by passing th virus through on
vvir. 1 , — this ucuaUy sffnets changes in the virus attMounting it,
and sex-tiutsc »f facts nutation* in the virus Attenuating it , and scae-
tir. ^ affects sutrtion n Um vliun. I don't havo to go into that,
that would inks up too cuch tl&i.

"1. :r * und* rat nd you u;rrctly, witn as, you roll on n scientist
* to rt.Vi.lcp a vaccine frox living virus, in other uords free, a nen-
rtthogenie vino, but nevrih-li-ss had the anti-genie offoci, nfti'.ly
th* off ct cf prot*cting tfcw vaccin t d p-rsen against fitting thu
dianr.s lnt- - by infocticn, is that sc?

A. Tec, that is corr ct.

f. ’ .w, *itn< S8,»ehody is reproaching y-u for having produced vaccines,
cut it is said you tistd the Mffurhiv-nnss cf your vaccines in n
c neentratien ennp. tr." prosecution -rll-d th-s*. virulent, v.i you
ay that they «« nco-pnthoguaic. At any rott- that is tiw .<ny I under—
-cod th < r nronch of th* Froseeutio*-, rut first before . »<. g: into
i>‘, witness, will you plnnso tell th*. court how did it ■ v-r happen
- a, yr in s ^ ttrr caa late. =: t ct rith the o
ccncvr>trati-n cr.-.p :>.tzw«il*«?


/


19 Jut ,7-*-T -12-2-ilOov< Ere.-;)

Court ?fe. 1

A. Tfc it«T«lopc* at of typhus throughout the war wr.s th* t typhus
was aot a purely w r epidasdc, but bn-aus of the =.-.py transports,
"•i-lt-ry, civilian v»d prisoner of war, And others typhus had boa®
brought into Ot-nrnj, too, •.sp.-ci-Ily in th* cv.rcrowad creeps, end
l*ck of oanlt»r7 installations, thorn was ccnsiderabl- d ng-r froo
typhus, p»rticulrly whro people ass«efcl*d who case froa the ^!ast. I
h' vr only to sty tjvt in th- Auschwitz coop, for but .also

In nr-n7 cth .r prison- r crcics i- th -nst th- n had already been
'xtrnslv. eptdocids, Ty hus pr* aaod furth r - furt or into Gerarny.

•r. Res has already told you hew enny eases of typhus there* w-rt, and
this shows wb‘t constituted th* .pr-at da ng-r. hv ry closed eoncunity
like r. erp is r. gr-r.t source if .a,- r in itself, of tha danger of
typhus , est o- l; th- i-ng'-r 1 ’n «: 11 erdc within the <vunp, but also
on epidesic that spmrds to t -'ding civ popul tion. Uost

cf tho ooneimtrr tion a nap in^.tes >,.r- ur.*d to w-,rr. outside the carap
In foctcrias, n- 1 th-ae coc* into contact with th*. civilian popul'toe,
ra you can • ••sily s*e t • l-n^ r or contagion. !"ow, in bri' f, tho ccap
Goosander, a.: th c-i.p doctor in the ccurcu of th> spring of 1943
turned to so tc osk i- whether they cculd have ny ussistnnen in
ccrh ting this dwigsr.

O. ‘itnar-;, * pr* par tory qu-sti-n, first, did you have .any
ir nn'ction with th- S3, wit:, the c« nccntr’ticn carp, r-s such?

A. I h • no conn ction with th- 3S r wit!, the concentration Mops;
or with any office in charge of th*c.

\ Hew coc.fi the cc-.p cocsrad-r and the coop physician of the
Sat?veil r concentration cn-p turned specific.*»lly to you?

A. Aj dir* ctcr of the rygordc Institute I had r. rrther ir.rge

s-.hm cf activity in Alsace, a-c of course it ms k-cwn in th> con-

cnntrrtion 'asps, too th-.t =y offices were n Stmssbcurg. For this

re sen th carp tu nel tc =e for the ; cl- it mated in any BOtt'tf*,

including th- chaining ’ vnccin-s and :• * Ip in disinfection of the c*np,

?4c3

I* 4 AS «


13 Jun~ z.7-t-35-U-3-M»Icy<=rc»n)
Court So. 1


■* l - 80 ^ortfc, eattars which jxrfc'ps we shell tarn to later.

. tu o.y then th?t tfci cnap turn d to you b-causa you worn
thn hypi-nict in the Alsatian district round Sinssbouig?

A. 7h t is correct.

i. You said also thf.t th*-- c-aran-.rr or -lector rak-d for
’our assistance?

A. 7 a, th-r via on obvious thing for hla to do, b«caus«* 1 was
right th*r in Gtmsabourg.

0. You -Id further th-1 it .. s roughly : a the spring of 190
that th sc request for -osistnnen vnr*. a/. *. to you; wna there nn
noi ir-lc i. th c-r.p already, *t th ttise, or why did th.y think
they n®did your h-lp?

A. t th-t tir. th'r*- vr . . - ' .vie in th- c»jp,, hut thn

gwrnl cpi-bn.> 0 logic 1 1 situation w.s such that an outbnek of
typhus w.-s -.xp^rt-d it any ruc/nt, nsp.ci'lly cincn transpertn wore
continually ccri-r f—r th- • -.at which » r<i inT'.:H with lien, rnl
puopl- wr.c w r-. air-"tv infuoUd with typhus, -'id otlrr cnnps in th«
n- lahhcrt - * 1 wr. nad rlr-Ady had thnir fir it or s- e of typhus.

1. Frol-saor. wh-.t n 'jo »id you hrv* n/rilrbln to h-lp th on

•

C'.-.ps ;h; ici-n-: r 1- • iv :t you:self,firat of all your vrecint-s?

A. h-vc '-In -.dr nin th t th-re ;r>. vr-ileus vnccin-is avallnbl«;
kj i- frort virus, "d -tiro thos*. fren living - nd ntt'-nuatod

viru3. ~vtting virus .-t that tin w.-s 7 ry difficult. 7h«; supnrior
officers aicply could not rok- U-* *-ff-.ctivu vr.ccinos "V.-ilrhl«t, and
in erd-r to carry out any plnns nil sorts of d«cm«;3 and ordnra existed
in '- nr ny far th.* jl.-nninr of systematic r- coin tion should th.-. vangtr
of typhus --rim,

'I. Sew, witn-’s, you have dercrib. d ycur work in th- field cf
vaccine pr.-'ucticn, nr.--ly th-t of : rrducim a livi-*,- apr.thogunic
virus, -"id you b-pin


•.•AoA


la' Jtine 47-14-«K-ia-la-Halo7-(3rovn)

C0U3I I

% •

this developing and working on your own initiative, or
.11 some other agency refer the problem to you?

Living typhus virus was being manufactured in
foreign countries at th .t Use In groat quantity, partic¬
ularly lr. Franco whore they bad had a great deal of exper¬
ience with such living virus. I have already mentioned
Blanc, Saltaaar, Looollo and Legror, and during the war
protective vaccines ware carriod out *'lth suoh living
virus in Korth .tfrlca. There had already boon millions of
such v .cclnatlons, and of course this permitted experience
to be g•thered. The fact that the Frenoh, who saw this
great danger also a'w the necessity of suoh large scxle
vaccines, nd they h d also had a few f itallties. .vs I
said, wo had to use a virus strain for tho30 vacclnetlous
which v»s It Is true w\o alive and still p-.thogenlc for
anlsal 8 . In ether words, a virulent virus which the pat¬
hogenic effect of which on human beings was suppressed
to a lirge extent and that Is the easenoo of all living
vaccine manufacture, and It must occupy thj c-ntrol
position In our ccr.aldjr .tlons here. You bring about auoh
aut .tlon only by passing the virus through animals, and
every specialist knows when the virus Is passed through
animals It is attenuated there more than by being cultured
or bred, ror instanc-, In chlchen yolks or by being preserv¬
ed In a vacouua, or at very low temperatures and only some¬
what attenuated In strain.

Q. fitness, you still haven't answered ny question
fully whether you carried out his wor> on your own
Initiative or on the basis oi* an order, directive or

.assignment that came to you from elsewhere?

, 9^65


13 J„ne •i7-^-.^-i2-2»-Maloy«(Brovn)
COURT I


«*• In developing this living typhus vaccine —

TrU P.RSdlDili?: Vitness, you can answer that question
in a very few words. Just answer the qiestion propounded
to you by your counsel.

... (continued) This was a research assignment, as
I just said, there was no allltiry directive or directive.

’fitness, you have already described ho*-' research
assignments were distributed this norning, and told us
that in general-the assignment was made on the application
of a soljr.tlat for suofc an assignment; now what was the
case here, did you work on this problem first ar.d then
receive an assignment or wa3 therj already an assignment
in existence and then you began to verr.?

... Oh, I see. ^11 this worh was done entirely on
my ovr. initiative, ar.d then I saw to it ttyat I got the
necessary research assignment so that I could have the
necessar;* funds for the vorfc from the Reich R 0 ooarch
Council, and then from the .ledlcal Chief of the Luftwaffe.
Th*.t la where I had my assignment from.

HR. KdRjf: Your Honor, before we adjourn may I
inquire from the counsel how long the examination will
continue, and hew long other defer.so counsels will taho
in their examination of the witness Haagon.

OR, II??: I have already said I will need roughly
a day and a half. 7e have olreaiy eliminated some of the
questions, I don't Rnow if I can finish this Afternoon,
but I 3hall not need so much time tomorrow morning, ’/hat
time my other colleagues will need I cannot tell you.

XR. ‘l-URDY: Do I understand Dr. Tips is going to

*

tohe the rest of the day, lr. spite of the fact that we
sit until 5 o'clock?


9466


lo June 47-M-^s-i3_-«a-HAl 0 y-(Brovn)

COURT I

33. II??: I shall use all of this day, yes.

7K£ ?R3SI02*T: Do any otho • defense counsel desire
-o examine thl6 ’'ltness while he is on the stand?

DR. 7I?P: Dr. Holte Just tells ne that he will need
a quart_r of an hour md colleague Kr auss for Rostock
fifteen alnutos.

33. FRITZ* Ar. President, I cannot say definitely
now how long I shall neod bocaueo I do not know how a any
of the questions I intend to put to the witness will be
cade unnecessary by D r . Tlpp's examination.

TH£ ?RJ3IB2iT: The Tribunal Is only asking for
an estlaate.

33. FRITZ: One hour.

7HJ PR23IDC..7: Jounaol, during the noon recess will
you Instruct your witness to answer your questions directly
and sloply without expostulating on natters while sclentl-

s

flc and lnportant the Tribunal has already beon advised.
Kindly Instruct hln and to explain hi® to answer these
questions.

T.-.o Tribunal will now be in recess until 1:^0

(Thereupon the noon reoess was takon.)


Court 1 /f^ 7

June lS-A-13-l-HD-keehen-Von5choen.

AFTERNOON SESSION.

(The hearing reconvened at 1330 hours, 19 June 1947.)
THE HaRSHaL: The Tribunal Is again In session.

'.ME PRESIDENT: Counsel nay proceed.

ZUOZN HaaSEK - Resumed
DIRECT EXaHINaTICK (Continued)

31 DR. 71??:

... Professor, before the recess ;ou 6 old that you
began y. .*.r work in tnc field of typhus on your own inltative
-nd that in the c urso of tals work y u attained research
assignments from the her leal Inspector of the Luftwaffo ns
well r.a Shs Helens Roasorch Counsel; now could I ask you
if in your connections m«*do before the various assignments
woro Issued, were - ny details given -ab ut the work which
"uU planned to carry ut or the work which ye- already had
carried -ut?

A. No dot"11c woro given, of course, merely the
problem as such was dealt with,

Q. You have "Irocdy descrlb d to the Tribunal your
work .n this problem. It was to find a vreoine produced
fr ..i living virus, a virus n > longer p^th g^nlo for human
beings which huwevor cont ir.ed the qualities of the virus.

a. Yes that Is true. Cur work wes limited to the
development of a living vaccine and this work was based
on tne groat experiences of foreign offices, especially the
French scientific rlnno; the technical side was always
carrlcd-outnn ~nimol experiments.

^" -hotf,yttneas, id 7 u succeed In finding a vaccine
of- the^type de^<$Svlbed?

A. Yes we did succeed from a so-called curlne typhus

' Cnj

virus strain*,’ fr. a rat typhus we developed such c vaccine.

The voc^iln^Vas brought about thr.ugh animal experiment’s
y' iiu>*


Court 1

June 18^A-l^-2-H3-:«ehan- VonSchoen.

through cultivation la chlcxen eggs and thirdly tnr uch
c. r.servotl .n procedura.

’>a tr.ls vaccine then tested for Its effectiveness
-nd if bo, how?

'fas, the veccine was tested for Its effect:, venose,
first, f course, by enlcpl experiments f-r its Immunizing
qurlltloe. After tnis quality n-d b~en proven the first
v.-ccln-tl r.s were ur.dert her. in order l. test tne effective¬
ness -r.d t. e t ler nce on ..umnn beings. Tnle w^s dene on
v 1 .intears.

*'nero did u get these volunteers, Professor?
a . First ,Z '•ll I served myself, tnen the members of
:• natltute rnd number ef students .f the university.

C. . jV will y u please toll t o parpuSo of tr.oeo
-r-orl.nontfl?

A. *’hen una h r s produced c new v’oclne .»ne mast tost
r t only its effectiveness, but '•Is- Ito t lornblUty.

*• t err. be d ne .ly .n numnn oelr.gs, rnimrl experiments
~.ro not s.ifflclent. At .*» certnlr. stage it ^lw^ys bocc-nos
neoess.-r; t try it .n huarn beings.

%. In these vccln-'U-r.s on mombwrs of the Institute
-*r.d students, y u tested the tolerability -f the v-cclno;

- o lm.miring effoot of tne v/*ccin>, If I ur.aerst. .d you
oorreot, ouuld not be proven by those experiments?

«. l*es, the Immunizing effect cm rlso be dot rained.
R- needs mar ly to mnio the ..’ell-Falix oactlon, which
nrs been mentioned in t. is trial, t -he sure In the fc-dy
coruo there ere protective e dies ag-inst the typhus .,-rm.

~ is test, I mar.ti.r. tnls because mlstrhos n-v_ eaen m-ee
h^ve, is used not -nly t- rf diagnose the disopse, but r.lso
c c -cm Its Immunity reaction to find the protective

-.tilss vaccination.


Court 1

Juno 13—1-13- 3- HD-Ke ehan - Von 5ch o e n .

i. Ye will coae trci to that Inter, witness. Sow
when did you achieve your ale, wnen did yo have a vaccine
f the tyoe described ar.d when did you develop It 60 far
that It could be used?

A. In the spring of 1943.

C. *rd when was this v-cclne first used actually or.
a l^rge scale or when wrs It first used at all?

A. The first vaccinations were carried out In May
of 1943 In the Sohlrceck Internment cesp, which belonged
to the Katzveiler concentration cacp. The vaccinations
woro performed on porsons in special danger.

n. This morning, witness, you mentioned the roquost
of r crop doot r of the Natzwcllar Concentration Camp end
Schlrnook w-s r. • doubt under him; cay I ?ei whether thcoe
ochlraeck v-cclnatlons 'go brek to the requoct of tho camp
physician?

A. I do not quite undorst-r.d your question.

rleaso toll ao whether the vaccln~tl ns porfonaei
tn Sohlrmock orlglnr.t-d with the request of tho camp
physiol an?

Yoe, 3chlroock end Nntzwellor belong together, ily
vacoln-tlon3 there ware In c >nnecti r. with ell the work


13 Jore-A-PI^lA-i-Caniels (Ir.t. von Schon)

Court Bo. I, Case I

Q.- Then you usee this vaccine for the first tiae in :iay of 1943
in Schirsek. Bob aany oersor.s did you vaccinate?

A.- r tent .“-eight persons were vaccinated altogether.

•- 73U •’« an7 inlluer.ee on the selection of these persons;

that is, were these oersor.s selected by you, or who selected then?

A.- I did net .eve any direct influence on the selection of these
persons, only to twit extent that I told the ca=p adsir.istrator and
the caap doctor t.iat ve could only vaccinate oeo-ile who were in a .lore
or less "ood condition of health, since if this were not the case it
would not correspond to our Geraan vaccinetion laws. To that extent I
did have soae itulue.xe.

Tl* soloctian was aide according to the ^oir.t of vie-.i that arsons
in speeiaL oarer oi typhus were reLocted, arsons who were in the so-
called east block ol the esio. Sew tr-najorts were always ooniujr roa
the East, lice infected, lor the aost cart, so that one cool-’ count on
a ccnoiderable t~ hus dar,-ir. In this virt of tlx caap the dinger 'fas
greater than i.* the oerts of tr.e caap <rx ro there were Gorcar.s cm Al¬
satians who :i not cone free tho East.

Q.- You seif, -Titr.eoo, the persons '.ere selected fro;a tho roup of
rlMosrs r of contractin', t-rhus. You .lust oentioned

the east bloc:.*, Can you tell us whet nationality these persons - ore?

A.- Ao fez as I car. ranter they uore ol various natiOna s.
There wore c quito nurher of then who sx>ke Ger-.tr., so that one could
talk t.osa well.

witness, I should like to ssk you to describe how these
vaccinations wors carried cut. Perhaps a srelininary question first, "hy
did ycu vacci.Ata only 2 £ persons? ..hy die you not vaccinate aLl the in¬
mates of the cans there?

A.- At -irst I coulc ur» uc* the race ne only in ver s ail »Rti-
ties. !iy laboratory ties were very Halted, If I hod ante: to
wccinale a hole osu I would have ha: have a orodostion workshop.

f .“71


18 June-A-rL-Ii.-2-Daniela (lot* von Scho;:)


Court o. I,* Case I

That is the reason nr.7 we vaccinated only a snail number of oeoolo.

Q,- lew, Pxc sssor, please describe how the vaccinations wore en¬
forced.

A.- Vaccinations were xrforaed on 2Z oersons altogether, in se¬
veral -roups. I*:e first vaccination nas of eight persons. They were
given one in'ecoion of 0.5 CC of the vaccine into the breast mscle
in tha customary arnsr. The secern *roup consisted of 20 persons, di¬
vided into two suo-jroups of ten each. The xirst group — let's call

•

this Group A — as also given 0.5 CC of the vaccine intra-uiscularly.
Sub-grcup 3, the Last ton persona, were first ;ivcn a vaccination of
0.5 CC of a li.Ua typhus vaccine orocucod in the Robert Koch Insti¬
tute. Then, ci nt -/s later, there was a second vaccination with a li¬
ving vaceii.j, a 0.5, intraa scularl;*. I should like to say tat the

•

first vaccination ..it:, tbs killed vaedr.o, vfcioh I nave .lust aantionad,
was performed for t*.»o reasons: l irst of all, in order to be able to
coooare arr. see vhoth.jr this preliminary enanlnation produced aero
antibodies; «.r., in the second pL.ec, .-.-.other this oreliairary ororii-
nation with ill« voccino .;i ht cause any reaction cr ai ht rcc’uoo
the reactions o: the living rr. rcir.o.

At tbs sa.u ti:o, I carried out orotcctivo vaccinations on >or»onc
outside of the c» cr. volunteers. They -lore o^ain psrforsed in such
a wa- that tr.ort or; three injections this tic: the first, 0.25,
the second 3.25, and the third injection 0.5 CC, of the living voccine.

s,.- Tne covrt -rill bo wsocciaLi i, witness, in tho reac¬

tions of the cersons after this vaccination. Can ycu toll us that!

A.- Ir. - , hrso. ; rouo of eiy.ht persons who were riven 0.5 CC of
the livirv, vaccine only once, three had a reaction that was a short
fever of ovur 3? eyrees. The rest of the ersons, h: <cver, hac to
reaction.


In the second roup, anon- the; tan ersons in -roup A there •:cro
. i :. . • - tore vei


18 Ju.-w-A-FL-ii.-3-D^iio La (Ir.t. von Cchon)

Cixrt Ko. I, Case I

Sjoptoas, ir. sous cases only a headache and dejection. Typical syaotcos
of typhus, brain sysntces or vessel srzntozs, arri other sysptoos,
not apoear in cny case.

The sana as true of the third jroup. Hero again there was no
reaction.

a

I nust say In this conrwction that I used a vaccine :roduccd ren
rat typhus virus. I eust point that out because later, in Katr:oilor,

I use ; tha class:.c opidesic or lous- t rphus virus vaccine.

Professor, after the vaccination did you watch the tell 'join"
of the persons vaccinated?

A.- Iflfl, of co -rse. After tho vaccination I was in tho caao fre¬
quently. I looked at the persons who hod been vaccinated and nas ta’xn
at thiir fever charts. Aft.r four weeks a final blood do^jIv was ta¬
ker. to ncriora the -iL-Folix reaction ami to s^c by it what •.-cr-j of
lmunity tnoy had 'vVolepvd.

t

Q.- jVoiossor, you have already so ntior.ed tho !,oil-F«U. a t reaction,
y*y I aoaxw that the test for iiaunization was -Hirforejod by tho oil-
re lix reaction?

A.- Yes. Tha 1 uaur.ity tost was -wrfortiod with thia Suroloeioal
r-jacti jr.s, tho _ iL-Polix reaction. I ouliove it has alrcat / bjon dis-
-ussad her-, so that I rwed not describe it again.

Q.- Periiais you will tell rs briefly. Professor, what is dotor.ii.-wi'
in the -Oil-ralix reaction oxpress-d in figures.

A.- You b.ar the torn "titur valuo p .

If.. HAT. Y: Your onor, I ni3»_d one point. lie spoko of three roups.
I didn't g~t tlio third group; 1 had an interruption there* and didn't
--ar what tho t.tird ;*raup was. Could ho ruooat that olease?

THe .THiSS: Tho third group -as oi ht o.rsons who wore vaccinrtud
-r. throe peria s, tho firs* ction bain* 0.25 CC, the s.cond 0.2= CC,
->r.i tho third 0.5 CC of the living vaccina.


I? Jutm-A-cL- 1/.—c —^L'-ieia (Int. von Schon)

Coart ::o. I, Casu I

=T S6. TIP?:

'•- Anri that as the croup of volunt-ors?

A.- I-:, that "caa the group of volunteers.

C.- Very vo 11, witness.

rou <«sjro interrupted whar. you ware a xakin- of the tit-r vaiu-a.

. ill you pL-aae w;>Laln .;hat that is?

A.- XR tie sox-olo;ical d*ta rains tier. of ian unity, a certain amount
of the vactoria arc brought together with a certain a.rua. The aonta
is dilute., the hi>:»-st cilutior. hich ia reached <o call the final
titer, and t.sat is used. If a dilution of ono to five hundred givoe a
reaction that ia an agglutination, that io the titer.

I believe that ia enough,

rw tlat after t vaccinations you d.tcrained tho 1 -vauni-
ty of the various xraona froo the bloo, seru-a. I aoauae th.v vms dono
by doUrsinin tho titer valuea. I don't b-lievo that ths Court is ln-
Ur-at-.d in th. individual Jigures, Professor, 2 should a.r ly liho to
««* vhat was do ter lined about tlx iauunisin* oil.ct thrai h this *.,st.

A.- T.o. practical retail is that it.i this living vaccine ons can
achiuv* a hi h-r o ree of ianunity, accorcinf to th. s«.rolo ical
reaction, at lotat, than with the kiU.c typhus va~ . I* I stay ivc
r-n. firuTwC —

• I don't t»dnk that is necessary, •••itnoas.

If I <i at oil informed in this fid:, vitness, theso titer vnl-h.8
cr. be d-ter-znec hr. e >.rson has survived a r-’l case of typhus. Pert,
:or. the so it-.-r va lu_ft, aft-r vaccinati r., *: ronar.d : ith the t’t'.r
-Hues in .. blood of a pati-nt aft.r b, .as survive f the is^aso?


13 Jur.e-A-'.'J*i^-i-?cl'lt(rcaSchcn)
Court J*o, 1


A, T-b, thit 1 . possible. I h«vn already said that the reaction
is an insanity reaction which can also b<- diit reined aft- r dis-*se,
tut I sust say that thi test raist be pnrfcrned v.-ry seen aft r the
urrival of the dia-as, hocaure th anount of antibodies in the blood
is soon r* duend. If wo want to got the eeepprative values, then wo
Bust rake the teat very aeon aft-r the -lisoaso or very soon after
the vaccination. Thnn we can find that, aa a rule, persons who hove
neover-’d fron th f disease have a very high tit- r, of 10,000 or
12 , 000 , p rhapsj but those vaccinated with killed vaccines have a
tit^r of only ICO; Th* first r -ilta with the living vacein gave
* higher value, up to 2 , 000 ,

Then the r suits w m v ry fhvorable, witness-?

A. The results worn quite favorable, yr.s,

O. But wuru th«y ntinly satisfactory, or w«.m you still
■pricing on th. dcvolopcnnt of the vaccina?

A. Hu. an vaccinatio'-a with mt typhus vaccine. The ideal would
to to vaccinate lice and typhus with a vaccine produced free lice
infected with ty-hus. V nuat exp-ct th t ovci though the iianaans
•re elesaly r latcrl, th-r- am certain difference a, referring to
the degree of «tioge*.ic quality. Th- ain w.--s to produce a louso
faceinn.

0. Aft-r this scinntific interruption 1 t ua go back tc the
facts, witn-ss; In the ecursn cf these vaccinations at Schirr/mk
ucm thor- any deaths?

A. Ho, there were no deaths in the vaccin> tiens at Schinanek.

q. -fitness, your t* stineny is in contradiction tc. the testi¬
mony of e prcsecuticn witn-ss »dion »-• heard h* m; This is Gi.crge
Firs, who testified hem on the 8 th cf January. His Vstineny is
Hgr. 1310 Of the German e-vl 1293 of th English r«-cord. Hirz said that
®t 3sJiliw&ek yru injected 20 to 25 p-rsons and the following days these
had a high fev^r. Th, tar -t is said to have began aft r 36 tc LB

9475


18 3‘aao-A-l&-15-a-7aldt (vcnSchon)
Court I


hours and two of these people died. lie witness also said who had
r..e:inated his, the head of the ea=? and the Capt.in the hospital,
till y.u explain the differeaces between your testicoay and the testi-
sosy of HirxT

Am It is true that these three people, the casp head and tho
derat;' c.xrj head and the nurse, that was Kir 2 , wers vaccinated with
the customary vaccine on the basis of an order that canp personnel,


whore there was any chr.ger of typhus, had to be vaccinated regularly
against this disease. How, the personnel wasln such less danger that
the incites thecselves; so in order to help tho cacp doctor, I supplied
the voeclne and vaccinated these three persons, but I reserved the
living vaccine for te persons who wero in real danger. Ihcso wore
the racoons why there wero these ulegod distinctions code.

-hen the prisoners c*xie to the cacp they were given a
oaroful examination by the cocp doctor. In the interests of prevent¬
ing dlseaso in the cacp, that was nocessa.y. Zhercfere.horo I Merely
had t o observe that they were free of oxtornal synptcce of dlse.-.so
and to detexnine how strong they were.

T.. 2 hea if I understand you correctly, you soy that tho uedi-
c.l e:a.:ination was perforsod by tho cacp doctor, who unde then avail¬
able to you for vaccination?

a. les, the ettsn doctor and the head of the c<ep, together.

'.. How, Professor, is the atatecont of tho witness Kir* cor¬
net that after 36 to 48 hours these persons had a fever of up to 40
do-reco Centigrade, 104 degrees Pahrenhoidt?

a. I have already said that aside frao the first group thero
was no special reaction. Elrz hinc-lf did not hnow the first group,
he soya himself. In the second group I Just testified there wero no
fever reactions or any other reaction.

xX you said, witness—oh, that was the first group.

A. Tcs. and even here the reactions were quite custom..ry such


&76


13 v-e—a-iC-l5-3-7eldt (venlehen)
Court I


as occur ia ether vaccinations, too.

3 ut Hlrt also says that a t the end or tho fever, sovon to
«is^t days, the persona becace disturbed and their speech was inter¬
fered vita, aad ia three or fear cases they si adored. Pc you hnou
jaythiac about that?

Am ’-hen I visited these persons 1 did not observe ary such
syintce*. Hone of thee cccpl a ined, and I os sure thut if any oac ob¬
served these syeptoss oa hlaself he would icssediately go to tho dootor.
Jvoryono was interested in doing avuy with theso sysptocs. I did not
obser-ra&ny disturbances or stansering, If Hirs had scon thee at tho
tine, I cc, convinced he would have repertod then to ce. He was a
nurse for these persons end was responsible for then; I cannot iiio-
Cine thut he would huvo fulfiled tho interest of these prisonors by
he<ning these things secret.

C*. Tou say that nelthor you observed such s;-cptoas nor did Eirt
rojort then to you. How, witness, Hlrt also said that after two days
two of theso periBontel subjects, as he calls then, or vaccinated
porsena, os you Coll these, diod. Did you obsorvo this, witness?

A. I hove alroady said thut in the onallcr ©xicricental ;,roui>
no ono died, because I <jb sure I would have noticed it and I visitod
there. Uien I looicod at these persons who had beontuecinatod I would
ordcrod an v-utopsy in tho case of such deaths to doternine what the
persons died of, Hot only I would have ordcrod cr carried out this
autopsy, but the Zucr. adninistration would have ordered it. Ono could
got tho idea that these people perhaps died of typhus. I cust b
that of tor a two day ircubation period no one has ever died of tyolius.
uie shortest tine fer deaths, that is the shortest incubation period
plus length of disea3g was ten days to fourteen days, and thoso e.jly
ioath3 uro surjosed to be cases with a high pathogenic incldcoca dirooi-


ly frou h naa n beings. lor this reason alone it is quite impossible
.. "itness, you said that in such cases you would doubtless


12 SiaiP-^i .J-l5-4-JoId*. (rcnSchon)

Court I

hare had an autepsy perfcm&d. You aid you heard nothing abut the
deaths, aid that thereforo there was no autopsy; is that right?

-a- Tos, that is correct*

v I should like to railed the Ccurt of the tcsticony of Eirz
on Page 1238 of tko English record, 1316 of toe Gersai rocord, »fho
said that ho iscodlately wrapped the bodies in paper and had thee
burned in the crccutoriun at Hatzveiler. Hot orea tho "Prosecution
witness was able to s*y, or perhaps did not west to soy , how Prof.
Eoagoa roacted to theso deaths. How one ncre question about this
witness Hlrz,. Here on the witness stand Hire was asked, "How wit¬
ness, you realized that these exp«.risonts porfoxued on the rD to 25
porsens worj experiments forthe dotoasination of typhus in connection
with tho typhus disease? *. Yes, I hod not tho sllghtost doubt a'oout
it. X hnro fifteen years of practlco behind no." X do not know, vit-
r.cs'i, vhat this tosti&osy coons. Perhaps X an not onou^i of a special¬
ist to Judgo, but I cay assuso that you can orplain what tho entento
of ihcoo states onto is.


18 June— j-r^J-1 1 -Gay 1ord (vcnSchoen)
Ccurt I


js !o kr. aim's statement, I ex only say that I c_naot
uadorstcsd it at oil. 2 hare so ilea what experiments to dotosair.o
is connection with this disease are e^oposod to by. 7irct of
all, thoro were so expo; isects to determine typhus pined there uas no
V.'phus. and I don't know any cothod for performing Axpoi-imonts on hu¬
ll^ beings to dot cruise typhus. If by experiments, OJ.e so . tho ro-
atral of blood ia tho Leil-Telix reaction, that is scmetnlng else,
but that is not vfcut he is tolling about hero 7ha witness gives ao
roasoa for his ojpert knowledge, tiat he has boui a pharmacist for 13
yo^rs. 2 ;at ho has such a long practice behind h)p and considers hic-
solf on assort then in tho field of cootag'con diseases, I ran 1 1 Quito
understand that either, dat I think on con oxpont that frees a phai'-
aaciot—aftor * 11 , pharmacists do sell vaccines for pebiio discaoue
ia pharmacies, one would really orpoct hie t<vknow what vaccine rauc-
tioas cro and that a real disoase is. and th«.n in tho first .rotQ)
vitovo a reaction did appear, ho didn't xnow that group at oil.

Tou have already said, wltnoss, something about kr. ..irt'o
tosti-iony that the prisoner atleff told hie that what kr. Kir* des¬
cribes wus tho socond oxporinwnt. It soass to no that supports your
statement that kr.Eirx knew nothing about tho first group, that io tho
oi^-.t porsons. Can you tal us anything olso, Professor, to explain
the contradiction botwcoa 7 our tosticory and that of kr. Him?

a. Him spooks oily of one injoction definitely, not of two.
rho vaccinatod persons whom ho took Caro of al hod two injections at
intorrala of suvorul days. If he hadroally boon intorostod about tho
vaccination, ho cust have known that two injections woro porforacd.
-not is one point. Ihcn ho soys that tho needles wore not chongod.

He soon to hare overlooked something there ogA: that for every in-
joctien a now injoction needlo was used which was brought free Strass-
bcurg already sterilised, and that the technical assistant changed
them, whoever knows anything abut scientific work knows that in such


S“79


lo Jua 15-ir-Gay 1 o rd( Yon Schcon)

Court I

important work one does set use the ease needle for sevoral orsons,
luito aside fras the fact that this Is eno of the cost clinontaiy do-
sonds of asepsis. Eero again he probably didn't obsorvo very care¬
fully.

z. Low, Professor, tho question Interests us whether in tho
earn of Schlmcclc, through artificial injection of pathogcae virus
you voatod to produce typhus. Did you p-rforc such o^joriconts ct
S ehixaock?

•i . L*o, no such oaperlcents wore perfoxned. 1 don't know
what tho purpeso would havu been.

<U She if I tay sun up, Profossor, you wore int .*otow5 eg a
vacclao into practice after it had alroaiy been tosted o:.-

poriaoats in sclf-cxporinents and in oxporlz«nts on volunteers. 2Xit
cricrlnonts as I have just described wore rot porforcod at Schiraock,
is that correct?

A. Tos, tat is correct. Vo woro coroly introducing a vacclno
which vat olroady fcolng usod on a largo tealo in other countrios.
Pcriups I nay add that at first X intended to perforn further vaecino-
tiono in tho Schiraock c«> inerdor to protect this cusp ao f.r an
possiblo, but that in tho course of tho next aonth, I roolirod that tho
a'htsvoilor c«p was ontiroly different in its vholo stmeturo and that
thcro was such greater dangor of typhuo in this cjsp. -’hero:foro I
shiftted =y intorcst frees Schlnicok to Xatxvoilcr.

Z- Low before we go on to tho work at Satzvoilor, witnos-,, I
should like to clarify the following point vita you. Kr. Eir* testi-
fied here that the prisoners used for soccination wore not voluntoors;
hat you say, Professor, that your point of wiov is that oaporlntatal
subjects suculd be voluntoors. Can you please alearly answer this
question and explain the points f view vtlch arc ieportant in yJUX op¬
inion in vaccinations particularly?

a. Zee prisoners <fcce we vaccinated were not volunteers. I


IS Juac-ir-»J-16- 3 - Gay lerdCv onfchc on)

Ceurt I

whould like to Bay the following on that point: as I have already
said, I share with coat scientists the point of viow that the pre¬
requisite for any eaporiaeat is tho self-esp eric ent. This w a c not
neroly a theory in ny case. Zvory ono who knows ny work or saw sy
work 2a10 VB that I pororreed a nusber of solf-oapo. inonta and contracted
a mu ibor cf infections. Z noed not go into that now, but of course
I tested oil vaccines cn ayself. In this present caso, if we dis¬
pensed vitkttie olesant of voluntarinosa, X cust state that according
to our roles and laws in Gersany, vaccinations aro ordered wherever
thoro is danger of an cpidcssic. This situation cui^'.ed 1 Sthirnook
and k'utswoiler, Thoro was a docrco for this cecp {it*. *i. lo-VVEA,
and doerces voro suit out by tho chief do-tor of concur*,--ition cjria.
Our vaccinations v-re porfcreed within these legal regulations. In
tho records of tho trial, I find again and again tho point of vice
thut I bed takon poor, holploss prisonoro and troated thee with
aurdcrous (-res. But if one knows cy work voll, ono can see that
on tho contrary I was coebatlng these dlsaasos. Thoro cun bo no
quostion of any crisinal experieonts horo. I want to object very
definitely to boing called a orininal when I was noruly fif^tinj
diseases.

Voll, Prefossor, you say that in this easo you dispensed
with hiring voluntevrs because it was not an o^jorlncnt, but rathor
a vaccination, and because it is your point of view that for vacci¬
nations it is legal y poreissiblo to cake tho: cacp'^leory, that you
wore noroly carrying out a legal coasuro under intornatic. JL la'•7

A. Tea, this was a vaccination with a vaccine which al¬
ready being used elsowhcrc in tho world within tho framework of gen-
oral vaccinations carried cut cn tho basis of tho existing regulations.

Professor, aside free the vaccinations against influenza
'•nick wore touched upon this corning and tho vaccinations against
v-pnus which wo have Just been discussing, did you do any further


13 Juno-^h T -l~^3sylc:dr-(vcaSchoen)

Court I

work at S chirceek?

*. So; I have already ecnticnod the influenza vaccination this
norni-s and the vaccination against typhus.

q. Vos this w*r< finished with your vaccinations in Schimed:?
d. Skis was the first stor; 1 wanted to dovolop yet a vaociao
against opificuie typhus itself, that is, with louao typhus vinio. In
tho couroo of the auxn:er of 1943, this work was p«-rfonsed.

Bum, if I understand you correctly, you said that ct tho
end of i lay 1943 tho end of tho first part of your work woo reached
and that you continued 70 ur work. Will you plcaso briefly docoribo
your work aftor 'viy 1943.

d. da I have already «tid, wo wanted to try to develop a
living typhus voccino against louse typhus, and in tho course of tho
dtsuicr of 1943, wo did so.

C. Lot cc intorrupt you a uccont, witnoss. I should liko to
stick to tho chronolo©r of tho docucont, if posaiblo. You aro spoakirK
of tho suitor of 1943. I asauso that you soon July and autfiot. Tree
tho ucuntino, however, we huvo a docusost of tho 15th of June 1943.
Perhaps vo can liscusi it ut this pelnt and diacovor how this letter
caao to bo wrltton. That is Docuscnt B>-3C5, &*ibit 2S5, on Pago 73
of the ih-^ish Becus cm Book 211. It Is a lottor free you d .ted 5
Juno' 1943 to Oborstarxt Prodossor Br. Hose. Vill you pious*, toll uo
Cow thic lottor exo to bo written? You write, "In supplementation
of our talophonc conversation" perhaps you will toll tho Tribunal
what trccccc.cd this lottor.


Geart So. 1

18 Jun 47-A-17-l-HEX-~urthc (7on Schon)


A. "his is a letter referring to the establishment of a olant for
producing vaccine. Professor Hose visited =e ia Kay 1943 end ~e dis¬
cussed tvo Questions, first of all the possible establishment of such a
manufacturing plant, rad also ay taking over e ooeition as consulting
hygienist. Shat was the pre-history of this document.

Q. Tou sneak of the establishment of a production plant for vac¬
cine. «y next auestion refers to that. I ouote from this document, SC-
305, tho lest sonteaco, "Ky calculation is not right therefore, but, ns
Hr. Oiroud iadlcetes, thirty to forty persons arc still required aoathly
for tho manufacturing of 100,000 doses." Tcu said this refers to the
establishment of a nr eduction plant for vaccine but this fomulation,
thirty to forty porsons needed for the production of 100,000 doses
monthly, but the prosecution drov tho conclusion that thirty to forty
experimental subjocts vero needed. Can you plor.se explain that?

A. Shis report le a correction of the telephono convo. 1 ration
bctvcun Profcocor Hose end cysolf. I gavo hio tho nuaber of persons
needed as personnel for the production plrnt. This statement had not
been ouitc right; thus I corrected aysclf in this letter. I oold that
to produce 100,OCO doses per month onu vould need a porsonncl of thirty
to fort;/ persons. I too* those figures fra-, a lot tor fron Profoscor
Oiroui ’•ho told ns unor. ny inquiry hov .uch personnel ho needed lr. oro-
duoing vr.ee lno.

Then this hes nothing to do vith the 6roorimcntrl eubjccte,

vitnoss.

A. So, it has nothing to do vlth eny oxcorinentrl subjects.

V Sov, Vill you rlcase look at Document SC-305, Hrf-.ibit 296,
page 74 in tho inglish Document Hook 12. It is a letter from Professor
Hose to you, deted 9 June 1943. Hr.. Hose vriUs that based on your
original papers vhich he enclosed he hoi vorfced *it « prop 1 for the
inspector for setting tip a production plant for vaccine. Do you neon
the one that Hose end you had agreed upon? Or vfant connection docs


thi3 letter have vith any human experiment allegedly carried out by you?


Court So. 1

15 Jus 47-A-17-2-£3i-*urthe (Yon Schon)


A. This letter, too, has nothin* to do vith any experiaents on
huaaa beings. Professor a 06 e eerely said that ha aede aa application
for the establishment of a vaccine-producing plant, enclosing various
docunents. This second paragraph it aa inoulry by Professor Eose whether
he had heard anything free Separtsent I and refers to =y appointment ae
consulting hygienist vith Air Fleet "Center", which later becase Air
Fleet "Hatch". The next sentence, "It will take soae until 2-7 comes
out vith a nev research order," and so forth, was referring to the
approval of coney for the asslgasent on typhus research. I think I heve
explained the letter nov.

Q, You said that the caap doctor of Satcweiler a*kfci you for help
and that you declared yourself vllllry; to help in clean!rg up the casp,
•specially la vaccination.- So far, you have spoken of your work at
Schlrnek. Vhen did you begin your work in Sattwellor proper?

A. It was ay intention in the raneer of 1943 to begin vaccination

in the Satsvsilsr caap, but thon unexpected difficulties aroso »dilch I

au*t go into, bocauso I think they are of significance for v ls trial.

Professor Eirt, whose name I bolievo has been aontloned here rcpoatcdly,

the director of the Anatoclcal Institute in Strassbourg, was a noeber of

the SS and researcher of the Ahnenerbe. As SS officer he had loernod

through the caap that I wanted to perfora vaccinations thcro. Ee then

intervened because hs thought if persons outside tho SS or the WEA

wanted to work in the caap in scoc fora ;r other vo had to have approval

for this, quits aside froe the fact that I had been asked to porfom

these vaccinetions, etc. Profossor Eirt told tho casp doctor and ayself

that he vas ready to get this approval and asked do to ocke a reouest

to this affect to the Institute for Military Scientific research. I

had no connection with the SS or any sub-organisation of the SS, nor

did I knew the inner orgenitation of the SS. Iho application was cade

in the suncer of 194?. I cannot reaenbor the wording of the application

exactly, but Eirt sent it on to theage qcy i n.question. I only know

that the application said that I had asked for remission to vaccinate

9A84


Court 5c. i

IB Jos 47-l-17-5-aEK-#tarth« (Ton Schon)


a certain nusbcr of carp innate*. Ctoe bad to nake the liaitation because
I cculd produce the vaccine only in snail ouantitiee since the technical
conditions did not yet exist at the Institute for large-scale production.
In this letter to Elrt I pointed out that there vas no danger in vaccina¬
tion vith the aev vaccine but that ve had to eroect a core or less 6trong
reaction, especially a fever reaction in accordance with the variances
in the individuals. I also pointed out that the people to be vacclnatod
had to be in good physical condition, so that they should be in roro or
less tho sase physical condition as our soldiers. I said tJ in order
to confora with the general vaccination regulations. >f lev sect tine I
recoived free the Institute for Military Scientific T.rti : xi annour.ee-
aent that ay roouest would be granted.

Q. Profeesor, on page 76 of the doouaont book will you please look
at Docuaont SC-120, which is Inhibit 297. It is a letter froa tho Roichs-
fuehrer 5S, Porsonal Staff, Institute fo: ..llitary Scientific Research,
detoi 30 Soptccber 1943. It le signed by *r. Siovers, and it Is addrossed
to tho Director of the Institute for Kygloao of tho Reich University,
Strassbourg. Mr. Sl«rers writes:

■I confira receipt of your roouest of 16 August 1943. I shall bo
glad to holp yw and have accordingly contacted tho oropor source to
havo the doslred personnel placed at your disposal."

Is thie the letter you aoant, witness, when you said that you wore
given approval in principle to carry out those vaccinations?

A. Yes, this letter created the basic prurepuisities for rerforalng
the vaccinations. If we disregard tho fact that for opidealologiccl
reasons tho vaccinations were Justified and even necoseary, this lcttor
I believe gives us a Justification to perforn then.

Q, Tow, were vox able to carry out the veccinations?

A. i'o, that wasn't es elsole as that unfortunately - I say "unfor¬
tunately" because precious tine was lost and I was interested in protect¬
ing the canp as soon as possible, at least to the extent that there was

no longer any danger cf typhus. I infornod the canc doctor of the con-

94C5


Court Sc. 1

16 Jua 47-X-17_4-ZEwto*.h« (Tor. Scfcor)


teat* cf tfcl» letter acd asiced that I ho alloved to ccceorce the vacci¬
nations, hut e considerable tine passed ard not until 5ove=ber did I
receive cotlee that ve could begin with the vaccinations. Through Hirt'a
iaterr ontion, therefore, the uhole affair had not been helped: it had
area boon delayed, -hen, vhen I received the first hundred orlsoncrs,

I looked at then acd I found that they vere in such a condition that thoy
were suite out of the cuestion for vaccination. Thoy vere in very poor
condition. ! rust soy that they vere prisoners that cane fror. Auschvltz
on tho transport; I thine eighteen of the people haa already died. In
such a group ono roally had no right to perfom a viivcinitlon, I did not


do so and refusod far nodical reasons.


12 Jona-A-PIr-lc-L-.*5urtha (Int. von Sc..on)

Court lio. I, Case I

Q.- And afcat die roc do then, * ito_ss?

A.- I infer .d Kirt of this. I wrote to hia frankly that the so
pecol- w-rc. out oi tb« question for vaccination and I asked for -wn in
fool physical condition.

ft-ofessor, -111 you pLas- look at Doeuauat NO-U , iSLToit

293? It is in the --.vlish docun-nt bock on os go 78, and in the Gorian

on page 31. It is a Utt.r fron you to Professor Hirt, dated 15 itov~>-
fcvr 1913. you .n-an this letter xh-n you say that you wrote to :iirt?

I shall rwat. brio fly:

"On the 13th of 1 ovenber, 1913, a--, ins action .«ns .nd_ o; ti:. »ri-
mn-rs that v.re furo.sU.tf to ac by th. SS-.VRA, i n ordur to feWrjino
t.^ir suitability for th. t-sts which have be.n nianned tor the slotted

leVer vaccift.3. n

la this the letter?

A.- Yes, this is the letter of 13 r 1913. I nay it out

in this lett.r e'.at I asked tor a hundred prisoners in foot >hyaicol
condition, ns only in thia way could I e.~o-ct results which can b- uo:d
lor purpoe c oi eo >-orison.

Q.~ Prole: sor, 1 nave soa thing to '-it to vsu froa t is ocy nt

which is our a>s in contradiction — or which nay be inter -.It.' to bo

in contradiction — to rour testimony hitherto: You say that you anted

to vaccinate tlx-se -xople and th. first s-rtw.-.c« oi the docua.nt s ons

to indicate that. You *rite, "their suitability for the typhus vr.ccJnn-

tior.3. n rurc: .r m, bowev-r, in the document you s-'eok of testing a

new k&.in, furth.r d-wn, ■at.risl - . . ebrirh." Q-.e

. :: et. ere not vaccinations sot amts. It h io

not in contra fie .i n ol your t-stiior.v?

tradictioo of ajr statements. It io oooc-

rcr.tly i*cesaar. :r Oe to anppL , at 57 st ■ t - ? by sayiny t.-.c ol-

1 owing: As J aH;, in tb_ Satssciler Ca.-} I ’.anted to vaccinate 2 fairly

l^rjc r.rnber oi :*ie.::_re. 7. - vaccine -mr ready as far as :e L tory

9187


IS J'JT.c-A-?L-L0-2-^irths (Int. von Schoc)
Ccun. Ko. I, Car-_ I


*£8 conc-mcdj it hod been tested in ani-.nl expert r.t; it had been
*..st,d in ».U-« erixnts, end cn a saall youp of volunto-rs. I tlv-r--
for- kn-w that it did not involve any lo^er danger for pe. on 3 vac-
cirsatul and that the us. of this living vaccine did not brin b roout any
aanifwat dia-c*.. But vun a nun vaccin. is us-d for the first tiu
in ' ractlco it is to a certain d u? r^ an *ua>-riaent, since the tole-
rencu has still to be deteixir-d and that can be deterdn-d only or. a
larfe muber of eoplu. Tlx. dose atiU has to be det-ruinod the re¬
sult of the vaccination stiU ted to bo chocked on a Lrge nuz-.lvr of
people. So I ciltit it is no doubt tru. that th. use of a ne« vcccino
for the first ti_x in yactico on a Ur> nuaber of People could st.'U
1 COnai<,OTW? “ ' ic ^ ri -I should c c<id that in the <irst
iars—scale explication tk_ -.ter values and ^lood w*ru cftulnulj of
oorxse, tei-oraturo taker, and all other observations «er. crjelully
tscie, in or'y .o .t ceflniU final iaveosion of the effectless snd

; it *ac out . • no

1 bi. rei . : .d alii- to intre uc. r n.* vr-edne Uk- this, n if x-
ted aU.tdy ^ri.. £ . in a ssall eX>rix:A or. or.e s-lf r.rzl volanfcuurs.
3ut tbftftt lr. t .is tri.- i th- word, ".xv.ri Jt," has b-n grossly bde-
us.d. in this !er. our vaccinations t n :

fc - ‘-*i-r.ts with any uhoertain onl or purpos.. Cno
c-r. hsrdljr m-ok of crLiinal «dctwrla>nts h r.. A.’*: in -v-r-' X-diccl Jorr-
nnl in the uorl , on dost every xSind e:;xrl-xnts -t t rieje-

- • md : oi*'. think anyone has any ibr.ion to Una orn And or
us hner. . tru concern-d, I tf.wiid ilk. to refer to aevurti-

s^nts -i.-.lcii ste» f... public attitude ol -.a r _wrican lira, in oictupe
wrin.s hich I l_v. s.cn ayself: antis-ptics li).- IdsUrirc, rixro
• *» tests 1; v, b_.r. v.

1 ■■ ‘ - s r -  1 «* the word, -e: -r;.vnt," is us.c- in „ fo-

~’t senses.

Q.- One v-jv has not b-en cUcr.d up * in tide

1 -88


:nd that


13 Jur--i-Pk-ie-3»:'urtha (Ir.t. van Schon)

Court Bo. I, >.se I

is it*, las-, :? ore’s, "coaotrohL. arterial," Cen you please explain *.:hat
tf-.t aoans? het :ic you a.an by "coop creole materiel®?

A.- That —ana that the investigations indicated have already been
sad- r -'* 1 tact tho results wur- to be ccopared with one enoth.r, !>o %
that o*w can .rv» rorlly useful median results. Th- individual values
of every lar.unolo^ist varies consider'bly according to th. constitution
and g-n-ral ihyeiccl condition. That was on. of the reason vhy T tj. s
very car-ful to _c.t only persona in rood physical condition for vncci-
lOft, nine, -rsar.s ir. poor co.-v iti :r\ r-’ct quite differ ntly. Resid.s,
I *ust point o.t th t aceor^lnt to th- ,en-.r:l vaccination r-julrtions,
vaccination ol -ny type ccn only be p-rioi- -d on huelthy poo»ie, and 1
wanted to observe this rule strictly.

DR. TI?F: IT. President, I is now oocdiy to another subject. 1
should like to suggest r-cessing new. 1 think this would b DOd point.

♦

TKD P -.il ..T: Very Well; the Tribunt}- will be in rtcosa.

(a short l-.cess was t ker..-)


IB Joa:TirR>2&l-Cooit (=ro0

_ourt 1


F-rsorta in th- Coir i rooc -iU ple-.Se fin! th-ir sc*Is.

25C Trpunri is in _n session,

BE PHS3LS3T: Counsel _rr* proceed

3T :a. tit:-:

Professor* on, conduit' quost-lon in this er.ttcr. Y-‘u a ii that
you inter.— to c-.ny out vaccin biona in ll'.tr»eilcr Concent:- tloa Cup
in or—r -o Li-uniie th- c _p \r Last typhus. You further abat-C that
these incwv— v ccimtians w-r- CKperiatnta in ao far as they —r- to
t-it the ta -r eility of tie. vaccine, la t.. t mi?

A; Yes. That ia ca-r-ct.

i; ^neiher question - in this fncu— nt 121 tfdcn w- ^acu-sei l ot
it ia a l.: tiv.t thw first ?rou.. of iiuatca that ucr- to b. ..ie . v .ilablo
to you .'or vaccination .er- s-j-c.e: fr — ett-*.r c.-pa, n.l furthu below
you » i: t; i .rhaon-ra wt. a-.- to you. Cft- co\»li -r- ■* the oo .elusion
th -.t thes. -r- therefore purely cqwrinenta ni ---re iot quit- in
.oconi to ie e.th th. i^atooialn i ct-r of th- c -p. Fcxhrpa you v*
coul- . :.e this cl- r to us.

A: ffc .*:ii.; these first pi-otec.lv- vaccinations th. avc is true
^ 6

a I ail: o-fare, na-cly, th -t I hul no place to produce the v-.cc.nes,
tut couii only produce sell aminta of v edr.e ther-. Those a*- tile
re . 3 .ns iiy I be—n v .ceinetions ..lth 100 p-raons in N-tr./oiler.

=-, x J-n; Ue•choice of the selection of lit persons to be vaccinate I
I s.il r.lre fy th-t I h~ no la-cdiato influence or. that. 1 could only
x this for v rely »eelic.l reasons an! feJr.t ia why I r.-n th- first
prisoners ve.uaei to c rry out fly vaccinations t -.11.

KG tie f-.ct that the risoners first to be vaccin.to- c n, froo
sther c-_ G is not to be ttribute- to your influence. If I un^-ratnod
you corr.ctly th .t use o^aauru taler, by th- competent SS office over
.rr.ich you hr! no influence?

«: Correct. I h - no influence w.r h-re the p-raona to bv

v.ccir.ate- c'.o fro a.

9A90


IB Jutc-a-?->2>2-Coo.< (Brown)
Court X


• : Th-r. 70 a loa't knar any ?Laofcr3 frot cratsile rfcrc pat -t your
.ispos- : to ssccin-i-d?

a: Ko, I lon‘t.

1: Sou, -.dtness, I turn to Lie .'^xt jcu^-.l on p\> SO or :ocuru.nt
took 12. : .lo is iocuu-nfc So. 122, aehlbit 296, correction, pr. . 79. It

is letter lx ©u ..esc. to you of 13 IX-ceeix-r 1943. In this latte? tho
frequently entiono- Copenh -^cn v.-cine is c-ntiaac-. Kerr ?.oce n*ites
her- that tl- testing of tenf vr.caxo d.ult-jioocolp jiveu r. clccr-r
picture of o_tt_r or or*, results of ...-tho! urn the testin of one

v.ccint -lane. partner Her- in antion of the •acp-rUufta in Duehen-
. XL. Let .ai: you first of .Ol, Profcaoor, ..hr.t .iJ you ltnou in
D-ecub-r 1VO .hen you rcc-ivw. this letter '±>cux. the*- Buchontr.il
experia-r.es?

..: tn_ let .Us »i* those 3uch-n* L; exp-r io.nt& cnly iroa

this tr. 1 iro. ttv. iocueiinta. eOr-'-v_r, the report on the pert of Dr.
jinr t th co.-.suitin: a>nfer-r.ee in 1943 D - a-ntione. r.n*. 1 her.rl of
Professor ..oo-'a proc-it .j;-inst these hua-n exp-ria-rdo th fc ti*..

You L a*, h.- no on.action .lti L -se Jin- expert—nts?

I .~v.r orxe. Ath Din nnl kn.. of his work only-fro - the
report t t.j.o consulting conference.

J: r.-.e P;os-cution h 3 r. n W- f e'.uctinr, rt-.r-r-ing these
Buchoiarld exp-rL-onta ttr.t tite -l-ic-cy of th. stccino .to teat*: by
subsequent rnf-ction aith p'.U.oj_nic virus. .,111 you pior.se s\v dr t
you h*.vc to ‘-boat th-.t?

7-tio .ttitule on the ?:t of th: Fxooecution ignores the fact
.3 I* 3 --.ll sever It lets, I ttver hr.l r. strain of virus uhich is pathogenic
for hu. n beings, consequently I ccul- not c try out aach infection -s the
Froo-cution seo^s to sX-. S’-c subsc/ru-nt infection «dtr. fcwnly
patho-nlc virus 1 h-Ver thou*— of 0 r^.-ir. out because I \rs .0 rkiq;

-3 - 3Ci_-.tis- -it- ay o..n natei-i -I axl -.ran’*- testing eixtur- for other


v .ccencs ct


IS Junr. -A-'.'wi-I-f -rrin( Brew)
Ccurt -c. 1


A. As 1 h ve already sale, on ace-sicn of Ahnrlneslinv, I
vaccinate?! sect bf th» ire/.trs th-r', with "n rttinut>'i viras in
oH"r to cinirlze th* r*".otic- s to the vaccine-. I thought th?t
in tho nsxt v'.-cin-ticn th f t I shouli carry out tP.« su priory
vaccinations with -.M v coin's r.rri I w-nt'i tc us such r. Tnccin- that


use 2 r isn't virus wi I want* to use •» i*i-l Jolls for th'-t. In the
arr.ntiae betwaon Schirryk v-.ecinns and the now vaccinations in Jtefc*-
I h'i carriM cy work to th 4 * point Acre I no longer nooici a
•Uai vaccine. 5ut the previous history was this: Prcfnaaor Rose, by
awn-ting =e t’ is Kopwnhngon voecin* thought hr. w a supporting o» ani
giving ae assistance. Ani h« suggest th-t I inoluio this iwii raccino
in ry series cf vaeci'ws. L-t ne say, rtg»r!ing this 1 oponhngnn
vneoinn that it w-s a livr- vncci-o which is anii to bn nuch norc
' ffnetiv* than the ath-r •• i r ccin-a, particularly than th*» lung
vr.-cin"; an S if is sii tc b* r.uch core effective, as I hr.vn sail
ni Iror. it , in •• v» fore a butt- r pret-ction couli bo •xpncto-1. Mow,
it m o .v pcint of vi w that if w shouli iistributn ovnr ISO p rscru
nr in v>l would not g -1 oth- r p-rsons th • • wouli not bn enough p rsons
vaccin-t J to bn of vnluo for reap risens. So, I -idn't »«i nny
n-son for introducing tr». Kop«nhag«m vaccin* . I to 1-1 this to Professor
flcsn n 4 Prcfsscr itos naw n<t in th* fera * s w. hnvn s«.n in the
1-tt r which ccnstitut-s this -tecuaont. IMe wcull h-vo giv«n son.!
tarsia for cerp-riser* btwnen th. two vaecirmo. However, I didn't usn
it because I was no lcng-r int- r-strl in it r ince in th- antiao wo
ha*J sues e -.1 aca-what in attenuating cwr own virus th- 1 no couli do
without it. I hVri ^o ecr* frost Professor Been about this v< ccino mi


n m r r coiv^ thu Kop rih.".g- n vneclnru

0. Than you say, Pref-aser, th:t this was a iuM vaccine, nastily
th* ropsoh'gen v-ccin-., nni thr w-s -Iso your cwn Iwi vrccin- which
ws to fca use ! for r. pr-linin'-ry vaccination to rciuon the react-ons
tc th’ living v-.eein*. Howev r, this.pirn, although originrlly i-t. n-.o-!


ms 1* v r carria*S cut?


IS Clin- -7-A-i'-2i-rrin(Brcwn)
Court fc. i


A. Tob, that is bo,

. 'lam, ?rof*-.sscr, wo stopped with ycur letter to Professor
Hirt cf 15 Nev-cb-r , *r^, in which you ?.sk hin to sake oth-r pria-
-.p.-rs evailftblf. -'as this re-west r-t L*t r and cculo you carry rut
vaccinations in Hctsweil-r Inter with ycur rv «* vaccine?

A. Ina, I received the p-raon I ha-*, r quested end in fcoceebcr
cf 19 u3 nn - January cf 1944, *« eould carry cut these vaccinations, I did
these vcccio-tiona in two groups cf 40 p'raons «r.ch with ny living
attenuated vinos w.ieh is no len *r hu-crnly pathogenic, r nd this I
want to a. te explicitly.

). Prcfacscr, pl»ee .la crib® th so vaccin-tlcns bmifly tc the
Tribunal,

A, First, group Of 40 p-raona w a vnccin f-d. The first
vaccination was dene with on-‘ ~o. intr-auacularl^. One was a vnccino
mn of Hurt no typhus virus vccin*-. In no case did local reactions
of fever or other eyaptoM occur. Th< soccnd vaccination took plnco
a week I ter. This was again enu ce. of vaccine introduced intra-
ruaeul rly, Thia w s no leng-r v-hog-nic to hunan brings. Tc cc.-r.pl to
th* story I hr.vc to say th t brtw.cn the Schirsok vaccinations in liny
and th-cc vaccinations, I had tn^-rf tc the proiuctlon of n leuao
typhus vaccine; nr. this vreoin*-- contained living virus. Before it
w"c uari in Hntxveil-.r as n vaccim , it was f ated on oursnlvns
that is with sc=- 1 coll- borators, to ascertain the tclnrftbility
and effnrts^ Tc w r; roughly f-o p-rsons, »cb- as of tha institute
nr,- ala. stu J on». <-nly th» n did usn th. vncciae with th- prisoners
in K° taw ail r. Four w~ks eft r the last vaccination, th-To wore the
usual B'rolog. xnciir.tio ns. Tbn Yii-Folix r-ction waa tiwrt.

Ton nvnrr.ge titer, l‘t n- say, was b- tt r than in tfr. vnccin-tioos with
th- rat vir^s. It wra, .nar»ly, 2,0CC. I d not go into th .so dotells.
Th* g-n-.rel reactions w>n nonvl ractio-s tc i-nccul'tlon, fov .r and
ho* inch- SJ but th- r> k- r* no -nif-st* ti .-s cf cctunlly typhus r.a a ■
r* suit of inoscula tic ns •


91.93


12 Juw ^7-«Wl-3-Pr rrin( Hroiei)

Court »fc, 1

Tou said th*t you curried cut tk-.se vccin. tiona on the first
group through i-itr-rcuscul-r injections, if I understood you correctly,
but you ere apo-ki'.g of ft first roup so I assusq tsre oust h re _
fc-»n ft second group. Hew did you c"rry cut the vreein tion of the
second group?

A. It occurred to an th t inatnr/i of injoeting the vrecine, the

v* ccinnticn could b > -erried cut by scarifying the skin in the sn-e

way thftt you scraps the in whn you nrJce n aor-.ll pcx vnccin'tion.

Therefore, aftsoe as with the first group, with the sner living

virus vaccina, I vneoinftted 1 .0 Additional p*racna with scarification

of the skin. L>t c« point out th- «p«-ricentr. on nysolf and on zy

assistants ware eftrried out in the sfxr <«ny, with scarification of

the akin. Tb.* rofteti na wr* ooopcritively nild, corresponding roughly

to the reactions to n v-icculrr typhus vaccina reactions ao thftt v»r hnd

nc alogivin^s about undertaking thia kind of faccin' tion.

o, You "escribed th*. nactio'-a of youraolf nnrl the vclunt «)®3 r.a
*

v ry slight. Kow, t‘ ernnetiena of th > prison rs * ro strong* r, were
they r»t?

A. Yas, th y m r* stronger nr/in. Ani then we enn only explain
thftt by ball ring th t th* g«m-ral sV t«> of health onong the prison* rs

• t

*-8 low r then 'sonr =y ossooixtes, but th-im was »»u such thing as

* natural aanisf ctrtion of typhus or any f't-liti- s.

o. Frcfcsaor, this work wra done 3 you saw r round Uococb r of

• j .3 r ft d January of '-J.. ’n have a doouse^t free this tie which I
should iik - to discuss with y.u nt this tier. *niir. is DoBUcnot
"c. 138, kxh b t 300 . It ia in Docunent &>ck 12 on P.'fis 81. Ibis is

r Cirr^spcn- nc b* tw • n th- jbdeh -Ws-nrch Council wrf youraolf. First
->f ail 1 rxs int* r- st.d in h m in your l tfr to th* Fr sidcr.t of the
Reich hes arch Council of 12 Jrnuxy 1?U, Pnrticul' rly ntrfcnr two
i+ich concerns itself with typhus. You r ^fr h r* to v^cci-r t-iens th t
you w.rri d cut, and you say, md I quote, "The effects could bo t‘-sted
on 8 persons so far ^ t ««*» arc you talking nbout h .re?


IB taua rrin(3rcvn)

Court *So. i


A. This raport to The Erich Hnsnnrer, Council rf- rs to
r-ccinntions th?t I perfers:'! in Schirc.f.k, ml I '■■n wntiO'd'iK h«r«
T.hn on* gre.p cf C persons of Mr.y, 1%3, that .wore voccin tr.1 v_th
.-urine typhus vncelrai. This l*tt» r then, "is v.ritt- a roughly --t
ih* ern' tine -s qy vrccin tio-.s in Mntwoilr with the lous>
vaccine. I w*-s r f rring to this work when 3 said that •otp'-rlct-ota
wre undarw-.y tc ascertain wh-th- r with an *pi defile prp'rziki sinilrr
results could be obtained.


9W5


li Jw*&-ArOJG-22-i-ifelcy (Brown)

Court I

• Q I can assuae, Professor, frcs the center .!3 cf this document
that th_ effects ycu are referring tc ere the .eil-Fclix reactions,
is that sc?

r. Tea, that is so.

Q In the lost sentence cf this, vaccine the ocncept of tha er.ti-
infecticns effectiveness of the dry vaccine is mentioned; at is tc be
tested cn human beings; we sh 11 return tc thrt concept inter. Icu have
already said thrt there were no fetelitics tr.d no raanifcsUticna of
typhus cs t result of these qualifications, is that so?

.. Tes, I car. repeat that. There were no manifestations of typhus
end there vere no fatalities.

Q But, Frcfcsocr, tc this statement I shell hnvo to ..ut tc you
3 one thins tfcrt was said beforo this Tribunal, end which is quite diff¬
erent freu what you have Just said. I ta referring to the testimony
of the witn.ss, Sdith Schmidt. Cn 9 January 1947, cn pt o 1371 of the
transcript she sad that you had carried out vaccination experiments on
100 to 150 persona in Natmoilur, end cf thoso oxporinonts of the control
group roughly 50 are sad tc htve liod. Hies Schmidt stat.d that she

knew this frer. notes that your technical assistant :iiss Cro'.'ol had aede

• •
about the typhus experiments at Natswailcr. Can you pic*so toll the

Tribuna -hat notes lliss Schmidt was referring to; in other uords how

do you -.x lain hor testimony?

„ It is utterly impossible for rrauloin Schnidt to hr.vc seen
records cf notes of my vaccinations in JJctxweiler in v-hich fatclities
occurred, uccanso as I have already sad no cno died showing the
vaccinations. These netes of Frculoin Crodul«s that Frr.ulcii; Schmidt
saw dc net refer tc tha vaccinations. That can be s«-er. from -.he nuabers
th--t Fraulcin Schaldt mentioned, bee-ruse I only vcccin-tod -0 persons
at Hatsveiler, net 150 tc 200 as the witness stated. This nuab-r end
the concept cf a control group the witness apparently took fre-; liter
writings, which is tc be discussed hererft-r, but I can imagine *. hat
notes she ccula r.ave been referring tc.

91*96 1 •


1 Ov G-22-2-iialc7-{BTrr*n)

Court He. 1


Q Please do that witness l

k The witr.zs? sta.t.s correctly -hen these notes were aadc, bo-
cruso she scys the sun was shining on two pages. That cast nave’boon
in the spring or surrxr of 1911. This corresponds with th*. tine when
the typhus opideaic was raging in the ce=p. Thus I aa tuning thrt
Freulcin Schmidt really did see genuine notes of sene sort,

Q Thor. witness you ere saying that theso were not-a that ».ore
node in the courso of an cpidcnic that tcck place in Notzrffiilcr, can
you tell us the tiac *hcn this epiduaic broke out?

So far aa I can atato fro: oeaory the cpiduaic- broke out in
February or lirrch of 1914. Gradually the nuaber of eases becarao very
largo, rnd in the ousacr it represented the very considerable nunber
of roughly 12CO.

T L-t ac pcint cut in this connection that tide cpidoaic ia
ecofimcd by twe proaocution witnesses, Grrndjean on 7 J .iucry, page
1099 of the transcript, and tho witness Hell on 3 January 1917, page
105-3 of the English transcript. Both witnesses atstod that in tho
spring of 19 H nrxl also in the sunacr following there was a severe
typhus opidoaic in Rottweiler. Tho witness Grsndjean gave tho nuaber
as 1200 to 1100 cases, rs I rjaoc±er, thus tjis uould agree with what
you have just said, witness. ?Icw, the cost iaportant question in
this connection, did the outbreak of this epidoaic have any conneotion
with 7 cur vrednetiens, whrt I acan is were your vaccinations the
cause cf this upida r ic?

A !!c, there was nc connection between tho opidcaic rnr' cur
vaccinations. Our veedn-'ti ns h* : already boon concluded in Jenu ry
1911 , and the first typhus cases occurred in February or :trch, rnd
they were re ught to the canp frc.- outside, either by tr:. sports cr
free; other ctaps. Let ac repeat that the sick people were taken from
outside cc_ffs to Schira-k where they -re treated in r special -epart-
-ent, bee i sc there was no way of isolating then in the outside ceops.

: Let ecint cut the t-.stiaeny of Grand jean about 6 Jrnuiry,
page 1115, -..ho says the sane. H«- said he was a nurse in the t;xhus


9L57


10 Jaao-.x-CJG-22-5-*i?lo7 (5rr n)

Court So. 1

dcprxtncr.t of N- tzwciler, end the sick persons when he had tc tend to
csee free the various ccaacnioes end from the canp itself How, witness,
you said thrt the notes that Fraulein Schsridt nonticnoc corld be in sene
Hey related tc this epidemic, perhaps you could cxplrJ 0 .-,*0 to tho
■Tribunal at greeter length.

%

jv a In order tc be sura cf a diagnosis that typhus tcrily existed
in a cert-in c-sc cne carried out the Vcil-Fdix reaction Icat, end
took blood testa which vero sent to the competent ueiic.il clinic to be
anclyzod* This clinic ms in ay hygenie institute in 3‘-r .otiourg, Thus
in the course cf tia. re received c 1 -rgc number cf blood aeflples cf
persons who were suspected of h’.ving typhus and wor- actuary sick with
typhus. This va r perfectly usual dirgnoatic ex-nin'-ticn, such rs is
usually can led out when typhus i: expocted, in order to clarify tho
dicpvcsis, It is apparent th-t I was interested in there eases to get
r. cccpleto picture cf the serobogical behaviour of typhus patient*. Ir.
ty institute - doctors’ thesis bed boon written on this subject, and
for this re*son the notes cf these cases, if lass Schmidt really saw
the genuine Actes, were sup li-d with notes so thrt wo should not
have to weit for further aterirl. In this way it is of ccuroo quite
possiblo thrt rrauldn Sohaidt did add up 50 deaths.

o You say then thrt th- cases Prl. Schmidt mentioned were not
deaths th:t occurred in the ccursc of these vaccinations, but were
deaths ir. the course of erses of typhus thrt occurred during tha
opidoaic in the cay?

A Y:s, th-.b is so. That ern bo soer. from the fret cf tho tino
relation between the deaths of the c-ldu-c rnd the all celled deaths of
the vaccinations. Tho ep&dumic w.s in tho sumer. "li.rs Sclvd.'t states
that correctly, end I -sust assume thrt the notes she s-.w were the records
cf the scrcloric-i tests, rnd which she falsely construed,

Frrulein Schmidt 3cid c let -bcut ycur wen; rnd y: err.elf,
Frefessor; e sh-11 have to go ir.to her testimony at considerable
luigth; first, about herself, witness, shu scid that from 1 February on
she was active under you in th« hygienic institute, rr.d gave the


IS Jut.G- 22-l-ifeicy (Brown)
Court :.'c. 1


scroio^icil. rectcriciosicci courses to the students, is th. t sc?

iv T-3, it is. Hiss Safcnidt iron 19i2 or 1912 on she was c. tech¬
nical .-ssiatant. She was cn assistant instruct;r cf courses, end nr-.de
the preprretiens for the practical students courses end assisted in
the torching cf the courses thoasdv.s. !liss Schnidt, honever, >*s not
used in ether t.chnical iicrk t-c-use she didn't hrvt the n*cc3scry

trrinir.j, pcrticularly net in the field cf typhus, end for this r*-scn

%

she could net have had sufficient knowledge tc bo rble to evaluate
these duties.

*1 Tr.cn the witness sinrly prep-red the students courses, but bed
nothing tc dc with the r*acrrch work, is thrt so?

3 Professor, the witness said th t she wrs th* only assistant
ir. the institute who was net vaccinated against typhus, is thrt sc?

a Jte, in the institute only that personnel was vaccinrtcd rgainst
typhus th t actually wcrk*d in tho typhus l.bcr'tcry. .lies Schuidt was
net vaccinet«d because sho was not used in this work. However, despite
the fact that she was net vaccinrtcd net rv'liring the danger ohc was
running rnd the danger sh* night be erasing fer ethers, she entered the
laboratory, 'Itheugh she vas net p^r-itted tc dc sc . No on. knows
typhus would do so.


COUTt SO, 1

18 Au 47-A-£3-l-ZS(-eefcn (3rovn)

Q, ' es this prohibition scee thing bhmmI; ves this sonstiing that
can ho t- eccd beck to the desire to neintain secrecy?

A. So, that ves not the reason. This vas purely e creceut onary
noasure. Vhen working with the gores of dangerous diseases you hare to
be nos* careful ark laboratories of this sort in all clinics are rur. vlth
the ia:e precautions. So one is to enter laboratories vfco does not work
there. This had nothing to do with aelntalnlng secrecy.

q, The witness tried to sake her testisony sound oarticularly
weighty b7 saying she was the only Alsatian in tho institute. She
probably intended that would indieete that she was the only ono thrtt
could toll the real truth about tho work. Is this stateaont of hors
correct?

A. That tostisony is already refuted by the effect that on thle
witness stand there was another Alsatian, Traulein Syor, free cy insti¬
tute. There wore at least ten out of tho.ninetoon assistants Alsatians
whea I could nano now. In other words that testinony of "rauloin
Scheldt is not correct.

q, Sow, Professor, furthor regarding Jraulein Scheldt's tootinony.
Vhon asicod by the prosecution whether you did brood a viralont typhus
virus in your laboratory, she replied, "Tos, and this wes done with
guinea pigs.* Sho also stated that you, witnoes, had token theoo
guinea pigs to Setxvcllor in order to infect tho nrisonoro with then.
Vhnt truth is there in that!

A. This statement is also caapletely wrong. It is correct to
that extent only that ve did keep infected guinea olgc in tho laboratory
with typhus virus bcceusc, as every soecielict knows, tho guinea oigs
ire, so to speak, the virus reservoir fron which wc could dro« our
virus whenever we wanted it. but this does not nean that the virus in
these guinea pigs v?.s nethogenlc various. On the contrery, let r.c put
that again that the =ore often a virus cocos through an aninal tho
nore deluted it beccaes.

Q, Vhen you say pathogenic, you nean nethogenic to hunrn boinge?


Court S . 1

18 Jus •.7-A-2c-2-iKX-fceefcan (Brown)


* «l w «y» do when I utc that tors. Lt t no repeet again,
vt did cot have any Tires pathogenic to buses bei-i< b. Klee Scfcaidt
said took the infected guinea pigs to Katrveilcx to infect the
prisoners. lor the reeson I have Just given that .s practically inpos-
•ible; sorcerer, you cannot ertifically infect hum n boirgs with typhus
in the way that kise Scheldt seons to Imagine end Jet guinea pige run
around end spread the gems. That ie cot the way y m get typhus. That
is not so. If a person is ertifically infected wit.t typhuc, and this wo
know froo literature, then it =uat bo done free tho frosh blood of another
hunnn bolng who has Just gotten the disoaso and this cust be transmitted
to tho hoalthy person who is to be infected. As we k to froa lltcraturo,
that is the r.oot certain way of infecting a oorson art lflcnlly with
typhus. Every other way of infoctlng is uneortr.in and is thcroforc not
to be used in any sort of cxporinentctlon. However, P.’euloin Schsidt
is corroct in saying we took guinea pigs to Satsvollcr; however, thoso
voro nice hoalthy guinoe pigs and they were tekon thero because tho
prisoners were brooding guinoo cige in Katswoiler and also breeding nice,
because that gavo then a groat doal of pleesuro. I offo.- for collabora¬
tion of this the Btctouest of Attendant Zauton.

Q. Ifcon you oro saying, witness, that Kiss Schaidt ind nothing to
do with your actual research work, that sho v*s not active in the tyohuo
laboratory and that she vas never alone or with you in l'n;*woilcr. In
this cose, where do you think .:lse Scheldt recoivcd ell 1 10 knowledge Bho
alleges to have and to vfcich ehe testified here?

A. This knowledge she got fron us or fro-, nc directly during our
intermissions for tea at the institute. All the workers got together
and the work was talked of without any effort to kcop secrecy. Kiss
Schmidt was frecuently at these intermissions for tea and heard all this
thore or later and reported on lt later in this trial. Che picture that
she drew up is altogether incorrect, however.

■t* Something else that .iiss Schmidt said scorns important to sc.
Witness, she was asked if she knew of the 31enc vaccine fros the Pestcur


55*1


Coart So. 1

18 Jus 47-A-23-3-I£X-Me then (Brown)


Institute in Tunis. Ska seid yes. Then she %«s asked If ehe know if
this vaccine, like yours, »es node froc living attenuated virus; she said
that the Blanc vaccine was not used because of its dengerouencst. Is
that so what she says?

A. This statesent of hers is also incorrect. I an sorry that Blanc
is not here personally in order to rofute this statesent. It is absurd.

Of course, 31anc's vaccine was aadc of living attenuated virus and had
already been used to a large extent. Several nillion oersons in North
Africe were inoculated with this vaccine. There oxlst publications on
this subject, too. The use of living ettemrtod virus is aoroover ouito
old. Tho enallpox vaccine is the oldest vc know that thero is, Pasteur'o
hydrophobia rabies vacclno and the yollov fover vaccine, all of thoeo
aro nado with living attenuated virus; also the Calnstto's tuberculosis
vnccino, Strong's plague vaccine, etc. All of theso having living virus
in then.

Q» You aention Blanc's work, Profosscr. Kay I ask whether in con-
ploticg your vacclno papers end in studying lltoraturo y<*j aado use of
theso French works on the subject?

A. Yes, I did, particularly on tho work of French rosoarchors
becauso they coca worthy of emulation and to thet extent 7 think that Kiss
Scheldt is correct.

Miss Scheldt stated that you had used Fronch works on this sub¬
ject; this testimony is in the trnnecript of 9 January 1947, page 1380 of
the English transcript. Witness, asido frou Kiss Schaidt, whose testinony
I should like to leave for tho rtoaent, we also heard froc Frruleln Clga
Syor. Vo had her on 15 January 1947, page 1755 ff of tho Englich tran¬
script. She seid that you vaccinrted with virulent vaccines. To that
extent I believe she is correct, isn't afce?

A. Yes, she hoard nc cay that nyself beceuse she wes ajr secretary
end took care of ny corresoondence.

Q. ?id Freulcin lycr have nodical knowledge? Tid she have any


snccielixed training in r.edicine?


Court So. 1

18 Jtts ' 7-A^25-4-£=>-- ehan (3rovn)


A. Sc, 7i-eulein Ivor hed no nodical training, nor wee she e medical
technical assistant, nor was she trained es such. Sho ves simply a
secretary an* in this capacity, because she had to do e lot of writing
for se, she heard and used lots of nodical expressions ai^ terms. I iio
sure that she did not always understand these teres, becauso it is vory
difficult to do so unless you have the necessary nedlcal training.

q, Jreuleir. iyer also adnitted that before the Tribunal. Sho was
asked «4»thur sho know the report you had dictated and she said on ongc
7070 of the Inglish transcript, "I wrote the rcoorts but I don't know
whet w*«s In then. I as not an export and I have never studiod acdicino."

Sow, another point regarding Trruloin iyer't tostinony. She statod
correctly that you worked with virulont, that is living vaccines, but
she further statod that this virulent vaccine brought about the disonno.
Vhnt do you have to say about that?

A. Vhon Miss kyer is spoaking of virulent vaccine, this corresponds
to vhat I sold in cy affidavit y^stordry. Thoso nro living virus but
they cro not pathogenic for husan beings, so sho is correct in speaking
of the living virus boceuto that was what it was in the vaccine, tut
that this virulent vaccine shoild cause the disease is cooolctly errono-
cus end sinply proves again how difficult it is to uso the terse correctly
end vhat little valuo such teotisony con havo.

Q, How, Professor, soccthing aost confused thot the witness said
was, when being exasinoi by hr. Hardy, she said, "Yes, virulent vacclno
vob ueel." Then ;Ir. Hardy asked, "Veil, if you cey virulent vaccine, do
you scan virulent virus?" Then she said, "Tos, I meant to spy virulent
virus." I assume that Hr. Hardy was referring here to pathogenic virus,
although this culd made this setter much clverer. Perhaps you con say
something about this testimony?


9503


15 Jj>-A~.E-£ -l-D-nicls (let. 3rova)

Court Mo. I, Case Mo. 1.

A riiTo tho ideas that Franlein Zyor has are cccpletely ixod
up. .Ive -y Living vaccine does ccntrir. living and virulent virus, as I
have already said. Kovaver, the i-portant feet and the decisive o.'o-
cent if tho question is that this virus is no longer pathogenic for
hiacar. beings, .c have got to distinguish between "virulent" and
■pathogenic" for hown boings. Only tho latter causes illnoss in
haw boings.

Q It is your opinion than. Fro 1 -sr.or, that this wit nose 1
testimony gives only a very confused pioturo of tho real situation
ar/i that tho witness* knowledge did not suT- ico to correctly undo--stand
this difficult problem of virus and vaccino?

A Yos, tiiat is what 1 want to say. lot no say also that
Friulcin Iyer had no idea of what was going on. Ar a spocialist, I
bus*, ro&ard hor testimony here as coaplotoly worthless.

Q Sow in conclusion I want to quoto something elst sho said.

Sho answarod cy collenguo Dr. Frits* question saying: "As I have al¬
ready said, I don't Know enough about this." This statoo-nt, which
so -as to bo tho .iost decisive thin, sho said, is on page 1770 of tho
English record.

:row, to go along chronolo.'.-ically, Irofossor, when wo stepped wo
wero discusslns ycur activity in connection with tho epidemic nt Kntz-
woilcr. You said that you earned or. tho s volcgical examinations in
your institute. Did you confirm yourself to this, or did you do any¬
thing iso in the cccp in connection with tho upidcaic?

A Ics. I have already told yen that tho camp coo. and or ac!:od
so specifically to help render the crop sanitary. The camp, it is
tru.-, did have a dclousing station but it was not large enough to tako
care o: this -.cuto situation. Particularly, the prisoner physicians
dr>;w ny attention to this fact nary times. Rhen I was asked, thon, to
r.vlp tl. n i-". this crisis, I made available to thin a good disinfecting
station tl-.-.t v s ir. the institute and vrhicb I hod taken to :*ats>;-iicr.
This substantially incr-.tscd tit d_louoin: copacity in thi earn.: so that


9501


18 Jur«-A- 3-2:.-2-Danials (Int. proem)

Court Jo. I, Case So. 1.

it certainly contributed to protecting cany cf the prisoners free ty¬
phus sal thus frer. certain death.

I also save ny assistance to tho surgical dc artaor.t by turning
over sterilization apparatus. I had one stcaa and two dry sterilisers
whieh I ado available. There is sceo corrcopordenco on this.

Q I shell have to bring up a for docu^r.tc, Irof-sscr, vhich
the prosecution .mt in in com.oction with the work ot liatsT.-oilor, ap¬
parently to 3Tcvo that you carried on hmr.n experimentation in :>tz-
wtilcr.

Tho first ono is on pego 35 of the document book, docurunt
r.uabor KO-13 , exhibit >01. This is a lot tor fro= you to tfoorstum-
fcohere Dr. Kriegor, Concentration Crnp l*3tzv;oiler. You speic tore
of Bonding two fever theracootsrs, and you ask his to Bond you n list
of thoso vaccinated, stating their ago and when they wero vaccinated.
What does this lotto r ref or to?

A This lot* or you arc nsntioniiyj raf-rs to the facj, that tho
crap had no or too fow clinical therucceators and tho prisoner doctors
aakod n. to supply soec. I th_n sent thcr tiro.

7h-n, in tho case of tho six persons vaccinated who are tvnaod
bore, those arc ca-.p personnel whose s.rologicnl oxaaination I rar.tod
to ent_r into tho records. They had been vaccinated with do ad vac¬
cines, and, as I have already told yov, I me hooping an exhnustivo
serological record of all thwso vaccinations. They had nothing to do
directly with =y v-iccinations in the can?.

Q I turn now to the next document at pago 100 in the document
book XU. This is BO-133, Exhibit 311. This is a lottcr from you to
*-ho ccnp surguen at the concentration caap Dachau of 21 October 19ld:.
You arc asking that fever graphs bo sent to you that wero drawn up by
a Dutch doctor in Hatzweilor. mat were thoy?

A This Dutch doctor vus a prisoner doctor who had helped eo
“ ith cy vaccinations at Xstzweilor, end who was in charge cf tho fever
graphs. I, of cours., wanted tc have Vies a graphs in the autism for


13 Jocr-k- T-2_--3-D:nicls (Int. Bror.r.)
Court Xc. I, c-sc ::o. 1.


<


ny records whoa the caap wes aovod. It w.s v_ry irrportnnt tc no to
hwc those graphs, and I s^nt for then cad '-ofc than.

. i Q }lcxr tho third docir-jnt I want to brin^ up is on aaiu 1*2.
This is dociront HO-136# Exhibit 313* T’^s is a letter cf your: of
16 llov_:i>_r 19 L- to the casp surgeon of the concor.tr it ion emp Hatz-
wcil_r, Itotorstumfu-hrir Rode. You nro askin' h_rc for or.o autoclave,
one ster-a vosel, and one round dry sterilizer. Doss this apparatus
haw anything to do with your allo'-d hvnan c.tjx risen Mtior.?

A So, As I hav„ s id, this oquijttont was that which I had
mado avoliable to the surgical dojartaor.t, and after the cnsip nap dis¬
solved, I wanted that back boccuse it was valuable apparatus, partic¬
ularly since wo had had a direct bonb hit‘or. our institute and lost a
lot of oquipaont. This apparatus had nothing at all to do with husar.
expo rircr.tat ion. I stress that this was apparatus used exclusively
in the surgical deportee at.

Q You said that your vaccinations u.ro carried out in December
of 1 : 13 =rd January of l£u. Thus they occurr_d Ufore tho opid-:iia
which, according to your testimony, took place in thj spring .and sura-

acr of ISM.. In tho course of tho cpicLmc, could you ascertain

%

whothor the 7-,ccino you had usod or. the prisoners was effective?

A Of course we could. All tho prisoners w 0 ro in tho c.aap and'

».. I

none of those prisoners fell sick of typhus during the opidoiaic.

Q What was the course of ycur work is typhus vaccines eft. r
February 1 ?Ux?

A I night roturn to tho 7r.ee ire t ions of tho winter of 19li3-

1?Uj. Contrary to oar oxpcctatiorj, sona of those vaccinated had
%

sere severe reactions to the vaccination. Thus it could not y^t bo
used or. a laryc scale. K>* work, aft_r t .oso first vaccinations, r.-s
•iirect-d toward developing the vrccir.o by storing it awry for a longer
length of ait .award further attonuntin- v ccir.cs so that tho rc-
• ions r be so severe. _■ reached, that aia ir. the t'-: or of

Iri... • Than, as T have said, r. had tho fortunate result that of tho so


18 Jun-A- 3-2£-k-Qnnio la (Int. Srcn.-r.)

Court He. I, Cas^ Ho. 1.

when wo had vaccinated in the winter, none cf then fell sick of typhus.
Therefore, I wished to continuo with cy vaccinations and as!:od for a
larger number, namely, tto hundred Tcrsons tc bo vaccinated so that I
ceroid carry out tho vaccinations.

Q I assinae, Professor, that you :vu'_ this request through the
saco channel that "you have already nonticnod, naa_ly, Pref easor Hirt.

A That is correct.

Q .How, Professor, please tr.':o a look at two docuncnts put in
by tho prosecution. Tho first is on page 88 of tho document book,
document ::0-123, Exhibit 303- This is a. letter from you to Professor
Hirt of 9 Ifcy 19U-. "hero is an appendix, another letter of 27 Juno
19Ui, froa you to Hirt. This is docatcnt 127, Exhibit 306, nnd this
ia or. page 31*. Plena, take a look at thos^ taro letters, Profoasor,
and toll do rhotlxr you thinking of then when you Just gnvo your
testimony.


9307


IS Janc-A-PL-25-1-PeIdt (lot. 5rown)

Court Jio. I, Cos. I

Y-o, I was referring to thuso two lett. rs.

I turn na« to Dock*.-nt MO-123. You nj,: Ior_d there n stucy by
70u r-ardir. your work witn dry typhus vaccine. You sty that yoitr ttotIc
arcwwd th-.t this vnccin- irA highly -nti-in. _ct ous results. I undcr-
8t ‘ nc t --‘- ~*y?r. thr.t tala vaccine w:a a oroi-.ctior. inst thu di-

o^.av. its-If. You ua.d the aaa. .xor-ssion in D cua^nt NO-. 2S, your
r.oort to tiie \eich L..'rch Council, oi 21 Jomary 1 ?U, atd 1 bolieve
I an corr-ct in aaau ling thr.t this conc-pt is th, core of the Prosecu¬
tion's cn'r. j. Th*. Prosecution b-li_v-s that to t-st th- ef'i-.ncy of
tf.ia vaccine the ‘-roans vac ci nr ted u-r- s'ba-eu. ntly infected nith
virul-nt or ca jou crll it pathogenic virus, -ruJ this deduction is sup-
porteC* b7 w :at /oc a » ir. Document JO-127, b-a-ua- h-ro you sped; of
aubaequ-rt ix/ection • iti viruL-nt typhus gerr.s. 1 ».* in ore -r to cla¬
rify this o *i. t will .ou pl-cse explain eo the Tri »unal in what way
you tested the Mti-inlectioun effects of the v-'cciie, or at any rato
how did - o', >:ah to t-et this on 9 !fcy 19U?

Tldo is such cn inport nt question th-t I a at go into oomo
detail t in o;*« ,r to rnsw-r it, -r.d above nil to acke .vyself conpreh-n-
oi - . If I c :r'»t t:.e .ntitoxic to th- *nti-infuctious eftecta, then
I -a at r.f.r to uhRfc 1 orid it the beginning of ny ,xtj inntion. virus
-.Vx fro.-i !till«', nhich is a virulent virus, i dif f .r-r.ti-tec' froi th-
v-ccin- and- fro living, virul-nt virus, and arid that in viruo ilaecoeO
'iie kiil-d vir;s, the hill-d vaccine, do.a not -roUct .hi o-raon ro-
cir.-.ted . ainst corir-ctinx the disease. In oth i -ores. it is not »;t.i
infectious, :ut v-rely i _etns of reducing ir.e severity of thu fisoasd.

non'.s, it only reducer the toxic effects of th. g-ra. K»:0VeT,

*- ; - ouroose of r.ti— infectious vcccir.atio; a :s to reVent the -raon
?or.f r-ctir.-- th. die os. -.t -11, In otlur ores, it is both nil-toxic

•

'eCtioas. Th- anti-infectio ts eff-cts of the v-.cd.i-, k■•\. v_r,
r cult fro-, tb. f-ot that lik- a n-.tui'l inf ction, it iaaun.roa hu-


9506


1? Juflo-A-F£/-25-2-F_ Idt (Irit. 3rown)
Court 2£o. I, Case I


=rr. body a*aiw. subsequent infection «ith tht» s-a. disease . To subs¬
tantiate this have billions of cas~s of vaccination with other li¬
ving virus. L-t >_ point out this is one example: The vaccination with
smallpox virus, '..'hat I ra spying n-r- is that *u know that we have a
certain — Uw have en absolutely certain nnti-infeetious .irotuction.

Froa this or.-a'lu you can sec that living virus wuld result in such
an -nti-irJ-ctious vaccine. This infinity n.suits if there arc enou^i
antibodies in th- blood or tissues. Thuso antibodies cnec-1 out the of¬
fsets of the gum thrt -nturs the body when a person contracts the di¬
sease. This virus is effective because its antigens -an. retained. Tie
anti en is introduced into the body and is able to prot-ct the body
against subsequent inf-ctior., protect it .a -inst the toxity of the di-
•OGfeJ jura. ThuSO antibodies ar». formed in th_ tissue and -re then
-aptiwd into tbj b fluids, sanely t . .od or blood sums. The so
protective bodies in thw blood w v c*n deoonstraU thu existence of by
th- n-cusor.ry s~rolo£ical examination swiftly. Th-t Quins that the V'C-
cino content o:* antibodies rapidly d~cre e^t, but we kne* that ttov
“bser.cu of .-.tibodies in the blood Is no oroof that the body is not
Laaun., no orot-ction agrinat new disease. Th't is Very import .it for
tndersi andlng this whole probl-m. The 1 iirtnt factor is the iaaunity

•

of *. r , at at of antibodies. This c , however,

c*nnot b_ irovea directly bat has to be proved indirectly La a. serolo¬
gical wav in th t the titer valuer are analyzed before and after “ay sub-
raccinr.t L Then if thu content of antibodies in a typhus vac¬
cine sinks, .- s:ill c-nnot dr-w ray conclusions regarding the dtrruo
of laaunitati m of th. person involved. 3ut »e c-n undertake a subso-
uunt vaccination and iron it draw .nonaously valuable conclusio'ns. Tio
can oossibly ir^Dco in such a sub: nt vaccina.tion. First, tho

titv.r values ill '"in rise, that is to say, the organism has reacted
•o the ..J! v.accLvtion by erecting n_>. orot.ctiv. bodies fhich hav. oe«n
-aptL-d into :.:e blood. This would have. beer, a piroor. vho had prev oraly


IB *ir.e-A-fL-25-3-Feldt (Int. 3ro.-)
Coart Ko. I, Case I


not b_«-n f.tlly La=uniz_d. Hoover, if wo vaccinate. a person in "ton the
titer v-lu-s h vo sunk and the titer values do not then rise after the
subsequent vaccination, then this proves that the person was coaolete-
ly incunized. It -roves tnat the body does rot create any more nnti-
bodi.s, end cons-aik-ntly no aor. antibodies appear in tto blood. In or-
d«r to ascert in this, you do not have to carry out an infection with
a humanly pathogenic virus, but you can use an attenuated, r.oathcg-nic
virus such as m. had in the virus. It was with tto use of such a virus
t the asc.r -nts »ere aadu of which this docun.r.t spooks. These

aubs^ruent inf-ctlons are referred to as "infocticns" both by m- and

•

in Litorture, but the vii*us in question is always an attenuated, ape-
ttogenic virua. Tlxse rxe the scientific insights I have felt it neces¬
sary for <*. to state in ord.r to -lieu this orobL-a to be corr.ctly
evaluated.

In NatzwoLUr also with the persons who had b_.r. vaccinated wc
carried :ut this subsequent testing In a lew weeks after th- first vac¬
cinated r.ceived ou'oseq«*.nt third vnocinatlon, and then wo conducted
the necoss-r-- s.rolo<ic-l exair.ations. It turn-d out that all of these,
■all those uto had been vaccinated, did not hr.va any rlo- in titer va¬
lues after the subsequent vaccination, craving that th-y had already all
b.en immune.

For vurposes o? comparison we now a»:d the rrovri of 40 persons *.rlio
hrd b-en vaccinated oy skin scarification rd we used them .as a control
group. I beli-Ve I ed not go any furth.r into those scientific oat-
terc. Furttor r.'ctdcal proof of the - r .ti-infeCtiocs protection is to to
l curd -Iso in Lie fact that none of thos. vaccinated fell ill o’ typhus

during th. eoide.de,

Q.- itn.se, before I ccr.tinu. in our discussion of thus- locUnvnts,

•

ar. inter icdiary question: you said th-t in the way described, you test¬
ed th. effic-c of your r.ew vaccine in the laboratory a.lroady in Decem-
->-r 1943 '-ad J aacry 1944. You firt.-.-r stated that your scientific con-


18 Jur.e-A-7>25-i-Feidt (Int. Br=*n)

Court Ho. I, Case I

elusions crave to be correct according to what happened in the epidemic
at xintzseiler, but 1 don't see way in June 1914 7*1 planned, as can
be seen from document NO-127, to start a n-* experimental series with
200 ■xj'sjr.s. * .“ay did you do that?

A.- You are overlooking the f'ct, counsel, that above all, it was
ny intention to develop -nd to carry out vaccinations throughout tho
■hole camp in order tc rend-r the whole camp ianurx so that there would
be no further d-njer of typhus. And I also rished to eliainrte this
source of d-.ig-r -or tho civilian pooulation of A l sail a.


9511


13 Juno-,3JG-26-i-G'ylcrd (5rc‘-r.)
Ccurt 1


« (continued) Since re could not carry cut a lrrg-r production
ir. the suaacr cf 19U., I could not do this on e. large scale, but I
nevertheless felt that I cculd vpccinato 200 son-. Thus amdng use
cf the experience we hod free: the first series, wo wished to_compare
the general reactions that would occur in this socond series.

1 Ko> , witness, turn to Document NC-127. You said that probably
there iiculd net be such long lasting reactions ns there- were in the
preliminary experiments. How, when you use the expression "preliminary
cxperin-r.ts", whet do ycu seen and vh:t is ycur retaon for thinking
that there the rerction* would be lees severe?

.. The prclininrry cxp-erin-nts referred tc are the first croup
that was vccdnr.tod in the winter of 194>-'A4 in vhich we ascertained
that tho reaction h^d to be reduced before the v.-ccino could to further
used. This we did by storing the vaccine rwey fra lcni-r period cf
tine. I new had this stored away vcccine available becruoc I h;e’ dene
no further vrccinrting. In the qccntine, I nr a eble to store tlds
vcccine ewey, rad when used it c;cin, we sew that the reaction w:s
considerably less severe.

(\ But, Professor, let no put this tc ycu: in tho next pr.rfgrr.ph
you sped: cf subsequent infection rith virulent typhus gems, and ycu
s-y th t this w-s necessary in order to prove clearly the anti-infectious
effects of the vaccine. But 70 U Just s-id that ycu wanted tc test the
anti-infecticus affect by subsequent vaccination and serological cx-nin-
aticn. !.*ow hcv cm these two things wh: t you Just 3 'id on the Stand
and what is stated here in this document be brought into any sort cf
an .agreement • ith cn: mother? It looks tc ne like- a contradiction.

L I admit that when ycu see this statement from the prospective
cf this trial, it docs leek a little suspicious, and I can't hold it
against a lrytrn fer reading .ate =7 'erds r nooning that 3 not in¬
tended* To explain this sentence, I nay return tc >ih*t I s?i- tc
explain the terms - r.ti-inf ecticus immunity and subsequent infection.

'.hen I say subsequent infection, I m referring tc the subsequent

. - til ■ -


13 Juno-»-i>JG-26-2-Ge7lord (Brown)
Court I


vreccincticn vith living virulent virus containing vaccine, noscly
the third vcccinctlco thrt I carried out in this group.

- Fr.ecsecr, you *r» asking synorxacus thv word "infection" with
■vc.ccinr.ticn", using vaccines frea living — neaely, virulent-virus.
la the feet thrt ycu ore nokin' these •. oris synonyns rn invention :f
ycur a a, or is this cusb.ar.ry usr-ge in literature end in science?

A Iv.ry vrccincticn with a vcccint thrt contains livin'; virus
in -n infection p-r sc. Thrt I oust enphesize very clterly. For this
rerson dene, I bed no aisgivinES about using the word in this context;
Qcrcover, I eai:t uaphr.sitc, I didn't intend to 1 -t the pursens whe re d
lettor sec dc.*rl 7 into ay intentions md whr.t I wrs dcir.., sc thrt
I used this expression her> with no ais^ivincs fit nil.

i Hew, Professor, why were ycu being sc secretive rbout this?

.. 7dl, I kn-w thrt this problca or siailrr prcblcas were being

worked on elsewhere, but I didn't kno*. whether or net ay letter vculd

frll into the hrnds cf persons who would be interested in the wry I

nr.o approaching the prcblea; cn ’ bee-use these were inportent new

scientific discoveries, rhich I of course >mtod tc reserve the right

tc evdurtc, I phrased ay a elf scac.-hrt undccrly to keop ay secrets

to r-yself. Te determine enti-infectieus iraunity, I carried out the

scrolcric-l ocfnincticns th-t 1 drocriy aentionod. These serolcgicd

cxcnlnrticr.s hevo been crrrl-d out in ether virus diseases — in sadl-

pox, r.bcv- .- 11 , -rul it hed proved itself in mirer .1 oeporiaenta. I

carried cut ucrainotions in this artt-r cf sarllpex for ten or twelvo

0

yeers rnd hrd proved the cnU-infecticus ierrunity by such in-’ircct

o-thods.

q Prefesser, is this syncnyncus use "infection" with "veccinr.ticn",
"subsequent vr.ccinr.ticn" rnd "subsocuent infecticr.", custcacry in
lit*.r. turt? If sc, perhaps you ccuTJ givu the Tribunrl rn exra. le.

A I-s. In literature el so we find th~so two weris used syneny-
acusly, sc thet I had r.e aisgivings in using this word. ..s eea.upie,

I cm give y.u the title cf o French work by Blanc, :.’cury end Br-Ltrserd,


If- June— i .-DJG-26-X52yicrd (3rcwn)
Court 1


in the. publication cf the French Acedtmy cf Science. This is Velum,

2C1, p.v . 1226, year 1S35. The titol reeds: "Prcsesncw ct prenunitien
an cours du typhus exanthuaatique ct en ccurs d' uno infection inr.pper-
ento par le virus fcilirirc."

3 Itccss, pinnae sperjt a;rc sickly, otherwise the correct terns
aill net s-t into the record.

The translation: * , presenr.-c end prmunition ere v*ry diificult
to translate. "In the crursc cf.typhus cxanthooaticuo end in the course
cf en invisible infection by virus ccubin-d with gU." The two words
used in the title, "prcacancc" rnd "proainiticn", are difficult to
translate. They ncan r.ughiy, the ccntinurnce- cf the gern to exist
in the erg-niaa, rnd pre-ianunixation. I nij^it read a brief excerpt
free this tact: -:iir.e of those v ccincted vere exruiinod by infection
with pore virus. One rcectod to this virulent inoculat ion. n The
authors here rrc using "inoculation* rnd "infection" synonyacualy.

The;* then ccr.tmuo: "Free; nuuercua subsequent experiments, vo hr.vo
ascertained thrt the fcccine virus (virus vaccin) remains in the
organise cC the person vcecinetad for 25 to 30 days." I v.ote
furthers "The subsequent incculrtion was errried cut -.t the moment
when the persons vaccinated had rn inrppr.rcnt infection (infection
inr.pv ranto). Ccapariscn -xperlacnta shew thrt a vaccine killed with
phenol pre-rides no iasamixatien against r virulent infection (infection
virulent.), rod it irs this tins thrt the inccu :i took
Here those French ruthers arc fcvicusly using "vaccination" rnd
■infection" synonymously. Thus you can see in wh-t context the ;-crd
"Infee tier." ern be used.

3=. TIFF: ICr. President, the r.crk th't the witness Just cited is
unfortunately .-vailable only in French, tut 1 believe th t ;J%r.t you
have ae rd from it rlrccdy is enough to serve cur purposes. If ycu
wish, he* ever, I cm hove the work translated.

7K. If counsel believes that ray 3uch -xtr ots ler

any such uerk ern he had tc the Tribunal, they can be a ran sir ted and


12 Jcnoi>3J j-26-t— Or ylord (Brown)
Court 1


sobeit&cd as a docuacnt. It is not necessary tc take the ti^o of the
Tribunal listening tc c witness reed then frea the stand. ..nything
like that era tc acre sisply suh_ittcd. Hot such longer, counsel, do
you entidp.- te this cxruir.-' ticn of this witness rill continue?

DR. TUP: One hour et the acat teaerroe.

TKZ paiSID2n : I will hend to the clerk two extra copies of this •
jcram dbetnent which are net necessary for the Tribunal. The Tribunrl
‘-iU tKv be in recess until nine-thirty teaerrew acming.

TrL, ItJSH.X: The Tribunal wUl be in recess until nine-thirty
o'clock teaerre* naming.

(The Tribune! adjourned until 19 Juno 1947, 0930 hours.)


If Jure-: -3J-l-l-;>lcy-(=ro*n)-
Cour*. 1

Of r ioic.l Trfescrint of the. Inericcn
Military Iribunnl in the settor of the
United States of ~=orica, *rnir,st
’izrl Smndt, «t el, defendants, sitting
at Su-rnber^, Sorneny, on If June, lfC7,

Ocjo-Cuf, Justive Seels, rroaidin?.

ras .A- S3«l* Forsons in tho courtr«>oa will ple-sc fine thoir seats.

Tha aonoreble, tho Judros of -littery Tribuntl 1.

Military Tribunal 1 ia now In sossion. Cod snvo tho United Statos
of A=r-rica *nd this Honorable Tribunal

Thoro will be order in tho oourtrooa.

TJS PESSILSTTi r. .Snrahftl, will you . soortein whothor tho dofondnnts
er« all pruaont in Court?

THE > r iJt3HaL« Key it plonso Tour Honors, nil tho dofondonta oro nil
present in Court?

THK PBSSTirVZi The Secretary Ocmrtl rill note tho rrcsonso of nil


tho dofondnnts in Court.

1 should like to ask tho Frosccution if they hrv. r-ny idea oonc. rnin :
tho nunber of witnesses who will be oallod by tho Frosooutitn in rebuttal?

H-P-Ti Off hrnd, Tour Hor-r, I o-.n roooll that 1 intend to ooll
-crh'.ys fire r»ro witnesses In robuttal in behalf of tho Prosecution.

7 b.'so wltnoaios will not take »ro then an hour on direct exert notion
on oceh oeorsion. There ary ba aero or thoro ary bo loss, but 1 should


say BrjTOXi*ntoly five.

7HE PK^ILSFT. Tho .‘ribunnl was only inSuirin for on approxlotion
of tho ti*.. u la S4fci«r.ir that tho ‘ribun-,1 expedite tho close of
the oridonoe to the rroctea p mIUU ux:ont. The Tribunol will bo In
sossion r. t lo-st Saturday s»rnin : . ahethor or not *n afternoon sossion

will b


t Saturday will bu announced Inter. Counsol my proceed with
tha witness.


Bblod that bo is still u*dor oath
DR. &UJJ5£ (Eosuacd)


; i

.I..SCT St,..a «-'XCr (Continued)

5516


1 C June-.>Tv : -l-2-i>.loy-(erewa)-
Gosrt 1
5Y La. TIP?*

i. Profoss or, ysstor3oy we stopped when we wort diacuaainr Locu.-nor.t
•0 1 ' 7 , ncyo In Locu-fcnt Seek 12 . *>o lest discussod t o way in which
you testod the offeeta of your voccino '.-cir.st the disease itsolf, that
is the anti-inf oat ioua iammity nd lac whet pirns you hrd for tho
future* ir. thia direction. Pcr’.mpa by way of transition you could olnrify
thia concept in two or thr»«. aontanoes*

A rr •/. i-inf.ctioua inour.it/ have two poasibilitica. One,

of ocurso.is observation of tho Tcooinatod person during an opidonlc.

Tho othjr la - laboratory procedure, whloh 1 w, ptrhn-a oluoidate

briofiy. ‘Ml rcoup of thoao already twico vaccinated wra ;ivon n

third aubacquor.t vrooina ticn of the oulturr.l vrocino. *hia third

vacoinrtion wit not orrriod out in order to give additional protootion

by wry of to ocin tim, rather ita purpose «i by aorolo C iool rwona

to racc-tcin any ohrn : c8 in tho titer values after the entrance into

the body of tho antisoae. »•« aro horo not intoreatod the offoota of tho

netho-enlc oor.-snouts, but only the offoots of th:'nttfeeni« oomnononta.

•

Sines the nurpae of tho third wnssltatlca woa net innur.iiation but
rather c toat of innunitati r, 1 had no -Ja-ivinfa, follow!™- tho
x -* 1 „ of othar cutters in •ponkins of thia oa m infootion or subse¬
quent infootion, but I nuat r.rcir umhaito that thia vaccine contained
no covenants pathcR-n'o to huarn bein;e of, after thia rcnowod.intro-
• duotion ore forced, which will -cnlfost itsolf in - new incrorao in
tho titer values - a doterninod by tho i.cil-?clix reaction, thia -rovoa
that tho body hr d not teen oonplotcly i-anunirod thereof era. The body
tissues reacted by *a«f refur in- now anti-bodies which then entered into
tho bleed. If the titer value in thia subsequent i-noulation robins
u-chanrvd, tten wu car. draw tho ccncluaion ttet tho c^nisn has con-
plcto ioacunity. The tissue forced now anti-bodioa. me thoroforo none

ttmoorsd in the blood. That ia t synopsis of I •«* yo«U»rtoyi

• •

< Thun Frofesse: you say that tte aubaequont infootion, nontionwS
in Locunont C 12','. with virulent typhus R-re* wrs to bo t subsequent


19 Junu-k-OJ-I-3- .rlcy-(srown)-
Court 1.

viceination with your virulent, that is to «&y living, typhus virus vncci-
c-. which w-.s net. P^t^oronie for hunen bcin»s, is thet corroctt

j. Yus, thet is corr - ot. 1

W Thun you mko synanowous the two terms, °subsoquont infjetion" ' nd

*

"subsoquont inosculation"? *

* Yes.

*>r£ I nsSeed you yostcidry whether tho intcrchenp© of those two
words cr concepts was a special cn your port, or whether the interohnnpo
of these two wor«!e or cnconts otn bo found in litor^turo; you r.nsworjd
this quostion in the offirsntiv© siyinp that tho int.rchnn'C of thoso
words was cust'.mry in litor-tur-, and to prove this you cited o Fronch
paper. Sow, .itnoss, you sneak Fronch, and oonsoquontly it is to bo oxpoo-
ted of you that you rai'ht hove used Fronoh tjrns horc, but it is not tb
bo oxpootod that tho Tribunal or the ether do<'on'ants and dofense
counsel rro so familiar ith French it to understand theso tochnioal
tor os. 7horofcr., it would be ©xnodient if you would briofly repeat In
siBplo 3ormn what it we* you statod yo*t usinf the Fronoh t rns,

* 1 arid ns n model for the tcrninolory I usod I hod taken another
authors, and I nontionod as an OJttnplu r neper by tho Fronoh soiontista,
alone, "oury, -nd 8r.l*oiar, in tho publiw tionc of the French ..ondony
of 3oiencc. This is - voluue 201, n*.'c 1226.of the voar 1955- 1 shall
repeat tho title onco rr-in ir. Gcrarn;"Pr jso'noo rnd prenunition in tho
course of tyrhus oxonthcmticus and in tho course of an innppnrant

infsetion froa * virus ccabinod with call." -jcin a brief cxcorpt froa
texts Kino of th so vaceinr.toe r^r« testod by boinr 'iron an infection
with pure virus. "In other words, the authors r.ro hero equating infection
r.nd innoouloticn. They continue, "from mrorcus lrtor oxp-rin r.ts wo
feund out that the vaccino virus r.ncinad in the or^nism for 2y-3 n ddys.
The sufcsoquont inncculetirn wos ndoinistored fit tho tiru h-n th v-.coi-
r/ted persons hnd a hiddor. infection. Froa comp'-rison it w-s r.seort'in
th t a virus killed with atnxul had nc effect m a virulent inf'eti.-n."


1$ Jlcy-(Irrwc)-

Court 1

I believe thet is ell I have to rcpoet cf this pcrtieular work. !!ow # if
cne looks at this oerer critics!!y, ona secs isnedietely that tho authors
undortook on infoction with a prthorenic virus. In othor words, thay did
exactly whot wo oro ehar-cd with having dono horo, n=»ly infootinp huraen
beings with a pctho^onio virus. I have anid sovcrnl times that such
oxperiasnts with pathogenic virus wore not undertaken by us.


9519


Court So. 1

IS Jun 47-*t-2-l-i3t-Heehea (Brown)


HE. KAEDT: 1 pro muse. Tour Honor, that the defense counsel will
hare these excerpts In Trench translated into the English and German
languages and sutettted to the Tribunal, In accordance with the instruc¬
tions of the Tribunal yesterday.

SB. TIP?; Hr. President, I did not understard the Tribunal to
request that this should be put in evidence. I thought the Tribunal said
if I wished to subs it it I could do so. If, however, it \me the wish of
the Tribunal, I shall have the docueoct put in evidence.

THE FEXSIDlffT: Defense counsel correctly understood the suggestion
nade by the Tribunal. Does the prosecution desire that this be trans¬
lated and Bade a pert of the record!

HR. KAHDT; Tour Honor, it seosn they arc talcing auite an ieeuo of
it. I think it would be voll that it bo translated into the English
language so that v« car. Interpret it in our brlofs ns voll n» Dr. Haogcn's
interpretation.

THE PHESIDEST: Very well, tho dofense counsol will coooly with the
•uggostion sado ty the prosecution.

£R. TIP?: Very well, Tour Honor.

3T TR. TIPPl

Q, Professor, I think tho subeeouont inoculation Question has been
definitely clarified by now. I should like to tako up in Document HO-127
tho further conception of what you stated thcro. Tou wrlto;

■This tine 1EO persons will be used for tho vaccination and 50 for
tho control inoculation.”

Then, you also write that illnesses oust be oxpectcd. Sow, what do
you scan! The prosecution understands under tho concept "control inocula¬
tion* persons who were not vaecinetcd and were then givon the disease so
that they could be ccepexed with the oersons who had received vaccinations.
Tell us whether you used the tern ■control persons", let us say, in the
sene vey as Ding used it. Tell us just what you did =ean by the tern
■control persons” and what your clans were!

A. Sirst of ell. let ae say thet this was only a plan end that vac-


Court Sc. 1

15 Jus 47-K-2-2-£2X-keeha= <2rown)


cisatloa was sever actually carried out. I intended the following: I


vested to vaecirate t-o groups of 150 persona tvico in the noraal way,
ready, by intramuscular injection. This group, after a lapse of four
wee<s, was to be given a aubaecuent vaccination through scarification,


auch as la carried out in asallpox vaccination and which I explained
yesterday. This acerificatlon was to be a third inoculation to teat tho
issusirir*; effect on the first two, as I also described yesterday. Kow,
the control group for this tea to have a single vaccination, using the
scarifying sothod. This would have be do it oossiblo to tost tho scari¬
fication reactions of those who received the third subsoouent vneclnntlon
with tee rosults of those who recoived only tho singlo scerificatlon
vaccination. Thus, vhon I speak of the group of non-vaccinatcd persons,

I as speaking of this latter group, naaoly, the pooplo who roceivod only
oco vaccination with the scar if lent ion nothod, thoso who had roceivod no
previous vaccination, so vo would have to count on tho reaction to tho
vaccination.

This is what I aoan whoa I say hero in this docunont that wo suot
count on sickness. Thoso sicknesses I rofer to fro, of courso, tho
reactions tc tho vaccinations, but, of courso, they arc not any ouch thing
as a sanlfest typhus disease ltsolf, which of courso our attenuated vac-
cico ewild not produce.

Q, Witness, you just told us this sickness reforred to wao a reac¬
tion to tho vr-cclac, in other words, a fever, headachos, fntiguo, otc,
such sysptccs cs ero well-known to everyone who has boon vaccinated.

Then, why do you sneak of sickness at all in this letter, if these are
si=pl 7 the reactions that arc *. - be expected fron tho vaccination?

A. hy letter was probably read only by layacn, who would probably
have no idea vhat the tors "reaction to vaccines" scant. It was there¬
fore easier to speak of'sickness. Moreover, these prisoners were being
used for work end wero not to be kept nvey fron work any longer than ’-ec
absolutely necessary. Since I did not have enough experience, with vacci¬
nation by scarification, ! did speak of the possibility of such a reaction


Court So. 1

19 Jus 4?—jt-2-3-Z24-kcchan (Brown)


is or lor to be absolutely covered. Since the inoculation* did not take
slaee, we do not, of course, knov whether there would have been such
reactions.

q. Professor, if I understand you correctly, tho anti-infectious
effoct of your vaccine was tested by you, in the way you have Just
described, in the course of your first vaccinations in December of 1943
end January of 1944 in Satxveiler. Was this planning that is described
in Docunent S0-127 essentially different fros tho work that you had pre¬
viously carriod on in Katxweiler?

A. Thera was no fur.decental difference; tho only difference was
that tho vaccine hrd be in stored away for a longer tine In the second
ceso, so that wo anticipated that tho vaccine would hove arturod further;
thus we could oxpoct a further reduction in tho reaction to tho vnecino,
but it could bo proved only in practice to what oxtont thle *ould
actually bo tho cose. This again was a tooting of tho tolerability of


tho vaccine.

Q. Do I understand you to »ay thnt thooe olano wero nevor out
into offect and that in January of 1944 was tho laot tine you carriod
out inoculations in Sctxvoilerl

A. Too, no further vaccinations were carriod out in Satxwoilor.

Q, Sow I shall have to turn back to the tostlaony of tho witness
Edith Schaidt. On 9 January 1947, page 1378 of the English transcript,
Edith Schaidt said that your vaccinations in Satxweller were continued
until July of 1944. Sow, did you cake neny trips to Satxwollcr in the


suaaer of 1944T

A. Tes, I was in Satxvoilor ecveral tiaes during the coidealc in
tho suaacr of 1944. I vent to tho caap at irregular intervals to assist
the doctors vfco were combatting the eoidoaic there, which had reached
considerable proportions. I did so to deliver the dclousing eocaratus,
which has already been sectioned, but no vaccinations were being
adainictered at that tire. That was prevented by, among other things,

9522


Court Sc. 1

19 Jun 47-K-a-4-i54-#C£b an (Brows)


th« fact that I had arxy sllitary duties and as consulting hygienist
einply waa not in • position to spend the tine carrying on observations
in Sattveilcr. Therefore I had no tine to carry out inoculations.

But, Professor, Frauleln Schsidt said that you went to Natsweiler
with ell your saterial and fros this she drew the conclusion that further
inoculations were carried out.


9523


Court So. 1

IS Jun 47-ri-3-l-Z=X-?eldt (Brown)

A. It ia true that In =y tripe to Setiveller I took oaterlal with
=e. These were packages of phenol which were to serve for the sterile
extraction of blood for the Veil-Tcllx reaction. This test tee carried
out by us during the course of the epideoic. The doctors at the camp

a

had no teat tubes and no sterile apparatus for taking blood tests, and
that Is *fcy I took this caterla 1 with °«» and this Is the oaterlal that
Miss Scheldt. saw ne taking along, although It bore no direct relationship
to the tyohus laboratory.

XB* TIP?: hay it olease Tour Honors, the witness Scheldt herself
■aid during her testimony that she neroly concluded that the inoculations
were continued at Satrveiler, but she did not.say that she had any
knowlodge of her own on thie fact.

BT D3. TIP?:

Cnc question that arises free your testimony yesterday, wltnoss.
You said that you had no virus strain in Strassbourg that wee oathoganlc
for husan boings. Vhere did you get your nlckottala strain of llco
typhus with which you oanufactured your vaccine?

A. This lice typhus strain was a virus sent us by Professor Ciroud
fros the Institut Pasteur in Paris; this typhus virus had gone through
several anlsal passages and it vac sent to us In this farn fros Paris.
This van the only laboratory strain that w had.

Professor, wouldn't It have beon very oasy, or at least a lay-
sac isegines this to be so. to bread a strain oathogcnic for hunan
beings, or can that not be done so easily in the laboratory?

A. Veil, perhaps the laynan thinks it is very easy to obtain a
strain pathogenic for husan beings, but we know fros literature that this
doesn't sees to be outte so easy. If one wishes to have such a strain,
then ore suet catch the Infected persons at a vory early stage.

^ Professor, you are using the tors ’infected oersons". Vhat do
you seen by that? Do you sear, real, actual cases of typhus, or do you
seen artifically Infected ccxsccs?

A. I seas natural cases of actual tyohus. As I was saying, In


Court So. I

IS Jus 4?-k-3-2-IHX-7eldt (Srown)

general one does cot know tfcea the actual Infection began. The infoctcd
person reaches the clinic only after the disease has progressed Into a
relatively late stege. At this point in the course of the disease, unfor¬
tunately, the Rickettsia virus is no longer in the blood but hoe already
taken up its residence in the tissue. Thus an extraction of blood and
passage through an Inals succeed in only a very snail percentage of the
cases, and only in early cases. Thus you vill aee that tranenleeion is
not so easy and does not alvays achieve Its goal. A really successful
transaiesion to a n la a ls - this v« also know fror literature - can usually
be done only if a hucan being is used so that the virus is uessed through
the hucan orgonisa first. In other words, it isn't so easy.

Q, Then I can tun up as follows: You had no strain pathogonic for
huzan beings. Further, neither in h'atrwoiler nor in SchlrncJc did you
carry cut o^serinents in which you infoctod prloonors with a living
virulent virus that ves pathogonic for hucan beings. You slaply used
your living, that is to say, virulont, virus in Schirack and Natswoiler

e

for purposes of protective vaccination, /urthcraoro, you sold that,tho
oxporiaontal aspects of your work consisted in tosting tbo tolerability
of the vaccine and that you collected further data for tho study of tyohus
vacclno production, is that correct?

A. Tee.

q, Sow, Professor, I turn to the next point, naaely, the rosenreh
assignaents that yai received. At the very beginning of your teoticony
you said thet your tyohus research rested on ycair own initiative and

•

that to receive aid, particularly fincncinl aid, in this research you
applied for research assignaents, is that correct?

A. Ysc, It is.

q, Yculd ycu please tell us again fros when you received these
ossignaonts?

A. Sons of then I received fron the Reich Research Council, others
froa the Xedical Inspectorate of the Luftwaffe.

q. Perhaps ve had better turn back to Docueent 50-137, Docuaont

9525


Court Sc. 1

19 v-un 47--S-3-ZE-7 e ldt (Erown)


3oo* 12, psge 76. "hi* Is your appliedion to the rector of the Scich
University Strassbcurg, 7 October 1943, in vhich you ask that your
Institute bo accepted as a silitary installation. Vlll you please take
a look at this docuaent and tell us fcov it cane abcut?

A. Jhis application is baaed on a circular letter sont out by the
Reich klnlstry of Education to the rectors of all the univoreities. In
this circular letter v« vere ecked to state vhether our institutee vero
nillterily nocossary, to decide whether or not we should receive corres¬
ponding assistance. Here is on application for a research assigreor.t
under So. 2 here froo the Luftveffc Hedical Inspectorate, nasely, a
rosearch asslgnnent in typhus vaccines. So. 4 is another typhus appli¬
cation. It was Issue1 by the Reich Rosearch Council. Again the subject
is typhus, end this is a puroly rosearch asslgnnent.

Q, Professor, one queotion about this laot point. This application
of the Reich ?. 0 8oerch Council bears the note "top secret". Vhy is thlc
top sccrot?

A. That I can't tell you, but I essune that during the war such
theses wore handled as top secret and were given preference ir. torse
of priority of raw naterials, and so forth. I cen't give any other
reason. They roceivod a vory high priority rctixv.

Q, “hen you don't think. Professor, that there were any reasons
for nalntalr.lng secrecy In this cettor?

A. So, I don't, and that cen be seer, free the fact that tho
results of this work were subsccucntly published.

Q. I as, of course, particularly interested in So. 2, tho assign-
sent you received fros the Pedicel Inspectorate of the Luftwaffe. Toll
nc, Professor, which Eeferat of the Kedicel Inspectorate took care of
the typhus assignments, ond with when did you carry on negotiations?

A. The Hygiene Eeferat was the one I negotiated vith. This vac
the Eeferat that concerned itself with virus Questions. I negotiated
first of ell vith Professor Eoae, as he has said severe! tines, then
vith Dr. Atncr. Ea vac the Referent for Hygiene. And then I spoke with

9526


:<?urt So. 1

19 Jun 47-*-3-4-ZHX-?elit (Sroo)


the scs la charge of the funds, Antsrat SrIntel.

Q. Toe said that you negotiated with Hose as consulting hygienist
Rid With Atncr as the cccpetent Ecferect. Eowevor, as you cen soc free
this docunent, the research essignnents all bear the file nunber £5, end
also the Heferat nunber 2 II ?. Those ere the ambers of the Roferrt for
aviation nsdicine. Conseouontly the prosecution has assused that Hr.
3ocicor-?reyser.g htd soaething to do with tho giving of these aesigrmente,
because he was the cccpetent Sefercnt in the Heferat of which this is the
file note. What do you have to say about thet?

A. As scientist and consulting hygienist I really concerned cyoolf
ver:' little with file notos end such natters. Consocucntly I cannot give
you ersy roolly satisfactory lnfornation on this point. I do know thrt
tho filo note 65 always scant research, because it always acpcexod on
research assignnents. And I do know that all applications for research
wore worked on by the Rcferat for Aviation Kcilolno. But since I didn't
belong to this agoncy, I didn't concern nysolf with tho red tone that
went on inside the Kedical Inspoetornto, I olaoly vent to Hr, Atncr or
to iVofossor r«ooo if I wanted their support.


9527


1C JuoQ-Ii-SJ-l-tossGr-(cr6wn)-

Court 1.

< Professor tho Prcsocuiion has assarted that you received ardors
frea -r. -celrer-Proyaenw, tc oarr T cut yoyr research oasisncaonts. i*id
you?

A ye. I never roceivod nn order. I crc't ira^inc. how suoh or. order
r ovon instructions for sciontifio work could h'vo boon wordod, 1 don't
think thnt any cf the yontloaon thoro hr-d suoh insi-ht into this work

to hove an-bled thoa to pive as cny instruction. In rdditi'n, r.scorch
oonnot bo dircctod recording *.n orders or dirootivos, boonuso tho nr.th
thnt is to be taicon is prooiaely whft tha rosocrch cr-r. is try In; to find,
out.

W iJwn, Profossor, I understand you to soy that you rocoivud no
orders froa tho -odisnl Ins-ootorato in this diroetion. hec - our work
supervised by the . odioal Ins^ootorato or, aoro s-ociflcnlly, were you
ohocked or. ir. dotail in tho oourso of your work by tho ' odiool ins^oto-
rrte?

A You oann t sperk of any suoh thinp os supervision or ohookir.; on cry
work. They did not tore torouyh onou;h tavr lod;o. Of courso, tho -entlo-
(twr. in tho edio-1 Inspector-to wore intorostod ir. the propr-.*s the
work wea rr.kin;, end 1 spoke fbout it with sororal rontlonon, for
example Professor Lose, ii ho hlnsolf has said.

W iiol 1 , -r. Beokor-rToyson- said hero on tho stand that ho visited
you once in your institute in Strsssbourr ir vul" l^A. This visit has
boon touoh.i or. briefly durin; your tost loony. May I osk you now when
you first code ir. ueckor-Proyscny's oocuaint-.neo?

A 1 hod hoard of -r. :eokor-Froyaor» and ,Vxo; that ho wnc subordinate
to Professor Anthony in tho Roforst for /.nation odicino. I -ndc his
personal ccquaintmco on c tri-> froa ..oidolborp to Preibur- ia =ros<?u,
in June or 'ey of jeUu, • nd then ir. 3ookor-?r«yson* visited no tho
•nd of July lcta-, ot Profossor Schroodcr's «u.--aation, in order to '’iscuss
r>ith rs the problor of acquiring uxeeriruntal -ni3*-ls. Ha to find
cut -• s-ecific rishos in this natter, because ■ tint tirx he was in


.- 5 -


1C JuK-:t-SJUi-2-Loor-l -rorai)-
Coart 1

char-a of acquirin' ox-'cri^ntol ani=»ls in the cdical Inspectorate
lr. -oskur-Freysen' had ooar.ections with lr. Sucfaalle, who *es broodin'
aairels on a lar^e se-le, a«i ho wanted to aobilite this nan's or.or-i-s
for me. This, howercr was not done in Strassboury, but lr. Suchalla
risited s* in Obersohroibor.^au, whoro wo discussod sottiny up tho r.oceaaa-
ry enraratua for breeding and whoro ho pro-.iaod to provide rith tho
mmiivv anlsr la. lr. Suchnlla visited « then . Iwenua* lr. Boolcor-
froyaonc oould r.ot yivo hin eny full satisfactory informtion about =y
needs and roquirencr.ts.

W You also oontionod * visit by Profossor Sehroodcr. Car. you toll
us whon this visit wasl

A At tho ond of lay 1?!, Sehroodcr visitod no in Strnsobour-. and
■ r ent a few hour* with at in tho Hy'lonio Institute.

t, Porhepa you oould tell us whnt happened durinr this visit"

A It rent in tho way any visit fron a hiph -ailitary chiof would take
olnee. I showed hin through tho Instituto. rarticularly tho animl
section, which lntoroatcd his preatly; then wo had c convocation in
very jonorcl terns that oonoernod itself with eoiantific work.

W At those visits fror lr. Bookor- r ro"son- and Prof. Sohrodor, was
there o.r.tior. of tho foot that you had carried out or intendod to carry

out oxporiaer.ts in ratswoiler or SobSrwkt

A Ko. I don't think so. U loost “ can't ro»t*or any aontion of


that.

V few, Frofessor. re.-rdiny tbaso roso-rch nssisnoamt., you said


that you roooivod no orders es to how the tssirr.oBonts wore to be
carried out - you rccoivod no coaeands or directives. ?ou said that
they woro r.ot supervised and that you spoke wither with lr. Iccfcr-
Frcysor.y or Professor Schrovdor -bovt d otr.ils. such -s tho vat a motions
• : X r cr .c-irxc. -ew to r-turr. to tho KSOnfoh • •« F* ■


T 'ndcubtsdly you reported on than, didn't "ou“

A T.s. It was. I believe r rosorih:d that every quarter or soad-nnual
1 - a rcoort vr-s to bo sent in on tho -rowr. ttrt one's r,so-roh *-•


9529


1C Jure-—W sscr- ( ;r ownJ-

Court 1

— kin--. I was Tory irroculor in mooting this aquirenent, which is quito
understandable because one cannot procedure results, at any : roscribed
date, of the sort that one con report on. “ox end then 1 did sont interim
reports to the iadical lespe:tor-te, but 1 did not -bide by that directi¬
ve v^ry often. It was, for purely factual reasons, i^ossiblc to jive
reports on specifiod dates.

W Can you tell us xhr.t tho oontonts of those int rin roperts wore?

A In fltoersl, le-vln?: out all the details, re de-.cribod tho profess
tho work was akin,:, y reports wore sont in, irst of "11, when I was
specifically asked to send in a report; or s-.oondl", whan 1 had used up
all ey funds and had to -Wo cocao reason for rishin' additional funds.
These reports were nuoh tho sane in Torn as tho one hero to the heich
hesoarch Council. In other words, they wore Tory .-cnor"l la form.

^ Mtcesi, tho 'rosocution has assortod that Tro- your interim ro -
ports tho fact oould be seen that tho innoculations. or tho experiments,
the Prosecution oclls tho-., xero oerriad out on prisoners. Lid you
Motion «ny specific details in your interim reports?

A In these interim reports I certainly did not t»ntion any specific
detail«, if only for tho reason that no rosoarohor jives inforretion
on his plans and results before tho work is concluded. Tho only thin.-
thst could interest the fedleal Inspectorate in this rtfttor was when 1
could bo jin lnrje-scnlo snnufaoturo of tho vaccine, and it was not neces¬
sary to ro into details in order to .-Wo then this inf or nation.

W Professor, none of your interim reports to tho odionl Inspectorate
are here in evidence, hoover. there are -*ny documents referring to vour
typhus research os such. *.o want to jo.through these docu-ents to "ind
cut whether there is anythin; in the* that you carried out cr-orimonts
on human be Inf. Tou wrote to clrt, as we have already soon, but we
can iynoro that because that docs not oor.crn the odioal Inspectorate.

Lo you efca with pa?

A Ye.. That is true, -hat I sent to Hirt was copies of letters !


had sent elsewhere.


9530


jc Juoo-M-GJ-U—.-Less«r-( Erowr.)-
Sourt 1

^ Tfcen, witness, plecse turn In Locurent 3ooV 12 to najji 66. This is
t lotter froc you of the 2?th of A-ril 1$U4, to the Beioh -3r.istor of
Aviation and Co;-r»nder in Chiof of the LuftwafPe-l-in Ik-in other fords,
to the ijdicel Inspectorate. f his is -ocunent !'C-Jf>2, Zxhibit >02. This
docuaer-t is "ratty lonp, Frcfoasor; perhaps you could just toll us
briefly what it la about and st'ceifically toll us whothcr there is any
indication in thia doou ont that you innoeulatod prisoners experimented
or. huren boin'3.

A I havo thia docuaont boforc no. It is ainly an opinion on r vaoeino
production by * firr.. This lotter rontioned horo of 8 January ici*k, does
not seen to bo hero, r.or oan I reeenber v-hst it said, but it can bo soon
from thia doou-aont hero wtat the sub/oot must ha»o boon. I fas nsVod to
tost this v ocino boo'Uso thoro woro doubts na to its offioecy. This
veeoir.e was a Icillod virulent from the ehrin/r forks. Or. oontr *at
to the vaccino of Koch, Oildeneister, and s^eolf. this vacoino used not
only the irtellino sao but-

V fitness, 1 don't think: the dotails aro of intorost to tho Tribunal.
This, thon was a vaccine mnufaoturod by tonobody olae, tho Bohr inf.

»orks, and you vero to test it. Sow, how wore you to to at it -nd how
did you tost it?


f


r

L9 Jun©-i-FL-5-l-Pri=««u (In*.. 3rotm)
Court ho. I, Case I


A.- 7a* testrLv was carried oat In the laboratory. It -.<as ascer¬
tained alcroscoTicaily i nether the vaccine arulactured bv the 'e.ring
orte contained core or less Rickettsiae than the vaccine -.tee cccor-
ir.: to our s educations.

i ;cHere .tat ia enough for this voir.t. Then the testing nae
carried out in tie laboratory?

A.- Tea, in t: e laboratory ar.u rtith the aid of a dcroscooe.

Q.- And the result of this test is sot do.'n here ir. this let ar?

A.- Yes.

n.- 7non th’.s letter has nothing to do vith any inocule' ons or

uX^erLsents?

A.- Yot- sx a: ;U.

Than let*a tum to ja L .e 9f, 1 0»t document, Doc meat

Exhibit 309, a le .ier of 29 Au. ust 1944, Saalw, Jron tl.o Hi h Covint
of tho Luitttc. 2. It sears the 1 ile no bar 55 and tho P.ofcrnt r ot. tion
"2113". It 1: ■.dro z a i nrily to you. It refers to a letter of

21 Juno 194 . txo\ you. Can you rocall u .at that letter .-0 ir. It? It
vas not offer*' m ovidcaco.

A.- ;;o, I can't, but Iron this letter eru I can aoro or less re¬
construct v ., it .-St have been. I ass.- * ran this, as can c or.n
!raa Kuaber , I c.\ requesting additional funds lor tyohue research.
\ hen so doir. , es 7 have said, I always sent ir. brio! re j orte on ay
vork.‘ I gather Troa oeregraph 2 and 4 that I rote that ay .-orh tmo ro-
ceoding satisfactorily that the vaccine h'd already been ta3tos ir. prac¬
tice and had wove Its efficacy, naaely, in Katraeiler in the au-nor
of 1944 dun- tfco ooido.tic there. I -.cr.cion this because during that
coidenic oir vaccine had proved itself.

'T..cn t. :rc is disc ass ion of eottin; -up a nanufhetury or vac¬
cine, and you avc already said that you intended to underta!3 t is a-
nttefactury in year institute at the request of the tedical Inspectorate.

9532


19 Juno-J-?L5“2-Fri. .c u (Iat. 3ro*n)

Court :^o. I, Cass I

I believe that we can skip that point noe, but 1 aa afraid I have to
bother you aytir. about this file r.ujber. Again we have the fiio nciber
55, and this tied the Roferat additional notation n 2IIA."

TE2 PRCSIZL3.T: Counsel, when you read that series of numbers be¬
fore you rcid ”2113." Or. the Tribunal's copy it is ■2HA."

DR. IT??: This docuwnt, Your Honor, bears the notation "2IIA"
whereas ti.; fornor iocuucnt bore the ni cer "2113'. NO-131 has the num¬
ber —

THc. PT—SL. . 7: The translation st-.ee to bo "3."

E.T2 , .P*JS7.3: Ifr fault, your Honor.

3Y ir, n?? i

Q.- Froa tills Xilo notation, witness, the Prosecution lias trev-n tho
conclusion t.^t oil the contents o; this letter, nuabers 1 to L nero
workoc on by Dr. Cockor-Froysong, tho Referent for Aviation 1sdicino.
bhfct do you heve to say to that?

A.- To that I can only say that this vaa a hygiene oat tor am', in
.ay opinion, aist '.*v« been worked on by the Rcfer-nt for K.- iono; naaciy
Ata-jr, or at boat by the consulting hy;\onlst, Prof. P.oso.

Q.- Tho Prosecution lays preat woi hfc or. oora*raih IV in this c'o-
cun-nt. This pcrs;r*nh roads, and I quote: "Tne reoort of 21 Juno 1.-4A
in which the invest!; at ions at Xatzwc.il or arc aontloncd should havo
boon s-nt as secret." Fr» this tho Prosecution dra-»s tho conclusion
that in your 1-Lt-r of 21 June 194.*. thorc au6t have buen soie -untion
of uXfMtriroci s or inoculations in the. concentration caup of .atr :eilor.
Can you uni lam time, itr.ss7

A.- This report :~alt with a ty-ph.-c *.>l£caic, as you can oc.o from
paragraph HI in this l.tt.r, a-ri typhus epidemics ir. any caw :iorc
to be reported or. es socr.t. That was a -rwral directiv-.

C..- r.;m, itrx.se, you say that this request for r-cr. cy has
nothing to ~.o ritfc any u: -_ri.oer.ts in a concentration coop.

A.- So, ZB I sold, the fact that thoru was a typhus - i .u.c In

9533


i9 Ju£t-^f-FIr5-3-rri xau (Int. 3ron)

Court So. I, Cc:^ 4

t:.- casp was ono:*h r-ssor. for having the atUr k^pt secret.

Q.- 3<*», •.fit.'X-ss, let's turn to Docuaor.t HO-132 on th- .v.xt -££0
cf tfc*. document book, a Liter iron 70a dated 19 Septusber 1...- , to
th^ Hifib Coacaod of tfte Luft*alfu, Chiuf o: the Ldical Larvic.. 7.;- re-
5-r.r.e*. is the. doci xnt *.«e Just discuss-d, naa-ly, 213-131. This, then,
is your rvply to that l»tt,r. >.ho ir. th- 'I ileal Inspectorate r-coivcd
Utters of this sort?

A.- This a: in is a h.\ ieix satt-r, and I knw lor c^rtoint at
th«s^ T.-.ro her.dice wither by Dr. At-.r, :mo nas th- SXf.r-nt for
or b" Pro;. Kos-, th Consulting Zionist.

‘ o 1 , • itr.-so, in conclusion, r- nr.irv thw». two doouxnts,

70 U a aid that this typhus -oideftic a«> thus also your inv.stigationo
v.re carri.- 0 t in th*. concentration caap of .atr’-iler, but h«r- in
Docusunt 10-132, -ou spoak of tba cay as such.

A.- Tnst 10 to bv traced bock to v eut’ to maintain socrec •. I
could not iv. iruclou cLtails.

Q.- In ot.Vr ports, you didn't a-ntion the fact tint Jatruuil. r
fcnn a concentration cxrp7

a.- :.’o. I ie \ot.

Q.- That cojxliu.us the discussion of the ir.t-rla r-oorta, ar.

I shell turn Co -jit final reports, .hat sort of resorts did you hevO

to turn in ;ten a i-c- of work was finished?

IH5 ??.J& I T: Counsel, hou long will your further uxar.inrtion of
this «itnuo 3 csr.tinuc?

1 . TIT?: I Link I shall be do.-v. by th*. int-mission.

PSJSr..n: Tou - 1 .an you -stisat- fifteen ainuUs furth-r? TX
Tribunal ia!l noti X in r.c.sB for a leu ninvtes.

(Theroiaon a r.c .33 was taker..)


953A


19 Jucw-14-r L-7-1-C sole (Xnt. 'Jib_r 11)

Court lio. I, Cr*- I

TH3 'JJ& 'J* L: 71;- Triburr.l is -gain in s-ssion.
ifcy It >L.-8w your Baun ( th- d e f o n t rnt Poricorny : - -

cus-d by the Trixni'l y-st-rday is h9fi Ih. 7 ort.

TV- i*_£D-1.7: Th- S-cn.t:r;' G-n.r-1 .rill note th- rbs-nc- of th.
d_I _r. nt Povkaray parsac nt to -xcus. by th. Court on r.qu- ot ol nia
couna. 1 .

Th- Tr->--- 1 r.ji d.sir-t to ranounc- tl.-t th- Triburrl will bo in
s-ssion -.11 ->y S-.t-rdiy ol this wook. Son- tine -.go tb- Tri -un-.l rdo

-r. -stir.t. of f >- iia- th t rooli b- n.c.sa-ry finish th- t-hing
if t.stLxony in this c-s-. Th~t -sti-r.t- h-.s n-w b--r. er.oeudod rad tho
-n<S is nit y-t. Th- Pros-cut ion inf >ros us th*t th-y h-.v- fivo roro
uitn-sa-s ti c*ll in r.butto.l, -nd th- ?ri.oiu.'l, *»hil- fulinj xt no-
:.ss-jy to . Utlto th- thing A t-stioony, rad while not doslring
to h-ao-r ath-r the Proaecation or th- wx-ns-, th. Tri bun- 1 rill h-'.r
th- titn-ss.; \-,o rr. off-r-d, but it tr.y „v-n b- n-c-cc-ry du- to cir-
caastrncu* x-enc' rr.y.rx-'s c.ntr-L Urt th- Tribunrl will -von pro¬
ceed to h -Lei ni ht 0-ssioi.a, but in -ny -vent th- Tribunal "ill b- in
s-osior. -11 C y . turd-.y of this *-_k f-r th- ucu-1 hours, -ad or-on-

r-.tlans mil b- r.d- to irv- lunch-on s-rv.d in th- Curt house ~s uair.l

• 1

on ordinary c- rt .vs.

Couna-1 vy or -c— d.

"Y . TIP?:

.v tf-ssor, s- c.3- now to your fir-1 r.oorts. In wbr.t 1 am
did y u x-ix t.inti r-p.rts?

A.- I .in a.t ciidt any sp-cific :i..-l r-por»s, but <*h-n re¬
sults s— ,a-c to x north otblic-tion I suboiLt-d o -cnuscriot i or r *-
?r;v 1 , r.c -h. cont-ata of th- 3nnuscri;t .re “.t th- ana- tla- tbo
finr.l r.oort.

fAnd ho- -ny c-nose riots, thrt is, now -my .in-1 re rts wore
o:;.oi t.d b. - yo , Pro -ssor?


95b5


-•* ; -2-(Int. Uiberall)

Court : o. I, Cate I


As as the typhus work was concerned, two aanuecripts or
that kind were eufcdttec as final reports, one was published subse-
cr-^.Uy, that is, at the beyinning of 1944, the other study, -hich con¬
certed vaccinations vith tte louse vaccine, was published at Ve one'

of 1944,

r v.- Anc -°re wer your papers ou-liskod, Professor?

A.- "Zcntrslblatt fuer Pathologic." (The Ce;.tral Jo.in.el or Pa¬
thology).

Q.- These ?aiera hove not yet been fitted in this trial, only
various documents re to then, witness. Writ of ail the .'ecu xnt

of the Prooocutic. -128, jcibit 337, fctet is lr uasnt 'ook Ho. 12
■ a o 95 o. the lish ard 97 of the Geraan book. It is the letter
with the heading* " faaical Acaccny of the Luftwaffe" Training Group
Science axv; search, 7 Jaly# l%/tf arv , u i# 3i , n#d by 0bcrattir . t ^

feswr Dr. Lotunburgsr, ltness, iroa that docuaent I should lUw to
iscuce aeroly one ioint with you, and that is the folio ing: It is
aentior.ee hero, - out the riddle of the ia e, t}»t one ha* to coaparo the
results Of vaccines ith the average fever cherts of tho exourLiontal. on
the one har. ar/ the control persona on tie other hand, iny I ask you
•-o ’-oil us, you t.o-I the contents o' yoo- viwrrs, vhot control oo.oone
-.ro referred to in connection with that -or:.-?


9536


I-' 5-1-C-rosc (Ir.t. ULbarall)

.1


a That stu y contains tho results cf vaccination with a iivin
virus, an_ tho -^st essential point ..as tho fever charts \rcro
attached to ta.se nanascripts ori inally. fhoy ere charts of avert, o
fi arcs wldch Later, for reasons of savin spcoo, ha I to bo
* 3itto * 1 3h ul: *° Q^-sizo in this connection that tho

cri led author, tfw nan -..-ho wrote this papor, put inncculation and
infection on the sane lovol.

Professor Toao has else alroc y opok«n about that point in detail.
As far ftathe central sublets nontionod arc concerns!, that is tho
oito ,roup of vaccine os whs w.rc only trortod vith tho sacrification
:»th= ’. X believe that is about fie rvst inportant thin- I -ant to
aar.tion in that connection.

1 :fc . vitnese, the :nin -paLnto in this connection coul ’ bo soon
fron yv.r stu V - that your vaccinations or ospori-xnts as vo can roa ’
fr:.: this ’sou.v.nt vero cerriod or. in a concentration cup an*, on
concentration cc:p in r toe.

•* * > f c oncontratlon cans nothin. was cal ' hero, ria vacci¬
nations, as i havo sai , in oonn-ctlon idth a typhus opinio in
Q Cocoor. : :• jt y to TJCh nattar. secret,

as 7 havo 'Iron * pointod out. I :ay also rofcVto publication
•hors I nontionod vaccination in a unit in or.'ar to act accor'in; to
instructions.

: Tho fact, therefore, that you hr • aal. vaccinations in ccncon-
tration ernps ccul • net be s.an frou this study?

•• *bat c ul’ not bo seen fp - it.

itness, then there is another locuaont frea which it can bo
seen that tho Ruichsfuchret*«3, tho SS iirts^iafts-Vorunltun s-
- v.;,tant on'., also the Institute for T ilitary Scientific 3asoaroh -.fas
to bo nontionod in this sta >. Tnat rcaixk is in Docuifcnt BO - 12?,

^zni it 3' v ‘., ?a;.o 97 of ta, £a lish an' 93 of the C-.-man Sccunant
' ob. That rocork m ht load the reaber cf that stay to bdiuvo fiat


9537


J


19 June h7--..7>-S-2-C-rcss (Int. TZibaroll)
Court So, 1


7C’ur research n-.s in sao, connection with tho SS -r tho a Ministration
of ecncuntrstion caaps. Let mu ask you, did your work, your study,

I'myq that notation airea^- whan it was subedit od for approval for
publication?

that can bo see £>t fr tho datos. pocjxnont

12i, which -:ntains approval for publication of ry stu*y, was da tod
7 July 19-V., her-as tho locuacnt just nontioned, whore that pass&co
can bo fcun', 'at os f*on 10 July 19Uh. So that that footnote vas a Mod
later bocauso on, ccuL!n»t help hut ccaply with that request.

q Ir. sum- arid.a , Professor, :sxy I say, therefore, that intoriu
reports wore aado only at irra. ular intervals and id not contain
any ’.otails ro; ar 'inj your work? lour final reports consisted ir.
submission of sd.ntifio studios 'osinoi for publication? And frou
neither kin' of report ooul* or., soo that your work was conhictod ir.
a concontrati.cn ca ;, is that correct?

.. Tos, that la correct.

" tor, unfortunately, oonccndn theso roperto I have to put to
you a witnoss tosti.jcny which does not entirely a ;rca with y-ur
statenant. That is ah; tostiaony .f v-.s ltno s 01-a r>vr who vas
oxnninod or -5 Janu-r:- 19U7. Sor testimony is on pa > 1761 of tho
G-r.von -ad 1739 of the dr. lish transcript. C.uld you toll us first
y '-° position Fr-.uloin ~y_r was ir. ycur institute?

.. Frnul-in "Var, as I have alrea y saiwas ry secretary in tho
H71 i-rdc Instituto at Straasbourg an’ was entrusted with tho care of
■V ccrro3por. 'onea base! on stonocrapMc nc tos, as is usually tho case*
Stj sat in t*j ui tore on before ry office.

'• That witcosssaiii hero, ’rjfossrr, that -r. your ox. ari-ionte at
'atr-ilor quart:rly reports - ,r sent t; the. ' .. be"! Inspectorate,
dha fartdiaru.ro stated that fr-ai what oral’ 'mj suer. fr:n those r.; ?rts
fifty prisoners had be_r, vaccinated with virulent ty/hur. -/ires. Car. ycu
s-r.y ary r.orc, ;r tall us with when you had ccrrosponduico by way of
re;, rts, ate.


953S


19 Jano -7-:-.7D-r-3-rross (Int. ttLbcrall)
C urt Sc. 1


„ I ha' to scr. ’ raperts only on ay research assirncentaani that,
as I .".vo rontionei -ofere, to too oich Research Council an 7 tho
' . leal Inspectorate of tho Lufttr.ffc, These w.rc rep-rts which I
.-.a’o in :y capacity as a research aan or Mr.ctor of tho Hygienic
Institute.

Then Z also hr.i to auhnit reports, bo.innina with th_ :d.M 1g of
19ii3 particularly, in ry c.a;x*.city as Consult!^ Hy i-nist, to tho
..ir Fleet Fhysidan an ' these, a a I have sai ' alroa V, w-.ro justly
roper to oh oxporioncoo which wer " i le al Inspootorato.

'j- corros;x>n .once, s y u can iuaaino, raa vory -xt .nsivo an it my
•jo assuv:! that In feet ovary throo nonths a report of 3 -no sort or
other '-.9 -..ale, ithor to the "xi'leal Inspoctorato or to tho Reich
Research Council. Consi *orlr. tho Laro nu : or of nasi nnenta I hat',
that van qulto pcssi’.lc, ' ut It is not c rroct that re ularly every
throo ;r»ntha I ro portoV. the M/ical inspoct-r.ato about vaccinations,
because that icn harly possible, since altc cthor vaccinations woro
a idnistaro 1 only telco — in ''ay 191,3 an* In the rintor, that la
Ifcccrbor 191,3 t January 19i,' • It is incorrect that frr: ary r-pert it
coul ’ have 1 .^n 3oun that I ha 1 innoculnte7 fifty prisoners with
virulent typhus vires. Tho Itnoss Tyor no 'oubt ruf rs to tto '.ocuuont
provi ualy !iscu3ajhero, wh ro I nxjuosto' another 200 prisoners for
vaccination, an' vh-.ro I : nations l t!so fifty ccr.tr 1 persons. That
lottor I lotaUd to her# I havo also -Iscusso.l that hare alma ,'y. Tho
vitr.oss apparently frr: this request >u. tho conclusion "hieh 3 ho
. rascr.to ’ hsro.

1 Professor, the ritness fUrthocaoro tel ’ us that fren 7 ur
report it a;r oaro*. quito obvious that th-s. oxpcrlnonta hai boor. con-
’ucto '. or. hsraar. bdn s, apocifioally . n in. cates of ocncontration ca ns.
Caul-’ you say anythin about that?

" 00 , I have .alrcny ^l’-ciV.tj this point, an’ ; are

- - : letter a Hirt, sho is ri bt,

‘ ut I have tc object to ih. expression " experiments on hoar. -_in s n

9539


19 2i7-T-..r>-5-li-Grcss (Int. mbcrall)

Court Tfc. 1


lr. the s-nso -hlch is unlarstool in this trial* is far as reports to
tho ‘ oVLcni Inspectorate an.' ths ?.oich lesoarch Council c she is
dstakaa, r d.r r-coilccticn is not quite ccrract.

1 You :i_ar. to say, Prcfossor, that tha vitnoss c: nfuso;' your
latter to Hirt with tha reports to tha -i:ileal Inspect:rata an:’, tho
Reich Vosonrch Council?

.. Yes, I ooul *. not think af another <j?lanaticr. — that rnust
Vo a rdstala..

Q In this connection :v.y I rof.r the TriVunal to tho fact that
the \dtnw3s Syor in uross-^xa dnation — on .? o 1770 of tho 2n lish
transcript — arcs force', to with'xcr in ,-rrt h-r state:*-nt ua!o in
'irjct «xr_dnati:n. Sha ha.' to aVdt onco that she li ' not un ’orstanl
:uch a'Knit th. contents if thoso r_ports Vocausa oho was not a
specialist in that fiol*!. ..n' she fUrt'.urxro hal to a.'.sit that as
fa.r as tha contents of tho report to tho Vo deal Insect.rato aro
concern.' I sh. cy have bojr. dateken, that sho !i' not havo uxact
kn/ .lo '• e a’:out that.

Prefuss.r, thoro era two :»ro points to door up. First, your

.ati "ith -r f-ssor Virt. Yew havo air . , if ro -.y so,

o-d-d: • kin .00 you . - r. -firt. oro you

in any relation to j^rt? Dii you rork to other Kith hin in a scientific
fi.l’? m. y u .articipatc ir. Hirt»s or. orlrxnts at !!atr.ilor?

.. I cr.n say t . . ro facility

c o l lo a uos. j; * our relations v.ro of c-\irso this. r co l lcojnos. Ho
r .-.s tho or>rt an rnctxy at the University of strassbourr an' I *,raa
Vyi^n'.. . That aliwa’y - :s vat our fid Is f r- ric re. entirely
iff-rent.

"a cl sc cc-. irr tier, in .any scientific or a-.- 3irdlar :d .l’. ovor

.l-.cc dth rif-ss-r -art. In articular, ... n.v^r r o ary
scientific stu d os *. cth.r at ’atzr:_ilar.

1 Thor, pnu ..r- at rx nr. assistant ,f ?r. f.ss r :drt ir. Ids
rk, as the Prosecution dlajos?


19 Junr 47-*.'-S~-9-l-£axro^Uiberell)
Court Vo. 1


A. :io t I was n-v-jr an assistant of Hirt.

0 . H.t last point ldiich still n-r'-ss to be clerifi-d is the
question of the vaccine-s, or, ?s th- Froscutiof. calls then, the
experimental subjects. *'ou told us that the vi ccine.es we re members
of vtrtovs • stickslities. "ksw, we have hen airee fitnesses here
who acid literally the sane thing; that is to say, that these
vaccirv-tions in 5chin=ek were cade only on Poles. That was orated
b7 the witness Iyer, r.s well as by the witness Firs, end that
statement is also cc*.tr ined in an -ffid&vit by a Dr. Gchuh of the
18th of 'oveabr, 1946, and all three of these witnesses have testified
that they protested to you against these experiments at ^chiraek, and
the pssist-ot at that tire, Dr. Grnefe, had stated that there were
no misgivings ogfinst this work because the experiments would not be
conducted n human beings but on Poles, Could you sty anythin about
the assertions of these three witnesses?

A. It seecs to re twite impossible thct these three people, at
the w.e tir.« or one rt a tine allegedly pretested to ne In almost
the scr.e words. I ao of the opinion thnt the statements cf thoso
three witnesses wero, in fact, put in their mouths for obvious
reasons. A protest of thr.t kini  s never expressed to no, and I
hnv* never mn o " st» tenant in such poor t-- ste; that Polos were not
human beings. I consider it quite impossible that m*. Groofe said
anything similrr.

*. “he last question, witness, that is concerning the t xper-
laente.l subjects. Th’t is to’say, the vccdoees. Tou told us that
your 7rccin'es t Schiraek were -ot •olunWra. l>.y I ask you, w*»r
*aur vp.ees rt Katzweilnr volunt'-nrs, ;nd if they were *ot
volunteers, why did you beli-ve that you could wtivt: the principl9
of their N >g volunteers?

In t is case nay I .-grin ref-r to >hr.t I have described
fcmifly trforr. The vaccines w-re net volunteers. Tl.-.y tw .'wlectud
by the comp cxc.'^, and th only influence T hrd in their selection

95U


19 Jane -37-9-2-* arro*< liberal!)
Court ’o. 1


w’s that I could stress the cedical points of view. That is to say,
whether th. p rscns selectrd to bo vr.ccinf.t -d -< i- h-althy enough and
whether t - ir physical condition u»s such that they could bo used
for v* ccin r .ticns, because other p*oplc I did not wmt, I could net
us*', fnd I wra »^t supposed to use for vrccinstions. «s I have already
explain—, those *'<n> pretr-ctivo v cci" tiens which, first of all,
were to pretest th* vrccin'w-s thaasolv* s, and then also protect thr.
rest of thn inar.t's, and, in cf.se of /in cpinrcic, if th* ennp could
h»v« b'-'tn v-ccin t<'d to r lrg 'octont it would have been n great
idwit-'-gn to the mtirn population, b'-enuse you know thrt typhus is c
highly ccnt igioua dis'.nsn r.m h rd to cccb >t. Th»-30 i* uocul' tions
w‘ ich wnr an c within the xepe of vaccinations which h:.d air* 1 -, ty
been or- r . Th-r' were rv»ny d cr- a i thn G«ra:.n ra».d forces
ns v 11 .s '-lth th- civiii.n h'-lth offices that, in cose of rtn*ig r
of \r, eplV-nic, ' g*ner.’l vuccinntion should be crrriud out ng> inst
that D-rticul-r disease, - , t for r.h-> conceotr tiou <u.-.ps th-r*- existed
a npecinl ror th t, in case of dv*r. r f t."phus opideoic, -ill
i'dates were to bo vr.cci- tod. These worn thn legal foundations which
rv -.* th«a* v cci -fiens ncssibl. Furth rrr. r., th au w.r r no longer
experiments, but. th* prr.cticnl introduction of r. vaccine which
lr-ir-dy h d t n tnot«l, within th- scop' cf r genorrl vi.ccifi.tion
prepr-aa. H aid s, e should lii;* tc su to th. t each ina to kn'*w what
danger typhus rdpr* scnt>'l for his own life, -vd he c-rt .inly knfw
vhf.t grr.v. c-'i3-'U’.ec« 3 typhu3 »cuid bring bout for hLn pnrso'inlly.
h-refore, h- J we .-.si d th* ina-.t-s wh th r th*y voul i vclunW-r for
th' vr.cci'- tion, I _ a sur* thrt we would h“.v* get not only the nunber
rccuin-d, b- aaey cor:, but I did ret hr-.vn my nor vaccine rt ay
disposal . I b.iiev*. Iso that in the fee. of th- -ngr thay would
h-v* '.cc-.pt' th. reactions thrt I .describ d. Iurth-.rr.cr>, I conducted
cy 7-cci.n tions wit:, th" "Ctiv ssist -ce cf the inarta physic! vis,
n! 7 "c uito sure th: t they euid h’vn r sistt-d the v ccin tions if
-t i. ; b* —n see-- crliin--l und-rtrfcin^; t:. r. w-r t-.c. i-ontc


92*2


15 Ju nr 47-K-S--S-f*rro«( Uibi-rall)
Court ’’o. 1


physicians of whc s I cnn ser ttat thny certainly h.'.'l high ethical
at-* n^iria. ^n" » r a r Professor Pftulsnn fro= Csio. In sueenry of '.11
th* at t^K'its I hrvc &: - 1 *. rbcut ay work which r r»< cr.llnd axporisnnts
here, Iry say: If this work is coosi-I-rod r crialnnl undertaking,
th'n tht cn only hr.v< t»<m -tu*. to lr.ck of specific knowldgn .ini
ignorance cf tho true facts; oncn these questions hrvr. all boon clr re¬
ified, this s sortie* cr.n no longer bn neintnin!. I *a final J convince-!
th~.t, on tho deals of ny sttwnu, the truo c^n bn separated frea
the fnlso, th. good from the evil, and if I ay sty so, tru< acionco
fren false scier-co; I, hrvc r.tt*uptad, in tho tw-nty-fivn ynr-.rs cf ny
being "8 scientist, tc a-rvt scientific tmth only.

. I th*nk you.

!'r. Pr»<ai'"'t, Z hrvn no furth-r :u<atio-t to this witness,

T KZ PrSSIDEPt* Jr. Frits for th- defendant Jtose nny nxrninu thu
Witness.

DT;. fair” (Dof nan counsel l'.r th« “ofendant licao):

Professor, auo to the v.ry lot-He 1 wain-tion by cy
coll rguo, *>r. Tipp, r 1 rg- portion of tho cueeticns which I iutoadod
to put to you rr no long* r n* enssnry. Therefore, Z should like to put
only those oucsticns’to you which I have to put to you in th" interests
of ay oil nt. Or. Korw .

•he-» • wi-r ex-Kiuni by Dr. Tipp, Profnsscr, you state! th t
Frof-sacr visita! you in itr--a:fccurg in 1943. “s ho frequently in
Strasbourg?

Prof 35or Ho- ae wns in Str-.ssbcurg c*iC" noro. Thr.t w a in tho
surtwr of 1?44 or the spring of 19u4.

. Mo furth-r visits by Professor Hose took pl'co?

. Kc, nc further visits took place.

. You jf.ntionwl in yeer -ttr-'Ct •x*ri'vticn tho report ~ th t is
Docuc'nt X. 13b, which is on p' :• 8 u of th- nocuc-r-it book f 12 of
the Prosecution.

1 . 34 '


5343


19 »uw! 47-tf-S'-9-4J nrxcwd'ibenll)

'curt Ho, 1

. In th ?/>r=.-n Docucrmt Book, S2 in th- X>iglish Document Bock,
v our Honor.

Th' report cf th 21 st of Jr-nuny 19 UL tc tho ’reai.Seat of the
i.ich .tas«-rch Council. I have only one r.ueBtion concerning t is
r- pert - whether it ». a also sent to the Koiicnl Insepctomto of tho
Luftwrffn or to Professor Rose?

A. ’*c, I io not recall that. *h-t irs \ report which, in no wry,
concrnM th~ Ifi^iicnl Inspector^* , only th* *vich fosenrch Council.

. No, u cca*- to -.nether subject. Professor.

If you , rccorting to your st-.tmont, iid not curry out any
infection with typhus virus rv thogenic tc humns, then, as a typhus
sped'list, you c< rv inly know that sue firiawit* >ur« o i out.
p-rt cf th* Inlictr.ent, for loerspln, lor.Is with * jqjoriaonts of that
kinl nt Buchsnt-li. -nr-* thuso Buch*nw«H rjcporiflants, of which you
oust know through th* public-tion by »r. Ding in tho hour*ml fur
Hygiene -n-i I-factious Dis"s'.s, the first of this kini in typhus
ms«\rch?

. ’Jo, prior to th t sitsll/ r studies h i b « n nic. I bili.vo I
ntion’ * »t lr.rst one stuty b; th. ?mnch scientist, Bl-.nc, •ini in
r.- ileal lit -rtur* them r uit>- r> nueb r .1 rticl. - cr-ncuroing
artificial infection rf huwubeings. If you - m int-rrstM, I n*y toll
you the com ifiportnnt en'-a.

Tos, pl---si> io. Professor.

. Th-m 'r* tuo --roups of stuiins. Cn*>, >dth the solo purpose,
by r rtif - * 1 infection of husr.n b-in-'s, tc dnfc. rdnr. how th* tr na-
rdssion of typhus t kes plr.ee. Th- ;- st rtci r long tinn - go — th s»:
stuiins. The cth-r roup ic tho cn- whom vr ccin tions took pl--cn *nl
then tho incunlzinf effect of thes*- vr ccin-ticna w a f stni by sufc-
cocut-nt infection with A virus pathogenic tr huaans. Cf course, r.y
list cf a-ileal lit or-turn is -mt c. opl to. Cn*- any any them :.re
3 ivrl cl-ssic^l stuii -s h- m. Cm- by • rsin r-ii Y'-S-ll. Y s-11* v a
on* of tbf- 'Haccvm ra of the pl'gu*- gem.


95U.


19 Jun-i —! S-1Q-1-J L chan (Int. Gibcrcll)
°ourt :;o■ -•


Q Sccus. r*j, frefossor, nay I ask you to distinguish botwo».n
thes~. Wo grouts I have Just motioned?

A Tos, y-s. I rill just spu"Jc about those aado with artificial
infect iocs- One is fro r. 1906 r.d, by tho to Prone i nan, they

tried transfer by huaan blood and even undertook a bunaa pr.s 3 r.g 0 .

First cn 1* do-Chiaoso Coolie was infoctod with typhus blood, r.nd as
ho bccc-c sick, his blood was trmsferred to n hoalthy perron, r.nd
both bccceio sick. If you ore interested in tho data of the literature,
I can state than, but I think we can leave that out if you ogroo.

Then w_ httvo a second study by Otero fro.'. Isoxico, who also in¬
fected c person by transferring typhus blood, and the person fell ill
after vie von days. That stud;' is froa tfrj yoar 1907-

Then there is a study by Sergeant Foili, and Violetta, which
is concomod with the transfer of tto disease by lice; infoctod lico
wore plnood on healthy persons, or the crushed lico wore injected in¬
to hurra. beings in Algeria, and typhus was caused.

Tlaro is also a study by Voitano, wlio *iado tho tr-nofer by dog
ticks, and another study by a Turkish Doctor, who used nany axpori-
nontal subjects and transferred the disease by transfer of the blood
free diseased persons to hoalthy otvjs; ho had quite a nur.bur of fatal¬
ities. Altogether 310 persona were infoctod with 17li cascc of disease
and 1*9 fatalities.

Then there is •’Iso an English study b7 }Iitchell and Richardson,
who also infected with typhus blood. Then a study by IfcCoHa and
Breritton, that is on *mric'n study, wharo tho purpose was to detor-
nlun th> contagion of Rocky .Sbuntaln spotted fevor by ticks. 3 .ocky
he un tain spotted fever is a variety of typhus.

The other study is to be motioned by Sparrow and Luabroso,
who infected huaan beings by ur „:g infected brains of guinea pigs,
but it only ca a to a rdld discaso.

They rere tho studies which .-re based or. the artificial infection
of hur.an brings by pathogenic material. Than, in answering your quos-


15 Jui>ii-13-iC-2-4k»hnn (lnt» Oibcrall)

Court llo. 1.

tion, tbo subject of subsequent infections after protective vaccina¬
tion* there. *r_ various studies here, too. I shall only nontion the
cost important or-s. In i ico, a study by Sanchez Casco in 1932,
who first vaccinated a..: t!tn subsequently infected with a nurinc
typhus virus: of eleven subjects so vaccinated, throe fell ill with
typical typhus. This author thin states that threo persons who had
net pr-viovsly oocn vaccinated vero infected as control subjects, cf
vhon only two fell ill.

Then there is the studs* by 7-ntcr.ili.-.e frera 1939; here also,
vaccinations uer. first c"rrlcd out and then an infection was brought
'bout with typhus rickottsia. lore also it croo to an outbroak of
the disease. Finally ther. is to b_ ^ntioned a study by Blanc and
Baltaznrd, >'ho inoculat.d sevcr l rtreons with a virus r.lxud with gall
and thus attenuated, ^hibscquontly they -re infected with pathogenic
virus to deter, .inu the degree of in unity. IJon-vaccinatcd control
persons were also infected.

Tltn thore is : net her study to be .euntionod, which belongs in
the first group, oita.r by Blanc or Balta*ard, ono or the other, I
c-nr.ot say at tho .orajnt which ono of tin two. Thoy xlso carriod out
a pur- inf-ction on four or five paxalytics. Those aru all the Btudioo
I know on the subject.

Th_n, conc-ming tha question itself, the question of thu ox-
pcrl-unts at Buchcnwald, .

Q rfcll, rTofcssor, I ar. inter-oted to know whether you as an
expert car. answer tho question as co whether tho experiments of Ding
had any inporta re o for the developer, of vaccines in the field of
typhus research?

A If I 72 to answer this question ns 'n expert, then since
these experiments are known, I would say the following. Those ccnpara-
tivo studios about tit immunising effect of various com. erci-al killed
typhus virus-s had gret practical value, because they . .ado it poss¬
ible to eliminate vaccines which arc not effective, and doubtless by


Coart :«, I.

e llrrinn ting those less effcctivo vaccines, assry lives were doubtless
s-red in typhus cpidenics. Thcs^ experiments confirned the experience
r^dc in practice that with attenuated virus no anti-infcctious off cat
could be achieved, but that tho disease was ;trdy rade aildcr and
rcducod. That is about tho anamr 1 would give in ranking
a statcrent as an expert.

Q Tho final report then, did it also shew the iuporta^ of
the roaoerch work that you carried on in Strassbourg; that is that the
use of killed virufl would not protect against infection?

A Yes, that is true, we aado that observation during the war.

Q Than, again I hava to refer to your relations with Professor
Rose erd to ask you, were you over in any Torn subordinate to tho Con¬
sulting Hygienist of tha Chief of tho liodicnl Service of tho Luftwaffe,
that is to say, ITofossor Rose?

A I was never subordinate in a allltary way to tr ofossor Rose,
who was Consulting Hygienist with tho chief of th: Medical Sorvico*

■V offico was an ontirely different ono. I was Consulting Hygionist
with tho Air Pleot Physician. That was superior fron th> uilitary
point of view.

Q Did you hare to report to Professor Roeo irtrsodlntclyj that
is to say about your work as consultant or your work in carrying out
research assignments?

A reports as consultant wont to tho Air FliK.t Physician, as
I have mentioned already, and then through c hannols to th. Inspoctor-
ato. A direct report could not take place, bocauso thiro was no sub-
ordination* Also as far as ay scientific and research work was con¬
cerned there was no relation as between tho subordinate and superior in

»y «^y.

Q Thon, na 7 I assice that Professor Rose did not have to super¬
vise th: annnor in which your research was carried out?

A ’io, he did not have to do that in any ixanner*

Q Was there frequent correspondence between you end Professor


95A7


19 Jun-H-i3—10-3.-!fechnr. (Int. Uib-r~ll)
Court Ho. i.


Ecaa?

A. :k>, it ms not Tory extensive; I can rorc-nbar possibly five
or six letters.

Q And that infrequent correspondence, ns jtu nay call it, was
that of or. offic.nl or r. scientific rr.tur.?

A .'ell, it did not have nn official natur-; it tns correspond-
crcGj I should liko to soy, bother, colloaguua ongagod in tho sano
profession rhorc natters of tie sn^j arefosrion arc discussed. That
can be so-r. fro-., tho documents at haixl.

Q Did Professor Hose -t nib* tine visit tho carps at N.at:n*;ilcr
and Schirrak?

A Profossor Rcco was cover in Schir.ioh or H-.t?w:iL.r with
nrri I nov-r heard thr.t ho hnd ever buor. p.t oitb:r of those cnnps.

Q On*. Last qu-stion. Professor, which I should liko you to
nnsvor in your capacity no a bacteriologist, hocausc you have verted
in that capacity for doc ados in this country and abroad; what do you
know about international customs in cases wtoro vaccinos, gor .s, or
diao-so ccrriors are transmitted?

A It has always boon tho cuntcc that institutes, gevenejont
agoneios and recognised ociontistc oxch-ngod bacteriological naterials —
which includes vaccinos. On xa.quc.ft tho v-ccir* or bacteriological
notarial was supplied free of cost, rrithout inquiring what it was
nooded for, because ono had to asmno that scientific work being
carried out on which tho perron concemod would not givo any informa¬
tion. It was t‘-.u gcncr-1 practico for xm in Germany to get natorinl
from A trie a, England, France-, Srodon, otc. Sven during thj war 7 re¬
ceived highly’ infectious natorinl fro ~r-r.ee and Sweden — from Srodon,
for ex~::plo, poiiacyolitis virus, that is, infantilo paralysis.


19 Juno 47-*-S~-ll-i-i:\loy( Uib'. mil)
Court ffo. 1


.- 3 it true. Professor, that - person w-o sends such naterlal
b.- sealing it loos not ossuao i*ny responsibility ‘for the typo of *ork
"hich the recipient conies cut with that naterlnl?

a. Th t is correct, because if I sen? er.tcriel free cy institute
to a reputable institute or sci ntist, the ■ir.uto the mtorial loaves
cy Office -r. • fchn other receives it I Id not nssw. further respon¬
sibility for it.

OR. -?I. : Thank you. Your Honor, I h*-v« no further aiestions.

iHT: ..t"SISCT: If Dr. felte on boh If of tho -lefen ant Hnndloser
h*s squestions h« *ny proceed.

9Y DR. "TLTr ;

. In the 'irect exndnr.tion you hv« already toll us that if in
thn fields of your res- nrch you hrA my rorm-sts to nrk* y 0U tunic 1
to the -fetch Wosrrrch Council or th.. Chief of tho hodical Service
cf the luftn ffc . Furthoroom, you have st.at.-d, »nd I buliovo I do not
hav to put th-t in the fern of • rustic, th? t, reports on th mss
oxperinnnts w«r. M-.t by you to those offices frou which you hart
received research -ssignomtn . Is that correct?

A. Yas, that is c rnct.

. -*e suppl.'o -alng th- qu. sUons concor-iing Professor Hmdlosor,

I should like to ask you, lid you -vur receive n research ftbsignumt
fTO * ? rofossor H-n-loser r. 3 Chief of the ••ehm'cht Jtadicnl S-rvico?

I urvor receivl ->n nssigno -t of that kind.

. -Hi you ov»r send * nfcrt tc the Chief of the hrasoht Kod-
ic ' 1 5 * rvice b ut ^xp-riicnts which you c-rrl*d out for the H< ich
Research Council cr the Kodical Inspectorate of the Luftwaffe?

i b- U. vt 1 rvy say th t such reports ere never nr ie, because;
a:r:ct rep rts whi± only concerned the Chief of the Vriic.al Uirvice-

s

of the Luftwa ffe * could not have rv^la tc the Chief of the iehnacht
-c .I 5 rvice. Th* t wsuli have hr! to gc through official channels,

-V ports concerning resse ch . 35 igns „ ta frcc Reich .^„ nrch council
n ‘ v, -r v-.-t tc ?r;f. sc.r ILvidloser.


9549


1? ‘uk -7-11-2-4'-J.cy(fib“r»ll) II—S’*’
Court Vo. 1


I. Did Professor Hanilcser ev«r inspect ycur institute r.t
Strrssbcurg?

«* , th't s nev-r the css.

• l ‘y coU * 'f ue » Dr * ‘ipp h s elre. iv r-.f^-red to the str.to-
cents a J c b> the wit*vcs Ever,ml nuoted "th: t reports on expe^-
iaents war* to the Medical Inspoctorrto of tv. Luftwnffo, to the
Tv ich Ssarr.reh Council, s t»* U na tc m office of the Luftwnffe
t B. rlin- i >hloa." Th« t st t-c -A by Fr-uloin Ey.,r is Document 883,
h>hibit 320, Vc. u. Fr. Ey r '11s literally, I cue to i "I ary
th-t I -Iso h to send reports to the 0K* V 'h-n the witness ms
curotionm *'• vitn.ss box she ctuli net st to tc tfu t office of
tV C! the c reportsvnilsent. Ncr coult she state uhtm theso
r-rerts t^rc sent tc tfco CK7. Therefore, I nsk you, din the Cli’T,
tVt is apart e C w free the Chinf of th. ’-chimcht KolicU. Servico
regularly r-cciv copies of reports which you sent t. the Ksiolt
.h search Council or th* Chi' f «f the Knlc-1 ^.rvico of the Luftwaffe?

A • . 7 th0 °n» i»‘ V u ar.lce th-t distinction, I had no connection

■fertnanr. that* w^o no office vh«r« I could ml should hnvs reported*
,*,F rt from the Chief of tho ••nhrtrcht dic/.l Service, ml in this
c/'s. I h-vo * lr. /'-.y said th t this ii*1 net occur.

. To the Ufifitidn of hepatitis ycu h:.v* given us suffic.unt
-nsw ro -.lr*-.y, but concerning h- p- titis I should like to ,sk y, u,

-t tho c. nfcrmc* n hftprtitis in .W 1944 r t Breslau lid nnyune
nf , ' h *' lecturers mpo t cn c.v .-La- ,ts cn human beings within tho
scop* of hep titis res*-.-reft"

’• There wer six or seven scientific rep rts, nJ not one of

'•' r. ntkosi senti ything .i ut ••xp ria*-»ts on huarm beings.

: 'Xcl-in'-* yesterday that in Grainy I h-*l not heard of .viy exper-
iments f th t kind. *h-1 of co:.rsc Iso ppliod to the BreslAU
conference.

.. Ttul y u pleas*-. t-_l a- briefly vhrt was th' purp E«i of the
' rt'dtsri'.g 5 foxtsH • t BrosL-u cn the initia tive of Tn fossor


9550


19 •'Bn* 47-? f-S^-11—3-4tnloy’ rib* ifcU)

Court So. 1

Schr*ib«r?

A. The ?urTJS. oS these Arbeitsriog stuiy groups was th't v. rious

specialists wfc were interested in the Question of hepatitis got

together, 3. that by this ccobirr t Fork positive results could be

obtalari cor*, 'uickly -or easily. Th-t systes hrd proved itself

in th* c-se of -y stuly -roup. I said that I worked with four

or five ger.tlcoM, together, -nd in t is c.-nncr wo progressed v-ry

f r rod vr rapidly i n th- field f hep titis rosor.rch.

.. •, ; oup work with nrof-/$ or Dohar-i, how 'bout that, tho

short visit in Strasbourg, on th- f-ct that ho was not in »ntzw*il..r :

sinen it was already dw.lt with in the direct exaxainntion I bdiovo

I do nut h°v* to sp* a/, bout that, 'V- the 19 April 1944 you seat a

n"tr.o to the CeaBK/ider in Chi.:f cf the Luftwaffe, th-t is to say to

tho d-'Xt surf'rivr officer to yourself, th-t is Lxhibit 31 B, Dccun -.t

* 310, • hlch c'nc ms the est bllahc< -t cf nn institute to produce

\

t.-nhus v cine ecnorctei with the Hygicnn Institute of tho !»nivnrsity

cf *>trrfsbwurgj do 7ou roocab-r thrt aws. tho events which lord

up tc it; it is io the I> cua. nt Back, which you should hive bufuro

ycu - on pr.gn 114, that is thi Geronn D cun>nt be ok.

0

'• T«s, * hrd alr-'dy a«mtirn.>d th- 1 th. Luftwaffe lntundu.1 to
establish its cwn vrecin* pro Juction, and t*y t thoy hd nppro«chud
nh for th-t pcrrcs-, with n r«ust to ost blish that production
site an-* to be in chrrgu of it.

^ Hew ecus the Lul'tw- ffe w-s int rested in tho production cf
vaccines? Tcu know, den • t you, th-t tho branches i f thi TBhnar.cht
could get vccines free the coin nediccl pc 1 ?

— Th-‘t is correct. The central distribution office for t:o
v, ehr=--.cht r. 8 thr Control !'diccl Depot, but thu .-counts of vaccine that
c ull b«- <;bcr iu 1 -.--in- -ot large enough to cover the deaand. Therefore
th-ro w-s -1- -ys r shortage, nd fer th-t ro- sen it w s understandable
th-t tho Chi -i cf the I.odical — rvlcc _f the Luftwaffe want! U have
an addition?! scuro®, and the sinplest tninE , was cf course, tc


19 June loy( Uiberall)

Court Kq. 1


establish its own production r.s the Array tel done,

r U Therefore, the fun Inarntftl rn-scn was the effort of the
Tjifcwffe to b :.cfc< acernr.at independent -s far r.s priority or urgency
*-s concern- d iron the distribution, th?t cnan free tho other sou cn?

A. Th t is right, p-rticul; rly since there w:s still idditiontl
wnccine valiable * rcn the « uot-- which the Iiiftwrf.e r.c«dv from cho
cnin Bfrdical depot.

. If I understood you correctly in the dir- ct rtxaainntion,

and if I reseeb r r stateo-nt arde by Prof. .«»«, you wore of the

opinion th“t v CClnc production, rs such, in principle was nut to h>ve

anything to do with y^ur proper activities. ’Tio, in your opinion, was

intended to suprriar th- production ol vaccines?

%

n. I h’ vo -Iwrys ►ephnsi* d t:.-t pre ruction is ni t the task cf n
research institut- or scientist, but th t it is ' rutt -r for tho
vrcclv inmstry , -a fir i-unVnc* tho >hrlng "orks, cr th« Snxcnirji
S-inia ''cries.


9552


Court So. 1

19 Jun 47-K-12-i-2E>.-7eldt (Uihcrell)

•

lc your opinion the ph&rneeeutlcal Industry web sunnosed
to m anuf acture the necessary vaccines. So you happen to know what
Professor Eandloner's opinion v&a on this point?

A. Z could not toll you that. Vo did not happen to discuss that.

I ic not know It.

Q. Is another lettor In Socunent Book 12, page 77, which has

already been mentioned by ay colleague Dr. Tipp. It Is Socunent N&-306,
Ixhlbit 296, and it is a letter fros Professor Hobo to you. "I have
drafted a suggestion to the Inspector of the Luftwffo or. the heels of
vhieh I ask yew to supoort the demand that tyuhus vaccine be’ aanufocturcd
In the East for the entire Vsfcraaeht.* Vhat aro tho events which lod
to that letter?

A. As for a* they concerned tho Chief of tho Kedlcal Service of
the Luftwaffe and tho Vohraacht, I do not know. I only know of this
lottor vhorc Profosncr P.oso lnfomod ao that tho demand had boon nut to
tho Chief of the Kodical Sorvico of tho Vchrcacht to hnvo tynhus vaccine
manufactured for the ontlrc Vehraacht In tho Znet.

Q, Vns that suggestion rocllscd?

A. So, It vas never carrlod out, and I do not know how far it went
at all botvoen theso two offlcos.

Q, Tai rocolved nclthor a posltivo nor a negative doclsion?

•A. Shat is correct.

Q. That correspondence free tho year 1943 end 1944 which doale
vith the aanufacturo of typhus vaccine - did that have anything to do
with typhus research as such?

A. Sc. One is a research assignment; the other vould hove boon a
croduction assignment.

v Vho vas your superior es Cberetabsertt of tho Luftvwffe?

A. As I pointed out already, thrt vbb the Air Fleet Physician
P-eich.

Q» Vas Professor Han closer as the Chief of the Kcdicel Service of
the Yehrmacht in a position to give you any orders?


9553


Coart So. 1

19 Cui 47-^-12-2-LHX-reldt (Citerail)


A. So. At far os I know ailitary channels, that was not DOSslble.

3. Sow, *f fce had wanted to get scee information about senething
which you night have been in a position to tell hi=, what would have
teen the right way for hln to find out?

A. Ee had the choice between two ncthods, either through official
channels through the Chief of the Medical Service of the Vehraacht,

Chief of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe, and down to ne, and I
would have had to pass on thie inf or net ion through the sane channels tho
other way around, “be othor method, which would be nuch sianler end
would probably heve been usod, wouldhavo boon for the Chief of the Hodi-
eal Service of tho Vohrmacht to have writ ton to ae, "Hy dear colleague,

I would appreciate it if you could givo ae that and that information."

That It to say, siaple corrosoordence between two colleoguco, two doctoro.

Q, Thon officially ho would havo had to go through tho Chief of
tho Medical Service of the Luftwaffe?

A. Too, that is ay opinion. Whether it is cuito corroct I do not

know.

25. KELT*: Thank you. I have no further oucstlons to thlo witnooo.

P.-iSICXST: Arc there any other oucstlons to be pronounded to
the witness by any defense counsel?

BY IF-. ^ISS0Z53i?. (Tor tho defendant Slovens):

3, Professor, since whoa do you know Sievero?

A. I saw Sievero for the first tiao here In Kuornberg. That wob
in 1945-46.

3. Then you never saw Sievcre in your Hygiene Institute at
Strassbcurg?

A. So, never.

3. To you happen to be infermed about the fact that Siovers was
at the can? cf Setrvoiler while you carried out your tychus vaccinations
there7

A. So, I know nothing ebout that. At eny rate, I never acw
Siever& at Satrvuilcr.


Ccurt So. 1

19 Job 4’-*t-12-3-22;-7eldt (Ulbarall)

Q, Sid you ever send a report on your research work either to
Sievers or to the Ahncnerbe Society or to the Institute for Military
Scientific Research?

A. Only the lettere discussed here to Hirt, and Elrt oa hie part
say have passed oa these letters or made reports or included then in
reports Of his ov-, hut as far as I was concerned, I never nadc any
report to tho Ahneaerhe or to Sievers personally.

Q. Vno put tho rooee end oauipaer.t at your disposal for your vac¬
cination work at Satxvciler? Sid those reouests go through Siovere?

A. Voll, special roons or equionent were not put at ay disposal.
Thu vacoinationa were adalnlstorod in tho hospital vhere tho vacclnos
wore quartered at that tine.

Q. In ensvorlng a Question put by ay colloeguo Tlpp, you have
already statod that to carry out tho typhus vaccinations you roouostod
imatos as vaccincos. Sow 1 should like to find out vhoo you approschod
for that.

A. I havo already statod yostorday that these vaccinations woro
based on discussions which had takon place botvocn tho oanp cocrandant
and sysolf, that originally thoro had boon no intention of having ary
other agsncy concerned in then, hut that Eirt, «hon ho hoard about it,
coneldered it nocossnry, since this vr.s e now typo of vaccination, to
roouest spocial approval for it. and that started the ontire corrosoon-
denco.

Q, Tou also sectioned the reports on your work which you oont to
the Hoick Sosearch Council. To whoa were theso reports addrossed, as
fer as they vent to the Reich Research Council?

A. The Raich Research Council.

q, 3 ut did they go to tte heed of the specialised department
(Tachspertonloiter), for instance to Genoralarzt Scfcrciher. or what
do you know .-tout the way tho correspondence was received there?

A. Tor years I had the habit of sending sy reports to an
administrative official wfccc I knew for nany years, that was n Zr.

^55 S


Court Sc. 1

IS Jus 47-tt-12~4-ZE) :-7eldt (Cibercll)


Breuer, and he probably forwarded then to the official in charge of that
particular subject; I eseune that Dr. Brcucr night have taken ny reports
together with others end given then to Schreiber, or whoever was dealing
with that natter.

Q* Concerning the typhus vaccinations, nay I then sun up that
Sievera was of no importance as far as the execution of eroerinents

was ccccornod, and elso as to the typhus research itself, and had no con¬
nection with it as far as juu know.*

A. Vitfc tho work itself Siovcrs had nothing to do, of course, and
as far as I understand it, Sievera only passed on ny application with n
reccenondr.tion. I bol.eve there is a letter to no where Clovers inforns
ae that he has passed on ny reguost*.

the prosecution has sutaittod a Docuaont SO 8ei, Exhibit 2ffi.
That is an affidavit by Rone Colonba Vagner, who vac n scientific drafts-
nan with Professor Eirt in Strassbourg. In this affidavit Vagner spooks
of Sievera as being the superior of Professor Eirt and says litorally,
and I quote, "Sievera was froouontly In Strasbourg and vac lnforaod
• about tho facts aontioned bolov. Ho reccivod regular reports on all
work conducted by 'Vofoasor Eirt at the University of Strasbourg, and
through Eirt he wee also always lnforaod about the work done by Profosoor
Eaagen. I nysolf froouontly saw Siovoro at Strossbourg In Firt'a offico
where Z worked.* You wore also a professor a.t the University of Stroos-
bourg, were you not, and a colleague of Professor Eirt, as you have
explained today? ?ron your work at Strasbourg do you know that Siovoro
was the superior of Eirt, or did Eirt in conversation with you speak of
Siovors as his superior?

A. In his position cs a professor and director of the Anatonleal
Institute Professor Eirt could not have been subordinate to Siovers.

Q. Did you know Hirt's office in the Anatanicpl Institute?

A. Tos, I did.

-id you ever neet this Vagner there7

A. I cannot reaenber ever having seen hin.


«?w


-


Coart So. 1

19 Jun 47-tf-12-6-i3i-Foldt (uiberell)


v Suppose 70 a vest to a conference la Hint's office. Could Vagner
find out about that?

A. Surely. Yes.

0. Sc you know where Vagner's roo= «?

A. So, I do not know that. Put it !■ possible, of course, that one
oet in the corridor. That is not excluded. That is quite possible.

Q. 3y coincidence.

A. Tos, by coincidence, of course.

TEZ PEESIDZST: Counsel, how -any no re oucetloat hevo you to propound
to the witness?

ER. 'I.ISSCIE3ZE: I have approximately four or five aucstlons, Hr.
President.

PRZSrE*:^: The Tribinel will now be In reooss until one-thirty.

(A rocess was teken until 1330 hours.)


9557


1? teaz -7-..- 7
Court *3, 1


—r (Inti Sro'.-n)


.jTriDSK ssssio;:

'Tit h-»arir, reconvened at 1330 h.urs, 19 *na 19h7.)

TS "-•SB'.L* persons in tit Ccurtro-:: ill ploosc fin.’, their


scats.


The Tribunal is a-ain in session.


T'v! .“Sic:::”! The Socrctary Oonoral 'ill note f:r the reoord


t&S «<ikeonco f the defendant Fokorry, who has boon excused to consult
with his counsel*.


C runs el icy prccood*


OTEN HiiflSi: - dosured
DC..HV..IOK (Continued)


3T Dd. USGT^T! <C unsei for nf_r ’ant Si-vors):

0 Pr^fosa.r, in vir. r y~ur hn yorrs of teaching, at
Universities, y-u can assure Uy ansx»r th- follw.in question. hat
role decs th- scientific fraftaran piny in a iss.ctin reon? !>:os Ik
have ce-rule to insi ht intc his chief *3 octivitiosj '.-.os ho have an


opportunity to soo reports this chief hat drown u: ; , ovo all,

is he oapahle ..r unrtorstan In*; their oentants oojplotdy?

That question carnet bo answerod so oasily. It '.open da, first


cf all, cr. what position this lrafts:an oocupios, what special trainin'*

la has ha' and, of course, it i 3 important alto, what his personal

relations are with the professor in question. Yr? , ^ust what the

relations nro ir. this ease, I unfortunately cann. t toll you. It is to

*:o assured, :f c-urso, that if tho person is lahir.- drawings cf such

a spcdalisol field he probably is in re tty cl so cntact irith his

•

Buperier 7 ecau 3 o th .ro ill bo -hin s t. Mscussj but, as I caiI


cannot !vj y*u 'otails about this.


is a professional 'r'fts.an who has taker, this
rvrr -’urin the war, in 19lil, however, one
ith hi 3 chief was n-.t so vary intinato
f-._ chief *s activities? I an referring,
situation at the Strass'-.urr University. Do
9553


19 «taa- - 3-2-1^ 53 (Int* Brora)

Court *£>. 1


nco thaso facts I Jist rationed also play a part?

•

A Carteir^yj la juf in such parse nal natters the so thin s aro
important. If this rafts:an visited his chief all tha tlno and
entered an' left the rctn all the tino, tfvey ray have ha' pro tty
close relations, Dut, as I said before, I cannot toll you hr close

they vaeom

q Di‘ Prfessor Hirt ov.r tell y_u that ho ha'. lnforW. liovers *
of your rork?

- Sc far as I knr.. h. 1' this only ir. th. course vf ids
oerrospen’onco that .'icai*. if: th- vo ccinos ho vus askin • for,

1 !fo other cases that ja.u knr.; of?

A »•

q Do you assu-w that in oth-r casos Hirt d ht have infor.wd
Siovers cf y ur /ark?

A So, I I_n*t *>alicv. he Id.

*1 Thank y u, I have n; furthor questions,

D’’. STAUS'i (Counsel fur VjfoniWt . stack):

q Profass r, 1' tho research assi m-nts in typhus an ', hepatitis
’•hich y-v .-.ro iv-n y the Toich h-soarch Council bear Profosnor
Hcstcck«3 si nature?

.. I ormot recall ov-r 'r.vin s.on "’rofosoor qosteokis si naturo,
Q Profess: r, when you applied to tho .ulch h„3oarch Council, for
financial r-aaens, for a r.search nssl n.nt, iyou than !oal with
Profeosor ‘-stock?

.. M • Those applications r_ro alur.ys a h ir. vritln an:' wero
3 oat to tho It-ich Ho search C.uncil as an or anizati' n, r to Tr, “r.uor,
q Did yen send rrritton reports on your research to Prefossor

dostuck?

A I Lj not believe s , 2 carnet rxwrbor fiat I *1
q, Did you ev-r report cr. such thin s to Ida orally?

.. „t st it is pi3si*-lo that :«» d.ht have spoken a':out theso
fair, s at tha hepatitis confcr-neo hut I cannot recall that ire i ‘.


9559


1? jaao
Court !fc. 1


(int. Brown)


q Did y.u over visit Pirfossor r.ostcck ir. Berlin?

A !fc.

q I rast rof.r briefly to the affidavit that y.ur f:mor 30crotcry,
:iss Eior, si nod. This is Doconcnt '.b. '.'>£83, Exhibit ib. 320. In it,
uniter No, 3, "A 3 3 "tier /ado ct-tao-ats to the contrary in thi3 atior.

I shall havo th- affidavit aut to jru and ask you to rood 2 *:. 8, which
is or. pa a 10U of ’tecuaunt Eok 12.

A Tea, I soo this, but 'iss tier says •*! think.' Sho srys,

'Profess/r lostock tr.s in constant tcuch with Haakon an*. they iv/.’o
nurtreus oral rep-rta to occh other; Sta'un use ! to visit Eostock in
Berlin. 1 '

<1 Please ror *. "o, 8 ar.' t’sen I will i«t a question to you.

A Vory ’.-oil.

~l Profosscr, tho witness, •'bits, has corroborator* in its rr.Jor
points what y u havo Just salCor. y-:u also state, with .ahsoluto
curtair.tr/, that this is ar. orror ir. rxr.iry cr. tho part of :‘iss Eior?

A Yos, that is the only nay I can c-nstruo this booavso !los
Sicr mat ho.vu kroim to ’.-hon I to lott.rs an ’ f ran -hen rocoivod
then.

1 Thun ycu 1 * not s^ni or rocoivo lott»r3 involvin Profaeoor
Rostock?

A Jfo.

1 Thank ym. Ho further -.ucstions.


Court So. i

19 Juo 47-A-i4-l-23t-Pri.- Jeu (Brovu)


Ca PaLSHSTT: Any other truest ions of the witness on the cart of
deforce counsel? If not, the orcsecution cay ercsa-exealne.

CRC6S IXillSATICF


ST .3- *X ?XSY;

"Itness, did you know the position held by the defend act Eostodc
la the office of the defendant Brandt?

A. I can 1*7 about this only that froc letterhead# that I have #eer.
I knew that 2c#tcck did sooethlng la Brandt'# offlco.

Q. "Id you knov vhat thl# "soaethinc*

A. So, 2 didn't.

Q. Shore did you #ee th«#e letterhead#? I ucderotood your tcstl-
ncny about tvo nights ago to have been that you had no correscondence
vlth Rostock.


A. Juat at the conclusion I said that 2 had had no correseondenco
vlth Rostock In thl# natter. Chat 1# Just vhat I got through saying.

I received a fev letter# frea ?rofe##or Boatoek. Theoe letter# vere con¬
cerned *dth the training of a technical assistant and it i# froc thoa I
•av the letterheads I Just centloned.

Q. Did you have corresoondenee vlth hln abait anything alael

A. No, I can't recall that I did.

Q. Vhat about the electronic cicroscopc?

A. I never had an electronic nicroscope.

Q, And you can reaeaber that you definitely had no correeconder.ee
vlth Boatock concerning the electronic eicrosoo-oe?

A. I cannot recall ever corresponding vlth Rostock In that cattor.

Q. Tou lenev that Boatock va# chief of the office for science and
research under Sari Brandt, didn't you?

A. I have Just told you that I do not knov exactly vhat oosition
Rostock occupied In Brandt's office.

Q, Did you knov vhether it had anything to do vlth research?

A. That I assuae.

v “ li * vc ^ l Bat Boatock in August of 1944 classified your


Court So. 1

IS Jua 47-A-14-2-LHH-Pr in cau (Brov=)

typhus research as urgent?

A. Of that I knav nothing.

Q, I understood 7 our test irony to he that free the tine you vent
to Strasbourg in October 1941 until the summer of 194? you were not a
renter of the Luftwaffe.

A. Iron 1 October 1941 until the ciddle of 194? I vas on leave
froc sy military duties. I had leave to carry on work.

Q. And you did no vork for the Luft»«ffe during that period?

A. So.

Q. X an under the lrpression that you received an influenza
research assignment in 1942.

A. That is so, yee. -

Q. And you did nothing about it?

A. Hov an I to understand you to near that, that I did nothing
about it?

As I understand it, you testified that fron Cctobor 1941 to tho
suaror of 194? you vere on leave fron the Luftvaffe and had nothing to
do with thee. I point out to you that la 1942 you received a reeearch
assignment on Influent a free tho Luftwaffe. I havo eceo difficulty
reconciling these tvo propositions.

A. Tou have to dlscrinlnate between tvo things here: on the ono
hand, ny military activities, and on the other hand ny activitieo ne
professor and scientist. I received this asrlgnsent not os a coober of
the Luftvaffe but as a researcher and specialist in this Hold.

Q» But you were working for the Luftvaffe in whatever capacity,
weren't you. Professor?

A. I received this research assignment froa the Luftvaffe but
that does not Justify you in Baying that this research eseignnont was
for a specific office of the Luftvoffo. I have already told you that
when ve wanted research assignments we turned to whatever office could
provide us the funds.

Q* Professor, I an not interested in that. I an Just inoulring


Court So. 1

IS Jun 47-A-14-3-Z3i-?ri=eau (Brown)


frco you whether you vero doing research. Vc will leave it tc the Tri¬
bunal tc decide whether or not any of the defendante in the dock were
reapers‘hie for that, tut yair testimony had left the impression that
frco Cctcher 1S41 until the su=er of 1943 you weren't doing anything in
concoction with the Luftwaffe and I Just vented to point out that that
is not quite accurate. Sow, when you wore on active duty with the Luft¬
waffe, you were subordinated to the Air Fleet Physician Reich, were you
not?

A. Cn leave I was not subordinate to him.

during the period when you were not on leave.

A. Until 1 October 1S41 I was subordinate to the Air Fleot Physi¬
cian; froa 1 July 1943 I ««s again subordinate to him.

Q, But ho caild issue orders to you, couldn't ho?

A. Eo could glvo ce no orders,

Q. Couldn't give you any orders?

A. So.

Q. Bid ho have any disciplinary rights over you?

A. Bo.

Q* »ea really weren't a aecber of the Luftwaffe? You had no
cosnacdor, no one to issue ordors to you, is that right?

A. -he Air Fleet Physician was -.ot cy superior and could not givo
=e orders, nor was I subordinate to him disciplinarily.

Q. Did anybody give you orders in tho Luftwaffe?

A. Tea.

Q. *ho?

A. The Luftgau physician So. 7 in Kunleh.

Eo could Issue ordors to you?

A . That is right.

Q» ho could discipline you for any infractions of the regula¬
tions, ic that right?

A. "hat is 60. Cf course, he could give ue disciplinary penalties.

Q. And if Luftgau physician So. 7 indicated a dec ire that you carry


Court So. 1

IS Jus 47-A-14-4-ssX-rTi=cau (Brovn)


cut research os typhus, I assune that you would cosply with that, would
yen cot?

A. It 1« my opinioc that research eesignsents casset to ordcrof
asi I dos't tell ere any superior could have tees feund o vould have
gives such order*.

Q, Veil, I don't recall that I uei the vord "order" tut you
vere a virus expert, I dos't ae«use they vould ccce to you with e erot¬
ics os surgery tut If they indicated a desire you worlc on tyohue, a*
distinguished fros eoldesic Jaundice, I as asking you if you vouldn't
cosply vltfc thet request.

A. I should sot have had to accord with thlo reouest unloss the
requost had Interested sc.

% But I assuse you vere a patriotic scientist working for the
toneflt of tho Oersan var effort and If Luftgeu So. 7 and tho chief cf
tho Kodlcal Sorvlce of the Luftvaffo folt that tyahus rosoarch von o
particularly Important protlcs, I an asking you If you vouldn't work on
It and subordinate any personal Interests you sight have In other fields.
Isn't that right, Profossor?

A. If soscono had asked sc to do this, that w-*ild havo fced to to
a specialist In this field and tho Luftgeu physician vho could give so
criors was no specialist end vould havo left tho docislcn up to sc
whether or not I vishod to vork In that fiold.

Q, Voll, did you evor got any such suggestions fros anybody?

A, So, no such proposals vere ever nade to se.

<<. Vhat did hose suggest to ycu in 1943?

a. Yesterday and today I exolalnod vfcat P.oso and I talked about;
to vit, tho taking over cf a vaccine sanufecturing plant.

Q. Veil, then ho encouraged you to do that, didn't ho, and also
to develop an effective vaccine which you would produce?

A. That is so. Vc speko cf the vaccine that was to be nroduccd.

Q, Pros vhat office ve-e your research cesignscnts by the Luft-
vsffo issued?

956 L


Court 5a. 1

19 Jus 47-A-14-5-L3(-?ri=eau (Brovr)


A. Che research easigrecnta that I received frcr the Luftwaffe
were, since they were is the field of hygiene, primarily directed by
the hygiene Safer at, namely, Stabearst Atmer, as I have already said.

Q, You ere testifying that Stabaarzt Atmer iaaued the research
assignment to you, la that right?

A. Tea, la collaboration vith Guenzel, vho waa in chnrgc of the
fuxsio.

Q, "oil, all of the research assignments that wo have in our docu-
seata carry the Eeferat number 2 II 3 - that is, arable 2, Horan 2,
capital 3 - or 27. Bccker-Freyscng has testified that uo until soaotlmo
in 1944 Anthony was chief of that office end thoroaftor he vne chief of
it.

A. X havo already aaid that from the puroly fornrl point of view
the roaoerch assignments woro vorkod on thcro tut that the real decision
on then vna nado ty tho hygicno Eoforat.

Q, I didn't ask you who node the decisions. I asked you vho iacuod
tho assignments. You testified that Atacr didn't. The fact is that
3ockcr-yrcytong's offico, the Eoforat for Aviation Koilclno, iaaued thorn,
lon't it?

A. X ncv..r saw thrt cny roaenreh asrignaents omaneted from hie
office.

Ci, then Dr. Rose wrote you a letter in June 194? saying something
about Anthony bolng away and that he wished fcin to iaauo you tho order
wfcon Anthony returned. You rcaccber that, don't you?

A. X reporter that and X also havo Juat stated that this offico
worked'on th6to assignments in a puroly formal way. I also aaid that I
an not intimately acquainted with the internal structure of the Helical
Inspectorate to I cannot give you the procise data on thlf natter, but
I can toll you that Becker-Jreyaeng h?d nothing to do with any rescerch
assignments.


9565


:? June t7- —-'*-I5-l-F‘‘l tt(“rc%a>)

Court Ho. 1

. r-fcy just forrvlly through his office; th t is -11
h- h-vf to e with th-s; is thit right?

A. Th't is *11 I knot -bout it.

. free ifrwieft ca< th ecnr;•? Diln't th .-1 ilso fcrmlly cense
cut of 2 n B 2 F?

I s- ok'i o"ly Kith ,-r.tsr t tunzrl -bcut finmei 1 cr:ttors, anl
b> proviifth th'! coo<y.

. h t ••ip' rtr.nt vs h*> in?

A. I.-cn't '-no* Khrt th« nna> of the < oprrtr.«it is. I -le k*icw
tht h" took c r. of th! financirl e't* rs.

. H«vr ctll* -1 Anthony or Rnck«r-*V«ya <ng -bcut thrt?

A. No.

. How i- you icccunt for th* so-vya thr.t you rtc.sivni froa tho
Luftwrffi*?

A. Th nO'iny w«a pr.irt into th* 1-oiv raity tmosury nnl I heel to
e-rry ry »ccounts through th. I niv- raity tnrsury.

r . You B-nn to r-iy th-t whnn th* Luftw-ffo gr-it«fi you : rnanrrch
'3sigr,ff.».f.t m• A,COO rv’rka, th-.t th««n thay leliv-trod th*i L,COO a rka
to th- Univiraity of Jtrr sobcurg?

A. It s s*nt to th' "tr ssbcurg U'dv-raity Tr«. sury *ii th%y
•vl. thi n-coas-- ry payr^nts, v* i ao forth.

. "h't o you c* n, th*- ar.in tho n coas - prynonts? Suppose you
r trip to b'tsv il r or 5chir=*k »vii it cost you 50 .wichnrrks. Hew
ill you g t ycur zon-y b-ck ?

A. Th trip to "'trwdl- r v; s a 1 by cr. »ho ghccliu. w; s purchraui
--il r. bill ant ni ' vouch r ci to t t .ffuct.

. to * cc -ti ! you tun ovr th vouch r?

. . “h-y ’ll w -»t to th IfeiicAl I'-sp-ctorrtu to ”r. u<nr*il.

<• Thy >nt to th Luftwr.ff* -iic-1 TnEpretont*;"

A. Th • v. .t to Ur-iw l, -ho ws v ki* g c; r* of th* finances.

. V*: J .i J you r- r n -ccountinr.? You -ii-Jn't s«-n *. in * -.ch
-ittl* hill, I -ssus>. I gu« ss you r •• for thr •• zonth p rio.i or


9566


19 Juno L7-i-S'-15-2-r~l'it(. Trowri)
Court ’Vi, I


sory such p riol lik« thtt m th»n tollisi up the it.«os rud or. do *n
-Mounting, -fl-tn't you?

/. Th*t, of course, is true. Hot every little bill wns s««nt in,
but when the sus -Uett" 4 . w-s wisest usr ' up, r final recount van nr mi
up "n* s nl to Hr, uenzol.

' • *•'» h.i - ith th Strr-.ssbcurg Uoiv« rsity cr the Luftwaffe?

I r* a little confuse. horn,

A, He w-s « afeh r of the Luftwaffe.

. nn« li*- you show these trips to Netzvoilor on these "ecounts
you turn'-i n to the T.uftwffo?

!•» tho cccounts thorn w s only anntlon.of th* g- solin* I
k'ught tt son- grs st'tion.

. I c ssk ng "ou if th* accounts you tur-.-i in worn in such
letr.il th t they couli a*-" th't you wort incurring •oepunsus in cc"'-
•ctico with trips to >tr nil r nn 1 i'chirrack?

A. *'o.

r . 'i In't you *v r ark.! rny telephone c 11s to SchinvJc or f/atz-
weil* r, long •istv<C« C'lls?

*'• res, I -i-,

. 'ou -i-'e't charge those up on tho nxpeusn account?

A, T tiln't ieclu'ir thee in the exp* ns» -ccount b*.c ? uso that m.s
t*ken enro cf by ay phono bill with tho University.

r, You wor- i with tho l uftwr ff«. for su:* tiae ( .,| I trim it you
rniop i * lot of thr.se sttononts, v ou re pretty elc.-r in your
t-stiaony -bout this, th.-t you co.lin't toll fro;: the o stat-n its th t
ycu were n-kinr trips to ’'tzwciler ml Schimek concentration cnr.ps?

A. The -uft> - ffr eculi not see fros th'so accounts th..t I ms
•tailor trips to Schirnek or ?fotr»eil* r.

. 'here w^3 Schirnck in rwferenee to Str ssbourg?

A. chircsk is west cf Gtn ssbourg in tho Bosge3 Kowittlns?

( » Hew f r r?

*• -.-proxiffl'tely 35 tr O kileaoters,

9567


15 *W *.7~--15-3-F«l'tt( Hrom)

Court 'h, 1

. Sehins-k wa concentration c-s.p, w?an’t it?

A, ochimak i..s officially n Sich-rangsl.g-r, thr.t is, ». c-cp to
house p -rscns uui»r security intention.

' . Th^t is * concentration c'tjj, isn't it? It is like !Jrstu“il*-r.

A. h.rs cust h' v« b-.en scae lifferoncn bccruse enn is c. ccacen-
tr tion c'rp -n* thn other is cr-ll-i n security n tnation c« op,

• Row big *"s SchircnJ: ?

"• I c-.n't trII you, ''ou probrfcly wr-.t to know halt =rny inc tr.s
it hr/t, but I c r n't toll you.

C. Can't you r .ivo us r rough *stic. t«?

/. Th't is terribly difficult. I sh uli nr»f-r to n.fr.in froc
loing bo,

r. How oft-n w«r- you in Schirank?

A. In Schirork erybr. four or five tines, if 2 rn «.stic ting
correctly,

0. V.en" 7 !*. you go there first?

A. I ’n't t-11 you the ox-ct 'l-.te, I r r.lly c/ui't bo infinit*
•bout th t, s id our v.ccio' tinr in ll^y, 19A3, but when I wns th-re
•or th first tis* I ern ' t till you. Th*t w-a too le»ig -go.

', * 11, you • r there for • tie- or two bfor- youa.trlnl out
your v-.ccia tions * n y, 19A3, is th t right?

A, I cv.not any th-1 for sun..

.. "cu -*iin't visit concentr- ticu c aps v-ry often, riicl you
I" r-o feasor 9 I shnull think :ou woul. h'v« - pr*tty «in recollection
bout ycur trios to concentration c'«ps.

... Plf.'sc Wt forget thitlks Iso in V-tzuoil-r, which ». s
v r ry n* rby , -r - thr.t --ltog.thr I pill r lot of visits.

. «ny b si-, s !Vtsr oil* r n-i Schirack?

A. * : o.

. "ho g'v- you p- Triasion tc nt r '*» chiroek?

A. Tk< c .-op x*nrgraeat.

. >i ' h exo to a— you or ti i you go to wn- hie


95oC


19 Juno ‘.”-‘—5' -i^-F-l^tf Brown)

Court v o. 1

-3 I s i- »»st«ri-y, th r-jicoi n-tor of Vi tr.^ilrr nl
.is - oi ’•-tr- rdi'.r with which Schiru* v.s f.ffiliit«ri r.ni

th* c a np physician to eo.

. h t v. s th" purposH of Bock* r-*rfcy3«-np'a visit to -tr'-ss-
bourg i" July 19U.T

A, =-ck-r-^rnysenfi's visit to co in Str. ssb-urg in 19U. wns ---n
b-c-'usc I h"i prwvr.ously spokrn to Professor Schro-. i»r ?bout th*
Ilfficulti'S I •'•a hiving to got "riiriils, ni h* prcrdsu-1 a*. thit
Pock^r-fraysnn? woul-J c*-t in touch with n- on tho ruosticn of :.c'-air¬
ing r.om -'•In* Is. Jor this r-^son -’ck' r- r ro;-s<ng ckw to bo in
Str sshcurg.

r . t kin-l Of rnii-ls'

A, r'ur 1-bor tory .-»d*rle, briar rtly nicn oi ■ Iso rr.bbits?

r. A’-y guinv nigs?

A. r on't b- linv" I -,ak* 1 for guin- pigs. Only ticn rni r-bbits.
. . w-a 'ot with Schro«1* r on th- occr-sion of ‘'chrcndi r's
visit to s you in -trissbourR*:

A. '.'o, Br. B-)ck* pJ'roysong wns not with Prof. -chrcMrr t thn

tin« in >tr asbcurg,

.. -1 :-isn dl «chronl«r coo ?

A. Schro- -- r h‘*l b *n th-n b«-for- .

(. Do you rr>cb<r in wh-.t nonth?

I 3-il y 3t'-r!ny thr.t Prof. ~chm i r v-.s with no in Str bs-
bourg -it thn col of Kr.y.

Dll. II'": ’’r. ?r ai-.n».t, :or ton =i«>ut-3 !'r. Jte”m«-y hxs b*<cr»
sking cu sticns, nil of wh .ch h .v- lr - 'y boot rsk*. i in th- iiract
• xrnin'.tion -n hum b n ns.- r i. Th-- Tribun-1 wish i aplicitly
th* t th- exf-cl^tion of this witn- ss hr Unitei to thn a- c*--s3- ry
ft-ninun, r «1 I obj ct to his putting <-u: sticns which I h v* -lr- "j
r-Jt. ”• rr. p" tr r- sen is th-1 'r. *'cK n y vs,'t pn eont iurinr th t
r rk of eh 'ircct •'xir-in?ition, hut th- avstions r- * 12 ;- nrc not
necassnry, - I ofc>ct to th-dr fc-ing put.


9569


19 Junr 47-'—5 —15-5-* nHt(Brown)

Court So. 1


TV- PRT'I .-"7: This is r cross -cfni'- tion. Ccuns-'l nr.y proceed.

®T !C:. *C EafcY:

. s -osa with Schroder on th« occasion of his visit to
Strr ssfcourr in V-y 1044?

A. No.

. Ad when 1 it •‘os soo you in 1944?

A. ‘rof, ssor -osn i.na th rc ct i. iff~r at tix. It wa also sct»>
tir.- luri'tg th* arn-r, hut n C t rt th'. swan tin thrt ^chro*Kl«ir vi
th»'r* .

.. ("• nos. * Iso visitaa you in 1943?

A. Y*>s.

. Do you ronabnr "t>y cth* r visits by Hot, othr th»n thao

two?

A. Hoao ptil B* ao oth* r visits.

'• How rvny res<:/rch M 8 iGne>.ts Hi you c n t free th-* !.uftw'.ffti
oa influanza?

.. I h on n 3 'T.rch assi£nr».t fr-n th Luftioffe, sari this
'•» than subs: uoatly • xtrn'bl , who. th* Am* s w.irn us.! up.

. ' 11 , iacluiiar th« origin -1 rs.igorcont, plus th* 'Xtcnsiwaa ,
th'r* tr.n* three, u r* thau »ot, ’■•■Hnning i»» '42? Another on* in
'43 ’ ni -cth r oa ia '44, is th*t right?

A. Vo, you cn't put it thrt v-y b ccuso I o.ly -sl.rl for such
fja-'s »h-n thy war- tail, ust 1 . It was 'll th*. s-ma rt-s- nrch nssign-
a-at which i" t-ch case w.-s foctanlol,

.. It v. .s ■ xt* a i* 1 twic* thm, once in 191.3 * < 1 ^ oncu in 1944?
Th/t is possible, yes.


19 Jur.-A-’“-iS-i^ook (In*.. 5rcwn)
Court lo. I.


: i ia! “rore you using a living virus ir. the influenza vaccine?

I understood you to testify that you re re.

A I explained very carefully yesterday that in the influenza
vaccine a living virus was used in the sa.* way that vaccine is manu¬
facture*; in other countries, su:h as America and England.

Q Wow, rrofessor, couldn't you have answered that qi»sticn
"yes" without the three or four sentenoes?

A Yes, I could do that too.

V

Q I would appreciate it if you would. Now, how many trips
did you nake to Schirneck in connection with the influenza vaccinations?

A For the purpose of influenaa vaccinations I went to Schir-
neefc twice.

$ And you vaccinated twenty women?

A Yes.

Q What was the purpose of the second visit?

A The second visit was to ascertain whether there had boon
any reaction. In other words, to look into the tolorability of the
vaccine.

4 And you found out the tolorability was good?

A Yes, the tolerability was good. Vo one's ability to work
was in any way interferred with.

Q Do you rcaenber how high their fever wont?

A The tern»ratures hardly rose at all. If they had risen at
all it certainly rould have struck ne.

Q :ior nuch influenaa vaccine did you have available?

A About enough for 250 to 300 .ersons at that time.

3 '’as influenza vaccina generally available in Oerrary?

A Various agencies were concerning themselves at the ti e
with the manufacture of influenza vaccine, just at that tire.

3 .as there any concerted effort to lave large scale influenza
vaccinations carried out cn Gencar. soldiers or on civilians?

A Mb aj vaccinations were .ade at that time, particularly or.


19 Juiv-A- 3-16-2-Cook (Int. Irown)

Court So. I.

civilians and soldiers.

Q I .-.ave sera difficulty in understanding why you went to
Shiraeck and vaccinated twenty wsaen with this vaccine.

A A can? is always particularly vulnerable when there is a
possibility of an epidemic breaking out because people are packed k>
elose together in the canp that the eoidenic is likely to spread very
quickly. In any caap there is always a group of persons who are
particularly likely to spread such an cpid o aic of influenza, nanely,
those who cove fre» one barracks to another, taking care of food,
transports.tior. and so forth. How if one such person is infected with
influenza it is very easy for the person to travel fron one barrack
to another and s. read it ar.d that is Why I vaccinated thoso twenty
wocen wlvo vore designated to no by the caap con. end or as people who
were endangered in this respect.

Q It is your scientific opinion and ;ou want the Court to
understand that in a caap tho eizo of Schirjock vaccinating twenty
wccor. wes a good prophylactic -easiTO to keep down influonza in Sohir-
nock, is that right?

A Of coureo, I should have preferred to bo able to vaccinate
core people but ay production capacities were snail in this respect,
so consequently I vaccinated only thoso who wore particularly danger¬
ous. In Schineck it was those woaa n and in Strassbourg it rns tho
200 employees ho were vaccinated because here again the danger exist¬
ed that these 200 nurses and doctors in tho hospital, nasely, tho ones
who ware vaccinated, would transact tho disease. They t henselves wore
particularly in danger of contacting tho disease because they worlcod
in the hospital.

0. So that your testimony is that the can- doctor of Schiraeck
care to you ar.d 3aid that there is danger of an influenza opideaic in
Schimack. "or.it you ccne there and help us out, and you had no in¬
terest ir. testing this vaccine at all, bat you did go there and vac¬
cinated twe n t y of the cost susceptible carriers with the influenza vac-

9572


19 Jui>*-ffi-l6-3-Cook (Int. Brown }

Court He# I.

cino, is that right?

A The canp physician didn't as'.: oo. I free ny own epidoaiol-
ogical knowledge sat: this danger and since the carp aanagement was
agr-cablo to this I was able to carry out those vaccinations.

Q Tou rent to hin then. He didn't ccoe to ycu?

A In the caso of influenza vaccination s I want to hi...

Q ..hich took place first, influenza or typhus?

A Typhus, that was Hay 1?U3#

Q Ho had already ccgo to you in connection with tho typhus dan¬
ger ard after you had nadc his acquaintance you suggested tho influenza,
is that right?

A I didn't suggest it. I told hia 1 thought it would bo a
good idoa if ho had this vaccination in tho car.p. Ho saw tho truth
of this and then I could do too vaccinating.

Q And tiioso tests you carried out thcro wore no differont
froa tho othor 200 you corriod out on students and assistants in Stross-
burg, is that right?

A This was rot an oxporLxmt but a regular protective vrcci.na-
tion and was exactly tho sfuo sort of thing *ihich I did with ;y per -
sonnol in Stra3shurg.

Q And you wore not interacted in .making any observations on tho
reaction against tho vaccine, you were vaccinating like ~o givo a c^all
pox vaccination, is that right?

A That is right.

q And this had nothing to do with your research assignaent fron
the Luftwaffe, of course?

A It had nothing to do with it, nc. That was ny own initiativo
and ny cnr. idoa.

Q just protective vaccination?

A That is right.

Q ‘.'ell, I assuno you didn't charg; this to th- Luftr-^fo then,
is that right?

?573


19 J-n-A-:3-li—- -Conk (Int* Brown)
Court No. I.


A Haw aa I to understand that: "Chari- it to the Luftwaffe?"

Q -ell, you had received non./ free thca to do senothing for
thee in tbo way of influenza research. I haven't heard cuch about
what you did tr.rt you said these protective vaccinations didn't lirva
anything to do with it and I a asking you if you charged uhntovor ex¬
penses :^ou incurred in connection with it to the Luftwaffe?

A A3 I said, all of tho things I did for the Luftwaffo I
cherg-d thee for. When I was in Schixtaock, of course, I charged thoa
fer tho gasoline for tho trip.

* 3ut you didn't do theso vaccinations fer the Luftuaffo?

A That is correct, I didn't.

Q Woll, lot's look at the chnrgo sheet you did sutr.it to tho
Luftwrffo. You i-r-.do two tripe to SchiraocSc in connection irith this
influenza vaccine, is that right, Professor?

A Yoo, tr*>, in winter l?li3«

Q ' ell, lot's soc what this s'mm,

A Yes.

Q Km this is a ataU.nont of expenditures on your inlluonza re¬
search, isn't it, Professor? This is document Ko. !.'0-3!i50, a otato-
Dont cf expenditures on your Luftaraffo influenza xvsunrch, isn't it?

A Yes.

Q The first assigrrent on the 22nd of January 1JU2, and thon
that ra.s continued again in 19hk, tdiioh shews that it eric out of tic
offico II ?, that is Bockur Fxeysong's of-io-, isn't it?

A Hare Is-, the date of *1.3 to if I an re-ding correct Jy.

Q Yos, I think that is true. You testified that you nado somo
tripe tc Schircock?

A Y-s.

Q And callod over long disUrcc Ul-phono also on the 2S Octo¬
ber irlii:, in ©onajetion with those srctectivc’vaccinations. Did you
fini thr.v, the 2: of (fcteUr If 1.3?

A Yos, I so- that.


957A


19 Jurv-A- -1 .-5-Cook (1st. Brown)

COUP. ’..Cm -•


Q You ohargad t.ut to tho leftwaffa, didn't you?

A lis, that is included in the *}«onu cells.

Q And nay davr. ir. 'Ui:, the 12th cf February, you cr.de mother
trip to Schiraec’.c, did-.'t you, 25 asrks, in conrcction with those,
protccti*/- vr.ee inations 7

A • erw I so_ tho 12 of I’obruary otm ontry return of two bc;^is.

q Tho 12to of February, 19U 7

A Ala, .'->ro it is. Hero it is, that otiior one, t*.o tri e to
Natswoilor, bocouao Katswoilcr and Schir.sock wore sort- or less all ono
thing. That is tho way to explain that.

Q That is tho wry to oxplr.in what — that you called Kr.tzwoi3.or
"Schtreock"?

A • In otrassburg that is tho way ire crllod then and I wasn't
tho person who ;/roto those things, I jvst dictated this Hntsvwilor or
Schir ock to y aocr.it.nry and r.s I told you, there wore all ono thing.

Q I didn't understand you t-st-T-od anything .about having
cr.do any inliuor.sa protactivo vaccinations in '.lotjurelior, did you?

A Ho, no.no wore done tlun.

q .'all, to is bill ho re '.vas nothing to do vith typhus, .‘o aro
only concomod with influenza hare.


5575


Court So. 1

19 Jun 47-^-17-l-iSMJro*8 (3rovn)


A* Perhaps tfas title of this is iafluenxe but that doesn't neon
a thing. If I made e trip to Satr'-eilor, I cc*ild h.-'ve cut that down
under iafluonzn. Iverythlng wasn't done as carefully as all that. Tho
secretary nado tho notation end then put it dovn.

Q, You didn't tabulate your expenses in connection vith your influ-
en*a vork separate from that in connection vith your typhus verk? Isn't
that right, you Just ltripad then ell together?

A. Yes, perhaps in the typhus accounts there aro things that really
should hare boon In the influenxe account, and vice versa. That is aulte
possible,

Q, So you deny to the Tribunal that you vont to Schimcck 12 ?eb-
ruar/ 1944 in connect!an vith influenre, is that right?

A. That is cortelnly the case. I did not go to.Sehirmock on
account of influence.

q, and on 29 Pcbruory, "long distance tolophono Schlrmeck 108",
what Is that telephone nuaber? You undoubtedly knov thet very '-ell.

A. Yes, that v*s Schimcck, too. I guess I telephoned Sehirmock
for s coo thing or other - vonted to knov something about the fevor graphs
from before. That is all quite potsiblo. All these v-ere serological
examinations that had boon sent in to us about which I telcrhonod back.

q, You arc positive that Schimeck 108 is the toloohonc number in
tho Schlrmeck cicp, is that right?

a. That I can't tell you for sure today. That night have bocn
Satxvollor.

q, Veil, do you knov vfe.cn ycu vere calling vfeon you called
Schlrmeck ice? Vhan did you get on the telephone?

A. Ky secretary nede the connection end I Just don't remember the
numbers. Cnee the connection vas made then she cut mo on the vire,

Q. *ho did you talk to?

A. I talked vith py secretary ?nd she made the connection.

q. I neen vfeo did you talk to in Schimcck or SatTveiler. You
made a telephone call. Vho did yc*i talk to?

9576


' (

Court So. 1

19 Jun 47-i-17-2-ZHX-Orcs« (3rovn)


A. Spoke to the cesrp ebysician.

I think you Wll find that Scfcir^eck 108 is the Eatzveller nun-
tar. You nnde a call on 29 Jctrurry, oa 28 Kerch; on the next oage on
18 Kerch you vill find long distance cell Schiraeck 1C8 Ketsveiler. Tind
that?

A. Cae long distance call Schirr.cck. Yes, that nust hove teen
Hntzwoiler. With the best vill in the vorld I can't tell you what the
nunbor vns; I en very sorry.

Q. And on 25 April, 5 Kay, and 6 Kay you nado additional calls to
Srtzvcller, is that right?

A. If tho nuroter is here, then ve nado the calls.

Q. But that has nothing to do vith influonta?

A. So, it didn't. The secretary Just nut it down here no having
a one connection with roserrch oseigrrionts.

HR. XC EAKZ.Y: If the Tribunal please, I do not know the non
oxhlblt nuntor la ordor.

TEL PESSIIEST: You cm ascertain that during the recess oorlod and
properly r.dvioc us later.

HR. IiC EASLY: Very well. Tour Honor, ! will offer this document at
that tine.

BY XR. itC EASY:

Q. Didn't this co-aingling of your influensa oxoer.scs vith your
typhus exponsoa cause any confusion vith the Luftvaffc?

A. I don't think so. The sane porsen vne concernod in both, ncnoly,
ayself. I ves the one to vhon the assigar.ont had toon given.

v Veil, tut if the Luftvaffc decided to give you 400C narks for
typhus research end 4000 narks for influenza research weren't you taking
a slight advantage of then when you spent 55 00 narks of tho influenza
noney on typhus and raising the total of research noney of tynhuc to say
7500? Wasn't that sort of imposing a little tit on tho Luftwaffe?

A. L*o, you can't put it that vay. All these were scientific assign¬


ments that I vas working on and if the noney in one fund «es e little


Court So, 1

19 Jun 47*^k-17-S-Z2t-Gro8S (3rown)

•hart why ve could sake it up from none? wit of the other fund. 1 know
no misgivings were expressed ebout that.

Q» Sow on epidemic Jaundice for a fev ninutos. As I under ctp.r.d
7cur testimony, you admitted that you were planning to cprry out toi-
ieaic Jaundice experiments on huaan being®, ie that right?

A. Yos, I spoke of that planning yesterday.

q, And this was to be in collaboration with Ealk, Buechner,
Zugschwort, and Dofcmen.

A. Who was the first?

Q. Ealk, E-a-l-fc.

A, Oh, Ealk, yes, that w*s our work drclo.

q, How, vr.s Doteen ineludod in this vork circlo.

A. Ho, he didn't.

q, Sow, those human eToorinonte wore discussod in the Broslau
netting in 1944, urcsided over by Schrciber, woron't they?

A. Yes, Schroibcr was chairman.

q. Voll then, I an suro it won't come as any shock to you thrt
Sehroibor later got In touch with the dofendont Hrugowsky in January
1945 and asked him to nrrango for 20 concentration camp inmates In
Buchonmld. Do you know anything about that?

A. Ho, I don't.

Q. lor vhat reason ves your proposed olnn to carry out Jaundice
experiments nbfr.denod?

A. The ver situation dotcrainod that. Xy opportunity to work in
Strassbourg stopped around August, September because student cononnlce
vero aent off, the reserve hospitals were changed into ency hosoitpls,
and there were no more chances to work there.

q. Sow you testified that you planned to use volunteers from the
student companies of the Vehrmacht at Strassb^irg, rrciburg, or Hcidol-
berg, is that right?

A. Yos, that is so.

Q, How far is Trciburg from Stressbourg?


957S


Court So. 1

19 Jun 47-A-17-4-SJ:-9ross (Srovn)


A. About one hours Ire's ride.

0- Hev nacy kilometers free Strasebourg?

A. I guest it is about 60.

3» Prom Heidelberg!

A. Heidolberg - one end ono-half to tvo hours train ride.

Q» Hov many kllonoters vcaild you say Hoidelberg woe free Straosbourg?

A. I should estimate 90 to 100.

3- And ysu feel that those tvo cities aro in the vicinity of
Stressbourg, is that right?

A. Yes, it ves very easy to reach thee by car.

Q, 3id it ever occur to you tc use the v-ords Straeobourg, Koidol-
berg, Prolburg in this lotter corccrr.ing these Jaundico exoorinonts on
huaar. beings vfcaa you usod instead tho tern Stressbourg and vicinity?

A. Yet, as I said yesterday, this ves only a planning vhich was
discussed irith Professor Yelk.

3. And tho "in tho vicinity of Stressbourg" could by no stretch
of imagination noon lintsvollcr?

A. So, not in this connection at all.

3- Satxvoiler, hevovor, vns a littlo bit closer to Straosbourg
than olthor Trciburg or Eoidelborg, vnsn't it?

A. That is so but in this case very prcciso clinical observations
had to bo nado rad, as I said yesterday, ve had to bo ablo to roly on
vhat vaccinated persons told us. Therefore, it vac hotter to uso nodical
students vho had bettor interest ir. this natter.

3. Veil, nov, were theso student companies available for this our-
doso that you vere plenning to use them for? After all, they v©re
studying; they had other things to do.

A. “hat is sc, yes, but wc could be perfectly suro that they
vould make volunteers available to us.

3. You were sure that the Luftveffe vould make these ncoolc avail¬
able although they had a lot of vork to do end other duties, is that right?

A. Yes, but they also hod vacations and ve could very veil hnvo done


9579


Court So. 1

19 Jus 47-A-17-5-EX-Gross (3rcvn)

thli vcric taring vacation.

Q, Vho told you you could use then or vho led you to believe that
they sight he available for that purpose?

A. Professor Kellc vas also of this opinion. ~o kaov the sontality
of the students and he believed that ve vould corteinly rcceivo tho
necessary nuaber of students.

Q, Voll, ves Ealic in a position to know. I find it difficult to
believe that you could get these students, Professor.

A. hr. Prosecutor, ve certainly should have got thor..

Q. And vfcet about clinical facilities and voron't they crovdodl
I also find it difficult to believe that you could have cprrlod out
your oxporlr.onts in the clinic because of tho crovded conditions.


19 June 47-.>l»-l-»~-S"Jr,w (3r-«x)
C-urt 1


I not sure thr.t in tie reserve n_3pit-.ls ;* c ule Ir.v. dene
cix acccswrjy uork. Bic students didn't have t- stey in the n.o.-it X
very lea- - I D-lievc th .t i_*. this iqj-rt'-Rt -r.ct._r cert-.ini;- ti.- apr.ee
w.uld have b~-n node nvr.il~. b lc,

0: Yea are quite elenr nb-ut thr.t? Y u really tent the fcrihjJvX
t_ believe th-.t?

..*v’ sh ul/ln't they o_ii_ve it? Li -tfxr places --.la they
carriol on inveoti^nti ns dtl. v luntoers r. hep-.titia cpi '.c.dcr.,

r\t And there r.a n rusulati n f the fchrscckt preventing the
use -f these otu-enta or of a-ldi-rs?

At Ik.-. f n such dir„c.ivc,

Qt ell, if thcr hr-, been would y u h-.v*. kn.-.A if it?

A: Since ■*. ah old have t. turn t the Cnto f f the ::cdicr.l
Service rny.ry, we shuld h.-.vc be-n told a .xt.:in^ nbc^t such r.
directive if n. h-l existed.

Q: And you cm testier thr.t y-u certainly c uld hr.vc c rrX.d out
these rape: .nta .dfch.ut z t. a c ocontr'.tl m c-np, is thr.t :?-jht?

At It ia cvrt'in thr.t :ic c uld here 1 rx hr. t tdth volunteer
students,

.X.ut h u 1 juz ■ it :r.v- taton t. carry thus .ut?

At Ion w.uld it h-.v„ taken until that?

T hr.vc carried but these aqsorXxnts,

At Th-.t probably c uldn't be s n uivanoo. Y.u ..--ul. have t
-sk -. clinician, aai it depends hat the period f incubation ia end
h l.nj the illnoss l~.3ta. It c-uXI take a little .diilc r it -Xsj
could X-.3t a very 1 n^ while. I c n'e tell y u rythinj r.b.ut it.
lei 1 , ...uld it lest at lc-.st c-r. -.-oeks, A y u thirds

A: I cr.nit tell you.

•ht Suppose y.u toll the TrihurrX «Jt h’Xaaor vns.

At rinser? Jr ever rr.s ne f i:irt»s assistants.

r: A -her f the Inftvr.ffa?

9531


1? Juno-;.-T -13-2-£arr - v (Braun)
C:urt 1


Tea, I think he was c. St.~-bs-.rzt in the LefV.cfi'c.

3 : I- \ti-x. was he subordinated?

At I can't tcU you.

Qt Der.«t kn-w?

A: Ha, I don't kn».
r>: .fcafc abn* r,racfc?

As Graefa was assi^od to .a in the Hygiene Institute, find then
froa 19A2 -r. ix, was else an .assistant in the Instituto.

O.t He 'Xs richer -f the Inft-.svffc, wasn't he?

Yes, ho im a stabsarzt in the bjfUr.ffc, clthu^h he -.r.s
detailed ti nc by the Luftwaffe.

a; ? i\ .a was he subjrdinatcd?

A: Militarily tea sub.rdinated to Luftjau PhysicL-n fl.

Q: Technically to you?

A: scientifically .r technionlly subordinate to t, yes.

0: "J»: Kr-diott?

Tint >; s - Dutch prisoner A c- r in Nr.txwcilor.
n : Ho Itr.i.ra all ab.ut your axporL^nta, - ~sn«t ho?

At Yob, ho assisted in then.

■*;: Ah ore is ho?

A: I can't tell you. I assxnc he is in H.lland.
a; five *.r.s Paulsen?

A: .. Hsr^ciian internist. 7ne chief internist in the Jfctswoilor

hospital, !.. . a i» - ,

a: go .ras an innate, rasn't he?

At V ~ c •

a: He also kn- .-s -11 about y-ur orpcrioo.nt 3 , i^sr.'t he?

A: Yes, he doe3.

.jiC ix he said y u infected tJx. ce^x.rlutntal subjects s;iti a
virulent vim he, at least, as in a position t- kr. v, r*.K;H he?

... • ... :ortai n ly .as b.cause - .V:.


95S2


19 June 47->Fd-l£-3-?:err (Br
Court 1


thins.

: And '.a-'.t nb_ut i-eycr? ;h mt.s licyar?

As He ^-s the nd^inistretive inspect Dr end wes in -y institute
in Strrsb ur;.

ilc;-r cs in the H^ienc Institute?

A: In t:.u Kcdicinol Hesoerch Unstitute - thr.t Mas pert ef the
institute, or rnthcr, I vr.s r.lc i.; c'.-rjo of thr.t p-.rticuier institute,
eni of this 1 .dicinnl R.scr.rch Institute bich I Just otntioncd, Hcyor
wr.s en ru dn istretive inspect, r.

1: J.t ;<aa Henri Fierre?

A: Henri Pierr-? I think this is the first tie I v; herring thr.t

naue.

y. He is -. very sll;ht you een, rcthor thin,
fju don't rc-seber hie?

here did he writ? I cr.n't roatisber tho nnec. I ern't r.ssxir.to
tho nnx. .dt:; n pers n.

"is 0 y ruxnber -. .-.n, lurking *.t dtr- 3 b ur,;, by the nr-x of

B-ns?

A: I c .'t toil yufr saro. ihr.t's n.t r.n unuorl nrao, but I
don't seen t rcncsber it.

Q: ; uld it refresh, y.ur recollection if I t Id y u hu *.r rkod in
tho Anct. deni Institute?

As Thr.t ,i uldn't help do tecr.usc I didn't kn u the personnel f the
.inutoidcni Institute.

1 ; Bid y.u kn -w Scr.uti?

As *fco.

1: '.Sxrw id iebuh *crk?

As He I.r.s r.n -ssistmt in I^rdcir-d flesetreh Institute.

Q: Art! you acre his b.so?

,vs His L...t li .tc t 33 -.-s Pr-fe33 r Trer.z, Ux. Direct, r n Ober-
e_iri;.*.lrr.t f th:.t institute.

95S3

I

I


19 June i.7-;.f»F_-13-t~:r.rrnf (Er~.c)

Curt 1

ast you Wire in ch-.r-c of that superior of Schuh's, is that

rijsfc?

I '.r.3 the scientific director -f b th institute, but I ho.:
n thin t 8-7 :b ut th_ jsrt.-nr.el :f thot -thcr institute.

I b^licv. yot hov- already testified that you Can't rcoctiber

Jagner.

•

Tou L.«m tho draftsjan .r.-ncr?

It i>i 7 -u roefcotoor hi-;?

I Sen?* the no~e fr.. th ' cuucnts involved in this tri 1, but
I can't rc.x_bv.r ni .. i wasn't acquainted with tho personnel -f this
anotudeal Institute.

1: Uow, Prouloin Scheldt - she r.ricod with y.u, didn't shw?

As Tos.

Is y-u roueflber on ln.r.to by the n u t, f Holes?

1 I don't reoueber hie.

rw 4 .ce.bor Holes. Ho rcaoobors you.

D- ; u rtaaabcr on ircr.tc by the nr. -a f Braors? .. DutoSian ,
a dcct. r? Ho vos in .*at 2 -_ilor.

2 nly kar.r tho n-ao, Br. Krudit is the nly dect.r 1 !cn:«.

D- 't k r. .i r. cortoin Jr. B.ojnorts, an in:.;-.to .t liatswoilcr?

.rs the chiof sur^cior. in the hnpitd t h icr.

Qs That's rljfct. He performed tho autopsies.

A: I never sow arv aut:?ai.s -f his. I can't toll y.u. 2 don't kn
c'llc :.o t that in .want.

K-.; for ;r.s the Hygiene Institute fr a tlx Anatomical Institute?

A: Five t ci jit ainutes by fact.

•Is jorc y u -*n pretty - 1 tor-os with Kirt?

A: I no-to his acquaintance .-her. I -.font t.< Strose.ur;, anil, -as
*•

c-llc .^ucs, -c r. -d t. uch with n. -n-thcr.
os And Sickcnbach?

..: I hod n c ntocts with hi a.


'


95SA


19 Jur-otf-A-v;>2S-5-:<OT3v (Brfar.)
Csurb 1


'• ..’oil, you krew Bickcnbach, didn*t you, Pr^fcss-r?
a: SUrc, I knew hi-:, but vre sau each - tier very infrequently.

*: d -t vc.3 aiekenb-.eh *a J-b at Strasbourg?

Kc -r.s direct r f the Internal Polyclinic at the University.
r : : Diu 7 u ever biup int- hin in Hatzwcilcr?

JU I&.:cl ncror ate h i . - , . in : fctzwciler.

O: suppose y.u toll the Tribunal what y.u know about Kirt's gas

experiments, Pr-fess r?

I -nly know what I havw read here in these d cuua»ts in U’.ia

trial.

•1: "ou A-r- in Strasb.-ur from October, 1941. Hirt carried out his
experiments fr .. November, 1942, until t..o l".tc sumor f 19V, in
Matrwcilcr. Y u irant t- toll the Tribunal y.u d.n»t kn..: anythin., about
his floats with Lost -as, is that ri^it, Profcssor7

I .. .v. already said that I laws t r. tr.in, Ohout Hirt«o iiblfc find
exporiasnts.

S ' it c.-ac as a groat surprlso t y.u, an: 1 ai.v-so it did,
.hen y.u read these d.oaxao and lc. amod that Hirt was carrying
cx.xr3swnfc3 in Hatzwcllor -with Lost gas? Is that r^H?

I Just fual it ur from thes*. Cxuwnfca. .’•-»» I know.

}: D y.u also want t testify to the Tribunal that you !mow
a thine do vat y.ur c Ucague Bickcn&ach*s experiments with L-ct and
Ph sjcnc gas?

It .r.a nly in c.nnccti-n -with t.is trial that I, f r the
first fcLe, heard f th x c:; rirunts. 1 as ".3ko4 ab-ut chat 5 .-c
tine r.-o,

■1: M 1 supp-so that it‘s p. intloss fr oo t- ask y.u t. tell
the Tribunal \tr. t yx kn.u about the J- is:*, skclct n c ilecti r. which
rested in the bcseaaot of tlx: .mat—leal Institute, oifiht ednutes
away fra. ..arrest, 1943, until the ..:iies enter— ir. *?vcubtr 1944?
anything about that?

95G5


t


Old y.u 1


1/ June -r^-I£-c-Jfcrr:n (r^.a)

C-ir*t i


I fca - tfc t :nly fra these '.cherts am ft:~i the res.rts in
th: papers lhat .ter, regarding it.

r i: iiixl tfc t c.ac as soncthirE <f a shxSc t you?

*'•: *'•-» 2 read it, y-u a»an? In ’bveeber 1945, I .'3 sked

about theso .ett-rs rx.ro in NUmberg 'fll that -.res the fir so ti-x I
hear: uiytliing about true, a. I wnaa*t t. - surprised Inter after I
found ee fkrhor details hero.

lou £*aa y u joren'e surprised really ::hon you f -ur.. „ut
about that? f-u find it quite belie v ;1- that Kirt and Bicixnb eh i.-orc
capable cf do in- these thin, a, is that rij;t?

I didn't intem t say that. 1 nasn't surprised because I
already !eaow. During cy interregatiens here in Number; these things
ha bee.*, br.uc.ht t- y attonti n. It -s * natter cours. t;. t I ras
surprise t.; t such things had been one.

Q: ul»! the Tribunal lilt; t eCJ urn at this tiac?

TIC IZGSXDBFT: T-.c Tribunal -.dll b>. in recess.


(;. recess uaa taken)


Tone l^-A-2-20-l~]ieehea (Int. Uiberrll)
Court To. I


TEL K AH S H AL T .: 7he Tribunal 1 b r.-rin la session.

3?KCEirzr:

* Document To. 3^. the 8t*t«=ent of Expenditures Ir. connection with
the Influenza Seae-rch A ssigaseat by Eragen ''ill he nr.rked for identifi-
ertion cb Prosecution Exhibit Eo. ylC.

Professor, you testified thrt you Jcr.ov nothing about Elrt 1 s gr.s expori-
r.er.ts or ^iekenbrch's ;ra exnerinents; is thrt right?

A Thrt is correct.

^ Did you ever cprrr out «ny gr.s cxncrincnts?

A I hrvo never carried out rny such expertr-ents.

Q the rffirnt Sc huh in Document So. 325, Prosecution Exhibit 3lU,
which you hpve already rerd, strtec in *>r.rr TPph ^ thnt he lermed froa
Koyer thrt Hr.rgen together vith Professor Eirt nrdc soac triple of cocbrt
gro - Lost - in Srtr/ciler on Jewish prisoners; do you deny thrt?

A Yes, I hrvc to deny it becruae such trirls were never cr.de by ce.

\ Then you know nothin, rbout any such trirls , whether cr.do by
you or other persons?

A I did not know rr.y thing nbout such trirls.

^ You don't know thrt Elrt vps .'uteres ted in ens r.t rll; is that right?

A At thrt tine I IId not know it.

\ 3id you hnve pay iuforantlon nbout the work of Elrt pt Strasbourg?

A I knew very little rbout vhrt Eirt did in his institute.

\ You did not hold nay faculty ,ectin*s in Strasbourg?

" Yes, vc bn& those in the srcc Banner cs in my university.

^ It wro cy ndorstradin: thrt r* other universities the;/ discuss
one paother's work rad pretty generally rre rdvlsod on the work of their
colleagues; thet vrs not true rt Strasbourg?

A I do not believe thrt er.ch individual professor speaks nbout his
work vith his colleagues; thrt is not only the case in Strasbourg but
Pt rll universities ml I r.ssuce thrt Professor Eirt had reasons why
he did aot speak p.bout his work.

•v Veil, I era appreciate thrt. E probr.bly w-^uli not hrvo spoken
rbout his ;pe experiments or. inert s pt ITptzveilcr to m ordinary person,


June ic-jr*3&.- -P-JIeehrn (Ynt
C~urt 2 To. i


Tibcrril)


bit on the other h*sd It occurred to sc that it si :kt be possible, if
mot probable that c nan who hisself vest to Eirt to kcvc concentration
cano laartes ^ade available to his for experiments night knov something
about EIrt's experiments on coscentrrtlcn cwrp inmates too, but you say
that is not so?

* I as sorry, but I lave to say a.-yin that Eirt had not told me my¬
th ln .3 about his «rk.

^ Tou any have noticed that the affiant Va.pjer in Document ?o. SSI,
Prosecution Exhibit 230, says in orrr.-T/nk 8 :

*?or Professor Ear,ten, I had t, sake e chart of about 2 x 1 meters,
on which ware listed the various combat gasses with their chonica.l
formulas, and which tv* indication or. the dangers that men could en¬
counter. I e deduct id' thstoex ,erlments had been cade on human beings.

So you know anything rbout that?

SR. TIP?: Kry I ask that the Document be also shown to tl* witness
and that it be put to his. That has always been done and I know
Professor Bar. *en does not have the document in front of bin right now,

?RZSI3HTTs It seems that the docusent should possibly be submitt-
tod to tho witnosc.

K3. KCHA2ST: I c-n submit it to his in Sa-lish, I understand he rends
English. I do not have it in Ger an. I understand ho hrs been shown
the document by Yamcr rs I understand that h* lo here. You read
English, don't you, Professor?

3iS KITTSSS: Yes, I do.

3T :S. IXEUZYt

* You will find this under ~rrr.~riph S. Sid you read the prrr reph?

A Yes, I ? e seen It. V p.ner writes here that he drew up p chrrt

for me and that he was told to Cray up a 2 x 1 meter chrrt where
various combat rtses'-dth their formulas were giver. and also indica¬
tions 0 ? the d'-n.-er which human beinrs would encounter. Be concluded
from that thjitrt^periotnCs or. human beings had been made.

I p rsonrlly do not know anything about p. chart or r table of that


vane 19 -.V-B 2 - 20 -?-!Uely.n (1st. TJIrerrli)

C &art So. 1

kind . I era not recnil that I ever rr.vc V'.zner nn nsslgnscnt of tart
nrtare -=d In ny lecture I never spoke rtout rrs, co-brt erases, so
thc.t I cm not 1 nrpine today that I should ever have riven rn rsal pv-
nent for r chert of thct kind. 1 sectioned tefore thrt I did not know
Vrraer.


95^9


19 Juno*-2 I-I-^-.v-Gayloxu (U£>crr.2l)

C-urt 1, a sc 1

Then you iny Jngxxr's stctoicnt is true, is that right?

-/ell, 1 cannot rcsxsbcr _vcr having rderod a chart of that

kini.

Q: If y u .rdcre. . chart uhieh.fioacoraed.paa warfare and

0

experiments on huoan beings, you :-uld re-xn'oer it, -.*.uldn«t you.
Professor?

I certainly world rcrccbor it, of course.

0: So y :u .aist testify that /Sgner ir.s net telling the troth in
his affidavit, mustn't yoi?

Certainly, certainly, b-cause I knew nothing f that chart.

0: I Just want t mkc the record clear about y.ur position. I
<bn*t tent to have the r-.c-rd oh u .ui^it havo forg-tten this.

>/ ^r.or knew yor as distinguish; J fr.e. Hirt. Kc rulin't c-iXuso y.-u
with HirW.

But one would have t. asarao that i should renujber a ten
like .fcanor if I had given hi; an hsoignujit,

i: 1 —3 asking whether a .xr could p.aoibly have .rdo any
aist-l'x as bct..ccr. y .u and Hirth. That is n t vciy likely, ia it?

I d:n*t kr.,w, tut I have seen fra. other passages ,f the
transcript th .t 1 was c rrie -.-re .a an .assist nt f hirt«a, a. it •

is p .isiolo that there nay be alstake : that

~\l fci:, rr-f«3Sor, I d-r.*t rent t; argue with y-u .abovt the -e
Lost gas CN.^riacnts, but n the thcr hand I want you to be advised s-
that you c a nakc st tcccnts n» that . r. ;.oilis, ,h you say you Jo
not rcacxicr, that r.s an iiarte in ic.tsucllcr, aid it says iie a
assign- t y.-u as an assistant la 1944. Far. n ox, that is inc rroct.
I an sperJein f an ther witness nor. He says that y u supervised
aut -pales X .oorsons wh. ind b-^n killed in these p is.n gas ur'crlo-nts
in 1 .trailer la the early p rt I 1944.

“2 y.ZSXDtlTZi h . ar_ rninu.vj t , counsel? Jr. . d-eo "he"
r-f-r to?

9590


19 Junc-2X-2—Pli-i.-GAYLORD (Uibcmll)
Court X, Case 1


—- ~ c Hollis, TwHcux. Pardon rc. How let .x get this

straight. Let's t the stress 3x-xs first.

IB. ?r=: iiay it please the Tribunal. Hr. licHaixy refer s
apparently to •. st.-U.acnt cade by the dtness. In the witness'
toatioony, i cannot rcscober that a testimony -f this kind had been

introduced in this trial up to row. 3- far it has been the custor

•

that sue!: d-cuncnt3 could only bo usod in the cross cxaioinati n if
thoy had been sutxrittod previously*. Perhaps Ur. LcHancy will bo kind
enough to sitoait the decuacnt t us bef-re he discusses it with the

witness.

131. I.c if. NET: If the Tribunal please, the prosecution is rather
in the ald-lo. I supposo that if wo call witnesses, which -,/o certainly
intend to do, t. Ustify ab.ut Karlen's activities la tawciler, and th.y
testify ab.ufc his L at gas activities, there that then th. deforvu counsel
will cccplair. that Harden should be re called and bo given an opportunity
t; answer that. H w 1 au anticipating that certain witnesses .hoa we
have int-rviosed will testily concerning Lost gas expert.xntn -.ith
which this witness ran allegedly c nnccU N«w if he wants t say
ttr.t that is impossible, that he never had anything t d. with Lost
gas oeperlcnts, m. can g- on.

TiC rdSSJDE/T: Counsel re roly requested that the doeuoont •.r.ich
the prcsocuticr. was referring t; be exhibited t. fcia. That i3 as far
as hia request -..-eat#

IJl. IKLdCEY: Ve have no dccirxnt, lour Hra r, ..f any probative
value hatever. il bav*. a littlw -tcorandun here i-.de by - person-wh
interviewed these witnesses.

1KB rHLSIDZhT: The Tribunal r.s n.t aware of '.'hat cn. ran du:i you

had.

DR. TI?r: Hr. President, ray I also cephasizu the following:
i-r. Par ly aooerts here that Kaagea na- ,:ade cxperisxnt3 vdth lost gas
and he rants t- question bin _n that. He c_uld do that if Kaagen vere


9591


1? Junc~.s-21—3-fi>Ga7l -rd (Uibcicll)
CvUrt I, CT-3C I


a Jcfcnlr^i a.c_rc, but Harden, -.3 d_r as I r-o-axor, is a -.rifcixjsa
specifically, a dtr_5s for SChroeder and Bocter-FTcyscng. Up t n w
the prcsccuti n has never asserted — it is nx t. ec f^uni i- the
Ladictmat -t in tr.u pro sen..'. Li n of evidence — that BccI—r-Freyseng
and Sefcr.edcr participated in Lost gas experiments. I d: n t know,
therefor-, against wh-.a the prosecution rrnts t - sob^iit this evidence
n Lost gas otparixnts. In 17 op ni-.i, a idt.ioss can mly be hoard n
matt_rs for nhich ho can be a vii.xss ar.d tfiich are included in the
Iadicfcooa t . That is not the ease here. The Lost gas ocperLxnts, at .any
rate, have nut been presented .as evidence .against Schr-cdor and Bcckcr-
Freysenj. The ref re, no cannot speak of a resp nsibility for Oiporixionts
uhich allegedly tho -.dmass carried -n. I-,n t know .here this is going
t lead be. If tho pr soeuticn if.nts t- exteni that part.of the
Iniictecnt * inst Beckcr-Freyscng, oeayb- he cm hear Haagen as a
witnoss -a this point; but at .any rate there :;u3t be .an assorti-a by
the prosecution first, .tner.iisc we .rill experience the sane tiling a 3 in
the fin so of tiie ,'ittcnau oxporlxnto, hich have .also been ixnfci nod by
the vitnoss ixr^. hen .a-. Hardy was .ad- : by Juije Sebrinj -.bother he
includes these expvriuents Li the Indict xifc, he sal.'.. No, t!r.t isn't
so. The snuc applies, in .y opinion, t the Lost experiments. They .are
n t a subject in the In_ictix.it — .at MV rate, n.t against Schrocder and
Bockor-Frcyneng — and I . not .:v. in fact .h t irfconti.na Jir. UcKancy
has: ,.r.at he ;xmts t prove by questioning the dtness on that point as
far as this trial and those defendants are c neerned.

lQLltcH..rtZr: I have. t» very va.lld purposes in directing these
quest! as to the witness. L. the first place, I think that if I cm c n-
tradict and show th.t he did participate La thu L st gas experiments, it
night have t* e aff-ct :n his crc d ioility with rmpect t t it. typhus
experiments; 00 : the second plac_, if .« can show that the Luitorffc
through Hanger., and as .x have already Sr. un thr .ugh the It . oarzt .istiOr,


9592


19 June -. .-21-d-Fd-Gey le r d (OibcirOl)
G-'urt I, I'.sc I


prxticipr.tcd in these last gc.s ucccrioents, ac -.fill certr.inly use thee
f r my -'urp.se against my -f the defendants in the l_-.de .i.ic. me
perdt-.cd by th. In-ict-xnt. Jc would cert inly use it f-r iii-.tv.vcr
it'a virth.

THS 7.12SIDSKT: Cr. cr ss cxocinr.fcl-.n, c.unsol my test the
credit Hit f th- witness. In this cr.sc, f c ursc, if questions

propounded by the prosecution te tho -.dtness, if answering thaso
questi-ns would ten! t incriainr.tc the .dtness in my vr.y, tho witness
cm refuse t answer. But the cr ss cx.-minr.ti~n lias n-t go.no beyond
the field f proper cr.sa cxnainr.tion. C.unscl cry pr~ceod. Cancel in
propounding certain _f thcs~ quest! ns should put t:._. in the hypothetic"!
f.rn; o-y, if the witness srys this r.b.ut n certain rnttor, calling it
t- his r.ttcnti n if thot utuId be c rrcct r inc-rrect. C unsul tiry
priced.
b: IP.. ;.cI~JEY:

3* .Itnoos, 111 y u .r did y u n t .dtness tho parf rtr.nco f
any nutopsico .n cxpcrlnentr.l subjects hilled lurirg th. c-urse f g's
experiment a r.t ttimrilcr?

I nove uitneoses that,

0: Y d rc.xnt>-r the naoc Gcorg~3 3 egort-a ".a being an incr.tc
surgeon r.t Kata we iltr, i3 thr.t ritfit?

A: Yes, 1 remcribcr.

Ysu kn.n.thing f my au*. psies perf.recd by Bogarts, i3
thr.t right?

As Of these -.ut_psic3, i lav.:; n.thing.

And y u ocrc n t interested _n th. fact thr.t the lungs f the
victims ver- s. sw lien thr.t the anterior triangle f the heart, :hich
is usu lly n-t c v^red by the _ungs, ;.-m c .pl.tcly c vmed nd b liber' -
t_ I fcy tie swollen lungs in this esc? I u kn r. thing - > at thr.t?

:i , I kn -r n.thing r.b.ut tiut.

: Y u sp.kc -f typhus epidemics ir. ..uschuitz. Vfliat inf r.-x.ti n


9593


I? June—„-r!5-21-5-G3yl rl (Uibcr-Jl)
C ucfc I, Case I


J- y _ have nb u. .any such cpiu-aics?

Inf nrtion of that kind we received, for instarre, thrtujh
L-vx.tes -.ho care froa Auschwitz rad had already fallen ill fron typhus
*cn they arrived at Jiatzwcilcr.

1: did y.u speak t. those iaoatcs?

.'.s On the ccasi.n _f ty visit t- the caaps, I p _ke to tho
inuato physicians ird they tcld ex that iiur.to prison-rs had arrived
fr « Auschidtz and other carps alroa-.'y ill,

1: Do you rcecrbcr the oonth this wan?

/oil, tn, first c*ac f typhus in cy roe ;llocti >n rr.s in
February or iiarch 1944.

0: S y ur inf raa.ti n is based upon what the ir.ntc d;ct rs t did
you ab.ut ha.t happened in .jisclr./itz?

A: 1 sa.w tho patients.

Q* a-.o was tho crop c -orandcr in Katzwciler in 1943?

In 1943, that r.o Kruj*stun fuehrer Krrjxr »tf;o was caap
coeoandant.

Hr: l.nc did he ivnain there?

T.-o exact date 1 c.uld xr.t toll you. I assuuu that that was
spring >44. It oust have boon spring '44 -hen <a new caop c-uard-st
was assigned.

0 : '..“ant was his ir.no?

A: Hie area; was Hartgcnstcin.

'll *.3v. *..-a.3 the coop c asandor at Sc’iirnock?

A: Hint was H'.uptsturnfuohrcr Bud:,

V- And h .; i n- Oil he sta.y there, t- y.ur knowledge?

As Uvat I c Jill not tell y u tdth any certainly how loi£ he
stayed there; at my rat-, when vaccina tins against typhus and njadnst

— that in 15..; — at that tine !:- -..-.as carp
c xanicr. F r Cloi^ an.', whether iv. was 3tiii tr.er in >44, 1 c uld
r. t tell you*


9594


19 Jun^FU^-VLcs (Xnt, UlbcraU)

Ciurt Sa. I, Cast I

Q,-. ..'no nas tho coop doctor at Sehiraok?

A.- In Schlmck itself thin, was, to the best of my knoi.lx.dso, no
* : * ap WBicisn but tfx. a-dloal cere was ndainistered by the canp ohy-
aicians .f Jfctzw.ilor.

'•• h; was t ie crap physician r.t KatzwciL-r?

A.- Ihore flcru thrteo. In sequence, I y.t .in-ee o>: than. One was
" Dr. Kriue-r, then Dr. Plater and the thir mza a Dr. Rode. Those ucro
the 3 physicians I net.

Q.- Did nil t«icsc gentian impress ->i as good, h^nost utn?

A.- well, I did net n,ti<x -nyti ing particular wh,n I was thoro.

Q.- .mat rirt ^ a am did Kra.^r ir^ress y^i as b..ing?

A.- »cll, I did n.t coa- to know I.’raaor very intina-ioly. Wo only
had conversations or. the c ebetting of typhus so I should not llko to
pass any Judg-ient on Kr-oer because 'ay knowledge A his character Is
too sUght — too United.

Q.- «tes it Kr-^r who invit. j you to go to Sehiraok?

%

A.- It u.o ^ra^r, y-s, who case to ac.

Q.~ And vhen uns that, to the best of y. ur recollection?

A.- In tl-.e oxxse of t rv. year 1913.

Q.- Ar.d !>c t.ld you 'that ho was afraid of a typhus epidemic?

A.- I thin’: t. \t t'.vt was on the initiative f tho canp physician.
The caao physician haft explained the situation to Xr-ajr. I do not
kn«w the b-ohj ‘r .,d ‘tut at any rate both gentle non cane to sco rso and
asked Ee f or ay sxp- rt.

Q»- And you e-ore cdoitted t Schinaok on the ->rc3er of Xrrjxr?

A.- x« Sc.rir.*,k? On order? Well, ono could not socak of giving an
order. Hauptstiumfuohrur 3uck Just let y. in.

s ixn an.- c.ntact -ith 3erlin in c mecti.n with your r rk
in t:.„ cr -p,?

A.- Fio, no. I -_rs naliy hr. d no c nfcect with Berlin.

,u —j 7^u t-stifi_d .ab ut the WHA yesterday. It occurs to ac


9595


19 Jur*.-A-FL-22-2—L_sscr (Ir.t. Ulborcll)

Court Ko. I, Case I

tfcnt you have a pivtty good working knowledge of the eoncentrati on crap
ays ton, Did you over hove any contact with t*ta W.V.N.A.?

A.- I had no ina.dir.tc cutset. The correapor.dorco went via Hirt.

And whore did Hirt peas it or.? It went to the defendant Sievera

then?

A.- I think ao, H- intended to go to Sievera. Sievera gavq ao the
inforaati.n later that I v.uld get tho approval to carry on with vaccin¬
ations.

Q.- Ar.d Sievtrs sent it t- Pohl ;f theh.V.H.A. - is that right?

A.- ..'oil, those c-nnecti.na within the SS I do nA kn.w, I an nA
inf a*aod ab-ut then.

Q,- Did you ever h-vu any contact with Lolliry, in Amtagruppo D
of the m.V.H.A.? Dr. Lulling was the chief d ctor.

A.- I ;ct Dr. Lolling -nco, in tho auao.r of 19 U*, the occasion

of tho epidooio at Kr.tzaoilcr. That is...

Q.- <na it cust:.oary, ao far os y u know, fa- canp conkaan!er3, like
Krroner, tj jj >ut in th. surr.unding villages end towns and solicit tfjo
aid of pe-plc t.xro in c ;nr..cti.n with the or.bl-ns in the canp?

A.- I do n.t kn~w hJf I ra to understand that quoati.n,

Q.- ! e viill >“.83 that. Y u say tho typhus vaccine y:u tested in
Schiraek in 1943 >“3 = curing typhus vaccine?

A.- Yes.

Q.- And that, as wv 1-ys r. understand it, nurine typhus is rat
typhus - that is right, isn’t i{?

A.- Yes, rat typhus, yos.

Q.- And that is not quite $> dangerous as the so-called louso
typhus r the Rickettsia pr.waxckl virus, is it?

A.- VoU, I helievw that it is very difficult t^ detcraine or de¬
cide that; both t- varieties f typhus, the rat typhus as well as the
l.use typhus, Thcro are th~rs but whether rat typhus is nildor I d. r.:t
know. There arc stntua&nts to that effect in aodicsl literature but there


9596


19 Jur*.-ft-f^-22-3-Lc5j-r (I-it. Uiborail)
Court !Io. I, Case I


m elao very serious va»-s if rat typhus so I think that it is quite
difficult to decide or determine that. 3oth are variotics of typhus.

*•“ And t’is marine typhus vaccir.e had m attenuated a virulent virus,
did it a. t?

Tint vaccine contains, if it is living, an attenuated virus, vi¬
rulent virus, which is no pathogenic to huaan beings.

s>- D- I understand that you regard the word avirulcnt virus as
designating a dead virus or rarely a weakened live virus?

A.- Any dead virus is aviruL-r.t end every live virus which still
has any effect, is virulent.

Q.- S» that it w uld be Inc-rroct to s>erk of an attenuated a.viru-
lunt vires - is that right?

A- It is r. t logic but s :au laya-n, non-sp.clnlista, put thus on
the a an- level, that is, -virulent and dead virus. At any rate, it Is
c-rrvct, if a. spec In .i a live virus to consider it virulent au*' thon
to rrJee the distinct! n t dotenairx whether it is p-.th.ganic to huran
b-ir.gs or not.

Q.- .toll, maybe I misunderstood, 'cut I th-ught that the dofendant
P.-s- spoke f r 3 *r A days and uaod the tern "attenuated r.virulent virus"
and I cert-inly id not understand him to be using the w ,rd avirulcnt as
design-tin: *-• ^~d vaccirx. Perhaps *» can clxck tho roc rd and esta¬
blish that. Did you read the r-e.rd t Rose's Ustia ny?

A,- L,e, I have xv-d the rec.rd his testimony but I should like
to have it put tax again if it sh.uld beciec subject to" discuss! n.

Q.- Veil, it is not rxcossarily an important point but did you notico,
when y u were roedieg, that Rse used thv- ohra sc "attenuated avirul-nt
virus"?

Yea, I read that.

9

u y.u fceL that the defendant Rose cade a grievous -alstako

there?


i'cll, it is an inaccuracy, but tv-n today wo fine studies were

9597


i? Juns-.»-F>22-A» Les3.r (lot. Ulbcrr.il)

Court So. I, Caso I

the tera "cvirultnt" la used In tbo same meaning as harmless - not dang¬
er uc.

Q.- Of course, it makes your documents b)ko little bit nicer if
" u f definition, doesn't It, teat c virulent virus does not

r.co_sscrily uw'n anything except a living virus and it night be attenuat¬
es :t eight bo regarded by Rose end the re at of ua up to now as an
attenuated avirulent virus ?

Util, mryex. I con uxplain that again. «a long as the vixua
is alive and active it is virulent; but no have to examine its offoct
in connection with.the species where it causes r disease. A virulent
virus nay be highly pcthog-nic for animals but n.t for hua'n beings. Then
we have a virus which is n ;t pathogenic to human beings bat virulent and
wu find that dcsignati n also in other countries.

r :.- 70 U stnte that bjf,ro you went to Schiroek y-u tested this

murine virulent vaccine on y-ursolf and sabers of y*xc institute, is
that right?

A.- I did not try it -ut on myself. I tried ut the pronazeki vi¬
rus on myself; I stated that yesterday. There wore other members of the
institute wh- wer- im cul‘t_d with that vcccinj. I inn-culatcc! myself
with pr saseki virus and, unf rtunately, it is nly posaiblo to carry
.ut jno vaccination if ^ne wants to obtain results, because 2 vaccin¬
ations, of course, would have disturbing effects n each thor beca.uso
the first vaccination is supposed to create isaunication. But I had
vaccinated a number of v lunteers - 5 r 6 volunteers.

Q.- with this xnrinu virulent vaccirx?

A.- .;ith that murine virulent vaccine.

Q.- How -tony people?

A.- Tr>jr- »er- G altogether, I believe, e persons.

rf-.ll, did that satisfy... Vhat was tix purpose .f this vaccin-
ati a f these o ae ole? '-.'.a y.u testing merely for c. patibility?

n.- That was th- test f->r c opatability which always previously had


9598


19 Jun--FL-22-5-L:s:~r (let. Cibcrail)

Ciurt Kj. I, Crs. I


b^en aide.

Q.- “id 7^1 arlco a Wcil-Tclix reaction teat?

«•- Thu ,'oil-Falix reaction test was els: aadc.

.-11, y-s there...Did y- u g- t: Scr.irs^k then tj innsculato
thus, -.tiv-r p.rs.ns - vaccinato thoo Kith .r.y view in aind jf studying
further this typhus vaccir>., :r »-re yxi satisfied that it was ell
right as a result :i y^ur 8 uqjeria-nts :r vtccinati ,na >n persons in
y.ur institute?

-. 11 , it was suffici-r.V, in irdor t_ gain an Laprussi/n :n the

/

c_cpp.t ability, ii ox v^.cciiviti.d 6 p^rs.na i r that purp^ao it ir.a
tiruly sufficient, and practice oft-rwarda or vod it.

Q.- tfell, did yvu expect t> get any valuable scientific date as a
result f t iib vaccinati -ns ,n the inaat-s at Schiraok?

. 0

-LI, that questim c old bo answered in the affirmative, but
a Large rn-unt :>f e:p-ri-nc- was available already in tb:r plncos -
experiences with t..c». vaccin.s. I have yesterday aln.*djr so'kon abeut
vaccinations with thes- vaccines. Such oxpori-nceo h“d already boon
g-in-d by French researchers.


1C Juoc-A-GJ- 23 -l-Pr 1 wjru-( liberal1)-
Court 1.

x ..oil, *e can say than that tha real purpose of your 'oinj to
SchlrrtJCk »»* sioply to eccc-cd-rc tho cn«o co-m-ndor I'rnner, who was
worrying about a poasiblo typhua opldooic?

Tho c-.so oo-rcndor oorf.ir.ly - orried but I ryaolf wns worrying o
-rcot deal sera bocauoo overy typhus opidoaio in a earn conatituon a
danror to tho civil inn population in tho vicinity of tho cr.pp.

V That ia the reason you wont to Schir-oock?

A That ia tho ronaon i wont to Schiraook.

q, ho*. hcv did you determine tho offieacy of this aurino typhua
vnooinc?

A By cpplyln- tho '..il-?olix reaction toat.

,.nd you did that, both on your voluntoors nnd tho persons at

lohirtcak, is that ri;htt

A It wns done in tho onao of all th.so vnooimtod regularly.

V ..oil, did that civo you a rclinblo and dofinito roault *-ho
offootivenosa of this nurino typhua vneoinot

A That ia not quite so easy to aoy. vhnt it rill rivo ua wo will
- ft In on id or of tho of foot of this livin; virus con-rod to tho of foot
of a deed cur in j virus. Tho n-enbinntions titr which wo obtain with
tho dord virus aro linitod sorolo-ical <.xnninn*lonn of tho som of
pooplo vn oo inn ted hfiTO shown that the surinc l!vo vr.coino lends to
nuoh bettor results. Tho tita values in tho son of those who nro vao-
cin-tod w ith life virus cro ~oh hifikor than thoso who hnvo boon
vneoinnted -;ith do'd virus.

(. -..oil dM r« 1" DD y ”r ««t «*■ =^ !no vt, ' 0l ”° r - > t0 *“

ir.footloua offset other then by runnln; tho -U-r.ll* roootioo to.t-
A ?o. ttat «. .1M further oxonlnod in e>i»l o».rl«mt. -hothor
that roooino tad on pntl-infcctioui offset, ttot con —Uy boon .eon
in anirrl cxrerirxints.

k .hot other tnti-infectious ^rtaort. tonld you tevc tarried
out or. this arurine va wire?


9600


1$ June-A- '«:-23-2.rriaeru-(UlScrc!l )-
Court 1

A i.oll t 1 beliovo that is c hypot.istiorl question whi oh I con only
-ns’for with a hypothetical answer. Ihe first possibility, of oourso, is
tho ono which was used, was aplliod, by tho French researches who vncci-
nntoc these persons first ar.d then subjected then to artificial infec¬
tion, e rorulsr rrti'ioial infootion. he find statements in radical 11 -
ternturo to prove that.

Tho socond possibility- is to wait until an epidemic brooks out. If

4

tho -Arsons vaccinated rosnin hcr.lthy, whilo during a lc.rro opidomio
snr.y people f-1! ill in tho i—wdiato ▼ trinity, ono ocn conoludo that
thorc Is o »ood rnti-infoctious protection.

Tho third possibility is tho ono whioh i havo described vestordny
already, that of conp'.rr.tiro sorolopioal examination. 1 don't know
whether you w-.ro herb yesterday wt»n It was nontionod. 1 would bo quito
willin' to ox plain it onoo roro. ho you want no to do that?

W Wool, I an not suro. Is this -v»thin difforont from tho boil-Felix
ronotiont

A It is tfcj .oil-Felix roootion whioh is onrriod out, boforo and after
o subsequent vaccination.

h 3ut you did or did not do that in connootion with tho nurino
vaccine?

a I mentioned 'lrondy that is - hypothothioal quostion which I can
only nr.swor hypothoticolly. I did not do thr-t.

*» *hy not?

A In these onsos it did not soon noecssnyr.

W In oth-r words, tho third typo of test which you nut is tho vacci¬
nation plus pest voooination. You -xploinod the words "subsoquont in¬
fection" in sono of the docur*nts later on in Eovonber end i-oooriber 1^3?

a Yos.

t* You explain the words "subsequent infection" by stating that in

fact it ms a nose cr second -eco;notion.


A It was - third vaccination. Tho subj-cts wore vaooinatod twice.

96C1


19 vur.c-X-SJ-23-3-Prl-xi-u-(Uibor'-ll )-
Court 1

Th-t ooooludod the incur, it at ion. The third, tho additional vaccination,
aorvod tho purpose to prove tte i-r canity which wna c-used by tho rrotoo-
tivi V'otin-.tiona • rd I hed r.o nispivir.gs to uao tho word "infoot" inatond
of “vaeolsetol.c find th-t also in cv-dial litoraturo, that both word a
ero uaod to express the snno 'r.d 1 already sot forth thrt any vaccination
with a live virus on infoction perse.

^ Moll, would I bo giving o proper oxanplo if I say that really whet
you neent wni liko vaccinating a aon with a sen 11 ocx vneeino and thon,
aay two tenths later, giving his another aenll pox vnocino which doesn't
toko ond you thoroforo conclude that ho has boon in-uanirod against
•noli pox? Is that right? - %

a That quo a .ion, r. Froaoeutor—cry I forauloto it slightly differont
oo that X ihoyId bo in noaition to rr-swer it? In tho oaao of thJs roaonroh
wo arocor.C'.rnod with tho serological roaction, not a phyaical roaotlon.

That 1« to any, 1 vneoinnto with saoll pox, then a certain dogroo of
loBUnity ic nchloved, nnd tho eooond vaccination doos not trko. That ia
whot you ■a.ar.t.ian't it? ell, it ia not really right to oomparo this,
to put this to the sr.ao lovel soiontifio-lly. SnsioMly, what vou moan
and wr.ht I acT la tho snre. Tho only thing ia that what rtntlon—
ono ia tho physiological proof *nd tho other ono is tho soroligical proof.

I hope I h-vo oxyroaaod rrysolf clo rly enough.

W And why ''id you not carried out that typo of tost in oonnootlor. with
tho nurinu v-.ccino?

A That had its reasons ossontially in thj fact that only in tho course
of sorolagior.l studios -ftcr thrt ti-» I cor.coivcd tho idoa to uao thoso
roaa-rch lottors in order to ostrbliah tho anti-infectious offoot of tho
vnocir.rtior.3. ’.o hr-vo froquontly found out thet during tho illnoss nlrondy
boforo the ond of th; cor.rloscor.t period a reduction of tho tita vluos
in the sorua can h«, found -nd sinco I have conducted siailar roaonroh with
sari! pox I intended to extent that study olso to typhus.

V ::cv, you test fiod that in Kr.y lgi} you vacoin'-tod 28 ooraons in


1$ Juno-A-V-SJ-^-Frinoau-tUibercll )-
Court 1.

ochiracck. 8 with fiva-tonths of a cubic contisctcr of the vnooino, 10
'with five-tenths of s cubic contincter of the mocine, and 10 with n
deed Tcocine plus fivc-tonths of a cubio ccntia-tor of the murine mccino.
Is that ri*ht?

A I r I understood you corroctly, 0,5 cubic continutors? That is cor
root,tint is ri-ht.

V That should bo ono-lr If cubic eontinoter.

A Onc-hrlf? toll, that is fivo-tonths. Yos thnt is ri;ht.

W A total of 28. Lid you vaooineto ony aero in Schirsock nt any tine?

A ::o, no, no, only with the doed virus — throe persons.

V Throo additional persons with n deed vacoino?

A Yos. with o dood voocino.

W How a»ny trips did you srkc to Schlrocok with thoso vaccinations?

A Aeoordiny to ny rocollootion thoro wore four trips.

W Four trios?

A Yos, 1 think co—yes.

V Thoro woro no sorious rcootions to this raccin'.’

A Wo, no sorious roactions.

W v hy is it that you tr-nsforrod your aotivitios to Wottvoilor’

A ihrt hed it's reason in tho location with rorsrd to opidenios.
Sohirnock, cs 1 said already, wr.s a ccap for soourity detention and thoro
tho tyro of pooplo was quite dlfforont frer. those nt Wottwoilor. Thoro-
foro the conditions with record to hyylonc rnd i*unoiory wore such thnt
3 chir»ck scot»d to bo los= ondenrerod than lr.tiwoilar ns far as ony
cpldosic wns concerned.

V And tton through * hos did you errnnye this trr.nsfor of your r.cti-
vitios?

A Thet I did on -• own, fron 8own knowlod-yj of tho locations.

V Isn't it r fact that you didn't carry out after infectious expon¬
ents with your BUrina va ocinc because you ted to obtain prisoners
furnished by tho 33 and they would not pernit you to carry out your oxye


15 Junc-A-5J-25-5-?ris»cu-(Uiborell}-
Sourtl


rinonts on thoso 26 persons you Taoeinrted?

a -o, no under no cireusstrneos, booeuan thoro woro no oxocriwints
in tho rxnn-r in which they ore interprotod in this trial for that
purpose. That was for tho purpose of protootin; those -ooplo.

V Isn't hto rocson you 'cat to Hi ft boeausc you hr.d to hovo
axncrinontel subjects on whos you could oerry out your plannod eftor-
infootior. axperiaonts to tost tho rncoino?


19 Juno 47--JjC-2-l_3eefd (In*., tJlberall)
Court I


A In tho first place I did not originally turn to Hirt because
the ea=p coanandcr negotiated with =e without Sirt's knowledge. I would
hare carried out this vaccination vithin the scope of tho general vaccin
nation progras were it not for the fact that Hirt had lntc-rvoned at the
tiac, end the result of this interference is the points which you can
find in the documents, pnorg the documents.

Ct Tot what repson did Hirt interfer?

A Specific reasons I could not tell, I do not know, hut Hirt bc-
licvo - and I have told the ca=p physician and the casp connandcr that
I eould not obtain sufficient mounts of the custonary vaccino, tho
eoaaercial vaccine — there was not o no ugh of that in Strassbourg, and
that I would start to vaoelnato with the new vaccin. which was nanu-
factured in ny placo. And, Kirt heard about that and thought probably
that this was a new thing which requiro'* approval of tho superior officor
and ho told =c then that it was probably better If I nsk tho approval,
and as known froa the docuacnto, obtained that approval.

•i *hcn was the last tine you woro In Shlraeck?

A I could not say: I could not tell you the accurate date. Tho
last tisc whon I perforaed a vaccination there was at the tine whon tho
Influcr.ta vaccinations were aadc — aust havo been In 1943, tho late
fall of 1943.

k and, as an expert, you testify to the Tribunal that vaccinating
those 28 persons with the aurinc vaccine was n real contribution to
fighting the possibility of a typhus enldcnlc in Shirnock; is that right?

A I did net say that in that fora, did Ij I don't think so.

H I aa at a loss to understand how you could feel that the vacci¬
nation ef 28 people in Shlraeck, and 200, or I think you said 80 in
Katrwcillor, could have any effect whatevor on the likelihood of a ty¬
phus cpidor.ic. There was soac 12,000 insates in Katzwoillcr, was tin re
not. Professor?

A There were a grert nany, but I explained yesterday “lrordy that
first I had to slowly because the laboratory ne»ns at ay disposal I


9605


19 Jure (IrAi; Cibcrall)

Court I


ccnld act manufacture a sufficient aseur.t of vaccine. I regretted that
very nueh, of course, and for that reason =y work took very long.

*hat was the nationality of these 100 innates that were shipped
froa Auschvit*?

A The nationalities, l co-old not tell you; later I was Informed
that they wore C-ypslcs.

k Do you not know the general appearance of a Gypsy? Is ho dark
In color or do you not think you would recognise one If you saw a
Gypsy?

A Yes, hut not all Gypsies look alike. If It Is the real, tho
typical C-ypty, then one could say that, hut X have to say that I aa
not onough of ar. Anthropologist, and If I an confronted with 00 or 100
pceplo, It is not so easy to tell whether they aro all Gypsies, Polco,
Slavs*and so forth, Hungarians, or Italians, which wore naongst then,
or other dark haired typos. I could not make that distinction.

Q Did you personally exaalno theso 100 inmates shipped In for
your vaccinations? The first 100 In Koveaber or tho first of December,
1943?

a Voll I looked at tho firs* suhjocts that were sent to mo, and
ono could already see that tkoy woro In such a had condition that vaccin¬
ations regardless of what kind, could not he applied anyooro?

And, 18 of then died on the transport; Is that right?

A That was what I was told.

'x That is rather sordid Isn't it?

A Yes, Indeed, and I also made no secret of ay opinion of that vhon
I spoke to Hirt.

‘t You knew that these 100 -*n had hcon shipped in on your request,
didn't you?

A So, I did not know that before, because I was of tho opinion that
they were or would he Innates who were already In the carp. Tho back¬
ground conditions — for Instances, that people had been brought from
Ausehwitr to Satrveiler for this purpose I did not know.

5606


19 e 4?-iuJjC_2^3_3earA (Iht., Uiberall)

Court I

$ 3ut, you knew it after it happened, didn’t yon?

A After it happened, after I heard about it, I knew it, yce.

And, you roquested another 100 and they wore also shipped in
weren't they?

A That I cculd not toll you whether they were shipped or whothcr
they were inn*tea who wero already in the crap. I hwe no knowledgo
of that. I could not tell you.

* Tou knew that in the first case, but you don't know in the se¬
cond caso; is that right?

A So, I don't know it.

t* Weil, this second 100 you exealned than, didn't you?

A 1 locked at then, yes. I cxaair.cd then together with the prison
physicians, and we found out that they could be vaccinated.

* 5onc of than woro Gypsies, were they not?

A According to ny recollection they wero of nany difforont nation¬
alities; not only Gypsies, no, no.

(I Soae of then were Polos?

A Von, today it is hard for no to toll in detail what nationality
they belonged to; it 1s quite lnpossiblc now.

* Witnesses fron Strasbourg testified here that you tor.dcd to
Justify your work in the c«cp by saying that no Alsatians wore used, only
Polos, but I want to know whether you reno-.bor if there wore sono Polos
anong the persons you wero gol-g to vpecinato?

This cust be a nistako. T 0 u scan Sfchlrncck; don't you? The quos-
tiono was discussed in connection with the incstcs vrcclnrtod in Schlr-
nock, not in Sat*vciller.

* Wen, you nay be correct. W e rc ny Polos in Schirneck?

A ?h« re were. Sot all of then were Poles, at any rate. I noticed —
I eculd speak, I conversed with eonc of then. At any rato, they belonged
to different nationalities, they were not all Poles.

Did you -ake the ronark attributed to you by several of tho wit¬


nesses here?


19 J une '7_A_I‘C_24-4-Beard Uibtrell)

Court I

A So, I did not mice it, no.

^ It strikes =e thet you were a tit persistent with your vaccin¬
ations when you ordered hundred sen after tho first 100 turned out to
he in had shape. *as there any reason why youucould not tell the
canp eomander? Let us use 100 sen right here; rijit here in tho caap
now. All I want to do is vaccinate thus to protect then fron typhus.

*hy do we need 100 non shippod fron Auschitz?" Did you say anything
like that?

A So, I did not do that: and, I told you already that I did not
knew about tho transport fron Auschwitz bofore it had arrived, and even
if there'had been new arrivals fron Auschwitz, os far re I know they
were largo transports coning in all tho ti-c fron Auschwitz and fron
other eanps, and they again wero carp innate*, and Just as vulnorablo
as the others in tho carp.

W Icu testified yesterday that the persons working in your laboratory
wore vaccinated against typhus and you nentioned sonc danger in connection
with the laboratory work. *111 you toll the Tribunal what that danger
was?

A *oll, whon working with typhus, thcro is always tho possibility
of an Infection brought aVut in the laboratory, and one has to tall
all precautionary rcasurcs to sake sure thnt such «n infection doos not
take place.

^ Bid you pay your laboratory Assistants a risk bonus?

A Yes, two assistants, crploycos of the laboratory who wero parti¬
cularly endangered were paid a bonus.

H I thought you also testified on two or three occasions that you
had r.o virus strains which were pnthogonlc to hi nan beings; is that
right?

A That i„ right.

* ^d, *h«t vas the danger which arose to the laboratory workers?

A *cU, that is fron the fact that aonetincs we do not know every-
thing about the biological natter. S 0= ctines a strain sight bccoac


19 Juno 47—l_J jC-24-5-3eard (jht., Uiberall)
Court I


pathogenic for hfcan being, that 1 not excluded.. In every laboratory
one can make that observation once In a while. *ith nil ^irus whoro-
ever they nay be kept they nay be kept and where ever they nay appear It
1 * quite understood that all precaution* have to be taken, precautionary
neassre have to bo taken.

<< But r 7 ou relied very heavly \^on the fact that you had notpatho-
gcr.lc strain* and you set that up a* a big defense against the possibility
that you earrlcd out aftor-lnfcction experiments with a virulent virus
and you pooh-poohed the possibility that thoro was pry danger to tho
test persons, and X an having *osc difficulty reconciling tho groat
danger to the laV-r-tory assistants, but no d-rgor to persons who whre
subject to the vaccinations?


19 Juno l7-..-«.T>25-l-C-ok (Ia% Uiborail)
Coart Ho. l


I believe ono cannot interpret this in that n a nn o r because
sonot&acs oven in th: laboratory wo are confronted with natters which
wo cannot quite control. Therefore, it is always bettor to bo caroful
if cnc handlos -a to rial of that kind than to ’x> n-„ li{_*ent.

0 But yju excluded th possibility that any of y-ur tost persons
could have boor, harsod in thu sli htast way by those vaccinations?

In the preliminary experiments wo c*il' fin’ that out and
that is olrea-’y the best tost if that can bo found out, whether thoro
is a danf.ur apparent or net.

q Than you took the uinoa pi s to Katswoiler to por.it the
imatos to brood than, is that ri.ht?

That is correct an’ thoro was tba chiof of tho hospital who
was vary wch in to ro a ted in animl breodin; and I brau; ht hin nlco,
as well as ulnca pi s, so that ho could start his a final brooding*

Q You were shart of rabbits and :ico but not of -juinoa pits, is
that ri ht?

Yes, -ainoa pi’>s wo would havo noodod considerably and wo hoped
to *;ot acre.

q Profosscr, y u testifio • yoster’ay and I queto tho translation:
" ."hen I say "subsequent infeotian" I an ref err in;* to subsequent
vaccination with living virus vaccine, tho third vaccination which I
carried cut ir. this rcup." asn*t thero any word which yuu could havo
U3ad inntoa' ;f "subsequent infection" to c:nvoy sorxiwhat no re cloarly
what you uoant to :1c?

A I sai ‘ yesterday airoa y that tho word "subsequent infoction"
which .ms us- but that it had nothin' to Vo *.dth tho vaccination for
tho purpose f protection, ‘nit that a third vaccination was nado in
trdor to cxmdno th- tlo^rcc of irimnity r the fact of imurdty and to
nako that distinction botar-un these two actions I spook first of tho
real vaccina tier, ftr th_ purpose of protection an’ I call the next
vaccination the "subsequent infecti-n # "


19 Jaas U7-,-A7d>-25-2-Ccok (Int b'iberali)

Court !io, 1

q And 7 ai think that ths use cf Uw, word "Subsequent infection"
is better then, for caCEpl., then "HachiEpfuni"?

A Yos, one could uso the, ’for: JfcchLapfun:" I bdiovo sinco tho
sczxi rotarial is used. Th-rc is no besic Jiffcronca end in nodical
litcraturo tho word "infection" or n ro-infecticn" is also used in tho
sanso cf "HacMEpfuns*, subsequent infection, Ono lees not have to
consider that infection noans scoottains at any rate dangerous,

Q "hen you uso in conjunction with tho wore! vaccination or
irnunlzation tho word "subsequent infoction" which has sonothiiv? of
a bit of oolor in it, doosn*t It, Profossor?

A Jfc, I len't think ono could say that,

q oil y~u concodo that thj Prosecutions intor ; rotation of tho
word "subsequent infection" as noanin - infoction with a virulent
typhus virus of the typo oarriod out in Buchonwal' is equally con¬
sistent with tho interpretation y u put cn it?

A If orv. interprets it that way, ono has to consider vfhat

notarial was uso! for that subsequent infection. As far as I an

info rood ruw in Buchonwal • and also in other placo3, an infoction was

carrier', cut by hunan passa-c, that is with th. blood of diseased persons,

which is hi hly infectious, an.’, with that blood Huron boin.s woro

infoctod. That is cf c urso an entirely different natter than to toko

•

an attonuato * virus and waccinato with it,

q Y u havo V. start with a Tolly virulent virus theu’h, don*t
y.u, bofaro yu win’, up with an attenuated virus, dcn*t yju,

Profc33cr?

A That is c rrect,

0 But y u n-ver ha 1 ary such fully virulent virus, is that
rl':ht?

A I had a virus strain which had boon bred for a Ion- tlco cn
tho lun'-s cf a rabbit but by Prof^sscr Giraud in Paris and which wo
continued t- ' rea I in a plant, an dead tlcsslj that •'as alrea dy an
attenuate- : strain.


19 Jbx» b7-d^ ~>-2>-3-Cock (Int. Uiburall)
Ccurt Koi 1


Q "o can, of course, fin:’, cut, I thank* rather easily what tho '
soruas cf this strain ycu obtained frcn tho Pasteur Institute* wa3.

Let :a put this question tc y.us Do you thirl: it wool:', have boon safo
to havo taken scoo cf the bicod free scco cf tho :uinoa pi;;s carrying;
this strain when ycu first rocoivcd it an:', inject it into a person?

.. I e'en*t quito understand tho question. Icny I ask y.u to bo
kin:’. ontu"h to repeat it?

Q Suppose you ha.’ injecto:', a hvrtan boinr with th_ strain which
ycu rocoivo 1 frtn Oiraud would it havo rosultod in a serious typhus
illnosa or rot?

A That a -ain is a quosticn, :i*. Prosecutor, which is of a noro
hypothetical nature, I think the roct probability is that it would
have co.no to a nil ' infection but I cculd not say with a hundrod por
cont certainty, ' ut th> exp-rionoos which wo havo ;ainod inUento that
it woul' havo boon only a rdld caso. Thrt is a hypothetical quostion
a/nin which I can only answer in a hypothotical way.

1 'oil ,-ursuin thu hypothetical quostion further, you insist
on tostlfyir. to this Tribunal that ycu could rot havo possibly
brou ht on a sorious caso of typhus iUnoss if y.u had triad to do
sc, is that ri ht?

A That is cor roct, * occuso I hr tried out that natori.nl alroady
in oxporirants on .ursolvos and thu quality _f be in.; apatho*;onic to
huivcns ms pr'vo.’ by that*

1 Do ;* u rcn. Xr '.ecu .ait Hu. 127, that is ycur lottor to Hirt
of 27 Airo lPUl;, Q3kin for nn additional 200 persons, that is Proso-
cution Exhibit 306?

A Paco 96, tc Professor Hirt.

Q Henr ycu haalrca y carried cut ycur experiments in Ducufcor
an January, 19U3 an 19kh, respectively, on 80 persons, is that ri ht?

A Yes.

1 2 fcw in Jun- a; air. y-uasied for an a' ’itional 200 and y.u statu ’-.


9612


19 Joan U7-..—.TD-25-ii-Ccok (Ini* Oibcrall)

Court Ifc. 1

tewevor, in the su.sc<jiont inoculations with virulent typhus which
■'xo to '_o rede for the purpose cf testin' the protective vaccine, ono
raist count on sickness, particularly in the control roup which has
not receive.1 the protective vaccine. 'Thy rcro you pursuin'; those tosts?
You hxvc explainsd that as boiir, nothin . re re than a sub3oquont vncci-
notion* You carried out such experiments on the 80 persons in tho
winter of *U3 - *Ui. hy di * you 'rant anoth-r 200 to carry cut the
same experiments?

This is no longer an experiment as it is usually understood
hero ir. this court room, but a scrios of vaccinations with a vaccine
that is already Icwwr, That I roquestod another certain rturibor of
pooplo to bo vaccinated is explained by tho fact that qy possibility
for promotion wero limited, but horo in this caso wo boliovod that
wo would bo able to vanufacturo sufficient vaccine for 200 porsons.

0 ’./oil, but you draw tho distinction in this lcttor boWoon
tho cxporlnonts ycu had carriod out so far an* tho ono which you pro¬
posed in this lottor, yet I put it to you that nee or din to ycur own
testimony hero now y?ur plans were no Ifferont at all. You simply say
that a ain ycu woro oin; to carry out su' soquont vaccinations not
subsoquont infections. You had already do no that on this first hundrorl,
tho first eighty experimental persons, hat was tho roason for doinc
it are in, Professor?

I stated already that rv intention wr.3 if pcssiblo to vaccinato
tho ontiro camp fer their protection, but at first I could only tako
200 , but sinco here oynin I intendod to nako sciontific observations
concernin' tho compatibility of tho vnecinos, I mdo thoso two dis¬
tinctions hero* and tho ono ryoup which ayain shculd bo vaccinated on
the am by scarification, I dosi'-natod as sublets of control
innoculation, an:'. I said also that I knew that in other placos work
was done on typhis vaccinos. Therefore, I axntioncd ayain these control
ir-ncculaticns in order tc nako it dear# These are the only reasons.


9613


19 Juna 47-26- l-3r o b s-£ lb er all)
Jourt I


Q. Tnls 13 nothing thon out a repetition of -'hat
you did on the 30 experimental subjects?

i.. I explained taat already yesterday, it was the
sane as tno vaccinations I carried cut In the winter of
194—■•«.

<• now, did you actually carry out any vaccinations
aftor cho vaccinations in December an? January on the 3©
persons? Dll you carr*' out any core vaccinations In
:«&t£VdllOr?

.so, I did not. There vero no more vaoolnationa
carried cut.

%. You dldn't vaccinate anyone during the course
of the epidemic? I should have thought that they would
have boon eager to lot you vaccinate those people. Horo
they vore crying for you to come In --hen there was no
ecMoBlo to keep an oplaenlo off and then they got an
epidemic r.d you vaccinate nobody, how do you explain that?

Vo, those people m W3 no longer vaocmated and I
explained that already yesterday that In the summer I had
to sa/.j so cany official military trios that I could not
carry thl3 cut anysore.

Then you sode n- vaccinations on anyone In i: *.t2-
"eiler after January 1944, is that right?

There were no vaccinations carried or. after
tneae vaccinations m December 194* and January 1944.

Q. Kow did they cosbat the epidemic?

Tne eoiaeaio v >t8 oonbated by delouslng all the
Insates as possible and the request of the oarnp physicians
I ayself to it that they received the equipsant to
do that. I ^nov that the capacity of the decontamination
equipment was too Halted so that due to the impossibility


96U


i_ J u ne 47-^-i2t-2c-a-A-*K-GrosMi:berall)-
Court I

of a perfect delouslng the epidemic was increase 1 . Then
our institute extended that equipment ar.d transferred it
to I’atzveller. That Increased the capacity to dolouso in¬
mates to twice the amount and that prevented many typhus
cases.

When had you completed this third vaccination in
the series on the 4C test persons in December and January?

a. iat must have been during the course of January,
the precise date I oar. not tell you any longer.

Q. How far separated was one vaccination from the
other?

Well, the two first vaccinations were made at an
interval of approximately one weak. The third one which wao
doolgnat :d 13 subsequent Infection four weeks aftor the
last vaccination.

Q. and was this third vaccination any different from
the first vaocinatlon except that you apollod it through
ooarifioatlon rathor than injection?

... There was no other dlffar;nco except that, of
course, tho amount usoi for scarification was smallor than
that used by lnjeotlon.

Q. Did the persona get sloh when you made tho first
injection In the series of three?

.*. I don't quite understand that question. After the
first lnjeotlon of the series of three vr.at injections?

Z. Did your experimental subjects get ill or sick
after tne first vaccination of the three which you gavu
tee 40 test persons?

a. . _ r.o test persons received only one single scar¬
ification or. the arm. That was only the simple vaccination
-ade by one scarification.


9615


IS June Jr-i£-26-''-&ross-(Uiberall)

Court I

2 thought we had two -roups, the group of *iO which
received • vaccinations ir. a series, tho first two being
given by injection, the last one being a scarification
vaccination and at the same tine the 4C control persons
were given a similar scarification vaccination, is that
right?

A. Yes.

That's all I wanted to Know. Now then, when you
gave the first vaccination to the persons, disregarding
the oontrol peroons now, did they get sick?

«. They got tho normal reactions of a vaccination
but thoy didn't get typhun.

/ell, why 10 you draw a distinction In your letter
of 27 June that one must count on sickness in tho oontrol
group. Tho control group in this oaoe got nothing more than
the other group - so why draw tho distinction between
sickness lr. tho control group as oospared with the immunized
persons? ou didn't give this group anything mere serious
that you gave the other group you vacclnnatod, lnduod you
Save them somathing much loss serious, as compared with tho
three times, . ow, why was there sickness in tho control
group iftor one scarification vaccination?

A. This morning I have already explained that that
letter was read by laymen and probably dooldud upon by
layman, and here in mentioning tho normal reactions to bo
expected after the vaccination I sooke of sickness but it
would be quite erroneous to assume that I meant typhus, as
I nave said already this morning I Just referred to the
normal reaction after vaccination.

*. Then the oontrol group didn't get ny more severe
reaction than the ones that were not controlled, did they


doctor?


19 June .7 ..-Zi-ir.-pkp Gross (Uibcrdil)

C-urt I

... The --ict,! ns s for r.s I ern still x\.c~.ll thwa -,^rc n .i:rc scrioin
than din t..-sc ahs h~_ previously oc-n v'.ccinted ay injection.

In thar ,.aeCa, a. signs -f r. umifest typhus fis&'.sc.

, y.u really wen. paying scoothing that «s utter nonsense >*ion
y.u talked aoout sickness in thu control gr-xip? licrcn't yu?

... K-’- f urn that, please?

Q. I any, y ur talk -f sickness in the c-nfcr-1 greup is just

nonsense then, b-.c~.u3c there cm oc no distinction her*, bet-,icon your

control 2 roup here, and y-ur other ;rc*ip?

A. If I understand you correctly, lx. Frosecutor, I don't knov: if I

understood that question corroctly. There were in the first .group

reactions to che vaccination mong the first 40 that had boon vaccinated

and such reactions of vaccination wo also had in the socorri group of

40 eh t •..ere vaccinated, but •.« had no eases of typhus.

0.. I m agreeing with your proposition, professor, thr.t you

didn't subsequently infect .nybody even though you *ay eo. Gut, 1

can’t for the llfo of no understand hew you can spook of a control

•

group in this lotter nd speak of axpccting illness in tho control

group tfion .he control ,rcu? didn't ct any thing noro than a vaccination,.

The other -roup got a sitailar vaccination and two others, yot you ere

indicating to, Mr. Hirt, that we can oxpoct 3ccvo Hines, in tho control

group. Ibat's r.onsori3o, isn't it?

A. :; 0 that is not nonsense. I have exp la in od yesterday already

that tho purpose of that control greup w, Tact was with roforcnce to

serological reaction which we wanted wo cxrjaine ir. comection dth those

•

vC'.o had ween vaccinated various ticc3.. I 3aid already this aornins
that -lrcady after tho vaccination tho agglutination titc in tho
sc run wore reduced -nd we wanted to ,x;t uheae two groups into
relation to each other 3 far as those v lues were edneemed. And

this group r.ich \cs vaccinated by ocarificition yea a comparative

I t

group in who sense of a control test for tho serological reaction.

9617


19 June i? A- 26 - 2 a-pkp Groo: ( Hit era 11)

Court I

And, if I aontioa cases of sicknoss in this letter then I noant the
noronl of foots of the vaccination.

rrofossar, we are having groat difficulty getting on the sene
gron-jf. Let sc put ono final cuicstion to you. *03 there ary reason to
expect ary tore serious rone tion to the vaccination in tho control
group ns compared with the other group?

A.

jo, there .ns no reason .batevor for you drawing Hiat3 attention
to tr.o possibility of sickness in tho control group? Isn't that tho point,
Professor? Thoro is no point* to it unless you really intend to infect
tho control roup ;dth a virulent virus as you stated?

A. 'do. I beg your pardon, i r. frosccutor. I have nlrondy told
you that this sic loess was effects of tho vaccination, noraal re .ctioho
of the vaccination zad I h id heard free Lolling, chief physician of tho
casp , sp-cifically that it was not d4sirod that people wero lost for
..or.:. .*.;croforo, I covered sysolf .nd said it is possible hoirovor that
such .oactions of the vacci/t.tion ill occur and if I have to rupoat again
I dsed the ord sickness in this docuuent in order to axpruas that
reactions of the vaccination -.dll Iv.vo lo be expected. 1 -jc. sorry but
I have no other -xplanation than this.

:• Let pit a docunant to you boforo wo adjourn. Do yew
read french? Fr of-os or?

... Yea a little, but I do not. apo J; it fluently but I kno*4 it

sufficiently.


9616


19 Jar. >-..-BJG-27-l-KBrrc-.: (uib.rr.ll)
Ccurt Sc. 1


*i I m putting tc the ritr.css Document. SC £07, ProsGcuticr. Zx-
hi v it 1C5. Frcf-aacr, do you see the point -t v'aich I h_ve atdo
pencil nrrfca or. the. photosti tic copy of th~ document?

A 25th of Jrauery, 1943?

5 Cat oinutc, Professor.

ZE« TDIt !£»*• President, 1 only esk, Jr. President, chore tho
document is tl -t r. s put tc the •itc.css. I should like to i.. P it rlso
tad ’ - ■lie tc cc.^jrre it. .!r. K:x^ tcld nu the dcouamt book ?nd
did net ivc so th<- pr.ge oi the ccu_u;t. 1 should like tc t here

the document is lccrtcd ml ess it is nc- cne.

.1. ISCH..V2TI It is cn old cne. It cm he found in the r.'.cl-ten
collection document beck. Doev .ent Beck n 7. It is cs :\c 2> cf
the 543ila») document book, Dc : lent '.!C L07, Prosooutioa it lb5#

This Is priCiril; r. bock of pictures concerning Hirt'o skeleton collect¬
ion, but there :re ?lsc in this locu-.nt extr-cts teken fran cricinrl
0 -racn records found in the Srtx*. oiler ccncentr- tier, c-.i c-nc ralng,
co the prosecution stys, Keygen's t; ;\.us .xpcrlaents, * nd X m nc-.
rskins :ir * to rw.d ti.ree excerpts *.ihleh rppeor in th-o docuuuit.

y • HI s I don't bell eve, lx. President, thet there i« French
dccuner.t ii. cur dvcu.:er.t beck. '.x. H. _-cn srit th t his French t.rs
net flu_.;t tnd th't he only knew French, rr.rt 1 think it ir» vu- . n-er-
ous tc =u'-.dt to e tdtn~so r docunutt ii. » l^npinco in vhich he ip net
quit, fluent. Jr. cKmcy is n: doubt in r. position tc a.’ . t «!rt
docua-at in Ocnacn md 1 shcul. like tc s,\ hia to do co.

1 . cK MY: I cssua- th t defense counsel s the dceuacit in
Gernm.

: STidcctl

lc. G .Id you r-.-d thrt yc.-ticn c: t w docun-nt • hich you ;-ier to
in I Mioh rrrJ h*ve it tronslr.tcd ir.uc Gvr—-n?

HI -i . *teUu2:

. Ter: v sil; ttA if the - iun-ss :.ill folios JLvier -h- 2. lish
or tl. Gemtn he err. tell us if i-. is cc rr^ct.


9619


19 Jur..-OJG—27-2-X*nor (Uiburell)
Court Ko. 1


The first extrrct th t I vio-cd kia tc read is fJ:c iron c report
cf the c... footer cf h tzneil.r concentration cm.;. File 1:3.'. 341.

7:,-r. ' p-. ti the initials "Et" cbviousl; standing fer Dr. Uri-r whoa
the itnosa testified he knw . D ted Sftzv.ciler, 1 February 19W. It

rtfdas

■Experiments . t the ihnooertoo or;;ri-cvnt 1 st/tien cro -till not
und~r I *: . Cnc of the 09 hnann experimental prisoners (Gypsi-s) oied
ith plcuxr.c nyshyec...* I can't t'-kc eh -1 cut — "... durirr the
period ccv.red by the report. Forty Gypsies r.crtvcd • iropk; X*tie
innocui tier, for r t:phus exp .ri ;ent."

tore ycu rblc tc fcllov th-t, Fi*ofossor? Th t's the excerpt 1
checked — 1 Februrry 1944.

.. 1st Febru r/ 19U — "expert .uxts ir. the exncriacntrl st tien
ehnenor' Is ttvt it?

. TV t's it. Hi t's here you \ ere uerfcinc isn't it, frofessor?

.. I fid net voric ir. the /Jmcntrho.

\ u: i you kne- rherc the 41ine.jcrle st tier, v; s in 11 tr.;rciler?

Li K- tzeciler I cannot realtor having seen the special
desiportion ..haonerbo nhen 1 r.crkcd there.

. Then you ccn't testify you Cidr.'t v erk in the ..hnon-rbe, ern
you, Frefesaer? Hr.vc ycu found this excerpt?

.. Yes, yes, I hr.vo it here.

■Experiments in the oxpcxlmontrl st.-tion 4hncn-rbc have not ; ct
started. Cf t .e 00..." lh-t ia var. difficult tc read here. “01 tre

CO cxiicriacntfl subjects, iaaitcs, Gipsies, cne died Ire.; jdtvjv. cr^p-
iftoniaa ir. the avntiiv:. 4 0 Gypsies ere v ccin-.tcd for the urosc
ex* r t: pirns ex>ris-nt."

; IT the Tritunrl t-ishes tc adjourn, >c -..ill oontintte .'.th this
decusmnt tcecrrcw. I'll - si. thr.t the altn-ss pass it back,

TrZ ri^SlDSH : The ritn.ss 'dll return the iocttacnt.

r.-.e lri'-urv-l rill net be in recess until 9:30 o'clock '-c :tct,

~r:_r. .

(.. r-c-ss k:s tken until 0930 hours, 20 Jun. 1947)


9620


Roll 10
Target 2

Volume 26
June 20-24, 1947


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


OFFICIAL RECORD


UNITED STATES MILITARY TRIBUNALS

NURNBERG


CASE No. 1 TRIBUNAL I
U.S. vs KARL BRANDT al
VOLUME 26


TRANSCRIPTS

(English)


20-24 June 1947 pp. 9621-10005


20 JMb ~?~ ."2-1-1-. r JX>han (Int. 3rcm)

Court Sc. 1


Of field Transcript of the Xaarican * : ilitary
Tri':urd in the setter ^f the Crdfcod States
of .bacrica, aminst Ilarl brandt, ot d,
lofendanta, ait tin: at Hurrfxsr , Gernany,

cn 19 June 19^7. C93G-09U5, Justice 2oals,
prosi&inc.

TKZ :'J.lSR.Lt Persona in the courtrccn trill please fin ’, thoir
soats.

Tto Ifcixra'ilo, the Ju'-os of rilitaiy Trlbuml 1.

‘llitary Tribund 1 ia new in session. God save tho Urdtod Statos
of .’norica an*, this Hone rode Tribunal.

There will bo erdor in tho ccurtrocn.

THE FHSSHEMT: 'tr. Ifcrshd, will you ascortain that the
lofonr'anta aro all prosont in Court?

TrT. TJ5E.L: ”ny it ploaso Tour Honors, all tho lofondants aro
prosant in tho court.

TIE PHiSHeHTj Tho Secretary Ooncrr.l rrill no to for thu rocord tho
prooer.ee of all tho ofonlanU in Court.

I was ur.-r th- in.rc3sion that counsel for Dofoatant Hovon had
requested that ho ' j excuse • fron attendance to.tay, I '.on*t know
whether ho ’osiros i, bo excuse:* or nd. Tho court avo hin pomission
to ha absent ta consult with his counsel. I ton»t soo his oounsol pre¬
sent but when ho cones, ho rxvy sVato Ids 'fishes in thu ;-nttor.

Coun3ol *.ay procoo d.

IKft.fcT: "ay it ploaao tho Tribunal, Profossor, at tho oncl of
tho sossi n yesterday, I .xit to ycu cortain cxcorpts apponrin in
Osculant ::c-807, nhich ms Prosocution bxhi' it Us. 185.

DR. HP?r ’r. Presi !ant, I already said yostorday that wo do not

knew about this Docurxmt that *.r. ItoHanoy i3 about to put in. I brru/ht

Ns. 9 with tx an*. I ascortain that Oiocwnt ?B-807, as put in by tho

as *r. IIcHanoy is puttin: tc tho

.

-:ck, kcuixnt 1C-307 is .n pr :o 18, that
nudsr in the ixmncnt bock. This DOcuiwnt

-f Hauptsturnfto chr or Sraix-r boforo a


20 Jttr» U7-!>^n)-a«^!OGhan (Int* Brown)
Ccurt :fc. 1


rilltary court in Strassbcurp on 27 July, 19U5. "r. "cBancy, however,
ha put on entirely afferent doc-xicnt to the witress undor tho Huhber
'.E-hCl or at least a art cf another ’ocxraent, a '.ocunent which tho
iofonso does ret have. I do not lmcnr what the reason for this is, but
I reiterate the lofonso is not acquainto! with this docunant :b*.
iWfanoy is puttin'. to tho witnoss under ?to. JD-807. If lir. ItcHanay

wants to discuss this Jo cur cut hero, either ho oust d.vo it his otm

•

exhibit rarfjor or at loast, accor .'in; to tho rules of prooo :fcro, ho
raist rnko a translation of this docunont availahlo to us. I thoroforo
object to tho adrdssicn of this docunont, which the Prosecution has.

; Q have not received oithor tho French or tho translation.

Id. rCH.HEf: If the tribunal nloaso, the document which I havo
put to the witrcss, JIO—807, was introducod as prosecution exhibit
Jfe. 13 1 ;. It consiatopriaarlly, an* it was offorod prinarily, of
pictures of tho so-callo Jewish skeleton coll, ction nado by Fronch
authorities whon they oapturod Strassbeur. . This hook al3o contoinod
a sworn ntatunint taken frra Cosp Comandor Xronor of tho conooiv-
tration ooap Xatxwollar an’ Additionally contained excerpts taken fron
oaptura * Ooman docunonts in Natzwoilor. Unfortunately, when tho
doctr.ant was translated, for acuo roason tho Translation Department
failed to translate in full tho snail oxcorpts which apjoar in thi3.

•

Thoy aro aide roforonco to in the translation, which tho Tribunal has,
but tiviy doo*t actually translate then, ;.p; orontly tho sano doficioncy
appears in the Goran ninoorraph copy. Of course, they caul ’ not very
wall oopy the pictures. So obviously all that appears in tho QorJJan
copy is thi certificate by the French Gevornnont plus tho affidavit by
dr-.-cr, however, I should hava thou ht that a /hot-static copy of this
was furnished to tho Defendant* s Infomntion Center. In any event when
I cccpleto exardnin the witness cn this ’ccunont, I shall bo very happy
to ivo Dr. Tipp ay photostatic copy here.

7EF, FDESIDSSTx That is tho book an*, .ago runber in which thi3 .’ocu¬
aont is fouirl?


9622


20 June L7— ’ . .7!>-l-3— ! !o ohan < Tnt. ~ram)
Court llz, 1


IC. :BEJEI* Docun_-r.t book 7, pa o.

JE. TIi'Px Decucont bock 9, isr.it it?

‘ . ' EF.'.jrr ;i I lor.'t think so, it probably eri finally was narkod
'xcuncnt S. I think we raaarkc.1 it Ho. 7. It is tho skeleton collection
docunont book.

TrZ: iTcESIBoJfTs On what pa^o of tho 'ccunont book is it?

:C. 'CP..BYJ It appears on pa-o 20, it is th- last docunont in
the book.

T® PTSSEENTs You state, counsel, that this corcploto translation
of th_ 'jcvcaont uas furnisho*. to tho Dofondnr.t's Infornation Contor?

:n. CF-.!EY: ?to, I'-ur Honor, I said I nssunod that possibly a
?bot astatic oopy as furni3hc -ut I an not certain of that. I rioroly
rvaka tho strtonont cn tho basis cf the proposition that v/o did attonpt
to furnish th.r. with phot.static copies of each ’ocunent, I don't know
and it my bo this was ovorlookod. I don't otr.to that it was fumishod.
..nyvr.y, I will bo lad to ivo then ny photo static copy when I on
finis ho \ vdth tho witness.


9623


Court So. l

20 Jus *i7-Jt-2-l-l»-D8r.iel b (Drown)

IB. TI??: hr. President, I an sorry, but this statement of Hr.

XcEaney is not sufficient. In our docuaent book according to the running
page nuabers there is a Document 807 but this is merely an interrogation
of Kauptsturafuehrer Kramer and nothing else. There is reference, to be
sure, to a fev pictures, but I don't place any isportance on those oic-
tures; I don't need then. Eovever, I do vant to say that oart of the docu¬
ment that concerns itself with typhus, and vhich Kr. HeHar.ey discussed
with the witness yesterday, is not contained in our docuaent boolc at all.

I could not know that the urosecutioa understands, under the nuaber 807,
sonething quite different froa vfcat the defense recelvod under that nunbor.
That is the reason why I an objecting to this.

Perhape .ir. HeHar.ey would be so hird as to show ne the original
document that he intends to discuss with tho witness.

ha. i.C KAX5Y: Does the Tribunal have the translation of this docu¬
aent before it?

JICCn SiSSISC: I don't think eo.

TEE PSI31X537: It le very incooplotc.

I a. ,:c HATZY: If tho Tribunal cleasc, I can explain It briefly.

To you hevc tho document that was given to you - tho translation?

TKS r\£CIILh'7: Vo have a very sketchy docuaent.

K?.. «C KAIZY: Veil, If the Trltunal will turn to page 2 they will
see translations of captions of photographs. On that list there nro
soao 14, 17, 21 pictures. Isaediatcly u-.dcr the translations of the cap¬
tions you win find "I-A", ”II-S n , "Dote: Docuaonts found in

tho Struthof Concentration Carp." That is the Trench word for Katxveiler
Concentration Ceap.

I- A is a list of phone nuabers. They did not list the ohone nuabers
in this translation; they aopeer in the original.

II- 3 is an extract of the aonthly report froa the casr: doctor saying
that experiments have teen done on sixteen gypsies and that three deaths
have resulted. I have now been in the process of witting: certain of
these extracts listed here under I1-3, which I ar ouitc ready to confeos


962A


Court So. 1

20 Jus 47-K-2-2-sBi-3anlels (2rown)


were unfortunately not translated, tut they do appear in the original.

While defense counsel has undoubtedly teen taken by surprise, for
vfcicfc we are ouite sorry, nonetheless I don't think that is sufficient
reason for not remitting the prosecution to out those docunents to the

witness.

THE PE£SXXI2£7s ¥111 the Secretary ascertain if a ohotoctatic copy
is available la the Defense Infornation Center?

IF.. TIP?: hr. President, vhat Ur. i-.eHaney says is true, and I can
add the following. In our document book there is contained only the
interrogation of this Eraser before the French silltary court, but not
tho first page of the document +.ich, as I s«o frees the photo copy, con¬
tains excerpts frea »ouo report on tho part of ths caap doctor. It is
precisely thle part of the decusont »hlch ve do not have in our document
bock, that .j. .vcKaney is putting to tho ”113018 to croso-oxnnino hin on.

I can only reiterato that the docuccnt that the orosecution gave uo
is not a true opy of the locusent ho is about to put to tho vitnono.
Thore is nn ensential part of this document alsoing in our version. I
don't thick .nat e : i; H : tr.is vaa a mistake la sufficient. If the orosc-
cuticr. h.\j msec such n niutuke, it exist abide by the rules of nrocoduro
and sake aval): llo to the dofonse tho part of tho docuaent that is
aisslng before pat.Ing it to the witness. That io tho ruling of tho
Tribunal, and I do not beliove thcro is any nocossity for deviating from
that ruling.

TEL PriSIIEM: If ycu are allowed five cinutes to examine the
prosecution's copy of that document, could you familiarize yourself with
it - five minutea or ten ainutes?

IE. TIP?: That would suffice, ycB, tmt of course I should like to
read the photo copy before Hr. U cEaney cross-examines the witness on it.

TEE PHZSIDZI^T: The prosecution has no other subject of cross cxaal-
nation that would take tine until the morning recess when counsel could
examine this document?

HA1ZV: Well, wc have further cross examination, Your Fonor,

9625


Court Sc. 1

20 Jun 47-«-2-S-iSt-5 B ciels (3rovn)


aid I vill bo glad to proceed. If it 4oesn«t taka bin until the r*»CBs,
perhaps I can cut this to his. I vould prefer to nut %hl* to

hla before going very auch further.

THE ??iSI3ihT-: I understand, but defense counsel's position 4s cor¬
rect. They are entitled to have an opportunity to cxaaine thl6 document
before the vitness Is cross-exaaincd concerning it.

HR. KC E A S2Y: That Is Quite true. Your Honor, I vill let him
have the docusont nov. As soon as he has indicated that ho has road It
sufficiently, If he vill turn it back to ae I vill put it to hin.

TEE PHESUETT! Tory wll.

SY <{R. KC EA1EY:

Q. Kerr Professor, I had discussed with you yesterday Doeueent NO-
127, Prosecution Exhibit 2C6, That van your letter of 27 Juno 1944 to
Tr. Klrt.

JUICE SSBRZ»l Vhat book, kr. McHancy?

MR. MC FXEY: Book 12, Your Honor.

BY X?.. i.C KAKXYi

Q, Do you find that docusont, in vhich you ask for-

A. (Intorposlng) Yos, I have it.

Q,-in which you ask for 200 oxporiaontnl portons, 150 to bo

used for protective vaccines and 50 for control inoculations?

You will recall that on your direct oxanlnation you eonevhat
ridiculed the testioony of Fraulein Schaidt on the ground that she vac
talking of 150 to 200 cxporiocntal persons, Pereas you said in fact
that you experlaentcd only on soso 80 in Dcceeber and January of 1944.

I suppose you vill concede, as a hypothetical proposition, that.- if you
in fact carried out the exoerisents which you speak of in Prosecution
Exhibit 305, then Fraulein Scheldt's testiaony is rather eccurato under
that hypothetical proposition, is it not, Herr Profossor?

A. I don't believe you have to put that as a hypothetical question;
I believe you can put it as a direct Question because those vaccinations
of the 200 people vere never carried out.


9626


Court So. 1

20 Jus 4?-i;-2-4-ZEX-3ani el a (2rown)


q, And there vorc ao Vaccinatioitt of any kind ox. any iwautto o/
the Sate^eller ea=p after Jesuary 1944, ie that corrcet?

A. Tee.

Q, Let 1 * turn to Tocusent £0-131, Proeecution Xxhiblt 309, In
Docusent Bode So. 12.

K» At vfcat page, counsel?

HE. 1IC HAST: Page Se. Tour Honor.

3T :s. HC HAST:

q. Tou will find that that le a letter fron Kahnt to you dated
29 August 1944 In vtleh he asks yew, under oaragraph 3, ^hothor tho
typhus opideate prevailing In Sattveilor Is connected with the vaccine
rosoareh. Having road Rose't testiaony, I suppose you rcoonbor that ho
stated that ho also sponsored this letter signed by Kahnt and, ns a
aattor of fact, had drafted a sceovtet longer lottor to you on this
subjoot.

I 03 asking you now how P.oao end Kahnt could possibly have thought
that your vocclno rosoareh In Satrwollor had anything to do with tho
epidoalc.

A. I cannot say what aotivos thoso gontlcaon had. I atsuao that
for reasons of precaution they askod no this ouostlon. Kovcvor, lot no
renark that a groat nusber of tho first casot of tho disoaso did not
cceo froa tho co=o itsolf but fron outsido, free outsido camps '-hich did
not have an;/ hospitals of their own, so that tho Satzveller caap had to
concentrate tho trectnont of all sick porsone in Itself.

There can bo no connection between this and oy vaccinations
because, first, while the vaccinations were being given, the vaccinated
persons did not cooe into contact with the other lnnates; end secondly,
they were cccplctcly free of lico; and thirdly, transnlsslor. of typhus
Is possible only during the period of incubation and in the vor-/ first
days of the disease. Since no tychus cases occurred aaong those vncci-
natei, I believe this problca is solved. These were exclusively scon-
iar.eeus cases of typhus that broke out.


9027


Court 2o. 1

2 C An 47-i:-2-5-£^t-3e=.i®ls (Brown)

q* You say that ycur vaccineted persons did not coce in contact
vith any of the other imates. I assuae you are speaking of the oereons
vaccinated by you in Seecebcr of 1943 and January of 1944, is that right?

A. Those ere the oeople I an talking ebcut, yes.

Q, And whore wore they confined?

A. They were accomodated in the hospital, as I believe I havo
already said at another tine.

Q, You had 40 in one roon and 40 in another roon?

A. There wore 80 in all vfco, as I roaenbor, wero all accconodatod
in one barracks.

Q. And how long wero they confined?

A. Until I had testod tho eorological roaction and aocortalnod
the dogroo of iaaunity.

Q, And when wi that?

A. I cannot givo you tho prociso dato, of coirso, sinco I havo no
docuaonts horo, but I should say it ««s at tho aost four vocks aftor tho
vaccinntions.

q. Voll, in othor words, cortalnly during tho aonth of Fobruary
you ccrplotod that?

A. I could havo boon January or it could havo boor. February.

Q. Sow, going bock to this inquiry of Ki-hnt, ns I understand your
testimony, you don't know why thoy asked you this ouection and you can't
think of any reason other than precaution, is that so?

A. It think they did it for roasons of caution, yos.

q. Sow, P.oso said that he thought your vaccino night havo suddenly
beccno virulent or pothogonic for huaan action and cause cases of typhus.
That is ridiculous, is it not?

A. That is sot ridiculous, but the fact that no typhus cases
occurred proves that this wes not the case.


9623


20 Jur_-U-rL~3-l-Fol«21 (Int. 3rmm)

Court lio. I, Ca»: I

Q f - W- 1 I, 70 a r-p-rtud t the Chid . f the Medical Servic- of the
Liftwaffo and to Herr R;ae thr.t you tad carried out these vaccinations
and 7 -u gr.vo ttao the results of 7 -ur test, did you nit?

A.- I issued a report in the farm of a aanuscript, as I described

it yesterday.

Q.- Anf ;-ou of course reported in this manuscript that there Mere
no cases of illness, and you gave the results of your vaccination tests
and reported, I suppose, that they were succeasful; is that right?

A.- That's right.

Q._ You did all of this before June, 1944, didn't you. Professor?

A.- I can 't tell you the date for cure, but it is in the docu-
nsnts hero, si^ I think it ms kay. It could have been June when this
manuscript was submitted.

Q.- At least they had it before they wrote ycu this lettor on
29 August 19 UU t and I ask you again how any reasonable porson could
writo you and as!: you if your testa had caused an epidemic in hntzwollor
when thoy already had your report in he:*S that your vaccine exoeriaort-s
had beer, successful and that there woro no illnesses, and I steto again
to you, it is a iittlo ridiculous that Roas would stato on tho stand
that he thought your typhus vaccine had bo cone pathogenic. If you voccin-
atod these arsons in January, completed your cxaoinction in February,
and atao a rooort in May or June, how is it that somebody can testify
that he thought your vaccine had beco.se pdthogonic and posribly had
something to do with an opidenic?

A.- Jr. Prosecutor, I have already told you that no^sinf lo caso
of typhus occurred ir. those who had been vaccinated —

Q.- Just a .unuto, Professor. I aa not accusing you of having
started the opidonic at liatzweiler. I aa asking you hoi Rose and Ilahnt
and the Chief of the Luftwaffe could write you a letter in August 1544
asking 701 any such question as that when you had already reported to
them about your vaccine tests in Sntzwoiler. They had already boon


9629


20 Jur.e-I£-FI/->-2-Foldt (Lit. 3rown)

Court Ko. I, Case I

through for - ivc sooths. Hon could ttey write you and ask you about
such a thing as this?

A.- Jr. Prosecutor, I have already said that I do not knosi thoir
reasons and that the only explanation I can t ivu is that theso pintle-
sen were very cautious and cartful end wanted a j to confira the ft*ct
that tha epidemic bore no relationship to ay vaccinations. I can give
you no other explanation.

Q.- Let 's look at your letter in response ol 19 September 1944,
Docuatr.t Ko. 132, Prosecution Schibit 310, on page 99 of the dncliah
Djeux-nt Book. In response to this rrth-r st'rtling inquiry and, at
least to the Prosecution, unreasonable inquiry, if we assume the truth
of what you fcr.vu tostified to here, you simply write bock and state that
you tests of the vaccines did not cause tho opidvalc. Lhet reason can
you give us for not levin* told then tha- you had conducted no vr.ccin-
tlons of any Idnd sire*. January, 1944?

Q.- I probably put it this way, bccauau ir. Document 309 thoro was
no inquiry as to *i»thcr I had overtaken tie secxid series of vaccin¬
ations, so I of co’irse reforred to the fact that we had carrlod out
vaccinations end ri^ht here that there is no connection between the coses
of typhus at uatzwoilor and the examinations dealing with the typhus
vaccine that is to bo lasted.

Q.- But, Herr Professor, I think you will agree tint a reasonable
person slight dr-o* the conclusion from Kahnt's letter to you of 29 August
t!rt they were under thj impressions that y*-u were still carrying out
exaainr.t-ions of sane sort in Kr.tzneiL-r, cxrv.irr. lions contemporaneous
with the epidemic,

A.- Hr.icver, no such investigations were carri-d out, .and I do not
know what could l-avo given those gentle this iocrecsior.. I think this
can be se_n simply Irxz th. fact that I did no roportLig of any sort.

Q.- It didn't occur to you to toil tnoa that th-ir inquiry -as
b'sel«.3s hocr.’isc, firstly, you hadn't conducted any vaccinations at jr.tz-


9630


20 Junt-a-FL-3-3-Feidfc (Int. Brown)
Court So. I, Scat I


■cii=r since Jcnr.-ry, 1944, '-id, secondly, thct in any event they cer¬
tainly had no cctx : or a Lira because you .r*d no pathogenic virus to
infect anybody f’ you hid wanted to. hy didn't you toll them that?

A.- I jedo cy letter so brief as it is because tb- natter Mas so
crystal clear ».o _:c that I didn't, feel that cr.y furtb-r uocplnnations
wort necessary.

Q.- 'lO'\ havo testified that General St-barrzt Schrader was in
Strr.sb-Airr. in the latter part of Hay, 1944. Dida't you tell hia anything
about than coide-iic and ^iv- hin to understand that if be had any fears
about it that you work had nothing to do .iith it?

A.- hen Profoss-r Schr-jder nas uith at in Strasbourg that vao at
th. end of fey. At that tine te certainly kiw.w nothing cbout this in¬
quiry, which is dated August, and regarding such natters as had no
cennecti-ns ’rite jy vaccinations, there as no discussion. 1 can't
iarrine what interest Prof, echr -der could h'vc had in that epid-alc
in NitzKoiler.

C,.- .'-11, we won't argue about that very nuch. It night havo occur¬
red to hin that since there was an upid-alc there, it wan a good

opportunity for you to test y-ur vaccin,. That seens reasonable, doo3n 't
it?

A.- I said yesterday that j hed no f arther opportunity to cn.ry
out vaccinations. 0: c urse, I should have liked to inmnim tte camp
as seon as possible, that mis ay chief task but external circuit."reus
prevented tnat.

Q.- You had enough vaccine in June, 1944, to ask for another 200
p-oplo. '..hy didn't you us- that?

A.- Because I bad no tio-. I explair^d that yesterday. Through tho
events of thu war I was kept away !r^c Strasb.urg 3 - auch of the tine
thrt I had no tL;.e to carry cut these vaccinations.

C.- You don't ruseober the orcciso date in May on which Schrocder
Bade his visit, do you?

9631


20 Jum-Jr-FI^-^Foldt (Int, 3ro-.m)

Ciurt Ho. I, Gas- I


A.- Let's say ar^unc th- 25th if llay.

Q.- And you did discuss with hin yeur typhus vaccir#- work?

A.- I think «ic talked “bout that, too, ns far -s I recall. But
primarily »- discussed the business if ay acquiring cxperlvontnl nni-
aals, ind we discussed g«r.eml scientific questions thr.t night have
interested Prof, .ochrooder.

Q.- On the animals, di you use mice in carrying out lebapfttory u:>
perlaunta with Rickettsia prewazeki virus vaccine?

A.- !io, far thr.t you use guina pigs.

Q.- You us- dee inly with the aurine vaccine?

A.- That's right.

Q.- Haw, if you w~re carrying out orelininary laboratory tests
with t vaccine .u-eonratory to uainr it r. human beinpc, what srt of
oxpjrinunts would you crxry out on ania-ls to satisfy yourself that it
was safo to use this voccirv. in human biings?

•

A.- This question is of such r. technical nature, '*r. Prosecutor,
that I .an afr-id thet I ennnat cwko it L-nod lately clear t - Ifiyncn.

I belie wj wo should hav- to discuss thlr t?lth an export. H wuvor, I
shall rr.te. an effort to make it dear. In an anin-1 you can carry out
iaport-nt irrv-Btirtior.s and observ-tions. Fir eX-nplu, you can oboorvo
the ianinixin c ca -.acity of a vaccine -nd you c-n test it. Tho test for
t durability of the v-ccirv, ccn xily be carried ut on human boinr.s.

That is a. general fact, because the aniarls* re-ctionr -re entirely
diff-rent frsa t.-.-3c of a huar n being. Permit ae to give you -n exrnph..
Let's take the variola vaccine, nan.ly, the virus with which ne vaccin¬
ate persons against smallpox. This vaccine virus causes in human beings
nly slight sy-.ot.cs of illrv.se. Every one ol us, including you, ifr.
Prosecutor, have buon inoculated against sar-Llpox several tiais *nd
y m know tho typical syeptuas, and if m. tflta* this vaccine, which is
not dangerous and nanpathogenic f or husan bcinas arrf inject it into
rabbits, th_y fail deathly ill, depending en haw they are inoculated. If

9632


20 Jur^-i£-Flr->5-F-ltt (Ir.t. Br -*t.)
C-urt So. I, I


ki rub this vrxda. virus into the skin of tho rabbits they suffer a
very grv/j skin disease, of which they finally die, because the infoet-
i-r. finally embraces th-ir wh-.le bodies. If we inject the vaccine into
thoir orains trey fell ill of a very s_r.i-us inflrmation >f tho brain,
and if we inj-ct it ct other places as for oxeapls in the testicles,
the7 hav- oth.r serious inf l a aaa .tions. L-t us take the yellow fevor
virus, which is not donger-us for hun’-n bcircs. If »« inj-ct it into
aic- they die ' inflammation of th«. brain. If wo t-ke th- virus of
psittacosis, -vAch is a very d-nger .us vir_s, >o obs-rvo the >arrot has
syspt^ss in ills abdominal organs, but if -he gcra is giv-n to a hinan
being, his syjptons take place in the lungs -rd ho gets a serious Pami¬
rs onin. Froa all of cbeso oxa.-aples you can oee that tho affinity of tho
gem f r tho various specie- is quito dLiferent in the case of hunan
beings -nd a.ni "la. i.’.w that applies t, th- vaccinations in question.
The last proof or the tolerability of a vaccine can only bo carried out
on a hna»n bcin,, <nd that is r-cognised in all sciontx. Th.so arc
roughly tho biological reasons.


9=33

*


ZZ June—n-DJG-e-l-I -rrir. (3rovn)
Court :::• _


q I sc-. h-rily, I didn't 3k ycu fer the rerson why. -nd
while you hr.vc riven us - very interesting t*lk fer five minutes, you
haven't tcld =e hen ycu determined in the erne cf ycur living vims
v- coin.s lit it vis net geing t: hili tho first cerson you innoculrtcd
:dth it; end I .-Iso surest to you thrt — rnd I think I vi correct
•-.theut being r. technic -1 expert — thrt aarino typhus rad itickottsie
prowr.ee:d. rre pathogenic teth for nierls rnd for huann c-i;v.3; rnd
while there ary be t difference in reaction, I .light sr; to you thrt
I would hrv'c sect hcsitcncy in lotting ycu vreoinnte a- • ith * living

virus veednu ett-r ycu htd innccul- ted r. aousc cr r guinea. dy rnd
they bed died; I den't think th t ycu cculd pcrsur.de no very rryicUy
thrt this lrbomtory test h:d simply proved thrt ycur virus v:ccine
!-.s pi,; enic fer rnixeris but ;xu ecul gu rrintec ec th t it wsn't
gein ; to kill a.. Do you _-t th- yeint cf qy ir.ouir. , Pr.fcssor? I
vent to Sene’ hew you s-tisfied y-urself th t ycu -crcn't ©in to
acricusl: de.r-c cr kill sene cf the so test persons by your !•' .rr.tory
uxp-rin-.us cn 'nitric?

.. This find ?rccf takes plrco by the first innoculr.ticno cf
volunteers. This is *lrudy the .ut-t-d virus which we t-at cn volun¬
teers, w' in th- c-.se cf prcwczcld. virus, I carried cut the first
innccul'.ticn cn aye-if.

; “rofesser, ycu :a»ct h-vc s tisfied yourself th t .vcr. 'hen ycu
v ere using ycursolf c.s r t«at p-rsen th -1 ycu veren't runnir.;. : very
l r£. risk in killing yourself cr ,uttinr ycurcclf in b.- Icr let,
ninths* , didn't ycu c.ctur.11; conduct s-n aninrl t-sts cn -lee
end roiner ;igo fren 'hieh ycu cculd dr-*. so.-.- sort cf c-.'elusions
qbcut this?

Th t is v-ry difficult, b-cruse during the nut tier. :i the
virus, th- coqpcncnta thrt ark- it iconic fer rnin“l: do net dis-
-npc-r. E: t rrs sc in_the ether c-s-s rise, and heuever, we Irv- nc
hesiL-ei:.-. ir. v-coins ting huar-n beings idth it. Hot, if -ft-r breeding
the virus, I m yersueded that it h s autrted rnd be-ccoe -rtohuaied -nd


nrs v-cc


- cc it cm be used fer ccimtinr, tn-r. I c rr -' the


963 *.


23 June—.i—UG-i.-2-ferrin (Brer.-)
Court Be. 1


v-ccin '-ion further. I vr.cdn-tc .ays-lf rad others with it rat’ raccjs-
t-in its tslcr'bility, If I raccrt-in ir. fdditicn th t it is net

eruair.> typhus, then preef of its offic-c; h.-s been proved.

Let a. put just r hy-xthetied question to you. Sup;esc in

the cesc of your Rickcttsi- prowrsdd. living vrxeino, you vr.ccinrtcd

ten j cc, or ten guinea pigs, and eight cf then died. How, vrulc- you

wrlk oat of the l-Lcr-tcry .*nd inject th-t v seine into th- first huarn

•

being -ir t I'lkcd along rad arid, "I vrlunt-cr"?

.. I should like to ms or that quosticn hyp oth otic "11:. If you
s.w Itborrtcry experiment th t .-ice cr rrbblta -lrordy innocul-tod
: ith vaccine virus die, would you then hrvo th- ccurr~o to heve ycur-
sclf vrccir.:t-d with that virus? I think tint is the st *. r; th t I
cm ana* -r ycur hypcth-ticcl question, arncly, with mother kyycthcticrl
qu-ation.

, cl1, I didn't -t my hypothetical raster. You put rncth-r

question, rnd I will -nancr you, "Ho, I veuldn't lot you vr.cci.rte
ac with this vrcci , t-r I bed s a kill eight oat . - ten eninrla .1
.nd I wmt tc rsk you if in spit- cr thrt f• ct you sould vaccinate
scsc.edy ith it? -.hct is th- ms-.:-r, y-e cr no?

Tea, I veuid because I, a * specialist, rould knc. t!jo S-ch-
groun: wv*. -rsis md pr--ccnditicna for this whole business. ^

.-id ycu er- sti-fying yours-lf thrt the virus is sufficiently
r.ttcaurted, thrt is based upon th- mach-aicrl calculations concerning
the nu.f :r cf nin-ls, pras j-a cf virus, -nd statistical nc* .vochrn-
icrl c*lcul:tiens ccnccminy the 1 -n.th cf storage cf the v ccin-, is
that right?

.. I-s, tut I have tc rupc-.t thrt the find t.stir.a c:;i on.'.y bo
errri-d out cn hum coin,/3, md s I h-vc 'lr- dy arid, cn ax self md
ether volunteers, red th t is the * ry it s dene.

‘ t .uvd mind ocpcrlicnts dc.n't help ycu cut in dotor u i n las tbo
dcngcrcusncss cf this net living vaccine?

.i ox:eri..~~.ts in thus- dis-rs-s, th-th-r thuy ere mil

9635


z Jun*^3JG-4-3-?crrin (Brown)
court :ic. i


xx, typhus, "dlci fever, cr whatever — rniar.1 exp-ria-nts ic net
help us ir. rehieving the finrl gcrl,

'i Tell us who li^er vrs rg can. 'h:t did he dc fer ycu?

.. Jloior > ’s the inspector in the H-tienrl Hedicel Rts-rch
Institute end terked fer to this extent, cs ho tcck cere of the
providing of 1-bcrrtcry nnials. Th t r 3 his arin Job. He rise kept
the *cc junts. Tfc t -lsc t s onw ct his u~in Jobs.

4 He v»s killed in m dr rdd in 19U, fc s n«- net?

.. res.

q s IJoicr in r position to knot rheut ycur typhu3 oxperinents?

. l!o, because he t.ra n.v.r in ay lrtcrr.tcry. derli.:3s 'dth

bin tcc> ,:lrcc in ey office, «-r ir. out.r office, cr hia office.

, Tear dealings dth bin didn't sufficiently ccno-rn t'.:. typhus
ocp-rl—.v-s, racily, f-r hia to Hn.. ahrt ycu v.erc dcin;, is tfc.’t right?

Kb, he could net hrv*. .mc-n thrt unJv-r any circawtrncea.

. Cr. your v ccin-.tions in Schlraeck * gdn, ts I undoratecd it,
these vcrc Just single vnccincticns. You didn't errr. cut iiultiplo
vrccin.-tiona rs you did in K'.tswciler?

.. T t is SO, end yestcr you the reasons.

■J You did not errr;- cut the 1, 2, 3 vr.ccin- tier, soriec in
3 chir-^cl:?

.. ;Io, in Schiraeck 1 v,-.ccl-.ctcd cniy .ith the aurinc vrccin-,
b-c'.use . the tin., u;- scientific Inc*. lee. u hedn't progressed s: frr.

. .e*.d ycu ->ere *11 through with ycur vrccintticns there in liry

19<*3?

1 li-y 19L3, yes.

Q It sen vrednv. frer. Cepenhe -n rbcut -.hich the iviond'nt
Hose rote to ycu v?s r. nunne vaccine, ■ s it net?

.. It vr,s c 'c'i jurin- v-ccir.c, yes.

i .nd it h:d elrcrd; been tested f<r its cc-v Utilit; cr.
hasten ".cin-s, h-d it net?

.. I dc net knew hew the Ibs^n redr.t ties tested, end do net
kScti \Zv - -11 enough tc be ofcl- tc o-ll ycu on; d-t ils :V t it. I


9636


20 Junc-4HWG-i-^-»Grrin (3rc*r.)
Court -Ic. i


myself hrve h*d no experience -dth tbrt vrccine..

“l dl, you r.ill rccdl th't ycu get r letter fro-; Rose cn
hia trip to Copenhagen. This ' cs r.aerrently in thv letter . ;*t cf
Se;.tester, 19*o, ycu rtacjsber th t'

- Yes, 703 .

o .-"id ycu will rec-11 — th*t is Rest Docuncat :,'c. 22 . Th‘t is
in Rose. Occurcnt Book Be. 2. I don't — x~ll he at'tcs in this letter,
end I r~ quoting — I *dll pess it up to ycu sc ycur defence counsel
cn't c'cgcct, nr, you oca re-d it. I arrked the p-ss'-g-s cn Irgc 17

of the deennent beck, rad y u een rerd it wither in English, cr 1
suggest thft 2 -eu r^rd it in English 'xv! they c-n trmsl-tc it into

Gcraen. It /.purrs in English there.

You '> ent tc rerd prrt r-ph

1 I *>rr.t you tc reed the pcrr.gr ph I arrked in pencil cu pr-ca
17 «d 1C .

.. Yos. "The testiz^ of the v-ccinc on hunrn beings hes hu'w-
tofore c used nc acre sericu a rercti mi then In viwr

cf the e^*o:inents so frr with such r str ng concwntrrtic:., the rer.ct-
ic ns ccrrcs; cr.d prreticrXly te tbo:-o in the cr.se cf the four V'ccin-s
thc.t era used in the chrorcht, Hcvertr.ol.ss in nnixnhl o^peri-wnts,
the liver v« cciii. proved itself vstly superior to the lung vrccine;
where s he lun- v'ccir.e t.hcn tested proved itself..." Thc;c .ust
be r type rrphied error here.

i Crn ycu rcr.d it in English?

U ,r hen tested white, :>-h-i-t-e."

i Thrt nu 3 t he aisteke. Just continue riding, I d./.'t think


thet is the iapertent prrt mrtry. Did :-u roed the p-rt -.'here R:»c
“"id, on .v:o 1C, tnrt seaething tc the effwet -brut ths efficacy
of the vrccine?


20 Jun-.B-5-i-Lcsoe r (Inti 3rtr.ro)

Court No* I.

A "Cnly if it has been tested first, which proved its efficacy
ty ir.arev-m-nt ir. the mortality rate, and the liver vaccire If used in
a sinilcr way, protection is 19^5; yc vaccinated nice survived without
exception, whereas yj trial cas.s died without exception. »b iiavo had
no extended ex.oriance regarding the efficacy of the liver vaccine in
huaan beings. Two -«-*ers of the laboratory staff contracted labor¬
atory inf actions purposely with tho Rickottsia-prowazoki, which led
to very uild cases, and could only bo subscc.uantly ascertained by
serological axrainctions. 11

Q That is quito sufficient. How Rest told you, in effect, in
this report, that the compatibility of this vaccine had boon testod on
human beings and that it had no stronger r-actions than wer- oxoocted
and compered in that connection with t'.xa •uhroacht vaccine,s in us-;
and ho wunt on to show sooo interest in tho question of tho in unity
or cffic.ey of tlw vaccine in warding off tho disease of typhus, did
he not, prefossor?

A First of -.11, I do not rocsl?. -v-r having had this report.

It is possiblo, but I cannot rmoixjr. If I understand your qu-stion
correctly, you -r, referring to the laboratory infections, are you not?

Q No, I aa just trying to establish tho fact and got you to
admit it - I do not think it is so terribly Important - that wo voron't
concorr^d with compatibility questions in connoction with the Ibsen
vaccine. As .lose t.lls you in tho report, its compatibility was all
right. It compared with thj U We hr v.cht vaccines in use. !!o goes on
to talk about th. efficacy of the vaccine, nooning its nnti-infoctious
properties, Thet is what he was int-r-ctud in, wasn't it7

A That I cannot tell you. I cannot tell you what interested
him. Froa tho lotier that I received I cannot so- that. When I look
at this document I so- pricrrily its infomaticn on immunizing propuT-
ties as regards nice.

Q ^bother you knew about it or not, didn't you, in fact, pro¬
ves- t'.-.'fc you would carry out infection cxx:*i v-r.ts with the Ibs-n vac-


963G


20 Ju— 2-5-2-L-sscr (In-. 3rc r.)

Court 2o. I.

cine? Didn't you t%jll Rose that you B&^ht do that.?

A So. I ncv_r wanted to carry out my sort of infection ex¬
periments in correction with the Ibsen vaccine - nover hod thr.t idea.

2 ?.. CHA2ET: If d_f_r.se counsel hn3 sufficiently a-rusod
the document I v s about to put to the- .itness earlier, I would like
to do eo at this point.

DR. TIrr: I hav_ porus.d the document sufficiently end
have no objections to Lr. UcHcney putting it ruv to tho witness.

Q Hot, _rr Professor, do you find a s.rios of extracts under
the letter 3-3? I think that is on tho rijftt hand side of the page
3-3. How th- first one of th. s_ri_s of 3 hich have a pencil ohacJ:-
~'-rk to the left - th. drte, -s you vill s__ is very feint on tho
photostat but it reads 25 Hov-.oer 1/13 — that is tho first extract
iftich I have checked in thrt Svjri-s of oxtracts and I would like for
you to read Uir.t cloud.

A "In addition thcr. is thu .xp_riji-nt.il sorics that is to bu-
gin in tho a-xt fo» days which aakos spoci-al dornds In view of tho
nodical activities that will take placo then. 8

DR. TI?it I have sono misgivings about the fon-.al ednisai-
bility of this docuncnt. If tho Tribunal will look at tho docunont
it will 3w_ thr.t from a document, without any inter-connoction botwe-n
then, individual sentences have boon takon out and made into a n-w
docuncnt. In :y opinion, both t!w witness, tho r.uct answer questions
about it, and th. defense, have a right to see the whola docuncnt. 15o
just road - passage that you hoard and, as you have observed it, it is
coaplot.ly arbitrary for th, prosecution to -ssu-.o that this now research
c-rios, th. Ahnen-rbe r-so arch institute in liatzwoilor, has .anything to
do with typhus oxporijwntation. 7 aaro 13 nothing to that aff-ct in
that sentence. Wo know from other docu: _nts that, lot us 8ry, Birt or
3ick_nbach, 'i r. tire that we do not knev, carried out a whole s.rics
of cx.->-rii_r.ts in Satsweiler. In y opinion that docusxrnt is adnissiblo
s evidence only IT it is s If explanatory, th-fc is, if the sentences


9639


20 Jun-L-i12-5-3—lessor (in-. 3ram)

Court Vto, I.

•

which tta prosecutes- is going to discuss state exactly what experiments
ire being referred to. If I r_r_ to t_Il l'r. iicHancy that thoso wore
Kirt oxperteents that were discussed in tho sentences, 2 do not think
hs could prove the opposite. I believe fact the document, in the rry
it is about to b_ put in, does net cot the rules of docuncntary evid¬
ence such as hate boon observed heretofore in this Tribunal. If tho
document is to bo -(bitted, then lot tho thole document be adrdttod,
but not just a for sontcnccs that have bo-n torn fra- their context
«id which -ra not cccprehcr.si'ole in thonsclveo. Therefore I object
to tho n&ilaaion of this document unless the document from where thcs_
sentences noro taken is put in as - uholo.

!H. IbHARETi I think th-r_ is a r-coto possibility thr.t if
I an o-n-itted to put a few questions to tho witnoss ho wil] acLiit
that Vxs- oxtrr.oto pertain to his work. I havu been trying to do that
for about 30 minutes. Those oxtracts her-, I think, th: witnoss nay
very well concede, concern his orpjri ur.ts.

TE% 3ESIDS.'fr: Hay I ask tho witness if ho is mrerc uhothor
or not fiat oxtr.-.ct just read rofors to any particular oxporient and
if so, whr.t oxpert:jont?

A This is a note of 25 Octobor 19U2.

Q I did not ask you to road that ono. I want you to read tho
next ono Kid then tull tho Tribunal whether it has rofor-nco to your
activities in KettuoiL-r - the ono isnodiatoly uidor that - tlw first
ono cli^ckod.

A Then tho second p ra gra.pb. "At the cx-aaiivation .which tho
professor carryir^j out tb; ex>-ri..Jit conducted, only Ui jypsies could
b. found who rare suitable. Th_ meb-r of gypsi-s affected with
scabies could bo reduced to U. Qonoral c.asur_s to improve the general
situation ere under way." Is a. 1 a that the :tra.gra.ph you neon?

Q Yes; and is tho d-ato - very faint on the photostatic copy -
is the dato 25 !'ov_r.ber I9L3?

A The . is probably' connected with the first group cf ICO gypsies


20 Jar.- -l~-5-v.-L.S3_r (Int. Brer-)

Court .Jo. I.

who hr.ro b—r. . untionod in the docu:>;nts Ver..

Q That la what I thought, professor, so this r_f.r_r.Cw which
rends *Cnly lii gypsies wer_ found fit during th. examination by tho
prcfwsoor directing the expert. or.ts" — thr.t cone.ms the ICO gypsies
you got in th. letter pert of Kcvuubor 1913 doesn't it, professor?

A I cn not ICC# sur_ shotter this has roferonco to .x, or
£o;onc als_ but if I ~ right, this is th. group tint I dcclar«d
r.ot suitable for vaceination.

Q Now will you read tho rv^xt ono? This is dat.d 1 February
19il. It is tho very r-xt ono \4?ich is checked in pencil.

A I 1 rat have to find out whothjr I na able to road it. Y_c.
"Cn 12 Nov. ib_r i'l*3 gypsies fro:: Auschwitz nero :.adu rv-il.-.blu for
tho Ahnonorbo Sjqorinont-.l Station; after subsequent nodical ox - :^na¬
tion they word dis.dsscd free the oxtc.rijx.Rtal station os unsuitable.
Instead of than, on 12 Deecribor 19b3, raotlxjr 80...." or 89, - I ern-
not road this - ...."p.rsons woTO .i-.de cvailcbl Auschwitz. Ex-

perir-nts r. not yot under way." Shall I continu_?

4 Ik lost at that point but dees that oxc-rpt you ru-.d ap¬
parently apply to your second g: up?

A ssiblo. This is ainultanjoua with ry vaccinations.

3 ilor do you find on. there d-tud 1 ?_bru -ry 19ll there it said
■axperfi-ents “t tho Ahnonerbe 3r\.ri >ontaI Station ara still net under
ry, 1 of ths 39 hu -'-a oxporinontal prisoners diod with pleura onpyunia
during th. p_ricd covered by tho report; 1*0 gypsies recuivod prophy¬
lactic inr.c; ’.-ticns for a typhus cxx.ri ont." Is thr.t tho vay it
rc-ds?

A Y_3. That is th. Last sontonco -nd cart-.inly refers to ny
v-.ccin*tions. > .bather She first sontonco also does, that I cannot toll
you. At any rat-, the parson -ho diod of pleura onpyenia can net have
belonged to that group.

Q You Say th'fc th.y d±tia*t.....Y-v doa«t think that tho k>
poles she rocoivod the prophylactic innoculr.tions fer ty


9641


20 Jur.- .-5-5-l^ss-r (Inc. 3 tc.t.)
Cour*- I.


-tints wore ."re of tbo 39 mentioned in the s-.„ paragraph?

•V I can.»t say that far sura because I do not know vr.t sort
:f prisca_rc arriv-d at Katzr^i:_r frou Auschvitz; but so f r as tko
tiro -io.ent is concerned, th_ro could be. s.-cw connection. This c_n-
tence. th-t -nti-ra souobc*fy who di~d oi pie ur- anpy^raia, hcvcYor,
cakes ru wo e r a bit. That could net have had rjiything to do with
ny v.ccinr vl.ns, Tho I'.st Eontenc.- is the no that r\.f.rs to typhus
vaccinations.

Q '.ill you r»*d tho nc.at oxo.r;7fc which is ch.ckod?

A That is 22 Kerch 19 Uj? "Aa atat-d in thj last official re¬
port, -fts,r 2 typhus vaccinations in th- experimental staticn Ahnenorbo
there to.k plac. tho .actual typhus vaccination, -S t-r which towpor-
-vr. sonsuru ~r.ts and bleed analysis un i cut."

Q 0 esn't it err, actual^ , "As already reported in tho Inst
nonthly r-p.rt, tlvj typhus innoaulntion ,r j-r was new porter.- ed at
th: Ahiunurbw Tr:-rlaontal Station -ft-r a tv -f id prophylactic
typhrs inaoculati r.? It tfcH.cn «t o-y tho t:iir-‘ ono -.-s a typhus vac-
ciir.ti.n, d _s it, professor? Does ho rs~ the word "fc'pfur.gun"
there?


9*42


20 June U 7-ii-R:-6-l^riac«Qu (Brava)
Court i


reg. It C.ca - »t 2 x tr.rd r.nl actual typhus viccimti n*.cs
f 11- c.l b; trJcia; f toupoxetur. in . bl ..I analysis."

Y.u contend that this third re was still an-thcr viceini ti»n
ml not in in .collation f Infection .rith typhus?

Ho, th-.t ns n.t in infect! n with typhus. 1*. tn. c:urso -f
cy jcvJjv ti r. horc, I hr.vc enpl-in.d tint it -reit length r.al to:;>l-.Inc.’,
why it c--—.‘t hr.ro b-on.

q: ., lid this extract yply t- yyur uxp-ri. ents?

(::.T.) The expr^ii ion «»pr philactic vice in it i :;a" .18 fir
is I Icn vr.

DP.. ?3?rt hr. Pr-silent, rcg.ir.Ujv; t..e fsrcal aspect of this
locuaont, s cthinj ccurs t; .x. In. UcHmy iiosn't n tico this
because he cm 1 1 f 11. .i the Gersra interpret: ti n and can‘t analyte
tho Gwr.r.n Icuu-nt but this is Goraan - cuocnt in- thcr- ia entiun
in it .f r. "Typhus XciifUng," t;.*oi- v aoclA.it lan. TS>o Ocr-Ai ;rcre fir
typhus is net "typhus" but "Plccicfiobcr" -..vivas the Sn.liii urd
"typhus" jtfiB typhus. If thr.t ia .v. jrlcinil Ger»..i - cuticnt Witten
by 1 Ocxum, 1 cino t undcrstml iui; .ill 1 “. sudden in such r. doauttrt
there is x..ti n f us in; tho uvrl" typhoid fever" nd n.t tin . rd
"Flcchfiobe:." I &a*t know that I have mio t Ids exactly clear. smeo
there is 1 -‘1 iculty o-aid-s in the Gerurn lan;ua>, perh-vn e c.uld
sen tho Sr. lid*, tr -islr.tin. Bsc Ger .in original .IcuiMit is o.cuplot-
ciy noaacasical f.ra Gerur. xh. understands GeMin . The . r use.',
ncre is tho asrd U3vd f„r typh i fever and n.t the tr! f ;• typhus.

23. I'.’ilUL T: This witness, -ftcr rl-, is supp.sed t bo the
greatest expert in:tho world, 1 ua orstuv’., -.'1 h- 'ia c needed tint
the first tr.cts he road which ire in the T-ciur.n linyua> -.flies t
nis <£vOi*i^.nts. If he -..-.-.its t quarrel - ut u~ language in th—,
ho -s it liberty t. d. s , but I -e ui -1 rath-r ho w-uld i. it under
redirect thin r..v.

. JLojllfr: I didn't undorse-nd U: t -dtncs3 iv.de the direct

962*3


20 June i' -: -ltt-6-2-ft*Sa©2a (Brcrro)
C-urt i


rviatasion f ir.t y a = t:tc. tho Tribute 1 -rill njw be inrcccs 3 .

D--LX this recess peri . t-.e I-cuixnt ill t- stuii-tnl tiv; Tribunal
is net yet edvisci ns t the histry i this -ecuuJit r -*ore it c-..t

fr_ — e Ir.ver.’t seen it — -r -.here it \rs feu .a:, -r it's tot ry ns

fnr .s t.'is tri .1 is c ncernci.

Tribunal -ill n bo in reccst.

(.hereupon t rcc.33 ws t.'icai)


20 JL-l—1-C : (lot. v r. Sch a)

C.urt . I, Case I

THE . Ar—Al: Thu Tribune 1 is 25 c in ir. &-ssi r.

Tffi PSUSSUtt: Counsels

Df.. GAU 2 : I- -r the Dcfordnt, HjtbQ.

lj. Pr-sitknt, I did r.-.t ask f.r tho doicndrnt H.Ve-n today but I r
dry before yoatcrcay ir. tho r.fternoan and he was excused 'x.d I trih.d
tj him.

THD PR 2 SID— T: That » r *a ay oistrke. :Jy recallwcti<n •'“.a at fault,
c unscl, very well,

UP.. ifc3HA.Br: D.es tho Tribunal wish c. ah rt strt—r.t about tho
.ri£in of the d.cuoont which hr.a been out to the witness?

THE PF_ 3EIT: Tos, if the setter is t bo the sublet af f-Ttkor
interrogation b- ail .-vans,

•

UcHAiJY: I will or.as up ta the Tribunal d^cu .-r.t Na. MD-c07,
which w-.a introduced as Pr.&-:uti.n Bchibit 185. - is was in effect an
exhibit which ' -a .or-pared by Fr-r.ch authorities rnd c nsista priori ly
f oictur-a v'C’w ir. the analytical inatitut- r.t Str ahiurg by tho French
after that clt • vr.a caotur-d -xvi ah na certain bodies which were f.iw!
in the b sva~r.t of the building : tho r.nrt oic-.l institute, and it la
c nt-nd.d by tho Prosecution aupp-rt-c' by the evid.ncs I think tlvit

these pictur-o *ro t s- A the a -called a.\> leton c flection 'xr.n;; as¬
sembled by iiirt. Fallowing the pictures in t is nlbua cro v : i c ther
exhibits which .-to c part f the s-ao docusunt nnd consist af v-xi "O
thirds. I thin!; t ur Krr.r has opened the argu now with which n» are
c^ic-rned. D: y-u ind the sheet sarkod >5?

TBS PR -j3 T: TeO.

r.UeHUZ?: 3-B consists -f • photastatic c py i extracts ta.’daj
fr.J G-.nrn r-c. res .urprt-dly captured ir. ..atr.eiler. Tfc s- -r. aor.'-.e
paragraphs tak-r. fr n dii:_r-nt monthly r-p rta nade by the c-. • ’ ct <r
... .::tr cts taken fr - these a c wits whic . r in
this exhibit :xi rt t bo subject rtur te-lir.- with e'xx.ri-c. Is in
:>tzr:-il^r, *.v! - qu-sti ns j.-Ve b— n cir-ried t wm rltr.ess t.<


20 J'ZX’-X-FL-S-2-C-(int. von Schon)
Court !.'o. I, Case I


28 »rtrin whether or not U.os- extracts npoly to his typhus w.rk in
Katr*eiL-r. The difficulty which as ".risen r? occasioned by the un-
fsrtuar.tc jccissin .n the port f t'rft transin ti on departa-.-r.t to
translate those uxtr-cts which ore a p-rt f this exhibit which has
b._n admitted nr.d also their ftilurv to type then in the sdatogreph
c-py which were distributed to duf_r.se counsel, that has occasioned
an element of surprise to Dr. Tipp and oth.r dvi«-ns- c;uns_l which is
unf -rtuncte.

THE PF_ "TDSJfT: You will act. that there is - c-eplote tr-nsL-' ion
c-de and furii.sh:d?

Mr. KcHA.'ST: Y.s, I will, Your Honor. there aro a nuebor of
different extracts tk.iv tad I ter.a in the process of proceeding
u Ain the a la* by no red asking tb. witrxss whether they apply to his
experiments.

TK2 PRESIDE:'”: You noy pr.ceed.

3Y Mr.kcHAJEY:

Q.- Pr fess r, i think w. h d agroed that t Xtx? xt u:.;.r the
date 25 vuabor 1943, which n. is: "Only 14 gypsies were found fit
during the uxaiinati .r. by the Pr -fussor directing th- uxperlxntc. The
amber of sc.- bits infected gypsies was reduced t> four by intensive
sc"ties tre-Uu.r.t. Further erasures aro taken f r raising the gerwr-1
state f health,." how Pr.fesc.r, d.n't you think that ‘his oxcerpt Jrxa
the d ict.r's rop;rts in Hatzwoilur applied t the first pr.up
ICO pers n; - ,o w-re .rdv available l r vnccir.ati r. and which y u i ur.d
to be unsuitable?

A.- I fc\vc already said, Ij. IfcKanuy, that the dates agroo tore or
less, but as thcr .i -rk was carried on in ii' tzi^iler I conn t s-y for
certain whether by c:inc5d_nce there wore the sane c nditi ns i.i s v,
ther gr up. I aoic yesterday that ,f the first IOC »_rs ns wh. w_rc
pr«.s_.ated t k I believe 13 had died on the v y -rd th_ r_st who wero
pr_r_r.ted to sc in KGtzw.ilor, I gave theu a E-.dic.-l ex.-_air.ati i -r.d

9646


20 Jur>--U-FL-£-3-Coo:» (Int. von Schon)
Court Sa* I, Caao I


discovered that they m>re out of the question for vaccination. They
did nit conform te tho German legal qualifications but whether that
ia idontival with the group wo had 1 cannot say, of course.

Q.- Very woll, now the second excerpt to which I directed your
attention was dated the 24 December, 1943. In other words, approximate¬
ly >no month later than the oxcerpt which I have just put to you, tho
excorpt of tho 24 December, 1943, roads as foll-we: "The gypsies trans¬
ferred on 12 February, 1943, fre Auschwitz concentration camp to the
Ahnerv-rbo experimental station were ag-in released from the exporim-n-
tal station, having be-n f-md unsuitable in a strict nodical examination.
On 1 2 December, 1943, 69 oth-r gypsies wore transferred from Auschwitz
crop as rcplac-aents." Da you think that this extract applioa to tho
second gr up af oxporimenta 1 tost pore-ns received by you fir vaccin¬
ation?

A.- Hero again I can't say dofinitely wither this refors to tho
p«rs.ns wh,m I vaccinated. as far as tho date goos it s-ems very pro¬
bable end I sco no roaa n why I shouldn't admit the p-saibility.

Q.- Mow, the third extr~ct is the jtu dated Jiatzwoilcr 1 February,
1944, and it roads: "Sxpcrioxnts at the Ahnor.orbe experimental station
are still not under way. One of the 89 human experimental prisoners,
gypsies, diud with Pleura opyeaia doring tho period covered by this re¬
port. 40 gypsio3 received pr pnylactic innoculatins f-r a typhus ex¬
periment." Docs that extract apply to y ur typhus vaccinati>n?

A.- From this extract I gather in the last sontonco that 40 gypsies
wore vaccinatad for * typhus experiment, t*r.t is what it says in GoHMUi.
The date agrees Cfchin. It says that I carried ut tho vaccinations boforo
tho 1st f February because this report apparently was written on tho
1st of February.

Q.« Now, tho no; I extract in which thv.ro may be a translation dif¬
ficulty or a mistake :n the- port of tho camp d-ctor is dated liarch 8,

1944, and roads: "As already rep.rto.d in the last monthly report tho


20 Juno-lf-FL- 6 -VC ook (Ir.t. von Schcn)
Court Sa. I, Ccso I


typhus inosculation proper was rvow purl ormcd at the Ahnonerbe experi¬
ment -1 station after a two-fold prophylactic typhus inosculation. Sub¬
sequently temperature is checked daily and blood analyses effected re¬
gularly." Saw, first, Joes that extract apply to your typhus vaccin¬
ations and secondly, did you have any difficulty with the Qsage o 1 the
German words in that extract? I call your attention to the use of the
w-rd "Typhus Inpfung", end I aa suggesting to you it really refers to
y.or typhus vaccination, although I rvcsgn'zo that a strict translation
might indicate typhoid vaccination.

A.- I was so confused with the English and German before that I
accepted this ward typhus as typhus, but if we look at the report I notice
the Goman text Itself says "40 gypsies wore vaccinated for a typhus
experiment." That is the first thing I n ticcd. The second thing is that
cert-Inly the caap doctor doesn't kn w, he writes twice in tho last
paragraph vaccination f-r typhus Impfung, which re-.lly aoans typhoid.

One might anfct that .mistake new but twice seens to be ijnprobsblo. Tho
imp rt.-nt thing ir. the last paragraph s-oas to ce that he is spunking,
about imiculation and to a German practicing physician like Dr. Kriogcr,
that is synaixoous with vaccinati.n. Tho third thing I n>tice in con¬
sidering this docuxnt, it is supp;scd t be a nwdical rep-rt but it is
signed by the camp dxt-r A the concentration camp Natxweilcr, and then
th^rc is a signature which is Kramer, who u-s an SS Hauptstur.afuchrer,
and as far as I kn.u Dr. KriogeT was a sturrdxannfuohrer r.t that tijno
ard this signature cann. t bo read -s Dr. Krieger's. It 1 ok3 like Kranor.


20 Jun-!«-'.3-9-l-Gro3S (Lot. von Scbcn)
Court So* I.


CJ . 11 , rjr.-cr night acko a dstoke in writing “typhus Ihpfung"
when he really :»cnt "Flcckf icbor Inpfung*, .light he not?

A I don't think it's likely. H- would ncyor ccnvuse typhoid
-nd typhus but as it says or. t'no docin-ent th_r. Si -Hr. upt s t ur_i£ uo hro r
trrxcr didn't sign it. If the tv.p doctor had signed it, it vould bo
Dr. Xriogor.

Q Do y u know cf any typhoid Inoculations or oxjx'ri^nts in
tho Hr.tznoiler Concentration Cmp around this tino?

A I lau-sr nothing about it - that typhoid oxpcrL-icnts vero car¬
ried out. Dut, I know that in 191U there was a typhoid opid-.iic in
Hattwoilor. That's all I kn*r about it.

Q Do you know that your oxpjri unts wore carried out in tho
Ahnenorbe. Ixpuriecntal Station?

A Ho, I den't knew that and I don't knjw why it is called tho
Ahn.rv.rbj tor-. I know n. thin;, at the tt« about tho Ahnen-rbo or any
oonnooti ns that F.irt nay have, had with tho Ahn-norbe. Thuy wore not
carried cut at tto oxperinontal stati n as such but in tto hospital
barracks.

Q Did you ovor sco Hirt in Natzvoilor?

A No, I nov-r saw hin.

Q Did you knaw there was an Ahn-norto Exparinontal Station in
Natzvoilor?

A Bo, I didn't kn^w that*

Q Tton you can't exclude tto possibility that th_ place whore
you carried out ycur vaccinations was known also as tho Ahnenerbe ox-
p.ri.i-nta .1 station, can you?

A That I c.ann-'t say. It was the general ha spit-1.

Q Hew, I want to call y^ur attention to <nu noro.extract on tho
dccunont which you hav_. It's up on the saao page, up on tto uprer
p-.rt • f tho page under II b. D- yau find that?

A II b, yes.

Q And you sill so- that tto authorities who prepared this exhibit


20 J'jr.-I£-42-9-2-Gro;5 (Ir.t. von Schon)
Coart, So. I.


translated a paragraph froa another nonthly report by the caap doctor
at Natsweiier frcn the Oeraan into French. And you have before you an
extract free a report of the caap doctor dated 30 June 19 Uu. It is
written ir. French. Do you read French well enough to translate that?

A Yes, I think so. It is a aonthly report of the 30 June 19Wa
by the caap doctor. IV. Miscellaneous - the expcricental section.

During the period of the report experiments were carried out on 16
gypsies, 3 deaths were recorded.

Q Dees that extract apply to your experiments in Natzweilor?

A Ho, it dees not refer to my vaccinations in Natzweiler. It
is a report of Juno. We carried out our vaccinations in December and
January 19U3 and 19UU and no one died.

Q All right, Professor. Let's turn to another docunent. Now,
Professor you had testified in connection with ny questions concerning
the Ipeen vaccine that you never proposed to Rose that you would carry
out tests on his Ipsen vaccine that he had sont to you or was suggest¬
ing that he would sent to you. You also testified that you did not
conduct any vaccinations in Schirreck after May 19h3» I putting to
you docuasnt NO-237U which is a lottor datod U Octcbor I9h3 directod
to Oborstarzt Profossor Dr. Rose and I ask you if this letter origin¬
ated free you?

A ilay I first read the document?

TH2 HliSIDEtfr: The Tribunal has not received German copies
of this docucont.

3Y IS. IcHAKZY:

Q Did you send this letter to the defondant Rose, Professor?

A The letter does not boar ay signature. I camot say whether
the letter caae froa =e but I rer.- ber that 2 corresponded with Profes¬
sor Rose about the Ipeen vaccine and I assuae that the letter is authen-


Q You assume that the letter came from you?

A Yes, I ass use so but I cannot say for certain. It does not


9650


2D Jun-^HB-9-3-Gross (int. von Schon)

Court No. I.

bear my signature.

^ _ offer this as Prosecution 2xhibit 520 for identification.
Let's road a little part of this letter, Professor. Let's turn to
page 2 in the paragraph beginning at the top of that page. You speak
of ths report of Roso about the Iceen vaccine. About the middle of
that paragraph you state "As you !tnow already frco ny reports, \:o used
already unphonolizod yolk-sack cultures for the production of vaccine.

I alroacfy reported to you the numeral results of oxporirents on human
beings. The Scru= titer is considerably higher, also after a single
vaccination, in comparison with 3 tines vaccination* with deactivated
vaccines. I regret that it was not possible so far to perform in¬
fectious experiments on the vaccinated parson*; I requested the Ahnonorbo
of the SS to provide suitable persons for vaccination, but did not rc-
coive an answer as yot. Wo aro nor porforaing a further vaccination
of human beings; I shall report la tor about tho result. I guess wo
will then . -to reached tho point to bo ablo to roconnond our nor; vac¬
cine to bo introduced, for tho tiro being without infectious oxpori-
aonts. n Now, Professor, first I rould like to obsorvo that you used
tho word oxporimonts yourself in thia letter to Roso, didn't you?

A X_s, that's right. I had no misgivings about that. I oftan
said that tosts for compartson, otc., as long as a procoduro is not
definitely decided upon can bo called experiments.

Q But, you havo also insisted t*o this Tribunal that use of tho
word ox;>jriojnt in connection with what you aid is a complota misnomer•
Now you used tho word experiments in connocticn with your work in
Schimeck, didn't you. Professor?

A I said expressly in the oxsnination that in a certain sonso
ono ccr. speak of experiments but not in the interpretation t!». vord is
given here in this trial.

Q 11, be that as it nay. ITo rill proce-d a little bit. New
you say "I regret that it was not possible so for to perform infectious

experiments on tho vaccinated persons. n Nos boro you are- tolling Prof--


9651


2C Jur*-: r -'-2-v-L-0rc3- (Ir.t. vor. Schor.)
Court Ko« L


dsear Rose that you really scant that you hadn*t perforated another
vaccination on tho vaccinated persons. Is that your explanation of
that?

A Ko. First I rant to road this sentence.

Q Infections vcrsuchc.

A. I said yesterday that after the vaccinations proper turc
finis hod tre porfomad further vaccinations to dote mi no inaunity and
that wa called that infaction and that it ms frequently done in rorks
by other pe-plo.


9652


20 JirB-frFL-lD-l-fisrrc* (Ir.t. vr, Sch-n)

Court No. I, Case I

Q.- Yes, your three tlaes vaccination was re-Lly whnt 7 -u aoont
by infocti n experiments.

-*» I it t- you, hadn't y.m already used this three tioos vnecin
ati.n procedure in SciJ.rrxck, Pr cssor? See, you aake aor.tion if throe
ti-xe vaccination in this letter?

A.- L-t x su« where that is. V?hero is that?

Q.- It is ir. the sen. paragraph when, we have been re-ding:

“The scroa titer is c insider ably higher nis: after 2 single vaccin¬
ation" alsj indie-tin; that y-u carried out other vaccirvti^s. Then you
cintinuo: "Ir coapnrls.n with three tines vaccinations with deactivated
vaccln-s."

A.- This "in comparison with", where <5 es it say that? I can't
find that.

Q.- Do you Tind the part th-t wo Just reads

"I already reported to you tr*. nun-r -1 results of ooporiaeats on
hunan beings. The S»-ruo titer is c-nsidurnbly higher, also after a singlo
vaccination, in exsp-ris n with 3 tin.s vaccinations with de-octivatod
vaccines"?

A.- ’ e havu the experience t..at three tLocs vaccirr.ti.n with r dead
vaccine produces a very 1 » s-ruh titer, "rd that's what this "caparison"
referred to, not any special e 030 eri.-w.nt, but experience in general.

Q.- Nj tiiroc tiacs vaccination with your live vaccine? Is that
right, Pr.fess^r?

A.- That's right. fcu'r« t Iking about a dead vaccine here.

Q.- Now, ; oc said that y u didn't carry .ut any vaccinations in
Schirrxck after 1fay, 1943. lou find in this sax paragraph wo have been
reading the sentence:

■Vo are now ->orforming a further vaccination f hunar. beings..."

Vftx.ro was that done, Prloss-r? V.osn't that in Schir-oeck?

A.- It goes 'n — Oh, I so- it run. But this vaccination was ixvor
c ‘ rr i-d ut. It doesn't say did perf.ra".


9653


21 JunE-JJ-FIr-10-S-Karr r* (Int. v-n Schon)
Court lb. I, Case I


Q.- No, it doesn't say "Wu did p.rf^re", it says “»e arc nun per-
i: raing" is whet it soys, doesn't it, Professor?

A.- T:.~t -»ans it hasn't be^n done yet. I could fc-ve said »i»o rill
perform" too.

Q.- Yea, y-u c.uld have, but you a-id "no arc njw porforudng" and I
take that to ajar. in the process of performing.

A.- Yea, but the fact is that those vocolnsti >ns weren't porf rood
and this expression has to be interpreted to s xrn that we wore go in? to
porforo. That refers to the 2CO persons w/.o* I had asked for.

Q.- Oh, it docs? toll, wo'11 seo about that.

Y-'U s till rant to maintain thc*t yj u didr.'t perform any vaccinations
in Schirocck after Uay, 1913, do y^u. Profess r?

A.- Y*.s, I cointaln that.

Q.- And y also rr.intain th-t although y u used the w.rds "perfum¬
ing infection ex.ocrl-wr.ts on vaccinated pers;no" in this letter that you
realli* didn't com that, that y^u oo?nt another vaccin-tlon? Io that
right?

A.- Thr.t was the third vaccination that I teLked about. I have al¬
ready told you th-t all this work was with a non-pathugenic virus and it
■as to be continued.

Q.- Ar.d you wore prepared to recoaa>nd this vaccine for the tlno
being without inf-ctious experiments? All you meant to say by that uas
th-t you wwrv -.pared to recommend it even though 70 U hadn't conducted
y:ur triplw vaccination series?

A.- Then we had so such experience - I can See, looking back -n it
n^i - that We could introduce the vaccine on r large scale.

Isn't it a fact. Professor, that you had conducted your vaccin¬
ation tests and your c.-cpctibility tests and tho SS w ldn't Lot you
infect thoso persons in Schira^ck and you had to get special p;rsons through
:irt? Isn't that the fact. Profess:r?

«•- It's identical. Tr.e recue; that I orde at thj ti®. rent through

9651


23 Jut;- tf-?L-iO-3-Tarr a (Ir.ti vt Schon)

Cairt Ho. I, Case I


Hirt. That as tb. sane office which liter gave n the prisoners for
weeinati a, or intended to give at tho prisoners fer vaccination.

Q.- Let's dr:p d:wr. to the Inst f cm sontencos of t*t letter, Doctor.
Do you see where it roads:

"If we car. got experimental subjects from tho SS for test vaccin¬
ations, it would bo ar. opportunity to test the liv-r vaccine as Kell
:n its anti-infectious effect. I would thor. si^gest that our material
will be used parallel with th* Ipsen tests."

Do you find that. Professor: I thought you had.

A.- (Interrupting) Juot a minute. I navo xily thwo pages hero. I
have to find it.

Q.- It's at tho bottom of tho page. It's tho last two a. at cocos
of the next to the last paragraph. Do yoj find that?

"If r» c-r. get experio-ntal subjects from the SS for test vaccin¬
ations, it Id be m pportunity to tost the liver vaccine as violl
on its cnti-lnfoctious effect. I would then suggest that ;ur materiel
be used parallel with tho Ipsen toots." Do you find that, Professor?

A.- TeS, I found that.

Q.- I thought you testified to tho Tribunal that you never arid
anything to Rosa about testing his Ipsen vaccine for its efficiency?
Isn't that right? Didn't you tell that to the Tribunal?

A.- I testified here that if wo were to use the Ipson vaccino it
would n.t be in a planned groiy ranee otherwise the figures fur compar¬
ison n uid bo t;- small. Th't we would rvoed a special seri-o of per¬
sons.

Q.- You testified that y.u did not suggest anything to Rose about
testing his IosJi vaccine as t.- it3 ar.ti-infecti us effect. You told
that to the Tribunal at least twice under a very preciso question put
by bj. Don't *au eta to in this letter that y u -iill conduct ouch t sts
f r its anti-infccti a properties?

A.- I believe that I said that I didn't reader. Perhaps we c -dd


9t55


20 J0a»—M-FL-10-fr-Birrai (Int. vor. Schon)

Court Hr. I, Case I

cake certain of that. I can't richer. I t id you that I don't rc-
o-abur this letter.

Q.- i.E, it's ell in thj record, exactly whet you said and we
r.codn't worry about chat now, but you concede that in this letter you
arc telling Rose you will teat hi a Ipaon vaccine for ita ar.ti-infoct-
ioua effect, aren't you?

A.- Tea, hut I.

DR. TIPP (Interrupting): !Ir. President, apparently Ur. UcHaney urnts to
refer to Docunent ID-122, tho lc -ter of Professor Ros— At least, that
is how I understood hia, -r.d to avoid aistake8 I should lik. to point
out the f ^llwjing. In this docui-nt, MD-122, there ia n reference to
a letter fr.n IS*. Kaagon doted the 8th of Doci.-ab-r, 1913, and in the
direct exaninrtian r. Her. gen testified on this lot Ur of the 8th of
Dccecbor. Thla letter -hlch Ur. McHanoy Jra Just stated io dr.tod tho
4th of Octi , 1943, and entirely different letter.

l!r. J'cHAKeT: I think that tho observations by defense couna.l are
in the way of sone s rt if pr.Uction fir his witness, ll.’n, he has put
thu witnoss m the stand and thi witness can teku care of hiasolf. |{o
can direct any question .r. the clarification of t;dr snttor on redirect
ox-.adn'ti n, rnd I nuot -bjvct t hia interrupting this oxf-aination
unLss he has an ibjecti.n t> offer.

THE PRSSr-l’T: The ejection is verruL-d.

BY !ir, L'cHAKEY:

Q.- How, Herr Pr>foasor, L-t's test your testimony a little bit -uro

I want to put a iurth^r docu-Tont to y,u. This is Docu-o-nt IJO-3852.

Doct-r, I take it yru rtc.gnize that exhibit I put to y,u. Suppose
7:u Ull the Tribunal what it is?

A.- First I should like to look at tho docuaent carefully.

Q.- Have vcei read far enough to Ull us what this exhibit is. Pro¬
f-os ,r?

A.- I reed a Lit i le tine. The doc-i _nt is rather 1 nr. I'd li’ro to

9656


20 Jtsss -L-^-10 -5-Knrr(I r t. Yin Seluc)
Court Ho* I, Case I


study it.

G.- Professor, I don't want you to study the docunsnt. I'll put
specific questions to you and wo will go ovvr it together, but rij.ht
r.-w I want you to tell tho Tribunal w hat this little note book is.
till you please tell then?

A.- As far as I can sc« at tho aoc-nt, those are records, but they
on- rather extensive. After ouch a long tine, I should Ilk- a chance to
study then.

Q.- Professor, aren't thos. y-ur notes? Y-ur recognize your own
handwriting, .don't you?

A.- Ho, ‘his is not ay handwriting.

G.- Is it U.as CrodL U's hmckriting?

A.- I ha\u to h vo samples -.1 .Vndwriting, but it wight be that sho
■T t i*-, but first I'd have to &»e it car..: illy t> know the contonts.

Q.- Oh, c a no*j, Profess-r, I think you =ust rec.gnize this. I'll
give you an opportunity to study each little section of it oo we come
to it, out ri^ht new we have to tell the Tribunal what it is.

The first tl.cua.-nt is a fev.-r chart of a aou»», 540-541. That's
the first thing I have here.

C.,- ToS, that is a c.a-rt shxing a vaccination carried out n two
aic«, isn't it. Professor?

A.- Y-s.

G.- And thoso were experiments carried out by you, wer-n't th.7?

THE FRSSIDEI.T: You ay, counsel, that is the beginning of thia'doc-
ua-nt?

BY Ur. HcHANE*:

Q.- TwS, Tour Hon.r, wu will necessarily h-vo sue difficulty with
this exhibit. 7 «j have r.-t frd it very long and ag in, through soac ridic
ul.-us oversight, thoy did n-.t translate the full document, There arc, I
think, two charts attached to this not© b-ok which cannot be copied. In
■r.y eY-nt, I d—.'t intend t < direct nnny rio-acions in c nn.ction * ith


9657


20 .'-r^-^-FL-10 , ^--<crr» (Int vor. Schon)

C~<xt Ha. I, Case I

those and I oliovc no *ill be able to proceed in an orderly fashion.

THE PKEiDEOT: Sew that collate espies art furnished as soon ns
possible to defense counsel and the Tribunal.

BT 'Jr. IfcKMBY:

Q.- KJr.t about the note book. Professor?

A.- It is a r-cord of our nice. As far as I can see now, the vacc¬
ine was tested cr. these nice. The iseunizing effect of the vaccine.

Q.- How, you ere apenking of the chart n^w, are you?

A.- Yes, this curve her*.

Q.- That is rr.rkod in pencil. Does trttt have a pencil sr.rk on tho
lower right hand cornor? •


9659


20 Jano-4Mtf-U-l-««a (Tea S choon}

Court I

S ubsoquently vaccinated vith yolk-sacks, is that vfcct you i:

Vo will proceed. That is a vaccine test carried out by you on

"lea, is it not?

Tea, yos, of course.

d. Aid the dato is 3 Dec cub cr 1943?

4. 3 Dcccr.bor, '43. yes.

d. And you list the tost you oro carrying our as ■naefa-inpfuag",
dcosu't thrt f^pcor ia the chart?

A . The aico, yos.

d. You didn't say ■noch-infoction" in that caao you said "nach
-iupfung*, didn't you, and when you wore spooking about bunen boinge
you usod too word ■nuck-infccti6n« os ■nach-inpfung", didn't you?

A That is exactly tho s«io thing in this sonso. 3ho ciiistcat
node tkio entry, and I CD quito certain the* thet is right.

d. Seeopt when your assistant was referring to nouso tost, "nach
Lpfung" and not ■nach-infcction*. Supposo you toll tho Tribunal vhat
hepponod to the so two aico. Did thoy dio?

4. Veil, I hevo to ooc.

d. V hat do you have to soo? Thoro aro two big crosoos on tho
chart there.

A . Yos, but one cross is in tho aiddlc of tho curve, and they
couldn't have died in tho niddlo of tho curve. And the curve wont
on. That doesn't work. Ono can't soy it died if the taoperuturo io
taken aftorworde.

d. flea you tell frcu tho phort whothor tho aico diod?

A. -Jo, I c.a't say.

d. ~11 right. Let's pass on to this notobook.

A. Trea this chart, no, no.

5. Loti, pa, ato tho notebook. Eov. «hot doo, tho notebook
show? V hat is this notebook?


no ml


^ Shet is a control book, a


book whore the exporiuento with tho


* 20 Juafr-iWO-ll-a-Parrln {Ten Schoen)
Court X


typhua vcccino on the oainols vcre> rocordai.

0 . Dees that notebook concern your typhus eaporinonts?

i. is frr as X can boo now, it locks os if that was the curront
laboratory work which wo wore carrying cut. That is the w^y it looks
liko, but X*d havo tosoc all of it first.

q . Kov, Professor, you uust bo able to toll the Tribunal tfco wrote

this bock.

4 , She technical assistant kept it, and fr«: tho handwriting, it
looks as if sho nado thoss entries* but after such a long tiao, I o.u't
lntorprct ovory record. I hare to «tudy it first after such a long tiao.
Vo hod not only vaccinations, out also ccientific work.

q. But to tho best cf your nonbry, y=u o.o ct*to th^ this note¬
book was vritten by Hiss Crodcll. and it eoncoms tho oxporiuonts cm-
ried out by you?

a. Tho laboratory work, a' far as I cm coo at tho r.ouont. I uould
liko to aako that restriction.

SC. ihsa^rrr: The prosecution asksvthat tho exhibit bo uarkod as
Prosecution Exhibit 5a for identification.

3i KB. KC E-OT:

q. Sow, Profos ior, wo have covorod t ho chart of the tost oh tho
two aico. L-t'o go to tho notebook itself. and ia ordor to follow ay
<luooticns, I will ask you to obsorvo tho poncil nuaborc which I hnro
writ ton on this photostatic copy down at tho bottoc right-kund oornor
of oach pago. Bo you find that T

a. Tos.

q. V ill you turn to page 3. .

KE. mC ExESY: If tho Tribunal, please, it will bo nooossoxy to rev-
nuubor tho pages opposing on your translations. This applies aiuol;- tc
tho dofenso counsel. Vhcr. the translation vac node, they teak seno
pages off tho reverse side of tho pkotest* ic copy, end becauso of tho


9660


2C Juno-ii-KJ-H-fr-Porrin (Von S chose)

Court I

tvo pages epo caring f or oao photoatctic copy, thqy had to bo raaay-
bored. PcfiO 5 on tho translations should bo narkM p-jgo 3.

3T ;a. ::c Bjnsr*

Q . Be you find the ontry for 30 ^ril 1943, Professor!

A . 30 dpril *43, yes.

Andfcat soj-s, "S, plus, plus, plus, 9, S eh." Th_t Is
Schirncck, isn't it, ProfessorT "S eh."?

A. 3o. That noons ninth passago. It is suppesod to bo

ninth pas sago.

CJ. It says "Sch. *, whet does "Sob." no©?

A . It doosn't look liko "job."to ao.

Q. Vhat doos it lock liko to you?

la Corr.on, I think it looks liko o "p", a Cor;©

And you tnlnk it should reed wh£ 7
A. Jirst I said it is pr-.bully "pa*8C£o—ninth passage."

Cl. All right. tot’s go down to tho ontyy, tho no* ono for
14 Ilcy. In > rcathosis "two wooks," doo 8 that noan tho Yoccino hod
b-ca stored for two wockst

j* *J horc is thxt, I c © 1 1 find it?

CU 14 Mey, lmodiatdy—

A. It probably aoans th© it was storod for twe wocks, yoo.

!. Q. And then you go oa, and it roads, *1 plus two point two for
sin ::ico, point five, I. P. *11 injected again, six point six iixu'j.e,
calh two out cf four of tho contr:llcd diod," right?

A. Tos, that is right.

Q. Zhon, tho aoxt is 26 May, "four weeks, throo dosh six," what
does "threv dash six" aeon, Professor?

A. lour weeks, throo to six." I can't toll you at tho ncaient. I*d
hero to reconstruct what tho assistant wroto.

Udl, passing that for tho nonent. It continues to rord, "point
5 peoperson d six aico point fire I.P.. five dead after ten, fon. toon,

9661


20 vunc-4:-KJ-ll-4-?crrin (Tea S choon)
Court 3


fourteen drys. Tho rest after four weeks." Wu-.t doe* "the rest 0 rofer,
t: tho cuo ntuso? Boos that ref or to these unidentified porsons?

*h 2Io, that refer® to the cico. It was si-sply a ..ouso o:a>crinont.

I* srys «fivo doed". They have to have all the inf emotion or. the :iico.
This is a brief ontry.

'• But this is Kay, 1943, when you voro vaccinating pooplo in Schl-
c:cch, and this ontry scys "throe dash sis, point fivo por norscas."

Sow, you aro not suggesting to the Tribunal that tho ■porsens" r.ro re¬
ferring to tho ulco? It oontinuos to say—

But then it a^rs "six alee 1 with "point fivo", that vao tho
aorun, I suppose, that wo wore testing, tho iismnisins offoct on :'.ico.

I ca't intorprot it differently at tho :.:ncat. "Four weeks”, that
noons tho feeoino hod boor, atored for four wocico, "Point fivo por porsons"
voro vocciuntod. That night coca that was a caparison oxporiuont,
that tho offootivonoaa waa to bo toetod on ..ico. A t tho ncuoat, I ox't
givo nay or.net interpretation. I’d have tostudy tho dccunont very cai'O-

Q. Uhc.t do os this "por porson" rofor to? Talking about hwsan
beings, aren't thoy?

a . Yes. It is very possible that that was tho veccino i&ich uo
bed In Joe; cd into tho persona in Schin.ock in Key of *43; and then in
por ell 01 o^orinents, we tested it on nico. It was still^cthogonie to
“ico, It wc.3 tuo nurino typhus virus.

But not pathogenic tofcunon boings. It killod tho x.ioo, but
you woro oure it wouldn't kill ^ny hcan beings, is that right?

A. Too, tho vaccination shoved that.

Let's sco what it showod. Lot's lo-Jc ct tho ontry for 5 July,
rad yu will rocal that this is right about tho tfcoo that our witnoss,

Sirs was testifying. 6 July, "drawings of blood, Schimcck, 10 persons,
s had fevor, Voil-Fdix," and then under nur.bcr 1 to 8, indicating por-
sous 1 to 8, you give tho soma t.top count, and then cones a little
phrase, ■ The other two were not herv anyt;oro. ■ Profossor, whr.t about

9662


20 'ua(w!J-ll-5-Perrln (Von S choea)
Oourt 2


;nccc other two ponses out of the tea? Tou rer-.enbor that tho witnoss
Eirr testified that ho personally sowed two bodies up la a fcupor beg
which woro dollvcrod to tho c reoat arias after you had Injected yr*ir
rccoinc. Doesn't this, "the othor two ere not horo cnyuoro", rather
substantiate what tho witness *lrs testified to?

s. Ho, I wouldn't nay tha. In ny direct examination, I said that
in chocking thoso vcccln.lod porsons, no ono was nisslng. Whether 1 cr
tor porheps these serological extinctions vero In Hoy, two nontha
ego,-Mother scoo of the prlsonors woro gono in tho ;;oantino, I don't
know. If anyone hod fiiod thoro would havo boon ca entry senowhoro in
tho rocord, I should think.

Q* Dcosn't that entry scy, doosr.'t it soy "tho two woron't horo
Comoro"? Vhoro woro thoso sorologlcd oxtinations in U<y? I don't
sac that la your records. Dcoo it show ary aorologic.l ox^cinations in


"curt So. 1

3 ; j—: 47^-l»-l-S2X-1 1 trgetald (Von Schoen)


A. In the institute. And this is a later check on the insanity
through the *eil- 7 elix esperinents.

Q. Ve will oroceed, Professor. Sow you testified you did not con¬
duct any vaccinations efter Kay 1943 in Schirreck and I nut-• have given
you an opportunity at least five tines to nake that perfectly clear. And
even on the lest docuaent I rut to you you still insist you did not nske
any. The re:* entry reads, "4 October 1943, six aonths, inoculated 20
parsons in Schirseck, tube plus 2 cc distilled »«ter, 0.5 oer oereon."

Do you want to change your testiaony now, Profossor.

A. Jlrst I have to read it carefully. There is a figure here,

■six acnthe". ! have to interpret that "20 rersone inoculated in Schir-
neck". Thoso are probably the 20 people that ve vaccinated in Hey that
the vitnoss here aentloned. "Two cc dietilled vatcr. then 0.6 cc ror
oerscn." I do not know evon today that in the fell of 1243 ve carried
out voccinatione In Schiraock. ->.en thore it an entry on the 27th of
January, 1944, nine aonths.

Q, That is right. That gives you the length of tiae you hud this

vaccino stored, does it not. Professor? Cn 4 October 1243 you had it

stored six aonths? You inoculated 20 persons in Schiraock on 4 October,

did you not, as you stated in your lettor to hose, on the sane date,

the inocule ions are nov orogrossieg, or vords to that effect? Y.u

reaeabor you said to Rose in a lettor of 4 Cctobor 1943 vfcich I out to

yCU

you that vat Just a clan that/would d0 that. This entry indicates you
did do it, does it not. Professor?

A. I oust veigh vhat X said before. The lettor vae datod 27
January 1943, a tiae going auch farther back.

Q, Yes, it is furthor back. It is obviously a aistako. Professor,
no you veil knov. Sonetlaes people running free Deceaber over into
January aake a aistake and out the last year, you knov, and that is
obviously vhat hapecned in thie case because he could not vrite a con-
teaooronocus entry for January 1943 end then have it aruear uo above
that entry, entries for October, July and Kay and April 1943, could he,

i


Court Sc. 1

23 JuS 47-,i-12-2-iHi-rit zgeraid (Voa Sohoen)


Professor? Tom vill agree vith ne that that date should read TP January
1544, Woo the vaccina had beer stored cine norths dating froc 30 Auril
1543, lo that not right, Professor?

X. I cannot renenber that ve vaccinated anybody in Schirnock lator
I as very sorry.

Q. Tou renenber that you did not vaccinate anybody after Kay,
Professor?

A. Tes, that is right.

Q, On 27 January 1944, vhich is the next entry, "nine nonthe,
sized with the sane asourt as 21 Kay distilled vater plus tube, 20
persons 10 cc each." Those vero In Schlreeck, too, vere they not,
Professor?

A. It says 1 cc, 1 eolnt 0 ec. it doss not say anything about
Schlrmeck. I cannot so:'. I oust assure you orce noro that I actually
know nothing about those vaccinations. I an vory sorry.

Q. Lot us proceed to pago 4, Professor. It io apparently another
aeries on Sehirsock. Do you find tho ontry on ©ego 47 Your Honoro
should change psgo 6 to page 4.

ed

THE P5ZSIISS?: Cur pages oro nusbcr/l and 2. You ore referring
to tho nusbers on the original decuaont?

IS. ::c HAKeY: Yes, Your Honor, pego 6 on our translation, ©ago 6
of tho original should be changed to road page 4 of tho original.

Q. Sov, Professor, do you find an ontry on page 4 boforo you, of
10 October, five conths, inoculated ten rersons in Schirnock? To you
find that, Professor?

A. Yet.

Q. T h ~ indicates you lnoculatod ecce after 4 October 19^3, vacci
nations vhich 7CU auctioned in your letter to Hose, and vhich are con¬
i'irnei by this notebook.

And then, under the entry for 10 October, you find 27 January 1944
Icos it appear 1944 on the original?

A. 27 January 1944, yes.


9665


Court So. 1

ZL Jun 47-k-12-3-S£X-“itigerali (Yon Sehoen)


Q. Sight nonths?

A. Sight sonths, yes.

q, yqv 3 peoic of inoculating 20 persons there, do you not, Professor?
Con you tell the Tribunal that those verc done in Schlxaeck?

A. I do not knov that raceinations vere performed at Sehirseck at
•his time. v e vere only vaccinating in Satrweller at this tine, end I
^avc not heardthat such vaccinations vere carried out. I an eorry.

Q. All right.

A. I as trying to Interpret the document.

Q. Professor, let us go on to page 5. The Tribunal *-111 chango
page 7 of the original to page 6 of the original. I>o you find oego 5,
Profossor?

A. Yos.

q. This aontlons another series of inocu?at.'.oos in Schirncck, 13
July 1943, approximately sevon veoks, Schiraocfc, 0.G cc nor person and
six aico before the inoculation.

Let us drop dovn lo.-or on tho pogo. Do you find the entry for 14
October. is or. the next pogo of tho translation. Your Honor, 14

Cctobor.

Professor, do you find that?

A. Yes.

Q. Ten persons inoculated for the third tine with 1 cc. Profossor,
I thought you told us that you did not carry out au-tiple vaccinations
with your murine vaccine in Sehirseck.

A. I have already testifies that tho only vaccinations in Schiraeck
vere is hay 1543. I do not kno- from vhero this record case. In the
fall of 1943 ve vore -orking only in liatxveiler. 2 as sorry. I cannot
give any explanation.

This entry, though. Professor, indicates an inoculation for
the third tise on a series of ten persons. That “pp your "Infcktlons
Versucho 0 , *cs it not, Professor?

A. He. I knov nothing about it; I am sorry.


9666


gO^Joc* 47-i-12-+-33t-7 it x geraid (Tor. Sehoen)

q. But your series of three vaccinations wore vfcat you referred to
aa the "Infektions Versuche". vas it sot, Professor?

1. But these vere vaccinations *-fcich wro ctrried out is Sats-
veiler, Hr. Prosecutor.

q, 7he hook says they vore carried out in Schlrseclc, and about four
days beforo, on tho 4th of October, 1943, you wrote to Rose and said,

•Ye have to carry out Infection experiments." Profeeeor, is it uoeeiblo
that you really ueant V/ "infection experiments" something other than
your three-tines vaccination which you had concluded on 14 October 19-13?

A. Le* no too exactly what it says hero, page 5, 10 October-14 Octo¬
ber, ten persons, three-tiaos point five, it says again. It only says
it is a vaccination if this document is right.

Q. Does the document say "Vaccinatod ton ooreons. inoculated for

tho third tino"? Is that what it said?

A. Tcs, it says so. In Hay at SchiraaOc tho control group *o
vacclnr.tod throo tiaos. That is not impossible. bu» whet 1 notico on
this docuaont, if you want to connect it with tho Inaon vaccine, is
that it does not soy anything about tho Ips«n vaccine; I did not find
that yet, but it does say Gildoaolstor.

q, I have not nontionod anything about tho Ipson vaccino. Lot us
orocoad. Professor, so that vc get through boforo tho noon rocoss.
:-.c=w=bor, you tootifioi you had not carried out any vaccinations in
Satxvoilor after January 1344. Profoscor, will you tu: . to nngo 7 of
this little notebook on your oxperinents, and vhilo this is not the only
entry vhic:. tfcovs that you carried out vaccination experiments In Rott¬
weiler after January 1944, I think it will bo sufficient for our purposes.
To you have page 7? Mil you find the entry?

A. Yes, I have page 7.

q, fill you find tho entry for 26 iiey 19447

A. Yes.

q. Toes that reed, "Together with S inoculated, used up. five tubes
of I in Xatxvcilor; two anodes distilled water, throe to four cubic


9667


:r~: 1

3C Jon 4?-H-i2-5-IS-.-7itrgereld (Von Schocn)


centiaeters per aapule vaccine, 0,5 cc. The Inoculation took -olnee
during the incubation period, a transport containing also sick ueonlo,

13 >eca=e sick in the period free 29 Kay to S June; of those, two died."

Then it continues to give the titer value of sone of the others.
Professor, don't you have to change your teetinony about vaccinations in
Setivoilcr?

A. So, I cannot change it. I know nothing about this.

q. Professor, let us look at words "together with S". Wat do
you understand "together with S" to ncan? It ie 25 May 1S44?

A. I have no idea what "S" scans.

0, You toetifiod that the dofendant Schroodor visited you and
you fixed tho date, 25 Hay 1944. Is there any possibility that that
■S" could noan Schroodor?

A. Be, that is quite inpossiblo. Ispoesiblo. Professor Schroodor
sever carriod out any oxporinonts with no or did any work in ay labora¬
tory. Eo was not with ae in Schlraock or Satrvoilor.

Q. Eo was not with you in Ke.trvoiler?

A. So.

Q. I have no further Questions.

SHE PriSimr:: The noon rocoss today will bo extended until two
o'clock. Tho Tribunal will now bo in rocoss until two o'clock.

(Tho Tribunal rccossc* until 1400 hours.)


S6&:

*


'7 . .

20 Juat.-A-'3v r -15-l-Kcrro»-(5r«m)-
Tcort 1

ipruata ssssior


ITho honrinj reconvened ot 1UOO hours, 20 Juno, 1^7)

T 3 KaBSHALx The Tribunal is criin inscasior..

7..S ?R3SI^E!«T: Counsol any continue.

BUG3T HAAjS!* - Rosuned
CROSS SUilSATIOM - Continued

ET kcHASBY:

k Mth tho peraission of the I’ribunsl, I would lilco to diroot o few
rdditionol questions to tho witnoss ooncerninr. tho lest oxhibit. This is
prosooution exhibit 521 for identification which hos ejoin boon hr.ndod
to tho witness.

Frofossor, will you turn to po^c 1 J of tho Sxhibit?

.'his, if tho Tribunal oloeso, clso docs not ap-oar on tho translation.
Tho notes buforo you - tho translation before you sirsnly oono-rns the
r.oto book. This chart res attachod to tho note book end consequently is
isoluded in tho scoc oxhibit.

uo you find c chert thoro, Profotsor, on p".*o ljf
A Yes.

V Lo you rocnll your testimony to tho offoot that ’oyer wes not in c
position to know orjythiny. ebout typhus work?
a Yos, 1 do.

k Lo you find this ohnrt was drawn up by ’tiss Crodoll, your assistant?
a This is certainly o record that "dss Crodoll drew up.

V And whet detos doos this chart cover?
a Fron the 2 kth of S8sy.


to -rhott


oil-Folia rcoction tests?


ction was undertaken


nr.«e which -rpo-rs across the top


V.


9669


20 June-A-3J-15-2- K3rro*r-(5r^n)-
Court 1.

A Herr ifayer.

*» Ho farther questions.

733 PR3SILSTT: toy redirect cxr.ainction of this witnoss?

SSDIRSCT EXidOFATIOS

jT «i. TIP.

V. Profossor, tho cross oxeeinr.tion by }Ir. *!c3ency w-kes c few quostions

necessary.

First of nil, wo will discuss tho old docuosnts put in by tho prose¬
cution sorxtiiu bjo 'ne thon the now ones.

First of fll, e -rolialnory question, Profossor. In your diroot end r.lso
cross exenination you dosoribed 5ook©r-Froysong's visit to you in Stras¬
bourg. I should bo lntorostcd to know, whet you oar. soy ebout rhother
3:o5cur-Frcysonf otao to Stressbourg in ordor to visit you or whether
his purposo for tb. trip wns onothor find whothor his visit to you wna
only incidont -1 to this othor purposo'

X I hnvo clr-rdy seid that Bcoker-Preysong, on orders froa Professor
So hr odor, w-s to, if possible, ooot -y vishos rogardin cxporinontol
-aJitcla. I told hixwtet wishes -:ere. I b^liovo I rooonbor thnt
B-oktr-Freyson.-, visited rnothor instituto, howovor, ntraoly tho Phornr.-
eologieel Institute md the director there, Profossor Sohler»-r.

V Thn'.k you.

Flocso trke document book 12 up figaln, Professor, end toko ' look at
eoouwjnt ! J 0. 127 on pc-gc S. ‘hi* i® : /0ur loiter to Hirt of 2^ June
1 rLu -»hich oor.trins tho inf-nous concents "control porsor.s‘ , rnd "sub¬
sequent infeotios.” You sold that in the prr-llol -roup of parsons not
wcQinrtcd you could count on ers^* of s-ckness rcrticulr.rly in that
group. In opinion, you didn’t explain clearly enough in the cross
axeninntion, vhy proo&soly in this control group you folt that you hrd
to-count or. coses of sickness. Per hr. s : ou could elrrify thrt. Floaso
do rot go into the yroblcn of subsequent Infection at the ao-a-nt.

A I shell confine rrsolf to tho interpretation I .tcwo yesterday.


9670


20 Jvnc-A-SJ-17-3”~ r r ^*’-(3roHr )-
Court 1.

Sickness ia this csao soars nothin- asro then reaction to tho vaccination.
ks I said before, this letter was directed to l&ywn who wouldn't havo
\r.dcr stood aoro cocciicctcd terminology. That 1 pointed this out, tho
reason for th't w r s that vaccination with in^eotions cro ;onornlly known.
Chore h*vo boon hundrocs of thousands of or.scs of thet, so that 1 didn’t
hrvo to point out psecificclly tbit feet, but vaoeinetion through
sonrific-tion of the skin had not boon the sub*oot of truoh cxporionco
horatoforo. "horoforo, 1 hed to rofer to rr -reccin'tiona of Lcoonbor end
J*nuary. Thcrofora, for thoso ronsona, 1 folt that I should point out
that thoro would bo s*ron-hor reactions, but, r.s 1 acid, I did this for
*r own protection, so to spoek.

*» Then, if I o-'n aua up whet you hr -to sold, tbs control ^roun, r.a it
is horo celled, rs to be vr.ccir.ntod only once by e sonrifiertion prooosa
* ho rant tho other T-oup of lpO persons wns to bo -iron prolinin'ry
T-ccinctiona in the uaur.l nd wo 11-known wry by intr'-nusculftr injoot »on,
end in this rorerd you cro ar.yinj th't aare soTorc ronotions suit bo
expected in th't control *rour whioh wes rnccinctod only by sonrifi-
cction of the skin.

Tor, ro nuat turn to the documents that h*7o been put to you by tho
prosecution. Perhaps, -r. -oHenoy would be so .rood 's to ;£vo no tho
photstr tie copy that wns dJscuasod this corning. 1 aeon the photost'tic
copy of Coouaent 807. Apparently, the nhotost t is not hero ct tho nonont.
Professor. In the rtentim,, wo con trko up another document.

1 hr to the rhotoat-t copy now, so rr^ can continue in our discussion
of it.

Tou recoil this docu-xnt don't you? “his is the document with the
lottorhood "3cp Physician- Concontr tior. 2a-p I rttwoilor ." It contain
these individual sentences that r. iJchsnoy put to you this aorning
’•nd re par din.* which he asked you whether thoso individual sentences, refer¬
red to your work. I want to clear this thin- up, beor.usc in soro ersos
I an not clear In —> aind w bother you think that certain o r th- sontonoos


20 Jur.- -A- 3 J-l -& rr ow- ( rr awn ) -
Court 1.

rerlly do rofor to your fork. Tho first sontoncc roads, tho dato
is 25 th Octobar, 1 CU 2 , ad 1 euoto:

"In addition tharo is the r.rr scientific cxpcrinontcl series that
is rol of. to boric in th- next fow days which will erto* particular
desrnds on us."

Oen you toll us Profossor, whothcr this sent r.co refers to 2'our work?


9672


20 Jun-A-I3-l5-l-I*:s5c-r (Int. 3rowr.)

Court Ho. I.

A That sentence coaes from a report of 19h2 so that sonterro
(toes not refer to ny protective vaccinations.

D. 3 .. TIP?: When I look at this doc unant, your Honors, I seo
2 number of points in it that will bo of very considerable probative
importance. There are clippings. I seo that tho letterhead, with
the date, is on an extra sheet of papor and tho text thereunder is
on a different shoot of paper. Therefore, you cannot oven so«- from this
docuaont what dates belong to what entries. That is quite obvious from
tho photo copy. I do not know whether tho Tribunal has a photo copy
of this docisaont, At any rato, it can very clearly be soon in ny copy
that tho lettorhead and tho dates arc not on tho seno piece of papor
as tho ontrios. Porhaps Ur. HcBanoy can explain that, but in tho
fora that I havo it horo I can seo no probative valuo in thin docunont
whatsoever, ftrhaps I may bo ponsitted to show tho docuaont to too
Tribunal. Here, for oxanple, end perhaps JS•. UcHaney rill confirm
this, this is supposod to bo n lotturhoad. How this is written on
the slant, by another typewriter, and then tho entry thereunder is
obviously another pioco of papor cut out from so nowhoro.

UR. JiHAKKI: It sc_ns to no ifo have had considerable discussion
ibout this docunont. It is quite cloar that tho oxcorpts hero voro cut
out of a report Bade by the ceap doctor, tho report covering othor
natters than those in issue hero and which miro not included by tho
French authorities who prepared this. How, of courso, if you cut tho
b<*toc or siddlo paragraphs out of a report, it is not going to show
tho data on that piece of paper which is oxcisod from the full report.
Consequently, I think the obvious explanation is that tho French auth¬
orities who prepared this, as far zb this top lino goes, apparently
took off tlx; lottarhend of the report and then excised a par-graph
further down in tho text in the contort of it and thon photographed
the two togothar. As far as t'nc second excerpt gees, it aooos they
did not over, do that. They just cut out the p'rticular paragraph which
tb.y rantod to reproduce in the full report and thon apparently typed


9673


2C Jna-A-13-16-2-Lessor (let. Broun)
Coert So. I.


ia the dote of the report or. sene other rnchino,. contemporaneous with
jrepering this exhibit. All this -.rill bo quite clear on the original
exhibit itself, that is to scy, the album of pictures. It is rather
difficult to v_ry specifically analyse this photcstatic copy, but
since the document has boon authenticated as genuine by the proper
•reach authorities, and has been rdaitted into proof, I take it that
this nat^rial is admissible and can be put to the fitness and can bo
used for whatever valuo appears.

D 6 .. TIPPl Free this document, as it is put together, anj
fren individual sentences which taken by themselves are incompr-hon-
sible, it cannot to seen whore this sontorre really was in the original
docunent. These arc individual slips of papor in a row, ono aftor tho
other, and tiny have been photostated, without its being possible to
know what any particular sontonco belongs tc« That tho scntonco
ruolly belongs under tho date which is written alongside it is not to
te soor. fron this docuaont. This is, at any rate, tho first documont
of this sort that has jv^r boon put into ovidonco horv in such a fona«
It is quite possible for the Prosecution to cito cortain sontonco* in
a docaaont, but horotoforo it was always usual for tho ontiro docunent
to bo put in and if individual sentences wero oxtractcd from it, tboir
context iraa ccapr^hcnsiblo.

!it. ifcHAHETr If tho Tribmal please. There arc two ques¬
tions ojx>n here. Is tho docunont admissible? That question doponds
up?n the authenticity of the docunent and its probativo valuo. Now
thi3 document has been properly authenticated by tho appropriate
French authorities and has long ego bo.n aebaittod into ovidonco. 1'ow
th, second question is materiality. I put these excerpts to the wit-
cess and he has concoded that it is possible, if not probrblo, that
:;rtain of tto excerpts applied to hin. Ot:wrs, h- said, did net. I
'-’ki. it that this is sooa proof and that it can tx. considered by tho
-ricunal. Dr# Tipp's efforts now are to have tho Tribunal rule that
this portion'of the document is not admissible and that no questions

9674 .


>0 J:i>-A-KB-l5-3-IJ3sar (Int* Brora)
Ccurt No. I.


c-s. be put to the witness, whereas tto witness, hiaself, has already
conceded the possibility that certain cf the excerpts do apply tc his
exp^riaents*

THE PRESIDENT: The Tribunal •will reserve the ruling upon
this point until the photostats aro prepared and distributed and can
be exasinod. Jbanwhilo, counsel nay prococd with the redirect oxac-
ination.

3T DR. TlPf*

Q Since there is still tho possibility that this document will
be aduittod in its present fora, I nust still go over cortain points
that it involves. Now on 25 October 19U2 there is the sontoncot "In
tr.c roll-call that tho profossor conducting tho oxforlnonts called,
only Hi suitablo persons could be found. Troataont reduced those who
had scabies to li. Further rxasurcs to irsprovo tho general lovel of
health arc under way." As I say, this is dated 25 October 19U2, In
your opinion, could this roll-call or oxonination refer to tho ono
that you roforrod to in your direct oxraination? Perhaps - 1 could
read tho next sentence, to nnko this cloaror. "The gypsies providod
by Ahnenorbo for Natzwoilor fraa Auschwitz on 12 November havo after
rodic'l cxoainr.tion boon released free tho concentration cruip as un¬
suitable. On 12 Dococbor l?h3 sobo othor gypsies wore sent from tho
concentration ernp of Auschwitz. Experiments are not yet under way."
If you look at thoso 2 sontoncos -tain, Professor, which of thoso 2
scnt.ncos refers to tho group of jxrsons which, according to your
tosairceny in direct oxonination, wora ox'ninod by you and found to bo
unsuitable?

A As I said in =y cross-exminaticn, tho situation was as Tol¬
lers: If tho persons nentioned ir. paragraph 2 wore providod for ny
vaccinations, thon I con repeat rhat I havo rlready said - that thoso
persons wore really in a state of health such as node it inpocsiblo tc
vaccinate the:*. To that extent there is a connection between the fact
ad this 3tatcnent here.

96?5


20 Jon-A-J 2--i-_-Le ssor (Int* Brown)
Court Ho. I.


I


Q Just a accent, witness 1 la parogrqgfc 3 it says, "on 12
SorcCbor 15^3 prisoners sent ir~ Auschwitz vara reloosed as unsuit¬
able. That is 12 Kovseber 19li3. That dots corresponds to the date
given in your letter to Hirt, in which you stated that you exmined
this group of gypsies. Do you want to say that this paragraph refers
to your experimental group?

A Yos, but I was explainir.- the second paragraph.

Q Then you think that under th: circumstances the second para¬
graph too night refer to your experiments?

A In the cross-examination today I said that 1 cannot lx sure
whether or not those were the gypsies I was going to use for ny vac¬
cinations. If those arc the sano gypsies that are rvontionod in tho
third paragraph, then tho whole aattor is perfectly clear, because it
jays horo that the pmoplo wore unsuitable fcr vaccination. "After care¬
ful nsdical ox-aination they wore rclo-sod free tho cx;xrirx.ntal
station. Instead of then, on 12 Dccvi^xr 19h3, another 89 gypsies
sere sont in froa Auschwitz." Thnt i3 tho continuation horo in tto
dee ire nt.

Q In other words, witness, the two paragraphs could ref or to
ycur intended vaccinations and, if I understand you corroctly, this is
c.rtainly true of the third paragraph?

A Yos, that is the way it is.

Q 'Am tho fourth paragraph in this decuront - I should like
to ascertain tho following frc= thj document. Hero is a little slip
cf paper, apparently a letterhead on wiiich st-anir "Canp Fhj-sicl-n,
Concentration Canp Hatsvoilcr, 25 January 19 Jj 3." That is 'll there
is tc that slip of paper. This 6lip of paper obviously partially
covers another slip of paper, the text of which it is very difficult
to road. The first line is altogether covered and the second lino
T "Fart of tho additional dressings nc.dcd wcr. taken from the

S3 drug-st r- ’nd tho rest fro- tho nodical military departrmnt X the
Ar.-r.anical Institute cf the University of Str.assbourg." Is it your

5676


20 Jua-A-33-ic—5-Lesser (Int. 5rcrm)
Ccurt !fo, I.


opinion that this sentence refers to your experiments or your vaccina¬
tions?

A :io, that is out cf tho question, because the date proves,
rarely, January 19U3, that that tr.as net possible. Moreover, this date
refers to an altogether different letter, as you can see here.


20 June 47-A TjC-17-.l~friscau (Int., Brown)
Coart I


IP.. 71??: Then let =e state la order tc clajify the probetivc
valuo of this document that in the third paragraph of this document
the date of 13 Sovcsber 1943 le mentioned and then as continuation
there is a date of 25 January 1943. These dates alone show how
carelessly this docoaont was put together.

% How there follows a slip of paper with the letterhead, "Caap
Physician, Satrweller Concentration Camp, 1 Fefcruarv 44. This slip
of caper is again alone another slip of paper. However, attachod to
it is another slip which doesn't sees to bo tho sane piece of papor
but another: "ixperiment Stations in Ahnenerbe have not yet started
69 oxporiser.tal subjects, naacly gypsies. Of the 89 experimental
subjecte (gypsies) 1 has in the meantime died; 40 haro been vaccinated
for a typhus experiment."

If wo assuso. Professor, that the date is in order—naacly, 1
Icbruary 44 — do you then believe that theso 40 gypsies who snot
ha.vo been vaccinated in tho do ant iso were your first experimental
group?

A So far as tho last lino of this paragraph is concerned, it says
that 40 gypsies were v*ccinrtod for a typhus experiment. That, of
e-urso, is probable, but I don't boliovo that any German doctor would
U8C the wrong gender for the German word "experiment" which it dono lr.
this document; rs far as tho tiao element is concerned, it dooc ooca
to be in order,

H Then there ic the last sentence in tho last paragraph -f this
document. T*is, too, again is two different slips «f paper as the
photo copy sh ws. The first :nc says: "Camp Physician, Concentration
Cp -=p, Vatzwoilir, 22 March 44"; and the next fragment of the sheet of
papor carries the number " 10 " and says: "As last reported in tho Inst
monthly report, there were two vaccinations in the experimental station,
followed by the vaccinations proper after which blood analysis and tem¬
peratures were taken."

Let ae say the following regarding this. Here there is mention


9678


20 June i7_a—2jC-l7_2-Frineau (1st., Hurts)

Court I


of the last aostkly report and then It srys after two typhoid vaccina¬
tions there followed tho third vaccination. *n I correct is thinking
that vhen they speak cf the last sonthly report they ere speaking of
the report fr-a the aonth of February which we don't have here?

A The lepec of tiac wr.uld here bed to he about two nonthe ao
that, apparently, one report ie aissing here, * report that was made
• c that period of tlacT

^ That la apparently the report at the end of February and in
this report which la slicing it ia reported what took place in Jasu
uary; end there it naya that after two typhoid vaccinations tho
typhoid vaccination prorer to^k place.

H Vltnsss, do :you think wo can accuse that this eentonco, aa it
n:v stands, refers to typhoid which vc, of coursd, should roally
•r.doratar.d to be typhus vaccinations in Satzvcller?

A Vos, I think so because every general physician who hat any¬
thin/- to do with lnocculetion* kn-vs what an inocculatlcn Is and this
expression car. hardly be confused with anything olsc. The date also
rcaonbcr, please, that tho reports arc net given at rogular intervals
*n£ that on 22 Mprch the camp physician already knew the results of
tho vaccination. It isn't stated precisely vhen that third vaccination
ves sadc but it certainly wp.s dem before 22nd '1 March.

^ Tru, apparently, arc overlooking, witness, t v -t it cays hero
in this d'*euscr.ts "As already reported in the last n-nthly report."
T-crcf^re, th-". statement .oust have been nado in a. February report.

^n't you agreo with nc t« that extent?

A Us it was already stated In the last ninthly report, thcro
verc two vaccina.tlens followed by tho typhus vaccinations proper which
1= ‘‘■iT- was followed by blood analysie and tenporature taking." That
is what it seyc. But, I think tho nunber "3" here was wrozg. aunber
2’ would be right. It is badly printed horc. I read it "number 3" and
1 an trying to corrcet It. It should ha.v, been "2*. If it says two
7'ccinptions horc, they everything ir in order. There followed there¬
upon the third vaccination.


20 Juno 47-i-JjC-17-3-?ricenu (Sat., Eurtr)

Court I

I

<i If i understand JroU correctly, witness, you arc saying that
tht« sentence of tho report refers to your vaccinations in December
and January. Your series of three vaccinations. Sow let's take a
look at SO 3450, Exhibit 519. This is the list with the letterhead
statement of expenditures, with bills and receipts included, for
influenza research assignaent, et cetera.

A ♦ don't have the document here.

k Cno uucsticn about this, witness; Hr. MeHaney has said that
you said that you did r.' vaccinating for the Medical Inspectorate.
Fevort^eless, you nado nany trips to Sntzwciler and Sehirncck and
cany tolcph-r.t clls an< included the charges for that in the state¬
ment of cxpcdltures for the influenza research. Let sc ask you tho
following about this, witness; were the individual expenditures in
resoarch nvslgncont sharply kept separate or was the general policy
that the funds could be sproad around, for tho individual assignments
Kd tho funds for one asoignaent could bo used to a«ko vp for deficits
in tho other assignment?

A Yes, that was custoraary. If jr~u had sovoral fu-ds and "no
fu-d had Just beer, exhausted or was bbcut to bo oxhaustod, and. if
7-u had soncy in the cthor funds, and if the o'sc porson wro using
I'.th of those funds, that cane fr^s the sane pla.ee, then you took
the coney fra the one fund without question and used it for tho
-thcr fund.

Cn the occasion of tho conversation I had with Kvcnzcl during
vhieh I told his tha* the funds for anc research assignment wero
exhausted, Evenzel tcld me cxplicity that I c*uld take funds to nako
f“f that lack fran the other fund. In a laboratory where cany
things arc being worked ~n, that is quite a custocpry procedure. That
is something that everybody docs and in saying this I ba.se =y state¬
ment cn what Kvcnztl told ne himself. I believe others here could
substantiate that. .

‘t Then you say that these trips and telephone calls to Schirncck


9650


20 June e. 7-A-I«C_l7_4_?nine«u (Jnt., Zurtr)
Court I


vcrc included it*. this statement of expenditure a for Influent a resoerch
tut that this doe* rut prove that the trips end phene cells wore uade
actually in connection with thi* influents research for the Medical
Inspectorate cf the luftvaffc hut this-we* dono for purely practical
cr fornal reasons?

A Yes, that's os.

 J>> have the next docunent, witness, 2e7d, your letter to
2oso of 4 October 43?

a So, I don't,

S, I will have the docunent put to you. First, one little ques¬
tion about the docxncnt 3450 we have Just been discussing: it strikes
—c that there arc a lorgc nuuber f phone calls to Schimcck listed
hero which really sust be ph-nc eallo that wore nadc to Hatty oiler.
Vasn't the eituation this, witness — Sa.ttwcilor didn't have it's own
telephone exchange; consequently, all phene crll* for Sattweiler had to
go through the exchange at Schimcck, so that y:u couldn't kocp these
tvo things separ»to In tho bill at all?

A That I cannot tell you bccauso the oonncctlone wero always nndc
tv ay secretary but y u will see thnt in paTanthcoc* you will see tho
na.-c "Satiwcllor" after the word * Schimcck 106". Consequently, thcco
c*r. only have boon phone calls to Kattwoilcr.


20 June tocnl (Int. Brcrrm)

Court }n. 1


Q In ctocunent Jfc. 3b SO, under lo arch there is a phone cell
listed, Schirreck 108 (Jfctzweilor)* Mow, witness to 2ccun_nt 'k>,

2E7u, exhibit $2U, yxir letter to Dr* Rose fron b October 19U3, tho
Prosecutor put to you three points in this letter. The first thing ho
put to you is on page 2 of this tocuzaant, in the ori-inal it is
toward the end of the second .arapraph* You are spoakin; horo of Sorun
Titer Values in connection rith your, end I -..-ill quo to i "Tto Sorun
Titer is considerably hi .her, oven after n sinlo vaccination, in
cccT; orison dth triple vaccinations with toad vaccines." Tho Prosecutor
sal *, that you said nothin.- in your direct examination about a triplo
vaccination, and ’.-hen discus sin tho vaccinations with Schimook you
'i 'n»t eay ary such vaccination took placej what is this roforonco thon
to the triple vaccinations an’, tho Sorun Titer?

L triple vaccination was proscribe:', an.' wo havo the vast ox-

parionco with dead vaccinos that only liadtoa lutinativo titor

•

values rosulfce-.’.j that ia what this sontonco refors to, nsnoly, tha
scries of threo vaccinations with tho .ton' vaccines.

q Thon, if I understand you, WLtnoss, this is a statenent of
'.n:ral oxporiunco which you havo had with -toad vaccinos and those tto
rot rofor to any vaccination or ox..orir»nta that you carried out?

A That ia correct*

Q You wuro also asko! about tho neat sontonco by tho Prosocutiont
'I ” rot that it was not possible sc far to p.rfom infections oxpori-
* ots too vaccina to 1 persons; I requested tho Ahnenorbo of tho SS
, r?vi '.o suitable persons fer vaccination, but 'i ‘ not rocoivo an
•TaBT:-cr a3 yot*" Can you tell us what lottcr you are reforrin'- to when
•' u the t you turn-' d to the Ahnenorbo cf the SS, ut 1: net rocoivo
answer?

•* Hero I an reforrin to the application that I redo through
Prefessor Hirt, and apparently Professor Hlrt forr-.rde' this lottor to
-hr.-norbo. To what extent tho Ahaenerbe was competent *or identical


96C2


2C jtcn h .-13—2-€o-rd (Int. Brown)

Gcurfe Jfc- 1


sitfa tho ’that I do not know, 'rat certainly this refers to that
rra? of .arsons when I re cue steel for protective vac cin ation in
Sstswoilar*

1 leu arc r-ferrin then, witness, to the group that you first

• 0

-skei for froa Prefossor Hirt. l.’o do net have this application here,

•-it I car, rcaind you of Iccunent Ho. 120, in locunont book 12, pago

75, titLs letter nontiona your request of 16 ;.u ust 19h3j aicnod by

Siovars, it states that Sievors -.till ho glad to help and tas turned to

t!» competent aroncy to soo to it that thj persons you wish will bo

-ado a valla* .lo. This lottor of Siovers,is dated 30 Sop ter:, or 19U3j

ar.'. ''ocurcnt He. 287!;, naaoly your lottor to Roao is la tod U October

19U3, tocmsnt 287bf is it not noro than inprobelio that in vicr; of tho

•

itr.to of tho rail at that tine that on tho l*th of Octdjor 1913, in
Strossbour?, you could have roodvod a letter sent fron 'aiachonfold,
in Uppor Franks nia on 30 Sop tori; or 19U3?

That can 1 o soon fro:; ay lottor to Hirt. If I bed roodvod thio
lottor by then, I would have referred to it. This is feouaont 120 and
tbu lottorhoa' is, 'Instituto for "ilitcry Scientific Rcsoarch", and if
* hai received it, I afoul' have roferrod to it.

1 That is what I roan, witness, but I an *oin to prove fron tho
tr: datos involve !, that on U Ootc'. r >dwn you sent this letter to Rose,
y : coul! not yet havo roedvod tho lottor fron Siovors on 30 Soptonborj
ir. othor words, ye u had do wows frc.-. th; iJmonorbOj is that so?

i. Tos, that is.

“i Thor., witness, whon in this last lottor, 2672a, you soy that
you had turno to tho SS for carryin out infooticus oxporinonts, aro
you reforrirr to the sane thin , naaoly tho carryin out cf throe vacci¬
nations *.7ith reinstated livin; virus?

.. Toe, hut I think I havo to correct a do tail hero. I -'i !n*t turn
V: tho SS in a natter of infection oxp.rirvsnts 'nit in tho fitter of
/r-toctive vaccinations. You said tint I Pur it d to tho SS in a untter
or In • infections?


20 Jkxae >-33ar: (In*-. Brown)

Ccurfc !'o. 1


0 I tcs aizqaly u3ir. tho sarx. xris yi- used in this lettor.

Tsu ’."rite: 'I regret that it was not possible so far to perforo
infoctious oxpurirxnts on the vaccinated persons."

A That refers to tho roup that was subsequently to Lo post-
v- ocinr.tc to ascertain tho anti-info ctlous .rotocti.cn threu h
Sorolo leal oxardnation that . 10 uld folio;.

Q Sow, 1 sn horo further I would liko to dccuss aoocthln • vith
you — ski. ..in crx para TCph, tot.nr d tho on ’, I quota: "b.ccordin to
our opinion cf today ro ar 'in tho ccurso of infaction in virus
'ioor.oos, os, acially in thoir be innin , tte Sorolc ical la nosis for
tho classification of tho i-iaxrdty has a ain to bo consid.orod as of
roator in, ortancc," Ir.t do you r©cn by this So role'ical diagnosis
vhon you aro clnssifyin tho state of in ’.unity? Do y-u noon tlx. .11-
Folix reaction an*, tha horoby ascortainod Sorolo ical rosult or ifhat
aro you rofjrrin to?

.. Tos, that is ri ht, tho c il-?olix roaction ia of roat
oasistanco in oscortr.inin i ii m n ity an’ this a roes -..ith what I havo
alien V said fc*jro a’-out tho ascortninin of anti infoctious inaunity
by Sorolc leal -cans, ten I cr. ruforrin to virus liscnsos, I on
roforrir. * u r -riuncos that others havo ha in tho “cneral subject
cf otter virus Iseases*

0 Hat, tltnass, natter question about this toeunont. Tho Prose¬
cutor ce jparo 1 tte t»c concepts usod in thi3 ’ocuix-nt, Jou sold you
spoke of subsequent infoctious axportaants an' in tte last sontoneo,
you say, I qUoto: "If •o can -t jxperl’xntal subjects fron tho SS
for tost vaccinations.... ! , are you roforrir. to two ’Afforor.t things
on tho enj han’. when you speak of test vaccinations an*, or. the otter
hand, subsoquont tost infccti as, or j. those both r.f:r to tho sano
thin •. boro ycu gain • tho tao concepts siisiltanosusly in tho wor.'s you
explained ir. your \ircct oxanination?

5654


20 Jure u7-..-~7T-l£-l:-coe.r (Ir,T-roro)
Court !fe. 1


Yes, that is so. I an to stir, hero tho anti-infectious i-mmity
after tho pro tee ti vo vaccination*

n I holi-vo that sufficiently clarified this locunontj v/itnosa.

I shall turn now to tho last docuaoot put to you, 'locumnt ’O* 3352*
7® SHEXT* Boforo star tin:- cni rori . na tion on thafc'.oeunont,

9

Ccursol, tho Tribunal will bo in recess for a few rinutos.

(Thereupon a rocosa was token*)


9635


21 JuuC'-.r-hJ-aO-l-Gross (Ton Schon)

Court I

~Z£L ?SLaLi Persona in tho court roor. will please find their aor.to.
The 2ribunal is again in session.

23 PE3SI323T: Counsel nay proccod.

3T 37, 71??:

fitness, the lost docu.cut I should liko to discuss with you is
3352, inhibit 521. If possible I should first liko to soc tho orielnnl.

I would bo .Totoful to Co representative of the Conoral Socrotaxy if ho
would givo no the original of this docuncr.t, Exhibit 521, Jlocvuont Ho,3852.

fitness, you had this docuuoat boforc yiu this norning or n photo¬
stat cf it which was sufcilttod as tho original. Can you toll us did you
know this dc...cat bcf .ro it was handed to you this nominal

.w Perhaps Z night ooc tho photostat again, I should liko to odd
tint in port tho figure* givon horo agree with ny published renort but
the dates givon horo and othor infoxu.ition which dooo not agroo witl: uy
p.-per. If tho othor infomution about vaccinction is corroct I think I
would have hod no roasor. not to Include this in .uy published work, but I
should lilto tc ask to have tho original brought hero. I don't know uho-
tho.- that is posiiblo, or whother tho authenticity cun bo ascortninod in
cay other way.

fitness, I askad you whether y u know tho docur.ont boforo you
sou It this nomine. That's tho first question wo hava to go into be¬
fore wo can go on.

. .ifter such a long tine I can't rccccbor aractly how tho record
vas written but it contains so ncay uncloo- things, that I nust aq,- I
don't know i' in this fern.

?. foil, yu know tho handwriting of your assistant, witnoso. I
believe Kiss C rod ell worked '-ith you for years. Can you scy .ay thisg tr-
baut whether thi6 docur.ont was written by kiss Crodell, whothor. you
think tk;£ all of it was writ.cn by Kiss Crcdoll, or whether perhaps
she wrote part of it oSd did not write othor parts!

i. that is difficult to say. In general tho handwriting locks like


9686


2C Juno-,s-i:j-2&-2?Gros3 (Ton Scion)
Court I


Kiss Orodcll 1 s but sa;c parts look a little different. I think that
c oold oalj bo decided by showing it to Hies Cordell herself.

^ . You are no doubt quite right, orofessor. The only person who
e.-n identify the document one hundred percent would be Hiss C rod ell, but
we do not have her hero. Thoreforo, I oust unfortunately csi: you do you
consider that the ontiro document was written by Hiss Crodell or do you
bollore theft it was not entirely written by Hiss CrodollT

A . Voll, to Judge by tho datos in here ;md tho testimony tdaich I
have given and wh*i Hirs said c bout tho vaccinations thoro is ouch
disegroaient * I auat ecy tto record could not here contained tho
data in tills fori.

0.. Then, I understood you to so;', professor, that oecauso of tho
handwriting end the contents you have conoidorcblo doubt that this
docuiont was written entiroly by Miss Cordoll?

A . Yes, I Bust say that because I knew nothing about vacolsations
at this ti-.o.

H2. 1IC baih’hY: If tho Tribunal plooso, I ::uot object to tho ferao-
tlcn of tho quest!hs being nut to tho witnoss. It is quito cbvi vuo that

on attach is- being uedo -a tho authenticity of this docuior.t. Vo hero

•

Iitd sovdral unfortunato incidents already in this t rial in connection
with the cu* .c.iticity of variouw doom:oats. Bow, if this witnccc vishos
to attack that doom eat I will hero to iasist that quostions bo- directed
to hin in sue!: a r-annor that ho identifies particularly those ooctions
of tho diary in which ho soys Hiss Crodoll did write and those sections
cho did not write. Bow wo havo Just got goncrcl quostions so far cv-
bcut "Do you think soie of theu woro r.ot written by hor* and uo havo
no identification of tho particular passages the witness is prepared to
tostify Hiss Crodell did not write. I think getting a goaarrl stateuont
Of this c rt fren the witness is ;ot cpt tc correct anything.

~i~ ->?. ~sOcunsol is correct. Tho witness should identify
The profcions of tho document which ho says arc in Hiss Cordell*e writing

96£7


2C Jaao-ir4&.2C-&-Gro«s (VonS c" is)

Court I'

c-d these which he doubts ere. I weald ash counsel for Prosecution
whore the original of this document is?

hr- lie H.-Oiirsr: Tho document was obtained by Prosecution souo five
dxys o^o fre the French authorities in Strassbourj, particularly fc.o
is7Csticati=6 official who now have roturnod.

'ZHh* P?hSID2r7: Prcoccution sisply procurod a photcstatic cop;'
of tho doeuaont, is that correct?

112. hC EtSSSil So, y -ur Honor, tho orlclncl woo breu-sht to inu-.v-
ber" by tho French authority in whoso custody it was end who did not wish
to surrondor it to us. Vo bed tho original horo, wo h.4 it photostated
cadfco offioid did not find it convenient to proloa# his eta;' ir. Hur.>*
berj; and ho has rotumod with tho ori.’inrl,

THZ PRDSID2TT: Defan so counsol nay procood.


96C"


20 Ju»'--«-rL-21-I-Krirr;v. (Int. v n Sch.n)
O.urt Hj. Gas. I


Dr. HFP: 1L*. Prssid-r.t, .-f oixsc I civil ask the witnosB uhioh
>arta ... c utidori cuthen.ic r.nd which not. first, I wentcd to ask him
whuth-r r.u hr.: r.~y d ubts at ell.

H *, Professor, you haw the pkotsst&t bef.ro ycu. It is rcjyet-
tabie that tlvo :ri J.nal is n t available. I dj r.jt oulievt :?e will bo
r.Clo t j gut ni-.rv with-ut thu iririnal. II there arc d-;6ts *.f the au¬
thenticity of r. e -coc.r.t, which *s apparently the case here. It can bo
doter:dr>.d only with the rid ol the rigir.nl vhot.-.ur these d-ubto are
justified :r n .• . A cnxparis.n .f the handwriting end of tho ant.-rial
p-maps can bo a c.r forced with tho original, but not r.t -11, or only
with great difficulty, in a photostat. I sh lid be Very grateful to tho
Tribunal, tftcroi'jrc, f,r a ruling that the prosecution gut the .ri”inal
Irn Str.ae 'Tg and autnit it in evidence. If these r* ,ubts a\s d -red

•

up, then tr j ri^lnal can be rcanrtd frua thu liles and roplncod by ft
photostat, tut in this cas- it seems tj ae absolutely necessary u submit
the original in -»rder to d.teruine whotixr the entries r.x\» all in the
•aao handwriting. This can be ceterainod -nly fr« tba riginol.

THE HCSE; :;T: Ihe Tribun“l has n^t yet ever, tho photostat. After
the Tribunal has oxroin-d thu ph<t.stat at the end f thu examination,
o-ce ruling can bo ar.ds.

3TDR. TIP?:

r »»- ’.fitness, perk ps y u c sh-si sjcc striking p-ints where y:u
OlVu cc-ai.n t. that Lfiss Cr.'i.li diJ r.t flake the onfcry.

IrlE PRESIDE.!: Ccuns-i, .are y u limiting that question ta tho test
ft. d co»nt r t: the frr.nat jf t.;e handrritin.-?

DR. HP?: IV. Pr-sident, I an afraid I can answer this quosti r.
aly after tho witness has explained jti what his d ubts are based.

IS. ilC: IT: If tho Tribunal plea so, thi witness r.t-

-7 ole-r, and I trick that the cruse cxc.oinati.-n air- 'do it cl r,

’-hat tr.-re i3 - sharp contrast La the tost in ry f the witness a :r' certain
eru.tri. s in the diary. 1- *«, I thibi: that 1/ h. is c-nt-rtin. the a.-„.en-

96C9


20 Jacc-A-rlr 21-2-Kerr:* (Ir.t. von 3cfcon)
C-urfc So. I, Cam, I


tlcity -»f the docmoct, he oust da so not an the basis if his recollect¬
ion -f events which ho h's rlr ady testified to at £re-t length, bat
r. c spr.risjn .1 thu handwriting. He knows I'iss Croduii's handwriting
very well. She wortod with his cany years, end there is -.iso n s-ooolo
f "iss Cr^Soil's writing -r. an indupend-nt docuaer.t when, h- r-co-niacd
-„r eignstore. ' N, if be wishes t, f; through the docucjiit and s rj
"The entry on such and suer. r. page -pp,ors to ae to b_ not oho hand¬
writing of . ' r.a Cr:dtll B , v-ry well, but I can't see anything is t • be
gained by Lis testifying to ovents now. Ha hrs already d no that.

THE PHESJD2T: Subnit tho photo >t t , .

BY JUDGE SE83IJC:

C.- n as, arc y.u f-jilirr with the handwriting of Tiss C;-.<!cll?

A.- fes, I do.

••’ill you plea:*, oxsnino this docun-nt JO-3652 and state whether
.r rv;t it or any portion -»f it Is in t^j handwriting of Jiiso Cradell
and, if a-, nlnt portions are in r Jimiwritin r and what parti:ns -ro
r.t?

It '.-.ho as if this >;«r« Jiiss Cr.dell's handwriting, but thu
dates are r. t riht. Hero's an -ntry of the 6th of July about-tho
trkirg of bio :d at Schira.ck, 10 p-ro.r.s, p-gc 3 . This aus*. bo seeking
cbj ;t c-ri -1 ;icel re.acti n. It 6 J --.3 t joe that that dr to is auch t,o
lit-. S.c dly, I an n t -ware that a tho 4th f Oct ber, 1943, 20
pi, wore culrtod.

7IPP: "it.-.ess, a bo Judru aab-ri y.u rhich entri-s y u think rro
at ir. iss Cr ell’s handwriting. Y u are not - handwriting expert
ard the C-urt cannot expect that.

JIUG7 SSBailG: Yes, the C -urt car.-xp-ct it if he kr.:*~, f his
L.d^, whose lrndwriting It is. Certainly, the C.urt can expect
it. I: h- knr.;s of his wn kn wledg- that it is her handwriting, he can
: '*7 so and h does r. t have t bv -r. oxp.rt to say s .

' 17:7135: 7. ndwriting - Ilk- rirs Cl ll's.

9690


20 JurA-7L-21-5-Serr-• (Int. v.r. Sc:..n)

K . I, CM- I

DP. 71??: Ti.-n I r.ust l.r-cl-.to the. o.uestirn is 1)11*8, witness...
IKS ?? •E)-:T: (Interrupting) Thun, counsel, the witr-ss str. s
tint, ir. hie opinion, the dicun. r.ts art II in Kiss Cr.deli's hand-
arltinc. The only cj.’.ustixi which the Tribunal -cd the witness nr. c.n-
hotter nsfc thaw are err rs in the writing. *Wit is
ntixvly different question. The witness ooy, -f c uroo, str.to that,
ir. his opird :n, there are errors in whr.t ir-.s written, but fro* what

the witness e-id, I understand re stirt fr.r. tho pr positi n thrt tho

*

entri-s r.ro in tfca handwriting -f '.liss Ir i U.

BY ER. TIPP:

Q.- That is what I ur.ders*..,d the witness t) say t o, Mr. Preside:/ .

i.itneaa, rat I mAjrstnnd that fr^a the hmdsritirg widen y)U hrvo
bjT r. ym yau can dotcraine that sore j>-rta were written by Miss Cr.xk)ll

•xd ther prrts wore r. t? Flense testify cie-rly .-bout tho handwriting

r.l-K?

...» ifco h-nduriting is tk-.t f :!iss Crodell.

r„- _ then, ti.v qo-ati n .f tho TWbunrl is cleared up.

r- caaeo wither cuecti *r. which the President Just asked.

Pr b whteh sntrius da yau believe that lies Crbd&U was alofcaUtn? Itwt's
*.r. tr.jr qjo3tion.

T e i iret ^ntry which I think is .r,ng is the 6th - July.

"DniL s f bl A, ScMrr-ck, 10 p-rsons." Tfci vaccinati r.s n-re per/ ro-
-d in :i :y, -s too witness Hirs has c r.Iir .;d, rnd tno scr logical J-dn-
-.ti ns »a urjdort-kvn ur weeks niter the v* ccirnti r.o. It scene t:>
n, that this date is c little 1* ..Tno only explanation I can think of
is that !!isc Cr:<iell entered it late end undo this .list-.ke.

On the 27th -f Jrntt-.ry 1913, 20 p-rs r.s were vaccinated tilth no
cc c.-.ch. That conn - : v&cdiatt :: in racck. It is so tabigi»a

that I can *t tell what hind i vaccine it's supp sod t b .
s--s r..thing abaft mir -1 exp.rir.ntc ns it 6 eS nb v-_ in «pril and
wleiSji the n.' controls nr- entered. That 1 o, no irlng.


9691


20 Juoe-«-FL-21-4-Kcrr w (Int. von Schon)

Csort Bo. I, Case I

Th.n, 2 th f January 1944 - one- it sc 53 1943, “nd then -tain it
siye 1944. lib did r.--. vcccincte anyb^y in Schirauck.

Ae I rcuxobcr, the figures say bo ri^ht, but th-.n th&iv is another
discrepancy, 14 Cct-bor, apparently 1943, "hero 10 >rs ns wor«. ir-nocu-
L-t.d thr-*- -lacs Tilth one cc.

Those arc. the .certs which I cann t testify to.

Then tccro is another -r.try, 25 ISay 1°44. I em't underatand whet
"S" ooans and whrt "H* -^-ns. l'iss Crodoll certainly w uld n t have
j 2 _g ti>;ao abbreviations becaur. n:b -V would have underst then Ifttor.

Q.- Then if I understand y.u correctly, witness, th-'so art- the
p.ir.ts wh*rc you b.licv. that this record c uld be nist-kon?

a.- Yob, It c ntsina mistakes which I cmn.t uxpLnin.

Q.- If I have understood yju c?rroctly, the first p int was two
entries v tch y.u compared, -nt 27 January 1943 and one of 27 January
L944. I ah'* quote:

27 Jriiuar;* 1943 (9 .tenths) nixed with the a--to Mount no 21 lay
diotiUod wr.Ur per tube, 20 pers-ns 1 cc ouch."

The u-try of 27 January 1944:

"(Sn nths) nir^d with the sane amount rs of 21 Jtoy 2 cc distilled
water per Tube, inn.culr.Ud 20 purs no with 1 cc, each."

Tho two entries ngre., is that right?

A.- Yes.

Q.- Then, il those tn ontr'-s are correct that =e-ns that you
nerf re-d tho sane inn.cuLati,n ^r. the saao nuabor >t pers ns twice
exactly year .apart?

Yes, that's wh-t it 1 . ks like.

Q.- Is that possible, witness?

Ho, that is cuite iap.ssibU*. Or. tho 27 January 1943 it says
"9 -.-nths 1 *. didn't carry out any vaccirr.ti ns at nil. Hb didn't havo
ary vaccine. Or. the 27th of January 1944, which is much Later, it says


23 Jure - A-FI/-21-5- Snrr (Int. v:n Schon)
C urt ;; . I, Caso I


Then, *ou say the so two entries shew that the entry is not cr-r-
-cct ns for ns the cent wits to concerned?

A.- Tos, it is wring. I cer.'t soy nlct the sistako is, but thcro
is certainly a big ri stake here.

Q.- Jiow, witness, the entry >f 6 July "Drawings of blood, ScMr-nock
ID per? ns", tint's the fourth entry on page 3. 1 cuotc: "6 July,

Dryings of bleed Schirauck, 10 persons (3 had fever)" and ther, fallow
3 figures which are apparently titer valuer. Then it go*-? on "tho other
Wco were n t hero anymore". Then cones tho average titor. V/itnesa, can
you tell as / yeur asaist'nt writes "Drawings of bl.od, Schimcck,

10 pers ns" and than she gives the titor valuer of e and writes "two
aro not hero ar^r aoro"? The Pr-sccut r concluded that the two persons
oere not there. Do you believe that this interpretation of the prosccu-
tir is correct, or do you soo na other possibility of explaining this
ontry since it spooks of the "taking -f bl-ed fren 10 persons"?

A.- I havu already said that it says here "2 were not hero any
: re". It probably mens the tw. pvrr.no wore n t in thy evap. Thoro
aight bv the suspicion that thuy ad diud. I sp:ko si that under direct
ir.-.ti n. ' c.rt-inl.- * uld bar ad*- a. i n that two hr ' lied.

, diod t after ttv vaccination recording to Him.

Q.- !!.n, witness, e nothing else. .io -.ust assu’oe- that blood was
token fr n "10 persons, three had fvVer", as Hiss Cr doll writes. Then,
it rives 6 titer valuer and says "the tr.er tw wore not here". In ay
•pinion, thie '-*3 not ae-.n that two rers ns wore g re because it n uld
r t have rent!: nod the taking -f bio i frxi 10 perr-ns, but that so.no
sator ini was rissing. I d.-n't kn.w wftetter ay interpretrti,*n i3 c rrect.
It is Just a natter A interpreting the docu->-nt.

HE. lie HAKTf: If th. Tribunal please, I bject to tho question
and I ask tint the witn.se bo directed n t t: ar.swvr it. I think
It. Hpp rerliaos full well that hu has gene clear b-.y.r.d tho poroiss
- ads f unrjairction -f his .«n witness. He has beer, leading him


'-93


20 Juno-A- FL-21-6-Kerr=w (Int. von Schon)

Z-.ixt Ko. I, Caaa I

srx»«l by ti» rose with this dacuoont for about five or ten minutes.

IB. TIP?: Ur. President, I do not bolievt I an leading the witness
sround by th> a:*- or that I have overstepped tho bounds of permissible!
tjnnination. I — trying to interpret tho document which is ey right
•hen a document is submitted. I an asking tho witness what his opinion
is jo those various points.

THE PRESIDE:?: Tho witness should be the one to interpret tho docu-
smt, not the counsel. Tho question is objected to, but you can ask
the witness to exp Inin the dxuant.

DR. TIP?: Jr. President, nay I ask - is tho witness to answer this
question which I asked?

THE PRZSUBJfT (Interrupting): Tho objection to that question is
sustained. It is loading and suggesting.


96 9U


2C June 47-A-,»Y-23-l-r ltzgorald-( Von Schocn)

Court I

Very wall, Witness, the titer values of eight
persona are listed here, Probaoly you renenbor these are
titer values of the persons given In your pa*>er?

.a. Yes. I recognize thee.

So that the taking of blood of ten persons
refers to your vaccinations?

A. Yes.

Q. Uov witnusa If I renon'oar correctly, you told
us on your direct examination that you vaccinated only
eight persons In this group?

A. 'Jo vaccinated 28 of the persons altogether
in dchlrseck. One group was eight persons. 7hoy were
tor.on of by Antloff.

men there was a group of 2C persons who were
vaccinated and who wore taken care of bv pharmacist Klrz.
Antloff does not say who In this group of 8 persons died.
Hlrz says ir. the group of 20 which he took care of, two
are supposed to have died on the cecond day after the
vaccination. Tho eight persons were vaccinated when
Antloff as tho nurse.

Q. Thor, you believe, fitness, that these "two
who were not there anymore," - wo do know vhother it was
people or material or what, - cannot refer to the second
group of 20 persons, but only to the first group of 6
persons. Is that right?

a. Yes. That la right.

.C\. :icH.»NSY: I object to the question as being
leading and suggestive.

IKS ??S3ZDZ7: The general rule for determining
whether or not a question is leading Is vhethor it oan bo
answered with the words "yes" or “no". If It oan!t It la
a leading question. Or. some natters, you nay direct

9b 95


20 June 7- hr AK-22-<-Fit zga raid-(Von Schoen)

Court 1

tfca witnesses attention to the portion of the aocunent
and ask what it cear.s, and the witness '-dll explain the
oeanlng of the document.

Ja. 71??: I did net think I was asking a question.

I thought I was sorely sunning up what the witness had
Just said.

S&S PHiSIDSXT: That Is objootionablo, too.

Q. fitness, we will go on to the next entry, 4
October 194■ , . It say3, "Innoculated 20 persons in Sohlrmeck,
0.5 per person." I Cannot understand this entry, as It
stands. as n scientist, oar. you explain to us what this
scans?

A. In this entry of 4 October 194*, there is no
detailed ir.foraatlon. It aerely says 0.5 per person. I
oannot understand that entry. If It werd correct, It would
say, "0.5 cc" and then it would 6ay what It was. It Just
says C.5.

Q. Th^n cones the entry of 27 January 1S4 - *. Witness,
you have the photostauo before you. I do r.ot. 13 this
entry directly under tho 4th of October 194’ t In the
photostat?

A. Yes, directly under It.

Q,. '.fitness, can you iaiglno why Hiss Crodell first
describes acnethlng supposed to have taken placo on tho 1 st
of October 194*, and suddenly she Jusps bach to the 27th of
January 1&4*?

A. 2io; I oannot say. And the entry does not show
••'hat it wa3 about.

Q. As far as I know ayself, Kiss Crodell worked for
you for -v long tide?


2 € June 4/-rt-aK-23—'*-?i tzgarald-<7on Soho on)

Court 1

Yes.

Q. ’.'as ahe such a sloppy verier as this document
seems to Indicate that she made those entries at random?
That is c.:o conclusion we would have to arav.

a. :.*o. Mss vrodoll was very careful. She was
making entries in the record by the date, she cannot enter
an entirely different date later. That seems impossible.
3esides there is r.o indication what this about. It Just
says 27 January 194*. nine months, mixed with the same
amount as 21 Hay, distilled water per tube, 20 persons,

1 cc eaoh. That is an unusual way to /.oa? a rocord. It
should say vh.it vaccine it is and so forth.

Q. Ivjls 27 January 194’, mixed with the same amount
as 21 Hay, that Is on Pago *. In my copy there is an on try
21 Hay 194* on Page 5.

A. 1 cannot find the page.

1. fitness, vo wore just talking about Pago *. There
is an or.try of 27 January 194*.

A. Yos. Yos, I have that.

Q. It roods, "Hlxod with tho same amount as 21 May."

A. Ye6. I have that.

3. And or. page 5, you will find an ontry of 21 Hay

194’*.

A. Yes. I soo it.

Q>. 3ut bofore that, I do not see any entry of 21
Hay 194’. It is remarkable that on the 27th of January
194*, tho witness already knew that amount was going to
bo used on z'x 21st of ..ay 19-«*. There is a great discrep¬
ancy here. If I look at Page a, there is ar. entry from
194* again. I believe, .fitness, we coeld find quite a


9697


2C Jur.j 4?-.{-.Cv-22-4-7i tzgerald- (Von Sc ho on)
Court 1


number of such discrepancies In the document. I don't know
i:’ the Tribunal la interested in then. Tc ne, however, the
points which I have just been discussing, especially the
last one, that on the 27th of January 194'*, referring to
tn« 21st of :-ay 194’*, scons to bo enough to prove that the
document in this fora la not fully valid evidence.

lioHJw-'Sr: I will ask that the last remarks of the
defense ccunael be strlken from the record as being argum¬
entative, and should be reserved for hia final argument.

i)A. 717?: Since wo ore dealing with the probative
value of a docuncnt, we can decide it only by aoano of
arguments. I have made factual statements, and I think I
oar. afford to present the concluolono.

”K- It io not the proper tine for argum¬

ent, 'cut counsel may proceed.

Q. /ltr.eaa, let uo cxaclno the document more closely.
Let us look at Page -i. First of all, there is or. entry of
14 inay 194“*. a capital 'S", then throe plus mark a, 11
persons, 11 Tubes. Witness, can you oxplain this entry?

A. It la 11 passages, not 11 persons. That la the
number of passages. <tr.d as to the 75, 1 to 10 dilluted;
that is the illlutlon of the yolk sack. Then it was
-riel and put Into 11 tubes.

2. That must be a laboratory entry, 'itneas?

-»• Tes. It is a laboratory entry.

Q. Then it goes on, 10 October, five months, lnnocul-
a:ed ten oersons lr. Sohimeck, 7 with o.5 cc each.

-o. I think that cays twice with C.5 cc each, on
tr.e 10th of October, apparently 1S4*.

T- Tow -itneso, car. you explain something to me or.
Page *=?

5698


20 June 47-A-riK_22-5-r 1 tsgerald-( Von Schoen)

Court 1

The first entry says 1* Hay 194'. Then cores 10 October
apparently also 194"*, for a year is not given, then cones
27 January 1944.

RJ5ICJNT: Counsel, the il3crepency between the
English translation and the German translation apparently—

CR. TI?P: I 0 nly have the Gercan text.

HR. XoHaNSZ; I? the Tribunal please, under Pago \
the old Page 5 of the English Translation, the entry which
reads, "27 January, 1944," appears on the original copy
as 27 Jar. iary 194'. I thought I would call that to your
attention oarllor in the day. That la what the witness
has ceen -eatlfying to as a discrepancy of one year.

T.-iJ PRJSIDaHT: That is to what I had reference. I
slstook the entry.

Kl. hciULT: The entry under Page 6 is correot, "27
January. “


2C J»sr.-A-J3-23-I-S— pson (Int. vcn Schon)
Court Ho. I.


Q Perhaps th~ witness cor. help us. Professor, was tho entry
on pego 3, 27 January 19U3?

A 7os.

Q And cn page four there is nnotbor ontry.

A 27 J:aucry 191*.

Q Ihoa:- nx\j two entries *hich hove tho soao wording.

A Zxc-pt for the figures in parenthesis — they arc not tho
sane. 2? Jnurry 19U3, that figure rr.e apparently changed in tho
photostat.

Q Well, lot's gc on, witness. Or. pego h, the last ontry, 27
January 191* j is that right?

A Toe.

Q On pego 5* the first ontry is 21 Hay 19li3j it* that right?

A Toe.

Q Kerr, witness, can you tell no why I Use Crodoll, who accord¬
ing to tho Prosecution is supposed tc have kept this record, nixes
tho d-tes up so. It is not cv tcevuy, is it, in sciontific records
to Juggle the dates arcurd liko that, ir.yb. it was custccvnry in
Strasbourg, but that is not by oxporienco.

A noli, if tho pages agroo with ths dates, thon this chnnot
be a regular record such as is kept in a laboratory.

Q Thank you, witness. I don't believe the rest of the entries
are of an* articular inportarce a3 far as the probative value of tho
documnt is concerned. I ccr.o to page 8; I believe it is the ontry
of the 25th of }!ay, 19l*. Do you have that entry, witness?

A Tas, 25 Kay 19l*.

Q In ray copy it reads, to-etler with capital "S", innoculatcd
five tuces of :-l at Katzweiler, two ar.pules distilled wator, three
to four cc 0,5 cc. I do not understand these entries, witness. Per¬
haps you can lie Ip us. Tell us what it weans about together with "S".
Is there anything noticeable a' out this n 3" you have to state, or
night it be sone other letter. I would like to know that you have to


9700


20 JuoHMS-23-2-6(B?eon (lat. vor, Schor.)

Court No. I.

say about this,

A If that were a real entry in a j^aord, it would havo to be
so that one could understand the "S", I can't Liagino what this "S"
means, and I don't know what "iirl" jeans either* Those are things
which arc not written like that in a record,

3 Are those scientific abbreviations, witness, which ero used
in typhus rosoarch, or what elso night it be?

A If so, I would understand it; and I don't.

3 You can't explain it?

A Bo, I can't.

Q "Tho irnocuiation took place during the incubation (in a
transport containing olao sick people)". You have alroady said, Prof-
oscor, that Iliac Crodoll workod with you for yoarc and was very roli-
ablo# Can you iu.i-.ino that J.iac Crodol. would nako such an entry, es¬
pecially tho words — "during tho incubation". What does that noan?

A VToll, that would ijeon that wo kne v that tho pjoplc were ln-
fuctod with typhusj and during the incubation period, that is tho
period botwoon thj infoction and tho outbreak of tho discaso, thoy
wore vaccinated; but it cays in parenthesis it was in a transport in¬
cluding sick p.oplj.

Q -!iat ooans that in tho transport, which was vaccinatod,
thoro wore sore sick pooplo. As far as I knar.-, incubation period
moans the poriod botweon tho infoction and tho open outbreak of the
disease; is that right?

A Yos, that is right.

Q New, rh_n people in a transport are sick, when it is loarnod
later that there are sick people in tho transport, car. one speak of an
incubation poriod. Can you knot what tho incubation period is ;hon
the Foopie *• re sick?

A Then wo would, have to know exactly -.her. these people wer_
bitten by an infected louse.

Q In ether words, you could not know that*


2: Jun-A-- .-25-3-Sc.3Sor- (Iflt. vonSchor.)

Court :io. I.

A How were wo to know that?

Q Than, it can't be- rcc-rdcd hero that the vaccinations rare
P-rf cr=od during tho incubation period.

A Kb, of ooursj not.

Q Tton ajoin, witness, if I understood you correctly, you re an
that this r.cort'. could not havo boar, ado by a scientifically trained
assistant.

A Ho, we didn't have tho untorial for that.

Q if wt, assucc hypottotically that this entry is correct

assuring thft you really knew that tho poor 1 b were infected with typhus,
oosuaing that you know they rare vaccinatod during tho incubation
jxriod -- I go on — thirteen bocaao sick in tho period frou 29 2-ay to
9 Juno; rf those, two died; after four *o_ks tho others had tho follcrr-
ing titer. Assilx> th^t this mtry is true. Can it be doter.-inod
whotbov tho people died, the pooplo who woro already in tho incubation
Foried, whether thoy diod free. tho vaccinations or fron the re-1 typhus
whith tiny had already contract d previously. Can one sov. that hozv?

A Thirteen h-cono sick in the poriod 29 Kay to 9 Juno. This
djos no*, show clor.rly when the incubation ;oriod was. Wo would havo
to consider tho incubation period tore. It is only ctat-d that tho
first apparently tccaco sick or. tho 29 of I toy, and tho vaccinations
woru on tho 25th of May, 19lt.. It is also said that those aoo;>lo woro
alroady in j incubation period. 2Vwn assuring it as a hypothetical
ansm.r, aorcly assuring that we vaccinated in tho incubation poriod,
it c'nnot bo dot.mired whotiicr it was a spontaneous ease cf tho
disease or whether it w-.s .an infection of'er the vaccination.


9702


20 ne U7- -.TD-ZU-l-Dariols (Int. von Schon)

Court I, ft- e I

■j Ar. ’ can yeu see froa this rccorProfessor, whether those
olio. ;o I 'oaths was the result of tho issase or tha result of tho
vaccination?

A Ho, that ia not clear. Ho -d to is .lvonj I can*t fin ’, any
elate as to when they died,

'l lloto aha last 3cnter.ee, Professor: "After four nooks tho other
cloven hr.*, titer." hat dc.J the . hotostat say?

A It looks to rto like the oth^r 17, after four nooks, ha! titer
9 or 0, I ’on*t knew whit that is, 3, U, <S, 7, <Uno, That noans a
t.talwho ha.' titer: thruO, 1:100$ one, 1;200; one. It: 100, That rako3
four, Throo, 1:,.«, — I can*t road that, but it nu3t bo loss than a
thouson \

Profo or, perhaps I can help you vdth tho copy, Tho copy I
have roads as follows:

"Tho other 11, aftor four nocks, had tho followin titor: Kinu had
no titor, Throo ha’ a titor of 1:100," That uokos twelve, "Ono had a
titor of 1:200," That rkoo thirtoon, "One, l:k00. n That nakoa four-
toon, 'Pro, 1 : 800 ," That lakes sixtoon. That ioens ; of tho rocaininr
11 , 16 had tho foUouin; titor,

A I *on't a-reo dth you or. th. fi uros, I road that as 17,

An* as to th- last ono, I roul * say that vr.s 3. That wculd r^ko 17
alto other, 3erovor, the ineortant thin in very low titor, rhich
in ioatos neither a real typhus injection nor a vaccination tilth a
livin vuacino,

0 Then you say the fomulaticn in tha titur values -'cos not
apreo with yeur scientific onp.rionco an' your kr.ewle '. e of too
personal!t; of Its3 Cro '.oil? Is that correct?

A Yos, that is correct. This roccri is in such a fern that it
would, not ccnfcra rith laboratory oxporlnents, If to hnvo typhus
pati_-r.ts and th_ a lutir.ation titer is calculate tho values arc

•

men, nuch hi her, Tveryono who lias over forked with typhus knar that,

9703


20 Jane 2L—2-0aniols (dirt. von Schcn)

Court I, Caso I


ovoryono who knows titor values. However, IT of 17 ~cr3ons nine — even
if sera had boon vaccinated — had no tit.r and tho other oi;;ht had
an a vara’ o titer of one to ora nine four> that is very unlikely, to
say tho lo'st.

Q "itness, you say that on tho 25th of :£y, 1911;, you did not
perfom any vaccinations at H&tsnoilor, Is that rifht?

Yoo, that is ri’.it,

Q Socor.', you say tho entry itself shews that this is not
corroct, that it ves not node by an expert,

A Yes, that is ri ;ht.

'l Nov;, witness, this nornin dr, UoHsnoy put another ontry to
you fren this ’ocunont which rofors to a :!r, Ifcyor, This :xirt of tho
'ocuront is not in tho Goman oopyj I don*t know whether tho
Tribunal has it, I believe not,

"foul’ you ;loaso toll us, witness, in -..hat connection is tho
nano "loyor" nontionod in this document?

A .’.ftor tho nano oyer 1 road ,, 0 oJ:onon"j that would bo an
arVdnistrativo official, foyor wa 3 an a ilnistrativo official
in tho "o.'ical Testin’ Institution, and I 3f\iJ that he had no
connection with our sciontific work. The prcsocutor sh.wod rao tho
’ocunont an' ha ’ ny confine that it was addrossod to I "r • '.foyer, but
ho -’i' not ivo no an o ; -.ortunity to aako any explanation. This i3 a
list of sonic leal tests of tho blood of sick porsons which was sont
to us. This was the tost of tho I'odical Testin’ Institution, Accor 'ina
to tho o-idorlc L-.W3, such tosts lad to bo nado by the Tc3tin :
Institution an*, re istorod, bccauso reports wore sent to tho hoalth
officers about o:nta.;ieus diseases,

~Jo hod to rate too3o scroio ical tosts of tho typhus oases, and
then on this list we, rave the fi urcs, end a list of results was olso
sent down. Then later wo rot back the aoney fer tho •lo.Uc'l Testin':
Institution,


970 ,


20 Jam L7 2u—3—barieis (Ir.t* von Schon)
Court I, Case I


Institution.

This is a financial -iattor an: riot a sciontific oicorinant in
any sonse, as "ho prosecutor no doubt ,ssuned. Bo neant to indicate
that I ~as in contact with lir. :iiyer in that connection.

1 ' 'oil. Professor, if I understand you correctly you say that
you told Hr. !fayer the nunbor of tests rsadc, Ho was the administrator
wh- was ir. charce of the nenoy and ho was to collect tho nencyj is
that ri;;ht?

A Yosj ’!r. .*i>yor was in charpo of tho offico of tho "odical
Tostlm Institution. Ho ropistarod all tho tests and he obtained tho
nocossary funds,

0 Now, witness, by way of .recaution, ansth.r question. You

that neither in October 19U3 in Schirxck nor ir. !fcy 19Ui in
Schirnock i.' you carry out vaccir ions. Now, this no min;, tho proso-
cutor spoko to you about this erdneus "S" in tho ontry of tho 2fth
of Ihy 19U: an' .Tow tho conclusion that this "S" noant Schroodor.

”3w toll :ao, rritnoss, when Schroodor visitod Strassbeur- 'id ho ;;o
to Uatswoilcr rdth you?

•• hj H ’ ajt jo to HatZTTeilor with no; ho was in Strassbourf:
only a fow hours. Is far as I can rocall, no arrivod about noon and
loft in tho jvortin . I boliovo tho train for Karlsruhe loft at 7:19.

I of ton uso d tho sane train. First of all, ha ato lunch; second, ho
visited institutoj thir he visited tho sur deal clinic; fourth,
ho ina.octod tho .omral installations of tho hospital; fifth, ha
ato su per with no. Therefore, thero was no tine at all to ro out to
I&tzwcilor. If to o .uct tho ajel tiixs, ho bad about thro a or four

hairs, which hu spent inspoctin the institute an* tho clinic, and so

•

forth. 9a also visited th: ear clinic, I forgot that before, I was
present itself,

0 Now bo careful, witness. Ycu said this aornin to tho prbeo-
cutor that it *.ns about the 25th. Professor Schroo 'or hap. -ns to knew
where ho was 7 a the 25th of "ay; it was at sen. ':irth 'ay party. Perhaps


2 C JUrc L7 ..'3-2!-L—Danicls (Int ven Schon)

Court Jfc. I, Case I (Ir.t. ven Schon)

I v.ill submit an affidavit cn that subject later* Can you reaanber that
it was cn the 25th, cr r±yht it have boon on the 26th or the 27th
that Schrooicr visited you?

It ni'-ht havo boon tho 2i*th, 25th, 26th, cr 27th, I don’t
know# In any ease, it was the end of !4ay. It rd. ht havo boon on tho
25th, I don’t knew#

Cl ’far. Professor, ay final question* Yes tor clay in your direct
exaninatior. you said that you sulnittod taro papors for implication.

Is that corroct?

A Yes,

Cl »w, can you turn to !ocuuont book 12, tocuncnt ND-128? It is
a lottor hoa’od ■ •'odical Aoadojy of tho lufti.uffo. Instruction Group,'
Sciunco an * Hosoareh, 7 July 19Uh", c- o 95. Subjoct: "Approval of
tho amor an ’ur. of Oboratabsarzt Profosoor Dr. Haaon and B. Crodoll:
"jewriaonts with a nor/ dried typhus vaccine, socond ropert."

That is at pa o 95 In tho Bn lish, 97 in tho Goman* I repeat.
Subjoct: "AR rjval of tho rxnomn'un of Oborstabsarzt Profossor Dr,
Kmi;on and 3, Crottlt Sxporlnonta with a non drlod typhus vaccino,
second report,"

Is it corroct, Profossor, if I assuno that thl 3 second. ro;x:rt was
tho last one?

A Yos.

Q Tho work approve ’ on tho 7th of July, 1911. Vo *.on«t havo that,
but frors locunont 50-123 wu can 3co when you sent tho pepor in. That
ia ycur lottor to tho S3 "ain Office throu h Dr. Hlrt on 9 Vay 1912,
pace 88i

"I onclo3- herewith a carbon copy of a pap-r on our cxp.rivnts
-.rith typha* vaccine. Tit ;apor was sent as a narwscript to tho Chief
-f tho Luftwaffe It; leal S-rvico with tho request for poralssion to
publish it."

?r f :r, the inper nontionod in the locunont of 9 :;-.y 19LL, is
that the second ropert r»ntior.od in tho tocunent of tho 7th ?f July?

9706


20 June 19b 7 -A-^r>- 2 U-»©anicl 3 (Ixrt. von Scion)

Court I, Case I

A Yes.

0. Then, on the 9th of Vsrj, 19Ui, you had only finishod this
report. This i-apor wan sent as a final report to the Medical
Inspectorate. This coul net have included thj vaccinations of tho
2>th of May 19U recorded in this rcjtert horo, not oven if they had
boon porforred. Is that correct?

A Yoa.

Q Did you evor send reports to the : odical Inspectorate cr
report in any way about ’.oaths?

A I was not a'.lo to .uport any .’oaths, bocauso thoro woro
no deaths.

DH. TIITi Thank you. ?fc> further quostions.


9707


20 Jua>-^y-25-Teldt (V;n Schon) ?ngc 1
Court I

ZaZ P3ZSH08J« at;- other defensc ejunsol any questions to pro¬
pound to this witness?

3T 3“, 3212Z (7or Defendant Soso)

CU ? refs sor, Z hevo only one question in connection with tho
question put to you tnis nomine by tho Prosecutor. Is it not correct
that in tho easo of living vaccine the question has often boon discuss¬
ed uhothor tho nonpathogonic goxr.8 can boo ono virulent ogdn? Z ucy re¬
al"^ you of a discussion which took plcco on tho occasion of tho Iaio'ooc!c
discstor, the tuborculosis vaccinations.

a . Shis question can be an owe rod with several cxciplcs. 7or ca-
cr^Jlo, variola vaccine virus. 7or 160 years ago it was ofcptof. to tho
crlf end novor changed again to bocouo pathogenic to huuu beingo card
produco true snallpox. a second oxcrplo is hydrophobia, a living vaccine
obtaiuod fraj rabbits is used. I <a not aware of any poroon contracting
hydrophobia fra; vaccination, a third cxcrplo io tho yollow fevor vaccino
which is producod by various procodurcd and has no doubt beer, uaod in
•nillions of vaccinations. It lias not been observod thcr it has ro-
vortod and bccano pathogenic to hunen boings. and an farm wo hrsvo any
e-^joi-icnco with living, attenuated typfcys vacciao frx; litoraturo, I
m thinking of tho oaporinonto, or rather vaccinations of 31unc, ono cnn-
not nporl: of esiy natation, as a sciontiot, to be quite honest, I havo
nothing to condcal. I adult that our oxporier.co is nit groat onbugh
yet. Ono nust havo nillions of vac lout ions boforo ono c^a take tho re¬
sponsibility for this decision. So explain, a docision of the *2oich
a ini8try of the Intorior, I boliove it was in 1934, was discussed a
r^cad do.1 in Ocmey at the tino whether caipulory vaccination ifhould
" oc aboliohod or whether a different typo of vaccination should bo i:>-
ircducod, that is, tissue culture vaccine. She Kinistry was of tlio point
view uo :mcw tho old vaccine. It kus boon used in billons nf C.-.S 03 ,
v ° do net yet know, over, though r *cny viccinati ns have boor, porfor.iod
-hat devolop froc this vuccino. Shat is, I think, against

9702


20 June 47_A_?jC-25-2-Teldt (Ton Sehocn)
Court 2


= 7 «clf or any ether scientist; -X aey quite openly that ve ere here
quite openly et the linit of our knowledge.

‘i Iroa your answer I conclude . Professor, that you concede that
it is not absurd for an expert to discuss the possibility of e gern
bo coning pathogenic for hinan beings again.

^ Yes, that ea_n be discussed, of course. In practice I know
n-thing positive about it.

12. 7BITZ: So further questions.

TE P M S I I& W i Aro there questions by any other defense counsel?
Apparently thcro arc none.

EICP.CSS UAMXUA?ZCV

3Y K?. MC HAJLTj

4 Professor, a hyp thetleal question. If one lnn^culatoa two
persons of sinllar physical ability and health, one with 1/2 ce. of
vaccine, by ir.tomuscular or intravenous Injection and the* cthor by
1/2 cc by scarification, in which person would yru oxpcct there to bo
tho norc serl'us reaction to the vaccination?

A Tou s"ld if one vaccinated two people, and I didn't quite
understand with vaeelno? *ould y° u aind repenting what you said?

Ir.trasmscularly and intravonously, y u said. And a third person —

ve Let's start again, Professor. *o have two persons, Wo v’-ccinatc
one with 1/2 cc of typhus vaccine and. Just f^r simplicity we will sake
it your typhus vaccine, by injection, fhc *thor person we vrcclnrto
with the sane vaccine and the sane quantity, nancly, 1/2 ce by scari¬
fication. In which of these two persons w-uld y*u expect the str-ngcr
reaction?

A If we inject 1/2 cc. cf the vaccine intranuscularly, we know
exactly the anount which has been introduced, but if as yna sry. Hr.
Prosecutor, we introduce 1/2 cc. by scarification, I nust toll you that
that is not a quantitative vaccination. Only very snail quantities of
the vaccine arc used in scarification. It is a superficial nethod.


9709


20 Jtao n-s-2 jC-25-3-Icldt (Int., Ton Schccn)

Court I

It doesn't even bleed. It la In tho cpldernis, pj id 1/2 cc. can't to
introduced that way.

<4 Then you can't answer ^ hypothetical question?

A I? you insist on 1/2 cc. I cannot answer the question.

<4 Let's change the quantity to one which you could introduce by
scarification.

A If* we vaccinate by scarification wo car. expect that the of feet
of the vaccination will be tho sane as if we inject subcutaneously or
lntra-useularly,

k Ir. other words, the aothM of applying the vaccir.o would ha.vo
no effect on tho reaction of tho person vaccination.

A It is again a. hypothetical answer. Tou asked a hypothotlonl
question. It can be assumed that tho reactions will bo tho sano.

H 1 understood your testimony on direct cxaniratlon yesterday that
In your group of 40 test persons In Hatrweiler,.the first and socond
vaccination* is that correct?

A That the ccarificatl-n vaccination was reaction after lntra-
ruscular injection? Did I understand you?

<4 Ho, How I an asking you about tho quantity r.f vaccine, and I
understood your testinony to be that y-u gavo then a larger quantity
of jrur vaccine in the first two vaccinations by lnjoctlon thnr. you
gave then on the last vacclratlon by ecnriflcatl-n; an I correct?

A Tes, that's right.

<•: This was the so-c vaccine used for the three vaccinations?

A It was the sane vaccine for the three vaccinations; yes.

‘i It is very clear. Thank yru. How I will pass up again Bocu-
nont SC 3852, Prosecution Exhibit r -21 for identification.

13. CIrF: Mr. President, I object to the uso of this decunont,

J^-is corning Kr. XcEaney concluded his cross examination. I believo In
re-cxP=inatlon he can only g- into questions developing out of the re¬
direct exanination. I don't believe he car. bring up n«.v qucsti;ns and
“cv docunents.

9710

f


20 <7ur.c 47_A_ 5 jC_25-^-Jcldt (lnt lt von S cheer.)
Court’ I


THE FBSSXXSStf: Just what do dune lit la this! I \inder*tand this
he* been under considerable discussion all afternoon.

IE. TIFF: I beg 7 enr pardon. I siaunderetood the number*

TSL FBASXJSST: An I correct, counsel?

XH. KC EAUETs Tes. This la the notebook on the —

TEE PHLSiaaTT: *c have taken considerable tine on that.

MB. XC HAS-T: Tee. I an about to conclude right now.

3T MB. XC E-wETj

<i Win you turn to page 3? Do you find the entry for 14 Mey?

A 14-6.

<4 14 H«y, yea.

A Tko accord entry, yoe.

And you tco in parcntheela two vocks?

A Tea.

H That scene the period of tiso thla vaccine had been atorod,
naaoly, dating fron 30 April 1943, dooan't it?

A Tea. I can atouse that.

<4 And for 26 May four weeks scant that it la four *-®eke it hao
been atored, is that correct?

A That siuat be right, according to the datec.

‘i And for October 43, parenthesis clx aontha, that is six months
dating from roughly the first of May, ion't it?

A That's right. It aaya six aontha, yea.

k If you drop down to the next entry which reodo 27 .Tonuary 1943,
pnrentheaca 9 aontha, that is nine aontha dated fros the first of May
1943, ien't it, Professor?

A That's right, yea.

<4 So that indicates quite clearly that Xlss Crodell had that sane
falling which neat of ua do have and carried over tho dote of tho old
yoar during the first nonth of the rev year, isn't that right, professor?


9711


20 Juno 47-i—JjC—25S-Jeldt (Int*, ron Schoen)

Court I

1 Tee, but afterwards there is en entry, 27 January, 1944,
and It 3sy b 9 and 8 nonths. That 1 ■ right.

tfc But efce did sake a mistake at that tine, isn't that correct,
doctor?

A I don't know. I can't see that fros the document. Tfcero aro
ao neny inaccuraciee in here that I can't be definite about anything
in this docunent.

XB. MC HAIH7: Ho further questions.

TS fElSIBLiiT: Sow that wo hare reforred to that docunent again,
there we apparently differences between the English and the German.
Under the entry on page 4, 14 :iay 1943 there is an omission Indicated
by a question nark in the English, vhllo there arc tho figuros 7.5 in
the Gornan. And in tho last paragraph of tho docuaont which has boon
ur-dor discussion it secss that thcro are eoao words in the Goman which
hard no cquiwalont in the English. I night bo wrong about that, ao I
ns not faailiar with Gornan, but I vioh thoso tranolatlono to bo chocked
and tho Inglish and Gcrsan ccspared.

KB. MC ElHXTt Vc shall do that.


9712


20 “tine 47-±sJ l j2-2&-l-Groffl (Int., 7on Schoen)

Court I

72 F2SIIES7: Any father examination of this witness!

The witness is excused froa the stead.

The Sribunel will new be in recess until 0930 o'clock toaorrow
Saturday rcrnlnc.

“HI MABSHAL: The Tribunal is now in recess until 0930 o'clock
tomorrev aomln*.


9713


21 Juxw-i^F^-l-l-Soapwn
C:ort K->. I, Case I


Official Transcript of the Aoericcn
idlitarv* Tribunal in the natter of

Tne United States of Airier., against
Karl Brardt, ct al, dofondants,
sitting at Numbers, Gcr.*r.ny, an 21
June 1947, 0930, Justice Be-Is, pre¬
siding.

THE 1URSHAL: Persons in the courtrooo will please find their soats.

The Honorable, the Judges of Military Tribunal I. liilitary Tribunal I
is no" in session. God save the United States >f Africa end this honorable

Tribunal. There uill be order in th. court.

THE PRESIDE;.?: It. Marshal, have y-u ascertained If th- defendants

are all present in court ?

THE 3URSHAL: Ifcy it pleas. Your Honor, all the defendants are pre¬
sort in the court.

THE PRESIDENT: mo Secretary Choral "ill n>te for the record tho
pr-sor.ee -f nil the defend-nta in court. Do I understand that the wit¬
ness Ernst Jfcttbach is available this o.rning?

1R, HARDY: Yes. It is ay undorstanding that r.t the c opletl-n -f
iiottb.ach '0 testimony, the defondrnt H ven's case "ill be herrd.

DR. STELiBA'Jm: (Att orney for Defendant Beiglb ock)'

I ask per.lsaLon, if it or.y please tho Tribunal, t- call th- witness

Ernst Sfettbcch to the stand.

THE PRESIDE!?: The Harshall "ill su-r-.on the witness Ernst IfcttV.ch.
cS:;3T 1ETT3ACH, a witness, took tho Annd and testified as f -Hows:

BY JUDGE SE3P1X:

The witness rill stand,' raise his rigid, hand and be s» rn:

I swear by God, the ^Laighty -nd Osnisci-nt, that I "ill sooak the
pure truth npUAU withhold and add n thing.

(Tho th- ath.)

•O’ V • 'f-\

, JUDGE SE2fS. l« Yvii'^aV be seated.

TnE PRESIDE: T: CouAsoU arjr pr xced with the awalnation f the
witroSs.' / l


a Jun®-iJ-FL*4-»6eEpsoo (Int. Srcur.) (DJ3)

Court Ho. 1, Case 1

Dimer staasAnw

BY D?.. ST2U3A0ZB: (Attorney fer Defendent Beigicocck)

Q fitness, what is ycur naze?

A Ernst Hettbech.

Q iihon end vhere were you tom?
k 30 April, 1920, in Fuerth.

Q Vhere do you live?

A Each emu 10.

'I '.hat is your profession?

A Jterchcnt.

Q that nationality -re you?

A Gcraro.

Q ’hat is your relit ion?

A Catholic.

Q '.cro you in c concentration cr.np?

A Yos, fro~i 6 June, 1944, I w=s arrested in Fuerth by the
Gestapo, and was trkon to the police prison in Kurnborg. Five days

lrtcr 1 was taken tc Auschtiitc. /.bout six woeks later 1 went in a
transport of roughly a thousand gypsies to Buchtnvdd.

Q Hor were you rccccv.;odctcd in Buchov.rld?

* Vo Tiorc in r ter.t cc^p; the acco.c.xdrticns wero very poor
t ceruse there • oro nrny people in 3uchcnwald; ?nd < a were glr.d when we
were put in the transport because wo had to sleep cn the Ground *nd hrd
only g feat blankets.

Q Hew did it happen thot you tcck port in the sor water exper¬
iments?

A At * roll call rt Buchenwrld we were ask-d whether fifty
volunteers — whether forty volunteers would erre tc gc tc a special
coiaarndo tc Drehru. I thought this cv^r; Dachr.u is nearer Fuerth then
Buchenr *ld; perhaps I would get r better set-up, p^rhrps acre food end
. icr- freedom, sc 1 md thirty-nine others volunteered for the cc.anr.ido


9715


21 Jane-i:-?L-l>fcs:4 flnt 4 *>)
Cjurt No, I, Ccn Z


to Daohaug

C«- i.hrt did you think thi* *:«ciando would be?

W° thought thi* would bu a boab «ca»ando because there wore
i^ta of bo«b« dropnjd around Itonich| at ttr.t Ur*, we thought wo would
bo oaployed cxcavr.Mng boebs.

Q«- Did you *hink thia would be dexterous?

A,- Vfo krxr that excavating b:nba waa dangerous, but we nevertheless
wanted because we knew we w-uld receive norc food r.nd noro froodom,

Q,- H>w sany gypsies were there whon thi* request went out?

A.- Tierc woro in total one thousand who wont froa Auschwitz to
Buchunrm’.d,

Qv Then, there were a thousand nor. tber. of whoa forty npplicdj

is that right!

A.- Yes,

Q»- Was any duress put on these f >rty persons?

A,- N>, Every ono wns very eager to bo anong those forty. Hundreds
and hundreds rpprocchod this aan urging hin to accept thca, and I was
fortunate enough to have been chosen for this c-raraando.

Q,- H m and when did the transport fra Buch-rmald to Dachau t.aku
place?

A.- On tho 8th or 9th of August we arrivod .at Dachau on a special
transport; wo spont tho night in the bathhouac; the next day wo woro
del.used; and wc were given clean clothing and were sent to tho quaran¬
tine station.

Q # - How wore you cceoeoodated for these days whon you wore in D^ch.au,
beforo you went to tho sea water station?

A,- In tho quarantine station every one had his wn bed and received
regular canp food,

Q,- wore you given 0 acdicnl examination and x-rayed?

A,- On the next day we did roccivo a special .nodical ex~_-ained and


9716


21 Jmo-K-FI/-l-4-&”^son (Iat. 3rown)

Court Ko. I, Caso I

also Wore x-rayod; then we were »ont back to the qusrnntiiK ensp.

Q.- Where did you go froc there?

A.- Ch t no next day wo went to the hospital station 1/1.

Q.- How die- you like this station?

A.- tti were very pleasantly surprised by the cleanliness there,
wo wore happy that every one had his own clean bod.

r ; .- Did you anko the acquaintance of ono Professor Doctor B.igl-
bocck?

A.- Yes, on the next day Dr. Bciglbocck caao to us.

Q.- What did he toll you?

A.- Ho introduced hiaoolf; he t.ld us th-t this was an expert™nt-
if a flier falls into the water, he has to live ,n tto water for sxno
length of tl-e; ho t old us wo had to ’rink sea water for a while; that wo
would receive good care so thot we w uld rocker; afterwards hj told
us we w.uld bo very thirsty, but that wo «od h->vo no fear, n thing
would happen to us; no one would die; aix! then he told us that he hin-
self had drunk sen water hlaself. Then, w- t-lkud this over n-nong our¬
selves and felt wo had c.nfidenco in the Professor, and dccLarod our
willingness to participate* in the experiment.

Q.- Did tho Professor then give you another physical examination?

A.- Yes, ho oxanined every ono iron tip to too.


9717


21 Junc-H-FL-Z-l-Pr^-'eau (Inc. 3rocr.)
Court Xo. I, Case I


Q.- Did he lake substitutions?

A.- Yea, as I reoenber, he did make substitutions for two or three
wto *rc too weak. He uanted to .sake a substitution for me, too, but
I asked him Jerticularly to keep se in the experinents because I wanted
to stay with my relatives who were there ar.c., aorcover, I didn't want
to lose tho oraiise privileges we were promised.

Q.- Then'you had relatives ir. there? There was another Uettbach
in the experiment ?

A.- Yes, that i«s a relative of nine.

Q.- .’oul'J you rccognire the professor if you say him again?

A.- Yes.

DR. ST3ER3AUZR: ifr. President, nay I ask the witness to see if he
can see the 7rofes3or among the defendants?

THE PPJlSIkJ.T: The witness nay stand up and ceo if ho can >icl: out
the professor, defendant Bciglboeck. I! he cannot froa his witness chair,
ho nay stop ait in front of tho dock.

A.- Yes, I see his. There he is over thore, thie short foLlon

hero.

THE PRESE) IST: Indicato to tho Tribunal tho oosition of the de¬
fendant whoa you identify as 3eiglboeck in the dock by counting from
your right.

A.- He is in the second row, the third man froa the ri;.ht. First
th'jro is a woian and then another rentleaan and then professor Be.’.gl-
boeck.

THE FilESD^:?: The witness nay bo seated. The record will slow that

*

the witness had correctly identified Jhc defendant Beiglboeck.

by dr, srzBrcuai:

Q.- ..Tut sert of food did you get?

A.- For tree or four days we received the regular canp diet and
then froa than or. we lived like kings. In the aorning we got oar ..ala ;c,


21 Jur.e-i7L-2-2-?ri2«au (Xnt. 3r or.)

Court No. I, Case I

cargarine, coffee, *igar, 250 grass of black bread. In the aomi«S» at
ten tie got a half a liter cf unskioned oilk with cakes, cookas — 20
to 25 cookies. At noon, we receive- a half litor oi soup, s°'^-ash, po¬
tatoes ard one slice of bread. At four o'clock p.a. we got 250 grans of
bread or five rolls, black coffee with nugar. In the evening no got an
egg, a oiaco of cheese, 30 grains ol x>d but tor, potatoes with soup,
black bread and toa.

Q.- How long did you got this sort of food?

A.- Exactly one week.

Q.- Do you knot: the nurso lUix?

A.- Yos, he wax tho cr.o that stoic our food and when wo complained
about Max, tho Professor removed him iwaodiatoly.

Q.- Did ft-ofossor Boxglboock concom himself personally about tho

food?

A.- Yea, he chocked on tho food daily. I can roaoabor very clearly
that or.co a can ol aoat caa« to us which ias discolored, boing black,
and the profossor iaridlatcly had it OXcahnflcd for another.

Q.- No*-, boforo tho experiment proper began did tho orofessor
carry out other axa.oinations?

A.- Y-3, there was daily blood analysis. Urine was censured and
stoll — ' lood pr-soun. — and people H-ro w-irhod daily.

Q.- Did this hurt?

A.- No, it didn't.

Q.- .hat did the scale look li3co? Could persons bo weighed cn it
prostaratv?

A.- No.

Qor: you :;ci*hcd daily?

A.- Yes, every morning.

Q.- ,.”xo -.'rot- down your weights?

A.- It rittendom French Judical students.

Th.y also ^.ze-jr-X urin- arx stool — that is to say, -rote ckr.n tho


9719


21 Jur^-"-7L-2-_-?r^_cu (Int. 3ro;.r.)

Cot*t ;io. I, Caw I

statistics on that,

Q,- Into rany groups did the orofossor divide then into?

A.- As far as I can xticall, fivo.

•Aft-r hso <dvid^d tb-a this ay, did ho exmine thoa again?

A.- Yes, th-y aoro all trained again.

Q.- r.jat group vuro you in?

A.- I uas in tho Schaofor group, so far as I re=>-cber, and I Tad
Experimental Ktaber ? and .zy relative Ice tho nunb-r 10.

Q.- •-'hot's your r-lative's nano?

A.- Ifottbcck, Just like mino.

Q.- Could the ; Kir sons •■♦no were not in tho ocpori.xnts novo around
in the courtyard or did they hevo to ivaain in tho barracko?

A.- In tho pj>»p'ratory oeriod wu could all take walks in tho court-
jr.rd but durinc Vue experiment only thow -those cxperixnt had already
boon interrupted or concluded could nalk around and those ocoplo had to
oat in th- courtyard so that tho nersons in tho experiment wouldn't sou
thua oating.

Q.- Did the orofessor himself dr in.’: xr water?

A.- I don't inow for sure but I boli-vc ay coarados told io that
before the o^jor^-ar.t began the professor lirst dr-nk s^a ncLr so that
ay coond-s -otildn't have the idea it aiyht bo poison.

"o'J., •' ou >.Vor actually ,>t in th. oxy-ri^-nt yourself?

A.- . ,, I didn't, I dropped out of tho exmerireiit in tho nrolial-
nary period. Tub nca on tho fourth ol fifth day. I suddenly et a fjyar.
1 was taken ri Itt to the x-r y station and I -ri s oxaain*d tfcenj for
pn-uaonia. I r..ccj.ved treatment ard aspirin taolcts. After t-ro or throo
d? 7 s I was - >“Jc.n to Station III /2 lich aea the lsttu
tho orofessor csed •’bout -.e the r*_xt dtjr and -sked aw how tlangs nere
cing. Throe cays _ _^r I : .ot up :d the professor ir. tho corridor
in front o: t:*- ashrooa. H- jjr.eted ^ ar. sked ae whether I -as ir.

_ I told hie that -v. - 3 going cion; ell ri;ht


9720


21 June-!£-FL-2-»’-?ri_-v.-u (Infc. 3ro<n)

Court No. I, Cose I

xvi asked hiei whether I night not visit ay ccarades. Bciglbocck alloied
this and every Caj I w-s permitted to visit ay friends.

But • conditions did he .oako when you visited your coarcdcs?

%

A.- He told t.Vt I should under no circuast-nces bring then
nny fresh water and J should behave because tta 7 weren't allowed to tkink
cny fresh water but had to drink sen water.

Then where were you actually a.ccoflvr.odated during the e;:pcri-

nunfc?

A.- I was Gcccanod-.ted in Station III — that was the station for
internal dise.asos — in Roan 2.

DR. STELNBAlERj Your Honors, aay I pier*se ask the T r ibuncl to toko
thv. sketch nhioh the witness Pillr_in dr.w? This is the ground olnn of
the c.oap. It is important. This is Exhibit 21. It's important to nsc-r-
t:ln h an far thi Sea water station wes free: the station in which the
witness iLttbach was accorcodatcd. L the Tribunal would be so gracious
ns to look at this chart —

THE PRESID^-TTr k ill you give us tbj voluaj and page in which thin
chart nay be found?

DR. ST.HNEAU3i: This i3 page 125 of Doc .tent Book No. 2. That is
Bcislboeck's Docua-r.t No. 2, I nsrmo.

’.hero the scr water station is . have already discussed. Now, tbo
sick room is Block No. 1, right across from the se.- w-ter station. Then
there is - blocket ctr .et .-nd then you can see block Ho. 3 (internal
station), .ares 2, 3 and U. The- witness ttfcbnch has s-id that tills is
here he spent his nights. I furth-r draw the attention of the Tribunal
or. this occasion to the fact that on the sketch, at th- top, Under tho
ward "AppeUol*tp, n which n-ans "roll call courtyard," th.ro ic the
sickrooa. Surgical "A", to the ri^ht.

BY DR, 3T Ju3AUE?.i

Q.- , •-‘.uss, hot: far was your roaa in 31oci: 3 from the a.a

'■-ter station?


9721


21 Jiuv,-:S-Fu-2-5-?'.'i£»-ai (Int. 5rcwn)

Court Ho. I, Cask I

A,- About thirty p-c-s.

h.- Than!; you, Please toll ua whet you sv during the cxxriAents
wh-n you visited your friends during thj day.

A.- My coared*,s told a. above -'ll they were wry thirsty .and hun¬
gry end they naked n. if 1 couldn't brim, then a little water. Tnoy
taoke quite r. f*» cigarettes, lhey gave ao soa, because I wasn't allow¬
ed to saokw in ay sick station. They told a. th-*t they h d to drink
aor. water nt xocciv- dextrose and such things — this look-d like cho¬
colate but it wasn't — that they n»r. weighed daily -nd that they tiero
thirsty. As I said, th-y did - lot of sleeping and were nervous. I could
rot do auch talking with ay friends because sost of the tiae they wore
lying on their beds asleep.

C,.- The arofeasor forbade your bringing th.a water. Did you, never¬
theless bring thea water? How, be hon-st.

A.- aivuml tiao.3 I brought ay relntivo Uuttbaeh water to A*ini:.

Q.- iftx.ro did you give it to hia?

A.- baneticxo I sauggl.d it in to the exp.-riaentnl station my¬
self, Soa.tLo-s I stuck it in through the fly screen which was a little
bit loos., or. the rrindew.

Q.- Could tf>- eSperia.nt-1 subjects receive o-.cknges?

A.- Yes, they could. I ay re If received none because I was only in
Dachau lor a short while .and tho nails took too long. Ono Tfcubannn and
another a~n .v-aed B'abcrevr received packages every week.

£.- .ftwre aheSe packages given to tlx- expert*-ntr.L subjects during
the preparatory o-ried?

A.- Tee — xrt_ientaL subjects did r«-=-ive the packages during tho
preparatory >-rloc, During th_ exo-rio-nt -roper they did not receive
th. orck-rec. Th-y were saved up for t'r.ea unt il after tho experiment.


9722


21 Jur.<--J{-FT/-3-l-?irrir. (Ir.t. Brown)

Court No. I, O'.* I

Q.- How, "hen tho cxporiment wes over, did the people recover
rapidly, or did it take a long while?

A.- Since they all received good food, they recovered very quickly.

Q.- Do you .'coir that seme of the experimental subjects repeated
the experiment?

A.- Yes, I r^ccaber ajac who doublo-croasud the Professor by
drinking water. The Pr-fessor raised a big rumpus about that and gave
then no cigarettes, took their cagsrotto ration away. Then, they promised
not to do it again and cskod to be ell wed to repeat the experir^nt be¬
cause they didn't want to lose the pr.aiscd privileges after the expe¬
riment.

Q.- Did 7 x 1 ooo any bodies carried out A the experimental station
on a stretetor?

A.- No.

Q.- Wore pors-na who weren't dead carried -ut A the experimental
station on atrotchcrs?

A.- Yea, end they wore taken to the eloctr--cardiop*aph station and
then I was carried to Station III.

Q.- Did you obsorve how those pooplo 1 .kcd when they woro boir«
carried? Wore thoy covered or whoro they men?

A.- Hootly, they wore c.vored because they h-d to be carried past
the wash room, and fr-sh w-t^r was running there all day long. So that
thoy shouldn't sco this water, they v. :*o cjvorod -vor with a white 3hoet.

Q.- Did yxi see ora.ap 3 , ,r c .nvulai.'ns, r raving?

A.- No, aad I never oven heard f that.

Q.- One gypsy is said to havo laid on the floor for an half an h ur
in cramps and dirclly had to get back into his -wn bed by hlaself.

n.- I don't bolievt that is so because if it had happened, ay com¬
rades would certainly have toid ao about it.

Q.- ‘.‘oulc the c tarad_s let the nan lie .n the floor half ar. hour?

A.- That is ut of the ^esti-n. That isn't the w~y they acted.


9723


21 Junc-M-FL-3-2-Perria (Ir.t, Broun)

Court Ho. I, Case I

Q.- Did soce of the experimental subjects have diarrhea during the
experiment?

A.- In the oroparatory period scoa of them did have diarrhea, pro¬
bably because they couldn't stand the good food; but during the experi¬
ment, no.

Q.- ’.tore blood staples taken?

A.- Yes, daily.

Q.- Who did it?

A.- Usually Professor Bclglb-eck. I'd like to remark here that
tto Profess jr, when he did take the blood arnplos, was very tender and
gentle. I ayself can judge that. I have received injections in other
comps, usually by SS-oen or nurses, and they were very care loss.

Q.- Did you sec punctures given in the .abdomen?

A.- In sono of ny comrades, I saw that on the right side, they wore
covered with ndhovivo tape; 1 asked them what it was, and they said
they had recoivod an injection.

Q.- Did thoy tell y ;u that that hurt?

...» They said it wasn't as bad ns having a noth pulled.

Q,- Did you ovor hear that uxporiountal subjects drank dirty
water?

No, I n-vor did, and if it had happ-ned, the evar-den would
certainly havo told an.

Q.- Hon did Profess .r &-iglb eck treat the subjects as a whole?

A.- were treated very well. He was very attentive.

Q.- Didn't he curse and scold?

A.- wjll, sooo times when a person dr*nk water behind ris back ho
did curse a bit, but b: rec.vered his g-oe hr. r almost iaaodiatcly
every time.

f.- Did be pass out cigarettes?

A.- In the -veparatory period, wo received two r three cigarettes
a day. During the oxporlnsnt, the Pr-fess.r gave us as mny cigarettes


9721


21 JunB-lf-Flr-3-3-Periln (Ir.t. or-wn)
Court No. I, Case I


as Me wanted. Ho r^s passing then out all tho tine.

Q.- Did you rvsaabcr that there were also Austrian gypsios in tho
experiment?

A.- Yes, I do. I can't tell you for sura how many there woro. I
think it was about 10 or 15. And there wore also Bargcnlacndurs thoro.

Q.- And what languago did they talk?

n.- Usually w. talked tlx gypsy language. Vhon wo talkud to the
Pr >feasor, wo oil t-alk-d German.

DR. STSIHBAU21: ILay it plena- the Tribunal, under Exhibit No. >5,

I should like to put in pictures of the experimental subjects. The Pro¬
secution alrcr/y has a c-py of this, so that I flay have these photographs
indantified by thv witixss.

:E. H.\PDY: ffcy it pleaaj Y ur Honors, the proaocution must objoct
to tho introducticn of those phot;graphs until they are substantiated.

Thu original photographs arc not ~v-11 able for the Tribunal, and it is
rather difficult to ascertain if these photographs are the actual ohc-
tjgr-phs taken. Tho original photographs have markings on tho backs
thereof, and the prosecution desires to see the ;rlfdnals. If they aro
■vailable, then I have no objecti^i.

THE PP-2SID2.T: Has dofens- counsel tho original ph-Ugraphs?

DP.. STEIHBA'JER: Of course, and there is nothing on the backs of
then. I oh-r.iud then ta Professor Alexander one*, and the thing on tho
back was tlx trade nark f tb- firm that made the paper. I should havo
been -nly too .Lad to lir.d rr.oxs on tho back so I could have identified
then.

THE PRd3IDZI»T: The pr ;sxcu‘i >r. nay examine the photographs.

HI. HABDY: Hay I ask the defense c uneel wlxrc he secured these?

THE PRSSIDrL’T: Can defense counsel answer th- pr:s.cution's ques¬
tion?

DR. STZ1H3AUSP.: 5cf->re Easter when I was in Vienna, I found tlx sc


9725


21 June -i£-FL-3-i.-?c rrln (Ir.t. Brown)

C-urt Mo. I, Case I

photograph* eoong tho o'.purs and what-not ttet ted to do with sea-water.
They wery ir. the s.‘a; place with these fever charts. I to ok then along
with n. and showed then to lir. efcigiboock and asked if they wore the
oxperi-o-nt'l subjects, and ho said they wore. 2 Jow, I'd like to have
then identified by the witness so that ho can say th-so really are the
exporiacntnl subjects.

UR. HrJU»Y: I have no further -/bjection.

THE FRESIDZ2T: Counsel nay hand tb- photographs to the witness.

A.- There is Reinhardt —

BY DR. STEINBAIjER:

Q.- Hr. l&ttbach, just wait a cexaent so that the Tribunal can
follow you. L-t's go thr.ugh page by pago.

THE PRESIDE. Ts What identifier! in nunber, what exhibit nunber arc
yxi going to give to tho* photographs?

DR. STEDiB^UER: Nunber 35.

BY CP., STSHHAUER:

Q.- Aro the arsons on the first peg- experimental subjects?

A.- Yea, all of then are. I recognirc all of thoa. I don't tavw
their nanus, but I do rec;gniic their faces.

Q.- Mow, let's turn to tho n-cond page.

A.- There I an on tho s-c.nd pagu her-. First on the loft at tho
bottxa.

Q.- But you aro vory thin, ena.cLatcd.

A.- That is tba way I am. I tevu always boon thin.

Q.- Do you know any of these people?

A.- Yus, next to su is Rwinhardt. Xevor Roinh-rdt is his nano. Tho
rest of their nazes, I d-n't kn.w.

Q.- ?ago 3» •"'-re those experimental subjects?

A.- Yes, all of then. The first in tho top rw, on the left, is
B~.aborger, th: next is a 7 relative Ikttba.ch, the third is L~.ubin,er.

The rest of ohua I don't know. I don't kn-v the names f -ny of the

9726


21 JaaJ-FL-2-5-?wrrin (Int. Br^r.)

Court I... I, Czs. I

others. Th.-so a.-.at U?.vc bc^n the Austrians, the ithur ir.cs,
c ..- Turn tc Use next page.

-- 3 > t.xsc persons wo clso lr. the vXDeria-nt, but I Con't
kr.-H their .uojj.

Q.- Gj through the, photogr'phs pag# by pag .me tcU ao -.hethor
rll j! thc£i rrc. cx.x.ria_nt 2 l subjects?

A.- ?os, they .-re. Yos, they wore 'J1 tb>r». 1 recognize r. ion of
tb;a. Pigo 5 I reej nize the*. Ttet chr.p's a-we aust be Fr.-ns, if 1
r.aciibcr rightly.

s

THE PitiSIDZ..T: On tbo ph^r-ph, Which o you K-ntify ci Frenz,
witness?

5. r.ui-c ere. tj picture, b>th of the■ ere Fran.

BY OR. STSIKBAlUlt

Q.- Vfcct io hum,, oorv. tj FT-.ns ttoro?


21 Jua-4WE-I;-1-Hinabuck (int. 3rewn)
Court He. I, Cose- Ho. I.


Q Shot la being dono to Frans there?

A In the lewar picture hj is having a blood scaplo taken. I
don't knew by non anyone on pego 6. I don't know the .an's none on
pegv 7 either. On page 8 I don't know the names. Cr. page 9 I recog-
nito the t»ople. The aan lying down in the top row in tho niddlo is
Henroinor, and the picture next to that is also Henreiner. Below that
is a Frenchman; I recognize him. And here is a little gypsy that was
tho youngest one there, the Profossar's favorite. Wo called hin tho
Parrot, Papcgoi. Ho is standing rext to the Fronchnan.

Q Witnoss, wore these oxpcrir—ntal subjects strong persons or
weaklings?

A You omj soo free tto pictures that they nro all strong. I
was the weakest ore of ther. nil. Toucan sou thot thoy are strong,
healthy pcoplo in those pictures.

Q Didn't tho Professor want to olinlnsto you because you wore
so weak?

A Yus. As I told you, ho did try to olinin';to no, but I naked
hin to koup no in the oxparinont.

Q Tho last two picturos are not pictures of cxporinontnl aub-
jocts. Those are two prison doctors, aren't thoy?

A Xos, I recognixo those. One of then is a Fronchnan. Ho is
taking blood pressure hore. Next to hin is tho little follow I told
you who was called tho Parrot. Ho is a gypsy, and tho othor chap with
tho microscope is also a Frenchman. Thoy wore not in th~ oxporinont.

Q Yus, I wanted to onto it clc-r that th;y were not in tho
axporinont.

A No, they were ^iply helping tho Professor.

Q Hew, lot us go on. Wore .-doors among tho experimental
persons? You just spoke of oat fror. tho Burjenland.

A YwS, that was the Parrot, “hero were other young people
there but thoy rrer_ 20 to 25 years old.

Q re tbs so minors that you just mentioned strong cr rroak


21 Jur>- i t- i B-4 t -2-Nin3buck (Int. 3rc*n)
Court Ho. I, Case No. 1.


physically?

A They were all strong.

Q Do you know in what experiment, to what experimental group
they wore assigned?

A As far as I know tho minors wore put into the group whero
tho experiments wore tho easiest.

Q 7/hat language did you speak anong yourselves?

A lastly in gypsy language,

Q VTnat was tho citizenship of tho individual experimental
subjects?

A Mostly ttoy wore Germans. There w^ro a lot of Austrians
and a lot of then came frea East Frussia and Upper Silesia and tho
3urgcnland.

Q You said that you woro sick. IXirir^ tho oxporiaont wore
other subjocts brought to th- hospital?

A No, only I was.

Q "ore thoro SS doctors in tho experimental station?

A Novor. I never saw orvj tho re.

Q What doctors did you soc in tho station 3 "hero you olopt?

A Thoso woro mostly prisonor doctors ana prisonor nurses. Tho
senior doctor of tho hospital was an SS doctor ax-od Hintcmoycr.

This nan was a very bad nan. He sent pcoplo who woro still very sick
back to work.

Q Now, when tho experiment iras over did tho subjects rcccivo
docent food?

A Yos. First of all th_y rjeoivod diot food; they woro on a
diet first of all, and then they received tho good food that they had
received before tho experiments that I described.

Q New, thoso wore simple people in tho experiment. Wore thoy
constantly- afraid of death or did they fear that they won on tho
point of death rl 1 the tirii?

A Ho, thoy didn’t have to and they didn’t, because tho Fl-ofossor


9729


21 Jun-L-:3-u-3-i«inrbuck (Int. Brcra)
Court .ic» I, Ceso '.’o. 1.


assured us that so one was going to die, that nothing was going to
happen to us, end wo hod cocpicto confidence in tho Professor.

Q Could a non step tho experiment 'rhenever he wanted to, or
did he hr.v ao ask permission?

A The Professor exmined the .arsons daily and when he saw
thr.t things were going badly with then, then ho interrupted tho ex¬
periment hiasolf.

Q Do you think anybody died as a consoquanco of tho expori-

raonts?

A That is completely oxb of tho question# I jot all of cy
comrades later in the streets of tho crap.

Q How lorg wero you the mo after tho oxporinonts wore termin¬
ated?

A I was lot out a few days bofero tho ond of tho experiments,
lot out fr:a tho sick rocn end then I was sont to 31ock 22. I was
thor- fer two or throe days and than all a;* cerradee returned. Sere
of then “Iso vent to Block 22 and thu at hors vent to athor blocks,
but xx not U the tiro and ire talkod about tho comando vo were
about to receive and wore happy that things wero going to go b-tt-or
for us new.

Q I uust t_li you that a -.fitness c'id here that throe days
after th- experiments -.icre over, cno cf the oxpcrinontr.l subjects cl¬
dc nly died.

A More cf the experimental sub;octs di_d t..roo days after tho
oxpc ri ant. It edght have boon net her gypsy. Thoro were lots of
other gjrpeios in the cac.p Dacha* .

Q !tow, I -n asking you very explicitly- and I ronind you that
you are testifying undor oath# You knew what tho consequences can bo
if you perjure yours-jlf. Dc you consider it out of the question that
any cl he gypsies died, or do you think that it is perhaps possible?
Mint do you knew -bout this? •

A far as I knew I c~n only say that none of the c-xxr' *ont-i


9730


21 Jur.-i -v3-t-2i-i : ir..buck (Int. Brsrt)

Court Kc. I, Cose ho. 1.

subjects died. I knew absolutely for certain that I not every orv. of
tb6C in the c~cp streets afterwards and spoke with then.

j YTould anyca& have told you if .nx, leyer or Kubcr or sazo-
b;dy had diod?

%

* .V j:o, if anybody had die a, cf course, that asws re ale have
spread through the canp Ireodiatoly. There would have a little
uproar raaong ua if that had happened, but it didn’t.

Q Did the people really rccoivo this good food that you have
been talking about?

A Yoa, X course they really did.

Q l"* -ft after tho oxporiaont?

A Throe or four days after tho oxporiront thoy got the foed.
First thoy wore on a diet and then they received this goed food that I
nemtionod.

Q Do you knew whether Professor 3ciglboock, rftor tho oxxri-
nonts, did sonothirg in behalf cf tao gypei.c?

A So far ca I kna* ti» Profesaer got in touch with tho crap
conaandor, but I can't toll you this fbr sure bocauo- all of a cuddon
I was sont out of Dachau in a largo transport, and I didn't knew ct
tho tiro whoro it was going. Thon, to uy horror, I found nysulf in
llauthauson.

Q Sirco you conti-r. ..authnus.n hoi: did things gt with you there?

A I had t-rriblo oxpjrionccs there. I had to work first .f nil
in ft quarry, and thon was sont to tho outlying oonp I to lk. There I
stayed far -:v«m or eight sz-nths; then in Sastor cf '15 I was taken
back frc-i it,; to hut hausen and thon, on thj 5th of ISny I was liber¬
ated fay tho Ararican troops.

Q When you were taken back frou lizlk to Hauthausen did any dio

then?

A That w-s tho worst night cf ny life. Vo were called up at
5: 1 in the aiming. Ee • _rc all sick and weak. Then the train rent
back tc h.uthr.usen "nd it tack all night. Thirty-six people died in


9731


21 Jn&#4S-li-5-Six»back (Ini. Bmrr.)
Cent So, I, Case Sc. 1.


the car in which I was before r.u ro-ched Hauthr.uscn.

Q Hotr, let's get back to tho experiments. Do you l:ncw that
ttero was a liaison nan that Bciglbacck appointed between bin and
the ox-ferine ntcl subjects?

A lus, there res. Ho had be.n in tho canp for quite a whilo
end knot - his way arcund tho esnp. Ha was tho oldest ono riacng us.

Q Dc you knew whether any of tho subjects had tta so-called
escape point?

A Y.s, two of than. Baaborger was ono cf thorn.

Q Thoy did !iav». escape points?

A Yes, thoy did.

Q Do you knar her the Profosscr treated those people?

A Tho Professor procisod then that if they finished tho expori-
ner.t they t Id havo tho escape point talcon away free then, and ti-is
would Iuyaj nadj things such easior for then bo cause people with tho
oscape point co’ildn't nevo around fro-ly in tho crep.

Q That point ::onnt that th-y tad attoaptod to oserp--. Woro
there, aiong the oxrcriruntal subjects, persons who hoc bc-.n in tho
Amy?

A Yos, I think cnee two gontioajr. fron 'amich cnoo. I think
thoy wore fron tho Oostage, and thoy asked us about our faoilios. I
think thoy were looking for rearons to let us leave tho caup. I think
ere of then told the-, that he had the Iron Cross, second class.

q h’ere you in tho lehr.iacht yourself?

« Ho, but I was in tin Reich Leber Service.

q Do you rone bar a curse fron Vienna, a young folio/?

A Yos, he talked the sire dialect as the Professor spooks.

Q T his nare raybe Fiiirein?

A I don't know his ns&a, but 7. believe this was the nurse who
took Hox\s place when Jta ras fired.

q Tfhat triangle did the gypsies tout?

A They all wore black.

9732

|


2 L -T-n-'-/inabuck (In*-. 3ram)

Court lh. I, Ca3Q !io. 1.

Q '/hat triable color did you i^ar?

A Slack.

Q Ueren't there gypsies with the brcm triangle?

A That ^aa earlier. Then in 19u0 that brora triangle rao
done aray with.

Q Tibet did the brcwn triangle rear.?

A That also noant asocial and slackers.

Q ikw did you get into the concentration cacp?

A I Tms alleged to be asocial. I vas t-ken to the concentra¬
tion c-i-.p ’.ithout really knowing vhy, probrbly bccauso I an a gypsy.

Q .-ter the liboration in 1?15 did you :ot any of t;occ gypsios

later?

A Yos, once I net Honroinor.

Q T.-hat did he toll you?

A Ho told no that things woi» going badly vrlth hia at the noaont.
I askod hin utioro ho lived. Ko said in the neighborhood of Augsburg
and vas a ■.orher ttoro. Ho said that on his uppor thigh ho had had an
operation. Ho had been used for a plog;x>no oxporiisont and then to
J ust talkod shop and that was r 11.


Court I . .

21 Juno-: -5-1 - X—*3 -Ussor (orcwn)


Di * be curse about tfco sea water oxperijents?

X. >, not exactly curse. He did say, hcov t r, th*t he was not
t «iB 4 vary wall treated after he had dona so such in the exp.rinants.

Did you aot au. body alset
A. Y-s, I -at Reinhardt.

Q, Did you uot Laubinj-r and Issfeurgur?

A. So, I nevur s-tw than ajain.

D?.. S *ZJSAUJR: I have no fvrt .jT qrostdens.
tot HBSUJKT* Hava any at ur dofonso counsel any questions
propound to this witness? TJ. being none, the Prosecution nay cross

examine.

CRCGS ZXXUKATIO:-*

gy ha?JC:

q. Witness, on the 6th of Jew l?Ui, when you w-.-o arr.stod by
t-.e Gostapc, noro you cold the reasons for your arrest*,

A. So, I was givun no reasons, but I assu^d that 1 wac arrostod

because I an a gypsy.

C,. lou noro arrested end placod.in c concentration carp
b>.ciusa you wore a gypsy, is th-t right?

A. Tos.

Q. Hod you oVor COB dUod any c imoa prior to that ti-o?

A. Ho, but I onco waa ffc*d for breaking a work contract.

Q. You noro novor in Jail for a,? other cridnal offense before
the 6th of Ain- lSUi?

A. r-s, I had 3 months in Jail for breaking th t work contract I
just aentiowd.

Q. :ihon you arrived in tho Dachau Concentration Car? you wore on

a special Ce-.KC.ndo detail, is that correct?

A. - were taken to the quarantine station iecodiitoly.

Q. Fit. you volunteered to go to Dachau for a special comando,

I

S72*


didn't ycu?


Cocrt l

21 June--: - -2 - LvQ - I^ss_r (2rcwr.)


A. ~^s; in 3nichecisid re volcntoarod and that is why we went to
Dachau. .a ware than sent to the quarantine station, and waited to be
sent to the procisad special ccanardo.

How naiy otn.r gypsies accompanied you free Buchenwald to Dachau?

A. 3xactly LO in toto; 39 others and rysclf.

.are the;- all volunteers for tills spec! 1 com ndo?

A. Yes, wu all vdnnteirod in -uehcnwald.

5 . Xt'Mti .'ou arrived at Dachau you state you ware given 2 physical
oxni nation. nho va you th t examination?

A. First wo were exrzdr.od by a prisoner-doctor. Then we were
x-ray jd.

}. nho x-r- ed you?

A. " - also iu ‘.one b a prisoner; th t was th* so-called .;-ray

Cipo.

Thor, you were asked to participate in tho sea-waur „xp.riraonts?

A. J?o. First of all v« were taken to i/l.

Q. ".aat was tho sea w tor station, wasn't it?

A. las, ti t was tho Boa-waUiT station.

Q. Thoro each one cf yen were askod it you wished to voluntoor
for tho sca-rator experiments?

A. Then Professor “oiglboa'k caiao and expl-inod tho experiment,
pointing cut to us that wo would to ver; thirsty but t at »c need not
bt> .freidj nothing would happen to us; nobody * 01 Id die. Thor, wo said
w_ would bo willing to participato.

;. And ho ashed each ono of you to volunteer?

A. 1 K) all UO cf us wara tnorc togothur and ho explained this busi¬
ness tc us. ..a talked it ovor .uaong oursoIves and declared cur rllling-


MSS<


Q. gr r

A. Nobcdr-

1.. Aru /CU suro't

A. Yes.


S735


Court I

21 Juua- - 5-3 - - - ea-sssr (3rc~r.)


Q. fhink i'O t tl.;t a aoasaut* Aro ou sur a a^ein?

A. I c-i absolutely certain th t no cr._ refus-d.

rh-eryoas was ha.jpy f.v.t they going to be subjected to sic-
water jzacriiisats?

a• i.c, 7-ur* all h-v.V hbo-t this, he wore told that after tfca
experiaant va voil.o receive an oasy con.ar.do and given food and we would
\ .-/ter r;o hoard this, wo ell declared our willingness.

.vit-r /ou had rocu'.vod the ph’-sical uxcin-tien, wasn't it
true that the. Wars J oi.ag to drop you fro.. the experiment?

A. Xe-S. Profess r i&iglbo-ch ranted to exchange no but I be;.tod
hit to Li--Ve BO in tfca crparisant oocauso I didn't r.ar.t to bu separated
free ny frionds, particularly from *y r-lativ-, . attboch, find boenuss I
die. not rs.-.t to lose the advantages t : t had been prosds-d.

Q. Is it possible t at you r .ro tho onlj vclunto-r ol the UJi rson
us«.d in the expjrirent - jou war. tho only on* th.t vented tc stay
•i,.ru because :ou had relatives te.oro and didn't rant to be separ-ted
free your cellua^uos’

A. So, /o all wanted to be tnero.

«• Did Laubingtr want to. bo th.r.?

A. T-s.

Die ic&nfcardt want tc- be there?

A. 1-3.

Q. Hot do .-cu ’<n cr that?

A. I w ; with then, .o talked with oach other.

,. Xau don't suppesu it is pcsaiblo the, didn't want to be there?

A. Xou aro asking whoth.r it is possible they did net want oo ba'
t:..ro - those two?

Q. las.

A. He, they daclar-d their 'Ulir.gn-s.f after we all h-.c tolled tho
zux\<*r Vwr«

<. tic • d -- c car liar ah at the; are car-tess with the truth If they
ar. v s hat you v*ra tho or.l; volunta-r?


Court I

21 Jone-I - S-I- - LJ3 - u-sccr (2rcrn)

.... „e : volunteers. '.c nil ep^liud for this exp.ri tnt.

Dad y_u hw «ech subject used in tha experiment?

*. r-s.

•j. You know every cno of then?

*. i-s, ovjr; one -i the .. I knew ovary single cns.

3 . Did you toor their nanas?

A. in -j w to-rLuontcl station I know almost nil the nones but I
have forgotten then in thu coanti c. I r-nesfc-r sone of then but of
course I havu forgotten a greet mr&er of then.

3 . Hr/ »eany i-n -..-ore used in the ojaoriaents?

A. At first hO a,nj then 3 or li t r- gypsi.a ecao fror Dtchcuj
in toto wo wore U; people.

3 . Did yw* know Johann Anger?

A. A.-.;.-r?

q. lea.

A. Spoil it, please.

3. A-n-e-e-ri
A. Ko.

3 , Ko was one of too subjects. 1 thought you knew then all?

A. i know then all. Kaybo 1 hav- forgotten tho tern, but os far
as I knew 1 did not know this ion, Angur.

Q. Did ho volunteer?
a. Mho, Ar.yjr?

3. T-3.

A. ;.o all volunteered,
q. Did you } 3 ic-r Paul tranz’

A. .ranz? X o, I recognised hin in tho pictcria bore.

3. ..hat's has nationality?

a. t^r.-an. K~ was freu "resin, if I rcr_-h^r.

3. You sure he isn't .-olish?

-h-ro is no cossibilitr tfist Bra* was a M-*.

4 . &re t.'„re any foreign nationals n.r. etr-r tr.


9757


.curt I . .

21 Jan-—. - 5-5 - L-*3 - lessor (-renr.)


O^razaa, used in tiuao cxscriiu-r.ts?

A. Austrians and Burgonl&onder end seme froa Upper Silesia and

iest Prussia.

4 . Ho Czechoslovakians?

A. Ho.

Ho Russians?

A. Ho.

Q. Ho Polish!

A. A couple of thorn talked Folish hut I think th-y care frer. Upper
Silesia cr -ast Prussia. That vory often happens. lots of upper
Silesians car. talk Polish. I can't toil you for sure.

4 . Was your number 911h7 - your shipment mefcor?

A. y Dachau r.u-hcr» I can't rao-rb.r any more but I think it was

912L7 or 91 "i5, I a* not sure.

Q. icm lived in Furth befrro you war. incarcerated in tho concen¬
tration ccap»

A. Y~s, I was bom th-ro.

4. You lived cn /iachorstrcaso?

A. Yea.

Q. On 9 Aujeat 1 kU you loft Buchorcmld?

A. Yjs, that is about right. It wa 3 either the 3th of 9th of
August t.--.t -o wont te Dachau - it night oven havo boon the 10th.
iJnon did you go to .hu-hausen?

A. About th- end X Soptccb-r or ooginring :-f October.

;. You are sure it wasn't tho Hith of Sept^nbur 19UL?

A. When I ant to . inuthauson?

3. T.at's right — the liitfc da;* of S,pt_rb-.r 1 i7

A. can't saj this for sure out I think it was the and f Soptoo-

ter.

3 . iould tho records of tho ... the Dachau records of the prison¬
er's transfers bo incorrect if they said that or. 1 U 3 opU-rber lftb V u
«ure trar-sT-rr.c to ---authausen?


97 W


5-6 - LJG - L.3sor fcrcnai)


Court I
21 Juno-:: -

A. T X camr*- toll you, — whether thay sro wrong,
u'r.an die the ex-.rinunts end?

A. About toe ridoi- cf Soptccbor.

4. -v.-.d you bed already gone to -authnusun, hadn't you',

A. Bo.

Q. Thun the ».chau records of tuj transfer of in rates ar- incorr-ct
and y u didn't leave on the lbth of Sopttofeor for Anuthr.usen?

A . T at I cannot s\ for srre but as far as I know, the exporinonts
ended about the nitdlfc of S-cte .-r end tco or three days oft_r too
oXp.rir.ents wor- coopletod, according to your own testimony, is that
correct?

A. I saw all of too subjects after too _x-.ria.nt. That I know
for suro. It was a few days after that t A I loft. X was the first
of too ox-jrt. .intal subjects t*o left Dachau.

q. S body could nav. died after you left, without y:ur knowing

about it, is that right?

-v. That could be, of ccurao.

4. And if you left on to- lbto of Septorb.r, did you leave beforo
the coiplution of the -xp^rinonts?

A. No. Shis I know f r Certain, i&en the ex rinnta w-rc con¬
cluded 1 was still at Dachau.


9739


21 Jani-M-FL-6-i-^ros8 (Int. 3r-»r.)

C. srt U©«-1, Cas>- I


Q.- .Jvt — - tv. :»ero tfx.y concluded?

A.- Thct I or. 't kr^r for Burt.

Q.- >.s rro.wssor 3ci ; lbo*.ck still ot Dachau nbcn you Uft or had
ho tonu hick to Vienna?

A.- That I don't know. I saw Professor Bci^ibxck for the Inst
ti-iJ wh^n I it. a 7-l~“.sod free the hospital.

Q.- Kan did you happen to know his n&oe to bo Buiglboeck*

A.- I .lidn't :cnow thct at thr* fciac. I just found out h-r~ that
is nan. *=s 3o. glboock.

C;.- You didn't know Uv.t when you n-rJ in th- concentration c.vp?

A.- ::o. I didn't know his nano in th»- cc.-rp.

TH3 PR^SIL..1.T: I oasuoe counsel thr.t your cross ocaain-tion uill
cor.tinuo for socc tiao?

MR. HA.1DY: This is c good breaking point, your Honor.

'HE Ph.^IL-.T: The Tribunal will nm bo ir. r-coss for a feu .ainutos


1 21 Jun.i-FW-!-£*' r,;-r. (Ir.t. von Schon)
Court I&i I, Ccsc I


ITS KARSHAL: The iribunl is ~g in in s-ssion.

DR. HDFnaaa: (Att HK7 £-r D-ienh'r.t Poloray)

}'x. Pr-sid-nt, a-y I -sk to h-v. th- &-i-rx-r.t Pokorny excused
this afturnaan i-c-us- I need hin to or- vr. his c-.sc 2

TH3 PRlSIDil?: Up'r. the r-que st :i Counsel for the Defendant ?--
x.rny thrt ho be -xcu3ed froa attendance bJ-r. tho Tribur.-l this r.f-
t.rruon, tho Court gr-nts the request, it nopo-ring thr.t it is vc^s-
t t tho rat consult with his counsel. His abaenco iron tho

Tribune1 Jill not or.judice his css-.

DR. GA-UK: (Attorn./ for Dofend-'nt Haven)

:tr, President, the D-fenso Counsel c-n spenk t. the dofondent only
ir. th- ,.rnin -nd afternoon. Since the C urt is sittin nil fry t>-
dv, I n aid ..-vu no opportunity t spunk to ay client, Dr. Ho von. I
c-.r. aaaua- that .:y oxcaination .'ill be finis'-c U nd-y, end then Dr.
Hov-n id 11 b- cr'as exr-niivd, and again I dll be ua-.ble to to
hin, “.s I tiill bw urnblw t. sp-'.k to ay client •'t -11 during the oaa-
ir. ti n. I .esu.x that a .>ae questions will c.a- tip durin< th- direct
exr.ainotlon. fher.. :r., I w rrf-r whett* r it .. uld not be possible .'or
th*- Curt to ru— that I be nil.wed to see qy cli-nt this evenin.. r
t-norrow aornins.

THi PR^SIDS-Tt Counsel any c-nsult ulth his client H-v-r. this
evening -T t.viorr v rniny, subject to th. regulations f Security,
which I -resu— c-n be arranged so that cair.Sel i-y c nsvlt Ids client
. r this evening a- tomorrow aomlng, or, both tines if he ros

a wish of th- Tribun-1 — I presUau that s-enrity will
: rj r= t» th— 3— directions; ;rd tho C mxt err. nrrnpgt that . 1
J-- c nsult uith '.lie client rny evening .uxt ^.k — w bother the de¬
fend mt Hover. is under direct or cross ugiinrtlM.

Dr.. CA’m Ti- i- y i.

(Att rr-y !r D-fentD.-.ts :\sc..r, Gbbhardt, -r.<? Ob-r-

uxr.)


9711


21 - - • I ■ ••

; art L'i. I, Can. I


Pr-sir „-.t, the dsfundant Se'shard t has h«*crt triubl-, six tho
nt Ob~rha.uscr is sis? ill. I subait a certificate by tho 3ris:n
r;ct r. Dr. F- ’-clr-r, i^r the deitnd-nt Gcbhcrdt; I sh.-.ll bring a c.r-
tUicnt* lir ti*. dicnd-nt Oivrhauser later, I recast that th.s- fr.:j
delcnd-jits be excused fris tho sessixi this rftcrnxn.

TfS PR5SSID5T: cha is t .. xofonvd t- on this corti-ficato.

1 a a-ntianod the def-rc-nt Ob. r he user or. b-th sccasivns.

DR. GXdL: Gobherdt and Obi rha user.

TR Z 2*28X037: I n tv that this certificate i the surgotn refers
t. the defendant Cobherdt, end cunsel roforr-d t, end luntionotf tho
def-nd-nt Oberi-auser. ‘.iU the certificate by the surycn b- filed in

rv-s-rd t th- -ucusiag f thw defendant Oborhauscr?

DR. 3rr.L: lb/ I c-rivet Yur Honor. -'hrt I intondod tJ ray was
LI irin 3 cortificatu i r tho defendant Oborhauaor lctor.

US PRiSmat! And you da sire th-a to be excused fr» attendance
b»: re th- Urioucel this afturnoon?

Dh. Oil L: Yob, pier*..

Hid Pursuant t- the Certificate by the prla n :f;icirl —

*h ia Dr. ?f .-cb-r?

:I . L: I .-.3 inf .ra-d that Dr. ?' ct r ~

the G*rmia pria-n u.ct -r/

TKi PRSSOJTT: 7h.Se certificates re usually lil.o bv the African


prison dxt char#* f the del', nts. Xl these daf cod sots

d-slr- t be oxcus-d this furr.. r., 1 ruggest y u or .cure certiijc -Us
•lean our?con in charge f tho ->ris n. Upon fillln
ta rt certificates, thu defendants Oc rhrrs-r and Gebhardt oay t- ox-
cus. c /r « attend race bof.ro the Tribunal, this a f tern. n.

2 . GIJDL: Thank y:u.


21 Jun-lPAH-o-l-Gross (Int. von Sckon)

Court So. I.

5Y *•?.. HARDY:

Q Witness, you know the r.va Robert Adler?

A I rerseber the nane.

Q Did ho ecce free Buchonrald in tho transport -.dth you to
Dachau on 9 August 19hk?

A Yos.

Q l?as ho of Polish nationality?

A !to, ho ms not a Pole.

Q You aro cortr-in of that?

A Yea.

Q Tifcy aro you certain of that?

A Bocauac I talked to hin. I re or.bor very well ho tnlkod
Gorcan to ::o.

Q la it poasiblo that a Pole could apoak Go man?

A It is poaoiblo.

Q You don't know whothor or not ho rna Polish, do you?

A As far aa I know ho uust have boon fron East hruaaio.

Q Do you know Siogr.urd Grabotrski, apollod G-r-s-fc-o-r-n-k-i?
A I don't rcriir.bcr tho nano.

Q You don't rororber that? Ho ca;x> in tho tranaport uith you
on 9 Auguat l$Ui.

A It ia poasiblo but I don't re .ocher tho nano.
n . You didn't know all tho aubjects that ova with you on tho
transport, did you?

A I knew then by sight but I don't knur all their nones.

0 You don't know whether or not ho was Polish, do you?

A That was tbi nano?
q C-rabowski.

A I don't know for certain.

Q Did you know Johann Vongilaj, spelled V-o-n—g-i-l-a-j?

A I do not rororber that r.hxs,

•I Did you knor Ronan Gusaw, spelled G-u-s- o - w ?


97A3


21 Jun-iMS-S-2-Gross (ir.u. von Schon)
Court Ho. I.


A Ho, I do not rerfinber that naic cither.

Q He was a Russian. Cano on the transport with you free 3uch-
enrald to Dachau.

A That*s inpossible. There wore no Russians on our transport.

So were all gypsies.

Q Could he have bocn a gypsy born ir. Russia?

A I don't think them was any Russian gypsy.

Q You really don't know, do you?

A Ho.

Q Did you know Jacob Bxiborger?

A Yoa.

Q Ho ©ana on the transport with you, didn't ha?

A Ho, he cun® fron Dachau.

Q Ho w ?.3 at Flossonburg boforo that, rrsn't ho?

A I don't know.

Q Didn't you knew hin?

A Yos, I Imow hin. I not hiji in Dachau.

Q He ms a Goman, wasn't ho?

A Yos.

Q You state that to volunteered for tiic oxpcriiants?

A Yos. :3c w: s pro sent whilo frofessor Beiglboock exp lainod
tho oxrorL-.ont to us and wo all said wo wore rilling. Wo could havo
gone back to tho block if we ranted to end gone back to work.

q If you had gone back to tho block, would you havo bocn treat¬
ed as a sabotour?

A No. I would havo boon put to work.

Q Did any of your gypsy frionds desire to be roliovod of tho
experiments and upon reqxxjsting not to bo used in the experiments was
told try 3oigiboock that ho would be liangod by Dciglboeck as a saboteur
if he refused?

A I h, that is i-xossible. Professor 3ci§lbocck never srid

that.


97U


21 Jun-I ?->E—3—3-Gross (1st. von Schon)

Court No. I.

Q You rover heard anything about that?

A Ho.

Q Could ycu state that your fellow gypsies used in the experi-
-ents wire being careless with the truth if they state one of the non
was refused and threatened in that aanaer?

A If they testified as a witness?

q Yes, suppose one of the other gypsies stated that. Would
you state they were telling the truth?

A Yes, I can say that tliat is not the truth. I never hoard
any such thing. I know that for certain.

Q It could have happened without you knowing about it,
couldn't it?

A As long as I was in the e^)er?i»nt I nover hsard of any such
thing. I an sure ny cocradoo would have told no if such a thing had
happened.

Q Do you know Siegfried Sc ddt?

A Yes, I know Schaidt but I don't think ho was in the o:q»ri-
aents. Ho was at Dachau. His nano wa3 Schaidt.

Q Ihat nusibor were you in tho oxrericont? Bod tf9, woron't

you?

A Yos.

q Your relative wea in bed #10, wasn't ho?

A Yes, I renenber that very well.

q Who was in bod no. 8?

A Bed i} 8, that oust have been Laubingcr. Laubinger was in cy
group, too.

Q Laubinger was in bod #7. Who was in bed #8?

A I don't renertoer.

Q Do you know who was in bod 511?

A Eo, I don't r enea ber.

Q ..ell, that was Siegfried Seknidt for your inforraticn, wit¬
ness, in bed Q 11, and you don't resesber hie?


97A5


21 Jun-«-»-5-ii-Gross (Int. von Schon)
Court No. I.


A Mo.

Q Just two beds array from jou?

A I don't understand the question.

q He was only two beds array free you and you don't rcasnber
Siegfried Schnidt?

A No, I don't reseober hie.

Q He was a Geroan gypey, bom in Hamburg.

A I don't reaesbor his.

Q Did you knorr Paul Hirschborg?

A Ho. I don't reaoabor this nano.

Q Did you know Hdnund Kirschberg?

A I don't remember that nu eithor.
q Did you know Alfred Koff, H-o-f-f?

A Hoff?

q H-o-f-f, Hoff.

A No.

q Ho cams in tho transport with you from Buchonwald, didn't ho?

A I do not rccesbor. 1 don't roaortor all tho naaos. That
was four yoars ago.

q Ho was in bed #U4.

A That's possible. I don't know. I don't know Hoff.

Q Did you know Oleskeritech? I will spoil that for you. It
is a na=e that I can't pronounco too '.roll. Spoiled O-l-e-s-k-c-v-i-t-s-c-h.
A Ho, I don't remeeber tliat nano.

Q You don't rerezber that naze. Wasn't he ono of the non who
was used in the experiment but did not com fren Buchonwald? Ho was
in bed £17, witness.

A I don't knew.

Q You don't know such about these subjects, do you?

A I enn't rer.er.bor all their naaos. I remember seno nares

because I knew the people and ttey were oary na-ts to xfea .aber - 3na-

•

berger, Laubinger, Reinhardt.

9746


21 Joa- lH B-8^-QcoS8 (Int. von Scbon)

Court Ko. I.

Q This subject was a Russian gypsy. You don't knew hie?

A Mo*

Q Did you know Michael Durnow, spoiled D-u-r-n-o-w? Also a
Russian gypsy. He was in bod #20. Did you know him?

A Ko, I don't reaesbor.

Q Did you know Victor Viljaev, spollod V-i-l-j-a-e-w?

A Mo. I don't romnber that nane.

Q Did you know Joseph Reinhardt?

A Hifl nano was Xavor Reinhardt, not Joseph.

Q Pardon nc, I neant H-o-i-r.-h-a-r-d-t, Joseph.

A Mo, I don't roBcebor the naso Kbinhardt.

Q Did you know Raynord Papain, F-a-p-a-i-n?

A Unloss it was this little gypsy nhoa wo called Pupagoi
(parrot). Ho caao fren Bur/cnlard. Ho -as tho profosKr's favorito.
Q Why was he tho profossor's favorito?

A Bocouso ho c3so free Surgonland perhaps - bocauso ho was
an Austrian. Maybe bocauso ho was young.

Q ito vas sixteon yoars old, wasn't ho?

A To3, that's about right.

Q Did you know Adolf Lafontaino?

A Mo.

Q Did you know Homan Ifcllanawrky?

A I don't ro rxr.be r that naro.

Q That is a Polish nan:, isn't it?

A Polish nanes are hard to rorenber. I can't renouber.

Q Tfell then, there were Polish people in tho experiments,
weren't there?

A I don't think so. They were costly free Upper Silesia and
Bast Prussia and there are nany Polish names tterc.

Q Do you know Barriansky?

A Mo.

Q Strauss, Reinhcld Strauss?


9747


21 Jun-:'W2-3-6-Gross (Int. von Schon)
Court Ho. I.


A I rcrr.roer that nare Strauss.

Q Do you know Fritz Rosinsky?

A No.

Q Karl Bernard?

A 3ernhardt?

Q B-o-r-n-a-r-d.

A I recccbor vaguely but I an not certain.

Q You know Karl Stoinbach?

A I roaenbor that nane, too.

Q You know Georg Papi, apolled I-a-p-i, P-a-p-a-i, pardon ne.

A That cust be tho little gypsy, the young one. Wo called
bin Papagoi. - . _

Q Well, now ho was aubjoctod to aea water, wasn't ho. Straight
mb wator in tho courao of tho oxporiixmts, this young boy?

A As far na I roo>nbor ho waa in a vory oaay group.

Q Would you consider it an oaay group to rccoivo 500 cc of aoa
water to drink ovory day. Was that ono of tho oaay groups. Ho was
subjoct #37. That waa ono of tho b-d groupo, wasn't it?

A I don't roaoebor.

Q foil, you don't knew, do ycu, vhothor those young boys woro
uaod in tho cost strenuous groupo?

A Tho young people wore noatly put in tho oaay groups. Ao far
as I rcccrbor the ;*orst group was group ono.


21 Juru1- l-?ri ecu (Int. v n Scl. r.)

C urt I, Caso I

Q.- ft , v ; r ;u know J hcnn 2-inhnrct?

A.- Hj, not J:;can R«inh-'.rdt. I hno» Haver Reinhardt.

Q.- w- y-u la..: Sto n iaL-.ua Pacakowski, P A C S K 0 S X I ?

A.- I cen*t .

Q.- Ho i -s only t\ or throe b.ds any ir n you. He vas in bed

lb. 6.

A.- I c-.i't or th.js. nr-, s.

Q.- c. js., you la-n lavwr Hcinhrdt?

A.- Yea,

Q.- D you lai • ft r.z KL.vdn, sp. lied K L A V D A?

A.- I don't iv-uber th e uk,

Q.- Ho woe • Csoch al-v klnn.

A.- , t: .;•- net n Cz-ch there.

r .- Y u*r ccr. in that, ere y-u?

A.- Yva.

■ * * t>ld y.u be vna r. Csoch; » uld you dioj.lie". . i i?

A.- Ls, ii 1-d t Id =e lie wta a Creel, I uld v.vo b.lievod

hLa.

H. uns in bod tt . 2. Did y u . to talk

tj hin?

A.- I cm 'i r...v-:.iber tint.

Q.- Did y u :. v. t U ttou tine during that firat

;r c <ilc! y.u .r.Lk ar .ur.d ~nd - ut into the yard?

A.- , in tho iroliai could go out in the oacrty&rd

walk nr uad end w> csuld run ar>and in the. hospital, too. ,

I tnlkcd t, t. . ic.pl-. th.t I ,Bv« beat.

.- Did reu :n?j Karl Kittbach?

A.- Yes, thrt*s rdntive >1 nine.

S. c o •; Cn*s.r., didn't ho, 0 r s - r. ?

• . ,

«•“ - - lr. • i-r- ar.s bom?

_.. J


9749


:l Jo,-*-«-FL-9-2-?r. -:a (Int. vor. Lc. m)

C irt i!-. I, Ccsc I

A.- Ss, I Cjt.

Q.- Dii -v^r t'-Il 7.'U?

A.- /k.

Q.- jid jzn karj Fr-r.z ICubik, K a b i k.

A.- I who neao.

Q.- la /- - Cz~-:h;3ljv:ikizn gypsy?

A.- i- , hi. n:t a Cz-ch svpsy. H_ I.d r. dlr.l-ct li J.

0

Q.- H - r.c r^! 3C7 > 5 a Cz-chj&l vrkicn. C-uld y> u

A.- I t icin' . hia birth curtlficato.

Q.- D- du Krrl Hrauc, K r u c ?

— M*

• l» '•

Fcydi»V-ad Br.nl w l?

A.- Ho.

Q.- K rl K -Ucnr-i.xr?

H wUw-j ir.-r?

Q.- Yw8.

A.- lui, I t.« .ia.

Q.- A • - itly, '.u dun't 5.r. « :.y - fch lr rr.vi, <1. >• u7

. r.l ■ r. ... *--.r v -,s tv rwn't a diilieult -v t!w

I far . I tooU-nr-ir.-'r rad SftlatarCt«

Die! u lat'ti r.* A thw th.ra by naan?

A.- I -v-wr S'ltac’.anbky.

r ,.- Any Ay uis*.?

•

A.- T-v.'M-m,

--uhnznr.7 H*‘ d yiu sp-li that?

A.- Taco i r. n.

Altai . • Pr?fo#sir • U

wX;xrLjunt s ;*.c c.itLd sf • *itfc yir Injie in Vchwrvld <n: 1
cid yju rw ~-ir. as zn usp-riMnt-i S'jblwCi?

: . •


zn A 'strian.
bo -.ir'...' 7


tlx. pr- li ar. r :


. . -/ had c f-rvr.


21 Jun~— - (Int. v.r Schw=)

C Tt .'{ . I, Cra- I


Q.- i u s-t Yury e.c!c -Yi tlk, third dr;*, didn't y -u?

A.- I dan't r^ib.r exactly. Test's p.ssibi..

Q.~ Tl-..n -:ur iov.r twnfc c n th. I jurth dry. Y-u didn't u.l
e. ill r. cr.- ij .rth d-.y?

A.- s, teu XwVur w-nt d;rr. nnd I didn't feel s,b-.t! but th- noxt
dqjr th* i-v.. *rorrt c r - in.

Q.- 7..- uv-r cctnally didn't f ■ up until tki aov.nth day in;
die it?

A.- Arc t:»n I M-a nut in .Vrd 3, Rj» 2.

Q.- Then you .iv.r wunt through t... vxpori_u.nt, did y u?

A.- X», I drrnk vrtcr.

Q.- \’ur- y.u ey.r in the wo.ri.-.ntnl oteti o r.t nife'.it hi..: t
2 >cri£.nt» wiro ,.-in_ an?

A.- Aft.r t. ruliainary p.:l d?

Ait.r the rwli^in ry p.ri>d.

A.- )l , t. -n I !; C t aL-.p in th h.aaitrl.

1.- Y.u ( d»'t :-r. n uheth-r any .f y-ur ypsy frienda w.ro ti e t
their beds, d? y.u, ?.t nifht?

A.- I kx n tiling -&*ut th-t.

Q.- Y.u r- ir. no position t> kn w that, r~ y.u?

A.- But i floe thuru in the dnytinu ant ]

Q«- h-r. wr« / u, in tho oc?tria.ntsl otiti n in tit, -il v
■ut in th. yrr , wiva y u c -a- t visit ir. th- dry tiuo?

A.- 1 . 33 I ttaa ir. th. r-rd.n and c xti-.u 3

Q.- Oid t. * -.a the C.-vra Lch.d?

.i until ?t- tion vorc fUn 1 eke:.

Q.- Yju i . V :u ti it * a - t
*.ri C. 1b int re
A.— Y-*8.

1= i- asilia that r u nly . t ucl - jvury ti .r
•' • • CX• :*tly tr.rt v. wjtj .very .y, :1

r_inc.


21 Jffl*-K-rL-S , -A-?rI _ -U (Int. v n Schn)

C .art I, Crs. I

•- T-or r.c rds sfc:w yxi n-r- ;nly wei hed n the first, third,

fifth -rai a-' -sth days cad that y.u wor-n't ;n the see .xl,

1 orth rr- si::th dr/ r the eighth dc.y. , if ur. 3-iglb eck 1 :. r-cm.s
r- sufficient —

I 5 sic!..

C.- T..-r. /.a ler-r.'t wei.'b.d ev-ry day, w.r. y:u?

A.- 'Jy fri-.rs -.iwre weighed -very day. I s.ar it.

Q.- fiU t.L* us y u -9. had wv-r* c-y. :: *», j u -.f.r-n' t,
w-ra j u?

A.- rt s 1 iv -s Im-c n t sick y.t in u._ s-eli unary >-ri .'. I r.e
eighwd -.very day.

r f- T!—r. yaa were n t Weighed the d'/s ytu «er- sick?

A.- On d- - Mr~r. I was i ek I mis r. t w»i<-hed.

C.- Ym r-'ily d.n't kn■* whet days •/ u ><-r- weighed, d you?

A.- Alur.jrs in the 3 rr.ing.

Q.- ..ell, rn th. dey that y^u Hwm sickost, which was the third
d v, ;• u were ‘ fctet d-y -nd y u Wei&bcd 50} kU^ttas. Is Urt

right? Tho d.\~s that :« w-r.n't rick, th- Second and tj.e f urth rnt
thu sixth, * : v-f. r..t Wwi,h-d. Then y.u MOr- sick 'gnir. en the . .venth
day — c m._ .rcfcly huh t-nporatur- up t 39 — rnd y »u Wer Mwi:h.d
‘tin then v/ -c AS .3 kilcaj s. y.u actu lly d n't Jen u when -.u
w-r- Wei-bod, us y.u?

A.- I v-.o Hei I c -.e in • bXptrl

: :t Uw third day. I don't fcn;w exactly •

• .

*. -f-.-r rds I gjt n fever. I can't or-tly rh.a.

r.. HARDY: I -r.t ut, Y-ur H r. r, Li cu*»w;it, o-i>3 ech i /jit
.. . . - cherts a;, 39 -nd C9 aru fchu eh arts c-rt: Ar.in- t l I

witness and th\,:* ir.:c .U that i . witmss - r.Iy w.i.b-i r. Cl'it *9
B th- first Czf : .rir.r.t, turf c-- .f the wx?-.*i-..nt, titi

. .. .

ss Is. -e£ii..-ieC ir. '-Tect that he . . unrlr.-lysis _-c.. . - 17 '

9752


N:a, y:u s-y thct -.ny &w*-ths K„r. -bs;lut-ly -ut f questi :n
in the 8 J-. *;r.t_r -:.p-ri-i_r.ts?

A.- I sav all ay CJand-s aft.r th- experiment.

C ; .- S-CV.J3.;’ c-ulc hrv_ died aft-r y:>u 1 -ft Dachau without y;ur
kn*in£ -b at it. Is that p ssifclt:

A.- That»s p'sslblw. I d.n't kn:n. I won't tJor- *n 7 cur-.

Q.- K->« any con w-r- urv.bl- ti walk at th- ctjpi-ti.n if tho o::-
pc,ria-nt 9 ?

n.- Th-y ciu'. - ti-.Lk. They w-r. 11 *>nt b-ci: ti tho bl^cJcs,

Q.- Ar_ you c-rtin -X that?

A.- Y-o.

Q. Other witRcoooo t-U ao that suae i thee c ulcta't walk. Y
d»'t agree with than? * f

A.— N j»

Q.- Tju nan 11 44 subjects, cm ccch .n. >1 th.a yjura.lf?

«•- Y-3.

Q.- Yju »-’idn*t b-u ny A th-n b-inv carried ut .n ctr-tch.ro ta
the h>spitil b-.rr-clca i. rtr«nta-nt?

N . Kr.ybj nft-nrrdo when 3 wasn't in D-chau -ny 1 r.. I /.*uld

ft t kn.-w.

Q.- Yiu didn't 3 — any A th--. bo lain th- >thcrs jp ut .f the
ex^.rLxr.t'1 stati n — that is, n- h l'in up -n'thur aicvply bvc-.uc-
tr-y were 3: sick they c . uldn't walk by tb.ns-lv-s?

A.- AcU, th-y were pretty wa".k, y_s, but I n-v-r s-w that n - iy
c uldn't walk.


7753


21 Jur.- h -^ fc -iO-I-Perrin (Inti vcn Sc ho n)
Court No. I.


q Did sore of these sypsiea return to work iaaedlntely after
the experinents were cospleted! %

A */ hen they were tent bade fro3 the experimental station to
tin blocks, I vr.s is the cccp only two or three drya then I left.

I don't know anythins cbout it. 3 U t during the two or three d*ye
vhec I waa in the caap, nobody had to work.

\ Do you know whether or not Lmbins*r went directly to work?

A Laubinger wee in =y block. He vu aent to Block 22. I save
hia ton* bread there.

^ V hy didn't he so to the hospital!

A V hy should he so to the hospital, he wasn't aick,

^ He vns very weak, wasn't hot

A Tes, l*:t not so werk that he had to .~o to the hospital.

% He ves rfrrid to so to the hospital! He actually vns afraid to
o to the hospital, waa he not!

A ITo. The hospitd in Saefc"U waa very .*ood. Thr trertaent wee
Tf ry -ood. Ec didn't have to be afraid. I ayself had boon in tho
hospital. : vaa tre-ted very well.

; r’A really don't know vh~t hia attitude waa, do you, you didn't
• ^ ta hia a.jout it!

a ro.

Q. Vhrt irroup vra ho in in t’-c experiaento!

A As far ra I rencabcr, he waa in the ixna .-roup aa I waa. Kc vra
in the bed next to a«.

i. V hat did he drink!

A 2 ic not sure vha.t he drank. He only told ao that he hrd to
rink sea. wrtcr. Ec was given dextrose end soacthins called Schokr-

Zolfi.

k Did he set aick!

a Tea. V hen ve left Auschwitz he had n carbuncle on hia eye; od
*r-<n in the prelinlnpry period, he hsd some kind of nn - -iaflnaontion
' eye ell the ti=e.


9754


21 Juue-X-32i-10-2--?erriu (Inti Via Server.)

C cart Do. 1

^ Si you know when Dr. Bei.-lboeck left Dechru?

A V*.

- often vbb Dr. 3ci lboeck pt the oxperlnentnl station?

A H- VC* there nil icy. Re Just went ewry to er.t. Ee wasn't there
ct ni<ht, tut the curses were there et cl-it end sone French nedied
students who were on nlrht duty.

Vfcat tine did Dr. Beldboeck lcrve In the evening?
a Ihft vrrled. S ocetlnes after the evening roll cnll, sonetines nt.
seven o'clock. That varied.

$ But he wns never there during the late hours cf the ovenin,T?
a I don't rcoeaber. After the roll call 1 hrd to :o trek to the
hospital. I hnd to «o to ted.

% Dow, in suaartlon, witness, you strtc that each expriacntal
subject volunteered for the experlncnt, Is that correct?

A T'*. Ve all said that we wore will In/:.

; T-vi are certain cf that?

a r-o.

x Have you over testified rs r vitness beforo a court before?

A Or. this subject, you ncan?

$ On any subject.

a Do, I have never been n witness.

^ D- you know the •L'nlflcrnce of an oath?

A Tes.

i Tou sverr that ycu arc tcllln.- the truth here on this stm d?

* Yes.

15. Ha3DY: I have no further questions, Your Honors.

33 FEZ SI DECT: Defendant Counsel have my redirect cxmlnatlon?

HZOIRZCT ZiAIirATIOr

=r DR. S?ZIT3A UZE:

\ V itness, the gypsies when you sentioned, where they nil able to r. ■ -
re:i md vrfte?

A Do, :>o*t of then could not read or write.


9755


2! June-Ji-RK-IG-J-Perri(1st. voa Schuet)
Sxrt *.'o. 1


} :;o»t of thee could sot reed or vrite. And then before you were
jut is the ccnocstrrtios crrp, were other relatives of yours in the
concentration ca-p?

A Yea, ay whole freily. Ky fr.tber md ny five brothers end sisters,
they ell died in Auschwitz.

\ : tea you vert the only one still at liberty?

a Yes, I pz the only one of ry family.

3 V here vere you vorkln.;?

A Ir. a dynraitc coapan V ir. ?uerth. In Stabcm near ?uerth.

v " hen you vere arrested and interro.tr.tcd by the Oeetnpo. Vhat

ch/rdes did the Sestipo aakel

A . hey i-eked ne about the work, md they ea.id that I had been in¬
volved ir. denis vith forei-acre who worked there: end several tiacc
I failed to .-o to work. I hrd beon convicted once for breach of work
contract, end they took se to the police prison hero, md five d/y e
l-.er I was sent to the concentration cicp.

; V hen you net Eoller.rcfcer and Reinhardt, did they tell you that
three dips pftor the experiments vere finished toseone died.

A ! ? o, Hollenminer end Reinhardt always eaid nobody died. I asked
ther especially whether rnybody died.

; To you knov hov the station was dismlvcd, or did it rand a in
cr.i a tenet?

A Ikj , it woo dissolved. I can re n ember eomo of ay conredes helped
?rof«aoor Sci tiboeck to clem up the station.

t they tell you that my body died?

A ro, I asked about fact. I saw all of thee afterwards. 7 he
-^rnans in the camp always asked about it because they were Interested.

' The Prosecutor asked you about raerson need Adler. Is that e
'Omar, name or p Poll go name!

A Adler is obviously a Serum nice. Z here ere aany ypsies steed
* . I hey ere ell Germans.

% gypsies in the habit of keepln- birth certificates end so on


9756


tTcne-K-Bt-lG-Werria (Xnt, Tor. S dhocn)
fcurt S o. 1


with then very carefully? Do ell -ypsies elviys know where they
belong?

A Veil, nrxy people don't know when they were horn, or where
they were horn tecsise they were tom In e cert on the rocd; and
= 38t of then didn't -o to school, they don't know how to read md
write. 7 here ere very few who know how to reed end write.

\ Ho*- a tout your urine, was it tckea dally? You hrve to tell
us about tint bectuse apparently somethln-t was not entered in the
record,

A Ve had a urine class that was a kind of museum, ond in the
bock there was a bi r, table. Every day in the morning, we had to
?it the urine glrose* on the table. D urin.: the nirfit it was
collected, ond we had to put the -lass on the table in the morning,
end either the r.urs« or soce Frcnchnei v -1 hed then or something -
I don't knew what hs did - he nersurod it, how such it was. I
think he sonoured the litore.

H The urine wo collected daily then?

A Too, and the stool was collected daily, too. The otcol wre
wei-hod drily.

33, STEirSAldU Z have no further questions.

•®. KAPJYs I hrve two core quest ions, Your Honors.

SZC5DSS rXA!l?TA:XOr

BY *.3. HA72Y:

' How cany of these experimental subjects received the sec water
ty a otenn-h tube?

A I know nothin- about that.

^ fou actually don't know anythin* about the experiments as to
the technical nature of then, how they wore conducted, whether
or not punctures were performed, and whether or not any of the
trustee received sea veter by c stomach tube?

A Ho, I didn't see that.

K2. HAEDT; Ho further questions.


21 JcE-tf-3£-i-7-*«rrIn (Xnt, Von Sehoan)
C curt rc« 1


2?.. S3I/3ATESJ Kr. President, I have no more <?iestions.

TEE FHZSITIlTi If there are ao acre ^aestlons to be propounded, the
witr.es* Ilettbach le excused.

B5 VITTSSSI Kay I sit In the audience now, Tour Honor!

~ r~ FEZSiriTt: The witness nay apoly for a pass to the office where
the passes are Issued, but he will have to ret his pass and enter the
gallery by that nethod.

THE WITTESSl 7 hank you.

32. srnrSAcia: Kr. President, I should like to conclude the Bolrl-
bceck case, and state that the weight chart, which le number 2 J, which
I showed tho rentieuer. In the course of crooe examination because ny
client has the photostatlo co-.les.of all the fever charts; ic d I would
Ilka to prepare a new chart fron these ori.^inrl curves \hich will
show exactly the vtlfifct variations In each case, when he thought tho
pjrson drank water, and the water, and tho blooc. Thcoc charts do
not show this exactly.

'.JR. EkSDTl This chrrt that has been drawn up, I wonder whether Ir.
Stclr.bnuer Intends to offer that in evidence.

32. SI2ir3JUEBl Tes, I will offor thlo chart at m exhld t then.

la. KA2DT: Vail , I object to the adnlsslor. of thnt chnrt Into
evidence inasmuch as It was a chart that was dmvn In thlB Hurnberj
•ri 1 by the defendant, based on documents which hive been altered.

I ur the me re, the cherts P nd the books have .--one over that thoroughly
In the course of the cross examination of the defendant md tho direct
examination of the expert. Ivy. I tee no reason for tho charts to
be further drawn up bv tho defendant inasmuch p.s he has amply testified
ccncemin-: the matter, and I don't think the charts would be accurate
that he would draw vp at this tine. 7 he probative value would be
deeply in aiestion, and I object to the admission of such evidence.

TEE iRZSl'TZ^i V hat would be the purpose of this chart! V ould It b
iff edded to the record which Is alrea.dy before the Tribunal!

32. I don't went to submit this as an exhibit. I want


9753


jur.s-!>BZ-lC-6-rerrla (Int. Vcn Schoen)

C oort So. 1

*o use it ir. the triel brief to explain the point of vi-v cf the
derer.se to the Crihuccl. The exhibit rerains, the fever chart.


:hU is just on explanation.


Court So. 1

21 Jan 47-iC-U-l-Z0(-Sitsbuck ("on cohos)


“2 PPSSIDI5T: In the preparation of hi 6 trial brief counsel Bay
include anything vhich ho deans relevant end pertinent which vill he of
easistence in understanding the record ea counsel contends it exists.

Of course, everything in the brief aust be based upon evidence vhich is
before the Tribunal. Counsel understands that.

ZK. STSXSS117S: Then I vill vithdrav this chart vhich I have
offered in evidence as Sunber 23.

DIEoPSSEa VC; SCECS: Your Honor, there eocns to bo something
wrong with the earphones in the defendants' deck. Tho technician sug¬
gests that “c tako a recess of a fev ainutes.

IS. EArlT: Your Honor, Dr. Stcinbruer le finished with his vitneso
in his case Sciglbceck and the ne*t caso coning uo vill be the defondart
Hovon. Ve could adjourn until 1:30 and vith defondrnt Hovon'o erso
start fresh at that tiao.

THE P2&SIBB5: I would ask tho iiarshal that during the noon roccsB
ho will teke uo tho natter of the consultation bot'-oor. counsel for
defcr.iant Kovon and defondrnt Koven for security and arrange unobjec¬
tionable security. It is tho wish of tho Tribunal that counsol consults
his cliont Hovon this evening rnd toaorrow corning If ho doslros.

In view of tho trouble with tho trensalocion tystoo tho Court vill
nev be in recess until 1:30 o'clock.

(A recess van taken until 1330 hours.)


S7*>


Court So. 1

21 Jun 47-A-13-l-£HH-IoBter (sr'vu)


JJTESSDC* SiSSIGS

(The Tribunal reconvened at 133C hours, 21 June 1947.)

IE2 KASSBALl The Tribunal Is again in session.

Kay it please Tour Honors, defendant Pskoray is absent, having boon
excusod by the Tribunal. The defendant Obcrhcuser and the defondnnt
Gebhrrdt are absent due to illness, having been excused by the Tribunal.

E2, 2$£SISE9Xl The Tribunal has a certificate signed by Ccotain
Kartln, surgeon in U.S. Arny. stating that defendant Oberhuuser and
defendant Gcbhardt should be excused thlseftorr.oon on recount of illness.
They are excusod frer. attendance before the Tribunal this afternoon.

Zho Socrotary Oeneral vill file the doctor's certificate with the record.


Counsel nay uroeced,

31. STZXSBAIOE (Tor tho defendant Pciglboeck): Hr. President,
having heard tho vitnoss Hottbueh, I hrve concluded ny cnoo for the
defendant 3ciglbooclc.

TEH PPiS IDXXT: Tory veil, counsol. The Tribunal nov calls tho
COSO cgolnst the defondant Hoven. Is counsol ready? Is counsel ready
to proceed?

DR. OAVLH (Counsel for tho defondnnt Kovon): Tos. Kr. Prosldont,
lot no first rocall to tho Tribunal tho fa-t that in tho ceso of tho
defondant Dr. Kovon I havo already hoard the vitncsces Piokk, Dr. Korn,
and Dorn. As further evidence, and In furthor pursuance of this enso,

I ash poruission to cell the dofondnnt Hoven to tho stand.


IPX PSSSIDXST: At tho rcoucst of his counsel the defendant
Yaldeoar Kovon vill take tho witness stand.

defendant, took tho stand nni testified rs


please raise his right hand and bo sworn


sure


Alnigfcty and CQniscient, that I will sneek the
withhold end add nothing.


9761


:ourt So. 1

21 Jun 47-A-13-2-lSi-70Btcr (3rovs)


(The v*tr.eos repeated the oath.)

THE ?3£SZBS5T: You r>y 8it dews.

9Z2&C3 SCJutfXATZGS

3Y T?.. GAELS (Counsel for the defendant Valdenar Eovon):

Q, Your nar.e Is Yaldfcr:ar Ecven, is that correct!

A. Yes.

v You are an ii.T.?

A. Yes.

q, Vhon end where were you torn?

A. 10 Tebruary 1903 in Freiburg In 3reiegau.

q. Please describe to the Trib unal your career.

A. ! Attended high school In 1910. I was graduated, vent to
southern Sveder. at that tiro, working in agriculture, thenoe to Denaork
until 1920. In 1921 I vent to the United States and in 1924 I returned
to Gernany. After =y return I took over the adainictratlon of sy
fathor's estate until 1930. 1931 to 1933 ! vent as a Journalist to
Paris. In the susaer of 1933 I returned to Ceraany. My fathor dlod in
1930. In 1933 =y brother diod, who had been a doctor and dlod in our
■anatoriuB. I then took over the adalniftrotion of ny frther's onna-
torius; the cedical direction of it «as to resalr. in the fanily. I
prepared for graduation froo high school and in 1934 I vts graduated.

Then I studied nediclne until 1939.

q. *hat did you do in the United States?

a. I vas or. agriculture inspector.

Q. "hat further training does a doctor in Gersony go through
after finishing his studies?

a

A. ?or one year he is a nedicel intern.

q. Did you go through this lnternshiu?

A. So, I did not.

q. To you have any specialized training as a doctor?

A. So.

q, 3id you belong to the Generel SS?


5762


Court 5o. 1

21 Jus 47-A-12-&-S-K-7oster (3rova)


A. Yea.

Q. ■•has did 7cu Join it?

A, 1934.

Q, Why?

A. Os the heals of the levs at that tloc, only jxirsor.o vere ocr-
sltted to study vko belonged to the Party or ose of Ito affiliation*. I
did sot wish to join the Party and for thl. reason I joined the affilia¬
tion, nasely, the SS. I had a friend by that tlae by the woe of Albert
Hut* vfco led the SS-Sturn In Freiburg. Ee told =e that I slcply had to
join It for sally In order to bo allied to begin ay studies, and I had to


do the regular SS duties.


to f+QL lk,i-Lca»«g
• cart JTo. 1

< Vhct was year last rarj? in the £enejrl-SSJ
A Untereeharfuehrer.

X Was the tint or scharf'iehr*r r n-nbar of the Tu^href «of?8 of the

ssi

A IT:. : herr were three rmhs between the tJntorsrherfeefcr and

the TJateratursfuekrer end the Untersturuh’Milnvr r>rr» eoondod tn .
rank to r lieutenant,

} Let us safe* this perfectly clear, At vhr.t r*»fc did the Fuehrer
Corps berint

A I Just said, with the ran* of Unteroturr-fuehjrer, Which #pii 1»4
lieutenant,

X Until when did you belon- to the Gcnerr-lrtt!

A Until the 23th of Au-uot, 1?3J.
x 7ron Whrt date on did you heIon# to the Veffan-SS!

A 7ron the sate date, 28 Au ust, 1?3%

X 3id you voluntarily Join the Veffea-SS!

A Uo, 1 received an order et this day ar.d I ves drafted.

X IB it true thrt you Joined rr.d ’belonged to the V^ffen SS on the
bcnla of a-le^el deerccT
A Yes, thet is so.

X V hy did you obey this order to be drpfted!

A 7Ms vea a ui litary order vhieh I had to obey. Just the way
everyone else had to obey such orders. It vns a draftin'* siller »♦
the drafting the emy carried out.

^ What activities did you have In the VafTen-SSt
A First I was a eo=on soldier In the Vr'ferwSS. On the basis of
p legal decree, all doctors were extracted frou the tri^p*. On 2'
October 193? X vent to 3uehenveld as an assistant doctor to the
troop doctor.

X Why did you obey this order!

A It vp .3 a nllitary order, that I had to obey,
c ifcet activities did you hrve in 3uehenv*ldl


37 >4


21 Juao--3MV-L*m«r (ir.U feovt)
"curt rc. 1


i I wca easietaut doctor to .ha troop Ao«tor end vac udi«islly
ia charge of the pu*r<U.

'• th '-° capacity did 70 U have ar.y fvnctlcu. In «>- .o-,,r.trt!4on

cusp of 3uchenwald?

A 5 o.

D urin • tkla activity did 70 U enter the protective cm tody
cmp cf 3uChenv*ld?

A To. Ho, that wee strictly forbidden. Cnc needed p special
peso to do so end only the ctco doctors received that !*ss.

X 3 urin.c your activities as assistant doctor for the .-aarda there,
did you know that In the protective custody ccnp any crises were
coml ttadl

A To, I hrd no connection with the protective custody crap or
the concentration canp.

X V her. did your activities in the concentration ein*> Bucher.vald
he In?

A Jrnuary l^Ui,

^ V hy did you xc:it yourself to he transferred froc tho -uards
to the concentration ce-.o Buchcnwnld?

A One dry I received an order froa Borlln and wps thereby trans¬
ferred to tha concentration cwsp,

X Vhrt was your first position in the concentration carp of
Suchenwaldl

A I v*3 second cam doctor.

X Who wag the first cr.cp doctor a.t tfcnt tine?

A One Dr. hex Blanche.

X Witness Boesfclld testified here tha.t when 31er.efci was still
first etnp physician, you occupied a very powerful position. ~ hr*,
la pa*e the Zn-lisk transcript. 1 3 that correct?

A Vhrt 3 oehahlld ueent Is certainly the foiluwin.-? 7 to- the

very first days of ny urcsence in the concentre*.ion epnp, 1 succeeded

in doin.r a-Teat led for the prisoners, portlculorly for the non-

9765


21 June-Ar-3&-l4-3“Lsss*r (Int. Brown)

Court Fo. 1

Sercsns, such as th* Ciee'M, 3 ut bfc a e n, rolos and Jew*ch pi ! sor.-rs.

7ro= thia feet the lucre salon ni.jrht hove arisen la Bobahild*s pad
idher prisoners' aindc, that I occupied a very powerful position. In
reality, however, I was having rreat difficulties at this tine la having
ry •'111 carried out be-eaee I fcr.d to tth* ay chief Into consideration
vho vea by no seano a frledd-fiftfche political prisoners. Officially I
•co subordinate to Br. Blanche end he issued ell the directives.

X Whet wes the situation rt 3uehcaveld when you took over your
activities k second easp physician?

A V hen I took over this Job the situation thero ves far froa
satisfactory.

X Vhn improvements did you Introduce during your activities es
second camp doctor?

A I had many patients listed pa so-celled convelcscents or out-ppV.vnta*
net lento. Z he*e vere really in -isrt convalosecnto rnd in pirt prisoners
vho were not stron.; enough for hocr/ Inter. Thon, without cy chief nor
the cp=s> comm® dor knowing the feet, I set up e. Jewish hospital und
cerrtod out the treatment of ambulant Jewish patients there. At first
this had to be dono at ni-rht Pnd later I arranged things so that it was
possible to do this treatment iurin.- the day. I then improved the
medicine supply system. X ,^ot sur-rlcrl lnstrucenis which, in pert,
were ay O'-ci private instruments froa the sannioriun, artificial oun-
-p*Ps, etc. I then arren^d thr.t the prisoners could auoly for olck-
csll at any time of the day or r.l.-ht and would then bo treated. In¬
cidentally, lile.-al be.tho were built into the be tracks ar.d tho hocoltol
without the knovied.-.e of the cenp-oucnasd-c.

^ Bid you set contrary to the ordorc of the Inspector of the concontrac¬
tion err^s and of the car.p comcenderl

A Set tin up the Jewish hospital md treatin’ then was, at the beoln-
r.ln of ay activities, strictly forbidden. Standard nedicaL prcpr.re-
* ions could only b* used for the S3 troopc.

v V hot consequences could this disobedience on your pert irve hnd for

976 S


21 Juao-A-3 7.- 1'— ’—! r c •; c r (Ir.‘. Breve)
Zc'ir'. So. 1


you!

A Veil, the consequences that could cone froa disobeying r- order
cf Hlndtr'i have probably beecae well enough known to the Tribunal
ir. the course of this trlp.l. I do sot believe I here to go Into the.*..

\ V hen did you becone first cep doctor!

A June of 19*42.

^ How did thet hepnen!

A I don T t h-cv nyself. I wrs noet surprised.

\ Describe your tasks md duties es first eeap doctor.

A "tdlcal enre of the prisoners under se. At least the*. la how I
const-usd ay tasks.

% Vcrc you also ^prrleon physician?

A Tes, X was.

^ V hat were the dutlos of the .tnrrison physician?

A His Job vri to tries nedlcrl cure of the ,:uerde.

> V hrt did you have to do with the concentration cenp In your
Ccpcclty ns .garrison doctor!

A Fothlne.

% Were there other enzp doctors!

A Tes.

$ Kov aj.

A >o or three. It defended. It vrs different 1 different tine.

^ Did you hove considerable ncdlcrl knowledge at that tlae!

A So.

> You have her-rd Xo-cr.'s ttstlr.ony here, who stated thr.t you had
no particular Inter, st In the aedlcal affairs of the canp. This Is
?a*e 12C3 of the Zn llsh transcricfc . Is that cofrect!


576 7


21 Jane U7-tt^7D-13*KSross (Int. Brown)

Court Ye. 1

That impression right arise because I vaa rot able to concern
nysalf intimately with the nodical caro of the prisoners but no one
can deny that the radical caro fer the prisoners and their troatnont by
specialist doctors was to a considerable extent improved xt. \rs*

a veil known fact among the prisoners that at jy tiro Buehorrwnld had
the bost hospital of all concentration corps* Hy a^in work, bowover,
that of assisting tho prisoners in view of the conditions of the
camp at that time. This demanded a groat deal of adninistrativo work
which uaod up ny time completely.

Q Kogon further asserted that you fait uncertain in tho fiold of
nodicino and that you ado no soorot of this. This is pago 1203 of tho
English transcript, is that so?

;» I know enough about nodi cine to know what was -dssing and what
was absolutory rwcossary for p-rfoot troatront and caro of tho sick
people in tho car? to bo possiblo. And that I accomplished. And that was
tho min thing after all. Th-ro would havo had to havo boon tiio goal of
•an experienced doc ter as '-oil.

a if you had not really finished your nodical training and had
r» specialist training, how cculd yai fulfill your duties as first
carp doctor at Buchonwald?

’lYon I began ry activities a3 camp doctor in Buchorovald tho
radical car; and troabiont rraa c-rriod out in part by prisoners who
v/oro net 1-ctcrs. Sot .a of ry .rudccosscrs, all of when woro oxporioncod
doctors carried out rajor operations. I corrocted those oonditions
t: mediately and put specialists in. For uxrmplo, Dr. Horn as chief
physician fer the surgical dopcrSiont. Dr. Hatuosok, u-^t-u-s-o-k,

I :ado chiof physician fer the internal department and Dr. Sc'nallnk, a
Czech Jeftrish doctor, wa3 director of the T9 Department. I gavo then
absolute authority ever th- nurses. Theoretically they wore subordinate
to no. However, they never received from no orders to carry out thoir
dutio3 in tho matter of nodical caro. They could work without any


9768


a Juno ^>*vn>l5-2-Orcs3 (Int. Brown)
Court lie . 1


iotarferanso fren n, exactly ns if they were in a regular hospital. -
I^-cr I .^t other socialists to take care of the patients, r-vxly
PolvS and Prenchaon. The quality of these. prisoner doctors vas
.-uarentee or. nigh for r~ that all sick >c?!~ without exception '"uld
bu accorded the host possible nodical care. I gave those prisoner
djetors a perfectly fra- hand because I 3aid to aysolf that thay would
fca cst ocncomod for the welfare of their folia-- prisoners and that,

,f course, was the caso. Therefore, so long as the SS doctors vero
.'.in; official duties I ado then subordinato to the prisoner dooters.
That is to say, I rtado thvzi assistants to Drs. Horn and Vatusok and
the ether doctors. Per these reasons 1 onpicycd thoso prisonor
dooters contrary t- a specific order frea Hla-lor and Gra-.dtz, It was
strictly forbidden tc use drugs and ncdicir.es fron the drug stores for
prisoners. I did not obeQr this order. Ir. 19U2 and 13 I ws tho largest
usee of drugs fro:: tho drug stcros in * clear and bucauso of uy largo
consu'^tion of drugs I ted.ee had to ox pi* in actions to tho head

effico in Berlin. Ho’-ovor, largo .--xnmts of -dicino wvro nocosr.-.ry. To
tho extent that specialised treat;vent to prisoners in BuchorT.'nld was
rut passible I ssr.t sick patients to the Clinic at tho University of
Vienna. I think this was tho rx>st unique occurronco in the history of
concentration cu ps,

1 You nar.jd Drs. Hern and ’.latusok.’ Is that Or. Hem you aention
Idontioal with the witr.033 horo?

A Yus, th't»s tho sane ran.

Q Tfhat was Dr. 'htusok's citizenship?

Ha “s also a Czechoslovakian.

Q Dr. Kos’on further stated that yeu had a tripl- function in
"uch^nrrid. First, can? physician, secondly deputy of Ding-Schulor in
-lock 15, and third as tho deputy of tho loading physician of the cans.
This is on page 12C9 of the laalish transcript.

.. I was never Ding-Scholar s deputy ir: bloc 16. That can be seen
Iroa Dingis diary. It is also incerroot tc design-to a- Dr. Lolling»s

5769


i


21 Jaao li7^.-..r>-15-3-Gr»ss (Ir.t, 3rcvn)
Coart Sa, 1


deputy. For throe weeks vhon Or. lolling was absent I was working In
his office* I ins a:t tk, official deputy ulth executive porters nor
did I issue directive or orders. I did, however, carry out tho
functions of canp doctor.

Q X turn new to tho typhus charge. Than was tha typhus oxpori-
runtal station in Puchorerald set up?

A Sc far as I recall that was at the turn of tho yoar 19U1 to

19U2.

3 vrhat was the roason for sotting up this axporinental station
precisely in Buchcnwald?

* 0

The reason was, I think, th't Dr. Ding had boon canp doctor
in Buchanvrald since 1930 and, therofero, knew the situation in that
casp voxy precisely,

Q '»ho was dlroctor of tho experimental station?

A Ding-Schulor.

Q Did y:u knew hin?

A Yos, of course.

Xc-on charaotoriroa Sokulor as follows, This is pago 1250 of
the English Transcript, "Ho was a; ii tie us, always watching out for
number one. Ho wanted to bo rogax*dod .".3 an inportant rr.n by tho public,
particularly in tho university. Ho sought ovory opportunity to fur-
thor his porssnol intorost3 and to have hi;3olf looked up to."

A That description ef Xogor. is certainly ccrrcct. Xogcn know
Dlng-^chulor nuch hotter than I did, n-roevor, and was ->ero closoly
connected “ith hir. that I was. Din- w.uld have oven sacrificod his own
family for his CT.r. personal advantage. Din^, becauso of this, reado
sori us offerts t keep other people., including -ysclf, fren having any
insight in his station f r virus research,

1 “Tiere were yen Ding*s deputy?

I w?.s Ills deputy in block 9^,

3 hy was Ding int.rested in having you bo his deputy ir. Block 5^?


5770


21 JUfto ~-i 5-L-C re ss (Ir.t. Bream)

C-urt Jo. 1


First if =11 bocauso I nrovidod hin with very natorirl
advenfcagos through these illegal r=rk shops hava repeatedly boon
described boro* Secondly* I vaa tho only doctor vhon the prisoners
trusted and -he, therefore, could collect tho orployecs and assistants
that -era to w:rk in block 50. Otherwise, ho would havo boon unablo
to find the:: bocauso it *.~s a natter of co non knowledge in tho con¬
centration can. that they often concealed their truo profession be¬
cause thoy never knar vhat they w-ro ftoing to bo usod for.

q Far whet reasons did Dr. Din' not havo you redo his paroanont
deputy in block U6 as well.

/. That was impossible bocauso I had no specialized kno'.:lod"o
which *rculd bo tho ntnlum roquirar:,nt for ary deputy. Tho nurses thoro
had alrocdsr acquired considerable knowlodgo so that thoy woro suporior
to no in this field* I had noithor tine nor intaroet to concom nysolf
with thoso problcna* Thoroforo I oould not havo givon tho prisonors
any orders.


9771


21 Jun-A- 2 -l£-I-Senpson (Jr.;, Brcwr.)
Court Sc. I.


Q Is it then true, 23 Dr. 'logon said, that the arsbitiotts Dr.

Ding hod nothing to fear in the way of competition from Dr. Hovon?

A Certainly that is true, as Kogan says correctly only the
-oat ho had to fear was competitors, but tho mi n im requirements for
3 coapotitor is that he has specialised medical training in hygiene,
so he didn't have to fear me as a competitor.

Q I shall now put to you Document N’O-571, in Document Book XII,
page 15. Here there is a notation to the effect that on 16 th August
19U3, Dr. Ding coved to Buchenwaldj is that correct? This is on pago

15.

A Dr. Ding's fanily moved at this tire to Weimar. However, at
the time the typhus experiments began he had his own room in tho of¬
ficer's barracks in Buchererold.

Q What do you knew about Ding's activities in the department
for typhus and virus research in Buchcnwald?

A I was nevor present during any experiments, but it was gen¬
erally known that typhus experiments wore being carried out on prison¬
ers.

Q What was your activity in Block L6?

A At Block U 6 I had no medical or research activities or
duties at all.

Q Were you Dr. Ding's deputy for Block li 6 ?

A No, I did not represent Dr. Ding in Block I 16 . Once for a
short time I wa3 his deputy in Block Idi and h?, but at that tire thore
were no oxperinents being carried out.

Q Where were you his deputy?

A Block 50.

Q What was being done in Block 50?

A Typhus serum was being manufactured there.

Q Were any experiments carried out in Block 50?

A I know of none. During this time I concerned nyeelf primarily
with collecting the doctors, the scientific personnel and enployeee for


9772


21 Jun-A-!S*»!6-2-6a3psoa (Int. Brcwr.)
Coart :io. I.


Block 50. This was done at a conference with the illegal camp manage¬
ment, above all with the leaders of the foreign resistance groups, the
renbers of which were at this tire in particular danger in the camp.

Q When you say the camp management, you nean the illegal camp
-snagonent. How did you become to bo Ding's deputy in Block 50?

A Cn the request of the illegal camp manage rent, and tho
foreign political prisoners I was interested in becoming Ding's dep¬
uty in 3lock 50, because 31ock 50 offered a good possibility for
fcolping many prisoners because their work would bo regardod by tho C5
as so important that they would bo classified as essential.

Q I shall now put Kirchheioor'a testimony to you; it is on
pago 132U of the English transcript. Kirchhoinor said* Ding's deputy
was Hovon. What do you have to say about that?

A It wac known that I had accocisodnted a large number of
prisonors who wore in danger in Block 16. Also, months boforo Block
50 was oponod, J was looking around for tho irisonors who woro to work
In Block 50. T!bon Kirchhoiacr says I was Ding's doputy, ho certainly
sust bo r- ferring to Block 50, that is as doputy in Block 50. Tho
only reason I or any of tho prisonors had anything to do with Block 1*6
war to use those tiro blocks — 1*6 and 50 — as asylums. I did not havo
to tell any prisoner at this tioj that I know nothing about typhus, and
that I had nothing to do with tho oj^erf- onto. Only today I havo to
oakc those rtatar nts. Every one in tho coop know that, and that I
accommodated prisoners in danger in Block 1*6 and 50, and that fact was
known in interested circles at that tins; and todgy I don't see it
could havo been any different.

Q .‘ore ox-crlnentr carried out during Ding's absence?

A I never carried any experiments out during Ding's cbscnco.

Q Did you over concern yourself, as a doctor. Kith typhus?

A No, It was in this trial that I ever heard any more prcciso
information about typhus. • Before the trial I had never concerned my-
Svlf sith typists at all, •


9773


21 Jon-A-*3-26»3-Sasp©on (Int. 3rown)
Court :>o• I.


Q It. your opinion, what knowledge is necessary for a person
to be a'ola to carry out typhus experirents?

A Well, at least specialized training in typhus and hygiene.

Q Do you have such training?

A Ho.

Q Did you send any reports to any offices on typhus experiments?

A Ho.

Q On page 1202 of the English transcript Dr. Kogan has stated
that Dr. Ding did not begin — cculd not begin any series of experiments
in Block U6 without n formal order from a higher off iso. Did you over
rccoivo such ordors?

A Ho.

Q Did you know the dofoitdant Gonzkon?

A Ho, never saw hin boforo this procoodings.

Q Who appointed you Ding's doputy in Block 50?

A It was on ord-rs of Grr.r.ltz, in agreement with Dr. lolling,
that I bocano his doputy in Block 50.

Q Wore you specifically designated ao Ding's doputy for Block
50?

A I was never appointed for anything oxcopt Block 50?

Q I shall now put to you Docusont KO-257, Prosecution Exhibit
283, pogo 11, in Document Book XII. This is Ding's affidavit. In
this affidavit. Ding said tho followingi ]»y presence in Buchcnwald
lasted always only a fow days while tta tino of tho experiments ard
the length of tho typhus epidcnic lasted about ton woeks. Ic that
correct?

A It is incorrect that Ding was present only for a few days at
a tino in Buchera.aldj on the contrary, hi was about absent for a very
few days whon he went on official trips. Ho was, at any rate, in
Buchersraid os long as the experiments went on. Moreover, ho never
instructed nc or any other doctors zo have anything to do with these


experiments.


9774


c

21 Jun-A-L3 ~i6-i;-Sa=pson (Int. Brown)

Court .’>o, I.

Q Ding also said: Dr. Koven had the orders, also had tho duty
of making theso prisoners who were sjlcctod by the RSKA available for
the prophylactic vaccination preceding the experiments.

A No, those statements of Ding's arc not correct, because
neither the chief of tte concentration caap or tho WVHA could have
issred orders of that sort at that tine. As I havo already said, I
only interceded on requests from tho foreign political prisoners in
order to prevent such prisonors being used for such oxporiraonts,

Q Is it true, as Ding said, that for tho yellow fovor oxpori-
aents that two to three hundred volunteers stood in readiness?

A I know that for Ding's experiments volunteers did apply,
but Just t/hat cxporiconta of Ding's they wore, I do not know,

Q In this affidavit Ding further oaysj "In tho year 19U2 ho
had to work a lot by hisaclf sinco I contracted typhus, arri after
that ms sent to a rust hoc*. Right after that I had a dotail to tho
rastour Institution in Paris, During this timo the sick reports car¬
ried tho signature of Hovon or Plain", This is on pogo 12,

A Fron tho diary it can bo soon that during Ding's sicknoss
with typhus thoro wero no typhus experiments oarriod out at all, Tho
sazo is true fcr the tie© when ho wr.s dotailod to tho Pasteur Instit¬
ute in Paris. Fror. this it can bo sown thoro was no opportunity for
any sort of indepondont work, entirely asido fron the fact that, fcr
tho reasons already rentionod, I was in no position to work independ¬
ently.


9775


Court Fo. 1

21 Jun 47-A#-17-l-^2K-Pr ineeu (3rcv»)


^ Vr.lch of the defendants did you ixov before tho bogoc7

A. Professor hrugovsky I not six or seven days before the Gestaoo
irrestcd nc In * einar. Ding had invited =y wife end ayaelf to his fceco
in Vairar. '.Lrugovaky and "in* vere present. There was no discussion of
tgrehus at that tine. The invitation lasted for, roughly, half an hour.

That was the flrut tino I saw :trugovsky and spoke with hin. Vith the
other twenty-ona defendants I had neither officially or privately any¬
thing to do. I sow then for the first tine in the dock hero.

Did you have any connection with firm whose vaccinos woro
tostod In iuehcnveld?

A. So.

Q, Did you saintain a«' connection with tho institute In Cracow!

A. HO.

% I shall put to you Document 13C5, Exhibit 469. This is a letter
of 5 January 1943 frer. the 3©bring ’'ork: stating that yellow fover vrccino
vlll ho sent. Zn this lottor it says, and X cuoto vcrbetiB! "Ve ask
for inforcotion vfcothor vo should send this shipment to Eoven in Buchon-
vald to the old address." Iocs this lottor not contradiet ycur etatenont
that you had no connection with firss?

A. Ding novor gavo in his letters tho address of tho persons
oer-ding the letter co tho eroerincr.tal station but ho gave the 'Cano of
Sttchoovsld" cintly. Ac:-* letters-

THE PFSSira*:: What is the dccuncnt v ook end page where this can

•c found!

CAV1IS: That document w B s cut in by rrosceution during tho
exanin?tion of the defendant .-Irugcvjiky. Conseeuently, it is in no docu-
nvnt book. It vea put in while Krugoviky war being cross-exanincd -
Docuaent 1305, Exhibit 465.

TES PhESXXES?: 1 understand.

A. Conseeuently, all letters or rrckagee fron this fim were sent
to tho address of the fim which Ting had out on as the doctor's address
and at soon as their contents would be ascertained they were sent to


9776


Court So. 1

21 Jus 47-A-17-2-B-X-Prineau (Brown)


Block 46. You cat see very cloarly fron this letter that Ding is being
asked vhat address the package should bo sent to. In other vords, he
will got in touch vith the cerocn vho is really going to receive the
tackago, ar.d that is vhat the firs is doing, asking kin for an address,
nothing core, to vhiek the packages or letters or vhatover it is should
he sent. Crel or written instructions free Bing aust have orcvioucly been
sent to this firs vhich aoeiirently voro not aulte clear so the firs is
again asking for cl^ar instructions as to hov the stuff is to be addressed.

Q, In this connection, .s. President, froa Document Book Hovon So. 1
I put ir. as Exhibit EO-1 Dccuaent So. 1, which is an affidavit by Arthur
Dietzsch of 2 April 1947, cages 1 to 4 In the docusont book.

THE PEiSIIET: The Tribunal has not yet boon furnishod with thoco
docusent books. Are they on the secretary's desk?

3. OA^LIX: They have been read." for about two weeks, Your Honor.

I on sure the Secretary General has copies of thoa.

TEE rEESIDLKT: Vc ooo tho Secretory has gone to lnvostlgato tho
natter. I think the book '•ill be here eventually. Proceed.

ER. OA'/LIR: Thio docuncnt io on cages 1 to 4 of tho English docuccnt
book. Kusbor 12 of this affidavit roads:

•I show you Tocuatnt SO 13C5. Why was the yellow fever infection
•crus sent to Dr. Eovcn?

"This was dor. for two reasons:

"1. Flock 46 had no sail ccenur.ication at all. All rarcols for
?lcck 46 vcr.t by way of the canp physician until the setting uu of 31ock
20 in 19-3.

"2. It was desired that the outside world should not know that an
enerirental station existed in Buchcnwaid cc=n.”

Then the affiant describes exrctiy 'tat the colicy was in the cacc.

it 3.

i. Vtre you at the third allitary neiical conference?

A. l*c.

v Did ?r. Ping tell you about his encounter with Pr. Eose at this

9777


Court So. 1

21 Jan 4' 7 -A-17-3-LK>.-?rinecu (3rova)


third ailitery aedical conference?

A. So, I heard ebout this conference the first tine here ir. the
courtroom.

5. Did you *i7e Dice any of tfcc data he needed for rending his
pacor?

A. So.

Q, Did you ever receive any orders free the' dofundent Krugovsky?

A. I cannot reaeober that I ever did.

q, I shall eain put Ding's diary to you aoln. Docuatnt 265,

Exhibit 287, also Docunent SO 571, Inhibit 265. On 27 August 194? Dir*
visited tho Zolas flrn In Jena, tho Land Industrial Office, and the
university clinic. This Is pe*c 18 of the Lngllsh docuatnt book. It
sets forth, according to the diary, or. 27 August 124?, 70 c-xcriacntal
sublets ^r. lnoculctcd. This is on page 47 of the English document
book. Did you cerry out these ©rocriaonts?

A. So, I never carried ait any oxocrlsonts.

Q. Who did?

A. I don't knov.

Q, Wasn't it your Job to taka charge of thoso cxoorincr.to because
Dice var absent on that day?

A. Sobody, not uvea Ir. Din*,, ever cccalosloncd ao to carry out any
oxrorimenis In Block 46.

q, You don't know vfcat the situation at Buchcnvnld vas?

A. Cr. 27 August 194? Din* could hnvj done the o^periaents and thon
later in the saao dry he could hevc gone to Jena. It >tb easy to ranch
Jena froa Buchonvali in 45 minutes, i.erever, you hf.vo to toko into con¬
sideration the coeiticn that Dietzech occurlcd in Block 46. BalachcwoVy
b.as described it correctly. At Block 46 Dictrsch vorked entirely
independently.

;. : so cut Balachovsky'e testimony to you. This is Document

rr Exhibit 251, cage 61 of Document rook 13, dumber 5. ralaohc*r.ky
said in this affidavit! "If the scientific direction of Block 45 -as in


Court So. 1

21 Jon «*7-X-17-4-£EH-?rlsean (3ro^n)


charge of SS-5tur=tasnfuehrer von Schuler-Sing, all the oreetlcel execu¬
tion of the exoerinente vat entrusted to the Xaoo of Block 46, the German
oolitical Interneo Arthur Bietzsch, residing at oresent at Betnold in
the British zone."

Is that testisocy correct?


9779


21 Jam - -TD-lc—1-r or rir. (Int. Brown)

Curt No. 1


_ It can dearly be 3-on fror. :his that I had nothins to do with
th„ oxporinanta in Bloc!: 1*6. Bala chor sky 'ascribes the situation in
Block L6 in such detail thr. if I had played a part there, he would
certainly have not fcrotten no, but ho didn't aontiffh no.

D?. :EL7E (Counsel for the Defondant Kandlcser): I ask that it bo
rndo dear frea what tino cn Balachowsky was in the canp so that it will
bo known fren whet tino on ho knows what the situation was in the canp.
This is of sone injxrtanco in tho Bose case, and tho Handlosor caso.

31 DR. (?:. LEi

Q Ploaao entinuo, witaoos.

It can be s-on particularly fron what hu says hero that tho
Kapo ^rthur Diotrsch was the an ho is running things. So that it
wasn't at all nocossary when Dlng-Schol-r was absent for a canp doctor
t- baoona active.

Q Pic y;u ever taku Fart in the actual carrying cut of the export¬
er, ts?

to.

TK: 'RSSIDHET* Counsel, daoa tho decuaant to which you rofor
contain the inform tic n concerning which Dr. Nolto spoke a no:ecnt
ago? I didn't gather fro:: what he said whether that information mo in
tho s.ar.o decurunt or not.

IB. K1R0J* Can't Dr. Solto brin~ out this inf naation in tho
course f his exert nation f tho defendant?

i:-Z nSSID2:rr* Yos, but While tho document is boing usod, thoso
dates night well bo put in th, record. It night save tine la tor n. Havo
y.u tho3o dates, c unscl, contained in this document? Do you kno* , Dr.
"olte, where f.vse dates arc in tho document?

DR. .‘l.TJT.s It i3 on page 59 in the English copy. "Dopertod
on 16 January 19hh tc Buchcanld, sent on 10 February t' tho Dora
tunnel. Drought back to Buchenwald n 1 ay I9U* in ord-r work in
Blade


9760


21 JCne !i7-% 4 -uTD-l6-2-Parrin (Int. Brown)
Court Ifc. 1


3T DR. GiuUSt

0 Dr. IfcVeo, d: you think that Balachowsky is in a position to
,-cka st-.tcixnts about tha situation at Buchonwald bofcro that tfcio in
view o' conversations that ho nay have had with ottor prisoners?

I don't kr.;w Balaobsusky. Lot no toko a look first. After I was
rJ-caaod by the Castopc in 19U5, I visitod ay previous prisoners in tho
crrrp, and it d: os soon to no I can rcuo.bor too naas Salach-wsky. It can
bo that ho was introduced to Do, but I can't say for sure. At any rato,
ho was a collaborator cf Dr. Dins-Sehulcr. Thoro was n Dr. van dor
Litton, if I raettfbar, and thin Homy Pluck, then Jan Rupert of tho
D'otoh Rosiotanco *' v^ior.tj and do oust havo boon r. friend cf cno of
those. Consequently, lie really sh.uld know on. ugh t: bo able to raako
statements.

q I .u kn er tho situation in the canp Buchcnwald, and then yeu
can oxproos an opinion cn this: If sc-.xonc gots to Bleck 50 only in
19 U: end thoro associates rith prisoners in Block U6, can ho nnko
statements about the tino that procooded?

Yos, ha certainly can bocauso, as I said, ho is a doctor fron
tho • astour Institute in Paris and ho had touch with tho nain rosistanso
loaders in the caap, and this was tho boat informed circle in the oanp.
Roborro Piock and van dor Lingon, ard so on, all bolongod to tho
rcsirtonco njv^oxsntj and they had :> ro information about tho things
in general than ar^oody olso in tho canp.

q Thank y u very :tuch. Did yu over d. any injecting or infocting
in Block US?

A I -.-ish to use vory rocisc tordr.dogy here. In Block U6 I navor
had a hype ferric n-odlo r an occulatic n lancet in ny hand.

1 You heard tto tos tunny cf thj -/it^oss "irchhoirtr that you
never .ado an injection? That is papo 132-1 of t^c English transcript.

A That is the prosecution witness?

•1 Yes, it is.'


5781


21 Joit u7—.TD-13-2—Parrin (Xnt. 3rown)
Coart So. 1


.. That be says is true.

Q He also stated that yjM never had a vacci n at ing lancet in your
hand —

!<?„ H^TSDTs Did that translation ©coo through clearly in con-
n:cticr. >.ith tho toatfcxny of Xirchhoiacr? TTculd he repeat his answer?

..s I undarstand it, he accepts tlv. test!--' ny f Kirschh-iner as truo,
is that correct?

Kirschhiimr said, did ho not, that I nuver had a vaccinating
lancot in ny hand? That is c.rroct.

37 QOTUDCt

Q If you had, Xirchlwl-iir :aist havo boon ably to see it, nustn»t
ho?

.. If bo hr.dn»t soon it hinaolf, ho certainly r_uld havo found
out about it,

q VOv, vfcrt aro tho reasons why ho rust havo found out about it?

A The nursos discussal everything that wont on in Block li6 cnong
thoinulvosj and if I had had a hypo dor nlc nocdlo er a vneoinating
lancet in ny hand, Xirschhei-ter nuld havo found cut about it on tho
aano day.

DT. O.V l-lZi Herbert Buhliok has -r.do an affidavit - hich I will

•

put in now, 26 ..?rll 191*7. Xtocuaent Hovon, ifc. 3, Exhibit Nuribor 2,

;v.- os lii and 15 *f tho 5kvon Dtcunant r-'ok. This affidavit of Buhlick
•ays, first :f all, and I quo tot «Follo»ing tho axporinont With lico,

I, with nine ether pris;n-rs as lodiuas, had a 2 ccn Intravenous in¬
action vf typhus -dthout vaccination.' On x o 10 cf the docu<*.nt
r ok 12, y u dll find a document that has acnotiiinc te do vdth this
t.stin.ny. ..t the end f 1°12 Duhlick •..•as in Block 16 whoru ho was
f.rking until tto end of »U. Ho says, "I was in Bl-ck 16 tho -tola
tl_ rjvd oven slept thor... I al-nys visited tho -thjr sick wards too
'hero I was a. t onpl yed a s a nur3c. Besides I cane ir.t: contact daily
'4th to. nurses f those , th_r .nrdsj on ttso ccasi-'ns -o talked about


9782


21 June - 7-A-uTD-l8-l»-Perrin (Ir.t. Brer./n)

Court 'km 1

-hat “or.t or. there. I cfc net know Dr. Haven at all. I only know a Dr.
Dint, -.rlx was chief cf Block U6. I sew th-t all the injections wore
givon by Xape Artur Dietzs eh when wo called the 'eld one*. I also
hoard freu tho ;ther nurses in Block 16 that all the injections woro
given by "aj» Artur Dietzs eh. I know that Dr. Haver, was working ir. tho
crr.p hospital. But in tho course of ay activities in Block 16 I havo
cover hoard that Dr. Hoven gavu any kind f injoction. I would certainly
h-.vc boon told by tho other nurses if Dr. Hevon had givon typhus in¬
jections to cxperiscntal persons in one cf tho sick wards whoro I wr.3
net working as r. hantfcrnnn. Such an ovont would havo boon the topic of
the day aaongst the nursos. , 1 se I could not havo failed to notico if
Dr. Hover, had visited tho sick wards. In virtuo of ny cbsorvr.tions
while working in Block 1.6, I -oust say that Xapo Dietzsch u^rlcod quito
ir.doperdor.tly In tho ebs-noe of Dr. Ding. Ho gave all tho ordors and
alsc carriod out tho oxporinents."

TA I I^ESDEXT: C unsol, duo to tto fact I did n.t have tho
Kovor. Drcuncr.t 3ock when you offered y.ur first exhibit, .dll you
please toll no what dcciuajr.t was offorod as your first orddbit sc I
sight r.'.tc it on thin?

DD. G/fLIXi Exhibit r . 1 was .o*tur Diotzsch's affidavit of
3 ..pril 19U7, D cure.nt 'to. 1, pago ?lo. 1 to h.


9783


21 JQK -T-n-v.ID-l^-rirr.buck
C.urt 1, Casa 1


TJ2 - ZSHHirT: Row is the tine for tho ■'.ft am -n recass. I wish
to ask Dr* Stcirhauar, counsel for defendant Boiglboock, end the
prosocutir.- attorney in conaocticn with this exhibit which was lvarkcd
Exhibit 23 just b.;fcro tho neon recess, I raa net dear end I don*t
lav.- 1 C tho ruc-rd is deer whether thrt exhibit was actually efferod
in evidence.

IP.. j Year Honor, it boars Exhibit !lur.bsr 23 which apparently

has 3lix)od ay */icw because I didr.it know that it had over boon
ff.rod as an exhibit. That is tho weight chart, is it, that vras drawn
up by tho defendant Bcialboeck hLu3olf, and I objected to it, and it
is :-y understanding that Dr* Stoinbauer is vdth drawing it from ovidonoo.

DR. STEINR.02P4 Yea, that is so.

TK3 F!lESID2:rr* Dr. St-inbauor, in that correct?

D?.. STEIKPAU-Ri llr. President, I withdrew the dacuncnt bocauso I
•Ishad t:. put in ancthor list which contains not only the initial and
ocncludlnfc ’oi'.'hto, but ircludos also tlx weights in botr_cr. so that
fr *• those charts it ’.111 be passible t follow exactly the, c urao that
oech caso took. .‘.In , tlx Diet: r dll indicato in thoso tablos when
*ny caoo drank rater.

7~ rRZSI^T: That is sufficior.t explanation for ny understanding,
tut I - .as n.t nur- that, as tho recording syatc i had coased to work at
hat tdjou, I msr.*t sur.. that the reo.rd ms cloar, s the ff-r was
withdrem for this exhibit.

Tho Tribunal rill now bo in roc os 3,

(Roeoss was taken.)


9?84


21 Jtaa u 7 --- 5 -r>- 2 ^-l---ss-r (In*-, v.r. Schocn)
Ccurt Kc. 1


THE !'ASS5»L* pjrs:n 3 in the Courtesan 'dll please find thoir
seats.

Tho Tribunal is again in session.

THE FSSSUEHTi Prococd, counsel.

by m* Gimxxt

q I efforod the’affidavit of Buhlick and I should like to call
tho attention of the Tribunal in this connection t. tho affidavit of
.Arthur Diotzsch, ..hieh I havo alroa:ty submitted in rjy iocurunt book, on
page 1, oopoolally .'to, t, vhoro Diotzsch said* "In prnctico, hewovor,
he (Dr, H ver.) did net ccncern rd-'isolf about tho experimental station
in 31ock 16, In ractico a*. H-von did not havo any activity in Block
1 * 6 .” I sh-tild als. like t:. call tho attention f the Tribunal to Ifc. 2,
stewing that fr n tho b-ginning of January 19ii2 until 5 days prior to
tho liberation by tte .oorioan .jvy, April 19U5, Diotzsch worked in
Block L 6 during the ontiro period when oxperinur.ts were boing carried
cut in Block 16. Diotzsch is a person trhe has th- nocossary knowlodgo to
ans*.r.r this qu^sti r..

..t wfcsi intervals n-oro tho cxporin.nts carried cut in Block !* 6 ?

.. Is it true that 3 5 persons i:oro infoctod with typhus nonthly,

ir. rdor to havo this virus living in th: blood?

A That is p: 3 si*olo, I novor hoard anything about it and I novor
t :k any interest in it. I had so onich to do in tho h spital that it
t Jc up all ny ti ;.

Q 7 Jho performed these injections if Dr. Ding was absent from
Buchorarald?

A I do n t know. I was not there.


Court So. 1

21 Jun 47-A-21 -1-SBi-GrosB (Vos Schon)

V : shall now shov you Document SC-1063. Exhibit 326 of the
prosecution, Isis is the file of the Office for "tr Crises lr. Assteriaa.
It is sot is ary docusent book. It was subsisted aubseauently by the
-rose(ratios. I should like to shov you cage 14 shoeing that a certain
ran lewprdea testified that you injected tychus serus into hie. "hut
do you have to say about that?

A. It is very difficult to say anything since I never infected
anyone with typhus. ! never injected typhus serus according to Lcwarden.
This cust be an excorinent of 12C ceoole. I gather that and ny assietrmt,
Dr. Flatter, infected all cf these peocle. 3ut I never hoard of Dr.
flatter having anything to do lr. Slock 46. Finally he soya nobody died
cf these eroerisonto. If vfcat Lewurden cays ere true, this e^orinent
would at least bo ser.tioncd in the diary and it would certainly say
that I carried out tfcle eroarioant. An riser.t on 120 noroor.o van

a big oxv.rises*, even fer the conditions under which Dr. Ding *prked.

I assuse that Lcwarden knows sc but not free tho infection which I
allegedly norforsci. It cust be a cattor of confusion. That's tho
Only explanation I can think of. It Is especially tragic for no that
it is a Dutchman that accuses st» of a deed that I did not do. 'regie
because in the string of 1942 the foert teacher Jan Fobcrt in 3uchon-
•f-li and Z rc: chad an agreement that the Dutch confidential agents were
to t-11 se ••hor.evor a Dutch person was in any special danger or was to
be sent on the Facht ur.l Sebol transport, so that I could heir his.

Jar. Fobcrt 'nn head cf a Catholic sovencr.t and wasted to cccc h«*rc as
a vi*n»!5B in ny triol but he had a fatal accident, ns the vitncec Ficck
L>3 already testified, rut it seess odd to =e that Lcwarden according
to his own tectlscry vac the only Dutchsan who participated in this
allege! croericent. According to his o'T. testisony for sir weeks he
received e-cellent foed before he was infected. That sears that the
J'itd; confidential agents had olcr-ty cf ti.ee to infers se about this
Even if I had nothing sore to do with the selection of the
exborisontnl subjects, these confidential agents knew very wll that


9786


Court So. 1

21 Jun 47-A-21—2-tS’.-Gross (“os Sehon)

everything was done by the illegal ccnp adniniEtration and uyaelf to
prevent foreigners being uaei in these arc exigents. It agrees vith the
fact that lower den says at Christmas 1942 ~e case to the Custlof ’'orlet.
7 aat was one of tho drives which together with the illegal cents adainio-
tretor Jan Sobert and Henry Pieck undertcoh to save the Dutchmen free the
Seeht und Babel transports to Nairv'-Iler. This is a true fact that
Dutchman were ouertcred in blocks 46 and 50 and were considered eecential.
It was intended that all the Dutch were cut on those Seeht und Hebei
transports by the 'lestuoo and Lewarden v*s Included in this reserve. On
the last page a Dutchman by the name of Henry van Dalen cays that ho
vcrlcod in Slock 46 for several ycar6 as a laboratory ass Is tent. He
would nurely have mentioned no and reported on my activity if I hod hod
anything to do vith the exoerinents in Slock 46 but he does not even
sent ion sy nine. In conclusion I can only aoy that Lewarden rust bo
nistoJcon. I don't wont to cay that he does this intentionally but I
assume that tho experimental sublets in Slock 45 were ir. such a condi¬
tion that confusing tec noraona ir ouito rocsible.

Q. '.'O'-, ' pvt to you th» testimony of Dr. Hogon on rage 1161 of
the Inglish transcript. Er. Eogon testified that you were Ting's deputy
for tho experimental atation 45. Vhot do you have to cay to that*

A. Kcgcn :unnot testify to that free his own knowledge. Only in
the enrlr.g cr summer cf 11-3 he became Dr. Ting's secretary but I aeounc
tr It “ogoa deduced from the fact that I visited the Illegal worksheets
Ir. Slock 46 frequently that I worked as a doctor in Slock 46. On the
other hand, sa ho klaaelf otated, he went into tho tynhus rroblca
thoroughly SO that he must know that I lack all the most fundamental cre-
reeuieitea to act os deputy In Slock Sut ny real conr.ecticne “ith
Sleek 46 sake it rossiblo to moke this mistake.

'AMIt: Kr. President, in this connection I should like to
-cil the attention cf the Tribunal to the affidavit cf Arthur Tlctrech
er.ec more, page 2 of the Keren Document Sock. No. 9 and 1C: "Til Dr.
F.*w- fn *nrn-lr rin't Sleek 467 Tea. ’ha-r did Dr. Keren do daring his


9767


Court Do. 1

21 Jun 47-1-21-Z-ZSi-Srcss (Ton Schon)


visits to Block 46? Dr. Hover, only visited the shoenakcr, the tailor,
end the furrier shops vhlch he had set uo there illegally."

2B. SA'-'LIK:

v Did you ever give any orders to Idetzsoh to carry cut or-,eri-
ner.tr?

A. L'o, Dietzs eh vac directly under Er. Ding end tesideE ho cer¬
tainly knev sore abcut tynhua than I did.

Q, Did you have any ovsortunity to prevent tho execution of the
rxcoriser.te?

*• Ho, I believe it has bceoco fcnovn in this roco that it was not
cossiblo to fail to carry cut a Kiaaler order. Kiaslor had orderod
those erroris-jnto. One could only try to oabctage thoa and ! did no in
the auestion of dcstroyir.r tho tyohus lice.

v She -ornsocotion has subcitted that you vero Din/: 1 * subordinate,
P»£0 1CJ7 of tho English transcript.

A. ? vuj -.v ri^’s subordinate. Do oxccrlsontal series voro
o tor ted -.'urirg -.r " uucenr.* free 3uchenvald and ho did not need ary
* -uty to t.-k-j cve zf rr.-j n. I have already giver. in dctnll tho other
reasons tar *.rleicn-.of tine. Distzsch ar.l tho other r.urnes “erkei

laic ml- trly >t on Dr. Dim: ”«nt away. ’hoc he loft, he gavo Dictzsch
ill tho c'.oescary ,'rctrue.lons.

Q. Couli ycu givo ar : orders to Din,-?

A. Cf rcurco r.ct.

*."r.ut do you tr.cv abcut the nunber of errorisentrl subjects?

A. I can say nothin about that. After ny arroct the orpcrlner.ts
continued for over a year and a half. And I did not take any direct
Interest in thee.

vfr.at can you tell us about the nustcr of croerisontul subjects
v io died froe tychus o.rnerleents?

A. I ten give no cruet inferaation on that.

According to r; «:e 1162 of the English transcript logon said
*- ‘t tee total nnnbor of persons '6:o died in Buchenwald froa tyrhus


97 sa


Court 'Jo. 1

21 Jun 47-A~21-4-S3X-Gro«8 (?cn Schoa)


eraerlaeatB, elisinating passage rersons, war 14C to 160.

A. I can say nothing about the ruuber of dead"fron those eroerlaents.
I do not know. That figure night be too high or too low.

Q. Vere there oxnorinents in Buchenvald with typhus infected lice?

A. Tee.

How nan:/ ehiraonta of typhus infected lino arrived in BuchonvaMT

A. Two.

q. How nany exoeriner.t* with typhus infected lice took clrco in
BuchenvaldT

A. Cne.

Q- Vhat happened to tho flrot ehipaent of lice?

A. At ny ir.otigaticr. Xapo Biottsch nnd I burned it.

q. Please describo to the Tribunal how tho flrot chlraer.t of lico
was dootroyod?

A. The prisoners lnforncd no - it -us a mireo - that a ohipsont
had arrivol with infected typhus lice and they asked sc to eoo to it
that this shipcont was destroyed. The nurses ar.d doctors w«rc afraid of
or. epidemic ar.d thoy ocked no to try to crcvor.t tho e-corinor.t6.

Ting vhs away at the tine. I think he woo in v oinor. I vent to
Slick 46. I locked at tho cages. There vvre fifty oages with 600 lice
each, if I renenber correctly. I knew that it w 8 s a cold tine of year.

:t oust have been the end of 1942. Tho stove was heated in the nntorooo
Pf .'lock 4r. I caw that the cages »^re fastened with v->t ar.d it
occurred to as tc say that they were not tight. And Tictrsch and I
rhrew thee into the stove and node a rerort on the basic of ay renition
as camp physician I could net take tho responsibility of or. er»ideoie
breaking out. I believe later I had a discute with Ting about it. I
'on’t reaecber erectly vhe* he caid. He eaid I should ar.sver for --hat
- Etnd this rccort about the destruction of the lice to tho

c:fice which had sent then.


Gxirt 1 *


. V: n Schco)


For -.ter .t re.-.son was the s-co.ad Aipoent J lice not used?

A: tto lice were broi*ht by :.n officer in the i/chxur.cht unifom;

they coac froa -n institute in Loaocr-j and he had ord.rs to atterxi the
-xporW.nt.

;! Plcr.se describe t o the Tribunal ho* prisoners were infected by
thv lice i'. the second shipment?

In the bcgin-ing I was not prose;*; Wxn I arrived thv cr.aes
*ert f-.stwfc-d t. the prisoners» thighs.

3 =s Dr. Ding pnosent r.t the ocpcrlnent?

A: -netixr h. ins in th. r m at the beginning, I do not Ww.

I heard that X * a so-e.-h-re in the building.

Fir ' ix ~ t r-=son wer. you present r.t the experiment?

A: I had l.arned fr._ the illog-.l c -p “dainistr ticn that r.
poUtic-J. prisons naoed Bach, B^a-o-h, was to bo usui as r.n exporWnt.nl

subj-ct in this exp^rWrt. For this reason I wont to Block 46 to

•

pr.v.nt ills being us-d -3 an cocacr inert al sublet; -nd in order, if
P saiblt Stop the cxpcrlneii bataPC it ;r.s finidi-d; .Ti, ii-.lly,
in recr to crry ut r. pl-n :iiic: ;n. had rr-n.d — t Ull him there
r3 ‘ cr * r l ~ Wc to iiciaar, and -.hen ho was go.x t set nn

•p; rtunity to destroy the lice.

.: I ii-uld lice t. call the at.ufcion .f Uk Triburr.l in this
tomctlM t. the ftfciuch affidavit. Ho. 3, p.ago 2. Thero Jl_tasch
iscribcs the d.stxaicti-n of the lie. sMprxnt. He says: "tX first
lipa-at of lico it. 3 d-strv.-od by Dr. ..jvji -nd qysolf in th. presence
nrnbcr i tr.le nurs.3 .-hose na^es I n. l.ng.r reoxaber. Dr. Woven
~ AT-cd t. prov.nt the inocculation with typhus inf.ct.d lie.

--c-us. disliked sue. ocpcrWnts." Then, Ditzsch describes the . -.1
2-=tructi.n of the s.c-;d shipoent of lice, especially f-r hat reas-n
- n-t po 33 ibl. t j destroy these lico iixcdiately. Did any pris.n-rs
"* -cans- f these lice experiaenta?


9790


21 JuRcr-;f^M2-2-Sr^paao (Lit. Von Sen an)

Court Ko. 1.

Ko.

y. Did ary fall ill?

Hot is fftr is I kn-w.

'll Plccsc look at D^cuxnt Book XII, of tr.e Prosecution, p:ge
a of the Zngli*, Drcuxnt KO-265, Exhibit 287, the Ding Diary. It says
that — infections on the 3rd ;f December, 1942 fiv- p-rsons developed
in .atypical disuse, fiat does nn atypical diser.se atm?

At That shows that they did not c.ntract typhus.

y. Nov, Z e tc to the selection -f tbo -xperixnt subjects. Did
y.u select *11 the experin-rtal sublets for the typhus ocperixnts?

Ko*

Or. page 1178 of the English transcript. Dr. K^-n sr.id th 1
it tiioea the c up physician was inv -lv-d Li the s-l-ction of th-
experimental sublets. will y.u c; ;xnt on this?

That was *. %--ry c-.plicated natter. Itx. acp-riocntal
sublets .-ere 3- 1 -ct-d by the gestnpo, rd by the caep ndoiniatratian,
srd the list -a sent to Dr. Ding. One dry an ag-nt of th- foreign
prisoners c it tort *nd r-p-rtwd that tier- ..-r- tu r threw 1 uxi't
know exactly how tray, for-ign political prisoners ra.ng the e.:,x.riaent .l
3ubject3. I L.-dL-tely u-nt to the SS -ffioc — whether that ir.o thu
c.or.andantis office n the Gestapo S-ction, I don't i\xitfab-r exactly.

..t .any rate, I t“lkwd to the 33 ccrbcr ho had drawn up this list on
behalf of .;is chief. I point-d out t hin ch .t I was responsible for
the oclecti .a of the wxjxri—r.t'l subject:-, Lie., f c urs-, v-S not
the c.se — but i.ich gave u. the necessary auth rity in his -yea. I
told .;i_ th t thw9. t;.- r ehr— f-rwigners — and they tv-rc the .nes
that I -_-aa int-r-sted in — -..-ere net suitable as experimental aibj-cts,
ad I succ^-ded in having th-3w tiw or cure- naixs tak-n ff th- list.

Th- sax tiling happened thereafter rce nr-. A repres-ntativ- -f th-
f-r-ig:i ..d -T-erorr. pris.n.r croups c*-a. t c dth the r-qu-st tl. c I
-•a. .Id arev-rt s ^lehow — one- and f jt ail — foreign p iitic-al ,»risonero


S791


21 Jure-..-FJ-22-3-S —ps-r. (Inti Yon Schon)

Court iio. 1

:r... be in- used f.r these experiments. There *,r.s always danger thr.t if
t h-v.-x.ixd away there v-uld be no otic ir. the camp t- get theSv

political prisoners off the list. Theref re, we arranged that these
lists were first sent t, the hospital, and fr.m the curr-nt card index
vhieh ;c had there in the h spitrl, which r-v- 'll the previous con¬
victions of 11 prisoners, the Gcc.ar. and f-r-ign prisoners s.lccted
the worst traitors and stool pigeons. Their a-ets -icr. known to the
prisoners, but -we wanted t- adte cur- b;- m-ans -f tlie card indm: who
they ;/.r- t gvt an enact picture of it. Tr.is list .r.s sent to the
he-.d ;f the pr-tective cust.dy c-.p who took over pri3 ners .-hoc h. did

r. t npprov. of. That :r.s sup. .sed t- by. the final decision; but we were
f-rced again to strike -ff the rr.o.s put on the list b; the head of the
pr-vetiv- custody camp if they were political priswxrs, Gcnaan of
foreign. It r.s a v.ry difficult natter. Finally, the list cwoe to

• m

ai. ck 1.6, and 1 can very well iaay.ine that there was the rumor pre¬
y-lent in the caop, that I was resp.nsiblc f .r selecting the prisoners.

I* hltncss, the witless RocchOd, according to page 1633 of the
English transcript, testified that sauction of experiuentnl persons
-as done or. t,.c c sis .if the card index ir. tix office -f the hoopit 1.
.hat do you feav* t- say aboil; that?

At I have just t.Id you how it \rs d -no. 1 uontiened the
card index in th_ prisorxrs hospital. That is the saae card indux
R. w.aild was ref-rring to*

It How, iho selected theso peoplo — these traitors or 3t-ol
pigeons \t\. -were exchanged for valuable political prisxxr3. *f-u
p.ro.r.aUy, sr did you let th. uris .xrs that?

..i I -ill be very pr.cis. on this p-ont. I n-V-r selected ev^n a
sii^lc cxp.idex.rt 1 p.ro n .r a jris.nor f r *n experiment — r. vcr. The
Vr-:entatives f the Gcrom ~nu foreign prisa.rs r.ly r~v?x:;cd the
“X! ; 6;:. prisoners c.LcUd. The pur,- se was to pre vent tee SS or

5792


21 Junc-.-P>«2^®aps-n (Lit. va: SffitBn)

C-'X't :«-• 1«


tit. Gestapo fm- putting G-r.rr. nr.d fcr-ign political prisoners in tfv.su
ocp-riair.ts. Tner., vfcoi the list had tew*, reviewed by the prisoners, l
signed it. neither the pris-rrrs n-r I actually had anything to do with
th. selection of the jcparittnfcal subjects, because the feet that cxpcri-c.at
cental subjects were selected could ni t. changed -ith^r by the prison¬
ers -r by cysclf, but we could jrevent tho So or the Gcstr.po putting
unpopular political prisoners uh they lid n't like in such aperinents,
mt frc.'. :!:c rxdical p.int of via.*, of course. And actually these
censures nr-v-nt-d German 2 nd foreign political pri3.rv.r3 being taken
for these expjrLxnts. This r.s _y connccti n and that -f the Gcr-cn
-.rd f r-i^n political pris.ners IV. the selection -f cocp-rinert.al
subjects,

• : Did -ny f year superiors* expeci-lly Gr.a\ritz r Lolling, ever
giv. you t!ie assignment -f selecting these prison, rs f-r exjv.riji.nt a?

Ho, neither of these to;; persons gave at such an order;
neither Gra.dtz nor LrUing, and I don«t bcJIeVv that they had anything
•. d it; thw sclecti r. of experimental subjects. It was exclusively
up t. the Geo tap. ?r th. crap adninistrati n.

Did s-x experimental subjects volunteer f r the experiments?
n : As far .3 1 hnow, thw re were v lv.ate-rs f:r s . e experiments*

Did t.e experiment 1 .ubjcc.s get any special privileges or
any advantages?

..s far as I know they aid have s:-c advantages. They had
good and --pie f .d, ihich is nT.cys a onecial induceu.nt; and V.en
they ;et _ut of bard work details, and s- forth.


21 Junov-F!H 23 -H?rlntau (Int. 3r3nn)
C-urt Ho. i


qs Dr. Kogon an page 1167 of the English transcript testified that
the experimental subjects selected fr 3lock 46 included net r.ly Gcxranns
but ? lea, Russians and Frenchmen in tile last y-ar. fliat da y_u have
t • sa; about this?

Of c our3C, Dr. Kagan's str.tcont is true. That ,r. a the rens-n wty
the pri3.rv.rs asked m_ to xo to it to take s:_c part in the selection,
hile I vaa r.ctiv. I cannot U'-ix foreign prisoners teing us.d f-r
mcp-rixe.Us. The f r-ifln *nd Gorman political prisoners were in charge
jf r.vie.rinj the lists f eXp«ria..±nl subj-cts just a that n. political
pric ncra would be taken. Kj;-a says that in the last y~ar Russians,

Piles and Frond-sen were used fer experiment a. 1 can't a ay ulvotJxr that
ia tree -r net. ..t that ti.e I f-c under arrest by tit. Gestapo.

1 : .jxi I tell y u that Xa;n testified that there ./er~ prisoners
.f ua.r -.seng tlx. exp_rim.rt.al subjects. T.iis ia page 1167 -f tile. English
tr-nacript. Jvat a you have t tr.y -bout that?

I oelieVe that I hav. already explained that, where 3 interfered
the Occam and f .r^L&i pris.oers reviewed the lists >f exp-rimuit-al
subjects; tlicr. c uld n .t have b-e.a any pric ners -f \r .r -n the lint,
because the" vero c nsider.d political prisoners; and it was our pv.rp.so,
as I hare said repeatedly, t. prevent German ard f;reign p libical
prisoners being put n the lists.

1: Did the illegal canp c -mttee select p lltical pris ners f.r
tr.e enperl'xr.ts?

lie, because the c:t-i.Le consisted 'f p litic d pria ners,
3ora-ns a:ti f r-igners*

]: The witness Kvg-n n page 1162 .f the English transcript
a.stified that the selection -f exrxri—ntal subjects r.s not the saat
at diff.rcnt times. K_ d.scribed it as foil ts: in the first peri d,
vlve.leers; later, subjects pr-videe by i<:c cap dxt.r r the cop
i-nistm»i_'.n; frsn t’t Fail of 1943 the Reich criminal police office


5794


21 Junc-A.-Rr-232-?riEeau (Lit. Br-'.-n)
Coiirt H-. 1


suppli-d erf ni hols. Is that true?

I c.nsidcr this subdivisi-r. that he sf-kes correct, hit that
there yorw volunteers in the first period I cannot say. I knov nly
tir.t there actually ./ere volunteers. V.r.i .rny ' l mat tia> - 1 d •

kn .‘.s to Point 2, Keg-n heard that at tee r. quest -f tl.o Genian and
foreign political prisoners I intervened and that the lists ve.it back
-.rd forth. He didn't know the. details, of course, since that :cs an

;gr~uo_nt between th. illegal cos? .odainiotmtion and to., representatives
of the foreign .a-is .ners md ryself. Hsu, as t th. Selection of the
ocporiacntal noojocts in the fall f 19&3 -n I can say n.ihi.% b-cause
I was under arrest by the Gestapo.

n : Oi o.-ge 1633 sf th. En .lish transcript R-wh lid testified that,
pr.d odrrfitly, criminals .and homosexuals vcr. sel-cted. Is this true?

It cay be. I did not kno.j that e-ainly houjsjar.la ,»re
taken 3ir.ee n.ith.r the illegal cajp adninistr ati on .r 1 o/ruld oe able
t prevent experiiocntal subjects being t-k-n. Our endeavor was t prvv.nt
Ger-an and for-ign prisoners hein* trkoi f r those jcperkxnts; when
such persons wore ,r. the list the nones ..ere taken .ff tile list ard
the nces -f the inf roxrs were pat in their place.
y. Did y u s-lect passage persons?

At lie, I n.ver hoard aqjrthing about passages at a? tino. I didn't
kno-.* hy such passages vndd be -ode. I learned that during tills trial
fr . the prosecution.

r. : Hov, I sh uld like t ref.r yn: t O cuouit i:0 257, Prosecution
Exhibit 283, It is n page 11 in the Gena an no English D'-cu<tent B k
12. This is .a statement. Page U - I b-s y ur pnrd n — that is page
10 in the Zr.-lish. Ding -‘k-a tes. foHiring 3tnt.ru.nt — pa . "11" -f
ihw Anfisa, third paragraph free the bottaa: "Dr. H-vcn hod the rder to
•;.c th. oris rtrs (professional criminals -x.nt.nced t death) that had
‘r.le--.- f r the -xp.rio--r.ts Ir..? tee Reich S.curity Office and th.

9795


21 Junc-A-Ri-23->-FrJcccu (mt. 3 r _^-)
C urt 1.


chivf f the c r.contrr.ti-n camps, raufr f ar the vnoeiasttsn -r the
infoctij;. after an examination of their physical fitness." Is this true?

There is not a vr,rd of truth in it. I hear it for the first
tto that professional criminals c ondconcd t. death Mere use-d for
jcpcri^-nt3 during ey time. Dr. Ding tries t indie-.te that the
selection \r .s nr.de by me but I think even the prosecution witnesses
-v/e proved that this T.s not the ease. .jny and how I elected er
h-A the pcrs:r.s s-Xectcd has also b_on shown. Dr. Ding forgot t any
t.v.t he, in th- Last analysis, had 1 i decide wh., was used tor these
jcp.ricertc because he *.as the .ns that carried thw ut; an order fro;a
the R.3.K.... t th_ inspector of the c xcentrr.ti -n coups rb .ut the
s-lcction -f the experimental sublets never reached

0: How do you explain tils incorrect stat«ient by Dr. Dlng-Schulcr?
Persons Condemned t death were r t in the concentration camp
Buchcrar.ld, at least n,t at qjr tfcx. It did happen that pero.no rho
*-r. in fcncontr.tijn c-mpe ,.-er. o.ndeincd by S3 ai»i police courts or
the wiecuti n \r.s rdored by HimLer MmsMf but thesw wex* exceptions
ard these persons were executed si:ortl; after sentence ms passed.

7.-r-. ico n: larg. noil-r f pera.ns c.ndconed t dwath in the con-
c-atr'ti;r. cap Huchcmr.ld. This alone shows that Dins's statu, -nt is
r. t true. large nurtocr of F-los — I think ?0 — were t be lyangod
-.chose f 3^-.ual r-lati 013 with Gcrr.an :/;uen and girls but sirce ihla
depended a the d ct .r, there was r..t a single exccuti n actually
aried .ut. These r I.s didn't 'll cane t. 3uchen.r-ld at nee but
r- r c-ursc f three quarters of a year. I should like t- say that durig
"-•- -act a 3ingle professional criminal cxukmncd t death -nto-cd
?l c - 43. This 13 true until the 12th -f 3epte.fc-r 1943. F r thw rest
' : -' r - the testin r.y f Dr. Sagon -t.- Ascribed v v ry c-rrwctly h it

“•& the ocp^ria-ntal subjects :ere selvCtwd. He aenti ned the


^ J ctor in addition t the -thcr officers which actually did solect


21 Jur.o-..*^UH2X-?riii--.u (int i ~r. ;n)

Ccurt 1

the cx#riacntal sublets bccriisc rbg-n .id d«bt hoard f-r nhat reesjn
I ir.tcrv-ncd in the election jf sublets, During qj* tiuc

thc P ;Utic-.l prisoners and I did everything possible £5 prevent Gcm~n
«ni f-reign prisoners being used f.r e^perir^nts.

n* I n» cx» t the affidavit =f tfcj defend wt. Dr. Hsven, in
his docur.ent 110 W9, .-r -sccuti on ESdiibit 281, en p^ 1 of Docujxnt


<i Jur.W.-FL-24-i-Pcrrin (In*.. Y.r. Sch r.)
C art Hi. I, Cas. I


I eh ,uld lilt- t : call tht apodal attention .1 the Tribunal

the -cisi.n on pega 1079/S0 if the an Hah transcript in the session

,i the thir' of January 1947, the Tribunal an!o the follawin^ .’ccisi-n

r. this ' cuuent '.urir.; th. s.ssi.n f 3 January 1947: "The affi'ovit

* al. - be accepts te.ap:r-ril7 ia'.opur. or.t l 1-tor objection. The nf-

fi avvit -vs not s..m whether tho 4,fen 'ant H.von -.:as answerin, rny

qu.sti.ns, if was intern^ntc<! with.ut having been name’, he can

in iente that later on the witness stone!; if he !i.-’ n.t ur/erston

Zhtliah an this affi hvit was n t translate , he ny clarify this -joint

als . But at this ti e the affi -vit will be a flitted pr-vid r.ally

nith-ut influ.nc- in the rijat jf his defense c unsel to object ti it

inter; an*’, if then thu Tribunal believes t«vat this affidavit io not to

a - 'itt. ., then it rill be strick-n t roo r Ur. Pr

I .n't knw whether the transcript f the 3r» «f January 1947 is in

the nor., s T t'cK Tribunal at the a -.ent; there 1 re, I have br jqht it

•

with -.e. ShaU I hen*, it to the Tribunal?

HE RSSlDSfT: Thrt is the transcript thr.t c - unsol has Jus ror’.?

DR. G.'e.’LIK: Yes.

TdZ PRESENT: That is sufficient.

BY DR. GXUKt

C.- In what lan^uago was this affidavit given ti you?

In Ea iish. Alter I h J given this of fife vit, I w.e cello:*,
in two r ti'XOo * vs Later. TJds tirx I was ,;iv*-n the first port of

•

*“ “-fa:-vit, t. -t io, iy life hist ry; out not in English, in Conran.

Aa it turn-.* out that there were s oanv nis tokos ir. tho Goman text

■r -'- r fcj go through it again with an, Then ho hod it
: Pi<- a. in, -.ixl I signed it f r tf* s-com* tLoi.

Q.- In order t: apko it cuite clear, this liie hist ry was hanJc
'• :* i in German.' after y-u ha., signe the vh.le- affidavit in English?

That is txue. Thu affidavit inclu'o ! ay life hist ry in English
‘ this part : the affidavit was dvun to >. throe days later in Gcr-


9798


21 -2:-2-P-rrir. (Irai v.r. Sch.n)

c urt :: . I, I


-an to si_n.

!?.. RADI: Your K »n rs, t: clarify for ttx. r.c r , I oiiit call to
thv. attention tho Tribunal the iffi nvit bo is r-f^rrin.; t> is the

Oorrr.n Ira: -c..o r*, c,r.t-in~ in Oscuaant 3 k N>. 1, which is the —
c«r*nt bjjk which lists th« p >siti,n f the fefeodrafcs. Dwfu» rat H-'v-n
v rtta. Or*, was a aril -sv. which is docu Bosk V. .1

and the affidavit that is at issue here was executed by the Defendant
Hover, for ae. As a -atter of fact, I wrote it, then the defondant Woven
corrected it in ay presence.

BT DR. GAWLEC:

Q.- Would you please coaaent on this, witness?

A.- ’.I’hat ’Ir. Hardy says is true, but after I had gone through the
affidavit with Hardy in 2nglich and it was roady to roe in Znfclish,
after that, three days later, I was called again and oart of tW> af¬
fidavit giving jjy life history nas given to M in German with the ox>la-
rntion that tiwre were aioUkas in this sort of the affidavit which
the interrogator had noticed, and then the interrogator — and it
wnsn«t lir. Hardy — went through .ay life history copied again alter I
had »>de corrections and then I signed it acain. That was after I had
given the affidavit to lir. Hardy.

Q.- Arid you only signed the life history the second timo?

A.- Yes, in Genua*

C.- part cf t e affidavit which said nothing about the charges
against you, only your lilc history?

A.- Yes, that is right.

THE PRESIDENT: The Tribunal would like to examine the original of
this affidavit. The Tribunal would like to examine the ori. inal r*XIi-
davit. Is it available here or in the o ice of the Secretary Conor' 1 1?
If it is not here, it cen be produced Monday aoming,

3Y DR. GJt.UK:

A.- I snook ir. lish well enough to carry on a conversation. T cro


9799


21 Jur.e-A-FLr-2A-3—Perrin (Ir.a. von Schon)

Court So. X, Case I

are 0007 words tfcr.t don't cooe 10 ce, bat in conversation I can avoid
thea. I as sure I did not understand the exact wording and the exact
sense of the affidavit.

Q.- Did you study English in school?

A.- So.

then vioro you in the United States?

A.- 1921 to 21 .

Q.- Aftor that did you h?ve an opportunity to refresh your know¬
ledge of English?

A.- Kb.

n.- Frox this entire affidavit ns contained in Document Book 12 ,
page 1 , did you sue a Ceman translation noforfc you signod it?

A.- no.

Q.- To r-il c. it quite clear, I ca talking about this entire nifi-
drvit in Docuaont Book 12. Was it translated to you orally before you
signed it?

A.- So, liith tho exception of the life history, but that wr.c a few
day* later, as I have already said.

Q.- To -y.ko it quit«- cloar tho lilo listory was translated for
you after you 3 :' nod the whole affidavit?

A.- Yes, three day# lator.

Q.- Did you dictate this affidavit in Docurocnt Book 12 ?

A.- Ho.

Does the wording f roa you?

A.- lio.

Q.- "ho drcni up the affidavit?

A.- I don't_knou.

Q.- ore you are:ent when it was set up?

A.- So.

Q.- On :ha basis of -mt note rial as it set up?

A.- I don't !x.or.


9800


21 Jer._-A-.-I^*2fr-A-?crr!n (Ir.t. von Schor.)
Court Sc. I, Casa I


C.— ere you interrogated before hand?

A.- Its.

5«- 'ora notes taken at this interrogation?

A.- Yes.

Q.- Did you sig* those notes which wore taken down before hand?

A.- Ko.

Q.- .fcro those no to 5 oboxn to you :or your cpprovnl?

A»— No.

r '*~ Did you havo any knowledge of xhat was taker. down?

A.- Ho.

Q*- Before tho interrogation were you infora.d that you could
r.fuae to testify if you sight incrlsinrto yourself?

A.- ( Ho»

'<•- Did you road the affidavit before you signed it?

A.- Yes, I read the English. I did not see any Cersr.n teat. 1
»r.s given tho Sr.-lish text. It was road to oc and I read it .ayaolf.

C..- Did you understand the Ron viral sense of tto affidavit?

A.- There tivro -rny words that I did not understand, and they nro
important in suer a docoaont. I don't speak 2 rglieh woll unou"h to
understand tho or.act aocning of this sta.toi.rt. In general, of course,
I know what it .:rs about. I’know ordinary conversational English. I
do not know any special technical torss.

Q.- For what reasons did you si r. the affidavit?

A.- I t-.ou.ht it was tne fora in which I said th^su things at the
ir.terrogation; rad for that reason I only read it superficially. You
*ust put yourself in ay plr.ee at tho tiao ol the interrogation. I had
'> ” ir * Gestapo ancons for or.o year nd in the concentration ca.n lor
- r year; and 1 don't have to explain ir. this rocs what that aoans.
n I w-s in rak-rican captivity. My nerves and ay health hr.d suffered
-XGidcrrbly ~rcn being in the custody of the Gestapo. Than I was in

S801


21 June-A-.-iy-2A-5-?-rrir. (ir.V. von Schon)

Court No. I, Case I

the P.: crap at Erouxnach, Froibech, Freising, end August, 1945, I cono
to Dacheu. Septcabor '46, I c^t to Kurnborg. I was in noway acquaint¬
ed with Aavrlcan ponal procedure, and I was not inforsud whether I
was to bo a •♦itness or a defendant. I did not know that I could rofuso
to sign this affidavit and deaand that it be translated into Goman.
Thv interrogator did not infora ao about all these things.


21 Joco-A-FL-25-l-Ninaback (Inf. von Schon)
lourt Ro. I, Case I

DR. GA~ 7 -IK: ’!r. President, Kith rcforcnc*. to the rulin;. of the
Tribur.'.l in the session of 3 J*J» r? 1947, orge 1079 ar.d 1080 of the
Inrlish tr-...script, I .nr.ke application that the affidavit, Joc-if~nt
;:0-429 not bo .-rilifted end that it bo stricken froa tho record. Free
th«- testimony of the uitness it can be soe.n that he did not ans*or any
questions. He ves interrogated without b-ing warn-d. Also he did not
understand English wall enough in order to get the ao-ing of the affi¬
davit -ir*-ru every word is inportnr.t, end the affidavit was not translated
lor him.

In ivgnrd to the finr.l point, I refer especially to the work of
harden, Jvider.ee in Cri-in-'l Coses, Volune 3, edition 1935, -*go 21-26
wh-re it is oiroressiy stated that it is absolutely essential to oeploy
‘ translator il the person ankir.g the* atr.t-a.nt does not understood En¬
glish*

EaA;ID*'ATION

BY JUDGE SS8GIKG:

C.,- fitness, as I urderetard your testimony it is that tho affida-
vit which appears in pro*.cution docu.-xnt book 12 at page 1 , as oroso-
cution doeum-nt ID-429, prosecution exhibit 281 was taken in the English
Ivvuoge, sc a thin riven to you in English, that you then read it war
nd sifr*.d it, Ic ny understanding of shat you hr-.ve said correct?

A.- Yes, Your honor, it was re-d to ao. It was ivad -loud and J
Te-.d it oys.u, and ao I -lreaciy rid, i c-.n carry on - conversation in
Sn.liah, ..hen I can't think of words I can circumscribe th-a. I under¬
stood the tenoral xaning of the affidavit but not the exact meaning
tnd not uv-ry word.

Q«" So you have before you new a copy of the English version of
•r.at affidavit?

A.- I hare tlx ernan text.

ill- • - ?•> h'ncto the witness the English text? Are you able
' r d English, vitnsss?


98C3


21 JuflC-A-FL-25-2-Hia-buck (Int. vco Schon)
Court !fo. I, Case I


A,- Yes, I think so.

' ill :*ou please —

A.- Pronunciation won't be quite right. I have been learning a
little ooru er.giish sines this trial has beer. going on.

.ell, you road js^lish well enough to know, regardless of your
pronunciation, *.hcn 700 coae to an English uord or phra&j or sentence
t.Vt you do not felly understand, don't you?

A.- Yes, your Honor. If soa-thing is read to ae -nd I aa .Vast
followin,-, I understand the general s-ns- and then I imagine that I
urd.rstood, but nft-recrds I find out .as in this case, that th-ro r.ro
"ords that I did not understand and scrtetLacs th, .x-.ning was dif¬
ferent frou what I thought. For example, when I read books — I have
iven reading cox, Jaiglleh books lately — I understood the general nonsc
and I knew nhat tho story was about, but I didn't undorst-nd all tho
dut'ils.

™ loinR to read to you tho l.aot paragraph of this
docuoont, your .affidavit, and I want you to listen carefully .'nd rhon
I have finished with it I want you to talk into the microphone in Gor-
•Tn, giving you veroion of what you havw uxtfurstood this to Dear,, rrd I
*ant you to gat -hj Ztj .lish channel and I road it to you, not the Ger-
a*n channel. Cm that b- arranged? Are you herring non?

A.- I nn hearing in English.

Q.- Y o. Then 1 si.all read tho Last paragraph.

A.- I shall not re *d with you, air?

r ..- Can you h-.rr x?

I cm hoar you.

r ..- Y.c. ell no., listen to what I road.

A.- Yes sir.

~;uotc: The aaov-. affidavit writt n in the Snrlish language,
-Anting of five priwS, is true and correct to the best of .ay know-

9804


21 Jtux-A-FL—25-2-Mir. - buck (int. von Schoa)

Court i:o. I, Ccs- I

ledge and toiler. This - ffidcvit nos ;ivcr. b7 at freely and voluntarily
without praaisc of ren-rd r.nd I nos subject to no duress or threat of
my kind." Unquote. How, do you urrierstand whet th t re'ns no I have
root it to you?

A.- Shall I nnsw-r in German or ir. English?

Q.- You .iv-y answer in English if 70U cere to.

A.- Sine- this trial tixr- ere many words I h-.v- h.ard now nhich
I didn't krew be for-, 0r.e word, sir, you sr rt-d was I think "quoted",

"I quote". And that's a word 1 have ho-ard erny tLaes now in Hajso sessions.
I didn't know it tofer-,

Q.- whet oth-r ores arc theru in the quotation I have rv.r.d you
which you do no understand?

A.- "Subjected,"

Q.- .-rill you ropont, pi*, a so?

A.- "Subjected", I think you said.

C„- P-rhaoa if you will turn to the English version at pc SC 6, that
last paragraph, end re d that if you will, -r.d then totn 1-in to us r.r.y
words ther- you do not understand?

A.- It is the word "affidavit". I only kn«* it after the businning
of this trial, 1 didn 't hoar it bofore.

'Jhat other words?

A.- It see-is to be very funny, but it's true, "volunt-rily", I
didn't knor it bofore, but of cour3-, I know it now as I heard it many
times.

Q.- "Howard", (sp- lling) r-c-w-a-r-d. And as I told you bo for-,
"Subjected", -.ad th- word "threat", I didn't know. Uy ooinion was it
n.-ns r. tr'itor or Mouthing lik- that.

-re tboro oth-r words?

A.- !io, that's all, sir.

In ot.. r words, you said that orior to the time you si nod
-0 affidavit you w-re not f-nili-r with the word "affidavit"?


9605


21 Junc-A-FL-25-4-Kinabuck (ir.t. vor. Schcn)

Court Ko. I, Cose I

A.- Yos, that*3 rirht/

Q.- You wore not f sili-r with tho word "voluntarily"?

A.- That *s right.

Q.- You wore not famili a r with thu word "objected"?

A.- Yea, that ia right.

You wer%. not f-miliar with the word "duress" (spoiling)
d-u-r---3-sj is that correct?

A.- Duress — I think it was "reward" (spoiling) r-t-w-n-r-d.

Q.- Reward?

A.- Reward.

Q.- You did not know what the word "rowerd" raj ant?

A.- Yes, sir.

Q.- And then the final word that you did rot undorstand was tho
word —

A.- "Throat" (spoiling) t-h-r-o-a-t. But 1 know it now of course.

Threat, you did not inow that word?

A.- "Ttuj"?

r <.- No, (apoUirr) t-h-r-e-a-t?

A.- "Throat", yes, thst'a right.

Q.- You bit rot know that word?

A.- .Vo.

So tr~r. if wo nr- to take thos- nords out o 1 tho final parrw
praah in tho first lux then will appear this statement, which as I
ardors tand you say you undvrstood at the tide.

A.- Yus, sir.

Quote: "Tho above writt-r. in tho English langtrg*., consisting

*

D - five pagc.3 is true and correct to thv best of ay kn;» lodge .and belief.
^iis affidavit — you s-id you did not understand "affidavit", 30 I
u -*1 d.lv.te tint, so it would road: "This res civun by m- freely and
without promise .lie , isn't that the effect of you understanding of that


: paragraph?


9806


con-


21 Jur--/.-'7J-2f-l-L' sser-(vos Scboon)-
Sourt 1

A I think tho "risundorstendin^ arises because I do kr.cn* a little
Tcrarcion: 1 Snyjish; 'a I have nlroady acid ir. tho courso of this triol
1 here frequently listened to the Sn-iish translation and hove loomed
fro"? do:l in that «y. And since I could carry on & conversation noro
or less by circuasoribir.p th- words I did not know, thor. I thought that

• hot nos reed to ro end vfcct I < 'ollow.,d n os ri-ht but thoro wore so-m words
that I did not uederatond; but I thou-ht that I understood tho t-*nninp

end thet it ros core or loss nhot I hed testified. Sosidos, it rent off
rethvr fast and 1 hod the impression thet thjrc *vor-. ' yont hurry for
TO to aim it on 1 did aim it,

v *.111 you bo preperod vhon the Tribun 1 convonos on ‘Sondny, to
h vo »ono over the in lish text of this documnt end its tr*nalation,
end then dvlsa tho Tribunal fro.-, th. witness stand just rhr.t portions
of it you now sr.y that you did not undent'nd nt that tino’

A Tour Honor, I shall bo -led to do that. I should like to point out
of.oo noro thrt at tho ti=o, I did not quito rc'.liro the mernin- thoso
t rioua words bucr.uso 1 did not kr.oc the purpose of this offld-vlfc. 1 did
r.ot knot, that it we- min- to b- used in on indiotrent minnt aycolf.

There rare individual entt-rs -hich oould have boon clarified or oxnloln-
'.d nd they disort tho -o-ninp without boin- oxnl*inod. I found out quito
defir.itoly th t pert of the affidavit, cono-rnin^ tho solcction of scnorl-
-ent 1 subjects, v s n.vor said by no in this for-a. never. Sinoc on tho
hoi. I understood tho jonor-1 forr, or this doounont »nd saw n few words
th t wer rl-ht, I r.sstrsid that it was Just rhat I said. I ro-liz- that
!:' ‘he r rson ho rroto this .f'ic-.vit rs not prosont rt tho interrogation
It —ould be vary easy to distort the aonnln;.

V ».ll suppose you crercre your so If to comply •-ith tho request of tho
-rihun -1 rq£ardir.p such portions of the of'id-vit in the an.-lish lr.nrucro

* you re prepared to say that you die not tee" nt the tin*- you simed
h- ff id vit whet you wero s i-r-.ir.p • nd then, 'oilonnr that, bo proprrud
*- ’ 51 thu Tribun' 1 *«hrt portions of that a fide vit -cu no" ary arc true


Sc07


21 June-A-jJ-26“2-Lo33or-(von Schoon)-
-ourt 2.

end “hat portions you any era untrue end do not rofloct rhot you s- id
ct tit-t tine or do not ref loot tho truth.

a I shell try. Your Honor, to folio* your instructions. It rill tnko
jok tir*. osposially since ir. tho re entire 2 here loomed o pood nony
ords, earcciolly words hioh npoor repor.tadly in this r.ffidcvit, but
I shrll try to reconstruct rhr.t I know r.t th/.t tiro.

7:.Z F?-o3IL2rT: ir there is nothin- sore to bo s-id, tho Tribun 1 vrill
nor tike its rocoas.

Loos counsol dosirc to ko cny other ststonent
f.. KAt&Yi Cf courao I mtioipoto tho tribunal will not rulu out this
"ffidr.Tit before I ho to had the opportunity to cross ox*. Mao tho witnoes
or. tho offidr vit?

'.ll 3 FSS3J..S'—: Tho Tribunal vill ocrt'ir.ly not rulo beforo you h* to

I

hnd on opportunity to oroaa--xor• no the ritnoss.

*ho Tribunal will nor bo in rocoas until O:jo o'olook i-ondoy
nornlnp.

A.-3 JiL: Pho Tribunal rill nor be in rocoss until 5:30 o'olook
-end-- rornin;.

(The Tribunal cdjo-;rnod until 23 June 1$«7# -t OOsJ-O hours.)


56C6


W 7

23 Jone-IKFL-l-l-Cook (Int. von Schon)
Court No. I, Case I


Official Transcript of the .irasricsn Military
Tribunal in the natter of the United States
of Anerica, against "nrl Efcnndt, et nl, de¬
fend.- r.ts, sitting et Number?, Germany, on
23 June, 1947. 0930-0945: Justice Beals, pre¬
siding,

THE MARSHAL: Persons in the courtroom ill please find their seats.

The Honorable, the Judges of Military Tribunal 1.

Military TTibunr.l I is now in session. God save the United States
of series nnr this Honorable Tribunal.

There will be order in the courtroom.

THE PRESIDENT 1 Hr. Marshal, will 70 U ascertain that the defendants
are all present in Court?

THE MtRSHALs May it please Your Honors, all the defendants are
present in the Court,

THE PRESIDENT: The Secretary Gener -1 will noulor the rocord the
presence of all the * efendanta in Court.

The defendant Hover, is reminded ho io still under oath.

Counsel any proceed:

DR. Gk'uUK: J'r, President. May I aako the examination about tho
affidavit, tho words which tho djfcndant did not understand or doos
the T p ibuml want to ask hia these questions?

TPZ PRESIDENT: Counsul, in wh-t document book is this affidavit
found? Tho Tribunal doos not hav© that roforoncc.

DP.. GAbUKt Document Book 12 , Your Honor.

THE PRESIDED: './hat page?

DR. GA'.LIX: page 1 , tho first document,
ai JUDGE S2BPi:r-:

C..- ,atj»^!r3rr^turday of last week Just prior to the tire that
the had under consideration Prosecution Do¬
cument /Hoy ProwExhibit 261, appearing in Prosocution

focuzent 3 ook 12 . I bclleVvf vbur testimony ms to the affect that this
affidavit m .5 aado by yoo in the sj lish Language and signed

9309


Jr-rnjv


23 Jur.e---FL—1-^-Cook (Ir.t. von Schon)
Court So. I, Case I


by you one? that at the tiae you signed it there wurc certain ^r. iish
■ords or phrases in the affidavit which were strnnge or unknown to you
and tfcrt ccr.tcquor.tly you did not understand the full .-r.d clearly lc.al
ianort of the oroar you were signing. Is that the effect of you assert¬
ion to the Tr bun-.l?

A.- Yes. exactly,

Q.- Do you have buforu you nt tho present tine the Ixulish version
of Document l?o. 0O-U29?

A.- Yus, Your Honor.

f s.- ill you be iood enough to refer to that document beginning
with paragraph one thereof and tell tho Tribunal what words, nhraacs,
clauses or son Uncos re contained therein, tho lug-1 import run- tho
textual import of which wis not fully understood by you at tho tlio
you oignod the affidavit?

In onra jrr.ch I, the word "affidavit," In the first oontonco
t... word "u\ly", in t«, s.csr.d lint, tho twrd “concluded", in tho noxt
line —

..-it Jus n icauit, pis*sc. I do not sco tho word "concluded",
in this affidavit.

n.- In th- seventh lin-, Your Honor. “In 1939 i concluded ay
loal studios."

Very 'loll, you a-y proceed.

A.- In tiiw nj:;t lino thu word "Joined."

f,.- You .aorn in thu senturce which reads: r.-jotu - "In 1931, I
*d joined the AH no-ins SC."

*».- Throe lines before that, but it s the a- .r,_ word: "Joined -lio
laffon SS as a physician. ”

Very well,

H» ssas word is in th- last sentence oi the first par:

C«- Very .iill.

9510


7-J 2 -i-^r .53 (I~t. von Schon)
Court No. 1


A In th. second .-crapraph 'assi plod" in the first sentence.

It. tho third lino "I was appointed", tho -.-ord " appoint <xF. In tho
fifth lino "in chargo". In tho third ;-oni graph.....
q Vory woll.

A In tho third lino frcn tho bottrn cn this page, icrograph
thro-, "acquainted" *

Q Vary wall.

A On ps.ro 2 "spottod fov-r". As far ns I kn.w today that is
tho wrong tora. It sh_ul ’ probably bo 'typhus". In tho second lino of
paragraph U "effectiveness".

q Is that in paragraph U?

A Yes, tho oco.'nd lino at tho ond of the lino,
q Vory wall.

A In tho fifth lino S ura-raph h tho word "supervision",
q In ofehor ords, tho -.for'* "tho dir-ct sup-rvision"? T'.iat was
rxt andors to od by you?

A That's right.

q Vory wall.

A Then in th-. third lino free tho or.d of paragraph U there is a
word thr.t looks like “chain", o-h-oi-n, "chair. f ce and",
q Vory woll.

A In paragraph third word ir. tho fir 3 t line “rooolloct".

Paragraph 6 - r. p-go 3 tho first oxproision "in as -uch as". I know
tho v>rd "raich". I know vfcat "as" oms but I don't kn.w this *.holo
jxrossior. "ir. as aich as”. And T tfcn't laic.? " constantly*' -ithor. I
know ’vary fri-aHy" in tho second lino of parccraph 6 . I usod tho word
1 Si.-ockfT aundsohnft" ir. Ouiaern. Thu intorro.getor told ue it !»-nt tho
saw thing.

•1 I -dll ask th- translators -.ihctlwr r net they agr-u that it
:.aans tho snn- thing?

r*r;" r ? 2 Ty J .s Tur ftonor, ’r -clcfr-enischnft" - .uld aoan ''frioneV-
ship of o^odiGney®.

9C11


-3 : - - - - ---I-'r.=3 (int. to a Scrca)

Court Hs. I

“ ^ t!a S'-cor.d l±r~ ,f paragraph 6 too word "frequently 1 . Tho
I=st ~*-rd in the third lino fTca tho end of paragraph six thoro is
toe word “in charge" which has already boon naationod. Farosrr.ph 7 ,
thiri lino at thj cod, "spotted favor" again. In tho lath lino "in
ardor tc contrast". In tea 7th line "proviuis" - tho third word.
Paragraph 3, the last word-in too first lino "purposes".

Q In other words "for the puiposo or 1 ?

*• Tos. Thor, in tho uth lino ef Jxxm rnph 3 "fenr.n boinjs".

I had net heard f this e:c;ros 3 ian boforu th~ trial. I th.u^ht tho
translation for "nonsobon* was people.

q Did yen understand rrhr.t tho word "ranan" ;r "hunans" :w>ant?

A !fct "huean boin-s".

q Did you understand vlrt too w:rd "hu: an" r "hurans" aoant?

It oays "tarr.n" boro.

q Did y -u undorstand what that .want?

A Tos, I understand that.

I know tho »rd today, of course.

q Di l y u town: it toon?

A I ii-’n*t know what 'buir^a" , Inga" was

too or.*w thin as people.

q But y;u did kn.-rr whrfc "larans", h-u-oc.-n-s, xant?

A jftrsonu?

q Vory roll.

A On ;o 3, tho Inst rd in to. a cor. lino fr 3 th botton
'roqoost". An!, thu Inst -.rd .n tho page "refjrr.i", Or. pago U tHo
rd "notified" in toe s .cor.d lin.;. 'Hoquoat" tlx first w.rd in tho
-to lino I havo alron-^r ojontionod. In tho sa.no line "at ran hr. 1 , I
never Ivoar' t’r.t in ny life. And tlx Inst -;:rd ir. that lino '-rector",
r. 7th lire '-jv_nt’. In tho last lino "roquortod" again. In tho 9th
lir - 'substitutes" and tho n cct v;rd ir. that line that I idn*t knew
as •’pr-vi-las". Tho 10to. Hr.. "victi.s«. Ir. toe 11th lino «ap; rovol".

9=12


23 JQbo - 7-:. _-2-3-C-r- ss (Int. V - Schon)

Ccurt Ho. 1

Xr- the 12th lino chccSc to ns cartel n". And the Inst word in the

p-r- jeph ’’requirranta". Peregreph 9 cn ;c-o 1*, the Inst word in

tho M C i dl n g "extcmirntier.", ind tho third word in the first sonfconco

"cuara". In tho saooni lino tho wor l 'oxtoroinction" occurs c^r.in.

Tho first word in tho tliird lino t: deficiont". The sr.:^ w„rd .ecurs Benin*

in tho 7th lino* In fcl*. 10th linu tlx \ rd " catcr:innti .<n C"nin. In

tJv: 11th Him ct the bc;.innino cf tie sontanco "nee rinneo". In tho

Inst Urw «n this ;neo tho ;urd "axtordnetion" a-;nir.i

?n> 5, first see.tcrep , artor.dnnted n # Tho first t’u*oc words in

tlo third lino “'issue falsified otetaaonta"* Faranraph 10 , tho Inst

word -f tho hondlnr “: 02 ns 1 '* In tho 5th lino tto c,rd "ovomr;o" and

tho next vorl 'h-nco". In tho oru» Hno the 1 :. rd '•jnvi id". Jn tho 7th

lino tho w rd " traitors". In tho 8th lino tho v: rd “crapovino". In

9th Hrv; the v rd "trait rs". In tho 10th «y! 11th Hnos tho word
"str.tenants" is routed. Pamsreph 11 tho third w:rd "instanco I
superviao".


-? w-ace-:^-r£-3-l-Hprrov (2r.t. ~on Schoen)
Court To. 1


% rov, just vfcrt is the vord * in a trace" or tho vord "supervised”?

A Soth.

( 2- the 7th line, prrp TT-h 11 , "performed" .

Or. pr • 5, in the 5th lint ■supervision* rad ■ aeons* in the 5th
line.

7 . And then, I believe you bp id, p.t the Sr.tur dry cession, that in
the final orrr rr-h below ?rre rrh 12 you did not underatrad the
vord* "rffldrvit" , "voluntprlly" , ° reverd" rnd ■ threat".

A Thrt is rl-ht.

7. 2id you uaderetrnd the vord ■ dureae" . 2UJZSS!

A I err.«t arr- tc dry. :t ! e possible thr.t 2 connected it with the
"renr.h wore for herd vhick is "dure* .

7 . Very veil.

rov, let ne rsk you this. 7 here ere severe!. vorde in this pi^r
ai-nod by you which you did not understrad rt the tlao you signed
the paper. Cm you ery thpt you did not undcrotnnd the iar;ort of
the wordo fro : the -encrrl context of the prptr?

A I pa eur« thpt I did not understrad the full airaificrnce. It
wpe rerd to =c rad I rerd it ayaclf, prrhrpa r little cupcrficlrlly.

I knew vhrt it wre nbout, but I did not undoratrad the exact nconin*
of pH the individurl words. I believed pt the tine that I hrd undor-
atood the r.craln.- tut, becrute I could sperk p little Sntllsh end
could crxry on p little convorartion, I any have over-estineted ay
und.erstrnilnr.

9 , Very woU.

And you a"y thrt you did not uadcrstrnA the words *e'jottod fever"?

A I hrd never herrd it before.

v So thrt, ps p artter of fr.ct, vherover the voids * shotted fever*
-npe:r then the Iribunrl is to undrratrad thrt you did not under-
strnd its connotation, ia thrt correct?

A I era not spy for rertf-ir.. I rr sure I did not know the word
itself, but it is possible thrt Z die undcratp.t-.d tho context. I


cm not spy for certrln. 2 only know thr.t I did not know the words,


3 Juat-;»-3Z-5-2-Zprrov (1st. 7or. Schden)
"curt To. I


but i- Bl.'tt be that I did -ret the seesla; of It because there* o
the word fever .

^ Tcu understand then the cenernl connotation of the vord "fever"?

A Tea. as I know now, through the trial, this lc the vron*
rxpresslon in Zniieh. It should be typhus I have discovered.

^ Z her. with the words elinlneted fron this prper you ci.r.ed,

I an oint to read into the record the prr.er or affidavit as it now -t
is with the deletions which you o"y were not understood by youVl

I believe, Ij. President, that ir. the Tribunal* final study of
this document if it is in the record in this fom it r.«y be of
nose aid to the Tribunal.

ZnZ rHZSI”:: You’re richt, sir.

judge sasxr:-*

“X, Ynidenrr Eoven, bcinc sworn, deoose and states

"I. ! vro born ir. Freibur- in Brele'ru on the 10th of February
19C3- I attended hi.-h school but did not cor^lote ay education
until aany years later. Between ’he years 1Q19 and 1933 I viol ted
Denarrk, Sweden, United States, and Franco. In 1953 I returned
to Freiburg mi conflicted ny hi.-h school course rr.d then attended
the Universities of Freibur.: and Kunich. In 1939 I —
cesicf'l studies ar.d the Yaffeiv-SS os a nhyoiciar.. The Inst rank
I held in the Voffea-SS was Eruotsturnfuehrer. In 19 1 * 1 * I had -
the A ll.-er.elnc SS."

Incidentally, for the sake of the shorthand reorte, wherever I
nrke a oruao will bo the fllrce where there ic r. doletion of r word.

Be inr.in - with the second vrr ra.-hj

" 2. In October 1939 I was - an assistant cedlcr.1 officer ir. tho
SS Hospital in the Bttchenwrld Concentration Cca^j rnd held that
-*sition until 19Ul when I was — the Medical Officer of the S3
troops stationed in the cm. At the end of i?-l I was transferred
to the ca=7 hos-oitrl en; beeme the Assistant he'-ic»i Officer there¬
in. This hospital was for the insates of the Buchcnwnld Concentrjt-


myi r


2; v m !!-5 Z ,• 3-;'-Zarr o” (1st. Vos Schoen)

Court 7o. 1

*.ios c? •>. In July ioUs I vre elevcted to the position of Chief
Physic ins and thereby hid the full responsibility for the innate
patients lr. the hospital. I held this position until Septeabcr
ig43 vhen I wro errested by the S^> Police Court of Vessel and
reclined under arrest until 15th of March 1Q45.

" 3. Due tc sy vrrious positions in the Buchcnwnld Concentnti
Cm? durla* this period of nerrly four yerrn I becane - with nil
phases of the uedlcil activities therein end a-, hereby able to
mite the follo«in.: etrter.ente: ■


5?16


Court Do. 1

2 c Jua 47-H-4-l-£EK-Heloy (Yon Schoen)


n -ivi?. ai-~ vi?.vs i 5 l:ts

°4. In the letter prrt of 1941 an exvcricantal station v«s estrb-
lichcd in the Buchen^old Concentration Ce=r in order to detemino the
of various fever vaccines. This deoertaent vae

celled tho ' Fever Zxperincntfil Station' and vas under

I>r. Din,?, alias Schuler. This cxporicontel station vas
sst up in 31ocie 46 of the canp. The Hygiene Institute of the Vaffon SS
in Berlin, under the comp-.d of Hr. eoochla Krugovsky, received ell the
reports of thuoo activities and It. Bing to:k orders froa Hrugovsky. In
the early days, that is. betveon 1941 and the su=r.,r of 194?. IT. Ding
hi.d neny mootings in Berlin ~ith It. Karl Gcnzkcn concerning hie work nt
5uchor.vald in connection vith the fever oxoariaonts. Er. Bing

told no that Dr. Genzken had o specirl interest in thcoc natters and that
he sent him roports at various ticcs. Dr. Ding also said th/1 Dr. Karl
Gonxkon cs one of hie euotriors. Free ay esoociatioa vith Dr. Ding I
understood that

Jevor Zxperiaental Station' voo as follows: Roichopxrt SS Cravitz,
OcnsScos, hrugovsky, and Ding.

"5. X can that Dr. Gcnzkon gavo orders to Dr. Ding in

January 1943 to enlarge tho orccrinontel station. At this tine Block 80
VT8 cleaned out and nada into a station for the croduction of the vtriouo
rrccinoa to bo used in the evpwriconts at Block 46. “roc this tiao or.
the cm-rinontal ctotioa vn.s knovn as 'Bcrertncnt Fovvr and

Virus P.oBoerch of the Fygiono Institute of the "offen SS'. Then in tho
snmc.r of 1943 Dr. Genz-cen turned ell his duties over to Dr. KrugoveVy
er.i from th -1 tine on Gvnzkcn no longer pctivciy perticinated in these
setters. I can rccell meeting Dr. I-o-ogovsjy' in tho hcec of Dr. Ding on
oac of his visits to Bucheawtld.

*6. I vrs associated vith Dr. Ding at Buchen-

VE --. bccene 'friendship cf expediency'. I discussod

-ttere v«»h Ding end visited his experimental st-pion fron tine to tine,
e natter of feet. Dr. Ding hed to go to Berlin for discussions vith

■At'1


Court So. 1

25 wUE. 47-H-4-2-ZHX-4C81 07 (Yon ScfcOos)


jirugcvs^ and Others nearly three days cut of every two weeks. rad
on such occasions I ves the Fever Institute. How¬

ever, vfcon Ding vent to Berlin, the oxperinente were discontinued until
he returned.

■ 7 . The experlnents at Slock 46 in the 3uchenvald Concentration
Cezv vero conducted as follows: One group of violins -ere first vacci¬
nated vith the fever veccino and then infoctod vith the

fever virus. tho effectiveness of the vaccine

mother group of inaates -ere screly infected with tho tovor

virus without any vaccination. Eetvoon the mituan of 1942 and

tho sunaer of lifts about 500 innates of the Suchon-old Concentration
Caap wro used in thoso orperinonts. During =y tins about tor. ucrcont
of tho total Briber of tho innate* usod died as n rosult. - heard that
e larger nuuber of tho victlns died after ny tine; that is about twenty
percont.

" 8 . Tho selection of inaa.tos to bo used for -.odical

orp-rlnonto in Slock 46 by the •Institute for Fever and Virus

Research' vus ns follovc: bhonover Dr. Ding neodod for

fclo work, vns nado to the office of tho Cano Com-ndcnt and

to no for action. Usually a nan nanod Schobor, an SS Hruot-
B tur= fuehrer, no to colect the necessary nunber of nrlsonoro

for those purposes. In accordance with this I "looted various

lnaat oi free the cr=o. The-, -ore olncod on a

list over ay signature and returned to Schobor, who often removed cer¬
tain naaee froa the list for uolitical reasons. In the that err-

ticular prisoners were moved fron the lint, . wns *° Bcl0ct

in order Dr. Ding with the desired nunber

After I returned the completed list to Schobur. it was
given to Dr. Ding • He nedo a final

fror. a nodical point of view, the physical condition of the selected


innates snd to determine fcetfcr or not they net his


QfllB


Court Sc. 1

25 Jun 47-K-4-3-IEX-*0il°7 (Yon Schoen)


-.UTrA^'A SC AC I'?-

"5. I feecere in 1941 that the so-crlled 'Euthanasia 1 orogran

far the the nontelly rad physically *p»

being carried cut in Otraeay. At that tine the carp conrerdor, Koch,
called ell the important SS officials of tho carp together and inforrod
then that he had received e secret ordor fron Eimlir to the effect that
rll nontally end physically innrtee of tho carp should ho killod.

The crap comender ctetcd that higher author it ioe fror. Berlin ordered
that all tho Jewish ino.too of the Buehcnvold Concentration Cam should
be included in this program. In these

ord rs 500 to 4C0 Jewish Prisoners of difforor.t nationalities wore sent
to tho 'Euthanasia Station' at Sernburg . A fov dayo

Inter I rocoived a list of tho nr-rco of those Jews who wore
at 3orr.turg free the crcp contender and wro ordcrod to

of death. I obeyed this erdor. This prrtleuler action wno
cxocutod und-r the codo wino '14 f 15'. I vlsltod Bornburg on ono occa¬
sion to nrrnsgo for tho crosetion of two inr.atc6 who diod in tho
Vornigerodo Branch ( ) of the Buchonvald Concentration

Carp.


"10. In thv carp ve hud n great neny prisoners ’•ho ^.ro Jealous
of the positions held by a certain fov of tho ianates, that is, sane of
tho politicel prisoners hold koy positions and were cblc to get bettor
living conditions . Eonco, nmy of the prioonors

those positions end radc every effort to discredit the rcr. who held tho
key positions. Such actions beerre known

to the non in the key positions and thon such wl?ro i=cdiptoly

■cUlei. In eech case I was later notified in order to r.cke out tho
death of the prisoners killed. ?his« did not

indierte the actual cause of depth, but were redo out to indicate that


9819


Court 5o. 1

23 Jan 47-M-4—4-2aC-Kaloy (Yon Schoen)


the prisoner died of ns turd ceusea.

"11. In tone the killing of these unworthy

imatos by injections of phenol at the recuest of the lmetes. These
killings took place In the canp hospital and I assisted by several
iazr.teB. Cn one occasion Dr. Ding cane to the hospital to vitness such
killings vith nhenol and said that I was not doing it correctly; there¬
fore, ho sor.o of the injections hinsolf. At that tine throo

innates vurc killed vith phenol injections and they died vlthin a ninute.

"12. Tho total nu-.bur of traitors killed was about 150, of whom
60 vero killod by phenol Injections, either by rpreelf or under r.y

in the ccap hospital, end tho rest were killod by various ,

such as heatings, hy the imatos.

"The abovo written in tho Zaglich language, consisting

of fivo ( 5 ) pngos, is true and corroct to the beet of ny knowledge and
boliof. This ves given by no froely and , without

cronies of nd I was to no or of any kind."

1 hellovo that conplotoo tho affidavit ns it is, Dr. Onwllk. with
the wordo onittod that tho vitnoss said ho did not understand or fully
conprohond thoir inport.

BY Sffi PEaSIIEUT:

Q. Vitnoss, have you rocontly exeninod tho original of your
affidavit?

A. Tho original? So.

Q. Aro you cvarc of the fact that in orrpgraph 4 after the words
"Spotted lover Sxperlsentel Station" in the document which you have thorc
ecoear in uaxeathesU tho wordo "Jleckfichor Yersuchsstr.tion", with
sone other Goman ^rds. including again "Fleckfiebcr and Virus ?or-
Bchung"? Are you nvrro o: the fact that those words smear in Geman
efter the English vords "Spotted Fever Fmerinental Station"?

A. Since you renind no of it. Hr. President, I re-.erbor. I undor-
etooi Judge Sabring to tell hie vhat words I do not know and I had
never heard the word "spotted fever" before.


0350


Court So. 1

25 Jon 47-M-4—5-SSH-fceloy (Vos Schctn)


A* Are ycu ava.ro of the feet the words la Com pa vfclch I have
endeavored to reed a-poear la your original affidavit?

A, Yes.

Then you underetood perfectly veil whet the words "sootted
fever" la English neent, because they were translated la Gerr-aa immedi¬
ately following those words la Icgltsc?

A. Judgo Sobring asked ac vhat It was. I did aot kn:v.

Q. I understand that.

A. I knew that this vti about the typhus oroorinentel station, yus.

Q. Aad %hca you signed thla affidavit, you know the Ocrr.an words
translated "opotted fever exterlnental station" oppoprod In the affidavit
valch you olgncd7

A. Aa far as I can rene^bor, I had rerd "aootted fever". I
croba.bly read tho Gerraa "Fleckfitbor and Ylruo Forschuag", nnd I
probably Just ignored the Spotted fever".

0* But thoae words vero In the affidavit In Gor:»n vhon you olgncd
it*

A. Yes.

Q, In paragraph 6, beginning with the socond sentence It ruade In
&zgli3h in tho affidavit before you, "Froc thle tlno on tho orperl"-ontRl
station vno known ae 'Eoprrtmoat for Spotted Fover and Vlrue Ecsoarch
of tho Kyglcno lactltutc of tho Vpffen SS'Following thooo words in
yonr original affidavit rpneor In oaxcnthcsls those sa-:e words in
Ctraan, "Hygiene Institut der Vaffon SS - Ab tel lung fuer FlecVrfiober
und Ylruo Forschung". To you rene=bor that?

A. Yes, that is right.

Sow, you bed every opportunity, witness, to correct your affl-
ievit, did you not?

A. Yos.

-O you rcroe-.ter r.eking any corrections in it?

A. Yos, I did.


Court 5o. 1

22 v T ia 47-X-5-1-Sx-rloehan (7oa Schoa)

-El ?S£5I2Z27: Is the last e nteace is ceragreoh five arocrrs
the affidavit as originally prepared, oucte, reading the If. Eestence:
1 ccn recall aooting Ir. krugowsky in the hone of rr. Ting, on on, of
his cany vi6ite to £ucfccn*eld." Ihe word "eery" is elicinrtcd tv e
line having been drawn through it and in the aargin following that lino
tcoecr your initials "Sr. fin". 3o*e that to you indicate that you ob¬
jected to the word "aaajr" end asked that it be elicinated?

TrX VImSS: Tes.

rFiSIlL.T: «r.d it ‘Td eliminated and you initialed the margin
to show that you had raked that it be olimlnrtad, is that correct?

C3. «imsS: Tea.

IHI ??2SZ2EZ3: F.oforring to paragraph 11, that peragrnrh begins:
"Ir. some instances I supervised tho killing of those unworthy innrtes
by Injection of phenol." Following tho word "phenol" appear in bond-
writing the words "at the roouost of tho innrtes". Your ir.itlolc,

"2r. Hn", follow that addition. Toes thrt to you lr.dlcr.to that you
roouosted tho addition of those words "at the roouost of the innatoo"?

7HZ TimSS: Yjs.

-HI PfiLSISil’Y: It then nep^ro, witness- Just a mcccnt, thcro

is another addition. At the close of paragraph 2, the last line rondo,
referring to yourself: "And recoined under arrest until 12 Soot»nbcr
1*44," affidrvit v e8 originally written with thrt d/itc "until 12
3. * -nber 1944"; thet icto was changed in handwriting to 15 1 larch 1945.
If that the correct dutc . 0 - your arrest wrc torisinntei, 15 !>rch
1545?

m vimss: Yes.

~yi PriSmiT: That addition in handwriting is followed by vrar
Initials, Tr. K.". Eoes thrt indicate to you thrt you corrected the
effidr.vit by asking thrt tho oorrect date be aided?

7X1 'ITl^SS: Tee, Your Honor.

TXL I._: TIZ. I: “c you rcccnb- r thrt you were rocucctod to initial
v ‘* : ' -i;o words a rr. H." cr Er. Hn." every cego of this affidavit?


Court So. 1

22 Jus 47-iC-5-S£-£ElWse chas (Vcn SchonJ


Ivory page of this affidavit, es shown in the rfcotostet, at the botten
of the urge appear the initials "Dr. Ea.".

TEX VITHaSS* Tea.

PESSUSJT 1 Those were your initials end you initialed every

TEZ Vl^iSS: Tea, Tour Honor.

?EZ PrJ.BUSKS: To not the facta vhicb I hrva Just referred to
indicate that you reel thia affidavit very carefully?

7H1 MTSSSSi Tour Honor, it was road aloud to sc and I followed it,
p.e I eel! on Saturday.

ZYJ. PHtSIZSlT: Doea it not indicate than that you oald attention
to it vfcon it vrs rurd to you and considered the language of the affi¬
davit crrofully and sade ccrrecticr.o, which you felt were r.ccoosrry in
order to sakv the affidavit OOBplctO end correct?

TH2 ’’iriaSSi I do not buliuve, Hr. President, thnt I read it very
carefully. I nuio these ccrroctiona, Just the ones that appeared to
sc and ewao to ay rttcntlon, this dote for instance.

ns PEnSIIESTl Poes it net also indicate that the verson who read
ycu the effidovit v*o nnxicuo to h've the affidavit prepared exactly
r e yeu wished it by elding corrections which you suggested?

TK5. HZTSZSS: Ao to tho word "friendly" I objected and no changes
v&re nede. This is cr. rego J, the sixth line fros tho tep; it say a
■very fricnily*. ! objected to that for "Ivccfcfrcur.dscha/t".

CHI PHXSI3I^T: rut other suggestions which you node '-ere followed,
'•ore they not?

CHS *:rriSS: Tea, Tour Honor.

Tri K-ZSIffiST: Does it occur to you no-, or did it occur to you
•hen, that if there were any words in tho rffidnvit, which you di? not
folly understand, that the seening would not have boen explained to you?

THE VXETZSSi So, : cannot say that. - think the reason whs I ohouid
vc do sanded that I be given the affidavit to study it carefully ar.d
v ®uli be given enough tin.- to reed it through. It v^s ooeeibly ny fault;

9323


Court jo . 1

23 Jim 47-h-S-3-££H-3ieeban (Von Schon)


1 failed to soke that denand. 2 had the iaprcssion that the non vfco
vas nek isg the pifidevit ves la a great hurry; he kept offering no the
fountain pen, end that Is why I signed It. Perhaps I was a little erro-
lesa. It vaa else a fact that ay interrogator had the irnressicr. free
vhet I told hla that I spoke English and after a few days he gave ac a
cert of tko affidavit, ay life history, in German, not in English like
this affidavit, hut in German. -hero it *«b discovered thet, although

2 read tho English version of the affidrvit before, I sew so nany nis-
trkes when I s' it in Gcrron that vo had to rewrite it.

THE ?3ESIEE5T: I will r*k the secretary during the recess to
procure the original of this affidavit. I esouac it is available in
tho offico of tho Secreta-y General. I would like to boo it.

Tho Tribunal will now bo in recess.

(A recess was tale on.)


962.


"curt 3o. 1

22 Jim 47-h-7-i-LH>.-Perrin (3rcvn)


i -AP-3HAL: I he Tribunal is again in session*

I?.. HC-T.-Ai:. (Counsel for the defoniont Pokcrny): ,; r . President,

Z ask that the Tribunal excuse the defondant Pokcrny free attending this
afternoon's session sc that he ray rreuare his case.

TP2. TS&SXXSS?: At the reouest of the counsel for tho defendant
Pokorny, the defendant vlli be excused free attendance before the
Tribunal at thin afternoon's session in order that he say consult with
his tcunscl in nrocaratlor. for his defense.

You will raturn to tho secrotery tho original affidavit and tho
photostat copy. Counsel nay preceoi.

ST TP. OA'XIK:

Q. •’hen did you see vhat the affidavit that you had cloned really
ncar.tl

A. I saw its trecise canning *d:en it woo rend into tho record,
Counsel, I should liko to ctato that on Saturday when tho Tribunal ashed
no to pick out the soecific words that ! hod not know- the nooning of,

I interpreted that tosh very strictly, aai chose only those words tho
near.ln* cf which I hal not known at that tine, and those regarding
"hioh I felt any doubt at all, ' assunod that I did knew th* scenlng.

Q. Ucv, you said here that you didn't know the ccar.irr of the
‘•ori "affidavit". Tid you then know whet significance this rarer that
you signed hadJ

A. I don't tcii-v- I knew very well what I war signing, otherwise
I should have had it tut to ce in Ocruan.

s

Q. Tcu have now stated in taragroyii nuabor in the seconi ten-
* iso*. 1 , that you didn't know the conning of the word "frequently", "cat
y:u wanted to say woe "I iiscusoei the nr obi "no with Ting," or rather oc
i* stands in the decunent, "I frequently discussed natters with “ink."

A. Ycc, that is so. It is true that I did not discuss these
-r.intc frequently vtL link because Tin.-, very scon saw the. Z didn't
Knew very such about then, nor did they interest

v beat do you have to say about the next sentence. It also says

9£25


Tcurt So. 1

23 Jun *47-ft-7-3-iEi-?crrin (Brown)


in that sane sentence we Just nentioned, under runter 6, that you visited
his experimental station free tine to tine.

A. Yae, that ic so, I did that. creouently I visited the eroeri-
ncntal station.

Q. Vfcat vas the purpose of these visits?

A. Ky workshops were there. Moreover, I lncuired as to the
welfare of the prisoners who were eccosncdatei there.

^ Please taic* a loolc at mmber 8, which concerns itself with the
selection of innates for the crcerincnts, and oleoso describe now what
your activities were in the selection of the experlscntal subjects.

A. You neon I shouldn't correct the errors in this point 6?

I shouldn't discuss this paragraph nunber 8?


9326


25 June ^7-K-TjC_8_l~Cook (Xftt., 3rcvn)
Court I


<i Tea, of course, you should and set the matter straight.

« -hi Gostapo did not or the ca=p lCFdcra undertake tho selection
of the experimental subjects. One day e-representative of the foreign
political prisoners cane to me and I vps told that there were political
prisoners more the experimental subjects. Thoy asked ac to see to it
•hat these persons should not be used in the experiments. I think there
vorc two or throe prisoners in question. I then vent to the SS office,

I don't know whether this was the Casp Comnandatur or tho Gestapo
Separtaent. I vent to vhtchcvcr it v-b. I went to the SS nan who had
the list of intended experimental subjects ard told him that these i\
foreigners, in other words, these rrisoners in question were not really
suitable ouhjects.

-s it true that because So. e c-ntains a lot «f words you
d-n't know tVt it here says something you didn't mean to say at all?

a That is so, but aside froa that I hod tho feeling that tho
interrogator -r tho translator did not understand ao correctly or did
r.'t translate correctly bocmisc I never said I solcctcd tho prisoners.

I did say that the prisoners had asked ac to intercede.

' Sow take a look a* the scntonco that has Schobcr'o naac in it
and tell us what was his activity precisely?

a It was Schober who wanted to include the political prisoners
la the experiments. He vps inclined to cross, it says here, he vented
to climate the political prisonere fron tho list and put ir. professional
prisoners and criminals but it was Just the opposite what he did.

S, Please take a lock new at Uo. 2. To what extent is Jo. 2 actually
erroneous and to what extent doe* i* need further elucidation?

a In CctcVr 1959 I bee a me assistant medical officer in the S5
h'spital but in the Suchenwald c-rcentretior camp that is not quite
correct because the SS hcspital had nothing to with the concentration


i ’"’hat should be differentiated between hen?


23 J unc -:7—''_J.iC_S_ 2 _Co-lc (Int,| Irwon)

Court I

A "lie concentration caaj 1 * to be kept secure tc frea everything
that exist'd outside «f the protective custrdy carp.

% Mher© was the SS hospital?

A It w«a outside.

V, lr.d eg Assistant Medical Officer in the SS hospital «hoa did
70 a have to treat?

a The 53 guards.

*i And did you hevc anything to do with the conec-tratlon cn=p?

A Ho.

S. Eld you ever enter the so-called protective custody c»cp?

A Ho, no one could, because you needed a special paso to do that
nr.d only tho caap doctors had it.

h How take a look at Ho. 3. ?o vhrt extent docs Ho. 3 need to
be explained or corrected?

A The sno lo true Wore. "Do* to ay various positions in tho
Suchosvald Concentration Caap during this period of nearly f*ur yoaro
I bee ace acoualntcd with all phases cf the acdlcal activities thsroin
and an hereby able t* aakc the following statement." That is n -1 true,
f-ur years, it began in January 19*1.

\ And when did it end?

A On tho 13 day of December, 19* ?.

 Hhat did you been as then?

A Then I was taken prisoner by the Gestapo.

^ I c-.sc to {mother p int now, other experiaerts, did you kn'v
*"rt in Block *6 txp.erlr.ents were being carried rut with yellow fever,
paratyphoid, A and 3, typhoid, dipthsria, saall pox and o r forth?

A Ho.

<* The witness Eirchhclscr testified here, page 1325 in the
~lioh “ranscript, thp* in Block ^6 there were also experiments
*ith yellow fevtr?

-» Cf that I ta'v nothing,

9826


23 June 4?-K-TjC-8_3-Cook (Int., 3rv n)

Court I

<4 I shall put document So, 571 to y:u, ixhiblt 2B5, page 13,
correction, rage 14, dccunent hook 12. These we only reports. Fror.
t v e entries of 10 January and 24 March y*u car. sec that other exrcri-
ncr.ts verc carried out in Buchenvald. Did y-u in any way participate
*r. the 7tllcw fever cxccri-.cnts carried cut on 425 experimental pcra-ns?

A Ho.

<i Did von hear anything ab-ut those experimento?

A S-.

vt Did you select any of the subjects?

A So.

<4 Who did?

A 1 cannot tell you of ay ovn knowledge.

<* Who carried out the experiments!

A I assume it vra Dr. Ding.

S Did you carry out expcrlncnto in typhoid and paratyph id?

A So.

S, Did you oolcct the subject for then!

A So.

Ton know Exhibit So. 265, Ding's diary, did you sou this
diary during your activities in Buchenvald?

A I did n*t kn-w t^c thlrr cxlotcd.

^ When did ycu first set it?

A During this trial.

H Wat one «f the ovpefl-.cots ucnti'ntd h.rc carried ut by you?

A 3*,t one.

k According to this diary, ppgc *e, document book S'. 12, fr-n the
W t 25th J-vtabc r, 19*3, far persons -cri experimented on with In¬
cendiary boabs. Where wero y u durinr that time?

* I vas under arrest by the CestapO?

* According tc the diary there were also tv- p-leon experiaunte
carried out. Where were yu at that ti=t?

A At that tine I was also under Krrest by the C-est«po.


9*29


23 June 47-M-JjC_g_4_fcook (Inti, Sr-vn)

Court I

k “id you tpke part ir. the ph sph-rou* incendiary bozb t-xperi-
=ents?

A Ifo.

* Ace rding to Kogan these experiments were carried out in the
spring of 1944. Where were ycu thcnT

a Aioo under arrest by the C.ctapo.

 1 Bhpl l Ptt* *'• 571 to ycu, exhibit 255, page 15, in the d^cu-
■-cr.t bo k 12. according to this docuacnt a gangrene experiment was
carried out on 15 experimental subjects on the 8th of Hrveaber. Where
vero y*u then?

A In the C-cotapo jail.

i* How ab-ut tho blood plasma experiments which logon soys here
were carried out In January, 1944. Whero vero ym then?

A Under arrest by the Gestapo.

Cl What do you kn-v about the transfer of blood experiments!

A Sothing, because I vac In the Gestapo Jail at that tiuo.

‘i Do you knew Dr. Root*?

A I ien-v Hose was In Buchenvald but I eann-t recall ever having
asen him there.

C; Wore y u the doctor who conducted Rose through tho experimental
station?

A Sn.

k “Id you ever participate in any way in the experiments in
•Jaehocrhruccn which took place on the 26 Oct ber, 1944?

A So, I was in the Gestapo Jail at the time.

k Did yru ovpcratc in Tercet's experiments?

A S-.

 Where vert y-u when they were being carried out?

A In the Gestapo Jail.

k Did you hare anything tr d~ with the Rllenbcck experiments?

A Ho, I wps at that time in the C-estap; jail.


9C30


23 Jttne A7-M-T 'C-9-5-Ca<■* (Int», Brcva)

Court I

<1 Hr. Pres ider.t, as ay next docuaent I shall put in the nffidrvlt
by Heichrld Schltteahola, it is Eoven docuaent Ho. 14, pages 16 and 17
of the English dncnent book, to attest tc the credibility of this
affidavit and to orcve Schittenhelc has the necessary knowledge I direct
yur attention to the first paragraph of the affidavit. Let te point
cut “chittenhelB is a French citiren who was arreetod for eopionage in
1040 in Irpnce and wae placed before a Goman court nartla.l, i-xhlbit
to. 3, your Honor, ard that fros January 19^3 until hie liberation by
the United States Arny was an innate in the concentration cacp. In
other words thla nan is a person --ho voul* hare no induceaent to protect
an SS doctor.


9831


Durt 1

case : ---i-9-l-KD-SrC 68-3TOWT..


(continued) This French citizen, Reinhold Bchltton-
-.lm, ecys under Yij. 1, t-j wnich I drew y ur prrtlculnr
-.t:enJiur.:

"She exporiaent 1 persons for Blech 46 were not picked
•r.d decided upon by Dr. .-.oven but oy eh© orlsoner's Crap
canc-,ca©nt. I can ?fflra to this for the period since
J;r.: ry 1?43. *t least once every week the senior block
inn ;ee vers c 11-d to tnc office. The senior block in«a- ios
t.tar. dooicod vr.ich .ri3on-rs in Block 45 we*, c to be used for
experiment 1 eurpo306.°

Froa the next prrr.-rnphs it cm bj seen how the affiant
hes t la knowledge.

Then rs ay nont exhibit I ut in the cffidrvlt b. Heinz
3 o.:?ou2>1j. This is r.ovon Docuoor.t Mo. 10 end this will be
i- bit ::o. 4. This is in the Sup:lemont ry Voluce.

I-UOX: & ur Honor, I don't h vo the Bup lo.ncnt ry
M ia : 5 my dlsooszl.

- J ?. r ^5IJ£l«T: Tne Su-:loacnt was furnished to cho
Tr: ncl Erturday. There seat b- o c oy rvailobl© for ou.

MR. HaRDT: I h ve one now, your Honor.

3" DR. IIS;

To --rove the credibility of this :*reun and to
?r v tnc; no res the necesacry /.novlodgc for answerin; the
■■•J-tiin I olr.t out tert acnr-ublo fr a 11 of Decoabcr 194'.
-.“.til 1 October 13 43 vp.s an inert© in the Concentration Or. vp
Bucliehwdd. He s?ya under iio. Is

"I knew that persons us^d in aodical experiments wore
selected by Dr. Boven but by tbs cc-t ap-aonageaent.

My knowledge is ^-s.d or. Che following personal
- -riw cc:

- r -iv. r* 1943 I x-g selected by the ;;-c ap-oan* gemont
*- a subject for coaled experiments. I ore8one that the

9032


Court i

jane 23-U-©-2-HD-Grosa-3rowm


fcr which I hrd been chosen was to be carried through in
ilock 46.

It v~.s Dr. Koven's doing that they were prevented from
carrying out ti'.la experiment on me."

This la to prove that Ho von kept poreons other than
bvtrnyora and etool plgoon6 from being used in the experi¬
ments. Nog. 2, 3, 4, and 5 describe Hoven’s goneral reputa¬
tion end -jOod charaotor. Please let no say in this connec¬
ter. that I consider this material r.nd refer particularly
to flnthrop’s Military Law and Prcccdoncc, pa = o 350. This
proves that it is lmporobablo thrt Kovon did what ho is
charged with.

I come r.ow to 14-F-13 aotion. Did you know of it?

A. Yes.

Q. Vhen did you first hear of tho action 14-F-13?

A. At tho -ond of 1041.

Z. >fho tcld you about it?

a. Tho camp commander at that timo of Suchonwald, Koch,

Z. ’.'nat was his reason for doing so?

A. Koch oailed all the heads of departments to him and
t Id then about tho 14-F-13 action.

r.. '.’ore you then head of a department?

A. Ho. •

Z. ’’Tho was?

A. My boss at the time, Dr. Max Blanche.

Q. Yr. else participated in this discussion?

A. The chief of the Gestapo department, the work assi^n-
:_nt leader, the chief of gardening and construction.

.. ' r ny did y u participate in this doscussion?

A’. I can’t say for what precise reasons Dr. Slancko
V. > me to this discussion. «t any rate on this occasion
2cch told us rt tho proposed action 14-F-13.


5833


Court 1

Juno 23-lo-9-3-HD-Gross-3rown


Z. *"vt did ho scy?

field th?.t In the next few days e commission cf
a ctors would coau from Berlin to 3ucher.wald. This commission
of doctors would seek out the cripples and the aantr.lly 111 .
horcovor all Jewish lnartos here rt Buchenvnld were to bo
included. These :rleoner6 wore then to he assigned to
various transports and killed. "ncro tnis wrs to t- ko place
v* s not mr.&o known.

H.. now mrny 14F13 actions were c?rri„d out at 3uchonwald?

A. V ile I w-8 '•ctlvo there only one.

Z- I ’put to -o- the fret thst the witness hen ;1 eke has
cestlfi^d that twice, namely In tne autumn of 1940 and the
autumn cf 1941, ho was in 3ech*nwold. This Is page 1883 of
Cr.o English record. .fact do you hVw to say about that?

’'nother ho woe m Buchonwnld In the autumn of 1040
1 do not .:r.ow since nt th-t time I h^d nothin* to do with
CvnconUrr.tlon c-mps but w?e •’salstrnt d'. ctor for the camp
doctor. Zut, I do know th-t rt the end of 1941 a commission
f doctors was In 3uchenwrld to carry oat the 14F13 order.

Z. Did you bring ab ut the filling out of any quostlon-
r.lrea f- r the carryln c out of this actl r.. 14F13?

a. No.

Z. 'ere any questl .nnalr.s for 14F13 ever sent to you?

a. Mu.

Z. Did you scloct prisoners for the 14F13 action?

A. No.

Dr. Xogon said that the 14F13 'Cticn wre done through

pris-ners 1 hospital. This is page 1211 of the Ar._lish
-ranscript. *'n~t do you v-e to say - boat tltf't?

I don’t believe tr.~ t rt that tim- £o_on -:new anything
'-•else at all about tale action because toe only person who
: la the prisoners anything about tnls action wrs I. I told

?S%


Court 1

Juno 23-i'^-9-4-HD-Grose-Browr.


the leaders of the Illegal camp management and a few liaison
ran ' the Jews wh m I was in steady touch with. And, I told
ay secretary Rudolf Gottsohalk. For tv reasons these
persona told no ona also about the action. First, bo cause
they w uld h've nr^re than endangered their lives and socondly,
boeauso they knew it w uld -ear. ay c.rtoin death bccueo thcro
••*a a secret order f r -m Hi cal or th^t whoever informed a third
jers n of the 14-F-13 action w"Q to bo shot within 2-4 hours.
For all thoeo rcas.ns Kogon could nc. have known about that
notion at that time. «sldo from the S3 officers who
attondod that conference no ono from the 33 either know any¬
thin.;. about the notion becauoo this special aoourlty order of
aiaoler kept the 14-F-13 action strictly secret. Korcovcr
Kor.r.ooko know soro ab ut this than Kogon. While Honncoko was
In Buchonwald ho drew up a detailed written report of hia
activities lr. Buchonwald and sent it to his wife. In this
letter he said r. thin- tf- the effect that his -work had boon
8U oortod by me or by any other d otor or any prisoner nurse.
In view of the detailed on nr. or in which he doaoribed his
activities in Buchonwald ho certainly would have mentioned
a fact of such importance as that.

2. I have Just boon told that a parently a mistako lias
boon made by the interpreter. You said that at the end of
19-10 you were assistant doctor with the troops, is th-at
correct?

A. Yes.

That was translated as assistant to the camp doctor.

A. There is a great difference thero.

Perhaps u had better explain that difference.
a. The assistant to the camp doctor is an assistant to
«... comp doctor, namely the c.neentreti. t, camp doctor. I was
assistant doctor for the tr>op doctor, the mar. who treated


S835


Court 1

Cuao 23-A-3-5-HD-Grbea-5rown.


S2u> 33 troops and units.

1. Do you know Dr. Mennlcke?

A. I cannot recall ever having scon Dr. Aon iickc In
3uchom.'ald.

*• Let ec cut .ils testlsvony tv / .u, pr.e 1397 of tho
- n ^ 13 " record, in which ho s-ys t::-t no ; ro*tvd yvU nco.
•*:-t do you h'vc to s^y about tn«t?

A. i Ivvo no doubt that Dr. ...n-iickj grootod ao boo-.use
-y boss never got to work before 10 c*clock. ?or th-.t
reason I believe t.Tnt konnlcko's tost loony here Is corroct
nd .-.j ; roc ted jic gs Dr. Slancko's representative or deputy.
Officially though I ad nothing to do with hlu. I did not
eoot hia privately either although he vac In Buchenwald for
oovcral days.


9836


23 June-!*-?^ 10-i-Sarrow (Int. 3ro:;r.)

Court ::o. I, Case I

Q.- r. President, as ay next document I put in Hoven Document
Exhibit 5, this is 23. This is a docaeent that was sut in
•n another Ma 1 Jwe, a latter iron the I f the Frar : t.

The 79 or seeps to be ^sain r frou the date, but it can be seen clear¬
ly that the cate is l?t7. That can be seen also from the cert” 1cation.
I out tils in to orove that the entire se'-action of the prisoners in
3uc.»wak: was carn.ee oat by Dr. Uennicke alone without tho aaaitoixe
no cauo doctors end, wxrticuUr Ly, itho it • .e assistance of , r .
i lover..

I put ; lulls testimony to you. lioonhild cold that in A .tu n
i%l > * U th8 J< * ;a to auc.^wold wore esairxc > the doctors to sue
whether they ere enable of work and u tko-were not tlxr-nero sent
to tho political department, and in the b ring of 1-7.3, throe or tow

traneports loft, v,., is nag. 1635 of the -w. : iish transcript. I:. - at
so?

A.- 2o, Dr. frmioke corrector he also :.now .jore. f ero ux>
today only n lew Prisoners who know about t. is and r.oo.ahilc is cortrinly
not one oi tho*. ..ouchild left the folio in; 3U t of considerate..!. v.o
or>r rca, x pUcitly "AH Jewish oriscr.Ts are to be taken or x \J>-
Action.^ Tua, a jodical «.aaiiw»tio.'. b - .. r . .

have been necessary. lloroovor, why shoul:* they be exaxaned? Tho i :w -

Uxit thi °S WR3 " t the Jews co-u ork or not, but it osi there

Jn istakabljr t-t dll Jews in 9uci.en .ald were to be taken or tl_.s .^or
2 “rr.icke has alreasi/ stated that ho liUe out the quest Ulo&rea :I
’• ■:* °° rt Ui ° ^ut EoeahiU! v-r only a clerk froa l hj oh

• - :r • ol his 0 -.T. tecwlcdre tfcat he has oai . He is -

a ‘ 5 -ior. Four tranapox

ti *

x.- -1 i: it . -j to?

A.- _ tbsag cmly, I found out fro? the prisoners that the tv .-newt
* to Serri ur an the baa lx.


9537


23 Juitt-Tf-FI/-lC-2-Xarrow (j r ,t. 2r»n)


Coart Ho. I, Case I

Q.- hr i. the other three transports not co?

A.- 3ecavia I, cooler at in with the illegal can? nana^o tnt one

the political .1 lowers arc the Jews, orev-nted that.

Tel- the Trifunal hor 70 :, in coo aeration .;ith the ii.ls^al

.nanajeient, ;r evented those transports ,'roi leavin* ?

A.- After the c on! ere no e with hoch at which I first heard of the

exteraiiv- tin action which later cam to be 'mown as 14-F-13, I 1 . . 0 -

dlately ot in touch ;ith the iUe. al c<.:j ana eaont, particularly

ilth the Ja leh liaison sen, and ay secretary, ar.c i told thaa of • iat

the action L.-r-i3 intenced. e consulted ith one another a.-.: debated

what we co o to tevont t:.xs action. \ o&v oisc-jooions occu\,od a

considerable ti_jo. In the .aeantiae, the conaiscion of doctors turnod in.

The Jo.dsh lx risen .asr. and I agreed with the illetr.l cnv> nano, pent

that tort o t:.e ondar^ered Jews s'r.culd be classified as rjson'c c>-

orentices and ; too!: the necessary aeasmet with this in con unction ±th

the work asci naont loader. I told hit: that aeny oi the Jowish v: ao.,:ro

•

* cro exccllont skilled lnoororo. A 3 1 /r. llo on has v -17 correct 1 . - r.tuta
there ;*>ro coniurcacoa that lasted i or days arc' consultation it!: all
sorts of o'.’icjs. x'.ore I could achieve rcall- definitive w.-arroo in
.3 direction, the order c-.ue fro-, wrl . r the first ti >enrt.

::jou h Czech liaison ten i was a’ole to ot the transport Lint -:-o i\
tha Costa 00 e artoant. e could not .in -vt, at that tiao, tiiat „!.o

• 4 , . .
that all political -risonors .ho, on nus^hnir-Kuschnerav^
incentive an the incentive o: the ot?»r ini or lerc ar.d stool- 1 'o::o
-e^r. put oh the list were to be talc roa it. I ,

-r. 31nnc 4 M, eat to those c-.s^rs stiro not cuoeble of

>• 1 .-.- t e .V r . . ... of an- further acratohin c

• t . :

-•rrmnt the trono ert iron leap.:— alto.. .1 sir-ce 1 ::a.‘ 3 05 s • p/e

9336


25 Jor.e-y-FL-10-^-Sarr<^ (In*., Brown)

Court ?;o. I, Cass I

ze who, 30 -ar cs t..e orieonerc ..ere concerned, had a basically c’iilc-
” nt ori itotioa t '- :n 1 at the la-.t .ainute was I tol:, sivort-

ir oeforo the transomrfc -as to leave, that it «« 8 ?<&ag to leave.

Sinoe I had just rota-nod iroa Veisar, 1 found out that a nurse fro a tho
orisorwrs' ho spit. I tus included in tho transport. After Ion: nc otia-
tions with Or. Uncke I succeeded in extracting this nurse froa tla
transport. I was ab. to or.vcr.t tne seco« trensoort's leaving alto¬
gether >cca.'.»i I Iiac :he Ja<a intended for that tranaoort aseLj^C an
aason's aurcciccs a.x , il a ->-rson couln't so bo cUssiiiud, I .’apt
t.uo Prisoner cs long a 8 the danger last;* citJ,tr in so.,*. section o.' do
hospital, or I class!, lod thou as oot atlentt -x- I said that tluy .;cro
suspected o: bavin: tj :hoid. All those aur«s 1 cannot describe in
Lr. .To.on stated correctly, as 2 *vo already said, that tbaro
was always a tug o: -iar which wort.v^ out to «jr advantage, not In tho
loost because I was cbl* to use the products ol U>o oit-n-ritionod lUo-
nal work shops an: was ablo to carry out a cheflcoe which protect.-; tho
tndai. orod Jc s,

1 ir ' - transport in the saa*. way. Or.e o ny col'.ja... os

-- ^run a say-r on tho anthropoid-; cel nuflwtt'i r.ts ot V./a, W too
Uawon non c' tho Jtrish prisenors, ion by tho naaas of J'ohn a:-/ Hoocha-
’ brou.ht . il co rotten i Ml « r o^r. at Cis ..Id

■- continue* o ficia.U* to orovl;^ a !u r.ason *or or-v.-i.^. tba
•r vc-arts. It at so done. That -c to say, ; -.o on. r-allr ."i any Mfe

enmo oaKr, it oU U*a. Slneo tho arltooura

tl is sandpapers . .>vorably . • ..i,co

 ° * ;c; *- v -’»  thiB Wft ^ save a * r.at r oj vo^b.

So far as I r-* bur no-.., I -c-.v r.t.d last transport a ste ,
■*.rar,- to t . t: uth, that the J.-iah nu-.,; euso-c;--. -j ly.-jn-.

.

th< 33 c - > .ad a very consider!!, recooct lar o-J-


9859


23 Jun;-H-FL-iiX-£arra- (int. 3rowr.)

Cut KO. I, Case I

d-aica.

Finally, Utfccra cast fro* the WVHa saying that only Judah >ri-
wn.rs could » transported who xrc rot capable of work. IIk eoixaanc-cr
shovvd nc letter and, in tlx, ooantiac, I had beccx the lirat cay
physician. Or. 7 «i Ration, the coaaandcr th&n reoorUc! to 3c: Lin t: at
therw wore no :n-rs in 3uchonwald who v-erc not capable oi work. This
bro ght it about that th. continual inouiriea fro? 3-rlin about th- tm.a-
-.orta atoo-xc cmuj in. xcaua. of th«s- continual inquiries, it :^d
b-vn rxccaaery to ii-vV.nt thi sax trer.sporta Uavinp s.v~ral tlx. run¬
ning,


23 June 47-Sf-c*-21-l-abloy( Bnw )

Court "C. 1

.. IS it then true as Dr, logan said on pago 1273 of the
Sngliah transcript, is it true that it was due to you that in the
beginning of 1943 there was a large nuccer of Jews in Buchenwald?

A. There can be no doubt about that. In addition I also aeniion
tfut at about ttat ti-e until ey i^priscrwent in September 1943 there
wrre a gr*,-1 number of Jews in Buchenwald. It aust also be actioned
that : had classified the Jewish prisoners as apprentices and who
-ere working as skilled laborers in the Guatlof works. Those were
the only Jews who had been interned in 1938, and who had aanaged to
" vo the African Arsy liberated then, seven years later, More¬

over, these were th.e only Jews in all the G, IRa an concentration ctaps
who had been incarcerat'd in 1938, and had survived, so that they
could he libnrat-d by the Africans, “his fact .as a airacln by tho
Arericans as I was told by one of ay inte rrogators. So far as the
acts of 1944 a<.d 1945 are concerned, thtre can be no doubt that it
was the will of the Berlin office that fcuchero aid van to bn cleared
of Jews b; 1941 , That this did -ot happen is »,ot nun solely to a<U
I should lik- to nephaaizo nt this tico that I was usccessful in
tr.is only because the Omim political prisoners did a vast anount
work rirkin? their lives • v- ryra; . Tho mu* is tru< of the Czech
-a.scn x*n she were in the Gestapo Erpar'.tctnt, risking their livu.i
n".:inr into oiricirl fil*a which were n ver accessible to n„. The So
":«ch orison'rs gave on a copy of the eath Ust. ,*>a th- basis of it
ire "nan political prisoners could be saved fron tho L, f 13 action.

~ zArliy t‘ ugh nsist bo given t the Jewi3r pris nera, nanoly Kax
"Cjst- r , *h wa» city architoct in Frankfurt n the lain, rigin lly,
'•’* tri ^' Bror.B a relative f the tonkin, a ur- f B..*uens in
•’cd/urg, en-* :« rg* ”arturg, c relative i the banking h.uo. f
,lCfc3t r » 1 b - iirtve in :“'?>.. Th«se ‘ wish rris nero w rk«n in th»
n r ,,G call'"! 13 • 14. st, d b; ao thr uck-
- arc! advised S'd helped re.


9541


23 June 47-:«*--ll-2-?5aloy(Bx^ir,
Court Sc. 1


Zh, jA''XI?: -r. Pmsidn-.t, in this c-eercti ;n I submit Hc.vm
r-‘curyit V”. This will be E4dbit 6, This is also a letter fr.ja
«h*r trial fr = the Fcurth Crini-.al C.urt • f Frankfw-rt .n the
•lain, ^rcc thi: it can fee B«ir| thi t all Ccncontivti^n car.ps, i/.clunng
Puch«*n aid wnr: t-. be cl "a red f .’ews. This document is to clrso
t is part -f cy -videnca. I have found out by inUrroR ting people that
#»n Buchanwald *as liberated there w'r a large nurb-r of Jews
present, and I hove also discover*^ that Lr. Hover, prevented r. -,y
tx-nsports of Jews, anl thruu. this lott* r I wish to prove that this
in sonothi-R Dr. Kovun b- piv-n credit lor.

."R.-Kr nWr I rove this be stricken iron th' record, and counsel
fr" instructs to xatAj* th« witness, a-.' u >. to testify on behalf of
til- witeosa.

D\. 'Ll: : I airply want to <anloin to the. Tribun/1 the nason
I jut In this document., ao tret this will be understandable to the
"ribunal.

THT F r TSnE'Tr V»r? >,vV.. Proceed.

r, I lo shot; you PS-1151, Exhibit 411, bocuc* nt Book 16, pago
IB of th'. r rli3k Docuc nt °ook. Thi: is th- 1 tt* r from th« loop tetor
or th" Concentration Canp3, 12 ^ococbor 194' , which -.its aunt ar.ong
oth'irs to th' camp car.-am* r of ?uch* a all. Did :*cu kno; about this
1 * tter?

A. .Vo.

And th* eueationnairr fom r-r.tlon, i in this letter, w* r
th- y ^.7cn to you b; the ca-.p eermav'r r?

A. ’ i ~, but they wouldn't hav*; fc--n siv-n ic anyway, b 1 causo
wasn't first canp doctor at th-1 tine. If it han been Riven to
anyunt it woul« be given tc Dr. Blanch* , who w.a the first camp
"• -tor.

. To you r cw wh- th-r lr. Mane* r ciwd such !• tt«rs?

a. I do-t think so, bocau3*- if hi had, of hours- , I would have
Tcued out ab.out it also.


O Jun-. i'Mi-S’ —H-3—"aloy(rroxn'
Sourt * : s. 1


can 7 u explain th* fact that thnsn questionnaires wrri-
not emt on to Dr. Blanck-- tiro uas first cscp csoctcr in BuchfinvaHj
'.o» can you xplain that fact th.y weren't s.nt?

I ca- .xplain that only as folio.: : filling out th* question¬
naires was -o long, r r- ;uircd in Buci: nnl'1. This 1 tt*-r is dated
>cnnh>tr 1?41, how-vr, JSnnnackn, as can b-. seen frea this !• tt r,
had already bt n in Duch-rc.al ! at thr.t tin* previously. Th* forms
which wora annexed to this letter »nr*» to bn th-> preparation for the
cocirig doctors' cc cisaion, but since thn Cerr-isoiou of Doctors had
already finished its work in ?uch*a»ald and had filled out thn lorxs
itself, it was *.o longer n< entsar; to send the an fonts out again. I
assuen that those forms w«<rc kept by th- comp coresndar in Buehnnwald,
\nd not sent on to th* camp doctor.

Plaao look at thn lr«:.t paragraph :: tide ltt*r following
’• ■’ cospl tinn ol th- -xani«ption of th insj* ctor of th*- concentration
:anp and to mAk r m»o -1 in which th- nunbor of the prison- rs who
«W* diracte-; th o «eial trmtaH-t U : 1 San tab* ni ttioMj lid

?ou zaj.c a-y -Ieh r- port'

* • "o, »nd i: then- hnd b.n any such report it l ould have

1 -n Lr. r lnok 's Jot', a d not r.in- . He .v-r, I ca iot recall thot
l ' r -: ou:h report • -••s -v r ca •>. * think what is r.«A-it it th: t th- camp
corcandcr should calm th* report to th- Inspector of th* concentration
c-icp.

* . I ahe- to you tloo .ccur.-nt P0-1151, a letter

r of :t tarch 19A2. r&pi U7- of th English footer nt bock. Do you know
the contents of this letter'

A. v -s.

. hit ?s don« in “uci.em'ild as a coi.sceuonco of this letter'

. fn th • . ris o: thi? letter 1 tel t:i> ai-rp c: as&nnor thot
-h-r. ill .7. tein- l -.0 • risuir r rnra-ln :f • . r> . "evt ay first

• -.-•'t y i r-w up this l«tt*r, a»sa I sign-d it *nr r.cnt it to the cp&p

9C43


2 ? -7-?'-' -ll^-::ilor(rrc«n)

Cous t Vc • i

cocxand^r. It naa then forwarded to Perlin. I know this fcr certain,
because on the bssis of our letter v« finally had th«i ismirace, namely
the prison- - a .:»•<! oysolf, that at any rate in 'uchenv.ald the 14 f 13
action hr-. coE- to an cni. n f course thf. . ! oy of those who participated
In cur counter-action 14 f 13 was ononsma. wi because cf this the
transports ait»d for 14 f 13 »rr abolished one, a-id for all.

. PI a: toll the court whet this 13 f 14 .-leant? th* counter¬
action?

A. V.ia as our co ntr-action. where I md the ‘-techs and

Germans, and Jews took pirt i*.. It was ^ust a pun-wo naael cur

ocunt*«r-action 13 f 14.

. Thii th-n ws a count r—action undertaken by tlifi illegal
»&-p ccnr.and< r m connection with this in Puch nwald, to koep the
✓ctien 14 f 13 !roc being cn:ri«-d out?

3, but you have forgotten tv fai r *«ndsfe prison'rs whon
? i ••ntionnd t lore.


C-urt i

;:n: 23-—12-l-HD-,.o,.aan-3ro va.


... Kuv, rc'i to t;.Is letter of 28 >--roh 1942; h"v: c-^uld
is be rscertained whether a person was capable of work?

... It was never "scertair.od r.t ell whether the people
wove capable of work. "lthout conducting an oxofflinr.tlon, I
s Id to camp oo£ lander the: were -all capable of work.

v. I cose- w to I'-ennocke's letter to his wlfo, In
•: -io • >e eays that In Hovenber of 1943 he filled out
qu-sti nnolres for 1000 Jews "nd 390 *ry-ns. This letter Is
In frhc record vn p'^e 1544 vf the transcript. Did you have
anything to do with fl-lln 6 out those questionnaires?

A. Xo.

Please turn to page 29 of the English document
) h. This is d^caaont 1151-r.S., a letter of 16 ISr.roh
1541 to the cosannder of the conccr.tr"tion cnap JrooG-.Hosen.
The prosecution os^rto that this Hot v*o Dropared for the
o w.rnder by the crap doctor. On the b sis of t.:ls d^ocaont
the Prosecutions clalns the following "r.d I quote: "This
11 t slaoly -escribes whet went on in the Caap Oroafl-Hoson.
Cr-nlenburg issued thj orders thrt the concentration or.npo
c..«asolvea should choose the prisoners who were to ^>o in the
ro.naports." The Prosecution tries the flew that Che 6ulectlon
was hade by tiu c-cp doctors and the defendant Ho von to h
erro of this In the Caap 3uchenwold; now Is that correct?

That .night a"ve been the case in 3roso Rooon, but
"3 I . v- "1 ready sold In 3uchonv"ld the comission o i doctors
c’T.o before the letter frjn the Inspector .f concent rati r.
caaps, Iso In 3uchenwold the Jews did not have t^ go
:.:r u h a preliminary physical ex aimtion by the coop
6-ct.rB, because tnc oraor read opeoific-lly and therefore
-11 Jews Interned in Suchenwald were to be included in action
1-7-13, I really co-id not s^e way a ohy a lei rl exruslnr.tlon
*■ uld be necessary in such a cn3<-. Dr. hennecio expressed


June 2*- .i- 1 2-2 -HD-}: e chan-Brown-«X
Jcurt 1


this vary clearly, as I reneaber. Then it can be seen from

..ennecke's teatioony that no doctor in Buohenwald supported
• •
hi a in his activities there, .JL 1 this goes to show that the

situation in Buchenwald was not the s^se as the situation in

dross-aosen. I gave no support to the Doctor's Coaciaslon

under the direction of Dr. ..enneche and aade no preparations

for thea it all, nor do I know that Dr. Blancke did either.

Q. /ore you in Bernburg?

«. Yes.

Q. THont

i. In «prll of 194.

Q. Thy?

<* prisoner doctor froa an outside canp told no
that in this oaap two prisoners died a natural death and I
wont there for the croaatlon.

3. Did your visit to Bernourg have my connection with
the action 14-F-l*?

do, that can be seen froa the fact that this visit
too^ place one and one quarter years after the transport hid
left 3ernburg.

«hoo did you speah with on vour visit to Bernburg?

•*. .k Dr. Sberl — o— b-o— r—1.

During this conversation was the action 14-F-l’*
discussed at all?

•i. :.'o, the conve sation lasted a -.axinua: of ton

nlnutcs. I then v e r.t out to the out-lying caap whore the
tvo prisoners had died.

Please turn to document boo.a 12 again, page 1 of
your affidavit, .io. S, this nuaber concerns itself with
tre Kutnanasla progr -. Kindly tell the Tribunal what sen¬
tences in here oxa Incorrect?

*In accordance with these orders *00 to 400 Jewish

S84d


Jourt 1

Juno 25-&-l2-3--B2-;o_ _bcn-3rcwn.


rrisnors of different nationalities were sent to tho
1 1 chanr.sla Station 1 at 3 rr.burg for exterain tion. B liow
Id n ! t exactly remember wtat r.uaber I arid.

Q. Vo 11, suppos- you tell as just v/lv:t ala h-ppon?

Ihere were r.b.ut 300 J.vlsh and non-Juwi3h prisoners.
It Is not st ted in this sentence that thore were non-Jews
also.

1 . Wiat else is wr^r.g?

A. n *% few drys l«ter I received a list of tho names of
...oso Jews who w»ro exterminated .t 3-rnburg from the C?mp
vva .rndor nnd was ordcr-d to issue falsified statements of
death. I -.bey-d t.'.is order. n

w. Then, whr.t rorlly did happen?
a. I thlnb it Is my f-ult rnd not the fault of tho
int-rregator that I c pressed myself unolotirly. Hero tho
statement ir. itself is incorrect, to bo sure I did n 1 .t
receive the order in turn frxn the canp comrr.dor. For tho
roae-ns I hnvo already given, I acid no c.ttentl n end laid
importance .n the denature.

Z. Wh issued those dortn certificates?
a. Tho prisoners did.

<. Thom did vu discuss tho matter with first; with
:ho of or oner, tinned four Jewish prls ners; wore thv,so four
)rl3oncrs part of the illegrl came c mmictvO?

a. Y-g, thv.r^ v-ro Jews on that committee, namely
choso f Ur. I au6t also say how this came nb/at. - c uld
: send this bach t- Dr. SjUmcJce because this was a very
■nr rnd tedl us worh since I h. d to wrltj out r.ll tho dor.th
certificates myself -r.d tnon Dr. Blanche would have. to write
hem ut himself, but the Jewish oris r.^rs who were advising
-u V Id me that I sh old leave the enhlng out of death
certificates up to them, because tm usual derth certifier ^06


S317


J


Curt Ho. 1

2c Jon 47-A-12-4-HT-.:aehsn (Brown)

vero only three or four lines long, stating that on such and such a
£ato, such end such a prisoner had died of such end such a disease. The
Jewish prisoners thought it %culd be better if I drev up er extensive
death certificate in order not to frighten and sake uneasy the oerson's
relatives, because I reaenber the Jevish pie :r.crs telling no that in the
cevspnpora they always read announce cents of death ir. this for.-, and thoy
had the fooling that the relatives vculd be suspicious and rads unhepoy
by this, so instead of drawing up the death certificate ayself I loft
that up to the prisoners to do and then signed then nysolf.

Q. One ouestlon to nake this aattor clear, to what oxtent dees
aaabor nlno ror.der a false conning? ?lease read the last sentence.

A. "I visited Bernburg on one occasion to arrange for the cremation
of two inantos who died in the v ornigcrodo Branch of the Buchcnvnld
Concentration Carp." This nl^.t be construed to no an that airultaneoue
with the 14-7-13 action I was in Bernburg; howevor, that is not truo,
because in tfco beginning ve did net oven knov that Bornburg axis tod.

q, Thon this trip described in this last sontonc© took niece ono
ar.d one-ouartor yoir s later end boro no connection with tho 14-F-13
action?

A. That lo correct.

TBZ FB£SIZS2«T: Counsel, it is tiao for the Tribunal to bo in
recoss until 1:30 o'clock.

(A recess was takon until 1330 hours.)


5346


i?*7

2 ' Jun--*-; z-an (Int. von Schon)

Court ho. I, C&e- 1


tsm&xox session

(The r-convened at 1330 hours, 23 Jun- 1947.)


TH A ^’AL: Ti-w Tribunal ia again in o-ssion.

"ay it )!—«'.3- your Honor, &.f-rdant 'ol-corny is abs-nt having bean
w'cua-d by the '.t’ Xiitsl this aarxdng.

THS The S-crotary will not i or th, r-cord th- abs- .co

?' defendant Pofcoxny, having been c: cuo-i by the Tribunal in o?-«r that
h- nay consult ith .ia couns- 1 .

. HAbiT: :t oluas- your Honor th- Trlounal, several da»s ago

during th- co rs. oi th- orts.r.tatior. of tba case against daf-odint
B-irlbo-ch, iroo-cvtion rv^UwStU’ th- Yri.u.fl to iapound the charts
in the. to bool<s sich '*>r. th- r-core's o the tc.ouriionts oon ircUc
at Oaohau 3ax-nfcrctlon Cas? coocuminG »ua •.:at-r.

At this bi -, th- oroaecutior. r-cu-sts that th. Tri'.vnal par lit
to b- allouud to a-nd thos- charts aw r-corda to Franco ort. .'ro-
a.cution desir-s to hav- the charta and r .cords ch-cl:-d ov-r by docu-
:xt uxocrt:., h.meriting -xo-rts and o-ooU. si? ici-illy o.".ablv to
j u.nt o! th- alt-rat on tux or!:inrrcr. th- docu.ionta.

In vi-»f oi th- ruling of th- Tribunal that these records will not

:j p-rus-d b* -it. er <-i-nsc counsel or iros.ckition ithout the oi t..;co

o

of a wnbor o. iv- o iic- o? th- hocr-tary General, it tnerefor. so-ia
ro-r.nt to - roo-cction that it viU bo necessary, ir. or- -r to carry
-a their re-.-.at, teat a a-abor of th- o- ic- of th- S.cr-tcr:
accor.oany _r o! th. proo-cution to i'r.-n;' art rail- th-s- oc- ta

u 3-ing or . that utedta with the a^nroval or th- Tiljunal,

• - s.tould U.':e o iifv; such a .--so-r frc»n th. S-cr~eary Gui-ral 1 c o. ico


- »i:»t-d • quI this niasion; or i : the Tribunal do- a : •.uv.-c-:

r # 5 ' -ur-s.ntativo, th- ir ,3-cvtion r-cuasts '.u- -' r

? or otal. th. oc- nto Ad htv-


•c • :.tO -2;cf : ’ -


-rt x: . . i


9349


23 J'i'.--A-rL-I3“2“?ri *.&u (Ir.t. voc Scbon)
Court Ko. I, Cas- I


THE ?r^CI- T: Counsel for do; .ol ar.t Sidglboock not being or-senfc,
the Tribunal '.rild be £lac tc hear froa hia in ccnr.-ction oith this
aatt«r bafare -inal irvction is given.

C-. riv'L/Y; Tour Honor, u* are not in a pooition to wait : or a •>«-

.iboeck. I think ho has

•floe to Vienna. _3 s a atUr hich prosecution douma relevant and
rj'd'J like to hsrw Owraission to o_nd th-a up inasmuch as We have
r.Ceivod —

THE FPSlZs—.?: T.ta defense coune -1 indicates that Dr. Stoinbauer
is present in i urnb-r .

Could •<« take that u? today so that w* could sittC

those r- res vos up tomorrow leassaph as the laboratories in
:ort will >. ,r;px. l -!vW to us tooorro.*?

TK- PRivIw T: 1%- natter -07 b- tr.’.-n up as soon as th- tufonsa
coups .1 *or . 1 . l ooeck arrives.

HATIDY: Tour Honor, »- can contir.u- ith our examination• .."ion
the d,f.nsj co-.:s.l a* &.lrlb 0 eck arriv-n w. con take uo the tatter

1 .T: Couno-l lor defendant "oven may proceed, T.v. ot'.ar
r.tt-r aay bu taksTt up .her. the couns-l -or Bulglbotck srr v a.

V. . I correct ir. assxaing bho d lonae couna r 3

-o«ck is hero in tlx City?

. . .A LXK: igT col. ... out to >? Dr. Stein-

I EMU.U. ny collvSrue St *Lnbauur will be here shortly. ;j. is in
: irr.burg. .eia not left,

: ..

'.I'ALiEEAR H0V3B - Loued

Dru or ^a:-xTio: (ccminuad)

' . . Si ( - a - tho del • Hovee):

: - stfbjact of 1111 in Ycr« p:

“ -r ir.o-.i L_dgo or ’07 you?

9850


23 June 47_A_rjC-14-L-Cook (1st., Von Sch-n)
Court I


S. - h 7 were these two people killed?

A I do not knew.

*t Is it true that Eogon vent to yon end Dr. Ding end tried to
help these two people?

A Whether he went to Dr. Ding fer this purpose, I do not know. If
I had known anything about the errest end intended killing, it would
certeinl” n->t here teken piece. E"gon testified himself that I was
always willing et eny tine t" try to s«vo prls-ners, end it wouldn't
have to he Dr. Xogon who suggested to bo t" save prisoners. I tried to
help any prisoner if it wes in ny power. In this wh'-le affair, I know
only thet Polish prisoners lnforacd se, end then it w*s errengod that
another prisoner, als- a Polish d ct-r, named ?c?lpyulowoky wre ervod.

I transferred hln to the outside ca=p in *ernlgcr dc in order to got
hln nut of the eight of Dr. Ding* hut no must understend the environ.

=ont end the ncntellty of the prisoners in order to know that in such
e c*so I C'ttld n-t learn the truth. ?ho fear of Dr. Ding was no groat
that n- prisoner wanted V* toll so exactly whet wrs g'lng on, since
otherwise, he would he afraid for his life.

DS. GaVLIK: Kr. Prcoldcnt, Dr. Stcinhauor ha- -rriwod. Shall 1
interrupt =y examination of the prisoner?

THi PSkSISESTt You say, counsel.

XH. HAP.DY: Drcs the r rihunal deoiro that I repeat my rocuoet
arain?

“HI PK SIHU?: Yes, e-ur.ecl.

XB. KiBXSY: During the c urse ~f the presentation of the e.-oe agntnot
tho dcfutd»nt Bri^lV'.cok, chart, ru<* tv aotohuwke ««ti prcooutod c re¬
taining information taken at the tine of the cca water experiments at
Dachau, At the tiro the prosecution requested that these documents he
inpvsrdcd by the Tribunal. Thereupon, the Tribunal ruled that ceid
d ccatnta would he retained solely in the possession f the Tribunal, ard
*-h»t the prosecution and defense ray peruse then at any time, but in


the presence of a mother of the office of the Secretary General,

9352


23 J-.no 47_A_JJC-14-2-Csofc (lnt», Von Schon)

Court I

The prosecution desires to haVe these charts studied by experts in
their laboratory In Irenkfurt la order to ascertain when 6oae of the
sari:lags vert made thereon, ar.d the ether obvious discrepancies In the
charts and to re-port to the prosecution the results of their findings.

In order to dr that, the prosecution reouesis that they be allo«od to
send the documents to Irankfurt. In vlcv of the ruling of tho Tribunal
the prosecution assumes that it will be noctssary for the Tribunal to
appoint a acabcr of the Secretary C-cncral's office to take the d-cu-
sents to Frankfurt with a representative of the prosecution. That Is
substantially the request rf the proseeutl^n, year Honors.

TX FrlSIHi'T: Counsel for the defondar.t Stelnbauer — I sera, for
the defendant Bciglboeck, Dr. Stelnbaucr, being present ha hoard tho
state-ent *y the pr-oscutlon.

DS. S-UHBAVnt (Counsel f-r the defendant 3olglV>cck): Tour
Hon rs, I believe that thlo application of the prosecution Is super¬
fluous. By the dotallcd examination in the presence of tho Court and
the c'nccosl'no of the witness 3ciglb:«ck, It h-s been clearly detor-
ainod what corrections hi. na.de. as for the nance, the General Secre¬
tary's offieo already has a list f naacs which io to be ph*t: stated
and made «vrii«blc to the Tribunal and the pr accutl n. I d n't re-
neaber how many nasos were in this list, ac I recall, there wore nany
n'-rc than submitted in e-urt, and it also cxplalnco 1 " which gr up
this person wna o that this list of nance c-ntalr.s srre Information
that the charts even if there had boon n- erasures. The Important, thing
is that In the lists, In the curves on the fr-nt which arc the proper,
no changes were made; and that Jr feso- r Ivy toatlfi-J lierc as an ex¬
port, hr.d no d^ub*. he had been Informed by the prosecution what changes
Vd been made, and he testified that these documents were an adequate
basis f"r an ^jinl'-n. I believe t v a.t wr e the reao-n why the Court
accepted these documents. If the C-urt, contrary ay expectati n,
sh-uld grant the request of the pr eecution, I ash that the defense
C'unsel also V given nn opportunity t<« examine the expert and to

9853


23 June <s7-A_IjC_l£-5-Cork (Int., 3r-wn)

Court I

e*afir= with hln.

MR. HA3SI: Your E-n-re, thia request is In the same naturo ns the
request node by 2r. I leaning a«ny ninths ago to have tho Ding diery
analyzed by nn expert.

TEL FRLSIULh’T: The requeot will he granted hy the Tribunal, The
cnly question concerns aose detail. ^ I understand c-unoel for tho
defendant BeiglhoecSc, if the documents are sent to Frankfurt for expert
exasination, he desires a representative to acc-srany the deunents
•a well as a representative 'f the prosecution!

UR. S^-IBULE: If e representut'lv® of. tho prosecution goes, I
■h*uld like the dofer.se to hav's.the aaae right.

MR. Ea?DT: Of course, y-ur Honors, the defense any take tho
d-cusento to hia own export. E« 8 one in Eumberg, the dofenoo coun¬
sel d'.oa, hut we haven't been able to sake hia available t“ tho prose¬
cution. The prosocutlon does have a laboratory, h'.wovor, in Frankfurt
to dotcrslne whether or not tho ink notations contained on the n^too
of 13 Soptcsbcr —

JUKI SkSRIlCt As I stated, the request t' send thon t* Frankfurt
vill h< rranted by tho Tribunal. Mr. Erdy, hw long do y-u antloipoto
that it win t«kc your expert to sako his lnepoctlon and findings? *111
he bo able to do that on the sane day that the dcuocnta arc taken th«r<?

K?.. HA?rf: Unf-rtunetoly, y-'ur H^nor, I aa not ablo to oatiaato
that; hoover, I weuld think it would toko longer than '-no day. There
arc 4*1 charts, and h-w extensively they do thoir work with nicr-> B cupce ><nd
whatever is tho process used in such work, that I as not too faailiar
with. The laboratory io run by th6 *i.5. Arny, by the C.I.T., and thoy
have vorkieg in there C-ersnn nati.r-nlc who are oxperte in this type cf
v rk. Kow long it takes, I as unable to doternine. Your Hon-T. Perhaps
I could inquire and report later, but I don't think I cculd got cay fur¬
ther information.

jnr-L Z23- lire- : It Y *z been referred to the Tribunal that nc-rhaps
if the matter could be completed in a day, there sight be a possibility


23 -*une •if-A-FjC.l^-Cock (Inti, Von Schon)

C-urt I

of ordering a =t=ber of the S e eretaMet to retain the doeuaenta In
hlf cuet*d7, to take thea to Frankfart, pad there pet with tho power
of the Tribunal re ■ eaal«*ienerj and at that tine, ho empowered
to take aueh questions and answers ae night ht propounded by either
•lde, reduce then to writing, and bring back the paper* and sake hie
return an conr-isal-ncr of the question* and enavera together with the
analyst* and report of the experts.

MR. E-HREY; That eculd be eaally done that way, Y-ur Honor..
H-wcvcr, I an aerely certain that such an operation would take n-rc than
a day.

JYIC-i SiBP.ISGi Could you lnwcatignte that?

MF.. KA?EY» I ean Investigate t v at, but I will bo unable to report
today ualcaa I could uae the roeeaa tine. as soon a* poaclblc, we
would like the alsslon to return to Burnbcrg lnrsnuch ra wo nay be done
here in a week or two.

m. SamiUUt! May I Bake a resark, Mr. President? In caoo theac
big chart a are auVnlttcd, then I aek that the two aaall books aro taken
along, too, Aa far ai I recall, Pr^fcaa^r 3elglbocck sold that tho
wolghto entered In Ink ~n tho upper edge were not written by hla at all,
but by a French medical ran: and these book* which *cr< kept by tho
Frcnchri-r.. there 1* the handwriting 'f thle Frcnchaan, and It vnuld be
nocoaeary t- era pare thea. If ho only has the chaste, of curse ho
cannot eoaparc the handwriting*,

TSX PHLSUSiTi I understand that tho requost f the pr-accutlon
Included the two snail booka. Th:sc will go with the charts? Thin
night V. done| The dncuocnt* sight be *cnt to Frankfurt u-dcr the
ever of the Secretary C-cncral. The experts thea sight cxaolr.c then
and when they hare done so, counsel for the prosecution and c-unsol for
the defenee could g~ ewer and listen to the report of the experta rod
aak then any cucetion that they sight desire to a*k.

MR. HAEDT: The purpose of the pr-secutioa in sending the docu-
ner.ts to Frankfurt la to ascertain what, when and when the cntrlea


9655


23 June 47-n-J<2;k (Int*, Ton Sch-n)

Court I

vcre cade. And this ia purely oft the hehelf of the preecefttlcn. If
defense counsel he a eny objections, I don't see why they can't send e
representative there with hie; h vcver, the pr-eccutlon d-can't ne¬
cessarily -.cpn to take the d-'Ctaenta *ut -f the hands of the Secretary
General, Inasmuch ea they hpre teen duly and e-rrcctly lepounded by the
"rlbunal. 3ut if a ctcbcr of the Secretary General's office C'uld
accompany — In r thcr v-rds, take the dccuncnta then, then the preoc-
cuti'n c r uld have the work d->r.c that they decccd t- he necessary. It
cay pnvc that the w rk la fruitless; however, It cay In turn pr-vc
enlightening In tone things th't we hart slacking aV>ut.

IS. IRloIS^T: Cf course, counsel for tho defendant Bolglhocck lo
entitled to exaalr.e tho expert that sakca the report.


23 Juj*e-~-CJ-l5-l-Cok-(7cn Schecn)-
Ccurt 1

JR. OJVtt assuming cf course, the Prosecution wishes tc intro¬
duce the report, ii the Prosecution determines that the alterations
arc something af material value tc the Tribunal, then we- will, cf course
introduce a report, and if necessary have the particular experts invol¬
ved cone here tc testify. However it is next tc impossible to have
this work dene here in Nuernberg due tc the fact we den't have the labo¬
ratory.

THE PRESIDENT: The Tribunal understands that thoroughly, if it
understands counsel for the Prosecution correctly he stated after the
Prosecution has the rcp:rts and if he desires to use then buf:rt the
Tribunal the expert who made t: examination would be available here
in Nuernberg.

UR. HARDY: can make the chief of that department available in

Nuernberg for r. day. I den't see why that would bo isp asiblc. I think
that it is very possible.

THE PRESIDENT: Hell if thv. Prosecution undertakes that, if the
documents are used here with that report by any export fr«.a Frankfurt,
that that expert will be here available for cross examination, and if
the defendant desires tc cr;ss examino the witness he will be hero
vailable, thon I questi n whether there is any particular necessity
for counsel far dofeniant Beiglbccck going to Frankfurt with tho
d cunonts. Do y*u agree. Dr. Stoinbaucr?

Dr. Stoinbauer: Yes.

THE PRtSIEENT: Then tho Tribunal will -Otar an rder that the
d cuaonts in question bo takon t: Frankfurt by a representative of
the cfficc of the Secrttcry e- bo n-sod and that, a representa¬

tive f the Prcsecuti-4. may a ccczpany the documents xnd call the att_n-
ti n rf the experts tc these matters up n which ha desires the expert
t concentrate his attenti n, and then when the expert has made his report
if the Pr secuti n desires t; use that rep rt in any way wnat-v^r bef-ro
the Tribunal that the expert who made the rep rt will be available r


9357


23 Janc-*v-GJ-15-2-Cc:k-(von Schrcn)-
Court 1

r n :nc whc understands the natter will be available hero in Nuernberg
f r cress ctnn ln atl:n by defense counsel and will testify bef re the
C curt as to his view.

•®* H-.rDY: Yes, Ycur Henrr. tfculd that app intnent of a ropr-Sen-
tativc of the Secretary «uncrol-

7HE PR-SIDEJT: I beg yourrpsrdcn.

.:H. EvRDY: .uld that aop'intsent .f a representativu of thu
Secretary General's fficc be fulfilled fday so that ord.rs can be
oado cut and sc f.rth tc leave perhaps t;n rrew?

THS PRESIDS.-iT: 1-s, the r.pp intnent can bo cade at ary tin— I
drn't know whether kn w whothcr ir. ..rtina c uld g. r not of whether
h- would be suitable cr any r.e whe would be suggested to acc'npany
the nissi:n cs cust dian of the d'eunents.

IS. H/.rDX: Thank y u, Y*ur H'n r.

1HE PRISILE.iT: Ceunsol for the prcsecuti n during the aftonx n
recess shal ascertain what representative cf the Secretary General can
take the d cusont3.

!iR. H..PDY: Yes, sir, I will ask Ccl nel R;y.

I E PR SIDElfT: «ad then rder sh uld be pr^par-d f r signature
by the Tribunal, in rrder sh uld be prepared cnbodying tho trder c f the
Tribunal, a writtun rder.

Counsel for defendant Seven proceed.

BY Dh. 0...7LIK:

Q TTitneas, what do y.u knew .b.ut ohc killed these tw. P.-Ush
priw ncr*.

In ,l.y Hr. Din* ct Ftvysing nn-'n-t -<i r f kHUng 3 P ljsh

d ct r. Ding ossun.d that I was n 1 nger alive. On the b'.sic f this
occusati-n I was arrested and als taken t rrcysing. Tnis was n the 23 rd
-- 191x5- Then Ding learned that -r. the 23rd Juno 191x5 I w.uld c tae

Freeing fca attenpt^d 3uiciie ~n the. evening bef or- , chat is n the
22 June 1?J;5. The atre.apt ms unsuccessful, hrwever. He hod cut the

5J53


'


23 Juno-n-GJ-15-3-C& Jc-(Kurtz )-
Court 1

artery in his left hand. On the 23th Juno 1915, I interrogated in
Freysing bocauso cf this accusation cf Ding's. Since I knew nothing
oven about the killing cf the doctor I was tc be c nfr nted with Dr.

Ding pars nelly, but Dr. Ding preferred instead tc take a confessten
and adnitted that ho had dene it hinself. That is all I Imrw ab ut the
natter.

q i.nd I put to y.u the tcstic-ny cf Dr. Keg on in this connection.
This is cn page 1215 cf the English record. Kegan said the following
I quote:

,r .Vhc exactly killed the three prisoners?

" hether it was Dr. Ding r Dr. H;vcn I did n t see cystlf. It
ms said in the conp that each cf the tr: d ct rs had killed one priso¬
ner or .no f then had killed twe but I cannot say aysilf."

What dr y u have tc say ab- ut this?

.v "hen he rep rta ruaci* which circulated in the caap he knews
exactly as well as I do what to think cf than. Ahon Dr. K gen was
Ding's first secretary ouch incredible rura:ra were circulated about hin
in the casp, that ho was in the sac-, with Dr. Ding and sc f rth. -hen
I first heard cf it I didn't eve find it necessary to inf ns Dr. Kegen.

Q Did ycu kn w the pris ners Frtudc-nnn tnd '..ay?

A V wa .

q In what category of prism.rs were they?

a They were pr fcs3i rval cried no Is who had been prevl ucly c nvlo-

tcd.

Q Is it true that these two priseinrei C&»p Ceain-

K-eh wh: bad r ntr.acftfid syphilis?

.» He, i/altor Eraser, a frno.r Reichstag delocat was the one K'p n
a-ont here whe was =y first Kap- in the h spitnl with wn.a I r-13 trvat
fironds The thanks that Kras.r g t r r- = K-ch was that he w s put in an
utside carp and shot. Tr.o state rial had b_.n suppll-d by Kuschnia
i’ischnarcv who was .'/alter Eraser's bitt_rert ppanent. Iru ; letter


9~59


23 Juac-A-GJ-l5-lHJock-(Vcn Schrcn)-
Ccart 1

t. the C>sar.ndant in favor cf Xranor but tho only result was that Koch
did n t venture tc curdor .alter Krm-.r in 3uchcnwald.

Q Is it trae that these twe prisoners, Frtudcaann and say, *cro
put in a typhus cxcerincnt because they had treated K eh in rdor t
aid hie in this way?

« S'., they were net put in the experir^nt f r that reason.

Q Is it tree that thosetw: prisoners wore curdcrcd in the pris -
r.ers hospital, killed there?

A That is true.

3 At whose instigation were these tw: Guraan pr fossignal criminals,
Freudenann end iay, killed?

/. At tho instigati a f the C eeaitU- of Qcrann nd Foreign
r litical Prisoners.

Q In this c nnccti n, I recind you . f Kcgen's tostineny cn page
1202 cf the English Transcript, in answer U ny question and I qu to:

“.vre y u amro that the political c'naittec, that is the illegal
caap uefainiot: fcl n, wa.* involved in this killing? 11 Bad n.

«nd K'-g'n answered: I qu U:

‘Later while I was in the canp I lcarn.d f that.-' Is this true?

.. Vhon K gen says later he coons the tine and the rcasn f: r ny
arrest by tho Gestap . Sinc^ I refused t give the nanus f the prisoners
»■- had been involved in the killinr f these tr SS spies I vr.s accused
bee use of this killing, .us-ng th^r things those tw wore the b-st eel-
lab .raters of the SS. Thv killing f th.se tw ini .rears and trait rs was
necessary because therwise hundreds :f decent ;je:n and foreign priso¬
ners would have been botrayuJ U Uu S3 ’>y ’ i-_udo&a;vi an.‘ ay and boon
billed in th*. carp. Ti. y wcr-_ called Jow slaughterers because they li-
V.rr.liy H at. Jewish pris orurs t death.


23 June-A-FIr-16-2.-0rcss (Ira. Von 3cbor.)
Court No. I, Case I


3y • hat n. .:t wer- th,s- traitors and SS sr.d G-staoo infoivaora

fcill-d?

A.- Th- -sti. testier a:ainst peonL- li-'~ thus- two on- cannot
•udyc froa for/ul circu-otar.c-s. Th- issu- «s not tivt th-y -or- in-
for v-rs, rot just that they butray-d th.tr I- 11cm prisoners lo th- SS
and G-stapo, ju' b-yond that th-y Jjd hundrucs ol aurd-ro on their
eonsciuie-, not enLy airc-rs th-y had lnsti ated hut aure-rs th-y hat.
--rlox _d t: .:e- v-», V o ?rison-r Coruitte- ;.nd I rtalifc' that they
sonttaoo in f. is activity if th-y wro not etopn-c*. They -r-
aarally v-ry inx -tor claract-rs ho <-v. nay to th-i: o‘«n -.ur;*eroua
instinct* and against horn t:.-r was no prot-ction. It*- victims anong
tho». *©ro the ah . valuabl- aor.£ t’x. oncer, rs, thosu who •• r- ur.:-r
nrr-ot lor political r-asons. On- aist ins in- thnt

, Ur. Horn rnd Dr. Sogon ior thuir vie tin. Sat what th J-
:Av-s w-r- ills-, the proa-cution V tDr. JC-on, ha show with th -
-jjjuple o! :: • 30 .s-I'Uschnarev. This was not nn unusual caSo. It rtS*
a typical otw« Vwr- vts no otter possibility of r-n'-rlir such cron-
tares inoi: . .1 ton thnt t - of -> n ymaa

ho or- today coiud.:a*«d b-ros in their o n countri-o had th- oj - >ro-
bl- . ea th- visa nd I die. \ knew that ouch a duciaion on not
».»/ an' is Inc- r-U-noiil- to a o-raon •>:» do.r not ,-ncft such n

.. -.^,-ri-nc- and observation. -

c si or. .03 b»l .. n-c-ssity is a fist Heh m b- olrj-i o’.v
coaporat.'.ru s-nft-, s 't-c dtb th- -aviro n.uo t. l
rac >--n any ;r... r *oaai jL. halation to. rriror. .rs and I -.• ■jhl a3t bava

at tix-r- was if a fcc-r. 11

--*7 t-ous-n-o of jr.act^ra, th- vest v.il p-’ ould

C by tbs 3S. -f-ci. ir.i or- t: uA traitors ol th. class ol "««&-
-/.r. v _u :.t r.r.r b- or. toi-1 -ut th_r vie Asa could not b bro" 1 - '

•

- •

vie La to 1 the : bti.ee • deb u:': Ac. o o rialn gl SS


23 Juae-A-Fty-lo-2-C-rcss (Lit. vor. Schon)

Court So. I, Can- I

tic. was considerable d-gree of uilt. Th-ro *as no on-

t'fc.a *.c.o ti: not .;av. any liv-s on his conscience. The Prison-rs Ccr-
-itto a --ntl iLl_; :1 caap administration coiratod such people ant 7. help¬
ed 2 -ms- ouch xopL.. In full d'aronoss of ay r«soor.:. • I

h-Lp-d in tho counter action against 13-F-li* only in the intor-sfc of
t-j prisoner; and in collaboration «*ith th-a. I pr-vent-d death trans¬
ports, son- :x-- the v-ry si*- transport s-v-ral tiaos. I tool:
so.vrs into . .-s-it.nl unde: 1 Is- cicnosit in orc’-r to irot.ct then

:ro.a death thro h the G-ato to or SS. I helped Gernrn and forol n .V.:a
r.in-v.r I couli. without consid-ration o: position vhich ovl be
acre than illogical as at the aeoj tli. other prison-rs '.v?d been hilled
•- • rribl rt in . hole concoct

hive beer. i.joo.iSist-nt end s-ns-l-sa ii it v-re not based on the w.n-
l- notiv- h.ch Rlvys ruled Je - th-.t xs, to h.lp oennU *ho dosorv d
it md to >at- in the eUaimtion o. tbos- fho Were'nothin;- >i<t

m -r-s -.v. c t: - s by instinct.

>] . dies. UUin&s carried out Vcr us- tlwse traitors v/
otnol pi^uona :-tv: iC their coirad-s to the SS?

A.- The b-tr. "1 of th-ir casrndus rs not the reason

Then h 7 Here tlwsu stool oi -c.;o end traitors killed?

s

A.- In or- -r to pr-v-nt nor- politic l prison-rs be in ilL-d,
ve happened if they . • .

C.-

: aerst

A.- :'o.

Ton .... .x. r. Horn* He said that ou h-c a butt
kcent oners, hat ves fcJrt . '

,

t

s

■ -r_ -tooL i c inlon.rs or tr..itovs?


2} Jun^-A-FIr46-5-C-ross (Inti vcn Schon)

Court Ho, I, Case. I

A.- As c ruL. - xopruaentatiy.; of the iU-snl oa^p ad.-ainistr'.tior.
cLt.r-.ir.ed this in the *irst place. Bat, I should like to sy ri w !it
con tSr.t every era- v.-s diffor-nt. I car. only describe this very ~r..-
r Lly. If the Gestapo Section of the c.-.w o: ainietrntion carried out
■rr-sts or transltrrot people to the stone carries byway of ounish-
a nt the ill- C-1 c& ■ ration to 1 ind out tho cause.

I mist edd that in th- course of tine th- orison-rs rnc- I .<ero ::l. to
put r-jv-a. :t- . •-r m important of!ic-s of the SS cp.tp adiinictr-t .on,
But I should U!r- to -v^hnsise that in soitu of *11 our -fforts v- did
n t sue cod in hcvinj c;,.r.ts in oil offic-s. Th-so oruits reported to
th. c 15 zc inistration who w-s responsible for tJvs. r.rrosts

or transfers. L. .... -irst lnv-stisctioas .h. ill rl cccp a&oinUtrr.-
.. .pcndmtl/. Ir. anay ■ I had no knoiilet - of
t'tt-r# .%s p. ;• L\ d only -..r. th. illegal ca i? •.' d-

juatr tion uf.ti. .... rid of its -.eP.ts ira not 'bU to d-tcralrx, tiw
c-'ifl. of tli« on - r. In th.a- cta.s 1 wort to tho cooronfcat, tho
1 . v-c of tn. a suttody e >>, th »o suction, wJ txlvd

tivity of t.-a- atool oiRwOno and tv to.
>. -. a. b th- ill-. rL ccn? -• inietr tion. Ih-y • r
.r :oro - '_v.:t o_.v on. In sax cna-s 1 -< r> .r.ts mm th.ne L.“i-

tom rod sto. -nns. . 1 h '■

■ •_...«> traitors in th- c to broken. Thus tluy yuro
5 : ter. u.-.-ol. to infora th- G-slapo or ot..»r s.ctlons of the r. » 1 ' \i-
r:ct.v tion. Ott the ofc ftd thuec. titoxs lid rot urnt to lose the
.. ■>*. fron their -ctivitleS. Ther-ior.,

to C-w8t- o or oau otlwr office ol th<« -O c"»v> itdii«Urt.ra«-n I«*

. mw: tion. he co'T.t-r -ctior.s of this was that orison-rc :• - 4 ir

.- - SS -r- anvate .. .:iU-c. This ft£.6 th-'r

c . . ‘ '

f ;Llu~ 1 G.rv.i or ior« i xv-sist nc- *ov- ---0 't L-s*. .


9G63


2} Jun--A-FIy-le—i-S - osa (Ir.t. von Schon)
Court Ko, I, -'3- I


h-vw had thu coow.-r.-vxw of justification out th. rc-s of those oriso: -rs
v.rw so s-cr-; -v.n th- inforc-rs Lrjn-fi orw or 'noth.r ar_ao
or.ty by accident. 3 u t since they wonted to hivo succvsa-s to s >a. to
SS or Gwstcoo o-r.wctly innoc-nt prisoners bed to suffer, persons
h {jo soiwtia.3 ’lid not -v-n know that there was - resistance sovw -nt
in tv. cjp • T.wr-:or., there was vn-rrl uncertainty in the c •-*' and
f.r.r. iv.ry prisoner .-d to olivet to ho rar.st.d on th- basis of e ich
f-Lao cocusctiORs. After the traitors Ir r->etcdly betr. wnra-d in
various »-ct5.ons ’op r-'r-s.ntrtiv-s of th- illegal ernp ad lir-as-ra. on
•nc .’rieoTv.ra Co ett— and th.y r-f 's.d to atoo th-ir activity the
Connitt--, t..» ro T-Swntotiv-a of the .or-iy* : roups, iv-ch th. c^ci-
aior. to kill s.-.ch risor.-ra in order to sav- lb- lives of - nu -r oi
decent prisoners, in this -:-y, prison.ra -.i.a oth.-r.ia_ wo -id hov« h--n
irrevocably lost.


9 G6L


* « O


.art 1

— j 23-.v-2.7-l- ~IWC- rr o v- Vo n Sc noon.


Kr. President, to support what tie witness has Just
g-id end to prove the ccctivites of these inforaers and
traitors, I offer Document noven a*9 ns exhibit 7. It i3 on
23 of your d-ceaor.t book. It is on affidavit submitted
;he prosecuti h in Cn6e IV ns Document NO. 2122, Sxolbit
l',9, r.r. affidavit „f c certain K~rl --.dr.- Boeder wh- describes
: -- netlvltlos of such a traitor and inforaer. T should
lilto t. call the ?.ttontl r. of the -riband especially to
u7. He speaks of n certain Christian knoll w..o was under
leotior. 51 of the Oerar.n penal code. I ary odd that this
•• ■- r. oers n considered legally irresponsible. Then I quote:

"Zlll, th- loader of the oretoctlve custody c-ap, or.io
. jo ,f this .an no an Instrument for aurdorino hundreds of
Jo loll and *th-r pri i ro. I ays elf and a nunbor of othor
orlo'-nors wor~ witnesses wr.on 1111 nee asked him when ho
intended to c ao f r nls next mo-al ( nc chunk of bread and
no loco of gquj *£0 . Tr.is meant that Knoll v * t>. cudor
- r u..& figure f n- :.undr».d prlGon-ro before no a ot this
j -l. This 2Cn 11 -nswerod: "I have 97 -nu shall qaiokly
boh the r-ndnir.i 3 by r.j.n." «t no on* wo sr.w him
l.-.t the orderly room (office belldln w .) -nd we .also saw
return froa -with t ~-i roooived. I

vSwlf caw rwpo-tedly In the c^np now he ill tr^-teu
ri3'nero in the cost heinous v-y with the un''Ebi a uoU3
intent! a tt kill thee. In nle cap city "S Capo of the
•1 ntaci n ho t-.ok -n -ctlvo p~rt in ch. sh->otin a of numerous
•Jo'./i_h orlsyr. rs by pulling the >rls n-rs 1 c^ps fr a tnelr
r,. c.3 and throwing theQ across the chain of sentries, so ”6
: tive the sentry a rcn6.-n f'.r ah .tin-."

‘•fitness, via the octlvity of the inf raors and traitors,
-tilled by you or with your anowled^O, similar to the
'-ascription ^lvan in this -ffld'-vit?


9365


C. art 1

Jcno i3-*-17- 2-5D-2crr-.v-r. Solver.


51-ii-r. Eicra wut*o irny v-rl-tlea.

Kv, I o i b-cb tv y.ur f.id vit, J^e 'JSOuS 2 % .

,S, - --bit £• 1, in Docoaerit 3*, > 12, ? a c 1. la uld
t disc ~S6 -10 v icr. 1 s ,n p = o 5. florae re'd *&•
ud tell ao v .otuor It 13 true tn t c -o >urovio -i .illin^e
& t .cop prla n-ra in X-y oo9ltl ns -a t..ls p r r*pa
i . ; .ndlc-Co, *nd t d you hr.vo t nda t- cl is '■> rsir-
v- >li *_lcn i- .nl * brief a.eaaar •?

A . T la :ivee - f so picture. It «*nd oido.

" v s iapo^ibl-, in .*»n interreact i-.n, c.- Icacrl o tlu
•: l. nvlrowunt in vMcb I liv~d. It la iaooaai'ilo t.

rise tnl doeoroti n In - brief nf-'id- vit. It la quite
:r - c arlfvn.re va wore In X- p'.aitl na wore w.ivlod ’ey
; .jr rla.ncra -nd tn-t trnitcrj unde f-lso aooaocti.ao
.-.ins-: sue. -<ri* n.ro t. tno e-no da In if tr tl^n, -o ;:oil
- t t - Ijss-v., in .rdor t a-vo ax* prlavn^ra "rve'-t-d
.id alllwd. a typiw-.l -x'uplo t..ia 1:- lo^rr. -leiaolf w. e
1 ; - c. v..o, J -X- It : : ilia t V - titflof.

i.v -ca f tba e.aitl n /.lc. no ..old, X..or. w-e envied by
. a;- pria.n.ra rnd tee t n.na,.nalc?l ruaura ciro-.vl tod

.?ocu« n .tivns wore airdo r&ninat him.

;r-.i; rr- «nd ?t 1 pi = aons, nevov.r, w rX-d n t nly rx.-lnat
pv 1 - n.r? In :.eltirne. Tn c v s t.x aln.-r pvt f c.:o
-o -.P tl ns a - ir. Cn. cssrp. Xuacbnir-bueobn- toy, r
o; ol-, 'cotr "wi H-aal-n prls-n-re f v r, ."c.n., --‘.ova,

die. nee a Id ray no;- p* sitl ne. Froudemmn '.id I.

*;otv-rod owisn ~>ris nore, n no f v. i-ld ~ny do; ?ei-
n . It Is, f c- urao, oxtrcaoly dif lealt t s t la
1.. few s.r.tor.cos. I tried t ‘escribe t.uj c nditi ns
-urln c ;• inter .i-ti ns rr.d, r. a eis c,r tr.is et ;o-
• 2a iod I a-do, tux of:Idnvlt v a dr-wr. .p, net b; _.c rut
: ; - r;0.c .t ion, -s I n* vc nlro-.d;- srld. I did not bn w


C art 1

June 23-rt-l?-5-Kc.rrw-V' n Sohonc-KD

whet the prosecutl-r. was interested in. I did nee know that
the statement w.ald be used ngeins me. I had no reason to
r.B lao th-t It v .ad be end, therefore, I did net consider it
Inner t-.nt to defend myself. «s far as the statement \r s road
tv no, it was n.t incorrect, but merely incomplete. fffccroforo,
I si_ned it issue Ing that I would h-.ve an opportunity, in
c~.sc there was any lack of clarity h^ro, to sake a oorc
detailed stntoacnt.

*nd vhrt was the further reas r. that y u did not
realize that this statement under -rlO sight b lvo a wrong
iQpressl»n?

Veil, one runs-r. w~s that I didn't understand som- of
c..o -nglleh words.

Z. rlor 30 toll Che Tribunal wh- Kuecr.aia-Kusohnr.rov was
~nd what r;l- he played in the Coap-Buchonwald?

.•V. Kuachnir-Kuschnnrov was a Russian laol^r-nt. Vhy
•o w~8 in the c ap, I d not knew. He wr.6 already tnoro
v on I o~ao t. the casp. In the c ursc of tine, ho had
succeeded in croctln e f-.r himself an important oocld r. with
•o oaap adainistrati.n. No -no loss t.an then Chief of the
C*o:tcpO end the BD, Hoydrlch, had rec-amended hiffl to the
camp c.aar.ndant. He went in and ut f the coaraandont'o
.f. ice without appointment whic.i vns n t permitted even to
che ai officers. 7. is aaall example shews clearly what
• -siti n K .sohr.io-Kusohnarev had. He t k advantage of his
v.-erful position for persjnrl advantages and betrayed
?i*is ners t' the c-mp c.meandrnt, t.:e Gestapo and th- .end
the protective custody crap. Xuechncrev had no in ibitlons
rJ; is v;n adventago. He nad unrestrained hatred, Ojqoocl-
.11;- a*.inst .he r llticrl cris.vn^rs, especially the foi'vi 6 n
i n_rs. Iho main tr-?cr.orvus ctivlty of Husc nr.rov


e~c..d its c 1 i.e-x when thw Russian ^rls ners of war cane to

9367


j --ft 1

v-ui- -.-.d-?.-rr -w-V r. ic..


iuo^uXv—ld. • sc.u:1~ —i. -ic.:n-rv.v received tie oa^l^na-nt fr.a

t .0 -wsS-p-. : '-lei ut tie c nulr-sors, cs?oclrll~ Jowls!:

i-a-rs, fr _r: r.i Che Rue 1 -:: iris n^re f rr. I £>

: Uiovo t - £• ta-ro w-rc '•ny c nal=a-r 6 loft on a.- *..z

R-.v 1 rls n-rs -f v»r wi- a-d 'Ire?!;' i.r.o t.ir e-vsral

- . .e. Ir. order c -rove .:1s officlonc;- nnd t. n-.lnt 1:: :1s

. eltl n wit!: C.:o cr^p cua^ndpnt, Kuscbnlr-ituscnn-rov a ir.tod

• 1 r e o r. :-:o_r f tr.060 prisoners f wor os c a:l- save und

. -'1C. tart t..~ tiers --ore all ror.lly o.nvir.ocd 3.1b. wViate.

•

le <,~nlr-Kuac n^rov v s reportedly w'rn-d by c.:u lUoy-l
- .p -dainiatr tiun, oapocl'lly represent’tlvoe C .o f reign
oris aors. Ir. cr.ls c-'se of iuaonr.lr-Kuec nrrev, ;.:o fvvol 0 n
•jj.;'; t :i r.a aapooirlly leport-*nt port. On tie b sis of
Is l-jv.rt'.nt pceltl.n, : o .vd t. T.w.f. very crrsflly. I
o describe tr.o cLt .lls. I d n't ta.v then. The result

ft... v-rr.ln, w s tt t.:e ngenta w!: .: d o;pro?.o.vd .la
wove r.rroatdd r.:d allied b; c.'.o icst-o.. Tie norf. .J tiic
1 ie 1 o dalalstrotl«in # r f-racr .*or.r,nn Role .scr.j c'olcgntv
■’-ltur Kronor, v.v a I ~ ve lroc.'y nontl r.ed, :<!.. vr s In
o r o f th- v.epltrl under no T v core than r. ye-.r *nd
• ..t . • a I w s r. v.r; tome -nb with vr. a I u Unborn tod

-1 wl. , ’.•’*■ s “ vlctl- T iusc.inorcv's -ctlvlty ~s -n In: ra-r.
!.e*v .v-rev'e did n t at-p ..is -ur.'.or os v ri. -.'.^re '.Ms nly
.... s:lutl n .d t.j t we t d nwny wit!: hla.


9363

I


I


25 •Tune 47—A- -18-l-italoy( Von Schoen)
Court -o. 1


. 'as i uschnir-f uschrvmY a oafibnr of thn United Nations?

.. ' r o, he W33 a hiisian irr-i g rant..

’ • ’ f uachnir-Ku a chnarev killed?

A. By an inaction with avipan or nol, I don't know which.

'• I renind you of th* testimony of Lr. Kogan on paj»e 120/.
of th« English transcript; Dr. Kogan tnstifieri that you killed
cth-r parsons at the sugg*>3ti n of the SS, is that true?

/. That was quite impossible, since I *a3 collaborating with
th. prisoners. . s for the prison ra whee th*. Wstapo and SO did not
like ><hor. they wanted to eliminate an-, against when they had
info ran rs or «-i«ts working, I fought against ths« a’*ntn tegnth-r
with- the prisoners during thn whol* tin ? was in Puchnnwald, and I
i vnd the prison r a fror. th*- Gestapo and the SC, And logan must k *ow
that beat, b. canon h* was o.< of then, on* ol th* people who vor* on
th* liquidation lint of th. SS, a-rt h> has also testified how it cam*
about th'.t ho «a in t, pos'tio* to testify hum, because I helped him
arainst th- SS a»vi G.sUino—d kept in off th* transports, not once
hut thr.i tin is, a id it would b* asking too ruch if on t:i< nn«* hand
. Ilf-* to =av>- pri; n rs and on t 3th* r hand kill thno, Tho
risk of ay iif* »ould bn unnecessary: but I '••*• d only have folded cy
hands, watched th- i-fora* rs and threatened collaborators with the SS
and Gestapo to gradually cl* f.r th* vhol anp of G* raan a*id foreign
orison* ru. r ut th 'Vr.tapo for a lc- tin*;, • at daily ai-.cn the
d ath of their collaborator Kuschnir-Kuschnan.v, discussed n» and r.h

'• >th transp rt3 from which I had rmov> d naiy people did * ot p'iso
unnoticed . th courr of tin . h« G atapo hi d for seme tiaa b n
collecting ‘vi' * ce ?. ainst mo, !!y arents who worked for th*i Gestapo
r CD h-d found th?t out freas state.nts cadi by th* SS and Gestapo
- w * had warn d - , but wh»t 1 had to do was rr-.scrib-. i tc n«, .'u.n
■•- for * -. i Lings 1 c’r.r sdnioirtr tio and the ::->r^ of th< for-agn
prisoner groups, s.d I cc tinu d to do this until th -tit. Tut if


• •


9869


. 3 Juas -7-: -S’ -l£-2-!»aioy(Von Sehonn)

Court v o. 1

Dr. Voga-'s tastifloijy, which I bulinvo carp iron th* carp racers,
tru" you r a y bn sure you would -ot -ow navi: th leading pris¬
oners, and th c - brn^an aid foreign ere P s » Hk PI” 3 * ^r, Horn,

S-.ng r .rs, Oootschalk and «if others. Th * knm cy wort, vary
thoroughly, and that th-y lid so shows thit thoy am juct aa brav.
,v.d courageous as they w* r- fonvrly ana am -ot afridof any
unpleasant co-anquo-iceB a»-d danger, but ocr- to help n«; in tay n d
just as I tr lp"i tb-n; but th^y would nwir have don- that if I
had «.v r supports th-t SC and r-stapo against th- pr: sonars.

. Tbnn o» ’oos »-ogan coo- to as! - this at at Wit, can you
explain that?

A, Vogfn lid *>ot cw of th- circuostrncos, osp-eially, s.nco
hn did not belong to th- coral if- of r «rcrn and foreign prisoners,
at laast -ot during ny tine, airing ay tin* ho -id not taJ;* any
active part, lany prison-rs assur* d th t if a rison«r was kill d it
was at the \n#tigation ol tho SS. They id not know that wr.s nn
i-»fomor. Then, of cour:;* , this infom- r had a lot o„* folio' -rs who
3 '<w to it that such rurors did -ot cost: out, b-enuon th-nn inforears
thro' gh th paopl- thet w-m working fer thn SS and tho O' stapr
could put th- ir friends into fx-od posit o*»s, o-.d th-ir friends in
turn suppli d th*a with i-fomation on th- car.p and tho life of tho
prisoners, which thoy passed on to th*: SS end Cmstnpo, but sinco
th* na.T.i'3 of th- ccrai»t «. of prison-rs wor*- known only to a v-.r>
acall group of p-rsons , only -iin was 1 ft. This is hew logan' a
t-stoaeny and cany others c*bo about,

. - n any prisoner? killed by you or with your knowlodg in
th* cours* o:' ‘IP action?

/. Not thft I L ow of.

. I rfsd.nl you of the test iaeny of Kogan on page 1214 of tho
English transcript, whore Vegan tail he could not say that while
you -wire -arp doctor or unc* r your vtei-istraticn, patients w-n,


9370


23 Jun* V-13-j- v*loy(76n School)

Court *'o. 1

Kill", by inf ctian in th Respite.! or in tr* course of ft T 1 * actio-,
but Kogan o- tifi'd th:t then wt» •ipidcci.es. The canp officer
u.st, who wa3 a violent opponent of the Jsrs could fcu uc-J-d oa
having Killings carried, what do you know about that?

•. Ik cw othi-r about that. I t bs almay b* "n stated hero,
thr.t thin •• ib for* ry tir.*:.

'. Ko , I should 111- to she*.- you th affidavit of hr. Link, who
r.»s did n th- antin'., dot-d 2C July 19L5. It is Prosecution
ocuarnt 'X 257, Exhibit 283, on pogf- 9 of th* G* n:.an, 10 of
th* English Ooeur nt n ooi: 12.

THE Pi i'JHE v ?: /a n Kilnr that affidavit will tak*. aocantijan,
tho Tribunal will -an take its rcnun before you start reading this
a.fidnvtt.

The Tritu-nl nill to In ntcoss.


(TV.* r-.uroa a r* o-ss wrs taken.)


23 ;unc-A-rL-20-l-«tl „:u (Int. Pro-.r.)

Court . o. I, C-a- I

4

WG Hv-xt/VL: sons in roc ill 1 =- lire? th-ir sor.ts.

Wx Tribuir L -s in s-ssion.

WS PHil - T: I oulc li>._ to r-iin. couna-l for th- Pros.cviion
t.nt it vill 3 . wi.tr.. u.17 ndviceol. to wxo-ciw thv rtt-re ms. of my
nitr.-ea that t..w ros.cur ion ill 1*. v- ir. on re? vor to iroc/r- so:_-
body -ho c-.r, ‘.r in cast thu defense r-sts th-ir teatiaon'’.

Th* eaut:..-. r tfwitndrnt.it/ oroc-ctf.

:7. H.V-.7: Your cnor, I *o not s_. t _ tf-f-ns. couns-1 for Pol©my
I'.-r., jut "rt ti._ o..;.r -.IvT-ns- couns-i blw io t«ll ua h c* lo.. i:«
cnticivics c.'.w cry. of ?otorny will t'’:- .vc -.h-th-r or not intuit 3
to e-U :ny *.iit.-.ns-3?

DR. 3* J7: Hi. Pr-aid-nt, I crnnot or - .-nvt.iin :or c*rtein, of
courau, bit o not o-li-7- tht th. difuia. of th* defendant ?o .orny
.-ill last v .v Lon . - .v.r, -a 1 0 , nnot bu c Lto on this,

TH5 ??o3I - 0/ course, I und.rstcnr that boa* of th- Coi-.v. Mto

h'V. oo.iw . oc - .’ . i.ts to off-r.

... HAROY: fottU it 0 * possible, Your Honor, for th«* <2-.-ns- coun-
o.l this -v-niiv to lev- r a-utins md d-t-r dn- har lonr th- r -irinc’.or
of th. present ‘-ion of tfwf-na. ill t-.k- in thrt tS.-y bill intro:“Co
their ot:.-r iocv w.v. books. l h-v require Kv«rri upj>lw>ntsl docn-
aonfc hooka in betel ol tbu du! ntf-mt Pari >-ndt, H?ndlo*>r ot *>v

d>f*ncVnts — nc .-ye th-n -nc-rt in Just '.01 lor.? it -..ill Ui- -0
thji clos. t.v. c, w.-s-, b-icr- th- iros wt: on nil st-j-t on r-Vjttr.l?

I think th*; cm i.!v 'cc-rtin that this -v-ninr end report t -t
to ue to-orrosr.

T.S I C.i .. co-i^ i c ,.-d thit ru; ; _ation r.: ‘is-

— ss t>t r.tt-: o.v.ot t:-_is.lv-s *nd vv s- th- TTibuwl in t - .or-
Ring aoi-' ic-- :s io Lngth of tii. it dll r-c.uir-, it Jill :. : -


23 J':r_-A-rL----. x j ..Int,. _rr

Os art lio. 1, Cat- X


. - ?:JZ~ .. Hi- couss.1 :or c-.f-n-r.'. _ jr oroc..-J.
r. Dr. 'A r J* (Cor s-l ior t'.x ticf-odant ; 'ovun):

‘.itr-ss, bwforw th- roc-ss w- .-vrc considvrinf thu st t.-k.nt
cd. by thw L- t. ^r. D:r<, uocuxnt !3-257, ihibifc 283, p-g- 15 of
: 12. :-r- c.wscri'x.3 th- kiUlng of -oar or fiVv» prisoners. U>t
- -jk ;oa r- . r :-_u_ t.-is, tb-s. rIso stool rls-or.s -nl traitors'

A.- Y-s.

;rt i. -s, l. . ir cit la-noblp?

A.- Gvrarei.


■


23


i- u vl.t. Sro r.,


-Dart IsO. I, I


TT-I- cour.o.1 -or tf-f-.Vmt d 7 Drocc-d.

Hr-r. a M' (Coc s- 1 lor tl>, twf-nd;nt "-ov^n):

' ttr*-as, --for. th- r-c-ss Wu ..-r-_ considiriiv th- st t- k-nt
,-.d- by t..« L-c- yr. D;a., Doctta-nt 10-257, -.ubi*. 233, p■£. 15 of
3 ©ok 12 . r- QiSi, C-scrib«.a th- killing of - oar or fiv- prisoners* ^ t
. ‘.ak yo-J r- rvx,. t.Aa, u-xv th-s- .-.Isos tool oig-or.s -nd trlto;-3'
A.- X-8.

irt -..-i t. ir citiz-nB:ip7

A.- 3-rr.-..


9L?3


.j


C.urt I

junc 23-^-2l-I-HD-?crrin—Brown.


I turn '•grin t. your affidavit! Docunont i<o. 249,
-re- 5 of Document B>.Jk 12. I should like to c nslacr now
number 11. Vhat dc you hove to soy cbout tho first sentence?
In articular, whnt did you .-nderstnnd tho w-rd n I super¬
vised..." to moan?

A. I indorst.-.d this t- near, that I h*d kniwisdgo
;hr ugh the prls nors' cooaltteo of tho intended killing of
.hose st-jol pigeons.

3. can this, in ox~ct terminology, bo explained,

the uso of the word "supervise*?

a. Kero ng"in I didn't know the aonnlng of tho i^.gllah
v.rd, needy, the coanir.g of the word "supervise".

... Tho president has already pointed out today that
y .. inserted the phroso "at the TwqUwOt of the inflates."

’•*h?t did y u moan to say hero?

a. Vhon I used tno word "Inflates" I was referring to
the Illegal camp administration.

i. Is It true that tr.la com.Ittoo of Oorar.n end
foreign inflates decided thrt thoso traitors and oto .1
:l^o ns w-ro t- bo killed?

a. Yu 6.

And now, please look at nucoor 12. Hero again the
rd "supervision" occurs, ‘ftwt did y u intend to o.ay?
a. Tho same os I Intended In number 11.

"111 you please repeat that?

A. I was referring t<. tno SHa^nl et-jap a& 11 •loiswiti^n

'-nc tho coamltteo.

Veil, It says here "under ay supervision."
a. Yes, It says that this was d no with ay kncwlod&j.
;. And why vis t..is err.no.us terminology used?
a. Aealn I didn’t know tho meanln. of the word
suoervl6l .r..


Court 1

June 23-<v-2l-l-H3-?crrln-3rown.


I turn '•grin t, y-ur affidavit, Document Ho. 249,

-- 'c 5 of D cement 12. I should liic tv consider now
number 11 . tfhat dc y 0 u have to say about the first sentence?
In .^articular, what did y,u understand the word "I super¬
vised. tc moan?

A. I underst ;d this t- moan that I h«d km-vlodgo
tor u.jh the prir nore* c amitteo of tho intended hilling of
;hcso stvol pigoons.

1. ft.w can thi6, in ox"Ct termin'.logy, bo explained,
tho uso of tho word "supervise"?

a. Hero again I didn't know the awning of tho Hngllsh
u-.rd, namely, the mooning of the word "supervise

Tho president has already pointed out today that
?• inserted the phrase "at the r«.qUwOt of the innr.tes. 11
•V.-t did y u mean to say h-ro?

a. When I used tno word "inmates" I w- 8 referring to
the Illegal camp administration.

v. Is ic true th'-t this ooa.lteco of Gorman and
foreign inmates decided thrt these traitors and stool
lgo ne ws.ro t bo hilled?

A. fu6.

i. And now, please look at number 12. Hero again tho
v rd “supervision" occurs, *fnnt did y u Intend to say?
a. Tno some as I intended in number 11.

”111 you plocao repeat thrt?

A. I was ref owing t*. the illegal o nlotmtlon

»nd the committee.

Q.. veil, it says here "under my supervision. "
a. Yes, it says that this was d no with ay knowledge,
r. And why via t..is erronc.UB terminology used?
a. Again I didn’t hr. the mcanin. of the word
supervision.


9m


C art 1

Jun 25-A-21-2— KD-Fc rr 1 n- 3 r vn.

h>v l* r v- a th*. nuaber - f prisoners, tr It v: uld
b. 5s-r t' e -;, tha tr:itvrs snd at ol c c ,r.s * "jsj
/ a hr.d knowledge?

.•». 55 r 50.

'... Thu re -c aonticn h-ro in cfcl6 affidavit of 150.
v. ; did /.a .vj t do lch t..u tillln. of the ronnlndur?

a. nothin-, ;; tfcin c rt oil. I f trad at ab ut t;«t
let r.

... VJ& wevo t.v ?o tie In c lc reaainder?
a. Thoy wore wit.: at ox^-?tl r. et-vl ^i-Ovns.

*«i. Than S-.ls ve-ylndor vf 9C r s thnt wove killed
■-•if ut ur knowlodso, -f v..o*o klllln. you f und ut
so .sucaontly, c uld •/< u fc-vo proventef t;-:sc klllln s ?

.•V. K , chvy ..■'d -lrondy ecoarra

... A.nd If \u hr* * the SS c?ap rdmlnl-straCivn
ut t If, w ld hnvc haoponod?

froo-bly can tiros ra ?r.y w aid ruvo bo a hilled,
1 oont p>.ra ne.

«n 1 vh w.old mvo boon '.filled?
a. ? •lltlcp.l -a4 foreign prls This w Id - vo

oo.» .oud -a r.a cxoueo tv atnrt a now -otiun.
i>i / u >now *»b ut tho hlf c' 3e?

Yes.

'•‘hu w«8 W'vlf?

-i. Hu w 3 e cars truetoc.

.. Old u sring it rb at t » if wna tmaafovroA
ut side cr.^'

Z—r : w a d no n tho ardors f t.-.v c -omne.or.

- ■ r>ir._ in closest c llr-borrtlcn with t.:o S3, peri—
-- - .rl with .. ndnlnlstretivc .:c-d f too protottiro

or-r), c.id he ployed r lscoatsblo role lr. ih- aajp.

- — .. xltlcul --r^.r. end foreign prlsunore wore greatly

9375


Overt 1

June 23-^i-21-5-Hii-lorrln-3rown*


ir.:crc6;ed ir. seeing to it that Wolf lost his influential
positi-n, because the position ns a trustee was one of the
/-at powerful lr. the cccp. It vos indifferent whether he
rca- lned in the canp. The goal of the illegal cr— p adnlnis-
:rnti n, and ay goal also v-'s th-.t a trustee who represented
the interestoo of the prisoners should take his plaoc; and
with ay assistance this was brought about. His successor
r.s a political prisoner by the naao of Reschke, if I rosoaber
c rrcctly, Cspelllng) R-e- 8 -o-h-h- 0 . horoovor, contrary
: what kogon said, Wolf did not dio in the outlying ennp.

Th~J w's ainply a ensp ruaor; so far no I know he Is under
indlctaont In the 3uohenwald trial.

C. Kogon hrs testified on page 1204 of the Knglioh
.rnnsorlpt th-t Dr. coven left the oriaonero nlono, and if
u-aowrc of the illegal caap ".dalnls tret ion were pointed out
: *.lu, th"t aueh and such a person was a traitor ho did

avr.y with hla # is th"t tru^?

A. No, it is not.

v. Whnt wno the actu -1 situation'?

rt . The aeabors of the illegal c-ap ndalniaeration
<vrtlcularly the prisoners' o.salttoo t which spoclally
Gcloctod foreign prle -ners belon^d, were n.t known to
evory prisoner; if they h-d be-n known, they wouldn't iv.ve
l-.stud long. In this testimony of Kogon's, he puts the
neaibors of the illegrl coaaltto* in a position that throws
t* alt-- 3 othor fnlso light on the nature of the illegal caap
a’ainictratlon. The ae-bers of the Illegal c-sn adainlstrc-
:1 r. t which foreigners also belonged, wore the coro of
: •- resistance r. v^aor.t against Che 53 lr. the caerp of
a’-’-ohonw-ld. Thr^ugh-.ut all those years they bore the xln
-rent -.f the 6trug_le to preservo the lives of the inartoo.

-he labors of tnis a.zr.ittOe dally risked their lives for

9S76


r « <J


•rt i

me 53-^-2l-4-E*>-?orrln-3rcifn.

t.:- *.felfrre r thj .:hcr prisoners. I know anny - then
•• I'.at ihair lives la their flint f r their c nnrndoe;

; 3 ^ no -leo olwya tv«k their piece. These noridieoa
zz o ur-ied 5 :a ri6 ners ~£?lr. rat "join t holt v.t, It
- --i vied then *r.d aclped then In over; respect. If aay
: i • nrl? nors c old ho envoi w.. therwiso w -If. have
irvovjoebl;' ho.n lost, then tfcct w-a aninly the -vo'npllsh-
-nt f tie n. h;or* -f the llle^rl c«np cdsinletr ;i' n.
a: iv cine, X'i'-n did not p'rticlp-te In tnia etr.v ;lo f.r
vo If ere f the pria.ncra. Taorof r., a, far -e fci-le
;oatia.n;* of -Is le c neerned, ho c-nnot testify t r.ny-
.v:.n. .f hie vn hr.-vied-u. «leo, aeabora of tno illegal
o -5 -dhinl -tr-ci -n -apllod t no n X i-.n'a ooh-lf, a\

: \j too indlrootly ,wea ..la life t. thrt o*.aclttco. In
1 ? tcetlz.ny, ho describee It ca If I tv ok r wr.lk \*.ujh
; e on-ip with the n-hocra of the lllj;-! c-'np ndaini'ivra-
1 n -nd the Inf ^rnoro wore p-lr.t-d ut t*. no, a'. 5 on I
1 nod.InCely .-d tn— d no nwy with. dot the aitnnti n vna
ra f'lltve: «o I hrvo rlre dy arid before, ;:-i
HU^-1 ornp -.dalaletritl on end t-e c-nnlttcc end t—

: \*.l a llr»le n nor, c n due tod v k r or.roful lnvo6-l ti.ne
: : .• Individual inf mere, -nd • nly ween It wra
n.c lv,c*llr proved tnrt the inf rn^rs were aotoia. their
dove fr-a the 3d r fr.z the dd c-.np -dnlnlatr 11 a, then
ir rte ece dleoueaad by the o-nnltloe. «nd only If it
• -o anv-ldAblj nooOBBery, nni l* n -.oner aor.afl vvro r.t
nd, tnor. cacy war- hilled. Cr. S— th.r hand, it vor.lly
lid be n-,ro epor .nrlr tv t - ex,In In lr. view the
n In the caap t tint tlaa he v'ltod t la.,
-c-v.se this torriblw terr.r tn'; :no ettol pl^avna sot loose
; . canp really h d f- b« hr '-iht t. -n end.


Co-art So. 1

23 Jun 47-i-22-l-5S£-Cook (3rovn)


v Do you know the Gr.brellovicr case?

A. I don't really rtnenbor the nase tnit now I know %*at you aro
tBiking about.

Q. Poenfcild testified that you eorlcusly aistrceted Gabrellovics
and that ho died shortly thereafter. That le oege 1640 of the English
transcript.

A. That is not true. Hoeehild is inegining things.

Q. "hat vne the real situation?

A. Gabrellovlcs vrs a Polish lnforacr working with tho SS. I
rer.or.bor still that Gabrollovlci was In Italy and oleyed a rolo in tho
Fascist party therv. For soau reason or othor that I don't know today
ho vent to Buchcnvold. Xany nrlson neeb.rs of tho Illegal caop adainls-
tratlon, particularly foreign prismorc, charged Gabrollovlcz vlth boing
an lnfornor, or.d It vat oarticulorly the liaison non nnong the Poles
vho roprusontod that point of viow. In the courso of this discussion I
loft the rsoa becauso I had boon called for. Thoroforo, I cannot toll
you of ny ovn direct knowledge whnt happened, but that tho dlscusolon
erne to results I can well boliovo, but that ho was so badly nlshnndlod
that ho diod of It, that I will r.cvor believe, and certainly he was
never oo alshandled in cy offlco.

V 'Vhore vac tho killing of the inforr.ers or stool pigeons enrriod

out?

A. In operating roo-. Ho. 2.

q. Cn p. go 1209 of tho English tranccriot Sogon testified that
the orison hoepitd w Q c *hc execution chamber of the illegal earn
administration. *hat d'^ you have to sey about that?

A. That 1b so, but F.oeahild els. said In this connection that it
wee only to be attributed to the activities of tho illegal canp
adnini3tr r ti n end the committee of foreign orisonerc that at tho ond of
the war the Americans were able to free 23,000 people who were still nlivo.
koreover, I should like to snphasire at this tiho that these inforr.ers
and ctid pigeons wjuld have not death even if the orison hoeoital had

%73


C Jurt Sc. 1

23 Jun 47-A-22-2-EEK-C k (Brown)


->t been the execution chembcr, end that -»therwiae it would have ccct
the lives of many valuable human belies. However, the v*y in 'diich the
inf or nor a vero killed would have been 6low and painful, because if there
had been no other way they sirroly would havo been beaten to death by the
prisoners.

V. Vere only such people killed as the illegal cam administration
design: ted an informers or stool pigeons, er.d did this heopen without
exception?

You would not say designated re inforr.ers. If the results of
the ir.wstlgrti a carried on by the illegal ce-mo administration and the
corritteo shoved that the informer waa a potential danger for the whole
carp and if it were decided to kill this men, thon this killing w* e
enrriod out with y permission end my assistance.

GA'ZIX: Hr. President, to substantiate the witness's statonont
I put in Eoven D.cur.ont So. 19, which will bo Exhibit So. 8. That io In
tho supplementary voluto, the affidavit of the Dutch Town Councillor fren
A.;oturdm, Loondort Socgors. Let no direct your particular ettontlon
to Ho. 12. Ssegsrs here statoc:

"I know that Dr. Hoven only killed those of the prlsonerc oyoto-
raticelly who had to be looked unon as SS and Gestapo soles or os dan¬
gerous collaborates v* thin the canp."

regarding the character of the affiant, let c.e cell your attention
to So. 1, also Hoe. 2, 3, end 4. Proa this it can be soon that Scogcro
vac in Buchenwald for three years and consequently has the knowledge
necessary for this deposition. In further oroof of Sesgere' character
I put in Hoven Document Ho. 6. “his will be Exhibit Ho. 9. Thie is a
reuort of the Dutch Cocmittee concerning the illegal nreoBrotlonB for
international enti-foeciet cooperation in tho c em> Buchenwald. This is
on page 25. Let mo call your attention first to uege 32. From this It
can be seen that thie report is signed by this Seegers among 0 the re, and
this nroves that Seegerc vas one of the leading personages in the reeis-
tEnce movement in the camo Suchenwald Bad in the illegal carp adnir.istra-


Court Sc. 1

23 Jun 4?-A-22-S-ZEX-Ccok (rrcvc)

tlon. It proves alto that Seegers it in a position to Judge regarding
the necettity of the measures tekec. I call your attention further to
cege 25, the second paragraph, cuote:

"In order to understand this amazing fact it is necessary to give e
short history of the hard and dangerous illegal activity and wearisome
preparations.

"The nectars of all the nations represented in the Puchenvald camp
took pert in these preparations."

On page 26, the next to the last paragraph shows that the SS used
orofessional crlcintls with rany years of ureviois convictions as the
extonded ar= for their shameful acts, naaoly, the act of destroying the
political prisoners. Just what happened in detail io shovn in tho last
caragreph on pogo 26 ; at tho top it soys:

"How cany sick orisonore, for exacplo, were hosoitolized contrary
to the intontions of the SS."

This was Hovec's activity for tho welfare of tho so-called decent
prisoners.

Lot ae draw your attention to cage 28, at tho bottom, whore it says:

"The German and Austrian prisoners who, as alroady stated, had occu¬
pied tho aost widely varying costs, ontered into communication with tho
Dutch."

This io the samo Seegers who signed tho affidavit, end tho Tribunal
will also recall that this ?ieck hee appeared here as a witness, «ho
also cade statements rogerding the necessity of those killings.

This again proves that Pieck has the necessary knowledge and that
he is a porcon who con exprese on oninion in this matter.

Furthermore, on cage 29 at the bottom you will find the statement:

"The Committee was conoosed of recresentetivcs of the Ar.ti-P.evolu-
tionary Party, the Liberal Democrats, the Catholic end Social Democrats,
the Communists, ard the Independents. In the course of time the follow¬
ing tcck part in the work of the committee."

And then there are a few names, among them tfca name of Seegers and

9830


Court So. 1

23 Jun 47-A-22—i-ZSi-Coo*: (3rovc)


•ho =o=o of ricek.

Cn pegs 30 in the siddle it seys:

■Under tho leadcrshio of the Gorcan veterans Valter Berth and Horry
iuhn end vith the participation of Zrnat Susse, representatives of Trance,
Austria, Czechoslovakia, Hues la, ond the Netherlands took cart in thic
first international discussion. Pleck took pert in this work for the
Netherlands."

This vill clarify rieck's personality. Pic ok bain,: the son I cnllod
here ns a witness, vfco cen soy ho played a nosition in the illegal coop
edsiniatretion. It roads further:

'Tor ronsocs conr.eeled with the conspiracy, only n few non of tho
cocalttso should be token into tho secret."

This proros that this was e very ssoll clrclo that could Judgo tho
necessity of thoso killings.


23 '■'urn -'.7-<3-i-'—S'-Gros:(°rown;

Court Ife. 1

Ll: rc» the cttontio. of the Tribunal to page 32, Ih« report
i3 sign i for the Anti—h* - vcluti .ary Party by Dr. u. v-ri Linton; for tho
Liborcl-Occocratic party by G. hitoocst'-r; for thr Social L'onocn tie
Labor Prrt> i- th* !<V.tfc«rlznia by Ari Tr um. it; then by i.cgors; cud
fer tr.* Catholic Group by J. Kob*rt.

T.t rt- raw your attention no’ to Fi.ck’a testimony, who .said this
J. Sobnrt is th: arx can who was approv* -t a a n witness for au but whj
ha* a fatal - cci' nt -

!?.. P’SDYs l-y I ask , your Koorr, «) t defence c unsul porosrts
this to bo?

OB. 0. "'Li’ : Tnis, .rs ycu can fc«»i fro a tho title , is th*. mpert by
the ' • th* rlo s Comitt • on tho ill* g-l preparations for ±r$.nmntionr.l
anti-fnsclet coot r'tion in th*» Cnep Boehcuwold.

•?. U ..RDT: V. i> Is th* original?

CH. Oi’XIK: In Holland. Pi* ck brought the r* port with him , end I
hri tho Gin rl wccrnt-ry pmtrn this copy,

»'fl. H: iDY: r.y T a* th - cp; , ple»ao? Ih*n this copy in Gftmim
c rtifi^d by Captain Hie* purports to be the coty of th- original
brought by ‘'r. Piock?

DR, G 'XI* : Tht* Secretary G* n* ml h 3 ccrtifi*<d it. Vitek
brought it rlcog. PiAek h"1 to t>J.«* it back with him, so I runt
lock to the Shcr..t ry ""<n-iral.

H. :.DYr U this Cr.pt. in Itico f.-wilirr with the Itoraan

l^ngorgn?

DP., r- II?: I »:sue* so. 1. is a trenal tor. I didn’t worry 'bcut
th t. I .lust grve it to him in th*- tafcqsu counsel’s offico.

1 ?.. H’PDY: I '’oo* r. k-cn who this roan hi sc is, y ur Honor. I have
•i obj-cticn to it. I -jcuid like to know whe Cnptain itico i3 of tho
'“crotary‘••'-•^rr.l* s office. I never h*ar J . of him.

II : C r* ct i on. -aic. i? in tht •

J:st ire.

THE ?:TSEES!: I notice th- copy in the Tribunal’s Oacucnnt *-»ock is


93G2


23 v T un* S’^-Grosrf 3 rcwn)

Court T T o. 2

Ltr Tran tho attention of the Tribunal to png* 32. The report
i= sign d for th'i Anti-hevoluti nary Pr.rty ty Dr. D. vm Lingen; for tho
Iibercl-Deinocntic Pr.rty by 0. RitooeaUr; for the Social Dnaocrctic
Libor ?rrt;. i- th* tk* rl^nia by Arie Treumeit; then by . cugora; end
for the Citholie Group b; J. heb-rt.

T.* t r. rtK ycur attention non to Fleck’a t-atinony, who.an! d this
Robert ia thi 'an tan who was approve* 1 . a Mitncia for qb but who
kv* n fat-.l * cci' - nt —-

MR. : TBY: :>y I rafc , your Hc-or:-, wh-t iofcose c unaul porporta
t’ria to to?

DR. 0/*XD : This, rs you can too fros tho title , ia tho report by
tho thrl'n s Cooaitt- •• on tho ill g-1 prop.-rations for iutnmntionftl
■nti-fnacict cccr ration in the G«sp Duchi nwnld.

13. ••. !.r.Y: h r* ia t:.. original?

DR. 0/."LIK: In Ho 11am. Pi.-ck brought tho r* pjrt with hioi , '■n'i I
hfd tho Con- rr.l i«cr*t-ry prepr-ru thia copy.

M*. H. IDT: r.y I »« , th-, op; , please? Than thia cop; 1 in Goman
c rtlfW by Captain Ric* purports to W. the copy of th- original
brought by ^r. Pi ode?

DR. G'"IX : The S er fry G« ne r-1 h a corti/iod it. Tifei:
brought it ,«loog. Pi4ck hart to It brek with hin, ao I aunt
’lock to t.-,f Secr-t’ ry General.

IT. H. i-.DT: I- thia Cnpt> in idea f.ncili''r with th Gum-in
L’nrurgn?

D?. G.' IQ: : nosusr an. [>! ia n tmnsl tor. I didn't worry nbcut
*. I . grvd it to in thu defense counsel’s offico.

. - I V: I 'o^'t knew who • l Lee ia, ; ur . ire

•* objection to it. I would like to know wh; Captain .dee ia of the
■-cr:t'ry »e-..r*l’ a office. I nov-r Ymri cf hie.

. - •••:.: : * roction. dee is in the Wfena« C
upat ira.

nz FiTSILFT: I notice tho copy in the Tribunal a Docuannt a ook ia


9302


23 Jun* -.7-23-1-/.-- Grcssf^rown;

Court Vo. 1

L t - 'raw the attention of thr. Tribunal to pag-> 32. The report

is sign i for thi nti-:.* vcluti nary Party tj Lr. u. v-n LinE'm; for the
librnl-L -_roc re tic Pwty by G. Kito-est* r; fer th Social L'cnccrr.tic
Labor ?! rty i- th< Rth'rlfnda by Arle Trcurncit; then by fingers; an*!
for th« Catholic Group b; J. Robert.

T.* t a rr.w your att'jr.tion 'xom to Piock's testimony, who nail ttiis
v. Hofc»-rt is thi can hc was apprev--. *>a a witness for a- tut who

h /' a fatal *cci" nt —

1!?.. H'UDY: i v y I ask , your Honor?, wt-t a* fence c unsul poroerts
tv is to te?

DH. G.’Xi? : This, nr you cm ten free the title , is the report by
the fNith> rl»nta Ccwsittn; on the ill- g’-l preparations fer international
viti-fasciet coon-.ration in the ^anp Duchrriwall.

IS. M..RPY: -t r. is th» original?

DR. XVXI?: In Folianl. Pi-ck brought the report with hia. , mi I
h."i tho Can* r^l Secret* ry pr*twn thin copy.

lVt. H^.nDYs ay I th • cp; , pl«"cc? hn this cop; in Goman
c rtifiM by Cnpt^in Hie* purports to hr thn er r of th* criminal
brought by ‘-r. PiocF.7

DP.. G. ’TJJ : Th* Sncr.itary Gen* ml h s co.-titted it. Difek
brought it 'loo, ritek had te t-k it tf-ok with hia, »c I sent
*’l«ck to tr.« S-rcr-t- ry Gmeml.

IT. H. i.DY: lr this C-.pt* in idee fttili-r with the Gerann
l-ng-orpn:

Dr. r- HI : l poouct. bo. ! h is n transl tor. I didn't worry about
th't. I Just grve it to hia in tho iefenre counsel's offico.

I?.. H'HDY: I ben't knew - ho this bvi nice is, y ur Honor. I have
no ab.Vction to it. I would like to know wh. Captain .ticc la of the
^cretrry Gon»r5ls office. I n^?-r h*ard of hie.

. U : : ruction. lc« is in the Defnnan Counsel's roca
■if si irs.

THE PKTSIDFiT: I notice th copy in th» Tribunal's Docus*nt Hock is


9SS2


• ~'• ~ A -- ~ '-23-2-Grcss i Prcwn;

Court So, 1


certified by :ef»n-n counsel Dr. Gatflik.

¥- l » K_=DT: Th“ original is, hc» ver, in order. !> ; ch pr-*e io
C'rtific- by Crptoin Ricfi. I urs Juft in:uirii* rg to the br*CK-
grounrt cf the ccuvnt.

"HI FIT'Ll FT: Counsil sry proor.nl.

•

P v :>P.. C U?:

'1. Cn p» • 1209 of thn English rocorl Kogon tostifi* d Uut Hcvon
*crk'>d m closest cell/ bcrr.ticn with political • risonnrs. "hat do
ycu h.Pvo to sey about thr.t?

Th’t is ccr^ct. 1 work* *1 very closely with thn (iumr.n ini
foreign politic.* 1 prison* rs. I tlso wor* 1 with th- *» cent prisoners
ulo Hor: th gruo. triangle and »ror claasifi. d by th. SS ;-.s
prof* ssicml r. ii-.nlo, Tt would > sore comet to ny I collnborr.tod
prison r.-;, * k c nettnrwhrt cnfgory thn had put th*uT. ir..

It was '.f-tiroly indiff'n:*it to an wh'.t their rnvioua profession
hnd been, wether cultural or ’ort* ro. I rriat on;. that in thn najority
of cases of the arisen* r a ' saved 1 didn't k*.c»< who tho nan was.

This w> - the r-r'sen why, rs b r . hor- sail, then wire prlsonoru in
tho.V' tr-.n-ptrtn I kept free 1*-ving who ropms.utM 11 prof-asitna,
fror. 'liniLt- r of Ctate dewn to proletariat.

. ‘ -.a there no v*y of doing runy with traitors r.ad atool
Plogons?

If you h- uv-r b «n in r concentration caap and knew the
-Ctu-l cr.n-liti: i ttvori , you wouldn't ask thft question, Wt w s
tc do ? Should I gc to tho C3 .‘fciniatrrtion? Chou'd I go to
f'ach cr Lolli-gT To Gluecfcs, to Kiml* r, or to Lis Gnstr.pt agent,

Tr. Morgan, whe on Hi=r2* r's orders wr.s efi ryinj* out extorain'-tioos
-i tr- o—r>? » J she .Id I tell onr of tr.car ptpl* *Yusohorav.v, or
nr. of these i"f rs ycu hiv»- ixqilcyt , hrs killed hundreds
rls.-.n-;rs, tur-*d Husai'-n ccmissars over for *:xt •-mi nr-ticn r.m
-• t th-- Jawc b. b' ten to tenth?They wruld have told ro I was crazy


23 Jan* C-*-?'-&- 3 -Srosa>.£zcim)

Court «o. 1


or nor' prcbrbly the would h*v- si-ply shot n«, find *«o one would
h-vi b -.n h.-lp -* by u t.n d mthi-.p would hr.vr. b:n ch-.a3r.3_. ccsnaso

t.n* high est rHpr's’atrt- : -vas of justice i< th* cruop w* re : Iso ft the
seen turn th’ win xvaras-mtotivos of t: ext* ninf tion 'rogrut in

tfc* CH.3P. ,; or should it bn forge* t-m, <d I should lib to utj h -.SiE
'win non, ti-.-z n political prisoner, ahcthi-r G*rnw» or fer-ifn.

4r.s co.3i r m th concnntrrticn enpp to h»- t> *.« • or it crl/ii'-r.l,
ni his RXt rai'.' ticn free th* point of vi ■> of the SC v»:is t, good
Innd.

.. £•• t is oonn-ction I should lifc* to dnr.w th*- rttnntion of
th* Tribun-1 --in tc C «g*.ra' nifilvrit, n»r«ly Vo. 13. This la
doouemt Sb. IB in th*. Su-:1 t . Ho. 23, which rnadai

"Sonditiens i> Buch»>nnH, h-r. thra was pr»otic>.lly r otntn of
' r bitw . i;«'tn rad SC, pju.itt 1 of 0 otlvr nltnm tivo , in
njr opiair*’.''

"Vo. U. u: killings, s ft r 3 I * c.i, worn an l-bsduto
a'tceimity for fi.< grow ing orr-^ii* ntio of f:cliticrl prison.rs in
Puchi n»\H, which ny. <» of t> uch«'iwnld a c*ap which distinguish'id
it an If fnvouro ly free all oth* r existing coops in Onroany. It is
fo to * 3suc i*- this respect th-t Dr. vi-n just by thin killing
caist'-’ c-noctously in s-.vinr ti-.* liv e y f thwaands in Bucheuwnll."

We. 15. H r* S. rs says th«r> *• no other possibility of
doing nu>? with infora ro, rn ih> soys nt ti; • *i-t,"7o continue tc
-xist wo 11 r. v ~.ont ert in ifth for ;« ill*'gel pidsonor 1 s
-rgfdz tl.n i*. r eh ur.-.l'i rnd for thr- lf-z A irf prison"re .nd wc-i
h-.’/r 1- to •> c-t-stroph* for tha rntln ersp."

I further ut in a this ccn-r ctic-i th* nffi :* vit by F'ilip
* ir> . This i* 1 doom ”c. 13, which will • Exhibit lu, p:c A? t:

. . .a .n

*.•, th- question is, " Vt do you think -b-ut th- a- c- ssity of these
Killings?

9EGA


2? Jun*. - -23-..-Orcsti(Broxn)
’curt ,: c. 1


Ti-y »cr& pr3b->.ly wry n ceas.-ry.

'ieach Uni'll; scvo; th«; Iif«. cf xrny tia s thr. nuc.t*.r of
prison* re?

"Y-ry ,-rrb'bly."

"It. In r ti; r.;dati/<-; canditie-.n t U.< tixo .t tho Cohcbu-
tr tion C-xp Buckenvrid , "••• a th-i-n r.ny eth.'ir wny to :•» niir h* micas
th*s« "S • . • r-.stnpo aj-iea?

"So f-r -3 I I’.'cv, nc."

Kop.-rUn* tr.- ^ffirmt's ckr.ro.rt r, I ir-* th«* Tribunal 1 s nttcnticn

. •. i nn is ».ct Gnroftn • this st"tenant to

stor in Buotanwilri. This non is n I ui.

I/t x*' T' v ; -ur p rticulrv nttrntiun tc tfi' fret th(t hr hi.-.solf
sys "I *r chiefly int'ix atfd in intern ati end inl huernit* ri/.n acvc-
u* nts."

In vi v. of this, tho at; t>conts sr. • i" uuontions 13 to 15 by
thio -.ffi-nt shot li b- of particular ;r b tivo v lun. Hn also aiya
n-i r ' . 1 Since 1935 I hivn r> octroi fer «.u"kora in sy it»\nor.

».ft*r ti. ■ r I r'ct ivi 1 r-i official r -o.g-iti n of gratitude free,
tr.n M3i f r h Vi".- con-u.-l-’d US • In*,- n fer Bnv-.fi : anUia, duriru:
th» wr>r."

fos* 2 , 3 at 4 5’-.cw that he was in DuctxuwnU 'a prisoner*


9685


23 JIT--A- I-Sl-i-:. rror (Lit. ircr.n)

Coart Ho. I.

I 3hr.il further put ir. cviduncj the id*wit of Adolf Andre
HtOEul. This 13 Docicfcrxt Ho, 12 and Exhibit :>*a. 12, jr^c 1x0.

LS 3T5ID24T* Is not that exhibit nuaber 11, counsel?

Si D-. Ok.UK:

■i Correction, yes it is 11.

An car. be seer, free rage Uf, this is a former political prisoner
in 3uche.ir.ald who, on pages ll and 1x2, makes atatonarta x-esarding the
killings. At the bottom of pag* lxl:

"I know that pricor^rr have ocen .filled wi*.h the knowledge of
Dr. Hoy ... :t concerned without exception SS and Gestapo spies. The
killing of each one of these savec the lifo of a vast r.usber of prison¬
ers. The billing of every one ore persona wan necessary in order
to save the live, of decent prisoners."

Then apooica of t Yt Kuoohnir Kuachnarov case, which ia well
known to us by new.

'ay di • you yourself carry cut tin killings? Khy didn't you
leave it up to the iliogal oaap adciniau'Ablor. in all cases?

A Here ai;ain 1 nuct give you the same answer that on officer
■ould give, after a cattle, to the question "iihy did you shoot at the
enemy? bhy didn't you leave th'.t up to year nOIdlero exclusively?".

There wore cascr whore 1 had to act, casoc that I could net turn ovor
to the prisoners. I can prove that by the case of Kuashnir Xuschnarev,
although 1 jl ht choose cth*r examples, l chose the Kuachnarev case
beiauso the facts in this case have already beer, to stifled to by the
- - tier, witness Kogon. The powerful position that Kuachnarev oc¬
cupied and >ur connections with the Goa tape ar.d Si>, "hich extended as
far up ns the 3SHA, - Bra already . . ittee a£ political

:ricorers woo ,ox*suadec that Xuschnarev>s activities were nesting vith
success. He did his business perfectly openly. For aorc than a year
his death had beer, decided upon, but no one dared to carry out the aen-
te-.ee, beea-se Xuschnir Euschnarev lived in a rone which waa guarded by
the 3S. ?rIcorers could have been found who weald have sacrificed their


9336


Coart '.To. I.


own lives in order to kill Kuschnir Suschnarev, cut that would have
rad evil consequences also. That would have lad to an action against
the roll-leal Qeroan arri foreign prisoners and tra Jewish prisoners.
Koachrarcv'fl arrti-Secitisa was --raster than that ever, of the skip nd-
siaiotration, the 51. The xnctfcer of Jevs that he had executed on
falso charges runs into the hundreds. Consequently, it was only vrith
=y assistance that killing hir raa possible, and this war a case vhero
only I could do the killing. : also knew ir. this case that I had to
rick all. iverycno who appro ache-, the Xuschnarov problen was risking
his life, but, of course, I had tbs best chances of success. The most
prominent canters ef the prisoner ccaaittea were present when I toll
'(■/•n of ay decision to carry cut this killing and, though I knew that
billing m« the only possible solution, it was very difficult for ce
*c do so. I alleged that KuschnaroT died of typhoid. There are ter¬
rible notions that even today a person shies array fret - nADoly, tho
situation in the Cazp Burhenwald at that tiac. He known only

-f he sees then net fren the periphery of the cnap, but personally
experiences then hissolf.

Q 3c.r did you reconcile those acts with *Tur position as a

doctor?

A Those acts have nothing at all to do with ny position as a
ioctcr. I nhculd have acted ir. exactly the saao w«y if I )jad not boon

r. ’ y struggle wao against the conditions that prevailed, and
r.y osttlcr. ir. this fight ms prescribed for .» once 1 had put rjysolf
or. the s'.do of tho prisoner;. o the comittee there belongc*’., raong
otrers, of the cane profession as cine, who rould have acted in
the ear.o "ay as I did ar.d had tc act ir. the case way.

Q Kogon said, cr. pn 6 c 1239 of the English transcript, and 1

quote:

"If it was a case cf saving roiitacEi . riser.err who v.crs ir. dan-
Z-r af their lives by withdrawing then frees the prlitical department,
then It. -even was always read:-" tc jive hie signature for such nr. action

9307


23 v\r-A- a-Sli-S-Harro* (let. Brown)

-•curt Ho. I.

cnee the suggestion was made to hir.."

Is that correct?

A Yes, but it is not ccr.pleta. I did r.ot pay any attention to
• cat category the .risoner I was to save fell under. It was enough
for ce that he was no traitor or inferoer. Therefore, since I could
r.ot know each nrisorer personally, it was sufficient for ao if he was
proposed oy the agents of the illegal car.p administration or the Gor-
can or foreign political prisoners, fceca.se these agents were the
deputies of the individual resistance groups in the camp. The classi-
ficaticr. ae ,, croer. n or "red" or as Jew or Aryan wae mad* by the GS, and
for a* it had no binding validity.

Q From vhat dato on did you work with the illegal cfstp ndnin-
: stration end the political ccrcittoo?

A Shortly after I began ay activities as second ccap (lootor
at tlx be inaini of 19U1.

Q Kegon said the following in this matter I

"Frcr. the tioe > r.e: Dr. Hover, worked 03 tto camp doctor he col¬
laborated with the 11 logal ccap administration.

Is that corroct?

A Ion, but again it Is not cooplete beoauso, no 1 said, I
didn't work only with the illegal camp administration, but also with
the foreign prisoners ar.d with the Jews.

Q Regarding tre tire at which the dofe-xiar.t worked in col¬
laboration with the illegal camp administration, I draw your attention
to Document ilo. , 10. This is the affidavit by Philip Di: .

1‘ can be seer, that he was released on 20 J'arch 19lil, and ho at 1 tor,
•irder J>7:

"Iy wife had learned in Holland that one could obtain a release
•trough Dr. Hover.."

rlease observe tte date, 20 I&rc* V- .
between Russia and Germany had bp gun. Evan at that time Dr. Hoven was
known in Holland as a person who saved prisoners in Bucberwaid.


953G


23 Jur«-A-i3-2~—narrow (Int. 3rcwn)

Court :io. I.

’ 4 b did it happen ttet you collaborated with the illegal camp
adsinist rati or.?

A The ; xisoaers with when I cane into close contact, namely
Walter "ja«er when I have already named teday - he was a for:oar
=eichsta3 Deputy - and other renters of the illegal camp adninistre-
tior. soon saw that I was different from ny predecessors. From hin and
fro - foreign prisoners and the aforementioned four Jewish prisoners
particularly I found out about the real conditions in tho camp. This
rade such an impression on re that 1 allied myself with, then.

Q Roenhild said, on page of tte English transcript, that
ir. Itover.ber or Decenber you saved a transport of about hCG political
prisoners. Is that so, and who wore those prisoners?

* That is so. These woro prisoners vho were to be killed
wlthir. tte framework of the liaeht vr.d Fobol Action. In tho case of tho
French priooners, as usual, tho most prominent prisoners woro chosen
for this action. Ir. 19U2 awi i;U3 tho Dutch would ail, without ex¬
ception, be sent to Hat.wuilcr which, toward tho end of 19U2, ted be¬
come quite definitely ar. extermination caap. I found out that Kntt-
weilor had this reputation at tho end of 191.2. I found out from Dutch
and Frerch jrisoners who had core fvcu tetsuoller to Buchenwald. Ttero
nere tv* or throe prisoners. To pravont those transports from 'xwvix^,

I followed tho name piar. ov«.ry tire, a plan which worked. I vms in¬
formed in good tire how the transport was to be made up. Tho illegal
-oap administration told mo this. Then I removed moot of the : rinonor«
from tho transport and said that for coo reason or another they wars »:>-
fit for travel, being sick. Those in particular dstigar, nnroly those
«ho had nlayod a political role in their homo countries, wore d. sign*-
V..! by mo as convalescents or they «e put in the hospital as patients

or were used as skilled laborers in tte Gustloff works.

lot me interpolate at this tire that 2 «ns «ked occasionally
rhatter I only rescued prominent irlscrers or "hotter I also rescued

vr.om what the situation was.


others. In the meantime it has bee ore

9639


23 Jvr--A-13-2a-5-4CarroTr (lot. Brown)
2ourt So. I.


=ut the reason why I zade the acouaintence prl-.arily of preoinent
rrisorers - naaely people who, in thoir private lives, occupied load¬
ing positions in their owr. countries - i s that they were ii. particular


danger.


23 Junc-~-G«*-25-l“Ol.y-(rr m)-

C .art 1

They were kn wn cc the uostap -Rd the SS, me they n.re persecuted
t han a priarn r wh hadn't played any particular r*lc in his wn c untry.
This was the rcss n why is was particularly these pris n rs wr. 3e
acquaintance I ~dc, because they were in the greatest danger. Jy saving
f these prisoners when Rte.ohild.ncnti.ned c.uld :nly bo d:ne with the
help f particularly reliable prisoners. This was a: ttschalk in 192 j2
1 .r the French nc Schltu.nn.ln, ana a Jewish pris ncr, -.upust Cthn, one
:i the greatest altruists that Buchcnweld ev.r saw. 1: r the Dutch the
J n R bert and • l cnry ?ieck, nd I nust caphosisc that these tw ntn on-
iangere.i their llv.s daily In carrying n the activities that they did
in 1913. another trnnsp rt : Dutch nd Fr-neh was tc leave. It was pre¬
vented fr c le ring in the s ~o way. Tn.r- wrs likewise large transport
f Jewish prisoners. S far as t:x Dutch ar. c nc.mod, all the Dris ners
w.r. liberated by the .mencan *rny in 19L5, with th. exception - f th'.oii
Tib dil r. t survive was acti n :{ 1912 nr.d 19li3. oir-cv. cthur pris ners
,:.r. acc<dated in B1 ck 50 and in the dustlcff * ncs, they were ceol-
RXUted 11 essential :nd wer- never caught ud in the .lacht und .icbcl
tranap rtc.

. i r what reuse ns did y u help th. prisoners? It has been said
her. that y 1 had c.tiVwS T c rrupti n.

« That w uld havo been an expensive -flair fer t engngo in,
if I hie had U pay with lif-. f r any material advantages I was
tryir. t cquir.. Th.Se a33erti.n3 arc inc rr-ct. I believe it wan Dr.
a- ■ n wh» naric that statencr.t here. Id net say that K n is delibera¬
tely lyin , but f< r n pars n who is n t .. tho inside - and K g.n was
such = pers.n because h. was u t a a ember f the ill gal c.~c.ittee or
illegal coop adsinistrutl.n - as I soy, far a persen vfc is n.t an the
inside it night appucr that I was helping tht pris n-rs - r ccrrapt
reas ns, That however, was by nr Beans the c sc. I JtrivLd advantages
fr:n ah-, pris a rs. r r, I I ■ "- 1 ? *r-E

then, because 1 had sency in cy r»n right, and did acttacod th- orisv
r.err, help. «11 tr.e people who We-re pointed cut tr ne- by the foreign


9091


..


23 Jun*-vw-aJ-25-2-^lcy-(BrcTOi)-
Court 1

cocaittee and tha Illegal cocp administration a nd whaa I thought wcrthy
help, all these people I helped with n- regard l'r what they had
- offer, and fator all, what could a prisoner in a concentration carp
ffer. dost cf thee were without property, if they had fcra.rly had pr:-
xrty it had already been seized by the Gostnp. . This was particularly
true -f the ncn-Ocroan prisoners. To bo sure, in order to help the pri-
s nars I had to bribe the Gestapo political department, the adjutant's
-fficc, the leading doctors in Berlin, and the offices zf the RSHa. They
assisted 3e,and in this my it was p ssible t- h-lp the prisoners, for
example tc btain releases tc pr.v-nt the execution cf penalties, etc.
According t: die regulati-ns it was frrbidden to r-cosr.-nd any relea¬
ses. In order to hav the necessary funds for this bribinc, I set up
the illegal workshop in Block li6, and I Set it up specifically in Blcck
tuaa there was nc dangci that the workshop w. uld be disc vored#

. r-'.ver, I c uld use particularly end uuercu prisoners ~t wirkcrs in
the w-rksh p and thus pr tect th-n. It is f n. inp rtance, but, I iruld
like t say it hero that the suggestion that those ill-:al terksh ps be
set up was net cine. Thu prisrn-rs cldo the suggestion tone, and it its
: d n-. Mot -nly .'id I not receive anythin free the prisoners I
helped, but I supp rted thee for the first period after their releeau.

I gave thee clothing, shoes and f d, -nd even pr-vided f r their rclc-
ives in-sax cases. This was h -rover, nly p ssible by cy sending packag¬
es to ny wife wh sent thee on under anothar nano. i. t only f r pris t.crs
whe were released but also f r prisoners in the caap itself, and their
relatives, I sent, clcthiu- and shoos camfMtar-i in tho iH'.:*\l
sh:ps.

. X-.g.n .Is said that the prisoners gav- y. u presents, pictures,
cl thing -tc., whatever y_u wanted, is that s .

If K gen is referring tc cl thin,-, n-nufacturei in th_ il-

- r.1 TT-rkshrp that is c rr.ct, but the,* cruld't five th e tc. because

- was the dire ctor f these w rksk.ps, .nd I wouldn't bribe nysclf.

1 did net receive these things for =y pers-r.el use, but as I said, -


23 J-25-3- ^cy-{ ir-rn) -

Ccart 1

had then nanufretured frr the purp-sc cf bribery in the interest :f
prisoners thenaelves. I r uldn't bo speaking cf those uninp riant
natters now, I an net under indictncnt for that, but I would liko t say
I an able tc say even today where I get cy suits i clothes I wo in
Buchcnwald. They were node by Peel in L nd n. Terkelscn readv part Cf
then. Lclonfc in Paris nade s-oc af tnes. Kever in ny life have 1 worn
silk shirts, but I didn't have cy shirts aide in Ducheimald. I had enough
f then. I ret fr c a sh:p d'Abosc. ..s I have said I cane t» 3uchcnwald
with 8 suits cf cl thin,. They were in very g« d condition, bee-use as
everycne know English natorlal is v.ry g d, and I gave then all away
t prison-re, prisoners i*«- had bean r^lcas-d. If it were necessary I
produce affidavits to show you.

4 Did y-u receive presents free th. prison, rs?

*• 'fas, it is true that I red v-d presents free, the pris ners,
but these were «nly presents give nc in .ratitudc, and f n. particular
value. « person rhe kn as the setua in Buchenwald particularly ny o 1 -
labcration with the illegal ciap adninir.tr-ti*n and the otaitWo f
n litical prisoners, rill understand that the prisoners node eff rto t-
■oanifest thwir gratitude, :r>i I could net have br u*ht cysolf t refuso
t icccpt such a pr-aent, because that would have hurt the d n rs feelings.
Tr.-3c were such things as -shtrays, noodlewcrk, otc., and 2 -;ain gvo
th-3c pr.sents tc ether people. 1 think durin? cy tine in Buch-nrald
I c licet>.d scccthi&g like 180 ashtrays, but I have non*, f then left
•.-day. 1 gave then all away. It is true that Pieck painted ny p rtr-it,
also that f ny faaily, but that has nothing t dc with corruptlrn.
rl rk wh- was a aenber rf ill. .1 casp adaintotratien, J lulpcd b.-
•' re I knew what his profession was. Then Hern said tho only ray Pieck
• be used was as a painter. Horn correctly stated that we couldn't
-v-r. us-- hia t/> k.ep the fovtr charts. _ reevor ?i-.ck painted in 11 his
re ties with reat pleasure. Ho had that privilege, and 2 believe that
- -id • ieck a fav r os .a pointer, liuss u c h as 1 gave hie an opportunity ’
Pursue hi3 orofessi n.


9093


23 JU.-U-A-FI/-5-—1- :-uhax (1st; Brorr.)

Coopt . o. I Cn&. 2

Q.- Or 1204 of the Inglish trenaepiot . agon c-ll^d you prjLr-
ril” c .-.m - ho liltv/i io liv_ n confert-.bl. lift-; is tfc-.t so?

A.- I don*t hrww uhr.t could hcv- [iv,r. ?ofon that opinion. ho; on
c r.r.ot Judge This -cause ho rvv-r work-d vrith -- in the hosoit l.

Th-*e cm ottly be. iniounded ruaers which s.i-li .uinds L-t loos. in the
xorLd. 1-cr.ui)- I liv-d in for\i : n countries and lived two torts in
’-srio, .wr.;-’ ir.vo concluded t -t X 1U-- to liv- r. luxurious lifo

b-ctuse I -*Ve da l.rv-nt opini-r.o on .Ttt-rs tlrn other oeooU. to. At
any r-te, this nuch is true, whetev-r I h d the orison-rs rlso hro,

;t least iy nurses did. I often r.u with q. nursos and now nnd th-n
tr* k c lass o, ir.. or br-xdy with th-o, but ay nctiviti.s • or th.

t.V.t not on. a-y o: v- li . • ca a-I-. 3-c-ua- ”o or.
lcn.v this, X do not uai-rot nil why he ;-d- thu st-.t-o.nts tb-.t hu c'\'.

h-r o- l-.-m jovjt the r. 1 oircu at r.c-a n con .tions

rt 300JWWR1/?

. ht t .h. be; ginning oj ay activities. I Irv- Iron * s“ic
• through wu-.'i, foreign, md Jewish wison-rs, I n -o infer u.d o .
true conditions in the c- o. It is o-rh^oo w.11 th t I h n no io-
Ltic 1 i rsw.-aio. o, -ec-ua in this w-v I s rot attached to n - c *.
ruu-j in d rticv.tr r.c coaltS t.-.L-e th- inter.ots of U into contido-
r t:>n. It x.c ... . known thrt ic -ht 1 thought*

At the b._L\ n ol ay activities, s • h-v- r-lr-tdy s-i'.c’. -n-
••-Id w-s under the control of a c-rt-in category ol hrbitu -1 cviaintls
*n inf or -re ho v.re continuously in ish-r oonv with the Sh rjw'. '■«?-
- i. It is rot corr-c. to b.lteVe th t *11 the orisoot.rs usrins ' -

cn| . rbitinl criaiirls. ■njority of thus : - -

Itlos for ainor cri Mostly they wore skille' 1-bar-
r. , nc t st -s or- of the a-in r- sons /hy SlrLr, *s c-.i-J - the
j.r.-.on Polio-, star -• the h hitu 1 criain 1 actions, in ord-r i t -

. oiy o: skilled - orers, I


a


,3 - . r. (ir.t. 3rc.<r.)

-curt lo. I, 3's_ X


sharply cilf_r.ntint-d frca th- rroup of is itu‘1 criair.r.ls ho si-'.-c'
•ith thw SS n -r- cher ply oooos-.. 37 thwcu Th-y £tvu -r-rt sjcort
to l- in ty otru, L. r riflst trv crof-aaio.vL cridr.-ls .ho ,:-r- e:o-
j-r tin with tfco - 3 . I h-Lxc th-a- c_n .iuat th- f ty I ls-lp. tho -*o-
Uttc'l C-.ru n n:‘ lor-ign priaou-ra. ith th. h-lp o: this «!.o: li-
cr. t-gory o. Toioasionni crlalncls, oat ol ‘‘hoc h d caaaitt-d cri-
-a b.:or- ’ ti.i_ md vxeu ioc’c-c. up cr it, t!~ tr itors -.nd

Li!or c_ra iriwt to -t.t-rair.ct- th- G-rn~n n.’ for dgn oolitic -1 ori-
a::-ra nc - .sc the J. 5.

I naa-rt t:.-t ithout this syat-a of infor.t-rs, th- conc.\t:-.Uor

r .-'jn-<! th-yx-r. • 7 ..-" -re.

ci..c.:.trtion c ; ( «b th. c.-r cct-riatlc .-

T 13 I know iron conv-ra-tloa* .nth ina-t a, who Wvr- ouch sor- eUv.r
*.n-‘ inc 1 U th-r. nf ?'ho Jrc such or- — > .ri-ac- in .i--

. . •/ thr.t aci.nt ji • v- ..t, alniftt-ra, .. at t»

0.iiciL , ’r...ov.c, matt and .uthora, in c or, -v-ryor.v .so or-
t;. r-d tri.h.i io n. b-cr.u*. aon. -t ho vor- th- ;r—n tri-n U -r- in
no cra.-aavo.. X crc.itr.tia th-y v-r- . ovc.d to iiv. Lr. th. oo.u ny
c. ' raona her .v.ry oitriliz-d att. ;o-V .rv- U-at b-kir.d j._e iu!

. U to condition a lr. th- c u • ever. only
Liy b ..- ■ • O:rr ctly .v...-*t-« - ..

htck-bonu p[ aod-t? tl- at-*., si f-.-.r countri-.c, aidd-ntly

th-TS.lv-a croddod tOj>tfccr in n*rro„ ■ a; _r.. v-nt mtrrexuv -ii V-
5 *::stio c ilia-no, c::.dr. Is ha war ' coll oor Mon ith ... ->ot
L--rior V>.ra •>. t.— SS, r. n-l" th-a- co.to.j-inti ou c* .1 SS .'

. .. . . 'if-r. SS, y-.iJ, -id. ‘it r. SS its. A 1 it*

•

- .. 3.lit eel oriaon-ra, to S*r- tJva ,

-• :s ath. of -c; L. r.-c^soit>- :or - Cown i-.B i or - .0

.

4

: i <1 tin coll tort- . *0 i.a. !:n.


9 r .95


23 Jur.^-A-?L-2;-3-H—l'- r. (L'.t. hrcxrn)

Court ::o. i, c.-.s- i

be given thr.t tlo. rul* o: the infer a-rs -.V tr itors in “uchen.-ld
-..-s broken* dU tIn feet tint conditions in 3uch.n«-lc still

■ -d -nou«h, .~vrt.,lwss the oolitic*l orisoners rid succeed in s v
tv- livws oi thousands oi vnlu-.biu person a. In this aurcorous sir.- U
bjta-en SS rnd infora-rs on th* orv- hend and tb- Gorocn -rd for-i;n-r
politic-1 orisons or. the oth.r, thu o-nns according to 'hich this
fi_ht was to *3- conuict-d *er- proscribed to the ktur in .adv'.TCe, so
to op-Qk. In -iiitior. to this activity of th- SS in using •'rod-ssior. I
criiincls, tbatu vr.a the systea of Crooa, block trustees, -r.

I iu*t point o'-t rn -rror which is rssoci't— with the word cr.oo, :.;d;

courao of the .x-iintion. The opinion is svarr«atly
5-ill proVelr-X ihrt r. Ccoo tad to coll oarct. with th- inforo-vc -.n
Oie SS, but . is ir.corr.ct. l--.der of .* erk co-uvndo .-.a ' */a
Of lied the Cajo, .Vi atra gl- of the lllej*l cvip dainistr-tion *1-
r.ct.d tow'Tf* ;-tti.v -s in7 of th-ir o-n into th- oosition of C- o -.s
oosaiblv; t .is coilc b- dor- only if tr Si did net kno* th. ori-.-t tion
thii CsM* I 'nd > «-_ap out nt cl ya -nd- vc-r.. -o

th.*. a»n • z wi.it - r.t for tbw Job of C-oo. This wes not -' —s
. ay, v :o- th- Scpo’s pyr t a cons. » • 88, . 0 vs-,

son* it op prorad oi to occur- this ooaition. UniortU-
r.-.t-ly, b;* the 1 of 1942 .lost o: the oositiono of C'>o w. occu-
i-i' by tr.eo- criodoiouD professional cn rlo ard lnior .re but • -

. : n inny C- or - ho did

-• oot oro .1 iocs nc - .zini tkin.E for f.vir coir d-s in or- r -o
U-vi-.t- dun-

si rist r.t Ion. 1 O ^os b-longud to tv. 5bm«-i«tia<U c -y
. r-iessior. I cr* us.c by t o SS in ore.r syst-i-ticrll- to *c-

■v/r. L_ the. V.:s oolitic -I orisor-rc, th» & thvir • Ctl. ‘

- t c-tr- . o tli. onc-ntr-tion c ->s Ir.co —r.t mc r>

' '■ -.oil- Lc- . oi.-.-rt r.c . r-.

9JV6


23 Jun--A-I (Int. 3rowr.)

Court lb. I. C-.5_ I

Q.- ho orc'-t\-c th- reluas- of orison-rs?

A.- Th- k.o.H.A.

s..- -r- th- pr-r-quisit-s for - -?rlConor's r.l--s- fro* a

*crb-ntrction cr.jp?

A.- Thuor-.ic'll;* th_ folloelng eon ohs h-d to b, ..o: r -

h-d to tevw --r. cor.-, th- ori-nt-.tion h-d to b- I.rtioiv.i iccir.-

Liat, conduct hid to 'x ?ood, but pnctie.-lly apjiJdng it w-.o -\lost

i.oosai'ol- to b- r-X>.*.s-<5 fro.a r conc-r.tntion ciso. I b-ii-v- th_r-

13 or- "bi« 3C'‘ it v.-.s -Lx>3t Lv>os9ibi-, lithou.-h th- rv.b-

lisaicn of th- con«cct r-ports which thv .6.K.A. ir-scribec co»l ...-v.

:-.d- r-l-is- ocssibl-, Tlx prisorv-r, -it-i* s_rvin; his a-r.tjr.c- in

prison, was a-nt to Ut concentration cmp. It ms rib-:' t'.;.-t ~S-

t-r * (|U rt-r o 1 ”--r r. concfuot report :ra to b- or-p-r-e 37 th-

c ip coivn. -v. • . C-ct-po oflic. that h d s-nt in th<- prisons* ordor-

- this cor ct : ort to b* or-irr-d by tlx c-ap co n-nd-r. !- prsscc

ti>- orc-r or. to th* herd ol th- prct-ctiv- custody ciar>, »i*.o wo to rm

up this r-»rt on th- b-.ais ol th- oriaon-r'a b-hrvior, t or :, *c-

coiolish' its. ?or this, of cc-rs. , it ;.is n-c.ss-ry It Ilia to .v!c-

,-v- th- subordinate o.lic- this Job, The BUbordiiV.to

offic- w-3 e.iLU> 1 a-oportfuwhr-r — the rssisfnt -d-ainistr-tiv. -x

1 . th. prob-ettr- custody trap —• bo ws a non- sdon-d of fie-:, '/..is

: r. in turn oat to 'eh- so-c-il-d bioch —re-re, .ho t-r. -xabers 0 tlx

Si -'ho h d ch:r..- ox on. or two blocks in hich th- orlson-rs v-rc

. Isadora tamod to th- block trust—s. Thu bloclc

tr -t— <-.8 r prison... Thus it con b- understood whit -ror ivre icr -r

block trust— Ir-.; in his hinds. Thun .x inf ©mitt on obt in-' by ih-

lee’.: l--d_r vs to p b-cl: through th- sa- ch-nn-ls to the 'S6ict-.it

inistrit-v. th-n th- -dcinls.r tor ol t'.u irot-ctiv- custod-

• '-‘■n ..o w.-.s 3*:> os-c to c~U th-- orison.rs m naS on th- Vs.-s o.' this

~ -or, nd on .r- o.-.s r-.oortc h -oulc o-n m opLiior. vl-.-t.^r x-i-

•

9897


23 Jun--A-i! "ls-Zc-5- vi (Ir.t. ~r^<r.)

Court Ko. I, C*-o_ I


s^n-r ahould - r-l~r.a-c. Th t oulc hov- b._n th- corr ct proc-i'ur-,
bet o: couth- ;.t ns iwv.r iollo.^d. This I knew Iron ?_rson-1
-i-nc.j ~r. -I j -tXr irLaitiv- thinr :ra th- r-.-son for tnia. Vi-
-dainlatr•.Hr- .V'is of th- orct-ctiv- custody c .-os v-r_ -l'-o -ti~r
sis^U-, .jri-_;:v- nnc Jr.c r.n - Election so slight you aould b-

aurxio.d to r it. In th. c op o: Cue!id th- -dainistr-t Yt

h. -t? of th-irot Cw v- cr..:p hrd th- r ni of - *or, but in th- >S

uould not • th- r rJ: o: - coroar I. I know thia b I

tj-s to .-.jj’w-t by on- of th-s- i ainistr-tiv- h-'.'-n in -Ivj

a tt.r of on- o th-s- conruct raparta J

orison-r -nt-r-d, - took up th- docu ~.it6 bv;innin vith th- bt-t--
y . . b—n ir.Uc.C to t*W .~o:c.ntr tion e-a>. Hie. <r.-
vloua -rr-at i.*.a .no Liot-i *titvr., -nd th- r-'.uon for his co:v.in--
...t r. - .... Th-s. docut-n'.a v-r- r-*.d through «ii tbo

o.r.t-nc-a tlr.t i.' ril : h*d Irtr.dy sarv-d or - Ion} Ma«.
iv-uS » r.tt-c!. o : _, hit IUa Bl4 th:.. : OUt f lb- Up-Shot o.‘

wo th t th- *Piao.t-ys --r- :r id to r.oort oo ttr.t th.ir eon *c.’ r--
•erts could • v J n &In o»: t . •. li.f atr tsv- .V-.c «r »»'.

i, w '.wr^ U»‘t i>.% cocu nta th.'t h~ h t not look t *t lor

aohthv rtnd - n, aokftnoth-a- loo: -t site o id, Tub vn ia -not
oolitic-l crook, . oooon-nt ol i. Uon*l - >oi lias", . r-' so th. r

.iho ir-vioualy -d. ht ! v. b--r. in r. - &f condition suddwnl? o'Ui '

a,If in th- perrry, fir. I r.-rolt ana tir.t ;t night cost ‘ala • . -
;• . • 1 ■ *

Lnsi-..t. into ta-o~ • caxuct r-oorts.

M2 - tt / Trib-: 1 ill b- in r-o-a*» until 9t?0

* -r..rro .

rn; Th. 1: ^ r-c-sa until 9:30 o'cwc. t>-

•rrr. orr^.. .

•)

9


Court So. 1

24 Jus 47-M-i-l-IEX-?oster (3rovn)


Official Transcript of the American Military
Tribunal in the setter of the United States
of America against Earl 3randt, et el,
defendants, sitting at Suernberg, Geraary,
on 24 June 1947, Justice 3eals presiding.


TEL MAESHAL: The Eonoreble, the Judges of Military Tribunal I.
Ailitary Tribunal I is nov in session. God save the United States of
America end this honorable Tribunal. There vill bo order in the court.

TEL PELSIISST: Mr. Marshal, you ascertain if the defondrnte aro all
present in court.

Ini HAESEAL: May it ploase Your Honor, all defendants are preaont
in the court.

TEL FEZS'SSTt The Secretary vill note for tho record the orfisenco
of all the defendants in court.

EF., FL ublUtoi Jir. President, the Tribunal inouirod yectorday hov
long counsels vould need for the further sutaission of its ovidonce.

It vill last roughly three and one-half to four days until all tho ouodIo-
nentary materiol has beon put in.

TEL PELS112.ST: Very v*H, counsel.

MB. HAR3Y: Your Honor, my understanding is that the defendant
Pokorny vill call three vitnossos horo.

TEL P5ISI3L5T: Vm counsol for tho defendant Pokorny advioo us
hov many vltnussos he will call.

3E. EG7/MAK (Counsel for tho defendant Pokorny): Mr. President, it
is correct that I intend to call throe vitcesses.

HE. EA3DY: Eov long does the defense counsel nnticiontc that the
tOEticony of tho defendant Pokorny and the testimony of the throe vit-


nessos -ill take?


tvo to two nod one-helf dnye.


f our

TEL


tine ve have another day fw the defendant
the defender:*. Pokorny, end acororinately


accordance with the statements of defense


9899


Court So. 1

24 Jus 47-M-1-2-EEX-Jos ter (Brown)


counsel.

Counsel for the defendant say eroceed.

BS. YALHMAR ROTES - Hesrced
BISECT EXLilXATICB (Continued)

3T DB. GAVLIE (Counsel for the defendant Eoven):

Q, witness, you described yesterday the prorooulsities for
prisoners' possible roleese froa e concentration casp. Let ne nek you
how It was possible for you to bring about the roleaeo of orisonero.

A. Prlnarily with the assistance of falsified X-ray olcturos and
side records, and then through falsified papers that vent through tho
RSHA.

tt JUIGi SISRISG:

Q, Just a aoaent. Witness, con you soy at this tine hov nary
releases you wore lnstruaontol In bringing about fron Buchonvold Concen¬
tration Canp as a result of that orocodurel

A. Appro xloetoly 15C. I cannot glvo you tho oxact nunbor. It vrs
rrthor sore than loss.

JUTOI SL33ISG: Thank you.

IKE PEESIDEHT: Proceed, counsol.

OB. OA'iLIX: Kr. President, In substantiation of tho defendant's
statenont regarding hov rclcasos wore offectuatcd, I direct your atten¬
tion to tho document I had out In, in the Hoven Document 12, Exhibit No.
10, tho affidavit ty Philip Dirk, Baron van Pallandt van Eerdo. Turn
to pego 46, *0. 7. in which Dirk says: "I was roloasod on his rocoanon-
detion, although, in fact, I was not sick.*

In further substantiation of these 6tateaente I out in Hoven -ocu-
-oat 3o. 14. "his will be Eovon Exhibit 12. This Is an affidavit by
van dor Lean, page 49 to £2. under So. 9 on cage 50 It Bays: "It is
extreaely probable that tho so releases wire only panted ovine to tho
false particulars which Dr. V. Eoven had forwarded to the authorities in
Berlin whose duty it was to great these oetltions for releeec."

Paragraph 1C states: "These acts by Dr. Valdeear Hoven rendered an


9SCO


Court Bo. 1 .

24 Joe 47-*-l-3-x£X-J08ter (Erovn)


inveluable service to the large nunbers of Dutch hostages."

Paragraph 11: "If these released hostages had been examined by
another Goman doctor, the fraud vould certainly have been discovered
end the consequences for Dr. Veldenar Eoven vould have beon serious."

Thon in Bunber 13 it describee the vay In vhich ho fcinself was
released: "Dr. V«ld*oar Eoven visited ae the sarse day and without Baking
eny extinction Whatever proaised ae that ho would try to have ay liberty
restored to no. Deter, en X-ray photograph of ay thorax was taken and,
es I cyself saw. no irregularity whatever was found. About a week lator
r va, released. This eventcould only have happened as a result of incor¬
rect inforaation given by Dr. Waldoaar Eoven. who had perhaus sent an
X-ray photograph of a patient suffering fron tuberculooie of the lungs
to Berlin."


2_ Jun—IX 3-2-l-"rcss (Int. rrcwr.)

'ocrt lio. 1 .

53 33. GA..IK:

5 hat was the quality cl the medical core ir. the conccntr-tion
Sue ho maid while you were there? I pvt to you ir. this connection
H.coahiid testified to, who stctc-d that tho hospital was always
ovarcrovdod and that the equipsnt ir. tho hospit -1 was most inadequate.
This is page lo39 of tho English tr~ -.script,

A That is incorrect. At ay tine, at any rate, the hospital
-\B very wall oeuippod, :1 though the SS docs not deserve cr.d.'.t for
that, Without exaggeration, 1 err. scy that during the year 1.°’ 1 to
1 * 3 , we h-d more and bettor codicinos and drugs than many civilian
hospitals. When ordering medicines i always ordered thriCG tho neces¬
sary -aour use our quota was r.i owor than what wa ns'.od for.

At ny tiao, at any rate, th-rc was always enough aodicinc. Sinco I
follc'.tod the sa.x policy in tho SS hospital I took a large amount of
aidiciro that was not needed at all in the SS hospital and transferred
it to tho prisoners• hospital. Wo had the hospit-1 enlarged and in
r. illegal fashion hid beds brought in and showers built. With oonoid-
rablo difficulties I also brought it about that two additional hos¬
pital buildings wore built. Tho number of convalescents, or out pat¬
ients, which was 100 when I took over was niud by mo to 600. In tho
individual barracks I put in so-called lou3o guards vho h-.d nothing to
do out to sec to it that the jriaorvars -.-ore dolouscd; also those r*on
« r to take any sick calls from hi3 barracks and ir. this way I cliia-
Lv.tid thu black treaty from any Latere3'- in this natter. 3 have also
told you that I used prisoners contrary to explicit orders. had
a., tlv oquipront ard instru.acnts ixjcoss ry for surgery. Tho e urgency
ward ms opor. d~ and night. Then, as I hflVa ircady said, tho Jewish
* _cr rr -s opened up again ~ra took cmvj of ambulatory patients, norci-

*t if c>.scary I sent sick patients to Jena for specialized atfccr.-

- *

*- •

; ;:r. President, in stbstantintion of those statenor.tr 1 pu
in document Hover. Ho. 17, which will bo Exhibit 13. This is an affid-


9902


2L *Jun-Ji-H5-2-2-Gros3 (lat. Srowr.)
Coart So. I.


ivit by Gerhard Schiedlausky, pege 56. This is an excerpt free Prosecu-
•.ion Doc unant Sc. KO-5C6, which was Exhibit 135, in Tribunal Four.

This is an affidavit fros ? August X9U5* Schiedlausky v=s th: suc¬
cessor of Dr. Horen and stated there: activities began in Duchen-

-ald on cr aoout 15-18 October 19li3." Let sc rocall to the Court's ct-
tenion that it was at this time that the witness was arrested by tho
Gv.stapo. "-hen I took over sy office, tho oxisting facilities for
truat xjnt In tho innate.3 hospital w^re adequate to operate it." And
in tho last sentence! "In th; hospital thuro were altogether 5 bar¬
racks availablo for taking in pntionts."

Rooahild has testified tore that thj inmates applied to yo\r for
*.rc taent end instead th-y were killed. This is page 1639 of thj
English transcript. Is that so?

A That is entirely inpossiblo because tho patients wro ro-
ceivod by the prisonor nursos without oxccption, not by no. That / lone
•hows why it can't bo true.

Q I now put in Document Hovon Ho. 2. This will bo Hovon Ex¬
hibit Ho. Uu Tlds is Rudolf Gottschalk's affidavit, pigo $, Plooso
turn first to page 5. Froo April 1939 until August 19L2 Gottschnlk
a political : risoner in Suchonrrald. Proa th? ond of 1938 on ho was
tfiployod in tho hospital. Ho was cick bay clork, laboratory assistant,
x?Io nuroo, and clerk and was thus in a position to know Just about
everything that was to be known about thj hospital. Ho also saw tho
t/phus experiments and says about the typhus experiments the follcn/ing:

’I declare that Dr. Hoven was in no way connocted with thj typhus ex-
i^rir'jntn vhich were started and the first series carried out during
‘•a. tire of ay Buchenwald stay. It was Dr. Ding who was solely rospon-
3;: - c -or the conduct and execution of these experiments. Ho onco
- st d to Kcvon in ay presence that not even tho ccnp nanagccont was in
• pot-tion to interfere with his plans as regards these experiments."

Ho further makes statements about the selection as follows: "Orig-
^ly, tho jersons who were used for these experiments were selected by


9933


2 U Jun-JMS-2-3-Gross (1st. 3rcwn)

Court :«o« I.

th& "politiccl department" (Lcclair, Seme artl Frc-richs)", and fur¬
ther “In ay tirt Hover, could hardly be called responsible for the
selection, hewevor, the inderground aovenent through the nodiut of
Dr. liovon tried to gain scr.e influonre ovor the selection and elocu¬
tion, in order to save political internees fron being --sod :.s hunan
guinea pigs by the SS. 1 ayscif was a usnbor of the underground sovu-
nent (Y. r Rlt»,r Srooaor, Karl Folk), and I an able to certify this fron
qy own observations.

■I wish to state that only ono transport was sent to the Pern-
burg gas chcnbers during the tins of ay stay in 9uchonwald. Tho
so lection of ttoso people and the conpilation of lists were carried
out by tho ‘political department 1 i.o. were -ade at the 'politioal
dopartajnt*“.

Thor, ho anJcos statoeents about preventing the transports: ''Tho
Bcmburg deportation list did not only boar tho nines of Jons but
also thooo of habitual crlsdnalo and political intcmcos. It w:is a
particularly hard blow to us political intornocs when wo found out
the ratio r of several of our pooplo who were 'loo on the list. 1 »n-
tion tho foraor Cornunist L-.ndt?g :>mbor Albert Hunt, who playod a
loading rolo in tho underground rcovoa.nt, Erich Inch, who worked in
th: cquipror.t storcroor and who nado a special point of looking nft.r
tho new arrivals, Rudi Stclinann and aany othoro whoso nrtnes have
slipped ny cind. "o political in to moos considered it our special
duty to try everything in our power to save our conradcs. Wo -odo
use of Dr. Hoven as our cor.p physician. Ho brought us tho list of tho
death candidates which showed us tho intentions of tho SS. Furthornoro,
Dr. Hoven told us that these political intom.es had boon entered on
‘-be list at the instigation of Kuschnir-Kuschnarev."

Then he toils how those people were released fron transport.

-n page 3, at tho top ho rakes st.-ecn.nts regarding cooperation between
tho Tltrt!3S and tho illegal cane rannagezaont: Turthemorc I wish to
state that Dr. Hoven stood in closest cooperation to the underground


9901 •


2b Jut-::-: 3-2-1-Pross (Int. Pro'-rr)
Court Ho. I.


aovossnt of which I was also a nc—bcr under the lcad.rshlp of '.’alter
Srae x r and Karl Kile. After th» violent death of -alter Krae _r ana
£arl Peik, Ho inrich T^ingaertnor took ever the leadership of the
underground novere-nt. At ay instigation and with tho full approval
cf Dr. Hov-n, ho was succeeded by 2rnst Busac."

I put this to you to prove u/hat a prominent role the defendant
played in tto resistance noverent in Buchcnwald.

The next paragraph discusses the saving of Poles and it is
stated that ho saved tho life of Folos by an king false staten_nto as
to tho state, ent of health.

On page 9, Oottschalk talks about t!» nodical core in thi crrjn.

&. sayoi *2ven though free a scientific point of view. Dr. !!ov-n did
not exactly conform to our gen-rally accopted idea of a physician, as
huann boing ho tried his utaost to maintain tta highoet poceiblo
lovol with r-gerd to sanitary conditions. In comparison with ether
can pa, tho sanitary conditions in Buchommld wore exemplary."

Thon there are furthor statoaonts about conditions in Juchen-
rald. On pa”o 1C, last paragraph, h nkos stntoaonts regarding tho
defendant 1 s attitudo toward tho Jews and says that contrary* to orders
of the So car;p nanngo-ent ha treated Jewish pr.tionts.

Faso 12 contains furthor str.tojcnts regarding Haven's cooperation
nth tho illegal can? manage;wnt. Hero vo find the nano Dr. Korn for
the Czechs and Pieck for the Dutch. This rill also prove that t’.xj
vitnesses board hero. Dr. Horn and Pieck, had the nocosoary knowledge
to aako tho statements that ttoy did rogrxdirg tt» defend-nt'r co~
o ,.ration with tho illegal cccp vanagasant and the Cor.aittco of
I-a lit leal Prisoners.


9905


Court So. 1

24 Juu 47-H-3-i-cHM-£srr5V (Brown)


As further document, I put In ftitt Eisckert's affidavit, Hover.

C icunent 5. Thi6 will he Exhibit 15, page 18 to 22. Eieckert also, as
you con BOO frcn page 18, Is a fomer inneto of Buchenveld; fra; 25 Seo-
tcaber 1939 until 26 Hey 1945 he was a political prisoner. Jrrr 29 Febru¬
ary 1940 until the liberation he worked in the conn hospltel ao orisoner
clerk in tho office. This above that he has the neceesary knowlcdgo
ab«t the defendant's character end activities. Cn pago 19 ho r.altos
stateaente about Dr. Horn, at the top of the oege, and Hock and says:

"I consider Horn and Block as absolutely crodlble person®. This
knowledge is drawn froa sy being together with both of then for «• dura¬
tion of cany years."

Thon he talks about the defendant'e activities in Block 46. Eo
spooks of the eondlng of lico and soys that:

"! know that Or. Hovon had a skipuont of lico oxtorninntod bocouso
thoy vero lnfoctod with spotted fever. At that tine Or. Kovor. said to
us prisoners, 'Sow they have gono crasy.' At the sano tine Or. Kovoa
oxerossed tho epprohonslon that o typhue epidenic night break out ao a
consoQUonco of ouch oxporinonts."

Ihon he soys what Hovon did when ho wont to Block 46 and tolls about
the illegal workshops, the ohooneker, the tailor, etc. Ee also says
that it was Hovon's endeavor to ecco:x.odato ondangerod orieonore, puticu-
lsrly Jove, in Block 46. Jews wore ocrticularly sofo in Block 46 bocoucc,
es he soys on p^ge 19:

"Iho SS could enter Block 46 only with the oornlsEion of the carp
doctor."

Eo then speaks, on page 20, of his eooporeti .n with the Illegal
ccnp :enaga:ont:

•: know th.-t Dr. Eoven collaborated in the closest way with tho
Seraan Cccnunist perty section and other illegal grcuoo inside the
3uche»ald enrip."

He also describes an actual incident:

’In a ncooriel service for Theelnann end Breitscheidt the SS Crap

9506


Court So. 1

24 Jun 47-ri-3-2-iHX-i£errcv (Brown)


Corttand had carried out numerous erreota on account of the holding of
this cocoenoration. During this investigation «t.lch wcs carried out by
the SS Dr. Horen had neintained a connection between the individual
accused prisoners and had thus exposed hlnself to the serious danger of
getting shot. In connection with Dr. Horen's actiTitles, Busse said to
no and to scao other orisoners of the hospital, 'Valdeoar— 1 that .naans
E-von '—Is crcry; you could ala os t think he was one of our ren.'"

Page 21, et th« top he speaks of the dofondar.t's cooperation with
foreign prisoners:

"I know furthercore that Dr. Horen aloo closely collaborated with
Block and Dr. Korn. Pieck was the representative of tho Dutch. Dr. Horn
represented the interests of the Csech prisoners. Aftor tho liberation
of tho representatives of tho Dutch Consualst Party Pieck workod in tho
International Canp Corr:lttoe."

Ho thos goes on talking about Hovcn's holp to tho prisoners:

"Purthornoro, Dr. Eovon froouontly sheltered in his hosoltal
prisoners which wore in danger, by providing a fnlso dldfnosis; oooocl-
rlly ho took in th^so who wore supoosod to bo sent away, in order to
»evo thon by doing so."

Further down:

■It is known to ao that Dr. Koven prevented extermination trans¬
ports; the details, however, I do not know exactly." Ho also epoahs
•bout saving Poles and others, page 21.

And he concludes his whole affidavit on oege 22, tho last sontonce:

"Qxlte generally I con say that Dr. Koven hod done nuch to alleviate
the prisoners' fate."

How long were you first casp doctor in Buchcnwaid?

A. June 1942 to 12 Seoteaber 1943.

■u In what way was your activity in Buchenwald brought to a con¬
clusion?

A. X wa3 arrested.

Q» Vfeo arrested you?


9907


Court So. 1

24 Jus 4?-M-3-c-IHM-2arrov (Brown)


A* Dr. Horten.

Q, Who w»s Dr. Morgen.

A. He was a Gestapo agent vfco had Hiasler's particular confidor.ee,
rad on Hltttler's orders was carrying out investigationB in the cam to
realise the plans that Hirrler Intended in the Buchenvald conn.

Q, Kov do you ienov this?

A. Froc conversations with Dr. Morgen.

Q, Procisoly what program or plan Himmler was following in tho
camp, and wfaat Dr. Morgen, the Gestapo agent, had to do vith this pro¬
ves - this Dr. Morgen acting on Hinaler's explicit orders - can he
seen from Bores Document 10 which will become Inhibit 16, urge 36. This
is an oxcorpt free a docuaont put in in Cate IV ue Document SO 2331, it
having roceivod tho exhibit nuabor 517 in Cate IV. This it an affidavit
by Gerhard Wlobeck. Ho wae an invoetigator of tho Main Gffico of tho
SS Court end he oaye:

■The concentration camp organization woo, according to cy exoori-
cncc, a eyetos that it a system intondod for tho mass extermination of
human life, tho terrorizing of groupe of political opoonor.te and for
dotorrlng purpoeoe. In sy opinion tho alxing of tho political prleonors
vith crisinale eorvod the purposo of preventing the uolltlcdl urleonoro
froo etertieg any oooooition whatsoever. The wholo system w»c chnrac-
tor lied by tho absolute lack of any rights on the side of tho prisoners,
the behavior of tho SS Fuehrer a6Signod to tho concentration carroo, and
tho socrocy surrounding the concentration camps. By far tho lergost
number of all killings, especially tho mass extermination of human lifo,
the ill-treatments, the tfelrd degree interrogations, tho giving uo of
txiople to hunger end starvation, the experiments and other things had
coon ordered by the highest govement offices headed by Hitler and
Sirmlor hiasolf."

Did Morgen pursue this goel of filmier in his investigations in
Buchenvald?

'A. Yes.

9908


Court So. 1

24 Jus 47 -K- 3 - 4 -SEK-Earrow (arcvn)


Q, Vfcjr were you errested by Morgen?

A. there wr» two reasons far this, first, the factual reasons,
and secondly, the reasons alleged by the Gesteoo. The reel reason vas
that It was generally suspected that I was working in collaboration with
the prisoners, but the reason given for =y arrest was that I had killed
an SS-Eauptscharfuehrer who «s involved in the Eoch affair. I had
nothing to do with this nan Koehler, who was the can killed. Investiga¬
tions wore undertaken with the help of the criclnal court clinic in Jona
end It vas proved without ouostlon that Koehler diod a natural death.

In tho courso of the Investigations of this allcgod aurdor Dr. Morgen
hit on tho ldoa, which wm very huaano for the Gestapo, to inject acid
gastric Juices free the doed atm Kochlor into tho bodieo of Jtuooinn
prisoners. Since tkore were no reactions froa this injection, bocauso
the nan had not boon poisonod, the crisonors did not dio. Finally, when
this did not avail hin in his accusations of ao, ho accused ao of boing
inotruacntal in Kuschnir-Euschnarov's death and usod two inforcoro
against ao who were known as Jew slaughterers, naaoly, Froudoaann and Kay.

Q. I understood you to soy tho following, vitnoso. -he rorl
reason wot tho suooiclon tfcet you woro opoosing the goal that Morgen and
Hinder woro pursuing, nicely, the extermination of tho political
prisoners. That's tho reason, isn't it!

A. To s.

q. In support of this stotecont by the dofcr.dant I draw tho Tri¬
bunal's attention to the affidavit cut in by Reinhold Schittenhela,

Docuaont So. 4, Exhibit So. 3, on pago 16, whore I ask you to look at
tho statoconts under So. 2:

"In tho Burner of 1543 a transport of Jews to Auschwits woe supposed
to toko place. As far as I receuber, the nunber of Jews amounted to
eoproxinately eight hundred to one thousand. I do not know vhc ordered
the transfer. The Jews were already assenblci for roll call. I*- W! ' s
the ganoral topic of conversation in the cam that Dr. Boron had crevcnted
this transportation of Jews. I know this particularly fron the Jewish

95C9


Court So. 1

24 Jus 47-S-3-5-I3i-£i!rr3v (BrcVs)


vcrtacn vhs vore -laying the floor in the Oustloff Verb. Moreover, it
vat generally talked about is the cusp that Dr. Hover, vculd socr. be or.e
of us because he had orerentcd the transportatloo of the Jove.

"Shortly after that Dr. Eoven vas arrested by the Secret State
polico In September 1943."

This nan 1s a French citizen vfco vas an innato in 3uehenvold.

Vhat was the result of the Investigation of yout

A. In Septasber 1544 there vos a trial beforo the highest SS
polico court. In tho coarse of the trial it turned up that Koch accused
ao of cooperating with the prisoners. Thon the trial was oupshed for
tho tlno boiag sc that a oclltical trial could bo instigated agair.et no.
All political trials had the seno outcc.no. I vas tab on to Suchenvold as
a prisoner vhcrc I stayed until the American Arny liborntod tho cono.

A fov days previously I had boon roleased and offorod servlco in tho
Vohmacht; tho political developments pomittod no further course.


9910


•«


- 1 -

i >—frCX*-i-iiulo?(3ro»: }

Court I

•' *-hora vero you after your arrestT

I vat tuken to the Xreuxnach prisoners cccp.

*. "o, I sean after you were arrested ey Gestapo agent hovnn?

— I was undor Gest^o arrest for one year. Then on 12 Septeu-
oer 1 C. I returned to Sachenwdd as a prisoner.

-• ifter your release froc Gestapo urres- and fron arrest In
tho concentration eut.-p what were your activities then!

a. I vent to the Cain dressing station In V eiuur as a doctor
until 11 *m 1945.

... V hat h<tpenod then?

— On this day I went to visit tko fonoor prisoners liica I had
known t’lvo -ilccotors froc the Cacp. X was Captured by the auorlc.ms.

X ••no put on c tan*. 2 te prisonors, who were riding around with t ho
jtorican soldiers in Jeeps, saw this and reported it in 3uck©nvald.

~on the Jovich prlsonor, august Cohn, cane and spoke with the com..n4-
or and received per-iesioa to t alee ce hack to 3j.cher.vald. In tho uc.n-
tlno tho there nod been arrested by tho /iiericcno. On Cohn*o r©2
rv.oct und cn tho request cf the foreign prioonors I van taken a. n
gv.cot tf tho concentration c utp to 31ock 60, Tvo days lhcr I van
ooiaiv.tcd fr« the So and put in an officers burrocks.,

2~* C*^ Hh: Thank you. h'o further questions,

Jhh PZ_1$I3JLT: are there any ituosticns to oo oropeunuod to this
vitnosc by defense ccunsol?

22. SdTaal'JS: Sorrntiuo for Zurl Sr^ndt.

'Jt 22. SiHWnJSs

2id you know Professor 3rqr.dt or did you seo Professor Ihvndt
in t_e c.iri?

— I never sav Professor 3randt in 3uc-.onvald nor before this
ri.1 hnd I seen hie atyvhero.

2 o you know free other sources vr.ethor no v_s ever in the c

- . I e^n only snook of the tine when I vas i- Bachenwald until

99H

I


C-- Juao-iXi^-4-&^islo(3r«wm)

Court I

uutil S optaiber 1S43. I never heard at any tise thd he had boon
there, cad in view of tho position Professor 3r;adt had it eotco un¬
reasonable to ossuae he was thore.

Q- 1 should liko to ask you a question for ay colle.guo vhoco
client io Dr. Rose. Do you know thit at tho beginning of 1942 3 r.

Soso vi cited tho typhus station at Buchenwald being load by a crin
officor?

Am fas.

Q . Pros vhet you know of the si tuition is it pocoiblo to find
out during such u visit that tho conditions prevailed in tho coop
such a you have hero doseribodT

a. Ho, thet is not possiblo.

On such a vjait would not the hospital--like atooophoro in
31ock 46 lead ono so visiting to ccco to tho conclusion that ovoiy*-
thing wc.o in ordor horof

lm I saw tho hospital cquipaont in 31ock 46 only twico aysolf,
but so far® 2 know tho cquipoont thoro w C s pcrfootly in ordor*

33. IZ2ZI3L: Korkol for Oonticn.

3T 33. YJSaOSbi

D r. Hoven. in your affidavit of 34 Ootobor 1946, Boewaoat
ITo 429, Prcsocution Exhibit 2ei, pege 2, Document Book 12 you ocy iutor
alias th-t at tho beginning of this typhus oxporiaont Ding had lots of
conversation with Gcnrkcn in 3crlin, and you cay Gonskon was pcrticula»-
ly intcrostod in this not tor and Ding sent bin various reports, tow
do you !»ow all this?

-5- Proa Dr, Ding.

You then aro girply reiterating what D ing told you?

Yes. Tint is so and I said so during ay interrogation.

%. You ..re not here reporting facts of your cvn porsond knoi/lodgo,
. ifo, I didn't know Gcnskcn„t ell.

^ . In tho stao docuaont you said that Gonnkon in January 194-3
ot'dorod tho oxporiacntcl station to bo enlarged, what do you neon by


9912


Juno-il-IhT—W;clo;*(3rovc)

Court I

■enlarged" T

im I wished to refer to Ding's sphere of activities which van to
he enlarged cad clao the production plant for vcccinos. act was what
tho order for cnlargaacnt referred to.

C* Zion Ding*a sphere of activities was to he extended by sotting
up c production center for vcccinos in Slock 50?

i. Yes.

It was then dffiliatod to tho hygicno institute?

Yos, that is what I ncai.

22. ..JhJZL: Thank you. tfo furthor questions.

21’.. rU-.Il'O: Flar-ing for KrugovaJey.

3Y32. rLad.ZBOs

Q. Sr, Hoven, in your affidavit which Just nontionod, Do<r>-
nont Jo-429, exhibit 281, you said that tho chonnoio of co=and for
Ding Would hate boon "Grawltz, Genrkin, Wrugosuky and Ding;" to ifcnt
activities of Ding's wero you referring to w hen you nodo this state-
sent?

* . To his activities in Slock 50, That lo tho only contact I
had with his.

Q . 'Jh.t do you know about Ding's personal relations with Oravits?

Am Ding was a friond of Grawits. Eo always likol to ncko frionds
coons such inportant pocplo. I know the* ho onre told so proudly, this
irao in 13*12, that Gravltz, on tho occasion of tho birth of Ding's
dnughfcor, nedo hio aitocobilc avail-ole to Ding-s wife. Then Grawits
had coao book that dealt with his work in tho Sod Groce end ho drew up
n one page long dedication to Sing.

u hilo you wero in Suchenvrid how often did Professor Glide—
nciotor vicit there?

A. Pour or five tines.

During tho tine you wore in Suchonwald?

^913


Yes.


zi Juno»-i U-4-4-K al oy< Srovn )

Court I

32. JLj-.IJG: Thank you. Ho furthor questions.

——' PH2SXSZI2: *ro thcr>- any. furthor questions to the vitnoss by
defense counsol?

There boing none tho Prosecution nay cros>-cxmlnc.

CHOSS^jCUiZHsZZOH

r . e-hot*

3 r. Hovee, during the course of your tine in tho Unitod States
in tho curly 1320's ycu stated that you vero an agricultural inspootor
would you bo aoro specific md toll ua Just vhat you ncji by that titlo?

L. Yes, I voa on a dairy furn in Kev Jovsay, tho fain being ovnod
by cn ccourint-nco of ny friend near Kinncr-iolis, Ulnncsotu.

Q . V h..t wore your duties as ogricultur.-l inspoctor?

a. 1 vorlesi thoro.

Q. Did you have to sake out reports?

*. Ho.

0.. Did you hare to Ionov tho Snglioh language ct all?

•i, 1l;o ovner had boon a Ooroan ionic rant and I spofco mostly 0 or.iua
la tho frally.

Q. I soo. Then you wore actually noroly a faru hmd, you v>or!:cd
crowd tho f arc?

Ho, I ves on inspector. I can only giv^ you tho cjqjrcsoion
that van used thoro, os I rcaaeber, ryjioly I was called " boas".

Q. u'non voro 701 drafted into tho Voff on S£, Dr. Hovea?

a. 28 ^aftust 1939. That is when I received a;- drafting order.

Q. At that tine voro ncr. boing drafted into tho Vaffon SS diroct,
sr vas ict your dref t order for the ttehmacht?

i. I vns dref ted dl recti;' into the V off on SS. I thick 1 re¬
vived cn ordor free the regional induction office. That ves a printed
f-su and at tho top it scys on such and such a d-.tc you aro to report, etc.

Cl . You didn't havo any alter rut irc7 It is cy understanding tho
-aft into tho V effen SS didn't start until a such lator date, that on


9914


24 June- Vr - itf •*-S-Maloy(Brown)

Court I

this dato, Jngust 1939, it was called selective sorvicc or whativor it
is is Gomeny, bed to dtersetiva to go into various branched of tho
Luftvrffo; did you chocso to go into the tfaffo&~8£, rethor then tho
Luftvrffo or the or tho Havyf


: i

Juno 24~h-5-l-HD-Mo.^ian-3rovn.

A. I w uld have preferred the Army and Navy to tho
Yaffen SS, but this wos o military order given In tho sano
: -rma as tho 'ohrcaoht rdors. as I sail, this coco froa
:co Regional Induction Offlco and I had no choice of any
branch of tho sorvioe.

%, Now, Doctor, I want you to attempt to reoall tho
Interrogations of last October, where In you and I drafted

this affidavit d.ouccnt, No. 429, which is nt considerable
issue hero during the presentation of your case. Do you
rcor.ll on tho 22nd day of October, 1946 that you were called
t. an Interrogation and at ouch interrogation Mr. OoVrio
nr.d I wore present?

A. Yob, I ror.cabor. Shall I use tho English document
tvk hero or the Ooraon?

Q. Yes, 1 > u eight use the English, Dr. hovon.

Now nt that particular date, tho 22nd Octobor, 1946,

. i wore asked If y v c uld apeak English; Is that correct?

A. 3y you?

Q. Yos.

A. Yes, I said that I could a:re or lees onrry on a
c r.vcrsatlon.

5. And then wore y u t Id that wo w uld talk in English
durlr.:- that lntormunti n an;i If y u did not understand
:nything Ju6t t: let us know ?nd we would try to olavlfy
it In German?

A. It w-s not quite that way. You were go d enough
to ask co whether it v;uld be alright If wo talked in
English, I said C.X., '■nd tr od t- airry n some oonversa-
tl n in English. You then asked co a few questions which

- *nevered in English, and than we branched questions Milch

- scorned cy activities cr matters which y u wanted to know

ut. *;e bith saw then that we c' id not continue in this


9916


G:urt -1

Juno S4-!i-5-2-HD->jahan-Br*c-wr.


way end fr- “ then on we both made use of the services of the
interpreter. ?roa the:, cn, I spoke a fixture of Goman and
English.

2. That is right, whenever ycu were oonfusad I always
had the Interpreter explain it to you In German; did I not?

A. This was not an Interpreter, It was Ar. DoVrio, who
was an Interrogator.

Q. Woll, we were using hln as an Interpreter?

A. That la ao, yes.

Q. Now, when the Interrogation first be-on wo ran ovor
jonorclly tho activities and conditions at Buchenwald; did
wo not?

A. Yob.

After having covered tho conditions generally, did
I not thon lnforn you th-.t I had drawn up a draft In tho
form of on affidavit and that I desired that wo go through
occh section of the affidavit to dotormlno Its corroctncoo
and truthfulnoss and at the completion thereof, I would like

iir.vo you sign tho affidavit for co; is that corrcot?

I can toll you that In much groator detail, Hr. Hardy.

Just a moment. Doctor,. I will rend you the quostlon
r.s I put It to you at that time and goo If that refreshes
your recollection so that wo can be brlof hero. Aftor wc
had discussed the various details. I said to you; "I will
o over this in detail with you. I want to got you to
verify those faots for us. 7a will chock these facts; that
-5 in the fora of an affidavit. I want to go over oach
section of the affidavit. If It is true, I would like to
*.r.vo you sign this affidavit for ne. B and you on awe rod
'--g; 0 do you renoab-r that?

A. Yes, but then you did not d: that, you were called
Gyay.

9917


Court 1

Juno 2fr-K-5—3-KD-He ohnn-Brovn


Just a aoaaat. Doctor, I have the Interrogation
bore, which will refresh your recollection.

Then, Doctor, I proceeded to go through various soctlons
of the affidavit with you In person. I went through para¬
graph 1 ef tho affidavit pertaining to y^ur biographical data
end you answered spoclflc questions there and y u said to
tho'first question, I road the first sentence of tho affidavit:

“I, VALDEHnR BOVZN, being duly sw m, deposo and stato:

"1. I was born In Freiburg in Sroisgau on the 10th of
February 1903."

Your .answer: "That Is right."

I took up oach sontcnco In that paragraph with you; did
I not?

A. No,

Q. Is It golrit, to bo necessary for no to road oach
ccntonco?

«. No, we do n^t lave to so burden tho Tribunal's tlno.

I can nakc porfcctly cloar what I as roforrlng to hr. Hardy,
'fart you are now saying Is that you twice Interrogated no.

Onco you said that In regard to this affidavit I did not
understand at tho cocont. «t any rate, It was a ouuaary.

You said explicitly that .4r. DeVrio would go through It with
u and by tho noxt day it would be in order. That nmot bo
in tho record,

Q. Lot us go ov-r it now by questions. I don't want
to _:o ov.r oach point in rebuttal. I will go over in tho
Tull transcript of tho interrogation which is found as
rebuttal ovldonco In the Frosoouti n Docunont B_o!:. At
this time I want to refresh the nenory of the defendant on
certain incidents which happened during the Interrogation.

THE PRESIDENT: Very well, proceed.


9913


Court 1

Juno 24-I4~6— 4-H3-Meehar.-3rr vr.


BY IS. HitHDY:

5. Nov, you will recall, Doctor, that after I had
discussed tha first two paragraphs with you, I ethtod or
reread paragraph 3, which 16 n*.w the paragraph contained
in Doouaont NO-429; in that I said:

"Kow, duo to those various positions in 3uchenv:ald
during this period of four years that yuu wore thoro, not
quite four years, out nearly four years, you bocano acquinted
uith all the phases of the nodical activities that vrent on
t Buchenwald; now, therefore, you are able to tnko those
statements?" Referring to the Draft, ar.d you stated, "Yes."

3c you reoall that I stated tr. you, "I want ou to
correct ce when I road if the facts are not correct," and
y u answered, “I .understand ycu."

a. Yu soon when you woro reading the English?

3. That is oorroct.

a. Yes and r.s I said I certainly ov*.r ovaluatod ay
knowledge of the English language In paragraph 6, I think...

Q. Just a aonont, Doctor, wo will = ot to paragraph
6. You did, did y.u not, when I told you yu would have the
opportunity to correct anythin- that I rend that ; vu thought
'* uld bo lnccrrroct; and I did toll you that in tno
interrogation; did I not?

a. That cay bo, yea, - d'.n't reaeabor it though. At
nay rate at that ties I did not know who you were or what
■ ae going on. You woro very friendly and raci.us to ao,

'*- z - really did net know what was cooking. I diu not
-••'-'V this wqe an official thing of s.no sort, but when
s ---'dy is very friendly and nice t’. rue, I also nrke in the
of a conversation et"tenants which are not as exact
: “no etp.tene.nts one would none when naklng an affidavit.

-- i had known I was do pee in. ar. affidavit in this c. r.verso-
tlon


9919


Court 1

June 24-&-5-5-HD-Keehan-3rown


I certainly would have mi It giver, to ne lr. Gorman trans¬
lation end would have thought about it for a day* It is
perfectly true that your personality made an cncrnoue
inpress lor. cn so.

%. You srved nc a considerable enount of ti^o, Doctor.
I want to go now tc the particular section f our interroga¬
tion wherein I asked you if you would assist lr. giving us
infornatlon c-ncorr.lng the activities of which you had
knowledge; do you roneeber that?

a. That could be, I cf ocurae cannot ronenber tho
details of the conversation that took place oltht months
ago*

Vo11, you have stated here that you wero not
certain whether or not we were going to have a trial.

Is that right? At the tine of this interrogation?

A. I said that at that tine?

Vo, you told thr.t nere in the stand; isn't that

correct?

A. Yes.

Q. Do you recall when I was later orally asking you
t'i aid us in finding cut frets concerning the activities
at Buchenwald and I stated that wo arc going to hr.vo a
trial; do you knew that you answered, "Yes' 1 ? Thon, I
stated to you, there Is no reason f'-r holding you as a
tricener unless we have a trial* do you reQoabor that?

I really did not get tho impression I mbs to have
anything t do with this trial; you vore 3 c extraordinarily
-elite and nice to no that you vero really acting like ay
iofonse counsel ar.d I did not think you were going to be
th_ Prosecutor.

i. "ell. now Doctor, in this c urse of 30 in over
. tha affidavit, do you recall that we »int over tho affidavit


9?i0


Court 1

June 2 4-5- 6-HD-He e ba n-Brown.

r x recall t.:ot v e vent over the affidavit to the extent
that I diBoussed with you the a election of Irucates to be
used in the experircents, not Hr. DeVries?

a. I certainly talked it over with Hr. DeVries, but I
cannot renenbor that I did with you.

THE PRESIDENT: I think Hr. Hardy, we will take our
recess now. The Tribunal will bo in recess for a few
a^nente.

(« recess was token.)


9921


24 '•••Ji».-!WL-?-l-SiE£JUck (ir.t. nartwnbcrg)

Court l.o. I, Case I

THE 1A3SKAL:. Tho 7_ibuncl is ag-in in session.

• HARD - : :ic y i pl-=se the Tribunal, this aarnina when I w.as
taking an attempt to ascertain th. duration of try. defense, I .-. P vj,nt-
ly ais under stood just the length of time the defense cr.sc would into,

Aa I to understand that tho case of ?okarrv 7 and his three witnesses
oill t-:<e two to two and half days, and in -ddition thereto, the defen¬
se counsel as r. whole will require four additions 1 days to pul in their
supplementary doou^nt books?

THE FRE4IQ-.T: la counsel's und-ratar* inr correct concerning tho
c’Se of defendant ?okorny?

Df.. PLflIX'O: Y-s, your Honor, tho (k-'er.se will need three -ndc
f.oU to four days to uuboit its supplementary docents.

:ii. HAfDY: Doos tho Tribunal int-nd to sit on Saturday of this week
cr. th. 4th of July, orri or. Saturdry of next Week?

?:.J PfiSSHaiTj The Tribun* 1 will coffMia on Saturday of thin Week.
Announcements wnc-roing the end of next u-ek will be nr.de .at so-*, Inter
date.

^i. HAIiDY: Th-nlc you, ycur Honor.

cross nCAi.ll.ATIOh' (Continu-d)

BY ii. HARDY:

Q.- Dr. IfoVen, would you kindly turn to paragraph nudb-r 4 in your
affidavit? ilo , in your affidavit you -iU not. 3r. the last Sentence oi
r rr.rrnh nunber 4 — this is on page- 2 of Docoo-r.t Book lluaber 12, Do-
cur-nt 1C—429 — in that s-r.t nee the affidavit r. ds as follows: "Froci
• tailor, .ith Lr. Ding I understood that the chain of coa*rnd in

: vision j tl.- spotUd f-v-r experimental jv •.ion was as folia. 1 :
BelchSvarzt—S3 Grawitc, Genzkun, l^-jrcmsky and Dine.’ 1

I.a<, do ycu roc-11 that in tho course of Vt- interrog ticn J stated
• a you th. following questions; one, "Fro- your ccnv.rsa.tio.as with Ding

lieV-xi tl'.o chain of coc&rnd ~as Gomzhen, ju, owsky, an:' then Ding?"


9922


2L Jur.e-l£-FL-7-2-Nifi.abuck (Int, <^rtcaberg)

Court Ko. I, Ccso I

And your answer Has, “And Grewitz." And then I said, "Yes, Grawitz. He
caa; above both of then", end your answer "yes". And that occasions the

0

reason why we out the chain of connnd in paragraph 4 to b« Grawitz,
Gensken, l!rugc»3ky 'nd Ding; is that corrcct?

A.- Yus, as far as Block 50 is concerned, that is correct.

Doctor, would it be aero convenient for you to follow oo in En¬
glish, or would you rather follow m in Gieraan through the interoretcr
during the course oi this interrogation concerning tho affidavit? '..hich
ever you wish to do would be perfectly convenient for au.

A.- Do you uxrn right r.cm?

Q,- Yee, if you would rather follow no in English you nay do so,
or if you would rather follow x in Gurm-n through the interpreter, you
nay do that also.

A.- I have lcnrixd a lot during the soven months that I hr.vo been
in this trial ruv list-n-d to the examinations, but it would bo rather
e-tastrophic for io to sp-ak In English. I don't understand that much.

I prefer to 3 pork in German.

Q.- .11 n<x, in connection with th. paragraph number 6, you havo

stated on direct oxnaination that you took exception to the words "very
friendly" at tho tlao of the interrogation; is that corivct?

A.- No, :ir. Hardy, that was when wo read this paragraph, I said
to 'Ir. de Vrios, “Very friendly". I don't mean that. I ,xan for th;
"friendship of expediency" And then : lr. de V r ies sals sene thing to you,
and I didn't understand what h; said, arc then ho told me, "That's tho
sax thin-. Tho waning is the s-sj." You wore present at tho tiro.

Q.- That's riaht. And when I proposed the sentence which is now in
the affidavit, I oroposvd it in th. following manner: "Inasmuch as you
Wer» constantly associated with Dr. Ding and your work in tho iaodica.1
field was of cotrx>n interest, you beecA. very friendly." Then wo Inter
‘truck out th. aroposal of airt , "That is, your nork in the medical field

9923


2L Jun>-jf-F Ir-7-3-?tincbuck (Ir.t. V^irt_r.bcrg)

Court No. I, Case I

*“ of cooon interest- And in answer to that you stated, “I got very
ft-iindly With Dr. Ding for a Certain purpose in nind, n"a.ly, to pro¬
tect cert-in prisoners who otherris. would have been shipped to a
concentration camp at Auschwitz. Through friendship with Ding I raona-
ged to giv- a certain nuober of prison-rs a position in the institute
of Dr. DIa* where they worked, and because of ttoir work therefore
could be declared vitally rxcessnry." Nou, isn't that the gist of what
you ne'nt by "very frieixlly"?

A.- You .mentioned yourself rt tlx beginning of ycur stc.tcaxnt that

I said that tlxre ncs a purpose, and froj that it is apparent that it

•

"as - friend ha ip for a certain purpose, and that is what I naant, a
friendship for ..d only lor a Certain purpose. If you xan it in that
sena., it is correct, if you understand it.


2h June U?-!!-■’.TD-c-l-C-ross (Int. arfcenberg)

C;urt No. 1

3 By virtue of that friendship you were able to -ain knowledge
of sono of his activities.

.. Or. t>>i basis of friendship forced for a certain purpose, yes.

‘ Now, than, also at that tine I asked you to write down tho
nanos of soroe of these iructc3, that is three or four imato3, you
wished to help cn-' protect and you supplied i» with tho following
nanos in answer to that you supplied no with tho nanusi Henry Piock, Jm
Robert, Prof. Dr. van Jflagor, ;.u ust Cohp, Fritz Kirchhadjcr, and
you atetod five other Jowish prisoners* is that correct?

A To what station is that roforrin- to 16?

3 I an reforrin. Just in .or.eral to the ontiro situation. I
nakod you to write down sonc of tho nanos of innatos whon you ettonptod
to protoct and you javo uo itoso naios, is that corroct?

A Tos, I sai *. that I know noro but at tho rxncnt I couldntt
rorvjubor their nanos.

C\ That*s corroct. ..oil now wo turn to tho 3oction in paragraph
no. 6 vhoro y,u stato in tho affidavitx ";.s a natter of fact. Dr. Din;’
had to r;o to Borlin for discussions with Dr. :5ru;j©w3ky and others,
nearly 3 days out ,f orory two weeks, an ’ on such tensions I wasiin
char;;o of tho Spottod Povor Institute Kowovor, whon Din ; wont to
Borlin tho oxpjrinonts wore discontinued until ho rctumod." New,
isn*t that substantially what you tol * no in tho interrogation and
i-'n*t wo chock evor this lan ua .o in ’raft fom cf tho affidavit at
that tiro?

:(r. Bar'y, it »ras liko that* dnn this was spoken I said,

'Din told no that way.'* It can be that ho wont t. Berlin and usod
thit as an excuse or ho ha * a .-orsenol purposo in 3orlin and had tho
tickot ar-do out that way, for at that tine only t. et such a tickot
0r » had to bo on an official trip. : Lay bo it is that ha stated ho wont
v tho ^r-iano Institute and actually di'n*t o an! I sail oxprossly
is "hat -S'. Din told no. That is corroct. Then porhape I assau>d


2h June U7rS>..7D-8-2-^rc3s (Int. V-rtenber )
Court !Jo. 1


not onou.-h knowledge cn your cart as to the actual conations. It
ms, as I already told you, in this typhus station in block 16, that I
took part at the request of the ^risonors in erdor to undortako tho
revision ef tho soleotion of tho experinontal subjocts and that was oy
reason for ’oin-y so.

q •oil, ycu vjtd, wore you not, ordorod or requested to suporviso
Block L6 at this km nhen Din;; was in Berlin?

Jfc, :!r. Pr jaocutor, for this doasntt nako any acnao to put no
in chnrco of the supervision sinco I did not understand Jiythin; about
it. K- had already Ivor. Ifcipo Dlotzsc’.i instructions and ro^ardoi L6
as his own ';nain.

q oil, ha ’ you over scon arty of tho experiments conducted in
3lcek h6?

A Ho.

Q fr-Tr, Dr. H-ron, Just a aonant. Horo in paragraph 7 I askod you

or proposal to yuu tho Kntonco which is thoroin containod at this tino

•

in Document 'IO-A29, and la tho first sontonco ‘‘Thj oxpurinemts at
Block U6 in tho Buchomald Concentration Canp wore conductoil as follows."
•* n: ‘ «hon I put tha question to ycu, I said., 'You know this fron talking
to Dr. Din ", and you answoro-' "SuabtLoos I havo soon then, too." You
raneDbor tollir.; nc that?

A He.

1 An’ this answer you avo when I askod ycu who the r you know
about tho conduction of experinonts i.; Block 16 fren t-lkin to Y. Dine,
ycu answered: 'Scno tirvis I havo s»-or. then, tee."

A utar.t do y.u aoan, when do y~u :uan I saw?

Tha oxporir»:nt3?

A I certainly di nt noan that. I cauldnt havo noant that at
all because events ir. block h6 naturally wero talked about am nr: tho
.ris.n-ra an! wa had sene inferation about this.

9926


2U Jjix; L7-CW.TD»8»3-Gros3 (Int, ' artenberg)
Court Ko* 1


Q And you state that you did not say that to no 'tiring tho
interrogation, I will road tho questions I put to you and answers you
-;avo to no, Tho question is as follows, Roferrin: to tho rough draft
of tho affidavit wo had* I quote: "The oxp-rinunts in block U6 in
Buchonwald concentration camp wore conducted as fcllowsj You know
this fren talkin'- to &•. Dinb?" You answorod n So no times I have seen
then, loo," This noanin suroly that you saw the oxporirents, Vory
clear, lsn»t it?

So, I did not asan that*

Q You dcn*t doubt that you said that, do you?

4 ..oil I cant toll that anyioro now but I only know I cant
havo noant it, I 1 dn»t soo thon*

Q roll lot®s ,o down to tho soction of paragraph 7 whoroin
you 4scuss tho porccntago of inpatos who died in tho course of tho
ojq^orinonts* First of all, I statod to you, in a question whioh
conparos sonowhat to tho third scntonco fren thu unrt of paragraph 7*

I statod: "Botwoon tho aufcuitn of 19^2 end tho sumor of 19U3 npproxi-
netoly 500 innatos of tho Buchawald concentration canp vroro usod in
thoso axporinonts," And tfcon I ,roposod that scntonco you stated: "That
is a rcu-h ostinatc." Consoqumtly I struck out tho worl "approxinctoly"
an'.’ put in tho wore! "about". Is that correct?

oil, ycu 3-C, :'r, Har*V, a» far as it is e.ncerncd statononts
yu yoursolf nano! tho fi uro 500 at tho lino, I felt that tho conver¬
sation with y.u was in tho foro -if a ccmrersation an’, whon ycu nontior.od
this fi-:aro 500, I then ftssunod that you ha ’ ucro kncwlacli'a than I.

And ycu can see that in ny opinion it was roally a loadin question,
ton ja_u naned this fi uro tc a 3 and I lot you Influenca :ia and I said
"I hive no infomntion about it, but accor 4n to ry’ ontiro knowledge
f concentration conps, I assuua that is corroct,"

1 'loll, wten you statod this , That is a rcu ht estinato" —

4dn*t I strike cut tto word "approximate" an ' put in the word "about" —
is that c-Troct?


9927


2h Jurc U7-: MTD-8-b-Oro ss (Int. marteribcrs)

Coart Sa. 1

A If 70U say sc that must be correct. Of course, at the aonont
I con*t recall exactly what happened.

q Toll, mw coDooming the last two sentences in paragraph 7
which refer ta the percentage of deaths or the mortality rato, I askod
y;u the following questions:

"How ctiuv cf thoso died as a result tf the experiments? Herr :iany
would, you say died of your own taxmlodgot" And 7cu answered "I estimate
for that particular porio 1 about 10; hod as a result or the oxporinonts
but after 19U3 a proctor poroontao tUod#" And then I said "'/hat
porcontaga woul: you sayl" And ansvoroi "I hoard fron othor sourcos,
fra: imates in tho eaft that after 19U3 the porcontago of pooplo who
dial as a rasult f tho axporlnonts arvsuntod to 18 or 20 U" Do you
rocall tollin that to no?

A It nay bo but I got both fi .uros fron statements of prisonora

and I rccallo \ then approjdnatoly.

q I soo. Thon the two sontoncos which aro containod in paragraph
no. 7 woro n-t y idoa, woro they? They wore ivon to no fren my
conversation, with you, is that correct?

A Yos, c ortainly, and I ropro Vcoi then fren conversation rdth

prisoners.

q Now, in comoction »lth para raph no. 8 which rofors to tho
selection of inretos to be- usod for the purposo A nodical experiments
in 31ock h6, id I un torstand you to stato in ircct examination horo,
yesterday, that you ldn»t have ary thin- to do with tho soloction?

A I novor ’oniod that I had somethin, to do with tho selection.

I only said that at Ww request of tho prisoners I book part and. told
that to you, too. I had not had anythin to do with that and I was
expressly askod by tho illo; al camp a Ministration an «. foreign prisoners
to take a -art in that. That is, to havo qy name as can? physician usod
for this revision of the selection bacauso tho revision of the 'solocti.-.n
-q bno by Gorran political prisoners and foroi n prisoners. I boliovo
that is how you understood ^ bat I assurve then there were nistakos


9928


2 U Juno i;?-*S-d7T>-6-5-Crcs3 (Int. -artcribor^)
Court Sc, 1


m:’o ir. tta translation.

1 I »=s roa !irv• what you sai l to no, ’octor. I proposed too sane
.xirovrcph "hich is m contained in Document H>Ji29, I road that sano
paragraph vorbatin to you in ti» interrogation and after roa'.in.-; tho
.crosraph yu stated, Toa", and thon I road another soction of tho
paragraph an', you said, "Yoa", an:’, thon I said to y u, "That havo you
tut to add to that?" After I had road tho paracraphs to you I asked you
;fhat you hod t. add to tint and you statod to no, "In selocUn prisoners
in Buchonwal! for axpcriiionta to bo earriod out by Dr. Din- it raa net
officially nucossary that I noko such a soloction cr si,;n theso lists.
This noant Dr. Din- Coul ’ have ordorod Schober to -uko tho nucossary
nunbor of inrat as available. Howovor, I pors anally cccupiod nyoolf with
this soloction, because I hod boon roquostod by tho imatos to do so
a. that I Id not dosiro tho lnmtos boew-.to victims, sinco I triod to
select tiioso ;>ooplo who -ro stated to bo criminals.

.^tor I loft Buchonual ’ tho sane systou of soloction was not
:rintaincd an! inrtxtos waro .ado avr.'lablo to Dr. Din , sinply through
Schcbor.' .s .' thon I a ain roforrod to tho pnnrraph an-’ said, "This
is basically true "and you sai d, yes", now is that what you rant to
bo put in the rocord, that answer you avo no?


2Z, Jur.>-:i-FL-9-i-Xarro. (Int. k&Ruiburg)

Court :-io. I, Css- 2

A, “ tloU -» fferdy, at the mota-nt I cannot toll any more,
hut what you havo just red es to whet I was supposed to have said is,

Ln no connection at cU with the actual conWnts of paragraph 8 as it
rvr.ds now. It says on page U in the Ex^lish text, for example, the,
words -at randoj- end the interpreter told ao that meant "willkucrlich"
ir. german and I believe that is a word I nover used in my record. And
you ary that that is the auening of whet I said in zy direct examination
that I took c onrt in It, and if I used that word it doesn't moan that
I did it, it »ans that I put ay nasto under it. That was ay affair end
if it would have had any unpleasant cm^u-sxos I would !r.vo had to
bear them, bccr.ua. I s-id that I was resoonsible for the prisoners,
for this action. The Kin object was to prevent that German political
-rd foruicr. .prisoners would be used for the oiperiaonts.

Q.- Mow, Doctor, the persons used in tho experiments - that is,
the persons sclect-d, whether they *,ro removed Later by you or othei^-
wis., were they volunteers?

A.- I don't understand, Hr. Hardy. It's like this. Th. Selection
ird already ouer. made by the Gest*po or the crap administration.

Q.- Then the export aentnl subjects wore not volunteers. I no trying
to convey this question to you. Doctor, lien these inmates were selec¬
ted to be used, in cxoericfcnts in Block 46, w-r- they volunteers in tho

Svna. that :c Bean volunteers as s-t forth as issue at this trial.

•

A.- Those -ho had been a-L-cUd by the Gostapo and the earn odainis-
* ration, I don't belie Ve that they were volunteers. However, it ha>p°n-
a few times that there wore volunteers -..long them but I don't know
for sure any or- in which -xporinonts. Hut thus- lists which the Ges-
t-oo and th. ccno administration s-lectod, the revision was by th- 'ri-
3-n«.rs. by tho trusted a-n ol th- German and fer-ien prisoners and they
a-r ruvis-tl i.a case th-r- were G-man political prisoners or foreign
■~"i;or._ro on thes- lists, and thereupon thos- political prison-rs wore


9930


21 Juno-k'-r- 2 -ilrrre* (Int. iiartenbcrg)

Court Ho, I, Case I

tak^n out of the list, ucd-r som- pretense be it that I said they n&iv
sick, for ay hospital, or soa« other pretense, and then I or thu pri¬
soners put delusively informers rnd traitors in their place, -nd these,
of course, ere not volunteers. Otherwise, I on of the opinion that
prisoners anyhow c.-jnot decide about volunteering as long as thoy oro
prisoners. It is only a conditionally voluntary action if they are
prisoners.

Q.- .ell, ttern, Dr. Hoven, if they had been volunteers for tto ex¬
periments then it would not have been necessary for you to occupy
yourself with tho Selection so that undeserving inmates -/ould not be¬
come victims? Is that right?

A.- Yes, that's quite right.

r «-“ “nen, can't you positively state that the aajority of these
in-natus w-re not volunteers? That they were forcefully being used in
th. expeila-ats?

A.- :ir. Hardy, I did not concern ay Sell with that in detail. I rw.-
rely had the ord„t, in agreement with th. resistarce grouos of the Ger-
rrn and forei-n prisoners, as I have Just reported it to you to tnko
th.o out of the o::pcrlaenU. Of course, you ere right, if they had boon
volunteers in these expria-nts, a hero I undertook this r-vision of the
prisoners ’-ho ead been selected, then there could not hove bocn any vo¬
lunteers, that is Certain, but beyond that it is certainly correct, bo-
cause probably in thos_ exp-riments .ihere they volunteered I would not
fr.ve revised the lists. It is quite certain there were volunteers for
3 vo. experiments, but I have alovady said I don't know for which on-s
or how aany.

Q.- '-’cjl not-, in the event that you saw fit to take the names of
certain doo-rving political prisoners off the list so that they would
r.:t be sub jo c ted to the experiments, did you then select otter oeoplo
take tile IT OloCe on the list?


9931


24 Junc-lt-PL-9-3~&u-rCT» (int. •..arteifcorg)
Court No. I, Cos. I


*.- It 1. not correct, if you „ the first ^rson. I did not do
it, bat the u-isonurs did it, but I cssuxi the responsibility for tlx
action. That is correct, - end thy .ere exclusively Inlorncrs or so.
■ho aacv-hcM :*_re conn-cted with tho SS.

-oil wr, afUr you ruaoved the naae of a dosurvins inaato
froa the lift and substituted it with tho of another inaatoj -
euppoa-dly a cri-iincl, an infor^r, or a traitor, - did that crininal,
th, 't inforu ^ or that traitor volunteer for the uxjxria-nt?

A.- Ho, Certainly not. But we felt, sine, we could not prevent
theau ox.^ri^ents, this waa atiU the boat aolution. It wr.a impossible
to prevent t.hoa, but at l~aat we ameliorated it considerably end the
nr-tter was handled very carefully and throughly by truated people of
the Cerocn political end foreign priors.

Ct.- ..ell no.;. In connection with tho transports s.nt to a outhn-
naaia atetion, vhich you later iound out to be Bernburg, do you ar.in-

taln now that oily aie tr.-nsport leit for 3ernburg, as you stated in
your affidavit?

A.- Yes.

0n tMa trcna -' i ° rt iK,r - ^.re ... How ,-nny people actually wru
an the transport? 2CD, 303, UCO, 500, 600, or What?

A.- T cannot teU you the exact li^ur-, Ur. Knrdy. I believe it
waa three h-ndrui r.*tf southing. Jewish, as weU as professional criminals
" nd other prisoners. Originally, Geraan political prlson.rs and fo-
rei^-.era had also b^n on the transport.

eU, ans a special list aado out of how a-ny people should be
-r. to. tr?nsx>rt at th.-t tioe?

A.- I don't know. I don't know ha. it was handled. Th-physicians'
mission had elected th-a. I heard Or. J^nneke was in charge of that.

Q.- til, .vny people did you save freo this transoort?

-LL, tr-ere were eluvcn pro-in-nt political prisoners, rnd then


9932


2 u June-iS-FL-?—VScrrcm (tot. Tfnrt-nb^r^)

Court No. I, Css. I

„ nuab’-r of otters, rise foreigners.' I don't kne* tta oeset figure r.ny

-ore. It wr.s quit- - 1'rge nur-'o.r.

Q.- ,._U, when you sr.ved a p-rson/roa tte tr-.nsport - that is,
struck their itaAe fras the list - did you hnve to insert or substitute

r.noth-r prisoner for the orw that you saved?

A.- That was not up to at -11; I not the chief c:-np physician,
I told .V chief to strike those o- *1- freu the list end then loo t-tf

not like this whole affair Very auoh eittar; he* it tapped, •t
reasons he gave, I don't knot; any - : In any cos-, "e knitted thus
into the hoapitr 1 as p-tients, and whether other arsons *-ro put in
their pl-ce, I t n't :t^».

Q,- , ,r . fcb. other yjO or 4CC Jea who actually 10t on the tr-ns-
part :U inf or .ra, tx itors, cr Loin- la?

A.- !!>, no; Cert’inly not.

q.- . 11 , uaa it inpossible to save thoa?

Bat, . :.-rty, 1 ejppnrntud ..ith tie J-.W< ZtmlUi

U 00 -oro nu»o^d to -x n.nt r«-y end :ic . id uvurythins tint »nn .*u-
-,nl? pautnl.. Tie p.Utlc- 1 , tie Judah tod foreipi PriMnurn, *0

~.U Old .turytl t"t "tthln hUT.-n ?m.r to do. • f-r ' I i»
aonbvr, r.t tie L-.t . .nt I did «e<xud In Irving n J~»l»h nurn. MMl
off the transport.

C..- Aft^r v.e eenspats eit f 3-rnbur* th-n you recav-d a lint
Jt tho man. of tie 1mm Z. ■ - Idled nt Bornburg, didn't you?

A.- r„., .or dy chivl, nd lx g.in rmclx-A It for tho con* cm-

anntVint.

Ark acre oa .rf-red to issu- f"l*. str.touonfcs of death, that
is, fake de-th Oortiiicatcs?

A.- T-s, sot I would <=* hive tad to accept officially. Ttoruup n,

on in thin entile notion ngr innt thu 14-F-13 Actiorfuith th- Smith
trusted pooplo rat for.ign prisons nnd Ecrnu-n politic.-! prinonom I


9933


2U 5-Xarrc* (Int. '..srtenberg)

Court So. I, Ccsl I


got together >ith thca and I told thea that end the cc-oittce p;.vo .sc
the advio* to IwfiVu Uir.t to ^ and fur reasons I have already told
y.steriay, 1 did thrt. Nothing could b- changed 'bout it. Whether I or
soaebody else did it it w: a the saae, «ly the earner in which I did it
*>“-■ 'non. .grccrblxj.

Q.- -ell no ., *i.W. you received the order to sr.ke out those d«cth
certifier.t-8 ran .b. -d it, didn't 70U, and nr.de out tho fake death cer¬
tificates, did .-.it ,’ju?

A.- I t Id -JC r.ireiay that I ay self did not .tr.kc thus cut. The Ju-
riish and Ger . n political orisoners did it, but I sign-d then for ma¬
sons I hWe just strtec.

Q.- Vu- oil, u.ctir. Did y.u -Ver visit Dernburg?

A»- Yv s.

•

Q.- For whr.t pur Id you visit Bornburg?

Fr:.t v, I b. lie\. it w-a 1 • , mu rocsivod

tho r^is th-t two ori^n-ra h-d diet natural de-th; the City or ..'cr-
i.-.rodv did not tern, a cr. . •. riua. «t tint tin-, *3 far I r~:iuVxr,

. p physician . ttnd ut I tr.eo- Prisoners .Vd di , nd then
7 tel.-. oehunr-ld ,r wr.te r sunt teL ( r a, I C'n't reoon-
ber ny aore. In n ers-, tho r et w~3 that two prisoners had died .ani
they could :ut X uri-d. Trio could not be denied. Therefore I elo-
phned Berlin and .aa’.xd what c:uid be done about it and th-y looked
*-er where tho a.-rest cmoatoriirx w.as that could be reached -nd that
a-rnbn_. 7.;. r.:x, I Kent thoro by car, talked to Dr. db-1 fir
•bout ten ainutes, -nd he gave the p-roission rnd s-aid that the corpses
ver to c s. *. *. »re an they u-uld burn thca -nd then 1 went to this
br-nch c rap -;ic informed then'-bout it.


9951


Court Eo. 1

24 v'ac 47-a-lO-l-IEX-Keloy (Vartenberg)


Q. • c « 7C— trio to rernburg and© before or after the first
transport left?

A. April 1943.

Q. “hank ycu. Doctor, turning to the section of your affidavit
vhick refers to the killing of innates by phenol. I recall that you told
the Tritwnal that at the tine that you executed the affidavit that you
did not ’enow vhat the word "traitors' 1 noant, is that correct?

A. Tes.

Q. Do you recall the Questions that I put to you vhich vere as
foliovs: "After you becaae second doctor, and through to the end, you
becane avaro of the fact tfcat there were aany of tho prisoners vho voro
not liked by tho other prisoners and vore trying to benefit thcnselvos,
and that they tried everything in thoir cover to becoso more ooverful
• r.d to get totter oositions vhich would act to the dotriaent of the
oollticol prisoners vho wore In need; therefore you considered those
orlsonors to bo traitors," and you ansvorod, "Sot ao but all of thorn,
all tho unintelligent lnaatcs." Then I asked, "Thoso orisonoro, Doctor,
voro conaidorod traitors by tho lnaatea?" and you ansvorod, "Yes."

"You and tho lnoates thensolvos considered then not worthy of life,"
and you answerod, "Sot only not vorthy of life, but if they had contin¬
ued to live they vould have billed hundreds of pooolo."

Sow, isn't it evident free those ouestlons and answers that you
understood the aeoning of the word "traitor"?

A. Judge Sebrlng asked a« tho words I did not understand in the
English version and I told his.

This was in Argil eh I asked you those cruostions and you
ensvorad in Anglioh.

A. I didn't understand vhat you just said.

H. 1 asked you one Question, "These orisenere were considered
traitors, Doctor, by the Incates?" and you answered, "Yes." I asked
you the cueEtion, "Therefore, ycu considered these prisoners to be
traitors," and you answered, "Sot only I but all of then, all of the


9935


Court So. 1

24 Jua 47-K-10-3-ZEK-rtaloy (Vartenberg)


Intelligent insatcs." In cthor words, the intelligent ireates considered
then to bo traitor*. Isn't it apparent froc that question at that tine
you did understand the word "traitor"?

X. Veil, I an not a»«re of that. At any rate I didn't know that
word. Of course, in the course of tine I lcarnod it now, but you know
this entire coaplor with these traitors and lnfornera there and every¬
thing was so cocplicated that at the tine I could not cope with it
stylistically; you will note that youreolf, that wasn't so einolo.

Sow . Dr. Ding case to assist you in tho operating row

one evening vhon you were adsInis tering phenol to throo innate*, did
Dr. Ding ccco in Just by chance or did he cooo in at your invitation,
or what was the reason for Ding's presence that evening?

A. I novur invited his.

Q, Ho Juct happened to cone in by chance?

A. Ho, vo don't bollvve so, but vo accuse that ho had boon told
about it soaohov, that this happened and this was done in entire agroo-
=ont with the Illegal ca=P canal*toe or with tho forolgn and Corsan
orisonors, and as far as I know ho killed throe. Ho didn't ask any¬
thing, otrango as this =*y sound, and thon tor ho had killod eceobody
hi as elf ho loft again.

Q. Well, did ho not interrupt you when you attoaptod to kill ono
of tho 1 cantos with o ohenol injection and infora you you were not
doing tho Job correctly, and take tho noodle e*ay fron you and chow you
how to porfora the Job, how it could bo done nore efficiently?

A. -hot war Just a pretense, I think. At any rate he took tho
needle and performed the killing hiasolf.

Did he perfora the killing aoro efficiently than you had dono

a A

I don't knew that.

How aary non had y<a killed with ohenol injections to that tlac?

Two.

Had you killed aany on ether occasions or was this the first


9936


Court Ho. 1

24 Jun 47-K-10-3-E3i-#aioy (Vertec^rg)


occasion you killed people by phenol injections?

A. That we* the first opportunity, tho first noccscity, vherc I
aysclf had to take part.

q» How, hov zany innate* vere hilled by yourself?

A. Tvo.

q. Veil now, 60 lattes vare killed by phonol injections?

A. About 60 to 60 »-ro killed.

q. Vho hilled the remainder?

A. They vure hilled by especially chosen prisoners vho wore
trusted son of the illegal cosp coocittoo.

q. Junaauch as ti«y veru trusted non, you nuet ron enter vho they
vero. You cannot have had norc than tvo or throe non vhon you trusted
that nuch or it vould have bocose an open socret and that would bo
rather dnngorou. Vould you hindly toll us who those innate wore?

A. It wasn't an open secret, and ay responsibility would not bo
docroased if I should aontlon tho nanus, because this io the results of
an individual torriblo ur.ergency only tho pooplo who llvodthrough it
c P n understand it, and tho pooplo vho did it did it on tho orders of
tho Illegal canp oocaittao, and they thought of nothing but sevlng the
lives of their cccrodcs, and ! could not-

q. Please toll no vfcc tho inaatas woro vho porforaed these killings
vith phonol. Can you tell r.e the*., clot so?

A. Vho tho trleonere wore?

q. Y we .

A. Euechnlr-Kuschnarcv.

q. I don't aeon the nrisonor* killed, I noon the prisoners vho
cerforaod tho killings.

A. You Just interrupted no; I just vented to coy so. I stated
the reosjuc why I cannot tell you that, bcceuso then I vould bo no
bettor than tho traitors egainet vhon I fought for “vete.

Then you cannot tell this Tribunal vho were the lmates vho
cerf-med the killings by phenol with you?


Court Bo. 1

24 Jan 47-X-1 C—4oy {"ertonbcrg)


A. I coaid say It, but I can't say it because then I nyself would
sot bo bettor than the treitore. I assuno the responsibility for thceo
killings, tho 50 or 60 infonters who died at tho Carp, since in agroc-
neat and urgent necessity of the emergency this was decided by the
foreign and Gerr.an illegal carp connittee; they are not to bo hold resuon-
■ible for this. I alone as tune the responsibility for that.

Did Dr. Dorn assist you, the Dr. Dorn who appeared here, who
was in tho hospital where tho hillings took olaceT Vas ho one of the
non who assisted you?

A. So. I reaenber Dr. Bom only bocause he gavo blood; that is

all tho nonory X hare of hit. I didn't know bin very voll.

%

Q. Ho was a nalo nurse in the hospital?

A. Yes, I belicTc. X had tore than a hundred nursoo.

Q. Was Dr. Horn, a Czech doctor, one of your assistants?

A. So, Dr. Horn was chief of tho surgical dopart.'VJnt.

C. Voll, now would it have boon nocossary for the corson who was
administering this phenol by injection to have had sons cxoorlonco with
tho use of a hyoodomic needle, or could Just any person of tho stroot
without too r.uch difficulty kill o person with a phenol injoctlon?

A. X could nit Judge that, but in neny cases one certainly mist
hare seno oxcrior.ee, but not experience in killing with chonol injec¬
tions but with injections ae such.

Veil, D.ctor, your dofonse is that theso killings in which you
cartlcipatod were Justifiable, If they were Justifiable in your opinion,
why isn't it eoually Justifiable to toll who assisted you in killing
those legates, the political prisoners vfco aecistcd you?

A. That is n.t up to r.o to nckc tho decision whether thoy wore
Justified or not, since it is up to the Tribunal to decide about that.

I nyself have* only tho duty to describe things as they were end can
-nly na8uro you it ves such en unimaginable emergency and tho nr 1 sonars
had been crowded inti such a snail rots that there was no further nossi-
bility. I can further tell y.u that, with the Minister of Justice, and


Court So. 1

24 Jus 47-H-iO-5-SD£-i-Iai *7 (Vertenberg)


cthor high offio 1 ala, cinietera of Justices of foreign countries, and
about ell theao problem of the infornera-

Q. Doctor, vo havo known that for e conaldarable tine. Tou do
cot- fool that you with to incrinlnate or tend to incriminate erorone else
in thia, in regard to the prisoners who esaiatod you?

A- I didn't understand thet thia ia incrimination. But I ah all not
state at that tl=« the peoole vfco tried to Improve thia situation at
thia tine, and aave the lives of their cceradco, today bofore a decialon
io being nade about these acta today to give the nanes of theao prisoners
to the Tribunal. It nay b« they will recolvo high honors for it aono
tine; I cannot decide about that at thia r.cr.ent. Thoreforc, X aaauno the
responsibility for nyaelf for the action.


2L Jim-'A-i 3-11-I-lScchan (Int. Wartcnborg)

Court So. I.

Q Did Henry Pieck assist 70U in tte course of those killings
with phenol?

A ifc.

Q Did any of the -witnesses that ap-oared before this Tribunal,
who wore imates at tjw 3uchcnwald concentration canp, assist you in
those killings with phenol?

A You include tho witnesses for tho Prosocution also?

Q Yes, any of tho witnesses?

A I cannot recall that.

Q Did you over receive orders fron tho Canp Coanvirdcr Koch
to porfora killings?

A Onco, but I did not do it beenuao I could not. Tho order
did not cano fron his, but it was an order frees the Roichsfuohrcr, ns
for as I can reo-sobor.

Q -’oil, now in tho course of thoso killings you state that
you killed two inrontoo and that the inmates thoasclves killed tho
others; who ouppliod tte n^dles and tto phjnol?

A For which do you noan, ::r. Rnrdy?

Q For all tho ki ll in gs, on thoso 50 or 60 peoplo that r/orc
killod with phenol; did you supply the acterial that was used on
tho irtaat^s? You, as a doctor, had access to the drugs, otc.?

A ’.Veil, of cours.-, tfx noddles tto prison,rs had then avail¬
able too. I said already that I nscunod tho responsibility for this.
The prisoners did not rocoivu them free n», thoy had thon themselves
and it had boon discussed in tho aanwr of a conspiracy or secivt dis¬
cussion. I also had tho conns for this at ny disposal.

Q Hem, iltza tixj camp cocand^r gave you ord.rs to givo in¬
jections to prisoners or to have than killed in the ray you describod
h.for>. the Tribunal; do you maintain that you took measures that thj
particular inmates who were to be killod wore cithrr taken out of the
hospital, hidden ease oth,r piac^. or Wv,r_ shi red to other conns so
that thi particular killings would not tales place; is that her you


9940


2U 5-11-2(lot. -fcrtoabcrg)

Court Ko. I.


avoided carrying out the orders of CottaarxJor Koch?

A Oh, ;.u did that in nary different ways. Ttere was a large
number of prisoners end I cannot uac thee all.

Q Then you received orders to kill more than once- frets the

f

caap ccsraander?

A Ho, prisoners wno had bocr. threatonod or who wore in danger.
I did not find that out directly, usually I found out from the trusted
sen and we saved then in the wcll-knoro manner by actaitting then as
patients or sending thee to outside camps; that is how we saved thun.

Q Didn't tho caap coarnnder over chock up at a later date to
find out whether or not those killings actually had token place, or i
was he negligent about that?

A 1 don't know; I cannot reseller vory woll that exactly. In
any case, the killings that you oor.t’oned before I was not able to
ujidortako them, — vho did, I don't rocall any sore today. At that
tino I was not so woll informed about those natters, but 1 was advioed
by tho illegal caap adsinistrotion. Thoy, of course, represented tho
interests of their conradoo.

Q '.law, after a parson had boon killed by the phenol injoction;
.that .kind of a death certif icatc did you nakc out?

A I left that up to tho prisonor3 who were the trusted people*,
of the illegal caap ad min istration, that v-as a corporation, an organ¬
isation, which took caro of those natters itself.

Q Woll now, you told no'in the interrogation of 22 October,
■Then I asked you what kind of death state cents you nostly made out,
you answered, "All kinds, quite oftc:., inflanation of tho lungs or
cxiart attack"; is that right?

A Do you scan the kind of dcatl;s on the informers who had

teen killed?

Q Yes, wh.it kind of death statements did you make. You had
lave death certificates for the record; did you make out a death
rtificatu ho had been ki l le d with an injection of phenol; or that


99U


2h Jun-I3-11-3“ e chan (Ir.t. ffartenborg)
Court fc. I.


he had died of infl wration of the lungs; or of a heart attack; or of
tuberculosis; or was tho death certificate a fraudulent one?

A Excuse no, I_*. Hardy, to Those death certificates are you
referring to non?

Q To the ones you killed with phenol?

A That is tho inferiors and traitors I aa talking about.

Q Yes.

A These death certificates I did not aake out personally, I
Just signed then.

Q Just n Decent, Doctor, you.have stated that approximately
50 or 60 persons wore killed with phenol injection; of tho SO or 60
sons wore kllloi without your knowledge, t but you wore la ted notified...?

A Ho, LSr. Hardy, that is not how it was; do you now conn about
tho ISO to 90?

Q Yoa.

A You uoon tho 90 casos?

Q Yoa, tho 90 ensos?

A They troro infora, rs - ‘no wvru spontaneously killod by tho
prisonors in cuap. I was told in one oosc that during tho roll-call,
tho prisoners killod om of tho so inforaors by stamping on hir. with
their foot. Of tiusu killings, I fon d out aftarr.ardc and I had no
influonco on tho:*- At tho oost, I cculd have denounced then to tho
superior authorities; tho jurusd.ction of tho SS I considered as crin-
inal, however, that has always b.cn ny opinion to this very dry, and
therefore, t _ro was no chance of looking for help thoro. Tho result
would hnvo boon .txiviy that th.iv -avid havw b..n a big action against
the foreign ;a*isor-jrs, Gcrran political prisoners and Jons and as a
result in rutribution for thj cL-ita of 90 prisorarc, thousands noro
f ould die ■


Q lfo 'px: r;one through that -inry, many ti^c-e; ir. suscarization
I'ifty or exxty a*isonors _r; killed by phenol injections?


A FV^nol or Evipar..


2k Jun-M-4®-U-Wfechan (Ir.t. Wartenberg)

Court Ho. I.

Q Art aximately 90 wcra killed by boatings or other nothods?

A Yea, or in any oth^r n a n ner. I don't know the runner in
which individual cases wore killed.

Q How did you loarn of thi 50 or 60 killed by phenol?

A With phenol or other drugs, is that what you ncan?

Q Yes.

A That was through the resolution of the illegal canp corr.it-

toc. They......

Q Just a nonent, now, think a nonont, slow dorm and try to
answer ny qusstions explicitly; how did you 2 earn of that; were tiioy
ill comittod in your pro scree with phonol or thu other drug in¬
jections?

A No, with ny knowledge, ay full agroeaoat.

Q And they wero porlor.iod in the caap hospital?

A Yes.

Q By yourself or by five iftaates who assisted you?

A That wna carriod out by trustod :*jn of the illegal canp
oooaittoo and I had agrood to it and I coverod up for then.

 And now did you learn of tho other 90 cases of death; did
you learn that because you wero tho only person in whon tie lnmtos
had confidonco and you were the praon who had to re*ku tho official
declarations of death?

A Both; it was quite clear, I had to wake out tho death certi¬
ficates, tho prisoners had filled then out, to be sure, I did j»t fill
ttan out but only signed then.

Q How did you know whothor or not each death was justifiable;
you arc assuring responsibility for a great number of deaths; how do
you know that each and overyono was justifiable?

A I assure the responsibility for those 50 to 60 quite fully.

Q And you are certain in your own nind that each one tras
justifiable in tiv_ context that you Rit to us here?

A Yes.


990


2 ii Jun-lME-ll-5-*feehan (Int. Tfartenborg)

Court Ho. I.

Q VbIIj now Doctor, after wc had our interrogation of 22 Cct-
oocr end I had shown you a draft and I had gone through a considerable
~ ount of this affidavit with you, then I left tho interrogation and
Ur. DeVries interrogated you further for a short tiaa. Did I not re¬
turn tho naxt day with the affidavit written in a fomal naxuior and
asked you to read the affidavit?

A lea.

Q And in fact I read tho affidavit cloud to you?

A Yes, you read it aloud to no. I requested you to read a
littlo oore slowly and you did so, but thon you were in a torrifclo
rush, you got up several tinos and threo or four ti-ws you handed -to
tho fountain pin and I still triod to road it. 1 havo to say, accord¬
ing to tho truth, your personality inpressed rw. I did not know tho
true oignificanco of this docuaont and then I signod it, in tho boliof
that what I uonnt vras written or what I noant to say.

Q And tho initials that r.ppoar on tho affidavit are your
initials?

A Yos, you told no to sign with ny initials and that in what

I did.

Q Did you over write a note in English to hr. DoVrioo after
that intoiTogation of 23 October 191*6?

A Yos.

Q You did in tho English langungo?

A Yos.

Q \tould you read that note to tho Tribunal, which you vroto
in En- liah to Ir. DaVrio3 on the 23rd in your own handwriting, kindly
read it in English?

A At that tine I had the support of a comrade, who was in
Prison here- -and who spoke English.

Q Is that your handwriting Doctor, or. that note?

A Tos.

Q Is that your signature on tho bottom thereof j would you


99 U*


21 Jun-if-I 3-H-^-H®ehan ^In». VartenbGrg)
Court He. I.


kin dl y road it aloud to the Tribunal?

TKS rfiESIDEHT: What is the purpose of this, Ur. Hardy?

M3. HARDY: To indicate to the Tribunal tho knowledge of
English this witness had on tho 23rd of October 191*6. I wish to have
hie read it aloud, it is in his handwriting and wo night havo diffic¬
ulty in reading it.

THE PRESIDENT: fery wall, tho witness nay road it.

THE '..TTICSS* I told you I asked ny comrades about rxany words
that I did not know and they helped no in writing this, I did not writo
it free cy own knew lodge alone.


9945


24 Jua©4.-.U-l2-l-Cook( -art eaburg)
Court I


r ;. Please road it for Us in itogliah?

— “U-.oa X staged throe nonths in the concentration c^ry in
3ach«»/al&, c'oout :.arch 1941, I vxtcd to ask for uy release of t_o
c-UX>. -a oooa as the prisoners heard about it, they asked ne not to
loavo then a. I was the caly oae they trusted, cad ia fact, tho sal;
oao t*~o uos ..cting for their benifit. They also wrote it ot ue la a
nccrot lotto? which still aaa Kre. Hovea. Ihcreforo, I folt the rooion-
sibllity aot to leave thoc, but to help tr.e prisoners asaucaa I vas
Solo to, cad so I did.

1 doa t wuat to troublo you with all tho possibilities I to
hoi.-) the prisoners freu 1941 to 43 S<ntoubor, 1 have uaay witaoeooo
thoreforo and sob? lettoro. jut I»cat to toll you that ca 11 th of
nil, 1945, vhea X was tokca prisoaer by the .iaoric^as, 3 uiloe froa
Jcchoav.ld, too hours ..ftor they liboratod 3uci.or.vcld, tho soldioro
mOlod no oa a S heruaa Paasor. «s soon as the prisoner* saw uo, as
Jewish prisoaer, *ygust Cohn, told the CO that I had boon tho only oao
uho holpod than always . So they brought uo up to Buchoawuld 'fc'oro
I had ny first interrogation. The prisonors told tho ^aoricaa reportor
that I alv.-yo holpod thound saved the lifo of t.:o oolitic.! prinonors
of all nations who wore ia Sucheawald. Ihoa I sot the poraissica to
stay as a ^uost of tno prisoaero ia too concentration c.~? itcolf until
the noci dty, whoa I becao a prisoaor of w u r, and *as brought la a c.jx?

to rr-e.*.sn..ch. Octobor 23, 1946?

.. That is signed by you oa October 23, 1946, and is vriitoa ia
tho uviis-- language ia your own handwriting, is that corrodt!

a . Yos, that is correct.

at that tine wore you ia solitary confinoaent ia tho >risoat
You wore, weren't ycul

i Yos, I wus ia solitary caafiaoaont, of course, but I ..... vorh.
I ccvlc. *.\ ch disho 3 and clc^a rat the hells. I oaliove I oven asked
the _^oric.ui soldier about a few words. You can see there arc ot o;


79h6


2r* Juno-ii-iiJ-lD-a-Cocfc (Vartenbourg)

Court I

crr.rircs. I erased things a ad X insertod words.

Do you have beforo you document ii0.1063, which io the re¬
port containing the results of the investigations carried out in the

/

Netherlands of tho experiments and t cats node by the Geraon aodic;l
practitionoroifcich contain* tho affidavits of Von dor Ling, Li evol¬
ve rd or. and Schftllcor?

JD3»2 SZBSISQj that book. Hr. Hardy?

UH» H.»SDY: It is not a document book, Your Honor. It is a singlo
document, on page 12 of that docuacat. Do tho latorprctors hovo that
domuont?

KH. HaSDY: It is docunont Ho. 1063, c^>ico have boon diotribut-
od to tho Interpreters. You should hovo copios avdlublo but if you
dor.*t I idll go on to another subject and you cm obtain then during
thr rcccoo. Your Honors, in this connection tho Prosocution requests
instruction*. S tit a:cat a vero uado in this docunont by throo affi¬
ants and tho dofonoo counsol roquooted that those affiants bo inter¬
rogated. Ihorcupoc, the Tribunal appointed a commissioner, Hr. ' *nltina,
to proceed to Holland to iatorrogato tho tnreo witnesses referred to in
this document, «fv.r procooding to Holland ho obtained depositions
frees the particular witnossos involved based on questions propounded
by the defendants or defense counsol, to the quoctiono propounded by
tho Prosecution. Thoroforo, the Prosecution dooo not fool that tho
answers geinod as tho rosult of tho Coa-issionoro while in Holland arc
subject to documentation and given a docunont and exhibit rainbcr. I
havo had then reproduced both in Goman and in Siglish language for uso
here. Docs tho Tribunal rule we shall docunont than uod give thus cn-
hibit numbers, cr would tho Tribunal tuko judicial notice of tho hoaring
gained by the Tribunals cccnissionor?

'ZZ P23SID2JT* Submit tho dccunents to tiro Tribunal,
iZU H_2JY: I presuno tho Tribund, is fmnili..r with the nip oint¬
ment of the Commissioner for this task.


99U7


2 d Jttao-;-J-ia-3-Coafc- (Varteabeurg)
Court I


JIDC-i: S23 ? .IliO: V as that a Ccunissionor mpointod by tho Tribune!
to trJee tcs;iaoay or depositions of these witnesses as dofenso witnesses
or ns 'rosecution witnesses?

hh. Tour Honor, os I recall tho question caao up when tho

Prosecution introduced thia record of tho Bureau of invogtigetioa for
'{ nr Critics in ^listerdcc. In tho record wore affidavits which voro
apparently damaging to dofenso counsel. Defense counsel then request¬
ed thnt tho;' be permitted to interrogate and bo porultted to ona'.ino
tho uitacsscs involved, duo to the fuct tho witaossos wore in Holland,
tho Court RTpointod a Cemission to proceed to Holland and ut the sevio
tiuo g.-.vc port.lesion to the Prosocuticn to propound lr.torrogatorion.

JU-GH SHBhliiO: On tho Interrogations?

h-h H-3DT: Tos, your Honors, and all interrogations and cnowors
tho rots aro contained in that document that I have u»o<x:blod to gothor
as given to jo by tho Cemissioaor, Kr. V altlnn.

DH. Oh LIZ: Sir. rrosidont, I sbjoct to the subaiuoior. of thio
document for tho following reasons: This was n request which I unde.
Upon ay application those vitr.osoos wore interrogated and thcruforo
tho document cannot bo introduced hero cg.dr.st ay will end that is tho
first fomal reason. Purthcruorc, for reasons of tho naterid I ob¬
ject becauao I consider it nocoooary if thooo two vitr.osoos who voro
not uitr.osaos in this trial, but -ho were being uorcly horc interro¬
gated b; this Batch Cemistion, if tho statement of t.iesc witnesses
should be introduced hore then I noho implication horo for cross cc.-
cjlnatioa so that I uoy crosc examine than r.orc. That should not urhc
ca? difficulties for tho Prosecution. If I was able t. produco a vit-
aocs fra: Holland, it is uuch easier for the Prosecution. They only
hovo to cend a car to Holland and produce tha witnesses hero. In
tho ucanor in \fcich it is done horc I object to tho submission of that
document.

r'r .~': 2 ho Prosecution has no cements on the rai .rhe of


99 13


2t- Juno-ii-Ke-l&-4-Cook (V,_rrcubeurg)

Court I

counsel, Tour Honor, in a ouch ea the Prosecution deals they arc un¬
sound.

JUIG-o 3E2IiG: Isn't the whole thing, if the statement of de¬
fense counsel in true, th*i Ccrt.fc affidavits or tho results of an i;y-
voBtigetion woro sulci tted to tho Tribunal ns apart of the Prosecu¬
tion* n ease, thon the defendant node application to the Tribunal for tho
production of the afficants in person for the purpose of croso o:niii:>-
ation. That application was denied by tho Tribunzl end in lieu of pro¬
ducing tho effionts for croll oxcBiiutioa the Tribunal appointod e eoi>-
cissionor to t.Jco their depositions as upon cross oxaii ration end thorir-
upon tho Prosecution, by leave of the Tribunol, also propounded oountor
lntcrrogo-orios, Tho cross oxaiinatiop tho r eport of tho cross a:«ii-
nation taken bef:ro tho CccDiMlaa is now beds hero for tho uco of Dr.
Gculih. Tou wanted an opportunity tc cross oxnuino these witnossos
end you have been granted lc_vo to cross oxaaino then through tho of¬
ficers of a cousin.lien uud it hoa been reported bach. Tho report has
boon undo by tho Casiesion of tho Tribunal to this Court and tho
question arises r.ow whether or not a Caiiicoioncr appointed by this
Tribunal, as c Tribune! official, to perforu a certain function, \ho
has porfomod that function and node his report to tho Court, vhothcr
or not that report over the objection of counsel who originally ashed
loavc tc propound tho cross interrogatories toy bo considorod by tho
Tribunal,. Isn't that all there is to it?

Ha. h-lPDT: That is tiy point. Tour Honor. I want to know ho\r to
deal with it, vhothor or not it is now evidence boforo tho Court or
whotkor I hero to produco it as avid once beforo tho Tribunal. Tho Pro¬
secution interprets it us evidence before tho Court in as uuch an it
is deposition token tho Tribunal's Cctmisslonor.

J-DGD £23X201 Dr. Gvalik, I understand y u have objoctod to tho
Tribunal considering this testimony or tho report of tho Caaiissionor
because now the answers haviag bc-n rccclvod on tho cross inter • ora¬
tories cithor you didn't docc then helpful to tho ccuso of your client
or you doaicd then imat oriel, is that tho point?


l: J-lZ-Zr-Z: :k (wartanbcorg)

Court I


32. Z-^ZZIZ: I consider thee in the present f ere not of probative
value because or, the bjis of the onswors which tho witnesses gave X
consider for the clarification of the facts that further questions aro
noecsorn--. Uaturdly, when I coapssod the questions, that is rmsTb
difficult, I couldn't predict tho cnowers of tho witnesses, and
naturally, cf course, I could only put a certain nuabor of questions.

On the basis of the mowers, X consider thd further quooti nc are nec-
osscry in ordor to clarify the facto and for that reason I ea not sub-
nitting it bccauso in this fora I do not consider it to have probativo
valuo rsii[ 1 ea of tho opinion since they arc questionnaires which uoro
granted to no cn ny request they c-nnot bo oubaitted by tho Procoeutiou
cgninio'. ay will.

JC2C-- SZ3 5I SOi Bint is tho point, doctor, aren’t you in pro-
oiscly tho kuo situation that you would bo in tho caoo of a vitaoso
being reduced hero in tho withoso box for diroct cx^-inution by tho
Prooocutlon and then at the completion of such ordination yeu would trfo
tho witness on cross oxa-imtion, und thon veulf nay that bocauoo of
tho faot ho has givon answers “,n cross oxeniuatlcn, that do net rid
• >y dcso, I ash that tho answers bo stricken, aren't yru in that
situation now? «nd if you are of tho view on tho other hand that tho
.uisworo hnvo no probative valuo, then, so far as your situation is
concerned, you t .rc not prejudiced by tho court considering tho tooti-
nony which has beon or:ught bach horc on crons intorrogatOrios t.hon
by a ca_.iscior.or ‘he is an officer of this 2ribun r l, ^pointed for
that rosy puryoso.

HE. Tour Honor, I dcn ! t think dcfo.-jjc counsel is clear

that this is new in evidence and is before the Tribunal and was before
tho Tribunal n tho 9th of *pril 1947 when tho Caooiooionor gave Ids
report tc the Tribunal. I think that is net clear to -in, end thoco
ore tho ins-ructions X with to have f ren the Tribunal so that I could
continue ny extinction and use these a? evidence obtained before tho


S95C


V


Court I


-I&- 6 -C 0 ' (¥artenbcarg)


Ccrmisa'-.ncr and already in evidence before this Sribund.

Dr, 5.D-XI2: 2c, It is not in evidence. I otill navo it in 4y
hmdi, •'ear Hon:r. I still have the origin;!. I vaat to ash tho
quoaticn of the Court if tho witnosa should be swmoaod hero for
cross oxrr.inntion end I hud put thcce questions to hla, I would have
boon in a position to ash hiu furthor questions end then 2 would have
been cole to outuit to hin transcripts and documents which have already
been submitted hero end I oo convinced on the basis of the Ovidonee \dolch
has boon oufcJittod ao far, the ntuta:o„ta of vitnoaooa and documents,
and traacoo-ipto, tho witncaa would hnvo giver, different toetiaony.

2 ho atatcaonta of the two witnoaaca r.uat bo baaod ca cn error which
aa I nov found out freufccso intorroguti ->no, cmnot bo clarified in
writing end could only bo clarified if tho witncaa would be produced
horc fer cress oxuninutl'n.

2£2 PPJCIDT.-I: Ifcc Tribunal will now bo in roccoa until 1:30


and *.111 announce it'o ruling then.


2h Jure UT^.-.TI-IJ-i-.&rabuck (Int. Brown)
Court I, Case I


. JTT?.?DC‘ r SSSSIOK

(Tte hcarin. reconvened at 1330 h.urs, 2J* Juno li7)

TJ5 : Tho Tribunal is a"ain in a os si on.

TE HESrEJTTs In regard to tho cetter of tho interrogatories un dor
discussion bofero the neon recess, thoso intorro:atcrios rcro propounded
by Jofonso consol by ray A cross examination of cor tain T.*itnossos
whoso writton statements wore offered by tho -rosocuticn and receive;! in
evidence by tho Tribunal. Thoso intorrof atorios be in , as I sal , by
way of cross examination - intorrojat-rios an:’, tho answers thoroto a
.crt of the ori inal statements or affidavits which were rocoivod in
evi:!onco an! aro thoroforo now admissible boforo the Tribunal ever tho
objection on tho part of '!ofon!ants who prop?undo! tho intorro;;atorios,
Tho Tribunal would, tevovor, in vitwr of all tho circumstances, ’iroot
that they singly bo msfcorod and filed on.’, rocoivo! in ovidonoo as docu-
rtor.ts in tho enso, of ccurso subject to portinonfc portions thoroof
which aro dooood of inportanco boir. road in tho re cor

DofenAanta have a ri-ht, In view of this rulin', to apply to tho
Court to eirsjon thoso witnesses boforo tho Tribunal or to propound
othor writton lntorropatorios tc thoso wltnossos if the anstvors any
bo tnkon and procurod boforo tho closo of tho ovidonoo. An application
i3 a !o to suxTxr. th- :rltnossos the Tribunal will consider it, but it
has not boon thi practico of tto Tribunal to direct that vritnoacos
fra; foroi:n ceuntrios bo brou ;ht hare, duo to passport and other
Ifficultios an ’ also duo to tho lack of juris ’Action on tho art of
tho Tribunal to roquiro tho presonco of a ritnoss rosi ’in_ in a foroifjn
country*. Thoso qiostions and answers then will bo filed as documents
and nay bo receives! ir. evidence C3 a part of tho exhibit which is


alroa y in-ovHoac-s.


71V


4 .


i.dont, 2 horoby apply that the wltnossos —

Lofe?ar.lG an.’ JcbanVP^etor Schackor bo called as witnesses. But sinco

l~.i * ■ .i .

this trial is a,,proochXdj its on’ I rake this application lone ’lately.


*


9952


2h Juno ii7—— TD-I3«*2~}tinabuck (int. Brown)
Court I, Caso I


THZ rHESHEHT: Ccunscl rust propose the usual written application.
It .dll bo ccnsilorol by the Tribunal end passod on promptly.

".XTITllR ®72K - Rosur-ed
CIDSS ZX*d«I!l.TION (Continue d)

BY JR. HARDYi

q Dr. Ifcvon, did you at any tino over participate in tho oxp-ri-
nonts at Block U6?

A V>o»

q Dc ycu contend that the testimony of LouverJen is erroneous?

A That I cannot judeo, whether it is orrono.us cr whothor it is
perjury. I think thoro is confusion, that ho has confused no with
scncono olso horo, because it is perfectly clear that if this is an
oxporlnont involvin. 120 persons it wcul ’ bo state 1 in tho dcry,
thjroforo it is cloar that I 1' net carry out tho oxr oriuont, I !onit
un’orstan '. nothin- about it and I noror carrie.! out weporiaanta.
q LouvarIon, however, says that ycu injected hin. Do ycu dory

that?

A Ropent ycur question ploaao?

q Louverden, hovuvor, statos that you injoctc! hiu in tho cour3o
of an ccQcrinoDt at Block Ii6.

A That Is irpos3iblo, bocauso I never did that.

Q Did you avor witness tho oxocution of Russian co rlssars by
shoo tint:?

A Or.co.

q fhon was that?

I can*t toll you the exact dato. I was s.nt ttero on rders of
the ill oral canp nnna^xnant and tho foreign political prisoners co::dttoo
to obsorvu the activity of Kushrareff.

q How nony Russian caiiissr.rs w„ro killed cn that occasion?

’ I cannot tell ycu that bocauso I loft alrr.st i-nadiatdy bocauso
■it turned fcy stoaach.


9953


21i Juixi U7-»>..E>-l>-3-:iaeiwclc (Ir.i. Brown)
Cxirt I, Casa 1


Q Vhz els a wa3 thoro?

A 2c r -b-rs of tho Kouaandantur staff. Her* nany thera varo and rto
I oann-t say.

0 ’(ban 1 '’ this happen?

A I can't toll you the date.

Q "boro did it hnppon?

A In a so-callod stable*

Q -.ha Hd tho Jdllinf?

A I'orfcors of tho Xoaian’antur staff,

q That ao *ical officer was . rcsont otter than you?

A I cann-t toll y n vhethor ry bess was orcsont or not.

Q TJho pron.uncod thoa load?

A I tol ’ you, ri-_ht after It starto d I loft, bucauao tho si-;ht
tumod ry stanach. I therefore di i-t carry out any no ’leal activitios
thoro.

Q ’ ordered tte oxocution?

A I assuno that Kieil^r 1', tho Gestapo,

Q How ’o yxu know that?

A I bn*t know it. I Just sail I osouix that.

T Dr. H^von, at any occasion \irirv tho courso cf your tiiio at
tho Buchonwal & ncontration ca.-rp, i' you roquust that a ■ risonor's
hoad bo placed on your 'oak?

A Ho, rover.


21. J ur— -A-FIr-14— i-Gros s (Ir.t. Broca.)
Court lb. I, Case I


C.- auvr did that?

A.- So.

You know a. em nnaied Jo3of Ackcramn?

A.- Y-3.

e.- Who r.s Josef Ackerscrr.?

A.- A political prisoner. I don't knon what p-rty 1* bclong-ci to.
I accoanodrtod hia ir. th. pathological departo-nt. He was orv. of tho
prisoners /ho did not take an active pert in tho fight against the SS
but who was b-ir.;. i.vip- d b7 a*-, the illegal crap a'nage-.ent, and the
politic-1 prisoners co.naittee. &, was to be Sent away on a transport
suv-r-1 ti.oca. The illeg L canp .aanage* nt wanted hia rescued and I
helped do so.

i.- Did you ever ooint o«t -n innate i lkin; -cross tho Map ^-rd
to Ackvraann and Ull hia that you w-tiled th-t nan kill-d?

A.- No, IViVer.

Ut us look at Docua-nt 10-2631. This nill be offered r.s ?ro-
Secuti n d-hlbit 522 f-r identlficatl .-n, your Honor, This is an.-ffi-
c! vit by J.Se 1 Acvr-rnn. I cant y u to turn to paragraph No. 2 nd in
r-T-rr ?h N . 2 -.TO _ o down to the 4th sentence beginning with th. ./ort's
"During the L~st >-ra...- and affidavit reads as 1 11 I qu te:
"During the last years ly super! ai • phys: Dr. i-.r

H VeR. ivory c-.rocc of r prisoner w.-s brought into the aortaary of the

a

pathologic -1 Swceion. I had also to compose the o>-.c-Ued p>ot- rt~.a
find!ns on thooo prls-ners ho m.re shot on escape, which finding
n-re distributed Li nua.r;-us copies, anong thers also to the Sfo-Court
in DusSvLdori."

ICoi; we -..ill turn to the next page - page 3 and on page 3 of tho
English, we will iind m page 2 of the Gcr.-e.an - th- l-st sentence on
p-fe 2 of th* Gcrrrr., which is the s-r.t-nce beginning Just about the
'.idc'le of page 3 of the owlish, abov- Li>- •. ords in parenthe»o8 (p.a*> 3
- -rigir.al) ..o s-nt-iic. beginning n lr. Kovtn stood mce..." D: you


9955


24 Jujx—A-FI rl4-2-Gr:3a (ir.t. 3 r o«n)

Court >‘o. I, Cas- I

hevc tfcnfc?

a.- res.

And I t'-ot*. th-refraa: Dr. :: -Ven stood or.ce together vlth ie
at fchfc window of the pathological section and p-inted to - orla nor,
n^t kr. :.n to ac who cr-s&J the place where the roll calls wore held.

Dr. Hovon told e: I want to see the skull of thio prisoner on :y witinc
A-ak until tsvurro. cvenins. The prisoner was ordered to report to tbo
fludicnl soctien, alter thu physician had n:Ud down th- nn*.r of the
prisoner; the c arpso rod on tb> sack day to th- dissection r

The p.3t-.aorUa exenination showed that thu pris,n«r h-d been kilL-d
by injections. The ckull was prepared ns ordered -r.d delivered t» Jr.
Haven."

Do you ’onsi anything “bout that dxrt r?

A.- This is the biggest lie I ever saw in ny whole life.

r ..- You c' n»t kn.> anything about that?

A.- First U, Ur . Hr rdy, there ucs never a okuLI a ay deck.

1 never interested -uy*ell ir. the pa th. logic-1 section. Th-Te was a.

- ct.r tr-re frvr. ^rlin by the naae A itiller, *nd b-f .re hi
L.vc. Moreover I only vicit>d *iOe the pathological section. Achenaann
usually stood at tie door, us~d t: grout x, and thank rae for nrving
political prisonerc and such thirds. 3ut, n-ver ir. ny liJe did 1 hr.vo
n prio ner killed .and acquire his skuU. I rsn't int-rustet! in skullo.
Thic is an ur-nist-kable lie.

Q.- I-a the .-ucherwnld C-r.Cer.tratlo.n Caop u-r- pris nerc beaten,
that is, gi-ror Lash.s?

A.- Yes.

r <.- .‘.-c it r.ec-ss'ry for a n_dicrl ifficur to approve th- beatir.
of a prisoner?

A.- Th-re <cs an -rd-r t that effect, n&aoly, that a ot r should
b-- present arc. th$t the d ct r should uxanine the prisoner bo: .r- hand#


9956


2L Juno-A-FL-lA-3-Gr oss (Int. 5r-»«r.)
Court S3. I, Case I


However, this orc^r was never absolved by ay predecessors. I nr.s the first
doctor to rcouir- that the prisoners who were beaten should first be
p hysically chained. Together with representatives of the political
?rie tiers j did everything «e could to suporcss these penalties - to o so
bi-tings. An C th„ decision as to whether a ~ n was in good enough con¬
dition to be beaten, was not reached by ae but by prisoner nurses .-ncl
the trustees of the illegal crap oocnittoe. he did everything we could
to see to it tnr.t no foreign or Gcraan political prisoners were beaten.
That wrs our gn-atest sucoess.

Q.- '.fell then suppose c professional crioin*'l was involved. fould
you npprove the beating .i a political c ri-ainal?

A.- I nca against those beatings but we couldn't ch:ng- orders
froa Hianler.T.vat was iapos&ibL.. Hie only wry you could iv-lp was to
try to keep as vany boatings .as possible froa talcing pL-Ce but if I
had refused to be present or if 1 had sinply asserted that no >riaoners
c.uld be beaten, then I w.uld have been replaced or penalized ant! tho
cinaequencen of that would h-ve been that all prisoners vh.< wer, t.. bo
beaten would have b—r. beaten .tkS in that case there w uld have been
no opportunity tv help the prit c.erc.

c.- ell, before c nan was beaten or bcfxe approval was granted
for hia to be beaten, wasn't it necessary th“t the flo ging be onro-
ved by the -.edical officer?

A.- I just told you that was not dccie^before my time. 1 was the
first to introduce that - the prisoners told n. such an order did uxist
and I went ayself to th. SS and insisted th*t we sh.iild be all *..d to
Se a thu priSe.-wra b-f r. they were be'ten nd to be sure that tl in¬
terests of the prison.rs were being represented the iileg-1 c~op .i"n-a-
ge-nent sent its reorosotttatives to ne. Th-y aade the &el-cli saw to
it that to. orison-rs ter- sent t the h.soit"l, etc.

Q.- ...11 ix.ru is - djeua-nt. It is Docaoent JO-2313, your Hon-r,

9957


24 Jau.-A-FL-14-a-Crose (Ir.i. Bream)

Court Ho. I, Case I

which I of for as Prosecution Inhibit 523 for identification, which cp-
ncrcntly, Dr. Hoven is the slip necessary to be filled out and tho
approvals marked t/.oreon before a prisoner can be beater.. How, I want
to pr-sa t.:ia up to you and see if you can identify on the reverse sido
the signature of tho medical hnuptstur.ifuohrtr. '.hose naze is that
t here?

A.- 'Jr. Place.

Q.- Hon do you spell that?

A.- P-l-a-a-a-.

Q.- -a ho your assistant, ct t at time?

a.- Ho was a caap doctor. Tea.

C.- oil, nas he your assistant?

A.- I ct. 't sc 7 assistv.t. He was a c(*.op doctor. Ho win subordinate
to as.

C,.- Yas. ell non you turn to the front prgo and you »ill notice
this parser. was a Polio., worker, considered a shirker -nd ho Luft i.is
Libor squad without peroission and was found later smokin' Jr. r hall.

And that an -ago 3 of tho translation, your Honor, wo note that before
»*ny prisor.or can be punished th.. medical opinion cuat bo giver. -nC
in this caso Dr. Plr.st h's stated, quoting from the docunont* "Tho
culprit, nfjaod on the rcvcrcu side, was roodicilly examined by % bc-
foro the execution of the flogging. I oo not have ~ny objection?
against tho application of flogging from the medical point of view."

And then tho ot: er statement is "I, as c physician, either raise
objections against the flogging - and gives the reason, or does not
r-ise and crosses out the word "rait~". .oil, was that the use 1 oro-
c-.dur- in every case of flogging?

A.- This what I first insisted on - that prisoners be brou ht
before ae. Previously the practice was that tho orders coat iren erlin
and the -an -ras flogged. The medic.*! certificate was Just road, was


9553 •


24 Junt-A-FL-L -O-Groas (Ir.t. Brown)

Court to. I, Case f

nuvi-T previously peid any attention to. This certificate want to Berlin
rs.d cos; back signed and tb_ prisoner f l^ggod n nd then nft-r ;x ids
flagged it was put to .ay predecessor then his doctor and sionod cost
facto and I was the first one to object to that proccdur-.

C..- How many of such floggings did you sign? Did you sign aiany each
wo-k -nd allow /loggings ta go on because the person was physically
able to end u*c tho flogging?

A.- Hr. Kardy, I didn't Judge according to th* state of health of
r. person. I didn't rerlly exvaine hia at all. '..bat we did was everything
we could whether healthy or not. .c were fundamentally against the >rac-
tico of 1 lof/rir/. and ell political prisoners, including the forei.ncrs,
wore sav.d by us so far ns possible from the flogging. I can't ivo
you the exact >.rce. t* o any more but I lnow we did savo soa.. It -Vsn't
ell. If I would vavo tried to save everyone 1 would h-vc beer. fired
and pone 11 sod and the irisoners would have bad no recourso. If tide .-r.n
here w.-a really flowed in Sept..aber 1942 I can only explain it by tho
fact I wasn't present at that time and Plaza didn't consult v, in the
.natter of «dic l examination for this prisoner. As I have -Ire..-/ or,id
I did whatever I could whunever I could, rrusely k.pt co many as possible
iroa being ilctge , making no difference, whether Cerxn or foreign.


& JunoJP-15-l-Sarro* (1st. Brown)

Court I

W. Would It nako a difference if ho was a political prisoner or
a erininol prisoner?

toll, if ho 3as er. out-and-cut inforoor vhor. *o know of, then
1 had no objections - none at oil - to tho can's being flogged. Ho
dosor7cd it.

C,, noli, did you know tho nano of tho non who was on that parti¬
cular slip thorct KIsilictka?

A. !>c, I didn't know hin.

Q. bid you know o can nonod Moldollok, Sj-nst W 0 I D. E L L S K ?

A. So, I can't roaoabor that I did know hin.

».. Was that can a notorious crin nol in tho oa-^p?

A. Could you ploose spoil tho nano again?

Q. a 0 I D B L l E K.

A. I can't rosoebor tho nor», at tho accent.

W. V.oll, I note that you a-provod that ho bo givon tn onty-fivo
lashos. Ho is a professional crininol. Bcoouso ho trlod to osoapo ono
day free a labor squad and did escape and was oopturod a fow days lutor.
*nd you orprovod that ho bo givon twenty-fivo lashos. Sow, that is
Dooucont SO 2312, whioh is narked Frosooutlon Exhibit Tor identi¬
fication. How, on tho rovorso sido of that doo'xiont, is that your si¬
gnature, Dr. Ho von?

A. Yos.

<*. Toll us about thet oaso.

A. Haw con 1 do that. I don't know this ooso at all. 1 told you
that 1 loft this up to tho agents ond liaison non of tho foreign end
Cknan prisoners ond thuwo i»n did whatever they oould .

<i. Then you a pprovod of booting a an - giving hin twenty-five
lashos - without having oxa-inod hin yourself and then certified that
you did find hie physioally fit to bo floggodl

A. I told vou that tho nurses and those egonts of tho political
rosistenco wovwponts did this on ay ordors. That r os nuoh bettor
than if I hrd done it rr/solf because in tho first piece, the so wore
all cooradus and, secondly, they were actually -or- intorest-a in this


9960


. V
*:


2u June-A-vT-15-2“tarrow (Int, brown)
Court I


than I wr.s and, thirdly, thoy kr.otr their cofoWjbttor than 2 did.

If for inatanco toe blw*a were ordorod and thoy nanaged to reduce it
by six, then thoy did so, I couldn't take oero of overythinr in tho
whole conp. It wasn't a Sunday sohool. But, it is also pessiblo und
t-‘is did hoopoe, that prisoners wfco wore caught while escaping v;oro to
bo shot and thon, through tho work of the illegal resistanoo groups
ond through having coneootions with tho adninistritivo hoed of tho
protootivo oustody oarp, it was possible to ooonuto that sontenoo to
a flogging end I ocn toll you that tho prisor.or was very glad for tho
ooatnutation, aoroover, wo hr.d cn illogal troosury Cror which various
offioials wore bribed,

• "v »• •

THS FttS31l-2.ITi nil! tho Counsel pass to t'.o Tribunal tho originul
of Frosceution Identification Exhibit 523T

-H. H-RDYi I be bonding up for t::o Judgos' porusal also, Exhibit

53U,

dY JVDC3 SE3RlF0i


witness, I shall hcvu landed to you Cooununt '/ VO 2313, whioh
h s boon nv-rkod for idunt.fioot on ro Irosooution Abuttal -xhblt 52 J,
nr.d I diroot your attention to tho fact that on tho front el? 0 of tho
doounont, at tho top, nro oortoir. ponoll notus, »ill jrov ploaso
oxerino these notos and stato, if you knerr, in vhoso handwriting thoy
apnocr and stato, if you oon rood tho note, what tho noto sayst

«, I oon try to oxplain it. Your honors, although I 00 nrot say
for oortcir., I assure that this is "III" whioh is nt tho top in tho
niddlo - 1 think that nust aoan "Dopertsont III. That was tho od
ninlstrotivo hood of tho protootivo oustody oawp. Mis offioo.

S, Vi ho was in oharw of that olficol

a. That wrs tho first cdslnistrctivc hood cf the protootivo ous¬
tody oor.p. At this ti-o that wr-s I think Stursfecnnfuohror 3ohobort -
SCH03SRT.

k, hall thon, I diroot your ettontior. to tho handwritten note
whioh ooncars or. tho frcr.t of th-t irstruaent, to tho loft of tho red


95 ^


2k donoJP-15-5-ir.rrcw (lat. -rcrsr.)

Court I

rcnciilcd r; rkings "III", rad ask you, if you w ill rood thr.t.

I can ilo only the nusbors "17-9-2”.

Q, uould th-t r.ot indicate to you 17 Sentasier 1942?

A. Yos, thru's tfco way I should coastruo that,

<». Hewr, what olsc is in that pencil notation?

Thoro is o Semen Gothic script “V", Then there is a Oormcn
"ft" 2 nd on "3" ir. Gothio soript, and c "b" end an "C".

Q . C-n you any wh-t thr.t steads for?

a. No, Your Honors, I do not know wh~t thr.t aoans.

Q, On tho English trensl'tion of thr.t docuaont whioh has beon
supplied to tho tribunal, at the hoed of tho doouoont, appears tho
words "diad - D I E L - 17 Sopturfcor 19U2". Coca anything of thr.t
sort ©■* oar on tho front page at the top of thrt docuaont?

A. So far as I oar. read horo, I sjo, as I soy, a snail "v" end
e saoll "r" ond a sncll "s", Thon a capital "3" and an "L". Thr.t*s
oil 1 SCO.

Q. '/cry Wall, thrnk you.

.

..IT 2>3(Interrupting) All of thoso lottors ore in Gothio ooript.

JUt<8 SsBHXHOt Vr. .lardy, I diroot your attention to the English
translation of Doouaent NO 2513*

*R. H.JJ/Ti Yea, Your Honor.

JUDGE SEel.IKGi Do you note, at tho top, the words "Liod 17
5cptoebor ici*2 "?

!?.. H.--AY« Yos, Your Honor.

J L3S SS&tlFGs fcharc did that oooo front

DR. HaUJY* I irx,rir.o it erw fren the oortifio-to of translation
- the translator, .rank ... Young. 1 was about to telco linn on tho
point boforo you took it up with tho do fcadent. Duo to tho applanations
ro*., it won't bo nocossary for no to do so.

JUDGE SS2LIKG* T ks issuo wit!, when?

• a. Hur-Ei: Tilth tho dofendant on t: o notation.


9962


2t* Juno-A-Jr-15-Eorrow (Int, 3rcwr.)
Court I


0-.n I r sic tho interpreters to nr.lee en cttosfct to decipher tho
Screen words on the top of this document?

7i2 PH25113HTt You any.

!fi. HkfiCTi Thoro's ~ handnritton notr.tior..

IKTZBP&STZBi These could be. the letters "v r s t r fc" with a
period which would be n possiblo ebbrovirtior for the Gorann word
"vorstorbon" which Dorns diod.


S963


24 Jur*J-A-FL-l£—1- a ioy (int. Brown)

Court Ho. I, Cose I

C,.- Do /ou knew whether or rot tills prisoner Kisilicakn di-d af¬
ter these beatings, Doctor?

A.- Bo, I don't icnow tho nr.no. I only know that there was strict
prohibition for tho prisoners, provision against the oris on-n: beia,;
olLwed to be taker. into the hospital after the beatings, Howev.r,

I always did so -yrsolf.

Kow sever* were tlx. beatings?

A.- .hat do you o^an by xvero?

Q.- .11, could tun Lashes bo sufficient to contribute to the
cause of death of one oi thase ini-.tos?

A.- I shouldn't think so.

Q.- How about trienty-fiw?

a.- That I c-nnot tell you. I have already told you all I toon
ebout this.

0.- Did they got hospital treat~-nt . ft-r twenty-five lashes?

A.- Th-t s l rbiddon. But whenever I xrsonally could I did take
tho prisonerc Lnto the hospital, if th-y needed care. Thrt is a well
toovm feet.

C t .- Did r >erson usually get care alter twenty-five 1-oheB?

A.- Certainly.

r ' •" h't did you h ve to do. Doctor, >lth the obstruction of
3Ixk 50, did you hrv- anything to do with that?

Yes, I was the deputy in Block 50.

Did you h vo anything to do with the construction?

A.- I was Imprisoned btfon then, but I recruited '11 tho uorlars
th.re, incled,in, foreign scientists, *nd :U the prisoners -ho *ro in
d-r. er. I didn't go ;o Block 50 on ay own initiative, but on tho expli¬
cit wishes of the political r.sisL-nce ca.op acnagcauit.

r ..- Did you conduct the business n.cossery lor the construction and
furnishing of oquipsa-nt for Block 50?

99(4


24 JunB-A-FI/46-2-- lay (Int. Broun)

Court So. I, Caao I

Ha, the £S canp addnistr-tion did that, but thj rooas in
3iock 50 uerc excellent. 7hoy were fised up with illegal work * 1003 ,
and so forth, but that is very difficult to explain now. All the roups
uorJt-d h- na in h a with each other.

Q.- Did jou ovor have any d.-Lings vith, for instance, tho Chief
of tho Construction 5ure=u of tho affon-SS and oolice cone rrdn; tho
building of Hock 50?

A.- liost of tho tino Dr. Ding was there, but I was hia to >uty, for
tho reason I Ivv« already given you, n-nd" I took the Job for tho
s?ko of the illo -.1 casp acnagto-nt and thj resistance .aove.aonts, Tho
important thin; was that we should safeguard tho prisoners and that ia.a
17 point of View, 'nt that was why I was there.

$•" 1 h™ 0 ‘ docuaint hero which is Dociraant !D-19U, which is
offure. 1 rs ?ros„citicn Exhibit L25 for identification; you will noto
h..ro in this eoc .x-nt several letters dealin. with the equipnent ivied
in 9Lock 50 th_ 'urnishings of Block 50, rnd the general construction
of 3iock 50, are in :oat instances it ia referred to you. Mo note co
?cgo 3 that the l.ttor is addressed to you; on page /, you wore .rentionert
in thet letter; r.- , Just what was your capacity concerning the cor.o-
truction of 31«k50, and tte quipping or tlx furnishing of it?

A.- 1 h-vu clrv.ccy told you I was the toputy. I usually left this
up to the iriso.-^ra there, busying .ayrelf with it personally *s littlo
-s possible.

Q.- Thu prisoners weren't building Block 50, were they, th-.t wro
on orders froa 3 run that the SS build it? Do vou a».an the prisoners
“•-re -ngr?.e<' ir. tho ccntruction ol 3lock 50 and in the production of
typhus vaccine are not th- hygienists of the SS?

A.- You -lisun:erstood a.. Hr. Hardy, lot as UU you that I have
iade efforts to be Ding's deputy in Bloch 50 in order to be able to help
the ill err 1 c_:i :rn eOent. The re-son for this was to save en cankered


9965


2 L Junc-A-FL-l6-3-ii:Io/ (Ir.t. a*own)

Cawfc Ho. I, Case I


prison-rs and arc.air._nt foreign politicians by taking them to 31ock 50
ns workers. That tills was done you know. Th t if in the course of this
work I did sex, e&slnistrctivo work thet is quite wder stand able. I was
advised in ell this by the prisoners. He. received suggestions. There ur.s
the Jewish ea inccr who wes .xntior.ee ir-edy xvor.-.l tisxs, iinx HoeCi«-
ster. I let his take care of this, because I kr._n auch too little about
it.

i*..- You have Document HO- 265 , the Ding dicry be for- you. Dr. Haven?

A.- >«lt page?

Q.- This - ill be page 39 of th. anglish under th. date 17 Jl-rch
1?42, concerning the visit of Professor Ros- wnd Professor Gild-xister
to Buch-rernld?

A.- I have it. I h vo it.

Nan, *.’e note th't in that entry that Dr. Ding w o sick with
spotted fever and Mas in the hospit l in 3erlir., is thnt corr-ct?

A.- Tlrt is '<hat it says here.

Q.- ho conducted Professor Gildoaeistur and Professor Rosj .around
during their visit?

I didn't., I assuae it was one of our doctors, 1 didn't do it
oirsply because I could give these gentian no inferaation about '.'tat
th-y wanted to know, because I understood nothing about it. As a doctor
I didn't went to lay <y»ulf open in that ay. Ify profussion-l reputa¬
tion i.ould have suffered. Ky reason was only this, so I cssucu cone
other doctor took thea around. Professor Gildexister cane ar urn' Several
tlr«a.

Q.- Dell, ns , the entry Just above thnt indicates that persons woru
infected with virus and that an expjrix,ntnl series was in orogross on
th. 3rd of March, and it says: "I didn't cto the results >f th't first
expert. xr.tal s-nes until 19 liarch. Kon, *.h-r. Dr. Ding was in ti e hos¬
pital at Berlin, tix -ntry 17 Ibrch st’t-s that you txre th- supervisor
ouring his rh s.r.co; now, isn't it true froa those entries that those

9966


24 Jua--A-FIy-I£—4—' 1-J.oy (Inti Srown)
C:urt lioi I, Cna- I


w.p.ri v^nts ore uaiorjry >hxb- you n_ro it. nasi cion A sepcmaor
damns the .-isc.xo oi Dr. Ding?

A.- Ko, h. l-’d Ire.-cy indoctrinate' his pooolo, pr.rticai.-rl~ tho
c->3 Diotzach. I —' dr.'t Lnr* -nythin^ - -out this, cjn*jc,u.ntly I e&.'V

r. jt orke the arr-j^oaents , -nd Ding, oi c.urse, ljicw th-.t,

uro 70 a or-a-nt on th- occo.aion th-t th» im-t-s wore im-ccod
sith lice, that it tho d-y the lice in the c-£ws w«ro tied to tlv. thighs
oi thu ina-tea ir. 31ock 46, ao na to ini.ee th-a with the lice oi Che

s. c xid sfcifxuntj dc you ao. thet inluction?

A.- I '.a : 1 c - ia nher. I via in th. hoapitrl.
r ..- “in Ly ’ff' r -j q: ostion, did you ace the infection, tit; you
the x r. sittciv. ar st-nding or vh-tever ooaition they Mere in .jith
= ccgo str-ppu: to ch.ir thighc with Ucc th.r-in, -nd thereby cruai.v,
infliction, die yoi; aoe th-.t?

A.- Thw sitting on ch- Lth 0 ->t atr-.po„d to t hair thighs
-^d X ar.v it. i a th-iw. I a 0 virgin there in order to n.-.vu the
politic/-! ure- r who «rc -jonj the c.Owrf .-nt 1 aubjtcts.

Q.- o., or- • inflicted by tbu SS P-Uc- Court r.ftcr your ri .at?

A.- Yuc.

f..- . > r y>j c.rvud ith nn indictxnt?

A.- : t . .. Gestapo rnd I r .c.

•5-.Ter.

erj ay c.-.cries v.v-r re-.d off to you?

•- Not ruai' t no, No ch-r#._a u.r- r.rd to n<_. I told nn one0
in th- interrogation t.Vt I got this rvd sUo of >cp-r, -nd I h-vu -.loo
. Ld you whet too oct-natolx. n--.s^ns ver. that th-y h-d to out <, or.
*rir.l, n-wly the Id. '-ling oi thu throe —

Lot*a 3 o to th.s_ other thinys first. You -er. -rr.su * in S.'-


t-nber 1943, is thet corr-ct?
A.- 12 Soot-obcr.


9967


24 Jur^-A-r ic—5— >.L :y (Ir.t, 3rcwn)
C>urt Ko« I, Cr.s~ I


Did jvj. -v-r £,o to trinl.

A.- ?-&.
h^a?

A.- On- :'~'r

bun ttG8 ;*3ur tritl, in thv list rt.cn our?

*'•- .Vo, uarliur, th~ beginning •>! Sotci.r 1944.

Q.- Aw* t ...n you n-rc sentenced ns c result A that trirl?


2h Jun-A-?3—17—1-I'aehan (Ir.t. 3rcwti)
Court I.


A No, I wasn't. The tr ia l was squashed, they were going to
put re on trial on political charges and then I was sent to Buchan-
mid as a prisoror.

"* Haro you over seen the results of your trial, that is tho
report written by tho judges, I suppose; yo xr trial that n:.s hold
in Septenbor of 19U:?

A I never saw it, but the reports that wore written about a
Gestapo and SS trial were written up in whatever way they pleased.

Q l.ho tried you; what court?

A Tho Highest SS and Police Court.

Q Who as tho Judge?

A I don't know his nano.

Q You nontionod Konrad Norgan; what did lk >rgen have to do
with it?

A Ho was tho Prosocutor. That was a wonderful picco of co-
oporation thoy had in thi SS, tho pro-trial Judge al3o boc-vio tho
Prosecutor.

Q "toll, th-n, Dr. .Sorgon m.s • the Judge actually; wasn't Ik?

A No, ho was the fro3ocutor.

Q I have horo a Docvoent No. 23o6, Dr. Hovon, that I want you
to look at. This will bo offered for identification. This, Your
Honor, is n voluminous indie taunt in the cr.se of SS Stand-.rtcnfuahrcr
Koch vs. Dr. Hovon. I an only going to refer to a few excerpts fron
It. Tho reproduction cf the Genian is rather difficult. I have only
oik copy for dofonse counsel, tlu photostat and tliu English oxcurpts
will be very brief.

Tit* PRESIDENT: Couns-l, what is tho purpose, what is the
evidentiary value of this docurunt?

IP.. HARDY: The docoxnt lists everything that Dr. Hov n did
*hilc ho was at Bucheinwald, ,as chargod by tho SS.

JUDGE SSBRI.’G: Yes, but did not the nan say he was accuitod
ard was not tried?

7569


2 U •un-A-43-17-2-£eehin (Ir.t. Drown)

Court So.


"• HARDYs That is not what these reoords boar out. Tour
Honor. To ccccnpsny this. Dr. Hoven, I here another djeusont Ho.

2330, which is offered as Prosecution Exhibit So. 536 f_~ identifica¬
tion, No, 52?, pardon no.

DH. OmiKi I object to this docusant, to document So. 2366.
I question tto probative value of this since it originates from tic
Gestapo, an organization which in tho verdict of the I.H.T. was do-
clarod a criminal organisation. Tho Prosecution would have to first
prove that this organization and the report that was drawn up by tho
officers of this organization aro credible persons who can bo beliovcd.
It nunt also prove that no criminal goals wore being porusod in this
docunent and in this trial of Dr. Hoven. 1 have tried to show in tho
conduct of uy defenao that Hinder through tho Gestapo was trying to
oxtominato tho political prisoners in the concentration cnnpc aid
everything that was opposod to this goal of his was conbattcd by Him-
ior and the Gestapo by every Joans at their disposal. That is tho
ccntonto of this docurcnt and I cannot ceo what purpose tho Prosecu¬
tion is persuing unless It is going to alino tic Gestapo or. tho sido
cf tho Prosecution. I see noitlcr tho purpose of the probative vnluo
of this docuuont.

TH~ FRESIDENTi Cf course an indictnont itself ic no proof
of anything, but the proceedings which follow tho indictnont aight bo
of probative value. In -any event, tho natter of probative valve of
'•ny doc ire nt present in evidence uay bo argued and will be finally
dote mixed by tho Tribunal -and if it has no probative value it till
bo disregarded.

DR. ajfLIK: But, this is an indictnont. Tour Honor, you
have just said that the probative vHluo must bo decided by tho Tribunal.

7 ®ESID3KTx It uay bo part of sere subsequent proceed¬
ings, which is not indicated, in any event it is not offered in evid-
' :ncc » but ccroly narked for identification.

JIDGE SZBBJUGi Or. Hardy, is it ycur purpose to prove that


9970


2h Jun-A-!&-17-3-Sfeahan (Inti Brown)
Court !*o. I.


based uper. ttoir indictment this docirxnt is sono final judgment of
soac court of jurisdiction?

MR. HAHDTx The defondant stated that because cf souo in¬
quiry on the part of Konrad Morgen, SS Judge and SS Hauptstisxfuohror,
ho was then dismissed end sent to the concentration crop for politic~l
reasons. I don't soo any indication of that in tho ropert sigrod by
Dr. i-argon, SS Judgo of tho rosorvw Ifargon imposed on Koch and I want
to have Dr. Hoven oxplain his statenants as opposed to tho states ants
contained in those documnts rod oxplain seno of th: reasons for tho
accusations made in these deevrunts.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel aey proceed.

BY MR. KARDYi

Q Dr. Hoven, taking tho voluminous photostatic copy of the
alleged indictiiontj will you turn to pago 51 of that report?

A There Is no pagination in this document that I can sow.

Q I think there is tho pagination ir. tho upper right hand

cor nor.

A Oh, yes, I soc, 51.

Q Xos, 51.

Now, you will no to on page 5l tho paragraph co rooming your
activitos rod in that paragraph is a statorxnt: "Besides Hoven had
a bad conscioroo bocauso of the executions ho directly imposed upon
Aceh for carrying then out;" That dees tho investigator moan by that
statement?

A I hr.vo already told you that tho Gostapo ard Dr. !iergon car¬
ried in tho indieti.ront anything they wanted to. 1 was Koch's greatest
opporont, that was known throughout 3uchcranld. Koch hated :xi fer¬
vently because he could not prove anything regarding my political
activities against tho SS. For this reason ho chargod no with thoso
killings, tho killings of Froudoasum and Joy I nontionod before who
were known as Jew slaughters. Bocauso I would not give hie th. names
cf tl *2 prisoners who had actually do no tho killings, bo charged ixj with

9971


2U Juiv-»i-4B-17-U-Moohan (Ins. 3rown)
Court Kc. I.


it in tim course cf the proceedings Against rva in the pre-trial pro¬
ceedings. I can give you the exact date for this, I shell always
rcrcr.ber it, 23 December, 19U3, •-i'ter on oir attack on Frankfurt on
the Main in the presence cf his secretary.

Q Lot us bw aero brief.

A I cr. just getting to the aain point.

Q J\ata mount.....

TiC HISSJD2NT: Please allow tho witness to finish his
ansr-or. Tho witness cay continue his answer.

BY HARDYJ

Q Continue, witness, but let uc repeat ay question and lot
your answer bo bri-fj did you iapeso on Koch to carry out executions?
That simply can be answered with "yes" or "no".

A I was going to continue what I had to say and then I would
answer you right sway.

This oTuning, in tho presence of hie s.cretary whom I .wt in
tho courso of tho interrogation, Dr. : ergon said ho found out frc*n a
phono coll that his house in Frankfurt had boon boebed by tho Ai.-crican
Air Forco. Then, ha came back into tho roco in an enraged state,
shouted at me and said, I don't know what curees ho used against uo,
but ho said, if you killed the African swines for that you would do-
servo nothing but God's thanks, however, in tho meantime if ten polit¬
ical prisoners are killed that is sccething no might talk about be¬
cause they were the worst enemies of the Sb. He said, "You killed
political prisoners, "and that it was none of say business." He was to
excited and inconsistent in what he was saying, my confidence was
shaken ccopletoly. I can only bring this up now, because this man is
saying now he worked for the welfare of the prisoners, however, as
Higgler's personal deputy he sickly furthered the extermination plan
which Kinder outlined'for the concentration can«, however, the ex¬
terminations wore not meant for informers or professional criminals but
for Jews and political prisoners.


9972


2li Ju n-A-J 3-17- 2 -Jfee han (Int. 3rcwn)
Court Ho. I.


Sow, to answer your question directly, I never directly imposed
on Koch.

Q It is not nocessary for you to go on to such an extonsivo
length to mswar ay question when it is as 3iaple as that. Doctor.

How, on page 67, wo note a reference nade to Schaufeieeier; did you
knew: Schaufelaeier?

A This is a killing with which Dr. 1'argon charged as also.

Q Did you know Schaufelaeier?

A I cannot re eerier hio, I had nothing to do with hin.

Q Did you knew Titz?

A I boliove that was a nan who worked under Koch, if I roo;n-
bor correctly; is that so?

Q I an asking you, Dootor?

A I think ho was an orderly whs worked for Koch, I do not
know for sure, but if you will toll no I will know if I an right.

Q Did you participate in the nurdor of Titz?

A If this is the Titz I an thinking of, rho was a servant of
Koch, thon I can toll you he is still alive. I saw hia by accidont
on tho day when I res taken prisoner. Ho is still alive, ho is fino.


9973


2li Jana l±7-.W.7D-l5-i-C=ok (Int. Brown)

Ccurt Jfc. 1

Q !7bo is Scrrsr?

A Ho was a supervisor in the bunkor?

Q An SS nan?

A Yos.

q Is ho one and the sane Soaaors who is new on trial here in

Nurnborg?

A Uo t ho has ncthirv; to do with tia (
q Did you know the ennp cc nanSant's wife, Frau Polk?

A Yes.

Q Did ycu ever have aiy rolations with hor?

DP. av LIK: I object to that question, I Isn't know what
probative valuo tho question is supposod to have,

TIE rRESIDSnt hat probative valuo could that have, lir,

HnreV?

:m. f&RDY j To show tho reason for the animosity tho dofonlr.nt
contends ho ha! with tho canp earandant,

TKE I’PESIDCJT: It appears to no iraatcriol an*, tho objection io
oustninocl,

by in. jlrdyi

q Did tho prisoner lectors ©,ntilbuto to tho writin;; cf y.ur
'doctor's thosis?

A Wo.

0 You aro certain of that?

A Yes,

0 DM you participate in the Jdllinc of C.llinot?

A !fc* but sinco invosti-ations of this case were- irxiodiatoly
undertaken plains t the illoral cot? isana -eaont, an! I wanted to koop
the prisoners fren jottinj into any trouble an ! sinco tho Gestapo had
already arresto ! no I took it upon sysclf. I !i* a fcdt scae thin s I
wa3 asked an! the thinjs I didn't adult they sai ' I ’1! my nay. That
•is tho way thoy work. Kay I cake an explanation of this, I!r. Hardy?


997A


21a Juno UTW.-l.TD-ld—2 » Cook (Int. Brown)
Court "o, 1


Q Gc ahead*

L I want to toll you ac that you will understand that hotter* I
dcnt want tc uao up the Tribunal3 tine describing- ry exp-rloneos with
tho Oostapo wton I wa3 in prison bo or. use you probably knew about tho
methods of tho Oostapo but I want to rardnd you, Vs, Ha rty s what their
□ensures woro, their practicos. Your American fellcw citizen, Frau
llldrod Fish who norriot! r. Oeraan scientist von Hrrn«ck* Sho was joins
to touch in tho University of Baltic re an* is known fer hor translation
of E&SUk'.'s "Druns alon tho Iiohawk" eat'. Stone's novel, 'Lust for
Lifo", which sho translated into Gormn* Sho was inv.lvod in sono
affair with hor husband ir. a fi;ht against Hitler, an-’ sontencod to
six years, r. ftcr bavin • boon in tho hands of the Oostapo. Thon sho u a s
takon by tho Oostapo sho tod blond toir. Sho was a pretty y un- : worm
anr’ loft for tho trial with whito toir after Hitler tod comutod tho
sentonoo and ha* con'cnno-’ Ilrs. Fish tc doath, Jfew those r.ro tho sort
of aotto 's tho Oostapo used so you can un lorstandsuch a dccunont as
this can ccno out of tto Gestapo an ’ it is protty hamloss in ecnporlson
with ttoir other stuff*

BY THE PRESIDENT t

<1 Jltnoss, returnin' to tto rmbjoct of .urdstaont in Buohonnald,
•dth ntot instrument woro thoso flo. injs a.Vdnistoro 1 ? Hc.r was it aa.!o
and of what tutorial?

i. It was a loathcr whip* I can* t tell whether thoro was a stool
n-J in tto aiddlo or only a wooden ono. That I .don't knew.

Q How Ion was it?

A About sc- Ion • (Indicatin'.;)

Q Approximately ono no tor?

A Yos, r.u;hly, yos*

Q Hew heavy was it?

A I don't beliovo I have over picked up cnc. I can't roally say
anr heavy it was.

TIE IRBSHE.VT: Tho Tribunal will now bo in recess.


(A short rocoss was taken)


2k Juno U7-*.-dTB-19-l-anabuck (In . irtchbcrr)
Court I, Case I


Tv. RESIDENT: ''r. Marshal, tho Tricunai anticipated ycu a corwmt.

It io unirv-rtant. Tho Tribunal is new in session, Counsel, ycu nay
prccoQd,

CROSS EX.JtIR.7I0N (Continue:'.)

BY *.R. R.HDY:

Q Dr, Hoven, 'urir. tho course of this exordia ticn —

.. Thoro is a noise in tho systen, !b-. Horry, I can't undarstCUK
ycu vary TOll* There is such a miso aver the oarphonos. Thera .uust
bo a ventilator,

:r:. R.RDY» .’o *dU havo the ventilators turned off,

Q nr. Hover., ‘urin the oaurso of ycur oxard nation hero ycu havo
rolntod with c nai Torablo fmnknoss your activities at BuchonwalNow
I vault you to bo as equally frank in tho question which I mi now about
to put to ycu, Ycu wore ir. Suotevmld in onj capacity cr another frois
Oetobor 1939 to Soptonbor 19U, Durir.- that period of tino you oust havo
ooon nany ’i nitarios ar.' officials of tho OoVermont, tho Party, and
tho SS eono an! po tc and frea tho ocup. Ycu undcubtodly tdkod to ijany
of tlufi or with otters who know the urposos of their visits, an' also
ycu :,r.y havo had the occasion cr raist havo ha! the ccasion to coo :vany
orders, ’.ocroos an:! drcctivus an*, corrospon 'onco ccncoridn tho
r.ctivitios or tho can?.

No.*, fr. :i what you havo soon, roa' or hoar' frn authcritativo
a cur cos coneomin;: 3uchonvnl' can you tell us what over mental or
Party or -military cr SS officials, arcaidsations, deportaonts or
a encios had krowlcr’co of tho proerca of nodical experimentation which
was carrio I on with tho ; risen i mat os at Buchcraral:?

I 3hall, of ccurso, ivo you information about everythin I kn /w,
I aa tho last one to pr -toct tho SS or who has any reason to !o so,
q Did y u over soo any 'i nitarios visitin 3uchonwald?
u Tho Rcichs3tatthalt..r Sauckel who do ! in the roontdno, tho
Prince .£ ai dock an! Piorxnt -ho iras in Buchorvolfrequently bo cause
V- s the hi host ju ’::o of tie ^ orra, istrict "SS-Cberabsc'anitt",


and tho conp oprnandor cf Buchonwald Koch wa3his !oputy as ju.’.jc, Ttoro

9976


2 U to U?4.<.T!W^anttteicfc (Int. ' artaribcrg)

C:urt I, Caae.-l

was c ~roat erdty between thcso two* Koch was tho one sho finally lost.
Tlxir. Hoydrich visitod too can? and about fifty to sixty hi~h '-hmacht
officors.

JUDGE SBBBBE: Tho woro sono of toon?

THE IT7ZSS: I was not intro die oi to ttea. They had tho tc.Jcs
of Generals an'. Colonels. Also physicians of the chrracht visitod tho
canp. As far as I sra.*, thoy visited toe hospital.

0 (By :*r. Har.y) Mid any of th..: visit tha oxctrir^ntal station?

A I hear', that tho Princo '/aleck visitod itj than Dr. !lor;en
whorj I alroa.y nontionod boforoj also tha so-callod chiof jud^’o of tho
Prirco T'al lock frer. Xassol, a Dr. Paulnann (spollirv ) P-a-u-l-!WX-n-r.
Paulmnn.

Q Did ary of tho ohrmcht physicians visit th> oxpcrinontal
stetien?

A Of to 'so who aro ;a*csont hero?

Q Ko, of thoso '*3 visitoDuchoremld that you spoko about.

/. I 1 ’n't undorstfjnd that question, "r. Barfy.

0 You state' that ohrnacht physicians visito.'. Buchoitml ’. Did
they ins. ect or havu the opportunity te 300 too oxporinontal station
at Block 1^?

Z cann t rooall whether thoy visito ' Block L6 bccau3o at that
tiao I was in tho hospital and I showod then the hospital.

Q Did you ever soo any e.rros, ndonco or or lors or iroctivos or
-ay other cemunications cr litcraturo which ln.'icato ’ to y.u that tho
'ohmaoht or ary rxnbors thereof had knowlc .I ra of thu ,ro;rra of uo leal
experimentation in Block U6?

a Ito, I id tv. t see that. I assirvo that later on when T was
■lroa-.y arreetod tid.3 nust have one vor Block 50, if that's how it was.
I novor saw ary eorrospor. 'onca I idn*t even know that thjy had c iary
n Block Ii6.

Q "ho in th; SS had. lauwic j,-o f Block !;6 ar. ' too e xportoontal work
‘in or. thoro? Di'. you have ary knouled?c as to that?


9977


2* June 47-A-F C-20-l-C-ros (lnt», Vartenburg)
Court I


A About the experiments?

Tee.

A I cannot remember anybody at the moaont. Whether I wae told
that somebody was there. I believe In Septcnbcr 1943 Hrugovsky was
there. I kn'w for certain that he vaa In Buchervald at the beginning
of September 1943. I set hia on that occasion of his visit.

k Well, vao it generally know an'-ngot the medical departments
of the SS that an experimental program was being conducted at 3uchon-
veld? Wore you in a position to ascertain that?

A Do you aean the physicians who wore at Buchirwald? Of couroo,
they knew it.

S. How »bout other SS officials? Did thoy hnv. knowledge of
nodical experiments which were conducted or. rrisoner lnaatcs at Buchcn-
wald?

A W©ll, the casp coamandant frcoucntly got visits, also visits
"f higher porsona. I assume that he told then that there vno an ox-
porlsontal s tat in but I cannot say that for sure. You havo to consider
that actually I was mostly in the hospital and concerned myself with the
problems of the prisoners mostly. were happy if wo didn't soo those
bie shots.

n Well, from what you have seen, read, or heard from various
oourcoo, con you toll us what officials h/*d knowledge of tho program
of Euthanasia or the program of extermination of prisoner inmates?

A I told you, Hr. Hardy, when we -et for the first time that I
believe it vno a slight orror when you asked me "Do 70 U tav:v about the
Euthanasia program of the German people"? At the aoac-nt I didn't know
what you w»ro referring to end then ycu said "When was action 113
started?" Ar.d, I told you I thought et the end of 19*1 but about tho
Euthanasia Pr^-fre of the German people I knew, per*sc, nothi-g more
than many Germans knew, namely that in insane B 6 ylucrs the patients
were supposed to be exterminated or had been killed. Th'sc wore rumors,

I even believe that I heard it for the first time from inmates themselves


S?78


I


24 June 47-A_J‘C-2C-2-2ross (Intij Nertcaourg)
Court I


who had fathered It froa soac kind of notices In the newspapers and
found out that sonething rut be wrong. But this action 14T13 - you
wrnt to know who knew about that? *hat offices?

Tes.

A Nell, the rrdcr, I was told, was given by H«n=ler. The inspec-
torote in Berlin sust have known about it, therefore.

'<* *hich inspectorate ia that, doctor?

A That was the Inspector Cluocks at the tiro.

Bid you ever work for Cluccks?

A No. I kn:w Gluecks because he visited Buchenwald two or three

tinoa.

H Bid he knwc about the cxistnnee of action 1«T13? *

A Mr. Kardy, of couroc, I cannot tell you from ny own knowledge.
But, according to all the connections which I found out about he sust
have known about it.

*i In there anyone else you feel sust hrve know about it? How
about C-ravlts? Bid you understand nc, doctor?

A I understand you. I an Just thinking it ovor. I don't kr."w
it fr*n ny own knowledge. I don't know whethor I can giro y u an
nnower which only ozpretaco ey ascunptions.

dare you In a position to eve- ascertain whether the high
conaand of the Nehrorcht had any knowledge f these setters f cx-
pcrinentctlon and cxtcrniruition?

* No, that I don't know.

^ Do you have nny knowledge os to whether or not high SS officials,
Ki-aler, Hcydrlch, and cedical officials like C-rnwlti had any know¬
ledge of this setter?

A Eiscler certainly because he ordered that. At least that is what
we wort told, that is certain.

Vi Dp y'u hove any knowledge whether the civilian sectors, sen
like the Minister of the Interior Trick, later Hisnlcr, ar.d doctors
therein, Dr. C-nti, for instance, had eny knowledge of these ratters!


24 June .17— Jl—3 *C—30-3— C-r o a 8 (1st., Wartenburg)
Court I


A Z can't tell 7 ou that froc =y ovn kr.ivlcdgc. I never had any¬
thing to do with then and didn't know then either.

^ Then 7 cu don't feel you are in a poeltion to inf ora us as to
the knowledge of the Governnent, Farty, sllltery, ?3 officl 8 la end
organisational

A Aa far ps action 1*T13 le concerned?

Ci And cxTcrimonte, yce.

A Mr. Hardy, I told you everything that I knov.

^ I hav< no further questions.


9980


24 June 47_A_7JC_21-l_aarrov (Ir.t.t *artenberg)

Court I

□JMXXitlOI

3YJUDG1 S I B RI1C ;

Vltnces, do you hare before you Prosecution Document iO 2312
which hoe been narked for identification as Prosecution Rebuttal
exhibit 52*7

A Ho, I don't.

»< *111 the page ploase hand that to tho witness.

You will notice on the first page of that document appears ....

XR. HARDY: (Interrupting): Your Honor, I don't believe he has
2312. I had only one other copy.

BY JUKI SABRIaG:

Do y«u have it new before you?

A I have 2312 and 2313.

H Do you notico that on the first page of that document appooro
tho wording "reason for protective custody"!

A Yoa, y^ur Honor. After "Headquarters of tho Concentration
Caepa".

<4 Exactly. Hew, under thcro appear ton categories as follows -
under the heading "Beacon for protective custody" there appear tho
categories: "political", "Politically revortlblo", "Professional cri¬
minal", "Bible researcher", "Rrchial polluter", "hoaoscxual", "emigrant",
"expulsion", "w-;rJc thIrkBr", and, finally, "caro -CaEi". All of thooc
aro listed under the title "reason f~r protective custody", and I assume
that this entire document deals with prisoners in Buchonwald who vero
being held there under protective custody. Is my assumption correct?

A Yes, that's correct, your Honor.

Yrom y-u understanding of tht situation under "reason for pro¬
tective custcdy* what would be meant by the ward "political"?

A They were the Inmates wh were arrested for political reasons.

In the cp=p they were designated re "political prisoners". ?he torn
"political" refers to the German prisoners as well as to the foreign


24 June 47_A-JJC_2I~2-£errcw (let., ^artenburg)

Court I

political priornora.

<e Are you fasiliar enough with the lav that vp* in existence et
that tine es to know generally the tj^jss of actions on the part of
these sen that would cake then a political prisoner? Vouldi it ho some
action or breach, either against the g«vcrn=cnt, rr against the Party,
or against Individuals of the Party, or against tho prograa of the
Party, or against the fleg of the Party, or any of tho othor things
that arc listed In the Gorsan crieinal law of that period which sot
out penaltios for any adverse action against the Party or Its ncabore?

Is that what you would understand by a "political priaonor"?

A Tour Honor, do you scan what I personally scan by It or what
the Go understood by that?

Wall, first what you understood by it.

A The political prisoner - I understand that it is a person who,
because of his conviction, was an opponont of the then existing dntlonal
Goclaliet government, cither after serving a sontoncc which was passed
by a special court or a regular court - a prison sentence or a peniten¬
tiary sor.tcnce - and who was then sent to a concentration cany. Proa
ay fairly good knowledge which I hod through contact with pollticnl pri¬
soners, the following has to b« taken Into consideration. Political
prisoners could, as I said before, by a Gersan regular court or a Goman
tpocial court, be sontcncod because f any political crinc - for example,
tho distribution of paophlots or objection to Uational Sociallss f-r one
of its followers - they c"uld be c^ndoancd because of high treason.

They could be sentenced to prison or a penitentiary. After having
served this sentence - I know frns ay ova knowledge that on this very
sano day, let us assnao that he was sentenced to throe years la prison
at the very b-ur after the throe years were up he was again discharged
fma tho prison. That lo what was the usage before. Then ho hod to
roport to the Gestapo, or the Gestapo had already established a contact
with the prison where hv. was being kept, and on the basis 'f his criie,
on the basis of the sentence which was passed p.gainst his, that is, the


9982


24 - T unc 47 -a-J jC-21-3-iprr;v (Int., tfertcnbtrg)
Court X


C-oatapo decided whether a further t o-e«llod "protoctlvo custody" w e »
acccaaary or not. By protective custody was acpnt that, in -rdcr to
protect the Gtraen people froa these political criminals, they were
then sent to a concentration eery and, as I have alroedy said yester¬
day, tho fo'llcvisg regulation existed, the so-called "Ecydrich pora-
graph". The Heydrlch paragraph said that for tho protection ~f the
security of the state and the Goman people, all political crises had
tc he punished and political prisoners whe had served a omtcnco, until
the state was certain that they would not ho rcvtrtiblc anymore, they
would then ho oent to a concentration en=p for their lsyrovenont. Tho
Gostapo office which sent then to the concentration easy was euppoood
to roquost a report cn the behavior of the prisoner. If tho report
was had, then they were supposed to ask for it again three months later.
If the report on the behavior was bad again, then the Gcstnpo cruld wait
ono year boforc tho next report, and it was up to tho dlocroti:n of tho
c-ncontration easy lender, the block loador who was a prioonor. In
practice, it was handled this way: Tho prloonCr wpo given a puniohment
by the easy and eutoaa.tically his prrtcetivc custody within tho C'sy
was prolonged by half a year. In practice, of course, the political
prisor.cro hardly ever wore released again. I personally ronombor a
caso in which it was being considered that o political prlsrner, wh-

•

had nt d--nc anything vrng be kept longer in the easy. Therofre it
wps said that he spit on the floor and had thus endangered the health
of the root of the prisoners and had daasgod state property. Faiiticol
prisoners showed the report to ns one day. Fr's their trusted men-they
g't a copy, and that actually occurred. Ihls was the reason givon in
the report-sent not o r .ly to the comandcr, but it also to Berlin, and
it was rccogni-ed as a repson. In practice, release was practically
impossible unless special persons did something about It r the prisoner
was released through s-=c accident, I stated already yesterday h v many
steps he had to '■vcrccne. The SS and Gestapo, strange p.3 it lay aeea,
sold that an inmate of a concentration carp was actually not e pric ner,


3-' June 47_A_JjC_3L-0:bttow (Xnt*, Vertcnbcrg)
Cotrt X


tut put In protect ire cuat-dy. That was st^posed to bo a stage bo-
tvoon a prisoner end a free citizen. Xt was exposed to be a better
clao* than a prison Innate or a penitentiary innate. Of course, this
was n*t in accordance with the facts because a prison woo considerably
aorc pleasant.

* Can yon say to what extent this practice of treatnont toward
the political prionner was known in the high circles of tho S$ or
"chrnacht or the governsont or the Party?

A i-xenoe Be. I forgot to answer one rf your qu<ations before, This
was not the only reason why the political prisoners were sent to concen¬
tration cusps, but it could also happen that a Ircialcltcr r a high-up
Party official was insulted by sobc can or other who wan not of his
opinion politically, Thua, this official could, through hio connection
with the Gestapo, inaodiatcly hare this san sent to a concentration
canp. Of course, this was not the officially prescribed way, but, in
practice, it was handled that way. Thus, it occurred, and X know of
such innatco and in part I © uld cron achieve their discharge, such pri¬
soners who were sent to concentration car^js with completely vspty files.
Only their na=»s wore on their papers. They were sont to concentration
cospa and then afterwards, they thought ever what they sight have done
and resenbered they had sonc fight with soc« Krcialcltcr or soaebody
in the goverr.-nent and they Manned that was why they were sent to con¬
centration easpo. They were the practical eases that I knrw. Thus, there
did not, of course, have to be a ocntcnco of a regular court or a special
court, but In sont casco this was the procedure.

<4 How, can y u state to what extent this program in actual practico
was known aaong the fficlals of tho Party, or the ^ohrascht, or of the
"3, or of tho govemsont? In other words, was this practice pursued
towerd political prisoners an "pen socrot - something that cverycr.o
knew about, generally speaking?

A The peculiar thing that, one of the feracr vitr.cssco

attempted to explain, but it did not c-ne out quite clearly. In order to


953£.


24 June 47—i_TjC.2i-5_Ap.rrev (int., Wartcr.berg)

Court •

answer your question directly, ycuf Hofior, the BSHA certainly knew it.
Only the BSHA was concerned with political prisoners. Cf course, the
knew about It. Also the superior offices of the concentration
ceap coasaadera knew about it because thcoo decrees had not been issued
by the coosandcra, but by the BSHA vhi* was also ever the individual
Gestepo officca. The donditlons could not be known asonr the C-oraan
people and everybody In general beceuec every Innate who was released
had to sign a docuacnt In which he gave a so-called affidavit that he
v-uld not report aiythtng about the events in the concentration caap,
but this wnuld not have been necessary evon, because he know qulto veil
that he was not allowed to report anything. In fact, bccauee If ho hod
reported It and then he was returned to a concentration casp his dooth
was cortaln. That le a natter which the lnaatos thcnsolvca, of course,
knew vory well. Individual Innate, told no that they did not oven tell
tho truth to tholr wivo. for jtc cautionary reasons.


9935


2k Jmo -7-»W.7>-22-1-! toloy (Ir.t. -.•artoaburg)
Court He. 1


"2 Do y:u know cf the fact that confined at 3uchonftnld as
political prisoners wore citizens frea the Sudotonlanfron 3oho!da
an! Iferevia, fron Polar.’, or certainly that rart of it that was tekon
over b7 th; GcTonrrnt General, I believe it was oel lo d, or fron Russia,
or free the Motherlands cr fron Franca, or fron Earmark -r fron any
other occupied countries?

A Such prisoners wore at Buchcnwald, and in frier to answer your
last question, Jnrirv; ay tins there wero no Danish prisoners. Hut \irinc
tho tino i*on I was an innate in Bochenrol l qysolf I hoard fron tho
concentration carp inrntos that Danish polico officers r/ero supposed to
havo boon thoro, they also tol 1 aa onco when I was in the coll that
Aaorioa parachutists and Snplish troops had cono t;- Buchenwald.

Q How, in possin. on to the next category, to "Reason for
Protective oust; V api»‘rs the cate ery "Political by Tovertible"
what to you un-'orstan ’ is neant by that torn?

/. That was as folios: a prisoner whs had. alroa y boon onco in a
concentration can;: an! was then release'; an 1 row for any roason whatso¬
ever ca:io into conflict with the law — that is cf c.urso for political
reasons, was tten without servin; a sontonco, without boin oontencod
by tho C.urt, imo diatoly rctumod to tho concontration canp. Those
prisoners had a rod trianlo and about this rod trlan lo thoy had a
horizontal stripo, about 3 contL-votors wide an'. 8 to 10 contijiotors
Ion . This was vern about tho trianblo.

f> In othjr words, a political prisoner 'fith the red trianjlo
thou; h, tho politically rcvertiblo, wore the sano trian-io viith tho rod.
stripe abovo tho red trian la, is that ccrroct?

I. Yos, that is corroct. Thoro is also a third cato ory which ia
net shown hero. They were "action" iirctos. "hoy w-ro ironto3 whe had
been in concontration car-ps enco for.olitical reasons. They woro
rcluasod an’ at tho be irmin. of tho war thoy were r-turned t> tiio con-
centra tijn canp without their having c. nit to 1 ary political c rinu cr
apycri-x whatsoever, but only for the security of tho state. They thor.

9986


2ii Juno U7nuA7D-*22—2~ 521c y (Iat, ^crfceiiaurc)
Coart lie, 1


woro a rod trian^Lo, and tho rod horisootol stripo was not abovo tho
tries lo, but about two contiiaoters bolow tho top of tho trlanclo, and
at tho ond of this stripe that went through the trlaalo tho .>ri3cnor*s
nirior was written*

Q I thiric I understand, Tho next oatosory ’’Pr-fossional Criminal."

A They wero re on trian;;lc3, and of courso thoro was also tho
sceo oatogory of "jroon rovurtiblo prisonar#"

Q Tton wo 00:10 to tho category "Biblo losoarchcr" what did you
understand by that?

A Jehovah witnassos. That was quito a peculiar affair# Tho
Johovch witnesses woro by IU^nlor at t „ bo^lnnin f tho *'ar sont to
tho concentration conpo, an.’ at least thoso who woro sont thoro thoir
livos ware saved by Bimlor, bocauao thoy woro conscientious objoctors,
an t tho -'chimcht would havu shot thon if thoy had rofusod to tako a
.'■un into thoir hands# Tho reason rhy Waaler ’Id this was that nanpor/or
was badly noodol, so it was not an altruiatical reason, but a vory
practical one, ;.s a :mttor of foot tho Johovnh rltnoasos woro a vory
stable back r amt in tho conp. Thoy vuro poo pi o tho novor liod, nor
nover stolo. Thoroforo, thoy also succoodod, an t after tho ori.inal
chicanory they had to suffer by tho SS end infonvors thoy cot positions
in tho food stcros, which thoy a-tuinistored oxcollontly an’ then after
thoir original difficult tinoe thoy had very jooJ positions in tho c“:qo.
Thoy had a purplo trian lo#

Q Tho noxt cato ory is "racial Folutor," what <!o you un dors tend
by that?

A Tb-y were Jo's, who had load sexual intordourso with Perm "onon
or iris. They wero tho Jewish star, and around it thoro was a black
rln about two continat^rs vdda# This was around thu entiro star. I
believo that theoretically Canaan warn and irlo who had had sexual
intorccurso with Jews wero also su^jsod to bo put into concentration
caro3 an’ also wore tho Jewish star with tho sane black rLo. I only
/•card that fron stories told no by the irmt03.

9987


2Ii J\r>i li7-»W.r!>-22-3^iloy (Int. ~ rxtczOxrz)

Court Ho. 1

Q “as this Jewish star a yoHow star?

i. 7 hi Jewish star in the ease of the political jews who rcro

sont to the can? was a red triable and a yellow triable. They wore
.* •
put orcr each thor in tho forn cf a Jewish star. Thocreticelly, of

ccurs*, Jewish professional cr iminal s would have existed too, but I

don't rcambor any Jtwish professional criminals in Suchoreal.

Q Passing to tho noxt cato .-ory, wo havo “Homosexual." I supposo
that torn almost answers itself. It is what wo un ’orstand in tho
no leal profession as tort sexuality?

1 Yes, Your Honor.

'• Thor. I will iflss to tho noxt cato pry “Inijjrant", i 8
"InL;;rant?"

A An ini rant, they w:ro Ceram political opponents of Haziisn,
who after tho soiauro of power by Hitler had loft tho Oerrar. Reich and
woro livin- abroa an’, woro str.yin; with friends who had tho sar.o
political opinion as tiny ha’* Fer oxanplo, thoso who feu ht in tho
Spanish Civil “ar, an’ run, who for oxanplo, wore livin in Franco, and
woro supinrtod by pooplo of tho sane . oiut of view an ’ as far as I
remember, especially thoso who fought in Spain were later on the basis
of an agreement handed over. One thins for certain* when tho Oovemnont
again got them Into their hands they imprisoned them in concentration
camps. They wore a bluo triable, if I rcoc-her correctly.

Q The next category "Expulsion," F-x-i>-j-l-s-i-o-n? what is that?

A I don't understand that. Your Honor. I heard that for tho
first time myself now.

Q Does that appear on that document you have there?

A Yes, it is on t!>e document.

q &it you do not understand the meaning of the tern?

A No, I don't understand the .leaning of the term.

Q We will pass to the next, the noxt is "Vork Shirker." iTho do
you understand to be a work shirker within the nomenclature of tha
concentration camp system?

9968


2ii June !i?-A-A7Z-22~ii-iialoy (Int. "artenburg)
Court !to. 1


A Hare In the Cairt, Tour Honor, you hoard that cer.tior.ed already
under another designation, namely asocial. They are the asocial people,
v;ho wore black triangles, they were the people who on the whole wore
treated beet in the concentration cacp, because usually they were
neutral. They did not belong to any one of the extreme groups.

Q And then the final category is "Care", C-a-r-e-j what do
you understand by that?

A "Care, 1 * - before Hltier*a tine, that is before 1933, thore
were as far as I know in tho Gorman criminal procedare institutions
which kept Juveniles who had committed crlnos, such as stealing or
sexual crimes, and who were not old oiwujjh that is they woro not of ago
yot, not old enough to be triad under tho penal procediro. They woro
sent to caro Institutions for that. I cannot state it with abaoluto
cortainty, but I assume they woro pooplo who had formerly boon in
rofornatorloe, booauso they had ccmittod sono crinos thoy lad to atono
for, and after thoy booomo of ago woro thon sont to concentration on ups.
Tho>' ouro must have boon very fow of thorn. I novor hod anything to do
with thorn, and I hoard vary littlo about it.

* 3 1 *8Tl Very well. Thank you vory such.

Is thoro aqy ro-oxoairation of this witness?


9989


Court 2

June 24-A~23-l-HD-Keehan-Vartonberg,


3Y DR. QaVLIK:

During the course of the cross-examination there
was repeatedly talked about the fact that you were working
for four years at a concentration oaap as a physician,
perhaps you will oorrect this now, namely, as the facts
actually wero. Do you have your affidavit boforo you of the
22nd, no that Is the 24th of October, 1946; please look at
that affidavit. What did you aeon to express by the torn
■four years In a concentration comp"; descrlbo what had to
bo differentiated here, the different ports and what
dlfforont parts you wore working In?

A. Counsel, I believe Hr. Hardy's question was
whothor I had been four years In a concentration camp
irrospootlvo of what positions I hold there, actually,
from 26 October, 1939 until the beginning of January 1941,

I was assistant physician and later troop physician In the
gaurd troop, nt that tlae I had nothing to do with the con-*
contratlon oamp at oil, bocauso troop physicians woro
forblddon to enter the concentration camp, a special pass
w-s needed for that and only cacp physicians got this pass.

Q. To what extent during that tli^e did you have
Insight Into the actual conditions In tho concentration
ociup?

H. It is actually os follows: oven people who wero
In tho nearest surroundings of the concentration oaup did not
find out tho facts maybe even less than some outsiders,
booauso (1) it w^s strictly proglblted to speak to prisoners
at all, (2) they only saw them onco ir. a while when they
went to work and (3) If there had been the possibility to
speak to Inmates, they certainly would not hove told tho
outsiders anything.


999C


Court 1

Juno 24-*-23-2-HD-Meehan-Vortenberg.

In your affidavit, please look at paragraph ? on
page 3 of your affidavit, page 12 of the German document
bock, you ?,entio.i the figure of 500 locates; as I understood
you and please toll me if that is oorrect; you did not nane
the figure, but Hr. Hardy told you the figure; is that
oorrect?

A. I can no longer stato whether it was Hr. Hardy or
the Interrogator, at any rate one of the two of thorn gave
mo the figure.

Q. And since you had full confidence In those gontlo-
men, whloh went even to the extont that you would havo boon
willing to tako these two gentlonon as your defense oounsel,
you agrood to the figuro; is that how this flguro camo about?

A. Yes, that Is correct.

Q. «nd tho further figures of 10 % and 20^ how did you
arrive at those figures?

A. I hoard those from prisoners.

Q. In roferonoe to the Justlflontlor. of thoso killings
you oogon to make stateaonta with what persons you dlocussod
this ct the tine you were camp physician In 3uohonwald, I
bolleve ttat you did not conclude these statements; do you
have anything to add?

A. It was a very difficult problea, of oourso, for me,
who did not feel that I was in a position to moke a decision
and was not up to It. I then did the noxt best thing and
got In touch with lnaates who Know me very well and had
confidence in me. I also discussed the matter with lawyors
as to what oould be done to assist in this emergency. Among
otters, I discussed it with the Duch Minister of Justice, who
was a hostage lr. Buchenwald, I also spoke with Polish
prosecutors and Czech Judges, I secko with authors, politlcans
and artists and we discussed together what could be done.


9991


Court 1

June 24-A-23-5—KD-Keener.-Wart enberg.

You here to imagine that these men formerly occupied a very
important position in their oountry and also had the
corresponding ebaraoter. Z have to insert here the remark
that this minister of Justice in particular and the Lawyers
and ether ooople, with whom I spoke, were a big exception
fr,m other political prisoners in tho enr^r. They represented
a higher stage, because as far as I know, they aid not ask
for any advantages that they oould have had, beo-uso it was
their opinion that if they oould get another pieoo of bread
or additional butter, they did not want It In ordor not to
hara their comrades. That was their taelo principles.

One day I we sitting opposite those men. They had
tholr hair shaved off, they wore thin and poverty stricken
and they sat opposite me in their blue striped suits. Wo
thon dieouseed tho quoirtl^ejfhlch were in our minds booause
of this terterror of the informers. I, as a lay-man,
wra informed by- then in a aonnor which seemed very obvious
to as. The: said, first you hnvo to soo who is your
superior, legal office. That was very slcple, that vns tho
highest legal office, which wns my superior and also that
of tho inmates, it was Himmler himself and his deputies.

That we oould not expect any Justice from them was dear to
everybody. We did not even have to talk about that. In
addition, the paradoxial and unique fe-ture of that was that
f.imnler In particular and nle associates, who had established
the concentration comps, wno were the superiors of the guards,
were also the highest Judges. Himmler and his plenipoten¬
tiaries held these combined positions. This informer
system ar.d t.ile killing system through the combination of
criminally charged persons and the political inmates who were
not considered criminals, they had thought out this moan and
complicated system for the camps which held about 15,000


9992


Court 1

June 24-A~25-4-KD-Me ehan-Vart onberg.

people. They had then under their control by this net hod
and besides certain groups, whlcn later combined a resis¬
tance group, no Inmates could trust another one.

Therefore, one was confronted with the question what
one should do next. Sot a single Innate, cither a political
prisoner or a foreigner, was sure of hl6 llfo and he never
knew whothor he should live to see the next day, These
political prisoners, who agreed to be inforners, were those
professional orlmlnnls or sooo others who agreed to fulfill
this task. They did this In order to rocolve o roward or
because of personal hatred of the representatives of the
bourgeois circles.

Those facts oxlstod and the officers of the Justloo
administration said that no help was to bo rocelvod from
the legal offloor9, they would not do away with the
conditions, therefore one would have to form an Illegal
oomnlttoo whlc.i would then hrvo to decldo what t«o to bo
dono with thoso Inforners. They did not foel entitled to
Judge the aots of such Informers, but thoy told me thcro
would only have to oonsldor thoso caaee In which they wore
forced to prevent further crimes that would oost the llvoo
of a large number of other prisoners.

The other orodlble thing and tho torrlble thing that
even today seem to be unbelievable to mo wns that political
prlsonors, be they Gormans or foreigners, who fought against
the SS, also assumed the risk that they would be discovered
or their movements would be discovered and that they should
be shot or hanged. But among then there were also some
whoso princlplo was, "I don't care about any one, I do not
take any active part and I do ay work In a wry that nobody
notices mo.■ It was possible ana It could happen that an
Informer happened to 6ee this person's none on a list or


9993


Court 1

June 24-A-23-5-ED-Meefaan-Warter.berg.

heard f r - r. anoth.-r inmate and put him on such a list, and
the innate then disappeared. In such a scanner, he woe
reported and innocently was accused.

The terrible thing was that this system had become s :tc
sort of hooo renedy. Individual blocks in which the prison¬
ers livod five hundred together, there chief officer was an
Innate who was called the block eldest or the block trustee,

When I was working with the Illegal canp administration
and committee, the conditions were as follows: These block
trustees, if they wore professional criminals or if thoy had
been dondenned before, had the following system] (1) they
neodod money and (2) they needed food. They hod no othor
moans at their disposal tnon taking the dally food w.iioh the
prisoners got three times a day, they took 20 to 50 portions
away, ospeolnlly from prisoners who had been newly
dollverod into the on:?.

%• Dr. Hovon, I only wonted to know with whom you
dlsouoacd the Justlflection of the kllllnge?

A. I talked with legally trained persons.

Q. Can you name one of them?

A. I nacod thoa one Minister of Justice of Holland.

3. Do ou still remember his nano?

A. the moment I cannot recall it, but it is known.

Z. ’"ion was ho Minister of Justice in Holland?

A. It must have been before 1939.


9994


24 June <i7_A_JjC._2i_i.Cook (Int., *artcnbcrg)

Co art I

k I n-w cose to another point that w M discussed hero, that
"M* 7 ^ w «™ *a the- h-rao stable where Hussions wort being ahot. Were
y-n there in capacity as phyaician or on order of the Illegal casp
afclnstratlon?

A I waa there only on the order of tho illegal casp adainistra¬
tion.

k v hat was the purpoac of your visit there?

A To observe Euschnlr Euschnar and to obaerre vhat he did. Thlo
waa icpoaaiblc for the caap insates. They wort not admitted. Naturally
the political prisoners were very interested in finding out what happened
to their assoelatos there.

x Did you observe Euschnlr Euschnar thcro?

A Tos, only for a short tine.

<4 I now subait to you again docuntnt 2312, that w B a subaitted
as Prosecution inhibit Ho. 53«.

A X have it horo.

k Ho, please at the oririral. Please pay attention to tho datos.
When was the document eo^osed?

A 22 - no Buchcnwald 6 August 1942.

k hcn w. t the penalty with twenty five lashes executed?

A On *hc 6th of August 19«2.

k How ploaso turn tho document over and read when the pcralceion
was granted?

A 10 August 1042.

x "o these dates give y^u any roasons for knowing whether y u
signed this dreuaent before thv execution of tho penalty or after?

a I* aust have been after the execution. I don't euitc understand
what you acan c-unscl.

X *hon was tho docuscnt cosposcd?

A 6th of August 1943.

x ’^hen wns Voidclcfc delivered into the concentration caap 3uchen-

Wftld?


9995


24 Juno 47-A-7jC_34-2-Cook (1st., Y&rtenbcrg)
Court I


A On the sa=* day - 6 august 1942.

k rf bcn was this penalty executed:

A Os the 6 August 1943.

<4 *hon w«« the remission granted?

X "hat can he seen on tho tack of the pago.

li On tho 10th luguat 1942?

X On the 10th of Aoguat 1542.

*4 *hat results u a conclusion fros these dates?

X That on the 6th of august vhll* on his flight he wag returned
to the casp and cn the 6th of Aqgu?t 1942 he was given tho punlahaont.

Boos tho possibility exist that the doovjftnt was subnit tod to
you only after the punlshncnt was carriod out to that you could no
longer prevent this punishment when you see this date?

X I said thlo already before. I said It was subalttod to no
afforwards.

<e Can you give a reason for this?

X *011 ecrtainly, if he wap brought back to the casp, 1 can givo
the best rensen. It won't be a legal ono but fron experience I aoouao
that aftor ho fled ho was brought back to tho eeap. He cane Into tho
earn and or the ardor of the eonsardcr he was lsecdlatoly glvon 53
laches. *hmt la cy experience. It la not a logal renson but thrt
usually to^k place without leng discussions, that is what I essuno, nnd
I do know actually that ordora existed that prisoners who flod should
be shot and this eosrjiwlor Plater who clgaod this, had a so new hat owftnr
heart and ehangod it by planing lsotcad the death penalty,  h rX 25
blows administered to then, «hlch essentially was BUch pleasanter, I
eoouea that fr a the fnct he «a- delivered on the sane day that he g-t
tho blcvs on the sane day,

S ^ould y:n have prevented the carrying out cf thla penalty?

A I ecrtainly could not have dene so.

s. Jew to speak aVut the category cf -rofccelcnnl crlnl-ale, whet
kind of innate arc we concerned with hire, to whet category dl 4 ht. belong?


24 June A7—A-3 jC«24—3-Ccck (Int», b'artcnberg)

Court I

A -o the professional crinlnals, the g-ccn ones.

14 Vhat cbs he concluded fros that eo to the nationality of the
iCBStO?

A At Iceat he was e Goman, a Volksdeutschcr.

*hero was he born?

A Z gee In Berlin, he was r> C-oman.

Vi S 0 what was he?

A E© war « Gersan nrcfceelonal crininal.

14 In regard to the carr-ring mt of the penalty of tho heating,

I would like to call the attention of the Tribunal to the ctatoaonte
which Z shall snbslt, especially the affidavit hy Qottschalk, docu-
aont E-ven 3, Exhibit Uo. 14, cn page 11 of the English document book.
Gottoehalk taleoc an attitude in regard to the carryln.-: out of his
punighaent, especially to tho fact that Hwen did everything in hit
power ot prevent this punishsont and it shews in particular that poli¬
tical pri 8 or.org, especially tho illegal ca=p coaaittio, algo intorferod
the nattor, and that the illegal casp coseittcc wero pregent during
the investigation. Kay I cu-'to:

"When I*. Even hecasc physician and thug crco undor the influence
of Valter Erncsor, E„rl Poix - the underground w.vcnont - a chango sot
in. Hcvtn refused hi a signature under influence and ro tho firgt of
all the doctors httd the cnirrgt to doxand and carry out a nodical exa-
al nation before tho whipping. 3 lncc vt prisoners wero presont" — and
Hr. President I think thic io docioivo - ’at these oxaalnatlona wo wore
able to cave ouitc a rusher of pclltlcal prlsoncrc, and aloo oono others
who wore all rirht, fr«n the whip. V© could not save then all but so
far as I resosber froa that ti* c until ry release scarcely a political
or otherwise prisonor froa convict lex vest to the whipping pest."

>.0 nose can aloo bt Scon by Hichart*c affidavit to which I would
like to call the attention of the Tribunal, docuaent Hoven io. 5,
Exhibit Ktvtn io. 15, pages 16 to 22 rf the docuscn*. book. I beg ymr
pardon, your Ecxorc, it is net Hichart's affidavit, it is the affidavit


9997


zi June ‘C_2£_4-Ccolc dnt',, Hartenberg)

Court I

of Schasubec, docuaont E 3 Ych So, 19, Exhibit Ho* *» 2 and 3. In

So. 3 Sehaublca describes Mb cvn ease:

*laster 1941 was reported for puntshoont by the carp loader of
hit tl-.c, Haul, fer alleged latinos*. In conscpuoncc of this report
I vat supposed. tc be dealt 25 strokes 2 dayi lator. My coarrdcs and
acpualntar.ee* adrlted as to see Dr. K^ren and to ask hla help. I there¬
upon petitioned Xr. Howea. IV. E'yco arde Inquires regarding the In¬
cident and In tone illegal way prcYcntod the execution of the punlshacnt."

The- Schacublen deecrlbea anothor caae whore tho wltnoea, Xr. Heron
In 1942, proYented the carrying oat of the punlehacnt with flogging of
two Polish prisoners. This wna suppesod tc be a public flogging.


9993


24 J T c *7-UjC_25-i— r ’ioabuek (let., Vartenberg)

Court I

l n the affidavit of Scfcaeublen I would like to call the attention
of the Tribunal to the fact that Sehacublen was a professi-nal crimi¬
nal. This can he seen on the fire? pego of the affidavit where he
Biya, *1 received the green triasglo because of some previous c-r.vic-
ticna, and I belonged to the category of professional criminals." This
ch'vs that Sr. Erven did net only prevent tho flcg.ing of political
inmates, hut also of professional criminals who wore tho green triangle
unless they were Informers or traitors.

Tea. pliSIILJ?* Counsel, how much longer do yen anticipate yeur
redirect examination of this witness will roquire?

31. C-A^LE: About fifteen sinutes, yeur Ein-r:

T?X FEi^IIA^T: Proceed.

BT a. GAXLX*:

14 Vitr.oss, during the cross exaninatlon Document MO-365, tho
diary of Bing ves discussed. Dr. Hoven, do you havo that?

A Tea, I havr tho document book.

14 Page 3“ of the Gorman. It is the ontrv of the 17th of March
1942. By aeano of referring ot tho document please find out whon tho
cxporlacrts took place and when, the illness of Bing you onco oxcoption-
ally wore supposed to supervise 31ocks A* and 49.

A I supervised 44-nd 49, yes, that is correct, but during that
time no oj^orinents were carried out.

<4 When were the experiments carriod out, on what date?

A By Dr. Ding, yon mean?

*4 Tea, when? Tou can soc that on pago 37.

a Cn the 5th of January 1942 end 1 February 1942.

s; Please repeat. I didn't understand.

A On 3 Kerch 1942.

i<, Vhen did it become apparent the* Ding v B s sick?

A Cn 17 Kerch 1942.

^ And when was the nest experiment carried out?

A Cn 19 August 1*2.


9999


34 Juno 47-l_J.r_25_2__,irx^\ic<: (Int., Vartenrtrg)

Coart I

^ So-, I KZ going orcr to another point* t c Dccuncnt SC-2366.

Do you 'w that before yr.u? It io the report by Dr. Morgen.

A So, X den*t have It.

h Please toll the Tribwl whet we .arc c-seemed with here,
whether It 1* a oecter.ee cr a Judgaent or what kind of a docunent It

io.

A It io on investigation, the final report on as Investigation.

«* ritnoo, what deco It say on the flrot page?

A Indtctsent, ladictaout, It says,
h And who wrote tho lndictsent?

A Dr. Morgen.

H Plt "» c *wa io 7««« 46 where Dr. K C rgcn gives hlo opinion
about the legal attention of the killings. Do you have that paragraph?
Pleaao rend what legal opinion Dr. Morgen had about a killing of insatco.
A Cn page 48?
s. It io page 46.

1 Oh, 46.

*4 legal situation.

A I ear 1 * pee anything,
i* The typewritten page 46.

A *'oo, It says about an cabe«lcnent. Tho nur.be rn aro at tho
right uppor corner of the pago.

^ In typewritten — not handwritten 46.

A Oh, with the typewriter — thcro lo a hole hero.

«4 53 In handwriting.

A "The right*—shall I read?

\ Yea please.

A *Ihc right to docldc about life and death cf ccnocntrntlon
cr=p Inaatco la trasaferred to tho Heichefuehrer SS. Ho, for certain
catogcrica cf icsetes, especially non^ors of tho Lester pcoplts, ha?
delegated this pewor to central off loop of tec 25?A."


34 June 4?-- 3 C^ 5 ^ 5 -*lnabuek (In:., Vertenberg)
Court I


All right, thank you. So* plena* turn to pg «7, typewritten

pego «7.

A I can't road it.

* Page 74 in handwriting.

A Page 74, 7«*.

iv 2a th« middle af the page, what Dr. Merger. wrote about you.

Plcaao atari with the aentcnce, "Hla largo achievement in Buchtnwald r —
it say a hero •direction" Leitung, but It must ncan Lelatung, achievement.

A "Hla great achievement in Puchcnwald la that among tho Inmate
nuraea and phyalclano he roccgnlxed tho really able peraena and left
then free play. Through hie good connection* of official and private
naturo ho alec accurod for tho hoapltal all kinds of advanregoa and
prevented distorting interruptiona. Duo to that - and thie io a per¬
sonal achievement of Seven's — the carp remained freo of pcata and
vlthlnathe scope of what io humanly possible everything wan dono for
the alek people that waa pooxlblo at ell when one takes into c naldera¬
tion the temporal and camp conditions."

H Pltnoc oontlnve.

A ""hio attitude of Pr. H.-Tcn'a alroady also had acme disadvantages
alr.ee he relied blindly on political inmates. It la to be aaauao with
cortainty that thla koy position which they had becauco of that, thoy
siauscl for tho purpose of camp administration."

A All right, then plcaao turn three pages over.

A Page 7*7

<4 Be, 70, page 73 , what he say* about Xnochnir Kuechnarcv, page 77
In handwriting.

A Page 777

<4 ?gb, la hanAariting,

A I don't boo page 77 in handwriting.

x I think 7 CU ccnfuac the figures - the handwritten figure 77
and typewritten page 70.

A All right.

10,001


34 J*i-e 47-A_JjC_2S_g-ii=abuck (Xnt., Wartaribcrg)
Coart I


* Wfct doc Dr. Morgen say about Kuschnir Euschharov?

A "The innate, Euschnlr Kuachnarcv"-

14 I do not want to take up the tine of the Tribunal, Pegin with
the eenteneo, *SS Standartenfuehror Koch"—

A "S3 Standartenfuafcrer Koch u«ed fcia aa crap inferser against the
Coaeraaist cliques raong the concentration crap lnaatos."

<4 Thank yon, that i* all.

A Sut not only Koch did that, hut It was done in agrocncnt pr.d on
or of Eoydrich. Pecauce of thia nan he repr-achcd nc especially. He
described hin as the nost devoted and helpful assistant of the S3.

>4 Please look at the affidavit of Aekemann again.

A I don't have it.

K Please turn to page 3. Did vou ever havo a conversation of that
kind with Achcrnann?

A I nover had ouch a conversation with Acherearm. What ouprioes
nc nest in this sattor Is hew a nan can got thic ilea at all. It is
Just about the soat absurd thing that I have ever hoard and tvoryono
vhc kneva nc would laugh about It. Xoreover, I never had a skull on
=y dock. The only thing that the innatcs put on it vac a hunch of
flcwcra every day. I could have obtained such things for oocc nodical
interest fron prlaonem who hod died if I had hocn interested in it,

Vat I didn't have any interest In it at all.


10,002


2L June 47-A-S*^-2^-l-Grcss (~artonburg)
Court No. 1


Cl Finally, thn following! 19 it correct that you killed two
inforcers and traitors who wer*' described to you as aich by the
illegal cacp committee, is thnt correct?

A. Tes. I hod to kill then because no one else could do it.

Q. Is it correct that you had knowledge about the killing of
about fifty further lnforaors and traitors?

A. Tes, that is correct.

Q. And is it furthermore correct that with tho last - tho ninety -
you had nothing to do?

A. No, I only found out about tho killinr after* ards.

C. And if tho killing of these informers and traitors would havo
been reported by you to the SS what would have bon tho result?

A. A very wolcooe action against political Goman and foreign
prisoners. At least, iwuld have had mssoo for their actions.

Q. Do you have anything sore to say to the question of tho
Prosocution, naooly why you will not oontion thn naans of tho illogal
camp ccccitt- o who carri- d out the killing of about 50 infomnrs?

A. That would not lesson ry responsibility. I said already that
them was no othnr possibility. I urderstood that and them wore no
ethics in a concentration cacp - only tho naked life of thn inoatna
was concerned. And I do Assuan thn r sponsibility for that.

r . And what wer th* furthor aotiv c that are decisive h*«ro?

A. That a sr-allnr nurber of oth* r inmates would b« killed.

Q. No, you misunderstood ry question. Dr. Hoven. *fcat motive ia
decisive for your not naming thesn names?

A. !'y case has not yet been decided and as long as it has not
b»en decided I do not have the right to name these names because it is
ay opinion that if I did name the; I would not better than the traitors
and informers against *oa I fought.

Q. I have one core question. * ? ith regard to Ackemann 1 s affi¬
davit. Can you cake some statements to the effect whetr.er it is
possible at all to prepare a skull from day until tomorrow. That is.


10,003


24 June 4 7-A-S»26-2-Gro=s ( '„rte nburg)
Court Mo. 1


within 24 hour*. Don't you know that?

A. I can't answer that free oy own experience. Put I re ally
can't imagine it and I believe if he would be such an honorable
person as he tried to describe himself he would at least had tried to
convince oe not to give such terrible awful order, even considering
conditions in a concentration car.p regardless of the fact that I never
even thought of saying such a thing.

Q. Ur. Fresident I have no fu-ther questions to the witness but
I have to aibait three further documents.

DR. FUMCEM}* Jfr* President, I ask the Tribunal to excuse tho
dofen ant Hrugowsky to no now afternoon free the session, A witness
which the Tribunal pemitted no to call arrived in the prison yostor-
iay. I do not intend to sirron hin here on the witness stand but if
possible shall suteit an affidavit froa hin. For tho preparation ,
however, I h vo to discuss a nuebor of questions with llrugowaky.

There fore, I ask that ho be excused by the Tribunal during the after¬
noon sossion tocorrow.

THE PRESIDENT: Pursuant to th* request of oounsel for the
defendant ftrugowsky tho defendant Hrugowsky nay bo excused iron
attendance bf fore the Tribunal during the sossion toooiTow afternoon
counsol dosirlng to consult with his client concerning the latter's
defense. Counsel for thn defendant Hoven cay proceed to offor the
docun<*ot3,

!?.. HARDY: It is qy understanding that tho testimony of Hovcn
has boon completed?

THE PRESIDE’! 1 :- Yes.. The defendant Hovcn nay be excused iron the
witness stand..

DR. GA'TJF: The next dccucent idiich I aubnit as Docuaont lioven
Mo,. 11,. Exhibit Hoven t> 17, tiwt ia page 38 of the Docunent Book. It
is an excerpt free one of the documents submitted by the Prosecution in
Case IV, 499PS, Exhibit 123. By this document I want to prove what
r.r.ans were used by the defendant L>r- Hoven or with his -nowledgo the

10,004


24 June 47-A-S* -2 6-3-Gross (•irtenburg)
Court to. 1


the infonsers used who were killwl, and what aeons they hr.d to kill
the decent ictates, especially political Gernan and foreign prison rs.
The next docucent I vant to sufccit aa Document Hoven 15, ns Exhibit
Hovon *‘o, 10 on page 54 cf the Docucent Book. This docucent, your
Honor, is a suppleannt to Pieck' s t- stinsoy, page 4785-86 . of tho
Cexr.an transcript and page 4725-26 of the *v»glish transcript and
a suppleecnt to the affidavit of Pallandt van Eurdo, page 45 of
ycur docucent Book, Docucent Hovrn g 13, which I already suboitted
ns Exhibit Ho van ?fe. 10. Proo this affidavit by Palland as well as
fron neck's statement results that Woven naintainnd his contact
with tho f'othorlands hostages. Documnt Hoven No. 15, that is
Exhibit 18, you soo Uiis ms strictly forbidden and that the defendant
Woven by that acted contrary to existing regulations. Irontos of tho
carp under Koitol docrac, W-decron, as it is known were forbi :don
OT,, ry corr apcnlcnco with others.

And as a further docurv-nt in the saco connection I subir.it
Doeurvmt Hoven #16 as Exhibit Hoven 19. It is an uxcorpt ft*oo n
docunont which tho Prosecution submitted in c/iso 4 — Docucent
W 1553, Exhibit 69, in that cns.-. 7hc 2 paragraph says, "In tho
case of 'T incat s, cr.re rust be takon that they do not got into
touch flith their roliti\ .3 or any other authority." And fron tho
first paragraph, I nubdt that as rvlienco to tho subject: Roloasos
Tror. the cap. Free this it antrs that it was even forbid on to
nake application for discharge to :>SHA or E-P/.i In snito of that
th« dofc' iant Hoven actod contrary to those r gulations and illegally
especially with tho help 0 f his office, ancceodnd in having largo
nurhrrs of inc.tcs discharged in this nanner. -«lth this I hrvn con¬
cluded ay s-Andssion of .-videncc for ths defendant Hovrn for the tine
being. However, I res-rve the right to suheit furthor evidonee.

THE F.TESIjET: The ri^t to off-r further ovi-dence is reserved to
counsel for 'he defendant Kovon. The Tribunal will new be in recess
until 0930 o'clock tecorrow coming.

10,005


Roll 10


Target 3


Volune 27


June 25-28, 1947


OFFICIAL RECORD


UNITED STATES MILITARY TRIBUNALS

NURNBERG


CASE No. 1 TRIBUNAL I
U.S. vs KARL BRANDT «t al
VOLUME 27


TRANSCRIPTS

s? (English)


25-28 Juno 1947 pp. 10006-10381


Court Sc. 1

25 Jun 47-tf-l-l-ZEX-7o«ter (Vertederg)


Official Transcript of the Aaerlcan Military
Tribunal In the natter Of the United State*
of Anerica against Marl Brandt, at el,
defendant*, sitting at Huercberg, Gersany, on
25 June 1947, 0930, Justice Seal* presiding.


TEX *iAf.SEAL: Persons In the courtrocc will please find the'r seats.
The Honorable, the Judge* of Military Tribunal I. Kllltery Tribunal I
is now In session. God sare the United States of Anerlca and this honor¬
able Tribunal. There will be order In the courtrocc.

THX PSMUBTI Hr. Marshal, you ascertain that the defendants are
all present In court.

TEX MA R SHAL: Hay It please Tour Honor, all the defendants are
present lc the court.

TEX FBISUMT: The Secretary will note for the record the presence
of all the defendants In court. Counsel for the prosecution.

HR. HASTY: Kay It ulease Your Honor, unless I haven't carofully
perused the papers In ay desk, as yet I haven't received the notice of
the call of the witnesses for the defendant Pofcorny, and I should like
to receive those notices as to case, and so forth, the regular form.

In addition to that. Tour Honor, It nay be ooeelblo that tho urosccution
vlll have sceo of their rebuttal witnesses hors by tho end of the week


and vs nay bo able to put soeo of thee on the stand Friday or Saturday,
as the caso nay be. In the event that ve do have rebuttal witnesses
ready and available, the prosecution repuests pernission at that tlao,
or will reoueet peraieelon at that tine, to call the rebuttal vitneeeos
and Interrupt the oreeentetion of tho supplementary docucents on behalf


of tho dofondante, If that Is pornirsible try tho Tribunal.


vlll be poraltted by the Tribunal. Ve win
arc ready.

desk this corning tho list of witnesses,
the defendant Pokorny - Just e list of n'uaes.
statecent as to each Individual witness. The
and Dr. Ernst Eock.


HE. EAETY: Kay I ask, doeB defendant Pokorny 1 s attorney Intend to


10036


Court So. 1

25 Jus 47-K-l-2-E3t-?oster (Vartenborg)


ceil hi a vitMiiei af ter he ha* called the defendant?

IB. HG7HUX (Counsel for the defendant Pokorny): Kr. President,

I believe that I eubaitted cy witsese Hat in tiao. First, I w.tod to
coll the defendant Pokorny to the vitneee etand, thon the vitneee Trux
aa the noxt one, to prove the eesertlone of the defondant Pokorny afcout
the rotivo behind hit letter. Then, in the natter of the exneritente
vith palladiua, the vitneee Dr. Koch vill he called froa Kadaue and
Dreeden-Eadoheul; and, finally, the lecturer in pharcacology at the
Unireraity of Wuerzburg, Dr. Jung, aa general experte on tho etoriliza-
tion question* on a pharaacological hael*.

THE PSESIBiSTj Tho Tribunal nov call* the oaee against the
defendant Pokorny. At tho request of defendant'a counsol, the defonda-.t
Pokorny vill take the vitne etand.

(ADCL7 PCKCESY, a defendant, took tho etand and testified os
follov*:)

BY JUICE SEEEXJD:

Q» Please hold up 70ur right hand and he svornr

I svoar by God, tho Alelghty and Osnisclcnt, that I vill eoeak tho
puro truth and vill vlthhold and add nothing.

(Tho vltnoss repoated tho oath.)

You nay bo soated.

BISECT EXAMISATIOS

BY BE. HOTTVXr (Counsel for the defendant Pokorny):

v Vitness, vhon and vhcre v«ro you born?

A. I vos born in Vienna on 26 July 1895.

Q, Yitooss, please tell the Court something about your parents
and the oxtornal circunstances under tfcleb you grov up in your oarer.te'

hone.

X. Ky father vae a farsor's son. He studied technics rnd then
he graduated froa the Ferrer*' Agricultural College. Upon request of
the Ministry of Yar In Vienna ho accepted a position as a military
official in Austria. When Czechoslovakia vps created, he >ts taken over

10007


Coart So. 1

26 Jun 47-tf-l-3-IEH-?3»ter (Vertenberg)

H -y l the Scpublic CO =t i mod to pay hie pension. My fether thus was sot
only bs officer but. haring studied at college, he vae especially edu¬
cated In general subjects. My nother was a daughter of a ehyticien.

Her father had been aa aaeiatant of the fasoua Czech oculist dee Curkisy.
Her oaaontlal characterlatlca were an extraordinary knowledge of
languagea - ako spoke aores larguagos - and her understanding of oueic
end literature. My perento, because of the position of ay father as a
nllitory official, lived in Austria, Herzegovina, Bosnia, ralnetia,
Poland and, finally, in Bohseia. I, nyself, in addition also lived two
years in Hungary - that was conditioned ty tho Vorld Har. Tho conso-
auence of this soldiering, I would like to say, in all of Europe vno an
sxaot knowledge of European conditions, furtheraoro, an understanding
end a love of the different peoplee and, therefore, a tolerant attltudo
politically.


1C008


25 Jfcmo-ii- llJ-a-l-Zcrrow (t'artcaburg)

Court I

VI t zoo a, what wcb ycur f crmol education?

*W I vent to public school partly in Galicia, that was r. mili¬
tary school which tcught la the German language. Hy further education
X so* la Bohecia in the Cyiuiasiun in Praguo.

at vtat universities did you study?

— I studiod at tho Gornan University in Praguo—I studied no-
dicino there. I bogan approximately at tho beginning of tho V orld Vnr,
S ineo X vas drafted into tho *ustricn axny, 1 lost four years which I
oould :irJco up efr only in p-rt, noicly, caly ono yocr. Duo to tho lose
of thcao sajcstors, I was f orcod to work day >'j4 night sinco uy ycx*
oats too hed lost dl their property duo to tho war. ®;oroforo, I
worked simultaneously, in addition to study, at tho Institute for
^orincntcl Patholo£y, tho chief of which was tho famous Professor
3icdl, who vns not only :y chief but also a fathorly friend to mo. 2 hou
X worked at tho Institute for Physiology with Profossor ?oer.ic&-
Zoisanock, and for or. ospcclally long ti::o in tho Instituto for dnatc-
uical Pathology undor Professor Ghon, a woU-knovn tuborcul:oio rad
cliolora resoarch nan. «x this Institute, I sutdiod especially pntholo-
giocl histology end this rosultcd La tho fact that Profossor Kroibich,
who noedod a histologist, called r.o to tho skin olinic.

Politically, os a student, I was democratic end liboral in accor¬
dance with tho ctnosphoro and cndltions in Prague. I was also not a
aaibor of ay national frntornity.

C . V itnoss, why did you stud;-- nodicino?

A • Xho boginning of tho Vorld V or In S orbia was a very shock-
1=€ osporionco for no end, sinco X was loaning anyhow in a paoiflotic
direction, tho Vorld Var ccnvincod no that war is n condition that one
should not strive forced, duo to taoso spiritual oxporiorcoc, of tho
■Jorid Var, I felt tho cell to boccue a physician in erdor to help hi*-
ncnlty.

C . Witness, in tho nodied fiold did you also get a specialized

10009


25 Juao-i*dV~2-3-Xarraw (V~rt anbury)
Court X


training la a specialty?

1 . J£tor X woct to the skin clinic I soon bccer.o on assistant
of Prefessrr Irclclck vfao, at that tino, wes probably one of the lead-
lac dor.:ct:logists of the world. He gifcod £ particular confidence in
:io, and acoa I beeme as asBlatant, one noath after X gr„duutod. Ho
put :»o in chcrgo of the lnflmarios. I was In charge of two dopart-
ncr.to. Ho charged uo with tho responsibility for tho locturoc that
everything vaa pr.porcd, thot tho charta and exhibits would be ready
and ho charged no finally to loeturo during tho mca:or saicstor :iy-
solf• Ho only rcaorvcd tho wintor sweeter to hinsclf, end I loetuxv
cd la the oitiior. X was, in othor words, ao to a:y, a aciontlfic na-
alatcnt and private aaalatant.

In addition, I atud&Od X-rr^ t bccauao :;y fiaancoo w Q o cu; S-ray
apociallat, at tho Socond Ualcorslty Clinic for Internal Piocaaco ua-
dor Professor Jubach Vertoahorat, Ao waa u loading non, at tho bo-
gllttlag of X -rcy and oapceiolly toxicology. Hit X-rxy assistant
waa Profoaoor Horrnhacuaor. X w 5 a oapociully intoredted la X-rry
dlcgonalo as a borderline field of ny field it specialisation. 2
then wont to Yionac, Aoro .iy vife workod at tho Contrul X-ray Lab¬
oratory of Prefosacr Holsknccht. I was in tho Urological Stolon of
tho 5 ocoad S urgieol Clialc whore Profeoaor Honlg was la charge. In
tho Urological X -rny atatloa, Profoaaor Pallogoy, and la tho Loiucr*
to logieol, Pi chi and or*. Lutor, thoro woro abort sojourns at othor
xialvoroltios for cortaln specialised studios which oro not voxy im¬
port rat.

tor finishing your nodical stud;.-, did you wont to r^ucia
at the Ualvoraity or did you want to oatabliah your own practice of
ncdiclr.o?

•1 . There woro cortaic factors which favored uo at tho Univer¬
sity of Prague. In addition, X had worked scientifically. Ihoroforc
2 vantoA to bccono a University professor. Professor Kroicich had


10010 •


25 Junc-Ji-K^-S-o-Sarrow (Vortcaburg)
Court I


also prc_l■ cd no to help no end invoiced no that tho preliminary qv.co-
tion la rogerd to fifty-fecr professor* had resulted in fifty-tvo ;>ooi-
tlvo ansvers, one voto palest no, and ono who had refreinod from voting,
Duo to the selection of ft Jcvlsh Sector, Professor Stdrkort, thoro wore
student rlotc in Proguo against this soloctioa atd. w^uMrlatantc.Ja. tbo
skin clinic did not participate in this strike, Acrofore, ve voro
dcacrl’ood ns scabs cad this put us in a rathor bad light. Tho Notional
courso at tho Univorsity bognn, at that tine, to tnko foir. rathor in¬
tensively, supported by Professor Oeschnock, who was in chargo of tho
tyo Clinic, and Prof os s or Schloffor in Surgery, and cthors. Uy chi of,
vho Was othonriso llboral, e^uld not also avoid this influence entirely
end, slnco jy vifo was Jewish, I saw thi 1 night not got uy nsuignnout
as lecturer.

Hov and whore eld you thon croato your own uodied practice?

— I thon was colled to Xcoetcu and tho re I took ovor q> first
consulting physician at the Hospital, but, in 1927, I gave it up for
ostcrnal reasons. Simultaneously, X foundod :iy own practioo for dex*-
natoloty end urology .ad ny wifo foundod a practioo for X-ray di£©-
nosic end 5-rey thorny.

IXu-ing tho yo r> rs when you wore a practicing physician, did
you clso work scientifically?

a . Scientific work, ospocially In tho pathological histological
field, of courso, aIso in tho doruatologic 1 field. I cocpjsou thoso
pepors at tho clinic clouo, as woll as with tho assistants, no veil as
with vife. On tho basis of ay experience in prnotico, I also vroto
scao peters, noinly tegothor with ny wifo. Tho subject was doxtiatology
or X -roy diagnostics or ccncornod with X -rcy thorapy. Since 19 Z2,
duo to c eorsonal connection, I workod also in tho phair.ocologic.'l
clinical field for the Praguo phoraaccuticnl fini, Nougino. a 1 tegothor
X vroto about twenty p;pcrs, of which I would liko to .lontion only tiro.
Scacly I described, at tec International Don:.itol ogle j 1 Congress in


10011


25 Jhao-K-MJ-JHi-Earrow (Vortoofcurg)
Court I


Kunich, in IS 22 , a new disease, doruatitis rebrc (pcqdliua vulgaris),
ttlch ; - 0 t 7 none. In addition, I discovered tho table sat retention
in an etkorulso f_td disease against which thcro was no drug, an;’,
through tho discov. y cf this sodium chloride retention the fire; ef¬
fective nothod agidnst this terriblo disoaso was created. In uidition
I also gave lectures at International Congresses, but that isn*t so in-
pert ant.

If hot organisations of physicians or otherwise did you be¬
long to during your student tine or lator on?

A . I belonged, of ccurso, to tho Proguo association of Physiol.-ns.
Then, to tho Domatologica Soeioty in tho Ciochoslovohicn Republic, cad
of tho .jicociation of X-ray Radiology S?ociclists in tho Csechoslovnloiaa
Republic I v.s aso c neebor, I was ospcciaiy active in tho Sooloty for
tho Tight oganst Yonora Disoaso for I worhod for about fiftoon yoarc
in a dispensary of this Society without bring pad. I was nly prld
for .$• expenses. In addition, Iwn tho export for tho st^o for doxv. 3 -
to lc-* in Czech os lor aid a. Previously, I was ftOtlvs. In a sport club. I
was a itOiber cf Schlarcffia. Schlarafflu was a society which uas organ¬
ised couo-hat liko Tree hasons on a philanthropic basis. In no way did
it havo a > Ait leal orientution. but lator on, undor too Third Roich, it
was fought against, especial? with us ct loosr, but soon that ab&tod*


10012


25 J'---::-' 3-3-1- laloy (lot. Sartcnborg)

Court SO* I-


Q Did you belong to a student fraternity?

A (no response.)

Q Did you participate in the first fforld Ar, and what vroro
your experiences?

A Cn ’irch 15, 1915 I was drafted, and I ni with a nunitior.o
coluan. I took part in tho crepaigns at Serbia, liar.tonogro, Albania,
and Italy# At tho Russian Front I was for a short tin* in tho
Stochod area. I there 6<>t bengu. fever and 5-day fever. Later I
got typhus and uhon I could no longer servo at the front I was as¬
signed to Infantry Keglaont 9U in Xotchlcoaot, whore I worked at tho
hospital for infoctious diseases during tho na;:t two yonrs and in
the surgical division of tho fiold hospital. At tho orel of tho florid
■Vor I was discharged as First lioutonant of the liedical Corps.

Q flitnoss, I asked you before whether you bclongod to a
student fraternity, and I den't know whether your answer was hoard.

A Ho, I was not a uonbor.

Q Witness, aft-r the First florid War Austria was divided and
you boca» a Czechoslovakian subject, is that correct?

A Xoa,

Q Did you also serve in tho Czechoslovakian Amy?

A Yes, I served twice. In 1521 when tho Bsporor Karl landed
in Hungary by surjrioo by airplr.no, Czechoslovakia at that tiao nob-
iliaod hor Amy against Hungary, I was drafted at that tino and was
Chiof Brigade Physician at th: front in Czechoslovakia. Tho conflict
was then settled in 1526. I took part in tho nanouvers with tho
105th Heavy Artiliory ftoglnont in 3uta>ls, Tho result was that in
tho Czochoslovakian Amy, I bccano a First Lieutenant in tho lijdical
Corpe for th: second tiao boenuK. ny jrcaotion in Austria was not
recognized by the Czechoslovakians.

Q After the occupancy of Czechoslovakia were you also drafted
into the G_mar. Arry?

A Ir. 1939 all forr.cr officers of the rosurve corps had to re-


10013


25 Jxm-WS3-a-tt'-loy (Int. ttsrtocborg)

Court ito. I.

port, and I was first infareod that as a politically unreliable per¬
son, and b ocan a a I had served in the Czechoslovakian lay r.s an of¬
ficer, and because of njr forrer Jewish rifo, I was regarded as being
vury unworthy* I did not caro about that very nuch, because I as¬
sumed that tho !*a=i Bogins did not rant to disregard political op¬
ponents, In 19Ui, I suppose about July, however, I was inf amid
that os I was oainb & i n od on tho records as First Lieutenant on tho
Rusorva in rotirc:»nt. In Diccnber 19iil I received a second report
that I was "Z.V." - availnblo - ns First lieutenant in tho Reserve
Corps| I was kept on tho records end that I r.-is already assigned,
that I would bo dr'Xted. On th: 28 of January 19L2 I was drafted.
Since tho loaguo of Physicians at that tiao was already so extensive,

I assTS&o, therefore, that physicians who uoro political:^ suapcctod
wore also drafted. I was ordered to Sroeny to the Rosorvo Fiold Hos¬
pital, Cbcrrchlohai, whore I wco working r.t a station for skin dis-
ocseB for half a yor.r, and then for n yoar end a half I ms detailed
to tho Surgical Division, that rme in Avo, and thon 1 wan put in
chargo of a division for vonoroal disease at tho Reserve Fiold Hos¬
pital, Bohmstoln-Srnstthnl, I want to ucphasixo ho re that it was
tho division fiold hospital, and not ny oi-n hospital, because I dis¬
covered two nist-kos in tho affidavit I gave here. Shortly boforo
tho collapso I had to transfer ny hospital to a British P.H, Division;
thoso woro British T.B, patients; and so at tte last noxnt tho fiold
hospital was transferred to Lichtcnstoin-Vallenberg.

Q T.'itnuss, during tho war you wore prenoted fror. First Lieu¬
tenant to Captain; her did you behave ns a physician in the Ooxsn
Arry; did you endeavor to bo especially strict in tho oxorcir- of
your ixdical duties or in the exercising of your position as a ailiiary
superior?

A That ax>uld not have suited ay character and ny attitude at
all, I believe that in accordance with ny duty I observed tho inter¬
national Ians of tho Geneva convention. I did not recognize any dif-


lfX.it


25 07 (Int. Wartenbcrg)

Coart Ho. I.

fcrcnec between officers and enlisted con, between Gemma and P.'T.c
in any way. The regulations which had bo„n issued in a sancwhnt ex¬
aggerated fom, duo to total war, ordered a hasty and rigorous classi¬
fication of tho soldiers at that tire; as cany as possible wore to bo
classified fit for service. I did not obey this order, 60 far as I
was nblo to avoid doing so, since tho health of tho persen was core
important to no than this order. In spite of th«- largo amount of
werk I had to do I voluntarily conducted a dispensary for prisoners
of War, in which about twice a rock I treated about 50 prisoners of
w^r, who were coaposod of about 20 English, 20 Frenchman and 10
editors of other arnies. I treated then for two yoars. Every tiro
I consulted with 5 British and ono French physician. Sinco those
physicians wore not specialists for skin diseases and tho troatix:A
in this dispensary for F.W.s was about ono ki lore tor away from tho
fiold hospit'l, I was in chargo of tho troatnont which they had to
carry out there. I still rcevxibor ono day tho English Uoutomnt
Colonol in the liodical Corps, Dr. Pell or Dr. Bull, I don«t roaoa-
bor exactly, fron Hon Zealand, who towards th, ond of tho War askod
no to cono to Hon Zealand after tho closo of tho War.

Q Witness, for do the question is still open, how your
prccotlon fron First Lieutenant to Captain c-rao about?

A I told you already that ht tho ond of the World War I was
First Lieutenant in tho Kodical Corps. That was not recognised, and
at asochoslovakia I was again prenoted to First Lioutenant in tic
judical Corpo. Germany did not rccogniso that, and then I was given
ny rank back after all, and toward tho ond of the War I bocaao a
Stab3-rst, that is equivalent to .a captain ir. tho American Array.

I did net get any awards.

Q Witn_ss, you are carried for the second tire, is that cor¬
rect?

A Tes.

Q .'hen did you carry for the first tiix and hor was this


10015


25 Jun^WS-3-ii^fclcy (Int. fcrtohberg)
Coot to. I.


aarriogo dissolved?

A In Novor&cr 1922 I carried for the first tine. I rrrriod a
follow studont, Dr. Lilly Woil, who then b»cazu an X-ray specialist.
Lit^r on differences in character, however, becano apparent, a; that
after 13 years, in July 1935 wo were divorced for non-politicrl
reeaona. I wna given the son ini qy wifo was givon custody of tlx>
daughter. In Juno 1938 ry wife went to Chechoslovakia, first to Pilsen
end then to Prague.

<1 Whan did you carry for tho second tiac?

A 3ig»t years aftor ny divorco free tta first carriage in
Soptoriwr 191*3. I anrriod tho daughter of a citiion of Konotav. Hor
aaidon nano sms Trace.


10016


3 frosi ycur first :-'- 2 rriags, do ycu have any children?


A Tes, I have a daughter who ..as born in 1926, her none is
Lotte; and a son who was bom in 1929; his naca is Stoaas.

Q Did you havo ary c h i 1 iron in your second aarrta r ,e?

A So.

■itnoss, witro aro tte children fraa your first aarrioge?

A They wro in ^Pgland.

Q T/hon did t’losu c hi ld r en go to Snjland?

A They went in June of 1939, »hbn thjy were tun and thirteen
yoard old, rospcctivoly, alona on a Czccho-Slovakia childron transport
to Pngland.

*1 wore thuso children sont to Snglandj did you hevo ary
apodal reason for doing so?

A I want to add in rogard to ay first question that I did not
':now anythin as to whnt had bcccuo of ay childron for soven year a. I
di'> no*, knoi if thoy woro still aliv, bocouso ovor correspondence, ovon
by t.-.o .Tod Cross, wns forbidden to no by the coapotcnt autJioritius of
the Oostapo end the ;.;>.D.A.?. in Kbaoteu. I attempted to establish
oontsot with the chUdron in an illegal *.ray and then failed. In other
words, I could not establish any contact -dth than.

q ; Itnoss, I ropoat ay previous quc?tionj hy were your c’.iildron
sont to Ifcrglandj did you have an;-- reauor. for ttat?

A r.v.- childron n.rj half-Jews ol the first dogr c of nixed blood,
they iruro endangurod in Romany or Zuropo to Kx, extent that they had
to anigreto.

Q aou corad not sjo that your children could advarco in Goxwuy
at all; did you?

A Duo to tho N'urr±K.rg lav, the children would not have any
opportunity to go to school, to continue their education, to say nothing
of the fact that they could not go to universities and th;y could not
rise navo earned a lir-inc. 2 crcovor, the danger booaa. aa*arcnt at that
tiao to which Jews end tho pooplo of first de-rec rdxod blood mro exposed.


10017


25 June 19i 7-VvTv-i-- 2 --:;ohr^ (In% =rt;rburg)
Court ;*>. 1


1 Wit mas, in the C z_ cho-Sio rzkL a state did you belnns to a
political party?

A Mo,

q After the occupation of th. Sufktcalir.i did you bulon. to a
party?

A Doctor, I only -aar.t to any I always votod dcaocratic; in other
-rorda, I ';avc ray voto for :xj\ who w.ro (Laocratic non I was a physician,
I was busy and I had no tlao for politics, I had other duties,

Q After th- occupation of the Sudotcnland, did you belong to a
party?

A !fo, thorj v.ro no elections eftor that tiao. Duo to my narriago,
bc' children >nd iy .Political opinion, I had no cause to j)cin the Nazi
party.

Q itmas, oft-r tho occupation of the Sudotunlcnd, did your
oconordc status chengo?

A *V ooonoalo situation ohongod for sonu t^nc and it changed
considerably for about one linl £ to about thre-wjuart-rs of a year. In
our city, tho structure of the population was changod, booauso tho Jaws
who conposod part of uy practice wao no long-r there, Tho Czechs had '
o'derated to th- part that still rosAinod to Ciocho-SlovrJdn and thoy
hnd oenposed a largo part of ny praotico booauso I was tho only
physician that spofc Cz^oh and hnd a positive attitudo toward
CzQcho-filovrdd.-., Tho young poofCLo after tho Anschluss w^ro oallod
into tlu. now formations, tho A r^r, tha Luft.rr.ffo and the Navy, r,s woll
as party offices and offices of tho state, so that actually mat of ny
patients actually disappo rud. 'bxvovtr, the boycott againrt o. started
at that tiao, bcoauso I was iuxnm as a jxrson who thought democratically
and had bc_n - rri-_4 to a Wen;, ATt-r I foresaw a catastrophe, I did not
keep any uonty, but invested everythin': I oarmd in agriculture. After
about thr--_-fourths of a y&“-r I ens faced with extraordinary financial
difficulties, but f in a l ly ry repot: Hon as a physician prevailed again

10018


25 JVina li 7-i ATD-e—3-i feuhm (Ir.t. artcnburg)

Court *>. 1


of physicians Uia acuto, also b.cr.uso airy, physicians y^ro
dr-.ftid Into th. Bjtf fornntions. Duo to thsso setters, ny nodical
prootioo booem. so lergo that I aould hardly toko oero of it. Thus, in
about ore yo-'r after the Anschluss, I was in a vary favorr.blo position
financially.

Q ’itness, in your personal situation eftor the occupation of tho
Sudotonland woro there any chengoe?

A :«at,tors diich had been of nuch importance boforc, for oxnnplo
politioal opinion, which I no 7 -r axpressod openly or ay foraor
ncrrir .30 or asy children, after the occupation suddonly caao into tho
foreground and woro pert of Jud in- ry personality, for it is known
thnt tho raci _ l concern bee. v a -jIm object,

q h=t was tho attitudo of tho ?arty and tow other officers in
Itonotau and th, SudohtcnXnndj what was thoir r.ttitudo toward you?

A You Haro to ina; lne that quito a different stratun of the
population new pot to power and it was very sad for *. to find out
that particularly thooe P^opL. -rha I had hwlpod when they wuro holploso
wuro now extraordinarily cotivs against no. On tfv> very day of tho
Anschluss of tho Sudutonlan: rae pcintod on ay oar by an un)n»wn persora
a Jewish Star, wtdoh was about 20 to l£ centiliters long, the *ord
"JoW was paintod on ay cer with whito paint end I could not r-raovo it
anymore,

Ysiediatyly r.ft_r th. occupation, I wes subjected to sovero
investigations by th. Pertt , the '•-.stapo, and too S.D. The so lasted
for sovorcl hours. I also reoeived to. confidential infonction from an
agent, *0 was ay patient, th t l was in toe riles of those >rho had to
bo politically observud, During the interrogations I was also given
certain prohibitions. For instance, toe Party prohibited =. froa
corrcsponclnp -ith ay f=m.r wife an! qy children and above all from
sending then non^y. A ia^ in fej employ of tJvj Post Cffico inforoed ne
that of course ay nail and ay tol_phoai being checked and this could


1C019


-25 Jane uT-^r^Ki Crc* Claw fe*teiibBrg)

Court !fe* 1


-iso ba noticed In tho lstt.rs I received* In the house, in r.Mch I

•

bed ^ preotie : 9 cn th. first fl-QT th.ro was a booutifpl apartment,
in >hich I had lived bolero trith ay I oantod to aovo into this

apartment, bat this was srdc impossi'ila bo cause this apartment was
confiscated. The otiler off!cars did not want to bo left lagging behind
and since I had a Cnoclic—Slovatina housekeeper, tho D.A.F. questioned
a about her. In ay fern, which I had in Czccho-SlovakLn, about fivo
kiio.-'otcrs awry froa tb_ city, I *v d a Social Democratic couplo and
a Dir.ocratic eouplu, who worked during the season when there was a
lot of nor’. Both couples had r-p-ntodly boon in concentration oaaps
and their political opinions had not prevented mo frm employing them


at all.

Thus, not only tho Party, twt also tho local farmers union
inturforod in a/ life. Later, during tiio war, a Polo was assigned to
my fans and sinco I tru ted tilts very intelligent parson vary woll, on
tho basis o!’ th; cxistiiv, regulations, I was also called to account.


It was important that in th. firot mooting of tho Jiszi Party I >n\o
pointed out pablionlly as Uu. -xraplc of a bad person and it was
roquostod that I bo toll to loavo tho city. }{y constant worker,Julius
Strauss, iroadiatoly info -jod -ui the naxt morning that I would bo
oxpollcd free: th: city. Th. reasons for thoso persecutions, or thoso
inconvenioncos, era of ooursc v? -erriago and the children, a fact that
I could not duny. Thurufbro, I uas practically persecuted for racial
roasons. Jfcr piblic, of course, did not find out anything about all thoso
things, or at lucst very iittlas I was not allowed to talk about
tii-a and a person who knows the conditions of th, tie-, knows that ono
did not 3poak of such things. One spoko only to people in -..boa ono had
absolute confidence.

Another v«.-iy difficult point was tho investigation to ay house,
because half of it belonged to zxy wif~, who was a full Je-w and half

t

belonged to a:. Th: office hi eh tocic over Jewish property in Pilson

or iq Carlsbad sent an r.--ont to mo an* it was very difficult first to


10020


2 > Jure U?-.'~tTT>-!*->4KObai» (PJT. "iirtentarg)
Court So. 1


fL^ht to fr.o the helf that belong to ay vifo and then ay ono half,
bea-usi I wanted to swintain the property of ay wife end ny childron.
At th-.t tine, of ooirac, .»c tad to uso all kinds of divers ways* thus
I started a book, In ’ hieh I racist-jed- the expenses of tho* talf of
the hous_, ’-Mch belonged to 37 vlfo. Thoro I Us ted aaounta of nonoy
hieh ey dfo did not owo to no, tat by scans of this book I could
show tl« ogoot that njr Trifo tad dobta to no and in this way I pro-
aeadod slowly In ^y way to prevent this confiscation.


.03


’J


25 June 47-?'-S-*r5-l-Cook v .^ y * ur5 )

Court Vo. 1

Q. "*itaf> 82 , a final u~stion in regard to this chapter, was
your * dnission to practice as a physician not attacked or did you
have difficulty in that mspnet too?

A. first, I v s forbidden to practice on insurance patients. This
mna started by the KVD Aussie, that is the Insurance Association for
GercAijy, "Er.seo'tanrtzliofaa Vorvdnigung bcutachlands", It was very
unpl*v-.s-nt to hi'oey x-ray anpr.rntus confiscat'd. Pirst the KVD
started son* nigotiatlons about thn sal-, of th x-ray a paratua with
me and since it was quite a n'W Sinoans four-valve apparatus, I ab¬
solutely did not want to give it up, but one afternoon I cano to my
offico and with surprise I saw ny x-ray apparatus had boon put on a
truck. Soa*- technicians took away the r at of the connections. Thoy
also took parts which lid not belong to the x-ray apparatus, films,
development lamps and t.rr.nsformrs which didn't «v-n belong to mo but
to ay vifo. In the place of tho price at which I bought it, which was
17,000 reichsmarks, I was paid 7,500 rlochaoarka. Later on work with
th* x-ray apparatus was forbidden to op. It was significant that tho
pnrsonnol chiof of tho Iandrat offico, a certain Braofnnr, denounced
nc to tho fJazi party. Tho irnis physicians' lcador, aho lod this
affair against me, allow'd r to look at the documents and I still
rmeBbor today the formulation by which I was deprived of tho doctor
title, tho prohibition to prectico, and expulsion fron Ciomanj', it says
as an unworthy human being who is equal to Jews and Czochs. Tho Prois
physicians* leader, howffW, wes in favor of no, and I can thank his
efforts that the whole mat tor during tho course of time died dom.

Tho lack of physicians played a not unimportant role in this, to be
sure.

. "itness, how long did this persecution last?

A. ell, these events happened more or less simultaneously and
sew of them, of course, cue after the other, but on thn whole towards
the end of 1940 approximately,I had no longer any of these unpleasant
experiences. The cause was prcbably that other persons now again became


10022


25 June 47-: :-3*-5-2-Cook ('-'artenburg)
Court T-o. 1


th< target of persecution of the party. The offices core or less
called down and above all th- events of the war probably guided the
people who were against me, aa veil as the party, the Gestapo, and
tho SD, and turn'd th*ir attention away freo^mr. In the meantime I
had learned how ono has to behave, how one has to camouflage onosolf
and when one can talk and when one has to be cfiiot. In this way I
had a seeming rest finally.

'dtnosa, wore you politically about in the sane position
as tho export for tbo Prosecution who appeared here. Professor
loibbrandt?

A. Tho statomnts of Professor Leibbrendt were very interesting
for me because they shew* d an absolute parollol. Ho also is on Aryan
and he was persecuted under tho f.'umborg laws only because his wife
was Jewish and in ry case tho ohildron wore Jewish. In addition, tho
confiscation of my x-ray apparatus I rogardod fonu'-rly aa n porsonal
chicanery, but due to tho statements of Profossor Uibbrandt I
realized that this was a onasuro which was taken against all pacif¬
ists, socialist?, and liberals, all physicians who thought that way,
and that this was n wide-spread action. y,

U Titncas, \hat forc did your lifo take in genoral now aftor

%

tho occupation of tho FUdoteoland?

A. I continued ay practice in Kcoetau and duo to all of those
experiences I was happy, as aft- r I Itad concludori ay nodical activities

I could withdraw to ay fare. Thus on the »diole I lived and on this

*

farm I Planted about 2,000 fruit trees and devoted myself to the
growin.; of plants. Since 1 turned ay back on tho city on the one hand
I had my peace; on the other hand tho connection with the farm, which
was five kilcootcrs away, was difficult becauso tho other physicians
wer* given gasoline but the KSDAP prevented nr. from getting gasoline.
Thus during the «dght at 20 degrees below zoro, contigrade, I had to
go to cy apartment on o bicycle. Cn about 24 January 1942 I received
the nows that on the 28th of January I hal to be drafted into the army.

10023


25 Juno 47- !i-S%-5-3-Ccck (*:&rtcnborg)

Court !fc. 1

Approximately, on the 25th or 26th of Jeouary cy foraor wife called oe
on tho telephone froc Prague and requested ao to help her bocauao
she was sucked to be sent to a concentration canp. I did not know
how I could help her, but, of coir se, I precised her to ccco to
Prague the next aoming and w« cade an appointaont in the cafo
DaUburica.


ICC 24


Court 1

June 25-lA-o-i-HJ-Klnatuck-Vartenberg.

’."non I made the preparations on ay car In the evening
for the trip to Prague the next day, a aan In a dork uniform
v.-s in front of ay door ar.d asked to speak to ae. Ho collar
was open bo that I could not 6ee what Insignia he had. Ho
told ae that the telephone conversation with my wife had been
overheard and'that If I should help ay wife or go to Prague
the ne;:t day, I would be shot In ay office.

Thereupon I had to send a telegram to ay former wife
with tho words, “Our ceetlng tomorrow Impossible", and I
algnod It with the naae of her slater because I could no
longer risk putting cy n?ae on the telegram.

On tho 27th of January I then went to my new offlco.

a very shooting experience hoppened to ae then. I received

tho farewell letter of a living dead person. My divorood

wlfo wrote to ae, “In memory of bettor days I do not want

to leave the vjrld without" — and then she returned tho

rirst r-sont I had ever given her. I answered hor with

a letter which was oightoen po c es long because this oad

experience caant for ao a conpleto reconciliation. Whcthor

she rooolvcd tho letter I do not know bocause I don't know

for sure when she was sent to a concentration cnap. Bo.I

nsEua.d that on the srme day that I was drafted Into the

•

Array my divorced wlfo was sent to a concentration caao; I
don't know to which one.

-Kov, the following situation had resulted. I, without
any freedom of movement, was with the Army. My wife in a
concentration camp, I did not know vnere, and my children
alone in ingland; I did not know where they were either.

Vflth what feelings under those circumstances * was In the
Army, I do not hav^ to descrloe here.

THE PRESIDE!?!: Counsel, It Is almost time for the
mornin* recess. I would assume that this biographical


1CC25


Court 1

Juno 25-H-5-2-HD-Kina&uc'4-A C rtenberg.

narration of the defendant Pokorny will be nearly concluded,
win It not, out6lde of his cilltery experiences?

DR. HOFPfUHN: Hr. President, I have.almost conoludod my
questions. I now, after tho recess, want to submit a
number of affidavits to support the statements of tho
witness Pokorny.

THE PRESIDENT: Very well. I would ask the Interpreters
a question. Referring to the document presented to tho
Tribunal yoetnrday, NO-2313 which was marked prosecution’s
Identification 523, I would ask the Interpreters if they
have mode any further study of the letters which nro hand¬
written at the head of tbnt document, rnd If so, what Is tho
rosult of their study?

INTERPRETER VARTSISESG: Your Honor, tho letters nro
V-r-s-t-b, Vorstorbon, the German word which means died.

THE PRESIDENT: Very well. Thank you. Tho Tribunal
will now be In roooss. •

(Reooss was takon)


10026


Court Bo. 1

25 Jon 47-H-7-l-£E'.-Sro6 8 (7 g= Schcn)

TE1 iUSSSilt Tho Tribunal is again in session.

TKS PSZSnaST: Counsel say proceed.

IE. K3P1XAK: Tour Honor*, Z should now like to begin with Iho eub-
nieeion of affidavits fron 37 Docunont Book I. I should like to point
out that b7 nittake an exhibit number is entered in the document books.
These ousters vill not be correct.

The first document Pokorny Bo. 1 - I shall offer the affidavit of
the sistor of the defendant, Clga Henscl. It is on pago 1. This will
be Exhibit Bo. 1. I should like to read e few paesagos fron this affi¬
davit. On page 1 the second paragraph roads:

■I as the defendant Dr. Adolf Pckorny's eiotor. I was born on 17
April 1886 In Theresicnstcdt in Ctcchoelovakia. Ho have no other
brothers or Bisters.

■Cur father vaa a nilitary official with the rank of lieutenant
colonel la the Auatrfa of that tine. Vo covodabout a good deal within
the Auntro-Hungarian aonarefcy owing to qy father's frocuont transfers.

Vo havo livod in Dalaatie, Ecrsogovina, Bosnia, Galicia, and Boheola.

In this way vo boceae accualntod with cany peoplos and languages. Aside
froo his profession ay father spent a greet deal of tiro on botany and
wi very such interested in agriculture. Ec had graduatod fron tho
Agricultural Collogo end thcroforo rotained a cortrln freedon of notion.
V e learned ot this wish, supported by our frccuent change of roeidenco,
aside froc Goman and Cteeh, tho Sorbino-Croaticn and Italian languages.

*Hy brother voe drafted into the Austro-Eungerlnn arcy in 1914 and
returned in 1918. Ho disliked going to war and roturned a fully con¬
vinced pacifist and anti-ail it crist, Aooarently tho experiences of tho
vnr 1914-1918 also novod hla to bccono a doctor, to help suffering
hunanlty In this vejr. *

In tho sane affidavit I should like to read on page 2, the second
paragraph on page 2 : * •

■)fcr brother vented to finish his cedi cel studies as soon ns possiblo
and therefore worked very hard and intensively. For professional and

10027


Court So. 1

26 Juc 4?-H-7-2-£HK-Srcss (Ton Sc hoc)


hu a ar .ltarian reasons ho enjoyed the particular supoort of inportant
Prague profooeoro, ouch eo Profesoor Siodl end Ghon. Re finally bocano
aseietant to Professor Kreibieh in which caoacity he also did scientific
work.

•He strongly disliked anti-sealtic excesses and did not participate
in the riots against Professor Stelnhers at that tine, which caused
special cooaent as he had been suggested as lecturer. Apart froa this he
rarrled a colloague in Prague, Kiss Lilly Veil, who was Jewish. As a
result of the situation at the University of Prague at that tine he also
refusod the position of lecturer, as in these circuastancos one did not
dare to appoint hln as lecturer owing to the views of cortain studont
groups. In 1926 therefore he went to loeotau as a doctor and aceootod
a position in the hospital.

"Cfcr contact after this retained very close despite tho distanco
that separated us, as understand oach other very well to thie day
owing to our Joint pleaeant oxperioncos in the hone of our naronte.

*1 froouuntly visited ny nother, who lived with ay brother in Konotau,
and in this way saintalnod tho personal contact with ny brothor and his
wlfo, *dio lived in another aoartsent in Konotau."


10028


Coart So. 1

26 Jun 47--8-l-ii-tarrov (Yon Sehon)


Z3. PESSIIESTj Counsel, it does net seen to the Tribunal necessary
that 70 U read these documents vhich ere sicply repotitious in so far as
the testimony of the vitness, the defendant Pokorny, h in self, is concerned.
Ve have the docuaents before us and they are in evidence and vlll bo con¬
sidered, but so far this affidavit is sisply recasting what the vitness
has hlnself said. It is not reasonable to suooose that this vlll be
denied by the prosecution as to the history of his past life. I don't
ina^lofl that it vlll be, but if it is you nay then bring further evidonee.
Heed such portion of the affidavit that vlll bo holpful to the Tribunal,
but I vould not encuuber the rocord vith natter that is nerely ropoti-

•

tiaxe.

IE. HC7TXAS: Tory veil.

Then as Pokorny Docucent So. 2 I offer, on page 6 , an affidavit by
Ocor* calorie, who is nov in Munich. This doeunent vlll be Inhibit 2 .

The affiant has icnovn the defendant for years and he repeats vtat tho
defoedant Poicorny has already said about his life history and his attl-
tudo.

The next docuaent is an affidavit by Ur. Rosa Sehlpek on pago 8 .

This vlll be Zxhlblt So. 3. I should like to read only a fov brief pas¬
sages free this docuaents

■I havo knovn Dr. Adolf Pokorny since the fall of 1917. At that
tine ho vas a soldier but had obtained leave to carry on his study of
cedicino. Together vith hin and scce other colleagues (including Dr.

e

Prltt Tischor, vho later becane Chief Surgeon of the Ophthalmological
Clinic in Leiptig, and the present profossor of ophthalaology in Bern,
ft-. Hans Oolduann) I prepared nyself for the examination for the doctor's
degree and so I became nore acaualnted vith hln than vith other follov
students iron the lecture roco. As a personality he vas beyond reproach,
a pleasant and helpful colleague, and nost DOpular on account of his kind
and cheerful nature. After completion of his tern of Btudies ho engaged
hlnself in the field of dermatology and very soon became assistant physi¬
cian at the clinic of Pro lesser Ireibich. Dp until the tine of hie nar-

10029


Court fc. 1

25 Jun 47-K-8-2-I3i-Sarrcw (Yon Schon)

rla^o to • student of roentgenology, ve aet at least once a week after
the costings of the Medical Association. He always regained the sane;
he never aimed at any position of outward distinction."

Then Z offer an affidavit hy Antonie Mueller which is on cage 10.
This will be Exhibit Bo. 4. I received this affidavit unsolicited aa
indicated by the introduction. It eayei

a

"Through radio and newspaper reoorts it has cone to ny knowledge
that one of the physicians indicted before the Allied Military Tribunal
in Suornberg Is Dr. Adolf Pokorny who, born in Vienna, lived last in
lODOtau in the Sudeten district whero he had his peroanent residence.

As X have known Dr. Pokorny since the year 1928, I consider it ny duty
to givo you as his defense counsel a brief account of his orevious private
and political life, requesting you to use ny statenents for his defenso
if you find then to bo in the interest of Dr. Pokorny."

Tho next docuaent ie an affidavit of a certain Julius Strauss on
page 12. This will be Exhibit Ho. 5. Strauss workod on tho fern of the
defendant Poicorny. Be was a ninor by trade, he can give testiaony which
is not influenced by social cr other considerations. The affidavit een-
tione tho treatnent of a Polo who worked on the farn of Dr. Pokorny. Ho
also says that Pokorny did not belong to the BSDAP.

Thon I offer the affidavit of Kre. Marie Helcer on page 14. This
will be Exhibit So. 6. Mrs. Hclaor was a oaticnt of tho defondant Pokorny
for a long tine. They discussed conditions in tho Sudetenland after tho
occupation and in this affidavit she has sot down what she know* about
the subject.

Then I should like to of for an affidavit by a certain Karl Hans
Mueller on page 16. Tfcie will be exhibit Bo. 7. Mueller speaks of tho
general treatcont of Dr. Pokorny after the occupation of the Sudetenland
and he repoats what Dr. Pokorry said on the witness stand.

I also offer an affidavit by Dr. Pranr Peiker on cage 18 which will
be Exhibit So. 8. I ahould like to read two paragraphs froo this affi¬
davit because they have not been discussed yet. The affidavit reads:

1C030


Court Sc. 1

25 Jus 47-*-6-3-£a<-«arrov (7on Scfcon)

"I hfve personally known Dr. Adolf Pokorny, vho vat residing at Rott
on the Lech, slnco January 1945. Dr. Pokorny vas known, to no na=o
since September 1940i At that tin® I vas for six veeks troop physician
at Xocotau, and Dr. Pokorny was known to se In connection with the fact
that no patients with skin or venereal diseases vere to be sent to hin
for treatsont because he had, as It vas called at that tine, 'not a clean
record' ooiltically.

"Ever since I cade the personal acauaintance of Dr. Pokorny, I have
osteecod and respected hla both as can and as physician. Our relations
beeauo friendly and intlnate froc the day %*on Dr. Pokorny learned from
oe iliat X f too, did not belong to the US DAP and tho forner Sudoten Gorman
party or Henloin. During subaeouent nucerous political discussions Dr.
Pol:or:y expressed to ae frankly his denocratic convictions and did not
hi'lo hie enti-natlonal socialistic attitude. Proc our nany lntlaato coiv-
verodtlons I also know of his continuous difficulties with' the local
peasant leader ani other 'leader*' at Xoootau vhlch vere duo to hie
political attitude."

?h* next affidavit is by hrt. Ilee Rcnatus on page 20. This vlll
be Exhibit 9. Thie le a very brief affidavit. Thoroforo, I should like
to read the eesontlal paragraphs!

"I as surprised to seo Ik. Pokorny - vho lived ae a suh-tonant In
sy house froc 26 Juno 1942 until the end of 1944 - in the dock, when in
viev of hie political attitudo I should have expected to see hla in qulto
a different placo. Dr. Pokorny vas surely anything but a National Social¬
ist. When ve listonod to radio cueic in the evenings, I had to turn off
tho radio tho nicuto novs or other political reports erne through. Ko
did not vant to liston to any of that huabug. I vas surprised when ho in
hi* position as an officer expressed very freoly to his vifo and to no
his adverse opinion of the Hitler regiao. Jokingly I repoatodly told
hla that eoae day he vpuld be dragged forth from our nice sofa cornor ani
be put in Jail if he did not keep his south shut. His anover vas always,
'Senate, you won't betray ae.'"


10C31


Court to. 1

25 Jua 47-*-6-4-I»-Iarr©w (Von Schan)


Then X offer an affidavit of Oswald Tlachsel on p*/;o 21 which vill
be Zxhlblt So. 10. Tlachsel wi ia the hospital which Or. Pokorny had
aa a doctor la tho Vehraacht. X should Ilka to read the flret paragraphi
•Or. Molf Pokorigr froa loaotau hat aot been Involved In politico in
any way. Between 10 Tebruary 1944 and 10 October 1944 I «. hie first
cedioal orderly aad aseietant ia Eohenstsin-Irnstthal. X have been an
anti-fascist ayself since 1929. Z was a aeeber of the Coosunlst Party
of Oersany since 1938 and since 1 Jebruary 1946 X have been a neebor of
the SEJ, that is, the Social Unity Party of Car cany. I was closely con¬
nected with Or. Pokorny and can well reoseber how he hated ailitary life,
how he had only the one desire to see the war ended and to return to his
native country. Dr. Pokorny had already enaed oe for his practice,
since in addition to his practice as a doctor he was an enthusiastic
faraer. In addition to nenbors of our Vehraacht we treated voluntarily
and for humanitarian reasons about 150 prisoners of war, who cans to us
free tho prisoners' hospital about one-half hour away. 1


10032


Court 1

June 25-X-9-2-KD-Maloy-Yon Schoeni


The next document Is an affidavit by Konrad Rltschel,
on page 23, which will be exhibit 11. I should like to read
one paragraph!

"During the war. In 1944 and 1945, I was three times In
the hospital In Lichtenstein In 3axony and was treated there
by the physician In charge, Stabsarrt Dr. Pokorny. Dr.
Pokorny took the same Interest In all his patients, he took
the same good care of everyone, whether they were privates,
officers or prisoners of war, no matter what their nation¬
ality. Ho was not one of those doctors who Indiscriminately
declared everyone fit for service and never dismissed people
from the hospital before they hod not been properly oured.

He did not allow his superiors or the recruiting commission
to lntorfere and thus had to overcome a good deal of
opposition. In the hosoltal he woe generally liked for his
humane and professional qualities."

The next affidavit Is by n oertaln Edgar Bauer. It Is
page 25. This will be Exhibit 12. Bauer was also stationed
a t the Hohenstoln-Emstthal Hospital, which was under the
direction of the defendant. I shall ro'-d briefly paragraph
5.

"Dr. Pokorny avoided all "ceremonial speeches." He
had others deliver those speeches and was never present at
'oelebratlons' of suoh kind.

"Dr. rokorr.y and his wife, who visited him frequently,
listened every day to the enemy broadcasts, especially the
'Voice of America', when this aroused suspicion, he asked
antl-Fnsclst soldiers to listen In on these broadcasts, and
to Inform him about the news.

"Dr. Pokorny had voluntarily on his own Initiative
installed a POV station for skin and venereal diseases.

or three times o week he took care of about 20 English¬
men,


10033


Court 1

June 25->S-;-2-KD-Keloy-Vbn Schoen.

20 HuesIans and 10 members of other nation*.•

Another patient of defondant Pokorny Is a certain
'.’llholm Valter Helnut Helnhold, who was given an affidavit
whioh is on page 27. I shall assign Exhibit 13 to this
affidavit. Here again I shall read briefly:

"I was a oenber of the Wehrmacht as a technical sergeant,
and In February 1945, I case to the hospital at Hohensteln-
Ernstthal in 3axony, which was directed by Dr. Bed. Adolf
Pokorny . The hospital was later transferred to Llohtensteln-
Cnllnborg. as a nattor of fact, I was to hnvo beon qualified
for discharge after about 14 days. I am sure that my release
was intentionally prevented by the chief physician, whioh*
ho personally substantiated, just as with me ho kept numerous
othor comrades by this procedure from furthor duty. Obviously
ho was an adversary of the w»r, and ospoclally an opponent
of the then existing government. *s an example, I montlon *•
that ho oxpressly forbade tho Hitler salute and the use of
military titles, I had the impression that the whole
hospital staff had been Influenced by him in this sonso. Dr.
Pokorny had two radio sets in his privato room In whioh I
was ofton prosent. Tho one radio he used In tho Interest
of tho hospital for following tho air reports. The othor
radio was permanently tuned in to tho English transmitter,
as u hoard for aysolf. Dr. Pokorny evon saw to It that
tnose wore transmitted to the other members of the hospital."

Finally, I offer an affidavit by Dr. Fischer, on page
29 * exhibit 14. Dr. Fischer was the doctor through whose
hands Dr. Pokorny's promotion from lieutenant to campain
had to go. He writes:

far as I remember, the promotion of Dr. Pokorny to
ctabsarzt wrs duo only to general seniority for promotion
determined by length of service as usual. I do not know


10034


Court 1

June 25—M-9-3-KD-Haloy-Von Schoen.


anything of political or special military reasons for the
promotion.■

For the time being, your Honors, I have completed the

submission of documents and would like to continue the

examination of the witness. Dr. Pokorny.

DR. POKORNY
DIRECT EXAMINATION
(continued)


BY DR. HOFFMaNK:

Q. Witness, can you tell the Tribunal something about
the general political feeling In the Sudetenland after the
occupation In 1938?

A. A description of polltloal oondltlons in the Sudeton-

lnnd from the beginning of the Gorman Invasion until the

end will, of oourse, take on cortaln personal conditions

for mo. The entry of Gorman troops was undonlably

onthusnstlcally welcomed by tho population. Some Individual
§ %

oltlrons hod misgivings, however, when on the same day tho
tax notes were posted In the most remote villages. The
subsequent events changed the picture rather quickly. First,
the population was disturbed about the manner In which tho
Jews woro driven out, and following the arrest of the
Communists and Social Democrats, the 11 Jehovah witnesses In
tho olty wore also arrested. Theso political people woro
sent to a concentration camp. Then there come a surprising
change, and even the National Socialists who had prepared for
the overthrow, but who were fairly loyal to the Republlo
woro also arrested. The civil servloo positions were
filled by officials from the Reich, which was not welcomed
by our population. Ve felt that the Sudetenland had been
sold out. People come over from Saxony in cars and took
cloth and coffee, etc. out of the district In large quantl
ties.


10035


Court 1

Jane 25-K-9-4-HD-Moloy-Von Schcen.

•

The financial situation of the population changed suddenly.
The Grech Korun was set at the exchange rate of one to ten.
If a person had the sun of 100,000 Korun and was a rich
son how he suddenly had only 10,0CO narks. The complaints
about this rate of exchange led to a change and the rate of
exchange was made one to eight. Property ownership was
arranged differently than it had been. Reas estate was no
longer rated at Its true value, bat according to the sale
value, and agricultural price ceilings stopped higher
income, but wagoe continued to rise. The nost Important
point perhaps Is that the population shifted. Czech workers
In the beginning voluntarily cane, then oane transports of
Poles, prisoners of war - for example In the neighboring
city of Bruecks there were members of perhaps 27 nations
working. In tho village where I had my farm, for example,

50 per oont. of tho population wore foreigners. Tho
resulting ploturo was an undeniably friendly reception of
the Gormans into Sudetenland, which soon grvo way to a
leos friendly attitude. On this soil of goneral passive
resistance wo learned through tne Poles and Czechs, through
the Communists and Social Desocrotos roloased from the
concentration camps things Walch were not known In the root
of the Reioh. a whispering campaign began. People listened
to tho Allied radio and I considered It Important that
people on leave and the wounded who oaae from tho Eastern
front told that the Russian prisoners of war in the oamps
behind the lines and on transports had very high losses.

Some Frague business men who had constant contact with
Prague brought the news, more and more alarming news, that
the Jews in Prague were being loaded Into trains and sent
of: toward the East. There was much discussion about their
fate, and even more whispering.

10036


Court 1

June 25-M-*9-5-HD-Xaloy~Von Schoen.

Q. Witness, what apeolal news nnd rumors did you your¬
self hear after the ocoupatlon, especially during the war?

A. I think I have already answered that question.

Q. After the occupation of the Sudetenland and later
during the war did you hear anything about sterilization?

A. Yes, we heard of the legal sterilization carried out
according to law in Oeraany, and I remember that the execution
was often discussed by our dootors In the Sudeten Gcu. At
tho end of July 1941 In the ninths of August or September
I had a private patient who oano from outside. His nano
was Volght. I do not renomber his first name exaotly,

Q. Please spell the name?


10)37


25 Jia-M-JMC-l-ifaehan (Irrt. to a Sc hen)
Court Ho, I.


Q Please spell the name?

A Y-G-I-G-T, his first name was Karl or Hermann, or perha.s
both, I had no reason to fill out the index card. At the tine, he
told me about Himler's racial ideas and the proposed sterilizations
to be performed, primarily on members of irviesixable races, Jews,
Sypsios, etc. Of course, I cannot r-snehber the exact wording of our
conversations, that was seven years ago and ir. the seven years I
have experienced a great number of serious things. I an therefore
fcreed to tell you the general ingestion that I gained at the tire.
He told me that experiments were perforaed to this end and the ex¬
ecutions of these measures had already bogun. The means of steril¬
ization was operations and x-rays.

Ho cano to speak of this subject after readir^ an articlo in
"taschau", to vhich I had a subscription. Ho happened to pick up
this mgazino as ho was waiting for no. Sinco a certain dogroe of
confidence developed in the course of tho troitaont arai since l»c was
from out of toon and did not know ay political roputation, ho was
possibly uore open with so than ho would have boon with coaeono else.
On tho other hand, I could not dote mine what position tho man hold.

I observed ho was extraordinarily woll informed about conditions in
Berlin, ospociolly the Important personalities and especially Hiador.

Q VVitnesa, in what connection did thir person tell you about
intended socrot sterilizations?

A I havo soon fron tho doevsjonts that ho presented it in a
somewhat, different context than was actually tho case. Ho told no of
tteso proposed aoasuros in connection with settlement in tho Zasc.

Ha want on tho assmption, whether this r za his own idea or rrhattar
he ires living at this as nows free Berlin, I do not know, but he said
that tho Conan family had an average of two children, wtereae tho
Slavic people had eight to twelve children, I had to concludo from
the conversation that Himler wanted to apply this mass sterilization
to various masses, especially the Slavs.


10038


25 Jui>«ifr- iB - i O-2-ifeehan (Int. von Schon)

Court So. I.

It was not possible for no to check this inforeation, but I
felt that there was a great danger here and if I nay refer to what
I said before, the situation in which we were at the tiao with the
illegal otreading of news by whispering, propaganda, etc., ms tlio
only possibility to learn the facts. So wero inclined to believe
any news that wo hoard. Ho also nontioned caladius and under tho
suggestive. influence of this article, ho imagined that the of foot
desired could bo obtainod with one injection, quite unnoticed. I
believe that ho caphasitod the apparent advantage of mass use. I
connoctod those stntcaunts with thfc ".astern thoator of war. As I
have already said, I thought that tho big losses, of which wo woro
inforaatl, of tho Russian iWsonors of War behind the lines and in
tho ccaps night bo connocted with this program. This racial hatred
of oil Slovaks and especially- Joirs and half-Jaws, cs well as various
hatred illusions, I thought I had to interpivt that th^se intontions
*trc to be oxtoncLd to then.

Q Dr. Pokorny, whnt effect did thoso statenonts hove on youj
what was your fraaj of nind when you heard then?

A Becauso all ordors can, free n'iovo in tt» Third Reich and
absclutoly had to be carried out, th-rc so-uod to bo nothing to be
dono about it. Of course, I was indignant and shocked airi vr.s in on
actually dosporato franc of nind. At first I trlod to discuado hin;

I pointed out, for oxrnplc, how icpossiblo it vould be to inport, and
I tried to nako the thing ridiculous and I said that 1 doubted thoso
statooonts of his. Ho answered, I should boliovo hin, ho had it dir¬
ectly from Berlin. Ho was in an iapertant position with tho SS and ho
nade nc precise to koop it a secret .-nd ho pointod out tho conscquoncos
of an indiscretion. I rusnrbcr that he said to oo that he would toll
Hisirloi* about this natter, about this caladiua. I was in a rather dif¬
ficult position. Later when I thought it ever, I said I would do so
rysc-if. Cno nay wonder that on th_ basis of this relatively super¬
fluous news there such a violent reaction on =y part, but his


10039


25 ‘* T un-c-Se-10-3-lfeehan (Int. von Schon)

Court Ho. I.

credibility was proven by a rather rcnarkablo coincidonco; ho told
tt that the Sinsatzstaebo of tho SD wore already prepared for
Tiflie. I did not know if th nan was crazy or not, but look thoro
the Goman troops voro at that tirw and whoro 7 if lie is located.

Or. the next Sunday, I visited an estate enmer, wnoso wife was
a Czech, rrher. I had released fron prison shortly boforc that by a
trick and ho sho»/cd no a draft card as an agriculture worker, as
Sondorfuohrcr or special loader. H.* said, "look at this; the placo
whoro I an to work is Tiflia." Froa this coincidonco, I concluded
that Voigt was roll infomod. I also concluded fron this and other
re narks that he was not in tho SS but in the S.D.

Q Witness, did this iaproarion of this conversation give rise
to any othor plans or thoughts in you?

A Ore cm understand that 1 began to think ov.r hen; thoso in¬
tentions of Hinder could bo intcrf«.n\.d with or sabotaged. Voigt's
statcaonts had directed qy attention to the article in tho "Unochau"
and the periodicals, but critical reflection aado na realize that
this idea wns unscientific and iapossiblo of oxocution, that tlio trork
and tho cxrorlncnts on which tho article was based had perhaps boon
done on false hypotheses, that the conclusions did not quite corres¬
pond to tho fcctaj and so I got tho idoa that this impossibility of
oxocution night be a way out.

Q Witnoss, now what did you want to do about this article in
"ttasohau?"

A According to th; situation in 19Ul-l/li2, the possibility of
sterilization by drugs in general and with caladiun in particular, as
I shall show Later, was quite impossible. Since th; other two
methods could be effective, I saw a way out bore and a possibility of
helping.

Q Sow, what did you do?

A First of all I procured th, first work on which this publica¬
tion in "Ifaschau" was based', fron the Magazine for Experimental Iksdi-


10040


25 Jai-JMB-lO-U-i&ahan (Int. Von 8 chon)

Court No# I.


cine. I studied the literature, I found nothing about caladius, but
I beesu pore and acre convinced that, as I had said, sterilisation
by drugs in goncral and by c ala dim in particular would have no ef¬
fect whetsoevor, ovon if this idea wore to be taken out of ny hands

%

for soiaj reason or other.

Q Witness, do you have Docunant 3ook 6 thoro? Flo&oo take
your latter, NO-035, Exhibit U*2, pngo 3 in Docunent Book 6 j explain
to tho Tribunal whothcr you wrote this letter and if so, why?


1CO/J.


Court So, 1

25 Jun 47-K-ll-l-iEX-Love (Ton Schon)


A. Tes, I did.

Q, i'ov, to go into the details. First- of all this letter uentione
the so of rrofeMar Hoehn. *ho vet Professor Hoehn? Eov did you cone
to section his? *htt does he have to do vith this letter?

A. I case upon his by accident. I treated the nobility of our
district too and I was personally acquainted with tone fnaillet. I had
a villa at Sothonhaae. I heard that there vaa a guest at the castle who
vaa a friond of Hinder. I imagined that a friend of Einaler who wae a
guest of a prince would bo an influential nerson, vho would be suitable
for taking inforsation to Elaalcr and exerting influence on Kinder and
I dotorained to take advantage of this opportunity. I vent up to tho
castle and ! had sosoone whoa : knew take =y nano in. I could not learn
tho neco of the gontlesan in question. There was rcnarkablo socrocy
about it. When ho received se, I eskod hla whether he would take a
letter to Elaalor and I told bin in troad outline tho contonte of tho
lottor, but I roferred to the high lossoo of tho Russian soldiers and I
notivntod the contradiction in these lossos with tho effect that wo
ncodod workers for reconstruction. 1 repeated this idea very urgently
and askod his to tell thle to Kinder. I lsaglncd that this suggestion
I was unking was to cotintcr-balance Kisalcr's intentions. Ho orosised
to do so and I asked, "What shall I do with the letter?" Ho said,

"Send tho letter to Professor Hoehn in Berlin," and ho gave re tho
address, but I havo forgotten the address in tho aoantino. I don't
know vhether that was really Professor Eochn or not but I think bo.

Aftor a few days I dictatod tho letter; it was sont by nail. The inpor-
tant thing vus that I had to give Hoehn the impression of credibility
so that he would influence Hirrler to that offect.

Q, In your letter you say, "Led by the idea that the enemy oust
not only be conquered but destroyed." Do you find that?

A. Tes.

Q, Khoro did you get this expression Iron?

A. I either hcerd this somewhere or reed it or got it fron the


100,2


Court So. 1

25 Jon 47-:-;-li-2-SeK-Love (Ton Schon)


radio, tut whether it wes told ne that it was •toothing Elnaler had said
I don't ranecbor. In any ease I considered these words suitable, con¬
sidering Hi=lor's charactor, to get his attention.

Q. Shj* do you vrito that you are *vritlng to Hinder as the Peich
Deputy for the Consolidation of Oeraan Jolkdon";

A. It is a nlstake. I learned about that hero by accident. The
title is incorrect; it shouldn't bo Bcputy but Coaniesar. I knew so little
alout titles in Berlin that I nado thie aistake. I selected this title
because I wanted to get Eicalor'e attention concentrated on tho S^st.

h* Vitnose, why did you encloso tho articles of Kodaus and Koch
In tho Maculae for Ixporinental Medicine, and alio the article of Mndaue
in the "tbaohai'T

A. The article in the Kagatine for Kxporinental Hedicino and oven
noro the article in tho Uaechau, which la a soul-scientific work, had
onomoue euggestive effoct by the inclueion of various Quotations, so that
I buliovod I should take advanteg® of this suggostivo affect on Elnaler.
Ei.--.lor' s Inclination toward biologic hocoopathy and other cyotical idoao
vno perhape not generally know- but had long boon known to no. Thoeo
ldena wore at ary rato diecusecd asong doctore, because theso erooriaontB,
such ae for oxacple thcee in - I boliovo it was tho Gustav Vagner Hospi¬
tal in aresdon, the sagaxine Rlppocrotoe, tho newly cublishcd book by
Srnuchle - all referred to the now direction of thought. Thceo oontoncoo
vhich had a particularly euggoetivc effect are underlined in red to
bring thee out.

THX PSZSXXBTS It would sees that these urellninary discussions
ere unduly protracted. Can you not expedite the witness with that pert
of the story *.lch deals Indirectly on the charges upon which ho is boing
tried before thie Tribunal.

12. EGJTKAS: Mr. President, I believo that tho oxolanatlcn which
the witnosc is giving of the various toms used in this letter is lnpor-
test in Judging the natter. Cf course, I shall subnit to the wishes of
the Tribunal and bring this down to a ninlnun.


1C0A3


Court So. 1

25 Jun 47-K-11-3-S5X-L ore (Vcn Schon)


SEZ mSZXEBfi vu«t condense the natter es rueh as you cen, counsel.

sr 3s. samuvt

Q. Witness, la the first paragraph of your letter you used e nunbsr
of exorosslons: "If it were possible to obtain a drug which aftor a
relatively brief tins sight produce unnoticed sterilisation In huran
beings, we would have a r.ev effective weapon.■ Then you write of throe
nlllion prisoners of var, using the tom "Bolshevists*. Will you please
tell us why you used such taxes?

A. Those few sentences include all the deaanda Hisrler would cako
of such a drug, the short tine, the lnporceotiblo effect, f-u the offoo-
tlvo woapon; that was the deaand of the tL.e, a now effective weapon.

Xy own plan was built up on dolay, to bs achlovod through the necessary
prolininary experiaents and so forth.

0* I want to ask you about tho second part of your letter, whero
you soy Dr. Kadaus was not allowed to nake any further oubllcat lone of
this nature, whero you speak of the growing of tho plant which can bo
easily grown in hot housss, and you say that imodlatc research of huaaa
toings, criminals, should bo carried out. Tou suggostod that the
choulcal structure of the offoctlve chonicnl subotanco bo dotoralnod.

Will y«x ploaoo explain how you caro to say this?

A. I beliovo tho aost lsportant thing is this picture of three
nlllion prlsonore of war. This was to havo a euggestlvo effect on
Hlmler; unfortunately it has had tho sane effect on the prosecution and
on the press. As I Cay, I learned of the whole thing in connection with
the settleaent in the last, snd I was thinking of the high losses of
the Busslan prisoners of v«r in the iast and therefore I coordinated
these various concents. I need not have used the words "prisoners of
war" at all; I could have said Russian civilian populction, or gyosioe,
or Jews, or sonetfcicg else. The word "Bolshevists* I need not have used
either but I think I chose it because I think I assured that Fierier used
it and the nuafeer of three = 111 ion - that v*s chosen to rake ny suggestion
as noticeable as oossible. Ail these orpreesionE were aired at ono coal.


lOOtt


Coart So. 1

25 Jan 47-K-U-*-Xa4-L©Te (Von Schcn)


that is, to sake the suggestion at olausible as possible. I thought the
tfcol* thlac over for three or four veeke. The suggestions vhieh I cade
are absolutely impossible for execution froa the scientific ee veil as
the practical point of viev. Tko vhole idea v«s based on their boing
iapoesible in practice. To take individual sentences out of a context
of course distorts the olcture. Cue suet resecber that the clan origi¬
nated by ny asking nyself; hov can I cake the idea platuelble.


10X5


C ourt To. 1

2Sjun*

Ton ask *fcy :>daus ve« not pubilshinn asy sore articles, That wpb
probably r reflection on a renerk of Vo :t's who wee astonished
thrt such important scientific info me. lion «rs published. "The
eneny listens" was a political Blocra at the tine which wrb posted
on every street comer mi printed in nil the newspipers. The politio-
el tendency of the letter eonsietB of one slo.*n Piter nnother. Thnt
vri Just about tU I knew positively about rational SocinllBc.

* VitncBB, do you a^ree with ae thrt this letter, if it had been
■oriously aennt and had hrd practical bucccbb, would hrve brou-ht
niefortune on caey people?

A I wpb convinced that all the su/;restions were absolutely
inpossible of execution cut that they were bo caaouflp-red that one
would hrve to fall for thee becaae they sceaefi to contain nn onomous
advantage. X was convinced that even on a seal! scale nothin,-
could be done with the idee. There wao r. certain risk, of couree,
but in view of the expected effect one would hrvo had to tako that
chrnee.

^ Witness, ie it true that your explanation of this latter hri
been distrusted? Did you not have nnother reason for writing thin
1 ettert

A There arc several -ossiblc reasons for writing such a lottor.

Tor example, a declaration of loyalty which is understandable einco
X vtb in a rather unploreaat situation politically. But I hnvo
already enld that in 19*0 ny political persecution, or Inconvenience
is a better word, had stopped and I hrd no cruse whatever for a
declaration of loyalty, for if I had followed rational Socialist
ideology, then, after 1938, -in view 0 f what I hav© described, I
would certainly hrve been cured.

There were no finmcirl reasons either, Ky practice was so bi*
rt the tine that I would have beer, rind to clvc up half of it.

Besides I hrd ny incone froa apiculture rod real estate. Another
possible reason would be that I was ar.bitious, that I wanted


1C0A6


25 Jaa®“K“3&-X2-3-Sinrcacjc (la.. 7on Schoeu)

Court To. 1

position - as tho press said, slsdirected mbltion - but I believe
tkrt it refuted by the fatft that X rrve up ny university career. I
never wanted outv-rd honor, t had no nore ferr about hein.-
drafted. I had obtained the new* that 1 ves to be taken as an
Oberarst Lieutenant. Second, because of a heart defect after
typhus I wr* not qualified for cilltnry service.

A ■ another reason X hould like to --oint out that thore wr
no possibility of rtterptinr to prevent Elcnler'* intention; all
one could do w P * try to cet his on r. flrec trail. In a democratic
oy*tcn one can ;o to tho press, or I an sure there are other ways.
In rn authoritarian state w e hrd no other way than tho ono I took.
Z Eov, witness, vh'-t did you think would happont
A Because of the violence of tho letter and the nppnrent
specialised knowled.?* and reliability apparently exprossod by thio
letter, I thouht that Ei-der would take up the idea, but I did
aot herr rny sore rbout It and I thought that It had beer, realised
how lnoossiblc the idea was of execution.

^ Did you hoax anythin.? later on!

A fas, lr. tho eprlnn of 'Ug - i era* t ery exrctly whon - I
received rn inquiry fron a Berlin office, I think It was an SS
office, Inquiring who produced the dxu.-. I rtuenberod that beemso
X noticed that they were inquirlnr about a &rur„ and I hnd not eaid
anythin - about a dra~ but about an cxpcricont. Thrt there actually
was a drur. calrdiua D-l, I did r.ot know. I do not have the letter
either.

rS. SAI3T: Tour Honor, I request that the defendant repent that
lest parr rranh as some of It didn't cor.c throu.h very clearly to
=e, when he va.s referring to the dru.?,

rHZ rJESIDSTT: Vill the defendant repeat the lrst sentence of
his testimony?

.-T VIZ3SS: I said that I had not centioned a drur but an
experiment; that there actually was a dru*;, cala.dius D-l, a


10047


25 Jus»-JU3i»12->riap.iucic (Xnt. 7on Schorr.)
Court To. X


honeopethie praprrr.tion, In existence at that tloo I did not know.
Ihrt ii a enclosed la the yearbook of the Xadaas Company for 19 k)
which X did not know. I •hell speak of thla dru*: later.

3T 32. BOnSUIT*

^ Zhea you received m lnouiry, wltneaa?

A Tee, rad X answered It.

^ V hy did you answer rad whet did your answer aryl

A At first X did not Intend to answer, or at lerst I let * Ion r,
tin# peas. X knew thrt the Idea had taken hold, ao to speak. I
thou'tht, aa It were, ea a be,-innln~ of the sabotage, to postpone
thla mover ns lon-t na possible.

k A nd how did 70U coco to mover?

A I net VoL-.t quite by accident nt the rrllrond station in
Voiberr betveen trains, end the repetition of his story and the
pirns md his opinions in cn oven stron/rer fora nnde ne think
thnt it was tine to nnkc the dru.- knovn or rather the firs. Other¬
wise ry whole plan would have been polntlees,

^ Vltneos, you vroto this letter. Cm you renenber vhnt this
second letter said?

• Xt Is difficult to sny. Because of tho length of tine, X had
forgotten the details of the letter nnd tho nrtlclo. Only of tor
seeing the letter md the article a/;rin wis X nble to reconstruct.
Besides it is hardly possible for ao to distinguish vhnt I wroto
or thourht or said ot the tine or rend or vha.t Toi^t snld,

i Then you cm not tell us anything nccurrte about the second
letter?

A To, but I know that I told then tho naae of the firn.

^ Ko*, witness, aside fron writing these two letters did you
^ive any caledius: did you perfora any experinents : did you do
anything else; or was your activity Halted to these two letters?

A I never owned nay cala.diuo. X did not have a hothouse on ny
fan. I never had pay experimental anlaals. I never perfomed


10QA3


10CM*9L


Court 1 ,e ^

Juno 25-A-l 3-3*-3D-Gro s b - V art a r.berg .


AFTERNOON SESSION

(Tho hearing reconvened at 1330 hours, 25 June 1947)
THE IIARSHAL: The Tribunal is again In session.
jtDOLF POKORNY - resumed
DIRECT EX^GNATION - continued

3Y DR. HOFPUANN:

5. Your Honors, I said already before the recos3 that
I shall submit a document to the vitnoes. Dr. Pokcrny - one
of the Prosecution documents. It Is doouaent N0-039 In
Document 3ook 6 on page 16. It Is the letter -;hlch tho
Deputy Gauleiter vrote to Himmler la tho calodium matter.

Vitnear-, do you have this lotter?

A. Yes.

Witness, from that letter you s oe that a Party
office expressed tho aoe views which you oxprosacd In your
letter. Nov, I would like to ask you were there any
connections between you and this gauloitor of the lower
Danubo?

a. No.

5. Vhr.t was the distance between Komotau and Vionna?
a. About 700 Kllocotors.

During the years 1941 and 1942 were you over In

Vienna?

a. No.

What was said of the gaulolter of the N.8.D.A.P.
In charge of the Sudetenland?


Relohsnberg?


suppo


, \<P

lotion hew this\


ou exolaln even If It Is only a


Iter may have oome about?


Since there wete no connections whaeoever between
me and tho gauleiter/l ’fan only make hypothetical construc¬
tions. Gorl^pi c X^s deputy gaulolter and If I have been


ICO 50


Court 1

June 25-A-13-2-H3-Oro8e-Vartenberg.

informed correctly he had a «ry high position in the 3S.

2. Wien did you find out about this?

A. I hecrd that here. Therefore, I suppose that It is
possible on the basis of his position he had &>me relations
to Hlonlor or to his office and therefore he found out about
ny letter.

3 . Witness, continue.

a. There are points which would Justify this con¬
clusion for he refers to the Madau. Journal of 1940 even
though it is apparent from the letter that ho Knew the two
other papers, too. T-an he quotes the scientlfio cart of sty
lettor In such a similar and close fora that the suspicion
Is ot hand here that ho know ay letter and the most obvious
thing la the coma word that I thought about for a long time
the word peropootlves. That is also used In his lettor.
Moreover, it is apparent from his letter that ho was also
subject to the subjective Influence of this lettor because
he believes In the hooopathio effect of this drug. Also ho
writes that largo numbers of experiments were carried out on
rats, guinea pigs, and dogs. And. there Is no ro. rd In the
paper of experiments on rabbits and dogs, only a hint •-•hioh
la not proved. Ko also writes the old culture of the
Priest’s profession wnlch have to .. followed up or the
sentence that through the feeding of Bchwelgro.ir, that la
caladlum synonymous what the natives trl-d to iring the
enemies to extinction. This is evidence tort he was subject
to the Influence of this paper. Thus, I am of the opinion
that t.iis letter is plagiarism and Gerland due to that became
an aide by inadvertently reporting this natter to such a high
office.

‘‘fitness, car. you still tell the Tribunal today for
what reason you as a physician, after having seen the papers

10051


Court 1

June 25-A-l^-3-HD-Cro0 s-V/artenberg.

of Xadaue and Xoch which you included in your letter, came
to the conclusion that en e^eriment with caladlum would have
no practical success? Just answer this question with yes
or no.

I was convinced that nothing would happen with caladlum.
That it la impossible to sterlllre a human that way and even
in small amounts that is, in small experimental series, it is
almost impossible to work with onladiun.

Q. Kay it please the Tribunal, before I oontlnue to
question the witness I first want to introduce a number of
documents from ay Document Book II. First Document Pokorny
16.

MR. K^RDY: Your Honor, I don't have Document Bc*'k
No. II. I wont through all my document books this morning
and I an unable to find Dsouaont took II,

DR, HOFFMANN: I only hrve it in Gorman.

MR. HARDYS I oan't follow in German very well, your
Honor.

DR. HO?F24«l.’N: Your Honor, I eutoittcd my Doouncnt
3ooka ns it should bo done and I regret very much that the
Prosecution did not got one but I shall be ablo to change
tho situation by having an English book fotohed.

HR. ' ;.RDY: Ho can proccod with his toounents, your
Honor and I can render any objections later if I desire to
do so. I oon follow him.

THE PRESIDENT: Very well, with that understanding
couneol may proceed.


10052


25 June 47-4“l4-L-H>-Carr.nr (Int. hrtcnburg )-Fll
Cjurt, I

DR. I'&YlUii : I n-v submit :1 cuet:*, #1 6, d;ciexnt Book 2, page
31. There are fsur photostats if photographs ...

THE PR2SIDEKT: .fiat ia the exhibit nu-Per y-u naaigrejC t.> this
-I-cuacnt, counsel?

DR. nOFFIL-N: #15, our Honca.

They aro ph.tc graphs free the K&nual af Biological Rcaeiics of the
division by Dr. Gerhard Manaus frx: th_ year 1938. Photogrepha have
been token cut of the b-ok col tr.vo bum cert If lei by a lUary.

The rvxt dosuuirfc I intrxbico ia Document #17, page 34. ?..Ja
ia the ^une-rrph by G. Ladaua anil Fr. E. Koch, "Studies -f .mltnl
ExperLtnts PertaLains to SUr±Usati~n by Medication.* Thia io the
•a-rurrpph idiicii is thw .* oia the article in the "U.oach-.u" - ne Uiich
ir.s Ola incliSv.1 in the Ltur by Dr. PJorh?.

Th_ next Ixucnt I w-uld like t_ aubcit ia Djcuntnt Pakvrny 418,
Exhibit 17, J»*o 49. This ia a . -n graph « 'Laris Plants' in the
Light of liep oriental Research" m "DL Uxobhau". Thia io tho
'..cuacnt hich was .-.la incl-sod in Dr. Pokorry's letter.

4a Document 21 I oub.dt excerpta frxi Clinical EnJ-crin.lpjy, a
t-at bo.k for physicians and at^cits, by ..rthur J-r-a, page 58.

Thia will be Exhibit #20.

TIC PRESIDENT: C urool, uir.t haa b„c .w rf exhibits nuhera
18 arxl 19? Ere y u skipping...

DR. "CFTILK: 18 nd 19? - ix fr.ve exhibits mefecra 17 ftnl 18.

Ni, occua- a, Yur Heflr, I have n-t si- Ittod 19 as yet. I
aubeiitte/. Domexrfca 18 an! 21.

THE ?RId3IDEK7: .Tu. y-u assigned t D -cuaent 21 Exhibit #20, as
I urdcratvi! y-u. It sfc mid be Exhibit #18, ^ -mid it rct?

DR. HCFrl-Ji: Yes, yjur ILner.

I then subdt D-curxri Pokarny 22, page 59. It ia an excerpt
free the text bxk jf General Pathology and the Pat holjgleal Enatoqy

of K. Ribbert, and by Dr. Earl Sternberg. This ia Exhibit 21.

10053


25 Juno 47-A-l4-2-RH£arrar.r (int. --rtcnbux^)

Court I

22 PRESIDENT: That should be Exhibit 19, Counsel.

3T DR. HCf JlL'lf:

0 : ^ 3 , I bog your pardon.

Then I aitcit Docuxnt 23. This is Exhibit 20, pr.jc 60.

/itness, bef.ro,you acre nlroody speokirs about the application
of c R l a dlun in large and soil dosoo. Tfould the adcinistration in
scnll doses have anything te d- wit. houoopathic application and :h-.t
*13 your attitudo toward hoocopcthie exx’-icino in 1941?

A: After x>rdom -x'.icin: hod put ita knowledge -n r.n absolutely
s.^fo basis, -n thu hi air f cxpcrlaatd research, t ttat ojdcrn
so.Heine t-dya cm bo expired to .r.thcootics. 1 , therof.ro, ixvor
iccoptcd tix the -ry ef the dee trine A hooocpethic colic inc .hich
doco not hr.vc on experimental basis. Tbit certain aicccsaos were
-.chiovcd by h-ocopathic oodicirr 1 attribute U the fact that Ux
Iju corccntrati n of ix Heine - let us dry D-i end D-2 ~ are the
snno as th-so in do ileal theory aid, an ro.e eases, they ore even
large, The noxt conccntrati ns, D-3 and D-4, art, in accordance with
tho strllost aoiunts use/. in pharmou logy md tho rvst f Lie c n-
contrations, u? t. D- 1 C 0 , ar- n.t based -n any uxperi—ntal bails.

This is nly a brand stataieot. .. jroat Coal could be said about it

j: .'itneos, in 1941, did you know tho fir.- f k&dnus and Koch
In Drcsdon-Shdobcul? Did y.u know its rr o or did you have any
relations with this fim?

A: I knew -nly the .._e of the fir a thr ai;h the advurtisoctnts
which ware scat t. ec an’, because I examined the dru-s -n the basis
■t these cdvcrtiscaorts an! tr.s not satisfied with the result 3 .

• Q; .-itness, in 1941, when yea wrote this letter, die*, you sto
freathe papers A iiidous and Koch v*hio dealt with cala’iuu - did
you see ir. that m attempt n the part f Lie fire: t- cpai up a ndn
field f:r hjocjpathic ex Heine ir tfcaaselv_s?

A: Fr:_ the rep-rt, it is clearly visible that Lie firu liad tho


ICO 54


25 Jun: A5—A—14“3“RHEarrov (Int. Jartcrfcurg)

C-urt I


Intention in rc^.rl to inner secretionary diseases to brent then idth
plant .‘ru^s ant! now «cnt^l to brir\3 a nunber -f aricines far
this f i eld , Portap* it wxild trice up too ouch ti-L if I would
quote, tie Appropriate places front:*. paper, but perhaps, ir. Jidor to
clarify the er.tto: .nco, I iT.y quota in th, paper on cxpriuontftl
ixdicinc, pr.jc 63, it say a ttr.t vegetable materials - hormones .....

'i: (Interrupting) .itness, please state the p-.j*. vhcru it
is written.

At Page 83 •

TJG P..23lLF2rT: .fitness, is the qu-t.ati. n whicn y_u propooo to
r«-.aA very lore? if it is, I vault', surest that it be prepared and put
in .as a document,

9

ITICSS: Ur. Pr-sidofi, I uveto down, vtat I th .night at tho tiuc
thoujita passed very quickly. Of exsrse, this dcscripti n is soccihat
Involved, If it is desired, I can ouboit a scientific J-cu^cnt no .a
an..pie. However, I would liko to ask that I cry rofer t- the tain
points,

uH. HAEDY: T-ur H-n r, this lamoit ho is referring to - tho

•

translation is in ur .. cuceflt oxks. If wo could the page nui>ur
should Ir.vo the exact translation -f *.iiat ho is ivadin/>

IHS PHSMOZHT: 111, c-unscl, the Tribur.il has had tho ibcuoont
bocks and has examined the., and '.ill cranlr* then v;ain. ,/hy is it
advisable or helpful for tlx. witness t- ope at what is already before
th. Tribune! and ir. th„ docu.xrfc book? He can call .attention to
cert'an LT.ttera if he considers t.x..i important, but I o-«. nj ->boct
in reading rrhat already rev*. bef3-e us in tile ease.

DfU SOFT -if: lir. President, 1 ajrce ulth y u entirely, a dy,
it 5CCM3 correct t that the witness should explain Wiat his
th.urjits were at the tiat ir.cn he s-a. .vsod t..at th^«, drugs '.r-ull


b. unsuccessful


10055


25 Jttno-/r-14-4-fK- Harrow (int. .artvnburs)
1


Fr^SHETT: That is entirely proper, exinsel, but I sc c no
ob>-ct ta re-re--ling ir.at w. already have befa*c us. If he will

give us tlx. pagw jf th. iccuctnt fc-o!c nbarc this is f.uncl, \/o can

/

follow his cx p L ' . n atiana fr-a the -Icuaoit b.ek.

UR. Dr. Pok-my, thus, as ym have hear 1 , it is not

cxpc&att tc roa*l that pnrfe frjfl the uocuccnt. Ins tea-1 1 w u3_. _iko
tc repeat ty quest!-n.

TK3 PZBSUEKT: .it 11, counsel, first gibe us the page aal voluac
of the (loeuticnt b -k where uc can fine this document ts »4iich his
reference is aulc.


10056


25 Jbns (Ir.t.' artonburg)

Court Ifc. 1


m. ‘TmANN'f Vr, President, I sonnet give y.u tbet fiav-re, I
•rwld lika to have tho -.dtr.oss state tho if.go nurbor,

1 Traj Irrcfc .-ego did yea quota?

A This ia scoOThat co Tlicr.to.% Of esurso, I could net refer to the
Cnsliah B: mount B ok, but I roforrod to tho riginal pages, and 3inco
the first i«*»cr is the basis of -xpcrfcuntal nadicin., I regard it as
Description I, and the aper in ttosebnu* as *:'iti r. II. Thoroforo,

I cited the page mufcers cf those oririn-l Vcuiur.ta f tho -nictations
I wanted to road, which are included ir. y C-raan Demount ~ook. Tho
nago rairbors in the JnglL/.i edition I cannot state.

D’., ®rVAHx !i. frocidont, I .oar the ago nurbors in tho English
jy.mraont nook arc the sr;*a as in th- Goman.

Q .fitness, givo tho nuabor of tho pogas in thu (Xanax B. cu;aar.t
Book, tho rar&or cf the i-agos?

A In tho paper on <sq>orinontAl nodicino it is D:cu:;ont Hi in tho
DooiKwnt rook, and th t io on ;a;.o 83.

IT. lATJffi I6^ k , your honcr*s book.

BIT. . T-jCJ'Ti Th: itnoos ay m oood vdth the crrplanafcicn.

TO. ‘.TTHESSt Sin 11 I quote tho paragraph?

Q -r old y u ploaso return to 7 -;uooti-n? I askod yea in t’i«i
erpjrir.'.nto rtdeh f nstiu bc.oio of tho papers ccuid y.u draw art’

conclusions?

A I «xuld draw tlx. ccnclo3ionc tint tlx. fim fs-oparod drugs froa
the troataunt of inn.r s c action .’iarrdars. Pert of those ara venereal
diseas, )rc*xu:atiens, ‘. at is drags f r th- s-.mal sph.ro. This ia also
apporont frcti tho .«por, that th- rir.i wasinclir.-d to introduce Cain-dun
as a 3 -xunl drur. I airca-y stated th r.x in regard to th, drug Cala^un
3-1, which :«i airoabo.r. introiucei at t'.rt ti: , it as not known to

3 Tlxs fr:n the- very beginning for 'i so -c.n rdc reasons was tho
adontific value cf tha trie doubtful for you?

(no rospcr. 5 '-).


10057


25 June 1:7—A7D-15-2^>.loy (Ir.t. 'artonburg)

C urt !fe. i

A Tho scientific vrj.ua or tho value of the ±*ue Cdaeiua L I
I i-jubted lr. tor on altogether, for the sia n lo roes on that th. authors
stata that they carry cut osparirsuts with niew '..hich brou. ht about
aVoriltzqtlcn in 10 :dc^, but those ro3ults, horror, c-uld not bo
pro die od legally. At that t±'.v tho arporiuonts \dth the rats end had
at yot boon carried cut, and it vas consilorod s ecrhrt daring that
on the basis of this scientific basis to introduce a drug tc increase
potency un-’er tho none cf Caladiun >-l.

Q 'ltross, Is a hoaeopathie basic principle applied in thoso
pay-ors rjv ! fr a y.ur point of viau of clerical nodiolno -..-hat is y.ur
attitudo?

A Pofcro answering tills question I vouiu like tr> say since 7 did
nrfc knew Cal D-l I considered tho ontiro pr;x.r as an advert is orient,
no to say, that is a ;-r pamtion for tho introduction of a dru-. Tho
hsrioopatldc principle, the roverral, that a Iru- in enlarged dota-. n
is destructive and in heuoopetfalo 1 sagos is ir-'ductive, is cited by
tho authors, and I an un 'or t*» irprossion that duo U thj allegedly
dostruotivo offoct ef CaT- Stun, Just b-causo cf this hwacoyothlc
principle cf tho rt ruv.rsal' offoct, tho pharruoc logical ofoctiv.^.
of Crlr.diua I>-1 ir supposed to bo proven.

Q ’itruss, what doubts -lid u '-—vo In J «V il an Lj the noiantific
basis of tho work?

A Aftor tho second paper in tho "Onochau*, that is c sortL-
sciontlfic lay i :urol, which is based cn tho s-.-o principles as tho
scientific paper in tho journal for oxn«ri" .nt-J rtcinn, certain
contradictions booGao obvious in both . ■ . foro doubted tho

valuo cf the work. Ibis assertion I -ould like t support by tin quo¬
tations, Tli. question to rthni extent the nalo spore can bo lueagod by a
poison so fchrt th. yreg. ry would also bo tbaagod i3 a concept in ’d-
cino which used tc bo called goru spcssctic damge. This t.t.g a juastion
of conflict in horodLtary ayphilliB and i. . an , rith c?.or^nts of
nicctinj end alcohol, an* Ter all students :f eugenics.


IOC 58


VctOf in the cxparlnootol aodlclno this first paper, /-age 75 of tho
criinai, I qu.toi

•Bhothor tho process -f c aelo for only £ ah:rt tiao with Ccladiun
'id. rj., which hid been troatod, 111 bo da eased, Sinco it Is cutsido
cf cur paper re cannot xcido r.ltb certain tv. “o nip rant to stato that
cno fonalo nornal rabbit in spite of good earo in the stablo end good
food prciucod living anirr.la for one day,

ir- IfJDTi Ho is quoting nrw fren tin- doeao-nt book and I haven*t
boon ablo to catch up Tilth hir. end find tho quotation, I would like to
uoo this in tho ocurso ^f cr=ss-ox~:inaticn and foil nr this poqphlct, an
if you will hesitate while re find this pega I rill apj rodato it,

nr. P^IDiKTi Can tha witness refer to tto nuribjr of tho pago
in thj Horvxn ctocitwnt be !:?

TT! ' ITK S3i V. Prosirtont, I at'tod pago 75 cf tho original
article.

D C. KF ' JJXt Pago h.2 ef the Oocuont 1 ok II — CTroction, it
is ccigo UL-A,

T5H '^ID"?rrt You say it is pego M-A?

73: 7.TH5SS Oh, Yes, y.ur ca:r, i*. is pago Ul-A to pago U2,

Shall I repeat?

Q He, ploaoo continue,

A This is on ;ego U2, /Ago liL-A, tho second 3ontoncoi ;, It ©an
\>nly bo noatloMd that c norncl fonal- rabbit gavo birth to young which
lived only onu dry ’cs^dto tho bo3t of earo after having boon rated with
a nalo, which had net boon troatod rlth OrladLua a sufficiently long
tine,"

I would like to a d re. as on oxplamtlcn that young urinals
rhich livo f r ono dry ero a daily * ccurrcnco with rabbits, and this
3aoond version —

Q TThat page?

A Papo 632, ct tht. better, of the original iocu^.nt.


10059


25 'Jov’ li7--ATD-l£-i4£&oy (Int. rxt.^xirs)
3surt Ho. 1

q P^3o 632? Tl^.t canaot be e^rract.

A Too, it is.

Q Mr.t ?c*a?

A 632.

Q Tew mat be irintrdmn. vttqoM?


25 Juno-.'r-l£-i^S£-iU:chir. (Int. Uartonburs)
Court I


DR, HOTFK..KH: It is page 52 of tit document b.ok, Your Honor.

THE FR28XDBKT: Proccod, witness,

HE .TTJESS: I qaotei "It could not be finally doteminod
•hotter any ill-effect la prxfcco! In th.se youns ones, which dcsconH
froa n cr.lo, :hich has been treated with caladiuo jnly f.r ft di >rt
period of tine, hoswor, it s-c.os probable on the basis of the results
obtain©! to ifctc."

Such an important conclusi-n, teich is tr^at-! in such i*. super-
fic Lai cran-r and categorically state-'. hardly scene! to be <xrrc.ct,
to oo,

BY DR. HCFFl’.KN:

Q: ./itness, tho questi-n if sterility seco-s t no to b- one of
tho lost in.'or tart factors in these cninal exp. rlncntn. Frau the
tru-.tr\cnt of this aucsti n by the .authors of thowc papers; did yt*i
jathor ary thing fr a your negative attitu 'o?

Id. n t Trant t. qu.tc the sentences uhicn refer to tills in
order net to ta.k. up t. o nuch tin. her-, but 1 nly want to refer
t. the charts which nr- n pages 71 na! 75, as «3r.rt No. i and Chart
?i . 4-.. f tit original, that is n jr.> 75.

liR. HARDY: It airfit help uatt-ra so. .euhat if th. ic for*’.ant \dll
refer t- th - d.curent nxrobers, as it refers t_ th- various pn .es and
charts. Kc has Juepc! fr . .no d.cuccnt t.. the -thcr. That has
c nfused us considerably and to- roc.rd .dll not show he is referring
t Exhibit 16 as .rt exhibit is opposed t. tit -thcr. This ref-rs to
Exhibit 17, which is nc part of th- tcntla-ry anil r-f-ro t- dxhibit
16 in tit .thcr part. This refers t pa> 71, which is the pamphlet,

which I believe is Exhibit .Vjnbor.I canfUse xysolf. If he 'fill

refer t. tho exhibit manors, it will help ao a bit.

THE PHZSIDSrT: Counsel, the Trituna 1 Iocs n't wwt to prejudice
the defendant * s case, nr interfere with the oid-rly procedure, but
the or.nncr in rtiich you are proceeding is certainly confusing. .ftaild


10061


25 Jtmo 47-i.-16-2-«eehan (ir.t. gortcnbujs) PH

Cecrt I*


it nit be possible f r the witness to stale his c nclusions and Inter
on you can vadtc a schedule as to the ?r.;.c and atker -n which ho b-.scs
the c -Delusion. Ia: ne..ly tii£ this, as I d- not want t.

inti.rfcro idth th- prv^cntati.n of yair ease, but this exth d of
jr jccolin- is certainly aonfUsLigi
BY OH. HCfFiLJWs

Q: ..itne ss, you can CC 17 ucil state y.ur fin -1 conclusions and
don't alleys r^fer t- the jr.^os, y:u can rwfa- to the- quite gonemlly.

Er. President, that is wh at I u^ant bs-fn. The paper is
D.cuucnt 14 frou Exfcrixx.nfcal ^iebe, the sec :nd fr-i "Dio Uuschau"
Doouxnt Ko. ID is thv teuucntary and I uill arjte th* cuiparison
botnoon tho tu. papers in writing if I ecy be p^ruitted to do so to
draw ti.. final conclusions. Bun I would, in nccor lance with y-ur
•rishca. Your H^nor, be able t- ednit iy final c ncluai.ns, in writing
and state tie page nueburs.

r\. Tl'.eSo scientifir rcfer*nois 1 shall th-n subuit in the f:ro
of an ffidr.vlt, Y-ur Konvr.

T5S PRZSIDeJ.T: Boat 'fill b- porfcctly satisfactory. Proccod,
idtncso.

T!C ITI^oS: Bw paper asserts that sterility ir. fcugan boirps
nay be pertrnent in the tele end in the fcmlo it « mV. nly brine.
sbJttt -a tci*>-rarjr sterilisation. If, h.never, -no takes a 1 ok at
the charts jn pa>s 71 and 75, nc sees tnat of the rnln animals
f.ur regained, tu. -f th-sc die, an is killed. T--evaluate the
length of sterility nly erv. single aaLd. regains and this .'.nirsl
is ebserred for 44 days. On the basis of sxa: an ocperirxnt rs can¬
not draw any ©onclusi.no to the effect that a preparation brings ab.ut
a pc mane ft sterilisation.

dtSi regard to tix fe=r.lc aninals, of twelv. aniir.ls, five die
of poisoning of the genie 1 , throe bring no results raid thru*, rer-.in.
Eics- thro- ninals are .bscrv^I fer ir-. 40 t 45 days, a span of


10062


25 Jur~ 47---F--16-3-Mocfcan (Ir.t. .fcrtcnburg)
Court 1


tine which is certainly r. ;t suf fie lent t: be Ale t. ask. any
states: A out the length of stc;il±ty, because the vary Caai&A
by ttv: poison rc-cds at lvast that length of tic. in -rdcr t- divert
itself f tills Iidq t.r- chr.nic polo da- by the rug r to recover
fr-a it.

BY DR. HQFFICHKi

jtnosc, did you c.nsidcr tfc nuabor f the ar.ical aeries
sufficient to clarify such questions, r ir*- the scientific point
,f view ir.o it n-cossary t -xpcrlxrt with ere anicals?

Tile first oxp.rlxrt with calc animals was carried out uUh .
nine nninals, three f thou died and -nly oit roa aln od alive. I
already ^enttonoi that. Five were killed.

Of t.V fcxmlo ardcals, a total twelve, there -..ere f ur failures,
five died of ohr nic pis nine, at least *,.at is hnr I regard the
caladiuceffect, t* were killod an’. tire. rc_airv.d alive, thoso
sixll nuebers t. us will in n. way prove anything.

I only \r.nt t qu.te the amber of animals thich -arw necessary
t. .lev-lop .a test. St least 40 anLr.lo are nccossaxy redly in order
to carry _ut the tost.

q: ltnesp, -sinus carries -ut a contr.l exp-ri.jont with hnoll-
•rass; do you !:nw shat that is ~nd do yxi think such a c.ntrol
gr up is convincing?

dftcr I Inscribe I the Caladiun effect as an unsjxcific
effect -f lcuc-cydcs, another poia.ttms plait wail: hr.vo t. bo
used no a control. Kn UfiWSB is ir»t poisonous, therefore tho
leans fif cxparis.n is lacking*

Ha;, U*. '.rug wr.s ndainisterc’ b mans of injection or orally.
By having, it .addnistere-: orally, it is a.thin- vise but fecdiic
if it is r.di-lstvr-. as aa injection, it is very dangerous because
it is net sterilise! • Buroftro, the c.r.trol nniaals wh arc Given
Knollgz&ss die as follows: one .xlo rat >ts 5QS, if y u have two.


10063


25 June—P! P- 16 * 4 Ifa chea (Int. .ortcnfcurg)
C-urt I


Of thj f xjalc cintr.l aniaals, there K'.s -rijinally three, all of
then diod, that is 1C0$. One eann .t u:rk :;Jth aid! mriy.rs,

Q: .itness, ir. the pap^r you cite the c: reept -f sterilization
by ccdicirts; please trite a. a. rci:~rl:3 m that subject?

A: The ceplarvition of sterilisation by -e-Iicincs is c: neept
-ftich wr.s Jeno-.n alrcaiy boforo this paper nas written. Actually it
cron originated in 1907 \i\ cn Hippcl end Baden stocher as subsidiary
findings nut this pheniLxn-n, Uadaua md iloch, h..cver, talked as.
if they had i.-troducod this c-neept ;f tho nodical literature. It
is p-oaiblc that 1 nisundurstjod theu in this respect, hoircvor.


1006A


25 June 47-*—S'S-17—1-C cok fertenburg)
Ccurt Vo. 1


Witness, do you find quotations in the paper which did not
sound scientific?

A* In scientific papers sentences like the following sound
somewhat peculiar. In both papers, for example, they write the natives
administered caladiua in large amounts to their enemies in order to
extinguish their potency and I cannot imagine how one can administer
large amounts of a poisonous plant to . ry one, especially to an
enemy. That is a sentence with a surgestive • ffect. Furthcnr.oro, in
the second version on pap* (CO of the original* the authors speak
of the unconscious eating of this plant among the natives and that
they regarded the plant as a welcome nr an a of secret elimination of
inconvencint enemies. They write also for that purpose they also
poison their arrows with thn sap of the plant and administer the
poison to the natives by the wound made by the arrow. This is a vory
direct one pari son.

THE PSESraUT: Counsul is it not possible to ask the witness
questions eooc ming his concluaions. The Tribunal is satisfied ho
has mad very oxtensiv*dy on this sifcVct. Can he not give in a noro
concis* fern his conclusions on the matter thet e. ght bo portin-nt
to the inquiry than by these lengthy mf r»nc s to books of poinon
arrows and so on? I fail to see any materiality to it, that it has
any probative value wtet3oov* r. 1 don't want to interf-re with your
case as I said before fc cannot the witness begin with his own work
and Me own conclusions, what ht -tid or did not do?

DH. HCJrMAN: Tour Hofor, th- witn ss as I have rlrwdy stated,
did two diff rent things, thrt is, h» wroto two li ters, that is
everything he did, »» tostified to that -ffect, and I would liko lor
fdm to show and to -fcseri v e rf-.y at that time wh-n ho studied tho
p apt rs he was of the opinion that nothing could be 1 chiovcd with this
caladiuc. That is why I an asking him about it. Kow*.vht, I do not want
to go into lcng scientific discussicre. I only thought that the*'-

1GD65


2 5 Jma i-17-C-Cook ( irtmburg)

Court Ho. 1


statements representing what h» f«H at the tir* when he r-alized
the scientific failure of this work and he told so that, and he
aloo wants to tell that to the Tribunal,

THE PRESIDENT: The wit/.* ea can tr*ry prop rly state what scien¬
tific works he read and giv* thea ad put in any reference to the
aci« ntifie works that you d'-sirc and the Tribunal can r nad thee arid
r^xacinn thee and it S'-ncs that the witness could then state fron his
studies he nade a*id rla rxreination of these bocks, and wo could
then have th-a in tho docua*nt books, that he n ached certain conclus¬
ion*.

’to will hav» a recoss in a few noae-ts and you can consider tho
Batter further but th witness is not enligiti-oinr thu Tribunal by
tho discussions ho is girir* at this tine, as I said by poison
arrows and certain caus< * of this drug, and it su*.na to no that tho
natt>r night bn shorten d * ith benefit to all concern'd, including
the defendant,

PT uH. HOPFJIAH:

C,, *itnoss, I should lifco to ask you tho following question:

At tho tiao did you conoidor hew such caladiun would be n«jd d in
order to st rilizo a nuober of hunan being*, perhaps even tho figure
of 3 nillioo ihich younontioned in this lott-T, always with tho
prornouisite that it would hart* b<*n possible at all.

A. *^r. Hoflaan, thoro woro a largo nuebor of reasons which
convincod no that th« collusions of tho authoris could nee bo
correct. Ky lofct r is based on that fact. Kow a largo nunfcor of v ry
important and cssontiel points *caiid ba nSntionod ana I would like
to add briefly that after nil I have boon .siting in order to sp<ak
h ro now at this .*onent t«m sooths in prison. I sent ny letter on the
basis of nodical consid- r -ion, Th'-rtfore, the nodical defense i3 ny
part of thu justification. !<>w in ord«r to answer your question. r ron
the tier, of the troataent to »fcich the ani-als wens subjected, in ono
case 40 to 90 days, in anoth* r case 77 to 218 days. That corresponds

10066


2 5 Juno A7-A-S-17-3-Cook (i*rtenfcurg)
Court So. 1


to aim—third to ontwhalf of the length of th*' life of a rat. I
only aention this t* show how enomously long tho tir.'ss were during
which the anlcals were under tre&tcent and that this cannot bo
applied to a hunanb eing at all because otherwise they would have
to bo treated t» enty to thirty years. During tlda tine two dosages
results, -och .-ninal received a 0,5 cc of fresh sap daily, the rats
veigh 150 to 2C0 grass each, that is they wore young, because a
grown aninal weigh §00 grass, and if ore calculates this dosage
and applies it to hunan beings, whose average weight of 70 kilo-
graes, the theoretical storllication dosage which results for a humm
being is 13.79 Idlograos. In tho second dosage under th« tiu.o con¬
ditions a necessrry anount of 31 kilograas results. Since frerh
sap can neither bo injected -or oth-rwiss bo used for hunan beings,

it can neither he sterilized nor pres or/ .-it lias to be proparod

phamnceutically becaus* It involves the danger of t-ntaus. Th-roforu,
the use of raw material :.ould even double tho nr.ovnt, thus according
to the nooago or.- it wouid bo 27.5 kilogracs, and according to
th- sveond 62 kilogrees. ^nco I ’/rot*, in th- letter it is v-ry oasy
te raiso then in hot hounoe, to supples-nt tho cnlculrtions I would
Ilk© to go into thet 3tat'»a'mt, l-avin6 out th* conoid-ration of the
difficulty of raisin tropical plants.

!IR. H HOT: ! ny it pi* ago v our Honors, I understood th d fonlant
stated he woild ’ rite a papor in tha fem of an affidavit and anhnit
it to the Tribunal containing t-s- technical rv~t< re. It 8--ns to no
that the issue nsroly is whether or not he haa r^ad these . ;.rticular
articles published by l och arri J^daus, whethor or not thu defendant
could i.t'*r=in-' wh-thnr thrt dmg caladiun seguinin would in effuct
sterilise a pa-son if applied te thra. I sons to n that lis defonse
is that he realized it would not sterilize a person, hence ho
rucomer- s it's use in .. • ffort to hoodwink Hinder. It that is it,
well it se«ss there is no necessity to go into technical explanations,

10067


2 5 June C7-A-3’ —17-c-Ccck ( •art'-nburg)
Court *fe. 1


As » =attar of fact to aid the Tribunal, the frcs-cution will under¬
take to take the e publications and also have an expert write a
tr-atlso for the Tribunal in sinpl*- la^r.-.-i's language to aid them
and tho -defendant nay do likewise and avoid all of this unnecessary
testimony in open Court*

THT P£ SICTTs As I have st«u d s; v^ral tin a it appears to
the Tribunal th t the ntt r ccaild be core properly pruannt<*d to the
Tribunal in the written fort by way of a docunont and it could be

studied at l-.iaurc and understood =uch better than it c uld bn by

\

listening to the witness' scientific dissertation froa the witness
stand* My sugg -tioes w-rn "ot intmdrd in isiy way to injure tho
d-«f«.n'ant 1 s caso but I think would help it since listening to tho
Btatc'mts froc the witness stand is r»ther confusing.

^hn Tribu* al will take it 1 s r ccss and counsel nay cor.rin* r this
r«att' r and discuss it and S'*j if it cannot b> arreng< d to lot tho
defendant Porkomy dictate his scientific thesis as he plonsos
rather than tootify ^ere to his conolusi. a and whnt he did and why
he did it, and then the vhole natter will bo before the Tribunal
exactly as v«U as inde- u in beut-r l’orr. than it would be if dotailod
by hia free tho witness stand and written i-to the record in this
mnnnor. The Tribunal will now be in recess.

(A short rccoss was taken)


10063


2$ Jun—A—' 1—19—i^lross (Int. von Schon)
Court Ho. I.


THU ARSKAL: Tha Tribunal i? again in session*

K-y it ploaso your Honors, tho iL.oadsnt Irugowsky is absent
this afternoon having been excised by the Tribunal.

T!E IRTSIDHSTs Trvj Secretary will note for the r.cord the
•baorce of tho defendant Irugcwsky pursuant to oxcure by tho Tribunal
so that K say consult tith his counsel.

Counsel for defense ray proceed.

3Y O!. HdTTAKr

Q Witness, ploaso coarc nt briefly on tho question what you
thought about tho nusber of hot houses which would have been needed
to cultivate ealndiua in Oenaeny.

A Basically I can say that tropical plants grown in hot
houses lose thoir poisonous effect or rather their capacity to jto-
duco poison. That is connected with tho lack of tho natural or.viron-
nont. As for caladiun specifically that is a plant of tho tropical
forest end is subject to vary dofinito conditions of growth which
aro vury difficult. Tb* mSbor of hot houses noodod car. bo soon
fron the anount of sap veiich I calculated would bo noccssory. Tho
plant grows about 1 aotcr high in a year. 7h:n it needs an cron of
1 square HOtcr and weights of about ly to 2 kilo grans would give 1
kilogram of sap. Thorofore, for 10 hunan beings 27U square notors
wjuld havo boon noodod. For 1,000 27,hOO squaro notors. That would
be 132 hot houses. Since tho letter gives tho high figures for
100,000 hunan boings 13,200 hot houses would have bocn noeded. Sinco
ny lot ter givos tho figure of 3 million, a su,zgoetion which could bo
rsado only by one insana person to another, I aust givo the calcula¬
tions for this figure, too. If it wore possible if one wanted to
sterilise 3 x IOC, OCX) persons a year, it would havo taken 10 ye .. s
to reach tto goal .and 6 x 100,000 - it could have been done in 5
years. According to dosage one 79,000 hot houses would havo boon
needed. According to dorge two 151,800 hot houses tropically’ boated
for 5 to ten years. Then ecou-s tho path fron laboratory and hot house


10069


25 Jujv-A-iE—19-2-Gross (Int. von Scbon)
Court Ho. I.


to production which during war tiro, especially in Genany, would
have been vary difficult. Then I know ttet I could afford to spook
in whatever way was nocoosary at tho tlao.


10070


25 Jun-A-' 3-20-i-Knrrow (Int. von Schon)

Court lie. I.

D?. t RCTFUINi Mr, President, at tho beginning of ray examination
of the defendant Dr, Pokorny, I had the f£tnosa describe under what
circumstances ho grew up and what t^p circle of his acquaintances was.
I also questioned hie about the xajtivo for his letter, .and finally, I
wantod to bring out tto points of view on tte basis of which he bo-
liovod at tho tizc that sterilization with caladiua was not possible,
working on the paper of Madras and Cccjxujy. I cm convinced that the
presentation of this third pert of tho examination of Dr. Pokorny
can be aado oxpcdiontly in tho fona of an affidavit and 1 shall sub¬
nit this affidavit Inter "nd I assure that tho prosecution will give
their approval.

Tr£ rRSSHEOTi Counsul racy prosont any affidavit by the de¬
fendant Pokorny, for consideration by tho Tribunal and the pronocution,
whan it is propared.

BY DP.. HCFftlAMt

Q h’itnoss, I hava only one noro question to put to you. Do
you believe, free your point of view, that tho attempt to use onlndiun
for storilization was impossible rod that, on tho other hand, yovr
notivo was succossful?

A According to tho docirunts ihich have been subnittod so
far - for ox-nplo, the report of Ur. Brock on thj 28th of January,

19U1, or tho tostinony of Dr. Roctocrg that, in Holland, a tho vs and
Jews were castrated and a thousand ware given nodical certificates
about this, tho boglmln* of tho Clauberg experiments at about tho
ssko timo - ono can see that, at this time, this problem interested
authoritative circles wory int_naively and that such experiments and
castrations were in fact carried out. How, in October, l?Ul, rgr sug¬
gestions appear which, as can bo soon fma casual connections, aroused
a certain interest and the authorities concerned took an interest in
my plan,. Tho X-ray experiments of January, 19)il, were dropped. New,
in Cctobor, 19l3, the witness Chajin 3alitsky stated, from testirrny
of Dr. 7*;vy, that ICO FeL-s *cr~ subjected to such -xpurirxnts. n


10071


25 Jun-A-iS-20-2-Karrow (Infc. von Schor.)
Court Uo. I.


October, 191*3, the project ires taken up again where it was dropped
in the Spring cf 19U.4 In t*c ucantiae, this impossible project had
been under consideration. I cannot assert, but it is probably, that
because. this project all these jensures were postponed for two
years and wore, in th. last analysis, too Into. How nany pooplo
were spared those measures, whether it rs ten or one hundred or ten
thousand, I cannot judge.

Q lir. Frosidant, this concludes the direction oxar.i nation of
the defendant.


THE PiESIBSTi Docs any dofonse counsel have any questions to
propound to this defondant?

If not, tho prosecution nay cross-cxrjaino.

CROSS EXAIUKATTCH

BY MR. SIARDYr


Q Dr. ftjkorny, I boliovo you stated here, during tho course
cf tho direct oxaninstion, that you found tho tostinony of Profosoor
loibr-.ndt cost interesting inasuuch as Professor ioibrandt was in a
soiKWha.t sinilar situation in that no also had a Jowioh wtfo. How,
in connection with Profossor Ioibrandt's tostinony, do you ogroo with
sort of tho rcasenn ho gave for the downfall of tho nodical prorossion
under tho Nazis? You nay answer that "yes" or "no".

A No, I can't answer that so briefly as all that. Thoro's
the following differences. Professor Ioibrandt was narrlud to a Josus3,
whereas I was divorced and ny two children wore the cause of tho noas-
urcs to which I ms subjoctod. As for tho deterioration of tho vwdical
profession in tho Third Reich, 1 realized that ns well ns nany oth^r
people did.

3 Well, was nodical education and training influenced by tho
Nazi ad m i ni stration?

A Will you ropoat tho question?

Q V.*as medical education influenced by tho Nazi adrdnistr-.tion?

A I had finished qy training at that ti.x-, but I had an opport-


10072


25 Jun-A-I B-20-3-Xarrcw (Int. voaSebon)

Court I/c. I.

unity several ti es to talk to medical students and I nade so:® ob¬
servations nysclf at the clinic at Prague and I observed that the
students were called upon for all hinds of exercises, meetings, roll
calls, so that they had little or no tlx* for studying. At the sur¬
gical section at Aue I once had four uedic.il students fron the 3tudont
company in Leicaig. I assigned then to the operating roon, etc. All
four of then cane to ue and asked m to recall this assignment so
that ttey would have tine to study which they did not have at the
University. This request shows that the tine of the studonts was
filled with other things than they themselves wanted.

Q Kell, did the agitation of National Socialism influence
physicians* organisations?

A I havo described whet measures I was exposod to through my
professional organisation. Yes, it oxercised an influonce on the
doctors - on ;cyself, for oxanple.

Q Did you bellevo that Nazism would load to disorganization
and downfall of tho thon oxistin^ medical associations and organiza¬
tions?

A Tho organizations no longer consisted of elected persons,
but of persons put at tho head of tho organizations by some ordor.
Consecfiently, it ras not clear whotlier those poo pi o held thoso posi¬
tions because of personal efficiency cr perhaps because of other
factors.

Q '/ring tha course of Professor Ieibrandt's testimony, ho
mentioned that Action Conti was one that started earlier in 1913 which
instigated ar.d directed persecution of doctors 'rho were either foreign¬
ers or of na-c:.Hod "sixed blood" or persons related by marriage to
Jews. Did you understand that to be tho some as Professor Lcibrnndt
had outlined for tl® Tribunal?

A I heard of this action Conti for tho first time here. I
did not know the name. I think you are mistaken. I think this was
earlier than l?ii3.


10373


25 Joxv-A-IB-20-Ji-;<nrrow (Ira* von Schon)

Court So. I.


Q Yes, it was 191*3, Doctor.

A I did not know the naiio. I only know what was dono against
syself. That the saae things were dono earlier in the Reich, I knew
that too.

Q Did you know tho defendant Kurt Blcro before you croc hero
to ifurnborg to stand trial?

A So, I believe I read tho naao in the newspaper onco as a
representative of the Reich Ryslcicna' Loador, but I an not oven
certain of that.

Q Did you know of any nodical organisations, dealing with
health and hygiene or public welfare, that wero r»t under the doainn-
tion of tho .'lari Prrty of tho SS?

A I don't bollove so.

Q Hot; you ever ho'.rd of thj Tuchror's School of Goman Fhy-
sicians in Altrose in kocklcnburg?

A I hoard on one occasion that thoro was a school for doctors*
that it was very pleasantly situated and that tho doctors who wanted
to go thoro had to havo cortain sponsorship because thoro woro too
r-ny applications. I heard that fron sono doctor at hotu.


1007A


25 June-A-FL-2I-l-;:aioy (Int. vcc Sc non)
Court Ho. I, Case I


Q.- Did you bolong to any party organisations, such as I National
Socialist Physicians Association, otc.?

A.- Ho, neither tho physicians' organizations or any other.

Did they .ana you in the course of you practice for not laving
boon a aisbor of a Eosi organisation?

A.- I an perhaps an unusual caso, which can be cjplainod only as
follois: tho measures taken against us in the Sudctcnland were 30 late,
11 aonths after tho occupation of Sudotonland, tho war began and bo-
cause it Has at such a late time there was great scarcity of doctors,
which probably forced the authorities to disregard these very radical
aonsu-os. I fas. In fact, allowed to'practice .ncdicino without being
a ckaber of chu league of Physicians.

C..- Dr. Pokorny, do you believe that xdical experimentation on
huasn beings is -ethical if performed on arsons other then voluntooro?

A.- You can inc-lnu that I have given considorable thought to
that probloa in the course of this trial, but the problem cannot bo
answered in ortt sentence. It depends on tho nature of the oxperi :onts,
it duoendo or. tho rocccocnse offered tho.-., it doounds on whether thoy
aro voluntuora or not. I think ono has to consider evory case so ira¬
tely. Try.re aro no legal provisions in any country in tho i.’orld• That
oust bo introt!ucod on on Lute motional basis after this trial.

Do you feel before a doctor should resort to todical oxpori-
r>-ntation on hiran ^ings that h. should first exploit experi-ientation
on animals; s_cond, to decide on whether or not experimentation on
human beings is necessary; third, to then seek volunteers for experi¬
ments and prior to seeking volunteers to warn thoa of the hazards of
tho experiments, and then to conduct tho experiments in an ethical .Tan¬
ner; is that s list antially what ycu believe to be ethical concerning
ethical experiments on hnaan beings?

A.- Kr. Hardy that is whole series oi quostions. That animal
experiments have to be exhausted before one goes on to human experiments


10075


25 June-A-FL-2i-2-. jioy (Int. von Scbon)
Court IJo. I, Case I


that is a condition dno c.ua non, ar.d the other conditions arc also a
.matter of course,.

; : o you consider to be a volunteer for a ssdical experi-

3-> nt?

A.- As it has occn brought out in this trial that even exporL-wnts
In the concentration cacps, if the people arc asked who wants to vo¬
lunteer for on aqari-jent which isn't hamful to health and if the peo¬
ple ore prods-c northing in rpturn, thoro .uust be a definite r-iatien-
ship. I can 1 £;inc that people who ar- volunteers .-ust be inf or .nod
what the*oxporimnt is about, of cours-. The experiment must bo carried
out carefully with consideration for the subjects, end ay oun xrsonal
point of view is that I personally would not like to carry out oxoori-
aents which lam the health of onoth-r person.

And t:x4-. state you would not conduct a ajdical oaqjorlivont
unless tbs experimental conditions ^-r- as stated, d-sirable to you?

A.- If I understood the translation correctly, j^s, but I an not
quite sure.

$•" 2 'rill repeat -ay qix^stion, would you conduct a n-dicrl Cxpuri-
ivnt if th. conditions which you outlined for an ethical experla-nt wore
not fulfilled?

A.- Ho.

c '«- oaW you conduct that exp-ria_nt if th- conditions wore not
fulfilled had you oe-n so ordered to do co b* the statu?

Tint .a Very difficult to answ-r. 7nat again.is suggestive. If
you take -v oaa situation, if I had refused to carry out an order that
-ould have 3-c.nt ay death. That no difference, 35 million pooplo

died ard or.u -.ore or less =»kes no difference, but I had the responsibi¬
lity for :ay two children. I cannot say today how I would have reacted.
That is a hypothetical question.

Pokomy, you stat. that you first gained knowledge! tliat


1CC76


25 J jne-A-rL-21-3- -lor (Int. von Sc hoc)

Court Ho. I, Caa. I

at^rtlization projrr.as wore being Inacted in order to st-rilize ^ast-m
vork-ra rod arisor-ors in 19U., is that correct?

A.- YeS, Sc Jtc :bcr 19U.

Q.- You rain-d this knowledge through on- Voigt, spelled
v-o-i-g-t, is that correct?

A.- U-t -a correct you, fir. Hardy. H- didn't say Eastern workers.
Aft-r aoven years I camot r-ousovr tho words that he used. I testified
thr.t I was describing merely tb- iapression that the conversation left
with .ce. I acid that in the course of the settlement of the East. One can
inter prof thr.t in various ways. J.\ this trir.l since it has not been dis¬
cussed yet, it Lb quite possible that this was the wish dream of a
psychopath, or that fcj was actually telling oo of an intention that or.ist-
ed.

Do you bis; what rank Voigt held rith the SS or SD?

A.- lio, I do rot know that. His position vns surrounded by groat
s-crccy. I tried to find out what it was »jvoral tioes. On various sta¬
te -*.nts I drew ay conclusions, .betb-r tb-se conclusions were correct,

I cannot say. I saw a oaper signed by Himler but that was during a
discussion of y ra-hology, wb»ro fx< «s showing ry. the signature, ant’ I
saw this signaeur- in violet ink. I didn't read it ayself.

Q.- You are r. specialist for skin and venereal diseases, is that
corr-ct?

A.- Yes.

Q.- as this vtient one of your v-roroal patients?

A.- Yus.

Q.- Did you have .-.any a--.bers of the SS ns Venereal patients?

A.- I can ;ive you tbj exact exabers of the SS nc* whoa I treated.

I had four, two of tfcca the lowest ranking with wkin diseases, ono who
always ccm« to n. in civilian clothing, but I hoard h_ was either in tho
S3 or SD, because I was warned. He wore the golden party badge. He had


10077


25 Joxk- A-PL-2I-4—1 iloy (Int. von Schon)
Court SO. I, Case I


a skin disease. Tho fourth was this Voigt I have been talking .'‘.bout.

Q.- «hjr icrcn't they treated by tho SS nedicsl acrvic.-s?

A.- Hu aas apparently an agent or in so.-.*- special job. Ho never
wore a unifora. Hu always wore civilian clothes.

»•- Did they cone to you for trect^nt because th*y didn't want
to report th-ir condition to the SS a-dicnl service?

A.- I bolievo I can ie=*ab.r that th-y brought certificates, si¬
milar to public health insurance but they asked n<- not to use thr.t but
to treat thea privately. That was one of the casus, even if it vro not
t venereal disease.

Q.- Ks', during tho course of Voigt's visit to your offio. you
statu that ho spoku cbout storilization by use of Coladiua after having
read an articlo publishing in n aagazine in your wniting-roon, is that
correct?

A.- Hot in tho vaiting-rooa. It was in ay consultation rocm. I con
describe the situation to you. For reasons of brevity 3 didn't go into
detail before. On ay desk th-re was a pile of .magazines —

I don't think it is necessary to -o into detail; hu npoko to
you about storiUzation by ns. of cr. Indian os set forth in an article
in "Uoachau" and published in 1941, is that correct?

A.- YeS.

Q.- Ho--, aft. that did }>.» also refer to the article Dublishod
by ifcdaus nr.d JCoch entitled "Studies of Aniuvl Exporter, to pertaining
to the proble.-a of Stcriliz-tion by aec'icatior. by neens of Cnlrdiuia So-
guinua?"

a.- Ho, bo die not. The "Unschau" —

Doctor, if you will kindly answer ay questions we /ill get along
f^st.r. .h<.n ior the first time did you read the publication in tho w>
periauntoL acfnzino by Hadru s rnd Koch? When did you rend th t ior the
first tiu*?

A.- I can't tell you exactly. Lot us say tA. beginning of October.

ico?e


25 June 47-A-I jC-22-l-Xeehan (Int., Von Schcn)

Court I

* rf B8 that before or after the visit of Voigt?

A It vae Just before he vas dlsaissed, I thick that vac the tiae,
but I cannot be definite about the ti=e. Tou can isagir.e after seven
years that one does cot resecber these things so exactly.

Well, 70U stated that your attention vas called to the nethod
of sterilisation by Voigt, that he had read in your waiting room an
article published in a =« a rice "Uashau; did you then take tire to
study this article in "Usschau" and then obtain the publication by
'iadaua and Eoch as published in the experimental ragarlno, or did. you
hare knowledge of this work prior to the visit of Voigt?

A Ho, I got this aagarine, t*at la a specialist's edition, after
Voigt brought ay attention to this work at one cannot account reasonably
unless one is correctly informed about the background.

Veil, new, when you had heard froa V 0 igt that sterilisations
were going on: you state that his convoroatlon had o great offoct on
you and that you wore rather indignant and shocked; was that the
occasion for further study on your part concerning the efficacy of
Calndiua?

A ot tho usefulness, but the Influence of Caladiua and whether
it was possible. In short a critical osnsidoratlon of the whole
problon ns it existed in 19*1 and 1942.

s, The point of hearing about these rass sterilisations, which
wore intended, yen stetc you were irdigr.ent and shocked; then what
did ycu propose to do about it whan you started to consider that it
was necessary to study the effects of Caladlus? I aa having considerable
difficulty u-derstandinr just wh- you cade an extreme effort to study
the effects of Caladiua '-hen ycu heard that these =aes eterilitatioar
were going on; were you studying the effects of Caladiua in order to
properly instruct Elanler or Voigt as to Just what could be expected
if the drug were used?

A So, I believe I testified to this. After ay attention had been
drawn to this field, after I had learned cf the intentions, after I had


10:79


25 June 4"-A_JjC_23-2-''cehan (lot., ?cc 3chon)

Court I

neec that the aethcd of steriliration by drugs v*s icpossiblo in
191-42, especially by Cnladius, I teat the pcssihility of taking
orders or actual stepa and I a eat the possibility of preventing those
plans by Baking a euggestlon which was iepcssible and which was to
keep tho authorities busy for a tics.

*4 Then briefly after you hed heerd of this fantastic proposition
to sterilise hundreds of thousands of people, you then studied saterial
pertaining to Caladius and date mined that Caladlus would not in effect
sterilise a person; then you dug up the idea that here ic a chance for
=e to extend a proposition to Hissler and then’Kinslcr will attempt to
sterilise these hundreds of thousrnds of reople with a ueeloos drug
and in effect the people will not be etorillsed; ie that what you are
trying to convey to ue?

A Yes, it would havo required cnoraouo preparations, preliminary
experiments, ae you con see fron the docuaente and an Interest was
taken in it and finally It would have boon dlecovcrcd thr* bocauco of
the large anotmt of aoterial noedod that 1 # nccosoary for growing tho
plant in hothouoes and all tho conditions, which I tried to doocribo
hero but was not able to since the tico vrs restricted, it would havo
be«n realised tho -ethod woo lr^osslble.

\ Well then you did take into consideration that tho Modauo-Kock
report stared that no experiments had been porforood on huaan boinge
and the report itaeli states it w*c cffcctivo on husan beings, not
anisnls? The Mrdaus-Iocfc had only indicated experiment* on animals,
not on huaan beings and your proposition wag for F.icalcr to exporimont
on huaan beings; is that correct?

A Ho, that was whet Ycigt told ac. He told 36 that and the
situation wao entirely different, they were already being carried
out.

You state is your own letter to Hisslcr, which is Ajcuaont
iC—035, on rage * of document book 6 in the paragraph were you out¬
line ycur idees end the coont which you suggest cay bo taken and under


10080


25 June ‘^-A_5 v 'C_22-?_Mcth&E (lnt., "eft 3ebon)
Court I


»o. 3 you state: "Iuscdlrtc resoarck cn busan beings (criminals!)
in order to deteraine the dose and length of the treatment. 0 Aro
you not in effect there proposing to Eis-lcr that exporioenta bo
conducted on husan beings?

A I did not suggest then, they were alroedy in progress. In
order to deterslnc the doso and length of troatsent, it wao rather
unnecesssT as one could figure that out, that was something I wanted
to talk a v out, but I was interrupted. Howeror, as cxpcrloonts wore
already going cn, I did not know or. vhon, it seined to do advisablo
to ne to be advisablo to take criminals because the interruption
would be the slightest.

H Veil, than you did ir. effect proposo that oxperinents be con¬
ducted on hunan beings right hero in this letter?

A J did not suggest it, I recapitulated what Yolrt had said,
if something is known it could not be suggested by no.

k V 0 uld you kindly turn to Doeusent EC-035, perhaps I have not
road it correctly? Do you hare Itocuacnt Book 6 beforo you?

A I hare a copy of the docuncnt.

t* Sow turn to the paragraph in the docuncnt, which roads ns
follows:

"If ny ideas sect your approval the following courso should bo
takoni

1 . ) Dr. Kadauo suat not publish any aoro such articlos. (The
cr.coy listens!)

2 . ) Hultiplying the plant (easily cultivated in grccnhousosl)

3. ) Inrodiatc research cn huaan beings (criminals!) in order to
deternim the doso and length of the treatment." etc.

Few, were those your ideas that you withod to convoy to Hlaoler?

A Tou cannot take tho individual sentences out of contoxt as then
of course the effect is different. Tou oust inagint that I was working
froa the point of view, how can I seke tho idea understandable, how
can I ernpose the letter in order to have tho desired effect on Himmler,


10061


35 June 47-A-TJC- 22 -^-xcchan (ihtij Ten Schon)
Court I


la order to sake this ispcgsibli idea plausible to hie.

ZB. SCSI JjLi: Mr. President, if I reaccbcr correctly, I hare
already asked these questions which Hr. Eardy is asking now and tho
Tribunal was of the opinion that they did net serve to clarify tho
issue. I believe that the Prosecution eus*. be in the sane position
and I therefore ask that this question not be pernitted, otherwise,

I would hare aoked it this aerning.

7=1 FHLSISLVT: It seens to at that these questions aro entirely
diffcror.t froa those propounded this aornlng by the defense. Tho
objection will be over-ruled. Counsel say proceed. If counsel for th<
defense fecle there aro any questions he should nek, he will have an
opportunity on rc-dircct exasl-ation of the wltnoas.

BT MB. KAPUT:

\ Kay I aek you. Dr. Pokorny, did you vrlto this lottor or did
Voigt write this lottor to Eiaaier?

A I wroto thie letter. It is a roaction to the isprcsolono
which I wae given by Voigt'e etateoonte. Just a aonent, ploaec, I
havo not finiehed *sy answer yet. I leaflncd at tho tlao that that
would be possible only by givlr^ Kiaslcr an idon, which hi would have
to think about for aonthe ar.d years in tho hope of a sensational ouc-
eaoo, but an idea which would not have thie succceo. This accounts
for the letter being in this fora. I qulto understand that you do
not urderatnnd the forrmla'ion of the lottcr, but I have teotiflod it was
not possible for uo to coabat those acasurcs wo hoard about in any other
way than this.

(< Sow, Doctor, I as having a great deel aoro difficulty that I
''id bef 're. Sow, it is you contention that you wrote this lottor and
you hoped that Hisclcr would sit back, rend tho lettor and would bo
confused ho would stop the expori*-ent6, which you sey were going on
pr-d endeavor in two or three years to deterainc in his own Bind whether
or cot he would use C*ladiua eeguinua to conduct future sterilisations;
wee that your aethod to sabotage the effort?


10032


25 June 47_l_JjC_23-l-Cook (In*., tfartesherg)
Court I


A Tee, that is w*at I ncan to say. The nccc-srry preparations
were 30 tnersous »nd eo difficult that a reasonable ncthod would
have required years before It «M found, aside froa the fact thrt
.Caladlur cannot bo used for at erl 11 ant ion -

Just a soaent; how such tire would it take a nerson to exp uri¬
ne nt with Ci(*iua sogulnln on one hu&ra being?

A f n one hus*n beinf ?

Yea.

A That was the risk that existed. That could have bocn dono -

i* Just a accent, answer ay question boforo you go into detail.
How long would it hiwo taken to Terfora an experlncnt with C n ladius
aogulr.ua on one husan being?

X 218 days.

218 days? Hew long would it havo taken to got tho OQUipmont
ready to start the experleent?

A I have already told you it roqulrod froeh srp. Thlo was -
please, Hr. Knrdy, lot at finish ay anawor. Thia freah aap cannot
be used on huaaa. boinga, since huaan beings aro not thi arao no rata,
because fresh srp containa tetpnua and gangrene, and so forth, I don't
nood to go into that, it would haro roqulrod preparation, but boenuso
of xy botannleal knowledge, I knew sonolhing about the plant. It is
a plart of a group of 27 tropical plants which were fornorly unod as
decorative plants in Europe and are not cultivated any aoro. In all
of C-ornany only Hadaue could have a few of theso plants, *t io diffi¬
cult to reproduce this clant for that roaaon alone and it would bo
difficult to obtain tho nccceoary nusber cf plants.

<4 Veil Juct a sonent. Hadaus sight have had a sufficient nun-
ber of plants to ls-.ediatcly go to work so that Hiaalcr could havo
cotton his plants froa Xadaus, isn't t v *t correct?

A I doubt It.

sc You know es a sattc-r cf fact Hicnlor did send his pooplc to
Kadaus organization to work there. &3 you know that?


10083


35 J'zrc 47-i_TjC-23-2-Cock (ir.t... Wartcnboxg)

Court I

A - sew that frca the doconeat.

3ut you doc't think it is possible Sjsalcr could hwe gotten
hi6 preparation* ready such 30oncr or do you think he could hnvo used
Caladius segulnua in an experiment on hunan beings in the same nanner
he vould have on rats?

A Preliminary experiments vould have been necessary, especially
extensive animal experiments wculd have been ncccsoary. What ve have
here that is a scientific work. That is not even the basis of ar. hy¬
pothesis. One knows nothing about the causative agency. I as suae it
vas a leucocytes. Whether this poison or the poison is one 'Ubstancu
or whether it reacts to heat, cold or chcalcel lnflutnco or not, vho-
t'-er it works alone or together with some othor substance, those arc
all factors which would havo to be tooted and any ouch toot vould have
taken months so that this experiment in tho caso of Caladuin specific¬
ally would have roquirid an enormous mount of tine, Dot no remind
you of penicillin which vent very quickly. With Cnladiua it is not so.

 Try to bo brief in your ansvers, doctor, Madnus and Kook voro
voro known opoclaliots in this field, weren't they?

A In tho homeopathic flold, yoo.

Vi Wore you a specialist in this field? Woro you oonoidorod to bo
a groat export in Gersany in this field? Had you ever boon hoard from
by anybody in this particular field?

A I really cannot call myself a big specialist in tho fiold but
2 had the literature. I had tho botannical knowledge and as I have
testified I worked for a pharmaceutical firs in Hcugleno and was very
close friends with one of tho very host pharmacologists and I had ns
much knowledge as I needed for this work.

^ And you stat that the phblicatlon of '.tadaus and Koch in tho
experimental mgasinc which is defonse Exhibit 16, that is Porkorny
Exhibit iio, 16 is 'insound scientifically, do you stato that?

A Let us say I hold the opposite view scientifically,

^ Did you ever see Caladius other tV-n in pictures?


1003 /.


25 Jtac 47-A_TjC-23-3-Cock (Int,| V»<rienbcrg)

Court J

A I hare already said that is one of the 27 plants fron the
ieesoa district -

Please doctor, I have asked you a Tory sicplc question. I aa
trying to expedite this oxanination so that we can finish in a rather
ahort tie® and I have asked'you a very sliqjlt quostion. I>id you ever
soo the Caladiua plant itsolf? How you can aiaply answer by saying
yes or no, whether you have read about it or have seen pictures of
it I aa not intorosed. Xindly follow ay question and sake an attempt
to an-er it specifically and we will be through such quicker and roach
an understanding nueh quicker. Ho- have you evor seen the plant
Caladiua scgulr.ur. ycursolf?

A This is an cxcslloni picture but I have never seen it person¬
ally.

H Have you evor workod with it?

A Ho.

<* Havo you ever look at it yourself?

A Ho.

* Thon you don't know tho offset of it othor than what you
havo road in lltcraturo, is that right?

A On tho basis of tho analysis of tho paper it was poselblo for
so to fora a Judgnoni of this typo of oxporiaont and tho offoctivonoss
of tho use of Caladiua.

S. Then you arc definit in your statement that Caladiua undor no
circusstanccs would effectively sterilise a porson?

A Caladiua cannot,

 And you fool you kaw aorc about the offocts of Caladiua than
Hadaus and Xoch?

A Possibly, yes.

 Do you know tho difference betwoen sterilisation end onstra¬
tion?

A Tos, what kind of sterilisation do you acan? Thoro aro dis¬
tinctions thoro too.

10035


25 "ure 4*’ -^-" jC_23_4_Co-k (Int., ^rteat.rg)
Ccurt I


* Veil la castration distinguished fron sterilisation?


*i Castration la the sterilisation of a nalo or a fesale indivi¬
dual b7 rcaoTBl or destruction of the tlaauci of thi reproductive
organ, isn't it?

* Ho, that la wrong, removal ie not necessary. One sorely ncoda
to separate then. Thore are several aethods, the sothod in uso

in Aaorlca —

*t X said rceoval or destruction. I didn't say exclusively ru-
noval, 1 said r^sovnl or destruction of the reproductive organ, This
lo the definition given by Albert Schoenborg in Lasarls, and printed
in his nanual, X-ray Thorapy, volua« ono, and Schoenberg in his aanual
X-ray lfcerspv, tho definition they give for castration ie tho storili-

V i

ration of a salo or fccalc individual by resoval or destruction of tho
tlssuos of tho reproductive organ.

A "ho definition is essentially corroct yco, but castration
and sterilisation aro not oynononous.

>< Do you oxeludc tho possibility that the uso of Caladlus night
havo had a castrating offoct or was your research cxtonolvo onough
for that?

a In tho first placo I perforsod no rosoarch at all but if you
vi11 think that « young rat volfhing 150 grass for 218 day* i* under
treatment and thoro is no effect yot then you can asouac that tho
drug has no offoct.

* Hov is cala.dlus adslnistcrod?

A Kadaus and Koch used it in two ways, as an injection and per
os, by south.

k Then after reading tho Kcdaue-Xoch publication you could not
doterainc that tho offeet of caladlus quite corresponded to n cas¬
tration? T 0 c excluded that possibility entirely.

A Tee, I can prove that irccdiatoly. That was included in what
I vrs not alleged to testify before. According to this work tho effect


10036


25 Jure 47_A_IjC_23-5-Ccck Vartcr.tcrg)

Court I


of Cnlndlua on aelo wnlanl* i« sterilisation tut on foaal aninals
It la lutcnlzing it doc* not destroy tut on the contrary it pronotoo
end that lc ridiculous. If * thing 1 * effective. It has the srnc
effect on non end vonon.

H £r. Porkcrny, did you ever hei*r of a chenist naaed Taubock,
Knrl kiihcls Jrlederlch Taubock?

A Taubock* no.


10087


Court So. 1

25 Jus 47-A-24-l-iSC-*lnabuck (Ton Sefcon)

Q. I would like to read you an affidavit by Tauboeck who has worked
on this drug and worked on it with Iladaus concerning the efficacy and
soc vhether or not you disagree with fcin. This is Docunent SO-3963,

Tcur Honor, offered as Prosecution Inhibit £20 for identification*

TES PESSUSyi: The nunber you assign to this is identification 520?

:e, eardt; res.

Q. (Cont'd) I will turn to paragraph nunber 3 which outlines the
aualifications of the affiant Touboeck in that he was a biocheaist and
botanist in the biological laboratory of I.G. Farbon. Sow, if you will
turn to paragraph nuaber 4, and I will cuote tharefroe:

■In the fall of 1942 I was instructed by tho director of ny labora¬
tory, Dr. Kueller-Cunradl, to devote =y tine to roscarch on the offoctivc
substanco fros the plant caladiun seguinuc. At tho boginnliy; of Sovcca-
ber 1942 I was oent to It. Schasbergor of tho Research Institute Gruno-
mld/3orlln for the purpose of obtaining further inforcation. Tho
Rosoarch Instituto Grunoweld was a covor none for a caaouflegod SS offico.
Tho address was Sorlin-Grunewald, Delbruockstrasso 6. Thoro I wno told
that this plant was to bo used for sterilizing sontol patiento. In
ordor to obtain further inforsation about tho progroos of o.vrjcrinonts
with caladius sogulnun which had already taken pleco, I had to visit tho
fire Andous in Droedon-Radebcul, together with Pr. Schaoberger and
another SS son. This firs had already node oninal oxparinents with
this plant rxd published tho results in a nodical journal lr. 1941. I
was introduced to Kr. Kr.duus as Dr. "ciss, so that nobody vould know
that I was an coployee of I.G. Farbon. Tho senior phnmocologist of
at. iiadaus asked us, n Tou aust be a cosnission froa SS-Obergruroenfuohror
Pohl," to which the SS non replied 'yes". The 'oharoncologist wont on
to tell us that a few days previously Pohl hinself had visited Kr.

•‘Odaiie together with several other poople and had centioned tho esoecial
urgency of this work. Fur thorn ore, while visiting Kr. Kadaus I checked
ell the eouipcent and eroerinents in the course of one day. 3y careful
examination of sections of nice and rats P nd of the histological cre-


10088


"curt So, 1

25 .’at *J7-A-24-2-ISi-Slncbuck (Vor. Sehcn)


parntions, I vas convinced thr.t the publications of Hr. Kadous were cor-
fcetly true. By this oxaainetion I, as a specialist in this field,
gained the conviction that sterilisation vith caladiun seguinuo is no
Utopia, but saavthiag vhich is ouite vithin the bounds of possibility.

On the return Journey free Breeden to Berlin tho SS Ben revealed to no
that this research vas being carried out on the express order of Hoichs-
fuehrer S3 Eisnlor in order to surpress birth eaong tho Eastern nations.
After this fact had been revealed to so, I was ovorn to secrecy. I *«s
furthermore inforsed at the Research Institute Grunevald-Borlin that tho
first preparations wore to bo supplied as soor. os possible, as the Reichs-
fuehrer SS had ordered the testing of tho new aethod on inoates of concen¬
tration caaps to take place at once."

How, paragraph nurber 6:

"In ordor to point out tho effectiveness and practical possibility
of using caladiun seguinua as a sterilisation drug, I would llko first of
all to go Into the subjoct of tho history of this plant. Boforo doing 00 ,
however, I would like to add that the coledius soguinua is not to bo con-
•idorod as a sterilisation drug in tho ordinary senso of tho word, but
as a castration drug. This is evident free tho fact that the oroeriponto
carried out by tho fira Kadaus have cloarly shown that a destruction of
the sexual glands of the oxoorinontal anlaols occurrod which is oouivnlcnt
to tho surgical recovnl of such glands."

And then ho goes into tho history of the plant, end in paragraph 6
he states:

"Inspired by this experience of the Brasilian natives the flrn liadnus
carriod out their excoriaents on anlaels. Tho rosults obtained by the
fira liadous, vhich I have seen with a;-- own eyes, eonfirn tho offeetlve-
r.oss of the drug (calediua seguinua) as a aoans of sterilisation for
huaan beings."

And he goes on extensively to give his reasons which Tour Honors can
read, and I *x>n't take up this tine to reed now.

:.*ov, do you think that this affiant has also aisunderstood the effec-


10089


Cwxrt So. 1

ff .’i>~ V7-J—/V


(Too Schoa)


tlveaass of cAiAHloa sagulnus?

r?-. HCf7.XiSi Kr. President, I ask that the defendant be given an

opportunity to read ell of this affidavit. Shore are a nuaber of pera-

<r "' 5h * 'tieh do not confirn the oolnioa of the prosecution. This reading

sight have a suggostive affect on the defendant.

:HZ PaZSICOT: Counsel vill be furnished with a copy of this trnns-

Ution in Gerran. The Tribunal ha. it and counsel aay have the copy of

it, of course, and the defendant say certainly road it.

E07P.OKS: I ask that he be given an opportunity to rend all of it

PSESZZBRi Tea indeed, I said that he via be furnished with a

copy of this affidavit in the Gorsan language. That i. available and he

 r0ad lt * Ec h * Te lt acd k «®r it in hia file and read all of it,
of ccurso.

I see no occasion, counsel, for the defendant to bo saking extensive
cc-.os on this affidavit. He would have a chance to discuss the affidavit

l«ter. Tou desire that he have tise to read it, but_

KR. KARST, Tour Honor, I have cnly perhaps one or two auction, to

* t0 hla 00cc ‘ rnln «  ttumm. Defense counsel say well out ether
westion. to his in re-direct exasination.

®* ECfT.iAK.-, Hr. President, I sorely vented hla to hove an oppor¬
tunity to look it over because Hr. Hardy asked hi. ouc.tion lssedlatoly.

“Z PeZSWMIt Hut ho is now srklng oxteneivo notes on it.

•*. HAHDTi Vhile he 1. reading it over. Tour Honor. I would like
c«ll your attention to paragraph nunbor 11 and road that into the
record also. The other peragraohs refer to soce of the si.givings con-
t'-ing the use of caladiua eoguinus by the affiant and the reasons vhy
.one of the test, by rfadaus and loch wore uneuecoecful. The

*^««aph nunbor 11 i. one that I think 1 . isoortant for the record.

• *111 read It:

* AE “ rCBUlt of ^ exw * la » and explanations aentioned I as of the
'* that au ' P r0dact l° a * * castrating preparation free caladius
Ht?liaa in ° e ™ 5 ' « the Ger=« occupied countries is B o droaa. but


/ 10090


Coart So. 1

o* Mi- A7. ^-=53CVo« Sehoa)


cwld anally have been put Into prectice. Another proof of the har-ful-
of th0 caladlu = polaon la the fact that the lladaus exaainationa coa-
firood beyond doubt the castratlve effect of caladiua despite all tho
.Urtccnlngs already described. ill thla Bade se realize at once the
-rlaical character of eucfc research and for thla ronecn did not carry it
out aa far aa ey aneclflc order va. concerned. Tho SS, hoamr, took a
greet lntoreet In thla aattor. I received ay order* aa an eeployeo of
the 1.0. Tarban Industrie froa tho chief of tho oocurlty police, first
through the caaouflrgod office of .the Eeacarch Inatltute Cnaevrid-Borlln
and later dlroct. I knov, hovever, that the flra Madaus placed their
order, through SS Obercruppenfuchrer Pohl separately and aa not acoualn-
t«d with tho dovelopoor.t of thla aattor."

0. (By Ur. Hrrdy) Sov you, vltne.., have road thla affidavit. Do
you think that the affiant la lncorroct In that ho atato. that tho dm*
oftlndluB segulnua vould have a castratlve effect?

A. Quito.


^ Vh, ° you vr °" °> u ISO-035, *lch 1. 1„ Docu-

“* 30011 Su=b0r «■ t0 X°» «nMelp.t. ,h», Plnalcr .ould

Bead it ovor to experts for study?

A. That', vfcat I thought, yoi .

9. Voron't you fr.ld «ht Ellor =!«ht find out thnt you -oro
ultir .,7 an ottoopt to hoodWak hla?


A. I hrvo tvo thing, to aey to that. That la why tho letter 1. put
thla fora, and that la vhy It .ay. that a. o Ooman doctor end Obor-
:• of tho 'ohraacht I pledge syeclf to secrecy. That I vna in danger
*.hi, natter I culto realized. Thcro could be tvo reason.: one. that

=i ' r t0 get rld of a W* ebout the secret; and tho

the evindlo had been discovered, then there vould have boon


... And you vould har. been In been In serious danger had Hitler
that celadl *= “Bguinun was not effective and that you vcrc
Als * °° roly sabotage hla efforts, la that correct?


10091


Court So. 1

V n— o..P-rtx; <rau Grime)


A. Tee, one can aarase that.


10092


25 Juno 1947-A-25-1-FIHJrsas (Von Scfcon)
Ccurt I


Q: And you were willing to take this chance even though you
knew that Hi nde r wc*ild as non kill a perosn as not?

At I ' tr - 3 ready to take *-ny conscqucncos.

Q: .hen did you divorce your first :;ifo. Dr. Paterqy?
a: In tho cddJlo of 1935. The divorce Bocae® effective the
first of .jril 1936.

Q: .hon did the Hum berg laws go into effect?

A: I do not know. I studiod the Nirnborg laws when thiy bocans
of significance for no, that is, for sqr, -children,

Q: Did thoy go into offoct in tte year 1935?

• •

A: I do not know. I read thee* I was in C rcchoslovakia. ifo
didn't have then, iboy didn*t touch cc at tho tie®. I tfcn't knew
Metier they wore issued nt that tirx>. I probably read thaa in

1939 - 1939, I think.

Q: And you state tho reasons for your divorce were rot ibr
Sational -Socialistic reasons?

At Nothing whatever.

Q: ./ore thoy for what purpose - or for what reason did you
wcurc a divorce frou y;urffirst j/ifo?

..j I have testified that our characters dckolopod in different

iiredtions.

Q: You ocan infidelity?

"t nofc infidelity a Those wero secondary consequences.

‘it .hat uis your second wife's naai?

A: Trux was her naidon nra o.

» Q: HqU do you spell that, plcaoo?

A: T-xmmc.

Q: .'aid you carried her in 1943?

As Soptcobor 1943.

'i: Could ycu tell us whetner or net th-„ naac L'lccva etans
tu you. apelluJ C-l-c-o-v-c.


ocs a --


10093


25 .ftjn^-Q^- J M-Groa g (van Schon)
Court I


A: Yos.

Q: .hat dec3 that tt-J» aenn to you?

A* That is tho lady to »faan I was onga.gcd at one tire, a Czech
Layer

Q: hen u=3 that?

A: That was about 1936 to 1940. I don't quite uniorstqnt whet
tftit has to do ;/ith this trial* I an net boing tried bocauso of ay
dirorco.

0: Just a nwxnt. .jhat ir.s her j*? .fas oho an Aryan and wasn't
*o lady district Judge?

As ros.

Q: Now you hav« told this Tribunal a story concerning coosuni cat ions
by your first wife in the year 1942 aal that sho was in Prague and called
you on tho telephone and ms in dire ixod of assistance, is that
right?

A: That was right. I can't giro tho exact date. It was 25, 26, or
Feasibly 24 January 1942.

Q: ..ell, that was in 1942, January 1942, And then an inn or
xcc -fficcr cane to you and warned you not to go to see your wife
In Prague as ho intercepted the tolophooo rrssage. Is that right?

A: That was on the saxso day, in tho evening. I think it ics
about 6:30 or 7.

Q: And vhat did he tell you Ixs o Id do to you if you went to
K 0 ycur \dfc in Prague?

Az He said that I w.uld be shot in cy consulting rooa*

fj: ,hat was his rank, do you ruaccbor?

A: Z don't kn-w.

Q: Captain? .fas he a Lieutenant? or a Sgt.?

As He had a black unif-ra coat. His collar was turned up. He
s-'-.-ed a. nis credentials. Ho told ec what he had to say and went
-'7 =_air..


10094


25 JunoHW«-25-3-Gro68 (Vcn Scion)
Court I


Q: And thin you as a result of that cculd not ouster up
sufflciaat courage to go to your wife *3 or your foraer wife's,
assistance in Prague?

A: That was not possible since I cculd assume that cy house
Mould bo guarded that ni£it and if I had gone out with the car it
wuld not have boon necessary to holp qv vifo.

Q: But you were the era ho had sufficient anount of courage
to iff It c a letter to no less a tand the Reich afuchrcr-SS in an
effort to sabotage his sterilisation program, kr.r.iing ftilly well that
if ycu ticro discovered the results uoulC be fatal that y.ur fnoily
perhaps would bo threatendd? Yet, you didn't have, sufficient couraso to go
to tho aid of your wife in Prague. Hor ib you reconcile this, doctor?

The situation is ontiroly difforunt in respect tc Hirxoor than
the situation I f-und ay so If since I know that ry house would
cert'inly b- watched and that aqy attcopt to get to Praguo ;euld
fwvo tho uost serious c-nsoquunccs.

Qi llou you have stated hero that in the spring of 1942 yen
received an inquiry regarding tho .-reduction jf the drug, hat drug
arc you referring t j in that.inquiry?

As I testified that I did not urdorstraj this question bocauso
I did n:t know that tho liadaus fin: had a drug called cnladiuo-D-1.
Consequently 1 did not urdorstanci this incident.

Q: S-y would Kirt-lor or an SS agency have t: writ- to you to
tieterrdno the producing of a drug \rhcn they thonselvos had the pub¬
lications froa fcadaus and Koch, .uxl, in nidition, thereto, they
already had non and representatives going to the *odaus Orpnny to w:rk?

I :cndone_ about that tco. If I had got a paper in ny hand
filed by liadaus I wuld hav^ assured that Madaus proceed the drog.

Cat>3 *iy I tendered. Besides I think yju are mistaken in the tiix
of the clocuccr.t. The first represertative t~ tho ILaiaus finn was
i'-tcr.

Q: .;dl don't you suppes. tint iiolor had contacted kadaxs after


1C095


25 Jufic^-A-FJ-25-4-Gr=3S (Von Schcn)


Count I

rccclvi.-^ your letter. This letter is dated October 1941 and there is
^ letter on pego 5 of Docirxri: Bod; 6 which is Docuflcnt NO-036 therein
Hinder personally addresses a letter to Oswald Pohl telling Oswald
fohl to got tcuch with Dr. Uadaus about the publications end offer
nin possibilities of doing rcsoarch with the Reich Physician SS on
xcifljnola *.ho would hare to be sterilized in any ease. N„- didn’t it scu j «i
seen unnecessary ho would have to refer to you when you were, as
you state, soacbody had read tho publications?

At I don’t understand your question. I wendcrud at receiving
this inquiry. Besidos you swe a certain ?_xunt cf success horo
already. Hio r .lor had gone into the idea if cxperiointo wore to be
porforoed tlty would bu perforoa! on criminals in as much as they
had to be storilizeJ aryway.

Q: That’s good you point that oifc, doctor. That is an aid to
tho Prosocutlon rathor than to the dofensc. Hinder here is eon-
dieting huaan experiments as you point out, and here you have proppsed
hu continue furthor oxporiixrts with c a l a di u o. .»oll this indicates
he is following through tho progroa given to hla, as ho says in tho
firet sentence of this letter to Pohl: "I read Dr. Pokomy’s vory
interesting iscnorandun .... n lour ccooranuun had considerable effect on
ttin, didn’t it, acc cycling to this letter?

It was suppowd to.

'll I have oo furtr.cr quoati.n your Honor.

THE PRESIDENT: Ccunsol rr.y rcdiroctly nudno tho witnoss,

DR. HOTFliJIN: Ur. President, I havo no questions. I should
like to call a witrtss nor tut I don’t know Aether it would bo
expedient or not to c-ll hisiat this tire.

HR. HARDY: If your Honer pleases, is it the witness Trux
that will appear first?

DR. HOPPUnKM: Yes.


10096


25 June 47-*V-Ri'25-5-GrD33 (Vcc Schon)

fcxirt I


REDIRECT ZLJUNATICM
3T ER. SiOTKR for the defendant Blooo:

9 Qs ,/itncss, I ns afraid I have to ask you a few questions
arising fraa your Answers to the cros3 examination by the Prosecution,
tto Prosecution called yew an expert a nl questioned you about things re¬
garding the ecdical profession end you anrwered those questions. Witness
do yeu really consider yourself an expert for such professional
questions for tfx. Coman Medical profession during tin Hitler tine?

I did not answer as an expert. I do not insider cysclf
an sxport. I answered merely as a private citiscn, as ooaaon senso
dictates. That ay tostinony is colored to a certain egreo -.dll
probably not surprise yew since you have learned ay life hist cry
today.

Q: witness, I twliovu you realise that the Prowcution is
tordly interested in what you think as a private citison.

«: I don't know what the prosccttion is Interested in.

Q: But that is quite clear, rdtnjsa, you were asked bccauso
of special knowledge rfiich you sxrc ossuxa-J to havo nod you
answored the questions . Bow, I would like to ask you a fow
Tuitions on this subjoct. Jticrc did you study?


10097


Court 1

June a'*—A—2^—l—HU-Perrin—VonScfcoen.

A. In Prague.

Q. In Prague, '•ere you-born In Prague?

A. Ivo, I was torn In Vienna.

Q. You were born In Vienna. In Prague and Vienna.

Did you know German conditions of the medical profession,
aedloal nolence, and the aedlcol faoultles before 1933 from
your own observation?

A. Yes.

Q. Where?

A. From congresses, visits to the universities. I
vis the «nior member of the dermatological Society in
Czechoslovakia. I tad scientific contact, not, of course,
to the extent that other peoplo did.

Q. Did you attend Gorman universities as a student?

A. No, I only visited them briefly.

Q. What do you moan visit, two hours? Did you Just
look at tho building, or wore you there for 6 months to
learn how they operatod? Please explain ti»t.

A. To bo Informed about Gorman science and research
-<-.oro 1933, ono does not have to be In the anteroom of a
-’.lvereity. One can Judgo that from quite a different point
of view.

Q. From Vienna and Praguo?

A. Yes, and from tho Reich.

S. ait you didn't live In the Belch, you didn't study
^ the Reich?

A. But os a person of scientific interests, I vas

A UlvtUf

x. Did you have Insight Into the medical training,

- e.ntific training of young doctors in German universities?

A. Yes, I did.

'• By visiting a German university here and there, when

'10095


c curt 1

yoa can»t toll so her loa^ tbs 7isit was?

A Because wo bed a certain contact with cur Geman colloogues.

Dr. Scutar, y-u will concoda that the first Gcroon university was
famed in Prague,

'i Ho don't have to go bock to tlv> HWlo Ages. I an talking
about ycur own studies.

A The la cover-/ of Anorica was c vary inpertont event. Tho
founding of tha first Ooracn University was also on inpertont avont,
and that iras in Prajmc,

Q You said bofaro that tho nodLoal training cf ycung doctors
in tho Third Reich rododod in its lovol, and you said that on various
occasions you talked to naloal students, did 1 understand you ocrroctly?

A Yos.

Q './hen w-.t that? Tfhr.t years?

A Thoso ideal stu 'ants that wasin 1913, tho beginning of ll3*

1 Q 13* ..nd did those rvx&ocl otudonts in 191*3 have insight into
conditions fcuforo 1933?

A I cin t toll you that. Thoy ocno frsn tho student company in
Loipsij.

T Put ycu can Jurtgo that, doctor, i" there ictro students in 19l*3
stu *yin dicin , than boforo 1933 they ruro children, and children
aro not nblo to fom ccapontivo Judgnont on tho quostion of nodical
training.

A Dr. C-utor, I T=i 3 net referring to tho craparisons whioh tho30

nodical students Irew. I was the. on. who drow tho croparison, what I

know fren oarli r, and what I Observed on th^so nodical otu'fcnt 3 , Thoro

is nc purpose in tasting r. 3 ?oat deal of this talk on this. On a dccsn»t

havo to sonarolico. Far bo it f ren no tc run down Oi raa rr .n odicino and

•

scionco and tho nodical profession. But one cannot dotty


30099


Court 1

June 25-*-26-3-KD-Perrln-VoR3choen


that -'are were certain factors and tendencies whioh reduced
the level of the German doctor and the German student. Let
us say — well — they endangered the level.

Q. Endangered, that Is not quite what you said before.
Doctor. But I'd like to know the following: You spoke of
the students. I hoard froa you that you got your informa¬
tion fora the a tudents?

A. These students coaplalned to me, they askod oe to give
thon tlae to study. They didn't wont to tork because at the
university they had to shovel coal, they had all kinds of
seetlnga In the evening, they had no tlao to study.

Q. Doctor, did you find out how much tlao theso studonts
spent por wook on ouch mootings.

A. According to the students about even days a wook.

0. Thon according to your testimony undor oath, Dootor
they had no tloo for anything also. Seven diys a v/cok from
nldnlght they spont on auoh oxcrclsos.

A. They had locturos.

3* Thoy did havo that time. That was wondorful.

A. Dootor, you must know froa your own studios that
locturos olono arc not enough.

Q. I was a student before 1933.

A. Yes, you are a qualified nnn.

Q. And I believe that after 1933 many a student had
qualifications.

A. tou vculd have had to have a groat deal of backbone
end talent.

DR. HOFFMANN: (Counsel for tha defendant Pokorny)l
Hay I ask my colleague, my client Is easily exoltable. Per-
* l iaps you might take consideration of him. Ke has been on the
stand all day today.

DR. SLUTER: We have been going through this for months.


10100


Court 1

June 23-*-26-4-HD-Ferrin-VonScboen.

BY DR. SAUTER:

Q. Doctor, you spoke of the Interference by the Nazis
In the professional organizations. Did you have any close
insight Into Demon professional organizations in the Reioh?

A. Yes, they case to us to our great Joy In October
1938. If you want the exact answer to this question, I
can help you. w certain Dr, Kress case to Ausslg, to the
KVD, and In the first seeting which wo attended It was
said that the exaggerated specialization had to be abolished,
that the good old Gcrsan general practloner had to return.

I have nothing against a good old general practlonor, but
any sensible humanking will not object to tho dovolopacnt
of medicine through specialization. Tho specialist la
nothing but the oxpondnt of tho clinic in tho oountry, and
what he does not aohlevo he sonda to the clinlo. Not all
tho noasures which wero takon by tho Goman Reloh Modioal
Association were ldoal, not to aontlon what effected no
personally.

Q. Doctor, you said that after 1933 pcoplo woro
appointed to tho top positions of professional organizations
who woro no longer elected, but appointed, and consequently
one could not Judge whether they owed their office to
personal efficiency or to other olrcunstancos.

A. Yes.

x. One of these porson3 was your co-dofor.dant Prof.
Bloce.

A. Yes.

Q. Do you seen to say on tho basis of your outstanding
knowledge of conditions that Professor Blone Is in any way
responsible for the lowering of the nedlcal profession
which you allege took place.

«. I never said that. 3ut you will a dalt that people


10101


{


Court 1

Juno 25-<i-26-5-HD-?crrln-VonSchoen


were in charge of things of whoa we never heard anything.

I an talking about Professor Blome.

A. Just a minute, I will get around to him. Ve were
used to the Head of the Dermatological Society being Prof.
Unna at Hamburg, and in France it was Brock or Bouteriore
and in America a man named Sutton, Those woro names wo knew.
I was not referring to Dr. 31ome on tho contrary I am glad
of this opoortunlty to clarify what might lead to a misunder¬
standing, that tho confiscation of my X-ray nachlno, this
aoasuro against doctors with Jewish associations is not the
fault of Hr. Blome. I believe tho XVD vent to tho Ministry
of Intorlor and there wee a certain Grots, yos, tlr.t is tho
nano, Grote, end thlo can Groto Is responsible, not Blome.

Q. Did you go tho Helen Physician Leadership at tho
tine? That wps your professional organization, roprosontod
by tho Rolch physician leador Dr. Blomo?

A. Doctor, I don't think I would have got as far as
the anteroom.

Q. 3ut you could have tried. You $>t as far as
Himmler. You could have gpt to Blome, too. You oould have
wrltton him a letter. Why didn't you?

A. Dr. Sautor, I had enough cxporlonco with tho lower
offices, end I could imagine what tould have happened If I
went to a higher agonoy, and so I never evon tried.

h. In that connection, Doctor Pokorny, you spoke of
tho Contl-Actlon. You know about this?

A. I loarned about It here.

Q. Did you hear nothing In your home town of a
Contl-Actlon?

A. Ko.

Q. Then in 1943 in Prague, there was no persecution of
Jewish doctors. They weren't taken out of their homes, they


Court 1

June 25 -j— 26-6—KD-?errln-YonSchcen


veren*t removed from their practice?

A. Dr. Sauter, that was already done in 1938 or 3©.

The doctors were reaoved as early os r 42, since I have test-,
if led that ny wife, ay foroer wife was sent to a concentra¬
tion camp in January '42, as I learned later, it was
Shoreslenstadt; and there were a few other things fcat happened
thore that I didn't mention.

Q. Isn't that a mistake, Doctor, don't you aeon 1943?

You say that the Jewish Doctors were taken away in '42? I
an informed that that was in 1943.

A. Doctor, you nay bo right for this country, but let
no point out that the whole development of Ilatlonak-Sociallsm
differed in our country and the Reich. Hero it developed
slowly, but the ccvement broke over us liko a flood; and
perhaps I am qualified to Judge this slnco ay own divorood
vi:o vns aunt to a concentration camp In January of * 42 , and
she asked no for help. I know that very well.

Q. Doctor, that has nothing to do with tho roooval of
Jowlsh doctors. Your wife was an entirely differont enso
than the removal of the doctors.

A. But she was an X-ray specialist, X-ray praotloner,
and the machinery was taken away. She wow not only Jewish,
but she was also a doctor.

Q. Do you know on the basis of what regulations that
vas done? I will make the quostion more speolflo.

A. I can't tell you. Doctor.

V, a9 that on the tnsl6 of a regulation of tho
professional organization or was that a Reich lav;?

A. I cannot give you any information stout that. It
=ust hove been a regulation which was in -effect in Czochoslova-

thot is, in the Protectorate. I can tell you nothing
absut it. I only know the fact.


10103


Oourt 1

June 25-^*~26—7-HD-?orrin-VonSchoon


You don't know whether the Rolchs-^erzte Fuehrung,
or the leadership had anything to do with it, or Prof. Blono
had anything to do with it?

A. I don't know anything about that.

7K£ PRESIDENT: Counsel, how such longer will the
examination of this witness probably tcntlnue?

DHL Sa'JTER: a few alnutes. Perhaps it would be better
to interrupt it now.

HARDY: Ybur Honors, is all this extensive examination
necessary. I think that it-

THE PRESIDENT: I woe about to suggest to oeunsol that
the Tribunal does not oee any particular objective in his
examination of the wltn-ies in hie oross examination. I think
that cvorythliig along tho line th t 13 followod so far, at
least, has aim \\ b-c: cu'-cmpl? shed. i 4 . the cross examination
vould toko oar i.vni, cf course, that wo lu bo a

difforont qj'.ttlu *. I think the Tribunal will no \i rccoso
until 9:30 0 temerrsw corning.

IKE MARSHAL: The Tribunal will rocoss until 3:30 o'clock
tomorrow corning.

(a recess was token at 1700 hours, 25 Juno 1947 until

0930 hours 26 Juno 1947.)


10101


Court Ho. 1

26 Jun 47-n-l-l-ia:-rostor (Vos Schon)


Official Transcript of the Anerican Military
Tribunal is the setter of the Unitod Statee
of leer lea against Bari Brandt, et al,
defendant*, fitting at Sueraberg, Oercaay, on
26 Juno 1547, 0930, Juetice Beale presiding.


22 .-AHST-AL: Pereone in the courtrooo will please find their seats.
Ihe Honorable, the Judges of Military Tribunal X, Military Tribunal I
ie aov in session. Cod stv# the United States of Asserica and this honor¬
able Tribunal, There will be order in the court.

7KB PPISnUYT: Mr. Marshal, will you ascertain if the defendants
ere all pro sent in court.

7KI llAfiSEALs Kay it please Your Eoncff, all the defendants are
present in the court.

TrI P52SIDESTi The Secretary vill note for the rocord the presence


of all the defendants in court.

ATXJ KK3UR - Eesuaed

7KB PBlSnaiT! Any further Questions to bs propounded to this
vitneos by defense counsel?

3t. SAUCES (Counsel for tho defendant Sloes )i nr. President,
bofore I continue the exaaination of this witness, I should like per-
elsslon to give a fev suggestions about procedure in the near futuro.

A few days ego the prosecution announced five aore witnesses. If wo
understood correctly, soae of then are to be on sea wp.ter Questions and
sone of thea on general Questions. The prosecution also apparently has
the intontion of presenting further docunentory evidence. This prevents
coao of tho defense counsel fron writing their final argusente or briefs
and turning then in for translation because these defense counsel expoct
that the evident which will still bo presented by the prosecution will


give soao of the defense counsel occasion to change or add. to these

intend to aaice. How, so that the closing speeches
in for translation as soon aa possible, we
if the prosecution, after the conclusion
would first subeit their ne~ evidence and exasine
the witnesses .and ii then after that the defense were to subeit “hat


of the


10105


Court Bo. 1

26 Jus 47-H-l-2-£EH-7oster (Yon Schon)

evidence rcnains vw believe that that vill expedite proceedings.

•G. H Aa ZTf: Your Honor, in this regard the prosecution, of course,
is adverse to complying with the wishes of defense counsel because that
vould then afford what you vould call a rebuttal on the part of the
defense to a rebuttal on the part of the prosecution. However, I as
informed this sorning that our first rebuttal Jocuaent book has been
filed vith defense counsel today, vhich is long before the tine neces¬
sary. In addition to that, the witnesses that will bo called, duo
notice will be given to theo. Bow, ; assuse that oartlcularly defenso
counsel in the position that Dr. Sauter is in, Inas m uch as he is
representing 31ose and Huff, that his briefs are all written and that
all he will have to do now is add sew evidence in a suppleeontary brief
to supplecont the brlofs that he has now coopleted. That should bo tho
ease in sost instances inassuch as the last few days the discussion has
been soa water which doesn't affect nary of the defendants to any groat
extent with tho o.veeption of lolglboock, Freysong, and Schrooder.

So it seoos to ce that their brlofs aro all conpleted now and
whatever nannor we finish up in tho noxt few days in our cleaning up
process that they could, in a nattor of hours, vrito a supuloacntary
brief to-accocpany the briefs which should hovo been conolotcd ut> to
this tine.

IH* ISSSIISWt Defense counsol will, of coureo, havo the orivilego
of writing, as suggested by counsel for the oroeccution, a suorlenental
brief. It is not necessary to delay translations of thoir rrinclolo
briefs because the Tribunal would accept a eupolenental briof bringing
in any now natter or changes in a brief that has alroady been filed.

It seecs to no that that would meet tho questions presented by Dr. Sautor.

Dr. SJlDTSH: Then, Mr. President, I have a cecond rcaucst. Tho
Question is still open. Wat ti=e is set for giving the closing brlofs
and the response to then? There are a few other sinor questions which
have to be cleared up. It vould be expedient to discuss these nattcro,
not here in court, but in a personal discussion with the Tribunal and

10106


Court So. 1

26 Jus 7--l-3-EK‘.-?cster (Von Sekoa)

the prosecution. *e should like to ask the President to givo the
defense counsel an opportunity to discuss these questions vhich need to
ho settled vith the Tribunal and vith the prosecution in the near futuro.
There are only a few ainor Questions of a certain importance for the
defense counsel, however. Ve should be very grateful for this opportunity.

aR. HARDY: Your Honor, I an apparently not cloar in what Dr. Souter
has said. He said "in answer to tho briefs". I feel suro that the
prosecution isn't going to write another brief in answer to defense
brief. I don't know Just what he is referring to. The prosecution
will file their briefs and I foel as far as the prosecution is concerned
that «ill be the last brief we will write.

THE PRESIDENT: The Tribunal fcao fixed no deadline for the filing
of these briefs, tlsply attuning that counsel for the prosecution ar.d
for the defomo would oxpedlto tho preparation and filing of thoir
briefs to tho groatest possible extout, but thore hao been no deadline
dixed for tho filing of briefs. Tho Tribunal si.cply wonts then as toon
as possible. Ve fix no deadline and shall not do so unless ve find
undue delay scoovhore, scoc delay which strikes the Tribunal as unreason¬
able. I think the Tribunal can neot a coaaittco of dofonso counsol at
5 o'clock this aftornoon, after tho adjourrccr-t of court. If defonoo
counsel desires to appoint a coseitteo to ooct vith the Tribunal and
vith the prosecution, we can noot with thcc in tho consultation roon at
5 o'clock teday.

IP., SAUTE?.: Thank you. Hr. Presidont. Ve shall be there nt 5
o'clock.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel say proceed.


10107


26 June JjC_2-l~Kcchan (1st., ?en Sehon)
Ccurt I


ST IS. SAL*7L?.:

H Mr. President, I shall follow jcur suggestion nade at tho
cad of the session yesterday and in the name of the Defendant Sloao,

I shall put no fur tho r questions to this witness, I should, hewevor,
like to a'ak * few questions for the Defendant Huff and the Defendant
Boaborg, with tho consent cf their defense counsel.

Vitness, did you yourself carry out any bo&an experiments?

X So.

h Did you study international literature on hunan cxpcrlnonts
before tho beginning of this trial, witness, I scan International
literature free which vo havo hoard cxeorpts hero?

A It depends on how you interpret the concept, experiments on
hunan beings. It is a natter of courso that a.t tho clinic wo tostod
a drug or a snail ploco of skin was reached in ordor to aako a diag¬
nosis, possibly also as the basio for a sclcntifie caper, but subh
things cannot bo interpreted as ccpcricccts on huwn beings. They
happen doily throughout the world, Such tests, of course, wore per-
foraod at our clinic too, but experiments on huaan beings, ouch ao
are scant here, that io what I noant in ay first answer when I oay
wo had not porforsed any.

Ae to your second ouostion, I had a. slight knowledge of this
typo of cxporlaonts because one can attain such a knovlodgo in part
eron fro* lay-literature. I nerer took a spocial intorost In tho oub-
Jeet before September of 1941 when the subject was brought to ay atten¬
tion.

\ Then in Septonbor sf 1941, Sector, did you study this inter¬
national literature, which we haTt discussed her*, for exasplec.
Professor Lcibrandt and Profeesor Ivy, and then in a nvabor of tho
dccmcr.i bcolcs; did you study this international litcraturo in 1941;
this is priserily literature which vac published abroad in forolgn
l-nnruegos, or were you unfjusiliar v-ith it until the beginning of this
trial?


10108


26 «uxic 47 JUT JC—2-2-Mochan (Xnt., 7or. Schon)

Court I

A I did act study this literature la be y specialized fashion,
but the subject vac discussed with great Interest by ae pad two
doctors, who west! friends of siae but then la ae point of Introducing
thes la the trial, because one of then died lr. e concentration casp
and the othor cossittcd aulcide. The extont of the cxporlaentatlon
cn hunan beings, which has been brought out by this trial, I did not
know of course.

^ doctor, yesterday, ycu spoke about the rules for oxporiraonto
on husan beings, I pb not rultc clear about this, hewover, thoreforo,

I ask you regarding your statement yestorday on the subject, woro you
oxprosaing year personal, erlvato cpinlor., which you forced for your¬
self without any knowledge of foreign literature, or did you scan to
say that what you said on the subject yesterday was In your opinion tho
roccgnitcd version of tho Goman nodical profession as a wholoT

A Dr. Sautor, I believe I ansvored thle question yostorday, when
you asked mo whether X spoke on the subject ns an export. It Is not
tho opinion of tho Gorean nodical profession, I had no way of checking
that, X had no occasion or opportunity to talk about It, that le tho
subjectivo opinion of sine and I attack all preblcrs fros the point

a

cf view of ccanon sense. I bellovc that Is the auron nodiocrltas,
which la thconly lcvol for a portion of ny callbor for Judlng a probloa.

<4 X have no furthor questions.

TEA Aro they® ax questions to the witness by any

dofonso ecunecl?

Eas the Prosecution any furthor questions?

H2. HA-ET: The Proe6cutlon has no further cuostlcns, your Honor.

TH1 FEBSHE7T: The Defendant Pekorny, ''Itncas on hie own bo-
half, nay be excused fros tho witness stand and rcsuac hie place In
the deck.

E3. HafT'-AXi Xr. President, I should llk« to call tho wltnose

”rux»

Ttj PHiSIIii'TS “he Karehal will s~iu-.cn the v itnca£, Hudolf Trux.


10109


26 June 47 -X-JJC-2-3-Mccher. (Int., '’cn Sefccn)

Court I

S-idoIf Trux, a witness, to^k the stand and testified aa follows:
3T JUDGi. SSST IhG:

H Please raieo yojir right hand end fee swore.

I swear fey God, the Alsighty end Oanlscicnt, that I will opcek
the pure truth and -ill withhold and add nothing.

(*ho witness repeated the oath.)

JTDGi 3UBSRH Ton nay fee soated.

DIBXCT UliajLlTICK


3i nt. Ecnsaurt

<1 Vitnose, ycu were feorn 11 January 1900 in Konotau, at that
tl x in Austria Hungary?

A Tos.

•4 Tou arc new a resident of Xrensainster in the Aocrican Zono
of Austria?

A Tos.

^itnoss, please toil the Tribunal briefly about your lifo.

A I cone free a faaily, which for about 400 years has been in
t v e Sudetcr.land. X spent ay youth in ay ho no town of Xocotov and
about half of zy youth, feurtoen years, in Prafuc and the rest in tho
Sudontonland. Sinco 193? or 1938 I hare boon living in Boichonborg,
tho capital city in tho Sudctcnland. 3i nC o Bovesfcor of 1945, I hare
lived in Xrcaosinstcr.

<4 Vitncoc, have you ever belonged to tho H.S.9.A.P. or any of
itc affiliated orgrniza.tions?

A I never bolongcd to tho party or any of itc affiliated orgenltn-
tions.

<i Witness, are 70 U related, to the. Witness Pokorny?

A Tes, he is the husband of cy youngest siotcr, ny brother-in-

law.

S. 3ld you knew Cr. Pekerny earlier?


^ Tes, before wo bccaac related.

10110


r t

26 June 47-H-*J"-2-4-Mceh«n (int., 3rown)

Court I

v< Was there any friendly eorxcction between you in addition to
your relationship?

A Tea, before we becanc related thorc was a connection between
ue, -he Sudctenland with ita three and one half cillien German
residents «ai s»ore or leas one big frally, everyone knew everyone
clao through busineii or fasily conncctlcna or otherviao and everyone
was connected. "Dr. Pokerny was a veil known nan, he was known in
Prague fron the German Soeioty of Physicians, tho Goraan Ico Hockey
Association, and several organisations, Kc frequented tho Prague
casino and was a well known spertenan and well knew tennis ployor.

t* Sid you often diteuso ideological questions with Sr. Pokorny?

A Yea, wo frequently discussed ideological questions.

H v hat kind of an attitude did ho havo?

A In the course of tho years a degree of confidence dcvolopod
between >. Pekerny and sysolf, which I night call a truo friondshlp.

Tho bo voro no inhibitions and apparent frankr.CBO oxistod botwoon uo.

?hie night bo in cart explained by conditions under the regloo. Svory-
ono who thought with a cortain dogreo of responsibility was noro or
less isolated and look for ecmtact with persons who shared thlo point
of view. Vhilo Sr. Pokerny was a ailitary doctor, wo ofton not on
his loaves in Bolchonbcrg, lr Eosotav or in Chennovits.

H Witness, did you knew about the difficulties Sr. Pokorny had
after the occupation of tho “udctohl a c d .

A Tog, the fact of hie fornor marriage to a Jowish woman, his
liberal attitude and other circuastancos were occasion enough for tho
party to sake difficulties for his whenever possible. Thooo difficul¬
ties ran like a rod thread through all phases of his privato and pro¬
fessional life. I nay give you tho following cxasqjle fron moacry.
Proceedings of tho y.S.S.AJ*., shortly after the occupation of tho
Sudctcnler.d began, with tho purpose of hurting hie practiso and recalling
hie license. Tho sain reason I remember was his close contact with
Ctechs and Jews, his half Jewish children, pacifists, etc.. As a


10111


26 June ♦7-y-JT*C_2_5-Mcehen (lot., Srown)

Court I

result cf Indiscretions he knew his house Kid his contacts were
*cl-g watched end spied upon hy the Gestapo. His praetieo, ns far
ns the influence of the party, went, ves systematically reduced,
lor his fnra at Eoaoter for a long ti=o ho wee refused the co-oellod
famors certificate, although he cultivated his fnra in e exarrplatory

way. Els proaotlon fron e lieutenant to Captain was long delayed

%

heenuoo of the political conduct certificate.


10112


Court 1

Juno 26-Ji-3-l-KD-Cook-7onSchoen.

Q. Witness, do you know the docunont in this ccoo, the
letter which Dr. Pokorny wrote to Himmler In October 1941?

Did you hear anything about it?

a. Yea, I knew the contents fron what my sister told mo
end what Dr. Pokorny later told me himself.

Q. Witness, please describe carefully, to tho Tribunal
under what circumstances this conversation took place and
exactly what Mr. Pokorny said, 0 ivlng tho date as far as you
can remember.

a. In the spring of 1942 my sister who was at the tlQo
living In Kocotau cane to us In Relchenborg for a visit.

She was at that tine gottlng a divorce fron her first marriage
and wanted to bo nway from Komotau for the transition period.
She probably expected that I would holp her. Sho ronalnod
with us for two or three months until the formalities of
tho divorco proceedings required hor presence In Komotau
again, When she was sitting with ny wife and mysolf one
evening sho said that Dr. Pokorny when he was still In
civilian practice had treated a patient who said he was a
noeber In the SD In the protectorate of Bohemia and itornvla.
This patient attracted attention by his roquost to bo
treated outside of normal hours. In the course of tho
conversation durln c the treatment which lasted several wooko
this patient announced ttat the highest political circles
were entertaining Ideas of sterilizing prisoners by operation.
The point of view here was to provent on lnter-marrlage with
the population of the country. on a later visit this

patient had mentioned an rrtlcle which he had found In a
oeglzlne In the waiting room. This magazine contained a
report about the result of sterilisation experiments on
animals by r foreign poison plant. Referring to this nrtlclo,
he had asked Dr. Pokorny whether this drug could bo used for


10113


Court 1

June 26-I4-3-3-HD-Cook-Vbn5choan.


sterilizing human beings. Dr. Porkorny had said "no." Dr.
Poritorny, my slater went on to say, was shocksd at the


intentions of castration and cojld not get over the Idea
that the Intention was to treat human beings like animals.

He regretted that the medical professors and other authorities
lid not have the courage to oppose such Intentions, iiy
•later added, that Dr. Porkorny, acting on this conversation,
had cade a suggestion by letter to one of the highost SS
agencies, that this foreign poison plant be used for the
sterilization experiments. Thus ho was convinced attention
would be detracted from the method by operation. Dr.

Porkorny expected no results from this drug but ho thought
that It would be a good way to pigeonhole tho whole thing.

'ft'ltnoss, did you yourself discuss tho matter wltn
Dr. Porkorny and when was it?

a. A few woeks later Dr. Porkorny nleo oaao to visit
us In Helchenborg. Thrt must have boon ot Pentcooot 1942
or c week when there was a C-thollc holiday shortly before
or afterwards. On one of these holidays wo and tho two
•"man and ay two children vent on an excursion to Frledland
in the Isongeblrgo to look at tho Karenstoln castlo, and
it's museum, './bile ve were walking In the park of the
castlo In the neighborhood of Frledland, I Intentionally
.r:>ught the conversation to this Information which my sister
•i d given me shortly before hand. Dr. Porkorny first of
*11 oorrcctcd by view that he had oxpressod any Judgment.
Botany had always been his hobby and In earlier years at
■edlcfll Congresses he had reported on the results of hla own
* osearch. There were ®ecicl public, tlone on the subject In
is book cases kilcn I had often seen. Dr. Porkorny said that
she paper would cause experiments and all the red ti pe
c nr.ectod v:ith It end that was from his point o.' view what

10114


Court 1

June 26-K-3- 3-HD-Co o 1c-TfonSchoen.

he wanted to Impose on the authorities concerned. If he had
expressed any opinion hlaaelf he would have saved the x>rk.

He conflraed what ny sister had told ne.

5, Witness, what was your re-actlon?

A. Hy first re-aotlon was that this letter was a very
serious natter, although I knew the reasons which load Dr.
Porkorny to write it. I nay have said this to Dr. Porkorny
too and when I said that I would not like to havo my none In
Kinnler's flies Dr. Porkorny ropoated his notlvce end said
that something had to be done. One can't oxplaln everything,
with rationalisation and use cr.roful cocaon eonec.

5. Hr. President, In connection with the testimony of
the wltnoss Trux I should like to offor a docunont for
ldontlfloation whloh lo in ny docunont book I on Pago 30,
doounent No. 15, whloh will be Exhibit No. 21. This Is a
certlfloate of the Czechoelovcklan Republlo about tho
political cirouastance8 rogardlng the wltncso Trux, on tho
basis of investigations.

HR. KaRDY: I would llko to know Just what this doounent
is, I would llko to have It oxplalned.

DR. HOFFMaN: Hr. Prosldont, this docuaent which I shall
show to the witness for Identification Is an offioinl state-
nont of tho Czech Republic stating that the witness Trux Is
rocognlzed as an Hr.tl-Paclst by the office for National
Security and Is exenpt froa wearing an Indent if lcr-tlon badge,
pursuant to ordinance 637.

BY DR. HOFPHjtfi:

Witness, please look at this photostat and tell tho
Tribunal whether this certificatews cade out for you?

«. les. I have the original of this. It was issued
for -e to certify that I an an Antl-Faclst, that I did not
3clon^ to the Party, ar.d accordin 0 to the tomlnology of the
Czech authorities, I an considered politically reliable.


Court 1

Juno 26-M-3~4-HD-Cook-VonScho en.


2?.. HOFFMaN: Mr. President, I hcve no further questions
to put to this vltneas.

Th£ PRE8IDENT: Counsel, do you desire to offer the
Photostat card as an exhibit?

OH. HDFnaH: I offered it as Exhibit No. 21
T.-IE ?RESIDENT: And it has the sane number ns the
certified oopy of this card vhloh is In your document book?
OR. K0FP1UN: Yes.

7K2 PRESIDENTS The Exhibit will be admittod in evidence.


Court So. 1

26 Cue 47-tt-4-l-iav-L©Te (Von Sehon)


52 PESSUSST: Doe* the defense counsel have any ouostlons to
- repound to this witness? Being no Questions, the orosccutlon cay

cross-exaalas.

EAEDf; Tour Honor, I sight rooueet tho defenso couneol for Dr,

?clcorny If it would bo convenient to call his vltnces Dr. Trledorick
Jung bofore ho calls Dr. Tricderlch Koch.

3 s .. H0T7HAKK: Kr. President, I should orefor to call Dr. Koch first
and then Dr, Jung.

.3. HASDT: X as asking If It would b« convenient for his to call
2r. Jung first. The prosecution would like Ms eallod first inasmuch as
I wish to prepare sooe work for .the witness Koch and I hrvon't had a too
long knowledge that Dr. Koch vac coclsg h«xo ns a witnose and I vould
llko to work ovor it a bit during tho recess this afternoon or at noontirao.

2?.. EC7T.JJYJ At. President, I »culd bo glad to obllgo Hr. Har$r
tut I ncod Dr. Jung after Dr. Koch end Z nnuounoed in tiae that Dr. Koch
-as casing.

hr.. HAEDT: In that ovent It say be necessary after the eceolotlon
sf tho direct exasinatlon of Koch for tho orosccutlon to aek for a delay
in cross-oxoninetion.

TEE PBESI3E!?*: The Tribunal will ontortain tho roouost vhon It is

=edo.

CROSS IXAilKAlIOH

BT luU HARD? I

Q. Kr. Trux, what is ycair occupation?

A. I es a back director by nrofesslcs, that is, I was until 1945.
Sinco then I have been director of a textile sachino factory In Austria,
v Vhcn did you seet Dr. Pokoray for the first tlse?

A. After the Vorld Ver, I think. 2 ces't resunbor today of course.

I bccene close friends with his after 1938. 2 vos in Kosotru froouently

lr. connection with the illness of =y cotber whoa Dr. Pokorny treated,
v ,- ho- did Dr. Pokorny first start courting your si*ter7
A. I as not lnforsed about that. Hy sister was e friend of Dr.

10117


Court lo. 1

26 Jan 47-*-4-2-£34-Love (7on Schon)

Pokorny for nesy year«.

Q, Dr, Pokorny serried her in 1S43, is that correct?

A. Tee, October 1943.

Q, Tour slater had been nerrled previous to that tine?

A. Tea, I sentlonod bofore that in the soring of 1942 eho vlaitod
us In Belchcnberg In connection with her divorce.

Q. And at that tine she spoke to you relative to a situation
therein Dr. Pokorry had net a high official of tfco SET

A. Tos.

^ What vos It the told you about his Booting of the high official
of tho SO core specifically?

A. X can only repeat vbet X said boforo. A patient ccno who aald
that ho was a aoebor of the higher SD In tho Proteotorate of Sohcola
and Koravia end who was unusual bocause ho has to bo tronted outsldo of
tho nonsal hours.

q, Did Dr. Pokorny ever talk about nay other ontients of tho SD
cr the SS?

A. By none, no, no one. It night have happoned that ho nade
general stntononts about a cortnlr. caso and draw gonoral conclusions
fren tho caso but I can't roaoobor that any specific cases '-oro talked
shout except for purposes of illustration.

q, Did Dr. Pokorny and your sister tell you that tho nattor con¬
cerning hit letter to Eirdcr wes Swcrot?

A. So.

q, Tcu of course have road the lottcr?

A. I know tho contents.

q. In the letter he states-

H

A. I was told abcut It by Dr. Pokorry end sy slstor.

q, Tou haven't reed the letter? Hasn't the defense counsel
presented tho letter to you to read?

A. Tes, I reed the text once.

q. The letter of Pokorny tells Elral er he will keep this natter


10118


Court So. 1

2« Jon 47-M-4-3-I3(-Lo rt (Von Sefcon)


secret, doesn't he? Don't you recall that In the letter?

(So answer)

Pokorny states In the last sentence of the letter to Einnler, "As
a toman physician and chief physician of the reserves of the toman
Yehraacht retired I undertake to keep secret the ourpose as suggested
V M In this letter." Is that right?

A. Tes.

Q, Ho vroto this letter in October 1941, did he not?

A. Yes, he told ae it was a few aonths beforo; X talked to him
in the spring of 1942 and he had writton this lotter a few months
beforehand.

Q, So ho didn't keen it eecrot if he told you about it, did he?

A. Kell, of coureo theeo thieve woro confidential.

Q, Did he tell you that ho had proposod that oxperiaento be con¬
ducted?

A. *?cll, I could see that froc vhat I was told froa tho contonts .
of tho lotter,

Q. Thon you understood that Pokorny woe proposing that oxoerinonts
be carriod out with this ooieon plant, caladlun?

A. Yoe, that is what I understood. Dr. Pokorny fron tho vory
beginning very clearly expressed the opinion that this was an ox-ocrlnent
with a useless drug because ho expected nothing fros this poieon and
beeauso the cultivation of tho plcnt during the wax would be lroossiblo,
as he said ropoctedly.

Q. But you understood that the reason why Pokorny proposed these
experiments was bocausa he thought the drug ves usoloeo?

A. The cotivo of Dr- Pckomy was doubtless to gain tine.

Q, I didn't ask you, witness, about the notivo. I asked you to
repeat ay answer to oucstion, the reason vfcy Dr. Pokorny suggested
that the experiments be conducted was bcccuse ho thought that tho drug
to be used vrs useless, hence the sterilisation would not trice effect.

A. Yes, he said to ae repeatedly that ho wanted to distract


10119


Court 5o. 1

26 Jus 47-44-4—4-JLEH-Lovc (Yon Sshoc)


attention froa the nethod ef operation. That, perhaps, v*s tho notivating
factor.

Q* In any event you clearly understood that Pole or ay had pronosod
to Hinder that he should experiment with this plant?

A. Yes, hut Dr. Pokorry was working froa tho assumption that the
poison could not bo obtained during the war.

HE. HARDY: I have no further questIona, Tour Honor.

TEL PRiSII£57: Ho further questions for defonso ccunsel? The
vltness Trux then is excused froa the witness otrxd. The lirrshal will
suonon the witness Dr. irnst Koch.

(DR. IRHST KOCH, a vltness, took tho stand and testified as follows:)

3Y juaa SaBRlSOi

Q. Hold up your right hand and bo sworn.

I swoer by God, the Alnighty nr.d Ctanisclent, that ! will gpcalc tho
pure truth and will withhold and add nothing.

(Tho vltness ropoated tho Oath.)

You nay bo seated.

DIKLCT LXAI;ISATICF

BY DR. H077.AHS:

Q. When and vhoro wore you born?

A. On tho 17th of Yebruary, 1901, in Tulltcu in Vostphallo.

Q. Vhat education have you had?

A. I attended the public schools for f«x years and tho Real Oyn-
Mtiuc in Qpackonhurg for five yorxt. Then ! Intended to study codiclno.
•V parents did not pemi*. that. I had to stud." actional oconory but
•ocrotly I took course* In medicine. Since 1922 I secretly etudied
medicine on the old*. 7a 1924 I took the Physical oxanlnrtion for tho
doctor's oxaalnatiOB in 1726 the State txraination; then I becaaa aesis-
tant ct tho Kedicel Clinic in Cologne. In 1929 I tccroc MBlrtnnt at the
bacteriological institute In Cologne. In 1522 I bo coco chief Physician
at this institute. In 1925 I was put in charge of the biological insti¬
tute of Dr. Xedaus in Radshcul.


0120


9 -

26 Jjsj L7-Ji-ATI>-5-l—Ninabuck (In-, vor. Schor.)

Court I, Case I

Q fitness, what scientific pepers have you written?

A Abeut seventy, rostly on the basis of anLaal oxperi-Mnts.

3 And what are you doing at present?

A At 'present I an working for I'-adus and Company in 3onn.

Q And where did you work until tho collapse?

A In Radeboul, and briefly bofero the collapse I >ras transferred
to !!bom, Haaburq.

3 Ifhnt position did you have for t'adaus an ' “och in Hariburg?

A I was in charge of tho biological institute.

3 Witness, In the Journal for Experimental IJodicino did you
publish a paper about calaliua?

A Tos, together with Dr, Gorhard "adaus.

3 In tho "Oneohau" — you know tho 'Uasehou"?

A Tea.

3 Did you publish an nrtido about oaladiun?

A Ho.

3 ‘iho did?

A Dr. Oorhard Ifcdaua.

Q What was tho .-urposo of your paper in tho Journal for
Sqarlamtcl !U)dicino?

A Tho firn of Dr. I'adaus pre hicod dnxgs from nedicinal plants.
This did not 3cen to h.."a a scientific basis ir. tho oyes of -.any
Gernan doctors, and it ras tho duty of tho biological institute to
ta-ry out sciontific research on nodieinsl plants, especially to dotor-
ilno tho offoct of such plants exactly in anLial axperir; j r.tafcior.. Dr.
’ai-.u3 had vory 3pe<*i,-J. irtorost in tho influence of r_ iicinal plants
-a the function of tho iiur organa, especially the function of tho
ti-v.is with internal sccrc*i:n r

Tho exact purp -so of paper I indicated in the paper itself. On

-?# the occasion for our invarai ntlons vns tho question — to what
-atcr.w the oxjx.ric.nco oE popular :va loin:- an* tho practices bared on
‘•his ojporior.ee could bo brought into conformity vith tho larrs cf


10121


26 June L7W.?3>>5»2^Itinabuck (Ir.t. vor. Sohon)

Court I, Caso I

pharnacology, physiology end exparlnontai therapy*" This shows tho
purpose of cur working plan*

Q tfitnoas, was tho purpose of this publication to announce a drug
for sterilization, perhaps for use in tho -uranic courts?

2 ?Jo, this was not the purposo of the papor. As I have already
said, tho oxanination of tho question of what influence caladiua had
or. tho function of tho glands with internal secretion. If tho paper had
had such a purpose, thon wo would havo had to rrultiply tho oalactLun
plants# Vo novor did that. 'Jo wculd also havo had to i sola to tho
offoctivo agont in thj plant and dotoriino t'.io chord cal formula. Wo did
not do that, "'ithout this procoduro tho question would havo boon quito
sonsaloes.

Q -itnoss, than you rrializod th*t this cala liun did net ropro-
sent a .'rug that could bo use:’ for tho sterilization of hunan boings?

2 Too, of courso.

Q How ccul ' that bo soon fra*, ycur papor, that this was not a
Srug for storilizinc hunan boirves?

A Thoro ere .’.any points in ths pep^r whoru ono can soo that
rory cloorly.

Q 'itnuss, ploaso do not quote. Sinco you wrote tho papor yourself,
just toll us about those roasoruj.

A On page 69 I said c-xjrossly that this ras no prospect of
procedure for hunan beings. I also saiJ that tho uxporlrx>nts varo in
part positive and ir. part negative, al3o on pago 69j that tho tino
until tho [rug took offcct was subject to oxtivnc variation; that in
souo eases after lhO to 160 daysthere ^3 no offoct; that largo amounts
-* tho extract wero noodod in con ..arisen to the bo^’ weight of tho
ardnal; that tho troatacr.t took 77 to 21' ‘-.vs; that in fcnalo aninals
iho sterility produced, wo as3iiod to bo only temporary; that it was
unknown how Ion;: sterility wcui ' continue nft_r trnt- at as 'iscon-
tin-io Ij that the changes in t:u -ypophysic -.:_rc n: t th: s:;v. a3 those


10122


26 Juno lx7-^-ATI>-5-3-?Jincback (Int. von Schon)
Court I, Case I


produced by castration; that th_ nethed of action of the plant in tho
body ms unknown; that wc had not thought cf i sola ting tho cffcctivo
agont and producing it artificially. I an sure thoro aro otter points,
but I think that will bo enough.

Q Witness, do yen believe that an average doctor, a ftcr reading
your pc par, would bo oonvinosd that thoro was no possibility cf using
oalodiun for sterilization?

A I should llko tc say that if ho had 1 eke at tho layer and
roac*. through tho i-ab sagos which I have Just quotod, ho would lave had
to real!so that.

Q Titnoss, you publishod this pe.jxr and Dr. lidaus had publishod
ar. article in tho "Unschau". Did you concern y.ursolf with the gre-.ring
of caladtun or was’ thoro any special roason for tho question of caladlua
being taken up in ycur instituto?

A In 1936-37 wo carried cut tests on cola Hun with plants which
happened to bo availablo onsrv cur :.- ’icinal plants, and ir. 1939-^0 wo
ill tho sum. Thoro was never ary cultivation on any large scale. Jo
sfton had difficulties in carrying cut tho experiments booauso thoro
Ir.pponod to bo no plant aatorlal available. Thor, in 1912 I was sucVdonly
told by a General ?ohl thqt I was to couo to Berlin for a conference.

4 "fhr.t kind of a gororal was tltit?

A Fra: tte S3.

Q And what happened ir. Berlin?

A Tho oonfaroncos ir. Berlin, "Ur.tcr den Eicten" rrcro in a big
building, apparently Pohl’ s office. The *uard received no, saying that
tho Gorcral had boon waiting for twenty ~dnuto3. I was taken up to hin
'J'r ho 3 aid that ho was not pleased that I hod written a vip.T on
V - L ' -un; that it was undesirable for Gamcnyls position abroad or seno
wch thin: • I can*t repeat hi3 exact words. ..r.d thcrofaro he asked no
the future tc rofrain fren n a hin such publications, but he askod that
tests bo continued and that v*o tell the S3 or rather hin, about the
results. Po were to continue the oasts on a broad basis, were to cultivate

10123


26 JtBSO l:7-»3pATD-5-J*-Hii»back (Int. tor Scbon)
Court I, Case I


oaladiuu, Truro to try to grow the calndiun freu seed, end ho had a fow
other wishoe, but I can*t rotvrijor then at tho nosent.

q V/itnoss, did ycu realize 'urine this h.scussicn what Pohl ranted
ealadinn for?

A !fo, that was not ontircly clear to no, but tbs wry in which
?chl opened this discussion and the my in which ho pointed out tho
sinnifioanco cf those investigations imo Stately '•isturbod no and nado
ue suspicious•

Q If I untorstand ycu correctly yax sai. 1 before that on tho basis
of your t»rk thjro was no possibility of storilizinir hunan bein'* with
caladiun* How, since you wore suspici.us, as you Just sai!, didn't you
toll pohl that nothin,': could bo done with oaladiun?


10124


"curt So. 1

26 Job 47-*-6-l-SEX-0ross (7on Sehon)


A. I tried very hard to convince ?ohl that this work would take
very long, that it would bs very difficult, that it would take =any years
Vvfore there vould he aror progress. I pointed out that tfcie Question
interested us froa the purely scientific point of viov with reeecet to
•he influence on the function of the inner organs and the function of
the glands with inner secretion, and that after ve had clearod uo this
Question vo had stopped our investigation in 1940 and that ve had no
intention of resuaing this work end no intention of publishing such vork
again.

Q, Vitncse, did you have the iaprossion that Pohl did not have
s very high opinion of caladiue but was following on ordor froa above?

A. Yes, I as sure he had such an iajression but I don't bcliove
that I could give aiy oxact reason for it. I had tho iepression first
that Pohl had a hlrfi opinion of the significance of tho ealodlun experl-
aonts in the beginning but thon ! told his all tho difficulties, the
extrcoely long duration of tho oxrcrlaonts - one vns 164 days, anothor
vas 357 days. I pointed out all those difficulties to him and I told
hin that thero was no calndiua available, or at loost that thoro wore
only vory ssall acounts, that thle plant grows in Aaorico, that it lo
very difficult to grow, end that it can bo grown in Ocrnany only in hot
houses. And thon be asked ae, "Can't that be grown free seed?" and I
said that growing tropical plants free seed in Goraany was often very
difficult because insects which exist in thv tropics end which plants
erc adapted to do not exist here and, therefore, it vould be necessary
to polloniso such plants artificially, and that this had succeeded in
nary cases, but hov it was for eeladiua I didn't know because I did not
carry out such exoorlaents ayself but I had hverd how our botanists
dealt vith such cucstlons or. principle. I colntcd out the great diffi¬
culties perhaps in ay own interest; I even exaggerated then a bit.

7K2 PHESiaZST: Counsel, the tribunal will uov be in retess.


10125


2 6 47 - U-Rt-7-l-Lcssor (Int. Broca)

C0J3T ». I

IKS I-.E31AL: Persons in the Cc*rtroon sdU picasc find their
scats. The Trituml is again in session.

IKS PRESIDE*?: Counsel any froccod.

B' DR. BQFF1BJH:

Q: .fitness, you told the Tribuml before tho roceS3, that you
spoke with Pohl in Berlin. Did yoa see hin again?

Yes,twice. O^co in 1942 - I don't know the precise date but
I do kx»n ttet thor- were ponchos so it -ust have bv.cn in the autucm.
i wr.s in ttw bi-logical institute at that tire an! all of a sudden
ms told tfr.t hitf: S3 generals or ffioors wore in cxir plantation.

This garden was 3 kilxetors fr» tho instituto. 1 kn.w that I was
surpriaod because in tho mttcr f caL a d l uc I had undertaken nothing;
besiefcs, I uos afraid ttat I ni£»t be dcnouncod beemiso cf tho
14 anti-fascistic collaborators, \;ho noro in pert political prisonors,
when I eaplaycd in the institute. I ienodiatciy wmt to tho plantation
and found Pehl with a large staff with hin who had coao in 2 Largo
autonbbilcs. He irucdlatoly intooducod no t» a dot* or noi-cd boiling
^nd told uj that in tin. future Lolling would supervise these experiments
aaX that I rhoull report to Lolling on tho results of the experiments.

In addition, ho specifically roquW. - of, I forgot to say before,
that ht tho conclusion of the conference in Berlin, Pohl gave i* no
precise orders or assignaont — but n.w ho gavo oj the specific order
that caladiun ocp-rixxntation war t: c- carried n on a bread basis.

Then we wore to cxaoii* the questi-n Aether native plarts contained
effective substances of the sai*. sort as caladiun.

Q: .witness, then Pohl erdored you to produce caladiun, at what

stage were your cxporicerfcs at that tine?

it that tine there wore no experixoori-a at all. The whole entter
r.od core to nothlfg in 19AO; tter- had boo: nothing done to follow it up
Ihat ic.s toward tto cal of 1940. 4fc enj rat., in 1940, at tiw ti» of ^


26 Juno 47-Ji-Fl;-7-2-Lc33cr (Lit, Brotn)
Court Ho. 1


tiv- publication of this paper, no experiments wore under Tray.

Q: Did you then unortako further exporiomtation after Pohl gave
you this older, anl until ihan did you cfc so?

•»: Yes, I did. rt t first wo ocpcrLxntcd on Drosopi.ilr.-aclogonasta,
■hich is a fly. The results of these experiments *.tero c-i-plotcly
negative. The records of tto expcrLxnta ire probably available. Thdn
■c experimented on cico. /vftcr c fe<’ weeks this experimont was broken off,
having had no positive insults becauas all tlu aniaola diod. ..o put in
the rocord that they died because of an opidualo aoong thcnsclvcs.

Then tohoro wore shat we called in cur records Storilixation ExporLaont
Mo. U» It was carried out on US rata in toto but they were strictly
ffibdividud so that, if 1 xvacntx.r correctly, ev^ry single plant or
varioty of caladiuu was given to, I think, 5 rats.


10127


26 Junc-47-4t-PJ-6-l-LovQ (Int. Brown)

Court I, Caso I

?hia cape risen t lasted 184 days and I b-livVo that in Hay 1943
vc reported on this, then thcro was tho 3aot experiment, Sepcriccnt
So. 5 with perhaps 60 animals altogether. I car.'t give ye*i the number
procisoly becauao I don’t have «y dccxixntnti-n any u re. This
experiment lasted 357 days, cas in the middle of 1944 nnfi then
I b^liovc aftor that no one was interested in any Giro taperinonts of
this sort.

Q: .Atness, I stall now put to you a report on the experimental
a-rics Ho. 5 oniats along with tho charts sal I ask you to toll tho
Tribunal uhothor these aro the results of your last experiment?

A: Yea, the so aro the reports on tho last experiment.

DR. HOFFiUWi Ur. Prosidcr.t, I put this record of tho last
experiment which the witness has Just identified in evidonco as
Exhibits 22 and 23. 'Thoy aro in tho Pdcorny Document Book Nos.

27 tad 28, tho report ami the tables respectively.

Q: Then it can bo clearly- so.n, uitnoss, that your last
cxpcrixtnts woro uith.ut result and wore br U off having had
r.o results?

Yos, that is bj. Hewever, I must explain in this
connection that since 1940 we had net thought of these exporirunts
as scientifically significant. If uc '.rere expecting any sort of
results fro-: then in tho way thoy wero carried out the so experiments
*erc if aid: a nature that you can derive n^hing of scientific value
ffjs thee today. The reason for that is that we assume that tho SS
or Pehl vet s pursuing intentions wheih tie did not agrvo with. For that
re-son tic experiments were planned and carried ott in the x I have
Just described, nanoly, in such a way as to lead to no Tollable
me lent idle results.

Q: ,/itness, even if you r.3 sum that tho oxporlscnts were undertaken


26 Juno'47-i5-F!i-S-2-LCVS- (let. Brow)
Oirt I, Casa I


seriously do you bolievo on tho basis of your knowledge particularly in
toe field of calalius that in tho calculable future anything would have cooxs
,f thee?

A: Ko, there is no reason for believing ttr.t there would. That is to

nothing world indicato that idiich would bo anything like scientific
proof. » only had experiences idth aninalo and tto results with tho
aoimla cculd not be transferred to huaan beings.

Q: Do you believe this was enough assurance f«r an averar, doctor
s. that ho could believe that no ccpcrimnts of any isportarro could
be carried on with oaladluc?

A: If the doctor reflected on the fact that it was necessary
to treat a n i nft la froa 70 to 120 days and that they wore still uncertain
elements then frea this fact alone you can readily see that tne doctor
w;uld not then fcol that ho could carry out otpericcnto n huion
beings. The humn beings would have to bo segregated, lockod up;
tacy would have to be guarded all the tioj because as soon as tho
person n ticcd that this drug that he was taking didn't agreo uith hin
t: could bring about artificial voaiting and thus frustrate the
cxpcrlxtn. Tho drugs had to bo taken in aa-unts fron 40 to 60
kiiigraas for every hunan person in ordor to have the saao rosults or
c:rrusp;nding results to the results frea the animl cxpcrin:nb3.

B»at is a very large acounfc. This factor also w-xild have persuaded
*<T no ml doctor. There are ai30 other indication in tho paper to
tr.c cffoct that this work was at a stage that perdttod no discussion
•o far *.s to its applicability to tiu^an beings. In tho paper on page
a? I specifically cunt lend that, precisely in order to prevent so .00
imaginative dec tors hitting on tho crazy notion of pursuing the
--ttcr in that direction.

Q: Doctor, did you have in Dresden tho rccasary nuefcer of hot
•’''Uses t- grow the necessary aaounts of caladi u a ?

10129


26 Junc-47-iWU-S-3-Lovc (Ir.t. 3ro:m)
fcurt I, Case I


:.t first wc h“d no hot h_usc for caladiuj; whether it yao gr.vn in
y.- tropical houses si to spefik an the side, th-n Pohl's order croc
U produce greeter aoounta of onlndiud and h, -ndc available a largo
Bit Rcuso to ua Otich I, however, refused .n the basis, saying there was
a. purpose t. that because oo didn't havw the pL-nts. Ihcn i;c were given
peruission to attach a hot house tha t lr«didy aciste: to a heating
plait that already existed. This \c.s 196 cubic octurs and perhaps 270
plaits could have grown in it.

q: .£« cr.inrttaa extract ovj> jroduiod for thu storiliration of
huoca beings?

;.! No, end I a a convinced that net oven n_ grva was produced; this
without ey Joaawlcdgc because the t:;o p.oplo entrusts. ,dth ,v oducing
this cctract, Ur. Bisker, anti-fascist, ..ell known, end ur. li.iger was
the other, a laboratory assistant of his, - he had be^n arrested lor
political re's-ns a few years previous to that and both hate’, the
third .leich vchuxntly. how, tlr.t these t:». -un night have ;iven
aythln: to the oS, that 1 c-nsidcr qui-u ut of th. question.

q: it ness, yesterday the prosecution put in an affidavit, an
affidavit by Karl .ilhcla Friedrich Tauboeck. ,-ul; you ploaso .
rake a ot ca™nt regarding this affidavit.

EE -TdoSIDEKT: Tfco iveard ;rill show that the wiin-sa is tUt
cx'-iniag Proaecuti-n Identification Ho. 528.


10130


26 Jun:-ii-rd-9-l-Uccfcan (Int* Brow.)
Cjurt I


TIE FHESEENT: Counsel, do you aspect to cxninc the witness.

Hr. FTlcdorich Jur.j, in connection rith this suae affidavit? I aig-cst
•.ret you ah;-; Che witness in advance thw affidavit before he takes the
stand, thereby saving the tice of reading it when ho takes the steal.

91 ER. HCFFILIIN:

Q: I just want to ask y.u very briefly about this affidavit.

First, L3 yeu kn;w a con by the atec f Tauboock?

..s I never hear; that nax.

Q: i> you knw» a tan tr-tC .A-iss?

I kn.w lots of people rr_x v/cias, but the an designated here
as Dr, cisa, who worked for .x, I earn t rcccebcr hit. for certain.

I dr s^-ii to rcrxnbvr that after PixVa visit in -ur garden and I
SvIioVo after Lolling'a visit to the institute, there was still another
c- .Jssien thorv -n. it is possible that Dr. ..eiss was a -e.ubcr A this
c-u.ission, but, I cannot rcuctfeer hi*;. In 1938 I hail «i-rc than 8,000
Ict^rs in the institute and it is L^essible for ac to know tho naaes
if all tie visit-re.

1: i.-ulr y u call - person ;rh. studied ;«rlnarily b;tany r.
socialist in this field?

Ho -dght ee an sxpert in the fiel.I f botany, but in the
ficl_ f .eljcia.. I A juU be very dubious whether he is a specialist,
^ cause .v arding histol.gical preporati.n and their coke-up he cakes
ititcucrte hero and he assorts that he practically had w-rked dth
tist -1.— La Vienna, but although I have great histological
«P-ri-.acc in the field .f ani.nl cxpcrlxxntation, in -.11 Lap actant
qu.v3tions _ always c-nsulted a specialist path, lor; i3t, that is a
-a.vdjj concorncd hinsolf 20 years -r .eere with hist-lojy. I ai.rays
aa.se -ae ie._ als specialized in this specific ficl.'. .and he had
:?-cialL:cd in the field -f the gla-vls ;dth inrer-s-creti n. F-r
•astancc, rrofess.r Pr-f^iertv., uh. tms in the qiestiz*. -f th_

^flucnce ef Caladia. :n thw structure, tint is t; say th. struc-ure

10131


26 June 47-iM*i-9-2- Ilcohan (Int. Dram)
Court I


{3X0 of th; tissues.

«U ~f these are very difficult astUrs is investigate. It is
r.r; dif f i c ult t. diagnose Chiracs in suet. -rg.-Jis precisely, Eioroforc,

I d. not think it is peruisssblc that a non dxtj wh. in addition t-
Biological studies, usy have studied Later histology, bo called a
jp.cialist in this field.

1: IL y-u happen t- knar -here Dr. Iiadaus had his experience in
Ue ~tter at the use of Caladiua?

•

a: Yes, I do knew that. Ho toL ce that pars nally in 1935 or
1936 Sofa-- began .ur first Caladiun caporiotits. He was in North
-trice and heard there in cutvcrsatiens that nativ-s of South .oxrica
used the CaLadiua pLant in order to sterilise their .rx.iii-3. They
trivd to feed it to tn.a secretly j perhaps they put it on arrow-
beads and shet their enemies with then. These, jf c.urse, ixre tales f
f:lk 1 re :j-e jr less and -.itthcr these tries wer- credible that y u cannot
*y. Jr. .hc’.aus hLaelf o-uld not toll. Because we wore interested in
v v \tahle -lodicines, xt f curse hoard innunorabL. such r-pa*ts .n th-
-leal cff.cta A this plant .r that. In nu-^r.us cases a. investigated
sxh tales thr.ugn ocperLxntation an! triu. t find ut exact!:' wh*.t their
s ure- vo .and if there was ary truth in thou at all. In such investigations,
s-xtLxs y u d. fin: the little nugget of gold, ttr.t is tie truth in
th. natter, out usually such t-les turn -ut t. be unf.unlc_. You
e-n.t tala, such talcs of ethology in general and apply thixs in tho
■ rid f reality.

n .: witness, on page 5 of this affidavit, this -oan writes f his

ecp.rier.ee, that he alleges he has hr; can you Ull by th. way he

♦

^r.sscs uLiself here Aether he really ha. such experiences, that is
u - necessary experience?

hen ix says here "in .nc -.aperLe-rfc" I cr_.n t characterize
"* = - -vs.lf as an cxperLxrt. It is n.t cust-oary in science t->

’-rce^ on single? _xp_ri-iont as pr-.f -r as substafctiati-n of any th.--.r 7 .


10132


£ Juno U7-i I-P..-iiceban, (Int. 3ro>n)-9-3
C-ort I

Cf coirsc, I cannot toll how ho Intended this expression "one experiment"
v: bo construed, that y.u * uld have to ask bin. But, if there -.tas
r: -lly only no experiment without any subseque:!. -r chocking ^perie^r.t,
aich a single experiment is not oven worthy of discussion.

Q: idr. Frcaiitnt, no furtr.cr questions.

TK Fd-dSIiEOT: .why defense counsel have any qu.stions t.
propound t. this witness? There beiqs neno, the proswcuti-n ury
cross examine#

CROSS Hdd3H..TICN

3Y :a. HJSffl

Q: Dr. Koch, it is -v underst-ndin- that you testified upon
r^.'ins tho article publish.! in tfcu publication, "Experimental
-.dicino" -..ritten by Undaus am*, y-uroclf, that a pers-n, that is a
physician, c.uld ascertain that Caladium Sejuinun cuild n t be
effectively applied t hucrn bcirj.s?

Yes#

Q: On jr.;c SS of the docirxr* book, uhich is pa?u 2 cf tho
report, y ur r-port there, do y-u have the report bcf.ru y.u, the
publication?

Y, , I don't.

i'*: Y-u have the publication b-f r- ; Ui t was written by
7 ursclf rnl c.daus?

~co, I do.

■>: C»: pa-c 2 of that report, tho publlcati .n, the first para-
jrspft reads as follows: "Th- artificial ereati n £ sterility, part¬
icularly the tcaporary cli-ainati.n of thw functions of tix female
:-.ital or~.ans in cap- f tab^re-jl. sis or other 3eri-us C"Jia>s, is
o question ... ich f.r understandable reasons is discussed frequently
-•rd vc*.ich has resulted in extensive anima l experiments; the results
it-ined in the c.urso -f this research have been m.st instructive
:r a the point of view of science. Jut have n-t yet bven applied, in


10133


26 Juno-U-Ri-9-fr’tdechan (let. 3rown)
C:crt I


practise to huoan boii^s."

B OK, en it n.t bo c .nstru-d froa rcadins that p.arv:raph that
it is possible that this research CrXadlu.-- Soguinua ah -ns to you
tsr.t application upon hu.r.n be in.-3 may also boar sene r-suits other
virn uhat you hRVe stated hero urdor direct ocvainrti -n?

A: Fundamentally it ah.uld be said that rtw investigations mi^ht

•

A c:ur3c produce no* results, tlr.t is a cuosti-n that no jxrson can
■nsiTcr. It Is impossible ti 1 cy tare. This intr-threti-n to iy paper
refers t. til _ problem nlto^cttar in c-ncr'l before 1 start-d dis¬
cussing Cnlladiua sp-cifically and n pa~c 69, pa-c 2, 1 specifically
uiphasiso tho fact that .n. sh-uld not si. ply uxp-ct that such a
product can be applied t human boJu\sn. I am ^phasizin-; that ry
statcaont r.pplic-- nly t. an Lei 5 .

horc is that, kixdly point that ut t us, -.Acre you say
that this cav.ofc bo applied t hirvan tai^a, kinily p-int that -Ait.

Page 69, pararyaph 2.

a: Mch pa> is that f the report?

a* pace 2.

ai .-A'.ld ym read that, pleas-, and road it slowly so that the
lrt .rpretors can f -11-w y-u.

TIL! LT-diKIZTCa: Iir. I lardy, it io pa> 36 a.

nc .IT!ISS 3 : "If we n» report in th^ f ll^drv" a third
P-ssibility of artificial, that i 3 to ffy sterili&ati n by indication,
this doc.3 r.-i. :xan a friv.l.ua .rxiiso of a similar ^cth d for liuan
--in.3s.11


10154


26 Juae-M-H-10-l-Coolc (1st. 3rovn)
Court So. 1


3T 12. EASTTl

l That does not exclude tho possibility thotyfr, doe* It doctor?

1 It does not exclude the possibility, of course, but a possibi¬
lity is after ell rn open question.

$ Tet in this same report on pe^e U of the original which is pane
37 of the Irv'liafc, you iepress upon the render thnt the effect of
calrdiun, this is the second pnrmrph on pc/e 37, of the 2 n^lish,
be^innlnr in the niddle of the Ipr.pe, you lrr.ress eponrthe reader
there the following lsnittagei

•The effect of cnladlum on the sexual organs has been known to
the nntives there for a lone tine; they ndsinf-stsr this plant in
lar.^e quantities to their ececies la order to Win,’ nboOt inpotencc."

Tow tho whole purpose of this publication is Vo onphnslso the
effiehejr of caladiun ss.-uhlun and you refer hero to a drue which was
used in South America by natives in ordor to keep out their onenlos,
«d you aro now showing the results in your animal experiments, rnd
you state In conclusion on p r^t Uj, starting on pr ;u US- 1 , that;

•Caladiun so-runium to which popular experience atttibotos a
sterilisin’ effect, shows in animal experinents the followin' effect;*

Ind you also show the effect it hat on animals. Kov fron reading
this you say it is impossible for a person to determine that this
vould bo effective on hucan beincs?

1 This statement that caladiun ever was used by nrtives is put
down here as an explanation or let us say ns o piece of iafomatlon,
explrinin* what our incentive was, what induced us to be,-in these
experinents at all, T he other information refers to results fron
animal experiner.tntlon, and previously X had numerous exmples which
showed clearly *ad unequivocally that this ^»rJc wpb at a stare or
that this paper describes a stn^e in research which nust be re arded
cs an initial stare of experimentation, a prerequisite for cubsequent
experimentation, an? a prerequisite for a possible subsequent us6
on human bein/ts, but I don't say that here pnd whether it is really


10135


2 $ June->i-3I-10-3-Ccok (1st, Brovn)

C our t Fo. 1


plag to be the case so one in the world could toy unless he is n
pf r*on of unusual lnuclaAtlx.

$ T hen you say that if it is possible that more elaborate exmeri-
rtr.tr.tion hod been performed or. anlccls, then it nay be thrt experimenta¬
tion performed on humans would show that ealedlua sctniniuc would be

effective, is thrt ri^ht?

•

A Thrt is en open question. There is no one in the world who can
tniwer that question yes or no. If you vnnt to nsk ae vhethsstthe
-jossibility is based on ay knowledge; if you went to r.sk oe what
results will probably occur froa further experlnentrtion then I will
tell you this: It will for certain take nany yenrs before this quostion
cen be rnswered in the affirnativc or nc^tive, for example, the
crlndiun question, rod that I era try on the bnois of uy own study, is
sueh core difficult to answer than the penicillin queetlon.

^ Veil, -.Why couldn't you inr.sdlntoly experiment on honen bslnfs
to determine this? Vould thrt be uncthicrl unless you had aost
xt*r.slvoly conducted experiaonts on animals?

A I don*t believe thrt any one would offer himself voluntarily
for ut experiment of this sort.

x Veil, you rr« aware, of course, that human boin.:s were loos
expensive to the SS than rniarls, weren't you*

A I be.: your pardon.

* Tau “ere of the fact that the SS could have obtained hunrn

-elnrs for experiments core readily thnn they could have obtained
rainrls?

A The sterilisation quntion as applied to hunen beings was never
discussed by ne with the SS. The extraordinary importance of tho
;*stion wrs simply pointed out but it was not said that experiments
t0 b* errried out on human beincs.

\ V ell, now let's <70 back -

“ 3ut if you ask ne whether I consider it cthicel to enrry out experi-
:< ~ l3 °a humn be in-e, such experinents, then I cpst say I do not
s «sider it ethical.


10136


23 June-&-Mt-10-}-Cook (1st. Drown)

C curt To. 1

$ Let us to bock to this report which you wrote. Do you consider
this report for publication written by you rad Kndchmuoiz. to be n
icientiflc publication!

X Tes.

I Sr. Pokorny says thet the report is unsound, has no scientific
r.-iucT

a Vhrt reasons did he £irc for the stctcacntt

$ Veil, Pokorny arid he knew this report was unsound because the
juthors crrlred r.t the conclusion that re cardin,--an iiial s that the drwr
voi effective on the rule anlsals nnd was not effective on fenele
nn Inals and In that cr.se he concluded it was an unsound theory, that
If It was effective on one it should be effective on the other, and
he felt the report had no scientific foundation whatsoever.

DR. H0?r,X?s Hr. President, I object to this question, the scientific
?rxt, and Dr. Pokorny’s scientific reasons, I did not .:o into that
yesterday because with the remission of the Tribunal I want to put
w nffidavit ir. on this question. T horefore, if the individual
liolatod statcasnts of Dr. Pokorny here aro to be torn froa their
contoxt beenuse he wae not yiven an opportunity to state his whole
tie* in this nattor, then that is a dlsadvmtrfcc to hia. It is
Impossible now to cvnlurte what he wanted to say and this question nuat
bo left until the affidavit is put in.

KAHDTi I eubnlt that the defendant Pokorny in cross examination
•*.ctcd to ae ns I have Just put the question to the witness and I an
rekiri' the witness whether he feels his report was sciontificrlly sound
ir. view of the testinony of tho defendant Pokorny. In fOinr into the
specific details of the experiment Just ^encrrlly the defendant Pokorny
stated to the Tribunal that he considered the report unsound rad un¬
scientific in as nuefc as they found that the dru~ was effective on
=ales and not effective on fcarles rnd hence he couldn’t understand
vherc there would be any value to it.

Hr. President, we feel that this should not be asked

10137


I


2 c Jun*-K-3E-10-k-Cooie (1st. 3rova)
Court To. 1


la the cross examination ns this was nil on the presupposition that
he toold Inter he nhle to nakc his entire statement la the affidavit,

rad the questions would not he propounded to his individual answers

In the cross execlnetioa sad put to the witness here end now on cross
examination.

73 PHESI!2yrt Counsel for the defendant Pokorny is correct,
defense coiesoI any file a supnlenentnl affidavit, tut counsel cay
aov ask the witness if in his opinion the fact that It Bight he
stated that the druc would he effective on c*es and not on fenelcs
would sake any difference In hie ecieatlfic opinion on the natter.

3T K3. HA3DY*

Q Vhat is your opinion. Dr. Kochi

A That it of no importance. 7 here nrc drugs that are five tines
as effective In nales as in fen* ee. I nyeelf have carried out ox-
perinents with the ncurotoxlc suhetrnce. “hose possibilities do
exist hut theso aro specialised scientific na.tters and the average
doctor would not he Inclined to know shout thi# or concorn hiceelf
vieh such questions. There is a difference in the resistance on
the pert of tho nnle or feualo or^wlea and In deteminin.: this
question I ha.vo river, specific consideration to this and published
t paper on it.

H Veil, now when you vero uelnc this crlediun scvrunlua or tho
irur derived thcrefroc in the course of your experiments, how did
you administer it to the snianls, orallyl

a Sot in the fora of a drur but in the fom of a fresh vc-etnble
extract.

^ V ell, could you introduce it to the animal or to the subject
other thrn orrlly, intravenously, for instrccel

A I do not think it has been examined intravenously - it hre been
•ivea 6ub-cutmcously and .through a stomach channel, into the etourch.

\ Veil, now when Oswald Pohl erne to your institute rr.d ordered
70u to serfcrc these cxperlnents did you ntterqjt to delry the


10138


2 o . , ur.&-»3£-10-5~C<jck (let. 3ro*u)

: ourt ro. i


experiments and fake the resuit si

X X must ::ake a correction. Pohl vae not at the institute. Ee
vest to oar botanical .Tardea* which la throe kilometers away. As to
the other part of the question X mist say this: Ve did not crrrj
through these experl neats with the ^rertest possible energy, first
if all we delayed the experiments; then secondly, ve started off in
t false direction, rad thirdly, as odepartmental head Plakcr told ao
later vt aade various sins of onission and other mistakes and we sar.de
itch mistake# intentionally, la order intentionally to sabotage thceo
izoerloents. It wes our firm intention that nothin? positive should
rrtr coco of these experiments.


10139


26 Juno 47-11-T--11-1-K inabu ck (list. 3 tram)
Cart I, Case I


Then you vtre of the. rpinien that soajtfcing positive could
exx of th- ce:poriei-nt3. Therefore y.u p;r?os-ly attempted to delay
-al frd:* tiv_ results so that no positive results could be obtained?

That is a,t an abs-lately rcccss-.ry deduction, becauso, as
* said, the caladlux- question is cn ;pen -re and s- lore as we do
ret have clear results you cannot say that tr^ateent of human
beings is possible with it.

3 : ~r*d by the saaa token y.u crr.not say that it is impossible?

A f Ho, n person “live could say that, that it is impossible.

But you can say that at the tixe ri^rfc now — it is inp-csiblc,
ml it is uncertain vfcothvr it ever will be possible. To stato this

•

very clearly the quest! n is Just as pen as if sote-no sai! "Aro
K c-ihG to bo able t telephone t inhabitants bf liars next aonth?"
then I can say "I don't know; that is an open question." .jil tho
eUadiua quooti n is exactly of the saao sort. Nevertheless, and
this is what y-u sccecd so surprised .aboutdin y.ur questi n, I didh't
carry out the experiments I was xdorod t - carry ut Just pxuciucJy
fr this reason, bee use 1 don't know, becauso n n. can know bhethur
c -ntpary t ccpectr.tl.ns perhaps these cxpcrio-nts might n.t have
«auc p-sitivo results. I drn't lai v and n. wk can know because it
hasn't boon done yet.

0: tell, did y.u ever , ive aqy f this crladiuo to the SS?

As Ho, rx,vur.

Is bid y-u ever give any to 1.0. Farben?

Ho. That is, I c annot recall ever having given any t: the
I.C. but I can say with apedictic ccrta nty that I n-v-r gave xc
dra. _f tnis calndiuc extract to anybody.

1: Y-u don't kn-w -.fcbthcr 1.0. Farben had any?

I don't knov.

~i: dvat were you d-ine in Dachau?

;c le.kod qt the botanical ^ardors there xP hl's imitation


10140


26 June /*7-I>H:-iI-2-Nir-“.buck (Int. 3ram)

C-urt I Case I

when in 1%2 he suddenly turned a? in air botanical ~nrdans end
1 - Jcc» r.t jut plants without knoulcdg— Usenet that tiuo he
tile us, "Pleas- don't think that ix ar- spying on you scientifically
-r other./iso. S~ that y-u .ry be sur- that we lev- different
pusp-oos *>:it.i --ur botanical -ardena in Dachau 1 invit- y-u to
pay a r.turn visit." .; c dil pay Uiis visit because th-ndoo wo

ha- to bo afraid that we \».rc oak ins Pahl suspied-us ef -ur
cxpurkxnts.

0: You didn't go d. un there far the purpose .f startir^ a
;r?.ith . f caladiuu aoquirai. in his h-thouscs in Dachau, did you?

Mo. S far as I know, n- pla_.t -f urs was sent any.diero
for sue:*. purpesca.

‘ 1 : her- y-u lnsld- th- c..icentrati-n ca.p uicn y.u w-nt to
Dachau?

i:o, I was in the botanic a 1 -ardens and they wer. *it,sido
the ca.:a proper, b-caus. we c.xild sc- fro., there a hi^n wall, aid
I assuuo that behind this hi~h .-all the c-nccntr-.tion ca^P lay.

Did y u cv.r $. t. Dachau a aaia after that fir3t visit?

lb, never.

O: .As ?-hl with y-u -n that visit?

He arranged for tnc visit. H- at us f.r perhaps tw.

-Lautv-s, turned us v-r t> an-thor -f fleer, and this van cons’.uctcd
us through tb. r-rdon3. .. c-nvcrcati.n of a acierfcif ic naturo Ath
F ill did .*x,t take place far ns I know. saw hi/o for the
ri-f^st sort jf tin-.

Did y-u _v-r a.ct Dr. Sclaexnn?

Ur. Schu;.a..n frxx ZnjlAnd?

is lb, n., an S3 physici an , Scr.usuuw
I cam-t raxaber that nazt..

Qs didn't h_ ever visit you at y_ur institute?

I can't .ell yew. I cann-t rcacober the nazx. I lon't


26 J^no4Hlf“ll-3'yin2buck (Ir.t. Sram)

Ourfc I, Case I

know. It is n^t i-p-ositlc. Thera were -any, .r-ny d.ct-rs in the
institute .ijeso maas I cl j not know, -r don't know today.

y. dhen did y.u -Lact Dr. Glaubers far the first ti.x?

The bacteriologist, Dr. Xlaubcr-, I -xt at a ^cro-biologic
conference, and I heard hin deliver a lecture there, tut I cannot
reenter ever tevijv- hid a private conversation with hin. Y-u are
referring t_ tiis bacteriologist, aren't you?

O: I aa referrin*. t. Dr. Kin ub err, rnAhor SS physician.

1 1*0 n.t knar any SS doc ter, Klaubois.

Q: 4w! y.u are sur.. you ncy-r ire rxy affiliations -dth
3chu.-r.nn ad Klaub-rj?

So f‘-r to I can no.*x.bcr I rwv-r had anything t_ i :dth
thoao tna, iu can I ruooi.r any correspondence with thcO* I think
I can any ;dth '.bo lute certainly that I had n. c nujeti-ns with thca
at all.

Q: Doctor, f.r the oruenfc I -.den t. pr^pauu a hy ,..th-ticnl
question t_ yeu. If y-u ir.vv. .a ju . iJiich tdXl he effective ,n .mles
an! not -n fe-.-Xs, would its us- f r ate.-iliaati>n b. neund — for
purposes of sterilisation be noun*.?

I didn't urxlorstard Uo gxstXn. C uld y. u plc.aso repeat
it?

ft: /ell n w, if y. u hav- a drug which is effective and will

-ffcct the sterility -f a aale but not .a f—r.X, n.uld. it 1>- scund

oci-ntific-ally an..x ie-ally t us- that 'ruj in actual practice,

r ..--ul ticre dinner that the -roles to \fr .~j the drug uaa a di. i in-

ist-rod. right, in s -x instances, n.t b-co.x sterilised?

•

We -ffoct -f caladlun US3 n.t the so... in all nnlxls.

.e f uTvl jiv; differences in the effectiveness. The r^sidthneo
-f an aniaal oo such a substance is very -rent; that is t sry,
the iff-rcaccs in resistance are very great. It c uld be, and it


10142


26 Jurc 47-i:-?-„-U-t->iir^cuck (Int. 3ro«n)
Court I, <Xs3 I


actually did happen, that so*oc — tho ani nls rare sterilized and
sxx of the aniaals wore ret sterilize- at all, _r if s+x. were
st-rilizcd, .nly ~ucfc later.

Hw ihothcr or n.t tala was health;’ f-r the anianls, I should
like to hrvc that explained aun. closely. hat d y u ecan by
healthy? .J. you talking about a general puisoniig? 1 -»»t any that
I have tit i.prossijn that xre cnlaals died :hcn being fc calndiun
in their food than snivels died tlr.t *;cren>t boir^ led calndiun.

It is possible that this effect on the gla.rvls with internal
secretion also has a toxic influence .n other organs .r was your
question intended difforer&ly?

.* 1 : Ho, that answer is sufficient, Dxt r. Oxt-r, did you
have any dsgivings after having been ap. ro.achod by Oswald Pohl
regarding the production aal cape rLsontation* with calndiun soquinun?

Yos, because we th.uj.ht w. saw sj_d purp >sc l-hind thaao
rneuvers ihich wo couldn't recognizo f.r certain, but which ;ro
suspected tho nature of. F r that roan awe ha.'. aingivings .art*,
fa- that rcr.s.n wo carried ut uc.xrLxnta ir. 1939-40 in a try that
fr a the scientific pjint f view is rut acceptable. Buy wore
oiaply carried -n in a p9eud- exact way,

at Jbll that, what was the reason for y.ur aisaivinjs, if you
thou^it that caladiua sequinua trouli not be effective if applied to
nuaan beings?

Because that *3 an pon qu: sti .a and y-u novor can tell
that trill c.oo .f such investigations. ic didr.*t even want to
broach this quo sti. n fr..i the scientific point of view, entirely
‘-side fro., the question what ultir.le goals the ai jit bo having
in this, naujly the possible atcrilizati .n f huiion beirrs.

.'ell then, y.u can*t agree with the p^siti.n taken by
or. Pekorry after having r-nd your publication, that iff would


10143


26 June 1?-L>-P-I-U-5-Hinabuck (Irrt. Srotn)

Court X, Case I

be impossible to st-rilize a huann being by use of cala_iu..i sequinua?

..t the tLx .hen wo *.rrotc the paper, and I think oven t,-Cay
also, bee'.use Ii n.t know that r.ny further invc3tigati ons have
been carried ut of this question, you can say that it was Lqooss-
isle. hat it will be in th- future that, as 1 have airily
ropcatcdl" sail, no one can know, because it is an -pen question.

rj: Y-»u lr.v„ never had any xvportc frxi tho SS c :rcc. nin~ the
results of rk with caLadiu.. suauinru -n husan beings -r rever havo
heard of any?

Mo, that cannot be. .JO redo no caladiuu available for such
purposes and that being th: c*s«, the would have had to fin:
caladiut. elsewhere. K n-ver lolivorud aqy >r did wo over have
any reason t > b-llev_ that -ny..torc in this world caladiu.A was
being use n faunn beings, -ven xn one single instance*

0: However, it aould well Ir.v- been d nc with-ut your Jcnarlcdgo?

That is <yilbc possible.

L3» VJ'JY: I hav» n_ further questions, your Hrn.r.

TTC PZJSDZST: .itneos, I would like to ask you if thcro is
any botanical relationship between this drug, caladiuo, -am! the drug
botanical pr-Cuct used in South ..xrica by the Lilians known as
curare?

iKl TKIZSS: H , s. far .as I know tlerc is n- c nnccti.n
hot ween tho two, because curare is used as a p is:n an! it par.aly»oa
the anlaal. It is txic t the n*.rv us systoj, tut in a case of
caladiua .x never nad the Lprusoi-n that it r.s f such toxicity to
tho nerves as curaiv is.

HZ PdZSEJECT: Thank y _. —ay further qu-sti ns t tho
dtr.v.co: Thutv bein- none the -.ritness is accused fr .i the stand*

DR. BCFF1ZK: I have no further questions, your Honor.

, * (.iitness excused).


10144


Court So. 1

26 Jun 47-i.-12-1-IEH-Gro£s (Brown)


D?.. E07T.jliS: hr. President, perhaps between r.ov carl the noon reco6*
I could put In the rest of documents bo that after the *}puse I can
call qjr witness.

TEL PHZSIDZKT: Very well, counsel.

HCT7KUK: As Exhibit So. 24 I rut In Document No. 24 fron Docu¬
ment Book II. This is an extract froa the nlr.utcs of the Ir.tcrntional
hilltary Tribunal In Nuernberg on 9 August 1946. This 1b the eyaninatlon
of Sicvert by 21*yn Jones on 9 August 1946.

.5., KAHDY: Tour Honor, this 1 b ar. crtrect of the crocood'nga of
the International Hilltary Tribunal which doesn't necessarily need to
bear a document nuaber. However, it Is not certified In tho winner pro¬
scribed by tho Tribunal end should bo certified by the Sccretrry Oenoral.

I won't object but surest It be certified in tho cropcr fora.

rs. V.Orr.JSEi I personally certified this oxtract. Fo*ovor, I can
also hr.vo it don». through tho Secretary General should that be necoosnry.

•S. HARDY: Your Honor, as a natter of oroodicncy I withdrrw py
objection but wont to do that with tho reservation that ary extracts
froa tho reoord should bo oortiflod by the Secretary Gonoral.

TEL PEISIDENT: Counsel is correct. It nay bo vnivod In this
Instance. The dccuacnt win bo admitted as Pokorny Exhibit 24.

IE. EQfTiJSEi I should llko to read this docunont very briefly.

«r. Zlwyn Jonos, tho orosecuting attorney, asked tho ouostlon of tho
witness Siovers: "Do you know that in connection with this natter"

- that is, rolative to Dr. Pakorny's letter which is an Issue hero -
"hothouses vers erected where those plants vero cultivated?

"Answer: No, I do not know this. In connoctlon with this, I recol¬
lect only tho following: that this publication was sent to Dr. Hadaus
for cocccnts, without eentioaing the rcarrkable suggestion of Dr. Pokorry
for consents of Dr. von ".'ucnrclburg who is an export on tropical nlar.te
f‘nd who stated et once that such a plant could not be cultivated here nnd
was not available."

THE PHISnSST: Counsel, I do not notice that this oxhlb't Is con-

10145


Court So. 1

26 Jun 47—fc*-12—3-£2-.-Gr08s (Brawn)

ta.iaod in your document took. I 'ms mistaken - it dooe show the record

of the pego of tho International Tribunal proceedings.

IF.. KC77..AEH: The next document I tut In ovidcnco is Document 25.

This “ill be Lohibit Ho. 25 and is on page 62. This ic en affidavit of

tho e/fiant before Kilitary Tribunal II, naooly Oswald ?Ohl, who on

seeing Document SO-041, Ixhibit Bo. 156, node additions to his eta.tcnont

of 14 July 1946, Eocumcnt BO-065, to tho following effect: *Hy lettor

of 7 September 1942, B0-C41, shove that I hnd c-rroloyod SS Sturabannfuohrcr

Lolling in connection vith cnladlin. Bov, I never heard any more fron

Lolling concerning experiments with caladiun. Had oxocrinents vith

caladius in fr.ct boon undo. Lolling vould have retorted to no about then.

As this vas not th« easo, no experiments could have boon made."

Bov cones Prosecution Document 26, Zdhiblt Bo. 26, cage 6?. This Is

an affidavit by Dr. V. Oottschald, Ph.D. - correction - tho affidavit

Is oignod by Dr. Thron, director of tho Biological Pirn of Er. JIadnuo and

Co., whoa I first intendod to call as a witness and fron whoa I now out

in this affidavit. This affidavit of 2 Jonuary 1947 stotes tho following:

"Sineo 16 August 1936 I havo been working cs a biologist at the

Biological Institute of the fire Er. nadaus and Co. aftor Er. F.och

evacuated nadobcul in February 1945 with a largo cert of tho oaulonont

of tho institute, I directed tho institute.

"I know that boforo I took over animal experiments with calndiun

secuinun voro performed at tho lnotituto. However, this w,«b done only

on a smell scelo as the cultivation of this riant, a tyoicol hothouse

plant, is vory difficult. I am not aware that calndiun was suomliod for

sterilisation exoerinents on human bc-lsgs.
not any

*1 knov that / members of tho SS came to inspect the institute.

In ny presence, hoover, nothing was discussed with then concerning
crladiun experiments."

Ar.i it soya at the end: "I vould add that I w?-.s never a ner.ber of
the SSDA? or of eny of its affiliated orgealiptions."


Ihc next document that I *«nt to put in is Pokorny Docunent So. 19

10145


Court So> 1

26 Jus 47-<:-12-3^HK-Or06« (3rovn)

This vlll bo Exhibit 27, Docuaent 3ock II, page £4. This 1# an affidavit
by r rofoseor *dl=ut Veese, director of tho Pharmacological Institute
In Duossoldorf, and vfco lake# statements regarding effects produced by
caladiuj.

Them I shall put In Document 2C, Exhibit 28, page 56. This is an
affidavit by August Vilhela Forst from Hunich, professor of pharmacology,
and this also discusses the effects ;f calndiun. From this affidavit of
Veeso I should like to rend only the last aerographs

"Apart free those restrictions, however, th° *holc train of thought
aeons to ne to bo vithout oertinont significance, sinco large scalo trans¬
plantation of a tropical riant to Europe would hardly have boon oosoible
during tho war.

"Because of the unspecific effect of tho edadiun oxtract, Its
virulently poisonous Quality, the doubt es to vhothor it can bo olentod
ral usod in cur nodorato tone, I considor it extrcr.oly improbable that
evor. a doctor of only avorago oducatlon will attonpt with conviction tho
oxporL'.ont of storiliiing human beings with calndium extract on tho
basis of tho verk of : .odous and Koch. Convincing oapers for the rroblon
roforrod to othor than tho work of Madaus and Eoch nro not known to no."

THE PEESIS5T: This conplctoo, counsol, tho introduction of your
documents, I think.

Dn. EOJT.iASX: Yes, it doos. Pom it no to cell tho witnose aftor
the noon roccss.

TEE PRSSntEET: The Tribunal will now be In roccss until 1:30 o*clock
this eftornoon.


10147


iff!

26 Ju T,mk~ s ser (Int # von Schoen)

Co\rt ;;o. i t


ATT SISSICSr


(The bearing reconvert at 1335 hours, 2 j June 19li?.)

T - AHSHALt Persons- In the Courtroce vill please find their


seats.


The Tribunal is again in session,

I* 5 .. KAIS)Y: hay it please' tho Tribunal, 2 aa iaJbmjd that the
examination of the witness, Jun?, i*ill not take much more than an hour.
At tho and thoroof I think Dr, Servatius rill bo prepared to cc: lotc
the afternoon by introducing supplemental document books of tho de¬
fendant Karl 3randt. Tho Prosecution requests to call, out of order,
that is, b of ore the coopletion of the supplemental documentary ovid-

•

once of the dofenso, 2 witnesses tomorrow. One ia Josof Laubingor
and tho other is Karl Hoollenreiter, bobh t&pcioe, who wero sub^octod
to tho sca-wator experiments at Dachau, I would like to be sure that
Dr. Stoinbouer ia info rood - ho is in tlvj city - and will bo available
tomorrow when these 2 wltnossos ap,«ar, if it mo- to with tho np.-roval
of tho Tribunal.

TKK tll'XTDZmt Seo that Dr. Stoinbauor is informed of tho


fact that tho so witnesses rill ba called Unrarrw noming.

’ a. HARDY: Very well.

DR, KCP' Al'll (Counsol for tha do fondant Fokorny): 1 should
like to call tho witness, Jung, at this tJjuo.


T!£ .-It^TDd-NT: Tho iarshal rill 3\roon thu witness, Friedrich


Jung.


FRUJRICH JUHO, a witness, took tho stand and tcetifiod as


follows:


!i please hold up your right hand and bo sworn:
Almighty and fciisclcnt, that I rill spoak tho


I'jtt/ rid '..-illVi^tehold and add nothin

(The witness jWjiiated the oath. )
JUIXil SX.U&y' You nay be seated .
vIEiitiSfe/: Coaisel as;- -roce-d.


JUDO,;


and add nothing.


You nay be seated..


2 6 Jun-A- 3-13-2-L-sscr (Int. von Scbon)
Court So. I.


DiHSCT 2XAIXHA7ICH

BT D.l. HCFr.ANIi:

Q nitnoss, please tell the Tribunal -..-hen and where you wore

born?

A On the 21st of Ajril 1915, in Friedrichshafen.

Q Floaso describe your scientific training.

A 1 studied cedicino at Tubingen, hoonigsberg and Borlin.

Since 1938 I have been an assistant at the ;har.vicological Institute
In Borlin, under Professor Huebner. In 19h5, I '--as at tho Phar.aacol-
ogical Institute of Tuebingon as a scientific assistant and sinco
the beginning of 191*6, I have boon head of tho Hiennacolosicnl Instit¬
ute of tho University of Wuerzburg and old the Chair of ihar. neology
thore.

Q r/itness, are . ou an ox ort on . '-nr.-ncological questions?

A Yes, I bolicvo so.

Q witness, what do you think of honoopnthy or bio-chozaistry?

A Koooopolhy or bio-chouistry is a vory interesting systor.
of ho-'.ling which, at tho tino of its origin was a reaction to tho
onc-sidod attitude of o las si cal aodicino. It is noteworthy and no
doubt justifiod and has oany good aspoctaj but I consider it psy¬
chologically ronarkablo that for 137 years thirf system has runninod
essentially unchanged as a doctrine although in tho pnat century tho
dev;lojx»nt of nodjm scientific rwdicinc has coao to a c.-rtain
dcgroc of fcrfoction. I consider this all tho raora reoaTkablo inas-
ouch .*>3 the advocates of hcocopathy at tho tine, insofar as they arc
doctors, have the advantage of tho high nodical training of our univ¬
ersities and nodical acadcnlos and should realize the unsoundn-ss of
the tenets of hoojopat.. , Tho lattor has be-n testified to by intern¬
ists and iiarr^colcgists on nan;* occasions. Schissler’s bio-chamistry,
which is not to be confused rith plysiolocicai checistry, is closely
connected rith hoaeopathy and is derived free it.

Q "itness, is it true that in instruction at the universities


101 !;?


26 Jur.-A-: 3-13-3-Lcssor (Int. von Scbon)

Coart -io. I.

a si si Lit antagonistic attitude toward bio-chaaistry or homeopathy
is expressed?

A Tea. I, aysolf, £B in tte habit of going into these things
in detail in ay courses. During qy o»m studies at the University of
Tuebingen and 3orlin, I heard nothing else. I know no German som¬
ber of qy profession, responsible for teaching students pharmacy and
related subjects, who is an advocate of homeopathy.

Q v;itness,cdo you beliovu the firs iiadaus is in favor of this
homoopetfale tendency in nodiciro?

A Yes. I have known tin I adaua fim for many years as a
leading fixn in this connection. I have always had the inpros;ion
that it publishes propaganda among laynon and doctors very extonsivoly.
As an oxanplo of tho naturo of this propaganda, one could rant ion
Modsus year books of all tho post years.

Q Witness, what we aro interested in horo is that tho firm
published a paper by )Ladaus and Koch, on the question of tho uso of
calodiira. You know this paper and if you have an opinion on It, I
ask you frees what point of view do you ballevo tho ]«r.daus fim enno
to carry oat ox,erimonts with caladius soguinm? ’

A Free thj final statooont of this paper itsolf ono enn soo
that it teas carried out in a sorios of oxporiaents performed by tho
Uadous fim, to study tho influorcc on tho horoono structure by
plant -satorial. This question is no doubt oxt really. interesting and
scientifically rewarding but it is cn obvious assumption that tho
ale of tho work was rather to fird a basis for tho uso of cnlruiua
in hoaoopathic practice in interruptions of patency, sterility,
frigidity, otc. That tho Uadaus fim had certain propagandistic pur¬
poses in polishing thi.~ paper can bo soon fren tha publication of
tto results of the work in a popular mgasine, a procedure which is
not customary.

Q Witness, what possibilities are there, in principle, for
sterilisation?

icaso


26 J’one-A-32-1^-1 07 (Int. 7on Sehocn)
C ourt So. 1


^ V * tr.ess, what possibilities pro there la principle for
sterilisation?

a Troc the papers which have been .'lTen to ae I hrve observed
that n clear dlattnctlon la not nude between sterilisation nnd
cratrntloa, and I should like to clarify that here flrat. Stcfcilisn-
tlon, .tenerally, scans dlaturter.ee of the capacity for reproduction.
Sterilisation includec castration. That ia, nor rarely disturbing
tho reproductive crpnclty, hut reaovl^ thf reproductive flnnds
fron the or.'mlar. which hr.a deep-seatod consequences for the whole
huarn belnq. T here-are felae disturbances of the psychic and of
the working ability. I believe thrt tho problcn under diecuaaion
hare ia not the problcn of castration, but tho problcn of tho ainple
diaturbpr.ee of the reproductive capacity while retainin' the othor
Papeete of the personality^ of tho hunan bcinr. I shall not ro into
the vorious procodurot which arc uaod in cedicine. V hen r. hu:irn
be i n-:, especially r wonan, is to be sterilised, totsporarlly, becnuoc
what ie at issue here ia percancnt disability of tho reproductive
capacity, ie interruption of the output of tfco reproductive ,*lmde.
That can be done b7 putting an obstruction at any point, that ie
by perforaln.: a eur^l^.-l operation. The second possibility ia that
tha huuan boln.t, as . nolo, renaina nornrl, the only thine that
la loet la tho reproductive capacity. The second n.'st radical
possibility ia the removal of the reproduct.v- .:\,ad«, which involves


castration, nnd various othor serious synptwct, reduction of
woTkin-; capacity, serious psychological ch-ares. « procedure
which in practice would be out of the question. - nother possibi¬
lity is radiotion of the reproductive riands with X -ray or ra.diun
rays, rad thus dnnr ins, then severely There "re certain very
definite disturbances, depending on tho de.trei of irradiation. T Ms
is in all equivalent to castration. X-ray sterilisation or X-ray
castration does not .marantee 100 ptr cent, success, unlese one
is ualnr very l»x.e doses. This X-ray sterilisation is based on


10151


26 Jun«-A (Int. Toe Schoen)

Court Zo. 1

the fret thrt Z-rays effect particularly younrapidly .trowin' tissue,
■uch '* reproductive ylands ere, hut thero is no specific procedure
for sterilization because X-rays will effect nlso other quickly
rrowic.- tiesi*. I thinking of the blood tuildln-' systen of the
tody. If one were to rrtdlat* the whole body with the dose neceesrry
for irrodlatlnc the reproductive ,-lmds, the person would probably die
of n severe blood dlecr.se. Another possibility is poison, which id so
effects specifically quickly .Trowing tissue. As rr. example Z would
like to nentlon Benzol. Vhen these poisons rro Introduced intc the
hunnn body, there is no wry of. controlling tho effect. If, for exanple,
BtnzbXv Is administered to n hunrn beln^ the reproductive rlrnds nre
drained It Is true, but before this can trJco offoet, tho blood build¬
ing orpins which repet elnllarly, are danreed even norc severely,
rnd the hunan beln^ dice. Ve hnve the picture of chronical Benzol
poisoning very frequently as rn industrial disease. In nost such
cases we have no corrplrlnt about sterllizliv: offect, Anothor way
of affecting tl* reproductive »:lande is to internet the sexual
life of the or<anlsr.. One ern perfom rn operrtion in the central
nervous systen at a certain spot. Thrt it, of course, not acceptible
for practical sterilisation. One can do tho snae by renovin.- the
pitltuary :land, the hypophysis. It is l;iportrnt for tho activity
of tho reproductive ,-lands. Thrt Is rlso a very difficult operation
rnd very frequently brings about the doath of tte cxpcrlruntrl
rnlMl, but one can rlso administer the hormones produced by this
.•land to the hunan -land in larrcr quantities and thus tho rcyulrv-
tlng aechanlsc is disturbed. Ve distinguish two hormones, Prolan A
and Prolcn 3,

KB. HAHDT* Hay it please. Tour Honor, I Just can't understand
the purpose of this testimony. Is this witness m expert on the
subject of sterilisation or is ho testifying as to frets concerning
rokorny's Inpliea.tlons In the experiments, or is he testifying as to

ft

the reliability of the Ilddaus Company, or to the effect of calndlua


10152


2 o June-A-3£-l*i-}-J!ploy (Int. Von Schoca)

Court in

«eTinlun! If he la testifying to the effect of cplp.diun ac-unluc, I
don't think the other diacuaaion is neecaspry.

TES F2ESIBnrr» The Tribunal ahrres the doubt expressed by the
Froaccutln- nttorncy, ao frr the point of thla witness's testimony
ia not erally discernible. Juat whrt la the purpose of It, counaelt
If the vitneea la coin.; to reed p. lorn: document It night he hotter
if It were preaented In the forn of ro nffldnvtt end put Into tho
docuncnt hook,

DH. H077KASX: Mr. Prealdent, I helieve thrt thia expert witness
hr4 rlreedy finlahed hla cone ml atPtenents. I eonaldcr hia lp.at
atp.Unenta of vnluc, which refer to paeeiflc end non-apeclflc atcrlll-
xMloa.

IRB PHZSIDZ2 r Ti Conce- lac wh->t pbrac of the laauea heforo tho court
la the wltnoaa to tcatlfy to!

DR. EOT7KA2TI The witness la to teatlfy thr.t apoclflc atcrlllxp.tion
la lnpoaaible for crlr.dlua.

TEZ rJESIOZn* Than Instruct the wltnoaa to proceed to glvo toetlo-
iny on th*t subject,

^ Vltnoaa, you hwe herrd, pier sc aponle of the poaalhlllty of
aterillartlon on the or.-rnlan re r. whole, rod not on tho reproductive
rlroda epoclflcrlly.

A I shell ho briefer. I thought It wra necesanry to co Into aono
detpll, he cruse in ty opinion the sterilising effect of crlndlua cen
not be understood, pad the heals of the procedure cm not he under¬
stood, unless one la Informed p.a to how huarn beings rod pninnls era
he sterilised r.t pll. If one docs not unioratroi sterilisation In
ftenerol one c«a fell lr. o the error of feel Inc this is a rclctlvo
opeclflc work.

THZ PHZSI32T: Witness, Just p. oonent.

S ounsel, why would this testimony not he aorc effective If prepared


lr. the forn of rn affidavit rad put Into n docuncnt book. I era R69ire
you it adds nothin*: to testimony such as .this to here it reperted in


26 Juae-A -3£-lUU-*loy (Int. Tea Schoen)

Court So. 1

op«n courti Xt la even core useful to the Tribunal *- lt le la the

fora of rr. affidavit la the doc uncat book| unless the procccutlon

attorney ceres to eross-exreine. the witness,

KH. E^HDT: I have ao desire to crose-exer-lne this witness, Tour
Honor,

XEZ rH2SHSTT: Counsel, lt seens to ne clerr thrt tho testimony of
this witness would be even core valunbls to the Tribunal In the fom
of an affidavit, thrt would be suhr.ltted ns one of your docuaents.

D3. BOTKAXTs Kr. President, X shall /.ladly conply with the wish
of the Tribunal rnd shall submit m affidavit frai this witness.

THZ P32SID3TT: I would ask you, counsel, if this wltnoss ern testify
dlroctly to any of the activities of the defendant Pokorny in regard
to this natter or anythin- that ho did In the natter of caladlun or
endeavorin': to procure erleiUus to be used as nr. experlnental dru^,
or Is this wltnoss testifying aerely to scientific facts as he sees
then!

DR. B3FDU1TI He had no direct connection with the dofendret
Fokorny. Ks car. testify only to the scientific value of tho natter,
ssnecirlly whrt rn overact doctor would think of this workln. aftor
studylor the results of the nnlnal experlnents.

THS ?IESIDSr*J Counsel for Prosecution stated he did not care to
cross-sxanlne tho witness. I sc sure thd tostioony of this witness
would be equally of vnlue to the Trihunnl in the fore of an affidavit
and sere considerable tine, the Tribunal accepts your offer to
withdraw the witness and put his statement in the fom of re affidavit.
It aust be nunbered oni submitted in the fore of an exhibit when
offered. The witness Jun~ Is excused fro*; the witness stand.

D2. E07 TXmTHs V itcoss, 7ou are excused.


101 &


26 Jun-A-I B-ljJ-l-lcuhan (In*, von Schon)

Coart So. I.

HESID^fTi I would ask the Secretory if Defendant
Fckorny's counsel has provided thes>. witness shoots if they are .avail¬
able for tie witnesses called this norning and tills afternoon for
rokorny, tho witnesses Trux, Koch ani Jung.

ili. HABDT* Tha Socr-trry reports he has no such docuaants
furnished.

THE IR3SJDLiff* They should bo prepared and furnished t< tho
Tribunal.

Does counsel for Da fondant Pokon v * have anything further to

offor?

DR. HCTn7JOTi Ks, I eu finishjd with ry COM then.

!R. ItARDIi Ycur It.nor, I baliovo Dr. Sorvatiue is prepared
to submit the rost of his documentary evidence in the case cf Karl
drandt. If ho docs not anticipate h. will fill out tlx. rest of tho
dry, I suppose Dr. Nolto will bo ready to put in supplemental affid¬
avits or documents for Handloser.

T:T. .TCSIDZ-ni Is Dr. :!J.te, ccinSel for Randlosor, prepared
to subait any further documents?

Tho Tribunal hre not only on tho bunch t!»o subsequent docu-
rxnt book, the last document book, prepared by Dr. Sorvctius, I
think they are all in our offices.

!3t. HARDY* Tour Honor, have a rather unusual circuistanco
horo. I Soarclxd ny files and find free; Dr. Sorvatiue about five or
six supplements. Now he has linod up in -,rd-r the documents out of
theso supplements which ho will introduce. 1 think he hae prepared
one for the Tribunal and one for tho Prosecution in addition tb the
supplenent ho put out in tho boo!:, lu has then now and in t!c arcLr
in tdiich he will present then. I rond-r if wo could recess for about
ten cinut-a, and line up the supplementary bocks and them tho copies
for tho judges can bo lined up at th_ arcs- tir».

TIE iRDSIDET: Very r»ll, the tribunal vill b_ in recess.


(A ruces3 was ta ke n .)
1C1S5


26 Jun-A- 3—16—1-Cock (int. ▼on Schon)

Ccurt Ho. I.

THB I ARSHAL: Tho Tribunal is -gin in scssicni

D.:. SERVATIUS: F' ' Karl 3r~ndt i

-It. resident, I fur- tho doctaonta in a now order for tto
convenience of the Court. I shall hand you thin copy. They are no
new documents in there. They are simply in a different order.

IMay it please Your Honor, this supplemental docu¬
ment book Dr. Servatius has Just passed up to your Honors contains
on the front page an index which starts out with Karl Drarrit Exhibit
Ko. 82, and runs down through Exhibit y>. If he puts then in evidence
this index will start out with his first exhibit being Mo. 30.

It would be most convenient for the Prosecution and I as sure for the
Tribunal If at a later ( date Dr. Servatius could supply us with an
index of the first 29 exhibits, thon we could take all the documents
■hlch he is not offering and do late the* free tl» document book arc!
then we would have them in chronological ordor, 1 through 29, and
then follow along in the r -nnor in which ho is going to offer thorn
»rd it would be much simpler for tho Prosecution, and then wo would
know just what documents he intends to introduce.

TTC iRSIDSKT: That suggestion will be followed, of course.

Each member of .the Tribunal should have a cccplotc document book, but
wanuhile wo can proceed with the submission of those documents as >re
now stand with one document book in uhich tho exhibit mmbers -.rill
be noted.

D3. S1P.VATIUS: Jr. President, the document which I intend to
5f: ° r fall into two categories, one affidavits about definite counts
of the indictment. The rest is extracts free literature as evidence
15 to the lack of reliability of the experiments on euthanasia.

First, I shall offer the affidavit- on tho actual char~os, docu¬
ment Karl Brandt 821, I offer as Exhibit 3C. This is an affidavit by
an Assistant Jud^e- Geist, ho was in contact with Karl Brandt through
the of planning and ecorsx-y through 19U3. He testified about

-v- activity of this office, especially the relationship of the office

• 10156


26 Jun-A- 3-16-2-Cook (Int. Von Schon)
Court Ho, I.


of planning and economy to tho office for science and research. He
says that tho greatest influerc vas rrith business economy, not with
planning and research. He says Professor Srandt never brought any
political point of vie* into the work, axx! that the planning office
did not have any political character, leztoers of the office did
not belong to tho party.

Now cones document U7 as Exhibit 31, it is an affidavit of
the Arms Adjutant of the Fuehrer, Adolf Hitler, who speaks of
Brandt's connection with tho Hitler office aixi hia activities.

The next docuaont free: the supplemental volvee II is document
E3 91, ar. affidavit by Heinrich Hoerlein, pharmaceutical technical
department of the I 0 Farbon Industry. He speaks of Brand»t offico
*nd ho confirms what Luebko said about planning and resoarch. Ho

a

also says that he believes Brandt was against the interruption of
Industry and prevented great da.;; at tho end of tho tor.


L


10157


Court So. 1

26 Job 47-A~17-l-Ziv'-Kitabuck (Von Schor)


The next docusent, 0-102, is an affidavit of Dr. Luebke, who el bo
vcrkod In the Office of Planning end Research, of Sovenber '43, also ea
officd reply on research. Ee confirrs that this office had aoro influ¬
ence than the one for science end research and sseeks about Profossor
Brandt's actual activity. Ho also says that the office never had any
political character. On the contrary, industry freoucntly ashed this
office for protection.’

%

TEL PEISIDEST: Counsel, for the sako of the record assign an
exhibit nunbor to each ons of these. Tho last one thet you just reforrod
to is Exhibit 33.

®. SIR VAT ICS: 33.

V

7EZ PRESIDENT: Announce the exhibit nuaber with each doounont for
the seko of the record.

DR. SZRVATIUS: Sow I offer KB-112, vhich will bo Inhibit 34. This
is a chart of Sari Brandt's office. The Court asked the defendant Karl
Brandt to proparo such a chart. This chart shows tho working connections.
Brandt's subordination was United to the offices for science and roeenrch
rr.d planning and econocy. I don't intend to go into this chart in dotail.
That would take too auch tiso and in ay opinion it is not of nny special
significance.

PBiSIISliTj Do I understand, counsel that this Is Karl Brandt
locuaent 1127

IP.. SERVATIDS: Yes, 112, Exhibit 34.

TEE PRESIDENT: The nuaber of the docuncnt is nissing from the sopy
in this book. That's why I lnouiro.

DR. SEEYAIIUS: 0-112, affidavit of Professor Karl Brandt about
this chart.

TF2 PRESIDE?'!: Counsel, the next docuncnt in your look does not
correspond with the index which you handed the Tribunal. Cn this indox
70u have Karl Brandt Document 120, and that is not contained in tho book.
The next docunent in the book is I^ber 0 - 66 .

DR. SERVATIuS: Cue docuncnt is nissing, 0-120, Punier 168. It has


10158


Court So. 1

26 Jua 47-A«-17-2-«iai-Sinaback (Von Schor.)

sot been translated yet. That will be the one following 0-112, after tho
chart.

HH. HARDY: Eight I lnaulre vhether Soaber 186 is the docunent vhich
ha« been offerod by the nrosecution or ie that a now docunontt

Da. SIRVA7IC5: I obtained this docunoat froa the Defonsc Information
Center. It hae not yet been offered by the nrosecution. I Intend to
offor It now. Vo have not yet got the English translation. I offer
23-120 ae Exhibit 36. It It not very long.

THE PRESIDES!! That It tho docunont vhich It Dieting fron thlt booh,
ecunaol.

Eft. SEP.VATIUSs It the affidavit 0-102 by Luebkc Bitting?

TEE PRESIDES!: 0-120, Nun her 108.

DR. SIRVATIUSi That It the docuaont that I wont to offor now. Thet
It alining. It hae not boon trantlatcd yet.

TEE PRESIDES!! That It Dieting?

ER. SERVATIUS: It hat not boon translated yet. It It ono pego long
and I ehould like to read It Into tho record.

THE PRESIDENT: Very wall, the docunont win bo supnllod for tho
docuaont book letor?

DR. SEnVAXIUS! Tee.

TEL PRESIDES!: It will bo Exhibit 36.

*• SIR VAT ICS: ! ehall only give tho conteice. Thlt rofere to tho

•

pooitlon of the Ahnenorbc office. It it a very characteristic*docuacnt
of tho aabltlona of this offlco to seize all research. ?lrtt there It an
ordor by Hlmler vhich taye tho Reich*fuehrer-SS hrs entrusted *he Ahnorv-
erbo with the execution of all scientific research asclgnncntt. Then
conet a notice about o telephone convertitlon of tho 17th of August 1S42
•eying Hitler Is to be etked to itsue an order saying that all scientifia
research work in tho SS It to be under the control of the Ahnoncrbc, ani
It is added, "Such an order it of greet lsnortence end special urgency.

could r.ot say eny nore." Pirally, there is a letter to Elunler, sneak-
'•=g of tho foundation of the Ahneaorbe, end I ouotc: "In a short tine it


Court So. 1

26 Jun 47-K-17_3-iai-Sinebuck (Tea Seboa)


suit caso to the point where we surpass the efforts of Rcichsloiter
Rosenberg and that It vill become the research office for Eetional Social-
lea. Thi« vUl he possible only if ve all stand together aad if every¬
thing connected with research, no natter what field, ie in tho Ahnonerbe
end is directed froa there." I believe this docuner.t ie of great signi¬
ficance in Judging the oosition of Hlcnler and the Ahnenerbc in research.

Sow, there follow a nuaber of docuaents on the eroeriaentation on
kuaan beings. first, 13-80 which I offer as Exhibit 36. This is tho
affidavit, the first one, of Dr. von Xiong, vho vns an assistant of Dr.
Aabros in tho apodal coaaittee of tho Ministry for Aneaont and "er
Production. He speaks about "B* product which is a subject of tho
Indictment and explains tho significance of this aeterial. Ko srys that
it is not a gas and was out of tho quostion for such purposes but that
lator the problea was taken uo anov by tho SS and worked on thoosclvos.

jlow follows Kr-69 which is Inhibit 37. This is another affidavit
of Dr. von Xiong, spooking of the gao docrco, tho text of which is not
known. Ho says that this decroe ontrustod Karl Brandt with anti-chonicnl
vrrfnro.

Tho noxt is KB-97 which is offerod as Exhibit 38. It is the tosti-
sony of a Dr. Outeraut who speaks of the danger of liver nuncturos which
van discussed horc during tho trial. Ho says it Is very hornless and Is
oerforoed in ell sodom clinics in tho world.

Ihc next docusont is XB-98 which I offer as Exhibit 39. It is an
affidavit by tho witness Dietzsch wfcc was oxaslned hero. Ho st.-ted at
tho tine that Professor Brandt had boon in Buchenweld at ono tine. He
says hero: "I declare that I undo ny statements solely on tho basis of
the inforaetion given by Dr. Ding: that is, that I nyself never saw
Professor Xnrl Brandt in Buchenweld."

Thoro follows ZB-SS which will bo Exhibit 40. It is an affidavit
v the co-defeedant Professor Schrooder about the question of tho oint¬
ment for burns. The defendant Brandt was accused of having passed on an
miatsent for experiments for phosphorous turns. This affidavit says that


10150


Court So. 1

26 Jus 47-M?-4-£&i»Sis&bT>ck (7os Schon)


such an ointment *».» offered to the Luftwaffe, too, and It eays here
that Professor Srendt made an ointment available to hit which %e*.s sup¬
posed to be suitable for use on phosphorous turns, and the doctor who
reported this to Professor Schroeder said, no, Professor Schroeder said
he told the doctor to got in touch with the firm lo obtain amounts for
tests in hospitals end first aid stations, the Court win remember that
that was the statement of the defendant Brandt, that ho had not passed
this ointment on for research purposes but only for teste.

There follows Docuaent 101i Lrhlbit 41, an affidavit by Pr. Anbros,
who speaks about chonleal warfare agents. He worked for I.C. Fnrbon and
had to work on chemical warfare events and protective agents. He says
that In 1944 ho came into touch with Karl Brandt, Cn that occasion
rrofessor 3randt said that ho had to take an intoroet in eheaical warfare
agon to and countermeasures. At the sane tiuo he showed a lotter froc
Hitler and said that he v#s primarily concerned with obtaining materials
for gas masks. He vent to two factories with 3rondt and Brandt wonted
to got a general picture of chcalcal warfare agonts. He says thoro van
great uneasiness at tho tine about gottlng protection against choalcal
vorfaro as it was thought that tho Allior would use poisonous gases. It
voo said that they had brought poisonous gas over with them whon thoy
landed at Tunis. It vos also said that tho Russians had new gas maoke
vfcich fact pointed to the possibility of the use of a now poison gas.

On the Gernan side, thore was definitely a serious shortage of chemical


warfare protective eouipccat, the reason why Karl Brandt was given the


special assignment to obtain gas masks.


lDloI


Coart So. 1

26 Jum 47-A-16-l-£EX-Gross (Vos Schos)


The next document Is S3 103. I offer It as Zxhibit So. 42. This
is an affidavit by Tr. Valter Kielens vfco speaks about the gas decree of
1 March 1944. He states: "As far as I remember, the decree was vorded
approximately as follow*:

'I have ordered sy Cocaissioner General for tho Medical and Health
Service (Prof. Dr. Brandt) to take a major part In all natters concerning
orotectlon against checical varfare (of the ar=y and the civilian oooula-
tion) and to issue orders to the stations (nllitery and civilian) estab¬
lished for this ourpose. In oxestlons of the protection of the civilian
population against cheoical varfare, he cunt obtain In advance the appro¬
val of the Reich Air Minister and Coasander In Chief of the Luftw-ffe.'■

The witness also says that there vas no research assignment in con¬
nection vith cheslcal varfare. Ke also says that the initiation of
checical »arfare >+ shortly to be expected because the encry hal largo
aaounts of gas ready. He also confircs the presence of gas shells in
Tunis and Dakar and says that there vas great alorn by the capture of
Russian gas casks because it vas assusedthat the Red Arty had succeeded

• 9

in. Introducing special cheslcal varfare agents. Ho also soyo that the
civilian population vas defenseloss against gas attacks, that the supply
of gas casks vas ccepletely lnadeouate, the average figure being about
32 percent, and fer childron about 7 percent. It was assuaed that
15,000,000 civilian gas aaeks had already become quite useless so the
civilian population vas completely unprotected. Forty-five silllon gas
casks would have had to be produced and that vas the purpose of Brandt's
assignment. According to the witness. Professor Brandt himself objected
stronuously to the initiation of chemical warfare by Germany. The witness
further speaks about £ agent, which was not a gas. And then he sneaks
on another subject which is of interest to the proceedings, that is tho
removal of poison free drinking water. He says he knows there was a
special commission in the Arcaments .'inistry for the decontamination of
drinking water. This had neither been established by Brandt nor was it
under his command. The task of this cosaission was the production of


10LS2


Court So. 1

26 Jun 47-A-18-2-ZKX—3roi b (Ton Schon)


deccntanination eouipeent. Ee also says the voric vas discussed In a
nesting in Dececber 1944 at which he we present. *ro/eseor Brandt,
vfco wi present, already egreed vlth the general opinion that Haase's
efforts, designer of the apparatus vhich vas discussod here, would not
constitute an lnproveoent in present nethods and should therefore be
rejected. He had therefore asked se to work toward this end.

This is advanced against the charge that Earl Brandt had ordered
drinking water experlnents in the concentration can?.

Ihcro follows KB 122

THE PRiSIBEKT: Counsel-

DR. SZRVAIXLS: It has not been translated yet.

TE1 PRESIDEV?: I was calling this to your attention, the fact that
this docuaont was not contained—

ZR. EZRVATIUS* I can tell you briefly what the contents are, I
can bring the docuaont itself lator. It Is an affidavit of tho witnoos
Seff, who was a witness, and In cross exaninetion I exaained hio. Vhon
I asked whether he actually had seen Karl Brandt at the concentration
caap (ha had previously stated that ho rocognisod Brandt*• striking face),
now horo he lays tho foJ* owing? "About two aonths of tor this oxar.lnation
I not Frofeseor Karl 3rardt in tho waiting rooe for nrlsoncrs. Professor
Earl Brandt spoko to ne, asked no whether I knew hln. I eaid, 'Hr.

3artels? : then I nintionod another nose, and then Profoesor Brandt said,
'But, Mr. Hoff, you recoguizod =c the other day, or spoke about no or
sosothing like that.' I don't know whether Professor 3randt or I nen-
tioned his nano. Then I said, 'Tes, I know you by eight.' Profoesor
Brardt said he hod certainly never been in Dachau. Then I said then,

'You oust have a double.' Bitally, Dr. Robert Scrvatius, who oraair.ed
ae before the Tribunal, I did not recognize again." Then the witness
said, "Before the examination I was shown a nusber of uicturoe of tho
defendants without being told what their noses were. I looked at tho
pictures and vhon I caae to the picture of Karl 3rar.dt, whose name I
didn't know, I said, 'That was a high ranging SS officer who vas certainly


301S3


Coart So. 1

26 Jan 47-A-18-3~i3i-Groas (Von Schoa)


in the hospital before 1942.' I was then asked If I could pick out this
person froa a nuaber of other persons and I answered that I could. And
than I was about two weeks later In court and was asked if I rcc^cnizcd
any of the defendants and I said, 'Ascng others I recognize the first
one In the first row as the person vfaoa I had seen in the hospital.'
nils was the first tlao that I heard the rase Karl Brandt." I shall let
the Court Judge the value of this recognition. That *»s Docunont 0-122,
Exhibit 43.

I now rofer to Docussent 13-93 which Is already offerod as Exhibit
29 but It was not adnitted at that tine.

HR. HARDY: Your Eor.or, I believe when this was offerod as Exhibit

29 protocut ion strenuously objected to the adalsslon of this docunont In

evidence, dousing it iaoatcrial. I don't know vbethor Your Honors rocall

the oxtenelvo orgunent by counsel In this regard but I would again like

to rolterato the objection on the port of prosecution to tho ndnlsslon
9

of this docunont In evidence.

UR. SIR7A7ICS: Hr. President, I consider It very 1soortant for
this docuoont to be adalttod. Tho Tribunal gave oo perslsslon to send
Questionnaires tp Professor KcCar.cc and Dr. Sabers, scdical counsellor
In Colog no. Tlicso Questionnaires were received by those gentleacn but
nolthor of thes has ancrored. I naeuao tho Conan gcntlosan has not as
yot received oomlsslon by the authorities and tho English gor-tlcsan
isn't Inclined to answer this Questionnaire. Thorcforo, it is all tho
sore lnportant far ac to sutalt this docunont. About the rolcvanco of
the docunont we have already argued. In =y opinion tho Reich Conaittoe
for the killing of doforaed children is of decisivo iaoortance. One con
see here that children, when they are incapable of living, oro not sub¬
jected to euthanasia but scoothing worse - that is, exoeriientc, I don't
think one can say parents voluntarily gave up children f« this purpose.
Then this case applies whether experiaents on non-volunteers or vhethor
conforas with aedical science and ethics. • "e see hero a foreign official
agency issues an order that all Goman agencies noss the setter on with-

lco6b


f


Court So. 1

26 Jun 47-A-1S—i-IHX-Oro s s (7on Schon)


cut scruples and that at a tlae W:en this trial has been going on for
scab tiac and everyone prefuaably has read abpu* the terrible things In
the press. With this I vant to peeve that the real attitude of tho nodi¬
cal profession is different then the press and propaganda. What the
press publishes is only false propaganda which daaages science and has
aone political alna. Jor that reason, In the interest of science I
sust offer this docuaent and prove that Karl 3randt did nothing different
that what is approved by highest authorities today. I foci this nust be
ndnitted.

MR. HARD?: Tour Honor, I still don't see tho valuo of the docuaent.
Furthermore, the docuaent hasn't been authenticated ae yet in a aonnor
prescribed by the Tribunal. It rry bo an isolated docuaent. Socondly,

It isn't in outline as to tho procoduro used; it has not been substanti¬
ated; its aatorlallty is in question. v hethor it has any nrobatlvo
value or not I aa not wishing to argue right at this ooint. I aa arguing
tho authenticity of tho docuaont first of all, thon tho probatlvo voluo
Istor.

PR. SiRVATXUS: Hr. President, on 22 Hay 1947 I received a letter
froes tho Socrctary Goncral-

9

TKS PHESI32SS: Counsel, this docuaont is not aveilablo to the
othor noabors of tho Tribunal.

MR. KARST: Tour Honor, I was under the iaprcsslon that tho Tribunal
hod ruled that if this docuaent vno properly authontlcatod it would bo
accepted into ovidence and gave Dr. Sorvatius aaple tiao to author.ticoto
tho docuaont. That he hasn't done.

7H2 PRZSXDLST: Veil, I wns going to say this docuaent not being
availablo to all the aeabors of the Tribunal the authenticity is not
easy to study. I suggest that this be nassod.

ZSU S1RVATIUS: nr. President, any I first explain. On 22 Hay 1947
the Secretary General wrote to =c:

"Subject: Procurement of Docunonts.

"To : Dr. Servetius.


10165


Court So. 1

26 Jus 47-A-i8-5-ZEH-Gross (Von Schon)


•Herewith copy of letter S2/PE 2457 dated 22 Juno 1946 free Deouty
Regional Cosalssioncr, Sortfc Rhine Region, to Obcrpracsldent, Horth Rhine
Province, which bn* Just boon rocelrod frees British authorities in
Dusssoldorf.

■Jor the Secretary General: E.E. Bonford."

Copy Is Inclosed. This Is an official statersont and an official
copy. I don't bolleve for foraallsa one can go so far as to ask Deputy
Regional Conalssloner Brigadier Vallacc to have this cortlfiod. I shall
hand you the docuaent.

J1R. HAHDTi Proa this addition. Tour Honor, which Isn't in sy doeu-
cont book, If ho has had it properly authenticated, I withdraw ay
objection.


1CELSS


Court Ko. 1

26 Job 47-1-19-1-ZHX-Ieo«er (Von Scfcon)


THE FSZSIHLS7: The docu=er.t nay be accented as Karl Brandt Exhibit
Xo. 29.

*e. HIEDY: Of course, I did not withdraw sy objection to tho
urobativo valuo. If the Tribunal deems it to have orobativc value, then,
of course, it is adaissible. I objected criminally as to its authenticity.

IKE PriSISESTs The docuDont is admitted es Exhibit 29. She nrobe-
tive value is before the Tribunal to decido. Counsol, of course, in
their briefs, aay argue pro and con on the aatter of the probative value
of tho docunont.

DR. SE-.VATIUSi Hr. President, os for the nuostionnalres sent out
on this subject, I ash for permission to suheit then later, if thoy
ifcould be received. „ , s

hr. President, I should like to offer the following document Ho.

110, for tho following reports. In this docunont X3-93, speaking of
HcCanco's oxporisents, it is said that they are heraloss and painless; •
they are kidney function examinations. Cne has no Idea of whet that
scons and if the Questionnaires are not an»wcrod wo will be in the dark.
Sow, by cure coincidence, I happened to find an articlo in "The Lancot"
hy this Professor hoCnnce, where one got* sooe idea of what is to bo dono
ty thsso children. It is said that these kidney function tests are best
F*rforaed on human boings and thon it is said that tho study of tho
osount of sodium chloride In the body can be cerforaod by an analysis of
•sail onioals, or upon analysis or fotusce end new born children. Thon
he gooa on with his aniaals about eraaination of the kidney function. I

e

bolievc that is lsportant since Professor Ivy said here that if such
experiments are nerforaed they are not on evil. The analysis can be por-
foraed only whan the children arc dead.

KAHDT: Tour Ko-?r, having locked ever tho rest of the documents
In this particular complex in the seauonce as Dr. Sorvotius wishes to
introduce them, tho Exhibit Vo. 29 that was Just accented into evidence
ar.i these other exhibits are all exhibits dealing with literature,
iiteraturo on experlneats and work in other countries. I now rerruest

1GIS7


Court So. 1

26 Jus 47-A-19-2-ZEM-Zc s s er (Von Schon)


that the Tribunal rule vhether or not such literature will be odalosiblc
in toto end thon vhether or not each docu*aont will be adsieslble rb it
is introduced; this has been delayed by the Tribunal, end If bo. It
scons to ac that perhaps -11 these could bo put in together for all of
the defendants. Screral of these are aercly articles fren Beador'e
Digest; "The Lancet" I do not know - I sust ask counsol here - whether
or not thoy are edalssible, tut first of all, before thoy are introduced,

! thick it would bo lncuabent upon the Tribunal to rule whether or not
this typo of evidence will be accepted. This has boon dolayed now and
if tho Tribunal rules that they will accept it then, of courso, wo can
object to each doeuoont as it goes la. ®ut it is ny understunding that
si yet the Tribunal has taken the position that thoy do not wish to rulo
ss to the adoissibllity of any of this evidence.

a. SlHVAXIUSi Hr. President, I wanted to cocaont on the aucstion
of litoraturc lator and offer sono affidavits now on euthanasia and at
tho end brieg up the auestion of literature.

KB. HARDY: Tout Honor, that la oorfcetly ell right, but thle is
going to ccoc up.with all the defendants and I wonder if tho Tribunal is
in a position to rulo on that now, or docs tho Tribunal want to doloy
that further?

%

TEL PRZSini!": The Tribunal will now be in rocoss for a few ninutco.

(A recess was token.)


1COS3


Court Sot 1

2i Jua 4 7-1-21-1-ISK-^eehan (Brcvz)


TEI nAaSKAL: The Tribunal is again ia seesioa.

THE PB2SI2E9T: With refereace to these docuaents vhich are undor
consideration, being extracts froe publications vhich ere decaed relevant
by counsel, the Tribunal vill be inclined to edalt in evidence extracts
Iron piblicatlons vfclch are approved nodical Journals, or publications
vhich are recognised generally in the countries in which they arc pub-
llshed by physicians and other persons as being responsible oubllentions.
That, of course, will rocuire oach document to be presented end con¬
sidered by the Tribunal and the ruling cede on oach docuncnt as it cay
be offered.

then Z spoke of res'cnsible publications, I intendod to cay publi¬
cations which are regarded as responsible insofar as nodical natters and
surgical catters ere concerned.

Counsol cay proceed.

IS. 8ZKVJSXUS: Kr. President, I should liko to say socethlng of a

fundamental naturo about tho adaissibility of other docuaents over and

beyond tho ruling vfclch the Tribunal Just cade. I should liko tho wholo

•

suostlon to be oxsclnol froc this ooint of view. The evidence in this
trial refors to the entire legal aspect of the natter, because the
prosoeutlon asserts that tho defendants have offonded the principal
penal lavs of all civilised countries. There nro no lews to this offoct,
tot even in Acerlea today. Tho wltnoss Professor Ivy only said that a
caoisission aet which vat going to cako sene regulations of an adalnistra-
tive sort, bhat the law actually is in the world wc can only Judge froo
vhat has happened. Tho rituation is the sacc as it is in international
law where the effort is cade to ascertain international law. The T.N.T.

—'inip.inod this law always existed and was slcply drawing on it. In
that caso vp cust proceed as a legislature proceeds. Vc*cuBt have a
vie*- of this whole aeiicel field as a whole and take into accouht the
opinions of all, not only the authorities, but also the entire rorula-
tion. Jor that reason the statements cade ir. tho press in articles by
less procinent authors are of great iccortance. They arc all a rcflec-

10169


Court So, 1

26 Jus 47-A-21-2-EE*i-Keehan (Brown)


tion of roal life. Ve should try to ascertain tho situation a* a «fcolo.
This is a sort of mosaic, -hich must be assembled. Tou cannot take only
authorities! you oust take other voices, too, vhlch ere a uart. Tho
structure nust include all of then. Only from the total facts can real
life be seen and ascertained vhat the real ouinion of humanity ie.

3K2 PRESIDENT: As X etatci, each document »'ill bo considered as it
is presented. Suppose you reserve this argument until eone document is
presented and objected to. Ve can consider it ee concrete vhor. it is
presented to tho Tribunal as a document.

*• SZRYATIUS: Kr. President, X offer Document Karl Brandt No. 110
as exhibit 44j that is the paper by Professor KcCanoe in connection with
•xporiaonts.

TKZ PaSs'lDIFSi Did you say that was published in "Tho Lancet"?

IB. SERYATXUS: Yes, and 1936 is the dato, a papor ty Profeeeor
KrCanco.

T?’3 PRiSDELT: Has counsel for tho proeecutlon any objection to
the admission of thie document?

.B. HARDY: Th« prosecution would liko the dofoneo counsol to
stote what ie the reputation of "The Lancot", as I aa not familiar
vith It.


THI PRESIDENT: Tho Tribunal is. The reputation of tho maguzino
'•* ’ery cood; it is an English nodical Journal.

KR. HARDY: Bo objection.

THE PRESIDENT: Karl Brandt Docuaont So. 110 will bo admitted as
rrandt Exhibit 44.

IE. SERYATIVS: Earl Brandt Document* 121 and 117 arc not yot
translated into English. Karl 3rondt So. 117 i 6 an exhaustive document,
a doctor's thesis of 1937 regarding tho ixucricoats effecting human

being#.

THE PRESIDENT: Doctor, these documents ''ill be considered when tho
Tribunal has before it the translation.

DE. SER7ATIUS: Then I will postpone putting in these documents.


10170


Court Sc. 1

26 Jon 47-A-21-c-EHX-Mechan (Brown)

Perhaps I can ha-re it as early as tosorrow.

Sov cones Docuaent lari Brandt 94; this vill ho Exhibit 45. This
is an excerpt froa the Geraan Medical V e eicly, an oxcorot froa the British
.iedical Journal 1945, an article by Trances Gardnor. This is an articlo
or. artificially produced Jaundice and its effect on rheoaatle arthritis.
The purpose of this docuaent is to prove that Jaundice is a non-hazardous
disease and that volunteers, because it is not dangorous, arc willing
to suteit to it.

The next docuaent, Karl 3randt 105 and Karl Brandt 108, I shall cut
in as Exhibits 46 and 47. They deal with the saao ouostion.

THE PRESIDES": Just a aoaent, counsol. Karl Brandt Docuaont To. 94
vill be adaitted as Brandt Exhibit 45.

DR. SIRVATIUS: Then I put in Docuaont KB 105, a work on hopatltio
ty Profossor Soofo. It is an oxcerpt printod in tho Medical Monthly*
tho article itself is froo Tho Aaoriean Jairnal of Medical Science 1945.
This docunent is put to orovo that hopatltls is not dongorouc.

THE PRESIDES!: That docuaent Brandt will bo adaitted as Karl
Srandt Exhibit 46.

DR. SEF.VATIUS: Ikon follow* Karl Brandt 108, a paper on hooutitio
ty tho sace author, Professor Bccfe, an ercorpt froa the Journal of tho
Aaoriean Hedical Aeec-lation, 11 August 1945. This concerns itself
with tho Question of voluntary consent in hepatitis and tho voluntoors
in those oxpcrlacnts wero conscientiwis objectors. It soys that tho
exuoriaonts wore aade possiblo through the cooperation of tho National
2oar4 of C.O.'s and the Aacrlcan Friends Service Cceaittoc. Voluntoors
vero given hepatitis and I shall later deal with the ouostion of volun-
irry consont.

THE PRESIDES!: That oxfcibit nay be adaitted as Karl Brandt Exhibit

47.

If-. SEHYATIUS: I then put in Earl Brandt 109, an cxccrot froo tho
periodical "The Lancet" of 12 August 1S4 It is ontitlcd "Irar.cnission
of Infective Hepatitis to Huaan Volunteers". This I put in reference to


10171


Court So. 1

26 Jun 47-A-21-4-=->:-Mechan (Brown)


tho question of voluntarr consent, too,

THE P B1S I DZ E T: That docuaont nay bo Karl Brandt exhibit 48.

IE. SKEYATIUS; Sext cones Karl Brandt 104j I an not sure vfaothqr
tho Tribunal has that In English.

TKZ PRZSIDiST: Yes, it Is contained in this book.

DR, SifcYATIUS; This is an article fros the Headers Digest of
January 1947 entitled "I Starved for Science". This is an article from
a fiction magarinc which contains scci-scientlflc information also and
thoro aro sono scientific works. This a reoort by a volunteer who, as
a conscientious objector, went through a hunger oxnerlncnt with 35 of
his ccarados. I nut it in first of ell in order to refute what Profossor
Ivy said, naooly, that such cxpericcnts do not lr.volvo nain, singly
sinor unpleasantness.

iS. EAHDY: I shall not object to the introduction of this document
hut, hovovor, counsel should reserve any arguaont as to tho orobativo
value of this docuaont for the argunents and then tho nrobativc valuo
of tho document can bo determined by tho Tribunal. Tho docuaont io not
refuting tho testimony of Dr. Ivy. It can bo scon it sinoly states how
volunteers subjected thcasolvos to diotic experiments. At tho or.d
evoryono was hanpy and they had a shopping oarty. There is nothing in
it to refute Professor Ivy's tostiaony; that is tho roason I aa not
objecting to it. I think if he has any cceaont to nako on the document
it should bo reserved for argument.


10172


THE r22SI23ET: The Tribunal is sot disposed to cdsit this offered
pxtlcls la evidence. It will aot he received.

IS. KA2ST; I understand It will aot he received!

THE FHSSIia*?: This offered exhibit will aot he received in ovideace.

22. SZHTA71 US: Kr, President, since 2 have similar documents here,

any 2 please spy the following if Z cry use these documents only
ia ny ar.picent then 2 shell heve to bring them to the attention of the
fribunr .1 leter in ay concluding pier, or not even then? A n 2 under¬
standing you correctly!

THE PHZSZ3ZTT* The argument of counsel nust be brsed upon evidence
which is received end admitted before the Tribunal rnd not xpon
extraneous natters.

22. SE27ATIUS: Then Kr. President I eo not in n position to bnso ny
or.biincnt on anythin’ because I will have no practical erse to rofer
to but nust refor only to hypothetical cases. I think 1 nust bo
•lvcr. an opportunity to substantiate whnt I an -oin-: to present. I
can not rely purely on theory.

K3 ? JSSIDZL’T: That was what I an try in.- to say that the rr«uncnto
of counsel rrc supposed to be based on the cvldenco which in before
the Tribunal, fre^ the facts and evidence which have beer, received.

That io not Unit in counsel'e argument to theory but on the contrary
•'Ives counsel evidenco which is before tl\ Tribunal upon which to br.so
Ms ar.pxacnt. Counsel, of course, in his nr-iunont nay draw deductions
from Batters which pro in evidence. He docs not hrfo to nrguo only
the evidence. That natter cm be token up lator if counsol is in
doubt about the rx^uaent.

32. SS37ATITJS: I than cone to Earl 3randt document 106, this will
be Exhibit hg.

■3. Ei3DYs Tour Honor, for the clarification of the record I want to
iafore the Tribunal thr.t I did not formally object to the adaisslon
of the lest docucent.

THE PHSSXDEET: I understand that.


10173


2o June-A-35-22—2-Cook (In*.. 3rova)

Court Vo, I

TR. SES7ATITJS: ZXrI Srrndt loS cor :e ■ f roc the Journrl of Phrx—acolo-
y rnd Srperincntrl Thernpdtiei, This it fa essny by Arthur R.

Cushny on Kustrrd Spa frou the year I 9 I 8 . It deals with t he question
of erucrinenta with Lost Sp.a, the two methods of r.dnlnlstrrtion, In
drops bclar one of th«e. I put thia in because of the chart thr.t la
to bo found in it, fron which it era bo acen thr.t the cxperlnentrl
subject a went through it: Cat rlto.tether different rperioda, fr • r
few aoconda to ten nlnutea, rad thrt here tho experiments woro of
vrrylng lengths of tine. I intend to use thia in ny -rfuaent, refer*-
ln,c to decrees of voluntary conaent. nnaely, the persons desirinc to
Yoluntoor for only one second, mother person volunteers far the
vholc nlnutos. If you will look throu.* the list you will ace thr.t
the Inst ones rre colored persons md thr.t hro somethin.' to do with
the decree of voluntary consent.

THE PIESIUirit Krrl Srrndt Boewxnt 106 lc ndnlttsd in evidenco
re Brrndt Exhibit Po. U 9 .

DR. SSdVATtUa Pov cooes EB 107, likowlie nn rrticlc fron tho
Journal A ?hrr=rcolo.*y md Sxporinentrl Therrpoutics of tho yorr
1919. This rlso dorls with nustrxd r,rs enerinonts. I put it in
to pro/w thrt such exparincnU with Lost Gns hrve been euotonnry
in nodlcino since 1318.

THE PJtfA93*Ti The doouaent wii! be rocoived in ovidoncc rs Krrl
Brandt Exhibit “o. 50.

DE. SSH7ATITJS: Kcxt cones Z^rl Brnndt 110. This will be Exhibit 51,
rn extract fron tho Archives of Pntbolo.-icrl Anatony md Physiology
and Cllnicel Kediclne, edited by Rudolf Virchow. This ism old
periodical fron tho year 1835. This also denis with the question
of voluntary consent. Eero n erte is described whore children in
the lr.st stages of infection Rre experlccnted on end two of then die.

It ary*: "i reserved to syself the continuation of further culture
experiments rad I shrli not fril to sport on my eventual, positive
results.• This r,-rln deels with the question of voluntary consent


1017ii


26 Jan?—A-3&-22—3-Cooic (l a t. 3rown)
Court ro. 1


of children r.a frr r.s it is considered possible r.t rll.

33 FHSSnzr”: The docusent vlll be adr.lt ted r.s Kerl 3rr*ndt
Exhibit To. 51.

33. SZSV^ritJS: It vould be expedient now if I vould deal with
Docuaent 3o:k III because there are n nunber of reticles therein
dealliv; with experlnents -

T.-Z rHESIE3T: Juat a aocent, Counsol, writ Just a r-onont.

DS. 8B3TATIUS: It bc.^aa with Docuncnt Errl 3rrndt U5.

TE2 rRESirZTT: Just n ur.cn:, counaol.

K3. E*3DYi Tour Honor, wouldn't it be no re expedient and logical
to cr rry on ia this document book he hr.a Juat riven ua rad hr.vo
the nunbers la sequence ao that we will hr.ve our docucent book in
rather chronological order r.a to exhibit nuabers nnd we won't hrvo
to Junn frun one to the otherl

TKB rHZSIDZTT: There ie »• question whether it will bo einplor
to follow in chronologic nl order or through the exhibit books by
subject anttor.

>3. Rv.’yf: It ia imrvterirl to nc, Tour Honor. I era follow oithor
wry >it it w.nxld aeon sluplor to follow through crch book if wo rro
roiaq to hud .. b*ok Vfother liiro thrt.

33. SxiiT.vHl'S* Thle tr n eras oi tiency.

7G rL*?';.r Th« *r'. axai vi?l follow the su,:.-eition by counsel
for E<*rl cl resit pud will now u;» Oocmwit Pook iTX.

33. SStUOTKa As Exhibit 52. - should like to put in hrxl 3rmdt
^5. This la an extract fros the book •Km -a/ylnst Death" by P*ul
de Eruif, which ia certrinly knows to the Tribunal. The last two
docunenta are also froa n book ty Paul do Eruif, the second book
bein'

:3. Ha 23T: The lrat three‘docunenta which rre extracts fron books
by Paul de Eruif, the Prosecution atrer.anuijy objects to. It in
fiction and nothing in the book is bnaed on nedical facta end nc Dr.
Ivy pointed out fron the aired he coulda't give nr. opinion on anttere


10175


26 June-A-3S-22-U-Cook (lat. 3rovn)

Coart To. 1

of this type in as nuch '■ it ii not reproved aedicrl literature.
It it written for purposes of the lay rer-der and not written for
the purpose of this Tribunal or for the purpose# of physicians
rat’ ne&icrl studies.

23. S237AT1CSI Kay I try sosethln; in this rc.y.rdt Tour Honors,
the public opinion is not forced by the rending of scientific
works, but a book like raul de Kruif s is known through tho world.
It can be purchased anywhere rad huannity does not ask whet the
eminent Professor so rnd so srid but bases its opinion on whr.t
Paul de Iruif tells hin. "his opinion hr.s c .Tort influenco a;;ein
on the j^nerrl opinion of th© -povernnent represer.trtives id turn
since they represent tho population. If you would ask anyone's
opinion on the nedleel .question he would e..:, refer to thir book.

TKS PKSSIEE'"; I did not hoar tho laat, was that ^translation
of a previous strtenent or was it only the Interpreter repeating

IVTZRPBTSRt I srid that this book was written for roncral
public. In order to make these idoas understandable to tho public
as a whole, and has nuoh rre atsr dispersion than a. scientific
work thrt a scholar draws ur> in hit study, consequently I
believe that it hae probative value because it represents public
opinion as a whole and should be admitted into evidence.

US. HA3DT: I ni-ht oak, Tour Honors, what is the purpose of
these docuncntt, if that is the purpose of the docuncnts, if it
is tho purpose to show that like expcrir.cnts, that the sarao typo
of experiments arc bcin,- conducted ns in Sersroy thoro nlfrt
be aoce consideration, but I er-n't sec for which purpose Dr.
Servotius has expressed that he «ants then admitted.


1GL76


li Juno li7-V»-iTD-23-l^t<os3or (In Brcnn)
Court ?fc. 1


DR, S EHVATIBS i '’r. President, a a far as I knew, Paul do Kruif is
a professor of biology) ho is not a layran. in this book, cccporl-^r.ts
a-G described in a cloar wayj these descriptions ciro a clear insight
into :rhat has hap pored in the last 30 yor-s. Ho describes the prebite
that lios behind the experiments and tho difficulties; ho ,-ivos do tail 3
sl»3* From najiy casos hors I oan approach tho quosticn of voluntary
wnsent. For instance, tho case of the plastic surg-ory experiments on
the prisonor, whoro labors had to be called in to '.otomino whothor
tho p-rcroquiaite of voluntary consent axis tod, Now Paul do Kruif shews
it is net t!» doctor who doeidos this and has tho responsibility by
tlx* director of tho prison, in other words, tho State, Thoso statonents
aist bo emitted as ovidavco, I ocwld, if nocossaiy, into this in
do tail in order to denonstrato this to th> Tribunal,

TIC PaESICBHri loll, camsol, tho probativo valuo cf all oxhibits
will bo boforo tho Tribunal to 00 ns idor,

'ft, HABDYt I did not hoar, ycur Honor*

THC PPJ^IQEHTi I said tto probativo valuo of thoso oxhibits trill
bo befbro tho Tribunal to oonsidor and th's off0rod oxhibit *rill be

Ofcdttod*

R-RHf 1 How I ur.' ‘stood wo wore discussing tho 3 oxhibits by
Paul do “ruif, is that ccrroct? 1

TIT PTESirEHT: Y03, it is a book. Considering Karl Brandt Docunont

1*5.

it?.. R'-RBYr And DocuiKr.t U6, t<Mch is also fro:; thu seno book? And
Dear sunt li7, writ ton by Paul do "ruif, "Hun-or Fi-htora" which is a
ficticral story about tho pellagra experiments .loos that also cone undor
rur Honors* rulin?

TIC PTvSSIDSKTr Tho Tribunal has mdo seen examination of Karl Brandt
D^curvxt Book 3 and cf tho documents offered in that book; they trill all
adaittod in ovidonco for wtr.t they acy bo worth, cxcopt Karl Brand
Docuncnt li9, Karl Brandt Docunont 55 and Karl Brandt Doettnont 7k, which
be rejected*


10177


26 Juno l4?-iV-».7D-23-2-Lc3Swr (Int. Brcr.m)

Court Ho, 1

%

IT-, asavmosi ''COM ycu bo so sood -8 to repeat those ctcurcntr
nunbora, jrour Hotter — the onos that aro rvat a^dsslblo?

TtE PassiDEHTt Karl .rendt Doarcr.t U9.

DR- EdV/.TIOS* In that coao IS—i*5 booouas Exhibit 52, I 46 boccnos
jihibit 53 an! U7 bocoaes Exhibit 5U. The next, b 8 .....

T!~ 'CJSnEKTr Karl Brandt Itocimjnt 55 will not bo a bittod.

:r, H_J®Yi Your Honor, in connection with all those various docu¬
sate which Dr, S-rvatlus is introducin'/ to a hr..- that non-volunt-cra woro
usod in other countrios, it is the opinion f tho Prcsocution that tho
burdon of proof is on Dr. Sorvatius to point out in each one of thoso
publications wherein thj description, tho status of thj subjoots usod,
is olicitodj and if tho articlo doos not specify this bo that wo aro
unr.blo to ascertain whether or not tho subjects woro volunteers r vroro *
n:n-volunt-ors, it is clearly irrclovant.

1® H?CSiaS!ffi Tho probative) vnluo od thoso till bo boforo tho
Tribunal. Of course, tho burton rests upon do fan to nt Brandt, in his
brief, to shew tho probative value of such portions of thoso docuiaonts
an*, what prebativo valuo they have.

!Tt. KuRDY* Tho Prosecution decs not cloarly understand what oach
tocunont is intro ■ucocl for and wo would like to havo that ;>ointoc! out
tfhothor they aro introdueod t: show -.rhothor they woro norv-vduntoors in
incrica or whither they aro introduco! to show they wuro volunteers and
'fhctJiar they w.ro cor.'toctod so tlxit deaths occurred, cr what is tho
par pc 00 ?

THE PiEUDSHT: That bur’on rests u r on tho defantont, Karl Brandt,
i^arl Brandt 5k>cu,aont 7U is nzt a bit tod in cviclonce. Ifaw tho nunbors of
too3o exhibits nay bo put on later. Tho others aro a bitted in o^picnco.

Dd. S:YW..TItE: I should UJco to to through thoso docunonts in a
.ror.oral way, or loos tho Tribunal prefer that I ros .rvo this for ry final
r-iaa?


10178


26 JQno Ii7-»'.-i.7>-23-3-Lcsscr (In'., Brewr.)

Court !fc. 1

THE TdESIDSKTt Counsel car. do that r*oro effectively in his brief,
*r in a separate brief dotted to this branch of the caso,

DP.. SEnV.VTIUS: Yes. I de not understand how tho exhibits aro to
bo rarfcercd. Fron Docunont Book 3 all beuaents arc adrdttod oxcopt

55, L9 and 7U?

T-Td .'TCSItCJrr: That is correct, counsel.

DfU SddV.TIUS: Then nay wo *ut down exhibit norhers. liB is
Exhibit 55) 50 boconos 5&J 5l«.

TK: FTCESIDENTi Counsel, did you road that into the record? ”oro
tho stenographers rottir.' that?

JUICE SEBPI?C: Ccunsol, by yc*ir loavo, tho Tribunal will road
into tho rooord tho onnor and tho order in idiich they will roccivo
t’.wao oxhiblts so that it nay bo quite clear.

Karl 3randt Document hS will bo rocoivod as Karl Brandt Exhibit

52.


Docunont

U6

as

Exhibit

53,

Docunont

li7

as

Exhibit

5U,

Dccumnt

Ufl

as

Exhibit

55,

•

Docunont

50

no

inhibit

56,

IXicunont

51

as

Exhibit

57,

•

Dccuixsnt

52

as

Exhibit

58,

Docunont

53

as

Exhibit

59,

Dccuaont

5U

as

Exhibit

60,

Docunont

56

as

Exhibit

63.,

i

i

57

as

Exhibit

62,

Docuront

58

as

Exhibit

63,

Do cure nt

59

as

Exhibit

61,

Docunont

60

as

Exhibit

65,

Docunont

61

as

Exhibit

66,

Docunont

62

as

Exhibit

67,

|

1

63

as

Exhibit

68,


10179


1 26 Jam L7-1---TD-23-o-Lc—cr (Ir.t. Brown)
Coart Nc. 1


Documnt

61

as

Exhibit

69,

r >oc\n?nt

65

as

Exhibit

70,

0

Dcc\rx:nt

66

as

Exhibit

n.

Docicxnt

67

as

iehioit

n.

Docunont

60

as

Exhibit

73,

•

Docunont

69

as

Exhibit

7U,

Docuaor.t

70

as

Exhibit

75,

Docunont

71

as

Exhibit

76,

Docuixnt

72

as

Exhibit

77,

•

Docu’iont

73

ns

Exhibit

78,

Docu-wnt

75

as

Exhibit

79


and Document 76 cs Tcrl Brandt Exhibit 00.

DE. SERVATIUS: ~nnow, your Honors, I sh .ul like tc turn bade
to y first supplcnontal voluru. Eero aro sax '.ocunents rofarriiv: to
biolo'lcnl narfaro.

IH. H’JlDYi The Prosecution objects to the noxt 3 ’ocunor.ts being
a.hittod. The Tribunal coul' oensidor than an! rule cn it without any
further couiont by tho Prosocufcion.

D SnitV/.TIUSi In rognr l to Uxso £ociLiants....I pwt in X3-110, an
article fron Popular Scionco ontitlod "Oom Weapons wcr«j Hoacy. This
concoms bacteriological rarfaro and I intend to put it in in roforonco
to tho question of humanity. One of tho nain charges of the Prosooution
is that tho iofontents actod oorrtrery to tha laws of hunanity. If you
cast n lanco on tho bactoriolo'jioal warfaro that was proparol horo and.
tho 'iscussion in this docunont, you rust co^xiro that with what tho
lofondnnto aro c'mrgod wit’-. As Ido fron tho fact that bacteriological
"arfarc i3 also a Cmnt in tie in'ictnont, dtheu-h it is not spccifiod
. r-oisoly what the defendants aro allowed to have actually dono in
bacteriological warfare. I can only state that h u ro in theso articles .
it is dearly stated "hat haypomd on tho othur silo. It can bo soon


101G0


26 Juno !i7-*j».TD-23—5-i<o33cr (Int. Brcwr.)
Cmrt So, 1


frcn this that It was anfihnxro that that tho Prosecution is charging
tho Jofbn-innts That is tho roason I wish to put it' in* Tho fact

that it appeared in a popular pseudo scientific nagarinc ioos not, in
ay opinion, aininito its probativo value, Juet tho opposite, it proves
how popular those idoaa wore. I should like, at tho saao tino, to put in
* doeuaont 12h. That would bo Exhibit 82* Thoro it says that tho
Jr.ponoBo. «•■*••


10131


26 JUna U7-»W.TB-21*-I-illBabuck (Int. Brorm)
Court 1 , Case 1


P ffiSID EOTi Just a ncoont, counsol — Xarl Brandt Docunont 118
'HI not bo rocolved in evidence by too Tribunal.

D °-« SSmUQSi Then I put in Document 121*. I put it in to provo
that in Gorr-my, as countar distinction to what happened in othor

ccflntrios, not raich' was dono in too field of bacteriological warfaro.

* «

This is an article froa tho How York Tinos Oversoas tookly, Sunday,

6 Octobor 1916, and it says horo: "Unitod States continuos work in
Hold in which Japaneso nado r>any crporinontsi" It says horo* “Tho
Japanese aro known to havo oxporiixintod considerably with biological
warfaro but tho Gomans had dono littlo." This is tho mason why I an
puttine it in.

'B. a.ran * If tho Tribunal plooso, I also cbjoct to this docunont,

TTE ITOSIDENT* Karl Brandt Docunont 121* will not bo received in
cvidonco,

a’JUJY* While I an on qy foot, your Honor, I objoot to tho neat
ono, Karl Brandt Docunont 125.

DS. STWAITJS: I also put in ? >ocuncnt 15U for the oano reason. It
also deals with tho quostion of bacteriological warfare and shows tho
official attitude concomin'i tho quostion of tho adaissibility of such
warfare. On ..ago 2 it say3* "Sono author!tios view gorn warfare as a
horriblo and lnbumno thin;, which this country should uso only in s
sulf—ijfonso. ISajor General .Jdon H. aitt, Chiof of Chonical 'arfaro
Sorvico, is spokesnan for another school of thought."

IC1. H.'J©Tt Beforo Dr. Servatius continues to rood this docur»nt,

" 1 - 3 i° Docunont 125, not l5Ji, your Honor. I wish to again rand or ay
objection bofero ho roads too docuasnt.

THD f t ESIDEHT: Wo aro considering Xarl Brandt Docunont 125.

t

DK. 35RV..TIUS: Lot no say sanotidne, about this, !fr. Prcsi.’ont. This
stetos official policy, to bo sure, in a popular periodical but
■'hoover wants to wago such war aist also carry out tho necessary export.-
JKnts and that car. bo scon....


10132


26 Juno ATD-21.—2—Stnabudc (Int. Brown)

Court I, Caao 1 *

T-C PRSSIDENTs If I understand this c-cunont, counsel, it is a
condensation by"Roadort 3 Digost" frer. an article in -Collior»3
"coldytf i 3 that ccrroct?

DR, SEHVATIOSt That is so, yes,

TR2 PRZSIDZMT: Tho document •.rill not bo rccoivod in ovir’.onco,

D7. S ’V-HUit I shcul' thon like to put in evidonco KB-113. That's

9

an articlo fren tho nowspapor, -Stars and Stripes" which has already
boon discussod boforo this Tribuml.

T- ay it ploaso tha Tribunal, tho otter day, during tho

closo of ono of tho cross examinations by Dr, Sorvatius — I boliovo
it was tho examination of Dr. Ivy — tho Tribunal ruled that this
’ocuixjnt had no mteriality and .*mld bo inadaisslblo. This is tho ono
'■rltton by tho Sorgoant jxiblishod in tho "Stars and Stripes",

TIE PRSSIDSJfTj Lott or to '3 Bag" froe a Sergeant. Tho Tribunal has
alrocity rulod that this docunont is ina.;dssiblo, and tho rri'xireil
adheroa to that ruling,

DR, 3S?.V..TIUSi I thon cooo to document ICB-llh, This is an oxcorpt
fr» '"Dm Pooplo" London, of 3 Ilarch This docuaont also cone or ns
Itsolf in part with tho experiments on prisoners. It wa3 in part put
to a tdtnoss horo end I should now liko to put it in ovidonco. It is
ontitlod "’Jurnborg, Jist Ono :toro Allied Trick" by Richard Llowollyn.

Cno particular ;>oint — ono possago intorosts no horo which alroaciy
has boor, a natter of discussion in this trial, nirv-ly, tho quostion of
tho idoa of ctono-xnt, and it can bo soon that oxperinonts aro not
approved only for volunteers but for all sorts of peoplo*

PRESIDENT: Counsel, in tho opinion of tho Tribuml, this docu-
nent has absolutely no probative value and it is rojootod.

D?.. S2RV..HtEs I now co.» to a sorios of documents that concom
outhamaia, KB~2li, as Exhibit Rl. This is an affidavit by Annolioso
-•chraindt. The affiant makes statements rojardinr a caso of outhanasia
■'lieh was un-lcr taken after the affiant had spoken rith Professor Brandt,

10183


26 Juv. k 7«.WiTD-2Ji-3--:iiaabuck (Ir.t. Brown)

Court So. 1, Case I

It was undertaken gainst a rdatiw of hors car! sSw says that sho
hcrSLy know Prcfossor Brandt at that tino, and that tho idoa of
euthanasia was alien to hor. J In order to jet information, "sho says,

'I asked Dr. Tori Brandt who was vary littlo known to no at that time.
His explanations w.ro ocrralotoly clear and corsprehorjiblo, and after
careful consideration wo had to agreo to than, si.nco this noant
dolivoranco of tho patient fra: his sufferings, and deliverance of ny
00 -yoar old stepfather, who bosttxrod infinito pains and rvonoy on tho
support of this boy who novor had any thine to expect fron lifo."

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel, this docurxjnt rdll bo received in ovidonco
as Karl Brandt Exhibit — what is tho nuribor ploaso?

DR. SERV/.TTUSi 91, yc r rionor. Tho affiant continues that tho nost
striking thinr about profossor Brandt was his attitude which was full
of sympathy and arousod groat confidonco an 2 showod his sonso of
responsibility.

Tho next docurant is I®—25 which will bo Exhibit 82. This is an
affidavit by tho Provinci.il Bishop TTura.

!tR. ftJUJI: Kay I call tho attontion of tho Tribuml — oxcuso no,
ycur Honor, the criminal has a Jurat thoroon. No objection.

DR. SEHV..THE: Provincial Bishop 'Jura states hero that tho Reich
Health Loader Conti infomod hin that thoro was law or at loast, logoi
basis for outhanasia >fhich was, howovor, not mdo public for purely
political masons. This concerns tho question of tho logoi permissi¬
bility of euthanasia.

Tho next toe vl- lent, .3-26, I C3k to put in os Exhibit 83. This is
an affidavit by Count r . Schsrorin &•©slgjc. Ho is personally acquaintod
with Pastor Bodolschwii^h, director of tho Rathol Hcspital vrhoro
insane, opilcptic and lofomod people, as well a 3 otltr patients, wero
kept. Ito sajrs that at that ttoo '.'aster 3oJalschrdr*3h told Wn about
conversations ha had had with Profossor Brandt and ho says —

THE PRESIDENT: Several of theso documents in tho iocunent book
which I ha vo aro now printed in &cman and net in English.


lClSli


26 Juno L7^WTD-22i-i*-Jllnabuck (Int. Brr t.)
Court I, Caso I


DR. S .'BV.'.TIOS: Than Docu^r.t 13-26 is nissirr; in English, if I
understand you correctly.

THE FTESITEfT! Tos, Decunont hO also, I now havo a oopjr of 26 in

Sngliah.

ID.. HA.TDT* I havo both of th or. in qy decunont book, ycur Honor.

D3. SD.V.'.TIUSr I ask your pardon that this anisaion occurred. This
decunont, first of all, shows Eastor 3odolschwinsh»s attitude. Ho told
Seb'orin I'rosi’k at that tiao: “Ho could understand that, fron a
radical and political point of riw.r, it aL^ht bo ar/piod that tho
painful lifo of individuals who vosotato like animals should bo
shortened. Ha f\irth_r states that a comittoo had visited Bodolscln.lngh
at that tine, an ' Bcdolsclwingh oxprossed his opinion..,.

THB rBSSItEHTi Has tho Socrotary anothor oopy of supplemental
tocunonts Karl Brandt 26 on! so forth in English?

I

Prooood, counsol.

RU SiRVATItBi At tho ond of this affidavit tho affiant tostifioa
regarding Pastor Bodolschwirv;h«s attitudo toward Profossor B r andt anil
also about Profossor Brandt*s attitudo toward outhannsia. Ho sayst "Ha
iad all tho aoro roason to apj.rociattf thoattitu'o of Profossor Dr,
Brandt, Dr. Brandt had dofondod his point of view in a way which
really callod for rospoct and rrofossor Dr. Dran ’t had also sfrnm
conploto understanding for Pastor Dodolschwingh's opposito opinion."

Thi3 rrill jo to provo ;hat Profossor Brandt»s roal ottitudo
actually was concerning tho allogod "axtomination of usoloss oator3."

Tho noxt docunont is KB-&). This is a part of Itocun.mt 1696-IS.


10185


26 June-A-3&-2b_la-Tinrbuck (Iat. 3rovn)
Court I*o. 1


7KS PHHSIDZYTx lari 3rnndt Soctxaent 26 la admitted cs Earl 3rrndt
Sxhiblt 83.

3E. SEK7a"IUSj The next one la E3-U0, Exhibit 8 U. This 1 $ a
letter free the Belch Conclttec for Scientific Study of Heredity
directed to the Director of tho State Health Office In Tuttlint-en,
dated 9 January I 9 U 3 . It la rery brief end rerdsx

■Thank you very nuch for your letter of 22 Deceobor 19^2 vith
appendix. S laco on principle I nerer aond children to the Hcich
Connitteo Sta.tlona e£r.inst*.the viahea of their parents or .^unrdinna,

I would aek you to consider this natter closed."

A copy vent to Dr. 7plthe.uscr for* infomntion. I think this io n
rory natcrinl point...

TH2 FasSXSZL'fx Who signed this letter, counselt The oi.'tnnture la
nlaaln.': fron thla docuaeat.

DR. SERTinCS: I don* t havo the original hero. I shrll lnforn
the Tribunal of that her-after. I also re not even sure whether
there is a si.-nrturc on the ori-inal or the copy I hnvo of it.

Tr3 PRDoIDZJT: Without r si nature the docur.-nt will hnvo no value.

DR. SSH^ATICS: hr. President, but it has-the sane value as all
the documents captured by the Allies. It is part of the wholo :locun-
ent bundle , 1696 . which the prosecution put in. I shall try to
have the orl-Ind n£»in in ardor to decipher* tho ol -nature.

HR. HARDY? Dr. Servntius. that is correct, this la a c/pturod
iocuaent which was in the hrr.da of the prosecution and when wo
turned over docua*:nts on Dcceabcr U or 5 to the defense counsel,
this happened to be one of then, I believe.


10136


Court So. 1

26 Jan 47-^-25-l^EXH} r0a8 (3 rowc )


m ‘ SSX7UIUS: next doeuccnt li O 81 and I offer It a.

Inhibit e5. This i. an affidavit by Gerhard Ingcl, fatten Adjutant for
the Fuehrer Adolf Hitler. Ha testifies regarding Karl Brandt's oosition.
that ho vas accoopanying physician and had to stay at tho Fuehrer's hoad-
cuartors. Ho *os closely tied to the Fuehrer's hcadouartors. Ho oro-
ducos this to prove that Karl Brandt did not concern hiasolf vith the
details of organization or carry out tho pregran of euthanasia. That
wasn't his task. Ho further states that “arl Brandt never participated
in discussions on tho general situation in vhich curront questions vero
discussed. Thlsvic of • * significance vlth respect to Haider's diary,
vfaoro It says that tho euthanasia progror had boon discussed In a dis¬
cussion on tho gonial situation at Novgorod in r.ussia. The affiant
states here, that Hnr* Lrandt novor took part in such discussions,
finally, concerning thu ^ostion of soaborship in tho SS, the Vaffen
Adjutant states hors. '! knov that Karl Brandt ar.l Hlaclor llvod on
considerably bad terns." ,

SS P=“.SI?Z:-”- Counsel, apparently a couy of that docuaent In
tho book before ao. X3 Ducuaont 81, Is not coaoloto b.ccusc it does not
seen to contain the. stal««aunta you read.

IE. 5ia7A7rJS- £ rhall check on it. Perhaps tho translation Is
faulty. That ij adttHUl la ovldcnco as an 0 &)M« for tho tico then?

I ask because of tho auabor.

Tr.Z P2S&IISW: Tea. 4 t noy bo adaitted In ovi.lonce as Karl Brandt
fahlbit 35.

IE. SSRVAIIUS: The next docuncnt Is KB 92, the affidavit of the
Kiniater Hans Laaners and concerns only the authenticity of Bouhlor's
signature vhich appeared In Docuncnt SC-156. That vps Brandt Exhibit
*-e and 4-b. It was unclear at that tine vhosc signature ves aonendod
*-o that docuaent.

Sow cooes KB 84. I offer it as Exhibit 87. This is an affidavit
^ fr. Stcinbrccfccr vhich concerns the aentel instituto Duoren vfcich as
tte 111104 troops approached vas evacuated. The vitness says tkrt Brandt


Court So. 1

26 Jun 47-A-25-3-2EK-Gross (Brown)


tinned up tharc «nd stated verbatim: "Professor Brandt shoved great
understanding in our situation and offered to ^anticipate In our fate."

I van* to stress that, contrary to the other Party bosses, ho did not
express a single derogatory vord on tho Insane. I put this in to orove
that Brandt's attltudo as a whole was a nodical one and vas not prinarily


sne of examination of these aentally ill persons.

i

The next docuaent, K3-86, I put in as Xrf-.lbit 88. This is a stoto-
aent by Grabo.

THE rRISIDaST: Tho next docusont on your index is Karl Brandt 90.

3t. SBY/fXUSs I should liko to insert one docuaent here - Q 86.
It nust bo in the docuaent book in that order. That vould then bo
Exhibit 88.

This concerns a vholc series of questions. Tirst of all, tho torn
■Action Brandt" is aentioned here, and it says that a construction pro-
gran was to be carried out. It shove horo that tho tons "Action Brandt"
is very ofton used and is usoi to cover a aultltudc of things. Thor, it
cent ions tho-attltudo of Brandt tovard half-Jcvish doctors, his attltudo
toward foreigners, and ordered then to be treated liko Cemans in his
hospital, Ee also states his opinion on the hospital action and tho
ouostlon of transferring patients In vlev of air raids. It says that
tho "Brandt Action" had nothing to do with oxtornination but vas dono
at a precaution against air raids. Ko says he dossc't knov of any cases
in vhlch pat loots wore collected end transferred to oxtornination canoe.
This refers to special hoaolials that Brandt had sot up.

Tho next docuaent is KB 90; I offer it as Exhibit 89. This is an
affidavit by Hans Kchrl. He nckes statements regarding the question of
protection against chcaical warfare. It says Karl Brandt concornod hin-
iclf with the sasufacture of protective installations egaicst cheaical


vorfare.

Tho next docuaent vill be S3 100 ; I offer it as Exhibit 90. I wish
tho Tribunal to consider csceeially whether it is admissible. I sent out
a circular letter to all 16 hospitals of this "hospital Brandt action" and

10188


Court So. 1

26 Jon 47-A-25-3-«ISi-vross (Brown)


piked then ell whether they knev enything ebout a directive regarding
transfer of patients to euthanasia institutions. I collected these
ftctione. I have then in ay rooo hut I haven't given then'in for trans¬
lation yet because there ere too aany of then. Eovevor, I shall do so
if the Tribunal vishos. This is a copy of the letter which I sent to
theso offices. I had ny assistant certify the cost important oart of
its contents. The unaniaous answer was that the "Brandt Action" - that
they know of no "Brandt action" according to which patients unfit for
vork wore taken fron the hospital and sent to euthcnacia Institutions
rcgardl-ss of nationalities.

Tax. PH1SIDE5T: These cannot be considered until the anavors are
placed at the disposal of tho prosecution and the Tribunal. v, e can
tell nothing about the letters *«hich counsel had sent to the V.oeoltals.

MF., HARUY: ! suppose all the answers «re given under oath.

31. SiBYATIUSs Kr. President, such a thing of such volune as this
could hardly have been done by way of affidavit. It would toko too

V .

such tine. This'could only bo done in scaevhat of a certificate font
in order to spare the Tribunal the nccosslty of caking all these trans¬
lations. Perhaps or.e of the Judges night be appointed as a coscissloner
who could go through thc-e answers. The IKT proceeded in a sinilnr
Conner in order, to handle their extensive noterial. I can't out in

e

a thousand letters in evidence here - that would be too great a burden
to put on the translation depcrtcent.

,3. HAE3T: If these letters have Jurats on then, Your Honor, they
con sorely be adaiesible. However, if thero arc no Jurats I don't nee
the coint.

JUTOI SZBEIbG: If sale in accordance with the fora adooted ly
the Tribunal for statesents in lieu of oath, would they not also be
adaissible?

«?., EABDT: hhen I say a Jurat, I also include that regulation of
the Tribunal.

-s, ShP.YATIL'S: Vhat I did was have ny assistant swear an affidavit


10189


Coart So. 1

26 Jun 47-A-25—4-H--v-Gro«t (Brovn)

:o the effect that he had received theee answers and he testified to
their contents. I did this purely for'reeson of expediency and could
have the sane thing done by affidavit.

THE PRESIDES!: This docuaent will he exaained by a neaher of tho
Tribunal.

IE. SERYAIIUS: This docusent is then adniseihlc as an exhibit, io
it not?

THE PRESIDES!: Yes, this docuaent say he adnittcd in evidence,

KH. HARDY: This docusent is serely a statesent by the secretary
that he has read all the letters that cane in.

IKS PRESIDES!: Very veil, that will be subject to nroeecutlon'o
objecting to it.

DR. SSRVATIUS: Tho next docueont is E3-115. I put it in ao Exhibit
91. This is an affidavit by Phillipp Prins von Hessen. He expresses
hinself briefly about euthanasia and soys tho following:

"During both cy altercations - alrcely known and brought down to
record - with Eitlor and Bouhlcr regarding the carrying out of so-called
euthanasia In ny province Profossor Brandt was not only cot asked to be
prosent, although he could have been reached innediotcly, but his nano
was not even nontloned at all. This for cc was oroof of the fact that
Brandt stood outside of the problese pertaining to the carrying out of
euthanasia. Also lator I never realised or heard that Brandt night have
stood as the leading factor behind the idea of euthanasia.


10190


26 Jum 1947- -Pd- 26 -l-.'.l (inU Braun)

Court I


TKd r.~-^nag: The Jocuasnt xd.ll Jc adoittcd .-.3 Brandt Exhibit
91, Brand Document 115.

DR. SERV.'.TllJS: The next is Docuetnt 116. This is an affidavit

by Uejor General Franz Holder, ft tired. I* in the r^jesti-n

of euthanasia in the Bossier. occppitd to it it cries. He its ah am Doc.

He. 1758 /ith a fexr notes appended to it, one ho says rc-ardinp it:

"These no too no hot really constitute a dicry, but arc nercly

per.cilia' daily oh-rthand notos, xidch ;«rc to 3crvo as rouinders.

Re-ardin; the notes eor.ccmirr; r.ayluas I recall that ‘.uartoraastor

General *v;ncr t Id Co that tho possible evacuation .f ..syluna in

the occupied Russian territory \r.s b*in: discussed eutsido the

./ehmacht and that it :cs said this ai^ht noceosiiatu tho killing
of rxntal patients.

"The :r.nncr in tnich CJr-rteraaafccr General .r.yxor discussed

I

this shouad th-.t ho was in strong opposido:: to this idea and I

tc-jk tho aano view. I icrv.inc that I uould reauaber IX tho nano

of Prof. Karl Brandt ha; b-cn oor.ti.nai in thiso discussions, :.s

the official .enti.n of the nix- d Brandt in qy sphere of activities

u.uld have been qiitc unusual as all official contact .ns lackin';."

The noct document is KB 123. This trill bo SchitAt 93. This
• #

Is a chart, a ;ra, hfc cover in; tho peri d 1910 to 192.5. This is

frxa Docunont 1696 PS fr a the Prosecution Dxu-tnt book, pa-o 74 .

IS. Kay I inquire uhotisr or n-t this chart is attachod

t o 1696PS, a captured d&cuoont?

DR. SSK7.JUS: Tea; it is in tho docunont book.. Only it

was sa_ll*x and was very difficult 10 rood, c nscqucntly I had it

redraun. If I tad it phot estate. r.-ain it w>uld fcavu bo.n ala st

ille ihlc. I had it reproduced and cnl r^d.

1IT.. K13DX: Is it -r.rt of a captured Gcruan D-cunent 1606 PS, is

•

that rijht?

10191


26 June *7_A_IjC_2e-2- *aloy (Brown)
Court I


EE. SI?TA?IQ5: Tee.

ME. K13DT: ^sank you.

TB. PELSIELS": Vhat la tho document, counsel?

18. SIHTATFJS: This it free tkc filet of the cental ir.Btltution
Kaufbeuren, pad refert to the oortality of the children in thit
inititution froa 1910 on. This docuaent it of grot interest for it
■hove that in the first Morld *«r the aortality rrt© of the children
Torched alaoat 12 per cent, rrd nov if vo take the tine when Professor
I«1 Brandt was active in the Reich Coaalttoc vc acc that during tho
vor the euno alao riaca and riaca even na high ra 13 percent, but
then it dropa a bit. It ahova that the aotual increase in mortality
of children goea ns high pa 36 per cent only in yew a 1943 pad 1944
rftcr Karl Brpndt hud already loft. I think thia la good proof that
Profoaaor Iprl Brpndt vpb not carrying out annihilation hero, but
t v P.t there v^a aoao nev action; frea acaoonc also th»t eauatd thia.
w hen Karl Brnr.dt vps there you find th^t breekin the curve vhero it
dropa froa 1* to 11 por cent, and it riaca after ho left. Tho graph
alao ahova in tho laat vpt children dlod in such the en*so way ae they
fiiod in thia one.

Tho noxt docusont la KB 85, which I put in ae Exhibit 94.

MB. HiEDT: I objoct to the ndnieelon of thia dc assent in
cvidonco. It la acrely a treatloo Justifying tho according of morey
doatha. I don't think that la an laaue here. I don't think it would
be rolovpnt; I object to it.

12 . SlBYAflUS: It la true thia is a litcraturo document shoving
the various opinions toward cuthanaela, but it la cf fTeat importance
frr tho general attitude that Karl Brpndt found prevailed in C-ernany,
and it alao ahova t>o connection betvoen the idea of medical euthanasia
end the cocbcouorcc of an economic nature. It doesn't, however, touch
the nost eaaontipl problem of nadical


10192


26 June A7->HS-26r3-i: lo* (lit. a?rj»)

C^urt I

rr; I ,-f - t nasia. .'-java 11 , 1 tbit it because ha a-.cnr
t-ltscr, tX author, \bo was hiasclf cho director of a cxdical

iC3tit tior. 3cni out a questionnaire tc 200 patients, asldny then
♦

•hat their attitude toirards the -*ep8. ,; l :i~ l ift , 3 of children was.

This jm!: study ica published in 1935, ajch earlier then K rl Brvndt‘3
• i. . Zvere -re 1&2 replies altogether - 119 answered "yes, *nd
U -uis- ;crecl «i'o". The otin point f<r the roes ora hy tlx parents agroe
or approve or disapprove is above all they eaphaaizo the fhcfc that
they dorPt even want to bo ashed the question of euthanasia to cerx up
in ccnicction t;ith their vildre.n, and Pvoi-esor -iltzcr says .»st
of then say even thos- t at say "no" du-.'t want W be co.tfronted *' -i-

;rith this question of conscience, but are agreeable to tho acts boins
carried out ithout their boi-- aa-Bd. Ito, just that is a critical
point in the charges against Karl Snndt. They re always acldix;
fclc h parents weren't aslad, or ’..orcn«t infor:xd, in connection
with the doath of thoir childron. V ,is is a p-ixtration into U*.
poydiolo- ro-'lly concerned in this ir.ttor. Hus :ivcs uo an insicht
into the tinnltiixj of those actually involved and their utivos. For
that reason 1 consider it particularly axtcrirl.

TO. rViaHEtT: This CocunoA ill be adaittod, K rl Jr-.ndt
Uacuncn. C5 ill be admitted as 3rv.it lit.ibit %.

UR. J-V...TIU3: In inclusion there re a To;. docuosnts concerning
the question of Brandt«s exebershi? in the SS, first an affidavit by
a soldier by the rr.se cf jcnatz, \i\ \orhod nvr Karl 3r.-ndt for a
few uontha. I thinh that the attitude toward foreigners is important
here. Ho says: ".love all I vould lito to stress that hu treated the
forviqacrs ho .xr- (»=p.ll- to vorh there pleasantly and f irly. Thoy
said that they had no xv.ason to ce.plain and praised Professor Brandt
as a pleasant and kirxlly era whoa they had all re-son to ost-su"


10193


26 Juno 47 A-2o-4-okp- Laloy (Brown)

C-urt I

THE P9SSXDEMT: What nuaber 're you giving it, counsel?

DR. S^lVATJUSi Exhibit 95# T*x» next document is K3 ?0 f ich I

•

offer za i;hibit 9$# IMb is on affidavit by Luisc von Oortzcn,
chlof -fxioiri in the Red Cross during t...- rr. Sho says th't Frofsseor
Brandt's orientati-n was orlaarily nodical, ’ad h~ told bur ~t th't tioio
ho hr.d boon violently attacked by Conti end Borarnn, boccuso ho was
predaainntcly a doctor and n-t a politician#

The next rfocuajnt KB 79 is Exhibit 97# That is an a ffidr.vit
by Gottlieb Birger, Chief of the SS Ucin Office, regarding Brandt's
position and his functi'ns, in tiv- SS. Hq says:

"As Chief of th» SS Ucin Office, I only kn-w that Professor
Karl Brandt belonged to thj SS -nly r.s an Efaronfuuhrur. I knxi of no,
single cr.se in ’Jiich Professor Karl Brandt -xtreised any functiai
whatsoever or took ov-r ~ny task in the SS. Ho certainly never
hold *ny of!ice.

"I consider It Impossible that Profossor Karl Br-ndt was of
Hinder's consulting physicians; HiaaL-r had his xm doctors."

Mow cooos KB 80, Exhibit 90. fnis is -n affidavit by Julius
Schsub, Hitler's personal adjutant. It oakes sta.Uaents bout Brandt's
cIjsj attacto-nt to th- fuehrer headquarters. It says that Prof-snor
Br ndt was Hitler's escort physician froa 1934, as such had to bo
available when called upon. Further, it says Hixnlcr was ininicr.blo
toiard Brandt; and be describes a east where there was bitter altercation
rb^it tho status -f the nodical ;fficer, whero Hiaalor naintcins tho
point f vie-.:, first h. is primarily a soldier and politic!*n, and
only secondly a doctor, ~nd this lead to a considerable ltercation.

It also says "several tioes Karl Brandt found the opportunity of
interceding with Adolf Hitler, particularly n behalf ,f tho
interest of Cr.th;lic nurses."

The next is a. docunnt K3 83, which -.dll bt exhibit 99. This is
an ~fi idavit by Josef Brunissun fr.c th- French, -U.sa.cia, and ho says
tho follywing:

10194


26 June 47 .W26-5-?kp- Meloy (3rovn)
Court I


“I an a member of the .ilsatlan clergy end since 1923
have been spiritual director of the abbey on 2'iount Gdlle
monastery on Mount Odlle In France. Durln^ the German
occupation, -he Mount Odlle monastery was to be converted
into an 68 school. The Commissioner General for Health and
Medical Matters, Prof. Dr. Karl 3r^ndt willingly Inter¬
vened lr. the matter In accordance with my wishes, and
succeeded lr. preventing the conversion of the Mount Odlle
sonaatery Into an 53 school. We are indebted to Prof.

Dr. 3r. ndt for the preoervatlon of our monastery and venou.
able place of pilarlBoge.*

How, comes K3 95, as exhibit 100. This deals with
Brandt’s connection with Professor Guosebart, and says
that Brandt gave him assistance In many difficult situations
and then everything he got for the civilian population.

And the last document K3 96, I put In as exhibit
101. This la an affidavit by Dr. Wille Gutormuth, Chlof
phyaleirn In the Clinic In Frr.ndjurt on the Main. He makes
statements recording Karl 3rondt's medical views nnd says
ho was shrrply opposed by Conti nd the I/*.bor Front.

Ke says also that Karl Brandt's offlcos did no politic"!
work . nd ’./ere not politically oriented.

That concludes cy presentation of documents.

Ho*./, Your Honor, I still have two witnesses,

Huber rnd Tessel, I have agreed with the prosecution that
I shall produce affidavits from both of thorn, and I ask
permission tc do so within a few days. The witnesses have
been approved for examination by the Tribunal, but I wanted
to put In instead the affidavits.

THE PRESIDENT: Were the witnesses procured by you,


counsel'?


10195


26 June 47 A-26-6-pkp- kfcloy (Brown)

Court I


r

OP.. 3I7/.VTIDS: THEY are here in person, but in order not to trice
up -he Tribunal's tine, I sii^ly didn't -ant to put thee on the stand.

IHZ PS5IXKT: You o=y propcrc tho affidavits ~M suboit then.

For five or six airutes che Tribunal will ceet with the cocrsittoe of
counsel, if they arc ready to call on the Tribunal,

Tho Tribunal will now be in recess until 9:30 tomorrow uoming.
(Thereupon at 1705 tho Tribunal rcc-sscd)


10196


27 Jua-f:-K3-I-l-Iieehan (Int. Brcim)
Court No. I.


Official Transcript of the American Mill tar;.'
Tribunal in the natter of the United States
of America against "arl Brandt, et al,
defendants, sitting at Number^, Germany, on
27 June 19U7, 0930, Justice Beals presiding.

TE3 : ARSHALi Persons in the Covrtroon will please find their


seats.


The Honorable, the Judges of Military Tribiral 1.
ldlitary Tribunal 1 is now in session. God save the United
States of America and this honorable Tribiaial.


There will be order in the court.

TIE rRT5ID2irr i Mr, !Marshal, rill yon ascertain if the de¬
fendants are all ,resent in court.

THE ASSvAL: Hay it please your Honor, all defendants are
present in the Court with the exception of the defendant Cborhausor,
who is absent due to illness. The .»d*cal c ertificato will be pre¬
sented shortly.

THE FRHSID2.7: The Secret.tr. Oertral will note for the rocord
the presence of all the defendants in ccurt, save the defondant Cbor-
hauser, who is absent on account of illness. The forthcoming nodical
certificate will be filed when it is rccoivcd.


IS. HARSTt Hay it please the Tribunal, due to sccte trans¬
portation difficulties the witnesses Laubinger and Hoellonrainor vrero
not able to arrive at the Palace of Justice. It is assumed they will
arrive in a matter of minutes or :«rhaps one half to one hour. In the
meantime, the Prosecution suggests that Dr. Melte proceed with the in¬


troduction of the supplinental doexjent books in the Kandlosor case.

THE RESIDUE Is counsel for the defendant Handloscr ready
to proceed with docxnents on his case, if so, he nay proceed.


The witnesses arc here, lour Honor.

The Interpreters have just inferred the Trib-
If they have, we will proceed

witnesses.

Honor, the witnesses have arrived. At this


10197


27 Jua-:.-£3-i-Z^i>ohan (Int. 3rc.-n)

Court Ko. I.

tire, the Prosecution would like to call the witness Jcsef Laubinger
to the witness stand.

T'-I’’ fToSJDVT: The iarakal will su=^on the witness. Josef
Laubinger.

(JCSJ IAU9EE2R, a witness, took the stand and testified as
follows^

3Y JUDGZ SEBRDKJi

Q Please r^lse yonr right hand and bo srorm
I swear by God, tht Alaighty and Cttniscient, that I will spoak
the pure truth and will withhold and add nothing.

(Tho witness repeated tie oath.)

JUIXTi S.3RDiG: You nay be coated.

DIRECT :aAI£7.TIC!I

3Y >a. HARDYt

Q Witness, your full nano is Josef Laubinger?

A Yes.

Q Your last nano is spellef L-A-tMJ-I-N-G-E-R?

A Yes.

Q TTitnoss, have you evur appeared bofore a Tribunal as a
witness bofere?

A Mo, this is the first tine.

Q I want to instruct you, witness, tJiat in tho course cf
this exanination, kindly answer tho questions that I put to you and
=ake an attor.pt to be brief, also nake an otte-ipt to fully anr.ror
the question. If you have anything you wish to tell the Tribunal,
you nay do so and Inasmuch as this exauiration is conducted through
interpreters, you must pause a aonont aftor you have heard ny question
before you bo pin to answer; do you understand ao?

A Yes.

Q When and whore were you born, witness?

A On 15 June, 1921, in itthaupten.

Q ..’here did you receive your education; if any?

10198


27 -’-rw *-I3-I-3-i~?ohar. (Int. Brown)

Court Ho. I.

A In linden in Westphalia.

Q .ran were you first arrested by tho Gestapo?

A In 19U3.

Q Had you over been in the custody of ths police prior to
torch of 19U3?

A Ho.

Q For what reasons were you arrested by the Gestapo in ’arch

of 19U3?

A I was arrested for racial reasons.

Q That is because you vero a Gypsy?

A Yes.

Q After your arrest in .'larch 19li3, wore you placed in prison?
A Yes.

Q Where?

A In Heilbronn.

Q And were you later transferred fron Heilbronn to another

prison?

A To Stuttgart.

Q And then "hero did you go?

A I was taken froea Stuttgart on a transport to Auschrdtc.

Q At any tins during ths course of your incarceration did you
go to trial; that is were you tried by the Gestapo?

A I don»t understand your question.

Q Wore you placed bo faro a Court and given an opportunity to
oe heard prior to the tire you wore placed in a concentration canp?

A No.

Q After you arrived at Auschwitz, hear long did you stay there?
A Not quite a year.

Q Then you apparently arrived in Auschwitz in tho spring of

1913?

A Yes.

Q And you 1 stayed there until the spring of 19UL?


10199


27 Jua-K-iB-l-^-Jieehan (Ini. 3rci.n)

Coart Ho. I.

A Yes.

Q And then you were transferred to another concentration caup?

A Yes, Buchenwald.

Q A nd how long did you reoain ir. Duchenwald?

A Not very long, a few weeks.

Q And whgt was your reason for leaving Buchenwald?

A A transport was nadc up of lih aenj rtc were told that those
III* aen vreuld do clearing up work in Dachau, and we applied for this
voluntarily.

Q What did you understand thi cloari^- up work to bo?

A I thought damaged housos wore to be .ut in order, etc.

Q has it comonljr known anong tho inaatos that Dachau would
be a bot'.or place to bo than Buchenwald?

A Yes.

Q Was that another reason why you voluntoored for tho work
«t Dachau?

A That is why we volmtoored, becauso things wore said to bo
better there than in Buchonwald.

Q Now, aftor your arrival in Dachau, wsuld you kindly tall
the Tribunal what happened to you?

A Vfe spent our first night in tho reception block. Tho next
corning wo wont bo tho hospital. There •.*> voro given a physical exan-
lmtion.

Q Did you also rccoivo an »r y?

A Yes.

Q Ar/1 then what happened?

A Then wo wore weighed and our hoipht was neasured.

Q And aftor your physical examinations, X-rays, etc., were
coaploted, did you leave the hospital?

A No, wo wore taken to the roca in which wo had to stay
throughout tho exrcrinent.

Q Vihon did you first learn that you were to be adjected to


10200


27 Jun— i»-i3— 1-5-jeohan (tit. Brown)

Court So* I.

an experiment?

k Hot very long thereafter. Dr, Boiglboeck turned up and tok!
ua that ire had to participate in the aea-*ratcr experiment. Me there-
upon answered that we had not coco to Dachau in order to participate
in any experiment, but to do clearing up work. He responded that tho
experiment was not bad, no one would dio, but we were still very nich
perturbed bccauso wo knew that wo could not believe anybody in a con¬
centration caa?.


10201


Court So. 1

27 Jus 47-*-3&3-l-££h-Kiaatur;c (Stove)

Sid you knew that the professor in charge of the experinents
was naoed Seiglboeck at that tins?

A. So.

0. Is nen the naae Seiglboeck you hare learned since you arrired here
in Suernberg?

A. Tee.

Q. So you think you could poseibly identify the •protestor who
perforaed the experiments?

A. Tot.

Q, Would you arise froo your seat, witness, valk rer here to the
defendants' dock, and carefully look at the defendants and =ake an
atteopt to identify the man vho conducted the experiments at Sachau?

What nuaber is he? Would you kindly tell uo in vhat Place he io in
the dock?

A. The third one over in the back rov.

hH. HARDY: Thank ywi. I ask. Your Eonor, that the rocord show
that the witness properly identified tho defendant Seiglboeck.

SHS P2SSIDEKT: The record will show that the witness has correctly
identified the defendant Beiglboeck.

‘.-S. HARDY: You may sit down, witness.

Q, (Sy Mr. Hardy) Witness, would you kindly, now, and slowly
toll the Tribunal Just vhat ?rofeer-or Seiglboeck told you pooolo when
he called you together in the one roco prior to the tine that the
experinents started, in your own words?

A. Va were lined up and were examined again by the professor.

Since I had now found out vc were really there, I asked the profes¬
sor to excuse ce fron this exoericent because I had already had two
stccach operations. He answered that I cculd tarticiuete in this
excericent without any aisgivings, that it would cause ae no ills.

Then ve were shown our beds. I had bed cuaber 7. The exnerincnt
was divided into three parts. The one departnent van pure sea water.

The second section vas nixed, but vhat it vas nixed with I don't know.


10202


Court *o. 1

27 Joe 47-W-5^_zs<_yi cabuck (Brown)


and tha third group va, distilled water. I tried all three varieties of
vater. I drank the first and also the second. Tou could notice no dif¬
ference between the first and the second so far as taste vas concerned*
Also I drank the distilled water, which tasted all right except that it
was a little salty.

At first we received ailitary rations. That consisted of iwieback,
choeolate, and arqy food* Ve ate this for seven or eight days - I can't
say exactly* toeh that was over, ve received the water. The professor
also asked us, "Do you know at all what thirst it? You will find your¬
self licking the dust froa the floor." The whole exneriaent lasted four
to five weeks.

Q- J-'ov, witness, did the professor csk the exoerlaental rereons,
that is, your friends who underwent the ex-erinents with you, whother or
not they wanted to volunteer for the experlcento?

A. Mo.

Q. And you state that the eroerlaental subjects told the orofesoor
that they had volunteered for work and not for nedical exocrisents?

A. That is so.

Q, Then 3eiglboock did not ask anyone for their approval, to your
icn owl edge?

A. So.

Q, Did he ask you for your approval?

A. Ho.

Q. Sow, you were olaced or. a diot, a special diet for a Deriod of
■even or eight days, you think?

A. Yes.

Q. Did ycu have to work during that tine?

A. So.

Q, Then you were to drink sea ^ter. Do you know whether or not
the water you were drinking was socially treated?

A. Yes, this was the second sort that had been nixed with conothing.

Q, Can you state how such you received of this water Airing one day?


10203


Court So. 1 /

27 Jon 47-Ji-eAJ-3-ZEH-Sin*buck (Brown)


A. In the scrning, noon, and night ve received a glassful, tut
fcov auch there vas in each glass I can't tell you. It vas about the

site of a beer glass.

Q» Vhat effect did the drinking of this water have on you?

A. It tasted very salty. After drinking it one brcaac thirsty
and tired.

Q. Did you feel vory sick?

A, Ve got so »'eak that ve could hardly stand up.

Q> Did you hare a fever at all?

A. Tes.

5* you evor becoae so week that you vere unable to walk?

A. Voll, I cculd stand up, but I had to hold on sorething.
Othsrvlso I would have fallen dovr..

Q. Hov long wore you subjected to drinking this particular vntor?
A. For eleven or twelve days we drank this v a tor.

Veil, did you y<xirself drink it for elovon or twelvo or a less
nuaber of lays, or can you reeteber specifically?

A. It was about eleven or twelve days.

Q. ’'ell now, did you ever at any tlae receivo a liver ouncturo?

A. Yes.

Q, Do you rcacabor when you received that?

A. After the eroericent, that is, when the experiments vero over.

Q. Did you also receivo a luabar puncture?

A. I don't know vhat that *ord aeane.

Q» ’ ell, that would be a puncture in your back?

A. Tes.

Q, And you received that also at the completion of the experiments,
you think?

A. Yes.

Did you ever receive any Injections?

A. So.

x- After the emeriaent vas over, did you have to stay in the room


1020 .


Court So. 1

27 Job 47-^w-^3-4-iat-Binabuck (Prove)

until *11 tha roet of the exoerlrents wore cospleted?

A. Toe.

v v# r« yo« •waited after the cospletion of the ex^erirenta?

A. Bo.

q. Vere you weighed after the conpletion of tho oxocrlaents?

A. During the eroerisenta «e were telghed every day.

3* Veil, after you had coop, oted the f -^erleant and then were
allowed to go hack to norsal life, that la, to eat again am* drink
again, vere you ever weighed after that?

A. Bo.

Q, Did you receive areclal food for three or four days after the
arperloent?

A. So, one day.

^ Did you get the silltary food then?

A. Tee,

Q- And then after that did you go back to the uaual carp diet?

A. Yea. *r. Belglboeck proslced ua that vhen tho oxoorlnont vma
over ahould recelvo extra ratlona ao that ve could recovor to vhat
ve had been, and vo would alao get an coay work aaalgnaont that vo
could readily etand, but vhen the eroerlrunt vra over ./.iglboeck didn't
concern hinaolf with ua at all after that. *’ o never oven lav Mb again.

JUG* SI3RHG: Mr. Hardy, vhat vaa that regular ease dlot? Tho
Tribunal w«iid be interested In knowing.

(By ilr. Hardy) Vculd you kindly answer the Tribunal's Question,
witness, tho regular casp diet? That is not to be confueod with the
silltary diet, but the carp dlot. ’.'oold ycu tell the Tribunal of what
that consisted, please?

A. .(ostly It consisted of turnips.

Did you got anything else bosldes turnips?

A. Ve had a bread ration, eight sen to a loaf. Sundays got a
Tittle butter saybe or Jar.

v Did you get anything to drink?

10205


Court So. 1

27 Jus 4T-4^-£fc?-5-iS<-Sinahuck (Brown)

A. Tes, coffee or tea.

Q, Anything else? Did you get any cake or anything like that?

A. So.

Q, Any seat?

A. Sundaye there was a epocial seal that contained noodles and
there were a few little chunk* of acat in there with fresh vegetables.

q» Veil now, aftor the discontinuation of the experlsents you say
you did not see Baiglboeck at all after that, that is, after you utartod
eating the regular casp diet again?

A. After that X didn't see kin.

Q* Did you eat tho regular caap diet while you wore still in the
experimental station?

A. Tee.

Q, And was Baiglboeck still thore, to your knowlodgo?

A. Tos, he i«b still thoro but wo never saw hia.

q. Veil now, after the experlsents were coerlotod, that is, the
entire experimental urogram had been completed, did you thon go to the
hospital for root?

A. Bo. Hore is the way it was. Beiglbocck said that whoovor folt
weak would havo a chanco to convalesce in tho hospital. A friend of mino
told se that those who v^nt to the hospital for. convalescence would
never cooe out again. I asked how ccee. Be said they would got injec¬
tions and would die. Of cairse, hearing thla I declined to enter tho
hospital. I sail I was quite strong enough to work.

q. And did you then go to work?

A. Tes, I went to tho block and stayed there only two days, and
then I wont on a work detail.

q, Voll, did you evor fool sick while you were working?

A. Tes, I felt ill, and If the work Capo hadn't been kind to =e,

I crobably wouldn’t bo here today.

q. How, witness, in tho exocriner.ts you state that *rofessor
2e‘glhoec> did not ask you to volunteer. How, did ho precise you that

102G6


r


Court So. 1

27 Jun 47 *-ai3-6 CTK-Siaaboak (Sfova)


you vculd be released after the ercerisents?

X. Tes, so far as secbers of the arsed forces were concerned. Tor
example, if I had a relative outside vfco had served in the ercy or if I
had previously done service, then there vculd be the possibility of ey
release. Regarding not only syself but several other comrades of nine,
it vas ascertained that ve either had relatives serving in the arced
forces or had ourselves previously served. Ve all had to go to the court¬
yard, Boiglbceck van there vith several other can. He vent down tho line
and asxod overyono vhose relatives were in the arny and woto down the
nacos, but nothing case of all this.

9- Did anyone of the insates attespt to rcbol before the experiments
started and try to influence the ojrooriaental eubjocts not to drink tho
vator?

A. Tes, thero van scaebody there vhose nano I don't roeenbor. Ho
sold that if vo drank the sea vator ve certainly vouldn't survive, and ho
said ve should all get together and refuse to drink tho vater. Boiglboock
heard about this and of courso he threatened this oorson, saying that
this vas sabotage and telling tho can that ho knev very veil vhnt happonod
to saboteurs,

9. Sid Boiglboock tell the san that soeothing drastic vould hapoon
to his?

A. Ho told his ho vould be hangod if ho didn't stoo this sort of
propaganda.

%

0* Veil, this particular can who wanted to objoct and organito a
rcbollion, did he receive the sea vator later?

A. Tes, ho did.

Q» In vfcat ma nn er vas sea vater adsinistored to hin?

A. Tho first tvo or three tises he drank the vator, but then, there¬
after, every tiso he drank the vater he had to vomit. Then Beiglboock
tree vith a rubber tube and the vater vas forcibly pourod into this fcllov,
not the sane amcunt that ve wore receiving, but an even greater amount.

If I am not vrong, it vas even as such as tvo or three liters.


10207


Court So; 1

27 Ain 474iaW7-IHa»8iM>icle. (3rown)

Q, rid 3eiglbocek administer this himself to that vartitular fellow?

A, Tea, ha lid.

q, Can you tell the Tribunal whether or not any of the eroorinontal
subject* were cvor tied to their bed* in any nanner whatsoever. If so,
kindly tell the situation to the Tribunal as briefly as roesiblo and in
your own words.

A. Thore was somebody there who ran about and who did drink water
other than tho sea water. Seiglbocek investigated and found out that
this can had drunk fresh water and had also eaten bread. This fellow
finally admitted this, end then Beiglbooek went and tiod this fellow to
his bed and soalod his couth with adhosive tape.

q. Did you see this fellow vlth his couth soalod with adhosive taco?

A. Yea, I know his, tut at tho cocont I don't rccoabor hie naao.

Q, 3ut you nositivoly ss*' a can in tho hospital or in tho exoori-
nental station with his couth sealed with edhosivo taocl

A. Yos, that was tho next bod to eino but ono.

Q, Conorally, did Boiglbocck cistroat tho orlsoncrs? Pld ho svoar
at thee or punch thee or do anything of a violont naturo?

A. So, ho wasn't brutal toward us, but his penaltios consisted in
giving us noro sea water to drink or depriving u« of othor privileges.

For oxaaplo, he withdrew our cigarcttos and things llko that.

Q, “oro ary of tho prisoners usod of nationality othor than Oornan?
In other words, were there any Stoles or Buselans or Czechoslovakians?

A. Yos, there varo in toto sovor. or eight Oeraens, end th8 root
voro all Buss Ians and holes and Czechs, people of evory nationality.

q, Eo you remember whether any of the innatos used in the exoeriaent
had to be transferred to tho fcosoital or tho sick bay before tho coeplo-
tion of tho experiments?

A. So, I don't remember.

Q. 3 id the inmates have to stay in the ex’*>rinontnl roon all tho
tice, or could they go out into the courtyard?

A. Ve could go into the courtyard next door under guard. Half an


10203


Court Ko. 1

37 Jus 47-tt-2&5-3-Z£<-5inabuek (Srovn)

hour or as hour later vc had to-go baefc.

Q, Did any of the subjects used ever beecn© delirious, froth at
tha south, become sad, tfcov any other syrptess of that nature?

A, Tee, quite a fov had these attacks. They rolled around on their
bods and yelled like little children. Then they got foaa at the south.
Then the professor was called ard he took the livor and spinal punctures.
After this w»a over the person in ouostion 'ais given eono liouid lntra-
vomiously, but what that liquid vas I don't knov.

Q, Do you knov frea your own knowledge whether or not ery of the
cxperiaental subjects suff«rod porsanent injury?

A. Yes, I knov two. I, for oxasple, still havo spells of dizziness,
and vhen I spoko vith Hoellonroitcr ho told no that ho still had thoso
spells too. _

q. Car. you toll so whether or not aiy of the erporiaontal subjocto
diod, to your knovlcdge?

A. So far as I can rcaoabcr, no, but two voro takon on strotchors
to the hospital, and these vo novor sav again. Vhat happened to then,
hovovor, I cannot toll you.

q, Witness, when ycu first voro transferred to tho oxporiacntol
rooa nnd you told Professor Beiglboock that you had had two staaach
eporations and did not vieh to undorgo tho oxporinents, why didn't you
press tho issue further and rofuse to bo subjoctod to the experirnonts?

A. I would have boon very glad to do that, but vo prisoners didn't
havo any froodoe of action in the caap. Vo cinply had to obey and if
did refuse, vo received the penalty for it.

q, Thon you voro afraid to rofuso?

A. Too.

q. 'fas this opinion froauently expressed aaong other cxoericontal
cubjccts?

A. Tcs, all of then.

JQ. HA23T: I have no further euostions. Your Honor.

5ES P5SI3SI: Counsel for defendant Beiglboeck nay cross-exaaine


10209


Court Sc. 1

27 Jus 47-K-243*-S»-Si M *uak (Brown)


the vitneoa.

cacss xjuxnurxcv

2Y ZB. STEIS3AIEE (Counsel for defendant Seiglbocck):

Witness, in vfc«t district and »fcnt provisco were you horn?

A. I van horn in the 3eden district?

W What ia your fothor'a nasc?

A. Josef Laubingcr.

Q. What vtia your Bother 1 a sniden nascT
A, Weiaa.

Q* What were your grandparents' naaea?

A. Laubingor,

Q. *ca, of course, but I scan first and last naaea.

A. :iy grandnother'a nano vna Alvina Laubinger.

Q» Veto you yourself in the oray?

A. So.

N. ’ oro you in the labor Scrvlco?

A. So.

O. ^ero you in Auaehvit* in Bloch 20?

A. Tea.

Q. So you roaenber vhat group you bolongod to in the crocrinonta?

A. Group 2.

Q* Wasn't tko naae of that Schaofor Group?

A. I didn't knov that expression,

Q, What vas your exporisontal nuaber?

A. Seven.

Q. '.hon Profcaaor 3ciglboeck gavo you a physical exarlnation, did he
ascertain that you had had this stosach operation?

A, Tea.

Q. Sid he ask you whether it still bothered you?

A. Yea.

Q. Were you not, for that reason, refused for the emoriaent?

A. So.


10210


Court So. 1

7P Jtm 47-ii-245-lO-SS%-»lnaln»ftk ( 3 - 0 * 0 )

* Eoc,t for «* t that are «adcr oath, vitnoas. Ian* t it sore
true to say that you really begged his to lot you participated in tho
experiment?

A- So, it ia not,

Q. After tho experiment actually began, vhat did you got to aat7

A. Tho experiment proper?

Q» that'a vhet I mean.

A. Hothing at all.

Q. Sow, you oro excited, Mr. Laubinger. Juet rolax and think about
thia. Didn't yew reccivo tho ao-called eacrgoncy rations, cooklea,
chocolate?

A. That vaa boforo tho oxporiaont.

Q. So, boforo the oxporiaont you got good food. Jolly and buttor
and silk end ao on.

A. Yoo, that la ao.

% Yoa, that's vhat I wanted to clour up. And thop, during the
actual oxporisont you received cookioe, coca cola, and chocolato?

A. So, no coca cola. Cookies and chocolate la vhat ve got.

Q. For how can:' day* did you got that food?

A. Thrco da;/a.

Couldn't it have boon four daya?

A. So.

Q. Eov do you know that for sure, if I can orovo to you that it vne
four days?

A. ’’oil, Juat becauac I enow that it waa throo daya.


10211


27 Jun-li- JB—ii-l-Gross (Int. Broun)

DO'JTt No. I.

Q la it poasible that it was four days?

A Veil, it ia possible.

Q Thank you. This food that you got, ras it very salty or
free of salt?

A It was free of salt.

Q That's right, it was free of salt. Then when the Professor
nado visits, did he visit you and ask you how-your stomach was doing?

A He ovary day visitod in tho aorning and asked us hoir wo
felt, who tho r wo ucro thirsty or natters of that sort - that*'a so.

Q £e ho also visited you and asked you how you wero fooling?

A Yes, of course.

Q I seo. You were visitod ovary .wrning. How nany kilos did
you loso?

A That I cannot toll you.

Q Ik? you happen to rcro.ibor how nuch you wolghod thon?

A No, I don't.

Q But you woro a strong honlthy nan.

A No, on the contrary - no wero wcakonod because of what wo
had gone through previously in tho concentration camp. Thon, aftor
not oating during tho oxporinont you oaa inaglno what rru looked liko.

Q Now, Hr. Laubingcr, I have a picture of you hare. You
look very sturdy indoed. Lot ao shew you this picture and toll no who
the first throo arc?

A I an tho third ono in tho top row.

Q Jho are tho ethers before you?

A That is — I can't rcasnbor tho nano.

Q 'oil, you nust knew his na^o. You wore all togethor there.

A No, I wasn't with hin during tho last dsys.

Q The first .aan you wore talking About?

A Yos, ho was with nc.

Tor, you say you wore togctlxjr. And who is the second can?

A “hat was a Swiss fellow.


10212


27 Jun-iK3-L-2-Gro 35 (Int. Brown)
Court Ho* I.


Q A Swiss fellow? That *3 wonderful. And the third or.o is

you?

A Xus.

Q Does it sour: to you that you look very weak there?

A Joll, this picture was taken before the experiments.

Q 3eforo you got the good food?

A Yob.

Q Iv’.y I ask that tho Tribunal also look at tho plcturo - he
is the third rian.

Could it bo, witness, that you neighed 60 or 61 kilos at that

tine?

A Ho, that could nov«-r bo. 2 did not woigh that auch.

Q But if in thj weight charts your iroight at ontry is put devm
as 60.5, would you say tho French:vm uado a nistako?

A toll, 1 don't knc*.. Anyway I wasn't that heavy.

Q Jtow -tuch do you think you did weigh?

A I can't toll you.

Q How ;viny days wore you in tho orxriaont?

A Jvat drinking sea water wu wore in it for 11 or 12 dnyo*

Q Yes, that is so. Did you loso woight stoadily?

A Every dry, yus.

Q And h<nr long did you lose woight every day?

A As li ng as wo drank seawater.

Q And that you drank for 12 days?

A Yos, 11 or 12 days.

Q Yos, that ic so. And you lost woisht consistently?

A Yos*

Q toll, I idll have to tell you that we have a very conploto
record on you hare* For tho four days of sea emergency ration you
lost 1/2 kilo in total. And, on the average you lost 1 kilo n day.

Can that be so?

A I cannot toil you*

10213


27 Jut.-::- -3—Gross (let. 3ronr.)

Court Ho. I.

Q Good, but you were weighed every day, you said?

A Xcs.

Q And tlcn you stayed another 8 days in tho oxperinent?

A Tcs.

Q Tfcll, in those 8 days you got nothing to oat at all?

A Nothing at all. That's right.

Q Can you say this under oath? Please think about this vory
carefully, }j. Laubingcr.

A You :wn during the soavat_r7

Q Tos. 'So know what wo aro talking about - for four days you
rccoivcd sea onargoncy rations - cooa cola ....

A Coca Cola? TTo didn't got coca cola.

Q All right, chocolate, cookios.

A For four days.

Q And then for 8 days you got no food at all, is that right?

A Yea.

Q You sinply got water to drink?

A Yes.

Q Kotr do you oxplain tho feet that in those 8 days when you •
*ot nothing to oat - and evoryono is going to loso weight if he
doesn't oat for a week - h<wr do you oxplain tho fact that during that
tino you lost only lj kilos, 3 pounds - in all that tlao - in 3 days
of fasting, didn't you get southing to cqt«

A :fo, I didn't.

Q Didn't tho Professor allow you to oat porridge?

A Ho.

Q Thor., you are trying to t-U this Tribunal that you fastod
for 8 days and only lost 3 pounds?

A Hot; auch I lost I don't .cnoTr, but 2 can say that during
that tino I was given nothing to oat, no broad, no porridge, no nothing.

Q I ztast toll you that tho Professor allowed you to oat a

little.


1021 /.


27 Jun-H-:3-l.-!i-Gross (Int. Brown)

Court !fo. I.


A Ho, that is not so*

Hi. : LARDY: Your Honor, I =ust object to defence counsel arguing
with the witness. The witness hoc testifiod directly that ho was given
nothing to eat. I see no cause for argirent between defonso counsol
and the Tdtncss.

TH2 KU5ID-L7: Counsel, objection will bo overruled, but do
not frcao your questions to tho witness in on argu-untativc nannor.

Just ask hia direct questions.

Q How do you explain the feet that your comrades who fastod
at the ssbo tiao you wore fasting lost 7-8 kilos, and you lost only

A That cannot bo.

Q What can't bo?

A That ay co mrades lost so auch and I lost almost nothing,
as you wore saying. I wont through oaactly tho sarao thing that jay
comrades wont through.

Q So, you insist that you got nothing to oat?

A Yob.

Q In those 1 2 days you lost first It Icilos and then 1 kilo
and a for grass - lot's say in total you lost 6 kilos.

A l.'oll, as I said, 1 can't toll you hor ouch I lost.

Q But can it bo - on 2 Soptosixir you loft tho oxpertaont -
that on 12 Soute.bor you had reached tho weight that you had rrhon you
ontejod tiio oxpcriaxjnt?

A I don't know.

Q Is it poosiblo?

A Ho, in view of the food wo were getting it is not possible.

Q How anny gypsies were thoro in r.ucherr.rald when tho pooplo
were askod to volunteer for Dachau?

A I can't tell you tft oxact number, but there wero sono
thousands.

Q And of this number the 1*0 volunteered?


10215


27 Jun-Ii-rZ-J k-5 —jtoss (Int. 3rowr.)

Court i^o« 2.

A Yea. "oro would hare roluntocrcd if thoy had been wanted,
but thoy were refused.

Q Then do you renastoer that when you first net the Professor
ho andc Herzberg the trustee?

A No, I don't rar^rber th;t.

Q Do you know Hcraberg?

A Yes.

Q la it truo that if anything caao up tho Frofoasor always
negotiated with Korxborg?

A Ho apoko to hi a now and then, but what thoy talked about or
whothor thoy negotiated I cannot tell you.

Q Now, when you woro got ting this very good food before tho
sea or.crgoncy rationa, did you, ns a poraon with having stonnch
trouble, easily digest this food?

A . Tell, I had sens troublo, but I was glad to got tho food.

Q In other «orda, you llkod It?

A Yoa, I did.

Q How about your previous convictions? He* iscny hnvo you had?

A Mono at all.

Q Mono at all?

A None at all.

Q Do you have a good reputation in your bo:» town?

A Nobody can 3ay anything against no. Of course, I havo a
bad reputation bocauae I had a child by a Gcraan vonan, and ir-dor

A

Hitler that was not poraitted.

Q Mo, I aa not talking about the old Hitler period. I an
talking about now?

A Right near?

Q Sinco 19U5*

A Hefeody can say anything, agairst ew.

Q You said that you tior- in Slock 20 in Auschwitz?

A You, that was too hospital block. I was a guard at the door.


10216


27 JurwL-i"-±i-^—Dross (Int. Brovr.)
Court !Jo. I.


Q tforonit you tho Capo there or tho ro<c senior (Stubcnaltoater)?

A Ho.

Q Now think about this earofulOy?

A I an*

Q Did you carry tho food?

A Tos, I did that in uy free tii-o. So.ctins I hclpod tho .ran
who distributed tho food.


10217


27 Jun—1 —13-5-1-Icsser (Znt. Brcvr.)
Court No. I,


Q Didn't you take a little bit of this food fron your co.xadcs
and give it to your .distress, or for yourself and have it cooked?

A Ko,

Q Didn't you aakc water available to the gypsies in tho Hor¬
ning for then to wash thcasclvcs as a foivsan in Auschwitz?

A Ho,

Q Didn't you hit an old gypsy moan in tho face so that sho
fell derm?

A Ho.

Cl Didn»t you hit tho little rjypsy children in Auschwitz so
hard that th-y foil down?

A Ko.

Q Didn't you nako then do knoc-bonds until they fell down?

A Ho, they did not fall down. There wero 3 children thoro
who wore so bad that thoir nothor askod no for holp. Sha had no hus¬
band or anything, I put then on top of the stovo, which was not lit,
of course, but it was liko a long bonch. They stood up thcro and did
knee-bonds. That was tho punishaont.

Q How, in othor words, you arc saying what I Just said was
an oxaggoration?

A I certainly an.

Q Han auch did you ask froc tho concentration cxnp fund ns
conponsation for what you have gono through?

A What fund arc you talking about?

Q Tfco fund in Stuttgart.

A Ch, yus, 3,000 or 3,5CO -larks,

Q You arc sure it wasn't 30, OCX) Ifcrks?

A It certainly wasn't.

Q Hhat auch cccponsation do you really want to ask for —
for tho seawater oxperiaents?

A That was no coaponsation for the sea-water cjqxrinonts,
but sinply to get za back on rzy feet. I an a shownan b V profession.


10218


27 Jun-%i-i3-5-2—Lcsr (Int. Brcfi.T*)
Court Ho. I.


and I wanted to hare a wagon built — it's being built now — but I
did not have the ionay for it. So of course I turard to the concent¬
ration cnap fund in Stuttgart for this assistance.

IP. HARD!: four Honor, I do not see the materiality of the
rehabilitation of this witness aft^r ho got out of the concentration
cosp; I dor.*t see that that is or. issue in this ease.

T'U iriSTDE'T: Ctojection orarruled. Counsel nay proceed.

0 Horr Laubinger, the forrv-r concentration crap innate, Pill-
wein, the forasr concentration coup iiteato Vorlieok, who was brought
here as a witness by the Prosecution, tho doctor Dr. Lesso, tho anti-
Nazi soldior Passion, and a gypsy who was also in a concentration canp
all 5 of thoso havo stated, under oath, that Professor Bciglbocck
treated tho gypsios wjII. Do you want to say that All 5 of thoso non,
including tho menbor of your owr. raco who lost every thing, are liars?

MR. HARDY: Just a nooent. Your Honor. If tho Dofonac counsel
wishos to quoto tho toetiaony of Fillw-in, Vorlieok, and other witnoss-
os, I wish ho would do it correctly. As I recall, Vorlieok, in arunror
to ray questions, did not soy that Uciglboock conducted hLnsclf in an
orderly manner at r.U tines. This is deceiving tho witness in his
testimony. 1 trish ho would correctly quoto tho other witnesses bo-
foro this Tribunal.

DR. ST.1i:BAUER: I Just hap.xjn to havo tho record hero; Vor¬
lieok, page 9509. Question: “Hon did 3oi^l'eoock tr^at tho pcoplo
who wore not in the oxperinent?" Answor: "Holl". Mora is not being
asserted by no.

Q Tfoll, witness, did tho profossor treat those people well
or poorly?

A rron tho hiciano point of view bo never did us any ham,
but he did carry out the oxporincr-ts ii. an or»iorly way tiwI p’nniicod
anyone who refused or caused any do lay.

Q Did you know Eduard Danberger?

A YLs.


10219


27 June 47-y-IJC-S-3-Lc»9cr (Brcwn)
Court I


<% v clli y° u Were together With kin here. He nudt have told
you whore he lived.

* *o, ho did not.

% Isn't he a decent chap?

A All I know about Banberger lo what I found out about hin in
thoso 11 or 12 days In that exportin'.. I did not know him boforo that.

i< ^B8 he In Buchenvftld or Dachau?

A He was In Dachau. Kc craw to the experiments only bcca.uao ho
had been prooloed. that If ho participated In the cxporincr.te — thoro
was another ftload of his there by the nnsc of Taubnann, both thooo
Chaps had the escape point, and they were told t v at If they took part
In the error Inert they would lose that csc-pc point. But what happoned
to then after t’-is ozporlsont, I cannot toll you.

<x But they did volunteer, didn't thoy?

A Tea, thoy volunteered.

And what about this adhesive tapo that the professor put -vor
the prisoners' souths? *hcn did ho do t'-at?

A Bocauso the nan had drurk wator, or oaten, or run around, ho
was tied to his bed «rd his aouth was plastered up.

«i Vltnoss, isn’t It possible that this was done at the tine a
tube was put down tho car's throat?

A So, rulto contrary. This frlond of nlno was not lying vory
f«r froa nc - there was one bed between us; I could see hln very
clearly. *hon ho lot his water tho plaster wet torn away from his
aouth and ho w" s given * tubo and. the wator was given hln through
that tube.

t* That Is what I wanted to krew. Vas this a bicyclo tubo or was
it a thin tube?

A It was a single tube, about an Inch In dlancter.


10320


2? Juc-ifr" £-5-U-Iossor (Int. 3rcwn)

Court No. I.

Q ifas it through the mouth or through the nose?

A Through the aouth.

4 Did you over see a tube put down a person 1 ? nose?

A Ko, I never did*

Q Is it possible?

A T^t sight bo possible, but I never saw it.

Q So for 8 days in that oxperi-ont you got nothing to oat.

A That was .lore than 8 days.

Q Ko, you wore in it altogether 12 days; for 1* days you got
cncrgcncy rations and thin for G days you fastud.

A Tv.a, that's right.

Q '.fnat consequences did you foci from those 8 days of fasting?

A I had attacks of dicsinoss; thon I fell down and don't know
what happens after that.

Q Is it true that a liver jxsiotvra was .aado on you, or nro
you confusing yourself with your noighbor?

A Ko, it was made or. ao.

Q ’fill you plaaso tell us how that was carried out?

A I had to expose ny side and lie doim. Then Professor
Bciglboock pullod out a needle, Q inches Ions or so, and, if I am not
mistaken, this noodlo was in a cover, but I cannot toll you for suro.
This noodlo was pushed between =y ribs, and thon the noodlo was pullod
out. Thon ho oxaninod scoathing that ha.d coao out with tho noodlo.

In poo: eases it did not coao out Just right tho first tiro, and ho
put tho noodlo back in. In sor» people he ut tho noodle in several
times, until ho was satisfied with tlxj result.

Q Tho professor did this himself? '

A Y-S, ho did.

Q Do you low* who slept ir. 3cd 20?

A Ko.

Q In 3oda h3 and Uh?

A I don't know.

10221


27 Jurr^>-‘3-5-5-L-ss;r (Int. Broun)
Court Ho. I.


Q Shan't it your relative, IJicfcr? lou are related to the
Kiefers, aren't you?

A Wo, I had no relatives there.

Q But you know the Eiofers?

A Yea, I Jmo'- th^ro was a Ilief-r who was with no in the ex¬
periment. He was a young follow.

Q You said then. were only 7 or 8 Oeraans?

A Yob.

Q Don*t you think it really waa norc than that, if I rood
you all those Oernan naixa, frai Bavaria alono?

A All I can tell you is uhat I rc:v.abor.

Q Couldn't it possibly bo no re?

A Yea, it is possible.

Q -7oron*t thoro 2 liottbachs there?

A Two Tettbaohs? Thoxv was a Schwaiz-r - yes, his naro was
ii.ttbr.ch.

Q T/oll, Furth, lot rx. toll you, is in Bavaria. Schsoidt?

A Y-3, I re-xr-b-.y Schaidt.

Q Tr-ni?

A I e an * t rmaonber hin.

Q Adler?

A Yos, T ro-xaber hin.

Q TTna ho a Oernin or a Hungarian?

A I don*t know.

Q Hcollonrriner?

A Yes.

Q Bernhard?

A Yos.

Q Uersberg?

A Yes.

Q Bamberger?


A Yus.


10222


27 3-5-S-I^sscr (Int, 3rerr.)

Court No. I.

Q Heme nr.?

A I don't know hia.

Q Taubaann?

A Xc3, I re.~nber hlo.

q Now, there, look at this. Bon about Reinhardt?

A Yus.

q Tfaroa't tiicro even a cou lo of .loinhr.rdts ir. there?

A I only know ono.

Q Non, thoro, look at that. '*> already have norc than 7
Gomans. Don't you grant tho possibility that thorc wore sore?

A Tea, of courae I do.
q Wcr. thoro Slovaks in tho oxocrieor.t?

A Slovoninna, yea, but who they wore and how.asny, I do not

know.

q Wore thoro Burgonla^ndor?

A Ho.

q ?x»xdx;r a littlo folic*- nnxd Papal?

A Yoa.

q Ho TTT.3 fror. Burgenland, wasn't ho?

A Tea.

q C-n you toll :oo tfcj nano of tho fallen y±o was forco-fed?
A No.

Q 3<rt you s-y ho was only 2 bods atny fron you?

A Nc vert ho loss I do not know his nano. I have thouglit about
this frequently.

q You wore in B:d 7?

A Yes,

q Could his rvxie havo been Patschcnrsky?

A I don't know*

Q Thon tho next nan was llottbooh.

A Ho, it was rot Uottbach.

q Thoa you don't know what.his iriao was?


10223


27 Jcn-H-t£-5-7-Icss-r (Lit. Brown)

Co-art Ho. I.


u Ho.

0 Did the Professor pass out vary ttanjr cigarette e during tho
exp-riaicnt?

A 5c.x3ti.5C8 ro got 2, scejotiaus 3j there wore soac anong us
who wore very good, end thoy got an extra ration of cigarettes.

Q How long did tho oxperinont last altogether, do you know

that?

A I can only tell you approxiretoly — li to 5 wocks, I should

any.

Q Cm it bo truo that on tho 12th of Soptc.-bcr it was finishod?
A I can*t toll you tho oxnct date.

Q Did the gypaioa help the profoasor to clear out tho experi¬
mental station?

A Ho.


1C22A


27 June 47-H-AK-S-l-Ho*;ban"(Broun)

Court 1

Q. Did you coco to Block 22?

a. Yes.

Q. Did you moot ..ettbach there?

A. Yoa.

Q. Ho said hero, as a witness, that ho had given you
a loaf of bread?

a. I don't *now about that.

* Did you coot other o mrados thoro?

.i. /all, wo wore In Block 22, but wo wore in different
rooaa, one, two, d tnrao, so wo cut now and again, that
la ao.

^ If anyone had dloi, then you would have found out
about It, since you gypsies stlok togothor?

A. Ho, It was not possible, because about two days tftcr
that i wao put tc work.

Q. ’/horn were you cent to?

I stayed in Daohau.

Q. Ybu stayed in the camp?

A. Yes, I did.

i}. Ah. that is very laportant. You Just wont out to
'ork during the day?

.w I was o..ployed there In the equipment office, and
while I was working there I did not have a chanoe to talk
to anyone. <>fter I was finished work, I was glad to have
a chance to rest.

< 1 . Dcn't you tnlnm that If anyone had died you would
Immediately have been told about It, :h*t was usual In the
camp; was It not?

a. ./ell, ay comrades were really too dumb to do that.

Q. Veil, you would not say that Kettbach was dumb,
would you?


10225


27 June 47-i4- .iK-6-2-vioehcn*(Brown )-
Court 1

.v- They vor. too ctfr.'-ld they would bo sent to the hos-
plt-1 oi* something would h ppen to th~.a If they told what
actually happened to tben or things of that sort.

c,. But y u ao not exclude the possibility that you
coula have heard of such a death If one occurred?

That Is possible, but I hoard nothing about it.

<t any rate, -ou heard nothing about a doath?

rt. :.'o, I only .enow that two wore carried to tho hospital

on stretchers and I saw nothing after that.

•

Q. 'Then was it that they were takon out?

a . That was during the experiment.

Slow, boforo you imswor, pleaso think lo it not
possible that one of thoso non was taken away at the very
beginning cf the experiment?

.w No, that la net possible.

Q. THen, I must toll you that ..ettb-ch said that he
va3 token avey on the first day.

That cannot be so, ..ettbach vent through the wholo
experiment.

i,. Now perhaps you are mixtingup tho t’#o Ilottbaoha.

4

I am referring-to tho younger Hottbach.

I don't know any young .iuttbach at all, all I know
18 the older .fettbnoh, he was a 3ohweleer and was with me
in the experiment. 9

T.-iS PRJSIDZNT: The secretary will file the certificate
of Dr. Roy l.artin, Captain, .;edlcnl Corps, stating that
the defendant Oberhauaer will not be able to bo in court
today on account of Illness.

Just a moment, counsel.

During the recess whloh the Tribunal is about to take,
the witness win be Kept in the custody of the Marshal and

10226


2? June 47-'.;-.iC-6-^-;.cchnn-(Bro v n)

Court 1

will not be Allowed to tUX to myonj.

Z.S IKTJn?RZT-.\: Your .-toner, nay I aafcc a correction?
TH3 PaaSIDSNI: Yoa, go ihead*

TnJ ZM?.*3?il£T2l! V>on this witness has boon using the
word ■Schwoltor", he la not referring to the nationality
Swiss, but to the Goraon word "Schweizor", nooning a dalr-
yarn.

T:« PBJ3I0S. T: /ory well* the record will ahow the cor¬
rection. The Tribunal will now bj in rocoaa.

(a roooaa was tsXon).


10227


27 Juno-44-DJG-8-l-P orria (Staler)
Court I


THE MA RS H AL: The Tribunal is again in session.

THE FRSSEEBiTi Counsel cay proceed.

BY DR. STEIHB^UZF.;

Q Vfitness, will you please be kind enough to givo ao your homo
address and iyour exact present residence?

A It is Heilbrcnn on the Neckar, Jaegcrheusstrassoj fornorly
the RAD camp.

Q And this is whore you are living now?

A Yes.

Q In order not to sdsuivicrstand one mother, during the oxpori-
nont you drank no soa water, only water which had the salt roraoved?

A No> this water also contained salt. It was tho second typo.

Q But you don't knew that it was callod Schaefer wator?

A Ho, I don't know that.

Q !hit at my rate, it «cs not soa. water?

.. Yes, it was sor. wator, but not as ouch salt content as tho othor.

Q Don't you knew the names of tho two poraens who allegedly wont
to tho hospital?

A He, I don't know thoir nemos.

q You wont throu^i the hell of Auschwitz?

A Yes.

Q ..ftcr the exporinont, you wont into tho quartermaster*s offico,
didn't you?

A Yes.

Q Hew, if you ca^jarc these two ccncontraticn caap experiences,
don't you think that the quartemastor'e office was a coaparatixdy
geed detail?

A Ho, on tho contrary. I had to do hard work thoro. I had to
transport rifles and fchina parts, and wo had to do whatever work
thoro was thoro#

Q Didn't you have to deal with tho so-called property room


there?


10228


27 Jur.e-a-DJG-S-a-Ferrin (Raaler)

Court I

Q Is it correct thct you actually experienced a liver puncture
perfornod on you?

A Yes.

Q T.’cll, where is the scarf

A Tho seer ie no lc«ger visible*

Q Don't you heve a little white circle on ycur derk skin. I m
sure thct you could soo if there wee a liver puncture thoro.

A Ho, I can't see anything.

Q Tfculd you ngreo to bo given a nodical exardnr.tion to sco
whothcr you have such a seer?

A Certainly.

DR. ST3IN3..U2i: In that ccoo, I havo no further questions to
put to tho witness.

TUS PRESIDENT: Any further questions on the pert of ccunsol for
tho dofendent Schrotder or Beckor-Froyscng? Does tho prosecution
havo any red! root exanin-tion?

If.. K.JIDY* Tho prosecution has no further questions to put to
this witness. Your Hcncr.

■ns JTCSIDrJIT: Tho witness is excused froa the witnoss stand.

(hitnoss excused.)

If. HARDY: At this tisw tho prosocuticn would like to call
Karl Hoollonraincr to tho witnoss stend.

TrZ FRESlDSfft Tho Marshal will bring tho witnoss Karl He oil on-
rain or to tho stand.

K-RL HOBLLESLIBBS, a witness, tcok the stand end testified r.s
fellows s

JUDGE SSCBXHQ: Held up your right hand and be sworn. I swoar
by Ged, tho Alnighty and Oaniscient, that 1 will sperk tho pure truth
end will withhold and add nothing.

(Witnoss reposted the ccth.)

Ycu nay be seated.


10229


27 Jur.o-it-DJG-8—3-Ferrin (Healer)
Court I


MHffiT ELJHK<.nOH

3Y !£. &.RDY:

Q Witness, yeur naae is Karl Hoellenrainer?

A Yes.

Q Would you spell your last nano, ploase? Did you bear no,
witness? Spoil your lest naac.

A Yes. .

Q teuld you spell ycur last neao, pi case?

A Yos. H-c-o-l-l-o-n-r—:-i-n-o-r.

Q Wien and vhoro wore you bora, witnoos?

A I was born in Fuerth, in Bavaria.

Q «hat year, ' hat is the date of ycur birth?

A I waa born on the 9th of March, 1914.

Q Pricr to the tiao that you wore errostod by the Gestapo, woro
you ever sentenced or cxrostcd by the police?


10230


27 v , ua--i*-13-?—l-Pcrrin (Int. Earner)

Court :*C. I.


A No, I was arrested on th: 29th of lfcy, 19Ui, by tfc, Gostapo.

I was sent to Auschwitz froa Nuomborg*

Q Tfitnoss, Just a ncojnt, pleaco. Hava you ever np.cared r.s
a witness before oiy Tribunal before this tias?

A Ho.

>

Q How, in the course of this axrcination, witness, I want you
to attempt to be brief, yet tell the Tribunal the story of what happoned
to you, and also try to answer ny questions specifically} and duo to tho
fact that I aa a s kin g you questions in English and you are answcrii^ in
J cm.'.n, it is wceessazy for you to jeuee a noa-nt after you have hoard
ay question so that it will be properly tr one la tod to ycu before you
answer. : ow, irltnoss, for what reasons >wro you .arrested by tto Gestapo
or. tho 29th cf Ifry. l9Li*7

A Because I an gypsy of nixed blood.

^ And aft-r your nrroct you wm\ sent to the Auschwitz con¬
centration can??

A Yos.

0 How lens did you rcrain in Auschwitz?

A About four wooks.

Q And then whore wore you placod?

A I was sent to Buchonrrald.

£

Q How long did you stay in Buehcranld?

A I only stayed thoro ftr a foa days.

Q And then what happenod to you?

* I was in a tent ccnp in Buchorerold, -nJ suddenly our nvmbors
wen. caLlod up, UO non wore callod, including no, .and wo wore told that
we would havo to ioavo for Dachau in ord.r to work there. .Vs soon as
wo arrived at D'chau we w«rt put in a quarantine block, and ono day an
SS nan cnco and wrote dewr. our ruicburs, and they sent us to tho sur¬
gical dopartrant of a certain doctor of tho Luftwaffe. I m afraid I
ao longer roo-ubor that physiciAr* narx>. I know that ho c.-.to from tho
Luftwaffe and that ho was an Austrian. Ho examined all of us, and then


10231


27 HS-^-2-Sorrin (Int. Raalor)
Court Ho* I.


*o were divided into groupc for a seawater experiment.

Q Just a tacoent, witness. I non want to ask you seno brief
questions concerning what you havo just told us. You stato that you
went to Daohau to work. Did you consider going to Dachau to bo good
fortune?

A Yos; a friend of nine, a gypsy, had already boen to Dachau,

and ho told ao that the situation was nuch hotter and that wo would get

• +

better food. But that was not tho caso.

Q Moll, did you understand *h^.t you woru to do when you wont
to Dachau, what typo of w>rk was it, borib disposal or rc.nov.al?

A Yes, we wont thoro to work.

1 Did you mdcratand that you woro goii^ to Darhau to volunteer
for scawr-ter oxpori-wnts?

A Ho, novor.

Q Hew, upon arrival in Mch.au you then wont to tho quarantino
block, is that correct?

A Yos.

Q You stayed thero for a dry or two and were givon physical

oxaainatlons?

£ Yos.

Q Did you .also got an x-ray on.-aainr.tion?

A Yos.

q And thon you were transferred tc tho experimental block?

A Xus.

q And th.ro you act a professor, or a doctor?

A Yos.

q Do you think you would be ablo to recognize that doctor if
You saw hii today?

A Isnodiately, yos. Tos, I would Laaodiatcly recognize hi-s.
q Would you kirdly stand up froa your witnoss chair, t.ako your
tarphorvjs off, and proceed ov^r to tha defendants' dock, ard sou if you
can recognize tho profossor that you act at Dachau?

Sfii ... . . •


10232


27 «Jun-sH£-0-3-torrin (Int. Senior)

Court Ho. I#

(Witness leave e tte stand.)

Q '.Talk right ov-r, plaaso.

O-’itnoss attenpts assault on tho dafendant Beiglbocck.)

IB* HASDYi Tho prosecution apologises for the conduct of the
witness, Your Honors. Due to tho nannor of this oxaaination, tho
prosecution will have no further questions. Your Honors.

THE HCSIBEWT* The Karshal will koop tho witness guarded bo-
fero tho Tribunal*

DR. ST :i!3AD&R (Coirsol for tho defendant Bciglboock): I have
no questions to put to tho witnoss.

THR FRSlDS.'frj Will thi Uarohal bring tho witnoss before tho
bar of this Court? Will an interpreter oono up horo who ccn translate
to tho witnors?

Witnoss, you wore su^nonod before this Tribunal as a witnoss
to giro -vl/lcnoo.

TtC UTHSSSi Yos.

THE RLSIDEIfTi This is a court of justico.

THE WITNESS: Yos.

Tin FRESIDEifTi And by your conduct in attempting to assault

I

tho defendant Bciglboock in tho dock, you hftfo c emit ted a contempt of
this Court.

TIE “ITBBSS: Your Honors, please oxcuso my conduct. I rua
r.ry oxoitod.

TIE IRlfllDEIT! Ask tho witness if ho has anything olso to say
in extenuation of his condixt.

THU uTTHSSS* I aa very oxttitod and that roan is a nvrdoror.

Ho rulnod ao for ny ontir: lifo,

THB FK3HEHT: Your statenmts affard re oxtc mint ion of your
conduct. You have ooeoitted a contempt in tim rrcsface of tho Court,
ir*3 it is tho judgment of this Tribunal that you bo confined in tho
Nuernberg prison for the period of 90 days as punishroent for tho con-
t.apt which you have exhibited before this Tribunal.


10233


27 Jan-JUB-P-it-iorrin (Int. RaLr)

Co’-irt !Jo. I.

*•— 7/TKLSS: Would the Tribtad please forgive ao. I aa
married and I have a little son. And this Ken is a nurdercr. Ho gavo
ae salt water and ho performed a liver puncture on no. Ploaso do not
confine ac to prison.

THE rRESIDSI-fT: That is no extenuation. The contempt before
this Court nust bo punished. People aust understand that a Court is
not to bo treated in that manner. Hill tho Marshal call a guard and

4

reuovvj tho prisoror to aorvo tho sentence uhich this Court has inflict¬
ed for contempt? It is understood that tho dofondant is rot to be con¬
fined at labor. Ho is sinply to bo confined in tho jrison, having con-
nlttod a contenpt in opon court by nttaapting to assault ono of tho do-
fondants in the dock.

IR. IL\RDYt At this tiaa, lour Honor, tho Prosecution will
request a brief recess, if Your Honors please.

T5C FttZSIDEtfTt Very wall, tho Tribunal will be in rocoss for
a rxraont.

(A recess was taken.)


1023i


27 Juno 47-*-S’<-ll-l-Love(aaeler)
Court 'Jo 1 Case 1


THE MARSHALL: The Tribunal is again in session.

THE PRESIDENT: I desiro to inquire whether or not stenographers
havo made a record of the recmt occurrence , in the course of *rich
the Tribunal found it necessary to sentence the witness Karl Hoellon-
rainer for contempt?

MR. HARDY: The court reportor for that tine has loft the court-
rooa. "o will chock if the Presidont desires it to bo in the record,

THE PP.LSIDENTi In order to make the record clear, I will state for
tho r* cord that the witness Karl Hoollenrainor, having been colled to
thn stand and duly sworn, and a few preliminary questions propounded
to him, was requested by counsel for the prosecution to identify the
defendant Belgleboeck. In order to do so the witness advanced toward
the dock and at a-proxiaately 1125 hours on this Doming of Friday,

27 June 194*7, m he approached the dock, suddenly sprang over the rail
of the dock and attempted to a ssault the defendant Beiglboeck. The
witness was promptly placed under restraint, a*«d the Tribunal directed
that he be brought before the Tribunal to be punished for a contempt
of court cocrsitted in open court by his attempted assault upon the
defendant Beiglboeck. The witness was asked if he had anything to say
in extenuation and simply pleaded his excitement and tho strain he was
under and that he yielded to the impulse of the ooment upon identify¬
ing the defendant Beiglboeck in the dock. The Tribunal thereupon sentenced
the witness to confinement to the ?*uraberg Prison for a period of
ninety days for a contacpt ccrnitted in open court, the defendant to bo
confined but not put to labor.

MR. HARDY: Tho prosecution his no further testimony to offer at
this time. Your Honor.

THE PRESIDENT: Is Counsel for the defendant Handloser ready to

proceed?

DP.. NELTE: (for the defendant Handloser): Mr. President, gentlemen
of the Tribunal, the submission of evidence in the case of the defendant
Or. Handloser was broken off on the 20th of February 1$4*7 by the


10235


27 June A7-tf-S*-ll-2-Lcve( Harder)

Court No. 1 Case 1

subeisoion of the dccuaent HA 3D, Ertiibit 51. We Tribunal has tec-
porerilv admitted into evidence a nusfcer of documents for the defense.

It haa acceded then subject to the si-teission of the proper oath in
the prescribed fore. In that connection I have to cention document
HA 42, which haa the temporary Inhibit No. 19, and also docuoent HA 3
which hr a tho temporary Exhibit No. 21.

WE PRESIDENT: Counsol, there haa been handed to tho Tribunal
one filo of theae documents. *ro there no other files available for
tho arobors of the Tribunal?

DR. NELTE: I naked the Secretory Central to »:hait thooe document a
to tho Tribunal by hr-nding hin that file yesterday. I asked him to
o*o to it that tho '.rvbunnl would have today available the translated
and mimcogra.thed docunent. I h<j believed that thr t would bo posaiblo
by thia coming. All tho 'ticunmta have born translated and aimoograph-
ed. They have boon aado available in aufficiont nuefcarn for tho benefit
of tho Tribunal.

HR. HARDY: Anticipating farther difficulties in the presentation
of the tnfonso counsel' a supplementary documents, I would suggest that
if possible the dofnnso counsel could atari out and oako an index
that tho Tribunal can uan end that tho prosecution con uso, such indax
containing Exhibit No. 1 through to the final oxhlbit *iich thoy wlah
to intro iuco. I have bofore bb new about eight or nine docunont books
or supoluccntTl nots for tho defendant Handlos r; I foel certain
that Dr. Kelte has no lntrntion of introducing each end evwry document
in those eight or nin supplementary editions that I have. Howover , in
erdnr to follow hie and in ord-r to follow the future presentation
of documents, if we were provided with these indexes, then wo could
folio*, the presentation core r«edily and discard the documents which
they do not intend to introduce, and then we could properly * Boccble
the exhibits in cno folder or two folders as tho case nay be, completely
disregarding the superfluous documents. I think that would be the only


10236


27 June -M-S*-ll-3-Lov n( Raeln r )
Court Ho. 1 Case 1


way I could work it out. I have several documents, end each tioo
Or. Kelt* reads off a nuebnr it will taka ne a considerable number
of ninut"* to find the document inwlvod. "e shall go on now and sue
if we can follow. But in tho future if the defense would follow that it
would be most helpful.

TEE PFESIDET7: The suggestion of tho prosecution appears to tho
Tribunal to be excellent. If that plan can bo followed by drfenso *
counsel it will nake matters easier for the Tribunal .nd opposing
counsel. Hy question in the first plaeo was directed to the fact that
the Tribunal h«s on the bench only on« file of thoso affidavits, Thoro
aust bo noro available. I would ask Hr. Har'y — tho secretary is absent
for tho moment — if during the noon recoss he could soo if thoso
documents are not available in tho office of tho Secret a ry-Cn« rnl so
that each n«ssb-ir of the Tribunal aauld be provided with a fila.

HR. HARDY: I must say that U r , Nelte hos born rest helpful in that
he has given me a folder containing th« documents which ho wishes to
Introduce as supplements, but I «a unoblo to ascertain what he loft
off and If ho is going to use some of tho others, and if thoso indexes
can bn provided at a lntor date, wo can procood with thia group of
documents *hich ho will offer to supplements and Introduce formally
now. I presumo tho Tribunal has one sot put in one folder as I havo.

TEE PSESZCffiTt The Tribunal has one act*

DR. HELTE: Hr. Pr aidant, this file is tho ono which I personally
submit tod yesterday, when distributing the documents; however, a number
of copies arc provided for the Tribunal as well as for the prosecution,
(uri I assumed that theso documents would already bo in front of tho
Tribunal at the time I started ny aabaission.

THE PRESIDENT: Evidently the Srcretary^Gencral haa just arrivod.

MR. H;RDY: Dr. ^elte does havo before him Your Honor, a rather
detailed index starting with Exhibit Ho. 1 and going through Exhibit
'o. ?7 as I see it hero, which is just what I was referring to. If ho

10237


27 June 47-1S—S~-ll-J.-Iovc (Rar.ler)
Court So, 1 Case 1


could have that niawogrephed, even in the German language as it ia
now, without translating it, it would be decidedly helpful, and then
we could take our document books and supplements and weed thee out
and have what he has presented to the court.

THE PRESIcarT: During the noon recess ycu can endeavor , Counsel
to assist Dr. Kelte in seeing that the nimoc graphing ja-ocoss moves
along as rapidly as possible.

DR. NELTE: I have Just explained that I submitted a number of
affidavits faring the case of Kandloscr which roceived only tu-nporary
exhibit numb r. °ofor« starting the further submission of evidence,

I should like to submit these three affidavits again in tho proper
fora, as desired by tho Tribunal. This is tho affidavit by Shoe.for,
document HA U2, Exhibit No. 19. Shaofnr has now submitted tho Affidavit
in tho fora as prescirbod by tho Tribunal, and tho snao holds true
of the affidavit of Professor dodonwald, rtiich Is Docu-x-nc H/. 3,

Exhibit No. 21, and finally tho affidavit of Professor *r«.y, which is
Docur*>nt HA 52, Exhibit No. 31. I submit those thiv»o foraal affidavits
to tho Secret ry-Gunerol, and I now ask thu High Tribu/vil to convert
tho provisional admission of theso documents into a final adaission.

THE PRESIDENT: Has counsel for tho prosocution examined those
documents? Is counsel satisfie' 1 th> t the proper Jurat is attached?

Tho see rotary will hand him the original documents.

MR. 'ARTY: This oorc.ly n formality. At the time that the
docunrnts ro introduced, wo objected to thorn because of lack of
Jurat. Tho three supple.entary pages contain Jurats duly notarized or
signatures sworn to, so the prosecution withdraws any objection.

THE "RESIDE?ITi It appearing to the Tribunal that Handle ser Docu-
=ents HA L2, HA 3, and HA 52, Exhibits respectively 19,21, and 31,
are now in order, those three exhibits are received in evidence on
behalf of tho 'cfen lant Kandloscr.

MR. HARDY: I night add. Your Honor, thi t you will find the

10238


27 June ll-5-Lovo( P?cler)

Court No. 1 Case 1


affidavits in Handloser English Document Book No. 2; whwrein you will
find Handloser Document Ho. 3, rtiich is Exhibit 21, Handloser Docu-
oent U2, *icb is Exhibit 19; and in Handloser Document Book No.

3 you will find Handloser Document 52 which is Exhibit 31-

TOE PR-SIDE7.T: I will return these three pagos to tho Secretary,
who will see that they are properly attached to the exhibits.


10239


27 Jur.o-lf-DJG-12-1-Jfelcy (Hosier)
Court I


r». KELTS* I should now like to ask the High Tribunal to givo
ae a dociaicn rogcrding tho edsission of a letter written by the
prelate, Kr&iz, This ia Document HI 39, which hra boon provisionally
adnittod ea Exhibit 41. This can be found on page 3262 of the Gornan
record. After the Prosocution had raised an objection to this docu¬
ment, the Proaidont mica ea follows: "It appears from tho evidonco
offored that it ia an answer to e lettor by Dr. Kelte, datod tho 4th
cf January. If Dr. Helte would submit a copy of the letter writton
to Ik. Krcuz, tho Tribunal would fravo something beforo it in order to
make a dociaicn. Document H,. 39, ca it ia before the Tribunal, now is
cloarly net admissible, as it ia merely a lettor. If Dr. *)elto can
auboit a copy of tho letter to which thla ia tho -nnwor. '.he Tribunal *.j
will then bo able to a-kc a dociaion rogcrding tho adulsslhilp.ty of
document HA 39 later I have rciod to have Prolate Dr, i.rcun odd to

4

hia lettor tho Jurat ca proscribed by the YriN;a*:.. On 1° March, 1947,

I inforaod Military Tribunal No. 1 that tno PraUto Dr. Krouz beenuso
of basic principles has rofuaad to givo an affidavit in lieu of an oath
end I eakod tho Tribunal to admit tho lettor witheut tho Jurat, ainco
it ia of particular valuo to nc with roforonco to Dr. Handloaor'a
character, and I roforred to ..rticlo III, Ordinance VII.

4

In ay letter of 3 March 1947 I also applied to tho High Tribunal,
in ease the Tribunal should not want to admit thia letter in spito of
its inoprt-nc3, vc nperovu the Prblato Dr. Krcuz oc r witness, and
-sk him to exae to Suvnborg. I have no dociaicn of the High Tribunal
in answer to this application, and 1 an asking ycu now to toll me
whether I ar.y assume that thia letter of tho prelate Dr. Krouz, Docu¬
ment HA 39, is finally admitted ea Exhibit 41 or whether the Tribunal
desires to mako any other decision in that connection.

THE PRESIDE'?: The Tribunal understands that the matter roots
beroro the Tribunal in exactly tho seme situation aa it was when
presented; is that correct. Dr. Ncltc?

DR. MELTS: I have- ccnfcnacd-with the wish of the Tribunal and


10240


27 Juno-!MJG-12-3-JM.cy (Healer)
Court I


submitted ay letter tc the Prelr.to Dr. Kreuz, on 19 March 1947. The
Tribunal desired tc see my letter to hie in order to bo able to
decide whether the answer of the Prelate Kreuz can bo admitted in
evidence.

THE PRSSID2fT: Has counsel for the Prosecution any conment?

UR. F..RDY: I have no ccmccnt to aoJco, Your Honor.

THE FRESJDEST: Upon the record before the Tribunal, the lottor
froa Dr. Kreuz, if I understand his nsao correctly, is not ednissiblo,
and the Tribunal is not disposed tc suzocn Kreuz as a witness.

IP.» H.RDY: Inasmuch as the letter is a character referencu of Dr.

4

Har.dlcsor, the Prosecution withdraws its objection without projudicc,
oven though it dsosn't moot with the requirements of the Tribunal.

THE PRESIDENT: In view of the statement of the Prosecution,
the letter by Dr. Kreuz to Dr. Handloscr will bo admitted in ovidonco,
attached to a ccpy of Dr. liaidloecr's lctt.r to Dr. Kreuz, which Dr.
Mdto would certify to bo j copy of the loiter which he wrote to Dr.
Kreuz. That bo admitted in ovidcr.co under the so circuo.-tanccs
as Hendloscr Exhibit 41.

JR. H.JIDYs Your Honor, I have a problaa to lako up here. Dr.
Mclto has, as Hendloscr Documont 52, in Document Book 3, as Hmdlooor
Exhibit 31, just subedtted r jurat. This Document 52 has c jurat
already, but Document H'ndloscr 10 from the arao affiant does not have
c Jurat, -r.d I assume that this jurat from the sane affiant should bo
attached to H-n:"lotcr Document He. 10 and not Handloscr Document 52.

I offhand do not kr.cr, the exhibit number of Handlescr Documont 10.

That is tc straighten that cno cut.

I also night call tc Dr. Hdte*a attontion that he has given us
a Jurat for Handloscr Document 42, which is Exhibit 19, ?nd that docu¬
ment already has a jurat cn it. Perhaps this jurat also should bo
attached to another document. Maybe he could clear that up at recess.
Your Honor.

THE PRESIDENT: we will pass that now until the noon recess, which


10241


27 June—1S-3JG-I2-3—I&l oy (Easier)

Court I

will occur in a few accents, and then it can be cleared up and the
natter dearly stated to the Tribunal when wo reconvene.

DH. KELTS*' It has a. Jurat, but not in the fern which wqs pre¬
scribed by the Tribunal during the letter part of the proceedings.

The original fersula was in ccopllance with tho general idea of sub¬
mission of an affidavit, tut decs not contain any reference to punish-
oent.

fR. H.P.DY: Docs that also apply to Hnndlcsor Dccuaent 10?

THE PRESIDE"?: I would suggest that those natters be diacusaod
betwcon counsel during th: neen recess, and ropert aide to the Tri¬
bunal when wo reconvene.

Ccunsal aay procaw.

DP.. KELTS: 1 now submit rn affidavit by Professor Dr. ;.’5r'.h,
who was tho hJtd of thJ K.vra-.cole d x cal Institute of tho Military
Medical ;.ccd<v. This is IL >6. 2 oak you ic accept it as Exhibit 52,

THE PTES IDS'fT: Counsel, jou Just gave us tho runber of Exhibit
56, I understood. Oh, Exhibit 5?, I see.

DR. HEL7K: Exhibit Kc. 52.

JUlGE SEZRLtO: fihat document book, please?

DR. ICLTE: It is in no document book, but can bo found in tho
book I today submitted to tho Tribunal. Yru will find it to bo tho
fourth document, coming after tho three affidavits which I hovo Just
submitted. Feint cnc of this affidavit refers to Presocution Dccu-
n;nt I'.J 1 It refers to a report i-hich was submitted by tho Prooo-
cuticn. I aakod Professor 7&rth tc state in this affidavit his
position with reference to page 3 cf this report, where it says*
third series of experiments was carried out with a representative
of th-_ Lost group, with nitrogen Lest, according to tho suggestion which
* .3 cade by Oberstabsarzt Professor Dr. Viirth on the occasion of c
conference with the P.eich Ccnoissicner Professor Dr. Brandt on 4
December 1944." <,s it can be seen frea the report, this series cf
experiments was carried out in the concentration crap of Ueuenganne,


10242


 —
dour* Z

Since the Prosecution mentioned this suggestion by Frofessor Tttrth in
order to ir.crininr.tc Prcfossor K andloser, by alleging that he was
the superior of Frofessor Wirth, I considered it proper to hear
Professor Wirth«s attitude with reference to this accusation. In this
affidavit, which I shall not road in its entirety, he states that he
actually did participate in the conference of December 194A, but that
fron a materiel point of view it is ontiroly impossible that he actually
aado any such suggestion. In this connection I should like to draw
the attention of tho Tribunal to the feet that this conference took
place on h Dccericr 19U. On 1 September 19 Uk, Frofessor Handlosor was
released fren his position as Ixaj Uodicel Inspector. If thero had
boon any connection at all between Professor Wirth and Professor Hand-
loser during the time Professor Handles or >cs Uodicel Inspector. Roman
nuaural II cf the affidavit deals with the purpose and significance of
the meeting cf Consulting Physicians, end further whothcr thoso meetings
cculd induce tho Prosecution tc allogo that the participants in thoso
mootings woro planning war crimes and crimes against humanity. I
merely rufer to tho answer to the question ccntrlnod in Reman numeral

II and Reman numeral III.

THE FRESIDEWT* Dr. Nolto, tho Tribunal will rocoivo tho document
in ovidonco. I will ask that during tho noon recess tho secretory.

Dr. Heltc and counsel for the prsoocuticn ns far cm possiblo will
ondoav' : to assemble a sot of thoso documents la English which Jr.

Kelt- i.- attempting to offer. I find that these befero me show sons
in Goman and ».ac in English. If each ncafccr of tho Tribunal could
havo a copy in English it xuld help a great deal.

The Tribunal will recess until 1:30.

(Thereupon at 1230 the Tribunal recessed until 1330)


1021.3


27 Juno 4?-A-«£-lft-l-Mochan*(Brovn)
Court 1.


.tfTERi.'OON SESSION.

(Tho hearing reconvened at 1*S0 hours, 27 Juno 1947.)

THE M«R3HAL: The Tribunal la again in session.

DH. TI?P; (Counsel for I»fandante Schrocdor and Beoker-
rreysong.) Hr. President, tho supplemental doouaonts for
Profoeacr Schroeder. which I wanted to eut In today, havo .
not yet boen translated. I do not w nt to take tho Tribunal'
-lno twioe and consequently ask permission to put them in
at tho same time as I put In the supplemental documents for
Dr. Bookor-Froysong. I hope that both of those groups of
documents will be translated ty tomorrow or Monday.

THE PRESIDENT: Very well, counsel, you may follow that
procedure. Tho Tribunal deslros to suggest to d ofonso ooun-

8dl . Dr - ®1*P» Just a aomont. Tho Tribunal doslres *.

to suggest to dofoneo counsel that in ordor to
oxpodlto procedure they assemble tho supplo:>-
ontal documents whloh they doslre to enter and havo them
prepared in ooquenoo as Dr. Sorvatlus did yesterday and then
submit thorn to tho Tribunal at the earliest possible date.

If any of thoso supplemental documents can be subnlttod
to the Tribunal tomorrow, tho Tr.bunol would aperoclato It,
Thore are not many defense coun 60 l hero present, but If
those who are ,>r.;sent will idvlso tho other defense counsel
of what I havo said, the Tribunal will be obliged.

Counsol may prooeed.

DR. N2LTE: Hr. President, I oflor throe copies of a list
for Professor Kandlosor. Numbers 1 to 51
in, and Documents numbers 52 to 72
This list Is In triplicate, and for tho
only of the documents that have not yet
this will suffice for the future pursuit


102&4


27 Juno 47 -a-AJ- 13-2-lio -hnn-(3rovn)

Court 1.

of ay c/iBo for tho defendant H-'-ndlcsor. The Prosocutlon also
hia auoh an indox, and during tho neon recess wo atte:*ptod
za put tho docuaonta In erdor nocordlng to this Indox.

7h: ?RJ3ID2iT: Counsel, as for this list of docuaonts,
how many of thea did you say had already boon admitted In
ovldonco; up to what number, up to 51?

D3.. Kusbors 1 to 51 and this aorning Document

:;o. 5o, which Is Exhibit i'.o. 52. If tho Tribunal will permit,
I shall begin with Exhibit Jo. 5', which Is Document H A *2.

THa .-RJfllEklKT: Prooood, counsel.

DR. l.'£LTi: Document K * 32 la a certificate by tho Prlcr
of the Abbey Maria Laach. This Is on pugo 4b of Document
3ooh 2. Tho putting In of this document was previously
postponed until *n affidavit oould bo drawn up In this form.

I now put this ovidonoo in. This will be Inhibit 53.

Please then associate this affidavit with the statement
on pogo 46 of tho Dooucent 3cok 2. I w sh to road only a
P«rt of It.

The undersigned herewith "Bonodlctlno Abboy Marla Laaoh."
states that Professor Hnndlosor, forr.or genoralsoborstaboartt
and Chlof of tho '.'ohrmaoht ledlcal oorvlco, during his activ¬
ity as Armeeorzt in tho Dlfel district from rovoabor 19^9
until hay 1940 •■'as frequently a guest at our abbey. It was
important to him that tho army hospital that was accommodated
In our houeo give every consideration possible and that tho
persons in the cloister should receive all possible medical
caro. fnen tho army left. Dr, Kandlosor, instructed the
replacement 'unit, particularly tho doctor of the Dofense
District 12, Wiesbaden, to see to It that a hospital unit
should always be accoasodatjd in ..aria L .ach. Ho hoped that
he would in this way protect the mcnastory from being closed


10215


27 June -.7- A- AK-13- .'S-Me ehnn- (3rovn)

Court 1.

up, which vaa a threat to .ill uonnsterios at that tlae.

Since Prof. Handlosor hAd in the raoar.tlno boon promoted to
Arjy Helical Inspector, vo felt the effects of his friend¬
ship In all our subsequent dealings. with tho orqy Medial
Authorities. The Intention was realized and tho Ab'ooy
.’aria Leach did recaln In tho possession of tho Bonodlctlncs.»


10246


27 J -.TO-/-:' J-l’.-I-Coo’: (Int. HJ-oun}
Court I


7.:: "-7I3 .7: Ceunsol '-.‘ithout ondoavorins to control your action
orient, oven tho slightest ertont, to -ho projudico of your client,
: ould si-^Qtst that you read Tree th~.se ibcir^ats non- only rv.tte:*3
^roetost importance to ye nr cliont. Z.aso docu onto mhen thoyr.ro
rcooivoc. in ovidonso ui!l bo available to tho Tribunal, and in :ovr briof,
~^ oh ' re ' 7in 3 tody carefully ; n n-rittn- the :ud£?unt/ you can then oithor
y:otc ->«: those documents or cell attention to those .portions of the
iccironts which you particularly dosir= to call to tho attention of t'.\o
Tribunal. Thrt is ruolly a noro effective refiod of hrinjin" thooo
•uttoro to the attention of the Tribunal, than it is sirnly to road a
eoaaidcreblo portion of tlr.se documents into tho record now, bocauso ;-cu
ray :-ost ensured th’ t tho Tribunal -..ill -JLvo y ur brier, -..“hen thoy cor»
to tudy the ccno, tho »st cartful consic ration.

7.. :m.r:t I rill restrict rysolf to tho abooluto :ininwn, hour
Honor, lay I csl: -or first to stato that '‘ocuront ?2 is nor accoptod

u ~;iiiblt 53?

77 .1.7.111:7: Counsel is correct.

17. "XTZ: ltar I offer 'ocirrmt IL*. 57. 7.1s is an affidavit by
‘'iroctor of tho University C!rin Clinic ir. Dv.-lin, .for. hr. Doohe.
r.ds is a statonsnt about tho confaronco3 of tho C::-jultin- Dpocialinta.
■irec tine Tribunal has already a.arc’ about tho purpose or tlio conference
3 . tho Consulting Dp; delists, I as!: -emission to put this document
ir. as Inhibit 5b, but -.411 not 30 into any stalls about it.

d 7*1 7EI7-: Doctor, is t:. t tho ca:-tiricato or tho affidavit
.‘roc Professor Dr. 1. J,oohe‘

- :r.:.7Z: That is riclst, yes. Pro.' ssor Dr. Tooho.

I corxi nosto a series of affidavits that I s'.all put in .ith-
K * --ntorinc upon then in dotail. 7ncy are boinp ut in evidonco be-
C£a3c '-*-ro sont to no spontaneously, .althout ny having raev.csted
•-cr. and lthaut Professor llandloser or an ono 0 “ his relatives hav-
-C arruaated

10247


27 Jtmo- - D-22:-2-Ooo9c (In-.. 7rc..v.
Court I


then. Teh affidavits - nest or thxs rro letters - sorto to ncho Prof-

•

o=3cr :'cnc'lo3or«3 exactor dear, and, cs Tr. !Iardly acid this aomtr.-,
c recognition or "andloscr's true psrsonality is of t ct 5; *x>rtcnco in
;his trial. I -sir thsrsforo that th :o doccxrts bo ad itted in ovidonco:
loctnont Cl 5C is an affidavit Iron ono Tr. 3tooc&oin, filch :rill bo
nhi’oit 55. Thon t arc is cn affidavit frer or. ladi-, “lur;. This i3
5?, end tn bo S Aibi t 56. - ar. Tart,

61 . 7.is -.nil bo Tnhibit 57. Tocurxnt 62 is cn affidavit by ConercdU
erst r. '.'olf-anj 3clnidt-3nidoc!3Kr. 7.:= Tribunal approved this 3r.
3chaidt-3ru3e!nor cs a -.fitness in tho cr.so _*or l^ndlosor. -res tho
c’licr or "taff in tho Arry "cdicrl T-sp.octorr.to fron 1 January 19J-J to
31 August 19U':. /-tor *»nths of efforts on tho pert of tho Tecrotnry
Consrel it -.rrs nsc rtainod that 7r. Tchrddt -“rtochn.r !iad boon rcloasod
-*ron tho :risontr-o_V.-ar er.np eftar ' is roc liad boon rovia-od by tho

• Ultory authorltlos. Dr. > - ciarod

his roedinoM to eppoar as a nitnoss, but bed an unfortunate accident
th-t redo it difficult /or h r to travol.

TIC PR/sraJT: hat is '-'.Is doccxnt narf3-r, tovmol?

r. :7 ! 71- Tliat is Cocu.:snt :. 62, Trfdbit 50.

77. ’ .I*' "Tr Correct.

D?.. *::.7C: Consequent?; , I esfcad Jehrld.t-Prv cln_r to nrJa hio
tostinc^y in tho lorn of an affidavit. I inTorr^l tho Prosecution of
tis fact, and i/aon I received tho affidavit, I shared it to tho Proso-
cu.ti-n 'or th.oir infornction. In tho : otter of 2C ' a;* tho Prose¬

cution state ? tlr.t they -rould fcrs*;o to 33 ;:a nation of t is ifitncas.

7:3 “-f'/'avit is cf tho utost 1 ortarxc ir. tho cess cf "an-Moscr,

:o-r.sc thdo is a ran vho .-C3 -ost intin-tely inforrxd rbeut Icndloocr'a
eativitiis. '•-onorclarst fchuorfler, Ax ~a f of Otr.f of tho Any
r.’iccl Carrico, hen boon hxard Iiorc, ant? A is affi avit fro r tho Chi of
tho rry ?di;cl Inspectorate is tho supplonaniotion to
• t .c::i;xr.;-. 7; *.o t' o Tiiofs cf Iteff *oro 'Aandloacr's .ror.ro3ontc-

-“:s or donutics durin; his cb3onco. Ttoy to :.is c ,s and errs and

10243

.. . " '


27 JtsnoV.— lii-3-Cook (Irrt. Brcrrn)
fourt I

cnc right hand, r.vorvt'dn- that was addressed to Handles_r or ns ensured

fandloscr .nnt through then. 7or tho pur ©so of simplification both

"cbeorflor on tSa stand and Ichr-idt-Pruockner in tils affidavit -.-ere shorn

ZwHoazr'a statements in his affidavit regarding tho organisation of

• _

tho Jhdiccl I ns no c tor a to of tho okrmacht. 7.:ii is Hi 29, SrSdbit lj.

Doth chiefs of staff certified to tho correctness of this affidavit of

•

"andloser's. I Msh to read brief o tcorpts fra-, this affidavit of 'Jr.
Selnldt-Hruoclsier, filch, as I said, is of particular importance, bocauso
it oppoars to 'o important to put them. into tbs record. Cn pa go 2,
per.- reph 2 , fruoclmer says as folio-rs:

'I should like to roto it quite clorr tV.t in position as
lYofessor Dr. i^ndlosor's Chiof of Itaff I -..-as bound to have full knonlodge
of any fundamental question or happonlngs -..filch voro considered inportent
ir. tho spboro of tho irv radical Inspectorate. "- 0 r. 2 rr.n-' I can say
V-x.t during “• tern of offico I had no kno::lo<l „o of anything concerning

0

tests and arporinonts in concentration arris cr In tho do rain of tho S3,
such os rro tho subjoefc of tho indict-ont ir. this trial. If 1 had loiovm
of these inadnissiblo oxporinents, nhich aro contrary to all rocogniscd
nodical principles, I should cortairj- :iavo submitted a letter reporting
ther to IVofcssor h'andlosor. In tho saao -.ray, I aa convinced that if
such a c*«o Iiad occurred, Prof_-.sor ’mr.iloscr culd hfvo done ovorything
•Mch *raa Mthin his official pov:r to cr.rr the attontien of t!io roapon-
sible authorities to tho natter, This conviction is based upon rr
long years of clo3o collaboration vith Vof. 'hsndlos.r end the JmoModgo
I have thus gain .-d of is personality. B

I should like to dra- tho ettontion of tho Tribunal, hor. raver, to
'-fi '^vit as a -hole, Oocunont If. 62, -filch ith the permission of
-.he Tribunal Mil be Exhibit 58.

~e nert docuaoofc is an affidax-it by rt-ofo33or fyar. Prof .ssor .^or
- lc dlpcctor of tho Institute for Typhus end Vims .lesecreh ir. Draco*.
?r,: - doctor in the carp Dccklfrr:-r.v3cn, but ho fell ill.

ir ' 71317 c * t:ic inportanao of t is Mtness, 1 infcV~cd tho .rosocution


1021 ?


Cl f


7 Joso-l-' “IMii-Jj-Goo!: (I"t. 'rcr. r.)

.onrt I

■•'mxi I -~nt to the Ifcc !:ii n;£euscr. eery., end I tool: tho rollorin~
aMidevit -’rot; rrolossor >-;r, fror. nhich I oliail rord only tho out ir>
■oit'-Tt ytoaazpa hero, nanoly, tho pease;* roTarrin- to tl--o •:cll-’^o'7n
yor-Sefcldi in -•ebruiry, and tho tcm. ;.a roTorrinc to tho sl-ircxmta
o: lico.


10250


27 June 47-A-S^-15-l-N nabuck (Broun)

Court No. 1 Case 1

•

"I was head of the institute for Typhus and Virus itnasenrch of
the OKH in Cracow. It is correct that early in February 1943, I
* s in the concentration cacp B uchcnwald with u r. “ernhard Schsddt.

It happened thus: Wo had produced yellow fev r vaccine by order of
the A ray Medical Inspectorate, and to ey knowledge had already delivered
it at this time to the Military -elical Acadasy, Hygiene Suction. I
had constructed a new storage container, anl one day rocoived the
order to demonstrate this storage container to a unit of the S3.

Dr. Schmidt and I went to Toinrr and w re picked up there, "o drovo
to Buchenwald. In a berracks thr re I showed D r . Ding aid sovral
other persons in white coats the use of the rx-w containor end how
to dissolve tho dry voccino. Sevral persons ware also vaccinatod.

Aftor this wo were show: thr kitchen, supply roccs and hygiunic
equipment.

"At this tirno tho crop w\s rot occupied. Apparently tho peoplo
wra at work, fo w*ro in thr crap one to two hours. I unphaslzo
particularly that wo wora told by nobody at all that typhus and othor
exporinonts wore boing carried out on tho concentration coop irraitos
there. I know nothing of this. T hat w-.s tho first and the last time
that I saw a concentration caep.

"'*o went back to Berlin and I irnidiately ^ent on to Cracow.

I spoke to no one froo the A nay i*«iical Inspectorate. ro tho canp
Buchenwald got the yellow fov'r vaccine which it later used for ’
innoculation, I do not know. *7o left only tho op nod demonstration
ampules there. No vaccine of any kind was cw r delivered fron Cracow
to Buchewald. e delivered to the 3-in rr.odical supply depot or
when so directed, to other units but never to SS units of any sort,
••either did we ever send infocted lice to Buchenwald free either
Cracow or I^cfcorg.

"I know u r. Haas. He was tho heed of the Behring Institute in Laa-
b*rg. ihi3 was a branch of the Behring •‘orks in Jtirturg and had nothing
to do with tho "ehrnncht or in particular with our institute."


10251


27 June 47-A-S^-15-2->:inbuck(Bro»n)
Court No. 1 Case 1


Please accept this affidavit in evidence as Exhibit 59. :ir.
Fresidcnt, the Prosecution has offered excerpts free the printed re¬
ports of the work conferences of the Consulting Specilaists. These
are documents 921 to 924, Exhibits 434 to 437. There is an omission
in connection with these documents.

First of all, thoy do not prosent any unifiod picture. Socondly,
if excorpts are taken and the parts loft out are not known, a picturo
can be conveyed which does not correspond to reality. For this reason
Professor Handloser, in Docuoent Book 1, aa HA Document 2 and Exhibit
37, has brought evidence regarding the purpose of these conferences,
and in the sane document book, on pages 17 to 20, has explained that
on the problems of dysentery and freer ng there were conferoncos
every year in which medical knowledge was ascer-.ained and supplemented.
In the sane docuoent and also in Document 2-A, Exhibit 37, he drew up
a typical agenda for such a conference from which i can be seen how
aany problems were discussed.

In or-er to give a truo total picture of these conferences I have
had D r. Handloser take a few excerits from thoso four books and havo
then translated and put in evidence. This has boon tone. Under .NO-
922, that is a prosecution number, there are also thoso excorpts
translated which a re to be put before you by Frofessor Handloser.

Now, I think that in ordor to avoid confusion I should give this
document, NO-922, a special exhibit number in the Handloser case.
Koreovnr, Professor Handloser, has put in an affidavit which will
rake it unnecessary for me to go too deeply into this probloa in my
final brief.

Regarding the cyicstion of freezing, typhus, and hepatitis
'ipideoica — all concepts which we know free this trial - he has made
'trnarks which he and I both bolievi* will stow the real integrity of the
cedi cal activities of the ^ercen ehmacht.


I of fir the affidavit of Prof. Handloser, HA-75 *vich has not yet

10252


27 June 47-A-S"-15-3-? T inabuck(2rown)
Court Ko. 1 Case 1


bn*n translated, let ae say cgain, which has not yut boon translated.

It ia here in the original. To avoid later repetition, and leaving
the Prosecution the full right to object, I should like to put
in this affidavit along with the other doeuaents that havu been copied,
as Exhibit 60, and the excerpts frca the conference reports will bu
put in as Exhibit 60-A.

UR. HARDY: Your Honor, this procedure is agreeable to no, but
I don't have th*. extract of 922. I have the extracts of NO-921, 923,
and 924, but I can't find the 922 extract.

THE PR-flDWT: I have horc an extra copy of 922. 'dll the
Secretary hand this to Counsel for the Prosecution?

HR. HARDY: I havt. it hero, oxcuso no, sir.

THE PRZSinEJJ?: You have it now?

HR. HAF.DY: Yes. As I understand it, the extract fren Prosocution
Docuaerit !X>-922 is boii^ marked for convunoinco as Handles- r Exhibit
£0-A.

DP.. NELTEr Yes.

HR. H*RDY: Thank you.

THE PRESIEDTt has that 60-A or was that 60?

UR . HARDY: 60 is the Homloser affidavit accompanying this.

THE PRFSIDB’T: Ch, wo haven't that yet.

DR. NEXT: I now put in the affidavit of the Goneralnerzto and
"••neralstabsaorzte in Canp Hu»xjstorlag<ir C. The so affidavits cover
the sane material as has boon covnrod by the other t ffidavits. I bring
them to your attention, and thus Docunent 64 will H.-cone Exhibit 61.
‘hrouah direct exT^A^tion of the witness C-unoralarzt Hartlebon, the
Tribunal tried to clarify the ounstions involving the. Vodical Inspect¬
orate. This cuestion is of particular interest in tho Ha-rilosor case.
The Tribunal will recall that I pointed out when oxaeing Gcnoralnrzt
Partloben that the court procedure that apply here ar- set down in
"ray *>«guiation 21, Part II, and when I offered to put the whole print¬
ed r-gulation in evidence I was refused by the Tribunal, but

10253


27 vunn 47-A-S»-l5-4-riwfccck(Brom)

Court Ho. Case 1

Rnndloser was asked to point out the passeges in thos» regulations
that appeared particularly ie^ortant to him end to have thee put in
evidence. Fandloser has done so ani now puts in an affidavit on court
procedure in the various branches of the "chrnacht. This is Document
HA-65. This will bo Exhibit 62, with tha ? mission of the Tribunal.

In this affidavit those parts of Amy Kogulntion 21 to which
Handloser refers are reproduced, ard I will give Amy Jlodicol Regul¬
ation number 2 to the Prosecution sc that they idll have a basis
of comparison. I shall forego reading indiviJual excerptsj but I ask
the High Tribunal to look at page 5, Roman numeral XX. Those are the
regulations concerning reports tfdch are not narta at spclfic intervals.
This passage h'.rt is of particular importance for a aatt-r that
concerns this trial; namely , the reporting of special occurrences which
have to be bro< ght to th*> ottantion of tno higher offices iranodiately
and irithcwt dolay.


10254


2? JU&-A-JB-16-I-Gr 03 ? (Int. Brava)

Court Ho. I.

Al» I a* you to look at pcgos ?, 1C, and 11 . The so aro tie
regulations regarding tho method of r-portiag zodical re so arch and
p?pora on ouch research. That is Document !!o. 65, which will be Ex¬
hibit Ho. 62 , with the permission of the Tribunal.

1 no* have an affidavit free the forrer Color»l Wolfgang
lueilar, which he sent to =® spontaneously; it is of particular inport-
arxe, since he was a colonel whose rank was broken because of the
events of 20 July. He was a departraent chief ir. the Aray High Con and
and knew Prtfescor Handloeer th re. Then such a nan offers to testify
in behalf of Handleser, saying that he protected the interest of the
bedical Corps with dignity against encroachments of the Party, tint is
important. I shall read only one sentonco. Ho writes hsre, "I would
not Bake this affidavit for Itandloser if I had only the slightest sus¬
picion that Dr. Hanriloeer was one of tho original Nasi physicians. On
the contrary, historical research dll show his merits in provontlng
the German aodioal profession frc« boing oraeated by Nasi idoas. Os-
taila of the above-described facts I put into ay diary at that tir».

I shall shortly publish these facts in =y book; Against the Lie about
the Stab in the back". This Docxjont \IX 66 becomes Exhibit 63 .

The Prosecution put in an affidavit b; Oswald Pohl. This is
Dccunent H0-<i07, but I have not boon able to aocertain the exhibit
r.unber. This affidavit is femulated in very gciioral and consequently
easily aisunderstood terns. Tiie Prosecution had Pohl state thrt doctors
of the Luftwaffe, the Aray, the I'avy, and the SS seen to have only
little difficulty in getting Kinder's ap.roval for such experiments.

And further he states: "I assume that 3mwits, Gebhardt, 3Carl Dr and t,
arri others were .liadar's advisors in ouch matters." "hen Pohl was ox-
*=ired about this he said: "I know of no fact tliat would justify at¬
tributing exreriaents in concentration camps and demands for concentra¬
tion camp inrates f<r experiments to Professor Handloser or his office.
Professor Handloser was certainly not ono of Hinder's advisors in suoh
matters. This Docuaent HA 67 I wish to nut in S3 Exhibit No. 6 U.


10255


27 Jun-A— 13—i6 —2-Jjtoss (Inc. Brc'.'n)
Court Ko. I.


?he next document, HA 6G, is an affidavit by Dr. Albrecht
Ziaja, a former generalarxt, who sent ne this affidavit on his own
initiative. He makes the sane positive statements about Handloscr's
personality as all the other Generaiaerztc ‘.iavo made. Document HA 68
I should like to put in as Exhibit Jlo. 65.

The next document, HA 6?, has not yet been translated. It is
a very brief document from Generalartt Wuerfler. The Tribunal 'rill
recall that the Prosecution put in a list of research assignments,
N'C-93k, Exhibit U$Q. Since Wuerf lor had already been heard and had
said that if such a docinent had reachod the office of the Chief of
the Ledioal Service of the Wohraacht he would have soon it, and sont
this document, Prosocution Exhibit lk>. 1*5C, to him and askod him to
tell me in the form of an affidavit uhothor he had evor soen this
document. The affidavit reads:

“On 10 arch 191*7 the attorney Dr. i.'olto sont no Document K0-
931, 1*0 typewritten fagea, and I haro read through this documnt. I
do not rocoll thot this document ever cco to the office of the Chiof
of the Hedical Sorvice of tho Wohmacht." Please accept this document,
■hich will be translated within tho noxt few days as Exhibit 66, with¬
out ixejudice to Prosecution's right to object.

Now there cones a Berios of five lotters, bearing nunbors HA
?6-a to o, which have not yet been translated. They wero brought to
zy attention too late for me to havo them translatod in tico.

THE RESIDENT: They bear tho niadjor 67, not 76 according to

you.

DR. >CLTo: Tes. They arc not yet translated - or are they?

THE PRESIDE??: I don't havo tho-.

DR. KEITE: 1 believe there arc t'*o documents in question
tore, 76 and 67.

THE mSIDENT: No Document 76 appears on this list - 72 is

‘•he highest number.

12. HARDY: He is referring, your Honor, to Document ?6 which


L


10256


27 Jua-A-Ia—15-3-Gross (Int. Brow n )
Court No. I.


is Ex h ibit 67.

THE nOSHEHT* Yes, I see it.

D?.. ISIT3: lot d« ask, Tour ffcnors, uhethor I should sake
stateaenta about this cfaciraartt new, without prejudice to rrosocution's
rieht to object since h 6 doesn't knew these doewaonts, or should I
present it later?

THE aSSIDBMP* Counsel aay uako his statement now.
in. HARDY: It wiuld appear to ne. Your Honor, that ttose last
few oxhibits, that is 67, which is niasing. Exhibit 70 I don't have,
which will be Exhibit 66, Nos. 71, 72, 73, and 7U I do not havo.

DU. N3U J: In the case against tfto defendant Handlosor the
Prosecution roforred to the well-knenm typhus conference of tho Reich
Ministry of tho Interior of 29 Doco.bar 19iil, in which Professor I land -
losor did not tako : -art but a representative of tho Army Medical Inspect¬
orate did, Stabsarxt Schrott. This is Document NO-1315, Exhibit U$h,

And it is a file note of tho Roich Ministry of tho Interior. Tho Do-
fondants lYofossfr Nrugowsky has ronortc froa Drc. Zahn and Donnitz on
this sano subject. Documents to-ugowaky 63 and 61:, Exhibits 30 and 19,

•nd an affidavit fraa Doanitz, ifrugowaky Docuaont 62, Exhibit 13.

Thaso docunonts jrosont a clear pictvro of *./hat was discussod in this
conference of 29 Ifccoabor 19lil. This was a discussion with tho phar¬
maceutical industry. New in Docuaont 1315, Exhibit U5U, thoro is a
discussion, as you nay roExrbor, of expori-ionts planned on 29 Doconbor
19hl, discussed between Professor Glide mister and lirugowsky, which
had already boon agreed upon, let no point out that it was not agreed
on at this conference because J'xugonsky was not oven present. It had
already boon agreed upon before tho discussion. Now tho Prosecution
states that this was the basis for tho subsequent human experiments.

The Prosecution further assorts the participants in the discussion
<ncv.' of this and knew that Buchonuald oxcriserrts wero to bo made.

Sir-co thore were also representatives cf tho Arry ‘fcdical Inspectorate
present, the Irosocution concludes that also the Aray hedical Inspoct-


10257


27 Jun-A-*3-l6-ii-Gross (Ir.t. Brown)

Court No. I.

crate and Professor Handloeer knew what was going on in Buchsrnrcld at
• hia tiao. Although this conclusion is refuted by a letter of $ Jby
19U2, ltrugowsky Docuaer.t 10, Exhibit 20, and by his sworn testimony,
tho Dofendant Profossor Handles or wishes to dispose of any last vustigo
of suspicion in this manner by putting in tho so five docuscnts. Thoy
bear nurbers HA 76 a to e. I shall put thon in as one document aid
ask that thoy bo givan Exhibit No. 67 a to o.


10253


27 Jua-A- ?—I7-1-Iesscr (Int» ^rorm)
Coart Jio. I.


These letters of February and 'arch 1 9hZ will prove that the Ar=y
ibdical Ins poctorato, if it had known shat was to go on ir. Duchere.-ald,
and if it had boon in agree cent with this, narely, that himan 0x3- ri-
nonts were to be carried on ir. Buchorarald in order to c-xpedito tiro
production of typhus vaccine — it would have bo_n absolutely without
any purpose for tho Amy Medical Inspectorate to have vritten tto
letters contained in this document. If it had known and apjrovod
■hat was coins on in Buchenwald, then it would havo waited for tho
results of this cxpori=«ntal plan. Ifewcvor, during this tirui it cor¬
responded with tho Behring Works and told tho Bohring Works, which
had bo«-n given an order, that they should bo sure to see to it that
tho vnccino to bo delivered should contain only Hckottsia froiraroki.

Tho Bohring V.'orks did not answer those lottors froa the ltodlcal In¬
spectorate saying, "Wait until tho Buchorarald oxporioents arc over."
They answrod on tho 21st of Parch that tho typhus vaccines wero now
being aanufacturod of Rickettsia Pronatoki alono, and thus tho roquiro-
oonts of tho Roich Ministry of tho Interior and tho Amy liodicol In¬
spectorate woro being not. Thoro aro 5 dociraonts horo which I ssk
you plocsc to oxaaine cost carefully, m uy final briof I shall eval¬
uate the contonts and probative valuo of thoso documonts.

R. HARDIs May I sec tho original c.rhibit, Your Honor, those
dccunonts which woro Just aontionod?

DP.. H£LTZt Those arc copies free tho filos of the Bohring
Yorks, which have boon certif iod by a notary.

I®. HARDY: Tho Prosecution would like boxq of tho Goman
copies too, Your Honor, in addition to tho Bn-lish translations, inas¬
much as thay purport to be original Gersan documents. This apparently
is tho Court Exhibit.

D?.. fCITE: The Gcrear. originals are not in ay possession but
arc in tho possession of tho Behring ’'orks. This is a ease quite
analogous to tho one ay colleague. Dr. Flcstanj, was confronted with,

*ho also put in letters fren thj 3ehring ' orks, which had oc.:n certified


10259


27 Jun--t-4Z-i7-2-lA-sscr (Int. Broun)
Court No* I.


by a notary on the basis of originals there. As I reracEber, tie
Tribunal accepted this certification by a notary as sufficient and
accepted tho letter in question in evidence, but I ask for your ruling
as soon as you soo tho original.

-H. HAKDT: 1 aa not objecting to this procedure, Your Honor,
inasmuch as tho Tribunal has established that it would bo all right in
the coso of Dr. Fle m ing^ docisaonts. I aoroly would liko Goman
copies of these now so that I could peruse then this evening, or my
analysts could do so, so that 1 could go over thorn imodiatoly, with¬
out waiting for translations.

TH2 PRSHSUi Will counsel for tho defondant Hcndloser soo
that Go naan copies arc furnishod to the rrosccutior. this afternoon, if
possiblo?

DR. KSITEx Yos. Next 1 put in a certified copy of a ruling
by tho Gorman Roichstag on 26 April 191*2. lot no correct an orror in
the copy. In tho copy horo it says 26 September 191*2 but it is really
26 April 1912. This was in tho Reich legal Garotte, Port I, Ho. 11*,
page 2l*7« This is a very well-known resolution of tho Roichstag, with
the forco of la*?, dealing with tho concentration of tho total power in
Germany in tho hands of Hitler, This docnaont is put in ovldonco in
connection with tho question of what significance tho so-cnllod State
Order has in tho totalitarian Stato. I do not wish to road this
resolution, but I shall refer to it in ny sus.iation. HA-70 becomes
Exhibit 68.

MR. HARDY: For clarification of tho record, I bolievo this
Raichs; -sctablatt oxtract is dated the 25 of September, not April.

DR. HEME: I have, already made that correction.

Tffi ntSIDBHTJ Counsel just stated that tho document
dated in Soptorber, not April. I understood tho interpreter to b ay
it was dated A;xil, not Septanbor.

DR. liEUE: It is erroneously dat.d Soptexoor and should bo
dated Apsril.

10260


27 e un-A-I 3—17-3-Icsser (Int. Brown)

Court So. I.

>K. HARDT: Well, then, I would like to 9=0 the original ex¬
hibit, Year Honor. The translation has tte 25th of September lhorcon.

DU. K3IZS: I have already attonpted to correct that. Tho
original of this resolution probably cannot be found. This resolution
is reprinted. It was published in tho Reich legal Garette (Rcichs-
gcsctrblatt) which can bo found in tho library hero. I assuao that
tho Prosecution nay talce a lock at it at any tiao. If not, I can
produco it for tho Prosecution*

>E. HARDY 1 Is Dr. Sol to certifying that Document HA-70, Ex¬
hibit 68, tho dato thereon should bo tho 26th of April and not tho 26 th
of Septenbor?

DR. NZIIEi That is right. I ccee new to ay final docunjnts
which donl with Prosecution Document 1305, Exhibit U69. Tho Prosecu¬
tion, in putting in this docunont, assorted that tharo was a gonoral
agreement botuoon tho Medical Inspectorate of tho Any and the Hygiono
Institute of tfra Woffon-SS — an ngroenont to tost tho Behring work
vaccinos on hinon beings in Buchonrrald. This docuncnt is a loiter
from tho Behring works in Marburg to Dr. l-rugovsky, dealing with tho
tosting of tho Behring vaccine, and it sftye, and I quote: "Ob-rstarzt
Dr. Schroibxir has told us that tho tosting on hunon boi.ngs will bo
taken care of ir. tho futuro through your offico." In order to clarify
this nnttor I t»vo intoi-vicwed anyonj who could know anything of valuo
about this _att~r and whee I could got in touch with, in order to got
affidavits fraa thja. Those are Professor Kandloser, OcnornLarzt Dr.
Schcidt-3ruockon, as Chief of Staff of tho Amy iktdioal Inspectorate
are! tho superior of Oborstarst Dr. Schroibor, Dr. Bornhard Schnidt, as
Hygienist in tho Dopartcunt for Scionco ard Health, also Dr. Dcauiit-,
director of tho B-hring Works in ifcrburg.

!R. HARDY: Is it isy understanding froc Dr. Selto that Docu¬
ment HO 1305, Prosecution Exhibit 1:69, was introd.ucod after Dr. Bern¬
hard Scheldt had aprwared before this Tribunal as a witness, or had it
been introduced before that tiac?


10261


27 Jun-A-;3-17-ii-L_sscr (Ir.t. Brown)

Court •*>. I.

DH. H3I22: It was pit in later, or in cross-examination.

HARDT: Then, your Honor, it seems to bo that if this
was Fut in before Dr. 3emhard Scheldt appeared boforc the Tribunal
as a Tritruss, dofocoo counsel had an ile opportunity to cross-oxaadjv-
Schnidt on that docusont, and this would bo a socond opportunity to
uxaaine hie on it by putt Log in this affidavit. Thu witness was here
and testified here, and tho dociacnt at that tiaa had boon put into
evidonco, according to dofenso counsel. Thorvforc I do not soo any
reason for further affidavits free jxiopio T/ho have boon horo as wit¬
nesses.

7 )?.. HZLTZi At tho ooe-nt I cannot say at what point in the

6

trial tho Docurunt 1305 was put in. At eny rato I do know that I askod
Dr. Bernhard Sohnidt about this .oat tor. I bcliovo that I got a full
P^rspaotivo of this ratter when I nado tho acquaintance of Dr. Irugow-
sky's Docuajnt Book and Doanitr 1 lottor. In a natter as important as
this, Tour Honor, the formal ruloi of evidenoe must bo sot aside and a
reel effort should bo mido to ascertain what tho situation actually
was. So I ask that the docueunts that I as not putting in in this
satUr, noaoty Document a HA-70, 71...no, I shall start again*..HA 71,

HA 72, HA 73, and HA 7U, bo accopted in ovid«nco as Exhibits 69 , 70,

71 , and 72. I have Just boon informed that Dociccnt 1305 was put in
evidence during the cross-examination of tho defondant H-ugowsky.

HR. HARD!: I think ay recolloction servos no the snroo, your
"cnor. If tho docuaant was put in aft_r tho witness oppoircd hero,
then I havo no objection to the affidavit.


10262


Court So. 1

2? Jun 47-A-16-l-iEH-i:aloy (Saolcr)


rs. HUri: This conclude# ny subcission of supolenental docunents
for the dofendaat Professor Haaileser, and thu# ay case for this defen¬
dant. I ihould liko, however, to re#ervo the right, should it he neces¬
sary, to offer one nore docuaent vfcich say he sade necessary by the docu-
cont# vfcich the prosecution gave to us yesterday.

IHI PRZSIDRNT: The Tribunal will hear counsol if he deens it neeos-
sary to offer in evidence any further docusents.

JTJTGa 5233X50; Dr. Selto, I have in sy hand here a docuaont
apparently of the prosecution, VO-934, vhich nrcsusably is an extract
free Docuaont NO-924. It is not cuite clear to ac vhat Fandloner oxhibit
r.uabor you gave that extract.

HR. HARDT: It hasn't any nusbor yet, Tour Honor.

rs. llLTLi Tea, NG-924 Is a prosocutlon docunont. Docusonts 921
to 924 arc prosecution docusonts, oxceruts froo tha Printed conference
reports.

:3. KARDT: Does dofonso counsel vish to have Docusonts VO-931,
*0-922, NO-923, and VO-924 attached to tho Fandloeer affidavit, vhich is
inhibit COT

TKL PSLaSXI&Kt That vea tho purpose of ny inaulry. I ossusc so.

». S*LT1: Tcs.

I®. HA5DT: In that lnstar.co, could v« nusber tho extracts from
Do CUSS nt HC-921 as Exhibit 60 -A, tho extracts fron NO-92? as Sxhiblt 60-3,
*.he extracts froa NO-923 as Exhibit 60-C, and tho oxtrncts froa 924 ns
whiblt 60-D? Then I vill be able to koep track of thee.

Ztt. PR2SHEYT: They vill be so numbered.

m. S&LT2: I havo no objection to that. I thank you. I hovo con-
:ludcd ay defease.

THL PH3SIDINT: Are there any furthar doeuaents to bo offered by tho

«ur.scl?

—. KRAUSS: Dr. Kraus* for tho defondant Professor Rostock.

i-r. President, a*, this tine I should like to put in three affidavits
'•= the case for the defendant Professor Rostock. I do not knov whether


10263


Court So. 1

27 Jun 47-A-18-2-IBWialoy (Ear-lor)


or not the Tribunal has the translations of then. If it is egreeablo to
tho Tribunal, I should like to put the three docunonts in now, oven if
they do not have the translations, giving a brief suanary of their con¬
tents.

IKE FKZSXX8ST: Counsel nay proceed. The Tribunal has no copioe of
tho documents that I know of.

IE. RA2TT: Ve have no copies. Are they affidavits on character
reference or what ore they? If I could look at the affidavits to soo if
they are proporly executed, I nay allow this, but I would rather have
then in English before ve have then introduced, Tour Honor.

IS. KRAUSS: I ask tho Tribunal to rulo on this. Either docioion
is acceptable to no.

THE PRESIDENT: I vas cndoavorlng to ascertain whother English
cooios are available. I have soon none.

IS. KAP.ZT: I should llko to look at tho Goman conies and sec
vhothor thoy aro in order.

THE PfESIEEHTi Counsel will subalt copies in Goman to cour.ool
for the proeuoution, vho will oxnainc then.

a. XRABSSl Tho Goman originals are horc and can bo oxanlnod.

iff.. KASDTi Tour Honor, thoy apocar to bo in ordor and have Jurats
thereon. I havo no objections to their being put in nov if cooios ero
served on no vlth the nuobers on each affidavit when they are sorvod so
that I will have a record of then.

THE PrESIDLST: Tos, and those for tho Tribunal also, vhon vo

*

reccivo tho copies, should beer the exhibit nunbors which aro assignod to
thee.

IF. KSAC5S: Hr. President, first I shall out in an affidavit by
the witness .-.argareto Saldow. This I put in as Rostock Exhibit Ho. 11.

The witness raldcv vas chief nurse at Professor P-Ostock's clinic. Sho
had a precise knowledge of Professor Rostock's activities and oersonelity.
She states in the affidavit that Professor Rostock, even after taking over
tho Office of Science and Rosoarcfc, still regained the responsible chief


Court So. i

27 Jun 47-A-i&-3-ZRH-»(cloy (Rc ol cr)

of the university clinic, and thft from a purely temporal coint of viov
ha spent _:ost of his tine end onergiss la the clinic and with his
ratlcnts. Because of her Intlaatc knowledge of Professor Rostock's
character, both as a huaan being and a doctor, the witness states that
she know of no participation of Rostock In Illegal cxoeri*cents and con¬
siders it quite out of the Question that he even knew of any illegal
oxperlnoats.

Tho socond docunant that I wish to offer to the Tribunal is an
affidavit by Professor Morsel. I offor it as Rostock Exhibit 12.

Professor .-.enrol vts business rcanagor of the Reich Resoerch Council. Ho
has a precise knowledge of the organisation of the Reich Resoerch Council.
Eo says in his affidavit that Rostock hinsclf woe not a nersbor of the
Reich Rosoarch Council, that ho was acrely the doputy of Profosoor Earl
Brandt froa 1944 on, and that Professor Rostock hinsclf never pertici-
SKtcd in a noeting of the prosidial council or of the chlofs of srecinl-
isod departaonts (Fachspartcnloltor) in tho Reich Rosoarch Council,

The affiant particularly states in tho affidavit that Professor Rostock
had nothing to do with tho issuing of research nsoignoents by tho Roich
Rosoarch Council. He also states that it was not Rostock's Job to holp
doternino the priority rating of tho individual rosoarch assignments.

Tho affiant also states that Rostock, as leoder of tho Sclcnco end
Research Offlco, had no right to give orders to tho Reich Research Coun¬
cil.

Third, I cut in an affidavit by .argarct Gcorgi. I out this affi¬
davit in as P^stock Exhibit 13. This witness is n doctor. In 1936 sho
received a long prison sentence for insulting the Fuehrer, and today
she is recognised as a victin of Jascisn. This witness Eays that in
view of her oolitlcal cunlshncnt she could not find »-ork in the Third
Roich, that she had difficulties vhcrover she turned, and that Professor
Restock, in full knowledge of the ffcct sho had been sentenced, employed
her as assistant doctor in his clinic. She further strtes that during
her activities as assistant doctor, in view of her political opst, sho


1


1026 $


Court So. 1

27 Jun 47-A.-1 S-t-ZEk-J«aLcy (Ra.nlor)


ves put at 30 disadvantage by Professor Rostock, but that she ve« oro-
noted the vry every other associate vas promoted by Professor Rostock.

kr. President, these three documents conclude ay defense of
Professor Rostock.

KL PSiSIIlJ": The three docuaents will bo adnitted in evldenco as
exhibits on bohalf of defendant Rostock, under the nunbors assigned to
the exhibits by counsol. Conies are to be furnished the Tribunal us eoon
os postiblo.

Do any other defenso counsel have any documents to offer?

DR. Silll: Soldi for Gebhardt, Obcrhcuser, and Tischer.

Hr. President, after the recess I shall be roedy to put in eupnlo-
aental docunonts for those throe defendants. Those docunonts aro in
Docuaont Book 2. Moreover, there aro prenarod fair loose docuncnto
vhieh also contain affidavits. I should be obllgod if tho Secretary
General will give tho Tribunal the translations of thoso docunento which
aro already prepared, and then I ehall offer tho docunonts.

THi PRISIDES7: Tho Secretary will furnieh tho Tribunal translations
of tfceso docunonts, to bo taken uo at tho close of the bonding rocoso,

Tho Tribunal will nov bo in recess.

(Thereupon a recess vas takon.)


Court No. 1

27 Jun 47-A-20-l-SEK-Cook (Srca)


7±a / vARSV AI: Persons In tht courtroom will please find their Boats.

The Tri'xmal ie again in session.

IE. SIIXi Counsel for the defendants Gebhardt, Cberhcusor, and
Pitcher.

Hr. Prosidont. in accordance with the suggestion nade by the
Tribunal, I have drafted on index where you will find nil of the docu¬
ments which have been subeitted so far. Also you will find there all of
those docunonts which I intend to eubrait to the Tribunal today. In view
of tho short tine at ay disposal, I was not able to got a translation in
tine.

• I do buliovo, hovovor, that this index «vsn in tho Gorman languago
will holp to facilitate the mrcceelings.

Co the first pago of this index you vill find a list of thooc docu-
nents which hnvo been submitted in Docuaont Book I and which have
already boon admitted by the Tribunal. This wt of tho index is
finishod and I aak you now to turn to page no. 2 whoro you will find
those docunonts which aro contained in tho docunont book now before tho
Tribunal, which is Document Book So. 2. Tor roasons of crocdicncy !
have ulso inserted, in Colunn 1, tho oxhibit cunbor provisionally for
tho convenience of the Tribunal.

In the eocond column you will find tho docunonts in tho order os
they ore contained in the docunont book, aid then you find tho nage nun-
ber and tho description of tho individual doeuaent.

Tho last docunont which I subeitted to tho Tribunal in Aorll was

Gobhardt Exhibit 16. The first document I an now subnit ting to you is

-ocunont So. 18 In Docuaont Book So. 2. This will boeonc Gobhardt

Exhibit So. 17, as it is listed in tho index. This is an order of tho

Rcichsfuchrer SS Einnler, dated 17 Kay 1940. The defendant Karl

Gebhardt in his direct examination defined his attitude toward that

or Aar. This order is being subeitted in order to illustrate the tasks

of the defendant Karl Gebhardt in his caoacit. os Consulting Surgeon to

•

the Vaffon SS. This doeuaent is offered as Exhibit Gobhardt Fo. 17.


10267


Court So. 1

27 Jua 47-A-20-2-iEM-Cook (3ro*m)


Tha next document In the document book is an order of the High
Coaaaad of the Vekraecht, signal by the Chief of the Vehrnacht Medical
Service, the defendant Dr. Eandloeer.

•'2. EAHDTs May I inoulre of defense counsel Just vhat is the
source of these docuaents7 The second doeunent I believe I have soon
the original oyself upon the interrogation of Oebhardt r-nny, nany nonths
ago. I won't object to that. 3ut the other copies, those aro certified
eopics by Dr. Soldi of original Ooraan documents. May ho infor-i no Just
vhero thoso documents aro kept in custody?


27 June 47-A-S"-21-l-?.'inabuck(.«nler)

Court No. 1 Case 1 v

DH. SSIELt Mr. President, the original documents were re turn el
to the defendant Karl Gobhardt aft^r his arrest. Ho turned them ovur

A •

to &, and they are now in py possession. According to the usage of
the Tribunal, that only copies or phtotstats are submitted, I thought
it sufficient to suboit only a copy. If however, it is desired, I can
submit the original to the Tribunal.

THE FREStCBIT: The originals should bo suboit tod. A photostat,
being a facsimile of thr. original, will serve a purpose, but h acre
typewritten copy would not.

DR. E-EIOLs In that caso I shall suboit the. originals of these
two docuoonts to tho Secretary General of the Tribunal. They are still
in ny possession. Tho document which I Just oontioned is Document
ffunfcnr 19, is the second document in ^cuaent Book Nunb'r 2. This is
the order of the CK”, dated 1 Kovpmb r 19LL. *he defendant has already
dofinod his attitude toward that order in tho witness box. This order
shows th*. tasks which had to be fulfilled by th«. defendant Oobhartt
in tho lost months of tho war. I off-r this iccunont as Gobhardt
Exhibit Vunhcr 13.

The next '.ocumont to which I turn now is an affidavit signod by
•Vnoral of tho ^offon-SS Tarl -olff. Karl * olf f, throughout a long
period of time, was Chief of the Personal ^taff of tho Rnichafuehror-
SS and therefore has a sound knowledge of the situation within thu Si
in gonorsl and also within tho medical s rvico of tho SS. Hu furthor
knows about the relationships between -he defondant Karl Gebhardt
anl Roichs fuehrer-SS Himlor. I submit this affidavit as Gobhardt
Lvhibit Number 19. Karl ’olff, among other matters, shows his attitude
toward ths corcept of th-' "escort physician’. Ho then status what Gob¬
hardt hai to do in his capacity as Consutling Surgeon to the affon-SS.

Hr further mak - s statements about the position of Dr. Stunpftggor tho
later accompnaying physician of Himlnr and Hitler. This s< ums to nt
*o bo necessary because br. Stuspfogg-r has reputedly b-^.n mentioned
in this casa in connection with the oqrrimrnts and in pcrtici lar the


10269


27 June 47-A-S^21-2-Himbeck(*ceilcr)

Court He. 1 Case 1

bone experiments. __

I now turn to the affidavit of Dr. Karl Friodrich Brunner, which
can be found on page 21 of thn document book. This affidavit I offer
as G'bhr.r it Exhibit Jfuab-r 20. This witness *crkM in the Defendant
Farl Gnbh-rdt 1 s clinic at Hohonlychon for a considerable tine. I ask
the Tribunal to take -otice of t ho contents of thi document. I should —
B rely lik' to quote a few sentences of the second paragraph on page
13 of that affidavit:

"ItogarUng Dr. ^tumpfegger’ s personality, I can state that already
in peacetime he was an assistant at the clinic before ne. *t the
beginning of the war in 1939 he Joined the -affen-SS and was then,
ns Tar as I know , from 1942 onwards escort physician of Hirrlor.

I did not see ^r. Stucpfeggwr on ny return to Hohonlychon in the autumn
of 1943 , nor had ha any official connection with the clinic up to tho
uni of the wir, either in r medical or in a military sense."

I then turn to the affidavit or Dr. nod. habil. Josef I'onstler.

This affidavit can be found on page 15 of the document book, and it
is sunfitted as >bhnrdt Exhibit Hurfcer 21. ^r. ronstW was also
an -ssistnnt physician nt Hohenlychnn. I shall quote only two para¬
graphs from this affidavit. They ore to bo found on page 15 of tho
docunont bock.

"•’her. Professor Dr. Karl Gnbhardt and 1/ at tho third Confcronco
of Consulting Specialists of the German ffehraacht in Hoy 1943 , gavo
a lecture on surgical aid for peripheral nerve damage, wo were, on the
one h , interpreting the results of aniaal exportents carried out
on experimental dogs from 1938 bo 1940 in the Ungenbeck-Vlrohow Hospital
Berlin, and in the institute of Professor Holt < nd Professor Ostrrlag,
and, on the oth r fend, announcing surgical cdhods ns they hnd boon

frruently used uring the previews yoars.

"Un lor the title of • Preparatory and Ri-.sotrativo burgory m casoB
of Peripheral Verve -nrr.gn’, I recorded those exp. ricnccs in tho “Goman
Journal for Surgery," Veto 259, Vuabcrs 1 to 4, 1943 , «*t in my


10270


27 Ju-l 47—A-S*-21-3- Hina buck( fooler)

Court *io. 1 Case 1.


hftbilitetion paper (1943, University of Berlin).

"I or.ch-sizt expressly that this series of oeporiaents was
cr.rrid out exclusively on nnio'ls."

I -vsk you to ncc*pt this affidavit ?.s Grbhnrdt Exhibit Uucbr r 21.

I no- go over to page 17 of the document book ».h«.rw you will
flni an of fi i«vit signed by .vether assistant physician of the
defendant Gobhardt. This is tho affidavit of Ur. hnns-Gcorg Jaedickc.

His statements are relevant in connection with the so-cnllod bio-
chenicfl xperionnts. I ask you to accept this i ffidavit ns Gub-
h'.rlt Exhibit Hupber 22, vrd I shall merely ouoto paragraph 5 from
page 21 of tho tocuarnt book:

”5) ■'iochasdcel "ork ft Hohenlychtn. In the course of 1943 a
n* dicrl conff ronco took place at Hohoulych* o a.-*>ng Professor Gnbhardt,
H>nlth Senator Lmm, the bioch'nicnl physician w r. nod. rioaewettor,

;ind Professor Schlonr., in which I participr.ted. Lnuo and Gchlonz
mproswtod the standpoint that the recognized surgical n-thods for
the treatoont of chronically purulent wounds should be supplanted by
biochccdcnl oca ns and bath treatments. Ltuo was of the opinion that,
according to tho basic principle of biochemistry, all lisensos orig¬
inate in a deficiency of of cert-' in minerals which uonv lly oxist
in snail uaotiti*>s in tho body -nl th«t the induction of these basic
minerals highly' diluted (in the case in aaestion; calciun carbon-

icur. 1:1,000,000, cnlciuc fluoratuol: 1,000,000; siUcw 1:1,000,000)

nould cure these lise^s. /lthough Professor Gobhurdt and I could
not confirm these findings, Profossor Gebhnrdt charged with the
clinical scientific chocking of tlxis bio-chenical therapy and tho
bath treteapot of clinic patients in the framework of our work on
stimulation thor py, of course retaining tho usur1 life-pros..rving
therapy. Irats on clinic p tionts suiforing freo chronic diseases Tid
l-.to ccr.plictions w re clearly justified, * s these nthods w«re not

(accidental wounds, 1 rush injuries)


applied t -t the b-ginning of a disease

10271


27 Juxjh 47-A-S ’-21-4-h'in.-buck (*wal-r)

Court !fe. 1 Case 1

but constituted Additional trentnents '"ppliod nt the end of the.
cur. As ainil-'.r trw'tnents of chronic prtienta, «spcci lly
juveniles, had long boon applied — especially when r 11 other nod-
icia^l thjjr-.py h»d felled - rnd hid pertly been found successful, rod
ns they ware entirely h -mless, vc hid the scientific guarantee
thft would not subject the patient to -uy risks by epplying this
trentcent.

"As'f'.r 'J Ian rea-ill, I treated .-bout fifty petionts ir.

qy surgical w.-.rd r dditio»r lly with tto-chaeicnl end bnliioologicnl

nrnsuros, «s could be foreseen, the success of these one—sided

rai-sur-iG was only sodom to rnd wne restrict! d to the well-known

good gonsral effect of contrast thompy with warn b^ths. I reported

thie to Profoosor Bobherdt, stbaitting a scientific rusunn and n

sciintific paper intended lor the profession*. 1 press. Only r yonr

l'tnr did I loam of Gobhnrdt’s and Fischer's aulfonrnido exp*<rljaonts,

which were cccplctod in 1942. In 1943 when I was transferred frora

the Luftwafie in 'Jorwry to the niliiry rosorve hospital Hohcn-

lychen, I lorrnod bout then fron nn official report (in n gmon

•

p-cphl-it issu'd in 1943) dealing with - congress of Consulting
Itodienl Officers of the Gornon '.'ohmocht. A short tixan beforo no,
in 1936 or 1937, Dr. -tuepfuggor joined tho clinic as in assistant
physician; it the beginning of the war, howov -r, ho boerxin r nilit ry
doctor, nd since that tia> he nov-T work d nt Hoh'<nlych««. I learned
that fre tc -bout 1942 on he was Himlor' s escort physician and th: t
he lator hold tho s tnr. position with Hitler."

The next docucrnt can bo found on pago 24 of t!ie documnt book.
It is an excerpt fron tho report on the Third Conference -nst of
Consultant Specialists free the 24th to the 26th of May 1943. This
is subnit ted as Cebhnrdt Lxhibit !Hsb-r 23. I should like to stn.to
tvt w.1 Arc concerned hero with an .occerpt fron this green pamphlet,
froa which the Prosecution ps well r s by the defense havo already


10272


27 June 47-A-S-21-5‘Minabuck( Bealer)

Court So. 1 Case 1

subnittoa excerpts to the Tribunal.

I subnit thia docuraent because the lectures by Gebhr.rdt end oth -r
■ioctora of his clinic were held during the sum emoting r.s the lectures
reporting on tha wlfonenide experinrnts. TJy t was in Key 1943- On
'nother occasion, when subaitted Docunent Book JJunfcnr 1, I subaitted
aerrpt froc thia report. This ms Gflbhardt Exhibit Nueber 10.1 nsk
the Tribunal to take notice of the contents of this excorpt. * locturo
by the Defendant ^rofosaor Bebhrrdt in collabon tion with Stnn-V rten-
furhrer Schulzo, who was chief phyaicirn et Hohonlychon, regarding
physioth* rapy r^d the oobiliznticn of joints, la described under figure
2 .


10273


27 Juno U7-»-AtDfc22«J.-Orcss (la“. lanL-r)

Court !fo. 1

Or. page 28 of the do euro nt book ycu fin?, the nano Koestlcr
ixintionod at tho botton of the page* Here tbs re is ns question at ail
of any ox^rinonts on hunan beings, but of cxpcrlenco rained as a
result of tho clinical wort* On page 29 undor parapraph 15 you find
a locturo ^ivon by Dr. Brumor. This concerns lirdtationsof tho
therapeutic valuo of x-ray contrast pictures of injurios of peripheral
nerves. I fofer to tho affidavit of Dr. Brunnor in this connection
which has clroady boon sutdttod as Gobhar't Exhibit 20, a few
inutos ego.

On pace 30 of tho docuaant book ycu fin roforenco to a locturo
undor pnroeroph 16 by SS-GrupponfUohror, Oonarolloutnant prof.

Gobhardt regardin'; aralysis of the nerves. This was do no in collabo¬
ration with Xoostlor. This locturo was ^ven as a result of oxporinoitts
on aninals which Xoostlor carried out un-!or tlv. loadorship of
Oobhardt# Koostlcr spoaks about oxporinants in his affidavit which
was already suboittod by no to tho Tribunal today as Oobhardt Exhibit

2U

TIE PRESIDED! ’ihat pa ;o of your Docu. :ont Book was tho last ono
y.u roforrod to, coureol?

DR. SEIDLi Paso 30 of tho Gurtvin an * 30 of tho English docunont
bock, your Ifanor*

HR. HARDY i Your Honor, exhibit 23 which is -keux-nt 21* does that
purport to bo an extract cf Prosocutionis exhibit?

DR* SSIDLi Wo aro bare cor.eornas* with tho sane ’ocunont which
v?s rxmtionod about an h-ur a c by Dr. ’suite. This is tho sreon
paaphlot about the report of the consul tins physicians.

I shall not turn to pa'jo 31 of tho Document Beck. Hero ycu find
tho 3tatanont node by Dr. I Sod* von Erlach dated 23 February 19li7.

Dr. Erlach was tho head of a nixed co mission of .hysi clans vrhich
visited tho clinic of Kohonlychca. He vlsitod thi3 instituto in M.3
capacity as chief physician, cc.nin iron S-tL tzorlan' fren the
International Rod Cross. I subnit this statenant as Exhibit Oobhardt 2U*


1027 /*


27 JUna U7-u-«T!>-22~2*Grcs3 (Tnt. Rnfalor)

Court :«o. 1

I don* 4 thirk that it is nccossary to quo to argrthin~ frcr. this stcvto-
oont and I ask the Tribunal to take notico of that.

I then turn to the affidavit of ' ilhalrdnc Honno which can bo
found on paco 3h of tho tdocuacnt book. I should like to nako tho
following recarks in that connection. Tho 9 documents vhich I on
oin to subnit use oil concern aoro or loss tho sano subject. Tho so
are sta tenants nado by foruor nurses, fornar nala nursos, and fomor
•^tients of tho Clinic Bohonlycbjn. I pickc! out fr:i a lcrco nuribor
of lotters which woro adtdrossed to no a nu.±>^r of statunonts and
ccnvortod thon into tho fom of an affidavit. I don't thin that it is
mcossory to road anything into the record and I shall ocroly subult
than to tho Tribunal as exhibits. Tho affidavit needo by \7iUwlnino
Konna on pago 3U of tho Jocuocnt book vhich boars the, nunbor 2U, will
bocono Gobhardt Exhibit 25.

Tho noxt etocur»nt is on affidavit sicnod by a cortain ltodonoisollo
.'.ntoinotto Etolachaux and it oan bo found on pago 37 of tho Docunont
book. This is locurajnt 27 an'. I sutrdt it asGobhnrdt Exhibit 26.

Tho followiix; docunont is an affidavit sicnod by a oortain Harr
ton Sohlabrcoggo. This you fin;'. In Docunont Book n on i<tgo 39. It
boars tho nur.bor 28 and it is subedttod as Gobharlt Exhibit ,?27.

Thon follows the affidavit si'.nod by a cortain Carl Frie drich
'fcssdorf. This you find or. ;a;:o U2 of tot. Docunont Book boaring tho
nurbor 29 and will boccuo exhibit 28. Then follows tho affidavit
sicnod by Paula Eallituunz-r who vr.s a physiotherapist at Hohonlychon*
This can bo found on paso hS of tho docunont book boaring ft 30 and
will boccoo Gobhardt exhibit 29.

Thoro follows on ,-Ago U7 of tho document book an affidavit
si;nod by Dr. Gustav Adolf Sclrwding which boars -’ocuajnt nuribor 31 and
is offorod as Gobhardt Exhibit ftJ0 4

TR. IT.PD Yt Fer tho convcrdonco of tho Tribunal at tho corxplotion
of tha introduction cf cvidcnco on the .art of Dr. Scidl for tho


10275


27 Jttro L7-»W.TD-22-2-Gross (Ir.t. Ranlor)
Court Me. 1


dofondant Gebfcardt, Dr. Ifcrkle will havo his docunont book roc. ■'y for
tho dofondant Gor^kor. and he has sutedttod his Oenxkon docunont book
and tho Secretary Gone ml nay procure those for the Tribunal end I
will attonpt to procure onos for th. Prosocuticn and wo '.ill bo roady
at that tina,

TIE FRESHEN?: Tho socrotary will procure tho ’.ocujionts.

DR. SEIDL: The last docunont to which I roforrod '~a tho affidavit
cf Dr. Gustav Adolf Schr-cdin.^ on Paso li7 of tho docunont book. This
boars no. 31 and is offered as Gebhardt Exhibit #30. The next docunont
is an affidavit signed by :irs. :&rlo Agw>s Xaston. This will find on
pajo U9 of tho Docunont Book booring tho docunont nunbor 32, and is
boine offorod as Gobhordt axhibit #31. On ,:or;o $1 of tho docunont
book you will find tho affidavit si,-rod by tho physiotherapist
Gisola Fritzo. This docunont boars no. 33 and is off trod to tte Tribunal
as Exhibit 32.

I row turn to tho affidavit signod by Xoothc Somor n llconsod
plysio tho rapist which you will find on pago 53, boarin;: #3U. This
affidavit is sutrdttod as Oobhardt Exhibit 33.

Thoso docunonts concludo tto sorios of affidavits with which I
intended to -ivo a picturo to th- Tribunal about tho spirit in which
Professor Gobhardt trlod load 1 As clinic. As already nontionod thoso
affidavits havo boon solootod fron a largo mnbor of lottors fron his
forajr collaborators and patients. Itow I shall turn to pago 55 of tho
docunont book. Horo you will find an affidavit signed by Fr. Dr. -toria
"obor, a nerve spocialist in tho norvo clinic of th> Itrnich University.
This boars #35 and is suhiittod as Gebhardt Exhibit 3U. This docunont
’istinjuishos itself frea previous toCUnonts by tho feet that it deals
<ith cno ..articular quostion which has played a part during thoso
proccodings, nanoly troatnont of psychopathic an:’, people who aro fooblo
nindod. This servos a goo ’ purpose in substantiating of tho tostinony
vhich Dr. Gobhardt undo or. tho witness star.'. It loscribcs horr tho


10276


27 Jjno li7-A-6TD-22-k-0rcss (In?. Rnlcr)
Court Ik), 1


defendant Gebnardt tried to cure psychopathic childron, fooblo nindoi
children, and nako then a^ain wertJgr nonbora of sc doty. ;.s I noationod
before I an offorlrr this docunent as Oobhirdt Exhibit 3 k.

There now follow a nartoer of Docirxnts, !*r. Prosidont, which aro
intended to shea what Dr. Earl Gobhnrdt*s political attitude was and
to show that ho was tolerant fron a politioal point of view and that
ho trlod to help the peoplo who hr.d yotton into difficulties boo&uso
of political or racial reasons, Hero I an also only supplementing
fron a nunbor of letters which I have rccoivod and which I an sul>-
nittdnc to the Tribunal in tho fom of affidavits.


10277


27 June-A-FL-23-l-Lcssor (Ir.t. Rnalor)
Court No. I, C=a- I


I Tbt first docu-cnt of that kind can be found on pngs 53 of the doc moist
® Dijk. This is an affidavit signed by iirs, Dorrit von Vic ruck. It boars
tho d-cosoRt No. 36 and is offered as Exhibit 35-1 repeat, Gcblmrdt
Ixhibit No. 35# In tb_ cas<_ of this docavnt, as well ca in the case
of all othor docuaents, I forego quoting any passages into the record
-nd ox, roly confine oyself to caking tho Tribunal to take notice of the
docuasntf.

On psfo 60 of th. Docttxnt Book you will find nn affidavit sigiwd
by a Nrs Daisy von «rnin, bearing Uw document No. 37, which is being
offered as Gubhcrdt Exhibit No. 36.

Tho next document to which I aa turning n:* is tho affidavit si-
.-nad by lkd. Dr. Gertrud Ober.*-icr, on page 65 of tho document book.

This doooaont boars tb. nuaber 39 and I an wboitting it to tlv Tribu-
ral as Gcbhardt Exhibit No. 38.

■RLS PRSSLUIT: Are you intentionally passing am. docuount, counsol?
Did you pass your document No. 38 intentionally?

DR. SblUL: I beg your pardon, -Ir. President. I overlooked that do¬
cument. Docu_>-nt No. 38 is tho affidavit signed by Conrad Sobers on tho
25th of lfcrch 1967.

THIS TVZSICu T: That is Document No. 38, counsel, is it not? You
said Document 39. It seens to tx. No. 38.

DR. SaOLx Yes, it will be No. 38.

THE PTISSIDJ’T: Exhibit No. 37.

DR. SSIDL: Docuav-nt 38 will beco^j Get hard t Exhibit No. 37. This is
-a affidavit signad by Konrad Scterz. The -ffidavlt sigixd by Gertrud
Oboraciur, bearing tb» r.inbcr 39, will baca Gcbhardt Exhibit No. 38.

Tou will find th.so documents in the sequence as recorded in the incur,
which was submitted to the Tribunal. It was ny oistake in overloo!dng
that affidavit of Konrad Scherz.

On *ag-o 67 you will find an affidavit by Ikdicnl Doctor Valdez
L-.rge, bearing the No. 60, which is sufccitted as Gebhardt Exhibit "o. 39.


10278


27 June-A-FL-23-2-Loss. r (Int. R.~ *J _ r )
Court to. I, Case I


Mr. Presdient, the next doc use at in tho docu.-x.nt book was drecdy
suhaitted by .1. -it ~n er_rlior occ'si n. This is .-n affidavit ai^vd
by Fr-u fcrgarethr. Uydln and was submitted as Inhibit Oberlv.us.r No. I.
This docu-oont refers inly to defendant : -rta Ob-rhauser and her -cti-
vity in tit concentration c r sp of Ravur.sbrueck. I s-rcly included it
nee .a ire in ny docuaent book because- it v.as then only subaitted ind.i-
tiduclly aid not within the Iraaework of c. docuaont book. In order to
rtAd any loss or overnight, I d w oood it ceo-diSr.t to also includo it
in ay docuacnt book ct this tin..


The lest document in ay document book —

TH3 ?3£SID5i'T: Counsel will you egein give >- the nuaber of your
Document Mo. 11?

BR. S'IDL: Document No. 11 boers tho Exhibit Oborhauser No. 1. It
mi already subaitted to the Tribunal into evidence end admitted cs
such.

The Inst document in tho docunont book constitute)o an ordinance by
the Govoraaont Gcnoral for tho Occupied Polish Torritorius. It is a
decree against acts of violations in tho Governaont dn.r-1 of tho 3rd
of October 193>. Tho Court suggested that this document be offered in
connection with jxv, of the docuox^its of Vcluoo I. I was not in c po¬
sition to sub-ait this docua.r.t at an earlier dote because at that tino
I er S rot in pass-scion of the Gazette of the Goveronent Gunor'l datod
1939. This ocu er.t is on png. 72 of the document book , bears the mro-
ber ..2 'nd is suhoitted by tw ■ s Gcbhnrdt Exhibit No. 10. I havu refer-
n,d to this d ocu .lent in ay li.-.'l pl-a and have explained in detail what
Leal conclusions can be derived fr» the docuav.nt. I cannot subait
tee ’.xiuaent in tho original because it is now in possession -f tha Ge-
tUT'l Secretrry*s Office. For that reason I have tar.de an excerpt fran
Gazette of the Gov-moxnt General and had it certified. If it is do¬
ored I shall 'Iso be in a position to subnit a ph-t'stat copy.


10279


27 Jur*-A-?b-23“3“I>-ss-r (Int. R-jai^r)
C -ort Hi. I, Case 1


12. HARDYi I understand defense cou.is-1 certifies that this 5.3 *.

*

tree copy o5 tho Act r.a sot f;rth in the C-overnoent General's rul-s,
or orders — is that convct?

JIDG2 SAEEIHG: Dr. Soldi, *- have boon obs-rving this dociwont
1.2,that is curtifiud b7 you. I understand this is r. litoral trans¬
cript , cortifiud by you froa the original?

I®. SDIDL: Yos. This ordinance was published in the sc \j .icy -a all
rther decrv.es end 1 -ms, thet is, in a. book. This bo^k can b. four/, in
tho library of tho General Secretary. I have a-rely ©.rtified the au¬
thenticity of the copy r.s it was taken iron that book. This decree of
tho Govemient General will become Gobhardt Sthibit No. 40.

This brings ao to the conclusion of the subsission if docunonts
Mhich are contained in Velu.co II. Gentle-awn of the Tribunal, there rro
. ^re docur-ants which I would like to subnit, which are n >t contained in
?oy docoajnt hook, out which I can subiit singly. Thoso aro 4 affidavits.
Iba first affidavit is a& affidavit signod by Countess von Kuonnburg.

It bears No. 45 and will be submitted to tho Tribunal as Cebhardt
Exhibit Mo. 41.

IH. HARDY: Your Honor, I would like to inf Jm Dr. Seidl that I ha.vo
trcr.slations of the so last 4 in ay possession.

DR. S.iIDL: The ssao question is treated in this affidavit which was
already dealt with by the witness Dr. .i-ria >.'eb--r, nniaoly, troat-aont
of feeble—linc'od end psychopathic children by the defendant Dr. Karl

fcbtaordt.

Tho noxt docoient-

THE PSESXDEHT: Counsel, Just a aaaeat. Tn-se w.re banded up to us
a t in jrdor. So would like to arrange then in order before you proceed.

DR. SilDL: Hay I ask whether the Tribunal has this affidavit of
C.untess von Kuonnburg before it?

THE PRESIDE.'7: Yes.

10280 .


2? J'_r.o-n-7L-23-4-L_ss'-r (Int. Rajk,r)
C-urt ho. I, Cas- I


IE. SZHjL: In that cas- I should lik- to sahrdt it as Gebhardt j:-
-ibit Nj. 41. The next docuro-nt listed in the indoc is cn affidavit si¬
gn^ by ;*s. Sjmngur, This is th_ wife of the well-known Dr. Stronger
•rd is intended to Si-* in what trends Pr-fess-r Gcbhardt's oolitical
thirdcing was -loving. This will be Gebhardt Exhibit No. 42.

The next is cn affidavit signed b7 a certain "achsauth and coals Kith
tbt boo- question. This bears No. 46 and is sub ait ted as Gebhardt In¬
hibit No. 43.

I n m turn to the last docuu-nt, .r. Pr~si.ient, It is an affidavit
j*rft.d by tho defendant Dr. Karl Gebhardt himself. I believe that it is
necessary for jo to state the reason which o-v.d oe to sub.-ait such an
offidavit in rddition to the testimony of the rkfendant ^r. Gebhardt,
aider oath, ir. the witness stand.

THB PRISILBM: Counsel, I have no copy of that document in in^Ush.
I»>nJer if or*, is available - an English translation of thio document?
e have only on- copy of that docuaent translated.

CP., SJIjLs I brought a nuab-r of trrnol'tijns al^ng with uc, !i > .
Pr.sident. I should .a-rely like to expLain, Is. President, that jy only
reason for submitting this affidavit is to prevent any .misunderstandings
iln interpretation during Professor Gebhardt's t-stiraony. - have, hs-rvod
ttet the translation of Dr. Gebhardt's testimony has prov.d to be v-ry
difficult ant for that reason I thought it to b- expedient to sub»dt to
Tribunal a concentrated suavry of PT-f-ssor Gebhardt's test loony on
•b. witness star. . Nothing net- is c ntairx,.’ in that affidavit end its pur-
P-se oor-ly is to facilitate the work of the Tribunal and to adjust and
:L.-x up cn y -ustakos in the translations which hrv- not been cleared up
: d-.te, I Just want to add that this r-ally constitutes no basical ques-
l ‘*w f-r oo rnd should the Prosecution be of the opinion that this proce-

is not prop-r, I for jy own part, will not insist on the submission
*his affidavit. I don't know whether the representative of the Prbse-
'-- 1 “ has already read the affidavit. In ers- he has not .as yet read it.


10221


27 June-A-FL-23-5-L-ss-r (In*-. Hauler)
Court I, Ccso I


perhaps the excision regarding its admissibility can lx postpone: ratal
such tiao ns !tr. Hardy is in a position to state whether or not ho
interns to obi-ct to this affidavit.

>HAROYs Your Honor, I have sufficiently looked over tho nf£i-
-rit to dotemino enough to satisfy myself that I do not think it is
-.daissible as an oraibit. It is a suaaary of evidencewritten by tho
defendant hL-.seIf. However, I fe-1 that it might be suggested that tho
defense counsel f-r Gebhardt aay w*il ill- this '.dth his brief to tho
Tribunal as r. surnry of ovieence written by the defendant instead of
by tho defense attorney. It is not r. £ocua-nt as such, as wo -oule con¬
sider here cs rxnissibL. In ovid.nce. It is merely a suanary of tho
transcript of the evidence and the testimony of Cebh-rdt when he v.r.o on
the witness stand. I think it is porheps a good brief rrr’ or.o that tho
Tribunal any find useful, but I do not think it is admissible cs an ex¬
hibit, In substance. Your Hon,r, I think the do fondant could well incor-
p r-.to this into his brief.

THU PXSSIDaTT: It se^s that the defendant w< uld have a ri^ht to
file an affidavit; it would, of cours-, bo subject to an examination,
ins section by the prosecution, or calling tho defendant again f:r cross
examination if h; desires, but


10232


27 Junw-J--GJ-2l*-l-Jialoy-(Rual-r)-
Ccurt 1


aa. HxBDTx But this -ffidavit, ycur honor, la Just a rehashing of
the testimony of the defendant which he has been oxaained on. In other
■erda, the defendant own sraaary of the evidence in this own judgment
of how he testified. That is fer the Tribunal to decide Wun reading the
testimony.

THE rSESUCNTt If the affidavit is a conclusion rather than a
statuBBnt of f-.cta it is not a proper subject for examination but a
proper subject for argunent as a supplant counsel's brief. Th- Tri¬
bunal has had no opportunity to -x n n in e the affidavit or whatever tho
docuacnt ia called.

Dh. STIDL: I say perhaps add the following. This affidavit contains
facts ns well as conclusions in the sane way. It contains conclusions
In the sane way as nany of the witnesses whoa we have hoard here have
stated conclusions. It is acrely a sum-ary of very extensive testimony \nd
is ccrjly intended to facilitate the work of tho Tribunal.

TIS PKBSHJEMTi The Tribunal will receive the docuncnt In evidence,
and disregard the conclusions. The counsel for prosecution nay call the
defendant for cross-ocralnaticn in connection with the docuaont if he de¬
sires. What nursber do you assign the document?

DP.. SKIOL: This docvc»nt *111 receive Exhibit Ulj. .Ir. President
the document number has not been assigned on the document. It 5s document
nunb. r ii3.

Ti*~ tRESIDENT: 1 had already aad-d the number wh eh counsel
gave us before.

Doos this conclude counsel's offer documents?

DP. SBIDL: Ur. President, this concludes the submission of eviden¬
ce on behalf of defendant Karl Gabbardt. I may again repeat that these
tocuconts arc of course also evidence on behalf of defendant Cberhauser
'■' d Pischer, and only for reasons of simplicity th. designation was
•-ohardt alone.

T.c rPESIf'WTT: The Tribunal understands that they arc or. behalf
°- r *-11 thr-c defendants.


10283


27 Junc-A-C-J-2U-2— .nloy-(RaBler)-
Ccurt 1.

T t csc documents counsel, z well arranged 2nd in consecutive,
order end the Tribunal would compliment counsel on the presentation
and arr ngenent of the docun-nts. I as not referring to the contents
cf th_ dccu^-nts because I hare not read then , but the arrangement -nd
order of pr-scntr.tion was excellent.

DR. SEIDL: Thnak you, *r. President.

T.'¥. FRESID^T: .fc received the bock offered on behalf of the
defendant Dr. Karl O t n*ken. Is counsel read} to proceed with thoso?

HR. HARDY: At the conclusion of Dr. uentk.n production of evidence
C think the defendant Ruffs document bock will be ready, so if the
Secretary General can have those document books ready, it will be he-loAil.

DR. sfc-RKEL: kerkcl for defendant Gonzken.

Ur. President, Gentlemen of the Tribunal, in supplementation of
the submission of evidence I should Ilk- to offer seven docunents. The first
document, Gonzken Document 16 to be found on page SO of the document
book. This is offered as Genxkoi Exhi it 17. This is an a ffidavit signed
by the witness Ruff. After the customary introduction the witness states,
and I quote:

"I was Chief of the FUchrungsabteLlung (administrative department)
in the SS KUehrungshauptast (SS Administrative Unin Office; since August

1913, and froa 1 Jay 1912 to the end of the Var 1 w -s la of the SS
Puchrungshauptamt and I an acquainted therefore with the organizatory
structure and branchc of the SS Fhehrungsbauptaiat, and consequently also
with the medical service -f the faffon SS.

".Thilo Groups of consultant physicians had buen attached to the
medical chiefs of the three s-cticns of the .'chraacht, groups which acted
in an advisory c pacity in the separate special fields of medicine, this
institution dod not exist with the Chief of the r.edical Scrvic- of the
•affen SS within the SS FXichrungshauptant.

11 1 know that there irs a largo mcb_r of leaders dthin the <affen
who wer- not subordinate tc the SS Fuehrungshauptont, but served an
-ther SS branch^, and were subordinate therefore to the chiefs of th-sc


102&L


2" Jonc-A-uiloy-Bcalor)-
Court 1
branches."

This affidavit should prov^ there were nc so-called groups of
consultant physicians at the «bffon SS. This supports the testimony
of the Defendant Gebhordt who designated M asc lf 03 consulting surgeon
of Kinol-r and therefore was not subordinated to the SS Puchrungshaupt-
•ot or the chief of the Mcaical Service of the * of fen SS.

All the other docucents arc copies of the ?ohl trial which is
C-sc Ho. U in Ccurtraco Ho. 2 All of these arc certified by -^Jor
Schaefer.

The first of these Series of dccuc.nts is Uenxkcn 19-A, can
be found cn page Ul of the document book. It is going to be exhibit lb.
This is the interrogation of witness Dr. Kogan by the porsooution in
tribunal IV. I quote on r. lil the last question:

MQ And in 19L3 Block 50 was abandoned and was used for the
production of typhus vaccine?

"a He entered the block on the 15th of August 19U3- It had b«en
arranged for th. purposes of production of typhus vaccine, and the
production had boon changed."

This shew? that Block 50, the vaccine production station was
only used is fWa the 15th of «ugust 19li3. If the Tribunal rill renumber
os of the 1st of Septceber 19U3 the institute for the production of vac¬
cine was no longer under the Jurisdicticn of Geniken, but under the Juris
diction of the Roichsorzt 3S Grawitz. The block was only occupied on
15th August 19li3. The actual production cf vaccine cust have stated
mch later, certainly after the 1st of Scpt^nbvr 19L3.

The next docuacnt rill be Oenxkcn 19-3, and rill bacon- Oenzk-n
exhibit He. 19. This you will find on page li3 of th. Docunent Book.

Here wu have the crcss-exarinaticn of the sane witness. Dr. Kogan by
defense counsel Dr. Scidl. As it is wai-kncwn Ealcchcwsky had subnitted
in a ffidiwit tc the prcs-cution, docunent ,.'o. D8U which was Exhibit Ho.
291. On page 65 of the cccun.r.t 12 cf the prosecution, there Balachowsky
speaks about a Main Cccoittee on typhus r-search and alleges Genzko.n was


10285


27 Ju^-^-OJ-2lt-l»-«aloy-(R=alcr)-
Court 1.

a somber of that cc rai ttco. .

Other documents heva already established that as such noin
ccrrdttOs. listed. It has been proved that Dr. Bslachoswky had not
sufficient knowledge about the situation in Slock $0 and Block 16, and
it is fer that reason I cm going to subait that dpeusent, Ho. 19. I
cc-rcly read the last question on page 1*3-

"Q Ch tho basis of your statenent, .1 =ust assunc that Dr.

"'.chalowsky -Iso was well inferred about th- conditions in Block 1*6 and
Block 50?

"A Hot so well not even ipprexinatwiy so w_ll as I was.’ 4

The next docuncnt will be ucntkcn Dccucunt 19-C, which will be
Exhibit Oonxkcn 20. This you find on pagw 11 cf the Docuncnt Book and it
is also an excerpt free the cross-exoaination of witness Kogan by defense
counsel Soldi:

U Q I shall now cctx back to theso aedical ^xpvricents at Buchen-
aald that mire carried out there. Yew testified that Dr. Ding fron
191*3 was chiof cf the Division for Typhus and virus Research at Buchen-
mld, is that correct?

n A Yes. The tlac within • 1*3 cust be stated noro accurately. I toll
you the Departner.t for Typhus and Virus Research was later on decided
upon by tho Hygienic Institute it Berlin, rather than at tho tine when
Ding-Schuler took cv-r these functions practically.“

"Q ..hen w L '.a the Dcpnrtn.nt for Typhus and Virus Research
created?

" A The Departo-nt which received that titlo lab.r on, according
to jy recollection, was created in Hevaaber 191*1, within the framework
:f the “epartnent fer Special Tasks of Dr. Ding-Schuler, and that was
only for a clinical station there- The plan fer the foundation on the sta¬
tion for the production of inoculants for typhus st.rt^d in Autumn of 191*2.
Th. .xecuticn itself ran free the end of January 19U3 to the 15th cf August


191*3- Th- ccapon title. Department for Typhus and Virus Research, at

10236


I


27 Jur^-A-GJ-2Ii-5-J‘*-lcy-(fL'nl>r)-
3curt 1.

3uchcrarald, wis, according tc ay rcccllccticn, finally d-cid-d
op n at thv. end of 19U3, at -he Hygienic Institute, of the .'affen S3,
B-rlin."


10237


27 June 4 7- A-25- 1-Kehan-(Realer)

Court 1

31nce the common title was only finally decided upon at
the end of 194*, one finds that only at that period of time
was the production of vaccine started.

The next document will be Gentkon 19-D, Exhibit 21, which
one finds on page 45 of the document book. This Is the dlreot
interrogation of tho Witness Aokermann by the prosecution:

■ q. Was Dr. Muellor, whom you mentioned, subordinated to
Dr. Lolling?■

A. Dr. Mueller, llko every other doctor in the concentrat¬
ion camps, was subordinated to Dr. Lolling."

This establishes that every Dootor in the concentration
camps, Including Dr. Ding, was subordinated to Dr. Lolling,
thehead of tho oonoentratlon camps. Dr. Lolling and his
department woro part of tho W.V.H.A., Sub-dopartmont D-*.

Dr. Lolling and his department, D—wore not part of tho
S3-Fuehrungsamt.

In addition I submit Oontkon dooument No. 19-E, which
vlll bocomo Gonrken Exhibit No. 22 and can be found on page
46 of the dooument book. This Is the continuation of tho
interrogation of the Wltnoss Aokermann by the Prosooutlon,

I quo to:

"q: Do you know If this camp was subordinated to tho
W.V.H.A. In Borlln: tho economic and administrative head
cfflco In Borlln?

A. After all letters, at least those from the medical
section, had been read and after we sent thorn to D-* and
Lolling had repeatedly ccme there for Inspection, wo had to
assume that the W.V.H.A., with whoa we were In direct contact
regarding economic matters, actually was the superior organ¬
ization of this SS institute.*


10233


27 June 47-A-.iX-2d-2-Meeh.iii*-(Senior)
Court 1


THE PRESIDENT: Counsel, will you please road again
Document No. 19-2 slowly and I shall ask the Interpreter
to interpret It without the benefit of the manuscript.

DR. MERKEL: "Question: Do you know whether this canp was
subordinated to the tf.V.H. A. in Berlin, the economic and
administrative head office In 3orlln.

“Answer: Since all letters, at least from the modlcal
department, had been sont to D-9, to Lolling*s offlco and
Lolling had co_o there repeatedly for purposes of Inspection,
wo had to assume that the W. V.H.A., with whom wo wore in
direct contact regarding eoonomlo natters, aotually was the
superior agency of this S3 institution."

THE PRESIDENT: Thank you.

DR. M2RX2L: Finally, In ordor to prove the sane matter,

I am submitting tho document 19-F, Exhibit 2', on pago of
the document book. This is also an excerpt from the exam¬
ination of tho witness Aokermann and I quoto:

"Q. Do you remember with what Aatsgruppo of tho V.V.H.A.
you worj in contact?

"<*. Mainly as a aedioal dopartaont we wore always In
contaot with the department D-*, tho roferat of which was
Dr. Lolling, which was tho competent organisation. Wo also
wrote tj other departments and I cannot romembor what depart-,
cents they wore exactly."

This concludes my submission of evidence on boh-.lf of tho
defendant, Dr. Oonrken.

THE PRESIDENT: Doctor, those documents which you are
about to offer, do they run from No. 22 through No. •"'2; "oos
that comprise all of them?

DR. SAU72R: No, I am afraid that Is not correct. The
documents which I now lntond to submit, run from No, 17


10289


27 June 47-AK-25- T —Moohan-(Racier)

Court No. 1

to No. 2*. This Is the supplemental voluae \ It begins
with an affidavit of Dr. Professor Werner Xnothe, repent
supplement * to document book Blomo, starting with document
17.

JUDGE SE3RING: Woll, counsel members of the Tribunal have
supplemental * In tholr rooms. If you would start this after¬
noon on suppleaent 4 f then we will take up supplement * In
the morning.

DR. 3.AITSR: Mr. President, supplemental volume 4 was
already submitted by me when dealing with my ovldonco. If
you remember, these were excerpts from the Philippine Jour¬
nal, which were already submitted. Mr. President, tho sup¬
plement No.* is available here In the English translation and
you can have It.

THE PRESIDENT: Let us have eoao of them, sir. Counsel,
are you offering documents on behalf of tho dofondant Ruff
or 31ome?

DR. 3*UT£R: For the dofendant 31ome.

THE PRESIDENT: WE had not recelvod thoso documonts until
this moment, I was misled bv supposing that you referred to
cthor documonts.

Proceed.

HR. H.uRErf: If Dr. Sauter would permit and is not In a
position to put In the bocks on Ruff maybe at this time we
could put In the documents on Rudofl 3randt. "Ho Is all
ready to go and wo could delay on Bloao until tho morning.

DR. S.JJTSR: I an also In a position to submit Dr. Ruff's
documents immediately, would you prefer that?

JUDGE S23RING: tfoll. Dr. Sauter, when I directed my
Inquiry to you, it was with regard to tho Ruff documents.

Vo have here fcoforo us Ruff Documents Nos. 22 to ^2, inclusive


10290


27 Juno 47—ii-.-iC—25—»—Mechar.*(Ranior)

Court I

.vt the tlno I directed ay Inquiry, we did not have the Blomo
docuaont book, ^re No a. 22 to *2 Docusents Ruff all of the
supplemental docunents to bo put In on his behalf?

DR. S.ilTSR: Yos. If you desire, I can laaodlatoly start
with the caso of Ruff.

IHE PRESIDENT: Is there any objection, *r. Hardy, to
starting with tho 31ono documents?

MR. H.»RDY: If he has any more than tho one supplement
I Just have one, I don't havo all the 31oao documents and this
is rathor confusing to no. I cannot scan ay files and know
what Is to be usod. Is he going to put In moro than tho ono
supplement document book on bohalf of Dr. Blomo?

DR.S.iUTER: No, only the supplemental Volumo No. *, vol¬
umes 1, 2 and 4 wore alroody doalt with. I havo only dooument
volume *.

THE PRESIDENT: Will counsol then prooood with Blomo
documents?

DR. S.JJTER: Yos, Mr. presldont.

The next dooumont, on bohalf of Blomo, ore documents
in Blome aupploaontal volumo 4. Theso are the dooumonta
Blomo Nos. 24, 25, and 26. I ropoat Nos. 24, 25 and 26, which
all had tho common exhibit No. 18. I am now continuing with
the presentation of the Blomo documents, starting with
document No. 17. I repeat Dooumont No. 17, whloh will rec¬
eive tho Exhibit No. 19. I repeat Document No. 17 will bo
glvon Exhibit No. 19 In Blome's supplemental volume. This
Is an affidavit signed by Professor Dr. Knothe, who comos
from Goslar.

I am net going to road theso affidavits, nor shall I road
the others, but I shall merely confine myself to a brief
statement of the contents. This Professor Knothe, who signed

10291


27 Juno 47- . &- 25- 5- .-.o oh an- (aaal or 4 )

Court 1.

..ffidavlt ilo. 17, vas for uany years the ohalraan of tho
Jordan X-ray .association. He states In this doouaont that
professor Bloao had von groat ajrit In aany fields, particu¬
larly in tho field of combatting tuberculosis and also in
the field cf conbAttlng cancer. Ho states about what 31orao
did and I quote: "tried to raise the level cf the general
practltlonor and organised then to a great oxtent."

I think thAt this vlll suffice And I ask to take notice
of tho entire contents of the Jccunont bonk.


10292


27 vun-A-lB- 26 -l-^ook (Int. Rasler)
Court No* I*


The next document in 3loco supplemental volrne III is an ex¬
cerpt free a Gorman book entitled "Ifcdical Hicro Biology" by Dr. Uillor.
This is docuaont No. 18. It will rocoivo oxhibit nuabor Blooo 20.

The original of this book was already received by the Tribunal
on the occasion of the submission of the evidence on behalf of Karl
Brandt, and I am roforring to doewont 121 of Karl Brandt, that is
when you rccoivcd this book which was submitted to you by dofonso
counsel of Dr. Karl 3randt this oxcerpt which was subnitted to you as
No. 18, Exhibit 20, is free a book which has boon published after tho
Hitlor period in tho year 19li6. It discusses various moans of can-
batting and broatoont of tuberculosis. I submit this book bocauao of
tho accusation raisod against thj defendant Blomo to participate in
tho extermination of thousands of Polos. Free this document, of which
I ssk tho Tribunal to tako notice, tho Tribunal will loarn that tho
suggestions and views as thoy wore oxprossed by ft*. Blomo in his

lottor to tho Gauleiter Groiaor, conformod with tho views of tho Gor- •

v

nan professional socioty at largo, and that ono cannot spook of .any
crino against humanity having boon ccomittod by tho dofondont Blomo.

Tho noxt throe documents in Blano supplemental Volume throe
iro Blomo docuajnts 19, 20 and 21, which belong togothwr; Document
Blooo He. 19 will rocoivo Exhibit No. 3. This exhibit numbor had al¬
ready been given to that docuasnt at .an oarlior da to. This document
has already onc^ boon submitted and received oxhibit No. 3.

THE PRESIDENT; Was tho dccxxvnt submitted in evidence or was
its admission hold for a subsequent decision?

DR. SAOTER: As far as I know it was already admitted into
evidence because otherwise it would not havo received an exhibit num¬
ber. At tho nooont I an not sure.

THE PRESIDENT: Then why is it offered again, cooisol?

DR. SAOTER: At that tine, Ur. President, I submitted all of

the so three documents. Thoy all refer to the well known assignments

• •

given by tho Roich Research Coimscl, the assign.wnt given to Dr. Hirt


10293


27 Jun-A-12-26-2-Ccok (lufii Easier)

Court No. I. . '

at Strasbourg and the asaigwfcnt given to Dr. Easchor at Dachau.

When the defendant Bloee was oxaniiwd, thoro soeaed to have boon some
controversy os to whether these two cssigimonts had to bo credited
to Bloee or to Gcheiarat Dr. Sauerbruch. In the as an time I havo ob¬
tained tho photostatic copies from the Prosocution and I am now sub-
aitting tto thrua photostatic oopics to the Tribunal. Those docu¬
ments have already received an exhibit number at an earlier date.

NR. HARDY: 2 believe at th. tiao, Your Honor, dofonse counsol,
used then and ho did not offer then formally and they were given num¬
bers.

THE FRESIDENT: Thoy will bo received in ovidonco.

DR. SAlfTER: I state once noro that docuaont No. 19 in Blomo
document book III will rccoivo oxhibit No. 3. Document No. 20 will
rocoivu oxhibit No. U and doevraent Blomo No. 21 will rocoivo oxhibit
no. *>•

This brings no to document Blooo 22 which will rocoivo ox¬
hibit Ho. 21. This is aft affidavit by Professor Dr. Strakosch, who
is null known in Gorwmy. This affidavit was signed on tho 8th of
torch 19U7 and cortif led in tho projxr manner by a Gorman notary. I
shall not quote this affidavit but »-*rely confiuw myself to pointing
out that Profossor Strakosch wa3 a nan of nixud dosccnt of tho first
degree who got into difficulties in tto Gorman Reich for racial reasons.
Ho turnod to 31ooo for help and vas supported by him vory actively.

This a nab led him to continue his nodical activities without any dif¬
ficulty also in tho Third Reich. I may porhaps quote one sonfconco
from that affidavit. It says on pegO 12 of tho Gorman text, and I
quote:

"I can further confirm, from ay 0«n experience that Profosscr
Blomo was not ono of the fanatical and ruthless types of the Hitler
regime. He always was rather popular because of his courteous and
conciliatory nature, axxi, also, wh:n a physician at Rostock, ho had
numerous patients from the ranks of his personal adversaries. According

102 %


27 Jun-A-’ 3-25-3-Cook (inti fooler)
Court No. I.


to ay experience*are! personal impressions ho always had the intention
of smoothing natters out, and in his political conviction ho was an
idealist but certainly not a profiteer."

THE PRESIDENT: What nuebor, doctor?

DR. SAUTER: This is dociraont No. 22, Exhibit No. 21. The
next docunont is No. 23 arrf will receive oxhibit No. 22. This is a
short affidavit, signed by the defendant. Professor Dr. Blorao, dated
the 1st of April 191*7 which has boon certified in tho proper nannor by
defonsa counsel. This document only gives a few illustrations as to
h<w Professor Blos» was rogarded by rocognirod and well known physic¬
ians who ore still well known and rccognisod in Oerneny today and I
ask you to teko notice of it.

HR. HARDY: I oust objoct to this affidavit Blono which con¬
cerns thro- or four lettors he has received and about which his dofonso
counsel nakos tho statooont and thinks it is admissible. I roquost
the Tribunal to joruso this quickly and soo why I an objoctlng to this.

DR. SAVTER: I ask you to overrule tho objection. I don't soo
why a dofondnnt should not bo able to sufcnit an affidavit *bout facts
liko that. This is a .trial wherein tho Prosocution has obtained on
affidavit free ovory one of tho defondants and often oven norc than
ono affidavit.

T'G PRESIDENT: It appears that there is at least ono stato-
cent in tho affidavit to be considered. Tho oxhibit will be adnittod
arel thos- ports of tho affidavit which nro inconpotont will bo disre¬
garded by tho Tribunal.

HR. SAOTZR: This, Mr. President, brings no to tho conclusion
of suppleajntal volume No. 3.

There are two aors docrants which I want to subnit to you
which I have already included in Blono volusw I. When at the tine I sub
citted those decent? the Prosecution objected to the fact that the
signature of the well-known Professor Dr. Bergmnn and that of tho
well-re nownod Professor, Mr. Martins were not certified in tho proper


10295


27 Jun-A-!3-2&-li-Cook (Int. Ranlor)

Court No* I.

wanner. I represented tto point of view at that tirw, that peoplo of
that reputation could not be askod to go to a notary, Tto Tribunal,
however, decided against ny point of view and did not accopt thoso
docununtc. As a result I had to undortako tho very unpleasant duty
of talcing those two gentlcnen to have their affidavits' certified by a
notary. Thoso two gontloacn have done so and those two doeuwants
therefore aro near in perfect order froo a fomal point of vicrw and 1
an subnitting then to the Tribunal.

One is Docusont Blows No. 3, which cones free tho first docu-
oent Voluno. This will receive Exhibit 3lore No. 23. This is an af¬
fidavit signed by tto world wide renownod IVofcssor von Bergiaann, \rho
enjoys tho saao reputation in tho United States as in Go many and who
is now tho head of a Largo nodical clinic at Munich. In this affid¬
avit (and considering tho brevity of timo, I shall not quote, although
it is of oxtonsivo inportanco for tho dofondant Profossor Blows) tho

I

scholar confiras that tho dofondant Dr. Blooo porfomod o tronundously
noritorious sorvico for furthering jrogress of tho Goman nodical
profossion during Hitlor's rulo. Fcr that reason I do not boliovo
that Blono can in any way bo rosponaiblo for any oxcossos having bc^n
comittod in Go many. I an now sutaitting this affidavit signed by
Professor von Borgnann of 22 January 19U7, which was certified by tho
notary in tho jropor warmer, which will be No. 3, Exhibit Blomo No. 23.


10296

10 £Vo


27 June 47—27-1-Hinabuck— (Ranler)

Court I - Case 1

A similar situation prevails In the case of the next
document vhlch Is an affidavit signed by Professor Dr.
hartius from Eoettlngon dated the 7t’n of February 1941,
which was submitted at that tine as Sloae Humber l’ and
will now receive rlome Exhibit Number 24. This is a very
short but very important affidavit signed by Profoaacr
Dr. Hartiue. It confirms that tho defendant Blone made
great endeavors to elevate the level of the scientific
spirit in Germany and was always trying to removo any
li itlonal Soclallstioe oxcessea from the profession. I am
handing this document to the Secretary Goneral and this
brings no to tho conclusion of my submission of evidence
on bohalf of tho defendant Dr. -lornj.

KH. HARDY: Tho llartlua certificates on.each doouoont
are in order, your Honor.

THE PRESIDENT: Tho oxhlblts referred to by the counaol
for the defendant Blone aro In ovldonoe.

MR. HARDY: Your Honor, would it be possible for defense
oounsol to ascertain which of defense oounsol will bo
ready tomorrow morning with tholr document books?

THE PRESIDENT: I understand that Dr. Sauter is ready
with some supplementary books on behalf of defendant Ruff.

DR. SaUTER: Yes, my dooumont book Is ready and in case
you have no English translations available, I shall bring
them along vlth me, and I shall thereby be ablo to assist
the Tribunal. If you like I can start tho first thing
tomorrow morning.

HR. HaRDY: Rudolf 3randt's documents will bo ready.

THE PRESIDENT: I understand that.

DR. *f El33GER3SR: hr. President, I am representing the
counsol Dr. Kaufaann and shall be able to submit supplemon-


10297


27 Juno -47- .£-27- 2- Ni nabuck- (Ramie r)

Court I , Case 1

Cal documents on behalf of tho defendant Auiolf Brandt
tomorrow morning. I have found out recently that the
translation of tho supplemental document booh on behalf
of my client, SI overs, has not yet been concluded.

DA. FL£AA1HQ: Mr. President, tomorrow morning I shall
bo able to submit document volume number 2 for Mrugowshy
which has already boon before tho Tribunal at an early date
but has boon postponed until all th. submission of evidence
had boon concluded, since It doalt with human experiments
as they wore conducted by foreign nations. Hy supplemental
volumes 2 and * are still in translation and I havo not
yot reoolvod thorn baok. Ono of those document books only
contains excerpts from the record of tho Pohl trial. The
presentation will only last a very short time since It
merely contains excerpts from records. Tho other document
boo* contains a nunber of affidavits and Its presentation
will last approximately 15 to 20 minutes.

MR. HARD': T>,en we can delay the Mrugowsky presentation
of documents until they are all ready.

T.-Li PR-SIDSHT: Yob, we Will not oall those whllo then
are others which OT3 complete and roady to bo presented.

DA. '/ILLS: Mr. President, I have four supplemental
document volumes in both tho German and the English langua¬
ge. They are roady and with your permission I mall submit
them tomorrow morning.

TH3 PrlSSIDSHT: l/e shall proceed with those documents
tomorrow morning, probably taking up Dr. Sautor's first.

He has Just completed his offer on behalf of defendant
Blome, but wa will proceed in order as may prove convenient.

The Tribunal will now be In recess until 9:^0 O'clock
tomorrow morning.

10293


27 J u no 47-^iJC-2?-s-r;inabuck-(aa«lorJ
Court I - Case 1


T.-_£ ILJiSrl.iLL: The Tribunal will bo in rocoss until 09*0
hours tomorrow norning.

(The Tribunal adjourned until 09*0 hour9, 28 J u no 1947.)


10299


/#*7

28 Jun-iS-iB-I-i-Gross (Int. Brown)
Court Ko. I.


Official Transcript of tho American
Military Tribunal in tho ncttor of tho
United States of Aasrlca against Karl
Brandt, ot al, defendants, sitting at
Ihornborg, Gorsany, on 28 Juno 191-7,
0930, Justice 3oals presiding.


TKS MARSHAL: Persons in tho Courtrocn will please find thoir

scats.

Tho Honorablo, the Juigvs cf lilitary Tribunal I.

Military- Tribunal I is now in suasion, Ood save tho Unitod
States of Anoricc and this honorablo Tribunal.

Thoro will bo order in tho Court,

THE PRESIDENT: Mr. Marshal, will you ascertain if tho de¬
fendants are ell jrosont in court.

TIE *!ARSHAL: Hay it plor.au your Honor, all tho defendants
aro present in tho court with tho uxcoption of tho do fondant Obar-
hausor, who is absent duo to illness. ibdieal oertificato will bo
prosontod at tho onr 1 lost possiblo nonont.

TfE P RE SID EN T: Tho Secretary General will noto for tho record
tho prosonco of all tho defendants in court, save tho defondant Ctour-
hausor, absent on account of illnjco recording to Modi cal cortifioato
by tho Prison Surgeon.

Counsol nay proceed.

Dr. Snutor, I do not find that your Supploncntr.l Docuront Book
III has been aado available to tho Tribunal. I wonder if it is hero -
for thj defendant Ruff.


DR. SAUTER: Just a accent.

tR. HARDY: Supplonental Book HI for tho defendant Blono you
neon, Your So'hor?


<


[raz .^ESlDBff: The defendant Ruff.


:/ IS. HARDY: That-has already boon introducod as Exhibit Ho.

v. / > *


20 . -


\:e preside:?:


behalf the.


documents -hioh you propose to offer in


Ruff begin with his Dodurant 3ook IV, is that


1030D


28 Jur.-ir—?£-l-2-Gross (Int. Brown)
Court Mo. I.


correct?

DR. SAOTER: That ia right, yes.

THC FRESIDEHT! Very well, proceed.

DR. SAOT2R: As counsel for tho doferdant Ruff I shall begin
putting in tho docunonts in hia Supplenontal Volin* IV. Tho first
one in this voluao ia Doc mmt Ho. 22, which 'fill bo Exhibit No. 21.

18. HAKDY: May it pleas- ycur Honor, Dr. Sauter calls to ny
attention that ho has three further doc moats to introdueo in tho enso
of Blono. And, it ia suggested, inasnuch as the record yesterday
ended up with documents of Blono, that tod.-y lie continue with tho
throo docunonts of Blono ?nd than start Ruff. In that way tJio record
will have seex continuity.

TOE TOEBIDElfTt Excellent suggestion. Counsel will prooood
with finishing tho docunonts Blooc. Have those docunonts bo-n fur¬
nished to tho Tribunal? Dees tho secretary knew i, or tiro they avail¬
able? Tho Tribunal does not hav- those documents you nontion, counsol.

DR. SAUTER: In order to bo perfectly sure I have brought tho
nocossrxy nunb-r of tho English tranelation with no and can give them
to you without any difficulty.

THE PRESIDENTi Thank you, counsel.

DR. SALTIER: I a ho 11 thon any tho rust of what has to bo said
in tho Bloao enso. Previously I put in Supploaental Document Book IV
in thi Bloco caso which contains throe, continuous docuccnts, namely
21, 25, end 26, ell of which pore-.in to one subject. Those -ro ox-
cerpts free sovornl annual volisacs from t'no Ibdical Journal entitled
*7ho Philippine Journal". Wo have dealt with those uxcerpts already
in tho Rose ccs-, and when Professor Ivy was on tho stand, who also
aid-- statoixmtc about those oxperiflents which are nontionod in this
Philippine Journal - th- experiments carried on by Strong. In tho
session of 21 March I gavo no exhibit maabor to those documents 2h, 25,
ard 26 , coca us- at that tiro there .••ns nc translation of than and tho
Court ruled that it would be expedient to give then an exhibit number

10301


28 Juiy-JWS-I-3-C-ross (Int. Brown)

Court !»c. I.


fiftcr tho translation was ready. They have now been translated and
I now givo tho so Blaao documents 21*, 25, and 26, tho c orison exhibit
nunix-r 18 for all throe of then. This deals aninly with those experi¬
ments - tho plague oxpjrinonts - that wore already do alt with in tho
nearing of Bloao and tho witness Dr. Rose, so that I need not say any¬
thing further about tho so docirunts.

THE FRESIDEHT: Then Doctor, I inxioretand that your Docunont
Book, Supplement IV, will bo riarkod Bloao E::hibit 18. That covers
your ontiro Doc ire nt Book SupplcihJ.td IV, is that correct?

DR. SAUTERj Y-s, and oil three doevzents will have tho exhibit

No. 18.

THE PRESIDENTi There are no other docunonts in that book ox-
copt tho three you have referred to?

DR. SAl/TER: That is coiroct, yes.

THE FRSSIDSKTi Vory woll*


10302


28 47-l>a;-S-l-Lc33cr (Int. LHC X )

Court !io« 1

L)?.. SdlTIdH: That definitely concludes ay defense of the dofonda..t
Blcco end I proceed nor to putting in the further documents for the
defoxilcnt I—ff. so far, documents up to document 21 have bcon put in*

I shall now begin with aipplcmcrfcal VoIujc U, containing, first of all.

Huff Documjrfc _ 22, which receives -Inhibit !!o. 21. These arc minutes
put in in the other Military Tribunal, of hich 1 horo have a certified
copy. This is the record carried fcy tfc director of a criminal instit¬
ution by the name af Strolow, cho '.ns c. ployed -uring the Hitler Rogimo
in a prison in Berlin. Li his affidavit, the Secretary Gcnorcl

has, he states th-t in the Priso.-.c Floctzcr.Sec in Geraeny, experiments
were carried on with poison gas lu*inj hitler!s regime but only on cri—n:
criminals and not on political prisoners, an: only volunteers \fr.o
had been condouiod to death; in addition, he says that those -r.ttorc
•lore kept so strictly s-crct thr.t even the prison officials know
nothing of thou unless they -.icrc iaiodi.'.toly concerned in them. That
is tho contonts of document 22 , Jinibit 110 . 21, uhich the Socrotary
Go no ral has La his possession and ’.ihich was put in evidence la Caso
No. 3. |

Uy next document is document K.« 23, r.ieh will bo Exhibit 22.

T!ic original of this sworn statement by a ..itness is to b- found with
the Go no ml Secretary, kiss -andellnhb), who has certified tho correct¬
ness of-the signatures thereon. Z *s is dm testimony, uador oath
of the former epical inspector of th- Luftwaffe, Professor Hippko,
in sossions of tho .-xrican military T -irunal II of 7th and 11th
Fcoruary 1917. I hero taken excerpt3 from this testimony, tfcich
i3 v.r;- lort and -hich 1 shall not roa.'_ and i.ich I ask the Tribunal

to trda judicial notice. I have extr cted Trom this lorg Ustinorjy

•

a fw.: salient facts; primarily, the fact that only volurfc-ers -.ore
used in tlx: Huff-Ho-berg experiments and those volunteers aero all
criminals; secondly, that Huff did net act or. his own initiative in
those experiments but only on orders fro— his ighest superior;


10303


26 June 47-^-2-2-Lcsscr (ir.t. Bro:n)

Court Hs. 1.

thirdly, that in the opinion of the highest .xdical inspector in the
Goracn Uifa affc, these high altitude aapurLxnts by Ruff end Rockers
•jorc eosolutoly necessary in order to clarify a problca that \c .s
particularly ieportant to Gertaany at that ti-x and to the air forces
of every country at that ticx; rad, fir.-.LI;-, that th~ \«y in -.Jlieh
these crpcrixxnts ns carried oi± tr.s in doping ;dth all the tenets
of huccnc behavior. 1 ash tbo court to take notico of this docurent
out shall raid net hing fraa it. 2wst .ir. t-u 2 docucxnts in Ruff
Suppaxicntrl Volute 4 *nd no:r I coa_ to Iteff A^plcrxntal Voliux Mo,

5, ihich contains docuaents 24, 25, and 26. Docuxnt Ho. 24 e-ill bo
Se.ibit Ko. 23. This is a list of the penalties to -.iJich Vi«x w vas j
wbjectod. Tho original is with tho Secretary G%.nor-.l iho uadu tho
original available to nc only for a fa: days so that 1 eight uako
this copy and have it certified.

lit. As I understand it, tie original is in tho hands of

the Secretary-General?

DR. S-XlERs That is right.

13. ILRDI: Then I suggec- that tho origin'll b- node availablo
to the Clerk of this Court as an criiibit oefore this Tribunal, your
Honor.

TKd ?Tw-e»IIG.T: Tho secretary -./ill procure frou the offico of
the Secretary General tho ari3in.1l r-evrd r-faTud to by oounsel for
the defendant Ruff - Docu-xnt lk>. 24.

DR. SJQl: I asked at that ticx to bo able to keep tho original
3 j that I could put it to the Tribunal but I uas told that I iculd
have to return the original to tlx S-cr-t-ry G-ncxr.i because or. the
original there is a note by the Gcr.rn police authorities that after
the jrigin.-l had bear, used it should ix. return-d to the Seman
authorities in Hanover. That -is the ra.sai .Ay ch. General Sccrctr.ry
'•--Id not let 'ax hare the original.

IKd PX3HCMT: Under those carcu. stances the original should

10304


23 June 47-lS-P_-2-3-Icsscr (lnt» Bre.n)
Ccurt tfe. i


not be introduced in evidence but a photostat node. Bk secretary
will prociuv''tK= original for production befero tho Tribunal far -
examination end oring a photostat of tho docArxnt, if any has lx on
aedc. If neno has boon aide then ore -.ill be procured.

M2. I'JZJT: Tour Honor, the secretary ’.111 tare considcir.blc
difficult;' finding if it has been return::! to the Geman authorities.

TriS rR-'anOfT: joll, if it has been returned, uf ccursc it is
not now available in the offico of the Secretary Gcrxral; but t.c
aecrctmy a dll ascertain Ahethor -r not it has been returned end, if
the original is in tho office of tho secretary Gcnaml, produce it
before tie Tribunal for cxacination.

D?.. i'.OTI2: For the infonr.tion of tho Secretary General, I
rccoivod tho original fron ;liss Benford at that tine and I gave tho
original bach to Idas 3enford efUr I had or-de -y copy.

jr, :»3iSUi Doesn't Dr. Sautcr have anything to uff-r as an
exhibit - a certified copy of it si.pvx'- by pettapa the Secretary
Gon-ral, or authenticated by hi-uxlf?

BE PZGSUHWT: Yea, the docuncnt boars a certification by Dr.
Sautcr.

::t. He docs rat have an axhiblt, your Honor, he merely has

copies of docun JAt books.

TKZ Flt-SUEtt: This certificate apparently reads: "I horeAdth
certify tiic above extracts fron tie crininal record as a true and
correct copy of the original befer- -e."

iir. iwilff: He docs ndt have an exhibit, as »ch, to offer to
the CoAirt at tliia ties as an-xhibit; .x only Ivas copies in tlxsc
document books.

DP.. S.J7TER: That is the only tfy I can do it, your Honors. If
1 received an original fro-i the Socret xy General 1 lould hevo to
give it bach the noct day or the day after. I can only .r.ko a copy;


otherwise tlxre is nothing I can do.

BE PENDENT: Soxuh-re mere ust be an original certified


10305


28 June i7“~~Pl>2-d-L::>s-r (Lit. Pro* n!
Court Ha. 1


by Dr. Stoicr Jv-r nis original siynturc that this is a correct copy;
Dr. Stotcr .ust Jure signed cocc thing bccauso this is a expy of his
signature. This ccttcr will not be at nil difficult of adjustment and
*• night -ait until the -orni.'v, recess ax’ that straight-n it out.

IT.. &it in this case, your Honor, the Prosecution is

rcry interested in seeing th; original dceuxnt or a ccrtifiod copy
of it, cc. tified by the prepor authorities.

TH-- KG S Tja i: If the . riginal document is still available here
' acss-;ig-r c a 3 iisxdl-.tcly to the office f the Secretary General
nnd ascertain whether or not it is there, a- with Hiss Benford, *1 don't
kno\< iiher- it ould be. The Tribunal is also in-rested in seeing the
original if it is available. *

>

DR. SdUCR: Let ix soy ttvi following regarding this docuncnt,

This lir. Vieweg who nos her- heard and was hoard in Dachau, manifested
" n-^*teblw -letury regarding uhat had happened in Dachau but ills'
recollection 3 particularly confuse- about his oub life.

TH- KLXIDzNT: .oil, cams cl, this document is clearly admissible
in evidence .as on exhibit. Ih. only thing that is not# under discussion
is scmc .Latter of rxr- process that surely <rn b--adjusted with a
little tine. I suggest that counsol proceed to tho next document
until we hear word frui the be ere tar.- General concerning the original
of this docuacnt.

V&• It is agreeable -.it:, -c to ir.rk it Exhibit Do. 23

and admit it provisionally; *nd if th-rc is any -bj-cti-n onuy part
L'.t-r I can raise it ani if I do not raise it we will assume that the
;.cu_cnt is admitted as Exhibit Ho. 23

dREillilNT: Veiy well. That proewdtre ■••ill be follDuotia
It will be .rrked exhibit 23, admitted provisionally, subject to
further e ra ai na tlon of the originn 2 *rocor\l.

IK. T' is list of convictions fur Vi~ ;-g I hr.v- put in

aier to s..: you that this ivn c ouaitted cxitright p-rjurv and that his


10306


28 Juno 47--*P->2-5--Lc3=^r (Inti Bryn)
Court I Jo, 1


testlreny os a whole is to be regarded .ith the greatest of suspicion.

•

?ro-i this record of convict lens it con bo seen that this xn, :ho sold
he could not r-atub-r having been previously s-ntcnccJ, had ncvcr-thc-
losa receive! no less th-n 5 previous c.nvicticns, on- of 'hich Ks
5 yenro in the penitertiery .and 5 years of loss of Civil rights. This
.flltajss volunteered ani was called by the Prosecution, and in this D
Docuocrfc I'o, 24, fcXhibit 23, he is shown up in his true colors.

I "o no:; to tho ixuct dreuaent. This is Joauxnt Ha. 25 and will

fcv 2xhibit 24.


10307


28 Jtoe U7-iK.7D-3-^-Sinabuck (Int* 3rown)

Court ?fo.},Caso 1

This is an affidavit by Dr. "7cmsr Loccklc of 2 Ifay 19U7 properly
cortifiod by tho Police Headquarters in Frankfurt. This Dr. Lcocklo
states in his affidavit that an assi-nrxnt to Dr. Ruff»s instituto
was rover iven by hia. This i3 a aett»r of sox irj;»rtanco in •

Jud-inc; Ruff»s position in his instituto.

Tho next one is Document 26, Exhibit 25. This is an affidavit
by Profossor Karl Luoronboun of 30 April 19k7 correctly certified, by
tho authorities in Honnef on Rhine. This affidavit concerns itself
>dth tho sam probloc as the foro oinf affidavit j naraely, tho fact
that a branch offico of tho DVL, that is tho Geman Rusoarch Institute
for Aviation, ever axis tod in Dachau am', noroovor, that all tho
rosoarch ossi. xrwnts to Dr. Ruff wero ordorod by tho Air 'linistry so

V

tliat it wasnt Ruffa personal interest in such natters that cot hia
thoso assi'.noonts. Thoso aro tho toounonts in Docuncnt Book Nunbor 5*
and now I cone to Docurxmt Book Nunbor 6. This contains Docurxnt
Ifonbors 27 to 31.

Docunont Nunbor 27 is an affidavit by Profossor Soownld ami is

9

Exhibit 26, dntod 19 '-*7 19k7. It lies boon corroctly cortifiod by tho
local polico. I nsk tho Trlbaml to take notico of it. This affidavit
also certifies that thoro was nc branch offico of tho DVL in Dachau.

Mon, an affidavit by Otto Fuchs who has alroay l*it in an
affidavit on erothor subjoct. This affidavit is of 19 :tay 19U7 and
has boon corroctly cortifiod. by tho ::ayor of Dachau. I ask tho Court
a join to tako notico of this. I shall not road it into tho rooord. It
too concoms itsolf with tho fact that thero was no branch offico of
tho DVL in Dachau and that thoro was no assirnrxnt inaido to this
rosoaroh instituto.

Tlx sixth joooMDt concoms itself with a quite different fiold.
Document 29, Exhibit 28. This is an affidavit by Dr. 'ilhcln Homoor-ar
of 21 3’ay 19U7 which also has boon certified by tho ccnpotont authoritios
in Tuobir.'-en. In Yiow of its length I a sk tho Tribunal to tako notico
of its contents, and. I shall not road it. I can ;:ivo ycu a brief


10306


29 Jons U7»: K.ID*3-2-J«innbuck (Int. Brcvn)
Court I, Case I


5 yr»psi3 of the contents. Dr. itor&^rzor, who has boon workin- at
tho loro-CIodieal Center in Saidclbcr^ for two yeers is probably the
first specialist in GorcarQr in tho fid*:, of pressure fall sickness
rear 'In;; which ire have already taard rarty Cotails hero. Dr. Hornbor.ror
concerned hinsclf with these problems both f x the Ooman air force
and in tho doro-iiadical Center. This is his specialty, and ho nakos
statenants ro-ardinc an assertion that was also aado hero by tho
prosocutionj narxly, that prossuro fall sicknoss could only bo causod
by tho formation of bubblos in tho blood circulation syaton, and ho
says that tho uoo thin can happon by tho Tarnation of c&a bubblos
in tho tissuos rathor than in the blood circulatory syston. Ho says
that tho injury can bo causod by bubblos in tho circulatory system
only -./ton an occlusion is feruod and thus stops tho flow of blood. I
*on»t want tc o into th- us deal aspects of tills. Tho defendant Ruff
has hiusdf axprossod his opinion or. this natter, and also Or. Ivy
•.ho is a specialist, an’ thoy haro pro tty veil substantiate J what Dr.
Hombor'-cr hero states. Tlioroforo, I ask tho Tribunal to toko notico
of thoso hi hly ccnplicated scientific data to bo found in this affi¬
davit of Hornb^rcor.

Jfcnr ccoos another affidavit, naixly, ora by Dr. i'atthos,

THE PRESIDElfTi This affidavit, tho one by Bombor-pr, you as3icn
tho nunbor Exhibit 28, I a33uno?

DR. S.'.UTSRi Tos. Tho noxt locuront is Docuaont Nunbor 30 which
will bo Exhibit *29. This affidavit by Dr. "atthos of 6 Juno 19U7 has
boon corroctly cortifiod by a Goman nctary. "atthes had proviously
put in an affidavit which ha now su.plununts with the affidavit, tho
criiral of which I havo Just ;;ivcn tho Secretary General, This affi¬
davit cs ix or ns itself with tho question '-hen th^ low-pros suro chnOber
wa3 rxvod fror. Dachau beck to Borlin, and tho answer cf this quostion
rdll ivc tho definitive answer to the quostion when Ruff-Ro:-.berc
oxpjriifcnto woro finally conclu ded, "atthos confims that at tho

be lnnin; of Juno, 19U2 the low-prossuro charter ras taker, back to

• 10309

_ _ _-_ ■ ■ — _ —


28 Janer !i7^m-3-3-*lmbuck (Itt. Brown)
Court I, Case I


Berlin, and ho says norcovor that tho danago to tho icrcootor, rogard-
i^v; which a witness horo testified, was not at tho end of Hay 19U2,
but quite a while previous to that, an! that tho timeo was repairod
long before !fcy of 19U2. In order to save tiao I shall not go into
this natter eithor, but put in ay next docuncnt, Docunont Ruff Nunbor
31, which will bo exhibit Nuebcr 30.

This is an affidavit by Gonoral Adolf Oalland of 1 Juno 19U7

which has boon correctly cortifiod by a C-oman notary public. This

$

Adolf Oalland wes perhaps tho boat known Ocroan fighter pilot end,
at tho end, tho chiof of all pursuit piano organisations. Thcroforo
ho is a nan of particular authority in Judging tho question whothor
and to what oxtent tho oxporinonts carried on by Ruff one'. Ro rob ore
halpod to oolvo tho problcc of rcscuo free high altitudes, and to
what oxtent and whothor thoy m>rc nocossary for Goman aviation and
for aviation in gonoral. This particularly conpotont follow says horo
in his affidavit that in his opinion Ruff’s and Rooborg’s axporloonto
in Dachau wuro absolutely nocossary to tho intorosts of tho Luftwaffo
and aviation in 6onoral and it was nocossaiy also that thoy bo oarriod
out at oaxinun altitudes, auch higher than 12,000 notors, !xit ho
doosn’t say whether tho naxin u n height is 15,000 or 20,000 notors
or ary othor specific raiubor of notors.

Froa this vory intoro3tin. , and in ny opinion vory important,
affidavit I shall road nothing, but I draw it to the attention of tho
Tribunal. Tho r.oxt doegnont is the last ono in this -‘ocunont book Ruff
nunbor 6, Dccurant 32, Exhibit 31. This is a docuncnt that was put
in i.-hen Ruff was being hoardj nanely tho work record of tho foronan
Karl Fohlroistor. I should bo only too happy to show you tho original
of this work record but I aa smowhat anbarrassod in this bocause Just
n faw days ago this for coon Fohlixsistcr wroto no asking no to return
the original to hin bocause it also contained a nunber of privato
entries covering uary years, am! ho needed tho book again. I Just showod

10310


J


28 Jur.o U7-iW.TD3^Hlac'--ack (mt* Brown)
Court I, Cos*:-!


tho orf^inal of the book to tho prcsocutcr and pointed out to bin tho
tro peMagos in question and astocl hir. to convinco Mnso l f that tho
copies in this docunont book nunber 6, Exhibit 31, Dccunont 32,
exactly oerrospond to tho original.


10311


28 Jone-:;_rL-4-I-Xirv:buck (Int* B rxm)

Court Uj. I, Cns_ I

:ry -~ Y: I; H:*or Pl^esc, I r- mi- b i o to do tJr.t bccauso
-f tlx, lecfc of loiowltd.'e of Goracn. Hcwever, before doing that, •.«
hRW> IwtWa « bcf3r *' the Tribunal to indicate the authenticity of this
luxmt, who*- it frua whet it ouroorts to be. Ihe prosecution
doubts what it is, and p.cca-ding to the regulations of the Tribunal tho
= BRru * r in which docua-r.ts should bo suhnitted here, if thoy axv Goman
oritinel documents, they ehould bo properly authenticated with a des¬
criptive certificate, if necessary. This decu^ent is clearly inadoisaiblfl
in evidence in this fora.

THii PU3SID3fT: Couns.1, was tboro rny direct teatinony concerning
this book? I hr.To a recollection of soo> ti*. book having been referred
to by soneonu. May bo this night be another one*

fft4 HARDY: It ana referred to in dcfow'rnt Ruff's oxc.ainr.tion, but
to had never ao-n the book bef .re, Tour Honor. 'his a book of an enti¬
rely different porson.

TK2 rT^SIB3:T: I wasn't sure what tho tostlaony was, but 1 roawabur-
ed southing; It was th- testimony of tho defendant Ruff.

DR. SAUT3R: This is exactly the sene book. I put it to the witness
at that tlou, and a.t that tia. asked the prosecuting attorney to a.ssuro
hinself of th. authenticity of it, and et that tlv. again ho said that
he didn't :<n*i enough &-rnn to do so. Ihat is, however, not rccossary
because whether I talk Go mar. jt English oakus no difference. Anybody
can see whether tho book was actually written at that tl*> or uhother
it was just .ado up lately.

® HARDY: Your Honor, that isn't the purpose of a? objoctin. At
th.- tLoe tide wr.e used in the defendant Ruff's wxajalnation it wasn't
fferod in evidence. At that tin- it wasn't appropriate for thu or lo¬
cution to object, but at this it is being offered. I aja not obAct¬
ing to it .as being in the- Go men language; I no Ejecting to th- docu¬
ment as it is not orop«.rly authenticated. I don't knwi but what this

-,i?ht be a book of sw, workaon working in soao other institute. There is

10312


23 Jutt^-A-FW.-2-HInrbmk (Int. 3r-wn)

Court No. I, Case I

no WX7 to —

782 PI - 3I0JiT : 13 th ^ r - affidavit by th. far^acn FohJ-oeist.r?

DR. SAITS'.: Yv.s, of c.urse, th.rc is. That's th- next Cocu.uc.nt I

■»* to put in. Perhaps discussion of this b ok, exhibit 3 31, can
b. postponed until that affidavit has been brought to the ettenti n of
the Tribunal; Perhaps then th* prosecutor will adopt a different point
of view.

Tli2 ?nSSJH3fT: Very well. C-asirLration of tide exhibit -.fill bo
delayed.

DR. SA’JTER: I turn now to -y n-xt document. This is in supplemental
document book nusber7.

TIE PRSSIQIiTj Counsel, the Tribunal has not reccivod that docuoont

book.

DR. SAinSR: I kn-w that, y-ur Honors. This affidavit is dated 11
Juft> V)U1 and I recoivtd it only four drjs aeo. Throe days ago I ent
tho copies in for translation with a rcqi*.st for a rapid translation
but, -f course, it hasn't been translated yet. I rsk pemission to bo .
able to tell you th. c.«tuits of this affidavit. lhnt will then concludo
the coapleU. presentation of ay defense and will givo no —

TOS PRBSEGHTi SuppUaental Docuacnt Book 7 contains rarely one
affidavit?

DR. SAu!2t: Th-.t is so, yes, an affidavit by this chap, F-hloneistcr,
tho acn tf-.o kept this work record for years on end, in his affidavit,
testifies to th. authenticity of this w-rk book so that you will then
bt in a position to rule on the adniasibility of that book.

•

TC- I^iSSmaiT: Veil, tho original affidavit then is present in
Numborg in sox office being translated?

ur., 3ABE2: I have the Goman original h-ro. Copies of it aro in tho
translating branch,

TKG FJSSIiEJ’Ts »*-11, that can no»: b« c^nsidored. e car. consider
the offer of that exhibit at this tie*.


10313


23 Juro-if-FL-A-3-Ilinabuck (Ir.t. 3r-wn)

Court II-. I, Cr.so I

:E. HARDY: Tour Honor, I sight inquire as to the iift:-. pnr&'rrph
.f thia docucont. '..hose he rewriting ia this in the light biuo ink? It is
e different handwriting that the signature jT tho affiant.

DP.. SADTEil: That ia different ink, but tho handwriting ia tlx aa.10,

3 th handwritings are those of Fohl-xiatcr *ho, at the ore! of paragraph
5, signoC tho affidavit and the whole thing ia certified by a notary pu¬
blic in the District of tho K'w-.org.jricht 3orlin, Kurt ’ ern-r Koin, a a
t*v prosecutor will not be in a position t. state that thia hnuiritton
addition which ia paragraph 5 ia not identic.-1 with tho handwriting of
tho rest of the docuunt.

THo PR'oSD.ilT: Tho Sec notary will pass the- original affidavit to
tho Tribun.'. 1 1 ,r eocaoinati .n.

Iff*.. HARDY: I eight n.te, T-ur Honor, that the light bluo ink ia put
in apparently of tor th- notary or after the affiant or oithor boforo, be¬
muse the affiant‘a signature and tho notary's aigmturo ars in tho rr-io
color ink. Your Hon-r, I withdraw ay abjection to tho note book if tills

•

affidavit ia nV-dasiblo ir. evidence as such. It is pr-p-rly authenticated.

•

I was .aorely questioning concerning paragraph nunber 5. Kxicv^r, I do
suggest that the -iork book be given to tho c -urt interpreter and ask hin
to interpret tlv.se nerds written In G«r.*n for a. ploose.

DR. SAUSZR: You have tho translation as document —

THd PKdSIidiT: C -ncerning this exhibit end the reference by counsel
f-r the prosecution to th, fact that paragraph 5 is written in a diffo-
r-nt c.lor ink, tho Tribunal has oxaainud th, riginal affidavit. Tho ai-
Snaturo of the affiant F^hlseister appears below four lines of hrjrriting
in n different color ink, but that signature of the affiant ia in tho
3--TQ c olor ink that the signature f the affiant is written.

s •

N.«, if tho additi.n in the lighter col .red ink, light blue ink, had
n.t booh written pri r to the signature- of the affiant -n page 2 f tho
affidavit, it .uld be a very curious c incidence that th. affiant had
sign.d far enough bol«w the last lino of typewriting to allow just bhqso


103U


23 Juno-M-FI/-£-A—Hinabuck (Int. 3r»n)

C-crt Ur. I, Case I

f-ur lirv-o in ink to htvu b-^n written in ait-raards. PrLvi fecic -.ho
affidavit appears to bu p_rf,.ctly rcguL-r in f’ra. UnL-ss ciunsul for
th. or-s^cutim tVslrvs tbu affidavit to be road into thj record by tho
interpreter-—

bR. HARD!: Obviously thu light blue ink ia in the arne han cirri ting
•.a the affiant, but tho typewritten lin- ab_vo the light bluo ini: ends
tho affidavit.

TKo PraSIDTJ-T: Th- -*-re question ia wbothor these four lines in ink
wore written bo fore the affidavit w ns and-. Th- affiant .a-y wall have
addod smoothing to tho affidavit bef-xe it w:-8 aw -m to, oven though
the fora of tho typewriting apparently concludes the affidavit.

1!R. HARD?: Out I an talking ab-ut tho sentence bof 're tho in);, as
a concluding sentence to an affidavit.

THE PRioIDarT: I understand that, but still thore ia nothing to pre¬
vent an affirnt fron adding a paragraph after tho typewriting if ho adds

It before ha swoara to it before the notary.

HR. HARDY s If thus- circa ist'ncus aro true, that ia oiroct, your
H onor.

THE PHSSIii'T: And the position of tr.e signature of the affiant
on page 2 of the affidavit indicates that the ink was written before he
oignod it, and that signature being written in the sane ink vhich he
signed the affidavit, ap.i&rer.tly before the notary. The affidavit may
t* adnitted, and I take it, counsel for the proaecution, this rorjovos
your objection to the other exhibit, tho extract froa the tlae book?

HR. HAHjY: Yes, Ycur Honor.

DR. 3 ALTER: Hr. President, let ao 337 the following regarding this
last affidavit. I '.rote first of all to Fohlaeister to have hLa cartify
tho entry in tre nork record, and those are the points that Fohlseistor
first takes up in his affidavit. Then in a second letter I as.rod Fohl-
■icister whether lie knew why the witness •■etties went to Cologne. Then,
in answer to this last questicn, Fohlaeister put down his nasber 5 in


10315


28 Jime-K-PL-*»-5“Hinabuck (Int. Brcwr.)

Court Uo. I, Case I

this affidavit and if the first four are typewritten and the last, na*-
ly, number 5 ia in ink, the explaration of that is that the inquiry that
led to mister 5 caoe auch later than the inquiry that led to the first
four paragraphs, .-♦cm, Mr. President —

THd the Tribunal is satisfied. Ruff's Document tinker 32

contained in his supoleoental document book 6 is admitted as Ruff ~.hi-
bit 31. The affidavit of Karl Pohlaeister which has been examined by the
Tribunal, and uhich I assume would be Rufi Docinent 33/ ia adnittod in
ovidence as Ruff fchibit 32. Ths translation, of course, will be filed
"hon it is ready.


10316


28 Jun-iWE-5-l-Prineau (Inti Brown)

Court Ho» I.

DR. SAUTE?.: Then I nay take the original of this rcrk r.a.rd
with ao and rot urn it to Herr Fohlmoistor. I an quite willing to leave
it with Mr. Hardy, for a few days if he wishes but I ask then that it
be returned.

TH2 FRESIDEJiT: Does the prosecution desire to examine the
docusant? The prosocution nny keep it for a few days if you doairo.

MR. HARDY: I will havo ono of my analysts look it over, your

Honor.

THE PRESIDENT: Vory well, cowaul.

DR. SAUTER: That concludos uy defense of the defendant Ruff.

THE PRESIDENT: Tho Tribunal notes that tho counsol for tho
defendant Ruff has concluded his dofonao.

MR. HARDY: I suggoat, your Honor, that whon Dr. Sauter guts
his work book returnod to him that ho make oxtracts of tho two ontrios
and havo them cortifiod and file than as an oxhibit so that tho Socrot¬
ary Oonoral's office will havo an indox filo for that particular ox¬
hibit.

THE PRESIDENT: Vory wull. Corns ul for dofondant Ruff will
conply with tho auggostion made by tho prosocution.

DR. SAUTER: They are already in. Thoy havo alroady boon put
in as a docicont.

THE PRESIDENT: I understand, but doos counsel for tho prosocu¬
tion dosiro a photostat aadc cf those two ontrios?

MR. HARDY: It is cy understanding that tho Secrotary Gonoral
doos not havo an oxhibit folder as such with that nu»abor as it is not
an exhibit until ho has a folder with tho oxhibit in it.

THE PRESIDENT: Tho formal original exhibit nust be prepared.

DR. SAUTER: Mr. Hardy has tho doewont, so how can I givo it
to the Secretary Goncral?

i*R, HARDY: I thought I cade nysolf very clear that when I r_-
turoed tho docucent to hin, it will bo noccsmry for him to make ox-
tracts of tho two entries, havo then cortifiod to bo correct and true

10317


28 Jun-U-JE-5-2-Prise au (Int. 3rown)
Court So. I.


extracts of the entries in the docunent, typed on to a piece of

put in to a folder and given an exhibit nuntar, and turned over to the

Secrotary General.

THE PRES IDE .'ft: For the record before the Tribunal, fer the
copy of that exhibit in the document book, it would appear that that
has already been done. Of course, whether it has or not we are not
advised butlho record is ccoplote boforo the Tribunal.

DR. SAUTERt Of course, that was all taken care of long ago.

IE. HARDY: The Secretary Gonorol does not have a foldor raorkod
Exhibit 31.

DR. SAUTERt The best thing to do would bo for the prosocutor
to tako a photostatic copy of this book and give tho original back and
then everything rould be all right.

THE PRESIDE'??: Tho Exhibit, Dccuuont 32, as it appears, Ruff
supplement 38, on page 111, purports to bo a copy of theso nenorandn.

It boars on tho faco of the pepor: "I h-rovlth certify that this is n
correct copy of tho oxtraot of tho original boforo no, Nuernberg, 12
Juno 19U7. (Signature) Dr. Sautor.■

If*. HARDY: That will be nocossary for Dr. Sautor to tako ono
of thoso miaoegraphod copios and sign it and put it in tho Secretary
u orxrnl's office. I an taking tho position of tho Secretary General,
not tha pr-oocuticn.

THE FRESHJ2KT: Counsel is oorroct. If no original to that
cortificato has boon filed with tho Secretary General, counsel for tho
prosocution is correct, that ehould bo deno.

JUDGE SEEKING* Dr. Sautor, -rill you please turn to Docunont
Sock for Ruff, Supploaont #5, Docuamt 32, as it appears in your dccu-
=ent boot?

DR. SAUTSR: *os, I luvo it.

JUKE SE3RINQ: Let's see it. Hold it up, please. Korr,

$

Sir, is tho original paper that was signed by you on this exhibit?

DR. SAlftffl: At ttio cooont I cannot tell you. I assuao th:t it


10313


28 Jun-L'-yB-5-3~ Prime au (Int. Brown)

'-curt Ho. I.

has been turned in socewbero. Tho dcctaent itself is bore in the pos¬
session of tho prosecution. The original of tho document is non in
the possession of the prosecution.

JUDGE S33PJH0: I neon tho certificate that you node and put
your nano to, the copy of which now appoars in tho doc uni nt book.

DR. SAUTER: This is always given to tho Secretary General
with tho roqusst for translation ~nd that is tho doc unant that has ny
original signaturo. I give this document to tho Secretary General with
the request for translation.

JUDGE SZBRDOt And such a docuaont was givon to tho Secretary
General and It was fron that that this nultigraphod copy was nr.do?

DR. SAUTERi Of course, with four copies; but if this soons oo
important I can again put tho thing in with cy personal signature. I
an only too happy to do so, should that soon oxpodiont.

JUDGE SE0RDIG: Tho only question is, Doctor, that, according
to tho socrotary of this Tribunal that original document boaring your
signaturo docs not soon to bo with tho Secretary Gonoral. It would
bo a very simple oat tor for you to sign anothor copy and hand it to
tho Secretary Ocnoral because his record oust bo conploto. That is
tho only difforonco.

DR. SALTER: 1 shall only bo too happy to do so.

1A, HARDY: Your Honor, Secretary Gonoral, Major Hatfiold tolls
no ho has sovon exhibits missing of tho docrants introduced this mor¬
ning. Ho doos not have soven exhibits in his files.

THE PRESIDENT: During tho naming recoss which I think we
will take now before wo open anothor caso, investigation can bo nado
at tho office of tho Secretary General to find out if those original
documents are there.

HR. HARDY: Your Honor, tho original documents have no occasion
to be there, rihon prosecution or defense counsel introduces a doCOMint
they carry the original document or certified copy with then to tho
Tribunal at the tire of introducing the document, affidavit or German

10319


28 Jun-lt-MB-5-e-Pricoau (Xnt. Brown)
Court Ho* I.


original document the docuncntB aro norely for the convenience of t!e


Tribunal and for the prosecution.


THE H


ixm .«


I understand but I thought these dociconts


wore B a de for the office of the Secretary General, that those are for
the translation division.


VP.. HARDfi I never have given the major horo his copies for
the true exhibits.

THE FRESIDSVT: The exhibits nust be filed, of course. During
this morning rocoss investigation can bo undo as to whoro or not tho
exhibits aro thoro because those originals must bo filed with tho
Tribunal.

Tho Tribunal will now bo in rocoss.

(A rocoss was toton.)


1032 )


25 Juno - 7-l-Lc3scr (Int. f.aaa*)

Court :.'o I


77. UL-jIHL: The Tribunal is a join in session.

T*.:: - 'D3!?: Counsel.

“... 7 V.:: (fopr :sontins Dr. ICufsiann, da ler.so counsol or tlio

doTondont .hudolf 3r«-ndt): hr. President, I . vo 7 supplcnentcl documents
to offer. Tho fir it is Rudolf Brnedt b©cu ent 15, i*ich will rocoivo
.'I'jii'lt r.vz&er 15. Tbis is cn affidavit signed by a certain Ic.'p Tioforibach-
ar, .'ho livod with ludolf Urendt .'or nanj* -ears end has :vch to say fror.

Ida Incr.fled e, .-.bout tho .tanner in f.iich nudolf 3rar.it worhod mi li ed.

:hia affidavit -xsara tho de.to or 2 . n to rood tho

third, ncr.t^rnyvi I quote:

“Dr. Brandt's activities are -reqvontly ovsrratod, ouins to i-.noranco
of tho organizational structvro of tho S3. Drmdt too!: dotm dictation iron
Ilralor or >avo it fro* !!l vl r»a briof instructions. Doyond thaao
activities ho hardly o.vortod an;: er.co. The clearajt proof of t :o ia

tho Drandt rain divis' n llaupin'etoiluns. It rrs so understaffed that it
had difficulties in co in' rxroly 1th tlx clerical vorl: and did not
03333 tho technical or-anizetion roquirev to cope rath nirrilrr's a:>
tonaivo 'iold. of activities. Coneoquontl;, *>r. hr and t lno!:od oil tlx
Troquisitos for assuring tho rolo of an . Ovisar."

I o!dn the no * part of this affidavit, and I nfcould li!:c to quote o.:;aia
on na,o 2 of tide docurxant; rondir." tho last 2 3ontcncc3 of tho second fron
last para pvph, I quote:

“Ho has never secured or ttrepted to socura an -dvantcfor
liirnolf on -ha basis of is o fiei.-l o3itior.. !*i3 widely h cr.m e.-.din ess
to ‘alp others arose fro is -ire arc and liiv.! heart, and rore'.ncd unfcrv.irod,
even ..ijon his ac!: of ’no-.:1c ' a of Inrun nature caused!.’- varies disa-
ppointnents. 4

I aeh tho Tribunal to taJw otico of tlx rest of this - fidavit. Ziis
'ocvroafc ha3 '. eon signed and certified it*, tin proper raumar.

It li . If and Will aloo have .ho

"rfdbic mother lc. This is an ffidavit si ned by the .'udr.o of the iocal
coart(tetsgorichtarat) Cerhard :icrr\eicli, '.o ’ts— hr. vdoif Drandt

10321


28 Juno4t-ZSI“7-&-!e»Eer (tnt, Heel or)

Court I

froa hit early school days, her In,: gone to school with bin. It throws
nuch light on ny cliont's personality, whoa sonebody kho has lived with
hia for neay yoora testifies about his character, I should like to quoto
the third percgroph of that affidavit. I quo tot

■I have always seen in Dr. Rudolf Brandt, aa a school boy and a
student, a nodol of industry, cloanllnosa and lanato docorvc. Through
his industry ho roachod tho highost spood in stenography when a noro
achool boy, 1 b far as I rooonbor, ho hod a spood of 360 syllables a
ninuto at a schoolboys* tost in tho autinn of 1927 and achiovod spoods of
noro than 300 syllables a ninuto in a groat nuubor of tosts up to tho
year of 1933. Since I attained such spood in shorthand nysolf, I know
what long, untiring industry and also what a tenporato way of lino is nccoo-
sary In ordor to achiovo such rosults. On account of his poronts*
tlnplo circmstancos, Dr. Rudolf Brandt lod a particularly nodost lifo
during his school days and otudont days. This nodoration onablod hin
to pay for all his studios out of his own onralngo."

I ask tho Tribunal to tako notico of tho rost of this affidavit. This
docmcnt has boon slgnod and cortiflod in tho proper nannor.

Tho next affidavit which I an going to subnit is Do cunont Rudolf
Brandt Ho, 17, It is an affidavit si/yiod by Dr. Vllholn Stuckart, a
fornor Stcto Socrotary in tho Roich Ministry of tho Intorior. Dr. Stuckart,
on tho basis of his fornor activity ns Stato Socrotary in tho Roich
Ministry of tho Intorior, is ir. a position to giro natorlnl testinony
regarding Rudolf Brandt's activity as tho hoad of Hinalor's Ministerial
Offico (Ministorbuoro). I shall quoto tho first two sentences of tho
socond paragraph of this affidavit:

"I an able to Judge Dr. Rudolf Brandt's position only aftor August
1943, end then only a6 far as ny sphere of work at tho Roich Ministry of
tho Intorior is amccraod. Ttader tho Roich Kinistor of the Intorior
IT. Frick there already oxistod a so-called Ministerial Office."

I shall skip tho next sentonce, and I shall continue to road paragraph 3,

I quote:


10322


2G Jun&-:-.:3B-7-3-Ii=s3or (Int. ilan let)

Court Ho. I

"‘.'ban Dr. .-rick -ts replaced l«y UiirOor in August 19U3, Hinnlar

forrtd a rv.rr Hinistcrial Offico, consisting of Dr. Brandt, tiro assistants,

end a sccrcctry. This laidot.rial :tco -ras not situated at the I'irdstry

of tho Interior in Barling, but r.t IlLalcr's field Hoodquartors, nhich

vas in tiio innediate vicinity of the .Tachror's Koadcuarters. Hinder <'c-

nnndod that ministerial affairs should ' c reported to bin thoro to a con-

aidcrcblo extent. H:nco, fror. that timo onrrard, tho linistarial Offico

bccano tiio place rt- .ro tho documents of tho Kinistry of the Intsrior -cro

•

brought by couriers for dcliv_ry or prosoir.tction daily. "Amlor, on

principle, did not psrcdt tho nenbere of tho Belch L’lnistry of tiio Int-

• .

orior to conamicrto with bin by tclcphono. flixrofov.i, tho tolonhono

calls of tho officials of the Berlin liniotry of tho Interior wsro

rocoivcd l>y the Ilinlstorlal c.ffico. Dr. DruntK reported ti»n to Hinnlor

and delivered ittnaler's decision to tho official concerned in nritins

or by tele phono. Tho teletype jajssc.cs of tho I 'i'iotry of tho Interior

in Berlin i/.im also '.olivorod to f .e ’ -nistorial Offico. Dt»cndt roportod

on all tills and inform.d Hinnl r rbovt ho ratters concerned, answering

•

a^ain all inoriries according to the decisions of Hinnlar, In that

1*Q informed tho Berlin linistry about all such decisions end orefers

•

of Hiceler, dth r through written notes or by tolOphono.

"Tiio voluxe of vor!c of tho ' inistrrial Offico was very erect. i*r.
3ranclt was oxcoptionally diligent and ovorburdoned with work. Ho,
hiu3:lf, ao director of tho ‘ J nistoriol Offico, had no authority;
neither did l;o posses cry po ;r of nnkiQS decisions in Ministerial
affoiTs.

“I, ysclf, iras State Socr.tary in tho B.ich Ministry of tho Interior."
~d3 affidavit has been 3igi»cd and certified in tho proper manner.


10323


Court 1

June 28— Ii-8— 1—HEWScllagher-Ramler.

DH. *'fZISCrIR3-R, (representing Dr. Kaufmenr., the defense
counsel for the defendant Rudolf Brandt.) The next docu¬
ment, Sour Honors, will be Rudolf Brandt Ho. 18.

TI-i: PRESIDENT: Counsel, what has this document to do
with the dofondant Rudolf Brandt? I do not see his nave
mentioned In It at all.

IJl. HARDY: At the soma time, Xour Honor, I wish that
you would peruse the next document, which Is Document No. Id.
Those dooi’.r..nts are apparently lotters addressed to one Hr.
Kerston, and the signatures of the writers or the authors of
the letters aro not authenticated, nor sworn to. Thcro is
merely a i:otar‘s certificate stating that this document is
a true pho too tat lc oopy of the original, which In no way
rondors thoso documents authenticated in tho manner which
the Tribunal has prescribed. Furthermore, I cannot see tho
connoctlor. and mntoriallty of tho documents In addition to
that.

TKS PRESIDENT: On their fcco, the documents havo noth¬
ing •..••-ntever to do with the defendant Rudolf Brandt.

DR. VZISCrERBER: Mr. President, I should like to mako
the following exolan-tlon lr. that connection: These two
lettoro hrvo probative value, no doubt, but how high this
probative valuo Is to bo considered is a matter for tho
Tribunal to decide. I should like to recall that whon
Rudolf Brandt was examined lr. the witness box, he mentioned,
amon^ oth^r matters, that ho actively participated In the
liberation and transfer of about 3,500 Jews from Sermon
concentration camps tJ Sweden. At that time r.n affidavit of

Jtodlzinp.lrct Felix Korston, who Is the addrossoe here,-

as Rudolf Brandt Exhibit No. 5. I thought I snuuld submit
these two letters of the Jewish '..'orld Congress, dated 15
December 12-15 ana 4 December 1946, to the Tribunal, because


1032k


Court 1

June 28—1A-8—1—HD-Gallagher—Rader.


DR. ^I3^ZRBZR, (representing Dr. Keufnann, the defense
counsol for the defendant Rudolf Brandt.) The next docu¬
ment, Your Honors, will be Rudolf 3randt No. 18.

t:-" PRESIDENT: Counsel, what has this document to do
with the defendant Rudolf Brandt? I do not see his nave
mentioned In It at all.

I.R, HARDY: At the same time. Your Honor, I wish that
you would ceruse the next document, which la Document No. 19.
Those dooun:nta are apparently letters addressed to ono iir.
Kerstcn, and the signatures of the writers or the authors of
the letters are not authenticated, nor sworn to. Thcro Is
merely a Kotor's certificate stating that this document Is
n truo Dho to static copy of the original, whioh in no way
rendors thoso documents authenticated in tho .manner which
tho Tribunal has prescribed. Furthermore, I cannot see tho
connoctlon and nntorlallty of tho documents in addition to
that.

THE PRESIDENT: On their face, the documents havo noth¬
ing v;'* at over to do with tho defendant Rudolf Brandt.

DR. VSISC£R3ER: Mr. President, I should like to noko
the following explan-tlon In that connection: Those two
lettors have probative value, no doubt, but how high this
probative veluo Is to bo considered Is a matter for the
Trltxinal to decide. I should like to recall that when
Rudolf Brandt was examined lr. the witness box, he mentioned,
amon^ oth.r matters, that he actively participated In tho
liberation and transfer of about 3,500 Jews from German
concentration camps te Sweden. «t that time an affidavit of

Mod lz Inal ret Felix Korston, who Is tho addressee here,-

is Rudolf Brandt Exhibit No. 5. I thought I snould submit
these two lettors of tho Jewish Vorld Congress, dated 15
December 1S45 and 4 December 1946, to the Tribunal, because


10324.


Court I

Juna BS-If-B-S-HD-G'- lie uher-Banler,

we rre .:.re c ncernad wit. - very i-portant statement reiard-
ln 6 t-is c.ct of liberation. If this Felix Xersten t.ie man
to wa.a t.ls letter la addressed, has made an affidavit in
favor of t.ie defendant Rudolf Brandt, I earn chat in support
of this affidavit for Rudolf Brandt these two letters of the
World Jowls C.n^rose be admitted, because they throw ll-ht
on t..e c-nfd.ti.ns at that time, and it la for that reason
that I believe that these two documents *. ve a oertaln
probative valu o .

r"i PRESIDENT: The Tribunal rules that these documents
have no probative value, *-nd they will not be received in
ovldcnoc.

DR. *\£IS3iR3IR: Then I shall offer In evidence a6 tho
noxt d o.' .cnt Rudolf Brandt Ko. 20, which will receive tho
exhibit number IS. This la an affidavit alined by Ludwig
Pemaol. I merely offer this document in evidence, and I
should like to rsi the Tribunal to take notice of it without
my rondin. any of tho >aeea;.ea.

T..u list dcouoent will be Rudolf Brandt Document No. 21
as Jxhlblt :?o. 19. This la on affidavit al c nod by a certain
Gobharc‘.t .-.immlor, which also refers to the sphere of work
end r ctivitloo of tnc defendant Rudolf Brandt. This document
concludes all the documents as they ore o ntalnod In Rudolf
Brandt's sup lomental volume.

THE PRESIDENT: The Tribunal ce received no copies of
these documents in Gorman. Those snould bo submitted to tho
Tribunal at aoae later date.

DR. '2I5(riR3-R: Yes, Y<.ur Honor.

THE PRESIDENT: The Tribunal has Just received ouo lu¬
cent I or. bohr.lf of ;ho defendant liruioweky. Is the defen¬
dant's c unscl ready to nresent these documents? I don't
see Dr. Flemuin*.


10325


Court 1

Juno 28-10-3— 3-HD- Oa11 a5 har-Ramle r.

:i?.. HARDY: Defonse Co nsel for defendant Weltz is roady
to present his supplemental documents!

TEE PRESIDENT: Do I understand that counsel for the
defendant '.’eltzer will present these documents on behalf of
the defendant Krugovsky.

MR. HARDY: No, Your Honor, the defendant Mrugowakyfs
document books are not In order and ready as yet for presenta¬
tion. He has several supplements, I understand, but the
defonso counsel for the defendant Weltz Is prepared to prosent
documents for the defendant Weltz.

THE PRESIDENT: Very well, wo will proceed with the
documents for the defendant Weltz. Wo have not as yet
recolved the documents.

DR. WILLS: (counsel for the defendant Weltz). Mr.
Prcaldont, I hevo only fow affidavits which I want to offer
In supplementation of ay provious evldonco. rroa the vory
beginning I have tried to keep ny submission of evldonco
ns brief as posslblo.

THE PRESIDENT: Just a moment counsel. Is the English
translation of those documents nvallablo to the Tribunal?

DR. -flLLE: Hr. President, I have them with me, excopt
for one document, but I believed that they were all before
the Tribunal.

THE PRZ3IDENT: These documents hare Just been handed
to the Tribunal.

DR. WILLIS: May I continue. Your Honor? In supplementa¬
tion of ay suabisslon of evidence, I first offer an affidavit
signed by Dr. Wendt, whoa I have mentioned here before. I
tried once before and you. Your Honor, suggested that I
submit this affidavit at the end of the entire submission
of evidence. I should like to offer this document, Weltz
Document Ho. 23, as Exhibit No. 21. The English transla¬
tions

10326


Coart 1

Juno 28-:^8-4-HD-aaXl4» ^her^-Racler.

have beer. -ttaohed. I should not like to quo to this e:.-ton-
Bive d o I be lie vo fcvt I can limit zyaelf to sumap.ri::-

ln. Sic vol-vant contents In ft few words.

TH3 PRESIDENT: Just a zoDcnt. These docooents In tile
Document lu ok Veltt No. 3 are not numbered.

DR. "ILLS: The dc-coaant whloh I h«vc Just s-bmlttod '..-gs
jlven to .00 by zy secretary and sr.e told ae It was Dociuio.it
No. 23. I don't know why this supple Dental volume has no
numbers. That I really don't know.

TKZ PRESIDENT: Those numbers should be added. If you
will nraber the original dvoument 'nook.

NR. HARDY: T.ila whole zrcsentetlon Is only a question
of one or tve documents, I think, Tour Honor.

THE PRESIDENT: I think that wo can >rooeod. Wo con
toko down ; o numbers ourselvos as they aro assigned.

Whr.t document number la this?

DR. "ILLS: No. 23, Your K;nor, Exhibit No. 21. I bag
your pardon, ”oltz Exhibit No. 22. In order to go back to
your objection. Your Honor, I shall immediately see to it
that r.ll t: ooo documents ore ulvon proper numbers. I MB
surorlood by the lack of numbers, and I shall proceed to
clarify the situation lrziediatcly.


10327


28 Jar*. !T3-9-I-Cr-s3 (let. Panlr.r)

Ccurt No. 1

I shall briefly sinr.rizo the contents cf this locimcnt. Car.tain
of the ‘lericol Corps "er.lt, who had boon for may years a conpetont
assistant f Dr. laltz in his instituto, confirms hero that .oltz at
no tiico ratio any suggestion to bin to carry out oxporinonts on hunan
boinc8 at Dachau. Raschor at that tino, without any influcnco fron
'oltz, ofloo to tho instituto. And ho furthor says that 'fondt hinsclf
*./ns surprised at this. Furthornorc, ho confines that Raschor showed
hLn a tolo^ran fron Hi m l or which indicated that tho proposed oepori-
nonts Iiad to bo kopt socrot frer. ovorybody, including Profossor
Halts. Von .It drew his conclusions and statod irrodiatcly to Raschor
that ho, Raschod, could no longor stay at his instituto. Ho subse¬
quently dictated a iottor to Air Gnu VII, asking that Raschor bo
roliovod of his assi^nont to his instituto. Dr. "endt in his affi¬
davit goos on to say that tho instituto of Profossor "oltz suppliod
no instruments for tho lntor cold work carried out by Profossor
Holzloohnor and that tho Ibmishin" of a cal ox-ire tor, which had boon
roquostod by a roprosontativo of Profossor Holiloohnor, was rofusod.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel, this Docunont Book not only lacks
docunont nunbora but it lacks an index, ill you soo that an index
in proporod?

DR. HXLLXEt I bog your portion, lour Honor.

HR. H&RDTt Tour Honor, os far as I can nako out, this Docunont
Book in will bo only ono dscuaont, bocauso one is a Prosocution
exhibit that is clroa-.br in ovidonco, and I don't soo any sonao in
putting it in ovidonco again.

THE PRESIDE NT t Tho Tribunal has just rocoivod thi supplement,
which contains only an affidavit by Dr. Hondt. Hew, is tho docunont.
Counsel, to which you have just roforred and riven tho nunbor of
Holtz Docunont Ho. 23, is that tho doposition of Dr. "endt taken on
questions an:', answers? I assuno so, but I desire the rocord to bo
cl oar.


10328


28 Jane U7-:K.TD-9-2-Gross (Int* Renlor'

Court Me, 1

DR. V.TLLE: Yo3.

THE PRESIDENT: That nay be aiaittod as dTelts Exhibit No* 22*

DR. miE: No. 21, Ur. Prosidont.

TE PRESIDENT: Counsel save it NO* 22, but it should bo 21*

IE. RuHDXs It is "oltz Document No. 23, Exhibit No. 21 1

DR. *i ILLSi Yos, I nc~ subnit a further docunont which Is

'./olta Nr. 21* and to tfaich I shall (jive tho Exhibit No. tfoltz 22. It
is a supplenontal statooont nado by Dr. *"'ondt. For intorosts of
brovity I nood not or.'.lain this docunont ary further. I shall U ni t
nysolf to subnit tirr it to tho Tribunal.

THE PRESIDENT! Tho docunont will bo rocoivud as ’oltz Exhibit

22 .

DR. • ILLEx I now sutcdt \7oltz Docunont lto. 15, which will bo
TToltz Exhibit Ho. 23. This is a statement by Dr. von <ors, a fornor
aasociato of Prefoasor "Toltz.

THE PRESIDENT: T’.x> Tribunal dr os net havo that docunont,

DR. ‘TLLSi I nn sulnittin.. this docunont to(jothor with two
English translations.

UR. ft.RIJY: Tour Honor, I do not havo a copy, but I havo looked
ovor tho En: lioh copy boforo it was proaontod to you and I will not
object and it my bo adnLttod now if ho will supply no with a copy
aftor tho rocoss.

THE PRESHETiTt Counsol will supply tho Prosecution with a copy of
this docunont in English aftor tho rocoss and supply two rxro copies
to tho Tribunal.

New, this Doctor, is oltz Docunont !Sr. 15?

DR. ILIf.i Yos.

THE PRESIDENT: And what is tho exhibit nuhbor as si (pod to it?

IF. . ’ 1 LIE: No. 23.

T® : RESIDENT: Tho '.ocunent is received in ovidonco.

0 *

DR. ILLS: !!r. Prosidont, I have yot another docunont, but I
havo net yot rcceivod tho English translation. I thoreforo ask tho

10329


28 Jto c h7-::-A7D-9-3-Grcss (Int. Punier)

Court So. 1

Tribunal whether I can offer this document now, supplying tho English
text later, or whether I should. postpone tJc submission of that
docuasnt. ’.That Is is is a further supplemental statoGont by Dr. '..’endt.

THE FRESID5ST: Suirdt tho document to tho Prosecution*

IE. R’.RDYi This is properly notorlzod, but it sooas to contain
a good deal of information about Dr. Alexander. I soo "Dr. Alexander"
throughout horo in tho Goman. I world ask what tho docusont purports
to bo.

THE IHESHEWTi Tho . rosontation of that iocunont will bo delayed
until En ;lish translations ore available to tho Pro locution and tho
Tribunal. "hon they aro available, tho natter nay bo again callod
to tho attention of tho Tribunal.

DP. HL?i I havo no furthor docunonts to offer,

TIB HBSXQBNTi Aro thoro any othor documents on behalf of
dofonso counsol?

DP.. FRITZ, (counsol for tho do fon/ant Rcso)i !tr. Prosidont, I
could offor 12 furthor docuaonts today, but I havo found out that
although tto Snrlioh and Oorrran copios aro ednoographod they havo
not yot boon bound into a voluno. I tavo boon promised that they
would bo done at 11:30. Therefore, I axpoct thon to bo horo any
ninuto now. I think it would bo expedient for tho Tribunal to wait
until such tine as tho document books aro actually in tho courtroom.

THE IESSZDEHTi "ill tho secretary of tho Tribunal ascortain
whoth:r thoso document books aro available?

SECRETARY: They aro n;t yet available.

THE PRESIDSKTr I un or stood that Dr. Floaainf for tho Defendant
' Crugowsky had a msaber of .'.ocu-acnts, and wo roccivod thoso docuaont
books. Tho doctor is net present in court.

in. !LARDY i Your ftonor, ttero aro a considerable nunbor of docu¬
ments alroady filed in tho oaso of 3ac! ,r-Freyson;-. It scons to no
that the attemay for Bockcr-Frcysong could introduce some docunonta
this afternoon. I have two eupplcnontal docuaont books with a rather

10330


23 Jur.o L7-lW.ro-9-«-Grc3S (Int. RarOor)

Court !fc>» 1

axtonaivo nunbor of doeo&onte end it ni-^ht tako presumably an hour
or. his .-art tc put thoso in* I ton*t knew whether ho has others to
prosont afterwards.

THE PEESIDEXT: I wonder whero the so counsel arc, whether thoy
aro available*

DR* FRITZ: !Er* President, perhaps you wcul! pernit no tc c® to
tho Dofonso Information Con tor and soo whether the so gentlanon: are
thoro, and at the sano tino I can fin;! out how cy docunont books aro
coning alone*

THE PRESIDENT: Yes.

UR. a.RUT: Tcur Jfenor, it would soon to bo that wo could uot
a recapitulation fren dofonso oounsol and fin:’, cut Just how nany rx>ro
document books they have to offor and how nany aro in tho process of
boinp translated*

If Your Honors ploaso, if thoro is nothin-; to pit in this aftomoon,
tho Prosocuticn would bo in a position to offor thoir Robuttal
Docunont Book Ho. I*

THE PRESIDENT: V.'o will rocoivo that this afternoon if dofonso
counaol aro not ready* In tho noantino irhilo awaiting tho roturn of
dofonso counsol fron tho I n fonaaticn Contor, tho court will bo in
roooss for a few nononts.


10331


23 Jcn-Ji-j3-U-l-Sinabuck (Int. a aslor)
Court '.lom I, Cose No. I.


TED : ARSr.YL: Tho Tribiaial is again in suasion.

IP- HARDY: Jfey it plor.se the Tribunal, the docurx-nt books
which I said would be ready this afternoon will bo presented by isiss
Johnson, and sho said that she would not bo roai ty to go on with it un¬
til 3:00 C‘clock, so tho lr.ttor port of the afternoon she can tnko up
with rebuttal docitiint books if necessary.

TK“. FESID2NT: Counsel, Dr. Fleming for defendant Nrugowsky,
the Tribunal hoc Supploa-'nt 1, Case 1, defendant ’xugowsky. Is that
tho volira from which you propose to offer further documents?

Dr.. n & HJ KOi Hr. President, 1 really intended to submit Docu¬
ment Book No. 2 first, which contains excerpts regarding exporlixints
on human boings abroad. This Docujunt Book No. 2 was submitted by uo
at an oarli-.r dr. to, ircodintoly after tho oxnnination cf tho do fondant
Mrugcwsky. Tho Tribunal at that tire ruled that tho docisior. regard¬
ing this document book bo postponod until all defendants had conclvidod
their cases.

Til: FR'ISIDIl/r: Counsel, the Tribunal can n utt procood to hoar
you offer the doexujonts contained in your Supplement 1, Case 1. It is
Frobable that wo have your Docua-nt Bool: 2 in our offices, but that can
bo offered whon wo have finished with your Supplement 1.

DR. FIIFJT7E: Yes, lour Honor.

11R. ILiRDT: Your Honor, may I put a few questions to counsel
concerning those document books?

TH3 HISS IDE!.T: Yos.

DP.. HARDY: Hare you cccplctod Document Book No. 1, nil tho
documents in that document book?

DR. FIZivIING: Yoa, that is concludod.

IP.. HARDY: Havo you completed all the documents in Document
Book 1-A?

DR. FiaiiTB: Yes.

DR. HARDY: And nw you have left Document 3ook No. 2 and Sup¬
plement No. 1?


10332


28 Ju&4HB-ll-5-Kirabuck (Lit. ---anler)

Court .To. I, Care Ho. 1.

OR. FiaUDfG* Yes.

M?a HARDY: Ard that is the entire nucber of documents you have?

DR. FUD?:T?G: Ho, there are two core documents which are still
ir. translation.

HU HARDY: All right, thank you.

DR. PL2TCDG: I shall first deal with Supplement 1, which is
before the Tribunal, and I shall leave Document Book 2 until such tira
as the Tribunal receive it froc their offices.

THE FRESHEN?: Well, counsel, we have it now. You may proceod
with Document Book 2.

Counsel, and Counsel for the Prosecution, this Document Book 2,
Urugov.'sky, was delivored to the Tribunal some time since and has boon
examined. How this docuaont book. Counsel, if I understand, consists
entirely of oxtracts from medical publications; is that correct?

DR. FLDIUHO: Yes.

THE IHESIDE.’IT: Is Counsel for the Prosecution ex a mining that
doc umo nt book?

HR. HARDYi Yos, Your tenor.

THE PRESIDENT: Well, under the ruling of the tribunal here¬
tofore node in otter cases, those documents appear to be admissible
in ovidence under tho rules. How, in order to facilitate the trial and
save trouble for Counsel and the Tribunal, the Tribunal will now admit
all these documents in ovidence without further tine or argument, ard
read the admission into the evidence. How the Tribunal-Will proceed
to dictate into the record the admission of these documents.

JUDGE SEoREC: Dr. Piercing, I nor.* i-avo before me Hrugowsky
Document dook 2 containing Krugowsky documents Hoe. 67 to 91 inclusive,
and you iiavo heard the ruling of the President that they will be admit¬
ted in evidence as Hrugowsky exhibits. That exhibit number do you as¬
sign to Hrugowsky Document Ho. 67?

DR. FLEH2ZN1: Ho. 67 will receive EAibit No. 61.

JUDGE 3S3RT.G: ?ery well. Thor, the Tribunal will receive in

10333


28 Jun-k-SE-11-3—Hinabusk (Int. Easier)

Court No. I, Case No. 1.

evidence krugowsky Docoaent 67 as Exhibit 6lj krugowsky 68 as 62;
krugowsky 63-A as Exhibit 63; Ifrugowsky 68-3 as Exhibit 64; krugowsky
68-C as 65; Mrugowsky 69 as Exhibit 66j krugowsky Nos. 70-71 as Exhibit
67; krugowsky 72 as Exhibit 68; krugowsky 73 as Exhibit 69; krugowsky
74 as Exhibit 70; krugowsky 75 as Exhibit 71; krugowsky 76 as Exhibit
72; krugowsky 77 as Exhibit 73; krugowsky 78 as Exhibit 74; krugowsky
79 as Exhibit 75; krugowsky 80 as Exhibit 76; krugowsky 81 as Exhibit
77; krugowsky 82 as Exhibit 78; Krugowsky 83 as Exhibit 79; krugowsky
89 as Exhibit 30; krugowsky 90 as Exhibit 81; and krugowsky 91 as Ex¬
hibit 82.

TIE RESIDENT* This action by the Tribunal takos care of
krugowsky Document Book No. 2 in Case 1. Counsel for the Defendant
krugowsky nay now proceed to offer the exhibits contained in Supplenont
1, krugowsky.

DR. FLEJCIL.0* Tos. First I an going to sutoit krugowsky Docu-
nont 51, which trill bo Exhibit 83. This is a report of the Third Con¬
gress East of tho Consulting Specialists held in the Medical Aoadomy, 24
to tho 26 May, 1943# I submit it primarily because of the report con¬
tained tho rein by 3S-Hauptatumfuohror Doetsor regarding tho ocopati-
bility of a now totra vaccina against typhoid, para-typhoid, and
cholera. I ask tho Tribunal to take notico of this docunent. I do
not think that it is necessary to read any details fran tho docunent.

THE HiESHENT* Proceed, counsel.

DR. FIEOUNGs Tho next docunent will bo Document krugowsky No.
66. I offer it as Exhibit krugowsky No. 31*. This is an affidavit
signed by Dr. Rudolf Fuse ganger, free Frankfurt on tho Main, and doals
with tho preparations Akridin and Ruthenol. Dr. Fussganger says on
page 3 of the document, page 9 of the docunent book*

"Tho first clinical experiments with Preparation 3582" - that
is Akridin - "were, as far as I ’.mow, carried out in the section for
infectious diseases of the Frankfurt on the Main medical clinic by
Professor Nohnenbruch. Three patients were involved, all of whan had


10334


26 Jon-M I B l l-li-Hinabuck (Int. Racier)
Court Ho. I, Case Ko. 1.


contracted typhus. After receiving Preparation 3582, the fover of all
three patients sank immediately.*

THE PRESIDE!??: la you read these docuaonts they will all be
received in evidence unless objections are nade either by counsel or
the Tribunal.

DR. FLCUIJG: The next docxraont will bo Hrugowsky 93, which I
offer as Hrugowsky Exhibit 85. This is an affidavit signed by Dr.
3rucener, from Hoechst. Attached is a number of lot tors and note filos
coning froa tho works at Hoechst. Dr. Bruen.or in his affidavit certi¬
fies that theso filos and letters attached to the docunont are auth¬
entic copies of the docuaonts free tho files of the I.G. Farben Works
at Hoechst. Vie aro here concerned with tho preparation Akridin and
its us a go. This correspondence is intordod to provo that Ding ro-
coivcd theso preparations for his oxporinontal sories directly fraa
tho works at Hoechst and not from tho Defendant Hrugowsky.

IB. HARDY: If it would Boot with tho approval of tho Tribunal,
whilo Dr. Planing is introducing this doctnont and its many attach¬
ments, I would like to soo tho original exhibits as ho rofors to oach
spocific lot tor, and then it will expedite mat tors. If I have an ob¬
jection I will interpose, and if I have none, as they aro going aloi^

I won't bother, but then I can poruso oach ono of then as ho is going
along.

THE PRESIDENT: I do not know whether or not Dr. Fleming pro¬
poses to refer to oach letter or sicply to offer tho sorios in evid¬
ence. Is the original exhibit in tho courtroom?

DR. Piai3\0* The originals are hero, yes. Hr. ft^osidont.

The originals aro hero.


10335


Court 1

June 28--I—12—1-HD-Les se r-Rasler.

This Is an affidavit, to which the notary as attached all
the excerpt6 from the flies with seal and string, so that
there car. really be no possibility for any confusion.

IS. HARD!!: Ho objection, ¥our, Honor*

THE PRD5ID2IT: Counsel for the Prosecution having no
objoctl n, the document will be admitted as Mrugowsky exhibit
85.

DR. FLa-UNG: I then offer Document Krugowsky 94 as
Mru.owsky Exhibit 36 and Mrugowsky Document 95 ns Krugowsky
Exhibit 37. Thoso are 2 affidavits signed by Professor Flury,
from ’.'uorzeurg. Both deal with ^konltln. One deals with
antidotes or antitoxins, and the other deals with tho dlffor-
enco In tho effects of «konltln and pruslc acid on the
human bo In . Tncso are Mru-,owsky Exhibits 86 and 87.

Tho ne::C will bo Krasovsky Document 96, which will be¬
come lirgugowoky Exhibit Ko. 88. This is an affidavit signed
by Dr. Kolnrlch Stlege, to whloh ore attaohed minutes of the
Prusoic ,.cid Meeting on 27 and 28 of January 1941. I offer
this docum-nt because I shall uso It in my final plea In
order to prove that Krugowsky had nothing to do with tho
distribute of prussic ncld to the extermination camps.

Tho next is Krugowsky Document 96, which will be
Krugowsky -xlv.bit 88.... This is on excerpt from the
mlnu:es of the Prussic «cl Meeting of 27 end 28 January
194-:.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel, I think you assi.nod numbor 88
to Document 96 — that Is the one you nr- now referring to
-96?

DR. 7L M-.TI'C: Tcs, I am now referring to Document iio.

96. The next will be .-jugowsky Document 97, which I of for
rs Mrugowsky Exhibit Ho. 89. This Is an excerpt from tho
Central Journal for Complete Hygiene, Including Bacteriology

10336


Court 1

June 2c-i£-l —o-HD-Leeser-Samler.

end T- • Ti’-ir, •. This Is the recognizee. Journel for this
branch f the Profession. The extract contnlr.a a .report
regarding »..opia--OJUgh experiments oarforned by the
A=3ric--r. ctuple HroDonnld -n f ur children with whooping
oou_h reparations*

.3. Your l-i.nor, at this time I nave the op or-

tunlt Sj poraee each .f these documents. The Prosecution
hr,s n jooti *n to any of the documents in this document
booh.

D?.. FLEI—IKD: The next Is hrugoweky Dvoument No. 98,
vhioh *.:111 be krugowsky Exhibit No. 90. Tills an extract
froa She Yo v 3ook of Pediatrics sn- Physical education,

~nd deals with scarlet fever experiments on children.

The next Is Xrugoweky 100 and will become llrugowsky
Exhibit llo. 92. T..18 Is an excorot from the manual of

Virus 31 eases.

*ruy.:oky Document Is offered xs hru owsky Exhibit Ho.
S3. This Is rn affidavit si 0 n<.d by a Dr. Xurt Feurhake, r.
personrl friend of the Dofendnnt iirugowsky, who has known
him ever li.ioe r.ls ohlldhocd and hove gives a character
rcferonoc. I don't think it is necesscry for mo to quoto
any passages from that d;c.ment. I ask the Tribunal to
take notice .f it.

The no::t document Is hrugowsky 102, which will become
Mru JW6h; Exhibit He. 94. This Is an affidavit signed by
University rrjfessor Dr. Paul Jhlenhuth r.t Freiburg In
3r.l3.ru. me talks rb ut vaccinations terforaed In the
concentration camp 3uchonveld, vacclnntltns v.tloh are
mcr.tl. r.cd. in the so-cr.lled Ding Diary and with which the
Defendant hvu.ovsky Is charged. I think lc 1" not necee cry
for me to c-ote any passages from that document.

The next document P.rugowsky 92 will be hrgoweky -xnx :lt
95. T is Is an excerpt from the seniority list of tne


10337


Court 1

June 28—1^-12-3-HD-Le s ser-Ranle r.

Elite Guard of the KoDaP, that is, the S3, ar.d refers to the
promotion of Hrugowsky to Sturnbannfuehrer on 9 November
1942. I r.oed this excerpt in connection with the discussion
of Ding's signature in the so-called diary.

-ZAHDX: Just a moment. Regarding Docunant 102, which
is an oxtract from the seniority list it should be Document
92. It is l*o. 102. The extmet from the s eniority list as
contained in this document book is not the promotion of
Mrugousky but the oromotlon of Dr. Ding, — is that correot?

DR. FLSOillto: Dr. Din.*, yos. The next document in this
document book is Mrugowsky Document 4a. In Document 3ook I
I had a Document No. 4, which was an excerpt from the Roioh
Law Oazctto and ooncernod part of the regulations regarding
pnthogenlo organisms. « part of this ordlnanco was omitted
by alotako. Therefore I hrvo Included in this document book
tho part of the ordlnanco which I neod for my case. This
will booomo Hrugowsky Exhibit 96. /

THE PRESIDENT: These documents are all rocolved in
evidence and tho Tribunal doslros to compliment Dr. Flomulng
on tho manner in which he has presented theso documents and
tho manner in which thoy wore prepared.

DR. FLEUMIKS: I should like to reserve tho ri B ht to
submit tho 2 volumes which I have not yet received fx^om
translation. I 6aid yeaterday that one volume contelne only
excerpts from the record of the Pohl Trial, arai the other
volume oontain6 a number affidavits.

THE PRESIDENT: The Tribunal will endeavor to oxpedlto
the translation of these documents, and they ary be offered
when received.

DR. FLELIIING: Iliank you, Tour Honor.

1IR. HARDY: Hay it please Your Honor, I am informed that
Dr. Fritz, defense counsel for Rose, has documents ready.


10333


Court 1

Juno 28—24-12-4-HD-Leseer-Roml 0 r.


and I wish to inquire whether other defense counsel will havo
documents -er.dy at Cue eolation of Dr. Fritz’s introduction?

THE r-PiSDE:::: The Tribunal has sons documor.ts pre-
— r-r. behalf of the defendant Poppendlck. If his counsel
could '-*3 . - uad, they could orobobly he offerod.

O. HARDY: I would surest the; dcfor.se counsel, dur-
ln. tko n n hour recess, contact other defense counsel and
see if thoy ern nrrrn_e for other defense counsel to present
what doowa-nte the" h ve this afternoon, -nd wo could clean
up a jveat deal of this.

Th2 -RE3ID2::?: Ihe Tri'eunnl v«g ab,ut to sake that
su WJ cstion. Defense counsel will endeavor to notify other
dofonsj counsel that this afternoon we will receive documents
whloh r.re ready for submission to the Trie unci. Apparently

soso a > j ru .-re Just b„in^ handed up. The Tribunal has

now recoivod document hooks on behalf of the Defendant
Roso.

DR. SAUIlR: Hr. President, durln^ the recess I had
rn op ortunlty to soon;-, to a number of jy c.ller_uos in
ordor to ascertain how far they have gotten with their
doc .sent : ' is In order to tell tho Tribunal cbout it. I
do . t ; '.ink, exce t for the c^oe of fopoandlok end Rogc,
tiiat any other c^sos will he concluded for presentation ishia
rftorn- n. I no tolling you this Hr. Pr.sldont, bocaueo I
doubt vketk-v there will he any polr.t in y . ur h.-lain., an
afternoon session unucr t jsc circumstances. Counsel for
Pop ondick and Rose -re .'ir.lshod *. ltn their document hooks
and arc re cl; to present them out I do not hallo ve that
any other cofsneo c uneel will he role c. et thslr document
hooks .*r _ tka translation branch in ti-io. I vented to tell
you t. at i:i order th't ;ou nay ho in a position to dispose
of your afternoon accordin- to . our own desires.


10339.


Court 1

Juno 2S-10-12-5-H3-L3 b s er-Ra~ ler.


THE PRESIDENT: The Tribunal appreciates Counsel’s
oeurtosy, but the Tribunal Vill convene at 1:30, and we
will sec how far we can get with these documents, and \»-hen
they arc entered the Prosecution will be In a position to
offer some documents.

HR. HARDY: Your Honor, due to that fcot. If tho Prosecu¬
tion socs on about 3:00 o'clock with their rebuttal document
books, It Is advisable that all defense counsel be present if
they wish to Interpose objections.

THE PRESIDENT: Defense counsel will notify their
associates that If tho defense.

DR. 5AUTER: 3:00 o'clock, Hr. President?

THE PRESIDENT: The Tribunal will oonvono at 1:30 and
hear documents offered by Defendants Rose and Poppendlck and
any other defendants who have any documents to offer. Tho
Prosecution will be ready tc offer documents at 3:00 o'clock
but tho Tribunal will convene at 1:30 o'clock and will
procood.

DR. a*UTER: Yes.

THE PRESIDENT: Dr. M-rkel, bnvo you anything to say
to tho Tribunal?

DR. 1-31ZL (Counsel for the defondant Gonrkon): Hr.
?ro6idont, I only have to make e 6hort correction on my
submission of evidence yesterday. I want to withdraw tho
3 documents, Documents 19-D, 19-E, and 19-F, which I sub¬
mitted yesterday as Ger.zken Exhibits 21, 22 and 23, because
I do not require these documents for ay cases. I wanted to
make this correction lr. the interest of simplification.

THE PRESIDENT: Veil, Counsel, will you prep--.ro a
vritton application to withdraw the documents, 60 that the
matter will be entirely a matter of r-cord in the Office of
the Secretary General, and then the Court will eprovo your

103i*0


Court 1

Jur.o 2-S—'.i-l*2-6-HD-Iea8er-Ra=Ier.

DR. :Zl?1 3L: Thank y^u. Your Honor.

7X1 7RS8IDEY7: I fils with the secretary the certificate
Oonoerr.ln; the absence of Defendant Oocrheaser stating that
sac rll? not he In c.urt today on aoc-unt of lllnees; the
3ocvotary will file the certificate.

Tho Tribunal will now he In recess until 1:30 o’clooh.

(a rocese was taken until 1330 hours.)


103^


2 C Junc-.'.-.jD-13-l-Pemr. (Irtt* .Hro irn)
Coast ::o. I


ATrrr: c-:: 3issio::

(Tho hearing reconvened at 1330 hours* 23 June 19h7)

THB YXYZYJ.L: Tho Tribunal is again ir. scsiioc.

•

TIC FR£SI£CirT: Counsel Tor the defendant Hose ns? nrooe: !.

III. "CDY: It is ry understanding your Honor, that Docuncnt Book

Itoso llunbor 1 end Docunont Book Ho so nuxixsr 2, and Docuncnt Book Roso

• •

If crfo ar 3 boro boon coanlotcd, .z, tjts introducti n of dOounonts*
and rvn 7 ho is proceeding to sutploaor-t tlx Docui :r.t Book Ho so Itetoor 2.

TIC KlSIDCrT: Is that correct, counsel?

DR. 17273 (counsol Tor tlx defendant Roso): Yes.

TIC PR SHEW* Y ou cro nor proceeding with Rose Supplementary
Doomsnt Book Ihnbor 2,

UR. -'12T2: 71 jo first c'.ocu. ant, namely, Docunont U9, which rill bo
R 080 "bd licit U8 in tills single renter-/ voluno, is on affidavit by lYoToroor
Brnat Hauck. It is not ry intontior. to road this affidavit. It cor.c-ran
itsolf rith raking availablo of notarial to another research nan or an
institvto, and states specifically that tho deliverer boars no respor.si-
'oility for rhet tho rccipiont das rith tlx ate rial. Tho art docunont
is Ihinbor 50 which rill bo Roso Hxhiblt IS, Tils likoiriso is an af¬


fidavit by Professor Brr.st llav.ck. This concerns itself :rltk tho question
of Trixthor calrrla tor tier? is a dan erous disaaso, and it says that
very frequently ejqserlaxn .a on human beings havo boon carried out
in malaria tortiona. Let roark tlir.t Professor Schilling also :ror!rod
in solaria tortiona in Dachau,

The next Docunont is Dcctrvint . 0 :0 51 ':ich -ill be hiiibit SO is an

• •

oxtra.ct form -Etude Seriologique s 1*Infection folusfcro" by ?r. Henry.


•hat _n *x cro3S-o.“'’--lnation of osa
jchillang asked that ho ’xs sent tho
of nalcria. This docunont shorn that
died of jjalcria are used in order to
by Schilling but by many others.

Exhibit 51. Eds is an excerpt from tho


tlx


? rh-.ps
ho >fOS


10342


26 Juno-d-13B-13-2-?crrin (Ir.t. Brotm)

Court ”o. i

bock by Dr. Reiner liieller entitled -IL'dicrl licrobiclo— •' ' J: s

published in 19U6. Tho statistics contained in this excerpt shoe

■

nhet a dm or t-.-nhus is, particularly during rer-tino. I havo to put theso
statistics in Tor the p.irposc cT final svmation.

Document 53 'fill be Zrddbit ~2. Zda too is m excerpt fron tlio hook
J i:pi denies cue to *7ar n by Professor Schlossbcrgcr. I can scy regarding
t:da Detract tlio smo that I said for tlia previous 0 :tract just uontioned.

Docutnent 5U 'fill bo Exhibit 53. Th.is is an oxcorpt fron the book
"Zpidonics Resulting fron .'ars" by Dr. SWiaing. This oxcorpt also
rakes nanifest the h oa r ds of typhus.

Document 55 'fill be Exhibit 51. This is an affidavit by Profossor
Doctor Otto, and there is appended to tin an oxcorpt fron the "Clinical
' 'ccldy* 1 . This doevnent Shons what tlw t-phv .3 situation was during tho
first '..'orId iTar.

Document $6 will bo Exhibit 55. 7ds is an oxcorpt fron t/vo book
thick '/as published in 1935 in London by liens Zinsser ontitlod "Rato,
lico, and History. “ r.iis oxcorpt also .vires palpable tho dangor of
typhus and points up tho dangers that tkreaton tho oteto through a typhus
opldondc, and it also uses oluci kites the iuportanco of that danger for
tho future,

Tlio nerd; doeuxont is tho docuaont put in by tho prosocution in tho

•

flick Trial. It ins xit in -s HE 5222, which in tills trial 2 shall put
in as Rose Docu.ont 56 and ..t './ill bo oridbit 55. This i3 a letter —

AE Counsol, -his last mnber should 'jo Exhibit

56. Ton already hed 55.

D .. T3TZ: CoiT-eetion, Erddbit 56. This ?s a 1 ttor iron tho pres¬
ident of tho Land Labor Offices *:st -Vila to t'w District Croup .nthracito
.'ining Ruhr of tho Economic Group lining, Is sen, and is dated 3 fobrunry

*U 2 . Ttds letter throws light on tho tyi.ua opidoric orjong tlio Russian

•

prisoners of war in Gerran inprisonront during tho Second VTorld 'Tar. On
l^ago 1 of th±3 docurent, it ate to 3, anon: otter things, "T”rhus has until
recently caused 15,000 deaths daily. In one cm? in'Vfastphalin over 900

10343


25 June-*.-:33-13-2-Perrin (Int.,3ronn)
Court Bo. I


prisoners of var died {faring Do confer."

SS» no:rt do euront is Docu eat $7, a Hcport by tho Society of BI 0 I 037
*07 ELanc and Bnltasardi Hunan boixg orrvorinents arc discussed hero in
t/oich control "roups arc used.


lOXh


26 Jun-A-MB-U-l-Ninabuck (Int. 3ro«m)
Court Ho. I, Case No. 1.


The next document is Docirent 58. This is a reprint frun tho
"Tropical Diseases Bulletin." I sliall put this in as Rose Exhibit 53.
‘his shows that during the Second ^orld War in Africa in a period of
two and a half years three and a half million protective vaccinati.ns
wore given with living typhus vaccine. It can further be seen from
this this paper that five to six cases Of typhus developed par thousand
as a result of thoso vaccinations. That would mean that roughly twenty
thousand pooplo became ill with typhus as a result of these protective
vaccinations.

Document 59 will bo Rose Exhibit 59. This is another affidavit
by Profossor Otto which doals with tho concopt "subsequent infection".
Tho concopt, subsequent infoction has played a largo role in the work
that Profossor Hagon did, and this word "subsoquont infection" freq¬
uently appears in Hagen's publications and in his correspondence,
among other things, his correspondence with tho dofendant Roso.

In addition I have turned in an affidavit by Dr. Knorr to bo
translated, but it has not yet boon translated and is consoquontly
not hero contained. This affidavit also doals with tho concopt sub¬
sequent infoction. I should liko to stato now that later I shall wish
to put this docicont in ovidencc. I have tho original horo and perhaps
it could bo given an exhibit nicb.-r now.

UR. HARDY: Your Honor, I suggest that he put tho document in
now. It seons to have a notary's certificate on it and file tho
English copies with us later, and then wo won't havo to bother to go
back to it.


THE PRESIDENT: Very roil, that procedure nay be followed.

DR. FRITZ: This then, will bo Roso Inhibit 60 , and finally,
lir. FTesident, I have throe French papers here, two papers by Sorgoant
and his associates and one toper by Tcrsa and .’assol. In thoso pa.ere
typhus infoction of non-vaccinated persons is described. I havo not yet
boon in a position to turn these over to the translation deportment.
Professor Rose has asked ao also to pot these papers in evidonco.


10345


28 Jun-A-M3-ll;-2-Ninabuck (Ir.t. Brown)
Court No. I, Case No. 1.


THE PRESIDENT: During the noon recess I consulted with the
translation department. They will do the vary best they can, but
there are limits, I fear, to what they can do. They prcciodd to ex¬
pedite the docuaonts and send then in to the Tribunal at the earliest
possible ncoont, but documents that have not yet been turned over to
the translators may possibly not bo translated in time to bo used.

DR. FRITZ: Perhaps the effort could bo nado, however, if I
givo tho documents to the translation dopsrtmont by Monday. Tlion if
thoy ere translated in tiro 1 can put then in.

THE PRESIDENT i Well, I would certainly adviso that thoy bo
given to tho translation department this afternoon. Do you have tho
documents there in tho original French?

DR. FRITZ: Yos.

THE PRESIDENT: Pass then up to tho Tribunal. Lot nvo look at

then.

DR. FRITZ: Not tho entirety of tho so articles is to bo copied
and translated, but only tho parts rarkod, only oxcorpto in othor words,
the ports that aro narked in pencil.

THE PRESIDENT: I mdorstand. I noto tto markings. I think
that thoso dociconts could not bo admitted and numbered and tho trans¬
lations furnished, tho English translations furnishod when thoy aro
made. You night show theso to counsol for the prosocution. Havo you
any objoction, Itr. Hardy?

:a. HARDY: No, I have no objection. Your Honor.

THE PRESIDENT: Thoy aro free scientific magazines, nodical
nagazinos. I suggest that ttey bo numbered. The furnishing of tho
English translations would bo a natter that could bo accomplished as
coon as tho translator finishes then.

DR. FRITZ: Then the work by Tors a and Wassel will bo Rose
document 61, Exhibit Number 6l. Tho first work by Sergeant and assoc¬
iates will bo Rose document and exhibit 62, and tha third, the other
publication by Sergeant, will be Rose document and exhibit 63.


103^6


28 Jua-Ar-MB-lli-3-Hinabuck (Int. Broro)

Court So. I, Case Ho. 1.

••

THE PRESIDE-;?: Counsel, of course, understands that the tv
lation of thoso dccuronts is only the first 3tep; that they must then
be ai5togT3phod and furnished. The translation is only one phase of

tho process.

DR. PHTTZ: I an quito awurc of tho difficulties involved, your

Honor.

THE PRESIDENT: The Tribunal nor: understands that this completes
finally Rose 1 s documents?

DR. FRITZ: That is so.

HR. HARDY: Your Honor, before wo proceed with tho introduction
of documents on bohalf of the defondant Pbppondick, tho prosecution
wishes to armounco that they will call two witnossos the first part of
next wook and, if poraissiblo with tho Tribunal, we will bo in a posi¬
tion to call them on Monday as rebuttal witnossos. Ono is a man named
Broors and tho othor a witress naaod Halos. Tho prosocution will filo
tho noticos conforming to tho regulations of tho Tribunal. Thoso two
witnossos will tostify as to tho activities of Hagen at Hatxwoilor.

THE PRESIDENT: Vory well, thoso witnossos may bo procontod
Monday. Any further witnossos dosirod to bo callod should bo prosontod
ot tho oarliost possiblo oomont, because that would, to sooo oxtont,
ccnponsato tho delay for tho production of docuaonts.

IP.. HARDY: Otter than thoso two witnossos, your Honor, it is
possiblo that tho prosecution nay call ono otter. However, that \3
merely possible at this point. It ray develop that thoso two Tdtnesses
will bo tho last witnesses called on behalf of tho prosecution for ro-
buttal.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel for tho defendant Foppendick.

DR. DUERR: First of all I should like to give the Tribunal
four English copies of supplemental volumes 1, 2 and 3. As first docu¬
ment I should like to put in HPO 16, an affidavit by Dr. 31aschko.

This will bo Foppendick Exhibit 15. Here the aevjlopnont and structure •
of the office Rcichs Physician SS is described and Foppendick*s positiori

102.7


28 Jun-A-IE-Ii-U-Ninabuck (Int. 3rcwn)
Court No* I, Case No. 1.


in it is also described. I should like to read a few passages. At
first the witness concerns himself with the structure and organization
of the office Helena fhysicinn SS and then he, on page two, first para¬
graph, discusses the reorganization in 19U3.

"In 19U3 Himler precised to lot him havo only a few depart¬
ments, among other things the pharmaceutical scrvico and hj’giono. At

A

the sene tiro Grawitz obtained free Himler the authorization for tho
establishment of soco subdivisional officos rithin his formerly unorgan¬
ized staff. In this way I too boonaa an office chief as Chiof Dontal
Surgeon. Hy ontiro staff consisted of qysolf and one dentist acting as
my assistant; I had to sharo a clerk with Dr. Foppondick. 3 mysolX was
ofton absent as I had ay private dental practice. *

Thon I should liko to skip a paragraph and read the noxt para¬
graph.

"Grawits himself had an adjutant and a fomalo secretary at hie
personal disposal. This secretary, who was in charge of Dr. Grar.ltz'
anto-rooo, was tho most inportant person in tho building. Slvo gnvo in¬
formation, acted as rocoptionist and arranged appointments with Dr.
Grawitz. Sho hnd workod for him sinoo 1939* and ho had complete con¬
fidence in hor. In her roce thore was also Dr. Grawitz'a rtrong-box,
to which, howovor, only he had tho koy. Sho also handlod tho sail too,
dictation, and did all tho filing. Tho mount of incoming nail was
very snail. Grawitz ofton cor.plainod that ho had so littlo to do.

"Sinco 19U3 there v-s also an office called Personal Offico but
it existed only or. papor, and never playod any real part. It could
not actually materialize, as Grarits hiaself nrd with his socrutary at¬
tended to everything. This offico was probably only supposed to koop
up appearances because as previously, discussions took place always
with Grawitz in strict privacy even if they woro quito unimportant
which was almost always the case with nino.

"At ary rate Dr. Pop.rendick was never present at ny discussions
with Grawitz. So far as I know, ho was, in fact, mainly in charge of


103AS


23 Jun-A-SB-lli-5-Ninabuck (int. Brown)
Court JFo. I, Case No. 1.


tho library."

THE PRESIDENT: Couisoi, please procood core slowjy. I fear
that tho reporters are rather in difficulties.

DJTERraSTER Your Honor, tho reporters have tho docu-

nont bofaro then.

THE RESIDENT: Proceed, but a little core slowly at that. The
Tribunal night bo in difficulties following it.

DR. DUERR: "His nost inf»rtant activity, horovor, took placo
outsido tho building. Ho was senior pf^-sicicn in tho Race and Colon¬
ization Office. Ho was not a vory conspicuous person, was very quiet,
and workod unobtrusively in his roaa. I always received tho documents
I had to work on straight free Grawitz, they wore also narkod only by
hie, and in tho same way I handod in ay replios to tho Secretary diroct,
and she passed thon on to Grawitz. rfhon I had to got a lottor diroct
from Grawitz, ho had do called by his secretary and took tho documont
free his briofcaao and discussed it with do. Grawitz thought ho could
do everything hotter and, therefore, ho wanted to do ovorything himself.
The roason for this was probably to bo found in his Dost prodominant
characteristic: a burning anbition to got on in life.


103U9


28 JuM-A-FL-15-l-?ri=esu (Ir.t. 3rown)
Court :.o. I, Case I


"He could get cr. only through Hin-ler and, as he was not on very
good ter as with hia, he apparently tried tc inpress him by his of.'i-
ciousness. hen in 1944, following the airraids on the city, almost
all offices were removed from oeriin, he retained his of:ice in Zerlin
despite the .'act that his work, already insignificant, now shrank to al¬
most nothing. I suppose ho wanted to appear to Hiaalor as the coura oous
undaunted man. He was as an individual exactly the opposite — inwardly
hesitating, always with an eye to his suporJore, and with an almost gro¬
tesque fear of provoking the displeasure of Him la r. As I concluded from
hints given by C-rawitz, he hoped to achieve through Hiraler the oosition
of chief of the whole medical service."

This affidavit io correctly certified.

Mow comes IPO 17, Popoendick Exhibit 16.

J

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel, 1 do not knot: what this exhibit io but it Is
scarcely nocossary to read into the rocord anything savo tho important
portion of t:*floo afiidavits in your brief it would be your duty to call
to tho attention oi the Tribunal, the portions of tho affidavit upon which
you particularly roly.

DR. DUERRs This affidavit is a cros»-afiidavit Iron Dr. Gerhard
Schicdlausky in roply to tho affidavit which tho prosecution out in with
the document iJO-508. I shall not read it. I should like to draw tho at¬
tention of the Tribunal beginning with the paragraph beginning :4th tho
lords, "Fron ray o n observation," which is tho ^ost important oassp o of
this affidavit.

This next document is RPO 18 which .ill Sxhibit 17. This alOo is an
affidavit by Fritz Schwa In. Thi s affidavit deals in detail ith Poopen-
dick*s activities in the Race and Colonization Lain Office but I shall
read nothing from it.

The next three documents, HPO IS, 20 and 21, arc excerpts from the
transcript of Case IV which have beer, certified by the Secretary General
and concern tha solves with the testimony of Koran. I do not boliovo that


10350


28 June-A-FLr-15-2-?» i_*jau (Int. Brown)

Court So. I, Case I

it is necossery to -ive these docur-ents c special exhibit mvibor — or
an I wrong?

THE ’’JbiSIL I.T: They should be nusfcereri in order that refcrenco
could b« _*adc to than in your brief or i.. briof of opposing counsol,

D:.. 3UThen HPO 19 Mill be Exhibit L', HPO 20 .till bo 1$,
and HPO 21 will bo 20. I shall just tot go any reading of any portion of
these docuicnta. Sup>laaentol volonc 2 consists of cr.u sirn-lo docuaont
HPO 22 which be Exhibit 21 . This is an a! idavit by August iioine.

In tho first oart of this affidavit the afiiant Lkino nakso state¬
ments about Docuaonts 1639A, 1639 and 214, ail of which were put in by
the orowcution. I should lito- to point out to tho Tribunal, tho su-.iary
nt tho end of this section. In the second part of this affidavit, tho
witness speaks of Professor Clauborg's activities as approver ol noplicn-
tion for o&rrlago licenses and in tho third section wo lvjar aoaothinc
fron Ifoinu rc;.aroin* tho procodurc in certifying copioo in tho SS, co¬
pies of docunonta.

I have annexed to this affidavit of iloir.o's a photo static copy
of Docu - jr.t 10-214 for tho convenience of tho Tribunal, It is hero in
tho Guraan ori^r-al and you can soc thj andwriting of this docitnont to
which tho witness bine refers in his affidavit. In the owlish trans¬
lation that the Tri 'oral las of this docaoont then- individual hnndurit-
te-n rti-arks ore not rated. That is why I hv>vo ado this photostatic cooy
of the original available to tho Tribunal 30 that they can aoro correct¬
ly cvaluat. ,eino*s affidavit.

As last document I put in HIO 23, St.ibit 22, on affido"it by Pro¬
fessor von Mornol. This is a atfttoaur.t aado by the prosecution during
the oraaination of Popo-ndick when the prosecutor accused the -fitness
von Kennel of lying. I do rot intend to read this affidavit since it is
very long but I should like to draw the Tribunal's attention to the first
two para raphs.

That will conclude th* case fer Popp-ndick; but I should liko to

10351


28 June— A-FL-15-3-?riawau (Ir.t. Breen)

Court So. I, Case I

point out tho last -Jocus:nt in Docirunt look Ho, 2 here. This i3 Doe wnt
ID-1300, which -as alrcacy boon put in by the prosecution. There van
an error in translation which distorted the o-aning of this document in
its English translation. Cons-o.ucntly, after hiving ccecunicaUd in
writing with the iros-cution and after receiving th- prosecution's appro¬
ve 1 of this alteration, I should lik- to out ir. this document iX>-13(X)
in a correct translation.

TKZ P7.iSIi-T: Can you furnish the Tribunal with the nrosccutior.'s
exhibit nu.iber o. this docuoent?

DR. OttftR: I don't know what thi mubor is at the soaunt.

)ffi. H£t/Y: I .vi afraid I have .aissoc the significance of the clionc®
that Dr. Duorr wishes to bring to the att-ntion of the Tribunal, I bo-
liov-. Will you Idndly repeat that again? I can't understand which words
ho is roforring to.

THZ HiaKJMT: Counsel did not atato to tha Tribunal the changos
which have boon ade. I understood hia si.toly to say taht the chango
had boen approved by the prosecution, ill counsel state the chang® in
translation which appears in this docuoant?

DR. DL'TR?.: This is a change in the s-oond para ;raph, the paragraph ,

which begins: "SS Standartenfuehrer—"

IK. HARDY: I seu^Kr- uc Haney'a signature, your Honor. Apparently,
it is all in order. I hadn't been fmiliar ith particular document aiv'
the change.

TrJL PliESIDeirT: Hav- you the Prosecution's exhibit nuaber of this
docuamt?

DR. DU5CB: Inhibit 2S9, your Honor. Should this doca-unt » a

special cediibit nuaber by a- or is it all right to leavu it ns is?

IR. HAf'JY: Your Honor, as Ur. JicKanoy points out in his aeaorandun
to the of fie- of tho Secretary General dated 17 Uay 1917 in connection
with this docuiaont — he stated: "I return herewith the file requested
for correction of transcript. Prosecution has no objection to tho changes


10352


28 Janc-A-FT-lWt-Prificau (inti 3roim)

Court !Io. I, Case I

requested by Dr. Duerr. They are for the .sost part insignificant
ta'xs ani it is considered unnecessary to return translations of ho
aff-ctud dociL’ents"; so if it is oossiblo the dofensu counsel could at
this tint read in the change he wishes to sake in the original ar^ In¬
dies to the change and then there won't b- any necessity of rcrennin3 it
cr iving it a no;: exhibit nuab-r.

THZ ?F_iSDZi;T: I think this docu-cnt should bear the ?o-»-n<Sic::
docu-xnt's oxhibit r.uab-r so it -any be ie-r.tiiicd and referred to. .“net
nuab«r would you give this docuo-nt?

DR. DU.T1R: 23.

W. HARDY: I ;/ish —

TH£ PRCSIJiI : T: 20 or 23?

. DR. DlTir.s Yes, 23.

N

W. HARDY: Your Honor, the changes are sorely —

THn PRSSBIHT: Just a oosx.r.t, until re straighten out this ratter
of the Jocu.ser.ts. I have the last nuabor 22. Nu-abcr 23 appears to bo
correct.

iff.. EDYt Your Honor, than the prosecution, -von though they !vivo
agreed to this change, will not rectify their briefs and refer to tho
new pogo nuaber in the record where this document is contained.

TH5 PR3SIDJ2IT: The burden will rost on the counsel for doferx'ant
Poppondick to call attention to that '.otter in Ids brief.

IE. HAT..Y: Your Kor.-r, the chr-ngos I sub-^tted are .*.rely as fol¬
lows in tho riginal docu ::ta os presented by the pros-cution. Thu co-
cond paragraph stat-s, "35 5iardartenfu.hrcr Dr. Lolling infer »d n-"
and th- rest of the o.nt-ncu; and th« change by the defense is, "S3 Strn-
dartenfu.hrer Dr. Lolling giv-s the ini oration." That is the change.

TK2 FRJSIDI- T: Is that th- only change?

IT.. HAT'DY: That is the only change.


10353


26 June 47-A-STT-l&-l-Gallagher( Brown)
Court 1


DR. DOERS: I can explain why I consider this change important.
This document is signed by SS-Standartenfuehrer Dr. Lolling in the
German text, and it rer.ds, "As SS-Standartenfuehrer Dr. Lolling says,"
and not, "As SS-Standartenfuehrer Dr. Lolling tells me". In order not
to c reate the impression that thre was regular correspondence between
Dr, Lolling and the defendant Poppendick, I should like to have this
change incorporated in the document.

THE PRESIDE?.'?: The ttocucent is adaitted in evidence as Exhibit
?'o. 23. Of course, as I said a moment ago, counsel for the defendant
Poppendick in his brief may call attention in it to this change,
and say exactly whet significance he attaches to the change.

DR. DUERR: This concludes ey defense of the defendant Poppen¬
dick.

THE PRESIDENT: l(k idU note that counsel for the defendant
Poppendick fe*s c sed his defendant's case.

MR. HARDY: If no other defense counsel has documents to offor at
this time. Your Honor, u r. Vorwerk has ono affidavit to offer, end ho
hos another affidavit which has not been translated in toto; he has
two affidavits, and he r*y offer ono now I presume.

DP.. VO.TSRK: Tho affidavit that I can not now put in is boita-
thing that followed from the examination of tho expert Dr. Ivy. Before
Professor Ivy appeared here this problem had not arisen, and that
oxplolns why the affidavit is '.eing put in so late. W is the reason
why the document is not as >rt ready, but I hope shortly it will be.

It will be a very short affidavit.

MR. HARDY: Your Honor, the Frc3ecutier« -uestions tho admiss¬
ibility of an affidavit which affects the testimony of Trosecution* s
rebuttal witness. Dr. Ivy was a rebuttal witness of the Prosecution,
•'ow, can the case be re-opened by an affidavit, and a document be
submitted to refute our rebuttal witnesses?

THE PRESIDENT: Yes, it can , if the rebuttal witness went any
further than to testify concerning witnesses of the defondants, which


1032 .


28 June 47-A-S#-l6-2-Gallagr.er (Browi )

Court No. 1

Dr.Ivy in certaincases did.

MR. HARDY: I ac not awe of that , Your Honor.

THE PRESIDE.-:« The Tribunal will be disposed to receive evidence
concern!*; the tmtlaony of rebuttal witnesses, which won't go farther
than to contradict or explain away the evidence concerning the
particular defendant; otherwise, then it beconos new evidence. Dr.

Ivy extended hia testimony over cnito a considerable grewnd of terr-

\

itory.

MR. HARDY: Dees this affidavit go over this extended territory?

THE PRESIDENT: I don't know, te have not seen it.

DR. VOR-'RX: Tho affidavit concoms a psychological <ruostion.

THE PRESI'ENT: The Tribunal has not United rebuttal witnesses
either lor the Prosecution, or for tb*. defense, and nor,a Uber>y of
action oust be ccorded for that reason.

DR. VOJTHRX: I shall put in evidence for tho defendant's case an
affidavit of Professor -Wr Knot he, M.D., dated 22 Uarch 1947. Only
this noming did I receive the <ngUsh translation and cinuograph
copy of this affidavit, and I don't know yet whether tho Tribunal has
copies. If not, I shall mke copit s available. This is berg's Docu-
n»nt I'o. 6, and will be Exhibit Ho. 6.

THE PRESIDENT: Just a ainuto.

DR. VOH~ERK: This is the saae re-st;icn«.t that I should like to
read into the record. Professor Knothe says: "On tho occasion of
lectures which ho held at Juoterbog for flying personnel physicians,
Herr Hans -olfgang Kosher?, K.D., lectured about his experiences while
working on flying accidents and incidents, seen from a technical ,
medical and aeronautical point oi view. The standard of his lectures
were scientifically irreproachable. I rccecfcer - it haVG bP ' en

in 1943 - that Doctor ‘-ochorg - rontioned in a private conversation,
when wo cane to speak of Ebctor Rascher, that he considered hin a
pathological liar, and besides that, an inferior individual." This is
all the now evidence I have to put in in Rahcr's defense of the n*>n«

10355


28 June Z.7-A-S*-l6-3-C-allagher( Brown)
Court So. 1


If wo receive permission of the Tribunal, I shall put in one further
affidavit hereafter.

THE PRESIDENT: This document is ^admitted a3 ‘kieberg' s Exhibit No.

6 .

MR. HARDY: Your Honor, as I said before, we will be ready
at three o'clock to run through tho Prosecution's rebuttal Document
Book No. 1 , and if I can sp< ed the process up to quarter to thruo,

I shall endeavor to do so. *rc there any other defense documents to
be put in a t this time?

THE PRT.SIDE’T: Those documents have all been distributed to
the Tribunal?

MR. HARDY: The document books, y«s, they wore filed as a
aatter of course a week c go, I believe. Your ; 'onor, is it possible
that sodo of tho defendants e ro not going to introduce supplements
to a documont?

THE PRESIDENT: Tho Trlbunrl has no information on that natter. Is
there any dofonsc counsel who roprcao ts a defendant rtio hoa not as
yet introduced any supplemental documents, and dons not expect to offer
any f No on© volunteers.

MR. HARDY: Then, v our Honor, on Monday it will bn possible for us
to bring in two Prosecution rebuttal witnesses, aid, thun tho defense
counsel will be able to have their supplemental rvidcncu ready by
Monday afternoon , end Tuesday morning.

THE PRESIDENT: You nay call in Monday wliatover witnesses that
you want arxl wo will dispose of then as early £3 possible. Thorn is
nothing loft but Urn tr&nslr.tico and nicuographing of the documents,
so you will be r*ady with your tdtnesses Monday noming, if ready.

Tho Tribunal will now be in recoss.

(recess)


10356


23 June 47-Jr-rtX-lS-l-Hoxsio-Ulaalar)

Court I Case 1

Jr.J . ^fl3H.iL: The Tribunal is again in session.

HI 33 JOHN so::: Your Honors, I would Ilka now tc present
Proaocuti-n Dccunent Book Ho. 13, containing the rebuttal
documents on behalf of the Prosecution.

T.iJ ?32SID£»<7: Counsel cay proceed.

hIS3 JOHNSON: The first document is :;>T343, which will
be offered as Prcsucucion'a -xhlblt 529. This is the sworn
statement of cno Otto 31c.enbach, a\do before a Judge of
a Fronoh military Tribunal at Strasbourg where the affiant
is held in detention and charaod with war crlnes. The
statement contain* reference to phosgene experiments and
lmpllcatcc the Defendant Xarl Brandt.

The next document is HO-*646, which is the deposition
of Frit a Suhron, and will bo offered'as Exhibit 5*0.

X\. Se^DL (For Defendants Gobhardt and Fischer): Hr.
President, I objoot to the admission cf Doouinent 'AO-' t B4B.

.xB a reason for ay objection I can otato the following:
firstly, this statement, which is designate: 1 , as an affid¬
avit in the index bears no signature. D.rlng the recess
I have looked at the original documont, ar.d I galnod tho
impression on the basis of the Gorman form and the German
style, as •-'oil as on the oasis of the entire mattor, that
this affidavit was t have oeen signed b*' 3uhron, but for
some reason was r. X signed by hla, perhaps because he
refusod to sign such an affidavit. From the remarks at the
end wo can see that the precise date was to be inserted,
for It says merely, “.ipril 1946“. The date on whloh the
affidavit was to bo signed apparently was to bo inserted
at a later time.

jocundly, I found out that tho affidavit was not signed

I

10357


28 Juno 47—.tr«K-19-3-Hoxsio- (Hammier)

Court I - Caso No. 1

by Captain Sills, in front of whoa It was taken down* The
only signature under the document originates froa Major
Kant who merely cortifies tho authenticity of the copy.
Thirdly, tho prosecution has had this affidavit In tholr
possession for longer than a year. The Defendant Gobhardt
has been hoard on that affidavit on two occaslor.6 before
tho beginning of tho trial. At first it was apparently
intended to U60 him as an lncrlnatlng vitn«*s '.gslnst Suhren.
The first interrogation took place Pndprborn l\septonber
1946, and the second interrogation In Novonbor 1946. Tho
prosocutlon has had aapla opportunity to present this
affidavit during tholr caso. .it tho latost tine thoy had an
opportunity to put this affidavit to the Defendant Gobhardt
in his cross-examination. On both of thoso occasions tho
prosocutlon has not done so. Therefore, tho defendant did not
have an opportunity to define hio attitude dlroctly as reg¬
ards this affidavit. For these abovo montlonod reasons I an
asking you to reject tho admission of tho affidavit. In cabo,
however, you should admit the affidavit, I ask to rosorve the
right that I bring counter-proof to tho Tribunal.

THS PRESIDENT: Is tho original affidavit avallablo for
the Court? Tho Jurat attached to the affidavit does not read
"Subscribed and sv rn to,_ "but simply mys, "Sworn to by
tho witness, Fritz Suhren, voluntarily, at Padorborn on
blank .,prll 1946, before no. Captain Duncan sills." Can
we hear fron the Prosecution?

MISS JOHNSON: I think, your Honor, that it is Just as
you s-y. It docs not purport to bear any signature of Fritz
Suhren; apparently it was an oral statoaent cade before
Captain Sills. He certifies it has been made before him
during tho month of April'1946.


10358


26 June 47-.-«X-lS-~Hoxslo-(Ranler)

Court I - Case No. 1

Undoubtedly the orlgihal contained the signature of Captain
Sills, and that has been certified to by Hajcr Hant.

THE PRESIDENT: The Doctor's objection will bo overruled,
and the Document admitted, but the Tribunal will consider
the Batter of allowing counsol for Defendant Gobhardt to
offer sono evidence by way of sur-robuttal in neeting this
ovllonoo. If counsel doslres to offer such ovidonco ho should
apply to the Tribunal and say what ovidonco he doslres to
offer In refutation of any state::.onts which are mndo In this
document.

MISS JOHNSON: The next four documents contained In tho
docuaont book are NO-"070, which will be offered as 51;

NO-■'071, which will bo offoroi as 52; NO-072, which will
bo offered as Exhibit 5; and NO-07, which will bo offore 1
as Exhibit 5*4. Those aro decrees of Hltlor concerning tho
pardon right of hlcsolf ;nd of the Governor-General of Oc¬
cupied Poland. They <to offorod at in connection

with tho status of tho Polish girls, the criminal status d*
the Polish girls whom Dofoniant Gobhardt performod some
oxporlaento upon.

Tho next document is .10 -

THE PRESIDENT: J u st a moment, Counsol, until I complete
tho record.

MISS JOHNSON: I am sorry.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsol may pr jceod.

MISS JOHNSON: I turn now to tho document on Page 19 of
the docucent book. NO- T 85*, which will bo offered as Pros¬
ecution* s Exhibit 5*5. This Is an affidavit of a handwriting
export who certified as to the gonulness of the signatures
cf Ding and J chulor, and arrives at tho opinion they are
the signature cf one and tho same person. The Prosecution


10359


28 Juno 47-.*-.jC-19—i-Hoxsio-( Roller)

Court I - Case 1

has contended that the signature "Schuler" is an alias
for the n .nc "Ding".

The next document la or. Pago 22 of the document booh.

It is .10-^630 which Is offered as exhibit 56. This is an
extract froa the transcript of .illt-ory Tribunal II of 21
April 1947. It is the testimony of Jugen Xogon who also
appeared lr. this court as a witness, and it clarifies cer¬
tain natters concerning the typhus experiments and the
poison-bullet experiments conducted at Buchenwald concen¬
tration can?.


103*0


Court So. 1

26 Jun 47-X-20-l-i^-Perr in (iuclcr)

The next document is on page 24 of the document book. It is HC—

1320. It will be offered a* Prosecution Exhibit 537. It is the filo

coto of one Dr. Eaubold, vfco is froc the Foreign Department of the F.oich

Chanbor of Physicians. The Court will rccell that the defendant Blono

was the deputy leader of the Heich Chaaber of Physicians. In this note

•»

Grawitr as chief of staff has reported and recommended a certain method
of typhus vaccine production, nrnely, rabbit lung production.

D?. SALTER (Counsel for the defendant Blono): Hr. Prosldont, with
reference to this Document Ho. 1220, a letter by Professor Oildomoioter
to tho Reich hinister of the Interior with n report of the Foreign Dopart-
sent of the Reich Chanter of Physicians, I ask that tho prosecution state
for what purpose this docuaont is being submitted. Throughout tho

J

nonths of this trial heard nothin, - : about any Foroign Donortaont of tho
Reich Chaaber of Physicians. Vo ere hearing for the firct tino todny
that any such deportment existed. For that roaton, in ay opinion, tho
prosecution has to sake o statooont in whit voy tho dofcndor.t Bloae io
to be incriminated on tho strength of this document. Coos tho orooocu-
tlon try to nalntaln that thlo Foreign Doportaent of the Reich Chaaber of
Physicians vnr. hooded by the dufundent 31 one? Or docs tho prosecution
maintain that the defendant Dr. Blono is in any way responsible for this
Foroign Branch of the Reich Chaabor of Physicians? Do thoy think that ho
was in any vuy in a position to disposo of tho actions of this department?
If I gut a statoaont on this aattor froa tho prosecution, I shall bo in
a position to sutcit counter-proof. It will be expodiont, however, if tho
nrooecution at first states what exactly thoy are trying to prove with
roforooco to tho defendant Slone.

iiISS JGH5SCF: Our theory is that Blono, ns deputy leader of tho
Reich Chaaber of Physicians, was responsible by reason of that position
for the activities thnt were participated in by ell of the various
deoartnente of the Reich Chasber of Physicians, and one of those depart-
nents was the Foreign Dcoertsont. And as Dr. Scut or will sec froa HO
1322, on page 26 of tho docuaont book, this Dr. Eeubold yes clearly con-


103S*


Court To. 1

28 Jus 47-A--2C-2-!HA-?errir: (Ranler)


nected with tho Foreign Department of the Reich Ckosher of Physicians.

Ia other vords, Ur. 31ooo ia implicated by reesoa of hi* position by
the responsibility of the Reich Chsaber of Physicians vfcich obviously
had aoao connection vith the typhus experiments.

IS. SAUCER: Jir. President, I enn meko tho follo*dng ototeeent at
this tine. Slone had nothing whatsoever to do vith the Foreign Deoart-
oent of the Reich Cheaber of Physicians. Op. the contrary, orders hud
been lesued that he was under r.o circumstances alloved to exert any
influence on tho activities of the Foreign Department. I shall be ablo
to prove that by sutnitting an affidavit written by tho dofondant Bloco
and perhaps wvon additional proof.

IHL PESSIDEXT: The exhibit vill bo received in evidence subject to
tho right of defense counsel to file an affidavit on the pert of tho
defendant 31oao and to make application to thi Tribunal for oorniosion
to introduce further ovidoncu if ho desirco to do so.

HISS JCENSCKs Referring again to KO-1320, the file note of Dr.
Kaubold of the Foreign Deoartcont of the Reich Chnmbor of Physicions, it
vill bo noted that a report by the Chief of Staff to Dr. Srnvltz has
boon code to thie Foroign Dopirtment to tho effect that rabbit lung
typhus 7nccino has boon tooted on concentration canp inmatos at eoao dato
orior to 11 December 1942.

Tho next document, page 25 of tho docuoont bookj is rointed to tho
srno subject. This is X0-1322 which vill b« offered as Exhibit 538.

This docunont is an opinion of Gildcmoistor from the Robert Koch Insti¬
tute, concerning tho assertions of Dr. Kaubold at to tho effectiveness
of the rabbit lung typhus vaccine. It vill be soen fren the first para¬
graph that Dr. Ding has carriod out experiments to detoraiao the effec¬
tiveness of this vaccine, and’those experiments vcrc carried out vith
the defendant krugovsky and under the defendant Krugovsky's supervision.

The socond page of the sane document, page 26 of the document book, is a
letter from tho Reich .tinister of Interior to the Foreign DcpertBCnt of tho
Reich Chamber of Physicians notifying that organisation ~f tho opinion of


10362


Court So. 1

28 Juc 47-A-33-3-;Bt-?errin (Bader)

2r. Glldoaeistcr. The Court will also note that rt the botton of oago
28 that the Reich Chief for Public Health has boon inforeed of the con¬
tests of this letter. That again implicates the defendant Slone.

Turning to the next document, uegc 26,’ vfcich is BO-2671, and which
is offered as Prosecution Exhibit 359. r -*o have here a lettor dated
Sovombor 16, 1943, from Rascher to Pfannenstlol where he reports that tho
deputy Roich hodical Chief, Dr. Sloco, with vfcos Rascher has been working,
has been making certain efforts in connection with tho R*ichor hnbilita-
tion. That io, as you will recall, the efforts of Rascher to obtain a
university professorship. It concerns the fact that the report has
boon suhsittod which Is cop secret. Rascher also slakes .mention of his
desire to perforn further high eltitudo cr^crinonts rad st.-tos thrt in
that connection ho •dll contnct tho defendant Slevorc in hie capacity,
apparently, as chiof of tho 3usinoss I .ranging Board - the orooocution
has up to this tine always contended thrt ho *rt deputy chief of this
board - of tho Reich Research Council. This again refers to Siovcrc'
activities in connection with obtaining materials for tho hunrn exoeri-
nents. Raschor intends to roauost Siovers to supply a low orcccure
chonbor for high altitudo oxperirents.

The next document, on pago 29 of the document boo’:, is NO-3847.

This is offered as Exhibit 540. This document and tho next docunont arc
related in subject matter. Tho no.rt docunont, on pago 34 of the docunont
•book, is Document Number 2903-PS, and io offorod as Exhibit 541.

DR. SALTER (Counsel for tho do fond ant Blonc): Euro again with
reference to thoso two documents, SC-3847 and SO-29C3, I have to ask
tho prosecution to tell us what they intend to urove against Dr. Bloae
by submitting these two documents and what incrimination Is to bo
deduced from these two documents, vnloss such a clarification is ren¬
dered by tho prosecution, the ounoso cannot be understood rs to why
those two documents have been submitted.

XISS JCE5SCS: Tho first document. Exhibit 540, is an oxcerot from
the IXT Judgment concerning the criminality of tho Loadershin Corps of


10363


Court So. 1

28 Jun 47-1-23-4-EEh-?err in (Ra-ier)

ttiJ Sail Party. The prosecution has not hero charged the defendant
rloce, and does not In any way contend that the defendant Plone is hore
criminal ly liable for hi# nsesbership in the Leadership Cores of the Karl
Party. The findii* of the International Sillitary Tribunal establishes
that persona holding certein preeminent party offices aro nenbers of a
crinitial organisation. The chert vhlch is offered in connection with
Prosocution Lsfciblt 641 shows that tho defendant 31oao ns dcouty to the
Reich Public Health Loador Conti was Rauptneetcr and was thus a oerson
of sorse pro-Jicmee in the Kati Party, that he erne within thoso groups
which wore dofinod as criminal within the Leadership Corps. Ir. other
words, tho prosocution offers this prinertly for the purpose of estab¬
lishing the proalnoccc of tho dofundent Blone.

IE. 81SJTZS: I should liko once rmoro to got clarification on one
point.


10364


23 Jun_—A-I-L-21-1—Schaab (lot. RiiiLr)
Court 'to. I, Case I


If I unr’cDatood thj translation correctly, the Prosecution by sub-
.cittlng theso two docuajnts does not ir.tond to maintain or prove that
Blon. tros a .suibor of tbo Corps of Political leaders, that is, a nen-
ber of a criainel argenization, but aercly intends to provo that Bla-jo
h-ld a prominent position within tho Party. Did I understand you correct¬
ly?


UISo JOWSOHv Yes.

DR. SURST.i Thank you, in that ease I liavo no further questions
in that oooinc'cion.

MISS JCffi-SO::-. I believe. Your Honor, I have pointed out sufliciontly
thy place of the du;-ndar.t Block, in the crart of tho Leadership Corps
to -Mke it clear to you that his position in the Leadership Corps, and
as a -ronir.-r.t orber of the Kasi Party, as .I said it, out hia in a
position of profit influence and proainenco.

Vo turn next to page 36 of the Document Book which is Docroont
NO-3837 wUloi: is offered as Prosecution inhibit 542. This is a list
ol Dr. Ke en's expenditures which Wert charged to the .'ohcaiacht in
connection with research on yulla.. fever end typhus during the jeriod


between 21 February 1942 and 13 Hov-sber 1544. On tho ifnglioh trans¬
lation of this document the word " .ehra.'.cht" appears at t!>u too —
should appear, I *-an to say, at Lb top ol tho page, above tho words
"Research Test Yells* Fever—Typhus. The ;ord " ehrraacht" does eppoar
on the original. (To the aarshal) ill you exhibit that to t ;o Court,
please, so that tt»y can correct their copies?

The ne.nt c'oer ..nt is on page 1.9 of the document book, is H)-944,


i3 offered cs 2=1 libit 543, is t.b. service-record of the defendant ?op-
pendick.

DR. DUSJl (Cour.sU for the defendant Fopp.ndick): 3eforu raising
an objection to this docurxnt I should Uke to ask the Prosecution for
r. hat purpose tills and the following document are teing submitted?


10365


28 Jun ^-A-- t *i^l-2-5c:«ab (Int. P.oml-r)

Court No. I, case i

%

!JSS JOiS'SO'.i: Primarily it is proof of the :c_=iber3hip in tho SS
of the defendant Popperriick; also to substantiate our contention as
Bocn fran Itcn ( of Foppendick's office in the staff of Reich Physician
Grawitz, ant fraa I tea If,, his role, in the office of Grswitz. It has
to do with his ■cabership in a criminal organization, and also activi¬
ties in the office of Grawitz.

Dr.. 0U3RR: I object to the sufcr-ission of that docuxnt. Too Prose¬
cution has submitted an affidavit *iith reference to these points. Tho
defendant was already in the witness stand - id was exnained on ell tho
points, Nothing is being shown by that ocuaont, and I don't think
it is necessary to anoolt rebuttal doeftxnt now which for sax oonths
has already i*en hands oi t Prswaoutioo.

THE Kilo I 2!T: Objection is overruled. Docuxnt will be recoivod
in evidence. If the, defendant Poppendick clnlas that in his fltatexnt
the docuxnt is incorrect, he say file cn affidavit statins Mo view of
the natter.

IASS J0HN301': The next docuxnt, cn oage 51 of the document book
is 10-1120, is offered as Prosecution feehlbit 544. This docoxnt also
rel tes to the defendant Poppendick. This is An evaluation of the xn-
vlcos of th- defendant Poppondick by hin superior, Roich Physician Gra-
witz. It also .ulcus -xntion of the fact that Poppendick has participated
in the activities of tho Rooj and Settle >»nt Office.

0

DR. DIERlts I do not object to tf.j 3-j.nission of this docu.xnt, but
I beg to be allowed to reserve the ri:ht to suholt new evidence pm coun¬
ter proof. „

THe PL3SI0BHT: Counsel say file- an affidavit by defendant Poooendick
or any other person stating this affidavit in incorrect, if he Inowc that
it is. If any firtb-r evidence is d^sir-d. Counsel should note applica-
'-ion to tho tribunal for peraission to introduce such further vi-tnee,

1R. KARj> 7: Tour Honor, in tho case of rebuttal evidence, »uld
;°ur Honors Jdadly instruct Prosecution, as wcLl as the Ocfens-, what po-


10366


20 Jurv<- k-Yb-2 L-3-Schw ab (Int. Rcjaal-r)

♦

Court. So. I, C=*g I

aition will tx, talr-n with reference to rebuttal evidence, end to whet.ex¬
tent the then in turn bring in -vidt-r.ee to refute rebuttal

evid_r.Ce.

THE PRESIDE T: Veil, when evid.no* i3 purely rebuttal evidence it
would be unlikely that n~w ovidonc- would be allowed to rofute that;
that would have to oe considered. 7r~re ai^.ht be c special ce*j whore it
would be ollowoc.. As regards these last Ten affidavits, whether cr not
the So are strictly rebuttal evidence, the Tribunal is not advised. I
don't rt.o*aocr nhetbor Popp-ndick denied his .o-abership as stated in
these matters. It acy bo and *07 not be purely rebuttal evidence.

MISS JDKHSOSft I think they may bo cumulative, Your Honor.

THE PTuioID - IT: That nra ay impression, that they were ourely cuau-
lative. But the fact is th: t the prosecution should really not introduce
merely cumulative evidence in rebuttal. The Court stated to Dofenno
Counoul thr.t they could file a further affidavit in this connection. If
ho desired.

The objection is overruled. The evidence is to tx> admitted.

L!ISS JO*!i;S)i': Ve turn next to >ago 53 of the docu.-w.nt bock,

M>-3269 which will be offered as Prosecution exhibit 545. Thio docuaont
d-ted 29 April, IS43, addressed to ?oppe;v'ick, airoly establishes tho
fact that Poppcndick had certain administrative duties in tho Race and
Settlement Office, a matter which has been the subject of the testimony
of Popoendick, to some extent. ->

1 cone to the next document which is on page 54 of the document
book. I would liiu to hend the Tribunal and Defense Counsel a covering
affidavit oado by the author of the document, » p-go 54. This is
?0-3347, which is offered as Exhibit 545.

THE PIL-SIe-iT: Counsel, you ahwiy iiave an exhibit 545.

MISS JOB'S!’: I have?

TKe PRESENT: Unless I cm oista^Q.


10367


28 Jurt -A-FL-21-/i-Sch* cb (Lit. RianUr)

Cxjrt Ho. I, Case, I

'3SS JOII 10ir: I beg your pardon. Your Honor.

VO-y^n io offered as Prosecution exhibit 546. I believe the co¬
vering affidavit will have to he distributed.

DH. HStTiAIH (Counsel for th_ defendant Pokorny): The document which
•as fnnde; to no by the Prosecution cbout two days ago contained only
the Docuaent 3347. At the aaoent I have only received the nccoananying
affidavit* I sj anted to point out that the 24-hour period when distri-
butine docu toots has rut been abided by, and for that reason object in
principle against the evaluation of that affidavit under those circiuis-
tcncos. .

With refore.Mo to tic opinion, it self I should like to ask you to

give rae an opportunity to define ay attitude towards this eighteen pa^o

long opinion, which was already eveileblo to the Prosecution - on the

• •

25th of AprJ1 L94o, ct a later date by submitting a. counter-opinion.

!fl. HA-DYt Your Honor, during the course of the *xr ination of tho
defendant Pokorny it was brought out that expert Ustinony as to tho
efficacy of c-.Lviua sequinun was -t issue. At that tine the Tribunal
naked the do enfant Pokorny to write m affidavit in lieu of his tech-
nlccl testimony. If you will recall, 1 at Mat tiao told tho Tribunal
tint wo wo ild aub-iit export testi ony tv arding the efficacy of caln r
dium sequinua as a rth in the r.o.rls i .L'tlaus and Koch. These re¬
ports sere exhaustively studied by Dr, Scl.^iffahrt at tho University
of Erlangen, !I- has :»ritten an rt opinion* The datJ of the ooinion
is 14 April, and tho Prosecution has held it exclusively .or the ourposo
of rebuttal uv'- .nou. In as ajch s Dr.-has n-t eCSeCutwd a

0

Jurat and ll»e varticular expert opinion h's’not been certified as of
26 June 1947, ^r. Sc-lilfahrt was called here. I had a jur-t executed,
and that is th- net; sheet that is atta.c'od to the docu-v-nt. Thc document
— the opinion vas based on tfc_ works of i-.caus and, of course-, 'Sedr.ux
and Koch — and, of course Koch was as a witness and testified as
an expert. T.aa is tie Prosecution's Rvbut.cl to his testimony, and I


10368


2S Jun^A-FL-21-5-Sch»ab (Int» Raaal-r)
Court Mo. I, Caac I


ca suru th-t those, docu=-nt books :-.rv- bc-r. in th- hands of tho Defonao
Inforartion Center longwr than 21 hours. If not, tho Prosecution risks
for a nvivor of that ti a.. I don't a— that anything is nee-carry i or
farther stuc;' on tho v.rt of th- D-fonao Counsvi. Ha fcs hr. his -report
on tho st-nd; his oi^-rt tea t-stifi-d -splicitly on that situation of
•aany of thi facts »-t forth in this o^ert opinion. And ho t.Us m that
tho defendant Pokorny *111 do likuiiiso.


28 Juao-i-JP-22-l-Gross (Int. H*eior)

Court X

IEZ PBZSmETTs This statement appears to to prc.pcr rebuttal ovi-
dcnco. OT course, thorc is tfco affidavit, Bocucont Ho. 3347. Is that
a supplement to 334? In the took?

KISS JOHHSCET: Tos, Tour Honor, tbo effiealr in tho off Id-wit,
Trlodrich Scfcolffarth, is tho person who vroto this troatiso which is
on page Si of tho took and he sicnod it on psgo 71 of tho document took.

THE PEESIIBfflSx Voll, tho objection is overrulod. This exhibit will
bo adnlttod.

13. HOHMAICrx Vlll I hove tho possibility to sutait countor rebut¬
tal egninst thin affidavit?

TH2 E13SIST: Voll, this is proper rebuttal cvidor.co. This is
in dlroct contradiction of oridonco that was introduced. Prococution
on robuttol is ontitlod to contradict that ovidor.co. Sothing new is
brought in, as I understand it, than that in tho to.tlx.ony of Pokorny.
That did not call for any now oridonco on your p»rt ns I understand it.
If Pokorny wonts to proparo another affidavit in connoction with tho
statasont horo ho nay do so if he novos promptly.

KR. HASirf* If Y-'ur Honors plonso, tho export opinion ic baood on
tho oridonco that has boon tubalttod by Pokorny. I had also intondod
to have oridonco submitted on which tho affidavit is bnsod. In no nuch
as all tho phrmp^lots ond natorial aro availablo and Pokorny'o tooti-
nony it is unnoccssory to submit tho sono natorial so wo will Just
submit tho affidavit and it is well roforoncod to tho natorial usod in
Pokorny 1 s.profloatation.

KISS JOEBSCHl Turning now to pngo 72 of tho Jtocuaont Book wo hnvo
HO 3620 which is offored as Prosecution Exhibit 547. This is a lottcr
fr-m the dofendant Sievors to Professor Hirth.

TP. VEISBSSOSB: Hr. Prosidont, IT. 'foisborger, counsol for tho
dofendant Stovers. Tor tho cooont I havo no objection but I would ask

a

Prosecution to giro no tho original document in order to as cortain tho
dato it boars.

KISS JCE5S®: This lottor relates.

m. •sissafiza: I rr asking this question because tho copy which


20 Jmo-JrJP-23.-3-Grr.B8 (Iat. H«ilcr)

Court I

was sutnittcd to dofcnso boars ao date. Tho phot-str-tic copy hero
dr,oa bear a date but it appears doubly end is ny opinion cannot bo
idontifiod easily* I have no fnrcdl objection to nefco but I bog to
roservo tho right t« revert to this document at r. lator dr.to.

IKS PHSSUBTTt There won't be Tory r.-ny later datos. Vfcnt is it
you dosiro to discuss concerning the docuncntT You say that tho ni-
onogrnph bears two dates* There is only ono dato 3 January 1942 on tho
docirxont before no*

HISS J0R3SCB: Vo contond that that is tho propor date although it
has boon r-pparontly typed over. ‘It nny bo a carbon copy and tho carbon
has olippod end nado an inprossion of tho two dates.

7H2 PKSSID2TT: Curoory ordination of tho doctnor.ts indicates that
in any event the lottor was written in January 1942. If thoro is nny
quostion In counsol's nind nr. onlnrgod photograph oould bo tokon of
that dato if it it oonsidorod loportant* An anlrrgajont vnuld probably
show exactly what that is. Tho docunont will bo admittod but if
dofenso counsel dooiros identification of that into an onlnrgod photo¬
graph can bo taken*

HISS JCKJSOTl JIO 3629. Prosecution Inhibit 547, tho docunont undor
discussion, signod by Sicrors ad rossod to Hirth rolntos tho prolininnry
activities of tho dofondant Siovoro in connoctioa with oorrlccs of tho
addrosso Eirtk at tho Ahnonorbo Instituto. You will soo thnt tho
reports of Eirth passod through Sievors to Elxxilor. Tho third para¬
graph indicates Siovors knowlodgo thnt cxporlnonts on hunan boings aro
approvod by Blcnlor and aro anticipated* 5fco fourth paragraph indlcntoc

0

the political atrnsphoro of tho original Ahnonorbe in which Siovoro was
Reich business -.onager.

Caning to tho next doemont on p&go 73 which is KO-3675 which will
be offorod as Prosecution Exhibit 548* Sis io a lettor of 22 Sep tee bar
1942 which wag form a manufacturing company which manufactured tho ins¬
trument callod tho electro card i«^nph* Tho writer rofors to tho fact
that Siovors has advised bin thnt ftn cluctrocnrdiogr.apb has boon ueod


10371


28 Jono-i-JB-22-3-Gro.i (Xnt. aa.-J.er)

Ourt I

lc important scientific experiments carried out at tho Research Insti¬
tute for Applied Military Science in Ihinich. That would incrir.inato
tho defendant Voltx and all othor defendants inmlvod in free ring ex¬
periments.

Ct page 74 Siovors has added a noto to this lettor and forvardod
it apparently to Dr. Raechor. Slorors hero rofors to tho activities
in connection with trying to obtain oquipoent for the high altitudo
oxporlnnnts.

Tho noxt document is on page 75, is SO 3674 and is offered ns
Exhibit 549. This lotter of tho 20 Cctobor 1942 Iron Siovors to Dr.

Vuest, who whs curator of Ahncnorbo and who was also roct-r of the _

Munich Univorsity roqueats cortnin catcrisis and. supplies which will
be used for oxporlncato to be porforr.od in Munich.

The noxt document, on pogo 77 of tho Document Book, is SO 3819, is offorod
ao Prosecution Exhibit 550. This is a lettor of 29 October 1942 from
tho do fondant Siovors to Dr. Hirt nt Strasnburg stating that an Ahnenorbo
subsidy will bo nndo available to Hirt in support of his rosonrch no-

tlTitios.

Coning to tho next damrant on pngo 78 of tho Document Book.

This is Docur.ont SO 2506 which is offorod as Prosocution Exhibit 551.

This is n cross-affidavit sccurod with tho porolsoion of tho Tribunal
from Dr. Hras Hoi tor who nado an affidavit on behalf of Frofossor
Eandlosor which, as tho affidavit states, was Dneuncat Handlosor 25.

This do cud on t rolatos to tho typhus conforonco 29 Doconbor 1941 and
tho affiant oxprossos sor.o doubt concerning Just how explicit tho
understanding was at that conforonco that artificial typhus infection
should bo nado on concentration canp innatos to tost tho officfccy of
tho typhus veccino.

Tho balance of tho dnemonts in the Docur.ont 3ook rolato to
Euthanasia. Coning to page 80 is Document SO 3356, which is offorod
as Prosecution Exhibit 652. Vo hero hero a transport list fron Eglfing
insane asylun dated 18 January 1940 -md the first n*o on tho list


10372


28 Juno-A-JP-22-i-Gros. (int. Had or)

Court X

la the n«io of a Jewish person as indicated by the naio Israel. Tho
Tribunal recalls that tho witross Loibrandt tostifiod that all Jowioh
people had to take certain nance to indicate their race* Tho neno
Israel was tho nane for tho con* This list is sifinod by one Vorberg
who was in chargo of the transport company, and his nano appoared on
tho chart of tho defendant Brack in connection with Euthanasia activitioc
The noxt do cur. on t on page 31 of the do cur. cm t book, KO 3355 is
offered as Exhibit 553. This do cur. or. t signed by PfnnnnDuller who
oppearod ns n dofenso witr.oss boforo this Tribunal relates Dostjy
to adninistratiYO dotnlla of Euthanasia concorning chi1dron.


28 Jn*KV:bb_23-l-L. 33 cr (Int., 2zvl ar)
Court ’Jo. I


DR# 3ZKVA7IIE (Counsel Tor tho o-'cr.crxt Hcrl Brandt): llr# Pres¬
ident, the docuaent has 3 annexes to rhich reference is node. They des¬
ert’'O the condition of the children. I ask that tho Prosecution 3v.bnit
the entire docuaent end not only tho fir :t pr.-e. I an very interested
in tho condition of the children at thr.t tins. It soys, above: "Enclos¬
ures: 3 Reports." linwvor, these 3 reports ere not attached.

:H3 JCSr.HO!. 1 : Tho Prosecution u’ould bo sled to supply thoso reports
if they had then but uo do not have then. Tfcoy rare not found xrith tlio
dccua:nt.

3’JRVAZXUS: In thr.t caso I ask tho Tribunal to instruct tho
Prosecution to give .no c roport on ho:: thoso doauaonts irero found. It
sccm peculiar to no that tho nair. -’ecu ar.t res found and the enclosures
\Kiro rot found, tiro tent bo s< ‘o roport on t’u-t.

IIJS JCIjCOM: Dr. Serrations, you observe.in tho top paragraph rolntod
todjforncd children - I believe that is the cub loot you ere rest interested
in, isn't it --^ho dofomity cf children?

DR. 3-3T\’ATHB: Yes# There rust bo cn e-net rc.xirt on Vivjso 3 children
and I tldn.’* thr.t tills dates back to tho beginning of tho Roich Corrlttoo
at tho tino hon tho Epiling institution :.rs active. Tho onperfc lira told
that tliuso children -:orc carefully coloctcd. On tho other hand, sono-
bcity else arid that thoso children .;crc ut*.o :;oro roportod on.

:X5S JOiGCOK: Your lienor, th;ro is mi cortainty that tho infomation
-..-hich Dr. lorvatius socks to obtain in tils connection ;.-ould bo available,
even if no did have tho reports. %

TIE .'A EID arT: The Tribunal -ouid instruct tho Prosecution to furn¬
ish Dr. Sorvatiua and bring before tho Tribunal thoso 3 annaao3 if they
had then; but a3 it is stated they do not have then, if the Prosecution
can give Dr. Scrvatiu3 any information as to hero tiioy found this document,
tfcoy 3hould do so.

T». I2-J3Y: Your lienor, th. :o documents, os you -rill plainly notico —
this particular decurcnt has tho initial of Pfannnuollcr or. it. There Coro
it is a carbon copy and I inaginc it \rz3 standard proceduro in Pf 0 - 01 : 310110 ^.'


1037 L


— r ' ■■ - « Pfy

26 JuskU ~D-23-2-Lzsaar (lot., ?.*•’_-)

Court lie. 1


office, =3 it .'Quid be in : Is/ office cr cry ether offico,, that if you

aafco r jpcrt3 you do not nmeUy nrhc volv rdn oi g conics or then. This

h.-.‘o apparently is the cover-lot tor thr.t *xnt tho reports. It eras

• • •

found in the Pfannnuan r files, at his institute. As a matter cf fact,
tisccc docu.tnts -..wro found in early i?li5 by no no less than tho invoatiga-
ting to an conducted by Dr. loc Alexander. Tlioy ar*i contained in a CIIfFO
report, which ss bound and published by an organization, that i3 Covibin-
o<l Intollijcnco and Dotcctivo Agencies of the British and United >tato3
Aroed Forces. It vjeld bo, rather difficult for no to go into ary furthor
do tail to explain tho sourco of tho doer arts.

*ir. ?.V;3ID~T: You havo Just corpliod with counsel Sorvatius'
roquost that lio got inforoation that *.ras available and tho Prosecution
has glvon it, which is sufficient.

DR. 3^WATIU3: Thank you.

1Ij 3 JO::ec::r Tvxnir.g to tho ne;.-t doexunt viiich is -n>nrgo 32
of tho docunont book and which is dccxx:nt !!G-335Jj, which :rill bo narkod
as Pl-osoct'uion vxhibit 55L, \ro havo farther ovidcnco in connection with
tho .hitluanasic pro gran. This shorn: that a Jewish person has rut *»ia donth
nt Lublin. Yds stetanent confirm tiw statement of Brack's witness,
Pfannnuoller, that Jtf/ish pooplo were sent to Lublin and I bolievo tho
dofoifdant Brack nr.do a statonont on the sane subject.

Turning now to pago 85 of the document book, which is M0-2O9U, ^rhich
will bo offered as Exhibit 555...

TH--' Hl'SincilT: Counsel, hew abret coc\—er.t ’’0-209U on ergo G3?

iT3 i JOIDECU: Tom- Honor, in :y book it shim .Yon 82 to 85.

On 02 uo Iiavo 335*t and I don't Ix.ow Aether tint's 85 or 83, K -209U —

83. I guess that is 83 perhaps.

DP*. (C unsol for tho dafo:r"a_r.t Brae!:): Could you please

liand no tho original? I-r. President, I mist object to tho adrdssion of
this document. Obviously this is c doexeent which raj not signed. Tho
rdnirac- required of a document is tho fact that it at least indicate tho *
sender, i-itiwr tho nano cr tho address of the sender hr 3 boon 3tatcd hero.


10375


22 J. no-A-iSD-23-3-L:3sor (mt.,ftylar)
Court I


TIC riSEEIIT: Pass the dccucnt tc the Tribunal.

:33S JOCinCK: Tour Hener, this t*x^u;-cr.t nr.3 found in tho files of

tho I'ln&stcy for Eastern Territories. It was ono of tho docunor.ts that

uca fevrd nith deexEEnts which ’.*sro svlxdttcd to Brae!: or. cross-crardnation

• •

and which were apparently cdnissiblo at that tiro although, of course, tho
admissibility of thoso dccuucnts has not boon dotorn ; .ned Sr certain.

It relates to tho qu_stion of /hothsr or net Brack rocoiv:d a eortnin lottcr
dated ilevenber 191il, rtiich ho deniod on origination that ho racoivcd, and
this i3, nro:* of tho fact that tho lottcr naa 3cr.t.

DR. 7HC6Cina»E:: 12r. President, ary I stato in that connoction that
in the dccunent trfiich was subdttcd to Brack during tho croso-c rani nation,
no lottcr dated 11 Uovonber 19U1 was vor.tlonod? Tho letter which *.rr.o oub-
nltt-d to Brack was dated tho 25th of Octc.vr 19bl. Therefore no lottor
11 Ilcvcnbor 15J:1 could have boon cttachod?

IB. :i JOT: Jfcy it please ths Tribunal. This doounont jnu*;-orta to
bo an original Oarnsn dccunent, found by our forces in tho overrunning
of Gornaiy. It ia obvius froi tfco contents thereof that it '/as around
tho lfoveebor poried of 191il. I assure ; iu that -.re didn't nonUfneturo
it. It wa3 found by the Allied forces - :ro in Oorrany. It is a dorian
document and it has probative valuo re it i3...

JUDC3 iZUTX^Q: TJhat probative valuo does it have, 'r. Hardy, in its
present Torn?

TIC Pi SI HfT: And against whon?

JUD1-E bUIiC: And a .ei.net 'At: and by whoa?

if.. Ii-fDT: It has tho probative valuo that lias Johnson just eut-


li.-vsd to ;• u and that is in that it refers to Obcrdionstloltsr Brack


right in tho docuront.

IT.. TittGCJCAISI: *ir. Resident, V. t nay have boon a draft. It nay
have boon a copy. It need n v.r 'arc boon scat. It is a docuront *./hich


lacks every trreo of probative valuo and. acodcsibility.


TIC f13U:::f: Objection sustained. This docu snt will not bo ad¬


mitted.


10376


28 Jdne-A-lSZW2j-h-loescr (Int., Bailor)

Court !?o. I

--- If your Honor placsc, vould tho situation chnngo if tlio

Prosocution could froduao positive evidonco *7hcro this docunont
obtained, fren rdrat file folder end in what niristry?

“ KTSI 3fT: At cost this sisrily - ofon to a letter sent to
certain Torsona including the defendant Brack.

I? - TToll, inasisich as I did not take the croso-cxr.Tinntion

of tho -deforoLent Brack I assure that tho nuncso of this docunont is
to refute and rebutt ansirers that t!v> defendant Brack gave concerning
Iris correction vith the Belch Kcc Uztt for tho TTast and tho Roic’.i KoraLosor.

TIC TToll, of courso tho Tribunal will reserve tho ruling

if counsol desires to oxa n ino tho ovidonco in tho erso of dofondant
Brack. o can boor fro., counsol again ! .'.relay,

1103 JOJCnciI: Tho no::t docu snt ajjpoars cn pa;.-© 39 of tho docu ont

^ * •

boo!:. It is ‘*0-1371,. It will bo offorod rs Prosocution bdribit 555.

Tlu. r.SI 3]“: Counsol, trhat nunber is tiro nuebo? of tho docunont
to which you tro referring?

1X8 JOHJBOH: 187U. I bos yaur pardon, IG 73 .

’./oil thcro is one docuror.t on peg© 81, - Docunont Ho.

i23U-rc.

:i3S Jc::;nc ’ 7'«r Honor. *fos. Coring to n-_ s -o 81, which is Ho.

123U-F3, r/.dcli rill bo offered as Bxhitlb 555, '.ro have hvro under dato of
3 April 19U2 a lettor frori the cc- ancient of the Crcss-P.eson Concentration
Crr,p to tho Belch I tain Gffico of 3co::orlc i. Adnistration, stating that it
has rocoivod a report, that is that tho concontrat3.cn carp has rocoivod

•

a re;xrt that 127 prisoners have rocoivod spociol tr entrant on 2 .Vril 19h2 f

nro prosecution contends that 'special treatment* ir. this ccso is oxtor-r-

incUon or euthanasia as it is applied to concentration carps.

• •

, *° coro t0 POv'.'O 89 of tho document bcok, which is HO....

•HE KJ3IDS.T: Just a nonont, counsel? Er. SVcschnonn i3 rraiting.
rp - 'TISI: I rarely wanted to a sir tiro Prosecution against r/hon

tliis docucnt 123li-rS is directed? The dccrcant to Vo found on page 87
of tho Gernan dt current book dates bee!: tc 5 DecerVor, 191Ji, and I do not -


10377


28 Juno-A-’ -D-?3-$-L353cr (In*-., Haclar)
Court Ifc. I >


know against nhen it is really directed.

; 7S3 Jtrosar: Hell, your Honor, this dc-cunont is directed against
ell the defendants uho havo been d'irstl irith activities ir. connection
Tilth euthanasia. ( ^

X., -HCBCm/dSl: li*. President, I should lite tc S^oervo tho ri-ht
£--t I oubrit nr. affidavit in ane or c document 123 U, end affidavit by
tho defendant Brack.

THH ?F;SID!ET; Counsel ray sufcdt an affidavit by defendant Brack
if it ia prepared arrf presented te tlx> Tribvj al promptly.


10373


Oeurt I- v-_,* ' - ¥

June 2B-.V- 24-1—HD-Hox6ie— Ramler.

liloS JOHNSON: Ve oome next to ?a:.e 89 of the document

bock.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel, ?r 0 e 35 Is the next pe^e on
ay docuncnt book.

2-HSl JOHNSON: I belle vc that rune through, that one
doo.mcnt. I don't have an;- ocmaont on the balance of N0-
1234. Lot ao see, we come to Pa&o 89 of the document book,
Document 210-1873, which will bo offered as Prosecution's
Exhibit 556. Thl? is a notlflcrtion fr.m the concentration
camp Z-rosa-Rosen to tine euthanasia extermination station,
3arneui*i, that seventy prisoners Arc eelnj, transferred from
the concentration camp to the extermination centor. This is
undor tho date of 17 March, 1942. 1942 that is dated.

*Jo como now to Pa o 0 93 of the document book, Docuaont
NO-2253, which is ofrored as Prosecution's Exhibit 557. 'Jo
have here tho affidavit of one Suchomcl. Ho vas in tho
Ministry of Justlco during tho Hitler ro^lao, and ho makos
certain statements with rospoct to tho euthanasia program.

He states tint tho paronts of children subjected to that
pro^r^a were not asked to D lvc their consent, but rathor that
outhanasia was ap lied without any regard to tho consont of
tho paronts. Ho further states thrt foreigners and Jovlsh
pcoplo woro included in the program, and ho makes special
rofcronco to the activities of the Defendants Brandt and
3rnck.

’Jo coao now to Pa\,o 99 of the document book. Document
No- 3059, which is offered as Prosecution's Exhibit 558.

This is a document which has been before the Court beforo.

At that time the defense objection to the document was

•

sustained because the document did not oontaln a proper
Jurat. ”e hr ve now obtained affidavit In proper fora. The
affidavit relates to the question of cet.-anasia in regard to
children.

10379


Court 1

June 28—^-24-2-KD-Boxsie-Kanler.

Your Honor, I aee that I have made a mistake here In ny
comment on Document 3059. This an affidavit vhloh Is newly
submitted to the Court. It has not been before the Court
before. It Is an affidavit of Hermann 3oeha and has to do
with euthanasia, the activity of Defendant Earl Brandt In
that Program.

•ffo come now to Pago 102 of the document booh, NO-895,
which will be offered as Prosecution's Exhibit 559. This
is the affidavit which was prosonted to tho Court at an
oarlior stage and wnlch was not admitted because It did not
contain proper Jurat. Vo have now had it prepared In tho
proper form. It rolatos to euthanasia concerning chlldro.n.

Tho conplctos tho presentation of rebuttal dooumonts
of tho Prosocutlon.

MR. HARDY: May It ploaso tho Tribunal, of oourso, tho
Prosecution has a fow alscolanoous documents which they will
put In robuttal ns thoy aro prooossed next week, as you
will recall I promised I would Introduce interrogations of
tho Dofondant Hovon, and thoso are now boing procossod.

Thoso will bo put In. Of courso, wo do have a fow othor
miscellaneous dooumonts. At this tlmo tho Prosecution docs
not have any further documents to submit to the Tribunal to¬
day.

THE PRESIDENT: There are a good many Prosecution
documents for idontiflention.

•

MR. HARDY: Those we have are now in the stage of be¬
ing processed, and when we get them together we can introduce
them in a core expeditious manner than If we attempt to
ho brio along here today. We are attempting to cake an Index
of all documents which are marked for Identification, and wo
perhaps can cover that problem In the matter of an hour or
two. *;?e will cover that next week.


10380


Court 1

June 23—A-24—3-HB-Kox8le-Rasler.

THE PRESIDENT: The Tribunal will announce that it will
not hold sessions on the 4th or 5th of July next week, unless
sone emergency arlsos which requires the Tribunal to change
Its mind. Thr Tribunal will now be in reoese until nlno-
thlrty o*clock Monday nornlng.

THE MARSHjtL: The Tribunal will be in recess until 9:30
Monday nornlng.

(The Tribunal adjourned until 30 Juno 1947 at 0930 hours.)


10381


MICROCOPY


ROLL
