G0VERNMENT:0P INDIA

DEPARTMEI^T OF ARCHAEOLOGY

CENTRAL ARCHAEOLOGICAL 
LIBRARY

Class

Call No

3 Mi

181.42

Boo-MAts

D.G,A, 79.

THE DOCTRINE OF 
AWAKENING

A Study on the Buddhist As'cesis

By

J. EVOLA

Translated from Italian hy 
H. E. MUSSON

LONDON

LUZAC e? COMPANY, LTD. 
1951

(LA DOTTRINA DEL RISVEGLIO)

Originally published in Italian by 
GIUZ. LATERZA & FIGLI

at Bari, Italy, in 1943

/

CENTRAL A < •

Aoo.

r,\OGlG4fe

I

\

Printed in Great Britain 
ai the Burlbigh Prbss, Lewins Mead, Bristol

SOURCES

f /

i/

i r

f -

If^

In this work we have, apart from the two last chapters, based 
ourselves exclusively upon the Sutta Pitaka, which contains the 
most important and most ancient portion of Pali Buddhism.

Many of the Buddhist teachings are set forth in the form of 
j Leit-motif, that is to say, of passages which recur in various texts, 
^ ■ almost in identical form. Wherever possible we have referred 
to these motifs in their contexts in the Majjhima Nikdya. There 
\ was moreover a specific reason for this, namely, that there is 
accessible to the Italian public a really first-class translation of 
this text, and which is also a noteworthy work of art, made by 
K. E. Neumann and G. de Lorenzo (7 discorsi di Buddho ; 
Laterza, Bari, 1916-27, in three volumes). We have done our 
\/ best to make the maximum use of this translation. For the 
other texts we give the reader the following references should he 
^^sh to refer to them.

i J Digha-nikdya. Sacred Books of the Buddhists, tr. by T. W.

V Rhys Davids, London, 1899-1910. For the Sutta No. XVI, 
^ I which is the Mahaparinibhana sutta, we have also made use of

1 the Chinese version, also translated into Italian by C. Puini, 
^ Lanciano, 1919.

* ^ Samyutta nikaya, tr. C. A.''F. Rhys Davids and F. L. Woodward.

V Pali Text editfwai^o^dQ*^ 1922-24, 4 vols.

Anguttara nikdya Nyanatiloka (Die* Reden des Buddhos), 
r Munchen-Neubiberg, 1922-23.* ^ Samyutta nikaya, tr. C. A.''F. Rhys Davids and F. L. Woodward.

V Pali Text editfwai^o^dQ*^ 1922-24, 4 vols.

Anguttara nikdya Nyanatiloka (Die* Reden des Buddhos), 
r Munchen-Neubiberg, 1922-23.

'Of the Dhammapada there exists the Italian translation by 
^P. E. Pavolini, Lanciano, ed. “CuUura delVanima 
^ The quotations from these as from other texts, follow the 
f paragraphing of the originals. Concerning those which have been' 
made available by H. C. Warren, Buddhism in Translations, 
^^Cambridge, Mass., 1909, (first published 1896) we have given in 
brackets the letter W.

For the Vinaya Pitaka, see Sacred Books of the East, v. XIII.. 
Dhamma Sahgani tr. C. A. F. Rhys Davids, London, 1900.

CONTENTS

Page

Translator’s Foreword -

Part I— PRINCIPLES

I. On the Varieties of "Ascesis ” - - - - 3'

II. Aryan-ness of the Doctrine of Awakening - 16

III. The Historical Place of the Doctrine of

Awakening - ..-----26

IV. Destruction of the Demon of Dialectics - 47

V. The Flame and Samsaric Consciousness - - 53

VI. Conditioned Genesis ------ 72

VII. Determination of the Vocations - - - 93

Part H— PRACTICE

I. The Qualities of the Combatant and the

" Departure ” - 119

11 . Defence and Consolidation 134

III. Rightness - 148

IV. Sidereal Awareness — ^The Wounds Close - 162

V. The Four Jhdna—Tm, " Irradiant Contempla-

tions ” 182

VI, The States Free from Form and the

, Extinction 206

VII. Discrimination Between the “ Powers ” - - 229

VIII. Phenomenology of the Great Liberation - 239

IX. Signs of the Nonpareil - 254

X. The " Void ” — " If the Mind Does Not Break ” 265

XI. Up to Zen 375

XII. The Ariya are Still Gathered on the Vulture’s

Peak 289

Vll

TRANSLATOR'S FOREWORDIX. Signs of the Nonpareil - 254

X. The " Void ” — " If the Mind Does Not Break ” 265

XI. Up to Zen 375

XII. The Ariya are Still Gathered on the Vulture’s

Peak 289

Vll

TRANSLATOR'S FOREWORD

Of the many books published in Italy and Germany by J. Evola, 
this is the first to be translated into English. The book needs 
no apology; the subject — Buddhism — ^is sufficient guarantee of 
that. But the author has, it seems to me, recaptured the spirit 
of Buddhism in its original form, and his schematic and uncom- 
promising approach will have rendered an inestimable service 
even if it does no more than clear away some of the wooUy ideas 
that have gathered round the central figure. Prince Siddhattha, 
and round the doctrine that he disclosed.

The real significance of the book, however, lies not in its value 
as a weapon in a dusty battle between scholars, but in its 
encouragement of a practical application of the doctrine it 
discusses. The author has not only examined the principles on 
which Buddhism was originally based, but he has also described 
in some detail the actual process of "ascesis," or self-training 
that was practised by the early Buddhists. This Study, moreover, 
does not stop here ; it maintains throughout that the doctrine 
of the Buddha is capable of application even to-day by any 
Western man who really has the vocation. But the undertaking 
was never easy, and the number who, in this modem world, 
will succeed in pursuing it to its conclusion is not likely to be 
laTge.

H. E. M.

London 
April, 1948 .

IX

PART I

PRINCIPLES

I

ON THE VARIETIES OF "ASCESIS "

t

T he original meaning of the term " ascesis " — ^from

to train — ^was simply “ training ” and, in a Roman sense, 
discipline. The corresponding Indo-Aryan term is tapas {tapa 
or tapo in Pali) and it has a like significance ; except that, from 
the root tap, which means to be hot or to glow, it also contains 
the idea of an intensive concentration, of glowing, almost of fire.However, with the development of Western civilisation the 
term " ascesis ” (or its derivatives) has, as we know, taken on 
a particular meaning which differs from the original. Not only 
has it assumed an exclusively religious sense, but, from the 
general tone of the faith which has come to predominate among 
Western peoples, asceticism is bound up with ideas of mortification 
of the flesh and of painful renunciation of the world : it has thus 
come to represent the method which this faith usually advocates 
as the most suitable for gaining " salvation ” and the reconcilia- 
tion of man, weighed down by original sin, vrith his Creator. 
As early as the beginnings of Christianity the name “ ascetic ” 
was applied to those who practised mortification by flagellation 
of the body.

^ THus, with the growth of modem civilisation, all that asceticism 
stood for gradually and inevitably became the object of strong 
dislike. If even Luther, with the resentment of one unable to 
understand or tolerate monastic disciplines, could refuse to 
recognise the necessity, the value and the usefulness of any ascesis, 
and could substitute it by exaltation of pure faith, then Human- 
ism, Immanency and the new Life Cult were brought from their 
standpoint to heap discredit and scorn upon ascetism, broadly 
associating such tendencies with " mediaeval obscurantism ’* 
and with the aberrations of "historically outdated ages”. 
And even when asceticism was not dismissed out of hand as

3

4 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

* ‘ *

pathological or as a kind of sublimated masochism, all softs of 
incompatibilities to our ways of life were affirmed. The best 
known and most overworked of these is the antithesis supposed 
to exist between the ascetic, static and emasculated Orient, 
renouncer and enemy of the world, and the dynamic, positive, 
heroic and progressive Western civilisation.Unfortunate prejudices such as these have succeeded in gaining 
a foothold in people's minds ; even Friedrich Nietzsche some- 
times seriously believed that asceticism only attracted the

pallid enemies of life ”, the weak and disinherited, and those 
who, in their hatred of themselves and the world, undermine 
with their ideas the civilisations created by a superior humanity. 
Furthermore, recent attempts have been made to provide 
” climatic ” explanations of asceticism. Thus, according to 
Gunther, the Indo-Germans, tmder the influence of an enervat- 
ing and imaccustomed climate in the Asiatic lands they had 
conquered, came slowly to regard the world as suffering, turning 
their energies away from affirmation of life and towards a seeking 
for *' liberation ” by means of various ascetic disciplines. We 
need hardly discuss the low level to which asceticism has been 
brought by recent ” psycho-analjdical ” interpretations.

In the West, then, a tight net of misunderstanding and prejudice 
has been drawn round asceticism. The one-sided meaning 
given to asceticism by Christianity, through its frequent 
association therein with entirely misguided forms of spiritual life, 
has produced inevitable reactions : these have usually — ^and not 
without a certain anti-traditional and anti-religious bias — ^stressed 
only the negative side of what one kind of ascesis has to -offer 
the " modem ” spirit.However, our own contemporaries, as though the position were 
inverted, are now again using expressions of this nature in the 
original sense, though adapting them to their own entirely 
materialistic plane. Thus we hear of a “ Mystique of Progress ”, 
a ” Mystique of Science ”, a ” Mystique of Labour ” and so on, 
and likjewise of an ascesis of Sport, an ascesis of Social Service 
and even of an ascesis of Capitalism. In spite of the confusion 
of ideas, there is definitely to be found here a certain element 
of the original meaning of the word ” ascesis ” : this modem use 
of the word or its derivatives does, in fact, imply the simple idea

ON THE Varieties of “ascesis” 5

' of training, of intensive application of energy, not without a 
certain impersonality and neutralisation of the purely individual 
and-hedonistic element.

Be this as it may, it is important at the present time that 
intelligent men should once again understand the value of 
asceticism in a comprehensive view of the tmiverse and thus 
what it may signify at successive spiritual levels, independently 
of the mere religious concepts of Christian type as well as of the 
modem distinctions ; for which they should refer to the funda- 
mental traditions and the highest metaphysical concepts of the 
Aryan races. As we wished to discuss asceticism in this sense, 
we asked ourselves : what example can History furnish as the 
best suited for examination as a comprehensive and universal 
ascetic S3rstem that is clear and undiluted, well tried and well 
set out, in tune with the spirit of Aryan man and yet prevailing 
in the modem age ?We eventually decided that the answer to our question could 
only be found in the “ Doctrine of Awakening " which, in its 
original form, satisfies all these conditions. *The " Doctrine of 
Awakening ” is the real signification of what is commonly known 
as Buddhism. The term ” Buddhism ” is derived from the P51i 
designation Buddha (in Sanskrit : Buddha) given to its founder : 
it is, however, not so much a name as a title. Buddha, from 
the root budh— to awaken — ^means the "Awakened One '' ; it is 
thus a designation applied to one who attains the spiritual 
realisation, likened to an " arousing " or to an " awakening ”, 
which Prince Siddhattha announced to the Indo-Aryan world. 
Buddhism, in its original form — the so-called Pah Buddhism — 
>sh(5ws us, as do very few other doctrines, the characteristics 
we want : (i) it contains a complete ascetic system, (2) it is 
universally valid and it is realistic, (3) it is pure Aryan in spirit, 
(4) it is accessible in the general conditions of the historical cycle 
to which present-day mankmd also belongs.

We have impHed that asceticism, when considered as a whole, 
can assume various meanings at successive spiritual levels. 
•Simply defined, that is to say as " training ” or discipline, an 
•ascesis aims at placing aU the energies of the human being 
under -the control of a central principle. In this respect we can, 
properly speaking, talk of a technique which has, in common

6 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

with that of modem scientific achievements, the characteristics 
of objectivity and impersonality. Thus an eye, trained to dis- 
tinguish the accessory from the essential, can easily recognise 
a " constant '' beyond the multiple variety of ascetic forms 
adopted by this or that tradition.In the first place, we can consider as accessory all the particular 
religious conceptions or the particular ethical interpretations with 
which, in very many cases, asceticism is associated. Beyond all 
this, however, it is possible to conceive of and to work out what 
we may call a pure ascesis, that is to say, one made up of 
techniques for developing an interior force, the use of which, 
to begin with, remains undetermined, like the use of the arms 
and machines produced by modem industrial techniques. Thus, 
while “ ascetic " reinforcement of the personality is the foundation 
of every transcendental realisation, whether in the form of one 
historical tradition or another, it can likewise be of great value 
on the level of the temporal aspirations and stmggles which absorb 
practically all the energies of modem Western man. Further- 
more, we could even conceive of an “Ascesis of Evil ”, for the 
technical conditions, as we may call them, needed to achieve 
any positive success in the direction of the "evil” are not different 
in kind from those needed, for example, to attain sainthood, 
Nietzsche himself, as we have already pointed out, partly shared 
the modem widespread prejudice against asceticism : when 
dealing with his “ Superman ” and when formulating the “WilU 
zur Macht ”, did he not take into account various disciplines 
and forms of self-control which are clearly of an ascetic nature ? 
Thus, at least within certain limits, we can quote the wprds of 
an old mediaeval tradition : " One the Art, One the Matejual, 
One the Crucible ”.Now, few other great historical traditions allow us to isolate 
so easily the elements of a pure aiscesis as does the “ Doctrine 
of Awaikening ”, that is to say. Buddhism. It has been justly said 
of Buddhism that in it the ascetic problems " have been stated 
and resolved so clearly and, one could almost say, so logically 
that, in comparison, other forms of mysticism seem incomplete, 
fragmentary and inconclusive ” ; and that, far from being weighed 
down by every kind of emotional and sentimental elemeht, an 
austere and objective style of intellectual clarity so much pre-

ON THE VARIETIES OR “aSCESIS” 7

dominates that one is almost forced to compare it with the 
modern scientific mentahty.^ In this respect two points must 
be emphasised.ON THE VARIETIES OR “aSCESIS” 7

dominates that one is almost forced to compare it with the 
modern scientific mentahty.^ In this respect two points must 
be emphasised.

Firstly. The Buddhist ascesis is conscious, in the sense that 
in many forms of asceticism — and in the case of Christian ascetic- 
ism almost without exception — ^the accessory is inextricably tied 
up with the essential, and ascetic realisations are, one might say, 
indirect because they result from impulses and workings of the 
mind determined by religious suggestions or raptures; whilst 
in Buddhism there is direct action, based on knowledge, conscious 
of its aim and developing throughout in controlled stages. “ Just 
as a practised turner or turner's apprentice, when turning quickly, 
knows : ‘ I am turning quickly ’, and when turning slowly, 
knows ; ' I am turning slowly ' ” — “As a practised butcher or 
butcher's apprentice who butchers a cow, takes it to the market 
place and dissects it piece by piece ; he knows these parts, he 
looks at them and examines them well and then sits down ’’ 
— ^here are two trenchant similes, chosen from many, and typical 
of the style of consciousness of every ascetic or contemplative 
procedure in the Doctrine of Awakening.® Another image is 
furnished by clear and transparent water through which can be 
seen ever5d;hing lying on the bottom : symbolical of a mind that 
has left behind all unrest and disturbance.® And if will be seen 
that this style persists throughout, on every level of Buddhist 
discipline. It has been well said that “ this path through 
consciousness and awakening is as clearly described as a road 
on an accurate map, along which every tree, every bridge and 
every house is markedSecondly. Buddhism is almost the only system which avoids 
confusion between asceticism and morality, and in which the 
purely instrumental value of the latter in the interests of the 
former is consciously realised. Every ethical precept is measured 
against an independent scale, that is, according to the positive 
“ ascetic ” effects which result from following these precepts or 
failing to follow them. From this it can be seen that not only

^ B. Jaaisink, La mistica del huddismo, Turin, 1925, p. 304.

* Majjhima-nikdya, X.

» Cl e.g. Jataka, CLXXXV.

^ E. Reinhold, in the iurioduction to the works of K. E. Neumann quoted by 
G. de Lorenzo, I discorsi di Buddho, I^terza, Bari, 1925, Vol. II, p. 15.

B

8 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING '

have all religious mythologies been surpassed, but also all ethical 
mjrthologies. In Buddhism, the elements of sila, that is, of 
" right conduct are considered purely as “ instruments of the 
mind : it is not a question of “ values ” but of " instruments ”, 
instruments of 'a virtus not in the moralistic sense but in the ancient 
sense of virile energy. Here we have the well-known parable 
of the raft : a man, wishing to cross a dangerous river and having 
built a raft for this purpose, would indeed be a fool if, when he 
had crossed, he were to put the raft on his shoulders and take it 
with him on his journey. This must be the attitude — ^Buddhism 
teaches^to all that is labelled hy ethical views as good or evil, 
just or unjust.®Thus we can fairly claim that in Buddhism — as also in Yoga — 
asceticism is raised to the digihty and impersonality of a science : 
what is elsewhere fragmentary here becomes systematic ; what 
is instinct becomes conscious* technique ; the spiritual labyrinth 
of those minds which achieve a real elevation through the workings 
of some " grace ” (since it is only accidentally and by meaps 
of suggestions, fears, hopes and raptures that they discover the 
right, way) is replaced by a calm and uniform light, present even 
in abysmal depths, and by a method which has no need of external 
means.

All this, however, refers only to the first aspect of asceticism, 
the most elementary in the ascetic hierarchy. When an ascesis 
is understood as a technique for the conscious creation of a 
forte that can be apphed, in the first place, at any level, then 
the disciplines taught by the Doctrine of Awakening can be 
recognised as those that incorporate the highest degree of 
crystallinity and independence. However, we encounter inade 
the system a distinction between the disciplines which ” suflSce 
for this life ” and those which are necessary to take one beyond.^ 
Ascetic achievement in Buddhism is. exploited essentially in an 
upward direction. This is how the sense of such achievements 
is expressed in the canon : ” And he reaches the admirable , 
path discovered by the intensity, the constancy and the con- 
centration of the wiU, the admirable path discovered hy the

ON THE VARIETIES OF “aSCESIs” 9ON THE VARIETIES OF “aSCESIs” 9

intensity, the constancy and the concentration of the energy, 
the admirable path discovered by the intensity, the constancy 
and the concentration of the spirit, the admirable path dis- 
covered by the intensity, the constancy and the concentration 
of investigation — ^with a heroic spirit as the fifth.” And this 
continues : " And thus attaining these fifteen heroic qualities, 
he is able, O disciples, to achieve liberation, to achieve awaken- 
ing, to attain the incomparable sureness.”® In this connection 
another text considers a double possibility : " Either certainty 
in life, or no return after death.”® If, on the highest level, 
“ sureness ” is linked with the state of '* awakening ”, the 
alternatives can be similarly interpreted on a lower level, and 
we may think of a more relative sureness in life, created by a 
preliminary group of ascetic disciplines and able to prove its 
value in all fields of life, and yet which is essentially a founda- 
tion for an ascesis of a higher nature. It is in this sense that 
we can talk of an ” intensive application ”, which is considered 
to be the keystone of the whole system, and which, when 
” developed and constantly practised, leads to twofold health, 
health in the present and health in the future ”.^® ” Sureness,” 
in ascetic development — bhavcmd — ^is associated with unshakable 
calm — samatha — ^which may be considered as the highest aim 
of a " neutral ” discipline, and which can be pursued by one

, who yet remains essentially a " son of the world ” — -puithujjana. 
Beyond this there is an unshakable calm — samatha — ^which is 
associated with knowledge — vipassand — and which then leads 
to ” Kberation ”.ii5ere we have, then, a new conception of the ascesis, on a 
higher plane than the last, and taking us to a level above normal 
perception and individual experience ; and at the same time it 
becomes clear why Buddhism, on this higher level also, gives us 
positive points of reference such as we find in few other traditions. 
The fact is, that Buddhism in its original form carefully avoids

‘ • Majjh., XVI.

• Majjh., X.

Angutiara-nikaya, III, 65; X, 15. Cf. Samyuit, XXXV, 198, where the 
disciplines are stated to be valid for this life since, in it, they create self- 
possession, and yet build the firm foundations for the destruction of the isava, 
that is, for the task of following the upward path.

“ In Angutt., IV, 170 it is said that the bonds give way and tiie path opens 
when samatha is combined with vipassana.

10 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

an5i;hing that savours of simple " religion ”, of mysticism in its 
most generally accepted sense, of S5^tems of " faith ” or devotion, 
or of dogmatic rigidity. And even when we consider that 
which is no longer of that life, that which is “ more than life ”, 
Puddhism, as the Doctrine of Awakening, offers us those very 
traits of severity and nudity which characterise the monumental, 
and features of clarity and strength which may be called, in a 
general sense, ” classical ” ; a virile and courageous attitude 
which would seem “ Promethian ” were it not indeed essentially 
Olympian, feut before this can be appreciated, once again 
various prejudices must be removed. And here it is well to 
discuss two points.It has been claimed that Buddhism, in its essentials, and leaving 
out of account its later popular forms, entirely centred as they 
were on a deified concept of its founder, is not a religion. This 
is true. We must, however, be quite clear as to what we mean 
when we say this. The peoples of the West are so inured to 
the religion which has come to predominate in their countries 
that they consider it as a kind of unit of measure and as a model 
for every other religion : they are near denying the dignity of 
true religion to any concept of the supersensory and to man’s 
■ relationship to it, when the concept in any way differs from the 
Hebrew-Christian tjqje. The res^t of this has been that the 
most ancient traditions of the West itself — ^beginning with the 
Aryo-HeUenic and the Aryo-Roman — are no longer understood 
in their real significance or effective value so it is easy to 
imagine what happened to older and often more remote traditions, 
particularly to those created by the Aryan races in Asia.* But, 
indeed, this attitude should be reversed : and just as “ modem ” 
civilization is an anomaly when compared with what has always, 
been true civilization,^® so the significance and the value of the 
Christian religion should be measured according to that part of 
its content which is consonant Avith a vaster, more Aryan and 
more primordial concept of the supersensory.

We need not dwell on this point since we have already dealt 
with it elsewhere ; Dahlke smns up the matter, sajdng that one

Cf. W. F. Otto, Dia Goiter Griechenlands, 1935, ^ passim,

Cf. R. Guenon, Orient at Occident, Paxis, 1924 ; La crise du monde moderne, 
Paris, 1925. (English, translations : East and West, Luzac, London, 1941 
and The Crisis of the Modern World, Luzac, 1943). s

ON THE VARIETIES OF “aSCESIS” IION THE VARIETIES OF “aSCESIS” II

characteristic of Western superficiality is the tendency always 
to identify religion as a whole with religion based on faith.^* 
Beyond those who *' believe ” are those who " know ”, and to 
these the purely "mythological” character of many simply 
religious, devotional and even scholastically theological concepts 
is quite clear. It is largely a question of different degrees of 
knowledge. Religion, from nligo, is, as the word itself indicates, 
a re-connecting and, more specifically, a re-connecting of a creature 
to a Creator with the eventual introduction of a mediator or of 
an expiator. On the basis of this central idea can be built up 
a whole system of faith, of devotion and even of mysticism which, 
admittedly, is capable of carrying an individual to a certain level 
of spiritual realisation. However, it does so to a large extent 
passively since it is based essentially on sentiment, emotion and 
suggestion. In such a system no amount of scholastic explaining 
will ever completely resolve the irrational and sub-intellectual 
element.’We can easily understand that in some cases such " religious ” 
forms are necessary ; and even the East, in later periods, has 
known something of the kind, for instance the way of devotion 
— hhakti-marga (from hhaj, to adore) — of Ramanuja and certain 
forms of the Qakti cult ; but we must also realise that there 
may be some who have no need of them and who, by race and 
by calling, desire a way free from " religious ” myrthologies, a 
way based on clear knowledge, on realisation and on awakening. 
An ascetic, whose energies are employed in this direction, achieves 
the highest form of ascesis : and Buddhism gives us an example 
of an ascesis that is outstanding of its kind — ^in saying "of its 
kiild ” we wish to point out that Buddhism represents a great 
historic^ tradition with texts and teachings available to all; it 
is not an esoteric school with its knowledge reserved for a restricted 
number of initiates. •

In this sense we can, and indeed we must, state that Buddhism 
— referring always to original Buddhism — ^is not a religion. This 
does not mean that it denies supernatural and metaphjreical 
reality, but only that it has nothing to do with the way of 
regarding man’s relationship with this reahty that we know more

“ P. Dahlke, Buddhistnus als Religion und Moral, Mflachen-Neubibere, a' 
1923. p. II.

12 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

I

or less as " religion The validity of these statements would 
in no way be altered were one to set out in greater detail to 
defend the exceUence of the theistic point of view against 
Buddhism, by charging the Doctrine of Awakening with more 
or less declared atheism. This brings us to the second point 
for discussion, but which we need only touch upon here as it 
is dealt with at length later in this work.We have admitted that a “ religiously ” conceived system can 
carry an individual to a certain level of spiritual realisation. The 
fact that this system is based on a theistic concept determines 
this level. The theistic concept, however, is by no means 
either unique or even the highest “ religious ” relationship sudi 
as the Hindu bhakti or the predominant faiths in the Western 
dr Arab world. Whatever one may think of it, the theistie 
concept represents an incomplete view of the world, since it lacks 
the extreme hierarchic apex. From a metaphysical and (in 
the higher sense) traditional point of view, the notion , on which 
theism is based of representing “being” in a personal form 
even when theologically sublimated, can never claim to be the 
ultimate ideal. The concept and the realisation of the extreme 
apex or, in other words, of that which is beyond both such a 
“ being ” and its opposite, “ non-being ", was and is natural to 
the Aryan spirit. It does not deny the theistic point of view 
but recognises it in its rightful hierarchic place and subordinates 
it to a truly transcendental concept.It is freely admitted that things are less simple than they seem 
in Western theology, especially in the realm of mysticism, and 
more particularly where it is concerned with so-called “ negative 
theology ”. Also in the West the notion of a personal God 
occasionally merges into the idea of an ineffable essence, of an 
abysmal divinity, as the iv conceived by the Neo-Platonists 
beyond the Sv, as the Gottheit in the neuter beyond th& GoU 
which, after Dionysius the Areopagite, appeared frequently in 
German mysticism, and which exactly corresponds with the 
neuter Brahman above the theistic Brahma of Hindu speculation. 
But in the West it is more a notion wrapped in a ccaifused mystical 
cloud, than a precise doctrinal and dogmatic definition conforming 
to a comprehensive cosmic system. And this notion, in point 
of fact, has had little or no effect on the " religious ” bias prevalent

, ON THE VARIETIES OF “aSCESIS” I3

in the Western mind : its only result has been to carry a. few 
men, confused in their occasional intuitions and visions, beyond 
the frontiers of " orthodoxy, ON THE VARIETIES OF “aSCESIS” I3

in the Western mind : its only result has been to carry a. few 
men, confused in their occasional intuitions and visions, beyond 
the frontiers of " orthodoxy

That very apex whidh Christian theology loses in a confused 
background, is, instead, very often placed consciously in the 
foreground by the Aryo-Oriental traditions. To talk in this 
respect of atheism or even of pantheism betrays ignorance, an 
ignorance shared by those who spend their time unearthing 
oppositions and antitheses. The truth is that the traditions 
of the Aryans who settled in the East retain and conserve much 
of what the later traditions of races of the same root who 
settled in the West have lost or no longer understand or retain 
only fragmentarily. A contributing factor here is the imdoubted 
influence on European faiths of concepts of Semitic and Asiatic- 
Mediterranean origin. Thus to accuse of atheism the older 
traditions, particularly the Doctrine of Awakening, and also other. 
Western, traditions which reflect' the same spirit, only betrays 
an attempt to expose and discredit a higher point of view on 
the part of a lower one : an attempt which, had circumstances 
been reversed, would have been qualified out of hand by the 
religious West as Satanic. And, in fact, we shall see that it was 
exactly thus that it appeared to the doctrine of the Buddha 
(cf. p. 108).The recognition of that which is “ beyond both ‘ being ’ and 
‘ non-being ' ” opens to ascetic realisation possibilities unknown 
to the world of theism. The fact of reaching the apex, in which 
the distinction between " Creator ” and " creature ” becomes 
metaphysically jneaningless, allows of a whole system of spiritual 
realisations which, since it leaves behind the categories of 
" religious ” thought, is not easily understood : and, above all, 
it permits a direct ascent, that is, an ascent up the bare mountain- 
side, without support and without useless excursions to one side 
or another. This is the exact meaning of the Buddhist ascesis ; 
it is no longer a system of disciplines designed to generate strength, 
sureness and unshakable calm, but a system of spiritual realisa- 
tion. Buddhism— and again later we shall see this distinctly — 
carries the will for the unconditioned to a limit which is almost 
beyond the imagination of the modem Westerner. And in this, 
ascent beside the abyss the climber rejects all "mythologies”.

14 the doctrine of awakening14 the doctrine of awakening

he proceeds by means of pure strength, he ignores all toirages, 
he rids himself of any residual human weakness, he acts only 
according to pure knowledge. Thus the Awakened One {Buddha), 
the Victor (jina) could be called he whose way was unknown 
to men, angels and to Brahma himself (the Sanskrit name for 
the theistic god). Admittedly, this path is not without dangers, 
yet it is the path open to the virile mind — viriya-magga. The 
texts clearly state that the doctrine is "for the wise man, the 
expert, not for the ignorant, the inexpert The simile 
of the cutting grass is used: "As kusa grass when .wrongly 
grasped cuts the hand, so the ascetic life wrongly practised 
leads to infernal torments.”^® The simile of the serpent is used : 
"As a man who wants serpents goes out for serpents, looks for 
serpents, and finding a powerful serpent grasps it by the body 
or by the tail ; and the serpent striking at him bites his hand 
or arm or other part so that he suffers death or mortal anguish 
— ^and why is this ? Because he wrongly grasped the serpent 
— ^so there are men who are harmed by the doctrines. And why 
is this ? Because they wrongly grasped the doctrines.”^’It must be thus quite clear that the Doctrine of Awakening is 
not itself one particular religion that is opposed to other rdigions. 
Even in the world in which it grew, it respected the various 
divinities and the popular cults of religious type that were 
attached to them. It understood the value of " works Virtu- 
ous and devout men go to " heaven ” — but a different path is 
taken by the Awakened Ones.^® They go beyond as " a fire 
which, httle by little, consumes every bond ’V® both human and 
divine. And it is fundamentally an innate attribute of the Aryan 
soul that causes us never to meet in the Buddhist texts toy 
sign of departure from consciousness, of sentimentalism or 
devout effusion, or of semi-intimate conversation with a God, 
although throughout there is a sense of strength inexorably 
directed towards the unconditioned.

We have now elaborated the first three reasons why Buddhfem 
in particular ik so suitable as a base for an exposition of a complete

“ Majjh., II.

Dhammapada, 311. V

” Majjh., XXII.

Dhammapada, 126.

Dhammapada, 31.

ON THE VARIETIES OF “aSCESIS” 15“ Majjh., II.

Dhammapada, 311. V

” Majjh., XXII.

Dhammapada, 126.

Dhammapada, 31.

ON THE VARIETIES OF “aSCESIS” 15

ascesis. Summing up : the first is the possibility of extracting 
easily firom Buddhism the elements of an ascesis considered as an 
objective technique for the achievement of calm, of strength and 
of detached superiority, capable in themselves of being used in 
all directions. The second is that in Buddhism the ascesis has 
also the superior signification of a path of spiritual realisation 
quite free from any mythology, whether religious, theological 
or ethical. The third reason, finally, is that the last stretch 
of such a path corresponds to the Supreme in a truly meta- 
physical concept of the universe, to a real transcendency 
well beyond the purely theistic concept. Thus whilst the 
Buddha considers the tendency to dogmatise as a bond, and 
opposes the empty sufftciency of those who proclaim : " Only 
this is truth, foolishness is the rest,”*® yet he maintains fimaly 
the knowledge of his own dignity : " Perhaps you may wish, 
disciples, thus knowing, thus understanding, to return for your 
salvation to the rites and the fantasies of the ordinary penitent 
or priest ? ” — “ No, indeed,” is the answer. ” Is it thus then, 
disciples : that you speak only of that on which you yourselves 
have meditated, which you yourselves have known, which you 
yourselves have understood ? ” — " Even so. Master.” “ This is 
well, disciples. Remain, then, endowed with this doctrine, 
which is visible in this life, timeless, inviting, leading onwards, 
intelligible to all intelligent men. If this has been said, for this 
reason has it been said.”*^ And again : “ There are penitents 
and priests who exalt liberation. They speak in various manners 
glorifying liberation. But as for that which concerns the most 
noble, the highest liberation, I know that none equals me, let 
alone that I may be surpassed.”®^ This has been called, in the 
tradition, " the lion’s roar ”.‘o Cf. e.g. Sutlanipata, W, xii :

Majjh., XXXVIII.

** Vlgha-nikaya, VIII, 21.

xiii, I7-I9»

II

ARYAN-NESS OF THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

W E have yet to say something of the "Aryan-ness '' of the 
Buddhist doctrine.

Our use of the term “Aryan" in connection with this doctrine 
is primarily justified by direct reference to the texts. The term 
ariya (arya in Sanskrit), which in fact means "Aryan ", recurs 
throughout the canon. The path of awakening is called Aryan 
— ariya magga ; the four fundamental truths are Aryan — ariya- 
saccdni ; the mode of knowledge is Aryan — ariya-naya ; the 
teaching is called Aryan (particularly that which considers the 
contingency of the world^) and is, in turn, addressed to the Ariya 
the doctrine is spoken of as accessible and intelligible, not to the. 
common crowd, but only to the Ariya. The term ariya has 
sometimes been translated as “ saint ". This, however, is an 
incomplete translation ; it is even discordant when we consider 
the notable divergence between what is concerned and all 
that " saintliness " means to a Western man. Nor is the transla- 
tion of ariya as " noble " or “ sublime " any more satisfactory. 
They are hfi later meanings of the word, and they do not convey 
the fuUness of the original nor the spiritual, aristocratic and racial 
significance which, nevertheless, is largely preserved in Buddhism. 
This is why Orientalists, such as Rh57S Davids and Woodwatd, 
have maintained that it is better not to translate the term at all, 
^and they have left Ariya wherever it occurs in the texts, either 
as an adjective or as a noun meaning a certain class of individuals. 
In the texts of the canon the Ariya are the Awakened Ones, those 
who have achieved liberation and those who are united to them 
since they understand, accept and follow the Ariya Doctrine of 
Awakening.®

1 Cf. Saihyutta.nimya, XXXV, 84 ; XLII, 12.1 Cf. Saihyutta.nimya, XXXV, 84 ; XLII, 12.

•"The racial significance of the term ariya is cles.r in certain texts, e.g. 
where it is considered as a difi&cult birth to achieve and where it is a privilege 
to be born in the land of the Aryans {ArtguUara, VI, 96)-

16

ARYAN-NESS OF THE DOCTRINE IJ

It is necessary, however, that we should emphasise the Aryan- 
ness of the Bud^st doctrine for various reasons. In the first 
place, we must anticipate those who will put forward the argument 
of Asiatic exclusiveness, sa5dng that Buddhism is remote from 
“our” traditions and “pur” races. We have to remember 
that behind the vg-rious caprices of modem historical theories, 
and as a more profound and primordial reality, there stands the 
unity of blood and spirit of the white races who created the 
greatest civilisations both of the East and of the West, the Iranian 
and Hindu as well as the ancient Greek and Roman and the 
Geim^c. Buddhism has the right to call itself Aryan both 
because it reflects in great measure the spirit of conunon origins 
and since it has preserved important parts of a heritage which, 
as we have already said. Western man has little by httle forgotten, 
not only by reason of involved processes of intermarriage, but 
also since he himself — ^to a far greater extent than the Eastern 
Aryans — ^has come under foreign influences, particularly in the 
religious field. As we have pointed out, Buddhist asceticism, 
when certain supplementary elements have been removed, is truly 
“ classical ” in its clarity, its realism, its precision and its firm 
and articulate structure ; we may say it reflects the noblest 
style of the ancient Aryo-Mediterranean world.Furthermore, it is not only a question of form. The ascesis 
proclaimed by Prince Siddhattha is suffused throughout with an 
intimate congeniality and with an accentuation of the intellectual 
and Olympian element which is the mark of Platonism, Neo- 
Platonism and Roman Stoicism. Other points of contact are 
to be found where Christianity has been rectified by a transfusion 
of'Aryan blood which had remained comparatively pure — that is 
to say, in what we know as German mysticism : there is Meister 
Eckhart’s sermon on detachment, on Ahgeschiedenheit, and his, 
theory of the “ noble mind ”, and we must not forget Tauler 
and SUesius. To insist here, as in every other field of thought, 
on the antithesis between East and West is pure dilettantism. 
The real contrast exists in the first place between concepts of 
a modem kind and those of a traditional kind, whether the latter 
are Eastern or Western ; and secondly, between the real creations 
of the Aryan spirit and blood and those which, in East and 
West alike, have resulted from the admixture of non- Aryan

l8 THE DOCTRINE OP. AWAKENING

influences. As Dahlke has justly said,® “ Among the principal 
ways of thought in ancient times. Buddhism' can best claim to 
be of pure Aryan origin.”l8 THE DOCTRINE OP. AWAKENING

influences. As Dahlke has justly said,® “ Among the principal 
ways of thought in ancient times. Buddhism' can best claim to 
be of pure Aryan origin.”

This is true also more specifically. Although we can apply 
the term Aryan as a generahsation to the mass of Indo-European 
races as regards their common origin (the origiaal homeland of such 
races, the ariyanem-vaejo, according to the memory consciously 
preserved in the ancient Iranian tradition, was a hyperborean 
region or, more generally, north-westem),^ yet, later, it became 
a designation of caste. Arya stood essentially for an aristocracy 
opposed, both in mind and body, not only to obscure, bastard, 
" demoniacal ” races amongst which must be included the 
Kosalian and Dravidian strains found by the Hyperboreans in 
the' Asiatic lands they conquered, but also, more generally, to 
that substratum which corresponds to what we would probably 
call to-day the proletarian and plebeian masses bom in the 
normal way to serve, and which, in India as in Rome, were 
excluded from the bright cults characteristic .of the higher 
patrician, warrior and priestly castes. '

Buddhism can claim to be called Aryan in this more particular 
social sense also, notwithstanding the attitude, of which we shall 
have more to say later, that it adopted towards the castes of 
those times.

The man who was later known as the Awakened One, that is, 
the Buddha, was the Prince Siddhattha. According to some, 
he was the son of a king ; according to others, at least of the 
most ancient warrior nobihty of the Sakiya race, proverbial for 
its pride : there was a saying, “ Proud as a Sakiya ”.® . This race 
claimed descent, like the most illustrious and ancient Hijfdu 
dynasties, from the so-called " solar race ” — surya vamsa — and

• P. Dahlke, Buddhismus -als Weltanschauung ^ Mtinchen-Neubiberg, undated, 
p. 35. English translation, Buddhism and Science, Macmillan, London, I9i3» 
p. 29.• P. Dahlke, Buddhismus -als Weltanschauung ^ Mtinchen-Neubiberg, undated, 
p. 35. English translation, Buddhism and Science, Macmillan, London, I9i3» 
p. 29.

• In this connection cf. our works : RivoUa coniro il mondo modetno, Milan, 
1934; Sintesi di dottrina della razza, Milan, 1941, Hoepli.

• H. Oldenberg, Buddha, Stuttgart-Berlin, 1923, p. loi. Prince Siddhattha 
seems to retain his pride even when he is the Buddha when uttering buch 
woids as these : In the world of angels, of demons and of gods, among the 
ranks of ascetics and of priests, I do not see, O Brahman, any one whom I 
should respectfully salute nor before whom I should rise for him to be seated 
(Anguttarohnikdya, VIII, ii).

ARYAN-NESS OF THE DOCTRINE I9ARYAN-NESS OF THE DOCTRINE I9

irom the very ancient king Ik^vaku.® " He, of the solar race," 
one reads of the Buddha.^ He says so himself ; “ I am descended 
from the solar d3masty and I was horn a Sakiya,"® and by 
becoming an ascetic who has renounced the world he vindicates 
his royal dignity, the dignity of an Aryan king.® Tradition has 
it that his person appeared as "a form adorned with all the 
signs of beauty and surrounded by a radiant aureole ”.’-® To 
a sovereign who meets him and does not know who he is, he 
immediately gives the impression of an equal : " Thou hast a 
perfect body, thou art resplendent, well born, of noble aspect, 
thou hast a golden colour and white teeth, thou art strong. All 
the signs that thou art of noble birth are in thy form, 4II the 
marks of a superior man.”^^ The most fearsome bandit, meeting 
him, asks himself in amazement who might be " this ascetic who 
comes alone with no companions, like a conqueror ” And not 
only do we find in his body, and bearing the characteristics of 
a hhattiya, of a noble warrior of high lineage, but tradition has it 
that he was endowed with the " thirty-two attributes ” which, 
according to an ancient brahmanical doctrine, were the mark 
of the “ superior man " — mahapurisa-lakkhaijM — ^for whom " exist , 
‘ only two possibiUties, without a third ” : either, to remain in 
the world and to become a cakkavatti, that is, a king of kings, 
a " universal sovereign ", the Aryan 'protot3qpe of the " Lord of 
the Earth ”, or else, to renounce the world and to become perfectly 
awakened, the Sambuddha, " one who has removed the veil 
Legend tells us that in a prophetic vision of a whirling wheel 
an imperial destiny was foretold for Prince Siddhattha ; a destiny*"Suttanipata, III, vi, 31. It is worth, noting that IkfvSku was conceived 
as the son of Manu, that is, of the primordi^ legislator of the Indo-Arjran 
; races, and that these references in Buddhism are significant : in fact, the same 
royal and solar origin is attributed to the doctrine expounded in the Bhagavad^- 
gUa (IV, 1-2) ; a doctrine that was revealed after a period of oblivion to a 
hshairiya, that is, to aii exponent of warrior nobility, and that shows us how 
the path of detachment can also produce an unconditioned and irresistible 
form of heroism ; cf. RivoUa contro il mondo moderno, dt., I, i8.

’ Sarnyutt., XXII, 95.

* SuUanipdta, III, i. 19.

• Suttanipdta, III, vii, 7.

Jdtaka, I.

Suttanipdta, III, vii, 1-2 ; 5-6.

Majjh., LXXXVI.

w Suttanipdta, 111 , viii; V, i, 25-28; Majjh., XCI ; Dlgha, III, i, 5, etc; 
Suttanipdta, III, i, 16, 19. A racial detail, not without interest, is that amongst 
the distinguishing marks us included a dark blue colour of the eyes.

20

THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

which, however, he rejected in favour of the other path.^* It is 
equally significant that, according to tradition, the Buddha 
directed that his funeral rite should not be that of an ascetic, 
but of an imperial sovereign,- a cakkavatti}^ In spite of the 
attitude of Buddhism towards the caste problem, it was generally 
held that the bodhisatta, those who may one day become awakened, 
are never born into a peasant or servile caste but into a warrior 
or Brahman caste, that is to say, into the two purest and highest 
of the Aryan castes : indeed, in the conditions then prevailing, 
the warrior caste, the khattiya, was said to be the more 
favoured.^*

This Aryan nobility and this warrior spirit are reflected in the 
Doctrine of Awakening itself. Analogies between the Buddhist 
ascesis and war, between the qualities of an ascetic and the virtues 
of a warrior and of a hero recur frequently in the canonical texts :‘ 'a struggling ascetic with fighting breast,” "an advance with a 
fighter’s steps,” " hero, victor of the battle,” “ supreme triumph 
of the battle,” " favourable conditionsTor the combat,” qualities 
of " a warrior becoming to a king, weU worthy of a king, attributes 
of a king,” etc.^’ — and in such maxims as : “to die in battle 
is better than to live defeated.”^® As for " nobility ”, it is bound 
up here with aspiration towards superhumanly inspired liberty. 
"As a bull, I have broken every bond ” — ^says Prince Siddhattha.^* 
" Having laid aside the burden, he has destroyed the bonds of 
existence ” : this is a theme which continually recurs in the texts, 
and which refers to one who follows the path they indicate. As 
" summits hard to climb, like solitary lions ” the Enlightened 
are described.®® The Awakened One is " a proud saint who has 
climbed the most sublime mountain peaks, who has penetraled 
the remotest forests, who has descended into profound abysses ”.®i 
He himself said, " I serve no man, I have no need to serve any 
man ” ;®® an idea, this, which recalls the " autonomous and 
immaterial race ”, the race " without a king ” {dpaaiXevros) —

Jataka, Intr. (W. 64).

IS Digha, XVI, V, II ; XVII, i. 8.

Jataka, Intr. (W. 40-41).

Cf. Majjh,, LIII; XXVI; Anguti., IV, 181, 196; V, 90, 73 seq.

’•s Suttanipdta, III, ii, 16.

Suttanipdta, I, ii, 12.

Majjh,, XCII ; Suttanipdta, III, vii, 25.

Majjh., L.

** Suttanipdta, I, ii, 8.

ARYAN-NESS OF THE DOCTRINE

21

being itseli kingly — a race which is also mentioned in the West.*® 
He is “ ascetic, pure, the knower, free, sovereign ”.**Majjh., L.

** Suttanipdta, I, ii, 8.

ARYAN-NESS OF THE DOCTRINE

21

being itseli kingly — a race which is also mentioned in the West.*® 
He is “ ascetic, pure, the knower, free, sovereign ”.**

These, which are frequent even in the oldest texts, are some 
of the attributes, not only of the Buddha, but also of those 
who travel along the same path. The natural exaggeration of 
some of these attributes does not alter their significance at least 
as sjmbols and indications of the nature of the path and ideal 
indicated by Prince Siddhattha, and of his spiritual race. The 
Buddha is an outstanding example of a royal ascetic ; his natural 
counterpart in dignity is a sovereign who, like a Caesar, could 
claim that his' race comprehended the majesty of kings as well 
as the sacredness of the gods who hold even the rulers of men 
in their power.*® We have seen that the ancient tradition has 
this precise significance when it speaks of the essential nature 
of individuals who can only be either imperial or perfectly 
awakened. We are close to the summits of the Aryan spiritual 
world.A particular characteristic of the Aryan-ness of the original 
Buddhist teaching is the absence of those proselytising manias 
which exist, almost without exception, in direct proportion to 
the plebeian and anti-aristocratic character of a belief. An Aryan 
mind has too much respect for other people, and its sense of its 
own dignity is too pronounced to allow it to impose its own ideas 
upon others, even when it knows that its ideas are correct. 
Accordingly, in the original cycle of Aryan civilisations, both 
Eastern and Western, there is not the smallest trace of divine 
figures being so concerned with mankind as to come near to 
pursuing them in order to gain their adherence and to " save ” 
them. The so-called Salvationist religions — ^the Erldsungs- 
religionen, in German — ^make their appearance both in Europe 
and Asia at a later date, together with a lessening of the pre- 
ceding spiritual tension, with a fall from Olympian conscious- 
ness and, not least, with influxes of inferior ethnical and social 
elements. That the divinities can do little for men, that mfin

Coll, des Alchimistes Grecques, Paris, 1887,

Zosimus, text in Berthelot,

Vol. II, p. 213.

** Majjh., XXXIX.

pe ^“valence of the two types is indicated, for 
example, by (II, 44). where it is said that two beings appear in the

AwaLned perfect

Awakened. One and the Cahhavaitt or universal sovereign

22 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

is fundamentally the artificer of his own destiny, even of his 
development beyond this world — ^this characteristic view held 
by original Buddhism demonstrates its difference from some 
later forms, especially of the Mahayana schools, into which 
infiltrated the idea of a power from on high busying itself with 
mankind in order to lead each individual to salvation.In point of method and teaching, in the original texts we see 
that the Buddha expounds the truth as he has discovered it, 
without imposing himself on anyone and without emplo3dng 
outside means to persuade or " convert " He who has eyes 
yill see” — ^is a much repeated sajdng of the texts. “Let an 
intelligent man come to me ” — ^we read** — ” a man wiiJippt 
tortuous mind, without hypocrisy, an upright man : I will instruct 
him, I will expound the doctrine. If he follows the instruction, i 
after a short while he himself will recognise, he himself ■mil see, 
that thus indeed one liberates oneself from the bonds, the bonds, 
that is, of ignorance.” Here follows a simile of an infant i^'eeing 
itself gradually frorh its early limitations; this image exactly 
corresponds to the platonic simile of the expert midwife and the 
art of aiding births. Again: " I will not force you, as the potter 
his raw clay. By reproving I •will instruct, and by urging you. 
He who is sound will endure.”** Besides, the original intention 
of Prince Siddhattha was, having once achieved his knowledge 
of truth, to communicate it to no one, not from ill-mindedness, 
but because he realised its profundity and foresaw that few would 
understand it. Ha-\dng then recognised the existence of a few 
individuals of a nobler nature with clearer vision, he expounded 
the doctrine out of compassion, maintaining, however, his distance, 
his detachment and his dignity. Whether disciples com^ to 
him or not, whether or not they follow his ascetic precepts,

” always he remains the same ”.** This is his manner : “Know 
persuasion and know dissuasion ; knowing persuasion and knowing 
dissuasion, do not persuade and do not dissuade : expound only 
ieality.’’^* “ It is wonderful ” — says another text*® — “ it . is 
astonishing that no one exalts his own teaching and no one

»• Majih., LXXX.

«’ Majjh.. CXXII.

” MmK XLIX ; CXXXVII.

»» Majih., CXXXIX.

>• Majjh., LXXVI.

ARYAN-NESS OF THE DOCTRINE 23»• Majih., LXXX.

«’ Majjh.. CXXII.

” MmK XLIX ; CXXXVII.

»» Majih., CXXXIX.

>• Majjh., LXXVI.

ARYAN-NESS OF THE DOCTRINE 23

despises the teaching of another in an Order where there are 
so many guides to show the doctrine.”” MmK XLIX ; CXXXVII.

»» Majih., CXXXIX.

>• Majjh., LXXVI.

ARYAN-NESS OF THE DOCTRINE 23

despises the teaching of another in an Order where there are 
so many guides to show the doctrine.”

This, too, is typically Aryan. It is true that the spiritual power 
which the Bud^a possessed could not but show itself sometinies 
almost automatically, demanding immediate recognition. We 
read, for example, of the incident described as “ the &st footprint 
of the elephant ”, where wise men and expert dialecticians wait 
for the Buddha at a ford seeking an opportunity to defeat him 
with their arguments ; but when they see him they ask only 
to hear the doctrine or of another where, when the Buddha 
enters a discussion, his words destroy all opposition “like a 
furious elephant or a blazing fire ''.®® There is the account of 
his former companions who, believing him to have left the road 
of asceticism, propose amongst themselves not to greet him, but 
who then immediately they see him go to meet him ; and there 
is the story of the fierce bandit Angulimila who is awed by the 
Buddha’s majestic figure. In any case, it is certain that the 
Buddha, in his Aryan superiority, always abstained from using 
indirect methods of persuasion and, in particular, never used any 
which appealed to the irrational, sentimental or emotional element 
in a human being. This rule too is definite : " You must not, O 
disciples, show to laymen the miracle of the super-normal powers. 
He who does this is guilty of an offence of wrong-doing.”*® The 
individual is put on one side : "In truth, the noble sons declare 
their higher knowledge in such a manner, that they state the truth 
without any reference whatsoever to their own person.”®* '* Why 
is this ? ” — says the Buddha to one who has eagerly waited for 
a lor(g time to see him — "He who sees the law sees me and he 
who sees me sees the law. In truth, by seeing the law I am seen 
and by seeing me the law is seen.”®* Being himself awakened, 
the Buddha wishes only to encoiurage an awakening in those 
who are capable of it : an awakening, in the first place, of a 
sense of dignity and of vocation, and in the second, of intellectual 
intuition. A man who is incapable of intuition, it is said, cannot 
approve.®* The noble miracle " conforming to the Aryan“ Majih., XXVII.

“ Ma^jh., XXXV.

“ Vinaya, II, 112.

« Anguit, VI, 49.

»» Satkyutt., XXII, 87.

»• Majjh., XCV.

C

24 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING“ Majih., XXVII.

“ Ma^jh., XXXV.

“ Vinaya, II, 112.

« Anguit, VI, 49.

»» Satkyutt., XXII, 87.

»• Majjh., XCV.

C

24 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

nature ” — ariychidiM — as opposed to prodigies based on extra- 
normal phenomena, and considered to be non-Aryan-r-flwmjya- 
iddhi-r-As concerned with this very point. The “ miracle of the 
teaching ” stirs the faculty of discernment and furnishes a new 
and accurate measure of all values the most typical of the 
canonical expressions for this is : " ' There is this ’ — ^he under- 
stands — ' There is the common and there is the excellent, and 
there is a higher escape beyond this perception of the senses '.”®® 
Here is a characteristic passage describing the awakening of 
intuition : " His [the disciple’s] heart suddenly feels pervaded 
with sacred enthusiasm and his whole mind is revealed pure, 
clear, shining as the luminous disc of the moon : and the truth 
appears to him in its completeness.”®® This is the foundation 
of the only “faith ”, of the only “ right confidence ” considered 
by the order of the Aryans, " an active confidence, rooted in 
insight, firm ” ; a confidence that “ no penitent or priest, no god 
or devil, no angel nor anyone else in the world can destroy 
Perhaps it is worth briefly discussing a final point. The fact 
that the Buddha, normally, does not appear in the Pali texts 
as a supernatural being descended to earth to broadcast a 
" revelation ”, but as a man who expounds a truth which he 
himself has seen and who indicates a path which he himself has 
trodden, as a man who, having himself crossed by his own 
unaided efforts^ to the other bank of the river, helps others 
to cross over*® — ^this fact must not lead us to make the figure 
of the Buddha too human. Even if we omit the Bodhisatta 
theory which so often suffers from infiltration of fabulous 
elements and which only came into being at a later period, the 
concept in the early texts of what is known as kolankola makes 
us seek in the Buddha the re-emergence of a luminous principle 
already kindled in preceding generations : this is an idea which 
agrees perfectly with what we are about to say on the historical 
significance of the Buddhist Doctrine of Awakening. In any case, 
whatever his antecedents, it is extremely difficult to draw a line 
between what is human and what is not, when we are dealingDlgha. XI, 3-8.

58 Majjh.. VII.

Mahdparinirv,, 52-56.

Majjh,, XLVII.

« Majjk, XXVI.

Sutianipata, III, vi, 36.

ARYAN-NESS OF THE DOCTRINE 25

with a being who has inwardly attained deathlessness — amata 
— ^and who is presented as the living incarnation of a law bound 
up with that which is transcendental and which can be " confined” 
by nothing — afariya-panna. The question of race comes in here, 
too. If a being feels himself remote from metaphysical reality, 
then he will imagine any strength that he may acquire as a 
” grace ”, knowledge will appear as " revelation ” in its accepted 
meaning in the West since the time of the Hebrew prophets, 
and the annoimcer of a law may assume for him " divine ” 
proportions rather than be justly regarded as one who has 
destroyed ignorance and who has become awakened ”. This 
separation from metaphysical reality masks the dignity and the 
spiritual level of a teaclfing and wraps the person of the teacher 
himself in an impenetrable fog. One thing is certain : ideas of 
” revelations ” and of men-gods can only sound foreign to an 
Aryan spirit and to a ” noble son ” — kida-putta — ^particularly in 
periods when the mind of humanity had not yet entirely lost 
the memory of its own origins. This introduces us to the next 
chapter, where we shall say something of the meaning and of 
the function of the doctrine of Prince Siddhattha in the general 
setting of the ancient Indo-Aryan world.

Ill

THE HISTORICAL PLACE OF THE DOCTRINE 
OF AWAKENINGIll

THE HISTORICAL PLACE OF THE DOCTRINE 
OF AWAKENING

F irst, a word about method. From the '' traditional ” 
point of view that we follow in this work, the great historical 
traditions are to be considered neither as “ original ” nor as 
arbitrary. In every tradition worthy of the name, elements 
are always present, in one form or another, of a “ knowledge ” 
which, being rooted in a super-individual reality, is objective. 
Furthermore, each tradition contains its own special mode of 
interpretation and which cannot be considered as arbitrary or 
as proceeding from extrinsic or purely human factors. This 
particular element tends to vary with the prevailing historical 
and spiritual climate ; and we can find in it the reason for the 
existence of certain formulations, adaptations or limitations of 
the one knowledge — and the non-existence of others. No one 
individual, suddenly, and as if inspired haphazardly by some 
outside agency, ever proclaimed the theory of the aima, for 
example, or invented nirvana or the Islamic theories. On the 
contrary, all traditions or doctrines obey, even without seeming 
to do so, a profound logic — discoverable by means of an adequate 
metaphysical interpretation of history. Accordingly, this shall 
be our standpoint when we deal with these aspects of Buddhism : 
this is also why we consider that critic to be -fundamentally 
mistaken who tries at all costs to pin the label “ original ” on 
Buddhism or, indeed, on any great tradition, and who argues 
that, " otherwise ” such a tradition would in no way differ from 
pthers. A difference there is, as there is also an element in 
common with what has gone before ; but both are determined 
— as we have said — ^by objective reasons, even though they may 
not always have been seen clearly by the individual exponents 
of particular historical trends.

26

THE HISTORICAL PLACE

2726

THE HISTORICAL PLACE

27

Having said this, we must go back to the pre.-Buddhist Indo- 
Aryan traditions in order to find the precise implications of the 
Buddhist doctrine, and in them we must distinguish between 
two fundamental phases ; the Vedic and the Brahmafta-XJpam- 
shad.

With regard to the Vedas, which fonstitute the essential 
foundation of the entire tradition in question, it would not be 
correct to talk either of " religion ” or of " philosophy To 
begin with, the term " Veda ” — ^from the root vid, which is 
equivalent to the Greek tS (whence we have, for example, olSa) 
and which means " I see ", " I have seen " — ^refers to a doctrine 
based not on faith or “ revelation ”, but on a higher knowledge 
attained through a process of seeing. The Vedas were " seen ” :

' they were seen by the rshi, by the “ seers ” of the earliest times. 
Throughout the tradition their essence has never been regarded 
as a " faith " but rather as a " sacred science

Thus it is frivolous to see in the Vedas, as many people do, 
the expression of a “ purely naturalistic religion As in other 
great systems, impurities may be present, particularly where 
foreign matter has crept in, and very noticeably, for example, 
in the Atharva-V eda. But what the essential and most ancient 
part of the Vedas reflects is a cosmic stage of the Indo-Aryan 
spirit. It is not a question of theories or of theologies, but of 
hymns containing a magnificent reflection of a consciousness that 
is still so harnessed to the cosmos and to metaphysical reality, 
that the various " gods " of the Vedas are more than religious 
images ; they are projections of the experience of significances 
and forces directly perceived in man, in nature or beyond, through 
a cosmic, heroic and " sacrificial ’’ concept, freely and almost 
" triumphantly ”?■Although they were written considerably later, the fundamental 
thought contained in such epic poems as the Mahabhdrata goes 
back to the same epoch. Men, heroes and divine figures appear 
side by side ; and, as Kerenjd said, when referring to the 
Olympian-Homeric phase of the Aryo-Hellenic tradition, men 
could “ see the gods and be seen by them ”, and could ” stand

» To some extent we can tae refet to what K. Kerfoyi has written on the 
sense of festivity ** {La religione a%iica nelle sue lines fondatnentali, Bologna, 
1940, c. II).

28 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING28 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

with them in the original state of existence The Olympian 
element is reflected also in a typical group of Vedic divinities : 
in Dyaus (from div, to shine — a root that is also found in Zeus 
and Dem) for example, lord of the heavenly light, the origin 
of splendour, strength and knowledge ; in Varuna, also a S5mbol 
of celestial and regal power, and connected with the idea of fta, 
that is to say, of the cosmos, of a cosmic order, of a natural and 
supernatural law ; whilst in Mitra there is, in addition, the idea 
of a god of the specifically Aryan virtues, truth and fidelity. 
We also have Surya, the flaming sun from whom, as firom the 
Olympian vovs, nothing is hidden, who destroys every infirmity 
and who, in the form of Savitar, is the light that is exalted in the 
first daily rite of all the Aryan castes as the principle of awakening 
and intellectual animation ; or there is Ushas, the dawn, eternally 
young, who opens the way for the sun, who gives life and who 
is the “ token of immortality In Indra we find the incarnation 
of the heroic and metaphysical impulse of the first Hyperborean 
conquerors : Indra is " he, without whom men cannot win ”, 
he is the ” son of force ”, the lightning-god of war, of valour and 
of victory, the annihilator of the enemies of the Aryans, of the 
black Dasyu and, consequently, of all the tortuous and titanic 
forces which “ attempt to chmb the heavens ” ; whilst at the 
same time he appears as the consolidator, as “he who has 
consolidated the world ”. The same spirit is reflected, in var3dng 
degrees, in minor Vedic divinities, even in those tied to the most 
conditioned forms of existence.In the Vedas we find that this cosmic experience is evoked 
through the agency of sacrificial action. The sacrificial rite 
extends human experience into non-human, provokes " and 
establishes communion between two worlds, in such a manner 
that the sacrificer, a figure as austere and majestic as the Roman 
flamen dialis, assumes the traits of a god on earth — hhu-deva, 
hhu-sura. As for life after death, the Vedic solution is fuUy 
consonant with the oldest Aryo-HeUenic spirit : images of obscure 
hells are almost entirely absent firom the most ancient parts of 
the Vedas : the crisis of death is hardly noticed as such — ^in the 
Aiharva-Veda it is even considered as the effect of a hostile and 
demoniacal force which, vdth suitable rites, can be repulsed.

* Cf, Ker^nyi, op. cit., cc. IV and V.

THE HISTORICAL PLACE 2g

The dead pass into an existence of' splendour which is also a 
" return ”, and in which they once again take up their forpi ■- 
" Having laid aside aU defects, return home : full of splendour 
unite thyself to [thy] form — and again : ” We drank the soma 
[symbol of a sacred enthusiasm], we became immortal, we reached 
the Hght.”^ The symbolic Vedic rite of " wiping out the tracks ”, 
so that the dead will not return among the living, weU shows 
how the idea of reincarnation was almost totally absent in this 
period ; such a possibility was ignored in the light of the high 
degree of heroical, sacrificial and metaphysical tension belonging 
to that epoch. There is no trace in the Vedas of the later 
significance of Yama as god of death and hell ; rather, he retains 
the outlines of his Irano-Aryan equivalent, Yima, sun-king of 
the primordial age : son of the " Sun Yama is the first of 
the mortals and he " who first found the road [to the hereafter]”®: 
thus, broadly speaking, the Vedic “ hereafter ” is bound up in 
great measure with the idea of a re-integration of the primordial 
state.About the tenth century B.C. new developments began: they 
found expression in the Brahmana texts on the one hand, and 
on the other in the Vfanishad texts. Both go back to the 
tradition of the Vedas : yet there is a noteworthy change of 
perspective. We are slowly approaching " philosophy ” and 
“ theology ”.

The speculation of the Brahmana texts rests chiefly on that 
part of the Vedas which refers to ritual and sacrificial action. 
Ritual, in all the traditional civilizations, was conceived neither 
as an empty ceremony nor as a sentimental and, at the same 
time, formal act of praising and supphcating a God, but rather 
as an operation with real effects, as a process capable not only 
of establishing contacts with the transcendental world, but of 
imposing itself upon super-sensible forces and, through their 
mediation, eventually influencing even the natural forces. As 
such, ritual presupposes not only knowledge of certain laws, 
but also, and more essentially, the existence of a power. The 
term brahman (in the neuter, not to be confused with Brahma

® Rg-Veda, X, xiv, 8.

* Rg-^Veda, VIII, xlviii, 3.

® Rg-Veda, X, xiv, 2.

3© ITHE jbOCTRiJSTE 61? THt: AwAlCElNlKG

in the masculine, which designates the theistically conceived 
divinity) origitially signified this particular energy, this kind of 
magic power, this fluid or Hfe force, upon which the ritual rests.in the masculine, which designates the theistically conceived 
divinity) origitially signified this particular energy, this kind of 
magic power, this fluid or Hfe force, upon which the ritual rests.

In the Brahmana texts this ritual aspect of the Vedic tradition 
was enlarged and formalised. Ritual became the centre of 
everything and the object of a. fastidious science which often 
became a formalism destitute of any vital content. Oldenberg, 
referring to the period of Prince Siddhattha, talks, in this connec- 
tion, of “ an idiotic science which knows everything and explains 
everything, and sits enthroned, satisfied, amongst its extravagant 
creations This judgment is excessive, but it is not entirely 
unjustified. In the Buddha’s time there existed a caste of 
theologi pMlosophantes who administered the remnants of the 
ancient tradition, trjdng with all the means in their power to 
establish a prestige which did not always correspond to their 
human qualifications or to their race — ^if not their physical race, 
which was well cared for by the caste system, at least their 
spiritual race. We have used the word " theologists ” since the 
concept of hrahman in these circles gradually became generalised 
and, in a manner of speaking, substantiahsed, to such an extent 
that the hrahman finally no longer signified the mysterious force 
which, fundamentally, only made sense in terms of ritual and 
magic experience ; it came to mean the soul of the world, the 
supreme force-substance of the universe, the substratum, in- 
determinate in itself, of every being and of every phenomenon. 
It thus became an almost theological conc^t.The XJpanishad, on the other hand, concentrated mainly on 
the doctrine of the atma, which largely reflected the original 
cosmic and solar sentiment of the earliest Aryan consciousness, 
in so far as it stressed the reality of the " I " as the super- 
individual, unchanging and immortal principle of the personality, 
as opposed to the multiple variety of the phenomena and forces 
of nature. The atma, is defined by nMi neti (" not so, not so ”), 
that is to say, by the idea that it does not belong to nature or, 
more generally, to the conditioned world.

In India the speculative current of the Brahma-^ and that 
of the Upanishad gradually converged ; this convergence resulted 
in the identification of the hrahman with the atma : the “I ”,

^ 01di«nbea?g, Buddha^ eit., p. 2X.

f

TH£ HlsToRiCAt iPtACfi

in its super-individual aspect, and the force-substance of the 
cosmos became one and the same thing. This v?as a turning point 
of the greatest importance in the spiritual history of the Indo- 
Aryan civilisation. The doctrine of the identity of the atma with 
th&-brahman did, in fact, constitute a metaphysical achievement 
but, at the same time, it initiated a process of breaking up and 
of spiritual dissolution. This process was bound to take 
place a.0 shadows began to cloud the luminosity of the original 
heroic and cosmic experience of Vedic man and as foreign influences 
gained ground.Originally the doctrine of the Upanishai was considered as 
" secret ”, as a knowledge to be txansmitted only to the few 
— the term “UpanisJmi ” itself conveyed this idea. But in point 
of fact the philosophical and speculative tendencies became 
uppennost. This resulted in divergencies of opinion even in the 
oldest Upanishad — the Chmdogya — and the Brhaddranyaka- 
Upanishad — as to the plane of consciousness to be used as reference 
point for the doctrine. Is the dtmd object of i mm ediate experi- 
ence or is it not ? It is both one and the other at the same time. 
Its substantial identity with the ” I ” of the individual is affirmed 
but, at the same time, we often see the unity of the individual 
vrith the dfmd-hrahman postponed till after death ; and not only 
this, but conditions are postulated under which it vrill happen, 
and the case is considered in which the “I” or, rather, the 
elements of the person may not leave the cycle of finite and 
mortal existences. In the ancient Upanishad, in fact, no precise 
solution is ever reached of the problem of the actual relationship 
existing between the individual ” I ” of which everyone can talk, 
and the atmd-brahman. We do not consider that this was 
accidental : it was a circumstance which corresponded to an 
already uncertain state of consciousness, to the fact that, whilst 
for the adepts of the " secret doctrine ” the '' I ” could be equated 
effectively with the dtmd, for the general consciousness the dtmd 
was becoming a simple speculative concept, an almost theological 
assumption, since the original spiritual level was beginning to be lost.

Furthermore, the danger of pantheistic confusions showed 
itself. This danger did not exist in theory since, in the Upanishad, 
following the Vedic concept, the supreme principle was not only 
conceived as the substance of the world and of all beings, but

THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING '

3 ^THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING '

3 ^

also as that which transcends them ‘‘ by three quarters ”, existing 
as " the immortal in the heavens In the same Upanishad, 
however, prominence is also given to the identity of the dtmd- 
hrahnan with elements of all kinds in the naturalistic world, so 
that the practical possibility of a pantheistic deviation encouraged 
by the assimilation of the dtmd with the brahman was real : 
particularly so, if we take into account the process of man’s 
gradual regression, of which we can find evidence in the teaching 
of all traditions, including the Indo-Aryan, where the theory, of 
the four yuga corresponds exactly to the classical theory of the 
four ages and of man’s descent to the last of them, the Iron Age, 
equivalent to the " Dark Age ” — kaU-yuga — of the Indo-Aryans. 
If, during the period of these speculations, the original cosmic 
and uranic consciousness of the Vedic origins had already suffered 
in this way a certain overclouding, then the formulation of the 
theory of the identity of the dtmd with the brahman provided 
a dangerous incentive towards evasion, towards a confused self- 
identification with the spirituality of everything, at the very 
moment when a particularly energetic reaction by way of a tendency 
towards concentration, detachment and awakening was needed.Altogether, the germs of decadence, which were already showing 
themselves in the post-Vedic period and which were to become 
quite evident in the Buddha’s day (sixth century B.C.), are as 
follows : above aU, a stereotyped ritualism ; then the demon of 
speculation, whose effect was that what ought to have remained 
" secret doctrine ”, upanishad, rahasya, became partly rational- 
ised, with the result that there eventually appeared a tumultuous 
crowd of divergent theories, sects and schools, which the Buddhist 
texts often vividly describe.® In the third place, we find a 
” religious ” transformation of many divinities who, in the Vedic 
period were, as we have said, simply cosmicaUy transfigured states 
of consciousness ; these have now become objects of popular 
cults.® We have already spoken of the pantheistic danger. In

’ Rg-Veda, X, xc, 3 ; Chdndogya-Upanishad, ITI, xii, 6.

® Cf . Digha, I, i, 29 seq ; SuUanipdta^ ■ IV, xii, xiii.

® It is essentially of tliese gods that we must think when we see them assume, 
in Buddhist texts, quite modest and subordinate parts, transforming themselves 
sometimes almost into quasi-disciples who receive revelation of the doctrine 
from the Buddha. We are dealing, that is, with the degradation of the ancient 
gods : and the doctrine revealed by the Awakened One ” corresponds, 
basically, with what they once signified, but which at this period, had been 
forgotten.

THE HISTORICAL PLACE 33

addition to these points we have yet to consider the effect of 
foreign, non-Aryan, influences, to which we believe are attribut- 
able in no small degree the formation and diffusion of the theory 
of reincarnation.As we have said, there is no trace of this theory in the early 
Vedic period ; this is because it is quite incompatible with an 
Olympian and heroic vision of the world, being as it is a “ truth ” 
of non-Aryan races which are tellurically and matriarchally 
adjusted in outlook. Reincarnation, in fact, is conceivable only 
by one who feels himself to be a “ son of the earth ", whp has 
110 knowledge of a reality transcending the naturalistic order ; 
bound as he is to a female-matemal divinity foimd alike in the 
pre-Aryan Mediterranean world, and in the pre-Aryan Hindu 
civilisation, such as the Dravidian and Kosalian. Into the source 
from which as an ephemeral being he has sprimg, the individual, 
when he dies, must return, only to reappear in fresh terrestrial 
births, in an inescapable and interminable cycle. This is the 
ultimate sense of the theory of reincarnation, a theory which 
begins to infiltrate as early as the period of Upanishad specula- 
tions ; it gives place gradually to mixed forms which we can use 
as a measure of the change in the original Aryan consciousness 
to which we have referred.

Whilst in the Vedas only a single fate after death is considered, 
as in ancient Hellas, in the Brdhmana texts the theory of the 
double way already appears : " [Only] he who knows andWhilst in the Vedas only a single fate after death is considered, 
as in ancient Hellas, in the Brdhmana texts the theory of the 
double way already appears : " [Only] he who knows and

practises ritual action rises again in life and obtains immortal 
life ; the others who neither know nor practise ritual action will 
contmue to be bom anew, as nourishment for death. In the 
upanishad, however, as the relationship between the real “ I ” 
and the dtmd oscillates, so does their teaching of what happens 
after death. They speak of the " dyke, beyond which even night 
becomes day, since the world of the brahman is unchangeable 
light ” ; a dyke constituted by the dtmd against which neither 
decay, nor death, nor pain, nor good action, nor bad action can 
prevail.ii They speak of the " way of the gods " — deva-ydna — 
which leads one after death to the unconditioned whence “ there 
is no return ”. But at the same time another road is considered,

Qatapatha-Bydhmana, X, iv, 3, lo.

Chdndogya-Upanishad, VIII, iv, 1-2.

34 ThIE DOCTRIiSIl; OR AWAKENINGQatapatha-Bydhmana, X, iv, 3, lo.

Chdndogya-Upanishad, VIII, iv, 1-2.

34 ThIE DOCTRIiSIl; OR AWAKENING

the fUr-yana, along which “ one returns ”, the individual after 
death being little by little “ sacrificed ” to various divinities for 
whom, he becomes ” food ", finally to reappear on the earth.” 
In the oldest texts the possibility of a liberation is not considered 
for those who go on this second road ; they speak instead of the 
" causal law ”, of the karma,; which determines a man’s subsequent 
existence on the basis of what he has done in the preceding one. 
We have now arrived at what we shall call the saihsaric conscious- 
ness (from samsdra), which is the keystone of the Buddhist vision 
of life ; the secret knowledge, confided privately by the wise 
Yajnavalkya to the king Artabhaga, is that after death the 
inchvidual elements of man dissolve in the corresponding cosmic 
elements, including the dtmd, which returns to the '' ether ”, and 
that which is left is only the karma, that is, the action, the 
impersonal force, bound to the life of one being, that will go on 
to determine a new being.^®In all this can be seen, then, more than just the effect of “ free ” 
metaphysical speculation : it is, rather, a sign of a conscious- 
ness that begins to consider itself terrestrial or, at the most, 
pantheisticaUy cosmic, and that now centres itself on that 
part of the human being which may reaUy be concerned 
with death and rebirth and indefinite wandering across various 
forms of conditioned existence ; we say ” various ” since the 
horizons gradually widened and it was even thought that one 
might re-arise in this or that world of gods, according to one’s 
actions. In any case, in the epoch in which Buddhism appeared 
the theories of reincarnation and of transmigration were already 
an integral part of the ideas acquired by the predominant mental- 
ity. Sometimes, and even in the Upanishad, different outlSoks 
became indiscriminately combined so that on the one side was 
conceived an dtmd which, although divorced from any concrete 
experience, was supposed to be permanently and intangibly 
present in everyone, and on the other side there was the intermin- 
able wandering of man in various lives.

It is on these lines that practical and realistic currents gradually 
established themselves in opposition to the speculative currents. 
We can include Sdmkhya which opposed to the pantheistic danger

Chdndogya-Upanishad, ^\-7L\BYhaddvanyaha-V'pa%ish,adt VI, ii, 9-16.

Byhaddyanyaka-Upanishad, III,’ ii, 13.

THE HISTORICAL PLACE 35Chdndogya-Upanishad, ^\-7L\BYhaddvanyaha-V'pa%ish,adt VI, ii, 9-16.

Byhaddyanyaka-Upanishad, III,’ ii, 13.

THE HISTORICAL PLACE 35

a rigid dualism, in which the reality of the " I ” or atma — called 
here furushcu — as the supernatural, intangible and unalterable 
principle is opposed to all the forms, forces and phenomena of a 
natural and material order. But more important in this respect 
are the trends of Yoga. Based both on Samkhya and on ascetic 
tendencies already coming to the fore in opposition to ritualistic 
and speculative Brahmanism, these recognised more or less 
explicitly the new state of affairs, which was that in speaking 
of “ I ” one could no longer concretely understand the dtmd, 
the unconditioned principle ; that it appeared no longer as direct 
consciousness ; and that therefore, apart from speculation, it 
could only be considered as an end, as the limit of a process of 
re-integration with action as its basis. As the immediate real 
datum there was substituted instead what we call “ sainsaric ” 
consciousness and existence, consciousness bound to the “ current ” 
— and the term samsdra (which thus only makes a relatively late 
appearance) means precisely " current " — ^it is the cmrent of 
becoming.It is not out of place to consider another point. The brdhmana 
caste is habitually thought of in the West as a “ sacerdotal ” 
caste. This is true only up to a certain point. In the Vedic 
arigins the type of Brahman or “ sacrificer ” bears little resembl- 
once to that of the “ priest ” as our contemporaries thiiik of him : 
he was, rather, a figure both virile and awful and, as we have 
said, a kind of visible incarnation in the human world of the 
super-human — hhu-deva. Furthermore, we often find in the early 
texts a point where the distinction between the brahman — ^the . 
“ sacerdotal ” caste — ^and the kshatram or rdjam — the warrior or 
regal caste — did not exist ; a feature that we see in the earliest 
stages of all traditional civilisations, including the Greek, Roman 
and German. The two tj^pes only began to differ in a later period, 
this being another aspect of the process of regression that we have 
mentioned. Besides, there are many who maintain that in Aryan 
India the doctrine of the dimd was originally confined almost ex- 
clusively to the warrior caste, and that the doctrine of brahman 
as an undifierentiated cosmic force was formulated mainly by the 
sacerdotal caste. There is probably some truth in this view. 
In any case, it is a fact that in many texts we see a king or a 
kshatriya (a member of the warrior nobility) vieing in knowledge

36 THE DOCTRIN.E OF AWAKENING36 THE DOCTRIN.E OF AWAKENING

with and sometimes even instructing members of the Brahman 
caste ; and that, according to tradition, primordial knowledge 
was handed down, starting from Ik5vaku, in regal succession 
the same " solar dynasty ” — surya-vamsa — ^which we mentioned 
in connection with the Buddha’s family, also figures here. We 
should have the foUowing picture : in the Indo-Aryan post-Vedic 
world, whilst the warrior caste held a more realistic and virile view 
and put emphasis on the doctrine of the aima as the unchangeable 
and immortal principle of human personality, the Brahman caste 
was becoming, little by little, "sacerdotal” and, instead of facing 
the reality, was moving amongst ritual and stereotyped exegeses 
and speculations. Simultaneously, in another way, the character 
of the first Vedic period was becoming overgrown with a tropical 
and chaotic vegetation of myths and popular religious images, 
even of semi-devotional practices seeking the attainment of this, 
that or the other divine " rebirth ” on the basis of views on 
reincarnation and transmigration which, as we have said, had 
already infiltrated into the less iUuminated Indo-Aryan mentali- 
ties. Leaving Yoga apart, it is worth noting that it was the 
warrior nobility — the Kshatram — ^which furnished the principal 
support not only of the Saihkhya system, which is regarded as 
r€;presenting a clear reaction against speculative " idealism ”, but 
also of Jainism, the so-called “ doctrine of the conquerors ” 
(from jina, conqueror) which laid emphasis, though with a 
tendency to extremism, on necessity for ascetic action.

All this is necessary for our understanding of the historical place 
of Buddhism, and of the reasons for its most characteristic views.All this is necessary for our understanding of the historical place 
of Buddhism, and of the reasons for its most characteristic views.

From the point of view of universal history. Buddhism' arose 
in a period marked by a crisis running through a whole series 
of traditional civilisations. This crisis sometimes resolved itself 
positively thanks to opportune reforms and revisions, and some- 
times negatively with the effect of inducing further phases of 
regression or spiritual decadence. This period, called by some 
the " climacteric ” of civilisation, falls approximately between 
the eighth and the fifth centuries B.C. It is in this period that 
the doctrines of Lao-tze and Kung Fu-tzu (Confucius) were taking 
root in China, representing a renewal of elements of the most 
ancient tradition on the metaphysical plane on the one hand, 
Cf. Bhagavad-gita, XV, 1-2.

THE HISTORICAL PLACE

37

and on the ethical-social on the other. In the same period it 
is said that “ Zarathnstra ” appeared, through whom a similar 
return took place in the Persian tradition. And in India the 
same function was performed by Buddhism, also representing 
a reaction and, at the same time, a re-elevation. On the other 
hand, as we have often pointed out elsewhere, it seems that in 
the West processes of decadence mainly prevailed. The period 
of which we are now talking is, in fact, that in which the ancient 
aristocratic and hieratic Hellas declined ; in which the religion 
of Isis along with other popular and spurious forms of mysticism 
superseded the solar and regal Egyptian civilisation ; it is that in 
which Israelite prophetism started the most dangerous ferments 
of coemption and subversion in the Mediterranean world. The 
only positive counterpart in the West seems in fact to have been 
Rome, which was bom in that period, and which for a certain 
cycle was a creation of universal importance, animated, in high 
measure by an Olympian and heroic spirit.^®Coming to Buddhism, it was not conceived, as many who 
unilaterally take the Brahman point of view like to claim, as 
an anti-traditional revolution, similar, in its own way, to what 
the Lutheran heresy was to Catholicism;^® and still less as a 
“ new ” doctrine, the result of an isolated speculation which 
succeeded in taking root. It represented, rather, a particular 
adaptation of the original Indo-Aryan tradition, an adaptation 
that kept in mind the prevailing conditions, and limited itself 
accordingly, whilst freshly and differently formulating pre- 
existent teachings : at the same time Buddhism closely adhered 
to the kshatriya (in Pali, khattiyd) spirit, the spirit of the warrior 
caste. We have already seen that, the Buddha was bom of the 
most ancient Aryan nobihty ; but this is not the end of the matter, 
as a text informs us of the particidar aversion nourished by his 
people for the Brahman caste : “ The SaUya ” (Skr. Qdkya ) —

On this significance of Rome as a “ rebirth. " of a primordial Aryan heritage 
cf. our Rivolta contro il mondo moderno, cit. second part.

This is the point of view held by R, Gudnon, Vhomme et son devenir selon 
le VHdnta, Paris, 1925, p. m seq,, with which we cannot — '' according to 
truth'' — agree (English tr. Man and His Becoming according to the Vedanta, 
Luzac, 1945)- More correct are the views of A. K. Coomaraswamy, Hinduism 
and Buddhism (New York, 1941), although in this book is apparent the tendency 
to emphasise only what in Buddhism is valuable from the hrdhmana standpoint, 
with disregard of the specific functional meaning he possesses as compared to 
tiindu tradition.

38 THE DOCTRINE OP AWAKENING38 THE DOCTRINE OP AWAKENING

we read^^ — "do not esteem the priests, they do not respect the 
priests, they do not honour the priests, they do not venerate 
the priests, they do not hold the priests of account.” The same 
tendency is maintained by Prince Siddhattha, but with the aim 
of restoring, of reaffirming, the pure will for the unconditioned, 
to which in the most recent times the "regal” line had often 
been more faithful than the priestly caste which was already'' 
divided within itself.There are, besides, many signs that the Buddhist doctrine 
laid no claim to originality but regarded itself as being, in a 
way, universal and having a traditional character in a superior 
sense. The Buddha himself says, for example :> “ Thus it is : 
those who, in times past, were saints, Perfect Awakened 
Ones, these sublime men also have rightly directed their 
disciples to such an end, as now disciples are rightly directed 
here by nae ; and those who in future times wUl be saints, Perfect 
Awakened Ones, also these sublime men will rightly direct their 
disciples, as now disciples are rightly directed here by me.”’'® 
The same is repeated in regard to purification of thought, word 
and action it is repeated about right knowledge of decay and 
death, of their origin, of their cessation and of the way which 
leads to their cessation ; and it is repeated about the doctrine 
of the "void” or “emptiness”, sunnatd.^'^ The doctrine and 
the “ divine life ” proclaimed by Prince Siddhattha are repeatedly 
called “ timeless ” — akdliko.^ "Ancient saints, Perfect Awakened 
Ones ” axe spoken of,®® and a traditional theme occurs in connex- 
ion with a place (here called " the Gorge of the Seer ”) where a 
whole series of Paccekabuddhas are supposed to have vanished 
in the past, a series, that is, of beings who, by their own unaided 
and isolated efforts, have reached the superhuman state and the 
same perfect awakening as did Prince Siddhattha himself.*® 
Those who are " without faith, without devotion, without 
tradition ”** are reproached. A repeated saying is : " What for

1 '' Blgha, III, i, 12.

Majih., LI.

Majjh., LXI.

Samyutt., XII, 33.

" Majih., VII.

« Majjh., LXXV ; of. LXXXI.

» Majjh., CXVI. Cf. CXXIII.

« Majjh., CII.

THE HISTORICAL PLACE 391 '' Blgha, III, i, 12.

Majih., LI.

Majjh., LXI.

Samyutt., XII, 33.

" Majih., VII.

« Majjh., LXXV ; of. LXXXI.

» Majjh., CXVI. Cf. CXXIII.

« Majjh., CII.

THE HISTORICAL PLACE 39

the world of the sages is not, of that I say : 'It is not’, and 
what for the world of sages is, of that I say: ‘It is’”.*‘ An 
interesting p'oint is the mention in a text of " extinction ”, the 
aiin of the Buddhist ascesis, as something which ” leads back 
to the oigins This is supported by the symbohsm of a 
great forest where “ an ancient path, a path of men of olden 
times ” is discovered. Following it, the Buddha finds a royal 
city ; and he asks that it should be restored.®’ In another text 
the signification of this is explained by the Buddha in a most 
explicit way : “I have seen the ancient path, the path trodden 
by all the Perfected Awakened Ones of olden times. This is 
the path I followIt is quite clear, then, that in Buddhism we are not dealing 
with a negation of the principle of spiritual authority but rather 
with a revolt against a caste which claimed to monopolise this 
authority whilst its representatives no longer preserved its dignity 
and had lost their qualifications. The Brahmans, against whom 
Prince Siddhattha turns, are those who say they know, but who 
know nothing,®® who for many generations have lost the faculty 
of direct vision, without which they cannot even say : “ Only 
this is truth, foolishness is the rest,”®* and who now resemble 
” a file of blind men, in which the first cannot see, the one in 
the middle cannot see and the last cannot see ”.®® Very different 
from the men of the original period — ^from the brahmai^a who 
remembered the ancient rule, who guarded the door of the senses, 
who had entirely controlled their impulses and who were ascetics, 
rich only in knowledge, inviolable and invincible,' made strong 
by truth {dhamm(i)~-~vrtxt their worldly successors, who were 
wraf)ped up in ritualism or intent on vain fasting and who had 
abandoned the ancient laws.»i Of these " there is not one who 
>» Sarhyutt, XXII, 94.

** Mahaparinirv, 52-53 (this is from the Chinese version of the text, however^

Samyutt., XII, 65.

SamyuU,, III, 106. It is interesting that according to the myth, Buddha 
attamed the awakening under the Tree of Life placed in the navel of the earth 
where also ail the previous . Buddhas reached transcendent knowledge. This 
as reference to the ^ Centre of the World which is to be considered in its ' 
way, as a chrism of traditionality and initiatic of orthodoxy whenever a con- 
tact with the origins was restored.

« Majjh,, XCIir.

« Majjh,, XCV.

Dlgha, XIII, 15; Majjh,, XVC; XCJX,

^utianipaia^ II, vii, 1-16,

P

40 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING« Majjh,, XCIir.

« Majjh,, XCV.

Dlgha, XIII, 15; Majjh,, XVC; XCJX,

^utianipaia^ II, vii, 1-16,

P

40 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

has seen Brahma face to face ”, whence it is impossible that 
” these Irahmana, versed in the science of the threefold Vedas, 
are capable of indicating the way to a state of companionship 
with that which they neither know nor have seen The 
Buddha is opposed to one who knows ” only by hearsay ”, to one 
who knows “ the truth only by repetition, and who, with this 
traditionally heard truth, as a coffer handed down from hand to 
hand, transmits the doctrine ”, the integrity of which, however, 
it is impossible to guarantee in such circumstances.®® A distinc- 
tion is therefore made between the ascetics and Brahmans who 
” only by their own creed profess to have reached the highest 
perfection of knowledge of the world : such are the reasoners 
and the disputers ”, and other ascetics and Brahmans who, “ in 
things never before heard, recognise clearly in themselves the 
truth, and profess to have reached the highest perfection of 
knowledge of the world ”,

It is to these latter that Prince Siddhattha claims to belong, 
and this is the type that he indicates to his disciples ;®* “ only 
when he knows does he say that he knows, only when he has seen 
does he say that he has seen.”®® Regarded from this standpoint 
Buddhism does* not deny the concept of hrahmana ; on the 
contrary the texts use the word frequently and call the ascetic 
hie brahmacariya, their intention being simply to indicate the 
fundamental qualities in virtue of which the dignity of the true 
hrdhmcii^a can be confirmed.®®Here, with the aim being essentially one of re-integration, the 
quahties of the true brdhmai^ and of the ascetic become identified. 
These notions had previously been distinct, particularly when 
the Asrama teaching of the -Aryan code, according to whidi a 
man of Brahman caste was obliged to graduate to a completely 
detached life, vdnaprashta or yati, had, practically and with 
but few exceptions, disappeared. By understanding this point we 
can also understand the Buddha’s true attitude to the problem of 
caste. Even in the preceding tradition ascetic achievement had 
« Dlgha, XIII, 12, 15.

Majjh., LXXVI. In this sense the tradition is asserted to be one of the 
things which may, in life, produce conflicting results [ibid,, Cl).

Majjh.t C.

Majjh., LXXVII. -

Ma/jh., XLVIII ; Dhammapada, 383 seq. ; Suttanipdta, III, iv, passim ; 
ix, 27, passim ; I, vii.

THE HISTORICAL PLACE 41Majjh.t C.

Majjh., LXXVII. -

Ma/jh., XLVIII ; Dhammapada, 383 seq. ; Suttanipdta, III, iv, passim ; 
ix, 27, passim ; I, vii.

THE HISTORICAL PLACE 41

been considered as above all caste and free from obligations to any 
of them. This is the Buddha’s point of view, expressed in a simile: 
as one who desires fire does not ask the type of wood which in fact 
produces it, so from any caste may arise an ascetic or an 
" Awakened One The castes appeared to Prince Siddhattha, 
as they did to every traditional xnind, as perfectly natural and 
furthermore, justified transcendentally, since in following the 
doctrine of the Upanishad he understood that birth in one caste 
or another and inequality in general were not accidental but the 
effect of a particular preceding action. Thus he was never 
concerned with upsetting the caste system on the ethnic, political 
or social plane ; on the contrary, it is laid down that a man 
should not omit any of the obligations inherent in his station 
in life,®* and it is never said that a servant — Sudda (Skr. Qiidra) 
— or a Vessa (Skr. Vaigya) should not obey higher Aryan castes. 
The problem only concerns the spiritual apex of the Aryan 
hierarchy, where historical conditions required discrimination 
and revision of the matter : it was necessary that the " lists ” 
should be reviewed and reconstructed, with the traditional 
dignities being considered real only on " the merits of the individ- 
ual cases ”.«* The decisive point was the identification of the 
true Brahman with the ascetic and, thence, the emphasis placed 
on what, in fact, is evidenced by action. Thus the principle 
was proclaimed : “ Not by caste is one a pariah, not by caste 
is one a hrdhmana ; by actions is one a pariah, by actions is one 
a brdhmana.”^^ In respect of the " flame that is sustained by 
virtue, and lighted by training”, as in respect of liberation, the 
four castes are equal." And again : as it is not to be expected 
that*the further bank of a river will come to the nearer side 
in answer to a m3.n s invocations, prayers and praises, so it is not 
to be expected that the hrdhmana who, although they are instructed 
in the triple Veda yet “ omit the practice of those qualities 
which make a man a true hrdhmana can, by calling upon Indra, ' 
Soma, Varuna and other gods, acquire those qualities which 
really make a man a Txon-hrdhmapa ” If they have not 
" Majjh., XCIII ; XC. ' .’• Mahdparinirv., 6-ir.

” Majjh., LXXXIV.

SuUanipaia, I.vii, 3i,

« Majjh., XC.

Dlgha, XIII, 24-25.

42 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

destroyed desire for the five stems of sense-experience, they 
can as little expect to unite themselves after death with Brahma 
as a man, swimming, can expect to reach the other bank with 
his arms tied to his body.*® To unite himself with Brahma a 
man must develop in himself qualities similar to Brahma.** This, 
however, in no way prevents the consideration in the texts of the 
ideal hrdhmana, in whom the purity of the Aryan lineage is joined 
with qualities which make him like a god or a divine being ;** 
and the texts even go so far as to reprove the contemporary 
Brahmans not only for their desertion of ancient customs and 
for their interest in gold and riches, but also for their betrayal 
of the laws of marriage within the caste, for they are accused of 
frequenting non-Brahman women at all times from mere desire 
" like dogs ".*« The general principle of any right hierarchy is 
confirmed with these words : “In serving a man, if for this service 
one becomes worse, not better, this man, I say, one ought not 
to serve. In serying a man, on the other hand, if for this service 
one becomes better, not worse, this man, I say, one ought to 
serve.”*’This shows that there is no question here of equalitarian sub- 
version imder spiritual pretexts, but of rectification and epuration 
of the existing hierarchy. Prince Siddhattha has so little sym- 
pathy for* the masses that in one of the oldest texts he speaks 
of the " common crowd ” as a “ heap of rubbish ”, where there 
takes place the miraculous flowering of the Awakened One.*® 
Beyond the ancient division into castes. Buddhism affirms 
another which, deeper and more intimate, mutatis mutandis, is 
not unlike the one which originally existed between the Aryans, 
those " twice bom ” — dvijd — and other beings : on one "side 
stand the Ariya and the “ noble sons moved by confidence ”, 
to whom the Doctrine of Awakening is accessible ; on the other, 
" the common men, without understanding for what is saintly, 
remote from the saintly doctrine, not accessible to the saintly 
doctrine ; without understanding for what is noble, remote from 
the doctrine of the noble ones, not accessible by the doctrine

*» Digha, XIII, 36 , 28 ; Suttanipata, 11 , ii, 11 .

« Dlgha, XIII, 33-38.

Angutt, V, 192.

Angutt,, V, X91 (vol. Ill, p, 221 1 ).

Majjh,, XCVI.

♦ • Vh^mmapada, ^8-^9,

THE HISTORICAL PLACE

43*» Digha, XIII, 36 , 28 ; Suttanipata, 11 , ii, 11 .

« Dlgha, XIII, 33-38.

Angutt, V, 192.

Angutt,, V, X91 (vol. Ill, p, 221 1 ).

Majjh,, XCVI.

♦ • Vh^mmapada, ^8-^9,

THE HISTORICAL PLACE

43

of the noble ones If, on the one hand, as rivers “ when 
they reach the ocean lose their former names and are reckoned 
only as ocean, so the members of the four castes, when they 
take up the law of the Buddha, lose their former characteristics " 
— ^yet on the other they form a well-defined company, the “ sons 
of the Sakiya’s son ”.®“ We can see that the effective aim of 
Buddhism was to discriminate between different natures, for which 
the touchstone was the Doctrine of Awakening itself: a discrimina- 
tion that could not do other than stimulate the spiritual bases 
which originally had themselves been the sole justification of the 
Aryan hierarchy. In confirmation of this is the fact that the 
establishment and diffusion of Buddhism never in later centuries 
caused dissolution of thfe caste sj^tem — even to-day in Ceylon 
this system continues undisturbed side by side with Buddhism ; 
while, in Japan, Buddhism lives in harmony with hierarchical, 
traditional, national and warrior concepts. Only in certain 
Western misconceptions is Buddhism — considered in later and 
corrupted forms — ^presented as a doctrine of universal compassion 
encouraging humanitarianism and democratic equality.The only point we must take with a grain of salt in the texts 
is the affirmation that in individuals of all castes all possible 
potentialities, both positive and negative, exist in equal measure. 
But the Buddhist theory of sankhara, that is, of prenatal pre- 
dispositions, is enough to rectify this point. The exclusiveness 
of caste, race and tradition in a hierarchical system results in 
the individual possessing hereditary predispositions for his 
development in a particular direction ; this ensures an organic 
and harmonious character in his development, as opposed to the 
cases in which an attempt is made to reach the same point with 
a kind of violence, by starting froni a naturally imfavourable 
base. Four ways are considered in some Buddhist texts, in 
three of which either the road or the achievement of knowledge 
is difficult, or both are difficult ; the fourth way offers an easy 
road and easy attainment of knowledge ; this way is called the 
" path of the elect ”, and it is reserved for those who enjoy the 
advantages bestowed by a good birth. At least it would have 
Majjh.t I.

•0 Anguit,, VIII, 19, § 14; X, 96.

« Majjh., XCVI.

** Angutt.^ IV, 162.

44 the doctrine of awakening

been so had circumstances been normal. But, let us repeat, 
Buddhism appeared in abnormal conditions in a particular 
traditional civilisation : it is for this reason that Buddhism placed 
emphasis on the aspect of action and of individual achievement ; 
and it is also for this reason that the support offered by tradition, 
in its most restricted sense, was held of little account. Prince 
Siddhattha stated that he himself had attained knowledge through 
his own efforts, without a master to show him the way ; so, in 
.the original Doctrine of Awakening, each individual has to rely 
on himself, and on his own exertions, just as a soldier who is lost 
must rely on himself alone to rejoin the marching army.Thus Buddhism, if a comparison of various traditions were 
being made, could legitimately take its place with the race which, 
elsewhere, we have called heroic, in the, sense of the Hesiodic 
teaching on the "Four Ages”.®® We mean a type of man 
in which the spirituality belonging to the primordial state is no 
longer taken for granted as something natural, for this tradition 
is no longer itself an adequate foundation. Spirituality has 
become an aim to him, the object of a re-conquest, the final 
lunit of a re-integration to be carried out by one’s own virile 
efforts.

"'This ends our account of the historical place of Buddhism, 
an essential prerequisite for understanding the meaning of its 
principal teachings and the reasons for their existence.

Before going on to discuss the doctrine and the practice we 
must return to a point we have already mentioned, that is, that 
Buddhism belongs to a cycle which modem man can also 
comprehend.

Although in the epoch in which Prince Siddhattha lived Ihere 
was already a certain clouding over of spiritual consciousness 
and of metaphysical vision of the world such as was possessed 
by ancient Indo-Aryan man, the later ^ course of history — and 
particularly of Western history — ^has produced an increasing 
amount of regression, of materialism, of individualism together 
with a corresponding loss of direct contact with metaphysical 
and, gerierally speaking, super-sensible reality. With the “ mod- 
em ” world we have come to a point beyond which it would-be 
difi&cult to go. The object of direct knowledge for modem man

Cf, Rivolia conifo il mondo modemo, cit,, pp. 294 seq^

THE HISTORICAL PLACE 45

is exclusively the material world, with its counterpart, the purely 
psychological sphere of his subjectivity. His philosophical 
speculations and his religion stand apart, the first are purely 
cerebral creations, the second is based essentially on faith.It is not entirely a case of Western religion, as opposed to the 
highest traditions of the most ancient time, having centred itself 
on faith, thereby hoping to save what yet could be saved. It is, 
rather, a counsel of despair : a man who has long since lost 
aU direct contact with the metaph37sical world can only adopt 
one possible form of religio, of re-coimection, namely, that provi- 
ded by belief or faith. It is in this way that we can also come 
to understand the real significance of Protestantism as compared 
with Cathohcism. Protestantism took root in a period when 
Humanism and Naturalism were ushering in a phase of " secular- 
isation ” of European man ; a process which went much further 
than the normal regression of the epoch in which Christianity 
in general arose ; and at the same time decadence and corruption 
appeared among the representatives of the Catholic tradition, 
to whom had been entrusted a task of support and mediation. 
These being the real circnmstances and the rift having thus 
grown wider, the principle of the pure faith was emphasised 
and opposed to any hierarchical organisation and mediation; 
a distrust of “ works ” (even the Christian monastic ascetism 
was included in this) was nourished ; tendencies which are just 
the characteristic of Protestantism.The present crisis of Western religions based on " belief ” is 
known to aU, and we need not pomt out the completely secular, 
materialistic and samsaric character of the mentality predominant 
in bur contemporaries. We are entitled to ask ourselves, under 
these circumstances, what a system, based rigorously on know- 
ledge, free from elements of both faith and inteUectualism, not 
tied to local organised tradition, but in reality directed towards 
the unconditioned, may have to offer. It is evident that this 
path is only suited to a very small minority, gifted with excep- 
tional interior strength. Original Buddhism, in this respect, can 
be recommended as can few other doctrines, particularly because 
when it was formulated the condition of mankind, although still 
far from the straits of Western materialism and the subsequent 
eclipse of any living traditional knowledge, nevertheless mani-

46 THE DOCTRINE OE AWAKENING

fested some of these signs and symptoms. Nor must we forget 
that Buddhism, as we have said, is a practical and realistic adapta- 
tion of traditional ideas, an adaptation which is mainly in the 
spirit of the kshatriya, of the Aryan warrior caste : it should he 
remembered especi^y since Western man's line of development 
has been warlike rather than a sacerdotal, whilst his inclination 
for clarity, for realism, and for exact knowledge, applied on the 
material plane, has produced the most typical achievements of 
his civilisation.Other metaphysical and ascetic systems might appear more 
attractive than Buddhism and might offer a deeper gratification 
for a mind anxiously trying to penetrate the mysteries of the 
world and of existence. Yet they tend proportionately to provide 
modem man with opportunities for illusions and misconceptions ; 
the reason being that genuinely traditional systems, such as the 
Vedanta, if they are to be fuUy understood and realised, pre- 
suppose a degree of spirituality which has disappeared long ago 
in ^e vast maidrity of men. Buddhism, on the othfer hand, 
poses a total problem, without any loopholes. As sopaeone has 
rightly said, it is “ no milk for babies nor does it provide 
metaphysical feasts for lovers of intellectual speculation.®* It 
states : “ Man, this is what you have become and this is what 
your experience has become. Know it. There is a Way which 
leads beyond. This is its direction, these are its milestones, 
these are the means for following it. It rests with you to discover 
your true vocation and to measure your strength.” “ Do not 
persuade, do not dissuade ; knowing persuasion, knowing 
dissuasion, neither persuade, nor dissaude, expoimd only reality ” 
— ^We have already seen that this is the fundamental precept of 
the Awakened Ones.

Thus, in describing the historical place of Buddhism, we have 
also explained the last of the reasons we adopted to justify the 
choice of Buddhism as a basis for a study of a complete and virile 
ascesis, formulated with regard to the cycle which includes also 
contemporary man.

♦ In English in the original (translator's note).

** Rhys Davids, Early Buddhism, London, 1908, p. 7.

IV

DESTRUCTION OF THE DEMON OF. DIALECTICS♦ In English in the original (translator's note).

** Rhys Davids, Early Buddhism, London, 1908, p. 7.

IV

DESTRUCTION OF THE DEMON OF. DIALECTICS

T he premise from which the Buddhist Doctrine of Awaken- 
ing starts is the destruction of the demon of dialectics, the 
renunciation of the various constructions of thought, of specula- * 
tion, which is simply an expression of opinion, of the profusion 
of theories, which are projections of a fundamental restlessness 
and in which a mind that has not yet found in itself its own 
principle seeks for support.

This applies not only to cosmological speculation, but also to 
problems concerned with man, his nature and destiny, and even 
to any conceptual determination of the ultimate aim of asceticism.

" Have I ever existed in past epochs ? Or have I never existed ? 
What was I in past epochs ? And how did I come to be what 
I was ? Shall I exist in future epochs ? Or shall I not exist ? 
What shall I be in future epochs ? And how shall I become 
what I shall be ? And even the present fills [the common man] 
with doubts : Do I indeed exist ? Or do I not exist ? • What 
am I ? And how am I ? This being here, whence has it really 
come ? And whither wih it go ? ” All these for Buddhism 
are but “ vain thoughts ” : " This is called the blind alley of 
opinions, the gorge of opinions, the bramble of opinions, the, 
thicket of opinions, the net of opinions,” caught up and lost in 
which ” the ignorant worldling cannot free iWself from birth, 
decay and death.”^ And again ; ” ‘ 1 am is an opinion ; ‘ I 
am this ’ is an opinion ; ' I shall be ' is an opinion ; ' I shall 
not be ' is an opinion ; ‘ I shall be in the worlds of [pure] form ’

. is an opinion ; ‘ I shall be in the worlds free from form ’ is an 
opinion ; ' Conscious, I shall be ' is an opinion ; ‘ Unconscious,

I shall be ’ is an opinion; ' Neither conscious nor unconscious,

I shall be is an opinion. Opinion, 0 disciples, is a disease ;

1 Majjk., II : XXXVIII.I shall be ’ is an opinion; ' Neither conscious nor unconscious,

I shall be is an opinion. Opinion, 0 disciples, is a disease ;

1 Majjk., II : XXXVIII.

47

48 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

opinion is a timiour ; opinion is a sore. He who has overcome 
all opinion, O disciples, is called a saint, one who knows.

It is the same with the cosmological order : " ‘ The world is 
eternal ’, ‘ The world is not eternal ’, ‘ The world is finite ’, ' The 
world is infinite ', ‘ The life-principle and the body are the same ’, 
' The life-principle is one thing, the body another ’, ' The Accom- 
plished One is after death ', ‘ The Accomphshed One is not after 
death ’, ‘The Accomphshed One both is and is not after death’, 
‘ The Accomphshed One neither is nor is not after death ’ 
— this is a blind alley of opinions, a thicket of opinions, a wood 
of opinions, a tangle of opinions, a labyrinth of opinions, painful, 
desperate, tortuous, not leading to detachment, not leading to 
progress, not leading to vision, not leading to awakening, not 
lea(hng to extinction.”® The doctrine of the Accomplished Ones 
is described as that which ” destroys to the foundations every 
attachment to and satisfaction in false theories, dogmas and 
systems ” and which therefore cuts off both fear and hope.* The 
reply to the question asked of the Buddha : ‘‘ Perhaps Lord 
Gotama [this is the Prince Siddhattha’s family name] has some 
opinion ? " is categorical ; ” Opinion ; that is remote from the 
Accomphshed One. The Accomplished One has seen.”®This reply indicates the fundamental point. It is not that 
Buddhism intended to exclude the possibility of obtaining some 
answer to these problems — ^for by doing so it would faU into 
contradiction, since the texts offer, where necessary, fairly precise 
teachings with regard to certain of them. It has, rather, wished 
to oppose the demon of dialectics, and has rejected every ” truth ” 
which is based only on discursive intellect — vitakka — and which 
can only have the value of “ opinion ”, of 8i^|a. It keeps its 
distance from ” reasoners and disputers ” for they ” can reason 
weU and reason badly, they can say thus and they can also say 
otherwise ”,® and they deal with theories that are only their own 
excogitations. And the a^rjXe irdvra, the “ take away all ” of 
the Buddhist ascesis is by no means a sacrificium intellectus in 
favour of faith, as in some forms of.Christian mysticism. It is,

• Majjh., CXL.

» Mam., LXXII.

‘ Majjh., XXII.

‘ Majjh., LXXII

• Majjh., LXXYI.

DESTRUCTION OF THE DEMON OF DIALECTICS 49• Majjh., CXL.

» Mam., LXXII.

‘ Majjh., XXII.

‘ Majjh., LXXII

• Majjh., LXXYI.

DESTRUCTION OF THE DEMON OF DIALECTICS 49

rather, a preliminary catharsis, an opus pur^tionis justified by 
a superior type or criterion of certainty, which is rooted in an 
actual knowledge, acquired — as .in the early Vedic tradition — 
by immediate vision.' It is a criterion of direct experience. 
Once “ cut off from faith, from inclinations, from hearsay, from 
scholastic arguments, from ratiocinations and from reasoning, 
from pleasure in speculation ”, the same criterion serves the 
Buddha when deciding the existence or non-existence of a thing, 
as it serves a man who judges the existence of pleasure, pain or 
delusion on the basis of ha^dng himself experienced these states.’ 
Besides, much knowledge, discursive knowledge that is, leaves 
an individual as he is : it does not contribute at all to the removal 
of the "triple bond”, necessary to advance towards superior 
knowledge.® Already master in fact of " deep psychology ”, the 
Buddha recognised that vain speculation, and the posing of 
numberless problems reflect a state of restlessness and anguish, 
that is, the very state which must first be put behind him by 
one going along the “ path of the Ariya ”. That is why, in the 
parable of the hunter,® the inclination of a disciple at a certain 
point in his development to set himself the usual problems 
concerning the soul and the world is considered as a step back- 
wards : it is one of the baits laid down by the Enemy and any 
man who feeds on it falls back into his power." To know by seeing, to become cognition, to become truth, 
to become vision ” — ^this is the ideal : knowing-seeing in conform- 
ity to reality — yathd-bhuta-nana-dassuna : direct intellectual 
intuition, far beyond all discussion and closely boxmd up with 
ascetic realisation. “ Recognising the poverty of philosophical 
opinions, not adhering to any of them, seeking the truth, I 
A recurring passage in the P41i canon is : " He [the Accomplished 
One] shows this world with its angels, its good and bad spirits, 
its ranks of ascetics and Brahmans, of gods and men, after he 
himself has known and apprehended it,” etc. There are even 
more radical expressions. " I affirm ” — ^says Prince Siddhattha^^ 
— " that I can expound the law concerning this or that region

T Samyutl., XXXV. 152.

® Majjh., CXIII ; cf. SuUanipata, V, viii, 2.

® Majjh,, XXV ; cf. Samyutt., XXXV, 207.

^0 SuUanipata IV, ix, 3.

Anguit,, IX, 22,

50 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENINGT Samyutl., XXXV. 152.

® Majjh., CXIII ; cf. SuUanipata, V, viii, 2.

® Majjh,, XXV ; cf. Samyutt., XXXV, 207.

^0 SuUanipata IV, ix, 3.

Anguit,, IX, 22,

50 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

in such a maimer that he who acts in conformity therewith will 
recognise the existing as existing and the not-existing as not- 
existing, the vulgar as vulgar and the noble as noble, the superable 
as superable and the insuperable as insuperable, the possible as 
possible and the impossible as impossible ; that he will know, 
understand and apprehend this exactly as it is to be known, 
understood and apprehended. The supreme form of knowledge 
is knowledge conforming to reality. A higher and more sublime 
knowledge does not exist, I say.” And again : ” ‘A perfect 
Awakened One you call yourself, it is true ; but these things 
you have not known ’ : that an ascetic or a Brahman, a god 
or a demon, Brahma or anyone else in the world can thus accuse 
me justly, this possibility ” — says Prince Siddhattha— “ does not 
exist.”^® The wise man, the Ariya, is not a follower of systems, 
he does not recognise dogmas, and having penetrated the opinions 
current amongst the people and being indifferent in face of 
* speculation, he leaves it to others, he remains calm amongst the 
agitated, he does not take part in the verbal battles of those 
who maintain : “ This only is the truth,” he does not consider 
himself equal to others, nor superior, nor inferior.^® In the 
canonical texts, after a description of the morass of contemporary 
philosophical opinions, we meet with this passage : “ TheAccomplished One knows other things well beyond [such specula- 
tions] and having such knowledge he does not become proud, 
he remains impassive, he realises in his mind the path which 
leads beyond. . . . There are, O disciples, other things, profound 
things, things difficult to apprehend, hard to understand, but 
which beget calm ; joyful things, things not to be grasped simply 
by discursive thought, things which only the wise man* can 
understand. These things are expounded by the Accomplished 
One, after he himself has known them, after he himself has seen 
them."'^*

We already know thht the title Buddha, given -to Prince 
Siddhattha, and then extended to aU those who have followed his 
path, means “ awakened ”. It takes us to the same point, to 
the same criterion of certainty. The doctrine of the Ariya is

Angutt, rv, 8 ; Majjh., XII.

Suttanipata, IV, v, 4 ; xiii, 10-19.

“ Digha, I, i, 28-37.

DESTRUCTION OF THE DEMON OF DIALECTICS 51Angutt, rv, 8 ; Majjh., XII.

Suttanipata, IV, v, 4 ; xiii, 10-19.

“ Digha, I, i, 28-37.

DESTRUCTION OF THE DEMON OF DIALECTICS 51

called “ beyond ima|;ination ” not susceptible of assimilation 
by any process of ratiocination. The term atakkdvacara often 
recurs, a' term which means just that which cannot be apprehended 
by logic. Instead the doctrine is presented in an “ awakening " 
and as an " awakening ”. One can see at once the correspondence 
between this mode of knowing and Plato’s view of anamnesis, 
" reminiscence ” or " recollection ” overcoming the state of 
oblivion; exactly as Buddhism aims to overcome the state 
produced by the dsava, by the “ intoxicants ”, by the manias, 
by the fever. These terms, reminiscence, awakening, however, 
should not represent more than the manner in which know- 
ledge appears, than recognition and appraisal of something 
as directly evident, like a man who remembers or who wakes 
and sees something. This is the reason for the recurrence 
in later Buddhist, literature of the term sphota, which has a 
similar meaning : it is knowledge manifested as in an un- 
veiling — as if an eye, after undergoing an operation, were to 
re-open and see. Dhamma-Cakkhu, the “ eye of truth ” or of 
" reality ”, cakkhumant, " to be gifted with the eye.” are normal 
Buddhist expressions, just as the technical term for " conversion ” 
is : ” his eye of truth opened.” Where the Buddha speaks of 
his own experiences we often find references to the pure presenta- 
tion of knowledge, either directly or "in similes never before 
heard or thought of Here is another leitmotiv of the texts : 
"As something never heard of before, vision arose in me, know- 
ledge arose in me, intuition arose- in me, wisdom arose in me, 
light arose in me ” this is called " the true excellence, 
conforming with the Anya quality, of knowledge ”. This recalls 
the qualities of the -vovs, of the 0]5mipian mind, a mind which, 
according to the most ancient Aryo-HeUenic tradition, is strictly 
related to “ being ” and which is manifested in a " knowledge 
by seeing ” : the -vovs is proof against deception, is " firm and 
tranquil as a mirror, it discovers everything without seeking, or 
rather, everything discovers itself in it ”, whereas the Titanic 
spirit is " restless, inventive and always in search of something, 
cunning and curious ”.^® Vision conceived as " transparency "“ Majjh., XXVT.

« E.g. MajjK LXXXV.

” XXXVI, 24 ; XII, 10.

Cff Ker^nyi^ La religione antica eco., op, cif., pp. 104, 167,

'«&»

THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

52

is the Buddhist ideal : " as one. sees through limpid water, the 
sand, the gravel and the colour of the pebbles, simply by reason 
of its transparency, so one who seeks the path of liberation must 
have just such a limpid mind.”^® The image which illustrates 
the manner in which an ascetic apprehends the four truths of 
the Ariya is this : “ If at the edge of an alpine lake of clear, 
transparent and pure water there were to stand a man with keen 
sight looking at the shells and shellfish, at the gravel and the sand 
and the fish, watching how they swim and how they rest ; this 
thought would come to him : ' This alpine lake is clear, trans- 
parent and pure ; I see the shells and shellfish, the gravel, the 
sand and the fish, how they swim and rest In this same 
manner an ascetic apprehends '' in conformity with truth ” the 
supreme object of the doctrine.®® The formula “ in conformity 
with truth ” or “ with reality ’’—yaihahhutam — ^is a recurrent 
theme in the texts, like the attributes, '' eye of the world ”, or 
" become eye ”, or ” become knowledge ”, of the Awakened 
Ones.This is naturally an achievement only through a gradual 
process. “As an ocean deepens gradually, declines gradually, 
shelves gradually without sudden precipices, so in this law and 
discipline there is a gradual training, a gradual action, a gradual 
unfolding, and? no sudden apprehension of supreme knowledge.”®^ 
Again : “ One can not, I say, attain supreme knowledge all at 
once ; only by a gradual trainiag, a gradual action, a gradual 
unfolding, does one attain perfect knowledge. In what manner ? 
A man comes, moved by confidence ; having come, he 
joins [the Order of the Anya\-, having joined, he listens;, 
listening, he receives the doctrine ; having received- ^ the 
doctrine, he remembers it ; he examines the, sense of 
the things remembered ; from examining the sense, the 
things are approved of; having approved, desire is bom; he 
ponders ; pondering, he eagerly trains himself ; and eagerly 
training himself, he mentally realises the highest truth itself and, 
penetrating it by means of wisdom, he sees.”®® These are the 
milestones of the development. It is hardly worth sa3nng that

Angutt., I, 5 ; Mahdparinirv., 64. 
. ” Majjh., XXXIX.

“ Angiut., VIII, 19.

” Majjh., LXX.

DESTRUCTION OF THE DEMON OF DIALECTICS 53Angutt., I, 5 ; Mahdparinirv., 64. 
. ” Majjh., XXXIX.

“ Angiut., VIII, 19.

” Majjh., LXX.

DESTRUCTION OF THE DEMON OF DIALECTICS 53

the placing of '' confidence '' at the beginning of the series does 
not signify a falling back into '' belief : in the first place, the 
texts always consider that confidence is prompted by the inspiring 
stature and the example of a master in the second place, 
as we can see clearly from the development of the series, it is 
a matter of a provisional admission only; the real adherence 
comes when, with examination and practice, the faculty of direct 
apprehension, of intellectual intuition, absolutely independent of 
its antecedents, has become possible. Therefore it is said : 
^'.He who cannot strenuously train himself, cannot achieve 
truth ; through strenuous training (an ascetic) achieves truth : 
therefore strenuous training is the most important thing for the 
achieving of truth/'^^Naturally, there is here an implicit assumption, which we shall 
discuss before long in detail, an assumption, that is to say, that 
the men to whom the doctrine was directed were not entirely 
in the state of brute beasts ; that they recognised, not as an 
intellectual opinion, but through a natural and innate sense, the 
existence of a reality superior to that of the senses. For the 
common man one w^ho thinks in bis heart : There is no 
giving, no offering, no alms, there is no result of good and bad 
actions, there is no this world, there is no other world, there is 
no spiritual rebirth, there are not in the world ascetics or 
Brahmans who are perfect and fulfilled and who, having with 
their own understanding comprehended, and realised this world 
and the other world, make known their knowledge — ^for such 
the doctrine was riot considered to have been expounded, since 
they lack the elementary quality of '' confidence '' which defines 
the noble son"' and which is the first member of the series 
'we have mentioned. Such men, according to an apt textual 
illustration, are as '' arrows shot by night

As for the pre-eminence accorded, in a pragmatistic and anti- 
intellectualistic spirit, to action in the Doctrine of Awakening, 
we quote another Buddhist simile. A man struck by a poisoned 
arrow, for whom his friends and companions wish to fetch a sur- 
geon, refuses to have the arrow extracted before learning who

« Majjh., XCV.

Majjh., XCV.

JDhammcipada, 304,

54 THE. DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING« Majjh., XCV.

Majjh., XCV.

JDhammcipada, 304,

54 THE. DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

struck him, what his name might be, who his people are, what his 
appearance, if his bow was great or small, of what wood it was 
made, with what it was strung, and so on. This man would 
not succeed in learning enough to satisfy him before he died. 
Just so— -says the text^«— would a man behave who followed the 
Sublime One only on the condition that the latter gave him 
answers to various speculative problems, telling him if the world 
was eternal or not, if body and the lifc-principle are distinct or 
not, what happens to the Accomplished One after death, and so 
on. None of this — ^says the Buddha — ^has been explained by me. 
“And why has it not been explained by me ? Because this is 
not salutary, it is not truly ascetic, it does not lead to disgust, 
it does not lead to detachment, it does not lead to dispassion, 
it does not lead to calmness, it does not lead to contemplation, 
it does not lead to awakening, it does not lead to extinction ; 
therefore has this not been explained by me.”^’

In the opposing theories regarding the world and regarding 
man characteristically reminiscent of the Kantian aiitihomies, 
either one opposite or the other might be frue. One thing is 
certain, however ; the state in which man actually finds himself, 
and the possibility of his trainmg himself, during his lifetime, 
to achieve the destruction of this state.* **®

* Majjh,, LXIII.

Dlgha, 28 ; Majjh, LXIII, 
. LXIII,

V

THE FLAME AND SAMSARIC CONSCIOUSNESS* Majjh,, LXIII.

Dlgha, 28 ; Majjh, LXIII, 
. LXIII,

V

THE FLAME AND SAMSARIC CONSCIOUSNESS

I N order to understand the Buddhist teaching we must start 
from the idea that to the man it had in mind the atmd-brahman, 
the immortal and immutable ” I ” identical with the supreme 
essence of the universe, would not be a concept " conforming to 
reality "—yaihd-hhiitam — ^based, that is to say, on the actual 
evidence of experience, but, rather, that it would be only a 
speculation, a creation of philosophy or theology. The Doctrine 
of Awakening aims at being entirely realistic. From the realistic 
point of view, the immediate evidence for such a man is what 
we have already called “ saihsaric consciousness ”. Buddhism 
proceeds to analyse this consciousness and to determine the 
" truth ” corresponding to it, summarised in the theory of univer- 
sal impermanence and insubstantiality [anatta).

In previous speculation, the first term of the binomial aimd- 
samsdra — ^that is, the immutable, transcendent “ I ” and the 
current of becoming — stood in the foreground. In the teaching 
which serves as the point of departure for the Buddhist ascesis 
emphasis is placed instead almost exclusively on the second term, 
samsdra, and the consciousness associated with it. This second 
term, however, is considered in ah those aspects of contingency, 
relativity and irrationality that can only proceed from a com- 
parison with the metaphysical reality already directly intuited. _ 
This reality itself remains therefore tacitly presupposed, even 
if, for practical reasons, it is not mentioned in the argument.

The world of " becoming ” is thus, in a manner of speaking, 
the truth Buddhism uses from the start.. In the becoming 
nothing remains identical, there is nothing substantial, and 
nothing permanent. It , is the becoming of experience 
itself, consuming itself in its own momentary content.

55

E

56 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING55

E

56 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

Ceaseless and limitless, it is also conceived as nothing more than 
a succession of states which give place one to another according 
to an impersonal law, as in an eternal circle. We can here see an 
exact parallel of the Hellenic concept of the "cycle of generation” 
kvkXos rrjs yevdaeoas and the “ wheel of necessity ” kvkXos rijs 
el/xapfievrjs.

The Buddhist term designating a particular reality or individual 
life or phenomenon is khaniha or santdna. Khandha literally 
means a group, a heap — ^to be understood as a bundle or aggrega- 
tion — and santdna means current. In the flux of becoming there 
form vortices or currents of psycho-physical elements and of 
aUild states — called dhammd. — which persist as long as the condi- 
tions and the force remain which have made them come together 
and pile up. After this they dissolve and, in their becoming 
(samsdra) they form similar conglomerations elsewhere, no less 
contingent than the preceding ones. Thus it is said : "All the 
elements of existence are transitory ” — “All things are without 
individuality or substance — sabie dhammd anattd ’ti."^ The 
law of sams^c consciousness is expressed by this formula : 
sunnam idam attena vd attaniyena vd ti — void of “ I ” or of 
anything that resembles " I ”, void of substance. Another 
expression : everything is " compoimded ” — sankhata — " com- 
pounded ” being the equivalent here of " conditioned In 
samsdra there are only conditioned states of existence and 
consciousness.This view is valid both for external and internal experience. 
We must emphasise that the dhammd, the primary elements of 
existence, are considered by Buddhism — and particularly its later 
forms— to be simple contents of consciousness, and not abstract 
explanatory principles created by thought, as, for example, the 
atoms of the ancient schools of physics. Thus we shall find that 
the doctrine of anattd, of unsubstantiality, when applied to exter- 
nal experience will tend more and more towards pure empiricism. 
As the external world directly appears, so it is. We should not 
say " this object has this form, this colour, this taste, etc. ”, 
but : “ this object is this form, this colour, this taste, etc.” — 
there is nothing behind sensible evidence to which it must be

^ Dhammapada, 377, 279. *

* Dhamma-sanga^i, 185,

THE FLAME AND SAMSARIC CONSCIOUSNESS 57

referred.® As we would say in modem terms, there only exists 
and is real the continuum of lived experience;* Dhamma-sanga^i, 185,

THE FLAME AND SAMSARIC CONSCIOUSNESS 57

referred.® As we would say in modem terms, there only exists 
and is real the continuum of lived experience;

The same point of view is adopted with coherence — ^we might 
even say, with surgical directness — ^towards internal and personal 
experience. As the legitimacy of speaking " in conformity with 
reaUty ” of a permanent substance behind individual phenomena 
— ^and even behind all nature, as tbe Brahmanical theory had it 
— is contested by Buddhism, so it challenges the idea of a substan- 
tial, immortal and unchangeable principle of the person, such as 
the alma of the Ufanishad,. Even the person — sakkdya — ^is 
khandha and santdna, an aggregate and a current of elements 
and of impermanent, " compounded '' and conditioned states. 
It is also sankhata. Its unity and reality are purely nominal, 
at the most “ functional It is said : as the word waggon 
is used when the various parts of a waggon are found together, 
so when the various elements making up human individuality 
are present, we speak of a " person “As the joining together 
of the various parts makes up the concept of a waggon, so the 
aggregation or series of states gives name to a living being.”® 
The waggon is a functional unity of elements, not a substance ; 
so with the person and the " mind ” — “ in the same way the 
words ‘ living being ' and ' I ’ are only a way of speaking of the 
fivefold stem of attachment ’'.® "When the conditions which have 
determined the combination of elements and states in that stem 
are no longer effective, the person as such — ^that is, as the particu- 
lar person — dissolves. But even while he endures, the person 
is not a “being" but a flowing, a “current" {santdna) or rather 
a section of a “ current ”, since • santdna is thought of as 
something which is neither started by birth nor interrupted by 
death.*The positive basis of this view — ^not very encouraging for our 
everyday “ spiritualists ” — ^is that the only consciousness of which 
the overwhelming majority of modem men can speak truthfully, 
yathd-ihutam, is “ become ” and “ formed ” consciousness :

* Cf. T, Stcherbatsky, The Central Conception of Buddhism, London, I9^3»

pp.

^ MilindapaUha, 28,

® Visuddhi-magga, VIIL

• The notion of "‘current*’ appears as early as Dlgha, III, 105, and Ill,

143 : This current is like a phantasmagoria void- of substance ** : beyond it 
the ascetic, going as *" one whose head is on fire **, seeks “ the unshakable abode *.

58 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING143 : This current is like a phantasmagoria void- of substance ** : beyond it 
the ascetic, going as *" one whose head is on fire **, seeks “ the unshakable abode *.

58 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

consciousness determined and conditioned by content, which 
are, however, impermanent. Consciousness and perception are 
inseparable : " these two things are joined, not separate, and it is 
impossible to dissociate them so as to differentiate between them: 
since of what one has a perception of that one is conscious and 
that of which one is conscious, of that one has a perception.’”' As 
it is meaningless to talk'of fire in general, since a fire is only of logs, 
or dung, or faggots, or grass, and so on, so we cannot talk of 
consciousness in general, but only of a consciousness that is visual, 
or aural, or olfactive, or gustative, or tactile or mental — according 
to the case in question.® "Through the eye, the object and 
visual consciousness, sight originates ; so for hearing, so for 
smelling, taste and touch ; and so through the mind and mental 
states, ■ thought originates. These sensory states, then, derive 
their origins from other causes and can claim no substantial 
beginning.’’® “ It is in relation to body that the idea ' I am-’ 
arises, and not otherwise. And similarly with feeling, perception, 
the formations, and consciousness— in relation to such causes the 
idea ‘ I arn ’ arises, and not otherwise ’’ ; .but these causes are, 
however, impermanent.^® Looking at things in this manner, it 
becomes quite evident that the idea of an aima, of a substantial 
unconditioned " I ’’ cannot be accepted. Consciousness is thus 
" void of ' I ’ ’’ : since consciousness always arises in the presence 
of any sensory or psychic content.^ More generally, the real 
" I ’’ experienced by everyone, not the theoretical " I ’’ of the 
philosophers, is conditioned by " name-and-form ’’. This 
expression, taken by Buddhism from the Vedic tradition, desig- 
nates the psycho-physical individual : “ that part of this aggre- 
gate, which is gross and material ’’ — ^it is said“ — " is form ; 
that part which is subtle and mental is name ’’, and between 
the one and the other there is an interdependent relation- 
ship. Bound to " name-and-form ’’, the “ soul ’’ follows its 
fated changes, and for this reason as we shall see, anguish and 
trepidation belong to the deepest stratum of every human and,» Majjh., XLIII.

« Majjh., XXXVIII.

• Milindapaiiha, 54-57.

“ Samyutt., XXII, 83. 
n Samyutt., XXXV, 193.

Milindapa^ha, 49. '

THE FLAME AND SAMSaRIC CONSCIOUSNESS 59

more generally, samsaric life.^^ Finally, individual consciousness 
and name-and-form condition each other. One cannot 
stand without the other as, according to a textual simile, two 
planks cannot stand without one leaning against the other. This 
is the same as saying that person is considered as a functional 
whole to which the becoming is not accidental but is his very 
substance. One state ends and another begins : and the 
succession is such that it is almost possible to say that nothing 
precedes and nothing follows.''^^

All this can be considered as a general introduction to the theory 
of the “ four truths of the Ariya — cattdri anya-saccdni — and of 
" conditioned genesis *'—^aUcca-samuppdda, The view of un- 
substantiality, as already discussed, does not go beyond a 
phenomenalistic consideration of the inward and outward world. 
To go further, we must adopt a different point of view in order 
to discover — in terms of direct experience — ^the deeper meaning 
and the law of this flowing, of this succession of states. The 
first two truths of the Ariya corresponding to the terms dukkha 
and taTiha, then appear.Already at this point of our investigations we have to imdertake 
the task of separating the core of the Buddhist teaching from 
its accessory elements and from its popular adaptations ; and, 
furthermore, we have to contend with a terminology whose precise 
significance is extremely difficult to formulate in Western lang- 
uages, particularly as the meaning of a term often changes even 
in the course of a single text. While the terms of modern Western 
languages have strictly precise meanings, due to their being based 
for the most part on verbal and conceptual abstractions, the 
terinsof Indo-Aryan languages have, on the other hand, essentially 
variable meanings as they have to express the richness of direct 
experience.

The term dukkha is frequently translated as '' pain whence 
the stereotyped notion that the essence of Buddhist teaching is 
simply that the world is pain. But this is the most popular and, 
we might almost say, profane interpretation of the Buddhist

Milindapanha, 49; cl v.'.-.-.f r.- ■ XVII (W., 184). The same idea

is expressed with the f ollowii' = ; le oil and the wick of a light are 
impermanent, then it cannot be thought that the light is permanent or eternal 
(Majjh., CXLVI). •

Milindapanha, 40-41.

6o THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENINGMilindapanha, 40-41.

6o THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

doctrine. It is quite true that dukkha in the texts also refers to 
such things as growing old, being ill, undergoing what one wishes 
to avoid and being deprived of what one desires, and so on ; all 
of which can in general be considered as pain or suffering. Yet, 
for example, the idea that birth itself is dukkha should make us 
pause, and particularly as the same term refers to non-human, 
" celestial ” or “ divine ” states of consciousness which certainly 
cannot be considered as subject to " pain ” in the ordinary sense 
of the word. The deeper, doctrinal and non-popular significance 
of the term dukkha is a state of agitation, of restlessness or of 
" commotion rather than " suffering ”. We can, now, 
describe it as the lived counterpart of what is e:!qpressed in the 
theory of universal impennanence and unsubstantiality, of anicca 
and of amUd. And it is for this reason that, in the texts, dukkha, 
anicca and anattd when they do not actually appear as synonyms,^* 
are always found in close relationship. This interpretation is 
confirmed if we consider dukkha in the light of its opposite, that 
is, of the states of “ liberation ” : dukkha now appears as the 
antithesis of unshakable calm, which is superior not only to' 
pain, but also to pleasure ; as the opposite of the " incomparable 
safety ”, the state in which there is no more restless wandering 
no more " coming and going ”, and where fear and anguish are- 
destroyed. In order really to understand the implications of 
dukkha, the first truth of the Ariya, and therefore to grasp the 
deepest significance of saihsaric existence, we must associate the 
notion of " anguish ” with that of “ commotion ” and " agita- 
tion ”. The Buddha saw in the world : ‘‘A race which trembles ” 
— ^men trembling, attached to their persons, " like fish in a stream 
that is almost dry ” This world is fallen into agitatiorf ” is 
the thought that came to him whilst he was still striving to achieve 
iUumination,^® ” in truth, this world has been overcome by 
agitation. We are bom, we die, we pass away from one state, 
we arise in another. And from this sorrow, from this decay and 
death, no one knows j;he escape Therefore it is a question, Cf. Stcherbatsky, Central Conception etc., cit. p. 48.

Jansink, Mistica del huddismo, op. cit. p. 95.

Suttanipdta, IV, ii, 5-6.

Samyutt,, XII, lo.

» Digha, XIV, ii, 18,

THE FLAME AND SAMSARIC CONSCIOUSNESS 6l

of sometlung far deeper and larger than anything the usual 
notion of pain can designate.

We now come to the second truth of the Ariya. which deals 
with samudaya, that is, with origin. From what does this 
experience of ours, which manifests itself as dukkha, as agitation, 
as anguished becoming, originate, from where does it draw 
nourishment and what maintains it ? The answer is tai^hd (Skr. 
trshnd) that is to say, craving or thirst : “ thirst for life for ever 
renewing itself, which, when it is joined to the pleasure of 
satisfaction £Lnd gratifies itself here and there, is thirst for sensual 
pleasure, thirst for existence, thirst for becoming.” This is the 
central force of saihsaric existence, this is the principle which 
determines the anattd, that is, the non-aseity of any thing and of 
any life whatsoever and which endows all life with alteration and 
death. Thirst, craving, burning, according to the Buddhist 
teaching, stand not only at the root of all states of mind, but 
also of experience in general, of the forms of feelmg, of perception 
and of observation that are most nearly considered to be neutral 
and mechanical. Thus we get the suggestive S5mibolism of the 
*' burning world ”. " The whole world is in flames, the wholeworld is consumed by fire, the whole world trembles.”*® "All is 
in flames. And what is the all that is in flames ? The eye is 
burning, what is visible is burning, consciousness of the visible 
is burning, contact of the eye with what is visible is burning, 
the feeling — ^be it pleasure or pain, or neither pain nor pleasure 
— ^which arises from the contact with what is visible is huming. 
And with what is it burning ? With the fire of desire, with the 
fire of aversion, with the fire of delusion ” — ^and the same theme 
is repeated separately for what is heard, for what is tasted, touched 
and smelt, and for what is thought and again there is the 
same theme for the pancakhhandha, the fivefold stem of the 
personality: materiality, feeling, perception, the formations, 
consciousness.** This flame bums not only in desire, aversion 
and delusion, but also in birth and death, in decay, in every 
kind of pain and suffering.*®

Such is the second truth of the Ariya, the tmth about “ origin ”.

Samyutt., I, 133. •

Mahdvagga {Vinaya), I, xxi, 2-3 ; Safhyutt, XXXV, 28.

Samyuit., XXII, 61.

** Samyuit,, XXXV, 28 ; Mahdvagga (Vin.), I, xxi, 2-3.

62 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENINGSamyutt., I, 133. •

Mahdvagga {Vinaya), I, xxi, 2-3 ; Safhyutt, XXXV, 28.

Samyuit., XXII, 61.

** Samyuit,, XXXV, 28 ; Mahdvagga (Vin.), I, xxi, 2-3.

62 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

To understand it we must go Beyond the most superficial plane 
of consciousness : since although everyone will probably concecle 
that desire is the root of a large number of human actions, 
practically none will ever understand intuitively that it is the 
substance of his own bodily form, the root of his very individuality, 
the base of his every experience, even of that of a colour or a 
sound, to which he is indifferent. This holds good to a certain 
extent for the first truth also, since it is most improbable that 
everyone will understand that beneath his joy lies dukkha, that 
is, agitation, suffering and restlessness. The fact is that these 
two truths are already, in a certain measure, related to the " other 
shore ", being directly evident only to those who have already 
crossed over and can comprehend objectively and fully the nature 
of the state in which they previously found themselves.*®* In 
this particular connexion the texts provide an illuminating 
simile, that of the leper. Those who, " driven by desire, con- 
sumed by the thirst of desire, burned by the fever of desire, 
delight in desire ", are hke those lepers, their bodies covered 
with sores, ulcerated, eaten by worms, who, in scratching their 
sores and scorching their Hmbs, feel a morbid delight. But one 
who frees himself from le|)rosy, feels cured, healthy and indepen- 
dent, " master of where he would go ” ; this man would then 
•understand " according to reality” the morbid deUght of the 
leper, and should anyone attempt to drag him by force towards 
the fire in which he formerly found dehght, he would struggle 
in ever^ maimer possible to withdraw his body.*®Apart from this, the S5nnbohsm of the flame and of the fire 
is enough to help us to understand approximately the law of 
conditioned existence and of becoming as " craving ” or " thirSt ”. 
Besides, let us fake as an illustration physical thirst or, in general, 
nourishment. Instinct induces an organism to satisfy itself by 
assimilating and consuming something for maintenance. Main- 
tenance, however, imphes that there is later a fresh feeling of 
hunger or thirst, because of the law of the organism that has 
been strengthened through the very satisfaction of the need.

In Majjh., LXXX it is, in fact, explicitly stated that only those who 
have arrived at the goal, have laid aside the burden, have done what was to 
be done, and who have freed themselves from the bonds of existence, can 
understand what craving and thirst for craving are.

Majjh., LXXV.

THE FLAME AND SAMSaRIC CONSCIOUSNESS 63Majjh., LXXV.

THE FLAME AND SAMSaRIC CONSCIOUSNESS 63

It is stated thus in the Gospels : “ Whosoever drinketh 
of this water shall thirst again. But whosoever drinketh 
of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; 
but ^the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well 
of water springing up into everlasting life.”** Still more appro- 
priate is the S3mibolism of the flame and of the processes of 
combustion. We owe to Dahlke an account of it that allows us 
to penetrate into the secret of samsaric life. Having likened 
craving to a fire, every living being appears, not as an '' I ”, 
but as a process of combustion since, at the level on which we 
are talking, we cannot say that a being has craving, but rather 
that he himself is craving. There is then— latent in everyone 
— a will to burn, to become a. flame consuming some particular 
material. The fuel stimulates this wiU and starts the fire in a 
process of combustion which, however, results in a greater degree 
of heat, that is, in a fresh will to bum, thus starting a new 
combustion, and so on, endlessly. From this point of view it is 
a process that generates and sustains itself ; and -at each instant 
the flame represents a particular degree of heat which, as such, 
is the potentiality for a new combustion as soon as contact is 
made with some fresh inflammable material.*^ In this way the 
text we have been following considers every contact, every 
perception, vision or thought as a species of ” burning ". The 
fire is the craving that the will induces towards this or that 
coritact, in which it spreads and sharpens itself, feeding itself, 
in a manner of speaking, on itself and provoking itself in the very 
act of satisfaction and of consuming its fuel. The “ I ” as 
santana, or ” current ”, is none other tham the continuity of this 
fire ■^hich dies down and smoiflders amongst the ashes when the 
supply of material grows short, yet ready to blaze forth at every 
fresh contact. The process of saifasaric life is thought of as a 
flame attached to burning material or rather as a flame which is 
itself its own material. The contacts develop through attach- 
ment, upddana. This occurs above all in the fivefold stem which 
. makes up the person in general ; materiality, feeling, perception, 
formations, individuated consciousness. Burning potentially in 
John, IV, 13-14.2 ’ Dahlke, Buddhismus als Weltanschauwng, cit., pp. 50-57; (translated as 
Buddhism and Science, Cit., pp. 47-56) ; Buddhismus als Religion und Moral, 
cit., pp. 102 seq.

64 the doctrine of awakening

this stem, thirst develops in each one of its five parts through 
the series of contacts furnished by the outside world ; the world 
itself appears to the will to bum and to be burning as a kind 
of varied fuel, a fuel which incites greater combustion in propor- 
tion to the delusive satisfaction it affords this will. The theory 
of anattd, of " not-I ”, thus has this meaning : the ” I ” does not 
exist outside the process of burning, it is this very process — ^were 
a halt really made, the " I ”, the illusion of being " I ” would 
collapse. Here, then, is the reason for the anguish and for the 
primordial " agitation ” of which we have already spoken, here 
is the profound source of the '* triple fire of sensuality, of hate 
and of delusion ” and of the will which ” causes the search for 
other worlds ”. The samsaric ” I ” has its foundation in craving, 
without which it would collapse.®® Even in suffering and in pain 
there works a variety of this profound fire, of the wfil of 
conditioned beings for existence, which involves a fundamental 
abdication.On this basis the Buddhist theory of sathsara has been able 
to develop as far as the theory of " instantaneousness ” or 
” instantaneous existence ”, khaifa. If existence and the sense 
of ” I ” are conditioned by contacts, this existence must resolve 
itself into the point series of these same contacts. In this sense, 
strictly speaking, life is instantaneous, just as, in the Buddhist 
image ofi the wheel of a waggon whose movement is continuous, 
but which, moving or at rest, touches the ground at only one 
point. ” In the same way the life of beings has only the duration 
of a thpught ; the being of the past moment has lived, but does 
not live and will not live ; the being of the future moment will 
live, but does not live and has not lived ; the being of the present 
moment lives, but has not lived and will not live.”®*

This is the coup de grace delivered to the Brahmanical theory 
of atma. And even if we ignore the later and more extreme 
expressions of the theory of ” instantaneous existence ”, however 
coherent, this way of thinking is enough to destroy the theory of 
reincarnation which we considered to be largely in Hinduism the 
effect of foreign influences. In fact, we have already seen that the

** Thus in Anguti., V, 69 he who destroys taphd, craving, is called “ he who 
destroys the support

Visuddhi^magga, VIII (W„ 150),

THE FLAME AND SAMSARIC CONSCIOUSNESS 65** Thus in Anguti., V, 69 he who destroys taphd, craving, is called “ he who 
destroys the support

Visuddhi^magga, VIII (W„ 150),

THE FLAME AND SAMSARIC CONSCIOUSNESS 65

preoccupation with knowledge of what one was and of what one 
will be beyond this life is considered by the Buddha to be ah 
opining and a rambling which is a ’disease, a thorn, a sore, a 
forest, a tumour, a labyrinth. In any case, the idea that “ this 
consciousness persists unchangeable through the cycle of changing 
existences ” is expressly stated to be “ Wse opinion, not spoken 
of by the Buddha”, the idea of “a fool”,*® a judgment in which 
the Order of disciples,, after questioning by Prince Siddhattha, 
agrees.®^ The lundamental argument here is that it is impossible 
in practice to refer the possibility of having already existed to 
any evidence of consciousness,*® and in thp second place, that 
” the nature of consciousness is conditioned ”** — conditioned 
above all by “ name-and-form ” ; a real continuity of conscious- 
ness is inconceivable where " name-and-form ” is liable to 
change, where new khandha, new and different psycho-physical 
aggregates may be produced in the current. In fact, “ it is not 
the same name-and-form that re-arises ”.** When, with the 
cessation of a life, “ name-and-form ”, that is to say individual- 
ity, ceases, it does not go on to exist elsewhere as the same 
aggregate. We must imagine it, rather, as the sound of a lute 
which comes into being without ever having existed elsewhere 
and which does not pass on to another place when the musician 
has ceased playing.*® A continuity does indeed exist, but it is 
impersonal, it is the continuity of craving, of the "current”, of the 
will to burn in order to be; when this force has exhausted, like fuel, 
one life it leaps like a flame to attach itself to another stem and to 
blaze forth in it. According to one text,** it remains in the inter-

»« XXXVIII.

« Mmh., XXXVIII.

»» Ma]ih., Cl.»« XXXVIII.

« Mmh., XXXVIII.

»» Ma]ih., Cl.

»» Mcyjh., XXXVIII.

Milindapanha, 46,

Visuddhimagga, XX (W., 186). In Tantric Buddhism (vajra-ydna), a 
and a sceptre are the two symbolical objects used in magical operations. 
The bell (ghantd) is the symbol of “ knowledge of the phenomenal world, 
where every reality, as the sound of a bell, is perceptible but evanescent ; the 
sceptre, on the other hand, symbolizes the male principle of the vajra, of the 
diamond-lightning, of which the spirit of every '"Awakened One is composed.

SamyutU, XLIV, 9, The text, in fact, says this : "as fuel is necessary 
for the flame, so a new existence needs a substance." It is asked, however, 
what' is the substance when the flame is carried by the wind. The Buddha's 
reply is : the wind itself. It is then asked : when a being leaves one body 
and arises in another, what is the fuel indicated by the Lord Gotama ? The 
reply is : In this case, in truth, the fuel is the craving itself

66 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING66 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

mediate stages as a flame which consumes itself, that is, as pure 
calorific potential. Strictly speaking we should here refer to a con- 
tinuum from which both absolute diversity and absolute identity 
are excluded. A simile used in this coimection is that of the flames 
of the three watches of the night : the torch of the first watch, 
which, when it is about to die out, lights another torch, and this 
in its turn, Ughts a third. These three flames cannot be called 
either the same or different. One has lighted another, one has 
the fire of another, but they are all different from each other, 
and the flame is in each case the flame (life, consciousness) of a 
different torch. Another simile is that of milk which turns into 
curd and then into butter, and then into cheese. We are dealing 
with the same substance, but any change of state makes the use 
of the same name improper, and we cannot say that curd is milk 
or that butter is curd.®’ In changing the state— in having a 
different “ name-and-form ” (philosophically we might say : a 
different princifium individuatioms) — it is well to change also 
the denomina,tion. 'The only real continuity is a causal connection, a kind of 
impersonal heredity. The flame which, in a given being, is the 
life of that being, assumes in the course of that life a certain 
quality, a certain habitus which wiU last and manifest itself 
in successive combustions. From this we derive the notion 
of what are called the sankhdrd (the formations) which correspond 
to the directions ado;^ed by desire and which constitute one of 
the five groups of the personality ; whilst for the general determin- 
ing law whereby this fundamental force gathers together its 
particular group of dhamma, or the elements, when manifesting 
itself, the Upanishad term karma (in P&,ti : kamma) is used, 
especially in later Buddhist texts. Thus kamma is spoken of as 
a " matrix of beings ” — kammayoni — and the principle is formu- 
lated that " according to the actions of a bemg, there arises fresh 
becoming ; what one does causes one to become again. Re- 
become, contacts touch one [that is, the new process of combustion 
is started]. Beings, then, are the heirs of actions ”.®® From . 
this kind of concept, how'ever, we must not again presume 
the continuity of an indi^ddual substratum, of an “ I ” ; we

’’’ MUindapanha, 40-41.

»* Majjh.. LVII.

THE FLAME ANP SAMSARIC CONSCIOUSNESS 67’’’ MUindapanha, 40-41.

»* Majjh.. LVII.

THE FLAME ANP SAMSARIC CONSCIOUSNESS 67

should bear in mind, rather, the idea of a flame which moves 
from one branch (of a tree) to another, and we should take into 
special account only the particular quality assumed by the fire 
in the one combustion which transfers itselt to the next. This 
is why there is no answer in the texts to the question : Is it the 
same individual who feels the effects of a preceding existence ot 
is it afiother individual ? The only answer we can give is to 
refer to conditioned genesis that is, to the process which, in 
general, leads to sariisaric consciousness.^® To the question : Is 
it the same name-and-form which arises in a new existence ? 
the answer is : It is not the same name-and-form which arises 
in the next existence ; but with this name-and-form good or 
bad actions are done, by means of which a new name-and-form 
arises in a future existence.'*^® The text concludes : The effects 
arise in a series from which both absolute identity and absolute 
diversity are excluded, whence one cannot say if they are created 
by the same being or by something different.'’^^ More radically, 
we could give the illustration of the billiard ball which moves 
after receiving both force and direction from another billiard ball, 
distinct, of course, from the first one — ^had not this same animated 
world of ours already provided us with a perfect analogy in the 
phenomenon of generation and biological heredity : for although 
distinct from his parent, in the new animal we find the life, the 
tendencies, the instincts and often even the blemishes of his 
forbears.However, we deem that one should think less of a linear 
continuity of individual existences, than of so many appearances 
of a single stem of craving. This, while in the process of 
coml)ustion, is every single life, every single individual ; it is 
the desire which composes that life, that individual, but which at 
the same time transcends it and, after returning to a latent state, 
moves on to emerge elsewhere, and to establish itself mainly 
according to the force and the direction which it has already 
given itself in its preceding life (or lives).

Samyutt,, XH, 17, 24.

Milindapanha, 46, 6-9. Also in Samyutt., XII, 37, where it is said that this 
body is considered neither as one's own, nor as someone else's, but as deter- 
mined by a preceding action, that is, by the energy produced by preceding 
actions, either mental or physical.

Milindapanha^ 46-49 ; Visuddhi-magga, XVII (W. 238''240)r

68 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

With this doctrine the compromise inherent in the Upanishad 
concept — oscillating between truth relative to dtmd consciousness 
and truth relative to samsaric consciousness — ^is overcome, and 
at the same time a severely realistic point of view is established, 
void of " idealisms ” and of attenuations. The result is certainly 
not a consoling view. The Buddha, in a manner of speaking, 
by speeding up the rhythm has set forth what amounts to the 
limiting-form of the fall or regression, because it is only in this 
way that a total reaction can be provoked and the necessity for 
the ascesis demanded by the path of Awakening understood.Here it wiU be well to add the following consideration. We 
have already said that the first two truths of the Ariya, with 
particular reference to the doctrine of thirst and of fire, may not 
be directly evident to modem man. He may be able to under- 
stand them fully only in special or critical moments, because the 
life he normally leads is as if outside himself ; half sleep-walking, 
he moves between psychological reflexes and images which hide 
from him the deepest and most fearful substance of existence. 
Only in particular circumstances is the veil of what is, funda- 
mentally, a providential illusion tom aside. For example, in all 
moments of sudden danger : on the point of being threatened 
either by the vanishing of ground from under one’s feet through 
the opening of a chasm or glacier crevasse, or in touching inadvert- 
ently a glowing coal or an electrified object, an instantaneous 
reaction takes place. This reaction does not proceed from the 
" will ”, consciousness, nor from the “ I ”, since this part follows 
only after the initial reaction is complete ; in the first moment 
it is preceded by something more profound, more rapid and 
more absolute. During extreme hunger, panic, fear, sensual 
craving, or extreme pain and terror the same force again shows 
itself — and he who can comprehend it directly in these moments 
likewise creates for himself the faculty of perceiving it gradually 
as the invisible substratum of all waking life. The subterranean 
roots of inclinations, faiths, atavisms, of invincible and irrational 
convictions, habits and character, all that fives as animality, as • 
biological race, all the urges of the body — aU this goes back to 
the same principle. Compared with it, the ” will of the ‘ i ’ " 
has, normally, a liberty equivalent to that of a dog tied to a 
fairly long chain which he does not notice until he has passed

THE FLAME AND SAMSARIC CONSCIOUSNESS 69THE FLAME AND SAMSARIC CONSCIOUSNESS 69

a certain limit. If one goes beyond that limit, the profound 
force is not slow to awaken, either to supplant the “ I ” or to 
mislead it, making it believe that it wUls that which, in fact, 
the force itself wills. The wild force of imagination and of 
suggestion takes us to the same point : to that where according 
to the so-called law of “ converse effort ”, one does somet^g 
the more strongly the more one ” wills ” against it — as sleep 
eludes one the more one ” wills " it, or as the suggestion that one 
will fall into an abyss will certainly cause one to fall if one " wills ” 
against it.

This force, which is connected with the emotive and irrational 
energies, gradually identifies itself as the very force which rules 
the profound functions of physical life, over which the " will ”, 
the ” mind ” and the ” I ” have very little influence, to which 
they are external and on which they live parasiticaUy, extracting 
the essential fluids yet without having to go down for them into 
the heart of the trunk. Thus one must ask oneself. What, of 
this " my ” body, can be justifiably thought of as subject to 
“ my ” will ? Do " I ” will ‘‘ my ” breath or the mixtures of 
the digestive juices by which food is digested ? Do “ I ” will 
my form, my flesh, or my being this man who is conditioned thus 
and not otherwise ? Can he who asks himself this not go on 
even further and ask himself : My ” will ” itself, my conscious- 
ness, my " I ” — do I will these, or simply is it that they are ?We shall see that the Doctrine of Awakening actually asks, 
questions of this kind. And he who is strong enough to force 
himself, in this sense, to go beyond illusion, cannot help arriving 
at this disconcerting conclusion : '' You are not life in yourself. 
You do not exist. You cannot say ‘ mine ’ of an3d:hing. You 
do not possess life — ^it is life that possesses you. You suffer it. 
And the possibility of immortal survival of this phantom 'I' 
at the dissolution of the body is only a mirage, since every- 
thing tells you that its correlation with this body is essential 
to you and a trauma, an indisposition, a fainting fit or any kind 
• of accident has a definite influence over all its faculties, how- 
ever ' spiritual ’ and ' superior ' they may be.”

There are some who, at certain moments, are able to become 
detached from themselves, get beneath the surface, down into 
the dark depths of the force which rules their body, and where*

Jo THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENINGJo THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

this force loses name and identity. They have the sensation of 
this force expanding and including " I ” and “ not-I ”, pervading 
all nature, substantiating time, supporting m5iTiads of beings as 
if they were drunk or hallucinated, re-establishing itself in a 
thousand forms, irresistible, untamed, inexhaustible, ceaseless, 
limitless, burning with eternal insufficiency and hunger. He who 
reaches this fearful perception, like an abyss suddenly opening, 
grasps the mystery of samsara and of samsaric consciousness and 
understands and fully lives anattd, the doctrine of non-aseity, 
of " not-I ”. The passage from purely individual consciousness to 
this samsaric consciousness which includes indefinite possibilities 
of existence, both " infernal ” and celestial — ^this, fundamentally, 
is the basis of the whole Doctrine of Awakening. We are not 
dealing here with a ” philosophy ” but with an experience which, 
to tell the truth, is not the sole property of Buddhism. Traces 
and echoes of it are also to be found in other traditions, both 
Eastern and Western : in the West particularly in terms of secret 
knowledge and of initiatory experience! The theory of universal 
pain, of life as pain, does not represent, in this respect, anything 
other than something completely external and, as we have already, 
said, profane. Where it has been widely diffused it refers only 
to the forms of a popular exposition.From the point of view of Western mentality, as a general out- 
look, two forms or degrees of existence and samsaric consciousness 
can be distinguished: one is truly samsaric, the 'other is limited to 
the time and the space of a single individual existence. The 
consciousness prevalent in the modem West is this second one. 
But this only represents a part, a section of a consciousness or a 
samsaric existence which stretches out across time, and which, 
as we have just pointed out, may also include states free from 
the temporal law that we know. In the ancient Eastern world 
there still existed, in great measure, this much vaster samsaric 
consciousness. And the initiatory-ascetic path considered as an 
essential first phase the passage from the particular consciousness 
that is bound to a single life and defined by the 'illusion of the 
■individual '* I ” to truly samsaric consciousness : a concept to 
which the notion of santdna, of the “ I ” as flux, current or 
indefinite series of insubstantial states determined by dukkha, 
also corresponds. Only after mastering this phase can a passage

THE FLAME AND SAMSARIC CONSCIOUSNESS Jl

be found to what is really unconditioned and extra-saihsaric. 
But, as we shall soon see when we speak of the vocations, it is 
very rare in the West to find anyone who does not confuse the 
unconditioned, the absolute, with what are only higher states, 
of samsaric consciousness.

VI

CONDITIONED GENESISVI

CONDITIONED GENESIS

T he problem of “ origin ”, corresponding to the second truth 
of the Afiya, is investigated more deeply in what is known 
as doctrine of dependent origination or ” conditioned genesis " 
— -paticca-samuppada — ^which makes a separate study of the stages 
aiid states by which conditioned existence is arrived at. ” Pro- 
found, hard to perceive, hard to understand, peaceful, elevated, 
not reducible to discursive thought, subtle, accessible (only) to 
the wise ” this doctrine is called.^ It seems that it may have 
been due to the common man’s difficulties in understanding it, 
that Prince Siddhattha at ^st hesitated to reveal it : "a doctrine 
which leads on against the current, internal and profound, it will 
be invisible to those who are ensnared by craving, wrapped up in 
the shadow of ignorance.”^ This should be borne in mind by 
all who, in this matter, like to advance a " caveat against reading 
profound metaphysical concepts into this old series ”.® Indeed, 
we are dealing here with the results of a transcendental investiga- 
tion, realised — according to tradition — ^in states of consciousness 
corresponding to the three watches of the night, during whicli 
Prince Siddhattha's spiritual activity brought him to super-rational 
illumination, to hodhiA We must therefore also anticipate the 
objection that this discoiuse on transcendental states, in spite of 
the declared ostracism of all speculation, is based on simple 
philosophical hypotheses. Buddhism belongs to a civilisation 
which accepted as a principle the possibility of insight " with 
which not only this world but also the world beyond is seen ”®

^ Samyutt., VI, i. 
a Majjh,, XXVI.

® C. A. F. Rhys Davids in the introduction to Kindred Sayings (the transla- 
tion of Samyutta^mkdya)\ (1922), vol. Il, p. vi.

^ Mahdvagga (Vinaya), I, i, 2 ; Majjh., IV.

« mgha, XIX, 1*5 ; Majjh., XXXIV.

72

CONDITIONED GENESIS 73^ Mahdvagga (Vinaya), I, i, 2 ; Majjh., IV.

« mgha, XIX, 1*5 ; Majjh., XXXIV.

72

CONDITIONED GENESIS 73

and thence the possibility of discovering in certain conditions, 
both the states which precede the appearance of a man in a bodily 
existence and those which occur when this form of manifestation 
is exhausted.* The horizons of our contemporaries are naturally 
very different, and for this reason the impression that we are 
dealing here simply with theories can not be entirely eliminated.

However, in one way or another, it is still necessary to penetrate 
this knowledge, since it is fundamental both for the doctrinal and 
the practical part of the Buddhist teaching. “He who sees condi- 
tioned genesis " — ^it is said’' — " sees the truth {dhamma) and he 
who sees the truth sees conditioned genesis.” And again : “ Of 
all things which proceed from cause, the Accomplished One has 
explained the cause and also its destruction. This is the doctrine 
of the great ascetic.”® It serves as the immediate basis for prac- 
tical action, and it is the generator of “tranquillity” (the opposite 
state to dukkha), because its meaning is this : “ If that is, this 
comes of it ; with the origin of that this originates ; if that is 
not, this does not come of it ; with the end of that this ends.”* 
By knowing what are the causes in virtue of which we come to 
a state of samsaric existence, we also know that their removal 
also removes this same state of sainsaric existence. For this 
reason the doctrine of paticca-samuppdda constitutes the premise 
for the two remaining truths of the Ariya : namely, the third 
truth concerning nirodha, that is, the possibility of the destruction 
of the state marked by dukkha ; and the fourth truth concerning 
magga, or the methods to be followed in order to achieve such 
a destruction.The paticca-samuppada — ^which literally means conditioned 
genes*is or formation — considers a series of twelve conditioned 
states. The term used is paccaya, condition, and not hitu, cause : 
it is a question of conditionality and not of true causaUty. We 
may here return to the simhe of a substance which, in being 
transformed, passes through various states, each of which contains 
the potentiality of giving place, in appropriate circumstances, to

• For this second form of knowledge cf, Bardo Thodol {The Tibetan Book 
of the Dead, trans. W. Y. Evans Wentz, London, 1927). Cf. also Mqjjh,, CXXXVI 
where it is said that through cetosamddhi the ascetic perceives the posthumous 
destiny of beings.

’ MajjK, XXVIII.

® Mahdvagga (Vinaya), I, xxiii, 10.

» ^athyuit,, Xlf, 21, 41.

74 the doctrine of awakening

the next, or, if neutralised, of suspending the next. On what 
level does this causal series develop ?

Oriental commentators and, naturally, still more, European 
Orientalists have often held discordant opinions on this point. 
This is due to their not having realised that the same series is 
susceptible of two different interpretations, neither of which 
excludes or contradicts the other since each refers to a distinct 
plane. According to the first interpretation — ^followed unanimously 
by those on guard against " metaphysics " — ^the entire series 
develops on the plane of saihsaric existence and provides a detailed 
account of the process, which is one developing in time — ^let us 
say': in a horizontal direction. Accordingly, a single finite 
existence is determined by others preceding it, while it, in its 
turn, determines a successive existence or a number of successive 
existences. It is thus at the same time an effect in one respect 
and a cause in another.

But above and beyond this there is a much more profound 
interpretation, which really concerns the origins and which is a 
higher form of knowledge than the " four truths ”. .But above and beyond this there is a much more profound 
interpretation, which really concerns the origins and which is a 
higher form of knowledge than the " four truths ”. .

According to this interpretation, the series is not only to be 
considered in temporal terms, but also in transcendental terms ; 
it develops’ that is to say, not horizontally but essentially in a 
vertical manner, starting from pre-individu£il and pre-natal states 
and finishing on the plane of saihsaric existence, in which the 
“ horizontal ” series considered by the first interpretation 
develops. Since in the texts these niddna or causal ' nexuses ’ 
are quite obviously considered now from one point of view and 
now from the o^her, there has been opportunity for confusion 
and for divergent interpretations wherever general doctrinal 
principles have been left out of account.

Here we have particularly to consider the paiicca-samuppdda in 
the sense of a transcendental, vertical and descending series, which 
even if it finishes by entering time, is not in itself temporal.

I. — ^The basic element of the whofe series is avijjd, that is to 
say, “ ignorance ”, unawareness. The significance of this term 
in Buddhism is not essentially different from its significance in 
other branches of the Indo-Aryan tradition, the Sdmkhya or the 
Veddnta doctrines, for example, and where it might be figuratively 
illustrated by saying : man is a god who is unaware that he is

CONDITIONED GENESIS 75CONDITIONED GENESIS 75

such — ^it is his unawareness {avijjd) alone that makes him a man. 
It is a question, then, of a state of '' oblivion of deliquescence, 
by which the primary motive for identification with one or other 
form of finite and conditioned existence is determined. We must 
not therefore think of an abstract discernible condition, but rather 
of something which also includes a disposition, a tendency, a 
virtual movement. Thus we can think of this state simultaneously 
as '' infatuation "intoxication"', "mania" — and, in fact, we 
find in some texts that " ignorance " and " mania " condition 
each other ; it is said, for example : " the origin of ignorance 
determines the origin of mania " and, at the same time, " the 
origin of mania determines the origin of ignorance " — mania here 
being considered as tripartite, that is, as " mania of desire, mania 
of existence, mania of ignorance — kdmdsava, hhavdsava, avijjd- 
sava Following Neumann and De Lorenzo, we have trans- 
lated the term dsava as " mania It has been rendered by 
Orieijtalists in various ways : sometimes as " passions " (Nyan- 
atiloka), sometimes as " toxins " — deadly floods, intoxicants* 
(Rhys Davids) or as " depravities "* (Warren) or " drugs "* 
(Woodward), ferments or stupefacients — or by effluvia, impure 
emanations, suppurations — unreine Ausflii’sse (Walleser), etc. The 
literal sense is exactly the idea of an intoxicant drug which can 
alter and pervade an entire organism with a disturbance or a 
" mania ", We must imagine a state of drunkenness which makes 
a man forget himself and, at the same time, makes an irrational 
action possible. The close relation of avijjd, ignorance, to dsava, 
mania, is confirmed not only by the fact that, as we have seen, 
this same ignorance is described as an dsava — avijjdsava — ^but 
stilf more by the fact that the state of intuitive knowledge or 
wisdom, pannd, as opposed to that of ignorance, is very frequently 
said to be attained when the dsava have been neutralised or 
destroyed.Here we must touch on the problem of the degree in which 
" ignorance " can be considered as something absolutely original. 
Various views are possible, according to the point of reference. 
In itself, the Buddhist teaching does not go back beyond avijjd. 
And, for all practical ascetic purposes, it is not even necessary to

Majjh., IX.

♦ In English in the original (translator’s note).

76 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENINGMajjh., IX.

♦ In English in the original (translator’s note).

76 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

go further back than the transcendental fact, the mysterious crisis 
which in the mythological form of an original " fall ” or " descent ” 
or “ fault ” or "alteration” appears to some extent in the teach- 
ings of all peoples. Doctrinally, however, things are somewhat 
different. It is stated that “ an anterior limit, in which ignorance 
has not been in some degree, but only after which ignorance has 
been, it is not possible to find ; this idea refers, however, not 
to the transcendental series, but to the horizontal and temporal 
series of saihsaric existence, about which it is, in fact, stated in 
the same text : " Samsara does not lead towards what is free from 
death. ^And it is not possible to chart the first point of the 
journey of beings who are hindered by ignorance and bound by 
cravmg”.^® It would, indeed, be an absurdity to attempt, as some 
do, to make ignorance the absolute pnus in the order of con- 
ditioned genesis : it would certainly endow Buddhism with an 
" originality ”, but only to -condemn it to every form of contra- 
diction and incoherence. Craving might possibly be conceived as 
something absolutely fundamental ; biit certainly not ignorance 
which aheady, as such, presupposes knowledge. Nor would it 
be sensible to talk of .an awakening, for obviously one cannot 
awake if one has not been sleeping, and if there is nothing which 
shines beyond the cloud of oblivion. And, finally, the very sub- 
stance of the Buddhist doctrine, that is, the ascesis, would be 
fundamentally prejudiced ; for it would not be possible to under- 
stand whence one derives the impetus for resisting, for detaching 
oneself from samsara, for destroying the whole chain of the 
nidana by following it in reverse or backwards, and for extinguish- 
ing mania without leaving any residue, unless ignorance signified 
something additional : an intoxication, a darkness and a drunken- 
ness which, however profound, yet still presuppose an antecedent 
state, and which are not capable of irretrievably paralysing all 
energy connected with this state. That the Buddhist teaching 
agrees with this point of view can be seen in this passage : " There 
is, O disciples, an unborn, not become, not compounded, not 
■constructed. If there were not this unborn, not become, not 
compounded, not constructed, no escape could be seen here from 
that which is bom, become, compounded, constructed. But sinceSathyutt., XV. I. 
w Sathyutt., XV, 3.

CONDITIONED GENESIS

77

there is an unborn, not become, not compounded, not con- 
structed, so an escape is possible from what is bom, become, 
compounded, constracted.”^®

In the view of the most celebrated commentator bn the texts,^* 
moreover, ignorance is, and at the same time is not the prime 
cause ; " it is the principal element, but not the beginning 
It is not the beginning from the point of view of samsaric existence, 
of which it is said that there never was a time in which ignorance 
was not, since this existence has ignorance and craving as its 
double root and coessential substratum. But it is the beginning 
from the higher point of view of the origins. According to this 
view, it seems that the dsava themselves are conditioned by ignor- 
ance and that it is because of this that they lead to a determined 
form of existence on the sub-human, human, or “ divine ” plane.^® 
On the samsaric plane, and therefore according to the temporal 
interpretation, an ignorant man is described as one who, having 
descended into birth, cannot apprehend that the law of the world . 
is duhkha, cannot see its origin, nor deliverance from it nor the 
path by which this deliverance is obtained : ignorance is thus 
ignorance of the four truths of the Ariyan. Hamng been deter- 
mined by the dsava, by intoxication or mania, this particular 
ignorance establishes the samsaric state of existence and deter- 
mines the substratum — upadhi — ^which protracts it.2. — ^In the connected series, after avijjd follow the sankhdra. 
This term also has been variously interpreted. Literally, sankhdra 
mpans a formation or predisposition in regard to a particular aim. 
We are deahng, that is to say, with a state in which the potential 
motion of the first niddna has already assumed a certain direction 
an(f has entered on the path that later development -will follow. ' 
To translate sankhdra by " distinctions " (Neumann) is, to some 
extent, exact, seeing that we caimot choose a direction “without 
first having defined it and thus distinguished it from other 
possible directions. We must, however, bear in mind the voli- 
tional and active factor {sankhdra as kamma-cetana) and the 
“ conceptional ” factor. In this connection, Bumouf recorded 
the exegesis according to .which sankhdra is " the passion which

13 Udana, VIII, 1-3.

1* Visuddhi-magga, XVII (W., 171-175).

IS Anguit., VI, 63.

78 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING ;

includes desire, aversion, fear and joy noting, however, that ;

the terms desire and passion are here too much restricted. In i

a commentary quoted by Hodgson, we read : The belief of a v J 
sensible incorporeal principle in the reality of that which is only a ^

mirage, is accompanied by a desire for this mirage and by a con- ■

viction of its value and reality : this desire is called smkhdra.*'^^

To which Burnouf added: “The sankhdrd are thus the things 
quae fingit animus, that is, which the spirit creates, makes, 
imagines {sankharoti) ; they are, in a word, the products of the 
faculty which it has of conceiving, of imagining. It is in such 
terms that the object of the “ mania '' begins to manifest itself 
and that a particular current, santdna begins to define itself ^

in the descent towards samsaric existence. We can, moreover, I

relate the sankhdrd to kamma (Sanskrit : karma) in a double I

sense : in the vertical chain, by taking kamma in the general |in the descent towards samsaric existence. We can, moreover, I

relate the sankhdrd to kamma (Sanskrit : karma) in a double I

sense : in the vertical chain, by taking kamma in the general |

meaning of action and as the general principle accounting for |

the difference of beings and in the saihsaric, temporal and |

horizontal chain, by seeking in kamma, rather, the roots of the ^

character, the predispositions, the innate tendencies, as well as 
all fresh ones which develop and which, when they are established 
and incorporated in the body of craving, pass from being to being.

In this second sense we shall see that the sankhdra are considered 
to be one of the five groups making up the personality. But, 
ultimately, the root of these sankhdra on the conditioned, ^ 1

samsaric plane, goes back, in everyone, to the sankhdra which |

make up the second niddna of the vertical series. 1

3. — ^The sankhdrd, through the distinction or individuation ;

that they imply, give place to the third niddna, to vinhdna or ^ I 
“ consciousness understood as distinctive consciousness. “That !

is to say, it is the germ of all that will eventually appear as ;

individuality, as individual consciousness or consciousness of “ I 
in the general sense of the Sanskrit term ahamkdra, and which

Cf. Corpus Hermetimm, I, i : Seeing his own form in the water, he

conceived a desire for it and wished to possess it. The act accompanied the ;

desire and the irrational form was conceived. Nature took possession of her ' J 
lover, surrounded him and they joined in mutual love. This is why, alone |

amongst the beings that live on the earth, man is twofold, mortal in the body, |

immortal in essence . . . Superior to sleep ( = avijjd), he is dominated by sl^ep |

E. Burnouf, Introduction d Vhistoirc du houddhisme indien, Paris, 2nd. edn., \

1876, pp. 448-449. I

Cf. Visuddhi-magga, XVII. |

CONDITIONED GENESIS 79E. Burnouf, Introduction d Vhistoirc du houddhisme indien, Paris, 2nd. edn., \

1876, pp. 448-449. I

Cf. Visuddhi-magga, XVII. |

CONDITIONED GENESIS 79

also includes forms of individuality differing from what is usually 
understood as human individuality.

4. — The fourth niddna is ndma-rupa or “ name-and-form 
This has already been discussed in some detail. All that is 
necessary here is to extend the concept once again, thinking of 
the general combination of both material elements (" matter ”) 
and immaterial or mental elements (‘‘ mind ”), which vinMija, 
or individual consciousness in general, needs as a base. On the 
level of the fourth niddna occurs the meeting of the vertical 
direction with the horizontal, and which leads to the conception 
and the generation of a being. . At this point the transcendental 
dispositions are incorporated in the elements of sariisaric heredity, 
which, whenever the series turns towards a human birth, show 
themselves, to a large extent, in the materia of the biological 
heredity of the parents.To orientate ourselves on this point we must consider Buddhism 
in the light of a more general teaching. Three factors come 
together in the birth of a human being. The first is of a transcen- 
dental nature and is connected with the first three niddna: 
“ ignorance,” mania and sankhdra must, in the first place, have 
determined a darkening and a descending current which, through 
the second niddna, has already been given its direction, and 
through the third, already tends towards an individuated form 
having an “ I "-consciousness. The second factor, on the other 
hand, is connected with forces and influences that are already 
organised, with a will that is already determined, thus correspond- 
ing to one of those processes of " combustion ” which constitute 
samsdra, and of which we have already spoken. These influences 
and’this will can be considered comprehensively as a form of 
entity sui generis, which we may call ” sarhsaric entity " or 
” entity of craving ”. It is a " life ” which does not exhaust 
itself within the limits of the individual but which is thought of, 
rather, as the ” life ” of this life and which is associated with 
the notions of “ daemon ”, “ double ” and ” genius ”, of kd, 
fravashi and fylgya, etc., which occur in other traditions and 
which, in the Indo-Aryan tradition, already existed as, for 
example, the linga-iarira or " subtle body ” of Sdthkhya, or as 
that entity — gandharva (Pali, gandhahba) — ^whose presence a text 
of the earliest Buddhist canon records as necessary, in addition

8o THE DOCTRINE OP AWAKENING8o THE DOCTRINE OP AWAKENING

to the parents, for a birth to occur. In the Abhidharmakofa, 
that is to say, in the theoretical system of Buddhism, this entity 
receives the name of antardhhava ; it is thought that it has a pre- 
and inter-natal existence ; nourished by " desire ” and carried 
by'impulses fed by other lives, it seeks to manifest itself in a 
new existence.®® This, then, is the second factor, already 
potentially corresponding to a largely predetermined " name- 
and-form On the level of this niddna — ndma-rupa — occurs 
the meeting of the principle that is obscured by ignorance with 
the antardbhava, or samsaric daemon, or entity of craving.; the 
first, in a manner of speaking, joins with the second, inserting 
itself in this way into a particular group of samsaric 
heredity.We have now to consider the third factor. In one of the texts 
we have just mentioned it says that the super-sensible eye sees 
the daemon wandering about until an opportunity for a new 
" combustion ” presents itself on the occasion- of the meeting 
of a man and a woman who may be suitable as its father and 
mother, that is to say, who may present it with a heredity in 
accordance with its cravings. A thing then occurs, with reference 
to which the doctrine in question is singularly in agreement with 
what “ psycho-analysis ” — even with its various deformations ■ 
and exaggerations — ^has presented to our modem eyes in the guise 
of theories of the libido and of the “(Edipus” or "Electra 
complex .The doctrine speaks, in fact, of a desire which this 
entity may conceive either for the futme mother or for the future 
father, according to the sex to which it belonged in its previous 
and now exhausted life, and of a corresponding aversion for the 
other parent.®® An identification follows through the infatuation 
and delight of the pair, by means of which the entity enters the 
womb and conception takes place. Immediately the various 
khandhd, the germinal chain of factors which will form the basis 
of the personality, condense arotmd it, and from this point there 
follows that physiological process of embryonic development 
which, in its exterior aspects, is known to contemporary medicine.

Maph., XXXVIII, ; Jdtaha, 330; MilindapaHhaf 123.'

Ahnidharmakoga, III, 12; cf. L. de la Valine Poussin, Nirvana, Paris 
J925, p. 28.

It was, moreover, already a Vedic idea (J^g-Veda, X, Ixxxv, 40), that the 
gandharva, the genius or double, found the wife before the husband.

CONDITIONED GENESIS 8l

Its internal development is determined by the various remaining 
nidam, of which we yet have to speak.**CONDITIONED GENESIS 8l

Its internal development is determined by the various remaining 
nidam, of which we yet have to speak.**

Thus, finally, there are present in the human being three 
principles or entities, which are called in Sdmkhya, kmatjM, Ufiga 
and sthula-ganra. These are also known to the ancient Western 
traditions as nous, psyche and soma, or as mens, anima and corpus. 
In coimection with these last,' we should remember the strict 
relationship that was conceived between the spirit as daemon 
or double, and the “ genius ” as life and memory of a particular 
blood and a particular stock ; a concept which, in its turn goes 
back to the Upanishad “ way of the fathers ‘’-—pitr-yana, to the 
path which continually leads back to birth according to the law 
of craving and the nature of saihsaric existence. The anima, 
according to the original concept, belongs to this very plane, 
it combines more or less with the “ daemon ” as an irrational 
entity ; and even in the Buddhist texts dealing with the prajnd- 
pdramitd, the person or anima — pudgala — ^is often confused 
with this pre-fonned principle which takes on existence as the 
life of a determined life, and holds together its elements ; a 
principle which yet maintains itself as a separate energy, not 
bound to these elements, and which transmits itself through 
various lives.In the texts of the oldest Buddhist canon (which is in P41i), 
things are often presented in such a manner that the daemon 
or saihsaric entity seems to be equivalent to vinnd-^a, that is, 
to " consciousness ”, the third nidana. In reality, the two things, 
as we have said, are quite distinct : the identification is explained 
by the fact that, through what we may call an elective affinity 
or a convergence, an identification is made between the force 
from above that is carried down by ignorance, and this entity 
. made of desire : this identification is entirely analogous to the 
identification of the same entity with the material that the future 
parents offer for its new manriestation of craving. “ Conscious- 
ness ”, vinnd'^a, is not the ” daemon ” ; it meets the ” daemon ", 
however, and identifies and joins itself with it at the moment 
when it achieves one of its inffividuations and incarnations ; this 
requires, in. fact, an already specified life-force and its craving.

L. de la Vallde Poussin, Bouddhisme, Etudes et Matdriaux, Paris, 1909, 
pp. 25 iflj.

82 THE DOCTRINE OP AWAKENING

Thus, in the human compound there certainly exists a "daemon” 
which is the seat of a more than individual samsaric conscious- 
ness, and to which there may also be attached memories, instincts 
and causes of remote origin and this is the signification of the 
so-called alayavinndna, the “ containing-consciousness ” which 
receives all impressions both conscious and unconscious of a 
certain stock or current ; yet there also exists in the human 
being a higher principle, but which ignorance and the 
dsavd have bewildered and obscured. This is a fundamental 
point, and if it is not kept in mind, large parts of the Buddhist 
ascesis will remain unintelligible.It is said that at the point when the antardihava, the daemon, 
enters the womb, and when the regrouping and solidification of 
the material elements begins around it, it " dies ”.** By this 
we must understand the cessation of the continuity of conscious- 
ness, and this means that one does not in the ordinary way 
remember pre-natal and pre-conceptional states either samsaric 
or transcendental. It is a kind of rupture, for, starting from this 
point, the fourth niddna, the interdependent correlation between 
consciousness and the psycho-physical unity {ndma-rupa) which 
individuates it, is established. For if consciousness, vinndrta, 
must enter the mother’s womb in order that " name-and-form ” 
can originate, then there must, at the same time, be " name- 
and-form ” so that consciousness can exist.***

In the texts we find the following, simile for the relationship 
existing between the three principles : the seed is vinUdifa, 
consciousness, the earth is kamma, and the water which makes 
the seed grow into a plant is thirst. Kamma here is the force, 
already determined by the sankhdrd, that corresponds to the 
" saihsaric entity ”, into which the descending principle (seed) 
enters and is brought to a fresh existence because there is craving. 
Only in cases of exceptional " descents ”, " fatidic ” in nature, 
of beings who. having removed ignorance to a certain degree, 
are in their substance mainly composed of “ iUuraination ” {bodhi 
— ^this is the literal sense of the expression bodhisattva), is the 
" vehicle ” they use in place of the aniardbhava or entity of 
craving, a " celestial body ” or " body of splendour ” — tusita-kdya.

•• Cf. C. Tucci, XI buddhismo, Foligno, 1926, p. 75.

M Cf. Dlgha, XV, 21-22.

CONDITIONED GENESIS

83•• Cf. C. Tucci, XI buddhismo, Foligno, 1926, p. 75.

M Cf. Dlgha, XV, 21-22.

CONDITIONED GENESIS

83

In these cases birth takes place without any dissolution of the 
continuity of consciousness ; the individual is in perfect possession 
of himself, he is imperturbable and has vision ; and for his 
nativity he has a choice of the place, the time and the mother.*®

Such views naturally reduce the implications of earthly bio- 
logical heredity to merely relative importance. Heredity is 
considered here as something much vaster : as not only that 
which one inherits from one’s ancestors, but also as that which 
comes from oneself and from antecedent identifications. Indeed, 
taking heredity comprehensively, only the latter is essential as 
far as the core of the human personality is concerned. From 
a higher point of view, to leave this heredity out of account 
would be as absurd as thinking that chicks of different species 
are bom only from eggs, without a corresponding animal here- 
dity.*® Returning to the S3mibolisni of burning : if we wish to 
find the origin of the fire that bums vsdth some particular log, it 
would be absurd to trace the origin of the log to the tree from- 
which it came, and that to the forest to which it belonged, and 
so on — at the most we could only discover the quality of the fuel. 
The origin of the fire must, instead, be sought in the nature of 
the fire itself, not in that of the wood, by tracing the spark which 
ht the flame, and then the flame from which the spark came, and 
so on. Equally, the most essential and truly "direct” heredity of 
a being is not found in the genealogy of its earthly parents. For 
beings are heirs and sons of action and not of father and mother.*’ 
Besides one’s own heredity of body and soma, there is samsaric 
heredity and, finally, there is one’s heredity that is the principle 
" from above ” clouded by " ignorance ”.5.— Returning to the chain of conditioned genesis, the states 
or nidana which follow " name-and-form ” refer to the internal 
side of embryonic development. As the fifth link of the series 
we have sai-dyatana, that is (the assumption of) the sixfold base. 
By this is meant the sensory fields or strands in which, through 
“ contact ”, the various sense-impressions and the various images 
of the mind will bum. In the Indo-Aryan tradition there are 
always considered to be six senses, the five that we know, with

« Cf. e.g. Majjh., CXXIII ; Dlgha, XIV, i, 17 ; Bardo ThSdol, cit., p. 191 ; 
Anguti., VIII, 70.

Cf. H. C. Warren, Buddhism in Translations, Cambridge, Mass., 1909, p. 212.

Dahlke, Buddh, als W&Uansch,, cU,^ p. 61 [Buddhism and Science, p. 55).

84 the doctrine op awakening

the addition of mano (Sanskrit : mams), mind or thought. 
Far from being S3monymous with “ spirit ", as many of our 
contemporaries believe, thought, subjective thought tied to the 
brain, is here considered as a sense sui generis, ranking more 
or less with the others. Whilst it is not limited to co-ordinating 
and o'rganising the impressions derived from the senses, it is held 
that thought originates from special and subtle forms of “contact".

6-7. — ^With the sixth nidam, phassa, we pass from potentiality 
to actuality. Phassa literally means " contact " or " touch ". 
It refers to all experience that, under particular stimuli, begins 
to‘ bum or blaze up in each of the six sensory fields we have 
mentioned. For this reason the next niddna is vedand, feeling, 
the affective colouring of the perceptions, sensation as a whole. 
Here a new development begins, which we may regard as the 
manifestation, the igniting, of the, so to speak, transcendental 
mania which appears in the guise of that particular desire or 
attachment forming the substratum of a given being's experience 
in given surroundings. '

8. — ^The which immediately follows feeling is therefore8. — ^The which immediately follows feeling is therefore

thirst, ianhd. This awakens in the various sensory fields, and' 
is nourished by contact, exactly like the flame which — according 
to a text we have quoted — ^bums in every sense and includes 
the object, the senserorgan, the contact and the impression which 
follows from it, even when it is neither pleasurable nor painful 
but neutral.

9. — And as “ to burn” on this level is the same as “ to be ", 
but since the flame, in order to bum needs material and depends 
on material and must have material, there follows the ninth 
niddna, updddna. The term, literally, means " to embrace it 
is an acceptance, a coming into possession in the sense of attach- . 
ment or dependence. Thus many have translated the word by 
" will " or by “ affirmation " (anunayo), which is the opposite 
of detachment or rejection (vimyo). Therefore, just at this poiot 
the ahamkdra, the general category of the “ belonging to self ”, 
adhydtmika (Pali : ajjhattika), arises and comes into being : there 
arises the feeling of “ I ” or of the “ person " (sakkdya) defined, 
by reference to this or that object, by the formula " this is mine,

I am this, this is my self " ; here, then, take place the 
aggregations, the formation Qf the personality based on the

COND-ITIONED GENESIS 85I am this, this is my self " ; here, then, take place the 
aggregations, the formation Qf the personality based on the

COND-ITIONED GENESIS 85

five groups Which are once again: the group of materiality 
{fupa), including all that falls under the dominion of the senses ; 
the group of feeling {vedand) ; the group of perceptions or 
representations or mental forms (sannd) ; the group of formations, 
of tendencies and, m general, of volition {sankhdra) ; finally, the 
group of consciousness itself, in so far as it is determined, 
conditioned and individuated {viMdna). It is said : "Attach- 
ment (updddm) is not the same as the five groups of attachment ; 
and neither is attachment outside the five groups of attachment. 
That which, in the five groups, is the cause of will, is affirmation, 
that is attachment.”^® Thus saihsaric personahty is not made 
up of these five groups, Uut of that which in them is " craving 
of will of that which proceeds as the result of the fundamental 
element of the whole process : namely, thirst. This now joins 
with the craving of the " daemon ”, and, at the moment of 
satisfying itself through the contacts, determines dependence ; 
whilst from dependence, in turn, proceed the anguish, the 
restlessness and the fundamental fear of those who have not in 
themselves their own principle and who desperately cling to 
sakkdya, to the person, to the “ I ”. On the subject of " attach- 
ment ”, there is said to exist a kind of brooding and watch over 
the feelings that are experienced, be they pleasant, unpleasant 
or neither impleasant nor plesisant, and a clinging to them. 
With this brooding and watch over the feelings and with 
this adherence to them, there arises satisfaction (in a special, 
transcendental sense for, as we have seen, the feelings may be 
entirely neutral) ; this satisf3nng of the feelings is attachment. 
Through this attachment originates " becoming ”.®®10.— In fact, all the necessary conditions for the establishment 
of the person are now present, and with its actual becoming 
there occurs the act of synthesis for its definite solidification as

“ Majjh... CIX.

»• Majjh., XLIV.

Majjh., XXXVIII. In tMs connection we may here explain two important 
Buddhist notions : that of sdsava and that of prdpti [skf.]. Sdsavd, from 
dsava^ means the co-intoxicant, or everything that lends itself to a develop- 
ment of '' mania ” or original '' intoxication" ; it is extended to include both 
" good " and " bad " states, and only "that which is not included " is not 
co-intoxicant, and has the natiure of pure transcendency (cf, Dhammasang., 
1103, 1104). — As for prdpti, this signifies assumption or incorporation: it is 
the primary adhesion, by which a tendency ttiat one has acquired exists 
potentially, only awaiting the opportunity for appearing again, even when, 
through satisfaction, it seemed to have disappeared, Cf. below, p. ?47..

86 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

an individual being, and of its “ existence ” in a literal sense : 
to stand or come out in an exteriorised existence. This consti- 
tutes the tenth nidana, bhava, which literally means " becoming ” 
and which has as its counterpart :

11. — ^Birth, jdti, often thought of also as a " descent '’.«i From 
the fifth to the tenth niddna we are concerned with states which 
develop in a complementary manner to embryonic life, starting 
from conception, with the determination of what in modern 
philosophy would be called the a priori categories of experience, 
that is, the modes in which this experience develops in space• and time or in other conditions of existence. It is noteworthy 
that the doctrine in question does not limit itself to the case 
of human and terrestrial birth. Although it is evident that 
Buddhism has formulated the theory of conditioned genesis for 
this case in particular, yet, in general, the possibility of a birth 
-—jdii, the eleventh niddna — ^must be considered not only on the 
plane of animal generation, but also on that of “ pure forms ” 
— rupa — or on the plane “ free from form ” — arupa.^^ In dealing 
with these cases, however, a modification of the preceding 
exposition is necessary here and there so as to conform to the 
different circumstances. It must be emphasised, however, that 
the Buddhist doctrine, like every reaUy metaphysical teaching, 
goes far beyond the singular narrowness of outlook prevalent in 
the West, and considers that the human being is only one of 
many possible states of conditioned existence, just as individual 
human existence is only one of many possible forms of individual 
existence and, in itself, is simply a section of a current, of a santdna.

12. — ^The last niddna is jardmarana, that is, decay {jard — ^in 
this particular case meaning old age) and death (mar ana). '“The 
Inseparable complement to birth — -jdti — ^is decay and death. 
Omnia orta occidunt et aucta senescunt : “ becoming generates, 
the become grows old and dies.”®* According to the texts, not 
theoretically, but by direct experience, by an absolute liberating 
vision, the " clear, immaculate eye of truth” apprehends at a 
particular moment the meaning hidden in these words : “All that 
has origin has also an end.”®*

Sathyutt., XII, 2.

Cf. e.g. MaijK IX.

“ Majjh., I.

« Mafjh., LVI; LXXIV; Dlgha, XXI, ii, lo.

CONDITIONED GENESIS

87Sathyutt., XII, 2.

Cf. e.g. MaijK IX.

“ Majjh., I.

« Mafjh., LVI; LXXIV; Dlgha, XXI, ii, lo.

CONDITIONED GENESIS

87

The chain of conditioned genesis has now gradually brought us 
to the world of contingency, of eternal impermanence, of agita- 
tion, of individuality, which is an illusion and purely a name, of 
life, which is mixed with death and which is parched by anguish 
and by radical privation or insufficiency ; to the world in which 
there is no liberty, in which beings, in the grip of craving, either 
leap hither and thither like hares caught in a snare or are 
lost, as '' arrows shot by night In these terms, he who 
declared that he was able to explain all life from its founda- 
tions has expressed the teaching which comprises the first two 
truths of the Ariya, that is agitation as the root of all

suffering, and its underlying tanha, craving or desire.

Now that we have referred to the various possibilities of 
'' birth we must emphasise that whilst Buddhism recognises 
the existence of another world, or rather, of other worlds, of 
other conditions of existence beyond this world, these celestial 
worlds are also considered subject to dukkha. Divine entities 
— deva — exist in their hierarchies like those of the angels of 
Western theology, but they are not immortal beings. Although 
their existence may be indefinitely long compared with the life 
of a man — deva dtghdyukd — ^yet even for them there will be 
jardmarana, decline and d5dng. This is to be understood in the 
sense of the general Hindu teaching on the cyclical laws of the 
cosmic periods in which was put forward the alternate reabsorp- 
tion and emanation of all manifested forms, including the highest, 
into the unmanifested principle, superior and anterior to them all. 
We know also that the ancient Western traditions, with their 
doctrine of the seons, of the saecula and of the cosmic years, 
were ^acquainted with similar views.In passing, it is worth mentioning that there occurs in Buddhism 
a personification of the pnnceps hujus mundi in the shape of Mara. 
If Mara is etymologically derived from Mrtyu, the ancient god of 
death, here he appears as the power which stands at the root of 
the whole saihsaric existence, asserting himself wherever there is 
. passive identification, attachment, bond of desire, satisfaction, on 
whatever plane of existence or in whatever world even, there- 
fore, in the spiritual world.®’ Mara, who has three daughters

Dhdmmapada, 342.

MajjK XI.

Samyutt,, XXII, 63; XXXV, 114; Mahdvagga (Vinaya), I, xi.

G

88 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENINGDhdmmapada, 342.

MajjK XI.

Samyutt,, XXII, 63; XXXV, 114; Mahdvagga (Vinaya), I, xi.

G

88 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

— TanJia, Rati and Arati, that is, craving, love and hate — ^is he 
who sows the pastures where beings, once enticed, satisfy them- 
selves ; but in the moment of their satisfaction they faU into his 
power®® and, paralysed by mania, re-enter without rest the flux 
of transient existence.*® Mara is also an incarnation of the 
ephemeral character of samslLric existence, and therefore, as the 
god of death, when the moment comes he surprises people and 
carries them off, while they are busy with this or that, “ like the 
inundation of a sleeping village.”*® Mara is closely related to 
" ignorance He can act so long as he remains unknown. 
“ This man knows me not ” — ^this is the condition under which he 
works. The moment the unclouded eye perceives him, however, 
his power becomes paralysed.**- 
The great practical significance of the doctrine of faticca- 
samuppdda lies in the fact that, through it we see that the con- 
ditioned and contingent world does not exist as something abso- 
lute, but is itself, in its turn, conditioned, contingent ; it is the 
effect of a process in which extraneous causes do not figure ; a 
change, therefore, or a reinoval or a destruction is always 
possible.** Created by deeds, the conditioned forms of existence 
can be dissolved by deeds. Buddhist teaching considers, besides 
the descending series of the "formations” from ignorance- 
called the “ false road ” — ^the ascending series of the dissolutions, 
called the " right road.”** Whilst in the first series, resulting 
from ignorance the sankhard are formed, and from these, " con- 
sciousness ”, from consciousness, " name-and-fotm ”, and so on 
to birth, decline, suffering and death — ^in the second series, when 
ignorance ” is destroyed, the sankhdi'd are destroyed ; when the 
sankhard are destroyed, “ consciousness ” is destroyed, and so on 
to the conditioned removal of the ultimate effects, that is, of 
birth, decline, suffering and death, or, in other words, the law of 
saihsaric existence.**It can now be understood why the attainment of the truth of 
conditioned genesis by Prince Siddhattha— the truth, that is, that

Itivutiaka, 14.

XXV,

Dhammapada, 287.

« MaUvagga (Vinaya), I, xi, 2 ; I, xiii, 2 ; Majjh., XLIX, etc*

" Sa^yutL, XII, i seq^ 20.

** SaihyutL, XII, 3.

** Mahdvagga (Vin.), I,, i, 2.

CONDITIONED GENESIS

89

samsdm " is ” not, but " is become ” — ^was conceived of by him as 
a liberating illumination : It is become, it is become ' : as

something never heard before, this knowledge arose in me, vision 
arose in me, intuition arose in me, wisdom arose in me, light arose 
in me.” . And it was also said on this same occasion : ” When 
the real nature of things is made clear to the ardent, meditating 
ascetic, then aU his doubts fall away, having realised what this 
nature is and what is its cause.”*® And again : " When the real 
nature of things is made clear to the ardent, meditating ascetic, 
he arises and scatters the ranks of Mara, like the sun which Hghts 
the sky.”*® At this point the samsaric demonism comes to 
an end.Now that the descending chain of the twelve niddna has taken 
us to the plane of samsaric existence lived by a finite being, we 
can consider the other interpretation of these same niidna which 
we have called ‘‘ horizontal ”. We must now subdivide the 
twelve niddna into four groups and refer them to more than one 
indiyidual existence. The first group wiE then consist of the 
first two niddna {avijjd and sankhdra), which correspond to a 
samsaric heredity come to a particular being from another life. 
Avijjd, unawareness, then refers to the " four truths ”, and it 
means the unawareness both of the contingency of the world 
and of the way out of it, while the sankhdra are the predispositions 
created in a previous life lived in this ignorance. The second 
group refers, instead, to present existence and includes the three 
niddna, “ consciousness ”, " name-and-form ” and “ base of the 
six senses ”, aU connected with the formation and development 
of the new life which takes on this heredity. The third group 
consists of the four niddna ; " contact ”, “ sensations ”, “ thirst ” 
and “ attachment ” and refers to the normal life of the average 
man in so far as this confirms the samsaric state of existenpe by 
nourishing the pre-existing craving on further craving and by 
generating, through thoughts and actions, energies which will 
appear in a new life. FinaEy, the last three niddna : “ (new) 
becoming ”, “birth” and “decay and death” refer to this new life 
being, as it were, effects.*^ In regard to this interpretation,

Mahdvagga (Vin.), I, i, 3.

Mahdvagga (Vin.), I, i> 7.

This is the interpretation mainly fellowed by NyanatUoka in his edition 
of the Anguttarornihdyat v. I, p. 291.

go THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENINGMahdvagga (Vin.), I, i, 3.

Mahdvagga (Vin.), I, i> 7.

This is the interpretation mainly fellowed by NyanatUoka in his edition 
of the Anguttarornihdyat v. I, p. 291.

go THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

individual explanations of some of the nidana are as follows : 
ignorance is ignorance of the four truths ; the sankhdra are the 
formations or predispositions manifesting in the three fields of 
deed, word and thought ; consciousness — vinndita — ^is the 
consciousness which relates to the sixfold base (to the six senses); 
“ name-and-form ” is the psycho-physical whole of the living 
man ; contacts and feeling again refer to sensory experience ; 
finally, updddna is attachment to desire, or opinions, or belief in 
the “ I ", or behef in the miraculous efficacy of rules and rites.*® 
Although this " horizontal " interpretation should be kept in 
mind in order to clarify certain canonical contexts, it must be 
remembered that in character it is lower and more external than 
the other vertical and transcendental interpretation, since it 
refers exclusively to the samsaric plane ; nor can it claim to be 
completely coherent. For example, it is difficult to see why 
" becoming ”, " birth ” and “ decay and death ” are not included 
in the middle group which refers to present existence, but apply . 
instead to a successive existence, almost as if they were not valid 
either for the present life or for that in which ignorance apd 
the sankhdra are placed ; as if the successive existence did not' 
again contain ignorance and the sankhdra, consciousness, sixfold 
base, etc., that is, the nidana that are referred only to a previous 
existence or to the present existence which takes its heredity 
from the previous existence. The fact that the majority of 
Orientalists, in spite of this, have , halted at this second inter- 
pretation -without becoming aware of these incoherencies, only 
shows the superficiality of their minds and their complete lack 
of metaphysical sensibilityOnce the doctrine of paticca-samuppada has been understood 
as indicating the conditioned nature of samsaric existence, then, 
as we have said, the third and fourth truths of the Ariya follow 
directly. The third postulates the possibility of destroying the 
state generated through the twelve niddna ; and the fourth 
concerns the method by which this possibility can be realised, 
and leads up to the achievement of awakening and illumination.

As a practical ascetic presupposition, the principle of immanence 
is valid here. It is suggestively expressed in an allegorical story 
about the " world’s end One of the Buddha’s interlocutors

*• Sankyutt., XII, z.

CONDITIONED GENESIS 9I

says that he was once carried — ^with magical rapidity — further 
and further on without succeeding in reaching the end of the 
world. The Buddha replies : “ One can not, by walking, reach 
the end of the world ” — and immediately passes to the symbolical 
significance By adding : “ where there is no birth nor decadence 
nor death nor rising nor perishing.” By walking, by going — 
that is, along samsdm — one does not find the end of the world. 
For it is in oneself. The world ends when the intoxications or 
manias, the dsava, are destroyed. And here the principle is stated : 
“ In this fathom-length body, furnished with perception and 
consciousness, there is contained the world, the arising of the 
world, the end of the world and the path which leads to the end 
of the world.”^® The body taken as a whole is the concrete centre 
of the samsaric experience of the world, yet both in its physical 
and in its invisible, hidden sides all the niddna are immanent. 
We can, however, find the roots of this experience, and, further- 
more, the powers which can eventually cut off these roots, and 
are thus enabled to transform one mode of being into another.In this connection the power of the “ mind ” is often emphasised; 
mind, that is, in a general sense, and not just psychological 
faculties. " What we are is the result of our thoughts ; mind 
is the foundation of aU our conditions ; they are mind-made.”'*’ 
" The world is guided by consciousness, drawn along by conscious- 
ness, subject to the power of consciousness that has arisen.”'^ 
It is the mind which “ deceives man and lolls his body.” 
Because of it, there “ exists all that has a form ”. “ The

mind, our destiny and our life, these three things are closely 
connected. The mind directs and guides, and determines om: 
destiny here below, on which depends our life ; thus, in a mutual 
perennial succession.”'® But the mind depends on the man; 
it may lead him to the world of agitation and impermanence, 
yet to it Prince Siddhattha owed his awakening, his becoming 
a Buddha."

We have now discussed all the necessary assumptions for the 
Buddhist ascesis, both as ascesis in general and as the AHyan 
Doctrine of Awakening.

Angutt., rv, 45 ; IV, 46 ; IX, 38.

Dhammapada, i.

Angutt,, IV, 186; Samyutt., I, 7.

Mahdpavinifv,, 64, Mahdparinirv., 64.

vn

DETERMINATION OF THE VOCATIONSAngutt., rv, 45 ; IV, 46 ; IX, 38.

Dhammapada, i.

Angutt,, IV, 186; Samyutt., I, 7.

Mahdpavinifv,, 64, Mahdparinirv., 64.

vn

DETERMINATION OF THE VOCATIONS

T he Buddhist Way, as a whole, is signposted by samatha 
and vipassam. Samatha must be understood as an unshak- 
able calm, which is gained with the help of various disciplines, 
particularly of mental concentration and control of thought and 
conduct; in attaining it, we still remain in the domain of an 
ascesis which, as we have said, need not in itself imply any tran- 
scendental realisation and which, therefore, may also be regarded 
as a form of mastery and as an acquisition of strength for one 
who remains and acts in the world. Vipassond, on the other hand, 
indicates “ knowledge " — clear perception, making , for detachr, 
ment, of the essence of samsaric life and of its contingency and 
irrationality ; the noble, penetrating knowledge " which perceives 
rise and fall If to this “ knowledge ” is added the calm and 
the control of samatha, then its development is assured and trans- 
figured, and the result is the ascesis which leads to awakening. 
In any case, these two factors are such that they reciprocally 
integrate each other.^ Vipassand is the indispensable condition 
for liberation.

The point of departure therefore consists in arousing this 
" knowledge ” to some extent. In this connection we can speak 
of a real and positive determination of vocations. It is a widely 
held opinion that Buddhist " preaching ” had a “ universal ” 
character.' This is an error — it may be true superficially, and of 
later and altered forms of the doctrine, but not of essentials. 
Buddhism is essentially aristocratic. We can see this in the 
legendary story in the canonical texts where the divinity Brahma 
Sahampati, in order to induce Prince Siddhattha not to keep to 
himself the knowledge he had obtained, points out to him the 
existence of " beings of a nobler kind ” capable of tmderstanding1 Cf. AngutL, V, 92-94.

92

DETERMINATION OF THE VOCATIONS

93

it. The Buddha himself finally recognises this, in these terms : 
“And I saw, looking at the world with the awakened eye, beings 
of noble kind and of common kind, acute of mind and obtuse of 
mind, well endowed and ill endowed, quick to understand and 
slow to understand, and many who consider that enthusiasm for 
other worlds is bkd.” There follows a simile : as some, lotus 
flowers grow in deep, muddy water, as other push up towards the 
surface of the water, yet others “ emerge from the water and 
stand up, free from the water ” — thus there are, in contrast to 
the mass of people, beings of a nobler kind.® They are, in other 
words, those who hold fast, who have not been entirely blinded 
by “ignorance”, but who preserve a memory of the origins. 
Water, moreover, is a general traditional symbol of inferior nature 
that is bound to passion and becoming — ^whence, be it noted in 
passing, is derived the symbolism used by Buddhism of the man 
who walks on the “ waters ” without sinking down in them, or 
of the man who crosses the waters.

It is, then, to an elite that Buddhism originally addressed its 
Doctrine of Awakening ; a doctrine which is, in fact, a touchstone. 
Only the “ noble natures ”, the “ noble sons ” react positively. 
This is now the place to discuss the problem of the “ vocations ”.

Let us consider first the idea of “ renunciation ”, which is, in 
some ways, the key to the whole ascesis. “Renunciation” may 
have many different meanings, depending on circumstances.Let us consider first the idea of “ renunciation ”, which is, in 
some ways, the key to the whole ascesis. “Renunciation” may 
have many different meanings, depending on circumstances.

There is a renunciation of an inferior kind, which is the one 
that — as we said at the beginning — ^recurs in the ascetic forms 
which have developed in the West since the decline of the ancient 
Classical and Aryan world. This renunciation signifies " mortifi- 
catibn ” ; it means painful separation from things and pleasures 
which are stiU desired ; it is at kind of masochism, of taste for 
suffering not entirely unmixed with an ill-concealed resentment 
against all forms of health, strength, wisdom and virility. This 
kind of renunciation, in fact, has often been the strength, bom of 
necessity, of the world’s disinherited, of those who do not fit in 
with their smroundings or with their own body or with their own 
race or tradition and who hope, by means of renunciation, to

* Majjh., XXVI, Mahdvagga (Vin.), I, v, 2-12 ; Angutt, IV, 36, where the 
sitaile is applied to the Awakened One himself, and is continued with the follow- 
ing addition : Thus I also, born in the world, growm up in the world, have 
overcome the world and stand, untouched by the world

94 DOCTRINE OE AWAKENING

assure for themselves a future world where, to use a Nietzschean 
expression, the inversion of all values will occur. In other cases, 
the motive for renunciation is mainly supplied by a religious 
vision : the " love of God " induces renunciation and detachment 
from the joys of the world; a detachment which even here keeps, 
in the most favourable circumstances, its painful and almost 
violent character with regard to all that one would naturally tend 
to wish and desire. The fact that asceticism is generally associ- 
ated, in the West, with such attitudes is one of the many conse- 
quences of the low level to whiph, as we have already mentioned, 
the “ Dark Age ”, kali-ynga, had fallen.The Ariya. t5q)e of renunciation, presupposed by the 
Buddhist Doctrine of Awakening, is of a very different character. 
Even the tenn normally nstA—paviveka, viveka — ^means detach- 
ment, scission, separation, aloofness, without any particular 
affective tone.® Apart from this, the example of the Buddha 
himself is decisive. He left the world and took to the ascetic 
road, not as one forced to reject the world through necessity, 
indigence or dangers,* but as the son of a king, a prince, " in 
the first flower of life ”, healthy, endowed with *' happy youth ”, 
possessing all that he could desire.® Neither religious visions of 
any description, nor hopes of a hereafter played any part in his 
decision : it came inevitably from the firm reaction of a " noble 
spirit ” to the lived experience of samsaric existence. One text, 
here, is quite definite ; it says that, on the path of the Ariya 
renunciation is not made by reason of the " four misfortunes 
disease, disasters, old age or the loss of dear ones— ^but by reason 
of the knowledge that the world is contingent, that one is alone 
and without help in it, that it is not one’s own, and finally, that 
it is in the grip of an eternal insufficiency, unsated and burning 
•with thirst.®

It is now easy to see how exoteric and popular are some of 
the -views ascribed to the doctrine. Such -views have led some

® Cf. Angutt., Ill, 92. It should be noted in this passage how detachment 
occurs as a result of the presence of a positive element — it states : since one’s 
own conduct is right, false conduct is got rid of ; since one possesses true 
understanding, false understanding is got rid of ; since the manias are shut 
out, the manias are got rid of.

* MajjK LXVIII.

® Majjh., LXVIII ; this describes all that Prince Siddhattha is supposed 
to have enjoyed, although with an intentional exaggeration, cf. Angutt., Ill, 38.

« Majjh., LXXV; LXXXII.

DETfeRMlNATIO^^ OE THE VOCATIONS 95« Majjh., LXXV; LXXXII.

DETfeRMlNATIO^^ OE THE VOCATIONS 95

Westerners to the conclusion that Buddhism begins and ends 
by showing that " the world is pain ” and hence appealing 
to man’s natural tendency to flee pain until he is induced to 
prefer the “ nothing For the same reason the legend of 
the four meetings — according to which Prince Siddhattha was 
persuaded to renounce the world after seeing a new-born baby, 
a sick man, an old man and a dead man — is to be taken with 
great reserve. Causes such as these can only occasionally pro- 
duce a reaction, which in any case will eventually transcend them. 
And the same must be said of the more general theme of the 
“divine messengers” — consisting likewise of new-birth, disease, 
old age and death : through failure to understand their message 
one would be destined to the “ infernal regions

This is only superstructure. The essential, rather is to confront 
a man with a relentless analysis of himself, of the conditioned 
nature of common existence in this world, or any other world, 
and to ask him : " Can you say : this am I ? Can you really 
identify yourself with this? Is it this that you wish?” 
This is the moment of fundamental testing, this is the 
touchstone for distinguishing the " noble beings ” from average 
beings ; it is here that they are separated according to their 
natures ; it is thus that their vocations are (iecided. The test in 
Buddhism has various stages : from the most immediate forms of 
experience the disciple proceeds to higher levels, to super-sensible 
horizons, to universality, to celestial worlds,® where the question 
is repeated : Are you this ? Can you identify yourself with this ? 
Can you satisfy yourself in this ? Is this aU that you wish ? 
The noble being always ends by answering in the negative. And 
then the “ revolution ” occurs. The disciple leaves his home, 
renounces the world and takes the ascetic path.This clearly shows the significance .of the other renunciation, 
the Ariya renunciation. This is based on “knowledge” and is 
accompanied by a gesture of disdain and a feeling of transcend-

’ Majjh., CXXX ; Angutt,, III, 35. It is easy to see that the deferences 
to the infernal regions which are found in these texts are simply popular 
references, without logical connection with the central ideas expressed there. 
The divine messengers can only impress on the mind that terrestrial life 
is finite and contingent ; one cannot see why those who either do not see the 
messengers or who limit themselves to taking note of that truth without deducing 
any special consequence, that is, by accepting contingent life as such, should 
be* punished with all sorts of fantastic torments hereafter,

® For the series of objects of possible identification see Majjh., I.

g6 THE DOCTRINE OP AWAKENING

ental dignity ; it is qualified by the superior man's will for the 
imconditioned, by the will, that is, of a man of a quite special -i 
“ race of spirit Such a man, then, does not reject life-— life 
which is interwoven with death — for " mortification ”, thereby '' 
doing violence to his own being, but because it is too little for him, J 
and when he remembers himself, he feels it to be inadequate to his 
real nature. At such- a moment it is natural to renounce, to cut 
oneself off, to stop taking part in the game. The oiily feeling 
there can be is one of scorn, when a man becomes aware that he : 
has been deceived and finally discovers the author of the decep- ^ 
tion : it is like the blind man who, whilst seekmg a clean white 
cloak, but, being unable to see, is given and accepts a discoloured 
and filthy one, and who, when his eyes are opened, is horrified |

and turns against the man who had made him wear it and who 1

had profited by his blindness. “ For a long time, indeed, I was 4and turns against the man who had made him wear it and who 1

had profited by his blindness. “ For a long time, indeed, I was 4

deluded, deceived and defrauded by my heart.”® On the path < 5 
of awakening, the point of departure is positive : it is not the 
forcible bending of a human being who is only conscious of being i

a man, aided and abetted by rehgious images and apocalyptic, j

messianic qr super-terrestrial visions ; it is rather, an impulse i

that springs' from the supernatural element in oneself which — -W- ]

though it has been obscured during the passage of time — s till sur- >

vives in “ noble beings ” beyond their saihsaric nature, like the i

lotus which, poised above the water, is free from the water. j

These are .the beings who, according to a text, gradually realise " I 
that the world unveiled by ascesis is their natural place, “ the I

land of their fathers ”, and that the other world — ^this world — |

is, instead, a foreign land to them.^® |

A short time ago we referred to a " quite special race of spirit ”.

We must explain this point and, together with it, the specific I

place of the Ariya. The touchstone, as we have said, is the vision i

of universal impermanence, of and Now, it is w/ *

said that the realisation that something is impermanent is eo ipso ' [

a motive for detachment from and renunciation of it. This de- 
pends, rather, on what we have elsewhere called the " race of the . |

spirit ”, which is at least as important as that of the body.“ Here 1

• Majjh., LXXV ; Dhammapada, 153-154. Jatakd, 168. I

“ On the theory of the " races of the spirit ”, see our Sintesi di dottrina |

deUa razza, Milan, 1941, pp. 113-170. from which is taken the terminology %

of the phrases to follow. , |

DETERMINATION OF THE VOCATIONS 97deUa razza, Milan, 1941, pp. 113-170. from which is taken the terminology %

of the phrases to follow. , |

DETERMINATION OF THE VOCATIONS 97

axe some examples. A "telluric” spirit may consider as quite 
natural a dark self-identification with becoming and with its 
elementary forces, to such an extent that it does not even become 
aware of its tragic aspect — as sometimes occurs amongst the 
Negroes, savage peoples, and even amongst certain Slavs. A 
" dionysian ” spirit may consider universal impermanence of little 
account, opposing to it carpe diem, the joy of the moment, the 
rapture of a corruptible being who enjoys from instant to 
instant corruptible things, a joy so much the more acute in that 
— ^as the well-known song of the Renaissance has it — “ di doman 
non v’^ certezza ”. A " lunar ” spirit, religiously inclined, may in 
its turn see in the contingency of fife an atonement or a test, 
in face of which it should behave with humility and resignation, 
having faith in the impenetrable divine will and maintaining the 
feeling of being a “ creature ” created by it out of nothing. By 
others still this death of ours is considered as a completely natural 
and fiinal phenomenon, the thought of which should not for a 
moment disturb a life turned towards earthly aspirations. 
Finally, a " Faustian ”, " titanic ” or Nietzschean spirit may 
profess “ tragic heroism ”, may desire becoming, and may even 
desire the " eternal return”. And so on. From these examples, 
it is easily seen that " knowledge ” produces “ detachment ” 
only in the case of a particular race of spirit, of that which in a 
special sense we have called " heroic ” and which is not uncon- 
nected with the theory of the bodhisatta. Only in those in whom 
this race survives and who wish it, can the spectacle of universal 
contingency be the principle of awakening, can it determine the 
choice of the vocations, can it arouse the reaction that follows 
frorf " No, I want no more of it ”, from " This does not belong 
to me, I am not this, this is not my self ” extended to all states 
of samsaric existence. The work, then, has one single justifica- 
tion : it must be done, that is to say, for the noble and heroic 
spirit there is no other alternative. Katam karaniyam — " that 
which has to be done has been done ” — ^this is the universally 
recurring formula that refers to the Ariya who have destroyed the 
dsava and achieved awakening.At this point anattd, the doctrine which denies the reality of 
the “ I ”, shows us a further aspect. The meaning of this 
doctrine here is simply that in the “ current ” and in the con-

9^ the doctrine oe awakening

tingent aggregation of states and functions which are normally 
considered as " I ”, it is impossible to recognise the true self, 
the super-sensible atmd of the preceding Upanishad speculation ; 
this true self is considered as practically non-existent for the 
common man. Buddhism does not say : the “ 1” does not 
exist — but rather : one thing only is certain, that nothing be- 
longing to samsaric existence and personality has the nature of 
" I This is explicitly stated in the texts.This is the scheme. The Buddha repeatedly makes his ques- 
tioner recognise that the bases of common personahty — ^materiality, 
feehng, perception, the formations, consciousness — are change- 
able, impermanent and non-substantial. After which, the 'ques- 
tion is asked: Can what is impermanent, changeable and non- 
substantial be considered thus : this is mine, this am I, this is 
my self ? The answer is always the same — as if it were perfectly 
natural and obvious — Certainly not. Lord. The conclusion is 
then more or less of this type : ‘‘All matter, all feeling, all per- 
ception, all formations, aU consciousness, past, present or future, 
internal or external, gross or subtle, low or high, far or near, all 
should be considered, in conformity with reality and with perfect 
wisdom, thus : ‘ This is not mine, this am I not, this is not my 
self.' Thus considering, the wise, noble disciple does not identify 
himself with materiality, does not identify himself with feeling, does 
not identify himself with perception, does not identify himself 
with the formations, does not identify himself with consciousness. ^ 
Not identifying himself, he is detached. Being detached, he is 
freed. The same theme has several variations in the canon, 
but the sense and the scheme are always the same. It is quite 
clear ; that all the probative force of reason is a function of this 
implicit premise : that by ‘‘ I ” we can only understand the un- 
conditioned, that is to. say, something which has nothing what- 
soever to do with samsaric consciousness or with its formations. 
Only then do the texts become clear and logical. Only then can 
•it be seen, for example, how it is that what is impermanent should 
always appear also as painful, and how this latter correlation is ■ 
established : ‘‘ That which is painful is void of ‘ I ’ ; that which 
is void of ‘I’, I am not, it is not mine, it is not my ^elf— -thus it 
is apprehended, in conformity with reality and with perfect wis- 
” Majjh .,- XXII ; CIX.DETERMINATION OF THE VOCATIONS 99

dom.”i* Only in this way can we understand the passage from 
the ascertainment to a reaction and an imperative : recog- 
nising the impermanence of the elements, of the groups of 
craving, of the senses, being convinced that they are not “ I ”, being 
convinced that " they are in flames ”, the ” wise Ariyan disciple ” 
feels disgust ; disgusted, he becomes detached ; being detached, 
he is freed : he has had enough of form, of finite consciousness, of 
feelings, of the other khandha, of objects, of contacts, of the 
emotive states which proceed from them, whether they are pleas- 
ant, painful or neutral ; he becomes indifferent in face of them 
and he seeks their ending.^* Here is a saying ; What is imperma- 
nent, what is anattd, what is compounded and conditioned, this 
does not belong to you, you should not desire it, you should put 
it away — “ the putting away of it will be greatly to your benefit, 
will lead to your well being ” : there can be no joy in it nor desire 
for it.^® It is clear that all this will not be sufi&cient evidence for 
everyone. The tacit but indispensable prerequisite is a higher 
consciousness. When this dawns, then in an entirely natural 
manner, not from painful renunciation or “ mortification ”, but 
almost accompanied by an Olympian bearing of the spirit, there 
occurs viveka, detachment.^® Realising this higher conscious- 
ness, it is said that one who attempts to find an “ I ” or 
something similar to the “ I ” — attena vd attmiyena — ^in the 
sphere of the senses, is like a man who, when looking for heart- 
wood, approaches a large tree and cuts it down but'who, although 
not taking the trunk or new wood or branches, takes only the 
bark where there is no core and certainly none of the hard wood 
that he is seeking.^’ The " I ”, then, is like this hard primordial 
essential substance, and this “I” is the fimdamental point of 
reference for Buddhism.There is more to it than this. In speaking of " Olympian 
bearing ” and of detachment we should not think of something 
b'lfp the indifference of a badly understood Stoicism- The Ariyan 
" renunciation ” is fundamentally based on a wfll for the un- 
conditioned considered also as liberty and power. This is

“ SaihyuU., XXII, 15; cf. 16 and 17, 49, 59, 76; XXXV, 2, 3.

“ Samyutt., XXII, 61, 9 ; XXXV, 3, 12 ; Mahdvagga (Vin.), I, xxi, 4.

15 Samyutt., XXII, 33; XXIII, 25-33.

i» Cf. Majjh., CVI.

lOO

THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING“ Samyutt., XXII, 61, 9 ; XXXV, 3, 12 ; Mahdvagga (Vin.), I, xxi, 4.

15 Samyutt., XXII, 33; XXIII, 25-33.

i» Cf. Majjh., CVI.

lOO

THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

apparent from the texts. The Buddha, whilst challenging the 
opinion that the stems of ordinary personality are self, asks his 
interlocutor if a powerful sovereign wishing to execute or proscribe 
one of his subjects could do so. The answer is naturally, " yes ”. 
Then the Buddha asks : " You who say ; ‘ materiality is my 
self do you now think that you have this power over materiality : 
' Thus let my materiality be, thus let my materiality not be ’ ? ” 
— ^and the question is repeated for the other elements of the 
personality. The interlocutor is forced to answer ” no," and thus 
this view that the “ I ” is materiality, feeling, and so on comes 
to be confuted.^ The basic idea is in no doubt here : not 
only the simple fact that body, feeling, consciousness, etc., are 
changeable, but that this changeability is independent of the 
“I”, that it is such that, in the normal way, in saihsaric existence, 
the ” I” has little or no control over it — ^it is this fact which 
demands the statement “ I am not this, this is not mine, this is 
not my self ". On this is' based the saying ; “ Renounce what 
does not belong to you.”^® This argument recurs in other 
passages. In p^icnlar it occurs in the second exposition of the 
doctrine given by Prihce Siddhattha at Benares ; " If materiality 
were the ‘ I \ it would not be subject to disease, and regarding 
it one could say : ' Let my materiality be thus, let my materiality , 
not be thus.’ But since materiality is subject to disease, and 
since one cannot say regarding it : ‘ Let my materiality be thus, 
let my materiality not be thus ’, therefore materiality is not the 
‘I’ ”®® ; and the same fonnula is repeated, for the other khandha. 
Elsewhere we find the attributes “ powerless ”, " falling "," feeble ”, " infirm " associated -with impermanence, anicca. It 
is by considering these particular characteristics that attachment 
vanishes and the identification provoked by mania is mteixupted.®^ 
The correspondence of the Buddhist view with that of archaic 
Greece should be noted here. It is the eternal " privation ”— 
arepyjais — ^the eternal impotence of things which become, -which 
" are and are not ”, that brings about renunciation. " By 
recognising that matter is impotent, unsatisfied, miserable, and 
that so are feeling, perception, the formations and consciousness.

« IWamA., XXXV.

« Majih., XXII.

Mahavagga (Vm.) I, vi, 38, 39-41 ; 
“ Cf. MajjK LXXV ; LXXTV.

Sathyuit., XXII. 59.

DETERMINATION OF THE VOCATIONS lOI

by perceiving that in them whicb determines the clinging 
tendencies of the mind ; by rejecting, destroying, abeindoning 
it and by becoming detached from it, I know that the mind is 
liberated ” — so says the ascetic.*® One who considers materi- 
ality as self, or materiality as belonging to self, or self as in 
materiality, or materiality as in self — continues the text — ^is 
like a man, carried off by a powerful alpine torrent, who be- 
lieves he can save himself by grasping the grass or weak rushes 
on the banks.** He will be dragged away.On these grounds we can speak, in connection with Buddhist 
realisation, of a will not only for liberation, but also for liberty, 
unconditioned-ness and unbreakabihty. One of the more com- 
mon descriptions of an ascetic is that he is a man who, having 
broken each and every bond, is free. The ascetic is one who 
avoids the snare, as does a wild beast, and so does not fall into the 
power of the hunter, but "can go where he wiU” — ^wlule the others, 
those who are subject to craving; " can be called lost, 
ruined, fallen into the power of harm ”.*^ The ascetic is one 
who has gained mastery over himself, who “ has his heart in 
his power, and is not himself in the power of his heart ”.*® He 
is the master of his thoughts. " Whatever thought he desires, 
that thought wiU he think, whatever thought he does not desire, 
that thought wiU he not think.”*® As a perfectly tamed elephant, 
led by his mahout, wiU go in any direction ; as an expert 
charioteer, with a chariot ready on good ground at a crossroad 
and harnessed to a thoroughbred team, can guide the chariot 
where he wishes ; or as a king or a prince with a chest fuU of 
clotljes, may freely choose the garment that most pleases him 
for the morning, the afternoon or the evening— so the ascetic 
can direct his mind and his being towards one state or another 
with perfect freedom.** Here are a few more similes : the ascetic 
is like a man burdened with debts, yet he not only pays them 
off but manages to gain a surplus on which to build his own 
life ; or he is like a man enfeebled by disease, his body without

« Majjh., CXII.

Safhyutt., XXII, 93.

Majjh., XXV.

« Majjh., XXXII.

Angutt., IV, 35; Majjh., XX.

Maijh., CXIX; XXXII.

102 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING« Majjh., CXII.

Safhyutt., XXII, 93.

Majjh., XXV.

« Majjh., XXXII.

Angutt., IV, 35; Majjh., XX.

Maijh., CXIX; XXXII.

102 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

strength, but who succeeds in removing the disease and regaining 
his strength ; or, he is like a slave, dependent on others, but 
who is able to free himself from his slavery and feel master of 
himself, independent of others, a free man who can go where 
he will ; or, again, he is like a man travelling through desert 
places, full of snares and dangers, who ;^et arrives safe and sound 
at his destination without losing anything.^® To complete the 
list of what a noble spirit regards as valuable, let us remember 
these other epithets of the Awakened One : " he who has laid 
down the burden ”, the " unshackled one ”, the “ unhooked one ”, 
the " escaped one ”, the “ unhinger ”, the " remover of the 
arrow ”, the “ leveUer of the trench ”, " he who escapes from 
the whirlwind/’ The whirlwind is a S 5 monym for the faculties 
of craving;®® the arrow should be understood as the burning, 
the thirst for living, which has deeply wounded and poisoned 
the higher principle ; the trench is samsara, which appears here 
with the same meaning that '* becoming ” and “ matter ” 
possessed in the ancient Hellenic concept : Penia, perennial 
insufficiency and “ privation ”, inability of self-fulfilment, or, in 
the symbolism of Oknos : a cord that while being woven is 
continually consumed.®®

It is thus that “ the noble sons moved by confidence ” recognise 
their vocfition and come to apprehend the “ ariyan quest ” :It is thus that “ the noble sons moved by confidence ” recognise 
their vocfition and come to apprehend the “ ariyan quest ” :

” Thus, 0 disciples, a man, himself subject to birth, observing 
the misery of this law of nature, seeks that which is without birth, 
■the incomparable safety, extinction; himself subject to decay, 
observing the misery of this law of nature, seeks that which is 
■without decay, the incomparable safety, extinction ; himself 
subject to death, observing the misery of this law of nsfture, 
seeks that which is without death, the incomparable safety, 
extinction ; ■ himself subject to pain and to agitation, observing 
the misery of this law of nature, seeks that which is without pain, 
the without-agitation, the incomparable safety, extinction ; 
himself subject to stain, observing the misery of this law of nature, 
seeks that which is without stain, the incomparable safety, . 
extinction. This, O disciples, is the Ariyan quest.”®^

»» 'Majjh., XXXIX.

*» Sathyutt., XXV, 200 .

»« Majjh., XXII.

« Majjh., XXVI. ,

DETERMINATION OF THE VOCATIONS IO3»» 'Majjh., XXXIX.

*» Sathyutt., XXV, 200 .

»« Majjh., XXII.

« Majjh., XXVI. ,

DETERMINATION OF THE VOCATIONS IO3

Returning to the problem of the determination of the vocations, 
we have said that the touchstone consists in the identification 
or non-identification of oneself with a whole hierarchy of modes 
of being, and the point of departure — anatta — ^has already been 
implicitly indicated. Non-identification of oneself not only with 
materiality, with feeling, with perception, with the formations, 
but non-identification also with consciousness itself, if regarded as 
individuated consciousness— that is to say, the overcoming of 
the belief in “ personality attanuditthi, and in its persistency 
— ^this is the first test put to the noble nature.®* To remain in 
this belief is a sign of a form of “ ignorance ” (the “ ignorance ” 
whose transcendental base, in the conditioned genesis, is vinnana) 
and of being subject to one of the " five lower fetters ”.®® One 
places oneself at a distance imtil there is a feeling that one’s own 
person is a simple instrument of expression, something contingent 
which in due course wiU dissolve and disappear in the saihsaric 
current, without the super-mundane, Olympian nucleus in our- 
selves being in the slightest degree prejudiced. The doctrine of 
the inessentiality of the person, of the psychological and passional 
" I ”, must then result in a mind which becomes pacified, serene, 
uplifted, clarified.®^ It should not be a cause of dismay, but a 
source of superior strength. It is said that only the man who 
has experienced this doctrine has strength enough to. cross the 
eddying current and to reach the further shore in safety; a 
weak man, who is incapable of this, is one whose mind has not 
been liberated by the working of the doctrine.®® Therefore : 
consciousness must not be considered as one’s self, nor one’s self 
as possessed of consciousness, nor consciousness as in one’s self, 
nor one’s self as in consciousness — any more than one should 
so consider the other khandha ; feeling, perception, and the 
formations.®*Second point. The road towards any pantheistic promiscuity, 
any naturahstic mysticism, any confusion with the universe, any 
variety of immanency, must be resolutely barred. The aim of 
this further test of the noble spirit is to set it definitely at a

»» Maijh., XLIV ; LXIV.

•» Mdjjh., LXIV.

3 * SaihyuU., XXII, 45.

Majjh., LXIV.

»« Majih., XLIV,

H

104 the doctrine of awakening

distance from the confused spiritual world that is characteristic 
of many Western minds, decayed from- all that is classical, 
clear, Doric, virile. It is a singular fact that, in the 
modem world, this pantheistic disintegration, this return of man 
to a state of mind confused by total reality or by “ Life ”, is 
habitually considered to be a characteristic of the Eastern 
mentality, particularly of the Hindu. The fact of the existence 
and diffusion in the East of the Buddhist Doctrine of Awakening 
,is sufficient to confute this opinion. Even if in pre-Buddhist 
India — and particularly with the later speculation on the Brahman 
— ^this false development was to a certain degree prevalent (and 
it occurs again, later, in some popular forms of Hinduism) — ^yet 
it is to be considered as an anomaly, against which Buddhism 
together with Sdmkhya afforded a salutary reaction. Similar 
phenomena occur, moreover, in the ancient Mediterranean world 
with the decline of the earher Olympian and heroic traditions. 
This is a general phenomenon, and talk of " Oriental pantheism ” 
should be left either to the uninstructed or to people of bad faith.Therefore : anti-pantheism. ” To take nature as nature, to 
think nature, to think of nature, to think ‘ nature is mine ’ ” 
is to exult in it ; to take unity or multipHcity, this or that cosmic 
or elemental force, and finally to take all as aU, to think all, to 
think of all, to think “ all is mine” is to exult in it — ^this 
pantheistic identification is, for Buddhism, yet another sign of 
“ ignorance ”, a mark of one who “ has known nothing ”, of one 
who is “ a common man, without understanding for the doctrine 
of the Ariya, inaccessible by the doctrine of the Ariya ”.®^

On this basis we can say more generally that the Buddhist 
Doctrine of Awakening demands an anti-mystical vocation." It 
is true that the term mystikos — ^from fiv-qtv, to close, to lock 
(in particular, the Kps) — originally referred to the Mysteries, 
and alluded to what is secret, hidden, not to be spoken. The 
current sense of the term is, however, quite different : to-day 
mysticism is used for the tendency toward confused identifica- 
tions, with emphasis on the moment of feehng and with none 
on the element of " knowledge ” and “ clarity ” ; " experience ” 
is certainly accentuated (usually in the face of dogma and 
tradition), but here it is prevalently an experience in which the 
siderial and absolute nucleus in the being is dissolved, submerged

Majjh,, L

DETERMINATION OF THE VOCATIONS I05Majjh,, L

DETERMINATION OF THE VOCATIONS I05

or " transported For this reason, mystical ineffability, far 
from being connected with a really transcendental knowledge, 
is of those who — ^to use Schelling’s apt expression — ^in their 
confused identification with one state or another, not only do 
not explain experience, but become themselves subjects in need 
of explanation. Thus, the mystical element, rather than being 
super-rational, is often sub-rational. We are in the playground 
of the spiritual adventures which take place on the borders either 
of the devotional religions or of pantheistic evasions, whose man- 
ner is the opposite of that of a strict ascesis and of the path of 
awakening of the Ariya.Third point. In the modem world, those who fight the 
doctrines of immanence and who conceive themselves “ defenders 
of the West ” against " Oriental pantheism ”, normally take 
” transcendency ” as their point of reference and as their watch- 
word. Their transcendency is, however, very relative, as it 
proceeds from the predominant theological-theistic" concept. 
Even in this Buddhism finds a touchstone for the vocations. 
We have already seen that Prince Siddhattha was induced to 
divulge his knowledge after recognising that, side by side with 
common beings, there are nobler ones and " many who consider 
that enthusiasm for other worlds is bad ”. The Doctrine of 
Awakening is presented as a doctrine which teaches men to make 
themselves free not only of the material "I ”, but also of the 
immaterial and spiritual ” I ”.®® Any form of moral conduct 
and any practice or rite whose motive is hope in a posthmnous 
continuation of the personality is considered to be another of 
the lower fetters.®* Thus, beyond a rabble, of faint-hearted, 
restless, obtuse and unvirile penitents,*® the texts speak of ascetics 
and priests who "through fear of existence, through hate of 
existence, go round and round existence, almost as a dog, tied 
with a leash to a solid column or attached to a post, goes round 
and round this colunm or post ”.® The words become stronger 
when they deal with those ascetics or priests who " profess 
attachment to the hereafter ” and who think : " Thus shall we 
be after death, thus shall we not be after death,” just as a

I06 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

merchant, going to market, thinks : “ From this I shall get that, 
with this I shall gain that.”**® Plotinus, speaking against 
moralistic concept, said: “Not to be a good man, but to become 
a god — ^this is the aim,”*® but the Doctrine of Awakening goes 
still further.Beyond the human bond is the divine bond, attachment to 
this or that state, to a state that is no longer human, corporeal 
or terrestrial, but that is still conditioned existence. These 
states in the Hindu tradition are personified in the various gods 
and in their seats ; they are equivalent to the seraphic and angelic 
hierarchies of Hebrew-Christian theology, therefore, to what, ih a 
more popular concept, is called “ paradise ”. The Doctrine of 
Awakening aims at surmounting these states : it tests the voca- 
tions by asking at what point one can apprehend that these very 
states are inadequate in face of a will for the unconditioned, and 
that to have them as the extreme point of reference and as the 
supreme justification of existence is still a bond, an insufficiency, 
a thirst, a mania. Thus, in the canon, these words appear : 
“You should feel shame and indig?iation if ascetics of other 
schools ask you if it is in order to arise in a diviue world that 
ascetic life is practised under the ascetic Gotama.”**Nor is this all. The very notion of “ existence ” is attacked, 
the stronghold of all theistic theology. Here, as we have said. 
Buddhism is no more than faithful to the purely metaphysical, 
super-religious teachings of the precediug Indo-Aryan tradition. 
Hi this, the personal god, as pure existence, himself belongs to 
manifestation and cannot therefore be called absolutely un- 
conditioned. Existence has as its correlative non-existence. 
For this reason only that which is beyond both existence and 
non-existence, which is above and outside these two transcend- 
ental categories, can be understood as really unconditioned. So 
also for Buddhism this is the extreme point of reference, not the 
belief in existence, not the belief in non-existence. Attachment 
to one or other of these is a bond, a limitation. “ By contempla- 
ting, according to reality, the origination and cessation of both 
of these ” one must be capable of overcoming both.*® Even 
« Majjh., CII.

Plotinus, Enneads, I, ii, 4 and 7.

Angutt, III, 18.

Majjh,, XI,

DETERMINATION OF ,THE VOCATIONS I07

" universal consciousness ” belongs, in the Buddhist teaching, to 
the samsaric world ; it is a variety of samsaric consciousness.Angutt, III, 18.

Majjh,, XI,

DETERMINATION OF ,THE VOCATIONS I07

" universal consciousness ” belongs, in the Buddhist teaching, to 
the samsaric world ; it is a variety of samsaric consciousness.

This view is well illustrated in the texts by means of various 
similes. There is, for example, the story of one who, wishing 
to know where the elements are completely annihilated, goes to 
the gods and passes from one hierarchy to another, finally reaching 
the world of the great Brahma, the supreme god of being. But 
it is not in the power of Brahma to answer him. He sends the 
ascetic to the Buddha, telling him, in addition, that he has done 
ill to have left the Sublime One and to have asked this knowledge 
of another. It is the Buddha and not Brahma who gives the 
answer. He indicates the spiritual state of the arahant, invisible, 
endless, resplendent : here the elements have nowhere to plant 
their roots, here “ name-and-form ” ceases without leaving 
residue.** But there is a much more striking story, moulded 
with the power of a Michelangelo. It is called the “ visit to 
Brahma The Buddha arrives in the kingdom of Brahma, 
of which it is said ; “ Here is the eternal, here is the persistent, 
here is the everlasting, here is indissolubility and immutability : 
here there is no birth nor old age, nor death, nor passing away 
and reappearance ; and another, higher liberation than this 
there is not.” To Brahma, who afSrms this, the Buddha says 
that Brahma himself is the victim of illusion and infatuation. But 
here Mara the malign, the god of craving and of death, intervenes ; 
he enters into one of the celestial 'beings in Brahma's retinue 
and from here speaks to the Buddha : " 0 monk, beware of him. 
He is Brahma, the omnipotent, the invincible, the all-seeing, the 
sovereign, the lord, the creator, the preserver, the father of all 
that has been and of all that will be. Long before you there 
were in the world ascetics and priests who were enemies of the 
elements, of nature, of the gods, of the lord of generation, of 
Brahma ; these, at the dissolution of the body, when their vital 
strength was exhausted, came to abject forms of existence. And 
therefore I counsel you, 0 ascetic : beware, O worthy one ! 
What Brahma has said to you, accept it, lest you contra^ct the 
word of Brahma. Should you, O ascetic, contradict the word 
of Brahma, it would be as though a man were to approach a rock« Dlgha, XI, 67-85.

Majjh., XLIX ; cf, also Sa^hyuU., I, 4.

Io8 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING« Dlgha, XI, 67-85.

Majjh., XLIX ; cf, also Sa^hyuU., I, 4.

Io8 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

and beat on it with a stick, or as though a man, 0 ascetic, were 
to fall into an infernal abyss and to seek to grasp the earth with 
his hands and feet : thus, O monk, would it befall you/' And 
Brahma joins with Mara the malign, repeating : I, O worthy 
one, hold as eternal that which is truly • eternal, as persistent, 
as perennial, as indissoluble, as immutable that which is truly so ; 
and where there is no birth and decay, nor death, nor passing 
away and reappearance, of this I say : here truly there is no 
birth, nor decay and death, nor passing away and reappearance ; 
and since there is no other, higher liberation, therefore I say : 
there is no other, higher liberation. Therefore, 0 monk, speak 
if you will : you will certainly not discover another, higher 
liberation, try as you will. If you take the earth, if you take 
the elements as your standpoint, then you have taken me as 
your standpoint, you have taken me as your basis, you must 
obey me, you must 5 deld to me ; if you take, 0 monk, nature, 
the gods, the lord of generation as your standpoint, then you 
have taken me as your standpoint, you have taken me as your 
basis, you must obey me, you must yield to me ; if you take, 
O monk, Brahma as your standpoint, then you have taken me 
as your standpoint, you have taken me as your basis, you must 
obey me, you must 5 deld to me." At this point the antitheses 
build up to a cosmic and titanic grandeur ending with the most 
paradoxical reversal of the point of view that is prevalent in 
Western religions. In fact, whilst the desire of surpassing the 
very Lord of creation, from this point of view, appears as some- 
thing diabolical, the Buddha, instead, finds a diabolical plot in 
the exact opposite, that is in the attempt to stop him i^ the 
region of being, to make this region an insuperable limit, beyond 
which it is both absurd and mad to seek a higher liberation. 
Here it is the Malign One in person who urges the belief that 
the personal God, the God of being, is the supreme reality, and 
who threatens the Bnddha with the damnation that is supposed 
already to have claimed other ascetics. And in another text^® 
his temptation consists of inducing the Buddha to confine himself ^ 
to the path of good works, rites and sacrifices — ^to the path of 
theistic religions. But the Buddha discovers the plot, and speaks 
thus to Mara : ' Well I know you, Malign One, abandon your*8 Suttanipata, III, ii, 3*4.

DETERMINATION OF THE VOCATIONS I09

. hope : ‘ He knows me not ’ ; you are Mara, the Malign. And 
this Brahma here, 0 Malign One, these gods of Brahma, these 
celestial companies of Brahma : they are all in your hand, they 
are aU in your power. You, 0 Malign One, certainly think : 
‘ He also must be in my hand, in my power ! ' I, however, 
O Malign One, am not in your hand, I am not in your 
power.”

There follows a symbolical test. The personal God, the 
Hebraic “ I am that I am ”, the God of being, whose essence is 
his existence', as such, cannot not be, that is, he is bound to 
being, he is passive with respect to being. He has not the power 
to go beyond being. It is here that the test occurs. Who can 
" disappear ” ? That is, who is lord both of being and of non- 
being ? Who rests neither on the one nor on the other ? Brahma 
cannot disappear. Instead, the Buddha disappears. All the 
world of Brahma is amazed and recognises “the high pbwer, 
the high might of the ascetic Gotama ”. Limitation is removed. 
The dignity of the atideva, of one who goes beyond the world 
of existence itself, not to mention the “ celestial ” worlds, is 
demonstrated. It is only left to Mara the malign to try in vain 
to dissuade the Buddha from spreading the doctrine.*®Here, then, is one of the extreme points in the test of the 
vocations : not to crave " even the highest of all lives ” — ^not 
only to pass from this shore to the other, but to apprehend that 
which lies beyond both.®" The words of the Awakened One are : 
“ Nature, the gods, the lord of generation, Brahma, the Resplend- 
ent Ones, the Powerful Ones, the Ultrapowerful Ones, aU things, 
I have known, how unsatisfying are all things ; this have I 
recognised and I have renounced aU things, abdicated from all 
things, detached myself from aU things, forsworn aH things, 
disdained all things. And in this, O Brahma, not only am I 
your equal in knowledge, not only am I not less than you, but 
I am far greater than you.”®’- And the words: “This is not 
mine. This am I not, this is not my self ” must be said by the 
“ noble son ” for the whole of that world too.®® It is still 
“ samsdra ”.

« Majjh., XLIX.

Dhammapada, 383 '385*

« MajjK XLIX.

Majjh,, XXII.

I lo

THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

Is a higher limit than this conceivable ? For the Anya it is 
conceivable. Attachment, dependence and enjoyment are to be 
eradicated also in respect of the supreme goal of the Buddhist 
ascesis, that is to say, of extinction. Here is the final temptation 
and the final victory. Here the will for the unconditioned 
approaches the paradoxical. The ultimate truth of the series is 
this : he who thinks’ extinction, he who thinks of extinction, he 
who thinks " extinction is mine ” and who rejoices in extinction 
— ^this man does not know extinction, does not know the path, 
is not to be counted amongst the "noble disciples Even 
in this region to feel desire and attachment — ^it inay be a subli- 
mated one — ^means not to realise the place and signification of 
real liberation.At the instant of understanding this one apprehends and intuits 
supermundane safety and the end of anguish. One who thinks 
no longer either of existence or of non-existence and thus, who is 
not attached to anythmg beyond, now trembles no more but 
reaches the supermundane and supreme "security of calm’’.®* 
He does not tremble and so does not crave — " not trembling, 
why should he crave ? ’’®® This summit must be apprehended 
by the " noble son ’’, it must be his purpose. The strength and 
sureness of those who know no more anguish or fear is described 
as somethiog that has a vertiginous and fearful effect on others, 
both human and superhuman ; when they are faced by those 
who have conquered, and when they hear their truth, they become 
aware of their own unsuspected contingency, and the primordial 
anguisif bursts forth tmchecked. They see the abyss.

When a man is capable of experiencing all these meanings, then 
his vocation is proved, he is on the road of personal revolufion, 
he can attempt to follow the path that was re-discovered by 
Prince Siddhattha. But in this connection there must be no 
illusion, particularly in modem man. This point must be quite 
dear : development in accordance with the Doctrine of Awaken- 
ing implies something akin to a rupture or a halt. The S3anbolism 
we have discussed should be remembered ; as long as one " goes ’’ . 
it is impossible to reach the point where "the world ends’’.

“ 1 ; Cir.

»* Majjh., CXL 
" MajjA.. CXL.

DETERMINATION OF THE VOCATIONS III“ 1 ; Cir.

»* Majjh., CXL 
" MajjA.. CXL.

DETERMINATION OF THE VOCATIONS III

One must stop oneself dead. In some way an extra-samsaric 
element, called in Buddhism panM (Sanskrit : prajnd), the 
opposite to avijjd, must manifest itself. This element, with its 
presence, arrests the “ current ”, in the same way as the element 
avijjd, unawareness, the state of mania and of " intoxication ”, 
confirmed it. At this point already there occurs a partial or vir- 
tual suspension of all the elements influenced by avijjd ; it is not 
only a matter of a suspension, but also of an inversion of 
the ciirrent : the flux or vortex which had generated the • 
common man starts to generate a superior being, uttamapurisa : 
pannd becomes the central element which transforms and purifies 
all the constituent forces of the personality, removing and 
destro3dng in them the element avijjd and the influence of the 
dsava. ® ^ For this reason, the texts speak also of a special strength 
beyond knowledge; of a ” superior and powerful energy ” — vinya 
— ^which differs from the normal human energies, and which alone 
works the miracle of "liberation of the wiU by means of 
the will ” it provides the strength for endurance, and allows 
of advance towards supreme liberation.®®One of the aspects of Mahdydna Buddhism which represents 
a decline from the original is the supposition that this element 
“pannd” (Skr. : prajnd) is present in everyone; it considers 
each individual as a potential bodhisatta (Skr. : bodhisattva), 
that is, as a being capable of becoming a Buddha. Whatever 
from the standpoint of the doctrine may be said about it, this 
view cannot in practice be said to be at all “in conformity 
with reality ” — yathd-bhutam. The manifestation of this know- 
ledge and of this strength, particiflarly in modem Western 
man, can rightly be called a l^d of a " grace ”, in view of its 
marked discontinuity when compared to all faculties and 
forms of consciousness, not only in normal individuals but 
even in the most gifted of our contemporaries. The 
example of Prince Siddhattha — ^that is to say, the fact that 
he had no need of masters, transmitted doctrines, or initiations, 
to open the way to liberation, since the direct reaction of a noble 
spirit confronted with the spectacle of the contingency and

Cf. Stcherbatsky, Central Conception etc., op, cit., pp. 50, 73-74.

Samyutt., Vol. V, p. 272 (P.T.S. edn.).

Mahaparinirv,, i6.

1 12

THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

burning of the world was enough for the purpose — ^this example 
should lead no one to repeat the adventure of Baron Miinchhausen 
when he attempted to raise himself in the air by pulling himself 
upwards by his hair. In one way or another something must 
happen : a kind of profoimd crisis or break, or the receiving 
“ grace ”, such as to provide a positive opportunity and a base 
for a “ new life It cannot be repeated, often enough that the 
man of to-day, constitutionally, is profoundly different frona the 
- man of the ancient Aryan civilisations of the East. Views, such 
as that of Mahayana Buddhism already mentioned, are better 
ignored if we do not wish to deceive ourselves or others.In Buddhism, the importance of the moment is stressed in 
every way. " Knowledge ”, in a text, is likened to a flash of 
lightning. One is exhorted to ” rise and awaken ” when one 
perceives one’s own passiveness, one’s own indolence, “ without 
letting the moment pass ” — ^if the right moment is allowed to pass, 
that moment when one would have been able to overcome the 
force to which both men and gods are subject, the demon of death 
will' reassert his power.*® “Battle must be joined to-day — 
to-morrow we may be no more. There is no truce for us with 
the great army of death. Only one who lives thus, struggling 
untiringly day and night, achieves beatitude and is called a 
blessed sage.”®^ The following simile is used to fllustrate this 
state of mind : what would a king do, to whom it was announced 
that the moimtains were crumbling and moving and overthrowing 
all before them, closing in on his kingdom from the East, from 
the West, from the South and from the North, and who knew 
clearly how difficult it is to achieve the human state of existen^^e?

To conclude this section, we shall refer again to the attitude 
of the Doctrine of Awakening towards the form of ascesis which 
is unilaterally connected with practices of mortification and 
penance.

Buddhism opposes all forms of painful ascesis. Having 
considered the “ many kinds of intensive, painful bodily discip- 
lines ”, Buddhism maintains that those who practise them, “ at - 
the dissolution of the body after death, go down by evil paths

Suttanipata, II, x, 1-3.

Majjh., CXXXI.

Sa'thyuti,, III, 3.

DETERMINATION OF THE VOCATIONS II3Suttanipata, II, x, 1-3.

Majjh., CXXXI.

Sa'thyuti,, III, 3.

DETERMINATION OF THE VOCATIONS II3

to sutfering and perdition ”, since this is a “ mode of living 
which brings present ill and future ill”.®* The methods of 
“ painful self-mortification ”, according to the doctrine of the 
Buddha, are useless, not only for the purpose of “ extinction ”, 
but also for one who aspires to achieve some form of " celestial ” 
existence.®* There are striking sketches of t3rpes of ascetics and 
of monks not unlike those who are found in Western asceticism 
and monasticism: "Shrivelled, arid, ugly, pallid, emaciated 
[men], who present no attractions to the eye that sees them.” 
They are afdicted by the " disease of constraint ”, since they 
lead this life, in point of fact, against their wiU, through a false 
vocation, lacking the support of a higher consciousness. ®® Fasting, 
mortification, sacrifices, prayers and oblations, none of these 
purifies a mortal who has not conquered doubt and who has not 
overcome desire.®® Two extremes are avoided by those who 
detach themselves from the world : " the pleasure of desire, low, 
vulgar, unworthy of the nature of the Ariya, harmful ; self- 
morti&cation, painful, unworthy of the nature of the Ariya, 
harmful. Avoiding these two extremes, the middle way has 
been discovered by the Accomplished One, the way which gives 
insight, which gives wisdom, which leads to calm, to supernormal 
consciousness, to illumination, to extinction.”®^ In distinguishing 
what is praiseworthy from what is worthy of reproof, even in 
cases where saintly knowledge has been attained, the fact of 
having attained it by means of self-torment is declared to be 
reprehensible. ®®The texts often give some accoxmt of the hfe led by Prince 
Siddhattha before his perfect awakening. He too, “ before the 
perfect awakening, as yet imperfectly awakened, stiU only striving 
towards awakening ”, had had the thought : " Pleasure cannot 
be conquered by pleasure : pleasure can be conquered by pain.”®® 
And thus, having abandoned his home against the wishes of his 
family, stiU "radiant, with black hair, in the flush of joyous 
youth, in the flower of manhood ”, unsatisfied by the truths

«» Majih., XLV.

«* Majjh., LXXr.

«* Majjh., LXXXIX.

Suttanipdta 11 , ii, ii; Dhammapada, 141.

8 7 Mahdvagga (Vin.) I, vi, 17; Samyutt, XLII, 12; Majjh,, CXXXIX.

8® Samyutt., LII, 12.

8® Majjh,, LXXXV.

II4 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENINGSuttanipdta 11 , ii, ii; Dhammapada, 141.

8 7 Mahdvagga (Vin.) I, vi, 17; Samyutt, XLII, 12; Majjh,, CXXXIX.

8® Samyutt., LII, 12.

8® Majjh,, LXXXV.

II4 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

taught by the various teachers of asceticism to whom he had 
in the first instance turned (these appear to have been followers 
of Sdmkhya), he devoted himself to extreme forms of painful 
mortification. Having bent his will in all ways, “as a strong 
man, seizing another weaker man by the head or by the shoulders, 
compels him, crushes him, throws him down ", he began with 
the body and practised suspension of the breath until he came 
near to suffocation. ’ ® Finding that this led nowhere, he practised 
fasting, until he grew so thin that his arms and legs resembled 
dry sticks, his spine a string of beads, with the vertebrae sticking 
out ; his hair fell off, his eyes sank in and his pupUs shrank almost 
away, “ like reflections in a deep well He thus arrived at 
this thought : "AU that ascetics or priests in the past have ever 
experienced in the way of painful, burning, bitter sensations, 
or that they may be experiencing in the present or that they 
will experience in the future is no more than this : further one 
cannot go. And yet with aU this bitter ascesis of pain I have 
not attained the supermimdane, the blessed riches of wisdom." 
There arose in him the conviction : There must be another path 
to awakening. And it was a memory that allowed him to find 
it : the memory of a day when, stfll in the midst of his people, 
seated in the cool shade of a rose-apple tree, he had felt himself 
in a state of calm, clarity, balance, peace, far from desire, far 
from disturbing things. Then there arose in him “ consciousness 
in conformity with knowledge : ' This is the way 'This manner of the Buddha’s ascesis is significant : it clearly 
shows the features of an ascesis which is Aryan, “ classical ”, 
clear, balanced, free from " sin ” complexes and from “«bad 
conscience ”, free from spiritualised and sanctified masochism. 
In this coimection it is worth noting that one of the maxims of 
Buddhism is that one who, being without imperfection does not 
recognise, in conformity with truth : " In me there is no im- 
perfection,” is far worse than one who, on the other hand, knows :

“ In me there is no imperfection.” And a simile follows : a 
polished and shining bronze vessel that is not used or cleaned -

We must note that here is meant obviously forms of breath retention 
employed purely as ascetic practices, not of those special haiha-yoga, practices, 
wittL initiatory aims, of which we have^ spoken in our book, Lo Yoga d&lla 
Potenza, Milan, 2nd. edn. 1949.

71 Cf. e.g. Majjh,, XII, XXXVI.

DETERMINATION OF THE VOCATIONS II5

woTild, after a time become dirty and stained ; similarly, one 
who is not aware of his own uprightness is much more exposed 
to confusions and deviations of every kind than one who is, so 
awareJ® There is no question, here, in any way, of pride and self- 
conceit ; it is a question of a process of purification through a just 
, and dignified consciousness. This attitude should put in their 
place those who, through feeling themselves to be hermits, 
penitents, poor, clothed in rags or through observing the 
most elementary forms of morality, exalt themselves and 
believe that they are entitled to despise others.’® The Ariyan 
ascesis is as void of vanity and stupid pride (which, as uddhacca, 
is considered as a bond), as it is permeated with dignity and 
calm self-knowledge.This does not mean, however, that we should be under any 
illusion and believe that exceptional inward energies are un- 
necessary in Buddhism and that the most severe self-discipline 
should not be imposed. He who realised that the way of painful 
asceticism was not the right one, was yet capable of satisfsdng 
himself that he was able to follow it to its extreme limit. Thus, 
at the moment in which the vocation is determined and one has 
the sensation of the emergence of the element panM, one must 
also have the strength to make an absolute and inflexible resolu- 
tion. In the forest of Gosinga, on a clear moonlit night, when 
the trees were in full blossom and gave the impression that celestial 
scents were being wafted around, various disciples of the Buddha 
asked each other what type of ascetic cotdd adorn such a forest, 
and discussed this or that discipline and this or that power 
achieved. When the Buddha was asked, he said : “An ascetic 
whot after the meal, seats himself with his legs crossed, his body 
erect and resolves : ‘ I wiU not rise from here until my mind 
is without attachment and free from any mania.’ Such a monk 
can adorn the forest of Gosinga.’’’* In the canonical texts 
something similar to a " vow ’’ is often mentioned in these terms : 
" In the confident disciple, who energetically trams himself in 
the order of the Master, there arises this notion ; ' Wfllingly 
may there remain of my body only skin and tendons and bones,

« Majjh., V.

« Majjh.. CXIII.

Majjh., XXXII,

Il6 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING« Majjh., V.

« Majjh.. CXIII.

Majjh., XXXII,

Il6 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

and let my flesh and my blood dry up : but until that which can 
be obtained with human vigour, human strength, human valour 
has been obtained, I shall continue to strive.”’® Yet another 
text speaks of the desperate strength with which a man would 
struggle against a current, knowing that otherwise he would be 
carried into waters full of whirlpools and voracious creatures.’* 
Struggle, effort, absolute action, iron determination, all these are 
essential — ^but in a special " style It is — ^let us again repeat 
— ^the style of one who maintains his self-knowledge, who exerts 
his strength where it should be exerted, with clear knowledge of 
cause and effect, paralysing the irrational movements of the mind, 
his fears and hopes and who never loses the calm and composed 
consciousness of his nobility and of his superiority. It is in such 
terms that the Doctrine of Awakening is offered and recommended 
to those who “ stiU remain steadfast ”.

I

« SamyuU., XII, 22 ; Angutt., VIII, 13 ; Majjh., LXX. 
ttivuttdka, 109,

PART II

PRACTICE

I

THE QUALITIES OF THE COMBATANT 
AND THE "DEPARTURE”

T he training or development — hhavana — ^presents in the 
Buddhist doctrine two stages. In the first place, there 
are the kinds of discipline which, not being carried beyond a 
certain point, serve only for this life ; they are distinguished 
from those which are considered as " wisdom ” and which relate 
to a more than human experience — uUan-manussa-dhamma?- 
More important and more general, however, is the division of 
the whole ascesis into three sections, namely : the preparatory 
section of " right conduct ” — sUa ; the section of spiritu^ 
concentration and contemplation — samadhi ; and finally, the 
section of “ wisdom ” or transcendental knowledge and spiritual 
illumination— (Sanskrit :In what follows we propose to arrange the disciplines referred 
to in the texts into one or other of these three sections in the 
manner most satisfactory for the reader. Our aim is not purely 
informative ; we hope to provide also, for anyone who may be 
interested, some practical guidance. The exposition, then, will 
be accompanied, where necessary, by an interpretation based on 
what can be considered as " constant ” in a careful comparison 
of the various traditions.

Before we discuss the instruments of the ascesis we must make 
some general observations on the preliminary conditions required 
of the individual, apart from what has already been said about 
the determination of the vocations.

' First point. In order to aspire to awakening one must be 
a human being. The possibility of achieving absolute liberation 
is offered primarily, according to Buddhism, only to one who is

1 Majjh., LUX ; SmhyuU., XLI, 9.

* Cf. Digha, X, passim.

119

I

120 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING1 Majjh., LUX ; SmhyuU., XLI, 9.

* Cf. Digha, X, passim.

119

I

120 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

bom a man. Not only those who are in lower conditions of 
existence than the human, but also those who are in higher 
conditions, such as the deva, the celestial or “ angelical ” beings, 
do not have this opportunity. Whilst, on the one hand, the 
human condition is considered to be one of fundamental contin- 
gency and infirmity, on the other it is thought of as a privileged 
state, obtainable only with great difficulty — " it is a hard thing 
to be born a man ”.® The supermundane destiny of beings is 
decided upon earth : the theory of the hodhisattva even considers 
the possibility of " descents ” to earth of beings who have already 
achieved very high, “ divine ” states of consciousness, in order 
to complete the work. -As we shall see, 'liberation can occur also 
in posthumous states : but even in these cases it is thought of 
as the consequence or development of a realisation or of a 
“knowledge" already achieved on earth. Man’s privilege, as 
conceived by Buddhism along such lines, would seem to be one 
which is connected with a fundamental liberty. From this point 
of view man is potentially an atideva, he is of a higher nature 
than the “ gods ”, for the same reason as is foimd in the hermetic 
tradition ;* that is, since he contains in himself, not only divine 
nature to which angels and gods are tied, but also mortal nature, 
not only existence but also non-existence : whence he has the 
opportunity of arriving at the super-theistic summit which we 
have discussed, and which is in fact the " great liberationThose who desired to enter the Order created by Prince 
Siddhattha were specifically asked : Are you really a man ? ® It 
is taken as a premise in this case that not all those who appear 
to be human are really “ men The views, widespread in 
ancient India as elsewhere, that in some men animal beings were 
re-incamated — or vice vena : that some men would be " reborn " 
in this or that " animal womb ” — ^may be understood symbolic- 
ally : * they refer, that is, to human existences whose central 
element is guided entirely by one of those elemental forces 
which externally manifest themselves in the normal way in one 
or other animal species. We have, moreover, already spoken 
of the limitations arising out of the various " races of the spirit

® Dhammapada, 182.

* Cf. Corpus Hermeiicum, IX, 4 ; X, 24-25,

® Mahdvagga (Vinaya), I, Ixxvi, i.

® Cf, Bardo Thodolf cit.f p, 54,

QUALITIES OF COMBATANT, AND ‘-DEPARTURE” 1 21® Dhammapada, 182.

* Cf. Corpus Hermeiicum, IX, 4 ; X, 24-25,

® Mahdvagga (Vinaya), I, Ixxvi, i.

® Cf, Bardo Thodolf cit.f p, 54,

QUALITIES OF COMBATANT, AND ‘-DEPARTURE” 1 21

Third point. An original condition imposed by the canon for 
admission into the Order was that of being of male sex. Eunuchs, 
hermaphrodites and women were not accepted.’ The Aiiyan 
road of awakening was considered as substantially and essentially 
manly. “ It is impossible, it cannot be ” — says a canonical text® 
— " that a woman should arrive at the full enlightenment of a 
Buddha, or become a universal sovereign — cakkavaUi ” ; likewise 
. it is impossible for her to “ conquer heaven, nature and the 
universe”, to "dominate celestial spirits”.® The Buddha 
considered women insatiable in respect of two things ; sex and 
motherhood ; so insatiable that they cannot free themselves from 
these cravings before death.^® He repeatedly opposed the entry 
of women into the Order : when he finally admitted them he 
declared that, as a flourishing field of rice prospers no longer 
when a parasitical grass invades and spreads in the field, so the 
saintly life in an Order does not prosper if it allows women to 
renounce the world — ^and he tried to limit the danger by promul- 
gating opportune rules.^^ Later, however, less intransigent views 
became widespread : even in the canonical texts — ^in spite of 
these words of the Buddha — ^there figure women who have entered 
into the current of awakening and who expound the doctrine 
of the Ariya, until in the texts of the prajndpdramitd, instead of 
the simple mode of address “ noble sons ”, there appears, without 
further ceremony, " noble sons and noble daughters ” — a sign, 
amongst others, of the easing of the spiritual tension of original 
Buddhism.

We have now to discuss what are known as the five qualities 
of the combatant that are required in the disciple these involve 
both internal and external conditions. The first is the strengthWe have now to discuss what are known as the five qualities 
of the combatant that are required in the disciple these involve 
both internal and external conditions. The first is the strength

’ Mahdvagga (Vinaya), I, Ixxvi, i ; II, xxii, 4. It may be observed that 
the same limitations are considered for the ordination of catholic priests.

* MajjK CXV.

• Majjh,, CXV ; AngtcU.^ I, 20.

Angutt,, II, vi, 10.

Angutt., VIII, 51 ; CuUavagga (Fiw.), X, i. Other Buddhist expressions 
about women : seducers and astute, they destroy the noble life (Jdtaka,

CCLXIII). They are sensual, bad, common, base. . . . Women are con- 
tinually in the power of the senses. Saturated with an impure and inexorable 
burning, they resemble fire which consumes all (Jdtaka, LXI). And again :

** The country dominated by a woman is to be despised. And so to be despised 
is the being who becoihes dominated by the power of a woman " (Jdtaka, XIII). 
The original doctrine of the Ariya was firnily anti-gynaecocratic.

« Mcfjjh., XC.

122 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

conferred by confidence — saddhabtda : confidence, if we, refer to 
historical Buddhism, in the fact that its founder was perfectly 
awakened and in the truth of its doctrine ; or, more generally, 
that there are beings who “ have reached the summit, the perfec- 
tion ; that they themselves, with their supramundane power, 
have apprehended both this world and the other and are capable 
of promulgating their knowledge In a simile of an “un- 
conquerable frontier citadel ”, this confidence of the noble son 
'is likened to the central tower of the stronghold which, with 
its deep foundations, gives protection against enemies and 
strangers.^*Besides confidence, the “ combatant ” must be endowed with 
that “ knowledge ” and wisdom of the Anya which “ perceives 
rise and fall Of this we have already spoken at len^h. Let 
us remember that, in an entirely general sense, by bodhisatta is 
meant one who, by means of this very knowledge, is already 
inwardly transformed, whose core is already composed of hodhi 
or paHHd instead of sarhsaric forces.

Third quality. One must be genuine, not false, one must be 
able to make oneself known according to truth for what one is 
to the Master or to one’s intelligent co-disciples. To have a pure 
heart, a free ductile mind — to be, symbolically, like a perfectly 
white cloth that can easily be dyed the desired colour without 
showing blemishes or imperfections.^®

Fourthly, we have viriya-bala, or virile energy (the root of 
viriya is the same as that of the Latin term vir, man in the 
particular sense, as opposed to homo), a strength of wiU, which 
here shows itself as the power of repelling unhealthy tendencies 
and states . and of promoting the appearance of healthy ones. 
Above all, one must rely on this strength to replace delight in 
craving {kdma-sukham) by delight in heroism [vna-sukham) 
a substitution that is a basic point of the whole ascetic develop- 
ment ; one must fundamentally change one’s attitude in such 
a way that the heroic pleasure, becomes the highest and most 
intense pleasmre that the mind enjoys. Buddhism teaches :

" Each man is master of himself — ^there is no other master ; by

“ Cf. Saihyutt., XLII, 13.

Angutt,, VII, 63.

MajjK, VII ; LVI, etc.

Cf. MajjK CXXXIX.

QUALITIES OF COMBATANT, AND “DEPARTURE” 1 23

ruling yourself you 'will -find a rare and precious master,”’-’ and 
again : “ Not by others can one be purified ” " alone you areCf. MajjK CXXXIX.

QUALITIES OF COMBATANT, AND “DEPARTURE” 1 23

ruling yourself you 'will -find a rare and precious master,”’-’ and 
again : “ Not by others can one be purified ” " alone you are

in the ■world, and -without help.”’® Here again the viriya-bala 
pro-vides the strength for standing firm in face of all this. In 
Buddhism, there are no masters in the true sense of the 'word 
— guru : there are only those -who can point out the road which 
has to be followed entirely by one’s own efforts : " It is for 
you yourselves to carry out the work : the Buddhas (only) 
instruct.”®®

The fifth quality of the Ariyan combatant : he “ is firm, 
vigorous, well set up, neither depressed nor exalted, balanced, 
fit to win the battle.” The presence of blindness, deafness or 
any incurable disease was, in the canon, a reason for non-admission 
to the Order.®’ To be old, ill or needy are " unfavourable 
conditions for the battle.”®® " Manias to overcome by avoid- 
ance ” is the heading given to those unfavourable states 
which arise in one who does not look after his own health and 
who does not take necessary measures to avoid physical dist-urb- 
ances and troubles caused by surroundings.®® The loss of one’s 
strength through excessive abstinence is considered as one of the 
possible causes — ^to be avoided — of the loss of tranquillity of spirit, 
and of eventually falling a victim in one of the many pastures 
so-wn with bait by the Malign One.®* We have already spoken 
of the negative attitude of Buddhism towards the path of 
” mortification ” ; training in privation and pain is salutary, but 
only up to a certain point ; in the same way, a craftsman heats 
an arrow between two fires in order to make it flexible and 
straight, but he ceases when his purpose has been achieved.®® 
Both excessive tension and excessive slackness must be avoided :“ the strings must be neither too slack nor too taut.” One’s 
energies must be balanced.®® The mania of self-exaltation must 
be overcome, just as the mania of self-humiliation, of self-

Dhammapada, 160.

Dhammapada, 165.

“ Majjh., LXXXII.

Dhammapada, 276.

“ Mahavagga (Vin), I, Ixxvi, i.

Angutt., V, 54.

Majjh., II.

2 -‘ Majjh., XXV.

Majjh., Cl.

Angutt., VI, 55.

124 the doctrine of awakening

vilification, must be overcome.®’' Even-minded, fully conscious, 
one must consider oneself as neither equal, inferior, or superior to 
others, one must not place oneself amongst the middle people, 
nor amongst the lower people, nor amongst the higher people.®*

In speaking of the point of departure, therefore, we can talk of 
a state of " inward neutrality ” : “ Do not let your own

imperturbable mind be troubled by pain, and do not reject a 
just pleasure, persist in it without attachment.”®® “ Craving 
does ill and aversion does ill ; and there is a middle way by 
which to avoid craving and by which to avoid aversion : a way 
which gives sight and vision, which conduces to calm, which 
leads to clear vision.”*® We often meet with the term satisam- 
pajanna which refers to the state of one who maintains perfect 
awareness by the strength of his clear vision. Let us remember 
what has been said on the recurrent theme : “ to see in conformity 
with reality, with perfect wisdom.”

Already in connection with the elementary stages the destruction 
of vain imaginings, past or future, is taught. " 'What is before 
you put to one side. Behind you leave nothing. To what lies 
in between do not become attached. And in this calm you will 
progress.”*^ One who would tread the path of awakening must 
cultivate such a simplicity in his mind. An end must be made 
to the whole world of psychological complications, of " subject- 
ivity ”, of hopes and of remorse — ^in the same way as the demon 
of dialectics is silenced. Become used to interior concentration :” the insight which is varied and is based on variety, this one 
renounces ; the insight which is single and based on unity, 
wherein every attachment to worldly enticements is complexly 
vanished,, this insight one cultivates.”*® Here are some 
expressions which occur in the canonical texts, and which deal 
with what the symbolism of the alchemists would call the 
" process of fire ” — ^that is, the manner or rh3d:hm of the interior 
effort ; “To persevere steadfastly without wavering, the mind 
clear and imbewildered, the senses tranquil and undisturbed, 
consciousness concentrated and unified.” “ With tireless and ^

Anguit., IV, io6.

Cf. e.g. Angutt,, VI, 49; Suttanipdta, IV, x, 8; IV, xv, 20.

Majjh,, CL

Majjh,, III.

Cf. Majjh., CVI ; Dhammapada, 385.

« Majjh., LIV.

QUALITIES OF COMBATANT, AND “DEPARTURE” 1 25

Tiiiremitting energy, with knowledge present and unshakable, 
with serene, untroubled body, with consciousness concentrated 
and unified.”*® “ To persist alone, detached, tireless, strenuous, 
with fervid, intimate earnestness ” — ^this is the general formula 
used in the texts for the discipline of those who, having under- 
stood the doctrine, go on to achieve its supreme end. We are 
dealing here with predispositions, with qualities and at the same 
time with achievements — we shall see that among these qualities 
there are some which, in their turn, are the aim of particular 
ascetic practices to achieve.As we have discussed the quality of objective vision, we should 
also mention — ^in passing — ^the style in which many of the oldest 
Buddhist texts are set out, a style which has been called " quite 
intolerable ” because of its continued repetitions. What is the 
purpose of these repetitions ? The usual interpretation of the 
Orientahsts, that they are a mnemonic aid, is the most superficial. 
There are other reasons. In the first place, some ideas have 
been given a particular rhythm so that they are not arrested at 
the level of simple discursive intellect, but can reach a deeper 
and more subtle zone of the human being and there stir 
cdrrespondmg impulses. This agrees with the more general aim, 
explicitly stated in the texts, of permeating the entire body with 
certain states of consciousness, so as to cause certain forms of 
knowledge or certain visions to be experienced “ bodily 
Rhythm — ^both mental and, more important, that connected, 
with breathing — ^is one of the most effective methods of achieving 
this. The modem intellectual, only interested in grasping an idea 
or^a " theory ” as quickly as possible in the form of a schematic 
and cerebral concept will entirely miss the point of the repetitions 
of the Buddhist texts — and it is natural for him to judge this as 
“ the most intolerable of all styles ”.

But the repetitions — at least a certain class of them, particu- 
larly those in the Majjhima-nikdya — ^have also another aim : that 
of encouraging a certain degree of objective, impersonal and 
strictly realistic thought. It is, in fact, easy to see that the 
repetitions form connected series in which the reality or fact, the 
thought that is formulated in grasping it, or the thought that is 
aroused from hearing them, the verbal expression of this thought 
Majjh., IV ; Angutt., Ill, 40 ; Majjh., XIX.

i. .

126 THE DOCTRINE DF AWAKENINGi. .

126 THE DOCTRINE DF AWAKENING

or the exposition of the fact, are found in exact logical sequence. 
This is how the structure of the repetitions is built up : first 
of aU the text describes the fact (objective phase) ; next, there 
appears the person who takes note of it and who coniments on it, 
using the same words as those in which it was given in the first 
place by the text (subjective phase) ; thirdly, the person may 
refer the fact to others, in the same words once again, as a pure 
reflection of a thought conforming to reality. It may also happen 
that a second person — ^normally, the Buddha himself — asks others 
if the fact referred to is true, and we meet the same words for 
the fourth time Stylistically, this is an absurdly tedious process. 
Spiritually, it is a rhjdhm of Sachhezogenheit, as one would say 
in German : it is the pure transparent passage of the same 
element from reahty to thought, from objectivity to subjectivity, 
and from one subjectivity to another without any alterations. 
We must understand the attitude and the purpose with which 
texts' of this kind are read. A patient reading of them can be 
a discipline: they give an example of impersonality and of 
crystallinity of thought which may themselves work formatively 
on the spirit of the reader, giving him much more than simple 
"concepts ”.. The first major action on the ascetic path is indicated by the 
term fdhbajja, literally meaning " departure ”. According to the 
scheme of the texts, one who hears the doctrine and discovers 
. its deeper significance, and who thus arrives at " confidence ", 
acquires a conviction expressed by this formula : " Home is a 
prison, a dusty place. The life of a hermit is in the open. One 
cannot, by remaining at home, fulfil point by point the completely 
purified, completely filumined ascesis." Comprehending tlus, 
the " noble son " after a short time shakes off attachment 
to things and of persons, leaves home and devotes himself to the 
life of a wandering ascetic.

We have translated the term bhikkhu which designated the 
followers of the Buddha by " wandering ascetic ", although it 
Mterally means a " mendicant ", one who begs. Originally the 
•Udkkhus were a kind of wandering and begging monks : the 
semi-conventual nature of the Buddhist organisations only 
appeared at a later period. The term we have used possibly 
allows of fewer misunderstandings. For example, when we

QUALITIES OP COMBATANT, AND “DEPARTURE” 1 27QUALITIES OP COMBATANT, AND “DEPARTURE” 1 27

speak of “ begging ” it must be borne in mind that the circum- 
stances included a society in which the acceptance — ^by an ascetic 
or a Brahman — of something from an ordinary man was not 
a humiliation but a kind of grace. It was thought that an 
ascetic — ^by acting as a point of contact between the visible 
and the invisible — ^fulfilled a supremely useful, if intangible, 
function, a benefit even to those taking part in normal life. 
Giving — dma — ^in these circumstances was conceived as an action 
which would produce benefits of the same kind as " right conduct ” 
and contemplative development.®* Thus — a thing which seems 
paradoxical to-day^ — as a sign of contempt or as a penalty, 
Buddhist assemblies in solemn conclave would indicate families 
or individuals from which the ihikkhu should refuse to accept 
anything, by s3unbolically reversing the receptacle or bowl he 
carried with Iiim.®®These details apart, the hhikkhus originally were a kind of 
free Order with a Head, rather like an ascetic equivalent of 
the Western medieval Orders consisting of the " knights-errant ” 
and, later, the Rosicrucians with their ‘‘Imperator The 
Buddha recommended that two disciples should not take the 
same road.®® The essential point, in any case, was the absence 
of bonds and of the desire for company, a liking for solitude, 
a freedom — also physical where possible — ^like that of the air, 
of the open sky. " Flee society as a heavy burden, seek solitude 
above all.”®’ Having much to do, being busy with many things, 
avoiding solitude, living with people at home and in worldly 
surroundings — ^these are so many more " unfavomable conditions 
for the battle ”.®® One who is not free from the bond of family 
— ^it* is said in particular — may certainly go to heayen, but will 
not achieve awakendng.®® “ Let the ascetic be alone : . it is 
enough that he has to fight with himself.”*® “ Only of an ascetic 
who dwells alone, without company, is it to be expected that 
Tie will possess pleasure in renunciation, pleasure in solitude,

Cf. Angutf., VIII, 30. As a reference Suttanipdta, III, v, 15 : Those 
who go through the world with themselves as their light, attached to nothing, 
entirely liberated — to those, in due time, men may offer alms 
35 Angutt., VII, 87.

Mahdvagga {Vin), I, xi, i.

Majjh., III.

Angutt., V, 90.

Majjh., LXXI.

Mahdparinifv., 6-8.

rzS THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENINGMahdvagga {Vin), I, xi, i.

Majjh., III.

Angutt., V, 90.

Majjh., LXXI.

Mahdparinifv., 6-8.

rzS THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

pleasure in calm, pleasure in awakening, that he will possess 
this pleasure easily, without difficulty, without* pain.”" And 
again : ” He who enjoys society cannot find joy in solitary 
detachment. If joy is not found in solitary detachment, one 
cannot concentrate firmly on the things of the spirit ; if this 
power of concentration is lacking, one cannot perfectly achieve 
right knowledge" — or the things which proceed from it.“ The 
detachment and the solitude xa^abhajja, the “departure”,are naturally to be understood both imder the physical and under 
the spiritual aspect : detachment from the world and detachment, 
above all, from thoughts of the world." Therefore, do not let 
people’s talk affect you, do not pay too much attention to words." 
Do not dispute with the world, but judge it for what it is, that 
is to say, impermanent.^® The texts speak of " beiug to oneself 
an island, of seeking refuge in oneself and in the law, and in 
nothing else.*® If a man cannot find a wise, upright and constant 
companion with whom he may advance in step, " he walks alone, 
as one who has renoimced his kingdom, as a proud animal in 
the forest, calm, doing ill to none Here are some other 
illustrative expressions : “ Strenuous in his determination to 
achieve the supreme goal, his mind free from attachment, fleeing 
idleness, firm, endowed with bodily and mental strength, let 
[the ascetic] go alone like a rhinoceros. Like a lion which 
does not tremble at any noise, like wind which is held by no net, 
Uke a lotus leaf untouched by water, let him go alone like a 
rhinoceros.”*® And again : a true ascetic is “he who proceeds 
alone and contemplative, on whom neither blame nor praise 
have effect, who, like a lion, feels no fear at the noises [of the 
world], who, Uke a lotus leaf, is not touched by water, who 
guides others, but whom others know not how to guide ”.*®

Anyone who considers the problem of the adaptabiUty of the 
ascesis of the Ariya to modem times, will ask himself to what 
extent the precept of " departure ” as a real abandonment of

« Majjh., CXXII.

« Angutt., VI, 68.

Angutt,, IV, 132.

« Majjh., CXXXIX.

Mahdparinirv.f II, i.

« Safhyuit., XXU, 43.

Majjh., CXXVIII ; JOhammapada, 328, 329.

Suttantpdia, I, iii, 34, 37.

Suttanipdta, 1, xii, 7.

QUALITIES OF COMBATANT, AND “ DEPARTURE ” I29Mahdparinirv.f II, i.

« Safhyuit., XXU, 43.

Majjh., CXXVIII ; JOhammapada, 328, 329.

Suttantpdia, I, iii, 34, 37.

Suttanipdta, 1, xii, 7.

QUALITIES OF COMBATANT, AND “ DEPARTURE ” I29

home and of the world, and as the isolation of a hermit, must be 
taken literally. The texts sometimes consider a triple detach- 
ment, one physical, another mental, and the third both physical 
and mental.®® If the last naturally represents the most perfect 
form — at least so long as the struggle lasts — ^it is the second 
which should claim the particular attention of most people 
to-day and which, moreover, was given greater emphasis in 
Mahdydna developments, including Zen Buddhism. Besides, 
even the canonical texts mention the possibility of an inter- 
pretation of the concept of " departure ” that is mainly sjun- 
bolical ; thus “ home ” is considered, for example, to be equivalent 
to the elements which make up common personality — and similar 
interpretations are given for wandering and for property.®^ A 
variation of a text we have quoted, says that " sohtary life is well 
achieved in all respects when what is past is put aside, what is 
future abandoned, and when will and passion, in the present, are 
entirely under control ” elsewhere it is said that a man wan- 
ders like a hhikkhu justly through the world, when he has subju- 
gated past and future time and possesses a pure understanding,®® 
when he “ has left behind him both the pleasant and the unpleas- 
ant, clinging to nothing, in all ways independent and without 
attachments ” and so on. Similar expressions recur throughout ; 
they largely refer, moreover, to the principal tasks of ascetic 
preparation and purification.®*Once detachment, viveka, is interpreted mainly in this internal 
.sense, it appears perhaps easier to achieve it to-day than in a 
more normal and traditional civilisation. One who is still an 
"Aryan " spirit in a large Eirropean or American city, with its 
skyscrapers and asphalt, with its politics and sport, with its 
crowds who dance and shout, with its exponents of secular culture 
and of soulless science and so on — amongst aU this he may feel 
Jjimself more alone and detached and nomad than he would have 
done in the time of the Buddha, in conditions of physical isolation 
and of actual wandering. The greatest difficulty, in this respect, 
lies in giving this sense of internal isolation, which to-day may

Angutt., IV, 132.

« E.g. Samyuit, XXII, 3-

Samyutt., XXI, lo.

Suttanipdta, II, xiii, 15.

6* Suttanipdta, II> xiii, 5-6; cf. Ill, vi, 28.

130 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

occur to many almost spontaneously, a positive, full, simple and 
transparent character, with elimination of all traces of aridity, 
melancholy, discord or anxiety. Solitude should not be a burden, 
something that is suffered, that is borne involuntarily or in which 
refuge is taken by force of circumstances, but rather, a natural, 
simple and free disposition'. In a text we read : “ Solitude is 
called wisdom — ekoMam monatn akkhatam — he who is alone will 
find that he is ha;;ppy — ^it is an accentuated version of " beata 
soUtudo, sola beatibudo ”.From the external and social aspect also, it is interior liberty 
which counts ; this, however, must lead no one to deceive himself. 
Thus, in the matter of bonds, the man of today must beware 
more of little attachments than of great ones — that is, of attach- 
ments connected with conventional and " normal ’■ fife, of habits, 
inclinations and sentimental supports which, by making their 
own often unconscious excuses, are judged as being too irrelevant 
to be confronted. In this connection, there is a striking simile 
in the tejcts, that of the quail. It is addressed particularly to 
those who say : " What can come of this insignificant matter ! " 
and who do not notice that in this way they estabhsh “ a strong 
bond, a firm bond, a bond without weakness, a heavy fetter ”. 
If a quail, caught in a noose of weak thread, thereby goes to 
perdition, captivity or death, only a fool would then say : "That 
noose of weak thread in which the quail is caught and whereby 
it goes to perdition, captivity or death, is not a strong bond for 
it, but a weak bond, a frail bond, an insignificant bond The 
opposite case is that of a royal elephant “with large tusks, 
trained to attack, trained for the battle, tied with strong yopes 
and bonds ’’ vvhich, however, “ by moving the body only a little 
snaps and breaks those bonds and goes where he will ”. Here 
again, only a fool would say : " Those strong ropes and bonds 
which tie the large-tusked royal elephant, trained to attac]^ 
trained for the battle, those bonds which he, by moving the body 
only a little, snaps and breaks and goes where he wiU, are a strong 
bond for him, a firm bond, a tough bond, a bond without weak- 
ness, a heavy fetter ".®* This simile well emphasises the danger 
and the insidious character of many little ties — in connection

Suttanipdia, III, xi, 40. ,

Majjh,, LXVI.

, QUALITIES OF COMBATANT, AND “ DEPARTURE ” I3 ISuttanipdia, III, xi, 40. ,

Majjh,, LXVI.

, QUALITIES OF COMBATANT, AND “ DEPARTURE ” I3 I

with the modem world, we have cited those of a cwventional 
and sentimental nature — whose apparent insignificance offer 
material for self-indulgence.

Detachment or interior freedom is further imderstood in the 
sense of a species of ductihty — and we shall see that it is more 
and more developed in this very sense in course of the discipline. 
It is the opposite condition to that of the man who “clings with 
both hands and who is only removed with difficulty We again 
remember the frequent simile of the perfectly trained thorough- 
bred which immediately takes the desired direction.

The detached hfe, thought of as free as air compared with 
" home ” life, is thus connected with a feehng of being “ satis- 
fied with knowledge and experience This spirit is open to 
everything, to every impression — and is, for this very reason, 
elusive. Here is the inward equivalent of the state of mmd which 
the texts hken to a bird that “ wherever it flies, flies only with 
the weight of its feathers ” ; an image that refers to the purified 
contentedness of the ascetic who is satisfied with the simpHcity of 
his life and needs. It is once again evident that right at the 
beginning there must be present something which, in its ideal 
and absolute form, is represented at the final state : the sense of 
sunna or sunnatd, the “ void ”, which in Mahay ana hterature 
ends by being S3mon3anous with the state of nirvana itself, can 
aheady be seen in the. various similaxities between the earher .state 
of the spirit and the later.The disciphnes which, in the path of awakening, are considered 
as preparatory and which consist of the two sections of samddhi 
and gf stla, can be outlined as follows. On the one hand we have 
instructions which are of an entirely technical nature, and refer 
to actions which the mind has to perform on the mind, in the 
form of concentration and meditation without special conditions 
Of intermediaries. On the other hand, we have rules of conduct 
which could be called “ ethical ” but which, in reality — con- 
sidering what " ethical ” normally means today — are not, since 
•their value lies entirely .in their instrumental usefulness. 
Although the instructions of the first type can be carried, out by 
themselves, for the purpose of the “ neutral ascesis ” we have 
mentioned, nevertheless the states of mind produced by slla, by 
“ right conduct ”, furnish more favourable conditions for this pur-

132 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

pose. Both these forms of disciplines in the Buddhist path of 
awakening are animated by “ insight ”, vipassana, and are 
designed with liberation in view : "As the ocean is pervaded by 
a single taste, that of salt, so this law and this discipHne are 
pervaded by a single taste, that of hberationFrom the technical point of view, the tasks of ascetic action 
can be described thus. We have said that the stirring and 
eventual determining of the “ heroic vocation ” in the individual 
is already evidence of the awakening also of an extrasaihsaric 
element, pannd or hodhi. A work of defence must be undertaken 
immediately ; the most common mental processes must be 
mastered so that the new growth is not stifled or uprooted. Then 
the central element must be separated from any adulteration by 
the contents of experience, internal or external, so that the various 
processes of “ combustion ” through contact, thirst and attach- 
ment are suspended ; this should also fortify the extrasaihsaric 
— or, let us say, " siderial ” — ^principle, so as to make it inde- 
pendent and capable of proceeding freely, if it wishes, in the 
“ ascending ” direction, towards more and more unconditioned 
states, and the region where the niddna of the transcendental, 
pre-conceptional and pre-natal series act.

The initial phase could be compared to what in the S3mbolism 
of alchemy is called the work of " dissociation of the mixtures ”, 
of the isolation of the “grain of incombustible sulphur ” and of the 
"extraction and fixation of mercury”®® — "mercury”, that shining, 
evasive and elusive substance, being the mind, the " mixtures ” 
being the experience with which the "incombustible grain of 
sulphtur ”, the siderial, extra-samsaric principle is mixed. flThis 
naturally suggests a cathartic action of gradual elimination of the 
power of the " intoxicants ” and of the manias — of the dsava — 
which can be defined as follows : do not be held back by, attached 
to, inebriated by enjoyment, (in a general sense, therefore alsQ, 
in relation to neutral states), so that in the " five groups of 
attachment ” thirst does not become estabhshed, much less 
embittered;®* "completely banish, extinguish that which in the ■ 
desires is dinging to desire, snare of desire, vertigo of desire,Anguit., VIII, 19.

** Cf. J. Evola, If a TffiMfiPW Erntetica, Laterza, Bari, 1931.

CXLIX, - . . ' - .

QUALITIES OF COMBATANT, AND “DEPARTURE” 133

thirst of desire, fever of desire and this concerns both the 
direct evidence of consciousness and the unconscious tendencies, 
the upadhi and the sankhdra. The more external forms of this 
catharsis are connected with ‘‘ right conduct ” — stla ; the more 
internal ones, dealing with the potentialities, the roots and the 
groups of saihsaric being, are operated through special ascetic and 
• contemplative exercises — th.& jhdna. This cathartic development 
of consolidation and, in a manner of speaking, of " siderialisa- 
tion ” of one’s own energies leads to the limit of individual con- 
sciousness, a limit which includes also the virtual possibility of 
self-identification with being, that is, with the theistic^ly- 
conceived divinity. If this identification is rejected, one passes 
into the realm of paftnd (the third step) in which the liberated 
and de-humanised energy is gradually taken beyond " pure 
forms ” — rupa-loka — to the unconditioned, to the non -included 
— apariyapannam — ^where mania is extinct and “ ignoreuice ” is 
removed, not only in the case of the being who was once a man 
but also of any other form of manifestation.

»« Majjh., XXXVI.

II

DEFENCE AND CONSOLIDATION»« Majjh., XXXVI.

II

DEFENCE AND CONSOLIDATION

B y way of immediate action, a stand must first be made 
against thought, against mental processes. " I do not 
know ” — ^it is said^ — " anything which, when imbridled, un- 
controlled, unwatched, imtamed, brings such ruin as thought — 
and I do not know anything which, when bridled, controlled, 
watched, tamed, brings such benefits as thought Thought, 
which everyone lightly says is “ mine ”, is, in reality, only to a 
very small degree in our power. In the majority of cases, instead 
of " to think ” it would be correct to say " we are thought ” 
or " thought takes place in me ”. In the normal way, the 
characteristic of thought is its instability. “ Incorporeal ” — ^it is 
said ® — ” it walks by itself ” : it “ runs hither and thither hke an 
untamed bull ”.® Hard to check, unstable, it runs where it 
pleases.* In general, it is said that, while this body may persist 
one year, two years, three years or even up to a hundred years 
and more in its present form, “ what we call thought, what we 
caU mind, what we call consciousness arises in one manner, ceases 
in another ; incessantly, night and day ” ; “ it is like a monkey 
who goes through the forest, and who progresses by seizing^ne 
branch, letting go of it, taking hold of another, and so on ”.® 
The task is to “ arrest ” thought : to master it and to strengthen 
the attention;® to ’be able then to say: "Once this thought 
wandered at its fancy, at its pleasure, as it liked : I today shal^ 
hold it completely bridled, as a mahout holds a rut-elephant with 
his goad "As a fletcher straightens his arrow, so a wise man

1 AnguU., I, 4.

* Dhammapada, 37.

® AnguU., I, 20.

* Dhammapada, 35.

® Samyutt., XII, 61.

® Suitanipdta, III, i, 20.

’ Dhammapada, 326.

134

DEFENCE AND CONSOLIDATION I351 AnguU., I, 4.

* Dhammapada, 37.

® AnguU., I, 20.

* Dhammapada, 35.

® Samyutt., XII, 61.

® Suitanipdta, III, i, 20.

’ Dhammapada, 326.

134

DEFENCE AND CONSOLIDATION I35

straightens his flickering and tmstable thought, which is difiicult 
to guard, diffioilt to hold.”® In the same text two considerations 
are of importance ; first, the Upanishai teaching is recalled, in 
which the seat of true thought is not the brain but is hidden in 
the “ cavern of the heart ” secondly, this simile is used : “As 
a fish taken from his world of water and thrown on dry land, so 
our thought flutters at the instant of escaping the dominion of 
Mara.”'^'> In point of fact it is a matter of reversing the relation- 
ship : in recognising the fragihty of the body, which yet shows 
itself much more stable than thought, thought itself is made 
firm as a fortress.^A few explanations. If one day normal conditions were to 
return, few civilisations would seem as odd as the present one, 
in which every form of power and domiaion over material things 
is sought, whilst mastery over one’s own mind, one's own emotions 
and psychic hfe in general is entirely overlooked. For this reason, 
many of our contemporaries — ^particularly our so-called “ men of 
action ” — areally resemble those crustaceans which are as hard- 
shelled outside with scabrous incrustations as they are soft and 
spineless within. It is true that many achievements of modern 
civilisation have been made possible by methodically applied and 
rigorously controlled thought. This, however, does not alter the 
fact that roost of the “ private ” mental life of every average 
and more-than-average man develops today in that passive 
manner of thought which, as the Buddhist text we have just 
quoted strikingly puts it, “ walks by itself ”, whilst, half-un- 
conscious, we look on. Anyone can convince himself of this by 
trpng to observe what goes on in his mind, for example, when 
lea^ng his house : he thinks of why he is going out but, at the 
door, his thoughts turn to the postman and thence to a certain 
friend from whom news is awaited, to the news itself, to the 
foreign country where his friend lives and which, in turn, makes 
'Tiim remember that he must do something about his own pass-

® Dhammapada, 33.

® Dhammapada, 37. It is worth noting that in Chinese translations of the 
Buddhist texts '' thought ” is rendered by the character hsin which also means 
heart. There is an analogy in the ancient Egyptian tradition. Also Dante 
{Vita Nuova, I, 2) speaks of the intellect which is situated in the "most secret 
chamber of tire heart

Dhammapada, 34.

Dhammapada, 40.

K

136 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENINGDhammapada, 34.

Dhammapada, 40.

K

136 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

port but his eye notices a passing vpoman and starts a fresh 
train of thought, which again changes when he sees an advertise- 
ipent, and these thoughts are replaced by the various feelings and 
associations which chase each other during a ride through the 
town. His thought has moved exactly like a monkey which jumps 
from branch to branch, without even keeping a fixed direction. 
Let us try, after a quarter of an hour, to remember what we have 
thought — or, rather, what has been thought in us — and we shall 
see how difficult it is. This means that in all these processes and 
disordered associations our consciousness has been dazed or 
" absent ". Having seen this, let us imdertake to follow, without 
disturbing them, the various mental associations. After only a 
minute or two we shall find ourselves distracted by a flood of 
thoughts which have invaded us and which are quite out of con- 
trol. Thought does not like being watched, does not hke being 
seen. Now this irrational and parasitical development of thought 
takes up a large part of our normal psychic life, and produces 
corresponding areas of reduced activity and of reduced self- 
presence. The state of passivity is accentuated when our thought 
is no longer merely “ spontaneous ” and when the mind is agitated 
by some emotion, some worry, hope or fear. The degree of con- 
sciousness is certainly greater in these cases — ^but so, at the same 
time, is that of our passivity.These considerations may throw some light on the task which 
is set when one “ ceases to go ” ; one reacts, one aims at being 
the master in the world of one’s own mind. It now seems quite 
incomprehensible that nearly all men have long since been 
accustomed to consider as normal and natural this state^ of 
irrationality and passivity, where thought goes where it will — 
instead of being an instrument which enters into action only when 
necessary and in the required direction, just as we can speak 
when we wish to, and with a purpose, and otherwise remain 
silent. In comprehending this “ accordiog to reahty ”> we must*" 
each decide whether we will continue to put up with this state 
of affairs.

In its fluid, changeable arid inconsistent character, normal 
thought reflects, moreover, the general law of samsaric conscious- 
ness. This is why mental control is considered as the first urgent . 
measure to be taken by one who opposes the " current ”. In

DEFENCE AND CONSOLIDATION I37

undertaking this task, however, we must not be under any illu- 
sions. The dynamis, the subtle force which determines and carries 
our trains of thought, works from the subconscious. For this 
reason, to attempt to dominate the thought completely by means 
of the will, which is bound to thought itself, would almost be 
like trying to cut air with a sword or to drown an echo by raising 
the voice. The doctrine, which declares that thought is located 
in the " cavern of the heart ”, refers, amongst other things, to 
thought considered " organically ” and not to its mental and 
' psychological offshoots. Mastery of thought cannot, therefore, 
be merely the object of a form of mental gymnastics : rather, one 
must, simultaneously, proceed to an act of conversion of the will 
and of the spirit ; interior calm must be created, and one must- 
be pervaded by intimate, sincere earnestness.The “ fluttering ” of thought, mentioned in our text, is more 
than a mere simile : it. is related to the primordial anguish, to 
the dark substratum of samsaric life that comes out and reacts 
since, as soon as it feels that it is seen, it becomes aware of the 
danger ; the condition of passivity and unconsciousness is essen- 
tial for the development of sarhsaric being and for the estab- 
lishment of its existence. This simile illustrates an experience 
which, , in one form or another, is even encountered on the 
ascetic path.

The iscipline of constant control of the thought, with the 
elimination of its automatic forms, gradually achieves what in 
the texts is called appamada, a term variously translated by 
“ attention ”, ” earnestness ”, " vigilance ”, ” diligence ” or ” re- 
flection ”. It is, in point of fact, the opposite state to that of 
“letting oneself think ”, it is the first form of entry into oneself, of 
an earnestness and of a fervid, austere concentration. When it 
is understood in this sense, as Max Muller has said,^^ appamada 
constitutes the base of every other virtue— keci kusald dhammd 
sabbe te appamddamulakd. It is also said : “ This intensive 
earnestness is the path which leads towards the deathless, in the 
same way that unreflective thought leads, instead, to death. He 
who possesses that earnestness does not die, whilst those who 
have unstable thought are as if already dead.”^® An ascetic

Max Mtiller in the edition of the Dhammapada contained in the Saored 
Boohs of the East, vol. X, p. 9,

.Vhammapada, 21,

138 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENINGMax Mtiller in the edition of the Dhammapada contained in the Saored 
Boohs of the East, vol. X, p. 9,

.Vhammapada, 21,

138 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

" who delights in appamada — ^in this austere concentration — -and 
who guards against mental laxity, will advance like a fire, burning 
every bond, both great and small He " cannot err And 
when, thanks to this energy, all negligence is gone and he is calm, 
from his heights of wisdom he will look down on vain and agitated 
beings, as one who lives on a mountain-top looks down on those 
who live in the plains.^®The struggle now begins. The s3mibolism connected with the 
Khattiya, the warriors, is again used. The texts speak first of a 
fourfold, just striving — cattdro samnuippadhdna — ^to be won by 
bringing to bear viriya-hala, the heroic force of will,^® which has 
already been considered as a requisite for the Ariyan disciple or 
combatant. Once the previously-deserted centre of the being has 
been re-occupied, and thought has been put under control, action 
must be taken against the tendencies which spring up. This is 
done in a fourfold manner : “ Summon the will, arm the spirit, 
bravely struggle, fight, do battle ”(i) to “prevent bad, not good 
things, yet unarisen, from arising” ;(2) to repel them if they have 
arisen; (3) to encoruage the arising of good things as yet unarisen;(4) 
to make them endure, increase, unfold, develop and become per- 
fect when they have arisen.^’ Understood in their fulness, these 
battles also concern further special phases and disciplines which 
will be discussed later — ^for example, the first and the second are 
related to the " watch over the senses ” (cf. p. 174) ; the third 
is related to the “ seven awakenings ” (cf. p. 177) ; the fourth 
to the four contemplations.^® But, at this stage, we are dealing 
with a general form of action, in connection with which the texts 
offer a series of instruments. An image or a simile is nomjally 
associated with each one of them. . The reader should pay par- 
ticular attention to these similes — as indeed to most of those with 
which every ancient Buddhist text is liberally sprinkled. Their 
value is not. simply poetic, ornament or an aid to understanding;, 
they often have besides a magic value. By this, we mean that 
when they are considered in the right state of mind they can act 
on something deeper than the mere intelligence and can produce . 
a certain interior realisation.

Dhammapada, 31,

Dhammapada, 26-29.

Anguit., V, 15,

1 ’ Anguit,, IV, 13-14 ; Majjh,, LXXVIII,Dhammapada, 31,

Dhammapada, 26-29.

Anguit., V, 15,

1 ’ Anguit,, IV, 13-14 ; Majjh,, LXXVIII,

Anguit., IV, I4.

DEFENCE AND CONSOLIDATION I39Dhammapada, 31,

Dhammapada, 26-29.

Anguit., V, 15,

1 ’ Anguit,, IV, 13-14 ; Majjh,, LXXVIII,

Anguit., IV, I4.

DEFENCE AND CONSOLIDATION I39

First instrument : substitution. When, in conceiving a par- 
ticular idea, "there arise harmful and unworthy thoughts, 
images of craving, of aversion, of blindness '' (these are — ^let us 
remember — ^the three principal modes of manifestation of the 
dsava), then we must make this idea give place to another, benefi- 
cial idea. And in giving place to this beneficial idea it is possible 
that those deliberations and images will dissolve and that by 
this victory " the intimate spirit will be fortified, will become 
calm, united and strong Here is the simile : " Even as a 
skilled builder with a thin wedge is able to extract, raise up, 
expel a thicker one " — ^just so, the immediate substitution of 
one image by another has the power of dispersing and dissolving 
the tendencies and the mental associations which the first was 
in course of determining or of arousing. What is " unworthy ", 
in one text, is defined like this : " That, whereby fresh mania 
of desire sprouts and the old mania is reinforced ; fresh mania of 
existence sprouts and the old mania is reinforced ; fresh mania 
of error sprouts and the old mania is reinforced."^® We are not 
dealing with moralistic aspects but with what may be described 
as ontological or existential references. It is a matter of over- 
coming and obstructing samsaric nature, of neutralising the 
possibilities of fresh " combustions " in oneself. Particular aid 
is given by the idea of the harmfulness of certain thoughts : upon 
the appearance of a " thought of ill-will or cruelty ", one must 
summon " wisdom conforming to reality arid then formulate 
this thought : " There is now arisen in me this thought of ill-will 
or cruelty ; it leads to my own harm, it leads to others' harm, 
it Ic^ds to the harm of both, it. uproots wisdom, it brings vexation, 
it does not lead to extinctipn, it leads to self-limitation." If 
this thought is formulated and apprehended with sufficient 
intensity and sincerity, the bad thought dissolves.^®This leads us immediately to the second instrument : expulsion 
through horror or contempt. If, in the effort of passing from 
one image to another as the first method prescribes, unworthy 
thoughts, images of craving, aversion or blindness still arise, 
then the unworthiness, the irrationality and the misery they 
represent must be brought to mind. This is the simile : " Just

Majjh., ir.

Majjh,, XIX.

140 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

as a woman or a man, young, flourishing and charming, round 
whose neck were tied the carcase of a snake, or the carcase of 
a dog, or a human carcase, would be filled with fear, horror and 
loathing ”, so, the perception of the unworthy character of those 
images or thoughts should produce an immediate and instinctive 
act of expulsion, from which their dispersion or neutralisation 
would follow. Whenever an affective chord is touched, then by 
making an effort one must be able to feel contempt, shame and 
disgust for the enjoyment or dishke that has arisen.®^In order to employ this ascetic instrument of defence to its 
best advantage we have to presuppose in the individual an acute 
form of interior sensibility and a capacity for immediately 
projecting the qualities which arouse instinctive repulsion on to 
the image of what is to be eliminated or neutralised. Hindus 
have the myth of ^iva, the great ascetic of the mountain tops, 
who with one glance of his frontal eye — ^the eye of knowledge 
— ^reduced Kama, the demon of desire, to ashes when he tried 
to disturb his mind. In reality, we must take account of the 
existence of “ serpentine ” processes of interior seduction — 
serpentine, because they develop in the subconscious and the 
semi-conscious, trusting entirely that no one is looking, and that 
a particular “ contact ”, which wiU eventually produce the 
thought in the mind, is not noticed. To be able to turn round 
immediately and see will paralyse these processes. But seeing 
impHes detachment, an instinctive and ready reaction which 
causes immediate withdrawal as soon as the contact and the 
infiltration are noticed. Other illustrations are given in the texts : 
as the man who inadvertently touches burning coals with his band 
or with his foot immediately recoils or as when two or three 
drops of water land on a white hot iron vessel : those drops fall 
slowly, but they vanish very rapidly. If this reaction is to be 
effective, one’s experience of the intrusion of undesired inclinations^ 
and emotional formations must proceed in a similar manner.®®

To discuss " cravings ” : when training this sensibihty and 
instinct we must not forget the " wisdom ” which measures the - 
significance of “ cravings ” from the point of view of the un- 
conditioned, of the extra-saihsaric. The fundamental theme,

“ Majjh., CLir.

“ Majjh., XLVIII.

« Majjh, CLII ; LXVI ; Sathyutt., XXXV 203.

DEFENCE AND CONSOLIDATION I4I“ Majjh., CLir.

“ Majjh., XLVIII.

« Majjh, CLII ; LXVI ; Sathyutt., XXXV 203.

DEFENCE AND CONSOLIDATION I4I

here, is that " the cravings are insatiable ”, precisely because 
each satisfaction only goes to inflame the cravings and to charge 
the individual with a fresh potentiality for desire. The texts 
provide detailed similes : cravings are like dry bones, without 
flesh and only with a smear of blood, and however much a dog 
may gnaw them they will never drive away his hunger and 
fatigue ; they are hke a flaming torch of straw carried' by a man 
against the wind, and if he does not immediately throw it away, 
it will bum his hand, his arm, his body ; they are hke alluring 
dream visions which vanish when the sleeper awakes ; they are 
like joy over a treasure amassed from things borrowed from 
other people who, sooner or later, will come and reclaim them ; 
they are like the points of lances or the blades of swords which 
cut into and wound the inner being ; and there are many more 
such similes.^* According to the degree to which this steady 
and Hved knowledge, conforming to reality, truly pervades the 
mind of the man who trains himself, so the possibilities of this 
second instrament, and also of the others, will multiply and the 
defence will increase in strength.■ Third instrument : dissociation. When undesired images and 
thoughts arise, they must remain meaningless and be ignored. 
The simile is : as a man with good sight, who does not wish 
to observe what comes into his field of view at a particular 
moment can close his eyes or look elsewhere. When attention 
is resolutely ■withheld, the images or the tendencies are again 
restrained. The simile we have just quoted brings out clearly 
what we have said about the state of passivity in which man 
finds himself during most of his mental and emotive life : has he, 
indeed, this power of looking or of wdthdrawing his sight at wiU ? 
Images, psycho-affective aggregates of fear, of desire, of hope, 
of despair and so on, fascinate or hypnotise his mind, subtly 
4ying it, they ” manipulate ” it by their influence, and feed on 
its energies like vampires. It is essential that this ascetic 
instrument be not be confused with the common and simple 
process of " chasing away ” a thought, a practice which often 
has the opposite effect, that is, of forcing it back, strengthened, 
into the subconscious, according to the psychological law of 
" converse effort ”. It is rather a matter of destroying by not 
Majjh., .XIV ; XXII ; LIV.

142 THE- DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

seeing, by neutraKsing the disposition and by leaving the image 
alone. The preceding instrument, also, should be regarded in this 
light : it is not repulsion by one who is struggling, but a reaction 
arising from a superior state of awareness and from an earnestly 
lived sense of the " indignity ” and irrationality of the images 
and inclinations which appear.Fourth instrument : gradual dismemberment. Make the 
thoughts vanish one after another successively. The relevant 
simile gives the idea of the technique very clearly : “ Just as 
a man walking in haste might think ; ' M^y am I walking in 
haste ? let me go more slowly ’ and, walking more slowly, might 
think : ‘ But why am I walking at all ? I wish to stand stiU ' 
and, standing still, might think : ‘For what reason am I standing 
up ? I will sit down ’ and, sitting down, might think : ‘ Why 
must I only sit ? I wish to He down ’ and might lie down ; just 
so if harmful and unworthy thoughts, images of craving, of 
aversion and of blindness, again arise in an ascetic in spite of 
his contempt and rejection of them, he must make these thoughts 
successively vanish one after another.” This method of* making 
the infatuation disappear by separating its constituent parts one 
by one in a gradual series and considering them with a calm and 
objective eye one after another, provides, in the preparatory stage 
of the ascesis, an example of the very method of the whole process. 
And image corresponds to image. The state of one who achieves 
extinction is, in fact, Hkened to that of the man who runs parched 
and feverish under the scorching sim and who finally finds an 
alpine lake with fresh water in which he can bathe, and shade 
where he can relax and rest.*® Another simile is given by,.the 
texts, stiU in connection with the method of dismemberment. 
It speaks of the pain that a man would feel in seeing a woman 
he favoured flirt with others. He arrives, however, at this 
thought : '' What if I w;ere to abandon this favouring ? ” — ^ii^ 
the same spirit as he might say : ” Why do I run ? what if I 
were to walk calmly instead ? ” and then were to walk calmly. 
Having thus banished his inclination, that man can now witness 
the sight which pained him before with calm and indifference.** 
The texts also speak of the conditioned nature of desire : desireSamyuit., XII, 68 ; Majjh,, XL.

Uaj'jh,, Cl.

DEFENCE AND CONSOLIDATION 143

is formed only because of a preoccupation of the mind which, 
in turn, is established only “ if there is present something which 
we may call an obsession, a possession — fapanca-sanm This

is the theoretical basis of the method of neutralisation by means 
of gradual dismemberment.

It is possible, however, that the mind in its irrationality may 
not be subdued even by this method. In that case one must 
pass to direct action, that is, one must come to grips with oneself. 
Whence, the last instrument : if, whilst making the thoughts 
gradually disappear one after another, irrational impulses and 
unworthy images continue to arise, then, " with clenched teeth 
and tongue pressed hard against the palate, with the will you 
must crush, compel, beat down the mind ”. The simile is ; "as 
a strong man, seizing another weaker man by the head or by 
the shoulders, compels him, crushes him, throws him down." 
Again, for real success in this direct form of struggle one must 
be able to call upon the illumination, the energy and the superior- 
ity that proceed from what is outside the simple “ current 
Only then is there no danger that the victory will be merely 
exterior and apparent, and that the enemy, instead of being destroy- 
ed, has disengaged and entrenched himself in the subconscious.*®In order to clarify the various stages of this subtle war, an 
author has adopted the following simile. It is not possible to 
avoid the appearance of images and inclinations in the mind : 
this occurs spontaneously and automatically until what is called 
voidness, sunna, is reached. To the disciple, to the fighting 
ascetic, some of these images are like strange and indifferent 
people whom we meet on the road and who pass by without 
attracting our attention. Others are hke people we meet who 
wish to stop us ; but since we see no point in it, we ourselves 
withdraw attention and pass on. Other images, however, are like 
j^eople we meet and with whom we ourselves wish to walk, in the 
face of all reasop. In this case we have to react and assert our- 
selves : the tendency of our will must be opposed from the start.

In the Buddhist text, to which we referred above, the result of 
this work of defence by means of dissolving the irrational deliber- 
ations and images which re-awaken the threefold intoxicating

” Dlgha, XXI, 2.

All this is in Majjh., XX.

144 the doctrine of awakening

force of the asava, is invariably expressed thus : “ the mind 
becomes inwardly firm, becomes calm, becomes united and 
concentrated," This is the path — ^it is said — along which an 
ascetic becomes " master of his thoughts ” ; “ Whatever thought 
he desires, that thought will he think, whatever thought he does 
not desire, that thought will he not think. He has extinguished 
thirst, he has shaken off the bonds.”** These disciplined, however, 
can also be used in an ascesis in a general sense, that is, independ- 
ently. of a supermundane end. To use them in this manner an 
easy adaptation of details is enough.In terms of " fighting ”, one is naturally advised to take the 
initiative in attacking what one intends to overcome. The 
expression is : " renounce a tendency or a thought, drive it away, 
root it out, suffocate it before it grows."*® There is also the 
simile of the herdsman who takes good care to destroy the eggs 
or the young of insects and parasites which might harm the 
animals entrusted to him.*^ In these circumstances, the methods 
of the wedge and of repulsion, as if some filthy thing had been 
hung rormd one’s neck, can be particularly effective.

All this naturally demands the degree of mastery of the logos 
in us that enables oin: discriminating exactly between our 
thoughts.®* Those that can be organised and used in the required 
direction shoidd be consohdated and established, working oh the 
principle that the mind inclines towards what has been considered 
and ponderedipr a long time.®® In this respect, however, nothing 
can equal the^enefits which come from a sense of innate 
dignity, as of a fecial race of spirit : then a reliable instinct 
will act and very little uncertainty will be felt in the task of 
” renouncing the low impulses of the mind ”.®* When this 
sense is weak, consohdation may be effected through reaction 
by means of what is known as the " justification ” method, 
which consists of awakening the sense of one’s own dignity bj^ 
Calmly contrasting one’s conduct with that of others. There is 
a whole series of formulae dealing with this, of which we have 
chosen the following : ” Others may lie, we shall not ” ; “Others

•» Majjh., XX.

. ” Majjh., n.

Angutt, XI, i8.

« Majjh., XIX.

” Majjh., XIX.

« Majjh., XXI.

DEFENCE AND CONSOLIDATION 145•» Majjh., XX.

. ” Majjh., n.

Angutt, XI, i8.

« Majjh., XIX.

” Majjh., XIX.

« Majjh., XXI.

DEFENCE AND CONSOLIDATION 145

may be egotists, we shall not ” ; “ Others may be malicious, we 
shall not ” ; " Others may yield, we shall persist ” ; " The mind 
of others may become clouded, our mind will remain serene ” ; 
“ Others may waver, but we shall be sure of our purpose ” ; 
“ Others may be provoked, but we shall not be provoked ” ; 
" Others may concern themselves only Avith what is before their 
eyes, they may grasp it with both hands, they may become de- 
tached from it with difficulty, but we shall not concern ourselves 
only with what is before our eyes, we shall not grasp it with both 
hemds, we shall easily become detached from it ", etc. What 
Islam calls nyya, the decision of the mind, is important and should 
be strengthened by the use of these formulae and of this style of 
thought.®® These instruments can naturally also be used as sup- 
ports in the building up of sila, that is, of " rightness ”.The overcoming of fear in aU its forms deserves a special word. 
It is achieved by firmly maintaining the feeling of one’s own 
rightness and detachment in face of all denials by one’s imagina- 
tion. There is nothing to hope, there is nothing to fear. The heart 
must no longer tremble, either through fear or through hope. 
There is no god or demon who can instil fear in the man who is 
internally detached both from this world and from the other. 
Whence it is said ; " Whatever fears may arise, they arise in the 
foolish man, not in the wise; whatever [sense of] danger may 
arise, it arises in the foolish man, not in the wise ’’ : only the 
former offers material in which the fire can start and spread.®* 
One text speaks of a discipline against fear. The Buddha himself 
recalls how, after well establishing the feeling of his rightness — ^in 
Latin it would be called innocentia and vacare culpa — ^he chose 
remote and wild places where fear might come at any moment, 
and how he awaited these moments in order to challenge and 
destroy any feeling of fear. This is the method : if one is walk- 
^g, continue to walk, if one is standing, continue to stand, if 
one is sitting down, continue to sit down, if one is lying down, 
continue to lie down until the mind has overcome and banished 
the fear.®’ These disciplines must not be dismissed with the idea 
that fear only arises in children or in timid women. There are 
profound, organic forms of fear, forms which may almost be called

” Majjh., VIII.

Majih., CXV; Angutt., Ill, i.

»’ Majjh., IV.

146 THE DOCTRINE OP AWAKENING” Majjh., VIII.

Majih., CXV; Angutt., Ill, i.

»’ Majjh., IV.

146 THE DOCTRINE OP AWAKENING

transcendental since they are not confined to simple psychological 
states of an individual but which come from certain abysmal con- 
. tacts. To be incapable of feeling fear in these cases may even 
be a sign of deadness or of spiritual flatness. It is said that when 
Prince Siddhattha was sitting under the " tree of illumination ”, 
resolved not to move until he had reached transcendental know- 
ledge, he rmderwent an attack by the demoniacal forces of Maxa, 
who was determined to move him from there, in the form of 
flames, whirlwinds, tempests and fearful apparitions. But 
Prince Siddhattha remained unshakable and all these 
apparitions finally vanished.®* Here we can see a variant of an 
idea which is found, even with the same symbols (e.g. the tree), 
in several other traditions — ^but we can also see something more, 
something beyond a mythical and legendary revival. Anyone 
who is famihar with ancient literature of the mysteries will recall 
similar experiences which appear as so many tests for the man 
who wishes to reach the light. In whatever form they may appear, 
they still deal with the emergence of profound forces of the being 
ratW than of simply individual or even human ones — and ” des- 
truction of fear ” is possibly the best term to describe positive 
victory over them. When a ” Yakkha spirit ” makes himself 
” felt ” by the Buddha and asks if he has fear, the reply is : “I 
have no fear : I merely feel your contaminating contact ” — and 
later in the same text these words are put into the Buddha’s 
mouth : “ I do not see, O friend, either in this world together 
with the world of angels, of bad and good spirits, or amongst the 
ranks of ascetics and priests, of gods and men, anyone who can 
scatter my thoughts or break my mind.”®* The attainment of 
such unshakabihty calls, however, for more extreme states of 
interior discipline than those we have assumed for the present 
discussion about fear. In this last respect a few words of emphasis 
may not be out of place. Where a text states that these two are^ 
not frightened at a sudden flash of lightning : one being he who 
has overcome mania and the other, the noble " elephant the 
commentary waifrs us that these are two quite dhferent cases : . 
fear gains no access in the first case because there does not exist 
an " I ”, in the second case because the ” I ” is extremely strong.»» LalUa-Vistara. XIX-XXI.

Suttanipdta, II, v, passim.

Anguit., II, vi, 6.

DEFENCE AND CONSOLIDATION I47

This should eliminate any “ titanic ” interpretation of the disci- 
phne in question. We are not dealing with the development of 
almost animal strength and courage, hut with elusiveness. The 
bond by which anguish might have arisen has been destroyed. 
There is nothing so rigid that it cannot be broken : but water 
cannot be compressed.By striving with the " fourfold, just endeavour ” and by using 
these instruments of defence, the personality — ^the extra-saifasaric 
element appearing in the personality — ^is gradually integrated by 
a fourfold strength, to which corresponds, in the texts, the tech- 
nical term cattdro iddhipada. We have, in the first place, the 
power which confirms the remmciation in its aspect of detach- 
ment from every form of desire, with the pure element of “ will ” 
giving support. In the second place we have the power of 
inflexibility, of perseverance in training, of paying no attention to 
defeats, of being able to start again with renewed energy. In the 
third place there is the power of supporting the mind, of recollect- 
ing it, of unif3dng it, of defending it both from states of exaltation 
and from states of depression, states which, on a path like this, 
could be entirely avoided only with the greatest difficulty. Finally 
there is the power of “ perception ”, to be understood as a kind 
of intellectual integration of the preceding one such that it be- 
comes impossible for the mind to accept false or vain theories. 
This fourfold power is to some extent summed up by a text we 
have already quoted : “ and he [the ascetic] reaches the admir- 
able path discovered by the intensity, the constancy and the 
concentration of the will, by the intensity, the constancy and the 
cong entration of the energy, by the intensity, the constancy and 
the concentration of the mind, by the intensity, the constancy 
and the concentration of investigation — ^with a heroic spirit as 
the fifth The term iddhi (Sanskrit : siddhi) normally refers 
to powers of a super-normal character. Here it must be under- 
stood especially in relation to energies which are associated with 
warlike discipline — hatthisippadmi — ^without forgetting, however, 
that, on the path of awakening at least, we are dealing at the 
same time with forces on which the bodhi or pannd element con- 
fers a quality which is not only human and that is not com- 
parable to any that samsdra can offer, since it contains something 
of the ” incomparable sureness ”■ — anuttarassa yogakkhemassa.« Majjh., XVI.

HI

RIGHTNESS

W E must now deal with stla, that is to say, with “ right 
conduct ”, which is complementary to the disciplines we 
have discussed, in so far as they lead to consoHdation of the 
spirit. We are translating the term sammd, which figures as the 
general attribute of the virtues included in the so-called eightfold 
path of the Ariya — ariya atthangika magga — by " upright ” or 
*' right ” because of the intrinsic evocative power of this word : 
upright is the position of things which stand, as opposed to that 
of things which have been knocked over or have fallen. In 
primordial symbolism the upright position, represented by the 
vertical | , belongs to virility and fire, whilst the horizontal posi- 
tion,—, corresponds to the feminine element and to the “waters”. 
Thus, by " rightness ” we must understand more than an accepted 
morality : it is rather an internal mode, a capacity for standing 
fast at all times without deviating or wavering, by ehminating 
every trace of tortuousness. The only point of reference here is, 
fundamentally, oneself : the “ virtues ” are essentially so many 
duties -to oneself which the re-awakened interior sensibility brings 
to light ; but once they have been put into practice, they en- 
courage, strengthen and estabhsh a state of calm, of transparency 
of mind and of spirit, of balance and of “ justice ”, by which 
every other discipline or technique is made easier.

We have already said that there is a complete absence of any 
moralistic mythology in Buddhism, since it is a creation of the 
pure Aryan spirit. Moralistic and moralising obsession is another 
of the signs of the low level of the modem world. It is even 
thought now that religions only exist in order to support 
moral precepts ; precepts which, incidentally, only tend to 
chain the human animal socially. This attitude is indeed an

148

RIGHTNESS

149148

RIGHTNESS

149

aberration. The fact is, and we must state it categorically, 
that every moral system, in itself, is .completely void of any 
spiritual value. In the traditional world, each ethical system 
drew its true justification from a supramundane purpose (which 
must not be unthinkingly considered as being a kind of do ut des, 
or as being inspired by the idea of sanctions or rewards which 
await the soul after death) and from the objective and impersonal 
fact that to follow or not to follow a particular line of conduct 
produces corresponding modifications in the essential nature of 
the individual. Morality, as it is thought of today, is only 
secularised rehgiott and, as such, purely contingent ; this is so 
much the case, that we are almost always forced to refer, in order 
to justify it, to the factual conditions of a particular historical 
society. • But even on this level the words of one Buddhist text 
which discusses the Order of hhikkhus are still vahd : namely, 
that when beings deteriorate and the true doctrine decays then 
there are more rules and fewer men live steadfastly.^In Buddhism then, as in every truly traditional teaching, ethics 
have a purely instrumental value and are therefore conditioned. 
They are not imposed on anyone : they are advocated purely 
from the point of view of knowledge. It is a question of knowing 
objectively what effect on the human being wiU result from 
following or not following certain principles and, having dis- 
covered this, of behaving accqrdingly. There is a context 
which clearly states the matter: " The fire has never thought, ‘I 
wish to destroy the foolish man’ — but the foolish man who wishes 
to embrace the burning fire destroys himself.”* We must speak, 
thenj_ of stupidity or foolishness, and not of " sin ” ; of know- 
ledge, and not of ” good ” and " evil ”. We have already quoted 
the Buddhist simile of the raft : as a man once he has crossed a 
river, vdll leave behind the raft which was built for that purpose, 
so we must leave behind the reference points of " good and evil ” 
\^ich served to encourage right conduct, once this conduct has 
been achieved. That the world of true spirituality has nothing 
to do with ” good and evil ” was also, moreover, a basic concept 
in the preceding Indo-Aryan tradition. i

Having made this clear, let us now consider the various parts

1 Mam., LXV.

2 Majjh., L.

150 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENINGHaving made this clear, let us now consider the various parts

1 Mam., LXV.

2 Majjh., L.

150 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

of $Ua. Sllci^ is divided into three grades. The lowest, cufa-stla, 
prescribes a mode of conduct that is expressed by this fixed 
canonical formula : (i) “ [The ascetic] has ceased from killing, 
he keeps himself far from killing. Without a staff, without a 
sword, tender-hearted, full of sympathy, he inculcates love and 
compassion for all living beings. (2) He has ceased taking what 
is not given, he keeps himself far from taking what is not given. 
He does not take what is not given him, he accepts only what is 
given, without thought of theft, with a heart become pure. 
(3) He has ceased from lust, he lives chaste, faithful to his re- 
nunciation, far from the vulgar habit of copulation. (4) He has 
ceased from lying, he keeps himself far from falsehood. He tells 
the truth, he is devoted to the truth, upright, trustworthy, neither 
hypocrite lior flatterer of the world. (5) He has ceased from 
malicious speakmg, he holds himself far from malicious speaking. 
What he has heard here he does not repeat there, and what he 
has heard there he does not repeat here, and. thus divide one 
person from another. He joins the divided, he rejoices in agree- 
ment, his words unite. (6) He has ceased from rough words, he 
holds himself far from rough words. Words that are without 
offence, cordial and urbane that dehght many, that encourage 
many : such words he speaks. (7) He has ceased from idle words. 
He speaks in due time." according to fact, careful of his meaning, 
with a discourse full of content, adorned on occasion with similes, 
clear and pertinent, adequate for its purpose.”* In connection 
with not taking what is not given, another text adds ; " not even 
a blade of grass ” and gives this simile : " as a leaf plucked from 
a branch cannot again become green, so a disciple who takes what 
is not given is not an ascetic and is not a follower of the son of 
the Sakya Elsewhere, a characteristic example is cited : that 
of a man who sees a gold coin on the ground and who neither 
picks it up nor pays any attention to it. Referring to sexual 
abstinence, this other simile is given : “As a man whose head 
has been cut off cannot continue to live amongst others with only 
his trunk, so one who does not practise sexual abstinence is not 
an ascetic and is not a follower of the son of the Sakya.”* Finally, 
one who intentionally takes the life of another is likened to a® Digha, I, i, 8 seq.

* Mahdvagga (Vin), I, Ixxviii, 3,

® Mahavagga (Vin), I, Ixxviii, 2,

RIGHTNESS . 151

block that has been spht in half and cannot be put together 
again.®

All this constitutes the lower sUa The precepts of majjhima’^ 
stla or the '' middle sUa '' deal with a kind of spartanisation of 
life : reduction of needs, cutting away of the bond formed by a 
life of comfort, with particular reference to eating, sleeping and 
drowsing. There are also precepts which come under the heading 
of a '' departure of a physical or literal leaving of the world : 
for example, avoidance of business or undertakings, non-accept- 
ance of gifts, abandonment of possessions and refusal to assume 
fresh ones, and so on. Included in this part of '' right conduct '' 
is abstention from dialectical discussions and speculation — this 
takes us back to the neutralisation of the demon of intellectualism 
(cf. p 47).

The last part of right discipline, maha-sUa, concerns not only 
abstention from practising divination, astrology or mere magic, 
but also from abandoning oneself to the cult of some divinity or 
other. One can therefore speak in some measure of surmounting 
the bond of religion in the sense of a bond that makes one lead 
the saintly life with the notion : '' By means of these rites, 
vows, mortifications or renunciations I wish to become a god or 
a divine being.'' But it is evident that this includes some elements 
which are supposed to have been already removed in the deter- 
mination of the vocations.'^In any case, it will be as well to discuss the elements of '' right 
conduct " as a whole, so that we may see them in perspective. 
It is clear that some refer exclusively to an absolute form of 
''departure", that is to say, of a material as well as a purely 
interior or spiritual detachment from the world ; that is to say, 
to the asceticism of the monk or anchorite. The degree to which 
they are strictly to be observed today depends, then, on what 
^ch individual may decide is necessary. A good number of the 
Elements of the middle and higher sUa can, however, be applied 
with simple adaptation to an asceticism that is practicable to 
some extent in the '' world " : thus, the precepts dealing with 
astrology, divination and the like, could easily refer to the modern 
debased practices of like nature in the form of "occultism",

* Mahavagga (Vin), I, Ixxviii, 4.

’ Digha, I, i, 8 seq*

L

152 THE JDOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

spiritualism and so on. Measured with the ideal of Awakening 
all this has thus the character of a dangerous straying.’*’ Digha, I, i, 8 seq*

L

152 THE JDOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

spiritualism and so on. Measured with the ideal of Awakening 
all this has thus the character of a dangerous straying.’*

Of greater importance are the precepts of “ right conduct ” 
which belong to the lower sila. They are widely applicable, inde- 
pendent of particular historical conditions. And that some of 
them clearly correspond to the principles of Ariyan morality, to 
the morality of a well bom man, is' plain enough. The following 
may be taken as a general maxim of sila : " Though I be hurled 
head down into the infernal regions, I will do nothing that is 
ignoble.”® Such is the case, in the first place, with the precept of 
not taking what is not given — ■“ not even a blade of grass ” — of 
wholly eliminating all intention to steal. Amongst the ancient 
Aryan peoples theft was considered a much graver offence than 
it is to-day, since they had in mind the inward rather than the 
material and " social ” aspect of the matter. For this reason 
there is no question of degree : as regards taking what is not 
given, it is just as dishonourable to do so by taking a cigarette 
from a companion — ^to refer to modem times — or a paper from 
one’s office, as it is to stage a full-scale b^nk robbery and carry 
off a large sum of money.■ In the second place, the rule of speaking the tmth, the absolute 
inability to lie, is specifically Aryan. Nothing, amongst the Aryan 
people, was considered so ignominious and degrading as falsehood, 
especially from the point of one’s own relations with oneself and 
of the duties that one owes first and foremost to one’s self and 
to one’s own interior dignity. " In one who has no shame in 
conscious falsehood, no evil thing is impossible ” — ^so mns a text — 
whence the firm determination of the ascetic ; “ Not even ^pr a 
joke will I lie” ; this is the exact equivalent of the sa5dng attri- 
buted by Western Aryan antiquity to the figure of Epaminondas: 
ne joco quidetn mentiebatur. In this text there is also a simile ; 
only when a man has made up his mind can he be said to be 
committed definitely, just as when it is seen that a royal elephan"? 
that has been trained for battle is using his trunk one can say :

" This royal elephant has renounced his life : nothing is now im- . 
possible for the royal elephant.”® Another text : " I would not

Cf. J. Evola, Maschera e voUo dello Spiritualismo contemporaneo, 2nd edn, 
Bari, 1949.

® Jataha, XL.

• Majjh., LXt,

RIGHTNESS

153

tell a falsehood even if the mountains were moved by the wind, 
even if the moon and sun were to fall to earth and the rivers were 
to rim backward.”^® This, in fact, is an essential point in all 
practice of rightness, it is essential for the man who would be 
upright and integral, not tortuous, not oblique, not masked. In 
an Aryo-Persian text it is even said that killing is not as serious 
as lying.Avoidance of malicious speaking needs no special comment. 
Whether we give vent to rough words or not obviously depends 
on the degree to which we allow other people to put us in a temper, 
to reach our spirit and wound it as if it can be wounded. It is, 
then, essentially a problem of interior mastery and of awareness. 
Besides, only an individual who is not carried away by anger or 
irritated by insults can succeed in putting a presumptuous man 
in his place. Buddhism, indeed, would agree with the ancient 
Roman maxim that it is better to suffer an injustice than to 
commit one, that one should not react to evil by producing more 
evil in one's turn. These precepts are essentially designed to 
overcome the bond of the personality, and we shall return shortly 
to a discussion of their interpretation when we come to* deal with 
the precept against killing. They are valid, naturally, for the 
practice of asceticism and not for life in the world.

Control of the tongue is emphasised and the absolute elimin- 
ation of all useless, disordered, hasty, inconclusive, indefinite, 
illogical or empty speech. There is something of the classical 
style here in speech which is suited to the subject, sober, clear 
and determined, timely, free from effusions and uncontrolled 
expajisiveness ; something of the style of Tacitus. It is with 
silence that Prince Siddhattha often replies. Little streams of 
water — ^it is said^^* — make a noise between their steep and narrow 
banks : the vast ocean, instead, is silent. " He who is insufficient 
rg,akes a noise ; he who is complete in himself is calm." We 
shall see that an Accomplished One maintains a similar style 
in his gestures and behaviour.

One of the aims of s^la is to create a state of harmony and 
equilibrium both with oneself and with the outside world. This 
is how we must interpret the precepts of cordiality, of abstention

Jdtaka.

SiUtanipdta, III, xi, 42-43.

154 DOCTRINE OF AWAKENINGJdtaka.

SiUtanipdta, III, xi, 42-43.

154 DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

from malicious speaking, of not contributing to the creation of 
discords, of contributing instead to the uniting of those who are 
disunited. This leads to the precept of not killing intentionally, 
a precept which, in the later forms of Buddhism, became much 
exaggerated — the respect for life was extended to even worms and 
insects. Originally, however, it referred particularly to the killing 
of human beings. However, even with this limitation, some 
people wish to interpret this precept as a kind of humanitarianism, 
little in harmony with the spirit of the Aryan Khattiya, or warrior 
tradition ; a tradition to which Prince Siddhattha had belonged, 
and which, in the Bhagavad-gita produced an entirely metaphysical 
justification for the heroism which spares neither one’s own life 
nor the life of others in a just war. The fact is, that this precept 
of not killing must be understood as having a particular interior 
and ascetic aim; and therefore, like all the others it has only a con- 
ditioned value. Already on the plane of stla a certain impersonali- 
sation and universaHsation of the “I” is to be aimed at. When 
one has to do with other people one must try to anticipate the 
state of consciousness in which another person is felt as being 
oneself, not in the Christian, humanitarian or democratic sense, 
however, but with reference to a super-individual consciousness. 
Seen from this height it becomes evident that “ I ” is one of 
the many forms which, in certain conditions, may variously 
clothe the extra ssuhsaric principle ; a principle which may ap- 
pear in the person of this or that being and there become mani- 
fest. We are dealing, then, with something very different from the 
respect of one “ creature ” for another " creature ". The other 
“ creature ” is considered, instead, from a higher point of view, 
firom the point of view of a “ totality This being so, it would 
obviously be abnormal to act or react against a part unless one 
felt oneself to be only a part. For this reason, the precept of not 
killing and of not causing others to kill is associated, in a text” 
with the formula of identification : "As I am, so are they, as 
they are, so am I ’’ and we have already quoted the simile of 
the split block for one who kills (p. 150-1). Again, we are simply 
dealing with a discipline which may produce an orientation of 
pragmatical value and subordinate to the higher aim. This same 
significance will be formd again both in the “ fourfold iiradiant“ Suitanipata, HI. xi, 27 .

RIGHTNESS

155

contemplation”, which also includes love, and also when we 
come to discms piibbe-nivasa-Mna, that is to say, super-individual 
insight which penetrates multiple existences.

The last of the precepts of the cula-sUa, that which relates to 
chastity, leads us to a short discussion of the sexual problem: 
Its solutions vary according to the degree of absoluteness to which 
ascetic practice is to be carried. Originally in Buddhism, for 
those who were not, properly speaking, hhikkhus but only 
" followers ”, only adultery was forbidden. Regarding adultery 
we must not forget that in the Aryan East every man belonging 
to a higher caste had several women at his disposal, but whose 
status was really more that of objects of use than " wives ” 
in the Western sense, especially with those " ladies ” or " life 
companions ” who nevertheless allow themselves to-day to take 
the initiative and gain emancipation or divorce. In state 
of affairs adultery simply came rmder the heading of taking what 
was not given and as such was considered to be dishonest.More generally, as regards relations between the two sexes, 
it is evident that one who wishes to achieve the basic condition 
for awakening, that is to say, cahn detachment and interior 
sufficiency, must train himself in such a manner that he will 
continually feel less need of a woman. The physical need, to 
some extent, is stiU allowable, like that of eating or of other 
animal functions. It is the “ spiritual ” need which must be 
eliminated at an early stage, since this affects a much deeper 
element which has nothing to do with the body and since it 
testifies to deficiency and to inconsistency of spirit. The danger 
that a woman represents, particularly to-day, is not so much 
her female aspect as the fact that she encourages the need for 
support, for reliance upon someone else who may be a weak 
soul unaye to find in himself a meaning for his life. A story 
is told of the men who were searching for a fleeing woman and 
who were asked by the Buddha : " What think you, O youths, 
which is better for you, that you seek a woman or your selves ? " 
The reply is : "For us. Lord, it is better that we go in search 
of our selves.” And the Buddha says : ” If that is so, 0 youths, 
seat yourselves, and I wiU expound, the doctrine for you.”^® The 
same Indo-Aryan tradition records a saying attributed to a.yogin,

Mahavagga (Vin), I, xiv, 2-3.

156 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

an ascetic : " What need have I of an external woman ? I have 
an internal woman within me ” — ^meaning that he had within 
himself the element of self-completion, of fulfilment, an element 
that the common man confusedly seeks, instead, in woman.^^ 
In this respect too we find ourselves to-day in completely ab- 
normal conditions. Modem men mostly httle know what 
spiritual virihty and internal sufficiency mean ; through “soul” 
and “ sentiment ” they descend to the level of women who, often 
enough to-day, and without appearing to be so, are the directors 
of man’s Ufe.• The precept of chastity must be considered on a higher level 
of the disciphne. In Buddhism, as in aU really traditional 
teaching, it has a purely technical justification. Only rehgions 
noticeably affected by the Semitic spirit have carnal ethics ; 
this is now so much the case that sexual matters have almost 
become the measure of sin and virtue. And Buddhist texts 
opportunely censure incomplete, impure and murky forms of 
isl^tity, including that followed by those who aim at a celestial 
woHd.^® The precept of chastity for those who follow the path 
of aw'lg.kening with all their energies has nothing to do with such 
an ord^ of things ; it has the transcendental justification, which 
takes us\beyond the field of stla, of “ right conduct ” pure and 
simple. 'The fact is that, in a being subject to “ craving ”, sexual 
energy is, '^in some ways, the radical energy. Through it one 
enters saihSaric life and through it the life-spark of one being 
is lit by another. The ancient esoteric teachings therefore 
considered tlhat the suspension and change of polarity of this 
force was a ^ffindamental condition for effectually “stopping 
the current ” and " reversing it ”. In fact, there even 
existed a precise and direct technique for acting on the force 
which normally appears as sexual energy and sexual desire, and 
for diverting :|.t to another state where it could serve as the basis 
for a birth, npt in time, but in what is beyond time.^® There is 
no mention-H-at least in original Buddhism— of such direct 
methods whych have a connection with dionysism and sexual 
magic. It /ban be said, however, that the whole Buddhist

Cf. our /work Lo Yoga della potenza, cit,

15 AnptU., VIT, 47.

This e.g. the sense of the so-called kuxi^alinl-yoga and of the Tantric 
pancatattvai with Tantric maithuma, on which cf. Lo Yoga della potenza, cit.

RIGHTNESS

15715 AnptU., VIT, 47.

This e.g. the sense of the so-called kuxi^alinl-yoga and of the Tantric 
pancatattvai with Tantric maithuma, on which cf. Lo Yoga della potenza, cit.

RIGHTNESS

157

ascesis is a process which will itself act in this way on the sexual 
energy, now no longer dissipated thanks to the discipline of 
chastity.RIGHTNESS

157

ascesis is a process which will itself act in this way on the sexual 
energy, now no longer dissipated thanks to the discipline of 
chastity.

In speaking of sexual abstinence we must not, however, forget 
the Buddhist precept of the gradualness of each aspect of discip- 
line, nor the simile of the serpent which twists round and bites 
if it is not grasped in the correct manner. Christian mysticism 
provides good examples of the lethal effects that are produced by 
a unilateral and unenlightened suppression of every sex impulse. 
These are the energies which, when they are simply repressed — 
verdrangt, to use the classical term of the psycho-analysts — ^pass, 
reinforced, into the subconscious and produce all sorts of upsets, 
hysteria and anxieties. We must never act “dictatorially"' in 
dealing with such matters, but always by degrees, so that every 
achievement is of an organic nature, gradually increasing. Equally, 
we must beware of unconscious transpositions '' of the sexual 
impulses, of the system of compensations and super-compensations 
to which they may give rise, thereby fooling the conscious mind 
which wrongly believed it had gained mastery through a mere 
veto. This last observation will also serve to put us on our 
guard against the exclusively psycho-analytical and Freudian 
interpretation that, in dealing with sexual impulses and, in general, 
the libido, admits of no other action than either repression" 
—Verdrdngung — ^which creates hysteria and neuroses, or altema-J 
tively transposition and sublimation A high ascesis is 
neither one nor the other, and we must be very careful that 
during development we maintafti a just balance and that the 
centKal force, spiritually virile and awakened and strengthened 
by the various disciplines, gradually absorbs the whole of the 
energies which' call for expression once the road to animal genera- 
tion is barred. Only one who feels that the interior process is 
djgveloping in this mamier can keep without danger the precept 
of complete sexual abstinence. Otherwise it is far better to wait 
than to force the pace— always provided that we are not being 
misled by pretexts provided for the conscious personality by the 
entity of craving. How important it is to 'divert the basic energy 
of life from subjection to the saihsaxic law of craving and thirst, 
which is clearly dominant in the field of sex, is clearly illustrated, 
moreover, by the Buddhist simile which states that one who158 the doctrine oe awakening

does not keep this precept of sUa is like a man who would try 
to go on living amongst others with his head cut off.

A particular rule of stla, of which we have not yet spoken, 
is abstention from “ strong ” or intoxicating substances, especially 
from alcoholic drinks.^’- This precept, too, has a technical origin. 
Such substances produce a state of inebriation which, in the case 
of ancient man rather thaiv in the man of to-day, might even 
produce a. favourable condition when the accompanying 
" exaltation — ^was made to act in the ‘right way. This

would, however, be a " conditioned ” exaltation which would 
harm the ” : where one’s own energy ought to have acted 
an exterior force has intervened, so that the corresponding state 
is infected, fundamentally and from the outset, by remmciation 
of initiative and passivity. Somehow or another, a “ debt ” has 
been created and we find ourselves bound by an obscure “ pact ” 
-T-this is a thing that happens, though to a greater extent in all 
forms of what is known as ceremonial magic. *Both in India,

• in the case of Tantrism, and in the West, among the pre-Orphic 
Dionysians, the possibility was considered of mingling activity 
and ■ passivity in a state of exaltation (not unrelated to the 
sexual energies), and this was carried to a point where, by means 
of ecstasy, the antecedents became of no further account.^® 
Such methods, however, would not befit the path of clear and

Ol3nnpian ” ascesis that the teaching of original Buddhism. 
. represents.Ol3nnpian ” ascesis that the teaching of original Buddhism. 
. represents.

As. we are examining these elements whose power sUa, as a 
whole, should diminish, we will take this opportunity of referring 
to the theory of the five bonds which plays an important jpart 
m the Buddhist teaching, particularly as regards the various 
degrees of achievement and their consequences. These bonds, 
which bind the “ ignorant common man, insensible to what is 
Ariya, remote from the doctrine of the Ariya, inaccessible by the 
doctrine of the Ariya ”, are : firstly, attachment to the '' I ”, tlTe 
illusion of individualism [attanditthi or sahkdyaditthi) secondly, ’

‘ Cf. e.g. Mahdvagga (Vin), I, Ivi.

We have also spoken of these rituals in our book, Lo Yoga della potenza. 
They were used in that form of Tantric Buddhism known as vajra-ydna, " the 
rgad of the diamond and of the lightning

The term sakkdya may possibly derive from sat-kdya, which deals with the 
illusion of a man who believes that the person insofar as it consists of the 
body is a reality (sat).

RIGHTNESS

159The term sakkdya may possibly derive from sat-kdya, which deals with the 
illusion of a man who believes that the person insofar as it consists of the 
body is a reality (sat).

RIGHTNESS

159

doubt {vicikiccha), doubt regarding the doctrine and the Master, 
and also, more generally, about the past or the future it is 
also doubt about the vocation existing in oneself, the road that 
one is following and what may result from the states of aridity, 
depression and nostalgia, which are inevitable in the early phases 
of a life of detachment ; thirdly, behef in the efficacy of simple 
conformity,^ of rites and ceremonies {sUabhata-pardmdsa) 
fourthly, sexual desire and all bodily pleasure and craving {kdma 
or rdga) ; finally, there is ill-will, aversion {patigha). If they 
are not neutralised, if they are strengthened through conduct 
dominated by ignorance these bonds '' lead downwards 
towards the lowest and darkest forms of saihsaric existence.^* 
As we have said, at this stage it is a matter of limiting the power 
of these negative inclinations in their more external and immediate 
forms. Their complete annihilation occurs in more advanced 
stages of the ascesis, where the " five bonds appear related to 
the so-called '' five impurities of the spirit '' (cf. p. 176).As for the positive side of the general work of consolidation 
and its developments, we have the well-known and rather 
stereotyped formula of the eightfold path of the Ariya — ariya 
atthangika magga. This deals with eight virtues, to each of which 
is applied the term sammd, '' right a term to be understood 
mainly in the sense we have already indicated, that is to say, 
as the attribute of one who stands who holds himself erect, 
as opposed to the oblique or horizontal direction of those who 
"are driven’'. First : right vision, which consists of keeping in 
sight the "four truths”, of being aware both of the contingency of 
existence and of the way in which, by following a particular 
method, it can be overcome. Second : right intention (in Pali, 
sammdsankappo), which refers to active determination, volition 
or desire, and is, therefore, the determination of one who opposes 
the " flux ” and who proceeds on the upward path. Third : 
right speech, which is inflexible sincerity, open speech, abstention 
from malicious words and gossip, as has already been stated. 
Fourth : right conduct, which is conduct conforming to the

Dhamma-sangani, 1004.

Dhamma-sangani, 1005 specifies thus : It is the theory, held by ascetics 
and priests foreign to out doctrine, which claims that purification is achieved 
by precepts of conduct, or by rites, or by precepts of conduct and rites 
2 !* Majjh,, LXIV.

l6o THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENINGl6o THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

aforesaid precepts of not taking what is not given, of not killing 
intentionally, of abstinence from lust. Fifth : right life, which 
is a life supported by blameless means, is sober and avoids 
pampering, extravagance and luxury. Sixth : right effort, which 
is interpreted essentially as the " four just endeavours ” (cf. p. « 
138). Seventh : right meditation, of which we shall speak later 
as it deals essentially with what is known as " perpetual clear 
consciousness ” (cf. p. 169). The term used here, is sammusati. 
Sati literally means memory,- that is to say, continual practice 
of mindfulness of oneself ; and of Self awareness. Eighth : right 
contemplation, which brings us to the " samadhi ” section with 
which we shall deal later (p. 182), since it is essentially concerned 
with the four jhdna, by which the catharsis leads to the limit 
of conditioned consciousness. 2*

It can be seen that this formula serves as a schematic represent- 
ation. Returning to s^la, we see that it aims at further consolida- 
tion : it eliminates much material which might rekindle and 
re-establish the sarixsaric flame. The " virtues ” of stla are said 
to be “ praised by the Ariyu, inflexible, integral, immaculate, 
unsullied, conferring liberty, appreciated by the intelligent ; 
virtues that are inaccessible [by craving and delusion], that lead 
to concentration of the mind The fixed formula which, in 
the canonical texts, accompanies the exposition of sila is : " With 
the accomplishihent of these noble precepts of virtue [the ascetic] 
feels an intimate, immaculate joy.” When this feeling arises it 
must be mastered, fixed and established, as it is a precious 
foundation for further progress. This is naturally not possible 
without a precise effort. But, in this respect. Buddhism. has 
further instruments of defence by prevention.The texts speak, for example, of the conditions for achieving 
power over the body and over the mind. The principle is that 
pleasant feeling which arises in the body binds the mind through 
the impotence of the body ; painful feeling, however, binds the 
mind through the impotence of the mind itself. Experiencing a 
pleasant feeling, " the ignorant common man craves for pleasure, 
falls a prey to craving for pleasure ” — and it is here that one must 
intervene and bar the way leading from the body, not in the sense

»> Cf. e.g. bigha. XXII, 21.

** Angutt,, III, 70 ; Samyutt.f XL, lo.

RIGHTNESS

i6i

of excluding the pleasant feeling, but of preventing it from binding 
one and carrying one away. Thus the impotence of the body is 
remedied, '^en painful feeling arises, such a man “ becomes sad 
and overwhelmed, he laments and falls a prey to despair ”. Here 
one must act directly on the mind, for it is now the mind, which 
shows itself to be impotent. In this way one begins to gain power 
over both the body and the mind, and interior balance is 
strengthened.This form of effort is more successful when aided by the 
necessary discipline. A particular experience may provoke 
pleasant feeling, unpleasant feeling or feeUng that is neither un- 
pleasant nor pleasant. This is how one must then train oneself : 
" Let me, during what is unpleasant, remain with a pleasant 
perception,” or : “ Let me, during what is pleasant, remain with 
an unpleasant perception,” or lastly : “ Pleasant and unpleasant, 
avoiding the one aiid the other, let me remain indifferent, collected, 
present to myself.”*® A variation of the same discipline concerns 
the repugnant and the attractive. From time to time one should 
consider the attractive as repugnant, in order to lessen desire or 
inclination (for places, foods, persons, etc.) ; and the repugnant 
as attractive (in order to allay feelings of repulsion, irritation or 
intolerance) ; and what is neither repugnant nor attractive as 
either repugnant or attractive ; and, ^ally, one should be able 
to maintain a balanced, watchful mind, aware of oneself above 
states of either kind.*® Any real progress in such disciplines 
naturally depends upon all aspects as a whole and, above all, 
upon exercises aiming directly at non-identification which we shall 
now.consider.

In a commentary on Hi^Anguttara-nikaya^'^ we read : " When 
confidence is tied to vision and vision to confidence, when the will 
is joined to concentration and concentration to the wiU, the 
Ijfilance of the forces can be considered as achieved. Self- 
awareness — sati — ^is, however, essential always. It must always 
be energetically cultivated.” The discipline called satipatthdna 
aims at this in particular.

“ Majjh., XXXVI ; CLII.

Samyuit, LIV, 8.

Angutt., VI> 55. (p. 86 of the edition, Die Redsn des Buddhas, published

by Ny^natiloka, Miinchen-Neiibiberg, 1922-23.)

IV

SIDEREAL AWARENESS— THE WOUNDS CLOSESamyuit, LIV, 8.

Angutt., VI> 55. (p. 86 of the edition, Die Redsn des Buddhas, published

by Ny^natiloka, Miinchen-Neiibiberg, 1922-23.)

IV

SIDEREAL AWARENESS— THE WOUNDS CLOSE

T he term satipatthana is made up of the word saii, which 
we have already explained as memory, or self-awareness, 
and patthdna which means to construct, set up, establish. In 
English this term is normally translated by " setting-up of 
mindfulness ” (Rhys Davids), and in German by Pfdler i&r 
Geistesklarheit — ^whence the expression used by De Lorenzo ; 
pilastri del sapere (pillars of knowledge — ^in the sense of self- 
knowledge). The whole formula of the text is; parimukham 
satim upatthapeti} which could be rendered thus ; “to place the 
memory of oneself before oneself”. The aim of the discipline 
with which we shall now deal is, in fact, to begin to disengage 
the central principle of one’s own being by means of an objective 
and detached consideration, both of what makes up one’s own 
personality and also of the general content of one’s own experi- 
ence. The very fact of standing apart from all this, as if it were 
something external or foreign, purifies and stimulates the con- 
sciousness, brings one back to oneself and further develops im- 
passive calm. In this sense the four principal groups of objects 
that ’are considered in this discipline serve as so many supports 
for “ knowledge ” ; they represent something solid for a 
reaction leading to an unfettering of oneself, to a return to 
oneself. The four groups of the satipatthdna refer to the body 
— kdya, to the emotions or feelings — vedand, to the mind — citta, 
and lastly to the dhammd, a general term which here includes 
phenomena and states brought about by the ascetic disciphne 
itself in its higher stages.I. — Contemplation of the body. To quote the canonical for- 
mula, the ascetic, after overcoming the cares and desires of the 
world, devotes himself in the first place " with a mind clear and 
1 Digha. XXII, 2.

162

SIDEREAL AWARENESS THE WOUNDS CLOSE 163

fully conscious ” to contemplation of the body. This procedure 
is carried out in various stages.

(a) To begin with, the ascetic practises conscious breathing or 
self-awareness whilst breathing — mdpdna-sati ; this is said to be 
one of the most rapid methods of attaining unshakable calm.* 
The ascetic must choose a quiet and secluded place and there 
practise consciousness of breathing in and out. He breathes in 
deeply and knows : “I am breathing in deeply ”, he breathes out 
deeply and knows ; “I am breathing out deeply ” ; he does the 
same with short breaths. He then practises thus : “ I wish to 
breathe in feeling the whole body ”, “ I wish to breathe out feel- 
ing the whole body ”, “ I wish to breathe in calming this bodily 
combination ”, " I wish to breathe out calming this bodily com- 
bination.” And so on. A simile which shows what perfect aware- 
ness is required in this exercise states : just as an expert and 
careful turner, when turning quickly, knows : "I am turning 
quickly ”, and, when turning slowly, knows ; “ I am turning 
slowly.”®Exercises of this kind are particularly important since, accord- 
ing to the Indo-Aryan teaching, breathing is connected with the 
subtle force of lii&-—prd^a — ^that forms a substratum to all the 
psycho-physical ftmctions of a man. The whole organism is ani- 
mated and pervaded by subtle currents — nddi (a term usually 
translated rather primitively by “ winds ”) — ^whose source is 
located in prana and in the breath. Thus an Upanishad says : 
“As the spokes of a wheel rest on the nave, so aU [in the organism] 
rests on prdna."^ These teachings derive from knowledge of 
the breath which is not understood by modem man and which 
he can only revive through a special effort. When, however, the 
breath or respiration comes to be felt as prana, it can then be 
made to serve as a “ way through ” : when the breath has 
been made conscious, when clear consciousness has been grafted 
onto the breathing, one is able to discover the " life of one's own 
life ” and to control the organism and the mind in many ways 
that are quite impossible for the ordinary consciousness and will. 
Furthermore, by taking the rhythm of the breath as a “ vehicle ”, 
it is possible to render certain states of consciousness “ corporeal ”

* Angutt., V, g6.

« Dlgha, XXII, 2.

♦ Chdndogya-i!^,, VII, xv, i.

164 the doctrine op awakening* Angutt., V, g6.

« Dlgha, XXII, 2.

♦ Chdndogya-i!^,, VII, xv, i.

164 the doctrine op awakening

and " organic ”, to make them, that is to say, act upon the life 
forces of the samsaric entity in such a way as on the one hand 
to stabilise and consolidate them, and on the other to modify 
the samsaric stuff accordingly. Further developments of the 
discipline of breathing are dealt with by Buddhism. From purely 
bodily mastery, we pass to psychic mastery, and formulae like 
these are used : I wish to breathe in feeling joy, I wish to breathe 
out feeling joy ”, “ I wish to breathe in feeling the mind, I wish to 
breathe out feeling the mind ”, "I wish to breathe in gladdening 
the mind, I wish to breathe out gladdening the mind ”, “I wish 
to breathe in concentrating the mind, I wish to breathe out con- 
centrating the mind ”, and the same for relaxing. Finally, 
conscious breathing is practised with other contemplations and 
states ; it confers a rhythm on them and is itself a channel through 
which they become united with the subtle counterpart of the 
human make-up. It is said that when the breathing is thus 
watched and practised, " even the last breaths cease mindfully, 
not unmindfully ”.® In the Upanishad it had already been said :

” Truly these beings arrive in the wake of the breath, depart in 
the waie of the breath.”®

At this stage, however, the aim of the practice is only contem- 
plative. It is a matter of making the breath un-automatic at 
certain moments, of making it conscious, of placing oneself before 
one’s breathing and one’s breathing before oneself, by experienc- 
ing breath essentially as prana, as the life force of the body.(b) In the second place, we have contemplation of the body and 
of ail its parts, with the coolness and precision of a surgeon at 
an autopsy. The canonical formula is : “ Behold, this body bears 
a scalp of hair, it has body-hair, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, tendons, 
bones, marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, 
stomach, intestines, membranes, faeces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, 
sweat, lymph, tears, grease, saHva, mucus, articular fluid, urine.” 
And the following simile is given in order to show how to perform 
the operation : as though a man with good eyesight having a sack 
full of mixed grain might imtie the sack and carefully examining 
the contents might say : " This is rice, these are beans, this is 
sesamum.” Naturally, the best thing that can be done by any-

• Majjh., LXII : CXVin : Anguit., X, 60.

* Chandogya-vf., VII, xv, i.

SIDEREAL AWARENESS— THE WOUNDS CLOSE 1 65

one wishing to follow these disciplines is to go to a' morgue or to 
be present at an autopsy : he will thus obtain particular vivid 
and effective images as a basis for such meditations. The, purpose 
is always the same ; to dis-identify oneself, to create a gap : 
" This am I, this is my body, it is made thus and thus, composed 
of these parts, of these elements;”’ There are some texts which 
prescribe, as an additional fortifying exercise, contemplation of 
the various diseases to which the body is exposed.®(c) Third exercise. The body is now considered as a function 
of the four “ great elements ” that are present in it. Whether 
he is moving or still, the ascetic must consider the body that he 
bears as a function of these elements : " This body consists of 
the earth element, of the water element, of the fire element, of 
the air element.”® This kind of meditation had a somewhat 
different significance for ancient man from what it may have 
today. Ancient man, in fact, regarded the ‘‘ great elements ”, 
mahabhuta, not merely as " states of material ”, but rather as 
manifestations of cosmic forces such as the elements which were 
taught by the ancient and medieval Western traditions. In any 
case, the aim of the meditation is to comprehend the body as a 
function of the impersonal forces of the world which follow their 
laws with complete indifference ito our person. In the second 
place, we have to understand that these '' great elements ” 
also are subject to the laws of change and dissolution. Thus 
sbme texts advocate the practice of calling vividly to mind the 
periods both of power and of decline and dissolution of the cosmic 
manifestations of the four elements, so that we come to this con- 
clusion : if change and cessation befall even these powers of the 
world, why should they not also befall this body, " less than 
eight spans high, produced by thirst for existence " ? -Are " I ”, 
“ mine ” or '' I am ” its real attributes ? In actual fact, " It 
has nothing ”.^® According to a simile for this third operation : 
hf recognising in the body this or that element one must proceed 
in the same manner as a man who, butchering a cow, separates 
the various parts and considers them well, takes them to the 
market and then sits down — that is to say, one must return to

’ nigha, XXII, 5.

* Angutt., X, 60.

• Dlgha, XXII, 6 .

>« Cf. Majjh., XXVIII ; CXL.

l66 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING’ nigha, XXII, 5.

* Angutt., X, 60.

• Dlgha, XXII, 6 .

>« Cf. Majjh., XXVIII ; CXL.

l66 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

oneself, one must finally become aware of oneself. By arousing 
the knowledge that the organism, though still alive and " ours ”, 
follows the objective and elementary laws of the great elementary 
forces, quite independent of the world of the " I ” ; by awaking 
this sense, the body once again provides the basis for a reaction, 
for a detached and free reahsation of the extra-saihsaric factor 
in man..(d) Mara^anussati, centemplatio mortis. Here one has to 
imagine a corpse in all the phases of its decomposition : stiff, 
then swollen up and rotting, then stripped of flesh with only the 
tendons left, then without either flesh or tendons, then as scattered 
bones, as bones heaped up and mixed with others, and finally as 
bones rotting away and as bones crumbled to dust. With this, 
one has to comprehend : ” My body, too, has a like nature, so 
will it become, it cannot avoid coming this fate.''^^ These similes 
should awaken particularly vivid feelings without, however, 
arousing Hamlet-like reflections nor those of the Semitic minstrel 
with vanitas vanitatum. The decay of the body, in all its 
crudity, is here considered as helpful to progress because, rather 
than depress the mind, it should awaken a detached consciousness 
capable of imagining with perfect calm and dispassion the fate 
of one’s own body after death. It is, once again, a matter of 
consolidating the sidereal, extra-sarhsaric element. Should these 
meditations result in a feeling of pessimistic depression, of desola- 
tion, of Leopardian shipwreck, then they have been quite wrongly- 
carried out. They are performed correctly when they result in 
a state of mmd where one can consider a disaster overtaking 
one’s body, and even physical death itself, as though another’s 
body were concerned. Ttiis state may even transform itself into 
a force capable, in certain circumstances, of acting positively on the 
organism. Thus the texts speak of a sick ascetic who recovered his 
strength and overcame his disease at the moment of imderstand- 
ing and apprehending the teaching about the perfect meditation 
on the body.^* It is said : “ If the body is ill, the mind shall not 
be ill — thus have you to train yourselves. The Ariya are not 
obsessed by the idea : ' I am materiality, materiality is mine, 
materiality is my self ’, and for this reason they do not change

“ Dlgha, XXII, 7-10.“ Dlgha, XXII, 7-10.

Angutt., X, 60 ,

SIDEREAL AWARENESS THE WOUNDS CLOSE 167

when the material body changes and grows old ” or when the 
same fate overtakes the other constituents which make up the 
personality.”

This is the fourfold form of the Buddhist contemplation of the 
body, which constitutes the first support. Its importance in re- 
gard to the goal, which we have already discussed, is confirmed 
by the statement that this contemplation, well practised, well 
exercised, gives a foretaste of amata (Sanskrit ; amrta), that iS 
to say, of the deathless.”a. — Contemplation of the feelings. After the body, the feelings 
— vedana — ^form the basis for the sidereal awareness of oneself. 
The canonical formula is: "Among the feelings within, the 
ascetic watches over the feelings; among the feelings without, 
he watches over the feelings ; among the feelings within 
and without, he watches over the feelings. He sees how the 
feelings arise, how the feelings pass away, how the feelings 
arise and pass away. ‘ This is feeling ’ — such knowledge be-, 
comes his support because it leads to wisdom, it leads to re- 
flection.”^® Such exercises can be correlated with what is called 
the control of the six intemal-extemal sensory realms, although 
this latter is normally included in the fourth section, namely that 
concerning the dhammd. Here we are dealing with the sphere of 
the senses, including the mental organ. The formula is : “ The 
agcetic understands the eye, he understands visual forms and he 
understands that all combinations resulting from both are bonds. 
He knows when these combinations occur, he knows when the 
combination that has occxured ceases and he knows when the 
combination that has occurred will no longer appear in the future.” 
The same formula is repeated for the ear and soimds, for the 
tongue and tastes, for the touch and contacts, for the mind and 
mental objects.^* To begin with we may not imderstand the 
a(j^ion that is to be performed : how do we obtain this separate 
knowing of the sensible faculties and of their objects, as if we 
were complete strangers to both, and what is the purpose of trac- 
ing their combinations in the same spirit as a chemist follows the 
process of the combining of two substances ? We should 
“ Sa^yuft., XXn, 1, 8.

Angutt., I, xxi, 47 ; Milindapanha, 336 ; Majjh., CXIXi

Majjh., X.

mgha, XXII, 15.

M

l68 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENINGAngutt., I, xxi, 47 ; Milindapanha, 336 ; Majjh., CXIXi

Majjh., X.

mgha, XXII, 15.

M

l68 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

understand the meaning of the discipline in this way; that 
we must make ourselves aware of the nature of common experi- 
ence, and of how it exhausts itself in the “ flux What we have 
already said about a passive way of thinking is mainly true 
in the case of the various senses. In reality, to say '' I see 
'' I taste ”, “ I hear ” is, in samsaric existence, rather an 
euphemism. Indeed there exists here only the fact of vision, 
the fact of hearing, the fact of taste and so on, which arise from 
the promiscuous contact of object and subject, and which 
proceed from the elementary self-identification of consciousness 
with its experience in processes of " combustion ”. The disci- 
pline we are discussing aims at dissociating this irrational 
mixture until one can truly say : " I see ”, ” I taste ”, “ I 
hear ”, " I touch ”, ” I smell ”, “ I think ” — ^with the same 
clarity and self-awareness as one who grasps an object in his 
hand or lets it fall and who knows : ” I am grasping this object, 
.1 am letting it fall”.' When we consider the domains of the 
senses and of the mind itself, we must seek to cultivate a real 
feeling that they are actual organs which are consciously 
used, but always at a certain ” distance ” : I am here, the 
thing seen or felt or tasted is there, and the result is the 
experience, and the " combination ” of the two as an element- 
ary fact or " bond ”, is also just as clearly before me. The texts 
provide a simile : "As from the contact of two pieces of wo^d 
when they are rubbed together heat is bom and fire springs up, 
and as the heat formerly produced by them ceases, becomes 
extinguished when they are separated ” : just so, must we clearly 
come to understand that " This feeling is arisen ”, " this feeling 
is extinguished ”. The texts add, with particular reference to 
the general aim of these contemplations : ” There remains only 
passiveness which is pure, clear, ductile, flexible, resplendent.”^’ 
As an example of this contemplation, on an everyday level, Jlet 
us take the case of a meal ; the mouthful is put into the mouth, 
it is consciously circulated in the mouth so that none remains 
unmasticated and so that none remains in the mouth when it is 
swallowed ; when it has been swallowed, the next mouthful is 
taken ; " the ascetic feels the taste whilst he takes the food, but 
he does not derive pleasure from it ” one must taste with 
Majjh.. CXL. “ Majjh., XCI.SIDEREAL AWARENESS THE WOUNDS CLOSE. 169

awareness and yet remain detached. A considerable inward effort 
is necessary to extend this kind of control beyond occasional 
moments of practice : it is, in fact, a case, not only of substituting 
one habit for another, but of coming to grips with the blind 
force of identification which acts in the former habit. The 
natural development of this contemplation is what is known as 
the " watch over the senses ” or the " curing of the wounds ” of 
which we shall say more below (p. 174).3 . — Contemplation of the mind. The term vedand can mean 
not only feeling, but also emotion or sentiment, and we can pass 
naturally from the sphere of the second contemplation to that 
of the third, which aims at awaking " knowledge ” in the presence 
of all states and changes of one’s mind. The canonical formula 
is ; "An ascetic knows the craving mind as craving and the non- 
craving mind as non-craving ; the hateful mind as hateful and 
the non-hateful mind as non-hateful ; the deluded mind as de- 
luded, and the undeluded mind as undeluded ; the concentrated 
mind as concentrated and the distracted mind as distracted ; 
the upward-tending mind as upward tending and the mind of 
low feeling as of low feeling ; the noble mind as noble and the 
common mind as common; the tranquil mind as tranquil and 
the anxious mind as anxious — he knows the liberated mind as 
■liberated and the bound mind as bound. This means that, 
jn the first place, one must cultivate an attitude of absolute, in- 
flexible sincerity and objectivity with regard to one’s interior, 
psychological and emotive life. In the second place, we are again 
concerned with the energy that is aroused by the dis-identif^g 
“ insight The sign that progress has been achieved on this road 
is one’s ability to regard one’s own emotions, feelings, states of 
mind and passions as if they were another’s — ^as though, naturally, 
they were taking place in someone about whom one were quite 
indifferent and who served merely as an object of observation. 
Once again, the aim is an active form of de-personalisation. A 
text reads : "As the clouds arise, pass, become transformed and 
dissolve in the open sky, so also is it with the passions in the 
mind of the wise man.’’ In its liberty and intangibihty, the mind 
of the wise man is thus likened to the sky. As its clarity is im- 
altered by the changing vicissitudes of the clouds, so his mind is

” Bigha, XXII, 12.

170 THE DOCTRINE OP AWAKENING” Bigha, XXII, 12.

170 THE DOCTRINE OP AWAKENING

unchanged by the passions and emotions which form, transform 
and pass away there according to their laws. As the Bhagavad- 
speaks of one who "does not desire desire, into whom, instead, 
all desires flow as the waters flow into the sea which, [continually] 
refilled, [yet] remains xmchanged ”, so in Buddhism the ideal state 
is likened to the “ depths of the ocean, where no waves arise, 
but where calm reigns We shall find other cosmic and ele- 
mental images of liberty and intangibility when we discuss the 
“ irradiant contemplations Here, this serves but as a signpost 
to point out the way of contemplation.4 . — Contemplation of the dhammd. The term dhammd has a 
wide meaning, as we have said, and this section includes contem- 
plation not only of phenomena and states of consciousness of 
various kinds, but also of the ascetic processes themselves. Thus 
it is said that awareness is to be practised in regard to the “ five 
hindrances”, that is to say : craving, aversion, slothful laziness, 
pride and impatience, doubtful uncertainty.*® And it must be 
practical as well in regard to the estimation of their absence, or 
of their development, or of their disappearance at the moment 
of intervention by the dissolving action of which we shall treat 
bdow. The same awareness is practised in order to observe the 
manifestation and the cessation of attachment in each of the five 
groups of personality in turn — ^we are dealing, in other words, 
with variations of the contemplation of states of the mind^ 
Further disciplines take as their object higher states of ascetic 
consciousness, such as the “ seven spiritual awakenings ” — 
hojjhanga,^ and the direct supermundane apprehension of the 
"four truths”.®* In this further region recurs the- necessity 
for maintaining a perfect, detached state of consciousness even 
in the development of the higher ascesis, as well as the necessity 
for avoiding identification even with super-sensible experiences 
and for emphasising at all times the absolute sidereal and extr^^ 
saihsaric element in such experiences. Loss of control and 
" agitations ” must never take place, a calm and steady light must 
shine on every experience and on every action. At the very limit

*“ Bhagavad-gUS, II, 70.

Suttanipata, IV, xiv, 6.

•• Dlgha, XXII, 13.

« Dlgha. XXII, 16.

“ Digha, XXII, 17.

SIDEREAL AWARENESS — THE WOUNDS CLOSE 171

of the supreme realisation, the pure and detached element of 
consciousness — saii — ^must constitute, in a manner of speaking, a 
higher " dimension ” than the content of any ordinary ex- 
perience.of the supreme realisation, the pure and detached element of 
consciousness — saii — ^must constitute, in a manner of speaking, a 
higher " dimension ” than the content of any ordinary ex- 
perience.

This is the fourfold form of satipatthdna. As we have said; 
what is realised in individual exercises should be developed into 
the form of a habitus of clear consciousness maintained at all 
moments of daily life. This, in fact, is considered in the texts 
as a development of the first contemplation, and is expressed in 
this formula : " The ascetic knows when he is walking, ‘ I am 
walking ’, he knows when he is standing, ' I am standing ', he 
knows when he is in this or that position that he is in this or 
that position.” In a word, he ends by literally bearing his own 
body. In a commentary on the texts, in this connection, the 
characteristic question is asked : ” Who is walking ? ” The 
answer being : " It is not the ‘I’ that is walking” ; " Whose 
walking is it ? ” “ It is not of an ‘ I ’ ” ; ” Who determines thewalking ? ” “An act of the mind, transmitted and assumed by 
the breath {pmija) which pervades the body and moves it.”*® 
The texts further specify: the ascetic is clearly conscious in 
coming and in going, in looking and in detaching his gaze, in 
bending and in raising himself, in wearing his robe, in eating and 
in drinking, in masticating and tastmg, in defascting and urina- 
ting, in walking and standing and sitting, in falling asleep and 
wa^g, in speaking and in keeping silent.®* As in a mirror, he 
” looks at himself again and again before performing an action ; 
he looks at himself again and again before sa3dng a word ; he 
looks at hims elf again and again before harbouring a thought ”.®® 
It can easily be seen that by following such a path a man naturally 
transforms himself into a kind of living statue made up of aware- 
ness, into a figure pervaded by composedness, deconun and 
dignity, a figure which inevitably calls to mind not only the 
■(^hole style of the ancient Aryan aristocracy but also that made 
famous by the ancient Roman tradition in the original type of 
the senator, the pater familias and the maiores nostri. In reality, 
there is a natural relationship between these effects of the 
discipline of self-awareness and the traits which, together with

. •' Oa Digha (W. 357).

«• Digha, XXII, 3-4.

Majjh., LXI.

172 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING. •' Oa Digha (W. 357).

«• Digha, XXII, 3-4.

Majjh., LXI.

172 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

the “ thirty-two signs of the superior man ”, tradition has 
bestowed on the enlightened Ariya in the following terms : "As 
an Accomplished One speaks, so does he act and as he acts so 
does he speak ” he goes neither too fast nor too slowly ; the 
lower part of his body, whilst he walks, neither swings nor moves 
through the effort of the body. In seeing, he looks in one 
direction : straight ahead, not upwards nor downwards, nor does 
he walk glancing here and there. He always sits composedly, 
not lolling his body, nor making useless movements with his 
hands, nor crossing his legs, nor resting his chin on his hand. 
He remains calm, ” girded with isolation ”.®® Calm, sidereal 
self-awareness cannot help but result in stylisation since it acts 
on the irrational, oblique and hidden part of the human being, 
rather in the way that the calm and severe glance of the school- 
master is enough to quell the prankishness of the pupil who 
thought himself unobserved. So we can say that the substitution 
of energies which is the essential aim of the whole ascesis of the 
Anya has already begun to have its effect externally. Whereas, 
before, every movement and every action of the individual was 
motivated by an irrational vital force or samsaric element, now 
this element is replaced by pure awareness, which cannot but 
bring about — as we have said — an increase of simplicity, com- 
posedness and dignity in the manner and the outward appear- 
ance of one who seriously follows this path. One might even 
discern a certain aspect of racial catharsis, too, in these discf 
phnes since, as we have just said, these elements of a style of life 
existed naturally, ab origim, amongst people of a higher racial 
t3^e, whose characteristics various factors, above all cross- 
breeding, have successively altered and encroached upon.®*Let us see where we have arrived in our exposition. When 
defences against the most immediate forms of mental disturbance 
have been raised, the assimilation of the principles of " right 
conduct ” arouses in the mind an ” intimate, unalloyed joy**” 
joined with the stability and sureness of one who feels himself 
in a state of " justice ”. For which we ai'e given the simile of

•* Angutt., IV., 125.

MajjJi.f XCL. It is said of the assembly of the fathers of the Order : "it 
does aot gossip, it does not speak, it consists of essentiality, it is the blessed seat 
for the world " (ibid., CXVIII).

Cf. Our Sintesi di doitrina della razza, ed. Hoepli, Milan, 1941.

SIDEREAI, AWARENESS — THE WOUNDS CLOSE 173Cf. Our Sintesi di doitrina della razza, ed. Hoepli, Milan, 1941.

SIDEREAI, AWARENESS — THE WOUNDS CLOSE 173

a lawfully crowned king who knows that his enemies are routed 
and that there is no threat of any kind to his sovereignty.®^ We 
have also acquired the strengthened " neutrality ” or " side- 
reality ” of the mind which, thanks to the fourfold contemplation, 
has further freed itself and is now at the centre of aU its experience, 
both internal and external. At this point we undertake the really 
cathartic action whose aim is to neutralise, by degrees, any 
possibility of " combustion ” and of self-abandonment to the 
multiple variety of " contacts ”. Contacts wound ; contacts 
consmne by exciting the fire which bums the body and the mind, 
which nourishes the samsaric stem and prostrates the higher 
principle. “ The fool, struck by force, perishes ; the wise man, 
when struck, does not tremble,” he remains intact, remains 
unshakable, remains elusive ;®® we must become like the wise 
man. It is a question, then, of dealing a blow at the transcend- 
ental ” desire ” which lurks in the visual and other senses, in 
the khandha (the groups of the personality), in the elements, and 
which is corruption, disease, suppuration.®® All this must natur- 
ally take place, not on the psychological or moral plane, but on the 
existential and metaphysical one. The beginning of the process 
of alteration lies in the senses, which are likened to so many 
" wounds ".®* They present us with forms or sounds or tastes 
or smells or tactile sensations, "desired, loved, delightful, pleasant, 
associated with craving, alluring”, whence, "in the five cords of 
desire, in one or other seat of the senses, may arise inclination 
of the mind ” or assent.®® We have used this word to translate 
the term anunayo which Woodward renders as " lurking ten- 
dency ”* and which can actually be likened to the attitude of 
someone who spies, who waits ready to identify him self, in 
this case, with nleasure, if there is a pleasant feeling, or with pain, 
if instead the feeling is painful, or with opaque indifference (with 
" ignorance ”), if the feeling is neither pleasant nor painful.®* 
And here, naturally, the reference is also to the primordial anguish 
which lies at the base of samsaric existence and which produces 
« Dlgha, ir, 63.•* Majjh., Lxxxn ; cf. IHvuttaha, 28 ; Angutt., VI, 35.

»» Samyutt., XXVII, i-io ; XXXV. 90.

Majjh.. XXXIU ; CV.

” Majjh., CXXII.

* In English in the Original (Tr. note).

Samyutt., XXXVI, 3.

174 the doctrine of awakening

attachment. In this way there arise formations or combinations 
which attach themselves to one or other of the five groups of 
the personality, that is to say, to the groups of materiality, of 
feeling, of perception, of the formations, of individuated conscious- 
ness, This being so, in order to “bandage the wounds” and neu- 
tralise the infection provoked by contacts, we must ensure that 
" the internal sight, the intern^ smelling, the internal hearing, 
the internal tasting, the internal touching, the internal thinking 
are not distracted ”, that is to say, that we are present in the 
sixfold seat of the senses in such a way that we can immediately 
prevent any self-relaxation, self-attachment, self-intoxication, 
any luring of ourselves by enjoyment. There will be, then, no 
further building of combinations, at first in the fundamental 
stem of the will, and then in the five stems of the personality.*’ 
This is the essence of the new work of catharsis.This work is based on what is known as the “ watch over the 
doors of the senses ”, for which the canonical formula is ; “ Upon 
perceiving a form with the eye, the ascetic conceives no inclination, 
no interest. Since craving and aversion and damaging and 
harmful thoughts soon overcome the man who lives with the eye 
unguarded, he remains vigilant, he guards the eye, he remains 
vigilant over the eye.” Upon hearing a sound with the ear, 
upon smeUing an odour with the nose, upon tasting a flavour 
with the tongue, upon touching a contact with the body, upon 
representing to himself a mental state with the mind, he conceive 
no inclination, he conceives no interest. Since craving and 
aversion and damaging and harmful thoughts soon overcome the 
man who lives with his mind tmguarded, he remains vigilant, he 
guards the mind, he remains vigilant over the mind.”** To fail 
in this vigilance at some point is to suffer the fate of the tortoise : 
when the tortoise unthinkingly put out one of its limbs a jackzil 
seized it by that limb and carried it ofi to its ruin.*® In this matter 
then, we have to come to grips with the samsaric entity wifli 
which we are associated and which constitutes our double, 
composed of thirst. A continually tightening circle closes 
round it. It is effectively likened to an enemy who, knowing 
that he cannot openly defeat his adversary, gets himself employed

»» Majjh., XXVIII : CXLIX.

Dfgha, II, 64.

Samyuti., XXXV, 199 ; cl idem 202.

SIDEREAL AWARENESS — THE WOUNDS CLOSE I75»» Majjh., XXVIII : CXLIX.

Dfgha, II, 64.

Samyuti., XXXV, 199 ; cl idem 202.

SIDEREAL AWARENESS — THE WOUNDS CLOSE I75

by him as a servant and gains his confidence so that he may then 
defeat him by treachery : this — ^it is said — ^is the part which the 
illusory " I ”, created by identification, plays in us until the tune 
of initiation into the doctrine of the Ariya..^^ That the discipline 
of the watch over the senses or binding the wounds leads to a 
higher liberation is shown by the siitdle of the man who has at a 
cross-roads a thoroughbred team and can guide them wherever 
he pleases." The man who does not know or who forgets this 
practice is dominated by forms, sounds, smells, tastes, contacts 
and thoughts, instead of being their master."

In another way this discipline can also be summed up by the 
word silentium : “ to gird oneself with silence,” silence in the 
technical and initiatory sense, in the sense of the Eleusinian 
auxiirQ. Impressions are arrested at the periphery, at the hmit 
of the senses. Between them and the “ I ” there is now a dis- 
tance, a zone of ” silence ”. We thus become endowed with that 
form of silence which consists of not pronotmcing either the 
exterior word or the interior word, and this in turn imphes not 
hearing, not seeing, not imagining. This theme has also been 
expressed in a popular form. It is, in fact, the deeper, hidden 
significance of the well-known statuette of the three sacred 
monkeys of Benares, one with the ears closed, one with the mouth 
closed, and one with the eyes closed : speak not, hear not, see not. 
And we may here also recall the curious Hermetical formula

Who has ears, let him open them (in the sense of a close watch 
on every impression), who has a mouth, let him keep it shut (in 
the sense of the aforesaid silence, of calm, intangible ‘neutrality’).”It is thus that the conditions for further liberation and then for 
awakening the extra-saihsaric principle axe consolidated. We shall 
see that development in this sense is directly continued in the 
four jhdnas.

As the natural counterpart of the watch on the doors of the 
&nses, a work of dis-intoxication is carried out within the zone 
that is now isolated, in order to eliminate or reduce those internal 
mouldering embers of agitation and self-identification which may 
be made to burst into hfe by external contacts. This is what is 
known as the removal of the five mvara^a, a term which means

“• Sathyutt., XXII. 85.

“ Sathyutt., XXXV, 198.

« Saihyutt., XXXV., 202.

176 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING“• Sathyutt., XXII. 85.

“ Sathyutt., XXXV, 198.

« Saihyutt., XXXV., 202.

176 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

a dross, a hindrance or an impediment. The five nlvaraija are: 
desire {kdmacchanda) ; hate or anger {vya^dda) ; slothful idleness 
{thlna-middha) ; pride and impatience {uddhacca-kukkwca) ; 
doubtful uncertainty {vicikicchd) . The action of these five 
hindrances is clearly indicated by the following similes : it is Uke 
trying to look at one’s reflection in water wherein all kinds of 
colomrs are mixed (desire), or in boiling water (hate and anger), 
or m water full of mud and moss (slothful idleness), or in water 
agitated by the wind (pride and impatience), or, finally, in dark 
and murky water (doubt).** Removal is effected by direct action 
of the mind on the mind, together with accurate and calm self- 
examination. The discipline is described in the texts in the 
following maimer. The ascetic finds a solitary place and begins 
to meditate. A weU-known Yoga position is coimselled : sit with 
legs crossed and body straight upright. This traditional Indo- 
Aryan position is, however, only suitable if one is so accustomed 
to it that it is quite natural and requires no special effort and does 
not produce fatigue. In general, the position recommended for 
this, as for other contemplations, must be one of equilibrium, 
which does not have to be changed it must have a kind of sym- 
bolical meaning of self-awareness and it must not demand efforts 
which would distract the mind. This is the formula for the 
meditation : “ The ascetic has given up worldly craving and now 
rests with his mind free from craving, he purifies his mind of 
craving. He has given up hate and now rests with his mind fr^ 
from hate, he purifies his mind of hate. He has given up inertia 
and accidie ; lover of the light, clearly conscious, he purifies his 
mind of inertia and accidie. He has given up pride and restless- 
ness, with his mind inwardly tranquil he purifies his mind of pride 
and restlessness. He has given up wavering, he has crossed over 
from doubtful uncertainty ; he has no doubts about what is bene- 
ficial, he purifies his mind of wavering.”** It is fundamentally a 
more advanced development of the states already induced by 
or "right conduct”. The aim here is obviously to bring us to a 
deeper zone by means of the strengthened power of internal vision 
which we have gained through the preceding disciplines. It is a 
matter of attacking, to some degree, the sankhdra, that is to say,*> Angutt., V, 193.

** Digha, 11 , 68-74 ; Angutt., I, 2.

SIDEREAL AWARENESS — THE WOUNDS CLOSE 177

the innate and congenital tendencies which come, in part, from 
the extra-individual heredity which we have assumed.

Here, too, the purity achieved at certain moments comes to 
be developed imtil it has almost attained a state of permanency. 
This is how we must understand what is known as .the “ threefold 
watch ” : " by day, walking and sitting, turn the mind away 
from disturbing things ; in the first watch of the night, walking 
and sitting, turn the mind away from disturbing things ; in the 
middle watch of the night, lie down on the right side, like the 
hon, one foot on the other, bringing to mind the hour of waking; 
in the last watch of the night, after arising, walking or sitting, 
turn the mind away from disturbing things ”.^® This is a kind 
of continuous examination of consciousness. The yama, the 
watches of the night that are recognised in this discipline consist, 
according to the Buddhist tradition, of four hours each; the 
first runs from six until ten m the evening, the second from ten 
until two in the morning, the third from two to six in the morn- 
ing. Thus, strictly speaking, the period of true sleep or of the 
state which in the common man would correspond to sleep (cf. 
p. 227) is restricted to four hours only, from ten in the evening 
until two in the morning. In this we must not see an “ ascetic " 
discipline in the Western sense of mortification : on the contrary, 
it is natrual that in advancing along the road of illumination the 
need for sleep is considerably reduced, and this reduction produces 
no iU effect. Here, too, a unilateral “ authoritarian” intervention 
would only serve to create states of fatigue and inattention un- 
favourable for spiritual life by day.With attentive care of the " wounds ” and with action taken 
against the hindrances or impediments, the zone of " silence ” is 
strengthened, and a gradual interior increase of the extrasaihsaric 
quality takes place therein; this increase should be aided by 
illuminated effort and it is related to the aforesaid “ seven awak- 
enings ” — bojjhanga. These " awakenmgs ” are the positive 
counterpart of the cathartic or prophylactic action, that is to say, 
they are a " defence against intoxication produced by action ". 
The canonical formula is : ' ' [The ascetic] rightly causes the awaken- 
ing of mindfulness derived from detachment, derived from di?- 
passion, derived from cessation [of the flux], ending in renuncia-

« Majjh., LIII ; Samyutt.. XXXV, 120.

lyS THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING« Majjh., LIII ; Samyutt.. XXXV, 120.

lyS THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

tion, he causes the awakening of investigation — of inflexible 
energy — of enthusiasm— of calm — of concentration — of equan- 
imity, of these awakenings derived from detachment, derived 
from dispassion, derived from cessation, ending in renuncia- 
tion.”** Various interpretations of the place of these awakenings 
in the whole development are, nevertheless, possible. Their 
sense as a whole, indeed, reflects that of the four jhdnas, of 
the contemplation which is to be performed in complete 
detachment from external experience. Here, however, .we 
may understand them on a more relative plane, as a kind of 
transfiguration and Hberation of faculties which are already per- 
vaded by the element of bodhi, whence the expression hojjhanga. 
It must be realised that we are not dealing with a simple schematic 
enumeration, but rather with a series in which the meditation 
whereby they are apprehended should pursue an intimate causal 
linkin g of the single terms so that we are natiually led on from 
one to the next, and so that in the one we see the integration 
and resolution of its predecessors. Thus, we must first achieve 
non-distracted meditation ; then we must awaken the state of 
“ mindfulness ”, fix it in the mind, develop it, master it and 
see how this state leads to the second awakening and passes into 
” investigation ”, which may find support in some element of the 
doctrine ; this investigation, when developed, fixed, extended and 
mastered must lead on to the awakening of " inflexible energy ”, 
whose perfect conquest should herald a state of special, purified 
" enthusiasm ”, of purified joy. By further developing the medi- 
tation, we should realise that this enthusiasm, this joy, awakened 
and perfectly developed m a body which is becoming calm, in a 
mind which is becoming calm, will become resolved and liberated 
in the next awakening, which is that of “ calm ”. When cahn has 
been developed, extended, fixed and mastered, " concentration ” 
awakens ; this, in its turn, when completely developed, becomes 
established and shines forth in the ” equanimity ” which is the 
seventh awakening.*^ These form a series of landmarks in medita- 
tion which is concerned with realisation and they are connected 
by an inherent continuity. Through these, one is led in another 
way to the confirmation of what was already becoming estabhshed*• Majjh., LXXVII.

« CXVIII.

SIDEREAL AWARENESS — THE WOUNDS CLOSE 1 79

in the satipatpham, the fourfold contemplation of detachment, that 
is to say, one is led to that impassibility which is qualified as 
" pure, dear, ductile, flexible, resplendent ”, but which has noth- 
ing to dcH— it should be noted — with the indifference of a blunt 
mind, with the indifference " of a fool, of an ignorant man, of an 
inexpert common man For our part, we think it opportune 
to add that the state in question must on no accormt be confused 
with apathy or atony, and that it develops together with a feeling 
of purified intellectuahsed and heroic joy, although this may at 
first seem difficult to understand. The Bhagavad-gitd says : 
“ When the mind, tamed by ascesis, becomes quiet ; when [the 
ascetic], seeing the self in the self, rejoices in himself, knows that 
boundless joy which, transcending the senses, can only be appre- 
hended by the intellect and, when fixed in it, does not stir from 
the truth . . .he knows that this detachment from union with 
pain is called yoga.”*® At the same time. Buddhism speaks of a 
pleasmre which is “ like dung ” when compared to that based on 
detachment, calm and illumination.®® Furthermore, such se- 
quences as these are frequent : " In the ascetic joy arises ; this 
joy makes him blissful ; being blissful, his body becomes calm ; 
with the body calmed, serenity arises ; in this serenity the mind 
comes to rest, becomes concentrated ; ” this is a preparation for 
the ioxxr jhdna.^^ This is another sequence which has the character 
q| a connected series, developing in an upward sense, not unlike 
that which, through the twelve niddna, led us downward to 
samsaxic existence (cf. p. 72). The point of departure of this 
new series is, in fact, the state of suffering, of agitation, of con- 
tingency, which corresponds to the last niddna of the descending 
path. Beyond it, there is the state of confidence ; this leads to

« Majjh., CXXXVII.« Majjh., CXXXVII.

Bhagavad-gUa, VI, 20-23.

Angutt., 'VlII, 86 ; cf. II, vii, 1-5, where two kinds of joy are considered 
and contrasted, the one bound to life in the world, to mania, to enjoyment, 
tlffe other to ascesis or to ultramundane states of detachment and of freedom 
from mania ; and it is said that the second is the higher joy. ” Extinction — it 
is said (Majjh,, LXXV) — ^is the greatest joy With reference to the state of 
the first jhdna (cf. p. 185), it is said that, were the idea of lust to arise in the 
ascetic, he would feel it as sickness (dbddha), as suffering like pain which tor- 
ments a healthy man (Angutt,, IV, 114). It is in order to possess a higher joy 
that those who find pleasure in the burning of desire are not envied (Majjh., 
LXXV) ; it is through finding that a joy beyond theirs — heroic joy*’ — ^is 
better, that craving and aversion are abandoned (Majjh., XIV). Joy, in many 
Buddhist sequences comes, in fact, after ” energy ”,

Digha, II, 75.

l8o THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENINGDigha, II, 75.

l8o THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

purified iay-^dmujja ; then follows serenity, which gives place 
to bliss, passing on to equanimity — ^the term used here literally 
means also to vanish, to cease being in a place ; it is a question of 
detached equilibriuim, and for this reason pdmuijja also sometimes 
figures as the antecedent of extinction.®* In this text the 
supreme realisation has behind it a linked series in which special 
states of liberated joy play a particular part : a kind of joy 
which Plato contrasted with all naixed and conditioned forms 
of joy or of pleasure. Let us quote another text which repre- 
sents the state at which we may reckon to have arrived at this 
point of our exposition : " Concentration which knows neither 
increase nor decrease, which is not based on wearisome subju- 
gation, which, because of its detached nature is constant, because 
of its constancy is full of bliss, because of its bliss cannot be 
destroyed — ^such concentration has suprenie wisdom as its 
result.”®*This should destroy the idea that the path of awakening is arid 
and desolate, that it kills all joy, that it offers only renunciation 
and destruction. That everyone whose furthest horizon is still 
within the effective, sarhsarically-conditioned world should have 
this idea is quite natural but is of very little account. A text 
reminds us that only an Awakened One can comprehend the 
Awakened One. An expressive simile demonstrates this : Two 
companions leave a city together and reach a rock which one qf 
them climbs. He says to the other : " I see from up here a 
wonderful view of gardens, woods, fields and lakes ”, but the 
other retorts ; “ It is impossible, it is inadmissible, friend, that 
from up there you can see aU that.” Then the companion stand- 
ing on the rock comes down, takes the other by the arm, makes 
him climb up on the rock and, after he has recovered his breath, 
asks him : " What do you then see, friend, standing on the 
rock ? ” The other rephes : ” I see a wonderful view of gardei^, 
woods, fields and lakes.” “And your previous opinion ? ” 
“ ^Whilst I was obstructed by this great rock, I could not see what 
is now visihle." It concludes : it is impossible that what is 
knowable, discernible, capable of achievement, capable of realisa- 
tion through detachment, can be known, discerned, achieved,

Samyuii., XII, 23.

»» Angutt,, IX, 37.

SIDEREAL AWARENESS — THE WOUNDS CLOSE l8l

realised by one who lives among desires and who is consumed by 
desires.®* Quite apart from the higher '' sidereal ” principle, 
the Buddhist also knows the kind of joy which is contentedness, 
rejoicing, jubilation, enthusiasm, exultation, transport of the 
spirit and which, amongst others, is considered as “ a factor of 
the great awakening "—^Ui-sambojjhango.^^

•* Majjh., CXXV.•* Majjh., CXXV.

Dhamma-sangani, 285. Countering those who believe that the Buddhist 
road is one of desolation and aridity, L. de la Vall^e-Poussin (Nirvapa, Paris, 
1925, p. 62) most opportunely writes : “ We must, rather, recognise that India 
is difficult when it comes to being and bliss ; that as she puts being beyond 
existence, so she puts bliss beyond sensation

V

THE FOUR THE " IRRADIANT

CONTEMPLATIONS ”

W E have so far dealt with the two sections of the whole 
system of disciplines called stla and samadhi. This last 
term has, in original Buddhism, a different meaning from that 
which it has in the general Indo-Aryan tradition, where it usually 
designates actual states of enlightening contemplation ; in 
Buddhism samadhi refers, instead, to the cultivation of consolida- 
tion, catharsis and preliminary liberation, all of which are inte- 
grated by the results of " right conduct ”, of stla. There are, 
however, some texts in which the tom jhdna, the contemplations 
of which we are about to speak, are included in the “ samadhi ” 
section.^ The fact is that these contemplations can be appre- 
hended and performed with varying intensity and in a varying 
spirit. On a lower level they continue the action of purification. 
\^en they are carried out with greater vehemence they lead to 
supersensible states, to the limit of individual consciousness, since 
they are equivalent in their results to the four “ irradiant contem- 
plations ” which determine the possibility of a state of union with 
the theistic god.In any case, by passing into the realm of the jhana, as we shall 
now do, we find that ascetic realisation removes those horizons 
which limit the Stoical doctrines as well as all “ superman ” 
theories. Let us briefly discuss this point. The limit of Stoical 
ascesis is apatheia, the destruction of any possibility of disturbance 
of the spirit through passions or outside contingencies. A well 
known symbol is the rock which temains firm and still whilst 
stdrmy waves break against it.® To this is_ added tranquility of

1 Cl e.g. Digha, X, ii, i-2o.

* This simile is found in Marcus Aurelius, IV, 49, and it is entirely similar 
to that of Angutt., VI, vi, 55, (Dhammapada 81), which speaks of a mountain 
rock, uncracked, all of one piece, which does not shake nor tremble nor move 
as a result of the storms and tempests which strike it from all directions,

182

THE FOUR JHANA — “iRRADIANT CONTEMPLATIONS*’ I 83

mind based on consciousness of one’s, own rectitude and a certain 
amor fati, that is to say, a confidence in cosinic order. Prom this 
standpoint, the irrelevancy of all that is purely individual and 
terrestrial is considered and experienced. As for the doctrines 
of the " superman ”, they are based on the reinforcement of the 
vital energies and of the “ I ” such as will produce invincibility 
and superiority to all tragedy, to all misfortune, to all human 
weakness, a pure force which, though it may be bent, cannot 
be broken, a will to power which defies men and gods.In the sphere of the Buddhist jhdna, both of these forms of 
ascesis are surpassed since the human condition in general tends 
to disappear. Only if the discipline of the Ariya were to stop at 
sila and samadhi could its achievements be likened to that of the 
most enlightened Stoicism. But Buddhism — ^like all initiations — 
has higher and freer realisations, and so, instead of the rock 
against which stormy waves uselessly break, the simile of air 
which one may try in vain to capture in a net or cut with a 
sword is far more appropriate. Imperturbability, calm fixedness 
— samatha — equivalent to the Stoical apatheia, along the path of 
awakening is, in fact, considered at a certain point as a bond 
from which one frees oneself in order to approach the domain 
of " non-existence ”.® At the same time, the " sidereal ” element 
here encourages such detachment as will induce Olympian quality 
in all higher states of consciousness and destroys in that detach- 
ment any residue of hyhris, of pride or of will for power attached 
to the “ person ”. To “ life ” — even at its summits — ^Buddhism 
opposes that which is “ more than life ”. The term superman 
— uttamapurisa — also figures in Buddhism as an epithet of the 
Ariya ascetics.^ But this ideal is here transfigured, it is carried 
effectively onto a supersensible plane in which the dark tragedy 
that is always hidden in the " titan ” and the " superman " is 
completely resolved. We shall see almost at once that in order 
to*achieve such an ideal a special enlightened use of sentiments 
such as love and compassion is even employed : a technique 
which carries us far beyond the plane of the contradictions 
against which fought without hope, for example, the soul of

^ Majjh.t CV. Cf. Majjh., CVI, where it is said that by loving and esteeming 
indifference, by letting consciousness rest there and become attached to it, the 
supreme aim of the ascesis is not achieved.

^ Cf. e.g. Samyuit,, XXII, 57 ; Dhamtnapada, 97.^ Cf. e.g. Samyuit,, XXII, 57 ; Dhamtnapada, 97.

N

184 the doctrine of awakening

Nietzsche and Dostoievski. We mentioned this in dealing with 
the two ways of overcoming fear (cf* p. 145).

The term jhana is translated by some as deepening self- 
examination '' {Selbstvertiefung), a rendering which should be 
remembered : indeed, in the disciplines of which we shall 
speak, we shall be dealing with a descent through successive 
purifications and simplifications into the deeper layers of one's 
own being, where, in the common man, we find the kingdom of the 
subconscious. We then tread the very same path that is marked 
by the Hermetic and Alchemic maxim : Visita interiora tenae, 
rectificando invienies occuUum laj[)idem, veram medicinam.^ Less 
happy, however, is the translation of jhana as Versenkungen

sinking below ") and still worse as '' trances or raptures 
since the normal meaning of these terms is just the opposite of 
what we are dealing with here. The term, trance ", makes us 
think at once of the state of a '' medium a passive state of 
subconsciousness, of sub-personality and of obsession, whereas 
the Aryan ascesis is hall-marked by super-consciousness, by full 
activity and self-awareness. Equally, the term, '' rapture ", 
implies an idea of ecstatic passivity and has a mystico-rehgious 
flavour, neither of which has much to do with the states in ques- 
tion. It is, therefore, preferable to retain the Pali term jhana 
(Sanskit : dhydna) after we have become quite certain of its 
connotations. States of " trance ", of confused thinking or of 
" possession " can only occur in one who has been unable to 
resist the challenge offered by such experiences.It happens that in the texts the jhana are given immediately 
after the four contemplations which are designed to create self- 
awareness and the girdle of isolation from internal and external 
experience.® This being so, their meaning can be explained as 
follows. With the disciplines we have already discussed, con- 
tained in the samddhi section, one isolates oneself, one cuts oneself 
off, one detaches oneself. Even the " seven awakenings " refer 
to the appearance, after this, of a positive force from within, 
which is related to the states achieved in tYiejhdna, These states 
radiate from the now isolated centre and proceed to re-occupy,

® Cf. our work. La Tradizione Ermetica, cit.

* In English in the original (Tr. note).

• Majjh,, CXIX.

THE FOUR JHANA — “iRRADIANT CONTEMPLATIONS” I 85

in a manner of speakjng, the abandoned zones, so that contingent 
elements are there reduced and these areas are reclaimed from 
the dominion of samsdm. It is, in fact, prescribed that these 
states, after they have been perfectly achieved by the miad, 
should be transmitted to the whole of one's being, even to the 
bodily structure itself. For this reason, it is said that death " 
finds access to one who does not practise the jhdna and pene- 
trates him as a heavy stone ball thrown on a mass of moist clay ; 
'' death " finds the way barred, on the other hand, by one who 
has achieved the jhdna, and his attempts are likened to a light 
clew of thread hurled at a planed block of hard wood.^The first jhdna is defined by this fixed formula : '' The ascetic, 
far from desires, far from any disturbing state of mind, maintain- 
ing feeling and thought, in a state of serenity bom of detachment 
and pervaded with fervour and bliss, reaches the first contempla- 
tion {jhdna) J' This has the same significance as : to dwell in 
the body watching the body, without thinking any thought con- 
nected with the body; to dwell in the feelings watching the 
^ feelings, without thinking any thought connected with the feel- 
ings ; “to dwell in the mind watching the mind, without thinking 
any thought connected with the mind ; to dwell in the mental 
states {dhanmd) watching the mental states, without thinking any 
thought connected with the mental states This, in a manner 
of speaking, is a summary of all that has been achieved in the 
preceding phases. All the waves are calmed. Serenity pervades 
the entire being and unifies it, whilst there is clarity, detachment 
and silence in every sensation which may arise or image which 
may present itself. In the first jhdna consciousness is stiU resting 
on feeling and thinking, on perception and representation — vitakka 
and vicar a.

These two elements have to disappear in the next jhdna, either 
in a single simplification process or else in two phases : in the 
second case sensory impressions are first sUenced and then repre- 
sentations or mental images. (Under these circumstances, there 
are sometimes considered to be five rather than four jhdna, with 
the one we are now discussing coimted as two.) The fixed 
canonical formula is : '' After having achieved feeling and

l86 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENINGl86 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

thinking, the ascetic attains serene inward calm, intellectual sim- 
plicity arises which is free from perceptions and images, bom of 
concentration, pervaded with fervour and bliss, he reaches the 
second contemplation.” By " having achieved feeling and 
thinking ”, we must understand a state of perfect equilibrium of 
these faculties so that they can, in a manner of speaking, be left 
to themselves and can eventually be overcome and abandoned. 
The term we have given as ” intellectual simplicity ” is ekodibhava. 
Some have translated it by : “ the mind emerges alone and 
simple ”, others ; " the mind grows calm and sure, dwelling on 
high”,*, whose corresponding state is said to be “self-evolved” ; 
yet others use the expression " single-mindedness ”* or “ one- 
pointedness ” ;* finally, some authorities speak of spiritual unity 
— Einheit des Geistes. It seems to us that our expression “ intel- 
lectual simplicity ” is nearest to the sense of the state m question; 
at the same time, it recalls equivalent terms figuring in ancient 
Western asceticism, particularly in Plotinus, lamblicus, Proclus 
and in the Hermetic texts. It is a manifestation of the mind as 
a unique and simple essence no longer dependent upon psychical 
functions, sensations, or formed images and thoughts. This 
achievement results from the power and intensity of self- 
concentration that has been developed to a point where, as in 
the episode referred to by a text, not even the noise produced by 
a large number of waggons is in any way noticed.® It is, in fac^ 
much more a kind of " growing ” of awakening than any form of 
(hrect “emptying” action which in many cases, to use two similes 
of Zen Buddhism, is Hke tr5nng to drown an echo by raising the 
voice or trying to chase away one’s shadow by running after it : 
we can thus see the error of certain modem theosophical trends 
with their ideas of “ making a vacuum ” in a purely mental sense. 
Furthermore, we must emphasise that to be able to dismiss the 
supports of consciousness, namely sensations and representatio:^s 
{vitakka and viddra), without passing into the subconscious or 
into sleep, and by participating, instead, in the miracle of the 
separation and manifestation of the pure intellectual substance.In English in the orignal {Tr. note).

• According to Buddhaghosa^s commenta^, the concentration of the second 
jhana is identical with that citf ehaggatd, which produces the arrest of the mental 
flux and with the collection of the mind in a single point, which is dealt with 
in Yoga (quoted by T. W. Rhys Davids, The Yogavacara*s Manual, p. xxvii). •

THE FOUR JHANA — “iRRADIANT CONTEMPLATIONS” I 87

comes only as the result of a very special inward strength. Unity 
of the mind — ^unity which is almost organically felt — is necessary, 
as well as effort nourished by slla, by “ right conduct Therefore,

it is said that, just as it is not possible to gain mastery over the 
sphere of transcendental knowledge {panna) without having first 
mastered the sphere of concentration, so it is not possible to master 
the sphere of concentration without having first gained mastery, 
over the sphere of right life {sUa), without which right concen- 
tration has no foundation.^® One must possess power — simply 
a “ mental ” power — of self-mastery and of calm practised in 
detachment, confirmed by inward simplification and consolidated 
by the dis-identifying contemplations, in order to furnish within 
oneself a support for consciousness and self-awareness when the 
“ silence ” is absolute and sensations or images no longer present 
themselves. Thus the term ekodihhava has not unjustly been 
compared with “ simplicity of the will without thoughts 
The " intellectual simplicity ” which is the centre of the second 
jhdna is not a simple mental state, but rather the point in which 
a pure will-power concentrates and frees itself, an inwardly- 
directed will-power having itself both as its object and as its base.In the third jhdna : “ The ascetic, dwelling even-minded, 
clearly conscious, controlled, having ehminated fervour and bliss, 
feels arising in his body the fehcity of which the Ariya say : 
J The even-minded wise one lives in fehcity.’ Thus he reaches 
the third contemplation.” As in the second jhdna feehng and 
thought having been brought to a state of perfect transparency 
and equilibrium by the first jhdna, were left behind, so here we 
leave behind the element of " fervour and bliss ”, which in the 
second jhdna comes to be felt as an impurity, as a disturbance, 
as something “ compounded ” and conditioned. It is not a 
contradiction that as a result of this further simplification there 
yet arises something which might almost seem to be a feeling. 
We can take it that there occurs in the Hdxd jhdna the removal 
of the general bodily sensation and its substitution by the ” in- 
tellectual felicity ” of which we have, spoken. This appears to 
be the transformation which takes place when the pmre intellectual 
consciousness, aroused in. the second jhdna and now still further 
purified, comes into contact, almost as a " reagent ”, with " coenes-

Angutt., V, 22, 24.

l88 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENINGAngutt., V, 22, 24.

l88 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

thesia ”, or the general sensitivity of the body. We can connect 
this state — at least in some measure — ^with the “ perfect serenity 
which, when it ascends from this body and arrives at the supreme 
hght, appears in its true aspect ”, with that light which exists 
within the body, a glimpse of which may be known to have been 
gained when, upon making contact with the body heat is felt 
in it — a state referred to by the Upmishads.^^ Special 
strength is required for this realisation too ; in order to prevent 
what is to be absorbed and transfigured from itself absorbing and 
submerging the sidereal element, in which case the experience 
would resolve itself in organic sensations, and one would fall into 
a state of trance or sleep. It should, in fact, be maintained that 
the first three jhdna are developed in an internal zone which, 
in the life of an ordinary man, would correspond to periods of 
fantasy, of reverie or of sleep. This is shown by the fact that in 
the following phase, the fourth jhdna, there may occur, according 
to the texts, the suspension not only of discursive thought (of 
“ words "), of feelings, of images and of emotive states themselves, 
however purified they may be, but also of the rh3Hlim of the vital 
force, that is to say, of the breath, whose movement is now become 
an impurity and a disturbance this is a state which outwardly 
resembles death. We shall have more to say on this subject since 
this and similar phenomena really appear on the scene in the 
later phase of the contemplations that are without form, and they- 
only occur in the jhdna when these are realised and experienced 
with special intensity.The fourth jhdna : "After detachment from pleasure and pain, 
after disappearance of previous joy and sorrow, the ascetic passes 
into a state beyond sorrow, beyond joy, into a state of equanimity, 
of purity and of illumination — ^into the fourth contemplation.”^® 
Here we have arrived at the extreme summit of inividuated 
consciousness. The catharsis or simplication must be capable qf 
removing even the sensation of pure transfigured intellectual joy 
so that a state of utter " neutrality ” may be achieved, a supreme 
point of balance, which is without colour, without form, com- 
pletely free of any support whatsoever. This is the frontier

“ ChandogyorUp., YIII, iii, 4 ; HI, xiii, 7-8. 
n Safhyutt, XXXVI, 11.

“ On the font jhana cf. e.g. : Digha, II, 75-82 ; Sathyuft., XXVIII, 1-9 ; 
Angutt., HI, 58.

THE FOUR JH ANA — '‘iRRADIANT CONTEMPLATIONS” 1 89

between two worlds, the point beyond which consciousness, if it 
still has enough strength and the will for the absolute not to stop, 
to advance, to destroy all anguish, can no longer be the 
consciousness of an '' I that is to say, of a particular finite 
being bound by a particular physical form. It is, in fact, the 
threshold of transfiguration in a literal sense, that is to say, the 
point at which one goes beyond '' form'"', beyond the person 
In the texts, in fact, the fourth jhdna represents the boundary 
which separates the contemplations bound to form from 
those which are arufa or free from form, not formal'' but 
'' essentialA few considerations, both on the practice and on the '' place " 
of these four jhdna : in order to develop them successively, it is 
of prime importance that the will for the unconditioned should 
completely occupy the mind. Only then will its advance not 
be obstructed. Only then, when each single jhdna has been 
wholly apprehended, can one be aware of what that jhdna stUl 
retains that is compounded ", that is “ conditioned ' and 
thus find a way which leads still further. When contemplating 
the phenomena proper to each jhdna in their appearance and 
development, the ascetic must confront them without inclination, 
without interest, without ties, without being attached, with his 
mind not limited by them, and he must apprehend " There is 
^ higher liberty " ; and by developing his experience he will, 
in fact, see : There is."^**^ The demon of identification and 
of satisfaction raises its head here also. It must be anticipated 
and conquered. Every feeling of enjoyment or of satisfaction 
which may arise upon the realisation of jhdna is immediately 
seen as a possible bond for the mind and is to be rejected.^® One 
must apply here the general Buddhist principle that all enjoyment 
through attachment is lethal, be it either of the heavens " or 
qjf nibbdna itself, since '' a fire lighted with sandalwood bums 
no less fiercely than any other fire ". The action must be neutral, 
absolutely purified and naked. As in the Carmelite S5mibolism 
of the ascent of the mountain, the path which does not become 
lost, which leads straight up to the summit, is that to which are 
attributed the words : nada, nada, nada — '' nothing, nothing,

Majjh,, LII.

Majjh,, CXI.

Majjh,, XXXVI ; CXXXVIII.

igo THE DOCTRINE OE AWAKENINGMajjh,, LII.

Majjh,, CXI.

Majjh,, XXXVI ; CXXXVIII.

igo THE DOCTRINE OE AWAKENING

nothing The difference is that in the A riyan path of awakening 
there is found no equivalent to the crisis which St. John of the 
Cross called the " dark night of the soul In the texts the 
impersonality of the action is evident also from the fact 
that the four jhanas are given as phases of a development 
from within^ phases which occur normally as a result of the 
fundamental direction which one’s own being has taken, without 
" volitional” intervention in a strict personal sense. In the four 
jhdna, as in the later experiences, one must never think : "It 
is I who am about to achieve this jhma," or ; " It is I who have 
now achieved this jhma’' or : " It is 1 who am surmounting 
this jhdna.” On the contrary, the mind, haying rightly been 
set in motion, should lead from one to the other.^’ Any interven- 
tion by the normal personal consciousness would only arrest the 
process and lead back to the point of departure, in the same way 
as Narcissus, at the moment of gazing at his image, prepared his 
own end. The Mahay ana saying, " there exist the road and the 
going, but not he who goes ”, seems not out of place here. We 
can also remember the Taoist maxim ; " To achieve intention- 
ally the absence of intentions ”.Active intervention in the normal sense can only be allowed 
in the process of consolidating each of these states so that they 
may be summoned at will. This presupposes a special scrutiny 
of each one once they have severally manifested themselves.. 
The texts record the following episode : by his super-normal 
powers, the Buddha appeared to a disciple who, upon coming 
out at jhdna, found that the perceptions and states he had already 
overcome were reappearing and re-establishing themselves. The 
' Buddha taught him how to carry the exercise further so that he 
might be able to get the better of all such residual states : every 
distraction must be eliminated and austere concentration rein- 
, forced ; the mind must be composed, completely mastered, an^ 
concentrated in a single point — ekodi-karohi.^^ 
jThis brings us to the " place ” of the realisations which are 
represented by the jhdna. Their " place ” depends on the degree

Safhyutt,, XXVIll^ 1-9 ; cf. Anguit,, X, 2, where the principle of graduality 
and of increase is expressed : ** Thus, O disciples, from one phenomenon arises 
another, one leads to the taking place of another, so that these very states 
of the world finally lead to the goal beyond the world.

1® Safhyutt,, XL, i seq.

THE FOUR JH ANA — “iRRADIANT CONTEMPLATIONS** 19!1® Safhyutt,, XL, i seq.

THE FOUR JH ANA — “iRRADIANT CONTEMPLATIONS** 19!

of intensity of the realisations themselves and on the extent to 
which they are animate with '' knowledge ”, vipassana. In 
the extreme case, there can occur through them the complete 
destruction, without residue, of the “ manias ”, of the asava, and 
therefore liberation. In other cases, when the action remains 
more peripheral and only a part of the saihsaric being is thereby 
neutralised, only some of the bonds are effectively broken, and 
liberation does not occur during life ; indeed, upon the decease 
of the body, one may even re-arise in states of existence which, 
although they may be more than human, are yet conditioned. 
We shall discuss these various possibilities in detail in a later 
chapter (p. 248 seq.). The possibility also exists of developing 
the four jhana in a “ neutral ” manner, on an essentially mental 
plane, not for the purpose of awakening, but rather as means of 
acquiring and of exercising certain extra-normal faculties {iddhi)?-* 
Whilst still on the subject of the ” place ” of the jhana we must 
state generally that these realisations, like the others of which 
we shall speak later, are not to be understood as being on a purely 
" psychological ” or abstractly spiritual basis — as simple spiritu^ 
states of the individual, but are to be regarded as having a kind 
of ontological or existential counterpart. The development must 
be regarded above all as carrying one beyond normal conscious- 
ness, into prenatal and preconceptional states which normally 
eorrespond to the unconscious which rules in the states of dream- 
ing, sleep and catalepsy. In the second place, the idea of "sphere” 
or of " realm ” is frequently found in the texts in connection with 
the jhana ; that is to say, the jhana introduce us to one of the 
" spheres ” which are included in the objective hierafchy of the 
multiple states of being. There is even mention of " heavens ” : 
with the jhana one is supposed to reach the " heavens of pure 
forms ” or at least to prepare a way which leads to them.®® 
There is also mention of spirits or gods or angels of one or other 
jhana sphere,®^ and contacts which ascetics have haci with them 
are discussed. Details are actually given. The hodhisattva, that 
is to ^say those who are advancing towards full illumination, are 
supposed, to begin with, to perceive a bright formless splendour ;In Angutt., VI, 29 the acquisition of such powers is directly connected with 
the development and frequent practice of the fourth jhdna.

Dhamma-sangani, 160 seq, ^

Anguit., IV, 123 ; III, 114.

ig 2 ' THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENINGDhamma-sangani, 160 seq, ^

Anguit., IV, 123 ; III, 114.

ig 2 ' THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

by purifying the eye of knowledge '' form also is perceived ; 
* at a later stage actual contacts (“ to converse together may 
even take place and, furthermore, they may come to recognise 
the hierarchical place of these beings to which celestial world 
they belong A close study is also made of the causes which 
lead to the interruption of such experiences, to the '' vanishing 
of the splendour and of the vision of the forms In the course 
of the development of Mahay ana Buddhism there appear outright 
personifications of the jhana as so many mythological Buddhas, 
and divinities of all kinds take the place of the various planes 
of contemplative and transcendental realisations. It is of 
importance, particularly in connection with this kind of literature, 
to understand clearly what is the right point of view : on the 
one hand the '' psychologistic '' interpretation must be avoided ; 
when one is in the jhana or in similar states, the centre of one's 
own being, even if only for a time, is elsewhere ", in worlds 
different from that perceived by the usual waking consciousness 
and one is not tmdergoing a process which has a merely 
subjective value. On the other hand, when the presentation, 
particularly in later Buddhism, is objective and almost theo- 
logical, with reference to divinities and cosmic or celestial 
hierarchies, then, stripping off the mythology, the matter 
must be understood in its essential form as a function of states 
of consciousness, of transcendental experiences. This holds good 
not only of doctrine but bIso in cases of genuine apparitions. 
Such possible apparitions are only '' projections ", that is to say, 
exteriorised forms of particular states that are experienced, and 
the personification takes place on the basis of images fixed in 
the mind or in the subconscious of the individual who is practising. 
Thus Tibetan Buddhism goes as far as admitting that, in a 
particular phase of practice, the Buddhist can see the Buddha 
transformed into a Mahdydna god, just as a Christian will ^e 
the Christ or an Islamite Mahommed. Everyone supplies the 
image that he has himself cultivated or that he has received 
from his samsaric tradition, as the mode — ^in the guise of a form, 
an image or an apparition — ^in which he experiences a particular” AngutL.Nlll, 64.

Majjh., CXXVIII. Some of the '' impurities of mind which paralyse 
the vision aie doubt, inattention, fear, exultation, excessive effort, relaxed effort, 
complacency, perception of diversity.

THE FOUR JH ANA — ‘‘iRRADIANT CONTEMPLATIONS*' 1 93

state of ascetic or initiatory consciousness. In connection both 
with the jhdna and with other states of experience it is, therefore, 
important to achieve a point of view that is higher than the 
ontological-theological as well as the '' psychologistic or

spiritualistic ” attitude. Only such a superior point of view 
can '' conform to reality ” and be suffused with true knowledge. 
Based on this knowledge, the Buddhist ascesis completely dis- 
misses the whole ghostly world that is made up of '' astral " 
or mental '' visions, phenomena, apparitions and so on, and 
that plays such a great part in the deviations of Western theo- 
sophy and anthroposophy ; even the substantialist aspect of strict 
theology is left behind. The references in the earliest texts to 
the gods and to the angels of the various regions where they 
do not represent interpolations and infiltrations of popular beliefs, 
are entirely schematic. The Ariyan ascetic achieves the various 
states which are the substance of -such worlds '' and goes beyond, 
without allowing his attention to be distracted by a phenomen- 
ology that is only made possible when " direct knowledge " wavers 
and when one is subject to the play of one's own unconsciously 
objectivising imagination. The world of the original Buddhist 
contemplation is extremely clear, almost doric. Such fantastic 
creations are entirely foreign to it — and it is for this reason that 
m some shortsighted people there has arisen the idea that we are 
here dealing with states that are merely '' psychological " or, at 
the most, '' mysticalWhen intensely experienced, the jhdna transform not only 
consciousness but also particular faculties — speech, thought and 
breath — '' purify " them and take us well beyond the catharsis. 
We have seen that these faculties remain suspended during prsLctice 
of jhdna ; and consequently they become quiet and mastered.^^ 
This suspension means, in fact, that consciousness has been taken 
b^ond their source, and that it continues to exist beyond them. 
Thus these faculties are brought into virtual subordination, by 
means of consciousness, which has now become the essential 
foundation of the faculties, and passes on to them the calm which 
it has achieved in itself. The catharsis of certain conditioned 
feelings is also considered,^^ and it is emphasised that the force,

21 Safhyutt, XXXVI, ii.

Angutt., TV, 200.

194 DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

thus advancing, cuts off not only the bond represented by " evil 
thoughts ” (which disappear in the first jhdna) but also the bond 
of " good thoughts '' (which disappear in the secondthus advancing, cuts off not only the bond represented by " evil 
thoughts ” (which disappear in the first jhdna) but also the bond 
of " good thoughts '' (which disappear in the second

On emerging from the jhana, even the general form of experi- 
ence is not the same as before. In this connection, three modes 
of " contact ” are mentioned, given in some texts also as three 
” liberations ” : contact of the “ void ”, contact of the " signless”, 
contact of the “ without tendency ” — suHfia-, animitta-, appai^i- 
hita-phassa}’’ We can consider these as new ” categories ”, new 
modes of experience, which appear, in general, at the moment 
when the ascetic, after going to the limit of conditioned conscious- 
ness, returns to normal existence. It will be as well, however, 
to discuss such forms of experience at a later point since they 
can only be considered in conjunction with the jhdna if we 
assume that these latter have been so intensely experienced as 
almost themselves to lead to liberation, whilst normally in the 
texts, after the jhdna, there are other transformations of the 
consciousness which come under the heading of pahnd, or 
transcendental knowledge. There are, however, some texts which 
consider special forms of contemplation in which the jhdna use 
the " void ”, the ” signless ” and the .without tendency ” as a 
base from which to produce a higher degree of " purification ”, 
characterised, in fact, by those three elements : suddhika- 
suHnatam, suddhika-animittam, suddhika-appaijdhitam? ® »The perfection of the iom jhdna implies their '' embodiment ”, 
and this also signifies a transformation of the invisible structure 
of the human organism (with particular emphasis on the saihsaric 
being which is its root), which is brought about by the pervasion of 
this structure by the states corresponding to the jhdna. The 
texts, in fact, speak of an actual " bodily rehving in oneself ” of 
” those saintly Liberations, which are high above all form, form- 
less ",** and this is considered as a higher stage of achievement. 
Thus, there is a distinction between one who is '' liberated on 
both sides ”‘ — ubhatobhdga-vimutta — and one who is only liberated 
" as to knowledge ” — panM~vimuUa. The second is the case of 
the man who ” has not bodily achieved those bhssful liberations

»* Majih., LXXVni. ’

Majjh., XLIII.

Dhamma-sangani, 344-53 ; 505-27.

« Majjh., VI.

THE FOUR JH ANA — “iRRADIANT CONTEMPLATIONS” I 95

which are beyond form, formless ” and in whom the intoxications, 
the “ manias ” or asava, are for this reason only removed in part.*®

To show this process of “ embodiment ” of the four jhdna, 
appropriate similes are given throughout ; they are important 
since they also serve to throw further light on the essence of each 
of the practices in question.

Here is a simile which concerns the iyxst jhdna : "As an expert 
bath attendant or bath attendant’s apprentice puts soap powder 
in a bath, soaks it with water, mixes and dissolves it in such a 
mariner that its foam is completely permeated, saturated within 
and without with moisture, leaving none over : just so the ascetic 
pervades and infuses, fills and saturates his body with the serenity 
born of detachment, perceptive and thoughtful, pervaded with 
fervour and beatitude, so that not the smedlest part of his body 
is left unsaturated with this serenity bom of detachment.”Second jhd.na : “ As a lake with a subterranean spring ; and 
into this lake there flows no rivulet from East or from West, from 
North or from South, nor do the clouds pour their rain into it, 
but only the fresh spring at the bottom wells up and completely 
pervades it, infuses, fills and saturates it, so that not the smallest 
part of the lake is left unsaturated with fresh water ; just so the 
ascetic pervades and infuses his body with internal serene calm, 
bom of self-recollection, pervaded with fervour and beatitude.” 
We should note, here, the simile of the internal spring, the idea 
of something fresh which spreads out from the inside and from 
the “ bottom ” — ^from the detached “ intellectual simphcity ” 
which has been achieved — ^unsullied by any influx of outside 
currents ; that is to say, with all vital sarhsaric nourishment 
neutralised.

Third ; “As in a lake with lotus plants some lotus flowers 
are bom in the water, develop in the water, remain below the 
surface of the water, and draw their nourishment from the depths 
of the water, and their blooms and their roots are pervaded, 
infused, filled and saturated with fresh water, so that not the 
smallest part of any lotus flower is left unsaturated with fresh 
moisture : just so the ascetic pervades and infuses, fills and satur- 
ates his body with purified joy, so that not the smallest part of 
his body is deft unsaturated Avith purified joy.” Whilst in the 
•» Majjh., LXX.

ig6 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

preceding phase we spoke only of a deep internal spring, here we 
have a further development, we have a state which now encloses, 
permeates and nourishes the entire bodily structure, by trans- 
forming the general sensation which corresponds to it, just as we 
have already said.Fourth jhana : "As a man might cloak himself from head to 
foot in a white mantle, so that not the smallest part of his body 
was left uncovered by the white mantle : just so the ascetic sits, 
having covered his body with a state of extreme equanimity and 
purity and clarity, so that not the smallest part of his body is 
left uncovered by the state of extreme equanimity and purity and 
illumination.” We are, then, at a third phase ; the body is not 
only pervaded but also covered by the new force, it is enveloped 
in the force as if the body did not contain the force but the force 
contained the body. The ascetic dominates his body, covers 
his body.®^

The similes we have just given are among those which, to a great 
extent, serve as "magic keys” : they have a power of illumina- 
tion for those who use them as a starting-point when elaborating 
this phase of embodying the experience corresponding to the 
four jhana.

The path leading through the jhana is not the’ only one con- 
sidered by the Buddhist teaching. The texts indicate a second 
path which, from its effects, would seem to be equivalent. It may 
be called " path of saintliness ” or " wet path ”, as opposed to 
the other which is mainly m the nature of a “ dry path ”. While 
the jhana are necessarily achieved by way of an intellectual 
catharsis and spiritual concentration, in the other path, which we 
shall now briefly discuss, feeling plays a large part, although it 
is employed in conjunction with perfect awareness and is used 
purely instrumentaUy.

This second path consists of four awakenings which are called 
brahmavih&ra-bhavana, that is, “ unfolding of the divine states 
or appamanM, “ the limitless ”, .the " infinite (states) ”. We 
shall use the term " irradiant contemplations ”. The method 
.aims at dissolving the bond of finite consciousness by means ofDlgha, II, 82. The white mantle of some western monastic orders which 
is provided witii a hood covering the head also, in special rites, has a symbolical 
Value which may be interpreted on these lines : a value which, in the Church, 
has got lost.

THE FOUR JH A NA — ‘‘iRRAUIANT CONTEMPLATIONS^' 1 97

the irradiation of an ever vaster, more dis-individualised and more 
universal feeling, so developed that it ends by leading to the same 
state as the io\xxth.jhana, to a state of almost discamate equanim- 
ity and mental clarity. This path entails the recognition that : 
'' Before, this mind of mine was limited and obstructed. But 
now, it is limitless and unfolded, and no limited action can still 
exist in it or maintain itself in it.'^^^ Again we have a catharsis. 
The four appamanna are conceived as containing, in fact, a '' puri- 
fication '' ; thus it is said that one who has realised them “ has 
bathed with the inner bathing '' and has no further need of ex- 
ternal rites of purification.®^ They produce the limitless redemp- 
tion of mind.''®^Here are the formulae that are given by the canon for the four 
irradiant contemplations : '' The ascetic dwells with his spirit 
pervaded by love Ivetta) and irradiates one direction, a second, 
a third, a fourth, so across and upward and downward : identify- 
ing himself in all things everywhere, he irradiates the whole world 
with spirit pervaded by love, with ample, profound, unlimited 
mind, free of hate and rancour."' The formula is repeated three 
more times, unchanged except for the term, love, which is replaced 
in turn by compassion {karund), sympathetic joy {mudita) and 
lastly equanimity, immutability or stability {upekkhd). After the 
irradiation of the feeling of love, follow compassion and sympa- 
thetic joy. Through love the ascetic feels himself in all beings, 
fioble or common, happy and unhappy, both of this world and 
of every other world ; he feels their destiny as though it were 
his own, he takes upon himself the contingency of their life, he 
feels with their feeling or suffering (compassion) — ^but he then 
irradiates Joy, as if the darkness in each being had dissolved, 
as if the feeling he irradiates were beneficial to the beings and 
were sustaining, clarifying and liberating them. Then follows 
the last irradiation, that of immutability or stability : the ascetic, 
stiU developing this universal consciousness, is as if he willed 
the being " of each being. He aims at infusing in every creature 
that same calm, that same quality of stability and of equanimity 
that he has developed in himself, by projecting in them the quality

Angutt,, X, 208.

33 Majjh., VII.

« Majjh,, XTJII,

198 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENINGAngutt,, X, 208.

33 Majjh., VII.

« Majjh,, XTJII,

198 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

of “ being ”, that same unshakability or security that he has 
achieved by completing this process of universalisation. In this 
connection, we may call to mind these words : "Peace I leave 
with you, my peace I give unto you : not as the world giveth, 
give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled; neither let it 
be afraid.''^® The formula is repeated, chan^ng only, for each 
contemplation, the quality of the basic feehng which is to be 
aroused first in oneself and then to be irradiated: “The 
ascetic dwells with compassionate — ^jo 3 dul — ^immutable mind and 
irradiates one direction, then the second, then the third, then 
the fourth, above, below, across : identifying himself everywhere 
in all things, he dwells irradiating the whole world with compas- 
sionate — ^joyful— immutable spirit, with ample, profound, un- 
limited mind, free of hate and rancour.”*®

To set free one’s heart by unfolding a love which turns to 
compassion, a compassion which turns to joy, a joy which 
turns to unchangeabUity, to impassible clarity and unshakable 
detachment, is the aim of this fourfold contemplation. To achieve 
it entirely, that is to say, to dissolve all trace of finite and unquiet 
subjectivity, i§, according to Buddhism, to have achieved the 
condition necessary for a state of umon with the theistic god, 
with Brahma — hrahma-sahayata. One text, in coimection with 
the fourth irradiant contemplation, even states : " Thusj. 0disciples, an ascetic dwells as a god.”®’ In any case, by this path 
which, as we have said, is comparable to the " way of saintliness,'*^ 
the andgdmi-phala or the " fruit of no return ” may be achieved : 
the individual in question, after the dissolution of the body, arises 
in the world of Brahma, a world, as De Lorenzo has rightly 
pointed out,®® of which Dante’s whole paradise is but an allegorical 
representation ; a world which, for Buddhism, however, is only 
a stage to be passed, a world which, when compared with absolute 
liberation, appears as something inferior — hlna—zs. something 
yet conditioned.®* *•

John XIV, 27 ; cf. Mahaparinifv., 40 : The Awakened One is peace to 
himself and bears peace for the entire world.'*

Majjh., VII. Angutt., IV, 190.

*8 G. de Lorenzo, I Discorsi di Gotamo Buddho, Laterza, Bari, 1916-27, 
footnote to Majjh., XCVII.

Cf. Majjh., CXX, where it is said that he who aims at extinction goes 
beyond all the divine spheres, he does not arise in any place, he does not arise 
at any point Furthermore, the absolutely neutral state in the path of awaken- 
ing stands higher than any beatitude, even celestial. When this state wanes 
beatitude, formerly overcome, springs up again : ibid., CII.

THE FOUR JH ANA — “iRRADIANT CONTEMPLATIONS” I 99THE FOUR JH ANA — “iRRADIANT CONTEMPLATIONS” I 99

As in the jhana, so also in these irradiant contemplations an 
interior and invincible force is set free and expands, once the 
preliminary ascesis has sufficiently barred the roads along which 
external contingencies might disturb the internal being. The 
states to be aroused and irradiated, including unchangeability, 
acquire the characteristics of absolute forces — ^rather than of 
feelings in the normal sense — ^which are such that they may even 
make themselves objectively felt at a distance,*® of forces which 
derive from a cosmic consciousness that completely dominates 
feeling and overcomes all suffering and all reaction of the spirit 
to an extent almost inconceivable. The irradiant contemplations 
are in this way related to the power of patientia, to the capacity 
for unwavering endurance of all that can come from the world 
of men by engulfing it in the vastness of the liberated mind. 
Whether people behave with love or with hate, whether their 
words are kind or imkind, sincere or false, whether their action 
tends to produce joy or suffering, the heart of the ascetic who 
practises the appamannd must remain undisturbed, no evil word 
must escape him ; he must, instead, remain friendly and com- 
passionate, his spirit must be loving and without secret malice. 
With a loving spirit the person who may have acted for good 
or ill is irradiated ; starting from him, the ascetic will then 
irradiate the whole world with a loving spirit, with ample, 
profound, hmitless spirit, free of impurities and rancour. And 
^bme cosmic similes are added : with spirit like the earth, like 
water, like the air, like fire." Like the earth ” — says the Buddha — “ practise ascesis. Just 
as upon the earth there is thrown the pure and the impure, 
excrement and urine, mucus and pus and blood, yet because 
of this the earth is not distressed nor saddened nor troubled : so 
also you, like the earth, must practise ascesis : for if you, like 
the earth, practise ascesis, your mind, touched by joy or suffering, 
wll not be disturbed.” And the same for water ; as in water 
there is washed the pure and the impure, or as in the fire there 
is burned the pure and the impure, or as the wind blows on 
the pure and the impure, or as, lastly, space is not limited by 
anything, so must one practise ascesis, like water and fire, like

According to Samyutt,, XLII, 8, the irradiated forces are perceived by all 
beings like the sound of a trumpet, blown without effort,^ in the four regions.

Q

200 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

wind and space : and the mind, touched by joy or suffering, 
will not be disturbed.*^Q

200 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

wind and space : and the mind, touched by joy or suffering, 
will not be disturbed.*^

There is a similar cycle of similes which again point out the 
cosmic nature of the feelings to be aroused and irradiated in such 
contemplations. It is said : '' Should a man arrive with a hoe 
and a box and speak thus ; ‘ I will clear away the earth ’ and 
should he hoe here and there, and remove the soil here and there, 
and throw it here and there and speak thus : ‘You shall be with- 
out earth ’ — ^what think you now, disciples : Could thi s man clear 
away the earth ? — Surely not. Lord,” is the answer. "And why 
not ? — ^The earth. Lord, is very deep and vast, and could certainly 
not be cleared away however much that man might toil and 
labour.” And likewise in the case of the air : if a man should 
come with lac and other colours, and attempt to draw figures 
in the sky, he would never succeed, since " the sky is formless 
and invisible, and a figure could certainly not be drawn there 
hoVever much that man might toil and labour”. Finally, in 
the case of water : the fool who with a bundle of lighted straw 
were to try to dry up the Ganges would never achieve his aim. 
Thus, with a mind like the earth, like the air, hke water, like fire, 
like space, with ample, profound, unhmited mind, free of hate 
and rancour, should one irradiate the whole world, never letting 
the heart be distressed, never allowing an imkind word to escape, 
remaining friendly and compassionate. The extreme example 
given is this : “ Even if, O disciples, brigands and assassins with 
a two-handed saw were to sever your joints and limbs, one who 
for this reason were to become angry would not be carrying out 
my teaching. Therefore you must, O disciples, thoroughly train 
yourselves thus : ' Our mind must not be troubled, no evil word 
must escape our mouth, we shall remain friendly and compassion- 
ate, with loving mind, without hidden ni-wfil we shall irradiate 
that person ; passing on from him we shall then irradiate t.he 
whole world with loving mind, with ample, profound, unlimited 
mind, free of hate and rancour.' Thus, 0 disciples, must you 
thoroughly train yourselves.”^^ In the course of this text it is 
emphasised that the mind must be put to the test at the very 
moment in which we are faced by injustice : that is to say,‘1 Majjh., LXII ; Anguti., IX, ii.

« Majjh., XXI.

THE FOUR JH ANA "^'iRRADIANT CONTEMPLATIONS^’ 20 I

we must neutralise and conquer our reaction also when it 
has most reason to exist. Naturally, we are in the field 
of pure ascesis, of pure discipline, and it would therefore be a 
great mistake to attempt to transfer this attitude to the plane 
of normal life. It should be further noted that there is no question 
at all of forgiving '' — and still less of forgiving '' that we 
may be forgiven At a certain point, the whole matter 
resolves itself into an objective inability to be touched or wounded. 
The attacker and the unjust find themselves in exactly the same 
condition as the man who seriously imagined he could remove 
the earth with his hoe or draw figures in the air. For this reason, 
the non-reaction of the ascetic must be understood — to use one 
of Kremmerz's similes^® — as the measureless good-will of a world 
boxing champion towards a spindly youth who arrogantly 
challenges him to a trial of strength and skill and who hits or 
kicks him to provoke him. The champion knows that he could 
lay out his assailant with no effort at all.This leads us to a consideration of the part that love — metta 
— splays in the Doctrine of Awakening. In the first place, it 
does not appear as an absolute value — as charitas, the theological 
attribute God is love but rather as an ascetic instrument 
which, at the fourth stage, gives way to impassibility, to a state 
of mind that is detached from all beatitude, that is “ neutral 
in a higher and sovereign sense. In the second place, it has 
nothing to do with a human “love for one’s neighbour”, but 
rather with the irradiant and almost objective power which 
proceeds, in a natural way, from an integrated and liberated mind. 
This is evident from the Buddhist view that of one who seeks 
his own health rather than that of others and the one who seeks 
the health of others rather than his own, the former is judged 
to be superior this takes us far indeed from “ humanitarian- 
i^ ”, but likewise from “ egoism The point is, that he who 
has not cannot give. Love, here, is not a matter of running after 
others with cures and solicitude and effusions, but is something 
which is based on “ obtaining one’s own health ” — ^that is, one’s 
own spiritual fulfilment — ^until it becomes “ radiant ”, and like 
the light of the sun which shines equally, irresistibly and

Cf. G. Kremmerz, Dialoghi sulV ermetismOj Spoleto, 1929, pp. 53-54.

** Anguit, IV, 95.

202 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

impersonally upon the good as upon the evil, without any special 
'' affection without any particular intent.** Anguit, IV, 95.

202 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

impersonally upon the good as upon the evil, without any special 
'' affection without any particular intent.

[In this connection, we recall the discrimination made by 
Christian theology in order to explain the possibility of loving 
even those for whom one harbours a natural aversion and 
repugnance so strong that one may have to restrain oneself 
physically from giving expression to it. Here the distinction 
is between natural and supernatural love, between love based 
on the senses and love based on will and liberty. The former 
is, in fact, conditioned by feeling and is not free, since it does 
not stir until confronted by an object corresponding to a 
tendency ; for this reason, when the object changes or when 
the mind alters its outlook, the love decreases or gives place 
to another feeling. In this form of love the individual, in 
fact, only loves himself or, more correctly, it is the samsaric 
being in him which loves ; and this is so not only with lustful 
love but also ’ with sublimated form& of love and affection. 
This is all part of the world of dukkha, it is an alteration, a bond, 
a disturbance of the spirit. The Ariyan path of awakening does 
not recognise love in this sense, and regards it in all its forms 
as a limitation and an imperfection.Different is amor intelUctualis which, though preserving the 
characteristics of an affective state sui generis, is- based not on 
sensibility but, as we have said, on will and liberty. In Christian^ 
theology this is loving all creatures in God '' ; which means 
that we here remember each individuars transcendental source, 
liking in him that which he is in the impersonal, metaphysical 
sense, and resolutely excluding any like or dislike proceeding 
from our particular nature. In this case liberty of spirit 
triumphs over the conditioned character of the senses, and love 
becomes the purer and the sign of higher liberty the less it 
depends upon particular satisfactions and attachment to single 
beings.^®

Only if we think of love in these terms can we understand that 
its value is simply instrumental and cathartic : in the ladder of 
Buddhist realisations it takes its place simply as the equivalent 
of the edoilier jhdna, that is to say, of the contemplative simplifi- 
cations designed to remove the limitation of the individual and 
Cf. I. Le Masson, Avis spirituals at m&ditations, Tonfnai, 1911, p. 23 saq.

THE FOUR JHANA----‘'lRRADIANT CONTEMPLATIONS' ' 203THE FOUR JHANA----‘'lRRADIANT CONTEMPLATIONS' ' 203

to neutralise the “ five bonds And we can then understand an- 
other thing, which is the magical power attributed by Buddhism, 
in certain circumstances, to love. There corresponds to this love, 
that is deeply experienced in the intellectual sense already 
described, a certain removal of the I — thou relationship, not as 
combination with or losing oneself in the loved one, but in the 
sense of establishing a concord between whole and part, between 
creator (” father and created son between the limitless 
and the limited. In loving, one goes outside oneself, that is to 
say, beyond the state in which the other person may be one 
like us ", one creature facing another — one assumes, one 
makes one's own the being of the other person, who 
then finds himself facing a profundity which he himself cannot 
attain and consequently against which he is powerless.^® He 
loves him, as it were, himself, not finitely, however, but infinitely ; 
it is himself with an extra dimension that is created by the very 
act of love. In this manner, when love is developed into an objec- 
tive intensity it may give rise to a magic force which is able to 
paralyse aU unfriendly acts of which the other person may be 
capable. Thus it is said that one who practises and truly develops 
love, thereby freeing his mind, also develops a state such that 
fire, and poison, and weapons have no longer power over him.^^ 
This same ide^ is expressed in various Buddhist legends. By ir- 
^radiating with unlimited mind, full of love and compassion, vast 
as the earth, Prince Siddhattha is supposed to have halted the 
onrush of an elephant set upon him by an enemy. On being told 
of the death of a disciple from snakebite, the Buddha says that 
this would not have happened.had the disciple irradiated the world 
of snakes with loving mind ; and here we have the confirmation 
of the very idea we have just discussed : love creates a defence, 
paralyses hostile beings, disarms them and makes them retreat, 
because it arouses in them the feeling that their limited selves are 
facing the limitless. Thus we read, in connection with the ir- 
radiant contemplation of love : “ Infinite is the Awakened One, 
infinite is the doctrine — ^you, instead, are finite beings. I have 
created my protection, I have sung my hymn of defence — ^let all 
living beings retreat."^® We can see from this how ignorant of** Cf, J. Evola, Fenomenologia dell’Individuo Assoluto, Turin, 1930, p. 247 seq, 
Angutt, VIII, I ; 63.

*8 Cullavagga (Vin), V, 6; cf. Angutt, IV, 67; Jdtaka, CCIII.

204 "mE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

Buddhism are those tvho practically deny to it the dignity of a 
proper " religion ” since they understand it as a simple ethic of 
love ” and " compassion ” in an adulterated, equalitarian and 
humanitarian sense.

Some texts advocate a combination of the irradiant contempla- 
tions with ih&jhana ; in which case, it is in those states of abstrac- 
tion and internal transparency belonging to the jhana that, at a 
later phase of the discipline, the awakenings of the “ four divine 
states ” should be practised through the successive stages of ir- 
radiation already described.*® One kind of “ purification ” thus 
'■ raises the other to a higher power ; and here we may pause to 
consider the possibility of the existence of beings who, according 
to Buddhism, from their distant, unknown solitudes, irradiate the 
world with influences far more efficacious and valuable than those 
that any visible human action can provide.As we have said, the four irradiant contemplations are equiva- 
lent, in practice, to the four jhana. They also lead us to the 
extreme limit of individuality, to the point beyond which there 
are the regions “ free from form ”—-arupa-loka — or the " super- 
celestial ” regions, whichever one prefers. As long as one’s hori- 
zons have not been made to appear relative by the will for absolute 
liberation, these states of love and of universalisation, up to and 
including the purity of the fourth “limitless” contemplation 
which correspond, one might say, to the mode of pure “ being ”, 
may' serve as a way to liberation from the self and from finite^ 
wiU, and bring one as far as the unio mystica, that is to say, the 
hrahmorsahayata already mentioned. We know already, how- 
ever, that this is " too little ” for the Ariyan vocation. The 
Awakened One knows the path which leads to the state of unity, 
which may be realised in life or after death, with the theistic 
divinity : he even goes so far as to say (a thing which should be 
noted by certain catholic apologetics when it pronounces every 
kind of foolish judgment upon Buddhism), that for him ft) 
point out such a path as this is as easy as for a man who is 
a native of a village to point out the road leading to that 
village.®® The truth he proclaims is, however, that there exists 
" a higher liberty ”. The mania of “ saintlmess ” is to be over-

Anguti., VIII, 63 ; Dhamma-sangani, 251 
“ Majjh., XCIX.

THE FOUR JH ANA — “iRRADIANT CONTEMPLATIONS” 20^

come, in the same way as those of desire and existence.®^ 
Of the four hrahma-vihara, the irradiant contemplations, con- 
sidered in themselves, we must say : “ this does not lead to 
turning away, not to cessation, not to calm, not to wisdom, not 
to awakening, not to extinction — ^but only to ascension into a 
world of saintliness

Angutt, X, 20 .

« Majjh,, LXXXIII.

VI

THE STATES FREE FROM FORM AND THE 
EXTINCTIONAngutt, X, 20 .

« Majjh,, LXXXIII.

VI

THE STATES FREE FROM FORM AND THE 
EXTINCTION

T he region of the later realisations of the Ariya, up till the 
great liberation^ corresponds to the arupa world. Having 
overcome sensible existence — kdma-loka — Shaving overcome the 
possibility of re-arising in the world of pure forms — rupa4oka — 
one still must proceed, if one has the power, to the overcoming 
of existence free from form — arupa4oka — and of the '' desire '' 
of which it may be the object, arupa-rdga. By arupa4oka, we 
must understand the sphere in which only that which is 
essence '' remains, only pure possibility of manifestation, or 
''meaning*' ; whilst the formal and manifested aspect, which 
may, amongst other ways, manifest itself through the phenomena 
of super-sensory vision, entirely falls away. From the individual's 
point of view, this is the space which extends beyond the fourth 
niddna, ndma-rupa, that is to say, beyond individuationr 
Dissociation from the samsaric being occurs when we enter into 
this higher ascetic and transcendental region, in which we still 
have to remove the first three niddna of the series : firstly, 
vinndna, imderstood as both the general possibility of a definite 
and dependent existence, and also the absolutely original motus 
which may lead to such an existence, in its double aspect of 
" non-wisdom '* {avijjd) and of intoxicated energy, sankhdra and 
dsava, ^

In the same way that, after the phase of defence, consolidation 
and preliminary detachment, the ascetic was offered two nearly 
equivalent paths, namely the touv jhdna and the 'four irradiant 
contemplations, so, in this final development, a twofold path is 
again offered. The first of these is by way of completely abstract 
contemplations " without form " and is developed, in fact, in the 
same sense as the aforesaid jhdna ; indeed, the term arupa-jhdna

206

STATES FREE FROM FORM, AND THE EXTINCTION 20 J206

STATES FREE FROM FORM, AND THE EXTINCTION 20 J

is often used here. The other path, on the contrary, is made up 
of special illuminating visions — abhinna — and is imbued much 
more with the spirit of the irradiant contemplations.

Before we deal with these paths, it will be profitable to take 
the opportunity of referring to certain initial techniques an^ in- 
struments which are considered by Buddhism as auxiliary and 
preparatory means — -pankamma-nimitta — ^both for the jhana we 
have yet to speak of, and for those we have already discussed. 
The texts speak of eight '' liberations — vimokkhd — ^five of which 
are the dyatana, that is, the contemplative states of the region

without form whilst three are clearly contemplations pre- 
liminary to them. In the first of these latter contemplations one 
considers, in one's own being, the single element form ", and 
one completely concentrates one's mind upon it : this is not 
entirely unrelated to some methods known among ancient 
Mediterranean initiations and associated with the formula : “to 
go out (from the body, from individual consciousness) through 
the skin To feel only the “ form " of one's own organism is 
like feeling its surface, the “ skin According to those ancient 
mystic teachings, to isolate this sensation of the “ form " and 
almost to lose oneself in it can, in certain cases, be a way ofgoing out And it is a method of Tibetan Yoga firstly to 
identify one's body with that of a divinity and then to apprehend 
it as empty, as if it were made only of a shining and transparent 
skin.^ The second “ liberation " consists of forgetting one's own 
form, one's own body, and absorbing oneself instead in an outside 
form, which alone must engage the mind and the sensibility. 
This is connected with the teclmique of the kasina which we are 
just about to discuss. The third “ liberation " is connected with 
“ splendour " and “beauty" — ^there are even texts which con- 
sider that these two elements only are the supports in the passage 
tQ the formless.^ There thus appears on the scene something 
which recalls the part played by aesthetic feeling in the Platonist

1 Cf. G. Me3T:ink, Golem, c. XVIII : The key is found purely and simply 
in making oneself aware of the form of one’s own I ”, of one's o^vn skin, I 
mean, sunk though one may be in sleep ; in discovering the narrow ciack through 
which consciousness finds its way between the ’state of wakefulness and that of 
the deepest sleep ”. ' It must be understood that, in the kasina, the power of 
concentration produces conditions analogous to those of sleep.

2 Texts in W. Y. Evans-Wentz, Tibetan Yoga and Secret Doctrines, London, 
1935. PP- 173-5. 190.

« Dlgha, XV, 35; Angutt, VITT, 66; Majjh,, LXXVIT.

2o8 the doctrine of awakening2 Texts in W. Y. Evans-Wentz, Tibetan Yoga and Secret Doctrines, London, 
1935. PP- 173-5. 190.

« Dlgha, XV, 35; Angutt, VITT, 66; Majjh,, LXXVIT.

2o8 the doctrine of awakening

and Neo-Plat onist mystiques, namely a kind of enthusiasm or 
rapture which acts as a vehicle for the attaining of the super- 
sensible. The difference is that here we are not dealing with 
the joy of the artist or of the lover of art, but rather with a 
quintessential and abstract feeling that is roused, not by an image, 
or a living creature or an aspect of nature, but simply by a pure 
colour, light, brilliance, or fire, in a mind that has already been 
brought to the hmit of purely individual and human consciousness 
as the result of the ascesis we have so far described. This 
refers to the kasina themselves.

The term kasina means, literally, " totality It denotes a 
procedure that would be described today as " hypnotic ”, a pro- 
cedure by means of which consciousness is led to become absorbed 
by identification in an object, until they form together a " whole- 
ness ”, one single thing. This process of identification produces 
isolation of the mind not only from physical impressions but also 
from one's own person ; the ” five hindrances ” being overcome, the 
passage to the abstract contemplations is made easier or hastened.As to technique : one may start with a disc of some perfectly 
pure colour, dark blue, yeUow, red or white, which is placed in 
front of the person who is to perform the exercise. Alternatively, 
a round opening can be made, through which an area of bright 
sky may be seen, or the same can be done in a screen placed in 
front of a fire in such a manner that a disc of flame is visible. 
In one way or another, one must arrange to have before one a" 
regular shape occupied by a pure and even colour or luminosity. 
The mind should be detached from all longing or worry and should 
warm to the thought of the truth and of the awakening of the 
Ariyas. Thus the mind is prepared for concentration and is per- 
vaded by the thought that the- action about to be undertaken 
will facilitate the grace of the mind’s own liberation. After this 
is done, one must gaze fixedly at the luminous disc, “ with eyes 
neither too widely open nor half-closed, as one looks at oneself 
in a mirror ”, without interruption, without blinking, concentrat- 
ing wholly on this perception, until there is created a reflex image 
(today we would say, an hallucinatory image) of the shape. One 
must then continue to concentrate on this image, with the eyes 
'both open and closed, if necessary ” a hundred or a thousand 
times ”, until the mental image is established in such a way that

STATES FREE FROM FORM, AND THE EXTINCTION 209

one continues to see it even involuntarily, with the eyes closed 
or open and with the gaze removed from the object. The first 
phase of the operation is complete when the “ reflex ”, the mental 
counterpart of the physical image of the disc, called uggaha- 
wimitta, is equally visible with the eyes open or closed. One can 
then stop sitting in front of the disc and pass on to the second 
phase of the exercise.In this further phase the “ reflex ” must, in its turn, serve as 
the basis for concentration which is now, in a manner of speaking, 
of the second degree. It is no longer the physical eye that fixes 
its gaze, but the eye that has been opened by the jhdna — -jhdna- 
cakkhu. The procedure, however, is the same : one again has 
to identify oneself with the mental image, forgetting ever5d:hing 
else, just as was done previously with the image provided by the 
senses. If this second concentration on the interior image is 
rightly carried out, there finally springs out from this image a 
new reflex of the second degree, something purely spiritual 
— •patibhdga-nimiUa — " without form, without colour ”. This re- 
sembles the melting of a fog, or the shining of the morning star, 
or the appearance of the moon from behind clouds, or is like the 
flash of a mirror taken from its case, or of a perfectly polished 
gem. These terms are used to describe the appearance of the new 
image which “ shatters ” and annihilates the preceding ” hallu- 
cinatory ” image, and “ rises, a himdred, a thousand times more 
clear ”. At the moment when this experience occurs, the obstacle 
formed by one’s own individuahty and by the “five bonds” is 
removed, the power of the dsava is neutralised, and the passage 
of the mind to the apprehension of the states free from form, or 
of pure forms, is made easier.*

The so-called light kasim is appreciably different ; it is indi- 
cated in the texts thus : “ The ascetic fixes his attention on 
perception of light, he fixes his mind on the perception of day : 
a^by day so by night, as by night so by day. Thus he trains 
himself, with his mind aware, untroubled, in the contemplation 
of light.” Correctly and constantly practised, this exercise should 
ease the opening of the " eye of wisdom

Another process of “ emptying ” is more mental in character

* Visuddhi-magga, IV (W. 293.55^.) ; AngutU, I, 20 ; cf. MajjK, LXXVII.

* Angutt,, IV, 41.Another process of “ emptying ” is more mental in character

* Visuddhi-magga, IV (W. 293.55^.) ; AngutU, I, 20 ; cf. MajjK, LXXVII.

* Angutt,, IV, 41.

210 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

and is based on successive abstractions. Forgetting oneself and 
one’s connection with common human existence, one allows only 
the image " forest ”, for example, to remain, as if it were the 
only thing in the world that existed, until the spirit is relaxed, 
made firm and freed. This produces a feeling of " voidness ”, 
of " real, inviolable vacancy ” — sunnatd. One then drops the 
idea of forest, leaving as the only object for the mind the idea 
of " earth ”, putting aside, however, all its characteristics ; ” as 
the hide of a bull is well cleaned with a scraper, and its wrinkles 
smoothed out ”, there exists nothing but “ earth ” in the world. 
And one apprehends the same feeling of liberty, or voidness, in 
conceiving that only the idea " earth ” persists as support of the 
mind. From ” earth ” one finally moves to the idea ” infinite 
space ” — ^with which one achieves the passage to the object of 
the first ariipa meditation, that is to say, of the first of the 
meditations beyond form.®Before going any further, we must forestall any misunder- 
standings which may arise regarding the implications of these 
forms of approach which are based on what is almost a hypnotic 
technique. It is quite possible that those idle people who go in 
search of," occult exercises ”, of short-cuts by which to reach the 
supersensible without effort, may believe that they have found 
something on these lines in the colour and light hasina, they may 
then mistakenly believe that by practising a form of hypnosis 
they can do without any renimciation, disciphne or spiritual effort. 
This would be a grave mistake. These material procedures mean 
very- httle in themselves : their only purpose is to neutralise 
peripheral sensitivity. It is then a question of seeing, firstly, if 
something of consciousness stiff remains, once the neutralisation 
has been achieved ; and secondly, if it does, what is the nature 
of any experience that may result. Everyone knows that pro- 
cedures si^ax to those of the colour and light kasina have be^n 
used both in the practice of magic and by visionaries, and in 
modem times, among forms of experimental hypnosis. The tech- 
nique of the " magic-mirror ” will be familiar to some, a technique 
which consists of gazing at a luminous point reflected by a curved 
mirror : others will be acquainted with the practice of " divina- 
tion ”, based on fixing the sight on a mirror or water or on the

• Majjh., CXXI.

STATES FREE FROM FORM,. AND THE EXTINCTION 2I I• Majjh., CXXI.

STATES FREE FROM FORM,. AND THE EXTINCTION 2I I

fire. We can see from this that the technique of the kasina, in 
itself, is neutral, and may produce one or another result, without 
in itself determining which. Thus, except for cases of privileged 
and exceptional predispositions, anyone with sufficient power of 
concentration will find that the effect of staring at the coloured 
discs or at the discs of light will be merely h5q)notic, that is to 
say, that he will descend to a semi-somnambulistic state of reduced 
consciousness like that of people who are h5/pnotised. In others, 
" complexes ” of all descriptions may emerge and be projected, 
resulting in inconclusive visions which may even be dangerous, 
because not only do they not lead beyond individuality, but they 
may even disclose and bring up a psychic " subsoil ” and so open 
the way to the manifestation of obscure iufluences.'^ Yet, others, 
once they have mastered the exercise, or if they have special 
natural gifts, may utilise the state of trance* into which they 
pass for the purpose of divining or magic. Lastly, the best that 
can happen is that apparitions of “ divine forms ” may occur, of 
forms belonging to the mpa-loka which, however, as we have 
already said, is itself left behind by the path of awalcening of 
the Ariya.For the effective use of the technique in question, the first 
condition is that consciousness should be already concentrated 
and detached and capable of maintaining itself by its own efforts : 
only then, when the peripheral sensitivity has been neutralised, 
can one keep one’s feet, can one go up rather than down, can 
one set out to attain a purified super-consciousness instead of 
sinking into the morass of the visionary or low grade medium. 
In the second place one needs, as we said, adequate spiritual 
tension, pervaded by the idea of awakening, almost like the 
state of a compressed spring on the point of release. In this 
coimection a text states that, as a man with a robust digestion 
swallows and consumes a spoonful of rice without difficulty, so 
oi 3 te who aspires to transcendental wisdom goes beyond the initial 
act of concentration on the image, absorbs it and transcends it, 
and achieves the state at which he aims. ® No one, then, should

’ It is what, in other ways, nearly always happens in the mediuroistic '' 
states cultivated by modern spiritualism and metapsychics. Cf. our critical 
studies ; Maschera e voUo dello spiritualismo contemporaneo, 2 nd end., Bari, 1949*

* In English in the original (Tr. note).

® Dhamma-sangani, tr. C. A. F. Rhys Pavids, London, 190 O 1 i^ote on p. 59t

212 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING* In English in the original (Tr. note).

® Dhamma-sangani, tr. C. A. F. Rhys Pavids, London, 190 O 1 i^ote on p. 59t

212 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

nourish any illusions about the techniques we have discussed 
by thinicing that they are capable of producing, in the way of 
genuine spiritual realisation, an5d;hmg more than he has already. 
They can only create, quickly and conveniently, conditions that 
favour a particular action which, in itself, presupposes a high 
development of ascetic, " holy ” or initiatic consciousness. The 
same is also true, although in a lesser degree, of the other, less 
mechanical forms of approach of which We have spoken : when 
we are dealing with the path of awakening of the Ariya, a 
" nobility ” and a special internal initiative are always pre- 
supposed. Even the continued contemplation of light can lead 
to little more than hallucinations, iostead of to the. opening of 
the " eye of wisdom ”, if we do not have a living and, in a manner 
of speaking, intellectualised sensation of this light (intellectual 
light). There is confirmation of this in the fact that the same 
practice is sometimes advised for wholly contingent purposes, 
for exaniple, as an antidote to sleep and torpor.®

As the starting point for the five jhdna free from form we 
have, on the one hand, objective detachment from the perceptions 
of the six senses and, on the other, " pure, clear, ductile, flexible, 
resplendent indifference ” in which the series of jhdna we have 
already considered as well as the series of irradiant contemplations, 
both culminate. Having made this clear, this is how the texts 
refer to the contemplative states.

First phase : “ Completely transcending perceptions of form, 
m aking the reflex images vanish, reducing every perception of 
multiplicity, the ascetic thinks : ‘ infinite ether ’ and reaches the 
plane of infinite ether.”Second phase : "After completely transcending the plane of 
infinite ether, in the thought ; ' iiifinity of consciousness ’ the 
ascetic reaches the plane of infinity of consciousness.”

Third phase : "After completely transcending the plane ^of 
infin ity of consciousness, in the thought : ‘ non-existence ’ the 
ascetic reaches the plane of non-existence.”

Fourth phase : "After completely transcending the plane of 
non-existence, the ascetic reaches the plane beyond consciousness 
and non-consciousness.”

Fifth phase ; "After completely transcending the plane beyond

» Angutt., VII, 58.

STATES FREE FROM FORM, AND THE EXTINCTION 213

consciousness and non-consciousness, the ascetic reaches the 
cessation of the determined, "i" At this point, it is said, the 
" mania ’’ of the illuminated ascetic is destroyed, the dsava are 
dissolved, there subsists no longer any “ gross or subtle bond ” ; 
there is, on the contrary, a flash of absolute liberating knowledge. 
For this interior vision, which destroys at the root any possibility 
of conditioned existence, the canonical formula is this : “ ‘ This 
is agitation ’ {dukkha) — so comprehends the ascetic, knowing the 
truth ; ‘ This is the genesis of agitation ', ' This is the destruction 
of agitation ’, ‘ This is the path which leads to the destruction 
of agitation ’. ' This is mania ’ (dsava) — so comprehends theascetic, conforming to truth, ‘ This is the genesis of mania 
‘ This is the destruction of mania ', ' This is the path which leads 
to the destruction of mania ’ so he sees, conforming to truth. 
Thus knowing, thus seeing, his spirit becomes freed from the 
mania of desire (kdmdsava), from the mania of existence (bhavd- 
sava), from the mania of ignorance (avijj dsava). ‘ In the liberated 
one is liberation,' this knowledge arises. ‘ Exhausted is life, the 
divine path realised, that which had to be done has been done, 
this world no longer exists ’ does he then comprehend."^^ The 
culmination is reached, reintegration has been carried out, life 
and death are overcome, every thirst is ended, the primordial 
anguish — ^the trembling and the burning— is destroyed.

, A few words of explanation on these transcendental phases of 
the ascesis : in the formula of the first anipa-jhdna the perceptions 
of form which are to be overcome are indicated by the term 
patighasannd, which contains the idea ofsomething which resists. 
This relates in some degree to experience governed by the law 
of opposition of object to subject, feeling oneself " I ” by contra- 
position to a non-I, to an ob-jectum, to a Gegen-stand (something 
which stands against me, which opposes me). This confirms the 
idea that, in order to enter into the world that is free from form, 
one must be capable of really abandoning this consciousness of 
self as an individual " I ”, conditioned by a particular "name- 
and-form ”, which endures just because of this law. And since 
all that is individual in an immediate and effective sense is 
supposed already to have been overcome by means of the

E.g. Majih, XIII ; LXVI.

“ e.g. Majj'h., XXVII.

214 'THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENINGE.g. Majih, XIII ; LXVI.

“ e.g. Majj'h., XXVII.

214 'THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

preceding catharsis, there remains to be eliminated only the subtle 
residue of “ I " which persists, as one text says, in the same way 
as the scent remains even when the flower which has produced it 
is no longer there.^® As for the “ reflex images ” which have also 
to be eliminated in this phase, these refer to the secondary 
reflected images, void of form, subtle and wholly intellectual, 
that are obtained by the colour and light kasina. When this 
reflex image is also suppressed, in the state of " voidness ” which 
comes to be present, the thought “ infinite ether ” leads to the 
apprehension of the plane of infinite ether.

Akdsa (Sanskrit : dkdga) is frequently translated as " space ” 
instead of as " ether This can only cause a misunderstanding. 
In the Indo-Aryan tradition, dkaga means essentially what 
" Quintessence ”, the " Fifth Element ”, the " Ether-Light ”, the 
aor and so on meant in the ancient Western traditions. It is not 
three-dimensional physical and mathematical space, but some- 
thing which stands in relation to it as does spirit to body. Even 
etymologically the word akdga evokes the idea of “ light ”. In an 
Upanishai, the 'brahman is tmderstood as beiag identical with 
the ” ether ” both outside and inside the man.^® The ether is, 
rather, called the internal, essential side {atmd), whilst light is 
called the external side.^* In the jhdna m question the idea 
" infinity of space ” can only serve as a basis for the evocation 
of space in its aspect of dkdga, live and luminous infinite ether, 
and as a preHminary to the transformation of consciousness intd 
ether, which is the first broadening out of pure “being”, beyond 
the sphere of Brahma.Having thus considered the object of the first dyatana, the 
passage to the second,, whose object is " infinity of consciousness ”, 
is quite natural. It is, in fact, a question of overcoming the 
residue of outside-ness and of “ cosmicity ” present in the experi- 
ence of dkdsa. The term used is vinUdndhcdyatana and it is 
related to the second niddna of the descending series, in the sense 
of being a “ purification ” of it. We have conceived the niddna 
“ consciousness ” in terms of a determined manifestation. To 
cut off the bond which it represents, we must pass over to the 
third dyatana or arupa-jhdna, whose object is experience of the 
12 Samyutt.. XXII, 89 .

Chandogya-up., Ill, xii, 7 - 8 .

H Chdndogyor-up.^ xiv^ z.

STATES FREE FROM FORM, AND THE EXTINCTION 21 5Chandogya-up., Ill, xii, 7 - 8 .

H Chdndogyor-up.^ xiv^ z.

STATES FREE FROM FORM, AND THE EXTINCTION 21 5

sphere of “ non-existence This sphere must be understood as 
the negative counterpart of “ consciousness ”, that is, the power 
of non-manifestation correlative to that of manifestation, whose 
principle is " consciousness The experience of this ayatana 
can also be denoted by the formula “ nothing exists ", since to 
penetrate the power of non-manifestation means to apprehend 
in ever3d;hmg the possibility of its non-existence, the lack of its 
own reility, even in the case of him " in virtue of whom everything 
that exists is For this reason, some have conceived the 
experience in question as a liberation from Etwas-heit, from 
objectivity in general, extended even to the super-celestial spheres. 
The state of the fourth ayatana, is nevasanna-nasanna or that 
which is neither consciousness (second ayatana) nor non-conscious- 
ness or non-being (third ayatana), that is to say, the element 
which is anterior to and higher than the two spheres previously 
realised. It is the " purification ” of that which in the descending 
series corresponds to the " sankhdra ” niddna, that is to say, 
to the impulse which leads to “ conception ” in general, to the 
differentiation of possibility, in so far as it is a passive 
impulse.The last ayatana leads to the ultimate point of the ovAwo-is, 
of the transcendental simplification or purification. Its state is 
denoted by the term sannd-vedayita-nirodha which refers to 
V cessation ” not only of the element " consciousness ” but also 
of that which, on the plane of psychology, would correspond to 
perception, to perceptibility or elementary determinableness. It 
is a matter of going beyond the double category of being 
(manifestation, consciousness) and of non-being (non-manifesta- 
tion) in order to attain every conceivable potentiahty, conceiv- 
able, that is to say, beyond this double sphere of manifestation 
and non-manifestation. One achieves, then, the state of 
consciousness (to continue to use this term, although it has 
become quite inappropriate at this point) which is absolutely 
^unchained, simple and intact, the state which in the chain of 
niddna precedes the primordial form of any determinableness 
whatsoever ; we have quite clearly, therefore, the immediate 
antecedent of the complete ■ destruction of the dsava and of 
" ignorance ”, and therefore the herald of the reahsation of 
extinction.

p

2i6 the doctrine of awakeningp

2i6 the doctrine of awakening

It is hardly necessary to say that, although each realisation 
may be conceived on various planes and in varying degrees, here, 
even more than in the case of the four jhdm of the world of forms, 
any " psychologistic ” interpretation must be resolutely rejected. 
We can hardly take seriously the suggestion that we are dealing 
here with delvings into the semi-conscious or into the “ sublim- 
inal ”, until we reach an ” oscillation about a zero-point in 
consciousness ” (C, A. F. Rhys Davids).^® Reference even to the 
Leibnizian perceptions is entirely inadequate since the fact 
is that we are dealing with a " voyage ” in super-individual and, 
in some ways, pre-samsaric states (anterior to association with a 
particular saihsaric heredity), in which the transcendental causes 
of every conditioned existence are rooted. For this reason the 
Buddhist teaching has " places ” — loka — or “ worlds ” or “earths” 
— hhiimihd—'ffYach. correspond to the five dyatana, and it is held 
that one will re-arise in this or that one of them at the level at 
which ascetic achievement has been arrested, instead of progress- 
ing to extinction and absolute illumination.^*With regard to the canonical formula for liberation, the term 
“ Exhausted is life ” implies the impossibility of any further form 
• of conditioned existence, and not merely of " rebirth ” in the 
grossly reincamational sense. Similar also is the significance of 
the formula itthattdydti pajdndti which, following Neumann and 
De Lorenzo, we have rendered as “ He apprehends ‘ this world np 
longer exists ’ ” — ^the world here being understood as the sum 
total of manifested forms, and therefore also as all that is implied 
in the Indo-Aryan doctrine by the " threefold world ”. As for the 
term bhavdsava, that is to say, dsava or " mania ” of existence, 
this almost brings us to the same point, if by bhava we understand 
the " becoming ” inherent in a “ birth ”, and in the assuming 
of a conditioned form. But, in a broader and deeper sense, we 
may see in the destruction of this dsava the equivalent of what 
Germanic mysticism called Entwerdung, the overcoming of 
" becoming ” in general. The realisation of the Ariya leads 
beyond both " being ” and “ becoming ”. Together with 
“ ignorance ” and “ craving ” — ^the other two dsava — the bond 
of " becoming ” is destroyed- at the roots by the clear vision

p. 75 in the English translation of the Dhamma^sangani,

Majjh., LXXV.

STATES FREE FROM FORM, AND THE EXTINCTION 21 7p. 75 in the English translation of the Dhamma^sangani,

Majjh., LXXV.

STATES FREE FROM FORM, AND THE EXTINCTION 21 7

which arrives as a sudden flash of knowledge in face of dukkha, 
the primordial agitation and contingency, and which gives' 
realisation of the incomparable safety of the state wherein 
there is no more ''becoming'', which is the "end of the world", 
the end of " going ", the end of birth and of death. Finally, 
the formula hatam kammyam, " that which had to be done has 
been done ", is the extreme expression of the Any an nobility. 
The whole work has been done because it had to be done. There 
are no reasons. There are no rewards. It is natural for the man 
whose spirit is Ariyan to feel these values, to desire this under- 
taking. The right state, in the highest sense, is that of a being 
who no longer thirsts, who has extinguished craving, who has 
made his own the Olympian and sidereal nature, as in the origins.In point of practice, what we have said of the character of 
" totality " of the kasina is valid also for the dyatana. The 
mind, entirely recollected and unattached, receives the basic idea 
of each dyatana — ^infinite ether, infinity of consciousness, etc. — 
and realises its content in an experience which brings about the 
corresponding transformation. To use a Buddhist simile, the 
spirit has become like a jar full to the brim with water, so that 
it only has to be tipped in one direction or another for the water 
immediately to overflow in that direction. Here, in the complete 
concentration of the inner being that is detached from the senses 
jnd from the bond of the samsaric " I ", the images have the 
power of transformation : to think " infinite ether ", " infinity 
of consciousness " non-existence " and so on, means to evoke 
the corresponding state, to transform the mind into that state, 
so that it undergoes the corresponding " infinitisation " and 
liberation. We can, furthermore, say of the dyatana what we said 
of the jhdna, with reference both to actions which must have an 
almost spontaneous character, to the neutralisation of any 
tendency towards identification, and finally to the burning 
process which, in every state — even at these heights — discloses 
something that is conditioned and that may be overcome, thus 
urging one ever forward.^’

Cf. MajjK XLIV; LXIV ; CVI ; Angutt., X, 29; IX, 31; X, 72. The 
passage from one arupa to another occurs at the moment of feeling, firstly, form 
and the reflex images as a ''disturbance*' and impurity; then the akdsa or 
ether element is so felt; then infinity of consciousness; then non-existence; 
then the element beyond perception and non-perception; then determination.

2 i 8 the doctrine of awakening2 i 8 the doctrine of awakening

This is about all that can be said of the five states of ascetic 
realisation in the planes free from form. The indications con- 
cerning them in the texts are Extremely schematic. Here begins 
that silence, which wiU later be absolute — at least in original 
Buddhism — about the essence of the state of extinction, about 
Nihhma (Sanskrit : nirvam) and about the destiny of the 
Awakenfed One after death.

We now have shortly to discuss the other path to extinction, 
the path considered by another series of texts and which is no 
longer given as a journey across the world beyond form, but 
rather in terms of special visions and corresponding '' births ”.Por our point of departure we must refer back to the state of 
consciousness corresponding to the fourth jhdna or to the fourth 
irradiant contemplation, that is to say, to an extreme, purified 
equanimity. To the state of mind which the ascetic must assume 
in order to operate, are attributed qualities similar to those of the 
*' pure, clear, ductile, flexible, resplendent indifference ”. The 
fixed canonical formula is : “with firm, purified, tense, sincere, 
unblemished, malleable, ductile, compact, incorruptible mind ”. 
With such a mind one strives first of all for achievement of what 
is known as ndna-dassana, the vision which comes from know- 
ledge, haviug as its object one’s own person, in its totality. It 
is, as it were, the uncoupling of oneself or, better still, a liberating 
of oneself by self-division, carried out by contemplation of oneself 
— ^both in one’s own somatic reality and in one’s subtle reality — 
as if on'e were another person or a thing. In fact, it is SEiid that, 
after the fourth jhdna, one must “ hold fast, one must consider 
in one’s mind and penetrate with one's vision the object of self- 
contemplation — j>accavekkhana-nimiUa — ^just as one man might 
look at another, the one standing looking at him who sits, the 
one sitting looking at him who stands ’’.i® It is, then, an extreme 
intensification of the process which began with the various con- 
templations on the body and on the mind during the consolidation 
phase ; a process which now passes on to an objective stage 
which is designed to eliminate completely the bond of “ I ’’ and 
which is distinguished by this characteristic : that which now 
does the contemplating is the almost ultra-human mind of one 
who has reached the fourth jhdna or who has followed the path 
Angutt ,, V , 28

STATES FREE FROM FORM, AND THE EXTINCTION 2igSTATES FREE FROM FORM, AND THE EXTINCTION 2ig

which leads to the possibility of a state of union with Brahma. 
The formula of the dis-identification or “ projection ” is : " This 
is my body, provided with form, made up of the four elements, 
generated by a father and by a mother, maintained in life by 
these foods. It is impermanent, subject to change and decay, 
break-up and dissolution. And this also is my vinnaij,a from 
which it proceeds and to which it is bound.” A simile is given : 
as though on a cloth there lay a gem, a very pure, resplendent, 
clear, transparent, perfectly cut and faceted jewel, whoRy excel- 
lent ; there might be tied to it a thread, blue or yeRow, red or 
white, and as though a man with good sight, taking it in his hand, 
were to consider it and see clearly how the one thing was joined 
to the other. This simRe, taken from Saihkhya, shows that it is 
a question of " exteriorising ” one’s own person in its entirety : 
the term vinnwm here refers to the subtle principle which 
organises and gives life to bodRy form.But this “ knowing ”, at present, only serves as a preparatory 
phase. This same "firm, purified, tense, sincere, unblemished, 
malleable, ductRe, compact, incorruptible ” mind is directed to- 
wards a further “ knowing ”, towards the vision of ” previous 
forms of existence ”. There arises the memory-vision of " many 
previous forms of existence, of one life, of two lives, of three 
lives ” and so back through whole series of lives in the periods 
^both of the coming-to-be and of the dissolution of worlds. ‘‘ There 
was I, I had such a name, I belonged to such a people, such was 
my state, such my office ; this good and this evil I experienced, 
thus was the end of my life. Having passed on from there, I 
entered again into existence.” In such a manner, the ascetic 
recaRs multiple forms of existence, each with its own character- 
istics, each with its own special relationships. A simRe is given : 
as if a man were to go from one vRlage to another and from, there 
to another and finally were to return home and, in recoRecting, 
should think thus : " I, then, went from one vRlage to another, 
where I stood thus, I sat thus, I spoke thus, I kept sRent thus ; 
from that vRlage I went to another, where I did thus and thus, 
and finaRy I returned to my village (' the coimtry of the 
ancestors ’).” This is the first ” knowing ” — ^the precise term 
is pubbe-nivdsaftd'iia — z. revealing vision having as counterpart 
an interior Rberation, a definite self-elevation beyond the

220 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

sarhsaric group to which a given particular individual existence 
belongs, and which now appears as a mere episode.220 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

sarhsaric group to which a given particular individual existence 
belongs, and which now appears as a mere episode.

The next experience concerns a “ celestial, clarified, superhuman 
eye it is called dihha-cakkhu-ndna which develops the vision, no 
longer of one's ''own" existences, but of other saihsaric groups, 
of the appearance and disappearance of beings' in the sequence 
that is determined by the law of action, of kamma. " With this 
celestial, clarified, superhuman eye the ascetic sees beings dis- 
appear and appear, beings that are common and noble, ugly and 
beautiful, happy and unhappy, and he apprehends that beings 
always appear in life according to their actions." Here, too, we 
have a simile : as if there were two buildings with doors, and a 
man with good sight, standing between them, were to see people 
leaving one house and entering the other, going and coming.This power of vision, by means of which the contingency of 
the various forms of existence is directly contemplated from a uni- 
versal, “ celestial " standpoint, provides* the final catharsis, 
leads to pannd or bodhi, to liberation, to illumination and to 
extinction, to the same culmination that crowned and resolved 
the series of the five dyatana, of the five re-integrations in the 
sphere beyond form. We have, then, as the third and last 
" knowing ", the vision of the '' conditioned genesis " which 
determines the " round of rebirth " of beings, the vision of that 
which lies at the root of the genesis, of that which is its end andr 
of the states which lead to this end. At this point the dsava 
disappear ; there occurs the '' redemption of the mind without 
manias ", and again we have the formula : '' Exhausted is life, the 
divine path achieved, that which had to be done has been done, 
this world no longer exists." There is a final simile, dealing with 
the crystallinity, the absolute transparency and clarity of this 
vision which brings to an end the entire catharsis : as if a man 
with good sight were to stand on the banks of an alpine valley 
lake and, completely aware, were to consider the shells and the 
snails, the gravel and the sand and the schools of fish, how they 
dart about or lie still.^®

Apart from the initial "projection" of oneself, this second path 
has thus three stages. It is important to emphasise that in some 
canonical texts they are related, respectively, to the three watches 
On aU this see Dlgha, II, 93-98 ; cf. Majjh,, LXXVII.

STATES FREE FROM FORM, AND THE EXTINCTION 221

— -yamd — of the night. Thus, the Buddha says : " This knowing 
[that is, the first, the vision of one’s own multiple, previous states 
of existence] I first apprehended in the first watch of the night,I dispersed ignorance, I apprehended wisdom, I dispersed obscur- 
ity, I apprehended light, whilst I dwelt striving ardently, watchful 
and strenuous.” The same formula is repeated for the other two 
" knowings ”. The disappearance and reappearance of beings is 
the second “ knowing ” to be apprehended, in the middle watch 
of the night, and the final, liberating vision is the third to be 
achieved, in the last watch of the night.^® In one text, it is said :" When the dawn is about to break, at the moment in which sleep 
is so profound and to wake so <|if&cult Another point : the 
three “ knowings ” have also been related to so many immaterial 
births — opapdtika. There is the simile of the hen which has com- 
pletely incubated her eggs and is waiting for them to hatch and 
for the new being to arise from them, safe and sound. The warmth 
which nourishes this symbolical birth is that of the ascesis, tapas. 
At the moment in which the " knowing ” of the various previous 
tales of existence is apprehended, -the ascetic — ^it is said — " is -for 
the first time disclosed, like the chick come out of the shell ”. 
This first birth — ^beyond physical, saihsaric, birth — is the growth 
beyond one’s own individuality ; a growth which is bound up 
with the ability to gaze beyond the temporal hmits of an indi- 
.vidual existence, to see the whole group to which it belongs. A' 
second openmg is achieved with the “ knowing ” of the passing 
and uprising of beings and, finEiUy, a third when the sudden flash 
of knowledge destroys the dsavd and determines the state of 
Nibbdna.^^ Each of the three " transcendental knowings ” is, 
then, an awakening, an " opening ”, a change of state, the passage 
froip one mode of being to another, from one " world ” to another. 
Thus we find in Buddhism a traditional symbolism that is used 
iji many forms of initiation, probably in connection with similar 
experiences. Besides these three births, which are of a real nature, 
there is a birth which is symbolical and, above all, moral, the 
” re-birth with the birth of the Any a ” or the “ blessed birth ”, 
referred to the man who makes the break, who achieves “ depar- .

Angutt., VIII, II ; Majjh., IV» In particular, on the experience, in the 
watches of the night, of the conditioned genesis and of the conditioned removal 
of its eiiects, cf. Mahavagga (Vin), I, i, 2.

21 Angutt, VIII, II ; Majjh., LIII ; Samyutt, XXII, loi

22221 Angutt, VIII, II ; Majjh., LIII ; Samyutt, XXII, loi

222

THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

ture ” and who devotes ’himself to the path of awakening.

We must give an explanation of this new group of transcend- 
ental experiences also. It is essential here to distinguish between 
the deepest content of the doctrine and that which refers to the 
popular exposition and which cannot be taken in an absolute 
sense {paramatthavasena).

To begin with, at this point we must forestall the idea that 
not only is the theory of reincarnation assumed by the Buddhist 
teaching, but that it is, in fact, demonstrated by a direct form 
of transcendental knowledge in the shape of an actual memory. 
It might seem, that is to say, that the situation were thus : that 
one single being having lived several Kves or, at least, several 
^ forms of existence, could, at a particular moment, see retro- 
spectively. Such an interpretation, in spite of all appearances, 
would be mistaken.In order to understand the true sense of these experiences, we 
must always remember their point of departure, that is, ndifa- 
dassana, the vision or “ projection ” of one's own person which 
allows of its consideration as a thing or as the person of another. 
In this there occurs, in a maimer of speaking, the fulfilment of 
an the labour of severance from one's own " I ", from one's own 
individuality, which has been carried out in the preceding ascesis. 
This means that one has become integrated in a new dimension or 
at a new level, an integration which is inevitably accompanied^ 
by a " loosening ". Consciousness is no longer tied to a particular 
" name-and-form ", it can move, it can take on the person of 
other people, both in space and in time. This is the foundation 
of the first two " transcendental knowings ", the vision of many 
preceding forms of existence (super-individuality m time) and the 
vision of the disappearance and reappearance of other beings 
(super-individuality in space, that is to say, with regard to various 
individual lives co-present in space).

With reference to the first experience, we could speak, in a 
certain sense, of "memory", but not as though it were one 
particular “ I " that remembered having lived other fives or, more 
generally having passed through other forms of existence. We 
can see that this would be absurd for the simple reason that the

Majjh., LXXXVI. We also find the image ot the snake which sloughs its 
old skin — cf. Suitanipdta, I, i, i seq. '

STATES FREE FROM FORM, AND THE EXTINCTION 223Majjh., LXXXVI. We also find the image ot the snake which sloughs its 
old skin — cf. Suitanipdta, I, i, i seq. '

STATES FREE FROM FORM, AND THE EXTINCTION 223

condition for achieving such a " memory "" is no longer to be 
an '' I to be free from '' I or from the consciousness connected 
with a particular '' name-and-form '' and with a particular life. 
We are no longer dealing with the memory of an '' I but 
with the emergence, in the individual consciousness, of saihsaric 
consciousness, with the '' memory associated with the 
group of craving, or daemon, or antarahhava with which one 
was identified : for — as we saw — one does not adopt a name- 
and-form a physio-psychical organism drawn from nowhere, 
but a more or less pre-formed saihsaric force carrying with it a 
heredity, a complex of tendencies, which continue from the dead 
lives in which this force was previously active. The continuity 
and therefore also the basis of ' 'memory'' is contained in this force: 
it is not contained in an identical and permanent " I " to which 
Buddhism rightly denies an existence on the saihsaric plane. At 
the moment when consciousness becomes dis-individualised, 
breaks the bond of the saihsaric '' I and becomes universal, 
this same saihsaric memory is spread out clearly before it. The 
very moment of one's dissociation from the " daemon ", or 
" double ", is the moment in which one comes to know it. This 
is the deeper meaning of the first “knowing", of the “memory 
of preceding forms of existence ".In the second “ knowing " there is an increase in the power of 
j:he dis-individualised consciousness, a consciousness which now 
extends not only along time and along the group of that particular 
entity of craving with which it was identified, but also in space, 
since it becomes capable of identifying itself also with other beings 
and of examining the saihsaric heredity which determines them, 
the will of craving in which they live and where are determined 
the causes, when the material of one life is consumed, for the 
same flame to flare up elsewhere in strict accordance with its 
antecedents.

Thus it is that, in these experiences, we can see the counterpart 
of liberations that are exactly similar to those of the ascetic who 
advances through the five planes free from form. In fact, it is 
not by chance that we have spoken not of “ multiple lives ", but 
rather of “ multiple states of existence The assumption of the 
person of other people, which we have mentioned, is by no means 
restricted to human lives in space and time, but includes also

224 'THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

extra-terrestrial lines of existence and of heredity. Now, all this 
is possible only if one reaches a dimension to be compared to 
the depths of the ocean, where all the insular and continental 
parts emerging from the water as separate things are unified in 
a single mass. We are thus brought back to images of immensity, 
of vastness, of immeasurableness, of indiscemibility. About 
such images we shall have more to say later. And it is natural 
that the texts refuse to apply to the Accomplished One, who has 
followed this path to the end, any category whatsoever which, 
in common speech, takes its meaning from the existence or non- 
existence, from the life or death of an iudividual being.Thus the theory of reincarnation is rejected from two points 
of view : firstly from the point of view of ordinary, samsaric 
beings, since it is not the same being which has already lived nor 
which will live again, but rather the group of craving working 
in him. On this plane a real substantial “ I ” does not exist. 
Secondly, from the point of view of transcendental illumina- 
tion, since from this point of view the “ many existences ” 
can only represent a mirage. The one who contemplates them 
can no longer be considered as an “ I ”, and he is now also about to 
break the law that from one sariisaric group there must spring a 
new existence. As we shall see, the Buddhist teaching also con- 
siders intermediate cases, that is to say, cases of incomplete extinc- 
tion : but for further states of existence or for new " lives ”, im 
the degree in which extinction is not complete, what we have 
said about the ordinary man is to a large extent stiU valid : 
there is no proper continuity, there are only transformations 
which affect also the " substratum ”. Buddhism maintains this 
view in connection with the "mental body" and with the body 
" free from form ”, which various texts attribute to the Accom- 
plished One, the term " body ” here being used in a general sense, 
implying other states and modes of being relative to tlj^e 
“ worlds ”, beyond the physical one, that are reached by the 
jhana. The question was asked if such "bodies” exist simul- 
taneously. The answer is negative. But the doctrine goes 
stni further : the passage from one to another of these states does 
not present a true continuity. The transformations are absolute, 
as in the aforesaid simile of the milk which becomes curd and 
curd which becomes cheese. It is absurd still to call curd milk

STATES FREE FROM FORM, AND THE EXTINCTION 225STATES FREE FROM FORM, AND THE EXTINCTION 225

or cheese curd : in changing the state, it is well also to change 
the name.^® With stiU more reason, the idea of an absolute 
identity of the “I” in the states to which a partial liberation 
may lead is to be rejected.On the subject of “ reincarnations ” and of " many lives ”, we 
must remember that, in spite of the opinions held in some circles, 
such ideas iihd no place in serious traditional teachings. Eastern 
or Western, nor therefore in Buddhism. Those passages in 
Buddhism and in the Indo-Aryan traditions in general which 
would seem to indicate the contrary, do so either because of a 
too literal reading of the texts or because they are popular forms of 
exposition which only have a sjnnboHcal value, rather like the 
crude images of the Christian purgatory or hell which are common 
amongst simple folk. To accept unquestioningly all that can he 
found in the Buddhist texts on the subject of preceding existences 
not only opens the way to all sorts of contradictions and incoher- 
ences on the doctrinal level, but also breeds doubts as to the 
efficacy of the historical Buddha’s real super-normal vision. The 
stories in the canon, and particularly in the Jataka, of the pre- 
sumed previous existences of Prince Siddhattha, notably in the 
form of animals, are all evidently of a fabulous nature and, even 
when their origin is not whoUy spurious, it is easy to see that they 
have been invented or introduced into Buddhism from, already 
existing popular traditions for pedagogic use to illustrate and 
enhven discomrses. We do not find, in the texts, a single serious 
reference to anything hke a " memory ”, like an actual fact of 
the past seen by super-normal means and then communicated. 
Here; also, the Awakened One maintains his silence. In any case, 
the classical and dryly glittering spirit of original Buddhism, so 
free of sentimentalism, is rarely found in the later texts, beginning 
with the Jataka, where not only is there a tropical overgrowth 
o| phantasmagorical and fabulous elements, but also not a few 
distortions of the original doctrine of the Ariya, particularly on 
the moral plane. It wiU. be enough to remember — one case will 
serve for a whole series of others — ^the story dealing with the pre- 
ceding life of Prince Siddhattha wherein he is supposed to have 
been an animal which, upon seeing a himgry tiger, allowed itself 
to be tom to pieces through " compassion ”, thus acquiring theDigha, IX, 39 ; 47-53-

226 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

" merit ” which, through the series of other lives, was little by- 
little to lead him to the grade of Awakened One. Whenever 
higher wisdom is not enclosed in the form of rigorous esotericism 
— true esotericism, not that of contemporary " occultists ” — such 
alterations are almost ine-vitable and it is for intelligent people to 
discriminate accurately, to pick out the essentials, or to clarify 
what has become obscure : which can be done only by the 
guidance of sound principles of a traditional and metaphysical kind.We must mention another point. We have seen that the three 
supernormal “ knowings ” have been related by the texts respect- 
ively to the first, the second and the third watches of the night. 
This is an important fact once we remember the Indo-Aryan 
teachings on the “ four states ” : the state of individual wakeful 
consciousness, the state of dreaming, the state of sleep and, 
finally, the so-called " fourth state ” {caturtha or tunya). In the 
same “ space ” in which, when individual wakeful consciousness 
disappears, the ordinary man starts to dream, passes into the un- 
consciousness of dreamless sleep and, finally, into a state like 
apparent death, it is possible to achieve, instead, a series of 
" liberations ”, of degrees of super-consciousness. In this connec- 
tion, the state of dreaming (that is to say, what would correspond 
to dreaming in the ordinary man) is called by the texts tejo, from 
tejas, which means radiant light and which is related to what we 
have said about akaga, “ ether ” the state of deep, dreamless 
sleep “ where there is no knowledge, but the subject of knowledge 
continues to know ”, is related to the condition of prajna (Pali : 
pannd) or of “ illumination ” : here " the being reunites with 
himself in a unity of pure knowledge and beatitude ” ; here there 
is “ the perfect serenity which, rising up from the body and arriv- 
ing at the supreme light, appears in its true aspect ” ; here we 
are on the point of crossing that dyke, " beyond which he who 
was bUnd is no longer bhnd, he who was wounded is no longer 
woimded, he who was ill is no longer ill ”, where " even nignt 
becomes day ”. The fourth condition corresponds to the un- 
conditioned state, absolutely above all duality, all particular forms 
of manifestation, beyond both interior consciousness and exterior 
consciousness, and above both together.®*Cf. Maitrdyaniya-up., VI, 19 ; VII, ii ; Man 4 >uka-up,, 4-7 ; Clidndogya-up., 
VIII, xi, I ; xii, 3 ; vi, 3-5 ; iv, 1-3 etc.

STATES FREE FROM FORM, AND THE EXTINCTION 22/

When we spoke of the jhana, we considered the possibihty of 
references to transformations of this sort, and a more exact 
correspondence can be seen with regard to the developments in 
the world free from form, to the ayatana. Thus, we are not 
unjustified in matching the Indo-Aryan traditional doctrine we 
haye just discussed with the realisations which take place in 
the three watches of the night : we have a consciousness which, 
" like a fire which advances destroying every bond ”, carries one 
beyond the state of wakefulness, leaves this state behind, advances 
to the state which in others would be sleep or profound sleep, 
and establishes itself there, '' dissipating ignorance, achieving 
wisdom’, dissipating the shadows, achieving the light ” — just 
as says the Buddhist formula which refers to the ” super- 
normal kno'wing ” acquired during the first, second and third 
watches of the night. Beyond the ” luminous ” or “ radiant ” 
state of taijasa, beyond the state of pure illumination {prajnd, 
which, in Buddhism, would correspond to the opening of the 
" celestial, tmclouded, super-terrestrial eye ”) there is the im- 
conditioned state. Tunya, the unconditioned state of the dtmd 
in the general Indo-Aryan tradition, would then correspond to 
the state of nirvdi^a in the Buddhist terminology.^®In such terms, the " vigil” of the Any a appears in the grandeur 
of a change in which the night is transformed into day, uncon- 
sciousness into super-consciousness ; the ■vision of an indefinite 
number of existences dispersed in time spreads out Hke a memory, 
and is left behind. During the last hours of the night, where for 
the others " sleep is deepest ”, at the dawning of the physical 
light, there dawns also that wisdom, that awakening, in which 
every mania is destroyed and which towers over all worlds with 
their ranks of angels, of evil and good spirits, of gods and men, of 
ascetics and priests. Thus the Accomplished One, when the final 
•yatch of the night changes into light, returns to the world of 
men at the moment in which the day once again shines on him, 
and awakening corresponds to awakening, the physical and the

There are also specific references with regard to the experiences which take 
place in the Awakened One in the state corresponding to that of sleep. Cf, 
Sumangala-vildsinl (commentary to the Digha Nikaya), I, 47 (W. 94-95) » where 
it is said that in the second watch of the night he sleeps and simultaneously enters 
into contact with some divinities. In the third watch, arising, with his super- 
terrestrial eye he perceives those who, in the world have decided to tread, the 
path of awakening.

228 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

metaphysical elements meet, and truly may we use for him a 
similitude of the texts: that of the sun, “when, in the last 
month of the rainy season, after it has dissipated and put to flight 
the rain-swollen clouds, it rises in the sky and disperses with its 
rays the mist in the air, and flashes and shines This is the 
mighty appearance of the Awakened One amongk men. "Light 
of the world”, the Buddha has also been called — “ the light of 
wisdom become light of the world ” “ the sage, who appears

in the world of men and of gods, proceeding alone, in the midst 
[of the people], dispersing every shadowin the world of men and of gods, proceeding alone, in the midst 
[of the people], dispersing every shadow

Thetigaiha, 148 (quoted by De Lofenzo in his translation of Majjh., Vol. II, 
p. 65) ; cf. Mahdpann,» 52-56.

Suttanipdta, IV, xvi, 2.

VII

DISCRIMINATION BETWEEN THE "POWERS"

T he Buddhist teaching admits the possibility of acquiring 
extra-normal and super-normal powers — iddhi — along the 
path of awakening : this is one of the signs that the Buddhist 
ascesis does not move towards a state of nothingness, towards a 
crepuscular frontier between consciousness and unconsciousness, 
there to wait for a final " aimihilation ”, but that it is 
accompanied by ever greater degrees of consciousness, complete- 
ness, elevation and power.

We have no need to consider the " difficulties of belief " which, 
with regard to the iddhi, may arise in the minds of modem 
“ critical ” commentators. It is, of course, well known how often 
these individuals, after denouncing as fabulous all that touches 
the super-normal in the history of great figures of the past, are 
capable of falling into ecstasy before some petty “ mediumistic ” 
phenomenon which, in the ancient world, would not have merited 
the attention of any person of consequence.

The problem of the extra-normal and super-normal powers is 
connected with the view of the world. When nature is not con- 
ceived as an independent reality, but rather as the outward form 
in which immaterial forces manifest themselves ; when, further- 
more, one admits the possibility of removing, under certain 
conditions, the purely individual, sensory-cerebral consciousness 
of a man so as to allow of positive contacts with those immaterial 
forces — then, assuming these premises, which are those of every 
normal and traditional concept of the world, the general possibility 
of extra-normal powers follows as a natural consequence.The true problem does not, then, consist in the reality or 
otherwise of certain phenomena — ^admittedly not capable of 
being explained by the physical or psychical laws known to-day 
—that in the past boasted a science sui generis, of which many,

229

230 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

although fragmentary, traces still remain : the true problem is, 
rather, the significance and the value to be attached to such 
phenomena.

We have already discussed the difference between " prodigies ” 
of the noble, Ariyan type and those not noble, non-Ariyan — 
amriya-iddhi. We must add that, by Buddhism as by any 
traditional doctrine, both the quest after the " powers ” in them- 
selves and, worse, the quest, after them for temporal and 
individual ends, more or less in the spirit with which technology 
and the power associated therewith have been developed 'to-day, 
were considered not only as having nothing to do ■with ascetic 
and spiritual development, but even as being positively harmful 
to this development. The practice of the " powers ” was held 
to be dangerous.^ “ My instruction ’’ — ^says the Buddha — " is 
not this : Come, 0 ascetics, and acquire powers which surpass 
those of ordinary men.”* The hfe which is led in the Order 
of the Accomplished One is not directed to the acquisition of 
powers that produce clairvoyance or clairaudience but has a 
higher aim, namely, liberation.® This, however, does not prevent 
the transcendental forms of experience and detachment that we 
liave considered from being capable of gi'ving rise to extra-norinal 
modes of action and of vision. And when there is adequate cause, 
an Awakened One may use such faculties, much as an ordinary 
man uses his speech or his arms.The iddhi are divided, in the Buddhist teaching, into three 
sections : “ magical ” powers, powers which reveal what for the 
ordinary man remains hidden (powers of " manifestation ”) and, 
finaEy, powers which work in the miracle of the doctrine and of 
right discernment. The last are considered as the most noble 
and august of them all. They are the ones to which we referred 
when we spoke earher of the “ miracle ” whereby there may arise 
in the saifasaric consciousness an extrasainsaric force and vocation, ‘ 
a ■will that is no longer the normal 'will, a "will that overcomes the 
normal 'wQl and arrests the " flux ”, a vision which can now 
discern what is noble and what is common, the rational and the 
irrational, the unconditioned and the conditioned. Together with 
the power of achife'ving this " miracle ”, the Awakened Ones — ^it

1 Digha, XI, 5-7.

> Digha. XI, I.

• Digha, VI, 1-13.

DISCRIMINATION BETWEEN THE “POWERS” 23 11 Digha, XI, 5-7.

> Digha. XI, I.

• Digha, VI, 1-13.

DISCRIMINATION BETWEEN THE “POWERS” 23 1

is said — also comprehend and acquire those of the first two 
sections which we shall shortly discuss* ; but they fully 
realise that, in themselves, they have very little value. If anyone 
should be tempted to show them ofi or brag about them, he 
should remember that it is possible to arrive at analogous results 
by means of certain forms of sorcery.® Thus the iddhi, the 
extra-normal powers, are never used, in the tradition of the Ariya , , 
even to astonish and convert men of low intellectual capacity ; 
the miraculous phenomenology which occurs in some later 
Buddhist texts is clearly of a fabulous, allegorical or symbolical 
type, just like the stories of the multiple existences. The attitude 
of the pure doctrine of the Ariya is almost exactly that which 
the last exponents of the Aryan and aristocratic Roman tradition 
assumed, in the person of Celsus, in opposition to certain forms 
of Christianism. Celsus, in fact, asked what the Christians were 
tr3dng to prove with ah. their excitement about this “ miracle ” 
or that, since it was well known that anyone with a taste for 
such things and wishing to produce similar phenomena had only 
to go to Egypt and learn about them from the specialists.With this in mind, let us see how we are to understand these 
powers which are mentioned in the texts of the oldest canon. As 
the starting point for the idAhi of "manifestation” the texts postu- 
late the purified, ductile, msdleabldi compact, unblemished mind, 
isolated from peripheral sensitivity, which is also presupposed for 
' the achievement of the “ three knowings ” in the threefold watch. 
Free from the bond of the senses and of saihsaric individuality, 
neutral, extremely balanced, this consciousness, aroused in one 
or other of the jhdnas, can directly realise the object whose image 
is evoked, by producing either telepathic knowledge, or objective 
penetration of the mind of others or, finally, vision of distant 
things.® In this connection we can recall a simile already quoted: 
just as it is enough to tip a vessel that is brim-full, in a particular 
Erection, for the water to overflow in that direction, "so also if he 
has devoted himself to, developed, often practised, established 
and brought to its just fulfilment the right, fivefold contemplation 
of the Ariya [here is meant the four jhma after being integrated 
by the vision-projection of one’s self — cf. p. 218], then if he directs

^ Dtgha, XI, 3 ; Angutt., Ill, 6o.

Dlgha, XI, 5-7.

« Dlgha, II, 9i>92.

, Q

232 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING^ Dtgha, XI, 3 ; Angutt., Ill, 6o.

Dlgha, XI, 5-7.

« Dlgha, II, 9i>92.

, Q

232 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

his mind to any element whatsoever that is susceptible of being 
the object of a higher knowledge [the ascetic] can apprehend 
this element in wisdom, provided he has developed the faculty, 
and provided the right conditions are present 
When it is apphed to the persons, the minds and the hearts 
of other people which the Awakened One is able to observe with 
, the same clarity and with ho greater effort than every one of us 
can observe his own features in a mirror;® such power may be 
regarded as an elementary grade of the first and the second 
" knowing ", wHch embrace multiple '' lives ” and multiple 
samsaric groups. In some texts, indeed, this twofold " knowing " 
is listed -amongst the abhinna or super-normal faculties, some 
of which are also called iddhi.^ In this case, however, we must 
distinguish between ascetic experiences' proper, in which those 
" knowings ” are the concomitants of liberation, and these powers 
of vision in themselves, when they are used for a particular 
purpose. We must not, in any case, forget that it is the "celestial, 
super-mundane eye " — dibha-cakkhu — ^with which the Awakened 
One perceives the whereabouts of others of whom he is thinking, 
sees into the heart and mind of his interlocutors as well as of 
people at a distance, and perceives that a particular being, to 
whom he has directed his thought, is dead, and so on.^®The coimterpart of this latter iddhi is the faculty of super- 
normal hearing [dibba-sota). The Awakened One is able to 
perceive two kinds of sound, " the divine and the human, the far 
and the near To understand the " divine " or “ immaterial ” 
sotmds, we must refer back to the traditional teachings which had 
already served a^ the basis for the Vedic doctrine of ritual and 
which, occurring as wisdom in the Mantras, were particularly 
developed in some forms of Yoga, and then, in the Tantras. We 
have already discussed this elsewhere. To hear the " inomaterial 
sounds ” is not to perceive an indeterminate and almost mystico- 
aesthetic “ harmony of the spheres ”, but rather to arrive at n. 
special form of perception of the formative forces of things and 
of elements, a perception which, in its working, is distantly 
’ Angutt, V, 28.

* Dlgha-niJi., II,

® Dlgha, II, 93-96.

10 Majjh., IV ; VI ; XXVI ; XXVII ; XXXVI ; LXXVI ; LXXXV ; 
CIX etc.

Dlgha, II, 89-90,

DISCRIMINATION BETWEEN THE ^^POWERS’’ 233

analogous 'to what the common man experiences as sound. The 
man who is really capable of perceiving and of grasping the

divine sounds is then also capable of pronouncing the word 
which is power, the Mantra, a thing which, amongst others, lies 
at the root of every liturgical practice which has not been reduced 
to a mere recitation.^^

Other iddhi considered by the texts consist of appearing and 
disappearing, of walking on water without sinking, of moving 
great distances in a moment, of “wielding power over one's 
body right up to the world of Brahma In order to understand

that such phenomena are possible we must start from the produc- 
tion of the body “ made of mind " — manomaya — ^which we have 
already mentioned. In the text to which we are principally 
referring this state occurs immediately after the contemplation- 
projection of one's own person (cf. p. 218) and is given in the 
following terms : “ With this firm, purified, tense, sincere,unblemished, malleable, ductile, compact, incorruptible mind, 
he [the ascetic] turns towards the production of a body made 
of mind. From his body he extracts another body having all 
its organs and all its faculties, furnished with form, but super- 
sensible, made of mind." To illustrate this there are similes of 
a man* drawing a sword from its scabbard, removing the pith 
from a rush, or a snake from a basket.^^ An important detail 
which warns us not to confuse this experience with a simple act 
of magic is that we are here — ^it is said — ^in the realm of trans- 
cendental knowledge, pannd?-^ Besides we have seen that the 
practice in question comes immediately after the apprehension 
of one's own person as that of another by means of the eye 
which has opened in the jhdna. We have mentioned the trans- 
formation of the sensation which one normally has of the body : 
it is a matter of taking this process further by achieving an ever 
more detached and dis-individualised consciousness, on the one 
hiLnd, and on the other, by penetrating down into the deep, 
“ vital " — ^in a super-biological sense — forces which rule the 
organism and which make up the “ double ", or “ daemon ", and

Cf. our book, op, cii., Lo Yoga della potenza aud J. Woodroffe, The Garland 
of Letters, Madras, 1922.

Dlgha, TI, 87.

Digha, II, 86 ; Majjh,, LXXVIX,

Cf, e.g, Dlgha, II, 20-26.

234 the doctrine of awakeningDlgha, TI, 87.

Digha, II, 86 ; Majjh,, LXXVIX,

Cf, e.g, Dlgha, II, 20-26.

234 the doctrine of awakening

the sariisaric being in us. Here the transcendental knowledge 
cannot do other than produce a special transformation, if only 
by degrees. The . transfigured mind, in this profundity, works 
almost, one might say, as a catalyst ; it transmits its own nature 
to the group of forces with which it comes in contact, so that 
eventually the half vital and half opaque sensation that one has 
of one’s bodiliness clarifies into the sensation of a transparent 
and luminous " form It is luminous or radiant since, actually, 
these experiences happen in a condition corresponding to taijasa, 
that is, in the condition of luminosity or radiance which, for the 
•Awakened One, takes the place of the state of dreaming. This 
is the. true sense of the " extraction of the body made of mind”, 
which is not “ another ” body, but a particular experience of the 
nower of which the body is the sensible manifestation.We have yet to see how far this power has been *' purified ”, 
to what extent the dis-individualised sidereal principle has 
divested itself of its sariisaric nature and directly controls 
this force. Bodily manifestation depends on this power : de- 
pends, in the same sense that speech depends on the faculty 
of speaking, the faculty by which it has been forged, which 
directs it, and which can either change it or re-absorb it into itself. 
If the catharsis has been taken as far as it will go, this force, 
which here appears as ” super-sensible body made of mind ”, 
plays the same part in relation to the manifested bodily form.^ 
It follows from this that anyone who realises and controls his 
body as a '' super-sensible body ”, has, virtually, also this 
twofold power : of extracting or projecting from the same trunk 
another bodily image, either the same as or different from his own ; 
or else of re-absorbing the whole manifested form into the energy 
from which it came, in order to re-project it completely elsewhere. 
The first of these powers is that of ubiquity, and it may be de- 
veloped up to the capacity, recorded in the texts, for " appear- 
ing as many, being one sole person, and of returning to be one 
sole person, having been many ”. Here, the real, physical person 
. of the agent is always supposed to persist in a particular place, 
whilst the other forms are only projected images, extracted from 
the agent’s own subtle form which we can call the matrix of 
corporeality. The second implies the faculty of appearance or 
disappearance, of passing through "solid barriers, walls and

DISCRIMINATION BfiTWEEN THE “pOWERs” 235DISCRIMINATION BfiTWEEN THE “pOWERs” 235

mountains without hindrance, as if they were air ”, of walking 
on water or of passing through the air. The simile conunonly 
used by the texts for this extra-normal and, in an A\Yakened One, 
super-normal phenomenology is : as a strong man stretches his 
bent arm or bends his stretched arm, so the ascetic disappears 
from one place and reappears in another : and this other ihay 
well signify a condition of existence differing from the terrestrial.

We must forestall the mistake that would be made by anyone 
who, in attempting to explain such phenomena, were to entertain 
the idea of “ de-materialisation ”, This would presuppose the 
existence of a ” material ” which, in the current modem sense, 
is quite unknown to the traditional teachings. Material existence 
is only manifested existence, a form of manifested existence. It 
is not, then, a question of " de-materialisation " but rather of re- 
absorbing a manifested form into its unmanifested principle in 
order to re-project it elsewhere ; one should not, therefore, even 
, t h ink of it as a kind of voyage through matter, from one place to 
another, but as a withdrawal of the manifested form, that is, of 
the bodily figure, at a particular place, to make it re-emerge, 
newly visible, elsewhere. This occurs by “ passing underneath ”, 
that is by the means of a principle which, since it is outside and 
above manifestation, is free of the condition of space and which 
may therefore be said to be ever 5 where and, at the same time, 
• nowhere. As the mind is now the centre of the body, the image 
of a place, adequately fixed in the mind imder the right condi- 
tions, determines eo ipso the phenomenon, quite irrespective of 
distance, so that it is said that projection in a nearby place needs 
the same " time ” as projection in a very distant place, since 
the mental act of evoking either has the same duration.^®All this may possibly help to clarify the intemal logic of the 
phenomena which are recorded in the Buddhist texts ; phen- 
^omena which, although extremely rare in the modem world on 
account of the ever more intense “ physicalisation ” and ” samsar- 
isation ” of the human being, ar6, none the less, quite real. We 
have, here, referred to phenomena which are “ real ” in a specific 
sense, distinguishing them from phenomena which can be pro- 
duced quite cheaply by means of collective or individual suggest- 
ive devices. Finally, we must consider the possibility that these

Milindapanha, 82 (W. 306).

236 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

same phenomena, rather than originating in the metaphysical 
and ascetic way we have discussed, are achieved along more or 
less shadowy paths through certain contacts with elemental forces. 
The Buddha touches on this point when he says, for example, 
that the forms of super-normal vision which he and many 
Awakened Ones also have, are created by mental concentration 
and are not those which are related to inferior practices or contacts 
with spirits or angels.^’In order that the iMhi we have considered may be perfect, it 
is naturally essential that " ignorance ” should have been des- 
troyed without leaving any residue and that there should have 
been an equally complete resolution of the samsaric being only 
then is the power over the root from which the body is manifested 
complete, and only then can all the elements on which the mani- 
festation of the bodily form is based be mastered. In this extreme 
case, rather than of a "body made of mind, furnished with form” 
we should speak of the " body made of spirit ” and of pure 
consciousness, free from form — arupa atta patilahha — ^which is 
related to the “ blessed body ” — tusita kdya — ^in which one who 
is on the path of awakening will re-arise after death,^® and to 
the " body of transfiguration ” which occurs in some Gnostic 
schools. It is to this that we must clearly turn when the texts 
. deal with the iddhi connected with having one’s body in one’s 
own power as far as the world of Brahma, that is, up to the con-* 
dition of pure being. Particularly in Mahdydna developments of 
the BuddMst teaching we find extensions of these views, through 
which we can arrive at the deepest meaning that was, perhaps, 
hidden in Christian docetism. According to these Mahdydna con- . 
ceptions, the Accomplished Ones, the Tathdgata, do not actually 
have a body. In reality, it is not a question of not having a body, 
but, rather, of completely possessing, on the summit of an 
absolutely liberated consciousness, all the principles on which itf 
sensible manifestation is based. And here, if it were the place to 
do so, we could devise interesting interpretations of the true sense 
of the various traditions that relate to beings who never " died”, 
but who were " carried away ”, \^ho disappeared from the physical

Angutt., Ill, 60.

Using the Taoistic terminology, this would he called the complete dis- 
tillation of the Yin to pure yang,

18 Cl Majjh,, CXXIII ; CXIJII.Angutt., Ill, 60.

Using the Taoistic terminology, this would he called the complete dis- 
tillation of the Yin to pure yang,

18 Cl Majjh,, CXXIII ; CXIJII.

DISCRIMINATION BETWEEN THE "‘POWERS^’ 237

world without leaving a body behind them.^® In any case, the 
most ancient Buddhist conception of the twofold “ body '' beyond 
the physical one, as well as the Mahaydna conception of the 
trikdya, the threefold body of the Buddha, refers to three degrees 
of the same realisation, and is related both to the general Indo- 
Aryan doctrine of the '' three worlds and to the views (particu- 
larly those of Sdmkhya) on the three bodies, material, subtle (or 
vital) and causative {sthula'-oi kanya-Mnga--ox sukshma—^nd 
kdrana-iarlm). To experience the body as a pure, dominated, 
free, plastic, intangible instrument of manifestation — ^this is the 
extreme limit.

We must briefly discuss one last point on the subject of 
miracles Buddhism states that, if they are not sought for theirWe must briefly discuss one last point on the subject of 
miracles Buddhism states that, if they are not sought for their

own sake but occur as natural possibilities m particular stages of 
awakening, the powers '' may be used where necessary with a 
pure mind, with the same indifference as the ordinary man uses 
his senses and his limbs. There are, however, particular cases in 
which the prodigy the extra-normal fact, is invested with a 
sacred '' and '' noble '' — Ariyan — character : such cases occur 
when the '' marvel '' has an illuminating power on account of the 
phenomenon being a symbol and a manifestation of a transcend- 
ental significance, since, in this manner, , it produces striking 
evidence of the dependence of nature on a higher order.^® 
#One can find, also in Buddhism, a few references to these true, 
sacred marvels. For example, walking on water: when the 
ascetic, in profound meditation, achieves the state of one who has 
escaped from the '' current from the “ waters ; of one who, 
hke the lotus in a simile we have quoted, arises above the water, 
tmtouched by it — then in particular circumstances he may reveal 
a cosmic sign of this achievement, the actual power of walking 
on water without sinking. One text relates that a marvel of this 
l^nd began to be neutralised at the moment when the mind of 
the ascetic relaxed its spiritual concentration.^^ Again, it is well

Cf. on this our work La Tradizione Ermetica, cit. There also occurs in 
Buddhism the Nibbdna of fire which leaves no residue^', cf. Udana (VIII, 10) : 
Dabba rises in the air and plunges himself into contemplation of the fieify 
element, then passes over into Nibbdna. “ Neither grease nor ashes remained of 
his burned body This concentration on fire also takes us back to the Tantras. 
Cf. La Vall6e Poussin, in the translation of the Abhidharmakoga, IV, p. 229.

Cf. Maschera e Volto dello Spiritualismo Contemporaneo, cit.Cf. Maschera e Volto dello Spiritualismo Contemporaneo, cit.

Jdtaka, CXC. In ibid,, CCLXIII, it ceases as he becomes contaminated 
with a woman.

238 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

known that the symbol of one who has passed over the current 
and who, when on the other shore, helps the noble sons to cross, 
is applied to the Buddha. Now, it can occur that at the very 
moment of the spiritual realisation of this a fresh cosmic evidence 
in the form of a "marvel” is produced : the Buddha and his dis- 
ciples in the act of crossing a river, find themselves magically 
carried to the other bank.*** Another example. When the Buddha 
meets the feared bandit Angulimala he prevents the bandit, 
who is running towards him, from catching up with the Accom- 
plished One, who is standing stUl. He who stands still walks, 
he who walks stands still.^* A transcendental significance is 
once more manifested in this marvel: locomotion, which does 
not take one forward, by which “ one does not reach the end of 
the world ”, is opposed to being still, in a supernatural stability, 
which, to beings that are carried along by the saihsaric current, 
must appear as a vertiginous, fearful going.

Whether or not such irruptions, so fuU of meaning, of a higher 
order into the natural order, ever historically took place, they 
serve, in the texts, to illustrate the significance of a particular 
category of “ sacred ” and " noble ” marvels. As for the other 
extra-noifeial or super-normal phenomena, from what we have 
just said it is clear that, in Buddhism, they do not have the 
character of " miracles ”, of incomprehensible and irrational 
happenings, as they do in many popular, and even in some not* 
so popular forms of religion. They have, instead, their own logic, 
they are connected with a particular view of the world, and the 
path of awakening, in its various phases, affords the explanation 
of the fact that they can really take place.

rr

SuUanifdta, III, vi, 36 , 
Digha XVI, i, 33-34* 
Majjh., LXXXVI.

I

VIII

PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE GREAT LIBERATION

T he pure, original doctrine of the Ariya is explicitly anti- 
evolutionist. “ Becoming ” has no significance. The 
“ cycle ” of rebirths does not lead to the death-less.^ There is 
neither beginning, nor progress, nor end in the succession of the 
states conditioned by “ ignorance " and by " agitation ”. It is 
said that, even as there is no lofty and massive mountain that 
one day will not crumble, nor ocean that one day will not dry up, 
similarly, there is no end to the changing undergone by ordinary 
beings who, through their samsaric self-identification, pass from 
one state of existence to another, like a dog that goes round and 
round, firmly tied to a post or to a column.^ Returning to the 
symbolism of the two shores, it is said that while few enter the 
water, fewer still reach the other side, while the great mass of 
hving beings runs up and down on this bank.* Rare is the 
appearance in the world of a Perfectly Awakened One.* Such an 
appearance is like the miraculous blossoming of a flower close to a 
pile of dung which represents, in fact, the worthless mass of 
ordinary beings.®

That Buddhism sees an essential difference between the " sons 
of the world ” — -pidhujjana — and the " sons of the Sakya’s son ” 
we know already, as we also know that by “ world ” Buddhism 
does not only mean terrestrial existence, but any conditioned form 
of existence whatsoever, be it higher or lower than the human state. 
The Ariyan path of awakening is, then, of an absolutely “ vertical ” 
nature, it does not conceive of " progressivity ” ; between the 
state of Nihbdna and any other state, demonic, titanic, human 
or celestial, it sees a gap. The state of Nibbdna cannot be found

1 Samyutt, II, 179.

* Samyutt., XXII, 99.

® Angutt., X, 117 ; Dhammapada, 85.

* Digha, XVI, v, 5.

^ Dhammapada, 58-59,

239

240 the doctrine op awakening1 Samyutt, II, 179.

* Samyutt., XXII, 99.

® Angutt., X, 117 ; Dhammapada, 85.

* Digha, XVI, v, 5.

^ Dhammapada, 58-59,

239

240 the doctrine op awakening

by " going ” ; it cannot be found in the horizontal direction of 
tinae, nor in the perpetuity, longevity or indefinite existence that 
are ascribed to the various angelic and celestial beings and to 
the theistic god himself, Brahma. Bodhi, absolute illumination, 
the " wisdom ” that liberates, is sometimes therefore likened to 
lightning,® a description which clearly shows its extra-temporal 
character. Everjdhing, therefore, that is connected with extra- 
sarhsaric development is to be considered from a quite special point 
of view. The oldest texts themselves remark on the relativity of 
the time needed to achieve fulfilment : seven years, seven months, 
seven days, the very day of hearing the doctrine. ’ In Mahdydna 
and in Zen Buddhism this idea is very much accentuated. In a 
Mdhdyana text it is said that one should not feel fear or anguish 
at the thought that “ one will awaken late to the incomparable, 
perfect knowledge ” since this awakening is the work of a single 
moment, and is “ the extreme [frontier] limit vrith something 
that has no past, and which therefore is a non-limit One must 
not even formulate the depressing idea : “ Great and long is this 
Unlit that has no past ”, since " this limit without a past, and 
which is therefore not a limit, is connected with a unique spiritual 
momeilt.”® By this it means that what, from the point of view of 
saihsaric consciousness, might seem to be a dist^t final aim, in 
reality stands outside any sequence, so that to apprehend it means 
to apprehend it also as something which has not had a past, which 
has no antecedents, which is without time ; whence it may be 
said that aU that has led up to it is eo ipso destroyed. The path, 
the effort, the gradualness, the *' made ” — sankrta — all this van-® Angutt., Ill, 25. In this text the spirit of the man who, still alive, has 
destroyed mania and has achieved liberation is also likened to a diamond. The 
Sanskrit term vajra (Tibetan : dorje) includes both these meanings — lightning or 
diamond — and has been particularly used in Tibetan Buddhism to designate 
the essence of illumination and the na.ture of one who is made of illumination. 
At the same time, it also designates the sceptre of the supreme representatives 
of Lamaist spiritual authority. This symbolism would take us much furthp,r 
in terms of comparative mythology — as far as the lightning-force symbolised by 
prehistoric hyperborean axes and the symbolism of the lightning which always 
accompanied divine “ Olympian figures of the Aryan civilisations. The 
** path of the v^ra or the " path of the diamond and of lightning (vajra-ydna), 
is the designation of Tantric and magic Buddhism, on which cf. Lo Yoga della 
Potema, op, cit,

’ Cf. Majjh.f X ; LXXXV. On this subject we can recall the words attributed 
to the Buddha by the Vajrasamddhi-siUra, when he said that the passage of 
fifty years did not represent a period of time, but only the awakening of a 
thought {apud Suzuki).

® Pyajndpdfamitd, texts in M. Walleser, Gdttingen, 1914, XIX, p. 120.

PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE GREAT LIBERATION 24I

ishes, disperses like mist. The Sdmkhya theory relating to the 
furusha, and the Upanishad sxid then the Vedanta theory relating 
to the atmd, have the same sense : the dtmd ox purusha is eternally 
present. It is not this that " revolves ”, that “ acts ”, that 
strives, that advances. Illumination is the flash in which, beyond 
aU time, this presence without a past is apprehended.Recognition of this discontinuity of the state of absolute illum- 
ination does not, however, prevent us from considering a series of 
cases corresponding to various approximations of the point from 
which the jump in the transcendental direction may be achieved, 
provided the necessary energy has been acquired. Even the 
ancient Buddhist texts discuss, in this connection, various possi- 
bilities which should not be interpreted without reference to the 
general Indo-Aryan views on the hereafter and on the various 
forms of liberation.

The highest degree is that where, while yet a living man, one 
has completely achieved extinction through having destroyed 
— ^without leaving residue or possibility for fresh germination — 
avijjd, the primordial ignorance, ianhd, thirst, the dsava, the 
transcendental intoxications. A relapse, a passing to any con- 
ditioned form of existence whatsoever, is as impossible for him as 
it is for the Ganges to flow towards the West.® Even the “ mania ”, 
through which he might have re-arisen as a god, is " extinct, cut 
down to the roots, made Hke the stump of a palm tree which 
cannot sprout again, can no more reproduce itself.”^® He is called 
the non-combatant, one who has no further need of fighting in 
the threefold realm of right living, of contemplation, of tran- 
scendental knowledge, besides that of the powers.^ That "he 
sjhould let attachment be joined again to his body or that his heart 
should beat again : this cannot be Powerful and impalpable 
being, there is nothing that can reach him, alter him or 
tljreaten him. With regard to all that he can still •" do ”, we inay 
quote the simile of the uninjured hand : “ he whose hand is with- 
out wound may touch poison : poison cannot enter where there

* Samyutt,, XXXV, 203.

AnguiU, IV, 36, .

AnguU,, XI, II. Cl Jataka, LXX : '* Not a good victory is that, after 
which you may still be beaten. A good victory is that through which you 
become invincible

Majjh., CV.AnguiU, IV, 36, .

AnguU,, XI, II. Cl Jataka, LXX : '* Not a good victory is that, after 
which you may still be beaten. A good victory is that through which you 
become invincible

Majjh., CV.

242 the doctrine of awakening

is no wound Whether " he walks or is still or sleeps or 
wakes ”, in him the perfect clarity of knowledge conforming 
to reality that ” Mania is exhausted in me ” is always present, 
just as in a man whose feet and hands had been cut off there 
would always be present the knowledge : " My feet and hands 
have been cut off.”^* The term nimpadhi is also used here ; it 
means destruction of the "substratum” [upadhi). This sub- 
stratum (which in its turn is related to the sankhdra and to kamma, 
Skr. karma) corresponds, in general, to the "entity of craving” 
which every life that is not liberated strengthens and nourishes 
so that it creates the possibility of a new arising, of a fresh 
bursting into flame after the material offered by that life is ex- 
hausted. In the " perfectly Awakened One ” this substratum 
no longer exists : being an obscure and oblique form born of 
ignorance and of " sleep ”, it is destroyed and dissolved by the 
steady naked light that he has kindled within himself.Jara, therefore, the exhaustion of the possibilities of life, the 
" fulfilment of time ” and the dissociation of the aggregates that 
make up the individual being, for the Awakened One means final 
dissolution. He can say : " The outward form of one who has 
achieved truth stands before you, but that which binds him to 
existence has been cut off ... at the dissolution of the body 
neither gods nor men will again see him.”^® With physical death, 
there collapses something which had only an automatic existence, 
conditioned in a positive sense — conditioned, that is to say, by 
the pure will, devoid of craving, of the Fulfilled One : that is 
what is known as khandha-parinibhdna which, in any case, is a 
wholly contingent occurrence, without consequences for a state 
which, by definition, has " neither increase, nor diminution, nor 
composition The term parinibhuta, “ completely extinct ”, is 
applied, in various texts, to the living Buddha. Material, physical 
death only dissolves the last material elements, without leaving 
any remnants, of a being who is aheady .dead to the world.^®

Besides, since we have seen that the Buddhist ascesis is not 
limited to detachment, but goes on to penetrate and control 
the deepest energies of the bodily manifestation, the death

Dhammapada, 12^, *

Majjh., LXXVI.

Dlgha, I, iii, 73.

Samyutt., Ill, 119.

PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE GREAT LIBERATION 243Dhammapada, 12^, *

Majjh., LXXVI.

Dlgha, I, iii, 73.

Samyutt., Ill, 119.

PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE GREAT LIBERATION 243

of an Awakened One is always of a voluntary nature, at 
least in the sense of assent, of non-intervention. It has rightly 
been said that " in order to die, a Buddha must wish to die, 
otherwise no infirmity can kill him The true death of Prince 
Siddhattha took place when, some time before his actual decease, 
he consciously decided not to desire to live any longer. From 
that moment he knows and repeatedly predicts the hour and the 
minute, the place and the couch in which his breath will cease for 
ever. The death of the body becomes so much a secondary fact, 
a thing of no account, that it matters very little what may 
cause it.''^^Buddhism, like Stoicism, does not condemn suicide. Taking 
arms — that is, killing oneself — ^is not proscribed by the doctrine 
of the Ariya, always provided that the person in question has 
actually achieved extinction. In vain, Mara, the demon not only 
of this world, but equally of the world of Brahma, seeks the spirit 
of the ascetic Channa who had “ used the knife In this case, 
it is not a question, in fact, of seeking death as a result of any 
weakness in face of life, of any form of despair, attachment, or 
pain. We already know that the premise of extinction is to have 
conquered desire even for extinction itself, to have achieved the 
state of one who is free and who has no desire either for existence 
or for leaving existence.^® The taking of one's own life, here, is 
no more than a wholly irrelevant act, rather like that of someone 
who, sitting in one position, decides at a certain moment to change 
it, or who finally chases away an insect which had been buzzing 
ceaselessly around him and which he had suffered with calm. 
This, like any other act of an Awakened One, does not create 
sankhdra ; in no way does it alter the realisation he has achieved, 
nor does it give rise to causes for future effects.

We must remember, however, that the spiritual stature of an 
Awakened One is such that the moment he may choose for leav- 
i&g his human form of appearance cannot be arbitrary nor can it

C. Formichi, Apologia del huddhismo, Rome, 1925, p. 29. The Buddha 
had declared Uiat, had he so wished, he could even have lived for_ jeons (cf. 
Dlgha, XVI, iii, 3). On the power of the Buddhas and of certain Afiya of pror 
longing life or of dissolving the vital energies, cf. Ahhidharmaho^a, II, 10; VII, 41.

18 Sarhyutt, XXXV, 87, MajjK CXLIV.18 Sarhyutt, XXXV, 87, MajjK CXLIV.

18 Suttanipdta, IV, x, 9. Cl Uddna (III, 10) : Those who believe that they 
can go out of existence by means of non-existence will not free themselves 
from existence Buddhism condemns both thirst for existence and thirst for 
non-existence {bhava-vibhava-tanhd).

244 DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING244 DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

depend on accidental considerations. There is a text which, in 
declaring against voluntary death, sets forth not only all the 
positive elements of an Awakened One's life, but also everything 
that, by continuing to live, he can give to beings in need of guid- 
ance.®® An Awakened One will always have, to some extent — 
— an extent that Mahayana considerably exaggerates — ^the sense 
of a mission on which will depend the course and the moment of 
the end of his life. Prince Siddhattha declared that he would 
not finally enter Nibbam, disappecir from the physical world or 
agree to die, before the doctrine, by means of the existence of a 
group of worthy and illuminated disciples who had apprehended 
it, had been established and well-proclaimed in the world of men 
and of celestial beings.®^ At this point, the Accomphshed One, 
with perfect consciousness and clarity, " laid aside his will to 
live ” and, “ concentrated and inwardly jo3dul ”, destroyed his 
personality “ as one shatters a cuirass ”.®® To this decease, 
legend has added cosmic signs and portents not unlike those con- 
nected with the death of the Christ.®® Some texts speak of the 
movements of the mind of an Accomphshed One at the moment 
of death : it passes upwards through the four jhdna and, beyond 
these, enters the planes of the first four reahsations free from 
form, that is to say, it passes up to the state beyond consciousness 
and non-consciousness. From this height the spirit then descends 
by degrees to the first jhdna, and then passes up to the fourth 
jhdna which, as we have seen, corresponds to the limit of individu- 
ated consciousness as '' name-and-form ” ; and from there, 
under the .impulse of this power come from the world beyond 
form, it detaches itself, it passes beyond, it “ departs no more 
to return '’.®*All this, then, concerns the highest form of liberation, the Hbera- 
tion achieved in life whilst still a m£in': it corresponds exactly 
with what, in the general Indo- Aryan tradition, is called jlvan- 
mukti, which means, in fact, “ liberated W'hilst alive As well 
as the case of jwan-mukti, the same tradition also contemplates 
what is known as viciBha-mukti, where liberation is achieved at

Milindapanha, 195, i sea, (W. 436).

^ Anguit., VIII, 70.

** Angutt,, VIII, 70.

« Digha, XVI, Vi, 10.

Digha, Xyi, vi, 8-9 ; Samyutt, VI, 5.

PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE GREAT LIBERATION 245Milindapanha, 195, i sea, (W. 436).

^ Anguit., VIII, 70.

** Angutt,, VIII, 70.

« Digha, XVI, Vi, 10.

Digha, Xyi, vi, 8-9 ; Samyutt, VI, 5.

PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE GREAT LIBERATION 245

the moment of physical death. Death, in this case, unlike the 
first, affords an opportunity for full realisation of liberation and 
illumination already virtually gained during life. This possibility 
also is considered by Buddhism : the mental faculties, it is said, 
can become completely clear, and the eye of supreme knowledge 
open at the moment of death. The end of physical life then 
coincides with the end of mania, with the final destruction of the 
.dsava. Such a case is known as sarflasM, This supreme trans- 
formation is supposed to be facilitated if either an Awakened One 
or a disciple of the Awakened One is present to recall the doctrine 
to the one who is dying, unless one has the strength to recall it 
oneself at this moment.^® We have already said that awareness 
of breathing constantly practised and properly understood, is 
considered to be one of the best means of maintaining a clear 
awareness up to the last moments of earthly existence. For our 
part, we may add that the condition of modern Western man is such 
that, in the vast majority of cases, the possibility of liberation can 
only be conceived in this form ; it can only take place, that is to 
say, in the state produced by that act of disruption which is the 
dissolution of the aggregates of the personality : this, of course, 
assumes that one's entire existence has been devoted to the 
focussing of every energy of one's own being, including those which 
lie deepest and which are hardly perceptible, in the direction of 
transcendency.

^ We shall now go on to discuss the possibilities that are con- 
sidered by the Buddhist texts for those who tread the path of 
the Ariya and who do not reach liberation whilst alive, nor at 
the moment of death.The class of beings that we are now discussing comes under the 
heading of sotdpanna, that is to say : " one who has entered into 
the curreiit ". They are the " noble sons " who have so acted 
that the fundamental force of their life is pervaded by what is 
beyond life, and they have therefore quite eliminated the danger 
of taking a '' descending path ". More specifically, to '' enter the 
current " is to nourish an unshakable faith in the doctrine, to 
have an eye trained to recognise each phenomenon according to 
its conditioned genesis, and to maintain five of the fundamental 
precepts of “ right conduct " : abstention from killing, from tak-

25 Angutt.f X, 92.

246 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING25 Angutt.f X, 92.

246 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

ing what is not given, from lust, from l3hng, from the use of 
intoxicants.*® Other texts have a slightly different view : 
those who have entered the current are principally those 
who have overcome three of the five bonds, namely, mania 
of the “I ”, doubt and the blind practice of rites and 
precepts for the sake of a divine hereafter. Two other 
bonds, however — desire and aversion — although weakened, 
continue to persist, and for this reason those in the 
category in, question do not achieve extinction either during 
earthly fife or at its end. Such a being may, however, be sure 
that his destiny is already decided. The enemy forces will not 
prevail. He is already established in the right law, he is not 
exposed to permanent lapses, he has a higher knowledge. He 
has escaped perdition, he possesses sureness, he may be certain 
that he will put an end to the state of dukkha and that he will 
achieve illumination and perfect awakening.*’ The simile 
provided here is that of the first-bom son of a warrior king 
legitimately crowned, who is certain of one day ascending the 
throne: the same feeling js possessed by an ascetic who is a 
“ blessed warrior ”, who has trodden the path of the Ariya, and 
who, inwardly unshakable, waits for the supreme liberation.*® 
The future course of one who, in the deepest nucleus of his 
own being, no longer belongs to the world of becoming, depends 
on the strength of the sankMm which correspond to the two bonds 
that have not yet been dissolved. Some texts, which deal with 
what we may call the pessimistic solution, envisage one who 
expects a single rebirth in the sense-world — ekaUjin ; one who 
expects repeated rebirths — kolankola — ^reappearing, in due course, 
two or three times in noble families ; or, finally one who expects 
to reappear, at the most seven times, in states that are not all 
necessarily human — sattakkhaUu-parama. After this, the condi- 
tion of dukkha will have been destroyed once and for all.*® These 
references in the texts are very schematic, and one cannot there- 
fore be quite sure of the true sense of the doctrine. Since such 
possibilities are distinguished from others, shortly to be discussed, 
which refer unquestionably to extinction achieved in one of the 
Anguit., X, 92.” Cf. Angutt., X, 92 : VI, 97 ; Majjh., LXVIII.

«» Angutt, IV, 87.

“ Angutt, III, 86.

PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE GREAT LIBERATION 247” Cf. Angutt., X, 92 : VI, 97 ; Majjh., LXVIII.

«» Angutt, IV, 87.

“ Angutt, III, 86.

PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE GREAT LIBERATION 247

worlds of “ pure form ” or " free from form ”, it would seem 
that we are here dealing with reappearances in the kama-l6ha, 
that is, in the sub-celestial sphere to which the human condition 
essentially belongs. Are we again faced with an idea of “re- 
incamation ” ? Perhaps one who " has entered the current ” 
will appear again as a man ? We must here refer to a viewpoint 
which is rather different from the simple idea of the multiple 
earthly lives of an ■" I ” that is supposed to pass from one to 
another ; a view, to which the term “ shoot forth again ”, or 
" germinate ”, of the text offers a way of approach. One who 
“ has entered the current ” has transformed the root from 
which he sprang into life : in the “ current ” of which he is 
made, we now find the element bodhi, something that is extra- 
saihsaric, which is destined to determine a new line of heredity 
— ^if thus we' may call it — and, above all, a certain kind of 
continuity that — as we have already seen — ^is not possible in 
one who belongs to the world of becoming and of ignorance. 
We can thus think of a super-individual matrix or root, no 
longer exclusively samsaric, of existences which tend towards 
liberation, as it were in a series of attacks (corresponding to each 
' life) and which are destined finally, in one of the existences, 
the last of the series, to trimnph. If one of these does not 
produce success, there appears another, taking over the 
attributes of the first, in order to carry it further ; the dura- 
tion of this process is determined by certain cychcal laws 
and is bound up with the number seven, whose importance 
in the field of aU that concerns development is kno-wn even 
in profane science. We no longer have the absurd idea of 
a single “I” which returns or which travels from existence 
to existence, but, rather, of various manifestations of one same 
principle that is already super-mdividual, but not yet fully 
conscious : manifestations which are ruled by the extrasamsaric 
force that has already been awakened and that is destined, sooner 
or later, to produce the perfectly illuminated being with which 
it will “ pass beyond ”, by completely releasing itself. From 
two books by Meyrink, which are more than just novels — Der 
Engel vom westlichen Fenster and Der weisse Domenikaner — ^the 
reader' may, perhaps, get a more intuitive idea of this kind of 
process.R

th.e

DOCTRINE

OF AWAKENING

For successive manifestations. Buddhism has laws which' are 
not unlike those discovered by Mendel for physical heredity. 
We know that, according to Mendehan laws, some elfements of a 
heredity may, through a secies of generations, have a “ recessive " 
character whilst others are " dominant ” ; they seem to disappear, 
although they are only, latent and ready to re-emerge and to 
re-estabhsh, thenaselves once the power that predominated before 
has been weakened or, as in the present case, once the material 
needed for renewed burning is- present. This,, according to 
Buddhism, is true both for the positive and. for the negative 
elements which at the end of a life, will; represent an upadhi, a 
substratum of existence. Hlusory forms, of liberation are there- 
fore, possible ; illusory because they are paramount only until the 
negative residues, which had apparently disappeared, re-estabhsh 
themselves and lead to conditional forms of existence; The 
opposite may well happen : a principle of hberation and 
iUumination may be. weh established, but it can only blossom 
and act fully after the total exhaustion of the power of un- 
resolved; negative and samsaric dements. These elements, 
sometimes seem to predominate when in feict, their roots have 
already been cut off.®^ This should be borne in mind when 
we consider the case of discontinuous reappearances in a series.Cl Angutt,, X, 206 ; III, 98. WiHi regard to the sankhdrcu and to the 
upadH, that is, to the potentialities of a possible fresh combustion, normal 
psychological consciousness must not be taken as the final criterion. It may bg 
that with' ageing and decay of the organs, a tendency or craving that was alive 
aad< unmastered before, may no longer makeJtself felt. But as a s^mkhdra, it 
has not therefore vanished ; it has only returned to its latent state, and is. 
waiting for a fresh occasion. The Buddhist doctrine of the possessions 
— pydpti — ^refers to this. When, for example, a desire has been satisfied, and seems , 
to be exhausted, it has not therefore been eliminated — on the contrary, it remains 
united, to the 1** and. to the stem, to which it belongs. Non-existent in act, it 
subsists in potentiaEty, And the possession ** — prdpti — will lead, sooner of 
later, to re-manifestation (sammukhlhhdva), (cf. La Valine Poussin, Nirvana^ 
cit,, p. 164). We must also, eventually, take mto account forces which, are not 
fully manifested or "spent* and which, in certain cases, we must lead to con- 
summation, even at the cost of causing ourselves as individuals and oth e r 
men to suffer their natural efiects. Something of the sort was intuited by^e 
Carpocratian Gnostics. Cf. also the image given in GoUm by G. Meyrink, 
c. XVIII : " Man is like a tube of glass in which many-coloured balls axe running, 
lu the life of most men, there is only one ball. If it is red we say that the 
man is ‘ bad *, If it . is yellqw we say he is ‘ good *, If there are two balls — 
one red and one yellow — ^he has an * unstable character We, who have 
been ‘ bitten by the serpent *, live in our life that which normally happens to, 
the whole race in an entire age : the many-coloured balls cross the tube df 
glass in a mad rush, one behind' another, and, finite as they are — ws hcuve become 
prophets — images of the divinity *’.

PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE GREAT LIBERATION 249PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE GREAT LIBERATION 249

of births (the isolated emergence of superior, extrasaihsaric 
types, with intervals of quiescence) and also as what may appear 
as a “ spontaneous initiation But the same idea also applies 
in the cases we have yet to consider and, as we said, this will 
refer to liberations that are to be later but inevitably achieved 
in posthumous " celestial ” states.Even for these cases we can find an equivalent in the general 
Indo-Aryan tradition, where it takes into account so-called 
" deferred hberation ” or “ liberation by degrees ” — krama- 
In order thus to attain the state of Nirvana in modes 
of being that cannot be called human, it is necessary to have 
also virtually cut off the two bonds of craving and aversion, 
which constitute the elementary differentiations of the pri- 
mordial mania. And if this mastery is not to be of an entirely 
psyschological character, and therefore ephemeral, the ascetic 
must, in his earthly existence, have developed to a high degree 
both the contemplations that produce a superior calm (samaiha) 
and the " wisdom ” that is closely connected with the wiU for 
the unconditioned, which leads to change of heart and detachment, 
and which brings realisation of the non-substantiality of all that 
is samsaric (vipassand)^^^ When these conditions have been 
fulfilled, one possesses the principle of a supreme “ neutrality ” 
beyond any craving desire, beyond any aversion, and the "divine” 
,world itself may be overcome ; the bond of the " I ", which has 
already been cut off as regards the hmnan state of existence 
by the one who “ enters the current ”, is now also cut off as 
regards any individuated and conditioned form of existence 
whatsoever, not excluding the highest and most resplendent. 
In the “ current ”, then, a force operates that will prevent any 
lingering on the " celestial voyage ” — spoken of, with varying 
S3nnbolism, in all traditions including the Dantesque — ^from being 
taken as the fin al destination ; this force guarantees that, by 
Sefinitively bringing to an end every attachment, one wiU' gain, 
in superhuman states of existence, the opportunity for extinction 
which could not be achieved in the human condition, not even 
at the moment of death. The ascetic has here created theCf.' K. Guenon, Vhomme ei son dSvenir sdon U VHdnta^ Paris, 1925, p. 181 
s&q. (Tire English translation of this important work : Man and His Becoming 
according icy the Veddntw, Euzac, 1945.)

Cf. Anguity IV, 124.

250 THE DOCTRINE OF AWA.KENING

conditions for a real survival of death, for a survival which various 
religions, notably the Christian, imagine is achieved by all beings ; 
whereas it is only logically thinkaf)le for those few who, as men, 
have been able to conceive of themselves as more than men 
and who have taken part, in full awareness —even if only through 
some flash of insight — ^in states that are free of the condition 
of the individual.

We are now in a position to give the various possible cases 
of liberation beyond death that are considered by Buddhist 
teaching :

(1) , he who frees himself and “ disappears ” half way in his 
development — antaraparinilldyin ;

(2) he who succeeds m this after the half way point in his 
development — upahacca-parinibhayin ;

(3) he who achieves liberation without an action — asankhdra- 
parinibbdyin ;

(4) he who achieves liberation with an action — sasankhdra- 
parinibbdyin ;

(5) he who proceeds against the current towards the highest 
gods — uddhamsota akaniUha-gdma^(4) he who achieves liberation with an action — sasankhdra- 
parinibbdyin ;

(5) he who proceeds against the current towards the highest 
gods — uddhamsota akaniUha-gdma^

Alt these liberations take place in one of the spheres of " pure 
forms ” — mpa-loka — or in one of the spheres free from form — 
arupa-loka — ^making up, together, the " pure abodes ” or " pure 
fields ” — suddhdvdsd — ^whose equivalent, in the ancient Western 
Aryan traditions, were the “Elysian Fields” or "Seat of the 
Heroes The order in which we have just given these cases 
is one which descends from the highest forms to the lowest. 
They are all, however, qualified by the term andgdmin, " a non- 
retumer ”, one who does not pass again to another forni of 
conditioned and manifested existence, since he has entirely 
conquered any force which could lead to this against his will. 
The term is the same as that used in the Upanishads for one who, 
.after death, does not tread the lunar and ancestral path — " 
pitr-ydna — but who treads, instead, the " divine path ” — deva- 
ydna.

It may be easier to understand the sense of these various 
possibilities by referring to a simile given by a text which makes

Angutt., VII, 16-17; IX, 12; X, 63; III, 85-86; FuggcUa-PanHaUi, 
40-46 ; Visuddhi-maggct, XXIII (W. 391).

PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE GREAT LIBERATION 25 1Angutt., VII, 16-17; IX, 12; X, 63; III, 85-86; FuggcUa-PanHaUi, 
40-46 ; Visuddhi-maggct, XXIII (W. 391).

PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE GREAT LIBERATION 25 1

use of the example of lighted chips flung into the air.®® One 
such chip may get cold even before it touches the earth — ^and 
this would be the case with one who liberates or “ extinguishes ” 
himself before or after the half-way point of his path (cases i 
and 2) ; or it may fall to the ground and immediately find a patch 
of dry grass which goes up in flames, and the chip may only 
get cold after this fire has died out — ^the case of Hberating oneself 
without an action ; or, again, it may land in a large pile of wood 
or hay, set it alight, and get cold only when this much larger fire 
has ceased — ^the case of liberating oneself by means of an action ; 
or, finally, the chip may fall directly into a forest, and the fire 
continue until the other side of the forest itself is reached, where 
there is running water or a field of green grass or rocks — ^the case 
of going against the current towards the highest gods. .By way of clarifying this phenomenology of the various post- 
humous developments possible for ascetic consciousness, the 
following remarks will suffice. The heat of the lighted chip, 
that is capable of starting a fresh fire, clearly represents the 
residual thirst for, and pleasure in, satisfaction still existing in 
the new current. Already extinguished as regards the forms 
of earthly existence, this residual potential heat can be finally 
eliminated whilst going along the, path, before the end of a 
particular development, " before falling to earth ”, that is to say, 
, before the complete transformation of state that follows death, 
and could result in the adoption of a new residence. This then, 
corresponds to cases i and 2. In case 3 this potential heat 
comes again into contact with combustible material and produces 
a fresh flame : consciousness re-arises in a celestial state of 
existence, where rapture and " super-sensible joy ” may promote 
new forms of identification, of greater or less duration. The 
extrasamsaric and sidereal force that has already been awakened 
will, however, sooner or later, lead onwards — whereas a “ son 
'of the world ” is always liable to degenerate again, to pass, 
even, into a state lower than that from which he started, although 
he has experienced for a time these supersensible states.®* In 
case 3 craving is exhausted by a natural process ; in case 4, 
however, a certain active intervention must be mhde, which is

Angiitt., VII, 52.

Angutt., Ill, 1 1 4.

252 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENINGAngiitt., VII, 52.

Angutt., Ill, 1 1 4.

252 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

spoken of in the texts sometimes as “ effort ”, sometimes as 
“ deepening of knowledge The most unfavourable case is the 
fifth which, in the simile, corresponds to a fire that, httle by little, ' 
spreads to an totire forest and does not stop until it has reached 
the natural limit of the forest itself. The potentiality of heat 
and of attachment, here, is such that it resumes, one after another, 
in ascending order (against the current), the various possibilities 
of superhuman life. This case could be compared to " deferred 
liberation”, the fundamental idea of which, as Guenon has 
rightly pointed out,®’ is to be found in the Hebrew-Christian 
and Islamic symboHsm of the " Universal Judgment ”. The 
final experience takes place at the moment in which an end 
is made, in obedience to the cyclical laws, to the celestial forms 
of existence themselves, and there occurs, in order of pre- 
cedence, the dissolution of each manifested form into its respective 
unmanifested principle. It is on such an occasion — almost a 
reproduction, mutatis mictapdis, of the possibility offered by 
physical death (cf. p. 58) — ^that final extinction may be 
acMeved at the exhaustion of a cosmic cycle of manifestation.

On the subject of symbolism, we may see, in the greater or 
less quantity of fire wMch bums again in the posthumous states 
and which must be allowed to die out before an advance can 
be made, the deeper significance of what Christian mythology 
calls ” purgatory ”. We must remember, however, in making,, 
this comparison, that this experience is by no means common 
to all, but only to those who, through a virtual mastery of the 
human condition and of the samsaric bonds, have indeed gained 
the chance of consciously surviving physical death and of taking 
themselves further, into super-terrestrial states of existence.Finally, the mention of Hberation with or without action gives 
us the opportunity of remembering that, not only at the point 
of death, but also in the successive changes of state and in the 
various phases of the “ celestial voyage ”, much may depend 
.according to the traditional teaching, on a spiritual initiative 
that is naturally connected with the accumulation of knowledge 
achieved and realised on earth .as a man. We can only talk 
■of quasi-automatic and predestined posthumous developments 
in the case of the ordinary man ; but, as we have said, to speak

Op. cit., p. 187,

PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE GREAT LIBERATION 253

of his " survival ’’ is merely to be euphemistic. On the matter 
of this transcendental initiative, we refer the reader to the 
Bar do Thodol, the Tibetan Book of the Dead which we have quoted 
earlier, and to what, on the basis of this book, we have discussed 
at greater length in the second edition of our book, Lo Yoga della 
potenza (Appendix I).

IX

SIGNS OF THE NONPAREILIX

SIGNS OF THE NONPAREIL

T here is, in original Buddhism, a well-known negative 
expression for the highest point of the Ariyan ascesis, Nibbana 
(Sanskrit : Nirvana). Its etynaology is rather intricate. The 
Pali term is related to the root van and includes the idea of a 
" vanishing The Sanskrit term seems to have a different root, 
vd, to blow, with the negative prefix nir, and is best translated, 
in fact, by “ extinction ”, but also with reference to " vanishing ”, 
Extinction of what ? It has been rightly pointed out^ that the 
same root vd appears in the terms vana, vani, which mean, to wish, 
to crave, to desire, to rave, to dote. Nibbana expresses the 
cessation of the state described by these terms : a fact that is 
confirmed by the whole Ariyan ascesis, in its comprehensive 
significance, particularly as Nibbana is attained at the moment 
in which the dsavd and tanhd, that is to s&y, the intoxicating 
manias and craving, are completely neutrahsed. We do not, 
therefore, propose to put forward a learned argument designed 
to confute the ideas of those who hold that Nibbana is " nothing- 
ness ”. It could only occur to a chronic drunkard that the 
ending of intoxication was also the end of existence ; so, only 
someone who knew nothing but the state of thirst and of mania 
could think that the cessation of this state meant the end of 
all life, " nothingness Besides, if "ignorance” and " mania ” 
are a negation — ^and normal beings can hardly think otherwise — 
then Nibbana can only be described, after the manner of Hegel, 
as a “ negation of the negation ”, and therefore as a restora- 
tion, as something that, taken in conjunction with a negative 
designation, indicates an entirely positive reality. The fact of 
the matter is that modem man has moved so far from the world 
of spirituality and of metaphysical reality that, when faced with 
1 De Lorenzo, in his edition of Majjh., Vol. I, p. 7.

254

SIGNS OP THE NONPAREIL 2 ^^254

SIGNS OP THE NONPAREIL 2 ^^

this kind of experienced achievement, he finds himself totally 
unprovided with points of reference and with organs of compre- 
hension. "'Awakening '' is the keystone and the symbol of the 
whole Buddhist ascesis : to think that " awakening and 
" nothingness can be equivalent is an extravagance which should 
be obvious to everyone. Nor should the notion of vanishing 
applied in a well-lmown simile of Nibbdna to the fire which dis- 
appears when the flame is extinguished, be a source of misconcep- 
tion. It has been said with justice^ that, in similes of this sort, 
one must always have in mind the general Indo-Aryan concept 
which indicates that the extinguishing of the fire is not its annihi- 
lation, but its return to the invisible, pure, super-sensible state 
in which it was before it manifested itself through a combustible 
in a given place and in given circumstances.

The point is, that Buddhism has very largely adopted the 
method of " negative theology which seeks to give the sense of 
the absolute by means of an indication, not as to what it is — a 
task which is considered to be absurd — ^but as to what it is not 
We may say, rather, that Buddhism has gone further stiU : it has 
refused to use the category of non-being and has understood that 
even to define the unconditioned by negation would, in fact, make 
it conditioned. This has been rightly noted by Oldenberg when 
the contrast between the contingent world and the eternal world 
,is pushed to the extreme limit of Buddhism, it is no longer possible 
to imagine any logical relation whatsoever between the two terms. 
All we can do is to use as a symbol, as an allusive sign, a word, 
that is to say, Nibbdna, Zen Buddhism would say : reality is to 
the word and to the doctrine as the moon is to “^e hand of the 
man who shows its direction.One thing, in any event, is quite sure : the theory which claims 
.that one who has destroyed the manias has also " broken him- 
self and will perish, not surviving the death of the body '' is re- 
garded by Buddhism as a heresy, bom of ignorance.^ But the 
demon of dialectics must not, in this way, be resurrected. When 
it is asked if the Awakened One exists after death, the answer is: 
No. Does not he, then, exist after death ? The same answer.

^ A. B. 'Keiiii, Buddhist Philosophy fL>oiLdon, 1923, pp. 65-66; de la ValUe Poussin, 
Nirvana, cit., pp. 145-6- 
^ Buddha, cit,, p. 269.

^ SamyuU., XXII, 85.

256 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

Does he both exist and not exist after death ? Again, No. Does 
he neither exist nor not exist after death ? Once more, the reply 
is. No. And should the questioner ask what, after all, does this 
mean, then the answer is that such things were not revealed by 
Rrince Siddhattha, that they cannot be discussed since they are 
transcendent — abMkkanta — since nothing intelligent can be said 
.about a state in which everything that might have been included 
in any concept or in any category whatsoever has been destroyed.® 
■Nibbana, indeed, " has nothing that is like it.®

" This has not been revealed ", " this cannot be discussed ”, -

“this is nonpareil ”. But where concept and word fail us, the 
evocative power of the simile may take their place. The simile 
is one of vastness, of depth, of itnmeasurableness, of ocean-size.“this is nonpareil ”. But where concept and word fail us, the 
evocative power of the simile may take their place. The simile 
is one of vastness, of depth, of itnmeasurableness, of ocean-size.

The king who asked the questions in the first place, is now ques- 
tioned : " Have you an accountant or reckoner who is able to 
number all the grains of sand in the Ganges ? " The reply is 
naturally negative. He is then told that it would be a similar 
undertaking to try to define the Accomplished One. " He is 
deep, imbounded, unmeasurable, inscrutable, just like the mighty 
ocean. Thus it may not be said that he exists, nor that he does 
•not exist, nor that he exists and does not exist, nor that he neither 
exists nor does not exist after death.”’' From each of the five 
components which make up common personality an Accomplished 
iQne is free : from material form, from feeling, from perception^ 
from the formations and from finite consciousness — all this that 
was in him has been made like " a palm tree, that is cut off at 
Hie root so that it can germinate no longer, no more re-develop ”. 
lit is quite useless for those who, in trying to understand, refer 
to one or other of these components, to set themselves the prob- ; 
lem of what an Accomplished One is or of where he is going.®

Since that of which we might say “ is ” or " is not ” is absent, 
there is no definition or discussion possible.® The fundamental 
point is that the Awakened One, whilst still alive, is not to be 
considered as material form, feeling, perception, formations, or ' 
consciousness, nor as Mving in these groups of the person, nor as

“ Samyutt., XLIV, i, ii. ' ' . !

• MUindupanha, 3.15 seo.

’ SaihvnU.. XLIV, i. ,

“ Maj'jh., LXXII.

• Suttanipata, V, vii, 6-8.

SIGNS OF THE NONPAREIL 257“ Samyutt., XLIV, i, ii. ' ' . !

• MUindupanha, 3.15 seo.

’ SaihvnU.. XLIV, i. ,

“ Maj'jh., LXXII.

• Suttanipata, V, vii, 6-8.

SIGNS OF THE NONPAREIL 257

distinct from them, nor as one deprived of them. K, then, whilst 
he is still in this hfe, the Accomplished One cannot be considered 
as really “ existing ”, there is no logical category which can enable 
us to xmderstand the state of pure Nibhdna, of total extinctiom^® 
“ For one who has disappeared from here, there is no more form : 
that of which we say " it exists ” is no longer his ; when all ithe 
dhammd aare cut away, then all the elements on which discursive 
thought is based also vanish.’’-^ We may then justly say : " it 
is as difficult to foUow the path of those whose dwelling is void 
and whose Hberation is without sign, as it is to follow that of the 
birds through the air”.^** The Accomphshed Ones, those who 
have "entered the current”, the anagdmin in general, are also 
likened to powerfid animals of the deep water of the sea.-^® 
" Deep ” — ^sa}^ a Mahdydm text^* — " is the denomination of the 
‘ void ' ; of the ' signless ’, of the ‘ without tendency ’, of the 
not-come, of the not-gone-out, of the notiissued, of the not-being, 
of the passionless, of the destruction, of the extinction, ctf tte 
coming-out, the denomination thereof is profundity.”Besides all this, two reasons of a historical nature have, in 
Buddhism, imposed silence on all super-ontological and super- 
theistic references to the state where thirst no longer exists. 
Here we must turn back to the considerations that we discussed 
in the first part of this study. It wiU be remembered, in the first 
place, that the doctrine of Prince Siddhattha arose, in contrast 
to every form of abstract speculation, as an essentially practical 
and spiritually progressive guidance ; in the second, that it had 
in mind a tjpe of human being for whom the dfmd, the " un- 
conditioned” of the preceding Indo-Aryan metaph5^ics, had 
already ceased to correspond to any real experience. This abso- 
lute, which could no longer stand for anything according to the 
only criterion that was decisive for the Indo-Aryan tradition 
—yathd-hhutam, the " vision conforming to reality ” — and which 
could therefore also be denied or profaned by the sceptical or

Samyutt., XXII, 85, 86 ; XLIV, 2.

Suttanipdta, V, vii, 8.

Dhammapada, 92.

Angutt., YIII, 19. In Milindapanha, 320 there is this simile: “As the 
sea is the abode of great and portentous beings, somlso Nibbana is the abode of 
great and portentous beings, such as the arahant, those who have achieved 
extinction

Prajndpdrainitdj VIII, 106.

258 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENINGPrajndpdrainitdj VIII, 106.

258 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

philosophising manner of thought that had already pervaded a 
large variety of disputing sects and schools — this absolute becomes, 
in Buddhism, the object of a single demonstrative organ : action 
itself, ascesis, hhavana. As a result of this, silence about the prob- 
lem of the nature of the state of Nibbana and of the destiny of 
an Awakened One after 4eath was imposed for a practical reason 
also. Any ideas on the subject could only be " opinion ” — Sofa — 
and, as such, useless and vain, if not positively harmful. Whence 
the justification for the absence of any reply from the Buddha : 
" This has not been declared by the Sublime One, because it does 
not belong to the fundamental principles of a divine life, because 
it does not lead to remmciation, to detachment, to cessation, to 
calm, to transcendent knowledge, to illumination, to extinction.”^® 
In this connection, too, one must cut back the agitation and the 
imagining of an inconsistent mind : “ I am ”, " I am this ", 
” I Shan be ”, ” I shall not be ”, " I shall be with body ”, " I 
shall be without body ”, " I shall have consciousness ”, “ I shall 
not have consciousness ”, and so on — all this, it is said, is a waver- 
ing, a sore, a vain imagining. It is the effect of craving, it is a 
tumour, it is the point of the arrow. “ Therefore ” — says the 
Buddha — " you must cherish this purpose : ' I wish to dwell 
with a mind that does not waver, that is not obsessed, with a 
mind that has destroyed these vain imaginings '. Thus, O dis- 
ciples, must you tram yourselves.”^®There are those who have held that one reason for not admitting 
that the state of Nibbana might correspond to the unconditioned 
dfmd of the preceding Upanishad trachtion lies m the fact that, 
in the latter, there was always an inseparable coimection between 
this same dtmd and the brahman, the universal subject, the root 
of cosmic life.^’ Buddhism, on the other hand, as a doctrine of 
purification and restoration that is principally Aryan in spirit, is 
especially characterised by its overcoming of this relationship. 
With regard to the supreme term of the ascesis, we certainly find 
in the Buddhist texts a number of passages which can be referred 
back to the doctrine of the dtmd but not one that can be recorfciled 
with the theory of the brahman ; and this is because Buddhism 
was resolutely oppoged to any pantheistic deviation and

Sariiyutt., XVI, 12 ; Majjh., LXII.

Samyutt., XXXV, 207.

M. Walleser, PrajMpdramitd, ciL, p. 9.

SIGNS OF THE NONPAREIL 259

cosmic identifications, and because its ideal was an absolutely 
complete detachment from any form of " nature ”, either 
material or divine ; it therefore carried the purifying, implacable 
fire of dis-identifying ascesis to almost inconceivable heights. 
And it is on this account that every bridge falls down and 
every word, every conception, seems vain and impotent. Less 
than in any other doctrine, is it possible to establish, at this 
point, any relationship at all between samsdra — or contingent 
existence which, for Buddhism, embraces every manifested 
state of being — and that for which Nibbdna is only a negative 
designation.Having dealt with this point, it only remains for us to consider 
a few elements which are simply of value as indicating marks. ■ 
First of aU, we can see without difficulty from the texts that 
the Buddhist ascesis sets itself a precise task : to overcome and 
destroy death, to acliieve amata (Sanskrit : amrta), that is, the 
" death-less ”. We have already said that Mara, the eternal antag- 
onist of the Ariyan ascetic, is one of the forms under which Mrtyu, 
the demon of death, appears.^® Throughout the Dhammapada 
there are references to the struggle to be fought against the demon 
of death, agamst the " finisher ” — antaka. “ Let Mara not break 
you again and again, as the torrent breaks the reeds.”^® “ Victor 
of death ”, is the Awakened One called,®® '' giver of immortality 
L^xts speaks of a battle against the great army of death,®® of a 
conquering or crossing of the torrent or kingdom of death that 
is achieved by few,®® of a contemplation on, the death-less ele- 
ment.®* It is toward this element that the eightfold path of the 
Ariya leads.®® One who is bom subject to death, goes on to 
achieve “ the death-less, the incomparable sureness, extinction ”.®* 
Nibbdna is called the " incomparable island, in which every thmg 
vanishes and all attachment ceases, where there is destruction of 
decay and of death ” ; it is an island for those who “ find them-

Explicit identification of Mara with the demon of death occurs in Mahdvagga 
(Vin), I, I ; II, 2.

Dhammapada, 337 ; cf. 37, 40, 46.

Majjh., XCII.

21 Majjh,, XVIII.

« Majjh,, CXXXI.

2* Angutt., X, 1 17; Majjh., XXXIV ; Dhammapada, 85.

2^ Majjh., LXIV.

2 8 Mam., XXVI, LXXV,

2 8 Maojh., LII.

26 o the doctrine qf awakeningMajjh., XCII.

21 Majjh,, XVIII.

« Majjh,, CXXXI.

2* Angutt., X, 1 17; Majjh., XXXIV ; Dhammapada, 85.

2^ Majjh., LXIV.

2 8 Mam., XXVI, LXXV,

2 8 Maojh., LII.

26 o the doctrine qf awakening

selves in the midst of the waters, in the fearful torrent that has 
formed and whereby they become subject to decay and to 
death ’’ P "As me^cine opposes death, so Nibbdna opposes, 
death.’’**® The Buddha’s annormcement is : “ The immortal has 
been found.’’ " Let the gate of the death-less open : he who has 
ears to hear, let him, come and hear.’’®® “ Yes, I have achieved 
the death-less’’ — declares Saxiputta.®® " Clarion of immortality, 
supreme triuumph in the battle ’’ is the doctrine of the Ariya 
called.®®' Allusions to revealing and beneficial contemplations 
or images, "having as base and as aim the death-less ’’, are very 
frequent.®® But that is not all : we must remember that the 
term amata, non-death, death-less, which is etjunologicaUy the 
same as the Greek word afjfipoaLa, has in the Indo-Aryan tradi- 
tion, a different meaning to the weakened form current in the 
West. In the West we normally find that immortality is inter- 
changeable with that very different thing, survival. At best, it 
may refer to the continuation of indmdual existence, though s till 
conditioned, in " celestial’’ or "angelic” states, which, according 
to the Aryo-Oriental, view, though they may be of indefinite 
duration, occup5dng many aeons, yet have nothing of the really 
eternal, of the “ death-less ” in an absolute sense. That is why 
in Buddhism, one speaks of cutting back the roots not only of 
death, but of life itself, of a path of health that leads beyond the 
dominion of death and of life :®® by " life ”, here, we have to 
understand any possibility whatsoever of re-arising in any con- 
ditioned form, even in those which are called, in the West, " im- 
mortcd ” or " paradisial ”. This may possibly confuse the ideas 
of those who have not grasped the limitations inherent in the 
more recent of Western religious conceptions ; but, in any case, 
this should do away with the absurd supposition that an 
ascesis thus attuned to the " death-less ” can possibly end in, 
" nothingness ”.Stability is. one of the properties of Nibbdna. As a great river

SuUdnipdia,'V, ii, 1-4. Cf. Uttarajjhdvana-sutta, XIII, 81 : It is a nearby 
place, but arduous to reach, where decay, death and disease do not exist

28 Milindapanha 319.

2® Majjh.r XXVI ; Mahdvagga (Vin), I, i, 5, 7 ; Samyutt., XII, 33.

Mahdvagga (Vin), I, 23, 6.

Majjh., CXV

32 Cf. e.g. Anguft, V, 61 ; VIII, 74 ; IX, 36 ; X, 56 ; VII, 45 ; Bhammapada, 
374 -

83 Dlgha XVr, II, 2-3 ; IV, 2.

SIGNS OF THE NONPAREIL z6lMahdvagga (Vin), I, 23, 6.

Majjh., CXV

32 Cf. e.g. Anguft, V, 61 ; VIII, 74 ; IX, 36 ; X, 56 ; VII, 45 ; Bhammapada, 
374 -

83 Dlgha XVr, II, 2-3 ; IV, 2.

SIGNS OF THE NONPAREIL z6l

inclines toward the sea, descends to the sea, flows out into the 
sea and, having arrived* at the sea, stays still ; so does the life of 
those who proceed towards extinction unroll.®* As the high moun- 
tain, on which no grass grows, is still and unshakable, so, like- 
wise, Nibbdna, in which no passions or mania are born, is still 
and unshakable.®® As men’s houses, with the passage of tune, 
become ruins, but the ground whereon they rested remains, so 
the mind of an Awakened One remains and knows no alteration.®* 
We remember the recurring theme that urges the ascetic contmu- 
ally onwards, even beyond the most abstract form- of contempla- 
tion because " that is compounded, that is generated, that is 
conditioned ”.®’ The result of this is to endow Nibbma — the state 
beyond which one cannot go — ^with the character of unconditioned 
and ungenerated simplicity :®® the term asankhata, " not made, 
not performed, not produced ”, is continually applied to Nibbma, 
and so is svayambhu, which indicates the quality of that which 
rests on itself or — ^in MaMydna terms — of that which rests on 
the not-resting. A limiting function is ascribed to the three dsava 
— ^they make beings ” finite ”, it is said.®* For this very reason, 
the state which no longer knows the dsava must be the uncon- 
ditioned and infinite state; since dukkha has be^ overcome, 
it can only be the state of a supreme supernatural calm, and 
of " incomparable sureness ” — anuttaram yoga-khemam. The 
” trembling ” is ended, the irrational “ recirculation ” is ended. 
Terms such as : “ become cold ”,** should no more be a source 
of misunderstanding than " extinct ” : the burning, which no 
longer exists, is to be understood as that of one who is fevered, 
of one who is burning with thirst, of one who is weakened by 
samsaric fire. It is the absence of heat m the pure Uranian flame 
—flamma non urens — of sidereal natures : of the Olympian 
principle of pure light.” Only that which has no birth does not perish ” — it is said in 
6ne text*i — " Mount Meru will crumble, the gods vrill decline in

Cf. Majjh., LXXIII.

Milindapanha, 323.

Mahdparinirv., IV, 6. Cf. Majjh., XIT.

Cf. Majjh., LII.

Cf. Dhammapada, 383.

Samyutt., XLI, 7 ; Jdtaka, 203.

Cf. Angutt., Ill, 34.

« Digha XVI, III, 45 -

262 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

heaven. How great, how wonder:^!, then, is the eternal essence 
that is not subject to birth and to death ! ” Still with reference 
to Nibhdna : “ To go out from this state [means to find another] 
state that is calm, beyond thought, stable, not bom, not formed, 
detached from pain, detached from passion, a joy that puts an 
end to aU contingency and that destroys for ever every mania.”*^ 
And again ; “There is, O disciples, an abode where there exists 
neither earth nor water nor light nor air nor infinity of ether nor 
infinity of consciousness nor any essence at all nor that which lies 
beyond representation and beyond nomrepresentation nor this 
world nor another nor Moon nor Sun. This do I call, O disciples, 
neither coming nor going nor staying nor birth nor death ; it is 
without base, without change, without pause ; it is the end of 
agitation.”^®

We have already had occasion to mention some of the traits 
attributed by the texts to those who, whilst still in this life, 
have achieved the perfect awakening, the supreme liberation — 
beginning with the son of the Sakya. With the end of 
identification they are free. Having destroyed the roots of 
the mania of the “I ”, for them the net of illusion has been 
burned, their heart is transparent vdth light, they are divine 
beings, immune from intoxication, untouched by the world. As 
the “ lion's roar ” their word sounds ; “ Supreme are those who 
are awakened ! “ Invincible and intact ” beings, they appear' as “ sublime supermen ” lions who have left behind fear and 
terror,^® they see the past, they see heavens and hells,®’ they 
know this world and that world, the kingdom of death and the 
kingdom free from death, time and eternity.®® They are " like 
tigers, hke bulls, hke lions in a mountain cavern ”, and are yet 
“ beings without vanity, appearing in the world for the good 
of the many, for the health of the many, through compassion 
for the world, for the benefit, the good and the well-being of gods 
and of men ”.®* “ I have overcome the bramble of opinions^

** liiyuttaka, 43.

« Uddna, VIII, i.

« SamyutL, XXII, 76.

*5 Majjh., CXVI.

** Suttanipdta, III, vi, 37.

Samyutt,, III, 58-59 ; Dhammapadat 422-23.

43 Majjh., XXXIV.

Ma/jh., IV.

SIGNS OF THE NONPAREIL 263

I have gained mastery over myself, I have followed the path,** Suttanipdta, III, vi, 37.

Samyutt,, III, 58-59 ; Dhammapadat 422-23.

43 Majjh., XXXIV.

Ma/jh., IV.

SIGNS OF THE NONPAREIL 263

I have gained mastery over myself, I have followed the path,

I possess the knowledge and I have no one else as my guide ” 
— thus says the Awakened One of himself.®® The Awakened One 
is he who is detached from life and death and who knows the 
way up and the way down,®i he is " bold, not knowing hesitation, 
a sure leader, pure of passion, resplendent as the light of the sun, 
resplendent without arrogance, heroic " ; he is the Knower * 
" whom no mania dazzles, no trouble conquers, no victory tempts, 
no spot stains ” ; he is one “ who asks no more, and who, as 
a man, has mastered the ascetic art ” ; he is the “ great being, 
who lives strenuously, free from every bond, no longer slave 
to any servitude ” ; he is '' the Valiant One, who watches over 
himself, constant in his step, ready to the call, who guards 
himself within and without,, to nothing inclined, from nothing 
disinclined, the Sublime One whose spirit is powerful and im- 
passible ” ; he is the “Awakened One whom no thirst bums, 
no smoke veils, no mist clouds ; a spirit who honours sacrifice 
and who, like no other, towers in majesty ”.®2 Unconquered, 
supreme, he has laid down his burden, he has no “ home ” and 
he has no desires. Passion, pride and falsity have fallen from 
him like a mustard seed from the point of a needle. Beyond 
good, beyond evil, he is loosed from both these bonds and, 
detached from pain, detached from pleasure, he is purified. 
Since he knows, he no longer asks “ how ? ” He has touched 
tlie depths of the element free from death. He has abandoned 
the human bond and has overcome the divine bond and he is 
freed from all bonds. The path of him, who can be conquered 
by none in the world and whose dominion is the infinite, is not 
known to the gods, nor to the angels, nor to men.®®In these terms with timeless grandeur, the supreme ideal of 
the purest Aryan spirit is continually reaffirmed. The contacts 
are re-established, there is indeed an awakening, a return to the 
pftmordial state whose echo we find in the cosmicity of the 
Vedic hymns and in the supernatural framing of the deeds of 
the first Indo-Aryan epics. Nibbdna is, in fact, announced as 
a state of which nothing had been heard for a very long time.®*

5 0 Suttanipdta, I, iii, 21. XCI. Mct'jjh., LVT.

5 ® Vhammapada, 402-20, passim, 179 J XCVIII.

^daJidvagga (Vin), I. The period, actually given here, “ for myriads of 
halpa ”, is typical of the tendency towards fabulous exaggeration.

S'

264 the doctrine of awakening

Beyond both, the labyrinths of speculation and the poverty of 
all human sentiment, beyond the samsaric world which “ bums ”, 
and beyond every phantasmagoria of demoniac, titanic or 
celestial existences, there is affirmed the knowledge of a nature 
which, for its purity and power, could be called Olympian and 
regal, were it not that, at the same time, it indicates absolute 
transcendency, it is inherently ungraspable, not to be qualified 
by " this ”, nor by “ here ”, nor by " there ”.

Such is the goal of the “ noble path ” or " path of the Anya ” 
(ariyamagga) which some have chosen to regard as “ quietism ” 
induced by an “ enervating tropical climate ” and leading, as 
though through an ultimate collapse of the vital force, toward 
” nothingness ”.

X

THE "VOID".—

"IF THE MIND DOES NOT BREAK”X

THE "VOID".—

"IF THE MIND DOES NOT BREAK”

W E have already quoted a text which sees in the “ void ”, 
in the “ signless ” and in the " without tendency ” the 
characteristics of the " contacts ” of those who emerge from 
the contemplations free from form. And we have also shown 
that the Dhammapada, in its reference to those "whose path 
is as difficult to follow as that of the birds through the air ”, 
associates “ void ” and " signless ” with viv&ka, aloofness or 
detachment. These are not the only places where the concept 
of " void ” {sunna or sunnata) appears in the texts of early 
Buddhism. One who is detached from pleasure and from desire, 
from predilection and from thirst, from fever and from craving 
is called " void Elsewhere the texts speak of a " superior 
man ” dwelling principally in the state of " real, inviolable, pure 
voidness — it is in this state that Prince Siddhattha receives 
and speaks to kings.® He has said that the perceptions no longer 
cling to those who know, who are troubled by nothing in the 
world, who ask no more questions, who have rooted out every 
loathing and who crave neither existence nor non-existence.* 
As one who is detached he experiences every kind of perception 
or sensation or feeKng.® With particular reference to the triad 
" void ”, " signless ”, " without tendency ”, all this is associated 
■with the form of experience — either internal and psychological or 
0? the outside world — of one who continues to live with the centre 
of his own being in the state of Nibbdna or in one or other of 
the higher contemplations ; and the Buddha said of himself that

1 Sathyutt., XXII, 3 .

Majjh., CLI.

» Majjh., CXXII.

« Majjh., XVIII.

' Majjh., CXL.

265

266 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING1 Sathyutt., XXII, 3 .

Majjh., CLI.

» Majjh., CXXII.

« Majjh., XVIII.

' Majjh., CXL.

265

266 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

he could dwell without effort or difficulty in one of the tovocjhana 
or in one of the irradiant contemplations, walking or standing, 
sitting or lying.® It is thus considered that the realisations of 
the Ariya are not only superhuman forms of consciousness but 
are also kinds of profundity wherein we can comprehend the 
multiple variety of the dhamma, that is to say, the various 
elements of internal and external experience.

This experience is itself liberated thereby, and the threefold 
category defined by the expressions " void ” {sunnatd), "signless” 
(animitta), " without inclination or tendency ” (appa'iiihita) refers 
to the very essence of this liberation or transfiguration. The 
category marks the " perfection of knowledge ” or of illumination, 
the knowledge “ that has gone beyond ”, the prajndpdramiid, 
a term which also designates ' a series of later Buddhist texts 
of distinctly Mahdydna, character. Those three terms must then 
be understood essentially suh specie inierioritatis, beyond any 
speculative construction.The " void ’ defines the mood of an experience free from the 
"I ”, and therefore dis-mdividuaJised, whose substratum may, 
analogically, be compared to infinite space, to the ether — dkdsa. 
Its fulfilment is, amongst other things, given by formulae such 
as this : hberation from the " I ” — ajjhattam vimokkha — ^the 
destruction of aU attachments produces a mental clarity which 
paralyses every dsava and removes belief in the personality.’ 
And again : " Since the world is without ‘ I ' and without things 
having the nature of ' I ’, therefore the world has been called 
void.”® " ‘ This is the calm, this is the supreme point, the end 
of all formations, the freeing from all substrate of existence, the 
overcoming of thirst, the final change, the ultimate solution, 
extinction'. In this manner the ascetic may achieve a state 
such that when confronted with earth he is without percep- 
tion of earth, so with water, fiire, wind, infinity of space, 
infinity of consciousness, non-existence, the region beyond percep^ 
tion and non-perception, and such that when confronted with, 
this world he is without perception of the world ; confronted 
with the other world, with what he has seen, heard, felt, cognised,

« AnguU., Ill, 63.

’ Samyutt., XII, 32.

8 Samyutt., XXV, 85,

THE “void” — “if the MIND DOES NOT BREAK” 267« AnguU., Ill, 63.

’ Samyutt., XII, 32.

8 Samyutt., XXV, 85,

THE “void” — “if the MIND DOES NOT BREAK” 267

attained and sought in the mind, even when confronted with 
this he is without perception, yet possesses perception.''® Thus, 
a cycle is conipleted. The beginning corresponds to the end. The 
void, the “ I "-lessness, which we had found to be the final 
truth of sarnsark existence, where all individuality or substan- 
tiality is ephemeral and pure flux, and where thirst for eternal 
rebirth is the final instance, this " void ” also marks the limi t 
of ascetic experience, where, however, it reverses its significance : 
here it expresses the absolute, the super-essential, the super- 
cosmic consciousness, freed without residue and become illumina- 
tion, where no forms nor perceptions nor feehngs nor any other 
dhammd can take root any more, or gain a foothold. That 
which is identical, then, is simultaneously the absolute opposite. 
To the " I "-lessness of sariisaric consciousness we may contrast 
the " I "-lessness of the state of Nibbdm and of perfect illumina- 
tion : sunnatd.The second category, the " signless " — animitta — expresses 
what, in fact, was known in Vedantic speculation as the " supreme 
identity ". It is the non-differentiation of characteristics {nimitta) 
on account of which normal consciousness cannot help distinguish- 
ing between beings, states and things. Not that things lose all 
their characteristics : it is simply that, in a manner of speaking, 
their varying weights, their varying distances in relation to 
liberated consciousness, come to disappear. Each becomes the 
extreme case of itself. Thus, in their very diversity they appear 
identical, as distinct places in space become identical if they 
are not referred to particular co-ordinates, but are considered 
from the point of view of space itself, of something simple, 
limitless and homogeneous. Beings, states or things are " sign- 
less ", then, if they are lived as a function of " void" ; and 
this now takes us on to the deeper significance of the third 
category, appariihita,. We have translated this term as 
" without tendency ". Whilst the bond of an “ I " stUl existed, 
all things " spoke " to this “ I " ; all things participated in 
subjectivity and nourished the illusion of “tendency", of “in- 
tention". Man projects his soul on the world and makes it 
personal, he endows the world with feelings, desires and aims ; 
he projects on to it a pathos, he gives it values and distinctions,

• AnguU., XI, 8 ; ci. XI, 10 ; Sathyutt., XXII, 89.

268 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING• AnguU., XI, 8 ; ci. XI, 10 ; Sathyutt., XXII, 89.

268 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

all of which, in one way or another, inevitably lead back to the 
force that supports his hfe, to appetite, aversion and ignorance. 
Man does not know the bare world, undisguised nature, precisely 
because his perception is itself a “ burning ”, a self-identification, 
a continual self-binding, which takes place in a simultaneous 
process of consuming and being consumed. But such a state 
has been surmounted. Thirst is exhausted, the mist of impurity 
is dispersed. All nature, every perception, every phenomenon, 
the entirety of the dhamma which make up " internal experience ”, 
the ‘‘content of the psyche”, are freed from ‘‘subjectivity”, 
separated from what is ‘‘ human ”, and appear pure, without 
words, without affects, without intentions, in a freshness, an 
originality and an innocence that a Western man might call the 
innocence of the first day of creation. This, then, is the meaning 
of appatiihita, ‘‘ without tendency ”, as a form of the experience 
of those who are hberated, as the third allusive element beyond 
the ” void ” and the '' signless ”.

But with this we have already passed from the tradition of 
original Buddhism to the fimdamental views of the texts of the 
Vva.jnd'pammitd, and of the school of the ‘‘ Greater Vehicle ” itself, 
the Mahdyana : our transition must, under the circmnstances, 
be considered quite natural, and we shall therefore say a few 
words about the doctrine in question.The theme of a double truth — satya-dvaya — spoken of by 
the Buddha, is here particularly stressed : the school of the 
Mddhyamika, especially, placed in contrast to the truth that 
corresponds to normal consciousness {vyavahara-satya) , a higher, 
metaphysical truth (paramdrtha-satya) , about which, however, 
many misunderstandings arose. Often, in fact, a speculative 
system was made to correspond to it, a system where the true 
point of reference should have been an experience or a state. 
Alter the early period of Buddhism, there occurred in the t^yo 
principal schools to which it gave place {Hlnaydna and Mahay dm) 
a definite twofold process of regression and of degeneration. 
Although the nucleus of the original doctrine of the Ariya was 
made up of ascesis aild of experience, and therefore had nothing ■ 
to do either with morality or with speculation, yet these same 
two elements eventually became paramount in the two schools. 
In Hlnaydm the ascesis frequently became weakened through the

THE “void” — “if the MIND DOES. NOT BREAK”. 269THE “void” — “if the MIND DOES. NOT BREAK”. 269

prevalence of the ethical-monastic element which even then 
evinced a certain similarity to Western monasticism ; in addition, 
a pessimistic interpretation of the world was usual, dukkha being 
commonly understood only as “ universal pain ” and Nirvdpa as 
a Beyond rigidly contrasted with samsdra. In Mahdydm, on the 
other hand, the philosophical element came to prevail, in the sense 
that — quite apart from the religious aspect, of which we shall speak 
in a moment — there was a paradoxical attempt to make use of 
the view of the world attributed to a consciousness that was 
hberated and become illumination, as the basis for a philosophical 
system that some have compared to Western “ idealistic ” 
philosophy. This comparison is, however, largely invalid. There 
is a fundamental difference ; for Western idealistic philosophies 
are simply products of the mind and their authors and followers 
are, and remain, men as saihsaric and as devoid of all super- 
rational and super-individual illumination as any of their con- 
temporaries ignorant of university philosophy. The “ ideal- 
ism ” of the speculative Mahay ana Buddhism is, on the other 
hand, an attempt at a rational systematisation of super-rational 
experience behind and above it. Without the dominating figure 
of Prince Siddhattha, not even the speculative idealism of 
Nagarjuna could have made its appearance, yet the existence of 
such figmres as Fichte, Hegel, Schelhng and the like is conceivable 
•without any such antecedent ; at most, no more is required 
than the background of a particular historical phase in Western 
critical and philosophical thought.We can now go on to discuss the views that in Mahdydna are 
more closely connected with our last considerations. Here, a 
single term marks the ultimate essence of every state, object or 
phenomenon of internal or external experience : tathata ; a term 
as difficult to translate as it is to express the state of rarefied 
jllumination from which it takes its sense. The English trans- 
lators use, for tathata, the term " thatness ”* or “ suchness 
the German, Soheit. The word denotes the “ this ”, the quality of 
that which is perceived, in so far as it is directly and evidentially 
perceived, as a subject of pure experience, of simphcity, of im- 
personal transparency. This quality, moreover, understood to be 
its own substratum, devoid of conditions and of generation which

* In English in the original (Tr. note).

270 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

is expressed by the term svayambhu, frequently associated, in the 
texts, with tathata. Tathatd appears as a primary element, beyond 
every qualification of experience as world of " I ” or of non- “ 1

In these texts, the normal designation used for an Awakened 
One, or a Buddha, is Tathdgata, a word which in the ancient books 
of the canon could be trgmslated as “ Accomplished One ”, but 
which here assumes a more special sense. The Tathdgata is one 
who ” has thus gone ”, becoming the “ this ”. The " this ” is 
the equivalent of his actual illumination, conceived as an in- 
expressible and simple existential state. The Awakened One is 
not an ” I ” and he does not “ have ” illumination : he is the 
tathatd, the very substance of the knowledge “ that goes beyond ”, 
the prajhdfdramitd.For him, every content of experience, every objectivity 
— dharmatd — ^becomes resolved into this substance ; and there- 
fore, into something existing as pure evidence, that is not sus- 
ceptible of name, sign or definition, that is inlponderable, that is 
" like the nonpareil ”, that is tathatd. These expressions are found 
thus in one text ; “All objects and states (dharmd) are unthink- 
able, imponderable, immeasurable, uncountable, like the non- 
pareil — ^these are the objects and the states of the Tathdgata [the 
Awakened One] : unthinkable, because the mind has attained 
calm [as opposed to dukkha, the state of samsaric agitation] ; im- 
ponderable, through surmounting the possibOity of being weighed.^ 
Unthinkable and imponderable are designations for what con- 
sciousness comes to attain. Similarly immeasurable, uncormt- 
able, like the nonpareil — these are the properties of the Tathdgata 
[the Awakened- One] because of a counting and measuring 
by peers, who have attained calm and neutrality.”^® Thus, 
" perfect filumination {prajndpdramitd) neither takes nor leaves 
any object experience develops, that is to say, as if in an 
ether-light, that knows no change or motion, like “ a flower open^ 
ing from the abyss ”. The condition of perfect illumination or 
of “ knowledge that goes beyond ” is, in fact, related to dkdga, 
the ether, of which we have already spoken (cf. p. 214), and the 
truth announced by the bodhisattva, by those who are illumination

PrajMparamita, XIII, 83. Quotations from the texts of the Prajndpdramiia 
' are ba^ed on M. Walleser's edition, Gottingen, 1914.

Prajndpdr., VIII, 68.

THE “void” — “if the MIND DOES NOT BREAK” IJlPrajMparamita, XIII, 83. Quotations from the texts of the Prajndpdramiia 
' are ba^ed on M. Walleser's edition, Gottingen, 1914.

Prajndpdr., VIII, 68.

THE “void” — “if the MIND DOES NOT BREAK” IJl

in substance and who move towards perfect awakening, is that 
form has the nature of ether, feelings, perceptions, tendencies, 
•consciousness have the nature of ether ; such is the nature of 
every thing or state {dharma), they do not come, they do not go, 
they are like space, hke ether, they are resolved in the void, in 
the signless, in the without tendency : for them, there is no other 
law.^®. In similar terms the nature itself of an Awakened One 
is defined : “ Why the name of Tathdgata ? Because it expresses 
the true tathaid ; because it has no origin, because it is the des- 
'truction of qualities, because he is one who has no origin, and non- 
origin is the highest aim."^® ’At this height, every form or state or phenomenon or element, 
every dharma appears, through its own nature, as vivikta or 
" detached ” — freed from its individuality both in the world 
that was once -without and also in the interior of the AccompHshed 
One. Dis-individualisatioii, resolution in the, " void ”, in the 
“signless”, and in the "without tendency” then reaches the 
highest regions, dissolves them, removes the final limit and 
prepares for a unity that, though entirely transcendent, is at 
the same time entirely immanent. To resolve all residue of 
duality, to make of the state of Nirvdija something that devours 
all, -without residue, to make of it the “ end of the world ”, that 
which in reality “ leaves nothing behind ” — dnupadhi-gesha — 
•then Nirvdiia itself and, with it, the Awakened One, the Tathdgata, 
inust be freed from individuality, that is, from the signs on accormt 
of which it might have an “ otW ” in opposition. The Nirvdna, 
that early Buddhism -wished to protect by wrapping it ia silence 
and a refusal to speak of it, is here the target of a speculation 
that reaches the height of paradox. This is what we read : 
" The ‘ this ’ [tathatd] of the Tathdgata [the Awakened One] is the 
‘ this ' of every thing, phenomenon or state {dharma), and the 
• this ’ of every thing, phenomenon or state is the ‘ this ’ of the 
Tathdgata, and the ‘ this ’ of every thing, phenomenon or state 
and the ' this ’ of the Tathdgata, that m fact is in its turn the 
‘ this ' of the Tathdgata. , . . The ' this ' of the Tathdgata and 
the ‘ this ’ of every thing, phenomenon or state, that in fact is

Prajndpdr., XV, 90.

V ajracchedikd, XVII (text of the Sacred Books of the East. Mah 5 ,y^lna 
Texts V. XLIX).

14 PrajUdpdr., XXII, 129.

2/2 THE DOCTRINE OP AWAKENING

a single ' this without duality, without plurality, is a ‘ this ' 
devoid of duads.”’-® And again ; “ That which has been14 PrajUdpdr., XXII, 129.

2/2 THE DOCTRINE OP AWAKENING

a single ' this without duality, without plurality, is a ‘ this ' 
devoid of duads.”’-® And again ; “ That which has been

announced by the Tathdgata as perfect illumination {prajndpara- 
mitS), is announced by the Tathdgata. as not perfect illumination 
and for this very reason it is called perfect illumination.”^* — a 
theme which is repeated for a whole series of other elements 
and for the attributes themselves of ein Awakened One, of a 
Buddha : that which has been announced by the Tathdgata as 
a quality of a Buddha, is announced by him as not a quality 
of a Buddha and for this very reason it is called a quality of 
a Buddha.^’ To remain in the " void ” is to remain in perfect 
illumination, in transcendent knowledge. In it dwells the 
bodhisattva : not in the world of the senses, not in a special state 
of ascetic realisation or in its fruits, not even in " Buddha-ness 
Nor is this aU : “ There is no knowledge, there is no ignorance, 
there is no destruction [of ignorance] ; there is no knowledge, 
there is no attainment of Nirvd'fla. A man who has [only] 
approached transcendental knowledge, [stiU] remains shut in by 
his mind {citta). But when the shell of his mind is destroyed, 
he becomes free from all fear, he is carried beyond the world 
of change and attains the ultimate Nirvdna.”'^^ And if one asks : 
” Is there anything that has been announced by the Tathdgata ? ” 
the answer, definite as it is disconcerting, is ; ” No : nothing has 
been announced by the Tathdgata. Again : “ If someone were- 
to say that the Tathdgata goes or comes, stands or sits or lies, 
he would not have understood the meaning of my teaching. 
Why ? Because the word Tathdgata says that he is going no- 
where, that he is coming from nowhere — and for this reason is

Prajndpar,, XVI, 98.

VajracoJiedihd, XIII.Prajndpar,, XVI, 98.

VajracoJiedihd, XIII.

V ajracch&dika, VIII ; cf. XIII, XXVI — ^in this last short chapter the 
formula is extended to the thirty-two attributes of a superior man (cf. p. 19) ; 
these are said really to be such when they cease to be so, as opposed to other£?, 
Cf. XXVI : One who wished to see me by seeing my form or hear me by 
hearing my voice would struggle in vain and would not see me. A Buddha 
must be seen by seeing the law, because the Lords [the Buddhas] have their 
body made of file law {dhaymahaya — on this "body made of \di,w**Mahdydna 
has a vast doctrine] and the nature of the law cannot be understood, nor was it 
made to he understood

Prajndpdr., I, 56.

Prajndpdramitd-hfdaya-’Siitra, in Sacred Books of the East, cit,, part II, 
pp. 147-48.

Vajracchedika, XIII.

THE “void” — “if the MIND DOES NOT BREAK” 273

he called the Taihdgata, the blessed and perfect lUumiHated 
One.”*^Vajracchedika, XIII.

THE “void” — “if the MIND DOES NOT BREAK” 273

he called the Taihdgata, the blessed and perfect lUumiHated 
One.”*^

It is thus that we arrive at the paradoxical equation of the 
most extreme Mahdydna schools : Nirvana and samsdra, the 
unconditioned and the conditioned, the “ end of the world ” and 
the " world ” are without duality, without plurality, they do not 
make a duad : they are one and the same thing. “ Form is 
the void and the void is form. The void is not different from 
form. Form is not different from the void. . . . Thus all beings 
have the character of the void, they have no beginning, they 
have no end, they are perfect and they are not perfect.”*® The 
central theme of the Lankdvatdra-sutra is, in fact, the need of 
taking oneself beyond notions of being and of non-being, of cutting 
oneself off from aU residue of dual thought — vikalpa — of over- 
coming the attitude that seeks Nirvdi^ outside samsdra and 
samsdra outside Nirvdria. Thus, the attitude of the " negativ- 
istic ” schools themselves is rejected. "All texts that affirm the 
unreality of things belong to imperfect doctrine,” as is said in 
the Mahdbheri-hdrakaparivarta-sutra. Another adds that this 
same doctrine of unreality is, in Mahdydna, something that 
obstructs, it is like a gate.*®Nirvdria = samsdra. This means that Nirvdi^a is not an 
" other ” ; it is the absolute dimension (superior both to samsdra 
, and to itself, if it is understood in opposition to samsdra) through 
which the “ this ”, the world can be Hved and essayed. And it 
is only thus, as a function of that which, like the ether, is infinite, 
ungraspable, like the nonpareil, imponderable, not susceptible 
to contamination by anything that is contaminated, immobile 
in any movement — ^it is only thus that the " world ” no longer 
really exists, that in forms, which ensure one who is ruled by 
" ignorance ”, it is no more substantial than an apparition, an 
^echo, or a mirage traced in the limpidity of the open sky.®* In 
its existence it does not exist, in its non-existence it exists : this 
is true both for the world and for one who is liberated, for the 
Taihdgata. This is the meaning of the recurring formula of the 
V ajracchedikd : “ That which has been declared as existing, that

“ Vajraccheiika, XXIX.

2 2 Prajndpdramiid-siZira, ibid,

22 Quoted in K. Nukariya, The religion of the Samurai, London, 1913# P* I 37 »

2^ Cf. our Fenomenologia delVindividuo assoluto, Turin, 1930, para. 30,

274 the doctrine op awakening

very thing has been declared as not existing and it is thus that 
it has been declared to exist.” . At this point it is said : "It, 
indeed, by this doctrine, by this exposition, the mind of one 
who aspires to illumination is not cast down, does not feel the 
abyss [does not sink], does not feel anguish, if his spirit is not 
seized, if he is not as though with a broken back, is not alarmed, 
does not feel terror — ^then such a one is to be instructed in 
the fullness of transcendent knowledge.”**® He will become one 
of those who are said to be '' not comparable with men, not like 
them ”, ” because unthinkable qualities are the gifts of the 
Tathdgaia, of the Venerable Ones {arhant), of the Perfectly 
lUmninated Ones ”.®*Such is the attitude of the esoteric, " supreme truth ” in the. 
teaching — ■paramdrtha. To stand up to it, ” one needs a threefold 
cuirass ”. The profane, when it faces them, tremble and cry : 
“ Rather samsara ! {varam samsara evdvasthamm)."^'’

PrajMpdK, I, 35 ; ct 44 
Prajndpdr,, XXII, 127.

BodhicarydvatdraHkd, IX, 53. In tlieir turn, tliese Mahdydna views have 
constituted one of the premises of Buddhist Tantrism, of the " path of lightning 
amd of the diamond ” with its development into a magic outlook on the world; 
on which, -see our work already quoted, Lo Yoga della poienza.

xr

UP TO ZEN

S INCE our aim has been to give the original Doctrine of 
Awakening as it appears from a study of the Pali texts, we 
have no need to deal in detail with the changes and transforma- 
tions of Buddhism in later epochs : besides, this would be more 
in the province of history than in that of doctrine. We shall 
confine ourselves, then, to a few short notes.

We have already said that Buddhism, in its true essence, is of 
an eminently aristocratic nature. At the beginning. Buddhism 
was the truth understood by those few, who alone had really 
achieved illumination and who appeared as hhikhhu or wandering 
ascetics. Then, around these, the upasaka, lay followers, collected 
and increased and who, according to the canonical formula, had 
taken refuge in the Buddha, the Doctrine and the Order. The 
Order, however, did not resemble a church and the doctrine still 
•less a religion. Women were originally excluded. The unity of 
the Order was essentially due to a strict style of life. It was 
only later, and with a decadence fully recognised as such by the 
ancient texts, that precepts and rules multiplied.The decadence of Buddhism was inevitable once it began to 
spread : for the Ariya Doctrine of Awakening is closer than any 
other to a path of initiation that may be understood and trodden 
only by the few in whom, together with exceptional strength, 
•there is present a lively aspiration for the unconditioned. And 
even racial and caste influences played their part : not for nothing 
have we insisted on the “Aryan ” quality of the doctrine under 
discussion. Frontiers to comprehension exist in the normal way, 
and they are conditioned by the race of spirit and, in part, by 
the body itself. As soon as Buddhism was adopted by the masses 
£md not only passed to levels where foreign influences survived

275

276 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

or were re-aroused, but spread even to peoples of notably different 
stock, changes and alterations became inevitable.

After the original period, the two principal streams of Buddhism 
have been, as we have said, Hlnayana and Mahdyana. There is 
probably more formal purity in the former than in the latter. 
Htnaydna remained the custodian of the canonical Pali texts, 
which every Buddhist recognises as " Scripture ”, and made them 
the base of its orthodoxy. But, as we said a few pages back, 
this stream eventually developed a prevalently ethical-ascetic 
interpretation of the Doctrine of Awakening on a pessimistic and 
claustral foundation ; an interpretation that represented, in fact, 
a fall in level. Yet Htnaydna retained more traces of the clarity, 
simplicity and austerity which reflect the original Ariyan style.Things went differently in Mahdyana, which developed in 
Northern India, Tibet and Nepal, where the presence of Mongolian 
elements mixed with even more ancient ethnic strains was 
noteworthy. Mahdydna presents a particularly complex and 
coniposite picture, which it is not always easy to analyse. On 
the one hand its metaphysical level is undeniably much higher ; 
on the other, cracks and changes in the structure become equally 
evident.

If we look at the negative elements, we must in the first place 
note that, in Mahdydna the Doctrine of Awakening from being 
the heritage of an elite of true ascetics, degenerated into a^ 
“ religion ” with an extensive mythology. Mahdydna is aware 
of the aspects which do not allow the Buddha to be considered 
simply as a man. Mahdydna, in fact, emphasised the cosmic 
and supernatural significance of the Awakened Ones and of the 
bodhisattva, who advance towards awakening. But, on the 
other hand, it allowed the deification in a religious sense of 
the Buddha, who here ceases to be one who is liberated and 
instead becomes a god, the object of a cult and of devout adora- 
tion that Brahmanic Hinduism tried to arrogate to itself by*^ 
making him one of the avatdrd, the manifestations of Vishnu. 
In these aspects of Mahdydna, feeling and imagination get 
the better of the purely intellectual and virile principle. As 
opposed to the Doric bareness of original Buddhism, we have 
here what is reaUy a fabulous and kaleidoscopic phantasmagoria 
of thousands of divinities and bodhisattva, of beings who are the

UP TO ZEN

277UP TO ZEN

277

mythological personifications of the various states of contempla- 
tion, of symbols, worlds, heavens and marvels. The Buddha 
becomes a transcendent being in the person of Amitabha, whose 
name means " infinite splendour and with whom primordial 
memory is enigmatically associated. Amitabha reigns in the 
" blessed land of the West ”, Sukhavati, where neither impurity, 
nor death, nor destruction exist ; this has the same traits as those 
of similar lands in the ancient Aryan-Western traditions, in ancient 
Egypt and the myth of Gilgamesh itself. These are mythical 
transpositions of the memory of the original Western (or North- 
Western) home of the “divine race”.’- Between Amitabha 
and the world of men stands Avalokitejvara, with the traits 
of a divine mediator, the " Lord who looks down ”, moved by 
love and compassion for aU creatures.Whilst these creatures are, on the one hand, led along the 
path of bhakti, of religious " devotion ” — and in some cases 
Avalokite9vara even changes sex, and becomes a maternal 
divinity, the Kuan Yin of Chinese Buddhism — on the other, they 
are each given the quality of bodhi, which is the extra-samsaric 
element capable of producing the miracle of illumiaation. Not 
only in each man, but — according to the more popular forms of 
this faith (since we must now call it a faith) — ^in every living being 
generally, apotential Buddha had to be seen. And here, naturally, 
we find a resurgence of particularly virulent forms of reincama- 
*tional fantasies that sometimes assume ridiculous shapes as the 
counterpart of a doctrine of " merits ”. From life to life, by 
accumulating “ merits ” of all descriptions, living beings gradu- 
ally become Awakened Ones. They are helped, besides, by the 
Bodhisattva, who here become semi-celestial beings, losing, at the 
same time, a large part of their Olympian traits : for, not only 
are men now no longer left to their own efforts to achieve awaken- 
ing, as they were in the original austere and virile doctrine, but 
*the Bodhisattva are concerned with universal salvation. They 
now go to the aid of men, and make a vow not to enter 
Nirvana themselves imtil, with their help, all living beings have 
arrived there too. These doctrines are certainly " generous ” in 
the equalitarian and, we were almost going to say, Christian sense,

^ Cf. our JRivoUa contro il mondo moderno, cit., II, paras. 4~5* Sukhavati, 
cf. the two SukhdvaH-vydha in Sacred Books of ike East, v., XLIX,

278 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

but they have little of the Aryan or the really traditional style 
about- them. We no longer have before us the Ariyan Doctrine 
of Awakening, but a religion put together for the satisfaction of 
the faith and sentiments of the masses, to the detriment of the 
knowledge and clear vision that conforms to reality.A second aspect of the degeneration of Buddhism is the philo- 
sophical one. Already the later part of the Pali canon, the 
AbMihamma, often shows the same stereotyped, unalive and 
rationalistic profile that belongs chiefly to our own medieval 
scholasticism. In Mahdydna, thought certainly has broader play, 
but it gives place to the misunderstanding we have already dis- 
cussed. The great merit of Mahdydna. lies in this : that it_ has 
taken as its foundation the point of view, not of a saihsaric being, 
but of an Awakened One, not of an ordinary man who strives, 
but of a Buddha, a Tathdgata, not the terminus a quo but the 
terminus ad quem. That which for the former cannot help 
being something negative and indefinite — Nirvdna — and which 
Hinaydna, too, considered essentially as being evanescently dis- 
tant, in Mahdydna assumes, instead, undeniably positive features. 
Here it is a question not so much of Nirvdna as of its counterpart, 
illumination, prajfid or hodhi. In its highest aspects, M^ahaydna 
is certainly a doctrine of illumination ; but unfortunately the 
demon of speculation managed to find a way in. Mahdydna often 
transforms that which, in its nature, is something super-rational 
and inexpressible, comprehensible only on the basis of a direct 
transcendent experience, into a speculative concept, and it be- 
comes the organ of a system of thought. The “void” — sunfta — • 
and the intangible tathatd condense, in spite of themselves, into 
concepts of a special theory of knowledge and of the world. We 
have, thus, the equivalents — anticipated by many centuries — of 
Western absolute idealism. Things only exist as creations of 
the mind. Mind is the original and permanent substance 
^bhutatathatd — ^intact and identical with itself in any phenom-'" 
enon. Earthly or celestial apparitions, samsdra, men, gods, 
Buddhas, all originate only in the mind. Mind is hke the water 
of the ocean, phenomena are like the waves that wrinkle its sur- 
faces ; mind and phenomena are of the same substance. Outside 
the rhind, nothing has real existence. So we arrive at Nagarjuna’s 
system.UP TO ZEN

279

• These ideas, which, as philosophical views, have nothing to do 
with higher knowledge, contain, nevertheless, a reflection of it, 
and are thus not without a certain cathartic power. The fall of 
level that they represent was halted in Mahay ana by the presence 
of a genuine esoterism which was capable, in a restricted circle 
of qualified individuals, of rectif jdng such theories and restoring 
them to the higher plane to which they belong, and also of 
discovering the secret knowledge hidden behind the m 3 rthological 
form of the various beings and divinities in the religious aspect 
of Mahayam. This same “idealistic" or “unrealistic'' theory, 
we must admit, was valued less from a theoretical point of 
view than from a practical one, as it was used as a kind 6f 
medicine for the purpose of purification. The misery of beings 
derives from their taking as reality /things that exist only as 
creations of their mind ; deceived by the false appearances of 
real beings and qualities, and of different natures and values, 
action takes them ever further away from true reahty, nourishes 
“ ignorance ", creates ever stronger bonds and perpetuates the 
irrational round which the living pursue. One who steeps him- 
self, instead, in the reality of the " void ", in the unreality of 
everything that, in heaven or earth, seems objective, leaves his 
intoxication little by little behind him, feels a loftier calm, de- 
taches himself from action that is due to craving and abandons 
vulgar interests, hate and anger. He has now made his mind 
ready to receive a higher knowledge. It is in this sense that the 
ideahsm or unrealism of Mahdydna, which possesses not a few 
points of contact with that of the Vedanta, had, and still has, a 
cathartic value.In this connection arises the problem of the extent to which 
a knowledge that, because it refers to transcendent summits, 
should be inarticulate, while being able, in general, to provide 
directional “ suggestions " and to encourage moments of 
fllumination.

In this very connection, and to end our exposition, we wish 
to say something about what is known as Zen Buddhism. Zen 
is one of the most important streams of esoteric Buddhism trans- 
planted into China and Japan and is still iti existence. According 
t© tradition, it is actually based on a secret doctrine trans- 
mitted from spirit to spirit by Prince Siddhattha to his disciple

T

zSo THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

Mahakassapa. Preserved tlirough. an uninterrupted chain of 
masters, it was carried, at the beginning of the sixth century a.d., 
into China by Bodhidharma, third son of a powerful Brahman 
king of South-West India. From China, Zen passed to Japan, 
where it grew powerful roots and had important developments. 
We are dealing, in substance, with a branch of Mahdyma esoter- 
ism, which found, in certain Taoist views (particularly in La6-tze’s 
doctrine of the “ void ”) and in certain tendencies of the Chinese 
mind (above all, in its feeling for nature), congenial elements with 
which it combined. As for the term Zen, it is itself the abbrevia- 
. tion of the Sino- Japanese term that corresponds to the Sanskrit 
dhydna and to the PaliyAawa. But here this term must be under- 
stood in a wider sense than we have previously given it. In 
general, it expresses a form of contemplation developed under 
the sign of the " void ”.Zen is not, as a few have claimed, a “ Chinese anomaly ” of 
Buddhism ; it is essentially a renewal of the exigency that origin- 
ally gave Hfe to Buddhism in the face of Brahmanic speculation 
- and ritualism. In fact, at one period there had taken place in 
Buddhism, but using different terms, the same phenomenon of 
decay, of scholastic formalisation and of traditional and ritualistic 
survival, as in post-Vedic India. Zen appears to have represented . 
as strong a reaction against all this as, in its own time, original 
Buddhism did against its own background of circumstances, 
Zen will have nothing to do with speculations, canonical writings,'" 
rites or religious aberrations. It is even positively iconoclastic. 
It does not. Eke Nagarjuna, discuss transcendental truth, but 
desires to create, through a direct action of the mmd on the 
mind, the conditions for its actual realisation.®

“ The Scriptures are nothing more than useless paper ”, says 
Rin-zai, a Zen master. Another thus reprimands one who was 
burning Confucian books : “ Y ou would have done better to have 
burned the books in your mind and your heart, rather than these 
written in black and white.” Texts, dogmas, precepts are so 
many bonds or so many crutches, to be put aside that one may 
advance on one's own. The Buddhist canonical Eterature itself 
is Ekened to a window, from which one contemplates the great

* The data and the quotatioijs from texts, in what follows, are taken from 
Kaiten Nnkariya, The religion of the Sumarai, London, 1913, and D. T. Suzuki, 
le bouddhisme Zen, Paris, 1940.

UP TO ZEN

281UP TO ZEN

281

scene of nature : but to live in this scene you must jump outside 
the window, 'there is also the simile of the finger and the moon : 
to indicate the position of the moon, a finger is necessary : but 
woe to those who mistake the finger for the moon. We must think 
the same of transcendental knowledge and achievement. As 
nature hates a vacuum — ^it is said — ^so Zen abhors everything that 
may come between reality and ourselves. Reap, if you can, the 
allusions contained in the doctrines : but beware of binding your- 
self to words and concepts. The idea of a special passing-on of 
the true knowledge independently of the texts is the cornerstone 
of one of the principal schools of Zen. The state of a Buddha — ^it 
is maintained — can only be understood by one who is himself a 
Buddha. To describe it in words is a task that would have been 
beyond the power of the son of the Sakya himself.To illustrate the teaching of inward independence, an anecdote 
is told of a Zen master who, to warm himself one icy morning, 
chopped to pieces a.- consecrated statue of the Buddha and put 
it on the fire with the remark : “ The Buddha would have offered 
not the wood of his statue, but even his very life to help another,” x 
The Buddha, he who has taught how to cut off every bond and 
how to subsist without support, must not become a bond and a 
support. With regard to the boundary that separates vision 
from mental expression, and to the consequent necessity of an act 
gtarting from within, we find in Zen some episodes that are down- 
right drastic. A disciple who finally asked his master to reveal 
to him the fundament^ principle of the Buddhist doctrine, is sent 
to another master. The question is repeated, and the answer is 
a slap in the face. Referring the matter to his first master, the 
disciple is again sent to the second. He asks the same question 
and the answer is no different ; a slap in the face. He is sent a 
third time. This time the disciple, as soon as he is in the presence 
of the master, without a word, himself gives the other a blow on 
tte face. The master, smiling, then tells him : " You have 
understood.” Another Zen master told a prince who w^ debat- 
ing with him : “ We ask nothing of the Buddha, of the Law, or 
of the Order.” The prince then says : " If you ask nothing of 
the Buddha, of the Law or of the Order, what, then, is the aim 
of your cult ? ’ ' Here, again, the answer is simply a slap on the face.

The Zen texts are rich in anecdotes where the impulse to know

282 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENINGThe Zen texts are rich in anecdotes where the impulse to know

282 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

intellectually is cut off by an answer that is entirely out of key, 
or by a brusque action by the master ; they are answers or actions, 
however, that sometimes act in a mature spirit as a catharsis. 
They may suddenly confront you with an empty chasm into which 
you must jump, leaving everything behind : your self, your own 
mind, your theories, even your own preoccupation with libera- 
tion. A man, wishing to be initiated into the knowledge, knocks 
at the door of a Zen monastery. The only answer he gets, is that 
the door is shut so brutally in his face that one of his arms js 
broken. In that instant, illumination flashes Over the man. 
" What is the sacred temple of the Buddha ? ” asks another. 
The Zen master replies : “An innocent girl.” "And who is the 
lord of the temple ? ” — “A child in her womb.” " What is the 
true body of the Vairochana Buddha ? ” The master replies : 
“ Fetch me a jug of water.” The disciple does so. The master 
says : “ Take it back to where it was.” And this is all. An 
assembly was called together to hear a lecture, long anticipated, 
on the essence of the doctrine. The master finally appears and, 
without speaking, stretches out his arms.This leads us on to another Zen theme : “ the tongue of the 
inanimate ”. These are Seigen-Ishin’s words ; “ Before a man 
studies Zen, for him mountains are mountains and waters are 
wiaters. When, thanks to the teaching of a qualified master, he,, 
has attained the inner vision of the truth of Zen, for him moun-^ 
tains are no longer mountains and waters are no longer waters, 
fiut after this, when he has really reached the haven of calm, 
once again mbuntains are, for him, mountains and waters, 
waters.” The second phase evidently corresponds to Nirvdm 
when it is faced by samsara ; the third, to Nirvdi^a which leaves 
no residue. The " return ” must be interpreted on the lines of 
the liberated experience, where every dualism is resolved, which 
we discussed in coimection \7ith the Mahdydm doctrine of the 
“ void ” and of the tathatd, Zen, however, tends to make nature 
itself suggest this dis-individuaJised and liberated experience, - 
and to produce moments of illinnination such as give a sense 
of the change of state, in which lies the essence of the path. 
The mind must come to feel that ever5dhing becomes mani- 
fest and reveals itself according to an absolute .and unparalleled 
perfection : only then jwill it have intimations also of that Nirvdm

UP TO ZEN 283UP TO ZEN 283

which leaves nothing behind it, and which corresponds to the 
mountains that are once again mountains and to the waters that 
are once more waters. One simile, in this connection, is quite 
expressive : The shadow follows the body, the echo arises from 
the voice. He who chases his shadow tires his body, not knowing 
that it is the body that produces the shadow ; and he who raises 
his voice to drown an echo, does not' know that the voice is the 
cause of the echo." It is also said : " The subject achieves cahn 
when the object vanishes; the object vanishes when the sub- 
ject achieves calm.' Lao-tze had already taught : "Abandon in 
order to obtain.” It is a question of creating a state of absolute 
identity with oneself, without signs, without intentions. Thus, 
Zen, following the steps of Taoism, speaks of an act which 
■ is a non-effort or a non-intention — ambhogd-caryd — and of a 
corresponding resolution, like a "vow” — ambhoga-pranidhana. 
Another saying : "As two flawless mirrors reflect, one in the other, 
$0 the concrete fact and the spirit must face each other without 
any foreign body being interposed.” Once again, it is a matter 
of catharsis from subjectivity, of destruction of " psychology ”, 
which had already been the aim of the yathdbhutam of ancient 
Buddhism, the transparent vision conforming to reality. Then 
nature, in its hberty and impersonality, in its extraneousness to 
all that is subjective and affective, is able to intimate the state 
^of illumination. This is why Zen declares that the doctrine is 
found in simple and natural facts rather than in the texts of the 
canon, and that the universe is its real Scripture and the body of 
the Tathdgata. “ Trees, grass, mountains, streams, stars, the sea, 
the moon — ^with this alphabet the texts of Zen are written.” "Can 
the inanimate preach the doctrine ? ” Hui-chung repHes : " Yes, 
it preaches with eloquent words and without ceasing:” The sun 
rises. The moon sets. Mountain heights. Ocean depths. Spring 
flowers. Fresh summer breeze.' The large autuirmal moon. 
"Winter snowflakes. "These things, perhaps too simple for a 
common observer to pay them attention, have a deep meaning 
for Zen.” " What is the truth ? ” asks a disciple. As a reply, 
the master Yo-shan indicates the sky with his finger and then a 
pitcher of water and says : "Do you see ? ” The other says : \ 
" No.” Yo-shan replies : " The cloud is in the sky and the water 
in the pitcher ” : that is all. Tung-shan says : " How wonderful284 the doctrine oE awakening

is the tongue of the inanimate. You cannot hear it with your 
ears, but you can hear it with your eyes”: with the Unclosed eye of 
the mind, not through perception, not with logic, not with meta- 
physics. Another saying of Zen : “ The leaves that fall, like the 
flowers that open, reveal for us the blessed law of the Buddha." 
We must, however, be very careful not to confuse all this with 
aestheticism sui generis. The Far Eastern simplified and par- 
ticularly transparent feeling for nature plays its part, as we have 
said. But the fundamental point is to go up, from nature, which 
is free from soul and is only itself, free from affects and subjectiv- 
ity, to the perception where, in fact, “mountains are again moun- 
tains and waters, waters ”. A Zen formula, which in some ways 
sums up its doctrine, is : “ Reflect in yourself and recognise your 
own face as it was before the world ” (Huei-neng).

Together with the message of the inanimate, there is a manner 
in which signs, gestures and symbols take the place of' words. 
We have already mentioned the master of Zen who, before the 
assembly of monks collected to hear his discourse, confined him- 
self to stretching his arms. Another simply raises his finger. 
Another presents a stick. It is said that Mahakassapa was chosen 
by the Buddha for the transmission of the esoteric doctrine in 
similar circumstances : the Buddha, in the midst of his disciples, 
had raised a bunch of flowers into the air ; only MahdMssafa 
among those present had smiled and inclined his head in assent. 
Words limit. A sign can, however, at a suitable time, cause 
moments of illumination.From these antecedents, it is not di ffi cult to understand that 
Zen insists above all on a spiritual awakening, or change of inner 
state, that is sudden and discontinuous. The opening of the third 
eye, satori, illumination, is a condition which happens suddeiily, 
destroying all that has gone before, appearing to be without origin, 
without " becoming ”. The theme of the Vajracchedikd is echoed 
in Zen : the Tathdgata is so called because he does not come from' 
anywhere and does not go anywhere. " When he appears, he 
comes from nowhere, and when he disappears, he goes nowhere 
— and this is Zen." And again : “ Where there really is a com- 
ing in or a going out, there great contemplation is not. Zen, [the 
contemplative state, ihe state of iUumination-awakening] in its 
essence, is without birth.”

UP. TO ZEN 285

At one period, nevertheless, Zen became divided into two differ- 
ent schools : that of the South — yuga-pad — ^which lays greater 
emphasis on the discontinuity of the awakening ; and that of the 
North — krama-vnUya — ^which, instead, allows of a certain gradual- 
ness. But both agree that it is essential, at a particular moment, 
to know how to " jump out of the ‘ I ’ how to " vomit forth 
the ‘I ’ This may be brought about also by violent, sensa-^ 
tions, even by a physical pain, by something, according to a 
Chinese sa3dng, that " twists the bowels nine times and more 
We have already told of the episode of the broken arm ; and 
there are many like it. It seems that, in some places at the present 
time, an operation not unlike strangulation is carried out, by 
meains of which the disciple, who is suitably prepared, is forced 
forward towards a void into which he cannot but jump.

As for preparation, the methods of Zen do not differ essentially 
from what we have already described as Ariyan ascesis.As for preparation, the methods of Zen do not differ essentially 
from what we have already described as Ariyan ascesis.

I Firstly. Make oneself master of external objects by substitu- 
ting a condition of activity for the usual one of passivity. 
Realise that wherever a desire pushes a man towards a thing, 
it is not he who has the thing, but the thing that has him. " He 
who takes a liquor beheves that he drinks it ; whereas it is the 
liquor that drinks him.” Detach oneself. Discover and love 
the active principle in oneself.

Secondly. Mastery of the body. Estabhsh one’s own author- 
*ity over the entire organism. " Imagine that your body is 
separate from you : if it shouts, make it be silent, as a severe 
father does his child. If it shows temper, hold it in, as one does 
a curbed horse. If it is ill, administer to it what is necessary, 
as a doctor to his patient. If it disobeys, chastise it, as the 
master chastises the turbulent pupd.” Temper oneself physically. 
Estabhsh with oneself a “ trial of endurance ” ^y accustoming 
oneself, for example, to undergoing freezing cold in winter and 
In summer a torrid heat. And so on.

Thirdly. Control of mental and emotive life in order to 
promote ^d consohdate a state of equihbrium. There is the 
appeal to one’s inner nobihty : “ It is ridiculous ” — it is said in 
Zen-^" that a being endowed with the nature of a Buddha, bom 
to be master of every material reahty, should be enslaved by 
httle cares or frightened by phantasms that he himself has created.

286 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING286 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

should let his mind be swayed by passions or dissipate his vital 
energy in irrelevant' things.” Anxieties, recriminations or 
nostalgias for the past, imaginings or anticipations for the future, 
enmity, shame and disturbance, all these must be put aside. 
On'e may help oneself, eventually, by means of the “ idealistic ” 
theory (cf . p. 279) — ^which may help one to realise the irrationality 
of so many of the mind’s impulses, and to regaining power over 
one’s heart. Furthermore, one must simphfy oneself, one must 
resolutely cut down the parasitical overgrowth of vain and 
muddled thoughts. To the question : ” How shall I learn the 
law ? ” a Zen master, Poh Chang, replied : ” Eat when you are 
hungry and sleep when you are tired.” Calm and equilibrium 
— ^the samatha that we have frequently mentioned — ^must become 
a habit. Here is an anecdote ; when commanding an army in 
battle, even in his headquarters, O-yo-mei would discuss Zen 
doctrines. He was informed, on one occasion, that his advanced 
troops had been defeated ; he calmly continued his discourse. 
Shortly after, he was told that, in the later developments of the 
battle he had become the victor. The commander remained as 
calm as before, and did not, even then, change his ’ discourse. 
This is how one gradually apprehends the existence of a principle 
that cannot be altered by doubt or fear any more than the light 
of the sun can be (iestroyed by fog or clouds.Fourthly. When we come to the aforesaid " throwing out of^ 
the mind ” or " of the ' I ’ ”, we find that we are here faced 
with some sort of discontinuity, for which there is no means 
of preparing, because it is an actual change of state. To one 
Who was astonished at the saying, that the world enters into 
the mind, a Zen master replied saying that the difficulty con- 
sists, rather, in making the inind enter into the world. It is 
a matter of the breaking of the shell constituted by the mind, 
of ‘ which a Mahdyma text we have already quoted, speaks ; 
only then does one have the intuition that Nirvana, when under-”" 
Stood as one term of an opposition, is itself an illusion, a bond, 
the object of an imperfect knowledge.

Zen uses a twofold symboHsm for the structinre pf its discipline : 
that of the “ five degrees of merit ” and that of the vicissitudes 
of the man and the bull.

The ” first degree of merit ” corresponds to the " conversion ”

UP TO ZEN

287

—similar to pahhajjd, the " departure " of the ancient Buddhist 
teaching : a ihan turns from the outer world toward the inner 
world. The illuminated, extrasaihsaric " I ”, is here portrayed 
as a king to whom one declares allegiance. The second degree 
of merit is “ service ” — that is to say, faithfulness and loyalty to 
this inner sovereign. The third degree is ” valour ”, what one 
must show when confronting and combating all opposition to 
the king. Then there is the “ merit of him who co-operates ”, 
due to one who is not simply good at defence and fighting, but 
who is admitted to the positive government of the State. The 
final degree of merit : " beyond merit ” or " merit that is not 
merit ” (an expression to be understood in the same sense as 
“ acting without acting ”) is the degree of the king himself, 
whose nature one assumes. Here action ceases or, if you prefer, 
action is manifested in the form of non-action, of spontaneity. 
The being and the law are here identical.And now the second Zen symboHsm, made up of ten well-known 
illustrations corresponding to ten episodes in the adventures of 
a drover and a bull. The mind — ^represented in the preceding 
allegory, by the king — or rather, ” illumination ”, the hodhi 
element, is conceived as a precious stone, alwa}^ fresh and pure, 
even when buried in dust. It has to be found as the drover 
seeks a bull. The first figure is, in fact, uncertain search. The 
^second is hope : the animal has not yet been seen, but its tracks 
have been sighted. Third ; the bull is seen in the distance, and 
a cautious advance towards it is made. Fourth : the animal is 
suddenly seized, and it tries in vain to escape. Fifth : the 
animal is tamed, mastered and fed, so that finally it follows the 
drover as if it were his shadow. Sixth ; the drover is carried 
home by this animal which serves him as a mount. Seventh ; 
” the forgetting of the animal and the remembering of the man.” 
Eighth : “ the forgetting both of the bull and of the man ” — 
Ihe corresponding figure gives only a large empty circle : we are 
at the point of overcoming all dualism in the ” void ”, in hberated 
consciousness. Ninth : return to the origins and to the source 
— ^we remember the Zen sa3nng : ” rediscover your own face as 
it was before the world.” Last figure : going into the town with 
the hands open; this phase should be compared with that in 
which, once again, “ mountains are mountains and waters.

288 THE DOCTRINE OP AWAKENING288 THE DOCTRINE OP AWAKENING

waters It is the point at which transcendency becomes 
the clarity of an immanence that is free from the stain of the 
" I ” ; it is the state in which there is nothing that comes or 
goes, that enters or leaves. As a corollary of this, some Zen 
masters have declared that self-application and self-concentration 
and the seeking of solitary and silent places belong to heterodox 
teachings. " Do not be attached to anjdhing whatsoever : if 
you understand this, walking or standing, sitting or l5dng, you 
will never cease to be in the state of Zen, in the state of 
contemplation and of hlummation.”

The Zen masters teach that the blessed Order of the ancient 
Ariya, seated round Prince Siddhattha, is even now gathered 
at the Vultmre’s Peak, that is to say, at the symbolical place 
where, in the Mahayam texts, the Awakened One is supposed 
most frequently to have spoken and that expresses the tradi- 
tional idea of the “ Centre ”, the " Centre of the World ”.

1

xri

THE ARIYA ARE STILL GATHERED 
ON THE VULTURE’S PEAK

I N this book we have not set out to make Buddhist propaganda 
but, rather, as we said, to indicate the fundamental elements 
of a complete system of ascesis : these elements may be found 
in other traditions also, but they appear with particular clarity 
in the Buddhist teaching which lends itself admirably to our 
purpose for the various reasons that we discussed at the begim^g.

It now remains to suggest the significance that an ascesis of 
this sort may have at the present day.

We need hardly stress the fact that the modem world stands, 
more completely so perhaps than in any other civilisation, at 
the opposite pole to that of an ascetic view of life. We are 
not talking here of the religious problem, which, as we have 
seen, has no direct relationship to higher ascesis. We are 
speaking of fundamental orientations of the spirit.• It would be hard to deny that " activism ”, the exaltation 
and practice of action understood as force, impetus, becoming, 
straggle, transformation, perennial research or ceaseless move- 
ment, is the watchword of the modem world. The world of 
the “ being ” is drawing to its close, and this decline has, 
for long been hailed with joy. Not only do we have to-day 
the triumph of activism, but also a philosophy sui generis at 
its service ; a philosophy whose systematic criticism and whose 
Speculative apparatus serve to justify it in every way whilst 
pouring contempt and heaping discredit on all other points of 
view. Interest in pure knowledge has become ever more dis- 
placed by interest in ” living ” and in '' doing ” or, a,t any rate, 
by interest in those departments of knowledge which can be 
employed in terms of action or practical and temporal realisation. 
To-day the nature and potentialities of pure knowledge, that

289 -•

290 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

is to say, knowledge whose peculiar object — as in the traditional 
ideal of all periods — ^is super-individual and super-historical reality 
is almost unknown. Our contemporaries grow ever more 
accustomed to disregard the " being ” aspect of things and 
concentrate, instead, upon their aspect as “ becoming ”, “ life ”, 
“ movement ”, *' development ” or ” history ”.” Historicism ” and the cult of becoming ” beat out the 
rhythm of activism, even on the cultural plane. Pragmatism, 
voluntarism, irrationahsm, varieties of the religion of “ life ” and 
" actuality ”, relativism, evolutionism, progressivism, Faust-ism, 
are lines of speculation that, in spite of their different guises, all 
spiring from the same motive. And this, then, is merely the 
translation into terms of self-consciousness and intellectual 
. justification of the central motive of the precipitate life of these 
times, with its tumult, its agitation, its fever for speed, its 
mechanisation devoted to the shortening of all intervals of space 
and time, its congestive and breathless rhjdhm that is, particularly 
in the New World, carried to its limit. There the activistic, theme 
really reaches paroxysmal and almost pandemic heights and 
completely absorbs the whole of hfe, whose horizons, moreover, 
are thereby restricted, to the dark and gloom which are natural 
to wholly temporal and contingent achievements.

It is too an ominous fact that forces of a collectivist, and 
therefore sub-personal, nature, must gain more and more power^ 
over beings who have no real traditional support and are racked 
by a hmdamental restlessness. The activist world is also ■ 
essentially a featureless and plebeian world, ruled by the demon 
of collectivism ; it is not only the scene of triumph of what 
has been called " the ideal animal ”, but it is also a world that • 
is essentially ” telluric ”, moved by forces that are bound up 
with the elements of “ mass ” and " quantity ”, where action, 
force, strife and even heroism and sacrifice are seen to become 
increasingly irrational, devoid of light, “ elemental ” and 
altogether earthly. ,That which the ancient Indo-Aryan wisdom had denoted by 
the symbol of saihsaric existence, and which corresponding 
Western traditions had styled " the Age of Iron ”, can now he 
said to be at the height of its career ; and there is no lack, either 
in Buddhism or in similar traditions, of texts in which, such

ARIYA STILL GATHERED ON THE VULTURE’s PEAK 29;!

characteristics of times to come were predicted with astonishing 
accuracy.^ We repeat, however, that the main characteristic of 
our times is not that life tends to exhaust itself almost exclusively 
on the samsaric plane, but that our civilisation stimulates and 
exalts this kind of life, and considers it, not so much as a state 
of fact, but rather as something of value, as something that should 
be, as something that is 'right. It must be unique in all history 
that samsara should become the object of a species of mystique 
or rehgion. The new philosophies of life, of becoming, of the 
elan vital, which flourish on the borders of practical activism, 
have just this significance and even come to exalt, in human 
existence all that is unconscious spontaneity, pure vitality, pre- 
personal biological substratum and which is therefore, essentially 
pre-human and sub-human.To think that we can effectively react against such a state of 
affairs, taken as a whole, would be frivolous, and would mean 
(unless we are simply dealing with intellectual reactions) ignor- 
ing the remote causes that have gradually led up to it ;* they 
are causes that cannot be removed in a day. But although suc- 
cess on a large scale, taking into account the general orientation 
of the modern world, is at present very remote, yet it might be 
achieved locally within the circle of an Slite, of a certain number of 
qualified individuals. The only possible point of reference, here, 
^is ascetic values, in the fullest, purest and strictest meaning of 
the term. The affirmation of an ascetic vision of life is today 
particularly necessary in view of the unparalleled force of the 
*' telluric ” and saifasaric element in the modem world.

The prejudices that have been created or encouraged by dertain 
quite special, abnormal and un-Aryan forms of ascesis we have 
already removed. Let no one, then, declare that ascesis means 
renunciation, flight from the world, inaction, quietism or mortifi- 
cation. The affirmation of a background of pure transcendency 
*fo balance a world that is ever more and more the captive of 
’ immanency, is the first point and the first task. But another 
point, not less important, concerns that very action which lies so 
close to the heart of our contemporaries. Indeed, one could justly 
maintain that those who despise all asceticism know nothing of

1 Cf. out RivoUa contro il mondo moderno, cit. Appendix II.

* Cf. our RivoUa coniro il mondo modsrno, cit., pari: II, fassim^

292 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING1 Cf. out RivoUa contro il mondo moderno, cit. Appendix II.

* Cf. our RivoUa coniro il mondo modsrno, cit., pari: II, fassim^

292 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

what action really is, and what they exalt is merely an inferior, 
emasculated and passive form of action. The sdrt of activism 
that consists in fever, impulsiveness, identification, centreless 
vertigo, passion or agitation, far from testifying power, merely 
demonstrates impotence. Our own classical world knew this well : 
the central theme of the Ciceronian oration Pro -Marcello is just 
this : there is no higher power than that of mastery over oneself. 
Only those who possess this mastery can know what is the true 
action, which shows them also to the outside world, not as those 
who are acted upon, but as those who truly act. We remember the 
illuminating Buddhist saying : he who goes, stands still — ^he who 
stands still, goes. For this very reason, in the traditions springing 
from the same root all movement, activity, becoming or change 
was referred to the passive and female principle, whilst to the 
positive, luminous, masculine principle were attributed the par- 
ticular qualities of immobility, unchangeabihty and stability. 
We can, then, definitely afiinn the existence of an ascesis which 
in no way signifies quietism, but which is, rather, the pre- 
requisite for a higher, aristocratic ideal of activity and Virility.This ideal — ^let it be noted — ^is in no way a monopoly of the 
East. The basic idea with which we are dealing is traditionally 
Aryan, whence, we can also find it amongst ourselves. The same 
idea was expressed on the metaphysical plane by Plotinus when 
he spoke of the becoming which is only “ the flight of beings that 
are and that are not ”, or by Aristotle when he discussed the ” still 
Mover ”, or, on the ethical plane, by the Roman Stoa with its 
^emphasis on the sidereal and unchangeable element of the mind 
as the basis of all human effort and dignity. One who is the cause 
and effective master of motion does not himself move. He in- 
spires motion and directs action, but he himself does not act, in 
the sense that he is not transported, he is not involved in action, 
he is not action, but is, on the other hand, an impassive, utterly 
calm and imperative superiority, from whom action proceeds and*" 
on whom it depends. As opposed to this idea of true and mastered 
action, which is only thinkable, howevet, on the basis of purifica- 
tion from the sainsaric element, one who acts while identifying 
himself with his action, impulsively, urged by passion, by desire, 
by the irrational, by restless need or vulgar interest, such a one 
does not really act, but is acted upon. However paradoxical it

ARIYA STILL GATHERED ON THE VDLTURe’s PEAK 293ARIYA STILL GATHERED ON THE VDLTURe’s PEAK 293

may sound, his is a passive action — ^he stands under the sign, not 
of virility, but* of femininity. And under the sign of femininity, 
the whole modem “ telluric " and activistic world also stands.* 
It is only a lower, anti-aristocratic form of action which pre- 
dominates here. Otherwise, it actually betrays that half-conscious 
desire to deafen and distract, that agitation and clamour which 
reveal dread of the silence, the internal isolation, the absolute 
being of higher nature, or it becomes a weapon employed in the 
revolution of man against the eternal which indeed marks the 
limit of the sarhsaric “ ignorance ” and intoxication of fallen 
beings.AH this is generally trae of asceticism as a whole. More par- 
ticularly, it is even possible to demonstrate historically that the 
ancient Oriental Aryan forms of ascesis are also capable of this 
application. We should not forget that, if the East, whether 
Indo-European or yellow, has not tmtil now given to a modem 
man the impression, from certain aspects, of a civilisation that 
is actiyisticiUy practical, this is due not to a lack of strength, 
but to the fact of having absorbed its principal' energies in the 
vertical direction that is beyond becoming and history ; few of 
the well-bom in these civilisations had, or have even now, much 
interest in other forms of achievement. But where these 
achievements, through external circumstance or through the 
development of special vocations, have acquired a certain power 
"of attraction over the spirit, the East has shown, on the same 
plane of action, what energy and will can do when they are 
shaped essentially by the ascetic view of life. Anyone who 
objects and points out, for example, the more recent political 
state of India, forgets that this country, quite apart from its 
original epics, had its own imperial cycle under Candragupta 
and under A4oka, a sovereign who was profoundly Buddhist. 
Besides, we know of no Western text in which heroism and 
Warlike action have received a transcendental justification so 
precise and a transfiguration so high, as in the Bhagavad-gUa ;* 
whilst, on another level, it is well known that, of all the troops

* In feality, all the ancient forms of telluric ** civilisations developed in 
close connection with feminine and promiscuous cults and with the naturalistic- 
vital substratum of existence. Cf. J. J. Bachofen, Bas Muitarrecht, Basel, 
;jnd ed., 1897.

^ Cf. Our RivoUa contro il mondo modamo, ciU, I, para. 18.

/f

294 the doctrine of awakening^ Cf. Our RivoUa contro il mondo modamo, ciU, I, para. 18.

/f

294 the doctrine of awakening

England gathered in her empire, those provided by India were 
the best qualified, composed as they were, not "of “ soldiers ”, 
but of warriors by race and vocation. And it was from warrior 
stock — ^as we have seen — ^that Prince Siddhattha himself came.

But a better example is offered us by Japan. It has been Justly 
stated® that “ the Russo-Japanese War, to the great surprise of 
most of the European world, showed us how the supposed ‘ emas- 
culated Oriental immobility ' could purposively and and heroic- 
ally fight, on land and sea, the so-called virile Western mobility. 
The heroism of the Japanese, educated for a millennium and 
a-half by Buddhist doctrine, has shown unmistakably that 
Buddhism is not the opiate that everyone previously imagined ”. 
Anyone with the interests of the West at heart should indeed 
hope that the future will not create a change of mind in the 
Oriental peoples whereby they are led to apply against the 
^West their enormous spiritual potential ; that the power that 
has been created by a millenial ascetic vision of hfe, should 
be directed onto the temporal plane on which most of Europe, 
having cut itself off from its best traditions, has chosen, to 
concentrate.It was not entirely unintentional that, at the end of this book, 
we spoke of Zen Buddhism. This particularly esoteric form of 
the Buddhist doctrine has been the most congenial to the Japanese 
warrior nobfiity, and Zen has even been called “ the religion of 
the Samurai According to the Japanese point of view, if a" 
man is a man, and not an animal, he can only be a " Samurai ; 
courageous, upright, trustworthy, virile, faithful and full of con- 
trolled dignity and ready for any active sacrifice. But the pre- 
cepts of viriUty ; of loyalty ; of courage ; of control of the mind, 
the instincts and action ; of disdain for a soft life and empty 
luxury — all these are elements of Bushido, the ethics of the 
Samurai warrior nobility, found in the Zen'ascesis, which derived 
froih the Buddhist Doctrine of Awakening their cqnfirmation^ 
integration, and likewise their transcendent basis.* It was 
thus that the Japanese nobleman was capable of a quite special 
and unconditioned form of heroism : not " tragic ” but " Olymp- 
ic ”, the heroism of one who can give away his complete life '

® G. de Lorenzo, India e huddhismo aniioo^ Laterza, Bari, 5th ed., 1926, p. 7.

* Cf. Nnkariya, TM Religion of the *Samufai, cit,, pp. 36-50,

ARIYA STILL GATHERED ON THE VHLTURe’s PEAK 295

without regrets, with a clear vision oi the goal in view and with 
dn ^^ire disreigard for his own person, because he is not life and 
not person, but already partakes of the super-individual and 
siiperdemporal.; are only examples ; and we dO not wish to give the idea 
that we are making a defence of the East or of the Far East. Let 
us repeat : we are dealing here with general views of life, a' dis- 
tinction between East and West does not enter the discussion 
since the opposition is one of super-national and super-continental , 
nature. Our own Middle Ages also knew a sacred heroism, and its 
history hkewise shows, in majestic strokes, how a heroic cycle 
— ^whenever the corresponding vocation is present — can develop 
under the influence of an ascetic view of life, even when this view 
presents deviations, short-comings and limitations of consider- 
able importance as happens in the case of Christianism. Either 
■as detachment beyond action, or as detachment in action and 
for action, there exists a common tradition. We have purposely 
made ^considerable use of the term “ Olympian ” in order to 
remind those who might forget. From the ancient Mediter- 
ranean " Olympian ’’world, where the opposition between 
region of being and region of becoming, between the cycle of 
generation and the super-world corresponds exactly to the 
Indo- Aryan opposition between samsam and Nirvaim, we derive 
our highest heritage, that which the modem world has forgotten 
*but which stUl persisted in some measure amongst the Germanic 
and Romanic elements of the best of the Middle Ages. The 
Olympian view of hfe, to which every true ascetic value is intim- 
ately bound, is the highest, the most original and the most Aryan 
of the West. It holds the symbol of all that, in a higher sense, 
can be called classical and aristocratic.A return to ascetic values can, then, be conceived in two forms 
and in two degrees. A formation of life newly orientated towards 
the extra-saihsaric and ” sidereal ” element can, in the first place, 
teach what real action and mastery are to all those who know 
only, their most obscure and irrational forms. In the second place, 
ascesis as affirmation of pure transcendency, as detachment, not 
only, in action, but beyond action, towards awakening, can ensure 
that the immobile is not overturned by the changeable, that forces 
of centrahty, forces of the world of being are set up against forces

296 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

of becoming. Nor should we think of this second process as 
though we had to do with the presence of guests of stone at a 
banquet of the agitated and fanatical. To inspire and estabhsh, 
even in scattered and unknown beings, extra-samsaric forces, 
may be an action whose invisible effects, even on the plane 
of visible and historical reality, are considerably more important 
than many might imagine. It is Buddhist teaching that the 
Ariya are able to work from a distance,, for the good of manj^ ' .in the human sphere as well as in the “ divine and these 
spheres would be harmed by differences amongst the Ariya. ® It 
is Buddhist doctrine that when the Ariya, in their dis-individual- 
ised consciousness, suffuse the world with the irradiant contem- 
plations, they can liberate forces which go out into it and act 
invisibly upon distant lands and destinies. We think it possible 
that should the course of history, in spite of all appearances, not 
deteriorate further, this may perhaps be due, less to the efforts 
and direct action of groups of men and leaders of men, than 
to the influences proceeding, through the paths of the spirit, 
from the secret realisations of a few nameless and reihote ascetics, 
in Tibet or on Moimt Athos, among the Zen, or in some 
Trappist or Carthusian cloister of Europe. .To an awakened 
eye, to an eye capable of seeing with the sight of one on the 
Further Shore, these same realisations would appear as the 
only steady lights in the darkness, as the only peaks emerging, ^

. calm and sovereign, above the seas of mist down in the valleys.®

Every true ascetic realisation becomes inevitably transformed into 
9. support — an invisible one, but for all that none the less real 
and efficacious — ^for those who, on the visible plane, resist and 
struggle against the forces of an obscure age. ■;

Lastly, let us say a few words about that special class of reader ;; 
who is interested in “spiritualism”. We have already, in our 
Maschera e VoUo dello Spiritualismo Contemporaneo, warned such <• 
readers against the errors and confusions that have been set afoof 
by many modem trends through mistaken aspirations towards 
the supernatural and super-sensible. Should anyone seriously

’ Cf. e.g. Majjh., XXXI. 'fi

» Majjh., CIV.

^ We may here call to mind the words of the Atharva-Veda (XII, i, i) : “ The " y. 
great truth, the powerful order (rta), the initiation, the ascesis, the rite and the y ^ 
sacrifice sustain the earthARIYA STILL GATHERED ON THE VULTURE’s PEAK 297ARIYA STILL GATHERED ON THE VULTURE’s PEAK 297

harbour such aspirations, he must take careful stock of such errors 
and confusions* and, above all, not deceive himself that true 
realisation of what lies beyond the human condition is possible 
without rigorous ‘ ‘ ascetic ’ ’ preparation and consolidation. Given 
the conditions in which the Westerner now finds himself and which 
we have frequently mentioned, such preparation is, today more 
than ever indispensable. We should, then, be under no illusions 
about the real nature of knowledge or “ occult ” discipline, par- 
ticularly when we are dealing with what our contemporaries put 
forward. A doctrine, such as the one we have discussed, gives a 
very good idea of the possibility of an Aryan and aristocratic path 
beyond samsaric existence. This path will have no need of 
“ religipus ” aids, dogmas or petty moralities, and it genuinely 
corresponds to the will for the unconditioned. But, at the same 
time, this doctiine shows no less clearly the preliminary conditions 
for ascesis and for detachment and which are absolutely impera- 
tive for. any enterprise of a transcendent nature. It also shows 
that the path of awakening — ^identical in its spirit with every 
true “ initiation ” — ^is absolutely irreconcilable with all that is 
implied by confused mysticism, mediumistic cults, the sub- 
conscious, visionarism, manias for occult phenomena and powers, 
and neo-psychoanalytical contaminations. It is well known that 
interested circles — either confessionahsts or “ illumined ” in the 
profane and " critical " sense — ^rely on such spiritual deviations 
in their attempt to heap discredit upon the ideals and kinds of 
wisdom which, in one form or another, were always recognised 
as the culminating point of every normal and traditional civilisa- 
tion. To realise that, as we have indicated, there is similar 
content in the path announced by a figure of the dignity and 
grandeur of Prince Siddhattha, the Buddha — and that this 
path, even if only in distant and varied reflections, is now 
related to the faith of more than four himdred million followers 
-^such a realisation should be enough to forestall any attempt 
by such shortsighted or malicious individuals to cause error 
and confusion of thought.In the opposite field, we must say something in particular about 
two currents ; the one, followed by those who, though themselves 
Orientals, apply themselves to “ adapting ” ideas of the ancient 
traditions in their own way and to popularising them in the

f

298 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

West ; and the other, which aims at introducing the concept of 
a new " modem initiation

The first case brings to mind the Hindu parable of a man who, 
when surrounded by water in a drenching rainstorm, made a 
great effort to draw some up from a muddy well. As far as the 
Oriental traditions go, or rather, the various Oriental forms of the 
one tradition, the situation we have to deal with is different to that 
existing in the West. Even in the case of transcendent wisdom 
there exist ancient texts, for the most part translated and avail- 
able to all, where we can find, in a purer and more complete form, 
all that such people would vulgarise and reduce, at best, to an 
emasculated reflection of the original. Anyone who can lay his 
hands on the Buddhist texts or the Bhagavad-gUa or the Yoga 
and Vedanta texts should be able calmly to close the doors on 
these modern publishers and commentators and adaptors, leav- 
ing himself only the serious task of study and achievement; But,- 
the true reason for the success of such new expositions is to be 
found where they are the most accommodating, least rigijJ, least 
severe, most vague and ready to come to easy terms with the 
prejudices and weaknesses of the modem world. Let everyone 
have the courage to look deeply into himself and to see what 
it is that he really wants.The second current differs from the first in that it makes no 
attempt to adapt or spread a kind of wisdom that is either ancient 
or Oriental. On, the contrary it maintains that such forms of 
knowledge are unsuitable for the man of to-day who requires an 
eiltogether modem kind of " initiation ”. This is based upon 
evolutionism appUed to affairs of the spirit. An evolutionary 
development of the world and of humanity is assumed, and it is 
thought .that even the spirit should conform to this law and 
follow this development. There is no trace of such an idea in 
the teachings of any school of wisdom. The world is what it is, 
samsdm, said the Indo-Aryans : kukAos ywiaeois, an eternal 
cycle of generation, said the ancient Greeks. And in sanisdm 
there is no " evolution ”, there is no beginning and there is no 
end. By "goipg ” one does not reach the " end of the world ”. 
The direction in which w? may find awakening and liberation, 
the direction of initiation, is vertical and has nothing to do with 
the course of history.

ARIYA STILL GATHEREn ON THE VULTURe’s PEAKARIYA STILL GATHEREn ON THE VULTURe’s PEAK

Certainly, the condition of modem man is very different frorn 
that of ancient* man — and in the course of this study we have 
repeatedly emphasized this fact. A “ fall " or a “ descent ” has 
taken place, which is in no way a happening in an evolutional 
scheme, designed to produce, in a “ happy ending ”, something 
higher than ever existed before. If this fall has any significance, 
it is that it shows the terrible power of the liberty of the spirit 
which can design and bring about even its own negation. There- 
fore the only thing to do is to admit that the ancient teachings 
cannot be used to-day without due consideration, and modem 
man must apply himself to a 'thankless task of reintegration : 
he must take himself back spiritually to the state of mind which 
has, always and everywhere, been the point of departure of a 
way that is essentially unique. There is no room for a ” modem 
initiation ” in a specific sense ; by definition aU that is modern is 
the contradiction of an5rthing to do with initiation.

If, when we speak of “ modern initiation ” we wish to claim 
for it the characteristics of a “ spiritual science ”, of a discipline 
which is as clear and exact as regards the supersensible world 
and the instruments of inward development as modem science 
is in regard to its own field and instruments, then we must show 
where in this, respect it does more than simply state the problem.It is, rather to traditional doctrines such as the one which we 
have laid before him in the present book, that the reader who is 
"attracted by true spirituality should turn, to understand what 
a " spiritual science ” really is : these doctrines will teach him 
the clarity of pure knowledge, divorced from all forms of visionary 
" clairvoyance ”, joined to a spiritual sovereignty, and to 
the will to break not only the human bond, but the bond 
formed by any other " world ”. Modern man has not only to 
fight against materiahsm, but must also defend himself from the 
snares and allures of false supematuralism. His defence will be 
^^urm and effective only if he is capable of returning to the origins, 
of assimilating the ancient traditions, and then of relying upon 
the ascesis to carry out the task of re-establishing his inner 
condition. For it is through this that these traditions will reveal 
to him their deepest and perennially real content and show him, 
step by step, the path. In conclusion, we would like to repeat 
the ancient Roman augural formula : quod bonum faustumque sit.

300 THE DOCTRINE OF AWAKENING

We would, that is to say, count it as ntost fortunate if this 
further modest contribution of ours to the understanding of 
pre-modem spirituality were to serve someone as something 
more than , a simple reading. Only then could we repeat the 
formula of the Ariya: katam karamyam — "done is what was 
to be done/’

INDEX

INDEX

' Ahhidhamma, 278 
Abhidharmakoga, 80 
AhhinUd, 232

Accomplished One(s), 48 ff,, 73, 113, 
153. 172, 224, 227, 236, 256/., 270 
Action, 44, 53, 66 /., 78, 83 
Activism, 289 ff.

Adultery, 155 
Agitation, 60, 239 
Ahamkdra, 78, 84 
AkdliJia, 38 
Alayavinndna, 82 
‘Alcohol, 158 
Amitabha, 277 
, Andgdmin, 250, 257

Anattd, 55 bo /., 64, 70, 96 103

. Anguish, 60, iio, 147, 173, 189, 213 
Angulimala, 23, 238 
Animal womb, 120 
Antarahhava, 80 ff.^ 223 
Anti-pantheism, 104 
Anukayo, 173 
Apariydpanna, 25, 133 
Appamdda, 137 /.. Anguish, 60, iio, 147, 173, 189, 213 
Angulimala, 23, 238 
Animal womb, 120 
Antarahhava, 80 ff.^ 223 
Anti-pantheism, 104 
Anukayo, 173 
Apariydpanna, 25, 133 
Appamdda, 137 /.

Appamanna, 196 jf.

Apparitions, 192 
Arahant, 107 
Aristotle, 292 
Afiya, 16, 42 passim 
^ Ariyan quest, 102 
.Aitow, 102 
AfUpa. See Loka

^ Aryan (the term), 16 ff.; -ness, 16 ff. 
Asanhhata, 261

Asava, 9 n., 51, 75, 77, 82, 85 w., 91, 
97, III, 132, 144, 191, 195,

206, 209, 213, 215 220 /., 241,

245, 254, 261, 266. See also Mania 
Ascesis, 3 jff,, 17, 39, 68, 76, 92, 96, 
112^., 119, 142, 144, 157, 183/., 
193, 201, 221, 255, 258/,, 268, 293, 
295

'• Ascetic, 40 loi, 127 ' /., 137 ; 
wandering, 126 
A^oka, 293 
Afharva-Veda, 27 /.

Atideva, 120

^ Atmd, 26, 30#, 57/, 64, 68, 98, 241, 
257/.; -brahman, 31 /., 55, 258.

' ‘ See also Brahman.

Attachment (updddna), 57, 63, 84/., 
S7, 89 /•» 100, no, 115, 132, 170, 
174,^89, 243

Avalokite^vara, 277

Avijjd, III, 241. See also Ignorance

Awakened One(s), 20, 32 n., 38, 41 /.,

50, 52, 218, 225/,, 228, 230, 232,

23b, 239, 242 255/., 258/., 261,

263, 270 /., 276 jg^. ; death of an, 
242 /. ; epithets of, 52, 102, 259, 263

Awakening, 9, n, 23, 32, 38, 39 n,,

51, 76, 90 /., 92, 97, 1 04 /., ri3, 
119, 127/., 152, 155, .j8i, 186, 208, 
227, 240, 246, 255, 262, 277, 298 ; 
path of, 96, 1 14, 121, 124, 132, 147, 
156, 180, 190, 202, 211 /,, 222, 
238, 239

Awakenings, four, 196 ff., 204 ;

seven, 138, 170, 177 /., 184 
Awareness, 170 ff., 184, 187, 196, 245 
Ay at ana, aiz ff., 220, 227

Bachofen, J. J., 293 w.

Bardo Thodol, 73 n., 253 
Becoming, 66, 85 89 /., 93, 97,

216 /., 239 ; current of, 35, 55 ff. ; 
world of, 55, 246/., 295 
Being, 133, 216, 273 
BhagavadgUd, 19 154, 170, 179,

293, 298

Bhakti, 12, 277; -marga, 11 
B Havana, 9, 119, 258 
Bhikkhu, 126/., 275 
Bhutatathatd, 278

Birth, 79 jf., 86 /., 89 /,, 102, 216,

218, 221, 262 ; no birth 261 /. 
Bodhi, 72, 82, 122, 132, 147, 178, 220,

240, 247, 277 /.

Bodhidharma, 280Birth, 79 jf., 86 /., 89 /,, 102, 216,

218, 221, 262 ; no birth 261 /. 
Bodhi, 72, 82, 122, 132, 147, 178, 220,

240, 247, 277 /.

Bodhidharma, 280

Bodhisattva, 20, 24, 82, 97, m, 120, 
122, 191, 270, 272, 276 /.

Body^ 69, 91, 96, 100, 1 14; 125, 134/., 
ibo ff., 173, 178, 185, 188, 195 /.,

219, 224, 233 ff., 275, 285 ; con- 
templation of the, 162, 218 ; dis-

solution of the, 242 ; made of mind, 
233 /•> 236 ; three bodies, 237 ; 
two-fold, 237

Bojjhanga, 177/.

Bonds, 20, 22, loi, 106, 130, 138, 191, 
227 ; five, 158 /., 203, 209, 246 
Bowl, symbolical reversal of the, 127 
Brahmacariya, 40

Brahma, 12, 14, 29, 40, 42, 107 ff., 
^14^ 233, 236, 240, 243 ; union 
with, 198, 204, 219

303

INDEX

304

Brahman, 12, 29 jf., 35, 104, 214, 
258. S&e also Atma 
Brdhmanas, 29/., 33 
Brahmans, 20, 37, 39 ff,

Brahma Sahampati, 92 
Brahmavihdra, ig6 ff., 205 
Breath, 188, 193 ; suspension of, 114 
Breathing, 125, 163 /., 245 
Buddha (the term), 5, 18 /., 50, 272, 
278 ; deification of the, 276 
Buddhaghosa, 186 n,

Buddhas, 39 n., 192 v

Buddhism : as the Doctrine of 
Awakening, 6 ff., 44, 278 ; as 
aristocratic, 92 f., 275 ; decadence 
of 275 j?". ; not a reli^on, 10 204

Burning (symbolic), 61, 63 ft., 83 /., 
94, 102, III, 261, 268 
Bumouf, E., 77 /.

Cakka-vatti, 19/., 21 n., 121 
Qakti Cult, II

Calm, 124, 128, 137, 148, 162, 179, 
187, 197, 249, 261, 286 ; unshak- 
able, 60, 92, 163

Caste(s), 18, 20, 28, 35/., 37 ff., 46 
Catharsis, 133, 174, 182, 188, 193, 
196/., 220, 282/.

Cause {heiu), 73 /.

Celestial : Eye, 220, 232 ; hier- 
archies, 1 91 /. ; beings, 129, 240, 
244 ; existence, 113 ; states, 249,

, 260 ; voyage, 249, 252 ; worlds, 
87, 95 
Celsus, 231 
Ceylon, 43 
Chandragupta, 293 
Channa, 243 
Chastity, 150, 155 /.

China, 36, 279 /.

Christ, 244 '

Christianity, 3 /., 10, 17, 45, 202, 252 
Combatant, 138 ; five qualities of, 
121 ff.

Compassion, 22, 43, 183, 197 /,, 
203 /., 225, 277China, 36, 279 /.

Christ, 244 '

Christianity, 3 /., 10, 17, 45, 202, 252 
Combatant, 138 ; five qualities of, 
121 ff.

Compassion, 22, 43, 183, 197 /,, 
203 /., 225, 277

Concentration, 32, 92, 119, 124, 128, 
^37 /•» 147* 180, 186 190,

208 /., 236

Condition {paccaya), 73 
Conditioned genesis, 59, 67, 72 ff., 
103, 220, 245

Conduct, right (sila), 119, 127, 131, 
148#., 172, 176, 182, 187, 241,245, 
Confidences^ 24, 52 122, 126, 161,

179

" Conforming to reality {yathd- 
bhUtant^, 52, 55» 98, IJI, 114,. 124, 
139, 14I, 257. 283 
Coniucius, 36

Consciousness, 57 ff., 65, 69/., 83, 88, 
91, 98#., 103, III, 125, 133, 134, 
X71, 185, 196, 212 ff., 222 /., 226, 
229, 266; conditioned, 160 ; dis- 
individualised, 233/., 296; higher, 
99, 1 12; individuated, .103, 174, 
1S8 ff. ; neither consciousness nor 
non-consciousness, 215 ; pure, 236; 
super-, 184, 226 /. ; super-cosmic, 
267 ; super -individual, 154 ; super- 
normal, 1 13 ; supports of, 186 /, 
See also Samsaric Consciousness. 
Consolidation, 144, 148, 159 /., 182, 
190, 206

Contact {phassa), 83 ff., 89 /., 99, 132, 
140, 173 /. ; of the void, etc., 194 
Contemplation, right, 160 
Contemplations, 182 ff. {jhdna), 241,

265 / ; four irradiant, 138, 155, 
173. 182, 184, 196 jf., 212,218,

266

Coomaraswamy, A, K., 37 n.

Craving, 62 ff., 67, 76 79 ff., 85,

87, 89, 99, 102, 122, 124, 140 /., ' 
156 /., 174, 216, 223 /., 242, 249 ; 
similes for, 141

Cross over, to, 24, 62, 103, 238 
Cruelty, 139

Current (santdna), 56 /., 63, 78, 86, 
97, III, 136, 143, 237 
Current (sota), to enter the 245 ff,, 
257

Cycle of generation, 56, 298

Dabba, 237 n.

Daemon, 79 ff., 85, 223. ^33 
Dahlke, P., 10, ii n., 18, 63, 83 n. 
Dante Alighieri, 135 n., 198 ^

Death, 242, 245, 249 /., 252, 258 f . ; 
contemplation of, 166;' of a 
Buddha, 242 ff. ; no death, 262, 
See also Decay and Death. 
Deathless (ness), 25, 137, 167, 239, 
259/

Decay and death, 6o, 86 /., 89 /., 
102, 242

Defence, 172, 206 ; instruments of, 
139#, 160Decay and death, 6o, 86 /., 89 /., 
102, 242

Defence, 172, 206 ; instruments of, 
139#, 160

de la Val4e Poussin, L., 80 n., 81 
181 n., 237 n., 248 n., 255 n. ^ 
Departure 124, l^6ff., 151, 221, 
287

Desire, 61 /., 66 /., 78, 80 /., .84, 87,

90, 113, 132, 141/., 147, 173, 181,

. 205, 243

Detached, Detachment, 94 , 97 ff., loi, 
129 ff., 140, 145, 147, 151, 155,

159, 179, 183, 185, 187, 198, 206, 
212, 242, 265, 295 
Deva, 87, 120 ; •ydna, 33, 250

INDEX

30 <

Development {bhdvana)^ 9, 119, 127 
Devotion, 10/.

Dhammd, dharmd, 56, 66, 162, 167, 
185, 257, 266 j5^., 271 ; contem- 
plation of, 170, 185 
Dhammapada, 259, 265 
Dharmakdya, 272 n.

Dialectics, A7 124, 15 1, 255 
Dibba^oakkhu-ndpa, 220 
Diligence, 137

Dionysius the Areopagite, 12 
Disciples, 38, 95, 115 121, 138 
Discipline, 119, 125, 138, 146 
Dismemberment (mental), 142 /. 
Dissociation (mental), 141 
Doctrine {dhamma), 15, 22 
Dostoievski, F., 184 
Doubt, 1 13, 159, 246 
Duality, 226, 271

Dukkha, 59, ff,, 70, 73, 77, 87, 96, 
213, 217, 246, 261, 269 
Dyaus, 28

Earnestmess, 137 
Eckhart, Meister, 17 
Egypt, 37* 231, 277 
Ekodibhdva, 186/,

Elem#nts, four, 165, 219 
Elephant, 146, 203 
Elephant's footprint, 23 
Endeavour. Se& Striving 
• Energy, 8 30, 67 n., 81, in, 122,

125, 133, 138, 143, 147, 172 
Epaminondas, 152 
Equanimity, 197, 218 
Equilibrium, 285 /.

Escape, 77 
• Esoterism, 279/.

Ether, 34, 214, 226, 266, 270 /. 
Evans-Wentz, W. Y., 73 w., 207 ft. 
Existence, 77, 105 109/., 205, 216,

235, 243 ; conditioned, 62, 78, 86, 
88, 216 ; leaving, 243 ; non-, 215, 
217 ; previous forms of, 219 225

Existences, multiple, 155, 191, 219 /.,

223 /., 231 247

Expulsion (mental), 139 
Extinction, 39, 102, no, 113, 139, 
142, 180, 205, 215, 218 ff., 241 jf,, 
« 246, 249, 252, 254, 261

Extra-samsaric element, etc., in, 
132, 166, 230, 240, 247, 249, 251 
Extremes, two, 113 
Eye of Truth, etc., 51 /., 86, 209, 212

Faith, 10 /., 24, 48 /.

Falsehood, 150, 152/.

Family, 127 
Fasting,' 113 /.Faith, 10 /., 24, 48 /.

Falsehood, 150, 152/.

Family, 127 
Fasting,' 113 /.

Fear, 145 /., 184

Feeling(s) {vedand)^ 84 /., 90, 98 ff., 
103, 160 /., i62‘, 169, 173 f‘. 185, 
193, 265, 267 ; contemplation of 
the, i6y ff; watch over the, 85' 
Fire, 14, 40, 58, 62 ff., 68, 148, 173, 
237 n., 251 /., 255 
Flames, 61 ff., 84, 99 
Form, 86, 13^3, 189, 194/, 206/. 21 1, 
219, 247, 250, 267, 273 ; free from, 
86, 189, 194/., 204, 206 ff., 223 /., 
227, 236, 247, 250, 265 
Formichi, C., 243 n.

Fichte, J. G., 269 
Freed, gS /.

Gandhabba, 79 
Ganges, 241, 256 
Giving {ddna), 127 
God (personal), 12, 14, 109 
Gods, 191 jf., 241 /., 261 
Good and evil, 149 
Gosinga forest, 115 
Grace, 25, in /.

Gradualness, 52, 157, 190 n., 240 
Guenon, R., 10 n., 37 w., 249 n., 252

Hearsay, 40, 49 
Heavens, 32, 191 
Hegel, G. W. F., 254, 269 
Hellas, Hellenic, 27 33, 37

Hereafter, 105

Heredity, 79, 83, 89, 223 /., 247 /. 
Heroic spirit, 9, 37, 97, 147 
Heroism, 122, 154, 293 ff,

Hinayana, 268, 276, 278 
Hindrances, five, 170, 176 /., 208 
Hinduism, 12, 33, 64, 104, 276 
'' Home (symbolic), 29, 129, 131 
Human condition, 119 /., 246 ff. 
Humanism, 3

" I ”, 30 f: 33. 35. 55 ff: 63 /., 66, 
6 Sff., 78, 84/., 90, 98#., 103, 146. 
154. 158, 165 /., 175, 183, 189 /., 
213, 217/., 222 246/., 249, 262,

266 /., 270, 285 ff, ; -lessness, 
276 /. ; void of, 98 
” I am ", 58, 165 ; "I am not this 
etc., 98, 100, 109 
lamblicus, 186 
Iddhi, 147, 191, 229 ff.

Ignorance, 22, 74#.i 79, 81 j5^., 88^.,

93. 103 f: 133. 173. 215 f: 236.

239, 241 /., 247. 254

Ik^vaku, 19, 36

Illumination (hodhi), 72, 82, 89 /., 
113, 143, 177, 179. 220, 224, 240/., 
245 /., 248, 266 /., 269, 277 jgr. ; 
Tree of, 146

m-viu, 139. 159

INDEX

306

Immanence, Immanency, 90, 103, 
105

Immensity, etc., ::224 
Impermanence, 55 /., 60, 87, 91, 
96#

Impurities, five, 159 
India, 18, 37, 104, 120, 158 
Individualism, illusion of, 158. See 
Personality.

Individuality, human, 57 fi., 65, 67,

. 78, 87, 271Impurities, five, 159 
India, 18, 37, 104, 120, 158 
Individualism, illusion of, 158. See 
Personality.

Individuality, human, 57 fi., 65, 67,

. 78, 87, 271

Indifference, 183 212, 218

Indra, srS, 41

Infinite ether, plane of, etc., 212 ff. 
Insight, 72, 132, 169; super- 
individual, 155

Instantaneousness (khaiici), 64 
Insubstantiality, 55/., 59/. 
Intellectual simplicity, 186 /., 195 
Island (symbol), 259 
lithattdyati pajdndti, 216

Jainism, 36

Jansink, B., 7 n., 60 n.

Japan, 43, 279 /., 294 
Jdtdka, 225

Jhdna, 133, 160, 175, 178 /., 182 ff,, 
202, 204, 206/., 209, 212, 216, 218, 
224, 227, 231, 233, 244, 266; 
** cmbodiTncnt of the four 194/. 
Jdy, J79//'. {pdmujja), 188, 197/- 
Justice", 1. 1 8, T72 
Justification " method, 144

Kafftma, Kafmd, 34, 66, 78, 82, 220, 
242,; ’’Cetdnd, 77 
jRTasttia, 20J ff.

Katarii hara^iyam, 97, 217 
Keith, A. B., 255 n,

Ker^nyi, K., 27, 28 n., 51 n.

Ifeith, A. B., 255 n,

Kndfidha, 56/., 61, 63, 65, 78, 85, 
98 /., 100, 103, 173 ; ‘parinihhdna, 
'■>' 242

19 35, 37, 46, 138, 154

150, 153 /•

' Knowings three 219 ff., 226 /., 
Htf.

* Knowledge, 43, 50 ff^, 92, 95 » 97» 
f>i 1x9/., 122, 141, 162, 169; 
discursive, 49; eye of, 191; liberat- 
ing, 213, 217, 221 ; perfection of, 
266 ; right (supreme), 38, 52, 128 ; 
self-, 1 15; transcendental, 146, 187, 
19)4, 233 241* See also

PrajESparamita 
Kolankola, 24, 246 
Kremmerz, G., 201 ^

Kuan Yin, 277

Lankdvatdra-sutra, 273 
Lao-tze, 36, 280, 283^

Law (dhamma), 23 
Liberated : as to knowledge, 194 ; 
on both sides, 194

Liberation, g, 15, 16, 41, 52, 60, 92, 
loi, 107, no /., 1 19 /., 132, 175, 
182, 1 91, 194 (three), 194, 198, 
204, 206, 207 (eight), 208, 213, 217, 
220, 230, 232, 241, 244 ff., 252, 
262, 266, 298 ; canonical formula 
for 216 /., 220

Liberty, 99, loi, 120, 170 ; a higher, 
189, 204

Life after death (Vedic), 28 /., 33 ;

(XJpanishadic), 33 /.

Light, 226 ff.

Lighting, 146, 240Liberty, 99, loi, 120, 170 ; a higher, 
189, 204

Life after death (Vedic), 28 /., 33 ;

(XJpanishadic), 33 /.

Light, 226 ff.

Lighting, 146, 240

Loka, 216 ; arupa-, 206, 250 ; hdma- 
206, 247 ; Yiipa-, 133, 206, 211, 250 
Lorenzo, G. de, v, jn., 75, 162, 198, 
216, 228 n., 254 n.

Love, 155. 183, 197/., 201 jgf., 277 
Luther, Martin, 3, 37

Made, the {sankrta), 240 
Mahdbhdfata, 27 
Madhyamika, 268

Mahdbheri-hdrakaparivarta-sutra, 273 
Mahakassapa, 280, 284 
Mah^yana, 22, in /., 129, 13 1, 190, 
192, 236/., 240, 244, 237, 261, 266, 
268 /., 273, 276 ff.

Malicious speech, 150, 153 /., 159 
Man, 120 ff, 133

Mania(s) {dsava), 51, 75, 77 ff., 84, 
88, 91, 100, 106, in, 115, 123, 
X3^ /•. X38, 146, 191, 195. 2i04, 213, 
216, 220, 227, 241 /., 245, 254, 261 
Mantra, 232/.

Manu, 19 w.

Mara, the Malign One, Sy ff,, loy ff., 
X35, 146, 243, 259 
Marcus Aurehus, 182 n.

Marvels, 2^y f.

Mastery, loi, 137; 144, 187, 263, 285, 
292 ^ .

Materiality, 98, 100/., 103, 16^., 174 
Meditation, 176, 178 ; right, 160 
Mediterranean ivorld, 17, 33, 37, 104, 
207

Memory, 222 /., 225

Mental control, 136 /., 144, 285 /.

Mental states, 185

Merit : five degrees of 286 /.

Merits : doctrine of, 277 
Meru, 261

Messengers, divine, 94 /.

Mettd, 201. See Love.

INDEX

Meynnck, G., 207 247, 248 n.

Middle Ages, 2^5 
Middle Way, 1 13, 124 
Mind, 83 /., 91, loi, 103, 134, 136, 
144, 147, 160/., 162, 164, 185, 219, 
231, 133#-. 278/. ; contemplation 
of, 169, 218 ; unity of, 187. 
Mind-and-Matter. See Name-and- 
form

Mindfulness, 177/.

" Miracles 23 /., 230, 237 /.

Mitra, 28 
Moment, 112, 240 
Morality, 7 /., 148 /., 152, 268 
Mortification, 123, 177 
Mrtyu, 87, 259 
Mliller, Max, 137

Mysticism, 6, 10 ff,, 17, 48, 103 ff., 
157

Mythology (Buddhist), 276, 279

Nagarjuna, 269, 278, 280 
. Name-and-form (ndma-rUpa), 58 /., 
65 79 88 ff., 107, 206, 213,

222 /.

J^dna-dassana, 218, 222 
Nega-feon, 255 
Nepal, 276Mythology (Buddhist), 276, 279

Nagarjuna, 269, 278, 280 
. Name-and-form (ndma-rUpa), 58 /., 
65 79 88 ff., 107, 206, 213,

222 /.

J^dna-dassana, 218, 222 
Nega-feon, 255 
Nepal, 276

Neumann, K. E., v, 7 n., 75, 77, 216 
Niddna, 74, 76 j?’., 179, 206, 214/. 
Nietzsche, F. W., 4, 6, 184 
Nirvdpa, mhbdna, 26, 13 1, 189, 218, 
221* 227, 237 n., 239 /., 244, 249, 
254 j?:, 265, 267, 269, 271 jj^., 277/., 
282, 286, 295 
No-retum, fruit of, 198 
• Nukariya, K., 273 n., 280 n. 
Nyanatiloka, v, 75, 89 n., 161 n.

Ocean, sea, 43, 170, 224, 239, 256/., 
261

! Oldenberg, H,, 18 n,, 30, 255 
Olympian element, spirit, etc., 10, 
17, 37» 99, 103, 183, 217, 261, 264,

294 /•

Opinions, 47 ff., 65, 90, 262. See 
Speculation

• Ord^ of bhihkhus, 120 /., t23, 149,

275

Origin (samudaya), 61, 72, 86 
Otiier Shore, 62, 103, 109, 237, 239, 
296

Otto, W. F., 10 n.

Pahbajjd, 126, 128, 287 
Paccekabuddhas, 38 
PaH Buddhism, 5

307

Pan fid, prajnd, 75, in, 115, 119,. 
122, 132 /., 147, 187, 194, 220, 226 
/., 233, 278

Pantheism, 31 103 ff.

Parinibbuta, 242

Path, 24, 39, 68, 77, 81, no, 114, 147, 
196, 204, 206, 240 ; " dry ”, "wet ”, 
196

Path of the Elect (Ariya), 43, 49, 264; .

eightfold, 148, 159/., ^259 
Paticca-samuppdda, 59, 72 ff. 
Pavolini, P. E., v

Perception(s). 58, 85, 98, 103, 147, 
1.74, 185, 212, 215, 265 ff.

Person sakkaya), 57, 84 /., 183, 189, 
218, 233

Personality, 30, 98, 100, 103, in, 
147, 153, 170, 173/., 245, 266 
Pitr-ydna, 34, 81, 250,

Plato, Platonism,, 17, 51, 180 
Plotinus, 106, 186, 292 
Posthumous- states, 105, 112, izb, 
236, 249

Power, fourfold {iddhipdda), 147 
Prajndpdramitd, 81, 121, 266, 268 
270, 272

Prana, 163 /., 171 
Pride, 115, 183 
" Privation ”, 100, 102 
Psycho-analysis, 80, 157 
Pubbe-nivdsandpa, 135, 219 
Puini, C., V

Purification, 194, 197, 204, 215 ; of 
action, word, thought, 38 
Purusha, 241

Race of ^irit, 96 120, 144, 275

Ramanuja, n 
Recollection. 51 
Reinhold, E., 7 n.

Reincarnation, 29, 33 36, 64, 222Purification, 194, 197, 204, 215 ; of 
action, word, thought, 38 
Purusha, 241

Race of ^irit, 96 120, 144, 275

Ramanuja, n 
Recollection. 51 
Reinhold, E., 7 n.

Reincarnation, 29, 33 36, 64, 222

ff- ^'^7 .

Renunciation, 93 99, 127, 147, 180

Repetitions (textual), 125 /. 
Representations (mental), 185 ff. 
Ritual, ritualism, 29 /., 32 /,, 39, 232, 
280

Rhys Davids, C. A. F., v, 72 n., 211 
n., 216

Rhys Davids, X. W,, v, 16, 46 n., 75, 
162, 186 n.

Rome, 18, 35, 37, 231

Sacrificial rite, 28 /.

Safety, incomparable, 102, no, 147, 
217, 261. See also Sureness 
Saintliness, 204 /.

■ Sakiya, i8 /., 37 
SakkayadittM, 158 
Salvation, universal, 277 
Salvationist religions, 21 
Samddhi, 119, 131, 160, 1S2 ff. 
Samatha, 9, 183, 249, 286 
Sdrhkhya, 74, 79, 81, 104, 114,

219, 237, 241 
Sammd, 148, 159

Sarnsdfa, 34/., 55 /•/64, 70, 76, .79, 
“ 89, 91, 10^1 109, 147, 185, 259, 269,

273 /„ 282, 291, 295, 298 
Samsaric consciousness, 34 /., 55 
67 /•, 70 /•, 82, 98, 107, 136, 223, 
230, 240, 267

Samsaric entity, being, 79#*» 85, 137, 
164, 174, 191, 194, 206, 224, 231, 
234. 236, 278

Samsaric existence, world, 59 jf., 63,

70. 73 /•. 76 j?-- 81, 87 jf.. 94. 97.

. 99/-, 133, 137. 159, 168, 173, 179, 
239, 264, 267, 290 
Samurai, 294

Safihhdra (predispositions, forma- 
tions), 43. 66, 77#., 82, 85, SZ jf., 
98, 100, 133, 174, 176, 206, 242/,, 
246, 248 n.

Safihhata, 56/- 
Santana, 56 63, 70, 78

. Saxiputta, 260 
Sati, 160/., 171 
Satipatihana, 161, 171, 179 
Sati^ompc^dnna, 124 
S atari, 284

Schelling, F. W. J. von, 105, 269 
Self, 84, 98, 100 ff., 155 ; -contem- 
plation, 218; -division, 218; -mas- 
tery, 10 1, 292. See also Anatta, 
and “ I

Sensations, 186 /., 265 
Sense-escperience, 42 
Senses, 39, 83 ff., 89 /*, 99, 167 /., 
173*#-, 212, 231 ; watch over the, 
138, 169, 174/.

Serpentine processes, 140 
Shiva, 140Sensations, 186 /., 265 
Sense-escperience, 42 
Senses, 39, 83 ff., 89 /*, 99, 167 /., 
173*#-, 212, 231 ; watch over the, 
138, 169, 174/.

Serpentine processes, 140 
Shiva, 140

St. John of the Cross, 190 
Siddhattha, Prince, 5, 17 ff., 21 /., 
30, 38, 40 ff., 44, 65, 72, 88, 92, 
94 n., 95, 100, no 113, 120, 146, 
153, 203, 225, 243 /., 256 /., 265, 
269, 279, 288, 294, 297 
Signless, ^94, 257, 265 ff.

Slla, 8, 119, 131, 133, 145, 148 ff., 
176, 182/., 187

Silence, 175, 177, 1855 187, 258, 271 
Similes, i, 138 
Similes :

air, 183 ; ancient path, 39 ; bath^ 
attendant, 195 ; blind man, 96 ;

Similes :

blind men, 39 ; ‘"bronze vessel, 
114 ; burning coals, 140 ; butcher,

7 ; carcass tied round the neck, 
140 ; charioteer, loi ; chest of 
clothes, loi chicks hatching, 221 ; 
citadel, 121 ; clear water, 7 ; cut- 
ting grass, 14 ; desiring fire, 40 ; 
dog chained to a post, 105, 239 ; 
earth, water, fire, wind, space, 
199 /. ; enemy, 174 ; field of rice, 
121 ; fire, 14, 138, 149 ; fish, 60, 
135 ; fietcher, 134 ; freed slave, 
102 ; full jar, 217, 231 ; gem on 
cloth, 219 ; heartwood, 99 ; herds- 
man, 144 ; hunter, 49 ; infant, 
22 ; king's eldest son, 246 ; lake 
with lotus-plants, 195 ; lake with 
underground spring, 195 ; law- 
fully crowned king, 173 ; leper,62 ; lighted chips, 251 ; limpid 
water, 52 ; lion, 128 ; lotus- 
flowers, 93, 96 ; lotus-leaf, 128 ; 
lute, 65 ; man cloaking himself, 
196 man going from village to 
village, 219 ; man in torrent, loi ; 
man on banks of lake, 220 ; man 
seizing another, 143 ; man travel- 
ling through a desert, 102 ; man 
witti debts, etc., loi /. ; man with 
disease, loi ; man with good 
sight, 1 41 ; man with head cut off, 
150, 158 ; man with sack of grain, 
164 ; milk, 66, 224 ; monkey, 134 ; 
ocean, 52, 256 ; one's reflection in 
water, 176 ; plucked leaf, 150 ; 
poisoned arrow, 53 ; potter, 22 ; 
quail, 130 ; raft, 8, 149 ; rhin- 
oceros, 128 ; rivers of the ocean, 
43, 261I; royal elephant, 130, 152 ; 
salt taste, 132 ; serpent, 14, 157 ; 
sleeping village, 88; split block, 15 1, 
154 ; strong man, 144 ; sun, 228 ; 
tamed elephant, loi ; thirsty man, 
142 ; thoroughbreds at cross-roads, 
175 ; three watches of the night, 
66; tortoise and jackal, 17^; 
turner, 7, 163 ; two buildings with 
doors, 220 ; two companions, 180 ; 
two-handed saw, 200 ; two pieces ^ 
of wood, 168 ; two planks, 59 ; 
uninjured hand, 241 ; waggon, 57,

64 ; wedge, 139 
Sleep, 177, 191, 226 /., 242 
Snakes, 203 
Society, 127 /.

Solar dynasty, 18, 36 
Solitude, 127 ff 
Sotdpanna, 245 
Sound, 232 /.

•

speculation, 32, 49, 54, 268, 278. 
See also Opinion

Spirit, dionysian, lunar, etc., 97.

See also Olympian 
Stability (of Nibbana), 260 ff. 
Stcherbatsky, Th., 60 w., in n. 
Stoicism, 17, 99, 182/., 243 
Strength, 122 /.

Striving, fourfold, 138, 147, 159 
Subconscious, the, 184, 186 
Substitution (mental), 139 
Suddhavdsa, 250 
Suetonius, 21 n.

Suicide, 243 
Sukhavati, 277 
Sun, 29

Sunna, Sunnatd, 38, 131, 143, 210, 
265 ff., 278 ; Sunna’-animitia- 
o/ppai^iMta, 194 
Superman, 19, 172, 182 /., 262 
Super-normal powers, 23/., 190, 225, 
229

Sureness, 9, 172, 246, 261. See also 
Safety

Surviv^, 250, 253, 260 
Surya, 28

Suzuki, D. T., 280 n.

SvayafMiu, 261, 270 
Symbolism, 221, 252; Zen, 286/.Sureness, 9, 172, 246, 261. See also 
Safety

Surviv^, 250, 253, 260 
Surya, 28

Suzuki, D. T., 280 n.

SvayafMiu, 261, 270 
Symbolism, 221, 252; Zen, 286/.

Taffhd, 59, 61, 84, 87, 241, 254 
Tantras, 232, 237 71.

Tantric Buddhism, 65 158, 240

274 w.

Tapas, 3

Tathdgata, 236, ^'jo ff., 278, 283/.

* Tathatd, 269 ff., 278, 282 
Tejas, 226 /.

Theft, 150, 152 
Theism, 12

Thirst, 61, 64, 68, 82, 85, 89, 94, 102, 
106, 132, 157, 174, 213, 241, 254, 
257, 261, 268. See also Tanha 
Thought, 134 ff., 144, 193 ; discurs- 
ive, 188 
Tibet, 276

Tibetan Buddhism, 192, 240 n. 
Time, 240 ; and Space, 222 /., 235 
Timeless 15, 38 
Tongue, control of, 153 
. Train joneself, to, 53 /., 200, 258 
Transcendency, 105 
Tree of Life, 39 w.

Truth, 22, 39 (dhamma), 50, 51 
(dhamma), 52 /., 55, 73 {dhamma), 
152, 208, 268 {satya) ; supreme, 
274

Truths, four, 59 ff., 68, 73 /., 77,

89/, 159, 170

Tucci, G., 82 n. 
Tusita-kdya, 82, 236 
“ Twice-bom 42

Unbreakability,

Unconditioned, 38, 71, 96, 98 /., 
106, no, 132 /., 140, 189, 226 /., 
230, 249, 255, 261, 273, 275; 
-ness, 1 01 
Universality, 95 
Upadhi, 77, 133, 242, 248 
Upanishads, 29 ff., 81, 135, 163 /., 
188, 214, 241, 230, 258 
Ushas, 28 
XJttamapuHsa, in 
Uttan-manussa-dhammd, 119

Vajra, 240 n. ; -ydna, 65 n., 138 n., 
240 n.

Vajracchedikdr, 273, 284 
Varuna, 28, 41

Vedanta, 46, 74, 241, 267, 279, 298 
Vedas, 27 ff., 31 ff., 40,58, 80 n., 263 
Vedic divinities, 28, 32 
Vigilance, 137, 174 
Vinndn'a, 78 /., 81 /., 85, 103, 206, 
219. See also Consciousness 
Vipassand, 9, 92, 132, 191, 249 
Viriya-bala, 122 /., 138 
Vishnu : avatdra of, 276 
Vision, 49, 51 83, 86, 124 /., 161,

218#

Viveka, 94, 99, 129, 265 
Vocations, 92 ff.

Void, voidness, 38, 56, 131, 143, 194, 
210, 257, 265 ff., 278 ff., 282. See 
also Suhna 
Vulture’s Peak, 288

Walleser, M., 75, 240 n., 270 n.

War, warriors, 20, 138, 143 147,

154, 246, 293/.

Warren, H. C., v, 75, 83 n.

Watch, threefold, 66, 72, 177, 220/., 
226/., 231Walleser, M., 75, 240 n., 270 n.

War, warriors, 20, 138, 143 147,

154, 246, 293/.

Warren, H. C., v, 75, 83 n.

Watch, threefold, 66, 72, 177, 220/., 
226/., 231

Water (symbol), 93, 116, 148, 237, 
239 ; walking on the, 237 /.

Will, 68 /., 79, 84, 96, 99, loi, 106, 
rro /., 114, 122, 137 f-> i43, I47. 
1 61, 174, 187, 189,204,230,242,249

Wisdom, intuitive (panM), 75, 98, 
119, 140, 227

Without tendency, the, 194, 257, 
265#.

Women, 121, 155

Woodroffe, J., 233 n.

Woodward, F. L., v, 16, 75, 173

INDEX

310

World, th-is and others, 72, 87, 95 /., 
122, 145, 216, 266; end of the, 
90 I IQ, 217, 238, 239, 271, 273, 
298

Wounds, 173 ff.

Yajhavalkya, 34

YathahhutaYri,S^,p, 57, ili, 257, 283 
Y atM-hhuta~kdnd-dassana, 49

Yama, 29

Yima, 29 ^

Yoga, 8, 35 1 14 w., 232, 298

Yuga, 32, 94

Zarathustra, 37

Zen, 129, 186, 240, 255, 279 jf., 294;

symbolism of, 286 /.

Zosimus, 21 n.

^ Vi

CENTRAL ARCHAEOLOGICAL LIBRARY , ji 
^ NEW DELHI

' 3d rr 0 .■ e r ' s l-'.e cord.

I Catalogue No.L8L.42/Svo/ivfUs. -3111 . ;

Author — SvoLa, J.

of a'lSaken. Ut, ,

Borrower No.

Date of Issue

Date of Return

'