The Book of Gates (E. A. Wallis Budge translation)
==================================================
E. A. Wallis Budge (trans.) — The Book of Gates, from The Egyptian Heaven and Hell, Vol. II (London: Kegan Paul, 1906), public domain. The complete New Kingdom funerary text from the alabaster sarcophagus of Seti I, with Budge's description of the twelve divisions of the Tuat. Scan via Internet Archive.

THE BOOK OF GATES 





¥ 





THE BOOK OF GATES 





CHAPTER I. 
THE ALABASTER SARCOPHAGUS OF SETI I. 


THE text of the “Book of Gates,” printed in the 
following pages, is taken from the alabaster sarcophagus 
of king Seti I., B.c. 1370, which is preserved in the 
Museum of Sir John Soane, at 13, Lincoln’s Inn Fields. 
This sarcophagus is, undoubtedly, one of the chief 
authorities for the text of that remarkable book; 
but before any attempt is made to describe the 
arrangement of the scenes and the inscriptions which 
accompany them, it will be well to recall the principal 
facts connected with its discovery by Giovanni Battista 
Belzoni, who has fortunately placed them on record in 
his Narrative of the Operations and recent discoveries 
within the pyramids, temples, tombs and Hacavations 
in Egypt and Nubia, London, 1820, p. 233 ff In 
October, 1815, Belzoni began to excavate in the Biban- 
_al-Multik, ie. the Valley of the Tombs of the Kings, 
on the western bank of the Nile at Thebes, and in the 


44 THE SARCOPHAGUS OF SETI I. 


bed of a watercourse he found a spot where the ground 
bore traces of having been “moved.” On the 19th of 
the month his workmen made a way through the sand 
and fragments of stone which had been piled up 
there, and entered the first corridor or passage of a 
magnificent tomb, which he soon discovered to have 
been made for one of the great kings of Egypt. A 
second corridor led him to a square chamber which, 
being thirty feet deep, formed a serious obstacle in 
the way of any unauthorized intruder, and served to 
catch any rain-water which might make its way down 
the corridors from the entrance. Beyond this chamber 
are two halls, and from the first of these Belzoni 
passed through other corridors and rooms until he 
‘entered the vaulted chamber in which stood the 
sarcophagus.! The sarcophagus chamber is situated at 
a distance of 320 feet from the entrance to the first 
corridor, and is 180 feet below the level of the ground. 
Belzoni succeeded in bringing the sarcophagus from 
its chamber into the light of day without injury, and 
in due course it arrived in England; the negotiations 
which he opened with the Trustees of the British 
Museum, to whom its purchase was first proposed, fell 
through, and he subsequently sold it to Sir John 
Soane, it is said for the sum of £2000. An examina- 
tion of the sarcophagus shows that both it and its cover 
were hollowed out of monolithic blocks of alabaster, 


1 As Belzoni’s narrative is of interest, his account of his discovery 
of Seti’s tomb is given in the Appendix to this Chapter. 


DISCOVERY OF AND DESCRIPTION 45 


and it is probable, as Mr. Sharpe says,! that these were 
quarried in the mountains near Alabastronpolis, ie., 
the district which was known to the Egyptians by 


the name of Het-nub, (| rar oS, and is situated 


near the ruins known in modern times by the name 
of Tell al-‘Amarna. In the Het-nub quarries large 
numbers of inscriptions, written chiefly in the hieratic 
character, have been found, and from the interesting 
selection from these published by Messrs. Blackden 
and Fraser, we learn that several kings of the Ancient 
and Middle Empires carried on works in them, no 
doubt for the purpose of obtaining alabaster for funeral 
purposes. The sarcophagus is 9 ft. 4in. long, 3 ft. 8 in. 
wide, in the widest part, and 2ft. 8in. high at the 
shoulders, and 2ft. 3in. at the feet; the cover is 
1ft. 3in. high. The thickness of the alabaster varies 
from 23 to 4 inches. The skill of the mason who 
succeeded in hollowing the blocks without breaking, 
or even cracking them, is marvellous, and the remains 
of holes nearly one inch in diameter suggest that the 
drill was as useful to him as the chisel and mallet in 
hollowing out the blocks. When the sarcophagus and 
its cover were finally shaped and polished, they were 
handed over to an artisan who was skilled in cutting 
hieroglyphics and figures of the gods, &c., in stone, and 
both the insides and outsides were covered by him 


1 The Alabaster Sarcophagus of Oimenepthah I., King of Egypt. 
London, 1864, p. 14, 


46 THE SARCOPHAGUS OF SETI I. 


with inscriptions and vignettes and mythological scenes 
which illustrated them. Both inscriptions and scenes 
were then filled in with a kind of paint made from 
some preparation of copper, and the vivid bluish green 
colour of this paint must have formed a striking 
contrast to the brilliant whiteness of the alabaster 
when fresh from the quarry. At the present time 
large numbers of characters and figures are denuded 
of their colour, and those in which it still remains are 
much discoloured by London fog and soot. 

The first to attempt to describe the contents of the 
texts and scenes on the sarcophagus of Seti I. was the 
late Samuel Sharpe, who, with the late Joseph Bonomi, 
published “The Alabaster Sarcophagus of Oimen- 
epthah IL, King of Egypt,” London, 1864, 4to; the 
former was responsible for the letterpress, and the 
latter for the plates of scenes and texts. For some 
reason which it is not easy to understand, Mr. Sharpe 
decided that the hieroglyphic characters which formed 
the prenomen of the king for whom the sarcophagus was 
made were to be read “Oimenepthah,” a result which 
he obtained by assigning the phonetic value of O to 


the hieroglyphic sign for Osiris tf The prenomen is 


sometimes written U ; iG A) ae , or Gillie 


and é vh 4 a and is to be read either Surt- 
MER-EN-PTAH, or SETI-MEN-EN-PTAH. Mr. Sharpe did 


not, apparently, realize that both the signs @ and fi 


GENERAL DESCRIPTION 47 


were to be read “Set,” and he gave to the first the 
phonetic value of A and to the second the value of O; 
he next identified “ Aimenepthah” or “ Oimenepthah ” 
with the Amenophath of Manetho, and the Cho- 
maepthah of Eratosthenes, saying, “hence arises the 
support to our reading. his name (ie, the king’s) 
Oimenepthah.” Passing over Mr. Sharpe’s further 
remarks, which assert that the sarcophagus was made 
in the year B.c. 1175(!), we must consider briefly the 
arrangement of the texts and scenes upon the insides 
and outsides of the sarcophagus and its covers. On 
the upper outside edge of the sarcophagus runs a 
single line of hieroglyphics which contains speeches 
supposed to be made to the deceased by the four 
children of Horus; this line is in two sections, each of 
which begins at the right hand side of the head, and 
ends at the left hand side of the foot. Below this line 
of hieroglyphics are five large scenes, each of which is 
divided into three registers, and these are enclosed 
between two dotted bands which are intended to 
represent the borders of the “Valley of the Other 
World.” On the inside of the sarcophagus are also five 
scenes, but there is no line of hieroglyphics running 
along the upper edge. On the bottom of the sarco- 
phagus is a finely cut figure of the goddess Nut, and 
round and about her are texts selected from the 
Theban Recension of the Book of the Dead; on 
the inside of the cover is a figure of the goddess 
Nut, with arms outstretched. On the outside of the 


48 THE SARCOPHAGUS OF SETI I. 


cover, in addifion to the texts which record the names 
and titles of the deceased, are inscribed two large 
scenes, each of which is divided into three registers, 
like those inside and outside the sarcophagus. 

The line of text on the upper outside edge reads :— 


TMIAWEMMa LIS 
=7=)\42 CMU 2 
KLUM ESSOR ETE 
STaDslvled es 
eM PE SUVs DIM 
<P? 421d E=N38 GID 
NEZUNI TEMS 
NEW TaSINwSsyre 
NeASaSiw=cere 
eS Cn ISI2ine 
9955S Jel Je Oe IE 
W- aS CEN AS 





\\ 


NG 














SPEECHES OF THE CHILDREN OF HORUS 49 


ce SPS Tio CLUS) 
Micst NilY Hd =e 14 
d= eta sSs = 
== Spe of SERS. 
Mnf SSS Ak rede S| oS 
Jeve lI ie | bed@ Sch ps 
S42 Se CmSyIpzly 
online ANAM SK Pes 
ai HEN LIege\(NS 
aE eld Nm doe BATH 
4a eWe TEA = Cte) 
lees us SUT SW 
Tlob eid Ble TAS 1 eve) 
Td Y RL a Sea 
me A RU SIRS Ss 


VOL. II. 








yee TAS Fico RSS 
eee cab 7: 
BG wee VCH]! Se 
CTH IS 4K C=: an 
J Joe Fs rid Sleeves). 
eet 


I. Speech of MestHA: “Iam Mestha, I am [thy] son, 
“QO Osiris, king, lord of the two lands, Men-Maat-Ra, 
“whose word is madt, son of the Sun, Seti Mer-en-Ptah, 
“whose word is madt, and I have come so that I 
“may be among those who protect thee. I make to 
“flourish thy house, which shall be doubly established, 
“by the command of Ptah, by the command of Ra 
“himself.” 

Speech of Anpu: “I am Anpu, who dwelleth in (or, 
“with) the funeral chest.” He saith, “Mother Isis 
Paescendeth 4 le . wx bandages for me, Osiris, king 
“ Men-Maat-Ra, whose word is maat, son of the Sun, 
“Seti Mer-en-Ptah, whose word is madt, from him 
“that worketh against me.” 

Speech of Tuamarer: “I am Tuamatef, I am thy 
“son Horus, I love thee, and I have come to avenge 
“thee, Osiris, upon him that would work his wicked- 





SPEECHES OF THE CHILDREN OF HORUS 51 


“ness upon thee, and I will set him under thy feet 
“for ever, Osiris, king, lord of the two lands, Men- 
“Maat-Ra, son of the Sun, [proceeding] from his 
“body, loving him, lord of crowns (or, risings) Seti 
“Mer-en-Ptah, whose word is madt, before the Great 
“God.” 

To be said: “Ra liveth, the Tortoise dieth ! Strong 
“are the members of ..... Osiris, king Men-Maat- 
“Ra, whose word is madt, for Qebhsennuf guardeth 
“them. Ra liveth, the Tortoise dieth! In a sound 
“state is he who is in the sarcophagus, in a sound state 
“is he who is in the sarcophagus, that is to say, the 
“son of the Sun, Seti Mer-en-Ptah, whose word is 
“maat.” 

Speech of Nut: Nut, the great one of Seb, saith: 
“O Osiris, king, lord of the two lands, Men-Maat-Ra, 
“whose word is madt, who loveth me, I give unto 
“thee purity on the earth, and splendour (or, glory) 
“in the heavens, and I give unto thee thy head for 
“ever.” 

IT. Speech of Nut, who is over the Hennu Boar: 
“This is my son, Osiris, king, Men-Maat-Ra, whose 
“word is madt. His father Shu loveth him, and his 
“mother Nut loveth him, Osiris, son of Ra, Seti Mer- 
“en-Ptah, whose word is madt.” 

Speech of Hari: “Iam Hapi. I have come that I 
“might ‘be among those who protect thee, I bind 
“together for thee thy head, [and thy members, smiting 
“down for thee thine enemies beneath thee, and I give 


52 THE SARCOPHAGUS OF SETI I. 


“ thee]! thy head, O Osiris, king, Men-Maat-Ra, whose 
“word is madt, son of Ra, Seti Mer-en-Ptah, whose 
“word is madt.” 

Speech of Anpu, the Governor of the divine house: 
“Tam Anpu, the Governor of the divine house. O 
“Osiris, king, lord of the two lands, Men-Maat-Ra, 
“whose word is madt, son of the Sun, [proceeding] 
“from his body, the lord of crowns, Seti Mer-en-Ptah, 
“whose word is madt, the Shennu beings go round 
“about thee, and thy members remain uninjured, O 
age king, Men-Maat-Ra, minors word is maat for 

“ ever.’ 

Speech of QEBHSENNUF: “I am thy son, I have 
“come that I might be among those who protect 
“thee. I gather together for thee thy bones, and 
“TI piece together for thee thy limbs. I bring unto 
“thee thy heart, and I set it upon its seat in thy 
“body. I make to flourish (or, germinate) for thee thy 
“house after thee, [O thou who] liv[est] for ever.” 

To be said: “Ra liveth, the Tortoise dieth! Let 
“enter the bones of Osiris, king Men-Maat-Ra, whose 
“word is madt, the son of the Sun, Seti Mer-en-Ptah, 
“whose word is madt, let them enter into their founda- 
“tions. Pure is the dead body which is in the earth, 


: ——1| | | § 
Supplying the words _ ct + 
yy 
Belt TY 
: << from the well-known speech on the 


Canopic jars. 


THE FIGURE OF NUT 53 


“and pure are the bones of Osiris, king Men-Maat-Ra, 
“whose word is madt, like Ra [for ever !].” 

On the bottom of the sarcophagus is a large, full- 
length figure of the goddess Nut, who is depicted in 
the form of a woman with her arms ready to embrace 
the body of the king. Her face and the lower parts of 
the body below the waist are in profile, but she has a 
front chest, front shoulders, and a front eye. Her feet 
are represented as if each was a right foot, and each 
only shows the great toe. One breast is only shown. 
The hair of the goddess is long and falls over her back 
and shoulders; it is held in position over her forehead 
by a bandlet. She wears a deep collar or necklace, 
and a closely-fitting feather-work tunic which extends 
from her breast to her ankles; the latter is supported 
by two shoulder straps, each of which is fastened with 
a buckle on the shoulder. She has anklets on her legs, 
and bracelets on her wrists, and armlets on her arms. 
The inscriptions which are cut above the head, and at 
both sides, and under the feet of the goddess contain 
addresses to the king by the great gods of the sky, and 
extracts from the Book of the Dead; they read :— 


54 THE SARCOPHAGUS OF SETI I. 


INSCRIPTION ON THE BOTTOM OF THE SARCOPHAGUS OF 
Seti I. 


Mac == ee 
OSes" ae. oo 


a @ patra ay oy 


© Nin ooo 1M BAe 
Ey EERE al Claret) Pei Soo 
= tia 

mt Tide! SJ So Coewle tt A 
ma (lar Sel ee 
oe (Oto > = SS = ll ee 
IR GA oe 

W. Tn & te Fe Ce) 28% 
aaa SEAL Dis) pene ON 
Ne cae | oe aS 














SPEECHES OF SEB, NUT, ETC. NS 


INSCRIPTION ON THE BOTTOM OF THE SARCOPHAGUS OF 
Ser E.. 


I. The words of Osiris the king, the lord of the two 
lands, Men-Maat-Ra, whose word is madt, the son of 
Ra (ie., the Sun), Sert Mer-EN-PTau, whose word is 
maat, who saith, “O thou goddess Nut, support thou 
“me, for I am thy son. Destroy thou my defects of 
“immobility, together with those who produce them.” 

II. The goddess Nut, who dwelleth in Het-HENNv, 
saith, “This [is my] son Osiris, the king, the lord 
“of the two lands, Men-Maat-Ra, whose word is 
“maat, the son of Ra, [proceeding] from his body, 
“who loveth him, the lord of crowns, Osiris, SETI 
“ MER-EN-PTAH.” 

III. The god SEB saith, “This [is my] son MEn- 
“Maat-RA, who loveth me. I have given unto him 
“purity upon earth, and glory in heaven, him the 
“ Osiris, king, the lord of the two lands, Men-Maat-Ra, 
“whose word is madt, the son of Ra, the lover of Nut, 
“that is to say, Smtr Mer-EN-Prau, whose word is 
“madat, before the lords of the Tuat.” 

IV. Words which are to be said:—*O Osiris, king, 
“Jord of the two lands, Men-MaAat-RA, whose word is 
“maat, the son of Ra, [proceeding] from his body, that 
“is to say, SeTI Mer-En-PTAu, whose word is madat. 
“Thy mother Nut putteth forth [her] two hands and 
“arms over thee, Osiris, king, lord of the two lands, 
“ Men-Maat-Ra, whose word is madt, son of Ra, 


56 THE SARCOPHAGUS OF SETI 


ToT Sosa 
aim S Reso eek 

=o ai eee) = 
Sey eto nS Se 
S JIS ySiz are 
pee, ali | 
Hoa TPO KR Slel— 
So RIETY2 Sifi—RS 
= Sai 

Wine eeneere Gc. | 
Poly AA Re As | 
wlll G0) 2 dR Haste 
ooo 
THe SEA A= 
Kee eds Gee ae 


SPEECH OF NUT 57 


“whom he loveth, lord of diadems, SeTr MeEr-EN- 
“PTAH, whose word is madt. Thy mother Nout 
“hath added the magical powers which are thine, 
“and thou art in her arms, and thou shalt never 
“die. Lifted up and driven away are the calamities 
“which were to thee, and they shall never [more] 
“come to thee, and shall never draw nigh unto 
“thee, Osiris, king, the lord of the two lands, MEN- 
“Maat-RA, whose word is madt. Horus hath taken 
“up his stand behind thee, Osiris, son of Ra, lord 
“of diadems, SETI Merr-EN-PTAH, whose word is 
“madat, for thy mother Nur hath come unto thee; 
“she hath purified (or, washed) thee, she hath united 
“herself to thee, she hath supplied thee as a 
“god, and thou art: alive and stablished among the 
“ gods.” 


V. The great goddess Nur saith, “I have endowed 
“him with a soul, I have endowed him with a spirit, 
“and I have given him power in the body of his 
“mother TEFNUT, I who was never brought forth. I 
“have come, and I have united myself to OSIRIS, 
“the king, the lord of the two lands, Men-Maart-Ra, 
“whose word is madt, the son of Ra, the lord of 
“diadems, SETI MeER-EN-PTAH, whose word is madt, 
“with life, stability, and power. He shall not 
“die. I am Nur of the mighty heart, and I took 
“up my being in the body of my mother TEFNuT 
“in my name of Nut; over my mother none hath 


58 THE SARCOPHA 


pie =1h AR MITE 
SRO aR SSIS St ae 
Ades Bohai bar 
TetLliewAeie).e— 
TS dev AoGi |= 
Se dy Hohe of ed. 
Fit ovela S89 
ae Zyps oe 
ed = of | Sx 
(Zidiy = Jo a ee 
MOR LV TA «es 
(ovo SSF | SGims) 
OUST SD YS 
Li ber aecall To SAR ACre) 
OPS = SS. Cit Sjo> 





BOOK OF THE DEAD—CHAPTER LXXII. 59 


“gained the mastery. I have filled every place with my 
“)beneficence, and I have led captive the whole earth; 
“T have led captive the South and the North, and I 
“have gathered together the things which are into my 
“arms to vivify Osiris, the king, the lord of the two 
“lands, Men-Maat-Ra, the son of the Sun, [proceeding] 
“from his body, the lover of SEKER, the lord of diadems, 
“the governor whose heart is glad, Set! Mrr-En-Prau, 
“whose word is madt. His soul shall live for ever!” 

VI. [“Nut,”] saith Osiris, the king Men-Maat-Ra, 
whose word is madt, “Raise thou me up! I am [thy] 
“son, set thou free him whose heart is at rest from 
“that which maketh [it to be still].” 

VII. Osiris, the king, the lord of the two lands, 
Men-Maat-Ra, whose word is madt, the son of the 
Sun, loving him, SETI MER-EN-PTAu, saith the 


CHAPTER OF ComInG FortH BY DAY AND OF MAKING A 
Way Torovcn Ammener.! 


Saith Osiris, the king, the lord of the two lands, MEn- 
Maart-Ra, whose word is madt, the son of the Sun, [pro- 
ceeding] from his body, loving him, the lord of crowns, 
Setr Mer-EN-Ptau, whose word is madt, “Homage to 
“you, O ye lords of madt, who are free from iniquity, 
“who exist and live for ever and to the double hents 
“period of everlastingness, Mmen-Maat-Ra, whose word 
“is madt, the son of the Sun, [proceeding] from his body, 
“loving him, the lord of diadems, Set MER-EN-Prau, 


1 This is Chapter LXXII. of the Book of the Dead. 


60 THE SARCOPHAGUS OF SETI I. 


=n Pe AIS Simyeh | 
MUN Da Ra de WO Ge}! 
shy mt lS= eis\)Se 
auiitn Ja NT No ee 
FS VMI ALIA 
ab ao P| WO aR PSS WG 
Sire SO Scr Se 
Hide GORA eR 
SKIS l2Teae 
OFS S22=h AFA B ag 
PIS SIUIG&eSyrqneer 
SY Wa 


ron recent eri ues Yew Te Bees 


33 (Vv\SeS=Ne 
oo aa 


BOOK OF THE DEAD—CHAPTER LXXII. 61 


“whose word is madt, before you hath become a 
“khu (ie. a spirit) in his attributes, he hath gained 
«the mastery through his words of power, and he 
“as laden with his splendours. O deliver ye the 
“Osiris, the king, the lord of the two lands, MEn- 
“MAAT-RA, whose word is madt, the son of the sun, 
“the lord of diadems, Setr Mrr-En-Pray, whose 
“word is madt, from the Crocodile of this Pool of 
“Maati. He hath his mouth, let him speak there- 
“with. Let there be granted unto him broad-handed- 
“ness in your presence, because I know you, and I 
“know your names. I know this great god unto 
“whose nostrils ye present offerings of ¢tchefau. 
“REKEM is his name. He maketh a way through 
“the eastern horizon of heaven. RrKkem departeth 
“and I also depart; he is strong and I am strong. 
“O let me not be destroyed in the MEesquT Chamber. 
“Let not the Sebau fiends gain the mastery over 
“me. Drive not ye me away from your Gates, 
“and shut not fast your arms against the Osiris, 
“the king, the lord of the two lands, MEeN-Maar- 
“RA, whose word is madt, the son of the Sun, [pro- 
“ceeding] from his body, loving him, the lord of 
“diadems, SETI MéR-EN-PTAH, whose word is madt, 
“because [my] bread is in the city of Pr,’ and my 
“ale is in the city of Trp, and my arms are united 


! Pe and Tep formed a double city in the Delta. 


62 DHE SARCOPHAGUS? OF SETI: : 


noolP UM INTE 


es cay | ea & ae ea an wt, 
xa nw Ye www a ov: “yoo Wis Bd 


INS EES RISK MADE 
SoA SN an] ess oo ae 
Fe oo ASI ESS Jas ye Fd 
fie LIC) Ses eS 
Bf-SoCi SAK Sa 
= Worl mel IN 20 


lm OG 0Ofs86 
CG = © Bs \\ VI’ 


we) | Ll= CrelN= 
om CLE Tied Fast iEc hk Neeere 
So dG LI Seay = 
Kot HoPhS waeos 
Ao an GI) S 1S 
WMIWSVerme Ss 4 


(EZ ZA 


BOOK OF THE DEAD—CHAPTER LXXII. 63 


“in the divine house which my father hath given unto 
“me. He hath stablished for me a house in the high 
“place of the lands, and there are wheat and barley 
“therein, the quantity of which is unknown. The son 
“of my body acteth for me there as kher-heb.' Grant 
“ye unto me sepulchral offerings, that is to say, 
“incense, and merhet unguent, and all beautiful and 
“pure things of every kind whereon the God liveth. 
“Osiris, the king, Men-Maat-Ra, whose word is madt, 
“the son of the Sun, [proceeding] from his body, loving 
“him, the lord of diadems, the ruler of joy of heart, 
“ Set1 Mer-EN-Pran, whose word is madt, existeth for 
“ever in all the transformations which it pleaseth 
“him to make]. He floateth down the river, he saileth 
“up into Sexuet-Aaru,? he reacheth SekneT-HETsp.’ 
“T am the double Lion-god.” * 

VIII. Saith Osiris, the king, the lord of the two 
lands, Men-Maat-Ra, whose word is madt, son of the 
Sun, loving him, Smtr Mzr-En-Pray, whose word is 
maat :—“O ward off that destroyer from my father 
“ Osiris, the king, the lord of the two lands, Men-Maat- 
“Ra, whose word is madt, and let his divine protection 
“be under my legs, and let them live. Strengthen 
“thou Osiris, son of the Sun, lord of diadems, Serr MEr- 
“EN-PTAH, whose word is madt, with thy hand. Grasp 
“thou him with thy hand, let him enter thy hand, let 


1 The kher-heb was the priestly official who read the funeral service. 
_? I.e., the Field of Reeds. 3 T.e., the Field of Peace. 
4 T.e., Shu and Tefnut. 


2423) sQlo=yy2 
a res pres =aswo es 
SEM oZOKMed,S- Play 
sea PENG Pines 
hot? se MLS = GE) 
ee 

wD Saja e= 
<S CMD IAMAY Wa 
ofA SAUNA SSS 
TAIZISRRIFDAS 
VEGNG2 ISR Kee 
SA SMVSULCA Idd 
WVISPR pS bey upsrey! 
[IVI RBIS TA PI 
Sob Sly HSCs A doy 





BOOK OF THE DEAD—CHAPTER LXXXIX. 65 


“him enter thy hand, O Osiris, king, lord of the two 
“lands, MEN-MAAat-Ra, whose word is madt, thou shalt 
“not perish. Nur cometh unto thee, and she fashioneth 
“thee as the Great Fashioner, and thou shalt never 
“decay; she fashioneth thee, she turneth thy weak- 
“ness into strength, she gathereth together thy 
“members, she bringeth thy heart into thy body, and 
“she hath placed thee at the head of the living doubles 
“(kau), O Osiris, king, lord of the two lands, MrEn- 
“ Maat-Ra, whose word is madt, before the beautiful 
“god, the lord of Ta-TCHESERT.” 

IX. Saith Osiris, the king, the lord of the two 
lands, Men-Maat-Ra, whose word is madt, the son of 
the Sun, [proceeding] from his body, loving him, the 
lord of diadems, SETI MER-EN-PTAH, whose word is madt, 


[THE CHAPTER OF CAUSING THE SOUL TO BE UNITED 
To 1rs Bopy IN THE UNDERWORLD] ! 

“Hail, ye gods who bring (Anniv)! [Hail] ye gods 
“who run (PEHIU)! [Hail] thou who dwellest in 
“his embrace, thou great god, grant thou that may 
“come unto me my soul from wheresoever it may be. 
“Tf it would delay, then let my soul be brought unto 
“me from wheresoever it may be, for thou shalt find 
“the Eye of Horus standing by thee like those 
“watchful gods. If it lie down, let it lie down in 
« Annu (Heliopolis), the land where [souls are joined 
“to their bodies] in thousands. Let my soul be brought 


1 This is Chapter LXXXIX. of the Book of the Dead. 
VOL. II. 1p 


fy aS eA ARS 
= SINS Weald 
f S> ils SNS Sp ae me IBY 
b xsl 2 Ye Md Soh y 
A heb Blast AR 
MEIER NO Sania a Peer e No Cr 
ice eS Pare i 


ie 


een 


TT Stems et 
tS anise 2 Ien= 

Peal: ob ed kde ade i 
xt SS ei ISe= 

an Elen eI > ss = 


Sols SST Ske |= 


ee ee ee 


BOOK OF THE DEAD—CHAPTER LXXXIXx. 67 


“unto me from wheresoever it may be. Make thou 
“strong, O guardian of sky and earth, this my soul. 
“Tf it would tarry, do thou cause the soul to see its 
“body, and thou shalt find the Eye of Horus standing 
“by thee even as do those [gods who watch].” 

“ Hail, ye gods who tow along the boat of the lord of 
“millions of years, who bring [it] into the upper regions 
“of the Tuat, who make it to pass over Nut, and who 
“make the soul to enter into its séhu (i.e., spiritual body), 
“let your hands be full of weapons, and grasp them 
“and make them sharp, and hold chains in readiness to 
“destroy the serpent enemy. Let the Boat rejoice, and 
“let the great god pass on in peace, and behold, grant 
“ye that the soul of Osiris, king MEen-Maat-Ra, whose 
“word is madt, may emerge from the thighs [of Nut] in 
“the eastern horizon of heaven, for ever and for ever.” 

X. Osiris, the king, the lord of the two lands, MEN- 
Maat-Ra SeETEp-[EN]-RA, whose word is madt, the son 
of Ra, loving PraH-Sexkri, the lord of diadems, SETI 
-Mer-EN-Prau, whose word is madt, saith:—“O ye 
“shennu beings, go ye round behind me, and let not 
“these my members be without strength.” 

XI. Osiris, the king, the lord of the two lands, MEN- 
Maat-Ra AA-RA, whose word is madt, the son of the 
sun, [proceeding] from his body, loving him, lord of 
diadems, SETI MER-EN-PTAu, saith :—*O Nut, lift thou 
“meup. Iam thyson. Do away from me that which 
“maketh me to be without motion.” [Nut saith] :— 
“QO Osiris, the king, the lord of the two lands, Mrn- 


68 THE SARCOPHAGUS OF SETI I. 


(28) & = 5 or Gh) 


ee "DR Sud 


Sess SSeS || = 





PRAYERS OF SETI I. 69 


“Maat-Ra AaA-RA, whose word is madt, the son of 
“the sun, [proceeding] from his body, loving him, 
“the lord of diadems, Set -MER-EN-PTAH, whose 
“word is madt, I have given thee thy head to be 
“on thy body, and all the members of him that is 
“SETI Mer-EN-Pran, whose word is madt, shall never 
“lack strength.” 


On the outside of the cover, beneath the two scenes 
and texts which occupied the upper part of it, was a 
horizontal line of hieroglyphics which contained two 
short speeches, the one by the goddess Nut, and the 
other by Thoth. The speech of Nut is a duplicate 
of the opening lines of that found on the bottom 
of the sarcophagus (see above § v., p. 55); the 
speech of Thoth is much mutilated, and can have 
contained little except the promise to be with the 
king, and a repetition of the royal name and titles. 
-On the inside of the cover were texts, many por- 
tions of which are identical, as we see from the 
fragments which remain, with the Chapters from the 
Book of the Dead which are found on the bottom of the 
sarcophagus, and which have been transcribed above. 
At each side of the figure of the winged goddess which 
was cut on the breast was a figure of the god Thoth, 
who is seen holding a staff surmounted by the 
symbol of “night,” >, When the cover was com- 
plete there were probably four such figures upon it, 
‘and the texts which accompanied them were, no doubt, 


70 THE SARCOPHAGUS OF SETI I. 


identical with those found in Chapter CLXI. of the 
Book of the Dead. 

The scenes and inscriptions which cover the inside 
and outside of the sarcophagus are described and 
transcribed in the following chapters. 


eo 


APPENDIX TO CHAPTER I. 


BELZONI’S ACCOUNT OF HIS DISCOVERY OF 
THE TOMB OF SETI I. 


“On the 16th (of October) I recommenced my excava- 
“tions in the Valley of Beban el Malook, and pointed 
“out the fortunate spot, which has paid me for all the 
- «trouble I took in my researches. I may call this a 
“fortunate day, one of the best perhaps of my life; 
“J do not mean to say, that fortune has made me rich, 
“for I do not consider all rich men fortunate; but she 
“has given me that satisfaction, that extreme pleasure, 
“which wealth cannot purchase; the pleasure of 
«discovering what has been long sought in vain, and 
“of presenting the world with a new and perfect 
“monument of Egyptian antiquity, which can be 
“yvecorded as superior to any other in point of 
“grandeur, style, and preservation, appearing as if just 
“finished on the day we entered it; and what I found 
“in it will show its great superiority to all others. 
“Not fifteen yards from the last tomb I described, I 
“caused the earth to be opened at the foot of a steep 
“hill, and under a torrent, which, when it rains, pours 
“a great quantity of water over the very spot I have 


72 THE SARCOPHAGUS OF SETI I. 


“caused to be dug. No one could imagine, that the 
“ancient Egyptians would make the entrance into 
“such an immense and superb excavation just under a 
“torrent of water; but I had strong reasons to suppose, 
“that there was a tomb in that place, from indications 
“I had observed in my pursuit. The Fellahs who 
“were accustomed to dig were all of opinion, that 
“there was nothing in that spot, as the situation of 
“this tomb differed from that of any other. I con- 
“tinued the work, however, and the next day, the 
“17th, in the evening we perceived the part of the 
“rock that was cut, and formed the entrance. On the 
“18th, early in the morning, the task was resumed, 
“and about noon the workmen reached the entrance, 
“which was eighteen feet below the surface of the 
“ground. The appearance indicated, that the tomb 
“was of the first rate; but still I did not expect to 
“find such a one as it really proved to be. The F ellahs 
“advanced till they saw that it was probably a large 
“tomb, when they protested they could go no further, 
“the tomb was so much choked up with large stones, 
“which they could not get out of the passage. I 
“descended, examined the place, pointed out to them 
“where they might dig, and in an hour there was 
“room enough for me to enter through a passage that 
“the earth had left under the ceiling of the first 
“corridor, which is 36 ft. 2 in. long, and 8 ft. 8 in. wide, 
“and, when cleared of the ruins, 6 ft. 9 in. high. 
“T perceived immediately by the painting on the 


BELZONI’S NARRATIVE OF ITS DISCOVERY 73 


“ceiling, and by the hieroglyphics in basso relievo, 
“which were to be seen where the earth did not reach, 
“that this was the entrance into a large and magnifi- 
“cent tomb. At the end of this corridor I came to a 
“staircase 23 ft. long, and of the same breadth as the 
“corridor. The door at the bottom is 12ft. high. 
“From the foot of the staircase I entered another 
“corridor, 37 ft. 3in. long, and of the same width and 
“height as the other, each side sculptured with 
“hieroglyphics in basso relievo, and painted. The 
“ceiling also is finely painted, and in pretty good 
“preservation. The more I saw, the more I was eager 
“to see, such being the nature of man; but I was 
“checked in my anxiety at this time, for at the end of 
“this passage I reached a large pit, which intercepted 
“my progress. This pit is 30ft. deep, and 14 ft. by 
“12ft. 3in. wide. The upper part of the pit is 
“adorned with figures, from the wall of the passage 
“up to the ceiling. The passages from the entrance 
“all the way to this pit have an inclination downward 
“of an angle of eighteen degrees. On the opposite side 
“of the pit facing the entrance I perceived a small 
“aperture 2ft. wide and 2ft. 6in. high, and at the 
“bottom of the wall a quantity of rubbish. A rope 
“fastened to a piece of wood, that was laid across the 
“passage against the projections which formed a kind 
“of door, appears to have been used by the ancients 
“for descending into the pit; and from the small 
“aperture on the opposite side hung another, which 


7A. THE SARCOPHAGUS OF SETI I. 


“reached the bottom, no doubt for the purpose of 
“ascending. We could clearly perceive, that the water 
“which entered the passages from the torrents of rain 
“ran into this pit, and the wood and rope fastened to 
“it crumbled to dust on touching them. At the 
“bottom of the pit were several pieces of wood, placed 
“against the side of it, so as to assist the person who 
“was to ascend by the rope into the aperture. I saw 
“the impossibility of proceeding at the moment. Mr. 
“ Beechey, who that day came from Luxor, entered the 
“tomb, but was also disappointed. 

“The next day, the 19th, by means of a long beam 
“we succeeded in sending a man up into the aperture, 
“and having contrived to make a bridge of two beams, 
“we crossed the pit. The little aperture we found to 
“be an opening forced through a wall, that had 
“entirely closed the entrance, which was as large as 
“the corridor. The Egyptians had closely shut it up, 
“plastered the wall over, and painted it like the rest 
“of the sides of the pit, so that but for the aperture, 
“it would have been impossible to suppose, that there 
“was any further proceeding; and anyone would 
“conclude, that the tomb ended with the pit. The 
“rope in the inside of the wall did not fall to dust, but 
“remained pretty strong, the water not having reached 
“it at all; and the wood to which it was attached was 
“in good preservation. It was owing to this method - 
“of keeping the damp out of the inner parts of the 
“tomb, that they are so well preserved. I observed 


BELZONI’S NARRATIVE OF ITS DISCOVERY 75 


“some cavities at the bottom of the well, but found 
“nothing in them, nor any communication from the 
“bottom to any other place; therefore we could not 
“doubt their being made to receive the waters from 
“the rain, which happens occasionally in this moun- 
“tain. The valley is so much raised by the rubbish, 
“which the water carries down from the upper parts, 
“that the entrance into these tombs is become much 
“lower than the torrents; in consequence, the water 
“finds its way into the tombs, some of which are 
“entirely choked up with earth. 

“When we had passed through the little aperture 
“we found ourselves in a beautiful hall, 27 ft. 6 in. by 
“95 ft. 10in., in which were four pillars 3ft. square. 
“T shall not give any description of the painting, till I 
“have described the whole of the chambers. At the 
“end of this room, which I call the entrance-hall, and 
“opposite the aperture, is a large door, from which 
“three steps lead down into a chamber with two 
“pillars. This is 28 ft. 2in. by 25 ft. 6 in. The pillars 
“are 3ft. 10in. square. I gave it the name of the 
“drawing-room ; for it is covered with figures, which, 
“though only outlined, are so fine and perfect, that 
“you would think they had been drawn only the day 
“before. Returning into the entrance-hall, we saw 
“on the left of the aperture a large staircase, which 
«descended into a corridor. It is 13 ft. 4in. long, 
“7 ft, 6in. wide, and has 18 steps. At the bottom we 
“entered a beautiful corridor, 36 ft. 6in. by 6 ft. 11 in. 


76 THE SARCOPHAGUS OF SETI I. 


“ We perceived that the paintings became more perfect 
“as we advanced farther into the interior. They 
“retained their gloss, or a kind of varnish over the 
“colours, which had a beautiful effect. The figures are 
“painted on a white ground. At the end of this 
“corridor we descended ten steps, which I call the 
“small stairs, into another, 17ft. 2in. by 10ft. 5in. 
“From this we entered a small chamber, 20 ft. 4in. by 
“13 ft. 8in., to which I gave the name of the Room of 
“ Beauties; for it is adorned with the most beautiful 
“figures in basso relievo, like all the rest, and painted. 
“When standing in the centre of this chamber, the 
“traveller is surrounded by an assembly of Egyptian 
“gods and goddesses. Proceeding farther, we entered 
“a large hall, 27 ft. 9in. by 26ft. 10in. In this hall 
“are two rows of square pillars, three on each side of 
“the entrance, forming a line with the corridors. At 
“each side of this hall is a small chamber; that on the 
“right is 10 ft. 5in. by 8ft. 8in., that on the left 
“10ft. Sin. by 8ft. 94in. This hall I termed the 
“Hall of Pillars; the little room on the right, Isis’ 
“Room, as in it a large cow is painted, of which I 
“shall give a description hereafter; that on the left, 
“the Room of Mysteries, from the mysterious figures 
“it exhibits. At the end of this hall we entered a 
“large saloon, with an arched roof or ceiling, which is 
“separated from the Hall of Pillars only by a step 
_ “so that the two may be reckoned one.- The saloon 
“js 31 ft. 10in. by 27ft. On the right is a small 


BELZONI'’S NARRATIVE OF ITS DISCOVERY 77 


“chamber without anything in it, roughly cut, as if 
“unfinished, and without painting; on the left we 
“entered a chamber with two square pillars, 25 ft. 8 in. 
“by 22ft. 10in. This I called the Sideboard Room, 
“as it has a projection of -3 ft. in form of a sideboard 
“all round, which was perhaps intended to contain the 
“articles necessary for the funeral ceremony. The 
“pillars are 3 ft. 4in. square, and the whole beautifully 
“painted as the rest. At the same end of the room, 
«and facing the Hall of Pillars, we entered by a large 
“door into another chamber with four pillars, one of 
“which is fallen down. This chamber is 43 ft. 4in. by 
“17 ft. 6in.; the pillars 3 ft. 7in.square. It is covered 
“with white plaster, where the rock did not cut 
“smoothly, but there is no painting on it. I named it 
“the Bull’s, or Apis’ Room, as we found the carcass 
“ofa bull in it, embalmed with asphaltum ; and also, 
“scattered in various places, an immense quantity of 
“gmall wooden figures of mummies 6 or 8 in. long, 
“and covered with asphaltum to preserve them. 
“There were some other figures of fine earth baked, 
“coloured blue, and strongly varnished. On each side 
“of the two little rooms were wooden statues standing 
“erect, 4ft. high, with a circular hollow inside, as if to 
“eontain a roll of papyrus, which I have no doubt 
“they did. We found likewise fragments of other 
“statues of wood and of composition. 

_ “But the description of what we found in the centre 
«“ of the saloon, and which I have reserved till this place, 


78 THE SARCOPHAGUS OF “SETTLE I. 


“merits the most particular attention, not having its 
- “equal in the world, and being such as we had no idea 
“could exist. It is a sarcophagus of the finest oriental 
“alabaster, 9ft. 5in. long, and 3ft. 7in. wide. Its 
“thickness is only 2in., and it is transparent, when a 
“light is placed in the inside of it. It is minutely 
“sculptured within and without with several hundred 
“figures, which do not exceed 2in. in height, and 
“represent, as I suppose, the whole of the funeral 
“procession and ceremonies relating to the deceased, 
“united with several emblems, &c. I cannot give an 
“adequate idea of this beautiful and invaluable piece 
“of antiquity, and can only say, that nothing has been 
“brought into Europe from Egypt that can be com- 
“pared with it. The cover was not there; it had been 
“taken out, and broken into several pieces, which we 
“found in digging before the first entrance. The 
“sarcophagus was over a staircase in the centre of the 
“saloon, which communicated with a subterraneous — 
“passage, leading downwards, 300 ft. in length. At the - 
“end of this passage we found a great quantity of bats’ 
“dung, which choked it up, so that we could go no 
“farther without digging. It was nearly filled up too 
“by the falling in of the upper part. One hundred feet 
“from the entrance is a staircase in good preservation ; 
“but the rock below changes its substance, from a beau- 
“tiful solid calcareous stone, becoming a kind of black 
“rotten slate, which crumbles into dust only by touching. 
“This subterraneous passage proceeds in a south-west 


BENZONI’S NARRATIVE OF ITS DISCOVERY 79 


“direction through the mountain. I measured the 
“ distance from the entrance, and also the rocks above, 
“and found that the passage reaches nearly halfway 
“through the mountain to the upper part of the valley. 
“T have reasons to suppose, that this passage was used 
“to come into the tomb by another entrance; but this 
“eould not be after the death of the person who was 
“buried there, for at the bottom of the stairs just 
“under the sarcophagus a wall was built, which 
“entirely closed the communication between the tomb 
“and the subterraneous passage. Some large blocks of 
“stone were placed under the sarcophagus horizontally, 
“level with the pavement of the saloon, that no one 
“might perceive any stairs or subterranean passage 
“was there. The doorway of the sideboard room had 
“been walled up, and forced open, as we found the 
“stones with which it was shut, and the mortar in the 
“jambs. The staircase of the entrance-hall had been 
“walled up also at the bottom, and the space filled 
“with rubbish, and the floor covered with large blocks 
“of stone, so as to deceive any one who should force 
“the fallen wall near the pit, and make him suppose, 
“that the tomb ended with the entrance-hall and the 
“drawing-room. I am inclined to believe, that who- 
“ever forced all these passages must have had some 
“spies with them, who were well acquainted with the 
“tomb throughout. The tomb faces the north-east, 
“and the. direction of the whole runs straight south- 


“west.” 


( 80 ) 


CHAPTER IL. 
THE ANTE-CHAMBER OF THE TUAT. 


In the First Division of the “Book of Gates of the 
Tuat,” according to the sarcophagus of Seti I., we see 
the horizon of the west, or the mountain of the west, 
C4), divided into two parts, & 4, and the boat of the 
sun is supposed to sail between them, and to enter by 
this passage into the Tuat. On the right hand is fixed 
a jackal-headed standard, and on each side of it kneels 


a bearded god; one god is called Tat, — a 

and is a personification of the region which is beyond 
ee 

the day, and the other SET, © , and represents the 
praca 


funeral mountain. On the left hand is a ram-headed 
standard, and on each side of it also kneels a bearded 
god; as before, one is called Tat and the other Set. 
The ram’s head has the horizontal, wavy horns, which 
belong to the particular species of ram that was the 
symbol of the god Khnemu; this animal disappeared 
from Egypt before the XIIth Dynasty, but the tradition 
of him remained. In the middle of the scene sails the 
boat of the sun. The god is symbolized by a beetle 
within a disk, which is enveloped in the folds of a 


els: 5% 
ene seal x ae 
a a |) TBE [eElie; 
SHEER 
|>ectyde f= 
oe eee 
: : eA 
SSS |e HEUSHEL 


° 
. 
2? 


sai TF 
ete A eS 












Mien <=. 
ANY eeeeoe 
awl %® 
OR ee 
SAR ae Me Re 
ee e se 


A 


e 
pe’ ee 


Aw 


=> =o 

et ee ae ee? 

= 90°, 00 ¢ 

fee ees. 
8 © woe, 
ee oe 
A 


Sere htctg Ce ce ee 
rc elee te: Seale: ote. oo ® 
Oo tee oe og Cte e fa, 
e. & ef eA ie 6 © 
si AOI Chaat wh 


=—_ 
= 


¢ 
: f 
eens 
e 
oe AS 


awn 


A SS 
e Bory 
Ps ree 
bd Pees 
5 Gated 


+ 


ye 
e) K 
<= 
ver oe 8 Aree one Say 
oe soeiere ne tae 
8 red 0 coe tetee 
tooo wo oo sacle ee 


R 
DER 
at POUL 


ea 
S< 
= 





—{fa oi} aie is 


Cate, 
| eee | 


eA 
=k 


VOL, II. 


enter the Tuat at eventide. 
n. 


eral Moun 


tai. 


are 'l'welve Gods of the Fun 


zon over which the Boat of the Sun passes to 
nit 


82 THE ANTE-CHAMBER OF THE TUAT 


serpent having its tail in its mouth. In the bows 
stands the god of divine intelligence, whose name is 
Sa, 8, and in the stern, near the two paddles, stands 


HEKA, , Le., the personification of the word of 


power, or of magical utterance. The god who usually 
accompanies SA is Hu. The text which refers to the 
Sun-god reads :— 


LE NSSXl4-49S 
te aie OG oes 
le SoSenme eee 
INF StRSSrviss 
= soi br AN Saal DALY 
Ste! 2 
Srstli Hie 
SA OI AVSREIILS, 


“Ra saith unto the Mountain :—Send forth light, O 
“Mountain! Let radiance arise from that which hath 
“devoured me, and which hath slain men and is filled 
“with the slaughter of the gods. Breath to you, O 
“ye who dwell in the light in your habitations, my 


Lea dealEAY Foe sf 
Iasi | 
tex j i€((3- en 2a wae 
eit fo HE a 

pest | 8 R ip 
W530 


pal se 









ce 
ne 
eee 


Tuat at eventide. 


the 


ter 














Gods of Set-Amentet. 


f the Sun passes to en 


1° 
IN cine 


oe 
oe % 4%) 
nee 8 So 






In it are twelv: 


eo a oe 2 e gO 
which the Boat 


eee 
Part of the horizon over 


est ath 
well 
[RSS 
Hende 
Nie paren ‘eenynceice 


» 


84 THE ANTE-CHAMBER OF THE TUAT 


- “gplendours shall be to you. I have decreed their 
“slaughter, and they have slaughtered everything 
“which existeth. I have hidden you from those who 
“are upon the earth, restoring the crown (or, tiara) to 
“those who are on the Mountain. The gods say :— 
“Let this jackal-headed sceptre (7) emit the words 
“of this great god who joineth together his members. 
“Come then unto us, O thou from whom we have come 
“forth! Cries of joy are to thee, O thou who art in 
“thy disk, thou great god whose forms (or transforma- 
“tions) are manifold.’ Their provisions [consist] of 
“bread-cakes and beer.” 

The paragraph below the above text is practically a 
duplicate of it, but it contains no mention of either the 
jackal-headed or the ram-headed sceptre, and it is 
unnecessary to give it here. 

On the right of the boat stand twelve ee who are 


called “gods of the mountain,” ane alt and 
nA’ 
the text referring to them reads :— 


(pe Saal oo pe 
8 {Sao \ Oe hes i ae AWW 
<> Powe Ch | yas 


ww | | | 


(ole SSee diese 
EON on lead iene is), 
[Seely sal ee 
ig 


THE TWENTY-FOUR GODS OF SET-AMENTET 85 


“(These gods] have come into being from Ra, and 
“from his substance, and have emerged from his eye. 
“He hath decreed for them [as]-a place (or, abode) the 
“Hidden Mountain (Ament Set), which consumeth men, 
“and gods, and all cattle, and all reptiles which are 
“created by this great god. This great god hath decreed 
“the plans (or, designs) thereof having made [them] to 
“spring up in the earth which he created.” 

On the left of the boat stand twelve gods, who are 


called “gods of Set-Amentet,” 111 al : & l Coe 


a a? 


and the text referring to them reads :— 
[Vat aee tn veh THe 
a eke is 77 dat 


ml Seine So 


ANWANK leit ees <—S 4 SS 
wy, ) fae SS 
ae 

“The hidden place. [These are] those who have 
“consumed the men, and the gods, and all the cattle, 
“and all the reptiles which this great god hath created. 
“This great god hath decreed plans for them after 
“he made them to spring up in the land which he 


“created, that is to say, in the Amentet which he 
“ made.” 


(7 86) ) 


CHAPTER IFff. 
THE GATE OF SAA-SET. 
THE SECOND DIVISION OF THE TUAT. 


THE boat of Ra, having passed between the two 
halves of the horizon of the West, now approaches a 
gateway, the door of which is closed before him; the 
door of the second division of the Tuat is different 
from the doors of the other divisions, for it consists of 
a single leaf which turns upon a pivot working in 
holes in the top and bottom of the framework of the 
door. This door is era by a serpent called Saa- 


SET, << 20.8, © 1, which stands upon its tail. The 
text referring to this serpent reads :— 


SSS ORs eS 


WN | OT ww THT a, SR ree WY 


eoMmSSAlaleh 


SPSs™ Bin 1c. pee 

we DOo a0 1783 a> H 2 + bIS. 

nal hee | 
ORR S.2. 


THE GATE OF SAA-SET 87 


“He who is over (ie, has the CLS. 
“mastery over) this door openeth to {{vrsenr. 
“Ra. Sa saith unto Sat-Ser, ‘Open eee 
“thy door to Ra, throw wide open thy 
“door to Kuutr. The hidden abode is 
“in darkness, so that the transforma- 
“tions of this god may take place.’ 
“This portal is closed after this god 
“hath entered in through it, and there 
“is lamentation on the part of those 
“who are in their mountain when 





- 
ee 
evee te 
ee 





“they hear this door shut.” 

In the centre of the scene we see 
the boat of Ra being towed along by 
four gods standing, each of whom 
grasps the tow-line with both hands. 
The god is now in the form of a ram- 
headed man, who holds the sceptre 


{ in his right hand, and has the solar 


disk above his horns. He stands 
within a shrine which is enveloped in 
the voluminous folds of the serpent 


Mehen, \; a serpent also stands on 


NNNAA 


his tail before him. In front of the 
shrine stands SA, and behind it HEKAU. 
The gods who tow the boat are called 


2TUsMIO Weo il r 


88 SECOND DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


The sun’s boat is met in this section by a company 
of thirteen gods, who are under the direction of a god 
who holds a staff in his hand. The names of the first 


MWA AAAS a 
Wao 5 <7, (WM 9 
seven gods are:—NEPEMEH, _O ,! NENHA, 5) Ba, 
Shee Cam) = 
, HERU, a BEHA-AB, ty, KHNEMU, 0; and 


SETCHET, | Zr ne the third has the head of a ram, and 


the fourth that of a hawk. The last six gods 


WEEX EXSSSSSVEM 


= 
thee 


kaalyet 11 Sg ate Sip 
= TiS Se coll BN 
aap 


20 ee 
mom ea At SS RL a ey 
ju 





The Boat of the Sun towed by Gods of the Tuat. 


are described as “gods who are in the entrances,” 


11 | 4p ee SS | ee a the god who bears the staft 


has no name. The text which refers to the Sun-god 
reads :— 


Moe Aly Td KRISS 


NW 
1 Var., NEPEN, Q Ra 2 Var., NENA, A 
Peedi 


89 


THE GATE OF SAA-SET 


ofk 

ak a 

AlfAS 
les 1S AI- 
Ante 
lal Acre 
I|12: #2004 
@(1-lz: (4 ae 
Fhea tele 
£ fEST HEI 5] 
pA 
SRP Ne 





Seven of the Gods of the Entrances who tow the Boat of the Sun through 
Saa-Set. 


=— 


(= 
i¢- Jasaltie 
KIWX'E 


1 


ie FEC? 
Rua IES 





Six of the Gods of the Entrances who tow the Boat of the Sun through 
‘ Saa-Set, and a god who bears a staff. 


volt nah 5 F2 es 
HSA LSS 
AWE SE eed? 
Jain Ke SAR 
Ihen’Se Se 2 Pin et ene 
Sean ow MASTS SRT 
LitemdL INNES 


zh coer ale Tim 
cml eo FRU Ne ASE 
_— wea! 


WW A FEB ko mtd 


== 
dey lee sy aan ia et la ae 


IE Oe sn no | ee or 
Se ais 


2 ee | eee. 
ieee say 


“This great god journeyeth along the roads of the 


SPEECH OF RA TO THE GODS OF SAA-SET gI 


“Tuat. This god is drawn by the gods of the Tuat 
“in order to make divisions (or, distinctions) in the 
“earth, and to work out [his] designs therein, to weigh 
“words and deeds in Ament, to magnify the great god 
“above the little god among the gods who are in the 
“Tuat, to place the Kuu (ie., the blessed dead) upon 
“their thrones, and the damned [in the place] to which 
“they have been condemned in the judgment, and to 
“destroy their bodies by an evil death. Ra saith :—‘O 
“grant ye to me that I may restore the tiara, and that 
“T may have possession of [my] shrine which is in the 
“earth. Let SA and HEKA unite themselves to me for 
“the working out of plans for you, and for making to 
“come into being their attributes (or, forms) ye [have] 
“what is yours. Isis hath made to be at peace the 
“wind, and offerings are there. None shutteth [the 
“door] against you, and the damned do not enter in 
“after you. That which belongeth to you is to you, O 
“gods. These gods say unto Ra, ‘There is darkness 
“on the road of the Tuat, therefore let the doors 
“which are closed be unfolded, let the earth open, 
“so that the gods may draw along him that hath 
“created them. Their food [ie., the food of these 
“gods] is of the funeral offerings, and their drink 
“ig from their cool waters, and their hands are 
“on meat offerings among the Akert regions of 
“Ament.” 

On the right of the boat are twenty-four gods, © 
the first twelve of whom are described as “those 


92 SECOND DIVISION OF THE TUAT 
: » tos 
who are at peace, the worshippers of Ra, = \ | ! 
(aN 
* iN S| *@, and the second twelve as “the righteous 


who are in the Tuat,” — ENG | | l +f & » : pr 


These beings are thus described by the accompanying 
text :— 


Be MTT wae Pi hemo o 


ais ett ut @mltiog 
| Se RA eee 

ah Se 1 Sp Sp Ses = TT www 
ee es lll eco ala 

Oe de III | WA ies BS PREG 
= www iii Cicer Gao OYimniit 


Ny is SARS i oR SD 
— MHMAToS IAS 
lo SAP NOs. ae 
mist he ot ae 

ea OM Me is aN 
Se iti * SD SUSE 
Soy dunes La eee |e 


ey YRS? FUER RS 


TWENTY-FOUR RIGHTEOUS GODS OF SAA-SET 93 


Hit. GaN SWE 













pation ates, Tt ah a ge mam TY y de4 A'S 
ey | 


IN enn 9 ate tt! rest 
re my 48 w= ee ee ee oe Be 
Ree eleSsTowe x 
EAR UN Ayer g ST et Se 
LS LID MRAP eS 


A. ifl om JIB) es o 


Nine of the gods who adore Ra and are at peace. 


ASA aan A Sl Ilys si 


Five of the righteous gods of Three of the gods who adore 
the Tuat. Ra and are at peace. 


94 SECOND DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


DAADAAA AY ANAL AAAAAA a a f= 
lox cartier a eee 
riliatisss | Waitihhitii 


Rl See ok > A 
a ee iP G ame Caco 
A= = he call! 
Ot a WAYS ee 


=. |c— <>_,— 
= Ovi =e O88 

“These [are they who] have worshipped (or, praised) 
“Ra upon earth, who uttered words of power against 
“Apep, who made their offerings unto him, and who 
“burnt (literally, made) incense to their gods on their 
“own behalf, after their offerings. They have gained 
“possession of their cool waters, and they receive their. 
“meat, and they eat of their offerings in the gateway 
“of him whose name is hidden. Their meat is by the 
“gateway, and their offerings are with him who is 
“therein, And Ra saith unto them:— Your offerings 
“are yours, ye have power over your cool waters, your 
“souls shall never be hacked to pieces, your meat 
“shall never fail, [0 ye who have] praised [me], and 
“have vanquished Apep for me.’” 

The above perc refers to the “ Worshippers of Ra 
who are at peace.” 


“(These are] they [who] spake truth upon earth, 


SPEECHES OF RA AND THE GODS 95 


“and who were not addicted to evil thought about the 
“gods. They make their invocations in this gateway, 
“they live upon maat (ie., truth), and their cool 
“waters are in their cisterns. Ra saith unto them :— 
“Truth is yours, live ye on your food. Ye yourselves 
“are truth ;’ and they have power over these their cool 


“waters, which are waters of fire to those who have 





pom =i) win @ | omen Se 
Ge eS lb eile Soe 
SAS Sie aA 





Seven of the righteous gods of the Tuat. 


“ouilt and sin. And these gods say to Ra :— Let 
“there be stability to the Disk of Ra. Let him that is 
“in the shrine have the mastery over it, and let the 
“serpent [Mehen] guard him well. May the flames of 
“Khuti which are in the corners of the hidden shrine 
“row stronger.’ And there shall be given to them 
“meat in the place of peace in their circle.” 


96 SECOND DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


The above passage refers to the “righteous who are 
in the Tuat.” 
On the left side of the boat of Ra are: 1. The god TEM, 


, who is depicted in the form of an aged man, 


leaning heavily on a stick which he grasps in his right 
hand. 2. Four male beings who are lying prostrate on 
their backs. 3. Twenty male beings, with their backs 
bowed, and their arms tied together at their elbows 
behind their backs. The 
four beings are de- 
scribed as “the inert,” 


BSW = 


the twenty as “the apos- 
“tates of the Hall of Ra, 
“who have blasphemed 
“ Ra upon earth, who have 
“invoked evils upon him 

= “that is in the Egg, who } 
Share nis MENON s “have thrust aside the 
ee Mk en eo right, and have spoken 


“words against Kaur,” aa NG peera— 
12 hi 2 ANS ef RNS 
AT ee coe Oa 


The text referring to the inert and the apostates 
reads :— 





THE GATE OF SAA-SET 97 


ot 21d +o Sem 
oe Od SSS 


SAN SIE SRSESlLD 


ie en > ENS 
a ee 5 Sp OO | ae 
= BA ee ='$|_ va 
eee ati a to. | in 
mri 4 eo 


TASS al Birr be > 
Mth KE fe Moe aS 
Pe re, ot iS 
= So alli (eS ae 


ges i SNS Ne 


fro a FS Beh Sa ye LS 


“Tem worketh on behalf of Ra, glorifying the god, 
VOL. II. H 


98 SECOND DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


“and singing praises to his soul, and distributing evil 
“things to his enemies. [He saith]:—‘The word of 
“my father Ra is right (madt) against you, and my 
“word is right against you. I am the son who pro- 
“eeedeth from his father, and I am the father who 
“proceedeth from his son. Ye are fettered, and ye 
“are tied with strong cord, and it is I who have sent 
“forth the decree concerning you that ye should be 


eevugsesgnee en 





The Apostates and Blasphemers of Ra, who are doomed to destruction, with 
their arms bound. 


“bound in fetters; your arms shall never more be 
“opened. Ra pronounceth the formula against you, 
“his soul is prepared to attack you; my father hath 
“gained the mastery over you, and his soul uttereth 
“words against you. Your evil deeds [have turned] 
“against you, your plottings [have come] upon you, 
“your abominable acts [have recoiled] upon you, your 
“(destinies are for evil, and your doom hath. been 


RA’S DECREE OF DOOM 99 


“decreed before Ra; your unjust and perverted judg- 
“ments are upon yourselves, and the wickedness of 
“your words of cursing are upon you. Evil is the doom 
“which hath been decreed for you before my father. 
“Tt is you who have committed sins, and who have 
“wrought iniquity in the Great Hall; your corruptible 





eo. — WA Qi MM Me meen => 
wei" Wise Lipase S 
eee rears. REVS YR 
peta fl 2 SS ok BS 
eee RS aS 
Las Mah te a ead me 





The Apostates and Blasphemers of Ra, who are doomed to destruction, with 
their arms bound, 


“bodies shall be cut in pieces, and your souls shall 
“have no existence, and ye shall never again see Ra 
“with his attributes [as] he journeyeth in the hidden 
“land. Hail, Ra! Adored be Ra! Thine enemies are 


” 


“in the place of destruction.’ 


C007») 


CHAPTER IV. 
THE GATE OF AQEBI. 
Tur THIRD DIVISION OF THE TUAT. 


Tu boat of the sun having passed through the Second 
Division of the Tuat arrives at the gateway which 
leads to the TutrpD Division. This gateway is unlike 
the first, which has already been described, for its 
opening is protected by an outwork, similar to that 
which protects the door of a fortified building. The 
outwork is guarded by nine gods, in the form of 
mummies, who are described as the “second company 


of the gods,” © i ie and in this wall, which com- 


pletely divides the Second Division from the Third, 
is an opening, which leads to a corridor that runs 
between two walls, the tops of which are protected by 


rows of pointed stakes, QAAOQ4. At the entrance to 


the corridor stands a god, in mummied form, called 
one per mak Aes 
AM-AUA, Ky ¥ 1, and at the exit is a similar 
Fecal 
—e INNVWW NWA 
god called SEKHABESNEFUNEN, J | S : 
e— Sn AWW 
each is said to “extend his arms and hands to Ra,” 


= § | T wm, At each side of the angle, near 
i socal Oo 


WAS 


= 
AWW 
—' 


Ix 


a. 


N“ 


a 


e 
~ 


7 


PAICOAIA 


AN 


(16 ir he Teste Son PH EPL 


FERC es Cea 


mei 18 @ 



















ATES 


WN SESS 


wo BO Oo 0 we ow oo 000 ew oo oc ces en coe 6 Oe estes 


=IRbornniass 


The Gate of the Serpent Aqebi. 


REST qr ve 


102 THIRD DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


the entrance to the corridor, is a serpent, who ejects 
flames from his mouth; the flame from the one sweeps 
along the corridor, at the end of which it is met by 
the flame from the other serpent which sweeps along 
the inside of the inner wall. The flames of these 


: —— —1— 
serpents are said to be for Ra, ww, The 
aes © | 


eateway leading to the Third Division is called SEPTET- 
UAUAU, | = || £\$] () I and the door thereof, 
which opens inwards, is guarded by the serpent standing 
on his tail, who is called AQEBI, NS Z| Q =, and 


faces outwards. The texts referring to the entrance of 
Ra through this gateway read :— 


S11 jx jee zljeeid 
4S ee 2a lice 
co won SF | ft sf) rm | a SG he 


NW2home cae. Nd 


gP> Toann em @ | 9 amr 1 awh 


mes Se SIS TiR 
Sy ee ee 
Goan lam mec dt | eS NS 
i AN 


RA’S ADDRESS TO THE SERPENT AQEBI 103 


“ When] this god cometh to this gateway, to enter 
“in through this gateway, the gods who are therein 
“acclaim this great god, [saying], ‘Let this gateway be 
“unfolded to Kuuti, and let the doors be opened to | 
“him that is in heaven. Come then, O thou traveller, 
“who dost journey in Amentet.’ He who is over this 
“door openeth [it] to Ra. Sa saith unto AQusI, ‘Open 
“thy gate to Ra, unfold thy door to Kuutt. He shall 
“j]Ilumine the darkness, and he shall force a way for 
“the light in the habitation which is hidden.’ This 
“door is closed after the great god hath entered 
“through it, and there is lamentation to those who are 
“in their gateway when they hear this door close 
“Tupon them].” 

Along the middle of the THIRD DIvISION we see the 
boat of the sun being drawn along by four gods, as 
before; the god Ra stands in a shrine, similar to that 
already described, and his companions are Sa and 
Hexav. The rope by which the boat is towed along is 
fastened to the two ends of a very remarkable object, 
in the form of a long beam, each end of which 


terminates in a bull’s head. The accompanying text 
describes it as “his boat,” SS x—, and from the fact 


that the four gods who tow the boat are seen again at 
the other end of the beam-like object, with the towing-. 
rope in their hands, it is clear that the boat of Ra, and 
the god himself, were believed to pass through it, from 
one end to the other. The object is supported on the 


I04 THIRD DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


shoulders of eight gods, in mummied form, “who are 
” os | 

called “Bearers of the gods, oN Ut rps 

at each end, immediately behind the bull’s head, stands 


a bull, and at intervals seven gods, who are called “the 





The Eight Bearers of the Boat of the Earth and its Seven Gods. 


gods who are within,” kj | +} » I are seated 


upon it. At the end of this Division stand four 
mummied forms, with their elbows projecting, and 
their hands crossed on their breasts. The text 


RA PASSES THROUGH THE EARTH-GOD 105 


which refers to the passage of the boat of the sun 
reads :— 


Non le YT Sly Td ce 
wx oS Te ATH SY 
= Sao >S=nllam 
=[>° GRE SILECh 
A wee es ME be de, 
a= Sie DAR Obs 
ek SF pei 
TAN dy ee YP 
relat fous la 10 | 
CTR Us ese ie eee 
eee eae dd eld} 
i at | Bille nw The 


WeQRREZIKM Soa 


106 THIRD DIVISION OF THE TUAT’ 


[| Fw a mm om ota 


WWW 
pon et ol eal aa [Hattie 
ee eS 4 cy joes | PARANA 9 Ca 
WWW. | fax BB | Re (| Reem ——D ANA 
a T%*—1 1/1 0 tes N CH AWWA 
Oe Goren Suse ty ae a ee) 
a 
(i tn Or ek ee Guile § Wes 


a7 Pr woes OO) PR SS pmial 


eS Wess a Wes} 


woo st thy ee SED OST lam 
ade a it | |e ae 


Ke, 
[ae | 


“This great god is towed along by the gods of the 
“Tuat, and this great god advanceth to the Boat of the 
“arth, which is the bark of the gods. Ra saith unto 
“them :— Hail, ye gods who bear up his Boat of 
“the Earth, and who lft up the Bark of the Tuat, 
“may there be support to your forms and light 
“unto your Bark. Holy is he who is in the Boat 
“of the Earth. I make to go back the Bark of 
“the Tuat which beareth my forms (or, attributes), 
“and verily I travel into the hidden habitation to 
“perform the plans which are carried out therein.’ 
“ HNNURKHATA, ENNURKHATA [saith], ‘Praised be the 
“Soul which the Double Bull hath swallowed, and 
“let the god be at peace with that which he hath 
“ created.’ ” 

The effect of the above words is to allow the Sun- 
god and his boat to pass through the double bull- 


RA PASSES THROUGH THE EARTH-GOD 107 


headed Boat of the Earth without any let or hindrance, 
and when he has done this,— 

“These gods (ie., the four gods at the other end of 
“the Boat of the Earth) say to Ra:—‘ Praised be Ra, 
“whose Soul hath been absorbed by the Earth-god! 
“Praised be the gods of Ra Who hath rested [therein].’ 
“This Boat of its Tuat rejoiceth, and there are cries 
“from them after Ra hath passed them as he journeyeth 
“on his way. Their offerings are the plants of the year, 


ce Ree 
Berio Ae eed 2 we 


—— 

AN aA > ff 

fm a aan oS A epee 
REO SSS TSS Eel ys 
eo @ penis sts ey NNN, 1 sag TO ww ANN, een 
7 = III Par er eS S—- a igo 1 
=o V i cacao 

—— 
(oe 
ul) 
—_ 
* 
ala 


The Tuat-gods address the Utau. 


“and their offerings are given to them when they hear 
“the words of those who draw along this great god. 
“The gods of the Tuat(?) who [draw] the holy Boat 
“in the earth say unto the Urau, whose arms are 
“hidden :—‘O ye Utau of the earth, whose duty it is to 
“ stand(?) near his habitation, whose heads are uncovered, 
“and whose arms are hidden, may there be air to your 
“nostrils, O Urau, and may your funeral swathings 
“ “be burst open, and may you have the mastery over 


108 THIRD DIVISION OF 




























wa AN 


f) 
—=_—) 


UAH 
[Wheat 8 
De SA B 
2 PGE S| S : 
EAMG E 
“ees 
rESTE! E 
CA Fe 
- = {hgd- ila j TT 
2) BES E 
HEV WER E 


2 12] Aba lod E 

Sr eathee 18 
co] TStelfc E 
2) TSE 
of OSHEUT 
Be) EW 
S| esti 
SSEROTE & 


is 
= 
os 


= 
= 
* 


ee 
re 


aul 


it 
oe *? 
eine 


—_ 
—J 
= 


ll 





The-Twelve holy Gods who are in the Tuat, 


THE TUAT 


“your meats, and may 
“you have peace (or, 
“rest) in that which I 
“have created. Their 
“food is of bread 
“cakes, and their 
“bread is. made of 
“the red grain, the 
“draughts which they 
“drink are of [cool] 
“water, and their meat 
“is given unto them 


| “because of the white- 


“ness (or, brilliance) 
“of their apparel in 


i “the Tuat.” 


On the right hand 
side of this Division 


7 of the Tuat the boat — 


of the Sun passes 
twelve shrines, each 


of which has its doors 


| thrown wide open, and 


So permits us to see a 
god in mummied form 


Standing inside — it 
these gods are de- 


scribed as “the holy 
gods who are in the 


THE GODS OF THE BOILING LAKE 10g 


vos? TTA DEED AS: sine 


the front of the aie shrines ee. an enormous 
serpent, the duty of which is to protect those who 
stand in them. Beyond the shrines is a long basin 
or lake of boiling water, with rounded ends, in 
which stand up to their waists twelve mummied 
gods, with black heads, who either have white bodies, 
or are arrayed in white apparel; in front of each god 
grows a large ear of wheat. These gods are described 


as “the gods in the boiling lake,” “al | +S 


\Y J () I. The texts which relate to both groups 


of beings are as follows :— 


=H ire Tiled e@ eT 
prom || oe O ee TN ira Leia 
me BORN Bri i Gh 
Bl R92 re] Soa 
Levent ie ie ea 
=e eee 

e- eet nS ae 


be SA cy PA) | a 


IIO THIRD DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


BOSSI eS 


bol See eS man | 1 | Aww 


ora A N28 00 rs Pee 
SOP wt > Sera 
rit tid b CBee om oe NH 
mia NTP PT as 
sper ukee : eg 


pie eal Hea SR eee 1 | 


Ete) peer yyy Ww 
ee i Ss acs We eh Ns 
ao g 6 oom io CMs 
NNN Rey WWW => ; AWWA AWWW | Wn 
Mle RU HN eee Ve Vea eI 2s alot 
ties (SUAS 2. os 
Ga TANCES <3 | anise 

pea BE lea 2 See me 
——5 

ros [| Son Sheree Soe xa 

bli Wo he See (aaa NN 


pauses lies 


==, a] L=z= ‘am si, 


RA ADDRESSES THE SHENNU GODS IIl 


SF ab \\ ! ae wy == rans maven [| Ss 
eh ae (II ONKNNK Secs) 
ee dase 9 
= = 
“{Those who are in] their shrines are the members 
“of the god whose shrines the serpent Seti guardeth. 
“Ra saith unto them:—‘Open ye [the doors, of] your 
“shrines, so that my radiance may penetrate the 
“darkness in which ye are! I found you weeping and 
“lamenting, with your shrines tightly closed, but air 
“shall be given to your nostrils, and I have decreed 
“that ye shall have abundance to overflowing [in all 
“things].” And these gods say unto Ra:—‘ Hail, Ra, 
“come thou into our lake, O thou great god who never 
“failest.’ The Shennu gods who are before and behind 
“him pay homage to him, and they rejoice in Ra when 
“he traverseth [their] region, and when the great god 
“journeyeth through the secret place. Their food 
“eonsisteth of loaves of bread, their drink is made 
“from the red [barley], and their cool waters come 
“from [their cisterns of] water, and the serpent of fire, 
“Serr, giveth unto them the things whereon they live 
“there. The door which shutteth them in closeth 
“after this god hath passed through their midst, and 
“they utter cries of grief when they hear their doors 
“shut upon them.” 


1 The text in brackets is supplied from Lefébure, les Hypogées 
Royaue de Thébes (Tombeau de Seti Ie", ive partie, pl. xiv.), Paris, 
1886. 


we 


12 


SS 
a 


hetté 


1 


Bs 


(SShl2! 


, 
hb 


Sail 
Deanne 


A 


= 
<9 


s 3 
[Sal 


“4t 


SoNS INA SUV 


ROLUSIUA 


THIRD DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


lone fE 


ie tae a 
ee (EA, 
BARE 
aaa 


CaESHe 
UAT 
ESN AS 
vs] OAM) 
Bele UME 
SA 
Bele ir= 
Used! 
eld ildeelH 
SISTER 
ee Fed 
GLE 
SE 
ES MEL sat cll 
(UIs0fi: BAU 


— 







ao 


| 


\ 


NAAUAANA IAG A 


I 
| 





Pl 
VE 


Rg 


= (M16 


The Gods of the Boiling Lake. 


eee 


RR 


The following re- 
fers to the lake of 
water in this 
Division :— 

“(Here is] the 
“lake of water 
“which is in the 
“Tuat,. and ii)4¢ 
“surrounded by 
“the gods who are 
“arrayed in [their] 
“apparel, and who 
“have [their] heads 
“uneovered. This 
“lake is filled with 
“ereen herbs. The 
“water of this lake 
“is boiling hot, and 
“the birds betake 
“themselves to 
“flight when they 
“see the waters 
“thereof, and when 
“they smell the 
“foetid smell which 
“is Int, “Unto 
“these gods saith 
“Ra:—‘O ye gods 
“whose duty it is 


THE GODS OF THE BOILING LAKE 1363 


“(to guard] the green herbs of your lake, whose heads 
“are uncovered, and whose limbs are covered with 
“garments, may there be air to your nostrils, and may 
“offerings be made to you of the green herbs, and may 
“your meat be from your lake. The water thereof 
“shall be yours, but to you it shall not-be boiling, and 
“the heat thereof shall not be upon your bodies,’ 
“These [gods] say unto Ra:—‘Come thou unto us, O 
“thou who sailest in thy boat, whose eye is of blazing 
“fire which consumeth, and hath a pupil which sendeth 
“forth light! The beings of the Tuat shout with joy 
“when thou approachest ; send forth thy light upon us, 
“O thou great god who hast fire in thine eye.’ Their 
“food consisteth of loaves of bread and green herbs, and 
“their drink (or, beer) is of the kemtet plants, and their 
“cool water is from [their cisterns of] water. And food 
“shall be given unto them in abundance from this lake.” 

On the left of the path along which the boat of Ra 
passes in this Division of the Tuat are two groups of 
beings. In the first of these we see the god Trm, 


a 2 : 
, im the form of an aged man, with bent shoulders, 


leaning upon a staff; coiled up before him in voluminous 
folds, with its head flat upon the ground, is the monster 


i —— . 7 . 
serpent APEP, ee Behind Apep stand nine men, 


with their arms hanging by their sides; these are 
_ a 
called the “TcHATCHA who repulse APEPI,” | | © 
mas 2 | | 
[aay oo 


eo (i 4 +sihh. In the second group is TEM, 
VOUe Ik 


503040 THIRD DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


hee efi S2ika 
rte Li= 
leAchic Ads 
[oA rapica 
ASUGINTI 
LIP AI-)) 
Alm isaitd 
edt 
ae .@— yal cor 
ES eect 
Jef lSsi3 
3) GAT 
Se SH 
DTH emed eka] 
| al 
EAMGARS 
Ee aad tel 
5 WF =| a 
Alli Jizeke 
HE CHA 


bx :0)522" 


dLenict i= 


a i 


in a similar atti- 
tude, and before 
him stand nine 
gods, each hold- 


Ra) ing the symbol 


The Tchatcha who repulse Apep. 





of life in the 
right hand, and 
the sceptre | in 
the left; thenine 


gods are called 
“Nebu  khert,” 


254 16, “Lords ar 


destinies,” » 
? 
| 


& | af | 
ee le 
a | 
The . texte 
which refer to 
these groups 
read :.— 


OF 
ie 
een. 
Deceree 
Seeiseee x<Oo— Ss © 
aceias oO yor 
?* e? 
Pe AWWA AWWA : 
° we 
ws 
‘e 


Fald@s 


| e201 ae 


A. ee 
wi 


“3 Sea ol = 


ZuVs 


eS lS Se 
=-ho fF Seite oS Ro 
ei mock eos 
mE DEON Tze 

Ete el} Moll 
Th RS Tem sen 
SSa ih. ctl | See ee 
won TN eee DR YY yee oh 
PTA STA US 
Be ee 


SST wo mY 
Jee aigiwane | mone UR SS 
eee 0 a Sec sl 


ITS re Sods T re 


116 THIRD DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


a | oS 


oy J a) 2S ww | 


ON ATV rm Aaa Soe hes 
ea 
Site — lS Sal 
SPHrro AM Nw acn] ds 
Se oMe ul ko [le 
Pe WE Sole i 


The first group shows us what “TEM hath done for 
“Ra, and how he hath protected the god by words of 
“magical power, and hath overthrown the serpent 
“Sepa. [TEMUu saith :—] ‘Thou art prostrate, and thou 
“shalt never more rise up; thou art enchanted by [my 
“enchantments], and thou shalt never more be found. 
“The word of my father is madt against thee, and my 
“word is madt against thee; I have destroyed thee for 
“Ra, and I have made an end of thee for Kuutt.’ 

“The company of the gods of Ra who repulse APEP 
“say :— Thy head is slit, O Apep, thy folds are gashed, 
“thou shalt never more envelop the boat of Ra, and 
“thou shalt never again make a way into the divine 
“park. A flame of fire goeth out against thee from 
s the hidden place, and we have condemned thee to thy 


THE LORDS OF DESTINIES(?) 


“dire doom.’ They (ie., 
‘the nine gods of the 
“company of Ra) live 
“upon the food of Ra, 
“and upon the cakes 
“of Kuent-AMENTI, for 
“offerings are made on 
“their behalf upon 
“earth, and libations of 
“cool water are made 
“unto them by the lord 
“of food (or, as lords of 
“food) before Ra.” 

To the second group 
gods “TEM 
saith:—‘Inasmuch as 


of nine 


“ye are the gods who 
“possess life and sceptre 
“(.e., authority), and 
“who have mastery over 
“your sceptres, drive ye 
“pack the serpent SEBA 
“from KHUTI, gash ye 
“with knives the foul 
~“and evil serpent Ar.’ 
“These are the gods who 
“work enchantments on 
“ ApEP, who open the 
“earth to Ra, and who 


LL? 
DEB AS  geeei: 
what, 
FAH ON ES 
b T5869 eet: 
ata H wb 


WEERAL: - fe 
eit i 


SAG) 
of ETAL] 
ZIJE= 
(LigreeZ 
ote! Us 
t: ZAIN 197 
SAIOUE 
golelilies 
ANAAL 
we DN IE Ea 
Sey 
SZ 4h 


a 


Rae ENA 
aS ES 





pak Act] Mele 


The Lords of Destinies (?). 


118 THIRD DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


“shut it against APEP in the gates of Kuenti-AMENTI. 
“They are those who are in the hidden place, and they 
“praise Ra, and they destroy his enemies, and they 
“protect the great one against the serpent Aru, and 
“they utter cries of joy at the overthrow by Ra of the 
“enemy of Ra. They live upon the meat of Ra, and 
“on the cakes offered to KHENTI-AMENTI. Offerings 
“are made on their behalf upon earth, and they receive 
“libations through [their] word being maat in Ament, 
“and “holy are they of arm in their hidden place. 
“They utter cries to Ra, and they make lamentation 
~ “for the great god after he hath passed by them, for 
“when he hath departed they are enveloped in dark- 
“ness, and their circle is closed upon them.” 





(ing) 


CHAPTER V. 
THE GATE OF TCHETBI. 
Tue FourtH DIVISION OF THE TUAT. 


Tue boat of the sun having passed through the Third 
Division of the Tuat arrives at the gateway which 
leads to the Fourth Division. This gateway is like 
that which admitted the god into the Third Division, 
and its outwork is guarded by nine gods, in the form 
of mummies, who are described as the “third com- 
pany of the gods of the great god who are within,” 


Peni AE Sli AY 


entrance to the corridor which runs between the two 
walls is a god in mummied form called ENUERKHATA, 
7 and at the exit is a similar god 


t— << w 
called SETA-TA, Wes ; each god has a 
: eS ss 


uraeus over his brow, and ie is said oe “extend his 
arms and hands to Ra,” ea oe The 


corridor is swept by flames of fire which Ses: from 
the mouths of two serpents, stationed each at an 
angle, and their “fire is for Ra.” The cig elile of oe 


Fourth Division is called NEBT-S-TCHEFAU, Se x ! : 


I20 FOURTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


and the text says, “This great god cometh to this 
“gateway, and entereth in through it, and the gods 


“who are therein acclaim him,” Sly 4 af O 


stl Se ao St eh 
aw 4 A a ww TIT | —+— 
a es: The company of gods say to 
Ra, “Open thou the earth, force thou a way through 
“the Tuat and the region which is above, and dispel 


“our darkness; hail, Ra, come thou to us,” Se io 
eee) aS 


[Slo SiR SSS viin 


OO Gta Pern pl 
(m0 QQ } 3 ww. The monster serpent 


which stands on his tail and guards the gateway is 
called TCHETBI, tae J QQ, and the two lines of text 
=a 


which refer to his admission of Ra read, “He who is 
“over this door openeth to Ra. Sa saith to TcHEeTsr:— - 
“Open [thy] gate to Ra, unfold thy doors to Kuutt, 
“that he may send light into the thick darkness, and 
“may make his radiance illumine the hidden habitation.’ 
“This door is shut after this great god hath passed 
“through it, and there is lamentation to those who are 
“in this gateway when they hear this door close upon 


“them,” ae aod SIM 
Sesh el ee ae 2 ls 


NW Sel Che ae tor 






— 
—e 


rk 
81 


"oe ee ee 
lance ene 
Onna @eacs 
se 
MOMENTO 


Sons 


rs 


= 


NetsAe tees : So | 
SH BHP GLUES ESV: 
eX !]Al “le 


a ee * f JE pne| 
Tver Wilfour ie) -<ch Ne AOS AE| 


“Te VASA TADS eon EEA CA YAIER Ibe 





The Gate of the Serpent Tchetbi. 


122 FOURTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


SP ao ole LS 


(x SoS ie a oH, } WT 


eek pa ee 


Sete st 

OTT ta 

In the middle of this Division we see the boat of ha 
being towed on its way by four gods of the Tuat; the 
god is in the same form as before, and stands in a 
shrine enveloped by MEHEN. Sa stands in the bows, 
and HEKA at the stern. The boat advances to a long, 
low building with a heavy cornice, which contains nine 
small shrines or chapels; in each of these is a god in 
mumimied form lying on his back. The nine gods are 
described as the “gods who follow Osiris, who are in 


their abodes ” tay “holes ”), hd So \ ! pi 


sls >| cS Sion ve ae Immediately in front of the 


nine shrines are two groups, each containing six women, 
who stand upon a slope, one half of which appears to 
be land and the other half water; these women are 
called “the hour goddesses which are in the Tuat,” 
Peel 2s, Me ome 

aes * " - ‘Each group is separated from 
the other by a monster serpent of many folds called 
HERERET, = and of him it is said that he 


“spawneth twelve serpents to be devoured by the 


hours,” | wo S ee | ate ) ese 


THE GODDESSES OF THE HOURS 123 





The Gods of the Fourth Division of the Tuat towing the Boat of Ra. 





vasress a Sas eo ‘ehaiomae hey ate 





The Nine Gods who follow Osiris. 


SAK SRE MS TSATS item Boe 
= Oh rei > SRS SIIT IS at 
fh as VY SS Sept SS eN Sy 
weet pS See iS Pepe Km Ah 
cn See it come | Vem Se ih Same I a OY me 
TRIN See ¥ SINS Sree F 

He Ses " 


= 
at 
= 
Sn 
909090000 
KOOVOGYY 
§000000 


Ath LER F 
: Prsra terran Ww ee 


The Serpent Hereret and the Goddesses of the Hours, 





’ 
124 FOURTH DIVISION OF THE TOAD 


The text relating to the passage of the boat of the sun 
reads :— 


PN Daw ee LED AN PENSE 
los MS! ee 
mini owt x Manes 

Sri hs er} WU ww see 
ete oo Pi Se eee 
obser Nn oe DSRS 
es oe lar eee 
lice Ne VAY oO 

oie TW 4 SRL eS 


SN RSH balste 
my O stant =f Kahin 


me & AAT o mAs! 
ri mune ical Ie Ae “Rl eo8 


DESCRIPTIVE TEXT 125 


lines bad Bas Fe es 


= iaiel {tol co 

Q Ii 

LSB RRS pe culicea 

A SN | ww Sem (U Wn 


== @ ] 
ai == o| 11 1 wma © ey 


A a Cn oe 


a oe wm =O AS Vn 
Ss a a ats et en YY pee 


oA QA aT Bierce do 


2s Sela cag Nae 


Se RP bal ro Se 


wm he Pe LAL he Swe 
i SAN Sum BOT d 


§ Sve [lf ve rity a =| en oe 


Ts 
( = <a os * fer c= I 


el 
WM —— { Cu Loe Sal 


i) 60 TT SBI [meee oe I oem 


Sate i = fhe Pw 


“This great god is drawn along by the gods of the 
“Tuat, and he journeyeth in the hidden place, and 
“worketh in respect of the things which are there. 


tt 


126 FOURTH, DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


“(He saith :—] ‘ Draw ye me along, O ye beings of the 
“Tuat, look ye upon me, [for] I have created you. 
“Pull ye with your arms and draw ye me therewith, 
“and turn ye aside to the eastern part of heaven, to 
“the habitations which surround Ars (or, Sir) [and 
“to] that hidden mountain, the light (or, radiance) of 
“which goeth round about among the gods who receive 
“me as I come forth among you into the hidden place. 
“ Draw ye me along, [for] I work on your behalf in the 
“gateway which covereth over the gods of the Tuat.’” 

“And Ra saith unto them:—‘ Look ye upon me, O 
“gods, for I strike those who are in their, sepulchres, 
“[saying], Arise,O ye gods! I have ordered for you the 
“plan and manner of your existence, O ye who are in 
‘your sepulchres, whose souls are broken, who live 
“upon your own filth and feed upon your own offal, 
“rise up before my Disk, and put ye yourselves in a 
“right state by means of my beams. The duties which 
“ye shall have in the Tuat are in conformity with the 
“things which I have decreed for you.’ Their food 
“consisteth of flesh, and their ale is [made] of the red 
“[barley], and their libations are of cool water. There 
“is lamentation to them: after they have heard their 
“doors close upon them.” 

In respect of the twelve goddesses of the hours it is 
said :—“[These are] they who stand upon their lake, 
“and it is they who guide Ra in a straight line by 
“means of their instruments. To them Ra saith:— 
“*Hearken, O ye goddesses of the hours of the night 


RA’S ADDRESS TO THE HOURS 127 


“sky. Work ye, and eat ye, and rest ye in your 
“oateways, with your breasts towards the darkness, 
“and your hind-parts towards the light. Make to 
“stand up the serpent HERERET, and live ye upon that 
“which cometh forth from it. It is your duty in the 
“Tuat to eat up the spawn of HERERET, and ye shall 
“destroy that which cometh forth from it. Draw ye 
“me, for I have begotten you in order that ye may pay 
“homage [to me]. Take ye your rest (or, be at peace), 
“Q ye Hours!’ Their food consisteth of cakes of 
“bread, and their ale is [made] of the red [barley], and 
“their draughts are of cool water, and there is given 
“unto them as their food that which cometh forth with 
“the khw (i.e., the beatified dead).” 

On the right hand of the path of the boat of the 
Sun in the Fourth Division we see:—1. Twelve gods, 
bearded and standing upright, who are called “the 


gods who carry along their doubles,” a gop Ss Se in 


2. Twelve jackal-headed gods, who stand 


LJ Perley 4 ee ae 
round the “Lake of Life, He Se ©? who are 


called the “jackals in the lake of life,” | 1 J » tay 


Cy J AAAS 2 a 
|p ale | + @° 3, Ten uraei, which stand round 


the “Lake of the Uraei,” we Or '> ! and are called the 


ar 
“Tiving Uraei,” \Fomes }e th ce coe The texts 


which refer to these three groups of beings read :— 


128 FOURTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


oe Lif ae ee eee 
29 Der Se Al SS 


oy. ne 


SoM FRPP Rae Ded 


Ha 
Soe PPT Vee) be VO Hho 
TT Tome eet Edt) ne ee 


ecw voll =. ee 
MWS NISaoOUSKEfi 
ieee tit: aa 


ESN rece lh ot a AS Ala 


ele | 


At bee aie a Chey 
eo ea oo ytd 

So a 
Vi (ie 

aS oi Oe : 
ia ee = peore pant h| JN ees <> 
ZG a= | An 
leat Oa we RS en & ey iH AWWW 


STENT mid Sm met PM 


Tin Nr voce Se NS HT BS 


DESCRIPTIVE TEXTS 129 


Sore. & Wo etic mm 
eG PV ay Caict nore rk 


lero A 8 SS IRSA, 


IN[eSeA AG CIMS 


a. Ss (acs Atak eee 
= Po, re a ny oneon Fated 


fools Sry Ne | 


ee holes | me PI es aT tl ie See i 
(La = SIN a WA [<a ==> 
(Gy) SVE nw | ee yee OR ee 

Pate iw 1 awn mT PROS 


DN GeT io HOLY Po Bs! 
mien Pao b Ss det 


| fu) a eK — — & 
li anwm © | | | awn (7) 
1 fd | ojo EIT Pris=errr 


(ody rr les Sse OL 


The paragraph which refers to the first twelve gods 
reads :— 

“(These are] they who bear along their doubles, 
“who immerse themselves in that which floweth in 
“abundance from the slaughtered ones during the time 
“of their existence, and who carry the offerings which 
“are rightly due [to the god] to his abode. Unto them 

VOL. II. K 


130 FOURTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


“saith Ra:—‘That which belongeth to you [to do], O 
“ye gods who are among your offerings, is to- offer as 
“an obligatory offering your doubles. Ye have your 
“own offerings, your enemies are destroyed, and they 
“are not. Your spirits are on their thrones, [and your] 
“souls are on their places.’ They say unto Ra, ‘ Adora- 
“tions be unto thee, O Ra-Kuuti! Hail to thee, O 
“thou Soul who art protected in the earth! Hail to 
“thee, as being eternity, the lord of the years and of 
“the everlastingness which hath no diminution.’ Their 
“food consisteth of offerings, their drink is of cool 
“water, and there is lamentation to them when they 
“hear their doors close upon them. Their food is given 
“to them from the goddess Mu-sta (?) by TESERT-BAIU.” 

The paragraph which refers to the jackal-headed | 
gods reads :— 

“[These are] they who come forth from this lake 
“whereunto the souls of the dead cannot approach by 
“reason of the sanctity which is therein. Unto them 
“saith Ra :—‘ That which belongeth to you [to do], O ye 
“gods who are in this lake, is to keep guard upon your | 
“lives in your lake; your offerings are under the guard 
“of the jackals which have set themselves on the edge 
“of your lake.’ They say unto Ra:— Immerse thyself, 
“O Ra, in thy holy lake, wherein the lord of the gods 
“immersed himself, whereunto the souls of the dead 
“approach not; this is what thou thyself hast com- 
“manded, O Kuuti’ Their food consisteth of bread, 
“their drink is [made] of the red [barley], and their 


THE GODS OF THE LAKE OF LIFE, ETC.. I3f 


22bS AL UTISD IS eA aoa Seas nea ral 





The Twelve Gods who carry their Doubles, 


fee FG 


ESS ABI IGINEMDS 


= ho YR EER TD oie 
S\N ae 2 
at 2S = ataas 

6 










ties tat . 

SWlie Tel mine ese 

4236 aw eae Se 

Sam Sime rey Ny “a! welt oe tS RA, =) 

RS iy iS Tye me yetis 

ieee oe kh RSE SDs 
Seatans, * . peal 


aA [} Ty fii aes : 
yy fe - FP yp 
a ' 


aaraye 










SSS (er GMOS 


The Ten Living Uraei of the Lake of the Uraei. 


132 FOURTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


“vessels of drink are filled with wine. There is lamen- 
“tation among them when they hear their doors close 
“upon them. Their food is given unto them as lord{s] 
“of their sceptres round about this lake.” 

The paragraph which refers to the uraei reads :-— 

“[These are] they who have their speech after Ra 
“cometh to them, and souls are turned backwards, and 
“shadows are destroyed at, the hearing of the words 
“(or, voices) of the uraei. Unto them saith Ra:— That 
“which belongeth to you [to do], O ye URa&kI who are 
“in this lake, is to guard your flames and your fires [so 
“that ye may hurl them] against my (literally, his) 
“enemies, and your burning heat against those whose 
“mouths are evil. Hail to you, O Uragi’ They 
“say unto Ra:—‘Come thou to us, stride thou over 
“ TANEN.’” 

On the left of the path of the boat of the sun 
through the Fourth Division we see the god Osiris, in 
mummied form, and wearing on his head the crown 
of the South, standing on a serpent, and partially 
covered by the earth of a mountain; his head only 
is above the ground, and he stands in a naos with a 
vaulted dome. His name or title, KHenr AmeENTI, 


& iE is written by his side. Before the shrine is a 


Flame-goddess in the form of a uraeus, and behind her 
are twelve gods, who stand in front of HERU-UR (or, 
Horus the Aged), the Haroeris of the later Greek 
writers. Heru-ur is in the form of a hawk-headed 


THE GODS OF THE PITS 133 


man, who leans on a staff. Behind the shrine 
which contains Osiris stand twelve gods, who are 
described as “the gods who are behind the shrine,” 


1118 aa iN » ee =. Behind, or by the side 


of these, are four pits or hollows in the ground, by the 
side of each of which stands a god, with his body bent 
forward in adoration before a bearded god, who holds 
the symbol of life in the right hand and a sceptre in the 
left. The four gods are called “ Masters of their pits,” 


cos and their lord is 
2a cals Seas 


“ VAN ide se = 
called the “ Master of Earths (?), eae S S| ! 


The texts referring to these gods read :— 


2S a ei ee 
eee he 2 dl To 
be SF2-ASEIYA 
om id eS toes 2S 
Vt SU SS te HS! 
meee Ag == OS SS 


Vp 2 ve) Ob I bene 


134 FOURTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


ISAS SRAIS 


© cel Se ol Prins ——— 
—— 4 ww Se xl oo Ss aoe 


sae retbee |e meee, Coa 
aS tS beers Eas 
foj—S 1 2°S DACIRD 
md SS4d mom ln SN PE coal oe 
ae WP | FF that pa oe OA 
a ih 
IIRL oR 
Tell AMR SHE S8 
mm APROSIZI DS AT 
oe oe $i eo 

ot ene hee ell 


=A ee So 


NYS Te BE 5 
eh S 
PA fort eh el A AES SS 

Fei ISN —1be ie EIb— 


PB Le Pn a | 


The text referring to Horus reads :— 

“Horus worketh on behalf of his father Osiris, he 
“performeth magical ceremonies for him, and restoreth 
“to him the crown [, saying], ‘My heart goeth out to 
“thee, O my father, thou who art avenged on those 
“who would work against thee, and in all the matters 
“which concern thee thou art guided by magical 
“ceremonies. Thou hast the mastery, O Osiris, thou 
“hast the sovereignty, O Kuentr AmENTI, thou hast 
“whatsoever is thine as Governor of the Tuat, O thou 
“whose forms (or, attributes) are exalted in the hidden 
“place; the beatified spirits hold thee in fear, and 
“the dead are terrified at thee. Thy crown hath been 
“restored unto thee, and I, thy son Horus, have 
“reckoned thy weakness there.’” 

The twelve gods who are in front of the shrine of 
Khenti Amenti say :— 

“Let Him of the Tuat be exalted! Let Khenti 
«Amenti be adored! Thy son Horus hath restored to 


136 FOURTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


“thee thy crown, he hath protected thee by means of 
“magical ceremonies, he hath crushed for thee thine 
“enemies, he hath brought to thee vigour for thy arms, 
“QO Osiris, Khenti Amenti.” 

In reply to this address of the twelve gods Khenti 
Amenti saith unto his son Horus :— 

“Come to me, O my son Horus, and avenge me on 
“those who work against me, and cast them to him 
“that is over the things which destroy, [for] it is he 
“who guardeth the pits [of destruction].” ’ 

Then saith Horus unto those gods who are behind 
the shrine :— 

“Make inquisition for me, O gods who are in the 
“following of Khenti Amenti, ‘stand ye up, and with- 
“draw ye not yourselves, and be ye masters over 
“yourselves, and come, and live delicately on the bread 
“of Hu, and drink ye of the ale of Maat, and live ye 
“upon that whereon my father liveth there. That 
“which belongeth to you in the hidden place is to be 
“behind the shrine, according to the commandment of 
“Ra. I call unto you, and behold, it is for you to do 
“what it is your duty [to do]. Their meat consisteth 
“of cakes of bread, and their ale is of the tchesert 
“drink, and their libations are [made with] cool water. 
“Their food is given unto them by the guardian of 
“the things which are in the shrine. And Horus 
“saith unto these gods :—‘Smite ye the enemies of my 
“father, and hurl ye them down into your pits because 
“of that deadly evil which they have done against the 





ti Sictealy| 
a 
Si J--efy 

edi sada 
We: K 
Fel djAli 


MSS 
2) A jhetg ? 
Arte lft Z 
CA Le) a 
Ta : 
(Ch HA, é 
cates @ 
PAS S 
AFSL, 3 
seth Anat} Es 
Nop eALTR é 
base IESE 
Loi 


2 SAM 


Heru-ur, 


‘t 
i! 
» 
Be 
ee 





of Flame 
(Nesert). 


anion \2 

pt pe DE aid 
hi HAA égs 
aren i 


SEEOA 
Apt ~1Ni) 
anal 


i ae 
Mea gx: ‘mr, 
Nee elles 
Sey Feet 
WIE: Led 
SALTS 
{ie 2JASaid- 
fetta | 
NER 

PES ZEUS 
z av ecuae 


The Twelve Gods behind the Shrine. 


Aas 
tHe sin (J 
Mevike ei 
Jeiletie: 
rari Al Ali 
PMBTEAS 
lew )S 
epee ga sa 
ole 
— bled 
inet, 





The Four Masters of their Pits. 


. The Master 
of Earths. 


138 FOURTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


“Great One, [which] found(?) him that begot me. 
“That which belongeth to you to do in the Tuat is to 
“ouard the pits of fire according as Ra hath commanded, 
“and I set [this] before you so that, behold, ye may do 
“according to what belongeth to you [to do]. This 
“god standeth over (or, by) the pits.” 


C-139'') 


CHAPTER VI. 
THE GATE OF TEKA-HRA. 
THE FirtH Division oF THE TuAT. 


Tue boat of the sun having passed through the Fourth 
Division of the Tuat arrives at the gateway which 
leads to the Firru Division. This gateway is similar 
to that which guards the Fourth Division, and is 
guarded by nine gods, who are described as the 


“Fourth Company,” ae O, at the entrance to the 


corridor and at its exit stands a jackal-headed god, the 
former being called Aau, .—o IN Ss and the latter 


a S 3 c : 
TEKMI, = Qd; each is said to “extend his arms and 
== 


hands to Ra.” The corridor is swept by flames of fire, 
as before. The gateway is called Arr, l A) bs f 

oe) 
and the text says, “This great god cometh to this 


“gateway, and entereth in through it, and the gods 


“who are therein acclaim him,’ <> ale Ly 
SA WWM oS 


ee eee), 
VY Td tN SAT The nine gills say to 


140 FIFTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


‘Ra, “ RA-HERU-KHUTI unfoldeth our doors, and openeth 


“our gateways. Hail, Ra, come thou to us, O great 
5 Eek. ee NWWW > 


“god, lord of hidden nature,” 2 Tt cw 
tm i} iiit i+ 
eT BAO SS 


5 | |S. The monster serpent which stands on his 
tail and guards the gateway is called TEKA-HRA, Z = 


and the two lines of text which refer to his admission 
of Ra read:—“ He who is over this door openeth to Ra. 
“Sa saith to TEKA-HRA:—‘ Open thy gate to Ra, unfold 
“thy doors to Kauri, that he may send light into the 
“thick darkness, and may make his radiance illumine 
“the hidden habitation.’ This door is shut after the 
“great god hath passed through it, and there is 
“lamentation to those who are in this gateway when 
“they hear this door close upon them.” As the hiero- 
glyphic text is identical with that given above on 
p. 120 it is not repeated here. 

In the middle of this Division we see the boat of Ra 
being towed on its way by four gods of the Tuat; the 
god is in the same form as before, and stands in a shrine 
enveloped by MEHEN. Sa stands in the bows, and HeKa 
at the stern. In front of those who tow the boat are nine 
shrouded gods, with projecting elbows; each of these 
holds in his hands a part of the body of a long, slender ser- 
pent, and the group is called “those who hold ENNUTCHI,” 


OS Aq /\. In front of these are 








NRT AR 





a 
fe io, bas fel] 


$000 Co SO oO HOS 0 OOS 009.0208 08 020008050990 088 5553808 OS SSESTSSESSOOID, 
2 ° 


: -: ae UATE UU = Md 
a ae 


qa TAAS 


i 


) 


—— 


=< 


a 


oe 
. 
of, 
ed 
sbofe 
i]e%e 
Mee 
RAG 
1? 6 
“06 
fee 
0 %e 
a%e 
je%e 


The-Gate of the Serpent Teka-hra, 


» 


142 FIFTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 
twelve bearded beings, who are advancing towards a god, 
ic 3 ; NYA a 
who is styled [the god] “of his angle,” 4 J aes 
AWWA ——— 


the twelve gods are described as BAIU RETH-AMMU- 
TuaT, ie., “the souls of the men who are in the Tuat,” 


CNN ae a {- a x, The texts read :-— 


yi cela Oe riage 


— ee 
a ew, areas | 


Seine we ater 





The Boat of Ra being towed by the Gods of the Fifth Division of the Tuat. 


eye ie Wy Hees 4 th 
pee eel ck Bin eee 


Sl <a ee hae S) 
Dae ee eh ieee a De ee 


Ne Yo Paro = 


SSSI ee ee 


DESCRIPTIVE TEXTS 143 


fo et NG) ss 
O —— 
WO wom "pte eS my 2 = a 


ee ge eS Ie 


Be Ss WD) we | es 
sce irises Urriic ie 
“Se SS ee 
BS oor oI]. b= 
i eho ae 
a Pe slinitrn hen ial 
egret = bl 


a Unatae bla 2 2 Nia les | ee | 
AS thee > eal 


(ame Shas Ns 


a ee | 1) (AAAS nna 1k Ib hea SND, 


Je AGE Teloasos 
6 encod nil eee 
pe Jee Ne 


144 FIFTH DIVISION: OF THE TUAT 


“The gods of the Tuat draw along this great god, 
“and he journeyeth through the hidden place. [Ra 
“saith :—] ‘Draw ye me along, O ye gods of the Tuat, 
“and sing praises unto me, O ye who are at the head 
“of the stars; let your cords be strong (or, vigorous), 

- “and draw ye me along by means of them, and let 
“your hands and arms be steady, let there be speed in 
“your legs, let there be strong intent in your souls, 
“and let your hearts be glad. Open ye a prosperous 
“way into the chambers (qertz) of hidden things.’” 


—rh e > 724); | > — ain —-. es OM 
c= ary Apmis erat 
Sheers o eee ewe IS 
Sey Sar SiN HER Ne om YS 
= arpa Bee vse, SSE iM a 
ee oS SRaR Pr ETS = 8 awa 


? 


The Nine Gods who hold Ennutchi. 


The text relating to the bearers of the serpent reads :— 

“Those who are in this scene carry this serpent. 
“Ra striketh them and advanceth towards them to 
“make himself to rest in [the gateway called] NEBT- 
“aHau. This serpent travelleth as far as it (ie. this . 
“gateway), but he passeth not beyond it. Ra saith 
“unto them :—‘ Strike ye the serpent ENNUTCHI there, 
“give him no way [whereby to escape], so that I may 
“pass by you. Hide your arms, destroy that which 


HUMAN SOULS OF THE TUAT 145 


“you guard, protect that which cometh into being 
“from my forms, and tie ye up (or, fetter) that which 
“cometh into being from my strength. Their food 
“consisteth of the hearing of the word of this god, and 
“offerings are made to them from the hearing of the 
“word of Ra in the Tuat.” 

“Unto those who have spoken what is right and 
“true upon earth, and who have magnified the forms 
“of the god, Ra saith:—‘ Praises shall be [sung] to 





Heri-qenbet-f. The souls of men who are in the Tuat. 


“your souls, and there shall be breath to your nostrils, 
“and there shall be to you joints in SEKHET-ARU. 
“That which shall be indeed yours is what belongeth 
“to the MaaTiI cops. The habitations which shall be 
“yours shall be (or, are) at the corner where [live] 
“those who are with me who weigh words for them.’ 
“Their food is of bread-cakes, and their drink of 
“tehesert drink, and their libations are of cool water. 
“Offerings are made unto them upon earth as to the 
VOL. II. L 


146 FIFTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


“god HETEPI, according to what should be offered unto 
“them.” 

Ra saith unto this god:—“Let him that is over his 
“Corner (HERI-QENBET-F) cry out to those souls who 
“are right, and true, and divine, and make them to sit 
“at peace in their habitations at the Corner of those 
“who are with myself.” 

On the right hand of the path of Ra in the Fifth 
Division of the Tuat are:—1. Twelve male beings 
bowing in adoration; they are described as “those 


who make adorations in the Tuat,” fu Qf Sit 
nes 


| +} i Ms : es 2. Twelve male beings who bear 


in their hands a cord for measuring plots of ground 
and estates; these are called “Holders of the cord in 


the Date Ata Oe ge 3. Four 


gods, standing upright, each holding the symbol of life 
in his right hand, and a sceptre in the left. The 
hieroglyphic texts which relate to these groups 
read ;:— 


meer tel Nm Ss Sell, 
Toe his OW PP x Str DS 
ee Te Tem aaol MPO | Bes 


yet: S ei es —— ee aie MAW 
<> SS Sa a OS, Kael 


GODS WHO MEASURE LAND AND THEIR OVERSEERS 147 


Os ree oso Ae tS 
Ot Jere oe SS 


<a | 
lon pa OF aaa | 


a eS" ea, | 


A NA | ee l);] 2 
si AWWW IAAAAAN ee Liebe male nl mae AANA — 


oS 2 AP SLLIe)z! 
a 1 ww &™ <> inom Ch Nyaa 
Torts rise ol oti 


par ENG cen re ae el ee 
= Hees Sn eS =I = NS 04 ze 
Joes “For laa | ap faua « 


ae 


ARES (Oy n 
w ie nan 2 A = III 


ol We ly GES RO OS a 


ae wie pet ae 
iT Nese il TIDES Li IS Aces II 


ae notl teria 2c. 


ery pee fe here Gata ox 
OU 
= iit | | PP Wasecesett ws ven 5 


— &® Ss 


AY SS Ue oes MS Aly 


148 FIFTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


Saat eNG Oe CMe Re ia 
eer  ]Mall'o 1S eh daa 
RS NG Cane oe 


(Nein ETD S| 








a 


Sie = 


The Twelve Gods who make adoration in the Tuat 


}SATH My Sams 


Oe | he CMa q SS 


(1. 


The passage in the text which refers to the adorers 
reads :— 

“[These are] they who make songs to Ra in Amentet 
“and exalt Heru-khuti. [These are they who] knew 
“Ra upon earth, and who made offerings unto him. 
“Their offerings are in their place, and their glory 


THE GODS OF THE MEASURING CORD 149 


“is in the holy place of Ament. They say unto 
“Ra:—‘ Come thou, O Ra, progress through the Tuat. 
“Praise be to thee! Enter thou among the holy 
“(places] with the serpent Mehen.’ Ra saith unto 
“them :—‘ There are offerings for you, O ye who made 
“offerings. I am content with what ye did for me, 
“both when I used to shine in the eastern part of 
“heaven, and when I was sinking to rest in the 
“chamber of my Eye.’ Their food is of the bread- 





The Twelve Gods who hold the cord for measuring land. 


“cakes of Ra, and their drink is of his tcheser drink, 
“and their libations are made of cool water, and 
“ offerings are made unto them on the earth in [return] 
“ for the praisings which they make unto Ra in Ament.” 

The passage in the text which refers to the holders 
of the measuring cord reads :— 

“These are they who] hold the measuring cord in 
«Ament, and they go over therewith the fields of 
“the Kuu (ie. the beatified spirits). [Ra saith to 


I50 FIFTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


“them]:—‘Take ye the cord, draw it tight, and mark 
“out the limit (or, passage) of the fields of Amentet, 
“the Kyu whereof are in your abodes, and the gods 
“whereof are on your thrones.’ The Kuu of NETERTI 
“are in the Field of Peace, [and] each Kuu hath been 
“judged by him that is in the cord. Righteousness 
“is to those who are (ie., who exist), and unrighteous- 
“ness to those who are not. Ra saith unto them :— 
“What is right is the cord in Ament, and Ra is 
“content with the stretching (or, 
“drawing) of the same. Your 
“possessions are yours, O ye gods, 
“your homesteads are yours, O ye 
“Kuu. Behold ye, Ra maketh 
“(or, worketh) your fields, and 
“he commandeth on your behalf 
“that there may be sand(?) with 
VOU.” 





The Four HenbiGods.  “ Hail, journey on, O Kuvuri, for 

“verily the gods are content with 

“that which they possess, and the Kuu are content 

“with their homesteads. Their food [cometh] from 

“Sekhet-Aru, and their offerings from that which 

“springeth up therein. Offerings are made unto them 
“upon earth from the estate of Sekhet-Aru.” 

To the four bearded gods Ra saith :—* Holy are ye, 
“OQ HENBI gods, ye overseers of the cords in Amentet. 
“[O stablish ye fields and give [them] to the gods and 
“to the KHU (ie. spirits) [after] they have been 


THE FOUR RACES » on ere ak SLs 2-3 


“measured in Sekhet- hn ee them give 8 fields. “and 
“sand to the gods and to the souls:whe pre'ya bis Wat. 
“Their food shall be from Sekhet-Aaru, and their 
“ offerings from the things which spring forth therein].” 

On the left of the path of the boat of Ra are:— 
1. A hawk-headed god, leaning upon a staff; he is 


called Horus, \- 2. Four groups, each group con- 
taining four men. The first are RETH, “iP dj b 

—s 
the second are Aamu, | IN iS |, the third are NEHESU, 


\ g | Ss I, and the fourth are THEMEHU, = » I. 


The RetH are Egyptians, the AAmMu are dwellers in 
the deserts to the east and north-east of Egypt, the 
NEHESU are the black races and NEGROES, and the 
THEMEHU are the fair-skinned Libyans. 3. Twelve 
bearded beings, each of whom grasps with both hands 
the body of a long serpent; these are called the 


5 Oe eri | 
Holders of the period of time in Ament, iS a \, 


aes Qh ae 4, Kight bearded gods, who are 


called the “Sovereign chiefs of the Tuat,” | | oe hii 
mam +4 | 
Ko, The hieroglyphic text which relates to these 


groups reads :— 


WedfeSioticaeSe 
fo Si SS Pi Slm\ 


tock es SS 
os ae ; ser aa Lyi} ION OF THE TUAT 


cre orp 
- HRW SRS ae 
Sen BY Ss Shea 
Sy eee TL N ea 
ee FAS 
res moon NK fle ve! SPARE TES 

Wir aS 2a Smal 
g=7¢ pers NG 
ee OPO IN HHH SelS, 
iy ool? bees Ce eae 
BEE ALE TF 
Th Sse Tod Sere NSS] Dc 
A ls allilele 21% 


—H+— 
ga pe eet ar | == nw, & |—= @ 
O lll ee ea eS ee awa | | | = os 


THE FOUR RACES OF MEN 153 





The Aamu, i.e., Asiatics. The Reth, i.e., Egyptians. Horus. 





The Themehu, i.e., Libyans, The Nehesu, i,e., Negroes, 


154 FIFTH DIVISION OF FHE TUAT 


Mie Mis AEST aN Ses 


caliees joa) Ses 


eS) 


in - oy Se oh = 
Mae deg baa nen iia 


% 
“INS AS eset a 


The passage which refers to the four groups, each 
containing four men, reads :— 

Horus saith unto the creatures of Ra who dwell in 
the Black Land (Qemt, Le., Egypt) and in the Red 
Land (i.e., the deserts which le on each side of the 
Black Land formed of the mud of the Nile):—“ Magical 
“protection be unto you, O ye creatures of Ra, who 
“have come into being from the Great One who is at 
“the head of heaven! Let there be breath to your 
“nostrils, and let your linen swathings be unloosed! 
“Ye are the tears’ of the eye of my splendour in your 
“name of RTH (ie. men). Mighty of issue (Aa-mv) 
“ye have come into being in your name of AAMU; 
“Sekhet hath created them, and it is she who delivereth 
“(or, avengeth) their souls. I masturbated [to produce 
“you], and I was content with the hundreds of thou- 
“sands [of beings] who came forth from me in your 


1 Or, the weeping. 


THE GODS WHO GIVE LIFE 155 


“name of NEHESU (ie., Negroes); Horus made them to 
“come into being, and it is he who avengeth their 
“souls. I sought out mine Eye, and ye came into 

being in your name of THEMEHU ; Sekhet hath created 
“them, and she avengeth their souls.” 

The passage which refers to the gods who make 
stable the period of life (Kueru-Auau-em-AMENT) 
reads :— 

Those who make firm (or, permanent) the duration 





—— 4 1c ome FA Py tp Wesel AANA 

Pe AS Re Ne BE Yeo oe Ll 3 # 
TUES Ty es Htb chest Pho BA Ty oo TBE Ree 
Wie Sess lh Leste Tele By rey 
pot indy oon A LY Soe in Se PPR Nome RA LY PO Se hen 













(4) (Ed) (BAD C8) «BD A) (RB) 8) (P(E) CHD 
SNASNASN-N ASIANS 








The Twelve Gods of Life in ate 


of life stablish the days of the souls {in] Amenti and 
possess the word (or, command) of the place of 
destruction. Ra saith unto them:—‘“Inasmuch as ye 
“are the gods who dwell in the Tuat, and who have 
“possession of [the serpent] Mrrsrur, by means of 
“whom ye mete out the duration of life of the souls 
“who are in Amenti who are condemned to destruc- 
- “tion, destroy ye the souls of the enemies according 


156 FIFTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


“to the place of destruction which ye are commanded 
“to appoint, and let them not see the hidden 
“place.” 

The passage in the text which refers to the divine 
sovereign chiefs reads :— 

“[{Here are] the divine sovereign chiefs who shall 
“destroy the enemies. They shall have their offerings 


awn & <— —'s' Se He 
os foe 
mE Tena SPE ea Pee eS 
ise Se UE hase S 

se ao fa Reset 
fate cos La Mh bd 


7 weta 





The Eight Sovereign Chiefs in the Tnat, 


“by means of the word [which becometh] Maat; they 
“shall have their oblations upon earth by means of the 
“word [which becometh] Maat, and it is they who 
“destroy and who pass the edict concerning (literally, 
“ write) the duration of the life of the souls who dwell 
“in Amenti. The destruction which is yours shall be 
“ [directed] against the enemies, and the power to write 


THE EIGHT SOVEREIGN CHIEFS 157 


“which ye possess shall be for the place of destruction. 
“JT have come, even I the great one Horus, that I may 
“make a reckoning with my body, and that I may 
“shoot forth evils against my enemies. Their food is 
“bread, and their drink is the tchesert wine, and they 
“have cool water wherewith to refresh (or, bathe) 
“themselves. [Offerings are made to them upon earth. 
“One doth not enter into the place of destruction.] 1 


1 Supplied from Champollion, Notices, p. 772. 


Ra Cie) 


CHAPTER VII. 
THE JUDGMENT HALL OF OSIRIS. 
THE SIxTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT. 


Tue boat of Ra having passed through the Fifth 
Division of the Tuat arrives at the gateway which 
leads to the SrxrH Drvision, or, as the text says: 


Sly 2s ( JES Zale 
Tt 2 Sed ALLE St A, omnis goa 


“cometh forth to this pylon, and he passeth in through 
“it, and those gods who are in the secret place acclaim 
“him.” The gateway is guarded by twelve bearded 
mummy forms, who are described as the “gods and - 


goddesses who are in this pylon,” cit = qq a th : 


ASS ) je * © | and it is called Nusr-awa, 
| Co wa 
eS. The gate which admits to the Sixth 


Division resembles those already described; at the 
entrance to the corridor and at its exit stands a 
bearded mummied form, the former being called 


Mak-is, —ay, and the latter Surra-iz, “9, 


These names mean “Right (or, true) of heart” and 


159 


ew 


THE JUDGMENT HALL OF OSIRIS 


ete, 


ll 


Tonia 
=a 
ie 4 


f 


— 
Mian @ @ 


i] 
1 
t 


wun ene 


cay, d 


Fea 
pS St} 
ees” 
Sree lvlemeereraice delaras alas 
CIPO sek 


PMs 


mE ease] 
1” @ 


a 


be NaN eh ero Helse 1ST IE el Ase 


A 


v 


(= 


Tho i Pe At 


(SNESea= MES ETNE E 


Let jij weitw 


DES «6S 
ied pe 


—r-& 


Pee eretioce creer. oe Perce ee ee 
"mA 7 a z = - 
: 
s 
hae etch eee eee eer eee rer Corer er rer. Serres 
* 





aa bet HEE 





+ =< g 
t 


I 








The Gate of the Serpent Set-em-maa-f,! 





TA 


The Judgment Hall of Osiris. 


160 SIXTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


“Hidden of heart” respectively, and each is said to 
extend his hands and arms to Ra. The corridor is 
swept by flames. The gods who acclaim the god say, 
“Come thou to us, O thou who art at the head of the 
“horizon, O great god, who dost open the hidden place. 
“Open thou the holy doors, and unfold the portals of 


“the hidden place,” a —— sm Th cO'| f 4 


Vee Siam 

gre ese 
oe Lee gate which leads into the SIxTH 
Division and the Division itself we find inserted a 
remarkable scene, which may be thus described :— 
In the upper part, from one side to another, a line is 
drawn, which is intended to represent the roof of the 
shrine or canopy in which the god is seated, and on it 


rests a row of kakheru = (| : Le., spear-head 
<=> 


ornaments. From the inside of the roof hang, upside — 
down, four heads of some kind of horned animal. 


These are called Hahaiw [[ \ Uo AS Ut I, 


and are supposed to be heads of gazelle! or oxen. In 
the space between the’spear-head ornaments and the 
side of the Tuat is written 


“Th fl ke @” > ASS ca ae 


The transliteration of these characters appears to be 
Ser her Twat sath then ; the meaning of the first three 


1“ Tétes de gazelles”” (Champollion, Monwments, tom. ii., p. 495). 


THE JUDGMENT HALL OF OSIRIS 161 


words is tolerably clear, ic, “ Osiris, governor of the 
Tuat,” but the signification of the last signs is doubtful. 
M. Lefébure translates the inscription, “ Osiris, master 
of Hades, Earth, and Tanen.” Osiris, who wears the 
double crown of the South and N. orth, and holds in his 
right hand the symbol of “life,” and in his left a sceptre, 


{, is seated on a chair of state, which is set on the top 


of a platform with nine steps. On each step stands a 
god, and the nine gods are described as the “ company 
which is with Sar, ie., Osiris,” S, (i. S a: 
= | —— 
On the topmost step is a Balance, in which the actions 
of the deceased are weighed; the beam of the Balance 
is supported either by the deceased, or by a stand 
which is made in the form of a bearded mummy. One 
pan of the Balance contains some rectangular object, 
and the other a figure| of the bird which igs symbolic 
of evil and wickedness. Behind the Balance is a boat, 
which is sailing away from the presence of Osiris ; in 
it is a pig being driven along by a dog-headed ape 
which flourishes a stick. In the top left-hand corner 
is a figure of Anubis, jackal-headed, and under the 
floor of the platform on which Osiris is seated are 
figures of the enemy of Sar, or Osiris. From the 
variant of this scene which is found on the sarco- 
phagus of Tchehra at Paris,! as well as from the 
sarcophagus of Seti I, we may see that the pig in the 


1 Sharp, Inscriptions, part ii., pl. 9. 


VOL. IL. M 


162 SIXTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


boat is called Am-a, 1 ——1, ie., “Eater of the Arm,” 


and the boat is piloted by a second ape which stands 
in the bows. On the Paris monument we see a man 
wielding a hatchet in a threatening manner and 
standing near the Scales, probably with the view of 
destroying the deceased if the judgment of Osiris 
prove adverse to him. 

The nine short lines of text at the foot of the scene 
read :-— 


ee Inh Sel ee ey 
Seri ay En SLL S| 
= Te aly TY 


This inscription is in the so-called “enigmatic” 
writing,! a fact which was first noticed by Champollion, 
but a transcript of it exists on the sarcophagus of 
Tchehra in characters which have the ordinary values,? 
and this reads as follows :— 


hn DT TTR See 
STReDs Sle 


1 See Goodwin, Aeg. Zeit., 1878, p.188; Renouf, ibid., 1874, p. 101; 
and Champollion, Monuments, pl. 272. 

? Lefébure renders, “O ye who bring the word just or false to 
me, he, Thoth, examines the words” (Records of the Past, vol. x., 
p. 114). 


THE JUDGMENT HALL OF OSIRIS 163 
eerie es 
as ie “i 
“feet, the gods and the spirits are before him; he is 
“the enemy of the dead (ie., the damned) among the 
“beings of the Tuat, Osiris putteth under restraint 
“{his] enemies, he destroyeth them, and he performeth 
“the slaughter of them.” 

The text which refers to Anubis reads :— 


eS VIS SZzVCA— Ill 
aoe a | 


and this Mr. Goodwin transcribed :— 


ON ee PSS 
PDA WM—tddiShiH 


l & hii X=, Le., “Hail, O ye who make to be madét 


‘His enemies are under his 


“the word of your little one, may Thoth weigh the 
“words, may he make to eat his father.” 
Immediately over the boat is the short inscription :— 


ee es) 


This Goodwin renders by, “ [When] this god entereth, 
“he (ae., the Ape) riseth and putteth under restraint 
“ AM-& (ie., the Eater of the Arm).”} 


1 “he diver [when] this god rises, he gives up [the pig] to the 
-plagues”’ (Lefébure, op. cit., p. 114). 


164 SIXTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


Behind the pair of scales is the following legend !:— 


GOR S BY SUSLLR 
of RWS FieVSY 11S 
aa ia 


This Mr. Goodwin transcribes by :— 


Tea Rad EASE SoI 
Me wan a oe 
PO GSS ae eee 
er ell Oa pa Yee We A @ «—. and render, 


IT awww 

“The balance-bearer does homage; the blessed spirits 
“in Amenti follow after him; the morning star 
“disperses the thick darkness; there is good will 
“above, justice below. The god reposes himself, he 
“gives bread to the blessed, who throng towards him.” 
The translation by M. Lefébure reads, “The bearer of 
“the hatchet and the ‘bearer of the scales protect the 
“inhabitant of Amenti, [who] takes his repose in 
“ Hades, and traverses the darkness and the shadows. 
“Happiness is above, and justice below. The god 
“reposes and sheds light produced by truth which he 
“has produced.” 


1 See also Champollion, Monwments, tom. ii., p. 490. 


THE JUDGMENT HALL OF OSIRIS 165 


The upper part of the space between the roof and 
the platform on which Osiris sits is occupied by two 
short inscriptions, which are full of difficulty; they 
read :— 


Le STY Se tV—> 
SHYT ARV IA 
TIF W SS eV TY 
=o SeT ES 

r= YoS SSNS ST 
eo TE Se RG 
SIU WT STB All 


oy. 


The meaning of these texts has puzzled several 
workers, and even the order in which the characters 
are to be read has given rise to differences of opinion. 
One of the chief difficulties in the matter is caused 
by the way in which the two legends are written 
on the sarcophagus of Seti I. Looking at the 
hieroglyphics as they stand, they seem to form one 
continuous inscription, but, if we examine the scene as 
it appears in the tomb of Rameses II., we see that we 
‘must divide them as above. Mr. Goodwin made an 


166 SIXTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


attempt to transcribe and translate a part of the texts, 
but as he considered them to form only one inscription 
we cannot accept his rendering. M. Lefébure has made 
translations of both texts, and they read !:— 

I. “They, they hide those which are in the state of 
“the elect. They the country [belonging] to them, is 
“Ameh in the land. Behold, these are they whose 
“heads issue. What a mystery is their appearance, 
“[the appearance] of your images!” 

II. “The examination of the words takes place, and 
“he strikes down wickedness, he who has a just heart, 
“he who bears the words in the scales, in the divine 
“place of the examination of the mystery of mysteries 
“of the spirits. The god who rises has made his 
“infernal [companions] all.” 

For purposes of comparison, the versions of the texts 
from the tomb of Rameses VI.,as given by Champollion 
(Monuments, pl. 252) are given. It will be noted that 
a part of the line immediately over the head of Osiris, 


Seen BS ae ; ; 

i lo [ roa GS , 18 given in different 
=> NW 

places in the latter scene, for dK = is immedi- 


ately in front of the double crown of Osiris, and 


Y KK ~~ pen is immediately in front of the 
sceptre of the god. The other lines read :— 


NWWWA WA 
I PRET TSE ee 
= Hat | SS WW 


1 Records of the Past, vol. x., p. 114. 


RIT MART 
IPYYIRIKUY TY. 
a ee 
Doh SpoR BITS BBLS 
FHUTASWMPT SI 


Ou 2 Sp 


( . i668,7) 


CHAPTER VIII. 
THE GATE OF SET-EM-MAAT-F, 
THE SIxTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT—continued. 


THE pylon which gives access to the Sixt Division 
of the Tuat has already been described. The monster 
serpent which stands on his tail and guards the gate- 


way is called SET-EM-MAAT-F, fla () e and the 


two lines of text which refer to his admission of Ra 
read :— 

“He who is over this door openeth to Ra. Sa 
“saith to SET-EM-MAAT-F:—‘Open thy gate to Ra, 
“unfold thy doors to Kuurt, that he may send light 
“into the thick darkness, and may make his radiance — 
“jllumine the hidden habitation.’ This door is shut 
“after this great god hath passed through it, and there 
“is lamentation to those who are in this gateway when 
“they hear this door close upon them” (see p. 169). 


se Loge Sd giea\y 


<o~— —4 iit <— iw eee A 
a a etl | Px 


Tose We Ore ee ee 


FRAGMENTARY TEXTS OF SETI I. 169 


Tr w> _—/ ne) 
oly mo NE 
DW HB Na IWWWWA 


me Poet ils do 
OOO NS AETIED NO NES 


The scenes and texts which illus- 
trate the Sixth Division of the 
Tuat cannot be obtained in a com- 
plete state from the sarcophagus of 
Seti I., and recourse must therefore 
be had to other documents. In 


fm soo 


TK 


the following pages, however, the 
fragments of the texts and scenes 
from the sarcophagus are first given, 
and these are followed by the com- 


el 


A * 


a 
| Sy 
TORAIER 
— 
4! 


plete texts as they are found in the 
tomb of Rameses VI., as published 
by Monsieur E. Lefébure in the third 
volume of the Mémoires of the French 
Archeological Mission at Cairo. 

The fragmentary texts and scenes 
from the sarcophagus of Seti I. may 
be thus described :— 

In the middle register are :— 

1. Two of the four gods of the 
Tuat whose duty it is to tow along 
the boat of the Sun through this 

_ Division. 


qt 


eTueal E 


3 


sa 


f 


Ol igs 


f 





The Serpent Set-em-maat-f. 


170 SIXTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


2. The god TEM, in the form of an aged man, 
S Soo? S 


bas bent shoulders, and leaning on a staff. 

. The jackal-headed standard called Ra, to 5 1, 
to which are tied two “enemies,” who probably repre- 
sent the damned. 

4. The two UTCHATS, <3 which appear to be 
keeping watch on the “enemies.” 

5. The jackal-headed standard called Tk, = ; 
with two “enemies” tied to it. 


6. A mummied form, with projecting elbows, called 
met 
AFAT, jg a. 
es 
7. The jackal-headed standard called KHEPER, 
G do, with two “enemies” tied to it. 


8A Oe form, with projecting elbows, called 


with two “enemies” tied to it. 
10. A mummied form, with projecting elbows, called 


SENT man st 


11. The jackal- breaded standard called SEB, SJ ae 
with two “enemies ” tied to it. 
12. A mummied form, with projecting elbows, called 


AQA-SA, s. IN > 


1 The names are supplied from Champollion, Notices, p. 502. 


FRAGMENTARY TEXTS OF SETI I. 171 
13. The jackal-headed standard called Sar, S al 
Cao 

(Osiris).! 

14. A mummied form, with projecting elbows, called 
AX-KHER (? Dy. 

A- (2), Me. | 

15. The jackal-headed standard called Herv, NG 


1 


16. A god holding a sceptre called SHEF-HRA, ae ©, 


The text which refers to the above-mentioned gods 
reads :— 


SV TH eri) 


RE —4+— 
rcP TIA NG Gch cut 
Tes factions YUNA. © 


Natok Wet 
Se aos = oy O'R ity LS 
(STA AITUEA Biss & Jat 


1 The names are supplied from Champollion, Notices, p. 502. 


Se ee = 
2 Ch llion’s text reads: 
ampollion’s text reac ceae 


a ey JAN SS ALY 
Nica MIS eds 


are, O a (Notices, tom, ii., p. 503). 


FER | 


\\ 


W 
\\\ 


SIXTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


172 





"I Mog Jo suSuqdoorvg oyy Jo L0A0H 94} Moy ‘yun j, ou JO MWOISTAIG YIXIG OY} JO JUOUS BIT 





THT eg 
Wa 


Ut: 


= 2 —p 









THE HARVEST IN THE KINGDOM OF OSIRIS 10 7/8) 

ROUA lest h Jie. 

sos Seat [rt fait 
willl CAE 

ne te AIS 

















iver AALS IA 
tohalaa eg. 
Ta Pa an Ok 
F4at lel Jey lute) 
MND WAS sah B 
SNES ARNE 
==tJ cA 
Letina 
WEA 0 Hdd 


: HActt 0 | So) es 
Wie ee Lea e 
ie—azd Belase Ze 
fe ete ta 
“a Wis I eet 2 
sak. ch oA 
Eyice HONE AT Seo 
Apr yal VA uit=y ye 


Fragment of the Sixth Division 


174 SIXTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


ON AY BS eee A De 
Nam ie rm Sr : one 
mes Am AMS Ss Al 


Mee rm AAS Me es 


» 


— YY 2 Ne 
Felli SMBS 
a Ww od 

Pc a eee en i eae 


“(This great god is towed along by the gods in the 
“'Tuat, and those who tow Ra along say, ‘Rise up, O 
SUES ets Per. castatein, a god, verily get thee forth to 
“the standards of Seb.’ Tem saith unto the standards :— 
“<«Keep ward over the enemies, and bind ye fast those 
“who shall be smitten. O ye gods who are behind the - 
“standards, and who are in the following of Seb, I give 
“ye the power to bind fast the enemies and to keep 
“ward over the wicked. Let them not go forth from 
“under your hands, let them not slip through your 
“fingers. O enemies, ye are reckoned for slaughter 
“according to the decree which [was given] to you by 
“him thet. «205 with his body, and created the Tuat 
“by his members(?). He hath passed the decree for 


THE HARVEST IN THE KINGDOM OF OSIRIS 175 


“you to be punished, and he taketh count of you and 
WA VO: BO ce ane 6g oid 

The upper register is much mutilated on the cover 
of the sarcophagus of Seti L.; on it we see:— 

1. Five upright male figures, each of whom holds a 
large loaf of bread, &, with both hands on his head; 
when the scene was complete these figures were twelve 
in number, as we learn from the variants published by 
Champollion,! and they are called HETEPTI-KHEPERU, 


its | sy | 
ra \ xi B » 

2. Six upright male figures, each of whom holds the 
feather of Maat with both hands on his head; when 


the scene was complete these figures were twelve in 
number, and they are called AUTU-MAAMU-KHERU- 


mirc = RAMEE DSH 


The text which remains reads :— 


=i PO eee ml, NO | 
I eae INS Ses 4 ee 
eo TN eS BFn 
ME Sine ool Mths ald ~ Bh aoe 


Z 
} Notices, ii., p. 501. 
2 Supplied from Champollion, Notices, u., p. 502. 


\N 


WS 


SIXTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


176 


. 
rE 


IN 
Wy 
G 


Wy 


| 
a 
w | 


| 


PINT ey Ori 


Tye 


AWS 
WV 
WY 


isa 


NWA 
NWWMA 
NII 
NW 


i 


“(These are they who have offered up incense to the 


WAAR 
iat 


aS! 





oe 


[ek OA 


i 


Y= 


i 


T 


; 


\se 


if 


Si 


i 


<a> 


> 


e 
° 
J 


XY 


| 


<n 
| 
C 
rae 


Jo 


ee 
1A: 


A 


=p oREp 


<} 


q 


Fragment of the Cover of the Sarcophagus of Seti I, in the British Museum, 


“gods, and whose doubles have been washed, <> : 


oe 


NW 


We et 


(ToFR ain 


“maat, they have been reckoned up and they are maat 


|p ee SASAS 
tt 


“eam 


THE HARVEST IN THE KINGDOM OF OSIRIS 1a yh 


“in the presence of the great god, who destroyeth 

“iniquities. Osiris saith unto them:— Ye are madt of 

“maat. Be ye at peace [because of what} ye have 

“done, O ye who are in the forms of those who are 

“in my following, and who dwell in the house of him 

“whose souls are holy. Live ye on what ye live...... 

“there, and have the mastery 

“over the cool waters which 

“oreun- your Lake i... rs 
A few years ago I pur- Le ae fai 

chased from a native at Luxor 

a fragment of the cover of | \) I 

the sarcophagus of Seti I. (see \ hd 

p. 176); this is now in the | \ } 

British Museum (No. 29,948), 

and it gives the following :— 
1. Three male figures, each 

of which bears a loaf on his 

head. 





2. The following fragment- Wee ZZ zy 
==) LiZZE- LD 
ary text: MWA 
ae Misi 
“cabal ts Liou ales aa a 
Teal ee iinate ont i Yl a 
Q Cl mw) 1 oc oo A en 
ae i 
=<?) 
met esr ge 1 eres Ne 


“Their bread cakes are ordered for 
N 


y) 


XK 
AW 


By 2 


vo 


F Wy 


I 


PA 


178 SIXTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


“them by their gods; their kaw are in their hands, 
“and they enter into their abodes at the pylon which 
«destroyeth its gods. The god Sar (Osiris) saith unto 
“them :—‘ Your bread shall be to you from that which 
“cometh forth from your mouths, O ye HETEPTI- 
“KHEPERU «2 ~ + s+ ee 

In the lower register are :— 

1. Five male figures, who are occupied in tending 
very large ears of corn; when the scene was complete 
these figures were twelve in number, and they were 
called, “Those who work about the plants of grain in 


«the fields of the Tuat,” = I >! UI Weal 
Nee oe Re 


oe Ae man holding a sickle; he is one of the seven 


“ reapers,” lly =i I> ed , of which this 


section of the scene originally consisted. 
The text which relates to those who tend the grain 
reads :— 


REN edn Sl: ih 
Se (Sirs Se FPA dS 


Hiebert CSP Acree 


pil Pe eee [vale Oe stale 1 
a ree ae Ser aalrro ih 


1 The passage in brackets is from Champollion, Notices, ii., p. 503. 


THE HARVEST IN THE KINGDOM OF OSIRIS 179 
tt) ~ YO AS HON 
CN ex 

ISP EROMAZIUA 
ZZ, oe [es limes Z 
OS ee oe eS 
GY Ui; YH broken } \\ Y 

= tate [oes Ee ri rah 

Sih Sees | int oe aoe lt | Lele 
\wo JO) 2: | wn ke yA ates 

w ay ss Ge 
MWNWA 
Chl eo LSNe ie =|] 
<=> <= [i & oo 
dl NG AS OPO oh 
S 
a(?) [ee het at | Beton 


AD oonen a warn) 


lawl I | MIWA 


WY 
7h 


ANNO <a 
ee niiiii = ‘i t yoo 


= ab Ibhe re 
NU 9 Se ar DS 
rit ve oP olirin. 


gm mS LOO Zier 
amen NA WWNMZZ => 
Yarr\\ia oll G@ ath 


VAT Fes J 


MX 


WS 
\ 


a 


GG 
WW WW 
AWS 
AW 


180 SIXTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


eS —— 4 Ha 8 AG ae Lee 
NVM 
(ete tie werwee' A LEE oo re 


mime DST ck 
JS 7 Ss MUMS | 


“(They perform the works in connection with the 
“orain, and they embrace the god of wheat (NEPRA) 
“which is eaten(?). Their grain becometh glorious in 
“the land through the light of Ra, when he appeareth, 
“and sendeth forth heat, and maketh his way by them. 
“The lord of joy of heart saith unto them :— Let your 
“orain be glorious, and let the young shoots of your 
“orain germinate, and let your offerings be for Ra] 


«...,.there.... Ra Let Neper germinate, and 
“let Sar (Osiris) be the source of food of the gods in 
STG PND var eee AmENTI.... behold, in the 


“fields of the Tuat. They gather together their grain, 
“and they say unto Ra:—‘ Let the fields of the Tuat be 
“oreen with young plants. May Ra shine upon the 
“members of Sar (Osiris). When thou dost shine the 
“young plants come into being, O great god, thou 
“ereator of the grain. Their offerings of food are of 
“orain, and their drink offerings are of tcheser, and 
“their libations are made with cool water. Offerings 
“are made unto them on the earth of the grain of the 
“fields of the Tuat.” 


1 The words in brackets are supplied from Champollion, Notices, 
ii., p. 5038. 


THE REAPERS IN THE KINGDOM OF OSIRIS I81 


Of the reapers it is said :— 

“These are they who have their scythes, and who 
“reap the grain in their fields. - Ra saith to them:— 
““Take ye your scythes, and reap ye your grain, for it 
“is granted to you. ..... your habitations, and to 
“join yourselves [to] me in the Circle of the Hidden 
“Forms. Hail to you, O ye reapers!’ Their food is of 
“bread, and their drink is of tcheser, and their libations 
“are made with cool water. Offerings are made unto 
“them upon earth as being those who hold scythes in 
“the fields of the Tuat.” 

The text which describes the middle register of the 
Sixth Division as it appears in the tomb of Rameses VI. 
reads :— 


2 Tm YT x ye 
A riot NK Us the vaso 
A= ASS eho aS 
emer wei sdy RI 
2 wo lOY Sp 2S aS 
Us eee gece) al fe 
SsISZAAI DI Aton Yd 





SP ie JABeegysh 
SS Sn Se eae 
SatuirSsp Zam y 
Ha Ties ha li eee 
eJIz SAS ORL ROSH 


Prd i panama cageng ere: aA iN 
NWA FTOC TIN 
‘ | areas AN wie int 


Meri Ss A lS re LST SD 
ae prone eet) 1 
PSs \. 252s | ae 
Gimnl —ae eS 
TT NTN Se 
KS DRS MDS Asi} 
eda Pisekhy sy 


“This great god is being ee along by the gods of 
“the Tuat, and those who tow Ra along say:—‘Be 


THE FETTERING OF THE WICKED 183 


“exalted, O Aten (ie. Disk), who art at the head of 
cae fey era the Light, the head .... Look ye at the 
“abodes of the Tuat. Your eyes are to you, O gods, 
“observe ye Ra, the Power in Akert. This great god 
“decreeth your destinies. This great god cometh forth 
“to the standards of Seb, which reckon up the enemies 
“after the weighing of words in Amentet. Behold, Sa 
“saith unto this god [when] he cometh forth to the 
Eapandards ol Heb... +: the head of Ra, the great 
“ood .... verily, get thee forth to the standards of 
“Seb. Tem saith unto the standards:— Keep ward 
“over the enemies, and bind ye fast those who are to 
“be smitten. O ye gods who are in the following of 
“the standards, and who are in the following of Seb, I 
“give ye power to bind fast the enemies, and to keep 
“ward over the wicked (or, those who are to be 
“smitten). Let them not come forth from under your 
“hands, let them not slip through your fingers. O ye 
“enemies, ye are doomed to slaughter, according to the 
“decree of Ra concerning you. His person is the body 
“of Akert, and he hath created the Tuat of his frame- 
“work. He hath issued the decree for you to be put 
“into restraint, he hath ordered your doom which shall 
“be wrought upon you in the great hall of Ra....... 
“the gods weep [and] lament, he setteth the gods 
“to ward you, and the enemies and those who are to 
“be smitten in the Tuat are condemned to these 
“ standards.’ ” 

In the upper register are twelve gods, each of whom 


184 SIXTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


stands upright, and has the feather of Maat on his 
head, and twelve gods, each of whom stands upright, 
and has a large loaf on his head. These gods are de- 


scribed as“ MAATI gods bearing Maat,” = ANG | xin 


A\ es eles and the “HeTEeptiv gods_bear- 


| Al, 
ing provisions,” | wan a i 
eat a OU Sak ji SB <= 1 I > 


The text reads :— 


Ci eens int Lee fi 


| oS © D nom 

== er ao i ee IGEN 

QA i pe am PE A SS 

2 a ee Pr) t bie Paes 
tT en pas I. HO BH fl JSS 
1 RMR} i <s @ 

aa md ey aad | em Fam © ! 

Sy Pe ey a 

| J iicek ible 

— —— = a= ss a 

=A lors deri erm id! 

a Scere AE aa at Pee 

(vue Oe hay, bee ee 
call EEN | aarti NWA 

Slt i tiv —— 2/4 ak A woven | Ss 


aH ———t T 
ae oe eli Mik <i, 
a hn ele I eZ Gem) aawubuesny. Sek 


THE REWARD OF THE BLESSED 185 


eee ee 
\lefem se Sela es Ahi 
esr Sobre RO dS 
Ree SS Yee ae 
mS MSR ASABE 
LEN Sreosd Mthe WHHL MY 
Se -Pe mm AT eo mrss 
Sa Narr lS 
E Priee bo Sel 
ape ars NOt beatae NOs 


Rem ko | SD ee eB 


is oR TH 

“ Offerings of incense to their gods, libations of cool 
“water to their doubles, and fillings of the mouth 
by his sustenance afterwards by their offer- 
' “ings of drink and their offerings of bread. Come 


let ay eta eo)! 


186 SIXTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


“forth to them their gods and their doubles. Their 
“hands are to them, and they go to their cakes 
“through the pylon of ..... and to its gods. SAR 
“saith unto them:—‘ Your bread is to you, [according 
“to] your utterances, and the peace cakes of Kheper, 
“and loaves of bread. Ye shall have the mastery over 
“your legs, and ye shall have satisfaction in your 
“hearts, and your gods shall present unto you your 
“Khenfu cakes and unto your doubles their provisions, 
“which consist of bread, and their drink, which shall 
“be of tcheser ale, and their libations shall be of cool 
“water, and offerings shall be made unto them upon 
“earth as the lord[s] of offerings in Amentet. For 
“they have done what was right whilst they were 
“upon earth, and they have fought on behalf of their 
“god, and they shall be called to the enjoyment of the 
“land of the House of Life with madt. That which 
“igs theirs by right shall be allotted to them in the 
“presence of the Great God, who doeth away iniquity.’ | 
“Then shall Osiris say unto them :—‘ Madt be to you, 
“O ye MAAT gods, and peace be unto you by reason of 
“what ye have done in following after me, O dwellers 
“in the House, the soul of which is holy. Ye shall 
“live your life upon that whereupon those who live 
“there feed, and ye shall have dominion over the cool 
“waters of your land. I have decreed for you that ye 
“shall have your being in all of it with madt, and 
“without sin (or, defects).’ Their bread |\shall be madt 
“cakes, their drink shall be of wine, and their libations 


THE HARVEST IN THE KINGDOM OF OSIRIS 187 


“shall be of cool water. And there shall be offered 
“unto them upon earth the offerings which must be 
“made from their land.” 

In the lower register are the figures of twelve men, 
each of whom tends a monster ear of corn(?), or a tree, 
under the superintendence of a god who leans on a 
staff, and a group of reapers, each holding a sickle. 
The text, which is mutilated in places, reads :— 


mr edi SUR SS 


Seire otc ZG Bea An 
“ PR SM 


=a es eae K ZBI a | 
i Se eee ° 
ce | 
Ltt imwwt | ZZ" oo A 1 1 ee wr IS 00 0 
Ww @ [| ww fl Bnei = Th Ke 
event por Ont ile woo eS 
CSS) ens Gams) A || Gas) Jee ee 
NW Sanaa? Cs WMH @ FY | wwe | % SX 
ee rete eC ee CON el — 
Z\ fs AG= Gage 
UG > | UY, WZZ 
Yj" "8" 2 IZ mon VY) om 
GY \\—><> 12 GYi$—=3 ANNIGAIww 1 1 10 | 


SUNNY TASS AT RS 


LAPIVROS Wold 
IS hoor BE Ssh sof = 


188 _ SIXTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


AWWA —4— AWW == oS qaqq ° 
nn WWW wean | NA SYN Py eft) 
www | tt AWW 111113 : ° 


SAU see US IS 
lip Nl foe 





<= Et ora gaq © 
Peery | 1twow mr =P 82 
On || ale newntatell =i | lt ° 
Ss. 5 Gf 4 So, ONIN oes 
ee Sl eee a a WAN\I\ Ia dl 1 | ar 


a Yim islet 


C= pig o AD PR LZ ORY 


LEWERITAAIRE 
$15 muss 


“They perform their work in connection with the 
“grain, and they embrace (ie. cultivate) the divine 
“grain (or, Nepra), and the spirits feed upon their 
“grain in the land of the god of light (Kuv), who 
“cometh forth and passeth by them, and [NEB-AuT-AB, 


‘Oey, on ty, ie. the Lord of joy of heart, saith unto 


“them :—‘ Let your grain be glorious], and let your ears 
“of wheat germinate, and let your offerings be for Ra. 
“Your khenfu cakes are in the Tuat, your offerings are 
“to you, the offerings which are yours by madt are 


THE REAPERS IN THE KINGDOM OF OSIRIS 189 


Uacereod«?). toe you. -Herbs=: ..... .°. among you. 
BOAR cv. ss SermMMNate”. . .. * and they say unto 
“ Ra :— Let plants spring up in the Fields of the Tuat, 
“and let Ra shine upon the members of Sar. When 
“thou dost shine the young plants come into being, 
“O great god, thou creator of the Egg.’ Their food 
“offerings are of grain, their drink is of tcheser ale, and 
“their libations are made with cool water. Offerings 
“are made unto them upon earth of the grain from the 
“Fields of the Tuat.” 

Of the reapers it is said :-— 

“These are they who have their sickles and who 
“reap the grain in their Field. Ra saith unto them :— 
“<Take ye your sickles, and reap ye your grain, for it is 
“oranted unto you...... your habitations, and to 
“join yourselves to the Circle of the Hidden of Forms. 
“Hail to you, O ye reapers!’ Their food is of bread- 
“cakes, and their drink is of tcheser ale, and their 
“libations are made with cool water. Offerings are 
“made unto them upon earth as being those who reap 
“the grain in the Fields of the Tuat.” 


( 190 ) e 


CHAPTER IX. 
THE GATE OF AKHA-EN-MAAT. 
THE SEVENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT. 


THE boat of the Sun having passed through the Sixth 
Division of the Tuat arrives at the gateway which 
leads to the SEvENTH Division. This gateway is 
similar to that which guards the Sixth Division, and 


is guarded by nine gods, who are described as the 
“Seventh Company,” Ol; at the entrance to the 


corridor, and at its exit, stands a bearded god, with 


arms hidden, the former being called SHEPr, 2 QQ =, 


and the latter HEQES(?), a re and each is said to 


extend his arms and hands to Ra. The corridor is 
swept by flames of fire as before. The gateway is 


called PESTIT, os Ut ©, and the text says, “This 


“great god cometh to this gateway, and entereth in 
“through it, and the gods who are therein acclaim him,” 


eee le eee 


ed aly THAN Sd 


THE SERPENT AKHA-EN-MAAT Igt 


Part of the text of the speech which the nine 


gods make to Ra is broken away, but what remains 
reads, “Open the secret places, open the ees pylons, 


“and unfol hidd 1s 
and unfold the hid eorperta Ss | U= = —— 
Ube oie ~ Il © nae “OT . The monster 
halle HW) Ow Toor === 
serpent which stands on his tail and guards the gate- 


way is called AKHA-EN-MAAT, q— = , and the two 
nm @ | 


lines of text which refer to his admission of Ra read, 
“He who is over this door openeth to Ra. Sa saith to 
“ AKHA-EN-MAAT!:—‘ Open thy gate to Ra, unfold thy 
“doors to Kuuti, that he may send light into the 
“thick darkness and may make his radiance illumine 
“the hidden habitation.’ This door is shut after the great 
“god hath passed through it, and there is lamentation 
“to those who are in this gateway when they hear this 
“door close upon them.” A portion of the text is 
mutilated, but it can be restored with certainty.’ 

In the middle of this Division we see the boat of Ra 
being towed on its way by four gods of the Tuat; the 
god is in the same form as before, and stands in a shrine 
enveloped by MrHEN. Sa stands in the bows and HuKa 
at the stern. The text relating to the god reads :— 


Pe se iesilrrio <> 


eed) = 
1 Var., = UW, Axua-nri. 
| . 
2 See Lefébure, Mémoires, tom. ii., part ii., pl. 11 ff. 


192 


hei] SEE ds 


WNT, JJ OHNE 


SEVENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 






ane = estin 
IETS Ba] Wialts 
reat a Peay 


ig “SNe 
Iola? oy | 

HEA SHUEY) 
TAS) LAM) 


Fragment of the Seventh Division of the Tuat, from the Cover of the Sarcophagus of Seti I. 





CeO ° 
Fragments of the Scenes and Texts of the Seventh Division of the Tuat, from the Sarcophagus of Seti I, 


. 
194 SEVENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


=e re 
ieee ame 2 ea Sen | ‘OS FA 
Trio il Sere pis 


Fre et PPE oe 










ays Kel & 
( ‘| wi 
ALATA, 


The Boat of Ra being towed through the Seventh Division of the Tuat 
by the gods thereof, 


rie ee a] 2 eo ee ee 
It | Can de eee 


aes a 5 

“The gods of the Fuat tow along this great god, and 
“they say unto Ra:—‘Thou art towed along, O great 
“ood, lord of the hours, who dost work on behalf of 
“those who are under the earth.” The gods have life 
“in his attributes, and the spirits look upon his forms. 





“And Ra saith unto them:—‘There is magical protec-_ 
“tion to you, O ye who tow, and there is holiness to 


GODS WHOSE HANDS AND ARMS ARE HIDDEN 195 


“you, O ye who tow and bring me into the nethermost 
“parts of the Tuat, tow ye me along until [ye arrive] 
“at the chambers (?), and take ye your stand upon the 

“hidden mountain of the horizon.” 

In front of the divine towers of the boat march :— 
1. Twelve bearded gods, the AmENNU-AAIU-KHERU- 

SHETAU, whose hands and arms are hidden; they are 

described as “hidden of hands and arms and possessing 


hiddenness,” Nee 6 » {i> am — ! aes Ss ! 


The text relating to them re — 


ee Se ee 
== WADA SI ASc PALO 
“ce 2c oe a 
2 enti me a aa 
aah 4s DER Ae 
ea 
Mele ees \ en a Nin es 
ieee ash 


oy ee) Os eee, 


196‘ SEVENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 

ar iba perarse Ses 5 
Tit tis cool DN ce eo hae 
aes So ae 
[Eos 


“These are oe who possess the hiddenness (or, who 
“hold the mystery) of this great god. Verily those 
“who are in the Tuat see him, and the dead see him, 
“who burn in Het-Benben (or, the temple of Ra), and 
“they come forth to the place where is the body of this 
“ood. Ra saith unto them:—‘ Receive ye my forms, 
“and embrace ye your hidden forms (or, mysteries). 
“Ye shall be in Het-Benben, the place where my body 
“is, The hiddenness which is in you is the hiddenness 
“of the Tuat, and cover ye your arms therewith.” And 
“they say unto Ra:—‘Let thy soul be in heaven, at 
“the head of the horizon, let thy shadow penetrate 
“the hidden place, and let thy body be to the earth 5. 
“as for the upper regions of the sky we ascribe Ra 
CRBCPORO! 6 Li sl, Fulfil thou thyself, and take thou 
“thy place [with] thy body in the Tuat.’ Their food 
“eonsisteth of offermgs of every kind whereby souls 
“become content, and offermgs are made unto them 
“upon earth by reason of the sight of the light in the 
“ Tuat.” 

2. Hight bearded gods, the NETERU-HETI, who stand 


GODS WHOSE HANDS AND ARMS ARE HIDDEN 197 





The Twelve Gods whose hands and arms are hidden, 


198 SEVENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


upright, with their hands hanging by their sides, and 
are described as “the gods of the temples,” aa 


lo>\, Ip and eight gods, the SENNU, who stand 


upright, with their arms held straight together in 
front of them, at a little distance from their bodies. 
The text which refers to them reads :— 


Se TT PW de dls => DN 
=ZRMS dari ae Dee 
a a = 
ig NTE SD NCO Bs 
Na Diisecrndt Si Sie 
se Sw Pelt SL 
FR Te oi Opinii. 
Aiea a dh 
* eel lt fo 

SWS meAUa Saree 
an Prd mile a amin 


THE NETERU-HETI AND THE SENNU GODS I99 


Freaad y= Shore 

e xe ieee lee ar) ‘5 nes iN ie 

- a eS. Lei ee 
sored aso 


— 








200 SEVENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


qn 
nt Pr Pd ri oe fon CA At 
sae WWW ces | SSS Hn 
mS it SSS |) ta | ww A= © 
“Th | am oma esan oe 
| pon ee AWWA 
| mow Awww HT | | | 


‘s — are they who are outside Het-Benben, and 
“they see Ra with their eyes, and they enter into his 
“secret (or, hidden) images; that which is theirs is 
“apportioned, and the SENNU gods bring it. [And Ra] 
“saith unto them :—‘ My offerings (or, provisions) are 
“from your offerings, and my nourishment is from 
“your nourishment which is to you, O ye who are in | 
“my secret places. I protect my secret things which 
“are in Het-Benben. Hail to you! Your souls live, 
“and their offerings are the offerings of Kauri.” Tuatt 
“saith unto them :—‘O ye gods who dwell in the Tuat, 

“who are in the divine [places] of the governor of 
“Ament, to whom what is their due is given upon 
“their ground, who lie down upon their own lands, 
“your own flesh is to you, ye have gathered together 
“your bones, ye have knit together your members, and 
“ye have collected your flesh. There are, moreover, 
“sweet winds to your nostrils, ye have girded on your 
“apparel, and ye have put on your wigs.’ ” 

In the upper register are :— 

1, Twelve gods, the Kueru-meTau[H], each of whom 
holds a stake or weapon, forked at one end; they are 
described as “those who hold the metau weapons,” 


THE KHERU-METAUH GODS 20 


M » : INN 5 iN SUL: The text relating to 


these reads :— 


aan AS Tiron Wet mi 
Pre PO i = a= 
SST ANAL 
4 =o ef HOS Pwya 
=o) SaaS 
= SEMI > 44F S| 2s 
Ot ees BT Ae oe 
$A Ra 
VeSsmm se 
i as PS nits kh 
lord Nts 


“Ra saith unto them:—‘Receive ye your metawh 
“weapons, and take ye them with you. Hail to you, 
“foo against] the serpent fiend Mamu; hail to you, 
“make ye gashes in him when the heads appear from 


H 


p 


D 


202 SEVENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


“out of him, and turn ye him backwards.’ They say 
“unto Ra: 





‘Our metauwh weapons in our hands are for 


“Ra [and against] Mamu, and we will make gashes in 
“the great and evil Worm. O Ra, do away the heads 
“when they come forth from the windings of the 
“serpent KuETI’ ‘These are the gods who are in the 
“TBoat of Ra], and they repulse Apep in the sky, and 
“they travel through the Tuat. It is their duty to 





N 
SI 


The Kheru-Metauh Gods, 


“turn back Apep on behalf of Ra in Amentet and the 
“places of the Tuat. And this god allotteth to them 
“ their provisions of bread, and their beer is the tchesert 
“drink, and their libations are of cool water, and 
“offerings are made to them upon earth because they 
“repulse the Enemy of Ra in Amentet.” 

2. The gods KHERU-AMU-PERERU-TEPU-EM-QEBU-F, and 
the monster serpent SeBA-Apup, the body of which is held 


THE GODS OF STAKES 203 





The Kheru-Metauh Gods. 


up above the ground by twelve bearded gods, who are 
described as “those who have food when the heads appear 


from his folds,” Sig" as oe 


= : 
[1 1. Twelve human heads grow out from his body, 
Ha 





204 SEVENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


the first appearing from his head, and the other eleven 
from his back. The text which relates to them reads :— 


pil ae ae So 


Sd SRE eSs 


EIB | PL oan 
Litia MST NS Ss 
nme ie al Tan Sh mr A 


Pe am Td Bee dT a Se 


a oh nan ee ae ens ee 
oO AWA 
IN Si) ite One ee 


ck Sa | vi 1 | oan ewe Edm 
age eyes tooo 
Pe Sl a a ee 


PN i 
“These are they who are the adversaries of his 
“two-fold evil, and who overthrow the enemies of Ra, 
“and it is their duty to seize the SzBA-Fiend when he 
“maketh heads to come forth from him. [Ra] saith to 


THE SERPENT SEBA-APEP 205 


“them:—‘Turn ye back SEBA, make ye to go back- 
“wards ApEep when the heads appear from out of him, 
“and let him perish. [Ra] ordereth for him his 
“destruction. ‘O heads, ye shall be eaten, ye shall be 
“eaten, ye shall be consumed, when ye come forth from 
“him.’ Ra ordereth for them when they come forth 
“that they shall be consumed (or, swallowed up) [in] 
“their folds when he journeyeth to them, and that the 
“heads shall retreat within their folds. The Worm 
“ HEFAU shall be without eyes, and he shall be without 
“his nose, and he shall be without his ears, and he 
“shall exist upon his roarings, and he shall live upon 
“that which he himself uttereth. The food [of these 
“gods] consisteth of the offerings [which are made to 
“them] upon earth.” 

3. An upright, bearded mummied form called Qan, 


feces a . To the neck of this figure are attached two 


ropes, which are twisted together symmetrically, and 
are grasped by twelve bearded men with both hands. 
Each god stands within a loop formed by the two ropes, 
and has a star before him. The gods are described as 


2 


Sah NSS 
A\ | mw © SSW. Before the figure 
Wie 


are the words [| — AQyosm | ye. 


The text reads :— 


ee | NT 





spate Tae 
PDT aa SP Sar Pel 








. ee » » 

> e@° Moe Sere etre r>e 

Vee ee Pees MY, be Seis Coane meee wt yt 
ae! en ace a i 2 te 


oe 






The Serpent Seba- yen with the twelve human h 


eads WiGeH grow out of his 
body and his twelve attendant gods, 


THE SERPENT SEBA-APEP 207 





The Serpent Seba-Apep, with the twelve human heads which grow out of his 
body and his twelve attendant gods. 


208 f SEVENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


—— © i ee a ee ee fae 
baluaancn tifa Dowd fa 





3 The god Qena, and the gods who hold the rope. 


SS) LR SS ohn 


Gio! —5 


RAR ww | it t to ow 


“The Enemy of Ra cometh forth from the Tuat. 
“ Offerings shall be made unto the gods of that whereby 
“T exist under the trees. Seize ye the rope, and tie ye 


QENA AND THE GODS WHO HOLD THE ROPE 209 






5 5 
Ee ae a irr 


+ = 
° ° oe 
,. e os Pi ies a Beye FP, 3 ery 
‘. ° ee eee < Ch iia oot ee . ee 
2 e8e Seen : GS Seems ners we 28 pe gM. ie = . . 


= A 
a iS 


= ORS HTn 


The gods who hold the rope, 





“therewith the mouth of Agen. Your hours come 
“forth, and there is benefit to you therein. Rest ye 
“wpon your throne[s], and let the rope enter into the 
“mouth of the god AQEN when he cometh to the place 


¢! all 


TPM 


The gods who hold the rope. 
VOL) Ls qe) 





210 SEVENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


“where the hours are born; Ra crieth out, and it 
“resteth in its place, and it maketh an end of ANEQ. 
“They say unto Ra:— The god Nag is tied up with 
“the rope, the hours of the gods(?) are to thee, O Ra, 
“with light. Rest thou and thy hidden body ..... 
“Their provisions of loaves of bread are to them, their 
“eer is tchesert, and their libations are of cool water, 
“and offerings are made to them upon earth.” 

In the lower register are :— 

1. A god, standing, and leaning 
upon a long staff; his name is TuATt, 


* Eee F 
a \ 
? NY 
2. The serpent NEHEP, a the 


long body of which is made to serve 
as biers for twelve gods in mummied 
form; the serpent’s body is provided 
with twenty-four legs of lions, and 
a mummied god rests over each pair 
of them. These gods are described as “those who . 


: se | 
are in the body of Osiris asleep,” +} iS 
| Ak co 
jie ut ‘Sq , and “those who are in inactivity,” 
| 
| 
1% 


TP eS 5 UY}. 


3. Four gods, each with his arms stretched straight 
together before him at an acute angle with his body. 


The legend reads, khast-ta-rut 7 \s “ ON: 





The god Tuati, 


211 


THE TWELVE SLEEPING GODS 





3 SUUEU 
Ba 


S- 


(er o 





The gods who are asleep in the body of Osiris, 






























Wer} . ae EM 5 : 
EEE 4 Icke : 





SEL 
Hac 


‘ 


\seZ]l 


Lifcas 
EEE 
gl A, 


ba 





WA 
rili-s-] 
Ee abl > 
ar 4 

AACE 
alle 


2 bbb Matting, > 


. 
REAL 
gee ass 





Sg An gee 
Se, 
iS aaa 
- e@ 
oe fe 


aad 
248 


ae 
The gods who are asleep in the body of Osiris, 














Teh Al EIEGA : 
=i ral HE = eS 


= 


ae 
‘<? 
226 


tz 


eld 


¥ EE 








A god in The serpent in the round Four Khast-ta-rut Gods. 
' mummied form, pool of fire, 


214 SEVENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


4, Four gods. 

5. A serpent within a circle filled with water. 
6. A god in mummied form. 

The text relating to these reads :— 


: NE ‘ a mii fin 


ee 

PROMALIUSIGR 

WU als J {eer | | 

LEAN Pid A Er 

eT eae ei Law Tt IT bd pd 

Slim ae bi ass 

SS | io 

as] CH by a Fa | 
NWA 

— i Se es 

© -4aGa oe ee RG 


APA UIE ST ASA 
le PRN ars Ahad ahh 
ie CT NG Cefcre sd || ae 
ETE NG Cee eet 
conse WEES 2 on ag 
Ke eeoMKRAT AREY 


THE TWELVE SLEEPING GODS, ETC. 215 
mia i Oe i MA Be 
eee et of Yo 


oe ae mang x (ih WW | <> &| 


OR OS reer So 
50a» 
Se ha 


So = Ne eal 
se Cans Ne rae Ne 
ALAS BVA A eS S 
oT AT. AVIS hel 
19 SPINS REIAN 
Sk NOS rer Meta 
TH & UP TNs Se {— 

sw Th Bl SP ca ok eee 
Tah om 2384 S55 Sl 


Rod SASS ei Se 
aol fio YS NOMAD. 
shld tal) '& NS 


\ ES me Sa 
SOT oo) Att 14 
Que 7 | ISAS aR rae =a <7 
<> © | | eh to oe 


= "d= oS ey BN Otc 
vo de BRS TSP AR PO 
noo TA Sree se 
SVN ts ae moe 
MSI N ey Qe Saas 

mania COTA ely ei 
eet win ms SE = 


NWA NW 


ww mown | tt | 
me pat 


eelShet se 


“The god Tuati saith unto them :— Hail, O ye gods 


THE SERPENT NEHEP, ETC. 217 


“who are over the Tuat, ye gods who dwell in this 
“[place] of the governor of Ament, who abide per- 
“manently on your places, arid who lie down upon 
“your couches, lift up the flesh of your bodies, and 
“gather together your bones, and gird up your 
“members, and bring ye into one place your flesh! 
“There is sweet (or, fresh) air for your nostrils. Loose 
“and take off your funeral swathings, untie and remove 
“your wigs, unclose your eyes and look ye at the light 
“therewith, rise ye up from out of your inert and 
“helpless state, and take possession yourselves of your 
“fields in Sekhet-nebt-hetepu (i.e., Field, lord of offer- 
“ings). There are fields for you in this Field, and the 
“waters thereof are for you. Let your offering be 
“there, [and] fields from Nebt-hetepu.’ Their libations 
“shall be of water. It is the serpent NEHEP who 
“giveth their bodies [and] their souls, and they journey 
“on to Sekuet-Aaru to have dominion over their 
“libations, and to walk over the earth. They count 
“up their flesh, their food is of bread-cakes, and 
“their drink is of tchesert ale, and their libations 
“are of water. Offerings are made unto them upon 
“earth as [unto] the god Sau, who resteth upon his 
“oround.” 

“These are they who are in the circuit of this pool. 
“There is a serpent living in this pool, and the water 
“of the pool is of fire, and the gods of the earth and 

“the souls of the earth cannot descend thereto by 
“yeason of the flames of fire of this serpent. This 


218 SEVENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


“great god who is the governor of the Tuat liveth 
“in the water of this pool.” 

And Ra saith unto them :—“ Hail to you, O ye gods 
“who guard this holy pool, give ye yourselves to him 
“that is the Governor of Aukert. The water of this 
“pool is Osiris, and this water is KHENTI-Tuat. This 
“flame consumeth and destroyeth the souls which dare 
“to approach Osiris, and the awe of this pool cannot 
“be done away, or made an end of, or overcome. As 
“for the gods who keep ward over its waters, their 
“food is bread, and their drink is tchesert ale, and 
“their libations are of water. Offerings are made unto 
“them upon earth as unto Terr in Amentet, lord of 
“offerings. There are fields for you in this Field, 
“and the waters thereof are for you. Let your offer- 
“ings be there [and] fields from Nebt-hetepu. Their 
“libations shall be of water. It is the serpent NEHEP 
“who giveth their bodies [and] their souls, and they _ 
“journey into SeKHET-Aaru to have dominion over 
“their libations, and to walk on the earth. They 
“count up their limbs, their food is of bread-cakes, and 
“their drink is of tchesert ale, and their libations are 
“of water. Offerings are made unto them upon earth 
“as unto SAH, who resteth upon his ground. 

“These are they who are in the circuit of this pool. 
“There is a serpent living ‘ 


eta 16h ear Meh 55 


(29-0) 


CHAPTER X, 
THE GATE OF SET-HRA. 
THE EIGHTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT. 


HavinG passed through the Seventh Division of the 
Tuat, the boat of the Sun arrives at the gateway called 


BEKHKHI, ve NY Qd () (J, which leads to the EicuTu 


DivIsIoN, or, as the opening text reads : = alg 


aoe ee he 
ee ese , “This great god 


“cometh forth to this gate, and entereth through it, 
“and the gods who are therein acclaim this great god.” 
The gateway is like that through which the god passed 
into the previous Division, and its outwork is guarded 


by nine gods in the form of mummies, who are described 
. 111 
as the Paut, ie., the company of the nine gods, Wo, 
a 


At the entrance to the gate proper stands a bearded, 
mummied form, with his hands folded on his breast, 


called BENEN, J oe) and at its exit stands a similar 


form called Heprtl, q 4 a UNG each of these is said 


220 EIGHTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


: a 8 7A| 
to “extend his arms and hands to Ra, ae g A x 
=o cee a The corridor is swept by flames of fire, 
which proceed from the mouths of two uraei, as before. 
The company of the gods who guard the outwork 
address Ra, and say, “Come thou to us, O thou who 
“art at the head of the horizon, O thou great god 
“who openest hidden places, open for thyself the holy 
/\ — I! 


“pylons, and unfold the doors thereof, =! 


Ga eaves | Cl YLJZ 

CO Iv=y1e >) x Ilo Aq 
i Ir mur 
Bakes ty 
stands on his tail and guards the door, is called SET-HRA, 


f. of and the two lines of text which refer to his 


admission of Ra read, “He who is over this door 
“openeth to Ra. Sa saith unto Ser- -HRA:—Open thy - 
“gate to Ra, unfold thy portal to KHutt, so that he 
“may illumine the thick darkness, and may send light 
“into the hidden abode. This gate closeth after the 
“great god hath passed. through it, and the souls who 
“are on the other side of it wail when they hear the 


“door closing upon them,” os oj 0s, %—0 | 
‘im! @ TH ww =X 


KPwSss Zp ye 


IEF | ae SS AR gO we 


{| The monster serpent, which 


222 EIGHTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


en = fo “@ | fi a iS 
—H— Th 
py UL. 

In the middle of the Division we see the boat of 
Ra being towed on its way by four gods of the Tuat, 


* wv ip the god is in the same form as before, 


and SA stands on the look-out, and Heka obeys his 
instructions as to the steering. At the head of the 





The Boat of Ra being}towed through the Eighth Division of the Tuat 
by the gods thereof, j 

four gods who tow the boat stands an aged god, who 

leans on a long staff, and is called “He who dwelleth 


in Nu,” +} IN a Immediately in front of the 


divine procession is a long tank, wherein we see four 
groups, each containing four beings, who are repre- 
sented in the act of performing various evolutions in 


the water. These are called HERPIv, [U oO QQ a 
<< ? 


Ax, | rN Ql Ss NUBIU, (Mm?) J Ql » | and KHEPAU, 


THE GODS OF THE WATERS 223 


a eas 2. Which names may be translated 


“ Bathers, Floaters, Swimmers, and Divers.” The text 
which refers to this section reads :— 


D Sey 1 a 
wo PRA ho ISIS 
=o ve IRIZ SSA 
(RIS TAPS [ON 


mow oN i Sef) MC == OP oo 
<a Do ee ae (eae 


ee | OU ren 
al ee ee er 
pee te ay i See 
JN Min 'e Wee We Wee 

eee eee i Sh 
SEZ PUS OMI a 


224 EIGHTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


ain ek go: S| ill | ae SOY moe Ga 


hee Bhi Y pore ae la roca To 


[ieee et eS eee 
eile He O rman ANT pe 
Naas on 
fat i salir SINS Se me 
AWWA Ka AWWA 
Wie Mie arian, SO | 
oe Se Book dant 
ee A rors eis 
% ye Sn t | meee 
AWWW 4 AWWW =; a= 
poe wen ay a = WPXK 
{) eis 
neces ore 


The first section of this text reads :— 

This great god is towed along by gods of the Tuat, 
and behold, those who tow Ra along say, “Let there be 
“praise in heaven to the soul of Ra, and let there be 
“praise on earth to his body, for heaven is made young 
“by means of his soul, and earth is made young by 
“means of his body. Hail! We open for thee the 
“hidden place, and we make straight for thee the roads 
“of Akert. Be thou at peace, O Ra, with thy hidden 
“things, O thou who art praised [by] thy secret things 
“in thy forms (or, attributes). Hail! We tow thee 


THE GODS OF THE WATERS 225 


“along, O Ra, we guide thee, O thou who art at the 
“head of heaven, and thou comest forth to those who 
“are immersed in the waters, and thou shalt make thy 
“way over them.” 

The passage which refers to the aged god reads :— 

“He (literally, those) who is in Nu saith to those 
“who are immersed in the water, and to those who are 
“swimming in the pools of water, ‘Look ye at Ra, who 
“journeyeth in his boat, [for he is] Great of Mystery, 


TMs eee Se Sars 
yegebees Hinged as Eee Eyes 


ett ge Sees oss ee! Wits: 


rouy aun ee 
Ds) 5 ay aX 


ERMAN 


aN 
The Four Herpiu Gods, and the Four Akiu Gods, 
“gods, it is he who performeth (or, maketh) the plans 
“of the Khu (ie. the spirits). Hail! Rise up, O ye 
“beings of time, pay ye heed to Ra, for it is he who 
“ordereth your destinies.’ ” 

The speech of Ra reads :— 

“Put forth your heads, O ye who are immersed in 
“the water, thrust out your arms, O ye who are under 
“the waters, stretch out your legs, O ye who swim, let 

«there be breath to your nostrils, O ye who are deep 


Vol. i. Q 


sete 










RARE = 





226 EIGHTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


“in the waters. Ye shall have dominion over your 
“waters, ye shall be at peace in your tanks of cool 
“waters, ye shall pass through the waters of Nu, and ye 
“shall make a way through your cisterns. Your souls 
“are upon earth, and they shall be satisfied with their 
“means of subsistence, and they shall not suffer destruc- 
“tion. Their food shall consist of the offerings of the 
“earth, and meat and drink shall be given unto them 
“ upon earth, even as to him that hath obtained dominion 















ED eo a Ie oir 
eee eaieageistts ei ES i 
al nt db 1¢dgnts 


= AMAA 
a —— "AN, 
hee 


NN ww eatin 
wen ow nn I 


rth TS aa 


sth 


“over his offerings upon earth, and whose soul is not 
“upon the earth. Their food shall consist of bread, 
“and their drink shall be tchesert Wine, and their 
“cisterns shall be full of cool water, and there shall be 
“offered unto them upon earth of that which this lake 
“ produceth.” 

In the upper register are the following :— 

1. Twelve bearded gods, who stand with their arms 
hanging by their sides, and are described as the “divine 
“sovereign chiefs who give the bread which hath been 

















THE TCHATCHAU AND THE SOULS OF SERSER 227 


“allotted and green herbs to the souls who are in the 


“Lake of SERSER (ie, blazing ‘re),” | | ene 


eallls 


9 =. £ one — 





stones IOS) 
=o 
—_~ 
hie Sh! 
= 
> = 


Pe ae ee eM e ge 
i gemst Ol == MN iin a tm SP =F IS 
ble*-e-e tet ese aria ‘Fa= 


NARAKARRARR 


The Tchatchau who give the bread of Maat. 





fi 
tegtgantas ate f2c5 


1 
— S = —— 
a f. = c vai gS atssS Cm RO z 





Souls who are in the Lake of Serser. 


2. Nine bearded, human-headed and human-handed 
hawks, which stand with their hands raised in adora- 
tion ; before each is a loaf of bread, Ch and a few 


228 EIGHTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


green herbs, YY. These are described as the “souls 


“who are in the Lake of Serser,” aN QQ S| [BASS 
lL. 


ow 
ee >> _ = 

3. A god, who holds a sceptre in his right hand, and 
oe in his left. 


The texts which relate to these read :— 


2S ANS a eee 


MW 4 [Yn ey Oo awg | ras AVES 
o) Sea 2 Meas 
mml || © |ZZudsl ila FH annsen 1 Eee 


Slot NIRS EAS 
ae Boat SS MSS ATD 
Mee WUT SEI SAAS SNe 
Ver US eS TSWANA 
INS FECs Selo as. 
jy Bos stn He 


cA @ IRE ts 7) 
TK ST RSA NGS wis 7h | | <=> 5 | 


‘ieowan rt a : 
Pd— lL SaaS ae 


THE SOULS OF SERSER 229 


AWWW 
CO | Se ee SSAA 


RRR © A geome wanna 2 © 
l pm OS nae — Pi Tipe SO 
ae pC moore 6 | SS YY 
Net 0 rare Sey OS 
lel Se. re ee ry in 


i oe cay lll 


Cy |e | SEES, TN TTA, NED a ieeee 
mie O mae FT] | 


2222) ae, Pe | eee mio | 
WW ots TA Hl = ae 


ONLSING Cees a NY EE Ny eae ORAS 
ee Ni 2 ae 
SS ASSES fe NEES VIAN te —— ST SS 


SS eS es 2 @ Sok’> 
ee ee Ree 


“NECNESARTE 
eet eon Daa 
NOS ole Soh: 


The portion of the text which refers to the twelve 
sovereign chiefs reads :— 

“These are they who make souls to have a right to 
“the green herbs in the Lake of Serser. Ra saith 
“unto them:—‘[Hail, ye] divine sovereign princes of 
“the gods, and ye chiefs of the Lake of Serser, who 
“place souls over their green herbs, let them have 


230 EIGHTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


“dominion themselves over their bread; give ye your 
“bread which is appointed, and bring ye your green 
“herbs to the souls who have been ordered to exist 
“in the Lake of Serser. They say unto Ra:—‘The 
“bread appointed hath been and the green herbs have 
“been brought to the divine souls whom thou hast 
“ordered to exist in the Lake of Serser. Hail! Verily, 
“the way is fair; for Knenti-AMENTI praiseth thee, 
“and those who dwell in TA-THENEN praise thee.’ Their 
“food is of bread-cakes, and their beer is the tchesert 
“beer, and their lbations are of cool water; and 
“offerings are made unto them upon earth by those 
“who are with (?) Tui by the divine sovereign princes.” 

The passage which refers to the souls in the Lake of 
Serser reads :— 

“These are they who are in the Land of Serser; 
“they have received their bread, and they have gained 
“the mastery over this Lake, and they praise this 
“great god. Ra saith unto them:—‘Eat ye your 
“green herbs, and satisfy ye yourselves with your 
“cakes; let there be fulness to your bellies, and satis-° 
“faction to your hearts. Your green herbs are of 
“the Lake of Serser, the Lake which may not be 
“approached. Praise ye me, glorify ye me, for I am 
“the Great One of terror of the Tuat.’. They say 
“unto Ra:—‘ Hail to thee, O thou Great One of the 
“SEKHEMU (i.e., Powers)! Praise is thine, and majesty 
“is thine. The Tuat is thine, and [is subservient] to 
“thy will; it is a hidden place [made] by thee for 


THE BURNT ENEMIES OF OSIRIS 23% 


“those who are in its Circles. The height of Heaven 
“is thine, and [is subservient] to thy will; it is a 
“secret place [made] by thee for those who belong 
“thereto. The Earth is for thy dead Body, and the 
“Sky is for thy Soul. O Ra, be thou at peace (or, be 
“content) with that which thou hast made to come 
“into being. Their food consisteth of bread-cakes, 
“their green herbs are the plants of the spring, and 
“the waters wherein they refresh themselves are cool: 





Souls who are in the Lake of Serser, A god with a sceptre. 


“Offerings are made unto them upon the earth as 
“{being] the product of this Lake of Serser.” 

In the lower register are :— 

1. Horus [the Aged], in the form of a bearded man, 
leaning upon a staff. 

2. Twelve bearded beings, who are described as the 


“burnt enemies of Osiris,” oe \° eS re J » 


@ » fl . The first four have their arms tied 


232 EIGHTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


behind their back in such a way that the right hand . 
projects at the left side, and the left hand at the right 
side. The second four have their hands tied together 
at the elbows, and the upper parts of the arms are at 
right angles to their shoulders. The third four have 
their arms tied together at the elbows, and their elbows 
are on a lower level than their shoulders. 

3. A monster speckled serpent, which lies in undu- 
lations immediately in front of the enemies of Osiris, 


THRILLS PS SSS 
SrTusta, ita suas 


Perr 


SF are ee 


ie — a 





Horus the Aged, The Burnt Laie of ce 


and belches fire into the face of their leader ; the name 
of this serpent is Kuert, mee f). In each undulation 


stands a bearded god in mummied form, and the 
hieroglyphies written above ce them as “the 


gods who are above KAETI,” at, Sai ae S 
Nl hal aires AN 
The text reads :-— 


(Sn wen to ae Se LOS 


THE ENEMIES OF OSIRIS 233 


—eeatwaraat lainan ibe 
Soi i oth Bem SUS 
[= Naas ee 
aoe ort Coes Nes In 
mele Mi Sr Satr ye 
iene NOL BY 
NSS Mes PN 
oP SSSR S hala 
Army WY ORY Nsw 
oS b le Me Sd Pe 
Shins ee 


eT ae, ef SE OY 


: eats $5 | eas San 


aie bende iee= 


is RIE: 


2 ics ' = 
Wee SQ ae 
Iles, aw = oe AP ite 
eeoce ORs i Oy 
ee ry Vi) ll wee — 
Saye | Sled 





Gay 
ee <> 0% 
=i ey [SS we. 
Cpe a: 
< A= 2 is Koa f) Se 

SONGS: es i eS = 
Nasi 

CENT: 
oes a ae | , WL 
ele: — t, “[This scene nae 
SION E “what Horus doeth for his 
RNA acess “father Osiris. The enemies 
bes eet f°) “who are in this scene have 
WS (ESSA “their calamities ordered for 
iainas. “them by Horus, who saith 
ao “unto them:—‘Let there be 
are ei “fetters on your arms, O 


Bb! ann ‘i: i ee 


NICS Mh 
we: at 
oe 


TE ie hes 
FA NEG 
Teese & 
hes 







save 


“enemies of my father, let 
“your arms be tied up towards 
“your heads, O ye who have 
“no [power], yeshall be fettered 
“(with your arms] behind you, 
“O ye who are hostile to Ra. 
“Ye shall be hacked in pieces, 


ad 


THE SERPENT KHETI 235 


“ye shall nevermore have your being, your souls shall 
“be destroyed, and none [of you] shall live because of 
“what ye have done to my father Osiris; ye have 
“put [his] mysteries behind your backs, and ye have 
“dragged out the statue [of the god] from the secret 
“place. The word of my father Osiris is madt against 
“you, and my word is maaét against you, O ye who 
“have desecrated (literally, laid bare) the hidden things 
“ which concern the rest (or, resting-place) of the Great 
“One who begot me in the Tuat. O ye shall cease to 
“exist, ye shall come to an end.’” 

“Horus saith :—‘[O] my serpent Kuer, thou Mighty 
“Fire, from whose mouth cometh forth this flame 
“which is in my Eye, whose undulations are guarded 
“by [my] children, open thy mouth, distend thy jaws, 
“and belch forth thy fires against the enemies of my 
“father, burn thou up their bodies, consume their 
“souls by the fire which issueth from thy mouth, 
“and by the flames which are in thy body. My 
“divine children are against them, they destroy 
“({their] spirits, and those who have come forth from 
“me are against them, and they shall never more 
“exist. The fire which is in this serpent shall come 
“forth, and shall blaze against these enemies whenso- 
“ever Horus decreeth that it shall do so” Whosoever 
“knoweth how to use words of power [against] this 
“serpent shall be as one who doth not enter upon his 
“fiery path.” 

The end of this text on the sarcophagus of Seti I. is 


236 EIGHTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


defective, but from the tomb of Rameses VI. we see 
that it should end thus :—“ Offerings shall be made 
“to these gods who are upon this great serpent. Their 
“food is of bread, their drink is of fesher beer, and the 
“waters of their libations are cool.” 


C2387) 


CHAPTER XI. 
THE GATE OF AB-TA. 
THE NINTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT. 


HAVING passed through the Eighth Division of the 


Tuat, the boat of the sun arrives at the gateway called 
vee 
a=) 


~—, which leads to the 


= oo 
AAT-SHEFSHEFT, © | ; 
; all il 


——~ 
NINTH DIvIsION, or, as the opening text reads: — l ‘ 


hig folie ar (hy Pt xan || [eee 
WWW =——l << ees www a Coad www awn 

ae lee I | 
pepe 
“This great god cometh to this gate, and entereth 
“through it, and the gods who are therein acclaim this 
“oreat god.” The gateway is like that through which 
the god passed into the previous Division, and its 
outwork is guarded by nine gods in the form of 
mummies, who are described as the Pavt, ie., the 


? 


company of the nine gods, on a, At the entrance 


to the gate proper stands a bearded, mummied form, 
with his hands folded on his breast, called ANHEFTA, 


q g , and at its exit stands a similar form 


238 NINTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


called ERMEN-TA, ee each of these is said to 


sa or 
wwe 1 

eso X— =D a. The corridor is swept by 
as 


“extend his arms and hands to Ra,” a sc 
pad: 


flames of fire, pe mtr from the mouths of two 
uraei, as before. The company of the gods who guard 
the outwork address Ra, and say, “Come thou to us, O 
“thou who art the head of the horizon, O thou great 
“god who openest the secret places, open for thyself 
“the holy pylons, and unfold for thyself the holy doors 


“ thereof,” a Ae hh. @lhyVv— 
[ So SS in | 
as ae — 


aS serpent which stands on his tail ma guards 
the door is called AB-TA, Oi , and the two lines 


-of text which refer to his eee of Ra read, “He 
“who is over this door openeth to Ra. Sa saith unto 
« AB-TA, ‘Open thy gate to Ra, unfold thy portal to 
“ KHUTI, so that he may illumine the thick darkness, | 
“and may send light into the hidden abode.’ This gate 
“closeth after this god hath passed through it, and the 
“souls who are on the other side of it wail when they 


i~ UT =, 


“hear this door closing upon them,” += 7 
IW Q 


| ww TO 
ee a = bk 0 PESOS ne 
—" NG VOC tT OS sewn itn lL wwe NV 


le 0he SFE Les 


eerccecer 
oe ee SOTO METH HHT MOSSES OSE DSSS SOEs ecer Feseseserscesecescer ceocecs 


et POPP Coe eersececer Feces SCo~seet®eceesces 


<I ea lah 


oomed Poe 


aN 


vi 
ra 
|| 
[24 
= 
L\* 
y 
An, 
NW 

a 
wa 
= 
—h 


il 


erorse vag, 
° 





Tae 


The Gate_of Ab-ta, 





240 NINTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


) eS a al ee ae 
fe Sh 


In the middle of the Division we see the boat of 
Ra being towed on its way by four gods of the Tuat, 


naNG a the god is in the same form as before, 





The Boat of Af-Ra in the Ninth Division of the Tuat. 


and Sa stands on the look-out, and HEKA obeys his 
instructions as to steering. The procession which 
marches in front of the boat consists of :— 

1. Six bearded male figures, standing upright, who 
hold in their hands the ends of a rod, or rope, which 
is bent in the shape of a bow over their heads; these 
are described as “those who are over the words of 


magical power,” ee. it c= » | fae 4 » I. 


THE GODS WHO CAST SPELLS 241 


2. Four dog-headed apes, which hold a rod bent as 
already described; these are described as “those who 


work magic by means of knots for Ra,” ogggge QQ » : ©. 


3. Four women, who stand upright, and hold a bent 





~ Pea 
& CIO, 


The spearmen. Aai. Shesshes and Apep. 





rod, or rope, over their heads like the four apes and 
the six male figures; they are described as “those who 
a 


1 O° 


4, Three male figures, each holding a harpoon in 
VOL. IL. R 


work magic by means of knots for Ra,” egggge QN 


242 NINTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


his right hand, and a cord in his left; they are called 


“spearmen,” ~—1 JJ > \\ iN I. Immediately in 


front of these is a bearded male figure, who has been 
lying prostrate on his face; he has upon his head a 
small solar disk and a pair of ass’s ears, and his name 


is Aay, IS Qd, ie, the Ass. In his hands he 


grasps a rope, which passes over his head and along his 
back, and is held by each of the three spearmen in his 
left hand; from the knees upwards his body is raised 
in a diagonal position, and this attitude suggests that 
he has either raised himself by means of the rope, or 
has been pulled into this position by the spearmen. 
Facing the Ass are:—1l. The monster serpent APEP, 

? and 2. The crocodile SHESSHEs, ox [lo , 
with a tail ending in the head of a serpent. 

The text, which refers to the whole of this section, 
reads :— 


Oe pomea a Pe el 
ONGA lec SS Wylie ae 
ad Po PIR SS Mensa 
ih ceaaige OC 


SlieNoait TAR Ma 


DEFEAT OF APEP 243 


% WN SS oe Sa 
EP tly, Li SeSSes We on || 4 


@ X= YO =e l (5 NEO ela i 
Rea —S Fn wn_—s* ny 
—sS CS aa | Eh eee 


SS Nes Gree ere 
el EWS ble See 
ee oe rey = US 
IWS hile GS ID DA 
mi MUN SPRAINS 
oor 4d) SFR ay Ss Se Se 
wm seme SO Aare Si 
POA NSN Dra S PES AUN 

Sn Saree Na 
se Demers [2 


4 ! egal Uo eS 

POLAT ee ee 

_ “This great god is towed along by the gods of the 
“Tuat, and those who tow Ra along say:—‘The god 


244 NINTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


“cometh to his body, and the god is towed along to his 
“shadow. O be thou at peace with thy body, and we 
“will tow thee along in thy integrity into thy (literally, 
“his) secret place. Come thou, O Ra, and be thou at 
“peace with thy body, for thou shalt be protected by 
“those who are over the curved ropes (?).’” 

The text which refers to the six men, four 
apes, and four women, with nets over their heads, 
reads :— 

“Those who are in this picture march before Ra, and 
“they utter words of power against ApEP, and [then] 
“return to the Arit (or, Hall) of the horizon. They 
“journey onwards with him into the height of heaven, 
“and they come into being for him in the Arertt 
“(ie, the two portions of the sky in which Ra rises 
“and sets), and they cause him to rise in Nur. And 
“they say their words of power which are these :— Out 
“upon thee, O thou Rebel Serpent! Out upon thee, 
“thou monster that destroyest, thou Apep that sendest 
“forth thy evil emanations (or, deeds)! Thy face shall 
“be destroyed, O Aprp. Thou shalt advance to the: 
“block of execution. _The NEmv are against thee, and 
“they shall hack thee in pieces. The Aatu are against 
“thee, and they shall destroy thee. The Axsgpurrt 
“(ie., the three spearmen) shall drive [their harpoons] 
“into thee, and they shall enchant thee by means of 
“their Hail! Thou art destroyed, dashed in pieces, 
“and stabbed to death, O serpent Szsst.’” 

“Those who are in this scene, and who have their 


THE GODS OF THE SOUTH 245 


“spears, keep ward over the rope of AI, and they do 
“not permit this Worm to approach the boat of the 
“oreat god. They pass: behind this god upwards. 
“These gods who do battle on behalf of this god in 
“heaven say ”:—(The speech is wanting). 





36; ci 


ae) lm poiaan U4 





Gods of the South raising the Standard of the South, 


In the upper register are the following :— 

1. Four gods, who in the place of heads have each a 
crown of the South, to which is affixed a uraeus, upon 
his body, and who, aided by a bearded male figure, are 
engaged in raising up from the ground, by means of a 
rope, a pole or staff, which is surmounted by a bearded 


246 NINTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


human head wearing a crown of the South; the gods 
¥ ” | 
are called “gods of the South, | | th, and the 


bearded male figure “he who is over the front end,” 


lian 
—] ® 
a 


2. Four gods, who in the place of heads have each a 









. 
. 2 
Oe Sela Bimigtiet @ Sig <* “tee, we? 
er ew are e@eet*eget Pre. e? 
e oe eae we aas as = 


Gods of the North raising the Standard of the North, 


crown of the North, to which is affixed a uraeus, upon 
his body, and who, aided by a bearded male figure, are 
engaged in raising up from the ground, by means of a 
rope, a pole or staff, which is surmounted by a bearded 
human head wearing a crown of the North; the gods 


HORUS-SET AND HERU-AM-UAA 247 


are called “gods of the North,” ae and the 


bearded male figure is “he who is over the hind part,” 


>, 


a 
8 Between the two groups described above is 


the hawk - headed 
sphinx which typi- 
fies “Horus in the wt: 
Boat,” = -= “. a: 
Above its hind- 
quarters spring the _ 
head and shoulders 
of a bearded human 
figure called ANA, 


i) 

head of the hawk 
and that of Ana 
is a crown of the 
South. Standing 
on the back of the 
sphinx is the figure ——_ Heru-am-uaa with Set-Horus on his back. 
of Horus-Ser with 

characteristic heads, with his arms outstretched, and 
with each hand laid upon the upper part of the crowns. 
of the South. The hawk head of this figure faces the 
back of the hawk head of the sphinx, and the animal’s 
head, which is characteristic of Set, faces the back of 
the human head of Ana. It is thus quite clear that 


Sea 
~~, and on the 
eT 





248 NINTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


Horus was regarded as a form of the Sun-god of the 
South, and Set as a form of the Sun-god of the North. 


4. The serpent SHEMTI, Ox iN e which has four 


heads and necks at each end of its body, and each head 
and neck are supported on a pair of legs. A male 


figure called Apu, Ww », stands and grasps the 
middle of the body of the serpent with both hands. 
5. The serpent BAra, J l s with a bearded head 


at each end of his body; each head wears a crown of 
the South. Above the back of this serpent is another 
serpent, from each end of the body of which spring the 
upper portions of the bodies and heads of four bearded 
male figures; the first figure of each group has a pair 
of hands and arms which are raised in adoration, and 
each figure of the two groups has a pair of legs, which 
rest on the back of the serpent Bara. A male figure. 
called Aber stands and grasps the middle of the 


body of the serpent Trt, a {d, with both hands. 


6. Two male beings, swinging over their heads a net, 
wherewith they are going to attack the serpent, or to 
resist him. 

The text which refers to the above reads :— 


sore oo Picea ieee 


FS AED 


THE SHEMTI SERPENT 249 


dS ONS edn 
=i Se SFT Ton OBEN 
cat Op eM oe a — 








ria ehiomli Perper ut and his warder Apu 


eee —1@¢\5! 0 singe 

Oo Ab set oR ee 

Df) ew sats O emesy Wie 

Eo aiiae hee Lee Lin ee 
ss My gn SS peek ee 

Ue eS ee 


Pat | SiG ee 


OD awl lt ts 


250 NINTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


(SEUSS? Se EN 2S. 

1222 PU SoRhS A 
Ras os AIS tS 
af erly bd 
HR OPS AIS fo Ae 
Se Sel TRIED 
ole & 2oW Fe QstSse 
Nu ponesaes | Fee pear fo ' 


BS wl a? 


“eS ml pl Jie 28 
Vou PUP Q LIP pus 
2 ZZ Arb eear 


——— lem 

| NBEAN 
——O| | | 

The passage which refers to the gods of the South 
reads :— 


“Those who are in this scene rise up for Ra, who 


THE SERPENTS BATA AND TEPI Z5E 


“saith unto them :—‘ Receive ye your heads, O ye gods, 
“and draw tightly the front end of your rope. Hail, 
“OQ ye gods, come into being! Hail, possess ye the 
“power of light, O ye gods, and come ye into being, O 
“ye gods. Possess ye the power of light, O ye gods, by 









= 2 


ec ewe FILS RE? ee 
. a *) * 5G Sit Oe bd 
: ee Shier ee 
e 
« ef 


The Serpents Bata and Tepi and the warder Abeth. 


“my coming into being in the secret place, and by my 
“power of light in the hidden place (Ament), in the 
«chambers of things.’ ” 

The passage which refers to Horus-Set reads :-— 
“Ra maketh to arise this god. This god with his 


«two faces goeth in after Ra hath passed by him.” 


252 NINTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


The passage which refers to the gods of the North 
reads :— 

“Ra saith unto them:—‘Let your heads be to 
“you, O ye gods! Receive ye your crowns of 
“the North, and pull ye tightly at the hinder 
“end of the boat of him that cometh into being 
“from me. Behold now Horus of the handsome 
“Face!’” 

The passage which refers to the serpent SHEMTI 
reads :— 

“ He who is in this picture strideth through the secret 
“place, and he withdraweth to Qa-TEMT, the Hall (or, 
“Court) of Ament. Those who are in it are the heads 
“which have been devoured, and they breathe the 
“odour of Suemti, of which Aru is the warder.” 

The passage which refers to the serpent BATA 
reads :— 

“He who is in this picture maketh his rising up for 
“Sar, and he keepeth count of the souls which are 
“doomed in the Tuat. He strideth through the secret 
“place, and he withdraweth to TESERT-BAIU, to the 
“Hall (or, Court) of Ament; then TEPI entereth into 
“BATA. Those who are in it are they whose heads 
“have been devoured. They breathe the odour of 
“ BATA, of which Aseru is the guardian.” 

The passage which refers to the two gods with nets 
reads :— 

“These are the gods who make use of words of 
“power for Horus-Ra in Ament. [They have power] 


THE GODS WITH 


NETS 253 


“over the net, and they make use of words of power on 
“those who are in the net[s] which are in their hands.” 


In the lower register are :— 
1. Sixteen gods, who stand at one end of the scene, 


and grasp a rope with both hands. 


are bearded, man- 
headed beings, and 
are said to be “ the 
souls of Ament,” 


ee i 
AN ! Ri OLA” 
the second four 
are ibis - headed, 


and are “the fol- 
lowers of Thoth,” 


ties 


the third 
are hawk-headed, 
and are “the fol- 
lowers of Horus,” 


tS ie. 


and the last four 





The first four 






{ene 
ig ee 
LAUDE 


syne: 


or 


= 





Two gods with nets, 


are ram-headed, and are “the followers of Ra,” 


B18 Z. 


2. Eight bearded, man-headed beings, who stand at 
the other end of the scene in two groups of four, and 


who are described as “ Powers,” Y © IN 4 » al Kj 4 


254 NINTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


each grasps a rope with both hands. The rope which 
is held by these groups of beings is attached to the 


legs of the enormous serpent KHEPRI, ra QQ {| 


This serpent has a head at each end of its body, 
the foremost part of which is supported on a pair 
of human legs; from each end of that portion of its 
body which lies flat on the ground springs a uraeus. 
On the centre fold of the body is seated a hawk, which 


wears on its head the double crown, Y. This hawk 
is the symbol of “Horus of the Tuat,” Heru tuati 
cae es 


AW 
The text which refers to this section of the scene 


reads :— 


mri NSS ks 
me SiS |wSl Sos, 


PRPS son [See ene 1 


ieee Oe be 


atl RSS Tbe 
S27 \elbs Smate 
TP Wes NEE AS Sly 
Wee rem 


THE TOWERS OF KHEPRI 255 


Ca AN = 
=9nS7Kes 
SS Ol D Ges = eS 


lai bere ee 
Mela SIFT RSS ee 


— aes ISS carr Cf Aas Ch 
Seed secie dient 
SHEUNE asst 


— i A) ot @ 





MSMR 





Seaae aR and the Followers of Thoth who A OER, 


= RE AS LING 
eee ey | 
Rho or 2zZE| 
Ogee ode I> NS 


256 NINTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


SSL Wma Ss 


NA ae A 11 1© |m = 
a Ee ea l_— LS ee 
= _—=_++ I4fiics Wa lt p~ososoy* 


AS Sn ASI Sh 


Lol | Goss? | www 2) J 


JR XGe d=. 

nl 

ow = Ae 
yaa 








“Those who are in this scene have the rope in their 
“hands, and it is fastened to the leg[s] of Kurpri, who 
“moveth backwards to the Hall of their horizon. They 
“draw this rope with the god into their horizon, and 
“they tow him along in the sky (Nut). They live upon 
“the things of the South, and their sustenance is from 
. “the things of the North, [and they exist] on that which 


KHEPRI AND HORUS OF THE TUAT 257 


“cometh forth from the mouth of Ra. The voice of 
“this serpent KHEPRI goeth round about and travelleth 
“into the secret place after Ra hath entered into the 
“height of heaven.” 

The four groups, each containing four beings, “say 
“unto Ra:—‘ Come, O come, after thy transformations ! 
“Come, O Ra, after thy transformations! Appear, 


Ita a $17 eet hlt 
we Re Dene, 
aae ye See Ms 8S 





ry Tee or 

eee ts 3 a cea weet wce Me 

eae eo ot a aS AC Be Seees® $s 
% a ew 





The Serpent Khepri and Horus of the Tuat, 


“appear, after thy transformations! Appear, O Ra, 

“after thy transformations in heaven, in the great 

“heaven! Hail! We decree for thee thy habitations 

“Dy the excellence which is in the words of the Mighty 
“One of Forms in the secret (or, hidden) place.’” 

The passage which refers to Horus reads :— 

-« He who is in this scene is HErvu Tvarti (i.e., Horus 

VOL. IL s 


258 NINTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


“of the Tuat). The head cometh forth from him, 
“and the forms [in which he appeareth] from the 
“coiled [serpent]. Ra crieth unto this god to whom 
“the two divine URAEI unite themselves; he entereth 
“in upon the way into Kuepri, who listeneth when Ra 
“erieth to him.” 






The two groups, each containing four beings, “have 
=a" man TS BP SE tp Ae 4 @ 


QT, os 
21 = = & eo. 








Pe Ce 


The Eight Powers who tow Khepri, 


“in their hands the rope which is fastened to the foot 
“of Kuepri, and they say to Ra:—‘The ways of the 
“hidden place are open to thee, and [the portals] which 
“are in the earth are unfolded for thee, the Sou which 
“Nut loveth, and we will guide thy wings to the moun- 
“tain. Hail! Enter thou into the East, and make thou 
“thy passage from between the thighs of thy mother.’” 


(> 259.) 


CHAPTER XII. 
THE GATE OF SETHU. 
THE TENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT. 


HAVING passed through the Ninth Division of the Tuat, 
the boat of the sun arrives at the gateway TCHESERIT, 


LZ Qq io , which leads to the Tenth Division, or, 
eS} 


as the opening text reads: A [VS J cena l 
SS Cees || as RRO 

O Fp ea Se 1 Oe as 
WWW o—1 1 SA ISRAAANG AAAI EA NAANAA meee LIAR 


1 as | ud + ! ——, “This great god cometh 


“forth to this gate, and entereth through it, and the 
. “gods who are therein acclaim the great god.” The 
gateway is like that through which the god passed into 
the previous Division, and its outwork is guarded by 
sixteen urael. At the entrance to the gate proper 
stands a bearded, mummied form called Nem, (0), 
who holds a knife in his hands, and at its exit stands 
a similar mummied form called KeErt, QQ. The 


corridor is swept by flames of fire, which proceed from 
the mouths of two uraei, as before. The uraei which 


260 TENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


guard the outwork address Ra, and say, “ Come thou to 
“ug, O thou who art at the head of the horizon, O thou 
“great. god who openest the secret place, open thou 
“the holy pylons and unfold the portals of the earth,” 


CN a er — Cx Ur © Ii 
=e 2 | Veet 


ww SA} e==, The monster serpent which 


*. 


40 





The Boat of Af-Ra in the Tenth Division of the Tuat, 


stands on his tail and guards the door is called SETHU, 
| @? and the two lines of text which refer to his 


admission of Ra read:—“He who is over this gate 
“openeth to Ra. SA saith unto SETHU, ‘Open thy 
“gate, unfold thy portal, so that he may illumine the 
“thick darkness, and may send light into the hidden 
“abode. This gate closeth after the great god hath 





S 8% oe cok Fee. ewe 
e pe o° Ol, er roe e om ° 
BO AeSR Cre een ee Sth Sere ees Et 
= i 
hia 
C4 @! 
=O, 
ay 
ry) ° 
° 


Z : 


i, 


i. 
Ed 


\o 


The Gate of the Serpent Sethu. 


HICSS Ave) 


a0 





“SHE ISN 


i 


NS: 
a 


(TASES evar rel 


262 TENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


“passed through it, and the uraei who are on the other 
“side of it wail when they hear it closing upon them,” 


22 lo cme OM PM Se SS 


lS) NS ee 


Ses Q | te Se] Oo 8 ht 
O0CGAALN NK ORS I 


ile ets Nene 


In the middle of this Division we see the boat of the 
sun hee towed on its way by four gods of the Tuat, 
ane 
AW! 
boat is piloted by Sa, who commands, and by HEKa, 

who steers according to his directions. 
The procession in front of the boat of the sun 
consists of :— 


the god is in the same form as before, and his 


1. A bearded male figure called Unrt, me 8k ; 


ie., the “god of the hour,” who holds a star in ee 
hand. 


2. Four kneeling ‘gods, each with a uraeus over his 
head. The first is Horus, ING hawk-headed; the 
second is SEREQ, a {| bearded, and wearing a wig; 
the third is ABESH, bearded and without a wig; and 


the fourth is SEKHET, ‘an with the head of a 
lioness. 


THE GODS WHO LIGHT THE SKY 263 
| 


3. Three bearded beings, the “ Star-gods,” QQ I 


each holding a star in his right hand, which is stretched 
aloft, and with his left towing a small boat containing 
the “ Face of the Disk.” 

4. A small boat holding a uraeus, which has the 
latter part of its body bent upwards; within the curve 


is the “Face of the Disk,” } l Meee 


5. The winged serpent SEMI, standing on its tail, 
with its body in folds. 


6. The bearded figure Bust, J | 4, receiving in his 


hand the flame which spouts up from the head of a 
horned animal, which forms the top of a staff, and is 
transfixed by a knife. 


et AWW 
7. The serpent ANKHI, ; © (4, from each side of 


the neck of which grows a bearded, mummy figure. 
8. Four women, each with both hands raised in 


adoration; they are described as “ Criers,” 4 ut a |. 


9. Two bows, set end to end, =~, on each of 
which three uraei rear their heads. Standing over the 
place where the two ends of the bows meet, with a foot 
on the end of each, is the two-headed figure Horus- 
Set, with two pairs of hands, one pair on each side 
of his body, raised in adoration. Horvs-SET is called 


“he of the two heads,” =, and the two bows are 


“the Crown of the Uraei,” roa l 0 hr \\e 


264 TENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


The text which refers to the above groups reads :— 
a DS. ee l NON suiting) 


eee bea TOL Ne ee 


SC wn LASS 
Jp Terese ooo 0) 
wwl® Ii | 7 oS ee 
re ran of ca ren @y SHUI as ony IN 
mC | Se ee (aja 


See =TMale 
TATE Sa 


pee iar ae =e con ne 


2 es 


(= (Ol) A 


wax i Mf wa-—— @ So IS 
nes cay ee i 
sain soul <= |e aoe EL ee 
Se a) @ MIS rm GHD Oe Oo 

aie fooe); 122 | 


elrs 22h ASA in SS 
Revont he Apa oA a i 
ty seh Maer 
Met NC and PLES SS Pe 


ern TINS ao MU GSIAW A 


THE GODS WHO LIGHT THE SKY 265 


| em Ne 


2 am NE i at 


a Rao Aes 
— : ae —_ nn Oe Bia sy Gi 

“This great god is towed along by the gods of the 
“Tuat, and those who tow Ra along say :— We are 
“towing Ra along, we are towing Ra along, and Ra 
“followeth [us] into Nut. O have the mastery over 
“thy Face, indeed thou shalt unite thyself to thy Face, 
“O Ra, [by] Maat. Open, O thou Face of Ra, and let 
“the two Eyes of Khuti enter into thee; drive away 
“thou the darkness from Amentet. Let him give light 
“by what he hath sent forth, the light.’” 

Of the god with stars it is said :— 

“He maketh a rising up for Ra (or, he stablisheth 
“Ra), Untr maketh to be light the upper heaven ; this 
“god leadeth the hour, which performeth that which 
“belongeth to it to do.” 

Of the four seated gods it is said :— 

“The [four] serpents who are in the earth, keep ward 
“over those who are in this picture. They make a 
“rising up for Ra, and they sit upon the great image(s 
“which are] under them, and they pass onwards with 
“them in the following of Ra, together with the hidden 
“images which belong to them.” 


266 TENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


Of the three gods who hold stars it is said :— 

“Those who are in this picture sing hymns with 
“their stars, and they grasp firmly the bows of their 
“boat, [and it] entereth into Nut. And this Face of 
“Ra moveth onwards, and saileth over the land, and 
“those who are in the Tuat sing hymns to it, and make 
“Ra to stand up (ie., establish Ra).” 

Of the winged serpent SEMI it is said :— 

“[{It maketh a rising up for Ra], and it guideth the 





Gods of Light and Fire. Star-gods. Face of the Disk, Semi. 


“Well-doing god into the Tuat of the horizon of the 
“ Kast.” 

Of the god BEs! it is said :— 

“He maketh a rising up for Ra, and he placeth fire 
“on the head and horns (or, [in] his hands is the fire 
“from the head and horns), and the weapon which is in 
“the hand of the Fighter is in the follower of this god.” 

Of the vraeus with the double male figure it is 
said :— 

“It maketh a rising up for Ra. The stablishing of 


MEHEN AND HORUS-SET 267 


“Time which is reckoned in writing by years is with 
“this uraeus, and it maketh it to go with him into the 
“heights of heaven.” 

Of the “Criers” it is said :— 

“Those who cry unto Ra say, ‘Enter in, Ov Far 
“Hail, come, O Ra! Hail, come, O thou who art born 
“of the Tuat! Come, O offspring of the heights of 
“heaven! Hail, come thou into being, O Ra!’” 









[ 
rye 





—? 
bor a red 
— 





Tlie 
i 


(HITHESE 
pte 

a 
ae 


® 
me 





a 1 
— > 
eis 


Besi, Ankhi. The goddesses who hail the god. Mehen and Horus-Set. 


Of the double bow it is said :— 

“This is the MEHEN serpent of the uraci, which 
“strideth through the Tuat. The two bows are 
“stretched out, and they bear up on themselves him of 
“the Two-Faces (or, Two-Heads, ie., Horus-Set) in his 
“mystery which [appertaineth] to them. They lead 
“the way for Ra in the horizon of the east of heaven, 
“and they pass on into the heights of heaven in his 


“train.” 


268. TENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


In the upper register are :— 


1. The four Antiv gods, l es: \ e each of whom 


holds a knife in his right hand, and a short staff with 
one end curved and curled in his left. 


2. The four HENATIU gods, g W a Ql ie each 


having four uraei in the place of a head; they are 
armed with weapons similar to those of the ANTIU gods. 





The Antiu and Henatiu Gods attacking Apep. 


3. The undulating length of the serpent Apzp, eae 
of whom it is said, “his voice goeth round the Twat,” 
eg ae 
tes Me 
monster is a very long chain, which rises in an oval 
curve, and, passing along through the hands of sixteen 
male figures, is then grasped and held down by a large 
hand, from which it again rises in an oval curve, and 


passing on for some distance descends into the earth 


Attached to the neck of the 


THE CHILDREN OF HORUS FETTER APEP 269 


immediately in front of Khenti-Amenti. On the first 
curve of the chain, lying flat on her face, is the goddess 


Serq. Of the sixteen bearded figures who grasp the chain 
with both hands, four are called SETEFIU, “<= lQ , 
and face to the left; the twelve are described as the 


“TCHATIU gods, strong of arm,” Tf] \An= A » 


| . . The right hand which grasps and pulls down 
Saal, 
the chain is called “ Hippen Bopy,” ale! I. 


Lengthwise on the second curve of the great chain 
lean the upper portions of the figures of five gods, 
each of whom grasps the chain with his right hand, 
and holds in his left a sceptre and the end of a 
chain which fetters a serpent in coils. The name of 
the first serpent is UAMEMTI, £) = (a, but of the 


remaining four no names are given. The five gods 
appear to grow out of the great chain, and are called 


| TE 
SEB, S J, MEST, ee Harti, - Qd, TUAMUTEF, 


* aS , and (QEBHSENNUF, ea a=, At the end 
of this section of the scene stands the bearded 
mummied figure of Kuenti-AMENTI, wearing the White 
Grown and the mendat, and holding the sceptre { in his 
two hands. 

The text which refers to these groups reads :— 

—4+— 4 NN 

Srl 2 | O ne in 

ee <> Tl www farses OF ee 


270 TENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 
Re Nan ey R (ae ee eS, 
S111ion | a \\--0!lllolltiooc : 
IE ae areca ES WINS ae Fe) gE ws 
CN eS ae ee AO) ie ee S IAM OO). || 
eee 

aes lele rn oe 7 wR ELS eT 
RANENS ean (xy (@) oa ee @ = 
te O Sx an oO A= Nc 


Oo € docu sel Rm el 2 || 


jo oer I> Se ae 


Xa [1] Cas ea Oe 
4 —> © C2 El Ann me Minh ce i 


eRe tie Se l> 


Hele of aS Sa 
Age Seo | oe ee 


TW mom Ko VR, J- Dl Se 


PSM Se hl JS hh Sek 
oan) FSS Sass 
gee iHe ie = 


Q ass tha Cah << EB i 


fA sl ccndlsencseaay mee | a a BX 


—————7, 


THE SETEFIU GODS 271 


woe | el SST A 
2 apa 
Mee tee SO Serna) 
~ ye hE pe daa 













Home eet 
ST PUAN TAAMAQUCLTAULGKG 


The Setefiu and other gods holding Apep in restraint. 


Of the eight gods (ie., the Antru and HENnATtv) it is 
said :— 

“Those who are in this picture rise up (or, stand) for 
“Ra, and Ra riseth and cometh forth for them, [and 
“they say], ‘Rise, Ra, be strong, Khuti; verily we will 
“overthrow Apep in his fetters. Approach not thou, 
“QO Ra, towards thine enemy, and thine enemy shall 
“not approach thee; may thy holy attributes come 
“into being within the serpent. The serpent Apep is 


272 TENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


“stabbed with his knives, and gashes are inflicted on 
“him. Ra shall stand up in the hour wherein he is 
“content (or, the hour of peace), and the great god 


“shall pass on in strength when his chain (ie., Apep’s) 
“is fixed.’ ” 


“The reptile (literally, worm) who is in this picture 
“breaketh asunder the fetters, and the boat of this 
“great god beginneth [to move] towards the region 






oe Se 
irate 9 thie 


ut 





td ia 


fut ak oy i 


Seb and the Children of Horus holding Apep and his gons in restraint, 


“of Apep; this great god travelleth on after he .e55 


“ Apep) hath been put in restraint by means of his 
“ fetters.” 


Of the four SETEFIU gods it is said :— 

“Those who are in this picture grasp the fetters of 
“the being of two-fold evil, and they say to Ra, ‘Come 
“forward, Ra, pass onwards, Khuti. Verily fetters 


“have been laid upon Newa-urd, and Apep is in his 
“bonds.’ ” 







THE GODDESSES OF THE HOURS 273 


Of the twelve other gods who grasp the chain it is 
said :— 

“Those who are in this picture [act] as warders of 
“the sons of the helpless one, and they keep guard 
“over the deadly chain which is in the Hipp—en Hann, 
“for the dead bodies are placed with the things [which 
“belong to them] in the circuit of the battlements of 
“Kuenti-Amenti. And these gods say, ‘Let darkness 
“be upon thy face, O UAmemmTi, and ye shall be 
“destroyed, O ye sons of the helpless one, by the 
“ HIDDEN Hann, which shall cause evils [to come upon 
“you] by the deadly chain which is in it. Ses keepeth 
“ward over your fetters, and the sons of the fetters 
“(e., Mest, Hapi, Tuamutef, and Qebhsennuf) put 
“upon you the deadly chain. Keep ye [your] ward 
“under the reckoning of Kuenti-AmMENTI.’” 

Of the children of Horus it is said :— 

“Those who are in this picture make heavy the 

“fetters of the sons of the helpless one, and the boat of 
“the Well-doing God travelleth on its way.” 

In the lower register are :— 

1. Twelve male beings, each of whom carries a 
paddle; they are called “gods who never diminish,” 


| | () =A 

Tide Nk 
2. Twelve female beings, each of whom grasps a rope 
with both hands; above the head of eachisastar. They 
are called the “hours who tow along [the boat of Ra],” 
Se x —& Mel. 

620 Ile Cat 

VOL. IL yi 


274 TENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 

3. The god Bantt, Je, with the head of a 
cynocephalus ape, holding a sceptre, 

4, The god SESHSHA, | d, man-headed, with a 

om 

star above him, holding a sceptre, e 

5. The god Ka-Amenti, (J te bull-headed, and 
holding a sceptre, e 


—aioe Ae ay VT a 
week es VAS a en 
SS men a tet 


3S ae 





The Twelve Akhemu-Seku Gods with their Paddles, 


6. The god RENEN-SBAU, mw | “ man-headed, with 


a star above him, holding a sceptre, ‘ 


7. A monkey, with a star over his head, standing on 
a bracket, “fF; he is called the “god of Rethenu” 


snin JS 


8. A bracket, whereon rests the Utchat, — 


THE AKHEMU-SEKU GODS 275 


9, A god called HER-NEST-F, = ae ja, 
te el 
holding a sceptre. 
The text which refers to the above reads :— 


SNS AGF Se BA 
Ti Fes g fae = ED Arcs ee sue 


nm & \\ © <> 


once 1“— lege oe Sie a 1 | 
ans Chea aan Sirk Se OPANe 
ee kT da oS 
SEN ER AR Aout 


Pri ee mr Pie mit 


YRS enh im FS EY 
li iain 
ee ea 
Bic Me Stimios ett led 
es (OS) ae rmibsen ir 
cell erm irie- PH Es en 
WS aR Se Bde a 


ites | Et pon |e (lee ee 


a 


Balin 


276 TENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 
Wi@-Sti a. = 
ene 1 Ee Lola la 


exe 1 | asete | ee 


~<— eee a 
bhp cee is (Va 0}. 

Of the twelve gods (the AKHEMU SEKU) it is said :— 

“Those who are in this picture make a rising up for 
“Ra, and they take their paddles in this Circle of 
“Unti They come into being of their own accord at 
“the seasons when Ra is born in Nut; they come into 
“being for the births of Ra, and they make their 
“appearance in Nu along with him. It is they who 
“transport this great god after he hath taken his place 
“jin the horizon of the East of heaven. Ra saith unto 
“them:—‘Take ye your paddles and unite ye your- 
“selves to your stars. Your coming into being taketh 
“place when [I] come into being, and your births take 
“place when my births take place. O ye beings who 
“transport me, ye shall not suffer diminution, O ye 
“gods AKHEMU SEKU.’” 

Of the twelve goddesses of the hours it is said :— 

“Those who are in this scene take hold of the rope 
“of the boat of Ra to tow him along into the sky. It 
“is they who tow Ra along, and guide him along the 
“roads into the sky, and behold, they are the goddesses 
“who draw along the great god in the Tuat. Ra saith 


THE GODDESSES OF THE HOURS 2997 


“unto them:—‘Take ye the rope, set ye yourselves in 
“position, and pull ye me, O my followers, into the 
“height of heaven, and lead ye me along the ways. 
“My births make you to be born, and behold, my 
“coming into being maketh you to come into being. 
“© stablish ye the periods of time and years for him 
“who is among you.’” 

1. “The god who is in this picture adjureth the 


a 


qin tery iigecilk 
feu Lilees ets Fie 
BCE Moe ear IS 
* hee ok Kk KOK 


{A ANE Cte i { (Mat 


> = Ti . 
CRA ° . cic fae 
fa ee 
3 Cee 
« 











The Twelve Goddesses of the Hours, 


‘i pylons to open to Ra, and he goeth on his way by his 
ese.” 

2. “The god who is in this picture crieth out to the 
“stars concerning the births of this great god, and he 
“goeth on his way with them.” 

3. “The god who is in this picture crieth to the gods 
“of the Boat of Ra, and he goeth on his way with 


him." 
4. “The god who is in this picture setteth the stars 


278 TENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


“in their places (literally, towns), and he goeth on his 
“way with the great god.” 

The above four paragraphs must refer to the four 
gods Banti, Sesusaa, Ka-AmENT, and RENEN-SBAU, 
and therefore the god of Rethenu, the Utchat, and the 
god HER-NEST-F remain without descriptions. From 
the tomb of Rameses VI. M. Lefébure adds the two 


ae NS SRS) ee ieee 
—sh'¢ Soe tals oeSt thls My erik 
Hees fly Val ptm ree Tig es Lies 
= t+h I mm Sxpeq 9 P—— AN gh ena >? 
litailla ince sid aol) 2 CE OSS r 
* x moxk ——_ By 8 

NNN: )\ <aSRe 

= ar 

a f os 


tet fe et 


° 
fais 

on 98 
Cred 
“ 











Banti. Seshsha, Ka- Renen- Neter- Eye of Ra. Her-nest-f, 
Amenti, sbau, Rethen, ‘ 


following paragraphs which concern the Utchat and 
HER-NEST-F, —> — eos 
| ee 
“This is the Eye of Ra, which the god uniteth to 
“himself, and it rejoiceth in its place in the boat.” 
“This is he who openeth the door of this Circle; he 
“remaineth in his position, and doth not go on his way 


“with Ra.” 


(=279))) 


CHAPTER XIII. 
THE GATE OF AM-NETU-F. 

Tue ELEVENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT. 
Havina passed through the Tenth Division of the 
Tuat, the boat of the sun arrives at the gateway 
SHETAT-BESU, == _ Ji - , which leads to the 

( astice be 
Eleventh Division, or, as the opening text reads : 
— 3 Seal eee 

J S a l ‘| ae Zee iB S a l 
<> DQ pwn Www AVA ——= Qa ww www 
eee lt eile 

AWWW 4 ws AWWW Wl | 
“foreat] god cometh forth to this gate, this great god 
“entereth through it, and the gods who are therein 
“acclaim the great god.” The gateway is like that 
through which the god passed into the previous 
Division; at the entrance to the gate proper stands 
a bearded, mummied form called METES, =a ~~, 
and at its exit stands a similar form called SHETAU, 


S. The corridor is swept by flames of fire, 
aD 


which proceed from the mouths of two uraei, as before. 
In the space which is usually guarded by a number 


280" ELEVENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


of gods stand two sceptres, TAs each of which is 
surmounted by a White Crown; the one on the right 


is the symbol of Osiris, © (Sar), and the other of 
= 


Horvs, \- Between the sceptres is a line of text, 


which reads:—“They say to Ra, ‘[Come] in peace! 
“{Come] in peace! [Come] in peace! [Come] in peace! 
“O thou whose transformations are manifold, thy soul 
“is in heaven, thy body is in the earth. It is thine 

a ina eased a 


(74 : ” 
own command, O ereat one ee a oe 
es Oke APT) © 2S aoa 


| SS) S48 S 8 SS 
cL \\— Ls bee 
The monster serpent which stands on his tail and 
3 I et 
guards the door is called AM-NETU-?, +} st * =a 
and the two lines of text which refer to his admission 
of Ra read :—* He who is over this door openeth to Ra. 
“Sav saith to AM-NETU-r, ‘Open thy gate to Ra, unfold 
“thy portal to Kuurt, so that he may illumine the - 
“thick darkness, and may send light into the hidden 
“abode.” This gate closeth after the great god hath 
“passed through it, and the gods who are on the battle- 
“ments wail when: they hear it closing upon them,” 


Hn 4 OG) | NWA AWWA Pr 
SF Ss to eee 
AWM TOT “TOIT pnnaay SEQ 2 11 1 UW it CG 


SA Aa TT Oo vs eo © -~Ss =F 


jieineeter : earirees 


4 


°. 
"Cees eat 


SCPC TPO aSOOSOSCD CCPC CCT SESS OPE ESEDS COLES HZIDOD GO OIEBESOEF 


TMT Soo TCE 


Wiha 





The Gate! of the Serpent Am-netu-f, 


282 ELEVENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 
aw Wa jes | Oto 
ny caer | a As =a\ oo 


ee ali alee = ohio hals te 


In the middle of this Division we see the boat of the 
sun ee towed on its way by four gods of the Tuat, 


mort 1; the god is in the same form as before, and his 





The Boat of Af-Ra in the Eleventh Division of the Tuat, 


boat is piloted by Sa, who commands, and by HEKA, ° 
who steers according to his directions. 

The procession in front of the boat of the sun 
consists of :— 

1. A company of nine gods, each holding a huge 


knife in his right hand, and a scepire, (, in his left; 


the first four have jackal heads, and the last five heads 
of bearded men. These nine beings represent the 


THE SLAUGHTERERS OF APEP 283 

« ipep” Ofll A | 

oe of the gods who slay APEP, HN 
By 


. te uM. 

2. The ei ee fettered by five chains which 
enter the ground; the fetters are further strengthened 
by small chains, which are linked to the larger ones, 
and are fastened to the ground by means of pegs with 


a hook at the top, |. In an earlier picture we have 





= nest gee ae 
thay tL eel ee © 
ee ee JU pam 0 Ae | Lg 

> sane Te] SD Ab Sy © A Oboe 
on ber i awe @ | i (ote 
Ee A Qe ec gc, es 


f_} 
= > 
a 


(ae 16 (\ 
‘K NA AYAYA AID 


The Slaughterers of Apep. 


seen ApEp fettered by Seb, Mest, Hapi, Tuamutef, and 
Qebhsennuf, who were represented by five gods, but 
here the figures of the gods are wanting, and it is only 


the legend “ Children of Horus,” () ! i al : , that tells 
us the chains represent the gods. 
3. Four Apes, » al k each holding up a huge 


’ hand and wrist. 


284 ELEVENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


4. The goddess of Upper Egypt, wearing the White 
Crown, and styled AMENTI, it 
5. The goddess of Lower Egypt, wearing the Red 


Crown, and called Hertr, NG QQ =o" 


6. The bearded god SEBEKHTI, Jor” © \ who holds 
the emblem of “life” in his right aay and a sceptre 


in his left. 
The text which refers to the above gods reads :— 


ee | Se OOOR Re | 
NW 


\\ | 
te SiS eS a SS sw YU | 


@ ~—1 © 555 —_A a meth, O a. ako A 
1 —0A\\ eA A law eA ee BS) CE ava 


Gps s4 MST WS 


oon Se = BI yi e= E> 6 tne 
Qa WW Le HI ie a o) © (pote 


err Al Sle tip I 
Robs Foom AS Se 
epee eae Pepe | 
DUT NSH seems OF o 
S hn ined a NO 


THE ENEMIES OF APEP 285 


ete oe 8 Oe 


ieee aa 


ae 2 bh hs eel 
ZO i atone Sled 
Salas 


[EEN Tea @ .b & oe Ea | OCD wy 

pee aa aw Tie <<) alia 
eee ia aa fal 2 .\\ ww NW 
x Ma ot a NC pawn Loh Lee 


Adds = =e eee 


lel recor oe ae == 
% ill a & ae ay Ags =i |. 

Of the gods of the Tuat oe tow the boat of Ra it is 
said :— 

“The gods of the Tuat say, ‘Behold the coming 
“forth [of Ra] from Ament, and [his] taking up [his] 
“place in the two divisions of Nu, and [his] perform- 
“ance of [his] transformations on the two hands of Nu. 
“This god doth not enter into the height of heaven, 


1 Supplied from Champollion, Monuments, tom. ii., p. 587. 


286 ELEVENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


“[but] he openeth [a way through] the Tuat into the 
“height of heaven by his transformations which are in 
“Nu. Now, what openeth the Tuat into Nut (i.e., the 
“sky) are the two hands of AMEN-REN-F (i.e., he whose 
“name is hidden). He existeth in the thick darkness, 
“and light appeareth [there] from the starry night.’ ” 

Of the nine gods with knives and sceptres it is 
said :— 

“Those who are in this scene [with] their weapons 
“in their hand take their knives and hack [with them] 

‘“at Apep; they make gashes in him and slaughter 
“him, and they drive stakes whereby to fetter him in 
“the regions which are in the upper height. The 
“fetters of the REBEL are in the hands of the Children 
“of Horus, who stand threateningly by this god 
“with their chains between their fingers. This god 
“reckoneth up his members after he whose arms are 
“hidden hath opened [the door] to make a way for Ra.” 

Of the serpent Apep it is said:— 

“The Children of Horus grasp firmly this serpent 
“which is in this picture, and in this picture they rest 
“in Nut (ie., the sky). . They heap their fetters upon 
“him, and whilst his folds (?) are in the sky his poison 
“drops down from him into Amentet.” 

Of the four apes holding hands it is said :-— 

“Tt is those who are in this picture who make ready 
“for Ra a way into the eastern horizon of heaven, and 
“they lead the way for the god who hath created them 
“with their hands, [standing] two on the right hand 


APEP IN FETTERS 287 


“and two on the left in the double dtert of this god; 
“then they come forth after him, and sing praises to 
“hig soul when it looketh upon them, and they stablish 
“his Disk.” 

Of the three remaining deities it is said :— 

“Those who are in this picture turn away SET from 
“this Gate [of the god Tuatr. They open its cavern, 





Apep fettered by the chains of Seb and the Children of Horus, 


“and stablish the hidden pylons, and their souls remain 
“in the following of Raj.” 

In the upper register of this Division are :— 

1. Four gods, each holding a disk in his right hand ; 


3 gee a A | | 
these are “they who hold light-giving disks, » | 


as | 


288 ELEVENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


2. Four gods, each holding a star in his right hand ; 
these are “they who hold stars,” » 1x], 
— act 


3. Four gods, each holding a sceptre, i in his left 


hand; these are “they who come forth,” QQ > A. 
—— 


4. Four ram-headed gods, each holding a sceptre in 


pawn rem >! 
—— ro Ft tt Aina MA 
eee & 31 SS es 
o @6—— 
Le er 
i A awn JX ann 
—_ = CIA ge i aww an 








The Apes who praise Ra, Amenti. Herit. Sebekhti. 


his left hand; their names are Ba, a, KHNEMU, ; 


= —— 
Penter, , and TENT, ww, 
‘ nw —— TS ees 
5. Four hawk-headed gods, each holding a sceptre in 


his left hand; these are called Horus, NG ASHEMTH 


XK. =, SEPT, \, and AmMtI-vAA-F, | ++ \ os 


2 


THE GODS OF THE DAWN 289 


6. Eight female figures, each seated on a seat formed 
by. a uraeus with its body coiled up, and holding a 
star in her left hand; these are called “the protecting 


hours,” mn fh ne | é 
7. A crocodile-headed god called SEBEK-Ra, who 
grasps a fold of a serpent that stands on its tail in his 


right hand, and a sceptre in his left. 
The text which refers to these reads :— 


ee | PA Ss See 
Oe OC Sag Need 


" HS ile Jae oeee 


“SNL Seer 


aos A Ba Da jess Lt Oia A 


DOO OR Timm QR kK mg ie @ — |o 
Aa 1 Aas! 1 | WhhhaAati][]=-~>-e4 


Soria ASL 
a Olt tsa >{ Sw i ——— pees nt 


ios = (Se So 
Reo ALS 
elniTi—airt = Mmm lg afin 


Wo Sis PSs SUS St 


VOL. ILI. U 


290 ELEVENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


cee Se FPS SiS eS 








i ere aN | a ee <= 
\ boss 

— Va se i 18 "N\ 8 Ea a | 

AN Iran aloo ca &, pie: 

NW RANA Cy 

Ve ho ee es 

| aes ere Se) 

(OF Sap mmm (SNE N Se 

bea Va mesa l(t 










x rf oe 7. 
oe . 
et eee et sre cte em iS e re eece 

<6 ate ete te Co Fa pe pe ce re ete 
BBs Vere ate cece? iq Ces e” os ee 
© oe eBsen es sp ae ria oe @ae® 






The gods who bring Disks and Stars for Ra. 


—) ay 
ax = mi | a eae oO rine J) Sik. 
NVA NVA AS mom 


HVC 9a) ee \\ awn 
AWWW + 1d. —— 9 =a 
ae Raat , ESE, 
si aX 2 WA Re 
leat CE Sal ess <= i ey Weary 


I a | S405 AWA Gee) 


THE GODS OF THE DAWN 291 


Of the four gods bearing disks it is said :— 

“Those who are in this picture carry the disk of Ra, 
‘and it is they who make a way through the Tuat and 
“the height of heaven by means of this image which is 
“in their hands. They utter words to the Pylon of 
« Akert so that Ra may set himself in the body of Nut 
“(ie., the sky).” 

Of the four gods bearing stars it is said :— 





Powe, ate Sig 6 eee 


. Po 7reuwees ° 
ete ° ee 27 
se ee Se hiee aie see eee a ee SS IG = aie Pee Fe ° aes 
COS Oe By Oe ers e.g ee ote ee ts fue Cee oe e 
e etete < ootes 2 oe ° or oe 
CeO < Oat 4 o* 44 ¢ ree 





e e oF ee 
OBOE ORS 
oe os REI EO 


> aa y wm am | [oes ee em 98 
Sy Se ej t! Wes 
cae ri ae SY OS Se ot Ne ON 
enw wun of | seman 9 ova. ¢° 4st 


The gods;who prepare the Offerings and Shrine of Ra, 


“Those who are in this picture carry stars, and 
“when the two arms of Nu embrace Ra they and their 
“stars shout hymns of praise, and they journey on 
“with him to the height of heaven, and they take up 
“their places in the body of Nut.” 

Of the four gods bearing sceptres it is said :— 

“Those who are in this picture [having] their 
“sceptres in their hands, are they who stablish the 


292 ELEVENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


“domains of this god in the sky, and they have 
“their thrones in accordance with the command of 
“Ra.” 

Of the four ram-headed gods it is said :— 

“Those who are in this picture [having] their 
“sceptres in their hands, are they who decree [the 
“making ready] of the offerings of the gods [from] the 
“bread of heaven, and it is they who make to come 
“forth celestial water when as yet Ra hath not emerged 
anu. 

Of the four hawk-headed gods it is said :— 

“Those who are in this picture [having] their 
“sceptres in their hands, are they who stablish the 
“shrine [in the boat of Ra], and they lay their hands 
“on the body of the double boat of the god after it 
“hath appeared from out of the gate of Sma, and they 
“place the paddles [of the boat] in Nut, when the 
“Hour which presideth over it (ie., the boat) cometh 
“into being, and the Hour [which hath guided it] goeth 
“to rest.” 

Of the goddesses who are seated on uraei it is 
said :— 

“Those who are in this picture with their serpents 
“under them, and their hands holding stars, come 
“forth from the two ATERT of this great god, four to 
“the East and four to the West; it is they who call 
“the Spirits of the East, and they sing hymns to this 
“god, and they praise him after his appearance, and 
“SETTI cometh forth in his forms. It is they who 


THE GODDESSES OF THE ATERTI 293 


“guide and transport those who are in the boat of this 
“great god.” 


There is no description of the crocodile-headed god 
Sebek-Ra in the text. 

In the lower register are :— 

1. Four gods, each wearing the Crown of the. 
South; these are the “Kings of the South in chief,” 





a * G x/W_x * * 
1D vr least islets in 


The goddesses of the Aterti. 


2. Four bearded gods, “the WEEPERS,” l = | QQ : : 

3. Four gods, each wearing a Crown of the North; 
these are the KuNemtv, () <= AS I. 

4, Four bearded gods, the RENENIU, mw roam » 1 I, 


ie., “those who give names.” 
5. Four females, each wearing the Crown of the 


x —+— 7a 
South ; these are the “Queens of the South,” ===> ae. 


294 
6. 


ELEVENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


Four females, each wearing the Crown of the 


North; these are, presumably, the “Queens of the 
North ;” these are the Kunemut, i 


Gs 
8. 


Four females, without crowns. 
Four bearded gods, with their backs slightly 


bowed; these are the gods who praise Ra. 


9. 


A cat-headed god called MArr, q l e 


The text which refers to these gods reads :— 


Pll ae a eee ea Gah ea 


DOAN 
@ fat Ke AA aes 2B ts 
= Mito: eta 


piel 


a NSS a 


we pty EO alate = laa 
bile ce De De ew OO oe 
—— | pean 
Ses ais 
OA wn | QA co” 
og al | iG 1e Hise 
nm LLL eats 
oe Wee 
TR 
ges fl "ei 


a ‘Vari, 9 AE Sar, Champollion, Monwments, tom. ii., p. 589. 


THE BEARERS OF RA’S CROWNS 295 


Som YS | eee Re 
eC ea Se dation Poe 
ane hi 


vs ete Caco, \\ Sait 
(2S (ees 
<< 


Sa os 0 LS SO I 
oa cy alles 
Garena Sra me oe 


Se are 
{olen Ab Zcare di 
emrriaw | Lc: 

Sr haere Rin 


51 0 Taptagimn 2 [Joeee 
ini == ae tae VA) OP 
tele A 


ee ee Re 


nnn | 


1 Champollion, Monwments, tom. ii., p. 589. 


296 ELEVENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


—}— 


eae ee ve Qd+xslni Be 


esata Sie oo 


La Le ee ee 





Ferhat eae Eau o | 


— eas arn Ee 
Saba NGe ar ala Te 
ry ned & —— —1— <> @ a. —.— 


= A aS =| 2. S(t 





The Stablishers of the White Crown. The Four Weepers, 


Of the gods wearing the White Crown it is said :-— 

“Those who are in this picture are they who stablish 
“the White Crown on the gods who follow Ra; they 
“themselves remain in the Tuat, but their ae go 
“forward and stand at [this] gate.” 

Of the four Weepers it is said :— 

“Those who are in this picture in this gate make 


THE BEARERS OF RA’S CROWNS 297 


“lamentation for Osiris after Ra hath made his appear-- 
“ance from Ament; their souls go forward in his train, 
“but they themselves follow after Osiris.” 
Of the four gods wearing the Red Crown it is said :— 
“Those who are in this picture are those who unite 
“themselves to Ra, and they make his births to come 





Se 8 eae een — 
Taam, Me ‘teen fila @ pty NR anf 
mn be | 6 


Si oe ae 
ig i Pan lll Ag oe cok Ere 
Ae © 7S ea r) ee 
== wate PEN EY oe oe 

11 6 Se i TI rere pps 





The Stablishers of the Red Crown. The gods who give names. 


“to pass in the earth; their souls go forward in his 
“train, but their bodies remain in their places (or, 
“ seats).” 

Of the four RENENIU it is said :— 

“[Those who are in this picture are they who give 
“the name to Ra, and they magnify the names of all 


298 ELEVENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


“his forms; their souls go forward in his following, 
“but their bodies remain in their places (or, seats).”]} 

Of the four goddesses wearing the White Crown it is 
said :— 


“Those who are in this picture are they who make 





Satattc aki a 


y aig Sa enese 


Se) 
them (NIN ae, a § 
h ‘erie me els Cle =, 


n 


a— 8 Box, tar 





[ed a 
ry g LY a ry a a 1 
a  * toto ee22 6 @ O5e Ue gee @e ae @ Sey 
ee ae eere ree Ob gt Me Sa ety Ore ceeeetns 
4 2 * es eF 
ae nee ae ee s, =e a es se B18 es. eee 
2 . On - 8 


Goddesses who stablish the White and Red Crowns. 


“ Maat to advance, and who make it to be stablished 
“in the shrine of Ra when Ra taketh up his position 
“in Nut; their souls pass onwards in his following, 
“but their bodies remain in their places.” 


1 Supplied from the tomb of Rameses VI. 


THE GODS WHO PRAISE RA AT DAWN 299 


Of the four goddesses wearing the Red Crown it is 
said :— 

“Those who are in this picture are they who stablish 
“time, and they make to come into being the years for 
“those who keep ward over the condemned ones in the 
“Tuat and over those who have their life in heaven; 
“they follow in the train of this great god.” 


adie 2 aL See 1 


oa 0 Oe 


CALA AN AA INE 


5 = 
o «ose eres ic Ry 
Gis Se) 60s 2 *fate siais 
« 
* 


ete tee e ” Oa 6 - 
eee ee Renee <o RCS anna celts 
Goddesses who drive away Set. Gods who adore and praise Ra. Mati. 
Of the four females who are without crowns Lh) 18 
said :— 


“Those who are in this picture in [this] gate make 
“Jamentation and tear their hair in the presence of 
“this great god in Amentet; they make Ser to with- 

_ “draw from this pylon, and they do not enter into the 


“height of heaven.” 


300 ELEVENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


Of the four gods with their backs bowed it is said :— 

“Those who are in this picture make adoration to 
“Ra and sing praises unto him, and in their place in 
“the Tuat they hymn those gods who are in the Tuat, 
“and who keep guard over the Hidden Door. [They 
“remain in their places.”]! 

[“The warder of the door of this Circle remaineth 
“in his place.”}1 


’ Supplied from the tomb of Rameses VI. 


( 301") 


CHAPTER XIV. 
THE GATE OF SEBI AND RERI. 
THE TWELFTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT. 


HAvING passed through the Eleventh Division of the 
Tuat, the boat of the sun arrives at the gateway 


‘TESERT-BAIU, —— a oo which is the last that he 


will have to pass through before emerging in heaven 
in the light of a new day. “This great god cometh 
“forth to this gate, this great god entereth through it, 
“and the gods who are therein acclaim the great god.” 
The gateway is like that through which the god passed 
into the previous Division; at the entrance to the gate 
proper stands a bearded mummied form called Pat, 


dK Ql {| and at its exit stands a similar form called 


AKHEKUI, ail A. The corridor is swept by 


flames of fire, which proceed from the mouths of uraei, 
as before. In the space which is usually guarded by a 
number of gods stand two staves, each of which is 
surmounted by a bearded head; on one head is the 
disk of Tem, ~ , and on the other a beetle, the symbol 


‘of Khepera. The text which refers to these reads: 


a 


The doors of Sebi and Reri. 





-Baiu. 


sert 


The Gate Te 


mop SEC EP: 


Vi 
th 


Me MMC LONE SE 


Wifames = Aicl{s 





’ he Sun-god under the form of Khepera with his Disk, in his Boat, 
supported by Nu and received by Nut. 


304 TWELFTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


Prin rr 7S Bille J 


& Ill 5 
= sacl bas J, They stand up on their heads, 


“and they come into being on their staves by the 
“oate; the heads stand up by the gate.” 
The monster serpent which stands on its tail and 


guards the one door is called SEBI, %& QQ, and the two 


lines of text which refer to his admission of Ra read, 
“He who is over this door openeth to Ra. Sa saith 
“unto Sebi, ‘Open thy gate to Ra, unfold thy portal to 
“Khuti, so that he may come forth from the hidden 
“place, and may take up his position in the body of 
“Nut. Behold, there is wailing among the souls 
“who dwell in Ament after this door hath closed,” 
Sy XT SO | A Ml agg Sw 
REO | pan HEI a, SS * Tm, Co 

TA i SS = om a 
ee NP ae Be 
The monster serpent which stands on its tail and 


guards the other door is called Reni, QQ, and the | 


two lines of text which refer to his admission of Ra 
read, “ He who is over this door openeth to Ra. Sa 
“saith unto Reri, ‘Open thy gate to Ra, unfold thy 
“portal to KHUTI, so that he may come forth from the 
“hidden place, and may take up his position in the 
“body of Nut.’ Behold, there is wailing among the 
“souls who dwell in Ament after this door hath closed.” 


THE BIRTH OF THE SUN-GOD 305 


The text, being similar to that which refers to SEBI, is 
not repeated here. 

On each side of the door is a uraeus, the one repre- 
senting Isis and the other NEPuTHyYS, and of them it is 
said, “They it is who guard this hidden gate of Ament, 
“and they pass onwards in the following of this god,” 
| eae 


AWWW Hs 5 D g 


*K 
ee fl wae! SS 


| oo . 


Here we see that the end of the Tuat is reached, 
and the boat of the sun has reached that portion of it 
through which he is about to emerge in the waters of 
Nu, and thence in the form of a disk-in the sky of 
this world. Having passed on to the water the boat 
is supported by the two arms of Nv himself, or, as 
the text says, “These two arms come forth from the 


ap 
nw OY) A 


: nasepea ered 
“waters, and they bear up this god,” <> al \\ 
——— ———il 
nw —#— | | | 


The god appears in the 


boat in the form of a beetle, which is rolling along a 
disk; on the left of the beetle is Isis, and on the right 
Nephthys. The three beings in the front of the boat 


are probably the personifications of doors, “i and 
the gods to the left are Ss, & J, SHU, f, HEK, 
i=, Hv, OSs and Sa, =x. In the hiero- 


glyphics at the top of the open space above the boat is 
VOL. 11. x 


306 TWELFTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT 


written, “This god taketh up his place in the MATETET 
“Boat [with] the gods who are in it,” as]! © IN 


ot oO | | = 
© mete] mele » a: Away in the waters 


above, or beyond the boat, is a kind of island, formed 
by the body of a god, which is bent round in such a 
way that the tips of his toes touch the back of his 
head. On his head stands the goddess Nut, with her 
arms and hands raised and stretched out to receive the 
disk of the sun, which the Beetle is ee towards her ; 


the text says, “ Nut receiveth Ra,” 220 » XY [| ©” 

The island formed by the body of fie: god is said to be 

“ Osiris, whose circuit is the Tuat,” =e oO BS 
<a 


es 
ew | 


END OF VOL. IL
